"","x"
"1","NASA/TP—2009—2 1 3 146—REVISION A

International Space Station

Science Research Accomplishments During the
Assembly Years: An Analysis of Results from
2000-2008

Cynthia A. Evans and Julie A. Robinson

Ofﬁce offhe International Space Station Program Scientist

NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, T exas

Judy T ate-Brown, T racy T humm, and Jessica Crespo-Richey

Engineering & Science Contract Group, Houston, T exas

David Baumann and Jennifer Rhatigan

NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, T exas

June 2009

"
"2","THE NASA STI PROGRAM OFFICE . . . IN PROFILE
Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to meetings sponsored or cosponsored by
the advancement of aeronautics and space NASA.
science. The NASA Scientiﬁc and Technical
Information (STI) Program Ofﬁce plays a key ' SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientiﬁc,
part in helping NASA maintain this important technical, or historical information from
role. NASA programs, proj ects, and mission,
often concerned With subj ects haVing
The NASA STI Program Ofﬁce is operated by substantial public interest.
Langley Research Center, the lead center for
NASA’s scientiﬁc and technical information. ' TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. English-
The NASA STI Program Ofﬁce provides access language translations of foreign scientiﬁc
to the NASA STI Database, the largest and technical material pertinent to NASA’s
collection of aeronautical and space science STI mission.
in the world. The Program Ofﬁce is also
NASA’s institutional mechanism for Specialized services that complement the STI
disseminating the results of its research and Program Ofﬁce’s diverse offerings include
development activities. These results are creating custom thesauri, building customized
published by NASA in the NASA STI Report databases, organizing and publishing research
Series, Which includes the following report results . . . even providing Videos.
types:
For more information about the NASA STI

- TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of Program Ofﬁce, see the following:

completed research or a maj or signiﬁcant

phase of research that present the results of ' Access the NASA STI Program Home Page

NASA programs and include extensive data at http://WWW.sti.nasa.gov

or theoretical analysis. Includes

compilations of signiﬁcant scientiﬁc and ' E-mail your question Via the internet to

technical data and information deemed to be help@sti.nasa.gov

of continuing reference value. NASA’s

counterpart of peer-reViewed formal ' F aX your question to the NASA Access Help

professional papers but has less stringent Desk at (301) 621-0134

limitations on manuscript length and extent

of graphic presentations. ' Telephone the NASA Access Help Desk at

(301) 621-0390

- TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientiﬁc

and technical ﬁndings that are preliminary ' Write to:

or of specialized interest, e.g., quick release NASA Access Help Desk

reports, working papers, and bibliographies NASA Center for AeroSpace Information

that contain minimal annotation. Does not 7121 Standard

contain extensive analysis. Hanover, MD 21076-1320
° CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientiﬁc and

technical ﬁndings by NASA-sponsored

contractors and grantees.
- CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected

papers from scientiﬁc and technical

conferences, symposia, seminars, or other

"
"3","NASA/TP—2009—2 1 3 146—REVISION A

International Space Station

Science Research Accomplishments During the
Assembly Years: An Analysis of Results from
2000-2008

Cynthia A. Evans and Julie A. Robinson

Ofﬁce offhe International Space Station Program Scientist

NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, T exas

Judy T ate-Brown, T racy T humm, and Jessica Crespo-Richey

Engineering & Science Contract Group, Houston, T exas

David Baumann and Jennifer Rhatigan

NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, T exas

June 2009

"
"4","Available from:
NASA Center for AeroSpace Information National Technical Information Service
7115 Standard Drive 5285 Port Royal Road
Hanover, MD 21076-1320 Springﬁeld, VA 22161
Phone: 301-621-0390 or 703-605-6000
Fax: 301-621-0134
This report is also available in electronic form at http://st0n.j sc.nasa.gOV/collections/TRS/

"
"5","CONTENTS
Introduction 1
Executive Summary 6
International Space Station Research Accomplishments During the Assembly Years: 2000—2008
International Space Station Research Results 6
Technology Development for Exploratlon 6
Physical Sciences in MlcrograVIty 7
Biological Sciences in MlcrograVIty 8
Human Research Program 8
Observing the Earth and Educational Activities 9
Science from International Space Station Observations 10
International Space Station Research: Beneﬁts to Life on Earth 10
Spin-offs and Patents 10
Supporting Future Exploration: Science After the First 10 Years 11
References 12
Summary of NASA Experiments and Their Results
T echnology Development
Analyzing Interferometer for Ambient Air (ANITA) 18
Active Rack Isolation System-ISS Characterization Experiment (ARIS-ICE) 19
Dust and Aerosol Measurement Feasibility Test (DAFT) 21
Elastic Memory Composite Hinge (EMCH) 22
In-space Soldering Experiment (ISSI) 23
Lab-on-a-Chip Application Development-Portable Test System (LOCAD-PTS) 24
Middeck Active Control Experiment-II (MACE-II) 26
Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS) and Space Acceleration
Measurement System11 (SAMS—II), TWO Investigations 27
Maui Analysis ofUpper Atmospheric Injections (Maui) 30
Materials International Space Station Experiment-l and -2(MISSE-1 and -2) 31
Materials on the International Space Station Experiment-3 and -4 (MISSE-3 and -4) 33
Materials International Space Station Experiment-S (MISSE-S) 34
Ram Burn Observations (RAMBO) 36
Smoke and AerosolMeasurement Experiment (SAME) 38
SerialNetwork Flow Monitor (SNFM) 39
Synchronized Position Hold, Engage, Reorient, Experimental Satellites (SPHERES) 40
Space Test Program-HZ (STP-Hz): Three Investlgatlons 42
Atmospheric NeutralDensity Experiment (ANDE) 42
Microelectromechanical System-(MEMS) Based Picosat Inspector (MEPSI) 42
Radar Fence Transponder (RAFT) 42
Physical Sciences in Microgravity
Advanced Protein Crystallization Facility (APCF), Eight Investigations............................................................ 47
Binary Colloidal Alloy Test-3 (BCAT-3), Three Investlgatlons 49
Capillary Flow Experiment (CFE) 52
Commercial Generic Protein Crystal Growth-High Density (CPCG-H) 55
Coarsening in Solid Liquid Mixtures—Z (CSLM-Z) 57
Dynamically Controlled Protein Crystal Growth (DCPCG) 59
EXPRESS Physics ofColloids in Space (EXPPCS) 6O
Fluid Merging Viscosity Measurement (FMVM) 62
Viscous Liquid Foam-Bulk Metallic G1ass(F0am) 64
Investigating the Structure of Paramagnetic Aggregates from Colloidal Emulsions (InSPACE)........................ 66
Miscible Fluids in Microgravity (MFMG) 67
Protein Crystal Growth-Enhanced Gaseous Nitrogen (PCG-EGN) 69
Protein Crystal Growth-Single Locker Thermal Enclosure System (PCG-STES), Nine Investigations............... 70
iii

"
"6","Toward Understanding Pore Formation and Mobility During Controlled Directional Solidiﬁcation

inaMicrograVity Environment (PFMI) 74
Solidiﬁcation Using Bafﬂe in Sealed Ampoules (SUBSA) 76
Zeolite Crystal Growth (ZCG) 77
Biological Sciences in Microgravity
Avian Development Facility (ADF), TWO Investigations 81
Advanced Astroculture (AdVAsc) 83
Biomass Production System(BPS)Techn010gy Validation Test (TVT) 85
Cellular Biotechnology Operations Support System (CBOSS), Seven Investigations......................................... 87
Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus (CGBA), Three Investigations.................................................. 90
Fungal Pathogenesis, Tumorigenesis, and Effects ofHost Immunity in Space (FIT) 93
Threshold Acceleration for Gravisensing (Gravi) 94
Microencapsulation ofAnti-tumor Drugs (MEPS) 96
Effect of Space Flight on Microbial Gene Expression and Virulence (Microbe) 97
Molecular and Plant Physiological Analyses of the Microgravity Effects on Multigeneration Studies

ofAmbidopSiS thaliana (Multlgen) 99
The Optimization of Root Zone Substrates (ORZS) for Reduced-Gravity Experiments Program...................... 100
Photosynthesis Experiment and System Testing and Operation (PESTO) 101
Plant Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus (PGBA) 103
Passive Observatories for Experimental Microbial Systems (POEMS) 104
Streptococcus pneumoniae Expression OfGenes in Space (SPEGIS) 106
StelSys Liver Cell Function Research (StelSys) 107
Analysis ofa Novel Sensory Mechanism in Root Phototropism (Tropi) 108
Yeast-Group Activation Packs (Yeast-GAP) 109
Human Research and Countermeasure Developmentfor Exploration
Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Microgravity (ADUM) 113
Anomalous Long-Term Effects in Astronauts’ Central Nervous System (ALTEA) 115
Bonner BallNeutron Detector (BBND) 116
Effect ofProlonged Space Flight on Human SkeletalMusele(B10psy) 118
Commercial Biomedical Testing Module (CBTM): Effects of Osteoprotegerin (OPG)

0n Bone Maintenance in MlcrograVIty 120
Commercial Biomedical Test Module-Z (CBTM-Z) 122
Cardiovascular and Cerebrovascular Control on Return from ISS (CCISS) 124
Cell Culture Module-Immune Response of Human Monocytes in Microgravity

(CCM-Immune Response) 125
Cell Culture Module-Effect 0f Microgravity 0n Wound Repair: In Vitro Model of New

Blood Vessel Development (CCM-Wound Repair) 126
Chromosomal Aberrations in Blood Lymphocytes 0f Astronauts (Chromosome) 127
Dosimetric Mapping (DOSMAP) 128
Space Flight-induced Reactivation 0f Latent Epstein-Barr Virus (Epstein-Barr).............................................. 130
A Study ofRadiation Doses Experienced by Astronauts in EVA (EVARM) 131
Foot/Ground Reaction Forces During Space F1ight(F00t) 133
Hand Posture Analyzer (HPA) 134
Effects ofAltered Gravity 0n Spinal Cord Excitability (H-ReﬂeX) 135
Crew Member and CreW-ground Interactions during International Space Station

Missions (Interactlons) 137
Behavioral Issues Associated With Isolation and Conﬁnement: Review and Analysis of

ISS Crew Journals (Journals) 140
Incidence ofLatent Virus Shedding During Space F1ight(LatentV1rus) 141
Test of Midodrine as a Countermeasure Against Postﬂight Orthostatic Hypotension-

Short-duration Biological Investigation (Mldodrlne-SDBI) 143
Promoting Sensorimotor Response Generalizability: A Countermeasure to Mitigate

Locomotor Dysfunction After Long-duration Space Flight (Mobility) 144
Nutritional Status Assessment(Nutr1t10n) 145

iv

"
"7","Bioavailability and Performance ofPromethaZine During Space F1ight(PMZ) 146
Effects of EVA and Long-term Exposure to Microgravity 0n Pulmonary Function (PuFF) 147
Renal Stone Risk During Space Flight: Assessment and Countermeasure Validation (Renal Stone) 149
Sleep—Wake Actigraphy and Light Exposure During Space Flight-Long (Sleep-Long) 150
Sleep—Wake Actigraphy and Light Exposure During Space Flight-Short (Sleep-Short) 151
Stability ofPharmacotherapeutic and Nutritional Compounds (Stability) 152
Subregional Assessment of Bone Loss in the Axial Skeleton in Long-term

Space Flight (SubregionalBone) 154
Surface, Water, and Air Biocharacterization (SWAB) —A Comprehensive Characterization of

Microorganisms and Allergens in Spacecraft 156
Organ Dose Measurement Using a Phantom Torso (Torso) 157
Effect of Microgravity 0n the Peripheral Subcutaneous Veno-arteriolar Reﬂex in Humans (Xenon-l) 159
Observing the Earth and Educational Activities
Amateur Radio on the International Space Station (ARISS) 161
Crew Earth Observations (CEO) 162
CreWEarthObservations—InternationalP01arYear(CEO-IPY) 167
Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus Science Insert-01 (CSI-Ol) 169
Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus Science Insert-02 (CSI-02) 171
DreamTime(DreamT1me) 172
Education Payload Operations (EPO) 173
Education Payload Operation—Demonstration (EPO-Demos) 174
Education Payload Operations—Educator (EPO-Educator) 175
Education Payload Operations—Kit C (EPO-Kit C) 176
Earth Knowledge Acquired by Middle School Students (EarthKAM) 177
Space Exposed Experiment Development for Students (Education-SEEDS)...................................................... 179
Space Experiment Module (SEM) 180
Results from ISS Operations
Clinical Nutrition Assessment of ISS Astronauts (Clinical Nutrition Assessment) 183
Education-HOW Solar Cells Work (Education-Solar Cells) 185
Environmental Monitoring of the International Space Station (Environmental Monitoring) 186
International Space Station In-ﬂight Education Downlinks (In-ﬂight Education Downlinks) 188
International Space Station Acoustic Measurement Program (ISS Acoustlcs) 190
Periodic Fitness Evaluation With Oxygen Uptake Measurement (PFE-OUM) 192
Analysis of International Space Station Plasma Interaction (Plasma Interaction Model) 193
Saturday Morning Science (Science OfOpportunity) 194
Soldering in Reduced Gravity Experiment, SDTO 17003U (SoRGE) 196
International Space Station Zero—Propellant Maneuver (ZPM) Demonstration 197
Environmental Monitoring of the International Space Station (Environmental Monitoring):

Miscellaneous Results 199
Space Station Science Benefiting Life on Earth 201
Appendices
Appendix A: Scientiﬁc Research by Expedition
Expedition 0 (Sep 8 2000 — NOV 2 2000) 204
Expediti0n1(N0V 2 2000 —Mar 18 2001) 205
Expedition 2 (Mar 10 2001 — Aug 20 2001) 206
Expedition 3 (Aug 12 2001—Dec 12 2001) 207
Expedition 4 (7 Dec 2001— 15 Jun 2002) 209
Expedition 5 (Jun 7 2002 — Dec 2 2002) 211
Expedition 6 (NOV 25 2002 —May 3 2003) 213
Expedition 7 (Apr 28 2003 — Oct 27 2003) 214
Expedition 8 (Oct 20 2003 — Apr 29 2004) 215
Expedition 9 (Apr 212004 — Oct 23 2004) 217

V

"
"8","Expedition 10 (Oct 15 2004 —Apr 25 2005) 218
Expedition 11 (Apr 16 2005 — Oct 10 2005) 219
Expedition 12 (Oct 3 2005 — Apr 8 2006) 220
Expediti0n13(Apr12006 — Sep 28 2006) 221
Expedition 14 (Sep 20 2006 — Apr 21 2007) 223
Appendix B: Publications Resulting from Research Aboard the International Space Station........................... 228
Appendix C: Acronyms andAbbrevzatzonS 245
vi

"
"9","INTRODUCTION
The International Space Station (ISS) celebrated 10 years of operations in November 2008. Today, it is more than
a human outpost in low Earth orbit (LEO). It is also an international science laboratory hosting state—of—the—art scien—
tiﬁc facilities that support fundamental and applied research across the range of physical and biological sciences.
The launch of the ﬁrst ISS element in 1998, the Russian Zarya module, was a highly Visible milestone for
international cooperation in human exploration. Later, When the ﬁrst international crew that included Bill Shepard,
Sergei Krikalev, and Yuri Gidzenko, moved into the ISS to establish a continuous human presence in space, a new,
global chapter in the history of human space ﬂight was opened. As of this writing, 18 multinational crews com—
prising 52 astronauts and cosmonauts have called the ISS their home and workplace since November 2000.
Dozens more have Visited and assisted construction and science activities.
While the ISS did not support permanent human crews during the ﬁrst 2 years of operations (November 1998
to November 2000), it hosted a few early science experiments months before the ﬁrst international crew took
up residence. Since that time—and simultaneous With the complicated task of ISS construction and overcoming
impacts from the tragic Columbia accident—science returns from the ISS have been growing at a steady pace. From
Expedition 0 through 15, 138 experiments have been operated on the ISS, supporting research for hundreds of
ground—based investigators from the US. and International Partners. Many experiments are carried forward
over several ISS increments, allowing for additional experimental runs and data collection.
This report focuses on the experimental results collected to date, including scientiﬁc publications from studies
that are based on operational data. Today, NASA’s priorities for research aboard the ISS center on understanding
human health during long—duration missions, researching effective countermeasures for long—duration crewmembers,
and researching and testing neW technologies that can be used for future Exploration crews and spacecraft. Most re—
search also supports neW understandings, methods, or applications that are relevant to life on Earth, such as under—
standing effective protocols to protect against loss of bone density or better methods for producing stronger metal
alloys. Experiment results have already been used in applications as diverse as the manufacture of solar cell and
insulation materials for neW spacecraft and the veriﬁcation of complex numerical models for behavior of ﬂuids
in fuel tanks.
.q .. '3‘“ ""Iﬁﬂ- I ’.
III:£.' '. fIII . __ -:. __ '15""??? - f - .
..-"""" . f ‘1 Irll _l_.
.53.} :r'- -— . ' .:..:' .' 1'? -'r::_'~-'l—'-__-- _i._-_.=' '_ - 41- ’3‘
I -. - , .ﬂw Z:- all ' .- . 3‘ .r’II
.. :: :-1. I. .. ' j. -. .- ._
# I.‘ :11! __-.'-r - _-. E '1 II'I.I%=— TE-MHJ.
I —.-_'II _IHIIE'I'IE .-I-II I .- ﬂ- - -. ‘_I -
-_'_""I:.I-I-' I J -- J“? .1..- _IihrHLé—TJ‘ :IEIII -h I Htf I ;-u--' 'II-LLIIIII I'Im'
I'i—r Jrgiji. . :L-TI- ﬁr I I _ ;_-..- I It- .. . - 1“ 1H"" - . 1: I -
E} I I J"": ' . I MI 'I - I
FEE”. I I F: _ __I '. I! F .""'.'r
- - * 1'1. 21.;
|I _ I- If-
i' 1v “"" 1 ' é
.r'III. ' f [III- -I II I ' i.
1""'_’l!.&. {I - iv-i'? if- - -
.' - 4L- . ‘ - ' . _ I-
1"" _ ﬁ- --"" i r - Figure 1. STs124e9982 — The
- . ‘ . . 3' I: F""; h .I'.' "" I International Space Station in June
I - - . .. _ *- I'- ' p 2008. The inset is a close-up view of the
I - three ISS laboratory facilities.
Over the ﬁrst 10 years of operations, events shaped the ability and capacity of the ISS for performing space research,
as well as the focus of the ISS research itself.
1

"
"10","o The ISS has been under continuous assembly during this time period (ﬁg. 1). The U.S. Destiny laboratory
was deployed in early 2001. The European Columbus Module and J apanese Kibo Laboratory were both
launched and mated to the ISS in 2008. Today, maj or research outﬁtting has grown to include 18 racks and
facilities within the laboratory space (ﬁg. 2)—a complement of several multipurpose EXPRESS [Expedite the
Processing of Experiments to Space Station] racks; Human Research Facility racks; a versatile gloveboxg
racks supporting ﬂuid physics, combustion physics, life sciences, and capabilities for deep freezing of
samples—as well as facilities for externally mounted experiments [8].

E-
a a _
3:: - -_. - -: “a l._ --..__ . _ ..
a _
a E“
.3 g E -
h: E. g
n:
l: ""1' 3 II
.E , . .. . E
E g
E El . . . . ; .' g
- 11
m In E "" E
T: :1 ' =
I: E 3 E-
E E I: H_ II
E? r3 E EGIT‘II— E
3 E - E
E I"" if:
EiE ._ r. -.
ﬁg - ...-_'_ - - ”W. 'ﬂ‘rﬂﬂl—— :
93 - WFR‘FﬁﬂLMEW' '
- ,- -. |!I'|- dltﬂ'E-‘ﬂk-ITHHF |
3,- Hu'ﬂﬂ'ﬂmm '
_ l. '4. mamas
_, -- _.- .' - -_- In'Jﬂ'Mi |
-. '.' |_I Illl'r- .5 35““; . ..__
III'HI IIHII ILH'IE HIE] 1'1""” ITIll-F II'HIIL'I- IIHIT IUIJ'H lilll‘l' lﬂlﬂ Zl'lll
Tears ﬂf Dperatian
Figure 2. Graphic showing the build-up of ISS research facilities over time.

o The space shuttle ﬂeet was grounded following the Columbia accident, halting ISS assembly. Prior
to the Columbia accident, more than 6,600 kg (14,600 lbs) of research equipment and facilities had been
brought to ISS. Between the accident and the return to ﬂight of the Space Shuttle Discovery in Jul 2005,
75 kg (165 lbs) of research supplies had been brought up on Russian Progress and Soyuz vehicles. The
crew of the ISS was also reduced from three to two, and the research program was drastically adjusted
to accommodate these changes. Since return to ﬂight in 2005, the research space has grown, and the
crew size has increased back to three.

2

"
"11","0 Assembly operations have required real-time changes in plans. For example, the contamination of the
starboard solar array rotary joint [SARJ] precluded full rotation of the starboard solar arrays and limited
power for science and operations. At the same time, assembly operations have also supported research
related that is to operations and important for future missions. For example, research on rates of micro-
meteoroid and orbital debris (MMOD) strikes and studies on the extent of thermal ﬂexing of new parts
of the ISS structure are ongoing.

- The focus of NASA’s 188 research has changed strategically to support the Vision for Space Exploration
that was announced by the President on J an 14, 2004. While still including some fundamental research in
microgravity, emphasis has shifted to programs that are targeted at developing and testing new exploration
technologies and reducing the risks to human explorers on missions to the moon, Mars, and beyond.

0 The NASA Authorization Act of 2005 designated the 188 as a National Laboratory and secured a path-
way for new experiments that are sponsored by other agencies or partnerships with the private sector.
Details and current plans are provided by Uhran [11]. The National Lab Pathﬁnder program is now under
way, with limited payload opportunities on each shuttle ﬂight to the ISS.

- The anticipated shutdown of the Space Shuttle Program in 2010 has reprioritized the manifests for research
equipment and operational supplies, and created pressure on investigators to develop new experimental
protocols that require fewer sample returns.

At the 10-year point, the stage is set for increasing the scientiﬁc returns from the 188. During the 2008 calendar
year, the laboratory space and research facilities were tripled with the addition of the European Space Agency’s
(ESA’s) Columbus and J apanese Aerospace Exploration Agency’s Kibo scientiﬁc modules joining NASA’s Destiny
Laboratory. In 2009, the number of crewmembers will increase from three to six, greatly increasing the time that is
available for research. The realization of the international scientiﬁc partnership provides new opportunities for
scientiﬁc collaboration and broadens the research potential on the ISS. Engineers and scientists from around the
world are working together to reﬁne their operational relationships and build from their experiences in conducting
early science to ensure maximum utilization of the expanded capabilities aboard 188.

This NASA Technical Publication is intended to provide an archival record of the United States-sponsored 188
research that was accomplished through Expedition 15, both as part of formal investigations or “payloads” and from
early scientiﬁc analysis of data collected as part of operating the station. By scientiﬁc theme, the investigations are
collected as follows:

0 Technology Development—studies and tests of new technologies for use in future Exploration mis-
sions. Areas of emphasis included spacecraft materials and systems, and characterization and control of
the microgravity environment on 188.

0 Physical Sciences—studies of physics and chemistry in microgravity. Areas of emphasis included materials
sciences experiments, including physical properties and phase transitions in polymers and colloids, ﬂuid
physics, and crystal growth experiments.

0 Biological Sciences—studies of biology using microgravity conditions to gain insight into the effect of the
space environment on liVing organisms. Areas of emphasis included cellular biology and biotechnology,
and plant biology.

0 Human Research for Exploration—human medical research to develop the knowledge that is needed to
send humans on Exploration missions beyond Earth orbit. These studies focused on the effect of liVing in
space on human health and countermeasures to reduce health risks that will be incurred by liVing in space
in future. Areas of emphasis included physiological studies related to the effects of microgravity on bone
and muscle, other physiological effects of space ﬂight, psycho-social studies, and radiation studies.

- Observing the Earth and Education—these activities and investigations allowed students and the public to
connect with the ISS mission; inspired students to excel in science, technology, engineering, and math; and
shared the astronauts’ unique View of the Earth system with scientists and the public. A detailed summary
of all educational activities on 188 is also available [10].

0 Results from 188 Operations—in addition to the formal, peer-reViewed scientiﬁc research and experi-
ments, the ISS supports a large body of research using data from 188 operations, including routine medical
monitoring of the crew and data that are collected on the ISS environment, both inside and outside of the 18$.

3

"
"12","This report includes an executive summary of all of the research results. The investigations that were conducted
during the ﬁrst 15 Expeditions are presented topically by the research disciplines, and alphabetically within each
topical section. Of the investigations that are summarized here, some are completed with results released, some are
completed with preliminary results, and some remain ongoing. For each case we provide an overview of the research
objectives and the results that have been returned to date. We also indicate whether additional activities are planned
for future 188 missions at the time of writing.
For interested readers, the appendices provide a chronological listing of the investigations that were performed in
each Expedition, and a full listing of research publications sorted by discipline and payload acronym.
In addition to speciﬁc scientiﬁc results, a number of reviews and updates on 188 science have been written
([2]—[6], Tate et al. 2006, [7], [9], [1]). Research that was conducted independently by the International Partners on 188,
especially the Russian Space Agency and BSA, is not included. Results from many of the investigations continue
to be released. Continuously updated information on 188 research and results is available on the NASA portal
at http://www.nasa.gOV/missi0n_pages/station/science/indeX.html/.
REFERENCES
[1] Evans CA, Uri J], Robinson JA. Ten Years on the International Space Station: Science Research Takes Off. 59th
International Astronautical Congress. Glasgow, Scotland. 2008, 29 Sep — 3 Oct; IAC-08-B3.4.2.
[2] Pellis NR, North RM. Recent NASA Research Accomplishments Aboard 188. 54th International Astronautical
Congress of the International Astronautical Federation, the IAA, and the International Institute of Space Law,
Bremen, Germany. IAC-03-T.4.07, Sep 29—Oct 3, 2003.
[3] Rhatigan J . Research Accomplishments 0n the International Space Station. AIAA/ICAS International Air and
Space Symposium and Exposition: The Next 100 Years, Dayton, Ohio. AIAA 2003-2703, 2003.
[4] Rhatigan JL, Robinson J A, Sawin CF. Exploration-Related Research on 188: Connecting Science Results to
Future Missions. NASA TP-2005-2l3l66. l—34, 2005. (Also published at the 44th AIAA Meeting, 2006-344, 2006.)
[5] Robinson J A, Rhatigan J L, Baumann DK. Recent Research Accomplishments 0n the International Space Station.
Proceedings of the IEEE Aerospace Conference, Big Sky, Mont. Paper no. 310, Mar 5—12, 2005.
[6] Robinson JA., Thomas DA. NASA Utilization of the International Space Station and the Vision for Space
Exploration, ISTS 2006-0-1-06, International Symposium on Space Technology and Science, Kanazawa, J apan,
Jun 4—10, 2006, pp. l—6.
[7] Robinson J A, Thumm TL, Thomas DA. NASA Utilization of the International Space Station and the Vision
for Space Exploration. Acta Astronautica. 2007; 61(1-6): 176-184 (Presented at the International Astronautical
Congress, Oct 2006 and the 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, J an 2007: AIAA 2007-139).
[8] Robinson JA, Evans CA, Tate JM, Uri JJ. International Space Station Research—Accomplishments and
Pathways for Exploration and Fundamental Research. 46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit. Reno,
NeV. 7 — 10 Jan 2008; AIAA 2008-0799.
[9] Robinson J A, Thumm TL, Thomas DA. NASA Utilization of the International Space Station and the Vision
for Space Exploration. Acta Astronautica. 2007, 61(1-6): 176-184 (Presented at the International Astronautical
Congress, Oct 2006 and the 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, J an 2007: AIAA 2007-139).
[10] Thomas DA, Robinson JA, Tate J , Thumm T. Inspiring the Next Generation: Student Experiments and Educa-
tional Activities on the International Space Station, 2000—2006. NASA TP-2006-2l372l. Lyndon B. J ohnson Space
Center, Houston, 108 pp., 2006.
[11] Uhran ML. Progress toward establishing a US National Laboratory on the International Space Station,
International Astronautical Congress, Glasgow, Scotland, Sep 2008. IAC-08-B3.4.

4

"
"13","HE. '
h. a _- _ :_.-—_... .421""? .—-_._.
5?. ti '2!“ “.1? -3“
1; ""I .I ”.1' ‘_..__ -'.:'-_ -
i . ._ -. . .
I "" r. ""' -'a'h .': 1| ' :I 'II':.:'J"" :- -_.|_""':|'
. 1: .W '_. . ._'-_l_ _ ':_ +9:
iii {3‘7 . . ._ ', .. - -' t-__ - '.- ._nit =' ;:
:'-""-.-':.- - —- . . ‘I'I'ﬁill :44 __ I -I Jul. . _ I _. Iii-l—Ii? Ila.-
;'-'_ _ 1Il :'- :.'_- . ' 3 _.""I
STS124—E—9956 — With three fully equipped laboratory modules, the ISS research potential becomes reality. This full view of
ISS was photographed by a crewmember on board Space Shuttle Discovery after the undocking of the two spacecraft in June
2008.
5

"
"14","EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION RESEARCH ACCOMPLISHMENTS DURING THE ASSEMBLY YEARS: 2000—2008
The ﬁrst 15 Expeditions aboard the International Space Station (ISS) have established the ISS as a laboratory that
provides a unique opportunity for research capabilities. This paper reViews the science accomplishments that were
achieved by the collaborative efforts of researchers, crewmenibers, and the ISS Program.
Early space station science utilization, while an important part of crew activities, competed with ISS assembly and
maintenance, anomaly resolution, and the re-planning efforts that were required after the Columbia accident. Simply
learning to live on and operate the ISS consumed a large percentage of ISS program resources. Despite the environ-
ment of construction and system shakedowns that dominated the early years, important science activities were
conducted.
In 2005 , the ISS Program Science Ofﬁce created an online experiment database that was aimed at tracking and
communicating ISS scientiﬁc research [1] and published a summary of all of the US. experiments and their results
through Expedition 10 [2]. Today, this database is continually updated. It captures ISS experiment summaries and
results, and functions as a reference that is used for planning ISS science operations. An important aspect of the data-
base is the inclusion of scientiﬁc publications from all ISS experiments as they become available. To date, more than
200 results publications and research summaries have been included in the database; the number continues to
grow at a steady pace [3]. Additional science data and results have been discussed in scientiﬁc symposia, with
publications pending. The scientiﬁc ﬁndings support future research and guide upcoming exploration activities.
NASA’s research activities on the ISS span several scien— ISS Experiments, Expeditions 0-15
tiﬁc ﬁelds, including exploration technology development, 11
microgravity research in the physical and biological
sciences, human research, Earth science, and education. 13 32
Data from ISS operations have been used in additional D Human Research
research on crew health, the ISS structure, and the ISS . Biology
environment. Figure l is a graphical representation of I Physical Sciences
the distribution of ISS experiments by discipline, based 22 ;;::;”:':::::1°pmem
0n the number of experiments that were performed E. ISS operations
through the ﬁrst 15 Expeditions. Below, we examine
and summarize the published research stemming from 27
NASA-supported experiments in each scientiﬁc ﬁeld.
33
Figure 1. Distribution by discipline of NASA’S ISS experiments
for Expeditions 0 through 15.
International Space Station Research Results
T echnology Developm ent for Exploration
One OfNASA’s top priorities for research aboard the ISS is the development and testing of new technologies and
materials that are being considered for future exploration missions. To date, 22 different technology demonstrations
have been performed. These experiments include research characterizing the microgravity environment, monitoring
the ISS environment both inside and outside the spacecraft, testing spacecraft materials, developing new spacecraft
systems, and testing picosatellites and new satellite commanding and controls. We are tracking 34 scientiﬁc publica-
tions, and recognize that classiﬁed and proprietary proceedings include a much greater number of results documenting
technology developments. Recent experiments range from combustion physics and soot production (important data
for redesign of spacecraft smoke detectors [4]) t0 the successful demonstration of microﬁuidic technologies for
rapidly detecting different contaminants such as bacteria and fungi. Other new technology experiments and
stand-alone instrument packages monitor other air contaminants.
One of the most proliﬁc series of investigations on the ISS is the Materials International Space Station Experiment
(MISSE). MISSE (ﬁg. 2) tests how spacecraft materials withstand the harsh space environment, including solar
radiation, atomic oxygen (A0) erosion, thermal cycling, micrometeoroid and orbital debris impacts, and con-
tamination from spacecraft. Hundreds of materials have been tested to date. MISSE results have been used to un-
derstand and calibrate how materials that are already in use on spacecraft degrade in the space environment [5] (for
6

"
"15","example, polymers used for insulation, and solar array materials) and predict the durability of new materials (e.g., the
solar cell materials that are planned for the Commercial Orbital Transportation System). Samples that are currently
being tested on the ISS include materials that are part of the design of the new Orion vehicle [6]. In addition to several
recent and upcoming publications, MISSE investigators have deVised methods for measuring and predicting AO ero—
sion yields, and have assembled data that will provide important reference for designers, developers, and builders of
future spacecraft and instruments. The MISSE team has also spearheaded innovative collaborations among industry,
aoadernia, NASA, and the Department of Defense (DOD), including hundreds of investigators.
o
_- --”” . ‘~ ?.J- . .4-
. 0“” ~29 W?“ ‘ ﬁ , u.
w 3:... ‘91:?qu . 4 /4_,_,._-.- I -- Jl ”L
‘- _t. 7 ~ ’ . “,7 "" gay}, .- \3 \ ‘l * ~ u]
‘ \ ‘ , \ 3113:. ,__»--J:<’""—~ -, Q ~ xx?!” , 22*?“ g
K I i ‘w T ' 4' V ‘377143’3 I ‘1' , “'3' I >— '1""""'?’,
- , Q... . --- r—q—A , . -_/-/-77 —
v, V«\ K a, ‘9» - / 7 "" ' ':’~ .‘ A;::;7/’ . «7 ’ '0
«X7’ .‘~’""“«//1 ""“ .<;./ '.\""
. . _/ , ‘, _ ,_ <_ _ ,/
5/. \ ‘3»? ‘ i ‘ {TR “ ‘
i r‘ ’4“ :ﬁA '
L ‘ x . “A4 '
Figure 2. Left: MISSE 3 experiment on the ISS, exposing samples to the space environment. Right: AO damage to materials on an
ISS solar array blanket box.
Physical Sciences in Microgravily
The research themes of the microgravity program in the physical sciences have shifted since 2000. Over the ﬁrst
15 Expeditions, 33 physical science experiments were performed, yielding more than 40 publications. Early physical
science experiments emphasized the growth of protein crystals in microgravity conditions and investigated fundamental
properties in ﬂuids as well as the speciﬁc behaViors of colloids. Today, a rnaj or research thread that is sponsored by
NASA on the ISS focuses on the fundamental properties of colloids and complex ﬂuids, part of the relatively new ﬁeld
of the physics of soft matter [7]. The fundamental properties of these materials are determined by the behaViors and
properties of the particles and their tendency to assemble or cluster into particular structures, depending on conditions.
MicrograVity research enables the deﬁnition of phase boundaries, and responses to directional forces other than
gravity and interactions without convection. Several experiments examine basic phase transitions (solid—liquid—
gas transitions) in the absence of gravitationally induced complications like density stratiﬁcation of materials.
While the ISS research addresses questions that are ﬂamed by fundamental physics and chemistry, the results often
have very practical applications for future exploration technologies and on Earth. For example, a demonstration of
capillary ﬂow of ﬂuids in microgravity (Capillary Flow Experiment (CFE), which is designed to record the ﬂow of
ﬂuid in containers with different geometries) produced the ﬂrst—space—validated numerical models describing ﬂuid
behaVior [8]. The research to describe capillary ﬂow in microgravity is important for the management of large
volumes of ﬂuids in space; results will be benchmarked and applied to the designs of fuel tanks, and other
spacecraft ﬂuid systerns.
Another experiment, Investigating the Structure of Pararnagnetic Aggregates from Colloidal Emulsion (InSPACE),
provided new observations and unexplained structures and transitions of structures in magnetically controlled
colloids called magnetorheologic ﬂuids (ﬂuids with suspended iron particles that cluster and form structures when
subj ected to a magnetic ﬁeld, causing rapid changes in Viscosity of the ﬂuid). MicrograVity allows for longer obser—
vations of the formation of magnetic particle aggregates, and their structures and kinetics [9]. Recently, the laboratory
environment on the ISS facilitated the real—time re—planning effort to explore unexpected structures that were observed
during InSPACE sarnple runs. Magnetically controlled materials have widespread applications in several industries
including robotics, the automotive industry (e.g., suspension and damping systems), and ciVil engineering (e.g.,
bridges, earthquake—proteotion systems).
7

"
"16","MicrograVity physics experiments include other colloidal systems that examine the clustering properties of colloidal
particles in microgravity. These experiments complement the fast-growing ﬁeld of research in colloids and complex
ﬂuids, with many potential applications in both commercial and exploration sectors—from plastics to household
cleaning and personal hygiene products to the manufacture of new high-technology materials.
Biological Sciences in Microgravity
Through Expedition 15, 27 different biological experiments were performed on the ISS. The early experiments were
centered on testing new biotechnology tools (see table 1). Cellular biology and parameters of plant growth affected
by microgravity comprised a large percentage of the research. Experiments on animal biology and microbiology were
also conducted. To date, we have collected 25 publications reporting results from biological research on the ISS.
Table 1. Biotechnology support hardware tested as part of early ISS utilization

System (08088)

Apparatus (CGBA)

System (MEPS)

(PGBA) control

Apparatus (GAP—FPA) microgravity
One of the most exciting results reported from ISS research is the conﬁrmation that common pathogens change
and become more Virulent during space ﬂight [10]. The Microbe (Effect of Spaceﬂight on Microbial Gene Expression
and Virulence) experiment was performed in Sep 2006; it examined changes in three microbial pathogens. Initial data
from one of the microbes, Salmonella lyphimurium (a leading cause of human gastroenteritis), showed that 167 genes
were expressed differently in ﬂight when compared with ground controls. The data indicated a response to the micro-
graVity environment, including widespread alterations of gene expression that increased disease-causing potential.
These results show great promise for both understanding mechanisms used by pathogens to spread disease and also
designing ways to better protect humans in space [10]. With these new insights, similar experiments will continue on
the ISS with related sets of pathogens. The original experiment was funded because of the human health risks for
exploration missions; but because of the potential for applications to prevent disease on Earth, follow-on studies
have been implemented as pathﬁnders for the use of the ISS as a National Laboratory.
Human Research Program
Research on the human body in space—how it reacts to microgravity and radiation—is a high priority for NASA’s
ISS science portfolio (ﬁg. 2). The Human Research Program (HRP) experiments aboard the ISS build from the large
body of work that has been collected since the early days of space program, including a robust set of experiments that
was conducted on Skylab, Mir, and shorter-duration shuttle ﬂights. Clinical evidence demonstrated important physio-
logical changes in astronauts during space ﬂight. The HRP, together with ISS Medical Operations, sponsored experiments
that study different aspects of crew health, and efﬁcacy of countermeasures for extended-duration stays in microgravity.
Up through the 15th ISS expedition, 32 experiments focused on the human body, including research on bone and
muscle loss, the vascular system, changes in immune response, radiation studies, and research on psycho-social
aspects of liVing in the isolation of space. Several of the early experiments have led to new experiments, testing
details of observations or pursuing new questions that were raised by early results. One or two new experiments
are started nearly every expedition (ﬁg. 3).
The HRP research now focuses on knowledge gaps in our understanding of the physiological changes that are
observed during long-duration space ﬂight and research that is aimed at ameliorating the greatest health risks [11];
today’s experiments are designed to provide more detail in the complex changes in crew health. Today, an integrated
set of parameters is monitored on ISS crewmembers. For example, Nutrition (Nutritional Status Assessment), which is
a comprehensive in-ﬂight study of human physiologic changes during long-duration space ﬂight [12], and Integrated
Immune (Validating Procedures for Monitoring Crewmember Immune Function) sample and analyze participant’s

8

"
"17","blood, urine, and saliva before, during, and after space ﬂight. These samples are used to study the changes that are
related to functions such as bone metabolism, oxidative damage, and immune function. These studies are unique
because of the information that they collect on the timing of changes during the course of a space mission. Another
collaborative set of experiments measures and monitors body ﬂuid shifts; electrocardiograms are collected to monitor
the heart function and vascular health of the crew. The crewmembers periodically test their pulmonary function, and
keep journals that are used to quantitatively analyze their response to isolation. Future research is also ensured. Extra
biological samples are collected for the Repository investigation, which is a long—term archive of critical biological
samples that are collected from ISS astronauts, for future analysis when new tools and methods can be used and
new questions are posed.
Resultsfrom the initial experiments on the ISSare just.
IEﬁIElﬂl-IIIIHIEEQII now being published; most studies require multiple subjects
1‘""
Emma]: =EE============== over1 severlal years to derive the necessary data. Nevertheless,
IIE-iﬁ-Eli-IIIIIIIIIIII WC ave a ready identiﬁed 43 SClentlﬁC publications from
IIEQEQIEEEIIEQIIII research sponsored by the HRP that was performed on ISS.
ILZEILIIIIIIjIIIIIIIII These results document, in increasing detail, locations and
IIIEJEEEIIIIIIIIIII parameters of bone loss, links between bone and muscle loss,
EEEEJEEEiEEPiIEEiEE renal stone development, rates of recovery and changes in
IIIIEIIIIIIIIIIIII recovered bone mass, changes related to the immune system,
—---mﬁE--!!!-!--== associated proﬁles of other physiological or biochemical
====EE5E=EIEEEEEFE parameters, and roles of diet, drug countermeasures, and
IIIIIEﬁEﬁﬁjﬁﬁgﬁﬁII-ii exercise. Cornpilations that include the collective results
=====Lﬁﬁﬁg%ﬂﬁ[ﬁjﬁﬁ== and collaborations of ground and space—based human
IIIIIIIEEEHIIL—‘jIIIIﬂI research experiments have also been published (e.g.,
=IIIIIIIfngE""—"":=filr_- HIIEII! Cavanaugh and Rice 2007). Since many of the human
—=======i-'-'IHEEHE%H research studies oontinue aboard the ISS, results will
ﬂw .Jhml I hj ﬁ'ifﬁﬁigilllﬁl continue to ﬂow in from the early experiments.
IIEEEEEEEEEIEEIEEQLL
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIEIEL-ZHII
IIIIIIIIIIIIIItﬂFlI F- 3 Ar .- f - b E d-- db
Mlllllllllllllﬂfjﬁﬁg uE‘ﬂ‘Epi Th1: L'ligiafnxﬁilﬁﬂéiedyneXV‘V’ZX'SSSaZﬁESnZSHy y
hlﬁﬂrwlla. . Lﬂﬁﬁat-ﬂ - -
IIIIIIIIIIIIII-un every Exped't'on-
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIEJEEI
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIILJII
EGMWFMHFI LEM"" Fill
Observing the Earth and Educational Activities
The crew continues to perform the Crew Earth Observations (CEO) investigation that supports a variety of Earth
Science initiatives. Crew observations document urban growth, monitor changes along coastlines and long—term
ecological research sites, record maj or events such as volcanic eruptions or hurricanes, and provide observations to
support the International Polar Year. In a recent example, researchers working with the National Snow and Ice Data
Center requested images of icebergs that broke from the Larsen ice shelf in Antarctica. The high—resolution ISS images
that answered this request provided the ﬁrst observations of ponded meltwater on the icebergs as they drifted into the
South Atlantic Ocean (ﬁg. 4). These data allowed scientists to use the icebergs as analogs of ice sheets and model the
accelerated breakup of an ice shelf [13]. While Earth observation activities have less formal experiment protocols, the
data are ﬁally accessible to scientists around the world. ISS Earth obser— ' g _. .. _
vations have supported more than 20 publications and one patent, - ' ' """"
several Web—based articles, and a robust database that serves more - '_ . J... _ _ .. _
than 325,000 images of Earth that were taken by astronauts on the _ ' 1 ...r -- x .. ' '
ISS (http://eol.jsc.nasa.gov). . _ _ ; ‘_' / -3-
2:14:5- . I ’
Figure 4. ISSOOS-E-12558 — ISS astronauts, working with scientists , I"" r - ..../
studying the breakup of Antarctic ice shelves, tracked Iceberg A398 near _ 3’
South Georgia Island as it collected ponded meltwater on the surface and ' -__ "" ' """"
disintegrated in the South Atlantic Ocean. , .
9

"
"18","ISS education activities have touched millions of students around the world. For example, tens of thousands of
students have participated in the EarthKAM experiment; even more have participated in crew conferences with
schools through HAM radio [14]. In addition, crews continue to create short Videos demonstrating elements of life in
microgravity, proﬁling technologies involved in living off the planet, and providing a behind-the-scenes look at
some of the science experiment hardware. Recent examples of these include a feature called “Toys in Space”

[15] and a demonstration of Newton’s Laws.

Science from International Space Station Operations

The formal experiments that are performed on the ISS, and their published results, represent part of the body of

188 research that is supported by NASA. For example, some 188 crewmembers initiate their own experiments and
demonstrations of microgravity phenomena (e.g., Saturday Morning Science [16]). Ground studies in analog settings,
experiments that reﬁne techniques or instrumentation, and follow-on studies to the ISS experiments support almost
all of the speciﬁc research proj ects that are performed on the ISS. Beyond the continued experimentation and analysis
and reporting of peer-reViewed research, there is a large body of science (at least 30 publications) resulting from data
that were collected from day-to—day operations of the 188. These data and their analyses are critical for future explor-
ation. They document daily parameters of the crew and the spacecraft, verify as-built conﬁgurations and responses
of hardware, record changes over time in conﬁgurations, document the space environment (radiation, micrometeoroid
and orbital debris (MMOD) ﬂux, local contamination from outgassing and venting, daily wear due to thermal
ﬂexing), and the efﬁcacy of countermeasures such as MMOD and radiation shielding.

International Space Station Research: Benefits to Life on Earth

Spin-oﬂs and Patents

We continue to track innovations resulting from research in microgravity. Several recent patents and partnerships
have demonstrated the back—tO-Earth beneﬁts of the public investment in 188 research. A few examples are provided
here.

0 The air-purifying technology (titanium dioxide (Ti02)-based ethylene), which is employed in the
plant growth chamber that is used in the AdVAsc experiment, was incorporated into an airborne pathogen
scrubber that is effective against AnthraX spores [17].

o A researcher who is mining the public database of astronaut photographs of the Earth
(http://eol.jsc.nasa.g0V) for oblique Views of large fans of sediments around river systems (ﬂuvial fans)
assembled and patented a compilation of the global distribution of these features. This work has
implications for hydrocarbon exploration [18].

0 An ISS investigator recently patented the Microparticle Analysis System and Method, which is an in-
vention for a device that detects and analyzes microparticles [19]. This technology supports the chemical and
pharmaceutical industries, and is one of a sequence of inventions that is related to technology development
for experiments on the ISS and shuttle, including the MEPS experiment that demonstrated microencapsulation
processing of drugs, a new and powerful method for delivering drugs to targeted locations. Also of note,
the ISS demonstration of the microencapsulation of drugs has now been reproduced on the ground [20].

o The investigator for the Binary Colloidal Alloy Test -3 and 4: Critical Point (BCAT-3-4-CP) was facing a
challenge using a microscope to observe the dynamic clustering behavior of his colloidal experiments: the
moving clusters of colloidal beads would move out of the ﬁeld of View. The investigator developed a
target—locking technology for his microscope [21].

o The MISSE experiments have yielded dozens of important assessments that are directly applicable to
current and future spacecraft materials. Additionally, spin-offs include the use of A0 to remove organic
content from surfaces for diverse applications. Examples include use of A0 to restore valuable artwork,
and to remove bacteria contaminants from surgical implants [23]. A recent patent was awarded to etch the
surface of the optical ﬁbers that are used for blood analyses to increase the surface area and enable rapid
assessment of blood glucose levels [24].

Education: Beneﬁts to the Next Generation ofSpace Explorers

Supporting science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education is an important component of all

188 research; the estimated educational impact of the collection of 188 research is broad. In 2006, Thomas et al. [14]

estimated that more than 30 million students and nearly 15,000 teachers have participated in 188 scientiﬁc activities

or demonstrations. Speciﬁc educational activities are part of every 188 research complement, and include student-

developed experiments, students performing classroom versions of ISS experiments and demonstrations, and stand-
1 0

"
"19","alone educational demonstrations that can be used as teaching aids or resource materials. In one large coordinated
effort, the ﬁrst educator astronaut ﬂew to the ISS in Dec 2006 and conducted classroom sessions throughout her
mission.
In addition to these education activities, many research experiments are tied to US. academic institutions
and involve student research from high school through advanced graduate degrees. Students may be listed as
co-investigators, involved in hardware development or testing, or participate in critical parts of operations and
data reduction. For example, two investigators for the MISSE-2 experiment enlisted high school students to collaborate
with them on sample preparation and subsequent data analysis of their polymer experiment that was mounted on the
MISSE-2 container for exposure to the space environment. This experiment, which is called the Polymer Erosion
and Contamination Experiment (PEACE) polymers experiment, is now being examined to determine the effects of AO
erosion [23,24]. PEACE polymers experiments were also ﬂown as part of MISSE-S and MISSE-6. Students who are in-
volved in the MISSE PEACE polymer experiments have successfully competed in science fairs and demonstrations,
and have gone on to science degrees from top universities. A team of three young women that participated in the
PEACE polymer studies placed sixth in the prestigious National Siemen’s Competition in Math, Science and
Technology. For its work, the team received medals and $10,000 in scholarship money. (For more information,
see http://www.hb.edu/htnil/about.php?id=l 158.)
Many other experiments conduced on the ISS comprised critical research for undergraduate and graduate students.
These educational venues are summarized in Thomas et al. 2006 [14].
Looking forward, using the ISS as an educational platform will be taken to a new level as the ISS National
Laboratory develops. The America Competes Act (2007) provides direction to NASA to include STEM educational
activities as a high priority. Educational activities are a key component of the National Lab legislation, and planning
is under way with commercial, academic, and other US. agency partners to develop novel programs and experiments
targeting student involvement [25].
SUPPORTING FUTURE EXPLORATION: SCIENCE AFTER THE FIRST 10 YEARS
Publications of ISS scientiﬁc results, which is one metric that is used to measure success of the research program,
have shown steady increases in all scientiﬁc research areas on the ISS (ﬁg. 5). To date, we have identiﬁed roughly
200 publications directly resulting from research on the ISS.
200
180 El ISS Operations
I III Earth & Education
160 - l Technology Development
140 l Physicical Sciences
I l Biology
120 III Human Research
100 —
80 —
60 —
0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Figure 5. A compilation of the number of publications resulting from research aboard the ISS.
Each discipline has produced a steady stream of published results, which is one metric for
assessing scientific productivity.
Building from these successes, engineers and scientists from around the world are working together to reﬁne
their relationships and build from their experiences conducting early science to ensure maximum utilization of the
1 1

"
"20","expanded capabilities aboard 188. These capabilities have already enabled scientists to replan their experiments in
real time, and immediately respond to new observations and unexpected results by performing new experiment runs.
Other research builds from questions arising from early 188 science results.

New experiments aboard the 188 include a broad range of science, as follows:

0 Coordinated human research experiments that collaborate with International Partners’ science objectives
and activities, including shared baseline data collection and in-ﬂight sampling, with the goal of understand-
ing integrated causes and effects of changes in the human body.

0 Research using new science racks, including the ﬂuids integrated rack (FIR), the combustion integrated
rack (CIR), and materials science research rack (MSRR), will enable new experiments exploring combus-
tion, ﬂuid behavior, and heat-dependent crystallization patterns in metal alloys.

0 Exploration Technology Development will build from early experiments on materials exposure, smoke
generation, liquid fuel management, and environmental monitoring.

0 The new Window Observation Research Facility (WORF) will provide capabilities to support remote-
sensing instruments, enabling Earth Science research that will, for example, document crop health and test
the utility of blue-green bands for ocean research.

cu mini“ .55 ulmmﬂm am.“ With a large body of published scientiﬁc results from the 188,
Mm new science facilities, mature operational protocols for science
”gm operations, the realization of international scientiﬁc partner-

Eﬂm -—.Il ships and new opportunities for scientiﬁc collaboration, and the

453“ P—ip—r increased crew size in the near future, the research from 188 is

IIIIIIII ._..—_._ “IL on the rise. Figure 6 illustrates the projected increase in crew

35‘” 'I — time that is available for conducting scientiﬁc research. We

3““ — :— anticipate that this graph also approximates the increased

253:: —| rate of scientiﬁc returns in the future.

EIEIE —|—

Tax: —|_

5m . _ Figure 6 Graph showing the projected increase in crew time

3 — - - =----- -I I I I I 'I'JI'TI I I I . I availableforresearch.
As 188 science activities and operations continue, scientiﬁc data that are derived from earlier experiments will be
re-examined, mined, and assembled with new data and ﬁndings—perhaps data from other ﬁelds. We anticipate that
successful 188 research will be used to seed new ideas and hypotheses to be tested on future missions.
REFERENCES
[1] National Aeronautics and Space Administration, International Space Station, 188 Experiment and Facility
Information, http://www.nasa.gOV/missi0n_pages/station/science/els_indeX2.html.
[2] Robinson JA, Rhatigan J L, Baumann DK, Tate J , Thumm T. International Space Station Research Summary
Through Expedition 10. NASA TP-2006-2l3 146. 2006: l—l42.
[3] National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 188 Experiment and Facility Results Publications,
http://www.nasa.gOV/missi0n_pages/station/science/experiments/Publications.html.
[4] Urban DL, Ruff GA, Brooker J E, Cleary T, Yang J , Mulholland G, Yuan Z-G. Spacecraft Fire Detection: Smoke
Properties and Transport in Low-GraVity. 46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV. 2008:
7 — 10 Jan; AIAA 2008-806.
[5] de Groh KK, Banks BA, McCarthy CE, Rucker RN, Roberts LM, Berger LA. MISSE PEACE Polymers Atomic
Oxygen Erosion Results. NASA TM-2006-2l4482 (2006).
12

"
"21","[6] de Groh KK, Banks BA, Dever JA, J aworske DA, Miller SK, Sechkar EA, Panko SR. NASA Glenn Research
Center's Materials International Space Station Experiments (MISSE 1-7). NASA TM-2008-215482 (2008).
[7] McLeish TA. Tangled Tale of Topological Fluids, Physics T Oday, Aug 2008: 40—45.
[8] Weislogel MM, J enson RM, Klatte J , Dreyer ME. The Capillary Flow Experiments aboard 188: Moving Contact
Line Experiments and Numerical Analysis. 46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV. 2008;
7—1 0 Jan; AIAA 2008-816.
[9] Vasquez PA, Furst EM, Agui J , Williams J , Pettit D, Lu E. Structural Transitions 0f Magnetoghreological Fluids
in Microgravity. 46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV. 2008: 7—10 J an; AIAA 2008-815.
[10] Wilson JW, Ott CM, Hoener zu Bentrup K, Ramamurthy R, Quick L, Porwollik S, Cheng P, McClelland M,
Tsaprailise G, Radabaugh T, Hunt A, Fernandez D, Richter E, Shah M, Kilcoyne M, J oshi L, Nelman-Gonzalez M,
Hing S, Parra M, Dumars P, Norwood K, Bober R, DeVich J , Ruggles A, Goulart C, Rupert M, Stodieck L, Stafford
P, Catella L, Schurr MJ, Buchanan K, Morici L, McCracken J , Allen P, Baker-Coleman C, Hammond T, Vogel J ,
Nelson R, Pierson DL, Stefanyshyn-Piper HM, Nickerson CA. Space ﬂight alters bacterial gene expression and
Virulence and reveals a role for global regulator qu. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2007: 104(41):16299—16304.
[11] Bioastronautics Roadmap. A Risk reduction strategy for Human Space Exploration. NASA SP-2004-6113
Washington DC, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 2005.
[12] Smith SM, Zwart SR. Nutrition issues for space exploration. Acta Astronautica. 2008; 63: 609—613.
[13] Scambos T, Sergienko O, Sargent A, MacAyeal D, Fastook J . ICES at proﬁles of tabular iceberg margins and
iceberg breakups at low latitudes. Geophys. Research Letters, Vol 32, L23SO9 2005.
[14] Thomas DA, Robinson JA, Tate J , Thumm T. Inspiring the Next Generation: Student Experiments and
Educational Activities on the International Space Station, 2000—2006. NASA TP-2006-213721. 2006: 1—108.
[15] National Aeronautics and Space Administration Educational Product. International Toys in Space — Science on
the Station. DVD. 2004: ED-2004-06-001-JSC.
[16] Love SG, Pettit DR. Fast, Repeatable Clumping of Solid Particles in Microgravity. Lunar and Planetary Science
XXXV. 2004; 1119.
[17] AiroCide T102, AdVAsc, Advanced AstrocultureTM spin-off, http://WWW.sti.nasa.gOV/tto/spinoff2002/er_5.html.
[18] M.J. Wilkinson, 2006, Method for Identifying Sedimentary bodies from images and its application to mineral
exploration, USPTO Patent # 6,985,606. http://patft.uspt0.gOV/netacgi/nph-
Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtm1%2FPTO%2Fsearch-
b001.htm1&r=1&f=G&1=50&co1=AND&d=PTXT&sl=6985606.PN.&OS=PN/6985606&RS=PN/6985606.
[19] Morison, DR, Microparticle analysis system and method, 2008
http://WWW.uspt0.gOV/Web/patents/patog/Week46/OG/htm1/1324-2/USO7295309-20071 1 13 .html
[20] Morrison DR, Haddad RS, Ficht A. Microencapsulation of Drugs: New cancer therapies and improved
drug delivery derived from microgravity research. Proceedings of the 40th Space Congress, Cape Canaveral, Fla.
Apr, 2003.
[21] Lu P, TARC: Target—Locking Microscopy, http://WWW.physics.harvard.edu/~p1u/research/PLuTARCU.

13

"
"22","[22] National Aeronautics and Space Administration Spin-offs: Corrosive Gas Restores Artwork, Promises Myriad
of Applications
http://WWW.sti.nasa.gOV/spinoff/spinitem?title=Corrosive+Gas+Restores+ArtW0rk%2C+Pr0mises+Myriad+App1icat
i0ns+.
[23] Banks, B, Energetic Atomic and Ionic Oxygen Textured Optical Surfaces for Blood Glucose Monitoring, 2008.
http://patft.uspto.gOV/netacgi/nph-
Parser?Sect1=PTOZ&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-
b001.htm1&r=1&f=G&1=50&co1=AND&d=PTXT&s1=%22Energetic+Atomic+Ionic+Oxygen+Textured+Optical+
Surfaces+B100d+G1ucose+M0nitoring%22.TI.&OS=TTL/.
[24] Stambler AH, Inoshita KE, Roberts LM, Barbagallo CE, de Groh KK, Banks BA. Ground-Laboratory t0
In-Space Atomic Oxygen Correlation for the PEACE Polymers, 9th1nternati0na1 Conference on “Protection of
Materials and Structures from Space Environment,” May 20—23, 2008, Toronto, Canada.
[25] National Aeronautics and Space Administration (2008) An Opportunity to Educate: International Space Station
National Laboratory NP-2008-03-503-HQ.

14

"
"23","SUMMARY OF NASA EXPERIMENTS AND THEIR RESULTS
15

"
"24","TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
F uture exploration—the return to the moon and human exploration ofMars—presents
many technological challenges. Studies on the [SS can test a variety ofteehnologies, systems,
and materials that will be neea’edforfuture Exploration missions.
Some of the technology development experiments have been so successful that the hardware
has been transitioned to operational status. Other experimental resultsfeea’ new technology
developments.

CHARACTERIZING THE MICROGRA VITY ENVIRONMENT ON [88
Many people think OfISS as a “zero-gravity ” environment because the eontinuousfree-fall as
[SS orbits the Earth simulates the absence ofgravity. However, tiny vibrational disturbances
aboard stationfrom aerodynamic drag, venting ofair or water, movement 0fs0lar arrays and
antennas, dockings, reb00sts, and crew activity all exertforees on station. Experiments have
monitored the microgravity environment and evaluated technical solutions to protect [SS
experimentsfrom unwantedforees.

ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING ON [88
The living space aboard the [SS is monitored eontinuouslyfor contamination or other threats to
the health of the crew. New technologies are being tested that rapidly detect and analyze both
contaminants in the cabin air (gaseous, particulate, and microbial), in the water, and on the sur-
faces of the station. Because the [SS is a closed environment, early detection and analysis of
contamination is critical. T he job ofaeeurate sampling and detection is made more diﬁﬁeult by
microgravity: air does not circulate by convection, and geography inside the station can create
zones that are diﬁieult to monitor. Variable concentrations ofeontaminants can also provide
misleading results.
S PA CE CRAF T ENVIRONMENTS
Understanding the space environment outside of the [SS living space is also critical to life
aboard the station ana’futare exploration missions. Quantiﬁzing radiation hazards, the eﬁ’eets of
A0, large thermal cycles, and mierometeorites and orbital debris is a large area afreseareh
aboard the ISS..
SPA CECRAFT MA TERIALS AND SYS TEMS
ISSprovia’es a testbea’for a variety ofspaeeeraft systems. Results Ofstua’ies on station help to
determine which materials are most resistant to the conditions of the space environment, provide
insight into in-spaee repairs, test satellite control algorithms, and give information on the physical
processes underlying systems as diverse as ﬁre suppression ana’pmpellant tank design.
PICOSA TELLITES AND CONTROL SYSTEMS
Better engineering autonomous operations in space, includingfree-flyers, and understanding
control system behavior in microgravity will be increasingly importantforfuture space missions—
b0th erewea’ ana’ unerewea’.
16

"
"25","Technology Development Experiments Performed on the International Space Station, Grouped by Discipline
Characterizing the Microgravity Environment on ISS
ARIS-ICE (Active Rack Isolation System — ISS Characterization Experiment).
MAMS (Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System).
SAMS-II (Space Acceleration Measurement System—II).
Environmental Monitoring on ISS
ANITA (Analyzing Interferometer for Ambient Air).
LOCAD-PTS (Lab-on-a-Chip Application Development-Portable Test System).
Picosatellites and Control Systems
MACE-II (Middeck Active Control Experiment-H).
SPHERES (Synchronized Position Hold, Engage, Reorient, Experimental Satellites).
STP-HZ-MEPSI (Space Test Program—HZ-Microelectromechanica1 System—Based (MEMS) PICOSAT Inspector).
STP-HZ-RAFT (Space Test Program—HZ-Radar Fence Transponder).
Spacecraft Materials and Systems
EMCH (Elastic Memory Composite Hinge).
1881 (In Space Soldering Experiment).
MISSE-l and -2 (Materials International Space Station Experiment -1 and -2).
MISSE-3 and -4 (Materials International Space Station Experiment -3 and -4).
MISSE-S (Materials International Space Station Experiment-S).
MISSE-6A and -6B (Materials International Space Station Experiment-6A and -6B).
Spacecraft Systems
DAFT (Dust and Aerosol Measurement Feasibility Test).
Maui (Maui Analysis of Upper Atmospheric Injections).
SAME (Smoke and Aerosol Measurement Experiment).
SNFM (Serial Network Flow Monitor).
Spacecraft Environments
RAMBO (Ram Burn Observations).
STP-HZ-ANDE (Space Test Program—HZ-Atmospheric Neutral Density Experiment).
1 7

"
"26","ANALYZING INTERFEROMETER FOR AMBIENT AIR (ANITA)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Gij sbert Tan, European Space Research and Technology Center, Noordwijk, The
Netherlands
Expeditions 15—1 7
Research Area Environmental Monitoring 0n ISS
5 ANITA. Fremf'l 213 Flat with ilnnnlal'lnnﬁ : 5 The Analyzing Interferometer for Ambient Air (ANITA)
”a - e__ L experiment is a trace gas monitoring system based on Fourier
| _ 5m?“ Leak 5 5 I '3 Transform Infrared (FTIR) technology. The initial ﬂight of
"" . _ ___ 5 _' L W ll = ' ANITA tested the accuracy and reliability of the FTIR tech-
“ﬂy. {E?w— 5H» J“! : a l tential next eneration atmos here trace as
k a + ,4- n0 ogy as a P0 g P g
-| Exxl'ﬁﬁi-_ff-E”:--"""""" - 5 - . 4 I 5 monitoring system for the International Space Station (ISS).
5 Ewan = —d_ ___""
Firs: Lag}; ____ __ ANITA data plot for Freon 218 demonstrating the ability to detect levels
| SJEEJPM of contaminant, and operations of the carbon dioxide removal assembly
: : dunking: : (CDRA)-
E E fdilulinnﬁ E
l .. .. _ ANITA was calibrated to simultaneously monitor 32 gaseous
.. :"" I"" ., -_ ' ; contaminants (including formaldehyde, ammonia, and carbon
monoxide (C0)) at low as parts per million levels in the ISS at-
mosphere. The hardware design—a quasi on-line, fast-time resolution gas analyzer—allowed air quality to be analyzed
in near real time. For this experiment, the actual ANITA analysis results (contaminant identiﬁcation and concentration)
were not monitored by the crew, but were downlinked t0 the ground support team. In the future, ANITA analyses
could be used by ISS crewmembers for detecting contaminants and immediate initiation of countermeasures, if
required.
The ANITA calibration models that were developed prior to ﬂight were based on a set of reference spectra of the
32 gaseous species that were considered possible contaminants. Earlier air quality analyses have determined that
these trace gases may be present in the ISS cabin atmosphere. The experiment set-up allowed for rebuilding cali-
bration models and resulting software changes to the in-ﬂight calibration codes by the ANITA ground team if a
contaminant is new or present at a different concentration level. A real-time modiﬁcation of the operational
parameters can be uplinked t0 the ISS.
RESULTS
ANITA data, which were recently completed, are still being analyzed . Once ﬁnal data collection is completed, the
results will be available.
However, ANITA was used in mid 2008 to detect a Freon leak (Khladon 218) from the Russian air conditioner, and
to monitor the timeline of Freon concentrations with CDRA operations and shuttle docking. The ANITA data helped
to determine that the zeolite bed in the CDRA was not effective in scrubbing the Freon leak, but that diluting the ISS
air after the docking with the shuttle substantially reduced the level of Freon.
The preliminary data analysis suggested that ANITA data were fairly accurate; the peak concentration that was
measured by ANITA corresponds well to Russian estimates of mass released. Air was captured and returned to
Earth for data analysis to corroborate ANITA results.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
1 8

"
"27","ACTIVE RACK ISOLATION SYSTEM-ISS CHARACTERIZATION EXPERIMENT (ARlS-ICE)
Principal Investigator(s): Glenn S. Bushnell and Ian J . Fialho, The Boeing Company, Seattle, Wash.
Expeditions 2—4
Research Area Characterizing the MicrograVity Environment on ISS
Constant microgravity conditions are essential for some ISS experiments. Sources of disturbance can include
minor changes in acceleration, the movement of hardware such as the space station rernote rnanipulator system
(the robotic arm), or even norrnal crew activities, any of which can cause subtle Vibrations to be transferred through
station. The Active Rack Isolation Systern (ARIS) protects equipment by absorbing the shock of motion before it
can affect an experiment.
ARIS is installed in two EXPRESS racks on ISS (EXPRESS Rack 2 and EXPRESS Rack 3), where it reduces
Vibrations using a combination of sensors and actuators. When the sensors detect a disturbance, the actuators counter
the effect by sending a reactive force between the EXPRESS rack and the laboratory module, much as a shock absorber
on an automobile would—except this “smart” shock absorber is ﬁnely tuned to react to, and cancel out, very minute
Vibrations. Accelerometer assernblies measure the disturbances and send data to the ARIS electronic control unit.
The electronic control unit signals pushrods to press against the framework of station, stabilizing the rack. A mi—
crogravity rack barrier prevents accidental disturbances to the active ARIS rack. ARIS is designed to isolate all
frequencies greater than 0.01 Hz, and is most effective in the 0.05— to 300—Hz range.
The ARIS—ISS Characterization Experiment (ICE) was a payload activity to characterize the ARIS on—orbit
performance by monitoring the ambient Vibration environment and by generating disturbances. The shaker unit
provided a precise, rneasurable disturbance that simulated possible station Vibrations. The other rnaj or component
of ICE is the payload on—orbit processor, which executed characterization tests and acquired, synchronized, and
processed ICE and Space Acceleration Measurernent Systerns—II (SAMS—II) data for downlink.
.f l I.' ffg' ..--'--
IK : l: I ii. - '3'?""

_F -.. ' .3..— . _r _ _‘.'.i _ “Lilli: 1;"" . __. I ' 'I r-

.I '. . _'fif'ﬂ E ]‘$'f ., .E' .' 88003327013 — Cosmonaut Vladimir

‘_ - -- . 115+ Ii ' Dezhurov performs ARIS-ICE hammer

”E . _'.' ._ .* I -""-""""1_ tests in the U.S. Destiny laboratory
' _ _ .‘ 2: I r; “If during Expedition 3.
. ill .. ' J'- u ' 1%.: I 1 F
IE - -.1-__: ' - '11-... ' I _-
.-""II _ ' '_ .I-.. . '1- ’J :
. - ' I|
RESULTS
ARIS—ICE operations were performed for over a year during ISS Expeditions 2—4. During that period more than
1,700 test runs were completed, ranging from short l—second stability tests to 5—hour isolation characterization tests.
Station Vibrations were isolated to levels well below the science requirements of investigations in EXPRESS racks
that were equipped with ARIS (Bushnell et al. 2002a). The ARIS—ICE command and data handling architecture
helped to streamline the operational efﬁciency of the ARIS. The level of testing that was needed was greatly
reduced by this system (Bushnell et al. 2002b). Quick—control design cycles were able to facilitate on—orbit
payload operations, allowing ease of performing ARIS—ICE (Fialho et al. 2003).
The investigators determined, through a series of acceleration characterization experiments conducted during
ARIS—ICE, that the ARIS facility provides the ability to predict and prevent the potentially damaging effect of
station Vibrations. It was also determined that sensitive experiments that are installed in ARIS would be isolated
1 9

"
"28","and protected from both Vibrational and acceleration movements. These capabilities are critical to make 188 a
unique, world—class research laboratory in microgravity.
PUBLICATION(S)
Bushnell GS, Fialho IJ, McDaVid T, Allen J L, Quraishi N. Ground and On—Orbit Command and Data Handling
Architectures for the Active Rack Isolation System Microgravity Flight Experiment. AIAA 53rd International
Astronautical Congress, The World Space Congress, Houston. IAC—OZ—J .5 .07, Oct 10—19, 2002a.
Bushnell GS, Fialho IJ, Allen J L, Quraishi N. Microgravity Flight Characterization of the International Space
Station Active Rack Isolation System. AIAA Microgravity Measurements Group Meeting, The World Space
Congress, Houston. Oct 10—1 1, 2002b.
Fialho IJ, Bushnell GS, Allen J L, Quraishi N. Taking H—inﬁnity to the International Space Station: Design,
Implementation and On—orbit Evaluation of Robust Controllers for Active Microgravity Isolation. AIAA Guidance,
Navigation and Control Conference, Austin, Texas. Aug 2003.
- — {r j]
t . r
-1 - '._ — _ _ -
.-_i' i- 1
‘- 'I|L- -._ I.
-- e 11:. . .
JSCZOO1E34286 — Astronaut James Voss
performing ARIS—ICE hammer operations in the
U.S. Destiny laboratory on EXPRESS Rack 2.
20

"
"29","DUST AND AEROSOL MEASUREMENT FEASIBILITY TEST (DAFT)
Principal Investigat0r(s): David Urban, NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
Expeditions 10, 13
Research Area Spacecraft Systems
Our understanding of how ﬁres burn in a spacecraft has evolved since the ﬁre detection equipment on space
shuttle and space station was developed. One thing we have learned is that smoke particles that form in micro—
gravity can be larger than those formed on Earth. Since smoke detectors are gauged to detect certain sizes of parti—
cles, this knowledge could help design more accurate smoke detectors for future spacecraft. The Smoke and Aerosol
Measurement Experiment (SAME) is planned to gather particulate size information on ISS. The DAFT experiment,
which was initiated after the Columbia accident, is to be used to obtain data in preparation for SAME using very
little uprnass.
__ _ _ _ DAFT is intended to assess and characterize the distribution
' - ""T :15 715—117: . _ , I .' of particles in the air inside ISS to allow assessment of the suita—
_‘LE- ' ' _ . ""1"" §- 9:: L _ _ bility of current shuttle and ISS smoke detectors. This experiment
5"" ‘7 _ : |l_=- _ was begun on Expedition 10 and completed during Expedition 13.
'- ""- .. :3 | _ __' ' DAFT is designed to test the effectiveness of the P—Trak Ultraﬁne
'% -_ ' ﬂ- - 1.; Particle Counter, a device that counts ultra—ﬁne dust particles in a
__.- '- ._ -_... _ "" I microgravity environment. Most particle counters work by using a
‘4: -‘_ :11 ?K ‘L . laser to record instances when the beam is interrupted; however, this
1: ii“? Ir"" _ --_._ .._ ._""__"" method will not record ultra—ﬁne particles that are much smaller
\ ; . _ 1 _‘5 ir ﬁ—Q‘f‘i than the wavelength of the light. P—Trak works by passing dust—
._ lb |25-1. fl J .r _ ' - laden air through a chamber of vaporous isopropyl alcohol. When
""1'? _--_...-__ ' J *- .I _ 'i‘""- a droplet of alcohol condenses over an ultra—ﬁne dust particle, the
‘i r ' _L _ tr} -.. J I "" particle becomes large enough to break the light beam and be counted.
Video screen shot Of ISS commander and science The alcohol is then recycled as it condenses 0n sidewalls and gravity
officer Leroy Chiao performing DAFT operations on pulls the alcohol back to the saturator. If the results are satisfac—
Statio“ during EXPEditiO“ 10- tory, P—Trak will be used in SAME, which requires counts of
particles ranging from 0.2 to 1 micron.
RESULTS
Preliminary results, which are based on DAFT sessions that were performed on station in 2005 and 2006,
demonstrated that the P—Trak Ultraﬁne Particle Counter could be successfully built into the SAME payload, and
established the optimal ranges for particle detection using this instrument. The data collected also indicate very low
levels of particulate in the ISS environment relative to that previously measured on shuttle. This low particulate level
is not surprising due to the small crew size on ISS (two or three vs. the typical seven—person crew on shuttle) and
the high—efﬁciency particular accumulator (HEPA) ﬁltration system of ISS. It is suspected that the particulate level
will rise once station hosts a larger crew. In later experiment runs, the results indicated that the average size of the
particles were larger on orbit than on Earth. These results could be due to the inefﬁciency of the large particle ﬁlter.
Once the median particulate level throughout ISS is known, it can be used to design future smoke detectors that
accurately distinguish normal dust from the presence of dangerous smoke particles.
A series of events (malfunction of the electronic data transmitted, crew time limits, and an alcohol wick that did not
open) shortened the overall experiment, but adequate data were collected to label the demonstration successful.
PUBLICATION(S)
Urban D, Grifﬁn D, Ruff G, Cleary T, Yang J , Mulholland G, Yuan Z. Detection of Smoke frorn Microgravity Fires.
Proceedings of the International Conference on Environmental Systems. 2005—01—2930, 2005.
21

"
"30","ELASTIC MEMORY COMPOSITE HINGE (EMCH)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Lieutenant Corey Duncan, Air Force Research Laboratory, Kirtland Air Force Base, NM.
Expedition 15
Research Area Spacecraft Materials and Systems
The elastic memory composite hinge (EMCH) experiment provided test data on new materials that will further
space hardware technology. This technology may eliminate the need for highly complex deployment mechanisms
by providing a simpler, lightweight alternative to mechanical hinges. EMCH builds on the previous space shuttle
experiment, lightweight ﬂexible solar array hinge (LFSAH) that was ﬂown on STS—93.
.. .. —-: _-:-=- ., _ I;
The siX EMCH test articles that were tested on the 188 were . ,1“. :5 1-
approximately 10 x 2.5 x 2.5 cm in dimension and made of a unique resin 1! ' _ . - ‘ f 1
and carbon ﬁber laminate that was developed at Composite Technology 11.:- - ,
Development, Inc. End ﬁxtures and metrology devices were developed ' . - ' ‘
to allow the EMCH test articles to be deployed through remote actuation, h ' -‘ = -' ' _ I
while their force—torque history and deployment accuracy are recorded au— '
tornatically. A resistive heater was embedded in the elastic memory compo— 3:.-
site (EMC) larninates in the hinge to provide the heat that was necessary .i' _ 1' [I- H
for actuation. The hinge was folded 0n the ground and deployed in space. "" “T "" . fr
A proximity sensor was attached to the end mass to determine the ﬁnal . ll. _; 1‘
position upon deployment. A second motion sensor was used to determine ' ! __ ' -' '
the deployment vs. time history. The test articles were re—settable to allow {J _ _ . -
for multiple deployments. j: '7'“: I |
I. am
. . . ' ' i {I I ' l . Lh ' '
|S$O15E08404 — VIew of the EMCH experiment assembly In the t :- . _ _
U.S. Destiny laboratory. The photograph was taken during Expedition 15. 0-
m .1- .45.
RESULTS
EMCH was successfully completed on board 188 during Expedition 15. The investigation was returned to Earth
for a complete analysis by the investigator team in 2007. However, the preliminary assessment indicated that the
experiment demonstrated the robustness and reliability of the TEMBO® EMC hinge in the zero—gravity environment.
This test campaign consisted of both nominal and off—norninal conditions, with the ﬁnal series of tests presenting the
most challenging conditions for on—orbit TEMBO® hinges. The successful completion of these tests indicates that the
hinges meet the designed performance goals of a next—generation space—ﬁight—qualiﬁed actuator. Additionally, the
science that was gained from this experiment conﬁrms the engineering assumptions that were used to design the
TEMBO® EMC hinges, as well as other TEMBO® EMC deployable structures that are being developed for
space applications.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
22

"
"31","lN-SPACE SOLDERING EXPERIMENT (ISSI)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Richard Grugel, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala.
Expeditions 7—1 0
Research Area Spacecraft Materials and Systems
The In—SPACE Soldering Experiment (ISSI) is another payload that
was rapidly developed after the Columbia accident to provide a low—
. "" mass experiment using hardware already on board station. It was de—
, 4f . . . . . . .
7 _ s1gnedt0 promote understanding ofjoming techniques, shape equil—
._ 5 ibrium, wetting phenomena, and micro—structural development in
: . space. Its primary objective was to better understand the effects and
consequences of soldering in a microgravity environment such as that
found on 188. In Earth’s gravity, soldering has a deﬁned behavior and
is reliant on gravity and convection to assist in solidiﬁcation, joint shape,
integrity, and microstructure. Unfortunately, on Earth detrimental gas
Video screen shot of ISS science officer bubbles (void spaces) are still found in the solder joint and at contact
Mike Fincke using a soldering iron to perform surfaces. These voids reduce the thermal and electrical conductivity and
the ISSI on station during Expedition 9- provide sites for crack initiation. Bubbles have less chance to escape in
the reduced—graVity environment of space and, therefore, are likely to
be more of a problem. To better understand this potential problem, a systematic series of soldering samples was
designed to investigate and understand porosity development, surface wetting, and equilibrium shape formation.
After the samples were heated on orbit, they were returned to Earth for property testing and metallographic
examination.
RESULTS
Five soldering sessions resulted in 86 samples. Experiment . . ""4.... _
samples were returned to the investigator team in late 2005, ""4 ' '- ' 1.- Ir' _' '
and were evaluated both nondestructively and then r "" .I 11-11
destructively. "" q- r l in.
rr- r. . * ' . -'
Real—time downlink Video of the experiment yielded direct - ' _ ' - —""I""_"" '- :1."" . - 4*
observation of the solder melting, equilibrium shape attain— ' _~ 3‘"" i 5 ""'u 1.“? ' 1*
ment by the liquid, and ﬂux movement. The ﬂux movement .- “a - ' ' . - """" '
was particularly noteworthy because it was entirely unexpected. ._ _._,._-—- ‘r I .
When the ﬂux was released from the solder during heating, it _ ?'""T “t"" H: _-.-. ' '- :
formed a droplet that spun around the larger solder drop. This ,..-. - 1"" __, I a. El ;
surprising movement is driven by thermocapillary ﬂow that is -
induced by the temperature gradient. This type of behavior I88009E14472 — Astronaut Edward M. (Mike) Fincke,
cannot be duplicated on Earth. Expedition 9 science officer and flight engineer, works
on the ISSI in the U.S. Destiny laboratory.
PUBLICATION(S)
Grugel R, Cotton LJ, Segre PN, Ogle JA, Funkhouser G, Parris F, Murphy L, Gillies D, Hua F, Anilkumar AV.
The In—Space Soldering Investigation (ISSI): Melting and Solidiﬁcation Experiments Aboard the International Space
Station. Proceedings of the 44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV. AIAA 2006—521,
Jan 9—12, 2006.
Grugel RN, Luz P, Smith G, Spivey R, J eter L, Gillies D, Hua F, Anilkumar AV. Materials research conducted
aboard the International Space Station: Facilities overview, operational procedures, and experimental outcomes.
Acta Astronautica. 2008 ;62;491—498. (Also presented at the 5 7th International Astronautical Congress IAC—06-
A2.2.1 0)
23

"
"32","LAB-ON-A-CHIP APPLICATION DEVELOPMENT-PORTABLE TEST SYSTEM (LOCAD-PTS)
Principal Investigator(s): Norman R. Wainwright, Ph.D., Charles River Endosafe, Charleston, SC.
Expedition 15—18
Research Area Environment Monitoring on ISS
' i "" The Lab—on—a—Chip Application Development—Portable Test System (LOCAD—
I PTS) is a handheld device that enables the crew to perform complex laboratory
.. tests for the detection of a variety of biological and chemical target molecules on
l' .‘ an interchangeable thurnb—sized cartridge with a press of a button. Every thumb—
sized plastic cartridge has four channels, and each channel contains a dried extract
I _. of horseshoe crab blood cells and colorless dye. In the presence of bacteria and
fungi, the dried extract reacts strongly to turn the dye a green color. Therefore,
the more green dye, the more microorganisms there are in the original sample.
|SSO14E18794 — Expedition 14
Flight Engtneer Suni Williams uses Tests by LOCAD—PTS will become increasingly speciﬁc with the advent
the swabblng unit to collect samples . . . . .
that will be placed into the cartridges of new cartridges. Current cartridges target bacteria and fungi. New cartridges,
to be analyzed by the LOCAD reader. which are to be launched on subsequent ﬂights, Wlll target bacteria only, followed
by groups of bacteria, and eventually individual species or strains that pose a
speciﬁc risk to crew health. Cartridges can also be adapted to detect chemical substances of concern to crew safety
on the ISS (e.g., hydrazine, ammonia, and certain acids) and proteins in urine, saliva, and blood of astronauts to
provide added information for medical diagnosis.
RESULTS
LOCAD—PTS was operated for the ﬁrst time on ISS during ;
Expeditions 14 and 15. Five separate sessions were performed
over 6 weeks, with four separate swabs taken for analysis at each
site. In Session 1, control test results showed that the instrument 1' -- . .
and procedures functioned norninally, with the positive control (a sfﬂ l: y""! '
swab of the palm) giving a high reading (2.4 endotoxin units (EUs) ' i _ _ tr '
per 25 crnz) and the negative control (no swab) giving the lowest pos— - _ _—__—_'__.:-"" ""'_ ' ' .
sible reading (less than 0.05 EU/25 crnz). This session also enabled ' '-
the LOCAD—PTS team to identify an improvement in the procedures . - 123;; "" ﬂ""! - -...._ '- ___A_w--—
(implemented during subsequent sessions) that would help remove y .L "" H, g
air bubbles during the dispensing step and make it easier for the crew _ t5"" ' =‘.
to dispense consistent droplet volumes. The consistent readings that ISSO14E18822 _ Astronaut Suni Williams,
were obtained in Session 2 (and remaining sessions) indicated that this EXpedition 14 flight engineer, works with the
procedure Change had been successful. LOCAD-PTS. Williams is placing the sample mixed
WIth water from the swabblng unlt Into the
. LOCAD-PTS cartridge.
Sess10ns l and 2 revealed that the smooth and ﬂat Node 1 surfaces
were relatively clean, an average of 0.1 EU/25 crnz, approximately 25
times cleaner than the positive control. The fabric surface of the temporary sleep station (TeSS) in the ISS that was
analyzed in Session 3 gave consistently elevated readings, but the readings were still fairly low as compared with a
typical ofﬁce desk. The audio terrninal unit (ATU) and air supply diffuser (ASD)—which were analyzed in Sessions
4 and 5, respectively—gave more variable readings, correlating with the increased variability of these sites in terms of
surface materials and air ﬂow between the four swab areas.
As the number of cartridge types on ISS increases, LOCAD—PTS is set to have an extended array of applications: from
monitoring the cabin environment for other biological and chemical contaminants to monitoring blood and saliva of the
crew to support rnedical diagnostics. Looking ahead, it is hoped that this type of rapid and portable technology has
the potential to be implemented on future human lunar missions to monitor the spread of Earth—derived biological
material on the lunar surface following landing. This will be important preparation for the human exploration of
Mars, where a rnaj or scientiﬁc goal will be the search for life and differentiation of that signal from biological
material brought there by crewrnembers and their spacecraft.
24

"
"33","Currently, the technology is being used to assess ﬂuids that are used in pharmaceutical processing. The technology
has been used to swab the Mars exploration rovers (MERs), for planetary protection, and to assess microbial con-
tamination in the NASA Extreme Environment Mission Operations (NEEMO) project. This technology Will provide
quick medical diagnostics in clinical applications. It Will also provide environmental testing capabilities that may
serve homeland security.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.

25

"
"34","MIDDECK ACTIVE CONTROL EXPERIMENT-II (MACE-ll)
Principal Investigat0r(s): R. Rory Ninneman, Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL), Kirtland Air Force
Base, NM.
Expeditions 1, 2
Research Area Picosatellites and Control Systems
The Middeck Active Control Experiment—II (MACE—II) was designed to allow engineers to design future spacecraft
and facilities with lightweight, inexpensive structures and materials without sacriﬁcing the stability that is demanded
by sensitive payloads. MACE—II, the ﬁrst hands—on experiment on board station, consists of two basic parts that are
designed to detect and compensate for Vibrations. The multi—body p1atf0rrr1(MBP) test article, which is the structure
undergoing tests, has four 1—inch—diarneter struts that are connected to ﬁve nodes. It is loosely tethered in the aisle be—
tween racks during operations and is stowed between operations. The entire platform has 20 separate sensors that
monitor Vibration. The experiment support module (ESM) is a self—contained computer with a power interface to
the EXPRESS rack and an umbilical connection to the MBP.
During experiments, scientists used a gimbal 0n the MBP to create a disturbance at one end of the platform.
The ESM detected these movements and, using an adaptable set of algorithms, calculated the opposing forces to
be applied at the opposite gimbal, thereby stabilizing the platform. The algorithms could be adapted to changes due
to moving parts, variations in temperature, and normal wear and tear on mechanical systems.
A collaborating team at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) planned to study how control systems
such as that used for MACE—II can be applied to hardware and systems that change over time, such as telescopes,
antennas, and robotic arms that must be moved to perform speciﬁc duties.
RESULTS
MACE—II provided data autonomously (no human intervention or prior knowledge of the system), decreasing
the effects of Vibration in moving structures in space. Algorithms were developed to control mechanical systems
in real time using only information from on—board sensors and actuators to respond to changes in the system. The
system was able to reduce unwanted Vibrations without human intervention once it was turned on. These algorithms
were able to “adapt” whenever they sensed changes in vibration or the loss of a sensor or actuator.
. . . _ ___ i: _ r Fourteen test protocols were completed during Expedition 1, and
_ |_ I _. _ - i :f _ 'i an additional 62 test protocols were completed during Expedition 2.
' I I l' '-' ' I :2 '-'-.___"" ‘ ' ""Jim!"" - - The MACE—II unit, which was returned on shuttle ﬂight STS—105,
' I - '- """"_F__ '3'"" ﬂi'h ""' successfull 1 d 11 ' ' b' ' h '—
5-3.... - ..., 5|.- ._ .-_ 1,. _ - _- : . y cornp ete a its experiment 0 JCCthCSt at were assocr
l, ' ' ';';,f _ 1’“ ' 'T-_ -11 .L: ated With the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) Seience Team
r JJJ"" _ ﬁ' _ - ; while on station. On orbit they demonstrated a decrease in Vibration
1- :i' . . j. . ' ' .' by a factor of 10 while the system was under control. They then showed
i “'1 ' {a , __ __.r, . I that their system could adapt to failure of a primary actuator 0n the
.I '1 1'"" —- '_1_-_ - '. Ti; I system and still decrease Vibration by a factor of siX.
_||.. . - ' _ ___ ='— '. .-' I -
' - I ' _ HI I ' However, due to data downlink constraints, the MIT Science Team
5300355721 —Susan Helms, Expedition 2 was unable to meet its science objectives. The MIT team required
flight\ engineer, works with MACE-II, which is downlink of speciﬁc on—orbit tests to build its control algorithms. By
shown. ""floating"" in the microgravity environment the time data were provided to the university, there was insufﬁcient
of station. . . . . .
time to uplink the commands to run the critical experiments.
PUBLICATION(S)
DaVis L. Economical and Reliable Adaptive Disturbance Cancellation. AFRL—VS—TR—2002—1 1 18 Vol. I,
AFRL-VS-TR—2002—1 1 18 Vol. 11 Pt. 1, AFRL—VS-TR—2002—1 1 18 Vol. 11 Pt. 2, AFRL—VS—TR—2002—1 1 18 Vol. 11
Pt. 3, Sep 2002. (DOD clearance is required to view this paper)
Ninneman R, Founds D, DaVis L, Greeley S, King J . Middeck Active Control Experiment Reﬂight (MACE II)
Program: Adventures in Space. AIAA Space 2003 Conference and Exhibition, Long Beach, Calif. AIAA 2003—
6243, 2003.
26

"
"35","MICROGRAVITY ACCELERATION MEASUREMENT SYSTEM (MAMS) AND SPACE ACCELERATION
MEASUREMENT SYSTEM || (SAMS-ll), Two INVESTIGATIONS
Principal Investigator(s): Richard DeLonibard, NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
Expeditions 2—12, ongoing
Research Area Characterizing the MicrograVity Environment on ISS
Apparent weightlessness is created as the station circles and falls around the Earth; its continuous free-fall simulates
the absence of gravity. A number of scientiﬁc investigations on station rely on the absence of gravity for successful
completion. However, tiny disturbances aboard ISS, including the reboosts that are required to maintain the station’s
orbit, mimic the effects of gravity. The SAMS-II and MicrograVity Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS) eX-
periments were designed to characterize the microgravity environment on the ISS, and verify whether microgravity
requirements are being met. Both SAMS-II and MAMS instruments were deployed in Apr 2001, and continue
collecting data for speciﬁc experiments.
The microgravity acceleration enVironnient includes quasi-steady-state (frequencies less than natural frequency of
the ISS, varying over relatively long times), Vibratory accelerations (oscillatory, greater than or equal to the natural
ISS frequency), and transients accelerations (short-duration and larger amplitude Vibrations).
Vibrational disturbances occur within the frequency range of 0.01 to 300 Hz. SAMS-II measures Vibrations from
vehicle acceleration, systems operations, crew movements, and thermal expansion and contraction. The SAMS
instrument, one of the ﬁrst US. experiments to be operated on the Mir space station, was identical to the instrument
that was used to characterize the microgravity environment on the space shuttle. The second-generation SAMS (SAMS-II)
was deployed on the ISS to characterize the microgravity environment of the ISS during construction in racks near
experiments that required complete characterizations of accelerations that were experienced during experiment runs.
The MAMS complements the SAMS-II data by recording accelerations that are caused by aerodynamic drag and
ISS movements, which are caused by small attitude adjustments, gravity gradient, and the venting of water. These
quasi-steady-state accelerations occur in the frequency range below 1 Hz.
Ill|l
|SSOO6E42571 — This view features a '
reboost of station. Ground controllers ‘lll
at Mission Control Moscow ignited the 1
thrusters of a Progress rocket that was 1
docked to the Zvezda service module. ""
This 14—minute firing raised the
average altitude of ISS by about 3 km. "" _ I
Periodic reboosts, vehicle dockings ' . ""nﬂ'J-‘J _ r.
and other maneuvers create small HA! _ - -- -
forces that may influence ,.
experimental results. MAM and SAM—Il - '_ _
provide critical data for documenting -‘
the microgravity environment and --... __‘_
interpreting results. _
MAMS consists of a low-frequency triaxial accelerometer, the miniature electro-static accelerometer (MESA),
a high-frequency accelerometer, the high-resolution accelerometer package (HiRAP), and associated computer,
power, and signal processing subsystems that are contained within a double middeck locker enclosure. SAMS-II
has multiple remote triaxial sensor (RTS) systems that are used to monitor individual experiments. Each RTS is
capable of measuring between 0.01 Hz to beyond 300 Hz of Vibration, which is also known as g-jitter.
27

"
"36","RESULTS
Both MAMS and SAMS-II experiments have been monitoring the microgravity environment and how it changes
during the construction of the ISS, and during certain payload operations to verify exact microgravity conditions.
MAMS data have been analyzed to examine the quasi-steady regime on station with a frequency that is below 0.01 Hz.
These are related to ﬂight attitude, aerodynamic drag, gravity gradient and rotational effects, venting of air or water, and
appendage movement, such as that of the solar arrays and antennas. Analysts determined that the movement of the
Ku-band antenna was the source of the unusual characteristics in the quasi-steady data that were collected by
MAMS. (A Ku-band antenna is used to transmit payload science data and Video.) The correlation was made
after comparing the data with real-time observations from 188 (DeLonibard et a1., 2002, 2004).
A special study using MAMS data was performed by 188 science ofﬁcer Don Pettit during Expedition 6 as a part
of Saturday Science. Pettit examined the motion of air bubbles in water to see how it correlated with quasi-steady
accelerations. (Quasi-steady accelerations are Vibrations that are at or below a frequency of 0.01 Hz for a period
greater than 100 seconds.)
SAMS-II has been used in microgravity and non-microgravity modes of ISS operations to measure Vibratory accel-
eration disturbances. Data have been collected to document Vibrations resulting from experiment hardware (e.g.,
fans, blowers, and pumps) and crew activity, and effectiveness of the ARIS to reduce the effect of the Vibrational
environment on the 188. These data are critical for interpreting results from experiments on the 188 that assume a
uniform microgravity environment.
As the ISS nears completion, the microgravity environment changes. During early increments—at least through
Increment 8 (2004)—the 188 was not meeting the documented microgravity requirements. For certain acceleration
regimes, the XPOP attitude ( (X aXis perpendicular to the orbit plane) appeared to provide a better environment
(Jules et a1. 2004).
MAMS is currently being activated intermittently to meet operational requests for data during maj 0r mission
events such as dockings by Soyuz and Progress vehicles. SAMS-II is also still on orbit.
PUBLICATION(S)
DeLombard R, Kelly EM, Foster, K, Hrovat K, McPherson, KM; Schafer, CP. Microgravity Acceleration Environment
of the International Space Station, AIAA 2001-5113
Del Basso S, Laible M, O’Keefe E, Steelman A, Scheer S, Thampi S. Capitalization of Early 188 Data for Assembly
Complete Microgravity Performance. Proceedings of the 40th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno,
NeV. AIAA 2002-606, Jan 14—17, 2002.
DeLombard R, Hrovat K, Kelly EM, McPherson K, Jules K. An Overview of the Microgravity Environment of the
International Space Station Under Construction. AIAA 2002-0608.
Jules K, McPherson K, Hrovat K, Kelly E, Reckart T. A Status 0n the Characterization of the Microgravity
Environment of the International Space Station. 54th International Astronautical Congress, 29 Sep t0 3 Oct 2003,
Bremen, Germany, IAC-03-J.6.01 .
Jules K, Hrovat K, Kelly EM. The Microgravity Environment of the International Space Station during the Buildup
Period: Increments 2 t0 8. 55th Int. Astronautical Congress 2004 Vancouver, Canada, IAC-04-J.6.01.
DeLombard R, Kelly EM, Hrovat K, McPherson. Microgravity Environment of the International Space Station.
AIAA 2004-125.
DeLombard R, Kelly EM, Hrovat K, Nelson ES, Pettit DR. Motion of Air Bubbles in Water Subjected to
Microgravity Accelerations. Proceedings of the 43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV.
AIAA 2005-722, Jan 10—13, 2005.

28

"
"37","DeLombard R, Hrovat K, Kelly EM, Humphreys B. Interpreting the International Space Station Microgravity
Environment. Proceedings of the 43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nev. AIAA 2005—
0727, Jan 10—13, 2005.
E-IJI:|:I-.'I.'I'[ 1"" 'Lu__- IIIII..! | .1: {l}. ICII
=-
’l I . . - . . I . -
I . . - . . I . -
'I
1
. WW“
ﬂ Time series of vibrations produced by the
- , . . - . . , . _ undocking of shuttle flight STS-105 (7A.1)
. . from ISS during Expedition 2. Data are
~ ' ' ' ' ' ' ' from the HiRAP sensor with graphs
... representing the X, Y, and Z axes,
_ 1 A respectively.
E 3 l H '( I'
_' | |
E ' “l 'I yW -
'I y '
'H. '5 [
I'I
'.""L.'- '4':- 'il .' IN --| '- 5: *1."" 5.1 33-J- ='-| -!-|-..'I
'I'Iru'lvr-H'ul-I I
29

"
"38","MAUI ANALYSIS OF UPPER ATMOSPHERIC INJECTIONS (Maui)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Rainer A. Dressler, Ph.D., Hanscom Air Force Base, Lexington, Mass.
Expeditions 13—16, 18
Research Area Spacecraft Systems
The Maui analysis of upper atmospheric injections (Maui) experiment observes the space shuttle engine exhaust
plumes from the Maui Space Surveillance Site (MSSS) in Hawaii. Observations occur When the shuttle ﬁres its
engines at night or twilight When passing over the MSSS. Spectrally ﬁltered images and spectra of the radiation
resulting from exhaust-atmosphere interactions are taken by the optical telescope and all-sky imagers. The data
should determine the chemical and physical mechanisms that
are associated With the interaction between the chemical species
in engine exhaust and the space environment. Improved models
of this interaction Will result in enhanced space event character-
ization as well as the determination of sensor requirements for
effective plume and contamination analysis of other spacecraft.
View of Orbital Maneuvering System (OMS) engine burn to boost the
orbit of the space shuttle for rendezvous with the Mirspace station. Image
courtesy of NASA Johnson Space Center.
RESULTS
Data are still being collected for this experiment.
PUBLICATIONS(S)
There are no publications at this time.
30

"
"39","MATERIALS INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION EXPERIMENT-1 AND -2 (MlSSE-1 AND -2)
Principal Investigator(s): William H. Kinard, NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, Va.
Expeditions 3—11, ongoing
Research Area Spacecraft Materials and Systems
Researchers from the private and public sector prepared a wide range of samples for the ﬁrst externally mounted
experiment on ISS. MISSE—l and —2 were testbeds for more than 400 materials and coatings sarnples, testing their
survivability under the corrosive effects of the space environment; including MMOD strikes, AO attack, intense
ultraviolet radiation from the sun, and extreme temperature
#1.} ' ‘1'? swings. Results will provide a better understanding of the
ff _ ' I durability of various materials in this environment. Many
#J' git ""'- - $2- of the materials may have applications in the design of
‘4'.- f-‘lr .3"": future spacecraft.
H . :1- —- ‘1 Both MISSE—l and —2 were deployed in Aug 2001 on
.- F ""I '“ _ Expedition 3 and were planned for a 1—year exposure. Due to the
.. . delays that were incurred following the Columbia accident, they
- , +.- : were not retrieved until 4 years later during ISS Expedition 11
_ ‘— in Aug 2005. Follow—on sarnples testing new materials, new
_ ' technologies and with increasingly complex missions were
5300932435 _ MISSE on ISS, over cloud tops. part of subsequent MISSE experiments mounted on the
station (MISSE—5, MISSE—3, MISSE—4, and MISSE—6).
RESULTS
In late 2005 , 35 investigators who were taking part in MISSE—l and —2 traveled to NASA Langley Research Center
to inspect their samples and prepare them for return to their respective laboratories for further analysis. Researchers
who took part in this investigation have interests in polymers, therrnal control coatings, nano—coniposites, radiation
shielding, environmental monitors, and marking processes that are designed to label parts that will be exposed to
the space environment. The primary data from MISSE will be obtained by comparing the preﬂight laboratory charac—
terization of the test specimens with postﬂight laboratory characterizations made after the specimens are retrieved.
Sorne particulate contamination was observed. Optical property changes in thermal control materials were also
observed. Several rnaterials did well in the harsh environment. Lack of widespread molecular contarnination on
MISSE gives conﬁdence in using station for future rnaterial studies. A number of results are anticipated to be re—
leased over the next few years. While the samples are still under investigation, researchers indicate that over
100 rnicrorneteoroid and space debris strikes were found. Many polymer ﬁlm samples were completely
eroded by AD, but some samples survived and are undergoing analysis.
Many of the experiments provide space—validated 5"" '
results for ground—based experiments , such as the - I
durability of materials to withstand AO (deGroh et al. . __ ‘ 1*“ i __ h d
2008)..Because AO erosion is the primary weathering .- . ' ""'1 '
force to spacecraft materials, and true space enViron— ll"" 1 "" _ I u"" l. - '
mental conditions are difﬁcult to replicate on Earth, '
MISSE provides a valuable test platform that enables
methods for correlating and extrapolating ground re—
sults. Snyder et al. (2006) discuss results from MISSE—2
testing of AO erosion of silicon oxide (SiOX)—coated ..
Kapton compared to uncoated Kapton (the AO erosion Ir
proﬁle of Kapton is well documented). They calculated h -. . ""
mass loss. De Groh et al. (2006) analyzed 41 different
PEACE polymers, with the objective to determine the ISSOOQE22432 — CIose-up of MISSE with Earth backdrop.
AO erosion yield for a variety of rnaterials—such as
Kevlar, polyethylene, Lucite, Kapton, and Teﬂon—that are used in spacecraft and exposed to the space environ—
ment. The erosion yield data are immediately applicable to spacecraft designs. Although the length of exposure
31

"
"40","was four times longer than planned, the sample preparation method of stacking many thin layers allowed for mean-
ingful data even after 4 years: not all of the material had eroded away. Samples masses were weighed after ﬂight
and compared with preﬂight masses to calculated erosion yields.
Other investigators studied speciﬁc polymers with various compositional additives or coatings to test resistance
to A0 erosion.( e.g., Tomczak et al. 2007, Juhl et al. 2007). One approach (Tomczak et al. 2007) is to embed
polymers with nano-sized silicon dioxide (SlOz). With AO exposure, a silica passivation layer is formed.
In addition to testing various materials, experiments were also set up to measure the geometry of AO scattering
from oxidized aluminum surfaces.
MISSE-l and -2 materials, and insights into AO erosion, have resulted in several patents and spin-offs, including
cleaning artwork, etching parts to be used in human grafts, developing new methodologies for testing blood sugar,
and more. Because MISSE assembles partners across industry and the DOD, in addition to NASA scientists and
academic partners, many of the results are proprietary.
PUBLICATIONS
Finckenor M. The Materials on International Space Station Experiment (MISSE): First Results from MSFC
Investigations, Proceedings of the 44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV. AIAA 2006-
472, Jan 9—12, 2006.
Snyder A, Banks BA, Waters DL. Undercutting Studies of Protected Kapton H Exposed to In-Space and Ground-
Based Atomic Oxygen. NASA TM-2006-2l43 87, Aug 2006.
de Groh K, Banks B. MISSE PEACE Polymers Atomic Oxygen Erosion Results. NASA TM-2006-2l4482 (2006).
Harvey GA, Kinard WH. MISSE l and 2 Tray Temperature measurements. Proceedings of MISSE Post Retrieval
Conference and the 2006 National Space & Missile Materials Symposium
de Groh K , Banks B. Materials International Space Station Experiment (MISSE) Polymers Degradation. 9th
International Conference on “Protection of Materials and Structures from Space Environment,” May 20—23, 2008,
Toronto, Canada.
de Groh K, Banks B, Arielle H, Stambler LM. Roberts KE, Barbagallo I, Barbagallo CE. Ground-Laboratory t0
In-Space Atomic Oxygen Correlation for the PEACE Polymers, 9th International Conference on “Protection of
Materials and Structures from Space Environment,” May 20—23, 2008, Toronto, Canada.
Tomczak SJ, Marchant D, Mabry JM, Vij V, Yandek GR, Minton TK, Brunsvold AL, Wright ME, Petteys BJ,
Guenthner AJ. Studies of POSS-Polyimides Flown 0n MISSE-l. 25—29 Jun 2007; Keystone, Colo.; 2007 National
Space & Missile Materials Symposium.
Juhl SB, Akinlemibola B, Kasten L, Vaia R. Durability of Poly(Caprolactam) (Nylon 6) and Poly(Caprolactam)
Nanocomposites in Low Earth Orbit. 25—29 Jun 2007; Keystone, Colo.; 2007 National Space & Missile Materials
Symposium.
Rice N, Shepp A, Haghighat R, Connell J . Durable TOR Polymers 0n MISSE. 25—29 Jun 2007; Keystone, Colo.;
2007 National Space & Missile Materials Symposium.
Watson KA, Ghose S, Lillehei PT, Smith Jr. J G, Connell JW, Effect of LEO Exposure 0n Aromatic Polymers
Containing Phenylphosphine Oxide Groups, SAMPE Proceedings Vol. 52, Jun 6 2007, Baltimore, Md.

32

"
"41","MATERIALS ON THE INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION EXPERIMENT-3 AND -4 (MlSSE-3 AND -4)
Principal Investigat0r(s): William H. Kinard, Ph.D., NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, Va.
Expeditions 13—1 5
Research Area Spacecraft Materials and Systems
MISSE—3 and —4 were successfully deployed in Aug 2006 - - F:
and retrieved in Aug 2007. Approxirnately 875 specimens 2 1 1.. .' . , .--""* “ a . 1'
of various materials were contained in suitcase—like cases 1., . '51:; _ ¢- 1-
called passive experiment containers (PECs). These speci— 1' I |.' I‘HTﬁE‘ _ '"".--
mens were exposed to the harsh environment of microgravity _. lit. 11'5"""" I
to observe the effects that AD (single—oxygen molecules) ' ‘I- ' j: .'
and ultraviolet light have on materials. _ '= _
I :35 . ' E
ISSO15E19092 — This image of tray 2 of the MlSSE-3 PEC was ""' I '
taken in Jul 2007. At this point, MISSE-3 has been exposed to '
the space environment for approximately 11 months. - ' I IIF ._.-F
The specimens include a variety of materials (e.g.,
paint and protective coatings) that will be used on future _
spacecrafts such as satellites. Environmental monitors '
recorded the thermal cycling (the change in temperature) that the experiment was subjected to while on orbit. New
material that might be used in the next generation of extravehicular activity (EVA) suits was tested to examine how
the material reacts to the harsh space environment.
As part of an education outreach program, three million basil seeds were placed in containers located underneath
the sample trays 0n MISSE—3 and —4 PECs. These seeds were returned to Earth as part of the STS—118/13A.1 mission
in which Astronaut Barbara Morgan initiated the grown cycle of basil seeds inside the ISS, The seeds were sent
to school children for them to plant and observe the differences between seeds exposed to space and seeds that
have remained on Earth.
RESULTS
Preliminary assessments, which include results from previous MISSE—ﬂown materials, suggest that the
contamination control for the station—the method for tracking whether scientiﬁc instruments, windows, radiators
and other hardware are staying Clean from contaminants such as dust, dirt, or hair—is working.
The earlier experiments showed that samples of the glass that were used in station windows were better than 90%
clear, and samples of the same white therrnal coatings that were used on station radiators looked like new even after
4 years in space. Full analyses of the MISSE—3and —4 materials are under way.
PUBLICATIONS(S)
There are 110 publications at this time.
33

"
"42","MATERIALS INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION EXPERIMENT-5 (MlSSE-5)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Robert Walters, Ph.D., Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC. (District of
Columbia); William H. Kinard, Ph.D., NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, Va.
Expeditions l l—l 3
Research Area Spacecraft Materials and Systems
MISSE-5 was an external payload that ﬂew on board the ISS from Aug 2005 until Sep 2006, thus providing an
opportunity for researchers to test a wide range of samples in the low Earth orbit (LEO) environment. MISSE-5,
which was a collaboration between NASA Langley Research Center, Glenn Research Center, Ohio State University,
the Naval Research Laboratory, and the US. Naval Academy, consisted of three experiments: Prototype Communica-
tions Satellite-2 (PCSat—2), Forward Technology Solar Cell Experiment (FTSCE), and the Thin Film Materials Experiment.
PCSat-2 was a communication system that was
sponsored by the U. S. Naval Academy. It had two
: .- ' _ objectives: (1) to test the Amateur Satellite Service
' I off-the-shelf solution for telemetry command and
_.'._. control; and (2) to provide a communication system
i h 1': ?'r-f +- 1"" *\ for the FTSCE. PCSat-2 was able to transmit solar
i :—'—""_ H ER . Ii: . ill. * cell data for FTCSE using the Amateur Satellite
-. I-ij P 1: -- \ 1 Service with a 145.825 uplink and a 435.275 i
_ _ . 1 ' ""' “#1"" "" "" ..-u 10 kHz Doppler downlink.
T""-' if 'i' - 1 ~
---I !: H . .. .
“HE ' :1: FTSCE characterized the durability and electrical
amani '2] h output of 39 advanced solar cell samples that could
ﬁl‘; ; . _|1 , E be used on future space exploration vehicles. Several
.. “f- . 1;: :...____r _ "" _ -. :1} types of solar cell technologies were tested: triple
2' . WA"" l: l ' ‘1‘; Junction InGaP/GaAS/Qe; thin ﬁlnq amorphous Si
_ _'_ .Il'ﬁ-ﬁ’"" {""11 _ 1 _ f"" ‘4‘ I and CuIn(Ga)Se2; and s1ngle-Junct10n GaAs cells.
11,4; Q .. «1""- ""_ I *1: _ ; It is known that solar cells degrade over time when
' - ' ' "" *- ""r "" they are exposed to the space environment. FTSCE
S114E7352 — Views of MISSE—5 mounted on the ISS P6 truss during used their 0n-b0ard instrumentation to measure the
Expedition 11. PcSat-2 is protected by a golden thermal blanket with .
flexible material samples attached. performance and downlink the data to Earth
through the PCSat-2.
The Thin Film Material Experiment consists of 254 thin ﬁlm samples that were attached to the thermal blanket
protecting the PCSat-2 hardware. The samples are exposed directly to the space environment to evaluate the degra-
dation of the materials over time. These materials range from testing polymer coatings to solar array blanket material
to paints that are used on spacecraft and many others. An additional aspect of the Thin Film Materials Experiment is
the educational component. Of the 254 samples, 49 are part of a collaboration between the Glenn Research Center
and the Hathaway Brown School in Cleveland, Ohio.
The technology testing that occurred during the MISSE-5 investigation provided the data that are necessary to
develop the new space exploration vehicles, satellites, and communication systems that will take us to the moon,
Mars, and beyond.
RESULTS
The MISSE team has reported many results from the MISSE-5 experiment. Because MISSE assembles partners
across industry and the DOD in addition to NASA scientists and academic partners, many of the results are proprietary.
MISSE-5 also tested new approaches for technology tests, including innovative collaborations that leverage the
costs and assembly environment of ﬂight article preparation (piggy-backed thin ﬁlms that are stitched onto a thermal
blanket) (Kinard et al. 2007).
34

"
"43","A wide range of solar cell technologies were tested with favorable results (Walters et a1. 2006). In some cases, the
samples that were ﬂown were orders of magnitude larger than previous samples.
In addition to the solar cell experiment, MISSE-5 tested a wide variety of materials. Some focused on new polymers
with additives to slow the AO erosion process. Others tested both new and 01d thermal control materials that are
used in multilayer insulation (MLI) blankets (Finckenor et a1. 2007). The data are compared with other ﬂight
experiments and analyzed for solar absorptance, contamination, and other attributes.
PUBLICATIONS(S)
Walters RJ, Garner J C, Lam SN, Vazquez JA, Braun WR, Ruth RE, Warne JH, Lorentzen JR, Messenger SR, CDR
Bruninga R, J enkins PP, Flatico JM, Wilt DM, Piszczor MF, Greer LC, Krasowski MJ. Forward Technology Solar
Cell Experiment First On-Orbit Data, 19th Space Photovoltaic Research and Technology Conference, (2007) NASA
CP-2007-214494, 79—94.
Krasowski M, Greer L, Flatico J , J enkins P, Spina D. Big Science, Small-budget Space Experiment Package aka
MISSE-5: A Hardware and Software perspective. 19th Space Photovoltaic Research and Technology Conference,
(2007) NASA CP-2007-214494, 95—117.
Kinard WH. Materials Experiment Flown 0n MISSE 5. 25—29 Jun 2007; Keystone, C010.; 2007 National Space &
Missile Materials Symposium.
Finckenor M, Zweiner JM, Pippin G, Thermal Control Materials on MISSE-5 with Comparison to Earlier Flight
Data. 25—29 Jun 2007; Keystone, C010.; 2007 National Space & Missile Materials Symposium.
Simburgera EJ, Matsumotoa JH, Giantsa TW, Garcia III A, Liua S, Rawalb SP, Perry AR, Marshall CH, Linc JK,
Scarborough SE, Curtis HB, Kerslake TW, Peterson TT. Development of a thin ﬁlm solar cell interconnect for the
PowerSphere concept, Materials Science and Engineering, Volume 116, Issue 3, 15 Feb 2005, pp. 321—325.
Walters RJ, Garner J C, Lam SN, Vasquez J A, Braun WR, Ruth RE, Warner JH, Lorentzen J R, Messenger SR, CDR
Bruninga R, J enkins PP, Flatico JM, Wilt DM, Piszczor MF, Greer LC, Krasowski MJ. Materials on the International
Space Station Experiment-5, Forward Technology Solar Cell Experiment: First On-Orbit Data, Conference Record
of the 2006 IEEE 4th World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, May 2006; Volume 2, pp. 1951—1954.
Wilt DM, Clark EB, Ringel SA, Andre CL, Smith MA, Scheiman DA, J enkins PP, Maurer WF, Fitzgerald EA,
Walters RJ, et a1.. LEO Flight Testing of GaAs on Si Solar Cells Aboard MISSE 5. 19th European Photovoltaic Solar
Energy Conference and Exhibition, Paris, France, 2004.
Pippin G, deGroh K, Finckenor M, Minton T. Post-Flight Analysis of Selected Fluorocarbon and Other Thin
Film Polymer Specimens Flown 0n MISSE-5. 25—29 Jun 2007; Keystone, C010.; 2007 National Space & Missile
Materials Symposium.
deGroh K, Finckenor M, Minton T, Brunsvold A, Pippin G. Post-Flight Analysis of Selected Fluorocarbon and
Other Thin Film Polymer Specimens Flown 0n MISSE-5. 25—29 Jun 2007; Keystone, C010.; 2007 National Space &
Missile Materials Symposium.

35

"
"44","RAM BURN OBSERVATIONS (RAMBO)
Principal Investigator(s): William L. Dimpﬂ, Ph.D., Aerospace Corporation, Los Angeles, Calif.
Expeditions 13—1 6
Research Area Spacecraft Environments :.- - - ——':———'T'“7r
_ '33:! _

The Ram Burn Observations (RAMBO) experiment ' ' _ ' ‘

uses a satellite to observe the spectral characteristics - - -' f

and direction of the movement of plumes that are cre— I

ated from shuttle OMS burns in LEO. The engine burns ""'

create high—temperature, high—Velocity molecular colli—

sions between the chemical species that are in the engine

exhaust (e.g., water and CO) and A0. Three speciﬁc -‘

objectives are listed below. b Lﬁ‘

_ :1?“
STSOO7I18778 — This image shows the Glow experiment ' _ _ f?f?- ﬂ: ; 1?."" -
documentation of OMS/Reactlon .Control §ystem (RC8) pods - . _ __ 33:: .- ' _‘-~.- '13!"" -' U.
and vertical stabilizer from STS-OO7. __ __-_3_:_ __ :éﬁ"" E1 - '_;__+- 3:1“

1. Determination of the distribution of internal states of CO that are excited through collisions With A0 at
hyperthermal collision velocities. Past experiments have shown that CO is efﬁciently excited to high internal
(Vibrational and rotational) energy states in collisions with A0 at high—teInperature (hyperthennal) energies. The
theory is that such atom—molecule collisions are generally inefﬁcient at transferring collision energy to internal
states (the state at Which an object is in regards to its internal properties). The A0 + CO system represents an in—
teresting scientiﬁc anomaly. The anomaly is attributed to a chemical interaction in the A0 + CO system, Which
allows the exchange of AO atoms to take place. A rigorous theoretical treatment of this system has been devel—
oped, and predictions of the energy transfer have been calculated. RAMBO measurements are a method by Which
the theoretical understanding can be validated over the range of collision velocities from 4 to 11 km/s by observing
CO radiant emission that is excited by collisions between CO in the plume and A0 atoms in the atmosphere.

2. Determine the total scattering cross section for atomic and molecular species at hyperthermal energies.
Analysis of the space shuttle orbiter engine plumes While in orbit have indicated that models for molecular
scattering that are based on laboratory interactions of ﬂame temperatures up to 2,000 through 4,000 K are not
accurate in the hyperthermal regime that is experienced by orbiting spacecraft. Analysis of infrared plume radi—
ance resulting from atmosphere—plume collisions that induce molecular excitation in the range of 4 to 11 km/s
from the RAMBO experiment Will help quantify total molecular scattering cross sections in the hyperthermal
regime.

3. Determining the rate constants for hydroxide producing reaction at hyperthermal energies. Emission
in high—altitude rocket plumes in the region from 3 t0 4 microns has generally been attributed to emission from
water. Better understanding has indicated that there is also signiﬁcant emission in that region from internally
excited hydroxide (OH) radicals that are formed through the reaction of atmospheric A0 and plume water and
molecular hydrogen. Rate constants that have been determined in the laboratory for these reactions are generally
limited to the thermal regime of energies below 1 electron volt (eV).

High—altitude plumes involve energies that extend into the hyperthermal regime up to about 10 eV. Extrapola—
tion of laboratory—rneasured rate constants into the hyperthermal regime provides modeling data, but extrapolated
values may have a signiﬁcant error. RAMBO experiments sample OH emission that is produced directly from
the relevant reactions at hyperthermal energies, and are being used to establish valid hyperthermal rate
constants.

36

"
"45","RESULTS
This experiment continues on the ISS. Results are pending, but are important for better constraining models for the
high-temperature, high-Velocity atomic and molecular collisions that are induced by spacecraft operations.
PUBLICATIONS(S)
There are no publications at this time.

37

"
"46","SMOKE AND AEROSOL MEASUREMENT EXPERIMENT (SAME)
Principal Investigator(s): David Urban, Ph.D., NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
Expedition 15
Research Area Spacecraft Systems
Spacecraft smoke detectors must detect different types of
smoke. For example, hydrocarbon fuels typically produce soot
and plastics produce droplets of recondensed polymer fragments
While paper and silicone rubber produce smoke that is com-
prised of liquid droplets of recondensed pyrolysis products.
Each of these materials produces a different type of smoke,
With particles of various sizes and properties.
SAME Will assess the size and distribution of the smoke
particles that are produced by the different types of material
that are found on spacecraft such as Teﬂon, Kapton, cellulose,
and silicone rubber. It Will evaluate the performance of the
ionization smoke detectors, Which are used on space shuttles;
evaluate the performance of the photoelectric smoke detectors,
A candle flame in Earth's gravity (left) and microgravity Which are used on the ISS; and collect data for Which a numer-
(right) ShOIWS difference in the processes 0f GombUStion in ical formula can be developed and used to predict smoke droplet
gleitcggarawty. Image courtesy Of NASA JOhnSO” Space growth and to evaluate alternative smoke detection devices
' on future spacecraft.
The experimental design and practical application of the data Will be complimented by the development of a
numerical code to predict the smoke droplet growth as a function of the fuel pyrolysis rate, the thermodynamic
properties of pyrolysis vapor, and the ﬂow environment. SAME also has the capability to evaluate other ﬁre detec-
tion/particulate sensing devices for the test materials. The results Will provide statistics of the smoke particulate size
distribution for a range of smoke-generation conditions and measurement of a readily modeled reference for
validation of smoke growth models.
RESULTS
Building from the earlier Dust and Aerosol Measurement Feasibility Test (DAFT) experiment that successfully
tested a particulate detector, SAME tested the size of smoke aerosols of spacecraft materials such as Kapton and
Teﬂon.
Smoke particulate that is produced in low gravity by SAME was found to be typically 50% larger in count
mean diameter than similar conditions in normal gravity. The particle sizes were all below 300 nm, suggesting that
discriminating smoke from spacecraft dust possibly could be achieved by detecting in the sub-micrometer range
(Urban et al. 2008). These results have signiﬁcant implications for the design of smoke detection systems for
current and future spacecraft.
The experiment also modeled the smoke transport in the US. Laboratory using Environmental Control and
Life Support System (ECLSS) data. Numerical modeling of smoke transport predicted that actual detection times
can be quite long and strongly dependent on detector location and the inside geometry of obstructions that block
cabin air ﬂow (Urban et al. 2008).
PUBLICATION(S)
Urban DL, Ruff GA, Brooker J E, Cleary T, Yang J , Mulholland G, Yuan Z-G. Spacecraft Fire Detection: Smoke
Properties and Transport in Low-GraVity. 46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV. 2008,
7 — 10 Jan; AIAA 2008-806.
38

"
"47","SERIAL NETWORK FLOW MONITOR (SNFM)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Carl Konkel, The Boeing Company, Houston
Expeditions 9—11
Research Area Spacecraft Systems
The serial network ﬂow monitor (SNFM) is a commercial off—the—shelf (COTS) software package that monitors
packet trafﬁc through the payload Ethernet local area networks (LANS) on board station. The SNFM experiment
characterized the network equivalent of data trafﬁc jams on board 188. The SNFM team targeted historical problem
areas including the SAMS—II communication issues, data transmissions from 188 to the ground teams, and multiple
users on the network at the same time. By looking at how various users interact With each other on the network,
conﬂicts can be identiﬁed and work can begin on solutions.
RESULTS
SNFM data are still being analyzed, and Will provide “lessons learned” for ongoing network operations on space
station and future spacecraft systems.
PUBLICATIONS(S)
There are 110 publications at this time.
m. 2. . 11:13
FEE 1' ' - - .
ii: I iil'l ll”? ""'P= . -
i
Enju- h 1- :II-l lying Dubﬁ- - :
4'____ ____________ ' - AM:
i
i
I i
I
ﬂame- h 1: 1-5.: _ F!!! ' - - I
“r m ' ”ﬂﬂjiﬂmi
Elﬂlﬂ .iLm---m E W..-.| ' 51 ﬂﬁlmwmm Hiﬁﬂﬂ
Computer screen capture image provides a graphic example of network load
monitoring.
39

"
"48","SYNCHRONIZED POSITION HOLD, ENGAGE, REORIENT, EXPERIMENTAL
SATELLITES (SPHERES)
Principal Investigator(s): David Miller, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.

Expedition 8, 13—15, ongoing
Research Area Picosatellites and Control Systems
The Synchronized Position Hold, Engage, Reorient, Experimental Satellites (SPHERES) experiment is a
testbed for formation ﬂying by satellites—the theories and calculations that coordinate the motion of multiple
bodies maneuvering in microgravity. To achieve this inside the ISS cabin, bowling—ball—sized spheres perform
various maneuvers (or protocols), with one to three spheres operating simultaneously. The SPHERES experiment
tests relative attitude control and station—keeping between satellites, re—targeting and image plane ﬁlling maneuvers,
collision avoidance and fuel balancing algorithms, and an array of geometry estimators that are used in various
rnissions.
SPHERES consists of three self—contained satellites, all of which are 18—sided polyhedrons that are 0.2 In in
diameter and weigh 3.5 kg. Each satellite contains an internal propulsion system, power, aVionics, software, com—
rnunications, and metrology subsysterns. The propulsion system uses carbon dioxide (C02), which is expelled through the
thrusters. SPHERES satellites are powered by AA batteries. The rnetrology subsystem provides real—tirne position
and attitude information. To simulate ground station—keeping, a laptop will be used to transmit navigational data
and forrnation—ﬂying algorithms. Once these data are uploaded, the satellites will perform autonomously and
hold the formation until a new command is given.
SPHERES is an ongoing dernonstration. Each session tests progressively more complex two— and three—body
maneuvers that include docking (to ﬁxed, moving, and tumbling targets), forrnation ﬂying, and searching for “lost”
satellites.
RESULTS
During Expedition 8, several interference tests were ___ ind
conducted to characterize the effects of lights and other ' J ' _ ‘ '- :1” ' -. .1
sources of electromagnetic radiation. The “Beacon— _ I __ .,_ ._ ' -*2 2 _ ﬁr
Beacon Test” (SPHERES—BBT) used one beacon _ _ - {1. .'-' :1 ' _ 1 rq.
(with mount) and one beacon tester to demonstrate _ 331;“: -
the functionality of the ultrasound/infrared position— - . ' W, '
ing system of the SPHERES experiment. This portion ' ' 'l'"" ,. .
of the investigation was a risk mitigation experiment - I . _ '. _ - a _
for SPHERES to determine whether any sources of . - -. "" '- i f
infrared radiation or ultrasonic waves eX1st 1n the work . - ..1 t .| . . .. .
area that may interfere with SPHERES operations. r1: ""_ j. t ‘1 . .1"" . - ‘ ""'
Infrared interference from a general lighting assernbly ' Ink 4'"" Al ' 1
and a laptop in the Node was produced during the "" MIT 4' —ﬁ -'
SPHERES—BBT. Based on these results, SPHERES _ '- 'Fﬁ"" ' _ . I
test sessions use the newer laptop and the general
lighting assembly will be dimmed by 25% in the workspace during SPHERES operations.
SPHERES test sessions that were begun during Expedition 13 demonstrated maneuvers that would lead to the
docking of a satellite to a beacon, tested algorithms that automatically determine the mass properties of the satellites,
and performed initial two—sphere satellite tests. During these sessions, the docking maneuvers were completed suc—
cessfully and updated to the estimator (calculation of the satellite’s location with respect to the beacon), which helped
to achieve successful approaches. The two satellite tests were successful; these tests demonstrated the functionality
of the new satellite and the ability of the satellites to maintain both angular forrnation (i.e., they point in the same
direction all the time) as well as position forrnation (if one translates the other does, too).
Other SPHERES test sessions that were performed during Expedition 13 demonstrated the functionality of the
Global Metrology Systern (during all previous sessions the satellites calculated their position with respect to a single

40

"
"49","beacon or With respect to other satellites, but not With respect to the US. Laboratory frame). This session set up
the complete metrology system so that the satellites could know their location and pointing With respect to the US.
Laboratory. Tests included collection of large amounts of data to process on the ground to test for the functionality
of all the transmitters and receivers in the system as well as the presence of any noise (such as reﬂections on unex—
pected obj ects). The test also demonstrated the functionality of the astronaut interface to indicate to the satellite the
location of the beacons in the US. Laboratory. All of the necessary data were collected. Secondary tests included
successful demonstration of two satellites docking (controlled contact between the two satellites). These tests will
ultimately enable scientists to assemble large space structures and make autonomous resupply of consumables
and upgrades a reality.
Additional one— and two—satellite tests continued during Expedition 14; three—satellite tests began during
Expedition 15 and continue. Expeditions 14 and 15 tested more complex docking maneuvers and formation ﬂying.
The SPHERES team also includes a “Guest Scientist” Program that enables remote scientists to have the ability to
design and code new algorithms to test.
PUBLICATIONS(S)
There are no publications at this time.
11- >w- -' x. ‘- w , - r: .
._ mam. 1‘ . 5. _
I fr”.- If"" I I I '— - I '
ISSO14E17874 — Three t
satellites fly in formation as part I _ h, ' . ‘
of the SPHERES investigation. 1 t ' '
This image was taken during "" i l. ' '* ‘1 \
Expedition 14 in the Destiny I. ' 1 ' ‘ i; . f. r__'
laboratory module. I. a -: ﬂ ﬁf .
""H. i._:_. II}:- '- |_""J'
T _
P! .I.
q-
: ISSO13E68304 — Astronaut Jeffrey N.
Williams, Expedition 13 NASA space station
science officer and flight engineer, does a
_ i check of the SPHERES satellites in the
-.1| 1 ' Destiny laboratory of the ISS.
_ J I. III_ -:r.
H3 -' .
jll'n' ' _. III: :. .ﬁ
I
I .' _‘.~-. 3.""
41

"
"50","SPACE TEST PROGRAM-H2 (STP-HZ): THREE INVESTIGATIONS
Principal Investigator(s): Andrew Nicholas, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC. (ANDE)
J ames Keeney, Ph.D., Kirtland Air Force Base, Albuquerque, NM. (MEPSI)
United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Md. (RAFT)
Expedition 14
Research Area Picosatellites and Control Systems, Spacecraft Environments
The complement of Space Test Program-H2 (STP-H2) investigations was deployed from STS-116/12A.1 on
Dec 20, 2006.
ATMOSPHERIC NEUTRAL DENSITY EXPERIMENT (ANDE)
_ ANDE consists of two spherical microsatellites: the Mock
ANDE Active (MAA) spacecraft and the Fence Calibration (FCal)

""= :‘1 spacecraft. These satellites were launched from the space shuttle
cargo bay into a circular orbit just below the ISS altitude. The main
objective of the ANDE mission is to measure the total atmospheric
density and composition between 100 and 400 km. Density data that

_ 1» _ are gathered will be used to better characterize the parameters that
J“ J w are used to calculate the drag coefﬁcient of a satellite and improve
orbit determination calculations of resident space objects.
n-

... Both satellites will be tracked by the Satellite Laser Ranging (SLR)
system and the US. Space Surveillance Network (SSN). These
satellites have similar dimensions, but are constructed of different

-- -' - 1* —— materials and have different masses. Because of the difference in
S116E07836 — Shown is one of the ANDE mass, the satellites will drift apart over time. Observing the satellites’
satellites floating free from the internal cargo u'nit position will provide a study on spatial and temporal variations in
(ICU) after deployment. The second satellite dld not . . . . . .
I 9 av 9 its h alf of the ICU until 4 hours later. atmospheric drag assoc1ated w1th geomagnetic act1V1ty. The FCal

sphere will also be used to perform calibrations for the US.
Radar Fence.
MICROELECTROMECHANICAL SYSTEM (MEMS)-BASED PICOSAT INSPECTOR (MEPSI)
The Microelectromechanical System (MEMS)-based Picosat Inspector (MEPSI) experiment series was designed
to demonstrate the concept of an on-board intelligent hardware agent, “InfoBot,” that can be used to assist satellite
operations. It is designed to enhance satellite command and control operations by providing active on-board imaging
capability to assess spacecraft damage from human—made or environmental threats, monitor satellite early orbit testing
operations, and augment servicing operations. MEPSI was developed through a series of four preﬂight missions,
each of increasing complexity and each improving overall satellite performance over the previous version. In
Dec 2002, MEPSI completed its third development mission with a successful launch from the Space Shuttle
Endeavour, which was its ﬁrst shuttle mission. Improvements from the 2002 version were included in this
payload, which was deployed in Dec 2006 from STS-116.
RADAR FENCE TRANSPONDER (RAFT)
The radar fence transponder (RAFT) mission is a student experiment from the US. Naval Academy that used
picosatellites to test the Space Surveillance Radar Fence and experimental communications transponders. More
speciﬁcally, RAFT was designed to provide the Navy Space Surveillance System (NSSS) radar fence with a means
by which to determine the limits of a constellation of picosatellites that would be otherwise undetectable to the radar
fence, and to enable NSSS to independently calibrate its transmit and receive beams using signals from RAFT. This
was accomplished with two picosatellites (RAFTI and MARScom): one that actively transmitted and received signals,
and one with a passively augmented radar cross section. Additionally, RAFT provided experimental communica-
tions transponders for the Amateur Satellite Service, the Navy Military Afﬁliate Radio System, and the Naval
Academy’s Yard Patrol Craft.
42

"
"51","RESULTS
35 Eat H Tenperature telenetrg Fur HHDE-i nuer last 1333 hours {2593 points}
Nnrmal Temperature rise due tn maximum Sun Eleta angle. E
This was highestfnrthe missinn due to it peaking at Snlstice.
‘ ANDE
3.3. The ANDE satellite re—entered the Earth’s
Lastdaytemperature rise .- 1 atmosphere on Dec 25, 2007, more than
I; ”“9 mmmma' “93““9- 1 year after deployment. Its orbital decay
g was tracked by the Maui Laser Ranging
25 Tracking Station. Because the satellite car—
ried packet radio communications systems
operating in the Amateur Satellite Service,
HAM radio volunteer ground stations were
I l i 1 critical for telemetry feeds that included
20 . 1‘ ""‘ Tr|‘rF-|ﬁ III. temperature and battery life.
15 II
HEM 2'3 NW 25 HEN 3'3 Dec 5 DE: 1'3 DEC: 15 Dec 2'3 Dec 25
tit}. ""
.. ‘ f"" "".-:-”ﬁ
MEPSI _ r“ .. ﬁght.""
This image of the Space Shuttle Discovery was taken by i - . _ , '15.. "" _ '
cameras that were located in MEPSI. This was taken shortly 1; 4y}? ‘1'?“ __ -_
after deployment on Dec 20, 2006. . .t 135'. - ~ g
I H x . ii“: :...--I-'. R
a ._ +1
32”- "" '
¥ \{ a . _ I - L
1 ' _ H: '
‘ r"". PhnTEa—nnt
: .. I' _ l. ‘
J
i ”V w I .
. ' 1
' _ _ - .. H'. 1- RAFT
__I __ _ oljhclllzn-tilﬂﬁg RAFT was deployed on Dec 20, 2006 and de—orbited on 30 May 2007
i * after 5 months in space. The deployment resulted in an applied torque to
i , - __ ~ - ': Hi the satellites (see image sequence, left). Several subsystems 0n the satellite
|."":' "" w I ' I (solar panel and thermal performance) were monitored. Volunteer
E . ' - ' - _ . ' H; 3' ground stations were used to track the satellites.
l . _ . ﬁphutn-DGEI
""III .
ex; :9 a _..- n
1:_ I. I . I-
- 2:2 _. E. ‘
' __ -' ' - _' Er hm'm The sequence of images shows the two RAFT satellite cubes being
.. '- _ deployed from the space shuttle (STS—116). The bottom photo shows the
- ' a - S onset of tumbling of the satellites.
' . La ' 'x.
I
43

"
"52","Below is a Digipan display of a detection of the radar fence from the UC Irvine Ground Station on the May 27 2007.
The Doppler starts high and then proceeds downward at an ever—increasing rate as it is approaching the center of the
pass.
'I_'I'II_'. H; .‘jl'l'll': j'-.I'Ii_'II'I
I I I I I I - I I I I I I I I I I I I I I ' I
TIJJHE-FUFHJIJI Elrr [IEﬂE'Aﬁ |_J""- 1'53. TI'IIE [I'IB E. IT'IE-‘EIE h IE I I' -f'| l Mﬂﬂrﬁ ﬁlE 1:th DI l | l-EI'I
5hIJII!]I.:}I'.:':_E:._:. ??3 I. I I -
Liljr1lEII'_{i;L {ILLIEEI'IEI‘i ' 3'11 -f I ""-- .. I 1"".an :3an Err] 3an ath_hﬁrrrjnnﬁirtgi . ' |
. _ ""'-.'I-..__IIII- . _ I II:— |
.""_E.-: i. '. "" 'I I . I :I _ a l
1. -.._.:.-'""=_'.:-'-.- ﬂ“ - .7 I - .- - - -::_'-:_'-. L - -- -- - '- . I:-:- |
:'-.'-..:':I ..__. . . _- . . . . 11-h"", I , Ln l
RAFT Radar Fiance anniink Recording ' — MPH“ ""
Matt Bennett, HFSRTE UC Irvine _ ' ' _ _
2? May EDI]? ﬂE'ﬂ‘l UTE .
- lra'Irisf:-'nan-:_I {SIM '[Iﬁ'IIH 1311""; +..'- 1H: '
PUBLICATION(S)
There are 110 publications at this time.
44

"
"53","PHYSICAL SCIENCES
IN M ICROGRAVITY
Much afour understanding ofphysies is based on the inclusion ofgravity in fundamental equations.
Using a laboratory environmentfouna’ nowhere else, the US. Destiny laboratory on space station provides
the only place to study long-term physical eﬂeets in the absence ofgravity, without the complications of
gravity-relatea’proeesses such as convection and sedimentation. This unique microgravity environment
allows diﬁ‘erentphysieal properties to dominate systems, and these have been harnessea’for a wide variety
ofinvestigations in the physical sciences.
The [SS Physical Science Experiments portfolio includes experiments in diﬁ‘erent sub-ﬁela’s ofphysies and
material science. Several experiments are broadly classiﬁed as fluid physics, whieh testphenomena such as
eapillaryflow, the mixing of miscible ﬂuids, and bubble dynamics. Other experiments test concepts in the
relatively new ﬁeld of the physics ofsoft matter and colloidal systems. Yet another class ofexperimentsfo-
cases on crystal growth, especially protein crystal growth in microgravity. Growing crystals (both protein
crystals and zeolite crystals) in space, free from the gravitational eﬂeets ofsea’imentation and convection,
provides an opportunity to grow crystals that are larger or more pure than crystals that are grown on Earth.
Crystallization experiments an ISS have examinedproteins, viruses, and other maerobiologieal molecules
to better understand their structure ana’funetionfor maintaining human health and ﬁghting a’isease.
FL UID PHYSICS
The current generation affluia’ experimentsfoeuses 0n colloidal and liquid crystal systems. The Light Microscopy
Module will be used for some 0fthese experiments. Colloidal investigations will study small eolloia’alpartieles that
are used to model atomic systems and engineer new systems without sedimentation ana’partielejamming. Liquid
crystal investigations will exploit the unique characteristics offreely suspended liquid crystal ﬁlms. Gravity-a’riven
sedimentation produces inhomogeneities in ﬁlm thickness, precluding the formation oflarge, homogeneous,
boundary-free ﬁlms in Earth ’s gravity.
MA TERIALS SCIENCE
Experiments in microgravity remove the eﬂeets ofgravity-relatea’processes such as sedimentation and convection.
This allows testing ofphysieal hypotheses that cannot be tested in any other environment.
PROTEIN CRYS TAL GROWTH
Experiments obtain high-quality erystalfor ground—basea’ research. Study ofprotein crystals is essentialfor
visualizingproteins and developing new drugs and agricultural products.
45

"
"54","Physical Sciences Experiments Performed on the International Space Station, Grouped by Discipline
Environment)
Growth of High Quality Crystals, Motions 0f Lumazin Crystals and Growth of Ferritin Crystals )
Thaumatin and Aspartyl-tRNA Synthetase Crystals Grown in Microgravity)
Subfractions in Microgravity)
Polypeptides - the case of (Pro—Pro—Gly) 10)
Protein Using Microgravity)
Measurements of Crystal Quality and Theoretical Modeling)
Metabolite Transport Proteins)
Science)
Properties)
Hardware for Protein Crystal Growth)
46

"
"55","ADVANCED PROTEIN CRYSTALLIZATION FACILITY (APCF), EIGHT INVESTIGATIONS
Payload developer: Italian Space Agency (ASI) for the European Space Agency
Expedition 3
Principal Investigat0r(s): Richard Giegé, Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque (CNRS), Strasbourg,
France; Effect of Different Growth Conditions on the Quality of Thaumatin and Aspartyl—
tRNA Synthetase Crystals Grown in MicrograVity (APCF—Crystal Quality)
Manfred W. Baumstark, University of Freiburg, Germany; Crystallization of Human Low
Density Lipoprotein (LDL) Subfractions in MicrograVity (APCF—Lipoprotein)
Willem J de Grip, University of Nij megen, Netherlands; Crystallization of Rhodopsin in
MicrograVity
J oseph. Martial, University of Liege, France; Crystallization of the Next Generation of
Octarellins (APCF—Ocatrellins)
Fermin Otalora, University of Granada, Spain; Testing New Trends in Microgravity
Protein Crystallization (APCF—Lysozyme)
SeVil Weinkauf, Technical University Munich, Germany; Solution Flows and Molecular
Disorder of Protein Crystals: Growth of High Quality Crystals, Motions 0f Lumazine
Crystals, and Growth of Ferritin Crystals (APCF—Crystal Growth)
Lode Wyns, Free University Brussels, Belgium; Extraordinary Structural Features of
Antibodies from Camelids (APCF—Camelids)
Adriana Zagari, University of Naples, Italy; Protein Crystallization in Microgravity,
Collagen Model (X—Y—Gly) Polypeptides: the case of (Pro—Pro—Gly)10 (APCF—PPGIO)
Research Area Protein Crystal Growth
Q; ‘ x t, 7., \, . 5“ — , V I - ; Understanding proteins is basic to understanding the processes
""-5 ‘ 4."" f V , > ,1, ' of living things. While we know the chemical formula of proteins,
#3"" ""’ i9» _ ' ' ‘_ “‘ < learning the chemical structure 0fthese macromolecules is more dif—
q ' ; g 7 ' ~ 5 97 . ._ ‘ '1 'j_ ﬁcult. Mapping the three—dimensional structure of proteins, deoxyri—
.ic ' _ 'l"" . i 1:. "" ?‘g bonucleic acid (DNA), ribonucleic acid (RNA), carbohydrates, and
a 5-. _ .~ ‘ .15 ‘ g Viruses provides information concerning their functions and behavior.
h! .. . 7! 12:1, 2 ’ This knowledge is fundamental to the emerging ﬁeld of rational drug
' 45‘ a i , design, replacing the trial—and—error method of drug development.
‘ I . .1 Microgravity provides a unique environment for growing crystals—
{J .. f - an environment that is free of the gravitational properties that can
' ‘11-» crush the delicate structures of crystals. Currently, several test
S105E5161 — Astronauts Frederick W. Sturckow facilities are used to grow crystals.
and Scott J. Horowitz of the shuttle STS—105 crew
F3089 With the APCF by the middeck locker during The Advanced Protein Crystallization Facility (APCF) can
EXped't'On 3' support three crystal—growth methods: liquid—liquid diffusion,
vapor diffusion, and dialysis. In the vapor diffusion method, a crystal forms in a protein solution as a precipitant
draws moisture in a surrounding reservoir. In the dialysis method, salt draws moisture away from the protein solu—
tion Via a membrane separating the two and forming crystals. Only the vapor diffusion and dialysis methods were
used for the APCF suite of experiments.
RESULTS
Initial analysis of the crystals that were returned from station supports the ﬁndings of earlier APCF ﬂights:
comparative crystallographic analysis indicates that space—grown crystals are superior in every way to control—group
crystals that are grown on Earth under identical conditions. Crystals that are grown in microgravity generally have
improved morphology, larger volume, higher diffraction limit, and are better ordered compared to Earth—grown
47

"
"56","crystals. Researchers reported that the electron—density maps that were calculated from diffraction data contained
considerably more detail, allowing them to produce more accurate three—dimensional models.
APCF—Carnelids, APCF—Crystal Quality, APCF—Growth, APCF—Lysozyme, APCF—Octarellins and APCF—PPGIO all
produced excellent—quality crystals that had better resolution and other optical properties than those grown on Earth.
APCF—Lipoprotein successfully produced crystals, but they did not achieve the expected level of resolution. APCF—
Rhodopsin had slight technical problems that prevented the formation of suitable crystals.
Although many of the investigators have not completed their analysis
and modeling, early published results have come out for crystals of (Pro—
Pro—Gly)10 or (PPGIO). PPG10 is a collagen protein that is found in many
tissues. This collagen is particularly concentrated in the skin, joints, and
bones. Video that was collected during Expedition 3 showed the small
_ movements within the crystallizing solutions. A direct correlation between
crystal motion and acceleration from events on station (such as docking,
i venting, and crew movement) was determined for the ﬁrst time. The PPG10
' crystals were independently studied by X—ray diffraction in various labs; the
best resolution attained for microgravity—grown crystals from ISS was 1.5A,
A thaumatin crystal, grown in micro— which was superior to the 1.7A obtained on the ground. The teams of APCF
gravity during Expedition 3, displays scientists are combining data from previous space ﬂights, the ground, and
interference patterns in polarized light- the station to get the best possible information on protein structures for
applications in pharmaceutical and physiological research.
PUBLICATION(S)
Berisio R, Vitagliano L, Vergara A, Sorrentino G, Mazzarella L, Zagari A. Crystallization of the collagen—like
polypeptide (PPG)10 aboard the International Space Station. 2. Comparison of crystal quality by X—ray diffraction.
Acta Crystallography, Section D Biological Crystallography. 58: 1695—1699, 2002.
Castagnolo D, Piccolo C, Carotenuto L, Vegara A, Zagari A. Crystallization of the collagen—like polypeptide
(PPG)10 aboard the International Space Station. 3. Analysis of residual acceleration—induced motion. Acta
Crystallographica. Section D, Biological Crystallography. 59(pt4):773—776, 2003.
Lorber B. The crystallization of biological macromolecules under microgravity: a way to more accurate three—
dimensional structures? Biochimica et Biophysica Acta. 1599(1—2):1—8, 2002.
Vergara A, CorVino E, Sorrentino G, Piccolo C, Tortora A, Caritenuto L, Mazzarella L, Zagari A. Crystalliz—
ation of the collagen—like polypeptide (PPG)10 aboard the International Space Station. 1. Video observation. Acta
Crystallography, Section D Biological Crystallography. 58: 1690—1694, 2002.
Vergara A, Lorber B, Zagari A, Giege R. Physical aspects of protein crystal growth investigated with the Advanced
Protein Crystallization Facility in reduced gravity environments. Acta Crystallographica, Section D. 5922—15, 2002.
Vergara A, Lorber B, Sauter C, Giege R, Zagari A. Lessons from crystals grown in the Advanced Protein
Crystallization Facility for conventional crystallization applied to structural biology. Biophysical Chemistry.
118:102—112, 2005.
Camelid crystals, complexed with -
lysozyme, grown in the APCF during
ISS Expedition 3.
48

"
"57","BINARY COLLOIDAL ALLOY TEST-3 (BCAT-3), THREE INVESTIGATIONS
Principal Investigator(s): Peter N. Pusey, Ph.D., University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Andrew Schoﬁeld, Ph.D., University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom; Binary Alloys
(BCAT—3—BA, Expedition 8)
Arjun Yodh, Ph.D., University of Pennsylvania, University Park, Penn.; J ian Zhang,
University of Pennsylvania, University Park, Penn.; Surface Crystallization
(BCAT—3—SC, Expeditions 8—12)
David A. Weitz, Ph.D., Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass; Peter Lu, Ph.D.,
Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass; Critical Point (BCAT—3—4—CP, Expeditions 8—10,
12,13,16,17)
Research Area Materials Sciences
, 3. * 7 L' 't , Ff ' - ﬁx; I |88008E2061O — Astronaut C. Michael Foale,
0 ii , {'ﬁ‘ ‘9; Expedition. 8 commander and NASA ISS science officer,
, ..I‘ j ' l ’ .. - .. 3 uses a digital still camera to photograph a slovy growth
' -7 L ‘ , . -, w a! - . .- sample module (SGSM) for the BCAT-3 experiment.
' f. 7:-.. ./ Fri,“ ‘. “y , - The SGSM is on a mounting bracketlattached to the
.‘4: ‘ 9 3 3?: ...-1}le .! V“ . maintenance work area table set up In the U.S.
‘_ .___3_; ., .2‘ - ~ 11,- ‘ Destiny laboratory.
/"" J , LE"" 4 '- .* . '
Vii ?i» l5 ‘ ‘"" . .1 b '/
\u’e "" The BCAT—3 hardware supported three investigations in
t r x ‘ ' Which ISS crews photographed samples of colloidal particles
P \ A k. :g (tiny nanoscale spheres suspended in liquid) to document liquid/
' T’ V , §- // - .' gas phase changes, growth of binary crystals, and the forma—
' ' ' 7 5 ' h ‘ tion of colloidal crystals that were conﬁned to a surface. Colloids
are small enough that in a microgravity environment Without sedimentation and convection, they behave much as
atoms. By controlling aspects of colloidal mixtures, they can be used to model all sorts of phenomena.
The BCAT—3 suite of payloads consists of 10 small samples of colloid alloys in Which the microscopic colloid
particles are mixed together into a liquid. These samples are contained Within a small case that is the size of a school
textbook. At the start of an experiment run, all samples are shaken to completely remix the colloid samples, using a
magnet to run a magnetic stir bar up and down through the samples—much in the same way that salad dressing must
be shaken to remix oil and Vinegar. After the samples are mixed, they are periodically photographed using a digital
camera until the colloid and liquid components of those samples have separated or the polymers have formed
crystals. The samples can be remixed to repeat the experiment.
BCAT-3-BA (PUSEY)
The binary alloy (BCAT—3—BA) investigations examine colloids, Which are technologically interesting because
they are the right size to manipulate light. For example, opal is a “photonic” crystal containing tiny spheres of silica
and hydrous silica that differentially refract light, resulting in ﬂashes of color under a directed light beam. The ability
to better control the movement of light is a maj or technological goal, With many potential applications (e.g., ﬁber op—
tics, other optical systems such as switches, displays). Crystal structures that are built from only one type of colloidal
particle, e.g., the arrangement of colloidal silica spheres in an
opal, are well understood, but their optical properties are
limited. More useful photonic crystals can be built from two ' -
different types of spheres that are mixed together, yielding a
binary alloy. Depending on the sizes and abundances of the
different colloidal particles, the resulting structures and their
optical properties are varied. MicrograVity is crucial to the
binary crystal experiment, facilitating the growth of crystals
that are far larger than those that are created on the surface of
the Earth.
8J229926.DCR — BCAT-3 sample 10, taken May 25, 2004
at 18:57:07 during ISS Expedition 9, 2 months following mixing.
The pink region is the phase separation region, which shows a possible indication
of surface crystallization. The black asterisk indicates possible bulk crystal nucleation.
49

"
"58","RESULTS
Unfortunately, the BCAT—3—BA sarnple dried out before crystallizing could occur on board the ISS.
BCAT-3-SC (YODH)
During the surface crystallization (BCAT—3—SC) experiment, astronauts photographed samples of suspended colloidal
particles in a liquid that contains a small amount of polymer to document the formation of colloidal crystals. Under the
right circumstances, these suspended particles will prefer to crystallize on the container surfaces rather than in the
sample volume. Three BCAT—3—SC samples will study the formation of colloidal crystals that are conﬁned to a sur—
face, allowing comparison with bulk three—dimensional crystallization, to begin testing out how geometry affects
crystallization itself. Results will help scientists develop fundamental physics concepts that were previously
hindered by the effects of gravity. Ordered arrays of these micron—sized particles might be ideal for switching
and controlling light.
RESULTS
Imagery for the BCAT—3—SC was collected over several increments and is still undergoing analysis.
BCAT-3-4-CP (WEITZ)
BCAT—3—4—CP samples were designed to help determine the phase separation rates and better deﬁne the phase
diagram of a model critical ﬂuid system. The colloidal mixtures were designed to model liquid/gas phase changes,
speciﬁcally, to model the behavior of boiling water in a colloidal—polymer system, where the phases that are analo—
gous to liquid and gas can be seen as two different colors. In an ordinary pot of boiling water, bubbles of water vapor
coalesce on the bottom of the pot, growing until they detach and ﬂoat to the surface where they escape into the atmo—
sphere. At boiling temperature water eXists simultaneously in two distinct phases—liquid and gas. The boiling water
would look different in the absence of gravity, when the vapor no longer ﬂoats to the top. The phase separation behavior
changes with increasing pressure: seal the pot, as in a pressure cooker, and the boiling temperature rises. Continue the
pressure increase and the mixture will reach its critical point, a unique pressure and temperature value where the prop—
erties of liquid and gas merge. Just above the critical point is the supercritical regime where there are no distinct
phases but, rather, a homogeneous supercritical ﬂuid.
.-"".r I HI mum: Il-IH T- 1 L I'lll-LIII ]'- H I:I.'-.-r T— +2 I:I.'I.'r:-I '|'— u Luna 1'— +TIIII'|.'I'!1 T- HI Irma
5mm Ill...-
IH-Ifl. _.
WFM-Il-I-I
. ||'|.II-’:-|I""I
WML-ll-I-I
mm
umm-I-I-I-
INJLI
hmm-I-I-I-
IN IN
II'! I-l-l
Images of BCAT-3-4-CP: Six samples of colloid/polymer mixtures separating at
different times.
50

"
"59","Supercritical ﬂuids are technologically important because they uniquely combine the properties of liquids and
gases, ﬂowing easily (as gases) yet still having tremendous power to transport dissolved materials and thermal
energy (like liquids). Understanding critical phenomena through ground-based experiments have been limited by
gravity, Which invariably causes the denser liquid phase to fall to the bottom of any container, precluding direct
observation of phase separation alone. BCAT-3-4-CP is the ﬁrst experiment to systematically attempt to precisely
locate the critical point and Visualize the behavior around it. This work also addresses the physics of complex ﬂuids,
such as colloidal suspensions, emulsions, or polymer solutions, and uses colloids as model systems With large particles
and relatively slow, observable rates to characterize particle behavior near the critical point. It also allows a better
understanding of phase behavior in colloid-polynier system, With many practical Earth and space applications—
colloid-polymer solutions are used in many household and personal care products.
RESULTS
The BCAT-3-4-CP samples have yielded some surprising results: The samples that separated on Earth also
separated in space; the samples that did not separate on Earth also did not separate in microgravity, indicating that
the tendency for phase separation is not linked to gravity. However, for those samples that separated into different
phases, the rates of separation for the microgravity samples were very different from the same mixtures on Earth.
Those samples With concentrations that are closest to the critical point took weeks to months in microgravity,
compared With a couple of days on Earth (Lu et al. 2007).
These dynamic data Will help determine the boundary conditions for future models of critical behavior. Present
observations also include a determination of the shape of the interface and Which part of the sample wets the cell.
The long-term observation of Which samples phase separates Will allow precise determination of the critical point of
this colloidal mixture, and Will allow inference of the fundamental physics underlying critical point behavior.
PUBLICATION(S)
Lu PJ, Weitz DA, Foale MC, Fincke M, Chiao LN, Meyer WV, Owens J C, Hoffmann MI, Sicker RJ, Rogers R,
Havenhill MA, Anzalone SM, Yee H. Microgravity Phase Separation near the Critical Point in Attractive Colloids.
45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit. Reno, NeV. J an 8—11, 2007; AIAA 2007-1152.

51

"
"60","CAPILLARY FLOW EXPERIMENT (CFE)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Mark M. Weislogel, Ph.D., Portland State University, Portland, Ore.
Expeditions 9, 12—16
Research Area Fluid Physics
CFEs are a suite of ﬂuid physics experiments Whose purpose is to investigate capillary ﬂows and phenomena in
low gravity. The CFE data that is to be obtained Will be crucial to future space exploration because they provide
a foundation for physical models of ﬂuids management in microgravity, including fuel tanks and cryogen storage
systems (e.g., water recycling) and materials processing in the liquid state. NASA’s current plans for Exploration
missions assume the use of larger liquid propellant masses than have ever ﬂown before. Under low—gravity con—
ditions, capillary forces can be exploited to control ﬂuid orientation so that such large mission—critical systems
perform predictably.
The handheld experiments aim to provide results of critical interest to the capillary ﬂow community that cannot
be achieved in ground—based tests; for example, dynamic effects that are associated With a moving contact boundary
condition, capillary—driven ﬂow in interior corner networks, and critical wetting phenomena in complex geometries.
The knowledge that is gained Will help spacecraft ﬂuid systems designers increase system reliability, decrease
system mass, and reduce overall system complexity.
CFE encompasses three sub—experiments: CFE—Contact Line (CFE—CL), CFE—Interior Corner F10W(CFE—ICF),
and CFE—Vane Gap (CFE—VG), With two unique experimental apparatuses per experiment for perfectly wetting and
partially wetting ﬂuids. There are multiple tests per experiment. Each of the experiments employs conditions and test
cell dimensions that cannot be achieved in ground—based experiments. All of the units use similar ﬂuid injection hard—
ware, Which is made of Lucite, have simple and similarly sized test chambers, and rely solely on Video for highly
quantitative data. Silicone oil is used as the ﬂuid. The differences between units are primarily ﬂuid properties,
wetting conditions (determined by the coating inside the test chamber), and test cell cross section.
During each experimental run a crewmember disturbed the ﬂuids by tapping the container, moving the vanes,
etc. By digitizing and quantitatively analyzing Video data of the resulting oscillations, natural frequencies and damp—
ing rates are determined. Using these data, the effects of partial wetting, the lag before contact angle changes, and
ﬂuid properties such as surface tension and Viscosity Will be quantiﬁed. Transient ﬂow rates, stability limits, and
coalescence time scales Will be measured.
- g/t ‘i ‘ o. . .
- J V
, ' - |88009E23445 — ISS science officer Edward
i i .. q M. (Mike) Fincke is pictured next to CFE-CL2 in
‘ , '; ‘..;:73 §th 1""? the U.S. Destiny laboratory aboard ISS during
11/ 'l i i' i Expedition 9.
r} \ ?..J‘Hvo""
i. -""_ """"‘- i: ‘7
,6?
* 3..
Contact Line
CFE—CL investigates the properties of the contact line (the boundary between the liquid and the solid surface of
the container). The contact line controls the interface shape, stability, and dynamics of capillary systems in low
gravity.
RESULTS
The ﬁrst contact line apparatus With perfect wetting properties, CFE—CLZ (pictured above With astronaut Mike
Fincke), was tested during ISS Expeditions 9, 12, and 13. The partial wetting conﬁguration, CFE—CLI, was performed
52

"
"61","during Expeditions l3 and 16. Scores of indiVidual primary science tests and additional “extra science” tests were per-
formed and downlinked, with commentary, Via Video by the crew. Full analyses of the CFE-CL data are under way
using both the low-resolution Video that was downlinked from 188 during real-time operations, and the higher-resolution
Video data from the returned tapes. The different tests explored techniques for imparting disturbances and contact line
responses in “push,” “slide,” and “axial” modes, as well as droplet effects. Experts are debating whether current ﬂuid
dynamics models can accurately predict ﬂuid behaVior at contact lines in microgravity. Numerical analysts from the
United States and Europe were given data (hardware descriptions and ﬂuid properties of the CFE-CL systems) with
which to create computer predictions of the experimental properties. Current ﬂuid dynamic models will be compared to
experimental results to determine the ﬁdelity of current models and the need for future research (Weislogel 2005).
Preliminary results on the ﬁrst space-validated numerical models that predict contact line behaVior are reported
in Weislogel et al. (2008). For sets of initial boundary conditions, the model predictions were excellent.
Interior Comer Flow
CFE-ICF studies capillary ﬂow in interior corners. Structured inside tanks providing interior corners are used in the
design of fuel tanks so that the fuel will always ﬂow to the outlet of the tank in the absence of gravity. The equations
governing the process are known but, to date, have not been solved analytically because of a lack of experimental data
identifying the appropriate boundary conditions for the ﬂow problem. Experimental results will guide the analysis
by providing the necessary boundary conditions as a function of container cross section and ﬁll fraction. The
benchmarked theory can then be used to improve propellant management aboard spacecraft.
RESULTS
Like the other CFE set-ups, the CFE-ICF apparatus provides benchmark data for validating numerical models
predicting behaVior of ﬂuids in complex containers. In particular, this experiment set-up provided imagery of the
bubble migrating from the vertex of the tapered container to the base, demonstrating spontaneous capillary ﬂow
within the container that appeared to be similar to the ﬂow that was predicted by models (Weislogel et al. 2007).
Two geometries were tested. Both provided similar results; when the meniscus location is plotted against time (both
dimensionless), the migration rates increase from dry, wet, and open loop tests. In general, migration rates increase
for dry tests. The validated conclusion from the two geometries tested is that speciﬁc container geometry can control
liquid ﬂow.
Vane Gap
CFE-VG studies capillary ﬂow when there is a gap between interior corners, such as in the gap formed by an interior
vane and tank wall of a large propellant storage tank or the near intersection of vanes in a tank with a complex vane
network.
RESULTS
The CFE-VG consists of a cylindrical container with and an elliptical cross section and a central vane that can be
rotated within the cylinder. The vane is offset from the cylinder center so that the gaps between the cylinder walls
are unequal. This experiment was designed to better understand the sensitiVity of ﬂuid behaVior in low-graVity con-
ditions to container shape, and to illustrate how very small shifts in container geometry can result in signiﬁcant shifts
in ﬂuid distribution. The ﬁndings from this research have direct application to passive management of ﬂuids aboard
spacecraft, with potential for pumping large amounts of liquid by container conﬁguration. The CFE-VG tests indicate
that the degree of wetting is dependent on vane angle and the wetting properties of the ﬂuid, but also on other geo-
metric aspects of the container, vane, and vane gap (Weislogel et al. 2008). In more detail, the tests show that for the
perfect—wetting ﬂuid, three ﬂuid conﬁgurations result: wetting along the small gap between the vane and the cylinder,
wetting along the large gap, and a large shift in ﬂuid distribution (bulk shift) that redistributes much of the ﬂuid to
one side of the container. The tests results show that very small rotations of the vane can cause bulk shifts of the
ﬂuid. In the partial-wetting conﬁguration, the bulk shifting does not occur, but wetting along either the small or
the large gaps does occur (Chen et al. 2008).
PUBLICATION(S)
Weislogel MM, Thomas EA, Graf JC. A Novel Device Addressing Design Challenges for Passive Fluid Phase
Separations Aboard Spacecraft. Journal ofMicrogmvily Science and T echnology. ISSN 0938-0108 (Print) 1875-
0494 (Online), DOI 10.1007/sl22l7-008-909l-7, Aug 6, 2008.

53

"
"62","Weislogel MM, Chen Y, Bolleddula D. A Better Non—Dimensionalization Scheme for Slender Flows: The Laplacian
Operator Scaling Method. The Physics of F luids. 2008; 20(9):093602.
Weislogel, MM, J enson, R, Chen, Y. The Capillary Flow Experiments aboard the International Space Station:
Status, IAC—07—A2.6.02, 2007.
Weislogel MM. Preliminary Results from the Capillary Flow Experiment Aboard ISS: The Moving Contact
Line Boundary Condition. Proceedings of the 43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV.
AIAA 2005—1439, Jan10—13, 2005.
Weislogel MM, J enson R, Klatte J , Dreyer M. Interim Results from the Capillary Flow Experiment Aboard ISS;
the Moving Contact Line Boundary Condition. 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit. Reno, NeV.
AIAA 2007—747, Jan 8 — 11, 2007.
Weislogel MM, J enson RM, Klatte J , Dreyer ME. The Capillary Flow Experiments aboard ISS: Moving Contact
Line Experiments and Numerical Analysis. 46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV. AIAA
2008—816; 7 — 10 Jan 2008.
Chen Y, J enson RM, Weislogel MM, Collicott SH. Capillary Wetting Analysis of the CFE—Vane Gap Geometry.
46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV. 2008, 7 — 10 J an; AIAA 2008—817.
Weislogel MM, J enson RM, Chen Y, Collicott SH, Williams S. Geometry pumping on Spacecraft (The CFE—Vane
Gap Experiment on ISS), ISPS, 2007.
""T | 1 1""!
| ' i _ f
- +
I _, __..
=1 - -- =2:
g. - ﬂ"" E-T‘Ll' r' E...‘ :- -'. I _
m_- .. :.-.. - .1
ii tF'FIr ll ‘
._ I -'. I I
Video screen shot of the CFE contact line-2 [Lyn ' __2"" 1 ' '1- I _
set-up and initial condition on board ISS during ' q ._ 1 . _. -. '| II
Increment 9. The light blue liquid is in two ; _ .l - -"" ﬂ. -.- I. ""
narrow tubes, which are shown side by F . 1L."" '1 1 -_
side, forming a meniscus in each tube. - '- . -.' J
' . i F :L. - ._I
+— I *1 - ‘1 ' '
Video screen shot of CFE CL-2 bubble test 1
on board ISS during Increment 9.
54

"
"63","COMMERCIAL GENERIC PROTEIN CRYSTAL GROWTH-HlGH-DENSITY (CPCG-H)
Principal Investigator(s): Lawrence DeLucas, Center for Biophysical Sciences and Engineering, University of
Alabama, Birmingham, Ala.
Expeditions 2, 4
Research Area Protein Crystal Growth
Proteins provide the building blocks of our bodies. Sorne proteins make it possible for red blood cells to carry
oxygen while other proteins help transrnit nerve impulses that allow us to see, hear, smell, and touch. Still other
proteins play crucial roles in causing diseases. Pharmaceutical companies may be able to develop new or improved
drugs to ﬁght those diseases once the exact structure of the proteins are known.
The goal of the Commercial Protein Crystal Growth—High—density (CPCG—H) payload is to grow high—quality
crystals of selected proteins so that their molecular structures can be studied. On Earth, gravity often has a negative
impact on growing protein crystals. In microgravity, however, gravitational disturbances are removed, thus allowing
some crystals to grow in a more regular and perfect form. During ISS Expeditions 2 and 4, CPCG—H was outﬁtted
with High—Density Protein Crystal Growth (HDPCG) hardware. HDPCG was a vapor—diffusion facility that could
process as many as 1,008 individual protein samples. The entire HDPCG assembly had four trays that held 252
protein crystal growth blocks, each consisting of siX chambers. The chambers had a protein reservoir, a precipi—
tant reservoir, and an optically clear access cap. The chambers were designed to reduce sedirnentation problems
and to produce highly uniform, single crystals.
The primary proteins that were involved in the testing of the CPCG—H hardware during ISS Expeditions 2 and
4 were rnistletoe lectin—I (ML—I, Thermusﬂavus SS RNA, brefeldin A—ADP ribosylated substrate (BARS, and
a triple mutant myoglobin (Mb—YQR). ML—I is a ribosome inactivating protein that can stop protein biosynthesis
(creation of proteins) in cells, and is also a rnaj or component of drugs that are used to treat cancer. Although the
study of T hermus ﬂavus SS RNA has been ongoing for well over 30 years, the exact function of the protein remains
obscure. Scientists believe that the crystallization of different domains of this protein may reveal functional properties.
BARS is an enzyme that is involved in membrane ﬁssion, catalyzing the formation of phosphatidic acid by transfer.
Mb—YQR was studied to assess the functional role of packing defects in proteins. The elucidation of these protein
structures will provide valuable insight into the role of these proteins for application in the pharmaceutical industry.
ll“ lzw' . - t i. 7 » > . ~
'I; t , 6. ., :71.- 1""“: 'w' _./ 1‘. A I .
L“ 4* L3,}: i. 1"" ktﬂi :1 '
.'. f A V‘ ,'-' ‘J/‘u ISSOO4E10827 — Astronaut
. 7* 3 3"" ’ \WI‘ ' Carl E. Walz, Expedition 4 flight
l , ‘5‘”: ‘I ‘ engineer, works in the U.S. Destiny
\Q; , ~ laboratory installing the CRIM-M.
T"" ‘\. , CRlM-M provides the temperature
EV 1"" control that is critical to the
4.. 1 «727,—. success of CPCG-H experiments.
RESULTS
Preliminary analysis indicated that at least 65% of the macromolecules that were ﬂown in the CPCG—H experiments
produced diffraction—sized crystals. X—ray diffraction studies of these crystals were conducted, and the data were
used to determine and reﬁne the three—dimensional structures of these macromolecules. Three benchmark proteins,
ML—I, T hermus ﬂavus SS RNA, and BARS, were ﬂown to validate the performance of the hardware. Diffraction—
quality crystals, which were obtained from all of these proteins, yielded X—ray diffraction data that are comparable to
those previously collected on Earth—grown crystals. Since the structure of each of the benchmark proteins is known
55

"
"64","to high resolution, these results indicate that the new HDPCG assembly worked very well, successfully producing
high-quality crystals of the benchmark proteins.
Synchrotron diffraction data that were collected from the space crystals of the BARS protein were comparable
in resolution but more intense and showed signiﬁcantly less mosaicity than data from Earth-grown crystals. This
indicates that the space-grown crystals had a higher order at the molecular level, and the X-ray diffraction data from
the space crystals produced a more complete data set. These results contributed signiﬁcantly to the structural study
of BARS (Nardini et a1. 2002).
ML-I is an enzyme that has the ability to inactivate ribosomes and inhibit cell replication. It is a target for new
cancer treatments. Crystals of the protein that is attached to adenine (one of ﬁve building blocks of DNA or RNA)
were ﬂown; these crystals yielded X-ray data to 1.9 A. These data were used to reﬁne the structure of the complex
and were especially valuable in reﬁning the active site conformation (Krauspenhaar et a1. 2002).
Perhaps the most exciting results from the macromolecular crystallization experiments that were conducted in the
CPCG-H hardware were obtained from the T hermus ﬂavus 5 S rRNA [ribosomal ribonucleic acid] experiments.
These experiments involved a synthetic RNA duplex 0f 5 S rRNA, which is a model system for the study of the
binding of ribosomal RNA to proteins. Crystallization under microgravity provided crystals that were of signiﬁcantly
higher quality than those grown in one-g. The space crystals diffracted to a maximum resolution of 2.6 A in contrast
to the best Earth-grown crystals, which diffracted to a maximum resolution of 2.9 A. The improved X-ray data
facilitated the completion of the structure of the RNA segment (Vallazza et a1. 2002).
To understand the true function of a protein, the structure must be determined. The model of the structure must be
accurate to allow scientists to create compounds that bind to the protein. The elucidation of the protein structure is
of maj or importance with complex proteins (proteins that have signiﬁcant folding). The three-dimensional structure
of the triple mutant protein Mb-YQR was solved by growing the protein on 188 during Expeditions 2 and 4. Follow-
ing return to Earth, three-dimensional models were created of the Mb-YQR proteins that were grown in space using
X-ray crystallography techniques (Miele et a1. 2004).
Structural studies of microgravity-grown crystals have provided important information for the development of new
drugs. For example, previous studies that were conducted using crystals that were grown on shuttle ﬂights have been
used in the design of inhibitors, which may serve as broad-spectrum antibiotics. The CPCG-H payload offers a great
increase in the amount of space that is available for protein crystal growth, enhancing the space station’s research
capabilities and commercial potential.
PUBLICATION(S)
Krauspenhaar R, Rypniewski W, Kalkura N, Moore K, DeLucas L, Stoeva S, Mikhailov A, Voelter W, Betzel C.
Crystallisation under microgravity 0f mistletoe lectin-I from Viscum album with adenine monophosphate and the
crystal structure at 1.9A resolution. Acta Crystallographica. Section D, Biological Crystallography. 5 8: 1704—1707,
2002.
Miele AE, Federici L, Sciara G, Draghi F, Brunori M, Vallone B. Analysis of the effect of microgravity on
protein crystal quality: the case of a myoglobin triple mutant. Acta Crystallographica. Section D, Biological
Crystallography. D59z928—988, 2004.
Nardini M, Spanc S, Cericola C, Pesce A, Damonte G, Luini A, Corda D, Bolognesi M. Crystallization and
preliminary X-ray diffraction analysis of brefeldin A-ADP ribosylated substrate (BARS). Acta Crystallographica.
Section D, Biological Crystallography. 5 8: 1068—1070, 2002.
Vallazza M, Banumathi S, Perbandt M, Moore K, DeLucas L, Betzel C, Erdmann V. Crystallization and Structure
Analysis of T hermus ﬂavus 5 S rRNA helix B. Acta Crystallographica. Section D, Biological Crystallography.
58:1700—1703, 2002.

56

"
"65","COARSENING IN SOLID LIQUID MlXTURES-Z (CSLM-z)
Principal Investigator(s): Peter Voorhees, Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill.
Expeditions 7, 16
Research Area Materials Science
Coarsening is an increase in the size of grains in a metal, usually during heating at elevated temperatures. The
process occurs in nearly any two—phase mixture, including industrial rnetallic alloys that are used in products such
as dental ﬁllings and turbine blades. It is important in industry because grain size and size distribution affects the
strength of metal alloys. The objective of the Coarsening in Solid Liquid Mixtures—Z (CSLM—Z) experiment was to
assess coarsening mechanisms in a two phase metal alloy to better deﬁne the physical—chemical processes and validate
models that are used for alloy manufacture on Earth. By operating on 188, material transport phenomena such as gravi—
tational settling and convection are eliminated, allowing researchers to focus on the effects of coarsening alone.
' i. \. i
, P .
\ )igw ISSOO7E10472 — Front ylew of the
I P ~o.<’ ‘ - - ,; CSLM-2 hardware followmg setup In the
' _ “ 1 ow /, microgravity sciences glovebox (MSG)
') . ‘ ‘ E \K ‘ before operation on Expedition 7.
, , 7 i. . ,- - ~ *4 i
___.""'=""—""'—_. r l 99 .
.L'.'.'.'ﬂ_'_.';‘r’ S
. 95 g
'“ "" i i . UL .. . .i "" ""'*“'""‘ \ \§
. t » F. "" ‘ i '”
During cooling of an alloy of several metals, the different constituent metals may solidify at different rates,
and solid particles may experience competitive particle growth—a process that is called Ostwald ripening. During
Ostwald ripening, coarsening occurs with large particles growing at the expense of smaller ones in a matrix, with the
large particles stealing atoms from the smaller ones. Eventually, the sample consists of a few large particles that are
crowded around a few remaining small particles. Materials that contain a few large particles rather than many small
particles are structurally weaker.
In gravity, sedimentation will draw denser particles to the bottom and light particles to the top of a sample. As
a result, the sample not only coarsens, it coarsens unevenly, thereby producing areas in the material that are much
weaker than other areas in the material.
In CSLM—Z, samples of a two—phase mixture of lead (Pb) and tin (Sn) were heated to the eutectic point (the lowest
point of melting) for the mixture that was inside a large, cylindrical sample chamber inside the MSG. The melting
resulted in Sn particles that were suspended in a liquid Pb—Sn matrix. The sample was then allowed to coarsen iso—
therrnally for a set period of time. After a sample was completed, pressurized water was pumped into the chamber to
quench the sample, cooling it for removal. This system can quench samples from 1850C (365 0F) (the temperature that
is required to initiate coarsening in tin—lead [Sn—Pb] samples) to 1200C (2480F) in only 6 seconds. CSLM—Z is a follow—
on to an earlier CSLM experiment that was performed on the space shuttle. The CSLM—Z samples test a wider
range of volume fractions of Sn particles and longer coarsening time than the earlier CSLM experiment.
RESULTS
Sample return from the CSLM—Z experiment was delayed due to the Columbia accident. Initial samples were
returned on STS—l 14 in 2005. Researchers had assumed that the data were compromised because the samples
were left on board for years and not kept under refrigeration. To their delight and surprise, the samples were suitable
57

"
"66","for analysis in spite of the extended storage at room temperature. Additional runs were performed recently, testing
the effect of larger and smaller volume fractions of Sn particles and longer times for coarsening at isothermal tempera—
tures. Investigators are now analyzing the microstructure of the samples. This Will allow them to obtain new spatial
distribution information on coarsening that is impossible to obtain using Earth—processed samples.
PUBLICATION(S)
Kammer D, Genau A, Voorhees PW, Duval WM, Hawersaat RW, Hickman JM, Lorik T, Hall DG, Frey CA.
. . . . . . th . . . .
Coarsenmg In Sohd—quuld Mlxtures: A Reﬂlght. 46 AIAA Aerospace Selences Meetlng and EXhlblt, Reno, NeV.
2008, 7 — 10 Jan; AIAA 2008—813.
- . 33:2 5‘}; ﬁe»? .: » . S‘ivi} 2- . - m - ‘ -
”.3153.” . ; 7,»... gwgﬁg» “a h a I ‘ ,. . , .. ' ' :..
t'. yj‘ﬁcRIfJ'. (~11: erT- .,‘I-.-' u“ ?_m- .‘ ‘ c‘ 1;:an f . '_ :«I ‘
5.?:4;.$7Ig=f~v"" ‘ ‘- ' ‘lI - . i'» I I I. '~.Ir"".'.' T.' I I . ' . ‘I . -‘ ‘IIII IIIIIII‘III 1""”, II
’I-‘Iw . . . 2‘ ~ -. _ ~ 1 .~,. -—' t: .3\..;..._:.‘, ,_'. d...” .
--f¢a‘:~‘;,t:.~;’r;x “+7. I. , «.113. . 4 i; #14."" . 3M?!“ I"" .‘ u * I
what. ‘ 'Iﬁ‘.""'III"" V ‘ w). . ‘ . - 145‘"" “4;. ID""; (7""...3’. p“? . A I’3"";\I7 « ‘-1\|Il“l .. '!
Tj’.?f.{,\':wasj-‘qiar-V’wn; , ’ ,\~_;-’v.v.' , ‘.I .55., “:1,“ 7,; .. { , '. . w 5.
I» ‘5»??? _‘ *qr‘ g “A 1-. n.‘ x,-x""-';.:ﬁﬁ;.->. awn - g . t ‘ .. »
m- o . . »
4,; 7;;53‘ “111.5, .1 ;: "".r f. .331"" .7“ .I’ I i' .1 ~ ~ I ‘1'?"" r"";
I.."",""I‘%-ji..‘l3""‘;: :35- :2). I 3‘31. 5, ‘- .‘I~'I.I‘f: I :9? . “I"" > I ‘I' I ‘4'5'553154
?.‘r‘tf'ﬁ ‘ ”if?“ - ?i—‘ixf-ivi ""£3143 6- ‘ .- ‘ ’ - ’ 4.7» ﬁ’iw‘v.‘
.555 u“ ', , ’ 1;?th
, v!» u;~'_'.‘;.-1'::.;""f.f*- . . ._.;.‘-‘<r.,f2;:‘~,'i ‘ ""i“’.”j;§»‘:7‘ -‘L _ V' . 5.5:""..‘21, “€313""
”33,"" ’ ta. t _ v . -.
;; 13;:3'55}:i»-.'*'I;T';{:7‘Irc77‘,"".'I.I-.'“I” ‘- .L i ’, F g ' ‘ ' 9. ‘2 --_,n 3.55 '5!-
. ‘. ‘p’i®é§_§:%};: 'lez‘k :.:::,$r: .- , . ‘ - '-_;d;‘:;.'..'; '-’ '» I .vI‘ , ' .1 . H , cf)"", #I 1“, 19b; “ ..
V‘V. 3a :Z‘E‘éye‘f'}, :p‘h‘kwv- t. I II I i“ - I x ‘ I ' I - I (I ' ' u -I '. — I'
Lighf‘fi , git: 1'. J.’ , . ‘ ‘ ‘I . ‘- ‘ , ""f - .°.'
I -_I‘ 1""“ ‘. 2'. ' ‘P g '1 .1310 r, . 23-"" -. '4: '2""?
I I: r 2""???“ I, ' ’I II-I‘I ""' r I I I IIIII>IaIirLI y II ' I ‘ I I I I ‘I'I'Ir
”’ "" I - 5'5; 3*- ‘n . '4 ' I 17. I 323533;!“ 'I ""
. x 1‘5 .4 I ‘ .~ . 17"" ‘ «1r . ,7 V
II; ”MI I -: ff
.' -III I n‘PJ-‘f"" I‘ ,
r ‘ “L. .. A- -
CSLM-2 sample showing Sn particles in matrix.
58

"
"67","DYNAMICALLY CONTROLLED PROTEIN CRYSTAL GROWTH (DCPCG)
Principal Investigator(s): Lawrence DeLucas, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Ala.

Expedition 3
Research Area Protein Crystal Growth
Researchers have found that it is possible to grow high-quality protein crystals in the weightlessness of LEO, where
gravitational forces will not distort or destroy a crystal’s delicate structure. When crystals are returned to Earth, their
structure is examined by sending X rays through them and using the resulting data to create computer-based models.
The goal of the Dynamically Controlled Protein Crystal Growth _, t . 1' \> ‘ ' 5
(DCPCG) experiment was to control and improve the crystallization process .' [31 “ ”E. &?%l
by dynamically controlling the elements that inﬂuence crystal growth. Current : ii& "" ' 1. ,g f “ fx - .
growth methods provide little or no control over growth rate and separation of ‘ ' i ‘ . 0: 'sﬁrg‘ \\l
the nucleation and growth phases. The DCPCG system provided researchers 5:» ~’ ‘ f o 'k ‘ \ r
real-time control of the diffusion process (supersaturation) through control of the ,“x E f 'i ‘3'“ ”'5“ 1
protein concentration. It also determined the differences in vapor diffusion rates .- "" - "" "" 1: ‘ z‘ \ ‘
(the speed at which the liquid surrounding a protein solution evaporates, leaving 2:1; '7 \\ i ,
behind a protein crystal) between experiments that were conducted in micro- ’7 m . V_ ”. y ' ‘
gravity and similar experiments that were conducted on Earth. DCPCG quantiﬁed '- !4 _ ' ' ’ V
the basic differences between crystal growth on Earth and in space, differences in = ;. I ’, ‘ ' 'l i '
growth rate and in the way crystals moved and organized in the two enViron- ' ‘ ‘ ' ' '
ments, thereby allowing researchers to assess in detail the best systems with ° “ "" Z"" ‘ ,
which to grow high-quality crystals and how to optimize those systems. '—=§~ / - "" x m .
Four rlifferent proteins. were ﬂown in DCPCG during Expedition 3. These [gi???glitigigxiva—refilrcﬁﬁﬁgclhnearggnoci
proteins were glucose isomerase (an enzyme that catalyzes the conversron the C-Iocker in EXPRESS Rack 1 on
of glucose to fructose), equine serum albumin (a blood plasma protein that is ISS Expedition 3.
produced in the liver and forms a large proportion of all plasma proteins), VEE
capsid (target protein in the development of antiViral drugs to ﬁght Venezuelan equine encephalitis (VEE)), and
a chaperone protein that catalyzes the correct folding of newly synthesized proteins. DCPCG consists of a vapor
locker (V-locker) that is connected to a Command and Data Management Locker (C-locker) that is installed in
EXPRESS Rack 1. The V-locker contained 38 growth chambers surrounded by a closed-loop nitrogen management
subsystem. Dry nitrogen ﬂowing through the subsystem caused liquid to evaporate from the growth chambers. An
in-line moisture sensor provided feedback as to how much of the liquid had evaporated. A static light-scattering sensor
allowed researchers to modify the rate of evaporation, giving them far more control over the crystal growth process
than is afforded by other methods. The C-locker housed the electronics and data ports for the experiment. A large
portion of the C-locker is the ancillary equipment area (AEA) drawer, which contains a selection of tools and
equipment for the experiment: a CD-ROM, spare ﬂash disks, connector covers, and a tool for activating the
experiment hardware.
RESULTS
DCPCG was the ﬁrst ﬂight test of an apparatus that was designed to control the crystal growth process by
controlling the rate of evaporation. The apparatus worked on orbit, and crystals were grown for the test proteins;
however, the investigators determined that the growth could have been better. The same apparatus was used in
extensive testing on the ground. Researchers tested a selection of protein solutions, including insulin (a hormone that
is produced by the pancreas to regulate the metabolism and use of sugar), serum albumin, and lysozyme (an enzyme
that attacks bacteria) and found that a slower evaporation rate yielded better results than a more rapid evaporation
rate. While the results of the ground tests were published, the DCPCG experiment investigators did not seek to
publish any structures from crystals grown in orbit.
PUBLICATION(S)
Collingsworth OD, Bray L, Christopher GK. Crystal growth Via computer controlled vapor diffusion. Journal of
Crystal Growth. 219:283—289, 2000. (Resultsfrom ground controls grown in parallel with ISS samples)

59

"
"68","EXPRESS PHYSICS OF COLLOIDS IN SPACE (EXPPCS)
Principal Investigator(s): David A. Weitz, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass; Peter N. Pusey, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland
Expeditions 2—4
Research Area Materials Science
Colloids can be deﬁned as ﬂuids with other particles dispersed in them, particularly particles of size between
1 nanometer and l micrometer. Since colloids have widespread uses in nature and industry, understanding of the
underlying physics that controls their behaVior is important. Under the proper conditions, colloidal particles can self—
assemble to form ordered arrays, or crystals. On Earth, the ordering of these particles is mostly directed by gravita—
tional effects, sedimentation, and buoyancy. Self—assembly does not occur. Thus, the weightlessness of LEO is an
important element in the study of colloids.
Physics of Colloids in Space (PCS) focused on the growth, dynamics, and basic physical properties of four
classes of colloids: binary colloidal crystals, colloid—polymer mixtures, fractal gels, and glass. These were studied
using static light scattering (for size or positions of the colloids or structures formed), dynamic light scattering
(to measure motions of particles or structures), rheological (ﬂow) measurement, and still imaging.
RESULTS
The results are discussed by class of colloid material that was studied. . ‘
Analyses are still under way. '
Binary colloidal crystals: These alloy samples are dispersions of two differ—
ently sized particles in an indeX—matching ﬂuid. Two samples were studied: an . -
AB13 crystal structure and an AB6 crystal structure. Due to a hardware failure '
late in Expedition 4, the AB6 experiment was not completed. , ' _
Unexpected “power law” growth behaVior that is still under investigation was
observed in the AB13 crystal structure sample.
One of the first images from the PCS on ISS.

Colloid-polymer mixtures: These mixtures induce a weak attractive During Expedition 2, sample A86 was illumi-
interaction that allows precise tuning of the phase behaVior of the miX— “ated With Whit? light to produce this irhage.
tures and approximates the phase separation below the critical point The ?OIOred reglons reSUIt from refractlon Of

’ . . . . . white light by the sample and sample cell,
of a gas—liquid mixture. The phase behaV1or is controlled by the con— splitting the light into its component colors.
centration of the colloid, the concentration of the polymer, and the
relative size of the colloid and the polymer. The results form the ISS experiments studied the spinodal decompo—
sition, or phase separation near the critical point, unencumbered by density differences of the phases. The growth of
the phase separation was studied using both light scattering and imaging. Without gravity, the phase separation took
30 times longer than on Earth. The sample was mixed, then phase separation began, gradually coarsening until the
container walls interacted with the mixture (at 42 hrs) and the colloid—rich phase wet the container wall, completely
coating it after 60 hrs. Because the results follow very similar time evolution as a shallow quench of a binary liquid,
they provide insight into the importance of the length scale of colloidal gels; separation depends more on coarsening
rates than initial colloid size (Bailey et al. 2007).
Colloid-polymer gels: This sample was expected to be in a ﬂuid—cluster state, but unexpectedly formed a solid gel.
The elastic modulus, which was estimated using the experiment’s rheology capabilities, will be compared to ground
samples. “Aging” characteristics of this gel were found to be similar to those formed on Earth.
Colloid-polymer criticalpoint: Immediately after mixing, the colloid—polymer critical point sample began to
separate into two phases—one that resembled a gas and one that resembled a liquid, except that the particles were
colloids and not atoms. The colloid—poor regions (the colloidal “gas” phase) grew bigger until, ﬁnally, complete phase
separation was achieved and there was just one region of each—a colloid—rich phase and a colloid—poor phase. None
of this behaVior can be observed in the sample on Earth because sedimentation would cause the colloids to fall to the
bottom of the cell faster than the de—mixing process could occur. Knowledge that was gained from these runs was
used to develop the BCAT—3 that later operated on ISS.

6O

"
"69","Fractal gels: Fractal gels may form when charged colloids have their electrostatic repulsions screened out by
the addition of a salt solution, permitting aggregation. These can be formed at very low volume fractions and form
highly tenuous aggregates that exhibit a remarkable scaling property—their structure appears the same on all length
scales up to a cluster size, and so can be described as a fractal. It was thought that the samples that were studied (col-
loidal polystyrene and silica gel) would, in the absence of sedimentation effects, ultimately form a continuous network
of fractal aggregate; the polystyrene fractal sample never fully gelled as expected, however. Initial indications are
that the volume fraction that was tested was too low. Large fractal clusters did nevertheless grow (larger than they
do on Earth), allowing measurement of the internal Vibration modes of these structures. The silica gel is thought
to have gelled, and is currently being evaluated.
Colloidal glass: These samples are still under evaluation. Comparison to samples that were formed in one-g in
the laboratory were needed to understand whether the crystallization observed was due to poor mixing or was a true
microgravity phenomena.
PUBLICATION(S)
Bailey AE, Poon WC, Christianson RJ, Schoﬁeld AB, Gasser U, Prasad V, Manley S, Segre PN, Cipelletti L,
Meyer WV, Doherty MP, Sankaran S, J ankovsky AL, Shiley WL, Bowen JP, Eggers J C, Kurta C, Lorik T Jr, Pusey
PN, Weitz DA. Spinodal decomposition in a model colloid-polymer mixture in microgravity. Physical Review
Letters. 99(20):205701, 2007.
Manley S, DaVidOVitch B, DaVies NR, Cipelletti L, Bailey AE, Christianson RJ, Gasser U, Prasad V, Segre PN,
Dohert MP, Sankaran S, J ankovsky AL, Shiley B, Bowen J , Eggers J , Kurta C, Lorik T, Weitz DA. Time-Dependent
Strength of Colloidal Gels. Physical Review Letters. 95(4):048302(4), 2005.
Manley S, Cipelletti L, Trappe V, Bailey AE, Christianson RJ, Gasser U, Prasad V, Segre PN, Doherty MP,
Sankaran S, J ankovsky AL, Shiley B, Bowen J , Eggers J , Kurta C, Lorik T, Weitz DA. Limits to Gelation in
Colloidal Aggregation. Physical Review Letters. 93(10): 108302, 2004.
Weitz D, Bailey A, Manley A, Prasad V, Christianson R, Sankaran S, Doherty M, J ankovsky A, Lorik T, Shiley
W, Bowen J , Kurta C, Eggers J , Gasser U, Serge P, Cipelletti L, Schoﬁeld A, Pusey P. Results from the Physics of
Colloids Experiment on 188. NASA TM-2002-212011: IAC-02-J.6.04, 2002.
Doherty MP, Bailey AE, J ankovsky AL, Lorik T. Physics of Colloids in Space: Flight Hardware Operations on 188.
AIAA 2002-0762, 40th Aerospace Sciences meeting, J an 14—17, 2002, Reno NeV.

61

"
"70","FLUID MERGING VISCOSITY MEASUREMENT (FMVM)
Principal Investigator(s): Edwin Ethridge, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala.
Expeditions 9, 11
Research Area Fluid Physics
.. ,; ‘ The Fluid Merging Viscosity Measurement (FMVM)
‘ f 1:5} g- ‘ experiment was developed rapidly after the Columbia
-' -a‘ E ' 75' ' accident to provide a low—rnass experiment using hardware
2 . i , *; 3 already on board 188. The purpose of FMVM is to measure the
. I ,’ . . a .
I . ' ’ I..' 3"",. rate of coalescence of two highly Viscous 11qu1d drops and cor—
\z , 5’7; § relate the results with liquid Viscosity and surface tension. The
r - . ' 9?"". ' FMVM experiment will verify a new method for measuring the
.- '. :3: Viscosity of highly Viscous liquids by measuring the time it takes
, ' ’ 1 i' . '1 l for two spheres of liquid to coalescence into a single spherical
’ “""4 ' . drop, where the time constant is proportional to the Viscosity.
. . \u ' The results are applied to calculating crystallization parameters
. “I / \ ‘. 1' '3 ' of a liquid above and below the glass melting point, including
ISSOOQE1456O _ Mike Fincke, Expedition 9 science an extremely broad range of Viscosities of the liquid.
officer, is shown deploying one of the drops of liquid onto
Nomex thread during FMVM testing. If this new method of measuring Viscosity is validated, it
could provide a method by which to measure Viscosities of
materials that cannot currently be measured. An example of this is liquid (molten) glass that crystallizes while
cooling from liquid to solid. The Viscosity in most of the crystallization range cannot be measured using current,
Earth—based technology in spite of the fact that this is the most interesting range for the study of crystallization.
To obtain accurate data for precise models, it is best to measure Viscosity in liquid that is free—ﬂoating and
uncontained. The station’s microgravity environment is an excellent testbed for this procedure because drops
ﬂoat freely in low gravity. The simple test apparatus was constructed of materials that were already on board 188,
and sample liquids, representing a range of Viscosities, were deployed to station on a Russian Progress vehicle.
These liquids consisted of glycerin, silicone oil (high and low Viscosities), honey, honey mixed with water,
corn syrup, and corn syrup mixed with water.
RESULTS
Preliminary results were based on downlink Video. The original data tapes were returned to Earth on shuttle
ﬂight STS—114/LF—1 and are still undergoing analysis. Glycerin proved difﬁcult to deploy as planned (the Viscosity
was too low and/or the surface tension was too high), but the two different silicone oil Viscosity calibration liquids
were deployed easily, and ﬁve coalescence experiments were recorded with the two liquids. A range of drop sizes
from 0.5 cc to 4 cc was coalesced. Since the honey had crystallized, the 188 food warmer was used to eliminate
crystallization and the honey experiments were completed. Two corn syrup liquids formed a stiff skin. Real—time
discussions with the astronaut resulted in a quick change to the procedure. New drops were deployed rapidly so
as to avoid skin formation. Several successful coalescence runs were obtained with the corn syrup.
. - .;... "" ""'""""'-1-.
; : I -:§:!'.'_'_~, £'..;.;_ li1_-1+-
41!: . -_-a--.:;.':'.; ﬂit- -H “1*
:.*';';[+-|:-1'::':.1""|;1: -- H-T'“ ""' H -L
1' - - I. . r-- ""' ' I r - . .. "" I _ 'T ' ﬂ"" —'
:- 17p: a at . E m +- t
—' i. .'-~+-.-« -—- r ' I'm
.r-e-m'P-g _.- 11:11.4 If...“ 1 }..ﬁ'._ Ly?
ll -“'[ ﬁlm"" - .. .— -F“' . ' - 1-
—-. . =1... _1. TFH u-ﬂ- n I ,
—=. n m. .- 1. -_l'l- 4.-
55am"" E'Eiﬂ. 'l'
""-lﬁﬂ=-_F l: == 1: III .I-I=EE=-
IEE- IE'IEIII‘EHI - '. -==ﬂ- IIH-II'I E
:===E==I.“=E::g:===___ 1.-.... ._ 5!, 5-... II—
llh-I - ------—- Same as oppOSIte figure, but at a later time.
Coalescence of two unequal drops at 3
early time.
62

"
"71","Preliminary results from data analysis indicate a very good agreement With the predicted coalescence time. The

experiments demonstrate that When the surface tension of a liquid is known, the coefﬁcient of Viscosity for that

liquid can be determined by the contact radius speed (Antar et a1. 2007). These data can be ﬁt to numerical results to

calculate the Viscosity, thus validating the model for this new Viscosity measurement method.

PUBLICATION(S)

Ethridge E, Kaukler W, Antar B. Preliminary Results of the Fluid Merging Viscosity Measurement Space

Station Experiment, Proceedings of the 44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV. AIAA

2006-1142, Jan 9—12, 2006.

Antar BN, Ethridge E, Lehman D. Fluid Merging Viscosity Measurement (FMVM) Experiment on the International

Space Station. 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit. Reno, NeV. Jan 8 — 11, 2007; AIAA 2007-1151.
63

"
"72","VISCOUS LIQUID FOAM-BULK METALLIC GLASS (Foam)
Principal Investigator(s): William J ohnson and Chris Veazy, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, Calif.
Expedition 9
Research Area Materials Science
Bulk metallic glasses are a special class of metallic materials that are created by rapid solidiﬁcation that causes
them to form glass—like structures that are light but very strong. This experiment investigated the formation and
structure of foams that are made from bulk metallic glass. Because the effects of buoyancy are minimized in space,
more uniform foam structures with unique properties can be produced. These new materials have potential applica—
tions for use in future moon or Mars space structures (due to their high strength and low weight) as well as for
potential shielding against micrometeorites and space debris impacts on spacecraft.
RESULTS
Three planned runs for the Foam experiment were
successfully completed on station during Expedition 9. O 7
Samples, which were returned to Earth in late Aug 2005, ..
have been analyzed and reported (Veazy et a1. 2008). The ’_ - ' ‘
experiment was designed to test the hypothesis that amor— , _,_,__.., '
phous metals exhibit foam—making qualities 0n the ground i‘ ‘ ,,.______-—-"" ,3-
that mimic metallic foam textures that are made in micro— ' i. ;. , I, .
gravity conditions. The amorphous metals, when softened \\ ~' . 1; q ; _ “‘9‘
0r rnelted, have a super—cooled state that has a very high 5 -. . ’
Viscosity—ideal conditions for foam processing. Foam 1g . “ ' t y \ "" ' ‘1
that is made from a Pd40Ni40P20 glass—forming metallic V - i‘ ‘
liquid was prepared both on the ground and aboard ISS. ' '9 .
Pellets 0f the material that contained 1—atmosphere bubbles - x I .
were sealed in ampoules. The ampoules were made to thread \ T ""
into a soldering iron tip for heating aboard the ISS. The ISSOOQE1479 _ Expedition 9 flight engineer and science
samples were heated at 3600C (68001:) for 5 minutes, 611- officer Edward M. (Mike) Fincke) performs the Foam experi-
abling foam creation before it was allowed to cool. The ment in the maintenance WOFk area 01‘ space station.
ground samples contained textures that were similar to
those that were produced in microgravity—equally distributed bubbles dominated by surface tension forces; the
bubbles did not experience sedimentation (ﬂoating).
These types of foams have great potential for future exploration applications because of their great strength and light
weight. In particular, such foams may make very effective shields against micrometeorite and orbital debris strikes.
PUBLICATION(S)
Veazy C; Dernetriou MD; Schroers J ; Hanan J C; Dunning LA; Kaukler WF; J ohnson WL. Foaming of Amorphous
Metals Approached the Limit of Microgravity Foaming, J. Adv. Materials, V40, n0 1 (2008) 7—1 1.
'0 . ~ .

|88009E14593 — Foam apparatus showmg

ampoules threaded into a soldering iron on

board ISS. Samples were heated at 680°F

. , a (360°C) for 5 minutes, thus enabling foam
~ -« ' . creation before the sample was cooled.
a' . ’ “
I q“ .
64

"
"73","_ I ""I- .‘ .:._1 F .a-- _..-la""? Ihlrli'Fjlﬂ-I'.
.. "" .- ' r1: ' "":- uf‘ “Herr? J
d‘i- slur... |. _... P:?- . _. I _..1 rib; :r _ 1: . - Ii”; .-
"" '.r I 1' rm _ ""'""
' 3 - ' ﬁg’ 9a.... ;-____ .' _H :—. .._
_ . l"" I'n—-- .- - ' 5 '..: - __3 . ' .--‘ r .._;
_ '...“ _ .- _. . 1,5..1 ' 7 . ""- . _ '._
I. I I'. -I' 'l: l. I: :.- - .I-Llfi- "" I ”I':- I'- - ""
1.. "" '.. I 1;.”- - .-I ‘ E2 ,H'1'-.__'”""'""-_-..I..¢. .-..
w. "" .v -- - .e- -
'-m J"" _ m‘ f""; __ .J.
— mapm a — 11mm b
. _.. , r
K. ?'- - --"" f ’0'.
l“ "" 'l ""I.- _ 1.. ..
# 4434':th . 1.5“. .1
I I. ""r ‘._-I .- II. . 1:};- .-_' "":- I I I ""1
.._ F . ‘ _,.. . ._w ’..“ . . ' £14
ai‘lrwml .1! 1- r _ ﬁ; _ _ -._- i
A I - II J- -' n .u ' ."""" :1 '
""""'-"" . .‘ i _' y
__ A . _: _____'__ 1 r-""'? _ '1
'- ' £3 . Li. .01.
'. _r .I 5' I ""I
J ?'- ‘-=- .‘T 9 {~ch Lia
— ‘lﬂﬂwn 1: — 1m! um {I
Close-up optical micrographs of foams that were processed at
680°F (360°C) for 5 minutes under microgravity (a and b) and
under gravity (c and d). The gravity vector points down.
65

"
"74","INVESTIGATING THE STRUCTURE OF PARAMAGNETIC AGGREGATES FROM
COLLOIDAL EMULSIONS (InSPACE)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Alice P. Gast, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, Mass.
Expeditions 6, 7, 12, 13
Research Area Materials Science
Magnetorheological (MR) ﬂuids are colloidal suspensions of magnetic particles whose properties can be con—
trolled by magnetic ﬁelds. These ﬂuids are classiﬁed as “smart materials” that transition to a solid—like state by
the formation and cross—linking of microstructures in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld. The InSPACE experiment
addresses the fundamental physics of liquid—solid phase changes in these ﬂuids. On Earth these materials are used
for Vibration—dampening systems that can be turned on or off, in the automotive and construction industries, and for
exploration technologies such as robots and smart space suits. InSPACE collects Video imagery of ﬁne structures of
MR ﬂuids in a pulsed (alternating 0n and off) magnetic ﬁeld. The experiment requires a microgravity environment
because the magnetic structures settle out in gravity, precluding the observation of steady—state structures. This
study will help researchers understand the competing forces that govern the ﬁnal shape of the structures.
The InSPACE coil assembly holds a Helmholtz coil assembly _, .. 3' '. . .~ __ '
containing sealed Vials of MR ﬂuid, the carnera/lens assemblies, #1 i“ *' :f _j T . '
and the power control. The coil assembly is attached to the ‘ *‘
“ﬂoor” of the MSG. The magnetic ﬁelds are applied to the ”l"" “v .1. ' ' a
various samples, and the operation of the experiment is Is ‘ _r. .. *
monitored Via Video. , - .1 ""-"" ‘5‘ - k
ISSOO6E41778 — During .... -. '
Expedition 6, flight engineer _i-n .
Donald R. Pettit works with the ”t- Aqu
InSPACE samples In the MSG In x __-_.1‘=.r--_'..'I""‘“""""b
the U.S. Destiny laboratory. -. i 1': 2‘ g; ""S; ‘
RESULTS
InSPACE was performed in the MSG during Expeditions 6, 7, and 13. Nine tests were performed for each
Helmholtz coil for a total of 27 experimental runs. The collected data were processed, enabling a quantitative
assessment of the structural data, including aggregate sizes and shapes. These are key parameters for deﬁning the
aggregate kinetics, and are used to test theoretical models of the microstructures. Furthermore, understanding the
complex properties of the ﬂuids and the interaction of the microparticles will enable the development of more so—
phisticated methods for controlling and use of these ﬂuids. Results suggest that InSPACE runs did not achieve
steady—state structures. However, intriguing data suggesting the onset of instability at low frequency were
collected. Both of these phenomena will be further addressed in InSPACE 2.
PUBLICATIONS
Vasquez PA, Furst EM, Agui J , Williams J , Pettit D, Lu E. Structural Transitions 0f Magnetoghreological Fluids in
Microgravity. 46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV. 2008, 7 — 10 J an; AIAA 2008—815.
t _- 159.5% T _ ___... m—L—gl"" “ﬂ ---- 7- ++- -
H.""""::; -+- —- . w - '---'-""-- - -‘ ~ 7""; 1'. 5....._."""""""" * 1‘ '- .‘ -.-
-' :5...i=.i-""_-l': “*1 .Hf ' ' -.- ——-.-__-: _Ta— '. 3' 111' ‘-' 213524- -. -.-—I-—
Structure evolution in a magnetorheological fluid over time while an alternating magnetic field is applied. The far left image shows
the fluid after one second of exposure to a high-frequency-pulsed magnetic field. The suspended particles form a strong network.
The images to the right show the fluid after three minutes, 15 minutes, and one hour of exposure. The particles have formed
aggregates that offer little structural support and are in the lowest energy state.
66

"
"75","MISCIBLE FLUIDS IN MICROGRAVITY (MFMG)
Principal Investigator(s): John Pojrnan, University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, Miss.
Expeditions 8—11
Research Area Fluid Physics
The goal of the Miscible Fluids in MicrograVity (MFMG) experiment is to test the ﬂuid dynamics between
two miscible (or rnixable) liquids in a microgravity environment that is provided by ISS. Earth—based applications
of this work may help researchers better understand the processing of miscible polyrners.
This experiment was designed to demonstrate the existence of surface—tension—induced convection in miscible
ﬂuids. The effects of surface tension on the interaction between two miscible liquids here on Earth are masked by
the effects of gravity and density . On Earth, miscible liquids effectively combine into one relatively hornogenous
(or equally distributed) solution. In microgravity, miscible liquids may behave cornpletely differently, potentially
taking on properties that are more akin to immiscible (or non—rnixable) liquids. The role of interfacial surface ten—
sion in rnisoible liquids was proposed by the Dutch mathematician Korteweg over 100 years ago. Testing
Korteweg’s hypothesis is challenging on Earth because the force of gravity overwhelms surface tension,
but the microgravity environment on station provides an ideal opportunity to do so.
, This experiment originated from a call for simple experiments
J.‘ ‘ ""t requiring little upmass following the grounding of the shuttle ﬂeet
’s ,1 ,1 4 _' / after the loss of Columbia. The MFMG experiment was proposed
_ f . :w ""= ' {'7 : as a simple study of miscible ﬂuids that was limited to the use of
‘ ' ‘ ordinary items that were already on board ISS (unused syringes,
,r“:_‘.”a§ . water, honey, Ziploc bags, a still camera, and a Video camera). In
/ O '7 / 5 i ’ the isothermal experiment (where diffusive forces predominate in
I ' I .. microgravity), a stream of either honey or water was introduced
"" f into a syringe of the opposite ﬂuid to observe the transient beha—
‘ l """" Vior of the rniscible ﬂuids. In the thermal experiment, a ternpera—
- . . . ture gradient was created across the syringe holding one of the
.4 . ﬂuids, and a second ﬂuid was introduced at ambient temperature.
Edward M. (Mike) Fincke, Expedition 9 science
officer and flight engineer, ”$9.5. Syringes to inject Korteweg’s theory predicts that miscible ﬂuids will demonstrate
honey Into water to test the mlxmg ability of the two . . . . . . . .
liquids for the MFMG experiment. interfa01al tens1on trans1ently until d1ffus1on prevails. Under normal
gravity, the stream of honey would break apart under its own weight
and surface tension would cause the ﬂuid to have as little surface area as possible for a given volume. The droplets
that form as the stream breaks apart would have less surface area than a cylinder (stream) of the same volurne—an
effect known as Rayleigh instability. The experiment was designed to determine whether the stream eXhibits the
Rayleigh instability characteristic of immiscible ﬂuids.
RESULTS
Isothermal results: Four sessions were performed with no observation
of Korteweg’s prediction of the Rayleigh instability. It was found that
the honey did not break into small drops, neither did it change its shape
when injected. The behaVior that was exhibited was that of simple dif—
fusion, which is seen on Earth when mixing two miscible ﬂuids.
T hermal results: Two sessions of MFMG were performed with a 1
thermal gradient introduced. The stream migrated towards the warmer L
side of the temperature gradient, which may indicate the presence of
Korteweg’s predicted behaVior. Further sessions with thermal ISSO11EO7771 CI . fth MFMG
- - - — 059 u View 0 e
gradients are still being analyzed. syringe containing honey that is injected with
tinted water during Expedition 11.
67

"
"76","Despite the negative results—the authors concluded that the surface tension stresses were insufﬁcient to overcome
the large difference in Viscosity of the h0ney-water system—the data were used to calculate the square gradient
parameter for the water-honey system.
PUBLICATION(S)
Pojman J A. Miscible Fluids in Microgravity (MFMG): A Zero—Upmass Experiment on the International
Space Station. Proceedings of the 43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV. AIAA 2005-718,
Jan10—13, 2005.
Pojman JA, Bessonov N, Volpert V. “Miscible Fluids in Microgravity (MFMG): A Zero-Upmass Investigation on
the International Space Station,” Microgravily Sci. T ech. 2007, XIX, 33—41.

68

"
"77","PROTEIN CRYSTAL GROWTH-ENHANCED GASEOUS NITROGEN (PCG-EGN)
Principal Investigator(s): Alexander McPherson, University of California, IrVine, Calif.
Expeditions 0 (prior to human occupation of ISS), 1, 2, 4
Research Area Protein Crystal Growth
"" ’ The microgravity environment on board the ISS is relatively free from
‘ the effects of sedimentation and convection and can provide an exceptional
environment for crystal growth. Uniform, large crystals are key for deter-
\\ W mining the structure of protein and other large biological molecules.
\3 2/ The primary purpose of this experiment was to provide a simple trial
\ platform for the production of a large number of crystals of various biolog-
ical macromolecules. A second obj ective was an education program that was
CWStaI OUWDSH.‘ that was WOW? in called “Student Access to Space” in which students participated in preparing
micrograVIty during ISS Expedition 4. . . .
some of the samples that were ﬂown on orbit and learned about crystallization,
the methods of analysis of crystals, and the impact of studies of crystals on advancing biotechnology, medicine,
and basic research in structural biology. Through the Student Access to Space program, more than 500 samples
were mixed by middle and high school students across the United States.
Protein Crystal Growth-Enhanced Gaseous Nitrogen (PCG-EGN) samples were brought to station frozen in
liquid nitrogen in a Dewar (a stainless-steel and aluminum container assembly that is similar to a Thermos bottle)
at —196°C (—3210F) in sealed plastic capillary tubes. On board ISS, the nitrogen warmed and boiled off, turning into
a gas, and the samples began to thaw. After 8 days, when the samples had reached the station ambient temperature
of 22°C (71 .6°F), crystals began to form.
RESULTS ,
Successful crystallization rates were as follows: Expedition 0 (prior to permanent '
human occupation of ISS), 10 of 24 proteins and Viruses; Expedition 1, four of 23 ., ‘
proteins and Viruses; Expedition 2, siX of eight proteins and both Viruses; Expedition 4, ',
three of nine proteins and zero of two Viruses. Maj or crystals obtained included Bence- .
J ones protein, Bromegrass Mosaic Virus, canavalin, lysozyme, pea lectin, thaumatin, .0 : .
trypsin, and 4a-hydroxy-tetrahydropterin dehydratase (DcoH). Overall the rate of suc- I
cessful crystallizations was not as high as expected. Although many of the crystals
that were produced were no better than those that were obtained in the ground Electron density map of
laboratory, there were still some signiﬁcant structural results. thaumatin crystal grown on
ISS during Expedition 2.
When compared to their Earth-grown counterparts, the space-grown thaumatin crystals diffracted to a higher
resolution, and some crystals showed as much as 40% more intensity during the diffraction process. This resulted
in a more accurate protein structure model (electron density map) being produced from the space-grown crystal data.
The pea lectin crystals also diffracted to a higher resolution than their Earth-grown counterparts. Data from the space-
grown crystals were the best obtained, giving rise to the highest resolution structure for pea lectin. A reﬁnement for
the structural model of pea lectin is in progress. DcoH crystals that were grown on Expedition 1 also appeared to
be of better quality than those that were grown on Earth.
Student investigations across the four Expeditions were successful in crystallizing a number of proteins. Al-
though many of the crystals did not appear to be better than previously analyzed crystals, some of the crystals
from Expedition 2 were used for microscopic observation and X-ray examination.
PUBLICATION(S)
Barnes CL, Snell EH, Kundrot CE. Thaumatin crystallization aboard the International Space Station using liquid-
liquid diffusion in the Enhanced Gaseous Nitrogen Dewar (EGN). Acta Crystallographica. Section D, Biological
Crystallography. 58(Pt 5):751—760, 2002.
Ciszak E, Hammons AS, Hong YS. Use of Capillaries for Macromolecular Crystallization in a Cryogenic Dewar.
Crystal Growth & Design. 2(3):235—238, 2002.
69

"
"78","PROTEIN CRYSTAL GROWTH-SINGLE LOCKER THERMAL ENCLOSURE SYSTEM
(PCG-STES), NINE INVESTIGATIONS
Payload Developer: NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala.
Expeditions 2, 4—6, samples held on board and returned during Expedition 11
Principal Investigat0r(s): Daniel Carter, New Century Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Huntsville, Ala, Protein Crystal
Growth Facility-based Hardware: Science and Applications (PCG-STES-SA, Expeditions
2, 4—6)
Aniruddha Achari (Technical Investigator), Raytheon, Huntsville, Ala, Vapor
Equilibration Kinetic Studies (PCG-STES-VEKS, Expeditions 2, 4—6)
Craig Kundrot, Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala, Optimizing the Use
of Microgravity to Improve the Diffraction Quality of Problematic Biomacromolecular
Crystals (PCG-STES-IDQC, Expeditions 2, 4—6)
Gloria Bergstahl, University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio, and the University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, Neb., Searching for the Best Protein Crystals: Synchrotron
Based Mosaicity Measurements of Crystal Quality and Theoretical Modeling, and
Searching for the Best Crystals: Integration of Synchrotron-Based Crystal Quality
Measurements and Structure Determination (PCG-STES-MM, Expeditions 4, 5)
Geoffrey Chang, Scripps Research Institute, La J 011a, Calif, Crystallization of the
Integral Membrane Protein Using Microgravity (PCG-STES-IMP, Expedition 5)
Barbara Golden, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Ind., Engineering a Ribozyme for
Diffraction Properties (PCG-STES-RDP, Expedition 5)
Ronald Kaplan, The Chicago Medical School, Chicago, 111., Crystallization of the
Mitochondrial Metabolite Transport Proteins (PCG-STES-MMTP, Expedition 5)
Bill Thomas, Universities Space Research Association, Huntsville, Ala, Crystal Growth
Model System for Material Science (PCG-STES-MS, Expedition 6)
Gerald Bunick, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tenn., Regulation of Gene
Expression (PCG-STES-RGE, Expedition 6)
Associate Investigators: Wayne Shultz, Hauptman-Woodward Institute, Buffalo, N.Y.; Debashis Ghosh,
Hauptman-Woodward Institute, Buffalo, N.Y.; D. A. A. Myles, European Molecular
Biology Laboratory, Grenoble, France; Naomi Chayen, Imperial College, London; J ean-
Paul Declercq, University of Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
Research Area Protein Crystal Growth
The Protein Crystal Growth-Single Locker Thermal Enclosure System (PCG-STES) is a suite of protein crystal
growth investigations that was performed in the station’s U.S. Destiny laboratory. Multiple independent and collabo-
rating principal investigators contributed samples and evaluated the technology for crystal growth in space. In general
these studies sought to grow crystals of target proteins that would be of superior quality to similar crystals that were
grown on the ground. The sedimentation and convection forces that cause many Earth—grown crystals to be irregular
in shape and small in size are absent in microgravity.
SCIENCE AND APPLICATIONS (Carter)
These investigations focused on the hardware that provided a suitable environment for crystal growth in micro-
gravity. Samples were housed in the PCG-STES and within two different types of crystallization hardware: the
Protein Crystallization Apparatus for Microgravity (PCAM) or the Diffusion-Controlled Crystallization Apparatus
for Microgravity (DCAM).
PCAMs consist of nine trays, each containing seven vapor-equilibration wells. The nine trays are sealed inside
a cylinder. Crystals are formed by the “sitting drop” method of vapor diffusion. Each sample well holds a drop of
protein solution and precipitant (salts or organic solvents, which draw water away from the protein solution) that is
70

"
"79","mixed together. A surrounding moat holds a reservoir, ﬁlled with an absorbent ﬂuid, that draws moisture away from
the mixed solution. Crystals form as the moisture is absorbed. A rubber seal pressed into the lip of the reservoir
keeps crystals from forming on Earth or from bouncing out of their wells during transport. Each cylinder holds
63 experiments for a total of 378 experiments inside the Single-locker Thermal Enclosure System (STES).
PCAM was used for all samples during Expeditions 2, 4, and 5.
DCAMs, which are slightly smaller than a 35mm ﬁlm canister, each contained two cylindrical chambers that are
connected by a tunnel. One chamber holds the precipitant solution and the other contains the protein sample. A thin
semipermeable membrane covers the protein sample that allowed the precipitant to pass through at a controlled rate.
The rate of diffusion was controlled by a porous plug that separates the two chambers. This is referred to as the
liquid-liquid diffusion method. Eighty-one DCAMs, which were housed inside the STES, were used for all
samples during Expedition 6.
The STES provides a controlled temperature environment between 10C (320F) and 400C (104OF) in which to
grow large, high-quality crystals. Its Thermal Control System (TCS) regulates the temperature inside the payload
chamber. A fan pulls cabin air through an intake on the front panel, causing the air to ﬂow across the heat exchanger
fans and then out the rear left side of the unit. Pushbuttons and a liquid crystal display (LCD) on the front panel
allow the station crew to command the unit. STES can also be commanded from the ground.
These investigations also focused on key proteins of the circulatory system, such as human serum albumin,
human antithrombin III, and human peroxiredoxin 5 (PRDXS). In addition, S-layer protein from Bacillus sphae-
ricus, cytochrome p450, and c-phycocyanin from Synechococcus elongatus were ﬂown as part of associate
investigations during Expedition 5.
VAPOR EQUILIBRATION KINETIC STUDIES (Achari)
In a technical investigation that was associated with the use of PCG-STES, crystallization conditions were
varied experimentally, including days to activate the crystallization, droplet volumes, and different precipitants.
By characterizing the time that crystallization took to reach equilibrium in microgravity, the goal was to help
identify optimum crystallization conditions.
IMPROVED DIFFRACTION QUALITY OF CRYSTALS (Kundrot)
These experiments focused on the growth of better-quality crystals for X-ray diffractions analysis. During ISS
Expedition 2, two types of samples were selected. The ﬁrst was a complex of basic ﬁbroblast growth factor (bFGF)
(a ﬁbroblast is a cell from which connective tissue develops) and l9t2mod, a 42-nucleotide DNA that inhibits bFGF
actiVity (inhibition of bFGF actiVity is a type of anti-cancer therapy). The second sample type was the plant protein
thaumatin. Thaumatin, which is a protein from the katemfe fruit of West Africa, is an extremely potent sweetener.
The objective of this sample type was to determine whether some of the chemical conditions that do not produce
crystals on Earth would produce crystals in microgravity. In addition to the samples above, two further proteins,
rDeer and glucocerebrosidase, were ﬂown as part of an associate investigation during Expeditions 4 and 5. A
deﬁciency of B-glucocerebrosidase leads to Gaucher’s disease, which is a rare chronic disorder of cerebroside
metabolism that is characterized by enlargement of the spleen, skin pigmentation, and bone lesions.
SUPEROXIDE DISMUTASE (Borgstahl)
During Expedition 4, this investigation focused on the crystallization of human Replication Protein A (RPA)
and manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD), which are to be used in ground-based X-ray diffraction studies to
understand the atomic structure. Human RPA is a single-stranded DNA binding protein that is used in DNA metabo-
lism (replication, transcription, recombination, and repair). SODs are antioxidant enzymes that protect living cells
against oxide radicals that are associated with cell damage.
INTEGRAL MEMBRANE PROTEINS (Chang)
This Expedition 5 investigation focused on the crystallization of two transporter proteins, Escherichia coli (E.
coli) MsbA and EmrE. E. coli MsbA is a protein transporter that is responsible for transporting lipopolysaccharides
and phospholipids from the inner membrane of the bacteria cell to the outer membrane, increasing cell wall strength.
It is theorized that antibiotics are transported out of the bacteria cells using this type of transporter protein and that
knowledge of the structure of this protein could help develop a new class of drugs to supplement antibiotics.
E. coli EmrE is of interest because its production is associated with antibiotic resistance.

71

"
"80","RIBOZYME FOR DIFFRACTION PROPERTIES (Golden)
This Expedition 5 investigation focused on the crystallization of a molecular engineered RNA enzyme. RNA
enzyme, which is also called a ribozyme, is an RNA molecule that is responsible for catalyzing its own cleavage
or the cleavage of other RNA strands. For this investigation, a ribozyme was engineered to be used to examine the
Group I introns (a segment of RNA that is not coded for a gene) through X—ray crystallography to get a detailed
View of the ribozyrne active site at the atomic level.
MITOCHONDRIAL METABOLITE TRANSPORT PROTEINS (Kaplan)
This Expedition 5 investigation focused on the crystallization of the mitochondrial citrate transporter protein
(CTP). Mitochondria are round or rod—shaped organelles that are located in most cells and that produce enzymes
for the metabolic conversion of food to energy (citric acid cycle). CTP is an important part in cellular metabolism.
CRYSTAL GROWTH MODEL SYSTEM (Thomas)
This Expedition 6 investigation used Ferritin and Apoferritin as a crystal growth model system to look at
fundamental protein biochemistry.
REGULATION OF GENE EXPRESSION (Bunick)
This Expedition 6 investigation focused on the crystallization of two different proteins: nucleosome core parti—
cle and D—Xylose ketol—isomerase (xylose isomerase). The nucleosome core particle is a building block of chromatin,
which is found in the nucleus and is responsible for gene expression and housing DNA. This investigation examined
the structure—function relationship in chromatin. Xylose isomerase is an enzyme that is used in the food industry to
convert glucose to fructose.
RESULTS
PCG—STES is a suite of nine experiments with additional shared samples for associated investigators. Samples
were taken to and from station ﬁve times for crystallization during Expeditions 2, 4, 5, and 6. The logistical con—
siderations of space ﬂight affected some of the results, as ﬂight delays compromised some samples and a jarring
drop of the hardware shortly after return on 11A/ STS—l 13 probably destroyed any larger crystals that had formed
during that set of runs. PCG—STES samples in DCAM were on orbit prior to the Space Shuttle Columbia accident,
and then spent an unprecedented 981 days (NOV 2002—Aug 2005) on 188 before being returned on the next space
shuttle ﬂight.
(a) ‘
I- """" - . "" ' Iil' -
:'.':.- "" Ti. .1- *
tr - _ .. '~;..'-- .. -
""- ""r all;- , “ j"" 1: _Ill:.._-I""' .
h _ "" I An MnSOD crystal that I ' I ' I L'
._ .ll' _ - was grown in microgravity. (b)
b 1' ' ‘F The pink color is a result 1*""
I II-n'"": - of oxidized manganese f
L... J ' in the active site. #
1- ' I I
. '1. la- _ 'l - '- 1 _ -
--=* e- um-
. .-"" '..l S""?
E H
(C) =5.
DCAM trays shown in the STES. - '3’:
I. t I'. I
-'|-_ - -‘ I
(a) PCAM trays with seven experimental cells. JI- - .'_ ' ; . _
(b) Nine trays are housed —-r f'; '
in one cylinder. '
(c) Six cylinders fit into a thermal carrier and are I
housed in an EXPRESS rack on board ISS.
72

"
"81","Not surprisingly, given the wide array of materials and obj ectives, some samples did produce large crystals while
other samples produced crystals no better than those produced on Earth. Yet other samples failed to crystallize at all.
Crystals of MnSOD, which were produced during Expedition 4, exhibited an 80—fold volume increase when
compared to the crystals that were produced on Earth. The crystals that were produced in orbit ranged from small,
needle—like crystals to large three—dirnensional crystals. These crystals were used for Synchrotron X—ray analysis, the
use of a high—energy, adjustable particle beam used for crystal diffraction. Through this analysis it was determined
that the diffraction resolution and quality of data for the crystals that were produced in microgravity were increased
when compared to the diffraction resolution of the crystals grown on Earth (Vahedi—Faridi et a1. 2003).
High—resolution structural data were also obtained from human albumin and human antithrombin III crystals,
and publications of new structural information is anticipated. Analyses of the samples retuned in Aug 2005 is
ongoing.
PUBLICATION(S)
Vahedi—Faridi A, Porta J , Borgstahl G. Improved three—dimensional growth of manganese superoxide dismutase
crystals on the International Space Station. Acta Crystallographica. Section D, Biological Crystallography. 59:385—
388, 2003.
l ’ 5 1‘ a . — _' .t., iiﬁ-K'
‘ . “ - ,1 .4 ‘,, “f' A,“
‘ , -:1::-3w- :4); ..'¢‘
f"" :21 4&4
t ‘ l""l "" - . V.
a , millage, .. , ‘,.'
_ '- 5' i ., "" ‘ .. 4 ’V
i"" 1""? H ‘i” R l. h ‘
‘2; 1‘ j A . 3., [m iii?
l ‘:' A .2 r 1 g
f :::= iii.""
‘, --—‘ - 32:3 i .
r“ {5, 5'3: '
ISSOO5E21531 — Astronaut Peggy A. Whitson, Expedition 5 science officer, works
the PCG-STES hardware on board ISS.
73

"
"82","TOWARD UNDERSTANDING PORE FORMATION AND MOBILITY DURING CONTROLLED
DIRECTIONAL SOLIDIFICATION IN A MICROGRAVITY ENVIRONMENT (PFMI)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Richard Grugel, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala.

Expeditions 5, 7, 8
Research Area Materials Science
On Earth, bubbles that form in molten rnaterials rise to the surface and release trapped gas prior to solidiﬁcation.
In microgravity where there is no buoyancy 0r convection, bubbles can become trapped inside the material, leaVing
pores as the material solidiﬁes. These pores can greatly reduce the ﬁnished material’s strength and structural integri—
ty, making it a less desirable product. One of a couple of experiments investigating melting and solidiﬁcation of ma—
terials, the Pore Formation in MicrograVity (PFMI) experiment, was designed to learn how bubbles form and move
during phase change (from liquid to solid) inside molten material. The PFMI experiment used succinonitrile (SCN),
which is a clear organic compound that is a transparent rnetal analog material, and SCN—water (1%) mixtures to ob—
serve bubble formation and bubble movement. The experiment was designed to methodically investigate pore forma—
tion and growth using SCN that was loaded with an excess amount of dissolved nitrogen gas, and examine the
role of herrnocapillary forces in transporting the bubbles away from the solidiﬁcation interface.
Experiments were conducted inside the MSG, which is a sealed and ventilated work volume in the U.S.
Destiny laboratory. Samples were rnelted inside a thermal chamber with ternperature—controlled hot zones and
one therrncelectric cold zone. Flow Visualization technology was used in support of the experiment to observe
bubble movement.
RESULTS
The PFMI experiment used glass tubes (1 cm inner diameter and 30 cm in length) ﬁlled with SCN and water in
concentrations ranging from pure SCN t0 1% SCN—water mixture. Of the 24 experiment runs, 21 were successful.
The data from this experiment were provided by downlinked images during real—tirne operations on ISS. In addition,
images were recorded using a Videotape recorder (VTR) inside the MSG.
Grugel et al. (2004) observed bubble migration up the temperature ,
gradient due to thermocapillary forces and reported that therrnccap— , H V ow
illary forces do play a role in bubble removal during solidiﬁcation, 373/
thereby providing a potential mechanism for avoiding porosity in - —=.!
s ace rocess1n .

p p g i \ .. ""7-99-33; : L —T
Strutzenberg et al. examined the morphological evolution of the . I w 7 LL; 5‘ : i; i I:
solidiﬁcation of the PFMI sarnples (0.25% water to SCN mixture ' r i\ _e I 3'; ' ’_3‘ I
and 0.50% water to SCN mixture). Direct comparison between the I i ""'1‘ ”I ,. ‘
ground—based thin (two—dimensional) samples and the ﬂight bulk K I I ‘ 1‘71""); . i T“ 2 4
(three—dirnensional) samples showed signiﬁcant differences in the via
interface morphology. The ﬂight sarnples achieved planar growth— \ 5-. __. V 4 2 A
an emergence of dendrites (crystallizes in the shape of a tree or branch)— T ' ._. i __ 7 - ,
in less time than the ground—based samples. When comparing the I ‘
planar interface recoil, the ﬂight sample was steeper than the ground— 5'; ~
based sarnple. Additionally, the dendrite spacings in the ﬂight bulk I ' I‘I
samples were closer together than the ground—based thin samples. This ISSOOSEQ6301 _ 0' M'Chael Foale, .Exped't'F’“ 8

. . . . . mISSIon commander and ISS selence ofﬁcer,
highlights the researchers’ premise that the use 0ftw0—d1rnens10nal installs equipment in the MSG for the pFMI
(thin) samples in cne—g to obtain quantitative data for comparison experiment.
with theoretical models has signiﬁcant shortcomings.

Strutzenberg et al. concluded that the thin samples are not adequate to provide data on the initial planar front

dynamics, which is the dynamical condition for the planar interface instability, and the steady—state primary dendrite

spacing. Solidiﬁcaticn of bulk samples in a microgravity environment and in the lab setting is necessary for a suit—

able comparison. The ﬂow Visualization images that were obtained for the PFMI experiment allowed Grugel et al.

(2005) to study bubble formation in SCN. The bulk solidiﬁcation samples, which were ﬁlled with SCN, were rnelted
74

"
"83","and re—solidiﬁed to observe the bubbles that formed. During controlled re—solidiﬁcation, aligned tubes of gas were
seen to be growing perpendicular to the planar solid/liquid interface, inferring that the nitrogen that had previously
dissolved into the liquid SCN was now coming out at the solid/liquid interface and forming the little—studied
liquid=solid+gas eutectic—type reaction. The ﬂight sample results could not be duplicated in the ground—
based samples.
COX et a1. (2006) are now attempting to better replicate the space phenomena in a ground—based lab by using small—
diameter channels to minimize bulk convection and buoyant bubble rise effects.
The experiment team expects that the results Will be directly applicable to understanding solidiﬁcation for materials
processing by providing insights into fundamental behavior of bubbles.
PUBLICATION(S)
Grugel RN, Anilkumar AV, Lee CP. Direct observation of pore formation and bubble mobility during controlled
melting and re—solidiﬁcation in microgravity, solidiﬁcation processes and microstructures. A Symposium in Honor
of Wilfried Kurz. The Metallurgical Society, Warrendale, Penn. 111—116, 2004.
Grugel RN, Anilkumar AV. Bubble Formation and Transport during Microgravity Materials Processing: Model
Experiments on the Space Station. Proceedings of the 42nd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno,
NeV. AIAA 2004—0627, J an 5—8, 2004.
Grugel RN, Anilkumar AV, COX MC. Morphological Evolution of Directional Solidiﬁcation Interface in Micro—
graVity: An Analysis of Model Experiments Performed 0n the International Space Station. Proceedings of the 43rd
AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV. AIAA 2005—917, Jan 10—13, 2005.
Strutzenberg LL, Grugel RN, Trivedi R. Observation of an Aligned Gas—Solid Eutectic during Controlled Direc—
tional Solidiﬁcation aboard the International Space Station—Comparison With Ground—based Studies. Proceedings
of the 43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV. AIAA 2005—919, Jan 10—13, 2005.
Cox MC, Anilkuman AV, Grugel RN, Hofmeister WH. Isolated Wormhole Growth and Evolution during
Directional Solidiﬁcation in Small Diameter Cylindrical Channels: Preliminary Experiments, Proceedings of the
44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV. AIAA 2006—1140, J an 9—12, 2006.
Grugel RN, Luz P, Smith G, Spivey R, J eter L, Gillies D, Hua F, Anilkumar AV. Materials research conducted
aboard the International Space Station: Facilities overview, operational procedures, and experimental outcomes.
Acta Astronautica. 2008; 62;491—498. (Also presented at the 5 7th International Astronautical Congress IA C—06-
A2.2.1 0)
.- 1:""- _ 1
PFHI—IE EE?ET-E * q
FE—1E:H:=- 1FI=EP=ETPF ____._.__
— - ft‘b— 'I-r_
-. I} #1: '-.' _ __7 1E. ""_ 1' Image of the solid liquid interface of the PFMI
' ' F .l: {i 1' ' '2 experiment. Bubbles detach from the interface
53 i L $13! *. ; and move up the temperature gradient (right to
' 1 . :5 f. “H r left), courtesy of Dr. Richard Grugel, NASA
_ + _—_T.-I__n_.-. i'll. 1'13; :-:"" 53 Marshall Space Flight Center.
75

"
"84","SOLIDIFICATION USING BAFFLE IN SEALED AMPOULES (SUBSA)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Alexander Ostrogorsky, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI), Troy, NY.
Expedition 5
Research Area Materials Science
Material melt—growth experiments have been difﬁcult to run in the space environment because there is just
enough residual micro—acceleration (g—jitter) to produce natural convection that interferes with the structure and
purity of the material. This convection is responsible for the lack of reliable and reproducible solidiﬁcation data and,
thus, for gaps in the solidiﬁcation theory. The Solidiﬁcation Using Bafﬂe in Sealed Ampoules (SUBSA) experiment
tested an automatically moving bafﬂe (driven by melt expansion during freezing) that was designed to reduce ther—
mal convection inside an ampoule to determine whether the bafﬂe signiﬁcantly reduces convection. Ground studies
showed that the bafﬂe reduces the movement of the material during its liquid phase, making the process easier
to analyze and allowing more homogenous crystals to form.
The key goal of SUBSA was to clarify the origin of the melt convection in space and to reduce the magnitude to the
point that it does not interfere with the transport phenomena.
RESULTS
The bafﬂe proved successful. Eight single crystals of indium antimonide (InSb), which were doped with telluriurn
and zinc, were directionally solidiﬁed in microgravity. The molten semiconductor material solidiﬁed as expected,
without separating from the ampoule walls or releasing the undesirable bubbles that have been reported in several
previous microgravity investigations. Semiconductor crystals with reproducible, nearly identical composition were
obtained for the ﬁrst time in space.
PUBLICATION(S)
Churilov A, Ostrogorsky A. Solidiﬁcation of Te and Zn Doped InSb in Space. Proceedings of the 42nd AIAA
Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV. AIAA 2004—1388, Jan 5—8, 2004.
Churilov AG, Ostrogorsky A. Model of Tellurium— and Zinc—Doped Indium Antimonide Solidiﬁcation in
Space. Journal of T hermaphysics and Heat T ransfer. 0887—8722, 19(4):5420—541, 2005.
Ostrogorsky A. Solidiﬁcation Using a Bafﬂe in Sealed Ampoules (SUBSA). Proceedings of the 41St AIAA
Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV. AIAA 2003—1309, J an 6—9, 2003.
Spivey RA, Gilley S, Ostrogorsky A, Grugel R, Smith G, Luz P. SUBSA and PFMI Transparent Furnace
Systems Currently in Use in the International Space Station Microgravity Science Glovebox. 41St Aerospace
Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV. AIAA 2003—1362, J an 6—9, 2003.
. ""ﬁttﬁi.%::;.;""> -_ . ‘3 _‘ ‘ ,_ T .3
I ‘ j. 2 mi .. ' \ I ‘ . ‘ .
. ; ’ IN . ,,
: 9 T i ' "" 5 t .~ '
"" p». x. ~ . . - ., 4-»
I?“ Has.— 1.. . . .7 z
I}: ~- I T i i ‘ a "" '
/
;;i m 1 . . '
I. i \ * TEL! , i
- I o J t l "" i r
~L, . ‘I I I
:: ""(N
:; ii “ ‘ . T ’
ISSOO5EO7172 — Astronaut Peggy Whitson, NASA science
officer, in shown in front of the MSG as she works on SUBSA
during Expedition 5.
76

"
"85","ZEOLITE CRYSTAL GROWTH (ZCG)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Albert Sacco, Jr., Northeastern University, Boston, Mass.
Expeditions 4—6
Research Area Materials Science
Zeolites are hydrated alurninosilicate rninerals, with a rnicro—porous crystalline framework that includes a net—
work of interconnected tunnels, creating a structure similar to a honeycomb. A sort of mineral sponge, which is their
microporous structure, enables zeolites to very speciﬁcally absorb and release chemical species, including various
cations and gas molecules such as H20, C02, N2, Freon, and more.
Zeolites and zeotypes (similar microporous silicates ) are widely used for many critical industrial processes, such as
commercial ion exchangers, adsorbents, and catalysts. For example, Virtually all of the world’s gasoline is produced
or upgraded using zeolites. In a very different application, zeotype Engelhard titanosilicate structure (ETS) titanosilicates
contain natural quantum wires, which are of great potential in electronic and optical applications and in photochemistry,
in their structures. However, scientists have insufﬁcient understanding of how zeolite and zeotype rnaterials grow,
and how the desirable aspects of their porous structure (size, morphology, purity) can be controlled during
crystal growth for commercial applications.
The Zeolite Crystal Growth (ZCG) experiment examined the growth of zeolite crystals in microgravity, where
the role of convection and sedimentation is minimized, providing a growth environment that would produce fewer
crystal defects.
The ZCG furnace, which was derived from earlier shuttle models, can grow zeolites, zeotype titanosilicate
rnaterials, ferroelectrics, and silver halides—all materials that are of commercial interest. The unit consists of a
cylinder—shaped furnace, the Improved Zeolite Electronic Control System (IZECS), which includes a touchpad and
data display as well as autoclaves. Two precursor growth solutions are placed into each autoclave, which rniX during
their stay in the furnace.
Zeolite Beta was grown from precursor solutions of sodium aluminate and colloidal silica that had been heated to
403 K (130°C) on station. The samples were characterized by X—ray diffraction to determine the crystal structure.
The performance of zeolite Beta as a Lewis acid catalyst was evaluated using a standard set of chemical reduction
reactions known as the Meerwein—Pohhdorf—Verley (MPV) reactions.
, 3 , n A 3 RESULTS
/s ‘ '\ A --* 3 ZCG produced zeolite crystals with a high degree of crystalline
‘ U“: f3 _ perfection in microgravity. During ISS Expedition 6, l9 zeolite
P 3 .\ W *Vﬁ’ﬁw --~"" . samples were mixed and incubated. These samples were returned to
. ' , V '...f:.-.' 1.; Earth at the conclusion of Expedition 6 and sent back to the principal
. 3 ' )3? 3 investigator for analysis.
' \ er) 2,51 '
~ . r , 3: 3‘3! ‘A: — ' Results from the samples that were mixed on ISS suggest that the
3' ‘3» VJ i ' .‘ 3 Lewis acid catalytic sites are altered in microgravity, as indicated by
' ... 3 *3 Cw” ~ , lower catalytic activity in the MPV probe reaction compared to Earth—
“a: 3 _ ' . . ., grown zeolite. This further suggests that the control of ﬂuid dynamics
I SSOO5E19055 _ Peggy Whitson, Expedition 5 during crystallization may be important in making better industrial cata—
flight engineer, places a cartridge into the ZCG lysts. Although space—grown zeolites had the same particle morphology
experiment in the U-3- Destiny Iaboratory. and identical surface framework as zeolites that were grown on Earth,
the average zeolite size of the space—grown crystals was 10% larger
than crystals that were grown on Earth (Akata et al. 2004).
Larger zeolite crystals allow researchers to better deﬁne the structure and understand how they work, with a goal of
producing improved crystals on Earth. Improved zeolites may have applications in storing hydrogen fuel, reduction
of hazardous byproducts from chemical processing, and more efﬁcient techniques for petroleum processing.
77

"
"86","PUBLICATION(S)
Akata B, Yilmaz B, J irapnogphan SS, Warzywoda J , Sacco Jr. A. Characterization of zeolite Beta grown in
microgravity. Micropomus and Mesoporous Materials. 71 : 1—9, 2004.

78

"
"87","BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES IN MICROGRAVITY
The [SS laboratories enable scientiﬁc experiments in the biological sciences that explore the complex responses
ofh'ving organisms to the microgravity environment. The labfaeih'ties support the exploration ofbiological systems
rangingfrom microorganisms and cellular biology to integratedfunctions ofmulticellularplants and animals.
Several of the biological sciences experiments have facilitated new technology developments that allow
growth and maintenance ofliving cells, tissues, and organisms.
Ammal Biology
Animal studies in microgravity can be beneﬁcialforframing research that can be applied to understanding the
human system in Space. While many animal studies are performed in analog environments on the Earth, the [SS
providesfacilities that allowfor research on animals in a microgravity environment.
CELLULAR BIOLOGY AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
In a microgravity environment, physical controls on the directionality and geometry ofcell and tissue growth can
be dramatically diﬁ’erent to those on Earth. Various experiments have used the culture ofcells, tissues, embryos, and
small organisms an orbit as a tool to increase our understanding ofbiologiealprocesses in microgravity.
MICROBIOL OG Y
New developments in microbiology have led to an increasingly exciting set ofexperiments that tests how
microorganisms change in Space, including analysis ofchanges in the gene expression ofdiﬁ’erentpathogens. T hese
tests are directly relevant to the health ofastronauts during their missions, and hold greatpotentialfor
understanding the mechanisms that are employed by disease-causing microorganisms,
PLAN T BIOL OG Y IN MICROGRA VITY
Studies ofplantphysiology in microgravity provide insight into the basic biology ofplants, and into how
plants might be used as part offuture Exploration missions. Successfully growing plants in microgravity presents
challengeS—from predictable distribution ofwater and nutrients to the reliability ofbiomass production.
79

"
"88","Biological Experiments Performed on the International Space Station, Grouped by Discipline
Environments)
Hormone Production)
Regulation: Mechanisms of Colon Carcinoma Metastasis in Microgravity)
Expression)
System for Optimizing 3-D Cell Culture Biotechnology in Space)
Erythropoietin by Mammalian Cells)
Human Lymphoid Tissue)
thaliana)
80

"
"89","AVIAN DEVELOPMENT FACILITY (ADF), Two INVESTIGATIONS
Principal Investigat0r(s): J . David Dickman, Washington University, St. Louis, M0., Development and Function of
the Avian Otolith System in Normal and Altered Gravity Environments (ADF—Otolith)
Stephen B. Doty, Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, N.Y., Avian Development
Facility—Skeletal Development in Embryonic Quail (ADF—Skeletal)
Expedition 4
Research Area Cellular Biology and Biotechnology
The aVian development biology experiment, Which is a
' ' - _ tool for the study of embryogenesis in space, provided the
_ - .- ‘1'."" .. ._ .. ', -- ' support hardware that is needed for researchers to better un—
- EETE'L-h: HWJT - I ' derstand and miti ' '
. _ ._._. . gate or nullify the forces of altered graV1ty
.. 1;: FE“: _ _ ' ;_ ' 0n embryo development. Avian eggs are ideal for studying
Li- _ , 55:: 1’! *j] _ --7 _ _ﬂ ' _ . embryo development since they are self—contained and self—
£3 ' IRA E . 1, ' ' ' sustaining, and can be nurtured Without a maternal host. The
JL --E 1 I ‘ - i . Avian Development Facility (ADF) provided incubation of
i. - . - ' ' - a ; aVian eggs under controlled conditions (humidity, temperature,
In] -' I . _ ‘i‘ I I};- . . .
[1| _ r. _ . .1 , E L: Erie and gas enVirenment) enerbit, and the ﬁxation of the eggs
5- ' _f 4.1 -.-_'.|-' for study While minimizing the effects of launch and landing.
x h. """" 3f Up to 36 eggs in centrifuge carousels could be exposed to
‘"" ' 21""} simulated gravity of zero—g t0 one—g in 0.1—g increments.
:1 ' *
' ,1. During its ﬂight on space shuttle mission STS—108 to
.i' the ISS, the ADF housed two investigations: the Develop—
*'=.':1- -. ment and Function of the Avian Otolith System in Normal
and Altered Gravity Environments (ADF—Otolith) and the
The avian hatching habitat With the exterior Skeletal Development in Embryonic Quail 0n the ISS
panels removed. (ADF—Skeletal) investigations.
ADF-OTOLITH (Dickman)
The otolith system (small bones of the inner ear) in all vertebrates
functions to detect head position and movement relative to gravity . '.
depending on neuromotor responses. The avian otolith system offers
an excellent model With Which . ———- .
to study the e ffects 0 f gravity 18 One of two ADF caroueels, each feattirlng _! '1I-__ .""'
sample containers. Durmg space mlssmns, ..,. . .. .-
upon development due to the one carousel rotates at 77.3 revolutions per - ‘ '33,.‘3: F
short maturation period follow— minute (RPM) to simulate a one-g gravity ' '*""' ﬁe; __ r"" ____
ing fertilization and due to the field. The other caroueel remlains motionless - 'f 5f. _. r
extensive knowledge 0 f otolith to prowcte a mleregraVIty enyllronment for the . .- i . It -4
. speCImens InSIde. In addition to eggs, the . A
system structure and function ADF can carry fish, plants, insects, or 1! h
in birds. cells in its sample containers. -_ ._ p-
Otoliths are part of the vestibular system (balance system) in vertebrates,
and are an essential component in the production of movement—related responses that are critical for daily function
and survival. During space ﬂight, vestibular disturbances are frequently reported by astronauts, With approximately
80% to 90% of current astronauts experiencing some symptoms of space motion sickness (disorientation and
nausea) during the ﬁrst 48 to 72 hrs of weightlessness.
Many scientists have suggested that lack of gravity as a constant stimulus during space ﬂight produces signiﬁcant
changes in vestibular system function. Preliminary studies indicated that the structure and function of the vestibular
system is affected by exposure to microgravity. For example, changes in size of otoconia in the receptor—afferent
morphology, hair cell conductance, vestibular afferent responsiveness, vestibular central pathways, and vestibular—
81

"
"90","related neuromotor responses have all been observed in both adult and developing animals that are exposed for
brief periods to either microgravity or hypergraVity.
I':""-r., 1"" ﬂ"" "" __- .- ~15” 1"""":
.t' ' _ , '5. .11"". :5""! I' .1 HP.“ 1"";- ‘ﬁfﬁ
1 5- _ 1:13” ._ . .""'_ --_- l . -..__'-_--:.r|,_':"" .
E..- 1-43-1511... '_-.'_' _.1 "" ..._.-. .' - - .. . . -1:: III - "" '29-""
"" ""'3' 1- - '.~'.1-1':1i|.*. '.""3. ' . _.E.:-: 'I : ”l. .
. ' ' L I. _ Iii. uréﬁ _.: - "" h -. __
3-5"": .a-1~ ' _ '-
Scanning electron micrographs of fused otoconial stones from embryonic day 12 quail embryos.
Three saccule stones are shown, one each from an embryo that was raised from fertilization in zero-g
(left), one-g flight (middle), and two-g laboratory centrifugation (right).
RESULTS
The inner ear bones in the embryos that developed in microgravity appeared to be larger than those found in the
controls that remained on Earth. There are some indications that the fan—shaped arrangement of receptor cells may
also be altered under the inﬂuence of microgravity. Conclusive data from this investigation are pending further
analysis.
ADF-SKELETAL (Doty)
The objective of this experiment was to deﬁne the effects of space ﬂight on embryonic skeletal development.
This investigation was a stepping—stone in determining the effect of microgravity on the molecular and cellular
biology of bone formation and loss. Many of the biological processes that are observed in bone formation during
embryogenesis (development and growth of an embryo) also occur in the adult skeleton during fracture repair.
Furthermore, previous space ﬂight studies identiﬁed bone demineralization and bone density loss in embryo quails,
_ which was similar to what is observed in adult humans with osteoporosis. How—

:H __.i'1'-_-'- ”11;.1. _ i'_% ever, up to a certain developmental age embryonic quail bones will rapidly recover
‘"" 11* - ti 1""-ﬁ¥rlu'.:;. from this condition when re—eXposed to gravity; whereas humans suffering from
. ' ”3;.7'1r'1i'riﬁ1'jﬂﬁ1' '=I""'_""'._ .' - - bone loss can take years to recover. Therefore, the data gained from this study
. .-'-.""-w t.1l5_1.ﬁ.1;,114..:*--;«.--*-'_- _ . . . . . .

3“- ”-'fg‘fg' _ _ '- ' .- ,..-+_ - should prov1de a foundation of future studies on bone demineralization and

' -.' ' rigid :j_ - . '1': density loss and insight into the mechanisms that are involved in the full re—

-_ "" ’ _Fb1‘ 'ﬁ _1;':.'_'-'.-'"" '1’ mineralization of bones.

- ﬂat 1;: _. 11w'.'-_'-_' _ RESULTS

' I ' ' No space ﬂight effects were observed for osteocalcin levels in the day 12

W 1.1;. ""3:41? £1 . _ embryos, based on bone matrix stating. Since osteocalcin reﬂects the degree of
. ' + 1 ._ -I _ -- . - ' . . . . . . . . . .

_.'.1-"" t1."" “-1 _ _ .""'_ ,._- '1: bone mineralization, this would suggest that mineralization is not affected in an

'- __1 {j .' -'-""i""'-"" - -#'_ "" ""'1 ' ' older embryo. However, direct mineralization quantitative studies have not been
' '- ' J , . ﬂ . _ .- '1: reported for day 7 and day 12 embryos, which should provide deﬁnitive

_ .- _ _ """" 'I; I ., "" - . . .
' ' ' - J.— l ' I - eVidence for whether osteoca101n—ass001ated processes are affected.
_ .. '. .+|.:'I|'Il!._l '|.

IE' I ' 'l' - The second ﬁnding was that the space ﬂight embryos that are on the spinning
Electron miCFOQFaIOhS Of quail limb carousel or stationary carousel had a reduced level of collagen—synthesizing
bénes formed under the mfluenoe Of activity as compared to the ground control specimens, although the sample size
micrograVIty show decreased mmera- 11 If th' t d . l‘d t d 't ld t th t ﬂ' ht h
Iization compared to bones formed in was sma . 1s ren 1s va 1 a e , 1 wou sngges a space 1g as a eoni—
normal gravity. The bone that devel- ponent that can affect collagen synthes1s that is not correctable by an applied
oped d‘uring space flight (top) shows one-g force. These insights might be important for the development of appro—
less mmeral compared to the control priate countermeasures for space travel. Final analyses and publication of
sample (bottom); the control sample 1 t (1'
clearly shows mineral deposits (dark resu S are pen 1ng.
spots) that are absent in the space
flight sample. PUBLICATION(S)

There are no publications at this time.
82

"
"91","ADVANCED ASTROCULTURE (AdvAsc)
Principal Investigator(s): Weijia Zhou, Wisconsin Center for Space Automation and Robotics,
University of Wisconsin at Madison, Wis.
Expeditions 2, 4, 5
Research Area Plant Biology in MicrograVity
AdvAsc was a commercially sponsored payload that provided precise control of environmental parameters for plant
growth, including temperature, relative humidity, light, ﬂuid nutrient delivery, and C02 and ethylene concentrations.
AdvAsc hardware was used in a series of tests over three Expeditions (2, 4, and 5). First, AdvAsc demonstrated
the ﬁrst “seed—to—seed” experiment in space, growing Arabidopsis thaliana through a complete life cycle. (Arabidopsis
thaliana (thale cress) is a model system in plant biology studies that has a short life cycle, a completely sequenced
genome, and a history of space experiments.) Next, 35% of the space—grown seeds and 65% of wild Arabidopsis
seeds were grown. Finally, soybean plants were also grown through an entire life cycle.
' ""u. .,- _'_ ""' u ' - _ I __ ’_. IIr-l '_I: I' l' '
I "" I. kill ; I't-""r—T- _._:Th'l Ir 1 Fl Ilia rill . I i I 'I _'_ -:'- I..- ' ""'-' ""
. _ Ti § .1'P‘_ _ _- '_ ill 1:.“ _ ' Ffi-I -' a “IT!
.2?""- .' . it. t"" n a '. f ' ..l c t -
' i m ' . I «""1- * ' ha ' ' ' J. 3;;- l T 3' - I I ""“
_. ’._ .. . _.:_~_—__—._.__:~..,;__ I ' ' 34%.:qu ., f E -.*I _J. -
tr -..-r ' t..- . 241” F "" w“. r J J=J| .. J
*ﬁihd‘ -.. - _' -.'. 1'1r: . ' weir"" “ 5;. ”'3' ,5 -- . - c -
”1""}: f 3.. _-'I.;""'r . '5. l 1:""- 1-""':n'h m -.
1:1.1F '1 . ”l: .4 -. . _. .i.~ ' |
pf? _. .1."" J; 1'"" Iii:- El; I ' . "": ’_i' _. ' '
. -' ""3' ' I-F- '9"" 311.. ='.: =1.— ___-""'""_ '-..
II .I h"" I m *ﬁ- ~... ,. I '“ “ . . “:-
"" _...F __ II“ _ ' 1 -- '- I l.
ISSOOZE6300 — James s. Voss, Expedition 2 flight |SSOO5E0720l9 — Astronaut _Peggy A. Whitson, Expedition 5
engineer, works with the AdvAsc condensate fluid syringe at NASA |S_S selence ofﬁcer, dlsplays a flrSt CF09 0f soybeans
the AdvAsc growth chamber in the U.S. Destiny laboratory. QFOWIHQ mSIde the AdVASC- PhOtOS 0f the QFOWIHQ plant have
been a useful tool for the ground-based science team, which
uses them to determine optimal time for cross-pollination
and harvesting.
RESULTS
Arabidopsis thaliana was successfully grown from seed—to—seed on 188. During a 2—month growth period, the plants
progressed from seed hydration to germination, vegetative, and reproductive stages, producing mature seeds. Ninety
percent of the seeds germinated in space, although only 70% of the plants grew to maturity.
Some of the seeds that were harvested from the plants that were grown in microgravity were planted in a ground study.
These seeds produced typical plants without any Visible abnormalities (Link et a1. 2003). During a second AdvAsc
run, second—generation seeds were produced and tissues were harvested and preserved for RNA and complementary
deoxyribonucleic acid (CDNA) analysis. Detailed results of the germination and harvesting of space—grown seeds in
the AdvAsc growth chamber in the U.S Laboratory Destiny have not been released.
In the third AdvAsc run, which took place over approximately 95 days on 188, soybeans were grown from seed—
to—seed for the ﬁrst time in space. Biomass production in the space seeds was approximately 4% larger than ground
controls. Flight and grounds controls produced nearly identical numbers of seeds, but the space seeds were larger on
average. Scientists found that the seeds that were produced in space were healthy, the germination rates were compara—
ble to those on Earth, and no maj or morphological differences were evident. Phytochemical analysis of commercially
important components such as oils, amino acids, proteins, carbohydrates, and phytoestrogens have not yet been
released.
83

"
"92","PUBLICATION(S)
Link BM, Durst SJ, Zhou W, Stankovic B. Seed-to-seed growth ofArabidopSis thaliana 0n the International Space
Station. Advances in Space Research. 31(10):2237—2243, 2003.
Zhou W, Durst SJ, DeMars M, Stankovic B, Link BM, Tellez G, Meyers RA, Sandstrom PW, Abba JR.
Performance of the Advanced AstrocultureTM plant growth unit during IS S—6A/ 7A mission. SAE Technical Paper
Series. Paper no. 02ICES—267, 2002.
Zhou W. Advanced AstrocultureTM Plant Growth Unit: Capabilities and Performances. 35th International Conference
on Environmental Systems, Rome, Italy. Jul 11—14, 2005.
"" _ Dried Arabidopsis thaliana plants, from
. ISS Expedition 4, upon return to Earth.
L'r -.I
."" '. _ F.
I.' I '
i (,5? I
*i _ I__i""
84

"
"93","BIOMASS PRODUCTION SYSTEM (BPS) TECHNOLOGY VALIDATION TEST (TVT)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Robert C. Morrow, Orbital Technologies Corporation Space Center, Madison, Wis.
Expedition 4
Research Area Plant Biology in Microgravity
The BPS was developed as a precursor to systems that are capable of maintaining plant growth in microgravity
for more than 90 days (e.g., planetary missions). It is comprised of multiple plant growth chambers that are independ—
ently controlled. The BPS objective was to validate plant growth system hardware functionality and performance,
plant productivity and health, information acquisition, and experiment operations and support in microgravity. BPS
demonstrated the ability to accurately measure the variables that are associated with plant photosynthesis, respiration,
and transpiration, and to control the growth variables and measure the responses so that the effects of microgravity
on plant growth and function can be isolated. The BPS housed two experiments: the Technology Validation Test
(TVT) experiment and the Photosynthesis Experiment and System Testing and Operation (PESTO) experiment.
3 _ ‘ ;—'— Brassica rapa (ﬁeld mustard) and T riticum aestivum (super
3..» I _: . ' , dwarf wheat) were the test species for the BPS. The BPS plant
3 3 growth chambers (PGCs) contained plants that were started on the
5.1"" _. I...- ground and had already developed their photosynthetic apparatus,
1'- ' III... such as stoma, guard cells, and other structures that are found in
_ -._ ..IIII - the leaves. Samples taken from the plants were compared to data
-_- - .Elﬂﬁiﬂs'ﬂ‘. :_- taken from previous ground—based experiments that were conducted
3: f'ﬁl :N-‘l' 11- i'r 27' ' using BPS. Over the course of the 73—day test, additional sets of
""1 ' ! plants were germinated and grown in microgravity conditions.
In—ﬂight progress of plant growth was monitored through
image collection; harvested plants were frozen or ﬁxed
|SSOO4E1 1721 — View Of Brassica plants from for later analysis on the ground.
PGC 2 being harvested as part of the technical
Ysalsldggggdtieiztnolthe BPS that was conducted durmg BPS tested the hypothesis that environmental control subsystems
would provide a stress—free growing environment in microgravity.
These technology validation studies provide a foundation on which to base the design of future plant growth units
for station or future Exploration missions. These results can lead to the development of regenerative life support
systems on future missions to the moon or Mars. While creating useful technology and science, BPS allowed stud—
ents in grades Kindergarten through 12 to work as co—investigators on real space research. This research, which is
known as “Farming in Space,” examined the basic principles and concepts that are related to plant biology, agri—
cultural production, ecology, and the space environment. Activities that are associated with this research
encouraged curiosity in the sciences while teaching good scientiﬁc methodology.
RESULTS
Multiple criteria were used to evaluate BPS technology; nearly all of the performance requirements (plant
health, temperature and humidity control, atmospheric composition control, nutrient and water delivery, lighting,
data acquisition of C02 levels, water use, biofouling) were met successfully (Iverson et al. 2003). While researchers
noted a few performance parameters required additional work (e.g., elevated temp—
eratures 0f the root zones), these indicators were identiﬁed and documented, and Fl 3 ”1-:
will be built in t0 the design modiﬁcation. Overall the BPS hardware performed as rt}; . f -.'- _ _:1.IT'::H __ _
expected, and may provide a Viable use in the development for regenerative life ,_'. _ '_'_._:_.__ 33b -
support systems for future spacecraft development. "" '_ 't_'—!,ﬁ--'3-. Firiﬁ3.1.'._.f'!':;:=i;_
.2'3'5‘E'1't-E‘i'EE-TFL- -iE'!.=-' ""'-
Thirty—two germinating Brassica rapa plants were launched inside the BPS for I: 52- -_-l: 3' _ _' L_ '
the TVT 0f the hardware. The Brassica rapa plants were grown over two growth ' - "" "" '
cycles on ISS. Brassica rapa tissue from BPS was analyzed for general morph- ' _- - ' ' .
ology, seed anatomy and storage reserves, foliar carbohydrates, and chlorophyll _- f I I -' '
and root zone hypoxia analysis. Some of the wheat plantings were evaluated for
growth, germination, weight, chlorophyll concentration, and root appearance . .
(Morrow et al. 2004). By the end of the 73—day experiment, BPS TVT produced a rape2395232232fggﬂgﬁﬁ’gg
during Expedition 4.
85

"
"94","total of eight harvests, seven primings, and a plant tissue archive of more than 300 plants.
Gross measure of growth, leaf chlorophyll, starch, and soluble carbohydrates conﬁrmed comparable performance by
the plants on the station with ground controls. Of particular interest were the differences between the immature seed-
lings. Immature seeds from station had higher concentrations of chlorophyll, starch, and soluble carbohydrates than
the ground controls. Seed protein was signiﬁcantly lower in the ISS material. Also, microscopy of immature seeds
ﬁxed on 188 showed embryos to be at a range of developmental stages, while ground control embryos had all reached
the same stage of development. These differences could be attributable to differences in water delivery or reduced
gas exchange due to lack of convection. These results suggest that the microgravity environment may affect ﬂavor
and nutritional quality on potential space produce (Musgrave et a1. 2005).
An ancillary study tested for bacterial and fungal communities in the BPS chambers and root modules; these cultures
were compared to ground control bacterial and fungal growth. Analysis indicated that more species of both bacteria
and fungus were identiﬁed in the ﬂight samples than in the ground samples. The populations were common airborne
species found on Earth. The signiﬁcance of the difference is uncertain (Frazier et a1. 2003).
PUBLICATION(S)
Musgrave ME, Kuang A, Tuominem LK, LeVine LH, Morrow RC. Seed Storage Reserves and Glucosinolates
in Brassica rapa L. Grown 0n the International Space Station. Journal of the American Socielyfor Horticultural
Science. 130(6): 848—856, 2005.
Morrow RC, Iverson J T, Richter RC, Stadler JJ. Biomass Production System (BPS) Technology Validation Test
Results. T ransactions Journal ofAerOSpace 2004 121061—1070.
Frazier CM, Simpson JB, Roberts MS, Stutte GW, Fields NW, Melendez-Andrade J , Morrow RC. Bacterial and
fungal communities in BPS chambers and root modules. SAE T echm’cal Paper Series. 2003 Paper No. 03ICES-147.
Iverson J T, Crabb TM, Morrow RC, Lee MC. Biomass Production System Hardware Performance. SAE T echm’cal
Paper Series. 2003 Paper No. 03ICES-67.

86

"
"95","CELLULAR BIOTECHNOLOGY OPERATIONS SUPPORT SYSTEM (CBOSS),
SEVEN INVESTIGATIONS
Payload Developer: J ohnson Space Center, Houston
Expeditions 3, 4 for cell cultures, Expeditions 8, 10, 12, ongoing for Fluid Dynamics
Investigation
Principal Investigat0r(s): Timothy G. Hammond, Tulane University Medical Center, New Orleans, La., Human
Renal Cortical Cell Differentiation and Hormone Production (CBOSS 01 OZ—RENAL,
Expeditions 3, 4)
J . Milburn J essup, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC, Use of
NASA Bioreactor to Study Cell Cycle Regulation Mechanisms of Colon Carcinoma
Metastasis In Microgravity (CBOSS—Ol—Colon, Expedition 3)
J eanne L. Becker, University of South Florida, Tampa, Fla., Evaluation of Ovarian
Tumor Cell Growth and Gene Expression (CBOSS—Ol—Ovarian, Expedition 3)
Peter Lelkes, Drexel University, Philadelphia, Penn., PC12 Pheochromocytoma Cells: A
Proven Model System for Optimizing Three Dimensional Cell Culture Biotechnology in
Space (CBOSS—Ol—PCIZ, Expedition 3)
Arthur J . Sytkowski, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Mass., Production
of Recombinant Human Erythropoietin by Mammalian Cells (CBOSS—OZ—Erythropoietin,
Expedition 4)
J oshua Zimmerberg, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md., Simulated Micrograv—
ity Applications Towards the Study Of HIV: The Effect of Microgravity 0n the Immune
Function of Human Lymphoid Tissue (CBOSS—OZ—HLT, Expedition 4)
J . Milburn J essup, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC, J oshua
Zimmerberg, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md., Cellular Biotechnology Oper—
ations Support Systems: Fluid Dynamics Investigation (CBOSS—FDI, Expeditions 8, 10,
12, ongoing)
Research Area Cellular Biology and Biotechnology
The purpose of the CBOSS study was to support biotechnological research on board ISS by providing a stable
environment in which to grow cells. The system was a multi—component cell incubator that was intended to grow
three—dimensional clusters of cells in microgravity. A self—contained apparatus, CBOSS was designed to allow
multiple experiments to be performed, thereby enabling scientists to study various types of cells operating
simultaneously.
I ' .. 1|... .-.:-.-' -
. - ' ' t. L .-
I I ""£3: I III :‘ I!
a» r ,l,\gx._.. - L
I j I ' l' I Il'lJ-1I I 3""}. -ll ..--""
;' .. ' ._.1:--:_! _- ' ""I .=_ -_ '.-I_
h"" i I 'I P - I ?_.IIILI 1-
”Elke _“.'_.._ .- '. _ . quit -- ‘1, |88003328030 — Frank L. Culbertson, Jr., Expedition 3
' . ,4“ y... 5'1.“ . . mission commander, works at the biotechnology specimen
"" "" 3, ' . ' "" _.1_-_f-L_. temperature controller (BSTC) for the CBOSS in the U.S. Destiny
+ . 3' laboratory on ISS.
.r. . .- 15.. .I _.""II:£E'I'-='h7 .3-
1r .- '
87

"
"96","In the human body, cells normally grow within a scaffolding of protein and carbohydrate ﬁbers that creates a
three—dimensional structure. But outside the body, cells tend to grow in ﬂat sheets and are incapable of duplicat—
ing the structure that they normally hold, which can make them behave differently in the laboratory than they would
in the body. Past research has shown that cells that are grown in a microgravity environment arrange themselves into
three—dirnensional shapes that more closely duplicate how they would behave in the body. Cell culture in microgravity
thus becomes a tool for studying cells in a state that is closer to that which occurs normally in the body.
HUMAN RENAL CORTICAL CELLS (Hammond)
To better understand the mechanisms that cause several kidney disorders, human renal
cortical epithelial cell lines were grown on station. This experiment used kidney cells to
. ‘ 5*? 4' study the mechanism by which the kidney reabsorbs proteins that are ﬁltered from the blood.
w 2-19..- 1 _' - The goal of this ISS experiment was to again create three—dirnensional growth of normal
:_ ' '_*- ‘__ -_ human renal cells, and to assess the production of erythropoietin and Vitamin D3 while
-' _ :. _ _ -' '1 assessing the model for production of commercial applications.
:IT-t‘kl. ._ _- .-.. ' . 1 '- 1.-
3.,— 1,‘ 1 h -1.| Microscopic image of . _'___ _ ' 1 f
HI; .|!' _ human. renal cortical v_f' - :1: _ . . -_ _'. .'_...
h i HI: eplthellal cells. 4 {a L? . : ._ fir .
Microscopic image of colon _"" 1:; CL"" :j'ﬂ "" .‘F- '+
carcinoma cell. _.,- j;- ‘ .- r ' q
1 HI' ._-. I {1
COLON CARCINOMA CELLS (Jessup) - -
Human colorectal carcinoma cells were grown to test the hypothesis that three—dirnensional growth in microgravity
facilitates the reprogramming of signal transduction pathways and gene expression as cells differentiate into the two
maj or colonic cell lineages. This differentiation is important because it may inhibit cancer growth and, if applied to
developing cancers, may block the emergence of new cancer formation. The unique environment of microgravity
can provide insight into the growth, maturation, and death of this type of cancer cells.
OVARIAN TUMOR CELLS (Becker)
The goal of this study was to characterize the complex three—dirnensional development of the human Miillerian
ovarian (LNl) tumor cell line to characterize morphological changes that occur during three—dirnensional growth.
This study also sought to determine accompanying alterations in cell cycle kinetics, cell cycle proteins, and cellular
oncoproteins. Cells were preserved in RNAlater, a ﬁxative that allows cells to remain stable at refrigerator temper—
atures (40C (39°F)) for up to 30 days. Following return to Earth after 3 months on ISS, the cells were analyzed for
antigenic stability after removal of RNA using the RNAqueous kit. Knowledge that was gained from this experi—
ment could help deﬁne mechanisms in tumor cell development that can be targeted for treatment of patients with
ovarian cancer.
PC12 PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA CELLS (Lelkes)
Neuroendocrine cells (PC12) are cells that receive electric signals from the nervous 1.?"" +1 ' _ 1.11,: ""'H' "" '1 .i
system and chemical signals secreted from glands. As they differentiate, the cells are ??""1- . 1i - '1. ‘. """"' .
known to produce catecholamines, which are key to normal function and pain suppres— .r..' . . ._- ' -' _ i . :ﬁ
sion. Evidence of differentiation is seen in ground—based (simulated) microgravity ro— l? , "" _ -' I _.
tating wall systems. In this experiment, the ability and extent of the differentiation in ”'5.- ' i5. “' '-
actual microgravity was assessed by the growth and subculture of these cells to f._.- -"".- ﬁg 35-; _ .i
provide a greater understanding of neural regeneration and pain suppression. Stained microscopic image
of neuroendocrine cells.
ERYTHROLEUKEMIA CELLS (Sytkowski)
Reduced immune system function and anemia that are related to decreased red blood cell production are two problems
that face astronauts after extended durations in space. This experiment was designed to study cells in space to gain
insight into the way microgravity affects blood cell formation. EMS—3 cells are Rauscher rnurine erythroleukernia
cells, derived originally from mice infected with the Virus that causes erythroleukemia. The EMS—3 cell line serves
as an important model system for studying the cellular and molecular aspects of erythropoiesis (red blood cell for—
mation), including the mechanism of action of erythropoietin in Vitro under controlled conditions. EMS—3 cells
were selected for culture in CBOSS to advance our knowledge of the effects of microgravity on the hematopoietic
system and to suggest possible in—ﬂight countermeasures and treatments for ground—based disease states.
88

"
"97","HUMAN LYMPHOID TISSUE (Zimmerberg)
Impaired immune function has been observed in astronauts during ﬂight, and these observations are bolstered
by evidence of lymphocyte dysfunction in the rotating wall vessel (RWV) culture system (the ground—based analog
or model for cell culture in microgravity conditions). Using human lymphoid tissue cells that have been isolated
from human tonsils and derived from ﬁve donors for the experiment, the goal of this study was to determine
whether microgravity was detrimental to the immune responses of human lymphoid tissue cell suspensions.
FLUID DYNAMICS INVESTIGATION (Jessup and Zimmerberg)
When cells arrive for culture on 188, they are thawed, injected into a static tissue culture module (TCM) with
media (nutrition), and then additional media is added at different times while waste liquid is removed. When these
cells are injected or additional media is added to the TCM, it is important that the entire contents of the TCM be uni—
formly distributed. If cells in one corner of the TCM are not receiving nutrients they will die, causing a leaching of
waste products that can be toxic to other cells. There is also the potential for bubble formation in the semi—permeable
TCM, which could be deleterious to cells in culture, so procedures are also being developed for their removal. CBOSS—
FDI [Fluid Dynamics Investigation] involves a series of experiments that is aimed at optimizing CBOSS ﬂuid—niixing
and bubble—rernoval operations while contributing to the characterization of the CBOSS stationary bioreactor vessel
(the TCM) in terms of ﬂuid dynamics in microgravity. These experiments will validate the most efﬁcient ﬂuid—
mixing and bubble—removal techniques on orbit; these techniques are essential to conducting cellular research
in microgravity, and will enhance the probability of success for future investigations.
RESULTS
The CBOSS hardware supported siX cell culture investigations with differ—
ent detailed scientiﬁc objectives. There were problems in the growth and
preservation of all of the cell lines grown on Expeditions 3 and 4. The PC12 _
and erythroleukemia cells did not survive well in long—term culture, so no soi— 1| 1|
entiﬁc results are expected from these experiments. It was found that there a J .
was more bubble forrnation than expected that may lead to cell death at the I J. #5 | .l I . FE: :_ '
air—liquid interface. Although not well documented in this experiment, it was ,_ .- _' -_""'. u * ' .-_""'.'
noted that poor mixing of cells/tissues and medium occurred in the other 1“} _ , .13
CBOSS payloads as well. Both the poor mixing and greater—than—expected 1.1g“! *_'-_. _ l ; _ . ""L
bubble formation were important lessons learned that led to the addition of "" ' ' .1
the CBOSS—FDI to study mixing and bubble formation in microgravity E] J. .’“I
on later Expeditions. _ r E . I _ . _
.. . . ._ 4'
Renal cortical cells returned were treated with an RNA stabilizing agent ' Hd'lt- '_ {f-
(RNAlater—Ambion) that enabled analyses of both RNA and immunoreactive 'l‘ ' . I'
proteins. The space and ground control cell cultures exhibited similar immun— I.“ 'r_- ' ‘ .u,_ -' - .
oreaotiVity proﬁles for the antibodies that were tested. These data provide ‘"" , L...— Ii."" I H '
evidence that the techniques used can be generalized to other cell lines, and ' I
that RNAlater will provide long—term storage of proteins at 40C (39oF) 1'
for long—duration investigations (Hammond et al. 2006). ISSOO4E521O — Image of the
Quad Tissue Culture Module Assembly
Analyses of the returned colon carcinoma cells revealed that the cells .(QTCMA)'5 on '88 Expedition 4 after
. . . . activation of the cells. A syringe was used
had died on orbit. However, ground—based research led to an appre01ation to inject cells into the pink nutrient
of a novel mechanism by which microgravity may kill cells as well as of the growth media. When the samples com-
role of tumor marker carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) on preventing cell P|9t9d their QFOWth Cydegthe CFEW trans-
death. It has been shown that CEA interacts with death receptors on the cell fetted the cells from.the Incubator t0 the
. . . biotechnology refrigerator, where they
membrane to reduce cell death. Since CEA is important to many of the can— were stored until they were examined at
cers that afﬂict men and women in the United States, this is a critical ﬁnding a ground-based laboratory.
that was in large part initiated by studies of growth in simulated microgravity.
These results are not yet published, but were presented by J essup at the Keystone Symposium on “Stem Cells,
Senescence and Apoptosis” (Singapore, Oct 25—30, 2005).
89

"
"98","5,;555'J; _. 51;? _. _: . .. The LNl ovarian cell cultures on board station did not survive in long—term
EE:I"".2,='_~I_~'-- ' ﬁg"" :1 if ""'1‘ culture. However, the cells that ere grown on ISS were found to have produced
' r31}? 3&3; ' ,:"" 22‘"" reduced amounts of cytokines (srnall secreted proteins that mediate and regulate
.__':'_. "" . '-' -«.'-'*.I rE-iﬁﬁl: ' E"" _' '_ immunity, inﬂammation, and hematopoiesis) compared to the ground controls.
; __ ,- . it TIE; . . '.'.__ ' _ .- l"" The proteins were recovered after the RNA had been removed from the cells Via
._* a""; ﬁr.“ '_ -. ﬁltration. The novel proteins, Virnentin and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA)
.3. ‘1 151-- I ""5“; {1 _ proteins, were extracted from ﬁltrate 0f the RNA extraction. Vimentin is the main
L}; , I - .‘ﬂfﬁ "" intermediate ﬁlament protein in embryonic cells. It plays an important role in the
Scanning electron micrograph differential diagnosis of undifferentiated neoplasms (abnormal tissue growths). EMA,
01‘ a human MUllerian ovarian cell which belongs to a family of proteins known as human milk fat globulernembrane
cancer nurtured in microgravity proteins, is considered a broad—spectrurn antibody that is reactive against many types
COHdItIOhS. The three-dmensmnal . . . . . .
structure shown is much closer in of adenocarcrnomas. The data that were obtained from protein extraction indicate
true size and form and natural the presence of the antigenic proteins, Virnentin and EMA, in RNA—stabilized LNl
tumor cells found in cancer cells following long—duration storage at 4°C (39°F). The Virnentin and EMA pro—
patients. teins showed similar proﬁles at different times between the ﬂight and ground
samples. These data provide conﬁrmation that the techniques that were used
can be generalized to other cell lines, and that RNAlater will provide long—term storage of proteins at 4°C (39°F)
for long—duration investigations (Hammond et al. 2005).
The human lymphoid tissue cultures were activated on board ISS but did not survive in longer—term culture.
Early preliminary results, which were in agreement with RWV ground studies (microgravity simulation), indicated
that the human tonsil cell suspensions show impaired immune responses in microgravity and that the extent of im—
pairment depended on the activation state of the cells. Cells in all conditions showed metabolic activity, indicating
that they were alive. Cells that were activated in microgravity did not demonstrate any increases in antibody or cy—
tokine production; however, if the cells were activated prior to exposure to microgravity, they did demonstrate such
responses. These results indicated that microgravity suppresses humoral immune responses in a not dissimilar
fashion to that of Human Immunodeﬁciency Virus (HIV) on Earth, and that this phenomenon may reﬂect the
immune dysfunction that was observed in astronauts during space ﬂights (Fitzgerald et al. 2006).
For CBOSS—FDI, a series of procedures was performed on
Expeditions 8, 10, and 12 to optimize particle mixing and bubble _
removal. A mixing protocol for particles has been found that appears m
to be effective and tirne—efﬁcient, and crew feedback has been very
valuable in these studies. Two bubble—rernoval methods were tested.
Future experiments will help determine their effectiveness, and a
protocol for bubble removal can be created for future tissue culture '
investigations. This investigation is critical for optimizing cell
culture in space and ensuring the success of future investigations. 2“
PUBLICATION(S) .
Hammond DK, Elliott TF, Holubec K, Baker TL, Allen PL, |SSOO8E09941 — A CBOSS-FDI tissue culture
Hammond TG, Love J E. Proteornic Retrieval frorn Nucleic Acid mOdUIe that was photographedicluring
Depleted Space—Flown Human Cells. Gravitational and Space Expedition 8'
Biology. 19(2), Jun 2006.
Hammond DK, Becker J , Elliot TF, Holubec K, Baker TL, Love J E. Antigenic Protein in MicrograVity—Grown
Human Mixed Miillerian Ovarian Turner (LNl) Cells Preserved in a RNA Stabilizing Agent. Gravitational and
Space Biology. 18(2):99—100, 2005.
90

"
"99","COMMERCIAL GENERIC BIOPROCESSING APPARATUS (CGBA),
THREE INVESTIGATIONS
Payload Developer: BioServe Space Technologies, Boulder, Colo., Antibiotic Production in Space
Expeditions 0 (prior to human occupation of 18$), 2, 4
Principal Investigator(s): Timothy G. Hammond, Tulane University Medical Center, New Orleans, La., Kidney Cell
Gene Expression (CGBA—KCGE, Expedition 0 [prior to permanent human occupation of
ISS])
Haig Keshishian, Yale University, New Haven, Conn, Synaptogenesis In Microgravity
(CGBA—SM, Expedition 0 [prior to permanent human occupation of ISS])
Louis Stodlieck and David Klaus, BioServe Space Technologies, Boulder, Colo.,
Antibiotic Production in Space (CGBA—APS, Expeditions 2, 4)
Research Area Cellular Biology and Biotechnology
The CGBA provided automated processing for biological experiments. It can contain up to eight containers that
house the experiments, and each container is programmable and temperature—controlled between 40C (390F) and
370C (99oF). The CGBA was equipped with data, Video, and telemetry electronics to allow telescience remote
operation. Three experiments, which are discussed below, were conducted in the CGBA.
,Im lhilifll-Hj-u ""III-.-
45.?“ _ _ ' _ 1+ . 3 1i“ ISSOO4E11048 — The CGBA
I ' - _FI..__ ""13f:- . {-I M. isothermal containment module (ICM)
-_..-. . 3:62""; .- 5?"" ' ‘15,}- v.3, installed in EXPRESS rack just
lit ' :- ‘I'E..___;__J.. J _, _-. __ I ' above astronaut Dan Bursch’s
.. 4-3 J'ﬁ _ - 1-,, .- . extended left arm; photograph
- {f 3"" . —<:%-' 1 taken during Expedition 4.
. -'. : HLJ ..}.'. ﬁn 1
.3. . 1—11-31. 4. '!""__4 'I.‘ l
I . I - '] ‘13::r"";;—'.""'1: :
f -"" . __ _ﬂa-ﬁ _.-:* ..1.
- LlllT-‘Ejlirii I I - -:: T
' Terr -' *2
KIDNEY CELL GENE EXPRESSION (Hammond)
The primary obj ective 0f CGBA—KCGE [Kidney Cell Gene Expression] was to assess how microgravity alters the
genes that control protein production in kidney cells. The investigator hoped to be able to manipulate the kidney
cells to produce speciﬁc tissues that can be used in models when developing
medicines or in humans. The kidney cell samples were drawn into the test _ ._ 7._. :3
tubes containing a preservative approximately 2 hours after reaching orbit. ' ' ' “*-T-.______
Once the samples were drawn, a messenger RNA (mRNA) preservative -. i: I .r - '_ -_ :11:
was added to the cell cultures for postﬂight analysis. ' 'T-' .- . . "".L_ '
SYNAPTOGENESIS IN MICROGRAVITY (Keshishian) ' .. _ ' . - ""I .. ‘ _
CGBA—Synaptogenesis in MicrograVity (SM) used the CGBA "" ' --“"" ' '
hardware to examine how microgravity affects the neuronal develop—
ment of fruit ﬂies, Drosophila melanogaster. This investigation used D.
melanogaster embryos and larvae to observe how nerves that control move— _
merit navigate through an embryonic central nervous system (CNS) and attach The adult D’OSOP’F’Ia melanogaster _
to muscle ﬁbers Investi ators observed how the s na ses which are the IS a Spec'es Of frwt ﬂy that was used In
' g y p ’ the CGBA—SM investigation.
91

"
"100","junction between two nerve cells where signals are transferred from one nerve to another, developed both during and
after the embryonic stage.
ANTIBIOTIC PRODUCTION IN SPACE (Stodieck and Klaus)
The objective of this experiment was to determine whether secondary rnetab— __.'__'
olite production in microbes was impacted by long—duration space ﬂight. Previous - .
research, which was conducted during short—duration space shuttle ﬂights, identiﬁed ' . 1. 1
signiﬁcant potential for antibiotic production by microorganisms in orbit. The CGBA— 3"" -' -
Antibiotic Production in Space (APS) experiment was the ﬁrst ISS investigation to '3"" '4'"" ' '
test whether long—duration exposure to microgravity stimulated antibiotic production '_ l"" - . 1.
in microorganisms. CGBA—APS spent a total of 72 days in orbit 0n ISS. The experi— F"" "" . . 't ”l.“ 1""""
rnent used Streptomyces plicatus to produce the antibiotic compound actinornycin D.
Actinomycin D is an anti—turnor antibiotic that is used to treat tumors of the bone, _
urogential tract, skeletal muscle, kidney, and testis. IT: _ __-'-
RESULTS ' ' -.—- “H
C GBA-K C GE : Preliminary results indicate that an average of 60% 0f the kidney cell
samples from CGBA—KCGE were drawn into the Vacutainers. Although the sample CBGA ICM With eigh’f
size was smaller, the samples were sufﬁcient for postﬂight analysis. For the synapto— . containers. The ICM
. . . . . . . . . prOVIdes both the computer
genesrs experiment w1th fruit ﬂies, preliminary results indicated that although the CGBA and the thermal control for
hardware operated successfully, there were unexpected temperature drifts above the the samples.
planned temperature in two of the seven containers. While ground tests were completed
for comparison to the in—ﬂight sarnples, ﬁnal data analysis has not been released.
C GBA-APS: This experiment originally ﬂew 0n Expedition 2 but was unable
.- -r"" ' ' - -- _ to function due to technical issues. Its re—ﬂight took place during Expedition 4
'1' _ fig}; where the hardware performed as planned. Samples of antibiotic were taken at
1 ; .513; “ﬁ- 4—day intervals. A total of 48 samples of Streptomyces plicatus were used to
’3: ""4;:45;F_r*— '_ produce the antibiotic compound actinornycin D for a span of 72 days on orbit.
. $%h_ _- The initial production of actinomycin D from on—orbit samples was higher than
{I -., ' -_ -' '3 3 those produced during the ground tests. This was true for samples that were taken
_ H §gﬁ1’1' ' on day 8 (15.6 % increase) and day 12 (28.5% increase) of the investigation.
' Beginning at day 16, the ground experiment produced more antibiotic than the
POStﬂight images §h0W MOBFAS on—orbit experiment. This trend continued for the remainder of the experiment.
[MUItipl.e Orbital Bioreactor W'th IOStrU' The causes for the higher yield during the ﬁrst 12 days of the experiment are
mentatlon and Automated Sampllng, a . . . .
fermentation, cell culture, and tissue still unknown. One theory is that there is a shorter lag phase, which allowed
engineering apparatus] tray with waste ISS samples to reach the growth and production phases sooner than the
bag and samples ViSible (dark SUb- ground samples (Benoit et a1. 2005).
stance indicates actinomvcin D).
Identifying the mechanism that caused increased production of antibiotics while in microgravity and applying
them to production on Earth could be advantageous to the pharmaceutical industry. A method for transferring the
microgravity research results to Earth—based production has not yet been identiﬁed.
PUBLICATION(S)
Klaus D, Benoit M, Bonomo J , Bollich J , Freeman J , Stodieck L, McCllure G, Larn KS. Antibiotic Production
in Space Using an Automated Fed—Bioreactor System. AIAA International Space Station Utilization — 2001 , Cape
Canaveral, F1a., Oct 15—18, 2001.
Benoit MR, Li W, Stodieck LS, Lam KS, Winther CL, Roane TM, Klaus DM. Microbial antibiotic production
aboard the International Space Station. Applied Microbiology Biotechnology. 2006 70 (4) 403—411.
92

"
"101","FUNGAL PATHOGENESIS, TUMORIGENESIS, AND EFFECTS OF HOST IMMUNITY IN SPACE (FIT)
Principal Investigator(s): Sharmila Bhattacharya, Ph.D., NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif.
Expedition 13
Research Area Animal Biology
I The Fungal Pathogenesis, Tumorigenesis, and Effects of Host Immunity
' -_ I in Space (FIT) investigation took place on board the space shuttle during the
. L __ STS—lZl/ULFI .1 mission. FIT addressed a series of human health risks that is
. _' ""1._ associated with space ﬂight using Drosophila melanogaster (fruit ﬂies) and the
1.- ! fungus Beauveria bassiana (B. bassiana fungus occurs in soils and can behave
rfr- ' - as a parasite on a number of insect species). Speciﬁcally, this research examined
h ‘1 'i-l' tumor progression and the compounding effect of radiation, and the progression
'1'. __ f?! ,"" of an immune response in the host in response to a pathogen in space.
1; "" .. -
Jr .
' ﬂ I 4""“ D. melanogaster were used to study the progression of oncogenic (cancerous)
ﬂ 'p .- r 1' j and benign melanotic tumors in sensitized mutant lines that show an increase
1. I __ -""""F in the incidence of tumor formation. Postﬂight samples were analyzed for
I“ “u I changes in blood cell, hematopoietic organ (lymph gland), and fat body (liver)
1"" morphologies. The effect of radiation exposure was factored into this study.
i§ Additionally, fungal pathogens (B. bassiana) were exposed to radiation
Dr. Sharmifa Bhattacharya, checks the and the space environment; space—ﬂown samples were used for postﬂight
health of the fly culture in readiness for infection of D. melanogaster hosts.
the shuttle flight experiment. Image
courtesy of NASA Ames Research
Center.
RESULTS
The ﬂies were returned to Earth on STS—lZl/ULFI . 1; analysis of the ﬂies is ongoing, and results are expected in the
near future.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
93

"
"102","THRESHOLD ACCELERATION FOR GRAVISENSING (GRAVI)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Dominique Driss-Ecole, Ph.D., University Pierre-et-Marie Curie, Paris, France
Expedition: 14, 19, 20

Research Area Plant Biology in MicrograVity
On Earth, plants respond to gravity so that stems grow up and roots grow down; lack of gravity causes plant growth
problems in space. The goal of the Threshold Acceleration for Gravisensing (GraVi) study is to investigate the three
parameters of the gravitropic response (a tendency to grow toward or away from gravity) for better understanding of
the perception of the gravistimulus (reorientation within the gravity ﬁeld) during initial plant growth. The three
parameters are:

0 presentation dose (minimum quantity of stimulation to provoke a signiﬁcant curvature)

o gravisensing threshold acceleration (minimum acceleration that can be perceived)

0 minimum deviation from the gravity vector, which leads to a reorientation of the root
GraVi uses 1enti1 seedling roots that have been subjected to centrifugal acceleration levels from 10—2g to 10—3 g in
microgravity to determine the threshold of acceleration to which the roots respond.
GraVi was divided into two phases to be operated on board the ISS. GraVi-1, which was completed during
Expedition 14, was the observation-only phase of the investigation. The development of roots by the 1enti1 seeds
during acceleration was videotaped by the European Modular Cultivation System (EMCS) for a designated period
of time. The tapes were returned to Earth for analysis. GraVi-2, which is the second phase of the investigation, is
scheduled for future operation on 188 and will allow for automated ﬁxation of the 1enti1 roots after acceleration
is complete. The Videotapes and the preserved roots of GraVi-2 will be returned to Earth for analysis.
RESULTS
The GraVi-1 experiment was launched to the 188 in Dec 2006 and returned in J an 2007. The goal was to understand
the mechanism of gravisensing in roots by determining the threshold acceleration and the presentation of the seedling.
In the ﬁrst run, 1enti1 seedlings were hydrated and grown in the microgravity environment for 15 hr, then were
subjected to small centrifugal accelerations for 13 hr and 40 min (.29 to .99 x 10—22g). In the second run, seedlings
grew for 30.5 hr or 21.5 hr, and were then placed in an accelerating environment for 9 hr (1.2 to 2.0 x 10—2 g). The
orientation and shape of the roots were captured in time series photographs for analysis. The Video tapes from GraVi-
1 are currently undergoing analysis (position of root tip and root curvature) by the investigator team.
The ﬁgure below provides graphic results from the GraVi-1 phase of the experiment. The top row of photographs
documents seedlings that did not experience acceleration. They show the initial root growth away from the seed,
then later growth to straighten out the root. The second row shows the effects of accelerations administered by the
centrifuge. The root curves back in the environment of acceleration. When the position and curvature of the roots vs.
acceleration was analyzed, the threshold acceleration was determined to be 3.8 x 104L g. The microgravity-grown
plants had greater sensitivity to accelerations than plants grown in one g.

A
Time lapse photography of lentil seedling root growth in microgravity without (A) and with
(B) being subjected to centrifugal accelerations.
94

"
"103","PUBLICATIONS(S)
Driss—Ecole D, Legue V, Carnero—Diaz E, Perbal G. Gravisensitivity and automorphogenesis 0f lentil seedling roots
grown on board the International Space Station. Physiologia plantamm. 2008; Epub.

95

"
"104","MICROENCAPSULATION OF ANTl-TUMOR DRUGS (MEPS)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Dennis Morrison, NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston
Expedition 5
Research Area Cellular Biology and Biotechnology
_ H- - _ MEPS is an automated system that is used to produce liquid-ﬁlled
'1'“ micrO-balloons. It works through the use of microcapsules—unique
I. ‘ capsules resembling miniature liquid-ﬁlled balloons the size ofblood
. 11"" cells—that deliver Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-appr0ved
_ '1 anti-cancer drugs by injection into the bloodstream. The microgravity
'l-I environment on ISS was Vital to the development of these capsules,
' - "" enabling the balloon structures to form and encase immiscible liquids
{ . containing the pharmaceutical enables the pharmaceutical and its
outer membrane to form spontaneously.
o MEPS was designed with ﬂexibility in mind. The system can
process a wide range of experiments. For example, it can handle
volumetric proportions of up to six chemical constituents; it can
Micro—balloons containing anti-tumor drugs transfer liquids back and forth, at variable rates, between its siX re-
and small amounts Of radiO-Gontrast 9” were . serVOirs and two main chambers; it can apply different electrical
ereated during MEPS Operatlons' Thls OII’ Wh'Ch ﬁelds to the enclosed experiments and it can be programmed to use
IS traceable by radlograph, allows doctors to follow . ’ .
the microcapsules as they travel to the tumor. The ﬁlters or membranes of different p0r0s1ty between chambers. Elec-
permeable outer skin releases the drug slowly, giv- trical ﬁelds charge the surface of the microcapsules, making it
""‘9 the microcapsule plenty Of time to reach its less recognizable as a foreign invader t0 the immune system.
destination. ThIS slow release prevents artery
damage as the drug travels to its destination. . .
The use of nnerocapsules Wlll beneﬁt the treatment of
several diseases. For example, diabetes patients can use implanted
microcapsules as treatment instead of daily insulin shots. Another Earth application of microcapsules is the delivery of
drugs directly to cancer cells. This method can be used as a substitution for traditional anti-cancer treatments, such
as chemotherapy, that involve large quantities of drugs that affect the entire body. The microcapsules contain a
smaller dose of medication that directly targets tumors; smaller doses and targeted drug delivery help reduce
the unwanted side effects that are currently produced by chemotherapy.
RESULTS
MEPS experiments were conducted during Expedition 5. Eight samples were processed using various methods to
mix dissimilar liquids to form micro—balloons/microcapsules. The recovered micro-balloons were analyzed for size
and drug content. Additionally, studies included the effects of temperature and internal pressure on the size of the
micrO-balloons. Ground-based medical investigations revealed that when using these microcapsules, the growth
of human prostate and lung tumors can be inhibited with only a few local injections. When anti-cancer micro-
capsules are injected following cryosurgery, the combined treatment can completely destroy l- to 2-cm-size
tumors in just 3 weeks.
In addition to the successful demonstration of production of microcapsules and their utilization for drug delivery,
MEPS and follow-on technologies that were developed have been awarded patents.
PUBLICATION(S)
Le Pivert P, Haddad RS, Aller A, Titus K, Doulat J , Renard M, Morrison DR. Ultrasound Guided, Combined
Cryoablation and Microencapsulated 5-Flu0r0uracil, Inhibits Growth of Human Prostate Tumors in Xenogenic
Mouse Model Assessed by Fluorescence Imaging. T echnology in Cancer Research and T reatment. 3(2): 135—42,
2004.
Morrison DR, Haddad RS, Ficht A. Microencapsulation of Drugs: New cancer therapies and improved drug delivery
derived from microgravity research. Proceedings of the 40th Space Congress, Cape Canaveral, Fla. Apr 2003.
96

"
"105","EFFECT OF SPACE FLIGHT ON MICROBIAL GENE EXPRESSION AND VIRULENCE (Microbe)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Cheryl A. Nickerson, Ph.D., Arizona State University, Tempe, Ariz.
Expedition 13

Research Area Microbiology
A human presence in space, whether permanent or temporary, is accompanied by the presence of microbes. The
extent of changes to microorganisms in response to space ﬂight conditions is not completely understood. Because
the length of human space missions is increasing, orbiting humans are increasing at risk of infectious disease events
occurring in ﬂight. Previous studies have indicated that space ﬂight weakens the immune system in both humans and
animals. As astronauts and cosmonauts live for longer periods in a closed environment and use recycled water and air,
there is an increase in the potential for negative impacts of microbial contamination upon the health, safety, and
performance of crewrnembers. Therefore, understanding how the space environment affects microorganisms
and their disease—causing potential is critically important for space ﬂight missions and requires further study.
The Microbe experiment employed three model rnicrobes—Salmonella
lyphimurium, Pseudomonas aemginosa, and Candida albicanS—to examine .. '
the global effects of space ﬂight on microbial gene expression and Virulence ’ I‘ -
attributes. These represent different types of bacteria and yeast. Salmonella _ .
is the most common agent for gastroenteritis in humans. Sanitation proce— ii... .
dures are used to eliminate Salmonella from food sent to orbit, but if some t. ' _f- if k
of the Salmonella were missed, the impact on crew health could be sig— I _‘I ""
niﬂcant. Pseudomonas has been detected as a contaminant in the water ' \
system of spacecraft, and was once a cause of crewrnernber infection dur— _ 'r _
ing the Apollo era. Candida, which is yeast that s present as part of the ' . ::
natural human ﬂora, has the potential for harmful overgrowth if _ _ _ r u - 'l' _ :r,’ 25$"";
microbial communities were to change over time in space. ' "" ""' ' "" ' ‘ J

Researcher Hami Teal, Ph.D. examines
The experiment was ﬂown inside self—contained culture charnbers hagglvﬂiyf‘;tﬂzgfmzseggiﬂtgemnatgf
that can be activated manually by a crewrnember turning a hand crank
to release growth media into the cell chamber. After 24 hours of growth
at ambient temperatures, the growth was stopped by a crewrnember turning the hand crank once more. Upon
landing, one—third of the samples were recovered as soon as possible; the live cells will be used immediately for the
Virulence studies while the remaining stabilized samples were frozen at —80°C (—112°F). Ground analysis focused
on identifying differences in growth rates and patterns, changes in gene expression, and changes in the virulence
of the microbes in space compared to Earth.
By understanding the changes that microorganisms undergo in the space environment, these studies may lead to
the development of vaccines and other novel countermeasures for the treatment and prevention of infectious diseases
occurring during space ﬂight and on Earth.
RESULTS
The Microbe experiment was performed in Sep 2006 during the STS—l 15/ 12A mission to the ISS; it tested three
microbial pathogens; Salmonella lyphimurz’um, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Candida albicans. Initial data from
S. lyphimurz’um showed that a total of 167 genes were expressed differently in ﬂight when compared with ground
controls. The data indicate that bacteria respond to the microgravity environment with widespread alterations of
gene expression (process by which DNA is made into a protein), alterations in microbial m0rph010gy(shape
and form of microbes), and increased Virulence (disease—causing potential).
The changes in gene expression in S. lyphimurium indicated that the qu protein plays an important role in the
response of this organism to the space ﬂight environment. qu is a protein that binds to mRNA, which creates the
blueprint for proteins, to regulate gene expression. Sixty—four genes that are involved in the expression of qu were
altered in ﬂight; this is 32% 0f the total genes that were identiﬁed and that were expressed differently in ﬂight. In
addition, by using a ground—based model of space ﬂight conditions on Earth, it was possible to reproduce the
qu regulation of some of the Salmonella responses that were observed in ﬂight. Collectively, these data
indicate that qu is involved in globally regulating the S. lyphimurium space ﬂight response.

97

"
"106","Scanning electron microscope (SEM) analysis of S. lyphimurium was performed and showed no apparent difference
in the size and shape of individual cells in the ground samples that were compared to the space samples. However,
the space samples did demonstrate clear differences in microbial morphology, as exhibited by the cellular aggrega—
__ _ tion and clumping that was associated with the formation of the extracellular matrix that
""‘ Eh .'T provides structural support to increase survival. Because extracellular matrix formation
.J ‘I -- _ -' can help to increase the survival of bacteria under various conditions, this phenotype
. 1:5,? ';:-....,,_- - 1""?“ indicates a change in bacterial responses that are potentially related to the increased
1' _ J"" ""f ’ 15-: - _. virulence of the ﬂight—grown S. lyphimurium.
Iﬁ lit - .- ' S. lyphimurium from ﬂight and ground cultures were harvested and immediately
.3. ' "" ' used to inoculate rodents 0n the same day as the STS—115/12A landing. Rodents that
were infected with bacteria from the space cultures displayed a decreased time to death
' ll _ ' __ _ and an increased percent mortality at each infection dosage compared with those that
k $.15?! ' 1""— were infected with ground controls. These data indicate increased Virulence for space
{mi -. W L ‘ '—-' ﬂight S. lyphimurium samples. The results of this work were recently published in
F F -f Ihr_ the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (Wilson et a1. 2007). Data
‘ l $.21? for P. aeruginosa and C. albicans samples are currently being analyzed.
8115907274 — Astronaut Heidemarie M. Stefanyshyn—Piper, mission specialist, is shown holding the
microbe group activation pack containing eight fluid-processing apparatuses in the middeck of the Space
Shuttle Atlantis during Expedition 13 and STS—115joint operations.
PUBLICATIONS(S)
Wilson JW, Ott CM, Hoener zu Bentrup K, Ramamurthy R, Quick L, Porwollik S, Cheng P, McClelland M,
Tsaprailise G, Radabaugh T, Hunt A, Fernandez D, Richter E, Shah M, Kilcoyne M, J oshi L, Nelman—Gonzalez M,
Hing S, Parra M, Dumars P, Norwood K, Bober R, DeVich J , Ruggles A, Goulart C, Rupert M, Stodieck L, Stafford
P, Catella L, Schurr M], Buchanan K, Morici L, McCracken J , Allen P, Baker—Coleman C, Hammond T, Vogel J ,
Nelson R, Pierson DL, Stefanyshyn—Piper HM, Nickerson CA. Space ﬂight alters bacterial gene expression and
Virulence and reveals a role for global regulator qu. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2007; 104(41):16299—16304.
98

"
"107","MOLECULAR AND PLANT PHYSIOLOGICAL ANALYSES OF THE MICROGRAVITY EFFECTS ON
MULTIGENERATION STUDIES OF ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA (Multigen)
Principal Investigator(s): Tor—Henning Iversen, Ph.D., Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
Trondheim, Norway
Expeditions 15, 16
Research Area Plant Biology in Microgravity
Multigen tested a novel method of immobilization of biological samples
M. (e.g., plant seeds). A similar immobilization system was tested on the ground
E? with positive results at the Plant BioCentre, NTNU, Trondheim, Norway. The
5:} Multigen experiment proposed to observe how this system Will work in
m microgravity conditions.
[Ii
[1""]- -
._.'-_"". The experiment used a water—soluble polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) membrane to ﬁx
.____, _ _ plant seeds to a surface, taking care that the ﬁxation method does not impact the
__ science (e.g., growth pattern and biocompatibility) and that it is compatible With
the experimental setup (auto—immunization and hardware in general). Experiment
protocols include observation of the behavior of the membrane as it is dissolved,
‘- ﬂ“ ' .- :l r. looking for any movement of the seeds. Multigen tested and compared PVA mem—
Egg; - ' __ ' an"" - branes of varying thicknesses, and also tested the set—up With different types of
"" %‘ seeds, although the main work is done on Arabidopsis thaliana.
Housed in the EMCS, Multigen grows Arabidopsis thaliana to determine the effects of
microgravity on plants. This image was taken a few days after germination of the seeds
during Expedition 15. Multigen is a cooperative investigation with ESA. Image provided
by ESA.
RESULTS
Multigen samples were returned to Earth for analysis by the investigator team in Apr 2008. Final results of the
investigation are pending data analysis of the returned samples.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
11r- .. -:""-1
u ' -|.':|_'
“:""ﬁh- - .- _ ""- I i? '55.!""
IL ' 3T 1* h -
' . ""i 13'
LL; mall... _ . _ 'l ‘g_:'r'li_ “J.
Housed in the EMCS, Multigen grows Arabidopsis thaliana to H i ' _ _. _ -__:n'-:.-j*l___
determine the effects of microgravity on plants. This image was ""' \ﬁ . r_'.I ""
captured on GMT 299 and shows the flower stalk (stem) with two to ... ':I.._ __'""_
three flower bulbs on top and a few stem leaves below. "" ‘ W. :_...-:
Image provided by ESA. -. E}:-
99

"
"108","THE OPTIMIZATION OF ROOT ZONE SUBSTRATES (ORZS) FOR REDUCED-GRAVITY
EXPERIMENTS PROGRAM
Principal Investigat0r(s): Gail Bingham, Ph.D., Utah State University, Space Dynamics Laboratory,
North Logan, Utah
Expeditions 14—16, 18

Research Area Plant Biology in MicrograVity
Many long—term space ﬂight life—support scenarios assume the use of plants to provide food supplies for crew—
members, as well as to recycle waste products. To date, Brassica rapa (ﬁeld mustard plant), T riticum aestivum
(super dwarf Wheat), and four species of salad plants have grown in microgravity throughout their useful life cycles,
With T riticum and Brassica producing Viable seeds in nearly normal amounts and quality. These successes came at
the end of nearly a decade of repeated efforts using the same equipment to arrive at optimal settings for substrate
moisture and oxygen.
Optimization of Root Zone Substrates (ORZS) for Reduced—Gravity Experiments is .
managed at the Space Dynamics Laboratory (SDL) as part of the laboratory’s Space
Plant Technology Program, and was developed to provide direct measurements and
models for plant rooting media that Will be used in future advanced life support
(ALS) plant growth experiments. The goal of this program is to develop and
optimize hardware and procedures to allow optimal plant growth to occur in I
microgravity for future space exploration beyond LEO. 3'
The key to this effort is validating wet substrate oxygen diffusion calculations in - f
microgravity. While the measurements appear simple and well studied in agricultural ﬂ
soils on Earth, collecting repeatable results at high—Water contents in the coarse—textured \ ' - ’
growth media that are required for microgravity requires a modiﬁed approach, due to ' .
the dominance of capillary rise in microgravity and the greater root zone density of __ J . .
plants that are grown in space. Collecting accurate data under both one—g and micro— '-
graVity conditions and correctly interpreting these data at reasonable cost requires ISSO16E027955 — Astronaut
careful management and organization, and expert technical microgravity experience. Peggy Whitson, Expedition 16
Only a few microgravity substrate water—management experiments have been commander, Ch.eCk.S the progress

. . . . of plants growmg In the RUSSIan
conducted. ORZS Will be the ﬁrst experiment to directly measure oxygenation Lada greenhouse in the Zvezda
parameters in wet substrates. service module of the ISS.
ORZS data collection Will use the following two existing ﬂight programs to meet experiment requirements:

0 Institute of Biomedical Problems’ (IBMP’s) (Moscow, Russia) “Growth and Development of Higher
Plants through Multiple Generations” program authority, using the “Substrate Technology Development
Section”

0 The Lada Space Growth Chamber, Which was developed jointly by SDL and IBMP

SDL has a cooperative agreement With IBMP to conduct a joint experimental effort to satisfy the ORZS scientiﬁc
and modeling requirements.
RESULTS
Initial samples from the ORZS investigation have been returned to Earth and are currently undergoing analysis
by the investigator team. Data from the ﬂight system of gas diffusion cells With different substrates Will be compared
With results from similar ground control gas diffusion cells to describe gas diffusion in microgravity (J ones, et a1.
2005)
PUBLICATION(S)
J ones SB, Heinse R, Bingham GE, Or D. Modeling and Design of Optimal Growth Media from Plant—Based Gas
and Liquid Fluxes, 2005 , SAE International 2005—01—2949.

1 00

"
"109","PHOTOSYNTHESIS EXPERIMENT AND SYSTEM TESTING AND OPERATION (PESTO)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Gary Stutte, Dynarnac Corporation, NASA Kennedy Space Center, Fla.
Expedition 4
Research Area Plant Biology in Microgravity
-. '1 ‘- 153' "" ""' , The PESTO investigation, which was conducted in concert with
1:. ' '- '!' technology veriﬁcation for the BPS hardware, measured the canopy
.1 l1| ﬂ .. photosynthesis (the production of oxygen and carbohydrates frorn C02 and
t1 ' ""-‘JJ- _ ' water in the environment) of T riticum aestivum (super dwarf wheat). The
t. r. .- wheat was grown under high light and controlled C02 conditions in micro—
'- -- gravity. The investigation also measured the metabolic effects on the pho—
. tosynthetic apparatus to quantify the effects on metabolism and to model
the impact of microgravity on biological approaches to atmospheric
regeneration.
Video screen ShOt .Of Tritieum aestivum To test the hypothesis that the carbon exchange rates would be the same
20 days after plantmg InSIde the BPS on . . . . . .
station during Expedition 4_ 1n mlcrograV1ty as on Earth, 1nvest1gat0rs measured and character1zed the
C02 and light response curves for a wheat photosynthetic canopy that was
grown in microgravity. Data came from various sources: gas samples that were taken from the closed atmosphere in—
side the chambers; liquid samples that were taken through ports in the chambers; plant tissue samples that were extracted
by the crew during different points in the growth cycle; and, ﬁnally, plant tissue that was extracted from the live plants
that were returned to Earth inside the BPS. The investigators analyzed the plant tissue postﬂight for primary photo—
synthesis parameters, such as electron transport, carbohydrate partitioning, and photosystem (the biochemical
pathway for photosynthesis). Measurements were taken over a range of relative humidity conditions to dis—
cover whether atmospheric vapor pressure deﬁcits affect gas exchange in microgravity.
RESULTS
During ISS Expedition 4, PESTO grew 32 plants for 73 days inside the plant growth chambers of BPS. Following
return to Earth, these plants were compared to ground controls that were grown in BPS plant growth chambers on
Earth.
11 _ The PESTO investigation supported research that
1""-.‘ M+_ : _ resulted in a more complete picture of microgravity
l1 1:9: , inﬂuences on photosynthesis, including chloroplast
f""! - - - "" development, changes in gene expression, and resulting
r - 1 ;~. _' -Il gas exchange functions, partitioning, and carbohydrate
._l""‘ _ f I 1i a metabolism. C02 and light response curves allowed
.1__ l 5H H .' researchers to establish whether canopy photosynthetic
:. . If. 5‘; '1 - 1! responses were affected by space conditions. This is
_ ""-.'II :1_ 1:"" *1 {i'- ' 1 ' noteworthy since plants can be used to regenerate the
I - '1 I: '. J1 : P j atmosphere in space conditions through removal of C02
_ 5"" lg! i '! ""arjﬂ .' f... and production of oxygen. In addition, the tests that eval—
1' I"" ' I.I-lll'. Huh“ I] uated movement of water Via transpiration are important
-' _r ' I - _ _ '- I —— since they are indicative of the stornatal responses that
ISSOO4E10138 — Close-up view of apogee wheat plants with regulate photosynthesis. Further, the impact Of micro—
a scale as backdrop to exhibit the development of the plants gravity on transpiration was signiﬁcant since plants can
grown as part of the PESTO experiment on ISS Expedition 4. be used to purify water under space ﬂight conditions.
These studies involving gas exchange at elevated C02
concentrations increased our understanding of the biological impacts of increasing levels of atmospheric C02 0n
Earth—based ecosystems. Furthermore, an understanding of plant responses under a range of C02 and light condi—
tions has potential beneﬁts to commercially controlled environment agriculture industries. Additional studies
examined physiological changes in chloroplasts and evidence for changes in gene expression.
The growth and development of the dwarf wheat plants on the space station was similar to the growth and
development of plants on Earth. Analysis of the plants indicated that the microgravity—grown plants were 10%
1 O1

"
"110","taller than plants grown on Earth, although the growth rate of dwarf wheat leaves was very similar to the plants that
were grown on Earth. The near-real-time Video data that were provided by BPS allowed for validation of the growth
data in microgravity when compared to the controls. Design applications can be made to the BPS to allow for suc-
cessful plant production on 188 and future long-duration missions to the moon and Mars (Stutte et al. 2003).
To effectively farm in space, multiple redundant plant growth chambers will be needed to acquire the maximum
yield of food, oxygen, and water. PESTO evaluated the transpiration (water) and photosynthesis (oxygen) processes
of the dwarf wheat plant in microgravity and found that microgravity did not affect either the transpiration or the
photosynthesis processes of the plants (Monje et al. 2005).
When environmental controls such as temperature, relative humidity, C02, and water are effectively maintained,
microgravity does not affect canopy growth of dwarf wheat plants. Slight differences in photosystem I (photosyn-
thesis in which light of up to 700 nm is absorbed and reduced to create energy) and photosystem II (photosynthesis
in which light of up to 680 nm is absorbed and its energy is used to split water molecules, giving rise to oxygen)
were noted and are being evaluated further (Stutte et al. 2005).
Additional studies on leaf samples examined microgravity effects on leaf morphology, cell structure, cell function,
and gene expression (Stutte et al. 2006). Some changes in morphology were seen in leaf cells and cell walls—leaves
had thinner cross sections, chloroplasts were more ovoid, and cells were packed more densely. However, no changes
were observed in gene expression or cell function, and levels of starch, soluble sugars, and lignins in the ﬂight
samples were statistically indistinguishable from the ground control samples. These results suggest that the
physiological changes that were observed in the leaf cells did not affect the metabolic functions.
When conducting biological studies, it is important to maintain the integrity of the samples. The standard method
to preserve samples is quick freezing at low temperatures (—800C (—1 120F) and below), but strict temperature con-
trol of samples on station is not always uniform or possible. Therefore a preservative is needed that will maintain the
integrity of biological samples before cooling. RNAlater was used to preserve some of the PESTO samples on station.
The Viability of the samples that were preserved with RNAlater was greater than that of the samples that were preserved
using formalin. To carry out long-term studies aboard 188, a ﬁxative such as RNAlater is needed to maintain the
integrity of samples at the varying temperatures that are experienced in microgravity (Paul et al. 2005).
PUBLICATION(S)
Monje O, Stutte GW, Goins GD, Porterﬁeld DM, Binghani GE. Farming in Space: Environmental and Biochemical
Concerns. Advances in Space Research. 31:151—167, 2003.
Monje O, Stutte G, Chapman D. Microgravity does not alter plant stand gas exchange of wheat at moderate light
levels and saturating C02 concentration. Planta. Online, Jun 2005.
Paul A, LeVine HG, McLamb W, Norwood KL, Reed D, Stutte GW, Wells HW, Ferl RJ. Plant molecular biology in
the space station era: Utilization of KSC ﬁxation tubes with RNAlater. Acta Astronautica. 56:623—628, 2005.
Stutte GW, Monje 0, Anderson S. Wheat (Triticum Aesativuni L. CV. USU Apogee) Growth Onboard the
International Space Station (188): Germination and Early Development. Proceedings of the Plant Growth
Regulation Society ofAmerica. 30:66—71, 2003.
Stutte GW, Monje O, Goins GD, Tripathy BC. Microgravity effects on thylakoid, single leaf, and whole canopy
photosynthesis 0n dwarf wheat. Planta. 1—1 1, 2005 .
Stutte GW, Monje O, Hatﬁeld RD, Paul A-L, Ferl RJ, Simone CG. MicrograVity effects on leaf morphology, cell
structure, carbon metabolism and mRNA expression of dwarf wheat. Planta. 224: 103 8—1049, 2006.

1 02

"
"111","PLANT GENERIC BIOPROCESSING APPARATUS (PGBA)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Gerard Heyenga, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif.
Expedition 5
Research Area Plant Biology in Microgravity
The PGBA is used to grow and monitor plants in microgravity experiments. PGBA is a self—contained plant growth
chamber that provides preset 0r remotely controlled temperature, humidity, nutrient delivery, and light. The PGBA
venting system also supplies the plants with ambient air and controls ethylene buildup.
The obj ective during Expedition 5 was to grow two crops ofAmbidopSiS thaliana (thale cress). The ﬁrst crop was to
be harvested when it reached maturity and placed into cold storage. The second crop was to be started at the harvest
of the ﬁrst crop and returned to Earth while it was still growing. Scientiﬁc objectives were focused on understanding
lignin production.
RESULTS
__ The returned plant material did not develop in a normal manner,
' -' _ and the primary scientiﬁc obj ectives were not met. The study did,
. 5 however, help to identify the need for greater regulation of air quality
- - .. within a PGC to ensure uniform plant growth. Although no results will
"" be published from this ISS activity, lessons learned from this study
-_ ' are being applied to the development of subsequent plant growth
' ‘ investigations and improved space ﬂight plant chamber design
(Heyenga et al. 2005).
- . - PUBLICATION(S)
.' . 1 Heyenga G, Stodieck L, Hoehn A, Kliss M, Blackford C.
Approaches in the Design of a Space Plant Cultivation Facility for
' . Arabidopsis thaliana. 34th International Conference on Environmental
' _ ' - ' Systems (ICES), Jul 2004, Colorado Springs, Colo., SAE—paper n0.
' .. ' : 2004—01—2459, 2004. (New designs inﬂuenced by lessons learned)
i Heyenga G, Kliss M, Blackford C. The Performance of a Miniature
_.' _ Plant Cultivation System Designed for Space Flight Application. 35th
' ' International Conference on Environmental Systems, Rome, Italy,
' _ _ _ SAE 2005—01—2844, 2005. (New designs inﬂuenced by lessons
. . ' '_ — 5""“: - _-'.. . learned)
- II. . l
#1 F"" u:-
- '. ' _.. . 2:
-Arabidopsis thaliana (Brassica family) plants grown
under controlled conditions in a plant cultivation module in
the Bioserve Laboratories.
103

"
"112","PASSIVE OBSERVATORIES FOR EXPERIMENTAL MICROBIAL SYSTEMS (POEMS)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Michael Roberts, Ph.D., Dynamic Corporation, Cape Canaveral, Fla.
Expeditions: 13, 14
Research Area Microbiology
The Passive Observatories for Experimental Microbial Systems (POEMS) investigation was designed to demonstrate a
passive system for microbial cultivation in the microgravity environment. The secondary objective of POEMS was
to observe the generation and maintenance of genetic variation within microbial populations in microgravity.
POEMS supported experiments that determined the
growth, ecology, and performance of diverse assemblages
of microorganisms in the microgravity environment. These
studies of microorganisms are required to maintain human __
health and bioregenerative function in support of NASA EX- - ' FJ- I
ploration systems requiring ALS. For this experiment, replicate ""'1... _=_=- i: .-
cultures were inoculated 0n the ground and launched on board f l _]
the space shuttle. Half of the cultures were returned at the "" _
close of the shuttle mission; the remaining cultures were I. _ _ h - L'
transferred to the ISS where they were preserved (frozen) If H .
at successive tirne—points over the course of 6 months. The } ‘ 1' E
cultures were returned to Earth and compared to ground con— -"".' J I I
tmls t0 deiermme W mlcmgramy affeCteq the physmlogy |SSO14EO5120 — Astronaut Michael E. Lopez-Alegria,
and genetic comp0s1t10n Of the microorganisms. Expedition 14 commander and ISS science officer,
prepares to work with a POEMS sample container
Bacillus subtilis was introduced by a small liquid in the Destiny laboratory mOdUIE-
inoculum into the void volume of an Opti—cell during
preﬂight integration, thereby providing a uniform inoculation front to the serni—solid rnedia. Bacterial growth
proceeded in a planar fashion down the long axis of the culture chamber, thereby providing a physically traceable
chronology of bacterial growth during ﬂight. As bacteria propagated through the media, they encountered genomic
DNA from related Bacillus species that have been marked with an antibiotic resistance gene. Sorne cells have the capa—
bility to bind, transport, and recombine the DNA Via transformation. By assirnilating the resistance marker, these
transforrnants naturally obtain a competitive advantage in the selective medium. The rate and extent of genetic
transformation during growth in ﬂight is compared to ground controls. Genetic and physiological screening of
isolates identiﬁes changes during ﬂight in vegetative cells. If cells form spores during ﬂight due to nutrient
exhaustion or other environmental stresses, the spores are isolated for analysis. Post—ﬂight analyses seek to
understand the effects of space ﬂight on DNA repair mechanisms, the ability to assimilate exogenous DNA,
and the ecology of a diversifying assemblage of bacteria cells in the space ﬂight environment.
. ma -.1 1., RESULTS
- _’ ”‘1 ' -"":-""_h___ _ . T en POEMS canisters were launched on STS—121 in a rniddeck locker (ambient
.- ti; :7"" “1.x"" environment). As a passive, sortie experiment, ﬁve canisters were returned on the
_Ti1 . '- f' sarne shuttle ﬂight and represent a data point for approximately 11 to 12 days of eX—
'. ' t 1 ”1"" posure to space ﬂight. The remaining canisters were transferred to an ambient location
1.. i _ ..r ' 0n ISS. Of these, three canisters were successively transferred into the Minus Eighty
. h“- ﬁg Degree Laboratory Freezer for ISS (MELFI) freezer and maintained at —68°C (—9OOF)
‘ "" E. or colder. Two of the frozen canisters returned home on STS—115, and the third cani—
"" - ' ster, as well as one of the ambient canisters, returned on STS—116.
. . ' . T1; POEMS performed as expected, and data (temperature, thermal offsets and humidity)
‘ ’1. IV” have been recovered from data—loggers. Bacterial cells and genetic transforrnants were
' 15'? recovered in all returned canisters. Fixed gases and volatile organic compound
"" analyses of canister headspace are under way.
|SSO14EO5124 — Expedition 14 commander and NASA science officer, Astronaut Michael E. Lopez-Alegria, is shown
inserting a sample container for the POEMS payload in the MELFI in the Destiny laboratory of the ISS. MELFI is a low-
temperature freezer facility with nominal operating temperatures of —80°C (—1123F), —26°C (—15°F), and 4°C (39°F) that will
preserve experiment materials over long periods.
1 O4

"
"113","The investigation team continues to isolate and characterize rifampicin-resistant bacteria and to enumerate
auxotroph mutants (lysine methionine tryptophan) that ere recovered from sortie mission canisters (ﬁve canisters)
and three canisters from the ISS mission that were returned on STS-115. Viable cell and spore counts are completed;
total direct counts and genetic characterization of transformants is ongoing. Transformation efﬁciency was lower
than expected in both ﬂight and ground experiments, but rates were sufﬁcient to yield >102 rpoB transformants.
Data analysis Will continue for 6 months after recovery of all POEMS canisters from 188.
Trends in early analyses suggest that microbe population densities and transformation rates may be slightly
elevated in ﬂight samples compared to ground controls, but the preliminary conclusion is that the effects of the
space environment on the rate of horizontal gene transfer are not statistically signiﬁcant for Bacillus subtilis. Full
data analysis is pending.
PUBLICATIONS(S)
Roberts MS, Reed DW, Rodriguez II. 2005. Passive Observatories for Experimental Microbial Systems
(POEMS): Microbes Return to Flight. 35th Annual International Conference of Environmental Systems (ICES).
SAE OSICES-214.

1 O5

"
"114","STREPTOCOCCUS PNEUMONIAE EXPRESSION OF GENES IN SPACE (SPEGIS)
Principal Investigat0r(s): David W. Niesel, Ph.D., University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Texas

Expedition 15
Research Area Microbiology
The Streptococcus pneumoniae Expression of Genes in Space (SPEGIS) experiment investigated S. pneumoniae
gene expression and protein production in the space environment. S. pneumoniae is an important human pathogen
(disease causing) and the leading cause of bacterial pneumonia (inﬂammation of the lungs with congestion), menin-
gitis (inﬂammation of the membrane covering the brain and spinal cord), and otitis media (ear infection). Importantly,
this pathogen has been isolated previously from the crew preﬂight, and related bacteria are found in the spacecraft
environment. Experiments were performed to identify and characterize S. pneumoniae genes and proteins, which
are differentially expressed in response to the space environment, and compare microgravity-induced genes and
proteins to those expressed during postﬂight rodent infection.
S. pneumoniae is a respiratory microbe that is normally found in the upper respiratory tract of approximately
40% 0f the healthy human population. The identiﬁcation of speciﬁc S. pneumoniae Virulence factors and cellular
and molecular processes may aid scientists in furthering the understanding of how this bacteria causes infection.
These data may aid in the design and development of new antimicrobial drugs. This experimental approach will
result in new information about a signiﬁcant human pathogen, add to our knowledge about the S. pneumoniae
pathogenic mechanism, and provide basic information on the bacterial model system of gene and protein
expression in the space environment.
RESULTS
SPEGIS is a recently completed investigation that is undergoing data analysis; ﬁnal results are pending.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.

1 O6

"
"115","STELSYS LIVER CELL FUNCTION RESEARCH (StelSys)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Albert Li, StelSys LLC, Baltimore, Md.
Expedition 5

Research Area Cellular Biology and Biotechnology
The liver ﬁlters potentially harmful substances from the blood and breaks these substances down into water-soluble
forms that can be washed from the body. The liver is, therefore, a difﬁcult organ to treat because medications can be
broken down and removed before they have an opportunity to provide effective treatment. The purpose of this
experiment was to allow the investigator to observe how human liver cells react to the presence of drugs in
microgravity, and to compare these results to a control experiment that was conducted on the ground.
Human liver cells were launched inside a caddy that was held at freezing temperatures within a Dewar. The
experiments were conducted in the CBOSS, including the biotechnology specimen temperature controller (B STC),
the gas supply module, and syringes. Individual cell cultures were grown in the temperature-controlled environment
of the BSTC. When the experiments were complete, they were stored in the ARCTIC freezer until the end of the
Expedition.
RESULTS
The samples that were returned from space were analyzed by specialized mass _
spectrometry equipment to determine the amount of drug metabolites that were I; I E:
formed by the liver cells from the drug substances added. Overall this analysis j t ' l .
showed that the rate of metabolism by the liver cells in space was lower than C. ,5: ill .' .
that of the liver cells that were maintained under similar conditions on Earth. r% ttﬁﬂlﬂ
This was true for all of the drug substances tested as well as for cells from . i: u.
three different liver donors. These results indicate that microgravity may I: i g _ {J
well retard the rate of drug metabolism in the human liver, although the k“ I 15% . . li.
mechanism for this effect is yet unknown. 3!. E. E; I' L

a. II- .
Returned samples were also analyzed by gene array to determine whether Human liver CGIIS at the completion
genetic expression differed for cells in microgravity. Differences were found, Of 8. ground-control .experifnef‘t- A
. . . staln has been applled to Indicate
including 9,200 of 13,000 genes that had at least two—fold greater express10r1 the live vs. dead (blue—
in space as compared to Earth and 9,800 genes that had decreased expression colored) cells_
in space. This large body of data is being analyzed for clues as to how liver cell
function changes in speciﬁc ways in the microgravity environment of space.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.

1 07

"
"116","ANALYSIS OF A NOVEL SENSORY MECHANISM IN ROOT PHOTOTROPISM (Tropi)
Principal Investigator(s): J ohn Kiss, Ph.D., Miami University, Oxford, Ohio
Expedition 14
Research Area Plant Biology in MicrograVity
Tropi consists of dryArabidopSiS thaliana (thale cress)
'3 I .i I r ' seeds that are stored in small seed cassettes. A. thaliana is
:- - ‘ ' _ _ a rapidly growing, ﬂowering plant in the mustard family. The
- ._ ...— 1:. IL. ' -.+- -: ' H ' seed cassettes were contained inside the EMCS. The seeds were
1'! . i installed into the EMCS dry and at ambient temperature until
I: . _ hydrated by an automated system of the EMCS. At speciﬁed
_. _ I r. ‘ #- times during the experiment, the plants were stimulated by dif—
""' ‘ '- ferent light spectrurns and different gravity gradients. The only
1 J H l“ : 3"" E operations that were required by the crew were to replace Video
. '._ _ . tapes and harvest the plants when they were grown. Once the
"" ‘ s 1 ""' 1'1 '- I .' 5'. I f1... ' plants were harvested, they were stored in the MELFI until
1'” l1 - ' ‘7 W '1' - their return to Earth (STS—l 16 and STS—117). Part of the eX—
. "" ‘ ' -'—""'— a 1 periment relies on a biochemical analysis of the returned
ISSO14E10652 — View of the Tropi seedling cassette for plants, but the investigators also gathered data from Video—
the EMCS experiment.containerl(lEC) i“ the Destiny taped images of the plants, watching their roots as they
laboratory module during Expedition 14. developed in the EMCS.
RESULTS
Preliminary analysis of the Tropi samples that were returned on STS—l 16 in Dec 2006 resulted in little yield of
total RNA, which is responsible for the transfer of information from DNA. However, samples that were returned on
STS—l 17 in Jun 2007 resulted in good—quality RNA. For the samples that were returned on STS—117, a 3—minute re—
quirement was established: the seedlings in the Tropi cassettes would be transferred from MELFI to the NASA
J ohnson Space Center cold bag within 3 minutes on the 188. This new requirement resulted in the success of
the cold transfer procedures and a successful yield of RNA.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
108

"
"117","YEAST-GROUP ACTIVATION PACKS (Yeast-GAP)
Principal Investigator(s): Cheryl A. Nickerson, Arizona State University, Tempe, Ariz.
Expedition 8, 13
Research Area Microbiology
This experiment was designed to study how individual genes respond to microgravity conditions. To achieve this,
scientists studied yeast cells—eukaryotic cells, or cells that contain a distinct nucleus bound by a cell membrane.
Mammalian cells have a similar eukaryotic structure, and the results of this experiment could aid in understanding
more complex mammalian cell response to microgravity. Yeast cells are far simpler than mammalian cells because
they have a well—characterized, Inuch—smaller genome. This makes it easier for scientists to study how microgravity
alters the makeup of the cells and their potential function.
Yeast is an ideal candidate for such a study because it is hardy enough to resist the rigors of ﬂight, requires
no refrigeration, and poses little risk to ISS crewmembers. The experiment used genetically engineered cells of
brewer’s yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and a special cell growth chamber called a GAP, which was developed
by BioServe Space Technologies. The goal is to identify the precise genes of yeast that are affected by growth in
microgravity to understand differences in the growth of yeast cells in space and on Earth.
RESULTS
Samples were returned on space shuttle ﬂight STS—114/LF1 in Aug 2005. Samples also ﬂew as a sortie mission on
STS—l 15 and returned in Sep 2006. Further analysis is ongoing.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
|88008E14397 — ISS science
officer Mike Foale is holding the GAP
-1'"" for the Yeast-GAP experiment during
J ' 'ﬂ:—-__._._, "" _""""""'--—.._ . Expedition 8.
. ' ﬁq.-____ - —__.-*:;-.-
.f . .- _—-—~.-
* ha ' . : illI. ‘-
f I II 113'
“Iraq '
i I
l'
'I.
1 09

"
"118","H UMAN RESEARCH AND COUNTERMEASURE
DEVELOPMENT FOR EXPLORATION

[SS is being used to study the risks to human health that are inherent in space exploration. Many
research investigations address the mechanisms of the risks—the relationship to the microgravity
and radiation environments—ana’ other aspects ofliving in space, including nutrition, sleep, and
interpersonal relationships. Other experiments are used to develop and test countermeasures to
reduce these risks. Results from this body 0freseareh are critical enablers for missions to the
lunar surface ana’future Mars exploration missions.
The overarching strategy that guides the ISS—basea’ Human Research experimentsfoeuses
0n ﬁlling in speciﬁc knowledge gaps and testingproposea’ countermeasures to determine their
eﬁ’eetiveness and evaluate their operational feasibility for mitigating known human health
problems in space.
Over the ﬁrst 15 Expeditions, 32 research investigations were initiated in the discipline ofHuman
Research and Countermeasure Development for Exploration. T hese studies are complemented by
ground—basea’ studies. Most investigations require large numbers ofsubjeets; many of the early
experiments are ongoing. Vettea’ results will continue to grow over the coming years.
T hese experimentsfall into sub-a’iseiplines that address speciﬁc element ofhuman health in
space. The table provides a breakdown of the Human Research and Countermeasure Development
experiments by sub-a’iseipline.

Physmloglcal Studies: Bone and Muscle
Astronauts experience signiﬁeantphysiologieal eﬁ’eets on bone and muscle after spending
months in a microgravity environment. T 0 date, the primary countermeasure to loss 0fb0ne and
muscle while on space station has been exercise. Exercise equipment that was deployed an [SS is
more mature and the prescribed exercise regimens are more rigorous than for any previous US.
space missions. Early station studies have evaluated the eﬁ’eets Oflong-a’uration space ﬂight on
bone and muscle in the context 0fthese exercise protocols. The transit to Mars from Earth will
be equivalent in duration to the typical 6-month space station Expedition. This allows us to
draw insight into the health status that can be expected when a crew lands on Mars.

1 1 O

"
"119","Physmloglcal Studies: Cardiovascular and
Resplra tory Systems
When astronauts move between diﬁ’erent gravity environments, a number of acute physiological
responses in their cardiovascular and respiratory systems can aﬂeet their overall health ana’per—
formanee. Studies of the process of adapting to changes in gravity are important for mission success
for future exploration missions aS astronauts may transition from Earth to interplanetary transit,
to the moon or Mars, and back. Otherphysiological changes in mierogravity—from changes in
immunefunetiori, pharmacology, and clinical diagnostic measureS—are also key areas of study.
In tegra ted Physmloglcal Studies: Immune,
Neurological, and Vestlb ular Systems
The complex, integrated changes that are observed in astronautphysiology result in other
changes in astronaut health, including diminished immune systems, new visual-neural connec-
tions, and more. Several investigations are designed to document the more complex cause-eﬁ’eet
relationships in overall crew health during long—a’uratiori tours on the ISS.

Behawor and Performance Studies
Long-a’aration Space missions, by their very nature, exert many pressures on groups and
individuals that could compromise mission success. Studies of the behavior of individuals and
teams under the conditions of Space ﬂight are important for determining the best team
composition and interaction models for future Exploration missions.

Radla tlon Studies
Cosmic radiation iS one of the most critical risks to human health in Space ﬂight. Once we venture
beyond the protective Shielding of the Earth ’S atmosphere, we are exposed to a wider Spectrum of
radiation that does not normally threaten us. Exposure to radiationfoana’ in LEO and beyond can
cause cataracts and cancer, damage the reproductive organs and nervous system, and cause
genetic damage.
1 1 1

"
"120","Human Research and Countermeasure Development Experiments by Sub-discipline
Biological Investigation)
Development)
Investigation)
Spacecraft Environment)
Duration space Flight)
112

"
"121","ADVANCED DIAGNOSTIC ULTRASOUND IN MICROGRAVITY (ADUM)
Principal Investigator(s): Scott A. Dulchavsky, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, Mich.
Expeditions 8—11
Research Area Immune System and Integrated Studies
- _' t-'""'=""T-' Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Microgravity (ADUM)
‘._'.,.. -- - tests the accuracy of using ultrasound technology in the novel
5 - ' ' "" l ._....._..._.......,......_.,...._._..... clinical situation of space ﬂight. This investigation includes
.. - - I 3:111:7-LIF71-ﬂrﬂn assessing health problems in the eyes and bones, as well as
. -- ﬂeiﬂ I. . sinus infections and abdominal injuries. ADUM further tests
a? 'i' the feasibility of using an in—ﬂight ultrasound to monitor bone
__ '_ -' '3"": “~13“: . _‘ density during long—duration space ﬂights. Another objective
"" *4— - h- of the experiment is determining how well nonmedical crew—
'r __f""_""‘ members can learn to use an ultrasound device with CD—ROM
I training manuals and remote guidance from Earth. The intent
' of the ADUM investigation is to develop methods by which
I I an individual who is untrained in medicine can use an ultra—
E ,_. ﬂ , I: sound machine with remote diagnostician assistance to
I I evaluate a vast array of medical problems.
Screen shot of the ADUM on-board proficiency enhancer
that is used to teach crewmembers how to conduct an . . .
ultrasound scan Of a new organ or system. Expedition crews used the ISS HRF ultrasound machine
and four scan sets: the cardio/thoracic scan, which focuses on
the heart but also can scan the lungs; the abdominal/retroperitoneal scan, which focuses on the organs of the abdomen,
including the liver, spleen, kidneys, and bladder; the dental scan, which can image the mouth, teeth, gums, facial bones
and sinuses, and eyes; and the bone scan, which images bones and characterizes bone loss during ﬂight. In addition to
the ultrasound machine and probes, another key component of ADUM on station is the on—board proﬁciency enhancer
(OPE)—a software application that is used to train crewmembers on the methods that are employed for each scan.
RESULTS
The ISS crews, which began their work with ADUM on Expedition 8 and completed it during Expedition 11,
have demonstrated that minimal training along with audio guidance from a certiﬁed sonographer can produce
ultrasound imagery of diagnostic quality. The ISS crewmembers, acting as operators and subj ects, have completed
comprehensive scans of the cardiothoracic and abdominal organs as well as limited scans of the dental, sinus, and
eye structures. They also have completed multiple musculoskeletal exams, including a detailed exam of the shoulder
muscles. To date, analyses of ultrasound Video downlinked to ground teams at the NASA J ohnson Space Center
have yielded excellent results that are beginning to appear in the scientiﬁc literature.
Ultrasound technology is now deployed in many trauma centers around the world as a ﬁrst—line diagnostic pro—
cedure; results have been accurate even when performed by non—radiologists. The use of ultrasound technology as a
diagnostic tool on the ISS required an OPE program, Visual cue cards, procedures, and direction from ground—based
trained radiological personnel. The Expedition 8 crew was able to capture high—ﬁdelity images of the thoracic, cardiac,
and vascular systems with minimally trained nonmedical personnel. This investigation
has laid the groundwork for using ultrasound as a diagnostic tool in microgravity and ""H
remote locations on Earth when a physician is not readily available. A scientiﬁc paper ,'
. . . . . I
discussmg these results was submitted by the crewmembers directly from orbit (Foale ""EE'IEJ }'
et al. 2005). .'._- .._.| .
Ultrasound images of the shoulder during Expedition 9 showed that ultrasound that “Elf. Eu ‘_ ""-. l: '
was performed by crewmembers obtained diagnostic—quality imagery for evaluation of -- IF"" .. '
shoulder integrity. An application of this technology would be if a crewmember were ' ._
to injure his/her shoulder during a strenuous EVA (or spacewalk), these techniques "" '
would allow evaluation and diagnosis of possible injuries (Fincke et al. 2005). _
|SSO1OE1877O — ISS commander and science officer Leroy Chiao .-"" F 3 .E- 1:25:
performs an ADUM scan on the eye of flight engineer Salizhan Sharipov q, r i - ""_""-'-a,_.
during ISS Expedition 10. 1"""". i ._- .'=:"" i”
1 13

"
"122","Following a traumatic event to the head or face, eye examination is a very important component of the physical
examination. This examination may be difﬁcult due to signiﬁcant orbital 0r facial swelling. The Expedition 10 crew
used ultrasound technology to examine the eye through a closed eyelid. This examination could determine a number
of problems with the eye that are signs of other, more signiﬁcant trauma to the head (Chiao et a1. 2005).
In addition to the importance of establishing ultrasound techniques for examination and diagnosis on 188, this
study is establishing ultrasound as a key tool for clinical medicine on future vehicles, the moon, and, eventually,
Mars. The success of ADUM may also lead to additional applications of ultrasound on Earth. The remote guidance
paradigm can be adapted on Earth for patients in rural/remote areas, disaster relief, and the military. Using existing
communication systems, a person (e.g., nurse, physician’s assistant, military medic) who is minimally trained in ultra-
sound could perform an ultrasound exam on a patient with guidance from an expert at a medical facility hundreds or
thousands of miles away. This would expand the tools for the rural medical community, provide the ability to triage
a mass casualty, and help in the decisions to conduct medical transport of patients. This capability was demonstrated
with a National Hockey League team and at the Olympic Training Facilities. Trainers were provided training that
was similar to that received by 188 astronauts. Images of various locations (groin, knee, elbow, etc.) from athletes
were obtained and transmitted for diagnostic interpretation by remotely located experts (Kwon et a1. 2007).
PUBLICATION(S)
Chiao L, SharipOV S, Sargsyan AE, Melton S, Hamilton DR, McFarlin K, Dulchavsky SA. Ocular examination for
trauma; clinical ultrasound aboard the International Space Station. Journal of T muma. 58(3):885-889, 2005.
Fincke EM, Padalka G, Lee D, van Holsbeeck M, Sargsyan AE, Hamilton DR, Martin D, Melton SL, McFarlin K,
Dulchavsky SA. Evaluation of Shoulder Integrity in Space: First Report of Musculoskeletal US on the International
Space Station. Radiology. 234(2):319—322, 2005.
Foale CM, Kaleri AY, Sargsyan AE, Hamilton DR, Melton S, Margin D, Dulchavsky SA. Diagnostic instrumenta-
tion aboard 188: just in time training for non-physician crewmembers. Aviation Space and Environmental Medicine.
76:594—598, 2005.
Sargsyan AE, Hamilton DR, J ones JA, Melton S, Whitson PA, Kirkpatrick AW, Martin D, Dulchavsky SA. FAST
at MACH 20: Clinical Ultrasound Aboard the International Space Station. The Journal of T muma, Injury, Infection,
and Critical Care. 2004; 58(1):35—39.
Kwon D, Bouffard JA, van Holsbeeck M, Sargsyan AE, Hamilton DR, Melton SL, Dulchavsky SA. Battling ﬁre and
ice: Remote guidance ultrasound to diagnose injury on the International Space Station and the ice rink. American
Journal ofSurgery. 2007; 193(3):417—20.

1 14

"
"123","ANOMALOUS LONG-TERM EFFECTS IN ASTRONAUTS’ CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM (ALTEA)
Principal Investigator(s): LiVio Narici, Ph.D., University of Rome Tor Vergata and INFN, Rome, Italy
Expeditions: 13—15

Research Area Radiation Studies
Long—duration space ﬂights result in increased cosmic radiation exposure to astronauts. The Anomalous Long—
term Effects in Astronauts’ Central Nervous System (ALTEA) hardware is designed to measure particle radiation
in the space environment, and determine how this radiation impacts the CNS of the crew. The experiment is com—
prised of a helrnet—shaped device holding siX silicon particle detectors that are designed to measure cosmic radiation
passing through the brain. The detectors measure the traj ectory, energy, and species of individual ionizing particles.
At the same time, an electroencephalograph (EEG) will measure the brain activity of the crewmember to determine
whether radiation strikes cause changes in the electrophysiology of the brain in real time.

. .' _-1 _ .-.“ .. ._ t?!

F‘ . ﬂ _ﬁ_ 1': r J "" ISSO14E16208—An astronaut wears the ALTEA experiment helmet

1 ' ' \J‘ while conducting the experiment in the Destiny Laboratory module.
:2 _ _ 1-H""- ""'4'n-.._.._...r.ll .

"" ' I ""F F ' r31} . “-1” . . .
-_ . 1JI-I|""!:._I:_J A common effect of radiation exposure that is reported
11 ""' .I by astronauts is the perception of light ﬂashes. The actual
W ' If?“ '. .- FTI%\EL W mechanism of these light ﬂashes is not understood. Earlier
Hi: r. 22.3333"" - .. "" JL; -. studies on the Mir space station suggest that both heavy nuclei
. “1.51% t . £1,113 ‘1‘"".— ' and protons trigger abnormal CNS responses (Casolino et a1.

' l. -. '3 1"" :1”: L - “I. ""...'.. 2003). A Visual stimulator tests the astronaut’s overall Visual
--__ 1""“ '— "" ' I system, including dark adaptation stimuli to monitor Visual status.

While not manned, the ALTEA hardware provides a continuous measure of the cosmic radiation in the station’s
U.S. laboratory Destiny. The neurophysiological effects of cosmic radiation in long—term space travel have never
been explored with the depth of the ALTEA experiment. Data that are collected will help to quantify risks to
astronauts on future long—duration space missions and propose optimized countermeasures.

RESULTS
Preliminary data that were compiled from three Expeditions, are currently in being fully analyzed. A long
run of dosirnetry data was collected during Expeditions 13 and 14; including deﬁnable particle and solar events.
During Expedition 13, the Visual stimulator malfunctioned, resulting in a loss of data from this instrument. During
Expedition 14, variable results were obtained from different crewmernbers. Overall, the crew reported a lower
frequency of light ﬂash events than expected; this was anecdotally attributed to a lack of dark adaptation. The
astronauts did perceive a higher rate of light ﬂashes in their sleeping quarters.

PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.

1 15

"
"124","BONNER BALL NEUTRON DETECTOR (BBND)
Principal Investigator(s): Tateo Goka, J apan Aerospace Exploration Agency, Tokyo, J apan
Expeditions 2, 3
Research Area Radiation Studies
The Bonner Ball Neutron Detector (BBND), which was developed by the J apan Aerospace Exploration Agency
(JAXA), was used inside the ISS to measure the neutron energy spectrum. It consisted of several neutron moderators
enabling the device to discriminate neutron energies up to 15 mega electron volts (MeV). This BBND characterized
the neutron radiation on ISS during Expeditions 2 and 3.
Due to their neutral charge, neutrons are ._._ . -- a d
not affected by magnetic forces, which allows * . ' I , ii .
the particles to penetrate deeper into materials. H 5‘. f- -.-.T
Potentially, the particles may deposit a larger 1: - II ' '
fraction of their energy into human tissue than : _. ' .I ' '
charged—particle radiations. Neutrons in the space - u 'l. .
environment are present in galactic background * ' I _ . 11"" -
and solar events (primary particles), neutrons are LJ ﬂ . ' ""--r."".-._-- I
also produced by the interaction of particles in the T"" 1 I inl' ' 1. . ISSOOZE5714 — Astronaut
materials that are used to construct spacecraft (sec— i I Til: 1f"" 1:1???an-ir:/eoeSrSvSEf:SdTﬁg I§BND
ondary particles). High—energy seconc1ary neutrons ”?:I i} .'1 ingide thge U.S.’ Destinf/ laboratory.
are produced by the interactions of high—energy i. - HT . 111 ' i r' | He holds the control unit (nearest
charged particles with spacecraft materials and 2'. r '""i '_ "". r ' '_!lI | the wall) and the detector unit
planetary surfaces. . ' .- fl! _ ‘ ET}- (DU) (in his hands).
i am. 77‘; t
BBND experiment hardware consisted of two I T"" _ ' - h“ ' .-._
assemblies: the BBND control unit, which stored
radiation measurements and controlled data quality;
and the BBND DU, which measured neutron radiation Via a series of siX stain1ess—stee1 spherical she11s. These
siX spheres were divided as follows: four spheres were thermal neutron detectors that were covered in polyethylene
of different thickness; one detector was covered in gadolinium; and one detector was uncovered. The gadolinium—
covered sphere acted as a control; neutrons are unable to penetrate the dense gadolinium. The data that were collected
by the uncovered sphere were used to determine the difference between pulses that were created by neutrons and
those that were created by protons. Data collected from the polyethylene—covered spheres show that the amount
of hydrogen that was surrounding the detector affects the amount of radiation penetration.
RESULTS
BBND characterized the neutron radiation on ISS during Expeditions 2 and 3 and determined that galactic cosmic
rays were the maj or cause of secondary neutrons measured inside ISS. The neutron energy spectrum was measured
from Mar 23, 2001 through Nov 14, 2001 in the U.S. Laboratory module of the ISS. The time frame enabled neutron
measurements to be made during a time of increased solar activity (solar maximum) and allowed results to be
derived from observation of a solar ﬂare on Nov 4, 2001.
BBND results showed that the overall neutron environment at the ISS orbita1 altitude was inﬂuenced by highly
energetic galactic cosmic rays, except in the South Atlantic Anoma1y(SAA) region where protons that are trapped
in the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld cause a more severe neutron environment. However, in the data that were obtained by
BBND, the number of particles measured per second per square centimeter (cmz) per MeV is consistently lower than
that of precursor investigations. The average dose—equivalent rate that was observed throughout the investigation was
3.9 micro Sieverts/hour (SV/hr) or about 10 times the rate of radiological exposure to the average U.S. citizen. In general,
radiation damage to the human body is indicated by the amount of energy that is deposited in living tissue modiﬁed
by the type of radiation that is causing the damage; this is measured in units of Sieverts. The background radiation
dose that is received by the average person in the U.S. is approximately 3.5 milliSV/yr. Conversely, an exposure of
1 SV/hour can result in radiation poisoning, and a dose of 5 SV/hr will result in death in 50% of exposed individuals.
The average dose—equivalent rate that was observed through the BBND investigation is 3.9 micro SV/hr, or about 10
times the average US. surface rate. The highest rate, which was 96 microSV/hr. was observed in the SAA region.
1 16

"
"125","The NOV 4, 2001 solar ﬂare and its associated geomagnetic activity caused the most severe radiation environment
that was experienced inside the 188 during the BBND experiment. The increase of neutron dose-equivalent due to
those events was evaluated to be 0.19 mSV, which is less than 1% 0f the measured neutron dose-equivalent that was
measured over the entire 8-month period.
Although this experiment did not characterize the neutron radiation environment outside of Earth’s magnetic
ﬁeld, the BBND sampling equipment provided results without the return of equipment to Earth and proved that
similar measurement systems could be used on missions to the moon and Mars to monitor real-time radiation risks
(Expedition 2 and 3 One Year Postﬂight Report).
PUBLICATION(S)
Koshiishi H, Matsumoto H, Koga K, Goka T. Evaluation of Low-Energy Neutron Environment inside the
International Space Station. Technical Report of Institute of Electronics, Information, and Communications
Engineers SANE2003-79111—14, 2003. [in Japanese]

1 17

"
"126","EFFECT OF PROLONGED SPACE FLIGHT ON HUMAN SKELETAL MUSCLE (Biopsy)
Principal Investigator(s): Robert Fitts, Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wis.
Expeditions 5—7, 9—11
Research Area Physiological Studies: Bone and Muscle
__ _ - ._ar -..__. It is well established that space ﬂight can result in loss
: ' +_ ""; ‘._: __ of skeletal muscle mass and strength know as atrophy. This
.J "" P"" 1"": "" ' condition continues throughout a crewmember’s mission,
-“ - *"".-_;.';.;.:-.;-f: !' _ fr even if crewmembers adhere to a strict exercise regime. What
‘._ . ..- 1%. ”ii i 3' researchers do not understand, however, are the effects that
{.3}:- -.Ir ' 3:11"" I _ ' '_ 1 = prolonged stays in microgravity have on skeletal muscles.
' L _ 1 ' '_ ' _... --""""'- ﬁn Biopsy evaluated changes in calf muscle function over
-- l “a ' - - - lon —duration s ace ﬂi hts 30 to 180 da s .
: 1g .!-.. “M; :.f-‘T-I .._. _ g p g ( y)
i"" :2 -.-I-.;_-' ' _ £—- ISSOO4E6331 — Expedition 4 commander Yury
_.4_' 4 .- II. IE. “'33: q- .l I #- Onufrienko exercises on a treadmill in the Zvezda
i' - *1 . ._ .. . .- - . -- serVIce module.
,. .. iii“! . . .. . .
'- . h —'_ d- _ LEI} "" For the Biopsy investigation, a specrally des1gned torque
I t . ' ""-- i ' i ' '13 _. ' velocity dynamometer was used to measure muscle strength
_5 -: - '.- Jl _"" - before and after ﬂight. Biopsies were also taken from the calf
;_ _ﬂ_,_,___ -; ﬂ . . muscles (soleus and gastrocnemius) of the participants. These
_- -'__' ' ”1'5“. _ - ___ tissue samples allowed for determination of the cell size and
‘L -1 ': 'I'l': . structural properties of individual fast and slow muscle ﬁbers.
m 7! "" .' 5.... Chemical analysis of the biopsies determined the muscle ﬁber
're'}? 4 - [Ii i- ' _' structural changes involving myosin, which is a protein “molec—
.. i' ._ ' ular motor” that drives muscle contractions and cell divisions,
- t . ‘ enzymes, and substrates. Electron microscopy was used to de—
ll ' - "" ' _ _._____ termine the relationship between thick and thin ﬁlament, the
_ _ amount of myoﬁlament loss, and changes in rnembrane—asso—
""1 £1!- E - I ciated protein complexes that are found in skeletal muscle
' - _ L I ﬁbers and connective tissue and that help the muscle resist
,3"" "" stretch—induced damage
RESULTS
Preliminary results were presented at the 2004 American Physiological Society Intersociety Meeting: Integrative
Biology of Exercise in three abstracts (see Publications on next page). Summarizing data that were collected from
the ﬁrst ﬁve subj ects, microgravity produced a 47% decrease in the peak power of postﬂight muscle ﬁber samples
compared to preﬂight muscle ﬁber samples. This decrease was due to the combined effects of reduced ﬁber size and
a decline in the size of the myoﬁbrils that make up the ﬁber.
Further examination of the data that were collected from the crew indicated that astronauts who performed high
treadmill exercise (greater than 200 minutes/week) vs. low treadmill exercise (less than 100 minutes/week) exhibited
a smaller decrease in peak power. Astronauts who performed high treadmill exercise showed a 13% decrease com—
pared to a 51% decrease in peak power of astronauts who performed low treadmill exercise. Sample analysis of the
muscle ﬁbers indicated that the ratio of myosin and actin proteins in the muscle ﬁbers was not affected by long—
duration space ﬂight. Although exercise slowed the onset of atrophy and loss of strength in muscle ﬁbers, a
signiﬁcant amount of muscle volume and strength loss still occurred on long—duration missions.
Of the exercise countermeasures that are currently being employed, treadmill exercise appeared the most effective
in protecting the calf muscles from loss of strength and atrophy. Final publication is pending an analysis of data
from all of the subj ects.
1 18

"
"127","PUBLICATION(S)
Fitts RH, Romatowski J G, Lim W—M, Gallagher P, Trappe S, Costill D, Riley DA. Microgravity, exercise
countermeasures, and human single muscle ﬁber function (Abstract). Paper 21.16, American Physiological Society
Intersociety Meeting: Integrative Biology of Exercise. The Physiologist. 47(4):320, 2004.
Gallagher P, Trappe S, Costill D, Riley DA, LeBlanc A, Evans H, Peters JR, Fitts RH. Human muscle volume
and performance: the effect of 6—m0 0f microgravity (Abstract). Paper 21.19, American Physiological Society
Intersociety Meeting: Integrative Biology of Exercise. The Physiologist. 47(4):321, 2004.
Riley DA, Bain JL, Gallagher P, Trappe S, Costill D, Fitts RH. The effect of 6—m0 microgravity on human skeletal
muscle structure (Abstract). Paper 21.17, American Physiological Society Intersociety Meeting: Integrative Biology
of Exercise. The Physiologist. 47(4):320, 2004.

A single muscle fiber. Each muscle is composed of

thousands of these fibers. Samples of muscles fibers will

be extracted and tested as part of the Biopsy experiment.

Image courtesy of NASA JSC.

1 19

"
"128","COMMERCIAL BIOMEDICAL TESTING MODULE (CBTM): EFFECTS OF OSTEOPROTEGERIN
(OPG) ON BONE MAINTENANCE IN MICROGRAVITY
Principal Investigator(s): Ted Bateman, Clemson University, Clemson, S.C.

Expedition 4
Research Area Physiological Studies: Bone and Muscle
Osteoporosis is a debilitating disease that causes a reduction in bone mineral density that leads to weakened
bones. One of the physiological changes that is experienced by crews during space ﬂight is the accelerated loss
of bone mass due to the lack of gravitational loading on the skeleton—a loss that is similar to the osteoporosis that
is experienced by the elderly population on Earth. Osteoprotegerin (OPG), which is a bone metabolism regulator,
was evaluated by the FDA as a new treatment for osteoporosis.

The Commercial Biomedical Testing Module (CBTM) examined the effects of OPG on bone maintenance in

microgravity using aged mice (older than 9 months) as test subjects. Bone changes that were observed in older mice

closely reﬂect the bone changes that are observed in older humans. The mice were housed in three animal enclosure
modules (AEMs) that provide the animal subjects with everything necessary to maintain health. Half of the mice
were treated with OPG (a novel protein that regulates bone resorption) and half were treated with a placebo.
RESULTS
r __ ‘3‘ ‘ﬁ. During ISS Expedition 4, 24 female mice were ﬂown to
ISS on shuttle ﬂight STS—108 in three AEMs. The AEMs
' remained on STS—108 throughout the 12—day rnission.
115'- Mice that were exposed to microgravity exhibited a 15%
A to 20% decline in femur elastic strength and a 40% to 60%
' decrease in bone formation when compared to the controls.

Fluorescent image of femur diaphysis from space flight The femur elastic strength decline was caused by three mech—

placebo-treated mouse, indicating greatly decreased bone anisms: reduced bone formation, increased bone resorption,

formation (calcein label indicates where bone was forming and inhibition of mineralization. Mice that were treated with
at the time Of launch, WhiCh allows quantification Of bone OPG and before being exposed to microgravity exhibited

formation rates during flight). . . . .
no discernable decline in femur elastic strength, and bone
resorption was signiﬁcantly increased (Baternan 2004).

r Mechanical testing data were complimented by serum,
mRNA, and histological analyses that indicated a decline
in bone formation and an increase in bone resorption in
addition to an inhibition of mineralization. OPG rnitigated
the decline in mechanical strength by preventing increase
in resorption and maintaining mineralization. In addition
to this detailed analysis of skeletal properties, a secondary

I ‘I analysis of calf muscles from placebo—treated specimens

Fluorescent image Of femur diaphySiS from ground control was performed to collect baseline data to validate space—

placebio-treated .mouse,.inc1icating greatly decreased bone ﬂown mice as an appropriate model for sarcopenia (age—

formatlon (calceln label Indicates where bone was forming at .

the time of launch, which allows quantification of bone related muscle 1055)‘ Space ﬂlght caused a 15% to 30%

formation rates during flight)_ decline in muscle ﬁber diameter size compared to ap—
propriate ground controls (Harrison et a1. 2003).

Data obtained from the mice following return to Earth also indicated some alternations in immune functions.

Analysis of the spleenocytes (immune cells produced by the spleen) indicated an increase in B—cell (a white blood

cell that matures in the bone marrow and, when stimulated by an antigen, differentiates into plasma cells) production

compared to T—cells (white blood cells that complete maturation in the thymus and have various roles in the immune
system). A slightly lower white blood—cell count in the ﬂight animals compared to the controls was not statistically
signiﬁcant. The spleen mass was 18% to 28% lower in ﬂight mice compared to controls. Results also indicate that

ﬂight mice weighed 10% to 12% less than ground controls (Pecaut et a1. 2003).

120

"
"129","The ability to survive a maj or physical trauma in microgravity may be compromised due to an altered immune
system. Platelets (a constituent of blood that promotes clotting at the site of injury) are the primary cells involved
in the wound healing process. The animals that were studied had signiﬁcantly higher platelet levels but low volume
compared to the controls. This indicates that the lack of platelets in the wound healing process is not a problem, but
that platelets formed in microgravity have a decreased functionality in the wound-healing process. Data indicate that
a short stay in microgravity can induce signiﬁcant changes in immune defense mechanisms, hematopoiesis (blood
cell formation), and other aspects of health (Gridley et a1. 2003).
PUBLICATION(S)
Bateman TA, Morony S, Ferguson VL, Simske SJ, Lacey DL, Warmington KS, Geng Z, Tan HL, Shalhoub V,
Dunstan CR, Kostenuik PJ. Molecular therapies for disuse osteoporosis. Gravitational and Space Biology Bulletin.
17:83—89, 2004.
Gridley DS, Nelson GA, Peters LL, Kostenuik PJ, Bateman TA, Morony S, Stodieck LS, Lacey DL, Simske SJ,
Pecaut MJ. Genetic models in applied physiology: selected contribution: effects of spaceﬂight 0n immunity in the
C57BL/6 mouse. 11. Activation, cytokines, erythrocytes, and platelets. Journal oprplied Physiology. 94(5):2095—
2103, 2003.
Harrison BC, Allen DL, Girten B, Stodieck LS, Kostenuik PJ, Bateman TA, Morony S, Lacey DL, Leinwand
LA. Skeletal muscle adaptations to microgravity exposure in the mouse. Journal oprplied Physiology. 95(6):2462—
2470, 2003.
Pecaut MJ, Nelson GA, Peters LL, Kostenuik PJ, Bateman TA, Morony S, Stodieck LS, Lacey DL, Simske SJ,
Gridley DS. Genetic models in applied physiology: selected contribution: effects of spaceﬂight 0n immunity in the
C57BL/6 mouse. 1. Immune population distributions. Journal oprplied Physiology. 94(5):2085—094, 2003.
WEAK? ""4?“ iii:-
aw
.. .' ?.?iﬁ Fl ""_ £91; I . .
. I, - - _ _ I. Image on the left shows a mlcroCT Image of
Ell}? 5"""" i'.'1_' trabecular bone from proximal tibia from a space
Ill]! flight mouse compared to a ground control mouse
' on the right.
121

"
"130","COMMERCIAL BIOMEDICAL TEST MODULE-Z (CBTM-Z)
Principal Investigator(s): H.Q. Han, M.D., Ph.D., Amgen Research, Thousand Oaks, Calif.
DaVid Lacey, M.D., Amgen Research, Thousand Oaks, Calif.
Expedition 15
Research Area Physiological Studies: Bone and Muscle
.1 "" ."" I I I I Currently, no pharmaceutical countermeasures for muscle loss
_ 'I ’ that are designed for use in crewmembers during space ﬂight
J I (l. , have been approved. To counter muscle atrophy on orbit, crew—
. , '- members engage in daily exercise. Exercise routines last 1.5 to
- 3 hours per day, which can causes a reduction in crewmember
. . -.l - I H :. . .- productivity. These regimes also do not completely alleviate the
- I ""' ' - "". muscle loss that occurs as a result of extended stays in space.
'2'? ' l 'I . . . . F— . 1 Developing and approving a pharmaceutical countermeasure to
L '_'- this condition could be instrumental to long—duration human
.- I. exploration missions.
II
liq..."" | I CBTM—Z examined the effectiveness of an experimental ther—
- . apeutic in preventing muscle loss in mice that were exposed to
I ' ‘F- I I microgravity. This was the ﬁrst time that an experimental thera—
5r - .- -' * peutic for muscle loss was investigated in space; an important
,r - - mic“? , 1 - l'— and signiﬁcant step in developing a more effective counter—
7h measure to microgravity induced muscle changes.
J""
S118E09308—The CBTM—2 hardware that is seen in this image flew on board STS—118/13A.1 in Aug 2007.
CBTM—2 will test the effectiveness of an experimental therapeutic as a possible countermeasure for muscle atrophy.
Physical deﬁcits from muscle atrophy also affect millions of Americans and result in signiﬁcant health care
expenditures. This experimental therapeutic has the potential to beneﬁt NASA crewmenibers, and could be a
precursor to the development of potential interventions for muscle wasting that is related to a range of diseases,
including cancer, kidney failure, and age—re1ated frailty.
CBTM—Z used AEMs. Three AEMs were ﬂown, each containing eight mice for a total of 12 treated and 12
control mice. Three AEMs, which were in the same conﬁguration as on station, were operated on the ground as
ground controls and ran in parallel with the space ﬂight modules.
This research is also expected to contribute data to the current body of research on microgravity effects on the
skeletal, cardiovascular, and immune systems in addition to liver and kidney function as well as other physiological
systems through a tissue—sharing program. Every effort will be made to harvest as many different samples and types
of tissue from the mice as possible for other mission—speciﬂc biomedical research. Positive results from this research
may advance our understanding of the mechanistic changes that occur in various physiological systems after
exposure to microgravity and support overall efforts to reduce health risks to crewmembers.
RESULTS
To address the impact of space ﬂight on cancer risks, mice were ﬂown on a 13—day space mission. Once returned
to Earth, their T—lymphocytes were analyzed and compared with ground control mice. New ﬂndings report that the
immune system of mice are highly sensitive to space—ﬂight—induced stresses. After examining spleens and thymuses
from mice that ﬂew on STS—l 18 and ground control mice, it was found that phytohemagglutinin—induced splenocyte
DNA syntheses were signiﬁcantly reduced in the ﬂight animals. Certain T— and B—cell counts from the spleens of the
ﬂight animals were also low, and the natural killer cells were increased. Analysis of cancer—related genes in the thymus
from the ﬂight animals showed that 30 out of 84 genes were expressed differently after ﬂight. The collective results
indicate that T—ce11 distribution and function and gene expression are signiﬁcantly modiﬁed by space ﬂight (Gridley
at al. 2008).
122

"
"131","PUBLICATIONS(S)
Gridley DS, Slater JM, Luo—Owen X, Rizvi A, Chapes SK, Stodieck LS, Ferguson VL, Pecaut MJ. Spaceﬂight
effects on T lymphocyte distribution, function and gene expression. J Appl Physiol . 2008 NOV 6.

123

"
"132","CARDIOVASCULAR AND CEREBROVASCULAR CONTROL ON RETURN FROM ISS (CCISS)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Richard Lee Hughson, Ph.D., University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
Expeditions: 15—17, ongoing

Research Area Physiological Studies: Cardiovascular and Respiratory Systems
The ability to maintain arterial blood pressure and brain blood ﬂow upon return to Earth after prolonged space
ﬂight is one of the most critical factors for crew health and safety. The inability of a crewmember to maintain blood
pressure appears to be related to inadequate increases in peripheral vascular resistance. Cardiovascular and Cerebro—
vascular Control on Return from ISS (CCISS) Will incorporate a new methodology that determines the simultaneous
gains of the arterial and cardiopulmonary baroreﬂexes in the control of peripheral vascular resistance.
A series of siX obj ectives has been identiﬁed that allows a more complete understanding of any alteration in
cardiovascular 0r cerebrovascular responses following long—duration space ﬂight. The ﬁrst two are addressed With
very brief in—ﬂight experiments that monitor the heart rate component _ _ _- — 1. 1-2;;- _. 4 ':..-u 3. -
0f the arterial baroreﬂeX and the relationship between heart rate varia— i'li ' RH """"' ' {:__
bility and physical activity as indicators of autonomic nervous system L‘s. «?_gﬁh
control. The remaining obj ectives are evaluated during a 32—minute '_,-F‘:.'e-. ' T 1' ' '_' :35, '
test protocol that is conducted preﬂight and immediately postﬂight. ' ”flan %:'= :51
During this test period, the central vein compliance is monitored. In is ,1 4' ' II"" a '1 .1
addition, the arterial and cardiopulmonary baroreﬂexes are monitored ""T15 .'_ i --;r . -_ . __2
during experiments that use an optimized schedule of lower body neg— .9. ' '1 1- '-
ative pressure (LBNP) to manipulate arterial and central venous blood {'1 i h
pressures. Within these same experimental sessions, assessments are ' - il- ' f. __ .. WI
made of cerebrovascular responsiveness to changes in arterial blood . ' 534'“. + .11.;
pressure and arterial partial pressure of C02. It is anticipated that the ' - :1 3 “Q1? I
ability to regulate blood pressure through baroreﬂeX control of blood ' - - __; - -.___'
vessel constriction may be impaired after space ﬂight. Similarly, it is __ ' _ 5| 'i'l'
expected that brain blood ﬂow Will be more sensitive to changes in I' "" -
arterial blood C02 and, thus, Will not be as tightly regulated after -
space ﬂight. I ' I

ISSO15E14753 - Expedition 15 Flight Engineer Clay Anderson is seen here
RESULTS working with an Actiwatch reader and computer during hardware setup for the
Resuls .from cuss pending em"""":22;izedz’V-i-stsm 3m;J2?..‘1%’§'SS§E§£L°§§
completion of testing on all sub] ects
before conclusive results are prepared.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.

124

"
"133","CELL CULTURE MODULE-IMMUNE RESPONSE OF HUMAN MONOCYTES IN
MICROGRAVITY (CCM-lmmune Response)
Principal Investigat0r(s): William Wiesmann, M.D., Hawaii Chitopure, Honolulu, Hawaii

Expedition 15
Research Area Immune System and Integrated Studies
Previous studies indicate that space ﬂight diminishes the body’s immune response. Cell Culture Module-Immune
Response of Human Monocytes in Microgravity (CCM-Immune Response) examined the human immune response
and the effect of newly discovered natural chitosan—based antibacterials to modulate and improve the immune response.
By using a monocyte (white blood cell) cell line and examining the gene expression as a result of bacterial-based
stimuli in the absence and presence of chitosan-based materials, this experiment examined the role of these
materials in modulating the inﬂammatory responses as well as connected wound-healing activity.
Monocytes were loaded into perfused hollow ﬁber bioreactors and divided into four groups. The ﬁrst group re-
ceived injections of endotoxin, the second group received injections of chitosan-arginine, the third group received
injections of chitosan-arginine and endotoxin, and the ﬁnal group (the control group) received common media injec-
tions. Cells were ﬁxed at two time points and their RNA, which is responsible for the transfer of information from
DNA, was extracted for examination by gene chip analysis of the human inﬂammatory and wound healing subset.
It is suspected that chitosan derivative injections may demonstrate a beneﬁcial role in mitigating inﬂammatory
responses while stimulating wound healing.
RESULTS
Preliminary results from CCM-Immune Response show that the cells were successfully cultured and returned to
Earth. The monocytes without chitosan did not survive the bacterial infection, whereas the monocytes with chitosan
were protected and survived. Preliminary analysis shows the potential for a new pharmaceutical to ﬁght large-scale
bacterial infections.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.

125

"
"134","CELL CULTURE MODULE-EFFECT OF MICROGRAVITY ON WOUND REPAIR: IN VITRO MODEL OF
NEW BLOOD VESSEL DEVELOPMENT (CCM-Wound Repair)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Stuart K. Williams, Ph.D., The University of Arizona, Tucson, Ariz.

J ames B. Hoying, Ph.D., The University of Arizona, Tucson, Ariz.

Expedition 15
Research Area Immune System and Integrated Studies
Previous microgravity studies indicate that space ﬂight diminishes the wound repair process. Cell Culture Module-
Effect of MicrograVity 0n Wound Repair: In Vitro Model of New Blood Vessel Development (CCM-Wound Repair)
used primary endothelial cells that were derived from adipose tissue as a wound-repair model to study and potentially
mitigate the effects of microgravity on wound repair. When endothelial cells, which are found lining all blood vessels,
are in culture, they form cords and tubes that are precursors to new blood vessels. It is believed that the processes
of new blood vessel formation and maturation will be impaired when the cells are cultured in microgravity, as
compared to Earth—based cultures. It is also expected to see differences in gene expression when the cultures
are subjected to genomic analysis.
The endothelial cells were seeded onto custom ﬂatbed bioreactors and perfused. Growth hormone (VEG-F) was
injected into half of the samples preﬂight, and all samples were ﬁxed during space ﬂight. It is suspected that those
samples that were exposed to growth hormone will show improved blood vessel formation and maturation compared
to those that were not exposed to growth hormone.
RESULTS
Preliminary results from CCM-Wound Repair show that the cells were successfully cultured and returned to
Earth. Data analysis is ongoing to determine deviations in cell pathology between the ﬂight and ground cells that
were used to characterize the microgravity-induced stresses on the ﬂight samples.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.

126

"
"135","CHROMOSOMAL ABERRATIONS IN BLOOD LYMPHOCYTES OF ASTRONAUTS (Chromosome)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Gﬁnter Obe, Markus Horstniann, Christian J ohannes, and Wolfgang Goedecke,
University of Essen, Essen, Germany
Expeditions 6—1 1, 13
Research Area Radiation Studies
Crewmembers are exposed to radiation When they leave the protection of Earth’s atmosphere. Ionizing radiation
in particular can damage chromosomes, causing mutations such as chromosome aberrations. To assess the genetic
impact of this radiation, blood is drawn before and immediately after ﬂight by venous puncture. The blood is then
cultured and the lymphocytes are stimulated to undergo mitosis (the process of cell division). In the ﬁrst mitosis, at
about 48 hours of incubation, the process is stopped and the chromosomes are prepared and stained using three
different methods of microscopic analysis to assess all types of aberrations induced by ionizing radiations.
These methods are:

0 Classic Giesma staining, Which allows the researcher to investigate changes in the morphology of the
chromosomes. Chromosomes have a natural X-shape. Structural changes that are detected using Giesma
include dicentric (the two chromatids of each chromosome are attached twice) and ring chromosomes 0r
fragments (chromosome pieces Without a centroniere).

o Multicolor Fluorescence In-Situ Hybridization (mFISH), Which scores reciprocal translocations and
insertions (exchange of parts between different chromosomes).

0 Multicolor Banding Fluorescence In-Situ Hybridization (mBAND) 0f the selected chromosome pair 5,
Which scores for inversions and translocations between homologous chromosomes (exchange or relocation
of DNA parts Within the same chromosome pair).

A quantitative comparison between preﬂight and post-
ﬂight aberration values provided information about the
. _ _ chromosome-breaking effects of cosmic radiation in blood
I lymphocytes of space travelers. Information was generated
concerning the participation of each chromosome pair in aber-
i"" t: ration formation as well as the inter- and intrachromosonial dis-
' ' "" ' : tribution of different aberration types. The association of
chromosomal aberrations With an enhanced cancer risk
I H H H .
4 .- . |_- stresses the importance of the planned research.
_ This photograph shows that a reciprocal exchange
-. ,-;.I '-I' ___1 ;. -. (translocation between chromosomes 11 and 12)
' ' ' has taken place in the blood lymphocytes of a
crewmember after space flight.
RESULTS
In each Expedition Where the experiment has been conducted, preﬂight and postﬂight blood samples were drawn
from each crewmember. To ensure high-quality results, the blood samples arrive at the laboratory Within 72 hours
after collection. Researchers are currently measuring changes in the genetic material and analyzing their signiﬁcance
and Will release preliminary conclusions seen. From this study, scientists may be able to better assess risk factors for
genetic damage in space. Understanding and reducing the risk of radiation is important for safe long-duration travel
in space, including stays on the moon and journeys to Mars.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
127

"
"136","DOSIMETRIC MAPPING (DOSMAP)
Principal Investigator(s): Gﬁnther Reitz, Deutsches Zentrum fur Luft und Raurnfahrt (DLR) Institute for
Aerospace Medicine, Cologne, Germany
Expedition 2
Research Area Radiation Studies
Interactions of ionizing radiations with the ISS structure and its contents create a somewhat different radiation ﬁeld
at each location inside the ISS modules. This is in part due to a large contribution from the secondary radiation that
is created by particles colliding with the spacecraft rnaterials. Dosirnetric Mapping (DOSMAP) was designed to map
the total absorbed dose in the U.S. Laboratory module of the ISS. DOSMAP was deployed from Mar through Aug
2001. This time frame included results from the solar particle event (SPE) that occurred on Apr 15 , 2001.
To fully characterize the radiation doses that were observed on ISS, the following four detector types were used:
therrno—lurninescence dosimeter (TLD) chips, CR39 nuclear track detectors with and without converters (NTDPs),
a silicon dosirnetry telescope (DOSTEL), and four silicon rnobile detector units (MDUs). Crewmembers used the
MDUs as personal dosirneters. They provided the ability to measure spectral composition with respect to nuclear
charge, energy, and rate of energy deposition (linear energy transfer (LET)), as well as to estimate absorbed dose
from galactic radiation, radiation belt particles, and the Apr SPE.
I . : “'"""" ‘ i -' ' I
1 '1 .“ - m_rT—3' ""I ISSOOZE7814 — James S. Voss, Expedition 2 flight engineer,
El -' _._ _' =-_hl ""f _‘ sets up the HRF DOSMAP power distribution unit in the U.S.
. - . _ I — ' I .' Destiny laboratory.
I '21:? 1' -__~.. .I' I I J' I """". ,9!
. Ir ' Qur‘— "" I- J}.
i ‘3' ""' . ii ﬁn; ——. ""' h
, - I f . ' -2313?» RESULTS
”H ._ g 1"" ﬂ __..-T1"" In general, radiation damage to the human body is
15' . ' indicated by the amount of energy that is deposited in
..__ _-:. . .. II;' . . . . . . .
+1. 7“ 1;; _ - . . _ liVing tissue, modiﬁed by the type of radiation caus1ng
-' ' ""' . "" ""-‘i - 'F +1 ' . the damage; this is measured in units of SV. The back—
ground radiation dose that is received by an average
person in the U.S. is approximately 3.5 milliSV/yr. An exposure of 1 SV/hr can result in radiation poisoning, and a dose
of 5 SV/hr will result in death in 50% of exposed individuals. The average dose that was determined by the data that
were collected during Expedition 2 was found to be 532 rnicroSV/day. This is signiﬁcantly lower than measurements
taken on previous space shuttle and Mir rnissions. All dosirneters showed agreement to within 10% of one another,
and over 95% of the projected measurements were able to be collected (Reitz 2001, 2005).
Three important conclusions were drawn from this experiment that will help with future monitoring activities:
0 The corrections that were needed due to device data storage and readout were negligible to the LET
readings and had only a small inﬂuence on dose rate estimates.
0 About 15% of the tissue—darnaging dose (effective dose) is from the short—ranged neutrons and protons that
were created within the spacecraft materials.
0 About 90% of the crewrnember dose is due to particles that deposit less than 150 keV/rnioron.
PUBLICATION(S)
Reitz G, Beaujean R, DacheV Ts, Derne S, Luszik—Bhadra M, Heinrich W, Olko P. Dosimetric Mapping. Conference
and Exhibit on International Space Station Utilization, Cape Canaveral, Fla. AIAA—2001—4903, Oct 15—18, 2001.
Reitz G, Beaujean R, Benton E, Burrneister S, DacheV Ts, Deme S, Luszik—Bhadra M, Olko P. Space radiation
measurements on—board ISS — the DOSMAP experiment. Radiation Protection Dosimetry. 2005; 116 (1—4):374—379.
128

"
"137","IDIIII
IJL'IIETEL
- :uuntnﬂr
“ |t'|-.
E i
'-|
Ir. _ .
' 1 NW NW 1 W ‘
[LIL '—'—‘ _ _
| .SIEI HHJE lthJil-I] lﬂﬁ-EE lﬂﬁﬁﬂ IDSJ': Jl'JE-IJIL'II 1115.25 Illt'rE-I}
15""“ Apn'l 115'“ April
1 L'Iu‘l' IUD]
III}
,_ ll}: GUESS Fruttm Flu:
: l :5: Iml-‘TEV K
FIE ll}
3. m”
.— 111':
1 '1 JLJLAH'u-_LL_I_hLL..L'_quu_J.Ju_
?ﬂd—ﬁﬂl 111415 |||J.‘E.I.’.|-ILI IIIJSES [USED 105.?5 Iﬂﬁﬂﬂ- Jﬂlﬁjﬁ lﬂ-ﬁ-ﬁﬂ
Figure from Reitz et al. (2005) showing the DOSTEL particle count rates Apr 15—16, 2001
(Days 104 and 105) during an SPE. The sinusoidal trend on the upper graph represents
count rates on ISS as it transits from high to low latitudes every 45 minutes, and variations
due to longitude and the SAA. The lower graph records the proton flux that was measured
by the geostationary operational environmental satellite (GOES). The DOSTEL measure-
ments were elevated after the onset of the event (approximately Day 105.75).
129

"
"138","SPACE FLIGHT-INDUCED REACTIVATION OF LATENT EPSTElN-BARR VIRUS (Epstein-Barr)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Raymond Stowe, Microgen Labs, Galveston, Texas
Expeditions 5, 6, 11—17
Research Area Immune System and Integrated Studies
_ . In the United States, approximately 95% of adults have been infected with Epstein—
1. .4' 'Ir- 4. i"" Barr Virus (EBV), which is one of the most common human Viruses and a member of
t 4. I I. -l|-I . . . . . . . . . .
- P #11:}. the herpes Virus farnily. EBV is an initial infection that establishes a lifelong ﬂorrnant
.- J i 5 infection 1ns1de the body that can be reactivated by illness or stress. Once active, EBV
7'1 4'! , .- 3 . 'I'lr causes infectious mononucleosis, cancers, and other disorders that are associated with
3__: r In ' "" 1, 4.1- the lymphatic system in people with a compromised immune system.
"" I"" 1': J';.
- '1 I}: E ._ The decreased cellular immune function that is experienced by astronauts in space
.- '1- ‘I __._I ._.— a ﬂight is likely caused by a combination of the microgravity environment and the stresses
.._ir - - that are associated with a mission. With longer—duration rnissions, it is hypothesized that
A colored, scanning electron latent Viruses are more likely to be reactivated, placing the crew at risk of developing
micrograph 01‘ an EPStein- and spreading infectious illnesses and jeopardizing the mission. Preliminary studies
Barr pamde' of astronauts have shown increased EBV shedding (the means by which Viruses
reproduce) in the saliva and increased antibody titers t0 the Virus’s proteins.
Epstein—Barr examined levels to which the crews’ immune systems were suppressed during space ﬂight and
identiﬁed conditions under which the Virus may reactivate. To conduct Epstein—Barr, investigators collected urine
and blood samples preﬂight and again postﬂight. The samples were analyzed for the presence of stress hormones
and cytokines (rnessengers 0f the immune system), EBV replication, and Virus—speciﬂc T—cell immune function.
Epstein—Barr used the levels to which the crews’ immune systems are suppressed during space ﬂight to determine
the conditions under which EBV may reactivate.
RESULTS
This experiment has recently been completed. Data from subj ects will be analyzed collectively before publishing
results. Earlier studies during space shuttle rnissions, which were the predecessors to this one, suggested that Virus
reactivation results from decreased T—cell function. If Epstein—Barr yields similar results, it will allow for a very
speciﬁc focus on developing drug therapies that will allow for more rapid treatment for space travelers as well
as for humans on Earth.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
1 30

"
"139","A STUDY OF RADIATION DOSES EXPERIENCED BY ASTRONAUTS IN EVA (EVARM)
Principal Investigator(s): Ian Thornson, Thomson & Nielsen Electronics, Ontario, Canada
Expeditions 4—6
Research Area Radiation Studies
.' . - __.r -_+ ._ =. __ ' A Study of Radiation Doses Experienced by Astro—
.. f .. ' . .rﬂ-f 51;“ t' nauts in EVA (EVA radiation rnonitoring (EVARM))

. 'L : _ _ H1 .ﬁ was designed to quantify the radiological dose that is
‘J .1 -' H ' c 1- ._ -' - _ received by astronauts while performing EVAs at the ISS.
't ' 'J ‘ ’ - “ . ' -. _ Extravehicular rnobility units (EMUs, or spacesuits), which

. _- “.""J- ' '1? F r are worn by spacewalking astronauts, provide less shield—
""I '5"" ﬂ'w . """" ing from radiation than the spacecraft. This means that
' ' - - .1 ' ""-‘.,—;___~.Jh__ I spacewalkers are exposed to higher radiation levels dur—
' I ” ' ' _ ""Em ing EVAs than at other times on orbit. When planning
5 ' , . EVAs, teams take into account rnission pararneters, es—
r .. _ ' “35' I tirnated duration, ISS altitude and inclination plus infor—
J J mation on space weather conditions (e.g., solar activity,
E r' F - "" -, geomagnetic ﬁeld conditions, proton ﬂux) that are
. ""“' . . _ '3' anticipated for that day.
IdsuiggiEnZEQ/X EEIESVEAEAe/Idggggrﬁgmrrrhaegieiirrg/jiig :rggzuunrl In addition to speciﬁc lifetime radiation lirnits, rnedical
of radiation that spacewalkers absorb during EVAs. standards specify that radiation doses that are achieved
by astronauts should be as low as reasonably achievable
(ALARA). To create new and improved shielding for EVAs, researchers must know the type and ﬂux of radiation inside
the EMU. EVARM investigated the dose that is received by different parts of the body (skin, eyes, blood—forming
organs) during an EVA by measuring dose rate based on the time and position of EVAs as compared to the orbit,
altitude, and attitude of the ISS.
As part of EVARM, spacewalkers wore dosirneters that were placed in small pockets along the EMU undergarments.
Two dosirneters were placed either inside the thermal comfort undergarment or the liquid—cooled ventilation garment,
one dosimeter was placed around the calf to measure absorbed dose to skin, and another dosimeter was worn above the
eye inside the communications carrier assernbly. EVARM used tiny metal oxide semiconductor ﬁeld effect transistor
(MOSFET) dosimeters, a 0.04—in2 silicon chip that was placed on a badge made of aluminum. When an MOSFET
is exposed to ionizing radiation, a positive charge builds up on the silicon - __ _
surface, creating a negative shift in threshold voltage. Measurements were Wm-m
taken by comparing the change in threshold voltage with the radiation ""'"" 'r
dose, which was recorded using a photodiode. New dosirneters were 3:. ‘ .
worn by the crew during each EVA. _ -‘-._’ .--. , '7}
RESULTS EV"" I --+----
For the EVARM investigation, 10 complete sets of data were collected I . I .- 1,:
between Feb and Nov 2002. These badges were compared to radiation "" imiﬂiil ‘L-l
monitors already on the ISS as well as to the ESA’s Space Environment '--*-' ' -i'.!"""".1 ' f'- - -
Information System (SPENVIS).
The results from EVARM have shown that EVA doses are EVARM hardware. The device shown records and
elevated from those inside the ISS but not signiﬁcantly. In processes data sent by radiation detectors in the
addition, this time period recorded doses during a time of in— spaceswts Of spacewalkers during EVAS'
creased geomagnetic activity (Oct/Nov 2002). It was determined that during this event doses to EVA participants
were increased due to elevated levels of electrons in Earth orbit. These electrons are easily shielded by spacecraft
materials and, thus, not measured inside the ISS. Fortunately, proper positioning of the spacecraft can dramatically
reduce the radiation ﬁeld that is encountered during EVA rnissions. A signiﬁcant ﬁnding was that a single detector
that was placed at the astronaut’s torso was not sufﬁcient to accurately determine organ doses. Results show that the
MOSFET detectors are accurate when compared with other monitoring equipment; however, the use of this battery
device may present problems in the EVA environment.
1 31

"
"140","PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
132

"
"141","FOOT/GROUND REACTION FORCES DURING SPACE FLIGHT (Foot)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Peter R. Cavanagh, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio
Expeditions 6, 8, 11, 12
Research Area Physiological Studies: Bone and Muscle
The human body is designed to bear weight. Without the stimulation that is
caused by placing weight on lower extremities, whether due to the microgravity
environment or lack of use on Earth, bones lose mass and muscles lose strength. .H
The Foot experiment characterized the load that is placed on lower extremities H. ‘'I, . _
during daily activities on station and examined to what degree mechanical load . - ' :
stimulus, Via an in—ﬂight exercise routine, could prevent the muscle atrophy and - ~..' I E. I '
bone loss that is associated with space ﬂight. ' Ll.- l' '1 - -"" '
To achieve this objective, Foot had several sensors mounted in a special pair of T ' I l.-
Lycra exercise pants known as the lower extremity monitoring suit (LEMS). The - ' .171] 1""
total force—foot ground interface (TF—FGI) served as an insole that, when placed ‘ -""'I
inside a shoe, measures the amount of force that is placed on the bottom of the foot. _ “L5 5,5 Hit,“
J oint excursion sensors (JESS) record joint angles at the ankle, knee, and hip. Electro— . 1'5"" ""Fifi ' "" "" -. 3le
myography (EMG) electrodes recorded muscle activity, including net neural drive, 'ﬁ"". 1'_ I
along the leg (the vastus Inedialis, rectus femoris, biceps femorics, gastrocnemius, i1 . 1 _ 1
and tibial anterior) and in the right arm (the biceps brachii and triceps brachii). In— 1 I ""1 '
formation was collected by an ambulatory data acquisition system and downloaded ISSOOSB 1018 _ Expedition 6
. . commander Kenneth Bowersox,
into the HRF laptop on board ISS after each sess10n. wearing a body harness, runs on
the TVIS as part of the Foot
RESULTS experiment in the Zvezda
Results provided insight into the processes of loss of bone mineral density and service module.
muscle mass during long—duration stays on orbit. Knee—joint motion in space was reduced when compared to that
on Earth, thus effecting muscle action. In preliminary data analyses of the ﬁrst subject, signiﬁcant loss of bone mass
was observed. Measurements of forces during exercise suggested that much less force was experienced than would
be experienced when exercising on Earth. Detailed data were collected on leads across all exercise hardware settings
during Expeditions 11 and 12. Final analysis will help in determining exercise prescriptions for station crew—
members and in the design of future exercise devices for Exploration Inissions.
Integrating these general results into a contextual overview of bone health on long—duration Inissions, Cavanaugh
and Rice (2007) have compiled a set of summary articles that examines bone health, bone loss, efﬁcacy of exercise
and mechanical stimulus, and other factors that are relevant to bone health in space.
PUBLICATION(S)
-- . Cavanagh PR, Maender C, Rice AJ, Gene KO, Ochia RS, Snedeker J G. Lower—
., Extremity Loading During Exercise on the International Space Station. Transactions
1' . _ I of the Annual Meeting of the Orthopaedic Research Society 0395, 2004.
l"" “I '1' Pierre MC, Gene KO, Litow M, Humphreys B, Rice A, Maender CC, Cavanagh
__ 'i _. 1 PR. Comparison of Knee Motion on Earth and in Space: An Observational Study.
- "" 1’ -"" . Journal ofNeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation. 3:8, 2006.
.. '- ..
"" ' _ ﬂ Cavanaugh PR, Rice AJ. Bone Loss During Space Flight: Etiology,
1""». -, + Countermeasures, and Implications for Bone Health on Earth. Cleveland Clinic
- - :71; Press, Cleveland, Ohio, 2007, 297 pp.
'l. -.
y .r' |88006E11011 — View of the body harness for the Treadmill Vibration
'_ 'T"". :.- Isolation System (TVIS) and the LEMS for the Foot experiment in the
__-- h "" ‘E _ Zvezda service module. The apparatus is shown worn by Expedition 6
- commander Ken Bowersox.
1 33

"
"142","HAND POSTURE ANALYZER (HPA)
Principal Investigator(s): Valfredo Zolesi, Kayser Italia SRL, Livorno, Italy
Expeditions 7, 8, 11, 16
Research Area Physiological Studies: Bone and Muscle
The Hand Posture Analyzer (HPA) examined how hand and arm muscles are used differently during grasping and
reaching tasks in weightlessness by collecting kinematic and force data on astronaut’s upper limbs (hands, wrists
and forearms). Three different sets of data were collected: preﬂight, in—ﬂight and postﬂight. The measurements,
which involved the crewmember manipulating both Virtual and concrete obj ects, is researched to assess the
approaching, reaching, and grasping mechanics of the hand and ﬁngers without the effect of gravity.
RESULTS
The HPA was launched to ISS on 12 Progress in Aug 2003. It was performed during Expeditions 7 and 8 on ISS;
data from siX HPA sessions were collected during Expedition 7 from one crewmember; two preﬂight collections,
two in—ﬂight collections, and two postﬂight collections. At the end of Expedition 10, ESA astronaut Roberto Vittori
performed in—ﬂight data collection with the HPA hardware. These data are being combined with data from the pre—
liminary version of the same hardware (Chiro), which was used on board ISS during an earlier “Marco Polo”
mission with astronaut Roberto Vittori in 2002. Together, these experiments assessed the short— and long—
term effects of weightlessness on upper limb performance.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
' . .' _t'i
. hr P I I- - .
_- 1i, "" 5:. _ I *-- I4: _ I
_ ' . g .. .'| I I . ' '-
,'_.;I-‘~r-'i ~- ~. u"" . 'H
- t ; t- "" 1I
I -- ll . .
“ﬂ"" I- uni-
|88008E21605 — NASA science officer Mike Foale was
photographed during ISS Expedition 8 as he used hand/wrist
position tracking via the hand posture acquisition glove during _
HPA ' . I -
operations _- . . :15“ __‘ .
— . -'.""--""_1i_-
. 4-“
Hand grip dynometer that was used for the '
muscle fatigue experiment that was part of
the HPA investigation on board station.
1 34

"
"143","EFFECTS OF ALTERED GRAVITY ON SPINAL CORD EXCITABILITY (H-REFLEX)
Principal Investigator(s): Douglas Watt, McGill University, Montreal, Canada
Expeditions 2—4

Research Area Physiological Studies: Bone and Muscle
In the weightlessness of LEO, the body loses muscle mass and bone density. The only known countermeasure
for this atrophy is exercise. However, as astronauts spend longer durations in space, will exercise continue to be an
effective countermeasure? Along with changes in muscle and bone, the neurovestibular system (the complex sensory
system that maintains posture, balance, and coordination) adapts to changes in gravity. Researchers hypothesize that,
as part of this neurovestibular systern adaptation, spinal cord excitability decreases and the spinal cord reacts less to
stimuli. If this hypothesis is correct, exercise may become less effective the longer astronauts stay in microgravity,
and researchers may have to adjust exercise programs accordingly.
H—Reﬂex tested this hypothesis by measuring muscle re— :2 -.. -. I-
sponse to mild electrical shocks (40—90 volts). Nerves that are -""--__ . "" ‘F r.
in the leg perceive the electrical shock and send a signal along C] ____n
the spinal cord to the brain. The signal stirnulates rnotor neu— ii . r ""“51“- ._ ‘— '
rons in the brain, which, in turn, send signals that cause leg .I ' ""-._-'-'-*_ .2137 :
muscles to contract. The bigger the contraction, the more the —_F ting""
neurons are stimulated, indicating the level of spinal cord lb "" _ ' . 3: '.-""""r- l .
excitability. Researchers compared measurements that were 3’ - fn— __ ' . r
taken before, during, and after ﬂight to determine whether the I ""
spinal cord’s ability to respond to stimuli changed over time. 'VL -
The H—Reﬂex equipment recorded the EMG actiVity in the
rnuscle—the electrical actiVity that causes the muscle to 11/ ' _
rnove—rather than the movement that follows the electrical 1""! -- 3
actiVity (as a knee—tap test would), allowing researchers to -_ _ /” a
take more precise measurements. 4: |' J_ '

. ___??? M _ f . .
RESULTS - 4.. i '
This study of spinal cord excitability using the Hoffman __ l _ A ' ' t_u
reﬂex was completed by a total of eight subjects overISS -'J_-1 L I . -
Expeditions 2 through 4. H—Reﬂex measured how excitable T"" ‘*“~ '5' 2"""": 1* .
the nerve cells were by applying srnall electrical shocks behind ' __' . _.- I“ G 1:“ 3!! -

. —~= 1* 4L. .
the knee. Each shock produced a reﬂex response in the calf ___ . _
muscles (the H—reﬂeX response); the data collected indicated f 5:; "" "".
that this response decreased signiﬁcantly while in microgravity. -;-.:-~ 1'"" 'L' 1.:
The study found that spinal cord excitability decreased by about -. _Jflﬁlfﬁ '. - '_' I
35% in weightlessness, and stayed at this level for the duration —-._...._
of the mission. Although there was notable improvement in the H _
H—reﬂex response the day after landing, it took about 10 days i _ _ '7' -' : T g; _ '
back on Earth for astronauts to fully recover their muscle |88003-330-006 —— Cosmonaut Vladimir Dezhurov on
strength and spinal cord excitability (Watt and Lefebvre '33 EXPEdition 3 performing H-REﬂGX activity in the US-
2001; Watt 2003) Destiny laboratory.
This difference in excitability means that only a portion of muscle ﬁber units are contracting in response to
signals from the nervous system, and explains functionally why muscle mass declines in weightlessness, even
with exercise. Reduced excitability means that there might be limits on the degree to which heart muscle strength,
leg muscle tone, and bone density (for which muscle contraction is an important regulating factor) can be rnaintain—
ed through exercise on long—duration rnissions. Because this decrease in excitability is only observed on orbit and
not during bed rest, an analog for weightless space travel, the results highlight the possibility that reduced excit—
ability with corresponding loss of muscle and bone might be partly a nervous system response and not simply
due to disuse of the legs.
1 35

"
"144","Based on the results of this study, decreased spinal cord excitability could be an issue for long—duration stays in
partial—gravity environments such as are found on the moon and Mars. Future designs of exercise equipment that
provide feedback on work actually performed would help crewmembers compensate for decreases in exercise
efﬁciency.
PUBLICATION(S)
Watt DG, Lefebvre L. Effects of altered gravity on spinal cord excitability. First Research on the International
Space Station, Conference and Exhibit on International Space Station Utilization, Cape Canaveral, Fla. AIAA 2001—
4939, Oct 15—18, 2001.
Watt DG. Effects of altered gravity on spinal cord excitability (ﬁnal results). Proceedings of the Bioastronautics
Investigators’ Workshop, Galveston, Texas. J an 2003.
Watt DG. Effects of prolonged exposure to microgravity 0n H—reﬂeX loop excitability. Proceedings of the 14th 1AA
Humans in Space Symposium, Banff, Alberta, Canada. May 2003.
.I I. . -
. .- . _
H. -‘
.. r"" 1'
Issoo3oo3o11 — Close-up of H-Reflex 1.: tat _
hardware on the knee of cosmonaut ,.-"" "" ""_,:,__ i. - - -'
Vladimir Dezhurov during ISS f * ﬂ W ._; ' 4.. .. 5-. .
Expedition 3. ' ' ' _ ' _._.
F . '. II
u- _’
. 3..
I-r. -' . - - :r
: _' ._ m 'I Lrﬂﬁi
_ _ "" I - I
-- .. _ i
r - - ""- n l T E-I. I
_._ _ -_.= i: -
II II: I ""-J'IF-I' -I- .
_.r “‘1' _- """"4. ' Still frame from a video of Expedition 2
. _.-.. _ I showing astronauts Jim V053 and Susan
E"" .1...— ~—_-7:_ Helms performing the H-Reflex experiment
*- _ - in the shuttle middeck.
136

"
"145","CREW MEMBER AND CREW-GROUND INTERACTIONS DURING INTERNATIONAL
SPACE STATION MISSIONS (Interactions)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Nick A. Kansas, University of California and Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
San Francisco, Calif.
Expeditions 2—5, 7—9
Research Area Behavior and Performance Studies
Isolated in the microgravity and vacuum of near—Earth orbit, the ISS is a potentially risky place in which to work
and live. Mission success and crew safety rely on the ability of station crews to communicate and get along with
their fellow crewmembers, regardless of their age, gender, nationality, or personal beliefs and preferences. It is also
critical that the station crew has good interactions with members of ground operations.
The Interactions study recorded crew and crew—ground actiVities in an effort to fully understand group dynam—
ics, individual psychological health, and factors that both hinder and help daily life on station. The study consisted
primarily of a computerized questionnaire that was ﬁlled out weekly by crewmembers in space and by ground per—
sonnel at NASA J ohnson Space Center, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, and the Russian Mission Control
Center in Moscow. The questionnaire software included a series of questions from three standard mood and
interpersonal group climate questionnaires as well as a critical incident 10g.
: k P “A t ““5““ Int. ‘L i“
er ;.
' ’T'T ‘ JSC2004E25790 —- Expedition 9 crewmembers, ISS
. 3.“ . g‘ 4 science officer Michael Fincke (right) and ISS commander
' ' A ' ‘51: ' i Gennady Padalka (left), use video and audio channels to
«""r '. i' .0 '7 g 1?: ‘ communicate with the Mission Control Center—Houston on
é V ,9. ' ' ' Jun 18, 2004. Everyone is celebrating the recent birth of
Q, Fincke’s daughter. The primary focus of the Interactions
E23? 7 w investigation is to improve communications between the
*— ‘3 9 support personnel and the Expedition crew.
ﬂ ""'4 _- —:22 E‘FW‘m—h‘e-
f 'I “Q 'H“
* “L ,-.. ﬂ :r—a *' ﬂ 3;:
12“ /§3 1-
RESULTS
The Interactions experiment observed the day—to—day relations between the ISS crew and the ground support
teams in Houston, Huntsville, Alabama, and Moscow, Russia. Data were collected over a period of 4 years during
ISS Expeditions 2 through 9. ISS crewmembers and Mission Control personnel responded to questions from three
standard mood and interpersonal group climate questionnaires (Proﬁle of Mood States, Group Environment Scale, and
Work Environment Scale) and maintained critical incident logs. The questionnaires used well—established psycho—
metric measurements (measures of psychological variables; e.g., intelligence, aptitude, and personality traits).
Additionally, crew actiVities (in particular, Earth photography ) were assessed as a mechanism for preserving
crew health (Robinson et a1. 2006).
Preliminary results were presented in two papers by Kanas et a1. (2005) and Ritscher et a1. (2005) at the 15th Inter—
national Academy of Astronautics (1AA) Humans in Space Symposium. Additional results have been presented in
subsequent meetings and published forums. Previous studies of crew interactions (e.g., when U.S. crewmembers
were added to the Russian space station Mir crews) identiﬁed important patterns of responses in interactions
137

"
"146","between and among crews and ground personnel. Not surprisingly, the investigation is also identifying differences
in mood and group perceptions between Americans and Russians, as well as between crewmernbers and Mission
Control personnel.
The early results were replicated after ISS crewrnernbers were questioned and responses analyzed; n0 “ 2nd half”
effects were noted (Kanas et al. 2006; 2007). In a separate but related study that was conducted by this research
team, ISS crewmernbers show evidence of an improvement in mental health
as they adjust to the environment (adaptation). The study indicates that g Iii -""i.I__ I_ -
crewmernbers improve in mood and social clirnate over the course of '5' _I i 3 ' ' '
their missions. Post—mission surveys of crewmembers are being used to i (- ""'"" 5'3 .F . "" .
evaluate strategies to enhance their in—ﬂight stress tolerance and postﬂight '- 1' '15"": ""
adjustment. In addition, other factors, including cultural sophistication
and language ﬂexibility, were analyzed among members of both crew ‘.I
and supporting Flight Control tearns. While differences in these cultural : E _
parameters were noted between U.S. and Russian teams, and the crew - ' -='., "" _ ..-_-‘.*‘ ""_'_""_
and Flight Control tearns (crews and Russian controllers exhibited higher ""71,—?"" _ é‘-_""'-=' _‘ﬁ
scores on cultural sophistication), they did not appear to be related to 1"": E: Q; :I'
mood and social climate variables (Ritsher et al. 2006). Finally, ﬂight it Q {:1-
control teams were interviewed to examine maj 0r leadership challenges, '- i! ll fir
impacts to mission management, and solutions to those challenges (Clement ""“1 ﬁlth
et al. 2006). Geographic separation and communication were identiﬁed as _ I-""- II _ .- l‘ r... _ I:-
key challenges requiring continued effort to mitigate. Strong interpersonal I . I“:1: ""nit i1. *
relationships, communication, and ﬂexibility are critical for all leaders I
Who ale workmg ISS ISSOO7E18044 — Astronaut Edward T. Lu (at J
operations. musical keyboard), Expedition 7 NASA ISS science I ‘
officer and flight engineer, and ESA astronaut Pedro
Many 0fthe behavioral Duque of Spain share a light moment during off-shift - _ -. .-
factors that were studied time in the U.S. Destiny laboratory. I"" - ._'._. .
in this experiment (com—
munication styles, multicultural teams, operational systems) will be important in planning operations systems
and relationships between Exploration crews and ground personnel for lunar and Mars missions. Complete and ﬁnal
analysis of the questionnaires is still being conducted.
PUBLICATION(S)
"""" __I 1. ---— _ “ Clement J , Ritsher JB. Operating the ISS: Cultural and
.‘I '1': In: .. u- .1: -# I;- leadership challenges. 56th International Astronautical
‘- -. _ _ -‘: i . ﬂ. Congress. Fukuoka, J apan, IAC—05—Al .5.05. Oct 17—
I II ’- II' :' . "" 21,2005.
. I E _._-._ - '. -_ Kanas N, Ritsher J . Leadership Issues w1th Multi—
_l'r *1""— 'i i- cultural Crews 0n the International Space Station:
.4-_':. r__' .""._.'_.I “___:11T- _—_ _— __ __- --1 - Lessons learned from Shuttle/Mir. Acta Astronautica.
-' “'1-ir'P-I i__L']' - - - . 56:932—936, 2005.
—_ 1"" .ﬂ'f-Ir:"""" #u. ___-E‘- T ..
___ i. . 1 ' I “[— I n; Kanas N, Salnitskiy VP, Ritsher JB, Gushin VI, Weiss
‘1 _‘ DS, Saylor S, Marmar C. Human interactions in space:
%h ' _- -~ . - ISS versus Shuttle/Mir. 56th International Astronautical
' . ' ' . I Congress. Fukuoka, J apan, IAC—05—Al .5.02. Oct 17—
IJSC2003E59333 — OverVIew of the statlen flight control room . 21 2005.
In the NASA Johnson Space Center MISSIOh Control Center. ThlS ’
photograph was taken during rendezvous and docking operations
between the Soyuz TMA—3 spacecraft and the ISS. Ritsher JB, Kanas N, Gushin VI, Saylor S.
Cultural differences in patterns of mood states on—
board the International Space Station. 56th International
Astronautical Congress. Fukuoka, J apan, IAC—05—Al.5 .03.
Oct 17—21, 2005.
138

"
"147","Ritsher J B, Kanas N, Salnitskiy VP, Gushin VI, Saylor S, Weiss DS, Marmar C. Cultural and Language Back—
grounds of International Space Station Program Personnel. Presented at the 57th International Astronautical
Congress. Valencia, Spain. Oct 2—6, 2006; IAC—06—A1.1.3.
Kanas NA, Ritsher JB, Saylor SA. D0 Psychological Decrements Occur During the 2nd Half of Space Missions?
Presented at the 57th1nternational Astronautical Congress. Valencia, Spain. Oct 2—6, 2006; IAC—06—A1.1.02i.
Clement J L, Ritsher JB, Kanas N, Saylor S. Leadership Challenges in ISS Operations: Lessons Learned from Junior
and Senior Mission Control Personnel. Presented at the 57th International Astronautical Congress. Valencia, Spain.
Oct 2—6, 2006. IAC—06—A1.1.6.
Kanas NA, Salnitskiy VP, Ritsher JB, Gushin VI, Weiss DS, Saylor SA, Kozerenko OP, Marmar CR. Psychosocial
interactions during ISS missions. Acta Astronautica 2007. 60:329—335.
Kanas, NA, Salnitskiy VP, Boyd J E, Gushin VI, Weiss DS, Saylor SA, Kozerenko OP, Marmar CR. Crewmember
and mission control personnel interactions during International Space Station missions. Aviation Space and Environ-
mental Medicine. 2007. 78(6):601—607.
' 0'4\\,
a. I \‘
, ' e. r ~ ~
. I _ .
I - ' I. - 0 . I
L 4 . . , ‘
-‘ . > V
-~ . x».
r 5 ' t
a 1: ¢' ‘5. ""x. ISSOOS-E-O6699 — Astronaut C. Michael Foale
) .97 r (foreground), Expedition 8 mission commander
7 - ' ‘ and NASA ISS science officer, and cosmonaut
i ‘ “ Alexander Y. Kaleri, flight engineer representing
- , . ‘\‘ Rosaviakosmos, eat a meal in the Zvezda
. 1“. . - ‘ ‘ I service module on the ISS.
\ ! .
139

"
"148","BEHAVIORAL ISSUES ASSOCIATED WITH ISOLATION AND CONFINEMENT:
REVIEW AND ANALYSIS OF ISS CREW JOURNALS (Journals)
Principal Investigator(s): J ack W. Stuster, Anacapa Sciences, Inc., Santa Barbara, Calif.
Expeditions 8—18, ongoing
Research Area Behavior and Performance Studies
A previous content analysis of j ournals that were maintained during long—duration expeditions on Earth (e.g., to the
Antarctic) provided quantitative data on Which to base a rank—ordering of behavioral issues in terms of importance.
J ournals uses the same content evaluation techniques on journals kept by ISS crewmembers. The objective is to
identify equipment, habitat, and procedural features that can help humans When adjusting to isolation and con—
ﬁnement While ensuring that they remain effective and productive during future long—duration space ﬂights.
While on orbit, crewmembers make . _ _ ' _ "".
journal entries at least three times a . . I n
week in a personal journal. In format, 'SSOO8E2235O _ "" l H] I -' - *
. . . . Astronaut Edward M. . I
then Journal can be either electronic (Mike) Fincke, Expedition 9 . ‘fT . _f f + a . _. J _
(i.e., using an ISS laptop) or paper. In NASA |ss science officer "" am}?! ____.-..1..- . M
addition to the journal entries, partici— 800' ﬂight engineer, WOFkS __ '._.._"". ' .
Pating crewmembers also complete a i” the US DeStiny —':___h_ .I = - - ' J"" ' .
brief electronic questionnaire at the laboratory. :1' -, - ;M_ - Ii ‘ r _'
mid—point of their Expeditions. F ' Ed. - I - 4: i171. _.
_. _ _._ .... __
Studies on Earth have shown that analyzing the F _H' '3: "" .. - .
content of journals and diaries is an effective means of identify—
ing issues that are most important to the person recording his or her thoughts. The method is based on the
assumption that the frequency With Which an issue is mentioned in a journal reﬂects the importance of that issue
or category to the writer. The tone of each entry (positive, negative, or neutral) and phase of the Expedition are also
variables of interest. Study results Will lead to recommendations for the design of equipment, facilities, procedures,
and training to help sustain behavioral adjustment and performance during long—duration Expeditions on ISS, or to
the moon, Mars, and beyond. These studies can also assist on Earth With Antarctic missions, service on submarines,
etc.—anyWhere humans choose to work in conﬁnement or isolation.
RESULTS
Data collection is ongoing, and the results Will be analyzed When all of the journals are available.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
I I
‘ ‘ ISSO1OE6816 —- Expedltlon 1O crewmembers
‘ ‘ r ' r Leroy Chiao and Salizhan Sharipov participated in
the Journals investigation.
140

"
"149","INCIDENCE OF LATENT VIRUS SHEDDING DURING SPACE FLIGHT (Latent Virus)
Principal Investigator(s): Duane L. Pierson, Ph.D., NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston
Expeditions 0, l, 2, 4, 5, 11, 13—15
Research Area Immune System and Integrated Studies
Latent herpes Viruses pose an important infectious disease risk to crewmembers who are involved in space ﬂight
and space habitation. The risk certainly increases as mission duration increases. Risks that are associated with most
bacterial, fungal, Viral, and parasitic pathogens can be reduced by a suitable quarantine period before the ﬂight and
by appropriate medical care. However, latent Viruses are unaffected by such actions. The observed decrements in the
immune response resulting from space ﬂight may allow increased reactivation
. of the same herpes Viruses, and may increase the incidence and duration of Viral
-:, """"_, _. shedding. Such a result may increase the concentration of herpes Viruses in the
. 1+."" _ F"": t . spacecraft. Particulates (including Viruses) do not settle out of the air in the micro-
Ii: ._ 'u H. -* a. T -'___ graVity conditions of space ﬂight. Additional characteristics of space ﬂight, such
{‘1}? 2- ""rt 2 4' as liVing in relatively crowded conditions in a closed environment and using
‘r .IJJL' {L ”I "" "" ' J- recycled air and water, will increase the potential for transfer of Viruses among
'-""- ' r {'1‘ hf""! . F' the crewmembers. This study will help determine the characteristics of Viral
144‘ 'ff'. : '_ . parameters such as latent Virus reactivation, shedding, and crew exchange
11*. "" . T E during space ﬂight, and is an integral part of ongoing efforts to accumulate
' ‘ ' microbiological data concerning the exposure of astronauts to potentially
infectious agents.
Microscopy image of a herpes virus, one of several latent viruses that will be
studied during the Latent Virus investigation. Image courtesy of Linda Stannard of
the Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Cape Town, South Africa.
RESULTS
Many of the biological samples that are collected from astronauts immediately before and following space ﬂight
have proven valuable for several investigators. Saliva samples that have been collected from crewmembers who are
traveling on the shuttle to and from ISS since 2000 have provided preliminary results for the Latent Virus investiga-
tion. For this investigation, EBV and Varicella zoster Virus (VZV) were studied using the saliva samples. The data
that were collected indicate that latent Viruses can become infectious under stressful conditions such as space ﬂight.
Thirty-two healthy astronauts have been studied for EBV reactivation on 10 space shuttle missions since 2000.
This study revealed that the increased stress of space ﬂight may cause latent Virus reactivation in astronauts. The
astronauts who were studied served as either commander, pilot, or mission specialist; these are all different positions
that carry their own unique stresses. Potential EBV reactivation in astronauts was shown by three measures: EBV
presence in saliva, number of copies of Viral EBV DNA in saliva, and titer of antibodies to EBV Viral antigens. Data
revealed that there was no correlation between the shedding frequency of EBV in the saliva and the amount of EBV
DNA in the saliva. EBV antibody titers increased before ﬂight and continued to increase 3 days postﬂight. The amount
of EBV DNA increased as the number of days in space increased. The pattern and amount of EBV shedding in the
astronauts likely correlated to various events that occurred during space ﬂight. The types, levels, and combination
of stresses experienced before, during, and after ﬂight, as well as the different ways in which individuals cope with
stress, may result in changes in the EBV shedding frequency (Pierson 2005).
Eight healthy astronauts were studied during three shuttle missions to determine the cause of VZV reactivation
in a healthy adult astronaut 2 days before ﬂight. Ten subjects (not astronauts) who remained on Earth were used
as controls in this investigation. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis was performed on DNA samples that were
extracted from the saliva of the subj ects. Before ﬂight all samples from the experimental subj ects were negative for
VZV DNA; during ﬂight VZV DNA was detected in 87% of the astronauts; following return to Earth VZV DNA
was detected in only 19% of the astronauts who were tested. During this same time frame, no VZV DNA was
detected in saliva samples of the control subjects. VZV, like EBV, can reactivate during stressful situations
such as space ﬂight (Mehta 2004).
141

"
"150","Each Virus—EBV and VZV—has its own unique timing When reactivation due to stress. EBV appeared to
increase at all phases of space ﬂight (preﬂight, in-ﬂight, and postﬂight), While VZV DNA increased as space ﬂight
approached and decreased postﬂight.
PUBLICATION(S)
Mehta SK, Cohrs RJ, Forghani B, Zerbe G, Gilden DH, Pierson DL. Stress—induced Subclinical Reactivation 0f
Varicella Zoster Virus in Astronauts. Journal ofMedical Virology. 2005; 72: 174—179.
Pierson DL, Stowe RP, Phillips TM, Lugg DJ, Mehta SK. Epstein-Barr Virus Shedding by Astronauts During Space
Flight. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity. 2004; 19:235—242.

142

"
"151","TEST OF MIDODRINE AS A COUNTERMEASURE AGAINST POSTFLIGHT ORTHOSTATIC
HYPOTENSION-SHORT-DURATION BIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION (Midodrine-SDBI)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Steven Platts, Ph.D., NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston

Expeditions 14—17
Research Area Physiological Studies: Cardiovascular and Respiratory Systems
Many astronauts experience postﬂight orthostatic hypotension, a condition Where the blood pressure drops When
an individual stands up, resulting in presyncope (lightheadedness) 0r syncope (fainting). Approximately 20 to 30%
0f crews 0n short-duration (fewer than 20 days) missions and 83% 0f crews 0n long-duration missions experience
some degree of orthostatic intolerance after return to Earth. To date, the countermeasures that have been tested—
e.g., ﬂuid loading, the use of LBNP, and the medication Fluronef—have not successfully eliminated postﬂight
orthostatic hypotension.
On Earth, the drug Midodrine has been used extensively to treat low blood pressure. Midodrine acts as a vasopressor
(raises blood pressure) by causing constriction (tightening) of the blood vessels, Which leads to an increase in blood
pressure. Test of Midodrine as a Countermeasure Against Post-ﬂight Orthostatic Hypotension—Short-duration Bio-
logical Investigation (Midodrine-SDBI) studies the effectiveness of Midodrine for the treatment of postﬂight
orthostatic hypotension.
RESULTS
Midodrine has been shown to successfully reduce orthostatic hypotension in patients on Earth, as orthostatic
hypotension affects people other than astronauts. To date, this investigation is ongoing; future Expeditions Will
involve testing on more subjects before conclusive results can be determined.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.

143

"
"152","PROMOTING SENSORIMOTOR RESPONSE GENERALIZABILITY: A COUNTERMEASURE TO
MITIGATE LOCOMOTOR DYSFUNCTION AFTER LONG-DURATION SPACE FLIGHT (Mobility)
Principal Investigat0r(s): J acob Bloomberg, NASA J 0hns0n Space Center, Houston
Expeditions 5—12
Research Area Neurovascular and Vestibular Systems
'I, "" i ""I I |' Following space ﬂight, astronauts experience disturbances in balance and
.' L -. _ 5 walking control during the postﬂight readaptation period, due in part to changes in
‘1 . ""i I the way the CNS processes sensory information as a result of prolonged exposure to
,l' . .. "" _ microgravity. The goal of this study was to develop an in—ﬂight treadmill training
ﬂ_ * 'F' program that facilitates recovery of locomotor function after long—duration space
_ . ' . ' ﬂight.
'-_ I. 'I- .-
' -- '_ Z *' . L The proposed training program was based on the concept of adaptive generalization.
' _. : , - During this type of training, the subj ect gains experience producing the appropriate
_ . _ '. . - i ii i J l adaptive behavior under a variety of sensory conditions and balance challenges. As
{:31 ""E I . I -- q. a result of this training, the subj ect learns to solve a class of balance and walking
' _="" ' _,' ' - problems rather than producing a single solution to one problem. Therefore, the
I l' .5. __ subj ect gains the ability to “learn to learn” under a variety of conditions that
'i ii. challenge the balance and walking control systems.
I. ""
' ' Mobility may help to develop an in—ﬂight countermeasure that is built around
ISS treadmill exercise activities. By manipulating the sensory conditions of exercise (e.g., varying Visual ﬂow
patterns during walking), this training regimen systematically and repeatedly promotes adaptive change in walking
performance, improving the ability of the astronaut to adapt to a novel gravity environment. It is anticipated that this
training regimen will facilitate neural adaptation to unit (Earth) and partial (Mars) gravity after long—duration space
ﬂight.
All participating subj ects perform two tests of locomotor performance both preﬂight and postﬂight: the Integrated
Treadmill Locomotion Test and the Functional Mobility Test.
RESULTS
Data collection on all subj ects has been completed and is currently undergoing analysis.
PUBLICATION(S) .-
There are no publications at this time. #534; L..__ _1
“ EL?""- ' 3.- I I
“:1 {Jr '1! . ""
'. e:- Jﬁwl l
- .. . r
I a . I'L-i'déﬂi
|SSO1OE24001 —Astronaut Leroy Chiao, Expedition 10 _ F L i :11 '
commander and NASA ISS science officer, equipped with rﬁf- ‘_ ' . ' |
a bungee harness, exercises on the TVIS in the Zvezda . I y. __ l"". -,
service module of ISS. Crewmembers who complete |_.‘3| - . es ' . i""
standard exercise protocols on ISS are the experi- H ' l. ' . _1._, .
mental controls for the Mobility experiment. 1 ' ii: t“
.l '3'
_ “I IIIhE-III-h
5- ,;‘il fr. 2' ' ET____
: -. e .. q;
144

"
"153","NUTRITIONAL STATUS ASSESSMENT (N utrition)
Principal Investigator(s): Scott M. Smith, Ph.D., NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston
Expeditions 14—20, ongoing
Research Area Immune System and Integrated Studies
The NASA Clinical Nutritional Assessment (MR016L) proﬁle, which has been implemented with two Mir and
all ISS U.S. crewmenibers, consists of two preﬂight and one postﬂight analysis of nutritional status as well as an in—
ﬂight assessment of dietary intake using a Food Frequency Questionnaire. The Clinical Nutrition Assessment
(Nutrition) investigation expanded MR016L testing by:
0 In—ﬂight blood and urine collection
0 Expanding nominal testing to include additional normative markers of nutritional assessment
0 Adding a return plus 30—day (R+3 0) session to allow evaluation of postﬂight nutrition and implications for
rehabilitation
On earlier ISS Inissions, it was not possible to assess nutritional status during ﬂight because blood and urine
could not be collected, stowed frozen, and returned. The altered nutritional status ﬁndings for several nutrients
postﬂight are of concern, and require the ability to monitor the status of these nutrients during ﬂight to determine
whether there is a speciﬁc impetus or time frame for these decrements. In addition to monitoring crew nutritional
status during ﬂight, in—ﬂight sample collection would allow for better assessment of countermeasure effectiveness.
Nutrition is also designed to expand the current MR016L to include additional normative markers for assessing crew
health and countermeasure effectiveness, and extend the current protocol to include an additional postﬂight blood
and urine collection (R+3 0). Several nutritional assessment parameters are altered at landing, but it is not known
whether the changes are still apparent 30 days postﬂight.
Additional markers of bone metabolism (helical peptide, OPG, receptor activator of NF—B ligand (RANKL),
insulin—like growth factor 1 (IGF—l)) are measured to better monitor bone health and countermeasure efﬁcacy.
New markers of oxidative damage are measured (8—iso—prostaglandin F2a, protein carbonyls, oxidized and reduced
glutathione) to better assess the type of oxidative insults during space ﬂight. The array of nutritional assessment
parameters was expanded to include serum folate, plasma pyridoxal 5'—phosphate, and homocysteine to better un—
derstand changes in folate, Vitamin B6 status, and related cardiovascular risk factors during and postﬂight. Addition—
ally, stress hormones and hormones that affect bone and muscle metabolism will also be measured (dihydroergo—
cryptine (DHEA), dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEAS), cortisol, testosterone, estradiol). This additional assessment
would allow for better health monitoring, and more accurate recommendations to be made for crew rehabilitation.
RESULTS
This experiment is still ongoing. Urine and blood samples for several astronauts have been collected before,
during, and after ISS Expeditions. Since the experiment design calls for the combination and comparative analysis
of data from all Expeditions, ﬁnal results are not yet available.
PUBLICATION(S) KM a “3-1
There are no publications at this time. M '_
1:313?- —
I ‘- 4:41.:-
.1"""".ir.l!
' II
It 615”""
|SSO15E10555 — Astronaut Suni Williams, Expeditions 14 ' 3""."" '
and 15 flight engineer, configures her blood samples in the I a ~ :' ' __1.
HRF-2 refrigerated centrifuge, preparing to separate the I"" q: Il- r'!"" F; .
cellular and IIqUId components of blood to faCIIItate P' -_ . . -- , 4""!
sample analysis on the ground. $3. . . -1- I if
I .J
145

"
"154","BIOAVAILABILITY AND PERFORMANCE OF PROMETHAZINE DURING SPACE FLIGHT (PMZ)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Lakshmi Putcha, Ph.D., NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston

Expeditions: 11, 13, 15, 16
Research Area Neurological and Vestibular Systems
Promethazine (PMZ) is a pharmaceutical treatment for the space motion sickness that is experienced by space
shuttle astronauts. This investigation measured the amount of medication that is absorbed and available to the body
after taking it to estimate the intensity of drug-related side effects that may affect the performance of astronauts
during space ﬂights.
For this investigation, two sessions were conducted: a ground-based and an in-ﬂight session. The in-ﬂight ses-
sion involved astronauts who take Promethazine for motion sickness during their mission. To keep track of these
astronauts, Actiwatches were worn to monitor sleep and activity; saliva samples were provided to measure drug
levels in the body; and the Karolinska Sleepiness Score (KSS) was used to estimate sleepiness side effects. These
data was compared to the postﬂight data that were collected 30 days after return from their mission. Results from
this study will be used to determine how Promethazine is handled by the body, and how severe the performance-
impacting side effects of the drug are on orbit and on Earth.
RESULTS
There are no results at this time.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.

146

"
"155","EFFECTS OF EVA AND LONG-TERM EXPOSURE TO MICROGRAVITY ON
PULMONARY FUNCTION (PuFF)
Principal Investigat0r(s): J ohn B. West, University of California—San Diego, La J 011a, Calif.
Expeditions 3—6
Research Area Physiological Studies: Cardiovascular and Respiratory Systems
This experiment examined the effect of long—term exposure to microgravity and EVA on pulmonary function
by studying crewrnernbers before and after they performed EVAs. It examined whether pulmonary function was
affected by long—term exposure to noxious gases or to particulate matter that may accumulate in the atmosphere of
the ISS.
There is a large difference in pressure between the inside of ISS and in the spacesuit that is used for EVAs. The
effects of this difference in pressure pose a signiﬁcant risk of decompression sickness (DCS)—kn0wn in the diving world
as “the bends”—f0r spacewalkers, including bubble formation within the blood. Even if the symptoms of DCS do not
occur, venous gas microbubbles can alter pulmonary function, increasing the risk of forming a venous embolism.
. ‘ ,- ,5 ,,
. ; . @ ISSOO634800'5 —- Astronaut Donald R. Pettitz Expedition 6
- ‘ , A NASA ISS selence ofﬁcer, uses a camera durlng a spacewalk on
A1” ‘ , Jan 15, 2003.
'l"".i;/ § ’7 d if“ g Q I
, l, \ -' I ' ‘ _ 1;}. ‘ ~’ f Each Pulmonary Function in Flight (PuFF)
' _ 33$ 3...‘ § session consisted of ﬁve noninvasive tests with the
.0 “7‘ '- ‘1 ‘ ‘@ 4‘ . 1' crew breathing only cabin air. The tests measured the
4 1;?"" '..:\‘ T L)"" pulmonary system’s ability to exchange gases, the amount
If; ‘ﬁ ' x i of air that is inspired and expired as a function of time,
v ""a . and the maximum pressure of the air that is inhaled and
! b: ""'ﬁL exhaled. The analysis looked for markers that indicate
1‘! - «F , ""P _‘~ that the lungs have been weakened from exposure to
’ "" ' 5. x“ ‘2‘ microgravity, or that the body’s ability to exchange
and distribute gases has been disrupted.
PuFF hardware, including a manual breathing valve and ﬂow meter, was attached to the HRF gas analyzer system
for metabolic analysis physiology (GASMAP) hardware, physiological signal conditioners, and the HRF computer.
GASMAP measured the volume of gases that were inspired and expired, frequency of respiration, and ambient
barometric pressure.
; - - ' i-l' . . -
RESULTS ll! _ ‘ ._‘ _. :- '-' I '5'. l"" e"";- '-f-'j._
Excellent quality data were collected from the crews on “-311 ._ -. '- ‘_ ii; i q I +_.-.- b
all four Expeditions, comprising eight crewrnembers who _.i r 1'- ""; _ i'-- ."" i
performed EVAs. Prisk et a1. (2005, 2006) reported no signif— ' ~ .“ ' - ' ' _"" I
icant changes in pulmonary gas exchange 1 day after an EVA ' h ' L! ! ' "", - ""
was performed. The researchers report a small increase in rneta— ”'- 2; _ f ' ""
bolic rates in the astronauts 0n the day following the EVA. The _ ,ﬁ‘ﬂfj _
authors note that testing was not ideal because acute effects re— _ . v ""#1 I -
sulting from EVAs could not be measured immediately after ' ..- '-;-_' ' - 4':- -
performing the spacewalk due to EVA protocols and logistics, ; ¢— _ ‘ﬁ {1'- "" ..
but remain conﬁdent in their primary cenclusion. However, the ISSOOSEO7133 —Donald R. Petti t sets up PuFF
small effect observed on the day f0110w1ng EVA suggests that hardware in preparation for an HRF experiment in
current denitrogenation protocols prevent the decompression the US. Destiny laboratory on station during
stress that is associated with EVA from causing any major EXPGdition 5-
lasting disruption to gas exchange in the lung.
147

"
"156","PUBLICATIONS(S)
Prisk GK, Fine J M, Cooper TK, West J B. Pulmonary gas exchange is not impaired 24 h after extravehicular activity.
Journal oprplied Physiology. 2005; 99(6):2233—8.
Prisk GK, Fine J M, Cooper TK, West J B. Vital Capacity, Respiratory Muscle Strength and Pulmonary Gas
Exchange during Long-Duration Exposure to Microgravity. Journal oprplied Physiology. 2006; 101:439—447.

148

"
"157","RENAL STONE RISK DURING SPACE FLIGHT: ASSESSMENT AND COUNTERMEASURE
VALIDATION (Renal Stone)
Principal Investigator(s): Peggy A. Whitson, NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston
Expeditions 3—6, 8, 11—14
Research Area Physiological Studies: Bone and Muscle
The loss of calcium from bone that is combined with decreased ﬂuid intake x
in ﬂight increases the probability for kidney stone formation during and
after ﬂight. Development of a kidney (or renal) stone in an astronaut can .. _
have serious consequences since it cannot be treated in ﬂight as it would be 3 ,' '
on the ground. To better understand the risks to astronauts on long—duration .
space ﬂights, quantiﬁcation of renal stone formation potential and recovery
is required. This experiment studied the potential development of renal stones - .
in space crews and the efﬁcacy of a pharmaceutical countermeasure. '
This micrograph shows calcium oxalate
Potassiurn citrate (K—cit) is a proven ground—based treatment for patients crystals in urine. These small crystals can
who are suffering from renal stones. In this study, from 3 days before develop to form renal stones.
launch and continuing through 14 days after landing, each crewrnember
ingested either two K—cit tablets or two placebos daily. Urine samples were collected during 24—hour periods at three
points during the crewmenibers’ rnission, once at the beginning, midway point, and at the end. In addition to taking
pills and collecting urine samples, crewmembers maintained handwritten logs of their daily food and ﬂuid intake,
exercise, and medication during the time of the urine collections. These log books acted as a backup to the barcode
reader records that are part of the inventory management system with which crews typically record food intake and
medication.
Ultirnately, these data will not only help long—duration space ﬂight crews, but also will aid those on Earth in
understanding how renal stones form in otherwise healthy persons. This should also provide insight into stone—
forming diseases on Earth.
RESULTS
Urine samples were collected before, during, and after ﬂights, as was dietary information from crewmernbers.
Since the experiment design calls for the combination and comparative analysis of data from all Expeditions, ﬁnal
results are pending.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
-. 1.; .-~ ..
I .::.-_' - ' I"" ' . .IIIr
' . E 1... - ‘* ISSO11E135OO —- ISS commander Sergei Krikalev
‘3 ‘ ' ' ' with Renal Stone sample collection hardware during
1, - xi . _ - ISS Expedition 11.
11.! _j "" J! ~ /
hi i:_‘_* 5 - - r; _ .
‘ i - . i i
I '- I
149

"
"158","SLEEP-WAKE ACTIGRAPHY AND LIGHT EXPOSURE DURING SPACE FLIGHT-
LONG (Sleep-Long)
Principal Investigator(s): Charles A. Czeisler, M.D., Ph.D., Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Mass.
Expeditions 14—18, ongoing
Research Area Behavior and Performance Studies
The success and effectiveness of human space ﬂight depends on the ability of crewmembers to maintain a
high level of cognitive performance and Vigilance While operating and monitoring sophisticated instrumentation.
Astronauts during long—duration space ﬂights, however, commonly experience sleep disruption and may experience
misalignment of circadian phase. Both of these conditions are associated With insomnia, and impairment of alertness
and cognitive performance.
There is little information on the effect of long—duration space ﬂight on sleep and circadian rhythm organization.
Sleep—Wake Actigraphy and Light Exposure During Spaceﬂight—Long (Sleep—Long) uses state—of—the—art ambulatory
technology to monitor sleep—wake activity patterns and light exposure in crewmembers Who are aboard ISS. Subj ects
wear a small, lightweight activity— and light—recording device (Actiwatch) for the duration of their mission. The sleep—
wake activity and light—eXposure patterns that are obtained in ﬂight are compared With baseline data that are col—
lected on Earth before and after space ﬂight. These data should help us better understand the effects of space
ﬂight on sleep as well as aid in the development of effective countermeasures for long—duration space ﬂight.
RESULTS
Data collection for this investigation is ongoing. Final results Will be analyzed for completion of data collection
from the last test subj ect.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are 110 publications at this time.
. + ' '93.; ... 1 .
‘1. "" ”1.- ' 4i?""— -. _,
1,. ”xii-ﬁ LHH‘ 1-. ‘--..__ ® ..""' '/ .
“f '4.'\-1; ’1. _- - '. 1 . *4—~..._ ""-—- ' '
'5. \3 .x'i 1,13; 4"" 1 I -
J"". II'-.II'-. -...I it‘- 1.
""i"" 1"" 1i _. It I .,
4.” '-=..-. ' L .1 +I-
.I . .-.'-""""-' .-_'_' -1: m; _.
. 4 ‘7‘
. . E
ISSO14EO5119 — The Sleep-Long Actiwatch is visible on the left arm of astronaut
Michael Lopez-Alegria, Expedition 14 commander. The Actiwatch monitors light and
activity patterns of crewmembers.
1 5O

"
"159","SLEEP-WAKE ACTIGRAPHY AND LIGHT EXPOSURE DURING SPACE FLIGHT-
SHORT (Sleep-Short)
Principal Investigator(s): Charles A. Czeisler, M.D., Ph.D., Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Mass.
Expeditions 11, 13—18, ongoing
Research Area Behavior and Performance Studies
-__ 4|: —--... . ' I"" , , .
-.i,_ 5; 3““: -. ﬂ / ﬁg 1 The success and effectiveness of human space ﬂight depends on
.. ._'__ __' --~L~. Eiﬁﬂ' ' --|;_ -_ the ability of crewmembers to maintain a high level of cognitive
5T Hg i .41”! h J performance and Vigilance While operating and monitoring sophisti—
_ _ h 5- i ﬁl cated instrumentation. Astronauts during short space ﬂights, however,
' . H F ' ' commonly experience sleep disruption and may experience misalignment
' 'ﬁ ' ”'11 !_ _. :.. of circadian phase. Both of these conditions are associated With insomnia,
' r.::- * FF and impairment of alertness and cognitive performance.
I 15-“ ._* . ‘i T -'.
_.. E .u-‘W , i"" :1] Relatively little is known of the prevalence or cause of space—ﬂight—
.i-lf "":1“? aqu,‘ induced insomnia in short—duration missions. This experiment uses
J. -- 1 -.*_ . «r state—of—the—art ambulatory technology to monitor s1eep—wake activity
I l. r 413' "" patterns and light exposure in crewmembers Who are aboard the space
i) ! H I ‘I-- - , . . . . . .
n n. . ,1 shuttle. Sub] ects wear a small, lightweight act1V1ty— and light—recording
~:_?._- ‘ I device (Actiwatch) for the duration of their mission. The s1eep—wake ac—
+ - '-. ‘._ ,ﬁ ‘1“ tiVity and light exposure patterns that are obtained in ﬂight are compared
' 1-"" 1-2. """"...;..'_-| . . .
-_ .1- a “-— With baseline data that are collected on Earth before and after space
ma. l'"" "" ' ﬂight. The data that are collected should help us better understand
S104E5114 —. Astronaut, Janet Kavangji on . the effects of space ﬂight on sleep as well as aid in the development
8T8 104 wean""?! an ACt'WatCh 0“ her “ght “ms"" of effective countermeasures for short—duration space ﬂight.
for recording actIVItIes.
RESULTS
Data collection for this investigation is ongoing. Final results Will be analyzed for completion of data collection
from the last test subj ect.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
1 51

"
"160","STABILITY OF PHARMACOTHERAPEUTIC AND NUTRITIONAL COMPOUNDS (Stability)
Principal Investigator(s): Lakshmi Putcha, Ph.D., NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston; Scott M. Smith, Ph.D.,

NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston

Expeditions 13—1 8
Research Area Radiation Studies
Data gathered from past space shuttle missions suggest that some of the medications that are packed in the
shuttle medical pack degrade even after relatively brief periods (less than 20 days) of space ﬂight. The observed
degradation includes both physical and chemical characteristics of medicine formulations. The degradation was
sufﬁcient to inﬂuence FDA-stipulated shelf-life for these formulations and may result in a loss of potency. Physical
and chemical instability of medications could render treatments with degraded drugs ineffective for assurance of opti-
mal crew health during long-duration space exploration missions. An evaluation of subjective data on medications
that are used by crewmembers during space ﬂight indicates that 8% of all treatments that have been administered
in the Space Shuttle Program were reported ineffective. Pharmaceutical instability may modify effectiveness and
safety, and is one possible cause of the ineffectiveness of treatments. Degradation of food products may also render
them ineffective in providing health and energy sustenance. The stability of medications and foods that are used by
the crew must be adequate to facilitate safe exploration of space in the future. The Stability of Pharmacotherapeutic
and Nutritional Compounds (Stability) investigation evaluates mission-critical medications and foods to understand
issues relating to loss of potency for medicines and to nutritional adequacy of foods in space.
Four identical Stability kits were delivered to 188 in Jul 2006 during the STS-l2l/ULF1.1 mission. The ﬁrst kit
was returned to Earth during the STS-l2l/ULF1.1 mission. The second kit was returned after 11 months of exposure
during the STS-l 17/ 13A mission in Jun 2007. The third kit was returned after 1 year and 7 months of exposure
during the STS-l22/1E mission in Feb 2008. The fourth kit was returned on STS-l28/ULF2 in Nov 2008.
Pharmaceuticals
Results from the Stability investigation offer an assessment of the stability and chemical integrity of medications
in adverse enVironments that are encountered during space missions. This information will also assist in identifying
susceptible medications that may require alternate methods of preparation, dispensing, and storage to improve stability
and minimize loss of potency during space missions. Estimates of shelf—life and potency from Stability data can be
used for the selection, modiﬁcation, and development of drug dosage forms and storage techniques for the ISS,
moon, and Mars missions. The data will also enhance our understanding of the conditions that contribute to
pharmaceutical instability and help deﬁne mitigation strategies that assure adequate drug stability for human
exploration of space.
Nutrients
Nutrients are Vital for every cellular process in the body, both on Earth and in space. It is eVident that the status
of certain Vitamins in the body is altered during long-duration space missions, but it is not known whether Vitamin
metabolism is altered, the Vitamins in the food supply have been degraded, or the food supply contains enough of
each nutrient throughout the mission. For example, other studies have shown that folate status is decreased after 3-
to 4-month missions. It is possible that high levels of ionizing radiation or long-term storage could destroy nutrients
in foods or decrease their bioavailability. Either of these would lead to impaired nutritional status in crews who are
consuming these foods.
Stability results from nutritional products could provide important information about the susceptibility of Vitamins,
amino acids, and fatty acids in the space food system to adverse enVironmental factors that are encountered during
space missions. These results will assist in determining whether modiﬁed requirements are necessary to avoid mal-
nutrition in crewmembers. The results will also indicate whether improved packaging designs will be needed to
protect food from irradiation and long-term storage conditions during long-duration space exploration missions.
These data will be useful in identifying alternate methods of preparation and storage of these speciﬁc food sys-
tems to minimize loss of nutritional value during long-duration space exploration missions.

1 52

"
"161","RESULTS
There are no results to report at this time.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
| d
. I' I . I - ||- _ .
. '5: 'r. Jig '- .- .j’“ -
-' I . . I i|| . . T.———-
. . I. . _
_ I I “i ""- '
Il- _. .r --""'_--—
_ , - J.J- - ... ., . *'_r
F I ?'I-. ._ I1 ‘33}.- ' __1 ' .-"" . |.I! ‘ .I
l-' __ II:-:-""fl- J _-_- """"'--.'11 1:51. _
ISSOO7EO7832 — Expedition 7 Science Officer Ed Lu prepares to add garlic paste to a food
packet while preparing a meal in the galley area of the Zvezda service module. A can of green
peas and eating utensils are visible on the table in front of him. Preserving food for Iong-duration
Exploration missions is important to maintaining the safety and health of the crew.
153

"
"162","SUBREGIONAL ASSESSMENT OF BONE Loss IN THE AXIAL SKELETON
IN LONG-TERM SPACE FLIGHT (Subregional Bone)
Principal Investigator(s): Thomas F. Lang, University of California, San Francisco, Calif.
Expeditions 2—8
Research Area Physiological Studies: Bone and Muscle
Bone loss is one of the known risks of exposure to reduced graVity—a risk that increases with the length of stay
in that environment. Although healthy bone can repair damage done to itself, researchers are yet unsure how much
bone is replaced after crewmembers return to Earth. Is bone mass recovered 1 year after ﬂight? Is there a difference in
the subregional distribution of bone prior to ﬂight and 1 year after ﬂight? Subregional Bone measured the amount of
bone that was lost during space ﬂight and recovered postﬂight in an effort to answer these questions.
Subregional Bone hardware consisted of several devices that were used before and after ﬂight. Dual-energy X-ray
absorptiometry (DEXA) provided a two-dimensional measurement of the entire bone mass of the hip, spine, and
heel. These measurements were compared to quantitative computed tomography (QCT), which examined cortical
(the bone’s dense outer layer) and trabecular (the bone’s inner, spongy-looking layer) bone separately and three-
dimensionally to determine the extent of bone loss in the hip and spine. QCT measurements allow researchers
to determine whether loss is localized in a subregion of the bone. DEXA and QCT measurements were also
compared to quantitative ultrasound (QUS) of the heel to evaluate ultrasound as a possible alternative to
X-ray measurements.
4' RESULTS
1 This experiment determined the distribution of bone loss in the
spine and hip in long-duration space ﬂight using QCT and assessed
how bone is recovered after return. One of the ﬁrst Bioastronautics
research investigations to begin on ISS, this study recruited 16 subj ects
between Expedition 2 and Expedition 8. The ﬁrst publication in the
Journal ofBone and Mineral Research (Lang et al. 2004) included
eight subjects who had been back long enough to measure their bone
density 1 year postﬂight. On ISS, bone mineral density was lost at an
average rate of about 0.9% per month in the lumbar spine and 1.4% per
month in the femoral neck. For comparison, a post—menopausal woman
\ experiences losses of bone mineral on the order of 1% per year. The
experiment provides insight into the process of bone loss because it is
the ﬁrst study to differentiate the loss in the cortical bone (the outer part
of the bone) and the trabecular bone (the inner parts of the bone). For
example, losses of mass in the cortical bone of the hip averaged around
1.6—1.7% per month whereas losses in the trabecular bone averaged
22—25% per month. In subsequent publications, Lang et al. (2006a
and 2006b) measured the femoral neck cross section and calculated
' ' volumetric bone loss and recovery after 1 year on the ground after
DEXA scan of a human hip space ﬂight. The authors report that bone mass and structure of the
astronauts” femurs recovered—but not fully—after 1 year back on
Earth. Astronauts experienced an average 11% decline in femoral bone loss during space ﬂight. While bone
mass and volume increased back on Earth, the volumetric bone mass density did not fully recover (proximal
femur is larger in size, but less mineralized and more porous than bone lost during space ﬂight).
This research is included in a comprehensive discussion of the effects of space ﬂight on bone health (Cavanaugh
and Rice, 2007). Lang et al. (2007) discuss their results in a broader context. The large weight-bearing bones (pelvis,
hips, legs) suffer greatest bone loss during space ﬂight, and countermeasures and recovery therapies should focus on
those areas to better protect against injuries that may be related to diminished bone strength. This research has direct
applications to the design of countermeasures and considerations that will be built into surface activities for future
exploration missions to Mars: after a lengthy transit (6 months) in microgravity, astronauts will be expected to
perform on the surface of Mars and engage in activities that place loads on large bones. This work feeds into
1 54

"
"163","ongoing and future experiments that monitor astronauts’ biochemical indicators of bone health and bone
loss, as well as the design of diagnostic tools that may provide additional means to monitor bone size and
density during exploration space ﬂights (Lang et a1. 2007).
In a related follow—on study, Sibonga et a1. (2007) examined the bone mineral density (BMD) measurements in
ﬁve regional sites for 45 crewmembers, both U.S. and Russian, Who participated on 5 6 long—duration ﬂights of at
least 4 months’ duration. The study population showed variable decreases in BMD across the ﬁve sites; the key
result was that they could calculate an estimate for time required to restore 50% 0f the loss of bone in each site,
and that full recovery would take up to 3 years—much longer than the mission duration.
PUBLICATION(S)
Lang T, LeBlanc A, Evans H, Lu Y, Gennant H, Yu A. Cortical and Trabecular Bone Mineral Loss from the Spine
and Hip in Long—duration Spaceﬂight. Journal ofBone and Mineral Research. 19(6): 1006—12, 2004.
Lang TF, LeBlanc AD, Evans HJ, Lu Y. Adaptation of the Proximal Femur t0 Skeletal Reloading After Long—
Duration Spcaeﬂight. Journal ofBone and Mineral Research. 21(8);1224—1230, 2006.
Lang, TF, Keyak, JH and LeBlanc, AD, Deﬁning and Assessing Bone Health During and After Spaceﬂight, in Bone
Loss During Spaceﬂight, Cavanaugh and Rice (eds), Cleveland Clinic Press, Cleveland, Ohio, pp. 63—69, 2007.
Cavanaugh PR, Rice AJ. Bone Loss During Spaceﬂight, Cleveland Clinic Press, Cleveland, Ohio, 297 pp., 2007.
Sibonga JD, Evans HJ, Sung HG, Specter ER, Lang, TF, Oganov VS, Bakulin AV, Shackelford LC, LeBlanc AD.
Recovery of spaceﬂight—induced bone loss: Bone mineral density after long—duration missions as ﬁtted With an
exponential function. Bone, 41 (2007) 973—978.
Sibonga JD, Evans HJ, Spector ER, Maddocks MJ, Smith SA, Shackelford LC, LeBlanc AD. Bone Health
During and After Spaceﬂight, in Bone Loss During Spaceﬂight (Cavanaugh and Rice, eds), Cleveland Clinic Press,
Cleveland, Ohio, pp. 45—51, 2007.

One-mm-thick sections through the mid frontal plane of the hip, showing regions of evaluation in

white superimposed on a false color image of the computed tomography (CT) data. The image on

the left shows the cortical region of the femoral neck, and the image on the right shows the

trabecular bone regions.

155

"
"164","SURFACE, WATER, AND AIR BIOCHARACTERIZATION (SWAB) — A COMPREHENSIVE
CHARACTERIZATION OF MICROORGANISMS AND ALLERGENS IN SPACECRAFT
Principal Investigat0r(s): Duane L. Pierson, Ph.D., NASA J 0hns0n Space Center, Houston
Expeditions 13—16, ongoing
Research Area Immune System and Integrated Studies
. ""3:: "" I ‘- _ .' I- I During long—duration space ﬂight, spacecraft build up a diverse array of
1.3, . i‘v- ""’"" ' L. microorganisms that directly interacts With the crew. Most microorganisms
-I ' 1: are harmless or even beneﬁcial to the crew; however, the presence of medically
- . .. ' signiﬁcant organisms appearing in this environment could adversely affect crew
1%.. ' ' health and performance during long—duration missions. The primary goal of the
“i ' ' r] ' Surface, Water, and Air Biocharacterization (SWAB) — A Comprehensive Char—
-.- _. ""' """"-. a - acterization 0f Microorganisms and Allergen in Spacecraft experiment is to use
jjI'I-I“, "" - advanced technologies to better understand the types of organisms that the crew
I51"" ' ' ~. could encounter and their sources, and to assess the potential risks.
.I II I'I‘I.._ ‘FT. f”? .. This study of microorganisms, allergens, and microbial toxins in the space—
; "" i. '- ‘37- I' "" ' . . ' craft environment was initiated to ensure the health, safety, and performance of
' '2 -- ' . — crewrnembers during ﬂight. All previous methods evaluating spacecraft ecology
'Ir III _I- Jil'ﬂ: ' have used culture—based methodology, thus rnany organisms have been omitted from
_ -‘ 1 I ,. _ isolation, including rnedically signiﬁcant organisms such as the pathogen Legionella
' 5 I1 gig?"" (the bacteria that causes Legionnaire’s disease). Likewise, culturable bacteria and
' _ _ . . : - , fungi are the only potential allergens that have been studied; the more potent aller—
ISéO515EO7586 —Astronaut Suinhita gens, such as dust mites, have never been analyzed in spacecraft environments.
L. Williams, Expeditions 14 and 15 This study uses modern molecular biology, advanced microscopy, and immune—
ﬂight eIngiIneer, GondlIJCtS a SWAB air chemical techniques to examine air, surface, and water samples for bacteria
fﬁqugg m the DeStmy laboratory Of and fungi, pathogenic protozoa, allergens, and microbial toxins.
To accomplish this goal, new collection techniques have been developed to improve the quality of the sample
that is being returned from ISS for analysis. Air samples are being collected through a novel gelatin ﬁlter to improve
collection efﬁciency. These ﬁlters can retain particles as small as Viruses. Water and surface samples have been de—
signed to improve DNA recovery, using a DNA preservative that is composed of a mixture of sodium dodecyl
sulfate (SDS) and ethylenediarnine—tetraacetic acid (EDTA) in Tris buffer.
Analysis of the in—ﬁight sarnples focuses around molecular techniques. These include bacterial ﬁngerprinting,
bacterial and fungal ribosomal identiﬁcation, and quantitative PCR to identify and enurnerate speciﬁc genes in
environmental samples. The identiﬁcation of speciﬁc genes is critical in the assessment of microorganisms for par—
ticular characteristics, including the production of microbial toxins. The samples that are returned from ﬂight Will
also be evaluated using denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), Which is a technique that allows for the
identiﬁcation of bacteria Without any ampliﬁcation of organisms With growth on media. This technique holds
the potential to increase the number of different identiﬁed species by lOO—fold.
RESULTS
Sample collection for the surface and air samples has been completed, and the samples have been returned to Earth
for analysis. Water sarnpling Will take place during future missions.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
1 56

"
"165","ORGAN DOSE MEASUREMENT USING A PHANTOM TORSO (Torso)
Principal Investigator(s): Gautam D. Badhwar, NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston
Expedition 2

Research Area Radiation Studies
One of the most critical risks to humans in space is radiation exposure. Outside the protection of Earth's atmosphere,
space crews are exposed to a wide range of particles, including neutrons, that are not normally a threat on Earth.
Exposure to radiation that is found in LEO and beyond can cause cataracts, cancer, damage to reproductive organs
and the nervous system, and changes in heredity.
The Organ Dose Measurement Using the Phantom Torso (Torso) employed a model human head and torso
(Rando phantom), which was imbedded with more than 350 detectors (thermo-luminescent detectors) and ﬁve
silicon diode detectors, over ﬁve depths to measure absorbed dose to speciﬁc organs during shuttle ﬂight. A tissue-
equivalent proportional detector and a charged-particle directional spectrometer (CPDS) were placed within 1.5 feet
of the torso during these ISS measurements. This was the ﬁrst NASA experiment to simulate doses at discrete locations
within the body.
The tissue-equivalent proportional counter (TEPC) consisted of a spectrometer and cylindrical detector with which
to measure external radiation doses. The TEPC measured radiation dose and dose equivalent in complex radiation
ﬁelds (ﬁelds containing a mixture of particle types). The CPDS measures particle energy and direction inside ISS.
Both the TEPC and the CPDS remained within 1 to 1.5 feet (3048—45 .72 cm) of Torso during its operation on
station.
RESULTS _ . u. .. 41. 1’4""
Torso results were combined with results from various exper- 'T' J 'i"" 331'!
iments on previous missions to validate NASA’s organ dose 1"" 1 .4; _ .- ’ 'l
database for astronauts. Preliminary results suggest that organ \\ _ 4-1:: I Jr"" r. “If
dose and dose equivalent can be projected to a i25% accuracy - __“_'=""' 1'
using a combination of dosimetry and radiation transport models. \ L _ 1t“ . :5 a /
This accuracy envelope is greatly improved relative to the current 19% i I: “,1
accuracy of organ-speciﬁc cancer risk projections, which are esti- 1!: _..-* . "" '
mated at i5 00%. Further analyses and incorporation of these -.-_:;_.""‘ _ . ' '-
radiation results into operational planning for exploration is it w ' -'
ongoing. III - . 7.1 ""'ﬁ ""

ISSOOZE5952 — Image of Torso on station
Overall, the dose rates that were measured in Torso were in during EXped'tlon 2'
good general agreement with other measured values and with the
models that were used to predict these values. The largest differences that were observed between measured data
and the simulations were 15%. In addition, a model that considers orbital altitude, attitude, and solar cycle emissions
agreed within 25% of the measured data. It was determined that the maj ority of radiation energy that was deposited
in human tissues (~80%) was due to galactic cosmic radiation. This is due to spacecraft material providing effective
attenuation of the protons that are trapped in the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. The data indicated an average radiation
quality factor (a measurement of how damaging a type of radiation is to tissue) of 2.6; these quality factors do
not appreciably change with depth in the body. Finally, this experiment indicated that the contribution to both
skin and organ doses from secondary neutrons is not negligible (Expedition 2 Postﬂight Report).
In a follow-on analysis, Cucinotta et al. (2008) report results from post-mission biodosimetry assessments of
chromosomal damage in lymphocyte cells from 19 ISS astronauts. These results were compared with space radiation
transport models, irradiation of preﬂight blood samples, and results from the phantom torso experiments. The ISS
missions who were sampled include those who ﬂew on the earliest missions near the solar maximum, and conclude
with the Increment 15 astronauts, who ﬂew near the solar minimum. During this time frame, although 67 SPEs oc-
curred, the extended solar maximum (particular to this solar cycle) decreased the galactic cosmic ray (GCR) levels.
Average effective doses for a 6-month stay on the ISS were 72 mSV. At least 80% of the organ dose equivalents
come from GCRs. Another important result shows that the models are predictive within about 10%. The authors

1 57

"
"166","conclude that many uncertainties about space radiation remain—both levels and types of radiation, and effects
inside the spacecraft. Continued research and analyses are required.
PUBLICATION(S)
Cucinotta FA, Wu H, Semones EJ, Gibbons F, Atwell W, Shavers MR, George KL, Badhwar GD. Astronauts
organ doses form 1962—2002: space validation With phantom torso experiments (Abstract), Proceedings of the
Bioastronautics Investigators’ Workshop, Galveston, Texas. J an 2003.
Cucinotta FA, Kim M-H, Willingham V, George K. Physical and Biological Organ Dosimetry Analysis for
International Space Station Astronauts. Radiation Research, 170, 127—138, 2008.

1 58

"
"167","EFFECT OF MICROGRAVITY ON THE PERIPHERAL SUBCUTANEOUS VENO-ARTERIOLAR
REFLEX IN HUMANS (Xenon-1)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Anders Gabrielsen, Danish Aerospace Medical Center of Research National University
Hospital (Rigshospitalet), Copenhagen, Denmark
Expeditions 3—5
Research Area Physiological Studies: Cardiovascular and Respiratory Systems
When the body’s legs are lower in relationship to the heart, the body triggers what is called a local veno—arteriolar
reﬂex, where small subcutaneous (below the surface of the skin)b100d vessels constrict, forcing blood from the feet
toward the head. If this reﬂex is not properly triggered or if blood circulation is impeded, the blood pressure drops,
causing dizziness and, possibly, fainting. This effect is called orthostatic intolerance. Due to a number of possible
reasons—reduced ﬂuid volume, muscle atrophy, neurovestibular adaptation—astronauts suffer from orthostatic
intolerance during entry and landing and for a few days postﬂight, potentially interfering with their ability to
perform entry and landing tasks and prolonging their recovery period. Xenon—l tested the local veno—arteriolar
reﬂex in an effort to understand the source of, and ways to combat, postﬂight orthostatic intolerance.
.-. _ Prior to and following Expeditions 3, 4, and 5, station crewmembers were
_ "" placed on a gurney as a small amount of Xenon—133, which is a radioactive
' 7' _.'I isotope that is dissolved in sterile saline solution, was inj ected into the subcutaneous
. -1 tissue of their lower legs. Arterial blood pressure was recorded by a continuous
_ .i ' '. pressure device on the crewmember’s index ﬁnger. This measurement, which
'_ "" .3. s"": -* was taken with the Xenon—l detector unit, was used to trace the movement of
' the Xenon tracer following injection. As the measurements were taken, the
Xenon memory box recorded and displayed the counting rate.
Injection of the tracer into a subject’s leg.
RESULTS
The last group of subjects for this experiment returned after Expedition 5. Data from all subjects were collected
successfully. The Gabrielsen and Norsk (2007) ﬁndings show veno—arteriolar reﬂex reduced subcutaneous blood
ﬂow by 37 i 9% before ﬂight and by 64 i 8% following landing, with no statistical difference between the two re—
sponses. The mean arterial pressures and heart rates in supine astronauts were very similar before and after ﬂight.
These data indicate that this reﬂex is not attenuated by weightlessness, and suggest that the veno—arteriolar reﬂex
is not a contributor to postﬂight orthostatic intolerance.
l: I .III Illll' - '
A Xenon detector unit is attached to
each crewmember’s leg, slightly above
the ankle, as shown here.
PUBLICATIONS
Gabrielsen A, Norsk P. Effect of spaceﬂight 0n the subcutaneous venoarteriolar reﬂex in the human lower leg,
J. Appl. Physiol. 103:959—962 (2007).
1 59

"
"168","OBSERVING THE EARTH AN D EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES
The tradition ofEarth observationsfmm orbit waS born in 1962 when Project Mercury astronaut
John Glenn packed an Anseo Autoset 35 mm camera, which was bought at a local drug store, to
take photographs of the Earth during the ﬁrst NASA orbital mission. T hese images changed our
view afourselves and our relationship to the Earth. Even with the many satellites now orbiting
the Earth, [SS continues to provide unique views afourplanet.
ISSprovia’eS a unique platformfor inspiring students to excel in mathematics and science.
Station educational activities have had a positive impact on thousands Ofstua’ents by involving
them in station research, and by using the station to teach them the science and engineering that
are behind Space exploration.
Observing the Earth and Educational Activities Performed on the International Space Station, Grouped by Discipline
160

"
"169","AMATEUR RADIO ON THE INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION (ARISS)
Principal Investigator: Frank Bauer, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC.
Expeditions 2—17, ongoing
Research Area Educational Activities
Ever since the Amateur Radio on the International Space Station (ARISS) hardware was ﬁrst launched aboard
Space Shuttle Atlantis on STS—106 and transferred to ISS, it has been regularly used education outreach. With the
help of Amateur Radio Clubs and HAM radio operators, astronauts and cosmonauts aboard the ISS have been speaking
directly With large groups of the general public, showing teachers, students, parents, and communities how amateur
radio energizes students about science, technology, and learning. The overall goal of ARISS is to get students in—
terested in mathematics and science by allowing them to talk directly With the crews Who are living and working
aboard the ISS.
In preparation for a radio contact, students research the ISS and learn about radio waves and amateur radio,
among other topics. Before their scheduled contact With the ISS crew, they prepare a list of questions on topics that
they have researched, many of Which have to do With career choices and science actiVities aboard station. Depending
on the amount of time and complexity of the questions, between 10 and 20 questions can be asked during a single
session. During the sessions, the ISS passes over a school or another location that receives a signal from station
and relays that signal on to the participating school; there is typically a 5— to 8—minute Window for students to
make contact With the crews aboard ISS.
While usually only a handful of students can ask questions due to the limited time available, hundreds of other
students frequently are listening in to the school event from their school classrooms or auditorium, so that each of
these events typically reaches hundreds of students.
RESULTS
ARISS has been instrumental in using amateur radio to connect teachers and students to the crew of the ISS,
sparking an interest in science and mathematics for many students around the world.
PUBLICATION(S)
Wright RL. Remember, We’re Pioneers! The First School Contact With the International Space Station. Proceedings
of the AMSAT—NA 22nd Space Symposium, Arlington, Va. 2004 Oct 8—10.
Cunningham C (N7NFX). NAISS, NAl SS, This is KA7SKY Calling. . Proceedings of the AMSAT—NA Space
Symposium, Arlington, Va. 2004 Oct 8—10.
Palazzolo P (KB3NMS). Launching Dreams: The Long—term Impact of SAREX and ARISS on Student
Achievement. Proceedings of the AMSAT—NA Space Symposium, Pittsburgh, Penn. 2006 Oct 26—28.
~a- . .'
__._-*' ' ' .,.a=-‘ «
'l 1' I _ L : If .H'
., .- — + *‘ r
% ""hf; h- i 4,; J
i ...r I ' ' ISSO14E18307—AstronautSunita L. Williams,
‘7; i . ' . Expeditions 14 and 15 flight engineer, talks with students
.‘ ‘11,"" .__ ' .- at the International School of Brussels in Belgium during
5'. _ {1 l ' .- .' an ARISS session in the Zvezda service module.
1 61

"
"170","CREW EARTH OBSERVATIONS (CEO)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Sue Runco, NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston
Expeditions 1—17, ongoing
Research Area Observing the Earth
ISS crewrnembers use commercial and professional handheld cameras with a suite of lenses (from wide angle
to an 800mm lens equivalent) to take Earth observation photographs that support research in a wide variety of Earth
Science subdisciplines. Scientists 0n the ground train the crew in basic areas of Earth system science and provide to
the crew a daily list of targets of the greatest scientiﬁc interest. Crewrnernbers takes photographs as time is available
and during their leisure time. These digital photographs are downlinked, their location identiﬁed, and both images
and rneta—data are assimilated into a public database. The images are used as educational and research tools, as well
as historical records of global environmental change, special geological and weather events, and the growth and
change of human—rnade features, such as cities. CEO can be conducted from any available window on the space
station, but is conducted primarily from the windows in the Russian Zvezda service module and the nadir—Viewing,
optical—quality window in the US. Destiny laboratory module.
RESULTS
ISS provides a unique opportunity to capture a variety of sites on Earth by providing repeated overﬂight passes of
the Earth with different lighting and Viewing angles. Through CEO, ISS crewrnernbers share their View of the Earth
with the public and take pictures of some of the most dramatic examples of change on the Earth’s surface. These sites
have included major deltas in south and east Asia, coral reefs, cities, alpine glaciers, volcanoes, large rnega—fans
(rnaj 0r fan—shaped river deposits), and features on Earth, such as impact craters, that are analogs to structures on
other planets. Astronauts also record dynamic events: in 2004 and 2005, station astronauts took key photographs
of the four Florida hurricanes, the Dec 2004 tsunami, and Hurricanes Katrina and Wilma. Other notable images
capture volcanic eruptions on Mt Etna (Sicily) and the Cleveland volcano (Alaska), dust storms, smog, forest
ﬁres in the western U.S., and the Kolka glacier collapse in Russia.
From Expedition 1 through Dec 2007, ISS crewrnernbers took more than 300,000 images of Earth, almost half
of the total number of images that were taken from orbit by astronauts since the ﬁrst Mercury missions. Scientists
and the public around the world have access to CEO images that were captured by astronauts 0n ISS through the
Gateway to Astronaut Photography of Earth Web site (http://e01.jsc.nasa.g0V). Between 400,000 and 1,000,000
digital photographs of Earth taken from the CEO collection are downloaded by the public each month. The Web site
also features an “Image of the Week” and searchable access to all the photographs. Scientiﬁc analyses using CEO
data have been published in scientiﬁc journals in a wide variety of disciplines. A few highlights of these publica—
tions are summarized here.
WM, ‘55 Spatial resolution is a measure of the smallest obj ect that
30m...,,o.w A - WW _ 7‘ t _ can be resolved by the sensor, or the size of the area on the
p, - t ,7 ground represented by each pixel determined by geometric
j"" “/9 _ ' -, \., properties of the altitude of the spacecraft, lens magniﬁca—
‘ ' /' ' ‘ h! \ tion, size of the original image, and 100k angle. To achieve
. ‘ .. ' y» “ maximum potential spatial resolution, a camera system must
' ' .. vc ‘ "" capture information at sufﬁcient speed to eliminate the effects
2' . , ‘ .4 a . ‘ ‘ ofrelative ground motion. Using handheld motion compen—
~. .' T: ‘ j sation, ISS crewrnernbers have achieved a spatial resolu—
l"" . ' ~ tion of less than 6 meters in photographs of Earth from ISS.
This comparison of Landsat 7 ETM+ (left) and digital The ISS provides great potential as a remote—sensing plat—
PhOtography from Station ('33002E6372, right) 01‘ a COral form that is capable of providing high—resolution imagery
reef atoll illustrates how astronaut photography can be an of the Earth’s surface (Robinson and Evans 2002).
Important source of supplemental data to studles that use
satellite imagery. Landsat’s 30-meter spatial resolution does
not provide enough information about the reef lagoon struc— CEO images captured from ISS of Paciﬁc Ocean atolls
tUFe- Detailed photographs 01‘ FGGfS that were taken from ISS (islands consisting of a circular coral reef surrounding a
are being used around the world. The high spatial reselution lagoon) allowed for an assessment of spatial resolution
of the Images (about 5 meter/ptxel) make them well swted for .
comparison to what is seen by divers in the Water. on estimates of landscape parameters of the atolls. Data
gathered indicated that landscape parameter estimates were
1 62

"
"171","fairly accurate regardless of spatial resolution changes from 5 to 30 meters. This study of ISS imagery showed that
spatial resolution, as well as spectral resolution, is of equal importance when studying these formations (Andrefouet
et a1. 2003). The most detailed images of Fangatau Atoll, which were taken from 188, were used to measure the bio-
mass of the giant clam ﬁshery at Fangatau Atoll with accuracy similar to that obtained from aerial photography
(Andrefouet et a1. 2005). Astronaut photographs of reefs in the Indian Ocean have been used as base maps for
dive surveys of reef resources in the region (Quod et a1. 2002).
Extracting clear water depths from a variety of sources allows the examination and mapping of shallow water
from global to local scales. Scientists from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) used
four sources of data to map shallow water bathymetry near U.S. coral reef areas. These included the sea-Viewing
wide ﬁeld-of-View sensor (SeaWiFS) on board the OrbView 2 Satellite (SeaWiFS allows global mapping within
l-kilometer pixels), the IKONOS satellite (global mapping within 4 meters), the Landsat Satellite (global mapping
within 30 meter pixels), and handheld photography by the ISS crew (CEO local mapping within 6 meters). A new
technique was applied to the blue and green bands from astronaut photography, allowing construction of a bathy-
metry map for Pearl and Hermes reef with accuracies similar to that obtained from IKONOS (Stumpf et a1. 2003).
High-resolution astronaut photography that was collected from
station has provided useful data for urban analysis, especially
vegetation measurements. The accuracy of the data that are obtained
from the astronaut photographs was similar to the data that were
obtained by satellite remote sensors. The high-resolution astronaut
photography that was obtained by the CEO investigation gives
insights into vegetation density in urban areas (Stefanov and
Robinson 2003).
Imagery of cities at night captured during 188 Expedition 6 by
Astronaut Don Pettit (example, right) and subsequent astronauts
aboard 188 has provided researchers preliminary data for potential
applications modeling urban land use and population density. 188
photographs of cities at night are unique because they provide
greater spatial resolution than any other source of city light data.
Nighttime images of cities that are taken by 188 crewmembers
have been used to support the concept of a new satellite sensor I I I I
for nighttime lighting called Nightsat (Elvidge et al. 2007a; D 0:18:13? Eiihzgegeiﬁirﬁaﬁgzgiilzrs‘ig gsgligﬁeﬂgcde;
2007b; Lulla 2003)- tracking system to track the ground as it moves
relative to station; this allowed him to acquire long—

Imagery that is taken by astronauts has been collected and used eXpOSUFe images under Ilow—Iight conditions using
to identify and build a global inventory of a new class of landform very long exposures. Th,ls Image Shows the “ghis Of

. . Argentina 5 capital City, Buenos Alres.
called megafans. These are large cones of sediments that are dep0s1ted
by rivers that empty into large continental basins. Megafans are more
easily identiﬁed using the wide, oblique Views that are provided by astronaut photography. The results have been
applied to interpreting features on both Earth and Mars. Wilkinson et a1. (2005) mapped megafans in South America
from imagery that was collected by space shuttle and 188 crews to understand how aquatic organisms might diversify
in different river systems in South America. By identiﬁcation of megafan systems and their processes, which involve
switching stream courses, habitat fragmentation and new habitat combinations can be hypothesized that, over time,
may enable new speciation in aquatic systems. Another application of megafan landform analysis discusses how
these features might provide a new perspective on mineral explorati0n(Wi1kins0n 2004). This analysis resulted
in a patent (Wilkinson 2006). Finally, mapping megafans on Earth have provided a framework for interpreting
similar landforms on Mars, supporting the existence of ﬂuvial systems on Mars (Wilkinson et a1. 2008).
CEO observations of large tabular icebergs in the South Atlantic Ocean stimulated new research with relevance to
global warming and the break—up of Antarctic ice shelves (Scambos et a1. 2005). Large chunks of ice calve off the
Ronne Ice Shelf in Antarctica and drift northward towards South Georgia Island in the South Atlantic Ocean. Polar
scientists track these icebergs; as they drift into warmer waters, they melt and break up. These icebergs can be used
as a proxy for understanding how the ice shelves respond to global warming. Imagery that was collected by station
astronauts in 2004 showed, for the ﬁrst time, meltwater on one of the icebergs. This indicated a different ice proﬁle

1 63

"
"172","0n the icebergs than previously modeled—one With ramparts along the edge that pond the meltwater inboard. These
observations allowed scientists to create new models for the forces that are experienced by these icebergs to help
explain how they break up. This work has continued under CEO support of the International Polar Year (CEO-IPY).
In a different application that ties two 188 experiments together, Robinson et a1. (2006) describe the beneﬁts
of photographing the Earth to the mental wellbeing of astronauts 0n long-duration missions on 188. For more
information about this study, see the Interactions results.
PUBLICATION(S)
Andrefouet S, Robinson JA, Hu C, Salvat B, Payri C, Muller-Karger FE. Inﬂuence of the spatial resolution of
SeaWiFS, Landsat 7, SPOT and International Space Station data on landscape parameters of Paciﬁc Ocean atolls.
Canadian Journal ofRemote Sensing. 29:210—21 8, 2003.
Andrefouet S, Gilbert A, Yan L, Remoissenet G, Payri C, Chancerelle Y. The remarkable population size of the
endangered clam T ridacna maxima assessed in Fangatau Atoll using in situ remote sensing data. ICES Journal of
Marine Science. 62(6): 1037—1048, 2005 .
Elvidge CD, Cinzano P, Pettit DR, Arvesen J , Sutton P, Small C, Nemani R, Longcore T, Rich C, Safran J , Weeks J ,
Ebener S. 2007a. The Nightsat mission concept. Int. J. ofRemote Sensing, V.28, 2645—2677.
Elvidge CD, Safran TB, Sutton P, Cinzano P, Pettit DR, Arvesen J , Small C. 2007b. Potential for Global Mapping
of development Via a nightsat mission. GeoJournal. 69:45—53.
Kohlmann B., Wilkinson M], 2007. The Tarcoles Line: biogeographic effects of the Talamanca Range in lower
Central America, Giomale Italiano di Entomologia. 12:1—30.
Lulla K. 2003 Nighttime Urban Imagery from International Space Station: Potential Applications for Urban
Analyses and Modeling. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing. 69:941—942, 2003.
Quod J -P, Bigot L, Blanchot J , Chabanet P, Durville P, Nicet J -B, Wendling B. Research and monitoring of
the coral reefs of the French islands of the Indian Ocean. Assessment activities in 2002. Mission carried out in
Glorieuses. Réunion: IFRECOR (1 ’Initiative Frangaise pour les Réciﬁ Corallines). 2, 2002. [in French]
Robinson JA, Evans CA. Space Station Allows Remote Sensing of Earth to Within Six Meters. Eos, T ransactions 0f
the American Geophysical Union. 83:185—188, 2002.
Robinson JA, Slack K], Olsen V, Trenchard M, Willis K, Baskin P, Ritsher JB. Patterns in CreW-Initiated
Photography of Earth From 188 — Is Earth Observation a Salutogenic Experience? Presented at the 5 7th International
Astronautical Congress. Valencia, Spain. Oct 2—6, 2006 IAC-06-A1.1.4.
StefanOV WL, Robinson J A. Vegetation Density Measurements From Digital Astronaut Photography. International
Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing, and Spatial Information Sciences. 34:185—189, 2003.
Scambos T, Sergienko O, Sargent A, MacAyeal D, Fastook J . 2005, ICES at proﬁles of tabular iceberg margins and
iceberg breakups at low latitudes. Geophys. Research Letters, Vol 32, L23SO9 2005.
Stumpf RP, Holderied K, Robinson JA, Feldman G, Kuring N. Mapping water depths in clear water from space.
Proceedings of the 13th Biennial Coastal Zone Conference. Baltimore, Md, Jul 13—17, 2003.
Wilkinson, M], NASA Tech Brief 2004: Large Fluvial Fans and Exploration for Hydrocarbons ,
2004, http:// www.techbriefs.com/ content/View/ 1 70/ 34/ .
Wilkinson, M], Allen, CC; Oheler, DZ; and Salvotore, MR, A new Fluvial Analog for the Ridge-forming
unit, Northern Sinus Meridiani, Southwest Arabia Terra, Mars, Lunar and Planetary Science XXXIX (2008).

164

"
"173","Wilkinson M], Marshall LG, Lundberg J G. River behavior on megafans and potential inﬂuences on diversiﬁcation
and distribution of aquatic organisms. Journal ofSouth American Earth Sciences. 2006; 21 :151—172.
PATENT(S)
M.J. Wilkinson, 2006, Method for Identifying Sedimentary bodies from images and its application to mineral
exploration, USPTO Patent # 6,985,606, (http://patft.uspt0.gOV/netacgi/nph—
Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch—
b001.html&r=1&f=G&1=50&001=AND&d=PTXT&s1=%22ﬂuvial+fan%22&OS)
ARTICLES ON THE WORLD WIDE WEB
Lu E. Watching the World Go By. Earth Observatory. Oct 22, 2003;0n—line posting.
http://e01.jsc.nasa.gOV/EarthObservatory/Watchingtheworldgoby.htm.
Robinson JA, Evans C. Astronaut Photography: Observing the Earth from the International Space Station. Earth
Observatory. Feb 16, 2001; On—line posting
http://e01.jsc.nasa.gOV/EarthObservatory/EO Study Astronaut Photographyhtm.
Pettit D. Auroras Dancing in the Night. Earth Observatory. 2004; On—line posting.
http://e01.jsenasa.gOV/EarthObservatory/AuroraDancingintheNight.htm.
Evans CE, Stefanov W. Cities at Night: The View from Space, Earth Observatory; On—line posting Apr 22, 2008,
http://e01.jsc.nasa.gOV/EarthObservatory/Cities_at_Night_The_VieW_fr0m_Space.htm.
Stefanov W. The Art of Science, Earth Observatory, On—line posting Oct 18 2005,
http://e01.jsc.nasa.gOV/EarthObservatory/The_Art_Of_Science.htm.
- -'-T=:I:;.-.-::.-1 ISSOO6E44305 — Astronaut Donald R. Pettit, Expedition 6
"" ' ' ' 1'3“ 1'7. NASA ISS science officer, runs a drill while looking through
-'- ,1 _..-' EarthKAM mounted on the nadir window in the U.S. Destiny
. 41.5.; d laboratory. The device is called a “barn door tracker.” The
_ _ ._e'- "" - '71.;5 drill turns the screw, which moves the camera and its
' . .--.'7:_ .""_""'”1:c'::l' .. :i“- spotting scope.
1: -.'1 H."" .' .-...--.
r _ . . |_-
|88013E24184 — ISS flight engineer Jeff Williams was the -: -'
first to report the volcanic eruption of Cleveland Volcano in
Alaska on May 23, 2006.This image shows the eruption - '
cloud moving west-southwest from the volcano summit. .. -
The Alaska Volcano Observatory was contacted and was . - .1
able to monitor the volcanic activity. This image was . .
captured using the Kodak 760C camera equipped ~
with a 800mm lens.
165

"
"174","|SSO15E2276 — On Aug 13, 2007, while docked to the
ISS, the crewmembers of shuttle mission STS-1 18 and ISS
_ Expedition 15 reported seeing the smoke plumes from wide-
. 1.5-? 41231325: ‘1 --—.__ spread fires across Idaho and Montana. The crew photographed
- ""-- - ..__"" '--~ and downlinked images of regional views of the smoke. Strong
_ ' ' _ . 1 ._ westerly winds were driving the smoke eastward. Tens of
__,- -_~_».'_- _ ‘ i; thousands of acres were ablaze at this time. This view was
NJ, __ f} .531 _.. -- .— ' 1. taken looking westward toward the horizon. It shows fires in
' _f‘TT3 ._ -. 41a Jr- "";5""'_ 1“; Montana (Gallatin National Forest), to the south in Wyoming
. .. . $5.21: *4: (Yellowstone National Park), and to the northwest in Idaho.
. i'- -. ‘._-ii.“-
' ' ‘ 151'? ‘Fiﬁ‘1t-I5
I _
|SSO10-E-13079 (left) and |SSO10-E-13088 (right)
were acquired Jan 15, 2005 with a Kodak 760C
digital camera using a 400 mm lens. . __
On Dec 26, 2004, a large (magnitude 9.0) ._h.._. 5.5,...11 - __
earthquake occurred off the western coast of ': _J,_.__.-_,..-.'-“* "" """"""""' '=: -'
Sumatra in the Indian Ocean and generated a ' F"" --:'.-""""--"" .
tsunami that affected coastal regions around the Jr 1 '
Indian Ocean. The northwestern Sumatra coastline ',
suffered extensive damage and loss of life. These ' . - .. -""'"" "" . """" -
photographs, which were taken from ISS on Jan 15, 'i - -'.'
2005 (roughly 2 weeks after the tsunami) show ,-.
some of the damage along the southwestern ';--rm-
coast of Aceh Province in the vicinity of the '.‘~-'
city of Lho’ Kruet, Indonesia.
. . . """" ' f 1
Large areas of bare and disturbed sorl (brownish . '.Ir , ﬂ
gray) that were previously covered with vegetation F! ‘ 1 'r .'
are visible along the coastline in the near—nadir (top) _ ""
image. Embayments in the coastline were particularly _ __..-' ' -""‘ 15""-
hard hit, while adjacent headlands were less affected. “-'- '-.:_-Ei'i& -' _. ‘_'
The oblique (lower) astronaut photograph was ac- f '1; 11.1 . _ . . -'
quired 45 seconds after the near—nadir photograph, ”I' F Ef'r‘"" ""--_- _ .
and captures sunglint illuminating the Indian Ocean .g-+I-I 1"" — “‘5' 3‘3'J‘-""- :____Z- i._. "" -_
and standing water inland (light gray, yellow). Distor— 'I"": ‘.__ _____ . 1-1 _ ""-.'.__5;'1;;-'..'_' '+
tion and scale differences in the images are caused F ""3; ‘5'""1—«3- ""i“; ._--..-' __ . ' - .
by increased obliquity of the view from the ISS. '.‘I 'T' . _--h'iv._Ii_-_'_ '

Arrows on the photographs indicate several points of if 1.1-..2 _.-.'1--- ' -.-.- '-- _
comparison between the two images. Standing ”-u --‘""""-' Hf"" ' ' .._ '-' _ __ _-
bodies of seawater may inhibit revegetation of _ _ _:‘ -. #1.--- _ =.'

damaged areas and act as sources of salt ‘._"": _ -- --- 1. _. __,'- '- . _
contamination in soil and groundwater. "" ' ”'""""'"" '
1- ,_ ' ' ._
166

"
"175","CREW EARTH OBSERVATIONS-INTERNATIONAL POLAR YEAR (CEO-IPY)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Donald Pettit, Ph.D., NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston

Expeditions 14—17, ongoing
Research Area Observing the Earth
IPY 2007—2009 is the fourth time in the past 125 years that scientists worldwide combined efforts in observation
and exploration of the Earth’s Polar Regions. A prime focus of the this IPY is global climate change and the role of
the polar regions in understanding climate change. The 188 is participating in the 2007—2009 IPY using the CEO
program
The station provides a human observational platform to observe high—latitude features, including sea ice, icebergs,
plankton blooms, and atmospheric phenomena such as aurora and polar mesospheric clouds (PMCs). PMCs, Which
are also known as noctilucent clouds, are thin clouds that are found in the mesosphere. They are the highest known
clouds With altitudes around 53 miles (85 km) and are Visible only at night When illuminated by sunlight below the
horizon. The 188 platform provides excellent observation opportunities for upper-atrnospheric features because the
crewmembers can observe the upper atmosphere to latitudes as high as 70 to 800, and their observations are not
obscured by clouds.
ISS crewmembers use digital still photography and Videos to capture targets that are cataloged and assimilated
into the CEO database. The targets are selected according to their relevance to the IPY studies, and are made
available to researchers Via the CEO Web site at http://eol.jsc.nasa.g0v. Additional imaging from satellites and
ground observation stations Will be compared to the data that are collected by the 188.
RESULTS
To date, 188 crewmembers have successfully documented the break—up of large tabular icebergs that have calved
from the Antarctic ice shelves and drifted northward into the South Atlantic Ocean. Researchers from the National
Snow and Ice Data Center have used the imagery from the 188 to examine surface features, including ice margins,
cracks, and surface meltwater ponds to better understand the mechanisms and timing of iceberg breakup. Large
tabular icebergs can be used to model breakups 0f the Antarctic ice shelf (Scambos et a1. 2005; 2008).
Several sequences of PMCs have been observed and documented by the ISS crews, and imagery of auroras from
the ISS and shuttle were collected simultaneously With data from ground stations and meteorological satellites. The
integration of these images and data were discussed in the European Optical Meeting in 2007 (Sandahl et a1. 2007).
Some of the data have been published and served to the public Via NASA’s Earth Observatory Web site
(http_://earth0bservat0ry.nasa.gov ).
PUBLICATIONS(S)
Sandahl I, Fuglesang C. The Network for Optical Auroral Research in the Arctic Region, and The Upper
Atmospheric Physics Group at the National Institute of Polar Research, J apan. Auroral Observations from Space
Shuttle Discovery, 34th Annual European Optical Meeting, Aug 2007.
Scambos T, Ross R, Bauer R, Yermolin Y, Skvarca P, Long D, Bohlander J , Haran T. Calving and ice-shelf
break—up processes investigated by proxy: Antarctic tabular iceberg evolution during northward drift; Journal of
Glaciology, Volume 54(187), 2008; 579—591.

1 67

"
"176",":1- ""' III
. '- pi ..- + 1-
' . .u * I-FI' . .
' "" ' + r '. ISSOO812558 — Image of Iceberg A43B WIth
. . - t - meltponds on the surface, taken in 2004. This
' _' ' .. .Ilt ,.. ._...u .- ,-- imageiniiae econsruciono anew mo e or
. ""'"" r-J-.-- ttdth t t f dlf
' .. ' , ""' . ' -+ "" ,..-' ' '. . ""'1' forces that are exerted on large tabular icebergs
.1. f _. 1:“: . .
- - _ -; J, III"" . -_.,. .- during theIrbreakup.
.- - . .. -.r - «- , .-""-- --
ﬂ: t-ﬁtl * '4' - j ""I l . ’1'""
- ._ _ - A 3--
.fT—Et'i‘w. ‘4: ‘- --'
""Jihﬂfl .r .r""_,- =_.
l '- . I __ _ l: .:._. 1:1. r
I I . 1"": ""'_. '_ i
i . . _.,.-f:; 1. ""15!... 3'.
_ I _ _'.- :- I "" :4
: J'if' -. .. ,
_
I _ ___.-—|.I—'r_ -
STS117e6998 — PMCs observed
over central ASia, _
|88006e28961 Auroras as observed from the ISS as it transited the
Antarctic region in Feb 2003. Astronauts have unobstructed views of
upper atmospheric events around the Earth’s polar regions.
168

"
"177","COMMERCIAL GENERIC BIOPROCESSING APPARATUS SCIENCE |NSERT-O1 (CSl-O1)
Principal Investigator(s): Louis Stodieck, Ph.D., BioServe Space Technologies, University of Colorado,
Boulder, Colo.
Expeditions 14, 15
Research Area Educational Activities
The Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus Science Insert—01 (CSI—01) was the ﬁrst in a series of
experiments for the K—12 education program from BioServe Space Technologies at the University of Colorado—
Boulder. This program provided students learning opportunities based on research that was conducted on the ISS
through downlinked data and imagery, which was distributed directly into the classroom Via the internet. National
Standards—based curriculum materials, including teacher guidebooks, student workbooks, and complementary class—
room experiments, were used to ensure the greatest possible beneﬁt to the participating students. The objective of
the CSI suite of experiments was to launch small education experiments to be processed in CGBA on an annual
basis such that during every academic school year, a “live,” on—orbit experiment is available to participating schools.
CSI—01 supported three investigations. The ﬁrst examined multigenerational, long—term growth of Caenorhabditis
eleganS—a small nematode worm, which is a model organism that is used to perform detailed study of physiological
processes that also affect humans. This experiment used two strains of C. elegans: wild type (CC1) and a balancer
strain (eT1). The eT1 strain was designed to allow the accumulation of mutations without such mutations proving
lethal to the organism. This model enabled the study of the biological effects of space radiation. The worms were
grown using C. elegans maintenance medium (CeMM) and gas exchange sterile chambers, Opticells, which were
inside the C. elegans habitat (CHab) that was housed in a CGBA. At approximately 1—month intervals, nematodes
were automatically transferred from one chamber to another chamber that had fresh CeMM. This was to ensure that
the nematode specimens reproduced and propagated for up to 6 months on orbit under nominal, well—deﬁned environ—
mental conditions. This C. elegans experiment involved over 5,000 middle school students (grades 6 — 9) who were
located in Texas, Arizona, Michigan, Florida, California, New Mexico, Wisconsin, and Montana, as well as several
thousand students from Malaysia. The C. elegans experiment was part of the Orion’s Quest education program
(http://www.orionsquest.org/); Video of the worms are available on the Web site.
The second investigation provided the opportunity for over 2,000 third—grade students to understand how gravity
affects germination and plant development. Raphanus sativus (radish plants) and Medicago sativa (alfalfa plants)
were germinated on orbit in a garden habitat (GHab). The activation for this experiment was coordinated with the
participating schools to have their seeds germinate at approximately the same time as the germination of the on—orbit
plants. Students examined both root and stem growth of the two plants on Earth and on board the ISS. The seed germi—
nation experiment provided the opportunity for schoolchildren to participate in the investigation in conjunction
with the Adventures of the Agronauts program (http://www.r1csu.edu/project/agronauts) at North Carolina State
University.
The third experiment included orchids, Malaysian red sandalwood, and rosewood tree seeds. These seeds were
returned to Earth after approximately 6 months of exposure to the space environment. The orchid seeds were planted
alongside control seeds for radiation studies; whereas the Malaysian tree seeds were distributed to students in
Malaysia for germination experiments that were performed on Earth.
. _ .' """" ' RESULTS

1'1. ' Initial results from Expeditions 14 and 15 indicated that the CSI—01
{LI '-'- “I h "" . CHab modules performed properly throughout the 7—month stay on
1-1:}; I.) 1""” ISS. The CHab modules, which were returned on STS—l 17/ 13A, are

'Fﬂ _ undergoing analysis; this analysis of the specimens is expected to
#3:"" ' I' greatly expand on the results that were already obtained from
_ ' @ images and Video and analyzed by thousands of students from

i - '- ' the US. and other countries.
- 1"" m -.

l‘ _-.- .
‘1 --- ..
ISSO14E20211— Astronaut Sunita L. Williams, Expeditions 14 and 15 flight engineer, is seen here with two GHabs as part of the
CSI—O1 investigation. The GHabs are placed in the CGBA where their germination will be studied by middle school students.
1 69

"
"178","At ﬁrst glance, the worms that were recovered from the ﬂight CHabs appeared to be comparable to worms from
the equivalent ground control habitats. This would imply that multigenerational propagation (20+ generations over
the 6-month ﬂight) of these relatively simple animals can occur normally. A much more detailed study Will be required
to determine Whether long-lasting adaptations to space occurred With the C. elegans. It should be noted, however,
that this is the ﬁrst study of its kind to look at long-term adaptations over a large number of generations in such a
valuable model organism.
PUBLICATIONS(S)
There are no publications at this time.

1 7O

"
"179","COMMERCIAL GENERIC BIOPROCESSING APPARATUS SCIENCE INSERT-OZ (CSl-OZ)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Louis Stodieck, Ph.D., BioServe Space Technologies, University of Colorado,
Boulder, Colo.
Expeditions 15—17, ongoing
Research Area Educational Activities
With the launch of the CGBA-4 on space shuttle mission STS-116/12A.1 on Dec 7, 2006, BioServe initiated a new
K—12 education program. Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus Science Insert-02 (CSI-OZ) was the second
payload that was developed for the program. The program was intended to provide teaching and learning opportunities,
primarily targeted to middle school students, that were based on research conducted on orbit and made available through
data and imagery downlinked and distributed directly into the classroom through the World Wide Web. National
Standards-based curriculum materials, including teacher guidebooks, student
r workbooks, complementary classroom experiments, etc. are used to ensure
T ' 7 the greatest possible beneﬁt to the participating students. For the program,
_ BioServe launched small education experiments that are processed in CGBA-4
! _ _ : on approximately an annual basis such that during every academic school year,
- :4 f - ' i . : a “live,” on-orbit experiment is available to participating schools. BioServe
_ -:-'--l‘ ' -b_[ ' ¥ ..2 L -i Space Technologies partnered with the nonproﬁt Orion’s Quest program
51:”. :‘f‘ -‘ .' 1 .‘ : I ""-1 (www.0ri0nsquest.0rg) and the Adventures of Agronaut’s program
3:14;? ' g A g (http://www.ncsu.edu/pr0ject/agronauts) at North Carolina State
13:3? . f -_ _' '+ .“H UT""; University to implement the educational component of CSI-OZ.
__ __ __ __""_ .
_ Cobalt chloride is seen growing in this Silicate Garden Habitat during Expedition 17.
Image courtesy of BioServe Space Technologies, University of Colorado, Boulder.
CSI-02 is an educational payload that is designed to interest middle school students in STEM by providing the
opportunity for these students to participate in near—real-time research conducted on board the ISS. Each experiment
was designed to be easily reproducible in the classroom, providing hands-on experience to the students. The seed germi-
nation and plant development experiment provided the opportunity for younger students to begin to understand how
graVity affects germination and plant development. Small seeds were germinated 0n orbit in BioServe-developed
hardware. The students examined root and stem growth and plant development over a period ranging from a few
weeks to 2 months. Classroom kits were available from BioServe for teachers.
The second experiment supported yeast cell growth during space ﬂight. Yeast has been used by researchers for
many years as a model organism because there are similar regulatory mechanisms between yeast and mammalian
cells. Postﬂight analysis of the yeast DNA, which is the main component of chromosomes and is the material that
transfers genetic characteristics in life forms, is used to determine differences from the ground-based controls.
Future plans for the CSI-02 experiment include more detailed scientiﬁc and experimental requirements and
in-depth analyses for middle and high school students to complete.
The third experiment replicated and extended the chemical garden experiment that was ﬁrst completed in
BioServe hardware for the STARSTM STS-107 program and ﬂight but not recovered due to Columbia’s loss in
Feb 2003. In this experiment, silicate crystals was activated and grown on orbit. The previous experiment demon-
strated that graVity potentially played a signiﬁcant role in silicate crystal formation. While silicate crystals that are
grown on the ground grow in an upwards direction, in space the silicate crystals grow outward and then in a rota-
tional pattern. Growth was very different between ﬂight and ground controls. Students were able to compare
silicate crystals that were grown in their own classrooms to those grown in space. Observations were made
by using an attached camera and lighting assembly to image all experiments once on orbit.
RESULTS
There are no results to report at this time.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
1 71

"
"180","DREAMTIME (DreamTime)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Ben Mason, Dreamtime Holdings Inc., Moffett Field, Calif.
Expedition 3

Research Area Educational Activities
As part of the DreamTime project, a commercial high—deﬁnition television (HDTV) system was ﬂown on ISS.
When compared to standard television Video, high—deﬁnition Video appears four times sharper, giving a considerably
more detailed image. The audio is also improved with HDTV, which records on 5.1 channels vs. the standard two
channels in typical stereo systems, in effect providing surround—sound capability. DreamTime was used on ISS
to provide these enhanced images and audio for ground—based observers.
RESULTS
In developing the original public—private partnership, NASA had hoped that DreamTime would play a role
in developing commercial products that were based on historic activities on ISS. Lacking commercial direction
from DreamTime, yet recognizing the historical signiﬁcance of activities on the station, NASA took the initiative
and developed scenarios and created storyboards for the ﬂight crew to record ISS documentary footage of outstanding
quality during the mission. The result of this effort returned over 500 minutes of HDTV footage, suitable for com—
mercial purposes, and far exceeding the expected imagery return. The private company that originally sponsored
DreamTime was short—lived, and no results were generated. The Bioastronautics Research Program has created
the Video “Secrets of Science in Outer Space” using some of the DreamTime footage.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.

_:.. ____ _ 1. _ r I."" I' i '-

2?- . . -- -; ISSOOB-E-5826 — Cosmonaut
' .. - ' Vladimir N. Dezhurov, Expedition 3
— .1 ' .h ""E |_' _ flight engineer, works with camera
,I"" - __ ‘1 '.-' ,-ul_ equipment in the Zvezda service
.3 ‘ .l - ' r"" _, ,-' . :-' module.
' '1 . '- «v. . - .1“
If."" . - ﬂ
F: I' - a
1 72

"
"181","EDUCATION PAYLOAD OPERATIONS (EPO)
Principal Investigator(s): Cynthia McArthur, NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston
Expeditions 4, 5, 7—9
Research Area Educational Activities
The objective of the Education Payload Operations (EPO) investigation was to
' ' use toys, tools, and other common items in the microgravity environment of ISS
. to create educational Video and multimedia products that inspire the next genera—
{7 “. , tion of engineers, mathematicians, physicists, and other scientists. The products
I!” 3:, _‘ :1 are used for demonstrations and to support curriculum materials distributed across
a _.: ""' the United States and internationally. The individual EPO proj ects were designed
'"" 1"" __ ' ' ' ' — to explore physical phenomena such as force, motion, and energy. Each Expedi—
?‘ , _ : - ' tion involved different on—orbit activities and themes, as well as different
I ' L - i partners, such as museums, universities, and public school districts.
— .I'
Expedition 3 science officer The EPO payloads were small, weighing less than 6.8 kg (15 lbs) each.
Mike Foale uses small and large Whenever possible the demonstrations use materials and objects that are
magnets to show the pull of the . ’ . . . . .
Earth’s magnetic field on ISS already available on ISS. Some of the act1V1t1es cover physrcal properties, such
as part of an EPO event. as Newton’s Laws of Motion or Bernoulli’s Principle for air pressure, and others
are speciﬁc to life in space, such as explaining how ISS solar panels work or
demonstrating EVAs.
Speciﬁc actiVities are as follows:

0 Education dernonstration actiVities (EDAs) showed basic physics, such as in Weight vs. Mass and Center of
Mass.

- EDAs illustrated aspects of living in space, such as Tools in Space and Pouring Liquid into a Container.

0 International Toys in Space developed a DVD for use in classrooms around the United States that was
based on the physics behind a variety of toys.

- Tornatosphere II exposed 1.5 million tornato seeds to the space environment. The seeds have been dis—
tributed to classrooms throughout Canada. Students will measure the germination rates, growth patterns,
and Vigor of growth of the seeds.

- EDAs for use by science museums included a harrnonica, puzzles, dexterity puzzles, and a balsa
wood Wright Flyer.

RESULTS
EPO has been a successful education program on ISS. By using simple - g ‘5.-
objects and the microgravity environment, NASA is able to produce Videos If)!-
that demonstrate physical properties, such as force, motion, and energy, that '1' ,r‘""
may be obscured by gravity on Earth. To date, over 500 Videos, DVDs, and .1: _ _ __..._._ a,
Video clips have been produced and distributed to science teachers and schools
throughout the United States. About 1,500 teachers each year are trained to use h
the materials in their classrooms. An additional 309 million students have had — ., '
the opportunity to participate in live downlink events where their classmates I ' ' __
pose questions of ISS crews on orbit. ' . ..—--

. . . . . . Expedition 8 science officer Mike
The 1.5 million Tornatosphere—II seeds from Expedition 9 were d1V1ded and Foale demonstrates the use Of tools
distributed to 160,000 students in 6,000 classrooms across Canada. on station for an EPO event.
PUBLICATION(S)
National Aeronautics and Space Administration Educational Product. International Toys in Space — Science on the
Station DVD. ED—2004—06—001—JSC, 2004.

1 73

"
"182","EDUCATION PAYLOAD OPERATION—DEMONSTRATION (EPo-Demos)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Matthew Keil, NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston
Expeditions 7—17, ongoing
Research Area Educational Activities
Education Payload Operation—Demonstrations (EPO—Demos) are recorded Video education demonstrations that
are performed on ISS by crewmembers Who are using hardware that is already on board station. EPO—Demos are
videotaped, edited, and used to enhance existing NASA education resources and programs for educators and students in
grades K—12. EPO—Demos are designed to support the NASA mission to inspire the next generation of explorers.
EPO—Demos are a continuation of education demonstrations that ______ ...---‘ """"""—_ ._——-
have been conducted by ISS crewmembers since Expedition 4. The ___:'::_:__ ._._
products are used for demonstrations and to support curriculum mater— “J
ials that are distributed across the United States and internationally to Ff w""
educators to encourage students to pursue studies and careers in STEM I""!
and inspire the next generation of space explorers. Each ISS Expedi— '
tion involves different on—orbit activities and themes, as well as _ :_ , L .
different partners, such as museums, universities, and public 4.: _L . .“Tillr r. ."".
school d1strlcts. _L_ 1 J: 1:
Some of the activities cover physical properties, such as Newton’s ' _. ' ' '
Laws of Motion 0r Bernoulli’s Principle for air pressure, and others i J
are speciﬁc to life in space, such as explaining how the ISS solar Teaching From Space Office team members in the
panels work or demonstrating EVAs. JSC TeleScience Center supporting an EPO-Demo
that is being conducted by astronaut Suni Williams.

RESULTS Image courtesy of Teaching From SpﬁcAzgjfgeg,
EPO—Demos has been a successful education program on ISS. By I
using simple objects and the microgravity environment, NASA is
able to produce Videos that demonstrate physical properties, such as force, motion, and energy, that may be
obscured by gravity on Earth. Several speciﬁc Videos demonstrating basic science principles have been created
and are available Via the NASA Education Project and Central Operations of Resources for Educators gCORE).
PUBLICATION(S) AND VIDEOS

0 EPO—Relative_Distance—Earth_M00n_and_Mars.WmV

o Exp_l6_EPO_Newt0ns_First_LaW_0f_M0ti0n.W1nV

0 Exp_ 16 EPO Newtons Laws of M0ti0n.me

0 Exp_ 16 EPO Newtons Second Law of M0ti0n.me

o Exp_l6_EPO_Newtons_Third_LaW_0f_M0ti0n.me

0 Inc 10 EPO Lab T0ur.me

o Inc_12 Solar_Arrays.mpg

0 Inc 12 Garbage and Suppliesmpg

0 Inc 12 EPO Lab Safety.me

o Inc_12_EPO_Trailer.mpg

0 Inc 12 Water Recyclingram

o Inc_14_EPO—Fitness.wmv

1 74

"
"183","EDUCATION PAYLOAD OPERATIONS-EDUCATOR (EPo-Educator)
Principal Investigat0r(s): J onathan Neubauer, NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston
Expedition 15
Research Area Educational Activities
The EPO—Educator payload supports the Educator Astronauts—full—time astronauts With experience teaching in
K—12 classrooms—in their mission in orbit. The Educator Astronaut Program (EAP) is one of NASA’s pathﬁnder
education initiatives. The main obj ective 0f the EAP is inspiring students to look at engineering, science, technology,
and mathematics as future career paths.
EPO—Educator uses investigations that are focused on inquiry—based learning. These investigations are performed by
students in ground—based studies. Students are also involved in design challenges that are directly tied to the investi—
gation. Part of this payload is developing activities for teachers, creating lesson plans for students K—12, and
providing a Web site that Will contain the data—collection information.
”'5' .1l Ir W I_ t;
a <5 ‘ -
- ' :1“ JSCZOO7EO3712_25O — Barbara Morgan,
% J “'- Educator Astronaut, is pictured with children

- “hi, 4. - "" during a demonstration at Space Center

W * Houston.

._______,
RESULTS
Through the EPO—Educator investigation, nearly 1 million students in grades K—12 have participated in the
NASA Engineering Design Challenge Lunar Plant Growth Chamber. This engineering design challenge asks
students to design, build, and evaluate a plant growth chamber for future missions to the moon. Students learn
about the engineering design process and how to conduct a scientiﬁc experiment. In conjunction With the engineer—
ing design challenge, approximately 10 million cinnamon basil seeds were ﬂown in space. As part of a comprehensive
suite of education activities, the seeds are being delivered to students and educators across the country. To get in—
volved in this activity and to see Video captured during EPO—Educator, Visit www.nasa.gOV/education/plantchallenge.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are 110 publications at this time.

1 75

"
"184","EDUCATION PAYLOAD OPERATIONS-KIT C (EPo-Kit C)
Principal Investigator(s): J onathan Neubauer, NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston
Expedition 15
Research Area Educational Activities
The excitement of space exploration is a sure way to catch the attention of students of all ages, and space biology
is one of many sciences that is critical to understanding the space ﬂight environment. However, many systems used
in the past for space-to-classroom biology actiVities have required extensive crew time and material resources, making
space-linked education logistically and ﬁnancially difﬁcult. The new Educational Payload Operations-Kit C (EPO-
Kit C) aims to overcome some of the obstacles to space-linked education and outreach by dramatically reducing the
resources that are required to conduct educational activities in plant space biology with a true space ﬂight component.
EPO-Kit C was originally developed as the Astro Garden, a miniature hobby garden that was designed for grow-
ing ﬂowers, herbs, and small vegetable plants on orbit. The kit required minimal resources, thus allowing its use for
educational opportunities. Illumination is achieved Via environmental lighting on the space shuttle or space station,
and watering is conducted manually Via drink bags. Stowage of the entire kit requires less than 700 01113; the garden
itself could ﬁt in a large pants pocket.
The EPO-Kit C experiment supported the Educator Astronaut in her mission in orbit. Launched in 2004, the
EAP exempliﬁes NASA’s commitment to inspiring and motivating students and educators on a national scale. The
program does this through a series of activities and initiatives that is based on astronaut training and the excitement
of space ﬂight.
On orbit, crewmembers captured Video of the transfer of two, small, collapsible growth chambers for EPO-Kit C.
The Video, which included a discussion of the growth chambers by the crewmembers, will be used during Phase I
and Phase II of the national engineering design challenge. The Video will be distributed to education organizations to
be incorporated into education products for students in grades K—12. Crewmembers also conducted a 20-day on-
orbit plant growth investigation using basil and lettuce seeds. The plant growth inside the growth chambers were
documented with still digital imagery.
EPO-Kit C aimed to inspire students to look at engineering, science, technology and mathematics as future
career paths. The EPO-Kit C investigations focused on inquiry-based learning; ground-based investigations were
performed by students. Students were also involved in design challenges that were directly tied to the payload. Part
of this payload also developed activities for teachers, creating lesson plans for students K—12 and providing a Web
site that will contain the data-collection information.
RESULTS
The EPO-Kit C, 20-day on-orbit plant growth investigation was successful.
: 1.. - The cinnamon basil seeds germinated in the microgravity environment and
H“: _ had some growth during the short investigation. Toward the end of the eX-
- ELF periment, the plants appeared to have received more water than needed,
5‘ :1, L: 41; causing them to slowly deteriorate. When the 20 days were up, the grth
"" 7-7- . - ' - chambers were collapsed and prepared for their trip home on STS-lZO.
Through the EPO-Kit C investigation, nearly 1 million students in grades
Basil plants grown from seeds, on Earth, K—lZ have participated in the NASA Engineering Design Challenge Lunar
in a simple plant growth chamber (closed). Plant Growth Chamber. This engineering des1gn challenge asks students to
Image courtesy of NASA Johnson Space design, build, and evaluate a plant growth chamber for future missions to
Center. the moon. Students learn about the engineering design process and how
to conduct a scientiﬁc experiment. To get involved in this activity and to see Video captured during EPO-Kit C
and EPO-Educator, Visit www.nasa.gov/education/plantchallenge.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
1 76

"
"185","EARTH KNOWLEDGE ACQUIRED BY MIDDLE SCHOOL STUDENTS (EarthKAM)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Sally Ride, University of California at San Diego, La J 011a, Calif.
Expeditions 2, 4—17, ongoing
Research Area Educational Activities
' 3 .li'; ..r Earth Knowledge Acquired by Middle School Students (EarthKAM) is
. 1' _ -II,' H- a NASA—sponsored education program that enables thousands of students
- . I' ' ‘h._ "" to photograph and examine Earth from the unique perspective of space.
'__ - .. I ' — . I 2-- . The purpose of EarthKAM is to integrate the excitement of ISS With
‘- ' ' I ""i"" , qr"" _ middle—school education. EarthKAM inVites schools from around the
'IIIIF' HI'I '75:."" -E m_- world to take advantage of this exceptional educational opportunity.
_.'..'fI.‘II . ( _ L) ' In addition to the many schools in the United States, schools from
1:513. , .I .. I _ 12 countries have also participated in the program.
1‘ ' "" I ' "" 'I ' __' I Middle—school students learn about spacecraft orbits and Earth photo—
lpfhgivT2§§wng (e)? ?AZngtQZrTiggnéegdmeéne graphy, and then target and request their desired images by tracking the
orbit of the station, referencing maps and atlases, and checking weather.
Their requests are then collected and compiled by students at the University of California, San Diego, Calif. With
help from representatives at NASA J ohnson Space Center in Houston compiled requests are uplinked to a computer on
board ISS. This computer records the requests and transmits them to the digital camera, Which takes the desired images
and transfers them back to the computer. The images are then downlinked t0 EarthKAM computers on the ground.
Within hours, the EarthKAM team makes the photographs available on the World Wide Web for easy access by par—
ticipating schools as well as the general public. Schools then explore the images in support of national, state, and local
education standards. Students learn to recognize and research features in the images, place the images in global
context using maps and atlases, and make connections With the topics and subjects that they are studying.
RESULTS
As of Dec 2007, more than 89,000 students from over 1,400 schools
worldwide, as well as members of the general public, have used EarthKAM to I
investigate every corner of the globe. Images taken by the participating schools
are posted on the EarthKAM Web site at http://WWW.earthkam.ucsd.edu/ for "" _ '
use by the public and participating classrooms around the world. Started in 1996, '-
EarthKAM has conducted 30 missions 0n ISS and offers more than 24,000 photos .r -
0f the Earth. No other NASA program gives students such direct control of an ,
instrument that is ﬂying on a spacecraft that is orbiting Earth, and, as a result, -"" ' .
students assume an unparalleled personal ownership in the study and analysis
of their Earth photography.
Edward T. Lu, Expedition 7
I .. i. _ - :1 ' _ -' flight engineer, participates in
.- ' H"" . 1:! .- - EarthKAM training in the Space
‘ K __,.ﬁ Vehicle Mockup Facility at
' ”-1 "" ' .' .. NASA Johnson
I I Space Center.
.-' . - I
, .. ,, .. i
‘ EarthKAM students determine photo locations by referencing maps
and atlases, and by matching these to a display of the upcoming orbit
- . tracks for ISS to generate their image requests.
1 77

"
"186","PUBLICATION(S)
HurWicz M. Case Study: Attack of The Space Data — Down To Earth Data Management At ISS EarthKAM.
New Architect. 38, Aug 1, 2002.
- .. .f"" . .15 .
_ __- ""' . '4. a ' ""la
'75??- L g h."" ' -'-. ""ta .'.: ',_.';-_‘3:""*_'... 511}:
. -- 1.52:;
a _-_ I I - . ‘r J J_l. -__ll _ a‘-
. . .1""; . . . 1 . . _ . 1.11.}? fr“ '
' '. "". - . _' _ . JP- -.
'I'.--.1"" . .|.-|III. - 1-
.-'l' Iir-q'g"" ' . .. _'_';'_='5‘I?
I .."";. 31.2. I- 4:; I.-- _ 'I: _‘r'l'ri'. -_'. _.- fr'l. I.
'4-1, ' '_ . - .1. _ 115‘--
I ' ""I . ' ' ""'I. I -' III. - ' '-.TI.' 1r I
- . . 1"""" 'I. ._l ‘ f '1 _ ,3!
l ' - .1 ' i_ ""-11-- ."":- I P.I- d1} 1 - 'l'h
. . . .. _- . f . .
. - - II _ .-'
‘I _
The above image was acquired by ISS EarthKam,
annotated, and captioned by students. The caption produced
by the students is as follows: «a
. .11. . _-"": -.. I .
South of the confluence of the Ganges and Brahmaputra _ﬂg' .- - _- .. . J...-
Rivers (not shown in this image) and north of the Bay of - .:'I!""' _ __ ' '
Bengal lies the vast Ganges Delta, which is about 220 miles "" ' -""': -' .
(350 kilometers) wide. As the rivers empty, they carry large '_ __ 5P1"" "" _
quantities of sediment into the Bay of Bengal. Parts of this '9' -'
delta—the world's largest—Iie in both Bangladesh and the *.-=- ""
State of West Bengal, India. The very dark part of the delta is - '
the Sundarbans, a vast wildlife preserve and abundant man- ' _
grove swamp that is the largest remaining habitat of the .
Bengal tiger. The entire Iow-Iying region is plagued almost -
yealrly by severe storm surges and plbwerful Iow-prefssure Expedition 10 science officer and commander Leroy
cyc ones (the monsoons) that arrive rom the Bay 0 Bengal. Chiao in front of the EarthKAM camera holding a student
Summer monsoon causes ﬂOOd'nQ’ heavy damage F0 ”.095 greeting from Wissahickon Middle School, Ambler, Penn.
and shelters, and loss of human life. The Ganges River IS the
most sacred river of India. Many Hindus come to get healed,
to wash away their sins, or to die at the river if they are ill or
elderly. When a person dies, they are taken to the ""purifying
stream"" and are then dipped in the Ganges before being
cremated. The Hindus then scatter the ashes across the
ﬂveh
178

"
"187","SPACE-EXPOSED EXPERIMENT DEVELOPMENT FOR STUDENTS (Education-SEEDS)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Howard Levine, NASA Kennedy Space Center, Cape Canaveral, Fla, and
Fredrick Smith, NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston
Expedition 1
Research Area Educational Activities
During the Education—Space—Exposed Experiment Development for Students (SEEDS) experiment, eight
pouches of soybean and corn seeds ﬂew 0n ISS and germinated under either dark or lighted conditions. A grid
along the side of the pouch allowed the crew to determine the amount of growth without opening the pouches. In
addition, microgravity—exposed seeds were distributed to schools in Fall 2001 and students conducted germination
experiments comparing them with seeds that had not ﬂown in space.
RESULTS
The Education—SEEDS investigation, which was part of the J ason XI mission, was the ﬁrst plant experiment to
be performed on station. This experiment studied the effects of microgravity and light on the germination of corn
and soybean seeds.
The corn seedlings that were exposed to light appeared to show phototropism (or growth towards light). The
sheets grew toward the light and were green, demonstrating chlorophyll synthesis (the creation of the green pigment
that is used in photosynthesis). The corn seedlings that were not exposed to light did not turn green and did not grow
towards the light. The soybean seedlings that were grown in the light were slightly greener than the seedlings that were
grown in the dark. The phototropic effect was more eVident in the corn seedlings than in the soybean seedlings. On
Earth, gravity inﬂuences the roots of plants to grow in a downward direction (gravitropisni). While on orbit, the
seedlings grew in a microgravity environment. Whether grown in light or dark, the corn roots grew in random
directions. The roots of the soybean seeds also grew in random directions (Levine et a1. 2001).
Examination of the seeds after their stay on ISS revealed that the nutritional and epidermal layers of the
space—eXposed seeds were more porous than those of the ground—based control seeds. This might allow nutrients
to disperse through the seeds more quickly and explain the faster germination and growth rates that were observed in
the space—eXposed seeds.
Simple space ﬂight experiments that are suitable for ISS can have signiﬁcant science impact in the classroom. A
total of 750,000 students across the US. participated in the experiments, growing corn and soybean seeds in their
classrooms to compare with the results from station, and participating in live broadcasts.
PUBLICATION(S)
LeVine HG, Norwood KLL, Tynes GK, LeVine LH. Soybean and Corn Seed Germination in Space: The First Plant
Study Conducted on Space Station Alpha. Proceedings of the 38th Space Congress, Cape Canaveral, Fla. 181—187,
May 2001.
""-19.9 _
..-_'_ .'_'_l"" .--_;“i ' E $' % ,.I
F - ""T . II. ' ""' I . -
-- - 5. ' '_._F ""=.:-.::- . .
Expedition 1 commander ‘ ' . ' "" _ "" '5 i. . 1-
Bill Shepherd is shown with _ -* ﬁ- - .i
a SEEDS pouch. Additional __ '- ' . __ ELIS-
pouches are hanging from : _ _ r . _ "" _ _ ' : ' - . ""I__ ' '! .
the ISS “wall” above the 'I '-':"" - . __.._.. - ' . :1
“Astronauts At Work” sign. .--- “g i
.. IF 2.: :41: f- _-. . r \
1 79

"
"188","SPACE EXPERIMENT MODULE (SEM)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Ruthan Lewis, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.
Expeditions 10, 11, 13, 14
Research Area Educational Activities
_ _ ‘I': T ' _ ,_ The Space Experiment Module (SEM) provided high
- "" school students with an opportunity to conduct research
' - - . _ '1‘; 0n the effects of microgravity, radiation, and space ﬂight on
I! n ' T ”‘T’Ir' ' various materials. Research obj ectives for each experiment
' If El] 111' "" If i 1L- 5."" "" r. were determined by students but generally included hypothe—
EEMEJITEH EL + 5EME.EI.TEZ!-=Z;'E;. II ' ses on changes in selected rnaterials due to the space environ—
I m .m _ ment. This was achieved by providing students space capsules
. ' if” IE 1:— EH ' 7' that contained passive test articles for ﬂight. These capsules
'_ '- . ' -_ ﬂ _ _. ' were clear, sealable polycarbonate Vials, 1 inch in diameter
"" _' "" -"""" ' _ '_’ -'_ "" i"" - ""3"" l“ -' and 3 inches in de th. The Vials were acked in satchels
. _. III“ _ . P P
""J ""'- (20 per satchel) that contain special formed foam layers
- =’- ' - for ﬂight.
ISSO10E12594 0— This image shows an integrated - - - -
SEM used during Expedition 10; the photograph was taken Students selected the items that were contained 1ns1de
by ISS commander Leroy Chiao. the Vials. Some of the items included seeds, such as corn,
watermelon, cucumber, beans, peas, and several other veg—
etables. Additional items included materials, such as wool,
Kevlar, silk, ultraviolet beads, chicken bones, copper, plastic, dextrose, yeast, over—the—counter medications, human
hair, mineral samples, light bulbs, and brine shrimp eggs. Many students tested seed growth after microgravity expo—
sure; other students tested how rnaterials protect against radiation exposure and survival rates of microscopic life
forms.
RESULTS
Eleven schools and 300 students developed experiments for SEM Satchel 001. The satchel was launched dur—
ing ISS Expedition 10 in Dec 2004 and returned to Earth on Space Shuttle Discovery (STS—114) in Aug 2005. The
sample Vials were returned to the students for analysis.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
__ _ I_II ' ' _'_-I - E- .
-' :--.:.-, .1_=-'-_. .
I ._' - __ _ _-1:. [IIIr' ""'II'; .
' I a I'r I I ' .k-{h - .
I III- III _ II I—IIIIII _.I'I.- IIr _- I i l. I I‘KI .
._ 'II-ﬁ, h""; I I I- I . I 'I _ ‘J- ' I
I _ I! 1.. ""-_I-_. i - I.I'- I . I I I.-. I I -."" _fng'.‘ I
a «4* . . ‘ / ""5'"" '15:“ ' - h .
-- - -‘"" iii - I '
._I. __ __ -_ _,_..I..-_-_'-_- 1 Jr r
1‘ '~.~+r*' ea. ' .m- . .445,
-m_ u 4— hf. §-
.I- *- l—I-I 'I.
r. ' ‘ _ ii I I
Students from Mott Hall School, New York City, NY. wrap fabrics around radiation dosimeters as they prepare
samples for the Wearable Radiation Protection Experiment that was part of SEM-2.
180

"
"189","RESULTS FROM ISS OPERATIONS
Although not part of a formal investigation orpayloaa’ an ISS, medical, environmental, and engineering data that
are collected as part of the operation OfISS are an important source ofinformationfor scientiﬁc study. We include
and summarize the results ofsix areas ofoperations that have generated valuable scientiﬁc data that enable scien-
tists and engineers to better deﬁne problems and understand the space environment: erewmember—initiatea’ science,
environmental monitoring, medical monitoring Oferewmembers, station development test objectives, supplementary
mea’ieal objectives, and lessons learnedfrom the operation 0fstati0n that are relevant to future mission designs.
CREWMEMBER-INITIA TED SCIENCE
This science encompasses activities that are initiated by the crew. T hese activities are performed at the discretion of
the astronauts on board [SS using simple materials that would not impact [SS operations. T hese activities often take
the form ofsimple demonstrations oflife orphysiealphenomena in microgravity; videos of the activities are
downlinkea’ t0 Earthfor use in informal education materials.
EDUCA TIONAL ACTIVITIES
Everyday life aboard the ISSprovia’es topics that can be used as springboardsfor classroom activities. Crew-
members and collaborators with certain payloads have creatively worked with ground—basea’ crews to produce
educational activities and materials that growfrom normal operations aboard the ISS.
ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING OF [88
Environmental monitoring research has been performed on all [SS Expeditions and will continue to be performed
onfuture station missions to ensure the health of the spacecraft as well as of the crew. While the monitoring—both
inside and outside the spacecraft—has a hara’purpose to support daily life aboard the ISS, the data that are
collected are extremely usefulfor addressing a wide set ofquestions, such as understanding the evolution of
contamination, discerning the detectable limits ofeontaminants, quantiﬁ/ing anecdotal assessments of
environmental conditions that impact the [SS crew, and more.
MEDICAL MONITORING OF [88 CREWMEMBERS
Medical monitoring OfISS erewmembers includes tests before, during, and after space ﬂight to follow the eﬂeets
of space ﬂight on their health and to ensure that they receive proper medical care. Medical data collection in
support ofbaseline monitoring Oferew health is separatefrom, but supports, the hypothesis-a’riven mea’ieal
experiments that are sponsored by the Human Research Program.
SUPPLEMENTARY MEDICAL OBJECTIVE
Supplemental mea’ieal objectives are designed to use data that are collected by another investigation to answer new
questions that are posed by investigators concerning the eﬂeets of space ﬂight on crew health. T hese small studies
can provide the data that are requiredfor deﬁning a full, hypothesis-a’riven experiment.
STA TION DEVELOPMENT TEST OBJECTIVE
Station Development T est Objectives (S T DOs) are designed to reﬁne or expand [SS models, assessfuture [SS
capabilities or improvements, and test eapabilitiesforfuture Exploration systems. The objects ofSDTOs are often
elevated to operational status after successful demonstration an orbit. Data that are eolleetea’fmm the SDTOs can
provide new scientiﬁc and engineering insights into aspects OfISS operations or technologies that are relevant to
future space ﬂight missions.
EXPL ORA TION LESSONS LEARNED FROM THE OPERA TION 0F [35'
Constructing and operating [SS serves as a test bea’for new technologies and techniques in support of the crew
exploration vehicle (CEV) ana’ lunar mission hardware design and development.
181

"
"190","Results from ISS Operations investigations by Sub-discipline.
Crewmember-initiated Science

Saturday Morning Science (Science of Opportunity)

Educational Activities
Education-Solar Cells (Education — How Solar Cells Work)
In-ﬂight Education Downlinks

Environmental Monitoring of ISS
ISS Acoustics (International Space Station Acoustic Measurement Program)
Medical Monitoring of ISS Crewmembers
Clinical Nutrition Assessment (Clinical Nutrition Assessment of ISS Astronauts)
Environmental Monitoring (Environmental Monitoring of the International Space Station)
Supplementary Medical Objective
PFE-OUM (Periodic Fitness Evaluation with Oxygen Uptake Measurement)
Station Development Test Objective
SORGE (Soldering in Reduced Gravity Experiment, SDTO 17003 -U)
Exploration Lessons Learned from the Operation of ISS
Plasma Interaction Model (Analysis of International Space Station Plasma Interaction)
ZPM (International Space Station Zero-Propellant Maneuver (ZPM) Demonstration)
Miscellaneous Science Results from ISS Operations
1 82

"
"191","CLINICAL NUTRITION ASSESSMENT OF ISS ASTRONAUTS (Clinical Nutrition Assessment)
Principal Investigator(s): Scott M. Smith, Ph.D., NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston
Expeditions 1—14
Research Area Medical Monitoring of ISS Crewmernbers
.. _=, __ _ To provide nutritional recommendations to crewrnernbers for long—duration space
. __' I travel, we need to better understand how nutritional status and general physiology are
' .1 - _. -"" _ affected by the microgravity environment. Dietary intake during space ﬂight has often
1"" TI? 1} .~ been inadequate, and this can greatly compromise nutritional status. Data from both short—
- _I: - .. 1L? and long—duration space ﬂights provide evidence that energy intake is typically 30 to
:5 "" j g '1 I. ' 40% below World Health Organization recommendations, but energy expenditure is
y_ 1' -. ' . ' - typically unchanged or even increased. This imbalance may explain some of the observed
£1.55 ' negative changes in overall nutritional status during ﬂight. However, blood concentra—
_ I E_ tions of some nutrients, such as vitamin D, continue to be low even when astronauts
'1'__-. 51:"" receive supplements during ﬂight. The space enVironrnent itself results in physiologic
_ _ __ ., .- "" changes that can alter nutritional status. For example, changes in iron metabolism are
"" I “i I"": ""A :1. closely associated with blood chemistry alterations during space ﬂight. Similarly,
_ ---"" I.,'. L increased levels of radiation and oxidative stress during ﬂight likely contribute to
I .-""' I I I|_' :l. 'b ' decreased antioxidant status and genetic damage during or after space ﬂight.
. . I ' I ' ‘-
|SSO12E12635 — ISS science officer Bill MacArthur during Expedition 12, is shown checking out the space
linear acceleration mass measurement device (SLAMMD) hardware of HRF-2. Measuring the mass of a crewmember
in space is difficult because mass does not equal weight in the absence of gravity.
There are siX components to the Clinical Nutrition Assessment research program. These are:

0 The food system provides a 6— to 10—day rnenu cycle; before each rnission, crewmembers participate in
food—tasting sessions, and dietitians plan rnenus using crew choices that best fulﬁll the deﬁned nutritional
requirements for space ﬂight.

0 During ﬂight, crewrnernbers were asked to record their dietary intake once per week using a Food
Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ) that was designed for use with the space ﬂight food system. The FFQ was
designed to obtain a near—real—time estimate of intakes of energy, protein, water, sodium, calcium, and iron,
as well as to collect information about Vitarnin supplement use and any crew comments. The questionnaire
inputs from the astronauts were transmitted to the ground, and results were calculated and reported to the
ﬂight surgeon within 24 to 48 hours.

0 Body mass was measured preﬂight, postﬂight, and in—ﬂight, while body composition was determined
preﬂight and postﬂight using laboratory rneasurernents.

- Blood and urine samples were collected preﬂight and postﬂight for analysis of whole blood, plasma, serum,
and various analytes; blood pH and ionized calcium levels were measured in—ﬂight using ﬂnger sticks.

0 Biochemical analysis of the blood and urine samples was performed at NASA J ohnson Space Center using
standard laboratory methods.

0 Statistical analysis of the analytical results were performed to detect differences in nutritional status from
preﬂight to postﬂight.

Body mass and body composition analyses were performed using an X—ray absorptiometer that was equipped with a
fan beam densitorneter. In—ﬂight body mass measurements require two astronauts: one to take measurements and the
other to record the data. The measurements were obtained using a body—rnass measuring device; this device exerts a
known force on the body and measures body acceleration. Body mass was then calculated. Standard rnedical ﬂnger
sticks and capillary tubes were used to obtain blood samples for input into an analyzer unit that was on board. A
single astronaut performed the blood collection and analysis procedure. The FFQ program, which was loaded
on station computers, was used to input food consumption information on a weekly basis.
RESULTS
Results have been compiled and analyzed for ISS crewmembers. Intake of energy (relative to World Health
Organization standards) was observed to generally decrease over time during rnissions. However, when dietary
counseling was provided to a single astronaut during ﬂight, adequate energy intake was maintained throughout the

1 83

"
"192","mission. Body weight, total bone mineral content, and bone mineral density decreased during ﬂight. Antioxidant
capacity decreased during ﬂight, leading to increased susceptibility to genetic damage from radiation. Vitamin D
concentration in crew bone was decreased, and bone resorption was increased, by long exposure to microgravity.
The relative concentrations of other blood and urine analytes preﬂight and postﬂight were variable and subject to
several confounding factors that limit conclusions as to the particular effects of space ﬂight (Smith, 2005, 2008 ).
The results of this study formed the basis for the nutrition and repository experiments, which are currently being
operated on 188.
Additionally, these data have been used by other medical researchers who are performing experiments on 188.
Cross-cutting results on bone health in space were reported in Cavanaugh and Rice, 2007 (see Smith et a1. 2007;
Hall et a1. 2007).
PUBLICATION(S)
Hall PS. Past and Current Practice in Space Nutrition, in P Cavanagh and AJ Rice (eds.), Bone Loss During
Spaceﬂight: Etiology, Countermeasures, and Implications for Bone Health on Earth. Cleveland Clinic Press,
Cleveland, Ohio (2007), pp. 125—132.
Smith S, Zwart SR, Block G, Rice BL, DaVis-Street J E. The nutritional status of astronauts is altered after long-term
space ﬂight aboard the International Space Station. Journal ofNutrition. 2005; 135(3):437—443.
Smith S, Zwart, SR, Block G, Rice BL, DaVis-Street J E. The Nutritional Status of Astronauts is Altered After
Long-Term Space Flight Aboard the International Space Station, in P Cavanagh and AJ Rice (eds.), Bone Loss
During Spaceﬂight: Etiology, Countermeasures, and Implications for Bone Health on Earth. Cleveland Clinic Press,
Cleveland, Ohio (2007), pp. 133—147.
Smith SM, Zwart SR. Nutrition issues for space exploration. Acta Astronautica. 2008; 63:609—613.

184

"
"193","EDUCATION-HOW SOLAR CELLS WORK (Education-Solar Cells)
Principal Investigator(s): Christopher J . Ferguson, NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston
Expedition 13
Research Area Educational Activities
The Teaching From Space (TFS) Ofﬁce at NASA J ohnson Space Center worked closely with astronaut Chiistopher
Ferguson, pilot of STS—l 15 (Atlantis); Lockheed Martin Corporation; Oklahoma State University (OSU), and the
Student Observation Network to provide classroom versions of solar cells and learning activities to NASA Explorer
Schools. These activities have been designed to engage students through the STS—l 15 primary mission obj ective,
deployment of a new solar array on 188. The original suggestion for this activity was brought to the TFS Ofﬁce
by Ferguson.
In his free time during the STS—l 15 mission, Ferguson demonstrated how solar cells work in front of a Video
camera. Ferguson discussed, in detail, how solar cells provide energy; open circuit voltage; and power measurement
with resistors. With the aid of light—emitting diode (LED) lights, a Visual demonstration of solar ﬂux was performed.
Following completion, the Video will be edited for use in the classroom.
Lockheed Martin Corporation donated solar cells to this project for educational purposes . Engineering students
at OSU linked the solar sells together in packs for use in the space shuttle demonstration and for distribution to the
schools. The NASA Student Observation Network created lessons and activities that will be provided to the NASA
Explorer Schools and the Aerospace Education Specialists when teaching this lesson.
RESULTS
There are no results to report at this time.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
Dan Hem, OSU Masters Student in Aviation and
Space Education, works on solar cell hardware
that will fly aboard STS—115. Image courtesy _
of OSU. 1 ""
. i. .
. : _ Eﬁ '_""'
I :- I __...-""-‘L:._. --""-.. ':_* . .
f .q *ﬁ/ I! T
.‘. I ___I.,_.-. HIE“ 1
1 85

"
"194","ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING OF THE INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION
(Environmental Monitoring)
Principal Investigator(s): NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston
Expeditions 1—1 8
Research Area Medical Monitoring of ISS Crewmernbers
To successfully live and work in the environment of space, the ISS environment must be monitored to ensure the
health of the crew that is living and working there. Astronauts can be more sensitive to air pollutants because of the
closed environment. Pollutants in this environment are magniﬁed in ISS because the exposure is continuous.
Sources of physical, chemical, and microbiological contarninants include humans and other organisms, food, cabin
surface materials, and experiment devices. One hazard is the offgassing of vapors frorn plastics and other items on
ISS; although this is a small hazard, the accumulation of these contaminants in the air can prove dangerous to crew
health. The air sampling systems on ISS periodically checks the air for potential hazards. Advanced HEPA ﬁlters
and periodic ﬁlter cleanings have been successful in keeping harmful vapors out of the air. Other signiﬁcant con—
tarninants that pose hazards to the crew are microbial growth, both bacterial and fungal; air, water, and surface
sampling by the crew in conjunction with periodic cleaning keep the microbial levels on ISS in check.
The volatile organic analyzer (VOA) is an atmospheric analysis device on I- '_ -_.- |I __ I ;- :-
ISS that uses a gas chromatograph and ion rnobility spectrometer to detect, _ ‘J' ""I ' i '
identify, and quantify a selected list of volatile organic compounds (i.e., 1. I. .a -l I
ethanol, methanol, and 2—propanol) that are harmful to humans at high .' I . I"" I! -
levels in a closed environment such as ISS. L. . "" . I f
. . . . 7'” ""' - ' . . - 'l ' I
To monitor microbial levels on ISS, crewmembers use devrces called ‘3 ' ' - , I'
grab sample containers, dual absorbent tubes, and swabs to collect station -- I-. '
air, water and surface samples and send them to Earth for detailed analysis ' ""I '
and identiﬁcation every 6 months. These data provide controllers on Earth |SSOO6E45319 — Cosmonaut and
detailed information about the type of microbial contaminants that are on ﬂight enginfeer for '88 Expedition 6’ Nikolai
board ISS. The controllers can then give direction to the crew on sanitation BudaIrm, '8 posmg near the POtOk 150MK
aIr-decontammation equment In the
if increased microbial growth is identiﬁed. The crew keeps rnicrobes under Zvezda service module.
control on ISS through periodic scheduled sanitation of the station.
Missions to the moon and Mars will increase the length of time that astronauts live and work in closed
environments. To complete future long—duration rnissions, the crews must remain healthy in closed environments;
hence, future spacecraft must provide sensors to monitor environmental health and accurately determine and control
the physical, chemical, and biological environment of the crew living areas and their environmental control systems.
ISSO1OE11563 — An example of microbial contamination that developed on interior panel
406 aboard ISS. Following workouts, the crewmembers placed their clothes on this panel to
dry out. Attempts to clean this panel with supplies aboard ISS failed, and the panel had to
be replaced.
RESULTS
During one study of the ISS atrnosphere, 12 bacterial strains were isolated and ﬁnger—
printed from the ISS water system. These bacteria consisted of common strains and were
encountered at levels below 10,000 colony—forming units/ 10 crnz, which is well below the
minimum of bacteria needed to cause illness. These data represent the beginning of station
habitation and indicate that the lessons learned from previous Mir and Skylab missions were implemented and have
been effective in keeping station a safe place in which to live and work (Castro et a1. 2004).
Other studies performed an in—depth microbial examination of the drinking water in various stages (from the
NASA Kennedy Space Center, Cape Canaveral, Fla. to the ISS ports). These studies have revealed that the NASA
1 86

"
"195","policy for biocide treatment has effectively removed pathogenic microbes that are traveling to space (La Due et a1.
2004; Plumlee et a1. 2002; Plumlee et a1. 2003). Studies on station air quality found that the active (VOA) and
passive (HEPA ﬁlters) controls that are in place on 188 are effective in controlling trace contaminants of volatile
organic compounds on space station (J ames 2003; Perry 2003).
In another analysis, 39 mold species were identiﬁed on dust in the 188 that was collected from the HEPA ﬁlters
(Vesper et a1. 2008). Because some molds pose health risks , including infections and allergic reactions, and others
break down organic substances that could compromise parts of the ISS hardware, understanding the mold popula-
tions on the 188 is important.
PUBLICATION(S)
Castro VA, Thrasher AN, Healy M, Ott CM, Pierson DL. Microbial Characterization during the Early Habitation 0f
the International Space Station. Microbial Ecology. 2004; 47:119—126.
La Due MT, Sumner R, Pierson D, Venkat P, Venkateswaran K. Evidence of pathogenic microbes in the
International Space Station drinking water: reason for concern? Habitation. 2004; 10:39—48.
Plumlee D, Mudgett PD, Schultz JR. Chemical Sampling and Analysis of ISS Potable Water: Expeditions 1—3.
32nd International Conference on Environmental Systems, San Antonio, Texas. 2002; SAE Technical Paper 2002-
01-2537.
Plumlee D, Mudgett P, Schultz J . ISS Potable Water Sampling and Chemical Analysis: Expeditions 4 & 5.
33rdInternati0na1 Conference on Environmental Systems, Vancouver, Canada. Jul 2003; SAE Technical Paper
2003-01-2401.
Perry J , Peterson B. Cabin air quality Dynamics on Board the International Space Station. 33rd International
Conference on Environmental Systems, Vancouver, Canada. Jul 2003; SAE Technical Paper 2003-01-2650.
J ames J , Limero T, Beck S, Martin B, Covington P, Boyd J , Peters R. Toxicological Assessment of the International
Space Station Atmosphere With Emphasis on MetOX Canister Regeneration. 33rdInternati0na1 Conference on
Environmental Systems, Vancouver, Canada. Jul 2003; SAE Technical Paper 2003-01-2647.
Vesper SJ, Wong W, Kuo CM, Pierson DL. Mold species in dust from the International Space Station identiﬁed and
quantiﬁed by mold-speciﬁc quantitative PCR. Research in Microbiology. (2008).

187

"
"196","INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION IN-FLIGHT EDUCATION DOWNLINKS
(ln-flight Education Downlinks)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Rene Flores, NASA J 0hnson Space Center, Houston
Expeditions 1—22, ongoing
Research Area Educational Activities
The NASA TFS Ofﬁce is responsible for facilitating the ﬂight of educational activities on the space shuttle and the
ISS. The TFS Ofﬁce activities focus on demonstrating science, mathematics, engineering, technology, or geography
principles in a microgravity environment. Most activities involve Video recording of the demonstrations and/or still
photographic documentation of a crewmember.
The TFS Ofﬁce also coordinates In—ﬂight Education Downlinks, which provides students and educators with the
opportunity to learn about science and the ISS by speaking to the crew in orbit. Prior to the event, students study the
ISS and 0n—b0ard science activities and develop questions to ask the crew. Since In—ﬂight Education Downlinks began,
thousands of students have had the opportunity to participate in a downlink event where ISS crewmembers answered
their questions and performed simple educational demonstrations. Through educational broadcasting, more than
30 million students have been able to watch the live interviews. Through In—ﬂight Education Downlinks, students
and educators can communicate live with the ISS crew.
Usually two education downlinks occur each month. Members of the formal and informal education communities,
NASA centers and education programs, and the ISS International Partners host these events. The hosts make downlinks
part of a comprehensive education package that supports national and state education standards and initiatives. Live
in—ﬂight education downlinks, which have one—way Video (from ISS) and two—way audio, are broadcast live on
NASA Television.
RESULTS
As of Apr 2007, over 30 million students have participated in In—ﬂight Education Downlink activities, which include
a Channel One (network broadcast to schools) downlink to schools across the western US. that reached millions of
students during Expedition 6 and a US. Department of Education downlink that reached millions of students around
the country during Expedition 12.
The following statements were written by seventh—grade students in Phelps, Ky., after participating in an In—ﬂight
Education Downlink event during Expedition 10:
o “I have decided to become more educated and become some sort of scientist.”
- “I have been inﬂuenced — I want to get an education in a ﬁeld of science or technology.”
0 “Small towns have big technology too.”
0 “I didn’t know about all of the good jobs we could get when we grow up. My parents say they didn’t have
these opportunities when they were growing up but we do.”
min??? 1' 1: fatal]
-""+ 31%? "" 5‘1“”; ‘
'.' LL. .r. "" - '*""'-' '- ‘3.
e5 trial
Expedition 13 crewmembers on board ISIS 113-: ' J l {.317
answered questlons that students asked In H. :11 _ , 1&an -
four languages during the International '. . - -.,.n. - -”:;
Education Week event that was held on (1:51;: _ __ I; J; . |
Nov 14,- 2006, at the U.S. Department of "". IE} 1: i't' :. +
Educatlon. Image courtesy of the NASA '_'_._..-- ..'I -_ __-_. . .
Educational Technology Services. - '
1 88

"
"197","PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
_ J.
* r
i - iti- ‘
‘ ' From 210 miles above Earth, Expedition 14 ISS commander Michael Lopez-Alegria thrilled
i 4"" an audience of students, faculty, staff, and their kids Apr 5, 2007. Pictured are 8-year-old
r Mark and 9-year-old Julianne, who asked Lopez-Alegria what it's like to float and what do
1 _ stars look like from the space. Lopez-Alegria did one better. He tumbled himself like a
. "" J'__ﬂ_,,,..rr-'=.- whirling dervish and then told Julianne that when they are on the far side of Earth, away
.$__ 1 _ -'-'--' from the sun, there are so many billions-of—stars that it's more like seeing a whitish back-
‘- ground with little black specks! U.S. Navv photograph taken by Javier Chaqova.
189

"
"198","INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION ACOUSTIC MEASUREMENT PROGRAM (ISS Acoustics)
Principal Investigator(s): Christopher Allen, NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston; Samuel A. Denham, Ph.D.,
The Boeing Company, Huntsville, Ala; S. Reynold Chu, Ph.D., Lockheed Martin,
Houston
Expeditions 0, 1—18, ongoing
Research Area Environmental Monitoring of 188
The 188 is a noisy place. To better characterize the acoustic environment as it changes
' , - -' r With assembly, the International Space Station Acoustic Measurement Program (ISS
Ira ' -_E""_. =.- -_. ___? Acoustics) has collected data from before a permanent crew occupied the 188. The
II-H _' - _' _ ""'- experiment uses one B&K Type 2260 sound level meter (SLM) and three Ametek
1r - '1_ _—- -—.. _ _ _ . Mark I audio (acoustic) dosimeters to monitor the ISS acoustic noise environment.
""' ""P ' .ﬁ- ' .
g' t ' ‘2. ' ' ' There are two types of SLM activities: the SLM survey of ISS and acoustic
i ‘ "" 132.4 .- engineering evaluation. An SLM survey is performed once every 2 months to
' . _ ' -}' measure the acoustic spectral levels at speciﬁed locations. An acoustic engineering
' I.' g ' _- evaluation is performed to diagnose acoustic abnormalities; investigate crew com—
- _ ii.- 1 ; plaints, and evaluate effectiveness of newly installed noise—reduction measures.
.ZJTI: _ Noise exposure levels are measured by crew—worn dosimeters and dosimeters
' I '31 that are deployed at ﬁxed locations to determine work, sleep, and 24—hour noise
I' exposure levels. Periodic reports of SLM surveys and dosimeter measurements are
_ I ""1 _ generated for noise trend tracking, acoustic diagnosis, and development of noise
.-.'-.-_!_=r____ ' . __' abatements/acoustic remedies.
ISSOO5E12372 - Flight engineer ._ -, "":' _
Sergei Treschev takes measurements with ""' 4.. . _ _:-
an SLM. in the U-8- Destiny laboratory during ISSOO7E08990 — Expedition 7 science officer Ed ; '-;_-.';I“n. '
EXDedlthn 5- Lu poses for a photograph in the Zvezda service ' - i I':
module while wearing the audio dosimeter. ' '- ""*1"" '_
RESULTS ' - 'r."" . ;.-
The 188 presents a signiﬁcant acoustics challenge considering all of the modules ' ' I .._. .
and equipment that make it an on—orbit laboratory and home With long—duration crew i. “I ' ‘ . .
occupation. The acoustic environment on board station has become one of the highest ' l 1 ""i
crew habitability concerns. The acoustics mission support function, Which includes train— I: . ..
ing, Mission Control support, and data analysis, is necessary to monitor crew exposure ,— - “-5
and ensure that the crewmembers’ hearing is not at risk. Without accurate on—orbit data, _ _ -:'} '
all preventative ground efforts are rendered ineffective. Mission monitoring and support I . J
is critical to the control and mitigation of acoustic noise on station. 188 Acoustics pre— '- _ ___._ _ -__ - '-.;-.
serves crewmembers’ hearing and provides for a safe, productive, and comfortable ""I '
noise environment.
The Acoustics Ofﬁce at NASA J ohnson Space Center performs valuable management oversight over acoustic
activities. The NASA J ohnson Space Center acoustic team provides beneﬁcial support of modules, payloads, and
government—furnished equipment requirements deﬁnition, design, and development and consultation, and applies
proactive efforts to help hardware providers achieve compliance. The acoustic team also manages predictions for ﬂight
readiness and on—orbit measurements, and maintains a database of measurements; it also distributes reports and assess—
ments of the data. It is important that the ISS noise be in compliance With current speciﬁcations. This is important
to ensure acceptable crew communications, health, and well—being. Data that were collected from the Space Shuttle
Program and Mir Program indicate that levels at or close to 70 dBA should be considered 188 daily exposure limits.
These limits are justiﬁed in View of crew experience, especially considering the variability in crewmember
physiological and psychological response to noise (Goodman 2003).
188 Acoustics develops measures to safeguard the crewmembers’ hearing, ensures there are workarounds for
excessively noisy areas or mission events, and provides for a secure, productive, and comfortable noise environment.
1 90

"
"199","This is aided by module noise monitoring, noise abatement, and restricting crew noise exposure during a mission
(Pilkinton 2003).
PUBLICATION(S)
Goodman JR. International Space Station Acoustics. Noise Conference, Cleveland, Ohio. Jun 23 —25, 2003.
Pilkinton GD. ISS Acoustics Mission Support. Noise Conference, Cleveland, Ohio. Jun 23—25, 2003.
I I -l 1:1: ' LITI'I-ilg I "":‘E. I'll I
tl, 1'“ ._if: ,__ .
: . . .. i‘ '- -
f ' 3""» "" a ""
._ . tar ”' . l ..
. .. '~.._ 11'? _ I
-| I .
. I '_‘: , _. I I - 1
q _ . r .ﬁ. .l.‘ hi
ll -. .. _ I ‘..“:- I i -
I I 1w ‘=. .. | _ '
: ,,. 'l‘ . u.
ISSOOBE329018 — Expedition 3 commander Frank L. Culbertson holds the SLM in the
U.S. laboratory Destiny. The SLM is part of the Acoustic Countermeasures Kit (ACK).
191

"
"200","PERIODIC FITNESS EVALUATION WITH OXYGEN UPTAKE MEASUREMENT (PFE-OUM)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Sean K. Roden M.D., NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston; Filippo Castrucci, M.D.,
European Astronaut Centre, Cologne, Germany
Expeditions 13—1 6
Research Area Supplementary Medical Obj ective
ISS crewrnembers routinely perform ground—based exercise tests using a metabolic gas analysis before and after
space ﬂight. During these tests, oxygen uptake measurements (OUMs) are made are used to determine a person’s
aerobic capacity. Measurement of aerobic capacity allows exercise physiologists and ﬂight doctors to assess crew
health and ﬁtness and accurately prescribe exercise countermeasures for use on board the ISS.
During space ﬂight, ISS crewrnernbers perform a monthly periodic ﬂtness evaluation (PFE) starting on ﬂight
day 14, and repeated every 30 days. While performing this test, a crewrneniber’s heart rate and blood pressure are
recorded using the blood pressure/electrocardiograph (BP/ECG). Heart rate data along with the prescribed Cycle
Ergorneter with Vibration Isolation Systern (CEVIS) workloads allow ground personnel to estimate changes in
crewrnernber aerobic capacity by comparing the heart rate response to increases in workload performed during
preﬂight evaluations. There are several limitations to this approach of measuring oxygen capacity that the
PFE—OUM will eliminate.
To date, OUMs have not been possible during the PFE because hardware that is capable of measuring oxygen up—
take has not been available aboard ISS. Now the Pulmonary Function Systern (PFS) provides the ability to perform
the required OUMs. The PFS is a development in the ﬁeld of respiratory physiology instrumentation by BSA. The
PFS consists of the Photoacoustic Analyzer Module (PAM), the Pulmonary Function Module (PFM), and the Gas
Delivery System (GDS), which is capable of a wide range of respiratory and cardiovascular measurements. The PFS
was initially launched to the ISS aboard STS—l 14/LF1, followed by a hardware upgrade that was launched on the
Russian Progress cargo module 21 in Apr 2006. A11 hardware pertaining to the OUM actiVity is currently stored
in the HRF Rack 2 and was checked out during Expedition 12.
. 4'. 1.. A ‘- -. 211:,"" r ' This evaluation was performed in two phases. The ﬁrst phase
I“: -_.:'I ' ”RIF 1-1 ""—1 aSsessed the feasibility of making OUMs during the PFE. The data
_. —-.f' ""- ‘4. - &' gave investigators and technical personnel the necessary information
_' - ' i i '.__..'P .~:,""""-'b _ _ - to determine whether the PFS is able to accurately perform OUMs
:41 I 1 4 . ' —“ “:7 ' - aboard the ISS within the current tirnelines that are designated for
. . ' a '. ‘é- + ' the PFE.
' . '. ‘1 'mﬁ - The second phase of this evaluation compares the current methods
- . ' ‘1 “I of estimating ISS crewrnernbers’ aerobic ﬁtness with the more direct
- I 1 "" II method of performing OUMs. The data that were collected during this
I S SE 0 1 3568 62 _ N AS A ISS science fficer phase alongwith data that were collecteci during phase one are being
Jeff Williams assisting flight engineer—2 Thomas analyzed us1ng the current method of estimating changes in aerobic
Reiter performing his PFE-OUM on the CEVIS ﬂtness (i.e., workload and heart rate observations alone) and direct
during '33 EXPEdition 13- analysis of the heart rate data in association with OUMs.
RESULTS
There were some initial instrurnent calibration problems when the experiment was ﬁrst used aboard the ISS.
This experiment is still ongoing, and results are pending.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
1 92

"
"201","ANALYSIS OF INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION PLASMA INTERACTION (Plasma
Interaction Model)
Principal Investigator(s): Ronald Mikatarian, Boeing, Houston

Expeditions 1 1—1 6
Research Area Exploration Lessons Learned from the Operation of 188
This experiment was designed to create a model to predict the voltage difference between the ISS and the plasma
background. The ionospheric plasma interacts with the ISS solar arrays and conducting surfaces, causing excess
charge to be accumulated, thus creating the potential difference. This model will be used to predict the ISS ﬂoating
potentials to assess vehicle and EMU dielectric breakdown.
The plasma interaction model (PIM) collected measurements of the ionospheric plasma around the 188 using
the ﬂoating potential probe (FPP), which was mounted outside on an ISS truss until it was jettisoned in late 2005.
Data were also collected using the Incoherent Scatter Radar (ISR) data, which is a ground-based technique for the
study of the Earth’s ionosphere and its interactions with the upper atmosphere, the magnetosphere, and the interplanetary
medium (solar wind). These measurements helped to validate the models that used magnetic ﬁeld inputs from the
International Geomagnetic Reference Field (IGRF) and the plasma environmental parameters from the International
Reference Ionosphere (1R1), which is an empirical standard model of the ionosphere that is based on all available data
sources. J oint investigations with ISR principal investigators at Millstone Hill (US) and Irkutsk (Russia) have been
conducted. Plasma data from a previously launched satellite, Dynamics Explorer-2 (which was launched Aug 3, 1981
and collected data through Feb 19, 1983) can also be used as input into the PIM. This plasma database will be in-
creased as more plasma data become available, i.e., from the CHAMP [challenging minisatellite payload] satellite
and 188 ﬂoating potential measurement unit (FPMU). Other inputs to the PIM include vehicle coordinates,
conﬁguration of solar arrays, conducting area, and the plasma contactor unit (PCU) currents and current-
to-voltage relationship.
RESULTS
The PIM has been used to predict the charge build-up and associated dangers for future 188 solar array
conﬁgurations. Ground data were collected from various locations around the world. Additionally, historical data—
e.g., the IRI 2001 model, FPP data, and the Dynamics Explorer-2 satellite data—are available. Using these data, the
PIM has been able to characterize the peak voltage levels for the various ISS stage builds. (Reddell et al. 2006).
PUBLICATION(S)
Reddell B, Alred J , Kramer L, Mikatarian R. Analysis of ISS Plasma Interaction. Proceedings of the 44th AIAA
Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NeV. J an 9—12, 2006; AIAA 2006-865.

1 93

"
"202","SATURDAY MORNING SCIENCE (Science of Opportunity)
Principal Investigator(s): Donald Pettit, Ph.D., NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston
Expedition 6
Research Area Crewmember—initiated Science
Science of Opportunity was the brainchild of Expedition 6 NASA ISS science ofﬁcer Don Pettit. On ISS,
crewmembers have access to world—class laboratory facilities in the unique enVironment of microgravity; the topics
for Saturday Morning Science were therefore spawned by living and working in the microgravity enVironment.
Science of Opportunity, which was dubbed “Saturday Morning Science” by Expedition 6 ISS commander Ken
Bowersox, was done at the discretion of the ISS astronauts. The experiments used simple materials that would not
impact ISS operations. During Expedition 6, a number of scientiﬁc principles were demonstrated through Saturday
Morning Science. The value of this science is the ability to provide observation—based insights for the reduced—
graVity enVironment. Some of the many experiments that were performed are described below.
Noctilucent Cloud Observations in the Southern Hemisphere
Noctilucent clouds, which are clouds that occur in the polar regions in the upper atmosphere (or at about 80 km),
appear as a thin but distinct cloud layer that is well above the Visible part of the atmosphere. This ISS crewmembers
have an excellent vantage point for observing these phenomena. Pettit’s observations included photographs, space—
craft position, date and time, and approximate Viewing direction. They were compiled into a data set that laid the
groundwork for the ISS participation in the IPY in 2007.
u Water Observations
.' L ' - . ' 1 An analog to planetary accretion processes was demonstrated using a plastic
I I "" 5 ' ' bag, sugar, tea grains, and water. The particles (e.g., tea leaves) were suspended
’ ' . f """" in water before they were manipulated and photographed. The “planetary” accre—
WK ' - ' . * tion (increase in the mass of obj ect by the collection of surrounding “interstellar
.. ._ _ I -M J gases and obj ects” by gravity) of the particles in microgravity was observed.
L3,; A . .
= g» _ As part of the Water Observations demonstrations, these clumps
. -= of 1- to 6-mm salt (sodium chloride (NaCI)) particles In air were formed
1 - _ on ISS Expedition 6.
Studying Water F ilms
In microgravity, thin ﬁlms were surprisingly robust and could withstand numerous mechanical durability tests
without breaking. Blowing on the ﬁlm created ripples that quickly dampened when the perturbations ceased.
Oscillating the loop through tens of centimeters with a period of about 2 seconds distorted the ﬁlm with patterns like
seen in a soft rubber membrane when driven by a sound oscillator.
Growing Plants in Zero-g
Using materials readily available aboard ISS (ear plugs, underwear, toilet
paper, drinking straw, basil and tomato seeds), basil and tomato seeds were
germinated and sprouted on ISS.
|88006E20853 — CIose-up view of earplugs
strung together by NASA ISS science officer .
Don Pettit to create a sprouter for basil and
tomato seeds.
Symphony ofSpheres
A 3—inch—diameter sphere of water, which was an analog to a pond, was inj ected with
. __ H.- a bubble of air (~15 inch diameter). Several more droplets of air were inj ected into the
.l -_ - - _* air bubble. Ripples moving outward from a disturbance on a pond (e.g., a rock thrown
,ﬂwf. __-.. -: into a pond) were demonstrated in microgravity using a pulse that was applied to the
l; "" 1'. -.‘:.-"" :3? f""? I sphere of water. The resulting ripples moved in an outward direction around the
u Water bubble injected with many air bubbles aboard
._ ISS during Expedition 6.
1 94

"
"203","spherical surface. The ripples met on the opposite side of the water sphere, 180 degrees away from the pulse. As
the ripples met, a spurt of water was shot out, which collapsed back down, sending a ripple back the other way. In
this demonstration, the surface waves damped out, leaving the spherical body waves to continue for 5 or 10 minutes.
Results
Several articles have been published on Saturday Morning Science. Although simple, this experiment often
demonstrated phenomena that had not been seen in microgravity.
An article that was published in Sky and T elescope in Oct 2003 titled “Shooting the Heavens from Space” discusses
the amazing Views and images that are captured by astronauts as they live and work in space.
In Apr 2004, another article was published in Sky and T elescope titled “Building Planets in Plastic Bags” that
was based on Water Observations that were performed as a Saturday Science Demonstration. The demonstration
involved observing how salt grains clumped in water while in microgravity. During this demonstration, Pettit unknow—
ingly demonstrated middle—stage planetary accretion. A summary paper of the demonstration, which was published
in Lunar and Planetary Science in 2004, concluded that although the demonstration lacked formal controls to iden—
tify the exact clumping mechanism, the mechanism is obviously electrostatic. Future investigations of this
phenomenon will use realistic materials such as rock dust.
PUBLICATION(S)
Grunsfeld JM. Shooting the Heavens from Space. Sky and T elescope. 2003; 128—132.
Love SG, Pettit DR. Fast, Repeatable Clumping of Solid Particles in Microgravity. Lunar and Planetary Science
XXXV. 2004; 1119.
Tytell D. Building Planets in Plastic Bags. Sky and T elescope. Apr 13, 2004
[http://www. skyandtelescope.com/news/ 3 3 08986 .html?page= 1 &c=y ].
any?” l-L-Il+
* , ,J“
. - '_.I I '-..--:-""""'I.._-. II: . l.
. "" TFJ‘i— - -.-_ __ |88006E18432 — View of surface tension
. ' '__ ' ‘-' . demonstration during Saturday Morning Science,
'- III I using water that is being held in place by a metal
. I loop. Food coloring has been added to the water
. ---. . for demonstration purposes only.
I ' h. -.I
1 95

"
"204","SOLDERING IN REDUCED GRAVITY EXPERIMENT, SDTO 17003U (SoRGE)
Principal Investigat0r(s): Peter M. Struk, Ph.D., NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio;

Richard D. Pettegrew, Ph.D., National Center for Space Exploration Research,

Cleveland, Ohio

Expedition 14
Research Area Station Development Test Obj ective
Current electronics maintenance procedures aboard the ISS call for the replacement of failed hardware instead
of repair. This strategy relies on re—supply ﬂights from Earth to provide the replacement units. Since this logistical
support may not be easily available for future exploration missions beyond LEO, repairing electronics at the lowest
component level Will potentially ease the logistical burden by minimizing the upmass and volume of required spares.
Soldering in Reduced Gravity Experiment (SoRGE) involves soldering small electronic components in reduced
gravity aboard the ISS. SORGE uses the soldering kit that is currently aboard the ISS and seeks to quantitatively
examine the effects of microgravity 0n the soldering process. This experiment is the next step in a systematic study
of soldering in microgravity, following normal gravity studies and reduced—gravity studies aboard NASA’s reduced—
graVity aircraft.
Earlier studies showed two primary differences between joints ___ ‘ +-
that were produced in normal gravity and microgravity, including . i 1'
external geometric differences, and a greatly increased amount of ' ' . .
voids in the simulated microgravity samples (about three times the r 1 ' ._
normal Earth gravity in reduced gravity). The changes in geometric '-'- i 5' . “1""“ - ‘
shape are due to the dominance of surface tension in microgravity, ‘ KI - _ 3
Where body forces are not acting on the mass of molten solder. The . l'- ' _ ‘
increase in void fraction during microgravity is due to the lack of '
buoyant forces on ﬂux and water vapor that are present in the molten *
solder and inherent to the soldering process. These entrapped gasses, .-
the presence of Which is due to the need for ﬂux in the soldering _— — — 1
process and from water vapor evolving from the circuit board it— ISSO15EO6764 — This image shows the samples
self during the soldering process, are normally transported to the that were ”590' during Ithe SORGE investigatien.
joint surface and eliminated While the joint is molten during SORGE. exammed how the m'9r09ré‘v'ty

, , , enVIronment affects soldering Jomts.
normal graV1ty soldering operations.
The amount of porosity in soldered samples is anticipated to be even greater When conducted in the microgravity
environment of ISS When compared With the aircraft results. This is because the “noisy” acceleration environment
aboard the aircraft (from atmospheric turbulence, airframe Vibrations, etc.) is believed to have provided some resid—
ual buoyant forces that may have helped to drive out some of the bubbles prior to the solidiﬁcation of the joint. Strat—
egies for mitigating the formation of voids in the solder joint Will also be tested during SORGE. Certain techniques
showed considerable promise during extensive ground and aircraft testing, but must be proven in the true micro—
gravity environment of ISS before use during future long—duration missions to the moon and Mars.
After ﬂight operations aboard the ISS, the samples (as well as the Video recording of the soldering operations)
were returned to the investigators for analysis using both nondestructive CT—scanning techniques that use X ray, and
industry—standard internal metallographic examination methods.
RESULTS
Data are still undergoing analysis.
PUBLICATION(S)
There are no publications at this time.
1 96

"
"205","INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION ZERO-PROPELLANT MANEUVER (ZPM) DEMONSTRATION
Principal Investigator(s): Nazareth Bedrossian, Ph.D., Charles Stark Draper Laboratory Incorporated,
Houston
Expeditions 14, 15
Research Area Exploration Lessons Learned from the Operation of ISS
To maintain its orbit and perform necessary attitude maneuvers, the ISS is equipped with thrusters and control
moment gyroscopes (CMGs); i.e., spinning wheel momentum—storage devices that are powered by solar energy.
_ . _ Although small attitude adjustments can be accomplished with CMGs,
"" - ' large—angle rotations that are carried out with the ﬂight software require
é II- I -'l ._ .., more momentum than CMGs can provide, resulting in saturation. For
'- . --'_""-‘ "" != this reason, thrusters are used to rotate the ISS. But, thrusters consume
1.-_-- ‘"" 1"""" * -""'- ' .. H ., precious propellant and their plume can contaminate and stress the
_ q: ='-.' - _ solar arrays.
\ E“ '_ l' Naval Postgraduate School Professor of Mechanical and Astronautical
___ l: 1*- ' E Engineering |. Michael Ross briefs NPS Space Systems Academic Group
..-. . .I- students on NASA's use of his optimal control software to maneuver the ISS
- 1""“ cost-free, without the need to use thrusters and expend valuable fuel. U.S. Navy
photo by Javier Chagoya.
To perform rotations, the ISS ﬂight software uses an eigenaXis trajectory, which is the shortest—distance kinematic
path. Most spacecraft use this approach as it is simple to implement in ﬂight software. According to Euler’s rotation
theorem, any two orientations are related by a common axis, the eigenaXis, about which rotation by a speciﬁc angle,
the eigenangle, accomplishes the transition from one orientation to the other. To follow the eigenaXis trajectory,
the attitude control system must overcome inertial and environmental dynamics, such as torques due to graVity
or aerodynamics. As a result, CMGs reach momentum capacity even if maneuvering at a slow rate.
The zero—propellant maneuver (ZPM) concept is based on developing a special non—eigenaXis attitude trajectory
that takes advantage of nonlinear system dynamics to complete the maneuver without the need to use thrusters. The
attitude trajectory modulates the attitude—dependent environmental torques that are acting on the ISS to maintain the
CMGs within their capacity limits. ZPMs can be used to perform rotational state transitions (attitude, rate, and momen—
tum), which can be either a maneuver between prescribed states and/or an attitude maneuver that is used to reset the
CMGs. The ZPM attitude trajectory is generated by formulating the ISS maneuver as an optimal control problem. It
is solved using DIDO, which is an optimal control software package that was developed at the Naval Postgraduate
School. ZPM will also reduce propellant use for spacecraft maneuvers by means of only thrusters.
RESULTS
The ZPM concept was successfully demonstrated on ISS. On Nov 5, 2006 and Mar 3, 2007, the ISS was rotated
90 degrees and 180 degrees, respectively, without using any propellant.
The 90—degree maneuver of ISS Stage12A was completed in 2 hours and reached 70% of CMG momentum
capacity (Bedrossian, AIAA, 2007). The 180—degree maneuver of ISS Stage 12A.1 was completed in 2 hours and
47 minutes and reached 76% of CMG momentum capacity (Bedrossian, International Symposium on Space Flight
Dynamics, 2007) The same 180—degree maneuver was performed with thrusters on J an 2, 2007, consuming
50.8 kilograms or 112 pounds of propellant. At an estimated cost of $10,000 per pound, the 180—degree
maneuver with ZPM saved %1,120,000 dollars (Kang 2007).
The ﬂight results were documented and compared to predicted performance. The data that were documented
included attitude, momentum, and gimbal rates during the maneuver. Flight reconstruction was performed to resolve
discrepancies between predicted and ﬂight results.
The impact of this new technology is to substantially reduce ISS lifetime propellant use, and avoid solar array
contamination and loads. Future applications that can also be performed non—propulsively include maneuvering the
ISS to unload accumulated CMG momentum, recovering attitude control when CMGs are saturated, and recovering
1 97

"
"206","attitude control in the event of a tumbling 188. Since ZPM Will also reduce propellant consumption for maneuvers

that use thrusters, it can also be put into service for moon, Mars and beyond missions Where propellant savings

are even more valuable than for 188 and Will allow for increased payload and provisions.

PUBLICATION(S)

Kang W, Bedrossian N. Pseudospectral Optimal Control Theory Makes Debut Flight, Saves NASA 1M dollars in

Under Three Hours. Socielyfor Industrial and Applied Mathematics News. 2007, Sep; 40(7).

Bedrossian N, Bhatt S, Lammers M, Nguyen L. Zero Propellant Maneuver Flight Results for 180deg ISS Rotation.

20th International Symposium on Space Flight Dynamics. 2007, Sep; NASA CP-2007-21415 8.

Bhatt S. Optimal Reorientation 0f Spacecraft Using Only Control Moment Gyroscopes. Master’s Thesis,

Department of Computational and Applied Mathematics, Rice University, Houston. 2007.

Bedrossian N, Bhatt S, Lammers M, Nguyen L, Zhang Y. First Ever Flight Demonstration of Zero Propellant

Maneuver Attitude Control Concept. AIAA GN and C Conference, Hilton Head, SC. 2007, Aug. AIAA 2007-6734.
198

"
"207","ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING OF THE INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION (Environmental
Monitoring): MISCELLANEOUS RESULTS
Principal Investigator(s) NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston
Expeditions 1—1 8
Research Area Medical Monitoring of ISS Crewniembers, Exploration Lessons Learned from
the Operation of 188

Several papers have been published reporting the engineering and operational ramiﬁcations resulting from the data
that were collected from the ISS space environment. The results fall into a couple of broad categories:

0 radiation environmental effects on 188

0 external contamination of 18$

0 other environmental assessments, including thruster plume contamination and condensate venting
Many of the external analyses were performed with the assistance of the Image Science & Analysis Group at NASA
J ohnson Space Center, at the request of the 188 Mission Evaluation Room. Results are maintained at NASA Web
site http://isag.jsc.nasa.gov/. Periodic reports from the external surveys, as well as analyses of other conditions
relating to the weathering of the ISS (MMOD strikes, etc.). are also maintained on this Web site.
RESULTS
Radiation environmental eﬂects 0n ISS
Koontz (2005) reported on in-situ measurements demonstrating the structural shielding of the 18$ for ionizing
radiation, both natural and induced, and including single event effects (SEES). While the altitude of the 18$ (3 50—
400 km) is well below the worst-case ionizing radiation environment that the structures were designed for, the relatively
high latitude that takes in the SAA and the contribution of SEEs creates a potential eVironmental source for 188 crews.
Data that were collected from dosimeters indicate that 188 has been performing well; the total ionizing dose (TID) is
well below the threshold for degradation in performance. While different parts of ISS receive different doses, the
overall design and operational controls have maintained an environment that is safe from the negative effects of
ionizing radiation. Models have overpredicted the rate of ionizing-radiation-induced failures by a few factors.
External contamination ISS
The 188 is subject to several sources of contamination, including component outgassing and breakdown, water
dumps, thruster plumes from both the serVice module and Visiting spacecraft, orbital debris, and micrometeorites.
Several papers provide data that model these different contamination sources on the ISS. Certain surfaces of the 188
are particularly sensitive to contamination; knowledge of the station environment leads to mitigation strategies and
feeds back into materials and mission designs for future missions.
Regular photographic surveys of the condition of the 188 are conducted with Visiting shuttle ﬂights. Changes are
documented, including deposits that are related to external contamination from thruster plumes (see Schmidl et a1,
2006), offgassing, MMOD impacts, changes in conﬁguration due to thermal cycling, and other damage resulting from
operations. Schmidl et a1. (2004) report that a main contaminant includes deposits of fuel oxidizer reaction products
(FORPs), including the carcinogenic N—nitrosodimethylamine. A concern is secondary contamination inside the crew
cabin by EVA suits coming in contact with contamination on the outside of the spacecraft. Mitigation operations
are now in place to control potential contaminations as a result of EVAs. Models were also created to predict
concentrations of the substance with distance from serVice module thrusters.
In addition, operations document the degradation of materials form the space environment , including paint peeling on
the service module, coloration changes, and degradation of the coating on pressurized module 2 (PM2) retroreﬂectors.
The data are used to help predict component life cycles, provide data that are relevant to performance, create opera-
tional rules for spacecraft and EVAs, and feed into future mission design considerations. NASA’s Image Science &
Analysis Lab produces regular reports of their ﬁndings. ISS engineers use the data for the various studies that are
reported here.

1 99

"
"208","T hruster plume contamination
Liquid droplets of partly reacted propellants are produced by thruster exhaust plumes from Visiting spacecraft.
Both the chemical nature and the physical acceleration of the drops can produce pitting, mechanical erosion, and
other damage on surfaces. For critical surfaces such as solar arrays, the models translated into ﬂight rules for
positions of the arrays during thruster ﬁrings (Alred at al. 2003; Pankop et a1. 2004).
Condensate venting
An experiment was performed in 2001 to document a water dump and venting event with Video for analysis.
The venting was characterized from the imagery, including the extent of the cone of the vent, number of particles out-
side the cone, and velocities of ice particles. Because the particles can be large (2 mm) and have signiﬁcant velocities
(30—50 ft/sec) , they have the potential for creating damage on station hardware. When the Video was analyzed, some
of the ice particles were observed bouncing off of the nearby ISS hardware. Results agreed well with models; during
the nominal phase of the vent, larger particles stayed within a cone with a 20-degree half—angle (Schmidle et a1. 2002;
Schmidle 2001). These data were used to develop an operational constraint on the location of the solar arrays and
photovoltaic radiators to mitigate potential damage.
PUBLICATION(S)
Alred J , Boeder P, Mikatarian R, Pnakop C, Schmidl W. Modeling of the thruster plume induced erosion.
9thInternati0na1 Symposium on Materials in Space, ESTEC Noordwijk, Netherlands, Jun 2003.
Boeder P, Mikatarian R, Lorenz MJ, Koontz S, Albyn K, Finckenor M. Effects of Space Environment Exposure
0n the Blocking Force of Silicone Adhesive, in Protection of Materials and Structures from the Space Environment.
Edited by J acob I. Kleiman, Integrity Testing Laboratory Inc. Markham, Toronto, Canada. ISBN 978-1-4020-4319-2
(e-book). Series: Space Technology Proceedings, Springer, Dordrecht, 2006, p.295
Pankop C, Alred J , Boeder P. Mitigation of thruster plume-induced erosion of ISS sensitive hardware, in Protection
of Materials and Structures from the Space Environment. Edited by J acob I. Kleiman, Integrity Testing Laboratory
Inc. Markham, Toronto, Canada. ISBN 978-1-4020-4319-2 (e-book). Series: Space Technology Proceedings,
Springer, Dordrecht, 2006, p.71
Koontz S, Boeder PA, Pankop C, Reddell B. The Ionizing Radiation Environment on the International Space
Station: Performance vs. expectations for avionics and materials,, in Radiation Effects Data Workshog, 2005 , IEEE,
11-15 July 2005, p 110-116..
Soares C, Mikatarian R, Scharf R, Miles E. International Space Station lA/R - 6A External Contamination
Observations and Surface Assessment. Int. Symposium on Optical Science and Technology, SPIE 47th Annual
Meeting, Jul 7—11 2002, Seattle, Wash.
Schmidle W, Alred J , Mikatarian R, Soares C, Miles E, Howorth L, Mishina L, Murtazan R. Characterization of
On-orbit US Lab Condensate Vacuum Venting, Int Astronautical Congress, 10—19 Oct 2002, Houston. IAF-02-
T.P.06.
Schmidl W, Mikatarian R, Lam C-W, West B, Buchanan V, Dee L., Baker D., Koontz S. Fuel Oxidizer
Reaction Products (FORP) Contamination of Service Module and Release of N—nitrosodimethylamine in a humid
environment from crew EVA suits contaminated with FORP, in Space Technology Proceedings, V. 6, Protection of
Materials and Structurs from the Space Environment, Springer Netherlands, 2006, p. 193-204
Schmidl W, Visentine J , and Mikatarian R. Mitigation of Damage to the International Space Station (188) from
water dumps, in Space Technology Proceedings, V. 6, Protection of Materials and Structurs from the Space
Environment , Springer Netherlands , 2006, pp. 93-105.

200

"
"209","SPACE STATION SCIENCE BENEFITING LIFE ON EARTH
It is difﬁcult to track all of the science research, applications, and innovations that have been “touched” by research
aboard the ISS. In the best examples, data from the ISS have provided critical insight or results—perhaps ancillary
to the actual hypothesis that is being tested—that inﬂuenced the trajectory of subsequent research on the ground.
In almost all cases, experiments on ISS are a small part of an overall research program. Even highly targeted
research demonstrations stem from a broad base of earlier investigations and ﬁndings. Research aboard ISS is
preceded by years of related research, supported by ongoing research on the ground, and may continue for years
after data are downlinked or the experimental samples or hardware are returned from the ISS. Along the way the
science that falls under the ISS research urnbrella has spawned rnany innovations, patents, and real—world
applications of techniques or ﬁndings.
Each experiment that is part of the U.S. integrated science portfolio is tracked in the ISS Program Science database
(http://www.nasagOV/rnissi0n_pages/station/science/), and each payload entry includes a section describing how the
work is relevant to exploration and to life on Earth. We have not captured all of the spin—offs 0r “Aha!” ideas that
have included space station research in their developmental pathway; neither have we fully tracked scientiﬁc and
technical innovations that resulted from research on board ISS. But many experiments have direct applications to
Earth—based processes. We are providing below a few examples of some of the success stories from ISS research,
and anticipate this chapter to grow in coming years as results from ISS experiments feed new innovations in
scientiﬁc and technical circles.
SUCCESS STORY 1
MISSE and exposure ofmaterials t0 the space environment: beneﬁcial uses ofAO
Perhaps the most proliﬁc suite of experiments to date is included in the MISSE payloads. Hundreds of researchers
and organizations from industry, other agencies, and academia have tested materials and components in the space
environment. One part of this research is understanding and quantifying the damaging effects of highly reactive AC
on different materials, and calibrating ground tests with results from space exposure. While preparing for the ﬁrst
MISSE experiments, researchers at the NASA Glenn Research Center performed AO erosion experiments on
the ground that led to new ways in which to harness the corrosive properties of AO.
Art Restoration
The NASA Glenn Research Center researchers realized that AD could be used in beams to remove organic
contamination 0n nonorganic materials such as organic coatings on old paintings that use rnetal—oxide pigments.
The concept for the process for noncontact removal of organic coatings from painting surfaces was patented in 1996
(#5 ,560,781) and 1997 (#5 ,693,241) ( http_://www.usp_t0.g0V). The technique was ﬁrst demonstrated to remove soot
particles from a painting that had been in a ﬁre. The technique was later applied in a high—proﬁle restoration of the
Andy Warhol painting “The Bathtub” that was damaged with lipstick after J
”fl
Work being performed on the Andy Warhol painting “Bathtub” (1961).
-""I""'_

\2.’ ""F '
someone kissed the painting (left). Subsequently, the technique has been tested ""'
on a variety of art media, textures, and contaminants, and licensed as a tech— ?— 7/
nique for art restoration. The links below describe the art restoration success ; '- I
story. The researchers, Bruce Banks and Sharon Miller, have received nu— I} "" H’ :5
rnerous awards and citations for their Atomic Oxygen Restoration Systern. . \ _
http://rt.grc.nasa.gOV/rnain/featured—technologies/atornic—oxygen—rest0rati0n/ 1,
http :// discoverrnagazine.com/ 200 l / j an/ featrocketsci Er :-

Ii? J 1
201

"
"210","r -'-._::._ a. 3"" L'T""_""’7""""""

i .Eﬁ? '- I-r:

: . rﬂ ”2: 3-1."".- ' '

'ﬂ-I-i- ' IE
1.3

The left photo was taken after the Cleveland Museum of Art’s staff attempted to clean and restore

it using acetone and methylene chloride. The right photo is after cleaning by the AO technique.
Cleaning and texturing ofsurgical implants
AO bombardment has been used to clean and texture rnedical surfaces such as bones that are used for surgical
implants. The same corrosive properties of AO that can damage materials that are used in spacecraft can also be
used for beneﬁcial applications. For example, AO can be used to remove harmful organic contaminants such as bac—
teria or their metabolic products that remain on surgical implants, therefore reducing the potential for inﬂammation.
It can also be used to provide nano—scale texturing on artiﬁcial surfaces such as plastics used in transplants, enabling
places for cells (e.g., bone cells) to adhere.
Mata A., Su X., Fleischman AJ, Roy S, Banks B, Miller S, Midura RJ. Osteoblast Attachment to a Textured Surface
in the Absence of Exogenous Adhesion Proteins. IEEE Transactions in Nanobioscience. 2:287—295, 2003.
New glucose testing equipment
The microscopic texturing properties of directed AO beams have been applied as a tool to texture polymer
surfaces that are used in medical equipment. Speciﬁcally, a technique has been developed and patented to use
A0 to etch surfaces at the tip of optical ﬁbers that are used for rapid measurement of glucose or other analytes in
very small blood samples. The technique has been patented and commercially applied by a company (Light—Pointe)
in a glucose sensor.
Banks B, “Energetic Atomic and Ionic Oxygen Textured Optical Surfaces for Blood Glucose Monitoring,”
http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph—
Parser?Sect1=PTOZ&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch—
bool.htrn1&r=1&f=G&1=50&co1=AND&d=PTXT&s1=%22Energetic+Atornic+Ionic+Oxygen+Textured+Op_tical+
Surfaces+Blood+Glucose+Monitoring%22.TI.&OS=TTL/
SUCCESS STORY 2
MEPS and new methods for delivering drugs
The HRP supports many experiments that provide fundamental knowledge about the human body or test techniques
that can be useful to the practice of medicine on Earth. Work that is related to one experiment, MEPS, has produced
exciting results and several patents.
The MEPS—II experiment on 188, Which is a follow—on to earlier shuttle experiments, demonstrated an automated
system that produced tiny (roughly the size of blood cells) liquid—ﬁlled rnicro—balloons in microgravity that are capable
of delivering drugs to targeted locations in the human body. Experiments on 188 included encapsulation of several
different anti—cancer drugs, magnetic triggering particles, and encapsulation of genetically engineered DNA. The

202

"
"211","experiment system brought together two immiscible liquids in such a way that allowed surface tension forces (rather
than ﬂuid shear) to dominate at the interface of the ﬂuids. The microgravity environment on 188 was Vital to the
development of these capsules; the experiment results provided insight about the formulations and conditions ( e.g.,
ﬂuid shear limitations and interfacial behaViors) that are required to produce microcapsules of different drugs and
particles.
Microencapsulation of drugs using protocols that were developed by research aboard the space shuttle and 188 have
demonstrated great promise for cancer therapies and delivery of drugs for other diseases. For example, microcapsules
that were made by NASA and that are targeted at inhibiting growth of human prostate tumors were successfully dem-
onstrated in clinical trials (Le Pivert et a1. 2004). MicrograVity demonstration of co-encapsulation of multiple drugs
has enabled new engineering strategies for the production of microcapsules on Earth. Other microcapsules have now
been made for the treatment of deep tissue infections and clotting disorders, and to provide delivery of genetically
engineered materials for potential gene therapy approaches (Morrison et a1. 2003).
Several NASA patents have issued from the space research ,and more are pending. Commercial companies have
licensed some of the MEPS technologies and methods; collaborations with academic institutions are under way to
develop new applications (see Morrison et a1. 2003).
Le Pivert P, Haddad RS, Aller A, Titus K, Doulat J , Renard M, Morrison DR. Ultrasound Guided, Combined Cryoablation and
Microencapsulated 5-Fluorouraci1, Inhibits Growth of Human Prostate Tumors in Xenogenic Mouse Model Assessed by
Fluorescence Imaging. T echnology in Cancer Research and T reatment. 2004; 3g2 2:13542.
Morrison DR, Haddad RS, Ficht A. Microencapsulation of Drugs: New cancer therapies and improved drug delivery derived
from microgravity research. Proceedings of the 40th Space Congress, Cape Canaveral, Fla. Apr 2003.
SUCCESS STORY 3
AdvAsc and anthrax: air-purijfving technology
The-air purifying technology (TiOz-based ethylene) that was employed in the plant growth chamber that was used in
the AdVAsc experiment was incorporated into an airborne pathogen scrubber that is effective against anthrax spores
and other pathogens.
Research on the 188 that is related to plant growth and plant biology requires special plant growth chambers
that are capable of maintaining a healthy environment and atmosphere, delivering appropriate water and nutrients
to the plants, and measuring and monitoring the test conditions for later data analysis. To support plant research in
microgravity, the University of Wisconsin-Madison and the Wisconsin Center for Space Automation and Robotics
developed plant growth chambers, including one used to grow plants on 188 that is called Advanced Astroculture.TM
Several new technologies were folded into these chambers, including a novel air scrubber that employs Ti02 to
remove ethylene from the chamber atmosphere.
A commercial company, KES Science & Technology, Inc., licensed the TiOz-based ethylene removal technology.
The intended application was to remove ethylene from the atmosphere to preserve food perishables such as fruits
and vegetables. However, the technology is also extremely effective at removing bacterial pathogens in the air. After the
2001 anthrax attacks, an employee of KES speculated that the ethylene scrubber that uses a catalyst bed that is coated
with Ti02( a photocatalyst) and ultraviolet lamps could be modiﬁed and used as an air puriﬁer. The combination of
ultraviolet light and Ti02 creates super-oxides and hydroxyl radicals (strong oxidizing agents) that completely oxidize
organic material. The technology is patented by KES as AiroCide, which is an air puriﬁer that kills 98% of airborne
pathogens that pass through it, including Bacillus anthraci (anthrax), dust mites, molds, and harmful Viruses and
bacteria such as Inﬂuenza A (ﬂu), E. 6011', Staphylococcus aureas, Streptococcus pyogenes, and Mycoplasma
pneumoniae.
Today, KES markets several AiroCide units that are designed to be installed in buildings (e.g., mounted on a
ceiling) and are capable of purifying large volumes of air. Commercial applications for the deVice include mail
rooms, conference rooms, hospitals, waiting rooms, day care centers, schools, athletic facilities, and other common
areas that are susceptible to bacteria, including homes.
http://www.kesair.com/airocide_and_nasa.htm
http://www.sti.nasa.gov/tto/spinoff2002/er_5.htrnl

203

"
"212","APPENDIX A: SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH BY EXPEDITION
EXPEDITION 0 (SEP 8 2000 — Nov 2 2000)
Physical Sciences in Microgravity
0 Protein Crystal Growth — Enhanced Gaseous Nitrogen Dewar (PCG-EGN)
Biological Sciences in Microgravity
0 Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus:
— Kidney Cell Gene Expression (CGBA-KCGE)
— Synaptogenesis in Microgravity (CGBA-SM)
Human Research and Countermeasure Development for Exploration
0 Incidence of Latent Virus Shedding During Space Flight (Latent Virus)
Results from ISS Operation
0 International Space Station Acoustics Measurement Program (ISS Acoustics)
204

"
"213","EXPEDITION 1 (Nov 2 2000 — MAR 18 2001)
these technical demands that we have—flying in space, keeping humans healthy and able
to work up there—have huge side benefits to the way that we live and the style of life we enjoy [on
Earth].” — Bill Shepherd Expedition 1 Commander
When the three-man Expedition 1 crew moved into ISS, they began not only a habitation that continues to this day
but also became part of a station that was a work-in-progress.
The Zvezda service module provided their early living quarters. At this time the ISS also consisted of the Zarya
module (the Functional Cargo Block) Node 1 (the Unity module) and a Soyuz spacecraft (in Which the crew had
arrived and Which supplied their assured crew return capability). Later in Expedition 1, the US. Destiny laboratory
was installed. Yet despite the Spartan living conditions and the sense of working on a platform under construction,
the crew made signiﬁcant advances in experiments:
Technology Development for Exploration
- Middeck Active Control Experiment-II (MACE-II)
Physical Sciences in Microgravity
0 Protein Crystal Growth-Enhanced Gaseous Nitrogen Dewar (PCG-EGN)
Human Research and Countermeasure Development for Exploration
0 Incidence of Latent Virus Shedding During Space Flight (Latent Virus)
Observing the Earth and Educational Activities
0 Crew Earth Observations (CEO)
0 Space Exposed Experiment Developed for Students (Education-SEEDS)
Results from ISS Operations
0 Clinical Nutrition Assessment of ISS Astronauts (Clinical Nutrition Assessment)
0 Environmental Monitoring of the International Space Station (Environmental Monitoring)
0 International Space Station In-ﬂight Education Downlinks (In-ﬂight Education Downlinks)
- International Space Station Acoustics Measurement Program (ISS Acoustics)
205

"
"214","EXPEDITION 2 (MAR 10 2001 — AUG 20 2001)
I know that the research that we’re doing will make us take steps forward that eventually
will help us to solve many of the problems that we face here on Earth. I think we can only
imagine what will happen on board the International Space Station as we continue to do research
and explore.” — James S. Voss Expedition 2 Flight Engineer
As ISS continued to grow and expand With the installation of new experiment facilities and hardware on the
US. Destiny laboratory, the capacity for research on board station increased accordingly. From the original four
experiments that were conducted on Expedition 1, Expedition 2 expanded the research potential vastly to include
many more experiments:
0 Technology Development for Exploration
— Active Rack Isolation System-ISS Characterization Experiment (ARIS-ICE)
— Middeck Active Control Experiment-II (MACE-II)
— Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS)
— Space Acceleration Measurement System-II (SAMS—II)
Physical Sciences in Microgravity
- Commercial Protein Crystal Growth-High Density (CPCG-H)
o EXPRESS Physics of Colloids in Space (EXPPCS)
0 Protein Crystal Growth-Enhanced Gaseous Nitrogen Dewar (PCG-EGN)
0 Protein Crystal Growth
— Single Locker Thermal Enclosure System-Improved Diffraction Quality of Crystals (PCG-STES—IDQC)
— Single Locker Thermal Enclosure System-Science and Applications of Facility Hardware for Protein
Crystal Growth (PCG-STES-SA)
— Single Locker Thermal Enclosure System-Vapor Equilibrium Kinetic Studies (PCG-STES-VEKS)
Biological Sciences in Microgravity
- Advanced AstrocultureTM (AdVAsc)
0 Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus—Antibiotic Production in Space (CGBA-APS)
Human Research and Countermeasure Development for Exploration
0 Bonner Bell Neutron Detector (BBND)
o Dosimetric Mapping (DOSMAP)
- Effects of Altered Gravity 0n Spinal Cord Excitability (H-Reﬂex)
- Crewmember and CreW-Ground Interaction During International Space Station Missions (Interactions)
- Incidence of Latent Virus Shedding During Space Flight (Latent Virus)
- Subregional Assessment of Bone Loss in the Axial Skeleton in Long-term Space Flight (Subregional Bone)
- Organ Dose Measurement Using the Phantom Torso (Torso)
Observing the Earth and Educational Activities
0 Crew Earth Observations (CEO)
0 Earth Knowledge Acquired by Middle-School Students (EarthKAM)
Results from ISS Operations
0 Amateur Radio on the International Space Station (ARISS)
0 Clinical Nutrition Assessment of ISS Astronauts (Clinical Nutrition Assessment)
0 Environmental Monitoring of the International Space Station (Environmental Monitoring)
0 International Space Station In-ﬂight Education Downlinks (In-ﬂight Education Downlinks)
- International Space Station Acoustics Measurement Program (ISS Acoustics)
206

"
"215","EXPEDITION 3 (AUG 12 2001 — DEC 12 2001)
“We need a space station because we need a frontier. We need to keep pushing the human race
to expand beyond the current boundaries that we have.” — Frank L. Culbertson Jr. Expedition 3
Commander
As With other Expedition crews, the Expedition 3 crew focused on expansion and scientiﬁc matters. While various
experiments naturally carried over from previous Expeditions—thereby establishing a pattern of building on earlier
work that carries forward to this day—the crew also conducted several new experiments as follows:
Technology Development for Exploration
0 Active Rack Isolation System-ISS Characterization Experiment (ARIS-ICE)
o Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS)
- Materials International Space Station Experiment-l and -2 (MISSE—l and —2)
0 Space Acceleration Measurement System-II (SAMS—II)
Physical Sciences in Microgravity
- Advanced Protein Crystallization Facility
— Extraordinary Structural Features of Antibodies from Camelids (APCF-Camelids)
— Solution Flows and Molecular Disorder of Protein Crystals (APCF-Crystal Growth)
— Effect of Different Growth Conditions on the Quality of Thaumatin and Asparatyl-tRNA Synthetase
Crystals Grown in Microgravity (APCF-Crystal Quality)
— Crystallization of Human Low Density Lipoprotein (LDL) Subfractions
— (APCF-Lipoprotein)
— Testing New Trends in Microgravity Protein Crystallization (APCF-Lysozyme)
— Crystallization of the Next Generation of Octarellins (APCF-Octarellins)
— Protein Crystallization in Microgravity Collegan Model (X-Y-Gly) Polypeptides (APCF-PPGIO)
— Crystallization of Rhodopsin in Microgravity (APCF-Rhodopspin)
o Dynamically Controlled Protein Crystal Growth (DCPCG)
0 Experiment Physics of Colloids in Space (EXPPCS)
Biological Sciences in Microgravity
0 Cellular Biotechnology Operations Support System
— Human Renal Cortical Cell Differentiation and Hormone Production (CBOSS—Ol-OZ—Renal)
— Use of NASA Bioreactor to Study Cell Cycle Regulation: Mechanism of Colon Carcinoma Metastasis
in Microgravity (CBOSS-Ol-Colon)
— Evaluation of Ovarian Tumor Cell Growth and Gene Expression (CBOSS—Ol-Ovarian)
— PC12 Pheochromocytoma Cells — A Proven Model for Optimizing 3-D Cell Culture Biotechnology in
Space (CBOSS—Ol—PCIZ)
Human Research and Countermeasure Development for Exploration
0 Bonner Bell Neutron Detector (BBND)
- Effects of Altered Gravity 0n Spinal Cord Excitability (H-REFLEX)
- Crewmember and CreW-Ground Interactions During International Space Station Missions (Interactions)
- Effects of EVA and Long-term Exposure to Microgravity 0n Pulmonary Function (PuFF)
0 Renal Stone Risk During Space Flight: Assessment and Countermeasure Validation (Renal Stone)
- Subregional Assessment of Bone Loss in the Axial Skeleton in Long-term Space Flight (Subregional Bone)
- Effect of Microgravity 0n the Peripheral Subcutaneous Veno-arteriolar Reﬂex in Humans (Xenonl)
Observing the Earth and Educational Activities
0 Crew Earth Observations (CEO)
0 DreamTime (DreamTime)
- Earth Knowledge Acquired by Middle School Students (EarthKAM)
207

"
"216","Results from ISS Operations
0 Amateur Radio on the International Space Station (ARISS)
0 Clinical Nutrition Assessment of ISS Astronauts (Clinical Nutrition Assessment)
0 Environmental Monitoring of the International Space Station (Environmental Monitoring)
0 International Space Station In-ﬂight Education Downlinks (In-ﬂight Education Downlinks)
- International Space Station Acoustics Measurement Program (ISS Acoustics)
208

"
"217","EXPEDITION 4 (7 DEC 2001 — 15 JUN 2002)
I think the culmination of our participation will allow us to really make some headway and get
some answers to some scientific questions.” — Carl E. Walz Expedition 3 Flight Engineer
The Expedition 4 three-man crew continued to maintain focus not only on ongoing experiments several of Which
had already carried through Expeditions 2 and 3 but also turned their focus to new experiments. Or in the words of
Carl Walz (above) this crew continued to “make some headway”.
Technology Development for Exploration
0 Active Rack Isolation System-ISS Characterization Experiment (ARIS-ICE)
o Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS)
- Materials International Space Station Experiment-l and -2 (MISSE—l and —2)
0 Space Acceleration Measurement System-II (SAMS—II)
Physical Sciences in Microgravity
- Commercial Protein Crystal Growth-High Density (CPCG-H)
0 Experiment Physics of Colloids in Space (EXPPCS)
0 Protein Crystal Growth-Enhanced Gaseous Nitrogen Ewer (PCG-EGN)
0 Protein Crystal Growth-Single Locker Thermal Enclosure System
— Synchrotron-Based Mosaicity Measurement of Crystal Quality (PCG-STES-MM)
— Science Applications of Facility Hardware for Protein Crystal Growth (PCG-STES—SA)
— Vapor Equilibrium Kinetics Studies (PCG-STES—VEKS)
o Zeolite Crystal Growth (ZCG)
Biological Sciences in Microgravity
- Development and Function of the Avian Otolith System in Normal and Altered Gravity Environments
(ADF-Otolith)
0 Avian Development Facility-Skeletal Development in Embryonic Quail (ADF-Skeletal)
- Advanced AstrocultureTM (AdVAsc)
- Biomass Production System-Photosynthesis Experiment and Systems Testing (BPS)
0 Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus—Antibiotic Production in Space (CGBA-APS)
0 Cellular Biotechnology Operations Support Systems
— Production of Recombinant Human Erythropoientin by Mammalian Cells (CBOSS—02 Erythropoietin)
— The Effect of Microgravity 0n the Immune Function of Human Lymphoid Tissue (CBOSS-OZ-HLT)
— Human Renal Critical Cell Differentiation and Hormone Production (CBOSS—Ol-OZ—Renal)
- Photosynthesis Experiment and System Testing and Operation (PESTO)
Human Research and Countermeasure Development for Exploration
0 Commercial Biomedical Testing Module (CBTM): Effects of Osteoprotegerin 0n Bone Maintenance in
Microgravity
- A Study of Radiation Doses Experienced by Astronauts in EVA (EVARM)
- Effects of Altered Gravity 0n Spinal Cord Excitability (H-Reﬂex)
- Crewmember and CreW-Ground Interactions During International Space Station Missions (Interactions)
- Incidence of Latent Virus Shedding During Space Flight (Latent Virus)
0 Effects of EVA and Long-term Exposure to Microgravity 0n Pulmonary Function (PuFF)
0 Renal Stone Risk During Space Flight: Assessment and Countermeasure Validation Evaluation
(Renal Stone)
- Subregional Assessment of Bone Loss in the Axial Skeleton in Long-term Space Flight (Subregional Bone)
- Effect of Microgravity 0n the Peripheral Subcutaneous Veno-arteriolar Reﬂex in Humans (Xenonl)
209

"
"218","Observing the Earth and Educational Activities
0 Crew Earth Observations (CEO)
0 Earth Knowledge Acquired by Middle-School Students (EarthKAM)
- Education Payload Operations (EPO)
Results from ISS Operations
0 Amateur Radio on the International Space Station (ARISS)
0 Clinical Nutrition Assessment of ISS Astronauts (Clinical Nutrition Assessment)
0 Environmental Monitoring of the International Space (Environmental Monitoring)
0 International Space Station In-ﬂight Education Downlinks (In-ﬂight Education Downlinks)
- International Space Station Acoustics Measurement Program (ISS Acoustics)
21 O

"
"219","EXPEDITION 5 (JUN 7 2002 — DEC 2 2002)
“[The] ISS is the one step for future investigation future science experiments — Sergei Y.
Treschev Expedition 5 Flight Engineer
As ISS continued to grow and expand so, too, did the scientiﬁc workload for the Expedition creWS—especially and
critically augmented by the installation of the MSG. The Expedition 5 crew arrived on station faced With the largest
workload to date of both continuing and new experiments:
Technology Development for Exploration
0 Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS)
- Materials International Space Station Experiment-l and -2 (MISSE—l and —2)
0 Space Acceleration Measurement System-II (SAMS—II)
Physical Science in Microgravity
0 Protein Crystal Growth-Single Locker Thermal Enclosure System
— Crystallization of the Integral Membrane Protein Using Microgravity (PCG-STES-HVIP)
— Synchrotron-Based Mosaicity Measurement of Crystal Quality (PCG-STES-MM)
— Crystallization of the Mitochondrial Metabolite Transport Protein (PCG-STES—MMTP)
— Engineering 21 Ribozyme for Diffraction Properties (PCG-STES-RDP)
— Science and Applications of Facility Hardware for Protein Crystal Growth (PCG-STES—SA)
— Vapor Equilibrium Kinetics Studies (PCG-STES—VEKS)
- Toward Understanding Pore Formation and Mobility During Controlled Directional Solidiﬁcation in a
Microgravity Environment (PFMI)
- Solidiﬁcation Using a Bafﬂe in Sealed Ampoules (SUBSA)
- Zeolite Crystal Growth (ZCG)
Biological Science in Microgravity
- Advanced Astroculture (AdVAsc)
- Microencapsulation Electrostatic Processing System (MEPS)
0 Plant Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus (PGBA)
- StelSys Liver Cell Function Research (StelSys)
Human Research and Countermeasure Development for Exploration
0 Effect of Prolonged Space Flight on Human Skeletal Muscle (Biopsy)
- A Study of Radiation Doses Experienced by Astronauts in EVA (EVARM)
- Crewmember and CreW-Ground Interactions During International Space Station Missions (Interactions)
- Incidence of Latent Virus Shedding During Space Flight (Latent Virus)
0 Promoting Sensorimotor Response Generalizability (Mobility)
- Effects of EVA and Long-term Exposure to Microgravity 0n Pulmonary Function (PuF F )
0 Renal Stone Risk During Space Flight: Assessment and Countermeasure Evaluation (Renal Stone)
0 Space Flight-induced Reactivation 0f Latent Epstein-Barr Virus (Epstein-Barr)
- Subregional Assessment of Bone Loss in the Axial Skeleton in Long-term Space Flight (Subregional Bone)
- Effect of Microgravity 0n the Peripheral Subcutaneous Veno—arteriolar Reﬂex in Humans (Xenonl)
Observing the Earth and Educational Activities
0 Crew Earth Observations (CEO)
0 Education Payload Operations (EPO)
- Earth Knowledge Acquired by Middle School Students (EarthKAM)
21 1

"
"220","Results from ISS Operations
0 Amateur Radio on the International Space Station (ARISS)
0 Clinical Nutrition Assessment of ISS Astronauts (Clinical Nutrition Assessment)
0 Environmental Monitoring of the International Space (Environmental Monitoring)
0 International Space Station Acoustics Measurement Program (ISS Acoustics)
- International Space Station In-ﬂight Education Downlinks (In-ﬂight Education Downlinks)
21 2

"
"221","EXPEDITION 6 (Nov 25 2002 — MAY 3 2003)
[Experiments] done on space station are designed around the reduction in the gravitational
force so that you can see other forces manifest themselves and you can make new observations
that are very difficult if not impossible to make any other way.” — Donald R. Pettit Expedition 6 Flight
Engineer
As station entered its third year of continuous operations, the scientiﬁc workload continued to occupy a signiﬁcant
amount of the Expedition crews” time. The Expedition 6 crew worked unremittingly 0n the scientiﬁc mission in face
of the changes wrought following the loss of Columbia, conducting experiments in:
Technology Development for Exploration
- Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS)
- Materials International Space Station Experiment-l and -2 (MISSE—l and —2)
0 Space Acceleration Measurement System-II (SAMS—II)
Physical Sciences in Microgravity
- Investigating the Structure of Paramagnetic Aggregates from Colloidal Emulsions (InSPACE)
0 Protein Crystal Growth-Single Locker Thermal Enclosure System
— Crystal Growth Model System for Material Science (PCG-STES—MS)
— Regulation of Gene Expression (PCG-STES—RGE)
— Science and Applications of Facility Hardware for Protein Crystal Growth (PCG-STES—SA)
— Vapor Equilibrium Kinetics Studies (PCG-STES—VEKS)
- Zeolite Crystal Growth (ZCG)
Human Research and Countermeasure Development for Exploration
0 Effect of Prolonged Space Flight on Human Skeletal Muscle (Biopsy)
0 Chromosomal Aberrations in Blood Lymphocytes 0f Astronauts (Chromosome)
0 A Study of Radiation Doses Experienced by Astronauts in EVA (EVARM)
- Space Flight-induced Reactivation 0f Latent Epstein-Barr Virus (Epstein-Barr)
- Foot/Ground Reaction Forces During Space Flight (Foot)
0 Promoting Sensorimotor Response Generalizability (Mobility)
o The Effects of EVA and Long-Term Exposure to Microgravity 0n Pulmonary Function (PuFF)
0 Renal Stone Risk During Space Flight: Assessment and Countermeasure Validation (Renal Stone)
- Subregional Assessment of Bone Loss in the Axial Skeleton in Long-term Space Flight (Subregional Bone)
Observing the Earth and Educational Activities
0 Crew Earth Observations (CEO)
0 Earth Knowledge Acquired by Middle-School Students (EarthKAM)
Results from ISS Operations
0 Amateur Radio on the International Space Station (ARISS)
0 Clinical Nutrition Assessment of ISS Astronauts (Clinical Nutrition Assessment)
0 Environmental Monitoring of the International Space (Environmental Monitoring)
0 International Space Station In-ﬂight Education Downlinks (In-ﬂight Education Downlinks)
- International Space Station Acoustics Measurement Program (ISS Acoustics)
- Science of Opportunity (Saturday Morning Science)
21 3

"
"222","EXPEDITION 7 (APR 28 2003 — OCT 27 2003)
[although] the science program will be reduced the most exciting results so far will be
continued. .. [For example] it does seem possible to reduce or even eliminate calcium loss in
bones from astronauts.” — Edward T. Lu Expedition 7 Flight Engineer
The Expedition 7 crew was the ﬁrst tWO-person crew to occupy space station and the ﬁrst crew to launch from
Baikonur on board a Soyuz spacecraft. Despite the loss of one-third of the expected crew complement, this crew
continued work to fulﬁll ISS’S scientiﬁc goals conducting experiments in:
Technology Development for Exploration
0 In Space Soldering Investigation (1881)
o Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS)
- Materials International Space Station Experiment-l and -2 (MISSE—l and —2)
0 Space Acceleration Measurement System-II (SAMS—II)
Physical Sciences in Microgravity
- Coarsening in Solid Liquid Mixtures—Z (CSLM—Z)
- Investigating the Structure of Paramagnetic Aggregates from Colloidal Emulsions (InSPACE)
0 Protein Crystal Growth-Single Locker Thermal Enclosure System
— Regulation of Gene Expression (PCG-STES—RGE)
— Science and Applications of Facility Hardware for Protein Crystal Growth (PCG-STES—SA)
- Toward Understanding Pore Formation and Mobility During Controlled Directional Solidiﬁcation
in a Microgravity Environment (PFMI)
Biological Sciences in Microgravity
- Cellular Biotechnology Operations Support Systems: Fluid Dynamics Investigation (CBOSS-FDI)
Human Research and Countermeasure Development for Exploration
0 Effect of Prolonged Space Flight on Human Skeletal Muscle (Biopsy)
0 Chromosomal Aberrations in Bloody Lymphocytes 0f Astronauts (Chromosome)
0 Hand Posture Analyzer (HPA)
- Crewmember and CreW-Ground Interactions During International Space Station Missions (Interactions)
0 Promoting Sensorimotor Response Generalizability: A Countermeasure to Mitigate Locomotor
Dysfunction After Locomotive Dysfunction After Long Duration Space Flight (Mobility)
- Subregional Assessment of Bone Loss in the Axial Skeleton in Long-term Space Flight (Subregional Bone)
Observing the Earth and Educational Activities
0 Crew Earth Observations (CEO)
0 Education Payload Operations (EPO)
- Education Payload Operation — Demonstrations (EPO-Demos)
- Earth Knowledge Acquired by Middle School Students (EarthKAM)
Results from ISS Operations
0 Amateur Radio on the International Space Station (ARISS)
0 Clinical Nutrition Assessment of ISS Astronauts (Clinical Nutrition Assessment)
0 Environmental Monitoring of the International Space (Environmental Monitoring)
0 International Space Station In-ﬂight Education Downlinks (In-ﬂight Education Downlinks)
- International Space Station Acoustics Measurement Program (ISS Acoustics)
214

"
"223","EXPEDITION 8 (OCT 20 2003 — APR 29 2004)
I think [our scientific mission is] going to be advanced quite significantly [That’s] a bold
statement but it’s supported by the fact that I have many investigations to carry out on board the
station.” — C. Michael Foale Expedition 8 Commander and ISS Science Officer
As compared to the scientiﬁc workload that was borne by Expedition 7 as the crewmembers accustomed themselves
to working With a reduced number, the Expedition 8 crew carried a slightly increased workload in research:
Technology Development for Exploration
0 In Space Soldering Investigation (1881)
o Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS)
- Materials International Space Station Experiment-l and -2 (MISSE—l and —2)
0 Space Acceleration Measurement System-II (SAMS—II)
o Synchronized Position Hold Engage Reorient Experimental Satellites (Spheres)
Physical Sciences in Microgravity
o Binary Colloidal Alloy Test-3-Binary Alloys (BCAT-3-BA)
o Binary Colloidal Alloy Test-3-Critical Point (BCAT-3-4-CP)
o Binary Colloidal Alloy Test-3-Surface Crystallization (BCAT-3-SC)
o Miscible Fluids in Microgravity-Isothermal (MFMG)
0 Protein Crystal Growth-Single Locker Thermal Enclosure System
— Regulation of Gene Expression (PCG-STES—RGE)
— Science and Applications of Facility Hardware for Protein Crystal Growth (PCG-STES—SA)
— Toward Understanding Pore Formation and Mobility During Controlled Directional Solidiﬁcation
in a Microgravity Environment (PFMI)
Biological Sciences in Microgravity
- Cellular Biotechnology Operations Support Systems — Fluid Dynamics Investigation (CBOSS-FDI)
- Yeast-Group Activation Packs (Yeast-GAP)
Human Research and Countermeasure Development for Exploration
0 Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Microgravity (ADUM)
0 Chromosomal Aberrations in Blood Lymphocytes 0f Astronauts (Chromosome)
- Foot/Ground Reaction Forces During Space Flight (Foot)
0 Hand Posture Analyzer (HPA)
- Crewmember and CreW-Ground Interactions During International Space Station Missions (Interactions)
- Behavioral Issues Associated With Isolation and Conﬁnement (J ournals)
0 Promoting Sensorimotor Response Generalizability: A Countermeasure to Mitigate Locomotor
Dysfunction After Long-Duration Spaceﬂight (Mobility)
0 Renal Stone Risk During Space Flight: Assessment and Countermeasure Validation (Renal Stone)
- Subregional Assessment of Bone Loss in the Axial Skeleton in Long-term Space Flight (Subregional Bone)
Observing Earth and Educational Activities
0 Crew Earth Observations (CEO)
0 Earth Knowledge Acquired by Middle School Students (EarthKAM)
- Education Payload Operations (EPO)
- Education Payload Operations-Dem0nstrati0ns (EPO-Demos)
21 5

"
"224","Results from ISS Operations
0 Amateur Radio on the International Space Station (ARISS)
0 Clinical Nutrition Assessment of ISS Astronauts (Clinical Nutrition Assessment)
0 Environmental Monitoring of the International Space (Environmental Monitoring)
0 International Space Station Acoustics Measurement Program (ISS Acoustics)
- International Space Station In-ﬂight Education Downlinks (In-ﬂight Education Downlinks)
21 6

"
"225","EXPEDITION 9 (APR 21 2004 — OCT 23 2004)
.. we’re hoping that we show on our mission the value of working together the value of team-
work the value of knowing one’s job and a good work ethic — Edward Michael (Mike) Fincke
Expedition 9 Flight Engineer and ISS Science Officer
For Expedition 9 the crew of Gennady Pedalka and Mike Fincke performed the following investigations:
Technology Development for Exploration
0 In Space Soldering Investigation (1881)
o Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS)
- Materials International Space Station Experiment-l and -2 (MISSE—l and —2)
0 Space Acceleration Measurement System-II (SAMS—II)
- Serial Network Flow Monitor (SNFM)
Physical Sciences in Microgravity
o Binary Colloidal Alloy Test-3 and -4-Critical Point (BCAT-3-4-CP)
o Binary Colloidal Alloy Test-3-Surface Crystallization (BCAT-3-SC)
0 Capillary Flow Experiment (CFE)
o Fluid Merging Viscosity Measurement (FMVM)
- Viscous Liquid Foam — Bulk Metallic Glass (Foam)
o Miscible Fluids in Microgravity (MFMG)-Isothermal
0 Protein Crystal Growth-Single Locker Thermal Enclosure System (PCG-STES)
- Regulation of Gene Expression (PCG-STES—RGE)
- Science and Application of Facility Hardware for Protein Crystal Growth (PCG-STES—SA)
Human Research and Countermeasure Development for Exploration
0 Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Microgravity (ADUM)
0 Effect of Prolonged Space Flight on Human Skeletal Muscle (Biopsy)
0 Chromosomal Aberrations in Blood Lymphocytes 0f Astronauts (Chromosome)
- Crewmember and CreW-Ground Interactions During International Space Station Missions (Interactions)
- Behavioral Issues Associated With Isolation and Conﬁnement (J ournals)
- Promoting Sensorimotor Response Generalizability (Mobility)
Observing the Earth and Educational Activities
0 Crew Earth Observations (CEO)
0 Earth Knowledge Acquired by middle School Students (EarthKAM)
- Education Payload Operations (EPO)
- Education Payload Operations-Dem0nstrati0ns (EPO-Demos)
Results from ISS Operations
0 Amateur Radio on the International Space Station (ARISS)
0 Clinical Nutrition Assessment of ISS Astronauts (Clinical Nutrition Assessment)
0 Environmental Monitoring of the International Space (Environmental Monitoring)
0 International Space Station In-ﬂight Education Downlinks (In-ﬂight Education Downlinks)
21 7

"
"226","EXPEDITION 10 (OCT 15 2004 — APR 25 2005)
“If we’re going to go to the moon and Mars we’re going to have to know how [and] the space
station is an ideal platform for that kind of work.” — Leroy Chiao Expedition 10 Commander and
ISS Science Officer
For the Expedition 10 crew of Salizan Sharipov and Leroy Chiao, the focus was on “knowing how” to work for
long durations in space and to continue to develop methods and technologies that would aid the space program in
a future return to the moon and exploration of Mars. Accordingly and in keeping With the pattern that had been
established by earlier Expeditions, they conducted several experiments:
Technology Development for Exploration
0 Dust and Aerosol Measurement Feasibility Test (DAFT)
o In Space Soldering Investigation (1881)
o Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS)
- Materials International Space Station Experiment-l and -2 (MISSE—l and —2)
0 Space Acceleration Measurement System-II (SAMS—II)
- Serial Network Flow Monitor (SNFM)
Physical Sciences in Microgravity
o Binary Colloidal Alloy Test-3 and -4-Critical Point (BCAT-3-4-CP)
o Binary Colloidal Alloy Test-3-Surface Crystallization (BCAT-3-SC)
o Miscible Fluids in Microgravity (MFMG)
0 Protein Crystal Growth-Single Locker Thermal Enclosure System
— Regulation Gene Expression (PCG-STES—RGE)
— Science and Applications of Facility Hardware for Protein Crystal Growth (PCG-STES—SA)
Biological Science in Microgravity
- Cellular Biotechnology Operations Support System-Fluid Dynamic Investigation (CBOSS-FDI)
Human Research and Countermeasure Development for Exploration
0 Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Microgravity (ADUM)
0 Effect of Prolonged Space Flight on Human Skeletal Muscle (Biopsy)
0 Chromosomal Aberrations in Blood Lymphocytes 0f Astronauts (Chromosome)
- Behavioral Issues Associated With Isolation and Conﬁnement (J ournals)
- Promoting Sensorimotor Response Generalizability (Mobility)
Observing Earth and Observation
0 Crew Earth Observations (CEO)
0 Earth Knowledge Acquired by Middle School Students (EarthKAM)
- Education Payload Operations-Dem0nstrati0ns (EPO-Demos)
- Space Experiment Module (SEM)
Results from ISS Operations
0 Amateur Radio on the International Space Station (ARISS)
- Clinical Nutrition Assessment of ISS Astronauts (Clinical Nutrition)
0 Environmental Monitoring of the International Space (Environmental Monitoring)
0 International Space Station Acoustics Measurement Program (ISS Acoustics)
- International Space Station In-ﬂight Education Downlinks (In-ﬂight Education Downlinks)
21 8

"
"227","EXPEDITION 11 (APR 16 2005 — OCT 10 2005)
“With our new emphasis as announced by the president [last] year, we’re going to be focusing
our science on things that will take us farther and longer into space.” — John Phillips Expedition 11
Flight Engineer and ISS Science Officer
For the Expedition 11 crew of Sergei Krikalev and J ohn Phillips, the following experiments were the focus:
Technology Development for Exploration
0 Materials International Space Station Experiment-l and -2 (MISSE-l and -2)
0 Materials International Space Station Experiment-S (MISSE-S)
- Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS)
- Space Acceleration Measurement System-II (SAMS—II)
- Serial Network Flow Monitor (SNFM)
Physical Sciences in Microgravity
o Fluid Merging Viscosity Measurement (FMVM)
o Miscible Fluids in Microgravity (MFMG)
0 Protein Crystal Growth
— Single Locker Thermal Enclosure System-Regulation of Gene Expression (PCG-STES-RGE)
— Single Locker Thermal Enclosure System-Science and Applications of Facility Hardware for Protein
Crystal Growth (PCG-STES-SA)
Human Research and Countermeasure Development for Exploration
0 Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Microgravity (ADUM)
- Behavioral Issues Associated With Isolation and Conﬁnement: Review and Analysis of Crew J ournals
(J ournals)
0 Bioavailability and Performance Effects of Promethazine During Space Flight (PMZ)
0 Chromosomal Aberrations in Blood Lymphocytes 0f Astronauts (Chromosome)
0 Effect of Prolonged Space Flight on Human Skeletal Muscle (Biopsy)
- Foot Reaction Forces During Space Flight (Foot)
0 Hand Posture Analyzer (HPA)
- Incidence of Latent Virus Shedding During Space Flight (Latent Virus)
0 Promoting Sensorimotor Response Generalizability (Mobility)
0 Renal Stone Risk During Space Flight: Assessment and Countermeasure Validation (Renal Stone)
0 Space Flight-induced Reactivation 0f Latent Epstein-Barr Virus (Epstein-Barr)
- Sleep—Wake Actigraphy and Light Exposure During Spaceﬂight-Short (Sleep—Short)
Observing the Earth and Educational Activities
0 Crew Earth Observations (CEO)
0 Earth Knowledge Acquired by middle School Students (EarthKAM)
- Education Payload Operation-Demonstration (EPO-Demos)
- Space Experiment Module (SEM)
Results from ISS Operations
0 Amateur Radio on the International Space Station (ARISS)
0 Clinical Nutrition Assessment of ISS Astronauts (Clinical Nutrition Assessment)
0 Environmental Monitoring of the International Space Station (Environmental Monitoring)
0 International Space Station Acoustic Measurement Program (ISS Acoustics)
0 Analysis of International Space Station Plasma Interaction (Plasma Interaction Model)
0 International Space Station In-ﬂight Education Downlinks (In-ﬂight Education Downlinks)
21 9

"
"228","EXPEDITION 12 (OCT 3 2005 — APR 8 2006)
“I think that in the future we’ll have a good knowledge about scientific things... a new direction
for the future development of space science and the exploration of space.“ — Valery Tokarev
Expedition 12 Flight Engineer and ISS Science Officer
The Expedition 12 crew of William McArthur and Valery Tokarev worked on the following:
Technology Development for Exploration
0 Dust and Aerosol Measurement Feasibility Test (DAFT)
o Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS)
o Maui Analysis of Upper Atmospheric Injections (Maui)
0 Materials International Space Station Experiment-S (MISSE-S)
- Serial Network Flow Monitor (SNFM)
- Space Acceleration Measurement System-II (SAMS—II)
Physical Sciences in Microgravity
o Binary Colloidal Alloy Test-3-Surface Crystallization (BCAT-3-SC)
o Binary Colloidal A110y-3 and -4-Critical Point (BCAT-3-4-CP)
0 Capillary Flow Experiment (CFE)
- Investigating the Structure of Paramagnetic Aggregates from Colloidal Emulsions (InSPACE)
- Toward Understanding Pore Formation and Mobility During Controlled Directional Solidiﬁcation in a
Microgravity Environment (PFMI)
Biological Sciences in Microgravity
- Cellular Biotechnology Operations Support Systems—Fluid Dynamics Investigation (CBOSS-FDI)
- Passive Observatories for Experimental Microbial Systems (POEMS)
Human Research and Countermeasure Development
0 Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Microgravity (ADUM)
- Behavioral Issues Associated With Isolation and Conﬁnement: Review an Analysis of Crew J ournals
(J ournals)
- Foot Reaction Forces During Space Flight (Foot)
0 Promoting Sensorimotor Response Generalizability Mitigate Locomotor Dysfunction After Long-Duration
Space Flight (Mobility)
- Space Flight-induced Reactivation 0f Latent Epstein-Bar Virus (Epstein-Barr)
0 Renal Stone Risk During Space Flight: Assessment (Renal Stone)
Observing the Earth and Educational Activities
0 Crew Earth Observations (CEO)
0 Earth Knowledge Acquired by middle School Students (EarthKAM)
- Education Payload Operations-Dem0nstrati0ns (EPO-Demos)
Results from ISS Operations
0 Amateur Radio on the International Space Station (ARISS)
0 Analysis of International Space Station Plasma Interaction (Plasma Interaction Model)
0 Clinical Nutrition Assessment of ISS Astronauts (Clinical Nutrition Assessment)
0 Environmental Monitoring of the International Space Station (Environmental Monitoring)
0 International Space Station Acoustic Measurement Program (ISS Acoustics)
- International Space Station In-ﬂight Education Downlinks (In-ﬂight Education Downlinks)
220

"
"229","EXPEDITION 13 (APR 1 2006 — SEP 28 2006)
""It's quite important to have a three-person crew obviously; one of the most important aspects
is the fact that we can dedicate more [time to] scientific research."" — Thomas Reiter Expedition 13
Flight Engineer and ISS Science Officer
The Expedition 13 crew of Pavel Vinogradov, J effrey Williams, and Thomas Reiter (Jul 2006 — Dec 2006)
performed the following experiments:
Technology Development for Exploration
0 Dust and Aerosol Measurement Feasibility Test (DAFT)
o Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS)
- Maui Analysis of Upper Atmospheric Injections (Maui)
0 Materials International Space Station Experiment-3 and -4 (MISSE-3 and -4)
0 Materials International Space Station Experiment-S (MISSE-S)
0 Ram Burn Observations (RAMBO)
- Space Acceleration Measurement System-II (SAMS—II)
0 Synchronized Position Hold, Engage, Reorient, Experimental Satellites (SPHERES)
Physical Sciences in Microgravity
o Binary Colloidal Alloy Test-3 and -4-Critical Point (BCAT-3-4-CP)
0 Capillary Flow Experiment (CFE)
- Investigating the Structure of Paramagnetic Aggregates from Colloidal Emulsions (InSPACE)
- Toward Understanding Pore Formation and Mobility During Controlled Directional Solidiﬁcation in a
Microgravity Environment (PFMI)
Biological Sciences in Microgravity
- Cellular Biotechnology Operations Support Systems—Fluid Dynamics Investigation (CBOSS-FDI)
o Fungal Pathogenesis, Tumorigenesis, and Effects of Hosts Immunity in Space (Fit)
0 Effect of Space Flight on Microbial Gene Expression and Virulence (Microbe)
- Passive Observatories for Experimental Microbial Systems (POEMS)
- Yeast-Group Activation Packs (Yeast-GAP)
Human Research and Countermeasure Development for Exploration
0 Anomalous Long-Term Effects in Astronauts’ Central Nervous System (ALTEA)
0 Chromosomal Aberrations in Blood Lymphocytes 0f Astronauts (Chromosome)
0 Space Flight-induced Reactivation 0f Latent Epstein-Barr Virus (Epstein-Barr)
- Behavioral Issues Associated With Isolation and Conﬁnement: Review and Analysis of ISS Crew J ournals
(J ournals)
- Incidence of Latent Virus Shedding During Space Flight (Latent Virus)
0 Bioavailability and Performance Effects of Promethazine During Space Flight (PMZ)
0 Renal Stone Risk During Space Flight: Assessment (Renal Stone)
- Sleep—Wake Actigraphy and Light Exposure During Space Flight-Short (Sleep-Short)
- Stability of Pharmacotherapeutic and Nutritional Compounds (Stability)
- Surface, Water, and Air Biocharacterization (SWAB) — A Comprehensive Characterization of
Microorganisms and Allergens in Spacecraft Environment
Observing the Earth and Educational Activities
0 Crew Earth Observations (CEO)
0 Earth Knowledge Acquired by Middle School Students (EarthKAM)
- Education Payload Operations-Dem0nstrati0ns (EPO-Demos)
- Space Experiment Module (SEM)
221

"
"230","Results from ISS Operations
0 Amateur Radio on the International Space Station (ARISS)
0 Clinical Nutrition Assessment of ISS Astronauts (Clinical Nutrition Assessment)
0 Environmental Monitoring of the International Space Station (Environmental Monitoring)
0 International Space Station Acoustic Measurement Program (ISS Acoustics)
0 Periodic Fitness Evaluation With Oxygen Uptake Measurement (PFE-OUM)
0 Analysis of International Space Station Plasma Interaction (Plasma Interaction Model)
0 International Space Station In-ﬂight Education Downlinks (In-ﬂight Education Downlinks)
222

"
"231","EXPEDITION 14 (SEP 20 2006 — APR 21 2007)
we’re trying to understand better the effects of Iong-duration spaceflight on humans, because
our goal is to extend our presence not just in low Earth orbit but to go back to the moon with some
kind of a longer-term presence, and hopefully on to Mars someday. “ — Michael E. Lopez—Alegria
Expedition 14 Commander
For the Expedition 14 crew of Michael Lopez-Alegria, Mikhail Tyurin, Thomas Reiter (Jul 2006 — Dec 2006), and
Sunita Williams (Dec 2006 — Jun 2007), the crew performed the following experiments:
Technology Development for Exploration
- Lab-on-a-Chip Application Development-Portable Test System (LOCAD-PTS)
o Maui Analysis of Upper (Maui)
0 Materials International Space Station Experiment-3 and -4 (MISSE-3 and -4)
o Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS)
0 Ram Burn Observations (RAMBO)
- Space Acceleration Measurement System-II (SAMS—II)
0 Synchronized Position Hold, Engage, Reorient, Experimental Satellites (SPHERES)
- Space Test Program-HZ-Atmospheric Neutral Density Experiment (STP-Hz-ANDE)
- Space TestProgram-HZ-Micr0e1ectr0mechanical System-Bases (MEMS) PICOSAT Inspector
(STP-HZ-MEPSI)
- Space Test Program-HZ-Radar Fence Transponder (STP-HZ-RAFT)
Physical Sciences Microgravity
0 Capillary Flow Experiment (CFE)
Biological Sciences Microgravity
- Analysis of a Novel Sensory Mechanism in Root Phototropism (Tropi)
- Passive Observatories from Experimental Microbial Systems (POEMS)
0 Threshold Acceleration for Gravisensing (Gravi)
- The Optimization of Root Zone Substrates (ORZS) for Reduced-Gravity Experiments Program
Human Research and Countermeasure Development for Exploration
0 Anomalous Long-Term Effects in Astronauts’ Central Nervous System (ALTEA)
- Space Flight-induced Reactivation 0f Latent Epstein-Barr Virus (Epstein-Barr)
- Behavioral Issues Associated With Isolation and Conﬁnement: Review and Analysis of ISS Crew J ournals
(J ournals)
- Incidence of Latent Virus Shedding During Space Flight (Latent Virus)
0 Test of Midodrine as a Countermeasure Against Post-ﬂight Orthostatic Hypotension-Short-Duration
Biological Investigation (Midodrine-SDBI)
- Nutrition Status Assessment (Nutrition)
- Perceptual Motor Deﬁcits in Space (PMDIS)
0 Renal Stone Risk During Space Flight (Renal Stone)
- Sleep—Wake Actigraphy and Light Exposure During Space Flight-Long (Sleep-Long)
- Sleep—Wake Actigraphy and Light Exposure During Space Flight-Short (Sleep-Short)
- Stability of Pharmacotherapeutic and Nutritional Compounds (Stability)
- Surface, Water and Air Biocharacterization (SWAB) — A Comprehensive Characterization of
Microorganisms and Allergens in Spacecraft
- Test of Reaction and Adaptation Capabilities (TRAC)
Observing the Earth and Educational Activities
0 Crew Earth Observations (CEO)
0 Crew Earth Observations—International Polar Year (CEO-IPY)
- Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus Science Insert-Ol (CSI—Ol)
223

"
"232","0 Earth Knowledge Acquired by Middle School Students (EarthKAM)
- Education Payload Operations-Dem0nstrati0ns (EPO-Demos)
- Space Experiment Module (SEM)
Results from ISS Operations
0 Amateur Radio 0f the International Space Station (ARISS)
0 Clinical Nutrition Assessment of ISS Astronauts (Clinical Nutrition Assessment)
- Education-HOW Solar Cells Work (Education-Solar Cells)
0 Environmental Monitoring of the International Space Station (Environmental Monitoring)
0 International Space Station Acoustic Measurement Program (ISS Acoustics)
0 Periodic Fitness Evaluation With Oxygen Uptake Measurement (PFE-OUM)
0 Analysis of International Space Station Plasma Interaction (Plasma Interaction Model)
0 Soldering in Reduced Gravity Experiment (SORGE), SDTO 17003-U
- International Space Station In-ﬂight Education Downlinks (In-ﬂight Education Downlinks)
- International Space Station Zero—Propellant Maneuver (ZPM) Demonstration
224

"
"233","EXPEDITION 15 (APR 9 2007 — OCT 21 2007)
“There are two limiting factors currently to deep-space exploration. One of those is the
technological problem, and it can be solved. the second limiting factor is the prevention of the
negative impact of zero gravity, how to be involved in a Iong-duration space flight while maintaining
good health, because station work requires good health and good functioning.” — Oleg Kotov
Expedition 15 Flight Engineer
The Expedition 15 crew of Fyoder Yurchikhin, Oleg Kotov, Sunita Williams (Dec 2006 — Jun 2007),, and Clay
Anderson (Jun 2007 — Oct 2007), performed the following experiments:
Technology and Development for Exploration
0 Analyzing Interferometer for Ambient Air (ANITA)
- Elastic Memory Composite Hinge (EMCH)
- Lab-on-a-Chip Application Development-Portable Test System (LOCAD-PTS)
o Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS)
- Maui Analysis of Upper Atmospheric Injections (Maui)
- Materials International Space Station Experiment-3 and -4 (MISSE-3 and -4)
0 Ram Burn Observations (RAMBO)
- Smoke and Aerosol Measurement Experiment (SAME)
- Space Acceleration Measurement System-II (SAMS—II)
0 Synchronized Position Hold, Engage, Reorient, Experimental Satellites (SPHERES)
Physical Sciences in Microgravity
0 Capillary Flow Experiment (CFE)
Biological Sciences in Microgravity
0 Molecular and plant Physiological Analyses of the Microgravity Effects on Multigeneration Studies of
Arabidopsis thaliana (Multigen)
- Streptococcus pneumoniae Expression of Genes in Space (SPEGIS)
- The Optimization of Root Zone Substrates (ORZS) for Reduced-Gravity Experiments Program
Human Research and Countermeasure Development for Exploration
- Anomalous Long-Term Effects in Astronauts’ Central Nervous System (ALTEA)
- Commercial Biomedical Test M0dule-2 (CBTM-2)
- Cardiovascular and Cerebrovascular Control on Return from ISS (CCISS)
- Cell Culture Module-Immune Response of Human Monocytes in Microgravity (CCM-Immune Response)
0 Cell Culture Module-Effect 0f Microgravity 0n Wound Repair in Vitro Model of New Blood Vessel
Development (CCM-Wound Repair)
0 Space Flight-induced Reactivation 0f Latent Epstein-Barr Virus (Epstein-Barr)
- Behavioral Issues Associated With Isolation and Conﬁnement: Review and Analysis of ISS Crew J ournals
(J ournals)
- Incidence of Latent Virus Shedding During Space Flight (Latent Virus)
0 Test of Midodrine as a Countermeasure Against Post-ﬂight Orthostatic Hypotension-Short-Duration
Biological Investigation (Midodrine-SDBI)
- Nutritional Status Assessment (Nutrition)
- Perceptual Motor Deﬁcits in Space (PMDIS)
0 Bioavailability and Performance Effects of Promethazine During Space Flight (PMZ)
- Sleep—Wake Actography and Light Exposure During Space Flight-Long (Sleep-Long)
- Sleep—Wake Actography and Light Exposure During Space Flight-Short (Sleep-Short)
- Stability of Pharmacotherapeutic and Nutritional Compounds (Stability)
- Surface, Water, and Air Biocharacterization (SWAB) — Comprehensive Characterization of Microorganisms
and Allergens in Spacecraft Environment
0 Test of Reaction and Adaptation Capabilities (TRAC)
225

"
"234","Observing the Earth and Educational Activities
0 Crew Earth Observations (CEO)
0 Crew Earth Observations—International Polar Year (CEO-IPY)
- Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus Science Insert-Ol (CSI—Ol)
- Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus Science Insert-OZ (CSI—02)
- Education Payload Operations-Dem0nstrati0ns (EPO-Demos)
- Education Payload Operations—Educator (EPO-Educator)
- Education Payload Operations—Kit C Plant Growth Chambers (EPO-Kit C)
0 Earth Knowledge Acquired by Middle School Students (EarthKAM)
Results from ISS Operations
0 Amateur Radio on the International Space Station (ARISS)
0 Environmental Monitoring of the International Space Station (Environmental Monitoring)
0 International Space Station Acoustic Measurement Program (ISS Acoustics)
- Periodic Fitness Evaluation With Oxygen Uptake Measurement (PFE-OUM)
0 Analysis of International Space Station Plasma Interaction (Plasma Interaction Model)
0 International Space Station In-ﬂight Education Downlinks (In-ﬂight Education Downlinks)
- International Space Station Zero—Propellant Maneuver (ZPM) Demonstration
226

"
"235","ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are especially grateful to the ISS crewmembers who have been dedicated to making the most of research activ-
ities, even in the years of ISS assembly when there are so many maintenance and construction tasks. We would like
to the Associate Administrator for Space Operations and former head of the 188 Program, Bill Gerstenmaier, and the
188 Program Scientist, Don Thomas, for their unwavering support of our efforts to assemble complete information
on 188 research and results. We thank the many scientists who have shared information on their station research and
supported us in tracking their results and publications. We thank them, too, for reviewing the evolving versions of
descriptions in the database and for their patience as we tried to describe their work for a general audience. We want
to thank those in the Mission Science group of Lockheed Martin who drew the information together for the ﬁrst draft
of the database, especially Peggy Delaney, Pasha Morshedi, Andy Self, and Wes Tarkington. Our original NASA in-
ternal Web site and database structure was developed by Wes Tarkington. The system evolved, and dynamic updates
to the NASA Portal Web site were made possible by the efforts of Ryan Elliott 0f the Engineering & Science Contract
Group and Alex Pline, NASA Headquarters, and his colleagues. Last, but not least, we want to thank Sharon Hecht
0f TES for her editorial help in making this NASA Technical Publication a reality. Her patience with our continued
updates and her gentle reminders kept this project on track.

227

"
"236","APPENDIX B: PUBLICATIONS RESULTING FROM RESEARCH
ABOARD THE INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION
PAYLOAD CITATION YEAR DISCIPLINE
Biological Sciences in Microgravity
Zhou WI Durst SJI DeMars MI Stankovic BI Link BM; Tellez GI Meyers
RA Sandstrom PW Abba JR. Performance of the Advanced Biological
Astroculture glant growth unIt during |SS-6A/7A mnssnon. SAE Technical SCIences In
AdvAsc Pager Series. 2002; Pager No. 02|CES—267. 2002 Micro-ravit
Link BM, Durst SJ, Zhou W, Stankovic B. Seed-to—seed growth of Biological
Arabidopsis Thaliana on the International Space Station. Advances in Sciences in
AdvAsc Space Research. 2003; 31(10):2237-2243. 2003 MicrOoravit
Zhou W. Advanced AstrocultureTM Plant Growth Unit: Capabilities and Biological
Performances. 35th International Conference on Environmental Systems, Sciences in
AdvAsc Rome, Italy. Jul 11 — 14, 2005. 2005 Microgravity
Frazier CM, Simpson JB, Roberts MS, Stutte GW, Fields NW, Melendez-
Andrade J, Morrow RC. Bacterial and fungal communities in BPS Biological
chambers and root modules. SAE Technical Paper Series. 2003 Paper Sciences in
No. 03lCES-147. 2003 Microgravity
Iverson JT, Crabb TM, Morrow RC, Lee MC. Biomass Production System Biological
Hardware Performance. SAE Technical Paper Series. 2003 Paper No. Sciences in
03lCES-67. 2003 Micro-ravit
Musgrave ME, Kuang A, Tuominem LK, Levine LH, Morrow R.C. Seed
Storage Reserves and Glucosinolates in Brassica rapa L. Grown on the Biological
International Space Station. Journal of the American Society for Sciences in
Horticultural Science. 2005; 130(6): 848—856. 2005 Microgravity
Morrow RC, Iverson JT, Richter RC, Stadler JJ. Biomass Production Biological
System (BPS) Technology Validation Test Results. Transactions Journal Sciences in
of Aerospace 2004 1:1061—1070. 2004 Microgravity
Hammond DK, Elliott TF, Holubec K, Baker TL, Allen PL, Hammond TG, Biological
CBOSS-O1- Love JE. Proteomic Retrieval from Nucleic Acid Depleted Space-Flown Sciences in
02-Renal Human Cells. Gravitational and Space Biology. 2006 Jun;19(2). 2006 Microgravity
Hammond DK, Becker J, Elliot TF, Holubec K, Baker TL, Love JE.
Antigenic Protein in Microgravity—Grown Human Mixed Mullerian Ovarian Biological
CBOSS-O1- Tumor (LN-1) Cells Preserved in a RNA Stabilizing Agent. Gravitational Sciences in
Ovarian and Space Biology. 2005;18(2):99—100. 2005 Microgravity
Klaus D, Benoit M, Bonomo J, Bollich J, Freman J, Stodieck LL, McClure
G, Lam KS Antiobiotic Production in Space using Automated Fed-
Bioreactor System. Conference and Exhibit on International Space Station Biological
Utilization — 2001, Cape Canaveral, Fla. Oct 15—18 2001. AIAA 200-1- Sciences in
CGBA-APS 4921. 2001 Micro-ravit
Benoit MR, Li W, Stodieck LS, Lam KS, Winther CL, Roane TM, Klaus Biological
DM. Microbial Antibiotic Production Aboard the International Space Sciences in
CGBA-APS Station. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology. 2006; 70(4): 403—41 1. 2006 Micro-ravit
Driss-Ecole D, Legue V, Carnero—Diaz E, Perbal G. Gravisensitivity and Biological
automorphogenesis of lentil seedling roots grown on board the Sciences in
Gravi International Space Station. Physiologia plantarum. 2008; Epub. 2008 Microgravity
228

"
"237","Morrison DR, Haddad RS, Ficht A. Microencapsulation of Drugs: New

cancer therapies and improved drug delivery derived from microgravity Biological

research. Proceedings of the 40th Space Congress, Cape Canaveral, Fla. Sciences in

Apr 2003. 2003 Microgravity

Le Pivert P, Haddad RS, Aller A, Titus K, Doulat J, Renard M, Morrison

DR. Ultrasound Guided, Combined Cryoablation and Microencapsulated

5-Fluorouracil, Inhibits Growth of Human Prostate Tumors in Xenogenic Biological

Mouse Model Assessed by Fluorescence Imaging. Technology in Cancer Sciences in

Research and Treatment. 2004; 3(2):135—42. 2004 Microgravity

Wilson JW, Ott CM, Hoener zu Bentrup K, Ramamurthy R, Quick L,

Porwollik 8, Cheng P, McClelland M, Tsaprailise G, Radabaugh T, Hunt

A, Fernandez D, Richter E, Shah M, Kilcoyne M, Joshi L, Nelman-

Gonzalez M, Hing S, Parra M, Dumars P, Norwood K, Bober R, Devich J,

Ruggles A, Goulart C, Rupert M, Stodieck L, Stafford P, Catella L, Schurr

MJ, Buchanan K, Morici L, McCracken J, Allen P, Baker—Coleman C,

Hammond T, Vogel J, Nelson R, Pierson DL, Stefanyshyn-Piper HM,

Nickerson CA. Space flight alters bacterial gene expression and virulence

and reveals a role for global regulator qu. Proceedings of the National Biological

Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2007; Sciences in

104 41 :16299—16304. 2007 Microravit

Jones SB, Heinse R, Bingham GE, Or D. Modeling and Design of Optimal Biological

Growth Media from PIant—Based Gas and Liquid Fluxes, SAE 2005-01- Sciences in

2949, 2005. 2005 Micro-ravit

Stutte GW, Monje 0, Anderson 8. Wheat (Triticum Aesativum L. cv. USU

Apogee) Growth Onboard the International Space Station (ISS): Biological

Germination and Early Development. Proceedings of the Plant Growth Sciences in
PESTO Regulation Society of America. 2003; 30:66—71. 2003 Microgravity

Monje O, Stutte GW, Goins GD, Porterfield DM, Bingham GE. Farming in Biological

-—--

PESTO Research. 2003; 31:151—167. 2003 Microgravity

Paul A, Levine HG, McLamb W, Norwood KL, Reed D, Stutte GW, Wells

HW, Ferl RJ. Plant molecular biology in the space station era: Utilization Biological

of KSC fixation tubes with RNAIater. Acta Astronautica. 2005; 56:623— Sciences in
PESTO 628. 2005 Microgravity

Stutte GW, Monje O, Goins GD, Tripathy BC. Microgravity effects on Biological

thylakoid, single leaf, and whole canopy photosynthesis on dwarf wheat. Sciences in
PESTO Planta. 2005; 1—11. 2005 Microoravit

Monje O, Stutte G, Chapman D. Microgravity does not alter plant stand Biological

gas exchange of wheat at moderate light levels and saturating C02 Sciences in
PESTO concentration. Planta. Jun 2005; Online. 2005 Microgravity

Stutte GW, Monje O, Hatfield RD, Paul AL, Ferl RJ, Simone CG. Biological

Microgravity effects on leaf morphology, cell structure, carbon metabolism Sciences in
PESTO and mRNA expression of dwarf wheat. Planta. 2006; 224(5):1038—1049. 2006 Micro-ravit

Heyenga AG, Stodieck L, Hoehn A, Kliss M, Blackford C. Approaches in

the Design of a Space Plant Cultivation Facility for Arabidopsis thaliana.

34th International Conference On Environmental Systems (ICES), Biological

Colorado Springs, Colo. Jul 2004; SAE Paper 2004-01-2459 (New Sciences in
PGBA desins influenced b lessons learned . 2004 Microravit

Heyenga G, Kliss M, Blackford C. (2005): The Performance of a Miniature

Plant Cultivation System Designed for Space Flight Application, SAE- Biological

paper: 2005-01-2844. In International Conference Environmental Systems Sciences in
PGBA (ICES) Proceedings, Rome, Italy. 2005 Microgravity

Roberts MS, Reed DW, Rodriguez JI. 2005. Passive Observatories for

5—.-
Annual International Conference Environmental Systems (ICES). SAE Sciences in
05lCES—214. 2005 Micro-ravit
229

"
"238","Human Re-
search and
Fincke EM, Padalka G, Lee D, van Holsbeeck M, Sargsyan AE, Hamilton Counter-
DR, Martin D, Melton SL, McFarIin K, Dulchavsky SA. Evaluation of measure De-
Shoulder Integrity in Space: First Report of Musculoskeletal US on the velopment for
International Space Station. Radiology. 234(2):319—322, 2005. 2005 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Counter-
Chiao L, Sharipov S, Sargsyan AE, Melton 8, Hamilton DR, McFarIin K, measure De-
Dulchavsky SA. Ocular examination for trauma; clinical ultrasound aboard velopment for
the International Space Station. Journal of Trauma. 2005; 58(5):885—889. 2005 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Sargsyan AE, Hamilton DR, Jones JA, Melton S, Whitson PA, Kirkpatrick Counter-
AW, Martin D, Dulchavsky SA. FAST at MACH 20: Clinical Ultrasound measure De-
Aboard the International Space Station. The Journal of Trauma, Injury, velopment for
Infection, and Critical Care. 2004; 58(1):35—39. 2005 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Kwon D, Bouuffard JA, van Holsbeeck M, Sargsyan AE, Hamilton DR, Counter-
Melton SL, Dulchavsky SA. Battling Fire and Ice: Remote guidance measure De-
ultrasound to diagnose injury on the International Space Station and the velopment for
ice rink. Am J. Surgery 93 (2007) 417—420. 2007 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Foale CM, Kaleri AY, Sargsyan AE, Hamilton DR, Melton S, Margin D, Counter-
Dulchavsky SA. Diagnostic instrumentation aboard ISS: just in time measure De-
training for non-physician crewmembers. Aviation, Space and velopment for
Environmental Medicine 2005; 76:594—598. 2005 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Counter-
measure De-
velopment for
Sargsyan AE, Hamilton DR, Jones JA, Melton S, Whitson PA, Kirkpatrick Exploration,
AW, Martin D, Dulchavsky SA. FAST at MACH 20: Clinical Ultrasound Results from
Aboard the International Space Station. The Journal of Trauma, Injury, ISS
Infection, and Critical Care. 2004; 58(1):35—39. 2004 Operations
Human Re-
search and
Counter-
measure De-
velopment for
Exploration,
Sargsyan A, Hamilton DR, Melton SL, Young J. The International Space Results from
Station Ultrasound Imaging Capability Overview for Prospective Users. ISS
NASA/TP-2006-213731 2006. 2006 Operations
Human Re-
search and
Counter-
measure De-
velopment for
Kirkpatrick, AW, Jones, J., Hamilton, DR, Melton, 8, Beck, G, Savvas, N, Exploration,
Campell, M, Dulchavsky 8. Trauma Sonography for Use in microgravity, Results from
Aviation, Space and Environ. Medicine 78, No 4, Sec II A38—A42, Apr ISS
2007. 2007 Operations
230

"
"239","Human Re-
search and
Koshiishi H, Matsumoto H, Koga K, Goka T. Evaluation of Low-Energy Counter-
Neutron Environment inside the International Space Station. Technical measure De-
Report of Institute of Electronics, Information, and Communications velopment for
Engineers. 2003; SANE2003-79:11-14. [Japanese] 2003 Exploration
Human Re-
Gridley DS, Nelson GA, Peters LL, Kostenuik PJ, Bateman TA, Morony 8, search and
Stodieck LS, Lacey DL, Simske SJ, Pecaut MJ. Genetic models in applied Counter-
physiology: selected contribution: effects of spaceflight on immunity in the measure De-
C57BL/6 mouse. ||. Activation, cytokines, erythrocytes, and platelets. velopment for
Journal of Applied Physiology. 2003; 94(5):2095—2103. 2003 Exploration
Human Re-
Pecaut MJ, Nelson GA, Peters LL, Kostenuik PJ, Bateman TA, Morony 8, search and
Stodieck LS, Lacey DL, Simske SJ, Gridley DS. Genetic models in Counter-
applied physiology: selected contribution: effects of spaceflight on measure De-
immunity in the C57BL/6 mouse. |. Immune population distributions. velopment for
Journal of Applied Physiology. 2003; 94(5):2085—2094. 2003 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Harrison BC, Allen DL, Girten B, Stodieck LS, Kostenuik PJ, Bateman TA, Counter-
Morony S, Lacey DL, Leinwand LA. Skeletal muscle adaptations to measure De-
microgravity exposure in the mouse. Journal of Applied Physiology. 2003; velopment for
95(6):2462—2470. 2003 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Bateman TA, Morony S, Ferguson VL, Simske SJ, Lacey DL, Warmington Counter-
KS, Geng Z, Tan HL, Shalhoub V, Dunstan CR, Kostenuik PJ. Molecular measure De-
therapies for disuse osteoporosis. Gravitational and Space Biology velopment for
Bulletin. 2004; 17:83—89. 2004 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Counter-
Gridley DS, Slater JM, Luo—Owen X, Rizvi A, Chapes SK, Stodieck LS, measure De-
Ferguson VL, Pecaut MJ. Spaceflight effects on T lymphocyte distribution, velopment for
function and gene expression. J Appl Physiol. 2008 Nov 6. 2008 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Reitz G, Beaujean R, Dachev Ts, Deme S, Luszik-Bhadra M, Heinrich W, Counter-
Olko P. Dosimetric Mapping. Conference and Exhibit on International measure De-
Space Station Utilization, Cape Canaveral, Fla. Oct 15 — 18, 2001; AIAA- velopment for
2001-4903. 2001 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Reitz G, Beaujean R, Benton E, Burmeister S, Dachev Ts, Deme 8, Counter-
Luszik-Bhadra M, Olko P. Space radiation measurements on-board ISS — measure De-
the DOSMAP experiment. Radiation Protection Dosimetry. 2005; 116 (1- velopment for
4): 374—379. 2005 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Cavanagh PR, Maender C, Rice AJ, Gene KO, Ochia RS, Snedeker JG. Counter-
Lower—Extremity Loading During Exercise on the International Space measure De-
Station. Transactions of the Annual Meeting of the Orthopaedic Research velopment for
Society. 2004; 0395. 2004 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Pierre MC, Genc KO, Litow M, Humphreys B, Rice A, Maender CC, Counter-
Cavanagh PR. Comparison of Knee Motion on Earth and in Space: An measure De-
Observational Study. Journal of Neuroengineering and Rehabilitation. velopment for
2006; 3:8. 2006 Exploration
231

"
"240","Human Re-
search and
Watt DG, Lefebvre L. Effects of altered gravity on spinal cord excitability. Counter-
First Research on the International Space Station. Conference and Exhibit measure De-
on International Space Station Utilization, Cape Canaveral, Fla. Oct 15 — velopment for
18, 2001; AIAA 2001-4939. 2001 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Counter-
Watt DG. Effects of altered gravity on spinal cord excitability (final results). measure De-
Proceedings of the Bioastronautics Investigators' Workshop, Galveston, velopment for
Texas. Jan 2003. 2003 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Counter-
Watt DG. Effects of prolonged exposure to microgravity on H-reerx loop measure De-
excitability. Proceedings of the 14th IAA Humans in Space Symposium, velopment for
Banff, Alberta. Ma 2003. 2003 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Counter-
Kanas N, Ritsher J. Leadership Issues with Multicultural Crews on the measure De-
International Space Station: Lessons learned from Shuttle/Mir. Acta velopment for
Astronautica. 2005; 56:932—936. 2005 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Kanas N, Salnitskiy V P, Ritsher JB, Gushin VI, Weiss DS, Saylor 8, Counter-
Marmar C. Human interactions in space: ISS versus Shuttle/Mir. 56th measure De-
International Astronautical Congress. Fukuoka, Japan. Oct 17—21, 2005; velopment for
|AC-05-A|.5.02: 8. 2005 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Ritsher JB, Kanas N, Gushin VI, Saylor 8. Cultural differences in patterns Counter-
of mood states on board the International Space Station. 56th International measure De-
Astronautical Congress. Fukuoka, Japan. Oct 17—21, 2005; |AC-05- velopment for
A|.5.03: 4 pp. 2005 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Counter-
Clement J, Ritsher JB. Operating the ISS: Cultural and leadership measure De-
challenges. 56th International Astronautical Congress. Fukuoka, Japan. velopment for
Oct 17—21, 2005; |AC-05-A|.5.05: 11 pp. 2005 Exploration
Human Re-
Ritsher JB, Kanas N, Salnitskiy VP, Gushin VI, Saylor S, Weiss DS, search and
Marmar C. Cultural and Language Backgrounds of International Space Counter-
Station Program Personnel. Presented at the 57th International measure De-
Astronautical Congress. Valencia, Spain. 2006; |AC-06-A1.1.3.0ct 2—6, velopment for
2006. 2006 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Counter-
Kanas NA, Ritsher JB, Saylor SA. Do Psychological Decrements Occur measure De-
During the 2nCI Half of Space Missions? Presented at the 57th International velopment for
Astronautical Conress. Valencia, Spain. Oct 2—6, 2006; |AC-06-A1.1.02i. 2006 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Clement JL, Ritsher JB, Kanas N, Saylor 8. Leadership Challenges in ISS Counter-
Operations: Lessons Learned from Junior and Senior Mission Control measure De-
Personnel. Presented at the 57th International Astronautical Congress. velopment for
Valencia, Spain. Oct 2—6, 2006; |AC-06-A1.1.6. 2006 Exploration
232

"
"241","Human Re-
search and
Counter-
Kanas NA, Salnitskiy VP, Ritsher JB, Gushin VI, Weiss DS, Saylor SA, measure De-
Kozerenko OP, Marmar CR Psychosocial interactions during ISS velopment for
missions Acta Astronautica 2007; 60:329—335. 2007 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Kanas NA, Salnitskiy VP, Boyd JE, Gushin VI, Weiss DS, Saylor SA, Counter-
Kozerenko OP, Marmar CR. Crewmember and mission control personnel measure De-
interactions during International Space Station missions. Aviation Space velopment for
and Environmental Medicine. 2007; 78(6): 601—607. 2007 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Counter-
Pierson DL, Stowe RP, Phillips TM, Lugg DJ, Mehta SK. Epstein-Barr measure De-
Virus Shedding by Astronauts During Space Flight. Brain, Behavior, and velopment for
Immunity. 2004; 19:235—242. 2004 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Counter-
Mehta SK, Cohrs RJ, Forghani B, Zerbe G, Gilden DH, Pierson DL. measure De-
Stress—induced Subclinical Reactivation of Varicella Zoster Virus in velopment for
Astronauts. Journal of Medical Virology. 2005; 72:174—179. 2005 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Counter-
Prisk GK, Fine JM, Cooper TK, West JB. Pulmonary gas exchange is not measure De-
impaired 24 h after extravehicular activity. Journal of Applied Physiology velopment for
2005; 99(6):2233—8. 2005 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Prisk GK, Fine JM, Cooper TK, West JB. Vital Capacity, Respiratory Counter-
Muscle Strength and Pulmonary Gas Exchange during Long-Duration measure De-
Exposure to Microgravity. Journal of Applied Physiology. 2006; 101 :439— velopment for
447. 2006 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Counter-
Lang T, LeBlanc A, Evans H, Lu Y, Gennant H, Yu A. Cortical and measure De-
Trabecular Bone Mineral Loss from the Spine and Hip in Long-duration velopment for
Spaceflight. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research. 2004; 19(6):1006—12. 2004 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Counter-
Lang TF, LeBlanc AD, Evans HJ, Lu Y. Adaptation of the Proximal Femur measure De-
to Skeletal Reloading After Long-Duration Spcaeflight. Journal of Bone velopment for
and Mineral Research. 2006; 21(8);1224—1230. 2006 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Counter-
Cavanagh P, Rice AJ (eds), Bone Loss During Spaceflight: Etiology, measure De-
Countermeasures, and Implications for Bone Health on Earth. Cleveland velopment for
Clinic Press, Cleveland, Ohio 2007 , 297 pp. 2007 Exploration
Human Re-
Lang TF, Keyak JH, LeBlanc AD. Defining and Assessing Bone Health search and
During and After Spaceflight, in Cavanagh P, Rice AJ (eds), Bone Loss Counter-
During Spaceflight: Etiology, Countermeasures, and Implications for Bone measure De-
Health on Earth. Cleveland Clinic Press, Cleveland, Ohio (2007), pp. 63— velopment for
69. 2007 Exploration
233

"
"242","Human Re-
search and
Counter-
Lang TF, LeBlanc A, Evans H, Lu Y. Geometric adaptation of the proximal measure De-
Subregional femur to skeletal reloading after Iong-duration spaceflight. J Bone Miner velopment for
Bone Res 2006: 21 :1224—1230. 2006 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Sibonga JD, Evans HJ, Sung HG, Spector, ER, Land, TF, Oganov VS, Counter-
Bakulin AV, Shackelford LC, LeBlanc AD. Recovery of spaceflight— measure De-
Subregional induced bone loss: Bone mineral density after Iong-duration mission as velopment for
Bone fitted with an exponential function. Bone 41 (2007) 973—978. 2007 Exploration
Human Re-
Sibonga JD, Evans HJ, Spector ER, Maddocks MJ, Smith SA, search and
Shackelford LC, LeBlanc AD. Bone Health During and After Spaceflight, Counter-
in Cavanagh P, Rice AJ (eds), Bone Loss During Spaceflight: Etiology, measure De-
Subregional Countermeasures, and Implications for Bone Health on Earth, Cleveland velopment for
Bone Clinic Press, Cleveland, Ohio 2007 , pp.45-51. 2007 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Counter-
Cucinotta FA, Kim M-H, Willingham V, George K. 2008, Physical and measure De-
Biological Organ Dosimetry Analysis for International Space Station velopment for
Torso Astronauts, Radiation Research 170, 127—138 (2008). 2008 Exploration
Human Re-
search and
Counter-
Gabrielsen A, Norsk P. Effect of spaceflight on the subcutaneous measure De-
venoarteriolar reflex in the human lower leg. J Appl Physiol 103: 959—962 velopment for
Xenon-1 (2007). 2007 Exploration
Observing the
Wright RL. Remember, We’re Pioneers! The First School Contact with the Earth and
International Space Station. Proceedings of the AMSAT-NA 22nOI Space Educational
8 mposium, Arlinoton, Va., Oct 8—10, 2004. 2004 Activities
Observing the
Cunningham C (N7NFX). NA1SS, NA1SS, This is KA7SKY Calling..... Earth and
Proceedings of the AMSAT-NA Sgace Symgosium, Arlington, Va. 2004 , Educational
Oct 8—10, 2004. 2004 Activities
Observing the
Palazzolo P (KB3NMS). Launching Dreams: The Long-term Imgact of Earth and
SAREX and ARISS on Student Achievement. Proceedings of the AMSAT- Educational
NA Sgace Symgosium, PittsburghI Penn. 2006I Oct 26 — 28. 2006 Activities
Quod J-P, Bigot L, Blanchot J, Chabanet P, Durville P, Nicet J-B,
Wendling B. Research and monitoring of the coral reefs of the French Observing the
islands of the Indian Ocean. Assessment activities in 2002. Mission Earth and
carried out in Glorieuses. Reunion: IFRECOR (I'Initiative Frangaise pour Educational
CEO Ies Récifs Corallines). 2002; 2. [French] 2002 Activities
Observing the
Robinson JA, Evans CA. Space Station Allows Remote Sensing of Earth Earth and
to within Six Meters. Eos, Transactions of the American Geophysical Educational
CEO Union. 2002; 83:185—188. 2002 Activities
Andréfouét 8, Robinson JA, Hu C, Salvat B, Payri C, Muller—Karger FE. Observing the
Influence of the spatial resolution of SeaWiFS, Landsat 7, SPOT and Earth and
International Space Station data on landscape parameters of Pacific Educational
CEO Ocean atolls. Canadian Journal of Remote Sensing. 2003; 29:210—218. 2003 Activities
234

"
"243","Observing the
Stumpf RP, Holderied K, Robinson JA, Feldman G, Kuring N. Mapping Earth and
—--
Coastal Zone Conference, Baltimore MD July 13-17, 2003. 2003 Activities
Stefanov WL, Robinson JA. Vegetation Density Measurements From Observing the
Digital Astronaut Photography. International Archives of the Earth and
Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing, and Spatial Information Sciences. Educational
2003; 34:185—189. 2003 Activities
Observing the
Earth and
Wilkinson, MJ, NASA Tech Brief 2004: Large Fluvial Fans and Exgloration Educational
for H drocarbons 2004 htto://www.techbriefs.com/content/view/170/34/ 2004 Activities
Andrefouet 8, Gilbert A, Yan L, Remoissenet G, Payri C, Chancerelle Y. Observing the
The remarkable population size of the endangered clam Tridacna maxima Earth and
assessed in Fangatau Atoll using in situ remote sensing data. ICES Educational
Journal of Marine Science. 2005; 62(6):1037—1048. 2005 Activities
Observing the
Scambos T, Sergienko O, Sargent A, MacAyeal D, Fastook J. 2005, ICES Earth and
at profiles of tabular iceberg margins and iceberg breakups at low Educational
latitudes. Geophys. Research Letters, Vol 32, L23809 2005. 2005 Activities
Observing the
Wilkinson MJ, Marshall LG, Lundberg JG. River behavior on megafans Earth and
and potential influences on diversification and distribution of aquatic Educational
organisms. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 2006; 21 :151—172. 2006 Activities
Robinson JA, Slack KJ, Olsen V, Trenchard M, Willis K, Baskin P, Ritsher
JB. Patterns in Crew-Initiated Photography of Earth From ISS — Is Earth Observing the
Observation 3 Salutogenic Experience? Presented at the 57th Earth and
International Astronautical Congress. Valencia, Spain. Oct 2—6, 2006 IAC- Educational
06-A1 .1.4. 2006 Activities
Observing the
Wilkinson MJ, Marshall LG, Lundberg JG. River behavior on megafans Earth and
and gotential influences on diversification and distribution of aquatic Educational
organisms. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 2006; 21 :151—172. 2006 Activities
M.J. Wilkinson, 2006, Method for Identifying Sedimentam bodies from
images and its agglication to mineral exgloration, USPTO Patent #
6,985,606 , htt9://gatft.usgtogov/netacgi/ngh-
Parser?Sect1=PT02&Sect2=HITOFF&9=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2 Observing the
Fsearch- Earth and
boo|.htm|&r=1&f=G&|=50&co1=AND&d=PTXT&s1=6985606.PN.&OS=PN Educational
/6985606&RS=PN/6985606 2006 Activities
Observing the
Elvidge CD, Cinzano P, Pettit DR, Arvesen J, Sutton P, Small C, Nemani Earth and
R, Longcore T, Rich C, Safran J, Weeks J, Ebener S. 20073. The Educational
Nightsat mission concept. Int. J. of Remote Sensing, V.28, 2645—2677. 2007 Activities
Observing the
Elvidge CD, Safran TB, Sutton P, Cinzano P, Pettit DR, Arvesen J, Small Earth and
C, 2007b. Potential for Global Mapping of development via a nightsat Educational
mission. GeoJournal 69: 45—53. 2007 Activities
Observing the
Kohlmann B, Wilkinson MJ, 2007. The Tarcoles Line: biogeographic Earth and
effects of the Talamanca Range in lower Central America, Giornale Educational
Italiano di Entomologia 12: 1—30. 2007 Activities
Observing the
Wilkinson MJ, Allen CC, Oheler DZ, Salvotore MR. A new Fluvial Analog Earth and
for the Ridge-forming unit, Northern Sinus Meridiani, Southwest Arabia Educational
Terra, Mars, Lunar and Planetary Science XXXIX (2008). 2008 Activities
235

"
"244","Observing the
Lulla K. 2003 Nighttime Urban Imagery from International Space Station: Earth and
Potential Applications for Urban Analyses and Modeling. Photogrammetric Educational
CEO Enooineerin and Remote Sensin. 2003; 69:941—942. 2003 Activities
Scambos T, Ross R, Bauer R, Yermolin Y, Skvarca P, Long D, Bohlander Observing the
J, Haran T. Calving and ice-shelf break-up processes investigated by Earth and
proxy: Antarctic tabular iceberg evolution during northward drift; Volume Educational
CEO-IPY 54(187), 2008; 579—591. 2008 Activities
Ingrid Sandahl, Christer Fuglesang, The Network for Optical Auroral
Research in the Arctic Region, and The Upper Atmospheric Physics Observing the
Group at the National Institute of Polar Research, Japan. Auroral Earth and
Observations from Space Shuttle Discovery, 34th Annual European Educational
CEO-IPY Optical Meeting, Aug 2007. 2007 Activities
Observing the
Earth and
Hurwicz M. Case Study: Attack Of The Space Data — Down To Earth Educational
EarthKAM Data Management At ISS EarthKAM. New Architect. Aug 1, 2002; 38. 2002 Activities
Levine HG, Norwood KLL, Tynes GK, Levine LH. Soybean and Corn Observing the
Seed Germination in Space: The First Plant Study Conducted on Space Earth and
Education- Station Alpha. Proceedings of the 38th Space Congress, Cape Canaveral, Educational
SEEDS Fla. May 2001; 181—187. 2001 Activities
Observing the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration Educational Product. Earth and
International Toys in Space — Science on the Station. DVD. 2004; ED- Educational
2004-06—001-JSC. 2004 Activities
-—-_
APCF- microgravity: a way to more accurate three dimensional structures? Sciences in
Camelids Biochimica et Biophysica Acta. 2002; 1599(1-2):1—8. 2002 Microravit
Vergara A, Lorber B, Zagari A, Giege R. Physical aspects of protein
crystal growth investigated with the Advanced Protein Crystallization Physical
APCF- Facility in reduced gravity environments. Acta Crystallographica, Section Sciences in
Camelids D, Biological Crystallography. 2003; 59:2—15. 2003 Microgravity
Vergara A, Lober B, Sauter C, Giege R, Zagari A. Lessons from crystals
grown in the Advanced Protein Crystallization Facility for conventional Physical
APCF- crystallization applied to structural biology. Biophysical Chemistry. 2005; Sciences in
Camelids 118: 1 02—1 12. 2005 Microgravity
Berisio R, Vitagliano L, Vergara A, Sorrentino G, Mazzarella L, Zagari A.
Crystallization of the collagen-Iike polypeptide (PPG)10 aboard the
International Space Station. 2. Comparison of crystal quality by X—ray Physical
APCF- diffraction. Acta Crystallographica, Section D, Biological Crystallography. Sciences in
PPG10 2002; 58:1695—1699. 2002 Microgravity
Vergara A, Corvino E, Sorrentino G, Piccolo C, Tortora A, Caritenuto L,
Mazzarella L, Zagari A. Crystallization of the collagen-Iike polypeptide
(PPG)10 aboard the International Space Station. 1. Video observation. Physical
APCF- Acta Crystallographica, Section D, Biological Crystallography. 2002; Sciences in
PPG10 58:1690—1694. 2002 Micro. ravit
Castagnolo D, Piccolo C, Carotenuto L, Vegara A, Zagari A. Crystalization
of the collagen-Iike polypeptide (PPG)10 aboard the International Space
Station. 3. Analysis of residual acceleration-induced motion. Acta Physical
APCF- Crystallographica, Section D, Biological Crystallography. 2003; Sciences in
PPG10 59(pt4):773—776. 2003 Microgravity
236

"
"245","PAYLOAD CITATION YEAR DISCIPLINE

Lu PJ, Weitz DA, Foale MC, Fincke M, Chiao LN, Meyer WV, Owens JC,

Hoffmann MI, Sicker RJ, Rogers R, Havenhill MA, Anzalone SM, Yee H.

Microgravity Phase Separation near the Critical Point in Attractive Physical
BCAT-3-4- Colloids. 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit. Reno, Nev. Sciences in
GP Jan 8 — 11, 2007; A|AA-2007-1152. 2007 Microravit

Weislogel MM. Preliminary Results from the Capillary Flow Experiment

Aboard ISS: The Moving Contact Line Boundary Condition. Proceedings Physical

of the 43ml AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nev. Sciences in
CFE Jan 10 — 13, 2005; AIAA 2005-1439. 2005 Micro-ravit

Weislogel MM, Jensen R, Klatte J, Dreyer M. Interim Results from the

Capillary Flow Experiment Aboard ISS; the Moving Contact Line Physical

Boundary Condition. 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit. Sciences in
CFE Reno, Nev. Jan 8 — 11, 2007; A|AA-2007-747. 2007 Micro-ravit

Weislogel MM, Jensen RM, Klatte J, Dreyer ME. The Capillary Flow

Experiments aboard ISS: Moving Contact Line Experiments and Physical

Numerical Analysis. 46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Sciences in
CFE Reno, Nev. 2008, 7 — 10 Jan; AIAA 2008-816. 2008 Micro-ravit

Weislogel MM, Jensen RM, Chen Y, Collicott S, Bunnell CT, Klatte J,

Dreyer ME. Postflight summary of the Capillary Flow Experiments aboard Physical

the International Space Station, No. |AC-08-A2.6.A8, 59th International Sciences in
CFE Astronautical Conress—2008, Glasow, Scotland, Sep 29—Oct 3, 2008. 2008 Microravit

Chen Y, Jensen RM, Weislogel MM, Collicott SH. Capillary Wetting Physical

Analysis of the CFE-Vane Gap Geometry. 46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Sciences in
CFE Meetino and Exhibit, Reno, Nev. 2008, 7 — 10 Jan; AIAA 2008-817. 2008 Micro-ravit

Vallazza M, Banumathi S, Perbandt M, Moore K, DeLucas L, Betzel C,

Erdmann V. Crystallization and Structure Analysis of Thermus flavus 58 Physical

rRNA helix B. Acta Crystallographica, Section D, Biological Sciences in
CPCG-H Cr stallo-raph . 2002; 58:1700—1703. 2002 Micro-ravit

Krauspenhaar R, Rypniewski W, Kalkura N, Moore K, DeLucas L, Stoeva

S, Mikhailov A, VoelterW, Betzel C. Crystallisation under microgravity of

mistletoe lectin I from Viscum album with adenine monophosphate and Physical

the crystal structure at 1.9 angstrom resolution. Acta Crystallographica, Sciences in
CPCG-H Section D, Bioloical C stalloraph . 2002; 58:1704—1707. 2002 Microravit

Nardini M, Spano S, Cericola C, Pesce A, Damonte G, Luini A, Corda D,

Bolognesi M. Crystallization and preliminary X—ray diffraction analysis of Physical

brefeldin A-ADP ribosylated substrate (BARS). Acta Crystallographica, Sciences in
CPCG-H Section D, Biological Crystallography. 2002; 58:1068—1070. 2002 Microravit

Miele AE, Federici L, Sciara G, Draghi F, Brunori M, Vallone B. Analysis

of the effect of microgravity on protein crystal quality: the case of a Physical

myoglobin triple mutant. Acta Crystallographica, Section D, Biological Sciences in
CPCG-H Crystallography. 2004; D59: 928—988. 2004 Microgravity

Kammer D, Genau A, Voorhees PW, Duval WM, Hawersaat RW,

Hickman JM, Lorik T, Hall DG, Frey CA. Coarsening In Solid-Liquid Physical

Mixtures: A Reflight. 46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Sciences in
CSLM-2 Reno, Nev. 2008, 7 — 10 Jan; AIAA 2008-813. 2008 Microoravit

Weitz D, Bailey A, Manley A, Prasad V, Christianson R, Sankaran S,

Doherty M, Jankovsky A, Lorik T, Shiley W, Bowen J, Kurta C, Eggers J,

Gasser U, Serge P, Cipelletti L, Schofield A, Pusey P. Results From the Physical

Physics of Colloids Experiment on ISS. NASA TM. 2002; 2002- Sciences in
EXPPCS 212011:|AC-02-J.6.04. 2002 Micro ravit

Manley S, Cipelletti L, Trappe V, Bailey AE, Christianson RJ, Gasser U,

Prasad V, Segre PN, Doherty MP, Sankaran S, Jankovsky AL, Shiley B, Physical

Bowen J, Eggers J, Kurta C, Lorik T, Weitz DA. Limits to Gelation in Sciences in
EXPPCS Colloidal Aggregation. Physical Review Letters. 2004; 93(10):108302. 2004 Microgravity

237

"
"246","Manley S, Davidovitch B, Davies NR, Cipelletti L, Bailey AE, Christianson
RJ, Gasser U, Prasad V, Segre PN, Dohert MP, Sankaran S, Jankovsky
AL, Shiley B, Bowen J, Eggers J, Kurta C, Lorik T, Weitz DA. Time- Physical
Dependent Strength of Colloidal Gels. The American Physical Society — Sciences in
EXPPCS Physical Review Letters. 2005; 95(4);O48302(4). 2005 Micro-ravit
Bailey AE, Poon WC, Christianson RJ, Schofield AB, Gasser U, Prasad V,
Manley S, Segre PN, Cipelletti L, Meyer WV, Doherty MP, Sankaran S,
Jankovsky AL, Shiley WL, Bowen JP, Eggers JC, Kurta C, Lorik T Jr,
Pusey PN, Weitz DA. Spinodal decomposition in a model colloid-polymer Physical
mixture in microgravity. Physical Review Letters. 2007;Nov 16; Sciences in
EXPPCS 99 20 :205701. 2007 Microravit
Doherty MP, Bailey AE, Jankovsky AL, Lorik T. Physics of Colloids in Physical
Space: Flight Hardware operations on ISS. AIAA 2002-0762, 40th Sciences in
EXPPCS Aerospace Sciences meetin, Jan 14—17, 2002, Reno, Nev. 2002 Microravit
Ethridge E, KauklerW, Antar B. Preliminary Results of the Fluid Merging
Viscosity Measurement Space Station Experiment. Proceedings of the Physical
44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nev. Jan 9 — Sciences in
FMVM 12, 2006; AIAA 2006-1142. 2006 Microravit
Antar BN, Ethridge E, Lehman D. Fluid Merging Viscosity Measurement
(FMVM) Experiment on the International Space Station. 45th AIAA Physical
Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit. Reno, Nev. Jan 8 — 11, 2007; Sciences in
FMVM A|AA-2007-1151. 2007 Micro ravit
n—-_
WF; Johnson, WL. Foaming of Amorphous Metals Approached the Limit Sciences in
of Microgravity Foaming, J. Adv. Materials, v40, no 1 (2008) 7-11 2008 Micro-ravit
Vasquez PA, Furst EM, Agui J, Williams J, Pettit D, Lu E. Structural
Transitions of Magnetoghreological Fluids in Microgravity. 46th AIAA Physical
Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nev. 2008, 7—10 Jan; Sciences in
InSPACE AIAA 2008-815. 2008 Microgravity
Pojman JA. Miscible Fluids in Microgravity (MFMG): A Zero-Upmass
Experiment on the International Space Station. Proceedings of the 43rd Physical
AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nev. Jan 10—13, Sciences in
2005; AIAA 2005-718. 2005 Micro ravit
M—I-
(MFMG): A Zero-Upmass Investigation on the International Space Sciences in
Station,"" Microgravity Sci. Tech. 2007, XIX, 33—41. 2007 Microgravity
Barnes CL, Snell EH, Kundrot CE. Thaumatin crystallization aboard the
International Space Station using liquid-quuid diffusion in the Enhanced Physical
Gaseous Nitrogen Dewar (EGN). Acta Crystallographica, Section D, Sciences in
PCG-EGN Biological Crystallography. 2002; 58(Pt 5): 751—760. 2002 Microgravity
Ciszak E, Hammons AS, Hong YS. Use of Capillaries for Macromolecular Physical
-—--
PCG-EGN 2(3):235—238. 2002 Microgravity
Vahedi-Faridi A, Porta J, Borgstahl G. Improved three-dimensional growth
of manganese superoxide dismutase crystals on the International Space Physical
PCG-STES- Station. Acta Crystallographica, Section D, Biological Crystallography. Sciences in
MM 2003;59:385—388. 2003 Micro-ravit
Grugel RN, Anilkumar AV. Bubble Formation and Transport during
Microgravity Materials Processing: Model Experiments on the Space Physical
Station. Proceedings of the 42nOI AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Sciences in
Exhibit, Reno, Nev. Jan 5—8, 2004; AIAA 2004-0627. 2004 Microravit
238

"
"247","Grugel RN, Anilkumar AV, Lee CP. Direct Observation of Pore Formation

and bubble mobility during controlled melting and re-solidification in

microgravity, Solidification Processes and Microstructures. A Symposium Physical

in Honor of Wilfried Kurz. The Metallurgical Society, Warrendale, Penn. Sciences in

2004; 111—116. 2004 Microgravity

Strutzenberg LL, Grugel RN, Trivedi R. Observation of an Aligned Gas -

Solid Eutectic during Controlled Directional Solidification aboard the

International Sgace Station — Comgarison with Ground-based Studies. Physical

Proceedings of the 42n AIAA Aerosgace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Sciences in

RenoI Nev. 2005; AIAA 2005-919. 2005 Micro-ravit

Grugel RN, Anilkumar AV, Cox MC. Morphological Evolution of Directional

Solidification Interface in Microgravity: An Analysis of Model Experiments

Performed on the International Space Station. Proceedings of the 43rd Physical

AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nev. Jan 10—13, Sciences in

2005; AIAA 2005-917. 2005 Micro ravit

Grugel RN, Luz P, Smith G, Spivey R, Jeter L, Gillies D, Hua F, Anilkumar

AV. Materials research conducted aboard the International Space Station:

Facilities overview, operational procedures, and experimental outcomes. Physical

Acta Astronautica. 2008; 62;491—498 (Also presented at the 57th Sciences in

International Astronautical Conress |AC-06-A2.2.10 . 2008 Microravit

Spivey RA, Gilley S, Ostrogorsky A, Grugel R, Smith G, Luz P. SUBSA

and PFMI Transparent Furnace Systems Currently in use in the Physical

International Space Station Microgravity Science Glovebox. 41St Sciences in

Aerospace Sciences Meetin and Exhibit. 2003; AIAA 2003-1362. 2003 Microravit

Ostrogorsky A, Marin C, Churilov A, Volz M, BonnerWA, Spivey RA,

Smith G. Solidification Using the Baffle in Sealed Ampoules. 41St Physical

Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nev. 2003; AIAA 2003- Sciences in

1309. 2003 Microgravity

Churilov AV, Ostrogorsky AG. Model of Tellurium- and Zinc-Doped Indium

Antimonide Solidification in Space. Journal of Thermophysics and Heat Physical

Transfer. 2005; 19(4);542—547 (Also published at the 42nOI AIAA Meeting, Sciences in

2004-1388, 2004). 2004 Microgravity

Churilov AV, Ostrogorsky AG. Solidification of Te and Zn doped |th in

space. 42nOI AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nev. Physical

2004; AIAA 2004-1388 (Also published in the Journal of Thermophysics Sciences in

and Heat Transfer, 19(4);547-547, 2005). 2005 Microgravity

-—-_

Characterization of zeolite Beta grown in microgravity. Microporous and Sciences in
ZCG Mesoporous Materials. 2004; 71 :1—9. 2004 Micro-ravit

Bushnell GS, Fialho IJ, Allen JL, Quraishi N. Microgravity Flight

Characterization of the International Space Station Active Rack Isolation

System. AIAA Microgravity Measurements Group Meeting, The World Technology
ARIS-ICE Space Congress, Houston. Oct 10 — 11, 2002. 2002 Development

Bushnell GS, Fialho IJ, McDavid T, Allen JL, Quraishi N. Ground And On-

Orbit Command and Data Handling Architectures For The Active Rack

Isolation System Microgravity Flight Experiment. AIAA 53rd International

Astronautical Congress, The World Space Congress, Houston. Oct 10 — Technology
ARIS-ICE 19, 2002; IAC-02-J.5.07. 2002 Development

Fialho IJ, Bushnell GS, Allen JL, Quraishi N. Taking H-infinity To The

International Space Station: Design, Implementation and On-orbit

Evaluation of Robust Controllers For Active Microgravity Isolation. AIAA Technology
ARIS-ICE Guidance, Navigation and Control Conference, Austin, Texas. Aug 2003. 2003 Development

239

"
"248","PAYLOAD CITATION YEAR DISCIPLINE
Urban D, Griffin D, Ruff G, Cleary T, Yang J, Mulholland G, Yuan Z.
Detection of Smoke from Microgravity Fires. Proceedings of the
International Conference on Environmental Systems. 2005; 2005-01- Technology
DAFT 2930. 2005 Development
Grugel R, Cotton LJ, Segre PN, Ogle JA, Funkhouser G, Parris F, Murphy
L, Gillies D, Hua F, Anilkumar AV. The In-Space Soldering Investigation
(ISSI): Melting and Solidification Experiments Aboard the International
Space Station. Proceedings of the 44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Technology
Meetino and Exhibit, Reno, Nev. Jan 9 — 12, 2006; AIAA 2006-521. 2006 Development
Davis L. Economical and Reliable Adaptive Disturbance Cancellation.
AFRL-VS—TR-2002-1118. Sep 2002 ;Vol. I — ||: Pt. 1—3 (DoD clearance is Technology
MACE-ll needed to view this paper . 2002 Development
Ninneman R, Founds D, Davis L, Greeley S, King J. Middeck Active
Control Experiment Reflight (MACE II) Program: Adventures in Space.
AIAA Space 2003 Conference and Exhibition, Long Beach, Calif. 2003; Technology
MACE-ll AIAA 2003-6243. 2003 Development
DeLombard R, Kelly EM, Foster, K, Hrovat K, McPherson, KM; Schafer,
CP. Microgravity Acceleration Environment of the International Space Technology
Station, AIAA 2001 -51 13. 2001 Development
DeLombard R, Hrovat K, Kelly EM, McPherson K, Jules K. An Overview
MAMS and of the Microgravity Environment of the International Space Station Under Technology
SAMS-ll Construction. A|AA-2002-0608. 2002 Development
Del Basso S, Laible M, O'Keefe E, Steelman A, Scheer S, Thampi S.
Capitalization of Early ISS Data for Assembly Complete Microgravity
MAMS and Performance. Proceedings of the 40th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting Technology
SAMS-ll and Exhibit, Reno, Nev. Jan 14 — 17, 2002; AIAA 2002-606. 2002 Development
Jules K, McPherson K, Hrovat K, Kelly E, Reckart T. A Status on the
Characterization of the Microgravity Environment of the International
MAMS and Space Station. 54th International Astronautical Congress, 29 Sep to 3 Oct Technology
SAMS-ll 2003, Bremen, Germany, |AC-03-J.6.01. 2003 Development
MAMS and DeLombard R, Kelly EM, Hrovat K, McPherson. Microgravity Environment Technology
SAMS-ll of the International Space Station. A|AA-2004-125. 2004 Development
Jules K, Hrovat K, Kelly EM. The Microgravity Environment of the
MAMS and International Space Station during the Buildup Period: Increments 2 to 8. Technology
SAMS-ll 55th Int. Astronautical Congress 2004 Vancouver, Canada, |AC-04-J.6.01. 2004 Development
DeLombard R, Hrovat K, Kelly E, Humphreys B. Interpreting the
International Space Station Microgravity Environment. 43rd AIAA
MAMS and Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, 10—13 Jan 2005, Reno, Nev., Technology
SAMS-ll AIAA 2005-727. 2005 Development
DeLombard R, Kelly EM, Hrovat K, Nelson ES, Pettit DR. Motion of Air
Bubbles in Water Subjected to Microgravity Accelerations. Proceedings of
MAMS and the 43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nev. Jan Technology
SAMS-ll 10 — 13, 2005; AIAA 2005-722. 2005 Development
Walters RJ, Garner JC, Lam SN, Vazquez JA, Braun WR, Ruth RE,
Warne JH, Lorentzen JR, Messenger SR, Bruninga Cdr R, Jenkins PP,
Flatico JM, Wilt DM, Piszczor MF, Greer LC, Krasowski MJ. Forward
Technology Solar Cell Experiment First On-Orbit Data, 19th Space
Photovoltaic Research and Technology Conference, (2007)NASA/CP- Technology
2007-214494, 79—94. 2007 Development
Krasowski M, Greer L, Flatico J, Jenkins P, Spina D. Big Science, Small-
budget Space Experiment Package aka MISSE-5: A Hardware and
Software perspective. 19th Space Photovoltaic Research and Technology Technology
Conference, (2007)NASA/CP-2007-214494, 95—117. 2007 Development
240

"
"249","PAYLOAD CITATION YEAR DISCIPLINE

M Kinard WH. Materials Experiment Flown on MISSE 5.2007 National - Technology
Space & Missile Materials Symposium. 2007 Development
Finckenor M, Zweiner JM, Pippin G, Thermal Control Materials on MISSE-
5 with Comparison to Earlier Flight Data, 25—29 Jun 2007; Keystone, Technology
Colo.; 2007 National Space & Missile Materials 8 mposium. 2007 Development
Simburger EJ, Matsumoto JH, Giants TW, Garcia III A, Liu S, Rawal SP,
Perry AR, Marshall CH, John K. Lin JK, Scarborough SE, Curtis HB,
Kerslake TW, Peterson TT. Development of a thin film solar cell
interconnect for the PowerSphere concept, Materials Science and Technology
Engineering, Volume 116, Issue 3, 15 Feb 2005, pp. 321-325. 2005 Development
Walters RJ, Garner JC, Lam SN, Vasquez JA, Braun WR, Ruth RE,
Warner JH, Lorentzen JR, Messenger SR, Bruninga CDR R, Jenkins PP,
Flatico JM, Wilt DM, Piszczor MF, Greer LC, Krasowski MJ. Materials on
the International Space Station Experiment—5, Forward Technology Solar
Cell Extperiment: First On-Orbit Data, Conference Record of the 2006
IEEE 4 h World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, May Technology
2006; Volume 2, pp. 1951—1954. 2006 Development
Wilt DM. Clark EB, Ringel SA, Andre CL, Smith MA, Scheiman DA,
Jenkins PP, MaurerWF, Fitzgerald EA, Walters RJ, et al. LEO Flight
Testing of GaAs on Si Solar Cells Aboard MISSE 5. 19th European Technology
Photovoltaic Solar Ener Conference and Exhibition. 2006 Development
Pippin G, deGroh K, Finckenor M, Minton T. Post-Flight Analysis of
Selected Fluorocarbon and Other Thin Film Polymer Specimens Flown on
MISSE-5, 25—29 Jun 2007; Keystone, Colo.; 2007 National Space & Technology
Missile Materials 8 mposium. 2007 Development
deGroh K, Finckenor M, Minton T, Brunsvold, A, Pippin G. Post-Flight
Analysis of Selected Fluorocarbon and Other Thin Film Polymer
Specimens Flown on MISSE-5. 25—29 Jun 2007; Keystone, Colo.; 2007 Technology
National Space & Missile Materials 8 mposium. 2007 Development
Finckenor MM. The Materials on International Space Station Experiment
(MISSE): First Results from MSFC Investigations. Proceedings of the 44th
AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nev. Jan 9—12, Technology
2006; AIAA 2006-472. 2006 Development
Snyder A, Banks BA, Waters DL. Undercutting Studies of Protected
Kapton H Exposed to In-Space and Ground-Based Atomic Oxygen. NASA Technology
TM-2006—214387 2006 . 2006 Development
de Groh K, Banks B. MISSE PEACE Polymers Atomic Oxygen Erosion Technology
Results. NASA/TM-2006—214482 (2006). 2006 Development
Harvey GA Kinard WH , MISSE 1 and 2 Tray Temperature
measurements. Proceedings of MISSE Post Retrieval Conference and the Technology
2006 National Space & Missile Materials 8 mposium, Orlando, Fla. 2006 Development
de Groh K , Banks B. Materials International Space Station Experiment
(MISSE) Polymers Degradation. 9th International Conference on
""Protection of Materials and Structures from Space Environment,"" May Technology
20—23, 2008, Toronto, Canada. 2008 Development
de Groh K, Banks B, StamblerAH, Roberts LM, Inoshita KE, Barbagallo
CE. Ground-Laboratory to In-Space Atomic Oxygen Correlation for the
PEACE Polymers, 9th International Conference on ""Protection of Materials
and Structures from Space Environment,"" May 20—23, 2008, Toronto, Technology
Canada. 2008 Development
Tomczak SJ, Marchant D, Mabry JM, Vij V, Yandek GR, Minton TK,
Brunsvold AL, Wright ME, Petteys BJ, Guenthner AJ. Studies of P088-
Polyimides Flown on MISSE-1. 25—29 Jun 2007; Keystone, Colo., 2007 Technology
National Space & Missile Materials Symposium. 2007 Development

241

"
"250","Juhl SB, Akinlemibola B, Kasten L, Vaia R. Durability of
Poly(Caprolactam) (Nylon 6) and Poly(Caprolactam) Nanocomposites in
Low Earth Orbit. 25—29 Jun 2007; Keystone, Colo., 2007 National Space Technology
& Missile Materials Symposium. 2007 Development
Rice N, Shepp A, Haghighat R, Connell J. Durable TOR Polymers on
MISSE, 25—29 Jun 2007; Keystone, Colo., 2007 National Space & Missile Technology
Materials 8 mposium. 2007 Development
Watson KA, Ghose S, Lillehei PT, Smith Jr JG, Connell JW, Effect of LEO
Exposure on Aromatic Polymers Containing Phenylphosphine Oxide Technology
Groups, SAMPE Proceedins Vol. 52, Jun 6 2007, Baltimore, Md. 2007 Development
Urban DL, Ruff GA, Brooker JE, Cleary T, Yang J, Mulholland G, Yuan Z-
G. Spacecraft Fire Detection: Smoke Properties and Transport in Low-
Gravity. 46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nev. Technology
2008, 7 — 10 Jan; AIAA 2008-806. 2008 Development
Clinical
Nutrition Smith S, Zwart SR, Block G, Rice BL, Davis—Street JE. The nutritional Results
Assess- status of astronauts is altered after Iong-term space flight aboard the from ISS
ment International Space Station. Journal of Nutrition. 2005; 135(3):437—443. 2005 Operations
Clinical
Nutrition Results
Assess- Smith SM, Zwart SR. Nutrition issues for space exploration. Acta from ISS
ment Astronautica. 2008; 63: 609—613. 2008 Operations
Smith S, Zwart, SR, Block G, Rice BL, Davis—Street JE. The Nutritional
Status of Astronauts is Altered After Long-Term Space Flight Aboard the
Clinical International Space Station, in Cavanagh P, Rice AJ (eds), Bone Loss
Nutrition During Spaceflight: Etiology, Countermeasures, and Implications for Bone Results
Assess- Health on Earth. Cleveland Clinic Press, Cleveland, Ohio (2007), pp. 133— from ISS
ment 147. 2007 Operations
Plumlee D, Mudgett PD, Schultz JR. Chemical Sampling and Analysis of
Environ- ISS Potable Water: Expeditions 1—3. 32nOI International Conference on Results
mental Environmental Systems, San Antonio, Texas. 2002; SAE Technical Paper from ISS
Monitoring 2002-01-2537. 2002 Operations
Plumlee D, Mudgett P, Schultz J. ISS Potable Water Sampling and
Environ- Chemical Analysis: Expeditions 4 & 5. 33rCll International Conference on Results
mental Environmental Systems, Vancouver, Canada. Jul 2003; SAE Technical from ISS
Monitoring Paper 2003-01-2401. 2003 Operations
James J, Limero T, Beck 8, Martin B, Covington P, Boyd J, Peters R.
Toxicological Assessment of the International Space Station Atmosphere
Environ- with Emphasis on Metox Canister Regeneration. 33rCll International Results
mental Conference on Environmental Systems, Vancouver, Canada. Jul 2003; from ISS
Monitoring SAE Technical Paper 2003-01-2647. 2003 Operations
Perry J, Peterson B. Cabin air quality Dynamics on Board the
_-
mental Environmental Systems, Vancouver, Canada. Jul 2003; SAE Technical from ISS
Monitoring Paper 2003-01-2650. 2003 Operations
Environ- Castro VA, Thrasher AN, Healy M, Ott CM, Pierson DL. Microbial Results
-—--
Monitoring Station. Microbial Ecology. 2004; 47:119—126. 2004 Operations
Environ- La Duc MT, Sumner R, Pierson D, Venkat P, Venkateswaran K. Evidence Results
_-
Monitoring reason for concern? Habitation. 2004; 10:39—48. 2004 Operations
242

"
"251","Vesper SJ, Wong W, Kuo CM, Pierson DL. Mold species in dust from the
Environ- International Space Station identified and quantified by moId-specific Results
mental quantitative PCR. Research in Microbiology, (2008) doi from ISS
Monitoring 10.1016/j.resmic.2008.06.001. 2008 Operations

M—I-
Goodman JR. International Space Station Acoustics. Noise Conference, from ISS
Cleveland Ohio. Jun 23 —25, 2003 2003 Operations
Results

Pilkinton GD. ISS Acoustics Mission Support. Noise Conference, from ISS

Cleveland, Ohio. Jun 23 —25, 2003. 2003 Operations

Hall PS, Past and Current Practice in Space Nutrition, in Cavanagh P,

Rice AJ (eds), Bone Loss During Spaceflight: Etiology, Countermeasures, Results
Other ISS and Implications for Bone Health on Earth. Cleveland Clinic Press, from ISS
Research Cleveland, Ohio (2007), pp. 125—132. 2007 Operations

Schmidle W, Alred J, Mikatarian R, Soares C, Miles E, Howorth |, Mishina

L, Murtazan R. Characterization of On-orbit US Lab Condensate Vacuum Results
Other ISS Venting, Int Astronautical Congress, 10—19 Oct 2002, Houston, |AF-02- from ISS
Research T.P.06. 2002 Operations

Soares C, Mikatarian R, Scharf R, Miles E. International Space Station

1A/R - 6A External Contamination Observations and Surface Results
Other ISS Assessment. Int. Symposium on Optical Science and Technology, SPIE from ISS
Research 47th Annual Meetin, Jul 7—11 2002, Seattle, Wash. 2002 Operations

D'Aunno DS, Dougherty AH, DeBIock HF, Meck JV. Effect of Short- and Results
Other ISS Long-Duration Spaceflight on QTC Intervals in Healthy Astronauts. The from ISS
Research American Journal of Cardiology. 2003; 91 :494—497. 2003 Operations

Alred J, Boeder P, Mikatarian R, Pnakop C, Schmidl W. Modeling of the Results

-—--

Research in Space, ESTEC Noordwi'k, Netherlands, Jun 2003 2003 . 2003 Operations

Koontz S, Boeder PA, Pankop C, Reddell B. The Ionizing Radiation

Environment on the International Space Station: Performance vs. Results
Other ISS expectations for avionics and materials,, in Radiation Effects Data from ISS
Research Workshog, 2005, IEEE, 11-15 July 2005, p 110-116 2005 Operations

Schmidl W, Mikatarian R, Lam C-W, West B, Buchanan V, Dee L., Baker

D., Koontz 8. Fuel Oxidizer Reaction Products (FORP) Contamination of

Service Module and Release of N-nitrosodimethylamine in a humid

environment from crew EVA suits contaminated with FORP, in Space Results
Other ISS Technology Proceedings, V. 6, Protection of Materials and Structurs from from ISS
Research the Space Environment, Springer Netherlands , 2006, p. 193—204. 2004? Operations

Schmidl W, Visentine J, and Mikatarian R. Mitigation of Damage to the

International Space Station (ISS) from water dumps, in Space Technology Results
Other ISS Proceedings, V. 6, Protection of Materials and Structurs from the Sgace from ISS
Research Environment , Spriner Netherlands , 2006, pp. 93-105. 2004? Operations

Pankop C, Alred J, Boeder P. Mitigation of thruster plume-induced erosion

of ISS sensitive hardware, in Protection of Materials and Structures from

the Space Environment. Edited by Jacob |. Kleiman, Integrity Testing

Laboratory Inc. Markham, Toronto, Canada. ISBN 978—1-4020-4319-2 (e- Results
Other ISS book). Series: Space Technology Proceedings, Springer, Dordrecht, from ISS
Research 2006, p. 71. 2006 Operations

Boeder P, Mikatarian R, Lorenz MJ, Koontz S, Albyn K, Finckenor M.

Effects of Space Environment Exposure on the Blocking Force of Silicone

Adhesive, in Protection of Materials and Structures from the Space

Environment. Edited by Jacob |. Kleiman, Integrity Testing Laboratory Inc. Results
Other ISS Markham, Toronto, Canada. ISBN 978—1-4020-4319—2 (e-book). Series: from ISS
Research Space Technology Proceedings, Springer, Dordrecht, 2006, p. 295. 2006 Operations

243

"
"252","PAYLOAD CITATION YEAR DISCIPLINE
de Groh KK, Dever JA, SnyderA, Kaminski S, McCarthy CE, Rapoport
AL, Rucker RN. ""Solar Effects on Tensile and Optical Properties of
Hubble Space Telescope Silver—Teflon Insulation,"" in “Materials in Results
Other ISS Extreme Environments,” edited by Mailhiot C, Saganti PB, Ila D (Mater. from ISS
Research Res. Soc. 8 mp. Proc. 929, Warrendale, Penn., 2006 , 0929—II05-08. 2006 Operations
Boeder PA, Visentine JT, Shaw CG, Carniglia CK, Alred JW, Soares CE. Results
Other ISS Effect of silicone contaminant film on the transmittance properties of AR- from ISS
Research coated fused silica., SPIE-04, 2004. 2004 Operations
Plasma Reddell B, Alred J, Kramer L, Mikatarian R. Analysis of ISS Plasma Results
Interaction Interaction. Proceedings of the 44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting from ISS
Model and Exhibit, Reno, Nev. Jan 9—12, 2006; AIAA 2006-865. 2006 Operations
Saturday Results
Morning Grunsfeld JM. Shooting the Heavens from Space. Sky and Telescope. from ISS
Science 2003; 128—132. 2003 Operations
Saturday Results
Morning Love SG, Pettit DR. Fast, Repeatable Clumping of Solid Particles in from ISS
Science Microravit . Lunar and Planeta Science XXXV. 2004; 1119. 2004 Operations
Tytell D. Building Planets in Plastic Bags. Sky and Telescope. Apr 13,
Saturday 2004 [http://www.skyandtelescope.com/news/3308986.html?page=1&c=y Results
Morning ]. from ISS
Science 2004 Operations
Kang W, Bedrossian N. Pseudospectral Optimal Control Theory Makes Results
Debut Flight, Saves NASA 1M dollars in Under Three Hours. Society for from ISS
Industrial and Applied Mathematics News. 2007, Sep; 40(7). 2007 Operations
Bedrossian N, Bhatt S, Lammers M, Nguyen L. Zero Propellant Maneuver Results
Flight Results for 180 deg ISS Rotation. 20th International Symposium on from ISS
Space Fliht D namics. 2007, Sep; NASA/CP-2007-214158. 2007 Operations
Bhatt 8. Optimal Reorientation of Spacecraft Using Only Control Moment Results
Gyroscopes. Master’s Thesis, Department of Computational and Applied from ISS
Mathematics, Rice Universit , Houston. 2007. 2007 Operations
Bedrossian N, Bhatt S, Lammers M, Nguyen L, Zhang Y. First Ever Flight Results
Demonstration of Zero Propellant Maneuver Attitude Control Concept. from ISS
AIAA GN and C Conference. 2007, Aug. AIAA Paper 2007-6734. 2007 Operations
244

"
"253","APPENDIX C: ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
ACK Acoustic Countermeasure Kit
ADF Avian Development Facility
ADF-Otolith Development and Function of the Avian Otolith System in Normal and Altered Gravity
Environments
ADF-Skeletal Skeletal Development in Embryonic Quail 0n the ISS
ADUM Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Microgravity
AdVAsc Advanced Astroculture
AEA ancillary equipment area
AEM animal enclosure module
AFRL Air Force Research Laboratory
ALARA as low as reasonably achievable
ALS advanced life support
ALTEA Anomalous Long-term Effects in Astronauts’ Central Nervous System
ANDE Atmospheric Neutral Density Experiment
ANITA Analyzing Interferometer for Ambient Air
AO atomic oxygen
APCF Advanced Protein Crystallization Facility
APS Antibiotic Production in Space
ARIS Active Rack Isolation System
ARISS Amateur Radio on the International Space Station
ASD air supply diffuser
ASI Italian Space Agency
ATU audio terminal unit
BARS brefeldin A-ADP ribosylated substrate
BBND Bonner Ball Neutron Detector
BBT Beacon-Beacon Test
BCAT-3-4-CP Binary Colloidal Alloy Test -3 and 4: Critical Point
bFGF basic ﬁbroblast growth factor
BMD bone mineral density
BP/ECG blood pressure/electrocardiograph
BPS Biomass Production System
BSTC biotechnology specimen temperature controller
CBOSS Cellular Biotechnology Operations Support System
CBPD continuous blood pressure device
CBTM Commercial Biomedical Testing Module
CCM Cell Culture Module
CCISS Cardiovascular and Cerebrovascular Control on Return from ISS
cDNA complementary deoxyribonucleic acid
CDRA carbon dioxide removal assembly
CEA carcinoembryonic antigen
CeMM C. elegans maintenance medium
CEO Crew Earth Observations
CEV crew exploration vehicle
CEVIS Cycle Ergometer With Vibration Isolation System
CFE Capillary Flow Experiment
CGBA Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus
CHab C. elegans habitat
CHAMP challenging minisatellite payload
CIR combustion integrated rack
CL Contact Line
cm2 square centimeter
CMG control moment gyroscope
245

"
"254","CNRS Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque

CNS central nervous system

CO carbon monoxide

C02 carbon dioxide

COTS commercial off-the-shelf

CPCG-H Commercial Generic Protein Crystal Growth-High-density

CPDS charged-particle directional spectrometer

CSI-Ol Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus Science Insert-Ol

CSI-OZ Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus Science Insert-OZ

CSLM-Z Coarsening in Solid Liquid Mixtures—Z

CT computed tomography

CTP citrate transporter protein

DAFT Dust and Aerosol Measurement Feasibility Test

DCAM Diffusion-Controlled Crystallization Apparatus for Microgravity

DcoH 4a-hydroxy-tetrahydropterin dehydratase

DCPCG Dynamically Controlled Protein Crystal Growth

DCS decompression sickness

DEXA dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry

DGGE denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis

DHEA dihydroergocryptine

DHEAS dehydroepiandrosterone

DIDO digital input digital output

DLR Deutsches Zentrum fur Luft und Raumfahrt

DNA deoxyribonucleic acid

DOD Department of Defense

DOSMAP Dosimetric Mapping

DOSTEL silicon dosimetry telescope

DU detector unit

DUST Dust and Aerosol Measurement Feasibility Test

E. coli Escherichia coli

EAP Educator Astronaut Program

EarthKAM Earth Knowledge Acquired by Middle School Students

EBV Epstein-Barr Virus

ECLSS Environmental Control and Life Support System

EDA education demonstration activity

EDTA ethylenediamine-tetraacetic acid

EEG electroencephalograph

EGN enhanced gaseous nitrogen

EMA epithelial membrane antigen

EMC elastic memory composite

EMCH elastic memory composite hinge

EMCS European Modular Cultivation System

EMG electromyography

EMU extravehicular mobility unit

EPO Education Payload Operations

ESA European Space Agency

ESM experiment support module

ETS Engelham’ titanosilicate structure

EU endotoxin unit

eV electron volt

EVA extravehicular activity

EVARM EVA radiation monitoring

EXPPCS EXPRESS Physics of Colloids in Space

EXPRESS Expedite the Processing of Experiments to Space Station
246

"
"255","FCal Fence Calibration
FDA Food and Drug Administration
FDI Fluid Dynamics Investigation
FFQ Food Frequency Questionnaire
FIR ﬂuids integrated rack
FIT Fungal Pathogenesis, Tumorigenesis, and Effects of Host Immunity in Space
FMVM Fluid Merging Viscosity Measurement
FORP fuel oxidizer reaction product
FPMU ﬂoating potential measurement unit
FPP ﬂoating potential probe
FTSCE Forward Technology Solar Cell Experiment
GAP-FPA Group Activation Pack—Fluid Processing Apparatus
GASMAP gas analyzer system for metabolic analysis physiology
GCR galactic cosmic ray
GDS Gas Delivery System
GHab garden habitat
GOES geostationary operational environmental satellite
HDPCG High-Density Protein Crystal Growth
HDTV high-deﬂnition television
HEPA high-efﬂciency particular accumulator
HiRAP high-resolution accelerometer package
HIV Human Immunodeﬁciency Virus
HPA Hand Posture Analyzer
HRF Human Research Facility
HRP Human Research Program
1AA International Academy of Astronautics
IBMP Institute of Biomedical Problems
ICE ISS Characterization Experiment
ICES International Conference on Environmental Systems
ICF Interior Corner Flow
ICM isothermal containment module
ICU internal cargo unit
IFRECOR l’Initiative Frangaise pour les Récifs Corallines
IGF-l insulin-like growth factor 1
IGRF International Geomagnetic Reference Field
InSb indium antimonide
InSPACE Investigating the Structure of Paramagnetic Aggregates from Colloidal Emulsion
IPY International Polar Year
IRI International Reference Ionosphere
ISR Incoherent Scatter Radar
188 International Space Station
1881 In-space Soldering Experiment
IZECS Improved Zeolite Electronic Control System
J AXA J apan Aerospace Exploration Agency
J ES joint excursion sensor
J SC J ohnson Space Center
K-cit potassium citrate
KCGE Kidney Cell Gene Expression
KSS Karolinska Sleepiness Score
247

"
"256","LAN local area network
LBNP lower body negative pressure
LCD liquid crystal display
LDL low-density lipoprotein
LED light-emitting diode
LEMS lower extremity monitoring suit
LEO 10W Earth orbit
LET linear energy transfer
LFSAF lightweight ﬂexible solar array hinge
LOCAD-PTS Lab-on-a-Chip Application Development-Portable Test System
MAA Mock ANDE Active
MACE-II Middeck Active Control Experiment-II
MAMS Microgravity Acceleration Measurement System
MAUI Maui analysis of upper atmospheric injections
Mb-YQR triple mutant myoglobin
mBAND Multicolor Banding Fluorescence In-Situ Hybridization
MBP multi-body platform
MDU mobile detector unit
MEMS Microelectromechanical System
MEPS Microencapsulation Electrostatic Processing System
MEPSI Microelectromechanical System-based Picosat Inspector
MER Mars exploration rover
MESA miniature electro—static accelerometer
MeV mega electron volt
mFISH Multicolor Fluorescence In-Situ Hybridization
MFMG Miscible Fluids in Microgravity
MISSE Materials International Space Station Experiment
MIT Massachusetts Institute of Technology
ML-I mistletoe lectin-I
MLI multilayer insulation
MMOD micrometeoroid and orbital debris
MnSOD manganese superoxide dismutase
MOBIAS Multiple Orbital Bioreactor With Instrumentation and Automated Sampling
MOSFET metal oxide semiconductor ﬁeld effect transistor
MPV Meerwein-Pohhdorf—Verley
MR magnetorheological
mRNA messenger RNA
MSG microgravity sciences glovebox
MSRR materials science research rack
MSSS Maui Space Surveillance Site
NaCl sodium chloride
NEEMO NASA Extreme Environment Mission Operations
NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
NSSS Navy Space Surveillance System
NTDP nuclear track detectors With and Without converter
OH hydroxide
OMS Orbital Maneuvering System
OPE on-board proﬁciency enhancer
OPG osteoprotegerin
ORZS Optimization of Root Zone Substrates
OUM oxygen uptake measurement
PAM Photoacoustic Analyzer Module
248

"
"257","Pb lead
PCAM Protein Crystallization Apparatus for Microgravity
PCG-EGN Protein Crystal Growth-Enhanced Gaseous Nitrogen
PCG-STES Protein Crystal Growth-Single Locker Thermal Enclosure System
PCR polymerase chain reaction
PCS Physics of Colloids in Space
PCSat Prototype Communications Satellite
PCU plasma conductor unit
PEACE Polymer Erosion and Contamination Experiment
PEC passive experiment container
PESTO Photosynthesis Experiment and System Testing and Operation
PFE periodic ﬁtness evaluation
PFM Pulmonary Function Module
PFMI Pore Formation in Microgravity
PFS Pulmonary Function System
PGBA Plant Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus
PGC plant growth chamber
PIM plasma integration model
PMZ pressurized module 2
PMC polar mesopheric cloud
PMZ Promethazine
POEMS Passive Observatories for Experimental Microbial Systems
PRDXS peroxiredoxin 5
PuFF Pulmonary Function in Flight
PVA polyvinyl alcohol
QCT quantitative computed tomography
QTCMA Quad Tissue Culture Module Assembly
QUS quantiative ultrasound
RAFT radar fence transponder
RAMBO Ram Burn Observations
RANKL receptor activator of NF-B ligand
RCS Reaction Control System
RNA ribonucleic acid
rRNA ribosomal ribonucleic acid
RPA Replication Protein A
RPI Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
RPM revolutions per minute
RTS remote triaxial sensor
RWV rotating wall vessel
SAA South Atlantic Anomaly
SAME Smoke and Aerosol Measurement Experiment
SAMS-II Space Acceleration Measurement Systems—II
SARJ solar array rotary joint
SCN succinonitrile
SDBI Short-duration Biological Investigation
SDL Space Dynamics Laboratory
SDS sodium dodecyl sulfate
SDTO Station Development Test Objective
SeaWiFS sea-Viewing Wide ﬁeld-of-View sensor
SEE single event effect
SEEDS Space Exposed Experiment Development for Students
SEM scanning electron microscope

Space Experiment Module

249

"
"258","SGSM slow growth sample module
Si02 silicon dioxide
SiOX silicon oxide
SLAMMD space linear acceleration mass measurement device
SLM sound level meter
SLR Satellite Laser Ranging
SM Synaptogenesis in Microgravity
Sn tin
SNFM serial network ﬂow monitor
SORGE Soldering in Reduced Gravity Experiment
SPE solar particle event
SPEGIS Streptococcus pneumoniae Expression of Genes in Space
SPENVIS Space Environment Information System
SPHERES Synchronized Position Hold, Engage, Reorient, Experimental Satellites
SSN US. Space Surveillance Network
STEM science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
STES Single-locker Thermal Enclosure System
STP-H2 Space Test Program-HZ
SUBSA Solidiﬁcation Using Bafﬂe in Sealed Ampoules
SV Sievert
TCM tissue culture module
TCS Thermal Control System
TEPC tissue-equivalent proportional counter
TeSS temporary sleep station
TF-FGI total force-foot ground interface
TFS Teaching From Space (Ofﬁce)
TID total ionizing dose
Ti02 titanium dioxide
TLD thermo-luminescence dosimeter
TVIS Treadmill Vibration Isolation System
TVT Technology Validation Test
VEE Venezuelan equine encephalitis
VG Vane Gap
VOA volatile organic analyzer
VTR Video tape recorder
VZV Varicella zoster Virus
WORF Window Observation Research Facility
ZCG Zeolite Crystal Growth
ZPM zero—propellant maneuver
250

"
"259",""
"260","Form A roved

Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and

suggestions for reducmg this burden, to Washington Headquarters Servuces, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davns Highway, Sunte 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302,

and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503.

June 2009 NASA Technical Paper

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 5. FUNDING NUMBERS

International Space Station Science Research Accomplishments During the Assembly Years:

6. AUTHOR(S)

Cynthia A. Evans*; Julie A. R0bins0n*; Judy Tate-Brown**; Tracy Thumm**; J essica

Crespo—Richey**; David Baumann***; J ennifer Rhatigar1>‘“‘“‘<

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION

REPORT NUMBERS

>kOfﬁce 0f the 188 Program Scientists, NASA J ohnson Space Center S-978

>“*Engineering & Science Contract Group

>“”‘NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston, Texas

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSORING/MONITORING

AGENCY REPORT NUMBER

National Aeronautics and Space Administration TP-2009-213146-Revisi0n A
—-

>kNASA J ohnson Space Center

128. DlSTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE
—-

Available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information (CASI)

7115 Standard Drive

Hanover MD 21076-1320 Cate_0r : 99

13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words)

This report summarizes research accomplishments 0n the International Space Station (188) through the ﬁrst 15 Expeditions. When

research programs for early Expeditions were established, ﬁve administrative organizations were executing research on 188:

bioastronautics research, fundamental space biology, physical science, space product development, and space ﬂight. The Vision for

Space Exploration led to changes in NASA's administrative structures, so we have grouped experiments topically by scientiﬁc

themes—human research for exploration, physical and biological sciences, technology development, observing the Earth, and

educating and inspiring the next generation—even when these do not correspond to the administrative structure at the time at which

they were completed. The research organizations at the time at which the experiments ﬂew are preserved in the appendix of this

document. These investigations on the 188 have laid the groundwork for research planning for Expeditions to come. Humans

performing scientiﬁc investigations on 188 serve as a model for the goals of future Exploration missions. The success of a wide variety

of investigations is an important hallmark of early research on 188. Of the investigations summarized here, some are completed with

results released, some are completed with preliminary results, and some remain ongoing.

14. SUBJECT TERMS 15. NUMBER OF 16. PRICE CODE

PAGES

International Space Station; research facilities; bioastronautics; space technology
—--

17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT

OF REPORT OF THIS PAGE OF ABSTRACT

Standard Form 298 (Rev Feb 89) (MS Word Mar 97) NSN 7540-01-280-5500

Prescribed by ANSI Std. 239-18

298-102

"
"261",""
"262",""
