"","x"
"1","AIAA SPACE 2013 Conference and Exposition AIAA 2013-5439
September 10-12, 2013, San Diego, CA
Effects of MicrograVIty on Extrusmn based Additive
Manufacturing
Michael P. Snyderi J ason J . DunnT, and Eddie G. Gonzalezi
Made In Space, Moﬂett F ield, CA, 94035
Made In Space, Inc. participated in four weeks of microgravity testing with NASA’s
Flight Opportunities Program during the Fall of 2011 and Summer of 2013. The company
tested the effects of microgravity on custom built and commercially available extrusion
3 additive manufacturing machines, more commonly known as 3D printers. The testing took
3 place on board a modified Boeing 727 aircraft ﬂown by the Zero-G corporation, in
§_ conjunction with NASA’s Reduced Gravity Ofﬁce and Flight Opportunities Program. The
E company has utilized the knowledge gained through this campaign on the project that will
E deliver the first 3D printer to the International Space Station (188). 3D printing in space is
3 an enabling technology that is crucial to the exploration of space beyond the low Earth orbit
8 environment. In order for 3D printing to ﬁnally be realized as a permanent ﬁxture in space
g exploration, the behavior must be fully understood in microgravity. Various 3D printers
g were ﬂown and tested, as well as multiple individual sub-components. With some
g modiﬁcation to the key systems, Made In Space was able to demonstrate that additive
2 manufacturing with extrusion-based machines functions similarly in microgravity as it does
E on the ground, allowing for a full proof of concept. The microgravity ﬂights enabled the
2 Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of the technology to be elevated to a TRL-6.
E
E I. Introduction
E MADE In Space, Inc. was founded in 2010 and is based out of NASA’S Ames Research Park. The company
é initiated the directives to build the infrastructure for in-space additive manufacturing. Three progressive goals
g were tolz
é 0 Study the underlying physics and fundamentals of 3D printing in the microgravity environment by ﬂying
g 3D printers on a microgravity ﬂight.
2 o Adapt commercial 3D Printing technology for use in microgravity.
é 0 Fly a 3D printer on board the 188.
E All of these goals were aimed at implementing additive manufacturing in space within a short three year time
% frame. Made In Space accomplished the ﬁrst goal, to study the effects of 3D Printing in microgravity under a
<23 contract with NASA’S Flight Opportunities Program (FOP). The FOP program provides ﬂight opportunities for
4: space technologies to be tested in relevant environments. Under this contract Made In Space ﬂew a series of reduced
ﬁg gravity ﬂight campaigns to study the effects of extrusion-based additive manufacturing in micro-, 1unar-, and
g Martian- gravity. These ﬂight campaigns were conducted during the months of July, August, and September of
5 2011, and again in June of 2013. In 2012 Made In Space took the lessons learned from the initial FOP campaigns
and designed the 3D Printer for the ISS, satisfying the second goal of adapting commercial 3D Printing technology
for use in microgravity. Now on the third goal, Made In Space is currently building the ﬁrst printer under a Phase III
contract that will launch to the ISS on SpaceX-S in 2014.

Additive Manufacturing (AM) has only recently become a competing manufacturing method to typical methods
such as CNC Machining. This is due to the increasing capability in micro-electronics, micro-computers, and
microcontrollers over the past two years that has allowed for precision controlled mechanical drives at relatively low
cost.

* Director of Research and Development, Made In Space, 20-1 S. Akron Rd., AIAA Member
T Chief Technology Ofﬁcer, Made In Space, 20-1 S. Akron Rd.
I Simulation Design Lead, Made In Space, 20-1 S. Akron Rd.
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2013 by Made In Space Inc.. Published by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., with permission.

"
"2","Unlike today, in the early 2000’s additive manufacturing was not commercially capable of building complex
geometries out of titanium, aluminum, and space grade polymers with tolerances approaching precision CNC
machined parts. Conclusively, in 2002, a method was proposed by Skycorp for in-space assembly of a spacecraft in
which all components would be built on the ground and shipped to space2. The main beneﬁt was the clever
packaging of components for launch could reduce ﬁnal structural mass of the spacecraft components. Reducing
spacecraft mass has many obVious advantages, and thus the idea was quite valid. However, with today’s additive
manufacturing capabilities another layer of abstraction can be removed for in-space assembly of a spacecraft when it
incorporates in-space manufacturing.

While the general consensus a decade ago didn’t recognize the beneﬁt of AM for in-space manufacturing, some
pioneering work had been performed at Marshall Space Flight Center by Ken Cooper. In 1999, recognizing the
potential for AM to achieve the goal on in-space manufacturing he began to test various AM methods in simulated
microgravity environments.

Testing a circa 1999 Stratasys Fused Deposition Modeling (FDM) 3D printer on its side, Cooper found that the

3 extrusion based technology could still function without gravity acting in the typical direction. In later tests, Cooper
3 ﬂew the same extrusion-based FDM machine on the NASA KC135 reduced gravity plane3. These ﬂights mark the
§ ﬁrst and only other documented microgravity 3D printing tests ﬂights aside from those made by Made In Space.

3 These reduced gravity ﬂights marked the near end of Cooper’s research on this subject. Some of his ﬁnal
E recommendations for moving forward were:

g o Acquire candidate polymer hardware geometry currently stocked as spare parts on the space shuttle or
3 station, and fabricate these designs using ground-based FDM systems with ABS plastic.

95? 0 Determine build time requirements for each component, in order to properly schedule parts to be built in
g space during a short duration mission.

:5 0 Determine maximum allowable factors for a space-based demonstration FDM unit, including weight and
g physical dimensions, environmental effects, i.e. toxicity, heat output and power consumption limits.

5 0 Determine, from parts inventory and feasibility study, the maximum build envelope capacity of the reduced
8“ FDM system.

:3 0 Design and build part storage containers for safe return of test articles to Earth.

2% 0 Place the FDM demonstration ﬂight unit in the queue for Space Shuttle ﬂight experiments.

E The technology ﬁnally began to catch up with Cooper’s Vision a decade after his research began, when Made In
3 Space conducted its own microgravity ﬂight testing in 2011.

E

(53 11. Research Goals

(:3 The fundamental concepts of what parameters are capable of working in microgravity had to be learned before
% signiﬁcant progress could be made in the technology. Parameters such as feedstock ﬂow rates, extruder
% temperatures, construction materials, environmental controls, power sources, and general sizing of all components
a had to be investigated before the design of a 3D printer for space could be solidiﬁed.

Q During the microgravity ﬂight campaigns, the Made In Space team set out with a list of research goals:

i o Conﬁrming that extrusion-based 3D printing works in microgravity.

i o Researching and understanding the fundamental physics of 3D printing microgravity and its effectiveness
$3 when compared to ground-based 3D printing.

3 0 Investigate the feasibility of using commercially available components and machines in microgravity.

E 0 Determine how to adapt commercial technology to function in microgravity to reduce the time from initial
Q concept to ﬁnal ﬂight design.

The primary objectives for the ﬂight campaigns was to evaluate the functionality of extrusion-based 3D printing
for use in microgravity environments. Initial experimental plans stemmed from the work by Cooper et al., which
was the ﬁrst study of an extrusion-based 3D printer in microgravity. The ﬁrst goal was to replicate the work done in
1999 to establish a baseline for future research within Made In Space.

Moving beyond the replication of the Cooper study, another primary goal was to understand on a deeper level
just how well the manufacturing process works in microgravity. Very little empirical data exists to establish
certainty that the manufacturing process compares well to Earth built parts when built in reduced gravity. Therefore,
it was extremely important to validate the extrusion-based process by studying characteristics such as layer
adhesion, layer height, and strength of the 3D printed parts created in microgravity.

Initial hypothesis for the functionality of 3D printing in microgravity stemmed off the previous research. It was
hypothesised that the 3D printing would function in microgravity similarly to how it would nominally function in

2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2013 by Made In Space Inc.. Published by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., with permission.

"
"3","Earth graVity. No change in layer heights or strength of printed parts was expected as a result of the microgravity
environment.
111. Experiment Setup
Due to power, mass, and budget constraints a simple experiment box was constructed out of 80/20, 10 series
aluminum rails and Acrylite FF panels. Three 3D printers were chosen to be installed within the experiment box for
the ﬂights. The ﬁrst printer chosen was the Extended Structure Additive Manufacturing Machine (ESAMM) which
is a Made In Space 3D printer designed to build structure larger than itself. The second choice for a printer was
MakerBot brand 3D printer. The MakerBot was chosen to test
the functionality of 3D printer that is on the lower end of the
;__ ._ ‘ price market and is widely available to the public. The last 3D
E f"" printer chosen to ﬂy was Bits From Bytes’ BFB 3000. The BFB
a .0 m 7 f“. //"" 3D printer is a more advanced commercially available printer.
% i 5. — d ’ Aside from minor alterations to the structures in order to
g ' ' properly secure the 3D printers to the experiment box, the
g J "" - w __ H !_ 7. E . MakerBot and BFB had no alterations made to the internal
g» e' =7"": 7 workings of the 3D printers at the beginning of testing.
2' ,. _ T"" T The ESAMM and MakerBot printers were placed on the top
(2 ' _:_:_ i 4- _ half of the experiment box while the BFB was placed in the
:0 L lower half of the experiment box as shown in Figure 1. The
E _ experiment box was designed to function with minimal
g 7 interaction from the ﬂight crew during the parabolas. The
$3 .7 addition of high deﬁnition cameras at strategic locations to
g _ ., capture the printing process ensured that the ﬂight crew would
5 ‘ 49' have Video data to analyze after the ﬂights in order to make
3“ ’ _ I . adjustments where necessary.
g _, r W! The outside of the experiment box contained a series of D—
E rings that allowed cargo straps that were connected to the
E Figure 1. Experiment Box 3D printers Mounted aircraft ﬂoor to heattached to the experiment box. The straps
E ' ' were mounted Within a 60” X 60” area around the 24.5” X 29.5”
E experiment. The location of the experiment box within the
g aircraft is shown in Figure 2.
(L3 The 3D printers in the experiment box each Q
(32 had a speciﬁc purpose and job to complete . .2_-_
E during the ﬂight campaigns. The purpose of the . ""
(é ESAMM during the ﬂight campaigns was to P_—'—“\
9 build a core sample and operate throughout the ‘ . ‘ i .
(<0: entire ﬂight, thus creating parts that were built in t J .
<23 ﬂuctuating graVity environments, and prove the OUTE’ASW ‘"" C . m .
E functionality of the ESAMM in a microgravity £33.32 V‘
:3 environment. The MakerBot printer and BFB 3D l . ‘
:3 printers were not altered for the ﬁrst ﬂight J- T — - - 2 , , Topomoomoome
8 campaign in order to determine their ‘ i"" I OUTBD OUTBD OUTBD OUTS; 002180 OUtYBO ‘ ' \T‘nggiFLOOR BEAM
functionality in microgravity environment suoswm mg: 3385 32%: ‘ 3:382 :33; 333‘
straight “out of the box.” Once functionality was Gm ma“ “RR” ”R"" 8”“ “R” 3‘”
determined, the MakerBot was tasked With Figure 2: Location of Experiment Inside Aircraft
creating coupons to determine material
properties when printing in a reduced graVity enViroment. The BFB was tasked with building columns during
reduced graVity that would later be analyzed for layer thickness. The BFB also printed the same columns while on
the ground before ﬂights in order to obtain a baseline value for layer thickness.
IV. Experiment Methodology
The ﬁnal experiment box layout and the 3D printers chosen for the microgravity ﬂights came as a result of the
weight and power limitations of the aircraft in which the experiment was mounted in for the ﬂights. These
limitations are in place to ensure the safety of personnel aboard the aircraft.
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2013 by Made In Space Inc.. Published by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., with permission.

"
"4","Since the experiment had relatively low prior development, some issues arose during the initial ﬂights. The
commercially available off the shelf 3D printer tests revealed areas that needed modiﬁcation to work in
microgravity. Several 3D printer mechanisms experienced issues working properly outside of Earth graVity. It had
been anticipated that such modiﬁcations would be required and so the ﬁrst ﬂight week Video data was used to
determine the required changes that had to be made to each individual printer in order to ensure proper functionality
in microgravity. It was observed during the following ﬂight weeks that the proper functionality of the 3D printers
had been restored after a large amount of modiﬁcations.

The purpose of the columns construed by the BFB 3000 was to
determine the difference in layer to layer resolution of a 3D printed
part made in different graVity regimes; one-g, Lunar-g, Martian-g, Layer DiStance
and microgravity. The main question to answer was how do the
layer thicknesses differ in a 3D printed part in various graVity
regimes? Subsequent questions were on the feasibility to control the

3 layer-to-layer resolution in different graVity regimes to equal that on

3 Earth. To characterize the layer-to-layer resolution, layer distance

§ was deﬁned as the distance from mid-point of two consecutive

3 layers, as shown in Figure 3. The columns printed during the ﬂights

E were stained with graphite to expose the ridges of individual layers.

g A location on the sample was then chosen and photographed at

E 400x optical zoom, at a 1600 X 1200 resolution, using a Veho VMS- Figure 3: Deﬁnition of Layer Distance

95? 004D Digital Microscope and the MicroCapture software. The Represents Mid-Point of One Layer t0 the Next
§ microscope was calibrated by capturing an image of a micrometer scale, which allowed for the image frame size to
g be calculated. The tolerance 0n the measured values was +/- 12 pm. This particular method of measuring was
E“ chosen over others due to the non-destructive nature of the process.

4:“

§ V. Results

g Over the course of the three ﬂights weeks several parts were manufactured on each of the 3D printers. During
g the ﬁrst ﬂight week the Made In Space designed ESAMM was tested and was found to produce parts identical to
g those built by the ESAMM in the laboratory. The MakerBot and BFB 3000 mechanisms experience issues
3 functioning in microgravity, and the ﬁrst ﬂight week was spent making modiﬁcations to the printers in order to
E establish nominal functionality.

é During the second ﬂight

53 week a larger focus was Placed Average Layer Thickness Across Va rying

g on the BFB 3000, the most . .

% advanced 0f the 3D printers GraVIty Reg'mes

m tested during the ﬂight 15

E campaigns. During this week 5; 1 4 .

(<0: sample columns were built. TE '

<23 Each column was built during g 13 .

E the microgravity portion of the E,

'0 . . . m 1.2

ﬁg ﬂight, this resulted in a core 3

g sample that had been built in g 1.1 - —Pre Modification

8 only one grayity regime E 1 . —Post Modification

The third ﬂight week 3%. —Earth Control
offered some new testing 3 0.9 ‘
opportunities. First and go 0 8 V
foremost, ﬂying both Lunar .5
and Martian parabolas allowed 0-7 ’
for new data sets to be Micro Lunar Martian 2-(3
collected on manufacturing GraViW Pr°f“e
und;rh:h0:aetagrag::ge::{31111;er' the Figure 4: Average Layer Thickness Across Varying Gravity Regimes
layer thickness for all of the ﬂight campaign is presented in the Figure 4.

This graph illustrates the changes in the layer thickness of the parts printed during the different graVity regimes.
The data has been normalized so that the averaged nominal prints in the control fall on 1 0n the graph and the

4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2013 by Made In Space Inc.. Published by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., with permission.

"
"5","rernaining data scales equivalently. The parts that were built before the 3D printers were modiﬁed had larger layer
thickness than the ground samples. The deviation from the ground sarnples decreased as the graVity regirne became
closer to Earth graVity. Samples built in microgravity had larger deviations from the ground sarnples than those built
in Martian graVity.

After the 3D printers were modiﬁed the deviations from the Earth samples was minimized. The values for the
layer thickness across all the graVity regirnes was close enough to the Earth samples that any deviations from the
Earth sarnples could be accounted to the error in measurement (+/— 12 pm).

VI. Discussion

The goal of these experiments was not only to demonstrate that “ "" _
extrusion based 3D printing works in microgravity, but it was also a
way to determine what commercial components work in .

a microgravity and what cornponents need to be modiﬁed in order to

% properly function in a reduced graVity environment. The goal of

g dernonstrating extrusion based printing in microgravity was achieved

g as many parts were built during the reduce graVity portions of ﬂight

i such as the ones shown in Figure 5.

2' The secondary goals of determining if commercial printers

(2 function in microgravity was also achieved. The MakerBot and the

E BFB . 3D pr1nters both required rnodiﬂcations to their internal Figure 5: Two Parts Printed in Microgravity; a

g workings in order for the 3D printers to function properly in Standard ESAMM Coupon and a Wrench

§ microgravity. The changes were achieved during the ﬁrst ﬂight week

if and an example of the results can be seen Figure 6.

g Made In Space used the ﬁndings from

5 these experiments to design the 3D Printer

3“ for the ISS under a NASA contract in 2012.

g \‘p «i: Luigi Due to the nature by which the 3D Printers

g i E‘; .17 — "" were modiﬁed to work in microgravity a

g *1 1' secondary beneﬁt is that they also would

3 Ii 1 work in all other graVity regmies as well. In

E . the end, the 3D Printer developed for the ISS

% . ...-..; ——. ‘ is essentially a graVity indpendent 3D Printer;

0 - . .

(L3 ‘ the ﬁrst of it’s kind.

E ' In June of 2013 Made In Space brought a

m . .

E prototype of this 3D Printer on another

(A parabolic ﬂight campaign. Testing of the

E Figure 6: In Flight 3D Printed Part Before and After Modiﬁcation deVice showed that it was indeed graVity

(:0: independent. The ﬁrst version of this technology to ﬂy to the ISS will arrive in 2014 on SpaceX—S.

‘z‘

43 VII. Conclusion

é? Overall, the three ﬂight weeks presented an amazing amount of opportunity and fast paced research and

E development for Made In Space. HaVing just three weeks between each ﬂight week caused the team to rapidly

9 developed experiment modiﬁcations and data processing from previous ﬂight to prepare for the next. This fast paced
development helped advance the company much further and faster than if the ﬂight opportunity was not available.

The ﬂight opportunity was extremely successful. The initial goal of understanding how well the 3D printing
process works in microgravity was met, and additional questions were answered. The data collected has helped
solidify the Made In Space business model and provide steps forward to the next phase of the rnission—ﬂying a 3D
printer to space.

The next steps for rnaturing the technology comes in two forms: First, continuing to analyze the parts that were
3D printed during the 2011 and 2013 microgravity ﬂight weeks. Second, pushing the technology to the next level,
speciﬁcally into the space enVironrnent.

Made In Space will launch and integrate the in—space 3D printer with the ISS in 2014. Once integrated, the in—
space 3D printer will undergo further research and the capability will be further demonstrated by building usable and
workable parts for the crew. The company will then seek to build a business around 3D printing parts and hardware
in space, further advancing the technology and its uses.

5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2013 by Made In Space Inc.. Published by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., with permission.

"
"6","References
1Dunn, J .J ., et a1, “3D Printing in Space: Enabling New Markets and Accelerating the Growth of Orbital Infrastructure”,
Space Manufacturing 14: Critical T echnologies for Space Settlement Conference, October 29-31, 2010, Mountain View,
California.
2Wingo, D., “Transforming Spacecraft Economics Via On Orbit Assembly,” Space Daily [online article], URL:
http://www.spacedaily.com/news/satellite-tech-02a.htm1 [cited 15 July 2013].
3Cooper, K.G. and Grifﬁn M.R., “Microgravity Manufacturing ViaFused Deposition,” Marshall Space Flight Center,
Marshall Space Flight Center, Alabama, USA, NASA/TM - 2003-212636, July 2003.
0\
§
2,
E
8
53
8
Q
E
O.
E
E
E
5
Z
8
m
Lu
P
%
0
Lu
o
<:
%
Z
o
E
Q
<:
m
<:
Z
5‘
""G
g
L3
Q
B
O
Q
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2013 by Made In Space Inc.. Published by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., with permission.

"
