"","x"
"1","NASA/TP—2016—219101

‘Lvllg Iri’

Summary Report on Phase I Results

From the 3D Printing in Zero-G Technology

Demonstration Mission, Volume I

T.J. Prater, Q.A. Bean, RD. Beshears, T.D. Rolin, N.J. Werkheiser, E.A. Ordonez,

RM. Ryan, and FE. Ledbetterlll

Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama
—

July 2016

"
"2","The NASA STI Program...in Proﬁle
Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to the 0 CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected
advancement of aeronautics and space science. The papers from scientiﬁc and technical conferences,
NASA Scientiﬁc and Technical Information (STI) symposia, seminars, or other meetings sponsored
Program Ofﬁce plays a key part in helping NASA or cosponsored by NASA.
maintain this important role.
0 SPECIAL PUB LICATION. Scientiﬁc, technical,
The NASA STI Program Ofﬁce is operated by or historical information from NASA programs,
Langley Research Center, the lead center for projects, and mission, often concerned With
NASA’s scientiﬁc and technical information. The subjects haVing substantial public interest.
NASA STI Program Ofﬁce provides access to
the NASA STI Database, the largest collection of 0 TECHNICAL TRANSLATION.
aeronautical and space science STI in the world. English-language translations of foreign
The Program Ofﬁce is also NASA’s institutional scientiﬁc and technical material pertinent to
mechanism for disseminating the results of its NASA’s mission.
research and development activities. These results
are published by NASA in the NASA STI Report Specialized services that complement the STI
Series, Which includes the following report types: Program Ofﬁce’s diverse offerings include creating
custom thesauri, building customized databases,
0 TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of organizing and publishing research results. . .even
completed research or a major signiﬁcant providing Videos.
phase of research that present the results of
NASA programs and include extensive data For more information about the NASA STI Program
or theoretical analysis. Includes compilations Ofﬁce, see the following:
of signiﬁcant scientiﬁc and technical data
and information deemed to be of continuing 0 Access the NASA STI program home page at
reference value. NASA’s counterpart of peer— <http://WWW.sti.nasa.gov>
reviewed formal professional papers but has less
stringent limitations on manuscript length and 0 E-mail your question Via the Internet to
extent of graphic presentations. <he1p@sti.nasa.gov>
0 TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientiﬁc 0 Phone the NASA STI Help Desk at
and technical ﬁndings that are preliminary or of 757 —864—9658
specialized interest, e.g., quick release reports,
working papers, and bibliographies that contain 0 Write to:
minimal annotation. Does not contain extensive NASA STI Information Desk
analysis. Mail Stop 148
NASA Langley Research Center
0 CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientiﬁc and Hampton, VA 23681—2199, USA
technical ﬁndings by NASA-sponsored
contractors and grantees.

"
"3","NASA/TP—2016—219101

‘s’llg 2? i,

Summary Report on Phase I Results

From the 3D Printing in Zero-G Technology

Demonstration Mission, Volume I

T.J. Prater, Q.A. Bean, RD. Beshears, T.D. Rolin, N.J. Werkheiser, E.A. Ordonez,

RM. Ryan, and FE. Ledbetter Ill

Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama

National Aeronautics and

Space Administration

Marshall Space Flight Center ° Huntsville, Alabama 35812
—

July 2016

"
"4","TRADEMARKS
Trade names and trademarks are used in this report for identiﬁcation only. This usage does not constitute an ofﬁcial
endorsement, either expressed or implied, by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Available from:
NASA STI Information Desk

Mail Stop 148

NASA Langley Research Center

Hampton, VA 23681—2199, USA
757—864—9658

This report is also available in electronic form at
<http://WWW.sti.nasa.g0v>
ii

"
"5","EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Human space exploration to date has been conﬁned to 10w-Earth orbit and the Moon.
The International Space Station (188), an orbiting laboratory 200 miles above the Earth, provides
a unique opportunity for researchers to prove out the technologies that will enable humans to
safely live and work in space for longer periods of time and venture farther into the solar sys-
tem. The ability to manufacture parts in space, rather than launch them from Earth, represents
a fundamental shift in the current risk and logistics paradigm for human spaceﬂight. In particular,
additive manufacturing (or 3D printing) techniques can potentially be deployed in the space environ-
ment to enhance crew safety (by providing an on-demand part replacement capability) and decrease
launch mass by reducing the number of spare components that must be launched for missions where
cargo resupply is not a near-term option to ensure mission success (in the current risk model, suf-
ﬁcient spare parts must be provided for planned maintenance activities and unexpected failures, the
likelihood of which increase with the duration of the mission).

In September 2014, NASA launched the 3D Printing in Zero-G (3DP) technology demonstra-
tion mission to the 188 to explore the potential of additive manufacturing for in-spaee applications
and demonstrate the capability to manufacture parts and tools on orbit. The printer for this mission
was developed by Made In Space, Inc., a small business located in Mountain View, California, under
a NASA Small Business Innovative Research phase III contract. The overarching objectives of the
3DP mission were to use 188 as a testbed to further maturation of enhancing technologies needed for
long-duration human exploration missions, introduce new materials and methods to fabricate struc-
tures in space, enab1e eost-effeetive manufacturing for structures and mechanisms made in 10w-unit
production, and enable physical components to be manufactured in space on long-duration missions
if necessary. The mission is aligned with NASA technology roadmaps for materials and manufactur-
ing as well as the NASA Human Research Program Decadal Survey, which calls for the “design and
deve10p[ment] of advanced materials that meet new property requirements to enable human explo-
ration at reduced cost using both current and novel materials synthesis and processing techniques.”
The 3DP unit was integrated into the ISS Mierogravity Science Glovebox in November 2014, and
phase I printing operations took place from November through December of that year. Phase I ﬂight
operations yielded 14 unique parts (21 total specimens) that could be directly compared against
ground-based prints of identical geometry manufactured using the printer prior to its launch to 188.
The 3DP unit functioned safely and produced specimens necessary to advance the understanding of
the critical design and operational parameters for the fused deposition modeling (FDM) process as
affected by the microgravity environment. From the standpoint of operations, 3DP demonstrated
the ability to remove parts from the build tray 0n orbit, te1eoperate the printer from the ground, per-
form critical maintenance functions within deﬁned human factors limits, produce a tool (the ratchet)
that could be evaluated for form/ﬁt/funetion, and uplink a new part ﬁle and produce it on the printer.
After printing, parts were separated from the build tray, packaged, and stored on station. The ﬂight
parts were downmassed from the 188 on the SpaeeX Dragon capsule in February 2015 and arrived
at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, in April 2015.

iii

"
"6","Upon arrival at MSFC, the parts were unboxed and underwent testing and evaluation at the
Materials and Processes Laboratory from May 2015 through September 2015. During that time,
ground and ﬂight prints completed the following phases of testing: photographie/Visual inspection,
mass and density evaluation, structured 1ight scanning, X-ray and computed tomography, mechani-
cal testing, and optical microscopy. Analysis of test data was performed by Materials and Processes
Laboratory personnel from September 2015 to November 2015 and presented to inVitees from indus-
try, government, and academia at a technical interchange held at MSFC on December 2 and 3, 2015.
Key ﬁndings from each phase of testing were presented at this meeting. Broadly stated, the ﬂight
specimens (with the exception of the compression specimens) are denser, stronger, and stiffer than
the ground prints. Many specimens also exhibit a noticeable variation in density in the through-
thiekness 0f the part, with the bottom half of the specimen being denser than the top half. The in-
spaee manufacturing (ISM) team and attendees examined identiﬁed inﬂuence factors and hypotheses
which may explain these observed variations between Classes of specimens in the 3DP dataset. Based
on the discussions and interactions at this meeting, the ISM team developed a ‘go-forward p1an’ for
further evaluation of the ground and ﬂight specimens and ground-based characterization work to
answer open questions related to the 3DP dataset.

The primary purpose of the phase I test plan was to verify the process capabilities of FDM
in the microgravity environment (i.e., FDM’s ability to produce materials with properties that are
equivalent/in family with their terrestria11y manufactured counterparts). While FDM is not a process
that relies on buoyancy driven convection to achieve materia1 consolidation, differences in heat and
mass transfer coefﬁcients in microgravity may impact 1ayer adhesion, surface tension, and cooling
rate. Even subtle differences in these parameters may result in structurally different materials. Evalu-
ation of the process over a long microgravity time constant in this manner is only possible using the
188. Data collected from the test plan were intended to quantify any characteristic change in proper-
ties, dimensions, etc. that may be a consequence of the operational manufacturing environment and
can be used, with the baseline materia1pr0perties generated through other materials characterization
activities, to derive knockdown factors (which allow designers to account for expected variations/
degradation in materia1properties of parts produced using FDM in microgravity).

Phase II printer operations wi11bringthese objectives closer to fulﬁllment. Phase II prints will
allow the ISM team to do the following:

° Gain greater insight into the sources of variability in the 3DP phase I dataset. Phase II prints may
1end additional clarity to causes of variability in the phase I data and which concepts/hypotheses
are best poised to explain property differences between ﬂight and ground specimens.

° Isolate the effect of microgravity 0n the FDM process. Severa11ayer quality specimens are part of
the phase II print matrix. Evaluation of these specimens using atomic force microscopy or scan-
ning electron microscopy will help to understand any differences in mierostrueture and/or phase
morphology that may be attributable to the operation of the FDM process in microgravity (or
point to differences in cooling rate between the ground and ﬂight specimens).

° Collect additional data relevant to the material aging hypothesis. At the time phase II prints occur,
the feedstock from canister 11 will be well beyond the 12-month recommended shelf life speciﬁed

iV

"
"7","by the manufacturer. Canister 12 is the same age as canister 11, but has been stored in a sealed
container With dessieant since its arrival on 188 (all phase I prints were completed With canister
11). Phase II provides a unique opportunity to evaluate material aging (and the rate of aging for
material stored in a controlled environment versus stored in the ISS environment) on orbit and
better deﬁnes feedstock requirements for future printers.

° Provide greater statistical sampling for mechanical property data. The sample size for mechani-
cal specimens from 3DP phase I is small (a total of eight tensile, six compression, and six ﬂexure,
With half of each sample set originating from the ﬂight prints and the other half from the ground).
Additional data obtained from mechanical testing of phase II tensile, compression, and ﬂexure
specimens Will provide insight into Whether trends, biases, and characteristic mechanical properties
reported based on phase I testing are consistent With further ﬂight operation of the printer.

° Demonstrate critical operational and maintenance requirements for the printer by changing the
feedstock and the extruder head. These represent essential operations for closing the ‘manufaetur-
ing process loop’ for 3DP and are also relevant to work on an in-spaee recycling system for feed-
stock.

° Demonstrate the ability of 3DP to print functional parts for use on 188. Two crew tools, the Win-
ning entry from the Future Engineers competition, and up to six to be determined/on-demand
parts for stakeholders Will be printed as part of phase II operations.

The 3DP mission is the ﬁrst demonstration of manufacturing in space and represents the ﬁrst
step toward a critical paradigm shift from Earth-dependent approaches (increasing space system reli-
ability and/or relying on cargo resupply to fulﬁll repair and refurbishment needs) to Earth indepen-
dence (point of use manufacturing for long-duration space missions). Future NASA endeavors Will
take crew farther than ever before, on missions Where cargo resupply is limited and a return home
requires months or even years. 3DP is one technique in a portfolio of ISM technologies that can
collectively provide on-demand, sustainable operations during NASA exploration missions, both
in transit and on the planetary surface (<WWW.nasa.gov/ofﬁees/oet/home/roadmaps/index.html>).
3DP is the initial step on a j ourney to develop, Characterize, and institutionalize the capabilities that
stand to fundamentally change the way exploration architectures are designed, and is one very criti-
cal piece of the puzzle to settlement of the high frontier.

V

"
"8",""
"9","TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.1 The 3D Printingin ZerO-G Technology Demonstration Mission 1
1.2 An Overview of In-Space Manufacturing 2
2. TEST PLAN FOR PHASE I PRINTS FROM THE 3D PRINTING IN ZERO-G
TECHNOLOGY DEMONSTRATION MISSION 6
2.1 PhaseIPrint Matrix 6
2.2 Tests and Test Procedures 10
2.3 Discussion and AdditionalNotes 14
3. MECHANICAL TEST DATA AND DENSITY COMPARISONS 16
3.1 Summary of Results of Density Comparison 16
3.2 Summary of Results of MechanicalTesting 23
3.3 Correlation Analysis: Density and MechanicalProperties 31
3.4 Time Series Analysis 32
3.5 Key Findings 35
4. X-RAY AND COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY RESULTS 36
4.1 Overview and Objectives 36
4.2 Two-DimensionalRadiography 36
4.3 Computed Tomography 43
4.4 Conclusions and Highlights 58
5. MICROSCOPY RESULTS 59
6. STRUCTURED LIGHT SCANNING RESULTS 68
6.1 Scan Produdure 68
6.2 Z-Calibration Value and Tip-to-Tray Distance 68
6.3 Key Findings 72
6.4 Conclusions 78
7. INTEGRATED CONSIDERATION OF TEST DATA AND HYPOTHESES
Vii

"
"10","TABLE OF CONTENTS (Continued)
7.1 Summary of Key Findings 79
7.2 Notes on Printer Operations 86
7.3 Exploration of Potentiallnﬂuence Factors 87
7.4 Evaluation of Inﬂuence Factors 103
APPENDIX A—SUMMARY OF TECHNICAL INTERCHANGE MEETING
TO OUTBRIEF RESULTS OF PHASE I PRINTS 116
A.1 Day 1: December 2, 2015 116
A2 Day 2: December 3, 2015 118
APPENDIX B—COMPARISON OF 3DP DATA WITH PREVIOUS
GROUND-BASED MATERIALS CHARACTERIZATION WORK 121
B.1 Comparison of Tensile Test Data 123
B2 Comparison of Compression Test Data 126
B3 Comparison of Flexure Test Data 127
viii

"
"11","LIST OF FIGURES
1. ISM phased technology roadmap 4
2. Comparison of average density of ﬂight and ground tensile specimens 22
3. Comparison of average density of ﬂight and ground compression specimens 22
4. Comparison of average density for ground and ﬂight ﬂexure specimens 23
5. Stress-strain curves for ground and ﬂight tensile specimens plotted
on the same aXis 25
6. Stress-strain curves for ground and ﬂight compression specimens plotted
on the same aXis 28
7. Stress-strain curves for ground and ﬂight ﬂexure specimens plotted
on the same aXis 3O
8. Regression model of density and ultimate ﬂexural stress for ground and ﬂight
specimens 32
9. X chart (process behavior) for standardized residuals. Residuals from
regression models predicting mechanical strengths are plotted as a function
of print order. Residual analysis was restricted to mechanical test specimens 33
10. Moving range chart for standardized residuals analysis 33
11. Residuals analysis With compression specimen 3 (denoted by red ‘X’
at observation 8) and ﬂight tensile specimen 1 (denoted by a red ‘X’
at observation 11) removed 34
12. Moving range chart With compression specimen 3 and ﬂight tensile
specimen I removed 34
13. Radiographs showing examples of printed specimens: (a) Oblique View of a ﬂight
calibration sample. The gray arrows denote the presence of less uniform material
at the hole’s circumference. (b) Oblique View of a ground calibration sample.
Notice in this case, the printing around the Circumference is uniform. (0) Flight
rectangular solid that is uniform. (d) Ground-truth rectangular solid that is also
uniform. (e) Flight torque sample. There is a low-density indication present (yellow
arrow). (f) Ground-truth torque sample. A similar low-density indication is present
(yellow arrow) 37
iX

"
"12","LIST OF FIGURES (Continued)

14. These radiographs show examples of printed specimens: (a) Overall View of the

ﬂight microgravity structure specimen. (b) Overall View of a ground microgravity

structure sample. Both (a) and (b) are very similar. (0) Flight container that

indicates lower density at the wall (yellow arrow). ((1) Magniﬁed View of a ground

container that also indicates lower density at the wall (yellow arrow). Because

it has occurred in both samples, this is unlikely to be a microgravity effect.

(e) Mechanism of a ﬂight ratchet. (f) The ground Wire tie 38
15. These radiographs show examples of tensile specimens: (a) Side View of a portion

ﬂight sample F004. There is a decrease in X-ray density from the top (yellow arrow)

to the bottom (White arrow). (b) Side View of G004. The material is denser at the

top (yellow arrow) than at the bottom (White arrow). (0) Portion of the ﬂight tensile

sample F012. There is a low-density indication present related to surface voiding

(yellow arrow). ((1) Side View of G012. The same issue in approximately the same

location can be seen in the ground sample (yellow arrow). (e) Portion of the ﬂight

tensile sample F015. This image reveals a uniform X-ray density. (f) Side View

of G015. The X-ray density changes from top to bottom. F018 and G018 were

uniform in X-ray density 4O
16. These radiographs show examples of ﬂexure specimens: (a) One side of F006.

The top (yellow arrow) is denser than the bottom (White arrow). (b) One side

of G006. There appears to be a delamination near the surface (yellow arrow).

(0) Portion of the sample F014. Printing is uniform across the Width. ((1) Portion

of G014. There is Clearly an X-ray density variation at one end (yellow oval).

The dark circles are slight indentations from tabs used to ﬁxture the part for

structured light scanning (White arrows). (e) One side of F017. There is

a low-density indication present related to surface voiding that runs about

two layers deep (yellow arrow). (f) Side View of G017. There appears to be

a delamination present (yellow arrow) 41
17. These radiographs show examples of compression samples: (a) Oblique View

of F005. (b) Oblique View of G006. There is a low-density indication near

one end (yellow arrow). (0) One side of F013. The print lines appear to be

pairs along this run. ((1) Side View of G006 for comparison to F013. The print

lines do not appear to be pairs (yellow oval). This could be the result of G006

being slightly rotated out of phase from F013. (e) Top-down View of F016.

(f) Top-down View of G016. No anomalies were noted in this View for any

compression sample 42

X

"
"13","LIST OF FIGURES (Continued)

18. Examples of CT images of tensile samples: (a) Tomograph of a Clipped View

of F004 to show the internal construction. It has been rotated to show the same

View as the 2D image. (b) Radiograph of F004. Note the X-ray density variation

in this 2D image veriﬁes What is observed in the tomograph. The density variation

is clearly not an artifact of the 3D-CT algorithm. (0) Tomograph of a clipped

View of F015 to show the internal construction. It has been rotated to show

the same View as the 2D image. In this image, the density variation from top

to bottom appears uniform. (d) Radiograph of a side View of F015 for comparison

to the 3D-CT scan. Note here that the X-ray density appears uniform, verifying

the 3D-CT data 44
19. Examples of ﬂexure samples: (a) Tomograph of a clipped View of F006 to show

the internal construction. There is clearly an X-ray density variation from more

dense at the top of the specimen (the last layers to be printed) to less dense near

the bottom. (b) Radiograph of F006. This image shows the same density variation

noted on CT. (0) Tomograph of a Clipped View of G006 to show the internal

construction. It has been rotated to show the same View as the 2D image. Not only

is the density Change present, but the delamination area is also Visible (black arrow).

((1) Radiograph of a side View of G006 for comparison to the 3D-CT scan. Note

here that the X-ray density variation is similar to that observed With CT and the

delamination is clearly present (yellow arrow) 45
20. Examples of compression samples: (a) Tomograph of a clipped View of F005

to show the internal construction. (b) Tomograph of a clipped View of G005.

(e) Tomograph of a clipped View of F013 to show the internal construction.

There is a voided area near one end indicated by a black arrow (not surface

related since this is an internal clip View). ((1) Tomograph of a clipped View

of G013 to show the internal construction. This slice veriﬁes the lower density

seen at the Circumference in the 2D Views of the compression articles (black

arrow). (e) Tomograph of a clipped View of F016 to show the internal

construction. Again, the lower density at the circumference is clear (black

arrow). (f) Tomograph of a clipped View of G016 46
21. Example of a single CT slice through a ground-built specimen. The dark spots

Within the gray rectangular cross section are LDIs 47
22. The 3D representation of a scanned specimen, consisting of several thousand

individual CT slices, is shown in the lower-right corner. The green plane

intersecting that volume depicts the location of the slice View shown in the

lower-left corner 48
23. Computed tomography number proﬁle for ISM specimen F006 50

Xi

"
"14","LIST OF FIGURES (Continued)

24. Computed tomography number proﬁle for ground specimen G004 51
25. Computed tomography number proﬁle for ground specimen G016 52
26. Screenshot of the VGStudio volume analyzer tool 53
27. Graph of mean CT numbers for ground and ISM specimens; error bars

represent i1 SD. While only ground prints are indicated on the x-axis, the

corresponding ﬂight prints are plotted on the same axes in blue 54
28. Graph of mean CT numbers for ground and ISM specimens; error bars

represent i1 SD. Data outliers resulting from X-ray technique variations

have been removed from this dataset. While only ground prints are listed

on the x-axis, the corresponding ﬂight prints are printed on the same axes

in blue 55
29. Screenshot of the VGStudio volume analyzer tool showing the boundaries

of ‘lower’ and ‘upper’ data collection regions 56
30. Proﬁle of X-ray absorption through a specimen, With the beginning of the build

on the left side of the image. The proﬁle indicates lower density as the distance

from beginning of build increases (from left to right along the yellow proﬁle line) 56
31. Plan View (bottom) of tensile specimens 6O
32. P1anview(t0p) oftensile specimens 6O
33. Close-up of tensile fractures 61
34. Images of tensile specimen fracture surfaces in the ‘head-on’ orientation 61
35. Plan VieWBof ﬂexure specimens after meehaniealtesting 62
36. Microscopy images of ﬂight and ground compression coupons

after meehaniealtesting 63
37. Plan Views of top and bottom of extruder plate for both (a) ground and (b) ﬂight 63
38. Side View of the extruder plate for (a) ground and (b) ﬂight 64
39. Plan and side Views of (a) ground and (b) ﬂight positive range coupons 64
40. Plan and side Views of (a) ground and (b) ﬂight negative range coupons 64

Xii

"
"15","LIST OF FIGURES (Continued)

41. Comparison of plan Views of (a) ground and (b) ﬂight torque coupon 65
42. Comparison of (a) ground and (b) ﬂight structural clip 65
43. Comparison of (a) ground and (b) ﬂight microgravity structure specimen 66
44. Comparison of (a) ground and (b) ﬂight erowfoot specimen 66
45. Relationship between z-ealibration value (commanded by user) and tip—to—tray

distance. For ﬂight prints, tip—to—tray distance is not directly measurable since

3DP does not have closed loop positional feedback 69
46. Comparison of (a) ﬂight and (b) ground ﬂexure specimens (top surface)

With nominalCAD geometry 73
47. Comparison of (a) ﬂight and (b) ground ﬂexure specimens (bottom surface)

With nominalCAD geometry 73
48. Whisker plot of (a) ﬂight and (b) ground tensile specimens. Lengths 0f Whiskers

are exaggerated by a factor of ﬁve for Visibility 74
49. Protrusions detected on ﬁrst layers of ﬂight ﬂexure specimen F014 75
50. Midseetion cutaway View of ﬂight tensile specimen F004 showing protrusions

along some edges 76
51. Compression cylinder With best ﬁt cylinder superimposed 78
52. Structured 1ight scan of front View of (a) ground tensile specimen G004

and (b) ﬂight tensile specimen F004. The color scale indicates the magnitude

of deviations from the nominal CAD geometry 81
53. Left-side View of extruder plate (G002) under optical microscope. Warping

on bottom surface is clearly evident and top surface experiences a reduction

in layer height caused by de-adhesion 0f the part from the plate during the build 82
54. Protrusions on ﬂight ﬂexure specimen F006: (3.) Side View during optical

microscopy and (b) specimen side imaged With structured 1ight scanning.

The color scale indicates the magnitude of deviations from the nominal

CAD geometry 82
55. Raw image from CT scan of ﬂight tensile coupon (F004) showing density

differences between the upper and lower half of the specimen 83

X111

"
"16","LIST OF FIGURES (Continued)

56. Two-dimensional X-ray image of compression specimen showing type I

and type II voids and surface roughness 84
57. Type 11 void evident on 2D X-ray of Wire tie specimen (G021) 84
58. Fracture surface of ground tensile specimen (G015) 85
59. Possible ﬁlament void bubble in the extruder plate specimen G002 85
60. Fishbone diagram used to facilitate root cause analysis of variability

in 3DP dataset 88
61. SEM image of bent ﬁlament. Mieroeraeks are Visible along radius

of curvature. Image courtesy of Dr. Richard Grugel, MSFC 98
62. Slight indentations in ﬂexure sample surface from ﬁxturing noted

on optical microscopy 100
63. Type IV tensile specimen 108
64. AFM micrograph of FDM-printed ABS showing phase morphology.

Ye110wis the butadiene phase and red is the more ridge continuous phase.

Image provided by NIST 114
65. Seatterplot of ultimate tensile strength (measured from room temperature

tensi1etests)aer0ss siX specimen sets 124
66. Seatterplot of elastic modulus (measured from room temperature tensile

tests) across siX specimen sets. Stratiﬁcation of data (i.e., repeated values)

is a consequence of rounding 124
67. Seatterplot of fracture elongation (measured from room temperature

tensi1etests)aer0ss siX specimen sets 125
68. Scatterplot of compressive stress at 20% strain across siX specimen sets 126
69. Scatterplot of compressive modulus across siX specimen sets. Stratiﬁcation

in data is due to rounding 127
70. Scatterplot of ultimate ﬂexural stress across siX specimen sets 128
71. Scatterplot 0f ﬂexuralmodulus across siX specimen sets 128

XiV

"
"17","LIST OF TABLES

1. Catalog of phaseIprints 7
2. Specimen IDs 10
3. Summary of specimens and tests 13
4. Average weights of 3DP specimens 16
5. Volume measurements for 3DP speamens 18
6. Gravimetric density comparisons for 3DP ground and ﬂight specimens 2O
7. Summary of density differences for ground and ﬂight mechanical test specimens 23
8. Summary of mechanicaltest specimens 23
9. Summary of tensile test data 25
10. Comparison of tensile test data for ground and ﬂight specimens 26
11. Summary of compression test data 28
12. Comparison of compression properties for ground and ﬂight specimens 29
13. Summary of ﬂexure test data 3O
14. Comparison of ﬂexural properties for ground and ﬂight specimens 3O
15. Summary of regression analyses for density and mechanical properties 31
16. Mean CT numbers for corresponding ﬂight and ground specimens 54

17. Results of the comparison of upper and lower section CT number mean values
for each specimen 57
18. Z-calibration values for 3DP phaseIﬂight operations 7O
19. Z-calibration values for 3DP phaseIground operations 71

XV

"
"18","LIST OF TABLES (Continued)

20. Comparison of average distances between the midplane 0f the specimen

and specimen ends for ground and ﬂight 74
21. Dimensional error in features of range coupon for ground and ﬂight specimens 77
22. Comparison of eccentricity for ground and ﬂight compression specimens 78
23. Summary of density differences for 3DP ground and ﬂight mechanical

test coupons 80
24. Summary of mechanicalmaterialproperty differences 80
25. Build tray and specimens for ﬂight prints 86
26. Inﬂuence factors and credibility 104
27. Summary of data series for ABS plastic produced Via FDM 122
28. Tensile data comparison for all specimen classes 123
29. Compression data comparison for all specimen classes 126
30. Flexuraldata comparison for allspecimen classes 127

XVi

"
"19","LIST OF ACRONYMS AND DESIGNATORS
3D-CT 3D computed tomography
3DP 3D Printing in Zero-G
ABS acrylonitrile butadiene styrene
AFM atomic force microscopy
AMF Additive Manufacturing Facility
AO atomic oxygen
ARC Ames Research Center
ASME American Society of Mechanical Engineers
ASTM American Society of Materials Testing
CAD computer aided design
CT computed tomography
EDU energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
ETU engineering test unit
F ﬂight specimen
FDM fused deposition modeling
FTIR Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
G ground specimen
GTU ground test unit
ISM in-space manufacturing
ISRU in situ resource utilization

XVii

"
"20","LIST OF ACRONYMS AND DESIGNATORS (Continued)
188 International Space Station
LDI low-density indication
LED light-emitting diode
LEO low-Earth orbit
MAPTIS Materials and Processes Technical Information System
MR moving range
MSFC Marshall Space Flight Center
MSG Microgravity Science Glovebox
NDE nondestructive evaluation
NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology
RFI request for information
RT radiographic testing
SBIR Small Business Innovative Research
SD standard deviation
SEM scanning electron microscopy
STEM science, technology, engineering, and math
T&E testing and evaluation
TIM technical interchange meeting
TP Technical Publication
TRL Technology Readiness Level
UV ultraviolet
V&V veriﬁcation and validation

XViii

"
"21","NOMENCLATURE
E modulus of elasticity
R2 squared correlation coefﬁcient
06 statistical signiﬁcance level
A difference
p gravimetric density
O-ﬂex ﬂexural stress
O'maXDZOO/O maximum stress corresponding to 20% strain
Guts ultimate tensile strength
Gys yield strength

XiX

"
"22",""
"23","TECHNICAL PUBLICATION
SUMMARY REPORT ON PHASE I RESULTS FROM THE 3D PRINTING
IN ZERO-G TECHNOLOGY DEMONSTRATION MISSION, VOLUME I
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The 3D Printing in Zero-G Technology Demonstration Mission

NASA Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) and the Agency as a whole are currently
engaged in a number of in-space manufacturing (ISM) activities that have the potential to reduce
launch costs, enhance crew safety, and provide the capabilities needed to undertake long-duration
spaceﬂight. The recent 3D Printing in Zero-G (3DP) experiment conducted on board the Interna-
tional Space Station (188) demonstrated that parts of acylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic
can be manufactured in microgravity using fused deposition modeling (FDM). This project repre-
sents the beginning of the development of a capability that is critical to future NASA missions.

The 3DP technology demonstration is the ﬁrst payload to perform 3D printing (or, synon-
ymously, additive manufacturing) in a microgravity environment over a long time constant. This
demonstration represents the ﬁrst step towards development of an ISM capability which has the
potential to enhance crew safety, enable long-duration missions where cargo resupply may not be
an option, and disrupt the orbital supply change to reduce reliance on Earth-based platforms.1 The
3DP payload was developed by the private company Made In Space, Inc., under a NASA Small
Business Innovative Research (SBIR) phase III contract. The 3DP technology demonstration was
j ointly funded by the NASA Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate (through the
Advanced Exploration Systems and International Space Station programs) and the Space Technol-
ogy Mission Directorate (Game Changing Development program). The NASA team provided guid-
ance for the payload design, early prototype and ﬂight unit qualiﬁcation testing, payload integration
management, ground operations personnel, the ﬂight to the ISS (SpaceX-4), and crew time for the
printer’s operation.

The printer was designed to operate within the Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG), which
provided containment, circulation to the outside of the printer and the electronics box, as well as
cooling capabilities to prevent the printer from overheating. The 3DP payload used an extrusion-
based process, FDM, to create ABS plastic parts. The Choice of ABS as feedstock material was driven
by its relatively low extrusion temperature, low toxicity, use in other commercial printing units, and
strength relative to other feedstocks. 3DP also contains its own environmental control unit, which is
designed to regulate cooling and provide ﬁltration of the air within the printer volume. Parts were
printed from data ﬁles loaded on the device at launch, as well as an additional ﬁle uplinked to 3DP
on orbit.

"
"24","3DP was unloaded and remained in stowage until installation in MSG on November 17, 2014.

The phase I printing, following the calibration of the device, occurred from November 24, 2014, to

December 15, 2014, as crew time allowed. 3DP was removed from the MSG on December 16, 2014,

and will remain in stowage until crew time becomes available for phase II prints. The phase I prints

were brought to Earth on SpaeeX-5 on February 10, 2015, and unboxed at MSFC on April 6, 2015.

From April to September 2015, the specimens underwent several phases of testing to characterize

differences between analogous ﬂight and ground printed specimens (ground prints were made using

the ﬂight printer in the glovebox installation at MSFC prior to the printer’s launch to ISS) and assess
microgravity effects on the FDM process. The results of each phase of testing (Visual inspection,
structured light scanning, X-ray and computed tomography (CT), structured light scanning, and
optical microscopy) are summarized in this Technical Publication (TP). Results were also outbriefed
during a technical interchange meeting (TIM) held on December 2 and 3, 2015, at MSFC. This TP
a1s0 captures the discussions, input, and recommendations from the broader materials science com-
munity regarding analysis and interpretation of the phase I print results. A detailed summary of
this meeting and an overview of the results from the 3DP phase I operations that were presented are

provided in appendix A.

1.2 An Overview of In-Space Manufacturing
The ISM project is responsible for developing the manufacturing capabilities that will provide
on-demand, sustainable operations during future NASA exploration missions. The scope of this
work includes testing and advancing the candidate manufacturing technologies for in-spaee appli-
cations, as well as developing the skills and processes (such as deﬁning veriﬁcation and validation

(V&V) activities) that will enable the technologies to become institutionalized. ISM utilizes the ISS

as a testbed for technology demonstration missions that will serve as the proving ground to transi-

tion these technologies to an orbital platform, enhancing crew safety and reducing reliance on Earth.

While 3D printing (and particularly the 3DP technology demonstration mission) are ISM’s
highest proﬁle activities, ISM includes work in many development areas that are key to reducing re1i-
anee 0n Earth-based platforms and enabling sustainable, safe exploration. These include:

° Feedstock recycling—The feedstock recycler, which will reeycle/reclaim 3D printed parts and/or
packing materials into feedstock materials which can then be used to manufacture parts using 3D
printing facilities on station.

° Printed electronics—Leverage ground-based developments to enable ISM of functional electronic
components, sensors, and circuits.

° Printable sate11ites—The combination of 3DP coupled with printable electronics enables the on-
orbit capability to produce small sate11ites ‘on demand.’

° Multimaterial 3D printing—Additively manufacturing metallic parts in space is a desirable capa-
bility for large structures, components with high strength requirements, and repairs. NASA is eval-
uating various additive manufacturing metal processes for use in the space environment.

2

"
"25","° External structures and repairs—Throughout the lifecycle of space structures, astronauts Will need
to perform repairs on tools, components, and structures in space. A previous project at NASA
Johnson Space Center investigated the use of structured light scanning techniques to create a digi-
tal model of damage and how additive manufacturing technologies such as 3DP and metallic
manufacturing techniques (including electron beam welding) could be used to perform repairs.

° Additive construetion—These activities are focused on developing a capability to print structures
on planetary bodies or asteroids using available resources.

The ISM program is focused on evolving manufacturing technologies from Earth-reliant t0
Earth-independent, work that is key to NASA’s exploration path. The 188, currently funded through
2024, Will continue to serve as the primary testbed and proving ground for ISM technologies. These
include the 3DP technology demonstration that is the focus of this TP, the Additive Manufacturing
Facility (AMF) (future hardware that Will operate on 188 under the management of the Center for
the Advancement of Science in Space), the feedstock recycler, the development of the part utiliza-
tion catalog, printable electronics, and investigations into additive manufacturing of metallies and
external repair.

On Earth, the program includes work on certiﬁcation and inspection processes, development
of a characteristic material properties database for parts manufactured in the space environment
using ISM capabilities, design of control systems and supporting software for ISM, and ground-
based technology maturation and demonstrations. Many of these activities (such as the Additive
Construction for Mobile Emplaeement project, Which seeks to develop a capability to print eus-
tom-designed expeditionary structures from either native concrete or concrete derived from avail-
able material on planetary bodies) represent intensive collaborations between the ISM and in situ
resource utilization (ISRU) communities.2

ISM is also a powerful tool to increase student engagement in science, technology, engi-
neering, and math (STEM) educational activities and develop the next generation of engineers.
Recently, NASA and the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) collaborated on
a student competition, called the National Future Engineers STEM program, to design a tool that
could be used by an astronaut on 188.3 The Winning part, a multipurpose maintenance tool, Will be
printed on 188 as part of phase 11 operations for the 3D printer currently on station. A similar com-
petition to develop a container for 188 use that can be printed in space is currently underway. More
information about these and other NASA/ASME competitions can be found at <WWW.futureengi—
neers.org>.

3

"
"26","@’ ln-Space Manufacturing Phased Technology
Development Roadmap
Earth-based Demos: Ground and ISS Exploration
_ _ 5.1.”,- _ I,_ _ Mars
. q. __ f .‘ .3 1 4.. -' _____. Asteroids
.- "" t . 1'"": ..|-- A 2:. Lunar
_ - ---.. 1 1
I ,_ “ll. . - «a gs.
'- ‘ .-.~' Mtl Lagrange
i=_ _ 1"", cler priﬁtﬁqg Pomt
."" 1* w - SmallSats _'I_-.I_
1. . J 'ntable SeIf-repair/ .3
I I ' _ 3D Print Tech Demo tronics Replicate
Pre-2012 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2020-25 2025 2030-40
Ground and Parabolic o In-space: 3D Print: ISS: Lunar, Lagrange Planetary Mars Multi-Material
Centric: First Plastic Printer Utilization/Facility FabLabs Surfaces Fab Lab
. Multiple FDM on '88 Tech Demo Focus 0 Initial Robotic/Re— Pomts Fab I - Provision and Utilize
Zero-G Parabolic . NIAC Contour o In-space Recycler mote Missions 0 Transport Vehicle In Situ Resources
Flights Crafting IDemo d F I - Provision Feedstock EgidSEESBWOUId ?;???de
. o ntegrate aciity . Evolve to Utilizin In apa iiy - a a : rovi es
Eigfégﬁtrehwetals o NIAC Printable Systems for Situ Materials 9 . A dditive On-Demand
Spacecraft StrongerTypes 0f (NaturalResources, C t t' d Manufacturing 0f
. Ground-Based Extrusiqn Materials Synthetic Biology) Rgngiﬁtfgrag Structures,
Printable , Small Sat in a Da for MuIItIple Uses _ .. p g Electrongqsz and
El - /S y Including Metals ' Product.AbIlIty ,to Structures Pan‘s UtIlIzm
ectromcs pace— and Various Plastics Produce, Repair, ln-Situ and E&Situ
, Verification and SpaeIe-based - Printable Electronics and Structure§ 9’? Eesources.
Certiﬁcation Addltlve NRC Study Tech Demo gggzgdzéﬁdﬂuvmg :ncludeIs Ability to
ns 9C,
Processes under ' ISRU Phase II ' Synthetic BiOIOgy o Autonomous Final RegyCIe/Redaim,
Development SBIRs Demo Milling to andNPogt-S’rocess
, - as ee e
Materials Database . Ionic Liquids 0 Metal Demo Options Autonomously to
o Cubesat Design and A C UItIIEnately IProvnde
Development 0 Printable Electronics ° DeMESGFOUHd Egln-Igtuestamment at
Destinations.
ISS Serves as a Key Exploration Test-Bed for the Required Technology Maturation and Demonstrations
Figure 1. ISM phased technology roadmap.

ISM has developed a phased technology roadmap (ﬁg. 1) to capture the chronology of
work needed to transition identiﬁed manufacturing technologies from Earth-based t0 exploration-
based through the 2030—2040 timeframe. The immediate focus and ﬁrst step is in-space 3D printing
and recycling of plastics, but in future years, the breadth and scope of activities are anticipated
to rapidly grow to include printable electronics, ionic liquids (another ISRU collaborative activ-
ity), additive manufacturing of metallics, and development and demonstration of external repair
capabilities. With the scheduled decommissioning of ISS in 2024, ISM could evolve (based on the
technology maturation made possible by ISS technology demonstrations in the preceding years)
to include fabrication labs 0n the M0011, asteroids, in Cislunar space, or even the Martian surface.
A fabrication lab would provide on-demand manufacturing of structures, electronics, and parts Via
processes that utilize in situ and eX situ (renewable) resources. The suite of ISM technologies identi-
ﬁed in the roadmap will be key enablers for exploration and self—sustainment at any destination.

4

"
"27","All of the technology development activities identiﬁed in ﬁgure 1 Will require extensive mate-
rials Characterization work for materials and parts/systems produced using ISM capabilities. The
ISM team at MSFC is working to coordinate an integrated team to deﬁne and execute material
property development activities to achieve the following objectives:

(1) Identify key material properties needed for design and analysis.

(2) Develop a materials characterization approach to establish baseline material properties
for plastic parts manufactured in space using current and future 3DP facilities.

(3) Understand relationships between manufacturing process variables and resulting material
properties. This includes characterizing the effects of ﬁlament layup/orientation, feedstock types and
lots, and operating the FDM process in the microgravity environment. Printer-to—printer (and build-
to—build) variability must also be Characterized.

(4) Anchor characteristic property data reported in (2) With results from structural tests of
printed parts to assess the predictive capability of cataloged property values for design and analysis
tasks.

(5) Report characteristic property values for materials and/ or material systems in the Materi-
als and Processes Technical Information System (MAPTIS). (A material system may be deﬁned as
a particular combination of printer/feedstoek/ﬁlament layup/operational environment.) Values in
the MAPTIS database represent validated properties that can be used for the purposes of design and
analysis.

Developing a materials characterization roadmap for ISM that Will enable functional
use of the 3D printer currently on 188 was the primary focus of the ﬁrst TIM held in July 2015
(a summary of this meeting can be found in ref. 4). These tasks are foundational for all future ISM
activities related to 3D printing of plastics. Materials characterization is also necessary precur-
sor work for V&V activities that Will be required for parts to be included in the utilization catalog
(a library of approved parts that can be printed on station). Follow-on activities that Will also require
a materials characterization approach and database capability for materials of interest include the
AMP, the in-spaee reeyeler ISS technology demonstration, and the launch packaging reeyeler. The
latter two pieces of hardware Will recycle 3D printed parts and launch packaging materials into
feedstock (Which can then be potentially used by 3DP 0r AMF) to Close the logistics loop. Robust
materials Characterization is essential to ensure that parts produced With ISM capabilities Will satisfy
NASA’s stringent functional requirements for spaceﬂight hardware, and the integrated team that Will
be formed through this work represents a Vital Agency resource for the future development of evolv-
able manufacturing systems that promote space sustainability.

5

"
"28","2. TEST PLAN FOR PHASE I PRINTS FROM THE 3D PRINTING
IN ZERO-G TECHNOLOGY DEMONSTRATION MISSION

This section summarizes the print matrix for phase I and provides details on test procedures
and objectives. Ground prints for the 3DP technology demonstration mission took place in June
2015 at MSFC. These prints were made on the ﬂight printer in the ground MSG unit. The printer
launched to 188 in September 2014 on Space X-4 and was installed in the MSG on station on Novem-
ber 17, 2014. Phase I ﬂight prints took place between November 24, 2014, and December 15, 2014.
3DP was removed from the glovebox on December 16, 2014. Phase I ﬂight prints returned to Earth
on SpaeeX-5 on February 10, 2015, and arrived at MSFC 0n Apri16, 2015. From April to September
2015, the parts completed multiple phases of testing, including photographie/Visual inspection, X-ray
and CT, structured 1ight scanning, mechanical testing, and optical microscopy. The objective of this
testing was to compare ﬂight prints against analogous ground prints to evaluate microgravity effects
on the FDM process, characterize printer performance, and assess the material quality achievable
with the 3DP unit.

2.1 Phase I Print Matrix

Filament 0f undyed ABS plastic at 1.75 mm diameter was used for the phase I prints. The
ﬁlament was heated to an extrusion temperature between 230 °C and 250 °C and fed through
a 0.4-mm extruder tip. A set of samples were built with the ﬂight printer unit and ﬂight feedstock
prior to launch (the ground control samples). These samples were directly compared with the speci-
mens printed using the ﬂight unit on board the 188 in November and December 2014. Mechanical
test specimens were built with a i45o layup with a solid inﬁll. Detailed information about the speci-
mens from the ground and ﬂight prints appear in table 1.
6

"
"29","Table 1. Catalog of phase I prints.
Characteristic
Sample Dimensions
Quantity Sample Name (cm)
6 Calibration Length: 3.00 This functional checkout and
(5 flight, coupon Width: 3.00 calibration coupon was printed to
(1 ground) Height: 0.41 determine the calibration distance
between the extruder and print
plate.
2 Extruder head Length: 5.89 This is a replacement part for the
(1 flight, casing Width: 4.09 3D printer itself; it is a side plate of
1 ground) Height: 0.51 the extruder casing.
2 Layer quality test Length: 1.00 This layer quality test specimen
(1 flight, specimen Width: 1.00 was printed to assess adhesion
1 ground) Height: 3.00 between layers and tolerances.
8 Tensile coupon Length: 11.35 The purpose of this coupon is to
(4 flight, Width: 1.91 assess the tensile strength of the
4 ground) Neck width: 0.61 printed material at i45° layup
Height: 0.41 orientation.
6 Compression Diameter: 1.27 Coupon to assess compressive
(3 flight, coupon Height: 2.54 strength of the printed material.
3 ground)
6 Flexural coupon Length: 8.81 Coupon to assess flexure proper-
(3 flight, Width: 0.99 ties of the printed material at
3 ground) Height: 0.41 i45° layup orientation.
7

"
"30","Table 1. Catalog of phase I prints (Continued).
Characteristic
Sample Dimensions
Quantity Sample Name (cm)
3 Negative range Length: 7.49 This coupon will be used to
(2 ground, coupon Width: 2.01 assess the performance, geomet-

1 flight) Height: 0.43 ric accuracy, and tolerances of the
3DP unit.

2 Torque tool Diameter: 3.00 This coupon demonstrates the
(1 ground, specimen Height: 2.50 ability of 3DP to fabricate a
1 flight) replacement crew tool.
2 Crowfoot Length: 4.70 This coupon demonstrates the
(1 ground, specimen Width: 3.99 ability of 3DP to fabricate a
1 flight) Height: 1.30 replacement crew tool.
2 Structural clip Length: 2.69 This is a structural
(1 ground, component Width: 2.10 connector/spacer that can be

1 flight) Height: 0.90 utilized to assemble avionics
(specifically electronics cards)
on orbit.

2 Positive range Length: 6.12 This coupon will be used to
(1 ground, coupon Width: 2.01 assess the performance, geo-

1 flight) Height: 0.51 metric accuracy, and tolerances
of the 3DP unit for positive relief
features.

8

"
"31","Table 1. Catalog of phase I prints (Continued).
Characteristic
Sample Dimensions
Quantity Sample Name (cm)
2 Sample container Body diameter: 4.03 This set will test the printer’s capa-
(1 ground, Body height: 3.28 bility to produce two components
1 flight) Top diameter: 4.60 in the same print. Part also has
interlocking threads.
2 Microgravity Length: 2.46 This is a test of a part that would
(1 ground, structure Width: 2.21 be difficult, if not impossible,
1 flight) specimen 1 Height: 0.51 to successfully 3D print in the
pictured orientation due to gravity
(i.e., sag, overhang, etc.). Speci-
men used to demonstrate how
microgravity environment can be
exploited to print structures that
are not possible terrestriaIIy (i.e.,
large overhangs without supports).
1 Wire tie* Length: 1.92 Part intended to assess flexibility
(ground) Width: 1.30 of the material after printing.
Height: 0.12
1 Ratchet* r- . Length: 11.35 This part was uplinked, illustrating
(flight) .- -"" -. Width: 3.30 how a part can be designed on
- '_ Height: 2.59 Earth and manufactured in space,
- ' ' on demand.
H.
Li -
*Note: Wire tie is a ground control sample and ratchet is a flight sample. As such, the wire tie does not have a flight analog and the ratchet
does not have a ground analog. No direct comparison between flight and ground can be made for these parts, but their respective
evaluations can be used to ascertain the overall functionality of the machine and process.
9

"
"32","Specimen IDs and descriptions are cataloged in table 2. The ‘G’ preﬁx denotes a ground

specimen and the ‘F’ preﬁx denotes a ﬂight specimen.
Table 2. Specimen IDs.
2.2 Tests and Test Procedures

All samples were stored individually in clearly marked and sealed plastic bags. When not
undergoing testing, samples were kept in a dry place at room temperature and away from direct
sunlight and moisture sources. Test conductors were required to wear latex or other suitable gloves
during testing to avoid direct skin contact and potential contamination of the samples.
2.2.1 Photographic Inspection

Each ground sample, ﬂight sample, and print tray underwent a thorough Visual and photo-
graphic inspection upon receipt and unboxing of the specimens at MSFC in April 2015. During this
inspection, photographs were taken from different angles and with appropriate scale representation
(e.g., a standard ruler) using a digital camera (with a megapixel resolution of 8 or greater) for print-
quality images. Anomalies and any suspicion of damage (which may have occurred when the print
was removed from the print tray) as well as any Visually apparent delamination, open voids, curling,
and warping were noted.
10

"
"33","2.2.2 Mass Measurement

A measurement of the mass using a calibrated laboratory scale accurate to 0.1 mg was repeated
ﬁve times for each specimen. Density was calculated based on these measurements, and the volume
was determined by structured light scanning. Mass measurement was completed in May 2015. Mass
measurements are summarized in section 3.

2.2.3 Structured Light Scanning

A structured light scanning technique was used to generate a detailed dataset characterizing
the surface geometric variations between the printed part for the ﬂight and ground samples and the
computer aided design (CAD) model. The scanning used an ATOS 11, Triple Sean blue light-emitting
diode (LED) scanner. The scanner has an accuracy of i 12.7 um at these volumes and the capability
to capture stereoscopic images at a resolution of 5 million pixels per scan. The samples were coated
in talcum powder (nonreactive with the ABS plastic) to reduce the reﬂectivity of the sample surfaces
and provide a more accurate scan. The talcum powder grain size is z10 am in diameter, and will have
little effect on the measurements made by the scanner.

The software package for the ATOS scanner uses the stereoscopic images to capture the fringe
pattern sent out from the central LED projector contained in the scanner. The software triangulates
all of the surface data (using the grayscale pixels, black and white contrast from the fringe pattern)
to determine the shape of the geometry. Through this process, the software generates a complete 3D
model of the object being scanned. The software also provides real-time feedback to show missing
surface data anywhere on the object. The missing data will be captured in subsequent scans to ensure
all sides of the object are represented. The software package also has the capability to compare the
model of the object generated from the scans with the original CAD model from which the print was
made. This analysis reveals deviations between the nominal CAD geometry and the as-printed part.
The structured light scanning analysis was performed in June and July of 2015. The data from this
analysis are discussed in section 6.

2.2.4 Radiographic Testing and Computed Tomography

Three-dimensional computed tomography (3D-CT) scans of the mechanical test specimens
were conducted in parallel with structured light scanning. The purpose of this analysis was to image
and characterize any internal structures or material deﬁciencies that could affect mechanical prop-
erties. Samples were imaged using a Phoenix Nanomelx 160. To perform 3D-CT, 2D images were
acquired through a 360° rotational axis; successive 2D images of the specimen (which is ﬁxtured in
the scan chamber and rotated 360°) were stitched together to construct a 3D image. Depending on
the sample’s geometry, resolutions as low as 8—10 um are possible.

Two-dimensional oblique X-rays of all specimens were taken using this same instrument. The
computer numerical controlled table for X-rays is calibrated to a measurement accuracy in the z-aXis
0f 5 um. The system has a detail detectability as low as 0.4 um in 2D mode. Results of this testing
appear in section 4.

1 1

"
"34","2.2.5 Mechanical Testing

Mechanical testing commenced in August 2015 after the nondestructive evaluations (NDEs)
in sections 22.1—22.4 were complete. Tensile tests followed a standard method deﬁned in American
Society of Materials Testing (ASTM) D638 and measured the tensile strength, yield strength, elastic
modulus, and fracture elongation of the printed material.5 A type I specimen would generally be
chosen for this application due to the reduced stress concentration at the ﬁllet, but the dimensions
prescribed by the ASTM standard were almost too large for the printer build volume to accom-
modate. This limitation drove the alternate choice of the type IV specimen. The ﬂexural test, per
ASTM D790, provided the ﬂexural stress and modulus of the printed samples.6 The compression
test, ASTM D695, was used to determine the Characteristic compressive stress and modulus of the
specimens.7 Mechanical testing was completed in September 2015 and is summarized in section 3.
2.2.6 Optical Microscopy and Scanning Electron Microscopy

Optical microscope images of all specimens were taken using a Keyenee VR-3200. These
images reveal structural details on the surface of the parts as well as layers and regions damaged
by removal from the build tray. Interlaminar regions were examined to ascertain if there was a sig-
niﬁcant difference in layer thickness for ﬂight and ground specimens. Defects 0r anomalies noted
in previous phases of testing were examined closely. Fracture surfaces of mechanical test coupons
were also evaluated using this technique. Optical microscopy of the phase I prints was completed in
September 2015 and is discussed in section 5.

Per the original test plan, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was slated to be performed on
the mechanical test coupons as well as some selected specimens using a Hitachi S-37OON instrument.
Uneoated samples were to be imaged using secondary electrons in a low vacuum mode to investi-
gate morphology and surface topography, particularly in areas of delamination. Fracture surfaces
from mechanical testing and areas with evidence of over-adherenee to the print tray represent key
regions for evaluation. This work has not been executed at the time of this writing, but will be part of
a follow-on analysis for 3DP phase I.

The overall test plan for the ground and ﬂight specimens is summarized in table 3. Specimens
which will undergo SEM are the calibration coupons, tensile specimens (fracture surfaces and paddle
sections), layer quality specimens, and ﬂexure specimens.

12

"
"35","Table 3. Summary of specimens and tests.
Measure
Mass, Structured Computed Mechanical
Photographic/ Calculate Light Tomography Testing
Sample Name Visual Inspection Density Scanning Scan (ASTM Standard)
speCImen
coupon
speCImen
-------
speCImen
component
-------
coupon
speCImen1
——————-
The overall objectives of these tests are as follows:
° Determine Whether operational capability of the printer is impacted by microgravity.
° Assess effect of microgravity 0n the FDM process, speciﬁcally through evaluation of material
properties of parts produced Via FDM in this environment.
° Characterize printer performance.

Analysis of the test results and comparison of the ﬂight and ground prints and print trays
using the methods discussed previously appear in subsequent sections of this TP. Lessons learned
from the phase I print specimens (see. 8) Will inform requirements for the design of next generation
spaee-based polymeric 3D printers.

13

"
"36","2.3 Discussion and Additional Notes

Test plans for specimens from 3DP phase I were carefully developed to provide sufﬁcient
information to make a comparative evaluation of differences between ﬂight and ground specimens
and assess any engineering-signiﬁeant microgravity effects on the FDM process. For future utiliza-
tion of 3DP, test plans Will be necessary to validate the performance of the part in its intended use
environment and Will be key to V&V activities required to certify designs and parts for usage (and
subsequent inclusion in the utilization catalog, a library of preapproved parts for printing on 188).

The anisotropy of materials produced Via FDM, as well as the high speciﬁcity of the as-
manufaetured part to processing variables (in particular ﬁlament layup/orientation), present materi-
als Characterization Challenges that are very analogous to those faced by the composites and welding
communities. The possibility of testing to composite standards rather than the standards for plas-
tics was a key point of discussion in test plan development. While additively manufactured ABS,
UltemTM, etc. are anisotropic plastics, the directional dependence of the properties of these materials
should not drive ISM practitioners to evaluate them using standards written speciﬁcally for compos-
ites. This philosophy is reﬂected in a National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) docu-
ment that surveys material testing standards for polymeric materials; “Materials Testing Standards
for Additive Manufacturing of Polymer Materials: State of the Art and Standards Applicability”
summarizes established International Organization for Standardization and ASTM standards for
materials testing of polymers and assesses their applicability to additively manufactured plastics.8 In
most cases, NIST recommends against testing to standards for polymer matrix composite, carbon
ﬁber reinforced plastic, and similar classes of materials. The overall recommendation for polymers
produced using additive manufacturing techniques is to apply standards for plastics With guidance
(guidance in this context may mean using test specimens of different dimensions from those indi-
cated in the standard, testing at elevated temperatures or in immersive environments, and careful
consideration and characterization of anisotropy). The overall consensus from this document and
from discussions Which took place during the ﬁrst TIM are that the ISM team should generally use
standards for plastics When testing FDM-produeed specimens, but modiﬁcations to the standard
may be necessary.4=8 The ISM team’s current approach is to remain ﬂexible With regard to standards
implementation. At this stage in material property development activities, it is more important to test
consistently and document test procedures than to follow standards that, as written, may not be best
suited for the materials being evaluated. Development of standards and Which existing standards are
appropriate for additive manufacturing is an ongoing area of debate in the broader additive manu-
facturing community. There is an ASTM committee (F42) as well as a NIST group tasked With look-
ing at these speciﬁc issues in more detail.9 The ISM team is aware of the activities of these groups
and Will incorporate their recommendations for best practices as they evolve.

It is important to critically examine the test plan for the 3DP technology demonstration mis-
sion since testing and evaluation (T&E) of subsequent specimens from 3DP Will likely follow a simi-
lar process ﬂow. V&V activities for candidate parts to be included in the utilization catalog Will also
draw extensively from this plan. The objective of the testing for the ground and ﬂight specimens is
to characterize differences between specimens based on build environment and determine Which of
these differences are attributable to microgravity effects on the manufacturing process. In executing
the phase I test plan, each print underwent Visual and photographic inspection, mass measurement,
l4

"
"37","structured light scanning (to characterize dimensional variations between nominal CAD geometry
and the as-built specimen), density evaluation (derived from mass measurements and volume eal-
eulation from structured light scanning), CT and radiographie testing (RT) (to evaluate internal
geometry/layer adhesion), mechanical testing (tensile, ﬂexural, and compression), and optical
microscopy. The decision was made to limit CT evaluation to mechanical specimens With the aim
of establishing linkages between any unexpected failures in destructive testing and internal material
ﬂaws. Optical microscopy was performed on fracture surfaces, but future SEM evaluation is needed
to provide additional insight into failure mechanisms. While there are no major deﬁciencies in the
phase I test plan, additional analysis of phase I specimens Will be required to answer some of the
open questions discussed in subsequent sections of this TP. Future 3DP specimens and functional
parts With more clearly deﬁned use scenarios, applications, and environments may also require addi-
tional tests and inspections that are not represented in the 3DP phase I test regime.

One ancillary test initiative of note is a currently funded effort at MSFC to conduct space
environment effects testing for ABS plastic produced Via FDM. Mechanical and ballistic impact test-
ing of specimens exposed to the space environment in low-Earth orbit (LEO) using a space station
exposure facility Will assess the degree to Which LEO levels of atomic oxygen (A0) and ultraviolet
(UV) radiation degrade material performance. Atomic oxygen typically has a severe degradative
effect on polymeric materials unless their chemical structure is modiﬁed or a coating is applied to
mitigate the erosion processes initiated by AQIO

15

"
"38","3. MECHANICAL TEST DATA AND DENSITY COMPARISONS
The objective of this phase of testing was to ascertain whether operation of the FDM pro-
cess in microgravity has any engineering-signiﬂeant impact on material quality and performance by
comparing densiﬁcation and mechanical properties for the ground and ﬂight specimens.
3.1 Summary of Results of Density Comparison
Following receipt and unboxing 0f the ﬂight specimens from the 3DP phase I prints at MSFC
in April 2015, ground and ﬂight specimens were weighed in the precision metrology laboratory at
MSFC. Each specimen was weighed ﬁve times using a calibrated laboratory scale (Mettler analytical
balance) with a capacity of 261 g and a resolution of 1><10—5 g. The weighing pan was enclosed in
an isolation chamber. Specimen weights are summarized in table 4. They range from 0.6 g (micrograv-
ity structure specimen) to z16 g (ratchet). These measurements were used to obtain a Characteristic
value for the mean weight of each specimen. Uncertainty in the reported values was generally on the
order of 10—5.
Table 4. Average weights of 3DP specimens.
—--
Sample Description Sample ID (9)
Calibration coupon
Extruder plate
_——
Layer quality specimen
_——
_——
_——
Negative range specimen
16

"
"39","Table 4. Average weights of 3DP specimens (Continued).
—--
Sample Description Sample ID (9)
_——
_——
Structural clip
_——
Positive range specimen
_——
_——
_——
_——
_——
_——
_——
_——
Sample container (container)
_——
Sample container (lid)
_——
*Piece of flight extruder plate peeled off during removal from build tray.
17

"
"40","The gravimetrie density p was subsequently calculated for each specimen by dividing the
mean mass value by the corresponding volume obtained from structured light scanning (see. 6).
The scanner has an accuracy of i127 um at the scale of the 3DP specimens. Point Cloud data from
the structured light scan are imported into a software program, Geomagie® ControlTM. Surface ﬁll
operations allow the user to create a complete surface and execute a volume calculation. This volume
is representative of the as-built part and not the CAD geometry. The surface ﬁll algorithm creates
high-quality surfaces that are representative of the part geometry and is a standard procedure for
structured light scanning to ﬁll in data that are missed/not captured by the scan. Reported volumes
for the specimen are tabulated in table 5 and range from 0.7 em3 (microgravity structure specimen) to
35 em3 (ratchet). Since the volumes represent a single calculation based on structured light scan data
rather than repeated measurements, an uncertainty value is not reported.
Table 5. Volume measurements for 3DP specimens.
—-—
Sample Description Sample ID (cm3)
Calibration coupon
Extruder plate* _—
-——
Layer quality specimen
-——
-——
-——
-——
-——
-——
-——
Structuralcup
-——
Positive range specimen
-——
18

"
"41","Table 5. Volume measurements for 3DP specimens (Continued).
Volume
Sample Description Sample ID (cm3)

Tensile 2 (3012

Compression 2 GO13

Flexure 2 (3014

Tensiles c3015

Compression 3 GO16

Hams c3017

Tensile 4 6018

Microgravity structure GO19 —

Sample container GOZOA “

Sample container (lid) GOZOB

Ratchet F021 35.30

*Structured light scanning had difficulty capturing point cloud data for
the extruder specimens in the area around the lettering. Flight extruder
plate also broke off during removal from print tray. Density was not
calculated for these specimens in light of the likely significant discrep-
ancy between actual and measured specimen volume.

**Microgravity structure specimen was also missing some point data.
Confidence in the calculated volume is insufficient to derive a density
value based on it.

19

"
"42","Where appropriate, the density of each ﬂight specimen was compared directly against its
respective ground sample. In cases where multiple specimens of identical geometry were produced
(tensile, ﬂexure, and compression), comparative evaluation was done for the pooled specimen sets
(e.g., mean density of ground tensile specimens versus mean density of ﬂight tensile specimens). The
mean density comparisons for the ground and ﬂight specimens appear in table 6.

Table 6. Gravimetrie density comparisons for 3DP ground and ﬂight specimens.
Average Density of Average Density
Ground Specimen of Flight Specimen Percent Difference
Specimen |D(s) Specimen Description (g/cc) (g/cc) (With Ground as Reference)
GOO4, GO12, GO15, Tensile coupons (pooled)* 0.93 3.4
6018, F004, F012, F015,
F018
GOOS,GO13,GO16,F005, Compression coupons 0.94 0.91 —2.7
F013, F016 (pooled)*
GOO6,GO14,GO17,FOO6, Flexure coupons 0.91 5.4
F014, F017 (pooled)*
6020A Sample container 0.91
(container)
*Since the data for the individual mechanical test coupons are not paired, the density comparison is based on the pooled (average) density value
for the complete set of ground or flight tensile, compression, and flexure specimens.
** Flight specimen only.
***Ground specimen only.

Density values represent gravimetrie (classical) density and do not provide any information
about density variations/gradients within the part or porosity. Another density measurement for
mechanical test specimens was obtained from CT data (see see. 4), but a conversion factor between
‘mean CT’ and gravimetrie density for ABS produced Via FDM has not been developed for this
material.

20

"
"43","The following trends and observations related to the comparative evaluation of density were
noted:

° Ground and ﬂight specimens exhibit statistically signiﬁcant differences (based on a t-test With
06: 0.05) in gravimetrie density.

° In all but two cases (pooled ﬂexure and positive range coupon), the percent difference in mean or
median densities for the ground and ﬂight specimens is <5%. In all cases, the percent difference in
density is <10%.

° In general, ﬂight specimens are slightly denser than ground specimens. Exceptions are the three
compression coupons and the positive range specimen (in these cases, the ground specimens have
a greater gravimetrie density than the ﬂight specimens).

° The densest specimens are the three ﬂight ﬂexure coupons. These specimens are, on average, 6.5%
more dense than the analogous ground specimens.

° Density of injection-molded ABS plastic is reported as 1.046 g/em3. The density of the vast major-
ity of specimens expressed as a percentage of the theoretical density thus falls in the 84% to 92%
range.

° As expected, the calibration coupons and the ratchet (Which have a lower inﬁll percentage) have
much smaller density values (approximately 50% and 45% of theoretical density, respectively) than
the rest of the dataset.

Mechanical test specimens merit Closer evaluation since material consolidation is Closely
linked to mechanical strength and performance. Comparison of the pooled tensile, ﬂexure, and com-
pression data shows that the tensile and ﬂexure ﬂight specimens are more dense than the analogous
ground specimens. The opposite (ground specimens are more dense than ﬂight specimens) is true for
the compression specimens. Overall, the densities for mechanical test specimens seem to represent
two different families of data. Density differences for mechanical test coupons are summarized in
ﬁgures 2—4 and in table 7. Note that the y-aXis scale for the bar charts does not start at the origin.

21

"
"44","0.96 ""—

0.95 ' _

094 —__ —
E 0.93 ' '
,3: 0.92

0.90

0.89 ' _

0.88

Average Density of Ground Average Density of Flight
Tensile Tensile
Figure 2. Comparison of average density of ﬂight and ground tensile specimens.

0.96 — _— _
A 0.94
73 0.93
#5 0.92 _. __.
c . ' _ - _ . _
8 0.91

0.89

0.88 I

Average Density of Ground Average Density of Flight
Compression Compression
Figure 3. Comparison of average density of ﬂight and ground compression specimens.
22

"
"45","0.96
0.95
0.94
E 0.93
3
g 0.92
2
g 0.91
0.89
0'88 Average Density of Ground Average Density of Flight
Flexure Flexure
Figure 4. Comparison of average density for ground and ﬂight ﬂexure specimens.
Table 7. Summary of density differences for ground
and ﬂight mechanical test specimens.
-—
Specimen Type (With Ground as Reference)
3.2 Summary of Results of Mechanical Testing
Flight and ground mechanical test coupons from phase I of the 3DP technology demon-
stration were evaluated using the capabilities of the Mechanical Testing Laboratory at MSFC. The
purpose of this portion of the testing was to assess the effect of microgravity 0n the FDM process,
speciﬁcally through comparative evaluation of material properties of specimens produced Via FDM
in the microgravity environment With terrestrially manufactured counterpart specimens. Table 8
summarizes the type and quantity of specimens tested.
Table 8. Summary of mechanical test specimens.
23

"
"46","3.2.1 Results of Tensile Tests

Mechanical Test Facility personnel performed eight tensile tests (four ﬂight and four ground
specimens) 0n ABS plastic ‘dogbone’ specimens under ambient (75 °F, 0 psig) conditions. Nominal
dimensions for the tensile specimens were based on type IV specimens in ASTM D638-10.5 Width of
the reduced section was 0.25 in with a length of 1.3 in and a thickness of 0.13 in. A 1-in gauge length
extensometer, calibrated per the B-2 classiﬁcation for determining modulus of elasticity, measured
tensile strain up to 100%. Tensile specimens were preloaded to a minimum of 1 lbf at 0.05 in/min,
then pulled at a failure rate of 0.2 in/min. All of the equipment used during these tests was calibrated
per applicable ASTM standards.

Data derived from each tensile test include:

° Ultimate tensile strength (Guts) is the load at fracture divided by the original eross-seetional area of
the test specimen.

° Yield strength (Gys) is the point at which the material begins to deform plastieally (per ASTM
D638-10, the “ﬁrst point on the stress-strain curve at which an increase in strain occurs without
an increase in stress”5).

— Some Classes of materials exhibit behavior that makes it difﬁcult to determine the yield stress. In
these cases, yield stress may be deﬁned as the stress that coincides with some speciﬁc amount of
plastic deformation (e.g., 0.2% of the stressed length).

— For the 3DP specimens, no yield is reported because the maximum and yield stresses are Virtually
coincident for ABS plastic.

° Modulus of elasticity (E) is the ratio of tensile stress to tensile strain (the slope of the line that
represents the linear elastic portion of the stress-strain curve).

° Fracture elongation (%) is the ratio of the initial length of the specimen to the Change in the length
of the specimen measured following fracture. Elongation to failure is a measure of ductility.

24

"
"47","An overlay of the stress—strain curves for the ground and ﬂight tensile specimens is shown in
ﬁgure 5. Table 9 provides a tabular summary of key material properties for each specimen obtained
from its respective tensile test.

5 _
GOO4 A
45 _ . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . (3012 A
---- (3015 A
4 _ . . E. . _ . . . . . . 6018 A
_ . . . _ --—--—-—5.?->_~=.-..__. . . . F004
3.5 J... ,_.__.—-.-—— ....._._—.._ _. _ __ H—FIH-h‘ 1.
j, .M“ -—..__ F012 1.. n!
ﬂ F018
‘J,’ 25 _ _ . _ . . . . _ . . - . . . . . .
2 .65“
1_5 _ I’. . - . . . . - . . . . . . . . .
1 _ E"" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _
0_5 _ . . _ . . . _ _ . _ . . . _ . . _
O _| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
O 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 7 7.5 8 8.5 9
Strain (%)
Figure 5. Stress—strain curves for ground and ﬂight tensile specimens plotted on the same axis.
Table 9. Summary of tensile test data.
Ultimate Tensile Modulus Fracture
Specimen Strength of Elasticity Elongation
ID (ksi) (msi) (%)
*Failure outside the extensometer footprint.
25

"
"48","The comparison of material properties obtained from tensile test data from ground and ﬂight
is summarized in table 10. On average, the ultimate tensile strength of the ﬂight specimens is 17%
greater than the values measured for the ground specimens. The modulus of elasticity for ﬂight speci-
mens is 15% greater than the ground specimen group. The ﬂight specimens, however, have a much
lower elongation to failure than the ground specimens.

Table 10. Comparison of tensile test data for ground and ﬂight specimens.
-----
of Ground of Variation Mean of Flight of Variation (With Ground as
Property Specimens (%) Specimens (%) Reference)
-----n
strength (ksi)
(msi)
—---—n
(%)

Comparative evaluation of tensile curves for ground and ﬂight reveals distinct behavior for
the specimen Classes. While the ﬂight specimens fail at a higher load and have a greater elastic modu-
lus (indications that they are stronger and stiffer than the ground specimens), the percent elongation
to failure for ﬂight specimens is approximately 30%—40% less than that of the ground specimens
(although some decrease in ductility is expected to accompany an increase in strength). Whether the
apparent bias toward increased strength and reduced ductility is a concern will depend on the appli-
cations of the parts produced using the 3DP capability. Activities to anchor predictions of structural
models with results of instrumented testing for functional parts will provide further insight into what
strength and ductility is needed to ensure adequate performance of functional parts.

An important note is that several tensile specimens broke outside the extensometer footprint
(see see. 5 on optical microscopy for images tensile breaks). This was the ease for the ground speci-
mens G004, G012, and G015, as well as the ﬂight specimens F012, F015, and F018. Breakage outside
the extensometer footprint may not invalidate data if strength values are in family with other speci-
mens in the dataset or results of additional testing. Fracture at this location is common in composites
and has been observed extensively in other ground-based material characterization work for ABS.
The Choice of specimen design may contribute to fracture since the ﬁllet creates a stress concentra-
tion and potential initiation point for material failure. Fracture outside the extensometer footprint
does not necessarily correspond to reduced fracture elongation.

Minor extensometer slippage was also noted during testing of ﬂight tensile specimens F012
and F018. This is corrected for by shifting the stress-strain curve so that the linear approximation
of modulus passes through the origin. For F012, the curve was shifted by 0.024%, and for F018, the
curve was shifted 0.019%.

26

"
"49","3.2.2 Results of Compression Tests

Mechanical Test Facility personnel performed siX compression tests (three ground specimens
and three ﬂight specimens) 0n ABS plastic cylinders (dimensions 0.5 in diameter by 1 in long) under
ambient (75 °F, 0 psig) conditions. Nominal dimensions for the tensile specimens were based on
type IV specimens in ASTM D695-10.7 Specimens were placed between the platens of a ‘birdeage’
compression ﬁxture and pulled in tension to create a compressive load on the specimen. A 1-in gauge
length extensometer, calibrated to the required B-2 Classiﬁcation for estimating modulus of elasticity,
was chosen to measure compressive strain up to 100%. Material properties based on 20% compres-
sive strain are reported. Specimens were tested until reaching a local maximum or at least 80% com-
pressive strain (whichever occurred ﬁrst). All of the equipment used during these tests was calibrated
per applicable ASTM standards.

Properties derived from the compression test include:

° Maximum stress (GmaXDZOO/O) (ksi) is the value of compressive stress that corresponds to 20% strain.
° Yield strength (Gys) (ksi) is the point at which the material begins to deform plastieally (the ﬁrst
point on the stress-strain curve at which an increase in strain occurs without an increase in stress).
— Yield stress is deﬁned as the stress that coincides with some speciﬁc amount of plastic deforma-
tion (ASTM D695-107 does not specify a yield offset; an offset of 0.6% of the stressed length was
selected).
° Compressive modulus of elasticity (E) (msi) is the ratio of the compressive stress applied to
a material to the resulting compression.

Figure 6 plots the stress-strain curves derived from the compression test (up to 20% strain) for
the ground and ﬂight compression coupons on the same axis. Table 11 provides a tabular summary
of key material properties for each specimen obtained from its respective compression test.

27

"
"50","8 (3005
6 - . . . . . . . . . . . . _ F005 .A
5.5 . . . . . . . . . . . ##M—wr-F‘” F013
5 . _ . ”éﬂﬂﬂw—f—""W‘ . . F016
E 4.5 . . . _ “""- . -- . . . . . . .
a 35 . . . . . . . . .
15 f: . _ . . . . . . . . . . _ . .
0 .
O123456789101112131415161718192021
Strain (%)
Figure 6. Stress—strain curves for ground and ﬂight compression specimens plotted on the
same aXis.
Table 11. Summary of compression test data.
I""-
Specimen at 20% Strain Yield Stress Modulus
ID (ksi) (ksi) (msi)

The comparison of material properties obtained from compression test data from ground and
ﬂight is summarized in table 12. In general, the ﬂight specimens fail at a lower load and have a lower
elastic modulus than the ground specimens. Comparative weakness in compression for the ﬂight
specimens may be related to their lower density. The relationship between density and mechanical
properties is discussed further in section 3.3 as well as section 7 of this document.

28

"
"51","Table 12. Comparison of compression properties for ground and ﬂight specimens.
Mean Coefficient Coefficient Percent Difference
of Ground of Variation Mean of Flight of Variation (With Ground as
Property Specimens (%) Specimens (%) Reference)

Maximum stress at 7.45 5.00 5.58 3.06 —25.1

20% strain (ksi)

Compressive 0.24 4.17 0.16 9.35 —33.3

modulus (msi)

3.2.3 Results of Flexure Tests

Mechanical Test Facility personnel performed six three-point bend tests (three ground speci-
mens and three ﬂight specimens) under ambient (75° F, 0 psig) conditions per procedure A of ASTM
D790-10.6 Nominal dimensions for the ﬂexure specimens were 0.4 in (width) by 0.16 in (depth).
ASTM D790-10 speciﬁes that a support span-to—depth ratio of 16:1 be used in test setup, provided
“the ratio of the tensile strength to shear strength is less than 8 t0 1.”6 A span of z2.5 in was used for
these tests. The required rate of erosshead motion, per equation (1) of ASTM D790-10, for a speci-
men depth of 0.16 in was calculated to be 0.065 in/min. Specimens were run until failure or until
z5% of outer surface strain was reached (whichever occurred ﬁrst). None of the specimens failed
within 5% outer surface strain. Flexural strength numbers are based on maximum load seen prior to
test termination. All of the equipment used during these tests was calibrated per applicable ASTM
standards.

Properties derived from the ﬂexure test include:

° Flexural stress (Gﬂex) (psi) is the stress in the material just prior to yielding during the ﬂexure test.
° Flexural modulus (ksi) is the ratio of stress to strain in ﬂexural deformation. The ﬂexural modulus
measures the tendency for a material to bend under load.

Figure 7 plots the stress-strain curves derived from the ﬂexural test for the ground and ﬂight
ﬂexure coupons on the same axis. Table 13 provides a tabular summary of key material properties for
each specimen obtained from its respective ﬂexure test.

The comparison of material properties obtained from ﬂexural test data from ground and ﬂight
is summarized in table 14. Ultimate ﬂexural stress and ﬂexural modulus are, on average, approxi-
mately 20%—25% greater for the ﬂight specimens.

29

"
"52","8,000 .- G006 [R
7,500 I -— G014 17-;
2,288 F - _ GO17 FR
M, II I ii-=g!!:!lll_ mun
5’500 .- . -J!=!---III F014 :-
m, Il=gﬂﬂi§!=§-l!!- I mwm
A j r ..:.--—~-—-* .. _
gmw II, ﬁgzu-F_---- I
13’ I'll .- _
§ﬁ£IIE= AggzﬁﬁiiiHEEE
(D ’ lsé/ __ '_|__. ._,_..J._.- - _L_ -|_.._.-_---
3,000 r/ w? T : '3"" 1
2000 4 .._. .— ._. _ ._. HF. ﬂ
’ AI? - i i . |
1,500 Fry .' i — i' '—| —
1000 _ 4 __ _.. .h “I. ._..L_
’ J | h"" | 1 ! | l
0 ‘ I.
0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1 1.2 1.5 1.8 2 2.2 2.5 2.8 3 3.2 3.5 3.8 4 4.2 4.5 4.8 5 5.2 5.5 5.8 6
Strain (%)
Figure 7. Stress—strain curves for ground and ﬂight ﬂexure specimens plotted on the same axis.
Table 13. Summary of ﬂexure test data.
Specimen FlexuraIStress Flexural Modulus
ID (psi) (ksi)
Table 14. Comparison of ﬂexural properties for ground and ﬂight specimens.
Coefficient Coefficient Percent Difference
Mean of Ground of Variation Mean of Flight of Variation (With Ground as
Property Specimens (%) Specimens (%) Reference)
Ultimate flexural 5,211.92 6,544.28 9.3 25.6
stress (psi)
Flexural modulus 197.86 3.9 241.40 22.01
(ksi)
30

"
"53","3.3 Correlation Analysis: Density and Mechanical Properties

One of the key tenets of materials science is that material structure determines properties.
Thus, it is not surprising that the degree of material consolidation (as measured in terms of
gravimetrie density) plays a key role in mechanical performance of a material. A correlation analysis
was performed using the density data and the mechanical property data obtained from tensile, ﬂexure,
and compression tests to quantify the relationship between density and mechanical properties for
the 3DP phase I specimens. The correlation coefﬁcient measures the strength of linear association
between two variables. Values are between —1 and 1. A positive correlation coefﬁcient indicates that
there is a direct variation between the variables; a negative correlation coefﬁcient is associated With
an inverse relationship. The R2 value reported in table 15 , known as the coefﬁcient of determination,
is the square of the correlation coefﬁcient and indicates What proportion of the variability observed
in the dependent variable can be predicted by the independent variable (in this case, density).

The results of these analyses demonstrate the trends in the density data are consistent With
the trends observed in mechanical properties. A summary of coefﬁcients of determination obtained
from regression models of each mechanical property as a function of density appears in table 15. The
strongest observed correlation (R2 = 0.88) is between density and ultimate ﬂexural strength. The bias
of the correlation is positive; mechanical specimens With greater density are generally stronger and
stiffer.

Table 15. Summary of regression analyses for density and mechanical properties.
-_--
Model Relating Density Ground Specimens Flight Specimens
Dependent Variable to Dependent Variable Only) Only)
———-E-

A positive correlation between density and mechanical properties is not surprising, but the
question remains as to Whether subtle variations in density (differences between ground and ﬂight
specimens are generally <5%) can account for the much larger observed differences in material
properties. The R2 values for these analyses indicate that not all of the variability in the specimen
property dataset is explained by variations in density. For the ﬂexure specimens, 88% 0f the variability
in ultimate ﬂexural stress is explained by density variations (ﬁg. 8). While its ability to explain
variability in mechanical properties between ground and ﬂight specimens for this dataset seems to
be highly dependent on the property being measured, overall density is a reasonable predictor of
mechanical performance (and as such may become a ﬁrst gate metric for assessing Whether a material
is of acceptable quality once the relationship between density and mechanical properties is better

31

"
"54","Characterized). A sensitiVity study of inﬁll percentage (which is the build variable that can be used
to control densiﬁcation in the manufactured material) and resulting mechanical properties for ABS
produced Via FDM is needed. Even if differences in density between ground and ﬂight specimens
are sufﬁcient to explain the differences in mechanical property data, the question remains as to what
mechanism creates this density variation between ground and ﬂight specimens in the ﬁrst place.
The mechanism could be microgravity effects on the FDM process, differences in operation of the
hardware during the ﬂight prints, or some other factor or combination of factors.
8,000
7,000 .
__.___....--0
r,—; 6,000 .
e, - R2=0.8751
3 5,000 ._,.....---'-""
g 4,000
g 3,000
5 2,000
1,000
0
0.88 0.89 0.9 0.91 0.92 0.93 0.94 0.95 0.96 0.97
Density (g/cm3)
Figure 8. Regression model of density and ultimate ﬂexural stress for ground and ﬂight specimens.
3.4 Time Series Analysis

A time series analysis of the residuals of the mechanical property data was performed with
the objective of detecting any possible changes in machine operation during the ﬂight and ground
prints that could explain variability in the dataset. This is of particular interest for the tensile speci-
mens, where the ﬁrst ﬂight specimen printed (F004) resulted in a specimen with a stress-strain curve
that more closely follows the ground specimens than the other three ﬂight specimens.

Regression models for the combined ﬂight and ground specimens were constructed for each
mechanical property value. These models remove the effect of ﬂight versus ground from the dataset
and consider the data as a time series where the order of the print is the x-value, and the mechan-
ical property of interest (in this case tensile strength, compressive strength, or ﬂexural strength,
depending on the specimen) is the y-value. The residuals for the regressions (deﬁned as the difference
between observed values of properties and those predicted by the regression models) were plotted on
a standardized scale. These standardized (studentized) residuals contain only unexplained variability
in the data. The residuals were graphed as a run chart with process control limits, and the graphs
were evaluated for trends. In the case where the residual data contains only unexplained variability,
no trends should be evident. Given the small size of the datasets (eight tensile specimens, siX com-
pression specimens, and six ﬂexure specimens), the test may be too insensitive to detect problems in
operation. Thus, process changes could still occur, but may be undetectable using this metric.

32

"
"55","Figure 9 shows a process behavior Chart for the ordered data. The pink line separates ground
(left) from ﬂight specimens (right), and the red bars represent upper and lower control limits. There
are no obvious trends or ‘pokeouts,’ and the analysis does not yield any alarms based on statistical
tests.

5.2

4.37

3.2
75 1.2 ’ . . ,
g 9 ’ t A , ‘9 ‘t ’ _017

V; v o ‘r .
'y 1 v
—2.8 . '

—4.8 —4.71
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011121314151617181920
Observation
Figure 9. X Chart (process behavior) for standardized residuals. Residuals

from regression models predicting mechanical strengths are plotted
as a function of print order. Residual analysis was restricted to
mechanical test specimens.

Figure 10 shows the moving range (MR) Chart for the residual analysis. This Chart plots the
difference between any two successive data points shown in the prior analysis (ﬁg. 9). As With the
standardized residual analysis, there are no obvious alarms and no obvious process Changes detect-
able in the data based on the MR metric.

6 -_
: 5.58
5 E
4 _E O O .
§ 3 — ‘ h
E I
2 E 9"" I o I , 171
0 _ ’ . o . 0
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011121314151617181920
Observation
Figure 10. Moving range Chart for standardized residuals analysis.
33

"
"56","While the analyses in ﬁgures 9 and 10 do not indicate any data points that are inconsistent
With nominal operating conditions for the hardware (deﬁned based on the mean of the residuals),
there are two observations Which are somewhat ‘unusual.’ Compression specimen 3 (G016, observa-
tion 8) and tensile specimen 1 (F004, observation 11) have a standardized residual that is below —3.
These specimens, While Within the control limits, could skew the residuals analysis. The data were
thus reanalyzed in terms of the residuals With these points removed. The standardized residuals
analysis excepting compression specimen 3 and tensile specimen 1 are shown in ﬁgures 11 and 12.
Both the process behavior Chart and the MR Chart for the reanalyzed data are unremarkable and,
once again, there are no obvious process Changes detectable in the data using this metric.
3.9 -
: 3.09
1.9 —_ o o
- .‘X A A.‘ A . 0'22
>< —O.1 __ w yr V V
'2'1 __ ’ —2.65
: x
—4.1 — x
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011121314151617181920
Observation
Figure 11. Residuals analysis With compression specimen 3 (denoted by red ‘X’ at
observation 8) and ﬂight tensile specimen 1 (denoted by a red ‘X’ at
observation 11) removed.
4 t
Z 3.53
3 —: '
§ 2 —_ . A .
E . A A ‘
1 —: “w. v 1.08
0 _‘ ’ o 0
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011121314151617181920
Observation
Figure 12. Moving range chart with compression specimen 3 and ﬂight tensile
specimen I removed.
34

"
"57","While the overarching caveat to this analysis is that the dataset is sufﬁciently small enough
that subtle process changes present may go undetected, overall, the analysis provides contrary evi-
dence for hypotheses (see see. 7) that point to abrupt changes in machine operation as an explana-
tion for variability in the dataset. For instance, the change in the ﬂight tensile specimen properties
between specimen F004 (the ﬁrst ﬂight tensile print, Which has strength and ductility in family With
the ground specimens) and the three subsequent ﬂight tensile specimens is not explained by a change
in hardware operation that is detectable using this analysis technique. Residual analysis only captures
operation of the machine and does not detect variation in the ordered dataset due to changes in
material (either changes in chemistry due to offgassing or variation in ﬁlament diameter) or environ-
mental conditions (humidity, temperature, etc.)

3.5 Key Findings

The analysis of the density data and the results of mechanical property testing of 3DP ground
and ﬂight specimens indicate that the two classes of specimens are signiﬁcantly different (and repre-
sent two different families of data) in terms of graVimetrie density, ultimate tensile strength, modulus
of elasticity, fracture elongation, compressive strength, compressive modulus, ﬂexural strength, and
ﬂexural modulus. Flight compression specimens are less dense (z3%) than the analogous ground
specimens. For tensile and ﬂexure specimens, the ﬂight specimens are approximately 3%—5% more
dense than the ground specimens.

As expected, these trends in density closely correspond to trends in mechanical performance.
Flight tensile specimens on average fail at a 17% higher load and at an elastic modulus that is z15%
greater than the ground tensile specimens. However, the percent elongation for the ﬂight specimens
is z30% less than the ground specimens. Tensile specimen F004 (ﬂight tensile 1) is more Closely
aligned With ground specimens in strength, modulus, and elongation than the other ﬂight tensiles
(Which exhibit reduced fracture elongation). In compression, the ﬂight specimens (Which were less
dense than the ground specimens) fail at 25% lower load and have a 35% lower elastic modulus
relative to the ground specimens. For ﬂexure, ﬂight specimens have a greater ﬂexural strength (25%)
and modulus (20%) than analogous ground specimens. In general, mechanical properties for 3DP
specimens are around 50% less than textbook values for injection-molded ABS. This is Characteristic
of ABS produced Via FDM, although manufacturing process optimization can drive the material
toward higher densiﬁcation and better performance. For the ﬂight and ground specimens, densities
are 84%—92% of theoretical for specimens With a high inﬁll percentage and about 50% for specimens
With low inﬁll (calibration coupons and the ratchet).

The root cause of the property variation between ground and ﬂight specimens documented
in this section is a subject of ongoing research work and may require further analysis of 3DP speci-
mens. Aside from operation of FDM in the microgravity environment, there are a number of other
variables (discussed in see. 8) Which may have contributed to these differences. Other analyses dis-
cussed in this TP (X-ray, CT, structured light scanning, and optical microscopy) provide additional
insight on differences between ﬂight and ground specimens and Which hypotheses in section 7 may
best explain divergence of the datasets in terms of mechanical performance. Appendix B examines
the data from mechanical testing of the 3DP specimens Within the context of previous ground-based
material and printer characterization work undertaken by the ISM team at MSFC.

35

"
"58","4. X-RAY AND COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY RESULTS
4.1 Overview and Objectives

The ISM team requested that the ES43/EEE Parts Engineering and Analysis team perform
2D radiographie and 3D-CT scanning of the phase I ground and ﬂight specimens. The system uti-
lized for both 2D radiography and 3D-CT was a Nanomelx 160 system. The system is capable of
64,000 grayscales with a 3D-CT resolution down to 8 am with appropriately sized samples. All ﬂight
and ground specimens underwent 2D radiography. Flight and ground mechanical coupons (tensile,
ﬂexure, and compression) were tomographieally scanned. The purpose of the tomographic scan-
ning was to identify voids and regions of possible delamination so that issues found in subsequent
mechanical testing could be mapped back to any radiographie indications. In addition, the 3D-CT
data were used to verify issues noted in 2D X-ray, as well as to provide a basis to delineate algorithm
artifacts from true indications. This section summarizes the key ﬁndings from X-ray and CT analyses.

4.2 Two-Dimensional Radiography

All specimens were initially evaluated with 2D radiography. Figures 13 and 14 contain several
examples of various specimens examined in 2D and compare the ground samples to their analogous
ﬂight samples. The radiographs of these samples were acquired at nominal accelerating voltages,
currents, and imaging times typically used to image polymers such as ABS. Initially, the ISM project
expressed some concerns about radiography imparting damage to the samples. However, the dosage
required to damage ABS is very large and samples would have to be exposed continuously for months
to impart any damage.11 The longest time any sample was exposed to radiation during the 2D exami-
nation was 60—90 s. Subsequent to radiographie inspection and interpretation, some printing issues
were identiﬁed, particularly in the area of radii and corners. The exact cause of these issues, such as
platen temperature, print speeds, or software, was not evaluated at this phase of the analysis. How-
ever, issues identiﬁed are present in both the ﬂight and ground samples, and this suggests that they
are not related to microgravity effects on the FDM process. This suggests that the cause of the issue
is inherent to the printing hardware or printing software and is not related to microgravity effects.
36

"
"59",". =- F - - I.
1' 1; ii; '
'I . ' g . _ P
I fr}: ' ..’ t”. ’i : - “H‘E .
-' ' I ' ' u L: I- 1 F:- 1. I
.I.‘ I {?m‘h-‘If i. - :3
1' H“ .55 ff“.
(a) 1mm“ MEI: (b) 13:: wanﬁnzn 'F '
Eﬂ'lﬁﬂﬁflﬂ 14.13 | E'ﬂ'lhﬂ'flf 10.49
(c) 13uw-m mm: (d) 1:”: wmmm
241150513 13.3%} 2:115 01.2? 13.“:
(e) 13mm“ MED (f) Inmwan -Eﬂ
Figure 13. Radiographs showing examples of printed specimens: (a) Oblique View of a ﬂight
calibration sample. The gray arrows denote the presence of less uniform material at
the hole’s circumference. (b) Oblique View of a ground calibration sample. Notice in
this case, the printing around the circumference is uniform. (0) Flight rectangular solid
that is uniform. (d) Ground-truth rectangular solid that is also uniform. (e) Flight
torque sample. There is a low-density indication present (yellow arrow). (f) Ground-
truth torque sample. A similar low-density indication is present (yellow arrow).
37

"
"60","EﬂlﬁﬂﬁJﬂ 13.419 315-912? lﬂﬁ‘l
P: r.""
-_ ii '- :ii'
_. -' _ ii,
H : 'Q .' -f'
iii? ,5;
(a) Iaqun man:- (b) Iquuuﬂsze
?ﬂlﬁﬂﬁ [$1429 WISHITFE'THH
I l 1}
m I 'u'a' I '4'“
.Elh I i ' - L
(C) Imwwmzo (d) ._ ‘ lMFV-ﬂﬂﬂh?“ .
?ﬂlﬁﬂﬁlﬂlﬂll WISHINIUFJ
““W
1‘ . .
‘éidw
I J""
I ;- "" . +- -' . -""
3 t- . . 355:},
Eli: i““1:‘:.~'_
?'l 1‘ Nu ..
$l.:-lﬁ , . hi“?- \ .
""ﬁr‘ﬂﬂ- ‘ ‘ ‘
(e) 130w-quEU (f) IﬂﬂkU-ﬁ-BMED
Figure 14. These radiographs show examples of printed specimens: (21) Overall View of the ﬂight
microgravity structure specimen. (b) Overall View of a ground microgravity structure
sample. Both (a) and (b) are very similar. (0) Flight container that indicates lower
density at the wall (yellow arrow). (d) Magniﬁed View of a ground container that also
indicates lower density at the wall (yellow arrow). Because it has occurred in both
samples, this is unlikely to be a microgravity effect. (e) Mechanism of a ﬂight ratchet.
(f) The ground wire tie.
38

"
"61","A set of tensile, compression, and ﬂexure samples that were planned for mechanical tests were
radiographed with the 2D system. This analysis was set up to facilitate identiﬁcation of potential
artifacts created by the 3D-CT algorithm that could be identiﬁed and ignored when analyzing the
tomographs. Likewise, any anomalies identiﬁed in 2D could be veriﬁed in 3D-CT. Figures 15—17
show both ﬂight and ground mechanical test samples. The most obvious ﬁnding from this portion
of the analysis was density variations that eXist in the rectangular bodies of the tensile and ﬂexure
specimens when looking along the z—aXis or height. N0 similar variations were found when examin-
ing across the width or along the length. The z-aXis density variation was typically found in ground
samples as well as ﬂight samples, which suggests that density variation was not attributable to micro-
gravity. Indications of voids and delamination were also found, but in most cases, they were outside
the area likely to fail during ﬂexure or tensile testing. The compression samples appeared to be the
most homogeneous. There were some signs of voiding just inside the outer circumference, but this
was found in all ﬂight and ground samples and extended throughout the height.

39

"
"62","(a) 131:! w :10 MHﬂ (b) I30 w .14:- im EU
?ﬂllrﬂﬁiﬂlﬂdﬁ ?{IIErCl-I'Fflﬁ-hl
(G) 1:31: w m mm: (d) I3U w no “A 3::
_ I
I
(e) 13:: w At: “A m (f) 134:: w m: msc-

Figure 15. These radiographs show examples of tensile specimens: (3.) Side View of a portion ﬂight
sample F004. There is a decrease in X—ray density from the top (yellow arrow) to the
bottom (White arrow). (b) Side View of G004. The material is denser at the top (yellow
arrow) than at the bottom (White arrow). (C) Portion of the ﬂight tensile sample F012.
There is a low-density indication present related to surface voiding(yellow arrow).

((1) Side View of G012. The same issue in approximately the same location can be seen
in the ground sample (yellow arrow). (e) Portion of the ﬂight tensile sample F015. This
image reveals a uniform X—ray density. (0 Side View of G015. The X—ray density Changes
from top to bottom. F018 and G018 were uniform in X—ray density.

40

"
"63","(3) I30 w 44:: uh r‘u (b) 1:le w 41:- uA HIJ
(c) mu w dﬂuﬁ-r’ﬂ (d) nan: w aumm
(e) 131:- w an mm (f) mu w .14: ML m

Figure 16. These radiographs show examples of ﬂexure specimens: (a) One side of F006. The top
(yellow arrow) is denser than the bottom (White arrow). (b) One side of G006. There
appears to be a delamination near the surface (yellow arrow). (C) Portion of the sample
F014. Printing is uniform across the Width. ((1) Portion of G014. There is Clearly
an X—ray density variation at one end (yellow oval). The dark Circles are slight indenta-
tions from tabs used to ﬁxture the part for structured light scanning (White arrows).
(e) One side of F017. There is a low-density indication present related to surface void—
ing that runs about two layers deep (yellow arrow). (f) Side View of G017. There
appears to be a delamination present (yellow arrow).

41

"
"64","?OIbOleOIbﬂ 20lb01280901
(a) wowao M20 (b) 130w aoquo
70'5051908’19 'IOIbOIYt409IY
(C) :30 w 40 M20 (d) :30 w 40 mzo
90|b% 190815 90"") 019809'3l
(e) :30 w 40 M 20 (f) 1:40 w 40 M .70
Figure 17. These radiographs show examples of compression samples: (a) Oblique View of F005.
(b) Oblique View of G006. There is a low-density indication near one end (yellow
arrow). (0) One side of F013. The print lines appear to be pairs along this run. (d) Side
View of G006 for comparison to F013. The print lines do not appear to be pairs (yellow
oval). This could be the result of G006 being slightly rotated out of phase from F013.
(e) Top—down View of F016. (f) Top—down View of G016. N0 anomalies were noted in
this View for any compression sample.
42

"
"65","4.3 Computed Tomography

Computed tomography is a volumetric inspection method that produces images of cross sec-
tions of the inspected part. Each CT ‘sliee’ is a Visual depiction of material structure and density at
a speciﬁc location in the inspected part. For example, CT slices taken on a plane parallel to the face
of a cube would be square images, while CT images taken perpendicular to the long axis of a cylin-
der would be Circular. Individual slices taken at successive steps through the volume of the inspected
part can then be reconstructed into a data volume that depicts the 3D structure and density of the
inspected part, and then can be manipulated to reveal internal conﬁguration of the part.
4.3.1 Computed Tomography: Scanning

Flight and ground mechanical test coupons underwent 3D-CT scanning. Specimens were
ﬁxed using a rubber-tipped, three-pronged holder that could be afﬁxed to the ends of each sample.
The ﬁxture applied only enough pressure to prevent slippage of the sample or other movement dur-
ing scanning. Examination of each sample was performed post-testing at lO>< optical magniﬁcation
to ensure no damage was imparted to the contact surfaces by the ﬁxture. A series of rapid scans were
conducted to determine voltages and ﬁlters. Accelerating voltages from 100 to 140 kV, with currents
selected to obtain adequate grayscales, were tested. The best images were obtained using 120 kV and
100 uA. The beam was eollimated and a 0.65-mm copper ﬁlter was used. The approximate resolution
reported by the instrument was as follows: 30 um for ﬂexure samples, 29 um for tensile samples, and
43 um for compression samples. The typical exposure time was 20—25 min per section. The ﬂexure
and tensile samples were scanned in two parts. Scanning regions were deﬁned so that the most likely
failure location would be captured with each scan; the region typically included the center portion
of the specimen out to the largest length that was Viewable. The compression samples were scanned
in whole, hence the lower resolution (larger voxel size) compared to the ﬂexure and tensile samples.
Typical images acquired through CT are shown in ﬁgures 18—20 for tensile, ﬂexure, and compression,
respectively. These images are shown alongside their corresponding radiographs to illustrate that
many of the indications found in 2D radiography were corroborated by 3D-CT.

43

"
"66",". ' : ..-..~r "" 313135;! "" ""1"" _
T .: ’3? 1 =' '
j
(a) (b) Ianwmmzu _
EﬂIEﬂEIﬂIII 13
-,§'-f;;fiii:~i'~;F'.r=‘::;t-';,a; .i-.-.'ni:1 .2”: I
1.1'1 ""iii'riii'TI'H ""s'i'it-Eu-""J? ‘ 57""“; t '- n"": :3 ~
'* 1m. ~”.‘fxl.:."" ?ﬁ': '4» .2 r: i'- .
(C) (d) Ianwmmm J
Figure 18. Examples of CT images of tensile samples: (a) Tomograph of a Clipped View of F004
to show the internal construction. It has been rotated to show the same View as the
2D image. (b) Radiograph 0f F004. Note the X-ray density variation in this 2D image
veriﬁes What is observed in the tomograph. The density variation is Clearly not an
artifact of the 3D-CT algorithm. (C) Tomograph of a Clipped View of F015 to show the
internal construction. It has been rotated to show the same View as the 2D image. In
this image, the density variation from top to bottom appears uniform. (d) Radiograph
of a side View of F015 for comparison to the 3D-CT scan. Note here that the X-ray
density appears uniform, verifying the 3D-CT data.
44

"
"67",".4”. .ﬂ. _. '
(a) (b) 1313 IN 40 [IA £13
(c) - (d) mm mm
Figure 19. Examples of ﬂexure samples: (a) Tomograph of a clipped View of F006 to show the
internal construction. There is clearly an X-ray density variation from more dense at
the top of the specimen (the last layers to be printed) to less dense near the bottom.
(b) Radiograph 0f F006. This image shows the same density variation noted on CT.
(0) Tomograph of a clipped View of G006 to show the internal construction. It has been
rotated to show the same View as the 2D image. Not only is the density change present,
but the delamination area is also Visible (black arrow). (d) Radiograph of a side View of
G006 for comparison to the 3D-CT scan. Note here that the X-ray density variation is
similar to that observed With CT and the delamination is clearly present (yellow arrow).
45

"
"68",". ',- 'I'L I - l '1
-._.' .1- ' I -
(a) (b)
(C) (d)
(e) - (f) -
Figure 20. Examples of compression samples: (a) Tomograph of a clipped View of F005 to show
the internal construction. (b) Tomograph of a clipped View of G005. (e) Tomograph of
a clipped View of F013 to show the internal construction. There is a voided area near
one end indicated by a black arrow (not surface related since this is an internal clip
View). ((1) Tomograph of a clipped View of G013 to show the internal construction.
This slice veriﬁes the lower density seen at the Circumference in the 2D Views of the
compression articles (black arrow). (e) Tomograph of a clipped View of F016 to show
the internal construction. Again, the lower density at the circumference is clear (black
arrow). (f) Tomograph of a clipped View of G016.
46

"
"69","4.3.2 Computed Tomography Analysis

Once scanning was complete, the MSFC NDE team was asked to review and analyze the CT
inspection data generated by the Center’s Space System Department. The NDE team worked with
customers from the ISM project team as well as with the Space Systems Department to develop
methods and objectives for the analysis based on understanding of the fabrication process and the
initial CT data collection process. The speciﬁc objectives of this review were established as follows:

° Does the CT inspection detect voids? If so, is there a difference in the size or number of voids
between the ground—built and ISM specimens?

° Do the CT data indicate differences in density between the ground—built and ISM specimens?

° Are there detectable variations in density associated with the build process, and if so, is there any
difference in this effect between ground—built and ISM specimens?

The data analysis was performed using two programs: VGStudio MAX, published by Volume
Graphics GmbH, and Image], an open—souree image analysis program sponsored by the National
Institutes of Health. Initial review of the CT images of the specimen fabricated for this study showed
many low—density indications (LDIs) throughout the majority of samples from both populations
(ground and ISM). A typical CT slice through a rectangular area of a specimen is shown in ﬁgure 21.

D ""~ET_C|P+TH'-r|15-ﬂ33 ISS Gm TrLlh 5m*-EEEHT-3mie W :35"" 3'3' 1| i I-' -' M“ II: ‘| Ede E'~Emmﬂﬂﬂm1ﬁeﬁﬁn1 'a'ni-gl'ld amide 335113-119 ‘i
293nm .
r ”Fifi!“ i’r'i""ﬂ-""nt' I'ﬁji;
{??“T"" .': ”.2 1'. 14.331-
‘ll! {3"" *1' 1'"" ""_.' . i-‘rri‘ﬁ
.‘IHL h-""f 1.__...‘ 4.
- n3: 4.3.. + w
* ._ 1%??? ”I
1
. . :1; ,g’i”: _
#:1- u- - .
.fmqmwﬁ
|_|._|._|._|_J D.Sﬁlm 2441-;
Figure 21. Example of a single CT slice through a ground—built specimen.
The dark spots within the gray rectangular cross section are LDIs.
47

"
"70","A 3D volume constituted of the ‘staek’ of individual CT slices is shown, along with additional
individual slices, in ﬁgure 22.
13H 21: xx: 5+nnmmna..-: rH-wv e-rraraewa w .- a
m—jal m 1. ml; I RJF-I
H. - - ---- -. - . “:Em-I— - 1-:- “fight“:- -- - .1
F ' 3 ' 9'5""""-
3'5 ' +1;
:-.1'.' ' LJ
1 . . - - - * |-*'*-
:-'. I ‘ I | h"" 1:]
m ' “""J'
. ‘ - .341;-
. I J.‘ If
”n ' it -
,«i .
.M't—‘I‘Tﬁ-‘ifi Q;
.r' '11.
’ Ii!
73'
Ln: 1' Th:
'5 ' f L'. T-‘h '
"" mannnrru'— - "" 1:1“ mu m - s r. . . '- '.
J' Wﬂuuuuuimr
a- “- -'""' *
Iv - '
-.-
.'-_'.~l- '.
'I. I
l _. , __ I_.'_._._._I— II.»
'5! .'.-.I '- '1“ II.- "" ._ naillrr‘irmtl'rﬁlﬂﬁlil
Figure 22. The 3D representation of a scanned specimen, consisting of several thousand
individual CT slices, is shown in the lower-right corner. The green plane intersecting
that volume depicts the location of the slice View shown in the lower-left corner.
48

"
"71","Computed tomography is very capable of detecting open voids as well as differences in den-
sity of material either higher or lower than the nominal density of base material. In a complex 3D
material such as additively manufactured composites, there are inherent variations in density result-
ing from the nature of the building process. In order to determine Whether the LDIs detected in
an inspected part are actual voids, the best practice is to simulate voids in base material using manufac-
tured ﬂaws (such as drilled holes) and determining how much Change in CT pixel value or ‘CT number’
is produced by the absence of material. To date, specimens With built-in ﬂaws have not been produced
for ISM analysis, but may be part of future work. Computed tomography numbers indicate, for
a given pixel in the CT image of the scanned part, the amount of X-rays absorbed by the scanned
region covered by that pixel. A pixel in a CT image is commonly called a vexel, meaning that the
image pixel represents a volume in the scanned part With dimensions of the image pixel in the x-axis
and y-aXis directions and the thickness of the CT slice in the Z-aXis direction. As the density of the
material covered by a CT vexel decreases, so does the CT number and gray level value shown in
the scan image, so lower density indications appear darker and higher density indications appear
brighter compared to nominal material density. Specimens With simulated ﬂaws were not available to
serve as a precise guide to the variation of CT numbers that positively indicate voids, but some con-
clusions may still be drawn from the data by comparing the measured CT numbers in LDI regions to
the CT number of the air surrounding the specimen, as shown in ﬁgures 23—25.

In each of the ﬁgures 23—25, the blue bounded areas are the CT numbers in air outside the
component, and the green bounded areas are the CT numbers in areas inside the specimen that are
of nominal density. The red arrows connect LDIs in each part to decreases in the plotted proﬁle that
indicate signiﬁcant drops in CT number compared to the CT numbers in nominal areas. Deﬁnite
identiﬁcation of these LDIs as voids would normally be done by comparing such images to proﬁles
across similar images With known voids. In this case, Without such known voids available, it can
only be stated that the magnitude of the decreases at LDI locations shown With respect to the dif-
ference between CT numbers in the air and in nominal areas strongly suggests the presence of voids
in the marked regions, but does not indicate voids With certainty. A qualitative Visual comparison
of ground and ISM datasets did not indicate a signiﬁcant difference in the number of LDIs in the
ground and ISM sets.

49

"
"72","4.
-_ _:-."""". '7; ﬂ... Eiéﬂ _. _ .r _ ..
I‘ .f' EH1 “35.j- 5:31,: 1' tr
' .55.. Ft? .' -.'l+.'-*""- & Hr???-
£33 33914- 31‘? 3-51."";
4.42 .. .f'iz‘cﬁa :ig..%
. 1; *4. 41.5.. ._""':'_
. . m . ._
64,000—
60,000 _ LDIs Near Outside Air Density
56,000 _ Levels Indicate Probable Voids
52,000 _ Nominal Material _
48,000— AirOutside Sample ._ _ . - _ . . . . . . AirOutside Sample
44,ooo— _ _. - - . 4-4 . .
3 34 000—
; 32,000—
2 ,
5 28,000—
24,000—
20,000—
14,000—
12,000—
8,000—
4,000—
0_
—7.2 —6.8 —6.4 —6 —5.6 —5.2 —4.8 44 44 —3.6 —3.2 —2.8 —2.4 —2 —1.6 —1.2 —0.8 —o.4 o 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 2 2.4 2.8 3.2 3.6 4 4.4 4.8
Figure 23. Computed tomography number proﬁle for ISM specimen F006.
50

"
"73","64 000 _ LDIs Near Outside Air Density
60,000 _ Levels Indicate Probable V0Ids
56,000-
52’000 _ Nominal Material
48,000— '
44,000— AirOutside Sample _ "" . - .' . ' AirOutside Sample
40000— ' "" ' ' - '
:5 ’ _ 1 ._ ' 4 ' ' A: 34,786
g 34,000— - .. _- .A'3.6’0-2-7 D't '1 ~' .- '
= - ' - '- . Isance: ' '- ' —'
32,000— 1 '
E 5.33 mm
0 28,000—
24,000—
20,000—
14,000—
12,000—
8,000—
4,000—
0—
—2.4—2.1—1.8—1.5—1.2—0.9—0.6—0.3 0 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.5 1.8 2.1 2.4 2.7 3 3.3 3.5 3.9 4.2 4.5 4.8 5.1 5.4 5.7 6 6.3 6.6 6.9 7.2 7.5
Figure 24. Computed tomography number proﬁle for ground specimen G004.
51

"
"74","64,000—
60,000—
56’000 _ LDIs Near Outside Air Density
52,000 _ Levels Indicate Probable Voids
48,000—
44,000—
._ 40,000— Nominal Material
d)
E 34’000_ AirOutside Sam Ie .---* L ""1*“ .~ '1 f” 1 . AirOutside Sample
g 32,000— p .- 4 - 1 -. ' ._
24,000— ' "" . ' 13.58 mm . .
20,000—
14,000—
12,000—
8,000—
4,000—
0_ | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
—2.4 —1.8 —1.2 —0.6 0 0.6 1.2 1.8 2.4 3 3.6 4.2 4.8 5.4 6 6.6 7.2 7.8 8.4 9 9.610.210.8114 12 126132138144 15 156162168
Figure 25. Computed tomography number proﬁle for ground specimen G016.
52

"
"75","Density variations Within additive manufactured composites can be quite localized, as seen in
the previous ﬁgures. In order to compare the overall densities (as determined by CT’s ability to mea-
sure X-ray absorption), VGStudio’s volume analyzer tool was used. An example of this tool’s output
is shown in ﬁgure 26.

m
.J itlﬁrﬁ h“ Jiﬂhﬁﬁu II :1 FH'W'.ﬂ-l'£-ﬁ¢$';l'JIL-F'aﬂJ u

""m"" 35113 “m_ﬁmﬁ‘ﬁﬂh' IF- ‘733 _ ___.._... _____ _ ___.-_--..-- _. _.

r... . . . . . . .. _. . E-ﬂ ,J__*.__.:_,._.__-III.IIIIII...__-_-_-_.__._...-._:.-. - . -- WI E

1|"" :Eir' ."". I:

l-I- II.JI:‘-III;I'.I . -

Ea - 1h“ .

1:. 'irh'.“
- - - ';._ - tiff 5* u-
:I _ .__ ."" ; 4-.- _3- _. 1.. 113i. :
' *- _ ..-.— wri- ""-"" ' ‘ _ ‘ '9'} '—
* i;¢«5*i%i::L'. Wt L
:' . 2.31;, iiiJ¥3~fI III. ‘. . .I_I::'.:‘ - II :—
L 1. i .- W __f_ ‘ ,....-.al.. _lnr—lu

‘“ ~ - __.- ""*-'F""""'""'-'.""""E""?§ -- ;:.:.'. m—

E - -- f:;';ﬁ'p‘i ... -' I u--

I dr— ._ -""- ' i "" ' ' -- I -

l - ""' HI h—hH-‘h-uhiﬂ-I-nicum

ff ' Ii'l -m

F iii. IW _ :

r III III]; Hind 55.!!! w u -u um m

1"" lg] ' I' H-nd—dh—unn— | m l E

: Emerirrrmnns‘rn—_ﬁfr _ _J--_ . _'I . '1 I

.anﬂl- IIIIIIIIIII .. _ .. [III III

.- .g iii:— '1 .""
It;— .‘I. I h, ..
1'1.- i ' _f. 1
£5.13 Iatn ' ' i ‘. :2.
'. _ . I I i ""'"" ""
. I . | - ' I
. - _ - - .‘ .1. I
_ _ .J t I II u II
I I Ir'IIII ' _rl‘ Ilium!“ ﬂ
wI ”1,... m ..-.,... I
.T.‘ . '.-. . . .-.u.|1-—'_|.
f.: . '..- . h.“ :|.—-,| .. rIn—j ....
.1“ a _Immw .
Figure 26. Screenshot of the VGStudio volume analyzer tool.

The volume analyzer works by counting the number of CT vexels Within density limits set by
the user in the histogram at the lower right. By setting the blue boundary lines appropriately to elimi-
nate the lowest density vexels (air outside the part), the user can produce an approximate measure of
the volume of the scanned specimen, along With a mean CT number (which represents both physical
density and the X-ray absorption coefﬁcient) for the entire volume. This is the best approximation
that CT can make to Classical density; that mean CT number can be correlated to physical density
With properly designed samples of the material to be scanned. In this case, the mean CT number for

53

"
"76","each scanned article was used as a representation of its density. The table of CT numbers measured
for ground and ISM specimens is shown in table 16.
Table 16. Mean CT numbers for corresponding ﬂight and ground specimens.
Mean Standard Mean Standard
Part Name CT Number Deviation Part Name CT Number Deviation
F004 side A 44,487 2,641 GOO4 side A 46,898 2,162
F004 side B 42,139 2,430 GOO4 side B 44,113 2,548
F012 side A 46,555 1,982 (3012 side A 46,217 2,122
F012 side B 48,211 2,468 (3012 side B 42,675 2,445
F015 side A 45,127 3,349 GO15 Side A 29,935 1,630
F015 Side B 36,463 2,589 GO15 Side B 46,063 2,291
F018 Side A 45,616 2,949 GO18 side A 28,124 1,551
F018 side B 44,463 2,618 GO18 side B 42,790 2,939
The standard deviation (SD) represents the noise inherent in (1) natural variations in the CT
process due to detector noise and X-ray beam variation and (2) variations in density throughout the
bulk of each scanned specimen. The usefulness of the SD as a discriminator in assessing Whether
ground and ISM populations have different mean CT number values is shown in ﬁgures 27 and 28.
55,000 .
+ Flight Items
Flexure Articles -°- Ground Items
. ———_
50,000 . I f -\
“""W’/\\/V‘?L J
E . III————I
E
.— 40,000 ' '
U
C.)
E
35,000 \/ \ /
30,000 .. ‘1
25,000
G004 G004 G012 G012 G015 G015 G018 G018 G006 G006 G014 G014 G017 G017
SideA SideB SideA SideB SideA SideB SideA SideB SideA SideB SideA SideB SideA SideB
Figure 27. Graph of mean CT numbers for ground and ISM specimens; error bars
represent i1 SD. While only ground prints are indicated on the x-axis, the
corresponding ﬂight prints are plotted on the same axes in blue.
54

"
"77","55,000 -
. + Flight Items
FlexureArtIcles + Groun d Items
50,000 _ , I Linear(FIightltems)
w ' u. .. w Aur'IM-r'
45,000 — ... . .. tr""
E
E
E 40,000 — ""
é.)
35,000 —
30,000 —
25,000 —
G004 G004 G012 G012 G015 G015 G018 G018 G006 G006 G014 G014 G017 G017
SideA SideB SideA SideB SideA SideB SideA SideB SideA SideB SideA SideB SideA SideB
Figure 28. Graph of mean CT numbers for ground and ISM specimens; error bars
represent i1 SD. Data outliers resulting from X-ray technique variations have
been removed from this dataset. While only ground prints are listed on the
x-aXis, the corresponding ﬂight prints are printed on the same axes in blue.
Figures 27 and 28 show that the CT datasets of ﬂexure and tensile specimens included three
scans out of 16 performed (two scans each on eight test specimens, one on each end of each specimen
due to limited scan area compared to specimen size) that have CT densities well outside the popula-
tion of the remaining 13 datasets. Review of the raw X-ray image data used to produce the CT scans
shows that in each of those three cases, the base intensity of the raw X-ray image was signiﬁcantly
lower than for the other 13 for unknown reasons. Figure 28 was thus generated without the three
outlying datasets in order to clarify the results. Both ﬁgures 27 and 28 show that, within the boundar-
ies of the error bars, the values of the mean CT numbers of the ground and ISM specimens do not
vary from one another in a statistically signiﬁcant way; there is no consistent trend of one population
(ground or ISM) having a higher or lower CT number than the other. Simple statistical tests (U-test,
unpaired t-test) conﬁrmed that there was no signiﬁcant correlation of mean CT numbers to ground
or ISM build sets. Therefore, the mean CT number of the entire volume of each specimen was not
an indicator of statistically signiﬁcant CT number due to being manufactured on the ground versus
ISM. More generally, CT could not determine a signiﬁcant difference in bulk density between the
ground and ISM sets.
Computed tomography number variations (an indicator of physical density variations) as
a function of build direction of the specimens were also evaluated using VGStudio and Image] to
produce line proﬁles and CT number volume analysis. In this case, the volume analysis tool was used
to deﬁne subvolumes within each scanned specimen in two regions, one near the beginning of the
55

"
"78","buildup of layers and one farther away from the beginning of build (designated as ‘lower’ for near the
beginning of build and ‘upper’ for the other dataset, as shown in ﬁg. 29). Consistent distances were
maintained for this analysis.
“jﬂﬂgmﬁwﬁﬂirﬂ :I"" EH-n‘r' r-t-L-ﬁaiﬁ- in t1 ﬂEIH-r II'
'5'“J'W'FWJW'WL'EWH-1* ....-. __ _ __ ...
H| “W -. . L...- ; 1+
1‘ .1_. ._- .
I .
E . . .
f: . _. ‘ _ _ .
i ' l_ I - _ ‘ .
ﬁ .
53
Figure 29. Screenshot of the VGStudio volume analyzer tool showing the boundaries
of ‘lower’ and ‘upper’ data collection regions.
Image J was also used to measure raw X-ray attenuation through the specimens in X-ray Views
With the X-ray beam directed parallel to the build planes, as shown in ﬁgure 30. Density variations
between the build layers are Clearly Visible in this View.
1m“ _ _ “Hm.- h— _ —'ﬁ_ “=‘== Ir; m! ""E“
1i III:- _-. 1+ mulling .I _-' fH-In i'l'ﬁ'ﬂﬂ““1'35“!“riﬁé-BEETZWITUELH-gIIJII-l __
; 31%.. ' +m
II: - ' ..-:“__ﬁ_':'_.:_______,____,____._,_.___.,____.__.-.-
‘ _ ﬂ 'I ""I . 1 ""I I ""-I. E1“; [I
'3' ”1'“II""'-'1""1'ﬁ-Im'u-'I¢Iq.lrlfl'l'”r'll Ihrrtrilh I'I'hll'ljI “H“,WF E I
;. ...; | . -
.i. _ E z 1 ' Lower Density
5. i ""i, l - in Upper Section
'. ""t ' 1' of Part
. g _ 3 I
t; ""'1 I 1 :.
,. .: I J“ W 5
' —- L..._.._._I._mll.. ""“ *“—"" '"" ' "" 'i
Figure 30. Proﬁle of X-ray absorption through a specimen, With the beginning of the build on
the left side of the image. The proﬁle indicates lower density as the distance from
beginning of build increases (from left to right along the yellow proﬁle line).
56

"
"79","Using similar methods, as with the analysis of entire scanned volumes, the upper and lower
volume mean CT numbers within each specimen were tabulated; the results are shown in table 17.
In every case, comparison of the difference between densities in the upper and lower sections of the
samples was found to be within one SD of densities in the lower region of each sample. The SD rep-
resents the combined effects of inherent process variation in the material and inherent variation in
the CT data. Variation within one SD of the more uniform lower section material is not considered
statistically signiﬁcant.

Table 17. Results of the comparison of upper and lower section
CT number mean values for each specimen.
IMII-I MMIII-
Lower Percent Value Lower Percent Value
Part No. Lower SD Difference (°/o) Lower SD Difference (""/o)
—----m
—----u-

The Variation between the mean CT numbers for the upper and lower sections of each scanned
item was analyzed for each sample by subtracting the upper section value from the lower section
value. The lower section of each specimen was Closer to the beginning of build and was considered
nominal, while, in general, the CT number of the upper section was slightly lower. The difference in
mean CT numbers between lower and upper regions was then compared to the SD of the CT number
in the lower (nominal) section. In every case, the difference in means of the upper and lower values
was less than the SD of the mean CT number in the lower section, where, as before, the SD represents
the inherent variations in the material itself and in the CT inspection process. Therefore, while there
was a general trend toward slightly lower mean CT numbers (and therefore densities) in the upper
section, this trend was not signiﬁcant compared to natural variations in the material for ground or
ISM specimens.

57

"
"80","4.4 Conclusions and Highlights

The study of CT data produced by scanning the ground and ISM specimens provides answers
to the questions set forth in the objective:

° Computed tomography can detect small variations in density in additively manufactured speci-
mens; analysis of the LDIs suggests that they are probable voids. The number and distribution
of probable voids per specimen was not signiﬁcantly different between ground and ISM specimen
sets.

° Computed tomography did not detect a statistically signiﬁcant difference in the mean CT numbers
of ground-built specimens versus ISM specimens; given that identical materials and conﬁgurations
were used in both build sets, it can be concluded that CT did not detect statistically signiﬁcant dif-
ferences in bulk density of the two specimen sets.

° Computed tomography did detect slight variations in mean CT numbers (and hence bulk density)
within each scanned specimen; these variations were small, and the trend of such variations was
not different for ground versus ISM build sets in a statistically signiﬁcant manner.

It is evident that CT is a powerful tool for the evaluation of additively manufactured speci-
mens and components; the known strengths of the inspection technique were demonstrated in this
study. Future CT studies of ISM materials would beneﬁt greatly from the (1) increased number of
available production articles, (2) availability of test articles identical to the production articles for
further optimization of X-ray and CT inspection techniques, and (3) availability of test articles with
manufactured or known natural ﬂaws that will enhance the ability to diagnose the nature of actual
ﬂaws by statistical analysis of CT inspection data from production specimens and components.

58

"
"81","5. MICROSCOPY RESULTS

Optical microscope images of all phase I specimens were captured using the Keyenee VR-3200
housed in the Mechanical Testing Laboratory at MSFC. For image acquisition, a black and white
color scheme was used to maximize contrast. Plan Views of the bottom and top of each specimen
were obtained. For the bottom plan View, the specimen is oriented so that the layer in the x-y plane
that was printed ﬁrst faces upward. In the top plan View, the specimen is oriented so that the upper-
most layer in the x-y plane that was the last to be printed faces upward. Side Views in the x-z and y-z
planes were also taken. These images, taken at 40X magniﬁcation, reveal structural features on the
surface of the parts and (to the extent possible) within the specimen. Layer thickness was measured
and comparisons between ground and ﬂight specimens (or classes of specimens) were made based
on this metric for analogous geometries. As noted in the X-ray/CT analysis, the lower layers are
more closely clustered, so layer thickness measurements are derived from the upper portions of the
specimen that represent steady state printing operation. Regions damaged by removal from the build
tray are also noted. Defects or anomalies noted in previous phases of testing, regions of specimens
potentially damaged in separation of the part from the build tray, and fracture surfaces of tensile
specimens were also examined closely.

Tensile specimens were evaluated after the completion of tensile testing. Figure 31 compares
the plan Views of the tensile specimens with the ‘bottom side’ (layer in x-y plane that was printed
ﬁrst) facing upward. The location and type of break are not consistent within specimen classes. For
the ground specimens, two specimens broke straight across when tested to failure, and two specimens
had diagonal breaks (since these specimens have a i45° layup pattern, ‘failure follows ﬁber’ in these
instances). For the ﬂight specimens, two of the specimens exhibit a horizontal break, while two have
a diagonal fracture surface. As noted in section 3, several of the breaks were outside the extensome-
ter footprint. For completeness, the plan View of the ‘top’ of the tensile specimens (specimen oriented
with the layer printed last facing upward) appears in ﬁgure 32.

59

"
"82","(3004 0012 (3015 (3018 F004 F012 F015 F018
. ‘1.“ “I:- c r -i.‘a .
W -- - -
""1""'-:""""'£' _ __ _.-""-:;:::
a 2'-
g
I.
Figure 31. Plan View (bottom) of tensile specimens.
0004 0012 (3015 (3018 F004 F012 F015 F018
_ 1* I ‘1'; '-1..
I i
- t
. i l
5 1'
1 .-
Figure 32. Plan View (top) of tensile specimens.
60

"
"83","A Closer examination of the tensile fracture surfaces appears in ﬁgure 33.
G004 F004
-
G012 F012
- :- - I"" ' ' - '1
E—E-E‘t': 21:; ==Erz: '1 :'
—; a ' --- 2, .. gafﬁjﬁ“ f""
G015 F015
1:;.“ t4:— .. '-'. :
_ = . ""?EEL; ; 7 1...:
G018 F018
* ---....- _' -;=-== - -~1.L' L: ---;i
-—- -——— .. - ‘ ‘- - - “'— _';_.:--—_ :1 ' _:r-'__.____'_-
Figure 33. Close-up of tensile fractures.

Images of the fracture surfaces taken in the ‘head-on’ orientation (ﬁg. 34) show denser regions
in the ﬂight specimens that are consistent With both gravimetrie density measurement and X-ray/CT
observations (although CT analysis concluded that the magnitude of both the density differences
within the specimen and between ground and ﬂight specimens, reported in terms of mean CT, were
not statistically signiﬁcant).

G004 G012 G015 G018
t 53 .--_ --ri _ _,__ ‘ . «3 '—‘~..‘ ""'1: _‘__'. {a .' "" """"‘l '
.- . ----.- . . _ r 1...”...
..'---:: '- -'“ 't‘ , 12] if '..- .--§: 11%“... ,_
u-F‘i - 1F .H t _ ’.-p .- _ - Ir” l-u-I-‘h-I-I-il- _
ET%¥:‘ r':$ ‘ t__ - - Ilﬁrl E‘ﬁ _ m ;i . .._' ELL...-
F004 F012 F015 F018
.. d"" -: J
. p :1. . -3;
?'"". ' _ 1 .L. '1‘-
f _ . u; .r ;' ﬁ'
' l 1- —':fF.I-r. *- HTJ'FH
Figure 34. Images of tensile specimen fracture surfaces in the ‘head-on’ orientation.
61

"
"84","Overall, the breaks in the ground tensile specimens more closely follow a diagonal (and the
layup pattern) than the ﬂight specimens. Breaks were consistently closer to the ‘birthmark’ (the
region where material deposition begins) for the ﬂight specimens. Stress marks were more noticeable
on microscopy for the ground-based prints. The thickness of the layers in the steady state conﬁgura-
tion (reached at halfway through the through-thickness of the specimen) were also not signiﬁcantly
different for ground and ﬂight, with ﬂight specimens exhibiting an average layer thickness of 0.008 in
and ground specimens having an average layer thickness of 0.009 in.

Microscopy images of the ﬂexure specimens appear in ﬁgure 35. As with the tensile speci-
mens, stress marks were slightly more pronounced for the ground-based prints. Steady state layer
thickness was measured as 0.01 in for the ground specimens and 0.01 in for the ﬂight prints.

G006 G014 6017 F006 F014 F017
.‘-""'-..‘ ‘ - _ ‘1. III ‘1 - 1:.

Ha ' ; '

Figure 35. Plan View B of ﬂexure specimens after mechanical testing.

Compression specimens were evaluated after mechanical testing, and microscopy images are
shown in ﬁgure 36. Specimen G005 had a slightly larger ‘footprint’ than other specimens.

Microscopy of nonmechanical specimens also provided some insight into printer operations
and adhesion. For both the ground and ﬂight extruder plate (specimens G002 and F002), the bottom
of the plate began to peel up during the print process. This effect, caused by rapid cooling of the
specimen on the unheated tray, is more noticeable for the ﬂight print. The ﬂight extruder plate was
also damaged during part removal. Figure 37 shows the top and bottom plan Views of the extruder
plate.

62

"
"85","G005 G013 G016
I _ '4!"" II -.III I J- .-
1- II_.. “nu... . '~..'-
.H I I; I f'f'Ir-TT-IIJ-gry-
.3 'i'. . ' {lgﬁlﬁh I
1 "". I -. I 'I IlII- - +
_' 14 “1 ""1:. '. ‘ - .
..f;- 'L _ _..-'”' ' ‘1‘?- 1: I J, . '
l“ 15.:- '1._'-l “L. —' - ' II III. _ II I
F005 F013 F016
I .I_ -.' I ##I .I-IIIIII ""' ‘ I. . II-I'I‘
‘- . . . _.
. 'I It ""r ""h ' I .I . II“? . 1
""1“} H 'r.
-_ 4 :l-i - | . I l. .
.I_'I_..J.1 ..r IJ'LIIE . II .""- f - ' - _ _ II
Figure 36. Microscopy images of ﬂight and ground compression coupons after mechanical testing.
G002 F002
II .’ I II I.IIII.I -. . I..IIII- }- I .III
* _ "" ."" ' IIII. -,.' -' .' ’fﬂ""
. .I' r“: "" - Hh’f'E-IFZ- _.
ﬁr Q- a ﬁe ' ”I 3’ 4
(a) I - I. r - III I I . I _ '__ I I (b) .._I_ _. _ ‘1 '-__-_'.'§ - iiiﬁ’lﬁ 19?
Figure 37. Plan Views of top and bottom of extruder plate for both (a) ground and (b) ﬂight.
63

"
"86","Side Views of the extruder plates (ﬁg. 38) show the peel-up that occurred during the build
process. The effect of warping 0n dimensional variation for this part is discussed extensively in
section 6. The positive and negative range coupons (ﬁgs. 39 and 40, respectively) exhibited similar
peel-up. Some of the holes on the ground specimen were not completed by the printer (apparent on
the bottom plan View of specimen G007 in ﬁg. 40).

G002 F002
_ —
(a) """"-‘- — — —- (b)
Figure 38. Side View of the extruder plate for (a) ground and (b) ﬂight.
G011 F011
1;:
(a) -- - (b)
Figure 39. Plan and side Views of (a) ground and (b) ﬂight positive range coupons.
G007 F007
— ==
(8) (b)
Figure 40. Plan and side Views of (a) ground and (b) ﬂight negative range coupons.
64

"
"87","Many of the parts exhibited no apparent differences between ground- and ﬂight-printed
specimens. These include the torque coupon (ﬁg. 41), the structural clip (ﬁg. 42), and the microgravity
structure specimen (ﬁg. 43). For the erowfoot (ﬁg. 44), protrusions were more pronounced on the
bottom of the ﬂight specimen and the ground specimen exhibited curling, observations which are
corroborated by the ﬁndings from structured light scanning.

G008
_ .—.i\\\\\\§W{////V
. 1’ ' . ""‘E
gm
(3) - -' '. .1? '
F008
' www-
.ix :h ’i //
' \‘ $ %
3 a e
i. i “ﬁx
__ ff J'! 'i. '1 \‘3‘
(b)
Figure 41. Comparison of plan Views of (a) ground and (b) ﬂight torque coupon.
G010
i _ ' 1”
‘I:
: i
(8)
F010
' ""Hiniu'i ..' will.“ _ ___:___:_______
+""“‘~'"" Wt —
(b) '
Figure 42. Comparison of (a) ground and (b) ﬂight structural clip.
65

"
"88","GO19
E
I _. r 'v... x11“?-
(8)
F019
; .. .41“ ﬂ? 1?. ‘1’ ' . .
(b)
Figure 43. Comparison of (a) ground and (b) ﬂight microgravity structure specimen.
(a) II: -|I:
D h .- --I
"" 1;: Iriggf
(b)
Figure 44. Comparison of (a) ground and (b) ﬂight crowfoot specimen.
66

"
"89","In general, microscopy results complement the ﬁndings of other, more detailed analyses.
Microscopy provides a cursory examination of surface features and maeroseale structural differences
between ﬂight and ground specimens. Key ﬁndings of note are extreme warping (particularly on the
extruder plate), protrusions along the boundaries of specimens (evident in the erowfoot), and greater
densiﬁcation in the lower half of the specimens (corroborated by CT, although this density variation
Within the part was determined not to be statistically signiﬁcant). Breaks in the tensile specimens
come in two varieties: straight or aligned With the ﬁlament at a 45° angle. The location and type of
break is not consistent within or across specimen Classes. Breaks slightly outside the extensometer
footprint may be Characteristic of a type IV tensile specimen and/or ABS. These observations are
discussed further in sections 4, 6, and 7, but seem to be linked to printer performance, repeatability,
operations, and/or coupon design rather than microgravity effects on the FDM process.

67

"
"90","6. STRUCTURED LIGHT SCANNING RESULTS
6.1 Scan Procedure

Structured light scanning was conducted to create a detailed dataset needed to Characterize
surface geometric variations between the printed part and the CAD model analogous ground and
ﬂight specimens. Point Cloud data from structured light were also used to obtain a value for the vol-
ume of the closed part surface used in the graVimetrie density calculation.

The scanning took place at MSFC using the ATOS 11 Triple Sean blue LED scanner. The
scanner has an accuracy of i127 ttm at these volumes and the capability to capture stereoscopic
images at a resolution of 5 million pixels per scan. The samples were coated in dry talcum powder
(nonreactive with the ABS plastic) to reduce the reﬂectivity of the sample surfaces, thereby improv-
ing scan accuracy. The talcum powder grain size is le am in diameter, and thus had little effect on
the measurements made by the scanner.

The software package that accompanies the ATOS scanner uses the stereoscopic images to
capture the fringe pattern sent out from the central LED projector. The software triangulates all
of the surface data (using the grayscale pixels, black and white contrast from the fringe pattern) to
determine the shape of the geometry. Through this process, the software generates a complete 3D
model of the object being scanned. The software also provides real-time feedback to indicate missing
surface data. Missing data are captured during subsequent scans.

The software package Geomagic was used to compare the Virtual objects generated from the
scans with both (1) the corresponding CAD model used to make the print and (2) corresponding
geometries from the ground or ﬂight class of specimens. Geomagie indicates dimensional variations
from the reference specimen (which may be the CAD model or a part from another scan). Geomagie
also calculates the volume of the printed parts from the scan data and makes geometric measure-
ments of part features (length, height, diameter, etc.).

6.2 Z-Calibration Value and Tip-to-Tray Distance

One of the key ﬁndings of structured light scanning is the effect of the tip—to-tray distance
(deﬁned as the distance between the extruder tip and the build tray that material is deposited) on
dimensional variation. This distance was held constant for the ground prints, but was varied for the
ﬂight prints based on in situ assessments of printer performance made by Made In Space during
operations. The tip-to—tray distance value is derived from the z-ealibration value, which is commanded
to the printer by the user during the print start procedure. The z-ealibration value is a measurement
(in millimeters) between the build surface home position and the desired location of the build sur-
face position during printing. The z-ealibration value set by the user drives the tip—to—tray distance.
The relationship between z-ealibration and tip—to-tray distance is illustrated in ﬁgure 45. Ideally,
68

"
"91","the tip—to—tray distance should be 0.2 mm; however, this value cannot be directly measured with the
existing 3DP hardware during ﬂight operations since it lacks closed loop positional feedback control.
The tip—to-tray distance thus must be inferred from the commanded z—Calibration value (and there
is no veriﬁcation that actual values correspond to commanded values for ﬂight operations). The
z—Calibration value will also be different for each build tray and extruder tip used since there is some
geometric variation in these parts. Four build trays (designated F01 through F04) were used for the
ﬂight prints. Ground prints were completed with a single build tray (U-O22).
Extruder Tip (0.4-mm Orifice)
Nominal Tip-to-Tray Distance
I
About 0.2 mm.
—Inp-to-nay
Distance
E | Z-Calibration
Bunld Plate Bunld Posmon Distance
Build Plate Home Position
Figure 45. Relationship between z—ealibration value (commanded by user) and
tip—to-tray distance. For ﬂight prints, tip—to-tray distance is not directly
measurable since 3DP does not have closed loop positional feedback.
Specimens built with the extruder tip ‘too far’ from the build plate eXhibit distinct features
from those that were built with the extruder tip at a Closer distance. For the set of ground control
samples, a z—Calibration value of 2.2 mm was used. The resultant samples consistently exhibited Char—
acteristics of having been built too far from the build surface (tip—to—tray distance >02 mm). Most
of the ground samples (per data from structured light scanning summarized in see. 6.3) were severely
warped and showed very little protrusion along the bottom edges. However, the ﬂight samples showed
little consistent behavior with regard to the commanded z—ealibration value and the resultant sample
quality. Although the majority of the ﬂight samples exhibited traits indicative of having been built
too Close to the build surface (tip—to—tray distance <O.2 mm), several were given z—Calibration values
that should have resulted in ‘too Close’ or ‘nominal’ behavior. The relationships between tip—to—tray
distance and dimensional variation of the parts are further explored in section 6.3.
69

"
"92","Tables 18 and 19 tabulate the z—ealibration values used for each sample during ﬂight and
ground operations, respectively. The higher z—Calibration values correspond to lower tip—to-tray dis—
tances (and lower values correspond to larger tip—to-tray distances). The samples highlighted in yel—
low are samples that sustained damage during part removal. In the ease of the highlighted ﬂight
samples, these prints over—adhered t0 the build surface. The highlighted ground sample in table 19
had a delamination between the ﬁrst and second layers; however, overall the build exhibited behavior
that leads to an off-nominal (extruder tip too far from build tray) Classiﬁcation.

Table 18. Z—ealibration values for 3DP phase I ﬂight operations.
Tip-to-Tray
Print Manufacturing Z-Calibration Distance Based on
Tray Part No. Part Name Date Value Part Quality
'—————
'—————
7O

"
"93","Table 19. Z-ealibration values for 3DP phase I ground operations.
Tip-to-Tray
Print Manufacturing Z-Calibration Distance Based on
Tray Part No. Part Name Date Value Part Quality
Situating tables 18 and 19 Within the context of structured light scanning and other analy—
ses, there are instances that show a Wide variation of resultant part quality While the z—ealibration
value remained constant. There are also instances Where the z—ealibration was lowered after building
a sample of nominal quality (increasing the tip—to-tray distance) that produced a sample With Char—
acteristics commensurate With having been built too Close to the build tray (e.g., sample F018). It is
unclear to What extent the z—ealibration (and subsequently determined tip—to—tray distance) is predic—
tive of material quality and/or the degree of dimensional variation. Subsequent studies (discussed in
see. 9) seek to explore this relationship systematically. Variation in the z—ealibration between builds
during ﬂight operations makes the dataset more difﬁcult to analyze and compromises the ISM team’s
ability to draw conclusions regarding microgravity effects on the FDM process.
71

"
"94","6.3 Key Findings

An initial analysis of the data showed that almost all of the samples from both ﬂight and
ground were signiﬁcantly warped and slightly shrunken. Warping is most evident in ﬂat parts such
as the tensile, ﬂexure, and extruder plate specimens. As noted in section 6.2, the ﬂight samples were
generally built with the extruder tip too Close to the build surface, whereas the ground control
samples were generally built too far from the build surface. Most of the ﬂight samples exhibited
signiﬁcant protrusion along bottom edges; in particular, the ﬁrst layers protruded beyond the desired
contour surface. However, most of the ground samples exhibited less protrusion but pronounced
warping, which is indicative of poor adhesion resulting from the extruder tip being too far from the
build surface. The data do not appear to show a good, direct correlation between the commanded
z-ealibration value and the resultant quality of the ﬂight samples; however, the ground samples were
far more consistent. Some of the samples built on 188 were built with commanded z-ealibration
values that should have been lower than nominal (too far) but still resulted in the specimens’ too
close characteristics. Additionally, all of the circular samples (compression samples, torque coupon,
and sample container) were slightly ‘out of round.’ By measuring the major and minor axes of the
cross sections, the data show that the ﬂight samples were more out of round than the ground samples
by about 17%.
6.3.1 Warping

Warping effects noted in structured light scan data are most likely a result of 3DP having
a nonheated build chamber and nonheated build surface. The uncontrolled thermal environment,
coupled with ABS haVing a relatively high coefﬁcient of thermal expansion, allows internal stress
relief to occur prematurely (i.e., before the printed part is complete). The lower layers tend to cool
and contract during the build process, causing the part to detach from the build surface. This perma-
nently warps the part and can adversely affect the quality of the upper layers. The degree of warp-
ing is driven by the surface area of the part and the surface area-to-volume ratio. Small parts with
small footprints in the x-y plane showed little sign of warping or shrinkage. Flat parts with larger
footprints tended to warp, whereas larger parts (height 2 plan surface area in contact with build tray)
tended to shrink (or both in some cases). Incorrect z-ealibration is known to exacerbate warping.

Figures 46 and 47 show the top and bottom surfaces, respectively, of a ﬂight and ground
ﬂexure sample prior to mechanical testing. The colors correspond to the location of the scanned
data points with respect to the original CAD ﬁle. Blue hues indicate that the scanned data points are
below the CAD surface, whereas yellow to red hues indicate that the scanned data points lie above
the CAD surface. Green indicates that the scanned data points align with the CAD surface.
72

"
"95","F006
(a)
G006
(b)
Color Scale (in)
---------------
| | | | | | | _O _O _O _O _O _O _O
Figure 46. Comparison of (a) ﬂight and (b) ground ﬂexure specimens
(top surface) with nominal CAD geometry.
F006
(a)
G006
(b)
Color Scale (in)
-------!-------
| | | | | | | 9 9 9 9 9 9 9
Figure 47. Comparison of (a) ﬂight and (b) ground ﬂexure specimens
(bottom surface) with nominal CAD geometry.
73

"
"96","Figure 48 is a whisker plot of ﬂight and ground tensile samples. The images are obtained from
2D cutaway Views of the sample. The whiskers’ colors and lengths indicate where the scanned data
points are in relation the CAD surfaces. The lengths of the whiskers are exaggerated by a factor of
ﬁve for Visibility.

F004
(a)
G004
(b)
Whisker Scale ><5 (in)
!------------!
I I I I I I I p p s: s: 53 53 53
Figure 48. Whisker plot of (a) ﬂight and (b) ground tensile specimens.
Lengths of whiskers are exaggerated by a factor of ﬁve for
Visibility.

Figures 46—48 are representative of a general trend that the ground samples exhibit slightly
more warping than the ﬂight samples (an indication that ground specimens were built with the
extruder tip too far from the build tray). This observation can also be quantiﬁed from surface
measurements. Representative measurements of data points in the midseetions and at the ends of
the specimens were compared for ground and ﬂight. The differences (A) between (1) one end of the
sample and the midpoint of the sample and (2) the other end of the sample and the midpoint were
averaged. The averages of the A values for the tensile and ﬂexure samples are tabulated in table 20.

Table 20. Comparison of average distances between the midplane
of the specimen and specimen ends for ground and ﬂight.
Sample Average A Average A Percent
Type Flight (in) Ground (in) Difference
74

"
"97","6.3.2 Protrusion of First Layer

Many of the samples exhibited protrusion in the vicinity of the ﬁrst layers. Protrusion occurs
When extruded material expands outside of the prescribed contour of the samples. These protrusions
were mostly observed in the ﬂight samples, an indication that the extruder tip was too Close to the
build surface for these prints. When the extruder tip is in the too close position, the bead of extruded
material is Wider than nominal, causing the material to protrude outside of the contour. Figures 49
and 50 Clearly show these protrusions along the bottom edges of the samples. Figure 49 is a side
View of a ﬂight ﬂexure sample. Protrusions are seen as red spots along the bottom edge. Figure 50 is
a Whisker plot midseetion cutaway View looking down the long axis of a tensile sample. Signiﬁcant

protrusions can be seen along the bottom edges on either side of the tensile sample.

Color Scale (in)
---------------
| | | | | | | $3 $3 $3 $3 $3 $3 53
Figure 49. Protrusions detected on ﬁrst layers of ﬂight ﬂexure specimen F014.

75

"
"98",".1 T.

—_—h— 1 . - .. . r . -. . . . #:-

33-11—1th|:H.1.;-._H.1.....I.1.1H.....\\\
Whisker Scale ><5 (in)
---------------
| | | | | | |
Figure 50. Midsection cutaway View of ﬂight tensile specimen F004 showing
protrusions along some edges.
6.3.3 Printer Accuracy and Circularity

Measurements of the range specimen features were extracted from Geomagie for the pur-
poses of characterizing printer accuracy and performance. Diameters of the circular samples were
collected as well to quantify roundness. These included the compression samples, torque coupon,
and the sample container. The measurements were taken by highlighting the relevant areas of the
scan data and then calculating appropriate feature shapes (cylinders, circles, squares, etc.) using
a best ﬁt algorithm of the selected areas.

The features of the range specimens consisted of pegs and holes of both square and circular
cross sections with characteristic dimensions ranging from 0.75 to 4 mm. There were also short walls
and trenches 0f widths ranging from 0.35 to 1.05 mm. Some of the smaller features of the range
specimens were missing too much data or the data were too noisy to construct a best ﬁt. Several of
the smallest range specimen features were missing altogether due to machine and process limita-
tions (also noted on microscopy). Table 21 catalogs the average errors of the ground and ﬂight range
specimen features as well as the associated percent errors (with respect to the dimensions speciﬁed in
the CAD ﬁles). The negative values indicate that the specimen features were undersized on average.
76

"
"99","The ﬂight range specimens were printed more accurately than their ground counterparts. The values
in table 21 for the Circular features are based on averages and do not account for roundness. Similarly,
the averages of length and width of the square features were used in this calculation, which do not
account for the aspect ratio.
Table 21. Dimensional error in features of range coupon for
ground and ﬂight specimens.
-----
Ground Flight Ground Flight
Total Averages (mm) (mm) (%) (%)

A similar measurement approach was used to quantify roundness for the circular specimens
(compression samples, torque coupon, and sample container). First, the circular surface was high-
lighted and used to calculate a best ﬁt cylinder. The average diameter was determined based on the
best ﬁt cylinder. Figure 51 shows a compression sample with the best ﬁt cylinder superimposed. Note
the dark and light blue sections of the cylinder. The dark blue sections correspond to areas of the
scanned data that were outside of the best ﬁt cylinder, whereas the light blue portions represent points
that lie inside the best ﬁt cylinder. Additionally, each light and dark blue section has a corresponding
section with the same shading 0n the opposite side of the cylinder, indicating that the samples’ cross
sections are indeed elliptical. To deﬁne the major and minor axes, two additional best ﬁt cylinders
were calculated by highlighting only the dark and light blue sections, respectively. Table 22 illustrates
that the ﬂight specimens are generally more eccentric than the ground counterparts. While both ﬂight
and ground speeimens’ diameters are undersized when compared to the original CAD dimensions,
the ﬂight speeimens’ eross-seetional areas are smaller than the ground counterparts.

The accuracy and roundness measurements holistically indicate that during ﬂight operations
the machine was more accurate (demonstrated by its ability to make smaller features relative to
ground specimens), but less able to hold tolerance (larger circular features were obtained for the
ground prints). The reason for this cannot be ascertained from structured light scan data alone.

77

"
"100",". . _.__ _. ' ""h‘
Figure 51. Compression cylinder with best ﬁt cylinder superimposed.
Table 22. Comparison of eccentricity for ground and
ﬂight compression specimens.
Elliptical Cross- Percent Error of
Sectional Area Cross Section
TotalAverages Eccentricity (mmz) WRT CAD
————
6.4 Conclusions

Most of the differences in geometry between ﬂight and ground samples may be attribut-
able to variation in the z-calibration distance (and subsequent) tip-to-tray distance between the two
phases of operation. While both sets of samples were signiﬁcantly warped, the excessive protrusions
in the ﬂight samples indicate that the extruder was in general too Close to the build surface during
ﬂight prints. There could also be a difference in the way the polymer cools and contracts in micro-
gravity (discussed further in sec. 7.3.1) that explains some of the geometric discrepancies observed
in the phase I dataset. Differences in the cylindricity 0f the compression samples could potentially
point to a microgravity effect on machine operations. Increased error in the moving parts of the
machine, referred to as ‘mierogravity tolerance staekup,’ is sometimes present in hardware operating
in a microgravity environment. Further studies, discussed in section 9, Will help to evaluate this.
78

"
"101","7. INTEGRATED CONSIDERATION OF TEST DATA
AND HYPOTHESES DEVELOPMENT
The individual analyses from mechanical and density testing, X-ray and CT, optical micros-
copy, and structured light scanning (detailed in sees. 3—6 of this TP) were performed in isolation.

This section looks at the data in an integrated, holistic manner With the following objectives in mind:

° Assessment of the effects of microgravity 0n the FDM process (i.e., are any of the differences
observed in ﬂight and ground specimens in any of the phases of testing clearly attributable to
operation of the FDM process in microgravity). If information from this dataset is insufﬁcient
to deﬁnitively answer the question of microgravity effects, the ISM team must identify What further
analysis and testing needs to be done.

° Identiﬁcation of inﬂuence variables in the 3DP dataset, Which may explain observed differences
in gravimetrie density and mechanical properties for ground and ﬂight specimens (also includes
identiﬁcation of unknowns in the 3DP dataset).

° Development of testable hypotheses to explain variability in data using root cause analysis tech-
niques, evaluation of supporting and eontraindieative data for each hypothesis, and classiﬁcation
of hypotheses 0n the basis of credibility/teehnieal merit and likelihood of occurrence.

° Deﬁnition of a go—forward plan to further evaluate hypotheses With the greatest potential to explain
property variations and elucidate What effect, if any, microgravity has on the FDM process.

7.1 Summary of Key Findings
Looking across the phases of testing and subsequent data analyses, the following key obser-
vations were noted. These ﬁndings are discussed extensively in the individual sections on testing, but
are reiterated here for completeness and to anchor the development of hypotheses based on these
ﬁndings.

7.1.1 Summary of Density Evaluation and Mechanical Testing

Gravimetrie density, ultimate tensile strength, modulus of elasticity, fracture elongation, com-
pressive strength, compressive modulus, ﬂexural strength, and ﬂexural modulus were signiﬁcantly
different for the ground and ﬂight specimens. The density differences for mechanical test specimens
and mechanical material property differences observed during mechanical testing are summarized in

tables 23 and 24.

79

"
"102","Table 23. Summary of density differences for 3DP
ground and ﬂight mechanical test coupons.
--
Specimen (With Respect to
Type Ground)
Table 24. Summary of mechanical material property differences.
----

Percent Difference of Variation of Variation
(With Respect to (Flight) (Ground)

Material Property Ground) (%) (%)
mm-
mm
———m-
———m_

Flight tensile specimens fail at a higher load and have a greater elastic modulus. On average,
the percent elongation for the ﬂight specimens is z30% less than the ground specimens. While not
a true statistical outlier, ﬂight tensile specimen 1 (F004) ﬁts With the ground specimens in terms of
strength, modulus, and percent elongation (ﬁg. 5). In compression, ﬂight specimens fail at a lower
load and have a lower elastic modulus than ground specimens (ﬁg. 6). In ﬂexure, ﬂight specimens
have a greater ﬂexural strength and ﬂexural modulus than the analogous ground specimens (ﬁg. 7).

Ground and ﬂight specimens eXhibit statistically signiﬁcant differences in Classical (gravi-
metrie) density. In all but two cases, the percent difference in mean density between corresponding
ground and ﬂight specimens is <5%; for all specimens, the percent difference is <lO%. In general,
ﬂight specimens are slightly denser than ground specimens. Exceptions are the three compression
coupons and the positive range specimen (in these instances, the ground specimens have a greater
gravimetrie density). Looking at density variations for the ground and ﬂight mechanical coupons
more Closely since material consolidation is generally a good predictor of mechanical performance,
one ﬁnds that tensile and ﬂexure ﬂight specimens (Which have higher strengths) are more dense than
the corresponding ground specimens, but that the opposite bias holds for the compression speci-
mens (ground specimens more dense than ﬂight specimens). The mechanical property data follow the
trends in density, as denser specimens are associated With better material properties.

80

"
"103","7.1.2 Summary of Structured Light Scanning Results

The structured light scanning data indicated that almost all of the samples from both ﬂight
and ground were signiﬁcantly warped. This warping is most pronounced in ﬂat parts With a large
surface area (i.e., the tensile, ﬂexure, and extruder plate specimens). Flight samples were generally
built With the extruder tip too Close to the build surface, While ground samples were built With the
extruder tip too far away from the build surface. Presumably as a result of the off—nominal tip—to—
tray distance, ﬂight samples eXhibit signiﬁcant protrusion along the bottom edges. Ground samples
exhibit less protrusion, but have more pronounced warping. Correlation analysis of the commanded
z-ealibration value for the machine and the resultant quality of the part (assessed in terms of
mechanical performance) does not yield a clear and consistent relationship. A controlled study Where
z-ealibration (Which determines tip—to—tray distance) is varied systematically is needed to assess the
impact of this variable on material quality.

The warping observed in the specimens is hypothesized to be the result of two primary fac-
tors: (1) Internal stresses and (2) damage incurred during part removal. Nonuniform cooling of the
specimen contributes to the buildup of internal stresses. The bottom layers of the specimen cool and
contract While the upper layers are still being extruded. In extreme cases, the specimen Will prema-
turely detach from the build surface, causing the upper layers to be thinner than intended. Warping
is also a result of damage sustained during specimen removal, wherein an external force must be
applied to remove the specimen from the rigid build surface. This applied force may permanently
warp the specimen. Internal stresses and part removal have a synergistic effect; warping that occurs
during separation of the part from the build tray is exacerbated by the presence of internal stresses.
Warping is clearly evident in the structured light scans of the ground tensile and ﬂight tensile speci-
mens, shown in ﬁgure 52.

(a)
(b)
Figure 52. Structured light scan of front View of (a) ground tensile specimen G004
and (b) ﬂight tensile specimen F004. The color scale indicates the
magnitude of deviations from the nominal CAD geometry.
81

"
"104","Some parts show evidence of warping occurring during the build process itself. This is likely
attributable to poor adhesion to the build surface, as warping is more pronounced on the bottom
surface (ﬁg. 53). Reduced layer height toward the top of the part is also evident, an indication of
the part’s separation from the plate during the build (When the part becomes unadhered t0 the build
surface, it reduces the tip-to-tray distance and affects a reduction in layer thickness). The increased
roughness of the top surface of the part is further evidence of warping.

.._.__...__',.__f ' "" ' ' E' "" +32? =é e3?

Figure 53. Left-side View of extruder plate (G002) under optical microscope.
Warping on bottom surface is clearly evident and top surface experi-
ences a reduction in layer height caused by de-adhesion 0f the part
from the plate during the build.

Protrusions (an excess of extruded material) are another feature of note in the structured light
scanning analysis. Protrusion is exacerbated by a decrease in tip—to-tray distance, as the extrusion
ﬂow rate increases when the extruder tip is off-nominal in this direction and material tends to expand
outside of the desired contour boundary. The protrusions detected from structured light scanning
are more pronounced in the ﬂight specimens, an indication that the extruder tip was positioned too
close to the build surface for this set of prints. Protrusions for a ﬂight ﬂexure specimen (F006) can
be seen in ﬁgure 54. Figure 54(a) is a side View of the specimen taken during optical microscopy and
ﬁgure 54(b) is the same specimen side imaged with structured light scanning (protrusions are the
ridge-like features on the bottom of the specimen).

;. z!“
- .3“ .5: -
(a) '
(b) E]

Figure 54. Protrusions on ﬂight ﬂexure specimen F006: (a) Side View during
optical microscopy and (b) specimen side imaged with structured light
scanning. The color scale indicates the magnitude of deviations from
the nominal CAD geometry.

82

"
"105","7.1.3 Summary of X-ray and Computed Tomography Results

Computed tomography of the mechanical test coupons was completed at MSFC in
August 2015. Two-dimensional X-ray was also performed for all ﬂight and ground specimens from
3DP phase I. The analysis of the scan data was performed by NDE personnel at MSFC using VGStu—
dio 2.2. The key ﬁnding from CT analysis was that the bulk densities of the ﬂight and ground articles
(mean CT value) did not differ signiﬁcantly. Density gradients in the through-thiekness of specimens
in the build direction were observed (the bottom half of specimens are generally more dense than the
top half), but the density variation between these regions was not statistically signiﬁcant. Review of
the initial raw images from the CT scans (shown in ﬁg. 55) conﬁrm that the density of the material
decreased as vertical distance from the build start point increased.

JH‘9~~'“— 7:22;: ""A‘ . I’H- '-° 0- l ' 4-914 b- s- u a .k,1-WT/:. 'kdlejthm : 1 -. I
g. ""..‘.'~“_',”I.‘,"",""‘f’.""‘.'_.""""“ﬂ ll - gfﬁ
, E Q. 7i IITTHT'T ”H ‘,i,77}ﬂ?7v{3
l ‘ i"" _ » '1 ' i‘,’-.""""l¢'7.'- 4;“ til "" ""‘3‘ M"" ‘1“ 1-; ""“ﬂ 7 1i
i U l i i i i
0- l , f 1 . g
l ; g E
l i ,
. : I ‘ -.. h
' l .. M“ :‘i. ' ‘ . '11 “y
if “n ”i
Figure 55. Raw image from CT scan of ﬂight tensile coupon (F004) showing
density differences between the upper and lower half of the specimen.

Voids were detected throughout the ﬂight and ground articles, but porosity is Characteristic
of the FDM process, and no signiﬁcant difference in size or frequency of voids for the ﬂight and
ground specimen sets was observed. Some LDIs detected in the specimens were proﬁled and com-
pared against the density of air. An LDI with a density Close to air is an indication of a probable
void. Voids such as these are inherent to the ﬁlament deposition process and are most likely not
related to microgravity.

Two types of voids were identiﬁed from CT and X-ray images: (1) Voids between ﬁlaments
and (2) voids between inﬁll and contour. The former (type I voids) are created by machine error in
the placement of extruded ﬁlament. The latter (type II voids) are common for the FDM process
and occur when the inﬁll material does not attach to the contour material. This may also be a result
of machine error, but may also be attributed to inefﬁcient inﬁll pattern (i.e., ﬁlling in an area with
a curved contour with ﬁlament deposited in straight lines). Both types of voids were evident in ﬂight

83

"
"106","and ground samples and were most likely not related to microgravity, but inherent to the ﬁlament
extrusion process. Signiﬁcant waviness, probably caused by misalignment of the contour ﬁlament
placement, was also noted on the outer surfaces of both the ﬂight and ground samples. These fea-
tures are illustrated in the 2D X-ray image of ﬂight compression specimen F013 in ﬁgure 56. The
type 11 void created due to inefﬁciency of inﬁll pattern is commonly observed in specimens With
contours (ﬁg. 57 shows the presence of a type 11 void in the ground Wire specimen).
E .:. '1 '. . -;:~
3 i: . . ' 1:3
E 5' ' . ""
m I.. . L '
‘3 l. _
-
*5 ..- .3
' .3
—_ a
Type II Type | Waviness of
OuterSurface
Figure 56. Two-dimensional X-ray image of compression specimen showing type I
and type II voids and surface roughness.
20l5072710130
Figure 57. Type 11 void evident on 2D X-ray of Wire tie specimen (G021).
84

"
"107","7.1.4 Summary of Optical Microscopy
In optical microscopy, layer thickness measurements were obtained from images of 3DP spec-
imens. Overall, no signiﬁcant difference in layer thickness was observed between ﬂight and ground
specimens with this analysis. Additionally, no signiﬁcant difference in layer thickness was noted
between upper and lower layers, with the exception of specimens that experienced warping when
the specimen separated from the plate during the build. For the extruder plate, the separation from
the build plate results in the extruder tip being closer to the part being fabricated and artiﬁcially
decreases thickness in layers deposited following this de-adhesion. Fracture surfaces of tensile sam-
ples (ﬁg. 58) were also examined. Many (but not all) of the tensile specimens broke along ﬁlament
lines (45°), as ‘failure follows ﬁber.” Some possible bubbles that may be associated with ﬁlament voids
were detected in two samples, including the extruder plate (ﬁg. 59).
Figure 58. Fracture surface of ground tensile specimen (G015).
Figure 59. Possible ﬁlament void bubble in the extruder plate specimen G002.
85

"
"108","7.2 Notes on Printer Operations
This section discusses the following aspects of printer operations that are relevant to the
development of hypotheses that may explain variability in the dataset:

° Feedstoek—Feedstoek used to produce the ground and ﬂight specimens was of identical mate-
rial and originated from the same manufacturing lot. However, the canisters for ﬂight and ground
feedstock were different. Additionally, the ﬂight feedstock, while still within the limits on shelf life
speciﬁed by the manufacturer, was 5 to 6 months older than the ground feedstock at the time of
printing.

° Changes in build tray—The build tray was changed over the course of the ﬂight prints. Four build
trays were used to produce the 21 ﬂight specimens. Table 25 summarizes the trays and associated
specimens.

° Changes in z-ealibration distanee—As discussed in section 6, the z-ealibration distance (and
subsequently, the distance between the extruder plate and the build tray, which is driven by the
z-ealibration setting) was changed during ﬂight prints. This distance was held constant for ground
prints. However, z-ealibration is not a directly measureable metric since the 3DP hardware does not
have Closed loop positional feedback. A correlation analysis, predicated on the assumption that the
actual and commanded z-ealibration distances are equivalent, found no consistent and signiﬁcant
relationship between the z-ealibration value (and tip-to-tray distance) and material properties. The
relationship between density of the ﬂight specimens and z-ealibration distance was also very weak.
For this dataset, calibration does not seem to be predictive of material consolidation or mechanical
performance; however, it is difﬁcult to draw conclusions about its true impact since it was varied
nonsystematieally.

Table 25. Build tray and specimens for ﬂight prints.
I“
Tray ID
tensile 1
structural clip, microgravity structural specimen, ratchet
86

"
"109","7.3 Exploration of Potential Inﬂuence Factors

A ﬁshbone diagram was developed by the ISM team and Ken Johnson, a NASA statisti-
cian, to explore possible inﬂuence factors that could account for the observed variability in the 3DP
dataset. The factors were broadly divided into ﬁve categories:

(1) Manpower—Faetors related to human interaction with the printer hardware. This encom-
passes removal of the part from the build tray, differences in operators, and other as-yet-unidentiﬁed
human factors.

(2) Material—This includes differences in feedstock (moisture absorption, dimensional
variation, Chemical composition, age, etc.) as well as radiation effects.

(3) Method—This category is comprised of variables speciﬁc to the printing process, which
may be different for ground and ﬂight or may change during the course of printer operations in
a single environment: feed rate, z-ealibration and tip-to—tray distance, extruder speed, print order,
warpage and degree of adhesion to plate, cooling rate, densiﬁcation, and specimen geometry.

(4) Machine operations—This category is Closely related to (3), and there may be some over-
lap between the factors. Machine variables include print head temperature, printer repeatability/
accuracy, hysteresis in mechanical systems, tray condition (surface roughness, cleanliness, etc.), the
levelness 0f the plate, and forced convective cooling (presence and position of fans relative to the
specimen).

(5) Environment—This includes factors related to the environment present when the spec-
imens were printed: ambient temperature, environmental conditions (humidity and moisture,
radiation, etc), both exposure of the feedstock and the printed material, and microgravity.

87

"
"110","The working diagram with the major factors and subdivisions appears in ﬁgure 60.
Manpower Method Machine
Feed Rate — Print Head Temperature
Print Head Gap
Extruder Speed Printer RepeatedIy/Accuracy
Print Order Printer Hysteresis
Tray-to-Tray Differences —L PrinterPrecision
Extruder Head Temperature
Warpage Tray Condition (Surface Roughness, Cleanliness, etc.)
_ Stick to Plate
C00|ing Plate Oﬁ-LGVGI
Density
What is Printed — Fan/Convection
Printed Part
Feedstock Batch Print Environment RH
Feedstock Moisture Adsorption Print Environment Temperature
Bend Radius Radiation—Feedstock
4 Age _ Radiation—Post—Print
Elasticity Gravity
— L01."" Differences Tray Temperature
Discrete Chemistry? Control Different Ground vs. Flight
— Radiation —4 EnvironmentTemperature
— Feedstock Type
(Ultem vs. ABS)
Material Environment
Figure 60. Fishbone diagram used to facilitate root cause analysis of variability in 3DP dataset.

Based on this working diagram, siX potential inﬂuence factors were identiﬁed and priori-
tized for further evaluation: (1) Microgravity effects, (2) material aging (offgassing and humidity),
(3) z-ealibration and tip—to—tray distance, (4) test effects, (5) damage to specimens, and (6) other
effects such as radiation and Chemical variability of feedstock.

With each inﬂuence factor, a hypothesis (or, in some cases, hypotheses) was developed to
explain the manner in which the identiﬁed factors may have contributed to the observed differences
in ground and ﬂight specimens in terms of densiﬁcation, material properties, and/or dimensional
variation. Supporting and detracting evidence for each hypothesis based on analysis of the 3DP
dataset is discussed and open questions are identiﬁed (along with the need for additional analyses
and/or experiments to generate further data related to a particular hypothesis). The inﬂuence fac-
tors and hypotheses were presented during the ﬁnal session of the TIM held at MSFC (app. A) and
discussed with participants, many of whom offered valuable information from their own work and
research into FDM processes.

88

"
"111","7.3.1 Microgravity Effects

7.3.1.1 Discussion. Although nothing in the test data speciﬁcally points to microgravity
effects on the FDM process as a key contributor to variability (and KC-l35 ﬂights of developmen-
tal printer hardware prior to launch of the ﬂight unit do not indicate that FDM is signiﬁcantly
impacted by microgravity over short time constants),12 it is difﬁcult to isolate microgravity effects
in the current dataset due to the presence of other variables such as tip—to-tray distance that were
changed nonsystematically. It is possible, however, that microgravity effects on the FDM process,
Which may manifest themselves as differences in cooling, adhesion of layers, tolerance staCk-up of
machine components in microgravity, differences in formation and distribution of material phases,
etc., could result in differences in mechanical performance between ﬂight and ground specimens. It
is a well-known tenet of materials science that ‘mierostrueture determines maerostrueture’ if there is
some engineering-signiﬁeant impact of microgravity on microstructure for ABS produced Via FDM,
Which may be present in this dataset but is unable to be isolated due to the operational differences in
processing of the ﬂight and ground specimens.

MicrograVity could potentially impact the morphology of the phase-separated domains of
ABS produced Via FDM. The formation of nonequilibrium phases may also be inﬂuenced by pro-
cessing specimens in microgravity. Differences in the distribution of phases between ground and
ﬂight specimens have not yet been Characterized, but a follow-on analysis of ground and ﬂight speci-
mens using atomic force microscopy (AFM) could provide insight into Whether there is any sig-
niﬁcant change in phase morphology observed for ﬂight specimens and if any detected difference is
likely attributable to microgravity. This work could be performed at MSFC or NIST and has been
identiﬁed as a potential additional analysis for existing ground and ﬂight specimens.

Differences in thermal enVironment for the manufacture of ground and ﬂight specimens have
also not been fully characterized. The cooling rate of the printed part plays a key role in microstruc-
tural evolution and is largely determined by the specimen geometry (dimensions, surface area, and
surface area-to-volume ratio). The ground specimens were printed on the ﬂight unit for 3DP inside
the ground moekup of the MSG prior to the printer’s launch to 188. The presence, position, and
amount of convective cooling provided by fans and ﬁltration systems Within the MSG should thus
be the same for both ground and ﬂight prints. Buoyaney-driven convection Within the part requires
a thermal gradient, Which is present in the ground-based prints; lower layers of the specimen cool ﬁrst,
and, for a time, are at a lower temperature than the upper layers, Which consist of freshly deposited
material. Buoyancy-driven/natural convective effects Will likely be overwhelmed by forced convective
cooling Which is much larger in magnitude. Nonetheless, an identiﬁed difference in cooling is that
natural convection Will be absent in the microgravity specimens since the absence of a graVity term
Will drive heat transfer coefﬁcients related to natural convective processes such as the Rayleigh num-
ber to 0. Surface tension effects dominate in microgravity, and it may be the case that the ‘spreading’
of the material after leaVing the extruder is more pronounced for the ﬂight prints. This is observed
in soldering and electron beam welding experiments related to metals, Where microgravity mini-
mizes buoyancy and thermosolutal convection, thereby promoting a more uniform miorostruoture.13
Differences in cooling due to microgravity and the dominance of surface tension during material
deposition may account for the protrusions detected for the ﬂight prints in structured light scanning
data but could also be a consequence of the position of the extruder relative to the build tray for the

89

"
"112","ﬂight prints. Variance in build structure due to surface tension effects should also be evident on SEM
analysis of ABS strands Within the printed parts, another potential follow-on analysis for the 3DP
specimens. Thermal modeling of the FDM process terrestrially and in microgravity represents work
that is needed to better understand microgravity effects on the process. Results of this work may
also provide insight into the observed density differences in the ﬂight and ground specimens, as the
cooling rate in materials processing is usually a key determiner in densiﬁcation and void formation.

The other aspect of microgravity that has yet to be explored are effects on operating the
machine itself in LEO. Commanded movements of the equipment could be different during opera-
tion on 188 due to mierogravity-indueed changes in drift, hysteresis, or other motor and system
Characteristics. Because the hardware does not have closed loop positional control, it is difﬁcult to
validate Whether this is the case without evaluating the hardware components themselves. Tolerance
staek-up (the cumulative effect of part tolerance) is a known factor in the operation of hardware on
the ground, but effects can be exacerbated by operation in the absence of graVity. While the hard-
ware underwent extensive evaluation and testing prior to launch, it is possible that operation of the
machine on 188 for much longer time constants than the simulated microgravity ﬂights could impact
the function of the hardware and subsequently the performance of the parts produced using it.

7.3.1.2 Open Questions. The key open question related to microgravity effects is Whether
there are observable structural differences between ﬂight and ground specimens that are attributable
to microgravity. There were no consistent observable structural differences for ground and ﬂight
tensile or ﬂexure specimens noted during CT. Optical microscopy, RT, and structured light scans of
all specimens also did not identify any features that were clearly a result of processing specimens in
microgravity. The larger protrusions observed for the ﬂight specimens in structured light scanning
may be a result of surface tension dominant ﬂow processes in microgravity, but may also be an arti-
fact of the closer tip—to-tray distance for the ﬂight prints. Structured light scanning also revealed that
eross-seetional Views of ﬂight compression specimens exhibit greater out-of—round behavior than
corresponding ground specimens. (Out-of—round is deﬁned as the deviation of compression specimen
geometries from the nominal CAD geometry on the metric of circularity.) A follow-on investigation
using the surface texture measurement capabilities of the tribology laboratory at MSFC is neces-
sary to assess Whether this may be a microgravity effect on the machine (and the prescribed manner
in Which the machine deposits material) or a consequence of the closer tip—to-tray distance for the
ﬂight prints. Since the loading of the compression specimens is in the z-direetion and compression
(in other materials) is typically a test that is sensitive to surface roughness, the compressive proper-
ties may be more sensitive to contour misalignment than properties in tension or ﬂexure. A study
to characterize the sensitivity of compressive properties to surface roughness for ABS produced Via
FDM is also needed and can be easily incorporated into other studies Where compression specimens
are produced. Irrespective of the cause, the increased out-of—round behaVior for the ﬂight specimens
may explain their weaker performance in compression than the ground specimens.

Additionally, even if microgravity (and differences in cooling rates for ﬂight and ground
prints) has an impact on densiﬁcation in the manner observed across the dataset (ﬂight specimens
are generally more dense than ground), the differences in density values for ﬂight and ground speci-
mens are very small (typically <5%). The sensitivity of mechanical properties of ABS produced via
90

"
"113","FDM to changes in density has not yet been characterized by the ISM team and it is unclear Whether
a subtle variation in density can produce the large differences observed in mechanical properties
(15% to 30%, depending on the specimen). Some information on the relationship between mechani-
cal properties and density for ABS produced Via FDM has been provided by TIM attendees and
a follow-on study (Which uses inﬁll percentage to control densiﬁcation) may also be needed to further
evaluate this relationship. It is also unclear at the time of this writing Whether differences in phase
morphology in the microgravity specimens, if present, impact mechanical properties in the manner
observed in the 3DP dataset.

7.3.1.3 Additional Testing and Analysis. Overall, more information on phase morphology
and microstructure of 3DP specimens (ground and ﬂight) is needed to fully assess the impact of
microgravity on the FDM process and the resultant quality of manufactured material. AFM can be
performed on existing ground and ﬂight specimens to examine differences in phase morphology if
desired. Additional specimens from phase 11 prints can also undergo this analysis. AFM can charac-
terize differences in phase separation, phase morphology at interfaces, and the presence of nonequi-
librium phases for the specimen Classes.

Phase 11 print operations may be better poised to answer the question of microgravity effects
since better manufacturing process controls (based on lessons learned from phase I operations) Will
be implemented. ‘Loeking’ the manufacturing process (in particular, control of the tip—to-tray dis-
tance) Will allow the ISM team to isolate the effect of microgravity on the material produced. The
complexity of all comparative analyses in support of phase 11 work is that the ground control speci-
mens, unlike 3DP phase I, Will not be produced on the ﬂight printer, but on the engineering test unit
(ETU), a ﬂight-like printer (and the backup ﬂight unit for 3DP). Any ground-based prints to facili-
tate comparison Will also not be performed in the MSG moek-up facility.

Physies-based modeling work at NASA Ames Research Center (ARC) and other research
organizations can be used to assess differences in convective processes, cooling rates, and solidi-
ﬁcation for the ﬂight and ground specimens. Construction of these models requires high-ﬂdelity
measurements of thermophysieal properties for ABS as inputs. While ABS is a legacy material,
properties of ABS produced Via FDM are largely uneharaeterized. Measurements of thermophysi-
cal properties for 3D printed ABS needed as inputs for physics-based models (e.g., speciﬁc heat at
constant pressure, glass transition temperature, thermal conductivity, coefﬁcient of thermal eXpan-
sion, dynamic Viscosity, and surface tension) can be performed at MSFC or at an external lab. In the
interim, modeling groups supporting ISM Will use cataloged values for ABS produced using conven-
tional manufacturing techniques such as injection molding.

While some data have been provided by TIM attendees on the sensitivity of mechanical
properties of ABS produced Via FDM to density, a follow-on investigation using the ETU, wherein
mechanical test coupons of varying inﬁll percentage (inﬁll represents the best manufacturing process
parameter to control density of the as-built part) undergo a density evaluation (based on weighing
and volume measurement from structured light scanning) and are subsequently mechanically tested,
may be needed to develop the relationship between density and mechanical properties for ABS pro-
duced using this particular hardware.

91

"
"114","A thorough literature reView of polymer melts and densiﬁcation in microgravity is also needed.
There is a breadth of research that, while not conducted on ABS in particular, may provide trans-
ferrable insight into microgravity effects on extrusion-based processes and material solidiﬁcation in
microgravity, and what analyses and experiments are best suited to characterize microgravity effects
in this application.

Surface texture measurement capabilities at MSFC can be leveraged to evaluate the ﬁlament
misalignment observed in the compression specimens. Surface roughness and deviations in circular-
ity can be correlated with mechanical performance of specimens in compression. However, even if
there is a strong relationship between compressive strengths and dimensional deviations, the cause
of the underlying out-of—round behaVior must also be determined (potential causes include changes
in machine tolerance in microgravity that impacts accuracy in circularity, variations in tip—to-tray
distance, and microgravity effects).

7.3.2 Material Aging (Offgassing and Moisture Absorption)

Another hypothesis developed based on ﬁgure 60 was that the ﬂight feedstock and/or printed
specimens may have been exposed to a humid environment at some point during their lifecycle and
absorbed moisture from the ambient air and/or simply offgassed material over time (although mois-
ture absorption accelerates this process). ABS plastic is hygroscopic in nature and readily absorbs
moisture out of humid air. Water saturation of ABS is known to degrade the material (a phenom-
enon called ‘splaying’).14 Looking across the 3DP specimen set, there is little detectable evidence
of moisture absorption in the bulk printed material. One notable exception is that a few ‘bubbles’
were detected in microscopy that could be ﬁlament voids, created when moisture is absorbed into
the ﬁlament and results in a bubble formation in the extruded material. No bubbles were observed
on microscopy for either ﬂight or ground tensile specimens. It is possible, however, that there may be
many more such bubbles internal to the samples. Computed tomography analysis does detect voids
in the mechanical specimens, but these are likely voids that are inherent to the FDM process. These
voids can be mitigated by optimizing manufacturing process variables to produce a ‘defeet free’
(>96% theoretical density of bulk ABS) material.15

It is also unclear, given similar conditions in processing and storage of both ground and
ﬂight feedstock and printed specimens, why splaying would speciﬁcally impact the ﬂight compres-
sion specimens and the ground tensile and ﬂexure specimens. One noted difference in processing is
that there was more idle time between builds during ﬂight operations. If a humid environment were
present (there is no indication that this was the case since the MSG is routinely used to perform very
sensitive experiments and thus has a precisely regulated environment), such conditions (even if pres-
ent for only a short time constant) might enable the 4 in of exposed feedstock between the ﬁlament
canister and the extruder to absorb some level of moisture.

For 3DP, careful environmental controls were put in place in part to prevent moisture absorp-
tion. Feedstock is stored in a ﬁlament canister with dessieant, and printed specimens were also sealed
and stored with dessieant up until ground-based testing of parts commenced. Mining the ABS char-
acterization data discussed in appendix B, many of these specimens were built with ﬁlament that
did not have dessieant in the canisters and were stored without dessieant after printing, but were
92

"
"115","not exposed to a humid environment. Even in the absence of carefully controlled storage condi-
tions, the specimens do not exhibit behaVior that is commensurate with the ﬂight specimens in terms
of fracture elongation. Temperature and humidity on board the 188 are comparable to conditions
where ground operations and testing occurred. Thus, there were no known environmental condi-
tions the feedstock or specimens were exposed to during their lifecycle that would have provided
an opportunity for moisture absorption at levels commensurate with observable material degrada-
tion. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) of the 3DP specimens, in particular those
with suspected ﬁlament voids, would provide additional insight into Chemical differences. To further
assess the effect of moisture absorption on ﬁlament quality and subsequent mechanical properties of
printed specimens, the ISM team may conduct a ground-based study where feedstock and bulk speci-
mens are exposed to varying levels of moisture for speciﬁed periods of time. Filament and printed
parts would be inspected for voids using microscopy and CT analysis. Chemistry of the ﬁlament and
specimens can be Characterized using FTIR. Results of mechanical testing will be correlated with
Chemical analysis as well as the size and frequency of porosity and voids in the material (based on
CT) to assess the effect of splaying on material properties. Offgassing of feedstock material over time
(and its impact on mechanical properties) has not yet been characterized.

7.3.2.1 Discussion. While ﬂight and ground prints were fabricated using identical feedstock
from the same manufacturing lot, the ﬂight feedstock was 5 to 6 months older at the time of print-
ing than the ground feedstock. The shelf life of feedstock (as speciﬁed by the manufacturer, Maker-
Bot®) is 1 year. Aging occurs naturally as a result of offgassing, but can be accelerated by moisture
pickup. The 5- to 6-month delay between prints of ground and ﬂight specimens may have allowed
aging processes (and subsequently Chemical evolution) of the ﬂight feedstock to take place. Aging
of the feedstock may make it more brittle, resulting in ﬂight specimens that are stronger and stiffer
than their ground counterparts. This hypothesis represents one possible explanation for the ﬂight
coupons (tensile and ﬂexure), which fail at higher loads and have a greater elastic modulus than the
corresponding ground specimens.

7.3.2.2 Open Questions. The primary evidence of feedstock aging is the enhanced strength
of the ﬂight tensile specimens and the reduced ductility (measured as percent failure to elongation)
observed for three of the four ﬂight tensile coupons. Data from mechanical testing of the compres-
sion specimens, however, show the opposite trend, as ground compression coupons are stronger and
stiffer than the ﬂight prints. It is unclear why aging effects, if indeed the cause of the observed behaV-
ior, would have impacted some specimens and not others in this manner.

Aging could also potentially explain the unusual bias (relative to the rest of the dataset, where
ﬂight specimens are more dense than ground specimens) in the density of the ﬂight compression
specimens. Loss of Chemical groups in the feedstock may reduce the mass of ﬁlament, which cre-
ates a less dense specimen when extruded (but again, an explanation as to why this effect would
have manifested in the ﬂight compression specimens alone is needed). Aging may also progress dif-
ferently in raw ﬁlament than in the printed samples. Since aging processes are accelerated in feed-
stock relative to bulk material, ﬂight specimens may have been more susceptible to aging effects
than ground specimens. Aging effects are also a function of the exposed surface area-to-volume
ratio and aging that impacts the printed specimen, and would presumably be greater for specimens
(such as tensile and ﬂexure) with a large surface area. However, it is unclear why material aging

93

"
"116","(regardless of whether it occurs as a result of natural aging or was accelerated by moisture absorp-
tion) would not have impacted tensile specimen F004 (the ﬁrst ﬂight tensile printed), which does not
have a strength or percent elongation that is in consistent with the other ﬂight specimens.

Offgassing of chemicals as a result of material aging is generally a function of time and speci-
men geometry. While offgassing for ABS produced Via FDM has not been characterized speciﬁcally,
many polymeric materials experience offgassing quickly at ﬁrst and then attain a level of chemical
stability thereafter unless exposed to an environment (e.g., humidity, heat) that accelerates the aging
process. There is no point in the lifecycle of the ﬂight specimens when an exposure to environments
or conditions that would create such an accelerated effect is known to have been present.

7.3.2.3 Additional Testing and Analysis. A thorough literature review on mechanisms of
aging in ABS and the degree to which loss of material and chemical groups impacts material prop-
erties (speciﬁcally tensile, moduli, and fracture elongation) is required. A better understanding of
the time constant and conditions for which aging occurs in this material is essential to evaluate the
potential effect of aging for the 3DP dataset. From interaction and discussion with TIM partici-
pants, it seems that aging of feedstock does not impact printability, but using feedstock of an age
beyond the manufacturer-recommended shelf life or feedstock that has been subjected to heat cycles
to simulate aging effects may result in specimens with more brittle behavior in tension. A controlled
study of feedstock aging and moisture absorption is needed to quantify these effects, a research effort
which is beneﬁcial to ISM as well as the broader additive manufacturing community. Going forward,
the ISM team will consider the age of the feedstock at the time of printing and the age of the printed
specimen at the time of testing as a variable in subsequent data analysis.

A chemical composition analysis using FTIR can be performed on select ground and ﬂight
specimens from 3DP and compared against control samples printed with new feedstock to assess the
loss of functional chemical groups due to aging and/or indications of moisture absorption. This is
also a priority topic for ground-based studies, as material degradation of feedstock with age is of key
interest to the broader additive manufacturing polymer community as FDM technology transitions
from a rapid prototyping technique to a manufacturing technique for functional parts.

The ground-based investigation entails several tasks intended to study the effect of moisture
absorption in ABS feedstock on mechanical properties of printed specimens and characterize natu-
ral aging due to offgassing. Mechanical tests will be combined with chemical analysis to determine if
the moisture absorption results in a chemical reaction, breaking up the backbone of the polymer and
impacting the mechanical properties. Specimens for the proposed studies will be produced using the
ETU since it represents the closest conﬁguration to the ﬂight hardware. The ground-based investiga-
tion tasks are as follows:

(1) In task I, ﬁlaments will be exposed to moisture per ASTM D57016 and will be taken to
four different moisture (percentage) contents, ranging from 1.8% to 10% of saturation. The test data
will be used to relate moisture content to tensile strength (for single ﬁlaments) and to determine the
effect of moisture on polymer chemistry (characterized with FTIR).

94

"
"117","(2) Task II Will study the effect of ﬁlament extrusion during 3D printing on loss of moisture
in ABS plastic. ABS feedstock Will be exposed to four different moisture contents in a humidity
chamber. After exposure, the ﬁlament Will be extruded and the specimen weighed. The difference in
weight Will determine the moisture lost during the extrusion process and help to answer the ques-
tion of Whether moisture absorbed in the feedstock boils off during extrusion (and to What degree
absorbed moisture can expect to be present in the printed part for a given humidity level).

(3) Task III Will Characterize the effect of feedstock moisture content on the mechanical prop-
erties of the 3D printed parts. Moisture in feedstock may boil off during the extrusion process and
can lead to porosity in the part. ABS feedstock Will be exposed to four different moisture contents
(ranging from 1.8% to 10% of saturation) using a humidity chamber. Immediately after exposure,
the ﬁlament Will be extruded Via FDM into tensile specimens and mechanically tested. The fractured
surface of the tensile test specimens Will be analyzed using SEM to Characterize porosity. Prints from
dry feedstock Will also be tested to obtain baseline tensile strength for comparison. Results Will be
compared With phase I data.

(4) Task IV characterizes material loss in feedstock due to offgassing When it is maintained in
a controlled environment. Equivalent sections of feedstock ﬁlament Will be weighed initially prior to
storage in a sealed container With desiccant. Filaments Will be weighed periodically over the course
of 6 months (length of study can be extended to 12 months). Single ﬁlaments Will be tensile tested
after weighing, and percent mass loss Will be correlated With mechanical strength.

(5) Task V is similar to task IV, but seeks to understand the effect of offgassing and mate-
rial loss on the properties of the printed part. Feedstock ﬁlament Will be maintained in a controlled
environment With desiccant and used to print ﬁve tensile specimens every week over the course of
6 months (length of study can be extended to 12 months).

(6) Task VI Will study the effects of printing With older feedstock. Some data Will be derived
from the tip—to-tray distance study since prints Will be made at the nominal calibration value With
feedstock that is the same age (and has been stored in the same conditions) as the ﬂight feedstock. If
continued trending of the tensile specimens toward higher strength and ductility is observed, it may
explain some of the variability in the tensile specimens between the ﬂight and ground prints.

Some additional information on the impact of feedstock aging may be provided by speci-
mens from phase II printer operations (although it Will be difﬁcult to decouple the potential effect of
moisture absorption versus natural aging due to offgassing processes for this dataset, Which is Why
a ground-based study is needed). If material aging does impact mechanical properties in the man-
ner observed for the 3DP specimens, it would be expected to see further aging effects in subsequent
specimens printed using the same feedstock cartridge as the phase I prints. Additionally, there is
a data mining task to look for trends in other feedstock batches of similar age to the phase I 3DP
ﬂight and ground specimens. Data from a senior design project related to ISM show that ABS feed-
stock 12 months of age (While a different manufacturing lot from the ﬂight specimens and printed
on a nonﬂight-like printer) produces tensile specimens that display the reduced fracture elongation
observed for three of the four 3DP ﬂight specimens (although these data are not analogous since

95

"
"118","storage conditions for the feedstock in question were also very different from the ﬂight feedstock,
as it was not stored in a sealed container with desiccant). While some data related to aging effects
may already be available, a controlled study is required to fully assess whether aging (from the two
mechanisms identiﬁed, offgassing and moisture absorption) is the source of the variability observed
in the 3DP dataset.

Results of this work are relevant to the broader additive manufacturing community since
phenomena related to offgassing and moisture absorption seem to be largely uneharaeterized for
both ABS feedstock and specimens printed Via FDM. These data are likely cataloged by original
equipment manufacturers of FDM machines since in many cases they also manufacture and develop
speciﬁcations for feedstock. The advantage of NASA undertaking such a study (in addition to better
understanding sources of variability in the phase I ﬂight and ground prints and deﬁning require-
ments for feedstock for future printers) is that the data and outcomes could be published and shared
with the additive manufacturing user community.

7.3.3 Tip-to-Tray Distance

7.3.3.1 Discussion. The z-ealibration value, which determines the distance of the extruder
head from the build tray the extruded material is deposited on, was adjusted based on Visual feed-
back during phase I on-orbit operations of the 3DP unit. The z-ealibration distance for the ground
3DP specimens was held constant at 2.2 mm. For the ﬂight prints, the value ranged from 2.39 to
2.84 mm. The matrix of ﬂight prints with the corresponding z-ealibration value and tip-to-tray dis-
tance indicated appears in section 6. A discussion of how the z-ealibration value is deﬁned (and the
relationship between z-ealibration and tip—to-tray distance) can also be found in section 6. The com-
manded z-ealibration value and the distance between the tip of the extruder nozzle and the build tray
are inversely related; a smaller z-ealibration value corresponds to a larger tip-to-tray distance.

Based on data from structured light scanning, the extruder tip was positioned too close to
the tray during ﬂight prints, resulting in specimens with protrusions along the geometric boundaries.
Protrusions are a hallmark of an off—nominal tip—to-tray distance in this direction. (The protrusion
is a consequence of a higher volume of extirudate.17 As indicated in see. 3, ﬂight specimens generally
do not have a larger volume (relative to ground specimens) that would suggest the presence of higher
extrudate ﬂow rates. However, differences in cooling rates between ground and ﬂight prints, which
have not been fully explored (see see. 7.3.1), may account for some material shrinkage.) The discrep-
aney in this machine setting for ground and ﬂight specimens may explain why ﬂight specimens are
generally more dense than their ground counterparts. As previously discussed, differences in densiﬁ-
cation between specimen Classes may account for the enhanced tensile strength, elastic modulus, ﬂeX-
ural strength, and ﬂexural modulus observed in mechanical testing of the ﬂight prints (although the
difference between densities is approximately six to seven times less than the difference in mechanical
properties for specimen Classes). The tip—to-tray distance hypothesis postulates that the Closer posi-
tion of the extruder tip to the specimen during ﬂight prints results in denser ﬂight specimens with
better mechanical performance.

96

"
"119","7.3.3.2 Open Questions. A correlation analysis of properties of the 3DP ﬂight specimens
(density and mechanical properties) and machine settings failed to indicate a compelling relationship
between z-ealibration (or tip—to-tray distance) and material quality. One limitation of the 3DP hard-
ware is that it does not have closed loop positional control or positional feedback; thus, there is cur-
rently no way to verify on orbit that the commanded position and actual position of the build tray
are equivalent. Correlation analysis is predicated on the assumption that the command and actual
value of the 3DP build tray for ﬂight prints coincide. This may not be the case if the accuracy of the
machine and the function of mechanical systems (for instance, actuators) are signiﬁcantly impacted
by microgravity. With that caveat, parts built Closer to the extruder head should be denser (and
greater material consolidation is generally commensurate With increased mechanical performance),
although a tip—to-tray distance that is ‘too Close’ (believed to be the ease for the ﬂight prints) can
create undesirable features such as protrusions and similar geometric boundary defects, Which can
function as stress risers, potentially resulting in premature mechanical failure. The hypothesis that
a smaller tip—to-tray distance produces denser specimens is consistent With the ﬂight tensile and ﬂeX-
ure specimens, but the bias in density of the compression specimens (ﬂight specimens are less dense
than the ground specimens) does not support this premise.

Calibration may also impact part warpage and curling of the specimens, Which (as discussed
in see. 6.3) can occur during printing or When the part is separated from the build plate (this differ-
ence in warpage would likely be a result of differences in cooling rate attributable to the larger vol-
ume of extrudate deposited in a layer for specimens With smaller tip—to-tray distances). Structured
light scan data indicate that 3DP ground samples, Where material deposition occurred farther from
the tray surface, exhibit increased warping relative to the ﬂight specimens. The discrepancy between
ﬂight and ground prints on this metric is particularly pronounced for tensile and ﬂexure specimens,
Wthh have a large footprint/surfaee area that is in contact With the build tray. Increased warpage for
the ground specimens (potentially an artifact of distinct thermal histories due to different calibra-
tions) could result in degraded mechanical performance relative to the ﬂight specimens, as warping
(and bending of ﬁlament) induces mieroeraeks in the material. This has been demonstrated in SEM
images of ‘Warped’ ﬁlament, shown in ﬁgure 61. SEM analysis was performed by Dr. Richard Grugel
at MSFC. However, the relationship between the degree of warpage and mechanical properties for
ABS produced Via FDM has not been robustly Characterized, and the extent to Which differences
in warpage between ground and ﬂight specimens can account for observed variations in mechanical
properties is thus unknown. The root cause of the warping for the ground mechanical specimens has
also not been precisely identiﬁed. Complementary modeling work is needed to shed further light on
the credibility of this hypothesis.

97

"
"120",". ,__‘.. "" """"‘-""'- .-i
""i ' _
Figure 61. SEM image of bent ﬁlament. Microcracks are Visible along radius
of curvature. Image courtesy of Dr. Richard Grugel, MSFC.

7.3.3.3 Additional Testing and Analysis. A set of controlled, ground-based experiments using
the ETU has been designed that will systematically vary the z-ealibration value in increments that
capture the range of values this variable was set at for the ground and ﬂight prints. Mechanical
testing and SEM analysis of these specimens will provide an empirical assessment of the strength
and nature of the relationship between tip—to-tray distance and densiﬁcation, mechanical properties,
warpage effects, and stresses within the part. These data can be correlated with physics modeling
work on ABS ﬁlament extrusion and material consolidation being conducted (in parallel with these
experiments) by researchers at ARC. The ARC model predicts material consolidation and internal
structure of the printed specimen based on the tip—to-tray distance (which determines the deposited
volume of extrudate for a layer). Data from CT scans of specimens generated through this study will
be used to validate this model or point the way toward sounder concepts that improve prediction of
material quality for FDM.

Adjustment of the z-calibration value between subsequent ﬂight prints was done in an attempt
to optimize the tip—to-tray distance based on Visual feedback. Changing this variable nonsytemati-
cally, however, creates noise in the dataset and makes it difﬁcult to isolate the effect of microgravity
on the FDM process, which was one objective of the technology demonstration mission. Calibra-
tion coupons (of which there were ﬁve for phase I ﬂight operations) represent an opportunity to
tune this distance to an optimum value prior to operating the printer. Future operations will employ
better manufacturing process control to optimize this distance prior to commencing with prints of
mechanical test coupons and other parts during on-orbit operations.

Inability to verify the calibration value is a limitation of the hardware which also compli-
cates the evaluation of this hypothesis using the existing dataset. There is no detectable correlation
between z-calibration and material properties for this dataset, but there is also no way to verify that
the values speciﬁed for z-calibration correspond to the actual position of the build tray during print-
ing. It may be possible to use a calibration plate with points at known distances to verify positional
accuracy of equipment prior to operations. The uncertainty inherent in the z-calibration data further
emphasizes the need for a controlled study to further characterize the impact of varying this distance
on material quality.

98

"
"121","7.3.4 Test Effects

7.3.4.1 Discussion. As mentioned in section 3, it is possible the mechanical coupon geometry
and/or test setup inﬂuenced the measured mechanical properties. However, testing was done per
ASTM standards for plastics, and procedures were consistent across both ground and ﬂight speci-
mens. Extensometer slippage was noted during testing of two ﬂight specimens. When pronounced,
extensometer slippage can result in artiﬁcially degraded values for fracture elongation. Additionally,
several specimens broke outside the gauge section. Based on these observanees, the strength data for
the ﬂight specimens may be more reliable than fracture elongation data (the latter leads to three of
the four ﬂight specimens to be Classiﬁed as less ductile).

7.3.4.2 Open Questions. Several tensile specimens broke slightly outside the range of the
extensometer. Per the ASM handbook on tensile testing and the ASTM standard testing was per-
formed to, data from a tensile test where specimen fracture occurs in this region can be considered if
the associated strength value is ‘within family’ (not unusually high or low) relative to similar data.18
A break outside the gauge length is of greater concern if it occurs in the paddle regions of a tensile
specimen. Failures outside the gauge section are common in composites, and data from these tests
are routinely accepted so long as there is no obvious reason for exclusion. Fractures outside the
bounds of the gauge length are also often seen in tests of composites which use the ASTM D6385
type IV specimen, as the type IV has a narrower gauge section and a more pronounced ﬁllet than
other specimen types, which may exacerbate breakage in this region. Specimens with fractures out-
side the extensometer footprint were still included in the dataset used for analysis in section 3, but
were analyzed with the knowledge that they failed in this region.

The question of failure in the indicated tensiles hinges on interpretation of the standard. If
failure outside the gauge section is Viewed as a binary Classiﬁcation (i.e., pass/fail with no consider-
ation given to how Close the break falls to the gauge boundary), then any break outside the exten-
someter may invalidate the test data. If failure is Viewed as a continuum (i.e., evaluation takes into
account how far outside the gauge the failure occurred) and is considered within the context of other
data (which is the recommendation of the standard), then test results from the specimens in question
may be incorporated. An additional consideration is the limited size of the dataset. If tensile speci-
mens with fractures outside the gauge section were not considered, then data from 75% of tests of
the ﬂight specimens and 75% of the ground specimens would be discarded.

Extensometer slippage noted during testing was previously discussed in section 3. The ques-
tion of whether reported values of fracture elongation in the ﬂight specimens are attributable to
extensometer slippage was raised. An extensometer slip typically manifests itself as a backwards slip
on the stress-strain curve. There is no consistent amount to shift data over when extensometer slip-
page is observed; the correction procedure involves load matching and shifting of the data along the
x-aXis based on the judgment of the test conductor. Correction factors associated with minor exten-
someter slippage for the two ﬂight tensile specimens are small (<1%) and are thus not substantial
enough to account for the several percent difference in elongation to failure for the ﬂight and ground
specimens. While extensometer slippage will impact fracture elongation to some degree, the severity
of the slippage here is minor enough that strength and modulus can still be extracted from the data
with little reasonable effect.

99

"
"122","7.3.4.3 Additional Testing and Analysis. The tensile coupon type Will be evaluated as the ISM
team interfaces With subject matter experts involved in standards development to provide further
guidance on coupon selection. Type IV tensiles were used for 3DP ﬂight and ground prints as well
as other ground-based characterization testing for ABS produced Via FDM. One key driver for con-
tinuing With the type IV is in the interest of collecting additional data that are directly comparable
with prior work. The ISM team will also consider ﬁxturmg, specimen geometry, and/or test setup
modiﬁcations to future tests to prevent extensometer slippage.
7.3.5 Damage to Specimens

7.3.5.1 Discussion. As noted from the analysis of structured light scanning data, some speci-
mens incurred damage during separation from the build tray as a result of overadhesion. The 3DP
unit, unlike many commercial FDM printers for polymeric materials, does not have a heated build
tray. Heated platforms serve to minimize the thermal gradient between the lower and upper layers
of a printed specimen, which provides for more even cooling of the part. Calibration may also come
into play; adhesion was less evident for the ground prints, Which may be a consequence of the larger
tip—to-tray distance that reduces bonding of the ﬁrst layer of the print With the tray and makes sepa-
ration easier. The higher volume of extrudate deposited for a given layer under conditions Where the
tip—to-tray distance is smaller than desirable may also exert a greater force on the printed specimen
during cooling, further contributing to warpage (this may be compensated for through adjusting the
inﬁll percentage). Other damage to the parts may have occurred during shipping, transportation, and
handling, although a speciﬁc instance or opportunity for part damage during downmass or shipping
has not yet been identiﬁed. During testing, a ﬂexure specimen was clamped for structured light scan-
ning. The indentations from the Clamp are Visible in the microscope image shown in ﬁgure 62.

_ __ ,Jﬂﬂwndaa; -Lr.aa5--a mu“. :3. -| ..- 'm: I
..-__._- ._- __. ..' 1+T-1--'-_ _...'..-""1'-'+'-_. """"3"" F'—' ' 3"" _' ' ' "" '3"" lbw“ _ __
Figure 62. Slight indentations in ﬂexure sample surface from ﬁxturing noted
on optical microscopy.

100

"
"123","During CT, some mechanical specimens were too large to image in a single scan. The tensile
and ﬂexure specimens, whose lengths exceeded the scan envelope of the mierofoeus CT, necessitated
two scans, with each scan imaging approximately half of the specimen along its length. To keep track
of which scan corresponded to which portion of the specimen volume, one side of all tensile and
ﬂexure specimens was identiﬁed by a dot placed on the specimen using a Sharpie® marker. ABS is
highly susceptible to most solvents, including two of the Chemicals in Sharpie ink: diaeetone alcohol
and ethanol. From a Chemical compatibility analysis using a material compatibility database, these
Chemicals have a ‘minor effect’ (resulting in slight permanent discoloration) 0n ABS. The severity
of the effect and the degree to which it degrades the material is dependent on the amount of solvent
present.19 Ratings are based on a 48-hour immersion test. It is extremely unlikely that the small
amount of ink applied to the ABS specimens impacted performance of the tensile and ﬂexure speci-
mens during mechanical testing.

7.3.5.2 Open Questions. Some of the tensile and ﬂexure specimens do exhibit damage arising
from warpage that may have occurred when the specimen was separated from the build tray Via pry-
ing. Three divots were noted on ﬂexure specimen G006 during microscopy and are likely an artifact
of clamping used to position the part for structured light scanning. It is highly unlikely, based on its
location, that this damage is signiﬁcant enough to impact mechanical performance. Properties for
specimen G006 are in family with other ground ﬂexure specimens, which suggests that the divots did
not degrade the material’s resistance to bending loads.

The ink that was used to mark some specimens for CT has known material compatibility
issues with ABS. However, the quantity and usage of the ink is very minor, and the markings are in
the paddles 0f the tensile specimen and are distant from the region where fracture occurred.

7.3.5.3 Additional Testing and Analysis. Noted damage to parts and strategies to mitigate
this damage in future testing work were key lessons learned from 3DP phase 1. Optical microscopy
should be performed on parts prior to testing (as well as post-testing) to ensure that observed fea-
tures reﬂect the material in its as-printed state rather than changes in specimen material incurred
during the testing process. Test conductors in future work will ensure that all ﬁxturing of parts for
imaging or testing does not impart damage to the part unless otherwise speciﬁed by the test. Addi-
tionally, inks needed for marking the part will be selected based on material compatibility.

7.3.6 Radiation Effects

Flight feedstock was exposed to ambient radiation during launch and on 188 prior to print-
ing. Bulk ﬂight specimens experienced radiation post-printing during storage on 188 and subse-
quent downmass. Both ﬂight and ground mechanical specimens underwent X-ray and CT evaluation.
Because the size of the tensile and ﬂexure specimens exceeded the scan envelope, the tensile and
ﬂexure specimens were CT scanned twice. All 3DP specimens were X-rayed.

As with aging, radiation absorption rates could be different for the feedstock and the bulk
material. Any radiation dose sufﬁciently energetic to break chemical bonds may be a contributor to
material degradation (manifested as more brittle behavior) observed for some of the ﬂight mechani-
cal test coupons. The radiation intensities and exposure times necessary to embrittle ABS are

101

"
"124","discussed in reference 11. The effect of radiation in ABS is initially eVident at 100 kGy due to butadi-
enee breakdown, but pronounced degradation is not detectable until exposure limits of 1,000 kGy
have been reached. Specimen exposure for imaging are orders of magnitude away from doses cor-
responding to damage and/or material degradation. During CT scans, specimens received 90 uGy/s.
Each specimen scan was 30 min. Tensile and ﬂexure specimens had 60 min of exposure time since
they required two scans. Two-dimensional imaging has much lower doses of radiation and shorter
exposure times, thus the total estimated dose for a tensile or ﬂexure specimen from imaging is 0.32 Gy,
over 100,000 times less than the level at which material degradation of ABS is ﬁrst observed.

The SpaeeX Dragon capsule used to upmass the printer and ﬂight feedstock and downmass
the printed specimens is (like 188) a radiation-shielded structure. Unless specimens received a much
larger than expected dose of radiation during their time in space, cumulative radiation damage is
unlikely as a root cause of suspected material degradation. Solar physics data from the National
Space Science and Technology Center do not catalog any high levels of exposure during this time
due to solar weather events. The return trajectory for Dragon is not known to pass through the South
Atlantic anomaly (i.e., the region where the Van Allen radiation belt is closest to the surface of the
Earth).

A further question is why radiation would impact some specimens and not others. Even if
the in-spaee radiation levels the feedstock or specimens were exposed to during their lifecycles had
been sufﬁcient to induce material degradation/embrittlement (there is no indication that this is the
ease), radiation exposure would only potentially explain the mechanical behaVior of the tensile and
ﬂexure specimens, since they alone are stronger and stiffer than the analogous ground specimens.
Additionally, there was no differentiation in part handling, storage, or downmass that would explain
why radiation would affect only speciﬁc specimens.

Some outstanding questions about radiation effects may be answered by an internally funded
MSFC effort to study impacts of particle and UV radiation on ABS plastic. While this investigation
will expose ABS specimens printed Via FDM to in-spaee radiation rather than radiation levels in the
erewed environment of 188, it will provide signiﬁcant information about the threshold radiation level
where material degradation is ﬁrst detected for this material and how radiation impacts mechanical
properties. The research is highly relevant for ABS parts intended for use in the space environment.
The study also includes additively manufactured metallic materials (Ineonel 718).

7.3.7 Variability of Feedstock

The variation in chemical composition and/or dimension of the feedstock used to produce
the ﬂight and ground specimens along their respective lengths has not been fully evaluated (although
prior to launch of the feedstock to 188, some measurements were taken to ensure that the ﬁlament
diameter was within the tolerance limits speciﬁed by the manufacturer). The quality of 3D printed
parts is sensitive to the feedstock diameter, as this dimension determines the ﬁlament feed rate for
the printer, which in turn determines the extrusion ﬂow rate of the material. A basic assumption is
that the ﬁlament diameter is constant. The FDM machine sets a roller speed that can provide the
desired ﬁlament feed rate and ﬂow rate necessary to ensure sufﬁcient material consolidation and
space ﬁlling.20 If the ﬁlament diameter is less than the speciﬁed dimension, it will create a deﬁciency
102

"
"125","in material ﬂow that creates voids in the parts. Filament diameter greater than the speciﬁed dimen-
sions would result in denser parts, but can cause the feedstock to ‘jam’ in the roller. No jamming or
other indication of an overﬂow condition (potentially caused by an increase in ﬁlament diameter
outside the tolerance limits speciﬁed by the manufacturer) was observed during ﬂight or ground print
operations for 3DP.

Feedstock characteristics, like powder Characteristics in additive manufacturing of metallics,
are a key determiner of material quality and a contributing factor to material variability. The mate-
rial safety data sheet for feedstock does not specify Chemical composition. Thus, the evaluation of
the variability hypothesis entails three tasks: (1) Deﬁnition of the nominal distribution of chemical
groups within a particular feedstock (Via FTIR or procurement of manufacturer data), (2) charac-
terization of the variation of composition at intervals along the feedstock length, and (3) correlation
of chemical compositions and concentrations of sections of feedstock with properties of printed
specimens produced using a speciﬁc feedstock segment. Feedstock should also be inspected to assess
the size and frequency with which ﬁlament voids occur (an assessment also related to the moisture
absorption hypothesis discussed in see. 7.3.2). A ground-based study represents a way to assess the
degree to which material quality depends on feedstock Chemical composition, a process sensitiVity
which to date has not been characterized in the literature. Information from such an investigation
would also inform a requirements deﬁnition for feedstock for future printers (i.e., the chemical com-
position, concentrations, and ﬁlament diameter range required to produce a material of acceptable
quality for a range of applications).

7.4 Evaluation of Inﬂuence Factors

The inﬂuence factors discussed in section 7.3 were evaluated and ranked based on their ability
to explain the variation in properties between ground and ﬂight specimens. Comparative evaluation
was based on the current dataset, experience with the FDM process, and informed engineering judg-
ment. Factors were sorted into four categories:

(1) High eredibility—A high credibility designation indicates than an inﬂuence factor is likely
to explain a signiﬁcant portion of the differences observed in the ground and ﬂight specimens during
testing.

(2) Medium eredibility—A medium credibility designation corresponds to an inﬂuence fac-
tor that may account for some of the differences in ﬂight and ground specimens observed during test-
ing, but the amount of variability explained by the factor is expected to be less than that of factors
placed in the high credibility capability.

(3) Low credibility—A low credibility designation describes inﬂuence factors that seem
unlikely to have played a signiﬁcant role in variation observed in the dataset.

(4) Uneertain—An uncertain designation indicates there is no substantive evidence from
analysis of the current 3DP dataset to support or refute the hypothesis.

103

"
"126","Table 26 summarizes the factors and their corresponding credibility ratings. Damage to
specimens, radiation effects, and variability of feedstock (chemistry and dimensions) are designated
as low credibility factors. Data about radiation levels present during the specimen lifecycle (on 188
and during RT) are not suggestive of radiation absorption levels near those needed to embrittle or
otherwise degrade the material. Specimen damage is also rated as a low credibility factor since the
only known damage to any of the specimens is the clamping marks on ﬂexure sample G006 noted
during microscopy; these shallow indentations do not appear to have impacted the mechanical per-
formance of the specimen. Variability of feedstock diameter and changes in Chemical composition
of the feedstock along its length were also assessed as unlikely. Feedstock diameter at intervals along
the length of the spool was measured for the ﬂight feedstock (from the same manufacturing lot as
the feedstock used for the ground prints) and veriﬁed to be within the tolerance limits speciﬁed by
the manufacturer.

Table 26. Inﬂuence factors and credibility.
————
————
—-——

absorption and offgassing)
————

Test effects were also placed in the low credibility category. It is understood that the Choice of
tensile specimen type (type IV in ASTM D6385) may impact test outcomes. The ﬁllet (created when
the tensile specimen necks from 0.75 inches in the paddles to 0.25 inches in the gauge section) is a site
of localized stress concentration, possibly resulting in reported values of material properties that are
more reﬂective of the specimen geometry than the material quality. The same coupon geometry was
used for ﬂight and ground tensile specimens; thus, while the measured values may be less than what
would be obtained with a type I tensile (which has a larger gauge section of 0.5 in), the ﬂight and
ground values should, in theory, be reduced by equal amounts as a consequence of specimen type,
and relative comparisons are still valid. Application of testing standards and procedures was consis-
tent across specimen sets. While the tensile geometry is one known factor that inﬂuences mechanical
test outcomes, in general, this factor is not believed to explain any signiﬁcant amount of variability
in the 3DP dataset.

MicrograVity effects on the FDM process and solidiﬁcation in the printed specimen, which
result in differences in densiﬁcation and mechanical properties for the ﬂight specimens, are also
identiﬁed as an uncertain inﬂuence factor, meaning that there is a general lack of data to clearly
substantiate or refute its inﬂuence at this time. As discussed in section 7.3.1, the manufacture of
ABS may be impacted by microgravity to some degree, but either (1) the effect is too subtle to be
detected with the testing techniques applied thus far (SEM or AFM may point more Clearly toward
material differences that may be a result of microgravity) or (2) the effect is detectable, but has not
been attributed to microgravity because of other factors (like tip-to-tray distance) that were varied
104

"
"127","nonsystematieally. SEM analysis of 3DP specimens will identify features such as ﬁlament slump, ﬁber
skewness and alignment, ﬁber thickness and shape, and characterize differences in these mierostruetural
features between the ground and ﬂight material that may point to a microgravity effect. Manufacturing
process controls needed to isolate the effect of microgravity on the FDM process and fully evaluate
the credibility of this factor to explain variability in existing and future 3DP datasets are discussed
further in section 8.

Factors identiﬁed as high credibility are material aging and tip-to-tray distance. Flight feed-
stock was 5 to 6 months older than ground feedstock at the time of printing (and thus nearing the
1-year upper limit on shelf life speciﬁed by the manufacturer). While aging does not appear to impact
printability of the feedstock, it can embrittle the material, resulting in higher strengths and lower
elongation to failure in the printed specimen (the mechanical behavior observed for three of the
four ﬂight tensile specimens). Knowledge of conditions present during feedstock storage, specimen
printing, specimen handling and storage, and specimen testing similarly does not indicate any point
in the specimen lifeeyele where the moisture present in the ambient air and/ or the time the feedstock
or printed part was exposed to a certain level of humidity would be a concern. However, material
aging due to offgassing of feedstock over time has not been Characterized. Material aging would
explain the bias in strength, elastic modulus, and fracture elongation for three of the four ﬂight ten-
siles and possibly the trends in ﬂexural strength and ﬂexural modulus for the ﬂight ﬂexure specimens.
The compression dataset (where ﬂight specimens are weaker than ground specimens) is difﬁcult to
explain within the context of material aging.

While no consistent correlation was detected between the z-Calibration value (or the subse-
quently determined tip—to-tray distance) and density or mechanical properties for the ﬂight prints,
literature on manufacturing process optimization for FDM indicates that this distance is a parameter
that can inﬂuence thermal ﬂow and cooling rate, deposition rate, and interlayer conﬁguration.20 The
need to optimize and maintain a consistent calibration distance in order to generate a structured
dataset for 3DP is discussed in section 8. An investigation of the effect of tip—to-tray distance and
related modeling work is a high priority of the ISM team based on interaction and discussion of
hypotheses at the TIM. It is thought that variation of this operating parameter throughout the ﬂight
prints may account for a signiﬁcant portion of the variability in the dataset.

The go-forward work discussed in section 9 will focus on conducting investigations that will
generate additional data related to inﬂuence factors placed in the high credibility category and pro-
Vide additional information needed to assess microgravity effects. An evaluation of mierogravity’s
impact on material quality and performance for specimens produced using FDM is essential to
future ISM efforts, as it deﬁnes how much of the materials characterization work needed to impart
a robust predictive design and analysis capability can be ground-based. The appraisal of micrograv-
ity effects is also part of the level II requirements for ISM, which indicate that 3DP, “shall obtain
data to advance the understanding of the critical design and operation parameters for the FDM
process as affected by the microgravity environment.” SEM analysis of the current specimen set and
mechanical testing/CT/struetured light scanning and mieroseopy/SEM of future specimens from 3DP
(where manufacturing process controls are more stringent) are necessary to further evaluate micro-
gravity effects. With regard to the high credibility factors, further work focuses on a ground-based
investigation to understand and model the relationship between tip—to-tray distance and material

105

"
"128","quality, and a controlled (also ground-based) investigation of feedstock aging and its impact on
mechanical properties. Investigations into low credibility factors Will be pursued as ground-based
investigations as time and resources permit.

106

"
"129","8. LESSONS LEARNED

One of the key objectives of 3DP is to use the lessons learned from operation, testing, and
analysis of 3DP hardware and specimens to inform future technology demonstrations that Will fur-
ther prove out the processes needed to develop a robust off—world additive manufacturing capability.
These lessons learned from 3DP Will inform requirements development for future printers, T&E of
specimens from future printer operations (both What tests are needed and the process ﬂow for the
testing regime), and deﬁnition of a phase 11 print matrix for 3DP that Will provide key additional
information needed to further evaluate the hypotheses and inﬂuence factors discussed in section 7.
These future technology development efforts would not be possible Without phase I of the 3DP tech-
nology demonstration mission.

Many of the following key lessons learned have been discussed previously in this TP, but are
reiterated here to emphasize their signiﬁcance and implications for further investments in micrograv-
ity FDM and other manufacturing processes that Will be proven out using 188 as a testbed:

(1) There is a clear need for implementation of manufacturing process controls that Will
enable the ISM team to isolate the effect of microgravity on the FDM process. Variation of any pro-
cessing parameters nonsystematieally or in a manner that is otherwise unplanned for in experimental
design should be minimized to the greatest extent possible. For future printer operations, the ISM
team recommends that the z-ealibration value (Which determines the tip—to-tray distance) be ‘tuned’
using the calibration coupon prints. Once a nominal value has been deﬁned based on Visual feedback,
printing operations should commence, and the value should not be changed thereafter unless there
is a disruption in the printing process or other operational anomaly that warrants adjustment. While
at this point decisions about proper calibration distance represent an engineering judgment based
on Visual feedback, the tip—to-tray distance study being undertaken at MSFC (see. 9) Will inform
optimization of this distance based on its impact on part quality. Future printers should also provide
closed loop positional feedback so that the distance between the extruder tip and the build platform
(and Whether the actual value deviates from the command value) can be precisely monitored during
operations. To the extent possible, given the constraints on crew time and other 188 operations that
must be attended to during printing, the time that specimens remain on the build tray after printing
should be consistent. Uniformity in removal of parts from the build tray, packaging, and part stor-
age is also essential to create a structured dataset from Which information about microgravity effects
can be extracted. Process controls Will also improve repeatability and reliability of FDM, both in
production of materials in microgravity and on the ground. Ground-based optimization activities
outlined section 9 Will Characterize process sensitivities and assist With development of a locked and
qualiﬁed manufacturing process With a deﬁned operational Window capable of producing parts With
acceptable material Characteristics. (Material Characteristics needed Will be deﬁned based on the

107

"
"130","application and intended use environment of the part, but optimization work Will also provide key
insight into What material properties are attainable With the 3DP unit.)

(2) A heated build tray is essential to mitigate specimen warping, reduce adhesion, and ensure
symmetric cooling of the printed specimen (Which Will result in a more uniform mierostrueture).
Many commercial off-the-shelf printers employ heated beds as a way to minimize the thermal gra-
dient between the extrusion temperature and the temperature of the build tray that the material is
deposited on. This thermal difference in part governs the rate of part cooling and determines the
ﬁber solidiﬁcation and molecular diffusion bonding between ﬁbers. Generally, greater material qual-
ity (fewer voids, greater bonding between ﬁbers, and higher densiﬁcation) is achieved With a heated
tray. Research into FDM process optimization by Sun et al.21 found a positive correlation between
the magnitude of the temperature difference and the size and frequency of voids in the printed
specimen.

(3) As discussed in section 7.3.4 on test effects, the geometry of the tensile specimen type may
contribute to a reduced ultimate tensile strength and fracture elongation due to the stress concentra-
tion at the ﬁllet (ﬁg. 63). The type IV specimen has a 0.75-inch Width in the paddle sections, Which
necks to 0.25 inches in the gauge section. The type I tensile also measures 0.75 inches in the Widest
region, reducing to 0.5 inches in the gauge section (creating a ﬁllet With less pronounced curvature).
The choice of the type IV tensile for 3DP was driven by the shorter overall length of the specimen
(type IV tensile is 4.5 inches long, While the type I tensile measures 6.5 inches). For future printers
With larger build volumes, the type I tensile may be preferred to minimize the effect of specimen
geometry on measured material properties. Mechanical property measurements in plastics (and com-
posites) are more sensitive to coupon geometry since, as a material Class, they are less ductile than
metals (for example, many plastics and composites do not exhibit yielding behavior, and ultimate
tensile strength and yield strength are Virtually coincident 0n the stress-strain curve). The mechanical
property efﬁciencies (the ratio of the as-built material to bulk textbook properties for ABS) might
be higher for ﬂight and ground With a type I tensile and reﬂective of actual material behavior rather
than specimen geometry.

WO
B \R L 3 »| El i
+| |+T
<— L —>
4— D —>
‘— LO —>
Figure 63. Type IV tensile specimen.5
108

"
"131","(4) The test regime, collected data, and subsequent analyses for the 3DP phase I prints pro-
vided a wealth of information about the mechanical performance of the specimens, their internal
structure, and deviations from the nominal CAD geometry. For future work, however, some modi-
ﬁcations to existing testing/analysis as well as the addition of steps in the test process ﬂow will be
needed to provide key data related to questions discussed during the TIM. The surface roughness
and eylindrieity of the compression specimens needs to be evaluated prior to mechanical testing
to quantitatively assess whether increased out-of—round behaVior (observed in structured light scan
data for the ﬂight class of compression specimens for 3DP phase I) impacts material performance.
The measurement techniques for this evaluation have recently been demonstrated by the preci-
sion metrology laboratory at MSFC using compression coupons produced by both the Stratasys®
Fortus 9OOmCTM and a ﬂight-like printer.

(5) SEM of the specimens was initially part of the test plan discussed in section 2. The test
plan was later amended so that only tensile fracture surfaces would be evaluated with SEM to provide
insight into differences in failure mechanisms for ground and ﬂight specimens. However, interaction
with subject matter experts in microgravity materials science at MSFC suggests that SEM analysis
of internal specimen surfaces can reveal features such as ﬁlament slump (an effect documented in
Rodriguez et al. and created by excessive cooling conditions in the printed part), evidence of material
underﬂow or overﬂow conditions (which could be created by an enlargement or reduction in ﬁla-
ment diameter or changes in tip—to-tray distance), the degree to which ﬁbers are skewed or aligned,
and differences in ﬁber thickness and shape (which can provide information about the temperature
distribution present during cooling of the part).15=17 Mierostruetural evaluation of the specimens
can provide insight into potential differences in operating parameters (extrusion ﬂow rate, nozzle
correction factor, etc.) for ground and ﬂight prints, observations that are key to assessing the effects
of microgravity on machine operations. The microstructure of the specimens determines mechani-
cal behavior; mierostructural features detectable with SEM may help to explain the variation in
mechanical property data for the ground and ﬂight specimens discussed in section 3. The depth and
value of information that can be obtained from SEM will make it an integral part of future 3DP
specimen analysis. For future work, optical microscopy should be performed on specimens both
before and after testing. Pre- and post-test evaluation enables the ISM team to distinguish between
features present in the as-built part and those that are an artifact of ﬁxturing/elamping or other
material changes incurred during the testing process. This is particularly important for mechanical
test coupons, as features noted in the as-built specimens on microscopy may have potential linkages
to mechanical performance and failure mechanisms.

(6) Changes in management of specimens throughout the test process will also be imple-
mented based on lessons learned from the phase I prints. While a ‘ﬁrst do no harm’ philosophy was
outlined in the test plan and applied during storage, handling, and T&E for phase I specimens, there
were some deviations from procedures that should be avoided in the future. These eseapements, which
are not believed to have any impact on test outcomes, include (1) marking of the tensile and ﬂexure
specimens with ink and (2) suspected application of an excessive clamping force when ﬁxturing one
of the ﬂexure specimens for structured light scanning. Clamping is generally not necessary for struc-
tured light scanning, but if required, the clamping force used to ﬁxture the part should be maintained
well below the force required to penetrate the material surface. For future specimen testing, the ISM

109

"
"132","team Will closely oversee testing procedures to ensure that ﬁxturing of specimens for imaging or test-
ing does not impart damage to the part unless otherwise speciﬁed by the test. (Specimens must be cut
and polished as preparation for SEM analysis. Mechanical testing, Where specimens are placed under
load and tested to a speciﬁed load limit or failure, is also an exception.)

1 10

"
"133","9. FUTURE WORK

Future work was prioritized and deﬁned based on the credibility ranking of inﬂuence fac-
tors discussed in section 7. Future work consists of further analysis of 3DP phase I specimens,
ground-based investigations conducted on ﬂight-like printers to generate additional data relevant
to inﬂuence factors in the high credibility and uncertain categories, and analysis of specimens from
ﬂight-based investigations conducted as part of phase II 3DP operations. At the time of this writ-
ing, 3DP phase II operations may occur in the spring of 2016, but could slip further due to payload
reprioritization for the MSG, the space station facility from Which the 3DP hardware operates.

Potential further work to better understand the 3DP phase I dataset is listed below in order
of priority:

° SEM of 3DP phase I speeimens—SEM of calibration coupons and tensile and ﬂexural mechani-
cal test coupons from the 3DP phase I prints is a priority analysis. SEM can identify features
(such as ﬁlament slumping, ﬁlament skewness or alignment, and changes in ﬁlament shape and
diameter), Which, by Virtue of their presence or prevalence in one class of specimens over another,
could be indicators of microgravity effects on the FDM process. SEM Will also provide insight
into failure mechanisms and features in the internal structure of the part, Which may have linkages
to mechanical performance, SEM analysis provides data relevant to assessment of the following
potential inﬂuence factors: tip—to-tray distance, microgravity effects (both on the FDM process
and machine operations), moisture absorption (since SEM can detect splaying), and feedstock
variability (changes in ﬁber Width outside the expected may indicate an overﬂow or underﬂow con-
dition created by a Change in feedstock ﬁlament diameter). Chemical concentrations could also be
obtained during SEM analysis With the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) module.

° FTIR of 3DP phase I speeimen—FTIR analysis Will provide information about the Chemical com-
position of the feedstock, the variability of Chemical composition of feedstock along its length,
and the chemical composition of the printed specimens. FTIR indicates the functional groups
present in the specimens and (When the FTIR equipment has a mechanism to maintain pressure
on the sample When mounted for analysis) their concentrations. FTIR Will provide information
relevant to evaluation of the following inﬂuence factors: offgassing/moisture absorption and feed-
stock variability.

° Investigation on the effect of tip—to-tray distanee—Using the ETU, the ﬂight-like unit for 3DP,
the ISM team Will print a matrix of tensile coupons, layer quality specimens, and compression
coupons Where the tip—to-tray distance is systematically varied from its nominal position. The
range of the tip—to-tray distances considered Will envelop the commanded variation in this value
for the ﬂight prints. Printed specimens Will be evaluated through mechanical testing, structured
light scanning, X-ray/CT, and SEM to assess the impact of tip—to-tray distance on dimensional
variation (including frequency of protrusions, deviation from circularity for the compression speci-
mens, and degree of warping/eurling), mechanical properties, densiﬁcation, and internal structure.

1 l l

"
"134","The physies-based modeling group at ARC has developed a model to Characterize the impact of the
tip—to-tray distance on the structure of specimens printed Via FDM. The ground-based experimen-
tal investigation using the ETU will provide empirical data for model validation or point the way
toward sounder modeling concepts that more accurately reﬂect material behavior during printing.

° Investigate effects of ﬁlament misalignment on compressive properties—Based on structured light
scanning data, the ﬂight compression specimens were found to deviate slightly more from the nom-
inal CAD geometry than the ground specimens. It was hypothesized that the greater out-of—round
behavior for the ﬂight specimens may contribute to their reduced mechanical performance relative
to the ground specimens, which exhibit less dimensional variation in the x-y plane. In addition to
the root cause of this behavior (which could be a microgravity effect on machine operations), the
relationship between eircularity/eylindrieity and compressive properties needs to be understood.
The precision metrology laboratory at MSFC has demonstrated several techniques that can be
used to assess eylindrieity and surface roughness for compression specimens. Stylus proﬁlometry
using the Talyrond from Taylor Hobson® constructs a map of the compression cylinder by build-
ing up a series of straight-line axial proﬁle traces around the specimen circumference. This analysis
provides an assessment of eylindrieity that complements the structured light scanning data. Stylus
proﬁlometry as well as a noneontaet technique, laser scanning confocal microscopy, can be used
to characterize surface roughness. Surface roughness and contour misalignment assessments per-
formed prior to mechanical testing will be correlated with compressive properties. In the literature
on compression testing of materials ranging from wood to concrete, compression seems to be
a test that is very sensitive to surface aberrations and/or geometric irregularities. Variations in
eylindrieity and surface roughness for compression specimens may explain the reduced perfor-
mance of the ﬂight specimens on this metric in the 3DP dataset and help the ISM team better
understand how geometric slicing and ﬁlament deposition for these particular specimens can be
optimized to produce a best-quality material. This characterization can also be incorporated into
other studies that produce compression specimens.

° Sensitivity of mechanical properties to densiﬁcation—One of the outstanding questions of the
TIM was whether subtle variations in density (recall that ﬂight and ground specimens had den-
sity differences of only around 5%, although the density bias of the compression specimen set
was inconsistent with the other data compared) can translate into the much larger (15%—30%)
observed differences in mechanical properties. The ISM team derives a sensitivity curve for density
and mechanical properties by systematically varying the inﬁll percentage of the printed specimen,
measuring density, and correlating density of a specimen with the corresponding properties mea-
sured during mechanical testing. Printed specimens of various inﬁll percentages will be weighed,
structure light scanned, and mechanically tested using the same procedures outlined in the 3DP
test plan. Gravimetrie density is derived by ratioing the mass with the volume measured during
structured light scanning analysis and can be correlated with results of mechanical testing to gen-
erate a curve that predicts mechanical properties as a function of density. This curve would enable
the ISM team to assess the magnitude of the effect of a small Change in density on mechanical
properties and better understand the relationships between inﬁll, density, and mechanical perfor-
mance of ABS specimens printed with FDM. This investigation can help explain the 3DP dataset,
but it is also of interest to the broader industry as FDM transitions from a process used to build
prototypes to a manufacturing technique for functional parts.

1 12

"
"135","° Material aging—This investigation, outlined in section 7.3.2, would consider the effect of both
offgassing and moisture absorption on properties of feedstock and the printed part. Recre-
ating 0r mimicking the potential effect of feedstock aging due to offgassing and/or moisture
absorption for the ﬂight prints is difﬁcult since it is unclear (other than the fact that ﬂight feed-
stock was 6 months older than ground feedstock at the time of printing) What exposures or other
environmental variables (in feedstock storage, printing, or shipping/handling of printed parts) may
have contributed to aging effects. What is proposed here is a general study With the goal of deter-
mining What behaviors or trends in data from these analyses are similar to the datasets for 3DP and
can thus be extrapolated as a possible explanation for the observed variability between the ground
and ﬂight specimens. Outcomes of the full study as discussed in section 7.3.2 include:

— Correlation between moisture absorption in ﬁlament feedstock and tensile strength and polymer
chemistry.

— Understanding of moisture lost in ﬁlament during the extrusion process, answering the question,
if X% of moisture is present in the initial ﬁlament, how much boils off during extrusion?

— Determines to What degree absorbed moisture Will be present in the extruded ﬁlament for a given
humidity level.

— Correlation of moisture absorption in feedstock With mechanical properties and moisture pres-
ent in printed part.

— Characterization of mass loss and Chemical evolution over time in feedstock ﬁlament due to
offgassing.

— Correlation With feedstock mechanical performance.

— Correlation of feedstock mass loss due to offgassing With mechanical performance of the printed
part.

— Characterization of selected phase I specimens using FTIR to understand chemical differences
in ﬂight and ground specimens, Which may be attributable to offgassing or moisture absorption.

— On-orbit evaluation of aging effects based on analysis of phase 11 prints.

° Thermal modeling to evaluate differences in convective processes (With the printed specimens) and
solidiﬁcation for FDM specimens produced in mierogravity—The objective of this work, Which
could be undertaken by the thermal modeling group at MSFC or the physies-based modeling
group at ARC, is to predict the temperature distribution of the printed part based on process
parameters Which inﬂuence thermal environment and cooling rate. The results of thermal analysis
work Will inform process changes for future printer operations to produce specimens With optimal
material quality.

1 l3

"
"136","- AFM of 3DP phase I speeimens—The purpose of this analysis is to characterize differences in
phase morphology (presence and distribution of material phases) between ground and ﬂight speci-
mens. As discussed in section 7.3.1, changes in localized temperature proﬁles at the weld line (layer)
interfaces during printing can result in the formation of nonequilibrium phases, Which in turn
impacts mechanical performance (ﬁg. 64). Phase morphologies that are unique to ﬂight specimens
may shed light on microgravity effects on the FDM process. This work could be done at MSFC
or in partnership With NIST, Who also proposed the investigation as part of a materials science
request for information (RFI) related to 3DP.

O

0 76.7

1 65.6

2 54.5

3 43.4

3

5 pm
4 5 pm
Figure 64. AFM micrograph of FDM-printed ABS showing phase morphology.
Yellow is the butadiene phase, and red is the more ridge continuous
phase. Image provided by NIST.

At the time of this writing, the Mechanical Test Laboratory has demonstrated the FTIR
capability for this application and has performed an analysis of selected specimens from the ground
and ﬂight prints. This work Will be summarized in a subsequent report, but no chemical differences
were detected between the classes of ground and ﬂight specimens analyzed thus far. Tensile speci-
mens, the calibration coupons, and the layer quality specimens from 3DP phase I are undergoing
SEM evaluation, and the analysis to date (Which Will also be summarized in volume 11) suggests that
structural variations in the parts resulting from processing differences in ground and ﬂight prints
explain the variations in mechanical properties Within class and between class (ground vs. ﬂight) for
the tensile specimens. A tip-to-tray distance study is currently being executed. A systematic study of
the impact of material aging on tensile strength and moduli has been designed. Some data on the
relationship between density and mechanical properties for FDM parts have been provided by TIM
attendees and a senior design project related to ISM. A study of the effect of ﬁlament misalignment
on compressive properties has been incorporated into the tip—to-tray study and Will be subsequently
published in volume 11.

l 14

"
"137","The scope of the ﬂight-based investigation for further analysis is currently limited to the
phase 11 prints. Phase II Will consist of 42 specimens and Will include additional tensile, compression,
and ﬂexure specimens as well as functional parts. With improved manufacturing process controls,
phase II prints Will serve to do the following:

(1) Isolate the effect of microgravity 0n the FDM process. Testing and analysis of 3DP
phase II specimens Will provide greater insight into Whether the variability in the 3DP dataset is
accounted for by microgravity effects or is an artifact of changes in tip-to—tray distance, material
aging, or another inﬂuence factor.

(2) Provide additional data relative to the material aging hypothesis. The initial prints of
phase II specimens Will be performed With feedstock that is already loaded into 3DP and has been on
station since the arrival of the 3DP hardware in September 2014. At the time phase 11 prints occur,
this feedstock Will be well beyond the recommended shelf life speciﬁed by the manufacturer. By
comparing data from mechanical testing (and possibly chemical composition analysis) from ground
and ﬂight 3DP phase I specimens and ﬂight phase II specimens, the ISM team can assess Whether
continued trending toward embrittlement 0f the material occurs With use of older feedstock (Which
might manifest as phase 11 specimens With tensile strengths that are greater than 3DP phase I prints
but have even lower fracture elongations).

(3) Provide greater statistical sampling for mechanical property data. The sample size for
mechanical specimens from 3DP phase I is small (a total of eight tensile, six compression, and six
ﬂexure, With half of each sample set originating from the ﬂight prints and the other half from the
ground prints). Additional data obtained from mechanical testing of phase II tensile, compression,
and ﬂexure specimens Will provide insight into Whether trends, biases, and characteristic mechani-
cal properties reported based on phase I testing are consistent With further ﬂight operation of the
printer. Whether conﬁrmatory or disparate from the original dataset, phase II prints may lend addi-
tional clarity to causes of variability in the phase I data and Which eoneepts/hypotheses are best
poised to explain property differences between ﬂight and ground specimens.

The ability of the investigations discussed to (1) provide information related to the inﬂuence
factors identiﬁed in section 7 and (2) potentially explain variability in the phase I 3DP dataset are the
key considerations in task prioritization by the ISM team. Time and resources are also constraints in
the deﬁnition of follow-on tasks. At this juncture, SEM analysis of selected 3DP phase I specimens,
an empirical and analytical investigation of the impact of tip-to—tray distance on material quality,
and a material aging study are considered the highest priority work. While all of the identiﬁed tasks
Will provide valuable data, the ISM team has made an effort to determine Which investigations are
of the greatest engineering signiﬁcance and are most likely to yield information that Will help the
ISM team to satisfy the requirements of the 3DP technology demonstration, optimize 3DP opera-
tions to improve material quality, understand the variability in the 3DP phase I dataset, and inform
requirements for future printers. It is believed that these highest priority investigations Will return the
information needed to assess inﬂuence factors for the 3DP dataset and advance understanding and
utilization of FDM for ISM.

1 15

"
"138","APPENDIX A—SUMMARY OF TECHNICAL INTERCHANGE MEETING
TO OUTBRIEF RESULTS OF PHASE I PRINTS

The purpose of the two-day TIM held at MSFC on December 2 and 3, 2015, was to (1) out-
brief the results of the testing of the ﬁrst phase of prints from this project and (2) leverage shared
experiences and collective knowledge in advanced manufacturing and materials development to bet-
ter understand the dataset. The meeting brought together experts from NASA, other government
organizations, industry, and academia.

Afﬁliations of participants in this meeting included NIST, Army Research Laboratory,
MSFC, ARC, University of Virginia, University of Dayton Research Institute, University of Hous-
ton, Made In Space, and Naval Sea Systems Command.

The TIM consisted of an overview session followed by more focused presentations address-
ing speciﬁc test results and aspects of the data as well as related special topics. Detailed information
about the content of each presentation and subsequent discussion are provided in sections 2—8 of
this TP.

A.1 Day 1: December 2, 2015

The meeting began with an overview of the ISM project given by project manager Niki
Werkheiser. The objective, requirements, and success criteria for the 3DP technology demonstra-
tion mission were presented. Other ISM activities, including the phase 11 prints using the current
188 printer (3DP) (which wi11take place in 2016), ground-based materials characterization activities
and the material property database for 3DP, future solicitations for external ISM, SBIR-sponsored
work on a feedstock recycling capability, and STEM outreach activities related to 3DP were also
discussed. The overview emphasized that ISM seeks to develop on-demand manufacturing capabili-
ties that will enhance crew safety, support sustainable operations for exploration, and many activities
beyond 3DP.

A summary of a precursor TIM, focused on development of baseline material properties
for ISM and deﬁning materials Characterization activities to support ISM, was presented by Tracie
Prater, Ph.D., from MSFC. The meeting took place at MSFC in July 2015 and had nearly 60 partici-
pants from NASA, other government agencies, industry, and academia. The summary report from
this meeting has been published as a NASA Technical Memorandum and can be accessed through
the NASA Technical Reports Server.4

Quincy Bean, the principal investigator for the 3DP technology demonstration mission, pre-
sented a summary of the test plan and test procedures for the phase I prints. The specimens under-
went multiple phases of testing at MSFC from May through September 2015. The objective of the
testing was to enable comparative evaluation of ground specimens (printed using the ﬂight printer
1 16

"
"139","prior to launch) and analogous ﬂight specimens of identical geometry that were printed on board 188.
All ground and ﬂight specimens were photographed, weighed using precision metrology capabilities
in EMlO, X-rayed, and scanned using structured light scanning to create 3D rendering of parts that
could be compared to the nominal CAD geometry. Mechanical test coupons (compression, ﬂexure,
and tensile) were CT scanned prior to mechanical testing. All specimens were also examined using
an optical microscope in EMlO; for the mechanical test specimens, this evaluation was conducted
after destructive testing was complete. This presentation also covered the baseline requirements for
the 3DP technology demonstration. Niki Werkheiser reiterated the key question that the ISM project
seeks to answer with this technology demonstration: Are differences in part performance attributable
to microgravity? During discussion, another question was posed: If differences are observed, how
would they affect overall performance, and can part design compensate? Some attendees felt that
more fundamental scientiﬁc research needs to be performed in order to fully answer the question,
while others felt that the focus should be on microgravity differences that are determined to be of
engineering signiﬁcance (i.e., focus on large effects that would affect overall part performance).

During the early afternoon, invited presentations were given. Dr. Ed Garboezi from NIST
presented information on additive manufacturing research that NIST is involved in. NIST has been
conducting round robin studies with the industry and working toward the development of additive
manufacturing standards for both polymers and metallies. Most of NIST’s additive manufacturing
efforts have been focused on additive manufacturing of metals; however, they have recently begun
studying polymeric additive manufacturing (i.e., FDM). They have determined that structural fail-
ure of FDM parts tends to originate at weld line interfaces and have performed AFM to measure
nanomechanical properties. It was suggested that AFM may be sensitive enough to detect subtle
mierostruetural differences between parts printed terrestrially and in the microgravity environment.

Following the ﬁrst TIM, an informal RFI was sent out to the materials science community
(but primarily focused on participants in the polymers session of the MaterialsLAB ISS workshop
for microgravity materials science research) to solicit ideas for potential uses of the printer to con-
duet materials science research. Three responses were received. The experimental concepts were pre-
sented at this TIM by the investigators who proposed the work:

(1) Dr. Jacinta Conrad from the University of Houston spoke about an investigation to
determine the feasibility of 3D printing nanoparticle-reinforeed composites in microgravity. These
nanoparticles add material functionality (e.g., enhance thermal or electrical conductivity) and result
in higher strength parts that expand the range of material uses. The microgravity environment may
enable printing of higher solid loadings of nanoparticles and ﬁner spanning features, which in turn
will improve the properties of printed structures.

(2) Dr. Thomas Forbes from NIST proposed using 3DP to enable real-time sampling and
particle sizing and ofﬂine chemical composition measurement of ultraﬁne aerosols emitted during
the thermal extrusion process. The study aims to provide information on the size and concentration
of emitted ultraﬁne particles, as well as the chemical composition of vapors and deposited particles
that are byproducts of the printing process and would help to address environmental health and
safety concerns that may be associated with operating the FDM process in a crewed habitat.

l 17

"
"140","(3) Dr. Ed Garboezi presented an investigation from Drs. Ryan Killgore and Ryan Wagner on
using AFM to assess microgravity effects on phase-separated domains of ABS produced by FDM.

Dr. Tracie Prater presented the graVimetrie density and mechanical property data for the
ﬂight and ground control samples. GraVimetrie density values were calculated based on specimen
weights obtained using a precision balance in EMlO, and volumes were derived based on structured
light scan data. In general, ﬂight specimens are slightly more dense than ground specimens. Excep-
tions to this are the compression coupons and the positive range specimen, which were less dense
than their ground counterparts. The masses of the samples had only slight differences. Each Class of
mechanical test performed (tensile, compression, and ﬂexure) yielded two clear families of data for
ﬂight and ground specimens. Data from tensile tests indicate that the ﬂight samples were on average
stronger and stiffer than the ground samples; however, the fracture elongation of the ﬂight specimens
was reduced relative to the ground specimens. Flight tensile sample F004 (the ﬁrst specimen printed)
could ﬁt in either family (ﬂight or ground) in terms of strength and stiffness, but had a fracture
elongation that is statistically in family with the ground dataset. For the ﬂexure specimens, the ﬂight
specimens had an ultimate strength and modulus that were signiﬁcantly greater than the analogous
ground parts. The compression specimens showed the opposite trend; for this class of specimens, the
ﬂight samples were weaker than the ground samples. This trending correlates well to the density data,
as denser parts have better mechanical performance. While variations in density between ground
and ﬂight specimens may explain observed differences in mechanical material properties, the ques-
tion as to what mechanism is responsible for the difference in density remains unanswered. During
discussion of mechanical property data, it was noted that variation in feedstock ﬁlament diameter
imparts a change in part density. Filament diameter variations can change the volumetric ﬂow rate
of extruded material from the nozzle, which can then result in thinner extrudate beads, which in
turn will lower the overall part density or create a weak spot/failure initiation point. The importance
of extrusion ﬂow rate to part quality is documented in papers by Rodiguez et al. from the Univer-
sity of Notre Dame.15»17 Mike Snyder (Made In Space) said that feedstock ﬁlament used for ﬂight
and ground operations was inspected, but diameter was not precisely measured. The ﬁlament was
inspected to verify that it was within the acceptable diameter range allowed by the 3D printer.

A.2 Day 2: December 3, 2015

Dr. Ron Beshears presented the CT data. The images from the CT scans show an abrupt step
Change in density that occurs about halfway through the thickness of many of the specimens. These
density variations were mostly observed in the ﬂight samples. Densities were calculated from the CT
data as a CT number. This value cannot be converted to standard density units using the current
dataset, but a conversion factor can be obtained for future analyses by scanning a witness sample of
the same material with a known density. The differences in CT number between ﬂight and ground
samples in general follow the same trend as the graVimetrie density measurements (i.e., ﬂight denser
than ground). However, the mean CT differences were not considered statistically signiﬁcant. Den-
sity for the top and bottom sections of the parts were also compared. The CT numbers were usually
higher for the bottom half of the specimen (i.e., the ﬁrst half to be printed) than the top; however,
the differences were again not considered signiﬁcant.
1 18

"
"141","Erick Ordonez presented the microscopy data. Examination of the tensile samples’ fracture
surfaces showed that many of the samples’ bottom few layers were smeared together more than the
top layers. This corresponds to the ﬁndings from the CT data, which indicates that the lower half of
the specimens are denser than the top halves.

Quincy Bean presented the structured light scan data. The scan data show that almost all
of the samples were warped or shrunken slightly. Most of the ﬂight samples exhibited protrusions
along the bottom edges, which is indicative of the part being built with the extruder tip too Close to
the print tray. If the tip is too close, then the extrudate bead width will widen, resulting in protrusion
in the bottom layers beyond where the part edges should lie. The ground samples in general were
more warped than the ﬂight samples. Warpage is generally an indication of poor adhesion to the
build surface and may have been caused by the extruder tip being too far away from the build surface
for the ground prints. Structured light scanning also showed that the compression samples overall
are slightly out of round, but that the ground specimens exhibit less dimensional variation from the
CAD model than the ﬂight specimens. During discussion, a question was posed as to whether small
differences in part geometry/toleranee would result in large differences in mechanical properties.
The extruder tip being too close to the build surface may explain the higher densities and strengths
in the ﬂight tensile and ﬂexure samples, but does not account for the weaker and less dense ﬂight
compression coupons. The differences in the mechanical properties of the compression samples may
be explained by tolerance differences; however, more data need to be obtained to understand what
relationship, if any, exists between out-of—round behaVior (perhaps quantiﬁed in terms of surface
roughness) and compressive properties.

The integrated data presentation reviewed the results of the phases of testing discussed dur-
ing the TIM: mass and density, mechanical testing, structured light scanning, X-ray and CT, and
optical microscopy. A ﬁshbone diagram constructed by statistician Ken Johnson and the ISM team
to identify process inﬂuence factors was discussed. Testable hypotheses developed based on this
diagram that could potentially explain observed differences in mechanical properties for ﬂight and
ground specimens were presented individually. These included microgravity effects, material aging/
offgassing, changes in z-Calibration and the tip—to-tray distance, test effects (i.e., mechanical cou-
pon geometry and/or test setup inﬂuenced measured mechanical properties), exposure of feedstock
and/or printed part to humidity, moisture absorption, radiation effects, and chemical variation in
feedstock. Supporting and refuting evidence for each hypothesis (based on the 3DP dataset) was
discussed. Open questions related to each hypothesis were identiﬁed as well as a plan for further
analysis. Lessons learned from operations of 3DP and subsequent testing of the ground and ﬂight
specimens were also summarized. The presentation concluded with an executive summary, high-
lighting successes of the project, remaining questions, and a go-forward plan based on evaluation
of the credibility of hypotheses, open questions, and task prioritization. Many participants in this
session of the meeting offered valuable feedback based on their own work with the FDM process
and ABS that will inform the team as it moves forward. Inputs included sensitivity of ultimate ten-
sile strength to subtle changes in density for ABS produced Via FDM, investigating the relationship
between specimen hardness and modulus and ductility, effects of moisture absorption on ABS, and
speciﬁc evaluations (SEM and AFM) that could provide insight into microgravity effects. Discussion

1 l9

"
"142","from the TIM Will guide additional analysis of ﬂight and ground specimens With the related objec-
tives of detecting signatures of microgravity effects on the FDM process and explaining differences
in density and mechanical properties between ground and ﬂight specimens. Test plans, procedures,
and analysis tools may also be amended to provide the best possible dataset for future test specimens.
The phase 11 print matrix was evaluated and revised based on feedback received from materials
experts to generate specimens that can potentially answer open questions identiﬁed during the TIM
and pave the way toward full utilization of 3DP and ISM capabilities.

120

"
"143","APPENDIX B—COMPARISON OF 3DP DATA WITH PREVIOUS
GROUND-BASED MATERIALS CHARACTERIZATION WORK

Because the properties between the ﬂight and ground prints are disparate and clearly repre-
sent two families of data, it is worthwhile to examine the ﬂight and ground dataset within the con-
text of other, previous ground-based materials characterization work for ABS produced Via FDM
to look for commonalities in properties and manufacturing conditions that could help to explain
the observed variation in the 3DP dataset. Although the datasets from the materials Characteriza-
tion studies are certainly not directly comparable with the 3DP specimens because of wide-ranging
differences in printers, feedstoeks, thermal conditions, machine operations, etc., they do provide
some insight into whether the observed property values for 3DP are within the bounds of other
ground-based specimens (and general process variability, although the sources of the variability for
the ground-based characterization work and the 3DP specimens may be, admittedly, very different).

Currently, there are four other datasets that can be considered:

(1) The SS series, produced on the FDM TitanTM (made by Stratasys) with ABS P400 white
feedstock.

(2) The GN series, produced on the ground test unit (GTU) for 3DP with ABS natural
feedstock.

(3) The BF series, produced on the ETU for 3DP with ABS natural feedstock.

(4) The LF series, produced on a ﬂight-like printer and delivered to NASA by Made In Space
(ABS natural feedstock).

Table 27 summarizes the data series, the make and model of the machines the specimens were
produced on, feedstock information, and storage conditions for the specimens. Specimens from the
GTU (GN series), ETU (EF series), and the LF series were produced on ﬂight-like printers. The
least relevant dataset from the perspective of evaluating the test results of the 3DP specimens is the
SS series, since it was produced on a Stratasys machine and used a different feedstock (ABS P400
white) than all other specimen sets (which used ABS natural). The SS, GN, EF, and LF series speci-
mens were also not stored with desiccant, and for GN and EF, no desiccant was in the feedstock
cartridge, potentially rendering specimens from these sets more susceptible to environmental effects
and moisture absorption than the 3DP specimen set (where storage conditions were more carefully
controlled). All specimens (with the exception of the SS series) were made with the same G-code
(slice) ﬁles as the 3DP specimens; however, the build parameters for the SS series were set such that
the ﬁlament placement emulates the original G-code as Closely as possible. All samples used the same
ﬁlament orientation (i45°) for layup.

121

"
"144","Table 27. Summary of data series for ABS plastic produced Via FDM.
«—
Imm-
Series Lot Cartridge Storage
white no desiccant
no desiccant
no desiccant
flight—Iike no desiccant
with desiccant
with desiccant
The SS, GN, and LF series consist of 45 specimens (15 tensile, 15 compression, and 15 ﬂex-
ure). Batches of ﬁve specimens each were tested at three temperatures (—20 °C, room temperature,
and 90 °C). For comparison with the 3DP dataset, results from these series were restricted to room
temperature tests.
Some additional speciﬁes and fabrication notes on the data series are summarized as follows:

° For the SS series, all 15 samples of each type (tensile, ﬂexure, and compression) were fabricated
simultaneously in a single build.

° For the GN, EF, and LF series, specimens were built one at a time.

° The GN series had a damaged build tray, and a LexanTM sheet (l-mm-thiek polycarbonate) was
afﬁxed to the build surface. During each build, the Lexan sheet would bow up from the build sur-
face, moving the build surface Closer to the extruder tip than nominal. As a result, all GN samples
were built too Close to the extruder tip. Specimens exhibited protrusions along the bottom edges.

° The GN series had a different thermal environment than the 3DP series owing to the presence
of the Lexan sheet on the build tray, but the commonality between the ﬂight specimens and the
GN series is that both were built with the extruder tip positioned too Close to the build tray.
A more complete discussion of tip—to-tray distance and its impact on the resulting material in
terms of dimensional variation appears in section 6. The relationship between tip—to-tray distance
and mechanical properties has not been Characterized, but will be investigated as part of a follow-
on investigation (further discussed in see. 6).

° For the EF series, specimens were inspected for quality control after fabrication. Samples that
exhibited signiﬁcant warping or protrusions were rejected.

122

"
"145","In comparing the datasets, a multigroup comparison (MANOVA) for the SS series, GN series,
EF series, LF series, 3DP ground, and 3DP ﬂight specimens was performed for each material prop-
erty (ultimate tensile strength, modulus of elasticity, fracture elongation, compressive stress at 20%
strain, compressive modulus, ultimate ﬂexural stress, and ﬂexural modulus). Data were restricted to
results of room temperature mechanical tests. The summary of the comparative evaluation of the
data from tensile testing, compression testing, and ﬂexure testing for the Classes of specimens identi-
ﬁed in the preceding discussion appear in tables 28—30 in sections B.l—B.3. Scatterplots of tensile,
compression, and ﬂexure data for all siX specimen sets are in ﬁgures 65—71 in sections B. l—B.3.

B.1 Comparison of Tensile Test Data

The comparison of tensile test data across the siX specimen sets (SS, GN, EF, LF,
3DP ground, and 3DP ﬂight) is summarized in table 28. The accompanying seatterplots for ultimate
tensile strength, modulus, and fracture elongation appear in ﬁgures 65—67. In terms of ultimate ten-
sile strength, the SS series exhibits lower than expected strength given that specimens were produced
using a commercial off-the-shelf, industrial-grade printer. The important ﬁnding relative to 3DP
is that the GN series, where specimens were inadvertently built with the extruder tip too Close to
the build tray as a consequence of the Lexan sheet necessitated by build tray damage, also exhibits
greater ultimate tensile strength. An off-nominal tip—to-tray distance with the same bias was also
present in the manufacture of the 3DP ﬂight specimens. This observation lends supporting evidence
to hypotheses that suggest greater densiﬁcation in the ﬂight specimens (and higher resulting mechan-
ical properties) is a consequence of the Closer tip-to—tray distances used during printer operations on
orbit. Ground specimens for 3DP are in family with the LF series (built with a ﬂight-like printer on
the ground) in terms of ultimate tensile strength.

Table 28. Tensile data comparison for all specimen Classes.
m
Tensile Strength of Variation of Elasticity of Variation Elongation of Variation
(ksi) (%) (msi) W W W

——————m

——————m-

——————m

123

"
"146","4.9 —_
g 4.6 — 3
5 I c.
2’ 4.3 — a
e — a
a _
2 4 — °
.5 _ a
g _ D
.— 3.7 — z a
‘3 _
2 — ° a g
E 3.4 - o c.
D ‘ g a
3.1 — ° °
U) U) U) U) U) U)
G.) d.) d.) d.) C C
.5 .5 .5 .5 E E
(D (D (D (D '5 '5
U) 2 LL l-L co co
0) (p LIJ _I o. o.
(D (D
"""" '5
E g
E 2
(D
Figure 65. Scatterplot of ultimate tensile strength (measured from room
temperature tensile tests) across six specimen sets.
0.26 ...
77; 024 u M u u
E
m :1 am :1
3
s
g 0.22 a W
E
.2 ° ""
E
m 0.2 a
0.18 °
U) U) U) U) U) U)
G.) d.) d.) d.) C C
.5 .5 .5 .5 “5’ “5’
CD CD CD CD '5 '5
U) 2 LL LL a: a:
co (9 LIJ _I o. o.
CD (D
E» E
E 2
(D
Figure 66. Scatterplot of elastic modulus (measured from room temperature
tensile tests) across six specimen sets. Stratiﬁcation of data (i.e.,
repeated values) is a consequence of rounding.
124

"
"147","9.8 a
17 8'8 a Z a
g 7.8 . .
g .. . ° .. ° a
E 6.8
LIJ a a
5 5.8 °
3 .
E 4.8 :
3.8 ..
3 2 {’2 {’2 '2 '2
(D (p LIJ _I o. o.
(D (D
E '2
2"" 3
E 2
(D
Figure 67. Seatterplot of fracture elongation (measured from room temperature
tensile tests) across six specimen sets.

The seatterplot of elastic modulus for all six datasets is shown in ﬁgure 66. The stratiﬁcation
of data (i.e., multiple specimens With the same modulus) is an artifact of rounding (modulus values
are reported to two signiﬁcant ﬁgures). Flight specimens from 3DP are statistically in family With the
GN series (Which also had a tip—to-tray distance commensurate With the extruder being too Close to
the build plate).

Fracture elongation data (ﬁg. 67) are highly variable across all specimen Classes. The most
variability is observed in the SS series and the 3DP ﬂight specimens (the coefﬁcient of variation asso-
ciated With these datasets is 29% and 26%, respectively). The large variability in the ﬂight specimens
is a product of F004 (tensile specimen 1), Which, though not a true statistical outlier, has a fracture
elongation that is z3% higher than the other ﬂight tensile specimens. While GN specimens and 3DP
ﬂight specimens were both built With the extruder tip closer to the build tray than nominal, the speci-
men groups are not in family With one another in terms of fracture elongation. Reduced ductility
may also be a consequence of the tensile specimen type (type IV from ASTM D6385), Which has
a larger stress concentration at the ﬁllet than the type I specimen design (but fracture elongation of
<5% is only observed in some datasets and thus does not show a Clear linkage to coupon geometry).

125

"
"148","B.2 Comparison of Compression Test Data
Material properties obtained from compression testing across the six datasets are summarized
in table 29.
Table 29. Compression data comparison for all specimen Classes.
Mean Mean
Mean Stress at Coefficient of Compressive Coefficient of Compressive Coefficient of
20% Strain Variation Yield Strength Variation Modulus Variation
(ksi) (%) (ksi) (%) (ksi) W
The compressive strengths (ﬁg. 68) 0f the 3DP ground specimens are in family With the
SS series and are also signiﬁcantly higher than Characteristic compressive strengths for specimens
produced using other ﬂight—like printers. The 3DP ﬂight specimens exhibit the lowest compressive
strengths of all data series.
9 7.9 .
é’é 5 °
E 7.4
5
E 6.9
1""“; a ., .
: :
E 5.9
.§ °
«’5: .
E 5.4 °
U) U) U) U) U) U)
C.) d.) d.) d.) C C
': ': ': 'E d) d)
U) 2 LL l-L a: a:
m (p LIJ _I o. o.
(D (D
E E
E 2
(D
Figure 68. Seatterplot of compressive stress at 20% strain across six specimen sets.
126

"
"149","As With elastic modulus, the stratiﬁcation in the compressive modulus data (ﬁg. 69) is
attributable to rounding. For this metric, the 3DP ground specimens have the highest Characteristic
modulus and are distinct from all other datasets for this material property.

0.26
'77? 0.24 a
E, .
3 0.22
.3 .,
é”
a, 0.2
3 u m
U)
E 0.18 n ==
9. u
g 0.16 a a u
0.14 an n
U) U) U) U) U) U)
-"":’ -"":’ -"":’ -"":’ 5 5
U) 2 LL I-L a: a:
(D (p LIJ —| o. D.
(D (D
E» E
E 2
(D
Figure 69. Scatterplot of compressive modulus across siX specimen sets.
Stratiﬁcation in data is due to rounding.
B.3 Comparison of Flexure Test Data
Material properties obtained from ﬂexure testing at room temperature for all specimen sets
are summarized in table 30.
Table 30. Flexural data comparison for all specimen Classes.
Ultimate Coefficient Flexural Coefficient
Flexural Stress of Variation Modulus of Variation
(ksi) (%) (msi) (%)
Flightspecimens 6.544 241.00 “
127

"
"150","Flexural strengths for the ﬂight specimens (ﬁg. 70) are in family With the EF and GN series.
For ﬂexural modulus (ﬁg. 71), there is an overlap in the range of almost all the datasets.
7.4 u
E 6.9 .
m a a
U) u u
g 6-4 .. . ”
(D
Tu ° ..
'5 5.9 a “
E ..
3; 5.4 . :
(U u
E n
E 4.9 . ..
D
4.4 °
U) U) U) 3 U) U)
-°:’ -°:’ -°:’ -: 5 5
U) 2 LI- LI- 0: cu
(D (9 Lu —l o. o.
CD (D
E: E
E 2
(D
Figure 70. Scatterplot of ultimate ﬂexural stress across six specimen sets.
0.28
g .. ., ., .
3 0.22 3 .. .
3 .. ° .
§
,7, 0.19 : B
'5 n
:5 a
E 0.16 a
0.13 a
8 8 8 8 8 8
.5 .5 .5 .5 g g
m m m m g g
U) 2 LI- ”- cu cu
U) (9 LIJ —| o. 9.
CD CD
"""" '5
E» E
E 2
(D
Figure 71. Scatterplot of ﬂexural modulus across six specimen sets.
128

"
"151","The SS, GN, EF, and LF series are not directly comparable With the 3DP data owing to dif-
ferences in feedstock, manufacturing process controls, and printer hardware. However, much of the
data from the 3DP ﬂight specimens are in family With other ground-based datasets (SS, GN, EF, and
LF series). The most puzzling dataset, When situated Within the context of prior materials character-
ization work, is the compression properties for the 3DP specimens. The ﬂight specimens have a char-
acteristic value of compressive strength that is unique and lower than all other observed data. The
ground specimens from 3DP have compressive moduli that are signiﬁcantly greater than any other
observations. Because of the multiple variables that are different between 3DP and other datasets, it
is difﬁcult to isolate and/or deﬁnitively identify the cause of this discrepancy. Further discussion of
the compression specimens (and observed differences between ground and ﬂight that may contribute
to their unique behavior) appears in sections 6 and 7.

129

"
"152","REFERENCES

1. Johnston, M.M.; Werkheiser, M.J.; Cooper, K.G.; et 31.: “3D Printing in Zero—G ISS Technol-
ogy Demonstration,” in Proc. AIAA SPA CE 2014 Conference and Exposition, August 5—7, 2014,
AIAA, Reston, VA, 5 pp., doi:10.2514/6.2014-4470, 2014.

2. NASA TeehPort, “Advanced Manufacturing Technologies (MAT): Additive Construction for
Mobile Emplaeement Project,” <teehp0rt.nasa.gOV/VieW/17558>, October 2014.

3. Mahoney, E.: “Future Engineers Finalists Get First Hand Look at Future of Space Explora-
tion,” <WWW.nasa.gOV/feature/future-engineers—ﬁnalists—get-ﬁrst—hand—look—at—future—of—spaee—
explorati0n>, July 30, 2015.

4. Prater, T.J.; Bean, Q.A.; Werkheiser, M.J.; et 31.: “Summary Report for the Technical Interchange
Meeting on Development of Baseline Material Properties and Design Guidelines for In-Spaee
Manufacturing Activities,” NASA/TM—2016—218219, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center,
82 pp., March 2016.

5. ASTM D638, “Standard Test Method for Tensile Properties of Plastics,” ASTM International,
West Conshohocken, PA, 2014.

6. ASTM D790, “Standard Test Methods for Flexural Properties of Unreinforeed and Reinforced
Plastics and Electrical Insulating Materials,” ASTM International, West Conshohocken, PA,
2015 .

7. ASTM D695, “Standard Test Methods for Compressive Properties of Rigid Plastics,” ASTM
International, West Conshohocken, PA, 2015 .

8. Forster, A.M.: “Materials Testing Standards for Additive Manufacturing of Polymer Materials:
State of the Art and Standards Applicability,” NISTIR 8059, National Institute of Standards
and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, 54 pp., May 2015 .

9. National Institute of Standards and Technology, “Measurement Science Roadmap for Metal-
Based Additive Manufacturing,” <http://WWW.nist.gOV/el/isd/upload/NISTAdd Mfg Report
FINAL—2.pdf>, May 2015.

10. DeGroh, K.K.; Banks, B.A.; McCarthy, C.E.; et 31.: “MISSE 2 PEACE Polymers Atomic Oxy-
gen Erosion Experiment on the International Space Station,” High Perform. Polym, V01. 20,
pp. 388—409, August 2008.

130

"
"153","11. O’Donnell, J.H.: “Radiation Chemistry of Polymers,” in Effects ofRadz'atz'on on H igh- T echnology
Polymers, E. Reichmanis and J.H. O’Donnell (eds.), American Chemical Society, Washington,
DC, pp. 1—13, 1989.

12. Snyder, M.P.; Dunn, 1].; and Gonzalez, E.G.: “Effects of Mierogravity 0n Extrusion based Addi-
tive Manufacturing,” in Proc. AIAA SPACE 2013 Conference and Exposition, September 10—12,
2013, AIAA, Reston, VA, 6 pp., doi:10.2514/6.2013-5439, 2013.

13. Grugel, R.; Cotton, L.; Segre, P.; et 31.: “The In-Spaee Soldering Investigation (ISSI): Melting and
Solidiﬁeation Experiments Aboard the International Space Station,” in Proc. 44th AIAA Aero-
space Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, January 9—12, 2006, AIAA, Reston, VA, d0i:10.2514/6.2006-
521, 2006.

14. Kulieh, D.M.; Gaggar, S.K.; Lowry, V.; and Stepien, R.: “Aerylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene (ABS)
Polymers,” in Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical T echnology, John Wiley and Sons, 1110.,
2001.

15. Rodriguez, J.F.; Thomas, J.P.; and Renaud, 1: “Characterization of the mesostrueture of fused-
deposition aerylonitrile-butadiene-styrene materials,” Rapid Prototyping J , V01. 6, No. 3,
pp. 175—186, d0i:10.1108/13552540010337056, 2000.

16. ASTM D570, “Standard Test Method for Water Absorption of Plastics,” ASTM International,
West Conshohocken, PA, 2010.

17. Rodriguez, J.F.; Thomas, J.P.; and Renaud, 1: “Mechanical behavior of aerylonitrile-butadiene-
styrene (ABS) fused deposition materials: experimental investigation,” Rapid Prototyping J,
Vol. 7, pp. 148—158, 2001.

18. Kuhn, H.; and Medlin, D. (eds): ASM Handbook Volume 8: Mechanical T esting and Evaluation,
ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 998 pp., 2000.

19. Cole-Parmer: “Chemical Compatibility Database,” <http://WWW.eoleparmer.eom/Chemiea1—
Resistanee>, 2016.

20. Agarwala, M.K.; Jamalabad, V.R.; Langrana, N.A.; et 31.: “Structural quality of
parts processed by fused deposition,” Rapid Prototyping J, V01. 2, No. 4, pp. 4—19,
d0i:10.1108/13552549610732034, 1996.

21. Sun, Q.; Rizvi, G.M.; Bellehumeur, CT; and Gu, P.: “Effect of processing conditions on the
bonding quality of FDM polymer ﬁlaments,” Rapid Prototyping J, V01. 14, No. 2, pp. 72—80,
d0i:10.1108/13552540810862028, 1995.

131

"
"154","Form Approved
REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE OMBNQ 07040188
The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining
the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing
this burden, to Department of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operation and Reports (0704-0188), 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302.
Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid
OMB control number.
PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS.
1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM—YYYY) 2. REPORT TYPE 3. DATES COVERED (From — To)
01—07—201 6 Teehmeal Pubheatlon
Summary Report 011 Phase I Results From the 3D Printing in Zero-G
Technology Demonstration Mission, Volume I
T.J. Prater, Q.A. Bean, R.D. Beshears, T.D. Rolin, NJ. Werkheiser,
E.A. Ordonez, R.M. Ryan, and FE. Ledbetter III
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
. REPORT NUMBER
George C. Marshall Space thht Center
Huntsville, AL 35812 M—1415
9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)
National Aeronautics and Space Administration NASA
Washington DC 20546—0001 11. SPONSORING/MONITORING REPORT NUMBER
7
NASA/TP—2016—219101
12. DlSTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Unclassiﬁed-Unlimited
Subject Category 18
Availability: NASA STI Information Desk (757—864—9658)
13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES
Prepared by Materials and Processes Laboratory, Engineering Directorate
14. ABSTRACT
Human space exploration to date has been conﬁned to low-Earth orbit and the Moon. The International Space Sta-
tion (ISS) provides a unique opportunity for researchers to prove out the technologies that Will enable humans to
safely live and work in space for longer periods of time and venture beyond the Earth/Moon system. The ability to
manufacture parts in-space rather than launch them from Earth represents a fundamental shift in the current risk
and logistics paradigm for human spaceﬂight. In September 2014, NASA, in partnership With Made In Space, Inc.,
launched the 3D Printing in ZerO-G technology demonstration mission to explore the potential of additive manufac-
turing for in-space applications and demonstrate the capability to manufacture parts and tools 011 orbit using fused
deposition modeling. This Technical Publication summarizes the results of testing to date of the ground control and
ﬂight prints from the ﬁrst phase of this ISS payload.
15. SUBJECT TERMS
111-spaee manufacturlng, addltlve manufacturlng, 3D prlntlng, technology demonstratlon 1111331011,
material testing, ABS, ISS payload
17. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 18. NUMBER OF 19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON
a. REPORT b. ABSTRACT c. THIs PAGE PAGES STI Help Desk at email: help@sti.nasa.gov
U U U UU 156 19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (Include area code)
STI Help Desk at: 757—864—9658
Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98)
Prescribed by ANSI Std. 239-18

"
"155",""
"156","National Aeronautics and

Space Administration

1802

George C. Marshall Space Flight Center

Huntsville, Alabama 35 8 12
—

"
