"","x"
"1","31“», Available online at www.sciencedirect.com m
(«>4 4"" ScienceDirect MM
W msmmmnam
PERGAMON Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 678—681 m
WWW.elseVier.com/locate/actaastro
Mental representatlon of spatial cues 1n nncro graV1ty: Writlng and
draw1ng tests
Gilles Clementa’ 1” *, Corinna LathanC, Anna Lockerdc, Angie Bukleyb
aCem‘re National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque, UMR 5549 CNRS-UPS Cerveau et Cognition, Toulouse, France
bRuss College of Engineering and Technology, Ohio University, Athens, OH, USA
CAnthroTronix Ina, Silver Spring, MD, USA
Received 22 December 2006; accepted 5 January 2009
Available online 31 Januray 2009
Abstract
Humans have mental representation of their environment based on sensory information and experience. A series of experiments
has been designed to allow the identiﬁcation of disturbances in the mental representation of three-dimensional space during space
ﬂight as a consequence of the absence of the gravitational frame of reference. This NASNESA-funded research effort includes
motor tests complemented by psychophysics measurements, designed to distinguish the effects of cognitive versus perceptual-
motor changes due to microgravity exposure. Preliminary results have been Obtained during the microgravity phase of parabolic
ﬂight. These results indicate that the vertical height of handwritten characters and drawn Objects is reduced in microgravity
compared to normal gravity, suggesting that the mental representation of the height of Obj ects and the environment change during
short-term microgravity. Identifying lasting abnormalities in the mental representation of spatial cues Will establish the scientiﬁc
and technical foundation for development of preﬂight and in-ﬂight training and rehabilitative schemes, enhancing astronaut
performance of perceptual-motor tasks, for example, interaction With robotic systems during exploration-Class missions.
© 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction reference during space ﬂight could be responsible for
disturbances in the mental representation of spatial cues.
Accurate perception and localization of objects in Such disturbances may inﬂuence the ability of astro—
the environment are prerequisites for spatial orienta- nauts to accurately perform perceptual—motor tasks such
tion and reliable performance of motor tasks. Humans as those involved in robotic control. Thus, this research
have mental representation of their environment based will pave the way for human exploration missions, par—
on sensory information and experience. There is ample ticularly those for which human performance with re—
evidence that gravity is taken into account in Visual per— spect to robotic systems is crucial.
ception [1,2]. The absence of the gravitational frame of A series of experiments has been designed to al—
low further identiﬁcation of the role of gravity in the
— mental representation of space. These experiments
>kCOI‘iesponding author at: UMR 5549 CNRS—UPS, Faculté de are currently planned to be performed With the astro—
2:?6313652: 1117;113:115?- 0f§3§231$§2013ranm nauts on board the International Space Station. This
E-mail addresses.: gilles.clement@cerco.ups—tlse.fr NASNESA_funded researCh effort mcmdes mOtor
(G. Clement), clathan@atinc.com (C. Lathan), alockerd@atinc.com teStS complemented by psychophysics measurements,
(A. Lockerd), bukley@0hi0.edu (A. Bukley). designed to distinguish the effects of cognitive versus
0094—5765/$—see front matter © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.actaastr0.2009.01.001

"
"2","G. Clément et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 678 —68] 679
perceptual—motor changes due to microgravity eXpo— \ "" ""T I
sure. \ ..- . * ‘ y .
One characteristic of mental representation that is ‘ \ V' i, 1"" _________ . .
easily quantiﬁable includes the spatial and dynamics i‘tl‘ * Ir— *’ "" L- °»—~---v-~”'U ~‘«
components of handwriting and hand drawing of mem— LL33; O“ -——-—-- ~
orized objects with the eyes closed [3]. Preliminary :g‘ Y""- \ \
results of the analysis of writing and drawing tests per— I
formed durin g the microgravity phase of parabolic ﬂight i' (a ' a .
are presented hereafter. ﬂ \ ‘ ‘ ’
2. Methods ll“. , '
n L -
This experiment was performed during the 40th ESA &‘ V eggs; ; .Q‘ ‘_ “
Parabolic Flight Campaign in Bordeaux (France) in J une “J :5: \ ‘1 “i"" .1; 'x‘v
2005. This campaign included three parabolic ﬂights, 3“” i’ 3' ' """" .

. . ' .m A- / ‘
each compr1s1ng 30 test parabolas. Each parabola pro— ‘ \— /—,'-J/)/// \‘
Vided approximately 22 s of microgravity during which T“\,“_ - . {g' ‘
the subjects were free—ﬂoating. K. ~.. \ | ,.

Nine subjects (siX men, three women, aged 24—49) k \.3 K
were tested both on the ground and on board the r” .. . M - 7‘ 2’
CNES Airbus A300 Zero—G. Informed consent form 213,? 4- \ ‘ \ a
was obtained from all subjects. The Regional Ethics '° I $1 ‘

Board (CCPPRB, Paris) approved this study. All ﬂight / , V; _ ‘ ‘ '
Participants passed an Air Force Class 111 medical / , - \
examination, and reported that they had normal or ~.

corrected—to—normal Vision with no known vestibular -
deﬁcits. _ _ _ _ _ _

mm of pamelbw .... a m
the subjects maintained a seated—hke posture and were
positioned in mid—air by the operator to eliminate
orientation—related tactile cues. Test subjects were at— 1 2
tached by loose straps to allow them to free—ﬂoat M (C Q O @5ng )TT
without the risk of bumping into obstacles. They were M 3
blindfolded. A digitizing tablet (Intuos A5, Wacom) 1 1 1 2 1 2 (
was attached to their thighs by knee—straps (Fig. 1). 5 C
Trajectory of the stylus pen on the tablet was recorded 2 + i i O (Q
on a laptop computer using dedicated script analysis O
software (MovAlyzeR, NeuroScript, LLC). 2 4 3 6

Each subject was required to execute 10 different i
types of drawings (Fig. 2) using the digitizing tablet \/
and a stylus pen, during 10 parabolas; that is, one type 2 I
of drawing per parabolas. Data were not obtained dur— 1 h—iﬁ T
ing 14 out of the 90 parabolas because some subjects Y 4
SUffered Of mOtion SiCkneSS' Data from tWO p arabOIaS Fig. 2. Examples of drawings and words used in this study. The
were also lOSt due to operator errors- numbers indicate the sequence of execution.

During one parabola, the same drawing was executed
about 2—3 times by each subject on average. This re—
sulted in a ﬂight dataset of about 220 drawings. In addi— 3. Results
tion, each subject was tested on the ground, prior to the
ﬂight. In one case, due to a last minute subject switch, Overa11,approxirnate1y 75% of the drawings recorded
one subject was tested on the ground after the ﬂight. during the ﬂights were analyzable. Some drawings were
The ground dataset comprised about 250 drawings. corrupted because the operator touched the subject’s

"
"3","680 G. Clément et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 678—68]
arm during turbulence or because they were poorly an— reference to graVity. Consequently, when the graVita—
Chored. These were discarded from the analysis. Also, tional reference is absent for extended periods, the men—
ﬂrst—time ﬂyers who were tested during the ﬁrst 10 tal representation of the vertical aXis of this object is
parabolas did not perform well. In general, drawings altered.
were executed much faster in—ﬂight compared to pre— Similar results have been found in other space stud—
ﬂight, due to subject stress. This made it difﬁcult to ies measuring the trajectories of hand—drawn ellipses in
evaluate the effect of microgravity on the velocity of the frontal plane in the air with the eyes Closed in astro—
execution of drawings. nauts. The results revealed a 10% decrease in the verti—
Measurements of the vertical and horizontal compo— cal length of the ellipses, whereas the horizontal length
nents of the handwriting samples manifested a 21% de— of the ellipses was basically unchanged [10,11].
crease (p < 0.05) in length in microgravity as compared On Earth, Classic neuropsychological procedure in—
to normal graVity. No signiﬁcant Changes in the average eludes line bisection, line cancellation, copying a simple
horizontal width of handwritten words was observed, drawing made of trees, houses, and Clocks, and draw—
In general, for the drawing experiments, examination ing of objects (e.g., a daisy) from memory [12—14].
of the ratio of the length of the horizontal lines vs. the Typically, patients demonstrating the Classical features
length of the vertical lines revealed that this ratio was of hemi—spatial neglect after right—brain damage do not
greater than one in normal graVity. There was no sig— draw the part of the objects on the left of their midline.
niﬁcant difference in this ratio when the drawings were In these patients, even the objects drawn from mem—
executed in microgravity. ory are altered, indicating that this deﬁcit affects the
higher levels of spatial representation [15]. It can be
4. Discussion hypothesized that impairment in spatial representation
is present in labyrinthine—defective patients, such as in
Gombrich [4] has demonstrated that the act of draw— neglect patients. In agreement with this hypothesis and
ing involves ﬁrst making an internal representation the early observations of Fukuda and Tokita [16] results
of the geometry to be copied. It is well known that from recent experiments carried out with labyrinthine—
graVity and Visual factors (such as symmetry and elon— defective subjects indicate a decrease in the vertical size
gation) are critical for the extraction of an object’s of written layouts and drawings [17].
reference frame [1,5]. Consequently, measuring the The results of the studies mentioned above and the
changes in the handwriting and drawing of geometrical present study in parabolic ﬂight suggest that we rep—
ﬁgures in the absence of graVity while blindfolded is resent the height of our body and the space around us
a simple way to assess how the gravitational reference as a function of the gravitational information. Conse—
frame is taken into account for mental representation quently, spatial disorientation in astronauts could be the
of the environment and spatial orientation. consequence of a deformed mental representation of 3—
It has been observed during previous space missions D space due to a Change in the gravitational input or in
that the absence of the gravitational frame of reference its central processing. It is assumed that a longer expo—
during space ﬂight could be responsible for disturbances sure to microgravity, such as during orbital ﬂight, will
in the mental representation of spatial cues. For exam— lead to larger effects. To test this hypothesis this eX—
ple, the vertical height of objects and written Charac— periment will be carried out on the astronauts on board
ters was reduced by 9% in some astronauts [6—8], It the ISS. Identifying lasting abnormalities in the mental
is interesting to note that the size of the letters did not representation Of spatial cues will establish the scien—
change in—ﬂight or post—ﬂight. However, the space be— tiﬂc and technical foundation for development of pre—
tween them is reduced. This suggests that the Changes ﬂight and in—ﬂight training and rehabilitative schemes,
seen are not simply due to motor deﬁcits [9]. enhancing astronaut performance of perceptual—motor
Because only the vertical and the oblique lines were and perceptual—cognitive tasks, for example, interaction
signiﬁcantly different in orbital ﬂight, with the horizon— with robotic systems during exploration—Class missions.
tal lines essentially unchanged, the implication is that
the mental representation of the height and depth of the Acknowledgments
word or obj ect has Changed, and that adaptive Changes in
proprioception are presumably not responsible for this The authors are grateful to the European Space
effect. In the case of a 3—D object, the internal represen— Agency (BSA) for allowing us to participate in the
tation is presumably normalized with respect to graV— parabolic ﬂight campaign. We thank F. Gai, T. Gharib,
ity, i.e., the vertical aXis of the object is deﬁned with C. Mora, A.—C. Duchesne, V. Pletser, M.—P. Bareille,

"
"4","G. Clément et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 678 —68] 681
and all the volunteers WhO participated in this experi— [8] G. Clement, Fundamentals of Space Medicine, Springer, New
ment. We would also like to thank Sebastien Gorelov York, 2005-
and Cian O’Cuilleanain 0f the International Space Uni— [9] T' Pozzo’ C' Papaxantys’ R Slap?” A' BethOZ’ The

. . . . sensonmotor and cogmtwe 1ntegrat10n 0f graV1ty, Bram
versuy for (levelopmg the scrlpt analy81s software and Research Reviews 28 (1988) 92401.
Denms Irwm (Oth UmVerSltY) for pI‘OVIdlng 655611"" [10] VS. Gurﬁnkel, F. Lestienne, Y.S. LeVik, K.E. POpOV, L.
tial experimental support equipment. This work was Lefort, Egocentric references and human spatial orientation
supported by Centre National de la Recherche Scien_ in microgravity. II: body—centred coordinates in the task of
tiﬁque (France) and Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales drawing ellipses with prescribed orientation, Experimental
Bram Research 95 (1993) 343—348.
(France)' [11] O. Bock, B. Fowler, D. Comfort, S. Ji’mgling, Visual—motor
coordination during spaceﬂight, in: J.C. Buckey, J.L. Homich
(Eds), The Neurolab Spacelab Mission: Neuroscience Research
References in Space, NASA SP—2003—535, NASA Johnson Space Center,
Houston, TX, 2003, pp. 83—90.
[1] LP. Howard, Human Visual Orientation, Wiley, Chichester, [12] T. Schenckenberg, D.C. Bradford, E.T. Ajax, Line bissection
1982. with neurologic impairment, Neurology 30 (1980) 509—517.
[2] I. IndOVina, V. Mafferi, G. Bosco, M. Zago, E. Macaluso, F. [13] ML. Albert, A simple test for Visual neglect, Neurology 23
Lacquaniti, Representation of Visual gravitational motion in the (1973) 65 8—664.
human vestibular cortex, Science 308 (2005) 416—419. [14] G. Gainotti, P. Messerli, R. Tissot, Qualitative analysis of
[3] RA. Finke, Principles of Mental Imagery, The MIT Press, unilateral spatial neglect in relation to laterality of cerebral
Cambridge, MA, 1989. lesions, Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry 35
[4] EH. Gombrich, Art and Illusion, Princeton University Press, (1972) 545—550.
Princeton, NY, 1969. [15] Y. Rosetti, G. Rode, L. Pisella, A. Fame, L. Li, D. Boisson,
[5] M.K. Albert, P.U. Tse, The role of surface attraction in M.T. Perenin, Prism adaptation to a rightward optical deviation
perceiving volumetric shape, Perception 29 (2000) 409—420. rehabilitates left hemispatial neglect, Nature 395 (1998)
[6] G. Clement, A. Berthoz, F. Lestienne, Adaptive changes in 166—169.
perception of body orientation and mental image rotation in [16] T. Fukuda, T. Tokita, A new arrangement of the vestibular
microgravity, Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine 58 examination, Acta Oto—Laryngol 179 (Suppl) (1961) 230—245.
(1987) A159—A163. [17] G. Clement, O. Deguine, Mental representation of spatial in
[7] C. Lathan, Z. Wang, G. Clement, Changes in the vertical microgravity and in dizzy patients, Paper presented at the
size of a three—dimensional object drawn in weightlessness by Meeting of the Societe des Neurosciences, Lille, France, 20
astronauts, Neuroscience Letters 295 (2000) 37—40. May 2005.

"
