"","x"
"1","ACES Operations: an ISS External Scientiﬁc Payload
Lookmg for Experlmental Conﬁrmatlons 0n the
General Relativity Theory
Mauro Augelli *

Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (ONES), Toulouse, France

ACES is an ESA mission in fundamental physics based on a new generation of clocks
operated in the microgravity environment of the ISS. It is expected to reach in microgravity
conditions a time drift of 1 - 10—16 s/s, corresponding to a time error of about 1 s over 300
million years.

This accurate time scale reference will be distributed on Earth Via microwave and laser
links, allowing ACES to perform tests on the Einstein’s theory of general relativity, includ-
ing an accurate measurement of the gravitational red-shift, a search for time variations of
fundamental constants and tests of the Standard Model Extension. ACES also develops
applications in different areas of research including geodesy and Earth observation.

ACES will be launched and installed on the nadir pointing ISS Columbus External
Payload Facility in 2017 and is foreseen to have an operational mission of 1.5 to 3 years.

This paper gives an overview of the ACES system (on-board and on the ground), de-
scribes the different interfaces and operational baseline and gives the current status.

Nomenclature
ACES Atomic Clock Ensemble in Space
Airbus DS Airbus Defence and Space
CADMOS Centre d’Aide au Développement des Activités en Micropesanteur et des Operations Spatiales
CCR Corner Cube Reﬂector
CEPF Columbus External Payload Facility
CNES Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (French Space Agency)
Col—CC Columbus Control Centre
COTS Commercial Off—The—Shelf
DAC Data Analysis Centre
DAM Debris Avoidance Manoeuvre
DLL Delay Lock Loop
ECLSS Environmental Control and Life Support System
ELT European Laser Timing
ELT DC ELT Data Centre
EVA ExtraVehicular Activity
FCDP Frequency Comparison and Distribution Package
FS Flight Segment
GNSS Global Navigation Satellite System
GPS Global Positioning System
GS Ground Segment
GSOC German Space Operations Center
IGS Interconnect Ground Subnetwork
INS Inertial Navigation System
*ACES Mission and Operations Manager @ CADMOS, CNES DCT/ME/EM, 18 Avenue Edouard Belin — 31400 Toulouse
— France.
1 0f 15
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"2","188 International Space Station
IWG (ACES) Investigator Working Group
JPL Joint Propulsion Laboratory
LKB Laboratoire Kastler Brossel
LOAC Loss of Attitude Control
SYRTE Systeme de References Temps—Espace (Laboratoire national de métrologie et d’essais)
MCC Mission Control Centre
MCO GS System Manager Team
MWL MicroWave Link
MWL GT MicroWave Link Ground Terminal
NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NICT National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
NIST National Institue of Standards and Technology
NFL National Physical Laboratory
0 / B On—Board
OC Orbitorgraphy Centre
PDAM Pre—dermined DAM
PDU Power Distribution Unit
PHARAO Projet d’Horloge Atomique par Refroidissement d’Atomes en Orbite
PN Pseudo Noise
PTB Physikalisch—Technische Bundesanstalt
REXP ACES Experiment Manager
SAMS Space Acceleration Measurement System
SHM Space Hydrogen Maser
SI International System of Units
SIGI Spacecraft Integrated GPS INS
SLR Satellite Laser Ranging
SPAD Single—Photon Avalanche Diode
S / W SoftWare
TAI International Atomic Time
TASI Thales Alenia Space Italy
TC TeleCommand
TDRS Tracking and Data Relay Satellite
TM TeleMetry
USOC User Support and Operations Centre
UWA University of Western Australia
XPLC eXternal PayLoad Computer
I. Introduction
IN 1967, the second — as the base unit for time in the SI — was newly deﬁned as the duration of 9 192 631
770 periods of the radiation corresponding to the transition between the two hyperﬁne levels of the ground
state of the Caesium—133 atom ( 13303). This new deﬁnition was improving the accuracy to extremely high
values, if compared to the previous standard ephemeris second, based on the Earth’s orbit around the Suna.
This new extremely reproducible deﬁnition made possible, for the second, to become a privileged unit among
others and gave an impressive momentum to the usage and related research on atomic Clocks.

Atomic Clocks based on Caesium atoms are commonly called primary frequency standards because they
are used for the operative deﬁnition of the SI Second. At present the most stable and accurate Clocks are
represented by atomic fountains based on laser cooled atoms.

ACES, an ESA mission in fundamental physics, is based on a new generation of Clocks operated in the
microgravity environment of the ISS and will be installed on the ISS CEPF in 2017 (ﬁgure 1).

One of the atomic Clocks aboard 0f ACES (PHARAO) — a primary frequency standard developed by CNES

31the SI second was previously deﬁned as 1/313559259747 0f the time taken for the Earth to orbit around the Sun at the
epoch of 1900
2 0f 15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","and based on laser cooled caesium atoms — extends the functioning principle of a ground atomic fountain to
microgravity conditions, taking advantage of weightlessness to have a more versatile and accurate Clock.
A second atomic Clock, SHM, an active hydrogen Inaser for
space applications is compared and locked, one to the other, _.__'=\
With PHARAO by means of the FDCP, in order to generate an >' 3 ;\.\\
O / B time scale that combines the short—term stability of SHM (146323
and the long—term stability and accuracy of PHARAO. “A \\
This 0 / B time and frequency reference is then distributed .1 ‘
Via a dual—frequenoy microwave link (MWL) and a laser link 15.5.8: . .
(ELT) to ground sites situated all over the world. \“ﬁé’z ‘
The unprecedented accuracy that ACES is expected to E“ § Q¢‘ ‘ ‘
reach in microgravity conditions (time drift of 1 - 10—16 s/s), ' {\""(ﬁ ’5};
corresponding to a time error of about 1s over 300 million ‘3 ' .2. .1259 | 4}
years, allows to open the way to a lot of improvements on the ' 4 \4 . Q i .9; ‘\6
observation of physical phenomena. As an example, prediction 5%,, i""--':~,,. - I '
of Einstein’s general relativity theory, is that time is linked V'f‘. a ‘9"" I ,4... . RV
to gravity, such that, for example, it passes faster at the top ' T .4 .4 —~ ”' i2 a
of Mount Everest than at sea level. These effects have been I ‘
proved in experiments on Earth. ACES Will make more precise Figure 1. Artistic rendering of ACES in-
measurernents as it ﬂies 400 km high on the 188. The accurate Stalled 0“ the COlumbUS eXtemal faCility
ACES time reference and the distribution Via the microwave platform Of the ISS'
and laser links Will allow ACES to perform tests of the Ein—
stein’s theory of general relativity including an accurate measurement of the gravitational red—shift, a search
for time variations of fundamental constants and tests of the Standard Model Extension. ACES also develops
applications in different areas of research including geodesy and Earth observation.
II. The Aces Payload
ACES is an 188 external payload that Will be installed on the nadir pointing CEPF of Columbus (see
ﬁgure 1). The payload Will be carried to the 188 by a SpaceX Dragon vehicle and installation on the CEPF
Will be performed using the ISS robotic arm Without need for a crew EVA. After the initial switch ON,
ACES Will take advantage of the ISS infrastructure (Columbus and 188) to have TM/TC link capability and
power. During the mission no interaction With the ISS crew and all the ECLSS subsystems is expected.
ACES has an overall rectangular cuboid shape With dimensions of 1172 mm X 867mm X 1246 mm and a
total mass of 227 kg. The estimated power consumption is 450W for nominal functioning.
GNSS MWL mine. XPLC F(DP fiiefccigier
antenna 0 ‘/ O
_, l .
. . ) PHARAO
. ‘ UGB
SHM F M $ (
~ - “ﬂ?” i (32:35:24
ll I II 1 §va 3:4 4:21:33.
‘ ‘1 f 1' Hi} .
.4 3K5}: dz; 2:"" E~J
/ . mg? is“ . I
Figure 2. A view of the ACES Payload with the internal components.
3 of 15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","The payload is composed of several subsystems and functions (see ﬁgure 2):
o PHARAO: a primary frequency standard based on samples of laser cooled caesium atoms
0 SHM: a space active hydrogen maser
o F CDP: the frequency comparison and distribution package that locks together frequencies of PHARAO
and SHM and at the same time provides MWL With the O / B reference time.
o Servo—loops: the two functions that allow to take advantage of PHARAO and SHM time references in
the regions Where they have the best accuracy. TWO serVO—loops are available: (1) short—term and (2)
long—term.
o M WL: the microwave link FS component to exchange time and frequency information to/With ground
MWL GTs
o ELT: the European laser timing F8 to exchange time and frequency to/With ground SLR stations.
0 XPL C: the eXternal PayLoad Computer that is the standard 0 / B computer used for external payload,
specialised for ACES.
0 PD U: the power distribution unit that is in charge of managing and distribute, at ACES level, the
power received by the 188.
o GNSS: the O / B receivers for orbit determination.
ACES system is completed also by some speciﬁc components that are installed on the ground:
0 M WL GT: ground antennae, connected to very precise ground Clocks, that exchange time and frequency
data With ACES FS
0 M00 GS: Ground Segment H/W and S/W, installed at the ACES MCC in CADMOS, that allows
command and control of the ACES mission.
In the following paragraphs a description of the main ACES components is provided.
A. PHARAO
One of the two time and frequency sources 0 / B of
ACES is PHARAO, an atomic Clock based on laser Cesium'esem"" Tm, magnenbssmem
cooled caesium atoms, developed by CNES in col- . Coo'ingsphere ‘ Ramsey caviWntmgation)
laboration With the laboratories SYRTE and LKB 1“ __ \ UMVacuum Tube
in Paris, France. J “Eu"": __ . __ ( Detection

PHARAO extends the well known concept of m, ’ 1‘ "" », y ‘ [A
laser cooling that is used for ground based atomic ,‘1 ‘ ._._-_\~;w;‘w;d 1.""
fountains in a way that allows operability in micro— J"" i ' r .7 _ _ 7

. . . J“ . ‘ Preparation . 7-1.:3/9 '0"" pump

grav1ty conditions. /‘ - ~ andselecﬁon A

Laser cooling is a technique that uses light to . E ,‘

b . Mechanical supports to A905“. J . I

cool atoms to a very low temperature in the 11K ACESP’8”°””(4’99'S’ '-- ‘H
region.

It works by tuning the frequency of light slightly Figure 3. Pharao components.
below an electronic transition in the atom. Because
the light is detuned t0 the “red” (i.e. at lower fre—
quency) of the transition, the atoms absorb more photons if they move towards the light source, due to
the Doppler effect. Thus, if lights is applied from two opposite directions, the atoms always scatter more
photons from the laser beam pointing opposite to their direction of motion. In each scattering event the
atom loses a momentum equal to the momentum of the photon. If the atom, Which is now in the excited
state, emits a photon spontaneously, it Will be impacted by the same amount of momentum but in a random

bThe simplest form of laser cooling is referred to as optical molasses, since the dissipative optical force resembles the Viscous
drag on a body moving through molasses.

4 0f 15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","direction. The result of this absorption and re—emission process is the reduction of the speed of the atom. If
the absorption and emission are repeated many times, the mean velocity and therefore the kinetic energy of
the atom are reduced. Since the temperature of an ensemble of atoms is a measure of the average internal
kinetic energy, this is equivalent to cooling the atoms.

The caesium clock PHARAO is composed of four main subsystems (see ﬁgure 3): (1) the caesium tube,
(2) the laser source, (3) the microwave source With the ultra—stable oscillator and (4) the O / B management
unit.

Inside PHARAO, atoms produced by a Caesium oven are used to load an optical molasses. These atoms
are launched in free ﬂight along the caesium tube and cross the resonant cavity Where they interact twice
With a microwave ﬁeld (see ﬁgure 4) tuned on the transition between the two hyperﬁne levels of the caesium
ground state. In the microgravity environment, the velocity of the atoms along the ballistic trajectories is
constant and can be continuously changed over almost two orders of magnitude (5 to 500 cm/s), allowing
the detection of atomic signals With a tunable frequency line—Width.

The microwave ﬁeld, almost resonant With the
transition between the two hyperﬁne levels of the
ground state excites the atoms. The relative pop—
ulation of the hyperﬁne levels is ﬁnally measured ' :r ' ""/
downstream by collecting the ﬂuorescence light in— : 2L 7 .\.&7 x .
duced by the interaction With a probe laser beam. ./ ‘ //” h, '

This signal is used to actively control the synthesizer \’ "" // ‘ ‘
driving the microwave ﬁeld in the cavity. “(39V

In a microgravity environment interaction time .*"" I/
can be much larger than on Earth, and therefore '
much narrower lines can be detected on the clock
transition. On the ground, because of gravity,

PHARAO can only be operated like a fountain clock,
With the atoms launched vertically along the tube.
Several tests have been performed With engineering

. . . . Figure 4. PHARAO functioning principle. Atoms are
and ﬂlght mOdels by loadlng caes1um atoms In the launched along the caesium tube and cross a resonant
optical mOIassesa COOIed down to a few 11K: inter"" cavity Where they interact twice With a microwave ﬁeld.
rogated on the clock transition by the resonant mi—
crowave ﬁeld, and detected by laser—induced ﬂuorescence emission. For a typical launch velocity of about
3.5 m/ s, the duration of the free flight between the two Ramsey interaction regions is about 100 ms, cor—
responding to a Width of the central fringe of about 5 Hz.1 Once operated in microgravity, the longer
interaction times Will allow PHARAO to measure line—Widths 10 to 50 times narrower.

Since the tuning and optimization of the instrument on
ground has been performed With the atomic clouds launched -
vertically against gravity, speed was set to 3.56 m/s. In these 7)
conditions, an Allan deviation of 3.5 . 10—13/ﬁ has been mea— . i”::::3 ﬂ
sured, Where 7' is the integration time expressed in seconds. Aluminiumcamy h II ‘ l”; Quarthulb
Frequency instabilities of 1 - 10—15 have been reached in less Magneticshields ‘ l 1- Thermalshields
than 2 days of integration time. The relative frequency stabil— — r ‘ H l .' Intermediate
ity of the PHARAO clock onboard the 188 is expected to be PCBl-EP iwfznadﬂ baseplate
better than 10—13 for one second measurement time, 3 - 10—16 Statesman T :ﬁéﬁ—f'i‘ Dlisytfﬁign
for one day and 1 - 10—16 for ten days.1 This is three orders OCXO ‘ ¥§¢Pké§ﬁ’ Assembly
of magnitude beyond the clocks Which are currently ﬂying in PCB3'EP ‘ t 7 5i”? 5:— {- PCBz'EP
GPS satellites. “43:13:33 ' “’55-‘1- - 1::s::i::onbulb
B» SHM Figure 5. SHM design.

The second time and frequency source 0 / B of ACES is SHM,
an active hydrogen (H ) maser for space applications developed
by SpectraTiine2 in Switzerland under ESA contract.

Hydrogen masers are atomic clocks based on the transition at 1.420 GHZ between the two hyperﬁne levels
of the ground electronic state of atomic hydrogen. H2 molecules are dissociated in a plasma discharge and
the resulting beam of H atoms is state—selected in the higher quantum state and are directed into a storage

5 of 15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","bulb placed in a microwave cavity that is tuned 0n the atomic resonance to induce the maser action. When
the atomic ﬂux is high enough, the energy available from the stimulated emission of radiation overcomes
the microwave losses of the microwave cavity and the maser action starts. The energy generated from this
process, despite its very low power (in the order of 1 - 10—14 W), is detected by an antenna and converted
into electrical energy, Where it is further ampliﬁed and synthesized.

SHM provides ACES With a stable oscillator. The main Challenge of SHM is represented by the low
mass and volume ﬁgures (42 kg, 390mm X 390mm X 590mm) required by the space Clock With respect to
ground hydrogen masers. For this purpose, the number of thermal shields 0f the Clock has been reduced
and a dedicated automatic cavity tuning system has been implemented to steer the resonance frequency of
the maser cavity against thermal drifts. This method allows SHM to reach a target of fractional frequency
instabilities down to 1.5 - 1015 at 104 s of integration time.

C. FCDP
The FCDP, developed by Airbus DS and Timetech un—
der ESA contract, is a main node of ACES. It provides pHARAo
measurements to perform an optimum combination of the Fiﬁ———_i
two previous Clocks Which results in a better performance __i m—ﬁi

a
of the one of SHM or PHARAO taken separately. Practi— _i _ l _ '—
cally FCDP combines SHM and PHARAO measurements — 3 %‘ ‘ ""— m-
in an optimum way prov1d1ng 100 MHZ Clock Signals and
comparing them in both frequency and phase and it is um I F
the main block of the short—term serVO—loop (described ——'
in next paragraph).

The direct comparison of the two Clocks has two pur— Figure 6. Short—tem (in blue) and long—term (in
poses: (1) to drive the short—term serVO—loop for phase red) serv0—100ps.
locking PHARAO local oscillator onto SHM (see ﬁgure 6)
and (2) to evaluate the onboard Clock stability.

FCDP is also in Charge of distributing the ACES Clock signal to MWL and ELT for comparison With
high performance ground Clocks.

D. SerVO—loops
The relative performance levels of the SHM and
PHARAO Clocks are such that for mid—term duration,
typically between 3 s to 3000 s (see ﬁgure 7), SHM stabil— ”1042 ======================================================
ity iS better then the PHARAO stability A combination EEEEEEEEEEEEEEE
, , --IIIIIII-IIIIIIII-IIIIIIII-IIIIIIII-IIIII _ SHM II
of the two clocks thus ewes the best etgnelz PHARAO :mo—t ggiiiiingiiiiinniiiiingiiiiingiii!ii
is used to guarantee long—term stability Whereas SHM % ESEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE
.9 --IIII-E!‘!!IIIIII--IIIIIII-IIIIIIII-IIIIIIII-IEIIIIII
the best midterm statute- Practically, the e em;g""-IIIIelm""slutty“
done by steering the SHM drift by PHARAO, While the §
PHARAO local oscillator is locked on SHM. e-""I'me-Illmelll""I"":glllllme-IIIII""

Moreover, as the tWO 010 eke are 10 eked one to each §§i.....§ii.m.§ii.....iiinnﬁiinnuﬁiinm
other, the two 100 MHZ signals are at the same frequency .IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIi:!!|06
avoiding low frequency beating between the two Clocks. MD MG Tirrxle [s] X X X
1. Short—Te'rm Servo—Loop
The “short—term serVO—loop” is the one allowing the Eigyre 7' ACES tinfle .Scale eXpeCted accuracy’

stlmated Allan DeVlatlon.
PHARAO local oscillator to be locked to SHM. That en—
sures a better mid—term stability of PHARAO local oscil—
lator, Which is mandatory to establish the accuracy bud—
get of PHARAO, as well as a zero beating between SHM and PHARAO 100 MHZ.
6 0f 15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","2. Long—Te'rm Servo—Loop

The “long—term servo—loop” is the one allowing to steer the SHM drift thanks to the PHARAO Cesium
resonator. That ensures the long—term stability and the accuracy of the ACES signal. Long—term servo—loop
is controlled by ACES XPLC and the O / B application S / W.

E. MWL

The ACES Clock signal distributed by FCDP needs to be compared to ground Clocks and this is the main
function of the ACES MWL.

The MWL, developed by Airbus DS, Kayser—Threde, and Timeteoh under ESA contract, is a two—way
crosslink microwave signal transfer system for comparing ACES With high performance ground Clocks.1

The MWL is consisting of a FS integrated into the ACES payload and several MWL GTs installed
worldwide at major time and frequency laboratories participating in the ACES experiment collaboration.

The system concept of MWL is based on the two—way frequency and time transfer principle that is already
used by metrologioal institutes since many years. The ACES MWL is designed as a coherent, dual frequency,
two—way crosslink in Ku—Band. A second downlink exists in S—Band for measurements of the ionospheric
refraction. It operates continuously thanks to the carrier frequency in the Ku—band (around 15 GHZ) that
also allows for a noticeable reduction of the ionospheric delay. A PN code modulation of the carrier removes
the phase ambiguity between successive comparison sessions separated by large dead times.

In addition to the two transmitters (S—band and Ku—band), the Flight Segment incorporates also four
Ku—band receiver Channels, allowing simultaneous contacts With up to four MWL GTs. The different simul—
taneous ground users are distinguished by a speciﬁc PN code and Doppler shift. The four identical receiver
Channels are called DLL.

Code and carrier phase stability determine the performance
levels achievable in the comparisons of distant Clocks. MWL
long—term stability is ensured by the continuous calibration of A
the receiver Channels provided by a built—in test—loop translator.

For shorter durations (N 300 s, corresponding to the ISS pass

duration), time stability is driven by the noise performance ' . '
of the transmitter Chain and the reproducibility of each DLL ’
Channel after proper calibration of internal delays. -..—- ' r; ‘. * l

Relativistics effects affecting time or frequency transfer 9-H: .31 ;
(gravitational shift, 2nd order Doppler effects ...) are cor— I l ‘_ :
reoted during post—prooessing using orbitography data. ' ’ _ I
1. M WL Ground Terminals . .-
The ACES MWL GT is a microwave station interfacing the g -
local Clock on ground to the ACES payload for spaoe—to—ground
Clock comparisons.3 It implements electronics similar to the
MWL ﬂight hardware, symmetry being important in a two—
way system to reduce instrumental errors. To reduce phase
instabilities due to the tracking motion, the electronic unit of
the MWL GT has been rigidly attached to the antenna unit.

The Ku—band signal is delivered to the antenna feeder Via a Figure 8. Illustration of S MWL GT An-
waveguide, a high stability RF cable is used for the S—band. tenna

The antenna is a 60 cm offset reﬂector With a dual—band
feed system automatically pointed in azimuth and elevation by
a steering mechanism. A computer controls the steering unit
based on 188 orbit prediction ﬁles, collects telemetry and science data both from the local Clock and the
MWL GT electronics, and interfaces directly With the ACES MCC.

The system is housed below a protective radome cover(see ﬁgure 8), Which also allows to stabilize the
temperature of the enclosed volume by an air conditioning system, part of a separate service pallet . The
total weight is 650 kg.

7 of 15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","About 10 kW are needed to power the MWL GT electronics and its temperature control system, the
steering unit, and the air conditioning below the radome cupola. The thermal design Will allow to operate
the MWL GTs for an external temperature ranging between —30 OC and 45 OC.

The MWL GTs are remotely controlled by the ACES MCC, responsible for deﬁning the planning of the
space—to—ground Clock comparison sessions along the ISS orbit
F. GNSS
ACES disposes of autonomous GNSS receivers that can be connected to its Clock signal. The system is
designed to provide orbit determination and payload positioning for evaluating relativistic corrections in the
space—to—ground Clock comparison measurements.

The GNSS receiver is accommodated in the ACES payload While the antenna is installed externally to
the ACES box (see ﬁgure 2) looking along the ﬂight direction of the 188, With a tilt angle of about 50 deg
With respect to the ISS velocity vector and 30 deg in the zenith direction.

The GNSS hardware provides, in the ACES TM, With a completely autonomous system for orbit determi—
nation. Even if not optimal in terms of Visibility towards the GNSS constellation, the selected accommodation
of the GNSS antenna fulﬁlls ACES requirements for orbit determination.

The ACES GNSS subsystem consists of a redundant set of COTS receiver boards (J AVAD GNSS Triumph
TRE—GBTH) and a power/data interface board. The interface board protects the GNSS receiver against
latCh—up events, formats the native receiver data ﬂow into the ACES time—slotted protocol and converts
the 100 MHZ ACES Clock signal down to 10 MHZ generating a reference that can be used for the receiver
operation.

G. ELT
ELT is an optical link, With speciﬁc 0 / B H / W, that uses laser pulses exchanged between the space segment
and SLR stations on the ground to compare distant Clocks.

The O / B hardware consists of a CCR, a SPAD and an event timer board connected to the ACES time
scale.

Laser pulses ﬁred towards ACES by a SLR station are detected by the SPAD diode. The ﬁre and the
detection events are tagged in the local Clock time scales both in space and on ground. At the same time,
the BLT CCR re—directs the laser pulse towards the ground station Where it is detected and stamped in the
time scale maintained at the SLR station.

The measurement of the start and return time on ground and of the detection time in space allows to
calculate the desynchronization between space and ground Clocks, With the capability to provide additionally
With precise ranging information.

H. Mission Control Centre — Ground Segment
One of the peculiarities of the ACES Mission is that science data are collected equally from space and from
ground.

The main part of the ACES GS is installed at the ACES MCC that is located Within the French USOC
CADMOS at CNES in Toulouse, France. It includes also the distributed network of MWL GTs, interfaces
to the SLR Stations as well as other external entities such as the OC and the user community. In addition,
being ACES an 188 external payload, the MCC is connected to the overall ISS ground architecture that
provides the communication links between ground and space through Col—CC and NASA ground segment.

The main functions of the ACES ground segment are the monitoring and control of the ACES payload
and of the MWL GTs as well as the generation, archiving and distribution of the data products based on
the measurements performed in space and on ground.

The ACES ground segment Will be integrated Within the overall ISS ground architecture providing the
communication links between ground and space through Col—CC and NASA ground segment.

III. ACES Scientiﬁc Objectives

The overall ACES mission and the associated architecture deﬁnition is based on a set of scientiﬁc objec—

tives. They can be summarised in the following parts:
8 of 15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","0 Primary Objectives

— High Performance Space Clocks and Time and Frequency link. To demonstrate the high perfor—
mance of a new generation of atomic Clocks in the space environment and the ability to achieve
high stability on space—to—ground time and frequency transfer.

— Comparisons of Ground Clocks via the ACES Microwave Link. To demonstrate the capability of
comparing ground Clocks at high resolution on a worldwide basis using a link in the microwave
domain.

0 Fundamental Physics Experiments

— Gravitational Red-shz'ft. To measure With an improved accuracy the Einstein’s gravitational red—
shift.

— Drift of F the Structure Constant. To measure time variations of the ﬁne structure constant oz at
an increased level of accuracy

— Anisotropy Of Light. To test the validity of special relativity by detecting a possible anisotropy of
the light velocity With an improved accuracy

0 Secondary objectives

— Space Hydrogen Maser long—term stability. T0 characterise the long—term stability of a space
active Hydrogen maser.

— Ground Clocks Synehmm’satz’on. To demonstrate feasibility of synchronisation of ground Clocks
With a low inaccuracy.

— Contribution to the International Atomic Time Scale. T0 incorporate ACES timescale into the
TAI improving its accuracy.

— Distribution of the Ultm-stable ACES Time Scale. To demonstrate the capability of transmitting
to ground users an ultra—stable time scale With a good time accuracy.

0 Scientiﬁc Applications

— Relativistic Geodesy. To demonstrate the feasibility of mapping the geoid With a good space and
time accuracy.

— European Laser Time

>|< Time Transfer. To perform time transfer Via a single and dual laser link.
>I< Laser Ranging. To use SLRs to perform ISS ranging.

— Clock: Comparisons via the GNSS Network. To support applications in the different areas of time
and frequency transfer Via the GNSS network.

IV. ACES Operational Organisation

As already explained, ACES operations take advantage of several entities involved that are playing speciﬁc
roles. In this paragraph, all the entities involved are recalled along With their main tasks. Figure 9 provides
also a graphical representation of some of the entities as they are geographically located.
A. CADMOS
CADMOS, as the ACES MCC, is the central component of ACES GS and has overall responsibility of ACES
operations.

CADMOS receives through COl—CC ACES downlinked data and issues TCs and uplinks ﬁles, also through
Col—CC, t0 ACES FS.

CADMOS is also the central node for data exchanged between OC and the end users, receives all data
from external GS entities such as MWL GTs, ELT DC and high level data products from the DACs.

All data received/processed, that are transferred to CADMOS, are archived in the ACES archive that is
located Within CADMOS as well as all high level data computed at CADMOS.

9 0f 15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"10","During ACES operations, starting from ACES launch, CADMOS Will be permanently manned. It is
in charge of establishing the operations planning based on inputs from IWG and taking into account the
constrains of the various elements such as 188 operations, maintenance in the different ground sites etc.

CADMOS is the only repository for ACES data products and grants access to these data to allowed
users.

Within CADMOS, a dedicated console position for PHARAO operations is foreseen to be used by
PHARAO instrument specialists to perform in—depth monitoring of the instrument and to provide to the
ACES Operator the speciﬁc commands needed to operate PHARAO.

CADMOS is also in Charge of the operators training, both during operations preparation phase and
during operations. For simulation purposes several simulators are available at CADMOS.

B. Investigator Working Group

The IWG, composed of representative of the ACES scientiﬁc community, is in charge of coordinating the
scientiﬁc exploitation of ACES mission data and to to request to CADMOS implementation of speciﬁc
activities during the mission.

The interface between IWG and CADMOS is at two levels:

0 High level mission interface to deﬁne the different science experiments to be carried out during the

mission and to organise dedicated ACES symposiums, workshops, etc.

0 Operational interface at planning level. IWG provides CADMOS With initial inputs for the ACES
mission planning. Based on external constrains, CADMOS iterates the process With IWG in order
to establish the consolidated experiment planning Which is the input for the daily mission operations
planning.

JPL. .N'ST \ .NICT
. ACES MISSION CONTROLCENTRE . UWA(TBC)
. MWL GT ""P'- (. PTB.
. COL-CC ..
. Orbitography Centre SYRTE (. (. .
. ELT DC
. SLR stations (only some)
. Data Analysis Centre CADMOS. .
Figure 9. Different parts of the ACES GS.
C. Columbus Control Centre
ACES operations are embedded into the European ISS operational network. In this frame, Col—CC has the
overall responsibility of Columbus operations and is in Charge of coordinating the operations of the European
payloads O / B 188 With the international partners. Col—CC also provides the ground communications network
10 of 15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"11","(IGS). IGS and the dedicated voice communication system using dedicated voice loops are used for ACES
operations. To be noted that no dedicated Video is needed to perform ACES operations.

All ACES telemetry is received at Col—CC from NASA (TDRS network) and transferred to CADMOS
in real time Via the IGS network. Col—CC also transfer automatically in non real—time TM that has been
stored O / B ISS during comms hand—overs. All Columbus payload TM is stored for a certain amount of time
at Col—CC and can be replayed on demand of CADMOS in case ACES archive is not complete.

TCs are sent from CADMOS to Col—CC and are then automatically forwarded for uplink on ACES. File
transfer is also managed by Col—CC as for all the other European payloads and is coordinated With CADMOS
Via a dedicated procedure.

Columbus provides to ACES power and bandwidth for down and up—link. Coordination between CAD—
MOS and Col—CC is needed for planning of these facilities.

After installation of ACES on the CEPF, Columbus Will immediately provide keep—alive power to ACES
and the TM and TC links are activated.

Col—CC has also the possibility to send some commands to ACES such as for an emergency power—OFF.
D. Orbitography Centre
The CC is located Within GSOC in Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany. It is in charge of computing and providing
the various orbit data products needed by ACES.

In order to achieve this, it gets, from CADMOS, ACES telemetry including ACES GNSS data and ISS
orbit and attitude data on a regular basis. OC computes different orbit data products that are provided
to CADMOS regularly and distributed further by CADMOS to the users, namely: ACES FS, MWL GTs,
ELT DC. Precise orbit data products are used further by CADMOS and DAC to compute high level data
products.

All transfers With CADMOS are automated and continuously performed.

E. ELT Data Centre and SLR Stations

Several ELT SLR stations are involved in ACES mission to provide additional data to those provided by the
MWL GTs. All the SLR stations are coordinated by the BLT DC, Which is the unique interface to CADMOS
for SLR stations.

As for the MWL GTs, CADMOS provides regular orbit data, ISS/ACES ancillary data and planning
data to the BLT DC, Which coordinates the activities of the SLR stations involved in ACES operations.

In addition to those data, CADMOS provides also to ELT DC a speciﬁc ﬂag ﬁle “’GO/NO GO” that
allows to ﬁre With the laser beam from the scheduled SLR to the ISS. This ﬂag is maintained by CADMOS
and is polled by ELT DC With a regular interval. In case the ﬂag is set to “NO GO”, or if the ﬂag cannot
be retrieved by ELT DC, NO GO Will be forwarded by ELT DC to all the involved SLR stations.

ELT DC gathers all the data provided by the SLR stations and computes high level science data that
are transmitted regularly to CADMOS for archiving. CADMOS does not perform any computation on the
data provided by the BLT DC.

F. Data Analysis Centre

The Main task of the ACES DAC(s) is to post—process ACES data to extract scientiﬁcally signiﬁcant results
to be used for veriﬁcation of the ACES scientiﬁc mission objectives and production of scientiﬁc publications.
From an implementation point of View, DACs have full access to ACES archive and provide high level science
data to CADMOS for archiving.

The main ACES DAC is located at SYRTE, in Paris, France. Other partial DACs Will be also deﬁned in
the future for speciﬁc topics.

Key activities of DACs include the analysis of space—to—ground Clock comparisons and the production of
high level data. ELT DC is considered the ACES DAC for ELT related data and physics.

G. Institutes hosting WML GTS
As previously explained, in order to perform the Space—to—Ground link for Clock comparisons, several ground
sites Which host various types of atomic Clocks are equipped With MWL GTs. These MWL GTs, distributed
11 of 15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"12","all over the world, are linked to CADMOS Via Internet. In total 7 ﬁxed MWL GT are foreseen for the ACES
mission. They Will be deployed at the following institute sites (ﬁgure 9 shows their position):

0 PTB in Brauschweig, Germany

0 SYRTE in Paris, France

0 NIST in Boulder, CO, USA

0 JPL in Pasadena, CA, USA

c NICT in Tokyo, Japan

0 NFL in Teddington, UK

0 UWA in Perth, Australia (TBC)

In addition, two mobile MWL GTs are foressen and can be installed at different sites during the mission:
(1) the same sites than the ﬁxed MWL GTs, in order to perform calibration measurements, (2) Closed to
SLRs to be used for cross—Calibrations With ELT or (3) alternative sites and be used for other purposes.

Basically, the role of the GT is to transfer Clock signals between ACES FS and the related ground Clock,
and to provide science data (phase measurements between the ACES reference Clock signal and the ground
Clocks).

Institutes are in Charge of keeping running the precise ground Clocks. In normal utilisation conditions,
there is no requirement for the institutes to intervene on the MWL GT Which is remotely controlled by
CADMOS.

During nominal functioning, CADMOS provides to the MWL GTs all needed data to perform their
activities. Among these products, there are orbit predictions and planning ﬁles that are used by the MWL
GT to compute the antenna tracking pattern for each planned Visibility pass.

V. The ACES Mission

The ACES mission has a planned duration of 18 months With a possible extension to 3 years and is
divided in six phases that can be summarised as follows, putting an emphasis on the operational tasks:

0 Pre—Launch. This phase covers all activities until ﬁnal countdown for launch. The main operational
activities during this phase are essentially for planning and for monitoring of the deployed GS. During
this same phase, ACES operators Will be also in Charge of testing the system and of training the
operational teams. Testing activities include testing of the individual GS entities, bilateral tests, end—
to—enol tests and system validation tests. The training Will include both stand—alone simulations and
combined simulations involving several / all GS entities.

0 Launch and in- Orbit Transportation. This phase covers the transportation of ACES from the launch
pad to its ﬁnal CEPF position. It starts at Launch — 2 days When ACES is in OFF condition and
integrated onto the SpaceX Dragon that is providing keep—alive power supply to ACES. It Will end
With ACES installed on CEPF and Columbus feeder providing keep—alive power to ACES. Concerning
the ACES MCC, no speciﬁc activities are foreseen during this phase.

0 On—Orbz't commissioning. This phase includes the initial power—up and warm—up of the ACES payload,
the sequential switch ON of ACES subsystems and the functional CheCk—out of ACES payload. This
phase Will also include functional veriﬁcation of the MWL data transfer and laser data transfer between
ACES and the ground segment.

With regards to the ACES MCC, all activities Will be planned, executed and monitored by CADMOS.
At the end of ACES full activation and cheCk—out, the OC and one or several MWL GT Will be involved
to Check the overall ACES system functioning.
It is also to be highlighted that, starting With ACES power—on through the Columbus module, CAD—
MOS Will be manned permanently until the end of active ACES operations.
12 of 15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"13","o On—Orbz't Characterisation
The on—orbit Characterisation phase is related to tuning and calibrating ACES instruments and equip—
ment parts. On—orbit Characterisation starts individually With the ACES instruments and equipment
tuning and subsequently adds system functions, namely the serVO—loop interlocking the two 0 / B atomic
Clocks SHM and PHARAO.

With regards to the ACES MCC, all activities are planned, executed and monitored by CADMOS.
Starting With the two reference MWL GTs, all available MWL GT Will be progressively integrated in
the ACES operation and also the BLT SLRs, coordinated by the BLT DC.

Operations, including activities With the MWL GTs Will be performed almost continuously during this
phase.

0 On- Orbit Utilisation
This phase starts at the end of the on—orbit Characterisation phase and Will be in continuation With
the latter.

All ground entities are supposed to be fully operational by beginning of this phase and operational
activities Will be performed continuously.

During this phase, CADMOS Will identify, based on 188 provisional planning inputs, periods With a
given duration of best microgravity conditions needed for PHARAO science operations. A minimum
of 15 of these periods during the ACES mission are required to achieve scientiﬁc results.

It is assumed that all available MWL GTs Will be involved almost continuously in ACES operations,
depending nevertheless 0n the experiment plan deﬁned by the IWG.

As for the previous phases, all activities are planned, executed and monitored by CADMOS based on
inputs provided by the IWG and on the ISS and Columbus activities planning.

0 Decommissioning
After an operational life—tirne of 1.5 to 3 years, ACES Will be switched OFF, With only keep—alive power
provided by Columbus.

The GS during this phase Will make available and maintain the ACES archive for a minimum duration
of 10 years.
VI. ACES Operations
ACES launch is currently foreseen in August 2017 aboard of Dragon SpaceX#13. Activities to prepare
operations have started. At the same time With operations preparation, a ﬁrst propaedeutic operational
activity (SAMS Measurements for ACES) has been baselined, implemented and is on—going. A second one
(laser ﬁring t0 the 188 before ACES Flight) is under preparation:

0 SAMS Measurements for ACES. ACES performance and stability, in particular for PHARAO, is depen—
dent on the microgravity environment it is submitted. In order to verify the time needed for PHARAO
to converge to the expected 10—16 performance, a campaign of measurements of the ISS microgravity
environment, in the internal position closest to the ACES installation point, is on—going.

This measurement campaign is performed using the O / B sensors managed by NASA/SAMS. SAMS
sensor F05 has been installed at the end—cone position of Columbus 0n the 25th of J anuary 2016 on its
dedicated support. Data cable has been connected on the 15th of February 2016. Since then, the sensor
is permanently recording data. CADMOS is in Charge of tracking dynamics events that are happening
at 188 level as well as identifying periods With crew sleeping and With crew intense activities.

TASI is in Charge of post—processing the recorded data and providing power spectral density of the
sensed O / B accelerations.

End of activity is foreseen for J une 2016.

0 Laser F z'm'ng t0 the [SS before ACES F light. In order to characterise the signature of the signal received
back on a given SLR from a CCR positioned on the 188 (188 has already aboard several CCRs Visible

13 0f 15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"14","from the ground), it is foreseen to perform a test of ﬁring from the SLR of Wettzell in Germany, before
ACES ﬂight. The main implementation Will be to have the test carried out using actual ISS SIGI data
received at CADMOS, processed by CC and then forwarded to ELT DC that transmits them to the
Wettzell SLR.
In a ﬁrst part, a test of tracking Will be performed using a Visual camera Chasing the ISS and if this
step is successful, a second one Will consist in ﬁring With the laser beam to the ISS and receiving back
a signature from the signal scattered back to the SLR.
The safety related topics of this operation are still under analysis. If no problems are popping up from
the analysis, it is planned to perform this operation in J une 2016.

A. Aces Operations Concept

CADMOS responsible for ACES operations is the ACES Mission and Operations Manager. Operations Will

be implemented manning two operational positions:

0 REXP: The experiment manager team that is the operation authority on—console by delegation of the
ACES Mission and Operations Manager.

0 Aces Operators The Aces Operators team that staffs permanently the ACES MCC, in order to ensure
monitoring of the Flight Segment and of the Ground Segment on a permanent basis. It is also foreseen
that the ACES Operators Will be able to send some commands to the F8 in the scope of well deﬁned
and validated procedures. In addition, the Aces Operators position is the focal point of contact for
ACES operations.

A support to the Aces Operator on console is provided by the REXP team for all topics except for
GS issues, and by the CADMOS transverse MCO team for all GS related topics. Both teams Will be
on—call When not physically present at CADMOS.

CADMOS Will perform the following tasks to implement ACES operations:

0 F light Segment monitoring. Monitoring of ACES. A permanent task (24/ 7) that uses displays and
alarms to react to contingency situations.

0 Ground Segment monitoring. (1) Monitoring of the CADMOS GS by means of dedicated displays, (2)
monitoring of the overall ACES GS by means of dedicated displays, (3) monitoring of the data transfer
between CADMOS and the other GS entities and (4) monitoring of the ACES archive completeness

o Payload commanding. Regular commands to be sent to ACES are deﬁned in the daily operations
plan. Commands can only be sent during agreed (With Col—CC) command Windows. The amount
of commands to be sent to the payload vary according to the mission phase and have to take into
account cornms handovers. Commands can be sent for immediate execution or be time—tagged for later
execution.

o F ﬁle transfers (via Col- CC). Up and downlink of ﬁles in coordination With Col—CC.

0 Ground Stations Operations ( M WL GT3 and SLRS). Operations With MWL GTs managed by CAD—
MOS are of two orders: (1) planning data ﬁle elaboration and transfer to manage the passes and (2)
deﬁning the schedule and role of the different MWL GTs involved in the upcoming operations, and
commands to conﬁgure the MWL GT.

0 Planning activities. Coordination With IWG on the scientiﬁc implementation of operations and With
Col—CC concerning the request in terms of needed power or TM/TC capabilities. In addition, contri—
bution With Col—CC to the integrated ISS planning.

0 ACES health and performance assessment. On a regular basis, CADMOS REXP team analyses data
using quick look displays, replays, etc. in order to determine overall performance of the system.

0 Monitor for [SS dynamic events. CADMOS monitors events that could have an impact on the orbit
determination and overall scientiﬁc performance of ACES, such as: ISS reboosts, DAMs, PDAMs,
attitude manoeuvre, LoAC etc. and provides information to 0C.

14 of 15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"15","0 Data Archive management. CADMOS monitors completeness of data in the ACES archive and manage
the correct access rights to the archive.

0 Operator training and simulations. CADMOS is also in Charge of organising operators training for
all ACES related activities. Classroom training With a list of mandatory courses is implemented for
each newcomer Within ACES project, and simulations With nominal and contingency scenarios Will be
organised to provide a realistic operational environment for operators training.

0 Support activities. ACES project Will also take advantage of the existing support teams in CADMOS
for PA activities and documentation management.

VII. Current Status

Part of the ACES payload has been integrated and integration tests are now scheduled for spring/summer
2016.

Final integration of ACES is scheduled for autumn 2016. At the same time, end—to—enol tests between
ﬂight model of MWL FS and actual MWL GTs are also scheduled for spring 2016 in order to characterise
MWL signal and have a system—Wise representative test.

The ﬁrst MWL GT has been deployed at PTB in November 2015. Additional GTs Will be deployed at
SYRTE, Wetzzell, NIST and J PL by autumn 2016.

ACES GS is expected to be ﬁnalised by autumn 2016 and should be handed over to CADMOS at the
beginning of 2017.

ACES operations are baselineol for the main part. Preparation of the operational products has started.
ACES internal operational products under preparations are: (1) ops procedures, (2) displays and (3) auto—
mated procedures to implement commanding and execution of sequences. Expected end of preparation is
foreseen for autumn 2016 to start the technical qualiﬁcation and after the operational qualiﬁcation.

VIII. Conclusion

The second is one of the most privileged units in the SI, because extremely reproducible and very accurate.
Atomic Clocks allow to have this high accuracy.

ACES, an external ISS payload, Will introduce a new generation of space atomic Clocks able to improve
the accuracy currently reachable on the Earth’s surface. At the same time, the fact that it Will ﬂy at a
different gravitational potential and its possibility to transfer and compare its very accurate time reference
to/With ground Clocks, Will allow to improve the precision level of physical phenomena observation. This
could provide a new conﬁrmation to the Einstein’s general relativity and other fundamental physics theories.

ACES Will be launched in August 2017 for a mission of 1.5 to 3 years. It Will be connected to the nadir
pointing CEPF and Will start operate converging to the expected high accurate time scale.

ACES system is in ﬁnal development phase and it is expected to be ﬁnalised before the end of 2016.

Operational organisation and operations are mostly baselineol anol ops products preparation is currently
in progress.

References

1Cacciapuoti, L., Salomon, C. (2011). Atomic clock: ensemble in space. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 327(1),
012049.

2Goujon, D., Rochat, P., Mosset, P., Boving, D., Perri, A., Rochat, J., et al. (2010). Development of the Space active
Hydrogen Maser for the ACES Mission (pp. 1—6). Presented at the EFTF-2010 24th European Frequency and Time Forum,
IEEE.

3Schmolke, J., zahringer M. Antenna Design and Testing for the ACES Microwave Link:

15 of 15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
