"","x"
"1","13-0216
Time Transfer: Sideline 0r Geodetic Objective
A. Schlicht (1), U. Schreiber (1), I. Prochazka (2), P. Exertier (3)

(1) FESG, Technische Universitat Miinchen.

(2) Czech Technical University of Prague.

(3) Observatoire de la Cote d’Azure

schlicht@bv.tum.de
Abstract. The evolution of timekeeping is the most impressive technical development in the recent
past culminating in the concept of optical clocks. Having a relative stability of up to 10'18these
clocks are getting interestingforfundamental physics applications, testing the theory of relativity.
With the need of carrying out these tests in space, the development of space clocks is pushed
forward. The ESA mission ACES will be the next step in this evolution and future ESA studies aim
0n the establishment ofa universal time scale in space. On the other hand, the development offree
space time transfer techniques has to come along with the evolution of space clocks. Having a
“space time scale” in mind, the importance of accuracy of time transfer is a major aspect in this
subject. Laser ranging is the geodetic space technique mostly trimmedfor accuracy in measurement
ofdistanees in space. Using the synergy between ranging and time transfer, time can be transferred
by a coupled two-way and one-way pulsed laser technique, whose principle and potential has
already be shown by the T 2L2 experiment onboard the Jason satellite and will be continued by the
ELT experiment installed on the ACES mission.
Introduction
With the redeﬁnition of the second in 1967 based on the transition of the two hyperﬁne levels of the
ground state of the 133Cs atom, the “atomic age” of time standards began. Since then a dramatic
increase in stability and accuracy of keeping time has made time “the most precise and reliable
observation we can make at present” [Fukushima 1989]. As the new optical clocks are getting more
stable and accurate than the cesium primary standards a further redeﬁnition of the second is being
considered by the international metrology community [ITOC website]. Fundamental physics has
special interest in such precise clocks. With the fact that a uniﬁcation of general relativity and
quantum theory leads to deviations from standard physics, the limits of these theories are subj ect of
intense studies [Lammerzahl 2008]. With clocks two aspects of the theory of relativity can be
veriﬁed: The gravitational redshift and the local Lorentz invariance of special relativity
[Lammerzahl 2008]. Gravitational redshift occurs When light leaves the gravity ﬁeld of a massive
body. As the photons escape the ﬁeld they loose energy Which results in a lower frequency. The
possibility to realize large potential differences to verify this effect With high precision is one reason
to bring clocks into space. Another application is the identiﬁcation of velocity dependent changes of
physical constants [Lammerzahl 2008] such as the speed of light. The complex time variable
gravity potential on the Earth's surface [Schiller 2007] and the possibility to tune atomic clocks in a
microgravity environment to better precision [Salomon 2001] are additional reasons for considering
to establish a future global time scale in space. The ACES mission Will be ESA’s ﬁrst step in this
direction.
Beside fundamental physics also navigation has an interest to have precise clocks in orbit
[Hugentobler 2009]. Navigation satellites equipped With stable and well synchronized clocks allow
to reduce the number of monitoring stations and to provide users With accurate predicted clock
information required for precise positioning and navigation in real-time and single receiver mode.

"
"2","With the trend to bring precise clocks into orbit there is also a need to compare and synchronize
clocks in space and on ground With high accuracy.

Geodetic interest on time keeping

We mentioned already three points Where geodesy has an interest in ground to space time transfer:
gravitational redshift Will allow to measure height differences With clocks, geodetic observing
stations Will have to be synchronized to a future global “space time scale” and navigation requires
synchronized clocks. We may, however, not only think of synchronizing GNSS (Global Navigation
Satellite System) clocks, but also of clocks of low Earth orbiting (LEO) satellites. Precise orbits of
many of these satellites are determined using onboard GNSS tracking data. With synchronized
GNSS and LEO satellite clocks the one way GNSS tracking data Will no longer consist of pseudo
ranges but in biased ranges. This Will enhance a geodetic observation technique Which plays an
essential role for precise orbit determination [Sohafer 2013].

T2L2 and its precursor experiment have already shown that SLR can be used for precise time
transfer by combining two ways and one way ranging technique [Exertier 2009]. To fully exploit
the synergy between ranging and time transfer the stations need a tight link to a clock (see section
SLR station performance) comparable stability to the space clock and a space segment Which does
not only reﬂect but also detect and time-tag the laser pulses sent to the spacecraft. Laser ranging,
accompanied With frequent calibration and well-established knowledge of detector delays is a
ranging technique trimmed for accuracy and stability. These two qualities are needed for time
transfer, too, for comparing time scales and synchronizing clocks. Exploiting the synergy between
ranging and time transfer, requiring some effort, allows SLR to contribute signiﬁcantly to the
precise comparison of time scales. SLR as a two-way ranging method is limited to distances up to
the moon [Degnan 2002]. This is evidently also true for the combined two-way and one-way time
transfer. For larger distances a combined one-way up— and down-link can be used instead, known as
transponder technique. For this purpose two clocks are needed, one at the station and one onboard
the spacecraft. Ranging is thereby directly linked With time transfer. The ﬁrst transponder
experiment was carried out to the Messenger spacecraft at an Earth ﬂy-by [Smith 2006], it is
successfully used for one-way ranging to the LRO spacecraft [Abshire 2006], and it is intensively
studied for further missions and experiments (see for example [Oberst 2012, TurysheV 2010]). The
preparation of SLR stations for laser time transfer is thus at the same time a preparation for the
participation in transponder applications. Last but not least it is important to note that With the
increasing accuracy of clocks the need arises to treat space and time as a common concept [Mai
2013]. Time keeping will then deﬁnitively become a geodetic task.

Synergy between ranging, data- and time transfer

The constant and ﬁnite speed of light explicitly couples the range of a travelling electromagnetic
signal to the time of propagation. Therefore time can be transmitted by means of ranging signals
referred to one time scale and registered With reference to another time scale. On the other hand,
modulated continuous signals can be used to transmit information. All three applications of
electromagnetic signals — ranging, time transfer, and data transfer - are related and bear the synergy
to use one signal for more than one application. Figure 1 illustrates this synergy. Precise timing
information is needed if a ranging application is also used for time transfer. Coding ranging signals
offer the possibility for data transfer [Kirchner 2011]. Data transfer linked to a clock can be used for
time transfer and ranging, if internal delays are calibrated. Combining data and time transfer thus
offers geodesy the opportunity for a new ranging method [Sohafer 2013].

In the following discussion we relate the pulsed optical SLR signal to the ranging application and a
phase modulated continuous signal in a combined one-way up—down link to the data transfer

"
"3","application. The later is currently done in the microwave domain (for example ACES [Caeeiapuoti
2009]), but ﬁrst experiments demonstrate the potential using optical signals [Nielsen 2002].
Comparing these different technologies, we have to confront a 2 kHz (limited due to
sending/receiving overlap) optical pulsed signal with an up to 5Gbit/s modulated optical signal or a
100 Mbit/s signal on the microwave channel. The predicted precision for the ACES mission for one
188 pass is 4 ps for the BLT experiment and 0.4 ps for the microwave link (MWL). But as stated in
the sections above before the advantage of SLR is accuracy. T2L2 has shown a repeatability of 45
ps in a common clock experiment, compared to the MWL t0 ACES provided an accuracy of 100 ps
(not optimized for that purpose). A transponder like conﬁguration with LLR systems working in
single photon mode allows for time transfer in the whole solar system, whereas optical data transfer
would need extreme laser power for interplanetary applications. Last but not least the SLR
community is organized in the International Laser Ranging Service (ILRS). Tasks can thus be
spread over the community depending on Visibility 0r weather condition. The pulsed and continuous
measurement principles have different strengths and LRO showed for instant, that a combination of
optical pulsed and microwave tracking leads to the best results [Mao 2012].
T2L2: measurement technique and results
The Time Transfer by Laser Link (T2L2) instrument is passenger 0f the oceanographic space
mission Jas0n2, and was launched in June 2008 at an altitude of 1335 km. T2L2 consists of an
optical system (detection in the multi-photon regime) and an electronic device for timing. The
principle of the experiment is based on the Satellite Laser Ranging (SLR) technique; thanks to the
laser reﬂector array, in support of the precise orbitography, T2L2 beneﬁts from the 2-way ranging.
The J as0n2 mission is using the Doppler Orbitography and Radiopositioning Integrated by Satellite
(DORIS) technique, which oscillator (a quartz) is used by the T2L2 instrument as a reference. Its
stability is of a few 10'13 Hz, that is of a few pieoseeond at 10 seeondes and growing in t”. At
ground level, T2L2 relies on the ILRS network, whose stations are tracking the satellite J as0n2 for 5
t0 6 times per day maximum of 10 to 15 minutes each. Around 21 SLR stations of the ILRS
network are participating t0 the T2L2 mission, providing Full Rate data in the CRD format
regularly (see the website https//t2l2.oea.eu/). Some of them acquired a hydrogen maser as the
reference clock of the station, since 2010 or before. Several ﬁeld experiments implementing very
different conﬁgurations have been realized to:

i) properly measure the performances of time transfer by laser link (short and long term stability),

ii) progress in the measurement of the ground links (delay, cables, etc.) including the time
distribution of pulses between equipment: clock, SLR system, and GPS antenna,

iii) comparing T2L2 time transfer to existing microwave techniques such as GPS [Guillemot 2012,
Samain 2011, Samain 2012]. We used the French Transportable Laser Ranging Station (FTLRS)
to beneﬁt from the quality of time and frequency laboratory SYRTE located at the Observatoire
de Paris; the FTLRS has been deployed there for several months in 2010 and in 2013.

The SLR stations performances are very different, mainly due to the quality of the timing system

and the detector. The error budget of the ground to space time transfer thus ranges from 45-65 ps

for the best stations (equiped with an hydrogen maser) to 55 ns for the worse. The average stability
achieved in today’s data processing at 75 seconds is of 4-8 ps and 2-3 ns, respectively. The ground
to space time transfers are computed for all the SLR passes available on J as0n2, that forms the basis
to estimate the ground to ground time transfer between any couple of stations. As a consequence of
the altitude of the Jas0n2 satellite, the ﬁeld of View of the T2L2 optics, the unstability 0f the
onboard oscillator over 1000 s, and the availability of SLR stations with a pieoseeond resolution of
its dates, the common View (CV) provides the best results. For example over Europe, the stability of
the time transfer between hydrogen masers ranges from < 1 ps at 30 sec. to 150 ps at 1000 see. The
main difﬁculty is to maintain a high quality of the different computation steps whereas the SLR

"
"4","does not provide data regularly in time due to technical, human, and meteorological reasons. A
campaign dedicated to the study of the long term stability has been realized between the FTLRS and
the MeO SLR/LLR station at the Grasse observatory by using the same clock for both systems.
After one month of common passes, we established a repeatibility of the link of 45 ps. On the other
hand, the stability of the time transfer between two h masers over 1,000 km has been estimated at
140 ps by comparing with the GPS technique. In that case on each geodetic site, the same clock
system is distributing time (PPS and frequency) simultaneously to a GPS antenna and to the SLR
station. Now considering accuracy, the space techniques should be referenced to a given point
located near to the time and frequency laboratory. The goal is to avoid having long distances on the
ground, to be able to measure the delays accurately, that is at the sub-nanoseoond level. We made a
campaign of time transfer in September and October 2013, betwen HerstmonoeuX (UK), Wettzell
(G), Grasse and the Observatoire de Paris (equiped with the FTLRS). These sites have been
calibrated both for the GPS and the laser techniques, relatively to the reference point selected on
each site. The preliminary results show the difﬁculty to maintain a high level of accuracy for all the
delays measured on ground, at the sub-nanoseoond level. But they are encouraging.

ELT: What is different?

The differences between T2L2 and ELT are in the space segment. ELT will be a payload of ACES,
a module which will be mounted on the ISS. ACES establishes a precise time scale in space. The
basis is an active hydrogen maser for short and medium-term stability and a laser-oooled cesium
clock for long-term stability [Caooiapuoti 2009]. With such a precise time scale not only space to
ground and common View ground to ground time transfer is possible, but also non-oommon View
ground to ground comparison of clocks. For that comparison two methods will be available: MWL
with 100 Mbit/s modulation and ELT as the optical pulsed method carried out by different stations
of the ILRS network. The ELT space segment is also totally different, as the detection principle of
laser pulses is changed. Whereas in T2L2 the complexity of one-way tracking is totally moved to
the space segment, leading to the above explained double detection, the responsibility for ELT’s
detection accuracy is entirely in the observer’s hand. ELT will only work in single photon mode.
The tracking station will have to ensure the single photon mode by regulating the laser power or the
divergence of the laser beam. A simultaneous two-way and one-way tracking is only possible
because the total attenuation between ground and space is 1013 at standard weather conditions. The
gating of the SPAD detector is synchronized to on board time and has an offset less than 50 ns to
UTC. The SLR signal should reach the detector within about 200 ns after gate open. The stations
therefore have to control laser ﬁre time to the predictions and correct for their own offset to UTC
which uncertainty should not be greater than 50 ns. From the two-way ranging a real-time
calculation of the 188 time bias would be helpful to further correction of the predictions. For
symmetry reasons of one-way and two-way tracking single photon mode detection on ground or the
use of a compensated SPAD diode will enhance accuracy of time transfer. The displacement of the
complexity to the SLR stations has the tremendous advantage that the space segment can be kept
light with low power consumption, an essential requirement to get the detector on future missions.
SLR station performance for time transfer

In section Geodetic interest in time keeping we noted, that stations need a clock with stability
comparable to the onboard clock. For the ACES mission this is only possible on a short time scale if
the station has a hydrogen maser. Ground and space clock can then be compared over one 188 pass
(300 s). No ILRS station has today access to a frequency standard with a long-term stability like the
ACES clock. For future experiments it will be necessary to get access to precise clock information.
The rapid rising development in the stability of clocks makes it impossible for the stations to

"
"5","operate an up to date frequency standard at any time, so the possibility to get connected to
metrology institutes by ﬁber link has to be considered. The ground network for time and frequency
comparison is planed today and the station operators should declare their interest now, to be
considered in these plans. After having access to precise timing information a reference point in
time has to be deﬁned and all timing information on the station has to be related to that point.
Calibrating and monitoring oable delays from the reference point to the GNSS receiver and the SLR
event timer Will be necessary. The calibration from the event timer to the reference point of the
telescope has to be done separately. This procedure is explained in detail in the article of Proohazka
et al. in this proceeding.
As mentioned before there are special requirements for the stations participating in ELT. The one
due to single photon mode and detector triggering are enumerated above.
Tuning laser power for single photon detection With 532nm wavelength at the space segment,
programming laser trigger in respect to receive time in steps smaller 50 11s, programming correction
algorithm due to real-time observed time bias, offset to UTC, laser response time to trigger signal,
calibrated biases. All uncertainties of biases together should be much smaller than 100 11s (on board
offset to UTC smaller 50 11s): offset to UTC and bias to laser trigger. The mounting of the ACES
module on the ISS make other requirements necessary: Having the capability to track low orbiting
satellites, handling a go/nogo — ﬂag, integrating predictions every 90 minutes and sticking to laser
safety issues. For time transfer full-rate data is necessary in the ILRS ord-format With every start
event recorded in piooseoond resolution.
Summery
T2L2 is a very successful demonstration, that SLR can do time transfer as a coupled two-way and
one-way ranging method. The high accuracy of SLR can be shown in common clock experiments,
With 45 ps long-term repeatability. But T2L2, With its double detection of laser pulses needs a
heavy and power consuming payload. To get on future missions a lighter payload would be
appreciable. ELT Will bring such a detector system on board of the ACES mission, changing to the
principle of single photon mode detection. The complexity of time transfer is relocated from space
to ground, and a greater effort has to be shouldered by the participating ILRS stations. But we
showed that this investment is a great and worthwhile step for future SLR applications and a science
objective for geodesy. If the ILRS can show, that time transfer in single photon mode can be done
With the same accuracy as in corrected multi photon mode, the probability to get on future
experiments Will be much higher.
ranging I'i I i data transfer
_ time transfer '
Figure 1. Synergy between ranging, data and time transfer

"
"6","References

Cacciapuoti, L., Salomon, C, Space clocks and fundamental tests: T he ACES experiment, Eur. Phys.
J. Special Topics 172, p. 57 — 68, 2009.

Degnan, J .J ., Asynchronous laser T ransponders for precise interplanetary ranging and time
transfer, J . 0f Geodyn. 34, p. 551 — 594, 2002.

Exertier, P., E. Samain, P. Bonnefond, and Ph. Ghillemot, Status offhe T 2L2/Jason2 Experiment,
Adv. Space Res., Vol. 46 (12), p. 1559-1565, 2010.

Fokushima, T., T ime systems in general relativity, in Reference Frames in Astronomie and
Geophysics, J . Kovalevsky, I. I. Mueller, B. K01aczek(eds.), Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht, p. 417 — 444, 1989.

Guillemot, Ph., et 211., Improvement Ofcomparisons between T 2L2 & RF Links, Proceedings of the
EFTF 2012, Gothenburg, Sweden, p 345-348, 2012.

Hugentobler, U.; Plattner, M.; Bedrich, S.; Heinze, M.; Klein, V.; Voithenleitner, D., Optical clocks
infuture global navigation satellites; Proceedings of the 2ndIntem21ti0n211 Colloquium on Scientiﬁc
and Fundamental Aspects of the Galileo Programme, 2009.

Kirchner, G., Koidl, F., Kucharski, D., Steinegger, W., Leitgeb, E., Usingpulse position modulation
in SLR stations to transmit data to satellites, 11th Int. Conf. 011 Telecommunications, Graz June 15-
17, 2011.

L21mmerz21hl, C., Ditus, H., F undamental Physiks, Space, Missions and T echnology, in Laser,
Clocks and Drag-free Control, Dittus, H., L21mmerz21hl, C., TurysheV, S. (eds.), Springer, Berlin, p.
3 — 25, 2008.

Mai, E., Time, atomic clocks, and relativistic geodesy, Verlag (1. Bay. Acad. d. Wissenschaften,
Mﬁnchen, 2013.

M210, D., Laser ranging experiment on Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter: T iming Determination and
orbit constraints, Proc. of the 17th Int. Workshop 011 Laser Ranging, May 16. -20.2011, Bad
K6tzting,Mitteilungen des Bundesamtes f. Kartographie und Ge0d2isie, 48, 2012.

MCGarry, j., et 211.., Laser ranging t0 the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter: a global network effort,
proceedings of the 16th International Workshop 011 Laser Ranging, October 13-17, Poznan, Poland,
2008.

Nielsen, T.T., Oppenhaeuser, G., In orbit test result of an operational intersatellite link between
ARTEMIS and SPOT 4, SILEX, Free Space Laser Communication Technologies XIV, Proc. of SPIE
4635, 2002.

Oberst, J .; et 211., GETEMME — a mission to explore the Martian satellites and thefundamentals of
solar system physics; Exp. Astron., 34, , pp 243—271, 2012.

Salomon, C., et211., Cold atoms in Space and atomic clocks: ACES, CR. Acad. Sci. Paris, t.2 Serie
IV, P. 1313 — 1330, 2001.

Samain, E., et 211., T ime T ransfer by Laser Link - T 2L2: Current Status and F uture Experiments,
Proc. of the Europ. Frequency and Time Forum, S2111 Francisco, California USA, p. 378-3 83, 2011.
Samain, E., et 211., T 2L2: Ground to ground T ime T ransfer, Proc. 26th European Frequency and
Time Forum, Gothenburg, Sweden, pp. 36-40, 2012.

Sch21fer, W., Flechtner, F.; Nothnagel, A.; B21uch, A.; Hugentobler, U.; Geodetic T ime Reference in
Space (GETRIS). ESA Study AO/1-6311/2010/F/WE Final Report GETRIS-TIM-FR-0001, in
review, 2013.

Schiller, S., et211., Optical clocks in Space, Nucl. Phys. B 166, p. 300 -302, 2007.

Smith, D.E., Zuber, M.t., Sun, X., Neuman, g.A., C21V21n21ugh, F., McGarry, J .F., Zagwodzki, T.W.,
T wo-way laser link over interplanetary distances, science 311, P. 53 — 54, 2006.

TurysheV, S.G., Farr, W., Folkner, W.M., Girerd, A.R., Hemmati, H., Murphy, t.W. jr., Williams,

J .G., Degnan, J .J ., Advancing tests ofrelativistic gravity via laser ranging t0 Phobos, Exp. Astron.
28, p. 209 — 249, 2010.

"
