"","x"
"1","Maarten J.A. Moes, Jose J. Bijvelt, Johannes Boonstra
o o o
Actln dynamlcs 1n mouse ﬁb roblasts
'n m'crogra 't
_ _ _ _ _ Introduction
After stzmulatzng wzth the growth factor PDGE cells exhzbzt
abzlndant m 6;"" br ah e mm? and 1?}? er m or p Z ogogz'cag CZ anges Humans exposed to microgravity conditions experience various
”n er n or m a gm?” con ztzons. _ ese m or p 0 0g 16a C anges physiological changes like reduced immunodeﬁciency, loss of
are largely deter m med by the actzn mzcroﬁlament system. N 0W bone mass and muscle deterioration. The underlying mecha-
these hctzn dyn a: 16;] weredsthdzecél WEE: 713:11am.gleamlyThconct’z- nism for these phenomena might be Within cells on the molecu-
tzons m m ouseﬁ r0 asts urmg t_ e 'mzsszon. e aztn lar level. This is supported by a large number of observations in
Of the present study was to descrzbe the actm m orp h ology m mammalian cells. Gravity effects mammalian cell growth and
detazl, t0 estabhsh the eﬁ’ ect of P D GF 0n actzn morphology and differentiation and cells were shown to have altered gene
to study the role ofseveral actm-mteractmgprotems Involved m expression in microgravity [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. The presented research
Introduced actm dynamzes m mzcrogravzty. Identzcal expert- ﬁts in an ongoing project that studies the effect ofmicrogravity
ments were conducted at I G on earth as a reference. No results on m am m ali an cells
in microgravity were obtained due to a combination ofmalfunc-
tioning hardware and unfulﬁlled temperature requirements.
5 *5
km {Eﬁlmmﬁrﬁﬂﬂ —- 5%
El. \ / c l
I ' '
ﬁt
E E '3 ﬂ
———' +3 _—* ‘3 W 3
ﬁt E; a HE
E / \
A. o I_,..
'l. E n.
E. i ""-E
E ‘5
5 i-
= ‘43.
Jilin, i
. . Inning?”
E
=-
F ig. I: Actin-bindingproteins aﬂect the behavior Ofactin in various
Authors ways. Some examples are illustrated in this ﬁgure: (A ) Monomer-
bindingproteins keep the amount Ofmonomeric actin subunits avail-
Maarten J.A. M 0 es able for polymerization low, to prevent the formation of F -actin ﬁla-
Jose J. Bijvelt ments. (B) When a ﬁber ofactin is formed it can be capped by a
Johannes Boonstra capping protein that prevents further elongation resulting in Short
. . capped ﬁlaments. (C) Severingproteins increase the depolymeriza-
E:E:$?:Iit§i:ri:ih€::§:seCISLiiiilzilscitgztflaigrtligcht tion of ﬁlaments. CrOSS-linkin g proteins can organize the ﬁlaments
Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands into gel-like networks (D) or bundles (E). Branchingproteins (F )
J.Boonstra@bio.uu.nl initiate the growth of daughter ﬁlaments by serving as nucleation
Sites on existing ﬁlaments resulting in branched actin networks.
1 1 1

"
"2","During previous studies in microgravity it was found that andanon-polyrnerized form (G-actin) and cycles between those
growth factor—induced signal transduction is sensitive to micro- states in cells thereby forming a highly dynamic network. Many
gravity. Epidermal growth factor (EGF) induced early gene proteins interact with actin and locally determine the behaVior
expression of c-fos and c-jun was decreased under micrograVi- of actin. One can characterize these proteins by their function,
ty conditions [1, 6]. Upstream of this early gene expression, including cross-linking proteins like 0t-actinin and ﬁlamin, seV-
EGF signaling was investigated starting at the receptor by ering proteins like actin-depolyrnerization factor (ADF) and
investigating receptor clustering, ligand binding and subse- coﬁlin, capping proteins like gelsolin, monomer-binding pro-
quently by investigating EGF induced signaling cascades from teins like proﬁlin and membrane-associated proteins like the
membrane to the nucleus. Selective transduction pathways were EGF-receptor. Together these actin binding proteins (ABPs)
identiﬁed to be susceptible to changes in gravity conditions regulate the dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton (Fig 1.). So actin
whereas other pathways originating from the EGF receptor and actin-binding proteins form a complicated network and are
were not [7]. This was shown in several studies in sounding important for many cellular processes.
rocket experiments in adherent A431 epithelial cells. Moreover, Actin-binding proteins on their turn are subj ect of regulation
cells showed increased cell rounding under microgravity condi- as well (Fig 2.). Various signaling cascades originating from
tions [8]. Cell rounding is largely determined by the actin ﬁla- both integrins and growth factor receptors stimulate or repress
ment system. Interestingly, the signaling cascade that was sus- ABPs resulting in remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton.
ceptible to changes in gravity, the PKC-rnediated signal trans- lntegrins link the actin cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix
duction, was demonstrated to be linked to actin. That is why the and by doing so play a role in cell attachment. Growth factor
actin cytoskeleton might well be the microgravity sensitive receptors sense the environment of a cell by binding growth fac-
component in cells [9]. MicrograVity might affect the behaVior tors from the outer world. Both integrins and growth factor
of actin directly or indirectly Via actin binding proteins. Actin receptors transport these extracellular signals over the mem-
on its turn could affect the PKC-rnediated signaling cascades. brane into the cell where cells respond by reshaping its
The experiments on the DELTA rnission were part of a series of cytoskeleton and ultimately altering gene expression.
experiments that aim at determining whether actin is the micro- Central players in these signaling cascades in relation to
gravity sensitive component in mammalian cells. alterations of the cytoskeleton are the Rho GTPases such as
Actin is an abundant protein in cells with important functions RhoA, Racl and cdc42 (for reView see [11]). Rho induces stress
like migration, cell cycle progression, intracellular transport, ﬁber formation and Racl and cdc42 play a role in the assembly
signal transduction, transcription, membrane rufﬂing and cell of actin ﬁlaments.
attachment. It also largely determines the morphology of cells Starting from the binding of a growth factor to its receptor,
and the shape and position of organelles within cells (for reView one can recognize the following events. The activated receptor
see [10]). Actin is present both in a polymerized form (F-actin) generates intracellular signaling peptides like PIP2 and acti-
vates Rho GTPases Via other peptides. Rho GTPases on their
turn start signaling cascades involving proteins such as ROCK,
Extracellular matrix 5mm“ “‘1'"" LIMK, leA and WASP. Subsequently the actiVities of actin-
GM [mm rmmm bindin roteins like coﬁlin elsolin and roﬁlin are modiﬁed
g P a g P
imam reshaping the actin cytoskeleton.
....----"""""""""""" (I I As described above, studies in microgravity gave rise to the
N l f WASP \ hypothesis that actin might be the microgravity sensitive com-
] G El snlin ponent in cells. Actin was indeed shown to behave differently in
l I ARPLI'E mierogravity [4.1, 9, 1.3]. The relative 1.3-.actin content was shown
HUGH mDIA ] to increase during rnicrograV1ty conditions [14]. So, micrograv-
l K Prufilin 1ty seems to either induce actin polymerization or to reduce its
depolyrnerization. Moreover, several studies describe morpho-
U M“ ] logical changes of cells in simulated and real microgravity. This
1 indicates a role for actin, since actin largely determines the cell
Cﬂﬁli"" —. morphology. However, only a few studies did partly investigate
the role of actin in simulated or real microgravity [2, 4, 12, 15].
The present study aimed at investigating the behaVior of actin in
cells in real microgravity, and to investigate possible local dif-
F ig. 2: Overview offhe interaction between Signal transduction and ferences in behaVior of actin in cells. These differences might
actin remodeling.-Activati0-n ofgrowth factor-recep-tors 0r integrins either be directly in du C e d by the physical environment Of a cell
by bmdmg t0 thezr respectzve lzgands results m actm remodelmg or in direc tly by modifying the interactions with actin-binding
through Rho GTPases. Rho GTPases subsequently activate a kinase .
cascade including ROCK and LIMK to activate the actin-binding protelns. . . . .
protein coﬁlin. Alternatively, the proﬁlin is modulated through leA TO study the behaVIOr ofactln 1n detall we deVBlOped a model
or the WASPpathway. allowing the study of actin dynamics in cells exposed to micro-
1 12

"
"3","gravity. Actin dynamics is triggered by stimulating growth-fac- Immunoﬂuorescent labeling
tor starved cells with a growth factor called Platelet Derived Cells were ﬁxed by adding 5.3% formaldehyde directly to the
Growth Factor (PDGF) (Fig 3.). This growth factor binds to the culture medium. The refreshment rate of the PBUs is ~70%,
PDGF receptor that on its turn stimulates intracellular signaling resulting in a ﬁnal concentration of ﬁxative of 3.7%. After ﬁx-
cascades. Via RhoGTPases these signaling cascades regulate a ation, cells were kept at 4 CC during transport to the laboratory.
number of actin binding proteins resulting in a response of the Here coverslips were taken out of the PBUs and washed twice
actin cytoskeleton. After stimulation with PDGF, the number of with PBS, permeabilized for 5 min in PBS containing 0.2%
stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions are reduced in cells. Moreover, Triton X-100, followed by two washes in PBS, and incubated
circular rufﬂes are formed on the upper side of these cells. for 10 min with 50 mM glycine in PBS. After washing twice
These circular rufﬂes are dynamic structures formed by actin with PBS containing 0.2% gelatin, cells were incubated for 60
starting from the periphery of cells and moving towards the min at room temperature with tetrarnethylrhodarnine-5- (and-6)
middle of cells [16, 17]. Actin pushes the membrane outwards isothiocyanate (TRITC)-conjugated phalloidin and Alexa 488
thereby changing the cell morphology. conjugated DNase 1. Subsequently they were washed six times
Using automated ﬂight hardware we planned to stimulate with PBS containing 0.2% gelatin. Finally, cells were mounted
mouse ﬁbroblasts with PDGF and subsequently chemically ﬁx in Mowiol-DABCO.
the cells in microgravity during the DELTA mission.
Acquisition ofimages
Material and Methods Pictures were taken with a Leitz microscope (model Orthoplan
Flu 043944) equipped with Leitz objectives 40x/ 1.3 oil and
Materials 63x/ 1.4 oil, using immersion oil Immersol 518F (Carl Zeiss
Tissue culture nutrients, Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium Microlmaging Inc.). Images were acquired using a Leica CCD
(DMEM) and fetal bovine serum (FBS) were purchased from camera (model DC350F; Leica Microsystems, Inc.) using Leica
Gibco (Paisley, UK). PDGF-BB was purchased from Upstate Image Manager 50 software, subsequently pictures were
(Hampshire, UK). All other chemicals used were obtained from processed with Adobe Photoshop 8.0.
Sigma or Merck (Darmstadt, Germany) and were of the highest
purity available. PBUs were manufactured by CCM (Nuenen,
the Netherlands). Coverslips sized 9x25 mm or 9x12 mm were
purchased from Menzel (Braunschweig, Germany).
Cell culture
C3H10T1/2 mouse ﬁbroblasts were grown at 37 CC in HEPES A
(25 mM) buffered DMEM supplemented with 7.5% FBS and 5
mM L-glutamine (humidiﬁed atmosphere, 5% C02). Cells were
plated at 12,000 cells/crn2 on coverslips and allowed to grow for
24 hours after seeding. Cells were growth factor—starved for 24
hours at 37 CC and subsequently growth factor starved for
another 8 days at 20 CC during transport from the laboratory to
the launch area in a temperature regulated box.
F light hardware
Plunger Box Units (PBUs) were ﬁlled four days before launch
except from cells that transported separately to keep them in I:
good condition. Cells on coverslips were inserted one day
before launch into the PBUs and kept in fresh serum-free medi- F ig 3 .‘ Eﬂect ofPDGF on F - and G-actin localization in
um. C3H/10T1/2 mouseﬁbroblasts. Cells were serum deprived for 24
hours and subsequently incubated in the presence or absence of 20
Fligh t experimen t ?gmengi-SBgog 0, 10 all’ld 3glminute}atj7 O-C, ?especltévillyd
. . , cm . u se “67’” C6 S were 1X6 usm orma e e
Cells were to be kept at 20 0C, for the dtlratlon sz, days durlng and incubated with Pthloidih—Tritc to label F-actihgﬁed) 0r wth/h
ﬂlght' 6 hours before stlmulatlon, experlmental unlts were to be DNase I—Alexa488 to label G-actin (green). In non-stimulated cells
transferred to 365i 0-5 OC- Plungers were to be activated to F-actin is visible in large stress ﬁbers, whereas G-actin is localized
stimulate 06113 With PDGF and to ﬁx them afterwards. mainly around and in the nucleus. Incubation in the presence of
Experimental units were to be cooled down to 4 CC and to be PDGF-BB for 10 (B) and 30 minutes (C) results in the formation of
transported at 4 CC back to the laboratory. membrane ruﬂles and the partial disappearance of stress ﬁbers.
(photo: Critical ReviewsTM in Eukaryotic Gene Expression,
15(3).-255—275 (2005))
1 13

"
"4","Results growth activation. Exp Cell Res. vol 224(1), p. 103-109 (1996)
6. de Groot, R.P., Rijken, P.J., Boonstm, J., Verkleij, A.J., de Laat, S. W., and
. . . . Kruijer, W.Epiderma1 growth factor induced expression of c-fos is inﬂu-
Ground CODtrOlS were C&I’I‘led out SlmujtaneouSly Wlth the ﬂlght enced by altered gravity conditions. Aviat Space Environ Med. V01. 62, p.
experiments using the same batch of cells. They were success- 37- 40 (1991)
ful and gave similar results as normally obtained (Fig 3.)[16, 7- Rijken, P-Ju d6 GVOOIZ R.P., Kmifen W., de Law: SW, Verkleijl 4-1,
17]. Cells showed nomal actin morphology and numb 61‘ ofruf- Boonstm J..' Identiﬁcation of speciﬁc gravity sensitive signal transduc-
. . . . . tion pathways in human A431 carcinoma cells. Adv Space Res. V01.
ﬂes 1nd1cat1ng that the cells surV1ved the long per10d of starva- 12(1), p. 14552 (1992)
tion and exposure to room temperature during the experiment. 8. Rijken, p1, de Grow; R.P., Briegleb, W, Kruger, W., Verkleij, A_JU
Cells that were not stimulated showed abundant stress ﬁbers Boonsl‘m, J, and d6 Laal‘ 5- W Epidermal growth factOT-induced 0611
and a pool ofG-actin mainly 10 calize (1 around the nucleus. After rounding is sensitive to simulated microgravity. Aviat Space Environ
. . . Med. V01. 62, p. 32-36 (1991)
Stlmulatlon Wlth PDGF the number Of Stress ﬁbers decreases 9. Boonstm, J..' Growth factor—induced signal transduction in adherent
and bOth F'aCtin and G'aCtin were found in CiI'CUJaI' I'Ufﬂas indi' mammalian cells is sensitive to gravity. FASEB J . V01.13, p. S35-42
eating an extensive reorganization of actin. (1999)
NO ﬂight results were obtained due to a combination Of mal- 10. Boonstm, J., Moes, M.J.: Signal transduction and actin in the regulation

. . . 0f G1-phase progression. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. V01. 15(3), p.
functlonlng hardware and unfulﬁlled temperature requ1rernents. 255-76 (2005)

11. Jaﬂe, A.B., Hall, A..' RHO GTPASES: Biochemistry and Biology. Annu
Conclusion/ Discussion Rev Cell Dev Biol. V01. 21, p. 247-69 (2005)

12. Uva, B.M., Masini, MA, Sturla, M, Praia, P., Passalacqua, M,

. . . . . Giuliani, M, Tagliaﬁerro, G., and Strollo F: Clinorotation-induced

GrOWth faCtor mdU’CEd aCtm dynamlcs m serum StarVEd calls ls weightlessness inﬂuences the cytoskeleton of glial cells in culture. Brain
an interesting model for studying actin dynamics in micrograv- Res. vol. 934(2), p, 132-139 (2002)
ity. Because Of the highly dynamic behavior of aetin small dif_ 13. Hughes-Fulford, M.. Function of the cytoskeleton in gravisensing during
ferences in actin metabolism in microgravity will be enlarged Spaceﬂlght'AdY Space ReS'V01'32(8)’p' 1585'??? (2003)

. . . . 14. Boonstm, J., Ryken, P. J., de Groot, R. P., Verklezj, A. J., van der Saag,
comparEd t0 the Sltuatlon m a more Statlc 0611' Moreover’ the P. T., and de Laat, S. W.. Growth factor—induced signal transduction in
mousa ﬁbI'OblaStS W613 Shown to Stand th€ haI'Sh conditions mammalian cells is sensitive to gravity, in: Frontiers in Biological
unavoidable when doing experiments in real microgravity. Science in Space- Sato, A» (ed), Taiyo Printing, Tokyo 10- 2—18 (1997)
Because there were no results obtained in microgravity for this 15' H’gasmbam’ A Imam’ZQ'Sa‘O’ M‘ 56k” M"" quqzm’ T"" [Shmka’ N""

. . . . . . Inﬂuence of Simulated m1cr0grav1ty 0n the activation of the small
eXperlrnent durmg the DELTA mISSIOn’ new ﬂlght opportunl- GTPase Rho involved in cytoskeletal f0rmati0n--m01ecu1ar cloning and
ties will have to provide answers to the questions regarding the sequencing of bovine leukemia-associated guanine nucleotide exchange
dynamics of actin in microgravity listed in this paper. factor- BMC Biochem- V01- 7(19) (2006)

16. Mellstroom, K, Hoglund, A.S., Nister, M, Heldin, C.H., Westermark, B.,
Lindber , U..' The effect of latelet-derived rowth factor on m0 h010
ACkHOWledgements and motility of human glial 1C<):e11s. J Muscle ﬁes Cell Motil. V01. 455), p.gy
589-609 (1983)
Because of space constraints we have been unable to cite all 17. Mellstrom, K, Heldin, C.H., Westermark, 3.: Induction of Circular mem-
original pap 61.3. We, therefore, ap 010 gize to authors whose work brane rufﬂing on human ﬁbroblasts by platelet-derived growth factor.
. . . . . . Exp Cell Res. V01. 177(2), p. 347-59 (1988)
1n th1s subject area may have been ornltted. Th1s work 1n our
laboratory is subsidized by the Dutch Space Organization
(SRON, grant MG-059).
References
1. de Groot, R.P., Rijken, P.J., den Hertog, J., Boonstm, J., Verkleij A.J., de
Laat, S. W, and Kruijer W. Microgravity decreases c-fos induction and
serum response element activity. J . Cell Sci. V01. 97, p. 33-38 (1990)
2. Lewis, ML, Cabana, L.A., Zhao, B., Dinh, HK, Pabalan, J.G.,
Piepmeier, E.H., and Bowman, P.D..' CDNA microarray reveals altered
cytoskeletal gene expression in space-ﬂown leukemic T lymphocytes
(Jurkat). FASEB J. V01 15(10), p. 1783-1785 (2001)
3. Semov, A., Semova, N., Lacelle, C., Marcotte, R., Petroulakis, E.,
Proestou, G., and Wang, E..' Alterations in TNF- and IL-related gene
expression in space-ﬂown W138 human ﬁbroblasts. FASEB J . V01 16(8),
p. 899-901 (2002)
4. Vassy J., Portet, S., Beil, M, Millot, G., Fauvel—Lafeve F, Kamiguian,
A., Gasset, G., Irinopoulou, T., Calvo, F, Rigaut, J.P., and Schoevaert,
D..' The effect of weightlessness 0n cytoskeleton architecture and prolif-
eration of human breast cancer cell line MCF-7. FASEB J . vol 15(6), p.
1104-1106 (2001)
5. Hughes-Fulford M, Lewis ML. Effects of microgravity 0n osteoblast
1 14

"
"5","Actin dynamics in mouse fibroblasts in microgravity: MASER-lO mission
Maarten I. A. Moes - Jose I. Bijvelt - Johannes Boonstra
Abstract

Under normal gravity conditions, cells exhibit distinct morphological changes upon
stimulation with the growth factor PDGF (Platelet-Derived Growth Factor), such as the
formation of linear and circular membrane rufﬂes and the formation of lamellae. These
morphological changes are largely determined by the actin microfilament system. During
the MASER-IO experiment, PDGF-induced actin dynamics were studied under
microgravity conditions in mouse fibroblasts. The aim of the experiment was to describe
the actin morphology in detail, to establish the effect of PDGF on the actin morphology
and to study the role of several actin-interacting proteins in microgravity. Identical
experiments were conducted at 1 g in space and at 1g on earth as a reference.

Introduction

The ACTIN experiment on the MASER-IO was part of an ongoing program that aims
at identifying the microgravity sensitive component of the actin metabolism in
mammalian cells. Previous observations gave rise to the hypothesis that the target of
gravity in a cell is focused on the regulation of actin polymerisation, being an increased
polymerisation rate or a decreased depolymerisation rate. A detailed description is
provided in Boonstra, 1999 and Moes et a1., 2007.

The experiments on the MASER-IO sounding rocket aimed at studying the actin
dynamics that are induced in mouse fibroblasts upon stimulation with the growth factor
PDGF. Stimulation with PDGF results in the formation of spectacular actin
rearrangements within minutes. During the MASER-IO mission, cells are exposed to
microgravity conditions for siX minutes. Therefore this model is suited to study induced
actin dynamics in this relatively short time frame. The actin dynamics that are induced by
PDGF require a change in the activities of actin regulating proteins, such as actin binding
proteins. The examination of the role of actin regulating proteins in microgravity was
another aim of the present investigation.

The model of mouse fibroblasts stimulated with PDGF was studied previously in real
microgravity during a long duration space mission in the International Space Station (188)

1 15

"
"6","(Moes et al., 2007). During this experiment cells were subjected to microgravity for several
days before stimulating the cells with PDGF. The experiment that was conducted during
the MASER-10 mission made use of the same experimental model but the exposure to
microgravity was different. The MASER-10 experiment was conducted with a sounding
rocket and cells were exposed to microgravity for 6 minutes. This implies there is little
time for cells to adapt to their changed environment, i.e. microgravity. This in contrast to
long term space missions, where cells may have ample time to adapt to conditions of
microgravity. In other words, during short duration space missions cells are investigated
that are adapting to conditions of microgravity and during long duration space missions
cells are investigated that may have adapted to microgravity. Ground based simulation
experiments revealed that cells indeed adapt to conditions of simulated microgravity
(Moes et al., 2010). Upon exposure to conditions of simulated microgravity cells round up
within minutes (Rijken et al., 1991, Moes et a1., 2010) similar as was demonstrated during
experiments in real microgravity (Boonstra et al., 1997). However, after exposure to
simulated microgravity for more than 1 hour, cells start to spread again, become ﬂattened
and exhibit a morphology that is comparably to cells that were not exposed to simulated
microgravity (Moes et a1., 2010). Because cells exhibit a transient response, one must be
rather careful in comparing the results of experiments that expose cells to microgravity
conditions for different durations.

During the MASER-10 experiment PDGF induced actin dynamics were studied in
mouse fibroblasts that were adapting to conditions of microgravity. The aim of the
experiment was to describe the actin morphology in detail, to establish the effect of PDGF
on the actin morphology and to study the role of several actin-interacting proteins in
microgravity. Identical experiments were conducted at 1 g in space and 1g on earth as a
reference.

Materials and Methods

Materials

Tissue culture nutrients, Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) and fetal bovine
serum (PBS) were purchased from Gibco (Paisley, UK). PDGF-BB was purchased from
Upstate (Hampshire, UK). The MAL antibody was kindly provided by dr. Treisman
(Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, UK), the monoclonal antibody directed
against B-actin (A1978, clone AC-15) was purchased from Sigma. The goat-anti-mouse-
Alexa488 secondary antibody, DNaseI-Alexa594 and Palloidin-Alexa633 were purchased

116

"
"7","from Molecular Probes. All other chemicals used were obtained from Sigma or Merck
(Darmstadt, Germany). Plungerbox units (PBUs) were manufactured by CCM (Nuenen,
the Netherlands). Coverslips sized 9X25 mm or 9X12 mm were purchased from Menzel
(Braunschweig, Germany). The experiment system BIM (Biology In MicrograVity) was
developed by Swedish Space Corporation (Solna, Sweden), Dutch Space (Leiden, the
Netherlands) and CCM (Nuenen, the Netherlands).
Cell culture
C3H10T1/2 mouse fibroblasts were grown at 37 °C in HEPES (25 mM) buffered DMEM
supplemented with 7.5% FBS and 5 mM L-glutamine (humidiﬁed atmosphere). Cells were
plated at 12,000 cells/cm2 0n coverslips and allow to grow for 24 hours after seeding.
Subsequently, cells were growth factor-starved for 24 hours at 37 °C.
a - . Figure 1. PlungerbOX units were used as experiment
L ._ _.._.ng1..__' containers. A plungerbox unit (80X40X20 mm3)
contains two culture compartments (C; 1 ml each)
_ _ '- q __ ......_. .*__ that can be processed independently. The other side
I 1 :1‘ - 0f the PBU contains siX cylindrical storage
' _ _ _ ' _ _ _ __ 5' ? TI compartments (S; 1 ml each) that can be ﬂushed into
1' the culture compartment when a spring-loaded
plunger is released. An electrically operated thermal cutter releases the plungers.
Flight hardware
Experiment containers (PBUs) contained two culture chambers (1 ml each) that can be
processed independently (Figure 1). Each culture chamber was connected to three liquid
storage reservoirs (1 ml each) that can be operated automatically. PBUs were filled one day
before launch at 37 °C. Cells on coverslips were inserted into the PBUs 8 up to 18 hours
before launch and kept in fresh serum-free medium. Subsequently, experimental
containers for the ﬂight experiment were transferred to the BIM (Biology In Microgravity)
experiment module (Holm et a1., 2005). The BIM facilitated the operation of the PBUs and
consisted of two parts, namely the Late Access Insert (LAI; Figure 2) that contained the
ﬂight experiments and the system for the ground reference experiments. The LAI
facilitated the ﬂight experiments that comprehended both the microgravity set of
experiments and the 1 g reference set of experiments on the centrifuge. The LAI thermal
1 17

"
"8","control was set to operate at 365i 0.5 °C with a tolerance of i 0.2 °C between PBUs. Four
hours before launch, the LAI was placed in the MASER-IO sounding rocket to ensure that
cells were recovered from any stress resulting from human handling. The experiment
containers for the reference on-ground were placed in an incubator at 365i 0.5 °C.
During the experiment the temperature was constantly monitored with several
temperature sensors (Holm et a1., 2005).
3—+ —$W— ' . f; 93""“
——1 Jr . n ? _ I ' __.l I :-
c _. .. rm r ' E.- n;
. I .' . .ll _ __ k-
""I + ._L.' E
' *1 .‘ﬂ -' E -
*ﬁi:§*§3?::______ _ - .. “ . I""""""'I L.- -. _ “g. .
Figure 2. The Late Access Insert of the BIM that facilitates operation of the experiments in space. The
drawing of the LAI (Dutch Space) with the cover (A) half—open indicates the position of the centrifuge
(B) and the static racks (C). The photo on the right displays the LAI with the PBUs mounted on the
centrifuge (D) and the static racks (E). The static racks facilitate the microgravity experiments and the
in-ﬂight reference experiments are mounted on the centrifuge.
Flight experiment
Cells were kept at 365i 0.5 °C. The launch of MASER 10 was on May 2, 2005 at the
launching facility at Esrange outside Kiruna. The experiment was performed
simultaneously under microgravity conditions, on a 1g reference centrifuge on board and
a 1g reference set-up on-ground. At the onset of microgravity, cells were either directly
stimulated and fixed, or stimulated with serum-free medium with PDGF and ﬁxed after 6
minutes, or serum-free medium was added and cells were fixed after 6 minutes.
Stimulations and fixations were performed by activating the plungers 0f the PBUs. All
experiments were executed in triplicate. Cells were fixed by adding either 5.3%
formaldehyde or 2.1% glutaraldehyde directly to the culture medium. The refreshment
rate of the PBUs is approximately 70%, resulting in a final concentration of fixative 0f
1 18

"
"9","approximately 3.7% formaldehyde and 1.5% glutaraldehyde. Subsequently experimental
units were passively cooled down.
Immunoﬂuorescent microscopy
Coverslips were taken out of the PBUs and washed twice with PBS, permeabilized for 5
min in PBS containing 0.2% Triton X-100, followed by two washes in PBS, and incubated
for 10 min with 50 mM glycine in PBS. After washing twice with PBS containing 0.2%
gelatin, cells were incubated for 60 min at room temperature with the primary antibody.
Subsequently cells were washed siX times PBS containing 0.2% gelatine. Then, cells were
incubated with the secondary antibody and/or Alexa633-conjugated phalloidin and/or
DNaseI-Alexa594 and washed siX times PBS containing 0.2% gelatin. Finally, cells were
mounted in Mowiol-DABCO. Images were acquired with a Zeiss CSLM (Pascal 510) fitted
with Zeiss objective lenses (40X N.A. 1.3 and 63X N.A. 1.4). All immunoﬂuorescence
studies were performed using single labelings as well.
Environmental Scanning Electron Microscopy (ESEM)
Coverslips were taken out of the PBUs and cells were stained in 1% uranyl acetate. After
washing in PBS, cells were kept in PBS overnight before analysis in ESEM mode in a
Quanta FEG (FEI Company, Eindhoven, The Netherlands). This microscope enables to
study cells in a fully hydrated state, avoiding all kind of drying artifacts.
Results

The aim of the Actin experiment was to investigate the behaviour of actin in detail.
For this purpose, the intracellular distribution of both G-actin and F-actin can be
determined. However, to gain insight in the degree of actin polymerization additional
information is required. Investigations of cell lysates can provide such information but the
limited number and small sizes of samples that were available for this experiment did not
allow both microscopy and biochemistry studies. It was decided to focus on investigating
the actin morphology by various methods of microscopy. For studying the degree of actin
polymerization in cells exclusively using microscopy techniques, the localization of actin-
interacting proteins may provide additional information. In this respect the subcellular
localization of the actin binding protein MAL is of particular interest. In serum-starved
cells, MAL was described to be mainly present in the cytoplasm and in addition a fraction
is present in the nucleus. Upon stimulation with serum, MAL was described to translocate

1 19

"
"10","from the cytoplasm t0 the nucleus (Miralles et a1. 2003). Stimulation of cells with serum
results in an increase of actin polymerization and a depletion of the cytoplasmic pool of
G-actin. MAL binds to G-actin and upon depletion of the cytoplasmic pool of G-actin,
MAL translocates from the cytoplasm t0 the nucleus (Miralles et a1., 2003). Therefore, the
localisation of MAL provides information of the degree of actin polymerization in cells.
The ratio of cyoplasmic MAL and nuclear MAL within single cells can be measured and
subsequently the average ratio of a cell population can be determined. It was investigated
if this model could be applied with the experimental set up of the Actin experiment in the
sounding rocket MASER-IO. For this experiment, fibroblasts were stimulated for only 6
minutes with PDGF-BB before chemical fixation. Control experiments on ground
revealed that this is ample time for observing a clear translocation of MAL in mouse
fibroblasts (Figure 3).
""-
Figure 3. A: In serum-starved mouse C3H10T1/2 fibroblasts, MAL is mainly present in the
cytoplasmic p001 around the nucleus. B: Upon stimulation with PDGF-BB for 6 minutes, MAL
translocates partly to the nucleus. In addition, MAL accumulates in newly formed circular rufﬂes.

C: 30 minutes after addition of PDGF-BB, MAL is less enriched in the nucleus of cells and the
cytoplasmic pool of MAL becomes more abundant.

As mentioned before, previous observations in the lab gave rise to the hypothesis that
the target of gravity in a cell is focused on the regulation of actin polymerisation. It was
hypothesized that cells exhibit either an increased polymerisation rate or a decreased
depolymerisation rate in microgravity (Boonstra, 1999). In View of this, the subcellular
localisation of MAL of cells exposed to microgravity might provide interesting
information about the degree of actin polymerization in cells. Similar to the translocation
upon stimulation with growth factors, the localisation of MAL might change upon

120

"
"11","exposure to microgravity conditions as a consequence of a changed polymerization rate or
depolymerisation rate of actin.

During ﬂight the Actin experiment in the BIM module was successfully performed.
All temperature requirements were fulfilled before ﬂight and during ﬂight and all but one
plunger were activated successfully (Figure 4). The recorded speed of the centrifuge
during the experiment as well as the start and stop of rotation of the centrifuge were as
programmed (Figure 4). After the experiment the MASER 10 sounding rocket
experienced a hard landing because of failure of the landing parachute. Due to this hard
landing a few glass coverslips were broken and these samples were lost. All samples were
examined using phase contrast microscopy and all samples were documented by taking
representative pictures of each sample. The quality of the chemical fixation was
determined based on the observed morphology and in addition the number of cells that
was present on the coverslips and the number of traces left by detached cells were
investigated. In the samples of the ﬂight experiments, an increase was found in the
number of cells that detached during the experiment. Therefore it was concluded that part
of the cells were detached from the substratum due to the hard landing. In previous
microgravity studies it was demonstrated that cells round up in microgravity. In addition,
cells round up upon stimulation with PDGF-BB. Hence, we assume that especially the
cells that responded most to PDGF-BB and cells that responded most to conditions of
microgravity did round up during the experiment. Cells that round up are less strongly
attached to the substratum. Therefore it can be expected that cells that responded most to
the stimulation with PDGF-BB and cells that responded most to microgravity have
detached more frequently than other cells due to the impact of the uncontrolled landing.
In conclusion, there are strong indications that the cells that were still attached on the
glass coverslips might not be representative for the experiment and therefore we cannot
draw any conclusion from the experiment with respect to possible effects of microgravity
on actin.

121

"
"12","A rimmwz-uz B ’m‘m’""““"" [ml
“10...... ..;;[ ll—CI 1"" 1 1
_——““___—:3 :2 :i:::1i::1:::i:j: i::::::::11:11:::::::i::::i:::::i::::i:::::::::::::::: :::::::i::::i:::::
.w.e?f§§if 3E1?é“§’—¢: ‘ ‘t
“aw...o; u w ,0; w a r» s; a w] [w aw M i a a a 10: w: w w.” W

Figure 4. Recorded temperature profile (A) and recorded speed of the centrifuge (B). The onset of
microgravity is at t=O and lasts till t=360, the recording of data ends after the hard landing of the
rocket. The temperature sensors on the centrifuge (C) and the sensors on the static racks (F) indicate
that temperatures were within 36.5: 0.5 °C with a tolerance of i 0.2 °C between PBUs during the
period of microgravity (B1 is the regulating sensor and B2 is located at the heat exchanger of the LAI).
Due to the impact of the rough landing, the thermal control and data logging were not working as
planned after the landing. The recorded increase in temperature at the end is probably due to the
impact of the landing. The centrifuge moved at spin-up directly after the lift-off 0f the rocket and at
de-spin at about +60 seconds (B). The recorded speed during the experiment as well as the start and
stop of rotation of the centrifuge are as programmed.

In addition, unexpected variations in cell morphology were observed in all samples,
including the ground samples. These variations could not be explained by a different
treatment, the use of different chemicals or differences in cell population. We have not
been able to identify the precise cause for the differences that were observed. However, the
experiments performed during MASER 10 have been performed many times in hand-
operated PBUs. Hand-operated PBUs can be used repeatedly and during the use of hand-
operated PBUs the differences in results as indicated above were never observed. The
automatic operated ﬂight PBUs can only be used once.

Although no conclusions can be drawn from the Actin experiment of MASER 10, all
samples were studied extensively. Except for the observed variation between identical
samples, the results from these studies again indicate that the experiment was conducted
successfully (Figure 5).

122

"
"13","""I-
F H L
""-2!
. '. ”V
Figure 5. Mouse C3H10T1/2 fibroblasts that are exposed to lg in the centrifuge of the BIM
experiment system in the MASER-IO sounding rocket. Cells are labelled for F-actin (blue), ﬁ-actin
(green) and G-actin (red). A-D: Serum-starved mouse C3H10T1/2 fibroblasts that are fixed at the
onset of microgravity. E-H: Upon stimulation with PDGF-BB for 6 minutes, dorsal circular rufﬂes are
induced by newly formed F-actin (E). These rufﬂes contain ﬁ-actin (F) and are enriched with G-actin
(G). The induced rufﬂe formation in the cells of the in-ﬂight 1g reference experiment seems
comparable with the rufﬂe formation that is observed on earth.
Some single observations suggests some interesting starting points for future research.
For example, it was observed that in the remaining cell populations that were still present
on the coverslips, dorsal circular rufﬂes are formed under microgravity conditions.
Circular rufﬂes were observed in various samples exposed to both PDGF-BB and
microgravity using phase contrast microscopy (Figure 6), ESEM (Figure 7) and
(immuno)ﬂuorescent microscopy using Confocal Scanning Fluorescence Microscopy
(CLSM; data not shown). However, since cells that were most inﬂuenced by microgravity
were lost at the landing, it is not known whether this observation is representative. It can
not be excluded that cells that are more susceptible to microgravity exhibit a disturbed
rufﬂe formation.
123

"
"14","- .' 1' f . ' ' .- -- . "" u. _ - ' . .
w 0‘ ﬁr); :- 1. ”11*?“ - _1 B ' HI - ,._-: - """"1"" 5}"" ”'- ;_

y t. 1:. «r :2 .. ~. g: t

+. ' r'. I “I J ""l: 'l ‘. "" ’_ 2:9,. I . __.-_:I' I ‘1. 1 r . . I
Hi1 l‘IFﬁ? $1,! Xv: II; {5511’ _ 1‘ t} .1 1f 1 _
'1' - 1(- g.‘%'. .' .1716 _ - 1g..- .a: 11.1: II "" ' 1 . _ m... r“

. ‘1 . ._ .. 1. {:41 '11. _.' ‘ I. .1. .I_ -. 3;"" - __1-
5'1“ -' 1f ' L111 1r! 1'” £121 \ ' -* i. F . r 1;:

a ,., . . , 3.: ;..=~ / - .. 1 — -

I' 1‘ 111' I q. ‘Ih-‘I'. - '--_._--' 1' .'_,___‘ H“ J 1 '- $1” i - #1.; r- I . - .‘..__‘\;.\‘
L 1t . .I-p' _. l;- J'“_ -.a- I . I' .II"" .I'i' .-_ H... . i

_- Ihlhﬁ‘h . \ --- r'd 1 IE"" 1..“ ._ . . 5-in- 1M. p. .
--.i r . 1' Ihr'h. \ __,- I ‘1] 3.; - - _ L _ . I '1‘- __ I \I‘.

,._ . ..._-..; 1 . .~..~_.~-. w:- ~- ~. .=
Figure 6. Mouse C3H10T1/2 fibroblasts exposed to microgravity and stimulated With PDGF-BB. Cells
are fixed With glutaraldehyde and Visualized by phase contrast microscopy. A: Serum-starved cells that
are chemically fixed directly upon the start of microgravity. B: Cells that exposed to microgravity and
stimulated With PDGF-BB for 6 minutes. Upon stimulation With PDGF-BB, dorsal circular rufﬂes are
formed that are indicated by arrows. Insert is enlarged twice.

A _ E
Figure 7. Mouse C3H10T1/2 fibroblasts exposed to microgravity and stimulated With PDGF-BB. Cells
are fixed With glutaraldehyde and Visualized by ESEM. A: Serum-starved cells that are chemically fixed
directly upon the start of microgravity exhibit a ﬂat cell morphology. B: Cells exposed to microgravity
and stimulated With PDGF-BB for 6 minutes. Upon stimulation With PDGF-BB, dorsal circular rufﬂes
are formed (insert). Insert is enlarged twice; bar represents 50 pm.
Discussion

No results in microgravity were obtained due to the hard landing of the sounding
rocket MASER-IO. It was concluded that part of the cells detached from the substrate
because of the impact of the uncontrolled landing. We assume that especially the cells that
124

"
"15","responded most to microgravity and PDGF-BB have detached. Therefore the samples did
no longer represent a representative population of cells and n0 conclusions can be drawn
from the results.

Fibroblasts that are stimulated with a growth factor form an interesting model for
studying actin dynamics in microgravity. The actin dynamics that are induced upon
exposure to growth factors will enlarge differences in the actin metabolism compared to
the situation in more static cells. Moreover, these cells were demonstrated to stand the less
ideal conditions unavoidable when doing experiments in real microgravity.

It should be stressed that the Actin experiment is probably the first experiment
carried out in a sounding rocket in which all experiments were executed in triplicate. In
addition, it is the first experiment in which cell morphology was studied in detail. Our
experiment demonstrated the value of doing experiments in triplicate. The variation in
results between experimental containers might otherwise not have been detected and
results might be interpreted differently. To avoid the problems that were encountered with
the variation between samples, re-usable experiment containers should be developed. Re-
usable experiment containers would allow to execute the experiment in the lab exactly as it
is conducted in the sounding rocket using exactly the same materials, both before and
after the space experiment. Any inﬂuences of the experimental units can then be excluded.

Sounding rockets provide a unique method for studying cells that are not fully
adapted to microgravity conditions. In addition, the facilities for doing biological research
are excellent on these unmanned ﬂights. The BIM experiment module did perform
excellent and should be rebuilt. The experimental model of mouse fibroblasts that are
stimulated with PDGF represents a well described and useful model for future studies
under microgravity conditions using sounding rockets. New ﬂight opportunities will
provide answers to the questions regarding how cells sense microgravity and the role of
the actin cytoskeleton.

Acknowledgements
This work in our laboratory is subsidized by the Dutch Space Organization (SRON, grant
MG-059). The authors would like to thank Swedish Space Corporation (SSC), Centre
Concepts Mechatronics BV (CCM) and Dutch Space for their contributions and technical
assistance.

125

"
"16","References
Boonstra, 1., Rijken, P. 1., de Groot, R. P., Verkleij, A. 1., van der Saag, P. T., and de Laat, S. W. (1997)
Growth factor-induced signal transduction in mammalian cells is sensitive to gravity. In: Frontiers in
Biological Science in Space (Sato, A., ed), Taiyo Printing, Tokyo, 2-18
Boonstra, 1. (1999) Growth factor-induced signal transduction in adherent mammalian cells is
sensitive to gravity. FASEB 1. 13(Suppl): 835-842
Holm, P., Léfgren, 0., Huijser, R., & Willemsen, H. (2005) BIM experiment module and its ﬂight on
MASER 10. In: 17th ESA Symposium on European Rocket and Balloon Programmes and Related
Research, 30 May-2 1une 2005, Sandefjord, Norway. ESA Publications Division, 487-492
Miralles, F., Posern, G., Zaromytidou, A.I., Treisman, R. (2003) Actin dynamics control SRF activity by
regulation of its coactivator MAL. Cell 113(3): 329-342
Moes, M.1.A., Bijvelt, 1.1., Boonstra, 1. (2007) Actin dynamics in mouse ﬁbroblasts in microgravity.
Microgravity Sci. Technol. 19(5-6): 180-183
Moes, M.1.A., Gielen, 1.C., Bleichrodt, R.1., van Loon, 1.1.W.A., Christianen, P.C.M., Boonstra, 1. (2010)
Simulation of Microgravity by Magnetic Levitation and Random Positioning: Effect on Human A431
Cell Morphology. Microgravity Sci. Technol. 23(2): 249-261
Rijken, P.1., de Groot, R.P., Briegleb, W., Kruijer, W., Verkleij, A.1., Boonstra, 1., de Laat S.W. (1991)
Epidermal growth factor-induced cell rounding is sensitive to simulated microgravity. Aviat. Space
Environ. Med. 62(1): 32-36

126

"
