"","x"
"1","2001 -01 -2289
Provudlng an Optimal Envuronment Utlllzmg the AVIan
Development FaCIIIty for Research In MicrograVIty
John Vellinger, Rachel Ormsby, Nathan Thomas, David Kennedy, Douglas Hudson, Paul Todd
Space Hardware Optimization Technology (SHOT), Inc.
Copyright © 2000 Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc.
ABSTRACT microgravity environment [Hester et a|., 1993; Hullinger,
1993 a, b; Jones et a|., 1993; Vellinger and Deuser,
Space Hardware Optimization Technology (SHOT), Inc. 1990; Vellinger et a|., 1996]-
has developed an Avian Development Facility (ADF) to
isolate the effects of microgravity on embryogenesis of Space Hardware Optimization Technology (SHOT), Inc.
Japanese quail embryos by initiating and preserving has developed an Avian Development Facility (ADF) t0
embryo development in weightlessness. The ADF will isolate the effects of microgravity 0n embryogenesis 0f
monitor embryogenesis during orbit by fixing specimens Japanese quail embryos by initiating and preserving
at various times and will shut down the experiment embryo development in weightlessness. The ADF
before leaving orbit. In effect, the ADF makes every provides a “Window"" for study Of embryogenesis in
attempt to minimize launch and re-entry effects in order space. It Wt” provide the facilities for investigators to
to isolate and preserve the effects of the experimental better understand and then to mitigate or nullify the
variab|e(s) of the space environment. The ADF also effects 0t altered gravity UPOh embryos. The ADF i3
allows for egg rotation (similar to turning in a natural currently scheduled to ﬂy as a mid-deck experiment on
environment) and provides separate carousel rotation to the space shuttle in November 2001 Oh the UF't 1Eti9htt0
accommodate centrifugation controls (up to 1-G) in a the International Space Station and back.
microgravity environment. Although no non-avian
applications of ADF have yet been implemented, The ADF provides a unique opportunity to exercise
application to several fields can be considered, such as precise control 0t experimental environmental
cell science, plant science, invertebrate biology and parameters, such as temperature, humidity, oxygen,
aquatic biology. The ADF is currently scheduled to fly carbon dioxide, centrifugation (utilizing side-by—side
and be operated on the space shuttle mid-deck in controls in microgravity), and refrigeration. No avian
November 2001 during the UF-1 flight to the experiment hardware to date has provided this capability
International Space Station and back. [Vellinger et a|., 1994, 1995, 1996].
The ADF will monitor embryogenesis during orbit, then
INTRODUCTION fix specimens and shut down the experiment before
leaving orbit. In effect, the ADF makes every attempt to
Developing the technology that enables human life to be minimize launch and re-entry effects .in order to. isolate
sustained in space and understanding the role of gravity and preserve the effects Of the experimental varIab|e(s)
in living systems are two major components of NASA’s Of the spaiceienVIronment. . The ADF also allows for egg
life science vision. Avian embryo development research rotation (similar to turning 'n a “atvra' envnronment) and
will expand the field of knowledge in both areas. ”0‘""qu separate carousel rotation to accemmodate
Unanswered is the question of whether an organism can centrifugation controls (up to 1'6) 'n a micrograVIty
go through all phases of development from fertilization to envnronment.
successful reproduction in microgravity.
Avian models are very well characterized and thus offer ADF SYSTEM OVERVIEW
research opportunities structured for observing changes
in cardiovascular, vestibular, musculoskeletal, The Avian Development Facility (ADF) (see Figure 1 for
immunological and neurological development in a exploded view) provides a test apparatus for supporting
1

"
"2","EXTERIOR HOUSING a
COVER o“<:::><:::;\
= \
° : > < >< >\
®®W~i
E h ‘-\""\ a a a
\m\\\©©©© \ INNER HOUSING
2 6 “\ a ” . U H
x &‘ \“\ ""7/ A
N ' / VENT SYSTEM1
_ VENT SYSTEM EXHAUST1
W_ CENTRIFUGE1
AIR SUPPLY kw H?
SYSTEM
2g}?! \
C02 REMOVAL 01‘ MOISTURE ADDITION
SYSTEM l4 4,:J
<89“ ‘4‘"" """"x SYSTEM
HUMIDITY REMOVA ii 3 9,
SYSTEM L4
PAYLOAD MOUNTING/ ’\
PANEL(PMP) \a 4 , »\/0
EXTERIOR Q a 4'
HOUSING \ 9 AIR EXHAUST
CENTRIFUGEZ 6/ 17%)-; FIRE EXTINGUISHER
6K” “Fig? ACCCES HOLE
#644 6 £425
VENT SYSTEM 2 kiij AIR INLETS
a 5 i g, xéﬁf ,3 INNER HOUSING
”.130
\a E .,
\/EXTERIOR HOUSING
«\6f= COVER
Figure 1 ADF Exploded View
2

"
"3","microgravity experiments employing Japanese quail Fixative Delivery - One of the innovative features of the
embryos. It has the capability of providing delayed ADF unit is its ability to chemically fix each quail embryo,
initiation of embryo development by virtue of its preserving the tissue for post-mission evaluation and
programmable temperature controlled environment. It providing a snapshot of the embryo development at a
also offers the Investigator the opportunity for conducting specific growth stage. The ADF unit provides a precise
concomitant controls by way of the centrifuge, which study of the embryo development in microgravitythrough
subjects one and/or two carousels to unit gravity. Chemical fixation of the specimen, which eliminates post-
termination decay of the embryologioal tissue. The
The ADF is equipped with an independent automatic, Chemical fixation occurs through a controlled fixative
programmable device for turning the eggs under either injection process that centers around the operation of
centrifuged or non-oentrifuged conditions. Finally, the the injection system. This injection system is a
ADF has the capability to either chemically preserve or functioning Chemical robot. It delivers approximately 30
inject liquid agents (but not both during one flight ml of 4% paraformaldehyde fixative to an embryo
increment) into any egg during the experiment. ADF sample on command via telemetry interface or pre-flight
incorporates vibration dampening in order to minimize programmed timeline. The fixation preserves embryos
launch and re-entry effects, isolate, and preserve the prior to reentry.
effects of the experimental variable(s) of the space
environment. Thermal Control System - There are two significant ADF
thermal modes of operation, a Chill mode and an
The following sections describe the design of each incubation mode. A typical flight would consist of ADF
system within the ADF and explain its capabilities. being loaded with eggs on the ground and put in an
“hibernation” cooling mode to keep the eggs cool
ADF SUBSYSTEM DESIGN enough to suspend development and minimize the
impact of launch variables on embryo growth. ADF is
Egg HoIder Assemby _ The ADF contains 36 egg hoIder loaded into the Shuttle Middeck while powered and
assemblies within the specimen volume. Eighteen remains active in the Chill mode throughout the Shuttle
assemines are mounted to each of two carouse|s_ launch. Once the Shuttle iS on orbit, the ADF timeline
and incubation mode is initiated. The incubation mode
The egg holder assembly provides all the interfaces with has a “planned” warm-up period to provide a thermal
the egg. lt restrains the egg while allowing vital gas transition for the egg specimens. During egg incubation,
exchange of the embryo across the eggshell and it also ADF ie in a heating mode to promote egg development.
provides the first level of vibration dampening for the When in incubation mode ADF activates several
egg. The egg holders provide the eggs with a sealed subsystems that change the heat dissipation compared
environment when the eggs are injected with fixative at to the Chi” mode, SUCh as rotating the egg carousel. The
predetermined times throughout the incubation period. quality 0t temperature control during this phase ie Show“
To promote normal embryo development, the egg holder in Chart 1-
assembly provides a means to turn the eggs while the
embryos are exposee to 1'G frorn the centrifuge. The ADF is unique in that is has two major operating
Industry uses the rotation of the centrifuge toimlmio the modes (chill and incubation), it must meet all
egg movements achieved In nature by the actions of the performance requirements in all environments.
adult female birds.
Centrifuge System - The centrifuge system allows an 40
investigator to expose egg specimens to microgravity, 39 —
and/or provide side-by—side experiment controls within 38 m—
an atmospherioally identical environment. Both sets of 37 WW
eggs are exposed to the same uncontrolled variables 3336
such as launch accelerations and landing vibrations. $35 —
. . . . . m
ThIs produces an enVIronment where micrograVIty IS the 034 —
only parameter different between the test and control “333 —
eggspecimens- —
32 —
The centrifuge system is broken down into two 31 —
subsystems: the carousel drive subsystem and the egg 30
turning subsystem. The carousel drive subsystem 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
provides a 1-G environment, while allowing for the DAY
positioning of the egg holders over the injection head for
embryo fixation. The egg turning subsystem rotates the
individual egg holders for optimum incubation. Chart 7 - Temperature Control & Monitoring
(shown for incubation mode)
3

"
"4","Humidity Control Subsystem - For an embryo to develop
normally into a fully developed Chick, the egg water
content must evaporate at a controlled rate [9]. When 3-5 7000
the egg contents dry too rapidly, the chick is smaller than 3 ii. .. . _ x en ar 'a ess"" e 6000
normal; when they evaporate too slowly; the Chick is IW
larger than normal. In either case, the embryo is 2-5 _ 5°00
weakened, resulting in lower hatchability and a chick of _ 2 Additi‘mSt°psatsem°im=3mgp5i 4000a
poor health and reduced scientific value. To ensure 3315 I— 3000?
proper dehydration of the egg contents, studies have ' |—
shown the relative humidity of the air during the first 16 1 A'rTank S°'e""°'d Pmses 2000
days should be maintained at approximately 65% RH 05 I—‘ 1000
(North, 1984). To regulate the evaporation of the egg ' I”
contents, the amount of moisture in the surrounding air 0 0
is controlled. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1°
DAY
The humidity control system consists of two different _ _
subsystems. The moisture addition system (Figure 1) ChartZ—Oxygen MOWtOfmg and Control
supplies additional moisture when the humidity level in @2 Removal 8 stem _ Maintaining the appropriate
the hardware becomes low. In contrast, the automated ——y—. . | | . the s ecimen volume is critical
humidity removal system (Figure 1) removes excessive carbon d'OX'de eves m p ..
. . . . . to normal embryo development. The ADF has the ability
mOIsture when the humidity Inside the hardware t . . . . .
. . 0 remove carbon dIOXIde from the air InSIde the
becomes too high. These two subsystems are designed . .
. . . . speCImen volume. The 002 Removal System activates
to work together to maintain the proper humidity |eve| . . . .
inside the ADF. when the 002 partial pressure InSIde the speCImen
volume Increase above 0.0735 pSl (0.5% of 14.7 psi)
I I I removing 002 from the environment. The quality of 002
Gas Monitoring and Control - Permeation. of exygen and control is indicated in Chart 3_
carbon dIOXIde through the eggshell IS Vital to the
developing embryo [North, 1984]. Maintaining suitable
concentrations of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the ADF
specimen volume environment is critical to support
normal quail embryo development. The gas monitoring 0-085 002Removaltrippoiwomopsi 400
and control system is composed of the Air System and 0075 350 g
the 002 Removal System, both of which ensure the 0065 m 300 {135
environmental parameters within the ADF remain within ' w 5' {.3
acceptable limits. The two systems are mounted ”-055 250 53%
together a back corner of the specimen volume. <2 0.045 m 200 (E IIIII
0.035 I“ 150 § §
The air system maintains optimal oxygen levels within 0025 I_- 100 5:
the ADF by supplying air (30% 02 and 70% N2) when the ' _ < 2
oxygen concentration falls below 3.087 psi (21% of 14.7 0-015 |—- 50 E4,
psi) within the specimen volume. The 002 removal 0.005 0
system maintains optimal carbon dioxide levels by 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
removing carbon dioxide from the system when the DAY
concentration rises above 0.0735 psi (0.5% of 14.7 psi)
within the specimen volume. The ADF carries its own
supply of air inside an air tank capable of holding 5000 Chart3— Carbon DiOXide MonitOFing 800' COIWO/
psig. The tank will only be filled to approximately 3000 I I I I
psig (30% Oxygen and 70% Nitrogen). The air system MGM 'I The ADF hOUS'nQ '3 a single middeck
allows control of the level of 02 independent of cabin air locker configuration, WhlICh allows the payload . to
concentration. The quality Of 02 control is indicated in interface With the shuttle Middeck. The housmg conSIsts
Chart 2. of two subassemblies, an inner housing and an outer
housing.
The outer housing provides the structural support,
durability for the payload, protection, containment of the
primary electronics, and the mounting interface from the
ADF to the orbiter avionics wire tray.
The primary functions of the inner housing are to provide
containment and structural support for the specimen
4

"
"5","volume. The void between the inner and outer housings o Aquatic biology and ecosystems: Each egg holder

is filled with the insulation system. assembly can accommodate a vial completely filled

with liquid, which can contain, for example, a small
number of small fish, such as Medaka sp. or model

NON-AVIAN APPLICATIONS OF ADF ecosystems that combine algae, small aquatic plants

and minor invertebrate species (isopods,

Considerable versatility has been built into the ADF gastropods, etc.). The temperature enivironmentifor

design. The egg holder assemblies are easily replaced each small system can be made Identical, and VIeIS

with other container assemblies, either Closed or open to can be subjected to selected Ieyels 0f Inertial
the controlled ADF internal environment. The centrifuge acceleration in groups 0f 18- If desired, speCIrnens
system is extremely desirable in a variety Of life science can be clinorotated at variable inertial accelerations
and |ow-gravity fluid science applications in which by simultaneously rotating the centrifuge rotors. and
variable inertial acceleration is a controlled parameter. the individual containers. The fixative delivery

The fixative delivery system is actually a generic system, as a generic chemical robot, can, Wlth

chemical robot, rated for operation in the Spaceflight suitable modifications, deliver additives (water, food,

environment. acids and bases, fixative) to each vial of specimens
on demand.

Although no non-avian applications of ADF have yet

been implemented, applications to the following Thus the ADF is a versatile tool for gravitational

examples can be considered: research. |ts application to fluid studies, although not

, Cell science: Each egg holder assembly can mentioned here, is also feasible. The complete
accommodate a culture vial, up to 36 in number. genomes of most of the species just mentioned have
The temperature and humidity environment for each been sequenced making ADF an even more powerful
culture is identical, and cultures can be subjected to mm for the study (?f- gene expression and Signal
selected levels of inertial acceleration in groups of transduetion. . Modifications 0f ADF .f‘.” these
18. If desired, cells can be maintained in applications, while not trIVIaI, are less difficult than
suspension prior to launch by rotating either the building new and needlessly specialized flightlookers.
centrifuge rotors or the individual containers. The
fixative delivery system will function as a generic CONCLUSION
chemical robot, delivering additives to each culture
atatime Specified by the experimenter. An experimental system for the study of avian

. PIant science: Each egg holder assembly can development in modified gravity has been designed and
accommodate a vial of germinating seeds, bUilt- This system COhSiStS 0f:
seedlings, or mature small plants (such as
Arabadopsis thaliana) in up to 18 separate . A housing/Chassis that fits the space shuttle mid-
containers. The temperature and humidity deck locker volume and isolates specimens via
environment for each specimen can be made insulation between an inner and outer housing
identical, and vials can be subjected to selected assembly.
levels of inertial acceleration in groups of 18. If 0 A number of egg-holder assemblies for the gentle
desired, plants can be clinorotated at variable inertial containment and rotation of quail eggs with potential
accelerations by simultaneously rotating the applications to other small containers of biological
centrifuge rotors and the individual containers. The specimens or fluids.
fixative delivery system, as a generic Chemical robot, . A pair of centrifuges with selectable inertial
delivers additives (water, hormones, and fixative) to acceleration of the specimens between 0-6 and 1-G
each plant specimen on demand. or slightly higher.

. Invertebrate biology: Each egg holder assembly can 0 A fixative delivery mechanism that is a Chemical
accommodate a vial containing small invertebrate robot under control of computer programs that run
specimens such as larvae and adult Drosophila automatically or can be controlled by the
melanogaster or developing nematodes investigator.

Caenorhabditis elegans with hundreds of individuals . An atmospheric control system that controls
in each of up to 36 separate containers without temperature, humidity, composition and flow rate of
significant configuration changes of the ADF airin the specimen volume.

hardware. The temperature and humidity

environment for each specimen can be made The ADF is useful for the study of the details of
identical, and vials can be subjected to selected neuromuscular, musculoskeletal, vestibular,
levels of inertial acceleration in groups of 18. If immunological, cognitive, and motor development by
desired, specimens can be clinorotated at variable exploiting the simplicity of care provided by the
inertial accelerations by simultaneously rotating the embryonated avian egg. Such studies are enhanced by
centrifuge rotors and the individual containers. The the option of returning fixed or live embryos. Finally, the
fixative delivery system, as a generic Chemical robot, ADF is a versatile tool for future application to a wide
can deliver additives to each vial on demand. variety of gravitational experiments, especially those

5

"
"6","involving small specimens and varying levels of inertial
acceleration.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The technical assistance of the engineering
management staff and the Engineering Department of
Space Hardware Optimization Technology, Inc. is deeply
appreciated. The ADF was developed and built under
NASA Contract NASZ-96022.
DEFINITIONS, ACRONYMS, ABBREVIATIONS
ADF Avian Development Facility
SHOT Space Hardware Optimization

Technology, Inc.
UF-1 Utilization Flight 1
REFERENCES
1. Hester, P.Y. et al., (1993). Avian Embryogenesis in
Microgravity Aboard Shuttle STS-29: Effect on Shell
Mineral Content and Post-Hatch Performance. ACTA
VET.BRNO 62 (6), 8 43-8 47.
2. Hullinger, R.L., (1993). Embryogenesis Aboard
Shuttle STS-29”. ACTA VET.BRNO 62 (6), 8 17-8 23.
3. Hullinger, R.L., (1993). The Avian Embryo
Responding to Microgravity of Space Flight. The
Physiologist 36( 1 ).
4. Jones, T.A.; Fermin, C.; Hester, P.Y.; and Vellinger,
J.; (1993). Effects of Microgravity on Vestibular
Ontogeny: Direct Physiological and Anatomical
Measurements Following Space Flight (STS-29). ACTA
VET.BRNO 62 (6).
5. North, MO, (1984). Commercial Chicken Production
Manual, 3rd Edition. Avi Publishing, WestPort, CT.
6. Vellinger, J.C. and Deuser, M.S., (1990). Avian
Embryogenesis in Microgravity Aboard Shuttle STS-29:
Experiment Protocol and Results. ASGSB Bulletin 4, 27.
7. Vellinger, J.C.; Deuser, M.S.; and Hullinger, R.L.;
(Sept. 27-29, 1994). Avian Biotechnology
Instrumentation as a Mechanism for Understanding
Human Dysfunction in Space. AIAA Space Programs
and Technology Conference.
8. Vellinger, J.C.; Deuser, M.S.; Hullinger, R.L.; (April 3-
5, 1995). Engineering Support of Microgravity Life
Science Research: Development of an Avian
Development Facility. AIAA Life Sciences and Space
Medicine Conference.
9. Vellinger, J.C.; Deuser, M.S.; and Hullinger, R.L.;
(January 7-11, 1996). Microgravity Life Science
Research Opportunities with the Avian Development
Facility. Space Technology & Applications International
Forum (STAIF-96).

6

"
