"","x"
"1","— T196 journal ofTMU MA® Injury, Infection, and CMtz’cal Care
Ocular Examlnatlon FOI‘ Trauma; Clllllcal Ultrasound Aboard
The Internauonal Space Statmn
Lemy Chiaa, PhD, Salizhan Sharipav, AshOt E. Sargsyan, MD,
Shannan Meltan, BS, Dauglas R Hamiltan, MD, PhD, Kellie McFarlin, MD, and SCOtt A Dulchavsky, MD, PhD
Background: Ultrasound imaging is ager was used in conjunction with a space- were excellent and could be used to an-
a successful modality in a broad variety of to-ground video downlink and two-way swer a variety of clinical and space phys-
diagnostic applications including trauma. audio. Reference cards with topological iologic questions.
Ultrasound has been shown to be accurate reference points, hardware controls, and GUHGIUSiUHSI A comprehensive,
when performed by non-radiologist phy- target images were used to facilitate the high-quality ultrasound examination of
sicians; recent reports have suggested that examination. Multiple views of the eye the eye was performed with a multipur-
non-physicians can perform limited ultra- structures were obtained through a closed pose imager aboard the ISS by a non-
sound examinations. A multipurpose ul- eyelid. Pupillary response to light was expert operator using remote guidance.
trasound system is installed on the Inter- demonstrated by modifying the light eX- Ocular ultrasound images were of diag-
national Space Station (ISS) as a posure 0f the contralateral eye. nostic quality despite the 2-sec0nd com-
component of the Human Research Facil- BBSUHSI A crewmember 0n the ISS munication latency and the unconven-
ity (HRF). This report documents the first was able to complete a comprehensive oc- tional setting of a weightless spacecraft
ocular ultrasound examination conducted ular examination using B- and M-mode environment. The remote guidance tech-
in space, which demonstrated the capabil- ultrasonography with remote guidance niques developed to facilitate this success-
ity to assess physiologic alterations or pa- from an expert in the MCC. Multiple an- ful NASA research experiment will sup-
thology including trauma during long-du- teroposterior, oblique, and coronal views port wider applications of ultrasound for
ration space ﬂight. of the eye clearly demonstrated the ana- remote medicine on Earth including the
MBUIUUS.‘ An ISS crewmember with tomic structures of both segments of the assessment of pupillary reactions in pa-
minimal sonography training was re- globe. The iris and pupil were readily vi- tients with severe craniofacial trauma and
motely guided by an imaging expert from sualized with probe manipulation. Pupil- swelling.
Mission Control Center (MCC) through a lary diameter was assessed in real time in KBVWUI'USI Ultrasound Ocular Aero-
comprehensive ultrasound examination of B- and M-mode displays. The anatomic space NASA.
the eye. A multipurpose ultrasound im- detail and fidelity of ultrasound video
J Trauma. 2005;58:885—889.
he Human Research Facility (HRF) in the International Cilitate on—site diagnosis.10 NASA experts have rated trauma
Space Station (ISS) provides a research platform to de— and acute medical problems at the highest risk level, when
velop and test medical care strategies and procedures in weighed by their predicted incidence and the magnitude of
anticipation of future long—duration, exploration—Class their impact.”12 This report documents the first performance
missions.” There is no current or planned X—ray or CT of a comprehensive ocular ultrasound examination by a min—
capability 0n the ISS, however a space—adapted ultrasound imally trained astronaut crewmember 0n the ISS using remote
system is available for research or medical diagnostic use.3’4 guidance and on—board reference cards.
Numerous investigations have highlighted the accuracy
of ultrasound in the detection of injuries to the Chest, abdo—
men, musculoskeletal system, and eye.5'9 Recent studies also METHODS . .
have shown that non—physician Operators can reliably perform The stndles reported .her e1n were approved by the Henry
a number of focused Clinical ultrasound examinations to fa— Ford Hospltal Investlgatlon ReV1ew Board and the NASA
Johnson Space Center Committee for the Protection Of Hu—
man Subjects. The Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Mi—
Submitted for publication March 4, 2005. crograVity (ADUM) in—ﬂight research investigation evaluates
Accepted for publication March 4, 2005. the ability of nonphysician crewmembers to perform various
Copyright © 2005.by Lippincott Williflffls &_Wilkin8,1nc- ultrasound examinations while guided in real time. Long—
Nat10nal Aeronaut1cs and Space Adrn1n1strat10n, Lyndon B. Johnson duration ISS crewmembers receive approximately 3 hours Of
Space Center Houston, TX Wyle LaboratoneS’ Houston, TX, Department of . . . .
Surgery, Henry Ford Hospital Detroit, M1, ultrasound tralnlng at the J ohnson Space Center, 1nclud1ng an
Address for reprints: Scott A. Dulchavsky MD, PhD Department of OVerVieW 0f the hardware and the principles Of Ultrasound-
Surgery Henry Ford Hospital 2799 W. Grand Boulevard Detroit, Michigan The Increment—IO crew also had 2 hours of hands—on instruc—
48202; email: sdulcha1@hth-0fg- tion in Clinical ultrasound specific to the ADUM experiments,
D01: 10.1097/01.TA.0000162456.37962.01 including ocular ultrasound, approximately 4 months before
Volume 58 0 Number 5 885
Cﬂpyright @ Lippineﬂtt Williams El Wilkins. Unauthﬂrized reprnductinn 01‘ this article is prahibited.

"
"2","The journal 0fTRAU MA® Injmy, Infection, and Cm’tz’cal Cate
—
“WWW “a g _ v . L
""ﬁgﬂk i"" J:- i ‘
'.‘""T“,""“7.'.‘”,L.‘L‘.‘T:.T"""" , ' . i 27;.-
mwmrm mama:
l“ I
l
I“
FIG 1. A reference “cue card” was developed for use with input from astronaut users to facilitate Clinical ultrasound examinations on the
155. The card contains information on equipment controls, probe placement, representative images, and probe manipulation.
the ﬂight. During ﬂight, the crew reviewed a 1—h0ur “On— bet and the lens. This initial targetimage was used to estimate
Board Proficiency Enhancer” (OPE) computer program the amount of pressure exerted by the probe as shown by
within a week Of the ultrasound examination. OPE iS a mul— ﬂattening of the corneal curvature; pressure was regulated to
timedia educational program that reviews ultrasound basics, maintain corneal convexity. The probe was then slowly to—
remote guidance terminology, relevant human anatomy, and tated 90 degrees successively in both directions, keeping the
tips for performing better—quality ultrasound examinations. A anterior Chamber in View, to obtain a set of antero—posterior
small reference card (“0116 card”), containing layout 00(1ng Views in the entire 360—degree rotational range.
for equipment controls and probe placement points, was up— A coronal View of the globe at the iris level was obtained
linked for use during the guided imagingpmcess (Fig. D' by having the subject direct his gaze in a cephalad direction
The 188 ocular ultrasound examination was perforhied and placing the probe over the edge of the zygomatic arch in
on a'space—adapted vers10n Of the HPLSOOO SySt?m (1311th S transverse orientation. The probe was slowly translated to
Medical Systems, Bothell, WA)’ Wthh was configured Wlth but the lower e elid and tilted to achieve coronal lanes in
a broadband 5—12 MHZ linear probe. The output of the a 1 . h lyb d b . . f h . . Thp b'
system was displayed on an on—board monitor and also was re ation to t e g 0 .e an 9 tain a Vlew O .t e ms° e su JeCt
transmitted live Via a satellite link to the MCC in Houston, was 111.8thth t0 intermittently vaer hls contra—lateral eye
. . . . With his hand to demonstrate pupillary response to Changing
TX, With a 1.8 second delay. Real—time secure audio link was 1, h d' , . M— d 1 d d (1
used between Mission Control at the Johnson Space Center in 1g t con itions, me e u trasoun was use to ecument
Houston and the ultrasound operator astronaut 0n the ISS.
High—resolution images were stored locally on the ultrasound
and transmitted after examination for final review and
analysis. 9.
The astronaut operator was securely restrained by foot !
straps and hand positioning before the ultrasound examina— a3: ,1 Q}
tion. The subject was restrained supine on a crew medical 3’ ﬂ
restraint system using straps to maintain a stable position in ‘
microgravity and to allow precise positioning of the probe on I. ""
the eyelid to avoid injury (Fig. 2). A radiologist with exten— .‘ _. :
sive hands—on sonographic and remote guidance experience I .. ' ,'-'
continuously Viewed the live ultrasound image and verbally .wwmwg/q
instructed the crewmember to adjust the system settings and . . w: . ' 75;. - ‘ _..“
modify Probe placement. The ocular examination was initi— “ ‘ ' '2‘ ' '
ated by placing the linear probe in a sagittal orientation over FIG 2. Cosmonaut Salizhan Sharpiov is seen in the Human Research
Closed eyelids. The subject was instructed to fiX his gaze 0n Facility 0n the International Space Station performing an ocular
a remote Object and keep his contra—lateral eye Open. The ultrasound examination on Astronaut Leroy Chiao. The crew-mem-
probe was manipulated to the sagittal antero—posterior plane hers used a restraint system and f00t—Stmps to stabilize the “pa-
through the middle of the globe, resolving the anterior Cham— tient” and operator during the examination.
886 May 2005
Cepyright @ Lippinc-ﬂtt Williams E; Wilkine. Unautherized reprﬂductinn Df this article is prehibited.

"
"3","Clinical UltrasoundAhoara’ The International Space Station
—
-..‘- .-~‘-r..4 ;!.-..-4 .‘ -: .-:.~ 1""."" _;;—-. J'X-Neﬁ. .~- uni) :r e: 1: ~
j; 7;; - 5‘; ST—T-‘Qi 3i"" _ g
‘ 1‘ .
-. H; _ ‘f‘sm- .
”1‘ .'_,:v‘ 'r L!“ 'n - e 1‘2211.‘ F: :21"". 1‘ ,9
FIG 3. The ultrasound probe was initially placed in a transverse 25.3.5: ix; ‘ ' if c
position over the mid portion of the upper and lower eyelid. The ‘3'; !
probe was ﬁnely manipulated until a transverse image of the lens . . ;
and ocular structures were identified. Limited probe pressure on the “
eye is conﬁrmed by the round shape of the vitreous humor. The lens, ' ' i '
aqueous and vitreous humor, and retina can be seen in this image.
. . . . . ""'zxm'm’“ '
the pupillary reactlon, quantify the Change in diameter, and
gauge the temporal response.
BESULTS FIG 4. The pupil is evident in this ultrasound image through the
There was a 1-8 second satellite transmission delay for inferior eyelid. Papillary reaction to light was readily apparent
bOth Video and audio, WhiCh did not impact the ultrasound when the crewmember exposed the contra lateral eye to light.
examination. The subject reported no discomfort either dur—
ing or after the examination, which was completed in approx— sensitive even when performed by n0nradi010gists.7'10 The
imately 10 minutes. expanded use of ultrasound to provide diagnostic information
A combination of remote guidance commands for probe on additional acute Clinical conditions has been investigated
placement and manipulation, with reference to the cue card, by NASA researchers, including Chest and abdominal trauma,
allowed a series of high quality antero—posterior images of the sinus or dental infection, and musculoskeletal
eye to be Obtained, representing the entire volume of both the injury.6’8’14'18Many of these ultrasound applications have
anterior and the posterior segments of the globe (Fig. 3). been reproduced by non—eXpert Operators; their findings sug—
The iris/pupil was imaged with a transverse, cranially gest that ultrasound may be expanded to uses in remote
oriented probe position through the inferior eyelid. Pupillary locations without a high level of on—site expertise.
response was easily demonstrated by covering the contra- The feasibility of ultrasonic imaging in human space
lateral eye (Fig. 4). B—mode display of the pupillary Opening ﬂight has been investigated in preliminary experiments on
was used to confirm and quantify response to light. A Change both US, and Russian spacecraft.19'22 NAS A researchers
in papillary diameter of approximately 30% was Obvious in have demonstrated the utility of diagnostic ultrasound in
both B— and M—mode displays (Fig. 5). abdominal and thoracic trauma in microgravity experiments
using animal models during parabolic ﬂight on KC—135
DISCUSSION aircraft.16'18’23 These investigations have verified that the
In a consensus conference of health care experts, the sensitivity and specificity of ultrasound is not degraded in
NASA Critical Path Roadmap Project rated trauma and acute microgravity, and may even be enhanced in certain Circum—
medical illness events at the highest level of risk in terms of stances. More recently, a focused abdominal survey for
predicted incidence versus the potential impact on mission trauma (FAST) examination and a shoulder musculoskeletal
and crew health.13 Ultrasound is currently used in most examination have been completed on the International Space
trauma centers as the first—line diagnostic procedure in ab— Station by nonphysician crewmembers using remote
dominal trauma, and has been demonstrated as accurate and guidance.”’15 Both of these ultrasound investigations pro—
Volame 58 o NamberS 887
CDpyright (£33- Lippineett Williams Ei Wilkins. Unauthﬂrized reprﬂductinn of this article is prehibited.

"
"4","The 10mm] 0fTMU MA® Injury, Infectian, and CM'Z'Z'Cdl Care

—

:': #4 :3 3..- I 1“: Q :T' f L .' , during the astronaut baseline examination when evaluated by

‘ _ -_,;........-. “*3“; _ the radiologist/ultrasonographer or research team involved in
:37; :7- 1?"" L ‘ a this trial.

??fff; "" - ” This initial ultrasound experience suggests that limited

If: ' . training, combined with directed remote guidance, provides

'1: 5' ?EE- ' an effective paradigm for performing complex imaging tasks
’ in special

_ Circumstances. The ultrasound examination was con—

- WV? :7 ducted using limited bandwidth, which would most likely be

. "" .- :7"" . .J ' ' - ~- +1 ---- the case in most terrestrial situations including trauma

. —----«~ w “ ‘ ‘ ~ applications.

._ . «W W~W .-.-...._. - The unique constraints imposed by the space enViron—
' .-_- 1*“ ’ ' ' ' A V . ment require the development of novel diagnostic and ther—
' apeutic strategies.9 The expanded use of diagnostic ultra—
sound is advantageous since it is readily available (hand—held
portable devices) and does not eXpose the patient to ionizing
FIG 5' M'mOde “ltmsonogmphy was demonﬂmted “S a 1001 to radiation. The remotely guided ultrasound concept, with as—
quantify the time course and magnitude of pupilla’y ”5190""“ to tronauts in the space program or comparably trained first
light‘ This teChnique prOVideS a methOdOZOgy to measure pupillary responders as operators, is a significant, Clinically relevant
reaction to light, which may occur due to changes in the central or advancement in space medicine with profound ramifications
autonomic nervous ”Stem for terrestrial medicine and trauma care.
Vided diagnostic quality images to the team in the MCC, REFERENCES
WhiCh COUld haVe been used to coordinate OIl—Ol‘bit treatment 1. Davis JR. Medical Issues for a Mission to Mars. Aviat Space
or evacuation decisions. Environ Med. 1998;162—168.

Ultrasound has practical applications in the ﬁeld Of Oph— 2. Barratt M. Medical Support for the International Space Station. Aviat
thalmology including biometry to measure intraocular dis— Space Enwmn Med‘ 1998455461' _ _ _ _ _ _
tances, bio—microscopy With ultra—high—frequency probes, and 3. Eargsyan A. .Medlcal Imaglng. In: Pr1n01ples of Cllnlcal Medlcine

or Space Fllght. Barratt MR , Pool SL (Eds). Sprlnger—Verlag, In
general purpose scanning.9’24 Evaluation of the eye is an press (2003).
important component of a physical examination in patients 4. Medical Intervention and Care. 188 Medical Operations
With trauma ’[0 the head 01‘ face; however, it can be Challeng— Requirements Document, Clause 4.1. ReV.B ed. Houston, TX: ISS
ing when significant orbital or facial swelling is present. The Program NASA } 2003531315 0260' _

. . . . 5. Scalea TM, Rodrlguez A, Ch1u WC, et al. Focused Assessment w1th
ultrasound technlque described herein 1s performed through a Sonography for Trauma (FAST): results from an international
Closed eyelid, therefore it can be used on patients with sig— consensus conference. J Trauma. 1999;46:466—72.
nificant facial swelling when it is difficult to open the eyelid 6. Dulchavsky SA, Schwarz KL, Kirkpatrick AW, et al. Prospective
to evaluate the pupil. evaluation of thoracic ultrasound in the detection of pneumothorax.

The ultrasound examination in this experiment could be J Trauma' 2001;50:201—5' _ _

. . 7. Rozycki GS, Ochsner GM, Fellclano DV, Thomas B, Boulanger B,
used to eXClude ocular pathology such as globe disruption, Davis FE, Falcone RE, Schmi dt D A. Early detection of
lens dislocation, ocular foreign body, retinal/Choroidal de— hemoperitoneum by ultrasound examination of the right upper
taChment, or occlusion of the retinal artery. This report also quadrant: A Multicenter Study. J Trauma. 1993;45:878—883.
demonstrates that quantification of pupillary light reﬂex can 8- DulchaVsky SA, Henry SE, Moed BR, Diebel LN, Marshburn T,
be done With B— and M— mode ultras 0110 graphy, which C 0111 (1 Hamilton D11, Logan J, Kirkpatrick AW, Williams DR. Advanced
be used ’[0 gauge pupillary reaction times in patients With Eliasonlc d1agnos1s of extremlty trauma: the FASTER exarninatlon.
rauma. 2002,53.28—32.
central nervous SyStem injuries 01‘ alterations in the 311m"" 9. Blaivas M, Theodoro D, and Sierzenski PR. A Study of Bedside
11011110 nervous system. Ocular Ultrasonography in the Emergency Department. Acad Emerg
The recent experience in Clinical ultrasound aboard the Med- 2002;93791—799-

ISS supports the hypothesis that a nonphysician crewmember 10' ShaCkford SR’ Rogers FB’ 051? TM’ 6t 31' Focuséd abflomiFa} _

. . . . . sonogram for trauma: the learnlng curve of nonradlologlst CllIllClanS
Wlth mOdeSt training can perform complex, diagnostic—qual— in detecting hemoperitoneurn. J Trauma. 1999;46:553—64.
ity examinations When remOtely direCted by a ground'based 11. Billica RD, Simmons SC, Mathes KL, et al. Perception of the
eXpert. The images acquired by the astronaut in this study medical risk of spaceﬂight. Aviat Space Environ Med. 1996;67:467—
were of excellent content and quality and, in a “real” trauma 73-
scenario, would have provided essential information to guide 12' Hfmtéhens B‘A' Madical'care SyStemS for long'dumtion Space

. . . . . . . . rniss10ns. Clm Chem. 1993;39:13—21.
Chmcal de01s1on—mak1ng. NO dlscemlble dlfferences were 13. Bioastronautics Critical Path Roadmap: An approach to risk
110th between the OCUlar examination performed on orbit and reduction and management for human space ﬂight. Bioastronautics
those performed by an expert sonographer on the ground Office, NASA; 2003: Rev. D: Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX.
888 May 2005

Copyright (£33- Lippincott Williams El Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prnhibited.

"
"5","Clinical UltrasoundAboard T196 International Space Station
—
14. Fincke EM, Padalka G, Lee D, van Holsbeeck M, Sargsyan AE, DL. Focused assessment With sonography for trauma in

Hamilton DR, Martin D, Melton SL, Dulchavsky SA. Evaluation of weightlessness. J Am Coll Surg. 2003;196:833— 844.
shoulder integrity in space: first report of musculoskeletal ultrasound 19. Grigoriev AI, Egorov AD. [The theory and practice of medical support
on the International Space Station. Radiology. 2005 ;234:319—1322. of long—term space missions]. Aviakosm Ekolog Med. 1997;31:14—25.

15. FAST at Mach 20: Clinical ultrasound aboard the International 20. Atkov OYu, Bednenko VS, Fomina GA. Ultrasound techniques in
Space Station. Whitson P, Sargsyan AE, Hamilton R, Martin D, space medicine. Aviat Space Environ Med. 1987;582A69 —73.

Melton SL, Dulchavsky SA. J Trauma. (Accepted). 21. Gazenko OG, Shul’zhenko EB, Grigor’ev AI, At’kov OI, Egorov AD.

16. Melton S, Beck G, Hamilton D, Chun R, Sargsyan A, Nicolaou S, [Medical studies during an 8—m0nth ﬂight on the orbital complex
Campbell MR, Dulchavsky S, Dawson D, Kirkpatrick AW. HOW to ""Saliut—7”—“Soiuz—T”]. Kosm Biol Aviakosm Med. 1990;24:9—14.
test a medical technology for space: trauma sonography in 22. Jadvar H. Medical imaging in microgravity. Aviat Space Environ
microgravity. Mil Med. 2003;168:312—313. Med. 2000;71:640—646.

17. Kirkpatrick AW, Nicolaou S, Campbell MR, Sargsyan AB, 23. Sargsyan AE, Hamilton DR, Nicolaou S, et a1. Ultrasound evaluation
Dulchavsky SA, Melton S, Beck G, Dawson DL, Billica RD, 0f the magnitude of pneumothorax: a new concept. Am Surg. 2001;
Johnston SL, Hamilton DR. Percutaneous aspiration of ﬂuid for 67:232—5; discussion 235—236.
management of peritonitis in space. Aviation Space Environ Med. 24. Rondeau MJ, Barcsay G, Silverman RH, Reinstein DZ,
2002;73:925—930. Krishnamurthy R, Chabi A, Du T, Coleman DJ. Very high frequency

18. Kirkpatrick AW, Nicolaou S, Sargsyan AE, Melton S, Beck G, ultrasound biometry 0f the anterior and posterior chamber diameter.
Hamilton DR, Campbell MR, Dulchavsky SA, Feiveson A, Dawson Refract Surg. 2004;20:454—464.

Volume 58 0 Number 5 889

Cnp‘yright @ Lippincntt Williams E; WilkinS. Unauthﬂrized reprud nation 01‘ this article is prﬂhibited.

"
