"","x"
"1","Crit Ultrasound J
DOI 10.1007/sl3089—009—0012—9
ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Ultrasonic evaluation of pupillary light reﬂex

Ashot E. Sargsyan ° Douglas R. Hamilton -

Shannon L. Melton - David Amponsah °

Nathan E. Marshall - Scott A. Dulchavsky

© Springer—Verlag 2009

Abstract fast and recordable method that can be used for evaluating

Background Evaluation of pupillary light reﬂex (PLR) is PLR.

an important neurological test with a variety of Clinical

applications. Obstacles such as severe soft tissue damage or Keywords Iris - Pupillometry - Pupillary light reﬂex -

hyphema may obstruct the Visual access to the pupil, thus Consensual pupillary reﬂex - Neurological trauma -

rendering direct PLR observation difﬁcult or impossible. Ultrasound imaging

Multipurpose ultrasonic systems, however, can overcome

this problem.

Methods Using ultrasound imaging, a coronal View of the Introduction

iris and pupil allowed Visualization of PLR upon contra—

lateral stimulation with a penlight. The technique was The ﬁrst ophthalmic ultrasound image was published in

tested in ten healthy volunteers and a trauma case study. 1956 [1]. Since then, ultrasound imaging technologies

Results Satisfactory Visualization of the iris was achieved have evolved to offer crucial diagnostic information in

in all subjects, in an average time of l min 10 s. Temporal many ophthalmic conditions, such as complications of

parameters of pupillary constriction, oscillations (hippos) and ocular trauma [2—5]. Ultrasound imaging is especially

relaxation could also be measured on M—mode displays. helpful when Visual (optical) inspection is impossible to

Conclusions Real—time coronal imaging of the iris using perform or does not provide a deﬁnitive diagnosis.

multipurpose ultrasound imaging is found to be a practical, Ultrasound in ophthalmology is employed in several
clinical applications such as general—purpose ocular
imaging (B—mode), ultrasound biometry that pursues
precise distance measurements (A—mode), and ultrasound

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this biomicroscopy (UBM) limited to the anterior segment,

article (doi:10.1007/s13089—009—0012—9) contains supplementary which uses high frequencies (6s, 50 MHZ) to provide a

material, which is available to authorized users. very high resolution of 33 ttm and 1655 [6—10]. Although

W very useful, specialized ophthalmic scanners or. UBM

Wyle Integrated Science and Engineering, Houston, TX, USA dCVICCS are nOt avallable 1n the vaSt majority Of
emergency settings. Modern multipurpose ultrasound

N- 13- MaI‘Shall ' S- A- DUIChaVSky systems, on the other hand, are increasingly available for

Departments of Surgery, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, USA emergency imaging needs, and they have been demon_

D. Amponsah strated to provide excellent ophthalmic images when

Emergency Medicine, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, USA ﬁtted With high—frequency probes [l 1]. Furthermore,
high—end systems of this Class employ sophisticated

A‘ E‘ SargSP/f‘“ (E) , focusing, harmonic imaging and other optimization

Space Medlelne, Wyle Laboratories/NASA JSC, , , , ,

1290 Hercules dr., ste 103’ Houston, TX 77058, US A techniques that are not yet feas1ble 1n the “ophthalmic”

e—mail: ashot.sargsyan—l@nasa.gov ultrasound systems. In the absence Of Slit lamp capability

Published online: 21 October 2009 @ Springer

"
"2","Crit Ultrasound J
or other imaging options, this imaging modality may J- r ‘
seek to obtain information that is normally outside the “h :I. ' I ::w_.E—T ' i. I
generally recognized scope of ocular ultrasound. w P 4; ' :""2': 3:2“.

The condition of the iris and its response to stimuli is of ' "" ' q' .;:...- '
interest in a variety of conditions. Reviews on pupillary
light reﬂex (PLR) and its Clinical implications have been ‘
published [3, 12]. For example, absence of the PLR has 't' -
been shown to be a risk factor independently associated ""7‘"" .
with death in craniofacial trauma [13]. Prognostic consid— ' 1 '
eration of pupillary diameter and constrictive ability was “lili-
also recommended by the American Association of Neuro—
logical Surgeons [14]. Due to the importance of PLR
evaluation, it seems prudent to consider other potential Digger"" _- .
means of PLR assessment for instances when soft tissue J. 5 '
damage, corneal opacity or hyphema may obstruct Visual
access to the pupil. Of the various pupillometry methods Fig. 1 Coronal yiew Of. the globe at the 1eve1of the iris. Measure—
that have been described, the majority still require spe— ments of the puplllary diameter are obtalned us1ng the measurlng tool
on the ultrasound system Wthh displays the measurement 1n the
Cialized hardware and expertise and are not available in the bottom left corner
majority of emergency settings [15—17]. Multipurpose
ultrasound imagers, however, are used in emergency
settings worldwide, rapidly establishing a new role Of variety of additional parameters such as rate of con—
sonography as a ﬁrst—line rnodality for emergency depart— striction, latency time, and dilatation time.
ments at the patient’s beds1de [18—20]. These conventional
multipurpose ultrasound scanners ﬁtted with high—fre—
quency probes in the 10—12 MHZ range can be used to
evaluate the condition of the globe and its components Materials and methods
[21]. Taking advantage of the capabilities of these scan—
ners, we developed a practical method to assess pupillary A technique was developed for highly revealing real—time
response to light. imaging of the entire iris and the pupil in coronal or
The experiments described here have been part Of a near—coronal planes without lens interference. Multipur—
large ground—based study conducted by NASA to develop pose sonographic devices with high—frequency linear—
ultrasound imaging procedures for long—duration space array broadband probes were used. The speciﬁc systems
ﬂight. Since the only ultrasound device currently ﬂown in used were an HDI'SOOO multipurpose ultrasound system
space is a multi—purpose system (HDI—SOOO, ATL/Philips, (ATL/Philips, USA) with a 5—12 MHZ linear probe and a
Bothell, WA, USA), procedures and protocols were sought Sonosite—128 portable ultrasound system (Sonosite, USA)
to take utmost advantage of the capability in the majority with a 5—10 MHZ linear probe. Consensual PLR pattern
of foreseeable medical conditions in space, including was recorded as a series of coronal images of the iris.
ophthalmic trauma, blunt head injuries and body injuries, Corresponding M—mode graphs were also acquired to
to name a few. demonstrate the capability to plot the pupillary diameter
This work is based on the ﬁnding that besides antero— versus time (Fig. 2)- The technique was tested in ten
posterior planes, coronal or near—coronal sections of the healthy volunteers with various ocular and orbital
eye are attainable, resolving the pupil in real time, topographies and also used in a trauma case study, in
Clearly and separately from the strongly reﬂective lens which all persons gave informed consent for their
(Fig. 1, Video 1). The ability to resolve the pupil using inclusion in this work. Imaging was performed through
ultrasound allows for PLR evaluation. Consensual PLR, the skin and soft tissues, thus avoiding direct contact
which is demonstrated in the procedure described, has with the conjunctiva.
been shown in human and animal experiments to be
weaker, yet, is comparable to the direct PLR in terms of Imaging procedure
the degree of constriction [22—24]. Besides evaluation for
instances such as neurological trauma, the method, with Following gel application on the probe face, the linear probe
some modiﬁcations, may also be of interest for general is placed below the orbit of the supine subject, strictly in a
ophthalmology and neurosurgery practice, as well as for transverse plane on top of the zygomatic bone. Applying
research in neurophysiology, since it allows recording a minimal pressure, the probe is then tilted about 450
@ Springer

"
"3","Crit Ultrasound J
' 1.“
___+____#___ __ T _ . __‘_..
""""'--—-—----._.""_'_ ""*H* _,-. -
- wMW-n — 1 - ' -
0.35mi _ ""-
“32““ ﬂ . _ ._ -Hu -;.._'mr
Eran; 1'""? J' r; ﬁwwﬁi V: 1 Fig. 3 Probe placement is shown for acquisition of coronal images of
Fig: 2 Siniultaneous B—mode and M—Inode displays of consensual gleeqllilesnlcljlllllija?;$£urpoSC portable ultrasound system Wlth a hlgh_
pupillary light reﬂex. The M—mode display shows the pupillary
diameter as a black band straight across the bottom that displays the
constriction of the pupil upon contralateral stimulation with a penlight
fr
downwards, with the probe face pointing toward the orbit. I
With the other eye open, the subject is instructed to look at a ' ' I |_
ﬁxed object on the ceiling, so that a stable gaze upwards is f"" H. _
ﬁxated. The probe is then carefully translated toward the orbit -"" -u;.'-r 1*- ‘1':
by l—l.5 cm, just beyond the zygoma, enough for the probe to ""3's?! J. J _ '.
create a skin fold abutting the face of the probe (Fig. 3). f, u i ii . 1‘
“Traditional” sonographic orientation (left side of the screen . _ ' ' ' I
corresponds to the subject’s right side) is used. During _. _-F‘ 1'_’ ”Ir
translation, care is taken to avoid any substantial pressure on, \ -- -- p. _ _ .
and displacement of, the globe. Once an oblique section of the l L__ f. ~' ' r! . _
globe is Clearly seen, the probe is slowly tilted further, to . '.
continue the transition of the scanning plane from the initial
transverse plane to a near—coronal plane. Immediately after Fig' 4 The ultrasound 392‘,“ng plane transeCtS the gIObe, in ,its
. . . . . coronal plane through the ms: 1 the ultrasound probe; 2 the direction
travers1ng the lens, the scanning plane 18 aligned Wlth the of gaze; 3 the scanning plane (Courtesy of Butler Graphics, Inc.)
plane of the iris, as shown in Fig. 4. Once the target image
with the anechoic pupillary opening is achieved, consensual
PLR is elicited by contralateral light stimulation with a pen— also, due to swelling and bruising, Visual inspection of his
light. The response can be documented in M—mode or by eyes was difﬁcult (Fig. 5a). In order to test PLR, sono—
Video recording of the ultrasound system’s output (Video 1). graphy was used as described in the technique above.
This technique can also be performed from a superior As seen in Fig. 5b, the probe was placed superior to the
approach to the eye. Using this approach, the patient is orbit and tilted upward until the iris and pupil could be seen
instead instructed to look downward at a ﬁxed object in full View (Fig. 6). The PLR was Visualized on the
toward his or her feet. The probe is placed transversely on ultrasound display screen upon contralateral stimulation
the superior margin of the orbit (frontal bone). With the with a penlight. The technique proved to be a quick and
probe facing toward the orbit, it is then tilted about 45° practical tool in this case.
upwards until the iris and pupil are seen in full View. The
consensual PLR can then be elicited as described above.
Results
Case study
Using the described procedure, coronal imaging of the iris
A49—year—old male presented to the emergency department was achieved in all subjects in less than 2 min with an
found unconscious by EMS after reportedly falling over ten average time of l min 10 s (range of 15 s—2 min). The
feet from a ladder. The patient suffered extensive head discrete anechoic Circle of the pupil surrounded by the
trauma which caused elevated intracranial pressure and typically patterned iris was Clearly demonstrated in
@ Springer

"
"4","Crit Ultrasound J
Visualized over a period of time. On the M—mode strip, the
superior—to—inferior diameter of the pupil was represented as
a black band across the strip (Fig. 2). Temporal parameters
of pupillary constriction, oscillations (called hippos) and
relaxation could also be measured on M—mode displays.
The remarkable absence of lens interference is explained
49;. W by the fact of the very acute incident angle of the ultrasound
"" beam and near—ideally smooth and regular surface; thus, the
* lens does not produce any echoes that could return back to
_ "" __ ' ' - the probe. The iris, on the other hand, is an excellent scat—
- - "" - _ terer due to its complex structure, surface and irregularities,
Hayn- H'i""--.-.,__H comparable in size with the ultrasound wavelength in the
- ‘1' IF _ ' soft tissues.
""F l ' . The temporal resolution in B—mode (grayscale), as
- determined by the actual frame refresh rate, could reach
10 ms depending on the image optimization used. M—mode
temporal resolution can be substantially better if the 2D
_ image remains “frozen” or is not displayed. In emergency
settings, since the technique would be used to establish the
Fig: 5 a Patient suffered substantial head trauma with swelling and presence or absence of PLR and therefore no measure—
bru1s1ng of the eyelids. b Ultrasound was used to evaluate PLR by .
placing the probe superior to the orbit to obtain a coronal View of the ments or M—mode 1‘ ecor dings would be necessary, only the
iris and pupil output of the ultrasound system would be recorded to
document the results, if necessary. While the theoretical
resolution at the frequencies used is 0.128 mm (12 MHZ)
or 0.154 mm (10 MHZ), the actual accuracy is better with
additional image optimization techniques available in these
systems, such as high—deﬁnition zooming, image persis—
tence, second harmonic imaging, and electronic focusing.
Conclusions
It has been shown that modern multipurpose ultrasound
systems provide the capability of Viewing and recording
real—time grayscale images of the iris in coronal or near—
Coronal planes, with a Clear, high—resolution View of the
pupillary opening. Such imaging equipment, commonly
found in a hospital’s emergency department, could be used
in a fast and practical manner for many Clinical scenarios in
which Visual access to the pupil is hindered or rendered
impossible. The dynamic nature of ultrasound imaging
Fig. 6 Coronal image of the iris and pupil Visualized with ultrasound offers the p OSSlblhty :[0 measure and monitor the p up lllary
in B—mode settings on the patient in the case study diameter and determine the presence or absence of con—
sensual PLR, an important neurological test. This tech—
the near—ﬁeld of the live image (Figs. 1, 2). Thanks to the nique can also be used to record the pupillary diameter
shallow situation of the target, optimal focusing and con— versus time, thus allowing analysis of the ﬁne detail of the
venient zooming were possible, thus further enhancing the iris constriction, oscillations (hippos), or relaxation for
quality of the image. As shown in Fig. 1, the pupillary both real—time and post examination. For this purpose, the
diameter is conﬁdently measured and rounded to the second M—mode capability of the ultrasound system is used. Other
decimal of a centimeter (0.1 mm). Upon contralateral probes with slimmer design and higher (up to 15 MHZ)
stimulation with a penlight, consensual PLR can easily be frequencies may be more practical and convenient. Testing
observed in real—time on the eye being examined (Video 1). and application of the suggested procedure in the Clinical
Using M—mode settings, pupillary diameter can also be setting seems to be a promising and valuable tool.
@ Springer

"
"5","Crit Ultrasound J
Acknowledgments We would like to thank Butler Graphics, Inc. 12. Kardon R (1995) Pupillary light reﬂex. Curr Opin Ophthalmol
(Detroit, MI, USA) for their help in completing the illustrations. 6:20—26
Supported by the National Space Biomedical Research Institute thru 13. SChreiber MA, Aoki N, Scott BG et al (2002) Determinants of
NAG 9—58. mortality in patients With severe blunt head injury. Arch Surg
137:285—290
Conﬂict of interest statement There is no conﬂict of interest 14. The Brain Trauma Foundation. The American Association of
related to the publication of this manuscript. Neurological Surgeons. The Joint Section on Neurotrauma and
Critical Care (2000) Pupillary diameter and light reﬂex. J Neuro—
trauma 17:583—590
15. Ellis CJ (1981) The pupillary light reﬂex in normal subjects. Br
J Ophthalmol 652754—759
References 16. Fankhauser F 2nd, Flammer J (1989) Puptrak 1.0: a new semi—
automated system for pupillometry With the octopus perimeter: a
1. Fledelius HC (1997) Ultrasound in ophthalmology. Ultrasound preliminary report. DOC Ophthalmol 732235—248
Med Biol 23:365—375 17. Hasegawa S, Ishikawa S (1989) Age Changes in pupillary light
2. Fisher YL (1989) Advances in contact ophthalmic ultrasonogra— reﬂex. A demonstration by means of a pupillometer. Nippon
phy: ocular trauma and intraocular foreign body patients. DeV Ganka Gakkai Zasshi 932955—961
Ophthalmol 18:69—74 18. Bahner D, Blaivas M, Cohen HL, Fox JC, Hoffenberg S, Kendall
3. Fisher YL (1975) The current status of ophthalmic B—scan J, Langer J, MCGahan JP, Sierzenski P, Tayal VS, American
ultrasonography. J Clin Ultrasound 32219—223 Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine (2008) AIUM practice
4. Hassani SN, Bard RL (1978) Real time ophthalmic ultrasonog— guideline for the performance of the focused assessment With
raphy. Radiology 127:213—219 sonography for trauma (FAST) examination. J Ultrasound Med
5. Frank KE, Purnell EW, Jennings WD (1978) Relative frequency 27(2):313—318
of ultrasound diagnoses in patients referred for ophthalmic 19. Dulchavsky SA, Schwarz KL, Kirkpatrick AW, Billica RD,
ultrasound. Ophthalmology 85:1212—1217 Williams DR, Diebel LN, Campbell MR, Sargysan AE, Hamilton
6. Deramo VA, Shah GK, Baumal CR et al (1999) Ultrasound DR (2001) Prospective evaluation of thoracic ultrasound in the
biomicroscopy as a tool for detecting and localizing occult detection of pneumothorax. J Trauma 50(2):201—205
foreign bodies after ocular trauma. Ophthalmology 106:301—305 20. Blaivas M, Theodoro D, Sierzenski PR (2002) A study of bedside
7. Nemeth J, Csakany B, Pregun T (1996—1997) Ultrasound bio— ocular ultrasonography in the emergency department. Acad
microscopic morphometry 0f the anterior eye segment before and Emerg Med 9(8):791—799
after one drop of pilocarpine. Int Ophthalmol 20:39—42 21. Bedi DG, Gombos DS, Ng CS, Singh S (2006) Sonography 0f the
8. Ludwig K, Wegscheider E, Hoops JP et al (1999) In ViVO imaging eye. Am J Roentgenol 187: 1061—1072
of the human zonular apparatus With high—resolution ultrasound 22. Trejo LJ, Rand MN, Cicerone CM (1989) Consensual pupillary
biomicroscopy. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 237:361—371 light reﬂex in the pigmented rat. Vision Res 29:303—307
9. Liu W, Wu Q, Huang S et al (1997) Application of ultrasound 23. Bourne PR, Smith SA, Smith SE (1979) Dynamics of the light
biomicroscopy in diagnosis of anterior segment Vitreoretinal reﬂex and the inﬂuence of age on the human pupil measured by
disorders. Yan Ke Xue Bao 132192—196 television pupillometry. J Physiol 293:1P
10. Wang N, Lai M, Zhou W (1997) Quantitative real time mea— 24. Smith SA, Ellis CJ, Smith SE (1979) Inequality 0f the direct and
surement of iris conﬁguration in human eyes. Yan Ke Xue Bao consensual light reﬂexes in normal subjects. Br J Ophthalmol
13:29—34 63:523—527
11. Nemeth J, Vegh M, Horoczi Z et al (1992) Examination of the
orbit using a non—Ophthalmologic ultrasound equipment. Orv
Hetil 133:2563—2565
@ Springer

"
