"","x"
"1","' I
SpeCIa Reports
1 ' f Sh 1d
E. Michael Fincke, M5 Eva uatlon 0 on er
s Gennady Padalka, MS . . .
. 0
g Doom Lee, MD Integrlty 1n Space. Flrst
Marnix van Holsbeeck MD
0“ I
-g Ashot E. sargsyan, MD Report of Musculoskeletal US
3 Douglas R. Hamilton, MD,
hD th I t t ' l S
g P, , on e n erna 1011a pace
Davnd Martin, RDMS 1
0

Shannon L. Melton, BS Statlon

Kellie McFarlin, MD

Scott A. Dulchavsky, MD,

PhD Investigative procedures were approved by Henry Ford Human Investigation Commit-
pubnshed online before print tee and NASA Johnson Space Center Committee for Protection of Human Subjects.
10.1148/radiol.2342041680 Informed consent was obtained. Authors evaluated ability of nonphysician crewmem-

Radio'ogy 2005; 234319-322 ber to obtain diagnostic-quality musculoskeletal ultrasonographic (US) data of the

. . shoulder by following a just—in-time training algorithm and using real-time remote

AbbreVIatIons: . . . . .

HRF = Human Research Facility gUIdance aboard the interhatlonal Space Station .(|.SS). |SSoExpedItIon-9 crewmembers

55 = International space Station attended a 25-hour didactic and hands-on US training session 4 months before launch.

OPE = Onboard Proficiency Aboard the ISS, they completed a 1-hour computer—based Onboard Proficiency En-

Enhancement hancement program 7 days before examination. Crewmembers did not receive specific

— training in shoulder anatomy or shoulder US techniques. Evaluation of astronaut shoul-

1 From the National Aeronautics and der integrity was done by using a Human Research Facility US system. Crew used special

Space Admlnlstratlon, Johnson Space positioning techniques for subject and operator to facilitate US in microgravity environ-

Center, Houston, Tex (E.M.F., G.P.),° t C t . f . t d d. .t. | b | t R It' US

Texas Diagnostic Imaging, Dallas, Tex rhen . ommon ana omlc re erence pom s aI e mi Ia pro e p acerhen .' ea - Irhe

(D.L.); Departments of Radiology Video of shoulder was transmitted to remote experienced sonologists In TeIeSCIence

MN“) and Surgery (KM, S-A-D-), Center atJohnson Space Center. Probe manipulation and equipment adjustments were

biliaryggiliiFOE/Ffllt1522529’9aVrYdeglg guided with verbal commands from remote sonologists to astronaut operators to

Labgratoriesl’ Houston, fex (A.E.S., complete rotator cuff evaluation. Comprehensive US of crewmember’s shoulder in-

D.R.H., D.M., S.L.M.).. Received Sep- cluded transverse and longitudinal images of biceps and supraspinatus tendons and

tembe"" 30/ 2094? reV'S'C?“ requesmd articular cartilage surface. Total examination time required to guide astronaut operator

October12; reVISIon received October . . . | 15 . M I . I d b

14,. accepted October 15. Supported to aeqUIre necessary Images. was apprOXIrnatey minutes. u tip e arm an pro e

by NASA Flight Grant NNJO4HBO7A pOSItIons were used to achIre dynamic Video Images that were of excellent quality to

and the National Space BiomEdica' allow evaluation of shoulder integrity. Postsession download and analysis of high-fidelity

Reseamh InStitUte grant SMSOO3O1‘ US ima es collected onboard demonstrated additional anatomic detail that could be

Address correspondence to S.A.D. g . . .

(e-mail: Sdu/Cha]@hfh5.org). used to exclude subtle Injury. Musculoskeletal US can be performed In space by
minimally trained operators by using remote guidance. This technique can be used to
evaluate shoulder integrity in symptomatic crewmembers after strenuous extravehicular
activities or to monitor microgravity-associated changes in musculoskeletal anatomy.
Just—in-time training, combined with remote experienced physician guidance, may
provide a useful approach to complex medical tasks performed by nonexperienced
personnel in a variety of remote settings, including current and future space programs.
© RSNA, 2004

Author contributions: Supplemental material: radiology.rsnajnls.org/cgi/content/fuII/2342041680/DC 1

Guarantor of integrity of entire study,

S.A.D.; study concepts and design, all

authors; literature research, S.A.D. M.v.H.;

data acquisition and analysis/interpreta-

tion/ 3” .aEJFhOFS; manuscript Preparation Medical care capabilities for the International Space Station (188) and future exploration

and def'n't'on 0f.'nte”.eFtual content ali space missions are currently being deﬁned (1,2). Although rigorous astronaut selection

authors, manuscript editing, S.A.D., K.M., , , ,

manuscript revision/review and manu_ procedures reduce the Chance of ChI‘OHIC health problems, acute condltlons can occur

script final version approval, all authors during spaceﬂight (3,4). The probability of a crewmember developing a medical condition

© RSNA, 2004 that may affect their performance or require care may be increased during long-duration
0r exploration missions.
319

"
"2","Sorne alterations in musculoskeletal in- probe placement and manipulation, and second delay) conditions. Two-way audio
tegrity take place during prolonged eXpo- equipment adjustments to obtain optimal communication with the US operator
sure to microgravity, despite the generally images. Identical rernote-guidance “cue was used to guide US probe placernent
successful exercise countermeasures (5). In- cards” were available to the guiding eXpe- and adjust US device settings.
sidious reduction in bone, muscle, and ten- rienced sonologist on the ground and the A full unilateral shoulder musculoskel-
don mass that has been observed during operator onboard. The cards included key- etal examination was conducted, which
spaceﬂight may heighten the risk of rnus- board prompts, anatomic reference points, included transverse and longitudinal

a culoskeletal injury. In addition, strenuous and other essential information to increase Views of the biceps and supraspinatus
~ physical work during spacewalks, corn- remote guidance efﬁciency. tendons and the articular cartilage sur-
° bined with upper body and arm motion face. The examination was initiated with
'H constrained by the current spacesuits, fur- the probe positioned at the distal end of
E ther raises the likelihood of shoulder in- IMAGING, EVALUATION’ AND the claVicle in a longitudinal attitude.
3 jury. COMMUNICATION The probe was “steered” with remote eX-
The assessment of musculoskeletal in- perienced sonologist voice commands to
: tegrity is difﬁcult in space because of lirn- The ground and in-ﬂight US exarnina- achieve the desired images. After acquisi-
ited rnedicaltraining of the crew andalack tions were both performed with ﬂight- tion of the four Views of the shoulder
of radiographic and magnetic resonance modiﬁed HDI-SOOO US systerns (ATL; area, the subject and operator aboard the
imaging capabilities on either the trans- Philips Medical Systems, Bothell, Wash) 188 switched roles, and the examination
port vehicles or the 188 (6,7). However, a by using high-frequency (5—12-MHZ) lin- was repeated.
multipurpose diagnostic ultrasonographic ear probes. Images were Viewed by the Examination cornpleteness was evalu-
(US) system is available within the Human operator on a ﬂat-panel monitor and ated initially by the ground-based expe-
Research Facility (HRF) of the 188. We eval- were transmitted simultaneously to re- rienced musculoskeletal sonologist by
uated the ability of a nonphysician astro- rnote US-guidance sonologists (A.S., D.L.) Viewing the real-time downlinked US
naut operator to perform shoulder US by Via local circuits (ground familiarization video stream. Full-resolution US frames
using remote guidance techniques. This re- session) or through satellite broadband were saved during the examination and
port documents the ﬁrst shoulder US eX- transrnission (ﬂight session). Flight corn- were downlinked to the Telescience Cen-
amination ever performed in microgravity munications include a 1.6-second trans- ter at a later time. These images were
of spaceﬂight. mission delay due to distance, data relay- subsequently reviewed by an outside
ing, and conversions. Still and Video musculoskeletal US specialist (M.V.H.) to
cameras in the US. Laboratory module verify the diagnostic quality of the exam-
ASTRONAUT TRAINING automatically recorded the US session, ination and the ability to exclude injury
but recorded images and Video were on the resultant images.
The ability of two nonphysician astronaut downloaded to the experiment team
crewrnernbers to perform shoulder rnuscu— only after completion of the experiment.
loskeletal US was evaluated in the HRF of The astronauts were asked to develop FINDINGS
the ISS durinngS Expedition 9. The inves- speciﬁc restraining techniques for both
tigative procedures were approved by the the subject and the operator, which The astronaut crewrnernbers used foot re-
Henry Ford Human Investigation Cornrnit- would allow access to the upper arm and straints and hand pressure to maintain
tee and the NASA Johnson Space Center shoulder area, provide stability for the positioning and freedom of movement in
Committee for the Protection of Human examination, allow unrestricted use of the microgravity environment (Fig 1).
Subjects. Both crewrnernbers received brief— the keyboard, and help avoid operator This positioning technique allowed the
ings and acknowledged their informed hand fatigue. subject to help with keyboard adjust-
consent before the mission, as did other The astronaut US operator completed a ments and provided rapid switching of
human participants. 1-hour cornputer-based US “refresher” the subject and operator when the exami-

Astronaut crewrnernbers attended a 2.5- course by using the Onboard Proﬁciency nation was complete (Movie 1, radiology
hour US familiarization session approxi- Enhancernent (OPE) compact disk devel- .rsnajnls.org/cgi/content/full/2342041680
mately 4 months before this evaluation to oped by the evaluation team 1 week before /DC 1). No hand fatigue was reported,
include a brief didactic presentation on the the US session. Information regarding OPE which had been noted by previous crew-
basics of US examination and the experi- navigation, time on task, and query re- members who performed abdominal, car-
rnent-speciﬁc principles of remote guid- sponses was stored on the ISS computer diac, and thoracic US on the 188, most
ance. The crewrnernbers also participated and was downlinked to the evaluation likely as a result of the additional effort
in a hands-on US session in the Payload team before the US session to allow the required when restraint is not optimal.
Development Laboratory at the Johnson team to reﬁne the procedure or highlight Rernotely guided shoulder musculo-
Space Center, Houston, TeX, where they certain proceduralcornponents to facilitate skeletal US examinations were com-
perforrned abdominal and musculoskeletal the upcoming US evaluations. pleted by the two nonphysician astro-
US on a human subject Via remote guid- The US session was completed during naut operators in less than 15 minutes
ance from an experienced sonologist (AS. scheduled Ku—band (Video) and S-band each (Movie 2, radiology.rsnajnls.0rg/cgi
and D.L., with 15 and 10 years of experi- (voice) communications. Dynarnic US /content/ﬁrll/2342041680/DC1). The down-
ence in musculoskeletal US, respectively). Video was routed through the 188 com- linked real-tirne US video stream provided
The hands-on sessions were designed to munications system to the Telescience good-quality images of all of the areas of
closely sirnulate in-orbit experiments. Real- Center at the Johnson Space Center, the shoulder that could be used to exclude
time US images were transmitted to the where the ground-based experienced so- substantial rotator cuff abnorrnalities
remote sonologist, who guided the astro- nologist Viewed the Video output from (Movie 3, radiology.rsnajnls.0rg/cgi/content
nauts through the necessary positioning, the US machine with near real-time (1.6- /full/2342041680/DC1). Full-resolution US
320 - Radiology - February 2005 Fincke et al

"
"3","F __ ‘ ea, , £3? .
ﬂ, 5:1; 7 , , . I u ‘5 ‘51 . fo’V‘ %. .
Q mt W51
: , ~ m 2» 1 ‘ m.“ -‘
.H _ ‘ b127,1 '4 1r~ .At- 1""“ ‘\ ‘4 T . ,
3 ’1‘“: J 1—K i ‘< b ‘ ﬁg J ,7 ' J. ,
. _ ,_ \_,, jg; é"" , g J, .
' MM ‘ ' 1‘: .JV .’ '7 ,
g"" ’3‘ , -/ x (f. q.
_ ”Y A, ﬁ‘ —\ . ﬂeet \ 7
cl?"" :9 3‘: J? ‘ . ' J Figure 2. Full-resolution US images of the
’1. ”f”: 'ﬁ'ﬁ ' 3: ‘ ﬁe J shoulder were downlinked from the 155 to mis-
'-.- 7 "" 5 - “ _ 7 . ’ sion control after the US examination. This im-
' ' ‘ age demonstrates a longitudinal View of the bi-
Figure 1. Cabin View obtained with a still camera of the HRF 0n the ceps tendon. The proximal intracapsular end of
ISS. Commander Gennady Palalka performs a musculoskeletal US the long biceps tendon (T) is displayed on the
examination on Mike Fincke by using an HRF US unit (blue ﬂat- observer’s left. Within the normal tendon, a dis-
screen monitor and keyboard). tinct ﬁbrillar pattern is noted (arrow). D = del-
toid muscle.
— training in a wide variety of tasks, ranging inal, musculoskeletal, and cardiac) require
from maintaining spacecraft systems to con- considerably more operator experience to
ducting research to performing emergency perform and interpret autonomously. Since
medical procedures. A crew medical ofﬁcer, extensive US training with frequent refresher
D who is generally not a physician, receives ap— practice is not feasible in many situations,
proximately 40 hours of additional training including remote medicine or the space pro-
. “3365* ‘ in medical diagnosis and therapeutics. There- gram, alternative paradigms of US examina-
“' m. . fore, accurate communication during an ill- tion are required for this application.
G ness or trauma is critical, particularly if real- Remote US guidance by experienced so-
. , 1‘ .L"", ' ‘ time imaging is to be employed. nologists Virtually couples a modestly trained
, '. J, US is currently used in many trauma cen- US operator with a remote sonologist. The US
‘1‘” ters to diagnose abdominal injury (8,9). The operator is trained in basic US Operation and
e technique has been shown to be accurate and gross requirements of the US examination.
sensitive in the identiﬁcation of intraabdomi- The operator places the US probe in a prede-
nal hemorrhage, even when performed by termined and familiar starting point (aided by
nonradiologists 0r nonphysicians (10). NASA topologic reference cue cards), and the Video
investigators have similarly demonstrated stream from the US device is split between the
, , , that US can be used by nonphysicians to di- on-site monitor and a remote location, where
Flgure 3. On this transverse View of the eX- . . . . . . . .
tracapsular biceps, the echogenic round shape agnose thorac1c 1n]ury orbone fracture. The it IS. Viewed by the experienced .sonologist.
of the tendon (arrow) is recognized between performance of US examinations and inter- Optimal probe p051t10n and deV1ce settings
the lesser tuberosity (g) and the greater tuber- pretation of images for the detection of ab- are guided with voice commands from the
osity (G). D = deltoid muscle, dominal bleeding or long-bone fracture d0 remote sonologist to obtain the necessary US
not require extensive training. Conversely, images.
musculoskeletal US is substantially more The remote guidance paradigm substan-
complex and requires specialized expertise tially reduces initial and refresher operator
frames, which were reviewed after the US during both data acquisition and image inter- training requirements and allows experi-
session by the team, provided excellent- pretation. , , , enced sonologist input during the conductof
quality detail of all of the shoulder Views Ba31c ultrasonic imaging has been com- the exam1nat10n.We cnmbined remote guid-
(Figs 2—5). The still US images could be pleted on both U..S and Ru551an spacecraft ance With a focused reV1ew of complex US to
. . (5,11,12). NASA investigators have demon- complete the shoulder musculoskeletalexam-
used to exclude subtle shoulder 1n1ury. , , , , , , ,
strated a Wide array of diagnostic US apphca- 1nat10ns. The unique software used for OPE
tions in microgravity experiments on animal evaluation in this project streamlined equip-
DISCUSSION models and human volunteers during para- ment setup and subject and operator posi-
bolic ﬂight on KC—135 aircraft. Results of tioning and facilitated the successful comple-
The ability to provide medical care aboard a these investigations suggest that the sensitiv— tion of the complex US tasks by means of
spacecraft is Challenging because of limita- ity and speciﬁcity of these US applications are remote guidance. This “just-in-time” training
tions in crew medical training, medical equip— not degraded in microgravity and may even approach allowed preﬂight and in-ﬂight
ment, and environmental constraints in mi- be enhanced in certain Circumstances. More training time to be reduced substantially. The
crogravity (1—5). The crews of the ISS receive comprehensive US examinations (eg, abdom- OPE program was constructed in modules
Volume 234 - Number 2 Evaluation of Shoulder Integrity in Space - 321

"
"4","that allow future HRF reﬁnements or equip— —
ment alterations to be modiﬁed electronically ‘ ""I 51,11, '. __ .’.,.' .5» 1L4.-. 'I . I.- '4,“ .
as required. The program also can be used as a Jr v.» :42: 3'51“: "" .. m: *1: . - 4
framework for other complex tasks that re- "" ...... .. D... - .
quire focused skills or complex instructions. D “’1: .. 2;"" . ' - ‘-
Q The self—reporting feature of the program al- “'__.’;T- “7.63 ““ Q.” , ‘ - 9 ""
lowed the experienced sonologists on the """"Wv‘tg‘ﬁ '_ _ ,-._ WWW, ,.
a ground to assess operator familiarity with the -‘ 'm S ' ' s. f"" . ' .Li-ﬁiiﬁs """" ' ’ .2"". ’
~ procedures to better prepare for and conduct ' . f"" "" ’ 2 . .
.2 the session. fm» - "" ”“3"""" 9“"" .01..” '
The evaluation of shoulder integrity with ""
E the use of US is the standard of care at many -
a institutions and is used by professional ath-
letic teams to evaluate injuries to athletes. —
: Astronaut crewmembers may be at risk of Figure 5. With the transducer turned perpen-
shoulder injury during long-duration space- dicular to the position in Figure 4, the examina-
ﬂight because of decreases in muscle and ten- tion 0f the SUPIaSpihatUS (5) iS completed With
don mass and exertion during space walks. transverse Views of the cuff. The deltoid muscle
The extravehicular activity suits that are worn Figure 4. With the transducer placed over the (D) .15 separated from the supraspinatus by alter-
constrain upper body and arm movement. long aXiS 0f the deltoid muscle (D), note the .“atmg hypo- and hypemChOIC lines, represent-
Construction requirements on the ISS and fu- longitudinal striations (upper attOWS) 0f the ﬁ- mg bursa a(nd pertlbursalhfat. TI: .eciogiplc
ture exploratory missions involving extrave- brofatty. 5613ta in between the muscle bendlee :gﬂriﬁpéngvii :1: 568an eiggeﬁuzlléralyiégg
hicular activities can increase strain on the Supraspinatus tendon (S) 15 displayed in Its long surfaceg (C) g
h lder 'oint. A reliable me tho d for evalua- axis deep to the .delt01d. The tendon rests on the '
5_ ou ] _ _ _ bnght echogenlc surface of the proxrmal hu-
tion Of shoulder integrity during long-dura- merus. The humeral head shows on the medial
tion space missions WOUld increase medical aspect (observer’s right) and the greater tuberos-
care capabilities for this operationally rele- ity more laterally, The anatomic neck is recog Referensﬁs _ _ _ _
vant concern. nized on the groove (lower arrow) between these 1' 231:1: gRéggeSrlﬁigiflﬁsegoi 593.11%?)1250 112/13”
ShOUIder mUSCUIOSkEIEtal US was per- bone surfaces. 2. Grigorigv AI, Egorov AD. The theory and prac-
formed rapidly and accurately by the tWO as- tice of medical support of long—term space mis-
tronaut crewmembers aboard the 188. The aV- SiOHS; AViakOSHl Ekeleg Med 1997; 31:14-25-
erage time to perform the examination was 3 Exgiaﬁedicalintervention and care 155 Med-
less than 15 minutes. The conduct of the eX- tions when the images were evaluated by the ' ical dperations Requirements Docurnent 53p
amination was not appreciably different than experienced sonologists involved in this trial. 50260, Clause 4.1. Rev B ed. Houston, Tex:
similar examinations in a terrestrial enViron- The optimal training of crewmembers for NA.SA,.2003.
ment and was aided by innovative restraint the ISS and later exploration-class missions is 4' Engqlev AI’ BUng SA’ BogomOIOV W3 e.t al'
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ edlcal results of the Mn year—long m1551on.
techniques developed by the crewmembers still being deﬁned. This initial US experience Physiologist 1991; 34(Supp1 1):S44—S48.
(Movie 4, radiology.rsnajnls.org/cgi/mntent/ﬁill suggests that limited training, combined with 5. Gazenko OG, Shul’zhenko EB, Grigor’eV AI,
/2342041680/DC1). The quality of the near onboard proﬁciency enhancement and di- At'kOV 0111; ESOIOV AD- Medieal StUdieS dufling
real-time US Video transmitted to the Tele- rected remote guidance, may be an effective ﬁﬁt87rn3n§21$g¥3 01210:? (grigthZZEEEXh/IS;
science Center was very good and could be technique for performing complex tasks. The 1990; 24944 [Russian]
used to exclude substantial shoulder muscu- examination was conducted within a strictly 6. Harris BA Jr, Billica RD, Bishop SL, et al. Phys-
loskeletal injury. Still US images were ob- limited time frame, which would probably be ieel examination during Space ﬂight Mayo
tained during the examination and were the case in most terrestrial situations, such as 7. gigsggzc X91242 (flijggg’gig In: Barratt MR
downlinked to the team afterward. These in some remote and most military settings. p001 SL, eds. Principles Of Clinical medicine f0;
high-ﬁdelity images were of excellent diag— The unique constraints imposed by the space ﬂight. New York, NY: Springer Verlag,
nostic quality and could be used to exclude space environment require the development 2003-
subtle Changes in shoulder integrity. of detailed training, diagnostic, and therapeu- 8' :33; En (55351:: O]; riginff; fffggg ($133255:
The ability of the ISS crew to perform com- tic strategies. Although some of the aerospace screening tool in the assessment Of injured
pleX US tasks aboard the ISS supports the hy- procedures currently investigated by NASA Children] Pediatr Surg 1999,- 34:44—47,- discus—
pothesis that a nonphysician crewmember are appropriate only for the space environ- 510“; 52—54- _ _
with modest training in US can perform high- ment, many other spaceﬂight-derived teCh- 9' 3321;: agxésizﬂgxﬁi 1:652:11; VXC’fOerttiﬁfg
ﬁdelity diagnostiC-quality examinations when niques are readily transferable to the Earth, (F AST): results from an integmﬁignal comm-
directed by a ground-based experienced so- including rural, military, and emergency sus conference.JTrauma 1999,- 46:466—472.
nologist. The images acquired by the astro- medical care. The remotely guided US con- 10- BOUlengef BR; Keathey PA; Brenneman FD;
naut in this study were of excellent content cept, with crew medical ofﬁcers or compara- Eigeeslsigihvﬁth Egﬁgzgaggrﬁgfgfsﬁﬁggsig
and quality, and in a “real” medical scenario, bly trained ﬁrst responders as operators, is an 1999; results Of a survey Of North American
they would have provided essential informa- important and clinically relevant advance- trauma centers. Am Surg 2000,- 66:1049—1055.
tion to guide Clinical decision making. There ment in space medicine, with profound ram- 11- AtkOV OYUI Bedneeke V5; Femine _GA- Ultta'
were no discernible differences between the iﬁcations for emergency or Clinical medicine EBZESEEVZ?§II1qlll/Ieesd 11n98$£a5C§(9H119etd21§'1/:129 $771?
US examinations performed in orbit and (Audio 1, radiology.rsnajnls.0rg/cgi/C0ntent/ﬁrll 12. Jadvar H. Medical imaging in mierogravity:
those performed in standard terrestrial condi- /2342041680/DC1). Aviat Space Environ Med 2000,- 71:640—646.
322 - Radiology - February 2005 Fincke et al

"
