"","x"
"1","SHORT COMMUNICATION
O O O O
0
Diagnostic Instrumentation Aboard ISS. Just- l n-Tlme
T ° ° f N Ph ' ' C b
C. MICHAEL FOALE*, ALEXANDER Y. KALERI,
ASHOT E. SARGSYAN, DOUGLAS R. HAMILTON,
SHANNON MELTON, DAVID MARTIN, AND
SCOTT A. DULCHAVSKY
FOALE CM, KALERI AY, SARCO;SYAN AE,O HAMILTON PR, MELTON S, tively time-demanding, thus rendering these important
MARTIN p' DULQH‘IWSKY SA' D “13""”,“0 ’""Stmmentatw"" “10.0“” 155’ scientific activities very challenging for ISS operations.
just-m-ttme training for non-physwmn crewmembers. AV1at Space . . . . . .
Environ Med 2005; 76:594—8. For example, rlgorous trammg of astronauts 1n chmcal
Introduction: The performance of complex tasks on the International ultrasound lmagmg IS 1mpract1cal for early ISS Opera-
Space Station (ISS) requires Significant preflight crew training commitments tiQnS, despite its potential merits for both operational
and frequent Ski“ and khowledge refreshment. ThIs report OdocOuments a space medicine and biomedical research (15) Terres-
recently developed ”Just—m—tlme training methodology, which Integrates . 1 1 d d . . £250 h
preflight hardware familiarization and procedure training with an on—orbit trla uO tljasoun prograrhs man ate a mlnanlun} O
CD-ROM-based skillenhancementThis”just—in-time”concept was used to Of tralnlng to perform 1Dd€p€nd€nt exammatlons and
support real-time remote expert guidance to complete ultrasound exami- this is clearly not possible for a tWO- 01‘ three-person ISS
hatlons usmg the ISS Human Research lfacnhty (HRF). MethodOs:An Amer- crew. Recently, focused ultrasound examinations have
lean and Russnan ISS crewmember received 2 h of ”hands on ’ ultrasound b f d b d. 1 . h . . f 1.
training 8 mo prior to the on-orbit ultrasound exam. A CD-ROM-based O een pet“ (?rme y non'ra 19O0g15tp yO51c1ans a ter 1m""
Onboard Proficiency Enhancement(OPE) interactive multimedia program ItEd trammg for very SpeCIfIC screenmg purposes 1n
consisting of memory enhancing tutorials, and skill testing exercises, was emergency settings, such as blunt abdominal trauma
completed by the crewmember 6 d prIoOr t0 the on—orblt ultrasound exam. (2,11,14). However, imaging Skill retention iS critical for
The crewmember was then remotely gunded through a thoraCIC, vascular, th . 1. d 1. t.
and echocardiographic examination by ultrasound imaging experts. Re- ese spec1a lze app 1C3 OIOIIS. . . O
suits: Results of the CD-ROM-based OPE session were used to modify the One Of the more effectlve trammg methods used 1n
instructions during a complete 35-min real-time thoracic, cardiac, and many educational environments is computer-based in—
carotId/Jugular ultrasound study. FolOlowmg commands fromOthe grouhd- struction. Development Of adaptive multimedia presen-
based expert, the crewmember acqunred all target Views and Images w1th- t t. ”Eh 'f' . t. d t k.
outdifficulty. The anatomical content and fidelity of ultrasound video were a Ions W1 use1:-spec1 1C nav1ga lOIIO aOn raC mg
adequate for Clinical decision making. Conclusions: Complex ultrasound seems to be a loglcal DEX’E step to Optlmlze aStI‘ODaUt
experiments with expert guidance were performed With high accuracy training and skill retention, The modular design of
following limited prefllghttrammg and multimedia based m—fllght revnew, these multimedia environments facilitates rapid and
despite a 2-s communication latency. ln-fllght application of multimedia b't ft d'f' t. t f °1°t t th .
proficiency enhancement software, coupled with real-time remote expert eOaSy OD-OOI‘ O1 SOO Ware m0 O1 lca 10D O O30 1 a e e mls—
guidance, facilitates the successful performance ofultrasound examinations 810D SPEleIC tralnlng requ1rements. ThIS mOdlﬂaI‘ 80ft-
on orbit and may have additional terrestrial and space applications. ware maintenance approach keeps the training content
Keywords: ”ltra5.0”nd' aerospace’ N.ASA' mEd'Cal Educat'on' equ'p' current and reduces the financial and logistical burden
ment desngn, radiology, surgery, medical technology.
on the space program.
Besides the limited training of the Crew Medical
' I 'HE HUMAN RESEARCH FACILITY (HRF) in the
ISS DeStiny laboratory OmOdUIe alreOady PTOYldeS a * This manuscript was written by Dr. Foale, in coordination With
solid platform for SClentlfIC research 1n a varlety Of the other coauthors, while he was serving as a crewmember aboard
fields including medicineO Construction of the Interna- the ISS. It was transmitted to DI‘. Hamilton for submission to the
tional Sp a C e Station (ISS) is ongoing, and a dvan C e d Journal. The authors beheve that th1s O1s the f1rstmanuscr1ptsubm1tted
. 1 b1. . .11 b . . 1 f . . d 1 to a peer-rev1ewed Journal from orblt.
medlga capaO 1 1t1es W1 eO cr1t1ca 01‘ anthIPatOe ong' From the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Lyndon
duratlon orbltal and espec1a11y future exploratlon-class B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX (C. M. Foale, A. Y. Kaleri);
missions (3). The preﬂight comprehensive crewmember Wyle Laboratories, Houston, TX (A. E. Sargsyan, D. R. Hamilton, 8.
training and skills development required for long-du- MeltoOn, D. MaOrtm); and the Department of Surgery, Henry Ford
t. . . t th ISS t. . t . A1 Hospltal, Detr01t, MI (8. A. Dulchavsky).
ra 10D mISSIOnS 0 e . are very lmedn en51ve' _ This manuscript was received for review in October 2004. It was
pletion of all required training, the linear nature of this Address reprint requests to: Douglas K Hamilton, MD, PhD,
- - - - - - 1290 Hercules Dr., Ste. 120, Houston, TX 77058; dham11ton@
does not have the ﬂex1b111ty for rapld 1mp1ementat10n wylehou com
01‘ Changes 1“ ObleCtlveS- For many résearCh protocOolOs Reprint & Copyright © by Aerospace Medical Association, Alexan-
conventional training methodology IS often pr0h1b1- dria, VA.
594 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine ° Vol. 76, N0. 6, Section I ° lune 2005

"
"2","TRAINING FOR NON-PHYSICIAN ASTRONAUTS—FOALE ET AL.
Officer, the medical diagnostic process in space is com- session and minimize the time needed to get the correct
plicated also by the lack of advanced diagnostic equip- image. The OPE CD-ROM consists of several user-se-
ment and microgravity-related factors (6-9). There are lectable multimedia modules which help refresh the
no requirements for X-ray capability on the 155, there- crewmember’s memory and skills regarding all aspects
fore, ultrasound remains the only medical imaging mo- of remotely guided ultrasound.
dality in the current space program (12). The HRF con- A llcue card” which illustrates anatomical markers
tains a space-adapted, rack-mounted version of the for scanning sites, probe orientation, and ultrasound
HDI-SOOO Ultrasound System (ATL/Philips, Seattle, control panel features was created for the crew to View
WA), which is also available to enhance the 155 medical during the real-time scanning session. The remote guid-
capability if needed) (10). ance expert in mission control uses an identical copy of
The use of telemedicine to teach physicians to per- this cue card to help standardize the terminology and
form medical procedures has been used to extend ex- nomenclature of the real-time session (Fig. 1) (4).
pertise to medically underserved locations. Although The subject being scanned was restrained in a prone
telemedical consults and proctoring can facilitate med- configuration using the Crew Medical Restraint System
ical care on Earth, the use in remote areas including (CMRS). The ultrasound operator was able to assume
space is complicated by communication delays, low stable position by using the CMRS footstraps and / or
bandwidth, and limited training of the remote care wedging legs under the CMRS. A high frequency (5—12
provider. This brief communication demonstrates a MHz) linear probe was used for the thoracic and vas-
progressive educational strategy using pre-mission fa- cular ultrasound examinations, and a 2—4 MHz phased
miliarization, CD-ROM-based skill enhancement, and array probe was used for cardiac imaging. The ultra-
remote expert guidance to successfully complete com- sound image was displayed on an LCD monitor on
plex ultrasound examinations on orbit. board, and simultaneously transmitted live Via a satel-
lite link to the Mission Control Center (MCC) in Hous-
METHODS ton, TX. A real-time private audio link was secured
O O O O O between the MCC in Houston and the lSS-based ultra-
Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasouhd 1n Micrograwty sound operator (Fig. 2)
(ADUM) 15 e NASA'hOlhded Oh'erhlt 155 research inves- Ground-based experts guided the examination re-
tigation which optimizes JUSt'lh'tlme ttalhlhg method- motely by Viewing the downlinked Video and verbally
9105188 to fac1litate 1n-ﬂ1ght advahceol ultrasound exam- instructing the crewmember to adjust system settings
inations (4/13)- The research act1V1t1es were approved and manipulate the ultrasound probe until optimal im-
by the NASA Johnson Space Center Committeefor the ages were obtained. The ”cue card” was continually
Protection Of Human. SubJects, and the Part1c1pat1ng referred to in order to facilitate probe placement and
crewmembers signed informed consent Phet t0 the ac- system control adjustments. Selected images and llcine-
t1V1tY- O O loops” were saved in full resolution in the HRF system
The. 153 crewmembers received a 2'h equipment fa- and transmitted to MCC after the real-time session for
miliarization and. hands-on ttalhlhg Wlth the ultra- final reView and analysis by the on-ground experts.
sound deV1ce, which included setup, orientation to the
keyboard controls, and basic instruction in cardiacOand RESULTS
thorax ultrasound imaging. The operator also received
hands-on remote guidance training by the radiologist/ The total time devoted to crew training, proficiency
ultrasound experts who later provided expert guidance enhancement, and examination for this on-orbit exper-
from the ground. Ultrasound examinations were also iment was 3 h and 35 min. The crew reviewed the
performed on the crewmembers prior to ﬂight to obtain CD-ROM instructional program for 1 h, 1 wk prior to
baseline images for comparison. the on-orbit ultrasound session. The 35-min ultrasound
A bilingual (English and Russian), interactive On- session reached the remote guidance team after an ap-
orbit Proficiency Enhancement (OPE) CD-ROM was de- proximate 2-s satellite delay. Refinements in probe
veloped which incorporated multimedia elements of placement and ultrasound system settings were com-
the experimental overview and conduct, ultrasound municated to the astronaut as a series of real-time feed-
principles, equipment setup, anatomy, and skill-en- bacl< commands from the remote experts.
hancing games. OPE was specially designed to allow Several nomenclature and knowledge-base issues
the user to roam through modules in any order and were revealed by OPE keystroke analysis prior to the
navigate using keyboard or mouse. The experimental real-time session. The real-time guidance expert was
design required a 1-h session on OPE to be completed made aware of these issues and made the necessary
7 01 prior to the ultrasound examination. Information adjustments to the procedures and terminology during
regarding program navigation, timing, language used, the real-time ultrasound session on the 155. During the
keystrokes, and answers to pretest questions were re- real-time session it became obvious that these issues,
corded during the OPE session and later downloaded which were previously identified by OPE analysis,
for analysis. The analysis of OPE data was performed could have caused some confusion or miscommunica-
by comparing the crewmember’s responses and l<ey- tion resulting in degraded image quality and increased
strokes to their preﬂight training data and to the re- scanning time. For example the OPE results indicated
spouses of similarly trained non-physicians. The OPE that the crew was under the impression that the remote
data were used to help the sonographic guidance expert guidance expert could ”see” how they were holding the
on the ground to maximize the quality of the real-time probe using a Video camera in the Destiny module. This
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine ° Vol. 76, N0. 6, Section I ° ]1me 2005 595

"
"3","TRAINING FOR NON-PHYSICIAN ASTRONAUTS—FOALE ET AL.
HRF Ultrasound Keyboard
1 V ‘ ' ~ ~ + *s IiIII t 1
1’ - - r - 1. -""’““%""”. _, 1 t I
a a F a a a a G w
He Ea ease gyw; - ,

77: ‘ . uPiJAYE 1 ‘SECECT -
mmmmmssaaaanaa . 1
lsmlgaaaun /‘ - ""' ‘
maaaaauaaaﬂa_ ~J: -1 -
IIIWE - - 1

Probe Application Points Probe Manipulation
ct \‘1 _ _ ;
. £ 1
Q N ’ Pan
® "" :2 N11;
gm » _ a , _
1.. Ilt
‘1 ® L2 . 1C3 ' I
: ® . Lg, c2
'1 « ' T C4 ‘ Rotate
Fig. 1. A reference ”cue card” was developed for use with input from astronaut users to facilitate Clinical ultrasound examinations on the [$5. The
card contains information on equipment controls, probe placement, representative images, and probe manipulation.
was not the case, since the only Video the remote guid- rax. The position of the diaphragm was noted by locat-
ance expert sees is the actual ultrasound image. The ing the interface of the lung/liver in relation to the
crew was made aware of this prior to the examination lateral costal landmarks to evaluate the potential liver
session and they recalled being much more focused on displacement due to microgravity. A thorough exami-
the commands being given by the guidance expert. OPE nation of a rib surface was completed to demonstrate
analysis also showed the crew spent some additional the ability of the ultrasound examination to exclude rib
time on certain ultrasound nomenclature sections and, fracture.
therefore, the remote guidance expert used simpler A phased array (“cardiac”) probe was used to com-
terms and conducted the examination much slower, plete a full echocardiographic examination using all
ensuring that the crew would follow all the commands. commonly required Views and modes. Heart position-
This shows that shorter training times prior to ﬂight are ing did not appear to be significantly inﬂuenced by the
still very successful in getting good results on orbit, but microgravity environment, allowing conventional echo-
the OPE analysis revealed some potential areas where cardiographic windows to be used. Excellent evaluation
the guidance expert can alter their approach prior to the of cardiac anatomy and function was accomplished
examination on orbit. during the 25-min cardiac examination, and resulted in
A full thoracic ultrasound examination was con- a full set of data on Chamber size, wall thickness, con-
ducted which included three separate ultrasonographic tractility, hemodynamics, and other commonly mea-
windows. Lung sliding was readily Visualized as well sured parameters. The high-frequency linear probe was
as the ”comet tail” artifact; in a clinical setting these used to complete a transverse and sagittal examination
could be used to exclude the diagnosis of pneumotho- 0f the carotid arteries and internal jugular veins during
596 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine ° Vol. 76, N0. 6, Section I ° june 2005

"
"4","TRAINING FOR NON-PHYSICIAN ASTRONAUTS—FOALE ET AL.
3; ass -- ,. xﬁ «5s, '2. as the first-line diagnostic procedure in abdominal
g» 3;“: a i g; a s. i f a . trauma, and has been verified as accurate and sensitive
. £2: V is - _ l in identifying intra-abdominal hemorrhage, even when
’ _ 4» Mi; _ .. sass W221 . . g performed by non-radiologists (2,11,14). The feasibility
. . ,:;. ._A f ”’V’ of ultrasonic imaging in human spaceﬂight has been
1;; ﬂ ' "" . __ $mn{ a; 35s“ demonstrated in preliminary investigations on both
_: ~. a N x . M *3 5“”;an i US. and Russian spacecraft (1,5,6,9). NASA medical
J's"" w g. a ” m“ 4 operations staff have also demonstrated the utility of
“,2 ' - g #4 :_’ ﬁgs; , § diagnostic ultrasound in abdominal and thoracic
M” m g . ”/e: : ,3? trauma in microgravity experiments on animal models
131a,..1;m‘__, W?“ am [gs ’ 3,! 4:; during parab olic ﬂight on KC-135 aircraft. These inves-
s' "" . ”w h“ f .. ’ “"" 3 ti ations su est that the sensitiVit and s ecificit of
W5 ms as » § s g gg . . y p . y .
...,:: - s g s w j: , these ultrasound applications are not degraded in mi-
”‘s as s s ‘9 .1 3 ~ ' , t crograVity, and may even be enhanced in certain cir-
m :3 :5, .K .. cumstances.
“3 "" . ~ ‘ 3% M ‘ During the postmission debrief with the crew they
’ a_ mmW , "" "" "" stated that the ADUM OPE experiment-unique soft-
Fig. 2. Dr. Michael Foale is performing a cardiac ultrasound exam on ware used in this research streamlined equipment
fellovy) cgwrllﬁerpberdAtlﬁxandeir ll<aleri.bThe ulérasoudrid “itrgjﬁigelisﬁerasilé/ setup, subject and operator positioning, and the 511C-
n r. n n r r In Wl l n - -
\SAE/tﬁile h/e holdgchZrobeEitnChDis rijglsitahgnde Atlgeiajnuctee Kaleri is heEiBng haeld ceSSful cornpletion Of the complex ultrasound taSkS Vla
to the Crew Medical Restraint System by only the waist and shoulder remOte gthdahce- Furthermore! they agreed that the
straps. Dr. Foale is interacting with ground-based experts in Mission ”just-in-time” expertise delivery approach allowed the
Control using a voice-activated communications headset. preﬂight training time to be significantly reduced. The
modular construction of the OPE program allows fu-
, ture HRF refinements or equipment alterations to be
rest and Wlth a Mueller maneuver. Components Of the electronically added as required. This multimedia ap-
ultrasound examinations, Wthh required a moderate to proach to training and proficiency enhancement could
hlgh degree Of continuous probe pressure, were re- be used for other complex tasks that require focused
ported to cause some hand fatigue. skills or complex instructions. The self-reporting feature
of the program allows ground experts to assess opera-
DISCUSSION tor familiarity with the procedures to guide the conduct
The astronaut and cosmonaut crews of the Interna- Of the session.
tional Space Station are rigorously trained on a multi- The abthty Of the ISS crew to perform complexnltra-
tude of tasks which encompass housekeeping, systems sound tasks. aboard the ISS supports the hypothesis that
operations, navigation and communications, scheduled a non-phys1c1an crewmernber thh modest tteththgth
research experiments, medical and environmental mon- ultrasound can perform htgh ﬁdehtYr diagnostic-quality
itoring, and many others. The Crew Medical Officer exarninations when directed by a gronnd-based expert.
(CMO), who is rarely a physician, provides most of the The images acquired by the astronaut 1“ thts Stitlldy were
medical support on the 155. The ability of ground-based Of excellent content and quality, and 1h a . real medical
clinicians to reliably diagnose and treat patients in scenario wonld .have PEOtht’d essential information to
space or other remote locations depends on fast and 8111019 mission impact clinical 0190510“ mak1ng.There
accurate bidirectional transmission Of information. were no discernible differences between the ultrasound
With the limited medical training of the CMO, real-tirne examinations perforrned on ?tbtt and those performed
communication during an illness or trauma-related cri- 1n stanolard .terrestrial conditions when evaluated by
sis is Vitally important, particularly if real-time imaging the radiologist/nltrasonographer 01: surgeon team 1“""
is to be employed. volved in this trial. The optimal training of crewmern-
Ultrasound may provide a means to diagnose a wide bers for the ISS and later exploration-class m1ss1ons 1s
variety of conditions including abdominal or urinary St1ll being defined. This initial ultrasound experience
pathology, sinus of dental infection, ocular trauma, and suggests that limited training, combined W1th on-board
musculO—skeletal injury, as well as provide crucial proficiency enhancement and directed remote guidance
physiologic information for research purposes. The out— from centrally based experts, provides an effective par-
come of a medical contingency may be changed drasti- adigm fOI' performing complex tasks in special circum-
cally if clinical decisions are supported by objective stances. The examination was conducted within a
diagnostic information. A suite of dedicated medical strictly limited timeframe, which would probably be
equipment was delivered to the 155 by the U5, and the case in the majority of terrestrial situations, such as
Russian Partners, and some additional medical hard- in some remote and most military settings. The time
ware is available as part of the 155 Human Research delays experienced by astronauts on the Moon were
Facility. The ultrasound system used in this study, the 2—4 s, which makes this real-time sonographic guidance
only medical imaging device on board, is an advanced technique a possible candidate to support future Moon
multipurpose research imaging tool equipped with a exploration missions. Exploration—class missions, such
linear, a broadband curvilinear, and a cardiac probe. as human ﬂights to Mars, will have communication
Ultrasound is currently used in most trauma centers delays of up to 45 min and, therefore, will require
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine ° Vol. 76, N0. 6, Section I ° ]1me 2005 597

"
"5","TRAINING FOR NON-PHYSICIAN ASTRONAUTS—FOALE ET AL.
substantially more medical autonomy. Just-in-time REFERENCES
training appears to be an essential element Of such 1. Atkov OYu, BecinenkoYS, Fomina GA. Ultrasound techniques in
missions; OPE software could serve as a prototype for s56a9ce7gned1c1ne. AV1at Space Env1ron Med 1987,58(9, Suppl.).
development Of neXt'generatlon expertise dehvery 3yS- 2. Boulanger BR, Kearney PA, Brenneman FD, et a1. Utilization of
tems Wthh WOUld account for the laCk Of real'tlme FAST (Focused Assessment With Sonography for Trauma) in
communications. 1999: results of a survey of North American trauma centers.
The unique constraints imposed by the space enVi- Am Surg 2000; 66:1049—55.
ronment require the development of novel training, 3- Bags JR- ﬁﬁcﬁggssggswfgr;132195511303 to Mars- AViat Space
- - - - nViron e ; : — , e .
dlagnOStIC’ and therapeutic Strategles° Althoggh some 4. Fincke EM, Padalka G, Lee D, et al. Evaluation of shoulder
Of the aerospace procedures currently investigated by integrity in space: first report of musculoskeletal US on
NASA are appropriate only for the space enVironment, the International Space Station. Radiology 2005 234:
other algorithms are readily transferable to the Earth 319—22.
including rural or military applications, The remotely 5. Gazenko OG, Shulzhenko EB, Grigoriev AI, et a1. Medical inves-
guided ultrasound concept, with CMOS 0r comparably tigationé during an 8—month ﬂight 0“ Salyut'7/SOYUZ'T- Kosm
trained first responders as operators, is a significant, ,BIOIAVMkosmMEd'1990;249—14' ,
linicall relevant advancement in s ace medicine with 6' GﬂgOﬂeY AL Bugmv SA.’ BogomOIOV VY’ Et al.' MEdlcal results Of
C y , , , ,p , , ’ the M1r year-long m1ss1on. Kosm B101 AV1akosm Med. 1991;
profound ramiﬁcations for terrestrial medicme. 34.544_ 8.
7. Grigoriev AI, Egorov AD. The theory and practice of medical
CONCLUSIONS support of long-term space missions. Aviakosm Ekolog Med
1997; 31:14—25.
A remOtely gUIded thorac1c, cardlacr and vaSCUIar 8. Harris BA, Billica RD, Bishop SL, et a1. Physical examination
examination with clinically acceptable fidelity and during space ﬂight. Mayo Clin. Proc. 1997,- 72:301—8.
speed iS possible, even With a minimally trained non- 9. Jadvar H. Medical imaging in microgravity. Aviat Space Environ
medical ultrasound operator and communications con- MEd 2000.713640—6- . . .
straints. Factors contributing to 811C CGSS include a robust 10. NASA..Med1cal intervention and care. 188 medical operations
-b d roficienc enhancement 1‘0 ram a S stem requirements document 2003; SSP-50260(ReV.B ed.):Clause 4.1.
on par P y , P g ’ , y Houston, TX: NASA; 2003.
Of Vlsual tOOIS/ and a conventlon among PaI‘UCIPantS 11. Patel JC, Tepas J] 3rd. The efficacy of focused abdominal sonog-
regarding terminology and procedure. A wider consid- raphy for trauma (FAST) as a screening tool in the assessment
eration Of these training paradigms for the Space PI‘O- of injured children. J Pediatr Surg 1999; 34244—7; discussion
gram and other time critical applications on Earth ap- 524- . . . . .
pears to be warranted. 12. Sargsyan A..1\4ed1cal irriegmg. In: Barratt M, Pool S, eds. Prmc1—
ples of clinical medicme for spaceﬂight. New York: Springer-
Verlag (In press).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 13. Sargsyan AE, Hamilton DR, Jones JA, et a1. FAST at MACH 20:
The authors acknowledge the enabling work Of the entire N AS A clinical ultrasound aboard the International Space Station.
experimental team, the Human Research Facility, and Telescience J Trauma 2005; 58335—9-
Personnel in the successful completion of this on-orbit activity. 14. Scalea TM, Rodriguez A, Chiu WC, 6’: a1. Focused assessment
Supported by NASA Flight Grant NNJO4HB07A and the National With sonography for trauma (FAST): results from an interna-
Space Biomedical Research Institute Grant SMSOO301. tional consensus conference. J Trauma 1999; 46:466 —72.
598 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine ° Vol. 76, N0. 6, Section I ° ]1me 2005

"
