"","x"
"1","Ii:“!m_ TRENDS in PlantScience Vol .6 No.12 December 2001 591
ISCience & Society
2001: A p la nt space odyssey
Brati sl av Stan kovi (2'
December 2001 — reflecti ng on the Recently, two major factors have 0 Selection of appropriate growth media
current status of pi ant space bi ology, one boosted the potenti al for qual ity pl ant types (e.g. peat—vermi cul ite, zeo| ites
mi ght i niti a| |y be tempted to take a research in space: the assembly of the or arci | | ite).
pessi mi sti c attitude. But is it real |y such a Internati ona| Space Stati on (ISS) as a o Speci a| ized nutri ent del ivery systems.
giant step from today’s plant experi ments permanent experi mental outpost; and o Planti ng the seeds.
in orbittotheextraterrestrial forestry the advances in molecular biology that o Securing the seeds, plants and other
concepts descri bed in Ray Bradbu ry’s have created previously uni magi nab|e materials in desi red places i n the
TheMartian Chroniclesl? experi mental opportuniti es with small absence of gravity.
Experi ments usi ng seeds and plants tissue samples. We are enteri ng an era 0 Avai |abi | ity of power and other services
flown in MICROGRAVITY (seeGIossary) have when we can begi n designi ng long-term (cooling water, ai r).
been conducted in manned and unmanned experi ments with molecular, cel | ular and 0 Control ofthe gaseous envi ron ment,
spacecraft si nce the begi nni ng of human physiological questions i n mi nd. ai r purification, canopy ventilation.
exploration of space. Thefi rst plant 0 Light quality and distri bution.
materi a| s were taken i nto a microgravity How to grow plants in space 0 M ai ntenance of hydraul i c conti nuums.
envi ron ment in 1960 — wheat, pea, maize Successful space farmi ng hi nges upon 0 Careful |y monitored and control led
and onion seeds hitchi ng a space ride on re| iab|e plant growth in control led plant surroundi ngs by re|iab|e control
board Sputni k 4. Si ncethen, privi leged envi ron ments i n microgravity — a complex systems.
research groups have used every given task requi ri ng chal lengi ng engi neeri ng M uch ofthe early work in orbit was
spacefl i ght opportunity to understand designs. Issues such as ai r conventi on, i nadvertently tai nted with uncontrol led
how to grow plants in space and how microenvi ron ment and power envi ron mental variables and artefacts.
plants grow and develop in microgravity. consumption become i mportant. To date, For instance, elevated ethylene has been
— one of the most significant outcomes from implicated as a cul prit in artefactual
‘The concepts for landing missions on M ars pl ant space bi ology experi ments has been results of spacefl i ght experi ments,
are driving the design of M ars-deployable an indi rect one: it has become a test bed leadi ng to altered plant morphology,
greenhouses...’ for novel technologies on envi ron mental development and steri | ity4r5.A product of
— control and life support. The design of plant metabolism and an important
After four decades of experi mentation, these technologies requi res i nteraction growth regulator, ethylene can override
little is known about the mechanisms between plant biologists and engi neers, gravitational effects in closed
underlying the molecular, cellular, leading to so| utions and compromises to environments. Once recognized,the
physiol ogi cal and devel opmental make the hardware perform and the ethylene problem highlighted the
responses of pi ants to the absence of experi ments work in mi crogravity. Thus, necessity for ti ght control of the
gravity. The difficulty i n establishi ng a in addition to asking plant space biology envi ronment in orbit. This includes not
more comprehensive understandi ng of questions, verification of new hardware only mai ntai ni ng opti mal levels of
the microgravity effect on plants stems and software is often a combi ned goal in temperatu re, humidity, lighti ng and
from the limited number of opportuniti es these studies. nutrient del ivery, but also control | i ng
for long-term studies i n orbit, the Sustai ni ng plant growth in spacefor carbon dioxide, oxygen, ethylene and
i ntroducti on of additi ona| envi ron mental extended periods of ti me i ntroduces other vol ati | e organi c compounds at
and biological stresses,thediversity of signiﬁcant challenges relativeto basicplant |eve|s be| ow the threshold for plant
model systems used, growth conditions cultivation. The uniqueissuesinclude: physiological responses4r6.
maintained, and biological questions
asked. The requi red vol ume i n which to Glossary
grow plants is extensive, and the
duration of plant cultivation is long. Gravitropism: The process of how plants sense and respond to gravity.
In comparison to terrestrial studies, Gravimorphogenesis: Gravity-regulated organ development in plants.
experi ments i n orbit present unique Graviperception: Gravity signal perception by plants.
| i mitations, such as avai |ab|e crew ti me, Gravitransduction: Gravity signal transduction to a target region.
power and storage. Graviresponse: M odulated growth of plants in response to gravity.
N evertheless, progress in plant space M icrogravity: Gravity field of 10-6 g;the condition whenever an object is in ‘free fall .’
biology has been made over the years. Nastic movement: Response ofa plant organ to a non-directional stimulus.
Periodical reviewszr3 have used case STS: Space Transportation System.
studiesto highlight and discuss the Tropic movement: Directional response by a plant to a stimulus. Itcan be positive or
achi evements from this heroi C peri od of negative (i .e. towards or away from the source of the stimulus).
plant biology i n space.
http://p|ants.trends.com 1360-1385/01/$ —see front matter ©2001 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. P]I: Sl360-1385(01)02158—6

"
"2","- orientation or reproduction, or what electromagnetic i nterferences and cosmic
' processes take pl ace at a cel | u|ar or radi ati on might i nfl uence pl ant
__.'..i_' . . . ' molecular level. physiological responses. Extravehicular
.'-_—-'i'_,_ 11:91; .. -_.- . Spaceflight experi ments with higher activities resulti ng in ai r pressu re
'-'='_-_' '. .'""_'[E._ :- .351 _'_ . _ plants have typically looked at individual changesin the growth chamber,
.-. . -il:' -'"" E"" 1. -' -.-_I .5..-' ' I ' processes, functions or structures. These temporary power losses and other
”— '%. - - - 1- ""5E“ include examinations of chromosomal uncontrol led variables can beful |y
-' ._I'_--..-|l I
'1; . '-_"". -'-_.}"" . 41W""- ""1 H'EIEJFL. damage and plant cell division, replicated only when a 1 gcontrol is grown
.."" ﬁg?“ ."" .'j-""E """"55"""" j embryogenesis, photosynthesis, biomass in an onboard centrifuge14. In reality,this
r H' . _ i..- . . :_ . . production, cell wall formation, starch crucial control is rarely avai |ab|e.
. - ._ Hg; ' - -'- - I: metabolism, aminoacid composition, The use oftransgenicplantsin
"" ' | i pi CI and fatty aci CI content, pathogeni city, mi crogravity experi ments should enhance
- I, reproductive development and gene our understandi ng of molecular events i n
- _ ' expression. M any experi ments have space. To address this questi on, transgeni c
_' yielded conflicti ng results, even at a Arabidopsis expressi ng alcohol
Fig. 1. Arabidopsis thaliana completing a full life cycle fundamental level — both decreases and dehyd rogenase (Adh)—GU S reporter gene
0“ the Internationa' Space Station-The 9mm“ increases in plant growth in microgravity constructs were flown on board the
ghamberwas dévemped aw""? W""SC0.”5""”.Centerf°r have been reportedZ. This can be shutt| e15 to i nvesti gate possi b| e i nci pi ent
paceAutomatIon and Robotics (U nIverSIty of _ _ _ _
WisconsinM adison, w1, USA).The plants were attrI buted, at least In part, to the use of hypOXI a resulti ng from the lack of
photographed Upon return to Earth. 25J uly 2001. different species at different stages of convecti on-driven gas movement. The use
devel opment with different experi mental of Arabidopsis contai ni ngAdh—green
A few successful long-term protocols and growth envi ron ments fl uorescent protei n constructs is planned
experi ments i n mi crogravity are (i .e. hardware). Revi siti ng o| cl questi ons for a future spacefl ight (R. Ferl , pers.
particularly noteworthy. Arabidopsis usi ng plants grown in tightly control led commun.). Gene expressi on profi | i ng
thaliana plants completed afull life cycle environments should be revealing. For using DNA microarrayanalysis is
on Salyut-7, a| beit with del ayed exampl e, recent experi ments exami ni ng underway usi ng fern (Ceratopteris
development and production of numerous the cell wall architecture and ligni n richardii) (S. Roux, pers. commun.) and
empty seeds7. The fi rst space vegetabl es compositi on of wheat grown on the space Arabidopsis (A .S.N . Reddy, pers.
were produced in 1993 i n the Svet growth shuttledid not reveal differences i n their commun.) on board a space shuttle.
chamber on board M ir8. M ore recently, the amounts or compositi on, regardl ess of The choice of sound experi mental
M ir Greenhouse was used for growth of the gravitati ona| fi e| cl differencesll. model systems is i mportant because the
two and a half generations of Wisconsi n This contrasts with early spacefl ight eXi stence of a vari ety of responses mi ght
Fast Plants (Brassica rapa)9, and for experi ments, which reported that reflect organi sm-dependent differences.
growth of two generati ons of wheat”. mi crogravi ty had adverse effects on Si ngl e cell systems (Chara a| gae cel Is,
The Wi sconsi n Center for Space cel | ulose mi crofi bri| ori entati on and Ceratopteris fern spores, moss Ceratodon)
Automation and Robotics (WCSAR, ligni n composition and amount2. have been used toidentify gravisensi ng
U niversity of Wi sconsi n—M adi son, WI, M icrogravity might infl uence plant structures and mechani sms. Certai n
U SA), i n col laboration with Space growth and development, di rectly or vegetables and crops, i mportant
E Xplorers, Inc. (G reen Bay, WI, U SA), i ndi rectly. The mi croenvi ron ment candi dates for long space fl i ghts
recently conducted a seed-to—seed growth becomes so much more i mportant in space, (e.g. dwarf wheat and ri ce)4, need to be
ofArabidopsis i n space, the fi rst pl ant life where e| i mi nati on of the buoyancy-driven i ncl uded. The potential ofArabidopsis
cycle experi ment on the ISS (Fig. 1). The flows (convection, sedi mentation) molecular genetics and gravitropic
pl ants compl eted their devel opment in i nfl uences gas compositi on, water mutants should be used.
two months and set viabl e seeds, showi ng relati ons, transpi ration, and
that Arabidopsis does not need gravity for photosynthesi s. In space, pl ants can not Prospects
normal growth and development. Detai led use gravity as an envi ronmental cue to In the planned human space endeavors,
results from this experi ment are i n estab| i sh gravitropic set-poi nt angles of pi ants wi || pl ay a si gnifi cant ro| e, both as
preparation for su bmi ssi on e| sewhere. their organle, which might explai n some a food sou rce and as components of the
of the disoriented gFOWth,TROPIC and NASTIC regenerative | ife—su pport systems16.
How plants grow and develop in phenomena observed in microgravity. For There is a pressi ng need to better
microgravity instance, even though Ci rcumnutation understand plant GRAVITROPISM and plant
The effect of gravity on the di rection of (see M igl iaccioand Piconese glossary, growth and development in microgravity,
pl ant organ growth is obvi ous. page 562) of Arabi dopsis hypocotyl s to affi rm, refute or modify the advanced
Consequently, GRAVIM ORPHOGEN ESIS, proceeds i n the absence of gravity, its theori es on pl ant gravi percepti on and
GRAVIPE RCE PTION , GRAVITRAN sou CTION and Characteri sti CS appear to be different13. gravi responsesl4r17.
GRAVIRESPONSE were the i niti a| foci of Adequate control s for mi crogravity E Xperi mentati on on board the ISS at
si mplistic experi ments i n orbit. Beyond experi ments are necessary, although 350 km altitude at an orbital speed of
these phenomena, |itt|eis known about difficulttoachieve. Stationary(1gon ~8 km s-1 poses challenges. Nevertheless,
how microgravity might affect Earth)controls are subopti mal. Launch in spite ofthelimited accessibility tothe
germi nati on, metabol i sm, devel opment, accel erati on, vi brati ona| effects, ISS (currently five to siX shutt| efl i ghts
http://p|ants.trends.com

"
"3","Iimmi— TRENDS in PlantScience Vol .6 No.12 December 2001 593
annually), and the small number oflife As the experimentation on theISS the Salyut-7 orbital station.Dok/adyA/<ad.
science experi ments, a great deal of expands, other important projects begi n NaUk 555R 271/ 509—512
planni ng and testi ng conti nues. to take shape. The concepts for landi ng 8 Ivanova'T'N ' eta"" (1993)Th.e 15t Space

. . . . . _ vegetables have been grown In the SVET
Researchers are busy preparl ng for the m1ssnons on M ars are drIVI ng the desn gn greenhouse using controlled environmental
STS-107 shuttl e mi ssi on scheduled for next of M ars-depl oyabl e greenhouses conditions.ActaAstronautica 29, 639—644
year, when several plant microgravity (R.A. Bucklin eta/., unpubl ished). In 9 Musgrave, M -E-eta/- (2000)Gravity
experiments will be carried in orbit. The space biology,thesky isthelimit, ancl independencedseed'to‘s’eed CVC'ingi“ Brass”
Closed E qui l i brated Biol ogi cal Aquati c there is a future for the pi ant rocket rapa' manta 210’ 400—406. .
. . . . 10 Sytchev,V.N . etal. (1999) Final plant experiments
System (C E BAS) — the most compl ex SCI entI sts dreaml ng of CH scovery. on M ir provide second generation wheat and
ecosystem to be fl own in space, which . ., seeds. Grav. SpaceBiol. Bull. 13, 48
contai ns an aquatic angiosperm BratISIaY Stank‘Iw'c I I I I 11 Levine, L.H . etal. (2001)Ce|l-wall architecture
(Ceratophy/lum)18,will beflown 0n gnlverSIW ofW|sconsm-Mad|son, Wisconsm and lignin-compositionofwheat developed ina
I I enter for Space Automation and Robotics micrograVIty enVI ronment. Phytochen/stry
STS'107- Wheat evaPOtransl"" rat'on and (WCSAR), 2348 Engineering Hall, M adison, 57, 835—846
photosynthesi s i n mi crogravity will soon W153706, U SA. 12 Firn, D. etal. (1999)The ups and downs of
be i nvestigated on board the 155 e-mail : bstankovic@facstaff.wisc.edu graVitmpism' Trmdsf’D/antSCi' 4{ 252
(6W.5.1m....np..blshed).The 13 1.2::$222.:1::2111911::1°::126:12:.
facn I ”5' es on boa rd the ISS ShOLIJId offer an 1 Bradbury, R. (1976) TheMartian Chronicles P/anta 203, S147—S158 I
enV' r0“ ment u n ' quely condUCI ve t0 (lst edn), Bantam Books, N ew York, U SA 14 Perbal , G. etal. (1997) Statocyte polarity and
studi es on the gravity effect on root 2 H alstead,T. and Dutcher, FR. (1987) Plants in gravisensitivity i n seedl i ng roots grown in
movements, tropi sms and spi ral space. Annu. Rev. P/antPhysiol. 38, 317—345 microgravity. P/anta 203, SS7—S62
processesl3r19. In 2002, A rabidopsis Will be 3 Dutcher,E.R.eta/. (1994)Prograssin plant 15 Paul,A.L-.et-a/. (2001)Transgeneexprassion
. research In space. Adv. SpaceRes. 14, 159—171 patterns Indicate that spacefl Ight affects stress
grown on board the 15$ for a second t' me’ 4 Bugbee, B. (1999) E ngineering plants for signal perception and transduction in
and we eXpeCt t0 bri “9 ti SSU€ sampl es for spaceflight envi ronments. Grav. SpaceBiol. Bull. Arabidopsis. P/antPhysiol. 126, 613—621
D N A mi croarray analysi s (gene 12, 67—74 16 Wheeler, R.M . etal. (1996) Proximate composition
expressi 0n profi | i ng) back to E arth in 5 Kiss,J . etal. (2000) Development and growth of of CE L LS crops grown in NASA’s biomass
Apri I . Improved meth 0d S for preservati on several strains ofArabidopsis seedlings in production chamber.A9v. SpaceRes. 18, 43—47
_ micrograVIty. Int. J. P/antSCI. 161, 55—62 17 Sack, FD. (1997) Plastlds and graVItroplcsenSI ng.
0f plant materl al on board the ISS ShOU'd 6 Stutte, G.W. (1999) Phytochemicals;implications P/anta 203, 563—568
GXPanCI the Opportuniti es for Ce” arid for long-duration space missions. In Biologically 18 Bluem, V. and Paris, F. (2001)Aquatic modules
mol ecu | ar bi 0| ogy experi mentati on_ If and ActiveNatura/ Products:Agroch6mica/s for bioregenerative l ife support systems based on
when compl eted, the long-awaited ISS ECSéISréeI-éf. and Cutler, S.J ., eds), pp. 275—286, igegslingbiotechnologyActa Astronautica
CentrifugeA-ccommodatlon M odule 7 Merkys,A.J . and Laurinavichys, RS. (1983) 19 M ilgliaccio, F. and Piconese, s. (2001)
ShOU I d cont“ bUte towa rd haV' “9 the Complete cycle of i ndividual development of Spi ralizations and tropisms in Arabidopsis roots.
much needed 1 9 control S i n orbit. Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) H eynh. plants on board Trends P/antSci. 6, 561—565

I Book Review
_— fruitful ly at all levels of i ntegrati on, bacteri um and two fungi , respectively.
A"" there IS to know from moleculeto population. The The other chapterstreat aspects such as
about the resistance Of developmentsin molecglar genetics thegeneticsofdisease resistance, _

_ have resulted In new msnghts and, In reSIstance I n populations, antimicrobial
plants to d IseaSe some i nstances, confi rmed pri nci ples compounds, the hypersensitive response,
that had been proposed decades ago. induced resistanceand transgenic
M echanisms of Resistance to Plant Diseases M echanisms of R esistance to Plant approaches to control epi demi cs. The book
Edited by A.J . Slusarenko, R.S.S. Fraser and Diseases revi ews the research al so features a su bject and a speci es i ndex.
L.C. van Loon, KIuwerAcademic Publishers, developments i n plant—pathogen The back cover states that the
2000. 245.00, US$264.50; £167.50 hbk i nteraction in a comprehensive way. This chapters were written to make an
(vi + 620 pages) ISBN 0 7923 6418 X textbook not only covers physiological , advanced textbook rather than a
molecular and cel l ular aspects of col lection of reviews. The authors and
'-'rI-.!I--I';':'---I:'.r.- _ Oneofthe most resistance mechanisms, but also covers editors have done an excellentjob to
E:;"":.;:'3'i'."".'!.‘5.L""_;;'ﬁ!‘-""J""5 challenging modes ofinheritanceand epidemiological achieve this objective.The styleof
"" -: "" research fields i n aspects, deal i ng al most as much with writi ng makes the i nformation easy to
r . plant sciences is suscepti bility as with resistance. Its scope understand and care is taken to avoid an
.— . — I. the i nteraction is therefore somewhat wi cler than the titl e aval anche of exampl es. As is appropri ate
-. --""""_'"" . ' between plants suggests. The book comprises 11 chapters, for such a textbook, the authors
- .I- .- l and the pathogens each written by experts i n their particular illustrated the text with schematic
:_ ""' that threaten field.Thefirst chapter issubdivided into figuresand occasional photographs,all
2"""" ""' a them. The su bject four su b—chapters, which serve as case bl ack-and-white. M any of the chapters
is bei ng studied studies on resistance to a vi rus, a contai n boxes that eXpl ai n certai n terms
http://p|ants.trends.com 1360—1385/01/$ —see front matter ©2001 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. P11: Sl360—1385(01)02154-9

"
