"","x"
"1","Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
® Pergamon acmucu@mnuc1~
www'°""“""°""°°m""°°“°’w doi: 10.1016/80273-1177(03)00250-3

SEED—TO-SEED GROWTH OF ARABIDOPSIS T HALLANA ON THE

INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION
' B. M. Link, S. J. Durst, W. Zhou, and B. Stankovié

University of Wisconsin-Madison, Wisconsin Center for Space A utomation and Robotics, 545\Science Drive,
. Madison, WI 53 71 1, USA
_ - ABSTRACT

The assembly of the International Space Station (188) as a permanent experimental outpost has provided the
opportunity for quality plant research in space. To take advantage of this orbital laboratory, engineers and
scientists at the Wisconsin Center for Space Automation and Robotics (WCSAR), University of Wisconsin-
Madison, developed a plant growth facility capable of supporting plant growth in the microgravity
environment. Utilizing this Advanced Astroculture (ADVASC) plant growth facility, an experiment was
conducted with the objective to grow Arabid0psis thaliana plants from seed-to-seed on the ISS. Dry
Arabidopsis seeds were anchored in the root tray of the ADVASC growth chamber. These seeds were
successfully germinated ﬁom May 10 until the end of June 2001. Arabidopsis plants grew and completed a full
life cycle in microgravity. This experiment demonstrated that ADVASC is capable of providing environment
conditions suitable for plant growth and development in microgravity. The normal progression through the
life cycle, .as well as the postﬂight morphometric analyses, demonstrate that Arabidopsis thaliana does not
require the presence of gravity for growth and development. © 2003 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights
reserved. '
INTRODUCTION

Successful space farming is a function of reliable plant growth in controlled environments in
microgravity. This is a- complex task requiring challenging engineering designs. The design of these
technologies requires interaction between plant biologists and engineers, leading to solutions and compromises
making the hardware perform and experiments work in microgravity. Thus, in addition to researching plant
space biology questions, veriﬁcation of new hardware and software is oﬁen a combined goal in these studies
(Stankovie, 2001).

Arabidopsis thaliana is a frequently used model system in plant biology studies. Some of the factors that
have contributed towards its popularity include its short life cycle, completely sequenced genome, and
existence of a multitude of mutants and transgenic plants. This is why Arabidopsis was chosen for recent
Space Shuttle experiments examining fundamental questions on plant growth in microgravity (Katembe et al.,
1998; Kiss et al., 2000; Paul et al., 2001). Arabidopsis has also been used to understand plant growth and
development in microgravity (Kuang et al., 1995). Transgenic Arabidapsis plants have been utilized to
address various aspects of spaceﬂight-speeiﬁc hypoxic stress in Shuttle experiments (Porterﬁeld et al., 1997;
Paul et al., 2001). In addition, Arabidopsis plants have previously been grown in microgravity for a full life
cycle on Salyut-7, albeit with delayed development and production of numerous empty seeds (Merkys and
Laurinaviehys, 1983).

In order to successfully grow plants in space and to understand how plants grow and develop in
microgravity, we developed an. automated facility for support of plant growth in microgravity environment.
Using this facility (Advanced Astroculture; Figure l), the Wisconsin Center for Space Automation and
Robotics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, in collaboration with Space Explorers, Inc., conducted an
experiment with the objective of growing Arabidopsis thaliana plants from seed-to-seed on the International
Space Station. The initial ﬁndings from this experiment are reported here.

Adv. Space Res. Vol. 31. No. 10. pp. 2237-2243. 2003

O 2003 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved

Printed in Great Britain

0273-1177103 $30.00 + 0.00 .
g

"
"2","2238 B. M. Link er a1.
MATERIALS AND METHODS

The ADVASC payload with n'inety-one seeds of Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh. (ecotype Columbia-O)
planted in the root module was launched to the [88 on April 19, 2001. The ADVASC facility was activated
(powered up) on May 10; deactivated (powered down) on July 19; and returned to Earth on July 25, 2001.
During approximately two months in space, the experiment went through seed hydration, germination,
vegetative and reproductive plant development, and seed formation and maturation. With that, the plants
completed an entire life cycle in microgravity, the ﬁrst seed to seed experiment carried out on the 188. On
June 26, the nutrient supply to the plants was intentionally turned off so that the growth chamber could be
desiccated and the seeds preserved. Telemetry data indicated that the plants dried out and completely senesced
approximately two days later.

The experiment was designed to perform autonomously through the entire plant life cycle. The seeds
were planted in two conﬁgurations: (i) with a cotton retention grid; (it) with cotton cartridges rolled in
germination paper. The environment conditions consisted of 22°C i 05°C for the temperature, 70% i 3%
for the relative humidity, 16/8 hours for the light on/off period, 230/25 umol mas"" photosynthetically active
radiation (PAR) at plant rosette level for the red/blue LED lights, minimum of 500 ppm C02.

The ethylene concentration was maintained at ppb levels, as indicated by post-ﬂight analyses of gaseous
samples that were taken at different times. Arcillite particle sizes ranging from 1 mm to 4 mm were used to
maintain adequate media water potential to support plant growth. Modiﬁed half-strength Hoagland’s solution
(Hoagland and Amen, 1950) was used as nutrient. The nutrient solution was delivered into the root tray at
tensions ranging from -0.05 kPa to -0.25 kPa, depending on the stage of plant growth. Using a camera that
was positioned in the center of the light cap, video feed was used to monitor and document the plant growth
and development during the course of the entire experiment.

RESULTS
Performance of Advanced Astroculture

The hardware performed very well especially considering that this was its ﬁrst ﬂight and that it was faced
with several power outages on the International Space Station. No major problems impacting the physiology
of the plants were observed, indicating that Advanced Astroculture (ADVASC) is capable of providing sound
growth conditions for plants in microgravity environment.

agent '-
'47 V, '
{f air ‘1 y , , > _ , 1‘ 3'” '
t3 ,. ' , w M“ .‘A .n
3 '. : .~- ES. Fig. 1. Advanced Astroculture (ADVASC) plant growth
’ . ., .. "" ' chamber for the International Space Station. The tap
, ‘ , ' ¥ ' middeck locker equivalent unit contains the growth
: ~ :_ . j ' E 9 . chamber. The bottom part is the support system;
3 a i. m“. ‘ ADVASC is installed in a rack located in the us. Lab
. .. . W Module on the Iss.

"
"3","' Seed-to-Seed Growth of Ambidopsis on the 188 2239

One of die critical components of Advanced Astroculture is the nutrient delivery subsystem. To deliver

nutrients to the plants in microgravity environment, modiﬁed Hoagland’s nutrient solution is continuously fed
through a system of porous tubes that are positioned in the root tray that contains mating substrate. (arcillite
particles). Once priming of the system is established in microgravity, negative pressure in the porous tubes is
continuously maintained. Through capillary forces, the nutrient solution is delivered to the roots. The water
that is not absorbed by the roots evaporates in the growth chamber, where it is condensed and recycled. Th ere
are no moisture sensors in the ADVASC root tray. Therefore, direct monitoring of the moisture in the root
tray containing arcillite particles is not possible. That limitation presents a problem for the investigators that
follow the experiment ﬁom hundreds of miles away, as they are unable to directly assess the level ‘of moisture
in the rooting substrate (arcillite).

To compensate for the lack of moisture sensors, understanding of the different degrees of wetness of the
mating substrate was acquired empirically. A series of ground experiments were conducted prior to launch.
When different negative pressures were applied to the tubes that deliver nutrient into the root tray,
evapotranspiration rates were monitored. At the same time, the degree of substrate wetness and the plant
growth were visually observed. Representative data from three such control experiments (labeled IV, V, and
VI) are shown in Figure 2. Through a series of ground studies and extrapolation of the evapotransporation
data, we were able to establish correlation between the amount of water being recycled through the sysmm and
the degree of wetness in the rooting substrate. Proper level of arcillite moisture was in particular critical for
germination of the tiny Arabidopsis plants.

-60
c, ‘ e N
w I V
8 .70
' O
» a ‘2’ W
C: E _90
g V
e “V;-
ﬁ 100 y=-12.151x-104.73 o
2 ..
_1 10 R 0.9887 s
4.0 ‘ -3.0 -2.0 -1 .0 0.0
Porous tubes pmssma set point (cm H.0)
Fig. 2. Evapotranspiration rates measured at different degrees of rooting substrate wetness. The Roman
numerals IV. V, and VI refer to different ground control experiments. A regression line is shown for the data
from ground experiment IV. Also plotted are evapotranspiration rates that correspond to three pressure set
points used during the space ﬂight experiment (Flight). This method was used to get an indirect assessment
of the mating substrate water status in microgravity.
Plant Growth In Microgravity
In comparison to ground-grown control plants, the microgravity-grown plants were similarly developed,
healthy, and they were growing well at the time the experiment was shut down (Figure 3). Due to the
relatively high density, these plants were somewhat smaller in comparison to standard greenhouse-grown
Arabidopsis plants. Nevertheless, the growth and development of the plants in space was comparable to
control plants grown in parallel in a similar ADVASC growth facility on the Earth (data not shown).
Microgravity-grown Arabidopsis plants developed rosettes that were comparable to the ground control
plants and typically had a single inﬂorescence stem by the time the experiment was terminated (Figure 4).
Some plants developed secondary inﬂorescence stems (branches). Hundreds of siliques (seed pods) containing
mature seeds were produced in total. The siliques remained attached to the plants, and there were very few
open siliques when the chamber was opened post ﬂight.

"
"4","2240 B. M. Link er a1.
: V“
E
é é
Fig. 3. Arabidopsis thaliana plants grown full life cycle on Fig. 4. A typical Arabidopsis plant that was
the International Space Station. The root tray containing grown for a full life cycle in microgravity
the plants was removed from the ADVASC growth environment (in the ADVASC growth chamber
chamber. Photographed upon return to Earth. on the ISS).
The carbon dioxide levels in the growth chamber were relatively high at the onset of the experiment.
This is probably due to leakage of cabin air containing elevated CO, levels into the growth chamber before the
experiment was powered up. The experiment was initiated approximately three weeks after ADVASC was
transferred onto the 188. In the period preceding the experiment initiation, COz-enriched cabin air probably
diffused into the growth chamber. High levels of CO; were present until plants started emerging and
developing it: the growth chamber. As the plants grew, increased in size, and enlarged the leaf (canopy) area,
notable diurnal patterns of changes in CO; concentration were observed. These changes corresponded to light
on/light off states, and reﬂect net photosynthesis in light and net respiration in darkness (Figure 5). The data
‘WWW l
300° Mm""
,... 2000 i
E 2000 § I: i
..§ A ; ‘
g 2200 "" A 5 A I
t E mnm—w a :
. g g ‘ I
'0 1400 ————-—— , i I
g 1200 ' ‘ i E g ,
012 m 014
Tim e (days)
Fig. 5. Kinetics of the carbon dioxide concentration (in ppm) monitored in the ADVASC growth chamber over a
period of 48 hours (June 2 to June 4, 2001). Note the gradual rise in CO; concentration during the dark
periods (due to respiration) and the gradual tall in CO; concentration during the daylight periods (due to
photosynthesis).

"
"5","Seed-to-Seed Growth of Arabidopsis on the 188 2241
showing kinetics of C02 changes will be used to calculate the net photosynthesis rates and compare the results
with ground—grown I xg controls.

Post—Mission Analyses .

The fact that the objective of the experiment was to grow plants from seed-to-seed in microgravity
limited the type of postﬂight analysis to examination of dry plant material. Thus the postﬂight analyses were
mainly morphometric, and to a lesser degree histological and biochemical. Post-rnission analysis showed that
90% of the seeds germinated in space, though only 70% of the seeds grew to maturity to produce siliques with
viable seeds. Approximately 20% of the plants either were under 3 cm in height or produced no inﬂorescence.
.TheSe were excluded from the statistical calculations. '

E] I . I I . . . _

Two different planting methods were used - cotton cartridges and retention grid (matrix). In general, the
plants grew well under the two different planting methods (Figure 6). There were slight differences; 17% fewer
seed germinated when the retention grid was used rather than cotton cartridges. However, the plants from the
retention grid were healthier. These seeds germinated well, produced taller plants, and more seed per plant.
The effects of the retention matrix (grid) were even more beneﬁcial and more obvious inra parallel ground
study (data not shown).

‘ArabidOpsis plants grown in microgravity were essentially similar to the 1 xg control plants that were
grown in a similar ADVASC growth chamber on Earth. There were slight and statistically insigniﬁcant
differences in the morphometric parameters"" between the comparable set of ground control plants. '
mm

Approximately 3.285 g of dried plant material (rosette leaves, inﬂorescence stems, including siliques) was
harvested from the root tray. This did not include root material. . Approximately 95% or more of the biomass
produced was collected. Plants produced an average of about 10‘leaves. An average of 24 siliques per plant
were produced, each one containing an average of 36 seeds. In comparison to ground-grown controls, the
Arabidopsis plants grown in microgravity appeared healthy and growing normally. There were no statistically
signiﬁcant differences in any 0f the morphometric parameters measured.

The number of aborted siliques was small, less than one silique per plant, regardless of the planting
treatment. There was a strong correlation between the plant weight and the number of siliques produced
(R2=0.92; Figure 7). This is another indicator of healthy growth and normal development of the Arabidopsis
thaliana in microgravity.

I 60 ,
fBRetention Grid
50 ' ”""JélCartridges ""W“ ' “""“““m““‘""““““""“""""'“
-m__....~-...,.__w._..-- 5. WWW;
Leaves Siliques Branches Weight Height Diameter
(mg) (cm) (mm) .
*___.-__.,_.___-——~—————____________________h__.__-__._.._-
Fig. 6. Morphometric analysis of dried Arabidopsis thaliana plants grown in microgravity. The data shown are
averages from all plants: Number of leaves. number of siliques, number of secondary inﬂorescence stems
(branches). plant dry weight (in mg), plant height (in cm). and diameter of the dry leaf rosette (in cm). are
shown for both planting treatments. .

"
"6","2242 B. M. Link at al.
180
, 160 -
.23 140 —A_
‘5 ‘°° —_
' 5 8° -' “
.5 60 , _
.9 4o '1‘:—
°' 20 .97 y=2.2091x-1.1334
o
0 20. 40 60 80
Number of siﬂques
Fig. 7. Correlation between the plant weight and the number of siliques produced per plant. Note the high
degree of correlation.
amen; .

Ethylene, a famous culprit in artifactual results in some prior spaceﬂight experiments, was removed from
the growth chamber through continuous photo-oxidation using a WCSAR-developed ethylene scrubber
(Peterson et aL, 1994). The scrubber ﬁtlly oxidizes hydrocarbons to C02 and H20. Two gaseous samples were
collected from the ADVASC growth chamber at different stages of , plant development (rosette stage and
developed inﬂorescence). These samples were analyzed post-ﬂight for ethylene concentration using a gas‘
chromatograph. The results indicate that the ethylene concentration did not exceed 50 ppb at the two times
sampled, on day 27 and day 42 of the experiment (data not shown).

m .

Approximately 1.418 g of siliques (seed pods) was harvested. They were qualitatively divided into two
apparent classes: mature and moderately mature. Both classes of siliques were found to contain 36 seed on
average. The majority (1.004 g) of siliques were arbitrarily rated as mature, while the remainder of the siliques
was moderately mature. Post ﬂight germination tests of the seeds produced in microgravity indicate that the
seeds were normally developed. The seeds developed in space had a germination rate of- about 80-90%,
regardless whether they were developed in mature or moderately mature siliques. When planted in pots in
stande fashion and grown in the laboratory, the seeds developed in microgravity produced typical

Arabidopsis plants, without any visible abnormalities, and at a rate essentially similar to w.t. Columbia plants
(data not shown). '
DISCUSSION

In the planned human space endeavors, plants will play a signiﬁcant role, ‘both as food source and as
components of the regenerative life support systems. There is a pressing need to better understand plant
gravitropism and plant growth and development in microgravity, to afﬁrm, refute, or modify the advanced
theories on plant graviperception and graviresponses. With the currently small number of available space
ﬂights, the largest gain can be obtained if researchers focus on a few well-estahlished model systems, such as

Arabidopsis thaliana.

This pioneering research was conducted in time when the 188 was still in its initial assembly phase. It was
the ﬁrst ﬁJll plant life cycle study conducted on the 188. The two-month experiment, controlled
telemetrically from the WCSAR ground control center, can be viewed as a prelude into an era of long-term
experiments with plants on orbit, where fundamental questions on plant growth in microgravity can be
revisited, and new questions can be asked. . '

Additional biochemical and histological analyses are under way to determine the amount and composition
of lignin, cell wall and soluble carbohydrates, cellulose, hemicelluloses. Histological and scanning electron
microscOpy studies of the seeds developed in microgravity are providing useful cell biology information.
Work remains to be done in terms of analysis and comparison of the spaceﬂight data with l xg-grown control

"
"7","Seed-to-Secd Growth of Arabidopsis on the 188 2243
plants. Calculation of the carbon ﬁxation rate and net photosynthesis will reveal the (dis)similarities in
comparison to ground-grown controls under 1 xg.

We designed a novel plant growth facility for long-term plant biology research on the International Space
Station, and successﬁllly utilized it to grow the ﬁrst full plant life cycle on this orbital laboratory. This
experiment demonstrated that the newly developed Advanced Astroculture (ADVASC) is a plant growth
facility capable of providing environmental conditions suitable for plant growth and development in
microgravity. The growth and development data obtained during the course of the experiment on the ISS and
the post ﬂight morphometric analyses shows that Arabidopsis thaliana does not require presence of gravity
for growth and development.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported in part by NASA UMISPD under the Cooperative Agreement NCC8-l29, and by
Space Explorers, Inc., DePere, Wisconsin. The anthers wish to extend sincere thanks to the entire ADVASC
Team at WCSAR. '

REFERENCES ‘

Hoagland, DR, and D. I. Amon, The water-culture method for growing plants without soil, University of
California Experiment Station Circulation, 347, 1950.

Katembe, W. J., R. E. Bdelmann, E. Brinckmann, and J. Z. Kiss, The deveIOpment of spaceﬂight experiments
with Arabidopsis as a model system in gravitmpism studies, Journal of Plant Research, 111, 463-470,
1998. '

Kiss, J. Z, E. Brinckmann, and C. Brillouet, Development and growth of several strains of Arabidopsis
seedlings in microgravity, International Journal of Plant Sciences, 161, 55-62, 2000.

Kuang, A., M. E. Musgrave, S. W. Matthews, D. B. Cummins, and S. C. Tucker, Pollen and ovule development
in Arabidopsis thaliana under spaceﬂight conditions, American Journal of Botany, 82, 585-595, 1995.
Merkys, A. J., and R. S. Laurinavichys, Complete cycle of individual development of Arabidopsis thaliana (L.)
Heynh. plants on board the Salyut-7 orbital station, Doklaay Akademii Nauk SSSR, 271, 509-512, 1983.

Paul, A.'-L.; C. J. Daugherty, E. A. Bihn, D. K. Chapman, K. L. Norwood, and R. J. Ferl, Transgene expression
patterns indicate that spaceﬂight affects stress signal perception and transduction in Arabidopsis, Plant
Physiolog, 126, 613-621, 2001.

Peterson, R. A., M. A. Anderson, and C. G. Hill, Development of TiO; membranes for gas phase
nanoﬁltration, Journal of Membrane Science, 94, 103-109, 1994.

Porterﬁeld, D. M., S. W. Matthews, C. J. Daugherty, and M. E. Musgrave, Spaceﬂight exposure effects on
transcription, activity, and localization of alcohol dehydrogenase in the roots of Arabidopsis thaliana,
Plant Physiology, 113, 685-693, 1997.

Stankovié, B., A plant space odyssey, Trends in Plant Science, 6, 591-593, 2001.

E-mail address of B. Stankovié bstankovic@wisc.edu

Manuscript received 19 October 2002; revised 4 February 2003; accepted 24 February 2003

"
