"","x"
"1","E. de Juan, A, Benguria, A. Villa et a]; The “AGEING” Experiment in the Spanish Soyuz M&ssion te the Intematiena] Space Statics
E. de Juan, A. Bengurfa, A. Villa, L. J. Leandra, R. Herranz, P. Duque,
E. Horn, E J. Medina, J. van Loon and R. Marco
The “AGEING” Experiment in the
Spanish Soyu M ission t0 the
I te nat‘onal Space Stat'on
ummmaeemwemamwﬁewwameewmwh’ewweWWm
Human expforation ofoztter space will eventually take place. In by incmasing their motia’ity, especially if subjected to these con‘
preparation for this endeavour; it is important ta establish the ditions immediately aﬂer hatching. The constrafms of the cur-
natwe of the biological response to a prolonged expasure to the rent Soyuz ﬂights made it impossible to sthdy the early post~
space ezzvironm 872:. In one QfIhe recent Soyuz: Missions to serve hatching period. A law temperature coId transport was income-
the International Space Station (155), the Spanish Soyuz missfan rated as a possible way out oftht's canstraint. It turned out that
in October .2003, we exposedfour groups of Drosophiicz male 912 top 0f the space ﬂight egﬂects, the cold treatment by itself:
imagoes t0 microgravz’o) during the almost elewrz days of the modifies the motility behaviour of the ﬂies. Although the four
Cervantes missian ta study their motitt'ty behavtaur. The gmups groups increased their motility, the youngﬂies did it in a much
were three afyoungﬂies and one of mature flies, 122 previous lower extent than the matureﬂz’es that had met been exposed to
space experiments, we have shown that when imagoes are the low temperature during transpartatian. Nevertheless the
mpased to microgravity they markedbt chatzge their behaviour ﬂies ﬂawn in the 153 are still more active than the parallel
ground controls. As a consequence of the lower motility stimw
lather: in this experim em, a likely consequence of the coId trans-
Authors port step, 220 eﬂ'ects an the life spans 0f the ﬂawn ﬂies were
d detected. T ogether with previous results, this study cwzﬁrms that
E. 6 Juan . . . . ,
Divisién dc Fisiologia, Universidad de Alicante, E—03080, Alicante, Spain h‘g’ leveis of man?” behavzohr are necessary to produce Sig‘
mficzmt decreases mﬂy Imgevzty. . . e
A. V1113, L. I. Leandra, R. Henanz, R. M31130
Departamenm dc Bioquimica
1.1. BiOmédicas “Alberto Sela” (UAM-CSIC), Madrid, Spain
Intraduction
A. Benguria
Present address: Centre de Bitoeenalo ia, CSIC . . , .
Camblmm Madrid, 3pm g Maay bloleglcal beings are gemg to be part of the adventure of
Exploration/celonization of outer space, if net for other reasons
P. Duque “ * ‘ ﬂ ~ m
E s AXE A C, Lin def Hoehe, $361147 Celogne, Germany 111th: life support systems 1h 'kmg term hentan bases 111 near by _
planets. On the other hand, it :3 clear that lmng systems are well
E. Horn . . . adapted ta the different conditicns existing on the Earth, includ~
DepmmentOfNemOPhys‘ology’ UW‘W‘W Ofmm’ Senna“? ing gravity. All living erganisms are well adapted to its pres~
F. J. Medina ence. The case of the plants is paradigmatic, but what about ani-
Ceneo de Investigaciones BiolégicastCSIC} mals? The size and strength of the different bielogicel maten’als
Rm“ d6 Mae“ 9’ 5.28040, Madnd, Spam and components is tuned to the presence of the hennal gravity
1 van Loon on Earth [1, 2]. Although he changes are expected in 811011 and
Dutch Experiment Support Center medium term exposures to‘ different levels of gravity, it can be
DESC @ OCB-ACTA—Vrije Universiteit ' '
Amsterdam, The Netherlands foreseen that evoluuonary changes may appear 1n the very long-
170 © ZwTec Publishing, Bremen Mierogravity sci. techno]. XIX—5/6 (2007)

"
"2","E. de Juan, A Benguria, A. Villa e2 e1: The “AGEING” Experiment in the Spanish Soyuz Mission to the Intematiettal Space Station
range. On the other hand, behaviour is a more plastic property ment on the behavéer of Drosophila melanogaster male ima-
of living beings, especially in complex multicellular systems [3, goes exposed to microgravity durieg the 11 days Soyuz ﬂight.
4]. Thus, it is net surprising that changes in behaviour is one of In previees experiments, we had observed a marked increase in
the traits mere often found to change ht environmental ceedi- the motility ef the ﬂies ie microgravity, in particular ef recent»
tions like altered gravity 1y emerged imegees, while two weeks old imagoes did not
The International Space Station is the current flight facility respend as much to this exposure [6]. Thee, for the experiment,
available to perform experiments in Space te prepare for the it was eecessary te video record the ﬂies behaviour in the 188.
new phase of space exploration and colonization. In this article, Since we ceeld not use the only glovebex that had been previ~
we will summarize the AGEING experiment run during the ously installed it; the 188, we decided to use the miniaquarte
Spanish Soyuz Mission, also known as‘ the “Cervantes” previously developed by Prof. E. Horn and EADS-
Mission. SP/Friedrichshafen. We could easily adapt the miniaquaria for
maintaining Drosephila imagees used in our AGEING experi-
The AGEING experiment background. merit. (Fig.1) Even though the experiment could have been
The experiment outline ﬂown in the Cervantes Mission in April, as initially envisioned,
the delay of six. months simpliﬁed the actual preparation and
Drosophila melenogaster is one of the main model systems in completion of the deeumentetion of the experiment.
current Biolegy. Meet of what we know abeut hew animal The experiment focused on the eonﬁmation of earlier work
development oeeurs has been derived from informatien ﬁrst by us [6] and to extend the informatien by incorporating differ»
obtained ie this organism. Even the current high-throughput ent strains of Drosopizfla. The three strains were: A) “Gravity
Biology has (me of the mere solid antecedents in studies initiat— altered”, a strain ef ﬂies selected for an altered response te gray»
ed more then a century age it} Drosophila [5]. We took adverb ity en the greend by using a maze similar to that used by other
tage ef this fact and conceived ear AGEING experiment. The groups (7). The selection response was to move in the direction
experiment intended to study the effects of the space enviren- ef the gravity vector instead, as the normal escape respense,
going away from that direction, B) “Long lived”, a strain of ﬂies
that were selected during many years fer late repmductioe, C)
. “Sheet lived”, a strain of ﬂies that were selected during many
3* g #1 «w “ 1 years for early reproduction. We used four experimental cendi~
' , ,, time: ﬂies as young (recently hatched) as possibly ef the three
QM; i » strains and a greep 0f mature, two weeks old ﬂies, of the C
' ,3; 1 i strain. For each condition, two mieiaquarie were used, loaded
1 féﬂ :e'ith Breech}: ilefeoti and 50 tnale ﬂies. All together the exper-
i j i Intent conglsted 1n etght centaleers.
; ’ , M"" The main problem was the diﬁicelty 0f bringng all the flies
H I a * ** . “ to Baikonem and preparing there the experiment. We already
. :1 ... _ ,_ . knew that older ﬂies do not respond so actively in microgravity
3% e ‘- ,
. V M § ﬁt VI ~- *‘iﬁzmét ”‘ ,
te : m , W -~ ' '-
55 e 9'. ~ ~ , ~ ” gm e I
F ig. 1: Miniaquarfe with ﬂfes ﬂewerfreme). Imegefmm theﬂfght
video recording. Above a larger view of the eontainez Dimensions of Fig. 2'. Extracting the mfeieqeariaﬁom (h e 155 2‘2: cu b at or. Mike Foe!
the type 1 container: 9.0x 4.0.1: 2.5 cm. (Ieﬂ) and Pedro Duque (right).
Mierogrevity sci. technol. XIX-S/é (2007) 171

"
"3","E. de Juan, A. Benguria, A. Villa et :21: The “AGEING” Experiment in the Spanish Soyuz Mission te the Intemational Space Station
as the younger ones. We also tested the capability ofDrosophila Aquarius 2 ineubater in the Russian Segment at 22590 On the
to survive at relatively lower temperatures, which they did. We 213‘, 23‘“ and 25‘h of October at GTM, the eight AGEING een-
coneluded that we could transpert the miniaquaria with the ﬂies miners were removed in groups of four by Pedro Duque, insert»
prepared in Madﬁd/Teulouse at 14°C. We could hand over our ed in a speciﬁc video holder and each of the two groups of 4
experiment the night before launch and be able to expose the not containers videe recorded Being the 118 Sony Video Camera
50 recently emerged imagoes to microgravity at normal temper- during 20 minutes (Figs. 1, 2). As indicated, the procedure was
ature. BSA provided the transport container (Yellow Box). repeated three times.

The actual time line of the experiment was as follows. The The eight containers remained in the Aquarius ineebator until
eight AGEING eentainers were inserted in the biology transport October 27‘”, when at 17.45 GTM they were brought into the
container, delivered in Baikonour and launched in the Soyuz 7 Biolegy Transfer Box and transferred to the Soyuz 6 capsule
ﬂight to the 138 on October 18, 2003 at 11.37am local time and returned to the ground with Pedro Duque and the exchanged
(5.57 GTM). After docking, the containers were trahsferred t0 Expedition Six crew in the ISS (Yuri Malenehenke and Ed Le).
the 138, where they were inserted in a helder and installed in the Landing took place on October 28 at 2.45 GMT and the

(a) “* FLIGHT (b) we GROUND
9 u: e: 3 '
a W... W,,, t
1‘ ,, 1*;
‘3 WWW. 8 3
5 3 h
a 4 I
3 ,3 v 3
2 . ' ’g I l 2 V'
1 hi"" \ :3.” “f- .{o ‘
a . _, a L. .I l...
sun 31.? eev LLY sue SLY GAY LL?
(C) m w a: 1k FUGHT M 2° Gm
” WWWWW,.WW 3
"" “
n , . ate "" 5;; g V , .. Etttt ﬁg g . 3 VV .
119 19 1e 1.49
F ig. 3: Averaged Iecomotor activity measured chtrt‘ng three mfttutes ofvz‘deo recording it: the Cervantes Soyuz Mission and it: the IML-2
Mfssion. (a) Cervantes Fltght actt'vtty of dwereht strains in mittz‘aqutarta (MO containers per strain): Short lived mature ﬂies (ELM), short
Iivedyoungﬂies (SLD, gravity altered yeung (GAY) and long lived young (LL19. (b) Cervantes Ground control activity. The analysis corm-
sponds to the recording on day 6'h of the mission. (6) IML-2 Flight activity; young maleﬂies exposed to microgravity (pg) and young male
ﬂies instaiied in the I x g Space contra} eenmﬁtge (lg). (d) IML-Z Ground controI activity»): young male ﬂies maintained in ground contra?
condt‘tions (1g) am! young mate ﬂies maintained in 310qu centrifuge conditions (1.4g). Recordings also cerrespond to the end ofday 5‘” of
the mission. Note the different scat’e behveen the Cervantes and IML»2 experiments. Bars correspond to standam’ error of the mean. The
activity of the SLMﬂies ts stgntﬁeatively dtﬂerentﬁ'om the activity recorded in the rest ofthe Cervantes containers (**p< 0. 01; Bonferroni 3’
Anew: multiple comparisons teat). The ﬂight containers with young ﬂies exposed to the cold transportation had higher activity than the corre«
sponding ground controls. In particulat: the déferenceg shown by the LLY strain are statisticalh' significant (*p< 0.05). The activity in the ﬁg
IML-2 containers ts also signﬁeattvely dtﬁ‘erehtﬂ'om the activity in the rest offhe containers (***p< 8.001}. The activity it: the 1 g ﬂight con-
tainers and the acttvity in the 1,4 g ground contattzers comingfrom the centrtﬁtge is not signiﬁcatz‘vely different, even though theﬁrst greup
had been video recorded at ,ug and the second at 1 g.
172 Microgravity sci. techno]. XIX«5I6 (2007)

"
"4","E. de Jean, A. Benguria, At Villa e: :21: The “AGEING” Experiment in the Spanish Seyuz Missten t0 the Internatienal Space Station
AGEING containers that should have been brought back at had an effect in the reduced survival of the populations exposed
roem temperature were mistakenly transferred back immediate to the Space envitemnent, not repreduced in the ground control
1y after lending to the Yellow Box at 3°C to be taken back to pepulatiensw
Moscow where at Star City they were deliver to the scientiﬁc We analyzed how maey of the genes effected ie Space are
team around 16.09 GMT.After moving into the provisional lab- modiﬁed in microgravity (Herranz et (21., this velume) and to i
oratory set by us there the containers were inspected. The ﬂies similar stressful conditions (Marco et al, in the press). Finally,
were it} very bad shape dee to this enprogrammed second eold- we have carried a similar comparison with the genes modiﬁed
er transport step. An almost parallel experiment, using ﬂies pre~ in ICE First, the Caenerhabditis elegans experiment run in the
pared a day later and exposed to 149C during a similar period of DELTA mission (8). The connection between the molecular
time as for the ﬁrst transpertetion step (ToulouseuBaikoeeer) effects at the gene level and phenotypie traits such as motility
was performed. The decision of delaying ene day the control behaviour or the ageing response of organisms is still a problem
experiment allowed us to incorporate at: equivalent second cold that remains to be tackle by biological seienee.
transport at 3°C in the Yellow Box, that came with the samples
to the laboratory in Star City (Moscow). These control samples The continuation of the analysis
had been video recorded on Ground at exactly the same time as
the ﬂight ones, but with one day delay. Performing space ﬂight studies imposes variees censtraiets to
The samples were analyzed for their behaviour after recovery the experiment setup. Until a new ﬂight opportunity becomes
in Moscow and during their posterior life spans in Madrid. available to us, we are limited to perform experiments in the
Leecmotor behaviour of Drosophila males was analyzed on ground simulation facilities available in oer laboratories. So far,
digitized video records using the SMART V2.5 colour image we are perfoming similar experiments in the Random Pesition
video—traeking software (Panlab, Barcelena, Spain). Machine (9), with and without a cold transport step. Magnetic
Spontaneous glebal activity was quantiﬁed as surface change levitatien provides a different approach on the ground to simu—
rate by measuring the number efpixels that change between two late microgravity (10). Analyses of expetiments equivalent to
consecutive images tn 3 defined arena ef the miniaquarie. the AGEING pretocol using these ground instrumentation are
Global activity was analyzed during the ﬁrst 3 minutes ef video new in progress. In particular, we are intrigued by the potentia-
reeerding. tionfneutralization of the phenetypie changes by introducing
additional modiﬁcations in the growing cendititms, such as tem—
Results of the AGEING Experiment perature, weak mutations that by themselves may not give sef-
ﬁcient phenotypes, etc.
In Fig. 3a, a representation ef the motility of the ﬂies in the
Spanish Soyuz Mission in Space is shown. When compared to Acknowledgements
the parallel controls (Fig. 3b) which have undergone the same
treatment bet the Space ﬂight, it turned out that a relatively The skillful work of the crew of the Cervantes mission? P. 0.,
large proportion of them shewed higher motility levels. On the Alexander Kaleri and Michel Peale, in the operation of the pre-
other hand, the level of motility was greater in this experiment cedtttes in ﬂight on board of the 188 is gratefully aeltnowlw
in the ease of the mature ﬂies than in the other groups. In the edged. We else appreetate the support of the ESA. team, in par--
Fig 3:: we shew the level of motility of normal young ﬂies ie tieular Mr Jestts Jimenez, Ms Nathalie Pettier and Mr. Fabrizie
an earlier experiment video recorded in the Bierack glovebox Festa. This work was supported by Grants from the Spanish
ﬂown in the Shuttle (IML—Z mission). Evidently, the motility of “Plan Nacional de Ievestigaeién Cientifica y Desarrolle
the mature ﬂies was lower than the yeeng IML-2 male ﬂtes. The Teenelégiee” Ref. Nos. ESP2001—4522»PE, and ESP2003~
main difference was that the mature ﬂies in the Spanish Soyuz 09475-C02~01 (RM), from the Dutch Space Research
Mission were not exposed to a lower temperature transpert step Organisation, SRON, MG~057 (JVL) and from the Gennan
while the yeung ﬂies in this experiment were. TWO additional Speee Ageeey DLR, greet SOWBOMO (EH).
features of the experiment are in agreement with these results,
namely, the posterior life spans and mortality curves (net References
shown). In previous exposures to the Space Envirenment (fer
example, Bengurja e: a],' 1996), a signiﬁcant decrease: in the l Vogel, S. Living in a physical worm VII. Gravity and life on the ground.
life—span of the young male imagees that had experienced a 1’ BiOSCi' 31(2), 201-214 (2006) ,
marked ieerease in motility had been found. The absence of 2 Mama R‘ Hum” D’ Hmmz R5 Mateos‘g Mm""? FJ’ mephﬂa
’ ~ . ~ . melanegaste; and the ﬁttare of eve—devo’ bretegy 1n space. Challenges
such an effect 111 the expenment of the Cervantes mtsswn like- and problems in the path of an eventual colonization project outside the
1y induced by the cold transportation step, did net produce any calm Adv Space Biol Med; 9t4l-31 (2903)
modiﬁcations in the life spans of the different pepulatiens cf 3 Ham 5‘ R- “F development 0f gmtfty sens“? SYS‘msﬁmng 93‘”in
flies. On the other hand, the unpregrammed cold step intre- 3:112:13; gmmy dependent sensory ""1pm Adv Spam BIO] Mﬁd‘ 9:133""
deeed during the traIISport free; the landing site to Baikoneer
Mieregravity sci. technol. XIX-Sfé (2007) 173

"
"5","E“ dc Jam, A. Bengmia, A Villa er (II: The “AGEING” Experiment in the Spanish Soyuz Mission to the International Space Station

4 Slenzka, Ki Ncumpiasticiw changes during space ﬂight. Adv Space Res.
3 1 (6): 1 595-604 (2003)

5 38338:“ M, Oliver 3. One hundwd years {3f high~throughput Drosephila
research. Chromosome Res. 14 (4): 349452, (2006)

6 Benguria, 14.; Grande, E; de Juan, 8.; Ugalde, C; Miguel; 3.; Garesse,
R.; Marco, R. Microgravity effests on Drosophila melanogaster behavior
and aging. Implications of the IML‘Z experiment, J . Biotechnol, 47(28):
i91~201(1996}

'2 Armstrong, J. D., Texada, M. J'., Muzzjaal, 1%., Baker; D. A, Beckingkam,
K. M. Gravitaxis in Drosaphila melancgaster: A genetic screen. Genes,
Brain and Behaviour 5, 222239 (2006).

8 Leandra L}, Szewczyck NJ, Bengurz‘a A, Herranz R, Medfm FJ, Gasser
G, wn Loan J, (30an C34, Marco R Comparative analysis of Drowphila
melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans gene expression in the
European Soyuz Flights to the International Spam Station Adv. Sp. Res.
40(4): 506—512 (2007).

9 Kraft TE van Loon JJ & Kiss JZ. Plastid position in Arabidepsis col-
m‘nella cells is similar in microgravity and on a randommositiming
machine. Planta. 211(3);415-22(2000).

1E} Bert)», M Vand Geim, A K, Ofﬂying frogs arid levitrons’ EmlPhys 18,
3107-3130997?)

I74 Microgravity sci. technol. XIX~5/6 (2007)

"
"6","Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

"
