"","x"
"1","DROSOPHILA BEHAVIOUR & GENE EXPRESSION IN ALTERED GRAVITY
CONDITIONS: COMPARISON BETWEEN SPACE AND GROUND FACILITIES
Raﬁ] Herranztl’z), David A. Lavzintz), Camelia Dijkstrah’), Oliver Larkinh’), Michael R. Daveyh’), J ack J. W. A.
van Loon“), F. J avier Medinats), Roberto Marcotz), Peter Schiller“)
(1) European Space Research & T echnology Center — European Space Agency (ESTEC—ESA) KeplerlaanJ 2201 AZ
Noordwijk ( T he Netherlands) Phone: 003 I -7 I 5 653995, Email: raul.herranz@esa.int
wDepartamento a’e Bioquz'mica 6 [[3 “Alberto SOZS ” UAM—CSIC Facultad de Medicina de la UAM C/Arzobis 0
P
Marcillo 4, 28029 Madrid (Spain) Phone: 0034-914975409, Email: raul.herranz@uam.es
(3) University ofNottingham, Nottingham (United Kingdom)
(4) DESC, Free University ofAmsterdam ( T he Netherlands)
(5) Centro de Investigaciones Biolo'gicas CIB-CSIC, Madrid (Spain)
ABSTRACT I. INTRODUCTION
Previous experiments in space (unmanned satellites, 1.1 Previous results on Drosophila Aging on Space:
space shuttle and the International Space Station, 188), Drosophila ﬂies change their motile behaviour in
have shown that adult Drosophila ﬂies change their microgravity in space. A consistent increase in motility
motile behaviour in microgravity. A consistent increase was found in those experiments, but more mature ﬂies
in motility in space was found in these experiments, but (two weeks old) showed less increase in motility than
mature ﬂies (two weeks old) showed less increase than recently hatched ﬂies. The results of Drosophila
recently hatched ﬂies. In the case of relatively long Motility Video-recording in the IML—2 experiment [1]
exposure to microgravity, the aging of male ﬂies indicates also that while the ﬂies in microgravity walk
measured upon return to Earth was increased, with ﬂies very actively, they rarely jump (this is the initial
dying earlier than the corresponding in-ﬂight lg movement to initiate ﬂying).
centrifuge or ground controls. The older ﬂies, which 1 2 P . . .
. . . . . . . rev10us results on Drosophlla gene expressmn
experienced a smaller increase in motility, did not show . . .
. . . . on Space. Although very 1nterest1ng, our results
this acceleration in the aging process. More recently we . . . . . . .
. . . investigating changes in gene express1on profile in
have performed comparative experiments us1ng ground . . . .
. . . . . . . . . space need to be validated in the same or at least s1milar
Simulation fa0111t1es. Preliminary experiments us1ng a . . . . . .
. . . . . . conditions. Our preliminary results us1ng Simulated
random pos1tion1ng machine (RPM) indicate that the - - - - -
. . . . rnlcrograV1ty (RPM) or hypergraV1ty conditions (10g
effects of this Simulation approach on the behaV10r of - - - - - - -
. . nudicar centrifuge) are also indicating novel changes in
Drosophila are of smaller magnitude than the - -
. . . gene express1on of exposed ﬂ1es [2], but these results
corresponding exposure to real micrograV1ty. Further . . . .
. . . needs further validation us1ng other molecular analys1s.
experiments are in progress to conﬁrm this effect. . . . . .
. . . . There eX1sts an inverse correlation in the express1on
However, when exposed to magnetic leV1tation, ﬂ1es 1 .
. . . evels for all the genes present (MASS) in samples
exposed to Simulated we1ghtlessness increased . . . .
. . . . exposed to RPM and to hypergraV1ty conditions. This
markedly the1r motile behaV1or compared With 1 g . . . . . .
. . . . preliminary data, obtained in a Single 10 g experiment,
controls both 1ns1de and outs1de the magnet. Th1s altered - - - -
. . . . . Will be checked With the ong01ng LDC experiments.
graV1ty-related increase in motility was also less
pronounced in more mature ﬂies. This motility effect at 1-3 From SP3“? to Ground S“PP‘_”‘t Facilities: OPT
the leVitation position reproduces the results in real pf€VIOUS T€S_UItS 1n th€ “(33113” experiment performed in
microgravity indicating the interest for space science of th€ 135 during th€ “Cervantes” M1ss1on have made It
this simulation approach. Similar experiments are being essent1al :[0 replicate 511311?“ experiments in European
performed in the Larger Diameter Centrifuge (LDC) ground SImUIaUOH f30111t1€sa 501116 Of them already
located in ESTEC (the Netherlands) and indicate that ong01ng.
6g, 12g and 2.0g are key points 1h the hypergraV1ty Clinorotation: The RPM is an upgraded piece of
response in ﬂ1es. Our experiments haV€ ShOWh that equipment derived from the 3D clinostat. Gravity is
developmental processes from embryo to adult neutralized almost completely or as required (0.16g as
proceeded normally in the magnet, the RPM and the on the Moon, 0.36 g as on Mars) by submitting the
LDC. In terms of gene express1on, preliminary results samples to a randomly rotating movement that is
indicate. that the affected set O_f genes under selected by a computer program producing the selected
hypergrav1ty responds in general 1n an noppOSIte level of residual gravity on the samples [3].
direction than that induced by the real or Simulated . . . _ _ _
microgravity exposure. The interest in conducting Magnetic leVItatlon: This is an alternative approach for
comparative parallel experiments in the (:omplete ground Slmulatlon of different graV1ty environments [4],
spectrum of ground simulation methods is shown in the complementary to RPM _ bUt affecting different
above studies and will be achieved in the near future. molecular components 1n11V1ng organisms.

"
"2","2. INITIAL DROSOPHILA RESULTS IN LDC 3. CONCLUSIONS
During April - June 2008, we performed studies in the This is the first report of a systematic biological
LDC located in ESTEC [additional details in 5], the ﬁrst utilization of the new LDC facility, now fully operative
goal being to establish key thresholds in the and available for biological and physical science
hypergravity response. Using the proﬁle indicated in experiments in the ESTEC TEC-MMG section. Long
Fig. 1, and evaluating the ﬂies’ graviresponse in males term use of LDC, not only with Drosophila but also
and females separately, we have determined different with the plant model system, Arabidopsis, will greatly
behaviour patterns at 2g, 6g, 12g and 20g respectively. support and justify further uses of this facility for the
We have detected different behaviour precisely at these research community and promises to be a source of
g levels and also slight gender differences (probably due novel ﬁndings in the ﬁeld.
to the larger size of females).

. . . . Acknowledgements. The present research would not
Future experiments, including behaV1our and gene h b . b l . .

. . . . as een possz e without the guidance and trust of
expression analys1s us1ng microarrays (whole Prof. Marco, the patience ofElena and Claudiafrom
Drosophila genome), Will be performed w1th samples S . d . . .

. . . pain, an the technical help ofAia’a Villa, Alan
collected at various time p01nts (from 12 h to 4 d) and D d L bk Z ""d d .. R H
. . . 0ws0n an 0 e ul] er uijn. . erranz was
developmental stages. The initial data about the overall . .
. . . . . . supported by a Spanish Sczence and Technology
surV1val and climbing ability of ﬂies exposed up to 20g . . . . .
. . . (Especzalizaczon en Organismos Internaczonales) /
has been obtained, and is being analysed. CDT] Fellowship (ESA Spanish trainee program) and
funding to participate in the present meeting was kindly
, granted by ESA. This work was supported by Grants
G Forc Behavior from the Spanish “Plan Nacional de Investigacién
12g Research Council, Basic Technology Grant No.
TimetmmuteS)
1. Benguria A., et al. Microgravity EffeCtS on D 7"" OSOPhila
—Proﬁlc Actin-‘ity males —Activit§' females melanogaster behavior and aging. Implications Of the IML-
2 Experiment, J. Biotechnol, Vol. 47, 191—202, 1996.
2. Marco R., et a1. Exposure to Microgravity in the 188 or in
‘ - ‘ the ground produces an extensive change on gene
. expression during Drosophila pupae development. Science
' l ['5 ’ (Submitted).
» ‘ i {‘2 » ‘ //—» .. 3. van Loon J.J.W.A. Some history and use of the random
(O) 69 89 (“:1 (“leg 39 6“"" positioning machine, RPM, in gravity related research. Adv.
\( A ‘ . \< "" s. , Space Research. Vol 39, 1161—1165, 2007.
""‘1‘ / 1:” "" 4. Brooks J .S., et al. New opportunities in science, materials,
2g (no apparent effect) 6g (activation effect) anci biological systems in the low-gravity (magnetic
leV1tation) enVironment. J. Applied Physzcs. Vol 87, 6194-
6199, 2000.
.‘_ 5. van Loon J.J.W.A., et al. A brief overview of animal
' ' hypergravity studies. J. Grav. Physiol. Vol 12, 5-10, 2005.
ow» . row x
1 2 g (hardly climb) 2 0 g (hardly move)
F ig. 1. Detection 0fthreshold valaesfor LDC experiments
with Drosophila. Drosophila behaviour changes with the g
force, first with an activation eﬁ’ect (6g) and then becoming
slower because of their weight. Females show a poorer
performance than males.

"
