"","x"
"1","Downloaded from rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 10, 2012
JOURNAL
nter I ace
SOCI ET Y
Effect of magnetically simulated zero-gravity and enhanced
gravuty on the walk of the common fruutfly
Richard J. A. Hill, Oliver J. Larkin, Camelia E. Dijkstra, Ana |. Manzano, Emilio de Juan, Michael R.
Davey, Paul Anthony, Laurence Eaves, F. Javier Medina, Roberto Marco and Raul Herranz
J. R. SOC. Interface published online 4 January 2012
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2011.0715
Supplementary data ""Data Supplement"" I I I
http://rSIf.royaISOCIetypubIIshIng.org/content/suppl/2012/01/04/rsnf.2011.0715.DC1.htm
|
This article cites 45 articles, 4 of which can be accessed free
References http://rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/early/2012/01/04/rsif.201 1 .0715.fu||.htm|#
ref—Iist-1
P<P Published online 4 January 2012 in advance of the print journal.
.7: EXiS 0- en Chﬂice This article is free to access
Email alerting service Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the top
right—hand corner of the article or click here
Advance online articles have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet appeared in
the paperjournal (edited, typeset versions may be posted when available prior to final publication). Advance
online articles are citable and establish publication priority; they are indexed by PubMed from initial publication.
Citations to Advance online articles must include the digital object identifier (DOIs) and date of initial
publication.
To subscribe to J. R. Soc. Interface go to: http://rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org/subscriptions

"
"2","Downloaded from rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 10, 2012
BURLAL
THE ROYAL ' ' ® J. R. Soc. Interface
SOCIETY
I t f ‘5 Fl rStC Ite doi:10.1098/rsif.2011.0715
n er ace e'pUbIISh'ng Published online
0 0
Effect of magnetlcally Slmulated
C C
zero-graVIty and enhanced graVIty
C
0n the walk of the common frultﬂy’r
Richard J. A. Hi1117*vl, Oliver J. Larkin2vl, Camelia E. Dijkstra2,
Ana I. Manzan03, Emilie de J uan4, Michael R. Davey2,
Paul Anthony2, Laurence Eavesl, F. J aVier Medina3,
Roberto Marco3 and Raul Herranz3v5v*
lSchool of Physics and Astronomy, University of N0ttz'n9ham, N0ttz'n9ham NG7 2RD, UK
2SChOOZ of Biosciences, University of N0ttz'n9ham, L0u9hb0r0u9h LE12 5RD, UK
3Departamento de Bioquz’mz’ca Universidad Autonoma de Madrid (UAM) and Centro de
Investi9acz'0nes Biolo’9z’cas (CSIC), C/Ramz'ro de Maeztu, 9 28040 Madrid, Spain
4Departament0 F 2192910929, Genétz'ca y Microbi0109z’a, Universidad de Alicante (San Vicente
0361199319629), Apartado de correos 99, 03080 Alicante, Spain
5Departamento de Bioquz’mz’ca, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid (UAM), C/Arzobz'spo
Marcillo, s/n 28029 Madrid, Spain
Understanding the effects of gravity on biological organisms is Vital to the success of future
space missions. Previous studies in Earth orbit have shown that the common fruitﬂy
(Drosophila melan09aster) walks more quickly and more frequently in microgravity, com—
pared With its motion on Earth. However, ﬂight preparation procedures and forces endured
on launch made it difﬁcult to implement 0n the Earth’s surface a control that exposed ﬂies
to the same sequence of major physical and environmental Changes. To address the uncertain—
ties concerning these behavioural anomalies, we have studied the walking paths of
D. melan09aster in a pseudo—weightless environment (09*) in our Earth—based laboratory.
We used a strong magnetic ﬁeld, produced by a superconducting solenoid, to induce a dia—
magnetic force on the ﬂies that balanced the force of gravity. Simultaneously, two other
groups of ﬂies were exposed to a pseudO—hypergravity environment (29*) and a normal grav—
ity environment (19*) Within the spatially varying ﬁeld. The ﬂies had a larger mean speed in
09* than in 19*, and smaller in 29*. The mean square distance travelled by the ﬂies grew more
rapidly With time in 09* than in 19*, and slower in 29*. We observed no other Clear effects of
the magnetic ﬁeld, up to 16.5 T, on the walks of the ﬂies. We compare the effect of dia—
magnetically simulated weightlessness With that Of weightlessness in an orbiting spacecraft,
and identify the cause of the anomalous behaviour as the altered effective gravity.
Keywords: diamagnetic levitation; microgravity; Drosophila melanogaster;
motility; diffusion
1. INTRODUCTION Space Station (188) [2] showed a striking increase in
Life has evolved under the gravitational ﬁeld of Earth the frequeney Of locomotor act1v1ty and walking speed,
. . . . . . compared With controls performed on the ground.
s1nce it began; so it is fasc1nat1ng and fundamental to . . . .
. . . . Drosophzla melan09aster is an ideal model organism
ﬁnd out how liVing things respond to an enVironrnent . . .
. . . . . on Which to study the effects of grav1ty: the ﬂies are
With different grav1ty. Experiments on Drosophzla . . . .

. . . . small enough that many 1nd1v1duals can be contained
melan09aster, the common fru1tﬂy, 1n rn10r0grav1ty con— in corn act cells suitable for s ace—ﬂi ht et corn lex
ditions 0n—b0ard the Columbia Space Shuttle (STS—65) p . . p g ’ y p

. . . . enough to possess a sophisticated grav1ty sense mechan—
[1] and during the Cervantes mission on the International . . . . . . . . .

ism [3]. Their use is ub1qu1t0us in studies of biological

*Authors for correspondence (richard.hill@n0ttingham.ac.uk; develOpmental processes and in endeavours to under-
iherranz©cib.csic.es). . stand cellular mechanisms in higher organisms, and
Our friend. and colleagne, Prof. R. Marco, d1ed on 27 Junei2008i. He they have been used in a number Of studies on the
made a major contrlbutlon to planning and carrying out this pI‘OJGCt. . . . . . .
This paper is dedicated to his memory. origin of the biological grav1ty sense mechanism [4,5].
*These authors contributed equally to the study. The motility of these ﬂies has been linked to molecular
Electronic supplementary material is available at http://dx.d0i.0rg/ ageing responses that .COU‘Id be Of Signiﬁcance fOI‘ fUture
10.1098/rsif.2011.0715 or Via http://rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org. human space exploration [6].
Received 18 October 2011
Accepted 17 December 2011 1 This journal is © 2012 The Royal Society

"
"3","Downloaded from rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 10, 2012
2 F ruitﬂy walks in altered R. J . A. Hill et al.

In these experiments, we set out to investigate the from those on a ﬂoating, neutrally buoyant object (such
walks of D. melanogasteﬂhenceforth referred to as ‘fruit— as the forces on an SCUBA diver), in that the weight of
ﬂies’) in a ground—based ‘simulation’ of the microgravity the levitated object is balanced throughout the body of
environment in space. We have used a relatively new the object, not just at its surface.
technique called diamagnetiC levitation to provide a Levitation of water and organic materials was
pseudo—weightless environment, which requires a power— reported ﬁrst by Beaugnon 84: Tournier [8,9]. The poten—
ful magnetic ﬁeld with a large ﬁeld gradient to levitate tial of diamagnetiC levitation for studying living
the ﬂies. Ground—based experiments are essential for organisms in weightlessness was ﬁrst demonstrated by
selecting feasible and interesting experiments for space— Valles et al. [10,11] who levitated frog embryos, and by
ﬂight studies. A primary aim of our experiments is to Geim and colleagues, who levitated a variety of small
demonstrate the usefulness of diamagnetiC levitation as living organisms, including a live frog ([12—14], see also
a Viable alternative to more established ground—based [15]). Levitation has since also been used in studies of
techniques for simulating the effects of microgravity on micro—organisms [16—19], single—cell cultures [20—23],
a complex organism, such as the random positioning biomolecule aggregation in vitro [24] and protein crystal
machine, or parabolic ﬂights. growth [25].

An additional aim of the experiments is to validate We used a superconducting solenoid magnet with a
ﬁndings of the original space—ﬂight experiments on fruit— vertical bore to levitate fruitﬂies. Water, being diamag—
ﬂies. In the experiments aboard the Columbia Space netiC, is repelled by the strong magnetic ﬁeld generated
Shuttle [1], six groups of 50 male ﬂies remained in orbit by the solenoid, with a force given by the product of the
for nearly 15 days. The ﬂies were hatched and incubated magnetic ﬁeld strength and the ﬁeld gradient [13].
on the ground until they reached the adult stage. Because the ﬁeld is strongest in the central region of
Approximately 8 h after launch, two of the groups were the solenoid bore, the diamagnetiC force acts in the
installed in a 19 centrifuge aboard the Shuttle. Every direction opposite to gravity in the upper region of
2 days the containers were transferred to a glove box, the bore, and in the same direction as gravity in the
where they were recorded with a Video camera for lower region. In our magnet, when the magnetic ﬁeld
15 min to observe their behaviour. All groups of ﬂies at the geometric centre of the solenoid is 16.5 T,
(including those from the 19 centrifuge) showed pro— water levitates approximately 80 mm above the centre
nounCed increases in the frequency of locomotor of the solenoid, where the diamagnetiC force is equal
activity and walking speed. It was necessary to remove in magnitude to the gravitational force on it. The tech—
the ﬂies from the 19 centrifuge aboard the Shuttle nique of stable diamagnetiC levitation has been
during periods of Video recording. Hence, the centrifuge described in detail elsewhere [8,10,13—15,26]. The ﬂies
cannot be regarded as a control in these experiments, levitate at approximately the same position as water,
at least as far as the behaviour is concerned. Any beha— owing to their high water content (in the region of
Vioural abnormalities were identiﬁed by comparison 70 per cent by mass), as in any animal, and because
with experiments performed on the ground. Although the dry mass of the insect has a magnetic susceptibility
great efforts were made to ensure a Close match between similar to that of water. Further details about the
the environmental conditions of the ﬂies on the ground levitation forces are given in §4 and the electronic sup—
and those of their counterparts on the Shuttle, the ﬂies plementary material.
on the ground did not experience the conditions of the Temporal and spatial variations in the walking
Shuttle launch, which were difﬁcult to reproduce exactly patterns of fruitﬂies have been studied as indicators
in the ground—based experimental control. Indeed, sub— of brain activity in response to environmental cues
sequent experiments performed on the ISS showed that [27—30]. Here, we concentrate on the measurement of
the behaviour of the ﬂies on the ISS was sensitive the velocity of the ﬂies and the mean square distance
to launch procedures [2]. There is thus some doubt travelled as a function of time, in different effective
about the root cause of the observed motility increase gravities in the magnetic ﬁeld.
in microgravity. The fruitﬂies were conﬁned within three cylindrical

By using diamagnetiCleVitation,wewere able to ensure ‘arenas’, 25 mm in diameter and 10 mm tall, stacked
that all groups of ﬂies were treated in the sarneway, except inside the magnet bore, one at the centre of the sole—
for their differing positions in the magnetic ﬁeld, and that noid, one near the top of the solenoid, and one near
all experiments were performed simultaneously. the bottom, as shown in ﬁgure 1. Flies in the central

In diamagnetiC levitation, diamagnetiC materials such arena experienced normal gravity. In the arena located
as water and many organiC—based materials including near the top of the solenoid, where the diamagnetiC
oils, plastics and biological material are levitated using force balances the gravitational force, ﬂies experienced
a strong, spatially varying magnetic ﬁeld [7]. Diarnag— pseudo—weightless conditions. Below the normal gravity
netiC material is weakly repelled frorn magnetic ﬁelds, arena was a pseudo—hypergravity arena where the grav—
compared with the more commonly known ‘magnetic’ itational and magnetic forces sum together so that the
(i.e. ferromagnetic) materials such as iron, which are effective weight of the ﬂies is twice that outside the
strongly attracted to amagnetiC ﬁeld. The diamagnetiC magnet [18]. For convenience, we label the three
force, balancing the weight of the levitating object, acts arenas inside the bore as 09*, 19* and 29*, as shown
at the molecular level throughout the body of the in ﬁgure 1; the asterisk indicates the presence of a
object, just as the centrifugal force balances the gravita— strong magnetic ﬁeld (16.5 T in 19*, 11.5 T in 09* and
tional force on an object in Earth orbit. The forces on a 29*). We label a zero magnetic ﬁeld control, outside
diamagnetically levitated object differ importantly the magnet, as ‘19’. The ﬂies could not escape from
J. R. Soc. Interface

"
"4","Downloaded from rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 10, 2012
F ruitfly walks in altered R. J . A. Hill et al. 3
(a) (b) . ﬁndings of previous studies [27—29], the ﬂies alternated
“‘~ V between stationary periods (during which they may per—
0 * N form other activities, such as grooming) and active
g periods in which they moved around the arena. A technical
\ 3 problem owing to the slight degradation of the Charge—
] coupled device (CCD) Video images in the strong magnetic
[lj?j ﬁeld prevented us from identifying any differences in more
' complex behaviour of the ﬂies, such as grooming 0r wing
1g""< rI beating. Nonetheless, major differences in walking speed
,x’t it] could be observed Clearly in the three different positions
_--- in the magnet bore. It is immediately apparent from the
1 Video images that the ﬂies in the 09* arena walked more
quickly and more frequently (electronic supplementary
‘ 2g* material, movie). Although the ﬂies did perform short
[ _ ' ﬂights occasionally in all arenas, ﬂights occurred s0 infre—
"" "" quently in the conﬁned space of the arena that we could
obtain no information on the effect of levitation, 0r of
(C) — fiﬁ hypergravity, on ﬂight.
lil-l 0g*, B = 11.5 T . A small number of ﬂies, typically two to four at any one
‘._ 1g*, B=16.5T time, 1ev1tated freely in the 09* arena, i.e. not in contact
..I-'-l * with any surface. These ﬂies levitated within 1—2 mm of
‘ i: i 2g ’3 =11'5T the observed levitation point of water, owing to the
[2; large water content of the ﬂies. Hence, as a ﬁrst approxi—
. jf- mation, we assume for the moment that the effective
I-11'gravity acting on the organism is the same as that
I I acting on water. We shall discuss the limits to this
superconducting ﬁ 5cm diameter bore approximation in §4. The exact position of the levitation
solenoid air ﬂow point depends on the hydration of the ﬂies. In fact, we
_ _ _ _ observed the levitation point Changing during the life
Figute 1. (a) One of the arenas contained w1th1n atransparent cycle of the fruitﬂy, from egg to larvae to pupae t0
101%th tube (dlameter: 25 mm; helght: 50 mm)’ Vlewed from d It owin t0 the difference in water content between
the side. The arena ﬂoor is a semi—solid culture medium (off— a u ’ g . , .
white material at the bottom of the tube), which provided a eaCh stage Of the fruitﬂy S hfe cycle. We ﬁne—tuned the
food source and maintained humidity in the arena at Close s01en01d current until the stable 1eV1tat10n p01nt Of
to 100 per cent. The ceiling of the arena is a disc of transpar— the adult ﬂies was located in the centre 0f the 09* arena.
ent cellophane (just Visible between the two retaining black Freely—levitating ﬂies are drawn towards the stable
rubber o—rings in the image, 25—30mm above the tube’s equilibrium levitation point by the combined gravita—
base) punctured around its perimeter to allow gas exchange. tional and diamagnetiC forces on them, but the ﬂies
(0) Three arenas held in a scaffold, before insertion into the could escape thlS ‘trap’ easily by taking ﬂlght7 as can
magnet bore. (6) Each tube was lit around its Circumference be seen on the Video recording. Some ﬂies held in the
by Six White hght'emittihg diedes (LEDS)7 imaged hem ‘trap’ remained motionless for several minutes, while
above by a Charge—CWpled deV1ce (COD) carnera, and Its others attempted to walk by Climbing over their fellows
temperature monitored by a thermocouple. The lighting, cam— hel d in the trap The camera resolution in this position
eras and temperature sensors have been removed from the . .' .
scaffold in these images for Clarity. (Online version in colour.) is too poor (0w1ng t0 the effect 0f.the magnetic ﬁeld on
the camera) to resolve more detailed behav10ur.
the arenas. We used the calculated effective gravity of
water in the magnetic ﬁeld, computed from the solenoid 3. ANALYSIS OF THE W ALKING P ATHS
geometry [26] and measurements of the magnetic ﬁeld,
to determine the vertical position of each of the three Figure 2 shows the walking paths 0t ﬂies moving over
arenas in the magnet bore. The 0 9* arena was placed the ﬂoorbf the arena, observed during three consecutive
to enclose the stable levitation point of water [26]. 33 s petiods. Note that these continuous paths include
The 19* and 29* arenas were placed to enclose the pauses in walking activity when the ﬂies are stationary.
point where the effective gravity on water is 9.8 nr1s_2 During these pauses, the recorded position Of the ﬂy
and 19.6 ms_2, respectively. Additional details about does not Change, 01‘ Changes insigniﬁcantly, from one
the apparatus are given in §5; details on the calculation Video frame to the next. It is immediately apparent
0f the effective gravity are given in the electronic that the ﬂies travelled signiﬁcantly farther, on average,
supplementary material. over the arena ﬂoor during each 33 s period in the 09*
arena than in normal gravity (19 and 19* arenas), and
that the ﬂies travelled shorter distances in 29*.
2. BEHAVIOUR OF FRUITFLIES IN THE
MAGNET 3.1. Velocity distribution and activity of the flies
For most of the time, the ﬂies remained in contact with the From the walking paths, we determined the velocity com—
walls, ﬂoor and ceiling of the arena. In common with the ponents of the ﬂies parallel to the arena ﬂoor (11$, 1),).
J. R. Soc. Interface

"
"5","Downloaded from rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 10, 2012
4 F ruitfly walks in altered R. J . A. Hill et al.
0g”< 1g”< 2g* 1g (control)
9:555} _ i ‘2‘— 5 p ‘
4 572% r“ '_ ‘ 5 r 7' -‘ “
‘Timi-i’. ~ I ' *
“71' -- i 1, ' -- _ ; _;'l¥:""!§
0—333 ~ - .' . y; 1:52;
t ,7. ‘f; ‘ ' \ ‘ ‘1 “'5? L5
.17 1 ,‘ i . r, I t . 3'
/ v.73); . FL u t“ M 1 ' -‘ p i!
4‘ '
+ 5
k . 7' . ' ‘ : ’3“; a ""3?, 1 'ak'%$ ‘
, :1; 3 4) ‘7"", 7 \ ‘ j n ‘ l/ I l‘\ I :0
«1 . a ' I ‘ 5- .5""-
15553., 5* y 2%”
66—1003 ‘ __' * ; ‘N9, .55 9,.
\‘V ' r r \‘ —q . 59-3.; .
7 5;; . x 5 ‘ 1cm ' , ' ..
Figure 2. Trajectories 0f fruitﬂies walking on the ﬂoor of cylindrical arenas (25 mm diameter) shown for three consecutive 33 s
periods. The Video still—images show the positions of the ﬂies at the start of each period. The position of the head at the start of
the period is shown by a dot. The large red Circle marks the edge of the arena ﬂoor. The ﬂies travelled signiﬁcantly farther during
each period in the pseudo—weightless arena (09*) than in normal gravity (19 and 19*). The ﬂies travelled shorter distances in
pseudo—hypergravity (29*). The vectors a: and 9 lie in the horizontal plane, perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld and the direction
of gravity (z).(On1ine version in colour.)
Here, 715 = Asc/At, Where A51: is the displacement of the ﬂy 1
along the a: direction between consecutive Video frames
and At = 1/15 s (@0067 s) is the time between the cap- 1
ture of one Video frame and the next, and similarly for
11y. The a: and y directions are labelled in ﬁgure 2. Deﬁned :5 10‘1
this way, the vector (7157 1)?) is the mean horizontal vel- E
. . . A A A
001ty 0f the ﬂy durlng the 1nterva1 At, not the >5 I i
instantaneous velocity of the ﬂy. In determining the i 10—2 A X 9 ‘
velocity, we make no distinction between ‘active’ and a a
stationary periods of the ﬂies, i.e. When the ﬂies are E A 9 v
stationary, we simply record the velocity as (7157 1)?) = a '3
(0, 0). We also determined the speed u: (113+ 1131/2, 10‘3 A A V
Which is the magnitude of the mean velocity vector A V
of the ﬂy during the time At between consecutive g A A
Video frames. 10—4 3 V 9
The histograms in ﬁgure. 3 show the distributions _20 _10 0 10 20
p(vx) and 19(1)?) of the ve1001ty components 715 and 11y, . _1
respectively, in each arena. The data show the distri— VClOClty Vx’ Vy (mms )
E1: téon forAthe ptilpulat1%n,b.zliild afi‘eﬁ ngrmahzgd such Figure 3. Histogram showing the distribution of the horizontal
a p (71$) 11x IS e pro a 1 1 y 0. n tug a y’ I‘an- velocity of fruitﬂies (21$, vy) in each of the arenas. The distri-
domly selected from the populatlon, Wlth a ve1001ty bution of 21$ is shown by solid symbols (red triangles, 09* (11.5
component .between 715 _ AUx/Z and ”x + Avx/Z at any T); green Circles, 19* (16.5 T); blue inverted triangles, 29*
partlcular tlme, and s1m11ar1y for p(vy). The h1st0gram (115 T); black squares, 19 control (0 T)) and 119 by Open sym_
bins are Avx, Avg = 2 mm 8—1 Wide. Note that p(vx) bols. Here vac: Aaj/At, Where Am is the displacement of the ﬂy
and p( 11?), as we have deﬁned them, differ, in general7 along the a: direction between consecutive Video frames, and At
from the distribution of the ingtantaneoug velocity 18 the time interval between the capture Of one Video frame
vector ((156 /dt, dy/dt), and depend on the Choice Of At. and the next, and similarly for 119. Hence (ng, 119) is the mean vel-
Nevertheless, they serve as a useful measure of the walk- ocity 0f the ﬂy during the interval At, not the instantaneous
- - - - velocity of the ﬂy. The data show the distribution for the popu-
1ng speed of the ﬂ1es. We observed no s1gn1ﬂcant . . . . . .
. . . . lation, normalized such that p(vQAvaC is the probability of ﬁnding
dlfference between the d1str1but10ns p(vx) and [9(1) ), . . .
h , h h , b' d , 19 a ﬂy, randomly selected from the population, With a ve1001ty
S meg t at t ere Is no las towar S any partlcu aI‘ between vac — Av$/ 2 and 119—1— Avm/ 2 at any particular time; simi—
hOﬂZ‘Oﬂtal dlrectlon. . . larly for 219. The bin-Width Aux 0f the histograms are 2 mm s_l.
Flgure 4 shows a cumulatlve hlstogram plot (some— The solid lines are ﬁts to the tails of the distributions With
times called a rank/frequency plot) of the speed p(vgc) ~ exp(—b‘v$‘); see §4.4. (Online version in colour.)
J. R. Soc. Interface

"
"6","Downloaded from rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 10, 2012
Fruitﬂy walks in altered R. J . A. Hill et al. 5
l 5
4 a 6
'1 9
3 l
10—1 Ar 0 7
s EAy
5? 2 (>“""J 0 8 |
s? 10-2 M l
5:: frame 1C~~~Q¢_f~O-4S) "" 9 .’
E / 010
Q start of \‘ “
10—3 interval n 0 \.: $ 05
\ p I
0 20 “ a 4
' 3* ° 15 g
10-4 ‘ I 0"" E 0 3
1 10 102 9‘ 9 w]; 0 2
speed, u (mm 3—1) (I ’
. . . . . . . t‘ '62) .StartOf
Figure 4. Cumulative histogram show1ng the distribution of 20 a c 54 l\ interval n+1
speeds u in each of the arenas. The data show the probability
of observing a ﬂy (randomly selected from the population) Figure 5- Graphic showing how our measure Of the mean
that has a speed greater than u. Here 11,: Ar/At, where square displacement (MSD) of the fruitﬂy versus time is
Ar: (A5132 _|_ A92)1/2 is the distance moved between consecu— obtained. Circles represent the position of a single ﬂy in
tive Video frames, and At is the time interval between the each Video frame. Consecutive frames are separated by the
capture of one Video frame and the next. Hence, u is the mag— time At = 1/15 S- The period Of observation is divided into
nitude of the mean velocity of the ﬂy during the interval At, non—overlapping intervals Of 25 Video frames each (1-7 s).
not the instantaneous speed of the ﬂy. Error bars give an indi— For each interval 77/7 we measure rm“)? which is the displace—
cation of the counting error. Red triangles, 09* (115 T); green n1ent away from the ﬂy’s initial position at the start of the
circles, 19* (16.5 T); blue inverted triangles, 29* (115 T); interval (‘frarne 1’), as a function of time. The MSD (72) is
black squares, 19 control (0 T). (Online version in colour.) obtained by averaging the square Of the displacement 7% =
rn- rn over all intervals n and all ﬂies. The distance moved
between consecutive frames AT is used to obtain the average
speed u = Ar/At, as described in the text.
distribution u. In this plot, P(>u) is the probability of
observin a ﬂ randoml selected from the o ulation
that hasga spyeed 9reatel: than u. Unlike tll)e Ietandarcl curnulative histogram that .ﬂies in 29* and 19* (and 19)
histogram, this type of plot does not require us to bin are a)(tJtive for Similar fractions of time, whereas the ﬂies
the data, avoiding the need to deﬁne a bin width [31]. in Oh 7 spend more. than twice *as much Of their time
From the velocity distribution shown in ﬁgure 3, we active compared Wlth ﬂies in 19 and 29 '
see that the ﬂies in the 09* arena spent more time walking
at higher velocity (on average) than in the other arenas. . .
. . . . 3.2. Mean square dzstcmce travelled by the flzes
For example, at any particular moment, it is approx1—
mately six to seven times more probable to observe a ﬂy In the previous section, we determined the mean velocity
with velocity component lvxl or lvyl between 9 and (7156, U?) of the ﬂies during the time At between Video
11 mm s_1 in 09*, than in 19. It is less probable to observe frames, and the distribution of this velocity in the popu—
a ﬂy in 09* moving with velocity lvxl or lvyl smaller than lation. Although one can approach a measure of the
1 mm s_l, than in the other arenas. When we averaged distribution of instantaneous velocities of the ﬂies by
the velocity (7156, 71,) over a larger time At, we obtained using a high—speed, high—resolution Video camera, this
qualitatively similar results: ﬂies in 09* reached higher requires intense lighting, which would disturb the behav—
velocity more frequently. The difference in velocity distri— iour of the ﬂies. An alternative quantitative measure of
bution between the 19*, 19 and 29* arenas is less clear the walking speed of the ﬂies, which is independent
from the histogram plot. However, a difference in the of At, can be obtained from the mean square displace—
walking speeds u between ﬂies in 29* and the normal ment (MSD) of the ﬂies as a function of time 75> At.
gravity controls (19* and 19) becomes apparent in the We divided the period of observation (100 s) into 20
cumulative histogram shown in ﬁgure 4. The probability non—overlapping intervals of 25 frames each, which corre—
of observing a ﬂy with speed u greater than approxi— sponds to a duration of 7': 1.67 s. For each ﬂy and each
mately 10 mm s_1 is similar in both 19* and 29*, but interval 71, we measured r.,,(t) - r.,,(t) = rn(t)2, where the
beyond 10 mm s_l, the probability decreases markedly vector r,,(t) is the displacement of the ﬂy away from its
in 29*, compared with that in 19* and 19. position at the start of the interval, as a function of the
Martin studied the temporalfrequency of ‘activity’ and time elapsed 75 since the beginning of the interval
‘inactivity’ in the fruitﬂy [29]. He considered ﬂies moving (ﬁgure 5). We calculated the MSD as the average of
greater than 4 mm s_1 as ‘active’ and those moving 71,,(75)2 over all intervals 71 and all ﬂies. Within a particular
slower than 2 rnms_1 as ‘inactive’ (he classed as ‘unde— interval, we excluded any trajectories of ﬂies that made
ﬁned’, those ﬂies moving between 2 and 4mm s_l). contact with the walls. This removed the circular arcs
Using this deﬁnition of activity, we see from the of ﬂies crawling around, or walking on, the walls of the
J. R. Soc. Interface

"
"7","Downloaded from rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 10, 2012
6 F ruitﬂy walks in altered R. J . A. Hill et al.
(a) / (a) 50 . 7
6 /$/ 2.5 ’ '
- w .0 ~ .
N a N“ , ’ . A
g 4 1 $41 2.0 E g 30 . 1 g
:5 it E :20 / .’ f 5N:
1&3 _ = FPHHF 1.0 10 i / ‘ ‘ 3
. H“: = = {ii iitinaa-rr’ 0.5 . ; E: __ ii—i—i-i-i—ii—i—E’H‘i’f 2
0 0.5 1.0 1.5 0 5 10 15
“5) t(S)
(b) 4* ' (b) .
”4““ - ii ‘ tr
N” 1 r” 441""“: ‘2 — ‘ﬁir’ﬂ’f’t
E /.A/— /ﬂ”’,—*‘V a 1 ii — . ; . ‘ —
g //4’ //f:/V’v*— V ftitf : : ‘ ’ t
0?: /,A/‘/’ /_:'5:’/'::::rt/ (<3: /— '/:;:/:é‘1 ‘ t
V ‘/:;I§::f::w/t* V / :_//: ?.??g;
10_2 :::=;:://V’ 10_2 ¢//_ .
/”/
‘1 10‘1 1 10
10 t (S) 1
t (s)
Figure 6. (a) MSD (72) as afunction of t < 7', where the period of . 2 . .
observation has been divided into 7' = 1.67 s intervals. The Figure 7' (a) MSD (T > as a function Of t < 77 where the period
mean is taken over several intervals and all ﬂies. (b) The of observation has been divided into 7': 16.7 s intervals. The
graph 0f10g<r2> versus log t is a straight line With slope ”y % mean is taken over several intervals and all ﬂies. (1)) Graph of
- - 7 10 (72) versus logt. Error bars show the s.d. of (T2). The dashed
1.5. The lines are offset along the y—aX1s by logD. The values . g . .
of y and D, determined from a least—squares ﬁt to the data, lines are 183815 squares ﬁt to the .data Wit}: 7: 1'3' Red tn""
are given in table 1. Error bars show the standard deviation of angles, 09 . (11'5 T2: green CerleS7 19 (16'5 T); blue
(7.2, Red triangles, 09* (115 T); green circles, 19* (16.5 T); inverted triangles, .29 . (11.5 T); black squares, 19 control
blue inverted triangles, 29* (11.5 T); black squares, 19 control (0 T)' (Onhne version m 0010111)
(0 T). (Online version in colour.)
Table 1. Coefﬁcient D and exponent y in the ﬁt to the data
2 _ 'y -
arena, from the analysis. The MSD (r2) is shown in <T>_ Dt Shownm ﬁgure 6'
ﬁgure 6. Error bars show the standard deviation of (r2). 2 _
. . . . D(n1n1 s 7’) 3/
Note that the max1mum variation in the mean square
between individuals is generally 2substantially larger 09* 347 i 003 1.50 i 001
than the standard deviation of (r ). The graphs show 19* (1575 i (1005 1.56 i 001
that the MSD of ﬂies in 09* grows considerably faster 29* 0.297 i 0.005 1.51 i 0.01
With time than ﬂies in 19 and 19*. Conversely, the 19 0.64i001 1.49i002
MSD of ﬂies in 29* increases more slowly With time
than in 19 and 19*. We performed a least—squares ﬁt to .
the data in ﬁgure 6 With the power law (7.2) : D157, ﬁgure 7With ﬁgure 6. This is owing to the increased like—
Where D is an ‘effective diffusivity’. The exponent y, lihoed 0f any particular ﬂy meeting the arena walls
Which is the slope of the log—log plot of the data during the longer interval 7': 16.7s: any traJectory
(ﬁgure 6 b), is approximately the same in all gravities, that meets the arena walls Within time t< 7' is excluded
'y% 1.5, including outside the magnet. The coefﬁcient from the measurement ef the MSD: thus reducing
D, Which is directly proportional to the rate at Which the Slhe 0f the set 0f tTaJBCtOTY data OVBI‘ Wthh the
(r2) increases With time, varies considerably With the mean is calculated.
effective gravity, as is immediately apparent by examin—
ing the yintercept 0f the straight line ﬁts to the
log—log plot of the data, as shown in ﬁgure 6b. 4' DISCUSSION
The values of D Obtained from the least—squares ﬁt are The rate at Which the MSD increases With time (pro—
given in table 1. Figure 7 shows the MSD calculated portional to D) depends on the effective gravity in our
using a longer time scale. In these plots, the interval experiments: the MSD 0f the ﬂies grows more rapidly
time used in the analysis is 7': 16.7 s. Just as in the With time in 09* than in 19*, and more slowly With
analysis on the shorter time scale, ﬂies in 09* increase time in 29*. These results corroborate the ﬁndings
their MSD more rapidl With time, and more slowly in from the experiments performed aboard the Columbia
3’
29*, than in 19 and 19*. The MSD of ﬂies in 19* increases Space Shuttle and the 188 that fruitﬂies walk more
at a similar rate as those in 19 in both analyses, as shown quickly in the microgravity environment and are
in both ﬁgures 6 and 7. ‘active’ more frequently. For example, it is twice as
The analysis that uses intervals of 7': 16.7 s generates likely to Observe a ﬂy in O 9* With speed u = Ar/At (as
more noisy data With correspondingly larger error bars, deﬁned in §3.1) greater than 4 mm s_1 than in the 19*
than With 7': 1.67 s, as can be seen by comparing and 19 arenas, at any particular moment.
J. R. Soc. Interface

"
"8","Downloaded from rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 10, 2012
F mitﬂy walks in altered R. J . A. Hill et al. 7
We also observed that ﬂies in 2 9* had a speed distri— the superconducting magnet, being of order 105 times
bution similar to those in 19* and 19, up to larger than the Earth’s ﬁeld at the surface, should dis—
approximately 10 mms_1, but beyond this, the prob— rupt their magnetic sense. Gegear et al. [39] reported
ability that ﬂies in 2 9* reach higher speed falls relative that ﬂies introduced to a ‘T—maze’ showed different pre—
to the 19 and 19* arenas. For example, the Chance of ferences for each arm of the maze depending on their
observing a ﬂy in 29* with u greater than 16 mm s_1 is exposure to a magnetic ﬁeld. Gegear et al. used a ﬁeld
approximately three times smaller than in 19* and 19, of 5 x 10—4T in their experiments, which is 3 x 105
at any particular moment. The coefﬁcient D of the times smaller than that generated by the superconduct—
walks of ﬂies in 29* is correspondingly smaller than in ing magnet we use in these experiments, yet we observe
the other arenas. no effect of the ﬁeld on the walking patterns of the ﬂies.
In experiments in larger arenas under normal grav— One reason for this discrepancy may be the lighting
ity, Valente et al. [30] observed a dependence of the used in our experiments. Gegear et al. showed that
velocity distribution on position within the arena, the magnetic sense is light—dependent: ﬂies exposed to
which we do not observe. However, our arena diameter broad—speotrum illumination displayed sensitivity
is approximately six times smaller than in Valente to the magnetic ﬁeld, but did not respond when a
et al.’s work, in order to ﬁt within the 5 cm diameter ﬁlter blocking wavelengths of less than 420 nm was
bore of the magnet. employed. In our experiments, the only illumination is
by white light emitting diodes (LEDs). Because such
4 1 Interactions with magnetic ﬁeld lights emit only a small fraction of their energy at less
' ' than 420 nm, we speculate that this may explain why
Before concluding that the anomalous walking speed and we do not observe signiﬁcant differences in the walking
activity observed in the magnet can be attributed to the patterns of the ﬂies in the ﬁeld compared with the
altered effective gravity, we need to consider the differ— control outside the magnet.
ences between the pseudo—weightless condition of According to Faraday’s law of induction, electric
diamagnetic levitation and the ‘true’ microgravity ﬁelds and corresponding electric currents can be gener—
environment in orbit—in particular, the effect of the ated in the organism if it moves through a static
strong static magnetic ﬁeld (which is, of course, not pre— magnetic ﬁeld with a ﬁeld gradient, such as is present
sent in spaoe—ﬂight experiments). In this section, we give in the 09* and 2 9* arenas. Glover et al. [38] have studied
a brief overview of magnetic ﬁeld interactions that can the disorientating effects of such induced currents on
occur in the fruitﬂies, besides that of the linear diamag— human subjects. The induced electric ﬁeld depends on
netiC force that we use to balance the gravitational the rate of Change of magnetic ﬂuX through the organ—
force. In §4.2, we discuss the uniformity of the effective ism, which is proportional to the product of the velocity
gravity acting on the ﬂies. of the organism and the magnetic ﬁeld gradient in the
Mechanical stresses within the organism can be intro— direction of motion. Because the direction in which
duced through alignment of biostructures by the the magnetic ﬁeld gradient is largest is Close to vertical
magnetic ﬁeld. Many biological structures contain long in both the 09* and 2 9* arenas, an electric ﬁeld can be
sequences of regularly oriented peptide groups. There is generated through small vertical motions of the ﬂy as it
a torque on such structures in a magnetic ﬁeld, owing walks horizontally over the arena ﬂoor. Because the
to the diamagnetic anisotropy of the peptide bond [32]. magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld gradient is the same
Some cell structures contain enough of these sequences in the 2 9* arena as in the 09* arena, the magnitude of
that the magnetic torque on the structure in relatively the induced electric ﬁeld is the same in both the 2 9*
weak ﬁelds of approximately 1 T can overcome the rando— and 09* arenas. Evidently then, the behavioural differ—
mizing effect of thermal motion, resulting in some degree ences between 0 9*, 19* and 2 9* cannot be attributed to
of magnetic alignment [33—36]. Other regularly oriented an electric ﬁeld (or associated electric current) induced
long Chain organic molecules can be aligned by the by linear movement through the magnetic ﬁeld. An
magnetic ﬁeld in a similar way [37]. electric ﬁeld can also be induced by rotational move—
We control for effects of magnetic alignment on be— ment (of the head for example) in the magnetic ﬁeld
haviour, and any other interactions with the magnetic by the same mechanism [38], but because this can
ﬁeld, such as magnetohydrodynamics effects [38], by occur even where there is no magnetic ﬁeld gradient,
comparing the motion of the ﬂies in the 19* arena we can use the comparison between 19* and 19 arenas
with the ﬂies in the arena positioned well away from to conclude that behaviour is not affected signiﬁcantly
the magnet (19 arena). The strong 16.5T magnetic by this mechanism.
ﬁeld present in the 19* arena had no Clearly identiﬁable
effect on the ﬂies’ walking behaviour: the velocity distri— . .
bution of ﬂies in 19* is the same (i.e. within the scatter 42' Effectwe gramty
of the data) as that in 19, and D and y Characterizing We now discuss in more detail the effective gravity acting
the MSD are similar. Although the exponent 3/ appears on the ﬂies. The linear diamagnetic force on the ﬂies is
to be slightly higher in 19* from that in the other proportional to the product of three quantities: the ma9—
arenas, the difference in 3/ between 19* and 19 is not nitude of the magnetic ﬁeld (N.B., although the magnetic
large enough, compared with the error in the measure— ﬁeld is a vector ﬁeld, its magnitude is a scalar quantity),
ment, to attribute unambiguously to the magnetic ﬁeld. the spatial gradient of the magnetic ﬁeld magnitude and
Because the fruitﬂy can sense the Earth’s magnetic the magnetic susceptibility of the material. The magnetic
ﬁeld [39], it might be expected that the strong ﬁeld in force acts on each molecule of the material. The effective
J. R. Soc. Interface

"
"9","Downloaded from rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 10, 2012
8 F ruitﬂy walks in altered R. J . A. Hill et al.
gravitational force is deﬁned as the sum of the linear dia— orientation with respect to the direction of the ﬁeld gra—
magnetic and gravitational forces, per unit mass; the dient. However, we observe that walking speed is
mathematical deﬁnition can be found in the electronic signiﬁcantly enhanced in 0 9* compared with 2 9*, what—
supplementary material. ever the orientation of the ﬂies in the magnetic ﬁeld, as
Unlike the other magnetic ﬁeld interactions discussed can be Clearly seen in the electronic supplementary
earlier, the effective gravitational force depends on the material Video. Hence, we conclude that the difference
direction of the magnetic ﬁeld gradient relative to the in behaviour between arenas is not signiﬁcantly inﬁu—
direction of the gravitational force. Note that the direC— enced by the variation in effective gravity compared
tion of the magnetic ﬁeld gradient with respect to with the overall reduction in the effective gravity.
gravity is the key difference between the environment This means that, as far as the walks of the ﬂies is con—
in the 09* arena and the 2 9* arena: in the 09* arena the cerned, we expect the effects of levitation to be
magnetic ﬁeld increases in the same direction as the grav— comparable to the effects of space ﬂight or free fall.
itational force (the diamagnetio force acts opposite to the Even for a homogeneous substance, like water, there
direction of gravity), whereas in the 2 9* arena, the ﬁeld is some spatial variation in the effective gravity, owing
decreases in the direction of gravity (the diamagnetio to the spatial variation of the magnetic ﬁeld. By conﬁn—
force acts in the same direction as gravity). ing the ﬂies inside the arenas, we have restricted the
Because the ﬂies levitated Close to the levitation range of the effective gravity acting on water to less
point of water (within 1—2 mm) we have, so far, than 6 per cent of 9; the variation within each of the
assumed that the effective gravity acting on the ﬂies arenas is shown in the electronic supplementary
is approximately the same as that acting on water. material. The stresses resulting from the spatial vari—
We now discuss a number of caveats to this assumption ation of the magnetic ﬁeld can be thought of as tidal
and their signiﬁcance in these experiments. forces (the spatial variation, i.e. gradient, of the
On Earth, the weight of a biological organism is sup— Moon’s gravitational force over the Earth’s surface is
ported by mechanical stresses within it. In orbit, or in responsible for the sea tides). In our experiments, the
deep—space, there are no such gravitationally induced tidal forces are weak compared with the surface tension
stresses. The aim of levitating the organism is to reduce of water: the effect on the surface oscillations of a levi—
these gravitational stresses to as near to zero as possi— tated cm—scale water droplet are slight [26], suggesting
ble by balancing the force of gravity with the linear that such tidal forces should have little effect on
diamagnetio force, in order to simulate a weightless similarly sized, or smaller, biological organisms.
environment. The effective gravity acting on the levitat—
1ng material depends on its magnetic mass susceptibility 4. 3. Response to reduced gravity
Xm- In a homogeneous material (for example, a well—
mixed diamagnetio aqueous solution or organic oil) )(m We speculate that the enhanced walking speed and
is a constant, and hence the effective gravity acting on activity in the 09* arena can be explained by a simple
the material, and the resulting stresses, are relatively physicaleffeotzthe ﬁies moved more rapidly and more fre—
simple to calculate [26]. The situation is different for abio— quently in 0 9* because locomotion expends less energy,
logical organism. Differences in )(m between the biological there being no work to do against the gravitational
structures within the organism causes the effective grav— force. Consistent with this hypothesis, ﬂies were measur—
ity to vary from point to point within the organism, ably slower in the 2 9* arena than in the 19* or 19 arenas.
generating additional internal stresses. Further details Detailed studies of the energy efﬁciency of different
are given in the electronic supplementary material. modes of insect ﬁight have been performed recently
Fortuitously for our experiments, in the case of soft bio— [41,42]. For walkin9, it is Clear that the ﬂexing of the
logical tissues, )(m differs by only up to approximately ﬁies’ joints and muscles would expend less energy in simu—
10 per cent from the susceptibility of water [40]. Hence, lated microgravity than 19 or 29. Simulation of increased
in many organisms, we expect any inﬂuence of the spatial gravity in a centrifuge results in a corresponding decrease
variation in effective gravity to be small compared with in the motility of fruitﬁies [43].
the overall reduction in gravity. Valles et al. [10] estimated Alternatively, the abnormal walks observed in the 0 9*
the internal stresses induced in a levitated frogs egg arena could emerge fromachange in the ﬁies’ perception
from the measured susceptibilities of a few major cellular of gravity. The ﬁies can respond to gravity using senses
constituents. They concluded that the stresses induced that measure the stresses on, and the angle of, joints in
by the spatial variation in effective gravity were con— the body [3]. Such senses are responsible for directing
siderably smaller than (typically approx. 10% of) the normal gravitactio behaviour [5]. These senses should
gravitationally induced stresses in 19. perceive the reduction in the weight of the organism. It
In our experiments, we can observe the relative is also possible that these senses could be inﬂuenced by
importance of the spatial variation in )(m by comparing a spatial gradient in effective gravity owing to the differ—
behaviour in the 0 9* arena with that in 29*. The spatial ences in magnetic susceptibility between tissues, as
variation in effective gravity, owing to variation in Xm discussed in §4.2. Studies investigating this mechanism
between tissues, is similar in both the 09* and 29* in human subjects in magnets used for high—ﬁeld (B =
arenas, as explained in the electronic supplementary 3—7 T) magnetic resonance imaging have shown that
material. Hence, if the spatial variation of the effective the human vestibular system responds to a (static) mag—
gravity had a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the ﬁies’ behaV— netiC ﬁeld >< ﬁeld—gradient product as low as 1 T2 rn—1
iour, we would expect to ﬁnd behaviour in 2 9* similar [38] (of. the 1360 T2 rn_1 required to levitate the ﬂies in
to that in 09*, or behaviour dependent on the ﬁies’ our experiments). Nevertheless, even if the gravity
J. R. Soc. Interface

"
"10","Downloaded from rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 10, 2012
F mitﬂy walks in altered R. J . A. Hill et al. 9
sense of ﬂies is affected by stresses resulting from the vari— correlations in the velocity can also produce superdiffu—
ation in magnetic susceptibility, these experiments show sion [48], as follows. There is a tendency of the ﬂies to
that the walking speed of the ﬂies, however governed, is maintain their direction of travel over short time
primarily inﬂuenced by the mean effective gravity, not scales. At very short time scales, the path of the ﬂy
the spatial gradient in effective gravity, as we have approaches an uninterrupted straight—line (so—called
discussed already. ballistic) motion, for which the MSD increases quadra—
One way to distinguish whether the anomaly in walk— tically with time, i.e. y = 2. With increasing time, the
ing speed in 09* is primarily owing to the ﬂies’ altered direction of motion becomes less correlated, and y
perception of gravity, or whether it is because walking falls accordingly. For a Gaussian random walk, such
simply expends less energy in 0 9*, would be to compare as Brownian motion, in which there is no correlation
the walks of different sized ﬂies in different effective graVi— between time steps, we have 3/ = 1. Our ﬁnding that y
ties. If energy is important,we might expect the anomaly falls between 1 and 2 is consistent with the fact that
in speed to be more pronounced in more massive ﬂies. we measure the MSD on a time scale in which we
Owing to the small number of ﬂies that can be contained expect the direction of motion to exhibit some corre—
simultaneously within the small arenas within the lation in time.
magnet, we were not able to observe statistically sig— The value of y for the population depends also on the
niﬁcant differences in the motility of different—sized spread in the behaviour of individuals. For example,
individuals. This would be a good topic for future a population consisting of ﬂies that maintain their
study, using a centrifuge, for example. Further studies, direction of travel over relatively long times (i.e.
using altered—gravitropic strains [44], are planned in having a relatively long velocity autocorrelation time)
order to determine the mechanism by which the ﬂies’ and ﬂies that alter their direction frequently (i.e.
walk is altered by changes in gravity, or whether several having a relatively small velocity autocorrelation time)
mechanisms are important here. would also generate a y for the population intermediate
The observations in this paper were made for ﬂies between 1 and 2.
conﬁned to 25 mm diameter arenas. The size of the The movements of the ﬂies are obviously also inﬂu—
arena used in diamagnetic levitation experiments is lirn— enced by their conﬁnement inside the arena (see also
ited by the size of the magnet bore (and ultimately by [30]): as we increase 7' up to 17 s, we observe that y
the present limit of high magnetic ﬁeld technology). falls to approximately 1.3 (ﬁgure 7). We might expect
The earlier experiments on board the ISS and Shuttle y to fall with increasing time scales owing to conﬁne—
demonstrated that the increased walking speed could ment of the ﬂies by the arena walls, which provides an
be observed in larger arenas [1,2], showing that conﬁne— upper limit to the MSD. From this data, we cannot
ment of the ﬂies to such small volumes is not necessary rule out the possibility that 3/ might fall to 1, when
to induce the anomalous behaviour. measured over a long enough time scale.
The focus of this paper is to determine the effect of
4.4. Form Of velocity distribution and mean different effective gravities on the walks of the ﬂies,
square disp lacemen t requiring us to use relatively small arenas and relatively
small populations in order to ﬁt Within the conﬁnes of
The velocity distribution of the population, shown in the magnet bore. Experiments performed in large or
ﬁgure 3, is evidently non—Gaussian (i.e. it does not open arenas with much larger populations would be
behave like Brownian motion, which has a velocity dis— valuable in determining which of the earlier men—
tribution of the form p(vx) ~ eXp(— a713,». The tails of tioned possibilities is responsible for the apparent
these distributions decay more slowly, as p(vx) ~ superdiffusive behaviour.
eXp(— b[v$[), as shown by the straight line ﬁts to the It is striking that the effect that levitation has on the
log plot of the distribution (ﬁgure 3). Valente et al. speed distribution is much more pronounced than the
[30] have observed that individual ﬂies conﬁned in effect that pseudo—29 hypergravity has, below 10 mms_1.
a circular arena exhibit a non—Gaussian velocity distri— Only above approximately 10 mm s_1 does doubling the
bution, and the distribution we observe for the effective weight of the organism (i.e. in the 29* arena)
population may reﬂect this. Alternatively, the slower begin to limit signiﬁcantly the frequency that ﬂies exceed
decay can result from pooling the data from a popu— a particular speed, compared with ﬂies in normal gravity
lation containing some variation between individuals (19, 19*). The reason for this is not well understood,
[45], just as we have done here. because it is a difﬁcult problem to model the relationship
We now discuss brieﬂy our ﬁnding that y > 1, which between speed and weight. Future experiments are
represents a so—called superdiffusive walk. There has planned at intermediate effective gravities to study
been some debate recently on whether or not the move— this effect.
ments of a wide variety of animals, including deer, A corresponding effect is observed in the measure—
bumblebees and wandering albatross, can be modelled ments of MSD. On short time scales, 7': 1.67s, the
as a special type of random walk, known as a Levy difference between D in the 09* arena and D in the
ﬂight or Levy walk [46]. Sims [47] show that some 19* (and 19) arena is much larger than the difference
marine predators can be modelled this way. Cole between D in the 29* arena and 19* (and 19). When
found fractal patterns of activity in D. melanogaster, measured over the longer time interval 7': 16.7 s, how—
which can generate a Levy ﬂight [27]. Such walks give ever, the increase in D in 09* is less pronounced: D=
rise to superdiffusive motion, but this is not the 1.55, 0.68, 0.19 and 0.58 for the 09*, 19*, 29* and 19
only way that superdiffusion can arise. Temporal arenas, respectively, for y: 1.3. This is an effect of
J. R. Soc. Interface

"
"11","Downloaded from rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 10, 2012
10 F ruitﬂy walks in altered R. J . A. Hill et al.
conﬁnement of the ﬂies. In our analysis, a trajectory temperature, vertical, 5 cm diameter bore that is Open
that meets the arena walls within time t< 7' is excluded t0 the laboratory at both ends. At maximum current,
from the calculation of the MSD. Doing this removes it produces a magnetic ﬁeld of 16.5 T at the geometric
predominantly those trajectories with larger MSD centre of the solenoid. The solenoid is cooled by a
from the analysis, reducing the corresponding value Closed—Cycle refrigeration system, which enables the
of D. Because the likelihood of any particular trajectory magnet to run for several months continuously at
meeting the arena walls is greater for longer intervals 7' high ﬁelds.
and trajectories with larger MSD, the measured D is
smaller at longer 7', with the greatest reduction of D 5.2. Arenas
Observed in populations with larger MSD.
The ﬂies were conﬁned to 25 mm diameter, 10 mm tall
45. Comparison with emperiments performed arenas. The 19* >Iarena was placed at the centre of the
in Earth orb'i t s01en01d. The O9 arena was located 80 mm above the
19* arena. The 29* arena was 80mm below the 19*
Our observations agree with experiments performed on arena. Each of the arenas were contained within a trans—
the Columbia Space Shuttle and the subsequent mission parent plastic specimen tube (diameter: 25 mm; height:
to the 1882 we Observed a pronounced increase in the fre— 50 mm) The arena ﬂoor was formed from a semi—solid
quency Of locomotor activity and the walking speed Of culture medium. This is Visible as the Off—white material
the fruitﬂy in pseudO—weightless conditions. All the at the bottom of the tube in ﬁgure 1. The culture
experiments in the magnet and the 1 g COﬂtI‘01 outside medium was poured into the tubes and allowed to set.
the magnet were performed simultaneously, under the The culture medium provided a food source for the
same conditions of atmospheric pressure, temperature, ﬂies and maintained humidity in the arena at close to
humidity, lighting and with the same batch of fruitﬂies. 100 per cent. The ceiling of the arena was a disc of trans—
As we have discussed earlier, the differences in the parent cellophane, 10 mm above the ﬂoor, retained
observed behaviour within the magnet are owing to between two black rubber 0—rings. These can be seen in
differences in the effective weight of the ﬂies. There ﬁgure 17 25—30 mm above the base of the tube. The disc
were no additional effects of the strong magnetic ﬁeld was punctured around its perimeter to allow gas
on the walks of the ﬂies. While there remains the possi— exchange. The 09*7 19* and 29* tubes were located in a
bility that the magnetic ﬁeld affects the ﬂies in some non—rnagnetic scaffold and held in place by plastic rings,
other way not revealed by the analysis of walking as shown in ﬁgure 1. The scaffold, with the tubes, was
patterns, our analysis strongly suggests that the weight— inserted into the bore of the magnet. The position of the
lessness 0f microgravity was responsible for the increased 09* retaining ring on the scaffold was adjusted so that
motility observed in the original experiments on board the 09* arena enclosed the levitation point of water. The
the Shuttle and 188. Although the experiments on the positions of the 19* and 29* rings were similarly adjusted.
188 showed some sensitivity to launch procedures, 0111‘ The experimentsinside the magnet were conducted simul—
study indicates that launch procedures are not the taneously with an external control in an incubator (19
cause of the increase in motility per se. arena), well away from the magnet.
46' Conclusion 5.3. Fruitflz'es
This study shows that the walking speed of fruitﬂies Approximately thirty 1_2 day—Old Oregon R D. mela-
and their ‘activity’ is altered signiﬁcantly by counter— n09a3ter ﬂies, with equal number Of males and
acting the gravitational force. Diamagnetic levitation females, were sealed into each arena a few hours
enabled US to maintain tight COHtI'Ol over the exper' before the beginning of the Observation period, to
imental COHditiOHS Of all the experimental subjects. allow them to acclimatize t0 the environment inside
This allowed us to identify, unambiguously, the altera— the magnet.
tion of effective gravity as the cause of the anomalous
behaviour. We have shown how diamagnetic levitation 5 . .
. . . .4. nght'mg
can be used to assess, quantitatively, the behav10ura1
response of a macroscopic organism to zerQ—gravity, Each tube was lit around itS Circumference by six
Four billion years’ Of evolution have equipped life on equally spaced surface—mount white light (InGa)N
Earth to withstand the stresses generated by the LEDS, on a printed Circuit board 1‘ng attached to the
ever—present pull of gravity. Here, we have shown that dia— scaffold. The LEDs (OSRAM Optosemiconductors
magnetic levitation can be used to investigate directly the GmbH) had a dispersion angle of 1200 and a luminous
inﬂuence of Changing gravity on the locomotion Of a com— intensity Of 495 med, when a 20 mA current was
plex multi—cellular organism, and that Close comparison applied. The LEDs provided the only source of light,
can be made with experiments performed in space. once the scaffold was located in the magnet bore.
Care was taken to avoid ambient light entering the
magnet bore.
5. MATERIAL AND METHODS
5.1. Superconducting magnet 5.5. Temperature control
The superconducting solenoid magnet (Oxford Instru— The temperature of the bore was maintained at 240C by
ments Nanoscience, Abingdon, UK) has a room passing dry air at atmospheric pressure, supplied from a
J. R. Soc. Interface

"
"12","Downloaded from rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 10, 2012
Fruitfly walks in altered R. J . A. Hill et al. 11
compressor, through the magnet bore at 1 l per second. 6 Marco, R., Vernos, 1., Gonzalez, J . & Calleja, M. 1986
The temperature of the pumped air was brought up to EmbTYOgGDGSiS and aging 0f DTOSOPh’ila 70619009981567“ ﬂOWﬂ
2400, prior to entering the magnet bore, by passing it in the space shuttle. Naturwissenschaften 73, 431—432.
through a coiled copper pipe immersed in a temperature— (d91‘10'1007/BF00367288) _
- - 7 Geim, A. 1998 Everyone’s magnetism. Phys. Today 51,
controlled water bath. Each plastic spec1men tube was .
ﬁtted with two thermocou les to monitor the tem era— 36—39' ((101101063/1'582437) . .
p p 8 Beau non E. & Tournier R. 1991 Lev1tat10n of water and
. . g 7 7
ture. During the experiments, the temperature 9f the organic substances in high static magnetic ﬁelds. J. Phys.
tubes were maintained With less than 0.1 C variation 111 France 17 1423—1428. (doi:10.1051/jp3:1991199)
between them. The 1 9 control arena was inserted into a 9 Beaugnon, E. & Tournier, R. 1991 Levitation Of
dummy magnet bore: a brass tube with the same organic materials. Nature 349, 470. (doi:10.1038/349
dimensions of the bore. The temperature of the dummy 470a0)
bore was maintained at 240C by placing it in an incubator, 10 Valles Jr, J . M., Lin, K., Denegre, J . M. & Mowry, K. L.
placed well away from the magnet. 1997 Stable magnetic ﬁeld gradient levitation of X enopus
laevis: toward low—gravity simulation. Biophys. J. 73,
1130—1133. (doi:10.1016/80006—3495(97)78145—1)
5,6, CCD cameras 11 Valles Jr, J. M., Maris, H. J., Seidel, G. M., Tang, J. 85
. Yao, W. 2005 Magnetic levitation—based martian and
Each tube was Imaged from above by a CCD camera lunar gravity simulator. Adv. Space Res. 36, 114—118.
(Fire—i Digital Board Cameras, Unibrain Inc.), modiﬁed (doi:10.1016/j.asr.2005.01.081)
for use in high magnetic ﬁeld, mounted on the scaffold 12 Rodgers, P. 1997 Molecular magnetism takes off. Physics
10 mm above the top of each tube. The cameras world 10, 28.
recorded Video footage of the ﬂies at 15 frames per 13 Berry, M. V. & Geim, A. K. 1997 Of ﬂying frogs and
second (0.067s per frame). The spatial resolution of leVitI‘OHS- E167“ - J- Phys- 187 307-
the images of the ﬂies is approximately 20 pixels per 14 Siriion, M. D. & Geini, A. K. 2000 Diamagnetic levitation:
mm (0.05 mm per pixel) and was calibrated against ﬂying frogs arid ﬂoating magnets (1nv1ted). J. Appl. Phys.
the dimensions of the tube. The 0siti0n 0f the head 87’ 6200' ((101101063/1'372654)
p .
. . 15 Brooks, J. S., Reav1s, J. A., Medwood, R. A., Stalcup, T. F.,
of each ﬁy was determined for 1500 consecutive M . 1 M W St . b E A . t L S t C C &
. eise, . ., em erg, ., rnow1 z, ., over, . .
frames, 1.e. for 100 S Of .footage, by eye. We recorded Perenboom, J . A. A. J . 2000 New opportunities in science,
only the movement 0f ﬁles walking on the ﬂeet 0f the materials, and biological systems in the low—gravity
arena. We ignored ﬂies walking Oh the other surfaces, (magnetic levitation) environment (invited). J. Appl.
ﬁies not in contact with any surface (i.e. levitating Phys. 87, 6194. (doi:10.1063/1372653)
freely), and also ﬂying, which they did infrequently in 16 Guevorkian, K. & Valles Jr, J . M. 2006 Swimming
the conﬁned space of the arena_ paramecium in magnetically simulated enhanced,
reduced, and inverted gravity environments. Proc. Natl
This work was supported by grants from the Spanish Science Acad. Sci. USA 103, 13 051—13 056. (doi:10.1073/pnas.
and Innovation Ministry: grant nos. AYA2009—07792—E, 0601839103)
ESP2006—13600—C02—01/02a and by a Basic Technology 17 Coleman, C. B., GonzaleZ—Villalobos, R. A., Allen, P. L.,
Grant from EPSRC, UK; grant nos. GR/ 883005 / 01 and Johanson, K., Guevorkian, K., Valles, J . M. & Hammond,
EP/ G037647 / 1. R.J.A.H. acknowledges EPSRC for support T. G. 2007 Diamagnetic levitation Changes growth, cell
under a Research Fellowship EP/1004599/1 and C—DIP cycle, and gene expression of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
grant EP/J005452/1. We thank the referees for their Biotech. Bioeng. 98, 854—863. (doi:10.1002/bit.21526)
constructive comments and suggestions. 18 Dijkstra, C. E., Larkin, O. J ., Anthony, P., Davey, M. R.,
Eaves, L., Rees, C. E. D. 85 Hill, R. J. A. 2011 Diamagnetic
levitation enhances growth of liquid bacterial cultures by
increasing oxygen availability. J. R. Soc. Interface 8,
REFERENCES 334—344. (doi:10.1098/rsif.2010.0294)

1 Benguri’a, A., Grande, E., de Juan, E., Ugalde, C., Miquel, J ., 19 Liu, M. et al. 2011 Magnetic ﬁeld is the dominant factor to
Garesse, R. 85 Marco, R. 1996 Microgravity effects on Droso— induce the response of Streptomyces avermitilz’s in altered
phila melanogaster behavior and ageing: implications of the gravity simulation by diamagnetic levitation. PLOS ONE
IML—2 experiment. J. Biotechnol. 47, 191—201. (doi:10. 6, e24697. (doi:10.1371/j0urnal.pone.0024697)
1016/0168—1656(96)01407—1) 20 Babbick, M., Dijkstra, C. E., Larkin, O. J., Anthony, P.,

2 de Juan, E. et al. 2007 The ‘ageing’ experiment in the Davey, M. R., Power, J . B., Lowe, K. C., Cogoli—Greuter,
Spanish Soyuz Mission to the International Space Station. M. & Hampp, R. 2007 Expression of transcription factors
Microgram'ty Sci. T echnol. 19, 170—174. (doi:10.1007/ after short term exposure of Arabidopsis thaliana cell cul—
BF02919475) tures t0 hypergravity and simulated microgravity (2D / 3D

3 Bender, J . A. & Frye, M. A. 2009 Invertebrate solutions Clinorotation, magnetic levitation). Adv. Space Res. 39,
for sensing gravity. Curr. Biol. 19, R186—R190. (doi:10. 1182—1189. (doi:10.1016/j.asr.2007.01.001)

1016 / j.Cub.2008.12.024) 21 Qian, A. R. et al. 2009 Large gradient high magnetic ﬁeld

4 Inagaki, H. K., Kamikouchi, A. & Ito, K. 2010 Methods for affects the association of MACFl with actin and microtu—
quantifying simple gravity sensing in Drosophila melanoga— bule cytoskeleton. Bioelectromagnetz’cs 30, 545—555.
ster. Nat. Protoc. 5, 20—25. (doi:10.1038/npr0t.2009.196) (d0i:10.1002/bem.20511)

5 Armstrong, J . D., Texada, M. J ., Munjaal, R., 22 Qian, A. et al. 2009 CDNA microarray reveals the
Baker, D. A. & Beckingham, K. M. 2006 Gravitaxis alterations of cytoskeleton—related genes in osteoblast
in Drosophila melanogaster. a forward genetic screen. under high magneto—gravitational environment. Acta Bio—
Genes Brain Behav. 5, 222—239. (d0i:10.1111/j.1601— chim. Biophys. Sin. 41, 561—577. (doi:10.1093/abbs/
183X.2005.00154.X) gmp041)

J. R. Soc. Interface

"
"13","Downloaded from rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 10, 2012

12 F mitfly walks in altered R. J . A. Hill et al.

23 Hammer, B. E., Kidder, L. S., Williams, P. C. 85 Xu, W. W. Tendler, S. J . B. 2007 Alignment of aromatic peptide
2009 Magnetic levitation of MC3T3 osteoblast cells as a tubes in strong magnetic ﬁelds. Adv. Mat. 19, 4474—
ground—based simulation of microgravity. Miemgmvity Sci. 4479. (doi:10.1002/adma.200700590)

Technol. 21, 311—318. (doi:10.1007/s12217—008—9092—6) 37 Manyuhina, O. V. et al. 2007 Anharnionic magnetic defor—

24 Glade, N., Beaugnon, E. 85 Tabony, J . 2006 Ground—based mation of self—assenibled molecular nanocapsules. Phys.
methods reproduce space—ﬂight experiments and show that Rev. Lett. 98, 146101. (doi:10.1103/PhysReVLett98.
weak Vibrations trigger microtubule self—organisation. Bio— 146101)
phys. Chem. 121, 1—6. (doi:10.1016/j.bpe.2005.12.001) 38 Glover, P. M., Gavin, I., Qian, W., Bowtell, R. 85 Gowland,

25 Heijna, M. C. R., Poodt, P. W. G., Tsukanioto, K., de P. A. 2007 MagnetiC—ﬁeld—induced vertigo: a theoretical
Grip, W. J ., Christianen, P. C. M., Maan, J . C., Hendrix, and experimental investigation. Bioelectromagnetz'cs 28,
J. L. A., Van Enckevort, W. J. P. 85 Vlieg, E. 2007 Magne— 349—361. (doi:10.1002/bem.20316)
tically controlled gravity for protein crystal growth. Appl. 39 Gegear, R. J ., Casselnian, A., Waddell, S. 85 Reppert, S. M.
Phys. Lett. 90, 264105. (doi:10.1063 / 1.2752718) 2008 Cryptochronie mediateslight—dependent magnetosen—

26 Hill, R. J . A. 85 Eaves, L. 2010 Vibrations of a diamagne— sitiVity in Drosophila. Nature 454, 1014—1018. (doi:10.
tically levitated water droplet. Phys. Rev. E 81, 056312. 1038/ nature07183)

(doi:10.1103/PhysReVE.81.056312) 40 Schenck, J . F. 1992 Health and physiological effects of

27 Cole, B. J . 1995 Fractal time in animal behaviour: the human exposure to Whole—body four—Tesla magnetic
movement activity of Drosophila. Anim. Behav. 50, ﬁelds during MRI. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 649, 285—301.
1317—1324. (doi:10.1016/0003—3472(95)80047—6) (doi:10.111l/j.1749—6632.1992.tb49617.X)

28 Martin, J .—R., Ernst, R. 85 Heisenberg, M. 1999 Temporal pat— 41 Pesavento, U. 85 Wang, Z. J . 2009 Flapping Wing ﬂight can
tern of locomotor activity in Drosophila melanogaster. save aerodynamic power compared to steady ﬂight. Phys.
J. Comp.Physi0l.A184,73—84. (doi:10.1007/s003590050307) Rev. Lett. 103, 118102. (doi:10.1103/PhysReVLett.103.

29 Martin, J .—R. 2004 A portrait of locomotor behaviour in 118102)

Drosophila determined by a Video—tracking paradigm. 42 Berman, G. J . 85 Wang, Z. J . 2007 Energy—niinimizing
Behav. Process. 67, 207—219. (d0i:10.1016/j.beproe. kinematics in hovering insect ﬂight. J. Fluid Mech. 582,
2004.04.003) 153—168. (doi:10.1017/80022112007006209)

30 Valente, D., Golani, I. 85 Mitra, P. P. 2007 Analysis of the 43 Herranz, R., Lavan, D. A., Dijkstra, C., Larkin, 0., Davey,
trajectory of Drosophila melanogaster in a Circular open M., Medina, F. J ., Van Loon, J ., Marco, R. 85 Schiller, P.
ﬁeld arena. PLOS ONE 2, e1083. (doi:10.1371/j0urnal. 2008 Drosophila behaviour and gene expression in altered
p0ne.0001083) gravity conditions: comparison between space and ground

31 Newman, M. E. J . 2005 Power laws, Pareto distributions facilities. In Proe. 0f the ‘Life in Space for Life on Earth
and Zipf’s law. Contemp. Phys. 46, 323—351. (doi:10. Symposium’, 22—27 June 2008, Angers, France. (ESA
1080/ 00107510500052444) SP—663, December 2008)

32 Pauling, L. 1979 Diamagnetic anisotropy of the peptide 44 Serrano, P., Van Loon, J ., Manzano, A. I., Medina, F. J . 85
group. Proe. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 76, 2293—2294. Herranz, R. In press. Selection of Drosophila altered behav—
(doi:10.1073/pnas.76.5.2293) iour and ageing strains for microgravity research. J . Gravit.

33 Maret, G. 85 Dransﬁeld, K. 1985 Biomolecules and poly— Physiol. (http: //hdl.handle.net/ 10261 / 39192).
mers in high steady magnetic ﬁelds. In Topics in applied 45 Petrovskii, S. 85 Morozov, A. 2009 Dispersal in a statisti—
physics vol. 57: strong and ultrastrong magnetic ﬁelds cally structured population: fat tails revisited. Am. Nat.
and their applications (ed. F. Herlach), pp. 143—204. 173, 278—289. (doi:10.1086/595755)

New York, NY; Springer. 46 Edwards, A. M. 2007 Revisiting Levy ﬂight search pat—

34 Maret, G. 1990 Recent biophysical studies in high mag— terns of wandering albatrosses, bumblebees and deer.
netic ﬁelds. Phys. B 164, 205—212. (doi:10.1016/0921— Nature 449, 1044—1048. (doi:10.1038/nature06199)
4526(90)90077—8) 47 Sims, D. W. 2008 Scaling laws of marine predator search

35 Denegre, J. M., Valles Jr, J. M., Lin, K., Jordan, W. B. 85 behaviour. Nature 451, 1098—1103. (doi:10.1038/
Mowry, K. 1998 Cleavage planes in frog eggs are altered nature06518)
by strong magnetic ﬁelds. Proe. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 95, 48 Upadhyaya, A., Rieu, J .—P., Glazier, J . A. 85 Sawada, Y.
14 7 29—14 732. (doi:10.1073/pnas.95.25.14729) 2001 Anomalous diffusion and non—Gaussian velocity dis—

36 Hill, R. J . A., Sednian, V. L., Allen, S., Williams, P. M., tribution of hydra cells in cellular aggregates. Phys. A
Paoli, M., Adler—Abraniovich, L., Gazit, E., Eaves, L. 85 293, 549—558. (doi:10.1016/80378—4371(01)00009—7)

J. R. Soc. Interface

"
