"","x"
"1","4 :34?"" ' Borrower: NAJ
I [J L! I Priority:
' Journal Title: D’apause in aquatic invertebrates ; Call #: QL365.36 .D53 2007
theory and human use/ Location:
Volume: Issue:
MonthiYear: 2007 Pages: 207/2214
.1
J A""‘°'e““e=StudyingmePhenomemmdmmamw IHIIIIIHIIIHIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIHIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
2; why it is important far space expﬂaratﬁah 1 ‘
ﬁn...) . n
”63 A Article Author: «ﬁsﬂekseev,n V ILL Number. 110698263
33 .. Odyssey:
> :? Ariel:
Inn
QM 0
C m' «-
ﬁﬁﬁ ————. Ian
.3 m a)
9 WM g
G) W 00 The copyright law of the United States (Title 17, United States Cade) governs the making of photocopies or other
E"" E :3 reproductions of copyrighted materials. Under certain conditions speciﬁed in the law, libraries and archives are
w W .. authorized to furnish a photocopy or reproduction. One Of these speciﬁed conditions is that the phctocopy or
5’6 g: z reproduction is not to be ""used for any purpose other than private study, scl‘mtaurshipa or research."" If a user makes a
r< '-‘--~' im- request farn or later usesﬁ a photosopy or repreducticn fer purposes in excess of ""fair use,,"" that user may be liabie fer
L9 3% copyrightinfringcmcnt.

"
"2","VICTOR R. ALEKSEEV. VLADIMIR N. SYCHEV, AND NATALIA D. NOVIKOVA
14. STUDYIN G THE PHENOMENON OF DORMANCY
Why It Is Important for Space Exploration
14.11 INTRODUCTION
Investigations to forward the use of animal and plant anabiosis, e.g. eryptobiesis and
some other forms of dormancy, in space exploration highlight ﬁve notable programs
on exobiology. The authors give an outline of each program and list the biological
species from bacteria to vertebrates and higher plants that have a resting phase
within the life cycle and have been selected for in=Spaee studies.

Biomedical support of humans in the absence of factors important to sustenance
and deveIOpment of every living thing is one of the indisputable aspects of Space
exploration. A critical aspect of the biomedical support framework is creation of
the central ecological life support systemS (CELSS) and. therefore, investigations in
this area are no less important than designing space vehicles.

Development of life support systems (LSS), including systems incorporating the
biological cycle, has been pursued since the initial space ﬂights of cosmonauts. The
groundabased test experiment with CELSS performed in the USSR in the period
from the early 19603 to 19808 demonstrated that, though simple in design. these sys=
tems were capable of regenerating atmosphere. waten and feed and thus adequately
provided the neeegsities of human subjects (Gitelson et :11. 1975; Shepelev 1.975;
Meleshko «St Shepelev 1996; Syehev et a]. 2.002. 2003).

Implementation of CELSS for space crews requires prior allaaround tests and
studies in order to:

. Determine the biological impacts of the space flight factors on the life of ""India
vidual organism. :13 well as communities (pepulatiens and bioeeneges)

a Develep teehnelegies fer cultivating highly preduetive pepulat‘ions 0f autetrophs
and heteretrephs in the zer0=gmvity environment

. Design hardware to sugtain the vital functions of autetmphs :md heterotrephs as
membere of space crew CELSS

a Search for methods to preserve the gene pool aboard the space vehicle and on the
planetary outposts

t. Optimize CELSS with consideratien for microgravity and constant radiation.
expegure

According to the resultg 0f CELSS=reIatetl investigations in space flight, microgravity

impedes tremendously heth functioning of the biological system components and

their integration into a uniform system. There are some hardware and technologies

that can make up for the lack of gravity; yet, some problems cannot be resolved

technically. Medel‘ing of even simpliﬁed ecosystems for remote planetary outposts,

e.g. 0n Mare. instantly raises the issue of long=temt transportation of the whole

207
VI Rt Atekeeett et at mm. Diamante m Aqtttttie Invertebrates. 207=214.
@ 2007 Springer;

"
"3","208 V. ALEKSEEV ET AL.
.5
ecosystem, or parts of the ecosystem, in microgravity. Maintenance of even a i
three=component ecosystem in an active state during 6 months of microgravity i
remains an unsolvable problem (Sychev et a1. 2002, 2003), which means that we }
should take a fresh approach. The phenomenon of protracted biological testing cart ;
be viewed as the alternative to transportation of the active ecosystem (Alekseev }
et al. 2006a, b, c). i
It has been shown recently that one or another form of dormancy and, eonse~ i
quently, the peculiar stages that secure survival under conditions incompatible with i
life are inherent to many organisms from bacteria to vertebrates (Alekseev & Ravera !
2004; Alekseev & Abramson 2005). Having a similar pattern in evolutionarily distant i
organisms, resting stages seem to have a common molecular genetic basis due to, ‘
likely, standing adaptation (Alekseev & Starobogatov 1996). We will not exaggerate
it greatly saying that all living things have the ability to arrest vital activities, a trait
that will be revealed 0? not depending on the quality of their environment. It is net _
seldom when this stage, on the borderline between life and death, is controlled by
speciﬁc signals and/or internal factors (e.g. biological clock). With this knowledge 1
we may set ourselves the challenge of learning how to induce and cancel dormancy *
in individual species and artifieial ecosystems. !
This adaptation, especially if it is controlled by an external signal, hears much i
promise for space biology, and bielogieal life support systems (BLSS) in particular, g
and can be the focal point of research pregrams including experiments fulﬁlled inside i
and outside of space vehicles° i
l
14% STUDY OF DORMANCY FROM THE; PERSPECTIVE OF ITS INTEGRATION E
INTO ECOLOGICAL LIFE SUPPORT SYSTEMS i
It is important to conduct research on a wide variety of taxa and p'hylegenetieally 3
different living things from bacteria te vertebratee and higher plants from the pee»
speetive ef their integration inte BLSS threugh: l) transpertatien of the biesystem I
components. heteretrephie speciﬁcally. in the State of hibernation fer the ensuing i
CELSS aseemhly en planetary eutpests. 2) creation of the egg, bank to he used for }
recovery of the BLSS functionality in the event of complete or partial breakdown, i
3) gradual ineeulatien of new CELSS Species te offset pessible imbalance in dimen= i
sienally and structurally limited system constructed Outside the earth’s hiesphere, 4
4) prediction of the longevity of seeds te ensure permanent production at vegetables 3
as supplement to the crew diet. i
1
H43 PLANETARY AND INTIERPLANETARY QUARANTINE
Persisting forms of life may be the cause fer incidental colonization of planets by term
restrial organisms and vice versa. This illustrates the problem of biological survival i
in hostile envirenments on and beyond earth. Diapause and eryptobiesis. though dif= i
fering in the preeesses leading to the resting stage and survival rate, keep organisms
alive. The range of thermal. chemical. and radiation variations that organisms can i
t
i
i
l

"
"4","DORMANCY AND SPACE EXPLORATION 209
survive in diapause and cryptobiosis is very wide. Preliminary studies showed that
some of the tardigrades could revive after dormancy at deep cold of «=200@C and up
to 100% heating, eXposure to 7,000 Gy, immersion in 100% ethyl alcohol and other
conditions incompatible with life (Alekseev 1990; Kinchin 1994; Seki 8': Toyoshima
1998). This persistence in harsh environments of not only unicellular protozoa but
also more organized multicellular creatures lets us suppose a high probability of bio:
transfer in outer Space (Rothschild & Mancinolli 2001). Therefore, studies of dormant
taxa embracing the whole phylogenetic multitude from bacteria to mammalia and
higher plants are. one of the goals with highest pﬁority for space biology. The quarw
amino measures to bo dovc10ped should establish a barrier to any illicit pcnetmtion 0f
dormant life into the environment of earth or another planet.
14.4 MICROBIOLOGICAL SAFETY OF SPACE FLIGHT
Microbial contamination of space vehicles has been the subject of extensive investin
gations on space station Mir (Novikova 2003,. 2004). Microbes contaminate (be into:
rior and hardware of the vehicle already at the manufacturer‘s site, during delivery,
installation, and prolaunch treatment. Microbes can be brought into the pressurized
space vehicle during the phase of spacecraft construction and operation and during
transport on cargo ships. The presence of microorganisms inside, the manned space
vehicle is: a factor of medical concern and presents very serious technical (cnginccra
ing) risks associated with residential colonization and consequent destruction of
the ﬁnishing and structural materials of the interior and equipment by bacterial and
fungal associations.
MS DIAPAUSE AND ADNYFATION OF HIGHER VERTEBRATES
T0 EXTENDED BODY METABOLISM
Reduction of the basal metabolism. often in response to low temperature, is common
to many wannubloodcd animals; initiating a winter hibernation. Traces of a Sinﬁlar abil»
ity in humans has been demonstrated in medical observations. In humans. who.
according to almost universal Opinion. originated in the low latitudes. this. adaptation
is unlikely to have been driven by natural Selection. Appearance of artiﬁcial methods
to protect themselves from cold weather (kindling. wannth=rotaining clothing) made
migration up to higher latitudes possible. Hence. unlike other wannabloodod species.
including such large animals as the bear. humans did not exploit the ovolutionaw
blockage of hibernation. Yet. th‘iS atzw'istic ability comes into play in the oven: of some
diseases, causing protective responses to the disease (mg. lethargy). Also. there are
documented facts of survival. particularly among arctic populations of people. of
freezing individuals who were too cold over a long period of time to have survived
using normal metabolism. Presentcday inventigat’ions are aimed at ﬁnding methods to
induce a similar state in the interests of nangplantat‘ion medicine, Le. to prolong the life
of recipients awaiting transplants (Fuller 8:: Grout 1991; Becker et :11. 2002). Although
hibernation in wann=bloodcd organisms is controlled by similar hormones as in lower

"
"5","210 v. ALEKSEEV ET AL.
invertebrates in diapause, of course, there is not complete similarity (Alekseev & 3
Abmmson 2005). Nevertheless, in=depth studies of the diapause mechanism and atten- I
dant molecular genetic events may help, in principle, to further our understanding of I
the dormancy phenomenon in higher organisms. We believe that tangible progress in .
this area can he achieved through the hormonal and molecular genetic investigations, I
which are already under way (Boyer & Barnes 1999). If these efforts are a success, the i
technology will be immediately adopted by piloted cosmonautics. Extension of the 5
sleep period by one third, as a minimum, and metabolism slowdown to the level charm I
acteristie 0f dormant invertebrates will afford significant savings of the vital, including I
psychological, resources in longeduration space missions. I
14.6 SEARCH FOR EXTRATERRESTRIAL LIFE I
In the foreseeable future life will be searched for on celestial bodies known to have I
marginal conditions for protein=based life or eryptohiosis. One of the practical survival '
strategies can be alternation of short periods of active life and leng latency. To discover I
life in these ecosystems utterly different than our own. search technologies may be I
required based on an intimate knowledge of cryptohiosis. The hallmark of these teeh= I
nologies should be somewhat of an alarm clock to wake up dormant life. Comparison 1
of the survival time of dormant organisms during eryptobiosis shows that cysts of unia II
cellular organisms (equally animals. e.g. protozoa; and plants. mg. mieroalgae) that i
were first dried and then frozen in ice displayed an amazing ability to revive after as I
long as many thousand years of dormancy (Rothschild & Maneinelli 2001). I
This long maintenance of life provides evidence of the possibility of interplanetary
transfer Oferyptie terms of life on meteorites, dust. and ice particulates of comets. We
can speculate that the advent of resting forms from space on earth is a permanent :
process. Absence of deeumented facts of space invasions can be attributed both to the
preportioxns (abundance of invading forms) and temporal heterogeneity (periedie or I
occasional ingress) of this process. I
The existing analogies of invasion of space travelers into the earth‘s biosphere sug=~ I
gest that implantation 0f newcomers into stable communities is of low probability due 5
t0 belligerence of the aherigine ecosystem members. which are better adapted to the ;
terrestrial envirenment (eempetitive strategy) and defend against the invaders using
bieaetive substances. Le. pheromenes.
Implantation of alien species most likely is more successful if they invade small i
or impaired asseeiatiens where competition is bleeked by lifeathreatening external ;
factors. In this connection, search fer extraterrestrial forms of life sheuld be con:
ducted speciﬁcally in the alpine and aretie eeesystems.
14:7 Tlrlli FIRST RESULTS AND PERSPECTIVES I
TO address the aheve issues within the Russian science program we have started I
experiments with dormant species belonging to different taxonomic grenps (Table
14.1). Dormant organisms are. and will he. expesed over different periods on the I

"
"6","; DORMANCY AND SPACE EXPLORATION 2111
1 TABLE 14.11. List of Species in a Dormancy State Exposed or Prepared for Exposing in Space
W
l Resting Outer
1 Organﬁsms Spccﬁcsﬂincs/cloncs stage space Inside 1188 Years
W
i Bacteria Bacillus subtilis 2335/105 Spore ’* 2005
l B. subtilis-ZS Spore ’1‘ 2005
1 Bacillus pumiIus-w Spcom * 2005
i Bacillus sphaericus-IZI Spam ‘1‘ 2005
1 Aspergillus sydowi Spore * 2005
1 (Bainicr & Sartory 19113:)
I Aspergﬂlus phoenicis Spore #3 2005
l (C0rda1840)
Fungi Aspergillus versicolor Spore ‘1' 2005
(Vui11cmin 1903)
Penicillium Spore * 2003
aurantiogris‘emn
(Dicrckx 1901)
Penicillin"": expausum Spore ‘3 2005
(Link 1009 ex Gray 1821)
' A1gac Pcdiastmm boryanum Zoossporc '1' 2005
I (Tum) Mcncgh.
(Chmmphym)
' Exmotia species 2005mm ’5‘ 2005
(Baciwaﬁomym)
I’honuidimu Zompom ‘5 2005
(Cyamphym)
Igcapcrsicum Seed ‘1‘ 20053
83611119121101: (Tommie)
Mﬁcmﬂ’om)
Raphamts saliva: Seed ‘5 2005
(Radish Cherry 00mm
i 01.11113 Arabia'npsix ﬂmh’mm Seed ‘1? 2005
1 11m 1508 WTZ
i I’t’sum xalivum (Pens: Seed ‘5 2003
15 11m: 131 mm! 102))
?}Wcmn aestimm L. Seed ‘5‘ 2005
1 (When! usuaAmgcc)
i: Anﬁmms Daplmi'a magtm Eph'a‘ppia ‘1‘ 2005:
; (Cﬂadocem «euunbrym 21006
! Slreptacephalus Cyst ((6111030)) *3 2005:
? lorricamis‘ (Amsumca) 21000
I Artcmfa salimx La Cyst ((embrym ’1‘ 2005}:
‘ (Anmurawm) 2000
Enema""; Species Ressﬁng egg 9“ 2005:
«Osamrznrccda» 200-6
? I’abpedilum 1112511119; 1amne 11‘ 2005:
: mmmplmzki (1115120111) 2006
: ﬂkzcrobi’oms species Cyst 0’ 200?
(Eummigmda)
Nomabmneh 1' us garduerf Embryo ’1‘ 2007
(015111
: W
Spccﬁcg expused in Space 115231110110 indicated in 12010 101%.
‘1
1|

"
"7","212 V. ALEKSEEV ET AL.

Russian segment of the International Space Station (RS 133) as parts of experiments

BIORISK=KM, BIORISK=MSV, AQUARIUM, BRADOS, SCORPION, and
I PLANTS=SEEDS. During BIORISKuMSN dormant organisms will be mounted on
' the external surface of the RS 138. Some results of the ﬁrst studies on donnaney
phenomenon in Space are listed hereafter.
’ 14.7.] Eﬁ‘éct ofSpaee Flight conditions on Survivorship and Lifecycle
g Parameters in Resting Stages ofsome Crustaceans
Effect of space ﬂight conditions on survivership and life cycle parameters in resting
' stages of some crustaceans were studied in 2005 during the RS 188 (Alekseev &
’ Sychev 2006).
i This study was conducted in order to elaborate a new technology for creating an
i artiﬁcial ecosystem outside the earth’s biesphere. Maintenance of aquatic animal
and plant resting stages in space conditions should be an essential part of this
I biotechnology. Reactivation of resting stages and lifeaeyele parameters in two
crustaceans, a eladocemn (Daplmia magna) and a fai1y=shrimp (Strepmcephalus
i torvicomis), were examined after a lamenth exposure of their dry resting eggs during
the RS 183 in August=September 2005. Special attention. was paid to possible negaa
tive changes caused by the set of space ﬂight factors at 138 including low gravity,
recitation, magnetie/eleetrie ﬁelds. and the biological impact of bacterial=fungal flora.
‘ as well.
: In both species we found statistically conﬁrmed differences in reactivation
z efﬁciency between resting eggs exposed at 188 and a control group kept in the
laboratory in similar environmental conditions but without exposure to space ﬂight
factors. Embryos of D. magma exposed to orbit revealed mere sensitivity to a fungal
f infection (Pitimn dapimiamm) than the reference group. In culturing experiments in
the Iaberatery D. magma juveniles obtained from the ISS expesed embryos had
longer maturation time and lower offspring preduetivity than in the control group.
Expesing the resting eggs to space ﬂight eendi’tiens else induced male production in
; the second generation of D. magma and net :1 single male had been produced in the

control, group cultivated in the same eenditiens.

Strepteeephahm temieemis in feet else demenstrated seme differences between
ISS exposed and control greups of resting eggg during cultivation. but most of the
differences were net statistically Signiﬁcant due te very high level 0? variability in
offspring life=eyele parametere.

These results present the first reperted effect et‘ environmental strege en life=eyele
parameters»; in animals; protected by a resting stage. not only for Space ﬂight eendi=
tiens but else for eeelegieal systems on earth tee. Discovery of :1 Similar response
to 188 conditions in ether speeiee candidatee for space studies can become a very
important limitatien fer transpertatien ef’ CELSS during Space missiens. The same
weuld apply to cultivation of artiﬁcial eeeeysteme at planetary stations outside the
earth's hiesphere.

"
"8","DORMANCY AND SPACE EXPLORATION 2113
14.7.2 D0rrtmney=based Resistance ofBeeterict and Fungi
t0 Extreme Space Ezwimnments

D0rmaney=hased resistance of bacteria and fungi to extreme space environments
became an issue of interplanetary transfer on external spacecraft surfaces (Nevikova
et at. 2006). Interptahetztry transfer 0f terrestrial microbes capable of surviving in
extreme envirenments, and planetary protection frem accidental biological e0ntam=
ination by these organisms, are issues of majer practical, rather than hypothetical,
value. Hardware and a program have been developed at the State Scientiﬁc Research
Center of the Rusgian Federation =- Institute for Biomedical Problems with the goal
of carrying out a space experiment named “Bierisk.” The experiment was aimed at
assessing the possibility of longuterm survival 0f microorganisms in outer space on
materials used in the Space industry during a time period cemparable with the dura=
tion of the Martian flight.

The natural resistance of mierohee to extreme envirenments and the possibility of
their transfer beyond borders of the earth's biosphere en external spacecraft surfaces
have brought forward a need for prefeund research into the likelihood of their
survival in euter Space.

Samples; 0f materiale were contaminated with test eulturee of bacteria (ertihzs)
and fungi (Aepergih’m. Pertieimtmz. :mtl Chtdat‘parium) known to be common resin
dents. of various envirenments on earth and resietant to multiple alternation of high
and low temperatures (Tahie 14.1). Materials; used in the eenetruetieh of exterhat
Spacecraft Surfaces eueh as steel. aluminum alloy, and heat=insulatihg coating were
Cl‘tOSQtt {13 test samples; for the experiment.

Containers; with these materials; and test miereergahisme were placed in it ptaetie
hag without {my ether external protection en the enter surface 0f the RS 188 for
205% and 365=dtty expesures. After detivery t0 the tahemtery the samples were pieced
in appropriate conditions to test viability et‘ haeteria and fungi.

It was fetthtl that the httmher et’ttperes; that Survived the expesure decreased signifu
ietthtty. pertiettittriy after the initial exposure (Grigeriev et at. in preset. It eheuld hitse
he mentioned that htteterizt. whieh are prekaryetie. i.e. mere aheieht. ergzmiems
displayed higher reehsttmee t0 the hareh ehttirehthehtztt et’feete thtth ettkzttyetie. Le.
yeunger frem the evelhtiehttty peiht Of View, fungi, The number et’ St]! Wivihg mierehes
0h metele wee greater them Oh petymere. indicating the petehtittt effects of the StfttC=
tttre and ehemiettt eempeeitieh et‘ the COHSlﬁJCﬁOn materiele.

Anether impertttnt parameter ehertteterieihg adaptive eepahitities of miereergtutu
isms is their etneeeptihitity te entimiet’ehitti ehheteneee. Every B. suhtth’s strain isehtted
from the Bieriek tnhit developed greater reeietenee te tttttpieihih :mtt eerhehieiltih and
it Stightiy lower reeiettmee te rietemyeih. Although the fateterte) reepensihle remains
uneteztr. petehtittt ﬁSkS eeeeeittted with reduced antihietie sueeeptihitity of pathogenic
strains should net he ignered.

Although fungal SDOFQS demehetreted lower resiettmee t0 the test environment
they were else recovered frem the Samples; of materials fellowing exposure to space.

"
"9","214 v. ALEKSEEV ET AL. L
All of the test microorganisms were capabie of demaney states that protected them 1
in harsh environmental conditions on earth. After this experiment in outer space we ;
have a unique data set that proves the possibility of bacteria and fungi successfully
overcoming such extreme conditions during long-tetm Space missions. Our results
confirm the importance and feasibility of Programs 2 and 3, especially fer success“
ful and secure completion of long=distanee space missions. ?
i
14.8 CONCLUSIONS
In summary. the “Biorisk” study was the first to demonstrate that bacterial and fun= ‘
gal spores can survive an extended. (12nm0nth) expesure t0 the harsh environments 5
of outer space. This suggests that terrestrial organisms can be transported to other E
planets by our space vehicles, particularly manned Spacecraft in spite of stringent f
waste management procedures. 3

Bacteria and fungi inhabiting space vehicles present not Only medical but also
engineering risks. They may cause biodegradation of various eonstruetien materials, E
including plastics. stainless steel. and glass. Their occurrence in dormant forms may E
pose serious problems making it almost impossible to deeontaminate spacecraft inte= l
rims and hardware. This emphagizes the importance of developing efﬁcient bioteeh~ E
nolegies to protect space missiehs frem aggressive microorganisms. E

In the visible future we will have to establieh reliable LSS on other planets. This i
can be achieved by using dermamt Organisms highly resistant t0 extreme envirena i
mentS as eompenents 0f mahamztde eeesystems that will be transported across huge ’
distances and remain eseentitilly unaffected by time or environmental conditions.

The eeheept ef dermahey end eryehiegis at; its extreme manifestation presents 1
great interegt in regard to Search fer extraterregtrittl life. Recent diseeyeries of algae. *
bacteria. fungi. and even pretezoa in the Antarctic ice shield mite our hopes to ﬁnd
life in enter Space. These ergttttiemg withsteod freezing temperatures over thousands
et’ years em! eeuld Survive outer space efi’eetg. at; Shewn experimentally. This implieS
the peesibility et’ interplanetary trenet’er of life forms»? by meteeriteh and eemets. E

Finally. we can peetulate that heavenly hedies. where terretitriztl terms; emu hardly
exiSt, may he inhabited by Ofgétt‘tiStttS remaining detriment ever the major pertieh (if
their life cycle. They can be detected ueing very speciﬁc Stimulating sighehs. which
will he ihyegtigatetl eh extremephilee item Atetie ttttd highntttotthtaitt eeesystemg.
Atttttmtntettgmwttt. The study was; performed within the framewetk et‘ RUS§i21n=Jﬂpﬂtt E
project OS=04=5®9M=5I<D end. partly supported by a RFBR grants O4=04=49121=z1 and E
054344857 1 =21. Dr. Tatiana Zitkhednewt kindly helped with algae species; identitiezttien. E

!

"
