"","x"
"1","Space Utiliz Res, 23 (2007) ©ISAS/JAXA 2007
Perspectives of RNA/DNA studies using latent stages of invertebrates and
plants exposed to space flight and outer space environments
O/eg Guseva’ b, Takashi Okudac, Vladimir Sychevd, Margarita Levinskikhd and Manabu Sugimotob.
a Kazan State University, Kazan, Kremlevskaya str., 18, 420008, Russia
bOkayama University, Tsushima, 3-1-1, Okayama, 700-8530, Japan
C National Institute of Agro-Biological Sciences, Tsukuba, 2-1-1, Kannondai, Ibaraki, 305-8602,
Japan
0' State Scientific Center of Russian Federation, Institute of Bio-medical Problems, Moscow,
Khorosheevskoe shosse, 76a, 123007, Russia
E-Mail: oleg@cryptobio.com, ogusev@mai|.ru
Abstract: We report preliminary data of analysis genomic DNA stability and gene expression
both in active and dormant stages of number of invertebrates and a plant exposed to real space
ﬂight environment onboard 188 during 2005/2006. Perspectives of DNA studies using latent stages
of living organisms exposed to outer space in the forthcoming space programs are discussed.
Key words; International Space Station, dormant stages of plans and invertebrates, hsp90, gene
expression, genomic DNA stability.

Limitations related to the cargo proven to be fully tolerant to the space ﬂight
space and water usage in the real space environment, and some prokaryotes and fungi
environment are the main factors inﬂuencing have been confirmed to be able to resist outer
the planning of the biological experiments space environment for long periods of time
onboard spacecrafts. In the long-term space (Gaubin et 211., 1990). Studies also suggest that,
ﬂight to other planets, one should consider in many cases, the active forms of the
using live animals as an important component organism revived from the eryptobiotie stage
of Life Support Systems (LSS), objects for and then exposed to space environment shows
biomonitoring and research procedures Changes in their Viability, rate of metabolism,
(Horneek, 1999). Many species (plants, and gene expression and other features of their life
both invertebrates and vertebrates) were able cycle (Clegg et 211., 2000).
to adapt to the microgravity and other factors The outer space environment represents
of space ﬂight onboard the spacecraft, but, in a combination of extreme factors, such a space
contrast to plants long-term cultivation (egg to radiation, space vacuum, microgravity, and
egg) of active animals in space has not yet temperature ﬂuctuations. In the next few
been conducted. An alternative way is to use years, several independent programs are
latent stages, such as cysts, resting eggs or scheduled to testify the tolerance of
eryptobiotie stages of living organisms. The multi-eellular organisms to such harmful
most attractive among these options are conditions (ESA “EXPOSE” and “Biopan”,
animals possessing an unhydrobiotie feature, Russian “BIORISK” projects). The effect of
being able to drastically decrease, or even stop long exposure to the outer space environment
metabolism in the absence of water, but stay on the RNA and DNA stability in the dormant
alive for years (Watanabe, 2006). A number of stages of higher animals and plants is one of
eryptobiotie forms, representing different the particularly interesting subjects to
group of pro- and eukaryotes have already be investigate.

This document is provided by JAXA.

"
"2","Both tardigrades (water bears) and embryos. Being involved in the formation of
branchiopod crustaceans (brine shrimps and the “glacial package” around organelles of the
triopses) are included in the list of species for dried cells, these agents would prevent DNA
the forthcoming experiments of the exposure molecules from fragmentation during intensive
of dormant stages of prokatyotie and higher homogenization with ceramics beans, but at
eukaryotie (for the first time in the world) the same time, excess of the saecharides and
organisms to the outer space environment for other preservative agents in the dormant states
the long period of time (“Biopan”, “EXPOSE” should have decreased the total yield of DNA
and “Biorisk” research programs). Those during the purification procedures.
experiments would provide a unique The data on the activated larvae of
physiological and biochemical data of the crustaceans (which is 60-80 mg per specimen)
resistance of the dormant stages of the is still preliminary and should be recalculated
multicellular organisms of different level of according to the stage of active animals to be
organization the complex of the extreme used in concrete experiment, because of the
factors, such as space vacuum, microgravity, rapid increase of cells number after hatching
space radiation and temperature ﬂuctuations in through the serial larvae stages (Suzuki, 2003).
the outer space. DNA and RNA stability and At the same time, data on the tuns and active
expression data would be one of the major stages of tardigrades can be considered
sources of information about inﬂuence of the conclusive (30-40 pg per tun). We have used
outer space on the biological object and adult water bears, so that number of cell, and,
organization of the post-ﬂight genetic correspondingly, average amount of DNA
experiments is matter of high priority in the would not be subject to Change after
planning of such projects. Considering the reactivation in a water environment. Our data
cargo limitations of space for model organisms indicate that both groups of invertebrates
in these planned outer space experiments, we (active and dormant) are quite suitable for
present here preliminary data of the genomic DNA analysis, including methods which
DNA extraction efficiency from the dormant require high size of DNA molecules. Moreover,
and active stages of tardigrades and in the ease of branchiopod crustaceans, PCR
branchiopod crustaceans. In addition, we analysis would be possible using genomic
report the first results of monitoring the stress DNA extracted from the single eneysted
response ability Changes in Artemia salina embryos (10-12 mg of DNA extractable from a
larvae revived from the eneysted embryos and single egg).
incubated for period 1 and 8 month under real We found that exposure to the space
space ﬂight conditions onboard the Russian environment depressed the ability of larvae of
segment of International Space Station (188). Artemia to resist the heat stress, but it is

Our experiments showed that both important to be careful with these conclusions
dormant and active stages of water bears and (GuseV et al, 2006). The range of the
branchiopod crustaceans are quite capable for temperatures differences in the expression of
post-spaeeﬂight DNA analysis. However, the the hsp9O mRNA was found to be different
yield and size of the extractable molecules of between space ﬂight and control groups
DNA is different between active and dormant (36-4OOC) represent extreme thermal
animals subjected to the same DNA extraction conditions for the larvae, since the average
procedure. We suppose that lower yield and temperature in natural environment lays in the
less fragmented structure of the DNA in the limits of 20-26OC.
ease of dormant stages of all tested Further experiments, which are now
invertebrates is a result of the presence quite possible on the basis of these programs,
molecular chaperones and other stabilizing including the global analysis of RNA
agents, such as trehalose in tuns and eneysted expression in the dormant stages of these

This document is provided by JAXA.

"
"3","animals being activated in space, are needed to

further understand the complex molecular

adaptations of the invertebrates t0 the
long-term space ﬂights.

In autumn of 2006 unique experiment
of growing barley from seeds under real space
ﬂight environment was conducted onboard 188
in “LADA”. A month old sprouts were
transported back to Earth and immediately
frozen. Preliminary experiments showed that
RNA and DNA in the tissues remained stable
and at the moment we are conducting of
molecular analysis Of grown in space barley
plants compared with ground control,
aiming to clarify stress genes expression
patterns.

Clegg, J .S., Jackson, S.A., Van Hoa, N.,
Sorgeloos, P. Thermal resistance,
developmental rate and heat shock proteins
in Artemia franciscana, from San Francisco
Bay and southern Vietnam. J . 0f Exp. Mar.
Biol. Ecol. 252, 85-96, 2000.

Gaubin, Y., Delpoux, M., Pianezzi, B., Gasset,
G., Heilmann, C., Planel, H. Investigations
of the effects of cosmic rays on Artemia
cysts and tobacco seeds; results of EXOblOC
II experiment, ﬂown aboard Bioeosmos
1887. Int. J. Rad. Appl. Instr. 17, 133-143,
1990.

GuseV 0., Ziegler, T., Saigusa, M. Expression
and structure of stress chaperon hsp90 in
terrestrial deeapods, Coenobita (Anomura:
Coenobitidae) and Chiromcmtes
(Brachyura: Sesarmidae). Crus. Res., 6,
109-119, 2006.

Horneek, G. European activities in exobiology
in Earth orbit: Results and perspectives. Adv.
Space Res. 23, 381-386, 1999.

Suzuki, A.C. Life history of Milnesium
tardigradum Doyere (tardigrada) under a
rearing environment. Z001. Sci. 20, 49-57,
2003.

Watanabe, M. Anhydrobiosis in invertebrates.
Appl. Entomol. 2001. 41, 15-31, 2006.

This document is provided by JAXA.

"
