"","x"
"1","5‘53? Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Pergamon SCIENCE@DIRECT.
www.elsevier.com/locate/asr PII: 80273-1 I77(02)00881-5
ALTEA: ANOMALOUS LONG TERM EFFECTS IN ASTRONAUTS.
A PROBE ON THE INFLUENCE OF COSMIC RADIATION AND
MICROGRAVITY ON THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM DURING
LON G F LIGHTS.

L. Naricil, V. Bidolil, M. Casolinol, M. P. De Pascale}, G. F uranol, A. Morsellit, P. Picozzai, E. Realil, R. Sparvolil,
S. Licocciaz, P. Romagnoliz, E. Traversaz, W.G. SannitaB, A. Loizzo4, A. Galpers, A. IGIOdaI‘OViChS, M.G. Korotkovs,
A. Popovs, N. Vavilovs, S. Avdeevé, V.P. Salnitskii7,O.I. Shevchenkol V.P.Petrov7, K.A. Trukhanov7,M. Boezios,
w. Bonvicinig, A. Vacchig, N. ZampaS, R. Battistong, G. Mazzengam, M. RiccilO, P. Spillantini11,G. Castellinilz,
P. Carlson”, C. Fuglesangl3

1 Dept. ofPhySics, Univ. ofRome ""Tor Vergata"" and INFN Sez. R0me2 , Italy
2 Dept. ofSciences and C hemical T echnologies, Univ. ofRome ""T or Vergata'
3 DISM- Univ. of Genova, Genova, Italy and Dept. ofPsychiatry, S UN Y, Stoony Brook, N Y, US
4 Istituto Superiore di Sanitc‘r - Roma, Italy
5 Moscow State Engineering Physics Institute, Moscow, Russia
6 Russian Space Corporation ""Energia"" by name Koroiev, Korolev, Moscow region, Russia
7 Institute for BioMedical Problems, Moscow, Russia.
8 Dept. ofPhysics 0f Um'v. and $92. INFN of T rieste, Italy
9 Dept. ofPhysics 0f Um'v. and $62. INFN ofPerugia, Italy
10 L.N.F. - INFN, Frascati (Rome), Italy'
I 1 Dept. of Physics of Univ. and $62. INFN ofFlorence, Italy
12 IROE of CNR, Florence, Italy
13 Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.
ABSTRACT
The ALTEA project partecipates to the quest for increasing the safety of manned space ﬂights. It addresses
the problems related to possible ﬁmctional damage to neural cells and circuits due to particle radiation in
space environment. Spciﬁcally it aims at studying the functionality of the astronauts’ Central Nervous
Systems (CNS) during long space ﬂights and relating it to the peculiar environments in space, with a
particular focus on the particle ﬂux impinging in the head. The project is a large international and multi-
disciplinary collaboration. Competences in particle physics, neurophysiology, psychophysiology, electronics,
space environment, data analyses will work together to construct the ﬁllly integrated vision
electrophysiology and particle analyser system which is the core device of the project: an helmet—shaped
multy-sensor device that will measure concurrently the dynamics of the ﬁmctional status of the visual system
and passage of each particle through the brain within a pre-determined energy window. ALTEA is
scheduled to ﬂy in the International Space Station in late 2002. One part of the multy-sensor device, one of
the advanced silicon telescopes, will be launched in the 188 in early 2002 and serve as test for the ﬁnal
device and as discriminating dosimeter for the particle ﬂuences within the ISS. © 2002 COSPAR. Published by
Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
Adv. Space Res. Vol. 31, N0. 1, pp. 141—146, 2003
© 2002 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved
Printed in Great Britain
0273-1177/03 $22.00 + 0.00

"
"2","142 L. Narici er 0!.
INTRODUCTION

The reports from astronauts, since Apollo missions, of Anomalous Phosphenes Perception (APP)
during orbital ﬂights (Pinsky et a1. 1974, 1975), is a demonstration that space environment can affect CN S
functions. Several experiments performed both on ground laboratories in the 703 (Charman et a1 1971 ,
Tobias-et a1. 1971, Charman and Rowlands 1971, McAulay 1971, McNulty 1971, McNulty et a1. 1972,
Budinger et a1. 1972, McNulty and Pease 1978) and in space (Osborne et a1. 1975, Bidoli et a1. 2000),
appear to link such APP phoenomenon to the passage of heavy nuclei through the astronauts' head, most
probably through their retina. Beside the open question about the speciﬁc mechanism governing this
interaction, its site is still unclear (retina? visual cortex? optic nerve? all of them?) Furthermore APP may be
caused just by particle passages, or may be a consequence of several instances, among which particles
passages play the ﬁnal triggering role. In other words the same particle that causes the APP, could, in
principle, be totally unobserved by the same astronaut on earth.

Prolonged stay in space may, in fact, modify the functional status of visual system (and ingeneral of the
CNS) so to enable it to respond to (particle related) visual inputs otherwise ineffective. Indications of
modiﬁcation of visual system due to permanence in space can be found in studies during previous space
missions (see, for example, Clement and Reschke 1996). However ﬁmctional changes of the visual system
may go undetected by the astronauts if not resulting in subjective percepts, but would be recognized if using
electrophysiological testing procedures. An electrophysiological study appears mandatory when planning
year-long space permanencies in orbit (International Space Station) or even travelling outside the protective
earth magnetic shield (Mars missions).

RATIONALE

Early studies on the effects of particles focused on the retina. However phOSphenes may be perceived in
several pathological or experimental conditions (migraine, partial epilepsy, direct electrical stimulation of the
cortex, etc). Particle-related phosphenes have been perceived in accelerator experiments in the 703, as well
as during ion cancer therapy, and, as mentioned, during orbital and moon ﬂights up to our most recent
experiments in the MIR station.

It should be mentioned that the variety of APP reports ﬁom the many astronauts involved in orbital and
moon ﬂights is quite wide. Shapes of many kinds have been reported, as well as apparent movement or
color. Finally, a broad range of frequency of these events has been observed: ﬁom astronauts who never
reported APP, to those who had problems in sleeping due to their too high number. Unfortunately it appears
quite difﬁcult, if not impossible, to retrieve all these information in a form suitable for statistical analysis as
most details derive ﬁ'om astronauts' informal reports. A suggestion clearly rise from this panorama: the
causes for APP may be several. Furthermore reports of olfactory sensations during ground experiments in
accelerators suggest that these interactions are not speciﬁc of one single sensory pathway.

The astronauts‘ frequent reports of visual abnormalities (APP) nevertheless proposes the visual system
as a privileged probe for studying sensory pathways interaction with particles and, more in general, with
space environment. .

It should also be mentioned that the sensory systems are just the most immediate targets of our
investigation. Higher, cognitive ﬁmctions may as well be affected. This interaction may in fact produce
undetected anormalities, for example in latency and discriminative power. The importance of assessing this
hazard in a space mission, where all abilities and competences of the crew may be in any instant vital for the
whole mission, would be large. Studies of interactions between brain ﬁmctions and particles/space-
environment is mandatory when planning long manned orbital ﬂights for the International Space Station
(188) and, more so, for the manned journey to Mars.

In order to give a complete answer to these problems the ALTEA project has been designed. It has been
ﬁnanced by the Italian Space Agency (ASI) and by the National Institute for Nuclear Physics (INFN), rated
""Highly recomended"" by the European Space Agency (ESA). It has a ﬂight opportunity on the 18$ for late
2002. A particle telescope from the larger ALTEA device plus an EEG is due to be launched on the 188
(Russian segment) in the early 2002.

"
"3","' Anomalous Long Term Effects in Astronauts (ALTEA) 143

To ﬁilﬁll its goals, ALTEA must concurrently monitor particle radiation (type and trajectory of
particles, energy released in the eye and brain), and the time and frequency dynamics of the
electrophysiological signals of the retina and brain. In order to quantitatively measure the functional state of
the visual system and the dynamics of sensory processing, ALTEA features a dedicated visual stimulator and
procedures for visual function testing. To be able to study APP phenomena the astronaut will sign the
phosphene perception With the pushing of a joystick. All this information will be acquired and analysed off
line, partly on ISS, partly on ground.

Normative studies are being conducted beforehand on ground on voluntaries and a complete baseline
database will be created working on the ﬂying crew, before launch.

The design and construction of the integrated device (Fully Integrated Vision Electrophysiology and
Particle Analyser System: FIVEPAS), the electrophysiological measurement procedure and the off line data
analyses are the three major steps in the project preparation.

Several parallel investigations will be carried on to supplement the ALTEA ﬁndings and provide
comparable data under laboratory controlled experimental conditions. The project includes developing and
testing an animal model to be studied in accelerators. This will allow to obtain information helping in the
prediction of the electrophysiological changes induced by particles for designing the FIVEPAS, the
experimental procedure and the mo st suitable data analysis. The laboratory investigations mentioned above,
performed in the 703, were conducted by experimenters serving as subjects in accelerator experiments
receiving particles in their eyes to deﬁne the particle parameters (type of particles, energies, etc) and the
conditions under which the phosphenes could be experienced. N0 concurrent electrophysiological
measurements were carried on and ethical reasons do not allow to repeat those measurements in humans.
We are therefore working on a project using mice to build such a model. Normal and transgenic mice with
progressive degeneration of retina receptors will be used in order to infer the location of the particle-cells
interactions.

Another side issue is the design and construction of dermal electrodes that will permit a fast montage of
the the system for electrophysiological recordings in space environment (we plan to use 32 channels).
Prototype electrodes have been built out of non—toxical components, with composite materials made from
polymeric gel, doped With alcaline and mineral salts, after a geliﬁcation process in organic solvents. The
conductivity (a few parts x 10‘4 Scm‘l) and the quite good stability are very promising. First EEG tests also
indicate the validity of the chosen technique. Results of this work will be presented elsewhere.

Needless to say ALTEA can produce results that go well beyond its original goals. In addition to the
planned baseline experiments, ALTEA is designed to qualify as a ISS facility to perform, for instance, real
time particle identiﬁcation and dosimetry inside the ISS, or sensory and cognitive electrophysiological
experiments during microgravity and under high particle ﬂuences. Proposals for these investigations are
being triggered within the proper communities; suggestions for the use of this apparatus are still coming and
always welcome.

A GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE ALTEA MULTIFUNCTION SENSORS

The core of ALTEA is an helmet shaped device, which will be worn by the astronauts during the data
acquisition (Figure 1).

This helmet accomodates twelve active particle telescopes, the visual stimulator and the EEG.

This multifunction device, FIVEPAS, will be most probably mounted on the ISS wall. The ergonomy of
the F IVEPAS is being carefully studied in order to insure maximum comfort and easyness of installation.

The diﬂerent components of the FIVEPAS are designed to gether in order to allow for an easy and
reliable integration, but they are being constructed and tested separately .

Two requirements have to be fulﬁlled in the FIVEPAS. The device must be easy to use and require the
minimum amount of astronaut time to set up the measurements. At the same time it must feature a high
degree of ﬂexibility, in order to permit diﬁ‘erent experiments to be conducted, even experiments that at
launch time may not be formalized yet. This is achieved with the use of hardware and software implemented
algorhithms/procedures. Re-programming will be possibly executed from ground. The main idea is that the

"
"4","144 L. Narici et at.
astronaut will wear the FIVEPAS, turn on the device, and press the 'start' button. Everything else will be
pre-programmed.
We will now brieﬂy describe the components of the FIVEPAS.
The large solid angle particle detector system features 12 Advanced Silicon Telescopes (AST), mounted
in pairs in six boxes, so to have maximal covering of the head (see Figure l).
A ] ’2 ..
I, __ .5” xx 1..
<;;;“I:'J’“ ""’
F ig. 1. A schematic view of the astronaut with the ALTEA system (frontal AST not shown)
a) The AST
The ASTs are active silicon based particle telescopes allowing for detection and discrimination of
particles, particle energies, trajectories. Each AST will feature three silicon planes, each with double detector
chips (view X e Y) and an area of 8 x 8 cm2. The pitch is 2.2 mm, thickness 380 pm. Therefore 32 strips
will be used for each view. The threshold will be about 1 MP and saturation will occur at 2600 MIP. The
distance between planes is 2 cm. With this number we expect an angular resolution af about 2°. The
technologies are developped in SilEye, NINA and PAMELA projects, in which the ALTEA investigating
team is active.
?;TA“ J b
E "" , ‘- \l§:: ”'2 /i
E “l - Z 31‘: g: 2 >
““s : A §i': 53 / ”
! I 3%: g. /
1 5 - i ..//
“a 'I ../’
i//
Fig. 2. A schematic view of the AST for the RS 188

"
"5","Anomalous Long Term Effects in Astronauts (ALTEA) 145

One AST, with the addition of two scintillators to extend its triggering capabilities, Will be launched on
the Russian segment of the 188 in the early 2002 (Figure 2).
b1 Electrophysiological recordings

The system for electrophysiological recordings will feature 32 channels plus 4 channels for
Electroretinograms acquisition. Newly deveIOped electrodes will be mounted on an elastic cap in pre—
determined positions (10-20 systems plus additional electrodes over the occipital cortex). The electrodes will
allow for Operation without the use of conductive paste/gel, and with minimum (or null) amount needed of
surface preparation and impedance minimization. '

c! The Visual Stimulator .

To monitor the status of the visual system, a dedicated Visual stimulator as well as procedures for visual
testing according to the international laboratory standards will be used. The visual stimulator is an adapted
Virtual Reality system, which allows for computer controlled 3D color viewing and include the possibility of
stereo audio input (see Figure 1). The stimulation routine for the baseline ALTEA experiment will use
luminance and contrast gray scale stimulation, exploiting only parts of the potentialities of this system.
Design of more complex experiments, involving different stimulation procedures is in pregress and
encouraged.

(1) Data acquisition

Particle passage information will be stored together with the continuous EEG, with a common time
reference. The visual stimulator, synchronized with the acquisition system, will be driven by a dedicated card
which will include the stimulation software.

PROCEDURES

The basic experiment includes proper training of the astronauts on ground, acquisition of baseline
database, measurement in orbit and again on ground aﬁer landing; most of the data analyses will be
performed off line.

A typical schedule of the experiment is presented in the following.

A) Astronauts T raining. B) Ground measurements (prior to launching): i) Set-up testing; ii) Electrodes
positioning (10 min); iii) Stimulation paradigm (5 min). C) Onboard measures: i) Set-up testing; ii)
Electrodes positionng (10 min); iii) Stimulation paradigm (5 min); iv) Dark adaptation (15 min); v)
electrophysiOIOgical recording and particle assessment during a full orbit (90 min). D) Ground
measurements (after landing): i) Set-up testing; ii) Electrodes positioning (10 min); iii) Stimulation paradigm
(5 min).

The stimulation paradigm is being designed in order to assess the status of the visual system following
known electrophysiological models in the most compact way. We are aiming at a procedure shorter than ﬁve
minutes. On board measures (C, above) will be repeated in different moments of the orbital permanence of
the astronaut to follow the dynamics of the visual system status from immediately after launch to the end of the
permanence in space. All measurements will be performed in relatively stable vigilance level, under proper
control and monitoring.

EXPECTED RESULTS .

The experiment ALTEA will allow the ﬁrst complete electrophysiological investigation of the visual
system in space. The quantitative dynamics of the functional parameters and the correlations of the
electrOphysiological activity with the passages of particles, that can be described in type, energy and
trajectory in areas of the cortex that can be localized, will assess the hazard risk during long manned ﬂight
for what concerns ﬁmctionality of the visual system. The electrOphysiological investigations will cover all
cortical regions permitting to extend these ﬁndings to other cortical areas.

"
"6","146 L. Narici et al.

ALTEA as facility will allow to set up all those experiments asking for simple or complex visual and/or
auditory stimulation with concurrent EEG acquisition/particle detection. As an example, experiments aimed
at assessing the level of cognitive performance during long ﬂights might be envised.

REFERENCES
Bidoli, V, Casolino, M., De Pascale, M. P., Furano, G. , Morselli, A. , Narici, L., Picozza, P., Reali, E.,

Sparvoli, R., Galper, A., Ozerov, Yu.V., Popov, A., Vavilov, N., Alexandrov, A.P., Avdeev, S.,

Baturin, Yu., Budarin, Yu, Padalko, G., Shabelnikov, V.G., Barbiellini, G., Bonvicini, W., Vacchi A.,

Zampa, N., Bartalucci, S., Mazzenga, G., Ricci, M., Adriani, 0., Spillantini, P., Boezio, M., Carlson,

P., Fuglesang, C.,Castellini, G., Sannita, W.G., Study of cosmic rays and light ﬂashes on board space

station MIR: the SilEye experiment, Adv. Space Res. 25, 2075-2079, 2000.

Budinger T.F., Lyman J .T. and Tobias C.A., Visual perception of accelerated Nitrogen nuclei interacting

with the human retina, Nature 239, 209, 1972.

Charman W. H. and Rowlands C. M., Visual sensation produced by cosmic ray muons, Nature 232, 574,

1971.

Charman W.H., Dennis J.A., Fazio G.G. and Jelley G.V., Visual sensation produced by single fast particles,

Nature 230, 522, 1971.

Clement, G., and Reschke, M.F., Neurosensory and sensory motor ﬁmctions, in Biologigal m medical

research in space, ed. D. Moore, P. Bie and H. Oser, pp. 178—258, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1996
McAulay I.R., Cosmic ray ﬂashes in the eye, Nature 232, 421 , 1971.

McNulty J ., Light ﬂashes produced in the human eye by extremely relativistic muons, Nature 234, 10, 1971.
McNulty P.J., Pease V.P., Pinsky, L.S., Bond, V.P., Schimmerling, W., Vosburgh, KG., Visual sensations

induced by relativistic nitrogen nuclei, Science 178, 160-161, 1972
McNulty P .J ., Pease V.P., Visual phenomena induced by relativistic carbon ions with and without Cerenkov

Radiation, Science 201, 341, 1978
Osborne, W.Z., Pinsky, L.S., Bailey, J .V., Apollo light ﬂash investigations, in Biomedical results of Amllo,

ed. R.S. Johnston, L.F. Dietlein, C.A. Berry, pp. 355-365, NASA—STIO, 1975.

Pinsky, L.S., Osborne, W.Z., Bailey, J .V., Benson, R.E., Thompson, L.F., Light ﬂashes observed by

astronauts on Apollo 11 through Apollo 17, Science 183, 957-959, 1974.

Pinsky, L.S., Osborne, W.Z., Hoﬂinan, R.A., Bailey, J .V., Light ﬂashes observed by astronauts on Skylab 4,

Science 188, 928-930, 1975.

Tobias C.A., Budinger T.F. and Lyman J .T., Radiation-induced Light Flashes observed by hmnan subjects in

fast neutron, X-ray and positive Pion beams, Nature 230, 596, 1971.

"
