"","x"
"1","A M n ri WM
ecepted a use pt ADVANCES IN
Q SPACE
Fast Probabilistic Particle Identification algorithm using silicon strip detectors RESEARCH
L. Di Fine, V. Zaconte, A. Ciccotelli, M. Larosa, L. Narici ' '
PII: SO273-1177(12)00258-X I - .’ ‘ '
DOI: 10.1016/j.asr.2012.04.015 . . ~ - :9
Reference: JASR 10957 _ - . . ”5-.“
To appear in: Advances 111 Space Research ﬂ - r&ﬁﬂﬁtﬁi
23:32.
Received Date: 22 August 2011
Revised Date: 13 April 2012
Accepted Date: 14 April 2012
Please Cite this article as: Di Fine, L., Zaconte, V., Ciccotelli, A., Larosa, M., Narici, L., Fast Probabilistic Particle
Identification algorithm using silicon strip detectors, Advances 112 Space Research (2012), doi: 10.1016/j.asr.
2012.04.015
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers
we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and
review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process
errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

"
"2","Fast Probabilistic Particle Identification algorithm using silicon strip
detectors
L. Di Fino*, V. Zaconte, A. Ciccotelli, M. Larosa and L. Narici
INFN and Department of Physics, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy
>“Corresponding author. E-mail address: luca.difino@roma2.infn.it
Abstract
Active detectors used as radiation monitors in space are not usually able to perform Particle
Identification (PID). Common techniques need energy loss spectra With high statistics to estimate
ion abundances. The ALTEA-spaee detector system is a set of silicon strip particle telescopes
monitoring the radiation environment on board the International Space Station since J uly 2006 with
real-time telemetry capabilities. Its large geometrical factor due to the concurrent use of siX
detectors permits the acquisition of good energy loss spectra even in a short period of observation.
In this paper we present a novel Fast Probabilistic Particle Identification (FPPI) algorithm
developed for the ALTEA data analysis in order to perform nuclear identification With low statistics
and, With some limitations, also in real time.
Keywords: ALTEA, PID, cosmic rays, silicon detector, algorithm.
Introduction
The radiation environment in a spacecraft is due to contributions from the different components of
cosmic radiation. Radiation biology findings strongly suggest the need of radiation quality
information for an accurate risk assessment. To this end it is important to perform Particle
Identification (PID) and to estimate their kinetic energy. This would also help in validating
simulations and transport models inside the spacecraft. The usual PID techniques used in particle
physics experiments rely on simultaneous measurements of momentum, velocity and energy
deposition with a combination of different detectors and methods: ionization, time of ﬂight,
Cherenkov radiation imaging and detection of transition radiation (Lippmann, 2011).
This approach, used in large experiments at particle accelerators, requires big and complex
detectors with bending magnetic fields, EM and hadron calorimeters, Cherenkov detectors, etc. (see
for example Picozza et al. 2007; Battiston et al. 2008) and it is not applicable in measurements
inside a space vessel Where detector volumes and masses are important issues.
Active detectors used as radiation monitors in a space habitat are often stacks of silicon planes that
can only measure the energy released by the particles and if the planes are divided in strips they can
also measure particle trajectory. Radiation monitors are usually small devices and they cannot act
like calorimeters that are able to stop particles and measure total energy of particles. Not measuring
any other of the aforementioned quantities, they are not able to directly measure kinetic energy and
identify particle Charge. The stochastic nature of the energy loss process and the contribution to the
radiation environment in orbit from different nuclei with a large range of kinetic energy make this
identification very difficult. Anyway there are various strategies to approach particle identification
with this kind of detectors.
A possible strategy to estimate Charge is to reduce the kinetic energy range. The simplest method
applicable to small active telescopes consists of requiring the LET to be almost constant in the
detector, so to select minimum ionizing particles (Casolino et al. 2006, Zaconte et al. 2010a,
Zaconte et al. 2010b). In this energy range the energy release depends on 22 so rough Charge
identification can be obtained fitting with multiple Gaussian or Landau functions the LET
distribution. To achieve an optimal fit a good statistics is needed, and still it is difficult to identify
the single particle given the fact that peaks for different Z values overlap.

"
"3","An alternate method to identify particles is to compare the energy losses on single planes with
theorieal releases (analytical or simulated ones) (Zeitlin et al. 1984). This approach was tried on
ALTEA data (both beam and ﬂight data) with no results even in the controlled conditions of the
beam data. The effects of energy straggling ﬂuctuations make this approach unfit to our data. A
third method is to consider total energy loss versus energy loss in one or multiple planes
(Scrimaglio et al. 2006) and to study the energy distribution. A last method is to train neural
networks to identify particle Charge and energy (Zaconte et al. 2008), but it is not suited to work on
orbit. All these methods are difficult to automate and require a lot of analysis work on them to fine
tune results.

In this paper we will validate the first identification method applying it to a Monte Carlo simulation,
and, further exploiting the method, we will introduce a novel Fast Probabilistic Particle
Identification (FPPI) applied to ALTEA data used even with very low statistics and with little
computational effort. We will then present a possible application to single particle identification that
could be used also in real-time.

ALTEA Detector

The ALTEA-space facility consists of an active particle detector system, to measure the cosmic
rays, an electroencephalograph, to monitor the astronaut brain activity, a Visual stimulator, to verify
the astronaut Visual condition, and a pushbutton (Nariei et al. 2004; Narici 2008). The ALTEA-
spaee Silicon Detector System(SDS) includes siX silicon telescope particle detectors (SDUs, Silicon
Detector Units) arranged in a 3D structure (helmet shapedl), capable to determine the energy loss
and the trajectory of the cosmic rays. The particle detector results in a full coverage of the solid
angle (due to the peculiar helmet configuration) and in a geometrical factor of 2300m2sr per single
SDU and 1190 cmzsr for the whole system, the latter value being less than 6 X 230 because of the
overlap of the acceptance angles of the different SDUs. A SDU is composed of siX silicon detector
layers, each 380 pm thick, arranged in three planes; a plane contains two silicon wafers, each
segmented in 32 strips with 2.5 mm pitch, so a plane includes 64 strips. They are alternatively
oriented along X and Y directions. Detector Characteristics and typical responses are described in
(Di Fino et al., 2011; Zaconte et al., 2008, 2010).

In fig. 1 the intervals of the detectable kinetic energy, neglecting the energy straggling, for each Z
are summarized. The areas 2 and 3 show the energies for the particles detected by the ALTEA-
spaee detector; in particular, the zone 2 considers fast particles that survive the 10% energy filter
that we use in this work (see next section for details). The area 1 includes particles whose energy
loss saturates the detector: these particles are detected and counted by the detector, but they cannot
be identified.

Standard analysis validation using simulated data

The FPPI algorithm we are going to present is based on the assumption that the radiation
environment being measured is well known. In this Chapter we are going to validate the standard
analysis on which the FPPI algorithm is based using a simulated data set. The standard analysis
used to estimate the number of ions detected is described in previous works by our group: after the
pedestal subtraction, only the single track events were considered so neglecting the possible
showers. Two cross calibrations, among different amplifiers on the single SDU and among the
SDUs, were performed and vertical incidence normalization was applied. Then the requirement of
almost constant energy loss is applied, selecting only the particles for which the difference of the
energy losses averaged over the first and the last couple of planes does not exceed 10%. This filter
1 This structure, featuring a quite large geometrical factor, has been Chosen to perform also measurements of the radiation impinging on the
astronaut’s head when investigating the processes linked to the perception of anomalous phosphenes in orbit; in this case the astronaut would position
his/her head inside the helmet— shaped detector.

"
"4","permits to cut out most of the distribution tails due to slow ions, reducing contamination between
adj acent nuclei.
A sum of multiple Landau curves, one for each nuclear species, was used to fit the energy loss
distribution surviving the selections using the Root-Minuit framework. Each Landau curve is a
function of three parameters pi
f {.1} — p"" I 1.1—“ a_“FE'z‘a—F'J sinﬁru} sin
n
where p0 is proportional to the height of the single nucleus peak, p; is proportional to the width, p1
is proportional to the position of each peak of the spectrum and 7x. a dimensionless variable. The
region between Boron and Iron was considered where the peaks are Clearly distinguishable thanks
to the high statistics. More details on the data analysis, on the effect of the 10% filter on ALTEA
data and on the fitting procedure can be found in (Zaeonte et al. 2010a). Similar filters and data
analysis were also used in (Casolino et al. 2006, Zaconte et al. 2010b, Larosa et al., 2011).
The simulated data set is populated using the PHITS Monte Carlo code. Even if not essential to the
validation, the simulation is a reproduction of the actual radiation environment inside the ISS, apart
from the primary proton and helium contributions. The cosmic ray spectrum was obtained by
CREME96 package with the ISS orbit and solar minimum conditions as parameters. An isotropic
and homogeneous ﬂuX with this spectrum was used in PHITS simulation were the 188 was modeled
as an aluminum sphere with a thickness of 0.7 cm. We simulated only particles which kinetic
energy is greater than 100 MeV per nucleon. The total number of simulated particles was roughly
equivalent to a week of actual measurements. Energy loss spectrum (fig. 2) for the simulated
particle ﬂuX was obtained applying the same processing used for real data, except for the pedestal
subtraction. This spectrum was fitted and the results were compared with the known input number
of ions from Boron to Oxygen and Iron from the simulation. The result of the comparison is shown
in figure 3. The agreement between the events from the simulation and the values of the Landau fit
is within 1 o for all ions.
Fast Probabilistic Particle Identification (FPPI) algorithm description
The technique described above provides therefore a good estimation of the ion population of the
measured radiation, but it needs a set of data with enough statistics for each single peak to emerge
from the noise. Nevertheless the real time features of the ALTEA detector call for the possibility to
process data also if the statistics is low (for example in case of data recorded in a hour, or even in
real time) using the results of the aforementioned standard analysis applied to a previously collected
data set. It is possible to use this data set and the results of the fit as a reference for a simple and fast
algorithm that discriminates ions assigning each particle a probability distribution of the nuclear
Charge if the measured radiation environment is similar to the reference one. In this paragraph we
will introduce the FPPI (Fast Probabilistic Particle Identification) algorithm while in the following
ones we will show its application to various cases with different statistics and we will discuss the
error estimate.
The first step is creating a lookup table from the reference spectrum. The reference spectrum RS( E )
is a function of the energy loss E, that in the case of ALTEA is the energy loss averaged over all siX
silicon layers, in order to minimize noise. The results of the standard analysis, the total fitting
function (F if(E )) and the Single Landau curve for each element (Landaug E )) as a function of each
energy bin E of the spectrum, are stored in a lookup table.
RAE} n“: FEHE} = Z Landnuzﬂj‘]
E

"
"5","FPPI defines a function of released energy and Z (IonPr0b(E,Z)) to give out the probability
contribution that the single event is a particle having Charge Z and energy value correspondent to
that E value bin:
fnanMEJZ} = W
F Lth}
In this way every detected particle with a certain value of released energy E is associated with a set
of probabilities for each Charge Z; by considering these “fractionary ions” we can count the ion
contributions even with a small integration time.
The second step is to use the lonProb functions to estimate the contribution of a ion with Charge Z
to the energy loss spectrum we are measuring:
N(Z} = 2 N03} - IanPrah{E,Z}
E
where N( Z ) represents the deduced number of ions with Charge Z and N( E ) represents the number of
measured particles with energy loss E.
A different way to use the FPPI is to apply to a single particle. In this case the mean energy loss E
of that particle corresponds to a set non-zero lonProb values. In Table 1 a particle with an energy
loss of 100 (arbitrary energy unit) is shown as an example. The value of the fit function to the
reference spectrum at that E value is Fit(100) = 8082 counts. The Landau curves have a non-zero
value only for Z < 8. Dividing the Landau values by the fit value, the resulting lonProb values
represent the probability that the ion has the corresponding Charge.
Note that the energy threshold performances of ALTEA detectors do not allow to have resolved
peaks for elements with Z < 5. This implies that it is not possible to identify ions with Z < 5 since
there is only one Landau function and one corresponding lonProb value for all of them. This is not a
limit of the FPPI approach but it is a limit of ALTEA device. Applying the method to detectors with
lower energy threshold and would result in a complete Charge identification.
To improve accuracy of FPPI recognition, in particular during a short time integration, the external
radiation environment variability due to the ISS Changing location in the geomagnetic field has to
be taken into account. Even if the trapped proton component in the SAA has little effects on the
FPPI applied to ALTEA detector since elements with Z<5 are not identified, a more precise
identification will be obtained with different sets of high statistics data collected at different
geomagnetic regions to use as reference spectra for data analysis for a given location. At least three
regions (poles, equator and SAA) should be considered, although the 10% energy filter strongly
reduces the differences between polar and equatorial regions.
Therefore the extended ion probability formula is
IanPruhﬂi', 3,1} = W
F Lth, X]
where X refers to different locations in the geomagnetic field.
Similarly the reference spectrum should consider possible transient modifications of the radiation
environment such as solar events, as in (Larosa et al., 2011) where the reference spectrum used to
analyze the solar event of December 2006 was the one measured during the activity itself.

"
"6","The FPPI algorithm is indeed very fast because it performs simple operations instead of complex
function fitting with many parameters (for ALTEA we are talking about 24 Landau functions with 3
free parameters each). As already shown, it has some limitations too: it needs the reference
spectrum to have enough resolution to resolve all ion peaks in the considered energy range and it
assumes that a previous high-statistics measure of the same radiation environment already eXists.
Error analysis
In order to estimate the error of the FPPI algorithm, we first consider the errors associated to the
standard analysis of the reference spectrum. We have one error for each ion Charge, i.e. for each
Landau function. For each Z we calculate the ALZ as the quadratic sum of the fit error Afz, that takes
into account the likelihood of the fit function to the reference spectrum, and the statistical error
ANLZ of the Landau distribution,
5L3 = lag: + am:
Where, for each Z, the fit error 51"" = ﬂfpnpl} is equal to the error associated to the product of po
and p2 parameters coming from the Minuit fitting routine, ENE. = 1.3% is the statistical error
associated to the single Landau distribution, i.e. the square root of the integrated Landau
distribution HI. = I Landau.
Using the FPPI algorithm we only have a statistical error associated to different ion counts. To
retain the information about the goodness of the fit, we scaled the ALZ error as it was all statistic,
obtaining for a single ion Charge the following error
' a
EN {3} = E N [3)
ML:
With this estimate the error associated with FPPI results depends on the quality of the reference
spectrum fit. This argument is valid since the hypothesis of a constant shape spectrum is assumed to
be true. Applying it to the full reference spectrum the error is again ALZ. In next section we show
that applying the FPPI method to two different length timeframes, the error associated is consistent
with the error of the standard analysis where this could be applied.
In the case of a single particle the Charge probabilities give an hint of what Charge the ion is more
likely to have and so FPPI method is only able to give out a Charge range.
Applications
In this section we will show some examples of FPPI application to data acquired from a single SDU
during sample week (2006, GMT 306-312). When possible, FPPI results will be compared to
standard analysis to show their consistence.
First we analyze the entire week (fig. 4) comparing CNO element counts from fit integrals with
corresponding values from FPPI algorithm. The values are absolute counts of a single SDU, hence
they are not time normalized. Is it possible to see that both results and corresponding errors are
consistent.
On the same week we then compare results for each day of the week (fig. 5). On the first day of the
week, GMT 306, the telescope acquired events only for about 8 hours. Comparison between the two
methods is possible only for CNO elements because it has enough statistics during 24 hours to
apply standard analysis, while Fe counts are shown only for FPPI method.

"
"7","The relative errors in the estimation of the Nitrogen (Z27) are higher than the others due to
consistent contamination on all odd Z nuclei peak from the nearby element peaks with even Z (in
this case Carbon and Oxygen); in this case the fit error is higher. For Iron the relative error is higher
due to the low statistics (about 40 ions per day).
The last case (fig. 6) is the application of FPPI to 90 minutes of integration time, nearly the duration
of an orbit, on the spectrum of all the siX SDUs. For each orbit, the counts of all elements with Z <
5, the CNO group and the Iron were considered. Error bars are not showed but relative errors are
about 10% for light ions, 30% for combined CNO group and 140% for Fe.
Real Time applications
The FPPI algorithm can be used in Real Time and it is therefore included into the AlteaRTClient
software used to receive and monitor ALTEA real-time data. The software calculates in real-time
several radiation parameters such as particle ﬂux, LET spectrum, total dose and nuclear
abundances. Since ion contribution is associated to each single detected particle according to the
FPPI method output, the significance of this result gains strength with increasing statistics. The
output showing the energy loss spectrum and the ion counts histogram is shown in fig. 7. With an
integration of few minutes the spectrum does not show any eVident peaks while the recognition
method produces a histogram with correct features such as the odd-even alternating pattern.
Since the quantity % found in the error formula depends only on the reference spectrum, we can
3'
calculate that, applying FPPI to ALTEA, to have errors less than 50% of the output values, counts
must be higher than about 100 ions for all Charges.
Conclusions
In this paper we present a novel Fast Probabilistic Particle Identification (FPPI) algorithm
developed to analyze data from the ALTEA particle detector system without information on time of
ﬂight or rigidity. The algorithm identifies fast particles from their energy loss even with short
integration time and it is based on standard analysis with multiple Landau fits applied to previous
high-statistic measurement in the same radiation environment. The standard analysis technique is
validated using a simulated dataset and then the FPPI algorithm and the estimate of the associated
errors are presented. Results and comparisons applied to different length datasets were shown
together with real-time applications. The FPPI method is generalizable and applicable to other
detectors assuming that they provide energy loss measurements, that they are multilayered (to apply
the 10% filter), and that their energy resolution and threshold makes it possible to resolve peaks of
adj acent ions. A novel improved method able to perform PID over the full data set with no energy
selection is currently under development.

"
"8","References

Lippmann C., Particle Identification, in press, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A, 2011.

Pieozza P. et a1., PAMELA — A payload for antimatter matter exploration and light-nuclei
astrophysics. Astropart. Phys. 27, 296—315, 2007.

Battiston R. et 211., The antimatter spectrometer (AMS-02): A particle physics detector in space.
Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 588, Issues 1-2, 227-234, 2008.

Casolino M. et a1., Relative nuclear abundances inside 188 With Sileye-3/A1tein0 experiment, AdV
in Space Res 37, 1685—1690, 2006

Zaconte V. et 211., High Energy Radiation ﬂuenees in the ISS-USLab: ion discrimination and particle
abundances. Rad. Meas. 45, 168-172, 2010.

Zaconte V. et 211., The radiation environment in the ISS-USLab measured by ALTEA: spectra and
relative nuclear abundances in the polar, equatorial and SAA regions. AdV. Space Res. 46, 797-799,
2010.

Zeitlin C. et 211., A modular solid state detector for measuring high energy heavy ion fragmentation
near the beam axis, Rad. Meas. 23, 65-81, 1994

Serimaglio et a1., Simulation of the ALTEA experiment on the International Space Station with the
Geant 3.21 program, AdV. in Space Res. 37, 1770-1776, 2006

Zaconte V. et a1., ALTEA: the instrument calibration. Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B 266, 2070-2078,
2008.

Narici L. et 211., The ALTEA/Alteino projects: studying functional effects of microgravity and
cosmic radiation. AdV. Space Res. 33, 1352-1357, 2004.

Nariei L. Heavy ions light ﬂashes and brain functions: recent Observations at accelerators and in
spaceﬂight. New J . Phys. 10, 075010, 2008.

Di Fine L., Casolino M., De Santis C., et 211. Heavy ions anisotropy measured by ALTEA in the
International Space Station. Rad. Res., Vol. 176, N0. 3, pp. 397-406, 2011.

Larosa M., Agostini F., Casolino M., et a1. 1011 rates in the International Space Station during the
December 2006 Solar Particle Event. Journal of Physics G: Nuclear and Particle Physics, 38,
095102, 2011.

"
"9","Captions

Fig. 1: Intervals of detectable kinetic energy for each Z (the energy straggling is neglected). The
areas 2 and 3 are the particles detected by the ALTEA-space detector; in particular, the zone 2
considers fast particles that survive the energy selection filter. The area 1 corresponds to saturation.
Fig. 2: Energy loss spectrum, simulated by PHITS, fitted With a sum of Landau curves, here shown
from Boron t0 Oxygen.

Fig. 3: Comparison between the PHITS simulation input ions and the results of the multiple Landau
fit applied to the simulated energy loss spectrum.

Table 1: FPPI applied to a single particle. Probability that the detected ion has a Z Charge is
obtained dividing the Landaug E ) value by the F it( E ) value.

Fig. 4: Comparison between FPPI and standard analysis results 011 the sample week period 011 a
single SDU. Ion counts from C to O are shown.

Fig. 5: Comparison between FPPI and standard analysis results 011 day by day counts of the sample
week 011 a single SDU. Results for Fe ions are only shown for FPPI method because statistic was
too low to obtain good fits.

Fig. 6: Particle rate for all the siX SDUs obtained with the FPPI method considering an integration
time 0f 90 minutes. Relative errors (not shown) are about 10% for light ions, 30% for combined
CNO group and 140% for Fe.

Fig. 7: Output of the Real Time (:11th showing the energy loss spectrum and the ion count
histogram for 480 total events (335 With Z<4).

"
"10","Table 1
———
_——
_——

"
"11","2r - ~
24;» 1
231*
22?» -
21L-
N. . .
m;
18>-
17:»
m-
15}—

N N7-
:3.”
12%
Hi»
10:»
9r
O'r-
7?-
6?
51'-
‘I’
3:- .
2;» ‘
1 ‘ ____L._—___J

O 50 100 150 200 250 300
Klmrtic EnergyWoWnucloon)
Fig 1

"
"12","Q&
“’ a . .. N ,\ Q}
.0. . WW
Fig2 9??
O
‘0
«3
o
o
v

"
"13","ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
10000
9000
8000
7000
6000
g 5000 Q‘
""‘ 4000
\
2000 ,
1000
0 J
B c N 0 Fe
Fig3 EV

"
"14","0
600 GMT 306-312 - CNO I Fpp|
I FIT
5000 I
4000 I —
§ 3000
O
U I —
2000 I - -
1000 I - -
0
c N 0
Fig 4

"
"15","1200
IFPPI
lfit
1000 “M
800 1 I
5600 ~ “I
o Illlllnlllll-
U
0
ONWCDOHN KDNWCDOHN KDNWO‘OHN kDNOOOIOHN
daHGMT)8888$:m 888838?» 88883354 8888383
‘0"" c N 0 Fe
Fig5

"
"16","lﬂiﬂﬂﬁ , W“ W Hiﬂlﬁllﬂ , liﬂﬁzllﬂ

"
"17","Energy Spectrum
$000
I! —SOU1
7.5 1‘. ~ - . - . - . ‘ ' ~ souz
6-0 f‘ ' - —sou3
45 .. I- . —sou4
3.5 ""m"" 0 . . . _sous
2.5 '1 . . . , , , , . 2 . .
10 ' I... ‘ l i
0.5 ’ . | : - ~ -
"" [ J H }
I 1 1
f—W—T_T_T—1——1—T—1—T—T—T—f——T—T—T—T—T—_f—
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180
Ion Count
30
8
4 . .

l . .
t—7—'T—T—T—T—T—T—'T—T—1_r—Tﬁ—1
0.0 2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10.0 12.0 14.0 16.0 18.0 20.0 22.0 24.0 26.0 28.0

Fig7

"
