"","x"
"1","29th International Cosmic Ray Conference Pune (2005) 9, 303-306

The Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer Superconducting Magnet

S.M. Harrisona, H Hoferb, R.H. MeMahona, S.R. Milwarda, R.C. Stafford Allena,

S.C.C. Tingc, J . Ulbriehtb and G. Viertelb

(a) Space Cryomagnetics Ltd, E] Culham Science Centre, Abingdon, 0X14 3DB, United Kingdom

([9) Eidgeno'ssische T echnische Hochschiile (ETH), CH-8093 Ziirich, Switzerland

(6) Massachusetts Institute of T echnology, 51 Vassar Street, Cambridge, MA 02139-4307, USA

Presenter: R.H. McMahon (riehardmemahon@spaeeeryo.eo.uk), uki-Inemahon-R-absl-he24-oral

The Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS) is designed to search for antimatter, dark matter and astrophysics
observables. After the successful ﬂight of AMS-Ol aboard the Space Shuttle mission STS—9l in 1998, the
AMS collaboration developed and is assembling a highly improved detector AMS—02, Which Will be
operated on the International Space Station (188). The superconducting magnet consists of a pair of dipole
coils and two sets of siX ﬂux return coils. This arrangement greatly reduces the magnetic stray ﬁeld to
minimize torque on 188 caused by interaction of the magnet ﬁeld With the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. The
magnet is cooled at a temperature of 1.8 K by evaporation of 2500 litres of superﬂuid helium. We expect an
operation time in space of 3 years Without reﬁlling the helium. Of the superconducting magnet hardware,
approximately 90% is complete. This paper reviews the status of the ﬁrst large superconducting magnet for a
space application, and the main features of the cryogenic system under miero-gravity conditions.

1. Introduction

The AMS experiment brings together particle physics technology and astrophysics in a way Which has never
before been achieved. Scientists and engineers from more than 50 institutes and research centres in 16
countries are working together to apply the methods and technologies developed in laboratories such as
CERN (the European Organisation for Nuclear Research) to solving one of the mysteries of astrophysics: the
apparent absence of anti-Inatter from the Universe.

Although balloon-based detectors have been used for more than 20 years to study cosmic rays at altitudes up
to 40 km, searches for antinuclei have all been negative. AMS, however, Will search for Charged particles
outside the Earth’s atmosphere at a height of 430 km, and With a sensitivity Which far exceeds anything
hitherto possible. During its time on the ISS, AMS Will be able to study not only anti-Inatter, but also dark
matter, strangelets, and the origin of cosmic rays in space.

2. The AMS—02 Experiment

The AMS—02 experiment consists of a set of particle detectors arranged around the superconducting
magnet [l]. The magnet itself has a 1.1 In diameter, ambient temperature bore in Which the ﬁeld is
perpendicular to the aXis of the detector. In this region is mounted the silicon tracker, a series of
instrumented planes Which are able to determine the trajectories of particles passing through. Because of the
magnetic ﬁeld, Charged particles Will follow curved paths: together With the other detectors, this Will allow
particles to be identiﬁed precisely and With high resolution over a Wide range of energies.

"
"2","304 SM Harrison et al.
3. Superconducting Magnet Design
The magnet system is shaped as a short, thick—walled cylinder, with the useful ﬁeld generated —
perpendicular to the aXis — in the cylindrical bore. In principle, the requirements could be met by a simple
geometry (such as a pair of Helmholtz coils), but in practice the stray ﬁeld outside the magnet would then be
very large. This would be unacceptable for a number of reasons. Firstly, the magnetic ﬁeld could affect other
parts of the AMS system, such as the electronics, leading to a requirement for shielding which would be very
heavy. Secondly, the stray ﬁeld could interfere with 188 systems, and could preclude EVA (extra-vehicular
activity) on the 188 in the region of the experiment. Most importantly, if the stray ﬁeld were large it would
interact with the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld, putting a torque on the 188 which would require the frequent use of
thrusters for correction. The magnet has therefore been designed for minimal stray ﬁeld, with a total of 14
coils (Figure l). The two large coils provide around 70% of the useful dipole ﬁeld perpendicular to the aXis.
The 12 smaller (ﬂux return) coils contribute the rest of the ﬁeld in the bore of the magnet, but their main
function is to reduce the stray ﬁeld outside the system. Table 1 lists some of the key parameters of the
magnet.
The superconducting wire used for winding the coils was specially developed for AMS. It consists of
ﬁlaments of niobiurn—titaniurn (NbTi) superconductor embedded in a copper matrix and co-extruded with
high-purity aluminium stabilizer: it has been described in detail previously [2].

Table 1. Key Parameters of the AMS Magnet Systern
NbTi is a low temperature superconductor and, because of the relatively high ﬁeld in AMS (see Table 1),
has to be cooled to a temperature of 4.0 K or less. The only cryogen which is still liquid at such a low
temperature is heliurn, so this is the coolant which has to be used. Moreover, liquid helium itself eXists in
two forms: “norrnal” liquid helium (He 1) and “superﬂuid” helium (He II) [3]. The transition between the
two phases takes place at a temperature (slightly dependent on pressure) around 2.17 K. He II has higher
density and latent heat of vaporisation than He 1, so has more cooling power per unit volume. Since the
magnet is ultimately cooled by the gradual boiling away of the helium, and once the helium has all vaporized
the coils will warm up and no longer be operable, a useful extension in the lifetime of the system is gained
by cooling with He 11 rather than He 1. The magnet is therefore designed to operate at temperature of 1.8 K.

"
"3","The Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer Superconductin g Magnet 305
. ' ’9 ‘5 ’ 7. ‘57- (wt? «,3; 3 “ , _,-w-C01ls

Flux return “’ .' , ‘ ‘17-;‘032 ’ ' ' ‘7 ""i‘ﬁx— ""

coil l‘.‘ 15‘ ‘ hf»; - - 'Magnet structure

Dipole coil - — ~ _ _ 5 _ . ' =3, l ' I ""

i 3 , 3 ?{i— _; f . ""'“WiVacuum vessel
5&5: i?- W \ES’ Ea ”:3”
' ‘ﬂ' _ — —— -Magnet support strap

Figure 1. Diagrams of the superconducting coil arrangement and of the coils assembled into the ﬁnal magnet system.
He II has a number of unusual properties which can be useful for operation in zero gravity. Chief among
these are its anomalously high thermal conductivity, and the thermo-caloriﬁc effect. The thermal
conductivity is a result of a special heat transport mechanism within the He II [3]. It means that, while the
helium is in the superﬁuid state, heat can be transported with very small temperature gradients (much
smaller than could be achieved through solid copper, for example). As a result, the entire 2500 litre helium
vessel is essentially isothermal, whereas if He 1 were used relatively large thermal gradients could be set up.
Another feature which comes directly from the use of He II is that the magnet can be cooled by conduction,
rather than by being immersed in a bath of liquid helium. The small amounts of heat incident on and
generated in the magnet coils are removed by conduction through thermal bus bars - consisting of pipes
ﬁlled with He II - to be dissipated by boiling in the large helium vessel. One of the advantages of conduction
cooling is that the magnet can be closer to the tracker in the bore (since there is no inner wall of the helium
vessel in between) which gives a higher useful ﬁeld. Another is that, following a quench (a sudden transition
of the wire from superconducting to resistive, leading to rapid warming of the magnet to between 60 and
70 K) the magnet does not dissipate large amounts of heat in the helium. Although a magnet quench on orbit
is extremely unlikely, this feature means that it will be possible to re-cool the magnet and operate it again: if
the coils were bath-cooled a quench would lead to rapid pressurization and venting of the helium, with no
possibility of re-cooling [4].
The thermo-caloriﬁc effect in He II is a well-known phenomenon in which temperature gradients in the
helium lead to pressure gradients. The general effect is that the He II is attracted towards warm surfaces in
preference to cold ones. This has obvious beneﬁts when the helium is being used as a cooling medium, but
can also be used in the design of a zero-gravity phase separator [5] to ensure that only vapour escapes from
the helium vessel, and not liquid. In AMS, the thermo-caloriﬁc effect is also used to drive a He II pump for
cooling the electrical feedthroughs carrying the current into the magnet [6].
Most superconducting magnets are installed either in hospitals (MRI scanners) or laboratories, and are not
subject to the loads and Vibrations encountered during a space mission. The AMS magnet has therefore been
designed with more attention than most to the mechanical engineering requirements. The mechanical loads
are all either magnetic or inertial. The magnetic loads are all reacted internally by the magnet structure, but
the inertial loads have to be transmitted to the vacuum vessel by a system of composite straps (Figure l).
The strap design is fairly complicated to minimize heat conduction between the ambient temperature
vacuum vessel and the magnet at 1.8 K: the straps have therefore been subject to particular scrutiny and
testing during space qualiﬁcation.

"
"4","306 SM Harrison et al.
4. Magnet Status (J uly 2005)
Figure 2 shows pictures of the coils, helium vessel, and vacuum vessel during manufacture.
""'- /
.-*"".'. 35-” -...-' /
5 . _ '."" '—"".—"" :"" "" uI
..;. f a 1 I1 - -. ._; -1 _.L 4.2 - '
.- '51: / r“ .4121: _
'. ' - __ '“I. . 1;,"" i 1 Z I 2."". :— -
I f ** “-'.. .1 / ,-_.'"" ,I'i'j/ E :4: E E E I '
Figure 2. Photographs of the assembled magnet coils, the lower half of a helium vessel, and the vacuum vessel during
manufacture in England, Switzerland and the USA.
The magnet coils are complete, and each was tested individually at 1.8 K before being assembled together.
The next operation on the magnet Will be a full-scale test to full ﬁeld at 1.8 K. The helium vessel is being
manufactured in Switzerland, after Which it Will undergo leak testing at 1.8 K in a specially-constructed
facility in England. The vacuum vessel has been designed and manufactured in the USA on behalf of NASA:
this item is also now complete and ﬁnal preparations are being made for it to be shipped to England for the
ﬁnal integration of the magnet system.
Once the magnet has been completed and tested, it Will be delivered to CERN Where the detectors Will be
installed. Finally, the fully-assembled experiment Will be transported to Kennedy Space Center for ﬁnal
preparation and launch on the Space Shuttle.
References
[1] J . Alcaraz et al., Nucl. Instr. & Meth. A 478, 119 (2002).
[2] B. Blau et al., IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, V01. 12, pp. 349-352 (2002).
[3] A. Kent, “Experimental low-temperature physics”, Macmillan, pp. 54-57 (1993).
[4] S.M. Harrison et al., IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, V01. 13, pp. 1381-1384 (2003).
[5] S.M. Volz et al., SPIE Vol. 1340 “Cryogenic Optical Systems and Instruments IV”, pp. 268-279 (1990).
[6] M.J. Dipirro et al., Cryogenics Vol. 34 ICEC supplement, pp. 267-272 (1994).

"
