"","x"
"1","General Relativily and Gravitation, V01. 36, N0. 3, March 2004 (© 2004)
Experlments 1n Fundamental Physms Scheduled
and 1n Development for the ISS
C. Léimmerzahl,1 G. Ahlers} N. Ashby} M. Barmatz,4 P. L. Biermann,5
H. Dittus,1 V. Dohm,6 R. Duncan,7 K. Gibble,8 J. Lipa,9 N. Lockerbie,”
N. Mulders,11 and C. Salomon”
Received September 19, 2003; revised October 6, 2003
This is a review of those experiments in the area of Fundamental Physics that are either
approved by BSA and NASA, or are currently under development, Which are to be
performed in the microgravity environment of the International Space Station. These
experiments cover the physics of liquid Helium (SUE, BEST, MISTE, DYNAMX, and
EXACT),u1trastab1e atomic clocks (PHARAO, PARCS, RACE),u1trastab1e microwave
resonators (SUMO), and particle detectors (AMS and EUSO). The scientiﬁc goals are
to study more precisely the universality properties of liquid Helium under microgravity
conditions, to establish better time standards and to test the universality of the gravita-
tional red shift, to make more precise tests of the constancy of the speed of light, and t0
1 Center oprplied Space Technology and Microgravity ZARM, University of Bremen, Am Fallturm,
28359 Bremen, Germany.
2iQUEST and Department of Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, California 93106,
USA.
3 Physics Department, University of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA.
4Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91109-8099,
USA.
5 MaX-Planck-Institute for Radio Astronomy, Auf dem Hiigel 69, 53121 Bonn, Germany.
6 Institute for Theoretical Physics, Aachen University, 52056 Aachen, Germany.
7University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131, USA.
8 Department of Physics, Penn State University University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.
9Physics Department, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305-4085, USA.
10University of Strathclyde, Department of Physics and Applied Physics, Glasgow G40NG, Scotland,
United Kingdom.
11Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware 19716, USA.
12Département de physique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, Laboratoire Kastler Brossel, 24 rue
Lhomond, 75231 Paris, France.
615
0001-7701/04/0300-0615/0 © 2004 Plenum Publishing Corporation

"
"2","616 Léimmerzahl et a].
measure the particle content in space directly without disturbances from the Earth’s
inner atmosphere.

KEYWORDS: ISS; microgravity; Special Relativity; General Relativity; speed of light;
gravitational red shift; renormalization group-theory; liquid Helium; high energy cosmic
rays.

1. INTRODUCTION

Fundamental Physics. The area of today’s Fundamental Physics can be
divided broadly into two categories of theories: Universal theories like Quantum
Theory, and Special and General Relativity, and the universal theories of many-
particle systems such as the Renormalization-Group theory, and Physical theories
like the theory of gravity and the electromagnetic interaction, or the standard model
of elementary particle physics. The universal theories are

0 Quantum Theory [characterized by Planck’s constantﬁ]

' Special Relativity [characterized by the velocity of light 6]

0 General Relativity [characterized by K = G / 62, Where G is Newton’s grav-

itational constant]

' Many particle (or statistical) physics [characterized by the Boltzmann

constant k B]

and the theories dealing With the four interactions are

0 Gravitational interaction [characterized by Newton’s constant G]

0 Electromagnetic interaction [characterized by the ﬁne structure

constant, 04]

' Weak interaction [characterized by aweak]

0 Strong interaction [characterized by astrong]

These theories represent our knowledge about all physical phenomena, from
the evolution of the Universe and the creation of galaxies and planetary systems, to
the functioning of everyday devices like cars, computers, positioning systems, etc.

Important Problems in Fundamental Physics. As can be seen from the
list of interactions gravity plays a double role both as a universal theory and as a
particular interaction, Which is certainly one reason for the diﬂciculty encountered
so far in quantizing gravity or unifying it With the other interactions. In fact the most
outstanding problem in the ﬁrst category is the incompatibility of quantum theory
and gravity. Some examples Where the present notion of physics breaks down are
the information loss in black holes, the nature of singularities, and the ‘big bang’.
This implies the need for a uniﬁed physical description, that is, a theory quuantum
gravity, Fig. l. The current approaches towards this goal are string theory and the
canonical quantization of gravity or loop gravity (see [1] for a recent review).

"
"3","Experiments in Fundamental Physics for the ISS 617

Quantum

Mechanics

h
[I .—]. DG
E: —} H
3: Quantum 13%“:an
Fuel: Tlieary Gravity
-' :3: a
G —+- u
\ {IrrF‘L'ﬁ-aﬂihm E‘- -+ m
Quainlﬂini
h a u {Erag'wc h” —1r 1}
iﬂaﬁav‘Jﬂﬂwﬁ Hewtopmn
~.'::' '- ' Gmww . v
-.; a n
Figure 1. The relations between Fundamental Theories as characterized by the fundamental constants.
Here, string theory also offers the possibility of unifying all interactions, a Wish
that is connected With the second category of theories mentioned above. Good
reasons in favour of such a uniﬁcation procedure are the universality principles
Which Special and General Relativity are based upon, that is to say the Relativity
principle, the Universality of free fall (also called Weak equivalence principle) and
the Universality of the gravitational redshift (also called Local Position Invariance,
or LPI). However, approaches to quantum gravity such as string theory predict tiny
Violations of these universality principles, and thus small Violations of Special and
General Relativity Which are, in this approach, valid only in the low energy limit.13
13 More on this and related questions can be found in [2]. See also the article of G. Amelino-Camelia
[3] in this issue.

"
"4","618 Léimmerzahl et a].

With regard to many-particle physics a fascinating problem is the understand-
ing of the organizing principles that are established in condensed matter systems,
for example the spontaneous formation of long-range order below a sharply de-
ﬁned critical temperature. Here, Renornialization-Group (RG) theory [4] plays a
fundamental role as it predicts universal behaviour under various different physical
conditions. The RG theory has not only explained a Wide range of experimental
results in critical phenomena, but the RG concept has opened up the possibility of
solving a signiﬁcant number of problems that are among the most diﬂcicult in theo-
retical physics. Successful applications of the RG approach range from statistical
physics to hydrodynamics, solid state physics to elementary particle physics, and
even to problems in quantum gravity. For these reasons, a highly precise experi-
mental test of the RG predictions is of fundamental interest. The most outstanding
RG predictions are the features of universality and scaling near critical points
of vastly different condensed matter systems (ﬂuids, alloys, magnetic materials,
superﬂuids, superconductors, ﬂuid mixtures, etc.).

All of the foregoing remarks make it clear that the future development of
physics really needs improved experimental data; and one way of achieving this
is to make use of microgravity conditions.

Many of the fundamental experimental tests are experiments on (i) the con-
stancy 0f the speed of light, that is, they analyse a hypothetical dependency of the
velocity of light of the form

C = C(ﬁ‘, v) (1)
0n the orientation 2? and/or the velocity v of the laboratory, and (ii) testing the
gravitational red shift, that is, the frequency difference between clocks located
at different position x1 and x2 in the gravitational ﬁeld, usually expressed in
the form

U (X2) — U (X1)
veg) = (1— 6—2 vm),
Where V(x) is the frequency of the clock at position x and U is the Newtonian
gravitational potential. If this red shift depends on the clock, then
U (X2) — U (X1)
V(x2) = (1 + _aclockC—2 V(xl)

and a comparison between the frequencies of two different clocks Will give

W k (x2) U(X2)—U(X1) V1 k (X1)

L = (1 _ (aCZOCkA _ aCZOCkB)—2 L (2)

vclockg (X2) C vclockg (X1)
so that the ratio of the frequencies of two clocks Will vary With the posi-
tion proportional to the gravitational potential difference With the coefﬁcient

"
"5","Experiments in Fundamental Physics for the ISS 619
ozAB zacgockA —ozcgock3. Eqs. (1) and (2) are the basis for the tests of Special
Relativity and 0f the Universality 0f the gravitational red shift, Which together
With the Universality of free fall forms the Einstein Equivalence Principle Which is
the basis of any metrical theory of gravity [5] as the Einstein gravitational theory
is. String theory, for example, predicts that ozAB 75 0 in general, see e.g. [6].—It is
also clear that the better clocks needed for these improved tests also contribute to
a better time standard and thus to metrology, and t0 the GPS.

As far as important tests in RG theory are concerned, we mention brieﬂy three
examples: (i) Critical points are characterized by a divergent correlation length 5
and by singularities of the temperature dependence of thermodynamic quantities,
e.g. a singular speciﬁc heat C , according to

S=S$ltl‘”, C=Ailtl‘“, (3)
Where t = (T — T C) / T C is the relative temperature distance from T C and Where —|—
and — refer to T > T C and T < T C, respectively. The critical exponents v and 04 as
well as the amplitude ratios SJ /SO_ and AJr /A_ are predicted to be universal, i.e.,
independent of the details of the microscopic interaction [7]. Furthermore there
exist exact relations between the various critical exponents, for example
2 — 04 = 31). (4)
To test the correctness of these predictions constitutes a fundamental test of the
correctness of the RG theory in general.

(ii) In a conﬁned geometry of characteristic length L, there exists the pre-
diction of “ﬁnite-size scaling” [8, 9] for the speciﬁc heat C(t, L) and for other
thermodynamic and dynamic quantities, e.g.,

C(t,L)—C(t,0<>)=L“/”f(L/S), (5)
Where S is the correlation length (3). Again, the scaling function f (x) is predicted
to be universal (for a given geometry and boundary conditions). So far, however,
there exist strong discrepancies between this prediction and real experiments in
conﬁned superﬂuid Helium [10, 11].

(iii) It is of great physical interest to investigate cooperative phenomena in
condensed-matter systems under non-equilibrium conditions and in the non-linear
response regime. There exist detailed RG predictions in this regime near the su-
perﬂuid transition of 4He in the presence of a heat current [12, 13]. An as yet
unresolved fundamental question is Whether there exist hysteresis effects in such
non-equilibrium systems [14].

Fundamental Physics in Microgravity. A microgravity environment offers
important advantages for Fundamental Physics experiments over ground-based
laboratories and is even mandatory for some experiments. These advantages could

"
"6","620 Léimmerzahl et a].
be broken down into basic or intrinsic advantages or requirements (space condi-
tions), and practical experimental requirements

0 Inﬁnitely long ‘free fall’ under microgravity conditions.

' Long exposure to very weak interactions is possible, rendering their effects

measurable.

' N0 seismic noise—quiet environmental conditions.

0 The cosmic particle content of space itself.

' Huge distances and variations in altitude.

' Large velocities and large velocity variations.

0 Large potential differences may be used.

One of the most powerful arguments for the utilization of the 18$ for Funda-
mental Physics experimentation is the unrivalled opportunity for quicker, easier,
and repeatable access to the experimental apparatus for adjustment, repair, repe-
tition of experiments, a post-mission analysis of the apparatus—something that is
quite impossible in the case of dedicated satellites. In consequence, this facility
must reduce considerably the time-scales and costs associated With the practical
realisation of such experiments.

This Review. In this paper we review the current Fundamental physics
projects planned to be performed onboard 0f the 188. These projects are connected
(i) With tests ofrelatiVity (SUMO — PI J . Lipa, PHARAO — PI C. Salomon, PARCS
— PI D. Sullivan, RACE — PIK. Gibble) thus exploiting the condition of large veloc-
ity changes, (ii) With setting up better time standards (PHARAO, PARCS, RACE)
using the condition of free fall What increases the interaction time of atoms With
external ﬁelds, (iii) With the detection of cosmic high energy particles and anti-
matter (AMS — PI S. Ting, EUSO — PIL. Scarsi), and (iv) With the thermodynamics
and dynamics ofphase transitions (SUE — PI J . Lipa, BEST — PI G. Ahlers, MISTE
— PI M. Barmatz, DYNAMX — PI R. Duncan, EXACT — PI M. Larson) in liquid
helium (superﬂuid lambda transition and liquid-gas critical point) using an environ-
ment Without any gravitational force at a level that would destroy the homogeneity
of the sample.

2. SUMO: SUPERCONDUCTING MICROWAVE OSCILLATOR
EXPERIMENT

Scientiﬁc Objectives. The Superconducting Microwave Oscillator experi-
ment (SUMO) is designed to perform tests in Special Relativity, and in conjunction
With PARCS (see below) a differential red-shift test of General Relativity. Also,
it Will support PARCS by providing it With a low noise oscillator signal on short
time scales. It Will be located in the LOW Temperature Microgravity Physics Facil-
ity (LTMPF) that Will be attached to the J apanese Experimental Module J EM-EF
close to PARCS and Will be connected to it With a ﬁber—optic link.

"
"7","Experiments in Fundamental Physics for the ISS 621
Tests of special relativity typically fall into two main classes: one involv-
ing angle-dependent effects and the other absolute velocity effects. A model of
potential Lorentz Violations was developed by Mansouri and Sad [15] who con-
sidered the possibility of an anisotropic propagation velocity of light relative to
a preferred frame. In this preferred frame-which usually is identiﬁed with the
cosmic frame-light is assumed to propagate isotropically. In a laboratory which
moves with a velocity v with respect to the preferred frame, the speed of light now
is a function of the velocity v and of the angle 29 between the direction of light
propagation and the velocity v
2 2
M=1+(l—ﬂ+5)v—sin229+(,6—oz—l)v— (6)
c 2 62 62
where 04 is the time dilation parameter, ,6 is the Lorentz contraction parameter,
and 6 tests for transverse contraction, to be determined either experimentally or in
the particular theory being considered (this is a special case of Eq. (1)). In Special
Relativity the last two terms on the right hand side of Eq. (6) are zero. For an
experiment on the ISS the velocity relative to inertial space would be modulated at
orbital rate, giving rise to a periodically varying clock signal. It is well established
[16] that the frequency of an atomic clock is independent of the velocity vector to
very high precision. In the case of the ﬁ-dependent term, a signal could be generated
by mounting two cavities at right angles, since their frequencies are sensitive to
the velocity of light only in the radial directions. At present the best limit [17] on
this form ofisotropy is (1/2 — ,8 —|— 6) < 2.2 - 10—9. By comparing the frequencies
of two orthogonally mounted cavities at twice orbital rate, the limit for this effect
could be improved of a factor of about 100 with 60 days of averaging. The present
limit [18] on the ﬁ-independent term is |,6 — oz — 1| < 6.9 - 10—7. Withafrequency
stability of5.10_16 referencing to PARCS, and averaging over 4 months, we would
expect to set a limit of ~ 6 - 10—10 , a factor of ~ 103 improvement. This signal
would be modulated at orbital rate.

Recently Kostelecky and Mewes [19] have pointed out that in the general
Standard Model Extension (SME) that permits weak Lorentz Violations additional
terms may exist which show signatures different from those expressed in Eq. (6).
In particular, quantities independent of v and others linear in 1) may exist which
could be detectable in certain types of experiment. A conﬁguration of interest is
a pair of cylindrical microwave cavity resonators operating on radial modes, one
with its aXis aligned in the direction of rotation and the other with its aXis at 450 to
the aXis of rotation. In the most general case the beat signal Av from such a pair
is predicted to have terms of the form

Av . .
T 2 AS s1n(a)t) —|— AC cos(wt) —|— BS s1n(2a)t) —|— BC cos(2wt) —|— const (7)

"
"8","622 Léimmerzahl et a].
where the coefﬁcients are linear combinations of potential Lorentz Violating terms
and a) is the rotation rate of the pair of caVities (this is another realization of
(1)). The quantities A and B include the effects described by Eq. (6) at second
order of v/c but also terms that probe for additional physics possibly due to
residual effects left over from the birth of the universe. There are nineteen possible
Lorentz-Violating parameters contributing to AS, AC, BS and BC, of Which ten are
bounded by astrophysical data. SUMO is sensitive to seven linear combinations
of the remaining nine parameters. Bounds at the 10‘17 level are expected for the
velocity independent terms, and at the 10‘14 level for those proportional to v.

The LPI principle of general relativity states that the outcome of any non-
gravitational experiment conducted in a local, free-falling frame is independent
of Where and When that experiment is conducted. A consequence is that different
types of clocks keep exactly the same time, no matter Where they are co-located
in the universe, provided that the laws of physics do not vary from place to place.
One of our goals is to look for a Violation of LPI by comparing a microwave cavity
frequency With that of an atomic clock as a function of position and gravitational
potential as the ISS orbits the earth and the sun. A microwave cavity and an atomic
clock have different dependencies on fundamental physical constants [20] Which
may reveal a Violation of LPI. Alternatively, one can View the experiment as setting
limits on effects predicted by various theories competing With general relativity
as descriptions of the interaction of matter and spacetime, or a search for new
physical phenomena. This test could improve on the earlier measurement by a
factor of about 1000. SUMO Will require two to four months of operation in order
to achieve its science objectives.

Experimental Payload. The SUMO experiments Will be performed on board
the ISS inside the LTMPF, a liquid helium cryostat allowing access to temperatures
down to 1.4 K for up to several months. The central part of the payload consists
of two cylindrical superconducting microwave caVities mounted With their axes
orthogonal. A conceptual design of the SUMO instrument is shown in Fig. 2. It
consists of a vacuum ﬂange Which is attached to the helium tank of the LTMPF, a
thermal isolation system, and a pair of microwave cavities.

The cavity design includes a special mounting structure Which reduces its
acceleration sensitiVity by a factor of ~1000. This was necessary to reduce the
effect of residual drag on the 188 Which has a component at the orbital period. A cut-
away View is shown in Fig. 3. The cavity is in the central section and is supported
symmetrically by the outer structure that is bolted to the thermal isolation system at
one end. The multi-stage thermal isolation system is designed to allow temperature
control in the 10‘9K range using specially designed paramagnetic thermometers
With extremely low noise.

Mission Scenario. The 188 has a low Earth circular orbit With a height of
approximately 350 km, and an inclination of approximately 500. Therefore the
velocity change of the apparatus during one orbit is about a factor of ﬁfteen larger

"
"9","Experiments in Fundamental Physics for the 188 623
l. 4- . I I: n
.._ 1 v _
3"" L h L.
I . '
_ \ ‘- 1' I'— . .
.1 iii iii I. - _ 3.:
I - . Id
. r .
._-.- ..- Fl
1:: ' -
Figure 2. Conceptual View of SUMO instrument.
The diameter of the structure is about 20 cm.
than that available on the Earth’s surface (the orbital period of the 188 is just over
1.5 h). While the gravitational potential differences are typically rather small, they
can be enhanced by ﬂying in a slightly elliptical orbit. Typically the ellipticity
is N 0.002, While values of 0.003 are allowed under normal ﬂight rules. SUMO
Will be requesting the highest possible ellipticity to enhance the driving term for
any red—shift Violation. The expected cyclical changes are signiﬁcantly larger than
those available on the ground on short time scales. By making use of the ISS
orbital position information it Will be an easy matter to keep track of the changing
gravitational potential for correlation With the SUMO/PARCS difference signal.
Also, by varying the location of the orbital nodes during the mission, it Will be
Figure 3. Cut-away View of a microwave cavity for
the SUMO mission. Its radius is about 1.3 cm. Due
to its special design this cavity is very robust against
microgravity noise.

"
"10","624 Léimmerzahl et a].
possible to separate any signal from that caused by a Lorentz Violation which would
be ﬁxed in inertial space. Estimates of the ISS Vibrational noise in all frequency
ranges indicate it should not be a serious problem using the low acceleration
sensitiVity cavities.

3. ACES/PHARAO: ATOMIC CLOCK ENSEMBLE IN SPACE/PROJET
D’HORLOGE ATOMIQUE PAR REFROIDISSEMENT D’ATOMES
EN ORBITE

Scientiﬁc Objectives. This mission [21] intends (i) to set up the PHARAO
clock on the International Space Station, and to study its performance in space. (ii)
Together with a hydrogen niaser, to establish a time scale which can be compared
with terrestrial clocks to an accuracy of 10—16—which would be an enormous im-
provement over the present level of synchronization that is possible using GPS
(Global Positioning System) clocks. Thus an ultra—high performance global time-
synchronization system should be realised, which will make possible new naviga-
tion and positioning applications. (iii) To perform tests of the Gravitational Red
Shift (with an improvement of more than a factor ten over present tests) and to
search for a time-dependence of the ﬁne structure constant 04 to a relative precision
level of 10—16 per year. This will be accomplished by comparison between the
ACES clocks and ground clocks of various types such as rubidium fountains and
optical clocks. (iv) To search for an anisotropy of speed of light by analysing the
propagation of microwaves in different directions when ACES clocks are compared
with ground clocks.

Experimental Payload. The payload consists of the PHARAO clock, based
on a fountain of cold Cesium atoms, and hydrogen-maser clock, Figs. 4 and 5.
Additional components are the MWL (MicroWave Link), replacing the formerly
considered optical communication link T2L2 (Time Transfer by Laser Link), which
was to send short bursts of light (100 picoseconds) between clocks on Earth and
the clocks on the 188, to synchronize them, Fig. 6. The payload will be placed on
an external platform of the European module Columbus in a nadir position.

Mission Scenario. The MWL will operate by sending signals from Earth to
the 188 where the arrival time will be recorded, and where the signal will also be
sent back to Earth. From the signal’s ‘round trip’ it will be possible to eliminate
any ﬂuctuations in the travel time due to the atmosphere. The mission is planned
to run for 18 months.

Technology. In this mission—for the ﬁrst time—laser cooling techniques
and atom traps will be established and tested in space. Furthermore, also for the
ﬁrst time the performance of atom-optical elements can be tested in space. All
these techniques will be of importance for future satellite missions. In addition,
appropriate microwave links will be developed.

"
"11","Experiments in Fundamental Physics for the 188 625
:....w 4r"" -' .4- . _ _ ;.;-:-:
' . .
I l"" ' k ‘ 2:""? w
J- I__.' I.” .: ﬂit
Figure 4. Principle of PHARAO, a cold atom clock in microgravity. An
optical bench (top) provides light to a cesium tube for cooling and detect-
ing the atoms using optical ﬁbers. Atoms are collected in optical molasses
in a ﬁrst chamber (left), cooled below 1 ,uK and launched into a second
chamber. They enter a cavity in Which they experience the two successive
Ramsey interactions With a microwave ﬁeld tuned near the 9.192 631 770
Hz cesium frequency. Atoms excited by this ﬁeld are detected downstream
by ﬂuorescence. The resonance signal is used to lock the oscillator’s central
frequency to the cesium transition. For a launch velocity of 5 cm/s, the eX-
pected resonance Width is 0.1 Hz, ten times narrower than in atomic fountain
clocks on Earth.
.. I i
. i u .
I. Ir I
a :2 L 'l ""i - I ' .
.an -.- :.'..-. 1:. .I -_Iill-:EI;1; ”1-; I“;
. I ~ :I!:::i;-.
. I: = , e
i 2'75""?""
I T' '-.'_,_.
‘I' g- ;= t I Figure 5. The zero- g qualiﬁed prototype of an atomic clock for
_. _-‘. _.-..1 .I .3 J 1 space: the cooling zone is at the bottom, the interaction zone in
*4 ' E , I J! .' - :r- the middle, and the detection zone at the top. The length of the
h ' '1 1 J apparatus is approximately 1 metre.

"
"12","626 Léimmerzahl et a].
m . #:Fa :4, __ ~- um
65 4’ a .. '
3:»! E? .
sh 4.;
1 , . 1 ' -.------r _ 1% I '-"""" 'Hurr .-- 5‘! -
_ e” i. - _ _J- #3“;- “ "" a .-. ~' ‘ '

I 'I II . ""...'- ._ T;- ' ""'-' {‘11.-
Figure 6. The ACES ensemble consisting of the PHARAO clock, and the hydrogen maser clock.
Microwave links establish the connections to Earth for time and frequency transfer.

Further Information. http://0pdaf1.obspm.fr/WWW/pharaohtml, http://

WWW.cnes.fr/actiVites/connaissance/physique/ 1 index.htm
4. PARCS: PRIMARY ATOMIC REFERENCE CLOCK IN SPACE
Scientiﬁc Objectives. PARCS is an atomic—clock mission scheduled to ﬂy
on the International Space Station (ISS) in 2008. The mission, funded by NASA,
and being a collaboration between JPL, NIST and the University of Colorado,
involves a laser—cooled cesium atomic clock, Figs. 7 and 8, and a time—transfer
system using a Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver Within the instrument to
provide position, velocity, and timing information. PARCS Will ﬂy concurrently
With SUMO (Superconducting Microwave Oscillator). SUMO Will function as a
stable local oscillator as well as a clock With structure dependent on totally different
physical phenomena. The objectives of the mission are to:

0 Test gravitational theory by measuring the gravitational redshift and per—
forming other measurements Which probe the foundations of Special and
General Relativity;

0 Study laser—cooled atoms in microgravity;

0 Improve the accuracy of timekeeping on earth.

"
"13","Experiments in Fundamental Physics for the ISS 627
lasers $9! .
Q i 9}! {’3
. gaﬁ‘g
. _ - _ ant tube detection
E «f *- n. f” .. _ __ region
if atﬂm _ \ . K h' - ‘H
"" cnllectlﬂn - ' ' ”h _' '1
n- ' - 34$! 42:.
ﬁﬁﬁ'; . 8‘ IE} .'
- gaﬁg . 4
5%
Figure 7. Schematic View of the PARCS clock, showing the laser-cooled atom collection
region, Ramsey cavities, drift tube, and detection region.

Technology and Mission Scenario. The proposed ISS location for the eX-
periment is on the External Facility 0f the J apanese Experimental Module (J EM).
This location affords a good View of the GPS satellite constellation, needed for
comparing space and ground clocks. In addition, the available volume, power, and
cooling system on the J EM are well matched to mission requirements.

The microgravity environment of space affords the possibility of slowing
atoms down to speeds well below those used in terrestrial atomic clocks, allow—
ing for substantial improvement in clock accuracy and stability. Clock stability
of 7- 10—14 at one second, and accuracy better than 10—16, are projected. The
GPS measurement system Will provide continuous position information to Within
10 cm, and velocity measurements better than 0.13 Inm/s. The frequency shift of
the orbiting clock can be compared to reference clocks on Earth With uncertainties
expected to be less than 2 parts per million, and relativistic corrections to be applied
to the orbiting clock so that it can serve as a truly international time standard avail—
able worldwide. PARCS Will be compared continuously to the SUMO oscillator,
allowing improvements in tests of relativity such as in the Kennedy—Thorndike and
Michelson—Morley experiments, and in tests of local position invariance. Table I
summarizes the goals of the PARCS mission.

Further Information. WWW.boulder.nist.gOV/timefreq/cesium/parcs.htm

"
"14","628 Limmerzahl et 211.
LEE gr: 1 I i: 'I‘ - _ . HW Synthaslzar
15w ' 35w

gs? ,_- '
GWFPIE :1. . . '_ ~-.;:::,_'f:_-_-""ﬁli .
Hm” . - _ ' i: ""V‘ :4!"" GPS
“3“} . r. “w. ?L/ w
Fl” 4 . “ ~-:*.--T~_"" _.. . '- .
,. ~— . ., _ -- - 1- ﬁ
. \- '1. -' f.- -
1"" ' :i‘ﬁ . - ..
x i“ _ .1.“
' -: . . lift - 'I _.--""-"""" .-
1*I_,II . . II""_ ‘iE-ﬁl‘: _
' i."" J!“ . _I . . Ramﬁadiatnr
I .' -. 3.15mi
~ "" . ' ' Luna 1
J EFF 25W ""SD
1:15“! aw
/ EFF 2
Nadir Radiator Pcnu ”-“‘” VME

13m sq.ft. 125w saw
Figure 8. The major subsystems of PARCS consists of (i) a Laser Optical Bench (LOB), (ii) a Cs
Physics Package (CPP), (iii) a Microwave Synthesizer, (iV) a GPS Receiver, (V) Avionics, (Vi) Instrument
Electronics, and (Vii) Structure/Thermal Control.

5. RACE: RUBIDIUM ATOMIC CLOCK EXPERIMENT

RACE, the Rubidium Atomic Clock Experiment, is one of the three clock
experiments planned for the ISS. RACE Will be based on Rubidium atoms instead
of Cesium. At laser—cooling temperatures, quantum mechanical effects dominate
in atomic collisions. This leads to potentially very large cross sections and these
collisions can produce very large frequency shifts in laser—cooled clocks [23] as
shown in Fig. 9. The collision shift is the largest systematic error in Cs fountain
clocks. By using Rb, RACE avoids this large error source since, for 87Rb, the shift
is much smaller than that for Cs [24, 25].

Scientiﬁc Objectives. We have three primary goals for RACE: (1) Demon-
strate new clock techniques for laser—cooled atoms to enable frequency compar—
isons With accuracies of 1 part in 1017. (2) Signiﬁcantly improve the classic clock
tests of general relativity. (3) Distribute accurate time and frequency from the ISS.
RACE is currently scheduled to ﬂy on the 188 in 2010. We review the design
constraints and discuss the schematic for RACE.

"
"15","Experiments in Fundamental Physics for the ISS 629
Table 1. Summary of Science Objectives for PARCS
Expected Previous Improvement

Measurement/Test Uncertainty Best Uncertainty (Ratio)
Net Frequency Shift, A f/ f 1.7 - 10-6 70 - 10-6 35
Gravitational Frequency Shift, A f/ f 12 . 10-6 140 . 10-6 12
Kennedy-Thorndike, 5 — a — 1 9 - 10-10 7 - 10-7[18] 770
Local Position Invariance, ozAB 9 - 10—6 2.1 - 10—5[22] 2.3
Michelson-Morley, 1/2 — 5 + a 5 . 10-10 2.2 - 10-9[17] 5
Atom Drift Time, value in seconds 10 1 10
Accuracy of Space Clock, A f/ f 5 - 10-17 1 - 10-12 20,000
Realization 0fthe Second, A f/ f 5 . 10-17 1 - 10-15 20

The tremendous advantage of microgravity for atomic clocks is much longer
interrogation times and hence very narrow transition linewidths. A microgravity
design has some very different design constraints than earth-based fountain clocks.
Essential to achieving high accuracy With RACE is a high short-term stability. To
achieve the high stability, atoms must be multiply launched—that is using the long
interrogation time that microgravity provides (e.g. 10s) While launching atoms at
a high rate (5 balls per second).

Technology. RACE Will use a double-MOT design [26] to multiply launch
atoms. This design allows a high throughput of cold atoms and therefore a high
short-term stability. The high throughput is possible as the double-MOT can rapidly

1.0
1;? 0.5
I
§
>‘ AVE.
8 0.0 . 1’ . _. “ 5' u
a 1
U“ \ §
9 \
1.1. .05 \\
\
\AVCS
—1.0
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Density (109 cm'3)
Figure 9. The measured collision shift for clocks
based on cold Rb and Cs atoms. The shift for 87Rb
is 50 times smaller than that for Cs.

"
"16","630 Léimmerzahl et a1.
23,; .
L, : Vapor Trap
ﬁg
“1""""— ! (1.3 [:H: shutter
3i l-i _u ”'2 $34 _ 1.1. 11— _
I 4— | ""H I —p- I
b Fill ﬂ v=ﬁcnn’s P
T w *—'u.5 m T

Figure 10. Schematic for juggling microgravity Rb clock RACE. Atoms are collected in the Vapor
Trap and tossed to the UHV trap with a large velocity. The UHV trap captures the cold atoms and tosses
them left or right to go through one clock cavity or the other.

capture Inany cold atoms and then elﬁciently launch them through a clock cavity.
The “upper” vapor cell trap in Fig. 10 essentially continually traps atoms and
then launches them at 5—10 m/s to the UHV trap “below.” Because of the high
launch velocity from the vapor cell trap, the atoms pass quickly through the shutter
separating the 2 traps. This implies that the shutter only needs to open for the short
time the ball of atoms ﬂies through and, only during that time, the lasers for the
vapor—cell trap must be extinguished (so that no laser light enters the interrogation
region). The real advantage of the double—MOT design is that the UHV trap can
capture and launch a ball of atoms in as little as 5 ms [26].This implies that
the shutter separating the UHV trap and interrogation region only has to close
for 5 ms for each launch and therefore is nearly always open. This allows a high
throughput since the ball of atoms Will have expanded considerably before reaching
the shutter.

The RACE schematic in Fig. 10 shows two clock cavities. After atoms are
collected in the “UHV Trap,” they are launched either to the left or right, through
one cavity or the other. Having two cavities is important for a number of reasons.
One advantage is that it greatly reduces the requirements for the local oscillator.
Few oscillators can perform at O'y(‘L') = 3.10—15‘E_% and there is signiﬁcant work
required to develop their ﬂight worthiness. The essential problem With only a single
cavity is that the microwave frequency fed to the cavity must be switched from
one side of the transition line to the other. During the switchover, the atoms must
be cleared from the cavity and this means the oscillator is not tracked for some

"
"17","Experiments in Fundamental Physics for the ISS 631
Table 11. Mission Performance Goals for RACE. An Improved
Kennedy-Thorndike Test Requires the (re)F1ight of SUMO

Criteria Goal

Short-term clock stability 3 - 10—15I_%

Clock Accuracy 1 - 10—17

Gravitational Red Shift 2.4 - 10—7

Second-order Doppler 3 - 10—8

Kennedy-Thorndike (,6 — oz — 1) 4 - 10—11
time. With 2 cavities, we can perform the switchover for one cavity while still
monitoring the oscillator with the other cavity and therefore the stability of the
clock is not compromised by the local oscillator’s instability. Other advantages
include eliminating the Vibrational noise of the ISS, an independent check on the
AC Start Shift due to blackbody radiation, and instrument redundancy.

Performance goals for RACE are shown in Table 11. Flight with SUMO will
allow high stability frequency comparisons for additional tests of fundamental
physics.

6. AMS: ALPHA MAGNETIC SPECTROMETER

Scientiﬁc Background. The Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer AMS will place
a sensitive particle detector in Earth orbit to learn the makeup of the particles
that exist in the cosmic void. The detector will enable the determination of the
number, energy, and charge of the particles that bombard the Earth from space. This
information will then be used to determine how much antimatter exists in space,
and, by extension, how much matter and of what type exists in the Universe. AMS
is therefore a major cosmology experiment, and it will be capable of observing
the properties of electrons, positrons, protons, antiprotons, and nuclei in high-
energy ‘cosmic’ radiation from space. These observations may answer important
questions about the Big Bang, including “Why did the Big Bang make so little
antimatter?” and “What makes up the Universe’s invisible mass?”.

Because charged particles such as antiprotons are absorbed by the Earth’s
atmosphere (through collisions with protons, for example), the Alpha Magnetic
Spectrometer must be taken up above the atmosphere into space, so that it can make
effective measurements of these particles. The AMS experiment will therefore be
placed on the International Space Station, where it will be left for several years
to accumulate readings. A predecessor of AMS, the 1998 AMS experiment, was
taken up into space by the Space Shuttle, and was the ﬁrst sensitive particledetector
to be placed in orbit. This early experiment was particularly helpful in calibrating

"
"18","632 Léimmerzahl et a].
r 7 ‘V -
r ' ‘1'. -r:i-;— . - - '
F vi? ""H ""1 ' .
: : _ .. '-"":I.'I-I : 'ZEJ'IEII “
7:: ='-
Figure 11. The AMS apparatus to be externally attached to the ISS.
the instrument, so that a future mission Will be able to take even more accurate
measurements. As the fundamental laws that govern our Universe are scrutinised
ever more closely, such basic questions as ‘What are the ultimate building blocks of
matter?’, or ‘What are the fundamental forces through Which these basic particles
interact?’ are being asked. AMS Will take a step toward answering these most
fundamental questions.

Mission Scenario. The AMS detector, Fig. 1 1, Will be placed on the ISS Inain
truss, making full use of the 188’s irreplaceable support systems, and Will gather
particle data for 3 years.

Technology. A transition radiation detector Will give the velocities of the
highest energy particles, Whilst a silicon tracker Will follow the particle paths
through the instrument. A very signiﬁcant weight— and volume—saving has been
made in the design of the apparatus by using a superconducting magnet to produce
the very high magnetic ﬁeld of AMS. The magnet, Fig. 12, wound With persistent
supercurrent—carrying Nb/Ti Wire Will operate at a temperature of 1.8 K, cooled by
360 kg of superﬂuid liquid helium. The curvature of particle paths through such a
magnetic ﬁeld Will give the momentum/charge ratio for each detected particle, plus
the all—important sign of the charge. In addition, AMS Will employ particle time—of—
ﬂight counters, a ring—imaging Cherenkov radiation detector, an electromagnetic
calorimeter, and an anti—coincidence counter to veto any spurious particles that
may pass sideways through the apparatus.

Further Information. http://spaceﬂight.nasa.gOV/shuttle/archives/sts—91/
orbit/payloads/amshtm, http://a1ns.cern.ch/AMS/Description/overviewhtml.

"
"19","Experiments in Fundamental Physics for the 188 633
4r - *. a
1.
h |
v ~
\ ‘-. . ”*- ﬂ
. I - Figure 12. The AMS magnet consists of 14 su-
perconducting coils arranged to give a dipole ﬁeld
with minimal external stray ﬁeld.
7. EUSO: EXTREME UNIVERSE SPACE OBSERVATORY
Scientiﬁc Background. One of the most challenging issues in Astroparticle
Physics is represented by the detection and observation of EECRs (Extreme En—
ergy Cosmic Rays): the existence of sub—atomic particles With individual energies
above 10 J (the kinetic energy of a tennis ball launched by an expert player, but con—
centrated in a single proton or neutrino !) raises fundamental scientiﬁc questions
about their origin and propagation in the interstellar and intergalactic space (for
various reviews see [27]). The Earth’s atmosphere constitutes the ideal detector for
the EECRs and the companion Cosmic Neutrinos. These EECR particles, inter—
acting With the atmosphere, give rise to propagating Extensive Air Showers (EAS)
accompanied by isotropic emission of UltraViolet (UV) ﬂuorescence (3 00—400 nm
wavelength range). These are induced in the Nitrogen of the atmosphere by the
secondary charged particles in the EAS, as result of a complex relativistic cascade
process; an isotropically diffuse optical—UV signal is emitted following the impact
of the Cherenkov beam, accompanying the EAS, on clouds, land or sea. An EAS
corresponding to a primary particle With energy E > 1019 eV forms a signiﬁcant
streak of ﬂuorescence light over 10—100 km along its passage in the atmosphere,
depending on the nature of the primary, and on the pitch angle With the vertical.
The extremely low value for the EECR ﬂux, corresponding to about 1 event/kni2
per century at E > 1020 eV, and the extremely low value for the interaction cross
section of neutrinos, make these components difﬁcult to observe. The solution is
to employ a detector With high values for the effective area and target mass.
The highest energy event ever measured was observed by the Fly’s Eye eX—
periment, at 3 - 1020 eV, or about 50 J ; the Fly’s Eye experiment was a ﬂuorescence

"
"20","634 Léimmerzahl et a].
detector, a forerunner of the presently operating HiRes experiment. The shower
evolution of this speciﬁc event is quite consistent with the particle being a proton,
the simplest possible explanation. At such energies particles such as protons can-
not no longer be conﬁned by the magnetic ﬁeld of our Galaxy, and so these events
almost certainly come from outside our Galaxy. In fact there are few astronomi-
cal sites known which could even conﬁne particles at such energies; the Larmor
radius has to ﬁt inside the source region for any acceleration process to work at
all; also since even protons at such energies have appreciable losses in photon
interaction and also by synchrotron losses in magnetic ﬁelds, those losses must be
balanced by any acceleration process. One solution for this conundrum is weakly
relativistic shock waves in radio galaxy hotspots. Another solution to the accelera-
tion problem is to suggest that these particles are the result of the decay of an even
heaVier postulated particle, such as a topological defect originally formed in the

Big Bang. In that picture there is no problem with any acceleration site; this process

could happen anywhere. In either picture the resulting particles must still traverse

the photon ﬁeld of the Big Bang, which induces a general cutoff—the so-called

GZK-cutoff14 at 5 - 1019 eV; this cutoff should exist for a homogeneous source

distribution, no magnetic ﬁeld effects at all, and a source spectrum which goes to

much higher energies of the protons (other known particles give similar, usually

lower cutoff energies). In the acceleration picture this means that we have to ﬁnd a

source, better many possible sources, and in the decay model we have to identify a

long-lived particle that exists as a residual from the Big Bang in suﬁciciently large

number density and lifetime to work as a candidate source particle.

So, either of these two main very different concepts have maj or problems: In
the notion that we have a cosmic source, which speciﬁcally accelerates protons to
very high energy, we ﬁnd at best one source at the top particle energy, and that is
the radiogalaxy M87; at lower energy there are many sources. However, in order to
obtain the near isotropy of the events on the sky in their arrival direction distribution,
we either need many sources or a near complete scrambling of directions by
magnetic ﬁelds, either in our cosmic neighbourhood, or in the Galactic halo. Both
is possible, but completely unproven. In the other main picture, that these events
derive from the decay of a new unknown particle, we face equally diﬁcicult choices:
We have to invent such particles, whose existence is plausible, but they have to
have an extremely long lifetime to survive through to today from the Big Bang,
and yet decay locally in just the right numbers to give that ﬂux observed. These
leads to just as great a problem as the ﬁrst maj or approach.

14 The GZK-cutoff, named after the three physicists K. Greisen, G. T. Zatsepin, and V. A. Kuzmin is the
effect that high energy particles interact with the photons of the cosmic microwave background and
create massive particles. As a consequence, particles with an energy of 1020 eV upon arrival at Earth
cannot come from a distance larger than 100. A possible solution of this puzzle is the hypothesis of
a Violation of Lorentz invariance at high energies [3, 28].

"
"21","Experiments in Fundamental Physics for the ISS 635
In either concept we can expect to learn new physics: In the notion that the
particles are accelerated, perhaps in radio galaxy hot spots, then in some such
radio galaxies, the particles would mainly interact in the source, and we could
perhaps observe the long lived decay products of the particles produced in these
interactions. In the decay concept, we might expect that there is a connection to
the dark matter particles which are generally accepted to make up the bulk of all
galaxy masses. Maybe it is the dark matter particles themselves that decay.

Last, there should be some connection to the very energetic gamma ray ﬂashes
or Gamma Ray Bursts (GRBs): Since these GRBs seem to occur in some frac-
tion of all supernova explosions, there should be one that was last in our Galaxy,
or other nearby well studied galaxies, and that might be observable in its resid-
ual signal. After all, supernova explosions are accepted to produce most, if not
all Galactic cosmic rays, up to energies of 3 - 1018 eV. In those special cases,
where GRBs accompany the supernova explosion, higher particle energies might
be reached. Again, new physics will be learnt then in some local well studied
neighbourhood.

These are just some well established examples of concepts that may explain
the occurrence of high energy particles, and all can be expected to teach us new
physics, far beyond any that Earth-bound accelerators can give, but still below what
the Big Bang itself involves, so with the ultra high energy cosmic ray particles,
we may expect to go beyond today’s world in physics, to then reach the ultimate
energy of the Big Bang and then the fundamental scale where all forces of nature
combine.

The Mission. The “Extreme Universe Space Observatory — EUSO” is the
ﬁrst Space mission devoted to the investigation of cosmic rays and neutrinos of
extreme energy (>5 - 1019 eV), using the Earth’s atmosphere as a giant detector.
The detection will be performed by looking at the streak of ﬂuorescence light
produced when such a particle interacts with the Earth’s atmosphere. EUSO will
observe the ﬂuorescence signal looking downward from Space into the dark Earth’s
atmosphere, over a 600 full ﬁeld-of-View. Fluorescence light will be imaged by
a large Fresnel lens based optical system onto a ﬁnely-segmented focal surface
detector. The highly focal surface segmentation and the fast time resolution of the
detector will allow reconstruction of the shower’s arrival direction and energy with
high precision. EUSO is expected to detect of the order of one thousand EECRs
per year with E > 1020 eV, and to open a window into the High Energy Neutrino
Universe. EUSO is a mission of the European Space Agency ESA, with a goal for
a three year mission starting in 2009. EUSO will be accommodated, as an external
payload of the Columbus module, on the ISS (Fig. 13).

The integrated exposure (about 2 - 103 km2 yr sr) available today for the
ground based arrays over the world is sufﬁcient only to show the existence of the
“ankle” feature at about 5 - 1018 eV in the cosmic ray energy spectrum. With the
current total exposure, the subset of available data is of only about twenty events

"
"22","636 Lammerzahl et a].
F I.
4
'1 I
I ' 1 l5- _ “— ' *' ' H- .
I . IE. __ __ -. "" ' m. .
.L m“ tr :— .- --= -—— --—-
_,_,f-_£,3, , H4.-.-.-.,-. .- .-.J.15I.E.I-.LI-.- -. ii. I, . .. ... . .
. - ' - h! —_- F i m 1- . ~‘1 '; ""15‘ w
4"" “‘55:- +2 .. . ._ -_._ “I . .
.. . v.?‘i. ' -
d a. ,.
p *0 aﬁﬁ ‘l"" ' ' .-
a'- k ' "" _ r
i ., _
Figure 13. EUSO is placed externally to the European Columbus module.
in total exceeding 1020 eV; the limited statistics of the available data excludes
the possibility of observing signiﬁcant structures in the energy spectrum at higher
energies. Experiments carried out by means of the new generation of ground based
observatories, HiRes (ﬂuorescence) and Auger (hybrid), Will still be limited by
practical diﬂiculties connected to a relatively small collecting area (<104 km2 sr)
and by a modest target mass value for neutrino detection.
Early in the eighties, J . Linsley, Who was also the ﬁrst to claim detection of a
1020 eV event, suggested that a solution can be provided by observing from space,
and at night, the UV ﬂuorescence induced in the atmosphere by the incoming ex—
traterrestrial radiation; this potentially Will enable the exploitation of up to millions
km2 sr for the acceptance area, and up to 1013 tons of atmosphere as the target for
neutrino interaction. This is the philosophy of the “AirWatch Programme”, and
EUSO is the ﬁrst space mission developed Within the AirWatch framework.
When Viewed continuously, a target obj ect for EUSO moves on a straight path
With the speed of light. The resulting picture of the event seen by the detector looks
like a narrow track in Which the recorded amount of light is proportional to the
shower size at the various penetration depths in the atmosphere. From a Low Earth
Orbit space platform the UV ﬂuorescence induced in atmospheric nitrogen by
the incoming radiation Will be detected by EUSO, and studied. Other phenornena

"
"23","Experiments in Fundamental Physics for the ISS 637
such as meteors, space debris, lightning, atmospheric ﬂashes, can also be observed
by EUSO; on the other hand the luminescence coming from the EAS produced
by the Cosmic Ray quanta can be disentangled from the general background and
measured, by exploiting its fast-timing characteristic feature.

Further Information. http://WWW.euso-mission.org/

8. SUE: SUPERFLUID UNIVERSALITY EXPERIMENT

Scientiﬁc Objectives. The Superﬂuid Universality Experiment (SUE) is a
developmental program that ultimately may ﬂy in the LTMPF. It is concerned
With the study of the second order phase transition that occurs When helium is
supercooled into a liquid, and further cooled into a superﬂuid, in a microgravity
environment under a range of different pressures. Due to fundamental theoretical
difﬁculties there exists no exact treatment of these transitions, limiting our ability
to perform decisive tests of the theory. However, the theory [4] makes some exact
predictions concerning the exponents Which characterise the singular behaviour
of many properties near the transition. Of prime importance is the prediction of
’universality’, Which states that the exponents have the same value for Wide classes
of systems independent of the strength of the microscopic interaction or of certain
macroscopic thermodynamic parameters. For example, in liquid helium just below
the superﬂuid transition temperature, T A, the exponent g“ of the superﬂuid density,
ps 2 ,00(P)t§ , is predicted to be a universal constant close to 2/3, Where t = l —
T / T A(P) is a dimensionless parameter measuring the temperature distance from
the transition. In contrast, the amplitude, ,00(P), is predicted to be a non-universal
quantity depending on the isobaric pressure, P, at Which ,05 (t) is measured. The
superﬂuid density, Which is not directly measurable, can be related to the velocity
of second sound and the heat capacity through a thermodynamic argument. SUE
Will measure the velocity of second sound and the heat capacity along various
isobars near the lambda line of helium, and from this determine the value of
g“ as a function of pressure. This information Will directly test the universality
hypothesis and any detected pressure dependence would nullify the theory. This
test would be the most accurate performed to date on any phase transition, about
a factor of 30 improvement on previous work [29]. The experiment needs to be
performed in space to reduce the spurious effect of hydrostatic pressure on the
measurements.

Experimental Payload. The core of the ﬂight apparatus Will consist of a ther-
mally insulating cylindrical sample chamber about 3 cm long and 1 cm in diameter,
ﬁlled With high-purity liquid helium. Attached to the sample chamber Will be a
thermometer With a resolution of lO‘lOK and a superconducting pressure gauge.
The sample chamber Will form a second sound resonator and Will be equipped
With a detector having an extremely high sensitivity and With a second sound gen-
erator. The generator Will be a thin ﬁlm heater Which Will also be used to perform

"
"24","638 Lﬁmmerzahl et a1.
‘ ﬁJr-J T l.
r'.‘ ~31 . —_
{/5} *3 . 3,};
rrf-ilxr/f ' it Fri! 'II-r'j
1 'I' .r .""I_""
HC”. 7- ”w“?
§ ill I... K T-
.‘f;' ’55} — 5 ~ 3;?!
“'IE- {ff HIM?"" Rh ”/1""! III:
.r r I - . _ _- _ _ .'r
1‘ ' F“ f"": ' '
:1 1“ TIT! ; R.“
1.1 .— .1. ""- :
i ri
I‘ ﬁt
___E__ _J Figure 14. Schematic View of SUE instrument and thermal
isolation structure.
heat capacity measurements. This assembly Will be placed Within a multistage
thermal enclosure functionally similar to that shown in the SUMO section above,
and sketched below in Fig. 14. The superconducting pressure gauge Will be used
as part of a constant pressure servo. A second, lower resolution absolute pressure
gauge Will also be attached to the cell. This Will be used to establish the link to
the ground—based second sound and heat capacity measurements and to calibrate
the high resolution gauge. The walls of the vacuum enclosure Will be maintained
near 1.4 K to allow operation of the sample chamber at various temperatures along
the lambda line. This basic operating temperature Will be maintained by using the
LTMPF cryostat, With an experiment time of 50 days needed for completing the
measurements.

Mission Scenario. The experiment will be located within the LTMPF and
placed on the J EM—EF attached to the 188. To perform the experiment, the density
is ﬁrst set at the desired value by adjusting the quantity of helium Within the cell
While referencing the absolute pressure gauge. Once the density is set, the pressure
is controlled using the high resolution gauge and a ﬂexible diaphragm. Next, the
temperature of the cell is raised incrementally closer to the lambda point and the

"
"25","Experiments in Fundamental Physics for the ISS 639
fundamental resonant frequency of the cavity is measured. Values in the range
0.25 to 500 Hz are expected. The heat capacity would also be measured at each
temperature. The frequency, pressure, heat capacity and temperature measurements
Will be continued until the transition is reached, marked by the rapid decrease of
resonant frequency and ultimate loss of signal. A number of temperature sweeps
at a given density Will be performed to check for errors in the data and to estimate
the uncertainties in the results near the transition. The density Will then be reset
and the measurement sequence repeated. A minimum of ﬁve different isobars Will
be explored, over the range 0-30 bar.

Further Information. http://cheX.stanford.edu/sue/, http://funphysics.jp1.
nasa.gOV/technical/ltcmp/sue.html.

9. BEST: BOUNDARY EFFECTS NEAR SUPERFLUID TRANSITIONS

Scientiﬁc Objectives. the study of molecular-level boundary issues, using
liquid helium during phase transitions between the ﬂuid and superﬂuid states in a
microgravity environment. In detail, BEST Will (i) improve the measurement of
the thermal conductivity in a three-dimensional 4He sample along the lambda line,
by three orders of magnitude, (ii) measure the thermal conductivity of 4He in one-
and two—dimensional conﬁnements of various sizes, and (iii) examine the cross-
over behaviour from three-dimensional superﬂuid transitions to the fundamentally
different tWO-dimensional superﬂuid transitions.

Experimental Payload. BEST intends to make use of the LOW Tempera-
ture Microgravity Physics Facility (LTMPF, a large helium dewar) facility aboard
the ISS. Superﬂuid Helium under various boundary conditions given by e.g. mi-
crochannel plates (see Fig. 15) Will be studied, using very sensitive thermometers,
together With high precision pressure regulators.

Mission Scenario. It is planned that this experiment Will be carried out over
a period of 6 to 14 weeks aboard the ISS, Which is sufﬁcient time for the helium
phase-transition to be studied along a number of different isobars, i.e. under a
number of different hydrostatic pressures. In this way it should be possible to ﬁnd
out if the scaling-function for the lambda transition is universal-in the sense that
it is pressure-independent. It is noteworthy that such an extended experimental
campaign would not be possible aboard the space shuttle.

Technology. In order to explore such highly constrained helium samples,
small high-resolution (nK) thermometers must be employed, along With high-
precision pressure-regulators; and in order to perform the tests on the one- and
tWO-dimensionally constrained helium samples, conﬁnement media With very high
uniformity and low thermal conductivity are required.

Further Information. http://WWW.n1s.physics.ucsb.edu/best/, http://
funphysics.jp1.nasa.gOV/technical/ltcmp/best.html.

"
"26","640 Léimmerzahl et 211.

'~.

Wmddu .. - - Figure 15. Scanning electron micro-graphs of micro-
‘ . channel plates. Top: 1am diameter cylindrical pores.
_ ____ ,_..____ Bottom: 5am X 50am rectangular channels. In both
T- ' cases, the holes can have a length (in the direction
.....,-. _ perpendicular to the page) of 1 to 5 mm. These micro-
r'F—Jﬂ channel plates serve as the conﬁnement medium of
"" ___r __ liquid helium. The hole diameter and channel dimen-
Fﬂ—ﬂm sions can be varied from about 1am (as shown here)
L to about lOOMm.
10. MISTE: MICROGRAVITY SCALING THEORY EXPERIMENT

Scientiﬁc Objectives. The MISTE ﬂight experiment plans to measure a vari—
ety of thermodynamic quantities (isothermal susceptibility, heat capacity, and PVT
measurements) throughout the 3He liquid—gas critical region. The theoretically eX—
pected behavior for the isothermal susceptibility near a liquid—gas critical point is
given by [3 0]

X;=P3E|t|—V[1+Pf|t|e+...], tET/TC—l, (8)
where F; and PO— are the leading critical amplitudes measured along the critical
isochore above the transition and along the coexistence curve below the transition,
respectively. IT and F1— are amplitudes of the ﬁrst correction—to—scaling that apply
farther away from the transition. Renormalization group theory [31] predicts a
divergence of the isothermal susceptibility With a leading critical exponent y =
1.240 and a correction—to—scaling exponent A = 0.5 . The heat capacity at constant
volume follows a similar expression having a leading critical exponent 05 = 0.109
and different critical amplitudes.

For most ground—based measurements, a gravity—induced density stratiﬁca—
tion becomes important near the critical point because of the diverging isothermal
susceptibility. These gravity effects have precluded detailed experimental stud—
ies in the asymptotic region [32]. This is the motivation for performing critical

"
"27","Experiments in Fundamental Physics for the 188 641
point measurements in a space environment. These microgravity measurements,
performed along various paths (critical isochore, critical isotherm and coexistence
curve) can determine the leading critical amplitudes and universal exponents that
describe the way thermodynamic properties are predicted to diverge. These micro—
gravity results Will self—consistently test asymptotic equation—of—state predictions
for universal critical amplitude ratios and relations between critical exponents.
Furthermore, the results of these microgravity measurements in the “asymptotic”
region very close to the critical point can be used to test equation—of—state models
that also describe the “crossover region” farther away from the critical point. These
asymptotic and crossover models apply to all simple ﬂuids and ﬂuid mixtures and
their unambiguous validation (or modiﬁcation) Will provide a maj 0r advancement
in condensed matter physics and engineering.

Experimental Payload. The MISTE apparatus Will consist of a cylindrical
experimental cell, Fig. 16, positioned so that the residual gravitational ﬁeld Will
be pointing along the cell axis. A low temperature valve and sorption pump Will
be used to change the density in the cell in—situ. High precision measurements of
the sample temperature, pressure and density Will be made With sensors attached
directly to the cell. The cell Will be attached to a low temperature probe that is
part of the LOW Temperature Microgravity Physics Facility (LTMPF). This facility,
planned to be on the ISS, Will provide the cryogenic environment for the MISTE
experiment.

amnemn 'mm"" ~ .
'1 i '
l. 1..!!ﬁlr;' - .
E&ﬁ‘i caLuP ] ,I'l' .' ._
Leﬁﬂm '; «i .. 43:3;3
sum manure ”Hr“?- I I' I. "" i112“!-
mutnﬂrm t g m —— IEELLEIIIZrIEl~|r I 'f /
- - 7/
«mm - 3 3:1, '1! L — ,‘9 .. ..
«m H __ mm; ?_«9/.« ,5;
.1... . """"i‘“ Ir 4.1-2???)
”Eﬁmm” .. 1.; ..._ .mﬁ‘ *'
Figure 16. The left drawing is an exploded View of the MISTE cell. The cell Will have ~ 60(0.025 cm
thick) copper plates and spacers fused together to reduce the thermal equilibration time. There Will be
two sets of temperature, density, and pressure sensors attached to the cell. The right drawing shows
the cell and associated sub-systems attached to the LTMPF low temperature probe support structure.

"
"28","642 Léimmerzahl et a1.
_:- “—53-“
,9 m \ __
_ 13* .9551.
. ii :v‘""
”3.5. . .. E!
Figure 17. The left picture is a small, normally closed low temperature valve developed in collaboration
with Mission Research Corporation. The picture on the right is a miniature GdCl3 high-resolution
thermometer that was initially developed speciﬁcally for the MISTE experiment.

Mission Scenario. The MISTE experiment will require at least 4 months in a
microgravity environment. Before the ﬂight, the cell will be ﬁlled to the critical den—
sity. Initial heat capacity, susceptibility and P VT measurements will be performed
along the critical isochore and coexistence curve. Additional measurements will be
performed along several isochores above and below the critical isochore by adding
and removing mass from the cell. A guest experiment, Coexistence Boundary EX—
periment (COEX), will also perform drift heat capacity measurements to measure
the shape of the coexistence curve very close to the 3He liquid—gas critical point.

Technology. The need to change the cell density in—situ required the devel—
opment of a low temperature valve that can be actuated multiple times, Fig. 17.
Also, a sensitive I nK SQUID—based GdCl3 high—resolution thermometer was de—
veloped to operate in the temperature range near the 3He liquid—gas critical point
(TC 2 3.315K), see Fig. 17.

This research was carried out by the J et Propulsion Laboratory, California
Institute of Technology, under contract with the NASA.

Further Information. http://miste.jpl.nasa.g0V/, http://funphysics.jpl.nasa.
gOV/technical/ltcmp/miste.html.

11. DYNAMX: CRITICAL DYNAMICS IN MICROGRAVITY

Scientiﬁc Objectives. When pure liquid 4He is driven away from equilibrium
by a heat ﬂux Q through the liquid its superﬂuid phase transition evolves from a
simple critical point into a fascinating nonlinear region where all transport theories
based on linear response fail. Numerous theoretical analyses of this phase transition
driven far from equilibrium have resulted in predictions for many new phenomena,
including a quasi—scaling relation for thermal proﬁle within the helium’s critical
region [12], a thermal resistance within the superﬂuid helium which does not
exist in Earth—based laboratories [33], and a depression of the superﬂuid transition

"
"29","Experiments in Fundamental Physics for the ISS 643
M(QJ (theory) ‘
1000 x 1000

‘3 . ' q i

Q T ﬁ‘ N l' N R- "" 4:

a 100 1‘ 01]. 11K (LI ,eglon “ 1 00

“Ed (MQ) .\\ A ‘

O] Q \\\ A

o \\ A
10 Superﬂuid Phase \\\ Normal. Finid Phase 10
10-? 10*8 10-910-9 10-8 10-7
1“ T/T). T/Tx -~ 1

Figure 18. The nonlinear region near the superﬂuid transition in 4He under a heat ﬂux

Q. This simple static critical point at temperature T A opens into a fascinating nonlinear

region once the helium is subjected to a heat ﬂux. The experimental data that deﬁne this

nonlinear region may be found in [3 6].
temperature With Q [13]. Field theoretic renormalization group calculations have
predicted the thermal conductivity of helium in this nonlinear region as a function
oftemperature and heat ﬂux [12]. N0 hysteresis has been observed in the superﬂuid
transition under a heat ﬂux on Earth, however such hysteresis may occur on orbit
[14]. The superﬂuid/normal ﬂuid interface is predicted to be stable on orbit, but
only under a heat ﬂux [34]. The DYNAMX experiment Will explore these aspects of
the superﬂuid transition driven far from equilibrium in the weightless environment
on the ISS. A guest experiment, called CQ15, Will measure the enhancement of
the heat capacity of superﬂuid helium due to the heat ﬂux in the same apparatus.
This fascinating nonlinear region, With experimentally determined boundaries, is
displayed in Fig. 18. Ground measurements, made to conﬁrmed proper operation
of new technology for DYNAMX, have also discovered a very interesting new
self—organized heat transport state [35].

Experimental Payload. The DYNAMX payload consists of a cylindrical
helium sample cell that is designed to support a heat ﬂux Q along its axis. Three
high-resolution thermometers (HRTs) measure the temperature of the helium at
their respective positions along the cell’s length, With thin copper foils penetrating
the stainless steel sidewall 0f the cell around the cell’s circumference at each
measurement point. Stray heat sources are controlled at the level of a picowatt,
and the HRT resolution is demonstrated at 100 pKA/Hz With a drift rate of less
than 10 fK/s. Heat is extracted from the cell through a 2 kK/W thermal resistance
to a cooling stage that is regulated to Within 2 nK of its operating temperature. The
15 The PI of this experiment is D. Goodstein, Caltech.

"
"30","644 Léimmerzahl et a].
F:.‘_ '_ l.
#35 9:4 5r.
l
1.

Figure 19. The DYNAMX experimental payload, showing the full dewar insert on the left and the cell
assembly, with cooling stage and the attach point ﬂanges for the two radiation shields (removed) on
the right. This apparatus design includes 107 ﬂight certiﬁed component drawings, which are based on
laboratory veriﬁcation through detailed testing on four ﬂight prototypes.
inner radiation shield, Which surrounds the cell and cooling stage, is also used to
measure the speciﬁc heating from charged particles With a resolution of 0.1 pW/ g
to assist in the data analysis of all the LTMPF experiments, in an associated effort
called ‘Particle Heating Detector (PHD)’ (PI S.T.P. Boyd, UNM). The DYNAMX
experimental payload is displayed in Fig. 19.

Mission Scenario. Once stabilized 0n orbit DYNAMX Will establish a heat
ﬂux Q through the cell and achieve steady state conditions at 100 nK below T A,
and hence in the superﬂuid phase. Then an additional heat AQ = 0.02 - Q Will
be applied to the heated endplate 0f the cell With only Q being extracted from the
opposite end, causing the cell temperature to increase. A normal ﬂuid/ superﬂuid
interface Will eventually form at the heated endplate, and advance up the cell very
slowly, past each of the three sidewall thermometry probes. The thennal proﬁle
measured at each of the sidewall probes Will be used along With the interface
advance rate to detennine the thermal conductivity Within the nonlinear helium
behind the advancing interface. The spatial temperature proﬁle measured in this
nonlinear region at each Q over the entire range of Q(5 5 Q 5 200 nW/cmz) Will
be used to test for quasi—scaling, and the variation T C(Q) Will be compiled, Where
T C(Q) is the temperature Where the interface forms. A search for hysteresis Will be
performed by noting any difference in the temperature When the interface enters the
cell versus When it leaves. All measurements Will be made under saturated vapour
pressure by making these measurements With a trapped helium bubble in a separate
chamber outside the heat ﬂux Within the cell assembly. The CQ guest experiment
Will measure the heat capacity of the superﬂuid as a function of both temperature
and heat ﬂux, and use this information to determine if our thermodynamic models
of the superﬂuid are accurate in the critical region. The PHD data Will be used to
prepare a map of particle heating as a function of latitude, longitude, and altitude

"
"31","Experiments in Fundamental Physics for the ISS 645
throughout the mission, for use by all current and future investigators planning
exceptionally energy sensitive experiments for orbit.

Technology. A new class of paramagnetic susceptibility thermometers has
been developed that utilize a dilute concentration of manganese ions in palladium
as the thermometric element. These thermometers have achieved excellent resolu-
tion (100 pKA/Hz) and low drift (< 10 fK/s) with a fast time constant (15 ms), and
each thermometer’s mass is only 2.7 g. A new miniature cryogenic valve has been
developed that is superﬂuid leak tight with a mass of only 1.5 g. New cell technol-
ogy has been designed to provide uniform heat ﬂux across a 2.5 cm diameter cell
from a point-like heater on a 5 mm thick composite aluminium cell endcap. The
stainless steel cell wall is only 75 microns thick near where the copper sidewall
foils penetrate to achieve good thermal contact to the liquid helium within the cell,
and small corrections associated with the heat ﬂux perturbations at these sidewall
probes are well understood and minimized. Finally, new methods of thermal iso-
lation and control have been developed to obtain the DYNAMX science, and to
determine the level of charged particle heating throughout the mission.

Further Information. http://coffee.phys.unm.edu/dynamX/, http://
funphysics. jpl.nasa.gov/technical/ltcnip/dynanix.html
12. EXACT: EXPERIMENTS ALONG COEXISTENCE

NEAR CRITICALITY

Scientiﬁc Objectives. Over the last 25 years RG theory has been developed
to a point where it produces highly quantitative predictions of most facets of
critical phenomena. Many of these results are necessarily of an approximate nature,
but exact predictions are possible for systems of spatial dimension greater than
or equal to the marginal dimensionality of the universality class to which the
system belongs. One of the few classes of systems for which this actually occurs
in nature occurs are tricritical points. As a result, the associated critical exponents
are expected to be exact small integer fractions and the corrections to scaling are
predicted to take the form of logarithms. A tricritical point occurs when a line
of second order (continuous) transitions meets a ﬁrst order phase boundary. A
prototypical example is found in the phase diagram of liquid 3He-4He mixtures.
(see Fig. 20), where for temperatures above 0.867 K the transition between the
normal and superﬂuid phases is second order while below this temperature the
transition is ﬁrst order.

Experimentally, tricritical exponents have not been measured with particu-
larly high accuracy because of experimental complications caused by either im-
purities and strains in the sample (for solid systems), or gravitationally induced
inhomogeneities (in liquids). As a result, for a class of systems for which we have
the best theoretical predictions we lack corresponding precise experimental data.

"
"32","646 Léimmerzahl et a1.
2.0 ~ , $3M
' Mine
1.5
Tricritical
,—.. Point
35 .
P— 1.0 Superﬂuid .
0.5 3 i '-
ii Phase Separated - .
0.0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
X=N3/(N mm
Figure 20. The phase diagram of 3He-4He mixtures
in the concentration-temperature plane.
Operating in a microgravity environment can drastically reduce the effects of con-
centration inhomogeneities, opening up a much larger part of the phase diagram
for investigation. The objective of EXACT is to obtain a comprehensive set of
measurements of the second sound speed near the tricritical point, from Which
critical exponents for the superﬂuid density and the shape of the coexistence curve
can be obtained. In addition, from the damping of the second it is possible to obtain
information about tricritical dynamics.

Experimental Payload. The experimental cell consists of two 25 mm square
quartz plates spaced 200 ,um apart. As shown Fig. 21, each plate supports a heater
and superconducting transition edge bolometer for second sound measurements
and capacitor plates to determine the 3He concentration. By changing the tem-
perature of a second volume, connected to the cell Via a low temperature valve,
the mixture concentration can be changed. The cell, enclosed in a temperature
controlled shield stage is attached to a secondary cooler necessary to reach tem-
peratures well below the base temperature of the LTMPF dewar.

Mission Scenario. It is envisioned that EXACT Will operate in a microgravity
environment for a period of approximately 100 days during Which second sound
and phase separation measurements Will be made at 30 different concentrations,
covering 3 decades in reduced distance to the tricritical point and 4 decades in
reduced temperature With respect to the )t-line. In addition, at a few concentrations
second sound measurements Will be done to a reduced temperature of 10—6 to
investigate ﬁnite size effects.

Technology. Because EXACT Will operate at temperatures in the vicinity
of 0.9 K, well below the temperature of the cryogenic environment, a secondary

"
"33","Experiments in Fundamental Physics for the 188 647
l_' .
I; I 2' T.‘ :....._ . .. ‘1 ,f
'f r. main capacitnr
: IDC '

Figure 21. The inside of the experimental cell. The op-

posite plate has a similar layout. The main capacitor

plates are used to determine the over all concentration,

the interdigital capacitors (IDC) are sensitive to nucle-

ation of the phase separation at the boundaries.
cooler, a charcoal pumped 3He evaporator, is required. A normally closed super—
ﬂuid tight valve has been developed to separate the experimental cell from the
mixture reservoir. SQUID based High Resolution Thermometry (HRT) technol—
ogy has been adapted for our temperature range near 0.9K using PdMn as the
magnetic medium.

Further Information. http://funphysics.jpl.nasa.gOV/technical/ltcmp/exact.
html
13. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
In this review we have discussed all of the experiments Which are sched—

uled, or under development, for being performed aboard the 188. Each of these
projects beneﬁts in an essential way from the temporal extension of micrograv—
ity conditions that is to be found on the 188, from its large velocity variations,
and locally from the extreme thinness of the Earth’s atmosphere. None of these
Fundamental Physics experiments could be made to work upon the Earth’s sur—
face. We have therefore highlighted the fact that there is a great potential for
carrying out Fundamental Physics experiments on the 188. Indeed, there are many
more current ideas concerning how the 188 may be used for Fundamental physics
experiments, as can be seen from articles elsewhere in this issue. For example,
the gravity—free environment may help in the search for tiny non—Newtonian

"
"34","648 Léimmerzahl et a1.
forces, or be instrumental in improving the accuracy of atomic interferometry
experiments.

However, it must be acknowledged also that for some experiments the condi-
tions onboard the 188 are not ideal. In these cases a ‘drag-free’ ﬂyer which houses
the experiments, and which still has to be developed, may prove to be the solution.
Such a new physics—facility for the 188 would create the ideal combination of a
true microgravity environment without disturbances (residual accelerations, for
example) and access to the experimental setup for the purposes of adjustment or
control — or for post-mission analyses.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to acknowledge the following ﬁnancial support: G.A., N.A.,
M.B., R.D., J.L., and NM. from the NASA Ofﬁce of Biological and Physical
Research; P.L.B. from the AUGER theory and membership grant 05 CUlERA/3
through DESY/BMBF (Germany); KG. from the NASA Microgravity program
and Penn State University; V.D., H.D., and CL. from the German Space Agency
DLR and the European Space Agency ESA; N.A.L. from ESA; C.S. from the
French Space Agency CNES and from ESA.

REFERENCES

[l] Giulini, D., Kiefer, C., and Lammerzahl, C. (Eds.) (2003). Quantum Gravily—From T heory lo
Experimental Search, Springer Lecture Notes in Physics 631, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

[2] Lammerzahl, C., and Dittus, H. (2002). Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 11, 95.

[3] Amelino-Camelia, G. (2004). Gen. Rel. Grav. 36, 539.

[4] Wilson, K. G., and Kogut, J. (1974). Phys. Rep. C 12, 76; Fisher, M. E. (1974). Rev. Mod. Phys.
46, 597.

[5] Will, C. M. (1993). T heory and Experiment in Gravitational Physics, Revised Edition, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

[6] Damour, T. (2000). In Gravitational Waves and Experimental Gravity, J. Tran Tanh Van, J.
Dumarchez, S. Reynaud, C. Salomon, S. Thorsett, and J. Y. Vinet (Eds.), World Publishers,
Hanoi, Vietnam.

[7] Privman, V., Aharony, A., and Hohenberg, P. C. (1991). In Phase Transitions and Critical
Phenomena, Vol. 14, C. Domb, and J. L. Lebowitz (Eds.), Academic Press, New York, p. 1.

[8] Privman, V. (Ed.) (1990). Finite Size Scaling and Numerical Simulations in Statistical Systems,
World Scientiﬁc, Singapore.

[9] Dohm, V., and Chen, X. S. (in press). J. Low Temp. Phys.; Dohm, V. (1993). Phys. Scrz'pla T 49,
46.

[10] Gasparini, F. M., Kimball, M. 0., and Moonay, K. P. (2001). J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 13, 4871.

[l 1] Murphy, D., Genio, E., Ahlers, G., Liu, F., and Liu, Y. (2003). Phys. Rev. L611. 90, 025301.

[12] Haussmann, R., and Dohm, V. (1991). Phys. Rev. L611. 67, 3404; Haussmann, R., and Dohm, V.
(1992). Z. Phys. B 87, 229.

[13] Haussmann, R., and Dohm, V. (1992). Phys. Rev. B 46, 6361; Dohm, V., and Haussmann, R.
(1994). Physica B 197, 215.

"
"35","Experiments in Fundamental Physics for the ISS 649

[14] Liu, F. C., and Ahlers, G. (1994). Physica (Amsterdam) 194B—196B, 597; Onuki, A. (1983).
J. Low Temp. Phys. 50, 433.

[15] Mansouri, R., and SeX1,R. U. (1977). Gen. Rel. Grav. 8, 497.

[16] Lamoreaux, S. K., Jacobs, J . P., Heckel, B. R., Raab, F. J ., and Fortson, E. N. (1986). Phys. Rev.
Lett. 57, 3125—3128.

[17] Mﬁller, H., Herrmann, S., Braxmaier, C., Schiller, S., and Peters, A. (2003). Phys. Rev. Lett. 91,
020401.

[18] Wolf, P., Bize, S., Clairon, A., Luiten, A. L., Santarelli, G., and Tobar, M. E. (2003). Phys. Rev.
Lett. 90, 1060402.

[19] Kostelecky, V. A., and Mewes, M. (2002). Phys. Rev. D 66, 0056005.

[20] Turneaure, J . P., Will, C. M., Farrel, B. F., Mattison, E. M., and Vessot, R. F. C. (1983). Phys.
Rev. D 27, 1705.

[21] Salomon, C., Dimarcq, N., Abgrall, M., Clairon, A., Laurent, P., Lemonde, P., Santarelli, G.,
Uhrich, P., Bernier, L. G., Busca, G., J ornod, A., Thomann, P., Samain, E., Wold, P., Gonzalez, F.,
Guillemot, Ph., Leon, S., Nouel, F., Sirmain, Ch., and Feltham, S. (2001). C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris
2(Série 4), 1313.

[22] Bauch, A., and Weyers, S. (2002). Phys. Rev. D 65, 081101(R).

[23] Gibble, K., and Chu, S. (1993). Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1771.

[24] Fertig, C., and Gibble, K. (2000). Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1622.

[25] Sortais, Y., Bize, S., Nicolas, C., Clairon, A., Salomon, C., and Williams, C. (2000). Phys. Rev.
Lett. 85, 3117.

[26] Legere, R., and Gibble, K. (1998). Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5780.

[27] Bhattacharj 66, P., and Sigl, G. (2000). Phys. Rep. 327, 109; Biermann, P. L., and Medina-Tanco, G.
(in press). (astro-ph/0301299); Biermann, P. L., and Sigl, G. (2001). In Physics and Astrophysics
0f Ultra-Hz'gh-Energy Cosmic Rays, Lecture Notes in Physics 576, M. Lemoine, and G. Sigl
(Eds), Springer-Verlag, Berlin. p. 1; Halzen, F. (2002). Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 17, 3432; Nagano,
M., and Watson, A. A. (2000). Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 689.

[28] Amelino-Camelia, G., and Piran, T. (2003). Phys. Rev. D 64, 036005.

[29] Graywall, D. S., and Ahlers, G. (1973). Phys. Rev. A 7, 2145.

[30] Wegner, F. (1972). Phys. Rev. B 5, 4529.

[31] Guida, R., and Zinn-Justin, J. (1998). J. Phys. A 31, 8103.

[32] Zhong, F., Barmatz, M., and Hahn, I. (2003). Phys. Rev. E 67, 021106.

[33] Haussmann, R. (1999). J. Low Temp. Phys. 114, 1.

[34] Weichman, P., Prasad, A., Mukhopadhyay, R., and Miller, J . (1998). Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 4923.

[35] Moeur, W. A., Day, P. K., Liu, F. C., Boyd, S. T. P., Adriaans, M. J ., and Duncan, R. V. (1997).
Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 2421.

[36] Day, P., Moeur, W., McCready, S., Sergatskov, D., and Duncan, R. (1998). Phys. Rev. Lett. 81,
2474.

"
