"","x"
"1","54th International Astronautical Congress of the International Astronautical Federation, |AC-03-TH301
the International Academy of Astronautics, and the International Institute of Space Law
29 September - 3 October 2003, Bremen, Germany
THE FLIGHT EXPERIMENT ANITA —
A HIGH PERFORMANCE AIR ANALYSER FOR MANNED SPACE CABINS
T. Stufﬂer (1), H. Mosebach (1), D. Kampf (1), A. Honne (2), G. Tan“)
(1) Kayser—Threde GmbH, Wolfratshauser Str. 48, 813 79 Munich, Germany
Email: timo.stufﬂer@kayser-threde.de
(2) SINTEF Electronics and Cybernetics, P. O. Box 124, Blindem, N-0314 Oslo, Norway
Email: Atle.H0nne@Sintefn0
(3) ESTEC, Keplerlaan I, 2200 AG Noordwijk, T he Netherlands
Email: Gijsbert. T an@esa. im‘
ABSTRACT
free detection of gas molecular Vibration and rotation
ANITA (Analysing Interferometer for Ambient Air) is transitions. Although each gas compound to be
a ﬂight experiment as precursor for a permanent measured has its unique IR spectral signature, spectral
continuous trace gas monitoring system on the overlapping between numerous compounds combined
International Space Station (188). With measurement noise, n0n-1inear effects, and
instrument imperfections makes the data evaluation
For over 10 years, under various ESA contracts the extremely difﬁcult. Therefore, specially developed
ﬂight experiment was deﬁned, designed, breadboarded sophisticated system calibration and analysis methods
and set up. For the safety of the crew, ANITA can are applied. However, once calibrated, the analysis
detect and quantify quasi 0n—1ine and simultaneously procedure is very simple, only requiring very short
32 trace gases With ppm or sub-ppm detection limits. computing time. During the last decade sufﬁcient
The self—standing measurement system is based on experience has been acquired for a very stable HW set-
FTIR (Fourier Transform Interferometer/-Inetry) up and the development of a corresponding unique
technology. The system represents a versatile air analysis SW allowing gas detection With 10W detection
monitor allowing for the ﬁrst time the detection and limits in strongly varying gas matrices [7], [8].
monitoring of trace gas dynamics of a spacecraft
atmosphere. This paper gives a glance at developments for the HW
and analysis SW, discussions on the ANITA mission,
It is envisaged to accommodate ANITA in a Destiny and the outlook towards a design for a continuous
(US LAB) Express Rack 0n the 188. The transportation second generation ISS air monitor.
to the 188 is under discussion. The Options are either
the Space Shuttle or the Automated Transfer Vehicle ANIT A MISSION
(ATV). —
ANITA on 188 Will be installed in a Destiny Express
—INTRODUCTION Rack. The baselined Operation of ANITA is 10 days.
. . . . . . However, the ANITA residence time on 188 may be as
The air quality conditions in manned space cabins . . .
. long as 6 months. For a nominally operating ﬂight
atmosphere have to be monitored regularly. The . . . .
. . experiment, extended Operation is offered as an Option.
European TGM (Trace Gas Monitoring) programme . .
. . . The ANITA des1gn and Operations have been
was therefore initiated more than ten years ago. . . . . . .
. . . . . speeiﬂcally rev1ewed m1nnn1s1ng the necessary crew
Starting With a market survey study and BB act1V1t1es . .
. . time. Thus, the normal gas sampling mode as well as
on optimized FTIR systems, [1] - [5], the TGM system
. . . . . . . . IR measurement, gas analyses, and data transfer are
has de01s1ve1y proven its capabilities in a blind sample f 11 automated
testing for NASA [4, 6]. u y '
The measurement principle is based on IR (infrared) ANITA cons1sts of two standard locker 1nseits. Bes1de
. . . . shuttle transportation to 188, also the ﬁrst ﬂight of the
absorption spectroscopy, With sens1t1ve and contact-
Copyright © 2003 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.

"
"2","European developed Automated Transfer Vehicle An FTIR system, like the one presented, represents an
(ATV) can be used as transportation, the latter being advanced, reliable optical measurement system
ESA’s preferred solution. showing the following advantages:
ANITA is considered as a precursor for a TGM system 0 high optical resolution (measurement speciﬁcity,
for permanent use on 188. The lessons learned from the resolved/reduced interference, improved response
ﬂight Will therefore provide the inputs for the linearity)
deﬁnition 0f SUCh a future system. 0 well deﬁned, linear and stable wavenumber scale
0 high optical efﬁciency (good SNR for short
Measurement PrinCi 16 0f ANITA measurement time)
The measurement principle of ANITA relies on the Hardware Description
detection of gas speciﬁc absorption features in the
-1 -1 . . . .
Infrared (600 cm — 5000 cm )- 111 general, most gases Fig. 1, 2 and 3 depict the ANITA ﬂight experiment.
ShOW SpCCiﬁC rotatiOH/Vibration tranSitionS in thlS The System Consists of two mid-deck locker inserts
spectral area. With connections on the panel’s front side and a laptop
for the experiment control. Additional storage space for
The features Of thC transition in combination Wlth thCiI‘ air Sample bags and a pump is required allowing
spectral location allow for the gas identiﬁcation. The measurements With remote air Samples from other 188
strength of absorption for the speciﬁc transition is modules.
directly coupled to the gas concentration Via the
Lambert-Beer law (1):
~ _ ~ —a(z7)z
I(V)—IO(V)6 C (1) ~-. i.
‘ /;)\ “R ‘ ; 4 m}. s . \3‘\
With: I : detected intensity , g’ ‘8 ?*Zg-gr’ ‘
-‘ ‘ "" ’: 7 ‘13""qu '
IO : original intensity ,1 f_ ‘3'"" ﬁg) 2/ J f
oc : absorption coefﬁ01ent 3“ ""1; 4y""
V : wavenumber . Q, .
1 : th len th 1'2” ‘ 1
c : gas concentration K“
%
Applying optical methods for the determination of Fig.1ANITA electronics and pumping
cabin air composition, the following advantages can be system (cover removed)
highlighted:
0 fast system response allowing quasi on-line multi- ' ‘
component measurements ' ‘ ;_
o non-destructive measurement principle; the air ._ :i-E: -’ J ?V\
sample composition remains the same before and i‘.‘ ‘1': ,1
after the measurements \. [57’ .- b, ~‘ NV"", / «s p ’é -
- - \.\_\( ‘f/ ‘\4 ‘I‘ 1‘ x_lt’i'. .~
o no sensor p01son1ng; V V‘ 9/) A: ‘55???"" i ,
0 high system stability through automatic feedback 5' ,fﬁh. Q «sf T&fgz
and compensation mechanisms //¢(v ‘./,gi/: A;. ..
0 n0 resource consumption except power ‘ i. “N '7 '7 I /
'(\\-""b “V7. ,
The system does not include a pre-processor for gas ”.«7 i .' ""
concentration or gas separation. Therefore, special ”,s/ '
effects like interferences 0f the gas absorption, non- '\
linearity etc. must be covered and considered in the
evaluation process of the measurement data. F ig. 2 ANIT A FTIR m easu r e m e nt u nit
(cover removed)

"
"3","t 7 ' 1/ ‘3'?» *«g m; Gas analyses for ANITA
’ In order to solve all crucial problems of multi-gas
‘ . . ‘ ' , calibration, novel analysis SW had to be developed in
I____ ‘2}; \ and in parallel to the TGM programme [l]—[5]. The
(3 :4,” j; ‘ {‘3‘ process of 1mprov1ng and opt1n11s1ng the analyses is
1 ‘5 . g (x?! 3% ' - stillong01ng[7], [8].
7 ,1 =\ *5), 3' g S. ;: _. Essential features of the method of calibration include:
‘ ‘ t-‘-‘\. K; ”WK 0 Synthetic calibiatlon exp101t1ng the advantages of
. \ ,3; ﬂ"" . L the FTIR technlque
_ ‘\\t;._,_.,::'v‘ ‘ ‘ 0 Control of optical spectral interference
’ ‘ ,y“ \‘V 2002/12/ 4 -
~\ 1/ / A_ _ (the main problem)
0 Baseline drift compensation (solves a maj or
Fig. 3 ANITA measurement units problem)
0 Optimal noise handling utilising information from
An important parameter to be optimized for a future numerous spectral data points
measurement system is besides mass and power the 0 Control of possible optical saturation effects
volume. A preliminary design study demonstrated that (too high spectral absorption)
the FTIR system would ﬁt in one locker or could even 0 Simple, fast, and fully automatic runtime
be designed smaller. calculations
0 Easy adaptations by recalibration, even after
ANITA’S HW performance in terms Of stability and deployment in space (without astronaut
reliability has been considerable improved compared to involvement)
the same commercially available system (reported
e.g. in [7])- The HW and SW dedicated for data These essential features are achieved through a
transfer to match the Express Rack control interfaces calibration modelling process that includes extensive
are implemented. Fig. 4 ShOWS an artists View 011 simulations of measurement IR spectra, pre-processing
ANITA accommodated in an Express Rack. of the simulated spectra, and multivariate statistical
analyses applying PLS (Partial Least Squares).
One of the advantages of ANITA is the high time
resolution. Within 3-4 minutes, a full set of
nieasurenient data is available, .which means The rather large set of examples (at leastn1any hundred
infonnation about the gas. concentrations on the 32 spectra) that is necessary for multi-gas calibration, can
most important trace gases 1h the cabin 31h for practical and economical reasons only be produced
through simulations. The simulations apply properly
ﬁtmm prepared reference spectra for the pure compounds,
! . . ‘ 33.. 3-,;23 PGSC These are combined to represent different gas mixtures,
‘ ,1 . 4/ and by imposing all important instrument measurement
‘ , ’ W” effects realistic IR spectra are produced. Thus the
Lg J . . . . . . .
a l J» N ‘ / ;~""E$-""‘ ?;alitly of the initrunienit :ahbration relies heaV1ly on
.r‘ .- ~ eaeuac o es1n1ualons.
' . 1 I i i/ Insert1 q y
""“t ii . .' "" L Insert 2 Even though a PLS system can handle noise
_ . ti; ‘ i (measurement noise and other kinds of disturbances) in
l "" ‘ 3t . »._ an excellent way, the modelling is hampered or
m “m... possibly impaired by any unnecessary noise. Therefore,
m “b“ 333» the pre-processing step enhances the PLS modelling by
?;?W selecting spectral areas and by excluding data points
With unwanted properties like possibly too high
absorbance (optical saturation) or excessive non-
Fig. 4 ANITA ﬂight experiment accommodated in an linearity.
Express Rack (With courtesy of NASA J SC)

"
"4","In addition to the essential features mentioned above, The simplest type of out-Of-range situations is that at
some additional features that Will be included in the least one gas in the gas list exceeds its upper
ANITA calibration are: concentration limit in the deﬁned measurement task.
This is detectable through simple comparison of
0 Special handling of non-linear spectral effects concentration values. This usually implies n0 disaster,
. Improved handling ofnon-linear spectral since theory as well as experience shows that the
interference measurement performance shows a graceful
. Automatic correction for n0n-linear gas degradation if the situation is Changed beyond the
response deﬁned task in this way. Therefore, the gas
. Outlier detection measurements Will still be useful, but they may be of
reduced quality. In advantageous situations, the
An important non-linear spectral effect is the measurement performance may not be signiﬁcantly
resolution—indueed non-linear response. Such non- reduced for concentrations out Of range by a factor. of
linearity occurs for narrow spectral lines that are not two or even more. However, from some concentratlon
fully resolved by the FTIR instrument. Such narrow level onwards, the increased effects from statistical
spectral lines are abundant in the IR spectrum, n01se and from p0ss1ble saturat10n problems er non-
especially from the omnipresent background gases llnear 1nﬂuenees Wlll lead to decreased preeis10n and
water vapour, carbon dioxide, and methane. accuracy.
Non-linearities make it considerably worse to handle _ _ _ _ _
spectral interference properly. Improved handling is A more severe type ef outlier s1tuat10n implies the
ensured through including the n0n-linear effects in the appearance Of an additional, unknown .gas. Th1S gas
simulations in the calibration modelling process. The cannot be measured applylng the eX1st1ng eahbratlon
simulations are based on the n0n-linear effects actually models. Also: the measurement 0f the other gases may
observed on the FTIR instrument through application be disturbed through spectral interference. It 1s
of multiple reference spectra measured at different gas therefore 1mp0trtant that the occurrence 0f any
concentrations for each gas that gives n0n-linear hhkhOWh gas 15 detected by the outlier detection
response. Although this approach looks simple, it is an system, leading to a proper eutlier warning. Several
amazingly complex task to combine the simulations detectlon methods are p0ss1ble, but the loglcally
properly With the statistical analyses and model s1mplest way is to Check Whether all features in the
construction in the calibration modelling process. measured IR spectrum can be accounted for by the
estimated gas concentrations. Also, if the measurement
The automatic correction for n0n-linear gas response is O_f another compound 1s disturbectl t0 glye a
a much more straight-forward procedure, Which is also s1gn1ﬁeantlytnetgat1ye concentration estimate, this is a
based on the same set of multiple reference spectra for good outller 1ndleat10n.
each gas With n0n-linear response.
If an unknown gas has sufﬁcient spectral absorption, it
All measurement systems are designed and calibrated may be. detected, 1dent1ﬁed, and roughly quantlﬁetl.
for explicitly or implicitly deﬁned variations in The calibration .models may be extended to cover this
measurement situations and environmental impacts. If gas as well. Us1ng the heW models, all the gases may
the foreseen variations are exceeded, 0r malfunctioning then be properly quantiﬁed.
0f the measurement system occurs, we denote it an
outlier situation.
The basis for the calibration work is the foreseen gas
environment, i.e. the list of gases to be covered and
Since the gas mixtures that may occur in a spacecraft their possible concentrations. The .gas list for ANITA
can never be fully predicted, it is important how a eontains 32 compounds, as shown in Table 1. This gas
system for gas measurement behaves When exposed to that has been complled to cover the foreseen gas
gas mixtures that are not Within the deﬁned seenaiios Of the .upcemlng ﬂight. The bas1s for
measurement task. Such situations must ﬁrst be compiling the gaslist1s1nf0rmat10n from NASA on all
detected by an outlier detection system. Then proper relevant gas measurements (from 188 and Shuttle,
warnings must be given, if possible including advice mostly p0st-m1ss10n sample analyses) and on other
on to What extent each of the estimated gas knowledge or assumptions on gases that may occur.
concentrations can be trusted.

"
"5","-—- detailed knowledge of the instrument performance.
NO- Compound SUbStance* Also, most of the reference spectra Will be measured on
the ﬂight HW, since an 0n-gr0und tWin system Will not
be built in this projectphase.
alCOhOI) The ANITA system Will have one set of robust
calibration models for general use. However, the
5 f0r1na1dehyde(1nethanal)) ald. analysis techniques allow for improved sensitivity
_— through local calibration models. Each local model or
set of local models is tailored to a more restricted
propylaldehyde) (CH3CH2CHO) “local” gas scenario, Which leads to an easier
_- measurement situation. Typically, local gas scenarios
(CH3(CH2)2CHO) Will lead to less saturation and interference problems,
9 t01uene(methy1benzene) arom. Which allow the calibration models to utilise the
spectral information more efﬁciently. Local models,
like any recalibration, can be developed and added at
any time and Without any HW changes, even after
launch or after the entire mission (to analyse stored
measurement spectia). Also, the improved sens1t1V1ty
15 n-butyl acetate (CH3COO(CH2)3CH3, ester for eas1er gas eond1t10ns can he achieved Without any
_- loss in robustness towards difﬁcult eond1t10ns. This
may seem toe good to he true, but runnlng the
generally appheable calibration models for the full gas
scenario ﬁrst to cheek Whether the local models are
, appheable can ensure it.
Owing to the obvious advantages, some preparations
for local models are made. It is expected that the
(C3F8) ANITA programme Will be extended to include at least
. some local modelling to enhance the gas sens1t1V1ty
(CH3COCH3)
24 2-butanone Ineth leth lketone ket.
_- W
25 hexainethyl cyclo-trisiloxane sil.
_- The air analyzing ﬂight experiment ANITA has been
26 octamethyl cyclo-tetrasiloxane siL developed dedicated to advanced air monitoring on
_- ISS. ANITA runs in a full automatic mode
continuously analysing the cabin air conditions tracing
([(CH3)ZSiO]5 in Si-0 ring) on 32 lead substances in parallel. After ﬁnalisation of
the calibration activities in the second quarter of 2004,
delivery to the launch pad is envisaged.
An ANITA derivative for a future permanent system
on 188 Optimised for power, mass and volume is being
studied.
* Abbreviations: ale. = alcohol, ald. = aldehyde,
33:3: higiszzﬁsohzdgssii‘2a23$313533? —ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
misc. = miscellaneous, back. = background gas
(always pr€S€n0 The described work is executed under ESA contract
Table 1. The gas list for the ANITA calibration number ESTEC/ 15 743/01/NL/J SS'ANITA'
The methods and procedures for the system calibration w
can be applied to any well-designed FTIR instrument.
However, for optimal performance, important [1] Breadboarding of an F TIR Spectrometer far Air
parameter settings and input data in the calibration Monitoring in manned Spacecraft; H' Bittner,
modelling should be tailored to the given instrument. 1""R' Johansen, A' Honne, G' Tan; ICES 1996;
The calibration modelling itself Will be based 011 Monterey

"
"6","[2] Progress in an F TIR-based Multi-Component SW: Software
Monitoring System for Spacecraft Air Analysis; T.
Stufﬂer, A. Honne, I.-R. Johansen, H. Able, G. Tan; TGM: Trace Gas Monitoring
ICES 1999; Denver

[3] Current Status of the ESA FTIR-based Multi-
Componem‘ Monitoring System for Spacecraft Air
Analysis; A. Honne, I.-R. Johansen, T. Stufﬂer;
H. Mosebach, D. Kampf, H. Abele, G. Tan, ICES
2000; Toulouse

[4] Blind testperformance offhe ESA F T IR-based
Component Monitoring System for Spacecraft Cabin
Design; A. Honne, I.-R. Johansen, G. Tan, T. Stufﬂer;
ICES 2001, Orlando

[5] AN] T A .' An F T [R Spectrometer F light Experiment
for Space Craft Cabin Air Analysis; T. Stufﬂer,

D. Kampf, H. Mosebach, H. Honne, Gijsbert Tan;
ICES 2001, Orlando

[6] A Process to Evaluate Advanced T echnologies for
Future NASA needs; T. Limero, J.T: James; ICES
2001; Orlando

[7] Status Report on ANITA, an FTIR Spectrometer
Flight Experiment for Manned Space Cabin Air
Analysis; T. Stufﬂer, D. Kampf, H. Mosebach,
M. Glier, A. Honne, Gijsbert Tan; ICES 2002,
San Antonio

[8] ANITA — The Optimised Spacecraft Cabin Air
Monitor on it’s Way to Orbit; T. Stufﬂer, D. Kampf,
H. Mosebach, M. Glier, A. Honne, Gij sbert Tan

ICES 2003, Vancouver

DEFINITIONS= ACRONYMS= ABBREVIATIONS
ANITA: Analysing Interferometer for Ambient Air
ATV: Automated Transfer Vehicle

ESA: European Space Agency

FTIR: Fourier Transform Interferometer/—metry

HW: Hardware

188: International Space Station

PLS: Partial Least Squares (family of multivariate

statistical methods/tools)
SNR: Signal to Noise Ratio

"
