"","x"
"1","2009-01-2520
Evaluation of ANITA Air Monitoring on the International Space Station
A. Honne, H. Schumann-Olsen and K. Kaspersen
SINTEF
T. Limero and A. Macatangay
Wyle Laboratories Inc
H. Mosebach and D. Kampf
Kayser-Threde GmbH
P. D. Mudgett and J. T. James
NASA-Johnson Space Center
G. Tan and W. Supper
ESTEC
Copyright © 2009 SAE International
ABSTRACT systems. Comparison with other reaI-time instruments
aboard ISS included the Volatile Organic Analyzer
ANITA (Analysing Interferometer for Ambient Air) is a (VOA), the Compound SPGCifiC Analyzer — Combustion
flight experiment precursor for a permanent continuous PFOdUCtS (CSA'CP), the Carbon Dioxide MOHitOF (CDM),
air quality monitoring system on the ISS (International and the MajorConstituentAnalyzer(MCA).
Space Station).
INTRODUCTION
For the safety of the crew, ANITA can detect and
quantify quasi-online and simultaneously 33 gas ANITA represents the current status of the European
compounds in the air with ppm or sub-ppm detection Space Agency ESA’s long term technology development
limits. The autonomous measurement system is based programme for continuous monitoring of the atmosphere
on FTIR (Fourier Transform Infra-Red spectroscopy). quality in crewed spacecraft [1-9, 11, 13-22]. At an early
The system represents a versatile air quality monitor, stage, the FTIR technology combined with sophisticated
allowing for the first time the detection and monitoring of multivariate statistical data analyses was selected as the
trace gas dynamics, with high time resolution, in a most promising solution. Based on various study and
spacecraftatmosphere. breadboard activities, supported by a very successful
blind sample testing for NASA [10, 12], it was concluded
ANITA operated on the ISS from September 2007 to that the requirements for on-Iine multi-gas air analyses
August 2008. This paper summarises the results of are best fulfilled by this combination of techniques.
ANITA’s air analyses and compares results to other
measurements acquired on ISS during the operational The launch of ANITA to the ISS was performed in August
period. The main basis of comparison is NASA’s set of 2007 by the Space Shuttle Endeavour flight STS-118.
grab samples taken onboard the ISS and analysed on ANITA was set up in an EXPRESS rack in the US
ground applying various GC-based (Gas module Destiny aiming for six months of operation, and
Chromatography) and GC/MS (Mass Spectrometry) the system start-up took place in September. Thanks to
SAE Int. J. ofAerosp. | V01ume4 | Issuel 451

"
"2","ANITA’s successful operation on the ISS, giving new and sets in an optimal way. For ANITA, IR spectra for known

very valuable information on the gas status and air gas mixtures constitute the examples, and PLS is

dynamics in the spacecraft air, the operation was applied to find the best utilisation of information through

prolonged until August 2008. Then, further operation was avoiding spectral interference and handling statistical

no longer possible, because of a Iong-planned relocation noise optimally. The applied tool is denoted PLS1, which

of the payload rack infrastructure on the ISS. produces a separate calibration model for the
concentration of each gas compound, taking into

The ANITA mission itself was an ESA-NASA cooperative account the possible influence from all other effects that

project. ESA was responsible for the provision of the are represented in the examples. Although PLS is very

HW, the data acquisition and data evaluation. NASA’s effective optimising the extraction of information, it is

responsibilities were launch, accommodation in the US very advantageous to perform data pre-processing in

module Destiny, operation, and data download. order to apply any pre-knowledge of where in the
spectrum useful information can occur.

ANITA’s standard, fully automatic mode of operation

applies direct air sampling in front of the system. Asufficiently large example set of IR spectra (hundreds)

Whenever wanted during the mission, air samples for for very accurately known rea| gas mixtures can hardly

automatic analyses could be taken from any human- be produced. The examples must be constructed

accessible position in the ISS or any connected through simulations. Therefore we must be able to

spacecraft and fed to ANITA, using gas bags and a hand describe and simulate the instrument behaviour, applying

pump. However, owing to the experimental character of proper reference IR spectra for all gases involved, the

this ANITA mission, no on-Iine measurement results ideal instrument response, as well as all foreseeable

were visible to the ISS crew. varieties of non-ideal behaviour.

The current ANITA calibration prepared it to detect and In summary, the calibration of ANITA was performed

quantify, quasi-online and simultaneously, 33 gas through four main steps [22]:

compounds in the air down to lower sub-ppm detection

limits. In addition the system has automatic warning 1. Simulations of measurementIR spectra

capabilities covering possible malfunctions, unexpected 2. Pre-processing of the simulated measurement IR

gases, and gas concentrations above preset limits. spectra

Immediately after the system start-up on the ISS, it was 3. Statistical analyses applying PLS

demonstrated how ANITA could be used to detect and 4. Corrections for non-Iinear characteristics

quantify an unexpected gas in the ISS air, and how the

system calibration could be updated from ground [22]. As a result of this method of calibration, the general
features of the resulting calibration include:

ANITA’S MISSION ON THE ISS
. Control of optical spectral interference

ANITA CALIBRATION FOR THE ISS (cross-sensitivity between gases, the main problem)
. Baseline drift compensation

Before the ANITA mission, the system was calibrated for (solves a major problem, since the “true” baseline

the expected worst case gas scenario on the ISS [18]. cannot be observed or synthesised)

The gas scenario is defined through a list of all gas . Optimal noise handling utilising information from

compounds, plus their individual upper limit of numerous spectral data points

concentration variations, that are expected or suspected . Control of possible optical saturation effects

to occur at significant concentration in the cabin air. A (too high spectral absorption)

significant concentration means that the IR absorption of . Simple, fast, and fully automatic runtime calculations

the gas may be large enough to allow detection 01‘ that (all complexity is handled in the calibration process)

gas or large enough to inflict disturbances 0“ the . Semi-permanent calibration: No recalibration is

measurement 0t other gases through spectral necessary unless the gas scenario or the instrument

interference (cross-sensitivity), unless it is prepared for changes beyond the specifications

through the calibration process. . Easy adaptation to new measurement situations

through recalibration, even after deployment in

The occurrence of an unexpected gas, Le. a gas not in space (without astronaut involvement)

the gas “St, may introduce interference 0“ the . A|| complexity is handled in the calibration process.

measurement 0t other gases through spectral The runtime calculations are simple and veryfast.

overlapping that has not been accounted for in the

calibration process. The potential for a semi-permanent calibration relies on
the inherent optical compensation for intensity changes

A Central tOOI Of the Calibration modelling iS PLS (Partial (aging or contamination of |R source, optics, 0r detector)

Least Squares). It is a family 0t multivariate statistical and the excellent FTIR wavenumber stability achieved

mathOdS [23], Wthh makes It pOSSible to learn from through the buiIt-in |aser reference_

examples how information can be extracted from data

452 SAE Int. J. of Aerosp. |V01ume4 | Issuel

"
"3","In addition to these general features, ANITA’s calibration is specified in the text of each graph below. This
includes other mechanisms [17] like special handling of treatment is quite different for the different gases, trying
non-Iinear spectral interference, automatic correction for to preserve potentially valuable information on the fastest
non-Iinear gas response, outlier detection, and local significant variations that can be extracted out of the
calibration models for even better sensitivity. noisy primary gas estimates.
ANITA OPERATION ON THE ISS ""Sitting"" of the spectra implies removal of all spectra

falling below a pre-set quality limit for each of a number
After the system set-up on the ISS, the FTIR moving of parameters derived from each spectrum. This
mirror could not be started [21]. Here, repeated power standard sifting removes the 34.6 °/o poorest spectra out
cycling led to a warming up and finally to the successful of the initial 6398 spectra downlinked from the ISS.
start of the system. After this, ANITA produced
measurement data most of the time. However, problems In order to improve potential outliers in the gas
mainly with the ISS laptop PC dedicated to ANITA led to estimates, most gases have been filtered with a sliding
periods of missing data, which are referred to as “data 5-point median filter, ignoring missing data points.
gaps” below.

For time domain averaging filters, we have applied
From the very first measurement on the ISS, ANITA Gaussian filters of different widths, taking missing data
gave outlier warnings, indicating that something was out points into account (i.e. preserving the correct time scale
of specification. ANITA’s outlier analysis features in the filtering). The FWHM (Full Width at Half Maximum)
revealed that the problem was an unexpected gas that for each filter is given for each graph.
could be identified as sulphur hexafluoride (SF6). This
situation was resolved through recalibration from ground The significance of gas concentration curves after
[22]. — The gas SF6 is an infrequent contaminant with filtering is of course quite different from the significance
extremely low toxicity that is used in specific medical of each individual primary gas estimate. With increasing
investigations. Therefore it had not been among the time averaging, the stochastic noise is increasingly
target gases of earlier analyses of the ISS air. suppressed, and offset and stability of the system
Consequently its presence in the ISS air was unknown, become increasingly important as limiting factors.
and the gas was not included in ANITA’s gas list.

For some gases, two different levels of time averaging
In addition to the unexpected gaS, a few technical (Gaussian filters with different widths) are shown in the
surprises occurred on the ISS. The spectrometer’s same graph for maximum usable information — including
spectral line shape changed slightly through some of the information on the noise level. This twin treatment has
system restarts, and the spectra contained unexpectedly typically been applied for gases where fast variations
high levels of noise in addition to variable spectral should be expected in reality, but where the overall
“ghosts” (spectral signals that falsely reappear in other spectral noise leads to poor significance for the
positions in the measured spectrum) [21, 22]. At the time estimates on these fast variations. — E.g. for ethanol (see
of writing, these technical problems are still under Figure 5 and Figure 9), it is reasonable to expect
investigation, since the ANITA system has only recently relatively fast variations owing to human activities.
been returned after the mission. However, the occasional negative values in Figure 9

definitely indicate a problem with the significance for the
The variable line shape was handled through special |eastfi|tered curve, especially early in the flight, when the
calibration modelling that apply spectral transformations ghost problem was most severe for this gas. Heavier
(developed based on [24]) in order to match dedicated filtering evidently leads to better significance while hiding
calibration models to the different line shapes. The noise all information on fast variations in gas concentration.
and ghost problems were minimised through calibration
modelling optimised for higher robustness, spectral The following widths (FWHM) were chosen for the
sifting (automatic rejection of spectra with very poor applied Gaussianfiltersfordifferentgases:
quality), and time domain filtering of the gas estimates
(optimised weighted averaging) [221- In total, the applied 0 40 min (alone: No sifting or median filtering): Water
adaptations and countermeasures were highly and pr (perﬂuoro propane, Freon 218)
successful, ensuring valuable data from ANITA. . 2_9 hours (alone): 002. Preserves the shape of daily

concentration ”valleys”

POST'PROCESS'NG OF ANITA DATA . 7.5 hours, after sifting and median filtering: 8 gases

. 5 days, after sifting and median filtering: 27 gases
Depending on the observed, assumed, and/or accessible (5 combined with 75 hours)
frequency contents of the time series, each gas has its
special selection among the treatments spectral sifting, For pr, even the very moderate 40-minute Gaussian
r'nedian. filtering,land Gaussian filtering with a selected filtering was skipped locally around the major leak in
filter W'dth (defined as FWHM — FU” W'dth at Half order to preserve the extraordinarily steep rise in
Maximum) [221- The applied data treatment for each gas concentration (see Figure 1, Figure 2, and Figure 10).
SAE Int. J. of Aerosp. | Volume4 | Issuel 453

"
"4","MAIN FINDINGS BY ANITA ON THE ISS time-resolved measurement is available. ANITA
measured ammonia varying mostly between 0.10 and
ANITA has measured several gases on the ISS that 0.15 ppm in the ISS oabin air, when a 5-day Gaussian
currently are not detected by other means (ammonia) or filter was applied [22]. This absence of events implies a
are not routinely measured by reaI-time or archival very important finding, viz. that there was no significant
methods, including PFP and SF6. In addition, many ammonia leak from the cooling systems. ANITA can
gases in the ISS air have, for the first time, been measure and track the ammonia oonoentration far below
measured with high time resolution. The observed gas the human odourthreshold value. And ANITA’s excellent
dynamics clearly show effects from spacecraft visits to precision allows the detection of even a very small
the ISS, crew activities and the number of crew ammonia leak that makes the air oonoentration rise
members present, and the functioning of the air slowly, even over days and weeks.
revitalisation systems. ANITA has given detailed time-
resolved information on very different gases such as Perﬂuoro propane
carbon monoxide, methane, ammonia, PFP, SF6, 120 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _Gas estimates
siloxanes, alcohols, carbon dioxide, and water vapour ii ?
[22]. An example on how much information may emerge 100 . . . . . . . . ,\ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
from time-resolved inform ation on just one single gas is A i 3‘W‘Mxiittii‘iiim.t.eWNW-.-111111011111e22.3M.3MW
giveninthefollowing. §80y0.1
C 1 1 .
ANITA’stime-resolved PFPvariationsgaveseveralnew §6O_3,
types of information: :5)
O 1 1 1
A. ANITA’s observed PFP oscillations during fast 8 4O 3 3 3
oarbondioxideremovalfromtheISSairreveaIed 20 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 ; 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 33
previously unknown coupling between PFP and the j 1 1
US CDRA (Carbon Dioxide Removal Assembly) [22]. O ‘ ‘ ‘
B. An incidence on the ISS was suspected to indicate a 215 220 225 230
PFP leak. This could be ruled out by ANITA’s PFP DaYSfrom Start 24-Sep-2007 00:00:00
data, limiting the search for the correct diagnosis of
the incidence [22]. Figure 1. Overview of the main perfluoro propane
C. A major leak of PFP from an ISS cooling system, leak event on April 29, 2008. The gas estimates have
and also a later servioe-related release, could be been filtered with a Gaussian fi|ter (FWHM 4o
quantified and fOHOWGd With high precision and high minutes) except at the steep rise, where the original
time resolution tor significant time periods. data estimates have been kept. The periods of time
D- The concentration details 'n item C over hours and where the noise looks larger in reality exhibit regular
days, revealed that Fhe PFP concentrat'on W35 oscillations induced by the us CDRA (se the text,
stabilisee rather qunokly, apparently after the PFP esp. list item A, and [22])_
penetration Into |ess aooessnble air volumes had
been completed. It could therefore be concluded that pemuom propane
neither the American nor the Russnan attempts to 140 . 3 . . . . 3X 2183449 . . . 3 . . . . _Gas estimates
clean the air of PEP were successfull, so that the 3 3 Y: 11866 3 _ Data gaps interpolated
extra cleanup actions could be terminated. —The 120 3333313 3 3 3 /'\ 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 33
detailed dynamics of item A also helped to explain A j j .6 1 \ae eeeeegeewgow,
whythe US CDRAfailed to remove PFP from the 2100 'f “18363 i ' T ' ' ' ' ‘5 ' ' ' Q“ ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ""
ISS air. E: j Y: 104.64 j j 3 More precisexvaluesfor
E. Owing to the stability of PFP in the ISS air, PFP can 5.3 8° * T * * * * "" * i * T’ * * * * '5 * * * ’7 themd'cated-data pomt?
. . c0 . . i 1 1 1 (GMT on AprI|29 2008).
be explonted as a tracer gas to calculate the effective «’5 . $_27178bﬁ58 i 1 1 1
relative airvolumes of any visiting spacecraft (not § 60 ' ' '3 i i ' ' ' ' ' ' Day H:Min
carrying PFP!) or new modules sharing oabin airwith 8 4O 3 3 “18353 i 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3;. 313-323 8333
the ISS. In practice for the ANITA mission, these 1 Yr 26-34 J j j 1 218:358 0836
calculations were mainly used in the opposite 20 . .x 218.349 ' . ; . . , , j, , . . ,1, 218.383 08:43
direction in order to have an extra Check on ANITA’s 1Y1 6-44 1 1 1 218449 10:47
re|iabi|ity [22]. 0 ‘ ‘ ' ‘ ‘ ‘
218.2 218.3 218.4 218.5 218.6 218.7 218.8 218.9 219
Since the major PFP releases to the ISS cabin air DaySfrom Stan 24—89'0'2007 00'00'00
occurred after submission of ref. '[22], details of the main Figure 2. Details of the main perfluoro propane leak
leak are shown in Figure 1 and Figure 2 (for full overVIew . .
s e e Fi gu r e 10). event on April 29, 2008. The gas estimates have been
filtered With a short Gaussuan filter (FWHM 40
As mentioned above, ammonia is currently not routinely minutes) except at the steep rise, where the original
measured in the ISS air, and no standard system for estimates have been kept.
454 SAE Int. J. of Aerosp. |Volume4 | Issuel

"
"5","COMPARISONS TO OTHER INFORMATION ON stability as well as potential losses. It should be noted
THE ISS AIR that ANITA only holds air samples for a few minutes, so
that all compounds that are stable in the cabin air on this
BASIS FOR COMPARISONS time scale are stable in ANITA’s air samples as well. The
main potential problem is losses to the inner surfaces of
In general, and especially since ANITA is an the sampling system. However, any such losses are
experimental system, it is important to compare the expected to be small, a“? they WOUId tend to even 9”
results to other sources of information on the ISS air. over time through saturation oflabsorption or adsorption
Current operations utilize real-time monitors and archival Oh the surfaces, moehy causing memory effects and
samplers to achieve a complete picture of ISS air quality. thereby elower reaction. For the reference measure-
The real-time monitors that target compounds in ments using grab samp'e containers (see below), these
common with ANITA include the VOA (volatile organics), pmb'ems are p°te“t'a”y worse However, “95“” has
CSA-CP (CO), CDM (002), and MC A (002, m ethane). shown that the stirfaoe treatment of the GSCs and the
The arohival samplers, grab sample containers (GSCs), sample handling in general successfully avord errors for
are returned to ground for analysis by GC and GC/MS the targetoompounds.
methods. The GSC analysis is considered the reference . ,
method for most compounds. Exceptions are siloxane AS part Of the evaluation, ,ANITAS results have been
compounds that have proven to be unstable in the analysed anci cross-tested 'h different ways 'h order to
GSCs. assess their reliability. Important information on
significance has also been extracted from how the gas
Comparison of real-time data to ANITA results is estimates reflect ISS events like spacecraft dookings and
somewhat limited because with the exception of the gasreleases.
MCA, the other instruments were operated only , , , ,
periodically. The other instruments only had occasional Owrng t0 the speoial problems W'th spectral disturbances
analytical sessions that overlapped with ANITA .(ghosts) and line'shape ohanges for ANITA on the ISS, 't
operations; however trending from these devices can be !5 highly interesting ,to hhe out whether such non-ideal
used to achieve some perspective on the ANITA influences in ANITAs optical spectra can have lead to
performance. Significant errors for a given gas. The most probable
error would be a concentration offset, and this type of
Eight grab samples collected in Destiny during the error is difficult to identify from ANITA’s Iconoentration
ANITA operations can be used for comparisons to curves alone. Therefore other information must be
ANITA. However, one special grab sample was taken exp|0ited.
direotl in front of ANITA. This excellent source of data .
for oorShparison is specially emphasized below. For highly'stable gases like PFP and SF6’ checking for
concentration offset IS possmle through calculation of air
Grab samples represent snapshots in time, while ANITA mixmg ratios W'th V'S't'hg spacecraft.
data give a sequence of data points with six-minute or , , , , , ,
haIf-hour intervals (for onboard operation and standard In prinoiple, ""F '5 also POSS'P'G t0 '0‘?“ for the srze Of. the
downlinked spectra, respectively). This sequence of data spectral details Of the gas 'h question. However, th'e !5
is primarily intended for time resolution of the gas essentially an approach I'ke olassroal spectral analysis
dynamics, but it has also been exploited for spectral for'gas. estimation, which is highly inferior to ANITAs
sifting and time domain filtering in order to improve the calibration for rhulti-gas measurement. Therefore. direct
noise level and detection limits of the gas estimates. For spectral ana'YS!S to support ANITA results "":7 d'fheUIt. 'h
most gas compounds, this time averaging has a minimal general, and it is not feaSIble Close to ANITAs eetection
effect on ANITA comparison to other methods, because I'm't for the target gas. For the ISS operations, the
the ISS air composition usually changes slowly, unless spectral disturbances add to the problems. Still, it has
an event occurs or crew activities have a localized effect been poSSIble to check for ANITAloffset for two very
on the air. Exceptions include PFP and 002 [22], but interesting gases, VIZ. carbon monoxide and methane, as
even for these gases the fast variations only amount to a well as SF6 and PFP under the followrng Circumstances:
few per cent in concentration. Also, the filtering of . .
ANITA’s estimates is tentatively limited to preserve the ' The target gas eonoentration '5 Clearly above
significant variations (see above). In total, a few hours ANITA’S detection “m't for averaged spectra
difference in air sampling is normally not significant, and ' The target gas exhibits a very distinctive spectral
anway the comparison graphs may indicate if a time pattern
difference might be significant. Also, the ISS is a well- ' For each measured IR spectrum, ANITA’S gas
mixed atmosphere so that samples acquired anywhere in estimates and procedure for calculation 01‘ the
Destiny can confidently be used for comparison with residual spectrum are applied to emphasize the
ANITA results. spectral contribution of the target gas (subtracting
the effects of all other known gases)
When we compare different air measurements, the ° Many spectra are averaged
sampling technique is a crucial element affecting sample
SAE Int. J. of Aerosp. | Volume4 | Issuel 455

"
"6","The second item in this list is of higher importance than being measured and the variability inherent in any
normal in order to distinguish real gas features from the analytical method.
spectral disturbances.
COMPARISONS TO GRAB SAMPLE TAKEN IN FRONT
For the abovementioned four gases where such direct OF ANITA
checking has been possible (carbon monoxide,
methane, SF6, and PFP), no offset of important size can The results from the GSC acquired in front of ANITA on
be present. Further use of spectral analyses is discussed October 10, 2007 are compared to the results from
for each gas. ANITA (Day 16.8468).
GRAB SAMPLE CONTAINERS At the time of these analyses, the presence of SF6 had
become known through ANITA. (It should be noted that
Grab sample containers (GSC), shown in Figure 3, and SF6 could have been detected in the GSC independent
the methods used to analyze them have been previously from any information from ANITA, if this gas had been
described (25); therefore, only a brief description will be selected for analysis, refer above.) Upon return of the
presented. The (3803, obtained from Scientific GSCs to the ground for analysis, an SF6 calibration
Instrumentation Specialists, Moscow, Idaho, USA, have standard was unavailable, because this contaminant has
a SUMMA electro-polished interior surface and a volume very low toxicity. When the GSCs were analyzed by
of approximately 350 mL. Preparations of the (3803 for GC/MS, a B-faotor for SF6 was used to quantify the
flight include a leak check, analysis for contaminants compound. (A B-faotor is an average response factor for
(proof), surrogate dosing, and evacuation to hard aoompound derived from aoompilation of data collected
vacuum (<10' torr). A sample is acquired on orbit by over the years by mass spectrometry.) This is commonly
opening a valve on the GSC permitting the container used by the JSC Toxicology Laboratory to quantify non-
vaouum to pull in the air sample. The valve is then target compounds, which may be detected infrequently
closed to preserve the sample until analysis. The and/or have Iowtoxioologioal impact.
infrequent Shuttle flights to ISS mean that samples can
be up to 6 months old before they reach the laboratory. ANITA quantified 12 gases at the relevant point in time.
The GSC analysis detected and quantified 32 gases (13
- of these are also on ANITA’s gas list), but only four
F l i gases were common with ANITA results. In addition, the
'1 ""5 1"" N GSC detected 27 gases at trace levels. (As opposed to
' t :x: . ANITA, GC and GC/MS systems may deteot compounds
3 below their quantification limits, but in this case
' ‘* concentrations can only be estimated.)
According to the description above, ANITA’s gas
estimates have been sifted and filtered in different
~ combinations. For some gases two different levels of
filtering have been applied in parallel. This is highlighted
1wr-'~:-'-1~~1...1...1_ for the different ANITA gas estimates in Table 1, which
shows the detailed comparisons on the four compounds
. . in common. To give the best basis for comparison, more
Figure 3' Grab Sample Container(GSC) than the assumed significant digits are indicated. The
. estimates for the two lightest alcohols, methanol and
Egg] returnlto the NASA/JISC loglcoggywligboratoryl, ”.19 ethanol, as well as 002 all show good agreement. This is
Isamp es were ana yze. y or V0 3“ e particularly impressive given the low aloohol
organic. compounds according. to Standard work concentrations (low ppm) and high concentration of 002
Instructions. The GC/MS method IS an adaptation of the (3500 ppm).
US. Environmental Protection Agency’s TO-17 method
[26], the primary adaptations being the inclusion of
standards for the compounds of specific interest for
spacecraft air assessment. The two critical aspects of
the GSC process are the assurance of proper instrument
function and calibration and verifying the integrity of
samples via trip surrogates. The surrogates cover the
range of target compound polarity and molecular weight.
It should be noted that the acceptable error for analysis
via EPA TO-17 method is +/-25% for most compounds
and +/-30% for reactive species (i.e., methanol). This
requirement recognizes the very low concentrations
456 SAE Int. J. of Aerosp. |Volume4 | Issuel

"
"7","Grab sample ANITA Ethanol
concentration concentration 3'5 3 3 3 3 3 3
GAS (ppm) (ppm) 3'11ﬂ11.
. . Sifted awa 34.6% ofthe ‘ ‘ 1 1 ‘ ‘ ‘
Gauss Median filter+ Median filter+ 9’ 3 3/\ YE 2'00 3 3 / \
filter Gaussfilter Gaussfilter E 2 3/33./3333/3\
“c6 1 x 16.847 . i 1 1 1
um #777177"" W“: W \
o1\\3/3X16847rvwksw/wwrwx
——-—— \’/w'\«
Table 1. Comparison of analysis results from ANITA 105-5 16 16-5 17 17-5 18 18-5 19
and the grab sample taken close to ANITA on Days from Start 24'399'2007 00:00:00
October 10, 2007 at 20:18 GMT (ANITA measurement Figure 5- Details Of ethanol graph around the grab
time 16.8458 days from start of regular operation). sample (the black dOt) taken near ANITA at day 17
* From GC/FID results (10 Oct 2007). After standard spectral sifting, both
**From GC/FID results; MeOH conc.=GC MeOH 00,70, traces have been filtered with a 5-point median filter.
(2* GC/MS Acetaldehyde 00,70) The green trace has also been filtered with a
medium-sized Gaussian filter (FWHM 7.5 hours) and
For SFe, ANITA measures a considerably higher the blue trace with a longer Gaussian filter (FWHM 5
concentration than the one reported from the GSC days).
results. The use of the B-factor for quantification could
introduce an error as large as a factor of four. This does
not begin to account for the 2 orders of magnitude 4000 CarbondiOXide
discrepancy in the two results. It is unclear at this time ; 1 ; ; ; ;
why the results are so divergent. 1 j $132536 j j 1 1
3soo\~v:/m\~33
The three gases with comparable numbers from the two 75‘ \ i i / X; 168417 1 1 1
systems are shown in detailed views in comparison plots 3/ \\ 3 3 Y: 3379 1 3 3 3
in Figure 4 — Figure 6 for illustration. ANITA’s sample 5 3000 ' ' ' N 3 ' ' ' ' / ' 3 \\ ' ' ' 3 ' ' ' ' ' 3 ' ' ' /
point nearest in time to the grab sample is indicated in E \ 3/ \. /
eachtrace. C \
\ / 3 3 \\ :1
O ‘ \J ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ \ ‘ /
Meta“ zooomw/
1 1 o ‘ 1 1 7 1 1 3 3 3 3 3 \J
‘ ‘ X16.8464\7HHVjV/ﬂﬂ‘hﬂﬂ‘ 1 1 1 1 1 1
A 0318 Y1: 0'1/9 \\ / \\ 15095.5 16 16.5 17 17.5 18 18.5 19
S 0.16 7 7 7 7 7 7; 7 7 7 7 7&1 7 / 7 7 \ 7 7 j/ 7 731: 7 1 7 7 7 7 j Daysfromstart24-Sep-200700:00:00
7:“ x 16.847 f gﬂgwﬂﬂ Figure 6. Details of carbon dioxide graph around the
1% 0.14 3 1 1 1 . ,.; 1 1 1 Y: 9'14 . 4244f . . 1;. . . 1 ; . . . /,; grab sample (the black dot) taken near ANITA at day
“’05) 1 Hr j /' j j 1 j / j 17 (10 Oct 2007). The estimates have been filtered
g 012 7 7 7 7 7 1 7 7 7 y/ 1 7 7 73 711 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7‘1; 7 7/7 7 g withaGaussian filter(FWHM 2.9 hours).
8 \ I x 16.847 K/ I I \ / I
\ 1 7Y1 0-12 1 1 1 1 / 1
0'1 \ x/ The comparisons to the GC analysis on the grab sample
0.08 \v/ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ taken in front of ANITA can be summarised as follows:
15.5 16 16.5 17 17.5 18 18.5 19
DaySfrom Start24'sep'2007 00:00:00 . 32 gases quantified by GO in grab sample, 13 by
Figure 4. Details of methanol graph around the grab ANITA
sample (the black dOt) taken near ANITA at day 17 . Only 4 gases in common (complementary systems)
(10 Oct 2007). After standard spectral sifting (see the . Methanol, ethanol, and (302 are in good agreement
tGXt), bOth traces have been filteer With a 5-point . SF6 resuItS do not agree, and it is not readin
median filter. The green trace has also been filtered apparent why there is this discrepancy.
with a medium-sized Gaussian filter (FWHM 7.5
hours) and the blue trace with a longer Gaussian
filter (FWHM 5 days).
SAE Int. J. ofAerosp. | V01ume4 | Issuel 457

"
"8","COMPARISONS TO ALL RELEVANT GRAB SAMPLES 1. 10 October 2007 (ANITA day 17)
AND OTHER MEASUREMENTS (taken directly in front of ANITA)
2. 12 November 2007 (ANITA day 50)
Introduction 3. 7 December 2007 (ANITA day 75)
4. 11 January 2008 (ANITA day 110)
When we compare ANITA data to other relevant grab 5- 25 February 2008 (ANITA day 155)
samples than the one sampled right in front of ANITA’s (taken inside a data gap for ANITA)
air inlet, the comparisons are normally still fully 6- 19 March 2008 (ANITA day178)
applicable (refer “Basis for comparisons” above). (taken inside a data gap for ANITA)
7. 7 April 2008 (ANITA day 197)
The term “trace” is used in the GSC analytical report to (taken inside a data gap for ANITA)
describe compounds that are confirmed as present, but 8- 22 May 2008 (ANITA day 242)
below the lowest calibration point. It is possible to
estimate the concentration for such a compound, but this In the following subchapters, the results from these eight
does introduce additional error to the quantification. grab samples are compared to ANITA’S results for nine
Compounds reported as trace, but shown in the following different gases.
graphs at derived concentrations are marked in a special
way in the curves below on carbon monoxide and W
methane (Figure 11 and Figure 12, respectively). The
legend for these symbols is shown separately in Figure The overall comparison graph for methanol is shown in
7, since it is too large for each graph. Figure 8. Details of a small part of this graph are also
shown in Figure 4. The general picture is that the two
systems show good agreement. The GC value is higher
0 NASA GSC data for all the five comparable data points, except the last
0 NASA GSC data, where ANITA has a data gap one. — The largest difference between the two systems is
NASA GSC data ..< reported detection limit"" actually for the grab sample taken right in front of ANITA;
I shown as zero with vertical barindicating detection limit most probably just by chance.
NASA GSC data ""< reported detection limit""
D shown as zero with vertical bar indicating detection limit, Methanol
mANITA data gap 0.45 —Estimates ﬁltered [7.5 hours] . . .
A NASA GSC data reported as TRACE — Data gaps interpolated
A NASA GSC data reported as TRACE, in ANITA data gap 0-4 — Estimates ﬁltered [5 days] ‘ ‘
E 0.35 —Data gapsinterpolated . l ‘
Figure 7. Common legend for the grab sample data 3/ l l
in all the comparison graphs. 5 0'3 ‘ ‘ l ‘ ‘ l a l
E 0.25 l“ ‘ . . l s‘ 7 "" w ~W\\\
For each gas concentration reported as “trace”, NASA 5 l l l . l l l O M lllll' [J
has assigned a numeric concentration value, typically § 0'le l l 4i , l“ l ' l1 l ll ‘
half the estimated detection limit (a triangle in the 0 0'5llll ~ 1: l [l ( O l V
graphs). For each gas concentration reported as “< l ‘
reported detection limit”, i.e. not detected (a square in 0.1 x . . . . . .
the graphs), the data point is shown as zero 005
concentration. However, in order to indicate the level of ' 0 50 100 150 200 250 300
the detection limit, i.e. the significance of the non- DaySfrom Start 24-Sep-2007 00:00:00
detection, a bar up to the detection limit is indicated. For
the squares and the triangles in the graphs, like for the Figure 8. Methanol: ANITA estimates with NASA‘s
circles showing the ordinary grab sample data points, the GC estimates indicated as black dots (open circles
symbols are filled if they can be directly compared to where ANITA has data gaps). Before the specified
ANITA data and open if they occur in a period where Gaussian filtering, there has been standard spectral
ANITA has a data gap. sifting followed by filtering with a 5-point median
filter for both traces.
The eight grab samples relevant for comparisons were
taken on the following dates: Ethanol
The overall comparison graph for ethanol is shown in
Figure 9 and details in Figure 5. Like for methanol, the
general picture is that the two systems show good
agreement, but the agreement is clearly poorer for the
last grab sample. Also, relative to ANITA, the last grab
sample gives the clearly most negative deviation.
458 SAE Int.J.ofAerosp. |V01ume4 | Issuel

"
"9","Ethanol Perﬂuoro propane
— Data gaps interpolated — Data gaps interpolated J ""H
6 —Estimates ﬁltered [5 days] i i i 100 ' ’ ‘ ‘ ‘J W ‘
E —Data gaps interpolated E Will l
E 5 lh E 80 ' ' ' ' ' 'llJ '
ac: l i ( iii i ”i /// cc:
0 ""H ~ ,1 l ‘ J o
1 , . Ji { . J . .
w ll ~ 1 20 Mwllllliiii/Wll ' '
o I l « . . . . . lillmmmwwwwmwm
o ”<on
‘1 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 O0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Days from start 24-Sep-2007 00:00:00 Days from start 24-Sep-2007 00:00:00
Figure 9. Ethanol: ANITA estimates with NASA‘s GC Figure 10. Perfluoro propane: ANITA estimates with
estimates indicated as black dots (open circles NASA‘s GC estimates indicated as black data points
where ANITA has data gaps). Before the specified (open where ANITA has data gaps). The estimates
Gaussian filtering, there has been standard spectral have been filtered with a short Gaussian filter
sifting followed by filtering with a 5-point median (FWHM 40 minutes), except at the steep rise, where
filter for both traces. the original estimates have been kept. The periods of
time where the noise looks larger in reality exhibit
Freon 11 and Halon 3101 regular oscillations induced by the US CDRA (se the
text, esp. list item A above, and [22]).
Freon 11 (fluoro trichloro methane, CCI3F) and Halon
1301 (trifluoro bromo methane, CF3Br) are both Also before any grab sample analysis of PFP in the ISS
measured at very low levels by ANITA and GSC, and this cabin air had been performed, ANITA’s PFP
is in agreement with VOA results. ANITA’s results show measurements could undergo solid quality assurance
higher values and possibly significant variations over based on ISS events. The main aspect without an
time [22], but this cannot be supported by direct spectral accurate feedback about the ISS measurement quality
analyses or obvious relations to events on the ISS. The was the scale factor for PFP. Such feedback would in
VOA and GSC results show Halon 1301 concentrations practice mainly imply an independent check of the gas
presentduring Shuttle docking, and quickly dissipating to mixing accuracy for the reference measurements of
zero (<ppt) within a week after Shuttle departs. ANITA’S ANITA (normal accuracy better than 2 °/o for gaseous
deviations from the VOA and the GSCs may mainly be compounds). No library spectrum for PFP is available to
caused by a combination of spectral disturbances and give gas concentration feedback like for carbon
noise. monoxide and methane. However, the combination of
the large PFP dynamics and the dilution calculations for
Perfluoro grogane air mixing with visiting spacecraft at modest PFP
concentrations does not give room for any really
The initial five grab samples in our comparisons were not significant offset in ANITA’s PFP estimates.
analysed for PFP because of the extremely low toxicity of
this compound. Therefore they are not indicated with The ISS crew estimated the size of the main leak of PFP.
values in the comparison graph for PFP in Figure 10. Diluted in the ISS air volume, the calculated step in PFP
concentration also matches ANITA’s results. So ANITA’s
For PFP, ANITA’s measurements have shown that this results on PFP in the ISS air are in accordance with all
gas leaves the ISS air in significant amounts only known sources of information.
through air mixing with visiting spacecraft and new
modules of the ISS, or through air losses [22]. Therefore, Carbon Monoxide
the PFP curve from ANITA gives a pretty good indication
of the PFP concentration also in the data gaps. — More In the comparison graph for carbon monoxide in Figure
detailed PFP values for ANITA’s data gaps can be 11, all the grab sample data are marked as below the
calculated based on knowledge about the volumes of reported detection limit, and only one value is reported
visiting spacecraft, new modules, and the ISS overall. as “trace”. For all the five comparable data points, the
grab samples give no detection, and each data point in
In the comparison graph of Figure 10, all three grab the graph is indicated as zero concentration with abar up
sample estimates for PFP are lower than those from to the detection limit (0.5 ppm for the first sample and
ANITA, but still in good agreement within the uncertainty 0.25 ppm for the other four samples). From the graph,
of the comparison. we can see that ANITA consistently measured higher
SAE Int. J. of Aerosp. | Volume4 | Issuel 459

"
"10","values between 0.7 and 2.2 ppm, i.e. higher than the represents an effective average over about 75
reported detection limit for GSC. measurements where we have special downlinks
(including around the points in time for the GSC
Carbon monoxide samples) and over about 15 measurements elsewhere.
2'5 _Gas estimates In terms of effective SNR (signal to noise ratio), the
detection limit for ANITA's CO should therefore be clearly
2 ii A A A A . ‘3 A below 0.05 ppm.
A ii
g H k W [ The scale factor for a gas in ANITA’s calibration relies on
E15 W ' ' i ' ' h i ' the source gas purity and the gas mixing accuracy for
'13 km M (0i ﬂit i the reference measurement (normal accuracy better
“ac: 1| / ht ﬂ ﬂw ﬂ ii inf A , than 2 °/o). Further checking of the resulting reference
8 r \r Vi MW i concentration was performed through the system testing
8 i on 30 real gas mixtures. In addition, the accuracy of the
0.5 A A A A . A reference gas concentration can be checked through
comparison to a library spectrum. This gives a rather
rough oheok owing to the unknown (and often
00 50 100 15 E 200 250 300 questioned) accuracy of the gas concentration applied to
Days from start 24-Sep-2007 00:00:00 produce the library spectrum. However, comparisons for
carbon monoxide have ruled out the possibility that such
Figure 11_ Carbon monoxide: ANITA estimates with errors in the calibration gas concentration could lead to a
NASA‘s GC estimates indicated as black data points soale error in ANITA in the order of a factor of two or
(open where ANITA has data gaps). After standard rnore, Wh'Ch WOU'd be necessary to explain the
spectral sifting, ANITA’s estimates have been filtered differences above.
with a 5-point median filter and a Gaussian filter with In ANITA’s measurements on the ISS CO is well suited
FWHM 7'5 hours. for direct spectral analyses as described above. After
For further comparison, the CSA-CP also produces CO subtraction of the spectral features other gases and
data. This system has a read-out resolution for CO of 1 averaging 0f many spectra, the very Icharaoteristio
ppm. It generally shows zero for CO with bounoe to 1 shpeotlral features of CO are easily reoognizable and of
ppm at times. 'e right srze to match ANITAs estimates. From the
highest to the lowest concentration the spectral features
Carbon monoﬁdeAﬁlTeilA 9%: partiCLrillarly we|| Suited for 3:12:32?Sﬁgid'rﬁgyéTgseﬁxﬁmﬁgééhebgoﬁgﬂ:yhghpa;
measurement y . e gas as a very istinotive . .
spectral line pattern in a spectral area with moderate Eggggibgpigﬁl ?)?ﬁgis’QZZZZSS'Y: npoéfﬁéuﬁrspgﬁgg
:Eiﬁjregiz frigtrer’i‘eNrepges, ssgcirafgsﬁost’sngln txzrlySSr-nodest inspection of and calculations on spectral details at the
time of a local minimum in the carbon monoxide ourve
ANITA’s curve for carbon monoxide relates well to agree well with ANITA’sIoonoentration estimates. This
known events on the ISS, most notably the hatch excludes any offset suffioiently large to make ANITA
openings to visiting spacecraft. And the unexpected _ offseterrors an important source of the differences to the
and so far unexplained — oonoentration dip before the grab sample estimates.
first Shuttle visit fits well with a parallel dip for methane . .
[22]. This combined dip for these two orew-related gases ?grﬁgegiltrrgtiohos Eeﬁzastjlrfgt ripeﬁnralacggfoéiiz vat?
looks clearly significant, especially since there were no ANITA’s estimated values arg démonstrabl resent in
observed corresponding effects on other gases or on ANITA’ IR t S Id CO t ANITA? t
ANITA’s spectra. Thus, there are clear indications that . S 'speo ra. 0200” en er? . sspeo ra
ANITA’s carbon monoxide curve gives significant W'thO.Ut beinglpresent m the gas oell. Th's '5 hardly
information, at |eastqua|itative|y. imaginable. Firstly, gases stable In the IR path In the
Instrument box outsnde the gas cell are cancelled from
In ANITA's pre-flight system testing on 30 real gas the spectra through'the use 0.“ Ibaok'grouno spectra.
mixtures, the CO detection limit was estimated to be SgiowglzidannyebheiiraertillcaInga:vggfotlogfegtree gnvsngﬁgt
slightly below 0.05 ppm. ANITA’s calibration for the ISS Then Gould 00 enterythe as cell from %ther sources
was later updated in-flight in order to take advantage of ’ . . 9 g. | . | .f h
the gas scenario observed onboard, which was clearly tharli' thefIShS calbin air. Thésthcoﬁqt IE? possnble II tke
more favourable than the worst case scenario applied for 2:: ltnhge (satm: Ygtlhrgijsgligr theega: CGIISWLCSn'?h:Za3/é
the very robust pre-flight calibration. No testing on known . . ' . .
gas mixtures was then feasible, but simulations in the ff: 'Sazgf/Ig Zéﬁuﬁaed gegorrﬁioﬁfrl‘cgitﬁgetﬁgb'gguggir
synthetio testing showed improved detection limit for CO Howlzver this wopuldgbe overgom ensate d throgu h the
by a factor of 2.5. The disturbances on the ISS had small Iow-pressure baokgroun d measureoments becausg then
consequences for the CO estimates, and the curve the gas cell is pumpe d to a lower pressure and stays
460 SAE Int. J. of Aerosp. |Volume4 | Issuel

"
"11","there for a much longer time. Then there would be more Methane
“false” CO in the background spectrum than in all other 18 _Gas estimates 7 F t F
spectra, except the first sampling after each background 1_t . , l I
measurement. Without any leakage, the sampled air is h \
only exposed to tubing, valves and the gas cell itself. The E 14 ‘ ' Jt \ O ‘ ’ J ‘
sampling pump is positioned downstream from the gas 312 l a tl \\ ’ a _ l A
cell. F t l
1% 10 A a \\ . . 0
According to these analyses and observations, we have “'05) 8 tttt J t . J . \l t J t .
not been able to find any sources of error that could 8 6‘ J I . , . \t I ll .
make ANITA’s estimates different from the GSC results 8 t t t‘ \t M
in the way we see. 4 t ‘ t ‘ \I‘ f y ‘
. . . . 2 h, «w WWW“ Wﬂwﬂwt ' \RN / '
The G80 and Its analysns IS the established reference “t“ A Key
method for determination of compounds and their 00 50 too 150 200 250 300
concentration in the ISS atmosphere. The GSCs are leak Days from start 24-Sep-2007 00:00:00
oheoked (<1x10'2 om3/month) prior to shipment. The
valve is a metal-metal seal, with no o-rings or other “soft” Figure 12. Methane: ANITA estimates with NASA‘s
parts. Surrogates are 3(1de t0 the GSCS to insure GC estimates indicated as black data points(open
sample integrity. Of the three surrogates, 013 -aoetone iS where ANITA has data gaps). After standard spectral
the most pertinent to this discussion, because of its low sifting, ANITA’s estimates have been fi|tered with a
molecular weight (i.e., volatility) and itS strong propensity 5-point median filter and a Gaussian filter with
to adhere to untreated surfaces. Over 20 years, only 2-3 FWHM 75 hours.
GSCs have leaked on orbit and the leak was due to
particle matter caught in the metal-metal seal. These The three remaining grab samples (no. 1, 2, and 8) that
leaks, ee WOUtd be true of any GSC leak, were detected are directly comparable to ANITA estimates are reported
by sngntftoant losslof surrogate compounds. Even a very as “trace”. This gives a rough quantification Close to zero
small leak wnll easnly be detected after months of storage. in the scale of the plot, while ANITA measures up to 8
The GSC analysns for CO IS performed on Valoo helium ppm. These differences called for extra effort in the
ionization detector. A small sample aliquot IS transferred oross-oheoking of ANITA’s operation and results like for
to a packed GC column from a sampling valve. The CO above.
packed GC column insures separation of the light
components of the mt)l(ture. .The helium Ionization Thanks to ANITA’s technique for calibration, methane,
detector IS calibrated usnng oerttfted standards and the too, is a gas well suited for measurement by ANITA. This
oaltbratton '5 checked prior to the analysns. And. the GSC is particularly the case at the low concentration levels
analyses 'h the present case were performed W'thOUt any observed on the ISS, when all spectral information in the
5'9“ 0t devnanoe from these standard procedures or main multi-line band of methane can be utilized without
normal overall quality. optical saturation problems. Like carbon monoxide,
I I I I methane has a very distinctive spectral line pattern, but
In oonolusnon, the differences In CO estimates between totally unlike carbon monoxide, there is heavy spectral
ANITA and the other systems remain unexplained. interference from the C-H parts of many organic
However, the differences and the CO values themselves molecules. However, this spectral interference is
are of the same order of magnitude as the detection effectively sorted out by ANITA.
limits of the other systems. Therefore the differences do
not represent a b'9 problem. ANITA’s calibration for methane on the ISS was updated
in-flight in order to take advantage of the favourable
m concentration range observed. No testing on known gas
I I I mixtures could be performed, but simulations and
As can be seen '“ the comparison graph for methane '“ observations allow estimation of the detection limit for
Figure 12, only two grab samples (no. 5 and 6) have fully methane in the curves from the ISS to be around 0.2
quantified concentration values. Unfortunately, both ppm or better.
these samples were taken during a data gap from
ANITA, but sample no. 5 is sufficiently close in time to Like for carbon monoxide, ANITA’s curve for methane
support the preceding ANITA data. Also sample no. 6 relates well to known events on the ISS. Also, the
gives a value that looks quite reasonable compared to unexpected _ and unexplained _ oonoentration dip
ANITA’S results before and after ”""3 Pomt ""1 t'me- before the first Shuttle visit fits well with the parallel dip
I I for carbon monoxide, supporting its significance like for
TWO samples (“0- 3 and 4, Wlth square symbols m the carbon monoxide. Thus, there are clear indications that
graph) are indicated as zero concentration With bars up ANITA’s methane curve gives significant information, at
to the detection limit, which is above ANITA’s estimates least qualitatively.
in this period of time.
SAE Int. J. of Aerosp. | Volume4 | Issuel 461

"
"12","Like for carbon monoxide, the source gas purity and the The general information contents of ANITA’s SF6 curve
gas mixing accuracy for the reference measurement for are confirmed through ISS events like for PFP [22], and
methane in ANITA were roughly checked and confirmed the dilution calculations for air mixing with visiting
through comparison to a library spectrum. Likewise, the spacecraft at the lower SF6 concentrations do not give
fully quantified grab sample no. 5 (and partly no. 6) room for any really significant offset in ANITA’s
clearly supports the correctness of ANITA’s level of estimates. In addition, the source gas purity and the gas
response. mixing accuracy for the reference measurement for SF6
in ANITA could be roughly checked and confirmed
In the direct spectral analyses, the very characteristic through comparison toa library spectrum.
spectral features of methane are easily recognizable and
of the right size to match ANITA's estimates just like for In direct spectral analyses, the very characteristic
CO. From the highest to the lowest concentration the spectral features of SF6 are easily recognizable and of
spectral features are scaled accordingly. This excludes the right size to match ANITA's estimatesjust like for CO
the possibility that important errors are inflicted by line and methane. And in the same way, the analyses
shape problems, spectral ghosts, excessive noise, or exclude the possibility that important errors are inflicted
spectral interference from other gases. Also like for by line shape problems, spectral ghosts, excessive
carbon monoxide, any important estimation offset in noise, or spectral interference from other gases.
ANITA’s estimates was ruled out through calculations on
spectral details at the time of a low value in the methane As mentioned earlier, SF6 in the GSC is analyzed by
curve. GC/MS using a B-faotor value rather than a standard
calibration mixture. Past experience has shown that for
Also like for CO, according to these direct spectral some compounds the B-faotor can deviate by as much
analyses, methane concentrations at least roughly in as 4X the actual response factor for a compound.
accordance with ANITA’s estimated values are Unfortunately, this difference does not explain the 2
demonstrably present in ANITA’s IR spectra. And no orders of magnitude difference between ANITA and GSC
other source of this methane “fingerprint” than methane results.
from the ISS cabin air in the gas cell seems conceivable.
In total, ANITA’s estimates of SF6 in the ISS air deviate
For methane, like for CO, we have not been able to find strongly from the GSCs, and the origin of this difference
any sources of error that could make ANITA’s estimates is unknown (confer above).
different from the GSC results in the way we see. All the
GSC procedures to establish sample integrity (i.e., leak Carbon Dioxide
checks) and instrument function (standards) applied to
CO analysis also apply to methane. The main difference The general comparison graph for carbon dioxide is
is the use Of the flame ionization detector (FID) for shown in Figure 13. Details from a small part of this
methane. The FID is the detector of choice for simple graph are also shown in Figure 6.
hydrocarbon compounds (alkanes, alkenes, etc.),
because the response is very linear and directly Carbon dioxide
proportional to the oompound’s number of carbons. The r I r _Gas estimates
degree of confidence is very high for the quantitative 7000 . 0
accuracy of this method. Therefore, like the CO results,
the GSCs represent a well established reference method A 6000'] v I I. I , . I I V v
with no sign of deviance from the standard procedures or g I I II 4 I e I I I I
normaloverallquality. E5000 iI II I I - I Iii ~ v
= I II
In conclusion, ANITA’s methane estimates on the ISS “g 4000 I j «t l II I III ‘ I I III I
are supported by the GSC at the highest concentration of § , ~ I I I lI I ' II I ’II I I /
about 16 ppm. The differences between the G80 and 8 3000 I II It I I ’ ‘ I III ‘
ANITA results for methane concentrations estimated “ I I I I‘ I
below 10 ppm are unexplained but significant from a 2000 ' ‘ ' ‘ V '
toxroologioal perspective. 1000 V . , . V V
O 50 100 150 200 250 300
Sulghur Hexafluoride Days from start 24-Sep-2007 00:00:00
AS shown in Table 1, the grab sample taken in front 0t Figure13. Carbon dioxide: ANITA estimates with
ANITA gave an SFs estimate two orders of magnitude NASA‘s GC estimates indicated as black dots (open
lower than ANITA- The other grab samples 3'50 ShOW circles where ANITA has data gaps). The estimates
similar differences to ANITA (bUt WithOUt parallel have been filtered with a Gaussian filter with FWHM
scaling), so that a common graph would give little 2_9 hours.
meaningful information.
462 SAE Int. J. of Aerosp. |Volume4 | Issuel

"
"13","The general picture is that the two systems show good . Other gases with ANITA estimates above the GC
agreement for carbon dioxide, especially in the light of values, but at low concentrations where rigorous QA
the possible Iooal influence from crew presence and for ANITA on the ISS is impossible:
activity in the different locations for the air sampling of . Halon 1301 estimates by ANITA larger than the
the two systems. Furthermore, these values are in close GC estimates
agreement with the CDM, when points can match, and . Freon 11 estimates by ANITA are above the
lower than MCA. MCA values have been routinely higher reported detection limit for the GSCs with GSC
than GSC or CDM values. estimates below this detection limit
W GASES WITHOUT GRAB SAMPLES FOR
COMPARISON
For the three fully quantified compounds that are in
common for ANITA and the grab sample analyses for all For gases that have not been measured on the ISS in
samples — methanol, ethanol, and carbon dioxide - the parallel to ANITA, no direct comparison is of course
two Systems show good agreement The same goes for possible. However, for ammonia (ANITA graph in [22]),
PFP, although this gas was analysed for only in the last NASA has been modelling the air and water contents,
three grab samples. and ANITA’s results are in good agreement with
calculations for the ISS.
For CO, methane, and SF6, the QA (quality assurance)
Of ANITA’S results through extensive oross-oheoking and ANITA also measured water vapour in the ISS air with
analyses, only support the results without indicating any presumably good reliability. ANITA’s curve reflects the
important error. However, ANITA’S estimates for these variations in the MCA results for water vapour, but shows
three gases show from small to large differences from olearly higher concentrations. The differences may at
the GSC analyses, which ie the well established least partly be caused by the long, unheated sample
reference method. The review 0f the GSC sample lines of the MCA. Also, ANITA’s water estimates are
integrity and analytical method has not uncovered any more in line with the desired humidity levels for the cabin
deviations that would throw the laboratory results into air.
question. The origin of these differences is still unknown.
CONCLUSION
Freon 11 and Halon 1301 are both measured at very low
levels by ANITA and GSC’ bUt With higher values from After the successful launch of ANITA on STS 118 in
ANITA'N‘,’ rigorous QA can supportAN1TAs values, and August 2007 and installation on the ISS in September,
the devtatiens from the G305 may mainly be'oaused by the system was monitoring the trace gas dynamics in the
aoomblnatlon of spectral disturbances and norse. ISS cabin air until August 2008. During the mission,
I I I problems in several areas were solved, leading to an
Two out of the three Siloxanes In ANITA’s gas list were updated system calibration.
also apparently detected by ANITA on the ISS, viz.
hexamethyl oyolo-trisiloxane anct deoamethyl oyolo- On the ISS, ANITA has measured several gases that
pentasrloxane [221' However, unlike for e.g. CO and currently are not detected by other means (ammonia) or
methane above, no rigorous. QA for ANITA can support are not routinely measured by reaI-time or arohival
these values. Also, no applicable reference value from methods, including perfluoro propane and one
GSC is available, since the siloxanes are not quantified unexpected gas, sulphur hexafluoride. In this case,
by the GSC method because of poor quantitative results ANITA gave an outlier warning, and the unexpected gas
dueto wall losses. was detected, identified, and quantified. Later it was
I I demonstrated how ANITA’s calibration could be updated
The comparisons to the GSC analysts on the full set of from ground.
eight grab samples taken in different locations can be
summarised as fOHOWS: Many gases in the ISS air have, for the first time, been
. measured with high time resolution. The observed gas
' Methanol, ethanol, 002, and PFP lh 900d agreement dynamics clearly show effects from spacecraft visits to
' CO measured by ANITA, With QA support, above the the ISS, crew activities and the number of crew
reported detection limit for the GSC, but not detected members present, and the functioning of the air
by the GSC revitalisation systems. ANITA gives detailed time-
' Methane measured by ANITA,With QA SUPPOTt resolved information on very different gases such as
. In possible agreement with the two highest GSC carbon monoxide, methane, ammonia, perfluoro
estimates (> 12 ppm) propane, sulphur hexafluoride, siloxanes, alcohols,
. At concentrations olearly above the reported carbon dioxide, and water vapour.
detection limit for the GSC for several samples
with GSC estimates below this detection limit ANITA’s short response time and high time resolution
. SF6 measured by ANITA, with QA support, far above makes the system of particular value for detecting and
the GC estimates following the development of any onboard incident that
SAE Int. J. of Aerosp. | Volume4 | Issuel 463

"
"14","affects the cabin air, like leakages or overheating of resolution and is intended to operate primarily on the
equipment. ANITA’s excellent precision also allows the ISS. This follow-on air monitor is a promising candidate
detection of slow gas buiId-up from small leakages as for integration into the planning of the future Human
well as fast feedback on the degree of success of Space Exploration programme.
countermeasures and olean-up actions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
On one occasion, ANITA’s gas data helped in the
diagnosis of a suspected leakage incident on the '88- The described work on ANITA was performed under
Later it helped to quantify two true leakages 0f perfluoro ESA contract number ESTEC/15743/01/NL/JSS-ANITA.
propane and to follow the concentration dynamics over
time. Thereby the attempts at oleanl-up could be REFERENCES
evaluated and subsequently turned off as Ineffective.

1. Johansen I-R, Honne A, Tsohudi J 1996:
The reference method for measurement of most gas I . . .

. . . . nvestlgatlon of FTIR Instruments for trace gas
compounds in the ISS air IS grab samples of the air d t t' S t E V | 8N 6 10-16
taken by NASA in different locations on the ISS and eecron, peo rosoopy urope, 0' 0' ’ '_
analysed on ground by various GC-based (Gas 2. Bittner H, tiohansen I-R, Honne A, Tan G 1996.
Chromatography) and GC/MS (Mass Spectrometry) Breaoboardrng of an FTIR spectrometer for aIr
systems. A total of eight grab samples relevant for monitoring m manned spacecraft, ICES 1996, SAE
comparisons to ANITA were analysed, including one technicalpaperno.961372.
special grab sample taken directly in front of ANITA on 3- Johansen I'R, Lines G T, H0009 A, Midtgaard T
the ISS for optimal comparison 19972 Calibration Of an FT—IR spectrometer for

ambient air monitoring using PLS, Applied
The grab samples gave detection and quantification of Spectroscopy, Vol. 51 No. 10, 1540-46.
more than 30 gases, which compared to ANITA’s 13 4. Tan G B T, Savage C J, Bittner H, Honne A,
gases, gave an overlap of 9 gases in common. — The Johansen I-R 1997: The monitoring of gaseous
four gases quantified only by ANITA were ammonia, contaminants in spacecraft cabin atmospheres, ESA
water vapour, and WC siloxanes. Bulletin, no. 89 Feb., 53-59. (By error, authors no. 4

and 5 were not included in print)
For four gases — methanol, ethanol, carbon dioxide, and 5_ Stufﬂer T, Bittner H, Honne A, Johansen I-R, Abele
perfluoro propane — the results from ANITA and from the H, Persaud K, Keding H-J, Tan G, Wessels H, 1998:
grab samples are 'n 900d agreement. Freon 11 land Fully Operational FTIR Based Multi—Component Gas
Halon 1301 were measured at very low concentrations Analysis System for Spacecraft Cabin Air Monitoring.
by bOth systems, bUt at higher values from ANITA' ICES 1998, Danvers, Massachusetts, United States.
lggienaggnerincesspegrzy drgasjng/ancbgs Caanusecrimisbg iﬁ SAEteohnioal paperseries 981568'
ANITA 6. Stuffler T, Honne A, Johansen I-R, Abele H, Tan G

' 1999: A Multi—Component Monitoring System for

The three remaining gases in common _ carbon Long Term Gpacecraft Cabin Air Analysis. Part 1:
monoxide, methane, and sulphur hexafluoride — are also Instrumentation Hardware. Workshop on Advanced
measured at higher concentrations by ANITA. For these L'fe Support, . ESA/ESTEC’ Noordwijk, The
gases several types of quality assurance of the results Netherlands, April 13'14 1999- Proceedings: WPP
from ANITA could be performed, including relations to 163, |SSN1022—6656,June1999.
known events on the ISS and direct analyses of ANITA’s 7- H0009 A, Johansen I'R, Stuffler T, Abele H, Tan G
optical spectra. These spectral analyses seem to 19991 A Multi-Component MOWI‘OFI'HQ System for
exclude that spectral disturbances, noise, or interference Long Term Spacecraft Cabin Air Analysis. Part 2:
from other gases can have given important errors. Calibration and Analysis Software. Workshop on
Additionally, it was not possible to find any procedural Advanced Life Support, ESA/ESTEC, Noordwijk, The
mistakes or deviations from the time-tested GSC Netherlands, April 13-14 1999. Proceedings: WPP
reference method that would have produced erroneous 163, ISSN 1022-6656,June1999_
results. Therefore it remains to explain the differences, 8. Stufﬂer T, Honne A, Johansen I-R, Abele H, Tan G
and further testing is recommended. 1999: Progress in an FTIR-based Multi—Component

Monitoring System for Spacecraft Air Analysis. ICES
ANITA’s results on the dynamics of gas concentrations in 1999, Denver, Colorado, United States. Paper no.
the ISS atmosphere have proven the usability of the 1999_01_2150_
“?ChF‘P'Ogy for air analysis .in ”9”“ cabins. The 9. Honne A, Johansen I-R, Stuffler T, Mosebaoh H,
Significantly smaller anti more lightweight next 9?“?rat'0.“ Kampf A, Abele H, Tan G, 2000: Current Status of
FTIR system for continuous air quality monitoring in . . .

. . the ESA FTIR-Based MultI-Component Monitoring
orewed cabins — ANITA2 — Will be developed based on S t f 8 ﬂ A' A I . ICES 2000
the lessons learned from the ANITA flight experiment. y S em or pacecr a ’r na y 8’8' ’
ANITA2 will operate autonomously with high time TOUIOUSG’ France. Paperno. 2000'01'2302
464 SAE Int. J. of Aerosp. |Volume4 | Issuel

"
"15","10. Home A, Johansen I-R, Tan G, Stuffler T 2001: Space Station. Part 1: The Mission; ICES 2008, San
Blind test performance of the ESA FTIR-based Francisco,California, USA. Paperno.2008—01-2042.
ComponentMonitoring System for Spacecraft Cabin 22. Home, A., Schumann-Olsen, H., Kaspersen, K.,
DeSign, ICES 2001, Orlando, Florida, United States. Clause“, 8 et alq ""ANITA Air Monitoring 0n the
Paperno. 2001'01'2157 International Space Station Part 2: Air Analyses,""

11. Stuffler T, Kampf D, Mosebach H, Home A, Ten G SAE [mg JI Aerosp. 1(1)I178-192, 2009,
2001: ANITA: An FTIR Spectrometer Flight doi:10.4271/2008—01-2043.

Experiment for Spacecraft Cabin Air Analysis. ICES 23. Martens H, Naes T 1989: Multivariate Calibration,
2001’ Orlando, Florida, United States. Paper “0- John Wiley&Sons Ltd., Chichester, GreatBritain
2901'01'2160 24. Ahro M, Kauppinen J, Salomaa |, 2000: Detection

12- leero T, James J TI 2001: A P r 00933 to Evaluate and correction of instrumental line-shape distortions
Advanced Technologies For Future NASA Needs. in Fourier Spectroscopy, Applied Optics Vol. 39, No.
ICES 2001, Orlando, Florida, United States. Paper 33, Nov. 2000
“0- 2001'01'2399 . 25. James, J.T., Limero, T., Boyd, J., et al, Toxicological

13- Mosebach H, Stuffler T, Kampf D, GIIer M, Home A, Assessment of the International Space Station
Johansen ""R, Tan G 20023 Advanced Trace Gas Atmosphere from Mission 5A to 8A. SAE Technical
Monitoring ”7 Manned Space Cabins - ESA'S Air Paper Series 2002-01-2299, 32nd International
Analyser ANITA. Part 1: Instrument Description. 2nOI Conference on Environmental Systems, San
Workshop on Advanced Life Support, ESA/ESTEC, Antonio, Texas, July 2002
Noordwijk, The Netherlands, Apr” 2002- 26. EPA website for Air Toxic Methods:

14. Home A, Johansen I-R, Mosebach H, Stuffler T, Tan httg://www.ega.gov/ttn/amtic/airtox.htm|
G 2002: Advanced Trace Gas Monitoring in Manned
Space Cabins - ESA's Air Analyser ANITA. Part 2:

Calibration and Analysis Software. 2nOI Workshop on
Advanced Life Support, ESA/ESTEC, Noordwijk, The CONTACT
Netherlands, April 2002.

15. Stuffler T, Kampf D, Mosebach H, Glier M, Home A, Atle Honne
Tan G 2002: Status Report on ANITA, an FTIR SeniorResearch Scientist
Spectrometer Flight Experiment for Manned Space SINTEF ICT
Cabin Air Analysis, ICES 2002, San Antonio, Texas, P.O.BOX 124, Blindern
United States. Paper no. 2002-01-2454. N-0314 OSIO

16. Stuffler T, Kampf D, Mosebach H, Home A, Tan G Norway
2003: ANITA — The Optimized Spacecraft Air Monitor . . I
on its way to Orbit, ICES 2003, Vancouver, Canada. Location: Forsknmgsvelen 1’ OSIO
Paper no. 2003'01'2548. Telephone. (+47) 22 06 73 00

17. Stuffler T, Kampf D, Mosebach H, Home A, Direct line: (+47) 22 06 7711
Odegard H, Tan G 2004: Anita and Anita ll - FaX- _(+47)22 06 73 50
O timized Anal zers for Advanced Air Qualit Cell phone. (+47) 93 05 92. 86

p . . . y y E-mall: Atle.Honne@smtef.no
Monitoring [/7 Crewed Spacecraft, ICES 2004,
Colorado Springs, Colorado, United States. Paper
no. 2004-01-2265.

18. Home A, Odegard H, Schumann-Olsen H, Stuffler

T, Mosebach H, Kampf D, Tan G 2005: ANITA —
Preparing for Automatic Air Analyses on the ISS;
ICES 2005, Rome, Italy. Paper no. 2005-01-2931

19. Stuffler T, Mosebach H, Kampf D, Home A,
Odegard H, Schumann-Olsen H, Tan G 2006: The
ANITA Air Monitoring Programme and
Instrumentation - ISS and other Applications; ICES
2006, Norfolk, Virginia, USA. Paper no. 06|CES-94

20. Stuffler T, Mosebach H, Kampf D, Home A,
Odegard H, Schumann-Olsen H, Tan G 2007: The
[88 Air Monitor ANITA — Going into Operation on
[88; ICES 2007, Chicago, Illinois, USA. Paper no.
07|CES—187

21. Stuffler T, Mosebach H, Kampf D, Home A,
Schumann-Olsen H, Kaspersen K, Supper W, Tan G
2008: ANITA Air Monitoring on the International

SAE Int. J. ofAerosp. | V01ume4 | Issuel 465

"
"16","(multivariate statistical method)
ANITA: Analysing Interferometer for Ambient Air
SNR: Signal to Noise Ratio
CDM: Carbon Dioxide Monitor
TGM: Trace Gas Monitoring
CSA—CP: Compound Specific Analyzer — Combustion
Products VOA: Volatile Organic Analyzer
ESA: European Space Agency
Calibration model: In connection with the ESA TGM
EXPRESS: EXpedite the PRocessing of system: A vector (set of numbers) to be multiplied with a
. . measured absorption IR spectrum to produce a value for
Experiments to Space Station .
a gas concentration. (One model for each gas
(rack for electronic equipment) compound)
FID: Flame Ionization Detector Calibration modelling: The process of producing
optimized calibration models, applying advanced
FTIR: Fourier Transform Interferometerl-metry Simulations and multivariate statistical analyses.
. . Outlier: A value or set of values that are abnormal, e.g.
FWHM: FU” W'dth at Half Maxnmum out of specification or indicating an error. Outlier values
or more complex outlier situations are discovered
GC: Gas Chromatography through special analyses leading to outlier detection,
typically leading to a proper outlier warning.
GSC: Grab Sample Container (Also used to
denote the techni ue a | in G80 and Residual spectrum: The remainder of the measured
I q ppy 9 absorption spectrum after the properly scaled reference
analyses Wlth GC and GC/MS) spectrum for each detected gas compound has been
subtracted. In popular terms the residual spectrum
|ss; International Space Station represents the “unused” or unexplained part of the
measured spectrum.
JSC: Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas Synthetic spectrum: An absorption spectrum
I I constructed as the sum of the properly scaled reference
MCA: M6110r Constituent Analyzer spectrum for each detected or simulated gas compound.
MS: Mass Spectrometry
466 SAE Int.J.ofAerosp. |V01ume4 | Issuel

"
