"","x"
"1","5mm» Available online at www.sciencedirect.com ———-—————__
5/3» C
\u. 3.3 scIENcE DIREGT® [Um
WW“
""“ [B$FMJMUUUHTEM
PERGAMON Acta Astronautica 55 (2004) 573—579 m
www.elsevier.com/locate/actaastro

The ﬂight experiment ANITA—a h1 gh performance air analyser

for manned space cabins
T. Stufﬂera>*, H. Mosebaeha, D. Kampfa, A. Henneb, G. TanC
aKayser-Threde GmbH, Wolfratshauser Str. 48, 813 79 Munich, Germany
bSINTEF Electronics and Cybernetics, P. 0. Box 124, Blindem, N—0314 Oslo, Norway
CESTEC, Keplerlaan I, 2200 AG Noordwijk, T he Netherlands

Abstract

Analysing Interferometer for Ambient Air (ANITA) is a ﬂight experiment as precursor for a permanent continuous trace
gas monitoring system on the International Space Station (188).

For over 10 years, under various ESA contracts the ﬂight experiment was deﬁned, designed, breadboarded and set up.
For the safety of the crew, ANITA can detect and quantify quasi on-line and simultaneously 32 trace gases With ppm or
sub-ppm detection limits. The self—standing measurement system is based on Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer (FTIR)
technology. The system represents a versatile air monitor allowing for the ﬁrst time the detection and monitoring of trace
gas dynamics of a spacecraft atmosphere.

It is envisaged to accommodate ANITA in a Destiny (US LAB) Express Rack on the 188. The transportation to the 188
is planned with the ﬁrst ATV ‘Jules Verne’. The options are either the Space Shuttle or the Automated Transfer Vehicle.
© 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction European Trace Gas Monitoring (TGM) programme
was therefore initiated more than 10 years ago. Start-

The air quality conditions in manned space cab- ing With a market survey study and BB activities on
ins atmosphere have to be monitored regularly. The optimized FTIR systems [1—5], the TGM system has

decisively proven its capabilities in a blind sample
_ _ . testing for NASA [4,6].

. Abhrevzatzons: ANITA, Analysmg Ihterferometer for Am- The measurement principle iS based on infrared

bient Air; ATV, Automated Transfer Vehicle; BB, Bread board; IR 1) t. t 'th .t. (1
BSA, European Space Agency; FTIR Spectrometer, Fourier Trans- ( ) a sorp 10.“ spec roscopy, W1 SC?“ “.16 an con—
form Infrared Spectrometer; HW, Hardware; IR, Infrared; ISS, tathree detectlon Of gas mOICCUIar Vlbl‘atlon and 1‘0-
International Space Station; PLS, Partial Least Squares (family tation transitions. Although each gas compound to be
Of multivariate statistical m€thOdS/tOOIS); NASA, National A6f0- measured has Its unique IR spectral signature9 spec-
nautics and Space Administration; SNR,.Signal t0 N01se Ratio; tral overlapping between numerous compounds com_

SW, Software; TGM, Trace Gas Monitoring. . . . .
* . blned Wlth measurement nelse, non-hnear effects, and
Corresponding author. . . . .

E—mail addresses: timo.stuﬂier@kayser-threde.de (T. Stuﬂier), mStrument 1mperfect10ns makes the data evaluatlon
atle.honne@sintef.no (A. Honne), gijsbert.tan@esa.int (G. Tan). extremely difﬁcult. Therefore, specially developed
0094-5765/59 - see front matter © 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.actaastr0.2004.06.003

"
"2","574 T. Stuﬁer et al. /Acta Astronautica 55 {2004) 573—579
sophisticated system calibration and analysis methods is directly coupled to the gas concentration Via the
are applied. However, once calibrated, the analysis Lambert—Beer law (1)

rocedure is ver sim 1e, onl re uirin ver short ~ ~ ~
p - - y - p y q g -y 1W) =10<V>e—“<v>lc, <1)
computing time. During the last decade sufﬁ01ent eX-
perience has been acquired for a very stable hardware Where I is the detected intensity, [0 the original inten-
(HW) setup and the development Of a corresponding sity, at the absorption coefﬁcient, I7 the wavenumber,
unique analys1s software (SW) a110w1ng gas. detec- l the path length, 6 the gas concentration.
tion Wlth 10W detection limits in strongly varying gas Applying optical methods for the determination of
matriees [7981 . cabin air composition, the following advantages can

This paper gives a glance at developments for the be highlighted:

HW and analysis SW, discussions on the ANITA mis-
sion, and the outlook towards a design for a continu— 0 fast system response allowing quasi on-line multi-
ous second generation ISS air monitor. component measurements;
0 non-destructive measurement principle; the air sam-
ple composition remains the same before and after
2. ANITA mission the measurenaents;
o no sensor p01s0ning;

ANIT A on 188 Will be installed in a Destiny EX- 0 high system stability throngh automatic feedback
press Rack. The baselined operation of ANITA is 10 and compensation mechanisms;
days. However, the ANITA residence time on 188 may ' n0 resource consumption except power.
he as lon as 6 months. For a nominall 0 eratin .

. e . . . y p e The system does not include a pre-processor for
ﬂight experiment, extended operation is oﬂered as an . .
. . . gas concentration or gas separation. Therefore, spe-
option. The ANITA des1gn and operations have been . . . .
. . . . . . Cial effects like interferences 0f the gas absorption,
speCiﬁcally reViewed minimis1ng the necessary crew . . . .
. . non-linearity, etc. must be covered and cons1dered in
time. Thus, the normal gas sampling mode as well as .
the evaluation process of the measurement data.
IR measurement, gas analyses, and data transfer are .
An FTIR system, like the one presented, repre-
fully automated. sents an advanced reliable 0 tical measurement s s

ANITA consists of two standard locker inserts. Be- tem showin the fellowin agvanta es y
side shuttle transportation to 188, also the ﬁrst ﬂight g g g '
0f the European developed AutomatedTransfer Ve- 0 high optical resolution (measurement speciﬁcity,
hiele (ATV) can be used as. transportation, the latter resolved/reduced interference, improved response
being ESA’s preferred solution. linearity)

ANITA IS cons1dered as a precursor for a TGM o well deﬁned, linear and stable wavenuniber scale;
system fonpermanent use on ISS..The lessons learned . high optical efﬁciency (good SNR for short mea-
from the ﬂight Will therefore pr0Vide the inputs for the surement time).
deﬁnition of such a future system.

2.2. Hardware description
2.]. Measurement principle of ANI T A
Figs. 1—3 depict the ANITA ﬂight experiment. The

The measurement principle of ANITA relies on the system consists of two mid-deck locker inserts With
detection of gas speciﬁc absorption features in the In- connections on the panel’s front side and a laptop for
frared (600—5000 cm—1 ). In general, most gases show the experiment control. Additional storage space for
speciﬁc rotation/Vibration transitions in this spectral air sample bags and a pump is required allowing mea-
area. surements With remote air samples from other 188

The features of the transition in combination With modules.
their spectral location allow for the gas identiﬁcation. An important parameter to be optimized for a future
The strength of absorption for the speciﬁc transition measurement system is besides mass and power the

"
"3","T. Stuﬁ‘ler et a1. /Acta Astronautica 55 {2004) 573—579 575
HZ"" ‘~~/ ’,‘m u ’C
.t .. A ”4/ ‘ ,{555 5f};
_.'.~v 1‘ §. § ' I 7 ’ 1‘ , i 9"" _ '-
£45342? 7;; , Q; . /‘ . 2;» EN.» "" -
‘ , ‘ _ 'V . 151/7 . n \ .- \I ?,l’i’ ‘. .3, ' ,
3%. ' /""2' I 12"" /’ - ‘ ‘ ‘ "" ’ '- . ' ' ' ~
.I ’ ' ‘ (x ~:'.'.‘-{;;'v‘ ./ 'l ' .il‘ - ‘ : . 1:}: ' ‘
‘2‘""??? ' :4 ﬁr X ‘I ’~"" ~ I :3: 5‘:
. .:\\ \ .v‘\‘ ., :1 ‘ ‘5, .,
. ,i‘c‘ﬂ , \‘Cx \, i J; ) € ‘ -'.
I. f. ‘ . » WC} ‘ ' ‘1 - "" - _
, 329%.. x x.‘ ‘ ,//’ ,
. V \\‘ QUUZ/I'Z/ 4
~ f ’V \111\ _- ”
Fig. 1. ANITA electronics and pumping system (cover removed). Fig. 3, ANITA measurement units.
. . ‘ E :‘ ..;;'t'.'-'°a’ PGSC
. "" . , §- ‘ l- ' ‘x:',* a $02,.“
~ «if “u“, g; ‘ Ti? ‘ I
,./ ’ l - . . A -’ “\ .
1/1_,_,/: //S .‘ ‘9; xx; 5,. f‘\ u I . (I, 14.. a ——‘
' ’, ,1. . ' ’ Q .V .1 .‘I “it"" ‘ “ l ,I"", I ~.
/\\. "" ﬁlg \ 5 “f.“ .2; ‘ ‘k‘; T;/l.{-L—— 4’ ‘ . —
1/ t? ‘ ' x; . :5 I .§ Insert2
\ 5‘ .( .I ,‘ /)-’f: ‘7
""I : A I pcsc g” 3”""
/ . abt- cm
Fig. 2- ANITA FTIR measurement unit (cover removed). Fig. 4. ANITA ﬂight experiment accommodated in an Express
Rack (with courtesy of NASA JSC).
volume. A preliminary design study demonstrated that
the FTIR system would ﬁt in one locker or could even data is available, Which means information about the
be designed smaller. gas concentrations on the 32 most important trace
ANITAS HW performance in terms of stability and gases in the cabin air.
reliability has been considerably improved compared
to the same commercially available system (reported 2.3. Gas analyses for ANI T A
e.g. in [7] ). The HW and SW dedicated for data trans-
fer to match the Express Rack control interfaces are In order to solve all crucial problems of multi-gas
implemented. Fig. 4 shows an artists View on ANITA calibration, novel analysis SW had to be developed
accommodated in an Express Rack. in and in parallel to the TGM programme [1—5]. The
One of the advantages of ANITA is the high time process of improving and optimising the analyses is
resolution. Within 3—4 min, a full set of measurement still ongoing [7,8].

"
"4","576 T. Stuﬁ‘ler et a1. /Acta Astronautica 55 {2004) 573—579
Essential features of the method of calibration in the ANITA calibration are:

include:

0 Special handling of non-linear spectral effects.

0 Synthetic calibration exploiting the advantages of 0 Improved handling ofnon-linear spectral interfer-
the FTIR technique. ence.

0 Control of optical spectral interference (the main 0 Automatic COTTCCtiOH for non-linear gas response.
problem). 0 Outlier detection.

0 Baseline drift compensation (solves a major prob-
lem). An important non-linear spectral effect is the

0 Optimal noise handling utilising information from resolution-induced non-linear response. SUCh non-
numerous spectral data points. linearity occurs for narrow spectral lines that are not

0 Control of possible optical saturation effects (too fully resolved by the FTIR instrument. SUCh narrow
high spectral absorption). spectral lines are abundant in the IR spectrum, espe-

0 Simple, fast, and fully automatic runtime calcula— cially from the omnipresent background gases water
tions. vapour, carbon dioxide, and methane.

. Easy adaptations by recalibration, even after de- Non-linearities make it considerably worse to han-
ployment in space (Without astronaut involve- dle spectral interference properly. Improved handling
ment). is ensured through including the non-linear effects in

the simulations in the calibration modelling process.
The simulations are based on the non-linear effects

These essential features are achieved through a actually observed on the FTIR instrument through

calibration modelling process that includes eX- application of multiple reference spectra measured at

tensive simulations of measurement IR spectra, different gas concentrations for each gas that gives
pre-processing 0f the simulated spectra, and multivari- non-linear response. Although this approach looks
ate statistical analyses applying partial least squares simple, it is an amazingly complex task to combine

(PLS). the simulations properly With the statistical analyses
The rather large set of examples (at least many and model construction in the calibration modelling

hundred spectra) that is necessary for multi-gas cal- process.

ibration, can for practical and economical reasons The automatic correction for non-linear gas re-

only be produced through simulations. The simula— sponse is a much more straight—forward procedure,

tions apply properly prepared reference spectra for Which is also based on the same set of multi-
the pure compounds. These are combined to rep— ple reference spectra for each gas With non-linear
resent different gas mixtures, and by imposing all response.

important instrument measurement effects realistic IR All measurement systems are designed and cali-

spectra are produced. Thus the quality of the instru— brated for explicitly or implicitly deﬁned variations in

ment calibration relies heavily on the adequacy of the measurement situations and environmental impacts. If
simulations. the foreseen variations are exceeded, or malfunction-

Even though a PLS system can handle noise (mea— ing of the measurement system occurs, we denote it
surement noise and other kinds of disturbances) in an outlier situation.

an excellent way, the modelling is hampered 0r pos- Since the gas mixtures that may occur in a space-

sibly impaired by any unnecessary noise. Therefore, craft can never be fully predicted, it is important how

the pre-processing step enhances the PLS modelling a system for gas measurement behaves When exposed
by selecting spectral areas and by excluding data to gas mixtures that are not Within the deﬁned mea-
points With unwanted properties like possibly too surement task. Such situations must ﬁrst be detected
high absorbance (optical saturation) or excessive by an outlier detection system. Then proper warnings
non-linearity. must be given, if possible including advice on to What

In addition to the essential features mentioned extent each of the estimated gas concentrations can be
above, some additional features that Will be included trusted.

"
"5","T. Stuﬁ‘ler et a1. /Acta Astronautica 55 {2004) 573—579 577

Table 1
The gas list for the ANITA calibration
N0. Compound Class of substance*

1 Methanol (methyl alcohol) ale.

2 Ethanol (ethyl alcohol) ale.

3 2-pr0pan01 (isopropanol, isopropyl alcohol) ale.

4 1-butan01 ((n-)buty1 alcohol) ale.

5 Formaldehyde (methanal) ald.

6 Acetaldehyde (ethanal) (CH3CHO) ald.

7 Propionaldehyde (propanal, propylaldehyde) (CH3CH2CHO) ald.

8 Butyraldehyde (n-, butanal) (CH3(CH2)2CHO) ald.

9 Toluene (methyl benzene) atom.
10 Meta-xylene (meta-dimethyl benzene) atom.
11 Ortho-xylene (ortho-dimethyl benzene) atom.
12 Para-xylene (para-dimethyl benzene) atom.
13 Ethyl benzene atom.
14 Ethyl acetate (CH3COOC2H5) ester
15 n-butyl acetate (CH3COO(CH2)3CH3, C6H1202) ester
16 Dichloro methane (methylene chloride) hal.
17 Freon 11 (CC13F) hal.
18 Freon 12 (CC12F2) hal.
19 Triﬂuoro bromo methane (Halon 1301) hal.
20 Freon 113 (CC12FCC1F2, C2C13F3) hal.
21 Perﬂouro propane (octaﬂuoro propane) (C3F8) hal.
22 Hexane (n-) hyd.
23 Acetone (2-pr0pan0ne, dimethyl ketone) (CH3COCH3) ket.
24 2-butanone (methyl ethyl ketone) (CH3COCH2CH3) ket.
25 Hexamethyl cyclo-trisiloxane ([(CH3 )2SiO]3 in Si-O ring) sil.
26 Octamethyl cyclo-tetrasiloxane ([(CH3 )2SiO]4 in Si-O ring) sil.
27 Decamethyl cyclo-pentasiloxane ([(CH3)2SiO]5 in Si-O ring) sil.
28 Ammonia misc.
29 Carbon monoxide misc.
3O Methane back.
31 Carbon dioxide back.
32 Water back.

*Abbreviations: alc.:alc0h01; ald.:aldehyde; arom.:ar0matic hydrocarbon; ha1.:ha10genated hydrocarbon; hyd.:hydrocarbon;
ket.:ket0ne; si1.:siloxane; misc.:misce11ane0us; back.:backgr0und gas (always present).

The simplest type of out-of-range situations is that concentration level onwards, the increased effects from
at least one gas in the gas list exceeds its upper con- statistical noise and from possible saturation problems
centration limit in the deﬁned measurement task. This or non-linear inﬂuences Will lead to decreased preci-
is detectable through simple comparison of concentra- sion and accuracy.
tion values. This usually implies n0 disaster, since the- A more severe type of outlier situation implies the
ory as well as experience shows that the measurement appearance of an additional, unknown gas. This gas
performance shows a graceful degradation if the situ— cannot be measured applying the existing calibration
ation is changed beyond the deﬁned task in this way. models. Also, the measurement of the other gases
Therefore, the gas measurements Will still be useful, may be disturbed through spectral interference. It is
but they may be of reduced quality. In advantageous therefore important that the occurrence of any un-
situations, the measurement performance may not be known gas is detected by the outlier detection system,
signiﬁcantly reduced for concentrations out of range leading to a proper outlier warning. Several detec-
by a factor of two or even more. However, from some tion methods are possible, but the logically simplest

"
"6","578 T. Stuﬁer et al. /Acta Astronautica 55 {2004) 573—579

way is to check Whether all features in the measured bustness towards difﬁcult conditions. This may seem
IR spectrum can be accounted for by the estimated too good to be true, but running the generally appli-
gas concentrations. Also, if the measurement of an- cable calibration models for the full gas scenario ﬁrst
other compound is disturbed to give a signiﬁcantly to check Whether the local models are applicable can
negative concentration estimate, this is a good outlier ensure it.

indication. Owing to the obvious advantages, some prepara-

If an unknown gas has sufﬁcient spectral absorption, tions for local models are made. It is expected that
it may be detected, identiﬁed, and roughly quantiﬁed. the ANITA programme Will be extended to include at
The calibration models may be extended to cover this least some local modelling to enhance the gas sensi-
gas as well. Using the new models, all the gases may tiVity even further.
then be properly quantiﬁed.

The basis for the calibration work is the foreseen
gas environment, i.e. the list of gases to be covered 3. Conclusion
and their possible concentrations. The gas list for
ANITA contains 32 compounds, as shown in Table l. The air analyzing ﬂight experiment ANIT A has
This gas list has been compiled to cover the foreseen been developed dedicated to advanced air mon-
gas scenarios 0f the upcoming ﬂight. The basis for itoring on 188. ANITA runs in a full automatic
compiling the gas list is information from NASA on mode continuously analysing the cabin air condi-
all relevant gas measurements (from 188 and Shut- tions tracing on 32 lead substances in parallel. After
tle, mostly post-mission sample analyses) and on ﬁnalisation of the calibration activities in the see-
other knowledge or assumptions on gases that may ond quarter of 2004’ delivery to the launch pad is
occur. envisaged.

The methods and procedures for the system cal- An ANITA derivative forafuture permanent system
ibration can be applied to any well-designed FTIR on 188 optimised for power, mass and volume is being
instrument. However, for optimal performance, im- studied.
portant parameter settings and input data in the cal-
ibration modelling should be tailored to the given
instrument. The calibration modelling itself Will Acknowledgements
be based on detailed knowledge of the instrument
performance. Also’ most Of the reference spec- The described work is executed under ESA contract
tra Wlll be measured on the ﬂight HW, Since an

. . . . . . number ESTEC/15743/Ol/NL/JS.
on-ground tW1n system Wlll not be built in this pI'OJCCt
phase.

The ANITA system Will have one set of robust cal-
ibration models for general use. However, the analy- References
sis techniques allow for improved sensitiVity through
local calibration models. Each local model or set of [1] H. Bittner, I.—R. Johansen, A. Honne, G. Tan, Breadboarding of
local models iS tailored to a more restricted “local” an FTIR spectrometer for air monitoring in manned spacecraft,
gas scenario, Which leads to an easier measurement ICES 19%” Monterey'
situation. Typically, local gas scenarios Will lead to [2] .T Stuﬂier,A.Honne,I.—R. JOhansen’H'Able’GTan’PrOgreSS

. . . 1n an FTIR—based multi—component monitoring system for
less saturation and interference problems, Which al- Spacecraft air analysis, ICES 1999, Denver.
lOW the calibration mOdels t0 UtiliSC the Spectral 111' [3] A. Honne, I.—R. Johansen, T. Stuﬂier, H. Mosebach, D. Kampf,
formation more efﬁciently. Local models9 like any re- H. Abele, G. Tan, Current status of the ESA FTIR—based
calibration, can be developed and added at any time multi—component monitoring system for spacecraft air analysis,
and Without any HW changes, even after launch or af— ICES 2000’ TOUlouse' ,
ter the entire mission (to analyse stored measurement [4] A' Home” I'_R' JOhansen’ G' Tan” T' Stumer’ Bhnd

test performance of the ESA FTIR—based component

spectra). Also: the improved sehSitiVity for eaSier gas monitoring system for spacecraft cabin design, ICES 2001,
conditions can be achieved Without any loss in ro- Orlando.

"
"7","T. Stuﬁ‘ler et a1. /Acta Astronautica 55 {2004) 573—579 579

[5] T. Stufﬂer, D. Kampf, H. Mosebach, H. Honne, G. Tan, experiment for manned space cabin air analysis, ICES 2002,

ANITA: an FTIR spectrometer ﬂight experiment for space San Antonio.

craft cabin air analysis, ICES 2001, Orlando. [8] T. Stufﬂer, D. Kampf, H. Mosebach, M. Glier, A. Honne, G.
[6] T. Limero, J .T. James, A process to evaluate advanced Tan, ANITA—the optimised spacecraft cabin air monitor on

technologies for future NASA needs, ICES 2001, it’s way to orbit, ICES 2003, Vancouver.

Orlando.
[7] T. Stufﬂer, D. Kampf, H. Mosebach, M. Glier, A. Honne, G.

Tan, Status report on ANITA, an FTIR spectrometer ﬂight

"
