"","x"
"1","‘ . Imaging and Applied Optics Technical Digest © 2011 OSA
' AIMA1.pdf
ANITA — an FTIR—based Contlnuous Alr Quallty ‘
Monltorlng System on the ISS (Internatlonal Space Statlon)
Atle Honnel, Henrik Schumann-Olsenl, Kristin Kaspersenl, Herbert Mosebachz, Dirk Kampf2
’SINTEF 1C7; Forskrzingsv. 1, P.0.Box 124, Blindem, N0-0314 0510, Norway. E -mail A IIe.Honne@simefno
2Kayaer—Threde GmbH, Wolfratshauser Str. 48, 81379 Munich, Germany
Abstract: ANITA applies a modiﬁed commercial FTIR instrument and novel analysis software ,
that solves most challenges of multi-gas measurement. Its fast and fully automatic analyses make
. it suitable for air quality monitoring and other multi-component measurements. .

OCIS codes: (300.0300) Spectroscopy; (300.6340) Spectrosc0py, infrared; (300.6300) Spectroscopy, Fourier transfoxms;
(010.1120) Air pollution monitoring

1. Introduction '

' Ensuring crew health and safety is a prime concern in spacecraft and other closed manned habitats. The air quality is
of particular importance. The crew health and well—being could be affected, or even endangered, by uncontrolled .
accumulation of gaseous trace contaminants. Sources of air contaminants include off-gassing (from structural
materials, electronic equipment, etc.), system failures (leaks, trace gas control system break-through, etc.), and the
crew itself (metabolic products). Therefore, ESA (European Space Agency) has a long-term research and
development programme where SINTEF is developing advanced air quality monitoring technology (calibration and .
analysis) in co—Operation with Kayser-Threde GmbH (hardware and system). The key technologies employed are
FTIR (Fourier Transform Infra-Red spectroscopy), simulations of the measurement process, and PLS (Partial Least
Squares), a family of multivariate statistical methods applied for calibration. The soﬁware includes novel
compensation methods for hardware insufﬁciencies. ANITA was launched on the Space Shuttle STS-118 in August
2007. After installation and start-up in the US lab Destiny on the ISS in September, the system successfully
monitored the trace gas dynamics in the ISS cabin air until August 2008.

2. ANITA system development and testing
The measurement task is very demanding. T here are more than 30 gas compounds to be monitored. Any combi—
nation of the compounds may be present, and each compound may be present in a wide range of concentrations.
Many of the compounds may give (too) high optical absorption, but still low or very low detection limits are
required, typically low ppm (parts per million) or ppb (parts per billion) concentrations.
~ ESA’s research and development programme started with technology selection. FTIR absorption spectrometry
was selected as the basic technique, since it had the best potential to fulﬁl the requirements on simultaneous multi—
compound detection and continuous air quality analyses. FTIR instruments can simultaneously collect spectral data
with high resolution in a wide spectral range, and this extremely efﬁcient collection of information is combined with
excellent spectral stability. Also, most gas compounds of interest have unique spectral signatures in the mid IR
region normally covered in FTIR. However, the complexity of Optical multi—gas measurements required
_ development of novel software for calibration and gas analysis. This software was developed at SINTEF in and in
parallel to ESA’S programme [1]. .
The initial system development went through two main breadboard phases. Commercial laboratory FTIR

' instruments were applied with optimised settings and moderate adaptations. The calibration and analysis software
was implemented with increasing abilities and functionality. An important step in proof of the concept was the very
successful competitive blind sample testing for NASA (N ational Aeronautics and Space Administration) in 2000 [2],
where the ANITA precursor emerged as a clear winner. A

The ANITA system for the ISS required that the applied commercial FTIR instrument was rebuilt to reduce mass
and volume and allow operation in microgravity. It is equipped with an automatic sampling system applying a pump
‘ downstream from the gas cell. This pump also allows background measurements on very low gas cell pressure. —
Neither pure nitrogen (anyway applied to reﬁll air on the ISS) nor space vacuum (seemingly abundant in space)
could be used for background measurements for reasons of safety, logistics, and ﬂexibility in the positioning of
ANITA.
The ANITA FTIR instrument applies a Globar IR source (SiC blackbody), helium—neon reference laser, White
gas cell with 10 m measurement path, DTGS detector (pyroelectric, uncooled), resolution 0.7 cm-l (0.5 cm‘1 before '
_ apodisation), applied spectral area 700 —- 3400 cm"" (3 — 14 pm), and a measurement time of 2 minutes.

"
"2",". Imaging and Applied Optics Technical Digest © 2011 OSA
AIMALpdf '

The calibration procedure relies on ﬁve main steps: 1. Measurement of one or more reference spectra for each V
gas compound at accurately known concentration(s) in nitrogen. 2. Realistic simulations of the measurement process '
applying the reference spectra and known instrument parameters and behaviour to produce numerous synthetic
measurement spectra for calibration. 3. Pre-processing of the synthetic spectra to sort the available spectral
information to aid the following statistical analyses. 4. Multivariate linear statistical analyses to produce one optimal
linear calibration model for each compound. 5. Establish a table for non-linear correction for those compounds that ‘
give non—linear spectral response owing to narrow spectral lines that are not fully resolved by the instrument.

The resulting calibration includes the following properties: First and foremost it solves the three main problems V V
of multi-gas spectroscopy, viz. optical spectra] interference between gases, instrument baseline drift, and optical
saturation effects (too high spectral absorption). It gives optimal noise handling utilising information from numerous
spectral data points. It includes automatic run-time correction for non-linear spectral response. The runtime
operation is simple, fast, and fully automatic — all complexity is handled in the calibration procedure. The calibration
is permanent, unless the conditions change beyond the speciﬁcations (regarding gas scenario and instrument
behaviour). It allows easy adaptation by recalibration, even after deployment in space — without astronaut
involvement. It also allows post-mission analyses, and even post-mission calibration, analysing stored measurement
spectra using calibration models optimised for the observed gas scenario. (In general, calibration models for an
easier gas scenario allow gas measurements with better precision and detection limits, since the calibration models

. do not need so much built-in robustness towards the worst cases.) The method may be readily applied to any well-
designed FTIR instrument and to many types of multi-component measurements.

In addition to estimating gases, ANITA’s analyses comprise an automatic outlier detection ﬁmction. Based on all
estimated gas concentrations, the properly scaled reference spectra are subtracted from each measured spectrum.

The remaining spectral details represent noise and unexplained spectral features. Based on several criteria, the
system may give outlier warnings, pinpointing problematic spectral areas and suspicious spectral features. Outlier
warnings may be triggered by unexpected gas compounds, spectral artefacts (""ghosts""), or excessive noise.

An impoxtant step in the system testing before going to the ISS was the gas measurement testing on 30
accurately known multi-gas mixtures, applying 1 minute measurement time [3]. With a gas scenario of 32 gases,
including strong spectral inﬂuence from the background gases water, carbon dioxide, and methane, ANITA ‘
exhibited estimated detection limits for the 29 trace gases ranging from 0.003 ppm to 1.0 ppm.

3. ANITA on the ISS

‘ _Q ' ‘ it ,"", W v 4f: 5;; __ v ,3? “:tgéfrgggéga

A ll»: ”waéllz;

W ’3 fa ” “ ”ﬂ 3* 0%“! Mt?! ”£13 %¢/

aka 3 {A l tum f/p) 3% [frmgg

. é 1’ tr é -— + : m. / t '

«M Q ' 15%? m“ L? ' a6“

V i W?) Q.’ / "" , ' ”t “ , l ?ﬁ *3 w M V

-” a ll A t” ‘g’ 91' s ggwﬁt’é ft ‘5’“ 1’

a Q a L}; 3’?”th a»? ﬁe

‘3‘“;th )

Etta ;,§
Figure 1. Photos from the ISS. To the left close-np of ANITA in two standard rack inserts. In the middle ANITA's special flight engineer Clayton

Anderson with ANITA close to his right lower arm. To the right Clay taking a remote air sample with a hand pump. (Photos: NASA)
After installation on the ISS, ANITA was mostly operating fully autonomously, taking air samples locally and Q
making automatic air analyses every 6 minutes [4, 5]. In addition, whenever desired, remote air samples could be Q
taken by'a hand pump in a sample bag (see ﬁg. 1, right) and fed to ANITA for automatic analyses. In periods of the
time, mostly owing to. computerproblems not directly related to ANITA, ANITA was not in operation. These
periods are shown as red intetpolation lines in ﬁgure 2. .

"
"3",". Imaging and Applied Optics Technical Digest © 2011 OSA ‘
. ' AIMAl.pdf ‘
Right from the ﬁrst measurement on the ISS, ANITA gave outlier wamings [5]. Thanks to the automatic
enhancement of unknown spectral features, one feature could easily be identiﬁed as a probable unexpected gas, and
it was soon identiﬁed as sulphur hexaﬂuoride. Since this gas only has a rather narrow absorption band in the applied
V spectral region, it was a good preliminary solution to make a new calibration (on the spot in the control centre) with
~ this band excluded. This gave a new, applicable preliminary calibration for all the expected ~ gases without much
interference from the new gas. The sulphur hexaﬂuoride could only be estimated more roughly by manual analysis
of its very characteristic spectral feature, Later, when a proper reference spectrum of sulphur hexaﬂuoride could be '
measured on the ANITA Ground Model, a ﬁll] calibration for 33 gases was produced, uplinked to the ISS, and
installed in ANITA without astronaut involvement. — The sulphur hexaﬂuoride on the ISS originated as tracer gas in
a medical experiment, and it survives all air cleaning actions.
ANITA provided considerable new information on trace gas dynamics in the ISS air, since most of the gases had
never before been measured with high time resolution. Some gases had never been measured in the ISS air at all. A
good example is perﬂuoro propane (PFP), which earlier had only been estimated without any measurement. PFP is
used in cooling systems on the ISS and in 188 Soyuz spacecraft. Two example curves are shown in ﬁgure 2 [5, 6].
' A Perﬂuoro propane Perﬂuoro propane '
19 ...--.-..-..----. __ . ~
_ kg 5 mm Data gaps interpolated \5 W Data gaps interpolated
E 16 ‘ E MW‘LWW—WM
0 ~ ‘t . . . 3 : 2
0 i I ' 2 o : : :
o 50 100 150 I515 220 225 230
Days from start 24~Sep-2007 00:00:00 Days from start 24-Sep-2007 0013000
Figure 2. AN IT A measurements on PFP in the [88 air. The Ieft—hand plot shows the ﬁrst ﬁve months of operation. The bands of large variations
may look like noise, but are regular oscillations with a full period of 4 hours 49 minutes, and they occur when the US CDRA (Carbon Dioxide
Removal Assembly) is running. The oscillations reveal that PFP is temporarily adsorbed and then released back into the ISS air by dual action
sorbent beds with somewhat different capacities. A step down in concentration occurs each time 188 is exchanging air with PFP—free spacecraft '
(two Shuttle visits and subsequent Opening of new air-ﬁlled ISS modules). These PFP steps actually allow calculation of the relative air volumes
of the spacecraft and modules. The only increase in PFP occurs from day 19, through the visit by a PFP-containing ISS Soyuz. The n'ght-hand
plot shows 17 days around a PFP leak event April 29, 2008. ANITA could quickly detect and quantify the PFP release and monitor the effects of .
the clean-up actions. ANITA proved these actions to be ineffective, so that they were just given up, saving electric power and equipment wear.
— 4. Conclusion and outlook '
ANITA has proven its applicability and usefulness as an air quality monitor through operation on the ISS in 2007-
2008, when it was ﬂown in an ESA-NASA cooperation. Development of a ﬁthher improved system ANITA2 is
. ongoing, aiming for permanent operation on the ISS, and possibly for an ANITA3 for exploration missions. The .
novel analysis techniques are well suited also for general workplace air monitoring, industrial processes, and other
multi»component measurement tasks. . ' A
5. References
[l] Johansen I-R, Lines G T, Honne A, Midtgaard T, “Calibration of an FT-IR spectrometer for ambient air monitoring using PLS”, Applied
SpectrOSCOpy, Vol. 51 No. 10, 1540-46 (1997). . s
[2] Home A, Johansen l—R, Tan G, Stufﬂer T, “Blind Test Performance of the ESA FTIR-Based Multi-Component Monitoring System for ,
Spacecraft Air Analysis”, ICES 2001, Orlando, Florida, USA. Paper no. 2001;01-2157. ‘
‘ [3] Home A, Odegard H, Schumann-Olsen H, Stufﬂer T, Mosebach H, Kampf D, Tan G, “ANITA -- Preparing for Automatic Air Analyses on
the ISS”, ICES 2005, Rome, Italy. Paper no. 2005-01-2931. ‘
[4] Stufﬂer T, Mosebach H, Kampf D, Home A, Schumann-Olsen H, Kaspersen K, Supper W, Tan G, “ANITA Air Monitoring on the
International Space Station. Part 1: The Mission”, ICES 2008, San Francisco, California, USA. Paper no. 2008-01-2042.
' A [5] Home A, Schumann-Olsen H, Kaspersen K, Clausen S, Mosebach H, Kampf D, Stufﬂer T, Supper ‘W, Tan G, “ANITA Air Monitoring on
the International Space Station. Part 2: Air Analyses”, ICES 2008, San Francisco, California, USA. Paper no. 2008-01-2043. Also selected for
SAE Int. J. Aerosp. 1(1), 173-192 (2008). . .
[6] Home A, Schumann-Olsen H, Kaspersen K, Limero T, Macatangay A, Mosebach H, Kampf D, Mudgett P D, James! T, Tan G, Supper W,
’ “ANITA Air Monitoring on the International Space Station: Results compared to other measurements”, ICES 2009, Savannah, Georgia. USA.
~ Paper no. 2009-01-2520. .

"
