"","x"
"1","55th International Astronautical Congress 2004 - Vancouver, Canada
|AC-04-T.3.01
The Advanced Air Analyser ANITA on its Way to the International Space Station (ISS) in the Year
2005
Herbert Mosebach, Kayser—Threde GmbH, Munich, Germany; MH@kayser—threde.de
Dirk Kampf, Kayser—Threde GmbH, Munich, Germany; KD@kayser—threde.de
Timo Stuffler, Kayser—Threde GmbH, Munich, Germany; SU@kayser—threde.de
Atle Honne, SINTEF, Oslo, NonNay; Atle.Honne@sintef.no
Havard Odegard, SINTEF, Oslo, NonNay; Havard.Odegard@sintef.no
Gijsbert Tan, ESA ESTEC, Noordwijk; The Netherlands, Gijsbert.Tan@esa.int
This paper describes the main objectives, hardware status, and calibration work for the space-qualified gas
analyser ANITA (Analysing Interferometer for Ambient Air). Following over ten years of technology and
hardware selection, breadboarding and test phases, ANITA represents a space-mature instrument for air
quality analysis in the crew cabin on the International Space Station ISS. Based on the FTIR (Fourier
Transform Infrared) principle ANITA is able to detect and quantify more than 30 gases on—Iine and simulta-
neously, with detection limits to the lower ppb levels (depending on the substance). After the final calibration
for the 32 target compounds, the instrument is ready for launch to ISS. In two NASA inter—comparison
studies on different air montoring techniques ANITA ranked first in NASA’s evaluations [2, 6, 7]. ANITA shall
be brought to the ISS by means of the ATV maiden flight (Jules Verne) to the US Lab Destiny. ATV and,
thus, ANITA launch is scheduled for October 2005. ISS Increment 12 (to be confirmed) shall take care of
ANITA onboard ISS. The baseline mission scenario foresees some crew involvement on ANITA test meas-
urements for 10 days. A follow-on campaign, called the ANITA Extended Experiment, shaII last at least 6
months with automated continuous operation of the ANITA system.
Key words: ANITA, ISS, Cabin Air Monitoring, FTIR, Multi-component Analysis, SMAC
1. INTRODUCTION
As regularly reported [1 - 5], the European ANITA 2. ANITA HARDWARE
programme (ANITA stands for: Analysing Interfer- ANITA consists of two drawers for ISS middeck
ometer for Ambient Air) for manned spacecraft locker with connections on the front side of the
cabin-air-monitoring started over ten years ago. In panels.
different trade-off and breadboard activities, sup-
ported by a very successful blind sample testing
for NASA [2’ 6], FTI R spectrometry has been reC' “51> // _ .5-,r-.
ognised as the optimum technology to fulﬁl ESA’s E ii: Ia v m
requirements on continuous analyses of cabin air s I ’ ‘ I ""
CIuality on ISS. Based on the demonstrated air I}: *7 ~ (:13
monitoring quality of the technology the expecta- “ ' TEE
tion is to achieve an air quality characterisation on I I“. ‘7
ISS as never before. m” ‘ I 5 1505 ‘5
‘ ‘ (w *I TI ‘
In the past years ANITA has been evolved to a 5 1‘ \@EJ!:§
mature flight experiment. This is the case for the I \ Jf’mw I
instrument itself, and also for the analytical tools \I “\I MTSyg/Xv
to be applied for cabin air monitoring. The status I , 1 \
of ANITA is presented in this paper. I l
The interest on ANITA has successfully crossed ""a
the Atlantic Ocean. NASA-JSC is engaged in the . _ . . .
ANITA programme. The main responsibilities of fIi‘ﬂifjéﬁﬂJﬁs'RIegrated 0“ '88 W'th contronmg “OtebOOk
NASA concentrate on integration on Destiny as
well as mission preparation and support, and
NASA will also integrate ANITA on the ATV.
1

"
"2","55th International Astronautical Congress 2004 - Vancouver, Canada
Fig 2—1 shows the future integration of ANITA on cm1 is used for detection of the gas characteristic
ISS (greyed drawers) with a crew member con- absorption features. The spectrum in Fig. 2—4
trolling the instrument via a notebook. mainly shows the heavy and widespread absorp-
tion from the ever—present compounds water va-
Figures 2—2 and 2—3 illustrate the ANITA flight pour and carbon dioxide. The spectral distur-
hardware. ANITA is based on commercially avail- bances from these compounds, together with the
able sub-components and has been optimised for extensive spectral overlapping between the other
operation in manned space cabins. A new opto- 30 gases, make up one of the challenges that
mechanical design has resulted in a stable and must be solved through sophisticated analysis SW
lightweighted FTIR instrument with rugged me- and calibration procedures. The spectral resolu-
chanical and optimised optical performance (see tion of ANITA is 0.5 om'1.
figure 2—3). ANITA features space-proven design,
high signal-to-noise ratio, linear signal response _. _.
(which is very important for gas analysis) and - H
excellent opto-meohanical stability. The testing of "" fr '1
ANITA has demonstrated significant improvement x - i
compared to commercially available systems. (”I .
"" 71M i h
"" .5""? 5;"" Fig.4-2 FTIRspectrum measured with ANITA
--¢5r"": .- r~ .n- J
H;- 1* :Ff. 3. GAS ANALYSIS
_:'-ﬂlr -' The important starting point for the calibration
f rfﬁhgm work is the list of gases to be covered and their
n! "" ."" ii"" I'li: concentrations. The basis for compiling the gas
' 3-""! f . ““12 list is information from NASA on all relevant gas
‘ 3"": measurements from the ISS and the Shuttle
"" + ' (mostly post-mission sample analyses) and on
' ' other knowledge or assumptions on gases that
may occur. The defined gas list contains 32
gases, as shown in Table 3-1.
Fig. 2-2 ANITA hardware consisting of two ISS drawers
If an air mixture is stable in the spacecraft cabin, it
will essentially be stable in the FTIR system as
well. Some semi- or non-volatile compounds may
have a tendency to deposit on surfaces, but for
gas concentrations up to a few ppm, this is a mi-
;___ nor problem. Any deposits that may accumulate
1?? :i'f on optical surfaces will be effectively compen-
r 1.5.3.?”- _1.. sated for through the optical measurement princi-
.g-Ij'iiﬂii 355.5: ' j_' .""__ If ple. However, for the calibration process, it is
' fﬁT-._1¢* necessary to establish known and reasonably
f, f 13- high concentrations for the gases in the gas cell in
F"" .{J‘W’ ' order to measure (at least) one reference spec-
‘ua-y/ trum for each gas. This becomes a challenge
"" ¥ -' -."", when handling compounds like the three silox-
1'...- 't-""-'"" anes (gases no. 26 — 28 in Table 3-1), which are
“r oily liquids or even solid at room temperature and
pressure. In order to protect the flight HW from
Fi 2-3 FTIRinstrumentcore ofANITA(cover removed) high concentrations Of the Siloxanes’ the refer-
9' ence spectra for these compounds have been
. . . measured on a different FTIR instrument, which
In ﬁg"" 2'4’ a typical ANITA spectrum '8 shown. has a gas cell that can be baked out more easily
The wave number range between 600 and 4000
aftenNards.
2

"
"3","55th International Astronautical Congress 2004 - Vancouver, Canada
The calibration modelling itself is based on simu- If linear calibration models are applied, the resolu-
lations, applying detailed knowledge of the in- tion-induced non-linear FTIR spectral response
strument noise Characteristics and baseline drift, leads to non-linear response for measurement of
and general knowledge on spectral effects. All some gases as well. In ANITA, this effect will be
reference spectra have been measured on the automatically corrected.
flight HW or comparable HW at the expected op-
erational temperature 0f the gas cell, since the An outlier situation implies that the analyses give
gas spectra depend on temperature. The Partial results that are abnormal, e.g. values out of
Least Squares (PLS) has been selected as kernel specification or indications of an error. One of the
for the analytical models. outlier situations we want to detect and identify is
the presence of a gas unknown to the system, or
The most important further developments in gas an outlier gas. Although ANITA’s present gas list
calibration and analyses in ANITA are: of 32 compounds is based on all existing knowl-
edge of the ISS gas environment, outlier gases
- Improved handling of non-linear spectral in- may still occur. The reason may be that a com-
terference. pound was never before released to the ISS air in
- Automatic correction for non-linear gas re- significant concentration, or that previous releases
sponse only happened in the long periods between the air
- Improved optimisation of parameters in the sampling for gas analyses.
calibration modelling.
° More sensitive and specific outlier detection. Ah important part Of the outlier detection in ANITA
is based on analyses on the residual IR spectrum,
- methanol - ethyl benzene - 2-butan0ne
- ethanol - ethyl acetate (methyl ethyl ketone)
- 2-pr0pan01 (isopropanol) (CH3COOC2H5) (CH3COCH2CH3)
- 1-butan01 - n—butyl acetate - hexamethyl cyclo-
- formaldehyde (CH3COO(CH2)3CH3) trisiloxane
- acetaldehyde - dichloro methane ([(CH3)ZSiO]3
- propionaldehyde - Freon 11 (CC13F) in Si-O ring)
- butyraldehyde (n-) - Freon 12 (CClez) - octamethyl cyclo-
- toluene - triﬂuoro bromo methane tetrasiloxane ([...]4)
(methyl benzene) (Halon 1301) - decamethyl cyclo-
- meta—xylene - Freon 113 (CCleCCle) pentasiloxane ([...]5)
(meta—dimeth. benzene) - perﬂouro propane (C3F8) - ammonia
- 0rth0-xylene - hexane (n-) - carbon monoxide
(orthO-dimeth. benzene) - acetone (Z-propanone, - methane
- para—xylene dimethyl ketone) - carbon dioxide
(para—dimethyl benzene) (CH3COCH3) - water
Table 3-1: Compounds covered by the ANITA analytical models
The simulation parts of the calibration modelling i.e. the remainder of the measured absorption
have been extended to include non-linear re- spectrum after a properly scaled reference spec-
sponse to narrow spectral lines. Such non- trum for each detected gas compound has been
linearity occurs for narrow spectral lines that are subtracted. ln popularterms the residual spectrum
not fully resolved by the FTIR instrument. This represents the “unused” or unexplained part of the
improvement will give even better protection measured spectrum. In ANITA, improved pre-
against non-linear spectral interference. processing of the measured spectra will give re-
duced noise in the residual spectra, especially the
3

"
"4","55th International Astronautical Congress 2004 - Vancouver, Canada

potentially dominating noiseinduced by non-linear figures 4-2 and 4-3). This mode enables gas

spectral response. This noise reduction opens for analysis at critical locations with respect to air

more sensitive outlier detection. It is also planned quality far away from ANITA.

to make the outlier detection and warning more

specific on which spectral areas that show sus- =1 R . _

pect signals. ~.___ _t ""ah, ..,__ W

I ‘ ' '""H_""'-- -_'*I'- '

ANITA will have one set of robust calibration -. ' t _ - _-.-‘.__ r _.

models for general use. However, for the ex- ' 1' ﬂ '

tended mission (see chapter 7), it is planned that - . l .tgv‘” '

special calibration optimisations will be made ao- Fl n 14;,” ﬂ,

cording to the measurement results on the ISS. "" I #4, i. Iﬁ'ﬂ‘ﬁ

The FTIR instrument and the method of oalibra- gaff. .h ' - -. ""1t ,1'

tion make the ANITA system well suited for such iii; """"' ' '

“retrofit” optimisations to enhance the system {Pugh 9,: W""

sensitivity even further. .1“. wt '

- a - .

4. ANITA SAMPLING MODES '-

ANITA shall be operated in two different modes:

The so-called (1) local sampling and (2) non-looal _ _ _ _

sampling modes_ In local sampling (1) ANITA Ejtgéif) ANITA non-localsampltng scenarro(wrth courtesy of

automatically collects air samples from the imme-

diate neighbourhood of the instrument with fol- 5 ANITA RESULTS IN NASA REVIEW OF

lowing gas analysis. Only little crew interaction is ' AIR MONITORING TECHNOLOGIES

necessary mainly for unstow and set-up .Of the NASA issued in year 2003 a Request For Infor-

Instrurnent, for stall and stop Of the continuous mation (RFI) to identify technologies that might be

operation, for monitoring ANITA every now ?“d capable of performing air quality monitoring on

then, and for eventual S.t0W. aftel missnon. A typical ISS [7]. The objective was to analyse technologies

local sampling timeline IS given In figure 4'1"" that might be suitable for replacement of the (cur-

Hwnmmmlml rently installed) Volatile Organic Analyzer (VOA)

...=ml=.-:t.=t on the ISS. Nine different technologies were pre-

._.. I I ........._....... sented to NASA, among them ANITA. Two of

W"" '-‘ 5 t '* these technologies were FTIR based (also

'Eﬂ“ .5731?"" Emir: F""““ Jﬂﬂﬁ; ANITA), the others use G0 or a combination of
i'ﬂﬂh'itul 5'” GC with further analysing methods like MS.

Fig_ 4—1 Local sampling operational flow NASA fOCUSSGd their review and evaluation to: (1)
Operation on ISS, (2) instrument characteristics
like mass, power, volume, analysis time, (3) sys-

___ __ . tem characteristics with main focus on develop-
$1 ""'_""' , ment maturity, (4) compounds coverage (more
3‘. than 35 compounds need to be detected, detec-
i _ tion limits, analysis accuracy and precision), and
J1 ' (5) instrument maintainability.
ANITA scored highest in this NASA review, to-
'- gether with one GC-based instrument. The only
i drawbacks of ANITA mentioned by NASA are high
. '._.- mass and volume, and not sufficient quantification
F. . range for some compounds. On the other hand,
'9' 4-2 PmtOtype Ofgas bag for mmocal samplmg clear highlights of ANITA are in the eyes of NASA

On the contrary, non-looal sampling (2) requires its development maturityz the ability for-operation

that the crew feeds the air samples to ANITA. In 0.“ '33, Short respons‘? .t'meS’ prove“ “'9“ aUa'y'

this mode air samples from elsewhere on ISS will sns accuracy and preonsnon, and very low mainte-
be intermediately collected in gas bags by means nance.

of a modified syringe, followed by the release of

the gas bag contents into ANITA for analysis (see

4

"
"5","55th International Astronautical Congress 2004 - Vancouver, Canada
6. ANITA STATUS Lab Destiny. ISS increment 12 (the number has
The ANITA hardware has been completed and still to be verified) is foreseen to operate ANITA.
fully verified against its required functionality. This During a ten days initial mission phase an en-
comprises the optical performance of the instru- hanced crew involvement in ANITA is foreseen, e.
ment, e. g. in terms of signal-to—noise ratio, linear g. to take care of non-Iocal sampling. The situa-
signal response, and opto—mechanical stability. A tion on ISS without an operative multi-component
successful parabolic flight campaign has proven gas analyser drives a NASA requirement to use
ANITA’s full performance under zero gravity. This the ANITA flight experiment continuously meas-
test took place in spring 2004 with five consecu- uring after the originally defined experiment phase
tive flights and 30 parabolas each (see figure 6-1). — the ANITA extended mission after the initial 10
On the left hand side the free-flying instrument days. This Extended Experiment shall last at least
drawer can be identified, the second drawer with 6 months with reduced crew activities, running the
the notebook on top are fixed to the aircraft floor. instrument mainly in the automated local sampling
mode. In parallel, gas analysis will be performed
. i even on-ground for model optimisation (e. 9. out-
'n. - |ier detection). For this reason, the ANITA meas-
' ' 1| urement data (spectra and gas concentrations)
_ _ . , ., shall be downloaded on a daily basis.
em'iﬂh ""-"" -
1 a FEE}. a I.
. ., _p..:-.__ _ ._ , 8. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK
"" "" ' _ ' Several aspects of the advanced air analyser
_ - -' - * ' .__H ANITA have been presented . The ANITA system,
_ ' -. ; - __ = “"".""""'-'=.-=_-. with its hardware and software units, has been
_ E ' ': _ '= ' e"" ' __1_;: described, together with the plans and prepara-
' . ﬁr—ﬂ"" "" “ii"" i _ : tions for the mission on the ISS in 2005.
_ - . I i ""i ANITA is foreseen to be brought to ISS by means
"" - j _ _ ___-._-_- 2.,” 0f the ATV maiden flight in October 2005. An ini-
. - ' “""""TLJ __L_.,:::_ *- 3 “-. tial 10 days mission with enhanced crew involve-
_ . -- ' a“ "" ' 1 _..--= ment will be starting point for the ANITA meas-
:1” ' ' W _ urements on ISS. The ANITA Extended Experi-
Fig. 6-1 ANITA on parabolicflight ment shall follow, with parallel optimisation of the
analytical models. The measurement results from
The development of analytical models (which ANITA will be regularly exchanged between ESA
includes the measurement of calibration spectra) and NASA supporting the ISS air management.
has passed CDR, and will be completed begin of
2005. Consequently, the final ANITA end-to-end 9. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
testing will be performed immediately after. This The ANITA work is funded by ESA under several
will be conducted in two steps, one with main contracts, with support by the German DLR and
focus on gas analysis performance, a second the NonNegian Space Agency.
phase mainly aiming at full operational functional-
ity. The European ANITA team expresses its grati-
tude to NASA JSC for their important support of
A crew training model of ANITA has been devel- the ANITA programme with many helpful contri-
oped. All hardware and software interfaces to the butions and discussions.
astronauts have been implemented, and the 10.REFERENCES
ANITA actions (to be conducted by the crew)
simulated. 1. Current Status of the ESA FTlR-based Multi-
component Monitoring System for Spacecraft
ANITA shall be shipped to NASA-JSC in March AirAna/yis, T. Stuffler, A. Honne, |.-R. Jo-
2005 for mission preparation and integration into hansen, H. Able, G. Tan; ICES 1999, Denver
launcher (ATV, see next paragraph).
2. Blind test performance of the ESA FTIR-
7_ MISSION PLANNING based Component Monitoring System for
ANITA shall be brought to the International Space Spacecraft Cabin Design, A. Home |--R- J0-
Station (ISS) onboard the ATV maiden flight hansen, (3- Tan, T- Stuffler; ICES 2001, Or-
(Jules Verne), which is scheduled for October Iando
2005, and integrated on Express Rack of the US
5

"
"6","55th International Astronautical Congress 2004 - Vancouver, Canada

3. Status Report on ANITA, an FTIR Spec-
trometer Flight Experiment for Manned
Space Cabin Air Analysis, T. Stuffler, D.
Kampf, H. Mosebach, M. Glier, A. Home,
Gijsbert Tan; ICES 2002, San Antonio

4. ANITA — The Optimized Spacecraft Air
Monitor on its way to Orbit, T. Stuffler, D.
Kampf, H. Mosebach, A. Home, Gijsbert
Tan; ICES 2003, Vancouver

5. ANITA and ANITA ll — Optimized Analysers
for Andvanced Air Quality Monitoring in
Crewed Spacecraft, T. Stuffler, H. Mosebach,
D. Kampf, A. Home, H. Odegard, Gijsbert
Tan; ICES 2004, Colorado Springs

6. A Process to Evaluate Advanced Technolo-
gies for Future NASA needs; T. Limero, J.T:
James; ICES 2001; Orlando

7. A Review of Air Monitoring Technologies for
Trace Gas Contaminants in the International
Space Station, J. T. James and J. T. McCoy;
ICES 2004, Colorado Springs

6

"
