"","x"
"1","conference papers
Granada crystallisation BOX: a new device for limitations, new methods have been proposed in which the
r t .n r t H. t. b t d.ff . nucleation and crystal growth proceeds far from equilibrium, the
p 0 El. C YS a Isa Ion y coun er' I USIOH main practical consequence of this being the existence of large
technlques gradients of two or more of the quantities controlling supersaturation
both across the system and along the experimental time. These
Juan Ma Garcia-Ruiz * Luis Antonio Gonzalez-Ramirez gradients ensure that crystals growing at different points of the
, . . + ' , , ' growth cell do it under a different supersaturation values and
Jose Antonio Gavnra and Fermm Otalora . . .
dlfferent rate of change of supersaturatlon, reducmg the number (or
. . . , . even eliminating the need) of screening and rate optimisation
Laboratorlo de EStUd’OS Crista/ograflcos. IACT- Campus experiments. This is the case of the so-called counter-difﬁasion
Fuenten.ueva..Facu/tad de Ciencias. 78002-Cranada, Spain. methods (Garcia-Ruiz, 1981; Garcia-Ruiz, 2002).
E'ma’l-‘lmgrU’ZC‘ngres Based on our experience in one-dimensional counter-difﬁasion
methods (Henisch & Garcia-Ruiz, 1985; Garcia-Ruiz, 1991; Garcia-
Ruiz & Moreno, 1991; Garcia-Ruiz et al., 1993; Otalora & Garcia-
Granada Crystallisation Box (GCB) is a new crystallisation deVice Ruiz, 1996) we have developed and made commercially available a
designed to perform counter-difﬁasion experiments. Here we new deVice for implementing counter-difﬁasion experiments (though
describe the deVice and its use for protein crystallisation purposes. not limited to them). The main features and uses Of this device,
GCB allows one to explore and exploit the coupling between called “Granada Crystallisation Box” (GCB), are described in this
crystallisation and diffusion. The role of Viscous ﬂuids, gels and/or article. GCB iS primarily intended for (though not limited t0) the
microgravity can be enhanced by using capillary volumes, creating a growth 0f crystals 0f biological macromolecules, SO it Will be
perfect diffusive mass transport scenario. The use of capillaries also described here in this context. The capabilities of GCB in other
reduces the consumption of macromolecules and avoids the handling crystal growth experiments will be published separately. The
of crystals for X-ray diffraction data collection, advantages of this new setup, discussed through the text, can be
summarized as follows:
Keywords: crystallisation device, protein, counter-diffusion (i) It works under difﬁsion-controlled mass transport, which is
known to produce better ordered crystal lattices provided the growth
1 Introduction proceeds in the diffusion controlled or mixed regime. The role of
i _ _ Viscous ﬂuids, gels or microgravity is enhanced by using capillary
Blologlcal macromolecules are. currently crysta111sed from volumes
supersaturated or supercooled solutions.(M.cPherson, 19.99;Ducru1x (ii) It automatically searches for the optimal crystallisation
& Glege; 1999} The Simplest crystallisation method 1? the batch conditions. Because of the properties of counter-difﬁasion
method 1h Whleh the p1‘ote1n solution and the solutlon 0f .the experiments, one single capillary scans the same precipitation region
prec1p1tat1ng agent are. nnxed to achleve a supersaturated solutlon. in the phase space as do many drops. As a consequence, only one
The ma1n recognlsed 11n11tatlon of the batch technlque 1s the lack of capillary is needed per precipitating agent.
control overthe delveloprnent 1n time 0t; supeﬁ‘satugatioia, blecause th: (iii) It reduces the consumption of macromolecule. Just 1 to 10
supersaturation V3 ue 1s instantaneous y ac 1eve an t e rate 0 ul of protein solution is needed per capillary (smaller volumes can
change of supersaturatlon 1s ﬁxed and controlled by the very growth - - - -
. . . . . also be used for screenlng purposes 1n caplllanes smaller that 0.1
process. Th1s 1s a severe restnctlon for compounds nucleatlng at very - - - -
. . . . . mm 1n d1ameter). As the number of experlments requlred to get good
hlgh supersaturatlon (as 1s the case of most blologlcal - - -
. crystals 1s reduced (see above), further reductlons 1n global sample
macromolecules), because the crystal grows (at least durlng the ﬁrst . .
. . . . consumptlon are obta1ned.
stages) from hlghly supersaturated solutlons requlred to atta1n . . . . .
. . . . . . . (1V) It m1n1m1ses the volume of the expenmental set-up. 120
nucleation, Wthh 11m1ts the crystal qua11ty and s12e. For th1s reason, . . . . .
. . . . . . caplllarles can be stacked 1n the holder shown 1n Flgure 1. The
most of the crysta111satlon protocols 1nV01V1ng th1s kind of . . . . . .
. . des1gn 1s modular and eas11y adaptable to dlfferent requlrements 1n
substances make use of some act1ve mechanlsm to exceed . . . . . . .
. . . . . experiment storage. This is particularly useful 1n nncrograV1ty
supersaturatlon from an 1n1t1a11y undersaturated or saturated solutlon. . . .
These mechanisms are based on temperature changes (thermal selence. Up to 30 GCBs can be p11ed 1n a volume of about 10x10x10
methods), evaporation of the solvent (vapour diffusion methods), or cm. _ _ _ _
slow mixing of solutions either through a membrane (dialysis) or (V) It 1s very well su1ted for X-ray analys1s.. GCB prov1des. an
free liquid interface (free interface diffusion methods). These easy and safe way to transport crystals to X-ray d1ffract1onfac111t1es.
methods, when correctly adjusted, are able to produce crystals In situ X-ray crystallography 1s easyfor crystals grown 1ns1de X-1:ay
nucleated close to the lowest possible supersaturation. Three cap111arles. No handhng of crystals 1s required, eliminating the 1‘1sk
different problems are still present in these methods: ﬁrst the rate of of crystal loss.or quality degradatlon durlng handling and mountlng.
change of supersaturation must be adjusted for them to work, if the At the sanie t1me, GCB can also be used for cryo-crystallography,
rate of increase of supersaturation is too slow, experimental time is ﬂash-coohng protocols have been tested successfully for GCB
wasted and, even worse, if it is too fast, the beneﬁts of the method capillaries conta1n1ng crystals as grown:
are lost due to the excess supersaturation accumulated during the (V1) It makes easy the V1sua11sation 0f the growth process.
nucleation induction time; second, this rate of increase of Transparent glass capillaries are very well su1ted for mlcroscopic
supersaturation is dependent on the solubility of the compound, so observatlon. The fact that they are contained theniselves 1h a
several screening experiments are needed to determine its optimum transparent box makes eas1er and safer the observation under the
value; and third, very often the nucleation and growth kinetics are mlcroscope.
governed by more than one parameter, which severely increases the
number of screening experiments required. To overcome these 2. Description Of the GCB
t Present address: Laboratory for Structural Biology, Materials Science Figure 13 Shows a general OVetheW 0f the GCB set including
Building, UAH, Huntsville AL-35899, USA. several boxes mounted on a rack. The GCB consist of three parts
1638 © 2002 International Union of Cr stallograph - Printed in Denmark — all rights reserved Acta Cr 5t. (2002). D58, 1638—1642
Y Y y

"
"2","conference papers
made of polystyrene: the box body (Figure 1b) consisting of a protein crystal growth experiment with the GCB is very easy using
narrow box open on one side, the capillary holder (Figure 1c) that the so-called Gel Acupuncture MEthod (GAME) from which the
ﬁts into the body and the cover lid (Figure 1b top) that closes the GCB inherits many of its advantages, particularly the automatic
box. The box body has been designed to be small enough for search for optimum crystallisation conditions and the possibility of
experiments storage and transport yet being able to hold up to siX performing handling-free diffraction data collection.
different crystallisation experiments. The box is transparent and The ﬁrst step to implement this kind of experiment is to prepare
narrow to allow microscopic observation of the experiments. The the buffered sol of the gel precursor (Figure 2a). For simplicity we
rationale behind the design of the capillary holder is as follows: the focus here only on agarose gels because they are reversible and have
density Of experiments must be maximised but without been demonstrated not to interact with protein molecules (Finet er
compromising either easy insertion and handling of capillaries or the al., 1998; Vidal el‘ al., 1998). Other gels like silica 0r polyacrylamide
microscopic observation capabilities. The capillary holder can can be used as well. Agarose gel preparation involves mixing the
accommodate capillaries of diameter ranging from 0.1 mm to 1.5 appropriate volume of buffer solution with agarose powder under
mm. The construction of the holder as a separate part was decided continuous stirring for a ﬁnal agarose concentration of 0.5 % w/V.
for ﬂexibility because this design allows the implementation Of This recommended agarose concentration is enough to maintain the
techniques other than counter-diffusion in capillaries within the same capillaries and to avoid disordered fracture of the gel. The mixture is
box body (see section 4). Polystyrene was used as the building then heated to boiling in order to break the cross-links of the agarose
material balancing the beneﬁts and drawbacks of different materials ﬁbres; at this point the agarose solution becomes transparent. After
for optical quality, chemical stability, physical stability and price. A keeping the solution at this temperature for about two minutes under
plastic rack is available for the storage of the GCB boxes upside (see continuous stirring, pour 3 ml in the GCB box body (Figure 2c) in
Figure 1a). which the capillary holder was previously inserted (Figure 2b). The
3. Counter-diffusion in the GCB sol is then allowed .to cool to room temperature, which takes few
minutes. The cross-links of the agarose Will be set to yield a gel With
The GCB is designed mainly for counter-diffusion crystal growth a strength that depends on the agarose type used in this study. We
experiments inside glass capillaries. Performing a counter-diffusion recommend an agarose with a gelling temperature of about 37°C.
While the gel is setting, ﬁll the capillaries with your buffered
. III...- protein solution. To do this, cut the capillary to 7 cm length ensuring
I: - ql-lg. . .
“ﬂ!"" __¥ — ___ '. h J"" _ _ that the two ends of the capillary are open and introduce the lower
: _ 14].: ' ': '""""-- - end of the capillary into the protein solution (Figure 2d). The
I. ---'|;-:.-- :' . I: I- . !.. {#3:
I“. r -' . a b C d
. J: . _I.|fu . _ I
T?” _ ' I I Precipitant I I I I
um“ Ilmul
/
a Gel /A
35 28
<—> <—> ‘
3 Protein l| “III
I 4 — — —
51 ll
5 I IIIIIIIIIII I m I E
II I “III “III
9 5 IIEEMJI IIIIHIHIEJIKI IHIHIEIEJI
85 ""Ill"" |||||ll|lw |||||l|llll
b c d
Figure 1 C f g
View of the Granada Crystallisation BOX. b-d) Sketch of the GCB Fi ure 2
components showing: b) the body of the box, and c) the capillary holder. All g
dimensions are given in mm. Schematic sequence of experimental set-up. See text for explanation.
Acta Cryst. (2002). D58, 1638—1642 Garcia—Ruiz et al. 1639

"
"3","conference papers
solution enters the tube by capillarity. Fill the capillary to your counter-difﬁJsion are not exploited and GCB is used just as a
convenience. Filling to a height of 5—6 cm is the common practice in container providing a capillary holder, microscopy observation and
our laboratory, because this length ensures the beneﬁts of counter- easy handling; in the second case the beneﬁts of capillaries are lost
difﬁJsion for reasonable experimental times. Then seal the upper end but those of counter-difﬁJsion techniques are gained.
of the capillary With a small amount of vacuum grease or your A capillary gel microbatch setup can be implemented easily by
preferred sealing material. the following protocol: Prepare your buffered precipitating agent
Next step is to thrust the capillary into the gel layer (Figure 2e). solution and mix it With agarose at 0.25 %. Boil it for 1 minute and
To do it, introduce the capillary through one of the holes in the GCB then cool it to 40°C. Maintain the sol at this temperature. Mix the
capillary holder and insert it into the gel. Inserting the capillary 2—3 appropriate volume of the protein solution With the appropriate
mm is just enough to keep it upside up, but note that this penetration volumes of the sol. In other words, proceed as to prepare a drop for
length is a variable to tune the Window of screened crystallisation microbatch. Then, suck the drop into the capillary by capillarity.
conditions. Longest penetration length increases the physical buffer Seal both ends of the capillary and hold it in the GCB capillary
of the counter-difﬁJsion arrangement lowering the rate at Which the holder. The use of oil With microbatch technique inside capillaries
salt invades the capillary containing the protein. Up to six capillaries can be also implemented (Moreno 62‘ al, 2002).
per GCB can be set in this way. The growth of crystals inside gels by counter-difﬁJsion is very
Finally, pour the buffered solution of your precipitating agent on simple. This method is ideal to prepare many large high-quality
top of the gel layer (Figure 2f). Typically a volume equal to the crystals for special purposes such as having many crystals for testing
volume of the gel layer, i.e. 3 ml is recommended. Note that With some experimental procedure, but it consumes a larger amount of
this 1:1 ratio, the ﬁnal precipitant concentration after protein than usual techniques. Make a sol of agarose at 1.2 % W/V by
homogenization of the experiment is half the initial concentration boiling the mixture for a couple of minutes. Prepare the protein
and close the box With the lid (Figure 2g) adding some vacuum solution. Let the agarose sol cool down to a temperature of about
grease to the body-lid joint before closing to completely avoid 40°C. Keep the agarose sol at this temperature. Under stirring, mix
evaporation. Optionally, the box body and lid can be ﬁxed covering one part of agarose sol With ten parts of protein solution, so that the
the joint With adhesive tape for further stability While handling of the ﬁnal concentration of agarose is 0.12 % While that of protein is 9/10
box. of the initial one. This agarose concentration is the minimum to
Alternatively, another counter-difﬁJsion setup can be produce an actual gel network. Pour the mixture into the GCB and
implemented, The procedure is even simpler, Pour 3 m1 of the introduce the capillary holder. AllOW the 801 to 0001 to room
buffered precipitating agent solution into the body of the GCB, temperature to set the gel. Once the gel is set, pour a solution of
Then, insert the capillary holder in the body of the GCB, Now, precipitating agent on top of the gelled protein solution layer. In this
prepare an agarose sol of your buffered protein solution at an technique the capillary holder is not used to hOld any capillary but to
agarose concentration of 0,2 % w/V, According to our experience, allow the easy extraction of the gel slice containing the crystals after
this agarose concentration is the minimum to avoid the leakage from the end of the growth. For instance, this implementation can be used
the capillary to the precipitating agent solution. To do it prepare the to grow reinforced protein crystals inside silica gels (Garcia-Ruiz 62‘
buffered agarose solution at a concentration of 2 % W/V and maintain al, 1998). Prepare a tetramethoxysilane (TMOS) 801 at the selected
the sol at 40°C, i.e., just a few degrees above the gelling temperature. concentration (between 1 and 20 % W/V) by mixing your buffered
Pour your protein solution into an Eppendorf tube and hold it in your protein solution With the appropriate amount 0f TMOS under
hand to maintain it at a temperature of 37°C, Pour a volume of continuous stirring. Four 3 ml ofthe solution into the GCB body and
agarose sol equal to 1/ 10 of the volume of the protein solution into introduce the capillary holder. Wait until the gel iS set, WhiCh
the Eppendorf and assure complete mixing by shaking the tube in depends on pH and TMOS concentration. Then pour onto the gel the
your hand. Then ﬁll and seal the capillary as above. Finally, solution of the precipitating agent and close the GCB.
introduce the capillary through one of the holes in the GCB capillary
holder and soak its lower end into the solution of precipitating agent. 5, Previous experience
d The amount Of protein solutlon .needed for these expenments Many different proteins have been crystallized successfully using
epends obV1ously on the caplllary diameter and on how much you
ﬁll the capillaries. Filling the capillaries up to a length of 50 or 60 GCB “P t0 “OW' These m°1°°ul°5 Sh°W° bl°°° rang° °fm°1°°mar
mm is recommended in order to have a Wide screening of the phase weight (from 5 to 1000 kDa), 1soelectrlc p01nt (.fmm 3 t0 1.2) and
dia am. The recommended ca illar diameter ran es from 0.1 mm pre01p1tant (salts, polymers, pH change). This information is
gr p y g . . . . .
for screenin ex eriments to 0.5 mm for roducin lar e or stals. summarlzed in Table I. Currently we are working in collaboration
g P P g g Y - - - - - -
Within these limits, the minimum protein solution volume required Wlth dlfferent groups to .expand this .hSt on hove crystallisation
. . . . systems displaying very different behaV1our can be 1mplemented in
to implement GCB experiments is 0.39 ul per capillary for . . .
. . . . GCB. Flgure 3 shows several typical crystals grown 1n GCB from
screening, the max1mum is 11.78 ul for producmg large crystals and . .
_ _ _ _ molecules 11sted 1n Table 1.
around 4 ul for obta1n1ng crystals of a suitable s12e for X-ray data
collection.
6. X ray measurements using GCB
4. Other methods _ _ _ _ _
Data collection at room temperature is made sens1bly eas1er by us1ng
As GCB has been deﬁned to implement counter-difﬁJsion crystal GCB as the crystals grow inside capillaries that can be X-ray
growth inside capillaries, it is perfectly suited for experiments capillaries. Therefore, no crystal handling or mounting is required;
having a subset of the experimental requirements of counter- just take your capillary, seal the open end With your favourite sealing
difﬁJsion techniques. Many different experimental setups can be material after drying or cleaning a little bit the capillary end and
implemented by combining gelled or ungelled solutions With or mount the capillary on the goniometer head. If the range of
Without capillaries. Two eVident examples are crystal growth inside displacement of your goniometer along the spindle axis is too short
capillaries by the batch method and inside gel by counter-difﬁJsion to accommodate the Whole capillary, you can cut and seal it to get
directly in the body of the GCB. In the ﬁrst case the beneﬁts of shorter capillary segments. In case the crystals are moving inside the
1640 Garcia—Ruiz et al. Acta Cryst. (2002). D58, 1638—1642

"
"4","conference papers
v Table 1 Crystals grown using the GCB.
Protein MW pI Precipitating pH In collaboration with
(kDa) system
. Dehydroquinase 17.2 5.8 Ammoniun 7.4 Tibotec-Virco
4. sulphate (Mechelen, Belgium)
“ / ‘ 3 Saicar synthase 35.5 5.3 Ammonium 7.5 Institute of
sulphate Crystallography
(Moscow, Russia)
’ . Factor XIII 336 5.1 MES 7.0 Institut ﬁir Molekulare
Biotechnologie (Jena,
' Germany)
Cytochrome C 15 4.6 Ammoniun 7 .5 Instituto de Tecnologia
"" 3 sulphate Quimica e Biolégica
23%.. ‘1 ‘ (Oeiras, Portugal)
”jg; Alliinase 51.5 6.5 Ammonium 8.2 Institut ﬁir Molekulare
Mi ‘5“ 3 . sulphate Biotechnologie (Jena,
’ Germany)
_ .3333 Glucose Isomerase 173 3 Polyethylene 7 .4
*‘W ' l: ""4.; glycol 8000
r. {3,531 . 1Q; Lumazine 1000 5.4 Sodium 8.7 TechnicalUniversity
-_\ . ""W 33...... synthase potassium Munich (Garching,
ll '5', f3; 14%;? phosphate Germany)
4’ 5' 7 ‘7 Lysozyme 14 11 Sodium 4.5
‘ ... , 3,3434 _ .ﬂ chloride
3,2? ‘ f 3 ~ Thaumatin 22 12 Sodium 6.5
— J W "" potassium
Tartrate
Figure 3 Ferritin 456+PMFe 4.5 Cadmium 5.0
sulphate
Some examples of proteins crystallised in the GCB. Top row from left to Insulin 5 5.5 Sodium 9.0
right: insulin, Glucose isomerase, Ferritin and Xylanase. Bottom row: phase _ Phosphate
interferometric images (Dubois & Novella, personal communication). Concanavalln A 102 5'5 Pflyeltlgyggge 8'0
g YCO
Catalase 250 5.6 Ammonium 5.2 Institute of
solution or you get too much scattering from the solution, you can sulphate Crystallography
- - ° (Moscow, Russia)
extract part of the selutlon before seallng us1ng cellulose ﬁbers or Ami lysozyme 27.9 8.4 Sodium 536 Vrije Universiteit
any other absorber Without touchlng the crystals. camel antibody formats (Bmssel, Belgium)
Of particular interest for X-ray characterization is the possibility Human liver 160 6.5 Polyethylene 9.0
° ° FBPase glycol 3350
of produc1ng shaped crystals. Far frorn the open end of the caplllary, Apofemﬁn 456 4.3 Cadmium 5.0
crystals nucleate at low supersaturatlon, and therefore at very low sulphate
nucleation density, so the resulting crystals grow to large sizes and, Xylanase 21 9.0 Polyethylene 7.0
eventually are large enough as to completely ﬁll the capillary (Figure g1y0014000
- - - - - - - (Pro-Pro-Gly)10 7.6 5.2 Sodium acetate 5.4 University of Naples
3a). Th1s produces cyllndrlcal crystals that, 1n add1t10n to maklng (Naples Italy)
absorption correction trivial, are intereSting for some X-ray Triose Phosphate 28.5 5.6 Ammonium 8.0 University of Liege
techniques. Isomerase sulphate (Sart Tilman, Belgium)
Cryocrystallography is possible Within the capillaries used in the
GCB (Lepez-Jaramilllo et al., 2001). The cryoprotectant can be experiments can be handed from the storage shelf to the microscope
included from the very beginning in the protein solution or added by and back without any risk. In addition, transport of crystals to
diffusion using the same GCB setup before taking out the capillaries. synchrotron facilities can be performed using directly GCBs. A
If the protein solution in the capillary has been mixed With agarose, thermostated transportation box for GCB Will be soon available.
the crystals 00 not move. Their quality can be tested at home and full Advanced observation techniques, like interferometry, can also
data collection at synchrotron facilities can be later performed on be used on the GCB experiments inside or outside capillaries.
previously selected crystals. An all-in-one procedure to obtain Recently, holographic Video and interferometry techniques have
crystals 111t0 capillaries Wlth the incorporation 0f anomalous been successfully tested in capillaries mounted in GCB boxes
scatterlng halides 1n cryogenlc solutions ready for ﬂash cooling (Figure 3 6.3 during the deﬁnition of a microgravity crystal growth
cryocrystallogr 31th has been demonstrated (GaV1ra 61‘ 611-4 2002)- facility (PROMISS) centred on interferometric observation of crystal
In special cases, When the X-ray technique to be used requires growth (Zegers & Dubois, personal communication). In fact, GCB
special handling, it is always possible to extract the crystals from the have been already used for microgravity experiments, as a passive,
capillary and to handle the crystals in the way needed for the light and inexpensive facility for protein crystallisation. Details of
particular X-ray data collection setup. the implementation and rationality of these experiments Will be
described elsewhere.
7. Observation capabilities, transportation and use in microgravity
. . . . . . 8. Further information
In spite of their su1tab111ty for the productlon of crystals for X-ray
analysis, this function does not exhaust the capabilities of GCB. Up to date information on GCB and a collection of practical
Experiments devoted to the observation of protein crystal growth are procedures and protocols are available from the LEC website
implemented easily and conveniently using the GCB. Both the bOX (http://lec.ugr.es).
body and the capillaries are transparent, allowing a good quality
microscopic imaging of the growing crystals (see Figure 3). For
most microscopic observation setups, the thickness of the GCB inner GCB are currently produced by Plasticos Hita (Granada, Spain).
space sets out of focus any feature in the walls of the box. Financial support from European Space Agency, Consejo Superior
Experiment handling is facilitated by the solid design of GCB: de Investigaciones Cientlﬁcas and Ministerio de Educacién y
Acta Cryst. (2002). D58, 1638—1642 Garcia—Ruiz et al. 1641

"
"5","conference papers

Ciencia are acknowledged. Two of the pictures shown in Figure 3 Garcia-Ruiz, J . M. (2002). Methods in Enzymology. To be published.

were kindly provided by Frank Dubois, Microgravity Research GaV1(r§0(12)AA Lélféez-Jafamlllfii-a {?haDu Garcia-RUIZa J- M- & Nga J- D-

Center ULB Brussel ' cm 73’” D58= 7— 5 '

( 9 ) Henisch, H. K. & Garcia-Ruiz, J. M. (1986). J. Cryst. Growth, 75, 195—202

References and 203—21 1.

DucruiX, A. & Giegé, R. (1999). Editors. Crystallisation OfNuclel'c Acids and Lopez-jlaralmglo, F'3J4"" 3G6ar013a-Eulz, J' M"" GaV1ra, J' A' & Otalora, F' (2001)“
Proteins:APracticalApproach.Oxford:IRL Press. J’ pp ° WSt' ’ 5— 7 ﬂ , , ,

Finet S. Bonneté F. Brouin J, Provost K. & Tardieu A. (1998) Eur. McPherson, A. (1999). Crystalllsatlon OfBlologlcal Macromolecules. Cold
éiopjhysical J ’27 263—271, ’ ’ Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

Garcia-Ruiz, J. M. (1991).Key EngineeringMaterials, 58, 87—106. MGI:??(EB‘Z’Q ?andalfii: 5E. & Chayen, N' QODZ)’ AbStht bOOk 0f the

G ’-R' J.M.M A.V°d C.&C11M.1993.Mt'l =ena='--

arc}; 1113151162771 2’8 Szrffggm ’ le ma” 0 ’ ( ) a ma S Otalora,F. &Garcia-Ruiz,J.M.(1996).Jeryst. Growth,169,361—367.

Garcia-Ruiz, J. M., Gavira, J. A, Otélora, F., Guasch A. & C011, M. (1998). Vldal’ 0"" Robert,1\/I.C., & Boue, F' (1998)]: Cryst. Growth, 192’ 257—270'
Materials Res. Bulletin 33 1593—1598. Zegers, I. & Dub01s, F. Personal commumcatlon.

1642 Received 18 April 2002 - Accepted 7 August 2002 Acta Cryst. (2002). D58, 1638—1642

"
