"","x"
"1","I*I Natural Resources Ressources naturelles
Canada Canada

.\ = - : ' i 3* Wﬁj‘

a h. , .1_. . a . . x""; _ 1.. $1 '5; 1‘5: Ea“ fE-Zi'i- xiii; k

.5» {:2 __ . . _._... .. .. é _ __ ‘5 ,

CWFC Facts 015 g i '
Canadian Wood %
Centre ”5""? * ""3‘ , x
- x r . v‘ ‘
y. < r‘ '.
Spruces In weightlessness , _,
White spruce is an important species for the Canadian In April 201 O, 24 white spruce seedlings were sent to the ISS
forest industry and its genetics is well known. How- aboard the space shuttle Discovery. On Day 3 of the mission,
ever, there are still a few grey areas remaining. For the seedlings were transported from the space shuttle to
example, what effect does gravity have on the expres- the Destiny space laboratory on the ISS. It was astronaut T.J.
sion of its genes? Eighteen white spruce plants spent Creamer, a member of the Expedition 22 crew, who trans—
30 days aboard the International Space Station where planted 18 of these seedlings into a small container and
their growth was compared with similar seedlings left placed it in an incubator developed by NASA called the ABRS
on Earth. Here is the story and summary of a unique (Advanced Biological Research System). At the same time, other
Canadian experiment in Forest Genomics. identical seedlings were placed in a similar growth Chamber
located at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida. Known as
In the fall of 2009, after a meeting with the Canadian Space APEX—CSAZ (Advanced Plant Experiments on Orbit), the ex—
Agehcy (CSA), which was in search of original research pro— periment was directed by the CWFC’s Jean Beaulieu in Close
jects to be conducted in space, Jean Beaulieu, a scientist at collaboration with the CSA and NASA.
Natural Resources Canada’s Canadian Wood Fibre Centre
(CWFC), proposed growing white spruce seedlings for 30 Produced by somatic embryogenesis in New Brunswick byJ.D.
days in a growth Chamber aboard the International Space Irving Ltd., the plants used were from three different lines. Six
Station (ISS) to evaluate the impact of weightlessness on seedlings from each of the three lines were allowed to grow
the species. The project was accepted by the CSA, but with in space and on Earth for 30 days, inside an incubator where
the stipulation that it had to be done very quickly since the the lighting, temperature and atmospheric parameters were
space shuttle program was to end soon. A project requir— controlled. Many challenges presented themselves before,
ihg the collaboration of several organizations was quickly during and after this unusual experiment. For example,
put together and all preparations were completed in just 4 the 24 seedlings had to be stored tightly in a small metal
months for a space shuttle launch in April 2010. box a few days before liftoff and were not taken out until
the transfer into the growth Chamber a few days later. The

The objectives of this experiment were to help researchers seedlings needed to be in a physiological state that would
understand the effects of weightlessness and the space envi— allow them to keep their buds Closed until the beginning of
moment on the growth of white spruce seedlings in addi— the experiment and budbreak had to occur quickly to allow
tion to obtaining an idea of the role played by gravity in forthe growth ofa young stem and roots needed to measure
the formation of tree cells and therefore the quality of the the effects of weightlessness during the short period allowed
wood produced by our Canadian species. for the experiment. Lastly, the seedling roots were subjected

Canadian Wood Centre ©

Working together to optimize wood fibre value — creating forest sector solutions with FPInnnvations

"
"2","u I ‘—'—'—'-—---TI_-Il-Il '“ Il-I'F’TEI-I-l-I-I-Il-I-
:E:==:===:=r i:::::-.-EE= m"" :a!=:=r=::=::::=
mﬁﬂiﬂﬂﬂ raga"": nr- .;aIs--i' :""r"" 3gp; i.g- _. - ,
3 E==Ill l!"" ""”5 ?II‘ 3:: :gl :5! .. ﬁrm"" -* EIE‘ 1-23 21: ~ ._ __ .g-_-::: ._
g If 1::- HE '1 :3 -ﬁ.‘-‘ “1]“ LI =55: ' .. ' Imri in 1: T” *— ﬁ-w -
. - - :- - .--:: “a L""... - -..--.._:l .
3. . ll 3F: *7 EiI-f'a-""W : . .‘!:L 1'! .5 - _ m 1.: -- I.
l '_ -- a Iillie: II; 91-51 'j [:9 1 31 .
' ”hr “HIP”- 'Il *1.""th =IE; - _ i: ‘:
_ ""T l: :. i I ﬂip :Jiiinlz- .liI-lef _ :31?
One of three white spruce somatic embryogenesis lines at One of three white spruce somatic embryogenesis Tubedeveloped at KennedySpaceCenterforchemical
the end of their growth period in International Space Station. lines at the end of their growth period on earth, in fixation of biological samples in weightlessness con—
Source: NASA the laboratory located at the Kennedy Space Center, ditions. Source: NRCan
Florida. Source: NASA
to growth conditions without soil. The substrate used was nificant differences were overexpressed in the weightless
the Smithers—Oasis foam used by florists. environment. These results clearly show that trees on Earth
respond to gravity.
On Earth, Jean Beaulieu and his collaborators monitored
the growth of the plants using video cameras and telemetry One of the challenges facing the forestry sector is finding
and asked the ISS astronauts to waterthem when necessary. a balance between the growing demand for wood fibre
After 30 days of growth, the newly—formed seedling shoots and the need to manage forest ecosystems in a sustainable
and roots were cut and transferred into preservative solu— manner for current and future generations in Canada. A
tions and stored undercold conditions. Samples from seedlings better understanding of the genetics of white spruce, an
that grew on Earth were collected at the same time as in economicallyimportant species, could one day make it possible
the ISS by NASA staff. Hahc the samples returned to Earth to create genetically improved varieties capable of contending
in May 2010 on the space shuttle Atlantis whereas the with climate change and producing fibre whose characteristics
other hahc came back on the last flight of the space shuttle would make the Canadian forest industry more competitive.
Discovery in March 2011, nearly a year later.
The completion and success of this project came as the result
Jean Beaulieu and his team concluded that growth was of collaboration between researchers from the Canadian Forest
“normal” in both cases (both on Earth and in space), but Service, Université Laval, the Canadian Space Agency, the
after analyzing the expression of 27 genes, they found that ministere oles Ressources naturelles du Quebec, J.D. Irving Ltd.
there were differences in the expression of the genes, i.e. in in New Brunswick and Smithers—Oasis. Furthermore, without
the number of molecules produced from these genes. Dif— the collaboration of NASA, this project would never have
ferences were observed in genes that affect how cells function seen the light of day.
and develop and this could have an impact on the forma—
tion Of the WOOOl. This Fibre Facts was inspired by the following article:
I I I I Beaulieu, J., et al. 2013. Differential gene expression patterns in white
The dlﬁerentlal responses by the SEGdllngS In Space and on spruce newly formed tissue on board the International Space
Earth also lmpaCtEd the morphology Of the SQGdllngsl e.g. Station. Advances in Space Research 52:760—772.
the length of the needles and their angle of insertion into
the stems. These innovative observations were a first for For more information, please contact:
trees and it was the exceptional experimental set—up put in Jean Beaulieu
place aboard the ISS that made it possible to obtain these Canadian Wood Fibre Centre
results. Nearly two thirds of the genes produced a larger Jean.Beaulieu@NRCan—RNCan.gc.ca
number of molecules in the weightless environment than Marie Deslauriers
on Earth. Although these differences were not for the most Canadian Wood Fibre Centre
part statistically significant, the three genes showing sig- |\/|arie.Deslauriers@NRCan—RNCan.gc.ca
Photos on front page, from left to right: Retrieving white spruce samples before performing histological and gene expression studies. Source: CSA-ASC;
White spruce seedlings at the end of their period of growth in the incubator at Kennedy Space Center. Source: NASA; View of the International Space
Station. Source: NASA

"
