"","x"
"1","AIAA 2013-3484
International Conference on Environmental Systems (ICES)
July 14-18, 2013, Vail, CO
43rd International Conference on Environmental Systems
Preparation of the Operational Air Quality Monitors for
Deployment 0n the International Space Statlon
Thomas Limero,1 J ohn Trowbridge, and William Wallace
Wyle, Science, T echnology, and Engineering Group, Houston, TX. 77058, USA
Abstract
The air quality monitor—government furnished equipment (AQM) has been scheduled to launch on SpaceX-Z to
g the International Space Station (188) in early 2013. TWO AQM units, With different gas chromatographic columns,
2' are planned to operate simultaneously on the 188 to accurately measure the target compounds important to the
§ assessment of the onboard air quality. Both AQM units have the capability to operate (including sample collection)
a in a remote location. This capability Will be used to measure air quality changes at the hatch opening to docked
g vehicles; an essential function for investigating perceived air quality degradations on 188. During the in-ﬂight
5 validation phase, a minimum of 6 mini-grab sample containers (mini-GSCs) Will be acquired simultaneously With
E the AQM sample analysis. The ground-based analyses of these mini-GSCs Will be compared to the AQM results.
95° Once it is demonstrated that the AQM is operating properly, the AQMs Will be used to monitor the ISS air quality
§ on a routine basis.
:2! This paper Will brieﬂy describe the AQM technology and the enhancements incorporated into the AQM units
E based upon the lessons learned from the AQM-SDTO (Station Detailed Technical Objective) experiments. The
§ ground preparation and veriﬁcation process of the ﬁrst AQM ﬂight units Will be presented.
3; Nomenclature
g3 A QM = Air Quality Monitor
8 DMS = Differential Mobility Spectrometer
E GC = Gas Chromatograph
(0-3 GSCS = Grab Sample Containers
31 [MS = Ion Mobility Spectrometer
g [SS = International Space Station
g LAB = US. Laboratory Module
Q JSC = J ohnson Space Center
g SDTO = Station Detailed Technical Objective
3 S VT = Science Veriﬁcation Test
E Vc = Compensation Voltage
Lg VOA = Volatile Organic Analyzer
:9 VOCS = Volatile Organic Compounds
Introduction
The 188 is a partially closed environmental system, in Which the atmosphere is recycled after removal of
contaminants such a carbon dioxide and volatile organic compounds (VOCs), such as, methanol. The measurement
of trace concentrations of VOCs is crucial to the overall assessment of air quality onboard 188. A slow rise in a
VOC might indicate unusually high offgas rate, an exhausted scrubber, or a chemical leak, and a more rapid increase
in a VOC concentration could indicate a spill. Additionally, a trace VOCs monitor provides valuable information
following a contingency event by tracking the effectiveness of cleanup efforts and contributing valuable data to help
decide When crewmembers may safely remove protective equipment.
1 Section manager, Toxicology Laboratory, 1290 Hercules Drive, Houston, TX. 7705 8/ SK and none
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2013 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. The US. Government has a royalty-free license to exercise all rights under the copyright claimed herein for Governmental purposes.

"
"2","Until the ISS was launched, trace VOCs were measured exclusively by archival air samplers. The crew obtained
an air sample in a grab sample container (GSC), which was returned to the ground for analysis at the J ohnscn Space
Center (J SC) Toxicology Laboratoryl. Archival methods were appropriate for short Shuttle missions (1 t0 2 weeks),
but a more immediate measure of the atmosphere was required for the much longer ISS increments (approximately 6
months). The Volatile Organic Analyzer (VOA) arrived onboard ISS in 2001, shortly after the LAB module was
launched and attached to the ISSZ. The VOA used a gas chromatograph (GC) to separate the trace contaminants
found in the ISS atmosphere and an ion-mcbility spectrometer (IMS) to detect and quantify trace VOCs. The VOA
monitored 20 target VOCs at trace concentrations for 8 years on ISS. The VOA ceased operations in July 2009,
long after its projected 5-year lifetime. In the prior 2 years, the J SC Toxicology Laboratory had been assessing a
potential replacement for the VOA, called the Air Quality Monitor (AQM). This instrument arrived on ISS in May
2009 as an experiment and is referred to as the AQM-SDTO (station detailed technical objective) 3'5. The major
advantages of the AQM-SDTO (Fig. 1) were its small size, low power, and minimal resource requirements, yet it
surpassed the analytical capability of the VOA6.

g The success of the AQM-SDTO led to the decision by the ISS Program to move forward with an operational
2' AQM, referred to simply as “AQM“. The AQM units have an expanded target compound list (as compared to the
§ AQM-SDTO target list where compounds were limited to compound-class representatives) and signiﬁcant
2 improvements based upon the results and lessons-learned from
g I‘F"" = .- .._ _. . ﬂ, . .. the AQM-SDTO onboard experiment7. The AQM is based upon
~ 1H - 1. -¢,.r_ - - -- . . . .
5 ,- F .. géiﬁ -.:'-r‘ *',-l“';""j.'.-.:"" -"".r _- gas chromatography (GC) and differential mobility spectrometry
E f. -. -' ' 4i” . ﬁn} ii. (1.11.3 .-*' (DMS) technologies. This paper will show how the
g ’ ?:ﬂii: ._ . IF: it . {1' REE ' improvements to the AQM units have increased their analytical
g ' .:-:-""-“. _._'__ ”""1"" _ .- ""~, 3'"". #7"" TE capability and improved their resource requirements and
E; “'6’; E R- _- ,1 ﬁll? ﬂexibility as compared to the AQM-SDTO or the VOA. An
g .. if; 7’3""; . m, __ .' L; _' _| overview will be presented of the preparation and veriﬁcation of
; 3*.“ -';""':'- ”-.:. _ ' ta."" ;.' the AQM units for ﬂight. The preparation involved compound
é Egg ' .ch 3""_ characterization (where the peak for the target compounds are
2“ ' ' J "" -:_1.' __ *1 r 3"" located in GC and DMS space) and quantitative calibration,
5-; .1- {i‘ i‘rﬂvﬁgﬁﬂ-rﬁ # which enables the units to accurately measure the concentrations
g of the target compounds. The process of verifying operational
@ . _ . readiness, a ﬁnal check before shipment for launch to ISS, will
é fligtllliiee: AQM SDTO 0n 0rb1t(red be described and the data from the AQM veriﬁcation will be
3 summarized.
31
Q
g Experimental
T: The AQM—SDTO essential components are shown in Fig. 2. A more detailed description of the theory and
(<an operation of the AQM’s detector can be found in
g» . _ _ _ _ l _ previous publicationsg'lo. An air sample is acquired by a
E :ﬂ sample pump, which pulls air through a preconcentratcr
Li I : (carbotrap B and then carboxen) to trap and concentrate
g» L _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ I- L _ _ _' the VOCs. The preconcentratcr is then ballistically
meﬁsﬁﬁaﬂlﬂﬁm ‘9‘ B“HHM 5‘3,“ heated to transfer the VOCs t0 the VF-624MS GC
column (Varian) where they are separated in time to
simplify the detectcr’s task of analysis. A unique feature

, , 0f the AQM-SDTO is that air, recirculated through

Flgure 2‘ AOM blOCk dlagram. scrubbers (molecular sieve and then carbcxen), is the GC
carrier gas and the detector make-up ﬂow, which eliminates the need for an external gas supply.

The AQM inlet is shown in Fig. 3. It differs from the AQM-SDTO in that a mechanism has been added to allow
the preconcentratcr to be purged after sampling, but before thermal desorption. The purge begins when a valve
switch pulls a stream of ambient air through a scrubber (molecular sieve and carbcxen) and then ﬂow this clean air
directly into the preconcentratcr. This scrubbed air is dry therefore as it ﬂows through the preconcentratcr it will
remove most of the water trapped from the air sample. This is crucial to improved quantiﬁcation of compounds that
co-elute from the GC column with water (such as, methanol, acetaldehyde, and ethanol).

2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","The preparation of the AQM for ﬂight began with determination of the GC and detector values for each
compound that would ensure proper peak identiﬁcation. This process is referred to as compound characterization
and used scan runs to extract the data. A
3_Way scan run, shown in Fig 4, “scans” all
E ha st Valve compensation voltages throughout the
X u ' . . .
5 c'ea“ 3"" from entire GC run time. Any compound w1th
ample scrubbers . .
pump a detector response w111 show a peak in a
scan run. Once the compound
3_Way characterization was completed for the
_ _ Valve target compounds, a method ﬁle was
AIr Sample In to GC column . .
. Check established for detection of target
Purge—mal:I—> Va'Ve compound peaks and quantitative
M°Ies'e""e calibration for each compound could
<1- scrubber . .
g begin. The method ﬁles established
2' “peak windows” in GC retention time and
g DMS space (compensation voltage),
3 Figure 3. AQM inlet. The 3-way valve on the sample inlet was where the peak would be identiﬁed and
5- preconcentrator to remove water trapped with the air sample. It can be seen in Fig 5 that a GC run
3 detects only peaks detected in speciﬁc
01) . . . . . .
‘3 GC-compensation voltage Windows, which greatly increases select1V1ty.
g? The veriﬁcation process was the last step to ensure the AQM units were ready for ﬂight. Once the units were
5% calibrated and all method ﬁles, including calibration “look up” tables, were completed they were challenged with a
; separate veriﬁcation
é Scan Slade 1. = l] 1!] 1. = -l .11 letHIC. This
2“ ..... ' J_- a'—-. mixture mimicked
ﬁg g i "" E E spacecraft air in that
g 2; ”U ’ 2:“ E 5'5 it contained typical
E z; :5? I. E levels of major
g :2; W ' constituents (carbon
5) g 4n~ _ _ _ dioxide, hydrogen,
§ 5 2t, _ _ i . _ W W_ methane, etc.) and
O_t ' h .- -;.;. :.-_.;-|.'.I:' “Inﬂow 3.; 17.1? ‘l'I-‘IIIInn
(2 V D L'H‘Iima-{we} the target
0 o o o
4% ' ('oﬁipengétmﬁ Voltage (Vc) .Flgélée 5.. G.C formatgllgohv/Ilsng Wlndgfws compilirrllclse ntratio :11:
:c Figure 4. Scan runs for target 1n (tlme in sec) an space ( C)' . .
Q . . . Within the
2 compounds established peak p0s1t10n . .
e . . calibration range.
4: (CC retention tlme) and detector . . . . .
3 m n t' n It (V ) Two veriﬁcation mixtures were created, because two units required
3 co pe sa 10 V0 age c ' veriﬁcation. To test for “false positives”, not all target compounds
E were included in each mixture, but all target compounds were
9 resent between the two mixtures. The calibration and veriﬁcation mixtures were enerated in 6 liter canisters usin
P 11 . . g . g
methods described in previous publications . Hexamethylcyclotr1s110xane was prepared differently than the other
compounds, in that the standard added to the canister was generated from a permeation tube, rather than from the
pure compound standard.
Results and Discussion
Capitalizing on its small volume and portability, two AQM units, one having the VF-624MS column used in the
AQM-SDTO and the other containing a DB-SMS (Agilent) GC column, were deployed for operational use on 188.
The columns were selected to afford much greater coverage for compound classes (nonpolar to polar compounds)
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","than is typically achieved by a single column. Also, two AQM units, even with different columns, will provide
some redundancy.

The advantage of the new preconcentrator purge capability (discussed in the previous section) is illustrated with
ethanol in Fig. 6. Removing water from the
prconcentrator with the purge results in an ethanol

1... um. um . ... Ema 5w.- 3 peak that is much easier to integrate.
Hm- ""I In addition to the decision to use two AQM
5” "" units, several other modiﬁcations enable greater
i'l- ""- ﬂexibility and use fewer resources compared to the
:w- a AQM—SDTO. A full XP computer and wireless
.1- E. communication capability were incorporated into
v m H the AQM units, which eliminated almost all crew
§ 1- == Egﬂiﬁwgu * -= .. 1* cﬂﬂgmmgﬂ * -= time for operations. The crew need only activate
2' Figure 6. Ethanol peak (black boxes): A) without the unit and rnove one unit to different modules at
g purge and B) With purge. infrequent intervals (~90 days) to better
3: characterize the ISS atmosphere. Analyses are
E automated and the unit can be controlled from the ground by remote desktop. A scripted run sequence provides
5' regimented run cycles throughout the week; however, the crew or ground personnel can manually activate a run
3 when it is necessary. A second enhancement, to increase the on orbit lifetime and the interval between scrubber
§° replacements, was the addition of larger and replaceable scrubbers. This modiﬁcation, along with continuous
§ powered operation on orbit (AQM—STDO was powered only 5 hours per week), addressed the negative rnode
E3 contarninant (carbon dioxide) that reduced the sensitiVity to compounds forming negative ions”. The improved
E scrubbers (replaceable sieve packs) are shown in Fig. 7. The ﬂexibility of AQM operations is enhanced by a battery
3 pack for the AQM (Fig. 8) that can be used for remote operations for up to 45 minutes. This capability is essential
g“ |-
g Wireless Com 5 \ Replaceable sieve Q,
g \\ packs /
5 , .
(g FullXP computer 11-1"" _- ‘ .‘ / I V ‘1'”
.2 .1""!- I- ka'jﬂ' 1' , 3-
:5 Meconcentramr ‘ ) V153 {j
<23 ' Purge ‘ ‘1
3: Figure 7. AQM modiﬁcations, including the W 7.
g previously mentioned purge. ﬂ _,
E Figure 8. AQM With battery pack.
0
Q for investigating anomalies that the crew may sense in any 188 module. The battery pack uses standard camcorder
batteries available on 188.

The target compounds for each unit are shown in Table l. The ability to detect sorne compounds on both units
provides some redundancy for automated analysis; however, if necessary, scan runs make it possible to detect and
quantify most of the target compounds on both units. It should be noted that scan runs also provide the means to
identify unknowns by comparison to a compound library.

Due to its extremely polar nature and its nature to stick to surfaces, ammonia data is qualitative (trending) only
for concentrations at the trace levels norninally found in 188. Three calibration mixtures were generated: one for
each unit and another mixture containing the siloxanes. At high concentrations of siloxanes and other compounds,
the calibration is disrupted by siloxanes coating the preconcentrator and preventing complete trapping of other
compounds. The calibration mixture contained all the target compounds (except siloxanes) for the speciﬁc unit,

4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","because all peak positions had been determined during compound calibration. This allowed a quicker calibration
process as all target compounds for a unit were
Table 1. Target Compounds fOI‘ the AQM Units calibrated with just 4 runs. Although 4 runs were
—--—-Unit2221 performed at each concentration, only 3 values
—--—- X were required for calculating the response curves
—-—- for calibration. In many cases, the ﬁrst run was
—--—- X discarded because of passivation of the sample
—-—- X . - -
—-—- delivery system to the unit. This protocol was also
—-—- X used for selence veriﬁcation testing (SVT). An
—-—- X example of the reproducibility of the peak position
—-—- X throughout the GC time for calibration runs on Unit
—-—- X 2218 (long run) is shown in Fig. 9. The zoomed
—-—- X View (Fig. 10) of the early part of the
4 _--—- X chromatogram illustrates the change in peak areas
§ with increasing standard concentrations and it
2' shows the reproducibility of the runs at each concentration (for example, dark and light blue traces are the same
g concentration). As mentioned before, this calibration mixture did not contain the siloxane target compounds.
4
g The calibration runs (spanning the range of concentrations) occurred over a 2—week period. Once the calibration
5' curves were developed from these runs and a quantiﬁcation method (referred to as a classiﬁer) was generated, the
g 1.02
g 0.07 — 0.72 -
g 0.92
g 0.37 0.07
E A 0.02 A
E 325' ”7 £5 0.52
g 0.72 f:
.. 3 0.57 1:
g E 0.52 1‘8 0.57 n.
'9 0.57 °' ’
g 052 i Q 0'52 i L [\
2 0.4750 7\ 100 125 150175 200 225 250 275 301 °-‘7 ‘ ~—»-. ii I f
E 55 00 115 140 105
(:3 . . 60 Retention Time(sec) . 66 Retention fume (sec)
é Figure 9. Unlt 2218 representatlve GC F' 10 Z d f l G C k
‘3 chromatograms for the ﬁve calibration runs. lgure ' oome 0 ear y pea 8'
g Only the ﬁrst 300 seconds of the GC runs is original calibration data obtained over the 2-week period,
:2 shown to better illustrated the peak was then cycled through the classiﬁer. The data from this
Q reproducibility process is summarized here. The “long run” data from
E Unit 2218 showed that precision for calibrant
g concentrations were all < i17% and most were < i10%. The siloxanes, as expected, had the most variability
3 between runs. The accuracy for these compounds (refer to Table 1) were all < i39% and with the exception of a
g few siloxane points and one acetone point, all others were < i20% and most were < i10%. The compounds
Q (acrolein, 2—Propanol, and benzene) detected in the short runs had precisions of < i10% except for 4 data points,
with the highest being 15%. The accuracy for target compounds met the requirement of < i40%, but one data point
(lowest point — 2—propanol) exceeded this value. The accuracy for most compounds was < i30%. The data from
Unit 2221 showed precisions < i20% for most compounds, with many < 10%. The decamethylcyclopentasiloxane
(at two concentrations) and acetaldehyde (at one concentration) were the only points above the requirement of <
i20%. The accuracy for this unit was < i40% for all compounds except for one concentration of n—butanol. Most
of the accuracies were < i25% and many < i12%. Of course, the calibration curves were generated from the runs
analyzed here therefore the precision and accuracies should be excellent.

The ﬁnal check of the systems before shipment for ﬂight is the SVT. The SVT challenge mixtures were
generated separately from the calibration mixtures and contained target compounds in concentrations within the
calibration range for AQM target compounds, but they were realistic concentrations for an ISS atrnosphere sample.
The SVT mixtures also contained major ISS contaimants (such as methane and Freon 218) in appropriate
concentrations. Concentrations of all mixtures were determined using GC/MS. In accordance with the SVT test

5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","preparation sheet protocols, tshe SVT mixture was presented to the instruments in two sessions, with the second
sample session occurring at least 48 hours after the ﬁrst. The sample session required 4 runs of the standard with a
clean run and n0 sample run between each sample run. The data from the SVT runs on both days for Unit 2218
showed excellent accuracy and precision. With the exception of benzene (22.7%), all other values for precision
were < i10%). All compounds met the accuracy requirement (< i40%) and accuracy for half the compounds was <
i10%. The precisions for both days with unit 2221 were very good (< i15%), except for acetaldehyde and
decamethylcyclopentasiloxane (45% and 35% respectively). The accuracy for unit 2221 was also very good, with
only acetaldehyde and hexamethyclotrisiloxane not meeting the i40% requirement.

The poor accuracy results for hexamethylcyclotrisiloxane are attributed to the difﬁculty of making stable
standards and delivering the sample to the unit without surface losses in the delivery lines. The precision for this
compound was excellent 4.1% (Day 0) and 5.6% (Day 2) therefore given this precision and the poor accuracy, this
compound has been designated for trending only. The precision and accuracy of acetaldehyde were poor due to the
fact that in many runs, the peak was not detected by the GC method in the automated analysis. This is attributed to

g contamination and/or water in the recirculation sieve packs. The sieve packs will be changed in approximately 6
2' months after ISS operations begin. In the meantime, if the acetaldehyde peak can not be detected automatically in
§ the GC runs, then it will be manually integrated from scan runs. The acetaldehyde peak in the scan run shown in
E Fig. 11 was obtained on Day 2. In Fig. 11, red indicates a much larger peak height than the light blue peaks. The
E integration is initiated by
a M using the cursor to draw
3 l"" W"" T” a box around the peak.
g) 5“” -m""""m3EW ""Mz‘h-rm‘” _ The peak is integrated as
g ""HWEE ”Ed. WI W I .'-‘.-.T. :W'Lm if it was a GC peak,
5: :w ' --- because the color of the
E! -W ;_ peak dictates the height
; CW :5 :a- for the integration. The
é. Wu"" f'il: value for the integration
3 ' ”j ';':""_"""" is displayed in the “Peak
5.; “Til“.‘f'f‘ i. 5111: ._1 Selector” window. The
§ m i '5 '31:”; manual analysis of
i .2141- ; f“? acetaldehyde runs on
g -_---_l____-- .Il; Day.0. and Day 2 yielded
3 '- J1 -.-.'-: -_- muf precrsrons of 10.2% and
§ 53""“; 25.7% and accuracies of
(E U. ljii :jﬁji 18.4% and 65.6%
g TE""; .- .ﬁ .. . .. ""’....ﬁ.,._ r - -- - respectively.
3 . -'-' ' ' ' "" Acetaldehyde remains a
(:5C '5"" -. H "" difﬁcult compound to
E Figure 11 Acetaldehyde scan. The black curse is through the middle of the analyze, but Wlth manual
3 analys1s it can be
3 acetaldehyde peak (black box) at ~60 seconds. detected qualitatively. It
E appears this might be a
Q unit speciﬁc issue.
Conclusions

Two AQM units were prepared for ﬂight by calibrating the units and verifying them ready for ISS operations
using a separate challenge mixture. The AQM units incorporate lessons learned from the AQM-SDTO experiment
and these improvements have enhanced the performance and overall ﬂexibility of the AQM platform. Of the
compounds on the AQM target list, two fell short of meeting the requirements: acetaldehyde and
hexamethylcyclotrisiloxane. The poor accuracy of hexamethylcyclotrisiloxane stems from the difﬁculty in making
stable standards rather than a problem with the AQM. For this reason, AQM data for hexamethylcyclotrisiloxane
has been designated as trending. Acetaldehyde had difﬁculty with both precision and accuracy, but manual analysis
will address this problem. Also, this appears to be a unit speciﬁc issue at this time. The AQM units were launched
on SpaceX-2 and will be operational 0n ISS in late March.

6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge support from the NASA ISS Vehicle Ofﬁce and Craig Stencil from the
NASA Human Health & Performance Directorate. Science, engineering and integration support from Eric Reese,
Jared Jones, and Jennifer Joiner (Wyle Laboratories), Tamara Durham (NASA), and John James (NASA) are
gratefully acknowledged as well as funding by NASA - contract # NAS 9-02078.
References
1 James, J.T., Limero, T., Boyd, J., et a1, Toxicological Assessment of the International Space Station Atmosphere from
Mission 5A to 8A. SAE Technical Paper Series 2002-01-2299, 32rld International Conference on Environmental Systems, San
Antonio, Texas, July 2002.
2 Limero T (2003) Validation of the Volatile Organic Analyzer (VOA) aboard the International Space Station. 33rd
E International Conference on Environmental Systems, SAE Technical Paper 2003 -01-2646, Vancouver, BC, 2003.
E 3 Limero, T., Cheng, P., Reese E., Trowbridge, J. “Results of the Air Quality Monitor’s Experiment to Measure Volatile
é Organic Compounds aboard the International Space Station”, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Technical
§ Paper: AIAA 2010-627 8, 40thInternationa1 Conference on Environmental Systems, Barcelona, Spain, July 2010.
if 4 Limero, T., Reese, E., Wallace, W., Cheng, P., and Trowbridge, J . “Results from the air quality monitor (gas
3 chromatography-differential mobility spectrometer) experiment on board the international space station”, International Journal
5 for Ion Mobility Spectrometry, Volume 15, Number 3, 2012, pp 189-198.
g) 5 Limero, T., Cheng, P., Reese, E., Jones, J., and Wallace, W. “Update 2011: Air Quality Monitor Experiment to Measure
‘3 Volatile Organic Compounds On Board the International Space Station”, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astonautics
3 Technical Paper: AIAA 2012-3468, 42ndInternationa1 Conference on Enviromental Systems, San Diego, CA., July 2012.
g 6 0p. cit.Limero, International Conference on Environmental Systems, 2010.
E; 7 Limero, T., Cheng, P., Reese, E., Jones, J., and Wallace, W. “Operational Air Quality Monitor: Scientiﬁc Studies in
5 Preparation for ﬂight”, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astonautics Technical Paper: AIAA 2011-5024, 41St International
g Conference on Enviromental Systems, Portland, Ore, July 2011.
2. 8 Limero, T., Reese, E., and Cheng, P. “Demonstration of the microAnalyzer’s Measurement of Common Trace Volatile
:3 Organic Compounds in Spacecraft Atmospheres”, SAE Technical Paper Series 2008-01-2128, 38th International Conference on
E Environmental Systems, San Francisco, CA. July 2008.
§ 9 Limero, T., Cheng, P., and Boyd, J . “Evaluation of Gas Chromatography Differential Mobility Spectrometry for
3 Measurement of Air Contaminants in Spacecraft.” SAE Technical Paper Series 2006-01-2353, 36th International Conference on
g Environmental Systems, Norfolk, VA. July 2006.
52 10 Limero, T. and Cheng, P., “Potential for Measurement of Trace Volatile Organic Compounds in Closed Environments
3 Using Gas Chromatograph/Differential Mobility Spectrometer”, Proceedings of the Submarine Air Monitoring Air Puriﬁcation
g (SAMAP) meeting, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2007.
§ 11 op. cit. Limero, 2008.
g 12 op. cit. leero, 2011.
<:
Q
Z
5‘
B
E
.2
E
8
7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
