"","x"
"1","JETS-JEI1-15-SAIP-DOC-0084
Designing for Reliability and Robustness in International Space Station
Exercise Countermeasures Systems
Cheriee Moore1
Johnson Space Center, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Houston, TX 77058
Randall Svetlik2
ERC, Inc., Houston T exas, 77058
Antony Williams3
Jacobs Engineering, Houston T exas, 77058
As spaceﬂight durations have increased over the last four hopes of improving future exercise hardware designs. These
decades, the effects of microgravity 0n the human body have lessons learned, paired With thorough testing, offer a path
become far better understood, as have the exercise towards reduced System down-time.
countermeasures. Through use Of a combination of aerobic and
resistive exercise devices, today’s astronauts and cosmonauts 11- COUNTERMEASURES SYSTEMS (CMS) OVERVIEW
are able to partially counter the losses in Inusele strength, When placed in a microgravity environment the human
aeroble ﬁtness, and bone strength that 0therw1se Inlght occur body begins to experience several changes. Among these are a
during their missions Oh the International Space Station (188) loss ofbone, muscle mass, and aerobic capacity due to the much
Since 2000» the 188 has employed a variety 0f exercise lighter than typical loads seen by the structure of the body When
equipment used as countermeasures to these risks. Providing compared to life on Earth. For a healthy individual in space for
reliable and available exercise systems has presented signiﬁcant a short period of time these losses are typically signiﬁcant and
Challenges due to the unique environment. In solving these, are quickly remedied upon return to the ground. However, for
lessons have been learned that can inform development of crewmembers that remain 0n-0rbit for an extended period of
future systems. time, the cumulative loss of bone, muscle, and aerobic capacity
can potentially result in serious negative health effects. These
1. INTRODUCTION effects can include an increased risk of kidney stones due to
. . . secreted calcium from bones, a loss of ability to tolerate Soyuz
Long durat10n spaeeﬂlght has a negatlve effect on .the landing, a loss of ability to perform Extravehieular Activities
hunlanbody, and exerelse countermeasures are used 0n-0rb1t t0 (EVA), an increased risk of bone fracture and osteoporosis
mtnlmlze bone and muscle loss, combattlng these effects. upon return to Earth, a loss of ability to perform rapid saﬁng
leen the 1mp0.rtanee.0f these hardwate systerns t0 the health and emergency egress activities, and a signiﬁcant increase in
Of the erew, th1sequ1pment must Ina1nta1n hlgh avallablhty. the amount of time required to complete rehabilitation after
Des1gn1ng spaceﬂlght exerelse hardware to meet h1 gh rehablhty returning to the ground.
and ava11ab1hty standards has proven to be Challenglng s1nce
crewmembers have been living on 188, beginning in 2000.
Furthermore, restoring Operational capability after a failure is
Clearly time-eritieal, but can be problematic given the A- T V15
Challenges of troubleshooting the problem from 220 miles The TVIS system was ﬁrst deployed in 2000 and provided
away. aerobic conditioning by simulating Earth’s gravitational force
Several best-praetiees have been leveraged in seeking to (l-g) running and walking on a treadmill in the microgravity
maximize availability of these exercise systems, including environment 0f the 133- With appropriate loading, treadmill
designing for robustness, implementing diagnostic exercise also provided impact forces and helped maintain
instrumentation, relying on user feedback, and providing ample neuromuscular and postural mechanisms.
maintenance and sparing. These factors have enhanced the The Vibration Isolation and Stabilization (VIS) System
rehablhty of hardware systems, and therefore have contrlbuted minimiz e d the transfer of dynamic for 0 es 0 aus e d by treadmill
t0 keeplng the erewmembers healthy upon return to Earth. Th1s exercise to the structure of the Russian Service Module (SM)
paper W111.I‘CV16W.thC falhhte h1st01:y for three countermeasure and other parts of the 188, While at the same time maintaining a
systetns W1th the 1ntent 0f 1dent1fy1ng lessons learned that can stab1 e runnin g /Wa1kin g surface. The VIS components were
help nnprove future systems. .Speelﬁeally, the Treadm111w1th software controlled and worked in unison to counteract the
V1brat10n Iselatlon anel Stablhzatlon Systern tTYIS)’ Cycle imparted pitch and roll torques and to provide a ﬂexible
Ergometer W1th V1brat10n Isolatlen and Stab1112at10n System mechanical connection to the 188 by stabilizing TVIS against
(CEVIS), and the Advanced Res1st1ve Exerelse DCYICC (ARED) excessive motion caused by exercise. The active components of
W111 be reV1ewed and analyzed, and conclus10ns 1dent1ﬁed 1n the V18 System were the gyroscope, four linear slide-mass
1Exploration Exercise Technology Development Manager, Flight 2Deputy Project Manager, Advanced Resistive Exercise Device.
Systems Branch 3Chief Engineer, SE&I, Engineering Department

"
"2","JETS-JEl1-15-SAIP—DOC—0084
stabilizers, four motor controllers and a VIS controller. The counter—inertia t0 the forces imparted by the riding subject.
running surface of the treadmill was used in much the same way These minimize forces imparted into the CEVIS frame and
as any conventional terrestrial treadmill, except the user was hence into the ISS structure. CEVIS was deployed on 188 in
held to its surface by the Series Bungee System (SBS) and/or March 2001 and continues in service currently. Figures 3 and
the Subject Load DeVice (SLD), which each attached to the 4 show the CEVIS schematic and the CEVIS in use in an
Treadmill Harness to counter the microgravity environment. recumbent posture, respectively. [2]

TVIS served on 188 until 2013, at which time it was replaced
with the Russian BD—2 treadmill. Figure 1 shows a schematic new”
of the TVIS, whi1e Figure 2 shows the TVIS in use on 188, Len. Forward ~ ff?ff.'.i.’irl?.w
including the SBS. [1] mm M. ‘ .Rigm F
ComrolPanel swim'i'c'” ‘ ¢ i 72-131mm; Bum
TtansferCase TteadmlllAssembMChassls) 45“” '5"" i V *S shewc. 5-
Fb’wheel Case Am ”we 633-5.:Ttw
spo W7, 5.1,. t M
Mala: 80): Ma .1 m a q :rame
Slabilizets Gy'°‘°°'°° Mama” m“
Figure 3. CEVIS System
Figure 1. TVIS System -_C~ i i ""w "" f; "" _ ""
v -l ""‘3‘ r; 3"". r “ '-.>ll- -:. . ll .h’
., *‘-=— 27—1 ; rx 1 0 —
.ﬁ y? w. i .45 31 .155! h, . ‘ — ._ | } _
. ‘k‘ l§ \ :é- *‘_ ‘g. ‘ ‘ 1
. ﬂ "" ‘171‘ , ——-I iEIII, “ i! ' “_ ‘ m [5 1i
i 3 1 - :30 ~ F""
‘ ‘ . «g : '7’. ' _ , i 1?}: , 7' H
'I. """" '1 :1 ' ,. «I ‘,
‘0’ l l :' 'J,‘ 5 :42)"" ’ "" *' ‘3 '
.- . 1 ~33. : $ tr. a g y , :17 .
I l ' ), i ‘d ’1 1’3“? . ngt ‘- _ , A I‘m“. :1 . . L:
0 i 1.1;}..1.’ .-
. . 4;. 1 ‘ ‘1'“, > ‘1']. wﬂq‘ I _‘
-  . r. . 1 7'41 ""1’1
{:1 1’ $ ‘ 7’” e» A i“ . ‘ .1 _
/‘. § - a u ‘-;‘_. ¢
1. . 3 '9 .4 ’ Figure 4. CEVIS in use on 188
i ' ' . , ' _;
Figure 2. TVIS in use on 188 C' ARED
The ARED is the primary resistive exercise device on 188
3- CE V15 utilizing two vacuum cylinders to provide workload. The
While the TVIS provides the ability to run and walk in ARED system incorporates multiple improvements to its
microgravity the CEVIS system provides cycling aerobic predecessor, the Interim Resistive Exercise Device, including
exercise, in either a recumbent 0r upright posture. CEVIS is increased.10ad from.320 t0 609 Pohndsa a more desirable load
also used for pre—breathe operations prior to an EVA, periodic characterization, Vibration isolation, 101W? , maintenance
ﬁtness evaluations, and pre—landing ﬁtness evaluations. The requirements, and greater ease bf use and reliability. It pr0V1des
CEVIS Ergometer can be controlled electronically Via protocols bar. and cable (rope) exer01ses, mPCh hke ground gym
in a control panel, or it can be manually controlled by the 6911111111611: 21ng 1tfcont£ains an. lgertlal ﬂywheel system ?0
subject. The Control Panel displays real—time subject data, s1mu atet e ee 0 1-g. ree—weig ts: ARED was (161)19de in
including heart rate, speed, and workload. Two Inertial January 2009 anc1 continues in serV1ce currently. Figure 7
Vibration Isolation and Stabilization (IVIS) Boxes are attached shows the ARED in use 0n 188' [3 ]
at either end of the Ergometer and provide passive mechanical

"
"3","JETS-JEl1-15—SAIP-DOC-0084
v -- t “ m —————
‘ ‘~’_' "" “ -_.."" WA - -f. 9/ EIdEPIIIE-l
'r: f ‘ a "" . l < .. —————
‘ I1 ‘1. '1 ""‘ ‘9‘! 'f “1; Pra' Lit:-
{til ' ""A I 7 v“ A i 9
’ ' l '4' L; 4. . ' g- Ignatiu-
5| 1 ' A‘ ,;, .1. 7H ' ' h"" l: v Pm.“ IIIﬁ. 1I' |I'EII'DII'E1I'F
F ' g I ~ "" fl l'
J‘QY » “M a 'I t- 1th
ti; I“.. r""; ‘ \, 3.53 .' .‘Iﬂl DE
l '3‘; «£2 Y ' I ""l 93 , :ijltlhsrm ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘
' - l\ t , / *1 '3‘. I -- 5m 5-- --- {mm 51 TM annuitF-Funcmn Pm: DH:
“ l. f .‘, . 5 f”: X “ V 'n‘} 3 ‘ mmmm-
lt‘ J; V—/ ,‘gﬁ f! ' V m I' g I' ... C#m Ell % um F"" rung]: %
,‘ '- a “...""\.‘ ‘ ""In -. .-
l . t ,_ _ ~ . - , t p. w m a
.. rt ‘-. ’ t "" .' ‘ Figure 6. NASA Life Cycle Phases
Figure 5. ARED in use on ISS
Table 2. Reliability Concepts [7]
111. DEFINITIONS AND CONCEPTS FOR RELIABILITY & mm mm A t_ _t
ROBUSTNESS TERMINOLOGY . . C 'V' y
Concept of . Deftne maintenance concept
The following deﬁnitions and references are provided to Operations . Defines reliability needs
provide a context for the reliability discussions that follow. (6362230?)
Table 1 R&M Deﬁnitions System 0 Provide the basis for establishing reliability
Requirement and maintenance (R&M) performance
8 Definition requirements
Reliability Probability that a given item will perform its 0 Risk and reliability analyses help designers
intended function with no failures for a given understand the interrelationships of
period of time under a given set of conditions [4] requirements, constraints, and resources
Analysis . Event sequence diagrams/event trees
Availability Probability that an item will perform its intended . Failure Modes and Effects Analyses
function at a given time, under designated . Qualitative top-down logic models
operating conditions, and with a designated . Quantitative logic models (probabilistic risk
support environment [5] assessment)
0 Reliability block diagrams
Risk The combination of the probability that a . Preliminary Hazard Analysis (
program or project will experience an undesired 0 Human reliability analysis
event (some examples include a cost overrun, o Probabilistic structural analysis
schedule slippage, safety mishap, health 0 Sparing/Iogistics models
problem, malicious activities, environmental Design . Zero Failure Design, Fault Tolerance,
impact, or failure to achieve a needed scientific Derating, Durability, Safety Margins
or technological breakthrough or mission . Design Reviews
SUCCGSSFr'ter'a) and t“? Gonsequencesg'mpact’ . Reliability Allocation, Modeling, and Prediction
or seventy 0f the undesltlred event, were 't to 0 Design Failure Mode, Effects, and Criticality
occur. Both the probablllty and consequences Analysis
may have aSSOCIated uncertalntles. [6] . Fault Tree Analysis
0 Sneak Circuit Analysis
0 Worst-Case Analysis
. . . . . . . . Statistical Analysis
De51gn1ng tor rehabthty does net only eccur 1n the destgn . Quality Function D epl Oym ent
phase of a preject, but 1t starts durlng requlrements deﬁnltlon . Robust Design
and continues into the operational phase. Figure 6 depicts the . Fault Detection, Isolation and Recovery
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) (FDlR) Capability _ _
system development life cycle model, and Table 2 lists areas ° EnVIrOHmehtal and Stress testtng, burrt-tn .
and approaches for addressing reliability during various life ManUfaCture ° Proces.s Fa'lure MOde’ EﬁeCtS’ and cr't'cal'ty
1 hases AnalySIs
eye 6 p ° 0 Statistical Process Control
Testing 0 R&M Performance Requirements Verification
0 Reliability testing (Typical testing regime for
ISS flight hardware [8]
o Functional/lntegration tests
0 Burn in, Vibration, Thermal Cycle, Pressure,
Radiation, EMI, Human Factors
0 Stress, Thermal, Materials Analysis
0 EEE Parts and Derating Analyses
Operations 0 Failure Reporting, Analysis, And Corrective
Action System

"
"4","JETS-JEl l-lS-SAIP-DOC-0084
1V. RELIABILITY HISTORY position of the slider (Figure 8). The crank handle requires two
In order to discuss the reliability of each system, this paper auto-locking mechanisms to be disabled in order to adjust the
will address the following areas: resistance. First, the crank handle is spring-loaded to prevent
1. Performance History inadvertent slipping of the crank load adjustment mechanism.
2. Failure History Second, a trigger mechanism in the handle requires the
3. Success Stories _ Reliable Components disengagement by the crewmember prior to adjusting the load.
The assembly consists of a stack of keyed parts that transmit the
Although the focus of this paper is the failures and the load to the adjustment mechanism (Figure 7) [3].
resulting lessons learned, it is important to note that all three
systems maintained very high availability rates over their Adapters 8 f: screws
lifetimes, as shown in Table 3. f ”¢:?
Table 3. CMS Operational Availability Adapt?” I diff ti
.l'. ’- .\\ '54: KKK Secondary
A. A R ED Figure 7. Exploded View of ARED Crank Handle Internal
Mechanlsm
1. Performance History
ARED has a history of being a very reliable piece of ' , I ‘
equipment, especially given the usage rates on 188, and even ‘ ~ ~ ‘
the maj or failures have typically deferred exercise only one or ‘ "" ,
two days at most. ‘ \ s
There are only a select few types of failures that will take \‘ i . .. .1 ‘
ARED to a NO-GO state, as seen in Table 4 below. ARED -- - '”
exercise in any form would not be able to be performed until I 'l _ l‘ . \ .
the broken part is replaced. “7 . r' w .
‘i . L‘f'ﬂ ..
On the other hand, certain types of historical failures have .- . . ° _, , .r‘r‘
been quickly recoverable, and the only factor that would delay . 7 3 V A . V \
ARED exercise would be the available crew time to perform the ’/ MI; \\ ‘
replacement or workaround activity. I. l ‘ ° o 'f f: h ,_
x o ,
Table 4 NO-GO and Failures with Operational 3 , o . ~ "" ‘
Restrictions - ARED S o . ‘ _ ‘_
estrlctlons
. Structural, Push-in-Place . Upper stop cable — no upper Figure 8‘ ARED Crank Handle Location
|(=F;Ii||::J)rer’ 0r Bearing :goupaltlsfts’ ""9' heel raISGS or The ﬁrst series of ARED crank handle failures occurred at
. VIS component failure 0 Detent Plates worn — Cannot approximately 2 years Of service in January 2012- Until then,
- Crank Handle failure perform bar exercise, Gable no maintenance had been required or performed on it. The crew
. XTIIBy— No instrumente d data experienced spontaneous increase in dialed load while turning
the crank handle, Wthh 1s only poss1ble if something in the
stack of keyed parts or safety latches were to fail. The crew
2- F ailur e H 113707”)? removed the crank handle from the load adjustment unit and
This SGCtiOh details the important ARED failures that found that the key that connects adapter 1 to the ball screw shaft
demonstrated 16550115 learned in reliability. was sliding into adapter 1 and disengaging the ball screw. This
a) Crank Handle was remedied by inserting a small socket into adapter 1 behind
The ARED arm base assembly is the connection point the key to prevent it from sliding. Next the crew discovered the
between the bar or cable actuated by the crewmember to the locking pin in the crank handle was worn down to where it
piston shafts that supply the load. It allows the user to adjust the would not engage the catch reliably. Another successful
load by turning a crank handle attached to the end of a screw workaround was deVised to replace the pin with abolt. The third
assembly. The crank handle serves as the crewmember interface and ﬁnal failure on this unit occurred when, again, spontaneous
to the load adjustment mechanism, and it allows the load increase occurred. When the crew disassembled the crank
crewmember to select the amount of resistance by adjusting the handle the ﬁnal time, they found that the keyed interface

"
"5","JETS-JEl l-lS-SAIP—DOC—0084
between adapters 2 and 3 had sheared off, allowing the stack to approximately a month later after spares arrived on board. It
spin freely and bypassing the protective latch mechanism. was determined that the rod end pulled out of the swage ﬁtting
ARED was declared NO GO until a replacement was delivered. and the paddle 0f the dashpot impacted the loose end, causing
The socket inside adapter 1 was reapplied t0 the replacement it to bottom out and crack the glass housing (Figure 13). Three
unit and continues to be in use. subsequent failures occurred over the next 3 years, all

The second crank handle unit had an anomaly occur in July exhibiting the same failure mode, but spares were pre—
2013. The crew reported the handle was loose. Upon inspection positioned on 188 to provide immediate recovery of operations.
they determined that the center bolt was loose. The ARED A design change was initiated on the interface of the rod end
engineers developed a procedure to properly tighten the bolt, and swage to provide a stronger connection. This design has
and a routine maintenance activity was added every 6 months since been life—cycle tested and certiﬁed for ﬂight and has
to prevent the center bolt from loosening again. proven to survive cycles that equate to the end of the ISS life

The second crank handle unit remained in service until a currently set to 2024. Spares will still be ﬂown to minimize risk
failure in October 2014. The crew reported a slight spontaneous of system down—tirne [15].
load increase, so troubleshooting was conducted on—orbit. The
crew found that three of four fasteners that connect adapters 1 Fl— ‘ «__—
and 3 were completely backed out and free—ﬂoating in the . _. ___7§' - '
assembly housing. The crank handle was replaced with a spare _> 9mm 7 7b / u. I .
and returned to the ground for assessment, where it was "" - 113i: 1‘ ‘ l] , .
discovered not only had the fasteners backed out, but the keyed ~ I Q ‘ -‘ﬂ -
interface between adapters 2 and 3 was sheared off. This 2 f"") , / 4 ’ I
damage can be seen in Figure9below. This last failure initiated mi ,’ ‘ “5’ / _‘ a 4 __ V
a change request to redesign the internal parts of the crank "" t ‘ m!
handle to eliminate p0ss1b111t1es for fasteners becoming loose or g; ' , '
interfaces from fracturing [9—14]. ' i 1‘ -- ' I‘l

, w ___ m . VISattachment '
-. :9 ' g: P°5t5
i. a: ’f £3”;
1 .'.‘::;:~"".j;j‘ . 3 WW
tax _ Figure 10. ARED VIS System
. . ,L . ’ .
' . .. n A 0
1 5%; t WW, "" ’5 mmmmm
w“? . — $5.5 ‘ , 3 i ‘x. .. .
Flgure 9' Adapter 3 Key Damage Figure 11. -R0tati0n Dashpot Rod End Failure (left) and
Table 5. Timeline for Adapter Key X-Rotation Dashpot Glass Breakage (right)

.

- ‘ ' ""

-

key sheared off , 4
’ r ’ b ' '9» _ _ 5 x-Rotation
- 1 ’ ' ' l. Dashpots
b) Dashpot Failures 1.... i

The ARED Vibration Isolation System (VIS) has three rnaj or y ‘
components: X—rotation, Y—translation, and Z—translation — I
(Figures 12 and 14). After approximately 6 months of use, the
crew identiﬁed damage to X—rotation dashpots, which was not Figure 12. X-Rotation Dashpot Position
preV10usly seen 1n ground life cycle testing, includlng a C) A R ED Instrumentation Boar d (A [B ) Failure
separated rod end and cracked glass h0us1ng. ARED was The ARED instrumentation consists 0f 14 individual sensors
declared NO GO, and the damaged dashpots were replaced

"
"6","JETS-JEl l-lS-SAIP-DOC-0084
located within the ARED system. The signals produced by because TVIS was designed for replacement of large ORUs that
these sensors are processed by the ATE, which contains ﬁlters, could not be accommodated in the limited stowage available on
data acquisition modules, and universal serial bus (USB) hub Russian Progress vehicles.
electronics for translation and communication of the sensor Most ORU failures that occurred on TVIS took it to a
signals. The AIB outputs the information to the ARED software NO—GO state, as seen in Table 6 below._TVIS exercise in any
for recording and displaying to the crewrnernber. form would not be able to be performed until the broken part

In August 2011, the crew received an error message was replaced. Certain types of historical failures were quickly
indicating that the ATE data acquisition board was not recoverable, and the only factor that would delay TVIS exercise
functioning. It could not be recovered Via power cycle, and no would be the available crew time to perform the replacement or
spares were on board. Ground testing with like units pointed to workaround activity.

a failure of the cornrnercial USB hub within the AIB. A design Table 6 N O- G O and Failures With Operational
modiﬁcation was 1n1t1ated to make the USB hub replaceable on- . .
. . . Restrlctlons - TVIS
orb1t by the crew, and the new des1gn of AIB was certiﬁed and
3. Success Stories — Reliable Components Restrictions
Even with the history of failures, ARED has several ' ChaSSiS ' Belt/Slatlfailure ' SLD _ use SBS inStead
. . . Gyroscope or Stabilizer 0 PC Card — Actlve (no
components that have been extremely reliable. The follow1ng failure data)/Manual/Passive mode
are examples of designing and testing to reach a reliable state. . Control Pane| / EB _ workaround
a) Polyester Exercise Rope stabilization goes down

The polyester exercise rope experienced an initial failure ° (?;?;;;ano EST :5;
with the splice pulling out during a zero-load condition, but freely— passive mode),
since a lock stitch was added to the design, it has operated transfercase, flywheel
without failure for 2 years on-orbit. This was a signiﬁcant case
increase in service life over the Vectran exercise rope, which ' ROHer Bearing failures _

. roller could be removed
required replacement every 6-8 weeks. The success of the and resume
polyester rope can be attributed to thorough life—cycle testing, a
scatter factor of 2, and involvement with industry rope experts
in the design. 2. Failure History
19) Cable Arm Ropes This section details the .important TVIS failures that

Although the ARED cable arm ropes have to be replaced demonstrated lessons learned1n re11ab111ty.
approximately every 3-4 months, they have never experienced a) ChaSSiS
an on-orbit failure, and they continue to fail in a consistent The treadmill chassis (Figure 15) consisted primarily Of a
fashion during life-cycle testing where they are used almost four-sided rectangular aluminum bOX With tWO long side panels
constantly in the ARED life-cycle test rig. Success and and two end panels. The internal chassis support assembly
consistency in the design can be attributed to thorough life- (ICSA) as seen in Figure 16» the main subassernbly 0f the
cycle testing, a scatter factor Of 2’ and involvement with chassis, contained 50 roller assemblies mounted in two
industry rope experts in the design. aluminum channels that provided support to the tread belt and
C) S true tum Z absorbed the footfall force. Eight roller assemblies .were

ARED structure has never experience d a failure to date, mounted to the three cross support bearns, which along With an
which can be attribute d to materials selection and thorough additional four black side roller assemblies mounted in the side
analysis to show positive margins of safety on structural panels, prov1ded support to the tread belt [11
components.

B. T VIS I MMJC.
1. Performance History I_ . 7 . , , . ‘V < -7

Compared to other CMS hardware systerns, TVIS spent a WW n: ‘ . - ‘ r- .. ""
considerable amount of time on-orbit in a NO-GO , , Z '_ I : . .' i . ~ ' _
conﬁguration with components/orbital replacement units ‘ ~ +_r____:__’_*‘ ' ""‘—
(ORUs) broken and waiting for replacement parts. Life-cycle ‘ _. -‘
testing was not performed on the original TVIS components, so '
when a part failed, there were typically no spares on-obit, and Figure 13- Treadmill Assembly (Chassis)
many of the failures required a redesign to ﬁx the problem. A
large contributor to down-tirne was that the US. was dependent
solely on Russian cargo ﬂights from 2003—2005 while the Space
Shuttle Columbia accident investigation was underway. This
created a longer waiting period for parts to arrive on 188

"
"7","JETS-JEI1-15-SAIP-DOC-0084
. ‘” ' ﬂ ' ‘ - V r - '
I’f .1 “7 ““ “‘7‘?“-
1,100,; ‘— ‘ - ’ '1 \Qz; '
“(a 0 /. .\ _ ‘ 5 L.» .r . \ F15 L \‘1
MW . A t: . .-. = +
.c/ 1 ... . . -r‘..-..
~ ‘10 ”(J ..-"".{;~.‘.';l‘ . ,ﬁ ’1'. ‘ «f g :gh Y 1 .
x e / _..~-.:.«7 0 x4; / ' ‘9” st-
e .x , r o / ' A ‘ £7» 1. 1
‘1 0c [41“ ..//' .3. ',_:;’_ 5
C-“e ﬂA ‘\. 01/ ~ “
“’0 "" /"" ""4-é',""‘\I\ ‘ o . f, 7 ‘ ‘ ‘ '
r’e / / \l‘ o , "" ' ‘“
“r /"" './‘~;.’.--° (/‘ﬁ 7-. ‘ i
[la 0 / _ _“ .~.;‘_' :1"" . .’_. L"" ’ Lu \ \ *. .
"" Q/éﬁ/M-“.'~3‘”"" ‘ / . I/ H ’ ‘ I '
1 , ”.uq‘"" f/ C ,x” 1'53”; ““4 .‘I ’» ,’ ll
. ;\~ ,.\\. .‘x/ ' «.3. - . 7
\:'\ \\ . // ' 31.») v_; & .1 . _..
‘~.‘~ - C _' .z, ‘3 , r 1 . 1 1.; ‘
‘ :ﬁ ‘— ‘ ‘9. ‘ ’ ‘ x.
y M _ . 1 .. 1 . . . .
t__ (:7, xx .& lkr ‘ , ~.. .7 .
Figure 14. ICSA Diagram ‘ ‘ ‘
Figure 16. TVIS Chassis on 188
The running surface of the treadmill, the tread belt assembly, 1 ""
was composed of several subassernblies, which included the 1— 4—7_ —....__, 1 ' «3‘21:
endless belt, slat assembly, pan-head screws, and weld nuts. —‘ ' ‘r
The tread belt assembly consisted of a ﬂexible belt with 159 L371”:- T 1 ' ' g 1 _. 111;}?
individual rigid slats, which were attached to the upper $41,121.; I, ,1 g1, ; 1 j, .. 1; “1'3:
Neoprene rubber side of the belt (Figure 17). “14.7; 11*1441J‘s""’11:“:33ji‘11éi'1}(7%.:2'1"".15%,r”:*:'&u yv’“ 1.
- ""1‘: J {-3. 3’ fnzﬁgirﬁ’w’
Pan Head baew ' _ ”‘1‘33337131541115~,;«:a;.;, 7;. 'rt-'.:£ 44¢ "" ""
—h_.__ ‘-‘.—'~.'.L' “ .._ E b.
Viggl—o: .. '1. N
Slats . ' 1' i ’ ' r 1 -' '-
I i I i i i , . _ Figure 17. Broken Ultem 2000 TVIS Slats
.. 1 1 , , . . Treadbelt
LII“-
Fa m 3 v“ H r x }
\v- '1. ..-' ‘ “130;..2'9'”;
Weld nut » _ . '6', s 1 3+. . . , 1’ '
\ ‘ \g{;,c ‘ | . 1 1'; . 0 w.‘
’ , ' 7‘ =~ ': :eE,
Flgure 15. Tread Belt Stack-up Nomlnal Conﬁguratlon ' . i .3 E - . 1
1) Broken T read Slats ‘ "" ‘ I "" 1‘
In March 2001, the crew reported that some Ultem 2000 slats 1 “ f
0n the TVIS chassis had cracked during use (Figures 18 and ““ ~..
19). Pictures were sent to the ground for evaluation, and TVIS ,
was declared NO GO for use. Upon evaluation, engineers on '
the ground determined that the slat design had negative margins 1 ' 7; 73:73:: géi '
of safety for stress and fatigue. The slats were subsequently "" 'ﬁ.‘ S?
redesigned and machined from aluminum (Figure 20). The - ‘ 1 m
aluminum slats were certiﬁed, ﬂown and installed, and never
experienced this failure again in the lifetime of TVIS operations
[17]. Figure 18. TVIS with New Aluminum Slats
2) Chassis Rollers and Bearings
First, during post-ﬂight Visual inspection of the chassis in
July 2002, an egg-shaped hole was found in the truss where a
roller shaft mounts (Figure 21). On-orbit troubleshooting
revealed two similar holes in the truss on-orbit. The root cause
of the damage was determined to be a failed bearing that seized
on its shaft. When the bearing failed, it caused the shaft to begin
spinning within its mounting hole. The steel shaft began to eat

"
"8","JETS—JEl1—15-SAIP-DOC—0084
away at the aluminum truss and created the egg-shaped hole. After the following corrective measures (design changes and
The failed bearings were sent to the NASA Materials and procedure changes) were implemented with the new roller
Processes (M&P) group for analysis, and they determined that assembly design used in the -309 chassis, this anomaly did not
the bearings had insufﬁcient lubrication and were underrated reoccur:
for this application. 0 The ICSA was redesigned to eliminate lightening pockets

Second, the crew reported a failure with the chassis rollers in and to use a stronger material (Aluminum 7075).
October 2007 . The ICSA with the missing roller can be seen in o D-shaped aluminum bushings 0n the outboard side were
Figure 22 below. They had approximately 660 hours of use added to increase the load-bearing capacity of the truss as
(2 years) at the point of failure, but were certiﬁed by analysis to the shape prevents the rotation of the bushing.
a limited life of 2000 hours. That analysis was based on KC—135 o The new truss was designed to allow for on—orbit roller
test ﬂight data that demonstrated the loads observed at the bearing replacement of the bearings that see the greatest
rollers within the treadmill. Using that data in an analysis, the load on-orbit.
center 10 rollers on each side of the chassis would need to be 0 The steel bearing shaft was secured to a locking nut.
replaced every 500 hours, whereas the remaining rollers should 0 Rheolube 2000 was used as a bearing lubricant.
1ast2000 hours. Since a roller outside the center 10 rollers failed 0 Crew procedures were modiﬁed to regularly inspect for
on-orbit after 660 hours, it was concluded that the analysis failed bearings [19],
assumptions were incorrect, and the design did not have enough 0 Treadmill usage was closely tracked and roller assemblies
margin to accommodate the actual loads applied on-orbit. A were replaced prior to bearings reaching end of life,
design change was made to the roller material and larger
bearing in 2009 using a modiﬁed skateboard wheel, and the
design proved to be robust, never failing or needing
replacement. The limited life was set to 500 hours, the same as
the previous black roller design since no testing was done. The ' j . .C' . . , .
performance of the new design was trended and monitored, but 4"" , - ‘ I
no damage or signiﬁcant wear was ever observed, as seen in '
Figure 23 below, so the life was extended to 1000 hours, and it - '
continued in use without a failure until the TVIS retirement in _ ~ g ‘_ _ f _ - i_ _/ _ / 1
2013 [18]. 7'
h"" '7‘ “
\
Figure 21. New Roller
‘13‘ ' : .3"" ‘2 b) Stabilizer Springs
' ’ w \_‘:‘_ The four stabilizer assemblies were used to stabilize Z-aXis
.« . a and pitch motion of the TVIS System. The stabilizer assemblies
_ ~29. , ‘ ' : were installed onto the treadmill Via two captive bolts at each
.. 1:7 1:: . 0f the four corners of the treadmill chassis. The three main
""0""“? 7:"". ‘ ‘ subassemblies 0f the stabilizer assembly were the motor
. . controller, clamp rope assembly, and the stabilizer (Figures 24
Figure 19. ICSA Damaged due to Selzed Bearlng
and 25) [1].
‘ . Motor Controller
""3 i * Stabilizer
, F' '
\ 3242‘ . Corner Bracket
' \ Figure 22. Stabilizer Assembly
Figure 20. Roller Damage

"
"9","JETS-JEl l-lS-SAIP-DOC—0084
r . . j -: ' On June 5, 2009 the forward and aft right stabilizers were
., ’ “j ‘ ' . disconnected from the TVIS System by the ISS crew, and their
, , .1 .5""; “ v mfg, ,. ”...'.' f- n‘ l. covers were removed. Internal inspections of the forward right
"" .3 ‘u' Il r stabilizer revealed that one of the four springs had failed and
1 . ‘- ~‘LC', the spring/ﬂange connector fasteners that attached the spring to
‘ ’- x . .‘~'F* the throw rnass had also failed (Figure 27). The spring/ﬂange
"" K; . ,7 / connector fastener heads and spring/ﬂange connector with part
, Clamp Rope ' .:~i: of the broken spring were removed from the forward right
Assembly ‘ "" ~ ‘5 stabilizer and the cover was reinstalled. No damage was found
\s.) during internal inspection of the aft right stabilizer. Both
stabilizers were reinstalled on June 2009, and an ACO
Figure 23. Stabilizer and Clamp Rope Assembly consisting of a “shake test” for all four stabilizers was
conducted to identify any additional loose parts within the
caVities. Following the unmanned and manned ACO, the TVIS
System was put back into use on-orbit; however, the system was
in a degraded state until ground spares could be assembled and
ﬂown.
In order to prevent additional spring failures and to return the
"" TVIS System to a nominal operating conﬁguration, four spare
l springs were ﬂown on ﬂight 2J/A and installed in the forward
‘ right stabilizer in September 2009. During the April 2010
— Annual Maintenance, a new forward right stabilizer assembly
‘ was installed and springs were changed-out with ﬂown spares
' in the remaining three stabilizers. Additionally, during the
scavenge activity on the forward right stabilizer assembly, the
crew reported an additional failed spring, which was removed
Figure 24. Stabilizer _ Cover Removed prior to re-stowing the stabilizer on-orbit as a “scavenge-on—
need” spare unit. Engineering believes that the possible cause
The stabilizer was comprised of an aluminum housing, rare 0f the additional failed spring in the stabilizer was .due to t,WO
earth magnets with a stainless steel back plate, and stainless broken springs Idemlﬁéd 1n the forward left stabilizer during
steel bearings. The stabilizers had an actively controlled mass the change-out act1V1t1es. The forward left stahilizer spring
spring motor system with a natural frequency near the average failures .potentially caused the remaining stabilizers to work
- . . . harder (1ncreas1ng load and spring extens1on and decreas1ng the
running frequency (~33 Hz). The stabilizers contained a ,
brushless DC linear motor equipped with linear bearings natural frequency of the V18 System) and rnay have contribnted
lubricated with Braycote 601, which moved the rnass-spring t0 til? premature failure 0f the spring in the forward ﬁght
system to provide an equal and opposite force to the footfall stabilizer [20‘221 ,
forces and to help stabilize above the natural frequency. The ”
internal components of the TVIS stabilizer can be seen in ' \
Figure 26 above. The motor controllers contained all of the i ®’ ®
electronics that controlled the motor movement within the ' . :3 §
stabilizers. ‘ g §
In May 2009, the crew reported that the TVIS System was 3 / «3; &
making a “clunking” noise in the forward right corner at speeds ' “:3 .
of 5-6 mph and that the noise corresponded with each footfall .
while exercising. Troubleshooting determined that the .
“clunking” noise originated from the forward right stabilizer. ' ,. i ' ' ‘ :‘f it
After pinning the throw mass to prevent movement, a Visual -'
inspection revealed a free-ﬂoating spring/ﬂange connector - E
inside the stabilizer cavity. A manned activation and checkout R , - ""
(ACO) activity was conducted, and a reView of the data and ,.,...........
Video identiﬁed unexpected Vibrations in the chassis, y ‘
degradation of the chassis stability, and a “thumping” noise --.. 7 ‘
(indicative of the throw rnass within the remaining three “ ,
powered stabilizers being overdriven), thus increasing the risk . -
of mechanical damage occurring to the remaining three active _ A
stabilizers.
Figure 25. Broken TVIS Stabilizer Springs

"
"10","JETS-JEl l-lS-SAIP-DOC—0084
c) Gyroscope certiﬁcation of the hardware. The failed bearings were 7 -years
The gyroscope assembly (Figure 28) was used to stabilize the old. It is believed the seals failed, allowing the grease to escape,
TVIS System from excessive roll during operation and which led to rapid mechanical degradation of the bearings. The
provided current peak smoothing of the TVIS System power TVIS System engineering team assembled a gyroscope repair
sources. The gyroscope ﬂywheel was housed in an aluminum kit and an in-depth procedure to allow the crew to disassemble
housing. It was designed to spin at approximately 2400 rpm and the gyroscope and install new bearings. The crew repaired the
provided the restoring torque to counter roll torque inputs by gyroscope in March 2004, and it operated nominally until it was
the crewrnernber. An integral brushless DC motor was used to replaced by a new gyroscope in December 2006. The newly
spin the ﬂywheel. Power and speed control for the gyroscope delivered gyroscope included several design improvements.
was provided from the V18 controller assembly. The gyroscope The bearing seals were made of Viton, which did not have a
was located beneath the treadmill chassis in an areainaccessible shelf life. Also, the bearing grease was changed to Rheolube
t0 the crew during nominal operations and was attached to the 2000 [23-24].
chassis side plates. The gyroscope had a vertical spin aXis and
pivot bearings positioned in the pitch direction to allow for the
required precession during operation. The gyroscope \ ,
incorporated two (one per side) swaged wire rope assemblies - 4 ‘
that aided in restoring the gyroscope back to its neutral position
and prevent excessive movement [1]. ~ ‘3‘ , . . 4' ‘
.f‘ t
r . , ‘a
v a
. “—7-? .' ° . I 1-.
1‘ -. a . 4” g? ' *‘4
J"" ' .., _ .3; t . ‘
‘ a 733- ""t‘FL’g ' f . \ 1
e F"" * 33‘?""
. ‘ \ 9.?"" '1’». I Figure 27. Gyroscope Bearing Debris
4 '° I I e \ 3. Success Stories —Reliable Components
\ ,4 1'4“ '5 , , - ' Given the schedule and budgetary restrictions on TVIS, the
. \O “V , ‘ 188 Program decided to ﬂy TVIS as a protoﬂight system and
. essentially conduct life-cycle testing on-orbit. This created an
‘V evolutionary design process, driven by on-orbit failures. As
Figure 26, Gyroscope assembly designs failed, were improved, and eventually tested on-orbit,
they progressed to a good stage of reliability. Some examples
On November 17’ 2003’ the crew reported a metal of items that had initial failures and evolved to reliable
scraping/screeching noise coming from the gyroscope. An compenents include the aluminum tread slats, theredesigned
In-Flight Maintenance (IFM) was conducted in December 2003 chassis rollers, and the gyroscope bearings. These items never
to disassemble the gyroscope. The crew identiﬁed that the requiredreplacernent once the des1gnwas stud1ed and rhodiﬁed.
bearing was degraded (Figure 29), and an investigation of the The engineering team was able .to learn from. the failure and
spare ground gyroscope revealed a similar problem on bearings make the des1gn robust and as fail-safe as p0ss1ble.
that had only been used approximately 20 hours. NASA M&P
investigated the problem and determined that the grease inside C' CEVIS
the bearings had been contaminated and was breaking down and 1- Performance H is tOU’
also that the Nitrile material used to seal the bearing has a shelf CEVIS has been one Of the most reliable devices Withih the
life of 3 t0 5 years. The manufacturer of the bearings initially CMS system, With failures rarely occurring. Some Of this can
packed the bearings with a hydrocarbon-based grease. The be attributed to the prior experience with the parent design on
instructions in a drawing Flag Note indicated that this grease the space shuttle, and some 0f it can be attributed to parts
should be removed and the bearings repacked with Braycote selection, as the parts have proven to be robust.
601 grease, but testing showed that the hydrocarbon-based Table 77 lists the types 0f failures that might result ih NO-
grease was not completely removed on the failed bearings. The G0 status or failures with operational restrictions. Failures 0f
remnants of this grease chemically reacted with the Braycote major components 0f CEVIS Will take it to a NO'GO state, as
601, decreasing its effectiveness. This contamination caused the indicated ih the following list, but only for a short time, as
bearings to fail prematurely. This information was not CEVIS has spare parts 0h board to quickly recover from the
previously identiﬁed by the bearing vendor or found during failures.

"
"11","JET S-JE1 1—15—SAIP-DOC—0084
Table 7. NO-GO and Failures With Operational every 3 months to check the status of the isolators. The Wire
Restrictions - CEVIS ropes have periodically broken due to fatigue at the clamp point,
NO-GO Failures Failures with Operational as a stress concentration eXists at that point When the Wire ropes
ReStriCti°ns are ﬂexed, but they can remain in service if eight or fewer wires
0 IVIS BOXGS — N0 GO due to 0 Control Panel — CEVIS are severed. Once the eighth Wire breaks, the unit is replaced.
Vlbl‘atlon ISOIatIOH—fll‘st $61 Contlngenéy C0nt1‘01161‘ The crew on Expedition 6 added rolled sock—balls inside the
laSted 14 years,pass1ve deVlce» (CCC) avallable Wire cage to help reduce movement during the EVA exercise
n0 Spare? pre-breathe activity, Which purges the system of nitrogen before
° Frame place _ n0 Spar?’ a spacewalk is conducted. This requires rigorous pedaling and
workarounds not poss1b1e . . . .
. . movement W1th the arms, Wthh makes the CEVIS riding very
o Ergometer — Spares, or1g1na11y .
n0 Spare unstable W1th0ut the socks. They also act as bump stops and
. P e dal _ Spares available prevent severe bending of the Wire ropes. . .
. Isolators _ required for Ops, The clamp plates of the CEVIS 1solator were redes1gned.1n
Spares available 2011 to add a chamfer to the edge of the hole Where the ere
rope passes through the plates, thus reducing the stress
. . concentration at that point. Figure 32 below shows the outlet
2. Fazlure sttory h 1 f th . 1 t b f th (1 . h d F' 33
This section will detail the important CEVIS failures that 0 e 0 e ISO a or e ore , e es1gn C ange, an 143““
. . . . shows the updated des1gn W1th the chamfered edge. This small
demonstrated lessons learned 1n reliability. . . . . .
change has 1ncreased serV1ce 11fe of the isolators substant1a11y,
a) Islolator _ 1 _ _ and the true service life is sti11being evaluated, as only one Wire
T e CEVIS ISO ators (Figure 30) are ere rope egg-beater- has failed on one isolator in almost 4 years of use. Per Figure
type deVICCS that proV1de the only structural attachment 31, it is eVident that the effects of the new design (magenta
between the CEVIS frame assembly and the ISS U.S. Lab rack lines) are a dramatic improvement [25]
using seat track adapters. They contain 12 strands of Wire rope,
and an isolator assembly is attached at each of the four corners '5°'at°' Severed ROPGS
of the CEVIS frame to minimize the Vibrations transmitted from x
the CEVIS System to the ISS structure during operation. They - ;
are changed out on an as-needed basis When more than 8 wire , - .
ropes are severed out of 12 on a single isolator. The isolators - 7
are inspected every 3 months and have had a service life varying 1’ /_— _ _ DNew
- ' - eSIgn
from 1 to 3 years [2]. i . — ‘ _.ff’z— _ J. :7
i “ . 7r.” ' _ .2. -‘4r'r~. v~r,.~~ * '>r""!
g ‘ '. Figure 29. CEVIS Isolator Performance History
1
: ' . a
, .. > . , ‘ l
.- - -:_ l
, t F .. 1
1h.'-.——_ “ W“ H t H i . I ‘ ' ff TS"" ° A; . 7"". ""Miix' I
‘ g, . ‘ 3/ . ‘I
'.\--‘v:r"" ‘. :f..‘,_, >- E.
Figure 28. CEVIS Isolators on 188 i - '
Over the service life of CEVIS, inspections are conducted ‘
Figure 30. Old Design With no Chamfer on Hole Edges

"
"12","JETS-JEl l-lS-SAIP-DOC-0084
supplies and wire, the crew was able to input voltages to
regulate the CEVIS workload and receive feedback data Via 0n-
orbit voltmeters. A replacement control panel was launched on

’ ULFl.l, and the CCC (Figure 34) was subsequently designed,
tested, and certiﬁed in case another unexpected control panel
failure occurred. The CCC remains stowed on 188 currently

"" [26].
t .g i a i. h? t ,8
‘ p / I .. . ‘ 1 i '
g.g’ Y , V . 1:: r}
“171'”- . tee... {5.51.8} ‘ T , ' i ’
‘l L i.$. m. ‘7
Figure 31. New Design with Chamfer 0n Hole Edges ‘ 1 7-
[9) Control Panel F eatures “—3
The CEVIS control panel provides the subject with an
interface to the control electronics 0f the ergometer. It stores , ,
data on a portable storage device and is connected to the ISS Flgure 32' CEVIS Contlngency Controller
local area network (LAN). It has a touch screen for crew entry
[2]. c) Ergometer
Key parameters displayed by the control panel include the The 188 cycle ergometer contains the main mechanics and
following: electronics to provide the user with cyclic and arm ergometry
o Subj ect selection exercises. The 188 ergometer is a modiﬁed version of the space
0 Target cycling speed shuttle IVIS cycle ergometer with the principal difference being
. Actual cycling speed the addition of an electronic control system. The gear device,
. Target workload IVIS interface, frame interface, motor coupling, lever, braking
. Actual workload band, and manual control systems have all remained unchanged
. Adjusted workload (RX mode) from the shuttle IVIS cycle ergometer. The exposed moving
. Target heart rate (RX mode) parts consist of crank arms, pedals, handles, and a cleVis ﬁxed
. Actualheart rate to a drive rod. The pedals, when rotated, drive a ﬂywheel
. Elapsed time through a planetary gear set. Friction/resistance is applied to the
. Stage time remaining (RX mode) ﬂywheel by a braking band that is tightened by a spring-tipped
. Loaded prescription (RX mode) ball screw driven by a stepper motor. Feedback from the load
The crew called down in March 2003 that when they tried to beam torque sensor enables the stepper motor to maintain a
power up the CEVIS for exercise, they received a “non-system constant workload. The pedals also drive the cleVis ﬁxed to the
disk” error and the control panel would not boot up, even after drive rod 0f the ergometer. This, ih turn, drives the throw
multiple power cycles. The exact cause of this anomaly could masses 0f the IVIS boxes back and forth to counter forces
not be pinpointed while the control panel was still on-orbit, but applied by the crewmember when pedaling. The ergometer
engineering suspected that it was due to either a hard disk houses the main electrical components and supplies the power
failure or corrupted software. The crew continued their exercise for the control panel. The manual control knob interfaces With
011 CEVIS, but in non-powered, manual mode. After the ergometer during manual mode operations to manually
questioning the crew further, it was conﬁrmed that the crew adjust the braking band tension to provide resistance [2]-
could not get the display to come up at all, the error message During the new CEVIS control panel activation and checkout
had been appearing more frequently when the controlpanel still in March 2009» the crew reported seeing the manual control
worked, and the modes on the screen were very noisy. Because knob message appear when the lead decreased from a high
there were no spares on-orbit, engineering concluded that the workload to a 10W workload ih protocol mode. A reView 0f the
control panel was “failed” and was not recoverable without new control panel activation and check—out data, PFE and
launching a replacement unit. subsequent exercise data revealed a gradual increase in
A workaround was developed that enabled the crew to workloads over time with rest periods not returning to baseline.
resume powered CEVIS exercise. Using on—orbit power The manual knob function was checked later during ACO and

"
"13","JETS-JEl l-lS-SAIP-DOC—0084
veriﬁed to be nominal. Subsequent data analysis showed that ' ""jive:
actual load was not following target workload. When target _ ”
workload changed from high workload levels to low workload ‘ ' M 'I
levels, actual workload was signiﬁcantly greater than target - , . 1w ~ “ ""4“
workload. This load discrepancy increased with time over the h.
course of an exercise session. On April 9, 2009, troubleshooting ,1 l. I ' J i, ' ° '
isolated the problem to the ergometer. The crew was directed to /ié ' Ir... '- 7 4‘ ‘»--'--il-
stand down on CEVIS operations because load discrepancy ’l 7' ‘
indicated potential internal ergometer damage, and the risk '\ '/ . i '
associated with continued nominal usage prior to an ergometer ‘ . l/ p M f , ‘ - '
internal IFM could result in irreparable hardware damage or .3 . __ “ ° '. . 7 ‘ ~ : -‘ '
failure. Trending data analysis from March 29, 2009 to April 8, . ‘ ,, ’ """" ""‘ ""- .»4 ““NS - ,
2009 showed the anomaly to worsen over the span of a protocol. 0 ’1’. “'- __ i ' .2»:
Several IFM activities were performed in May 2009 to ‘
disassemble the ergometer. Internal sub-assemblies were Figure 33. CEVIS Braking Band Replacement
inspected and determined to be nominal. The braking band, fan,
guide rod, and ﬂywheel were all cleaned of dust and debris. The
braking band contained some embedded dirt that was later ; '
partially removed by brushing and vacuuming. Several internal Q
components were inspected and photographed before 3.. i
reassembling the ergometer. After the ergometer was 1 7
reassembled, several protocols were run, and the workload drift
anomaly and manual knob messages disappeared. Data was
analyzed on a weekly basis, and n0 maj or issues were identiﬁed 7 i
in the data between June 2009 and middle August 2009. During
review of the CEVIS data downlinked in early September 2009,
actual workload data did not return to target load as commanded
when stepping down from high workload to lower workload.

On September 15, 2009, the crew noted that ‘Manual Knob

Activated' message was displayed on the CEVIS control panel Figure 34. Dirty CEVIS Braking Band

during a large delta in workload. The direct cause of the

workload drift was due to the excess friction force from a

heated, dirty and worn braking band (Figure 34) t0 the ﬂywheel, ‘0 F r am e , , ,

adding additional mechanical resistance to the system. The The mounting frame pr0V1des the interface between .the

CEVIS ergometer braking band was replaced with the new ergometer and the 1s01at0rs and can be broken down 1nt0 eight

braking band that was launched on 17A during an IFM activity coniponents, Wthh are stowed for launch and assembled on—

on October 5’ 2009 (Figure 35). The braking band had been in orbit. It places the CEVIS System above the face of the racl:

use on-orbit for approximately 7 years before it was replaced. during operations, .but allows .the ergometer t9 rotate 90

Data processed weekly since October 2009 supports that the countercloekwme Vla the m ounting. 191091? and guide pins to a

anomaly had been remedied by replacement of the braking stowed.p0s.1t10n when not 1n use. This minimizes the permanent

band. A braking band limited life of 382 hours was added to the protrus10n 1nt0 the ISS LAB aisle m pathway. The mounting

Government Certiﬁcation Acceptance Request (GCAR) and bIOCk and gulde pin are Sh?“ in Figures 37 and 38 below [2]'

began to be tracked by the CEVIS team. It is acceptable to In May 20,02 the Expeditlon 2 crew reportea that the CEVIS

exceed the 382 hours if no signs of the anomaly are present [27 - was becorning more difﬁcult to .rotate mt? ,bperational

28]. conﬁguration. They heard a “scraplng/crunchlng n01se, at
Wthh p01nt they stopped and notlﬁed the ground. The crew
conﬁrmed that the CEVIS was deployed in the operational
position, not in the stowed position. Engineering determined
that there was binding in the guide pins causing friction during
rotation and developed a troubleshooting procedure to help the
crew assess the problem. The crew veriﬁed that the mounting
block was stuck to the mount pins. Engineering determined that
the only solution for resolving the issue was replacement of the
forward frame, guide pins and mounting blocks. Operations
concluded that this conﬁguration was acceptable since it does
not impede emergency egress and only slightly impinges 0n the
nominal crew translation path. A material analysis was

"
"14","JETS-JEI1-15-SAIP-DOC—0084
performed on the ground at J SC, which concluded that 1 ’. ,.- 3;
materials selected in this application did not have good . V""
compatibility for galling prevention. The damaged guide pin ""
and mounting block bushing can be seen in Figures 39 and 40
below. The materials group recommended the use of a ' j w J
lubricant, Braycote 601EF, to reduce the risk of galling in the . I
. . . . I . 0»
future. Before on-orbit implementation, the reV1sed .1. ‘
conﬁguration with Braycote 601EF was successfully cycle- ‘ .0
tested on the ground the equivalent of 2 years on-orbit use. K i
From the time of failure in 2001 until 2006, the crew used "" _ ‘
CEVIS in the deployed position, and it was kept in operational ‘
position until the new frame was ﬂown on ULF1.1. Yearly Figure 37-CEVIS Guide Pill
maintenance to lubricate the guide pins and mounting block
bushings was implemented in July 2006 and continued every '3 U ‘
year thereafter [29]. f.
, . *ri
‘ .7 . ‘-’; NA“
' ' :3 ’1‘?
, -. 4! i
- .
Q 2‘? ' . _ _ j: | Figure 38. CEVIS Bushing and Guide Pin Damage
‘ , 2~,.|* ~_
.0 3. Success Stories — Reliable Components
ﬁ‘ ! Given the schedule and budgetary restrictions on CEVIS, the
‘ ( 188 Program decided to ﬂy CEVIS as a protoﬂight system and
Figure 35. CEVIS Mounting B10 ck essentially conduct life-cycle testing on-orbit. This created an
evolutionary design process, driven by on-orbit failures. Even
with the low rate of failures on CEVIS, as designs failed, were
improved, and eventually tested on-orbit, they progressed to an
even better stage of reliability. Some examples of items that had
initial failures and evolved to reliable components include the
"" . _ CEVIS isolators after the outlet chamfer was added to the clamp
_ ‘ plates and the mounting block and guide pin interface after
5; \' ‘ ‘wa, Braycote 601EF grease was added. These items have not
JR"" 3% i —' required replacement since the designs were modiﬁed. The
N. ”.1; _ engineering team was able to learn from the failure and make
‘"" T _ the design robust and as fail-safe as possible.
I #\ ‘ I , 2 V.ANALYSIS
' Studying the failure and success examples of the CMS
hardware systems can assist in the selection of criteria and
Figure 36. CEVIS Guide Pin processes that lead to good reliability. Depending on the
function of the system, it could be a single criterion or a
combination of many. The following sections detail these
criteria and processes that can be used in the hardware
development life cycle to help maximize reliability [5].
A. Robustness
Robustness is an important quality in successful hardware
and software systems in any spaceﬂight application. It is
defined as the degree of tolerance to variations in either the
components of a system or its environment. It is often deﬁned

"
"15","JETS-JEI1-15-SAIP-DOC-OO84
as the toughness of a system under variable conditions. Items lower stop exercise. These contingencies allow the hardware to
that are robust, such as the ARED structure and exercise bar remain functional and provide the intended capability to the
hardware system which have never failed, require little to no erewrnernbers. Sometimes a contingency is not possible, but by
maintenance and are expected to last for the duration of the thinking and planning for failures, the response to implement a
mission without replacement. The robustness of a system contingency can be relatively short if the required materials are
design can be predetermined 0n the ground, and conﬁdence in available.

a design can be gained Via the following techniques:
1. Life Cycle T esting/Scatter Factor 3' Instrumentation
Life-eyele testing Operates a system under normal conditions Predicting fa11ures before they actually happen by careful
to determine a service life. NASA uses a scatter factor of 2 for des1gn 0f1nstrurnentat10n is key to keeplng hardware ava11ab1e
n0n-safety critical items and a scatter factor of 4 for safety to crew. Instrumentation pr0V1des 1ns1ght to a system 5
critical items, which means that for every 2 0r 4 cycles in the eondition Via strategically placed sensors in areas that can
life-eyele test, only one cycle counts towards the actual service 1s01ate problems. It often increases the cost Of an item, 50 the
life on-orbit. This protects the system from variances in des1gner must have sohd rationale as to why the data1s needed.
hardware and conditions to provide ample time for spares to be Cens1derat1en to power consumptlon tht be taken, as to not
manufactured and delivered to space. It also determines the V101ate an item s allotted power footprint. The location, data
worst-ease maintenance interval for replacement. The rate, and accuracy of the sensors must also be Chosen to provide
experience with the CMS hardware demonstrated that life-eyele useful trending, warnings, and tirneiy alerts 50 that a response
testing with scatter factor is a very reliable way to protect can beapphed befere an actual fa11ure occurs. Examples. Of
capability 0n-0rbit and is one of the best ways to Predict useful instrumentation w1th1n CMS were the CEVIS braklng
maintenance and resupply schedules so that failures do not bantl anomaly and the TYIS Gyroscope bearing fa11ure. By
affect operations or crew health. haV1ng sensors in the right place Within the system, the
engineers were able to analyze data and form a successful
2. F actor OfSafely . . . .
. . . troubleshootlng plan w1th likely causes. This greatly reduced
The factor of safety is a des1gn margin above the calculated . .
. . . . . . the crew time required to troubleshoot the problem and allowed
ultimate strength or yield of a rnater1a1. By utlhzlng a factor of . .
. . . . . the tune to be devoted to actual repairs.
safety in an analys1s, the engineering team can ensure a des1gn
is built to sufﬁcient margins so that structural failures are not
. . . . . . C. Crew Feedback
even p0ss1b1e w1th1n deﬁned usage conditions. Agaln, the . . .
. . . . . Feedback from erewrnernbers 1s a valuable tool in assess1ng
ARED structure is a good example, as it has p0s1t1ve margins .
. . . . the health of CMS hardware. The crew uses the hardware daily,
w1th1n all structural components. The structure is Class1ﬁed as . . . . .
. . so after a short time 0n-0rb1t, they become 1n-tune w1th how it
fa11—safe due to these margins, as the process to replace the . . . .
. . . functions and quickly ascertain what is normal from a feel and
frame and structure 0n-0rb1t is not feas1b1e from a budgetary 0r . . .
. . sound standp01nt. Crewrnernbers are trained With the CMS
crew t1rne standp01nt. . . . . .
. . hardware for years before their rn1ss10ns. Tra1n1ng allows them
3- Independencefmm Fanctzonal Instrumentatzoh . to become familiar with the Operations and maintenance
Systems often rely on 1nstrurnentat10n t0 funetlon, and wh11e activities, and it attempts to normalize how the hardware is used
the data pr0V1des valuable 1ns1ght1nt0 the condition of a system, and what conditions it experiences with humans in the 100p.
electrical systems are often the p01nt of failure for hardware. Sometimes the human factor can introduce variations to the
Usmg the . CEVIS and . ARED as examples, where CONOPS based on an individual’s interpretation of how the
instrumentation systems failed (CEVIS .eontrol panel and device should be used, so when planning designs, these off-
ARED 51B)? the systems were able to eontlnue 0perat10ns, and nominal conditions should be considered and sufﬁcient margins
ava11ab111tywas sustained. The CEVI.S coultl Operate 1nrnanua1 applied. Examples would be the Kevlar TVIS corner ropes
mode, and the ARED could funetlon w1th0ut the AB? as breaking due to not being strong enough to endure actual 0n-
erewrnernbers entered data. manually into spreadsheets. Th1s orbit running and the ARED Polyester exercise rope splice
independence from the 1nstrurnentat10n systerns allowed coming apart under zero load conditions as crew handled the
exereise t0 eontlnue. When des1gn1ng hardware, th1s should be end of the rope. These could have been prevented had variations
eons1dered, as these redundaneles allow systems to adapt, in the normal Operations been considered. Crew feedback can
bypass the fa11ure state, and resume 0perat10ns. also point out failures that were not anticipated, such as the
4. ContingencieS/Workamunds more recent ARED upper stop cables. The crew noticed the
Contingencies plans and workarounds have been the life- frayed cable and reported the effects, and the ground team
saver for CMS hardware through the years. A contingency or produced and worked through a fault tree to determine the root
back-up plan can be by design or out of necessity. By design, cause. Without the crew’s Observations, the failure would have
some systems have contingency hardware. For example, been more sudden and impacts to Operations abrupt. By the
CEVIS has the CCC in case a control panel fails. By necessity, crew giving a warning of the damage9 the ground team was able
an innovative solution is devised using available supplies as a to prepare a plan to replace the cable when it failed before the
reaction to a failure. An example is tying back the ARED upper actual failure occurred.
stop cable with a cable tie when it fails to bypass the failure on

"
"16","JETS-JEI1-15-SAIP-DOC-OO84

D. Maintenance and Sparing V11. CONCLUSION

Maintenance and sparing is critical in systems With limited Reliability issues in 188 exercise CMS hardware has
11fe components. Knowmg all ofthe limited life items Within a produced lessons learned as well as success stories. As failures
system V13 test or analys1s prov1des an advantage to keeplng occur, they drive designs to evolve and improve to ultimately
systems operating and increasing reliability and availability. AS reach a point of utmost reliability. Designers of future systems
demonstrated .1n the ﬁrst few years Of TVIS operations, can utilize the resources, examples, and techniques discussed in
unk1}9wn hnnted 11fe on the tread slats, bearlngs, rollers, this paper and achieve better success in keeping hardware
stabihzer springs, and stabilizer corner Wire ropes resulted in operational for erewmembers. When deep space missions
s1gn1ﬁeant down-tnne 01} the system, une’épected resupply Of begin, system reliability and availability Willbe more important
spare components, and nnpaets t0 crew tune to conduct the than ever, as failures Will have greater consequences.
replacement activities. When deep space missions begin, With
limited stowage volume and mass available for spare parts,
knowing the life of the system components Will be critical to
mission success. Spares Will not be in close proximity, and a
failure of a part Without spares will most likely result in
permanent NO GO.

V1. LESSONS LEARNED

By studying the failures of CMS hardware, trends were
identiﬁed, leading to lessons learned. First, life-eyele testing the
hardware before deployment is the only way to accurately
predict failures and ensure the right number of spare parts are
stowed on 188. Using scatter factor, the maintenance schedule
can help protect against unexpected failures and keep the
hardware available for use. When a project has funding and
schedule available prior to ﬂight, they should always life-Cyele
test the hardware to gain this insight. Second, material
incompatibilities can result in damage to hardware during
operations, Which can lead to failures, as experienced With the
TVIS gyroscope, TVIS chassis roller bearing, and CEVIS guide
pin and bushing. When materials are interfaced and experience
movement, the materials, grease, bearings, etc. should be
scrutinized by industry experts to ensure the best choices are
made and reliability is maintained. Third, having ample spare
parts on board Will keep hardware operational and minimize
downtime. Although this is Closely related to life-Cyele testing
and understanding the maintenance interval, for hardware that
is being ﬂown for the ﬁrst time, it would be prudent to maintain
some spares of components that are single-point failures if
stowage volume and mass limits allow. Good examples are the
CEVIS control panel and the ARED crank handle, relatively
small items that could have been ﬂown and stowed With little
impact and prevented multiple days of NO-GO conditions on
the hardware. The ﬁnal lesson learned is that smart,
strategically placed instrumentation is key to troubleshooting
problems and quickly recovering from a failure. This Will
become more important as missions venture farther and farther
from Earth, as replacement hardware, if possible at all, Will be
years away instead of months or days. Most likely,
replacements Will not be available, so a quick diagnosis and
recovery plan must be formulated and executed by the crew.
Instrumentation should allow quick isolation of the problem so
valuable crew time Will not be wasted.

"
"17","JETS-JEI1-15-SAIP-DOC-0084
ACRONYMS REFERENCES
ACO Activation and Checkout [1] R. Ambrose, P. Bevill, M. Murray, S. Reddy, D. Blank, and H. Goetz,
AIB ARED Instrumentation BOX 1‘S1Si‘ilininngéltgiﬁigitt1-g DaTSCVri‘s’tiOs“ ft“ t5€$§f“f§%£§12vi§mﬁ%n
. . . . so a 1on n
ARED Advanced Re51stlve Exermse DeVlce 2011_ a a 1 12a Ion ( ) ys em” ’ eV' ’
CCC CEVIS Contingency Controller [2] R. Ambrose, P. Bevill, R. Bid, C. Reyes, and T. Moore, “Sustaining
CEVIS Cycle Ergometer With Vibration Isolation EnligiheerinngDSesg1ilption (S(léD) fosr) the Cycle Ergometer With Vibration
. . . t10n an ta 1 ization EVI System ” NASA J SC63334 ReV E
and Stablhzatlon SO a ’ ’ ’
2014.
CMS Countermeasures System [3] R. Ambrose, P. Ca11en,C. Maynard, C. Latour, L. Thackston, “Advanced
CONOPS Concept Of Operations Resistive Exercise Device (ARED) Sustaining Engineering Plan,” NASA
EEE Electrical Electromechani 1 n JSC6254.1’ Rev“ C” 2014
. ’ ca ’ a d [4] KSC Re11ab111ty,htt ://kscsma.ksc.nasa. OV/Reliabilit /
EleCtTOIHC. [5] Engineering Design Reliability Handbook, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,
EVA Extra-Vehlcular Activity 2004-
GCAR Government Certiﬁcation Acceptance [6] NASA Systems Engineering Handbook, NASA/SP-2007-6105 ReV 1,
R t December 2007
ICSA I :quesl Ch . S A b] [7] NASA Reliability and Maintainability (R&M) Program, NASA Policy
11 erna 3551s upport ssem y Directive (NPD) 8720.1
[FM 111 Flight Maintenance [8] Qualiﬁcation and Acceptance Environmental Test Requirements, SSP
188 International Space Station [9] giihzigghﬁﬁﬂgﬁhéargh 2003 k LAUC kH d1 P ' L kP'
, , , , , , , , . z mcza , ran an e r1ma oc 1n
IVIS Inertlal Vlbratlon Isolatlon and Stablhzatlon Fails to Engage, 2012 y ry
J SC J ohnson Space Center [10] FIAR JSCER0149F, G. Szymczak, ARED Load Changes Spontaneously,
M&P Materials and Processes = 2012
N AS A National Aeronautics and Space [11] FIAR J SCER0152F, H. Goetz , ARED Crank Handle Assembly Adapter
. . . Failure, 2012
Admlnlstratlon [12] FIAR JSCER0156F, H. Goetz, ARED Crank Handle Assembly Identiﬁed
NPD NASA Policy Directive LOOSE?» 2013
ORU Orbital Replacement Unit [13] FIAR JSCER0176F, H. Goetz, ARED Crank Handle Assembly Identiﬁed
. Loose, 2013
PIP Push-IIF-‘Place . . . . [14] FIAR JSCER0217F, L. Thackston , ARED Crank Handle, 2014
R&M Rehablhty and Malntalnablllty [15] FIAR JSCER0078F, J. G0 Boncan, Dashpot bracket Assembly R0d(p1n)
SBS Series Bungee System Came Loose and Backed Off From the Rocker Arm (paddle), 2009
SLD Subj CCt Load Device [16] FIAR J SCER0158F, H. Goetz , ARED Instrumentation BOX (AIB)
. Failure, 201 1
SM SerV1ce Module [17] FIAR JSCEA50115F, R. Toler, TVIS Slats Broken, 2001
SPD Subj ect Positioning Device [18] FIAR J SCEA0010F, W. Dyer, Roller Bearing Inside TVIS Chassis Broke
SSP Space S tation Program Into P1eces, Causmg The Treadbelt T0 J am, 2007
, , , , , [19] FIAR J SCEB0067, R. Senegal, Seized Bearing,2002
TVIS Tre301n111 Wlth Vlbratlon ISOlatlon and [20] FIAR J SCER0075F, A. Robinson, Broken spring in TVIS Forward Right
Stab111zat10n Stabilizer S/N 1004, 2009
USB Universal S erial Bus [21] FIAR J SCER0102F, P. Bevill , One spring found broken in TVIS Forward
VIS Vibration Isolation and Stabili t' (TVIS Right Stabilize” 2010
23 1011 [22] FIAR J SCER0105F, M. Allen, Two springs found broken in TVIS
311d CEVIS) forward left stabilizer, 2010
V18 Vlbration Isolation System (ARED) [23] FIAR JSCEB0168F, R. Senegal, TVIS (Treadmill Vibration Isolation
System) Noise, 2003
[24] FIAR J SCEB01 88F, M. Iwasa, Nitrile Seal On TVIS Gyroscope Bearing
Suspected To Have Exceeded Shelf Life, 2004
[25] FIAR J SCEB0336F, T. Schmidt , CEVIS Isolators Broken, 2005
[26] FIAR JSCEB0123F, R. Senegal, CEVIS Does Not Boot Up On Power
Up, 2003
[27] FIAR J SCER0069F, C. Langat, CEVIS Workload Anomaly And Manual
Knob, 2009
[28] FIAR JSCER0083F, C. Langat, CEVIS Workload Drift Anomaly And
Manual Knob Error, 2009
[29] FIAR J SCEA501 18F, R. Senegal CEVIS Deploy Position Problem, 2001

"
