"","x"
"1","Proceedings of the ASME 2012 Summer Bioengineering Conference
SBC2012
June 20-23, Farjardo, Puerto Rico, USA
S B CZ 0 1 2 -XXXXXX
ESTIMATED MUSCLE LOADS DURING
SQUAT EXERCISE IN MICROGRAVITY CONDITIONS
Christopher D. Fregly (1), Brandon T. Kim (1), Zhao Li (1),
John K. De Witt (2), and Benjamin J. Fregly (3)
(1) Lyceum Magnet Program, Abraham Lincoln (2) Wyle Science, Technology and Engineering
Middle School, Gainesville, FL 32641 USA Group, Houston, TX 77058 USA
(3) Dept. of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611 USA
INTRODUCTION obtained from the Simtk.org website as a starting point for the

Loss of muscle mass in microgravity is one of the primary factors analyses. The three-dimensional model initially possessed 37 degrees
limiting long-term space ﬂight [1]. NASA researchers have developed of freedom. A11 upper-body joints and both toe joints were locked in
a number of exercise devices to address this problem. The most recent positions consistent with the squat motions, leaving 21 degrees of
is the Advanced Resistive Exercise Device (ARED) [2], which is freedom. The joint structure of the nominal model was changed by
currently used by astronauts 0n the International Space Station (188) to replacing the ground-to—pelvis j oint with a ground-to-shoulders j oint.
emulate typical free-weight exercises in microgravity. ARED exercise This change allowed OpenSim to calculate inverse dynamics loads at
on the 188 is intended to reproduce Earth-level muscle loads, but the the shoulders rather than the pelvis using a bottom-up approach.
actual muscle loads produced remain unknown as they cannot
currently be measured directly.

In this study we estimated muscle loads experienced during squat g _ .- e _r
exercise on ARED in microgravity conditions representative of Mars, '3: .- 5% 5.115? K, , :37: :13
the moon, and the 188. The estimates were generated using a subject- E __f .' i.“ E _; . ‘
speciﬁc musculoskeletal computer model and ARED exercise data 2917' ~' g g g 1.5-:-
collected on Earth. The results provide insight into the capabilities and . ' 5%?""- {1*L ' :2, '__;-,;_ -_-23""- [.I‘F' .
limitations of the ARED machine. *g’ 3' Fix 92W. xi' §%‘ 1’

f ‘ -1r 1:5; 1.. hr r Ur; '- '=._; ' . /
METHODS J. 7 * if!” _} {?uxﬁ f‘ﬁi . 1- 7 '

Movement data were collected from a single male subject during 3 ' ' _ _ - 5"" [ii ' _ 3 '
ARED squat exercise performed at NASA Johnson Space Center. L . _ ' ., _ ﬂ, 9: . ' L
Institutional reView board approval and informed consent were Y - ( . _ P1 _ - 1 . 1| -
obtained. Data included surface marker positions measured by a 12- \ \H N: \ \
camera motion capture system (SMART-D, BTS Bioengineering ...H‘"" } ...?“ .1 ,,.r_.-* ' ff} ..-_=-""‘ ' #13?“ 9,
S.p.A., Milan, Italy) and ground reaction forces and moments ""'i' “‘6'"" 5 ""'r'
measured by two force plates (Model 9261, Kistler Instruments AG,

Winterthur, Switzerland). Experiment conditions included a normal Fig 1: Subject motion and ground reaction forces for the normal ARED
parallel squat motion and four motion variations (increased hip and squat trial 88 DFOdUCGd by model scaling, inverse kinematics, and
knee range of motion, decreased hip and knee range of motion, inverse dynamicsin OpenSim.

increased stance width, and faster squat). Analysis of the experimental ARED data involved a three-step

Musculoskeletal modeling and simulation work was performed process. First, model scaling using static trial marker data was
using OpenSim [3]. A nominal published walking model [4] was performed to convert the nominal model into a subject-speciﬁc model.

1 Copyright © 2012 by ASME

"
"2","Second, inverse kinematics was performed using the subject-speciﬁc Our results can be understood by considering the changes in joint
model to convert rnarker rnotion data into corresponding joint rnotions. loads relative to standing on Earth that would occur if a 1 BW
Third, inverse dynamics was performed using the subject-speciﬁc equivalent force was added to the shoulders while standing in 0g. The
model, joint rnotions frorn inverse kinematics, and ground reaction shoulders would experience a force increase of 1 BW, since no force is
force measurements to calculate muscle moments at the ankle, knee, applied to the shoulders during standing on Earth. At the other
hip, and backjoints and applied force on the shoulders (Fig. 1). extreme, the ankles would experience a force increase of only 0.03
Inverse dynamic analyses were performed for the different BW, since the ankles support 97% of BW during standing on Earth.
gravity and squat variations. Gravity variations were analyzed using Thus, adding a 1 BW force to the shoulders in 0g will change Earth-
the joint motions and ground reactions from the normal squat trial. level joint loads by the amount of BW below the joint of interest.
Reduced gravity was imposed by setting the gravity term in the model Relative to the normal squat exercise, the technique variations
to 0.38g for Mars, 0.17g for the moon, and 0g for the ISS. The four generally had little effect on maximum muscle moments (data not
squat variations were analyzed using the joint motions and ground shown). In contrast, every reduced-graVity case produced increased
reactions from the corresponding experiment trials. The output of each j oint loads. Thus, the squat rnotion variation beneﬁts when performed
inverse dynamic analysis was the time history of shoulder force and of on the ISS are most probably related to exposing the musculoskeletal
each muscle moment. For each of these loads, the largest value in the system to loading while in different kinematic positions.
squat cycle was selected for analysis. Muscle moments from the right Our modeling approach had two major limitations. First, we
and left legs were similar and were averaged during analysis. assumed that joint motions and ground reaction forces and moments
measured on Earth would be the same in microgravity conditions.
RESULTS Though no quantitative data eXist to evaluate these assumptions, a
For the different gravitational conditions, the model predicted NASA Video available on YouTube (“How Space Exploration Affects
sirnilar ankle and knee loads but larger hip, back, and shoulder loads Muscles”) suggests that astronauts perform ARED squat exercise
0h Mars, the moon, and the ISS than 0h Earth (Table 1)- The increase differently on the ISS than they do on Earth. Second, we assumed that
ih shoulder force for each microgravity condition was almost exactly back motion of the human subject could be represented using a single
proportional to the decrease ih bodyweight (BW) for that condition. ball-and-socket joint. In reality, the subject’s back probably ﬂexed at
Increases in maximum ankle, knee, hip, back, and shoulder loads were multiple locations, which may have affected the back moment
much larger when gravity was varied than when the squat exercise was calculations.
varied. For the normal squat rnotion performed on Earth, maximum
muscle moments were 49 Nrn for the ankle, 158 Nrn for the knee, 193
Nrn for the hip, and 362 Nrn for the back, with the rnodel-predicted
shoulder force (1.31 BW) being consistent with the force applied by ! P
the ARED machine (1.27 BW). t “a
Table 1: Absolute and percent increases in peak joint loads %
relative to Earth (16) for simulated ARED squat exercise in i. :-
various microgravity conditions. * -
Microgravity Condition "" ‘3‘
Mars Moon ISS
Joint Load (0.38G) (0.17G) (OG) "" '- "" '- "" '-
Ank'e Moment (m) 03/0 21/0 21/0 [ I {
Knee Moment (ﬁg) 23/0 3:0 330 1 l l 1
. Nrn 33 43 48
Hlp Moment ((%)) 17% 22% 25% _____ﬂ__ . . ___‘_ - -__~_,,1dI--
38"""" Moment (EB) 1:30 139/0 231/0
— Fig. 2: Change in bodyweight (BW) relative to Earth at each joint level
Shoulder Force (BW) 0'61 0'82 1'00 caused by adding a 100% BW equivalent force to the shoulders on the
(%) 46% 62% 76% ISS.
DISCUSSION
The rnodel’s predictions suggest that no single ARED shoulder ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . .
force on the ISS will produce Earth-equivalent ankle, knee, hip, and The authors .thank NASA Johnson Space Center for prov1d1ng the
back loads sirnultaneously. Increased shoulder force on the ISS was ARED experiment movement data used1nth1s study.
predicted to produce higher JOlnt loads than on Earth, With the REFEREN CE S
increases grow1ng from the ankle (srnallest increase) toward the back ‘6 . .
(largest increase). The shoulder force decrease needed to achieve 1' Geno, KO"" et al., 20.10’ ,,F00.t Forces during Exer01se on the
Earth-equivalent back and hip loads would result in knee and ankle International Space Station, J Biornech, 43’ pp. 3020—3021 . .
loads below Earth-equivalent levels. Thus, the optimal approach may 2' Loehr, JA"" et al., 2010’. Musculoskeletal A431)? tions to Training
be to choose a squat load that targets a speciﬁc joint of interest. A Wlth the Advanced Resistive Exer01se DeVlce, Med SCI Sports
design modiﬁcation that could be considered is to add bungee cords to Exer, 43’ 146—156' ‘6 .
the pelvis to pull it toward the ARED foot plate, similar to the bungee 3' Delp, SL"" et al., 2007’ QpenSnn: .Open-source Software to
cords used with the ISS treadrnill. Such a change could help distribute Create 3nd Analyze Dynarnic Simulations Of Movement, IEEE
forces better throughout the body, reducing the shoulder force Trans Biorned Eng, 54’ pp. 1340—1950 . . .
currently used on the ISS while achieving closer to Earth-equivalent 4' Harnner, S'R"" ét al., ZOlO’ ”Muscle Contributions to Propulsion
muscle moment s at all j oi nt s si rnult a n e ou sly. and Support during Running, J Biornech, 43, pp. 2709-2716.
2 Copyright © 2012 by ASME

"
