"","x"
"1","Grovitu's pull on orc lomp efficiencu
W.W. Stoffels,
Eindhoven University otTechnology - PO Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven ~The Netherlands - E—mail: vv.vv.stottels@tue.nl
K— Si02 or Al203 wall; 1000 K
Wherever humans are present artiﬁcial light is used. It allows
us to live and work indoors and outdoors at any time of the
day In densely populated areas, this literally lights up our planet as
is clearly seen from outer space in figure 1. The 30 billion lamps
operating worldwide are certainly a great conamodity, but they Electrode (W)
come at a pr1ce.Not only do they cause serious light pollution, dis—
turbing animal and plant life, they also have a huge energy need. Of
the annual world electricity production, Which is more than 1013 —
kWh, about 15—20 % is used for lighting applications [1]. A medi— A Fig. 2: A schematic view ofa metal halide lamp.The arc is
um— to large—sized electricity plant has a production capacity of produced between two tungsten electrodes in a mercury buffer gas
about one GW An easy calculation shows that a few hundred ofabout l0 bar. The arc lS COHﬁﬂEd inside an SlO2 Ol Al203 bUlﬂEl.
electricity plants are operating continuously solely to supply the Furthermore, a metal halide salt like Nal, Dylg, Sclg, orTll is added.
power for our lamps. Apart from depleting fuel reserves, this also After evaporation and dissociation, the excited metal atom is the
results in an annual C02 emission of about a billion ton and the mam radiation source.
attendant effects on ecology and climate. Obviously, lighting has a —
large social, economical as well as ecological impact.
The best known lamp type is the incandescent lamp, Where an Metal Halide Lamps
electrical current heats a Wire until it lights up. More than 100 years A metal halide lamp is derived from the better known mercury
after Edison’s invention, modern incandescent lamps are still not high—pressure arc discharge [2]. A schematic picture is shown in
very efficient. Incandescent lamps produce only about 3% of all Fig. 2. An electric arc is maintained between two electrodes, Which
light Whereas they consume 20% of the power needed for lighting. are sealed into the confining space of the lamp burner. In normal
Discharge lamps are about 5 to 10 times more efﬁcient. They can operation, the main gas in the lamp is mercury. Depending on
be grouped into two large families based on operating pressure. lamp type, size, and application; the pressure varies from a few to
Tubular ﬂuorescent lamps, commonly used in ofﬁces, are the best— several hundred bars. The former are large lamps used as street or
known example of low pressure lamps. High pressure lamps are stadium lights, the latter are tiny lamps used in Video and beamer
commonly used if much light is needed, such as outdoor lighting. projection systems. The centre of the arc is at a temperature of
About 97% of all artiﬁcial light on Earth is produced using plasma about 5000 K, While the wall is maintained around 1200 K. As the
technology [1, 2]. Evidently, plasma lamps are essential in lighting, lamps are in the millimeter to centimeter size range, this implies
and any increase in their efficiency, even by as little as 1%, has a that there are strong temperature gradients. A high voltage peak
large impact on preserving our natural resources and environment. starts the lamp in a noble gas, but after a few seconds the mercury
The metal halide lamp is a high—pressure gas discharge lamp begins to evaporate. Due to its lower ionization energy, the arc soon
With a very high efﬁciency Despite the fact that the lamp is Widely becomes a mercury discharge. Mercury discharges are very effi—
used in outdoor lighting there are still several technological and cient, and commonly used as lamps. The main mercury emission
scientiﬁc problems limiting its applicability. Some of the problems lines, however, are in the UV region. To obtain Visible light a ﬂuo—
are related to a poor understanding of the physics of the gas dis— rescent coating on the lamp is needed, Which transforms one UV
charge. Color separation, discussed here is one of them. But before photon into one Visible photon. It is the White coating on the
describing the problem and discussing some experiments one tubular ﬂuorescence lamps that we “see” not the UV—light generat—
should ﬁrst reVieW the basics of a metal halide lamp. ed inside the discharge. The lamp color is optimized by mixing
different coatings and not by changing the discharge. Unfortunate—
ly, the energy of a Visible photon is about half that of the UV
photons, so the energy of mercury emission is only partly utilized.
Metal halide lamps use the efﬁciency of a mercury discharge, While
directly emitting Visible photons. Thus there are no ﬂuorescent
coatings. This is achieved by adding a mixture of metal halide
salts (such as DyI3, ScI3, Cslz, or NaI) to a mercury arc discharge.
Obviously, in the hot central arc region, the salt Will dissociate and
the metals Will be excited and ionized. These metals are extremely
efﬁcient radiators. Even though the metal density is much less than
the mercury density, most light is emitted by the metals in the Vis—
ible region. As a result, metal halide lamps can be made, With power
efficiencies up to 40%, significantly better than most other lamp
types. A good color rendering is achieved by mixing various salts.
Currently, these lamps are used for industrial lighting, street
4 Fig. 1: A composite satellite view ofthe earth by nightThe visible
light is virtually all produced by discharge lamps. (© Photo: NASA).
eurOphvsicsnews number (a . volume 37 . 35

"
"2","VI
9
B
8 The emission in the lamp results from excited species of the
h metal salt. Even though the partial pressure of the mercury buffer
gas is constant over the discharge, a complex interplay of diffusion
and convection results in a non—homogeneous distribution of the
radiating metals. Let us concentrate first on the radial direction.
Going from the wall at about 1200 K to the are core at 5000 K
metal halide molecules Will first dissociate and then ionize. The
resultant density gradients cause strong diffusion ﬂuxes, Which are
counteracted by the back—diffusion of other species: near the wall
molecules diffuse inwards and atoms outwards, While near the cen—
tre atoms move inwards and the ions diffuse out. Unfortunately, the
diffusion speed of the molecules is signiﬁcantly smaller than that
of the atoms due to their size and mass difference. Ions and atoms
have similar masses, but ions diffuse faster due to ambipolar diffu—
sion. This is a typical plasma effect: the lighter and more mobile
electrons in the plasma are coupled to the charged ions by
Coulomb interactions. This results in an enhanced ion transport,
away from the hot plasma regions. In a stationary state With equal
inward and outward ﬂuxes, a lower speed is balanced by a higher
partial pressure. The total effect is called radial segregation and
results in a reduction of the partial metal pressure (in any chemi—
cal form) near the lamp center.
— In addition to diffusion, there is also convection in the lamp. In
A Fig. 3: Axial segregation and color separation in a vertically a horizontally operating lamp, convection Will counteract the dif—
operating metal halide lamp due to the combined effects of fusion as it effectively “mixes” the various lamp species.
diffusion and convection. a) A picture of the arc discharge with Unfortunately, in horizontally operating lamps, convection will also
color separation. '0) A0 artist impression Of the dlfoSlO“ and lift the hot are into the curved shape: exactly the process from
COHVECUO“ ﬂOVV5~ Which an arc discharge derives its name. Thus upward convection
— brings the hot plasma region close to the cold wall, Which at best
lowers the lamp efﬁciency and in worse cases causes lamp failure.
lighting, and city beautification. Unfortunately, the lamp also suf— To prevent this, most high—pressure lamps are operated in a verti—
fers from several problems, Which limit its use for other cal orientation. In vertically operating lamps, convection causes an
applications, such as shop and home lighting. These problems upward ﬂow in the hot central arc region, Which returns down—
include electronic control of the lamp, burning orientation, (re— wards along the cooler walls [4, 5]. The minority metal salt species
)ignition problems [2] and instabilities [3]. Another problem is follow the dominant mercury convection ﬂow. However, due to
color separation in metal halide lamps. This means that different radial segregation the metal that rises in the centre diffuses out—
parts of the lamps emit different colors [4, 5]. wards to the wall and is transported down. The combined effect of
Before going into a detailed explanation of the effect and show— convection and radial segregation is a decreased metal density in
ing the experiments, this general description of a metal halide lamp the upper part of the lamp (fig. 3b). Such aXial segregation results
should be concluded With a remark on mercury As is commonly in a non—homogeneous emission, called color separation, shown in
known, mercury is unhealthy and thus mercury—free lamps are figure 3a. The effect has a maximum if convective and diffusive
desirable. However, mercury lamps in general and metal halide ﬂows are of equal magnitude. High convective velocities result in
lamps in particular are highly efﬁcient. In assessing the ecological a good mixing of species thereby eliminating radial segregation.
impact it should be noted that there are small amounts of mercu— In the absence of convection, the lamp emission Will be aXially uni—
ry in the average fuel miX of electricity plants. During the long form but radial segregation is maximal.
lifetime of these discharge lamps, generally about ﬁve to ten times This explanation, first described by Fisher [6] , yields a reason—
more mercury is released into the atmosphere by electricity plants able qualitative description of the effect. However, quantitative
supplying the lamp power, than is present in the lamp. Moreover, models, needed to increase lamp efﬁciency, are not available. Dis—
the mercury in these lamps is easily recyclable. Since current mer— charge calculations of diffusion and convection in complex
cury—free lamps are less efﬁcient, there is no good alternative to the reactive mixtures With high temperature gradients are difﬁcult and
mercury—containing lamps for general lighting applications. There— many thermodynamic data are not known. In addition the elec—
fore it is important to understand how they work in order further trodes, the lamp geometry and wall material also affect the lamp
to improve their performance. behaViour. Experiments are necessary to provide input data and
verify any model results.
Color Separation
A metal halide lamp With color separation has different colors
along its aXis. As a result an object Will appear differently depend— 4 Fig. 4: Pictures Of a metal h alide
ing on its illumination. For some applications this may not be a lamp during normal gravity, hyper—
serious problem, but imagine if the fancy patterned shirt that you gravity and microgravity. The
see in the mall appears to be plain White in the sunlight. Figure 3a differences in the emission profiles are
shows an example of color separation in a lamp containing DyI3. caused by a changing in the Dy
Whereas the bottom of the lamp is White With a reddish glow distribution inside the lamp due to
around it, the top is green. varying convection and diffusion ﬂows.
1 g 2g 0g
36 0 volume 37 0 number (3 euroth’SicsnewS

"
"3","Microgravity Experiments
The previous discussion shows that diffusion and convection play 1480
a key role in understanding the lamp behaviour. To be able to »
unravel the complex interaction between convection and diffusion, ‘5 —
extended experiments under zero gravity have been performed. In =- 1460 ﬂ“, ’
the absence of gravity, convection is eliminated, so the effect of £- ‘ . “r"" .. l.-
diffusion can be studied undisturbed and compared With the '5 1440 ‘ .5366 l "" ff
model results. Parabolic free falls in an airplane have been per— 8. ”12513: -_
formed in an airbus of the European Space Agency (BSA) and 3 1420 ' ' ‘ '1: ' ' ’
extended microgravity experiments were done in the Internation— 3 m.“
al Space Station (188). During a parabolic ﬂight, a level—ﬂying .: 1400
airplane pulls up strongly before closing the engines and going into .9 l-Y‘--
a parabolic free fall for about 20 s. At the end of the parabola, a : 1380 l
second strong acceleration is used to prevent the plane from crash— 8 an|vnnn
ing. The result is that the plane is subjected to a series of '2 1360 c I

1.0—1.8—0—1.8—1.0 g gravity conditions. During the hyper—graVity '

(1.8 g) phases, there is an increased convection, Whereas there is no
convection during the microgravity phase. 1340

Figure 4 shows pictures of a test lamp during various phases of 0 20 40 60 80 100 120
the parabolic ﬂight. At normal gravity conditions the color separa—
tion is clearly Visible, as the lower part of the lamp emits bright Time (5)
White light, Whereas in the top part only weak mercury emission is
seen. The lamp efficiency is measured by placing the lamp in an . . . .
integrating sphere [7]. Such a sphere collects all lamp emission and ‘ F'9° 5: L'ght output _Of a 10 mg mercury lamp Wlth Dylg during a
determines the lamp efficiency by using an optical ﬁlter that imi— single parabola of an airplane. The light emISSIoh, measured usmg ah
tates the human eye. The photographs in figure 4 show that Integratlhg sphere, Increases {n the hyper—gtaylty phase. In the
. . . . . . . micrograVIty phase the emISSIOh decreases Initially due to radial

segregation in the hyper—graV1ty phase is s1gn1f1cantlyless than . b ttheh starts to increase as more metal enters the
under normal gravity conditions. This indicates that for this par— lsegregatlori .U . . .

, , , , , , amp [7].The Inset shows the ESA plane during a parabolic ﬂight
ticular lamp increased convection results in a better m1X1ng of the (ph oto: ESA)
radiating metal species. The integrated sphere measurements (fig
5) confirm this as the total lamp emission increases during this —
phase. In the microgravity phase light emission is homogeneous
in the aXial direction. In this phase convection is absent so there is
no aXial segregation. Radial segregation dominates and depletes the ﬂu
central region of light emitting metal. This is Visible in ﬁgure 5 as ' 0'9 .0. '.
a decrease in the emission at the start of the microgravity phase. .' ’
The subsequent increase is caused by an increase of the lamp tem— o I"". °

. . . O I I C
perature 1n the absence of convective cooling. A temperature 3 , _-' I.
increase results in a higher metal vapor pressure inside the lamp < .° I."" :
and thus a higher emission. It also shows that the 20 s of micro— v a ..' '
gravity, available in an airplane, are insufficient to obtain a stable 3 ':-' 3
lamp. In order to study a fully stabilized lamp under microgravity '7) -""-:.
conditions, measurements in the 188 are the only option. Under 5 ...---"""""" ..-
these conditions, there is no aXial segregation and the lamp is com— E ..o'.
pletely homogeneous. Comparing spatially resolved spectral — 0000""“.
measurements from the 188 With those at normal gravity show a
signiﬁcant increase of radial segregation under microgravity con—
ditions (fig 6). There is less metal in the center of the lamp as it
diffuses outwards, resulting in a strong gradient of the partial 0000 0001 0002 0003 0004
pressure of the light emitting species. Obviously, these variations _
have a strong impact on the lamp emission and its efficiency. RadIUS (m)
More details on the various measurements both under normal and
microgravity conditions can be found in the references [8, 9]. —
It is currently beyond our ca p ablhtles .tO fully understand and A Fig. 6: Light emission from excited atoms as a function of radial

model a commeraal metal halide lamp Wlth a comp 16X shap e and position in the lamp at normal (black squares) and micro—gravity (red
chemistry. Therefore, the measurements have bee? p erformed on a dots) conditions. Due to dominant radial segregation there is less
reference lamp With a Simple geometry and chemistry The absence emission from the central lamp region under micro—gravity
0f convection under microgravity conditions greatly simpliﬁes the conditions. The microgravity measurements are performed in the
problem. The measurements reveal a great deal about lamp behaV— international space station where the lamp shows no axial
101113 WhiCh needs to be 1""6131‘0C111C6d bY any valid lamp model. segregation as seen in the pictureThe normal gravity data are taken
Qualitatively the lamp behaviour is well understood and the meas— With the same lamp just before launching. The data are
urements supply ample data for the quantitative validation of a model. reconstructed from spectra | ly resolved side—on measu remehts,
In addition, the measurements clearly show that there is still room which is reliable until the shaded area. [8]
eurorohvsicsnews number (3 . volume 37 . 37

"
"4","U1
8
3
8 mforefﬁciencygain.Obviously,changinggravityis notapractical
L solution, but it may help to identify how to optimize discharge REferenceS
parameters, so that we can light our world using less energy, 0., [1] The International Energy Association (www.iea.org) and the Interna-
tional Association for Energy Efﬁcient Lighting (www.iaeel.org).
AbOUt the aUthor [2] G.G. Lister, I.E. Lawler,WP. Lapatovich,V.A. Godyak, Rev. Mod. Phys.
Winfred Stoffels did his PhD on experimental plasma physics at 76, 541 (2004),
theEindhoven University in The Netherlands. After atwo year [3] WW. Stoffels, E]. van den Hout, G.M.W. Kroesen, M. Haverlag,
period at the Un1vers1ty of Kyoto, Japan, he returned to Eindhoven R. K ey S e r, A p pl. Phys. L e t t. 88, 91502 (200 6).
studying dusty,electronegat1ve and molecular plasmas. Currently _ _ _
his focus is on the physics of gas discharge lamps in order to obtain [4] T.N1malasur1ya, AJ. Flikweert, WW Stoffels, M. Haverlag, I.I.A.M. van
more efﬁcient light 8 our c e s. der Mullen, N.B.M. Pupat, I. Appl. Phys. 99, 53301 (2006).
[5] AJ. Flikweert, T. Nimalasuriya, C.H.].M. Groothuis, G.M.W Kroesen,
Acknowledgments W.W. Stoffels. I. Appl. Phys. 98, 073301 (2005).
This work is a j oint effort by the many people in the ARGES team [6] E. Fisher, ]_ APPZ- phy5_ 47, 2954 (1976).
(www.arges.tue.nl). It IS sponsored by the .Space Research Organi— [7] WW Stoffels, P.C.M. Kemps, I. Beckers, G.M.W Kroesen,
zation Netherlands, the Eindhoven Un1vers1ty of Technology, M Haverlag Appl Phys Lett 87 241501 (2005)
Philips Lighting, the Netherlands Ministries of Education and ° ° ' ' ' ’ °
Research and of Economic Affairs, Senter—Novem, COST, and [8] T- Nimalasuriya>AJ~ Flikweert> > M- Haverlag, P- Kemps»
STW The support of BSA is acknowledged for the participation in G°M°W° Kroesen’ W°W° StOffels’ I°A°M° van der Mullen’
the ESA parabolic Flight Campaigns and the Delta Soyuz mission. 1' Phys' D "" App 1' P hy 5 ' 39’ 2993 (2006)°
Particular thanks are due to astronaut André Kuipers, who per— [9] A. l. Flikweert, M. Van Kemenade,T.Nima1asuriya,M.Haverlag,
formed the 188 measurements. G.M.W KIOCSCD,WW Stoffels, I. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 39, 1599 (2006).
SurVIVIng the sauna
L.J.F. (Jo) Hermans,
Leiden University ~The Netherlands - E-mail: Hermans@Physics.LeidenUnivnl
Human beings are not made for living in a 90°C environment. How fast will our body start to heat up? Taking a fair estimate
And yet this is the temperature in the average sauna. How for the heat capacity of our body of 200 kI/K, we find a heating rate
do we cope with such harsh conditions? of 0.5K per minute — as long as perspiration is negligible.

First, we use a towel to sit on, or we touch wood. Touching metal This is a sure way to disaster. So after a few minutes the sweat—
at that temperature is no fun at all. Even the glass door feels hot, ing should begin. And it does, fortunately, even before we notice
although its thermal conductivity is far below that of metals, and its that our skin gets wet. Keeping up with the 1,5 kW heat load by
temperature is only about 60°C, halfway between in and outside sheer sweating would require 2.2 liter per hour. Our body will not
temperature. Second, the air is dry, which enhances cooling by per— be able to evaporate that much without forced air circulation.
spiration. Incidentally, the dry air comes for free: Due to the Being physicists, we surely want to do a small experimentWhy
steepness of the water vapour pressure curve, even if the outside air not put some water on the stove, and see what happens? This
at, say, 20 degrees is 100 % humid, the humidity drops to 3 % once makes us feel even hotter, and the question is why Here is an edu—
the air is heated to 90°C. If it freezes outside, that would cated guess. At least four contributions can be
even drop to 1 %, provided that no water is added. (a. am]. .11., _ .- identiﬁed. First, the 100°C steam coming

1 . -' » l “*ﬁg%*ﬁ“féfﬁ ~

HOW fast would 0111"" bOdY heat uP>1f we neg— HOT WUFF‘ftﬂx‘? ‘J'i _ off the stove is somewhat hotter than
lect perspiration? Let’s do a back—of—the— . -‘9""- ' 'g; 2; T the sauna air. Second, it causes forced
envelope calculation. First the conduction ' \' .. “ .' 7 ;; _ convection, which will heat our body
term. Since the effective air layer surrounding our 1.. ' ‘ 1 1 5 even more, particularly if our skin is
body can be assumed to be around 3 mm thick, Q} ’ "" ‘ still dry. Third, the humidity goes up,
assuming a body surface area of 1.7 In2 and a tem— .. ,1 which makes perspiration more difficult.
perature difference of 50K, we find some 700W 8 -' . , And fourth: the thermal conductivity of water
Likewise, the radiation term yields about 800W So, 2;"" ﬁg} "" ‘4; vapour is slightly higher than that of dry air,
conduction and radiation are roughly equally ' > ‘ ’1 “*1"" ]' _ "" V ""“ since water molecules are a bit lighter (and
important, just like in normal circumstances. The i ‘ . . '1.’ '3 [i‘ 1 .5! therefore faster) than N2 or 02. Which of
difference is that they are reversed in the sauna. .5.» .. "" , . 3/ '1_-. 1 those contributions is the dominant one
And they are an order of magnitude larger, due [r3 ‘ 1 1. fl' 3' ' 1 may be something to sort out next time we
to the larger temperature difference and the fact (fr .1, ,1. ; 13‘ AI,"" ‘1, are in the sauna. After all, there is time
that we have ..eh... adapted our clothing. So ‘7’ l, : ' 1. 1‘ 1 . 1 enough to do some calculations and
the total heat load on our body is 1,5 kW, h - [V ' 't ‘ experiments.
which corresponds to the power of an elec— m“ 1 ‘ 7 ,9""? ~' < . A .--. But don’t forget to keep an eye
tric heater! Tall people suffer extra, in View of ' ' ' 1 - .r '1 ’ on the hourglass. .. a
the vertical temperature gradient. ' »-_- ., ﬂ _. _ .1 Mb
38 0 volume 37 0 number (3 y europhusicsnews

"
