"","x"
"1","ASTROBEE: A NEW PLATFORM FOR FREE-FLYING ROBOTICS
ON THE INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION
Trey Smithl, J onathan Barlow1’2, Maria Bualatl, Terrence Fongl,
Christopher Provencherl’z, Hugo Sanchezl, Ernest Smith1’3, and the Astrobee
Team
[Intelligent Robotics Group, NASA Ames Research Center, Moﬂett F ield, CA, 94035
2Stinger—Ghaﬁ’arian T echnologies, Inc.
3Universities Space Research Association
E-mails: trey.smith@nasa.g0v, [onathansbarlow@nasa.gov, maria.g.bualat@nasa.g0v,
terlgy.[0ng@nasa.g0v, chris.gr0vencher@nasa.gov, hug0.sanchez@nasa.g0v, ernest.e.smith@nasa.g0v
ABSTR A CT substantial astronaut effort for unstowing,‘ setup,
replacmg consumables, and continuous superV1s1on.
The Astrobees are next-generation free-ﬂying robots In contrast, the Astrobees have no consumables
that Will operate in the interior of the International other than rechargeable batteries, they dock, recharge,
Space Station (188). Their primary purpose is to and undock autonomously, and they perform most
provide a ﬂexible platform for research on zenyg free_ OpCI‘ElthDS Without astronaut SUpCI‘VlSlOD. AStI‘ObCCS
ﬂying robotics, with the ability to carry a wide variety can also ﬂy farther and faster, have better sensing and
of future research payloads and guest science computing, and have new capabilities to support
software. They will also serve utility functions: as research on manipulation and human-robotinteraction.
free_ﬂying cameras to record video of astronaut Each AStI‘ObCC I‘ObOt lS shaped as a cube 30.5 CHI on
activities, and as mobile sensor platforms to conduct a side, With mass N6 kg, and 11868 battery-powered
surveys ofthe 188. fans for propulsion (Fig. l).
The Astrobee system includes two robots, a docking
station, and a ground data system (GDS). It is
developed by the Human Exploration Telerobotios 2 2 CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS
(HET-2) Project, Which began in Oct. 2014, and Will Astrobee’s concept of operations (oonops) was
deliver the Astrobees for launch to 188 in 2017. introduced in an earlier paper [7]. Here, we provide a
This paper covers selected aspects of the Astrobee brief review to help motivate the system design.
design, focusing on capabilities relevant to potential Astrobees can move throughout the US. Orbital
users ofthe platform. Segment (USOS) of the 188. Each sortie begins and
1 INTRODUCTION elnds .Wlth the Astrobee docked at its charging station;
ooking and undocking are executed autonomously.
The Astrobee system draws on AERCam [1] and Operators use a planning tool in the GDS control
PSA [2] for small space free-ﬂyer inspiration. It is an station software to generate a sortie plan, WhiCh
upgrade to the SPHERES Research Facility already on contains a mix 0f 6-degree 0f freedom (DOF) motion
188. The SPHERES satellites are among the most used paths and other commands. The TObOt CXCCUtCS the
ISS payloads, and have hosted diverse experiments plan autonomously. During execution, an operator on
ranging from formation ﬂying [3], to satellite the ground monitors progress through the control
inspection [4], magnetic propulsion [5], and Visual station, Which receives Video and telemetry feeds.
navigation [6]. However, opportunities to run Most faults cause the robot to stop and wait for
SPHERES activities are limited, because they require operator assistance.
There are several alternative ops workﬂows. For
' ' ’ example, during frequent loss-of—signal periods for the
, /«5"" F 1,4‘ 7 ,, 1' ISS space-to-ground link, the robot can continue
. ”:x\ ,7 execution Without operator oversight; signiﬁcant
<, g5 anomalies Will pause execution until communications
‘Ixi fl / are restored. Operators can also interactively
. [\7“ f teleoperate the robot, using the control station to send
, V interactive motions and commands similar to those
3’ found in plans. The 188 crew can also run the GDS
F igure 1: F ree ﬂyer front view control station software on their laptops, if desired.
Next, we review three of the representative ops

"
"2","scenarios introduced in [7], with an eye to how they the overhead or “ceiling” of the ISS interior.
drive the Astrobee system design. Prominent features include: the propulsion modules
Research Scenario: A guest scientist uses an that occupy the entire left and right faces of the cube,
Astrobee robot to perform an experiment that requires the touch screen and a variety of sensors on the
mounting a custom payload and ﬂying within a forward face, the dock adapter and perching arm on
speciﬁc ISS module. the aft face, and open payload bays at bottom center.
Minimizing burden on the ISS crew is an important .
Astrobee goal. Installing and removing a payload 3'1 Propulsmn
unavoidably requires crew, but crew should not need The Astrobees are designed to operate in the
to be involved ih other aspects 0f experiment setup pressurized intra-vehicular (IV) environment but not
and teardown, nor should they need to supervise the the extra-vehieular (EV) environment of the 188. Early
experiment itself. in the Astrobee concept development process, we
This scenario motivates these capabilities: (1) studied producing a dual-use robot that could operate
Autonomously dock and undock from the charging both IV and EV, for example, using cold-gas
station. (2) Follow a plan to navigate to any location propulsion with autonomous refueling. We rejected
0h 133 (t0 pre-position the Astrobee ih the module for this option because ensuring EV safety would have
the experiment). (3) Perch 0h an 133 handrail (to wait greatly increased project costs and imposed design
for astronaut assistance, reducing power consumption constraints that would have reduced the robots” IV
and staying out of the way of other crew activities). capability.
(4) Quick-release payload installation/removal. (5) The selected IV-only propulsion design uses battery-
Execute guest software (to run the experiment). (6) powered fans. With electricity as the only consumable,
Improve all aspects 0f mobility performance (max we can support autonomous resupply with relatively
acceleration, maX velocity, accuracy, etc.) to allow the simple autonomous docking to recharge.
broadest possible set 0f experiments. Each Astrobee has two propulsion modules that
Camera Scenario: 155 F light 01987” ations uses occupy the entire left and right sides of the robot. Each
Astrobee to stream live HD video ofa crew activity. module is built around a plenum; the plenum is
This scenario motivates these capabilities: (i) pressurized by a single centrifugal impeller, which
Multiple-hour sortie durations (to record long crew draws in air through a central intake and feeds siX
activities without interruption). (2) Interactive exhaust nozzles around the edges.
teleoperation (to support live repositioning when The two propulsion modules are interchangeable.
needed to improve the VieW)- (3) Repoint camera They are arranged so that their impellers rotate in
while perehing (capturing useful Video angles With opposite directions and generally at the same speed,
reduced power consumption). (4) End-to-end canceling unwanted drag torque and gyroscopic
computing, communications, and GDS capacity to moment disturbances. The impeller speed is adjustable
compress, transmit, and VieW HD Video Oh the ground. to trade between peak performance vs. reduced power
Search Scenario: 155 Flight 01987” ations uses a” and noise. Basing each module on a single central
Astrobee carrying an RFID reader t0 0077177” m the impeller allows us to maximize the impeller diameter,
location Of a t001 needed f07” cm ”19007711718 076W reducing RPM rate, power, and noise. Conﬁning the
activity. propulsion system to the left/right sides of the robot,
This scenario is an example 0f using an Astrobee to with both intakes and nozzles directed outward, also
perform a sensor survey; ih this case, the RFID reader greatly improves design modularity—the complexities
is the sensor, and we assume the tool is tagged with an Of the central module and guest payloads that ﬁt
RFTD- The scenario enVisions starting by scanning the between the propulsion modules are isolated from the
module where the tool was last seen, then executing a propulsion air ﬂew and can be excluded from
search algorithm that homes ih Oh the ted by aerodynamic analysis and performance optimization.
analyzing variations ih the RFID signal strength. With a constant impeller speed, the thrust from each
This scenario motivates these capabilities: (i) 1311de nozzle has ﬁxed direction and continuously adjustable
and execute extensive survey plans that include many magnitude, controlled by adjusting the nozzle open
target positions and commands to take sensor samples. area with a servo that actuates two ﬂappers. The
(2) Minimize oversight burden 0h operator (survey ﬂappers can adjust from fully open to fully closed in
activities can be long and monotonous). (3) Execute <100 ms, and ﬂapper motion introduces negligible
guest software (search algorithm provided by RFID disturbance forces. Through careful design and
experts). prototype iteration, the nozzles achieve aerodynamic
discharge coefﬁcient >0.9 (l is perfectly efﬁcient) and
3 ROBOT DESIGN consistent thrust alignment, even when nearly closed.
Each Astrobee robot is cube-shaped, ~30.5 cm on a A propulsion system is holonomie ih 6'DOF if it has
side, weight ~6 kg (Fig. 1). Although Astrobees can the ability to instantaneously apply force ih any
move in any direction, they have a preferred forward direction and torque about any aXis. This capability is
motion direction and a top side that nominally faces important for Astrobee as a research platform, because

"
"3","a holonomic thruster arrangement can simulate the force can draw power from both impellers. Y forces
thruster arrangement of any other spacecraft of use two nozzles 0n the same module, drawing power
interest. Holonomic control is provided by the 6 X 2 = from a single impeller, which reduces the maximum
12 independent thrusters. The nozzle geometry is force available.
arranged with thrust vectors offset, such that they do An important propulsion design driver was the need
not pass through the robot’s body frame origin for efﬁciency—producing the required thrust with low
(geometric center); thus, each nozzle produces a noise and power consumption. Basic rocket physics
combination of force and torque. We can construct a dictates that with a ﬁxed fraction of reaction mass, the
pure force on any Cartesian aXis (+/-X, Y, or Z) by achievable Av scales linearly with increasing eXhaust
applying equal thrust With a matched pair of nozzles velocity ve, but with the downside that ideal thrust
that have aligned forces and opposing torques. power efﬁciency (W/N) scales inversely with ve.
Likewise, we can construct a pure torque with a pair Typical spacecraft design, with limited reaction
0f nozzles that have aligned torques and opposing mass, seeks to maximize Av by increasing ve.
forces (th fact, each torque 3th can be produced With Astrobees, 0n the other hand, have unlimited reaction
either 0ftW0 redundant nozzle pairs). mass (air in the pressurized cabin), allowing us to
focus on power efﬁciency by minimizing ve. Astrobee
LZ- nozzles operate efﬁciently at low pressure (~0.1 psi)
LX- +2 AY' and eXhaust velocity (~11 m/s). For comparison, the
W +X R SPHERES satellites use EV-analog cold gas thrusters
+2 that operate at ~25 psi with eXhaust velocity ~250 m/s.
FY- A further advantage of low-pressure propulsion is
R2' 1 that the required pressure can be produced by an
T \ efﬁcient centrifugal impeller, eliminating any need for
RX- LX+ a compressor, and precision engineering is not
R z ¢ required to adequately seal the plenum.
k FY+ \ LZ+ Astrobee eXhaust velocity is lower bounded by the
AY+ RX+ need to achieve sufﬁcient thrust while ﬁtting within
¢ volume constraints. The open area of each nozzle
RZ+ ranges from ~40-65 cm2 (compare to ~0.005 cm2 for
' ' . SPHERES), and together they occupy around 10% of
F lgure 2: Exploded vzew wzth nozzle geometry the t otal r 0b 0t surfa c e are a.
All moving parts of the propulsion system are
It is possible to achieve m_DOF holonomic control enclosed, which is important for reliability and safety.
with as few as n + 1 unidirectional thrusters [8], but by The intake is covered by a screen With N1 mm
using 12 > 7 thrusters, we improve efﬁciency and openings to avoid drawing in crew hair or drawing in
make the force allocation problem better conditioned and ejecting particles ﬂoating th the cabin. The nozzle
and more robust to deviations from the calibrated ﬂappers are covered With a coarser grille to protect
propulsion model (such as slightly misaligned ﬁngers and keep out objects that could cause jams.
thrusters). In case of certain types of thruster
malfunctions, it might be possible to take advantage of 3'2 Structure
redundancy to continue ﬂying an Astrobee with Modularity was a key design driver. Astrobee’s
reduced performance [9], but implementing this major modules, such as the propulsion modules,
capability is not in scope for the current project. forward and aft panels, and payloads, support
Although Astrobees have holonomic control, their straightforward removal and replacement by crew. In
maximum acceleration capability is not symmetrical. some cases, spares will be stocked 0n orbit to enable
When following a typical trajectory, ﬂying forward, repairs. Astrobees use captive fasteners to mitigate the
most of the required thrust is starting and stopping on risk of loose fasteners in the crew cabin, s0 crew
the forward/aft (X) aXis; this aXis has the largest maintenance does not require a glove box.
nozzles that achieve the full maX acceleration Each Astrobee’s core frame is aluminum. The
requirement (10 cm/sz). Nozzles 0n the right/left (Y) propulsion module plenum is primarily 3D printed
and bottom/top (Z) axes are mostly used for turning using lightweight Windform XT, and saves mass by
and for rejecting environmental disturbances; for these making dual-use of exterior impact foam as a
axes, we reduced the nozzle size, giVing up peak structuralmaterial.
acceleration to save space and improve control
precision at lower thrust levels. A further asymmetry 3'3 External Sensors
comes from load balancing between the tWO Each Astrobee uses a suite of siX commercial off-
PTOPUISiOh modules. Pure forces are constructed by the-shelf (COTS) external sensors (Fig. 3). First is the
using a pair 0f nozzles. For X and Z forces, the tWO NavCam, a forward-facing monocular RGB imager
nozzles are on different propulsion modules, so the with 1300 ﬁeld of View (FOV), ﬁxed focus, and 1.2

"
"4","megapixel (MP) resolution. NaVCam images feed the stream at ~6 Hz, providing smoother relative updates.
sparse mapping and optical ﬂow portions of the Fiducial-relative mode provides more accurate and
general-purpose pose estimator (section 3.4), and are robust position information when artiﬁcial ﬁducials
also useful for operator situation awareness due to the (or “AR targets”) are in View. It matches ﬁducials
wide FOV. detected in NaVCam 0r DoekCam images with a prior
For improved relative pose estimation during ﬁducial map. It will be used in two main scenarios.
docking and perehing, Astrobees use DockCam and First, for autonomous docking, in order to achieve the
PerchCam. DoekCam is a clone of NaVCam that faces ~1 em position accuracy needed for successful mating,
aft, where it can View ﬁducials 0n the Astrobee dock the Astrobee dock will have ﬁducials. Second, in order
during the docking approach. PerehCam is an aft- to support guest science needs for improved motion
facing CamBoard Pieo FleXX time-of—ﬂight ﬂash accuracy during experiments, we may outﬁt a
LIDAR depth sensor with 620 FOV, 224 X 172 designated workspace in the 188 with several ﬁducials
resolution, and effective range 0.1-4 m. It detects 188 on the surrounding wa11s.
handrails based on their 3D shape and determines the Pereh-relative mode provides accurate pose
Astrobee’s relative pose during perehing approach. estimates relative to an ISS handrail, based on 3D
To detect obstacles, Astrobees use HaZCam, a clone point clouds from the PerehCam depth sensor. It
0f PerehCam that faces forward. provides the ~2 cm position accuracy required near the
T0 stream Video of crew activities, Astrobees use end of the perehing approach for successful grasping.
SciCam, a forward-faeing RGB imager with 54.80 The perch estimator ﬁts a handrail geometric model to
FOV, 13 MP resolution, and auto-foeus, similar to the a point cloud, recognizing the handrail’s linear shape
camera module found on the back of many modern and relationship to the planar wall behind it.
smart phones. Impaired mode is used when inputs required for the
Finally, to provide a redundant velocity estimate, other modes are not available, for example due to a
Astrobees use SpeedCam, a top-faeing PiXHawk sensor fault or software fault on the mid-level
PX4F10w integrated sonar/optieal ﬂow sensor, which processor. Impaired mode uses the 3D velocity
does its own internal data processing and provides 3D estimate provided by the SpeedCam, which allows the
velocity estimates directly to Astrobee’s low-level Astrobee to stop and station keep until the fault is
processor. resolved.
More detailed papers on the general-purpose and
V pereh-relative estimators will appear soon.
’ 3.5 Navigation and Control
Q ?'I ’33:)"" >4 Astrobee’s navigation stack executes 6-DOF motion
’ (#1 \ trajectories. These trajectories are generated by the
r 5% j'ﬂ GDS control station planner or by Astrobee’s ﬂight
_:x/ L —) software. In either case, the trajectories are
,‘ L—r ‘3 - ""j FORWARD constructed to ramp velocity smoothly and respect
Figure 3: Side view with sensor viewing angles. operating limits sueh as max velocity and acceleration
constraints. A trajectory is represented as a spline
curve of polynomial chunks parameterized by time.
The navigation and control pipeline operates as
3.4 P 0 siti 0 n Estimation follows: (1) Navigator: Stores the overall trajectory,
monitors progress, and feeds new chunks into the
Astrobee position estimation has four main modes: pipeline as needed. (2) Command shaper: Taking into
general-purpose, ﬁducial—relative, perch-relative, and account any deviation from the target trajectory,
impaired. A11 modes use an augmented-state extended calculates a short-term repair trajectory that smoothly
Kalman ﬁlter (EKF) for sensor fusion, and all make transitions from the current state (12-DOF
use of gyroscope and accelerometer readings from p0se+veloeity) t0 rejoining the target trajectory, while
Astrobee’s inertial measurement unit (IMU). They respecting operating limits. (3) Controller: A PID
differ in the additional inputs used by the EKF. controller that calculates a foree/torque command
General-purpose mode is used to estimate position designed to zero the error between the current state
anywhere in the ISS USOS, with accuracy sufﬁcient and the command shaper’s repair trajectory. (4) Force
for reliable navigation in free space (20+ cm away allocator: Calculates the nozzle servo positions that
from walls). In this mode, the EKF has two additional implement the controller’s foree/torque command. (5)
inputs. First, Visual texture features on the ISS walls Output: The nozzle command from the force allocator
observed in NaVCam images are matched with a prior is forwarded to the propulsion module controller Via
sparse map of features, providing an absolute position 12C, where it is translated to PWM outputs for the
update at ~2 Hz. Second, an optical ﬂow algorithm individual servos.
matches features across frames in the same image While most of the control approach is

"
"5","straightforward, there are some particular challenges. ﬁre or leakage in the ISS environment.
First, it is non-triVial to calibrate the propulsion Each Astrobee has an electricalpower system (EPS)
physics model needed by the force allocator. The board based on a PIC microcontroller, which manages
thrust output by any nozzle has a non-linear power consumption by switching components on only
dependence on both the RPM rate of the impeller when needed, provides the ability to boot and reset the
(which increases plenum pressure) and the open area main processors, and outputs telemetry on internal
of every other nozzle (which decreases pressure). temperatures and power system health.
Second, Astrobee conﬁguration changes, such as . .
moving the arm and adding or removing payloads 3'8 Communlcatlons
(which may include integrated thermal fans), Will During sorties, Astrobees communicate commands,
induce inertial property changes and new disturbance telemetry, and Video through the ISS WiFi network
forces. Finally, during activities like perching and and Ku—band downlink. After sorties, Astrobees can
docking, the controller Will need to accommodate transfer large ﬁles through an Ethernet connection
contact forces. with the dock.
3.6 Computing and Software Architecture Commands and telemetry use NASA? RObOt API
Delegate (RAPID) message conventions and are
An Astrobee has three main processors: (1) The delivered by RTI Data Distribution Service (DDS)
Low-Level Processor (LLP) controls the propulsion middleware, which offers tunable quality-of—serVice
system, and reliably runs the high-rate control that can tolerate high-latency networks and dropped
software, in isolation from the rest of the software. (2) packets. HD Video is H.264 compressed and streamed
The Mid—Level Processor (MLP) runs most of the to the ground Via the Real-Time Transport Protocol
software developed by the Astrobee team, including (RTP).
the compute-intensive machine Vision algorithms, in Because the WiFi and Ku-band networks are subject
isolation from guest software. (3) The High-Level to frequent dropouts, Astrobees keep onboard logs of
Processor (HLP) is primarily for guest science use, all streaming data, allowing later downlink of a
but also hosts less critical functions such as streaming pristine copy.
HD Video compression and touch screen interaction.
To achieve a good combination of power, size, and 3'9 Thermal
performance, we use COTS ARM architecture Engineers are accustomed to relying on passive
processors provided ih a system-on-module format, gravity-driven thermal convection to provide free
derived from modern smart phone technology. The cooling; reduced convection in the zero-g ISS
LLP is a Wandboard Dual With tWO cores that I'llh at environment makes careful thermal design especially
up to 1 GHz and maX power ~3 W. Both the MLP and important.
HLP are IFC6501 modules, each with four cores that The Astrobee core module is cooled using a pair Of
run at up to 2-5 GHZ and max power ”10 W- The three always-on cross-ﬂow thermal fans that draw in air
main processors ride on two custom carrier boards that from forward intake vents, blow it over a heat sink
are designed to enable a possible OH-Orbit upgrade by that cools the MLP and HLP, and eXhaust aft. These
crew later in the project life cycle. Each Astrobee also fans do produce a net disturbance force, but it is
carries PIC microcontrollers for power management constant and small (<5% ofpropulsion system thrust).
and distributed control of the propulsion modules and The propulsion module impeller and servo motors
perehing arm. are the other main heat sources. Since these motors
The three main processors communicate with each only operate when the propulsion system is active,
other and with the dock Via Ethernet. Other Astrobee they are naturally cooled by the propulsion air ﬂow.
avionics components and payloads mostly A variety of anomalies could cause overheating:
communicate using USB 2-0 or 12C data buses. jammed motors, blocked vents, failed fans, etc. In
Astrobee ﬂight software uses a service-oriented these situations, over-temperature power cutoffs
robotic architecture style [10], built on the Robot ensure thermal safety.
Operating System (ROS) middleware. The LLP and
MLP run Ubuntu Linux, and the HLP runs Android, 3°10 Perching Arm
Wthh drives the touch screen display. Each Astrobee carries a perching arm on its aft side
3.7 Power that allows it to grasp ISS handrails and dwell for
extended periods, reducing power consumption and
Astrobees carry rechargeable Li-ion batteries, interference with 188 operations [11-12]. It could also
specifically Inspired Energy model ND2040HD34. An support future manipulation research.
Astrobee can operate with as few as two batteries The arm has three degrees Of freedom: two joints
(reducing mass and improving performance) or as and a gripper. The joints allow the arm to stow
many as four (increasing battery life). Each battery completely within Astrobee’s protective foam exterior
outputs 14.4V nominal, stores 49 Wh of energy, and when not in use, and deploy only for grasping.
incorporates numerous safeguards to avoid the risk of The gripper is an underactuated tendon-driven

"
"6","design With three ﬁngers. When unpowered, it is mitigate collisions. The simplest is an over-speed
passively spring-loaded shut; Winding up the tendon cutoff: When an Astrobee detects that it has exceeded
opens all three ﬁngers. its nominal maximum speed of 0.5 m/s, or loses its
Once an Astrobee grasps a handrail, it powers down velocity ﬁx, it powers off the propulsion system. This
its propulsion system, and its arm joints double as a feature limits impact velocity to below 0.5 m/s,
pan-tilt unit for pointing cameras located on the reducing the equivalent drop height to 1.3 cm.
opposite (forward) side of the robot (Fig. 4). To further avoid low-speed collisions, we combine
The arm is designed to be ﬂexible and backdrivable; multiple layers of checks: (1) Astrobee trajectories
its grip is not strong enough to injure the crew, and a Will generally be speciﬁed by a trained operator, With
perched Astrobee can be easily removed from a an opportunity to View a 3D simulation of ﬂying the
handrail if it is in the way in an emergency. The crew trajectory in the ISS environment. Using this feature,
can also manually backdrive and perch the arm on a operators Will catch and correct some errors prior to
handrail, as a convenient way to move an Astrobee execution. (2) Astrobees Will store a list of known
When needed. keepout zones, such as module walls, projecting
hardware, and areas near exhaust vents that could
blow them off course. An Astrobee Will refuse to
execute a trajectory that goes too close to a keepout
zone. (3) The HazCam can detect unexpected
obstacles, causing the Astrobee to stop and request
_ operator assistance.
, L J i I :4 We note that, despite these measures, like humans in
a A A crowded ofﬁce environments, Astrobees operating
3 g f unattended in the complex and dynamic 188
Figure 4: The perchiiag arm ghasps an [S S environrnent will unavoidably bump into objects froin
handrail and doubles as apan/tz'lt unit time to time, With minimal consequences. .Astrobee s
safety features primarily focus on preventing higher-
speed collisions and effectively controlling the risk of
3.11 Collisions crew injury or damage.
. . 3.12 Human-Robot Interaction
Astrobee robots must not injure crew or damage the
188. As a free-ﬂying robot in a tightly conﬁned space, The Astrobees are designed to interact With people,
collisions areapartieular concern. including the ISS crew, ﬂight controllers, and the
For comparison, the SPHERES satellites handle general public (for example, during crew outreach
collision safety primarily by assuming the constant Videos). They Will also be used for human-robot
presence and oversight of crew. The Astrobee conops, interaction research.
on the other hand, calls for performing most sorties Each Astrobee carries a touch screen, speaker and
end-to-end Without crew tending, except in case of microphone, signal lights, and a laser pointer. Initially,
anomalies. the Astrobees Will use these components primarily to
The Astrobees use a tiered approach to mitigate help crew understand the Astrobee’s state and
collisions. First, to ensure crew and 188 safety, intentions (for example, providing turn signals).
Astrobee hardware is designed to be inherently Eventually, they could also provide capabilities like
collision-safe, regardless of any software anomalies. Video telepresenee for ﬂight controllers, and pointing
Second, to minimize ops disruptions, Astrobee ﬂight the laser to communicate a precise location to a crew
software includes several collision mitigation features. member.
We ensure collision safety by (1) hardware limiting
the maximum thrust capability of the propulsion 3'13 DOCk
system to 0-72 N» and (2) enoasing eaoh Astrobee th The Astrobee docking station has two berths, each
an impaot-absorbing foam shell, similar to a bicycle providing power and Ethernet connectivity to one
helmet, With rigid hardware recessed behind the shell. Astrobee (Fig. 5).
The worst-case kinetic energy of a collision is When docking, an Astrobee autonomously
approximately the PTOPUISiOh force times the longest approaches its berth using Visual servoing relative to
straight-line path th the ISS interior (~21 m). ﬂduoials mounted to the dock. Once contact is made, a
Factoring th air resistance, the maximum impact system of oonioal lances (on the berth) and cups (on
velocity is ~21 m/s, equivalent to a 23 em drop th the robot) guides the ﬁnal mating, accommodating up
Earth surface gravity. Impacts near the worst-case to ~l cm of alignment error. The berth connector has
velocity Will crush the foam shell by UP to ~15 em 20 spring-loaded pogo pins that contact matching pads
depth, absorbing most 0f the impact energy th the on the robot side. Compliance in the pins
process. accommodates any remaining alignment error.
Astrobee ﬂight software has several features that When mating is complete, permanent magnets on

"
"7","the berth attract striker plates on the robot, providing 4 GUEST SCIENCE

passive retention force. To enable undoeking, push

rods extend from the dock and push the Astrobee N3 Astrobee guest science Will build on the successful
em away, sufﬁcient separation for the propulsion SPHERES Research Facility. Guest scientists Will
system to easily overcome the reduced magnetic force. pursue their own ﬁnding to develop their experiments,

The dock also includes COTS battery chargers and receive in-kind support from the new Astrobee
sufﬁcient to simultaneously charge a full set of four Research Facility (integration guidance, ground testing
stand-alone Astrobee batteries. This function provides facilities, etc.) and the 188 program (launch services,
spare charged batteries, allowing an Astrobee t0 ete.).
execute baek-to-back activities When crew are The SPHERES Working Group (SWG) is a
available to assist with battery swapping. community of researchers interested in using the

SPHERES facility. The Astrobee team is working With

the SWG to develop plans for the transition to

. \ Astrobee, and NASA has already awarded early

7, _ . x. funding to develop Astrobee-relevant payloads,

.. .. .. through the Small Business Innovative Research
i . ' I \ ‘ (SBIR) and Early Stage Innovation (ESI) programs.

‘ ' Beyond the research areas initiated With SPHERES,

future Astrobee research is likely to include: (1) F ree-

._ _7 a “ ﬂyer manipulation, employing the Astrobee perching

"" ' arm, or adding advanced manipulator payloads [13];

(2) Free-ﬂyer human-robot interaction (HRI) using

the Astrobee touch screen, speaker, microphone, laser

pointer, and signal lights, or adding new hardware

Figure 5: Docking station with two berths. Push [14]°

rods shown extended, ﬁducials not shown. Researchers can modify the Astrobee system in a
variety of ways. The simplest is to add an onboard
software node that interacts With the robot using high-

,._.. ’ level APIs deﬁned through the Robot Operating
~ ._ t . i, System (ROS). Guest software can subscribe to
73.9}. ~ H h e T telemetry and send commands such as robot motions,
‘ ' A’ —l arm motions, and HRI interaction, including providing
‘ ﬁf-f ii i an astronaut user interface through the touch screen.
i ; , 1‘ ii H t 4 t , i The robot’s Android/ARM high-level processor is set
‘ t 3 l H ‘ ”'[t }\ s‘mlei aside to host guest software, and isolated from high-
if"" ‘1’ """"4 “""‘"" i ’ ii ‘ I rate control code.
‘ 7 ‘ ' , ‘ 3' a ,_ ' If guest software needs functions not provided in the
i ‘ j '.‘ ‘ high-level API, such as experimental control
—""’ .. algorithms that need to run at high rates, researchers
F igur 6 6515071)” version OfGDS 00””01 station can customize the Astrobee core software for their
planning interface experiment. We plan to open source release the core
software code base to facilitate community
contributions. Note that core software changes Will
3'14 Ground Data System (GDS) need careful review to ensure reliability.

Operators monitor and command Astrobee through Guest scientists can also add hardware payloads to
control station software. Control stations can be used the robot. Each Astrobee can hOSt up to three
by 188 ﬂight controllers, research facility staff, or simultaneous payloads, each within a ~15 X 15 X 10
guest science researchers at their own institutions. em peripheral bay, attached With a quiek-release

The control station user interface is implemented mechanism: two tool-free quarter-turn fasteners Whose
using the Eclipse Rich Client Platform (RCP) toolkit. Closure also engages the blind-mate connector that
It provides tools for planning (Fig. 6), execution carries power and USB 2'0 data.
monitoring, and live teleoperation. As the control The peripheral bays are arranged With one on top
station receives position telemetry, it renders the (aft) and two on the bottom (forward and aft). The
robot’s estimated pose within a 3D model of the ISS, bays are recessed behind the foam shell that absorbs
in combination With Video and status displays. impact energy in a collision. The two bottom bays are

The GDS also includes servers for archiving contiguous, so an Astrobee can accommodate one
Astrobee data, and a suite of engineering software double-size payload. The top bay is often occupied by
tools to support ongoing maintenance and upgrades of the Astrobee’s perehing arm, Whleh can be swapped
the Astrobee robots. With a payload as needed.

Unlike aircraft in 1g environments, an Astrobee’s

"
"8","maximum payload is not limited by its lifting power. SPHERES Facility (Human Exploration and
Much larger payloads could attach to an Astrobee’s aft Operations Mission Directorate) provided funding
dock adapter in a tractor-trailer conﬁguration, or for this work.

multiple Astrobees could cooperate to exert stronger

forces on a payload [15]. Note that if payloads extend References

outside the peripheral bays or exceed ~1 kg mass, [1] Frederickson S, et al. (2003) Mini AERCam:
further analys1s would be needed to ensure collls1on Development of a free-ﬂying nanosatellite inspection
safety and update control software. robot. In Proc. SPIE 5088 Space Sys. T ech. Oper.

AS a pllot for demonstrating Astrobee payload and [2] Dorais G A, et al. (2003) The Personal Satellite
survey eapab111t1es, we are coordinating Wlth the Assistant: An internal spacecraft autonomous mobile
RFID-Enabled Automated Loglsties Management monitor. In Proc. IEEEAerospace.

(REALM) PmJeCt at Johnson Space Center [16] [3] Ramirez-Riberos J L, et al. (2010) Distributed
Astrobee w111 serve as a moblle RFID reader platform - - - - _
_ _ _ _ control of spacecraft formatlons Via eyelle pursuit.
to search for m1ss1ng 1tems, complementlng ﬂxed Theory and experiments. J. Guid. Control Dynam,
readers in cabinets and hatches. The REALM 33(5): 1665-1669.
Astrobee payload will use a bottom payload bay, [4] Twe d dle B E, et al. (2012) The SPHERES
together with thin ﬂat ﬂexible antennas mounted on VERTIGO Goggles: Vision base d mapping and
the propuls1on module faces. localization onboard the International Space Station.
- ’ In Proc. iSAIRAS.
\ '- \ 5 _o/ ‘ /-.—~—~——- [5] Porter A, et al. (2014) Demonstration of
electromagnetic formation ﬂight and wireless power
' ~ \ transfer.” J. Space Rob, 51(6): 1914-1923.
_ -. [6] Fong T, et al. (2013) Smart SPHERES: A
a ‘\ telerobotie free-ﬂyer for intravehieular activities in
- ’ space. In Proc. AIAA Space.
N "" x [7] Bualat M, et al. (2015) Astrobee: Developing a
, ’/ .7 v\ free—ﬂying robot for the International Space Station.
,' ’x'gx” 7’ ’ “a "" I In Proc. AIAA Space Forum.
m4” [8] Davis C (1954) Theory of positive linear
dependence. Amer. J. Math. 74:4 (Oct. 1954), 733—
F igure 7: P4 propulsion moduleﬁt check, prior to 746,
integration ofimpeller andfoam shell [9] Pong C M, et al. (2011) Autonomous thruster
failure recovery on underactuated spacecraft using
model predictive control. In Proc. AAS Guid.
Control Conf.
5 PROJECT STATUS [10] Fluckiger L and Utz H (2014) Service oriented

The Astrobee project is currently performing ground robotic architecture for space robotics: Design, testing,
testing of Prototype 4 (P4), the fourth in a series of and lessons learned. J. Field Rob. 31(1): 176-191.
integrated risk reduction prototypes. P4 is the ﬁrst [11] YOO J W» Ct 31- (2015) AViODiCS and perehing
prototype to have ﬂight_1ike size, structure, and systems of free-ﬂying robots for the International
propulsion (Fig. 7), and include a full docking station. Space Station. In PVOC- IEEE 1’”- Symp. Systems Eng.

Lessons learned from P4 will be merged into the [12] Park I W>_ Ct 31' (2015) Developing a 3'DOF
ﬁnal design iteration, prior to veriﬁcation of a 00mph?” perchlng arrn for a free-ﬂying robot on the
e ertiﬂ eati on unit later this year. Internatlonal Space Statlon. In Proc. ICRA. . . .

[13] Estrada M A, et al. (2016) Free-ﬂyer aequ1s1tlon
6 CONCLUSION of spinning objects with geeko-inspired adhesives. In
Proc. ICRA.

Astrobee is a ﬂexible platform that will enable the [14] Szaﬂr D, et al. (2015) Communicating
next generation of zero-g free-ﬂying robotics research. directionality in ﬂying robots. In Proc. HR 1.

15 La illi G, et al. 2015 Results of micro raVit
ACknOWledgements ilui]d dinamies eaptuied vgith the SPHERESg-Slosh

We would like to thank the ISS Payloads Ofﬁce, experiment. In Proc. 1 A C.
the JSC Flight Operations Directorate, ISS Avionics [16] Broyan J L, et al. (2014) Logistics reduction
and Software, the Advanced Exploration Systems technologies for exploration missions. In Proc. AIAA
program, and the ISS SPHERES team for their Space.
collaboration. We would especially like to thank
Jason Crusan, Ryan Stephan, Steve Gaddis, and
Kevin Kempton for their support. The NASA Game
Changing Development Program (Space
Technology Mission Directorate) and ISS

"
