"","x"
"1","nema rchltect

Wﬁvmﬁhwmbaﬁm

Attack of the Space Data

Down-to-earth management at 155 EarthKAM

By Michael Hurwicz

New Architect

August 2002

When Dr. Sally Ride and NASA created the ISS EarthKAM program in 1996 as a way to
help middle school students learn about the Earth, they soon realized that they had also
created a significant data management challenge. EarthKAM, which is a loose acronym
for Earth Knowledge Acquired by Middle school students, lets participating students
remotely control a digital camera mounted on the International Space Station (155).
The resulting images of the Earth are downloaded from 155 each hour, and are stored
in the ISS EarthKAM Datasystem—an archive that has grown to contain over five
thousand cataloged images with corresponding metadata.

For the team behind the project—a group of professors, university students, teachers,
and NASA officials—managing the archive has been a unique technical challenge,
complete with lessons in database management, disk allocation, and bandwidth
optimization.

Dr. Ride, who in 1983 became the first American woman in space, conceived of the
program as a way to let students share her experience of looking down on the Earth
from space. Originally clubbed KidSat when the camera was mounted on select Space
Shuttle missions, ISS EarthKAM has evolved over the past seven years to include more
schools and more frequent missions now that the camera is permanently mounted on
the space station.

Students plan the images they want to take by tracking the camera's movement above
the Earth. After entering coordinates and other related data into the camera control
form online, they log on to the Datasystem to see how their images turned out. The
students use the images to complete a variety of classroom ""missions"" in history,
geography, geology, physics, oceanography, mathematics, and current events.
Bringing Images Home

"
"2","EarthKAM images are all taken by a Kodak DCS 460 camera mounted in a window
onboard the space station. Each photo would normally result in an 18MB file if it were
stored as a standard TIFF image. However, space is critical in space. The larger each
file is, the fewer total files the camera can store; and the longer it takes to download
the images to the data center on Earth. To cope with this difficulty, the camera
immediately compresses each image into Kodak's proprietary DCR format, which
incorporates a lossless compression algorithm, reducing each picture to about 6.5MB.
The resulting files are saved via an SCSI connection to an IBM ThinkPad computer on
the space station. There, the files are further compressed to approximately 2.6MB using
gzip compression.

The gzip files are transferred via a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite, capable of 600 to
800Mbps data transfers, to a ground tracking station at NASA's White Sands Complex in
New Mexico. From there, the digital pictures are downloaded to NASA's Johnson Space
Center (JSC) in Houston, TX. Finally, an application at the University of California San
Diego (UCSD) pulls the data to a RAID array on a Sun Ultra 60 server. At this point, it
becomes part of the EarthKAM Datasystem, where each image is processed and made
available online to students and the public at datasystem.earthkam.ucsd.edu. (See a
screenshot of the Datasystem and an image from the Datasystem of England's coast.)
Sometimes, all of this happens quickly enough that students can access the Datasystem
and view or download pictures within as little as five or ten minutes. Typically, though,
the process takes closer to an hour. The most important variable is the time it takes to
download images to JSC. Images aren't always immediately downloaded after they're
taken because data transfers relating to the primary mission of astronauts on 155 take
precedence over ""hitchhikers"" like EarthKAM.

File Formats and Storage

A DCR file with gzip compression may be efficient for downloading, but it isn't
convenient for the typical Mac or Windows machine that a middle school student is
most likely using. Likewise, an 18MB TIFF isn't exactly a Web—friendly format either,
especially given that middle schools seldom own state—of—the—art computers or have
high—speed Internet connections. So staff members at NASA's Jet Propulsion Lab (JPL)
in Pasadena, CA, created a system that converts incoming images to Portable Pixel Map
(PPM) format at resolutions of 3060 x 2036 pixels and 768 X 512 pixels. The system
performs these conversions automatically when it detects and downloads new images
from the JSC server.

Paul Andres, a technical staff member at JPL and the Datasystem lead, optimized the
application by splitting it into two components. The first program handles the file
transfer, and the second handles the processing. In this way, both steps can be
performed at the same time on different images.

"
"3","After the initial processing, C and Perl scripts create three differently sized JPEG files,
each composed of 384 x 256 pixel tiles. When a student or teacher requests an image
in TIFF, PICT, or GIF format, a script creates the file on the fly based on the PPM
image. TIFFs and PICTs are the most often requested image formats because students
can examine and modify them in Adobe Photoshop. Some schools also use NIH Image,
a public domain image processing and analysis program developed for the Macintosh at
the Research Services Branch of the National Institute of Mental Health.

To help track images, the camera embeds metadata in the header of each file, including
a unique identifier associated with the photo request. When the images are downloaded
to the Datasystem servers, they are run through scripts that retrieve the embedded
data. From the time associated with the photo ID, the script calculates the space
station's position relative to the surface of the Earth—this is valuable in determining
what part of the Earth was captured in the photo.

The metadata for each image is stored in an Oracle 8.1.5 database on the Sun Ultra 60
server located at UCSD's Science and Engineering Research Facility. The system has
been at the facility for less than a year. Until early 1998, the Datasystem was housed in
the Digital Image Animation Laboratory at JPL. The system was also located at the San
Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC) for a few years beginning in 1998, after the fourth
EarthKAM mission.

Today, after more than seven years of acquiring images, the Datasystem has come
within 563 of maxing out a 14063 RAID array. There are more than 5,000 images,
each in multiple formats. Clearly, more storage is needed. Prior to an upcoming ISS
mission in the Fall of 2002, the Datasystem will receive a second RAID system, built
with inexpensive IDE drives and a SCSI host interface. ""We are currently looking at a
RAID box that will give us about three quarters of a Terabyte of Level 5 RAID storage
for approximately $5,000,"" says CTO Alann Lopes. ""It's not the fastest RAID in the
world, but it's a good value.""

Value is certainly an important factor in any NASA—sponsored project. The Ultra 60 is
one of Sun's most inexpensive duaI—processor workstations (UCSD's is a single—
processor configuration). And storage has been selected more for value, in cost per
megabyte, than for speed.

Database Performance

Maintaining satisfactory database performance has been a challenge for Datasystem
administrators, especially during missions when students log on to see the pictures they
have requested. As EarthKAM has grown more popular, and its software more stable,
the missions have grown both in the number of participating schools and the number of
photos taken. For example, the first few missions averaged 500 images each. But on

"
"4","the fifth mission, the project recorded over 2,700 images in that single Space Shuttle
flight.

Mission 5 averaged 200,000 requests per day to the Web site. The system was bogged
down under the load. Because of the launch and construction of 155, Mission 5 was the
EarthKAM's last one aboard the space shuttle. Moving the EarthKAM camera to 155 in
2001 meant reconfiguring the software and testing the new environment with several
scaled back missions. Dropping back into pilot mode meant that fewer schools could
benefit from the fewer pictures taken, which temporarily took the pressure off the
Datasystem. However, Lopes ancl Andres anticipate that in the long run, the move to
155 will greatly increase demands on the system.

The increased demand will stem from the fact that the camera on 155 is available
continuously, not just for a few days during space shuttle missions. Although there are
no plans to have EarthKAM operate continuously, the level of activity will still increase
significantly. ""Our goal is to have the camera functional once a month for a period of a
few clays, and to have thousands of middle schools all over the country and the world
control the camera,"" explains Dr. Karen Flammer, the UCSD researcher who helped Dr.
Ride create the EarthKAM program. Flammer now oversees the project. Once—a—month
missions would represent a tenfold increase in site traffic and image retrieval. More
frequent flights will also result in a much larger archive of images, eventually consisting
of hundreds of thousands of photos.

In addition to serving as a resource for participating middle schools, the Datasystem
archive is open to schools that don't take pictures, and in fact to anyone in the world.
Hits from non—participants will no doubt increase as the system becomes better known.
That's just fine by EarthKAM organizers. ""We want to tell the world: Look at this
incredible library of information and images we have, for students everywhere—not just
middle school students,"" says Flammer.

Given these ambitions, it became clear during Mission 5 that something drastic had to
be done about server and database performance. The team took steps in this direction
early this year. First, in conjunction with a move from SDSC to the UCSD Science and
Engineering Research Facility, team members put both the Datasystem's Web front end
and the database back end on the same Sun Ultra 60, thus reducing access times. They
also changed the file access method from a network file system (NFS) to a host—
attached RAID system. Naturally, moving from networked storage to local storage led
to substantial performance improvements.

The original Web front end had been designed to generate pages dynamically based on
user input to HTML forms. To decrease the server load, the team instead created a
large number of static pages that offered the types of information users most frequently
requested.

"
"5","The dynamic system, based on Perl scripts, already had some performance measures in
place, like a three hour cache of each dynamically created page. That made it possible
for teachers to ""preview"" pages that they knew their students would be requesting, to
speed the site up. There were few if any cache misses as long as students requested
the pages within three hours. After that time, however, performance would drop as the
system had to access the database and dynamically generate new pages. With the new
static system, caching is limited by available disk space, not by time. And even if there
is a cache miss, it doesn't require database access or dynamic page generation—the
page is pulled from the static repository.

Students may still access the Datasystem when images are initially downloaded from
the space station, before static pages have been created. Once the static pages are
there, they don't need database access anymore. Although precise numbers aren't
available, the new system has significantly improved performance. The trade—off is
increased disk space requirements and less flexibility in the possible kinds of searches.
Future Technologies

Currently, the most human—intensive task associated with the EarthKAM Datasystem is
determining the exact center latitude and longitude for each image. This helps target
the precise location to which each image corresponds—a task performed by UCSD
students.

Latitude and longitude can be determined approximately, based on the time at which
the image was captured. However, that time is known only to the nearest second, clue
to the delay introduced by software on the ThinkPad. Because the characteristic speed
of low—Earth orbit is 8 km/second, one second can mean a difference of eight
kilometers in the image's positioning. Unfortunately, an error of 8 km would greatly
reduce the accuracy of map matching, a feature on the Datasystem Web site.

Map matching is the overlaying of ISS EarthKAM images on jet navigation charts, digital
elevation models, and satellite maps. This lets students more easily identify known
geographical features in the photos like rivers, lakes, and mountains. Because the maps
are coregistered, they can be used to turn the EarthKAM images into VRML models.
These models let users interact with the images in their browsers. With the help of a
VRML plugin, like the Cosmo player, students can manipulate their viewpoint of an
image in its surrounding area.

To aid in the map matching, the group at UCSD may deploy automatic pattern—
recognition software. Although the science of pattern recognition is fairly advanced, it's
only beginning to be applied to satellite imagery. Dr. Flammer predicts that we're years
away from the day when satellite images will be automatically and routinely matched
with maps.

"
"6","As for short term projects, the UCSD group plans to upgrade the camera onboard 155
to a Kodak DCS 760. The camera will use a 400Mbps FireWire interface to transfer files
more quickly than the current SCSI interface. However, the notebook on 155 doesn't
support FireWire yet, and UCSD is still developing its Flight Software package to control
the DCS 760.
With these upgrades, the ISS EarthKAM program will be able to provide students with
an even more efficient method of selecting, retrieving, and researching Earth images.
The project's parameters and audience have provided creators and maintainers of the
Datasystem with a fun and interesting technical challenge. Best of all, they know that
their work on the system is having a direct, positive effect by motivating young
students to learn about the universe—all with the aid of some awe—inspiring images of
the Earth.
Michael is a freelance writer based in East Sound, Washington. Write him at
michael@hurwicz.com or visit his Web site at www.hurwicz.com.
Entire contents copyright 1996-2002 CMP Media LLC
Read our privacy policy at http:[[www.cmp.com[delivery[privacy.html

"
