"","x"
"1","The Avatar-EXPLORE Experiments: Results and Lessons Learned
Erick Dupuis, Pierre Langlois, Jean-Luc Bedwani, David Gingras, Marc Gendron,
Alessio Salerno, Pierre Allard, Sébastien Gemme, Regent L'Archeveque, Tom Lamarche
Canadian Space Agency, Canada
e-mail: {firstnamelastname}@asc-csa.gc.ca
Abstract operations team is located on Earth, or even with novel
concepts such as highlighted in the Augustine Committee
The Avatar technical demonstration is a series of final report [7], where the operator might be located in
robotics experiments that use off-line concepts of orbit around the target planet or on a nearby moon.
operations to control a robot with little bandwidth and
intermittent communication channels. To do this, a lot of During Expedition 2001, launched on May 27th,
autonomy tht be transferred Oh the robot, and the 2009, Canadian astronaut Dr. Robert Thirsk conducted
operator becomes more of a manager, as the robot is the Avatar-EXPLORE experiments, during which he
controlled at higher level, specifying goals and letting the controlled a planetary rover test-bed located in the CSA‘s
FOhOt accomplish the task. This paper contains an Mars emulation terrain (MET) in order to locate thermal
overview 0f the unfolding 0f the Avatar technical anomalies. The rover was CSA‘s Mobile Robotics Test-
demonstration that took place at the Canadian Space bed (MRT), see Figure 1. In addition to its usual sensor
Agency (GSA) Mars Emulation Terrain (MET), where suite consisting of a Light Detection And Ranging
the Mobile Robotics Test—bed (MRT)_ rover was (LIDAR) range sensor, an inertial measurement unit and
controlled by Canadian astronaut Robert Thirsk from the odometry sensors, the MRT was equipped with an
International Space Station (188) during expedition 21. It infrared camera that allowed the operator to obtain
3150 includes a hSt 0t lessons learned. thermal panoramas 0f the robot's surroundings [8]. The
objective of each mission was to navigate the rover 0n
1 Introduction the terrain, identify hot spots, and navigate to within a
distance of 1 meter to the heat source.
Over the last few years, the Canadian Space Agency _ . _ -_ _ .‘._ - .1
has been executing a series of space experiments to : ._ _.'.;:.-._ '._.7_1_'3;'-""""""="".
validate operations concepts for the remote operation of .. t _, ?:‘1: E t3? 't '.
robotic equipment under varying levels of supervision. ' 1“""; “""711“ I
The experiment series, named Avatar, have made use of -_ - '-'* P -
the International Space Station to test the concepts using . _.ﬂ '71.:3' - ._--_ .__' .
a reverse ground-control principle: the robotic test-beds -r""""‘t:: _ﬂj- gig}. I
being located in the CSA‘s laboratories on Earth and the “tut""""l-
operator being located on the 188. This configuration has ﬁg?
allowed the team to test the software under the same I a {7ft
communications and operations constraints as space - - -
robotic operations, but at a fraction of the cost and _ _ ""
complexity. r -'--._ |-
Similar experiments in autonomous Operations Of Figure 1 _ CSA MRT rover used in support of the
planetary robotics have been conducted in analogue sites Avatar Explore Mission
[1], [2], [3], [4]. Similarly, the Mars Exploration Rovers
have been controlled from Earth using semi-autonomous
operations [5]. However, no such analogue mission had Given the busy schedule of astronauts 0n the ISS and
ever been executed by an operator located in space. the communication constraints imposed by the selected
channel, the operations were conducted completely off-
During the summer of 2009, the Canadian Space line. The astronaut would receive telemetry files at most
Agency has conducted the Avatar-EXPLORE once per day, analyze the data, generate a command
experiments to validate operations concepts for sequence and prepare the command file for downlink.
autonomous navigation of a planetary rover under The execution of the command file was executed
infrequent supervision of an operator [6]. Such a concept automatically on the rover with no live supervision from
is consistent with traditional operations where the the on-orbit operator. At the end of the execution of the
i-SAIRAS 2010
August 29-September 1, 2010, Sapporo, Japan 54

"
"2","command file, the rover would prepare and compress the windows when the 188 was in View of the CSA‘s ground
next telemetry file for upload to the 188. based station.

Given the fact that the operator had no live The Russian team that was working on settling the
interaction with the rover, there was no need to present problems with the HAM radio gave up on trying
minute robotic details to him. The user interface was repairing the radio approximately two months before the
information—centric and completing abstracting the robot launch of Robert Thirsk and the delivery of the operator
from the planning process. The operator was presentEd station to the 188. This left the Avatar team with very
With a rough map Of the terrain With the actual location few options for manifesting the experiment, certifying
0f the rover and ge0-referenced telemetry data in the the software and implementing a mechanism to transfer
form of medium—resolution 3D terrain scans and thermal command and data files.
panoramas. Graphical interface panes allowed him to
consult the catalogue of data available on the rover, order The Avatar—EXPLORE Graphical User Interface
new data for upload or generate command sequences to (GUI) was trimmed down so it could be uplinked to the
generate new data sets. The operator was thus allowed to 188. This meant giving up the 3D Views, and other
concentrate on the analysis of the telemetry and science features of a Java—based GUI, and settle for a simple
data, thus planning sets of measurements instead of HyperText Markup Language (HTML)—based user
having to deal with the tedium of planning detailed interface, that provided all the functionality required to
FObOtiC operations. exercise the core functionality of Avatar—Explore [10],

[11], [12].

This paper presents the architecture of the Avatar—

EXPLORE experiments, provides experimental results This HTML GUI could support the core
and discusses the lessons learned from the experiment demonstration objective: controlling safely a planetary
series. rover from the 188, using a small bandwidth and an
offline protocol. It was developed in collaboration with a

. . . . panel of Graphical User interface experts from the

2 MISSIOH Descrlptlon Johnson Space Center, and is compliant with the ISS

, , , Desi n and Gra hics Standards (IDAGS). It is enerated

2'1 Evolutlon 0f the Avatar Mlssmn Concept fromgthe origineﬁ Java GUI, as a special output {Tormat to

The Avatar mission is part of a series of technical be used by the astronaut OhIY- Each GUI was certified,
demonstrations that aim at the validation of operations uploaded to the 155, and a command file was sent back
concepts and software for the remote operation of robots to CSA, read into the Java GUI» and executed by the
with varying degrees of autonomy. The robot can MRT FOVEF. At the end Of each run, a new GUI W85
perform actions on behalf of the astronaut, to become his generated hhth the hhSStOh was completed.
representative, his avatar.

The communication was implemented using the 188

The first of these technical demonstrations, Avatar— file server, going through secure web based file transfer
RESCUE, targeted the remote control, by an astronaut on software (HMS) This allowed decoupling 0f the work
the 188, of a laboratory—based dual arm manipulator aboard the 155 and Oh the ground. It allowed more
emulating a satellite capture [9] This experiment was ﬂElelllty fOF the astronaut t0 WOFk OD Avatar, and kept
run mostly as a risk—mitigation measure to retire many people at CSA from spending nights awake
technical risks in View of the Avatar—EXPLORE manning the HAM radio.
experiment. It used a test—bed and software that hati been 22 Avatar-EXPLORE O p e r at 0 r S t ati 0 n
proven on numerous occasmns 1n the past. The main risk
to alleviate was the use of the ISS Hobbyist Amateur Figure 2 represents the interface. The yellow lines
(HAM) Radio as the means of communication between were added by the authors to emphasize the separation in
the astronaut and the robot. four sections: Header, World View, Sidebar and Panes.

Several of the risks that had been identified with the Below there is a description of each of them along with
HAM radio did materialize and the Avatar—RESCUE their role in controlling the MRT Rover.
experiment was never successfully run. The main Header (1): This section of the GUI provides the user
problems associated with the usage of the HAM radio with basic utilities such as opening a file, saving a file,
have been related to configuration management and quitting the application, accessing the on—line help, etc...
equipment failures: the laptop computer connected to the World View (2): The World View contains most of the
HAM radio failed and had to be replaced; the serial cable Visual information available to the user. From here the
connecting the radio to the laptop was lost aboard the operator can: i) observe the MET in 4 perspective (each
188; finally, the software configuration of the radio was corner of the World View); ii) browse History of
changed halfway through our tests and the radio was locations given to the MRT Rover and their status; iii)
never again able to communicate in packet mode. In see the current location of the MRT Rover; iv) select a
addition, usage of the HAM radio would have required new destination for the rover to perform an IT panorama.
synchronization of the experiments with communication To View the MET in one of the four perspectives

55

"
"3","available the operator has to select one of the inward There are several ways to book time for astronauts.
pointing arrow present in each corner of the World View In decreasing order of priority, an activity can be hard-
(Z). This will activate the “Perspective” scheduled, proposed as voluntary science, or task listed.
The task list was preferred because of the flexibility it
allowed, and the little overhead required. Unfortunately,
S w ' ' "" Exam 4H__ the astronauts were very busy during increment 21 and
::§;l:l the crew requested we present Avatar Mission as
voluntary science, to increase its Visibility and priority.
In the end, Avatar was proposed both as Voluntary
a 13—: Science and Task Listed, although it was only performed
‘ as part of the task list.
E
c |__ 3 Experimental Results
at d
f 1:: I 3 A _ Over the entire Avatar-EXPLORE mission, three
series of experiments were conducted in increasing
ﬂ complexity. Figure 3 shows the paths followed by the
; rover during the three experiments. For reference, the
. . length of the terrain is 60 meters and its width is 30
Flgure 2 ' Example 0f the HTML Graphlcal User meters. All experiments required two command cycles to
Interface complete. The path of the rover during the first
Sidebar (3)3 Meet 0f the commands are entered experiment is depicted by the blue and cyan lines. The
through the Sidebar. The sidebar lS CllVlClECl ll] four: second experiment is depicted by the red and magenta
History, Rover Destination, IR Images Request and lines and the last by the green and yellow lines.
Generate Command File. In each case, the rover start location is depicted by a
History: The HtStOFY contains every command along Circle and the target destination (location of the thermal
with their current status already given to the MRT Rover. anomaly) is depicted by an ""X"",
Selecting an element in this list will highlight the
corresponding location in the World View. "" ‘ v 0 ca. ‘ \
Rover Destination: from here the operator can: i) add 0 ) _ Q‘ ‘
new destination; ii) rename an element in the Rover '
Destination list; iii) remove Destination Request. \/ Q o ° , t l
IR Images Request: from here the operator can: i) - 3
request IR Images for a particular location; ii) cancel an (/‘) ‘ C/
IR Images recluest. ( / (“\‘l a “‘
Generate Command File: Click on this command . 3‘ E o a:
button when the work is completed. It will open a new fl I ""
window and ask to save its content to particular location. ' 0 ° 0
This should be the last action taken by the operator. Figure 3 _ MET scans the top along with commanded
Feedback Panes (4): there are three tabs in this paths for each of the executed Avatar missions
section: Mission, Perspective and Thermal Scans; i)
MtSStOh3 this pane contains the last message sent by The telemetry sent back to the operator was in the
CSA- It 3150 allows the operator to send back a reply; it) form of an HTML graphical interface, which contained
Perspective: This is where the four perspective 0f the an image of the coarse terrain model, a set of instructions
World View are ShOWh- It Will SthCh automatically sent in a chat window, detailed terrain geometry overlaid
when clicking Oh the inward arrows in the World View; on top of the terrain model and thermal panoramas. The
III) Thermal Scans: When available, this pane contains LIDAR data were cropped at a radius of 7m meters and
the thermal scans Of a particular location. When Clleng the images of the thermal panoramas were hmﬂed to a
Oh one Of the 12 images it Wth Change the angle OH View resolution of 324 X 240 pixels to take into account
in the World View. communication bandwidth limitations.
23 Executed Avatar Missions The average size of the telemetry files was 329 kB
and the average Size of the command files was 5.8 kB.
The Avatar Missions were all performed by Robert In each case, the operator succeeded in locating the
Thirsk, during the second half of his stay on the ISS thermal anomaly and approaching it within two
(Expedition 21). The Avatar GUI were uploaded to an command cycles (even for cases when the source was not
155 drive from the Marshall Space Flight Center, in Visible in first panorama).
Huntsville, Alabama, and the Avatar activity showed up The command files Clearly show the evolution of the
on Dr. Thirsk’s task list to indicate the GUI is ready for level of confidence of the operator over time. He started
him to send commands to the rover, at his convenience. with very cautious steps on the order of 5 t0 6 meters
56

"
"4","between waypoint commands during the first command
cycle (which approximately corresponds to the cropping
radius of the detailed LIDAR scans). Distances between
waypoints quickly increased to 10 meters on the second
command cycle and even 28 meters for the third
command cycle. This shows that the operator was using
the coarse terrain model to conduct his strategic planning
and leaving the tactical planning to the rover. The total
distance traversed by the rover during the Avatar
EXPLORE experiment was 148m.
Distances between intermediate waypoints used by
the rover to plan its trajectories were typically on the
order of 6 meters, exceptionally up to 10 meters when
the terrain was favourable. The main limitation for this is
the fact that the sensor was intentionally mounted low to
limit the effective sensing horizon. Figure 5 - Thermal sub-scan taken at the final
The figures below illustrate the outcome of the first destination of first command cycle
Avatar experiment. This was the easiest experiment to
execute. The rover started at location X = 6.0m, y = 6.0m ‘
and the target was located in plain sight at X = 3.5., y =
0.0m. See Figure 4: the extension cord to the heat source
is visible on the concrete border at the right of the image. ”if ‘_‘ '_‘_"" ‘ “4’"": ‘ ’ “
Since this was the very first run executed, the , aggéﬁ‘z‘ﬁ‘ ML??? aggﬁﬁ
operator had difficulty interpreting the telemetry file that . , 1’"" 9“ f_-m“""'""‘ I; "";,_‘ ~1§§£
was sent to him. The first set of commands is illustrated A . ~ ‘g‘ﬁfvawm. ._ V 453’ iwwwvfw
by the blue line on Figure 3. The rover was requested to «‘aﬁgng? 7 fg' '\""‘.g a
Visit three waypoints during this first command cycle. 3', ,iﬁkgﬁvf‘vxgi"" ,: '
These waypoints initially moved the rover away from the , a ‘ *ﬂ‘:“"".:3§ug.u;-;;_itif ,7 ‘7 , ,' ‘
heat source. The thermal images showing the heat source ‘_‘~' #:325égjﬁégﬂ; '1, ‘ t.
at final the destination of the first command cycle is ':""-jj—"" 333W,;: ,1” ‘41:, 7'
shown in Figure 5. The latter is the thermal image, ' ;-' “""‘;'i’ ‘_ ~31 f ""'
extracted from the panorama, showing the heat source. ‘ ”r 15‘1”} ‘3 #5::
The heat source is the white spot Visible at the left top ' ” t T”
corner of the image. Notice the thermal scan is mostly , , , ,
grey, with the thermal source being lighter. This was Figure 6 ' Final Rover P0s1t10n
done on purpose to help the astronaut identify the heat
source.
The path followed by the rover during the second
command cycle is depicted by the cyan line on Figure 3.
This shows that the operator quickly horned in on the
heat source.
Figure 6 shows the final position of the rover in front
of the heat source.
. w...“ , _‘ .
""2..me --.“ "" ‘3‘“
b a. - a _ “. tn
' ‘ , . ~ . . 4w ‘13:
-' - “- ’ “ . . J‘ . J gm» .1533
y 4; _.i : 2,: t“ Figure 7 - Thermal scan taken at final position
'Lx .~. . . ~ ' 4 Lessons Learned
' t ‘ This section reports the main lessons that were learned
‘ throughout the execution of the Avatar Mission. The
reader is referred to [13] for further details of the other
Figure 4 — Initial position of rover lessons learned.
57

"
"5","4.2.2 Train with the flight version of the GUI
4.1 Operations Concept Lesssons Robert Thirsk was trained in Russia using the Java
version of the GUI that was eXpected to fly on the 188.
4.1.1 Data—centric operation concept worked The training took 2 hours, and was composed of a

The outcomes of the limited set of experiments that presentation and some hands—on GUI practice.
were conducted during the Avatar—EXPLORE mission Given the quick thth around we had to make when
show that the proposed concept of operation works. The we learned the Russians could not launch our software,
operator was able to concentrate on specifying the we had to modify the GUI extensively, keeping the same
strategic aspects of the mission (i.e. interpreting sensor overlying principles as we trained. However, Dh Thirsk
data to localize the heat source and conducting high level had no PtthOhS experience Oh the HTML version 0f the
planning in the coarse terrain model) and to delegate the GUT, and this caused about a month 0t delay to the
tactical planning to the rover. The evolution of the prOJect.
distance between waypoints over the command cycles This was due to the fact that he could not see the
indicates that the operator developed thrust in the rover's infrared images correctly because the GUI had to be
capabilities and did not require all the detailed terrain displayed th thh screen, which was written th the help
data to make tactical decisions in the rover's stead. section 0f the GUI, WhiCh was unfortunately only

available when the GUI was in full screen. Had Robert
412 Some rover—centric data is useful Thirsk known/trained with the HTML GUI, he would

The current Avatar GUI does not inform the user have seen that from the start, but not knowing what to
whether a destination is reachable or not, or which path 61:13 ect, hlel EUZZIEd over the lack 10f {IEEdhaCkf It toil? E
was taken to reach the current position. p one ca hl ml? space to untang e t e srtuation, W 1C

Both the space—borne operator and a group of ran smoot y a terwar 5°
ground—based operators (used for pilot testing) have
requested more rover—centric information. For example, 4.3 Rover Software Lessons
operators want to know the path that the rover actually
took over the preVious command cycles, although this 4,3,1 Need more states for the rover
information is not strictly required to plan the operations. S ome situations were not included in the

In addition, operators indicated that it would be hthezihsminidthfirthe rosxtelthsvzhichsumcehde Zierat‘ltsetttifgge
useful to have an idea of which part of the terrain are not ‘REQUTRES ASSISTANCE’, ‘P AUSED’, could allow
reachable by.the rover based. on the knowledge Of the more troubleshooting during real—time operations. These
coarse terrain model. It 1.5 understood that thtS states should be made available to the operator through
information could be wrong Since it is based on coarse telemetry.
data. However, operators preferred potentially erroneous
knowledge to no knowledge. 4.3.2 Navigation is not only reaching your

destination
4.2 Operator Interface Lessons Navigating is not only going from point A to point B,
it is acquiring geographical information, building a map,
4.2.1 Follow graphical user interface standards and using it during the course of the traverse.

The astronauts on the 188 have to deal with hundreds CSA has developed a framework to. handleoatlases Of
of systems and experiments, each having their own maps that getupdated as new information is discovered.
GUIs. Over the total of increment 21, Robert Thirsk However, thtS framework was not used during the
spent less than 3 hour on Avatar. The crew can not learn Avatar—EXPLORE mis51on. The rover stored LIDAR
new GUI paradigms for each system they encounter, and scans for future reference, but did not use them to
care must be taken to have the User Interface speak the enhance the mal? Of the area. Each time the rover moved,
same language that the User has learned. A lot of effort whether It was he ‘khOWh’ territory or not, It never used
was put into the Avatar HTML interface to make it easy hIStehe‘h .data. . . .
for the crew to understand, and even so, an estimated Additionally, the concept of data reliability should be
month was lost because the GUI did not seem to work included in the navigation map, which could be hhht
correctly: The Help window clearly indicated the first from a low fidelitynlodel .(tehehthty : low) plus the
thing to do was to press F11, or selecting View/Full LIDAR scans (tehehthty : h1gh)‘

Screen to resize the display, but the Help button calling
the Help window was not accessible because of the
initial size of the GUI on the 188 laptop. This caused the 43-3 RObOtiCS researchers are “Qt FOVEF operators
Infrared Images to appear much too small to be of any While it is easy to send a rover command, in a space
use, and probably some frustration on the part of the mission, much thought is put into the operators’ mind as
astronaut. All this despite the efforts put into testing and to which command, and when, and why. This gives rise
certification of the product. to different requirements than the ones a robotics
58

"
"6","researcher might suggest, and may help put some space, it could be argued that it did not absolutely require
problems in perspective. Rover operators must be the usage of the 188. These tasks do not require
included in the development process of the rover microgravity, or any resources from the International
hardware, software, communication architecture, and Space Station. Some of the same benefits could have
userinterface. been obtained using an operator subject to the same
. communication constraints. However, the benefits from
4'4 ProJECt Management Lessons operating under the set of severe ISS constraints could
not have been simulated.
. . 4'4'1 DO not have uncontrolled resources on your Given that Robert Thirsk spent an estimated total of
critical path 3 hours on Avatar Mission over his 6—month increment,
The fiFSt Avatar mission (Avatar RESCUE) was it is considered a reasonable success and a good starting
designed to control a CSA—based manipulator from the point to continue this kind of research.
155, using a HAM radio link. This quickly showed However, the cost of operating on the 188 should not
unreliable and difficult to implement, as there iS be under—estimated. The resources dedicated by the
insufficient configuration management of the hardware project to deal with the ISS—specific processes are not
and software on the ISS HAM radio. The main issue that used to conduct development work.
made this problem intractable was the fact that the radio
belonged to the ARISS community and was managed by 443 High risk projects require up—front
a facility curator located in Russia. acceptance of the level of risk
When. configuratioh management p roblems With the The Avatar—EXPLORE project was run with a high
HAM radio arose, this iterh was on the critical path and level of risk. The project was executed by a very lean
CSA had no leverage on either Of these parties to force team, using informal connections in different space
any action. In the end, the HAM radio 5011mm} had to be agencies to secure resources to be used on the project.
abandoned, ,Wthh forced a complete re—de51gn Of the For example, the laptop that was used for the operator
operator station ahcl required a complete. start—bver ofothe station was going to be a laptop on the Russian 5 e gment
manifest and certification process Within an 1mp0551ble from a previous project with CS A involvement; the
schedtile. . . . HAM radio usage was negotiated directly with the
Given the pressmg deadline tor .United States On— curator of the facility in Russia.
Orbit Segment (USQS) certification, the SEIECtEd Much of the project was run below the radar with
approach was t9 g0 Wllh a proven mechanism for data just enough visibility to reduce the level of unease from
exchange, , Wthh still allowed. the technology all stakeholders just below the rejection threshold.
tlemonstration 0f the Avatar naVIgation system and user Although this le d to success in re C 0rd time and with a
interface. , , very small team, the project was often at risk of being
.The proyect was yery lacky that It was EXECUtéd cancelled since it did not have the strong support that it
during the first expedition flight With. a full crew of SIX might have garnered from the community had it gone
astronalits. When the increment sc1entist was appreached through the official pr 0 c e s s.
to inanifest Avatar two months before launch, it was Despite the set—back encountered with the H AM
bEITEVEd by all that crew WOUld have p lenty Of Idle time radio just months before launch, the team refused to
during ,thls period. Hence, the mameSt process was admit defeat. Developers put in long hours and an extra
streamlined to allow Avatar to be available to occupy the effort t 0 implement an alternative solution that was
crew. finally successful. Furthermore, circumstances and the
. presence of a few key individuals on the team allowed
4'4'2 ISS framework 15 a heavy burden Avatar to be manifested in a streamlined fashion and t0
Conducting scientific experiments using the be executed during Robert Thirsk 's expedition flight.
International Space Station involves an important Despite all the hard work of the team, Avatar could
overhead of process in order to manifest and certify have failed to make it to the 155 under different
experiments. Even more challenging iS the process to circumstances. Such a possibility has to be faced by the
reserve astronaut time and to schedule experiments in the team at the very start and must be acknowledged as a
crew's daily schedules. plausible outcome. The difficulty for the project manager
The value added of having Avatar 0n the 155 was to in such a context is to maintain the team's commitment
study the capacity of ISS astronauts to take decisions throughout the project While being able to pull the plug
based on the provided GUI, to provide destinations for when the project is doomed.
the rover, and select datasets to be downloaded for better
situational awareness. It allowed successful testing of .
asynchronous human—rover interaction over a narrow 5 condusmns
bandwidth. As a side benefit, it also gave the research . .
team the challenge to work in an operational Thls paper documented the experiments and the
environment where Cheats are not possible. lessons learned of the Avatar—Explore MISSIOD.
While Avatar is an interesting experiment, and has
allowed the first ever control of a terrestrial rover from By the end 0f Expedition 20/ 21, three Avatar—EXPLORE
59

"
"7","missions had been successfully conducted. The Intelligent Mechatronics, Montreal, Canada, July
experiments were conducted in order of increasing 2010.
complexity. By the end 0f the experiment series, Dr. [9] E. Martin, R. L'Archevéque, S. Gemme, I. Rekleitis
Thirsk was able to navigate the rover to identify and and E. Dupuis, “The Avatar Project”, IEEE Robotics
locate a thermal source that was beyond the Visible and Automation Magazine, 15:4, p. 20_27,
horizon of the robot. These egperiments 'also provided December 2008.
Slghlflcent expertmental yahdatlon of CSA 5 autonomous [10] “Avatar HTML GUI Software Requirements”,
naVIgatlon algorlthms, 1nc1ud1ng terraln feature—based . . . .
localization path planning [14] terrain modeling [15] REVISIOD IR’ Canadlan Space Agency Space Statlon
’ . ’ Program, CSA—SS—SG—0054.
and data compressmn.
[11] “Avatar HTML GUI Test Procedure”, Revision IR,
The Avatar—EXPLORE experiment proved for the Canadian Space Agency Space Station Program,
first time ever the control of an exploration rover from CSA'SS'PR'0107-
space. [12] “Avatar Graphical User Interface and Command
Files Archives”, Revision IR, Canadian Space
References Agency Space Station Program, CSA—SS—DP—0047.
[13]P. Langlois, “Avatar—EXPLORE Final Report”,
Initial Release upon approval, Canadian Space
[1] iﬁN' Bakambu, C' Lahgley, G' Pushpahathan, W° 1 Agency Space Station Program, CSA—SS—RPT—0444,
acLean, R. Mukherjl and E. Dupuls Planetary
Rover Visual Motion Estimation Improvement for January 2010'
Autonomous, and Robust Guidance, Navigation and [14]D- Gingras, G- Payre, J- de Lafontaine and E-
Control”, Proceedigs 0f the 10th 1-5 AIRAS, Sapporo, Dupuis, “Path planning based on fluid mechanics for
Japan, 2010. mobile robot using unstructured terrain model”,
[2] G. R. Osinski, T. Barfoot, N. Ghafoor, J, Tripp, R. IEEE Int. Conference on Robotlcs and Automatlon,
Richards, P. Jasiobedzki, T. Haltigin, N. Banerjee, May 2010'
M. R. M. Izawa and p. Furgale “Lidar and mSM as [15]D. Gingras, T. Lamarche, E. Dupuis, J.—L. Bedwani,
Scientific tools for the Geological Mapping of “Rough Terrain Reconstruction for Rover Motion
Planetary Surfaces”, In Proceedings of the Canadian Planning”, In Proceedings 0f the Seventh Canadian
Space Exploration Workshop (CSEW), CSEW6003, Conference on Robotics and Computer Vision,
pages 50—51, Montreal, Canada, December 2008. Ottawa, Canada, May 2010-
[3] D. R. Thompson, T. Smith and D. Wettergreen,
“Information—Optimal Selective Data Return for
Autonomous Rover Traverse Science and Survey”,
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, May 2008.
[4] T. Fong, M. Allan, X. Bouyssounouse, M. G.
Baulat, M. C. Deans, L. Edwards, L. Flﬁckiger, L.
Keely, S. Y. Lee, D. Lees, V. T0 and H. Utz,
“Robotic Site Survey at Haughton Crater”,
Proceedigs 0f the 9th i—SAIRAS, Los Angeles, CA,
February 2008.
[5] J. Wright, F. Hartman, B. Cooper, S. Maxwell, J.
Yen and J. Morrison, “Driving on Mars with
RSVP”, IEEE Robotics and Automation Magazine,
13:2, June 2006.
[6] “AVATAR—EXPLORE Concept of Operation”,
Revision A, Canadian Space Agency Space Station
Program, CSA—SS—CD—0028.
[7] Review of U.S. Human Spaceflight Plans
Committee, ""Seeking a Human Spaceflight Program
Worthy of a Great Nation"", Report to White House
Office of Science and Technology Policy, October
2009, pp. 15 and 19.
[8] A. Gauthier, M. Pelletier, A. Salerno, P. Allard, S.
Gemme, T. Lamarche and E. Dupuis, “CSA
Redesign of the Mobile Robotics Test—bed (MRT)”,
2010 IEEE/ASME Int. Conference on Advanced
60

"
