"","x"
"1","Paper # 070HE-0218 Topic: Heterogeneous Combustion, Sprays & Droplets
8th U. S. National Combustion Meeting
Organized by the Western States Section of the Combustion Institute
and hosted by the University of Utah
May 19-22, 2013
Flammability Aspects of Fabric in Opposed and
Concurrent Air Flow in Mierogravity
Paul V. Ferkull Sandra L. 0150112 Michael C. J0hnst0n3 James S. T ’ien3
INational Centerfor Space Exploration Research, Cleveland, OH 44135
2NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 44135
3Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106
Microgravity combustion tests burning fabric samples were performed aboard the
International Space Station. The cotton-ﬂberglass blend samples were mounted inside a
small wind tunnel which could impose air ﬂow speeds up to 40 cm/s. The wind tunnel was
installed in the Microgravity Science Glovebox which supplied power, imaging, and a level
of containment. The effects of air ﬂow speed on ﬂame appearance, ﬂame growth, and spread
rates were determined in both the opposed and concurrent-ﬂow conﬁguration. For the
opposed ﬂow conﬁguration, the ﬂame quickly reached steady spread for each ﬂow speed, and
the spread rate was fastest at an intermediate value of ﬂow speed. These tests show the
enhanced ﬂammability in microgravity for this geometry, since, in normal gravity air, a ﬂame
self—extinguishes in the opposed ﬂow geometry (downward ﬂame spread). In the concurrent-
ﬂow conﬁguration, ﬂame size grew with time during the tests. A limiting length and steady
spread rate were obtained only in low ﬂow speeds (S 10 cm/s) for the short-length samples
that ﬁt in the small wind tunnel. For these conditions, ﬂame spread rate increased linearly
with increasing ﬂow. This is the ﬁrst time that detailed transient ﬂame growth data was
obtained in purely forced ﬂows in microgravity. In addition, by decreasing ﬂow speed to a
very low value (around 1 cm/s), quenching extinction was observed. The valuable results
from these long-duration experiments validate a number of theoretical predictions and also
provide the data for a transient ﬂame growth model under development.
1. Introduction

The combustion of thermally-thin fuels burning in low-speed ﬂows has been studied extensively
[e.g. Olson et al., 1988; Olson, 1991; Ferkul and T’ien, 1994; Grayson et al., 1994; T’ien and Bedir,
1997; Shih and T’ien, 1997]. The importance of radiative loss is evident in leading to ﬂame
extinction when the ﬂow velocity (or ambient oxygen concentration) is reduced sufﬁciently. This
quenching extinction occurs when the ﬂame power output decreases, and the radiative heat loss rate
becomes a significant fraction of the total combustion heat release from the ﬂame.

The observation of the quenching extinction branch is only possible at microgravity, since
otherwise any buoyant ﬂow generated would take the system out of the low-speed ﬂow regime.
This is shown for a speciﬁc thermally-thin fuel in Fig. 1 produced by a computational model. A
ﬂame can only exist inside the U-shaped curve. The ﬂammability boundary consists of two

"
"2","branches, as shown. Normal gravity studies are limited to ﬂow speeds above the minimum buoyant
speed in the ﬂame zone (20 om/s for this system). The ﬂames in microgravity are very sensitive to
ﬂow speed, especially as the ﬂame approaches the extinction boundary. This has implications for
both the fundamental understanding of _

. . . . Quenching
meohamsms leadmg to d1ffus1on ﬂame 0/0 02 Branch 1_g Studies
extinction as well as practical significance
for spacecraft fire safety. Materials in B|owoff
microgravity with adequate ventilation may Branch
burn more readily compared to normal Flame
gravity with all other conditions being
identical (pressure, oxygen concentration,
temperature, eto.). 14'5 _ — — _ _ — _ — No Flame

12.5 _ _ _ _ _ .

There have been few experiments Critical Low /
examining oonourrent-ﬂow ﬂame spread oxygen Limit I
over thin fuels in the long-duration I A
microgravity environments available in 7 20
space. In Saoksteder et al. [1997], the Characteristic FIOW Speed (cm/S)
number 0f teStS was limited and only Simple Figure l. Flammability boundary for a thin solid fuel from model
diagnostics were possible’ but valuable computation. Much of the boundary is inaccessible for study in l-g
11181 ght into the burning b ehaVi 01‘ of thin because of the ever-present buoyant convection ﬂows of at least 20 cm/s.
paper samples was attained, including a
Visual record of the ﬂames and measurements of spread rate and ﬂame temperatures. The fuel
tended to crack when it burned, causing the ﬂame to respond in a non-prediotable way. In Olson et
al. [2001], ignition was initiated in the center of a paper fuel sheet so that only a portion of some of
the ﬂames spread in the concurrent mode. Depending on the ﬂow speed, the ﬂame would either
spread entirely into the ﬂow (opposed ﬂow) or the ignition ﬂame would split into an opposed and
oonourrent-ﬂow ﬂame spreading simultaneously away from each other.

Understanding long-duration microgravity solid material burning and extinction is important for
improving strategies for NASA spacecraft materials selection. The goal is to link actual bum
behavior in microgravity to Earth-based selection methods. From a more fundamental point of View,
improved combustion computational models using the experimental results can be developed to aid
in the design of fire detection and suppression systems both in microgravity and on Earth. Validated
detailed combustion models in the simpler ﬂow environment of microgravity can help build more
complex combustion models of ﬂames burning in normal gravity. Better models have wide
applicability to the general understanding of many terrestrial combustion problems.

2. Methods

Combustion tests burning fabric sheets are conducted aboard the 188 (International Space
Station) using the Miorogravity Science Glovebox Facility [Butler, 2008]. The sheets are mounted
in a holder which sandwiches the fabric between two thin stainless-steel frames. The exposed fuel
measures 8.5 cm in length and 1 or 2 cm in width. One short edge of the fuel is not framed, and
ignition is achieved across the sample on this edge. See Fig. 2. A 29-gage Kanthal wire spans the
sample and is resistively heated to provide ignition. Typically the igniter resistance is 1 ohm and a
current of around 3.7A is supplied for ignition, which occurs within about 2 s. The samples each

2

"
"3","have their own integral i gniter, the leads of which are glued ﬂat along the frame to minimize any
ﬂow disturbances. The igniter leads come off the back of the sample and go to a connector which is
plugged in during installation.

The custom-made fabric (sometimes referred to as SIBAL fabric) is a blend of cotton and
ﬁberglass. The threads consist of ﬁbers of cotton and ﬁberglass which are spun together. A simple
weave patter is used with a spacing of 60 by 40 threads per inch (Fig. 3). The overall area density is
18.0 mg/cm2, with 75% by mass cotton and remainder ﬁberglass. This fabric was developed with
the idea that the ﬁberglass matrix would be left behind after all the fuel is consumed, so that the
sheet would not curl or crack. Either of these geometrical changes could affect the ﬂow in a non-
predictable way and so are undesirable. As will be seen later, the ﬂame is very sensitive to small air
ﬂow changes in microgravity.

Ali_ ment tab I I 7, ,T' T -Tvﬁ 2.
- , n *""""‘”.~""
i' Z ” 2 “ Z I :3 I 1
‘1 ‘ ‘ _“::Lr;¢:': -
7 e: Fuel: cotton-ﬁberglass :5, , -. p ., r- m p E .
""~~>=+- ~--+ ;§;;:::;;:: a4;
"" — - - \ #:9322232: ’ /: .
Frame/ 2-pin connec—2 "" T d . T ""V ’ T ’ . "" i ‘
Figure 3. Left: Close-up of cotton-ﬁberglass fabric. A simple
Figure 2. 2-cm wide fuel sample in holder. The open edge is ignited weave is used With a spacing Of 60 X 40 threads per inch.
by a resistively heated wire. The igniter is terminated at a 2-pin nght: , Each thread has cotton and ﬁberglass ﬁbers
connector which is plugged in when the sample is installed by the 1nterm1ngled.
astronaut in the hardware.

The samples are burned in the SPICE apparatus which is a small ﬂow duct with a cross-sectional
area of 76mm X 76mm [Dotson et. al. 2010]. The front window of the duct can be opened so that
samples can be installed one at a time. See Fig. 4. There is a tab with alignment holes on the sample
holder which permits quick and accurate installation onto small rare-earth magnets inside the ﬂow
duct. Samples can be ﬂipped 180 degrees so that the igniter is on the upstream or downstream end
of the fuel. In this way, both concurrent-ﬂow and opposed-ﬂow tests can be conducted. The
electrical connector is plugged into a socket inside the duct and the wires are tucked into a comer to
minimize ﬂow disturbances. A variable-speed fan is used to generate air ﬂow speeds from 0 to 40
cm/s. Air speed is the principal variable for this experiment.

The ﬂow duct is housed within the MicrograVity Science Glovebox (MSG) which provides
power, imaging, and a level of containment (Fig. 5) [Butler, 2008]. It is very advantageous that the
astronaut can perform hands-on operation of the experiment while Viewing the ﬂame directly.
Sometimes the ﬂame is very dim or has features which the camera misses. The astronaut can make
observations in real-time to the research team on the ground which is in direct audio and Visual
communication. The researchers on the ground in turn provide guidance and clariﬁcation is being
performed while at the same time beneﬁtting enormously from the direct involvement of the ISS
crew member.

3

"
"4","_ ii"" After all the appropriate electrical
. . connections are made between the duct and
1 _ﬂ_ the MSG, the cameras are set up. The
—. ‘ i . .
, ‘ — _ cameras prov1de the bulk of the data for th1s
‘ T . l ' Air ex experiment. A digital still camera takes high-
“ op wmdow . . .
- 7 7, V —> resolutlon plctures through the top wmdow at
_, ' - '- ~ “ _, rate of about one frame per second. A Video
—’ —’ camera captures the edge View of the ﬂame
—> ' Front windolv ; i through the front Window at 30 frames per
Fan section _. A- 1' ‘ seconcl. There isa character oyerlay on the
‘ L} V1deo 1mage to dlsplay fan settmg, ﬂow speed
"" ' "" (from a hot-Wire anemometer), radiometer
‘ , ° "" output from a Wide-angle sensor inside the
Figure 4. Small ﬂow duct used to bum samples. The front window dllCt, and time.
can be opened for easy installation of each fuel sample.

After the sample is installed, the MSG
volume is sealed and the lights are turned off. The experiment is operated using a control box Which
is external to the MSG and can adjust ﬂow speed, igniter on/off, and radiometer gain. In addition to
the camera Views Which are available live to both the astronaut and the ground team, the astronaut
can look into a port to View the ﬂame directly.

\ 0 . i
K , ' .
7 ’ ML’V‘ A t 5 .‘
’ \ “ _,’ ‘ .7
.8 u. ""E ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘\ . ‘
- /; - ‘- v ' * ' .
_ 4~ —-. x . _
, ‘ ‘; ' a 5 ' x.
/ r, 5.! v ’1' l. -J 1| ,
. ”A <b/ ‘L,._ d,“ .“ \r
a ‘ “-095 k/ s y 7
' ‘l ’ , ‘ ' n
. 4.x ‘ H V ,r' ‘
t '\ c: ‘m” \
J.) :14 1 .
Figure 5. Fish-eye View of the inside of the Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG) with the ﬂow duct
installed. The MSG provides power, imaging, and a level of containment. The astronaut can easily
access the hardware which permits valuable hands-on operation. The digital still camera can be see
Viewing down at the duct, and a Video camera and mirror image the sample through the front window.

Just before the test is initiated, the ﬂow is set to the desired value and the cameras start
recording. Ignition is turned on and a ﬂame is established Within about 2 seconds. The ﬂame
spreads across the sample, ultimately consuming all the fuel and then goes out. In some tests, the
ﬂow speed is changed While the ﬂame is burning to gage its effect. After the ﬂame goes out, the

4

"
"5","duct is a110wedt0 0001 and vent for several “J5: “$3 F22 5??
. . 93/31/12 11=1S=18
mmutes unt11 the 01d sample can be removed
and a fresh one installed for the next test.
3. Results and Discussion
Figure 6 shows typical ﬂame images
from both cameras for a eoncurrent-ﬂow test
at 10 cm/s and a 2-cm wide fabric. 011 the
left, the digital still high-resolution image is
shown looking down through the top
window. The ﬂame leading edge is mostly
blue, but there is a signiﬁcant amount of
yellow which indicates the presence of soot.
Dark eharring 0n the surface is Visible ' .. . ""
indicating the area of signiﬁcant fuel ‘ ’ ._ _
pyrolysis. The base of the ﬂame advances,
leaving behind mostly ﬁberglass but with . ,
some remnants of cotton. This is evident by ~‘
the bright orange smoldering occurring in Figure 6. Typical ﬂame images. Left: Digital still image from the top
the fuel matrix. Eventually, the smoldering window looking down on the fabric sheet. Right: Edge View from the
. . Video camera Viewing the ﬂame through the front window. Video
ceases. On the rlght, the V1ew 0f the ﬂame . . . . . . .
. . . overlay Informatlon 1s shown at the top rlght. Flow speed d1rect10n 1s
from the front WlndOW VldCO camera 15 as indicated yielding a concurrent-ﬂow conﬁguration. (Test 1)
shown. This View is important for
determining ﬂame symmetry and 2-D structure. While this camera lacks the sensitivity and
resolution of the digital still camera, it records images at a much higher rate of 30 frames per second.
For all cases, the two ﬂame halves were symmetric and the ﬂame spread uniformly without any
disturbances caused by fuel burnout (cracking or curling). The text overlay indicates the fan setting,
ﬂow speed, radiometer level, date, and time. The minimum measurable air ﬂow speed is 1 cm/s.
A total of 11 samples were available as shown in Table I. The tests are listed in the order in
which they were performed.
T able I .' T est Summaﬂ
Width . . Flow Speed
Single ﬂow speed change
__———
“_———
__———
__———
5, 3, 1.5, 1 Flow reduction; quenching extinction observed
n— Opposed “—
Flow increase; blowoff extinction not attained
Opposed 10, 20, 44 Flow increase; blowoff extinction not attained
__———
n_ Opposed 10, 6, 4, 2, 1.5, 1 Flow reduction; extinction not observed
5

"
"6","Most of the samples were 2 cm in width, and
most of the tests were performed in the
eoncurrent-ﬂow conﬁguration. The opposed
ﬂow conﬁguration was amenable to air ﬂow
speed changes during the burn since the ﬂame
was found to reach steady state quickly after the
ﬂow was changed. This is not the case for
concurrent ﬂow where the ﬂame response time
(and fuel length required) is signiﬁcantly larger.
gs, _ Figure 7 shows the comparison of
. ~ ' m3%%% concurrent air ﬂow speeds of 5 and 10 cm/s 0n
’ ‘ '"" "" "" ' ﬂame structure for a 2-cm wide sample. The
a - . images are taken about 20 seconds after ignition.
. . . ' - I The ﬂame base for the wider samples in
. .. i - ‘\ concurrent ﬂow is rarely horizontal; rather there
.. ,. ' . , is always a slight tilt. The spread rate of the
s - t ’ base of the ﬂame does reach steady state during
. the available observation times for air ﬂow
Flgure 7. Effect of concurrent-ﬂow speed on ﬂame structure.
Left: 10 cm/S_ Right: 5 cm/S_ (Tests 7 and 8) speeds of 20 cm/s and less. However, the ﬂame
tip spread rate is still growing for air ﬂow
speeds equal to and higher than 10 cm/s. To put it another way, the ﬂames only reach a steady length
for ﬂow speeds less than 10 cm/s.

In Fig. 8, a summary of the spread rates is presented. Results are plotted for both opposed ﬂow
(velocity > 0) and concurrent ﬂow (velocity < 0). For opposed ﬂow, the ﬂame responds very rapidly
to ﬂow changes and steady state ﬂame spread rates and lengths are obtained. As a result, a single
burn can yield multiple data points if the ﬂow is changed in a step—wise fashion. For concurrent
ﬂow, the ﬂame takes a relatively long time to respond to ﬂow changes so it is not feasible to attempt
to get multiple data points per burn by changing ﬂow speed. For concurrent ﬂow, the ﬂame base
spread rate is plotted and reaches a steady state for all points shown. However the ﬂame tip spread
rate was increasing for the 2-cm wide samples above 5 cm/s air ﬂow speed. The eoncurrent-ﬂow
ﬂames burning the 1-cm wide samples did however reach a steady length.

Concurrent-ﬂow ﬂame spread rate increases linearly with ﬂow speed, and linear curve ﬁts are
shown. Spread rate is width-dependent for the two widths studied. For concurrent ﬂow, extinction
was observed at a low but finite ﬂow speed of less than 1 cm/s (shown by the dashed vertical line).
Opposed-ﬂow ﬂame spread rate increases with ﬂow to a maximum when the ﬂow speed is around
10 to 15 cm/s and then decreases at higher speeds, in good agreement with previous research [Olson,
1991]. An opposed ﬂow extinction test was attempted by decreasing the ﬂow in a stepwise fashion,
however extinction was not observed before the ﬂame reached the end of fuel. Based on the trends
however, it appears that an opposed-ﬂow quenching extinction limit can be extrapolated to eXist at
an air ﬂow speed of less than 1 cm/s. This implies that for this fuel, there is a small range of ﬂow
speeds near zero within which the ﬂame cannot be sustained in either direction (concurrent 0r
opposed).

6

"
"7","6
92 cm concurrent
5 01 cm concurrent
m .2 cm opposed
E
E, 4 VF : — 0.20 U1: + 0.56
G)
Es”
a:
""U
8
g 3
Q)
E
2
LL VF=-0.15 UI+0.07
>» 2
""U
8
‘V‘ 1
O
I
1 I A
Concurrent-ﬂow I
extinction
0
-50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 50
Forced Flow Velocity, cm/s
Figure 8. Summary of steady spread rates. For concurrent ﬂow, steady ﬂame base
spread rates are reported. The red-dashed vertical line indicates concurrent-ﬂow
quenching extinction is achieved when air ﬂow speed drops to less than 1 cm/s.

The ﬂame spread measurements are made by tracking the ﬂame base and tip position from the
recorded images. The resolution and picture quality of the digital still images are far better than the
Video images. However, both can be used —
to determine ﬂame spread rate. A sample 90
tracking plot derived from the digital still :1 Flame Tip Position
images is shown in Fig. 9. The ease shown 80 0 Flame Base Position u""'""'a
is for a l-em Wide sample burning in a 70 x Flame Length l."" 00
concurrent ﬂow of 11 em/s. Ignition E 00°
occurs at t=0. There is some initial : 60

o o '1 '1';
development t1me When the ﬂame grows, 3.; xtip : 1.71 t + 2.25 ,'
but after about 20 seconds the ﬂame D9 50
reaches steady state. This is obvious as the g ’n"" o""
o o o a '1‘ ’1 ’

slopes of the base and Up p0s1t10ns become to 40 u xm : 1.681- 13.81

w '1"" I I ‘ ~
parallel for about 30 seconds and the ﬂame g 20
length becomes constant. Furthermore, the E '
Visual images indicate the ﬂame shape and GE) 70 +39""
. . . . . ('3 ‘- _____ ____ ' --‘ s¢o""so o _______-
1ntens1ty become nearly mvarlant durlng E u >o<.~”""° "" ‘
this period. Finally, When the ﬂame runs 10 $00 x
out of fuel, it shrinks and goes out. (9006) x

0 x
0 10 20 30 40 50 60

The opposed-ﬂow ﬂames all reach a Time S
steady length and spread rate as long as the . ” .
air ﬂOW S 66d iS held constant for around 5 Figure 9. Flame growth to steady state spread for 1 cm sample Width

p . in concurrent air ﬂow of 11 cm/s. (Test 10)
seconds. The l-em Wlde eoncurrent-ﬂow
7

"
"8","ﬂames also all reach a steady state. The oonourrent-ﬂow ﬂames burning the 2-om Wide samples all
have constant ﬂame base spread rates over the available test duration. However, only air ﬂows less
than 10 om/s yield steady ﬂame lengths. The concurrent tests performed right at 10 om/s give
0
Q ’ 9 9 y a r} .g .-i . . ‘
0’ '
9 9 . \
.
I I I ! § ‘0 o ‘ - . .
""Q’!’ ’v':'*""
11 cm/s Airflow I ‘l
‘ £1.13 I i i
I O . . . m
Figure 10. Digital still camera images for l-cm—wide fuel with concurrent air ﬂow = 11 cm/s. Images are taken every 1.125 sec
(starting at bottom and moving from left to right). The ﬂame reaches steady state after about 10 seconds. (Test 10)
indications that the ﬂames are approaching a steady length, but the fuel samples are too short to
conclude this With certainty.

In Fig. 10, the still image sequence is shown for l-om Wide fuel sample in 11 om/s concurrent air
ﬂow. The ignition, ﬂame development, steady state spread, and extinction portions of the burn can
be seen. In addition, the ﬂames tend to leave behind a small amount of fuel When they spread.

Since the fuel is very hot and now exposed to fresh oxygen, there is the development of an
interesting pattern of smoldering Visible as a bright orange glow in the fuel matrix beneath the ﬂame.
This surface reaction may have some effect on the stabilization of the ﬂame.

For oonourrent-ﬂow ﬂames, the fuel preheating depends on the entire ﬂame and hot plume Which
means that the ﬂame response time to ﬂow changes is a strong function of the ﬂame size. On the
other hand, opposed-ﬂow ﬂames tend to respond quickly to ﬂow changes since the fuel preheating
ahead of the ﬂame (Which controls spread) only depends on the small region around the stabilization
zone. One can take advantage of this aspect by performing a series of step-Wise ﬂow changes to get
the spread behavior as a function of ﬂow speed in a single test. In Fig. 11, the ﬂame images from
such a test are shown for a 2-om Wide sample burning in opposed ﬂow. The ﬂow is decreased from

8

"
"9","10 om/s all the way to nearly zero, and the spread rate is measured at each set ﬂow speed. From this
single bum, siX different conditions are studied. The ﬂow speed changes are indicated in the ﬁgure.
The ﬂame responds within a couple seconds, but the ﬂame is allowed to burn at this speed for about
10 to 15 seconds so that a good spread rate determination can be made.
. C O a Q a 1
1m .0... 00...:
I 6 cm/s
Airflow .
4 cm/~
2 cm/s
1.5 c /s
1 cm/
Figure 11. Digital still camera images showing a ﬂame burning a 2-cm wide cotton-ﬂberglass fabric in opposed ﬂow. Images are
taken every 1.25 sec (starting at top and moving from left to right). The ﬂow is decreased in discrete steps from 10 cm/s all the way
down to less than 1 cm/s. The ﬂame response to ﬂow changes is very rapid, and the ﬂow effects on the ﬂame and its spread rate are
dramatic. Total burn time is 90 sec. Flow changes are indicated by numbers. (Test 9)

One of the goals of his test was to determine the ﬂow speed at which the ﬂame would go out.
Unfortunately, the ﬂame went out because it simply ran out of fuel. The lowest ﬂow imposed was
less than 1 om/s and the ﬂame took on a nearly circular shape as difﬁasion of oxygen from all
directions became increasingly important. Given the character of the ﬂame at these very low ﬂow
speeds and the fact that this fuel will not burn at zero ﬂow, it is reasonable to conclude that the ﬂame
will reach quenching at some ﬁnite (but small) ﬂow speed.

In Fig. 12, the comparison of ﬂow direction on a ﬂame in microgravity is shown for a 2-om wide
fuel sample. The air ﬂow speed is around 10 om/s. The oonourrent-ﬂow ﬂame is longer and spreads
twice as fast as the opposed-ﬂow ﬂame. However, there is some indication from other experiments
and models that at lower ﬂow speeds, the opposed-ﬂow ﬂame will actually spread faster. It should
be noted that although the opposed-ﬂow ﬂame looks brighter, this is likely due to the different
camera settings used for the two tests.

As mentioned earlier, the oonourrent-ﬂow ﬂame spread is controlled by the entire length of the
hot ﬂame and the opposed-ﬂow ﬂame only by its stabilization zone. Fig. 12 helps to Visualize this
effect. Also, note that there is no Visible smoldering in the opposed-ﬂow ﬂame. This suggests that
the ﬂame is more completely pyrolyzing the fuel.

9

"
"10","In Fig. 13, a comparison is made for two ﬂames burning in concurrent ﬂow, but With one in
microgravity and the other in normal gravity. The microgravity ﬂame has a convex base and nearly
reaches a steady-state condition. The
normal-gravity ﬂame is much longer,
sootier, has a concave base, and is still
accelerating over the fuel length available.

Observations and comparisons like this can

help to guide model development of

fundamental gravitational effects on ' 7

ﬂames. Also, these provide a useful '""'

assessment of normal-gravity test protocols '

used for the selection of ﬁre-safe materials -'

for spacecraft. The standard test used by - i :
NASA to rate materials relies on burning .
them in an upward, normal-gravity V . ﬂ - ._
conﬁguration [NASA, 1998]. Building the i ""“ ' '
database of long-duration microgravity . I

combustion tests Will improve the ‘ . 10 cm/s Airﬂow
understanding and applicability of normal a ‘ ‘ r s

gravity material screening methods. . ' °

The fuel used 111 this investigation Figure 12. Concurrent and opposed comparison at 10 cm/s air ﬂow
cannot bum in the downward (OppOSCd- speed. Left: Concurrent ﬂow: Steady ﬂame base spreael rate is 2.55
ﬂOW) 0011 f1 gura 11011 111 normal gravity. mm/s. nght: Opposed ﬂow: Steady ﬂame spread rate 1s 1.21 mm/s.

(Tests 7 and 6)
Ignition can be achieved, but for any fuel
Width the ﬂame Will only spread downward for a short time before extinguishing. But in
microgravity, this fuel Will support opposed-ﬂow burning in microgravity. The comparison is
shown in Fig. 14. On the left, the opposed-
ﬂow ﬂame in microgravity steadily and
vigorously bums all the available fuel. On
the right, the normal-gravity, downward-
buming ﬂame is ignited, but sputters and
then goes out. The explanation is that in
_ ., normal gravity, the buoyant ﬂow generated
""A by the ﬂame is too high for the ﬂame to be
supported and blowoff occurs. This can be
seen by referring back to Fig. 1 as the ﬂame
I in normal gravity lies to the right of the
ﬂammability boundary. By going to
Difeiii/on microgravity and imposing opposed-ﬂow
, speeds below the blowoff limit, the
. .~ "" i consequence is to move the system Within
0-9 with flow (10 cm/s) 1-g with flow (10 cm/s) theoboumdary SO that the ﬂame can be
Steady flame base spread Growing flame base spread mamtamed. Normal graVIty results cannot
Convex base Concave base always be used to predict ﬂame behavior
Extended b'Ue zone EXtGF‘ded SOOt zone and material ﬂammability in spacecraft.
Figure 13. Comparison of O-g concurrent-ﬂow ﬂame (left) and l-g
upward ﬂame (right) for 2-cm wide sample.

"
"11",".s—t'1""
i "" ~41»: ‘4:-
l
. ,
d i ’ '1'33‘lﬂ
U _ 35?. 5': ‘
0-9 with opposed flow (10 cm/s) 1-g Downward (opposed flow)
Steady flame size and spread Flame does not propagate
Convex base
Extended blue zone
Figure 14. Comparison of O-g and l-g ﬂames in opposed ﬂow. Image sequences shows
ﬂames spreading from top down. (Test 6 and a l-g test)
4. Conclusions

Flat fabric samples were burned in long-duration microgravity tests aboard the 188. The samples
were burned in both the opposed and concurrent-ﬂow conﬁgurations. The custom-made cotton-
ﬂberglass fabric performed very well, with none of the complications caused by the burnout of
ordinary cellulosic fuel samples like paper. The main variable was air ﬂow speed and it had a maj or
effect 011 the ﬂame as suggested in earlier studies.

This is the ﬁrst time that detailed transient ﬂame growth data was obtained in purely forced
ﬂows in microgravity for a thin fuel with uniform burnout characteristics. In addition, by decreasing
concurrent-ﬂow speed to a very low value (around 1 cm/s), quenching extinction was observed
providing a direct veriﬁcation of the theoretically predicted U-shaped ﬂammability boundary for a
thin fuel.

For the opposed ﬂow conﬁguration, the ﬂame quickly reached steady spread for each ﬂow
speed, and the spread rate was fastest at an intermediate value of ﬂow speed. These tests show the
enhanced ﬂammability in microgravity for this geometry, since, in normal gravity air, a ﬂame self-
extinguishes in the opposed-ﬂow geometry (downward ﬂame spread).

For the concurrent-ﬂow conﬁguration, a limiting length and steady spread rate were obtained
only in low ﬂow speeds. However, ﬂame base spread rate was constant and increased linearly with
increasing ﬂow for all tests.

The valuable results from these long-duration experiments validate a number of theoretical
predictions and also provide the data for a transient ﬂame growth model under development.

1 l

"
"12","Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the NASA Space Life and Physical Sciences Research and

Applications Division (SLPSRA). The experiments were supported by Fumiaki Takahashi, Jay

Owens, Chuck Bunnell, Tiber Lorik, Bob Hawersaat, Dennis Siedlak, and Carol Reynolds. We also

thank astronauts D011 Pettit, J 0e Aeaba, and Suni Williams for conducting these experiments aboard

the 188.

References

Butler, C. (2008): Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG) Investigation Interface Requirements Document,
NASA George C. Marshall Space F light Center, MSFC-RQMT-2888H, Revision H.

Dotson K.T., Sunderland P.B., Yuan Z.-G., Urban D.L. (2010): Laminar Smoke Points in Coﬂow Measured
Aboard the International Space Station, AIAA 48th Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Orlando,
FL.

F erkul, P. V. and T'ien, J . S. (1994): A Model of Low-Speed Concurrent Flow F lame Spread Over 21 Thin
Solid, Combustion Science and Technology, Vol. 99, pp. 345-370.

Grayson, G. D., Sacksteder, K. R., Ferkul, P. V., and T'ien, J . S. (1994): F lame Spreading Over 21 Thin Solid
in LOW-Speed Concurrent F 10W - Drop Tower Experimental Results and Comparison With Theory,
Microgravity Science and Technology, VII/2, pp. 187-195.

NASA (1998): Flammability, Odor, Offgassing, and Compatibility Requirements and Test Procedures for
Materials in Environments that Support Combustion, NASA STD 6001, Test 1, Upward F lame
Propagation (formerly NHB 8060.1C).

Olson, S.L., (1991): Mechanisms of Microgravity Flame Spread Over 21 Thin Solid Fuel: Oxygen and
Opposed F 10W Effects, Combustion Science and T echnology, 76, 4-6, pp. 233-249.

Olson, S. L., Ferkul, P. V., and T’ien, J . S. (1988): Near Limit Flame Spread Over 21 Thin Solid Fuel in
Microgravity, 22nd Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, pp. 1213-1222
and NASA TM 100871.

Olson, S. L., Kashiwagi, T., Fujita, 0., Kikuchi, M., and Ito, K. (2001): Experimental Observations of Spot
Radiative Ignition and Subsequent Three-Dimensional F lame Spread Over Thin Cellulose Fuels,
Combustion and Flame, Vol. 125, No. 1/2, pp. 852-864.

Sacksteder, K. R., T’ien, J. S., Greenberg, P. S., Ferkul, P. V., Pettegrew, R. D., and Shih, H. Y. (1997):
Forced Flow Flame Spreading Test: Preliminary Findings from the USMP-3 Shuttle Mission, Joint
Launch Plus One Year Review of USML-2 and USMP-3, NASA Conference Publication.

Shih, H.-Y. and T’ien, J . S. (1997): Modeling Wall Inﬂuence on Solid-Fuel F lame Spread in a F 10W Tunnel,
Paper AIAA-97-023 6, presented at the AIAA 35th Aerospace Sciences Meeting.

T’ien, J . S. and Bedir, H. (1997): Radiative Extinction 0f Diffusion Flames - A Review, Asia-Paeiﬁe
Conference on Combustion, Osaka, J apan.

12

"
