"","x"
"1","45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2007-1 152
8 - 11 January 2007, Reno, Nevada
MlcrograVIty Phase Separatlon near the
Crltlcal Pomt 1n Attractlve C01101ds
Peter J . Lu and David A. Weitz
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA
Michael C. Foale, E. Michael Fincke, Leroy N. Chiao,
William S. McArthur and Jeffrey N. Williams
International Space Station and NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, Tescas USA
William V. Meyer and J ay C. Owens
NCSER at NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, USA
Monica 1. Hoffmann, Ronald J . Sicker, and Richard Rogers
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, USA
Catherine A. Frey, Amber S. Krauss and Gregory P. Funk
ZIN Technologies, Cleveland, Ohio, USA
Maria A. Havenhill, Salvatore M. Anzalene, and Henry Yee
SAIC, Brook: Park, Ohio, USA
We investigate the phase behavior of mixtures of colloids and polymers near their critical
point in a microgravity environment. Astronauts onboard the International Space Station
(188) are using photography to record the rate of phase separation of six samples near the
liquid-gas critical point. These photographs are taken both by an automated photography
system (based on EarthKAM hardware and software) and manually by the astronauts
who have setup the experiment. We have obtained high-quality photographs of processes
that are not observable on Earth, since both sedimentation and convection are negligible
onboard the International Space Station. Interestingly, we observe that gravity does not
affect the onset of phase separation in colloid-polymer mixtures near the liquid-gas critical
point: samples which phase separate on earth also do so onboard the 188. However, the
rates at which this phase separation occurs is affected by several orders of magnitude
by gravity, suggesting future avenues for exploration. The understanding of this system
is important for both practical earth-bound applications, as well as the development of
products and materials that are stable and functional over long periods of time in a low-
gravity environment. Thus, our results may assist the long—term spaceﬂight required for
proposed exploration missions to the moon and to Mars.
I. Introduction
The goals of this International Space Station (188) bench—top experiment called BCAT3 (Binary Colloidal
Alloy Test) and launched Via a Russian rocket are twofold: (1) to further investigate fundamental problems
in colloid science, (2) and to evolve the ﬁeld of “colloid engineering”, Which creates materials With novel
properties using colloidal particles as precursors. In both cases, gravity—driven sedimentation and convection
precludes these experiments from being carried out on earth, and requires a microgravity environment to
address the most critical questions.

The conceptual motivations for this work are coupled to current research in complex ﬂuids, optics, and
many—body statistical physics. The bulk of our research centers on the physics of complex ﬂuids, a subﬁeld
1 0f 4

Copyright © 2007 by Peter J. Lu. Published by the American {Wségaméiémws gﬁﬁgﬁmigg ma?! mbsmggisﬁ.

"
"2","of condensed matter physics. Complex ﬂuids are soft materials such as colloidal suspensions, ernulsions,
polymer solutions, membranes, and mixtures thereof, whose structure and dynamics are strongly inﬂuenced
by entropy and by relatively weak mechanical forces. They are thus particularly suited for the microgravity
environment of the 188, where the main mechanical force, gravity, is severely reduced. These materials are
intriguing from both fundamental and practical points of View.

BCAT3 is the ﬁrst experiment to use the size advantages of colloids (which can be used as model atoms)
to systematically and precisely locate the critical point and characterize the behavior around it. These
particles are not only large enough to scatter light (and thus be Visible to the camera, as well as the naked
eye), but also large enough to slow down the dynamics to speeds that allow us to photograph the phase
separation of samples over a period of weeks to months, using apparatus already onboard the 188.

Moreover, increased knowledge of some of the areas of this basic physical research may have future beneﬁts
in the application of the same physical processes on Earth. Supercritical ﬂuids (ﬂuids possessing properties
of a gas and a liquid simultaneously) have numerous applications in a wide variety of ﬁelds. An example
is supercritical carbon dioxide, which represents a solvent that can perform a wide variety of extraction
and processing duties, an environmentally friendly solution replacing toxic solvents used in dry cleaning,
decaﬂ'eination of coffee beans, and extraction of delicate pharmacological molecules from plants for use in
new drugs. The development and use of newer supercritical ﬂuids is dependent on further understanding of
the critical point of those ﬂuids, which the BCAT3 experiments are providing.

BCAT3 also has a number of direct applications with a potentially large impact on the everyday life of
the general public. The speciﬁc dynamics of colloid—polyrner mixtures are of great economic importance to
product stability, as the colloid—polyrner mixtures we study in BCAT3 have very close analogs in a number
of household products. For instance, fabric softener is composed of vesicles (which behave like colloids)
and polymer, added to increase Viscosity and improve product performance. The general phase behavior is
of great interest to manufacturers, who want to add more polymer without inducing the phase separation
that we are observing in the BCAT3 samples, for if phase separation occurs during the shelf—life of certain
household products, then their value to the consumer markedly declines. One company we have collaborated
with sells around US $1 billion of fabric softener each year, so a greater understanding of the phase behavior
of these colloid—polyrner mixtures will have immediate and large impact on an important household product.
There is thus a signiﬁcant commercial incentive, in a markets worth billions of dollars annually, in coming
to a better fundamental understanding of this particular system.

Finally, BCAT3 may play a role in enabling long—terrn manned spaceﬂight, such as those proposed for
missions to the moon and to Mars. Almost all studies on phase separation, and phase behavior, have been
done on earth, with its concomitant gravitational ﬁeld. The evolution of complex ﬂuids in the zero—gravity
environment, particularly over the long term, is not nearly so well understood, and not well studied. Under—
standing how gravity inﬂuences the fundamental thermodynamic and kinetic processes of phase separation
and gelation would therefore be extremely useful, and would facilitate the development of personal care
products (necessary for any long—term spaceﬂight or mission) that are known to behave properly for long
periods of time in the absence of gravity.

II. Experimental Procedure

In BCATB, we study mixtures of polymers and colloids that, depending on their composition, either
remain homogeneous indeﬂnitely, or immediately start separating into two phases, like salad dressing left to
sit. We launched six samples in 2004 to the 188, each with slightly different amounts of colloid and polymer
(see ﬁgure 1). Four samples have more of both colloid and polymer, and phase—separate on earth; the other
two samples always remain homogeneous on earth. Between the two groups of samples is a mathematical
idealization called the “critical point,” where the two phases becorne indistinguishable; phase separation is
inﬁnitely slow here.

The samples were mixed, then photographed on board the ISS periodically in the following days, weeks
and months, which gave us an opportunity to see if gravity affected which samples would phase separate.

III. Results and Discussion

Our ﬁrst major result is that only those samples which phase—separated on earth will phase separate in

space; whether something phase separates is therefore independent of gravity. Although simple, this result
2 of 4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","Ci

.2

4.» PHASE SEPARATING

£3

E (SPINODAL DECOMPOSITION)

Q)

U

C“ CRITICAL x"" ""‘N 1h 3

o \.
U POINT 5 6

g 4
.2? I-IOMOGENEOUS

£34

Colloid Concentration
Figure 1. Phase diagram of samples for BCAT3.
' ”r‘i...» - L -- “11%: $343? ~ ‘ w
' “MEL; u” ‘ 4-1:, 41;. -_ - .L ‘“ . Hz"" ‘
5 4' .. Zalsf ”7‘ ”glnf’iul 3 ' -‘*‘~ F- ' ‘t' . “1:: g -
Figure 2. Astronauts Mike Foale, Mike Fincke and Leroy Chiao photographing samples for BCAT3.
cannot be obtained in any way on earth, but rather requires a direct measurement on orbit. This ﬁnding
also permits meaningful ground—based experiments for further exploration of bulk phase behavior.

This particular result is extremely important for the potential applicability to long—term spaceﬂight. In
particular, Whether phase—behavior studies on the ground are applicable to those in microgravity has never
been, to our knowledge, directly tested.

The second major result, however, is that the rates of phase separation are dramatically different, between
that observed on earth and that observed onboard the 188. On earth, all four phase—separating samples show
the formation of an interface between the two phases (the liquid phase always falls to the bottom, because
of its greater density), Within a day or two. On orbit, dramatic differences between the four samples are
observed. The samples farthest away from the critical point phase separate Within a couple of days, as on
earth. But those Closest to the critical point require weeks. And complete phase separation in those samples
is not observed for several months.

This has important implications. Even though, qualitatively, the samples Which phase separate on earth
are the same ones (and the only ones) that separate in space, the quantitative rates at Which this occurs
are completely different. This suggests further avenues for future investigation, to better understand how
gravity inﬂuences the phase separation process. And the construction of these types of models may enable the
development of products and materials necessary for the long—term spaceﬂight required for the exploration
missions to the moon and to Mars.

IV. Conclusion

We observe that gravity does not affect the onset of phase separation in colloid—polyrner mixtures near
the liquid—gas critical point. These samples Which phase separate on earth also do so onboard the 188.
However, the rates at Which this phase separation occurs is affected by several orders of magnitude by
gravity, suggesting future avenues for exploration. The understanding of this system is important for both

3 0f 4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","DAY 1 DAY 2 DAY 3 DAY 4 DAY 6 DAY 8 DAY 10 DAY 14 DAY 18
Figure 3. Photographs of the evolution of sample 6 over time.
practical earth—bound applications, as well as the development of products and materials that are stable and
functional over the long periods of time in the IOW-gravity environment, such as that needed to enable the
long-term spaceﬂight required for proposed missions to the moon and to Mars.
Acknowledgments

This work would not have been possible Without a great deal of generous assistance from people through-

out the NASA organization.
References

1Lu, Peter J ., Conrad, J acinta C., Wyss, Hans M., Schoﬁeld, Andrew B. and Weitz, David A. Physical Review Letters, 96

028306 (2006).
4 of 4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
