"","x"
"1","fm'h Available online at www.sciencedirect.com ——_——_
565$? * . . [mm
(rm ""’ ScuenceDIrect
.52);
MWEHJMWFHHSM
PERGAMON Acta Astronautica 60 (2007) 420—425 m
WWW.elseVier.comllocate/actaastro
The development of the hardware for studying
b1010gieal Clock systems under m1er0grav1ty eond1t10ns, usmg
seorp10ns as animal models
L. Seraﬁnia’ d, W. Viganba, A. Donatia’*, M. Porciania, V. Zolesia, D. Schulze-Varnholtb,
P. Manieri"", A. El-Din Sallame’ f, M. Schm'ahe, E.R. Horne
aKayser Italia S.r.l., Livomo, Italy
bEADS Space Transportation GmbH, Friedrichshafen, Germany
CEuropean Space Agency (ESA), Noordwijk, The Netherlands
dDepartment Of Information Engineering, University Of Pisa, Pisa, Italy
evaitaztionatl Physiology, University Of Ulm, Ulm, Germany
fSuez Canal University, Ismailia, Egypt
Available online 24 October 2006
Abstract
The study Of internal Clock systems of scorpions in weightless conditions is the goal of the SCORPI experiment. SCORPI
was selected for ﬂight on the International Space Station (188) and Will be mounted in the European facility BIOLAB, the
European Space Agency (ESA) laboratory designed to support biological experiments on micro-organisms, cells, tissue, cultures,
small plants and small invertebrates. This paper outlines the main features of a breadboard designed and developed in order to
allow the analysis Of critical aspects of the experiment. It is a complete tool to simulate the experiment mission on ground and
it can be customised, adapted and tuned to the scientiﬁc requirements. The paper introduces the SCORPI-T experiment Which
represents an important precursor for the success of the SCORPI 0n BIOLAB. The capabilities of the hardware developed show
its potential use for future similar experiments in space.
© 2006 Alessandro Donati. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction organism including humans. The experiment results will
allow increasing humans’ ability to participate in long—
In the frame of Life Sciences Research Program the duration space missions. They also Will allow obtaining
European Space Agency (ESA) has planned a ﬂight knowledge and developing technology to improve life
campaign onboard the International Space Station (188) on Earth.
in order to perform biological experiments in space. The The Biological Experiment Laboratory in Columbus
major objective of these experiments is to identify the (BIOLAB) facility [2] is the laboratory designed to sup—
role that microgravity plays at all levels of an organ— port biological experiments on micro—organisms, cells,
ism, from the effects on a single cell up to a complex tissue, cultures, small plants and small invertebrates.
— One of the ﬁrst experiments scheduled on BIOLAB is
* Corresponding author. the SCORPI experiment of Prof. Eberhard Horn from
E-mail address: a.d0nati@kayser.it (A. Donati). the University of Ulm (Germany). The goal of SCORPI
0094—5765/$ — see front matter © 2006 Alessandro Donati. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.actaastr0.2006.09.025

"
"2","L. Seraﬁni et al. / Acta Astronautica 60 (2007) 420—425 421
is the study of internal Clock systems of scorpions in time relation between endogenous rhythms and external
weightless conditions. The SCORPI experiment is pre— periodic events as daily—dark cycle. Any disturbance of
sented in Section 2 underlying its objectives and de— coupling pathways and Clock signals, resulting in inter—
scribing the kind of analysis that shall be performed. nal de—synchronisation, has an impact on the stability
Section 3 shows the main issues to design a device of the balanced concert of these clocks and may cause
able to Classify and process, in real—time, the electro— severe harm to the well—being, mood and physiological
physiological signals of scorpions. Section 4 describes processes.
the hardware prototype developed in order to allow Many of the scorpion’s physiological properties
the analysis of the critical aspects of the experiment. reveal clear—cut patterns. They are well established
The SCORPI—T experiment, an important precursor for models for basic research on the neurobiology of the
the success of SCORPI 0n BIOLAB, is addressed in biological Clock system [1]. Scorpions are very suc—
Section 5. Section 6 shows some preliminary results of cessfully adapted to extreme Climatic conditions in arid
biological tests performed on earth and by the FOTON— environment. They tolerate a complete lack of food
M2 mission. Conclusions are drawn in Section 7. and water for more than 6 months. For these reasons

they are very suitable for biological experiments during
2. SCORPI experiment long—term missions in space.
The investigation of coupling and de—Coupling 0f the
The BIOLAB facility, shown in Fig. 1, is designed scorpion’s internal clocks is the main scientiﬁc objective
mainly for automated biological experiments in space. 0f SCORPI- Circadian patterns 0f locomotion, eye
The SCORPI experiment belongs to the BIOLAB pro— responsiveness and cardiovascular activity are recorded
gram and it has been conceived to study internal clock simultaneously as the most relevant physiological
systems of scorpions in microgravity conditions. EX- parameters to distinguish between directly CIOCk'
periments With scorpions have been proposed to give a controlled endogenous rhythms and those exogenously
ﬁrst insight into the mechanisms of internal coupling modulated by environmental disturbances. For this
and synchronisation Via natural “Zeitgeber” signals purpose the scorpion is closed in a container WithOUt
[1]. Biological clocks are essential to all living beings. external light and is instrumented With some sensors,
These Clocks control in a balanced manner the optimal displaced in its hOdY- Ah sensors COhSiSt in surface
electrodes and allow measuring the eye responsiveness
by electroretinogram (ERG), the movement activity by
A ___, —-r~’ “ﬁg electromyogram (EMG), the heart activity by electro—
K“ :— _;_ _;ﬂ;‘;‘;*w! _ 3? , __ _ , _ cardiogram (ECG), ancl the neurological aetiVity.(Sp.0n—
“i c' ﬂlﬂ' ‘ taneous Electrical Aet1V1ty: SEA). The animal is stim—
ii .3 :1! . 1 ""l f: ._ ulated With two light sources inside the animal holder.
g; .- g _ _ 5‘” ;. , :—_""“'.?:'y -_' ““ The ﬁrst light source is used to generate day/night cy—
gﬁ. .. f ; 1| ,‘5 I. ‘ ‘ ‘1’ t 4 Cles With controllable duration and light intensity, able
,1 ' ‘ .‘lél ‘ ‘ ﬂ 7’, to simulate dusk and dawn. This light is used for the
i ”i (ﬁx. ' ' ‘ -' synchronisation 0f the biological Clocks and it is inde—
: i . ( *—‘_ ‘ O ‘ pendent of signal monitoring. The secondlight source is
g 1“ _ ; : i - "" ‘- used to generate ﬂashes (light stimuli) in order to trigger
g } ’ B .I h. _ ii“; the physiological eye response of the animal. The study
T i 1"" , I l of internal clock systems is performed by analysing the
I( i"" ’8 1 _g .— > "" i electrophysiological signals acquired from the animal
_ - - - , ; in the environment conditions just mentioned.
‘ g h»; - : a -/ -'. 3. Experiment implementation issues
7 __ J“ The simplest method to classify the electrophysiolog—
i‘ﬂ Wt; ‘ ical signals would be to store and analyse them, off—line,
' ‘ A. ’ 4‘”, With potential software tools as Matlab. The SCORPI
® / experiment Will be executed on the 18$ for about 90 days
and it is not possible to save all signals in a n0n—V01atile
Fig. 1. BIOLAB. memory for such a long period. Thus a real—time signal

"
"3","422 L. Seraﬁni et al. / Acta Astronautica 60 (2007) 420—425
processing is mandatory. Processing algorithms With a Light intensity Day/Night cycle i
high performance cannot be implemented because they *
are time and power consuming. Therefore the real—time Light .
Classiﬁcation of these signals is a very hard problem in Stimulus i ggreigéVat'eh
such an environment. The trade—off to design SCORPI ; i f’:
hardware is among complexity of data processing, stor— :' i
age capacity, size and power consumption. Moreover, :' +NM» Time
the system designer has to consider the low amplitude 3 Dawn: Day : DUSkE
(few ttV) 0f the electrophysiological signals, their vari— I I
ability in wave—shape, the muscle noise and the artefacts Time
due to electrode motion. Section 4 shows a solution
to implement an efﬁcient Classiﬁcation of signals and Fig- 2- Day/night Cycle Proﬁle and eXpefiment timeline-
to overcome the hardware problems related to this
experiment.
Table 1
4' SCORPI breadboard Main characteristics of electrophysiological signal channels
A mechanical and electronic device has been de— Elecuohhysmlogical Inpm Peak BandWidth
signed and developed to perform the analysis of the Slgnal range (”V) (HZ)
critical implementation aspects of experiment hardware ERG 10—2000 0.1—100
and software. The breadboard is a complete tool to sim— EMG 100—100 000 01—10000
ulate the experiment mission on ground. It is a fully ECG 100—500 01—35
, , , , SEA 20—75 50—10 000
automatic recording deV1ce for Simultaneous and con— —
tinuous data collection of the physiological parameters
of the scorpion. The breadboard can be customised,
adapted and tuned to the scientiﬁc requirements. It is
able to manage eight physiological signals and two light executed for the entire observation period. At the end
stimulation methods. The breadboard does not ﬁt into Of the 019567” thb” period all scientiﬁc data acquired
the mechanical envelop ef the BIOLAB Advanced EX- can be stored. This measurement cycle is continually
periment Container, but the ﬁnal mechanical and elec— repeated and the entire monitoring can last several
tronic compatibility was demonstrated. The breadboard days. The breadboard has been studied t0 obtain a full
has fulﬁlled the system requirements for signal acqui— experiment ﬂexibility. The type bf signal acquisition
sition, data processing and data collection—storage of and processing Of the electrophysiological signals can
ﬂight hardware. A description of functionality, electron— be adjusted by the user by means bf parameters. In this
ics and mechanical part of the breadboard are reported way it is possible t0 customise the experiment execu—
in the next subsections. tion and ﬁnd the appropriate timeline Without changing
breadboard electronics and software.
4.1. Experiment management The dawn and dusk proﬁles of Fig. 2 are simulated
using the “Boltzmann sigmoid” equation [3]. The pro—
The breadboard operates autonomously managing a ﬁle 0f the day/night cycle and the features 0f the light
sequence of the experiment steps under control of ded— stimulus depend on additional parameters that can be
icated software. During the experiment execution, that set by the user.
can last several days, the electrophysiological signals
are continuously monitored in parallel, are processed 4.2. Breadboard description
and the results are stored. The observation period
(10min default value) represents the fundamental tem— The breadboard is able to manage four animal hold—
poral unit for the experiment execution. Fig. 2 shows ers and eight physiological signals from each scorpion:
the baseline timeline for data acquisition in the 019- three ERG signals (ERGl, ERG2 and ERG3), one
servation period. The light stimulus can be provided ECG signal, one SEA signal and three EMG signals
at the beginning of the observation period. The ERG (EMGl, EMG2 and EMG3) with different dynamic
measurement is immediately performed for 200 ms (de— voltage ranges. Table 1 provides the principal electrical
fault value). ECG, SEA and EMG measurements are Characteristics of these signals.

"
"4","L. Seraﬁni et al. / Acta Astronautica 60 (2007) 420—425 423
. frequency Characteristics of the signal Channels
Animal ‘ pc . . . .
H01 der: Control (Table l), and ﬁnishes With a second ampliﬁer. Signals
, h coming from the AH are ﬁltered in order to eliminate
' Mm,“ ”mi?“ Unlt g the continuous contribution and to reduce the electrical
—Front-end umt _ . .
n01se. The data process1ng and storage are based on the
analysis of pulses present in the electrophysiological
Fig- 3- Breadboard SYStem concept signals. The data handling is performed by a digital
manager, based on a microcontroller (nP) (Fig. 4).
For ERG acquisition, the ERGl, ERG2 and ERG3
E'""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""§ signals are acquired at the same time by multiplexing
E ., E the analog/digital (W) converter integrated inside the
r A i digital manager. The values are processed With the over—
: 1 sampling average technique and the peak values for the
[/0 three signals are computed. For EMGl, EMG2, EMG3
, : LED ‘ : and ECG signals a pulse counting is required. In order to
V‘ g ""i_""- ., distinguish the signal pulses desired, analogue compara—
E C . if E tors are used in the signal conditioning stage. The dig—
: ontrol Umt -_3 ,I ~ . . . .
________ 1tal manager performs the counting of pulses that have
amplitude higher than the threshold value of compara—
Fig' 4' EleCtmniCS for data prOCGSSing' tors. Therefore the pulse count depends on the threshold
value assumed for discerning the desired pulses. The
threshold of each comparator is manually selectable by
The breadboard consists of three main units (Fig. 3): the user. Concerning the SEA signal, it consists of sig—
animal holder (AH), control unit (CU) and personal nal classiﬁcation by counting the pulses With different
computer (PC). amplitudes. It is necessary to have several thresholds
The AH is constituted by an animal container and to distinguish the pulses With different amplitudes that
by front—end electronics implementing the ﬁrst signal compose the SEA signal. In the breadboard, four com—
conditioning stage. The scorpion is immobilised inside parators with four different thresholds are present for
the animal holder and the electrodes ﬁxed on its body classifying the SEA signal.
are connected to the front—end unit. The processing results of all signals are collected in
The analogue signals, coming from the front—end the internal memory of the digital manager and dumped
electronics, are received by the CU that performs the periodically to the PC.
second signal conditioning stage, the analog/digital
(W) conversion, the data processing and the tempo—
rary data storage. The CU also performs independently 5, SCORPLT experiment
the generation of day/night cycle and the light stimulus
(Fig. 4) inside the AH by means of tWO LEDS posi— The SCORPI—T experiment, scheduled on the Rus—
tioned at appropriate locations. The light intensity of sian FOTON_M2 satellite in May 2005, is an important
the day/night LED is regulated by a software controlled precursor for the success of the SCORPI 0n BIOLAB,
digital/analog (D/A) COHVCITCY- The goal of SCORPI—T is to study the critical aspects
A PC is used to periodically dump data stored by the 0f the SCORPI experiment such as effects of animal
CU and to control the system functions by means of locomotion 0n the implanted electrodes and stress to
dedicated software. the animals during the launCh/re—entry phases, besides
microgravity conditions. The experiments obj ective will
4.2.]. Data processing be achieved on observing the scorpions’ behaviour dur—
The signal acquisition—conditioning and the data ing the mission of FOTON—M2 by means of an im—
handling are performed in the CU, Where a mixed age acquisition system. A speciﬁc hardware has been
hardware—software solution has been Chosen to obtain developed for the SCORPI—T experiment. The SCORPI—
the best trade—off among the number of components T payload consists of two identical boxes to accommo—
and the functional ﬂexibility. date each scorpion. Each container, BIOKON in Fig. 5,
The signal conditioning stage (Fig. 4) consists in is made of aluminium and it includes the AH and the
band—pass ﬁlter, Which is adapted according to the electronic unit as shown in Fig. 6.

"
"5","424 L. Seraﬁni et al. / Acta Astronautica 60 (2007) 420—425
. grammable gate array (FPGA) for image capture and
' "" _ experiment management.
‘ 3N,” A day/night cycle is simulated to provide the same
- MK“ environmental conditions of SCORPI. A CMOS camera
‘ ‘5.” \~\ sensor is used to perform image capture of the animal.
' [ An infrared illumination inside the AH is provided in
~ ' ‘ order not to disturb the simulated light conditions during
._ ._ image acquisition.
A set of housekeeping sensors inside the BIOKON
"" . "" container allow monitoring environmental data such as
7' temperature, humidity and pressure. Sequences of im—
ages and environmental parameters are stored on inter—
' nal non—volatile memory of size 2 Gbytes for data dump
after recovery of ﬂight hardware. Making a trade—off be—
. ' tween the memory capacity and the onboard process ca—
- ' ' I pability, the maximum image size that can be acquired
L is 92 pixels x 121 pixels x 8bits at a rate of limage/s.
Fig. 5. BIOKON container. Images are continuously acquired for l h during launch,
and for 20 s every 20 min during the m1ss10n.
The whole experiment is designed according to the
“autonomous experiment” philosophy based on a pre—
loaded timeline that will be executed on ﬂight. Follow—
!"" » , ing this philosophy the SCORPI—T system is supplied
i a g "" by two lithium rechargeable batteries with an autonomy
E .. f— ' 3} of 24 days. The driven rule for the implemented design
‘ ~ _. a has been to limit the power consumption and, there—
5 _ _ "" -- Iv .1.-*-= fore, a system working alternatively in sleep mode (low
' l i l » -‘ ‘.‘ ‘ J— j V A consumption) and acquisition mode (high consumption)
_ - H . has been designed.
~~—' '9‘ “‘2 c“ r
'3 0 “i - 6. Preliminary results
' ‘ - Tests with the SCORPI breadboard were performed
: . - ' . on earth to verify the experiment execution. Animals
"" ' \n‘ 0 were mounted and instrumented with success inside the
o ' V 0 AH. Illumination tests were performed in order to ﬁnd
. . _ V _ ,._._.-- "" the proper light intensity and light duration. The tech—
niques of ERG, EMG and SEA signal recordings can
. . . . . . be considered as being fully established. Future work
F1g. 6. An1rnal holder and electronlcs 1ns1de the BIOKON contalner. Will focus on the ECG signal C011 ditioning in 01‘ der to
overcome the low signal amplitude during resting pe—
riods and the large amplitude modiﬁcations that occur
during and after movements.

The BIOKON provides the mechanical interface ver— Two scorpions (Androctonus australis) were used on
sus the FOTON satellite and it guarantees the enclosure FOTON—M2. One died during the ﬂight most prob—
of all units constituting the experiment. The BIOKON ably due to loss of body ﬂuid caused by an injury
shall be ﬁxed to the FOTON plate. at the base of the tail. Another reason for the death

The AH for SCORPI—T is capable of accommodating could be stress. The other scorpion survived in excellent
one scorpion with electrodes implanted in the animal’s physiological conditions. Simultaneous electrophysio—
body and it has been designed to be similar to the AH logical post—ﬂight recordings from the eight sensors
used in the SCORPI experiment for BIOLAB. The elec— (three ERGs, three EMGs, one ECG and one SEA) re—
tronic unit is based on a microcontroller and ﬁeld pro— vealed no change compared to pre—ﬂight recordings.

"
"6","L. Seraﬁni et al. / Acta Astronautica 60 (2007) 420—425 425

7. Conclusions Acknowledgements

The SCORPI experiment, Which is based on the study The results of this work have been developed under
0f the internal scorpion Clock systems in weightless con— a European Space Agency (ESA) contract.
ditions, has been presented in this paper. A breadboard
for verifying the experiment feasibility has been devel—

. . . . . . References

oped and described in detail. The capabilities of the
hardwaredeveloped, evenﬁ‘ .8111th on SCOI‘p 101.18’ Sth [1] RC. Riewe, E.R. Horn, The scorpion—an ideal animal model
Its potential use for any Slmllal‘ type 0f expeﬂment m to study long—terrn microgravity effects on circadian rhythms,
space in the future. The ﬂight hardware developed for in: MS. El-Gerk (Ed.), Space Technology and Applications
SCORPLT, the precursor ﬂight of SCORPL has been International Forum, American Institute of Physics, Melville,
presented, too. Thanks to its autonomy from the host— New York’ pp' 383—388' _ _
. 1 tf th t. 1 t. d t . .t. d 'd [2] (http://WWW.estec.esa.nl/spaceﬂlght/blolabhtm).
mg p 2‘, om, 6,3; 1m? 10“, a a acqum 19“?“ V1 60 [3] (http://WWW.curveﬁt.c0m/id203.htm).
recording capabilities, it can be used for Similar exper—
iments 0n FOTON in the future.

"
