"","x"
"1","Prolonged Space Flight—Induced Alterations in the Structure and Function of

Human Skeletal Muscle Fibres.
RH. Pitts], s. w. Trappez, D. L. Costi112,P.M. Gallagherz, A.C. Creerz, PA. Colloton',
J.R. Peters', J.G. Romatowski', J. L. BainJ, and D. A. Riley3.
‘Marquette University, Milwaukee, WI 53201-1881, 2Ball State University. Muncie, IN
47306, 3Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226

Running Title:
Prolonged Space Flight and Human Muscle
Address correspondence to:
Dr. Robert 1-1. F itts, Marquette University. Dept. of Biological Sciences,
PO. Box 1881.Mi1waukec, WI 53201-1881.
E—Mail: _r9_b§rt.ﬁtts@margucttc.cdu Phone: 414-288-1748; FAX: 414-288-7357
Downloaded from J Physiol Up.phy303.0rg) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"2","2
ABSTRACT
The primary goal of this study was to determine the effects of prolonged space ﬂight
(~180 days) on the structure and function of slow and fast ﬁbres in human skeletal
muscle. Biopsies were Obtained from the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles of nine
International Space Station crew members ~ 45 days pre- and on landing day (R+0) post-
ﬂight. The main ﬁndings were that prolonged weightlessness produced substantial loss of
ﬁbre mass, force, and power with the hierarchy of the effects being soleus type [>- soleus
type 11> gastrocnemius type 1 > gastrocnemius type 1],. Structurally, the quantitatively
most important adaptation was ﬁbre atrophy which averaged 20% in the soleus type ]
ﬁbres (98 to 79 pm dia‘). Atrophy was the main contributor to the loss of peak force (P0)
which for the soleus type I ﬁbre declined 35% from 0.86 to 0.56 mN. The % decrease in
ﬁbre diameter was Correlated with the initial prc-ﬂight ﬁbre size (r: 0.87), inversely with
the amount of treadmill runnin g (r 0.68), and was associated with an increase in thin
ﬁlament density (r “—“"" 0.9.5.). The latter correlated with reduced V0 (r = -0.51), and likely
contributed to the 21 and 18 0/0 decline in V0 in the soleus and gastrocnemius type 1
ﬁbres. Peak power was depressed in all ﬁbre types with the greatest loss (~55%) in the
soleus. An obvious conclusion is that the exercise countermeasures employed were
incapable of providing the high~intensity needed to adequately protect ﬁbre and muscle
mass. and that the crew’s ability to perform strenuous exercise might be seriously
compromised. Our results highlight the need to study new exercise programs on the 188
that employ high resistance and contractions over a wide range of motion to mimic the
range occurring in Earth’s 1 g environment.

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19. 2010

"
"3","3
INTRODUCTION

The goals of the international space community are to conduct long-termed
manned missions beyond the low earth orbit of the lntemational Space Station (188).
First, a number of issues regarding the deleterious effects of microgravity on human
biology need to be addressed and solved (‘Fitts et al. 2000; Trappe er al. 2009). It is clear
from the last 40 years of Space research, particularly studies conducted on the Skylab and
MIR Space stations, and Space Shuttle mission STS-78 (LMS), that limb skeletal muscle
is particularly susceptible to microgravity—induced deterioration in both structure and
function (Conveitino, 1990; Fitts at al. 2000; FittS et al. 2001). A consistent observation
is signiﬁcant atr0phy of both upper and lower leg muscles with the reSponse occurring
more rapidly in the triceps surae muscle group (ankle plantar ﬂexors) than the anteri 01‘
tibial group (ankle dorsal ﬂexors) (Fitts et a1. 2000). The primary cause of the decline in
muscle mass appears to be the unloading 0fthc skeletal and muscular systems rather than
reduced activation. Suppmt for this comes from the work of Edgerton er a1. (2001) who
found the total EMG activity of the tibialis anterior and soleus muscles of four crew
members during the 11-day LMS space ﬂight to be increased compared to pre— and post—
ﬂight values. The authors concluded that Space ﬂight on Shuttle missions is a model not
just of Space ﬂight but rather microgravity plus the programmed work schedule‘ Despite
the high EMG activity. the cross-sectional area (CSA) of the slow type 1 and fast type Ila
ﬁbers of the soleus muscles of the four crew members were on average [5 and 26 %
smaller post- compared to pre~ﬂight (Widrick et al. 1999).

The composite data from Skylab, MIR. and Shuttle ﬂights suggest that the loss of
limb muscle mass is eXponential With the duration of ﬂight, and that a microgravity
steady state may be reached by approximately 180 days (Fitts et a1. 2000). The loss in

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19‘ 2010

"
"4","4
muscle force primarily reﬂects the decline in mass. Consequently, when single ﬁbre force
is expressed relative to cross-scctional area (CSA), there is little difference between pre—
and post-ﬂight values (Fitts et a]. 2000; Widrick er a1. 1999). In addition to the decline in
muscle mass and peak force, crew members showed a depressed. ability to generate power
that was generally greater than the loss of force (Fitts et al. 2000; Widrick er a1. 1999).
For example, after 31 days in Space, lower limb extensor force declined by l 1%, while
peak power was depressed by 54% (Antonutto 3101,1999). The latter was greater than the
loss in single-ﬁbre power after the 17 day LMS ﬂight suggesting that factors other than
atrophy contributed to the decline (Fitts 81‘ al. 2000; Widrick er a1. 1999). Following the
LMS ﬂight, we found that the decline in peak power was partially protected by an
increased maximal velocity (V0) of both slow and fast ﬁbres such that the velocity
obtained at peak power was higher post—ﬂ.ight (Widrick er a1. 1999). The elevated ﬁbre
V0 was associated with and likely caused by an increase in myoﬁlament lattice spacing
that resulted from a reduction in thin ﬁlament density. It is unknown whether or not this
adaptation persists with prolonged space ﬂight or reﬂects a transient response to short
duration ﬂight.

A hallmark of space ﬂight is that considerable variability in the extent of muscle
atrophy and functional loss exists among crew members. For example, the crew members
in this study showed calf muscle atrophy ranging from 1 to > 20 % and loss of maximal
voluntary contractile force of the calf from 7 to 20 % (Trappe et a1. 2009). Similarly,
Zange et a]. (1997) observed muscle mass losses With 6 mo in space to vary from 6 to 20
%. F ollowing the 17 day LMS ﬂight, two crew members showed 2—3 times the reduction
in peak force (mN) noted for the other two (Widrick er al. 1999). Besides mass and force,
variability was also observed for Ca” sensitivity where the free Ca” required for half—

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"5","5
maximal activation of soleus type [ ﬁbers post-ﬂight ranged from no difference to 0.3]
ttmol more free Ca2+.

The primary goal of this study was to use single, chemically-skirnned muscle fibre
segments to determine the cellular effects of prolonged (~180 days) space ﬂight aboard
the International Space Station (183). An additional goal was to determine the extent to
which the observed functional changes were ﬁbre and muscle speciﬁc, and whether or
not they could be explained by structural alterations. C hanges in structure and function
were to the extent possible related to differences in the type and amount of
countermeasure exercise. To allow for scientiﬁc comparisons between the single ﬁbre
results described here and our recently published whole muscle data on the same subjects
(Trappe er al. 2009), the letter code used for a given crew member was the same in both
publications. The exercise countermeasure performed by each crew member was
presented in detail in the Trappe er a1. (2009) paper. The results were also compared to
the known cell changes following short duration space ﬂight.

METHODS

F light and subjects. The ten crewmembers, ﬁve American astronauts and ﬁve
Russian cosmonauts, who participated in this study, ﬂew aboard the International Space
Station (188) from increments 5 to l 1 (2002-2005). All ﬂights except for the ﬁrst
(increment 5) originated and landed in Russia aboard the Russian Soyuz spacecraft. The
crew of increment 5 was ferried to and from the 183 on the US Space Shuttle which lifted
off and landed at Kennedy Space Center. The post—ﬂight muscle samples for one
crewmember were damaged during shipment from Russia to the US, and thus the data for
this subject was not included. The subjects (n39) age, height. weight and days in space

Downloaded from J Physwi (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"6","6
were 45i2 y, l76i2 em, 8113 kg, and averaged 177i4 days (range x 161 d to 192 d),
respectively.

Prior to volunteering to participate in this study, all crewmembers were briefed on
the project obj eetives and testing procedures by a member of the research team.
Crewmembers were infonned 0f the risks and beneﬁts of the research and gave their
written consent in accordance with the Human Subjects Institutional Review Boards at
Marquette U niversity, Ball State University, The Medical C ollege of Wisconsin, and the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA; Johnson Space Center). This
study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration ofHelsinki.

Pre- and In—Fh‘ght Exercise and Nutritional Proﬁle. The pre- and in—flight
exercise programs ofeach crewmember have been published elsewhere by our research
team (Trappe et (11.2009). The erewmembers had access to a treadmill (TVIS; Treadmill
Vibration Isolation System), two types of bicycle ergometers (CEVIS; C ycle Ergometer
with Vibration Isolation System; and Velo (Russian Exercise Device), and a resistive
exercise device (iRED; Interim Resistive Exercise Device). The treadmill eould be used
in a passive (subject driven) or active (motorized) mode ofoperation. The exercise
countermeasure program was individually structured to allow for personal preference
with guidance from staff within NASA and the Russian Space Agencies. A summary of
the in—ﬂight exercise is Shown in Table 1. For more detailed information about the
exercise prescription performed while on the [SS and individual aerobic and resistance
exercise data proﬁles for each erewmember see Trappe et a1. (2009). The exercise
proﬁles were determined from crewmembcr logbooks and from downloaded analog data
from the treadmill and cycle ergometer (Trappe et al. 2009). The in-ﬂight diet was
designed to meet the nutritional requirements for [88 missions as established by NASA

Downloaded from J Physiol (ip‘p'li‘ySDL‘ﬂ-rg) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"7","7
and the Russian Space Agency (Smith & Zwart, 2008). The nutrient content of the pre-
and post-ﬂight foods was calculated using the Nutrient Data System for Research
(Schakel er al.1988).

Muscle Biopsy. A muscle biopsy (Bergstrom, 1962) of ~ 80 mg was obtained
from the mid-belly 0f the lateral head of the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles of each
crewmember prior to launch (L-SSi—Z) and on landing day (R+0) as described previously
(Trap-pe et a1, 2009). The post-ﬂight biopsy was performed mid-to-late afternoon
approximately 6-8 hours aﬁer landing. The post-ﬂight activity between landing and the
biopsy was kept to a minimum, and during that time the crewmembers performed only
light ambulatory activities,

Each biopsy sample was placed on saline-soaked gauze and divided longitudinally
into several portions for subsequent structural and functional analyses exactly as
described previously (Widrick et al. 1999). Two portions ofeach biopsy were placed in
small vials containing cold (4°C) skinning solution(125 mM potassium propionate, 20
mM imidazole, 2 mM EGTA, 4 mM ATP, 1 mM MgCl;, and 50% glycerol v/v, pH 7.0),
and stored overnight at 4°C. The next day, the vials were packaged surrounded by frozen,
water ice bottles in two boxes with each containing two vials (one soleus and one
gastrocnemius sample), hand carried back to Ball State and Marquette Universities.

Upon arrival, the bundles were placed in fresh skinning solution and stored at -20° C for

up to four weeks. All contractile measurements on ﬁbres from a given muscle were

performed within 4 weeks of the initial bundle i solation. A third portion of each biopsy

was pinned at a mild stretch and immersion fixed in a 0.1 M cacodylate buffer (pH 7.2)

containing 4% glutaraldehyde and 2% paraformaldehyde with 5 mM calcium chloride-
Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoeorg) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"8","8
This sample was shipped ovemight at 4°C to the Medical College of Wisconsin for
osmium post ﬁxation and embedding for electron microscopy as previously described
(Riley (3! a]. 1998). Fourth and fifth portions were frozen in liquid nitrogen and shipped in
a liquid nitrogen dry shipper t0 Marquette University.

Salmz'ons. The composition of the relaxing (pCa 9.0) and activating {pCa 45)
solutions were derived with an iterative computer program (Fabiato & Fabiato, 1979)
using the stability constants adjusted for temperature, pH, and ionic strength (Godt &
Lindley, 1982). All solutions contained (in mM) 20 imidazole, 7 ethylene glycoL—bis(|3—
arninoethyl ether)-N,N,N’,N’ —tetraacetic acid (EGTA), 14.5 creatine phosphate, 4 free
ATP, and 1 free Mgzi Calcium was added as C302, and ATP as a disodium salt. Each
solution had an ionic strength of 180 mM, which was controlled by varying the amount of
KCl added. KOH was used to pH the solution to 7.0. To prevent an increase in ADP or
decline in ATP, we changed the activating solution after every two contractions. The
activating and relaxing solutions were made fresh each week and stored at 4° C .

Singleﬁbre preparation. This study involved the isolation and study of 1900
ﬁbres with experiments conducted in the labs ofDr. Fitts at Marquette and Dr. Trappe at
Ball State Universities. The procedures described here for the isolation and study of
individual ﬁbres were the same in both labs. While the single ﬁbre systems used were
similar, the equipment was not identical. Since the results obtained by each lab for all
variables studied were similar, the data were pooled and presented here as one data set.

Single ﬁbres were isolated and studied as described previously and brieﬂy
reviewed here (Fitts et 01., 2007; Widrick er al. 1999). On the day of an experiment a
muscle bundle was removed from the skinning solution and trans ferred to a dissection

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"9","9
chamber containing pH 7.0 relaxing solution (4° C). An individual ﬁbre was gently
isolated from the bundle, transferred to an ~l ml glass-bottomed chamber milled in a
stainless steel plate. While submerged under relaxing solution (pH 7.0, 15° C), the ends
of the ﬁbre were carefully mounted and attached between a force transducer (Cambridge
mode] 400A; Cambridge Technology, Watertown, MA) and servo-controlled direct-
current position motor (Cambridge model 300B. Cambridge Technology). The position
and speed of the motor was controlled by custom—designed software running on a
microcomputer interfaced with a National Instruments data acquisition board (NI-DAQ).
T0 disrupt any remaining intact membranes, the ﬁbre was submerged into a relaxing
solution containing 0.5% Brij 58 for 30 s after which the ﬁbre bath was exchanged twice
with relaxing solution.

The experimental chamber was mounted on the stage of an inverted microscope.
Sarcomere length was adjusted to 2.5 pm using an eyepiece micrometer (800x), and the
length of the ﬁbre (FL) was recorded. A digital photo (Pro IDEO CVC- 140 camera) was
taken of the ﬁbre while it was brieﬂy su3pended in air. Fibre diameter was determined at
three points along the length of the ﬁbre using Scion Image software, and ﬁbre cross-
sectional area (CSA) calculated from the mean diameter measurement, assuming the ﬁbre
forms a circular cross section when suspended in air (Metzger and Moss 1987).

Experimental procedures. Fibres exhibiting IIOIPUIIifOl'In sarcomere lengths or
regions of tearing were not studied (Moss 1979). AdditionaHy, data for a given ﬁbre were
not included if peak isometric force (Pu) declined by > 15% or ﬁbre compliance
(determined from the y-axis intercept of slack test) exceeded 10% (Trappe er al. 2004).
For most ﬁbres, Po declined < 10% from the beginning to the end of the experiment.
Contractile function of individual fast type [I and slow type I ﬁbres were determined

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp,physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"10","10
exactly as described previously for our l7~day microgravily study (Widrick et al. 1999).
Briefly, the ﬁbre was maximally activated in pCa 4.5 solution. allowed to reach peak
isometric force (Pg), and slacked to a predetermined length. which caused tension to drop
to zero. The time it took the ﬁbre to take up the slack and initiate the redevelopment of
tension was measured. The ﬁbre was then returned to relaxing solution (I 5° C) and
reextended to its original ﬁbre length. Each ﬁbre was subjected to ﬁve different slack
steps and ﬁbre V0 (ﬁ/sec) determined from the slope of the least squares regression line
of the plot ofslack distance versus the time required for the redevelopment of force.
Slack length changes never exceeded 20% of ﬁbre length.

The rate constant of tension redevelopment (kn) was determined using the slack
un-slack procedure (Metzger and Moss 1990). To prevent sarcomere nonuniformity
during tension redevelopment Metzger and Moss (1990) used a laser to clamp the
sarcomeres at 2.5um. The clamp procedure is time consuming and not practical when
hundreds of ﬁbres are studied. In preliminary studies. we determined that the IQ, of slow
type I ﬁbre was idenlical with and without a laser clamp, while the fast type [I ﬁbre
showed a signiﬁcantly lower In, in the absence ofa laser clamp (Fitzsimons er a}. 2001).
Thus, we determined the k"". in slow but not fast ﬁbres. The measurement requires
activation of the ﬁbre in pCa 4.5 and following attainment of steady tension a 400 um
slack, a 40 ms delay, and then reextension t0 the original FL. Reextension dissociates the
cross-bridges, and tension redevelopment was best ﬁt with a ﬁrst-order exponential
equation where the rale constant k is kn, and thought to reﬂect the rate limiting step in the
generation of the high force state (Metzger and Moss 1990"").

Fol lowing the detemlination of V0 and k” , isotonic load clamps were employed to
measure foree-velocity-power parameters. For each ﬁbre, the force (as a percentage of

Downloaded from J Physml (j p.phytsoe.erg) by guest on August I9, 2010

"
"11","1 1
peak force) and the corresponding shortening velocity for 15 force-velocity data points
were ﬁt to the Hill equation with the use of an iterative nonlinear curve-ﬁtting procedure
(Marquardt—Levenberg algorithm), and maximal shortening velocity (Vmax) and the wPu
ratio determined (Widrick et al. 1998). Peak ﬁbre power was calculated with the ﬁtted
parameters of the force-velocity curve and P0 (Widrick et al. 1998). Composite force-
velocity and force-power curves were constructed by summating velocities or power
values from 0 to 100% ong in increments of 1%.

In a subset of ﬁbres [see Table 9 for the n for each ﬁbre type), force-pCa
relationships were determined by activating the ﬁbres in a series of solutions with
calcium concentrations ranging from pCa 6.8 to 4.5 exactly as described previously
(Widrick et al. [999). Hill plots were ﬁtted to the data and the activation threshold, the
one—half maximal activation (pCagg), and slope of the force-calcium relationship below
(mg) and above (m) pCajg determined (Widriek et al- 1999). Fibre stiffness or the elastic
modulus (E 0) was measured by oscillating the position motor at [.5 kHz at an amplitude
of 0.05% of FL both before (relaxing solution pCa 9.0), and during the measurement of
peak force at the various pCa‘s. The elastic modulus E; at each pCa was calculated from
the equation E0: (Aforee in activating solution - Aforce in relaxing solution/zfxlength)
(ﬁbre length/ ﬁbre cross-seetional area).

SDS gel analysis ofactin and mvosin composition. After the contractile tests, the
ﬁbre was removed from the experimental set-up and solubilized in 10 pl of sodium
dodecyl sulfate (SDS) sample buffer [6 mg/ml EDTA, 0.06 M tris (hydroxymethyl)
aminomethane, 1% SDS, 2 mg/ml Bromophenol blue, 15% glycerol, 5% B-
mercaptoethanol], and stored at -80 °C. Fibre types were identiﬁed by the myosin heavy
chain (MHC) isoform pattern using 5% polyacrylamide gels as slow type I or fast type II.

Downloaded from J Physrol Up,ph}rsec.01'g)by guest on AugUSI 19. 2010

"
"12","1 2
F ibres containing both slow and fast myosin (hybrid ﬁbres) were not included in the
analysis. Myosin (heavy and light chains), actin, tropomyosin, and troponin proﬁles were
determined by 12% polyacrylamide gel analysis (Widrick et a1. 1997), For type I ﬁbres, a
computer-based image analysis system and software (labworks‘m) were used to quantify
the relative density of the MHC and actin bands on the 12% gels. For ﬁgure 14B,
actinfmyosin ratio (actin band intensiry/slow myosin band intensity) was plotted versus
thin ﬁlament number per sq micron for subjects A, C, D, F F, G, H, and I. For each
subject, the actin/myosin ratio was determined on an average of 26 + 4 (pre-ﬁight) and 30
i 6 (post-ﬂight) ﬁbres, and the thin ﬁlament density on 5 pre- and 5 post-ﬂight ﬁbres
using electron microscopy.

Analysis of‘thinﬁlament density by electron microscopy. Our previous studies
demonstrated that in normal rat and human soleus muscle ﬁbers, thin ﬁlaments varied in
length, and during l7~day spaceﬂight and bedrest, the percentages of short thin ﬁlaments
increased (Riley et a1. 1998', 2000; 2005). In cross sectioned sarcomeres, thin ﬁlament
density was highest in the [band and fell off in the A band because the short ﬁlaments
arising from, the Z line were not long enough to reach the A-band in a sarcomere at 2.5
pm length. For the present 180-day spaceﬂight muscles, a qualitative inspection of thin
ﬁlament numbers in the I-band near the Z line and within the A—band (overlap A) where
thin ﬁlaments ﬁrst overlap thick ﬁlaments indicated that thin ﬁlaments were not missing
as expected from 17-day ﬂight data but appeared more abundant, pointing to increased
thin ﬁlament length. Further into the A-band nearer the M-line, thin ﬁlament number
decreased which made sense because only the longest thin filaments (~l .27 nm) could
reach this far, Thus, to detect increased thin ﬁlament density due to increased thin
ﬁlament length, thin ﬁlament densities were quantiﬁed near the M line in cross sections

Downloaded from J Physwl (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"13","1 3
0f sarcomeres of slow muscle ﬁbres in the pre— and post—ﬁight biopsy bundles from the
solei of each subject. The concepts of thin ﬁlament length, thin ﬁlament density and
location ot'near the M. line measurement site are illustrated diagrammatically in ﬁgure 16.

Cross sections (70 nm) of the epoxy-cmbedded muscle bundles were cut,
contrasted with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and examined and imaged in a JEOL 100
CXll electron microscope (EM). The near M-line regions of thick and thin ﬁlaments of
slo w ﬁbres were imaged, and the EM negatives were scanned for computerized
m01ph0metrical analysis using MetaMorph 5.2 software. As conducted previously to
achieve adequate statistical power, ﬁve slow ﬁbres were sampled per soleus muscle per
time point for a total of 90 ﬁbers (Riley et al. 2000; Riley et a]. 2005). Group averages
are reported as mean i SE. The sarcomere length varied in the aldehyde ﬁxed ﬁbers, and
it is known that myoﬁlanlent density is directly related to sareomere length (Riley et a1.
2000; Riley et a1. 2005). T0 normalize for sarcomerc length differences among ﬁbers,
thick ﬁlament spacing was adjusted to 31.3 nm (2.5 pm sareomere length). Alter
normalization, the average thick ﬁlament density of the pre—ﬂight ﬁbers (999 $2]
ﬁlaments/pmz) was comparable (p = 0.07) to that of the post-ﬂight ﬁbers (945 i pmz),
conﬁrming standardization. Measurement of thick and thin ﬁlament densities was
accomplished by countin g the numbers of each ﬁlament type in a 0.0056 nm2 grid square
at X201,000 magniﬁcation 0n the computer screen using Gunderson‘s rules for sampling
(Riley et al. 2000; Riley et a1. 2005). For nonbiased sampling of thick and thin ﬁlament
counts, the grid squares were positioned at random over the A band regions of thick and
thin ﬁlament overlap within an estimated 100-3 00 nm of the M band in central myoﬁbrils
(Riley et a1. 2002). The position of the sampling square was ﬁne adjusted to insure that
the corralled thick and thin ﬁlaments appears as dots, indicating cross section orientation.

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoeorg) by guest on August 193 2010

"
"14","14
Statistical Analysis. To minimize Operator bias, the morphological and
physiological measurements were completed independently before the data were
assembled for each subject to assess structural and functional correlations“ For the
functional studies, the ﬁbres studied for each crew member for a given parameter were
aggregated to obtain pre— and post-flight means. ""lhese data were analyzed using a one-
way ANOVA with a Tukey post hoe test. Group pre- and post-ﬂight means (high versus
10w treadmill, and all crew members combined) were analyzed with an unpairedt test.
For morphological quantitation, the pre- and post-ﬂight group means were compared by
subject paired t test. The thin ﬁlaments densities of post-ﬂight soleus fibres were
compared with the control pre—ﬂight ﬁbers for each crew member using a two-tailed,
unpaired t—test analysis of 5 slow ﬁbres per time point. When correlating thin ﬁlament
density with V0, the individual means of thin ﬁlament densities for the pre- and post-
ﬂight samples were compared with the V0 means for slow ﬁbres isolated from the same
biopsies. Statistical signiﬁcance was accepted at P< 0.05. All data are presented as means
t SE.
Results
For the determination of soleus ﬁbre diameter, peak force (Po), and maximal
unloaded shortening velocity (V0), 600 pre-ﬂight (540 type I and 60 type II, a type I/type
1] ratio 019094;), and 542 post-flight (458 type [and 84 type II, a type L’type ll ratio of
85%) ﬁbres were analyzed. For these same parameters, the gastrocnemius analysis
included the study 0f433 pre—ﬂight (305 type I and 128 type IL :1 type I/type [1 ratio of
70%), and 325 post-ﬂight (186 type I and 139 type I], a type litpr [1 ratio 0f57%)
ﬁbres. ”lhe force-velocity and the f0rce~pCa relationships were determined on fewer
Downloaded from J Php‘iul gppmsocmg) by guest. on August 19, 2010

"
"15","15
ﬁbres as following the V0 detemiination, one but not both 0fthese relationships was
determined. The main ﬁndings are described in the following paragraphs.

Fibre Atrophy)"" and Peak F orce. Pre- and post-ﬂight diameters and CSA for the
slow type 1 ﬁbres of the soleus and gastrocnemius are shown in Table 2 and peak force
(mN and kamz) in Tables 3 (soleus) and 4 (gastrocnemius). Corresponding fast ﬁbre
data are shown in Tables 5 and 6. In all but the fast gastrocnemius ﬁbres, prolonged Space
ﬂight elicited signiﬁcant atr0phy (as determined from ﬁbre diameter, pm and CSA) and
decline in peak force (mN) with the degree of change soleus type [> soleus type 11 >
gastrocnemius type I ﬁbrcs. Considerable variability between crew members existed in
both the degree of ﬁbre atrophy and the loss ofpeak force (Tables 2—4). For example,
crew member B showed no soleus type I ﬁbre atrOphy, and only a modest 10% loss in
ﬁbre force, whereas for crew member F, soleus type ] ﬁbre size and force were reduced
by 51 and 70 ”/6, respectively (Tables 2 and 3). The decline in peak force was primarily
caused by ﬁbre atrophy as the crew average for soleus ﬁbre force expressed in kN/m2
was not altered pre— versus post-ﬁight, while absolute force in mN declined by 35 ""/0
(Table 3). Crew members A and F soleus ﬁbre atrophy must have exceeded the
contractile ﬁlament loss as ﬁbre force per CSA signiﬁcantly increased (Table 3). For the
gastrocnemius muscle, none of the crew members showed a signiﬁcant decrease in type I
ﬁbre force expressed as kN/mz, while all but subject I showed declines in absolute force
that exceeded 18% (Table 4).

The % change (pre— to post-ﬂight) in the mean soleus type 1 ﬁbre diameter for
each crew member showed a signiﬁcant correlation with the % change in the pre- to post-
flight soleus muscle volume determined by MRI (Figure l). The mean space ﬂight-
induced decline in soleus type I ﬁbre CSA was 33%, a value that agrees well with CSA

Downloaded from I l’hysiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on Augusl (9, 2010

"
"16","1 6
determinations made on histochemically—stained muscle ﬁbre bundles (Figure 2). In the
soleus, the extent of type I fibre atrophy tended to be associated with an increase in the
number of fast type II ﬁbres post-ﬂightt Thus, crew members with the highest % decline
in mean ﬁbre diameter showed the greatest increase in the number of fast type II ﬁbres
(Figure 3).

The volume of treadmill use appeared to inﬂuence the muscle atrophy response
while on the 135 for six months. As a result, we subdivided the crew members into those
running 200 min/wk or more (high treadmill) from those running less than 100 Inin/wk
(10w treadmill). The weekly treadmill running average for each crew member has been
published elsewhere (Trappe et a1. 2009). The high treadmill group showed signiﬁcantly
less Space ﬂight—induced atrophy and loss of force in the soleus slow type 1 and fast type
11 ﬁbres (Tables 2, 3 and 5), while for the gastrocnemius no differences between groups
for these parameters was observed for type I(Table 2 and 4) or type 11 (Table 6) ﬁbres.
The protective effect of the treadmill countermeasure for the soleus type 1 ﬁbre is perhaps
best appreciated by comparing the plot of ﬁbre atrophy versus force pre— and post-ﬂight
for each crew member (Figures 4 and 5). The low treadmill group showed an average
pre-ﬂight force 0f~100 mN and diameter of 100 pm while post-ﬂight the relationship
for force versus diameter was shifted down and to the left so that the majority of the
ﬁbres generated a peak force < 100 mN and had a ﬁbre diameter < 100 pm (Figure 4). In
comparison, the down and left shift of the force verSus diameter plot for the high
treadmill group was less apparent (Figure 5). The average weekly treadmill running
showed a signiﬁcant inverse correlation with the % 0f soleus type 1 ﬁbre atrophy with r ~?—
0.68 (Figure 6). A second observation that seemed to impact the extent of ﬁbre atrophy
and hence the decline in force was the pre-ﬂight diameter. The larger the initial ﬁbre

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physeeerg) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"17","1 7
diameter the greater the atrophy such that a signiﬁcant inverse correlation (r = 0.87) was
observed between the mean pre-ﬂight solcus type I ﬁbre diameter and the prefpost ﬁber
diameter ratio expressed as a ""/6 [Figure 6).

Figure 7 plots the mean force (mN) versus diameter for each crew member pre
(circles) and post (triangles) ﬂight for fast type 11 ﬁbres from the soleus and
gastrocnemius. For the soleus, the plot was similar to that observed for the slow ﬁbre
type as post-ﬂight the force to diameter relationship was shiﬁed down (force loss) and t0
the left (diameter loss) in the low treadmill group with virtually no change in the plot (pre
versus post) for the high treadmill group. In contrast, the gastrocnemius fast type II ﬁbres
were not protected by an increased amount of treadmill running (Figure 7 and Table 6).

Maximal Shortening Veiocr‘ty (V0) and Rate of Tension Development (k,,). With
the exception of the soleus fast type II ﬁbres which were unaltered by space ﬂight (Table
5), the maximal unloaded shortening velocity (V0) measured by the slack test declined by
-~ 20% in both muscles and ﬁbre types studied (Tables 3. 4 and 6). Unlike ﬁbre size and
force, the decline in V0 post-ﬂight was not inﬂuenced by the extent of treadmill running.
The rate constants of tension redevelopment (kn) in slow type I ﬁbres of the soleus and
gastrocnemius muscles were not signiﬁcantly different and neither was altered by space
ﬂight (Table 7).

F ﬁbre Srfﬁizess. Peak ﬁbre stiffness (E0), a property thought to reﬂect the number
of attached cross-bridges, increased in the slow ﬁber type in both the soleus and
gastrocnemius muscles (Table 7). The peak force (P0)/peak stiffness (E0) ratio was
signiﬁcantly less post—ﬂight which suggests that if the higher stiffness was caused by
more cross-bridges, the additional bridges were likely in a low force (weak binding) state.

Downloaded from J Pliysml (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"18","1 8

me, Peak Power, and F area and Velociry at Peak Power. Similar to V0 (the
maximal unloaded shortening velocity measured by the slack test), the maximal
Shortening velocity derived from the Hill plot of the force-velocity relationship (me)
was signiﬁcantly depressed post-ﬂight compared to pre-ﬂight in the slow type 1 ﬁbre
from both the soleus and the gastrocnemius (Tables 8 and 9). Six of the nine and ﬁve of
nine crew members showed a signiﬁcant post-ﬂight decline in type I ﬁbre Vmax in the
soleus and gastrocnemius muscles, respective1y(Tables 8 and 9).

Figure 8 shows composite force—power relationships for type 1 and II ﬁbres of the
soleus and gastrocnemius muscles pre- and post-ﬁight. Post—ﬁight peak power of the slow
type I and fast type 11 ﬁbre was signiﬁcantly depressed in both the soleus and the
gastrocnemius (Figure 8 and Tables 8-10). As shown in Figure 8, the extent of the decline
in peak power ofboth ﬁbre types was Clearly greater in the soleus than the
gastrocnemius. Interestingly, while the fast type II ﬁbres from both muscles showed a
signiﬁcant post-ﬁight drop in peak power (uN FL 3""), when corrected for atrophy, the
power expressed in watts L”l was only depressed in the ﬁbres isolated from the
gastrocnemius. The apparent explanation is that velocity at peak power was signiﬁcantly
depressed only in gastrocnemius ﬁbres (Table 10).

In the case of the soleus but not the gastrocnemius muscle, the high treadmill
grouped showed less less in type 1 ﬁbre peak power with a pre/‘post ﬂight ratio of 63%
compared to the low treadmill group mean of 48%. Nine ofnine and seven of eight crew
members showed a signiﬁcant (p<0.05) post-ﬁight decline in type I ﬁbre peak power (LIN
FL 5"") in the soleus and gastrocnemius, respectively. When these data were expressed as
watts DI, the post—ﬂight peak power of the soleus and gastrocnemius type 1 ﬁbres
remained depressed in ﬁve and three crew members, respectively (Tables 8 and 9). For

Downloaded from .1 Physiel gpphysoaorg) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"19","19
the majority of crew members, the decline in peak power expressed as Watts L'1 was
caused by a significant fall in both the force (mN) and velocity (FL 3"") elicited at peak
power (Tables 8 and 9).

The two crew members with the greatest post-ﬂight loss in soleus muscle volume
F (-23%) and A (-22%) (See Trappc er al. 2009), also showed the greatest soleus type I
ﬁbre atrophy (Table 2), and loss ofPo (Table 3) and absolute peak power (Table 8). Crew
member F showed a post-ﬂight increase in peak power in watts L'l indicating that for this
subject the loss of absolute peak power was entirely explained by the ﬁbre atrophy and
the accompanying loss of force. Crew member A who displayed slightly less ﬁbre
atrophy and loss of force than crew member F (Tables 2 and 3), showed the greatest drop
in soleus type I ﬁbre peak power (Table 8). This can be explained in part by a signiﬁcant
decline and increase in the a/Po ratio for crew member A and F, respectively (Table 8).
Due to the greater curvature of the force-velocity relationship (Le. lower a/Po) post—ﬂight,
the mean force as a percent ofPo at peak power for crew member A’s ﬁbres was lower
(14% of P0) than the pre-ﬂight condition (16% of P0) and this contributed to the reduced
power. The opposite was true of crew member F as the a/Po ratio for this individual’s
soleus type I ﬁbres was signiﬁcantly elevated post—ﬂight (Table 8). In addition, crew
member A showed a signiﬁcant drop in velocity at peak power, while crew member F
didn’t (Table 8).

Force-pCa Relationship. The force-pCa relationship in the slow type I and fast
type II ﬁbres pre- and post—ﬂight are shown in Table 11. In the slow but not the fast ﬁbre
type, the slope of the Hill plot for values less than half-maximal activation (N3) were
signiﬁcantly higher post—ﬂight. and this was true for both the soleus and gastrocnemius
muscles (Table l 1). The pCaso for the slow type 1 ﬁbre in both muscles showed a small

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.phySOCbrg) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"20","20
but significant increase (Table l l). The post-ﬂight increase in the N2 0fthe type I ﬁbre
was not caused by the expression of the fast troponin 0r tropomyosin isoforms as SDS gel
analysis of the post-tlight ﬁbres showed only the cardiac/slow ﬁbre form 01’ troponin C
(cTn-C) and the slow isoform of Tn—l, Tn—T, and tropomyosin (Figure 9).

Ulrrasrmcmml Changes and Quantitation. At the electron microscopic level,
crew members exhibiting high levels of slow ﬁbre atrophy in the soleus muscle following
6-months of spaceﬂight had smaller myoﬁbrils, fewer intracellular lipids, smaller and
globular mitochondria and increased space between myoﬁbrils ﬁlled with glycogen
particles (F igure 10). Conversely, subjects with little atrophy retained similar sized,
closely~packed myoﬁbrils, lipid droplets and ﬁlamentous mitochondria encircling the
myoﬁbrils at the 1 band level (Figure 10). Within the myoﬁbrils in the A bands after
spaceﬂight, individual thick ﬁlaments in the near M band region were surrounded by a
greater number of thin ﬁlaments compared to pre-flight (Figure l l). The average thin
ﬁlament density (27441167 per 11ml) post-flight in the near M region was 22% (p<0.01)
higher than that (2253i132 per pmz) before ﬂight. T wo subjects did not show high thin
ﬁlament density post—ﬂight (F igure 12). The ratio of thin:thick ﬁlaments was signiﬁcantly
(p<0l01) higher post-ﬂight (2.99:0.21) compared to pre-ﬂight (2,210.15). The increase in
thin ﬁlaments and amount of ﬁbre atrophy were directly correlated, although the rise in
ﬁlament density plateaued around 3200 ﬁlaments/pmz, indicating an upper limit (Figure
13). This limit value matches our previously published data (Riley et al. 1998; Riley er a1.
2000) for th in ﬁlament densities in soleus 1 bands near the 2 line which averaged 3251
per pm: for the two studies (the published density numbers normalized to 2.4 nm were
renormalized to 2.5 pm sarcomere length for comparison with current data). The 3251
per um2 represents the largest number nucleated at the Z band (Riley et al. 1998; Riley 9!

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August. 19, 2010

"
"21","21
al. 2000). For the 180-day pre- and post-ﬂight slow ﬁbres, thin ﬁlament density and
shortening V0 were inversely related (Figure 14A). In contrast, the mean actim’myosin
ratio determined from SDS band den sities was unaltered pre (1.26 i 005) to post ( l .29 i
0.07) ﬂight, and the correlation between the actin/myosin ratios and thin ﬁlament
densities was not signiﬁcant (Figure 148). Of the ﬁve crew members showing an
increased thin ﬁlament density, three showed a small increase and two a small decrease
in the actin/myosin ratio post—ﬂight (F igure MB). The relationship of thin ﬁlament
density and treadmill use suggested that high treadmill use was partially effective in
preventin g increased thin ﬁlament density (Figure 15A). The level of cycle USe also
prevented in part the increase in post-ﬂight thin ﬁlament density (Figure 15B).
Discussion

F rom previous MIR missions and our recent observations on International Space
Station crew members. it is well established that signiﬁcant losses in leg muscle mass
occur with prolonged space ﬂight, and that considerable variability in the extent of
muscle atrophy exists between individuals (Fitts er al. 2000; Trappe et al. 2009). The
results of this study present the ﬁrst cellular analysis of the effects of long duration Space
ﬂight on the structure and function of human skeletal muscle. The main ﬁndings were
that the prolonged weightlessncss produced substantial loss of ﬁbre mass, force, and
power with the hierarchy of the effects being soleus type l> soleus type 11>
gastrocnemius type I > gastrocnemius type 1]. The post-ﬂight decline in power was
attributed to declines in both force and velocity. Stmcturally, the quantitatively most
important adaptation was ﬁbre atrophy, and the resulting loss and shrinkage of
myoﬁbrils. An increased packin g density of the remaining thick and thin ﬁlaments likely
contributed to the reduced ﬁbre V0, increased ﬁbre stiffness and increased cooperativity

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"22","22
of force development observed with activation below pCago in the slow type I ﬁbre types.
A ﬁnal conclusion is that the cellular ﬁndings docurnenl the inadequacy of the current
exercise countermeasures to preserve the pre-ﬂight muscle ﬁbre properties, and point to
the need for the development of better exercise protocols and hardware for preventing
undesirable transformation of ﬁbre structure and function away from the gravity-loaded
adapted state. The primary ﬁndings for long-term space ﬂight are discussed with
comparison to short duration Space ﬂight and prolonged bed rest studies.

Potential limitations of single cell analyzes

A maj or strength of single cell analyzes is that Spaceﬂight-induced changes can be
assessed in individual ﬁbre types and the impact of structural changes on function
determined. A potential limitation is the possibility that the biopsy sample and ﬁbres
studied were not fully representative of the changes occurring in the muscles as a whole,
and that this might contribute to the diverse range of reSponses between crew members.
However, this seems unlikely for the following reasons: 1. The effects of prolonged Space
ﬂight on cell atrophy and function tightly reﬂected the whole muscle changes observed
on the same crew for both individual and group responses (Trappe et al.2009). For
example, the two crew members with the greatest soleus type 1 ﬁbre atr0phy also lost the
most soleus muscle volume detected by MRI. These results are not surprising given the
relatively homogeneous nature [88 and 77 % slow type I ﬁbres pre- vsi post-ﬂight) of the
soleus muscle (""Frappe et al.2009). In comparison, for the mixed gastrocnemius muscle,
the cell atr0phy and whole muscle volume loss were not as highly correlated; 2.
Conﬁdence that the cell data are representative of the whole muscle is increased by the
large number of ﬁbres analyzed which was the largest of any published study.
Additionally, separate bundles from the biOpsy were studied in two independent labs

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoevorg) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"23","23

(Marquette University and Ball State University) and the same results obtained; 3. The
soleus type I ﬁbre atrophy observed in individual ﬁbres and by computerized
morphometric analysis ofbiopsy histochemical cross-sections were similar; and 4. T he
soleus muscle is fairly homogeneous (80-90 % slow type I), while the gastrocnemius is
more of a mixture of slow and fast ﬁbres. Our muscle samples were reﬂective of these
proﬁles. T aken together these elements provide a reasonable level of support to minimize
the size of the muscle sample as a limitation in this study.
MuscIe atrophy and ﬁbre force

Consistent with our earlier studies on short—duration space ﬂight (Widrick et at.
1999), ﬁbres from the normally tonically active soleus (both slow type I and fast type 11)
showed greater atrophy than ﬁbres from the phasic gastrocnemius muscle. The 20 and 35
% decline in the slow type I ﬁbre diameter and force observed in this work exceeded the
8 and 21 % drop in these variables following a 17—day Shuttle ﬂight (Widrick er al. 1999)
and the 9 % atrophy of type I vastus lateralis ﬁbres following an 11—day mission
(Edgerton er al. 1995). The major cause of the loss in peak force (P0) was ﬁbre atrophy.
The extent of atrophy was documented both at the cell and subcellular level (i.e.,
reduction in ﬁbre and myoﬁbriIIar diameter). The fact that the group mean force per
cross-sectional area was unaltered in any ﬁber type or muscle provides further evidence
that the primary cause for the space ﬂight induced loss of muscle and ﬁbre force was
ﬁbre atrophy and the accompanying loss in force generating myoﬁlaments. Microgravity~
induced ﬁbre atrophy in human muscle is thought to be primarily caused by a reduced
protein synthesis (Stein er a]. 1999: Fitts er a]. 2000). The molecular mechanism of the
decline in muscle protein synthesis is unknown, but at least in rat models of unloading
involves both reduced transcriptional and transiational processes (Fitts er al. 2000). The

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physocmg) by guest on August. 19, 2010

"
"24","24
observed ~ 20 916 increase in fast type ll ﬁbres post-ﬂight in some crew members
demonstrates that in addition to the down regulation of slow muscle protein that fast
muscle myosin isofortn was upregulated and [hat the extent of upregulation was directly
related to the degree of ﬁbre atmphy. The signaling mechanism initiating the altered
pattern ot’protein synthesis is likely more dependent on the decline in loaded muscle
contractions than muscle activity as the latter, at least during short duration space ﬂight,
was not altered (Edgenon er al. 2001).

F ollowing short duration space ﬂight, we observed a decrease in E0 and an
elevated PO/Eo ratio in the slow type I ﬁbre, and hypothesized that the changes may have
resulted from the selective loss of the thin (actin) over the thick (myosin) ﬁlament (Riley
et al. 2000; Widrick er a]. 1999). The resulting increased myoﬁlament lattice spacing
may have reduced E0 (a measure of ﬁbre stiffness) more than P0 (Kawai et al. 1985;
Goldman & Simmons, 1986). With prolonged space ﬂight, we observed just the opposite
in that the slow type 1 ﬁbre E0 was signiﬁcantly increased, and the Po/Eo ratio decreased
post-ﬂight. Since the thin ﬁlament density relative to the thick ﬁlament density was
increased post-ﬂight on average 31% producing a lattice spacing in which the average
distance from thick ﬁlament cross bridges to the nearest thin ﬁlament decreased, we
conclude that this closer arrangement increased E0. Any increase in P0 that may have
resulted from the reduced ﬁlament spacing was masked by the large decline in force
generated by the ﬁbre atrophy.

A consistent ﬁnding with both short and prolonged duration space ﬂight is that
large variability between crew members exists in the extent of muscle atrophy and the
commensurate loss in strength. This was panicularly true of this study where post-flight
soleus type I ﬁbre diameters ranged from 49406 % and P0 from 30-90 % 0f the pre~ﬂight

Downloaded from J Physnol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"25","25
values. An unanswered question is what fact0r(s) caused this variability? It seems likely
that a collection of factors to varying degrees contributed, such as initial musclefﬁbre
size, diet, the type and extent of exercise commtermeasures, and diﬂ‘erences in the
susceptibility to reduced gravity. While it is not possible to assign post hoc the relative
importance of these factors, our results suggest large influences were the pre-ﬂight ﬁbre
size and the pattem 0f self~selected, exercise countermeasure used. Following short
duration space ﬂights, Edgerton and Roy (1996) and our group (Widrick et 0!. I999) have
observed that the greater the pre-ﬂight ﬁbre size the greater was the degree of atrophy
post-ﬂight. The present investigation extends that observation to include prolonged space
ﬂight. The correlation between pre~ﬂight soleus type 1 ﬁbre diameter and % of ﬁbre
atrophy was high (r = 0.87) and very signiﬁcant (p < 0001). An obvious conclusion from
these observations is that the current exercise countermeasures that emphasize aerobic
exercise (see Trappe et a1. 2009 for a detailed description on the [SS exercise
countermeasure program) fail to protect muscle mass, and this is particularly true for the
antigravity soleus muscle. It‘s clear that the resistance exercises employed on the 188
during Increments 5-9 utilized low intensity devices incapable of providing the high—
intensity needed to adequately protect ﬁbre and muscle mass (Trappe er al. 2009). The
aerobic exercise used on the 188 provided detectable partial preservation of pre-ﬂight
properties when crew members utilized the treadmill modality >200 min/wk. There was
less ﬁbre atrophy, loss of force and increase in thin ﬁlament density than those with less
than 100 min/wk 0f treadmill exercise. Relying more on the cycle ergometer did not
appear to make up for low treadmill usage, although additional controlled comparisons
are necessary. For example, subject A cycled > 30 min more per week than the nine crew
member average (Trappe et ai. 2009) but sustained the second largest decline in solens

Downloaded from J Physiol (ipphysocorg) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"26","26
type 1 ﬁbre diameter and P0. On the other hand, this subject exhibited the greatest
prevention of thin ﬁlament density increase. The level of cycle use and the level of
treadmill use both correlated highly with prevention of post-ﬂight increase in thin
ﬁlament density. The relative lack of protection of soleus muscle mass with cycling likely
reﬂects the fact that this muscle is only activated during a small portion of the pedaling
cycle (Gregor er al. 1991). In the case of ameliorating thin ﬁlament density (length), it
may be the stretch (muscle lengthening) stimulation during treadmill walking and cycle
pedaling that is preventative. While our data suggests that treadmill exercise in excess of
200 min/wk can in part compensate for the lack of an effective high intensity exercise
device, this conclusion must be interpreted with caution as the high treadmill group with
less ﬁbre atrophy also had a smaller mean pre-flight soleus type I ﬁbre diameter (Table
2). In all likelihood, high treadmill use and smaller pre-ﬂight ﬁbre size both contributed
to the relative protection of the high treadmill group. Based on pre-ﬂight conditioning
biographies (Trappe et al. 2009) and soleus type I fibre aerobic enzyme content
(unpublished data), the in—ﬂight low treadmill group were in better aerobic condition at
the start of the mission compared to the high. treadmill gTOUp. Thus, the greater decline in
ﬁbre size and force of the low treadmill group likely reﬂects the combined effects of
greater initial ﬁtness (both aerobic and strength), and the ineffectiveness of the in-flight
exercise countermeasures. Presumably, with a better in-ﬂight high resistance training
device, crew members would be able to maintain muscle mass and strength gained
through pre-ﬂight exercise programs.

Previous investigations have documented that voluntary energy intake is reduced
in microgravity, and that as a result many crew members have been found to be in
negative nitrogen balance (Stein 9! al. 1999). While the focus of this study was not

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp‘physoemg) by guest on August l9, 2010

"
"27","27
nutrition, we calculated from the nutritional proﬁle and weekly exercise that the calorie
intake of the crew members we studied was ~ 20% below the predicted need (Trappe er
al. 2009). Clearly, an insufﬁcient dietary intake could limit protein synthesis induced by
exercise and activate muscle catabolism (Stuart 6! al. 1990; Paddon-Jones et al. 2004).
K"" and Fibre velocity

The rate constant oftension redevelopment of an isometric contraction (kw) is
thought to be ihe sum of the rate constant for attachment (If) and detachment (k') of the
cross-bridges and reﬂect the transition from the weak (10w force) to the strong (high
force) eross-bridge state (Brenner 1991; Metzger & Moss 1990; Fitzsimons et al. 2001).
Brenner (1991) reported that F and k‘ were an order of magnitude greater than the rate
constants for cross-bridge turnover (fapp and gapp). Thus while IQ, and V0 are known to be
correlated across ﬁbre type and species (Gordon et al. 2000), it seems unlikely that they
are limited by the same molecular step in the eross-bridge cycle. The published values for
k” range from 3 to 23 s”I for slow and fast rat ﬁbres with the rabbit psoas ~ 16 s’1
(Metzger & Moss, 1990; Fitzsimons el al. 2001)‘ The ktr has been shown to have a high
Ca2+ dependency increasing 10-fold as Ca” increases from just threshold to levels
eliciting maximal force. Our measurements were made at saturating levels of Caz? such
that the mean k” of ~ 1.5 for the slow type I fibres of the soleus and the gastrocnemius
reﬂects the maximal value for slow type Ihuman ﬁbres. The Slow type I fibre kn; 0f~ 1.5
is one-half that reported for comparable rat ﬁbres, but this is consistent with the known
decline in this variable with increased Species body size (Gordon et alt 2000), and with
the data of Kéhler et a1. (2002) for human soleus ﬁbres. Recent observations of Moreno-
Gonzalez et a1. (2007) suggest that in addition to a Caz:— dependency, kn, is affected by the
isoform of troponin C (Tn—C). Fast fibres reconstituted with slow Tn—C (the cardiac

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physocmg) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"28","28
isoform) showed a signiﬁcant decline in k"". The observation in this study that slow type I
ﬁbre kt, was not different pre— to Post-ﬂight is consistent with the detection of only slow
troponin in both pre« and post-flight slow ﬁbres, and suggests that Space ﬂight had no
effect on the kinetics of the transition from the low to the high force state.

Fibre V0 thought to reﬂect the eross-bridge cycle speed was depressed by ~ 20%
in all ﬁbre types except the soleus fast type II ﬁbre. The mechanism responsible for the
depressed V0 is not obvious, and could not be attributed to an altered myosin heavy or
light chain pattern. While some subjects experienced a phenotype switch in the soleus
from slow to fast that approached 20%, the post-ﬂight ﬁbres identiﬁed as type I
contained only the slow myosin isoform. While it seems unlikely, the possibility exists
that space ﬂight tn'ggered a post—translational modiﬁcation ofmyosin or the expression of
a second slow isoform of myosin that went undetected by the SDS gel analysis (Fauteek
& Kandarian, 1995; Galler et al. 1997). The ﬂight—indueed depression of V0 is in
contrast to short duration space ﬂight where we observed an average increase 01'30% in
the soleus type I ﬁbre V0 (Widriek er al. 1999). We attributed the elevated V0 in the short
duration ﬂight to a selective loss in thin ﬁlaments (actin) and the resulting increase in
lateral distance between the thin and thick ﬁlaments, and hypothesized that this
stereologieal change caused the cycling myosin head to detach from the aetin earlier
reducing the internal drag and accelerating velocity (Widriek er al. 1999). In our rat 14-
day hindlimb suspension unloading study, the soleus V0 increased and correlated with
decreased thin ﬁlament density (Riley et (11., 2005). When the soleus ﬁber myoﬁlament
lattice was compacted by 5% dextran, V0 slowed from | .370 to 0.959 FL/s substantiating
that increasing Inyoﬁlament packing density has a profound slowing effect on shortening
velocity (Riley et aL, 2005). These results are consistent with the lower Vmax observed

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.ozg) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"29","29
by dcxtran treatment in rat soleus ﬁbres (Metzger and Moss, 1987). The current data
suggests that the selective loss in aetin with short duration space ﬂight was a non-steady
state transitional effect. With prolonged space ﬂight, where it’s reasonable to assume that
crew members have adapted to a microgravity steady state, we found increased thin
ﬁlament density surrounding thick ﬁlaments. This structural change would be expected to
increase internal drag and reduce ﬁbre V0. This effect was not an exclusive factor as two
crew members showed a signiﬁcant decline in soleus type I ﬁbre V0 with no change in
thin ﬁlament density.

The total number 0fthin ﬁlaments is regulated by a ﬁnite number of nneleating
sites (a—actinin, CapZ) per cross sectional area of Z band (Castillo et al. 2009; Littleﬁeld
& Fowler 2008). What accounted for the increase in thin ﬁlament density in the present
study? The answer was increased length of thin ﬁlaments. The numbers Ofthin ﬁlaments
were counted in the Near M region an area of the A band into which only long thin
ﬁlaments can reach at a sarcomere length 0125 pm (Figure 16). Compared to pre-ﬁight,
the thin ﬁlament number increased by 22 %. The post-flight packing density in the near
M region (2744 i 167 pmz) approached the level in the [bands (near the Z line) of pre—
bedrest (2932i! 86 pm’) and pre 17-day Spaceﬂight (3569 d: 236 “m2) slow soleus ﬁbres
(Riley et a1. 1998; 2000). The concepts ofthin ﬁlament growth in length and increased
thin ﬁlament density near the M region are shown schematically in F igure 16. The
density of thin ﬁlaments increased in ﬁve of eight crew members analyzed following 6
months in Space (Figure 12). Despite the signiﬁcant increase in thin ﬁlament density, the
average actim'myosin ratio pre- to post-ﬂight was unaltered. This suggests that
aetin/myosin ratio determined from a whole ﬁbre segment lacked the sensitivity to detect
relatively small changes in thin ﬁlament density at the near M region. An alternate

Downloaded from J Pliysml (jp.physoeerg) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"30","30
explanation is that the ﬁbres tested for thin ﬁlament density may not have been
representative of the whole muscle. Recent studies suggest that the dynamic nature of
thin ﬁlament length in skeletal muscle is regulated by tropomodulin capping of the
pointed end (closest to the M line) influenced by titin and nebulin isoforms (Castillo et al.
2009; Littleﬁeld and Fowler, 2008; Prado et al. 2005). Examining these proteins Will be
of great importance for futUIe Spaceﬂight studies.

The present investigation, the l7~day ﬂight study, and our rat study show that thin
ﬁlament density relative to thick ﬁlament density can modulate shortening velocity
(Riley et al. 1998 & 2005). What stimulated the increase in thin ﬁlament density
(length)? Higher thin ﬁlament density correlated directly with increased ﬁber atrophy.
However, atrophy per 36 does not modulate thin ﬁlament packing density because the
soleus and adductor longus (AL) muscles of the rat both atrophied 50-60% during
hindlimb suspension unloading but only the soleus exhibited reduced thin ﬁlament
density (Riley et al. 2005). The difference was that soleus was also shortened by
plantarﬂexion foot—d‘rop posture, whereas AL was only unloaded. Since Skylab missions,
it has been noted that crew members assume a plantarﬂexion foot-drop posture when
ﬂoating in reduced gravity (Clement & Lestienne 1988; Thornton 197 8). The ankle angle
plantarﬂexion progressively increased during the ﬁrst 7 days of spaceflight and was
plateaued at 45 days (Clement & Lestienne 1988; Thornton 1978). Adaptation of muscle
to working or Operating range of motion has been shown in humans and animal models to
modulate the number of in-series sareomeres (Burkholder & Lieber, 2001; Riley et al.
2002: Witzmann er al. 1982). This optimizes muscle length to generate maximum tension
(optimal thick thin ﬁlament overlap). The reduction in sarcomere number in response to
the microgravity—induced plantarﬂexion takes days and is likely completed by 1 month in

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"31","31
space. Adaptation of the calfmuscles to a shortened posture may explain why at 17 days
ofspace ﬂight, we found decreased thin ﬁlament density (length) and increased
shortening velocity (Riley et al. [998). With long duration spaceflight, the relatively
short daily exercises optimized to maintain endurance and to a much lesser extent
preserve mass were not robust enough or performed over a wide enough range of motion
to counter the microgravity—induced calfshortening by stimulating regrovwh of in-series
sarcomeres. However, the treadmill, cycle ergometer and iR ED heal raises introduced
some contractions of the calf muscles while in a lengthened position. Such contractions
would have stretched the sarcomeres, and this may have triggered thin ﬁlament growth in
length. The resulting longer thin ﬁlament length (density) was correlated with and likely
contributed to the slowing of ﬁbre shortening velocity in 6 0f 9 subj ects. Variations in
thin ﬁlament length have been postulated to optimize thin and thick ﬁlament overlap
(length tension properties) to meet the range of motion the workload demands (Littleﬁeld
& Fowler, 2008). Thus it appears that the exercise prescription could be improved by
introducing a higher resistance calf muscle contractions over a wider range of motion
(particularly long lengths) such that the muscles function over the full range of motion as
occurs in Earth’s 1 g environment. We hypothesize that this would reduce the
microgravity-induecd decline in muscle mass and prevent calf plantarﬂexiou. This
concept requires validation testing on 188 with a more tightly deﬁned and standardized
exercise protocol than was available for the present study.

The observed decline in type I ﬁbre V0 (soleus and gastrocnemius muscles) was
similar to the data of Trappe el al. (2004) who found an ~ 20% drop in the Votype I
vastus lateralis ﬁbres following 84 d ofbed rest in subjects who performed no exercise
countermeasures. In contrast, Yamashita-Goto er a1. (2001) reported a 2-fold increase in

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"32","32
the V9; of 3913113 type I ﬁbres feliewing fee: meeihs of bed rest seetheet exercise, In the
Trappe er 6!, (2004} study, a high resis£eeee exercise eemxez‘meeeme cempIeEely
prevented the deciijee in V8. The authors hypothesized that eeleedieg With {:0 exercise
induces a decline in type 1 ﬁbre V3, while with exercise countermeasure pregame, type I
ﬁbre V}; is elevated. A comparison of ear Sheri. and pmleegext duration space ﬂight
studies, both of which employed exercise ceumemeeseres, suggests that the Situation. is
more cemplex. Clearly, fibre XI}; changes with unloading are dependent not only (>11 the
exercise countermeasure (emmmt of resistance and lengthening contractions) but the
duration ofunloading. Untike ﬁbre diameter and force, the effect ofspaec flight on ﬁbre
V0 was not different in the low and high treadmill exercisers as both groups showed the
same decline. It is clear that the exercise countemleasure used 011 the ISS did not prevent
the decline in ﬁbre V0;

F ibre Power

The postuﬂight peak power was depressed in all fibre types and both muscles
studied, and with 1116 exception of crew member F, the decline was greater than that
observed for peak force. By far the greatest contributor to the less ef peak power it: all
but the fast type II gastrocnemies ﬁbres wee etmphy end the resulting lose of force. Fer
example, the pesi-ﬂight seleee Slew type I fibre developed (ml); 54% 0f the peak power
obtained 'pIe-ﬂight. When eerweted fife“ {SSA (expz‘eesed es Watts L4) this increased to
8'?%. The fast type II fibres from the geetreeeeeziee were an exception in that force was
net altered and the 213% (imp ie peeewfligle peek geezer was attributed to e reduced
velocity.

ﬁewnloecied fem: J ?hye‘iel (ipehyeeeerg) by guest en euguez 19, 29%]

"
"33","33

Unlike short duration Space ﬂight where the soleus type 1 ﬁbre power was
partially protected by increases in the velocity obtained, power fell dramatically, and for
most of the crew this was due to a loss of both the force and velocity obtained during the
generation of peak power. One exception was crew member F where, deSpite the largest
decline in peak force (Po) and maximal velocity (V0), the type I ﬁbre showed no
signiﬁcant drop in velocity at peak power due to a reduced curvature of the f0rce-velocity
relationship as reﬂected by the signiﬁcant increase in the post-ﬂight a/Pg ratio. As a
result, the post-ﬂight soleus type 1 ﬁbres of crew member F shortened at a velocity that
on average was 21% of V0. In comparison, the post-ﬂight soleus type I ﬁbres from crew
member A showed a signiﬁcant decline in the w’Po ratio, and maintained only 14% of V0
at peak power. The combined loss of force and velocity reached at peak power resulted in
the greatest decline in peak power (28% ofpre-ﬁight) observed for any of the nine crew
members. i

The average drop in peak power for the soleus type] ﬁbre with weightlessness
was of a similar magnitude to that observ ed for the vastus lateralis type I ﬁbres with 84 d
of bed rest without countermeasures (54 vs. 45 % 0f pre—unloading value). However, the
type I ﬁbres in the bed rest countermeasure group maintained 71% of their pre—bed rest
power (Trappe er al. 2004). It’s apparent that the high resistance exercise and possibly the
range of motion employed in the bed rest study was more effective in protectin g ﬁbre
mass, force and power than that used on the 133. A major difference between prolonged
bed rest and space ﬂight is the observation that the former had no effect on type II ﬁbre
peak power. whi 1e this parameter was equally depressed with space ﬂight in the type I
and I1 ﬁbres of the soleus.
Calcium Sensitivity

Downloaded from J Physiol (ipphysocmg) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"34","34

In agreement With. previous Short 321d long duratifm bad rest 33d ShQIT daratien
space ﬂight studies, the calcium sensitivity as reﬂected by the forcepra relatimship was
rather {esisiant t0 mloading induced changes (Sfevens <5: {23‘ 1993; ""Widrick 8? a1. 1998 8:
I999; Yamashita—Goto g! a}. 2001). While short and 10:33 duration bed test has been
Shown to slighﬂy increase the C329 required for onwhalf maximal activatéom we
cbsarvcd either no change or a slight dcareasc (elevated pCa) in this parameter With short
and long term space ﬂight, respectively. While short damtim space ﬂight had :10 effect
on the sinpc of the farce-pCa relationship for Ca” values balmy pCagg (N2), this
parameter was signiﬁcantly increased following [011g dmtion. The effect was not caused
by an increased expression Ofthe fast isoform Oftmponin 0r tropomyosin.

In conclusion, the results of this study clearly illuminate the deleterious effects of
prolonged space ﬂight on the structure and function ofboth slow type I and fast typfb H
ﬁbres of the calfmuscle group. The extensive decline in peak force and power can be
largely attributed to cell atmphy and the accompanying loss of myoﬁlaments. The
restructuring elengation ﬁfths thin filaments sagging increased thin ﬁlament density
appears to be of majm importance to the: depressed ﬁbxe velocity a faster that exacerbates
the decline in peak power. This wark highlights the extensive nature GfEhe
weightlessness induwd muscle remedaling and 1033 {)f peak pawar in all fibre types, and
the limitations ot’the current 1.88 amzcisa wantemzeasm‘e program whh its focus 0:; Eight
:0 modemie intensity (Tzappe e: {23. 2809}. Cigarly, the deieterious Changes in mascle
structure and functien With pmlezzgad space ﬂight decumented in this; study have
pstmtially sexism implicatieas fer a varie£y 0f circumstances induding bm not iimited
t0: the craw’s ability 1‘9 pmferm 33:: emmgency egress; muscie damage due to high force
particularly eccentric contractions; and diﬁ’iwlties performing werk 0n the surface of the

ﬁownlomw fmm I ?hysioi {jp.physoaerg) by gates: 02: Angus? S9, 3818

"
"35","35
moon or Mars. Bed rest studies show that high resistance exercise countermeasure
programs are effective and time efﬁcient. Employing similar well controlled and
standardized exercise investigation on the ISS and documentng their effectiveness
should be a high priority that ﬁllﬁlls the intended scientific use of the spacecraft.
Acknowledgements:

We thank the astronauts and cosmonauts who graciously gave their time and
energy to this research. We thank Simone Thomas, Elkin Romero, Alicia Forrester, the
ﬂight surgeons, 331d the numerous unnamed people who assisted our research team at the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and Russian Space Agency.
This research was supported by a National Aeronautics and Space Administration Grant
NCC9-1 [6 to RH. Fitts.

Downloaded From J Physiol Upphysochrg) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"36","38

References

Allen JD & Moss RL (1987). Factors inﬂuencing the ascending limb of the sarcomere
length—teusion relationship in rabbit skinned muscle ﬁbres. J Physiol 390, l 19-
136.

Antonutto G, Capelli C, Girardis M, Zamparo P & di Prampero PE (1999). Effects of
microgravity on maximal power of lower limbs during very shon effons in
humans. JAppl Physiol 86, 85-92.

Bergstrom J . (1962). Muscle electrolytes in man. Scand J Clin Lab Invest 14, Supplement
68, 7—110.

Brenner B (1991). Rapid dissociation and reassociation 0f actomyosin cross—bridges
during force generation: A newly observed facet of cross—bridge action in muscle.
Proc Natl Acad Sci 88, 10490—10494.

Burkholder TJ & Lieber RL (2001). Sarcomere length operating range ofvertebrate
muscles during movement. J Exp Biol 204, I529—1536‘

Castillo A, Nowak R, Littleﬁeld KP, Fowler VM & Littlcﬁeld RS (2009). A nebulin ruler
does not dictate thin ﬁlament lengths. Biophys J96, 1856-1865.

Clement G & Lestienne F (1983). Adaptive modiﬁcations of postural attitude in
conditions of weightlessness. Exp Brain Res 72, 381-389.

Conveﬁino, VA (1990). Physiological adaptations to weightlessness: effects on exercise
and work performance. Exer Sports Sci Rev 18, l l 9- | 66).

Edgerton VR, McCall GE, Hodgson JA, Gotto J, Goulet C & Fleischmann K (2001).

Sensorimotor adaptations to microgravity in humans. J Exp Biol 204, 3217-3224.
Downloaded ﬁ‘om J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest 0n August19,2010

"
"37","37

Edgerton VR & Roy RR (1996). Neuromuscular adaptations to actual and simulated
Spaceflight. [11: Handbook ofPhysfology. Environmental Physiology. Bethesda,
MD: American Physiological Society, Section 4, Vol 11, Chapter 32, 721—763.

Edgerton VR, Zhou, M—Y, Ohira, Y, Klitgaard, H, Jiang, B, Bell, G, Harris, B, Saltin, B,
Gollnick PD, Roy RR, Day M K & Greenisen, M (1995)“ Human ﬁber size and
enzymatic pr0perties after 5 and I 1 days of spaceﬂight. J Appl Physiol 78, 1733-
1739.

Fabiato A & Fibiato F (1979). Calculator programs for computing the composition of the
solutions containing multiple metals and ligands used for eXperiments in skinned
muscle cells. JPhysiol (Paris) 75, 463-505.

Fauteck SP & Kandarian SC (1995). Sensitive detection of myosin heavy chain
composition in skeletal muscle under different loading conditions. A m J Physiol
Cell Physiol 268, C419~C424.

Fitts RH, Riley DR & Widrick J J (2000). Microgravity and skeletal muscle. J Appl
Physiol 89, 823-839.

Fitts RH: Riley DR & Widrick J J (2001), Functional and structural adaptations of skeletal
muscle to microgravity. J Exp Biol 204, 3201-3208.

Fitts RH, Romatowski JG, Peters JR, Padd0n~J0nes D, Wolfe RR & Ferrando AA (2007).
The deleterious effects of bed rest on human skeletal muscle ﬁbers are
exacerbated by hypercorttisolemia and ameliorated by dietary supplementation.

A m J Physiol Cell Physiol 293, C3 l3-C320.

Fitzsimons DP, Patel JR, Campbell KS & Moss RL (2001). Cooperative mechanisms in
the activation dependence of the rate of force development in rabbit skinned
skeletal muscle ﬁbers. J Gen Physiol 117, 133-148.

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"38","38

Galler S, Hilber K, Gohlsch B & Pette D (1997). Two functionally distinct myosin heavy
chain isoforms in slow skeletal muscle ﬁbres. FEBS Lett 410, 150-152.

Godt RE & Lindley BD (1982). Inﬂuence of temperature upon contractile activation and
isometric force production in mechanically skinned muscle ﬁbers of the frog. J
Gen Physi0180, 279~297.

Goldman YE & Simmons RM (1986). The stiffness of frog skinned muscle ﬁbres at
altered lateral ﬁlament spacing. J Physiol 378, 175- l 94.

Gordon AM, Homsher E & Regnier M (2000). Regulation of contraction in striated
muscle. Physiol Rev 80, 853—924.

Gregor RJ, Broker J P & Ryan MM (1991). The biomechanics of cycling. Exer Sports Sci
Rev 19, 127—169.

Huckstorf BL, Slocum GR, Bain JLW, Reiser PM, Sedlak FR, Wong—Riley MTT & Riley
DA (2000). Effects of hindlimb unloading 0n neuromuscular development of
neonatal rats. Devel Brain Res 119, [69—178.

Kawai M & Schulman M10985). Crossbridge kinetics in chemically skinned rabbit
psoas ﬁbres when the actin—myosin lattice Spacing is altered by dextran T-S 00. J
Mus Res Cell Mat 6, 313—332.

K6hler J , Winkler G, Schulte l, Scholz T, McKenna W, Brenner B & Kraft T (2002).
Mutation of the myosin converter domain alters cross-bridge elasticity. PNAS 99,
3557-3562.

Littleﬁeld RS & Fowler VM (2008). Thin ﬁlament length regulation in striated muscle
sarcomeres: pointed-end dynamics go beyond a nebulin ruler. Semz'n Cell Dev
81'0119, 511-519.

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"39","39

Metzger JM & Moss RL (I987). Shortening velocity in skinned single muscle ﬁbers
inﬂuence of ﬁlament lattice spacing. Biophys J 52, 127-131.

Metzger JM. & Moss RL (1990). pH modulation of the kinetics of a Caz"":'-sensitive cross-
bridge state transition in mammalian single skeletal muscle ﬁbres. J Physiol 428,
751-764.

Moreno-Gonzalez A, Gillis TE, Rivera AJ, Chase PB, Martyn DA & Regnier M (2007).
Thin-filament regulation of force redevelopment kinetics in rabbit skeletal muscle
ﬁbres. JPhysiol 579, 313-326.

Moss R1, (1979). Sarcomere length-tension relations of frog skinned muscle ﬁbres during
calcium activation at short lengths. J Physio! 292, 177-192.

Paddon-Jones D, Shefﬁeld—Moorc M, Urban RR, Sanford AP, Aalsland A, Wolfe RR &
Ferrando AA (2004). Essential amino acid and carbohydrate SUpplementation
ameliorates muscle protein loss in humans during 28 days bedrest. J Clin
Endocrinol Alembol 89, 43 5 1-435 8.

Prado LG, Makarenko I, Andresen C, Kruger M, Opitz CA & Linke WA (2005). lsoform
diversity of giant proteins in relation to passive and active contractile properties of
rabbit skeletal muscles. J Gen Physiol 126, 461-480.

Riley DA, Bain JLW, Thompson J L, F itts RH, Widrick J J , Trappe SW, Trappe TA &
Costil] DL (1998). Dispropoﬁionate loss of thin ﬁlaments in human soleus muscle
after 17-day bed rest. Muscle Nerve 21, 1280-1289.

Riley DA, Bain JLW, Thompson JL, Fitts RH, Widrick JJ, Trappe SW, Trappe TA &

C ostill DL (2000). Decreased thin ﬁlament density and length in human atrophic
soleus muscle ﬁbres after spaceﬂight. J Appl Physiol 88, 567-572.
Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"40","40

Riley DA, Bain JL, Thompson JL, Fitts RH, Widrick J], Trappe SW, Trappe TA &
Costill DL (2002). Thin ﬁlament diversity and physiological properties of fast and
slow ﬁber types in astronaut leg muscles. JAppl Physiol 92, 817-825.

Riley DA, Bain J L, Romatowski JG & Pitts RH (2005). Skeletal muscle ﬁber atr0phy:
altered thin ﬁlament density changes slow ﬁber force and shorten.ng velocity. Am
JPhysfol Cell Physiol 288, C360-365.

Schachat FH, Diamond MS & Brandt PW (1987). Effect of different troponin T-
tropomyosin combinations on thin ﬁlament activation. J Mol Biol I 98, 551-554.

Schakel SF, Sieven YA & Buzzard 1M (1988). Sources of data for developing and
maintaining a nutrient database. J A m Diet Assoc 88, 1268-1271.

Smith S & Zwart S (2008). Nutritional biochemistry ofspaceflight. Advances in Clin
Chem 46, 87-130.

Stein TP, Leskiw M], Schluter MD, Donaldson MR & Latina I (1999), Protein Kinetics
during and aﬁer long-duration spaceﬂight 0n MIR. Am J Physiol Endocrinol
Metabol 276, E1014-E1021.

Stualt CA, Shangraw RE, Peters 13] & Wolfe RR (1990). Effect ofdietary protein on bed-
rest related changes in whole-body-protein synthesis. Am J Clin Nutri 52, 509-
514.

Stevens L, Mounier Y & Holy X (1993). Functional adaptation ofdifferent rat skeletal
muscles to weightlessness. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 264, R770-
R776.

Thornton W (1978) Chapter I Anthropometric changes in weightlessncss. pp 11-160, In
NASA Reference Publication 1024, Anthropometric Source Book Volume 1:
Antmpometry for Designers, Ed. Staff of Antr0pology Research Proj cct, Webb

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19. 2010

"
"41","41
Associates , Yellow Springs, Ohio, Accession Number: 79N1 1734; Document ID:
19790003563; Report Number: NASA-RP-1024, S-479-VOL—l.

Trappe T, Costill D, Gallagher P, Crccr A, Peters JR, Evans H, Riley DA & Fitts RH
(2009). Exercise in space: human skeletal muscle after 6 months aboard the
international Space station. J Appl Physiol 106, 11594168.

Trappe S, Trappc Ta Gallagher P, I'larbcr M, Alkner B & Tesch P (2004). Human single
muscle ﬁbre function with 84 day bed—rest and resistance exercise. J Physiol 557,
501-513.

Widrick JJ, Knuth ST, Norenberg KM, Romatowski JG, Bain J LW, Rilcy DA, Karhanek
M, Trappe SW, Trappe TA. Costill DL & Fitts RH (1999). Effect ofa 17 day
spaceﬂight 0n contracti 16 properties of human soleus muscle ﬁbres. J Ph_1=siol 516,
915-930.

Widrick JJ, Norenberg KM, Romatowski JG, Blaser CA, Karhanek M, Sherwood J,
Trappe SW, Trappe TA, Costill DL & Fitts RH (1998). F orce—velocity—powcr and
force—pCa relationships of human soleus ﬁbers after 17 days of bed rest. J Appl
Physiol 85, 1949-1956.

Widrick JJ, Romatowski JG, Bain JLW, Trappe SW, Trappe TA, Thompson JL, Costil]
DL, Riley DA & Pitts RH (1997). Effect 0f 17 days of bed rest on peak isometric
force and unloaded shortening velocity of human solcus ﬁbers. Am J Physiol Cell
Physiol 273, C1690-C1699.

Witzmann FA, Kim DH & Fitts RH. (1982). Hiudlimb immobilization: length-tension
and contractile properties of skeletal muscle. J Appl Physiol 53, 335-345 .

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by gucsl on August 19, 2010

"
"42","42

Yamashita-Goto K, Okuyama R, Honda M, Kawasaki K, Fujita K, Yamada T, Nonaka I,
Ohira Y & Yoshioka T (2001). Maximal and submaximal forces of slow ﬁbers in
human soleus after bed rest .1 Appl Physiol 91, 417-424.

Zange J , Muller K, Schuber M, Wackerhage H, Hoffmann U, Gunther RW: Adam G,
Neuerburg JM, Sinitsyn VE, Bacharev A0 & Belichenko 0 I [1997). Changes in
calf muscle performance, energy metabolism, and muscle volume caused by long
term stay on Space station MIR. Int JSports Med 18, 8308-8309.

Downloaded from J Physiol (j p.physoc.org) by guest. on August 19, 2010

"
"43","43
Table 1. Summary ofaerobic 311d resistance exercise performed while on the ISS.
Cycle Ergomcter (CEVIS) Treadmill (TVIS) Resistance Exercise (i RED)
Time gluinfwk! Workload (watts) Time gminfwk) 829.011 { mEhg Exercises Fregucnc! Sctszch
138 i 26 126 st 10 146d: 32 3.2 £0.13 Squats 3-6 daysfwk 12 - 20
Range: Range: Range: Range: Heel Raises 3-6 dayS/wk 12 ~ 20
Little — 296 102 ~ 150 64 - 312 2.1 — 5.5 Dead Lifts 3~6 days/wk l2 - 20
For more detailed information about the exercise prescription perfonned while on 1118 133 and individual
aerobic resistance exercise data proﬁles for each crcwmcmber. please see Trappe el al (J. Ap/JI. Physio}. 1~—6:
1159—1168, 2009).
Downloaded from J Physiol (jp‘physccnrg) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"44","44
Table 2. Diameter and cross sectional area offhe 3018133 and gastrocnemius slew iype { ﬁbre
pre- and post—ﬁight.
WW .. __ .. .. .. ......,... “m_GamenwiW'ﬁ—mls""
Qiameter (ISA {)iameter SSA
: _MMMMJEL Wr€mw£m __wi‘i Em Nwwﬁ __-: “raw
A
Pre~Flight 70 18’? 3: 13: 9277 3‘: 416 56 ’22 :3: 2 4155 .3; 13:3,
Posthlight 45 38 3m i“ 54 2663 i 74* 28 39 33 i 3:: g; 2682 m 97* 65
3
meFlight 39 3*: x 2 4002 1':- 193
rmuF‘ligm 29 ’25 :1: 2 :66 446: m 204 11:
C
Pre~thht 48 105 i 3 3732 :f: 3 [6 18 9§ :i': 3 ?802 :i: 443
Foxbf‘light 47 83 i V '3} 5333 :E 183* 63 14 ‘39 2‘; 5 9} 659? :{z 741 85
I}
?re~FEig11? 52 99 4; 1 3‘81? ix 223 33 93 i 3 ?62? i"" 396
?wst—Fiighi 49 78 fr: 2“ ”39 $8223: &: E%* 62 24 134 ~:r~. 2* 3’6 439] :2: 505* 56
E
?ra—P'lighz “‘5 102 :: 3 8358 s. 473 32 100 i 4 8185 :: 3:4
?ost~?iigh1 64 8'7 r}: I“ 85 634$ i: 364* ?2 32 88 :2: E“ 88 {30% é: [3’0” ’74
F
Fm~§iigizt 3i £21 .-..».: 3 1:356 :£ 5 i3 53 85 ﬁ 2 3838 52:24.8”
?osi‘d‘ilighz 28 59%: 1* 49 2?98 :r EZG‘ 24 13 69 :i: 2* 81 3’23}: :i: £61* 64
G
?m-F¥igh§ :35 9? x 1 33391 .4: 1’36 44 ’23 ‘2: 1 $0? :3: I {8
.pt3st-«Fiigh§ 56 85 iv 1* 88 5?56 & 298* ’78 27 6'7 :3: 2* 86 3356:: §§‘?* ’34
ii
Pmnﬁﬁghz' £34 39 '4? i 6316 :21: E31 42 80 t‘x I 5937 :i: ¥60
Post-Fiight ’2: 3""; :r: 3* 87‘ 46176 :1: 1w ”9:; 33 68 m 2* 8:3 3694 ; 221* :23
I
Pre-Flighf 86 ‘3'? xi: E 7522 it £84 36 65 r: 2 3381:: 199
_._.-.._._Eﬂﬂﬁjglzim??:WWW?‘ :Mﬁﬁﬁ‘mg‘liwéﬁi _EiWWL 5': ‘ WWW"" __m.:_§131:133 . ???..m
High Treadmill
PmﬂFlighz 243 ?i} x § 65.17 2;: 936 138 85 3.: I 6006' 3:: 1691
:..,.......:W?0SEﬁEighjw 22‘? ??mi‘gEi .. _-_-—5335 :‘L 3.23 ...-__84*~'9 .,,,:....33 ”ER ....__3%_1__,,_:Wif?§.3 “’333""W3
Low Treadmill
I’re~Fligh.t :29? :04 M .9019 2:: 753 137 88 : 3 5758 :: 892
pospy.§§ggwwg§§M§ 2:»: W ?::9 4496:278'“ 53:12 114 53 :z 1* 85 iii: 4093 Q}: 1 73:? :
AK Crew Members
owv’light 540 98 :2: i ?90? :2: 705 305 $2 :: 1 5351 7. 643
PogtuFlighE 458 :79 i 1* 39 ‘x 6 3824 459* 6713135 “K v: 31.: 86 r 2 M 4:35 “$391 75:3
High treadmill gang} subjects 8,, ii, (3‘ and Pi: and low treadmill gmwg subjeczs A, {:2 3:), $3, and 1;. values are
means :l: SE; n, no. of ﬁbres smdieé. 33:}, peak Ese-cnetric force; ‘34:: percent afpreﬂigm wkse; Va, mammal
shortenin g Velocity; FL, ﬁbm ieagth; *signii‘icamly diffemm from pwﬂighz value: P<{}.{}§;
Downluadcd fmm 3 ?hysioi {jp.phy 500.0%} by guest on August 19, 2810

"
"45","45
Table 3. Peak 1"" orce and maximal shortening velocity of the soleus slow
type 1 ﬁbre pre- and post—ﬂight.
P0 V0
Crew Member n mN ""/0 kaIn2 FL'S“1 %
A
PrewFlight 70 0.86 i 0.04 97 i 2 0.90 i 0.04
Post-Flight 45 0.38 i 0.01* 44 144 i 4* 0.73 i 0.04* 81
B
Pre-Flight 39 0.48 i 0.02 124 i 4 1.13 i 0.16
Post~F1ight 29 0.43 i 0.02 90 97 i 3* 0.80 i 0.03 71
C
Pre—Flight 48 0.97 i 0.04 113 t 3 0.60 t 0.02
Post-Flight 47 0.55 t 0.02‘ 57 102 t 4 0.51 t 0.03* 85
D
Pre—Flig‘ht 52 0.96 t 0.03 123 t 3 0.93 t 0.05
PosthIight 49 0.55 i 0.02‘ 57 116 i 3 0.81 t 0.04 87
E
Pre—Flight 45 0.78 t 0.03 97 t 3 0.80 i 0.05
Post—Flight 64 0.66 t 0.02‘ 85 111 i 2* 0.83 i 0.04 104
F
Pre~Flight 41 1.29 t 0.05 114 1: 4 0.96 i 0.06
Post—Flight 28 0.39 t 0.01* 30 143 1: 4* 0.53 i 0.03’ 56
G
Pre~F1ight 55 0.86 i 0.03 118 t 4 0.85 1: 0.04
Post~Flight 56 0.63 i 0.03* 73 109 t 3' 0.67 1: 0.03* 79
H
Pre—Flight 104 0.74 t 0.02 118 t 2 0.84 1: 0.03
Post-Flight 71 0.47 i- 002"" 64 104 t 4* 0.62 i 0.02' 74
l
Pre-Flight 86 0.91 i 0.02 124 t 3 0.75 t 0.03
Post-FliQt 69 0.74 i 003* 81 113 i 3* 0.58 i 0.03' 77
High Treadmill
Pre-Flight 243 0.73 i 0.01 115 t 2 0.88 :1: 0.03
Post-Flight 220 0.56 :1: 0.01 * 77 106 :1: 2* 0.72 :1: 0.02"" 81
l..0w Treadmill
Pre-Flight 297 0.97 i 0.02 114 :1: 1 0.83 :1: 0.02
Post-Flight 238 0.56 i 0.01"" 58 121 i 2* 0.64 i 0.02* 77
All Crew Members
Pre-Flight 540 0.86 i 0.01 115 :1 0.85 :1: 0.02
Post-Flight 458 0.56 :1: 0.01"" 65 114 :1: 1 0.68 i 0.01* 80
High treadmill group subjects B, E, G, and H, and low treadmill group subjects A, C, D, F, and 1; values are
means i SE; n, no. of ﬁbres studied. P0, peak isometric force; %, percent ofpre-ﬂight value; V0, maximal
shortening Velocity; FL, ﬁbre length; *signiﬁcantly different from pre«ﬂight value. P<0.05; For subject C
the n for V0 was 35 and 31 for the pre~ and post—ﬂight sample.
Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19. 2010

"
"46","46
Table 4. Peak force and maximal shortening velocity of the gastrocnemius slow type I
ﬁbre pre— and post-ﬂight.
P0 V0
_Mﬂﬂ1¢f *1 __ml‘1mi ka‘ml FL'S""' 2%.--.
A
Pre~Flight 56 0.47: 0.02 116 i 3 0.86 i 0.04
Post‘Flight 39 0.38 i 001* 81 144 i 4* 0.71 i 005* 82
C
Pre-Flight 10 0.78 i 0.05 100 i 3 0.67 i 0.03
Post-Flight 14 0.59 i 005* 76 92 i 5 0.59 i: 0.03 8‘)
D
Pre-Flight 32 0.83 i 0.03 113 i 3 0.95 i 0.06
Post-Flight 24 0.46 i 002* 55 118 i 4 0.85 i 0.05 90
E
Pre—Flight 32 0.82 i: 0.04 107 'J: 5 1.05 i 006
Post-Flighl 32 0.67 i 0.02* 82 112 i 4 0.91 i 0.07 87
F
Prc-F1ight 53 0.73 i: 0.08 136 i 20 0.83 i 0.05
Post-Flight 13 0.45 i 0.09 62 121 i 5 0.65 i 0.06 78
G
Pre-Flight 44 0.53 t. 0.01 114 i 4 0.80 i 0.05
Post—Flight 27 0.35: 002* 66 103 j: 9 0.59 i 004* 74
H
Pre-Flight 42 0.56 i 0.01 114 i 3 0.87 i 0.04
Post~Flight 13 0.43 i 0.04* 77 118 i 10 0.58 i 004* 70
I
Pre~Flight 36 0.37 i 0.02 120 i 8 0.80 i 0.04
Posl-Hight 24 0.39 t 0.02 105 125 j: 5 0.67 i 004* 84
High Treadmill
Pre-Flight 118 0.62 i 0.02 112 i 2 0.89 i: 0.03
Post—Flight 72 0.50 i: 002* 81 109 i 4 0.73 i 004* 82
Low Treadmill
Pre~Flighl 187 0.60 i: 0.03 121 i 6 0.85 i 0.02
Post»131ight 114 0.43 i 001* 72 125 i 3 0.71 i 0.02* 84
A11 Crew Members
Pre~Flig11t 305 0.61 i 0.02 118 i 4 0.86 i 0.02
.. 135 . . 0.02""
High treadmill group subjects B, E G, and 11, and low treadmill group subjects A, C, I), F, and 1; values are
means :- SE; n. no. of ﬁbres studied. P3, peak isometric force; %, percent 0fpre»ﬁight 1Mlue; V0, maximal
shortening Velocity; FL, ﬁbre length; ‘1‘ Signiﬁcantly different from pre-ﬁighl value, P<0.05
Downloaded From J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"47","47
Tame 5. Diameter“ cross sectional area? peak fame. and maximal shortening vciocity ef the.
50123133 fast type II ﬁbre: pm» and post»ﬂ£gh§.
MW H_me M_ VG
WCOﬁmeMLWEW
I'Iigh Tread miEIE
Pre~Flighz 3’? 9i} i 2 6548 i 296 8.82 .3: 0.04 129 :i: 3 2.62 m 8.26
PoshFlig Eat 24 8”? vi: 3 92” 6170 .6: 490 94 {ESE} x 01)""? ‘98‘ 1302M? 2,32 é: 8.25 96
Low ”I‘rcadmiil.
Pm—Fljghg 23 ms t. 5 9054 :t 845 E28 ""i: 8.09 139$ 5 233.: :t 825
Posl~Flight 68 3'? 5‘: 2* 73 481.8 x 296* 53 {A68 3:: £103“ 57 144 '3 3.} E) + f}. E""? I E3
AH Crew Members
Pre—Flight 60 95 i— 2 7358 J; 396 {3.93 m 385 133$: 2 2.66 :1: 8.16
Post«Flight 84 3f} 3: 2* 86% 5245 :i: 255* ”I! 8331 2:: {333* ?3 E40 :t 3 2.94 t 8E5 11}
High treadmiii greasy: Skibiecﬁs i3. 23, {3, and EL and low treaﬁmiﬂ groggy sub§ects A, C. D, F, and 1; values are
means :1: SE: :3. no. {?f‘ﬁbms gtudiad. ?g, peak isometric fence; 4%“ p€¥€€§€ of preﬁight value; V0, maximal
shortening Veieciry; 1:1“, ﬁbm imgth; """" Significantly different from pmvﬂighE value, P<0,05..
{Esmzkmdeci finm J Physiui (“Ep.phjr's ccmg} by guest an August 19a 2010

"
"48","48
Table 6. Diameler, cross sectional area, peak force, and maximal shorten.ng velocily of
lhe gastrocnemius fasl type [I ﬁbre pre- and post-ﬂighl.
Diameter CSA Po V0
Condition )1 pm % um“ % mN % 1(1‘lx’m2 F Ixs'1 %
High Treadmill
Pre»Flight 52 9| i 2 9709 :1: 361 0.97 + 0.05 147 i 3 3.45 i 0.17
PoshFlight 58 35 5: 2 93 5845 1221* 87 0.78i0.03* 80 l36i:3 2.78-Jz0.l3* Bl
Low Treadmill
Pre~Flight 76 69 L 2 3970 :. 223 0.57 :1: 0.03 1535+w 4 3.30 d: 0.14
Post—Flight 81 70 3:1 101 40121168 101 0-61i0.03 107 154i3 2.763201% 84
All Crew Members
Pre-Flighl 128 78 .+.. 2 5045i 282 0.73 i— 0.03 151:1. 3 3.36 i 0.11
P031~1""ight _ 1 9-9 .. 9 968 i"" 902 . 93 '47 ‘ 2 2-77 i” 0'09”“ 82
High treadmill group subjects B, E, G, and H, and low treadmill group subjects A, C, D, F, and I: valuesare
means :1: SE; n, no. of ﬁbres studied. P0, peak isometric force; 0/0, percent ofpre—ﬂight value; V0, maximal
shortening Velocity; FL, ﬁbre length; * Signiﬁcantly different from pre—fiighl value. P<70.05
Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest. on Augum 19. 2010

"
"49","49
Table 7. Peak stiffness (Bo), Po/Eo ratio and the rate constant of tension redevelopment
(kn) 0f the slow type 1 ﬁbre pre- and post-Spaceﬂight.
Condition
Sol Type I Fibre
Pre~Flight 2.]635007 (146) 62.6120 [.58 + 0.04 (164)
P05t~Fli§ht 2.47 :1: 0.09 (103)* 52.3 3: ].9* 1.55 z 0.04 (127)
GM Type I Fibre
Pre~Flighl 2.22 i 0.03 (90) 64.3 : 2.2 1.47 :t 004 (111)
Post'High‘ . 2‘6 . '44 0-03 (‘09)
Values are means t SE; no. of ﬁbers studied shown in parentheses; En. peak elastic modulus; P0, peak
isometric force; km rate constant oi‘tension redeveIOpment; * signiﬁcantly different from pre-fligh’r value,
P<0.05
Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.mg) by guest on Augmt [9, 2010

"
"50","50
Table 8. Vnm, Peak Power, Force and Velocity at Peak Power for 8016115 Slow Type 1
Fibre pre- and Post-ﬂight.
11 F1. s""1 1.1; FL 5-1 06 Watts 1:1 mN Fl..s“
A__.._.-..-—-M.._.mm.—-_.-MMM.-...—2--Mm.—m----m.—----,..-—__
Pre-Flight 49 0.91 t 0.05 0.036 1 0.002 19.39 :~ 1.39 2.04 i 0.09 0.137 3: 0.006 0.139 2 0.006
Post—Flight 25 0.77 +. 005* 0.028 i 0002* 5.36 i 0.29* 28 2.04 i 0.08 0052 i 0002* 0. I 03 i 0005*
B
Pre-Flight 19 0.88 :2: 0.05 0.038 i 0.002 10.37 i 0.75 2.64 i 0.13 0.075 i 0.005 0.136 2 0.004
Post—Flight 11 0.76 .2: 0.04 0.033 1* 0.002 7.35 x 039* 71 1.60 i 0.07“ 0.064 t 0.003 0.114 i 0005*
C
Prc-Flight 25 0.95 6 0.06 0.029 :1: 0.001 20.86 :2 2.61 2.31 i 0.20 0.146 i 0.009 0.134 i 0.008
Post-Flight 28 0.93 + 0.07 0.033 :I: 0.003 11.13 i 084* 53 2.11 L 0.16 0.084 r 0003* 0.129 :1: 0.007
D
Prc--Flight 32 1.04 21-. 005 0.024 :1: 0.001 17.95 i 1.10 2.26 i 0.11 0.132 2 0.004 0.133 4 0.006
Post-Flight 28 0.83 .4: 0.05"" 0.030 2:: 0002* 9.45 t 068* 53 1.90 :t 009* 0.079 i~ 0003* 0.117 t 0006*
E
Pre-Flight 26 0.90 i 0.07 0.026 i 0.002 13.08 i 1.19 1.43 i 0.05 0.110 :t 0.007 0.117 i 0.007
Post-Flight 40 0.71 i 0.03“ 0.031 t 0.002 9.45 + 0.38“ 72 1.59 i 0.06 0.093 0% 0003* 0.101 i 0.003“
F
Pre-Flight 29 0.87 z 0.06 0.025 i- 0.001 17.11 i 0.83 1.50 i 0.08 0.157 + 0.007 0.113 + 0.007
Post-Flight 6 0.61 i 0.09 0.051 1*. 0010* 7.00 1. 183* 41 2.70 $11.67* 0.06] + 0006* 0.110 3: 0.004
G
Pre—Flight 38 0.78 i 0.04 0.024 .+.. 0.001 9.94 1: 0.64 1.35 73: 0.08 0.103 3: 0.005 0.100 :t 0.005
Post-«Flight 26 0.56 d: 0.03"" 0.032 d: 0.002"" 5.90 i 0.50”“ 59 1.05 _ 0.05'I 0.079 t 0008* 0.080 wt 0.003""I
H
Pre-Flight 45 0.90 1: 0.05 0.025 :I: 0.001 9.09 i. 0.34 1.55 :t 0.06 0.082 i 0.004 0.117 r. 0.005
Post-Flight 38 0.52 i 0.03“ 0033 i 0002* 4.40 i 028* 48 0.98 .1 007* 0.058 :1: 0003* 0.077 :3: 0004*
1
Pre«1‘light 48 0.72 i 0.03 0.024 i 0.001 10.02 i 0.45 1.34 i 0.07 0.11] i 0.005 0.09] i 0.003
Post~Fli8ht 37 0.46 .+. 002* 0032 i 0001* 6.48 i 048* 65 1.00 1 006* 0094 i 0005* 0.067 :r 0003*
m_------_m—_M-_,_.-._.___,WMW._—2-_M--.H_—H_--_.W_---_.mm-
Prc—Flight 128 0.86 i 0.03 0.027 i 0.001 10.35 t 0.57 1.63 i 0.05 0.093 i 0.003 0.115 7': 0.003
Post-F‘light 114 0.62 i 002* 0.032 .4; 0001* 6.77 2. 028* 63 2: 6 1.26 i 004* 0.076 i 0003* 0.089 J_r 0002*
immnTQ—ﬂ“""““""""""——“""”—ﬂwm—
Pre-Flight 183 0.88 fr. 0.02 0.028 i 0.001 16.52 i 0.64 1.84 i 0.05 0.134 .1 0.003 0.121 35 0.003
Post-Flight 124 0.76 i 004* 0.031 i 0.001 7.98 i 035* 48 “L 6 1.77 i 0.07 0.077 :5 0002* 0.104 .+. 0.004“
.__AW~_—_M-.-_—__- 2-.---.2mm—2 .-.-......-,-.....—_ ,.-_._..._..__—M...._.—
Pre-Flight 3 I l 0.88 i 0.02 0.027 1. 0.001 14.20 i 0.45 1.76 1* 0.04 0117 i 0.002 0.1 19 : 0.002
Post~Flight 338 0.68 i 0.02“ 0.032 i 0.001“ 7.47 i. 0.24“ 54 i 5 1.53 i 0.05“ 0.077 i 0002* 0.097 i 0002*
11.110. of ﬁbers studied. me maximal unloaded shortening velocity determined from the Hill plot;
2111‘0. unitless paramete; describing curvature of the 10101912810001; relationship. The relative power unit of Wattstiter (W L”)
is equivalent 1’)ka m“ FL 3'1; V 1:1 .111 PP, velocity at peak power; Force at PP, force at peak power; 17L, ﬁbre length; 110. of
high and low treadmill crew members listed in parentheses; * signiﬁcantly different from pre~ﬂig11t value, P<0.05.
Downloaded from J Physiol [jp.physoc-org) by guest on August 19. 2010

"
"51","51
Table 9. me, Peak Power, F orce and Velocity at Peak Power for Gastrocnemius Slow
Type 1 Fibre Pre— and Post-Flight.
Crew M 6 mb er Vm 351’.) .3. Peak 13130: Force at PP V61 :11 PP
n FL s"" “N FL 5-. 94. Watts L“ mN FLs”
WX.—..--__,H__MM.__-Wm—M.W—--_--..--mm—.----...W
Pre—Flight 42 0.87 170.04 0036 i 0.002 10.04 i 0.59 2.34 t 0.10 0.074 .‘c 0.003 0.133 t 0.005
Post-Flight 26 0.72 i 0.06” 0.034 t 0.003 5.64 i 034* 56 2.15 r 0.10 0.054 : 0002* 0.103 :‘c 0006*
(‘
Pre-Flight 10 0.64 d: 0.03 0.038 i 0003 12.0? i 0.86 1.56 r 0.09 0.120 x_- 0.009 01009:. 0.003
Post-Flight 10 0.64 i 0.04 0.032 d: 0.003 6.90 i 044* 57 1.25 3: 006* 0074i 0006* 0093 i 0.004
D
Prc-Flight 28 086 : 0.06 0.027 i 0.001 13.48 i 0.85 1.79 i 0.09 0115 at 0.004 0.116 rt 0.005
Post~Flight 24 0.781 0.10 0.030 i 0.002 7.24 i 044* 54 1.71 :E 0.09 00712 0.004"" 0.105 2 0.008
E
Pre~F1ight 24 1.08 d: 0.05 0.024 :t 0.001 16.21 :E 0.86 1.88 i 0.13 0.1 17 d: 0.006 0.139 i 0.005
Post~Flight 26 069 i 005* 0.032 r 0002* 8.85 .4: 0.3 9* 55 1.47:t 006* 0.091 t 0004* 0.099 i 0005*
F
Prc-Flight 40 0.75 1 0.04 0.025 t 0.001. 7.37 i 0.41 1.28 i 0.05 0079 i: 0.004 0.097 d: 0.005
Post—Flighl 12 0.69 : 0.07 0.030 :r. 0.003 5.70 i 023* 77 1.50 i 007* 0.06] ""i 0003* 0.094% 0.006
G
Pre-Flight 33 0.79 i 0.04 0.022 :1. 0.001 6.30 :t- 0.28 1.32 '3 0.06 0.064 3 0.002 0100+ 0.005
Post—Flight 25 0.51 i 004* 0.036 3: 0005* 340$ 027* 54 1.01.1: 009* 0.05.0 i 0005* 0.074 .+. 0004*
H
Pre—Flight 32 0.77 :h 0.04 0.0272: 0.002 7.311 0.36 1.42 i 0.07 0073 i 0.003 0.101 :1- 0.004
Posl—Flight 11 0.60 :b 0.07"" 0.037 :1: 0005* 4.94 .2 0.44“ 68 1.4 Lt 0.16 0.058 I 0006* 0.087 :1: 0005*
I
Pre-Flight 29 0.82 2 0.04 0.025 :E 0.001 4.694: 022 1.45 t 0.11 0.045 :2: 0002 0.106 t 0004
Post—Flight 24 0.52 i 004* 0.034 t 0003* 4.11:2: 0.24 88 1.31 r 0.08 0.056 1 0003"" 0.073 :1: 0004*
WéW_ _—M""_—mm——*W—HM'W
Pre-Flight 89 086 .4: 0.03 0.024 :1.- 0001 9.34 i 0.53 1.51 i 0.05 0.082 t 0.003 0.111 :5 0.003
Post-Flighl 62 0.60 i 003* 0.034 i 0002* 5.96 i 0.38"" 5‘) r 5 1.27 i 006* 0.069 3% 0004* 0087 i 0003*
WE'WMW—WM——WMW—WW""_——h""‘m‘m
Pre«F1ight 149 0.81 i 002 0.029 i 0.001 9.07 3% 0.36 1.73 i 0.05 0.08] i 0.003 0.113 i 0.003
Post-Flight 96 0.67 3: 003* 0.032 :1. 0001 5.30 t 020* 66 1 7 1.66 .+. 0.05 0.062 :r 0002* 0.094 :1: 0003*
WW----_—mm-.-._—m._—-,.,.._-___—.W-_W—
Pre-Flight 333 0.83 i- 002 0.027 i 0.001 9.17 i 0.30 1.64 i 0.04 0.08] i 0.002 0112 i- 0.002
Posl-Flight 158 0.64 i 002* 0033 i- 0001‘ 5.86 i: 019* 64 2‘: 5 1.51 t 0.04 0065 i 0002* 0.09] i- 0002*
n.n0. of ﬁbers studied. Vmam maximal unloaded shortening Velocity determined from the Hill p101:
a/Po, unitless parameter describing curvature of the force-velocity relationship. The relative power unit of Wattstiter (W L"")
is equivalent. of kN m“2 FL 5""; Vel at PP, velocity at peak power; Force at. PP, force at peak power; F L, ﬁbre length; no. of
high and low treadmill crew members listed in parentheses; ""‘ signiﬁcantly different from pre~ﬂight value, P4005.
Downloaded from .1 Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"52","52
T able 10. Force-Velocity Characteristics of Fast T ype II Fibres Pre- and Post-ﬂight.
I1 FL 5 “N FL s“ 93 Watts L"" mN F1. 3""
m”..—._--m2-._..._-..-..-_mm__-_.-._-._.m_.._....----.—m_.m..—_m_m-m_
Pre-Fl‘ight 24 1.76 .1: 0.17 0.0593: 0.005 51.72 '3 4.09 7.37 i 0.48 0.1643: 0.011 0.313 d: 0.023
Post-Flighl 29 1.62 T 0.14 0.059 d: 0.005 28.52%: 420* 55 6.22 2"". 0-56 0.092 d: 0008* 0.28] i— 0.018
Gastrocnemius
Pre-Flight 58 1.84 i; 0.13 0.079 -:; 0006 40.96 3% 2.80 9.13 d: 0.43 0.117 A; 0.006 0.344 :1- 0.016
Post—Flight 80 1.68 J: 0.10 0.065 -2- 0.005~:~ 32.59 r. 1.44* 80 6.75 i: 026* 011623 0.005 0.292 :L- 0012*
Values are means 1: SIS; n,n0. of ﬁbers studied. Vnm. maximal unloaded shortening velocity determined from the Hill plot;
afl’o, unitless parameter describing curvature of the force-velocity relationship- The relative power unit of Wattsz’Liter (W L”)
is equivalent of RN 111'2 1: L s""1; Vel a! PP, velocity at peak power; Force at PP, force at peak power; FL, ﬁbre length;
* signiﬁcantly different from pre—ﬂight value. P<0.05; *signiﬁcantly different from pre-ﬂight value, P<0. 1.
Downloaded {tom J Physiol Up physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"53","53
Table 11. Force-pCa [elationship in slow type I and fast type II ﬁbres pre- and post-
spaceﬂight.
Variable Pre—Flight P031~F|ight Pre—vFlight Post-Flight Pre-Flight Posthlight
n 125 9B 76 80 3] 49
Activation Threshold 6.96 i 0.02 6.94 i 0.03 6.85 i 0.03 6.90 i 0.03 6.63 i 0.05 6.56 t 0.03
pCaSO 5.94 i 0.02 600 i 0.02“ 5.86 i 0.02 5.97 t 0.03“ 6.10 i, 0.04 6.09 i 0.03
N, l.60.t0.05 1.72 $0.06 1.73 $0.07 [.89 £0.09 1.761020 2.14 :015
N; 2.35 :t 0.04 2.72 f 007* 2.43 : 0,06 2.79 i 009* 5.04 t 0.38 5.49 i 0.34
Values are. means 2+: SE; n, no. of ﬁbers studied; All values are pCa 0r ~-lo g of the Caz"" concentration and
pCagn, -log of the Caz; concentration at half—maximal activation; N, and N3, slope of Hill plot for values
greater than and less than half—maximal activatiom respectively; The type H data are composite means for
all fast ﬁbres from soleus and gastrocnemius muscles“ signiﬁcantly different from pre~ﬂight value, P<0.05.
Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"54","54
Figure Legends
Figure 1. Relationship between soleus ﬁbre atrophy and the decline in whole muscle
volume with prolonged space flight.
The percent change (pre- to post-ﬂight) in the mean type I ﬁbre diameter is plotted versus
the % change in soleus muscle volume for each crew member. The crew members A—l are
identiﬁed by a speciﬁc color with the low and high treadmill users indicated by circle and
square symbols, respectively. The variables showed a signiﬁcant (p < 0.05) correlation
with an r I 0.66.
Figure 2. Representative Pre- and post-ﬂight ﬁbre bundle.
Cryostat cross sections ofsubject C preﬂight (A) and postﬂight (B) soleus muscle ﬁbres
were stained histochemically for actomyosin ATPase activity atter acid preincubation
(method ofl-{uckstorfet 01., 2000). Slow ﬁbers are darkly reactive, and fast ﬁbers are
1i ghtly reactive. Based on computerized digitizing planirnetry, the post—ﬂight slow ﬁbres
are 31.5% smaller in cross sectional area. Bar equals 75 pm for both panels.
Figure 3. Relationship between microgravity induced ﬁbre atrophy and percent
increase in fast ﬁbres in slow soleus muscle
Symbols plot the percent decrease in mean ﬁbre diameter versus the percent increase in
fast ﬁbre type for each crew member. Each subject A—I is color coded as in ﬁgure 1.

Dovvnloaded from J Physiol (ipphysoeorg) by guest on August [9, 2010

"
"55","55

Figure 4. Relationship between ﬁbre diameter (um) and peak Ca2+ activated
isometric force (mN) pre- and post-ﬂight for low treadmill group
Each symbol represents the result Ofa single soleus ﬁbre. Type 1 ﬁbres, blue diamonds.
Type [1 ﬁbres, red squares. Hybrid Type [,1] ﬁbres, green triangles. Number of ﬁbres for
each ﬁbre type and crew member are shown in the insert.
Figure 5. Relationship between ﬁbre diameter (um) and peak Ca2+ activated
isometric force (mN) pre— and post-ﬂight for high treadmill group
Each symbol represents the result ofa single soleus ﬁbre. Type 1 ﬁbres, blue diamonds.
Type [I ﬁbres, red squares. Hybrid Type [,[I ﬁbres, green triangles. Number of ﬁbres for
each ﬁbre type and crew member are shown in the insert.
Figure 6. Top Plot: Relationship between microgravity-indueed ﬁbre atrophy and
amount of treadmill running (min/wk). Symbols plot the percent decrease in mean
ﬁbre diameter versus amount of treadmill running (min/wk) for each crew member.
Bottom Plot: Relationship between pre-flight ﬁbre diameter (um) and percent ﬁbre
atrophy. Symbols plot the mean pre~ﬂight ﬁbre diameter versus percent ﬁbre atrophy.
For both the top and bottom plots, each subject is color coded as shown in Figure l. The
circles and squares indicate low and high treadmill groups, respectively.
Figure 7. Relationship between ﬁbre diameter (um) and peak Ca2+ activated
isometric force (mN) pre— and post-ﬂight for type II ﬁbres
Each subj eet is color coded as shown in Figure 1. The average pre- and post-ﬂight values
are represented by circles and triangles, respectively. The plots show soleus type II ﬁbres

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"56","56

for the low (top left) and high (top right) treadmill groups, and gastrocnemius type II
ﬁbres from the low (bottom leﬁ) and high (bottom right) treadmill groups.
Figure 8. Force-power relationship of pre- and post—ﬂight fibres
Continuous lines represent composite pre—flight force-power relationships and dashed
lines the post‘ﬂight composite forcc-power relationship for soleus type I ﬁbres (upper
left), soleus type [I ﬁbres (upper right), gastrocnemius type 1 ﬁbres [lower left), and
gastrocnemius type 11 ﬁbres (lower right).
Figure 9. SDS-polyacrylamide gels illustrating MHC, actin, MLC, troponin and
tropomyosin in single human soleus ﬁbres
The 12% gel illustrates the protein proﬁle of two pre-ﬂight and two post—ﬂight ﬁbres
from crew member F. The ﬁbre type, maximal shortening velocity determined by the
slack test (V0), and the slope of the force-calcium relationship for forces < 50% of
maximal Ca2+ —activaled force (N2) are shown below each lane. The area outlined by the
dotted box in 9A is expanded in QB to show the troponin T fast ﬁber isozymes (TnT-f)
and the tmpomyosin isoforms Tm—B and Tm—OL. The latter has a different mobility in fast
compared to slow ﬁbres. MHC = myosin heavy chain, MLC = myosin light chain, T111:
troponin I, S—TnC : fast skeletal ﬁbre troponin C, C-TnC = cardiac/slow skeletal troponin
C. Slow and fast isoforms of proteins are indicated by subscriptcd s and f, respectively.
Figure 10. Soleus myoﬁbrillar ultrastructure
Cross sections of tnyoﬁbrils cut through the A bands (A) and the thin ﬁlament rich I
bands (I) in slow ﬁbres ot‘soleus muscle biopsied before and after 6-month spaceﬂight

Downloaded t'mm J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest. on August 19. 2010

"
"57","57
from subject F (upper left — pre, upper right — post) averaging 51% atrophy and subject E
(lower le ft -~- pre, lower right # post) showing moderate atrophy (15%). Myoﬁbrils are
outline by dotted lines in the A bands to illustrate decreased size post-flight [upper
panels). Myoﬁbrils are not marked in the lower panels because they have indistinct
borders typical Ofslow ﬁbers and are of similar Size pre- and post~ﬁight. The ﬁlamentous
mitochondria (m) predominately encircling 1 bands in pre-ﬂight muscle ﬁbers become
more globular post-flight and invade the A bands‘ most striking with greater atrophy
(upper right). Both subjects contain abundant intracellular lipid drOplets (L) pre-ﬂight.
Calibration bar, [.6 pm for all panels.
Figure 11. Soleus thick and thin ﬁlament ultrastructure
The top pre-ﬂight and bottom post-ﬂight electron microscopic images are cross sections
through the A bands in regions Showing thick and thin ﬁlament overlap in soleus slow
ﬁbres from subject F. The near M-line region morphometrically sampled is in the center
of each micrograph. The postﬂight increase (52%) in thin ﬁlament density is readily
apparent. Scale bar, 100 11111.
F igure 12. Soleus ﬁbre thin ﬁlament density
Thin ﬁlament density increased pustﬂight in 5 0f 8 crew members and exhibited little
change in 3 0f 8 crew members. Subjects are color coded as in Figure 1. The circles are
low treadmill users, and the squares are high treadmill users.
F igure '13. Relationship between soleus ﬁbre atrophy and thin ﬁlament density

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"58","58
The post-ﬂight increase in thin filament density correlates exponentially (p<0.01) with
increasing ﬁber atr0phy. Thin filament density plateaus indicating attainment of the
maximum number Ofthin ﬁlaments at ~ 3200 per sq micron. Markers are colored coded
as in ﬁgure I.
Figure 14. Correlations of Fibre V0 and Actin content with Thin ﬁlament density
ln pre— and post—ﬂight soleus muscles, the shortening velocity (V0) of type 1 ﬁbres is low
when thin ﬁlament density is high and the correlation is signiﬁcant at p <0.05 (A.), while
the actin/myosin ratio Oftype 1 ﬁbres did not Change pre— to post-ﬂight and the
correlation with thin ﬁlament density was not signiﬁcant (B). Each subject is color coded
as shown in Figure [with the ﬁlled symbols pre—ﬂight and the partially ﬁlled post—ﬂight.
Figure 15. Correlation between thin ﬁlament density and the amount of treadmill
(A) and cycle ergometer (B) exercise
Thin ﬁlament density is inversely related (p<0.05) t0 the amount of treadmill (A) and
cycle ergometer (B) use indicating that high treadmill or cycle ergometer use partially
counters the increase in thin ﬁlament density. The markers are color coded for crew
member as in ﬁgure 1.
Figure 16. Conceptual diagram of increasing thin filament density following
prolonged sp aceﬂight
The sarcomere at 2.5 tun illustrates thin ﬁlament (blue line) density and lengths in a
preﬂight muscle (left half) and postﬂight density and lengths in the right half. Thin

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"59","59
ﬁlaments arise from nucleation sites in the Z band and exhibit different lengths in normal
skeletal muscles (Riley et 01., 2000, Traeger & Goldstein, 1983). The density OfIhin
ﬁlaments is highest near the Z band [6 ﬁlaments in the Near Z region) and progressively
decreases away from the Z hand because some ﬁlaments are too short to overlap the A
band (4 in Overlap A) and others end hefore reaching the Near M band region. Aﬁer
prolonged spaceﬂight, thin ﬁlament length increases (indicated by red extensions of thin
ﬁlaments) and density increases in the Near M region (post-ﬂight). In our previous 17-
day spaceflight study, thin ﬁlament densities in the normal preﬂight soleus slow ﬁbers
Were 3570/t1m2 Near 7. and 3100mm2 Overlap A (Riley et aL, 2002). [n the present study,
Near M density was 2253/ pm2 pre-ﬂight, and thin ﬁlament density in Near M i ncreased
t0 2744,""me post—flight.

Downloaded from J Physio] (ipphysocerg) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"60","F ﬁgure ”E f ,
SMWS MHC I Eibm, Aimphy {% thgm 4
mm 50 «4.0 «w ~28 «m I m 3*;
m
o C E\:
D D .40
11: ' .
-I- G - - w >
‘ W E
O £23
Q
Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest an August 19, 2010

"
"61","Fagum 2 *
,r t _‘ .' l :.-. ' \ \. .l "" ‘ 1
. ‘ s"" ‘ - .‘E ""I \
- ' ~ “ . f K , ‘ VA ‘ x ""‘
' \ . K. J j .' _ I I, A III"", E V \ '1‘. _ ‘ .
. K. I ’4': t r i ‘ V.
‘ x ‘ 1r ‘ M , ~
.. _ z“ . »
’jf‘ ; \k ‘ ‘f I .
. 1/ ‘ , f
l / R ‘ / ‘ 1’
I/é- , ., A , {J ’1‘”
V ’1 I ,: . g/ A , . ’ ‘ H .-
.' ' ' ‘ . 1/ \p r - .1 .I -
_ .. / -‘ f 31' 4' . 4
, '7’ y f. . . ‘0 . - _. ,
4. ; . "" ' ~ ‘ ""
' ' \ _, - ‘ W n . 4:, L 1'
.2, ' . 1' , . g , f . :=i;:::..§}=r.. . .- . _ r ‘ 5 ' -- f, ‘ .
 . “-. ,I'fl   ‘ . ‘ , __ : .. ‘ V . . 2
Downloadea from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"62","3
?Egure 3
, $5

g 45 ~ r- 0.63 0-

.3g 25

” a O Q

c.\° «*5 = W“ '

- “ES ; £W¢Wﬂmrmmwrmww~mw

m mIO ﬁg $0 20 363;
% Immense in. Fast Fibres
' Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010 I '

"
"63","Figure 4
3 2 . o-
5. :5 Pregubjm5 5,. 5555555555: 5-
;2 2 T5121”: 9 ” Tsw1=36 A. ”’9 ‘
3‘ E Tmﬁ?‘ ' ' o0 3515213""?! 9 60‘ o
3 ‘5' 2 TypeLLI-l 3: B‘Pej'ﬁ'g "" . ‘ .
5 :55
o
8 ' 3‘33 300 333 333‘ 55: 5-5 10-5: 55.5 5555
5.. A 2 .5 PmSubgmﬁ ,5 . 5.
5;: z TypeI-SO 15:: PmSubjmﬁ
f; z T512114! 73333.32?
3; <13 3 55551.15” 5 Typell=14 '-
3 3‘3? s . f” 30° ”3' 5;, ”0 55 50:5 555 555
‘5': 5... 5 5? “332?: 0 5 msw555:5
3.. Z ""1“ f 551555-93
5 355231“: 0 I W a '
5:5 3 155523.15“ 3 Q
.5? ' 3 I
8 333 5 65 100 333 133 555 65 55:5 555 555
5' A z 3 ?ostSubjettﬁ ‘ _? PmSubjeth
3:. Z TypeI=SO _ '*' Typei-VS
' "" :; TypeH-S a preiI-l '
.3 = ., ; -
3 v‘ 3 mxm=5 b 5.- . 551555.154 ’9 .
553 55 105 555 570 35 55 105 135 5.555
5:; PreSubj'edH -
5. 5.. 2 555551-54 DIameter (pm)
:5“? :‘z TspeE-3 4""
3 E l : T}P€i,ﬁ'1
39 65 190 555 555 I 835151515TYPE3'3
; PcstSubjectEE Soleus Tﬁx LII -
3 5 r5pez-52
3 r"" T5peﬁ=13
2-. E 1 TypeUI-L‘
x 5 ‘
3; .5, .
”“3 :55 65 . 100' 5. 135 555;:
Dlametermm;
‘ Damioaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"64","5
ﬁgure 5
9 13 msMecta 1.3 1 Preslbimc
: A15 Imma 35 -; TypeI=§5 . 5
5 l1: Typeu=4 m 1 T9011“!
M. 5. IypeIJIWE;
i 30.9 «g 6 0.9 ..¢
’ 03 l ’ M O ’
§
3° ‘5 103' 335 176‘ 30 65 100 135» 3:70
9 1.8 '7 “
9 i PutSub B PostSubjectG
'5 A 1-5 '11“):ngt 1'5 Typol=57 I .
5:. Z 1.2 Type 11=5 W 1.: =3 TypeII=2 ""
'3 5M TW°W=3 M T-‘P‘m‘l‘ m
‘3 M W ' M t
0.3 E A a. {33. E $4; %
o i ""' W"" """"""—""T‘_——""“"""""" ""“w""""—“ ""l"" “"""" _“m""""""‘""""""""""""""'§ 3‘ >I~.mm,mm,»ww,>,,,,,,.,m~..z_._._._,,,,_._.,,,_._.,,_,l
30 65 100 135 25.70 30 65 100 135 170
1.8 i 1.8 72'
3 1.5 .i ?Sg‘ﬁff E . . 0 15 PreSijectH .
s. A 1.2 g 131"" “31.? . . 1.2 Typol=109
,3 Z E .W’H'Z’f 5 Typeﬂ=15 O ,
""""' E 0.9 Typelll=§ 9:9, jg; Q
30 6- am) 135 am 30 55. 100 33.5;- 3:30
' 13 m
9 15 qutSubjectE I. 3,5 ’ ¥""t31'5g‘n
f: §Typel=64 I A g F!""
?=- 22 03 ?'E'peIJIP-‘E . M E Imm=1 m
‘5 v 0.5 I . 9.6 g
3%.? 3.3 g . M 0
ﬂ, 4;“- _;§ g; T..««« «W
30 65 100 135 E?!) V 30 :55 100 135 170
"" Diameter(um) Diameterglm)
Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"65","ﬁ
Figure 5

a ”l 0

rs. 45 9 I=G.58

LL . 35

'5 5 25. -

g; 2 15} O O . a {“3 ,

3.2:: a

D :2 5"" . 3 m

<3 -, Y

Q ’3' “

3 3'0 191} 153 235' 355‘- 3-20‘ 356-.
Amount of'Treaimiﬂ Running mh-ivk
13% ~ 3» r= ""3
E E 1U} b\‘hmﬁmn
E 11’ ”'5' "" Wm»... I 6
:3? 3 95 ?\3
2L; = ”meth -
V g .E st. 3
’ M ‘15 .. ﬂ
4’.) 5E} 60 ‘79 8C3 9% ms: 115%
PtePostFibre Diameter Ratio
Downloaded ﬁom J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"66","7
Fégum “E '
Egow Treadmill Soleus Type 11 High Treadmill Soleus Type II.
EVE? ~ 1.6
oo o
E; 3.73? 3‘2
é ' 4 .43 '
Q, w A GOA
LE: 213.3% A 0.4 Q A
50 70 90 110 130 50 70 90 110 130
Egaw Treadmill Gastroc Type EE EEigh Treadmill Gastroc Type EE
3,5 m
""5;"" 0.8 ,3 9,8 013““)
a . 0 its . A
{g {354%- BA
{3; {:2
. 5% 7e3- 90 W 33% 50 70 9!} m 3.363
Diameter (me Diameter {gm}
Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 201E)

"
"67","Figure 8
1:; 55:5 -
5;. Evolcus bzﬁiezéza
,.. 1 1'}ch 5552-5-55 . Tm: W Fébrﬁ
£5. 5; , 35;:
-->, :1 g @ 3‘ .
:5. - g$ Q $.a §. § 3‘
3 'Q % $5 .1 ,
s 5 $0 aw
.3 ' C 73'? a
.5"". U "" Q
5.. I w
.5: 9. avg .
5 . v .
N3 gr
.. '5. 5,3
' 5% ' . 5
5.5:;
._.. q' {5553555553 W _ Gamay:
.- ' , , _ . .5... 65 Q"". . . .
«9:: . 5 5:553:35 3.5abrc5 :58 § ‘9 lync ll 1 lbrcs
:3: s3 we $33. =: I: ' WQ
7: 5‘: 6% I E»
[‘3 ., 3.6 :1 1-. :5} .0
s w a
. . 49!- “ v. :.
3. E16! '13:. E; H ’
g, $6
' “'5 .. o
33 a . ‘2? '3
@333: 3-2 5; .5; 33;; {g 131g 55:5 7? ’5‘? {Z?- 2. £?3 5:3 i“; 1? R: t *3-
‘ force (mENZ) Fitma {mN}
Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by gusst on August 19, 2030

"
"68","9
$igur99
A“ Pre Post
MHCr' ‘_ _‘ . 5-~5MI-IC°§§
. , . ' "" B' Pm Post
' _5, ._' m Ii 11, I II I
~ Am“ . ﬁvacun
e :32: 5.— ~ ~ m
E g £ a g” E garg— ' é ~ 3‘ £3” m mm“
. 5 g 5‘3"""": 5 ' n —..— s? -: ' .«
*mﬁu _ 7 I 5 5 3: MM?“
TnI, _ ‘ f; 3 :‘5. TnIs
S-TnC ""” 1"" 9W ”Ii: _.._ C-TnC
;   ‘ ‘ 'le ‘2 ﬁr?!
MLC,-—~ .5 .i ”FW"" '
- FibreType II I II I
V; 3.87 (3.65 2.91 0.6? ‘
N; 5.61 2.39 5.26 2.89
Downloaded from J Physiol (jgﬁphysocnrg) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"69","C
Fsgure 1Q
‘- Q‘B-nl’l v .v‘ F N . .._ ' 73."". ' ' _ Ci
' . . ~ f _-‘ - . .
. I ' . J: '. 4 b"" 5‘ .
‘ '2: <-..} ’ 1&1; ,- A ‘ a . f
, ‘. K W a , x ..
«cw» ' _ . .
_. - ' . I l. l r""
J- 2‘53 ~ ‘3 . n3» -» r"" - .‘ - i
'.é‘_‘raf ""t : 3,.” ‘2‘}, _ ‘0' at 'w x , .
R ,4. 9 -r:“’i'~'\- v, y - ‘ j ‘ ‘ ._. ‘ "" I
' ""ﬂ?"" ' O; ‘3': t rr .’ '""Q‘Yu: , x v T 1‘ m
|{'_""~‘ 1! W ‘35 7 ‘ Iw-d'r’ ""' n w lb ' - ~ r '
. . - ll 2: ﬂ , ""
1‘ . ‘Vi‘n ﬂit“: 5% . Q. ' 3! 9 .‘ .‘ ’3 -
1 ""u «Uh- u». ‘ 9""“: “31k "" l , "", ' .
. "". .‘ > ' 1:5. ’ ‘35,. v Q a. - . \. ‘ ."" § . '
: . V"" - *
25""? ., 1""?"" 1 am; .r gt- 1» ' “3"" _ ‘ T I ~:
.: x. mm; - v. ‘ ' * . “ ~ *4 -
i w 51*- -. . .‘ v ' '
E ‘7' 4 Lirfg"" ‘ f: ' .4}? -‘ i . ‘ 1'“ \ ‘ .'
, f Iv ’- ’5
t."" .‘ ‘ r ,n ""H- } . ’ 6' ‘ '21? ‘ ‘. x x a ‘ ‘
1,,u-ab ‘ﬁ ~ . . . "" v. .. “tr i. I, . . y .a‘ V. ""K
'41: - -.‘.;"" . "" "" "" r 71' - -' Y.
. 3"";3'4- 1 T,-.""‘;j‘- - ,f- 5‘ .. 23""???"" ‘ "" ”L - 1‘ W ‘ "" \ ‘ . f
53- , i . («utswr‘ ’- - ‘- A-a-ﬁ :~ , ﬂ ‘
- ' . ‘i, I i , g2“; 12."" .- I}: '. — I . ' ' ﬂ ‘ ' 1“ A L '
i'w ""13.23! ‘ .‘ f7 f‘gﬁ ‘ ’ﬁ: qt)! ‘. ‘ r . .t .. ' ‘ I
.9; L'I'“ 'r‘ 29¢“? 4. f . "" 3: 4-2 - t . c I
. f‘- , :rzﬂtlz > ' _ -' “ #:7' I A A .ﬁku - ”“1 n. i k '5 ‘ ‘
'~..,v.:-.—v1a . ‘ .12.. 9“”? ‘7‘ a, ' v
$3, .- I 'U’irviu' . .> > ‘ ' ‘ V“.
, — . , LIN."" _ ~. ‘ ~= N. '
o .. .. a ‘ ’._‘f y‘ , (v z ¢ .. .
ﬁ , . 0 L ,— ’ 4 _ 'l _ ‘
:; «yr.- . i n . , w ' -
. . ,1 . p .g 4  i .j,_. _-
. . ‘ _-.' ﬂ -‘ 1' ‘ . , ' . ,._-, “ :7.
y; Y M ‘r? Q N .3 . fl. ’ . #15 ‘ 4. 5| . £3 k . ‘\ .2 ‘
. ‘ '3 "" ﬁ"" 1 > ‘ V“ ‘ f - - 1
’1' i! _ . V ‘ ‘A~.:w ‘ \a .3 r .t i
' ' ‘ "" ’HM ' 3 -
H ‘ . .‘. ‘ s “'.""$ ”V in». ‘. V. “T
,2 .. _ n“ :‘r < ,— , ,
L . _ ‘* ""14-"".51 y w 5‘3; ‘
. ‘ . IJ {?gf~_~if.x;.‘;-=-. 3""
: ‘ _ A , """"‘ s . ' » .7» I‘ ‘3'.“ '4 ‘
; ' I "" i"", I -- “""Wt‘ 3‘
’ ‘-. - y. r. C
Z . \, I ‘. } ' ' . 4
. ' L . . . LI“. .
i I 1- , ‘ ‘ I
. L , ' ‘ + k . n
, l ‘ ' o
i *"" ‘ -- ..
Z ' .0 ' ' - « .
. o 'r a '
I ~ I ‘ 1“ v . ‘ ,
ﬂ . . ~n- ‘ - . ~
. 1 , '
. .1 '.>"" o ‘v ‘ ~ ' '
. rq . ' , . '
‘ . ' V |[ “A . "" 'f ‘
- . ‘ 4-“ - I , '7 V ~ I "" ,.
._ .- ~ . Q- ‘
._ ‘ _ ,‘ b ‘ ; . q; . .u _. , I
9’ ‘ b ’ .-’_ - h . U’ 3 , , ' -_ ‘
'. ’s' s ﬂ ,1. . ' , r"" ”"" ‘
Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"70","3
ﬁgure 4%
-:'7""""'a:""""""”'"" 3'4”} 3’42»: ‘ Er "" 7r Rm»; 21W, ' -. . - . ,2., -, 2 ..., , ..M
y A A I. I'! .2” . _ w 1 j .‘ ,' ,- 1 3 ,’,.‘ '2. . o .I .r ’ : ‘ , l_‘ ’l: I ...
.II"" 1‘ 2 I:._' ??%ivyf ’,f 1;,fv’: v'yf""§,iﬂq '-¥t“""'i""""' ‘ 1.. . I r‘_.'l""'é' >' t'aw’g'fﬂ1f’v)‘. ,' '. ”’21."" 1,12,} ‘ _ = ,2 "",2 I I
2‘. - 2:17;” f 1""?"" 5'1? ’5' ""2 ~ '2'”: ﬁx” ‘ ‘5; 2'10? 25""» 44.35254 2-5322"" 5 «2:4?
12 ;. 2-... ..‘r -:. 49 . .- yyk'x' ' -‘.':»'..1~, ""’ ”r"" 2'7” ﬂ «'32, 7 .. '1 2 1. ‘ ' ‘ .2 """"
4"" f, a "",9 f 2’ , ""' 2.2' ‘ ""I‘ ' ' """" t ‘ """" ‘,' ‘ ﬁt 5I 2"" . a . . W : 2 ‘- I ,' ¢ .0
35%,E"", .Jf Ag», 61’? #17715.» {’2 ; 335' ' 'r’ '3- 2’J'q-'1”:""-' ""1,"". 'ﬁ',,-r,""v ﬁ’hyﬂéﬁé; 2 y) ‘11“. ,_ '_,,- #13,» -.
"" ""1'. . . _ .' _. ,4 1 - t, - _ ’ , - 2 . 4. - ‘ ,. 2' _ .2. .' u , .' ‘ .
.2 2 ~22 2.» .2 A _. .1292» 12 2' . 2-. .- .. , v
.1“? ,- 225,229?“ .‘r - ~22” , '2’.""'2I'2 ,’ '41"" '- - 19 . 12 . ‘ 2- '5- ”1- 4 "" ' . t- - ""t"" 3'
,3 V x 5}]: ,' , - f' h‘akfg """"'P;"" . g ‘ ' .. n f I-uiqui 'g: ,. I. ‘ .9 . 31* .117‘, 1"" .Im’_ - v..','. '. f./ 1 g.
5'1 ~ 2% '42». 225.5 2 24 - .2» - ~ 22 ..2- «saw: . - 2. 221»? '- #24 ’1 . 22.42"".
' """""" - ' "" ‘ -' -.-./' ’ (2'2 2"" I .‘ 12'7"" ;>2 -’ ﬂ . -"" .5 ~- 4/""M1’hﬁ 2.f. L” -
. '2 2922-554?” <2"" .../.2 2 ' 4:2». _—~222~»- 5.922224%»: 2. ,. ...-2,22» . 2 H2» . 5' MM .
' 321’ ’-' M '. 5% .1243, :."",: 12’; ‘2???""- . ﬂfmz‘v' 2."". ‘32 _:»»’- “.71 ' . hf 22152;! ,“f'jg 3'3”, (”2.21,-
. ""I 41-"" , ‘1"" yn' '7‘. A 7‘ ,’ X/b/ ' , 1'51, 2.2P‘9,"" ""4!. ,1: ‘ﬂ, '1 2 25'""), v 7"" hi ,--‘._'r'.""2‘§ 2 :24; I; ', ""5'
{47'2-‘2‘11” 1f""! 4.” 2 2’Wag‘z 9,134,, 2."".', Jg’ﬁtm 5:, 7 “E? “73.23? 2”"" ...?“ 3'?
37;!” 2 '3’""? 2'9 3 2‘ ’ J."" *1"".»‘tf""4 1'» ’:""'""2»‘,.'”""2':""4”'3' .. ..'_- ' ” - 2""!» 22/ :d',’;~.-§1 , 42%
4.2»...22... .22.». 2 ,2. 2 2 .2 2 2 .. 2». 3-"" . .4203».— . , 2.. V .2».-
,2,.%§., .2442 wﬂr'a-i. ﬁ '~ 2,;1- 2,1.. t,» a - 3‘2 g."" 9,; » 1 ' j. . ' ,5, 2;...
223-2». .,,2 21% —. .. 222. 2.222,», ...,»- ., , M. _ m. ,2 2 ,1 ..
""' I"" .: -'.¢Jj .' 2 ' '47,."" ' .I ‘l "" “I""; [W '. :1 I ‘P . j,:’-1 ’ "" L [V I i"" . _ “ ' ' ‘4 ""' fat -h T'""'"" _ V' ' '1
$41.15}; ""-'_. ’vqs 9:.» V52? [ﬂy -' 77,1”! ,2 {A 2-2 g, , ’27:! )1 5‘ f4, . ., .4»? 352”” 5?:- f: -3
22922.32, .an 4'2: ,. ,2 2:2» 2 ,2 . 2 f , a..- ,2.,» 2 ,2 ,2....» «9-2 2,
.. ' ' 1.215 2 ' 6”""? 14 r» ‘ ”’4’” * 3; 2.7 ‘ 9""!” 1' 5.29.9.2..- ""'9'45 1"",.2/5122»: -':
WY”! 523”?“ ’3'” 7 3‘42 .1133»: t.» -, ...-5:135” ’- '15 ""£92.. ~.-*‘-5-».i""-e-»~~-‘:»‘ ”$.55'34'224'.~' -
‘“ 35:52,» :- 2412"" 3”” M 321'. ‘ :5- 74;: 2.5""""; .5»W»¢ g1» . ,3
. ,» '» '6 ' ..T‘ 3;;1 "" ,‘u . '2‘,"" 2f?-""""f' "" .1 r‘» ' "" 7"". ""i -' ‘1 ""'J "".7 2‘ ' '1? "" ""'3 ' ' ' ' "" "" ' '
2,2», 1,1,2, .. 222;... 22 . 2w”... {44.2 . . , fly .2. . . ...y 212», (f. , 2W3, , 22. ,,22.,..2.,.,c. ..»
9.212.; ‘2'» "" {i ' ‘ ya, ' ' ”’4’“ ' ' '2 ”’2‘!” 5’” 1""” .9; 21‘ '22 ’9'"" ’2' 2 ‘3' . '9' ,‘A’ .- 2 ..
’35». :g. '14, 3'“ 5:74.590»: . f” ’1” 72.7'2 "" 3"" ., f"" "",9- 4,144; d1. $2,,»g 355.5155
4’2 ""-w’J-""i‘ j” f‘i'ﬁl'iﬁ V' w...»- 3;» 22:22?- - 3-2”: 3‘4 "" 4-; n4. 1""...4';;,.2'5”2'""::,f
I I.51 } , ‘r , 2. ,-V"""";,,""' J ‘5 ‘ 'b, .‘ b. , , 91-h » .1. V. J r - _.-. ‘. (‘7’ ,1! ‘1’, ""A"" ‘ ' ’. _"".: .- . a ', ‘11:"" I ’ r' .'
’ ' *' “"" 7"".» -'»r-""-- '5' "" ””1224. '4'” ”5’?! 522.5” -. Wig, 22':- 5422». 3""- .22223‘59'5434-4». 25:”-
ﬁ‘ “#3.” 1,22,45,21». ,1?” ~54 », $929"" 1%? 2,""..9""2""-'? ~35 2. 43),?"" .25 gt,» 5? 9-3;, '91,, 3 92;:
2 2- ,2 . . ., .2122; 1 ~ '- ~ - ~ 2 2-
.1,, .v 1"" .-l '1 .‘ > 4 .l - S"" .c ""- "".' 141“, 9'. 2 .- 2 ’L ‘ ; I 11.1%,, _ . .-
_ {'""fff’"" . Jr J"" _‘ r ' 1 /' "" ‘/ -:, {a ' ”ﬁ- - 1"" '1 )‘I’,”‘ +.[i ,1"" 5' ” '1',"" "" ' "" ‘ 'ﬁ‘ 2'4‘, ~'~,4:""'b»ﬁ1"""".'_'
‘4' 2455”” 5f”: -' ”5"""" ﬂ*‘.} 24f” 3:542”, 2.22945 22:5
""""2: ?’?‘1'5’ '7 '5 .22» --' -. . 2 ‘ .2. 22.221‘1’ 2:. 2,4142» ._ r314 -. ' "",91-12. “...-,9.-
._;’ ,-l;i'”:,y' “’4’""; ,1. ”r'f_ ???;724 of 2.1, ingb‘ Aggf/kﬁu'f off“ 1’, '11.,""9? 3. f}; 5%. {:33 sift: ”$.w "" -'2'};{g4-,¢7'3' ,3-
'.""' f""""""' "" ""' "" e f”; I ""AIP'f‘d- ‘ ""'2"" "" "" ""' """" ' ‘3’,"" 2' 2' ' ' '9'!"" H"" r ""' ' "",""f b e"" '7""; ‘ ""I _.9' . ['15s , ' '2'""- '1"" '
9&1'42/4’ $4,717.22...» ,4; 11‘ ”7;""; » 3;}... .5422:- ,r,..-,,,2.,tjk7”, - 1?..2“.,,ﬁ."",;,ﬁlu. 4 £45ifﬂ' ,2 .1344. [J
”H‘s! 142 [3:12. 221“ ,Urm-‘(T (:1 . ,4” .. ’. 9' ""t"" . c ,, x». v 2.» .352'; . >4 ,f'f/ . k"" ([4 , 2-.” .2 )2 ,_ f""- ”V‘m'y'k "",-.""'-»‘”J;'~;/""""~.'
' .233? 'z""""""'»""""'»’""""' "" 4"" '4' 75,-,” 2 2 '1‘“th 2‘?» ""2,???” _1, '9 '7 )4; 1 ”’22"" iv“ ‘5’ ‘22? H2234.”
‘: .411,“ ,4” ”9"""".2’: 4%!“ '25 jr. 'ﬂé‘ﬁ 21m ‘- . 2’, - j *2! ‘51 . , 2, X, ,-”.£ . IV £3j’ejjl ‘2‘ {41. 2 @219
.1; 2', . . '2 4“ d - V - .2 . , ' _ _ r [‘4’ >1"". 2 . . '» ‘1 _ .. .”.'r‘ 2 . p f 1‘ _ .’ r} _ ‘. . ‘
‘ ' -""o'- #233,720: "" 4""4/I'u‘..,-f'/""-.’j’3,' """". =32)!» ”"" ' """"1 (#5,! { é'f'“, 32' 7mg,"" {/27 .g’ ’2"" j ,2, ”'5! 35%,, d’fa"": ~
' '1?"" )‘fvyﬂf'y .4! ,z‘i'f‘ﬂ ! 2/ 4414.2/ _ M” ' ~' £131"" {91' *V' fy' , . -‘ w, 2‘ r ""1-,""? 2f; _, 2.1 .2. Mg"" 3”"".fo ..
17' ”y 2) .‘ . """"09 ’2'2 JP“’ .221. 4”!) 71' 22-2-1 2'"". WW '2‘? . ' 1’ ..’9‘ 11*"" ""2- 3'5""” W3“: '3"" I '4’!"" ""9""“) "" ”‘3'“
' .AJ‘ a(- $2” 2'54,» / 7""- frxf”1,..mgﬂ m7, 1%} ‘ r‘ }{’k ..f..£f""""'1’ 7' """"""ép'. . 1‘ ,4 -~,-*'.. ,3 .""‘f,;;-"". ' I' ""F 'ﬁ';21¢!4”'
.222 . ,2- ,2- ’4“. ,3 2,551, f .. .4 ac]. 'L'i' , f‘J ‘1 I, 2 ”n2. '1 {3’922 ,' ’12,.- ‘2 I"" , 7 rd 03'2"""" ... ‘ .""""4’{"".~."".'
.'1?, ., . .. 1d"" .. 7’. .2 ff -. [n e - 1% .1 { ’4’ C; . 22/ 1 .. Al, 1""? ,1- 1.. ... ,4 ‘rl r J-{,‘l""‘
‘2 27/1 2-434” 525m 2222’»: =2» .2 2r '- - ' 2:
L‘ 5 - f» .- 2 11.»; 2 3: '- :2 .-"" 12's.: 2- . “'2 '5‘ "" .' .""-‘.-‘ e” . 5"".."" "" 3r -‘2
2 '. .2 .32”? 4"""" ”""22 ""i""l~1""""53. .' "" 61,5wa, 7‘ .../fr,- 22.??1. ”2:179""? -:-'.‘ «,2.. ';
3"" '2’» 0 9,2171"" "" ' 4» .2"" 22‘4”“? £49. :22"" W2 ’ 2 v: .’-""."". 2 . '. ’1 ..,,-2 """" 241%»th
_ "" ' 1’1' - 22 5. 2 2""."" ’ t- 1 ,- Iif'd ‘-""1,J§'ﬁg’x"" ”3 ’.-"".-'I"",. . "". '2 ”$317; """"9.
""”"" ﬂ """"""""""""""$"" '1 ?oﬁ-""ﬂ "" ""‘ ' ' 2» a. ' »'—1;-""""' ”I m” "" ' -» o’w ,. {ﬁﬁ’gﬁ "".1""
'2'». 'év-l- 2, ; .- 2..,.;2.2'-.-..22.2'.,~ «1w '2 .r’2 - . .. 2. . .. . _ '-
"""" ' u ”U '; ' ""'S‘J'Wt- A.» J ‘k' ""'"" 0. ‘ P"" 3""“ ' “-(9 “'2 .1. . - 2% ’ h:‘ ' 3"". u: ‘2 '. "" L 1"" tr‘r-‘
w3i¢ﬁ »- 34'1‘422§""'2=§‘f2’-'=3 - Q '21443555'299"" '2 2:222:25; 5 .13-92.:”:;'1:€""§L.2a-ﬁ95' 22122--
'- i?» -2 W5, ' ‘ '72-22'25'2-‘3 3‘ ""’ 2.2.2.2.» .2"" -- = 12'» 2' '221-§2‘2i'-'...2r=‘ -' w ""5§*""""”'
.‘ ‘4'»w 5‘ 2¢‘2‘-"".. "" 7,, .n.‘ , ‘ 3"""" ”""219! ""In W,- _$q,-"" '~.'-.-f,,» *Anzﬁp‘; '- 1' ""I I 31' '7' .
, .2 7:331 ’W‘ﬁfx‘mﬁ.'i . . 399:2'2x‘ ,2.: - ﬂ"" ,2 2 .. ' 3”», ~ -.».9, ' .2: N21 J}. 4-21.. -
~.. .. 9*“- ~.; .. '3', ' '- ""- '9 ‘2 "".1399 *5 -* .- . ‘f. 3...: 2'. i'r'“ ' . ..‘..'- .
. 3.?» ‘ 29$ ”3"" KW”? 2,12%, ', 25.373252. W» 5.922%; 2,, J, 129??” - .15..”- .12.ny ii ."""" $1,“ 7»:,»;-,a‘--’5‘i.-. ., . 2. ,9
y) .""x, 'g 1"" 'w ."" t . . ~- 1.; "":- ""-""'~~‘,..A~. ... . '_-.,9 ',""' ‘-' h. '..‘_., .. 4 .'-'. ,‘Al’v..-"".l"" . .2
'~»: 2- ‘ 27.1""”g53‘u, :2' 313%»? 'g'ﬁtﬁ‘, ”'2"" ~‘ 9;; ""544%2; .- ' ‘é’k44~;ﬁ.3§9 ""’4‘?”
. 2221‘}? 1 ”22.. : 5’35 «15 31‘» $554.4». 955'»; _- 2 1-2.2”:
3255295». ""'""""2.ﬁéii“'-""5*rr& ~. 5'- 45» 5"": 2. 22-2,» 1-1;:24'3-32 2: 2'. -1412“ ""2: 1:“=2::*1~.‘2'2.»2"" --‘~‘»-5’- 252%.. 34.232.»-
gﬁ» .' “$?M': 51-5“: u»$ﬁ'-s% “55;. na- :2"" ‘4 -’.-.\2'~:' 1‘.“-?2:1m. 72"""":ii'i-
2232,1399 2%» ~,..,.» 5‘ . 915933.292». 2:» ”g;- avﬁuﬁa
'3. ,2 Wu: 3‘s, - ‘1 '2; -. 2;, ""47-5? 3.2m»- CI’” 32»- - -. 5— 2 ‘5‘ <3 St» ""-1.4."" 9"" -.».2«‘>.-'2'2.""..f52_ -""
» ""’r '- '4. ﬁg, ‘¥'*- .Jz'ﬂwu',""'¢' .‘U),,J't'i' ', I '65,..5‘7' Q?) '9” 1- b” .. ' ﬁ‘. ’rgf‘ﬁ-S . J‘ghgng‘l ..' r' w}; .23)"" 5
3"""" v “ ""9'- . """" ‘y‘f‘ '5. ~‘ ""1"" .- ,. .-"".::’.‘g3‘.. 297.1‘Qﬁ“-‘ , ' 1. -""~ .. ., 2 ﬁ L2~' a .5237, 3»... .-.‘,;,.,;-"" .
5'25 '5 39:31.5 - 22.22;. .2 -‘ :22591» --2»~'»»»- 15-2-2231 =%»'2.2»-.~. 2'2 ... E
' ~ "". 2- ’- . ""3.5-“: ,312-,.,«.2.»-2 -.~ '2 . 2 .. k».,-# x; 2- , '. . . .»:~.2'<.4»z.992 , 3,2 2
"" "" '. %§‘ ' -- 'ﬁ'fi‘” "" ' ""Biz, .'i4)_‘ 'r-Jz 33(3’3“ “-""~'.!’.2»'.- 91“. \h {f 5% '5» “(d7 35“,“ 5‘"" ﬁg“, _-,,»ﬁ.¢ *5,
1,: .21' , ""9 . . ~ ~ ‘ ,v_-,- ‘ . ‘ ._"" ‘ . , ""'3""! . _' 12.1.4 1 . - - “_ml 9"" , . ‘. ’v. 1: 4"" ‘l - 1"" 30‘ _ 2 .Au' -,
‘ ¢1§Jﬁw If?"" .'.£ 'ﬁﬁ'%§ ’f4f‘bwa'Xﬁa‘?'f ""if, ,' QB'.JV\KL '};""""’N‘qﬂ '._ {‘3' #(E’rjgiqt‘i‘ ‘A t... ¥%€-- - .4 ‘
.' 2 “‘ f"", "" “ 2'9- _ 2 . _- V,"" I _ ' , -_ '-- 4‘l‘x . ' . t '_‘ -ﬁ‘ :5 , -,: ' .- —: I .1» (“1x 2 I 3' ‘ c':.:.-:_\ _ ,v '1 ,
'~ ""'"""" 25W 2. ”‘14 9'2é‘ég'1i5ﬂ‘é-h5'ﬁk5dﬁ’f“ '-. ‘ ”L” K 2 :3: 22915:; a 3, Maﬁa
; -' ‘ .v‘,' ¢-’. ‘. r ' .- 7% ""'. I h ‘ ' I , h 7‘. ‘ at x” ""‘ aV-Jr‘ '§ ‘y’rl"" ‘. .
I. '2, 2' 2 1-. 2.2:. -~ 1 - ""*3? 633""» .' .'. 2.».«2424? '2 ""I '2' 1;..2: :5. 2-»23/227‘
' '39. ""1 25"" "" v 2 '3’1'59355'5'222343224: '--""=' ' 3219’;- m g, -. -. . 31' .2 a w 22.3; .2...»- ;
‘1' ‘ ' v 2' "" . '..."" 2 . """" '_' ""‘ \'1 . .' 2 1. 'v‘f 4.. .7 - 32' '-I “f. f”; x ‘ .. .~. , 2
‘_ ,1‘. .21 J J %. b: _ ... :l/P‘ ?W‘VV :2: {4.51; .» #‘fw 5 'yg‘g rt, f? i?! 9 ,_ Ir :sr, ‘ ‘3"". J,f"".,',‘$.$""§§«'£1 - ' \j
‘ ' . 7/: ""‘ I ’ - I. -‘ “.2 ( 3"".- .k“‘..- 1"" 4% “1» 1'1 3 “. ’ (W ‘ 1*th 2-,H ..r “'51."". . ’ '- r‘_. ‘~ ‘ .432 '
. . 2""» 5 ”’32""? ...-”92:2. :31? 2:»£;i2’-}'5"".‘.‘2 ‘13“??542 2“» 1 “212.9.5r-3‘22w 14‘93'92” 5.3;” *
.. . 2- 3‘. ?‘f _ . . *7? 2-3 f§'._a§, '1’..- '.,Y 33""; 29,223.», """"52 ~99 2%, 99.;}..21""'#g-19i-'_,
“‘9, J , ,,$ .L- 2% A r. ~ . ,_ ’1' ,‘ ., ”Pa: 4% 2 ,1, 7', _ A 2"".- .3) .. $“A35 .
-' w“? {\2'.‘"" '. g? ”27% «225w? _ - ’.~ 9. «$1. .... n». 'f i; -'-. 4n”: x.“ 4""? ' 13' «. «'2 2“»- I
3r, ?€ﬁﬁbf'.“ .gwM "" . ""';""£."""" Janatxr. :{g‘ﬁ ‘ixqry’ﬁwum ,'- i M'f’k 1h: .2 :k’gg,
1‘, "" _ .9 ' ""v ‘4. 2 ‘2 ‘ U.‘ , ‘.' V -' Iv “ _ I ' . '. x . .‘415, . “'1' ‘ "" 22- 2‘4“ .'. - "":4‘ : '.. i .. ’ ._
,2 .... .. 35.2,. ,2 2 22-2222 .22..»222-222» 232,222». - .292.» .2 -2 «@4224: 22:2»
$3.5 amn‘ ,)A:;5‘!3*. ?""Aﬁ'tw'h't' ‘23“ 5-,J‘lug @3541” “‘37 41ft"": .- _‘_ '1'iv""' G '- ' 5 . ~ 9%. mw'315""""'::'~;?w""5 ‘
' t' "" ' '1 - '- '-’ ‘I.' 'k "" ‘ I - ""¢""‘ ' -*"" 5""» "" 51 ”u ""' '0 ‘2 'v',’ .; ' ' '- 1:1 ‘ ~ "" , .' ﬁ 1‘ '5'; _ ,,
. f .. ,‘y y‘. ”122-4. a. I W R."" 2- ﬂ 2-: . 2 ?‘ '- ‘..’ M! 2 -' \' ‘r WIQ’

‘ 1‘» . 95"")?» ' 1f ‘ 1-? ~‘& .‘.-’ ""9* L 3‘3‘».—- “:‘1 "" 9‘""? J. ""'3' ‘ 7""”53 ‘ (a .2 ”’. '2 """" '2’ '5
52.32?” <33». 'g‘iwﬁuif‘” 5 :25'$""?"". “2H,- _ 2'57 . “3'.,4""'§4'22x 1.2. .2""sz ”£3;
- 2451-22,»...9‘ ""F'J-J‘ ‘ ’1 ' '3. "" ‘Q'N’WP- ""354.32 '31:"" . . ~fﬁﬁﬁ'ﬁ -t».’j, , {'2 W:.;2.:\,-,-. ' . ”233»?
""F; :3 Vﬁ'ykg . q-,:;""1».ﬁ‘z£“h‘t;~ _;:;’K.I :2 .9 E? , ""QA'P’H\ A: ?‘g:¢""v‘,-1 ' «‘Ié Brt‘l‘?_£’-, 'lw’ﬁ'm-f '29 i“ 7

SW"" - 2, ‘3‘"";31' .r.-""~;.1;L""J""i""‘— 'T~""W“""4' Y», '1' W ‘.--'.“""""- ”?'“5‘732 ”1}? "" ii -’ ‘5”. W2 5’7""” a.»}f»'.€'.‘,:' *2? 3”». 2'}.
22» 2.2»22 ...“... 222» '22:». 2.""- 32 2'»
._.-,~:' .,_-"".“r""v..- . :0. _"" ,. ~_'"" ’4 . L‘ l ..i' ‘ . ,~;~,. ..' 2“"" _""_:.. .«E'A ( . ’,_ ""9"" VJ. ,. :2"". ‘ ‘ .-> .r‘,‘ . 9'. - \. ‘7
”3372.29""<.'>.3”‘.13f""4?w5""<:27§""'.Zﬂfﬁ""? ' ""c’lfhzi 2- __:.~' ’1f..f""‘£""tfqz ‘3‘""2'3’”; 1253;: :.,’33""""-'¢. 1&2 - g '-
< "" 2.."" - _ 9 .' ‘1. .P.‘ 3' .., .«‘_ ' .. n g“ ,..h ‘ ,. ... '4‘.;» .;_ ‘ ._‘ .' ‘ 1"""". ... ﬂ -. r ‘ ”:31 _'- , ‘ -‘ f .‘
r'g’tﬁifﬁhf"";n ”Pk"" -§-""""}\""'~,'%3""2ﬁ'7i~.{'1;‘"" 7"""" 2‘. ‘3’?.';-;'."" '3' 41""""? '85:: ' '3"" 55% j: J»;- .2? a - ,g'cﬁ‘rq‘ .'. 1:2
J; Q"" ?J'IQ'; 4:35.! W” .’. 12.5.4», 5’ »‘. -""-'.:.r-‘.-.»”:{'N, : 2-. ""“2 $13,, 4* ""22,4,""- '-‘_-'. ..117 ’ '3? ,,"" '3.» ‘ ”f"" .
'.~‘ F. E59745. 5:34-95- -I-':»*§""’*»’¢‘,'Eyi‘591,-7‘349'2-2' """"1: -';~2,,,;>2,';‘~»‘.'=1.-.3x'< ""2. 1:"" 535-555, 31425.55N, Wuﬁﬁfx. Q, 3:“
2h . ' Al.» "" ' ”.1, "". .-' ‘ ”I""- ' '- . '1""ka ‘ :14 2.13.2”! '4 : 157;»: 72""? """"-.».>' .- -' ‘32""
3’32. «1:42 2.2.2.224» ""3 ~32. .»€»5""‘4~. ‘3'"" ...».9’” 2‘ 5s»
,ﬁ” _ Chyois-y- ~?z_»gf'“’-Lf:‘»_h, 33,537 "" ”'3‘ <1-§,2f-%'T"""""".'5;5 2""""""§.’PL‘,.;,;L”-“-'\"""" ‘rgf-‘fI-G '7 . . . ., i""
. . .1 - _ . _- 1' ‘ ‘ .’ s',' '1, ‘. . ,- {1-40}?! {... ’9'! .' “1&9. “ki’(,‘V-r. ;&. ‘ ’3; 5.;
2 . 9‘ ‘ 2.I-'. . 1‘; ...-'1’ ‘_ .c ‘3' ,f» '9'
Downloaded from J P1 ' -'
l 810 ""
y 1 (3:52phySOCorg) by guest on August 19, 2mg

"
"71","’32
F§g050 22 ,

3500 ’
E"" 3250 0
3w
3 3000 _.
$3 a 2750 w 4
Q Q /
ﬂ} 3W4 .
2500 /
5 _
33 2250 g
£22 2000 V
P - w

Pmnﬂﬁgh’i ~ Pegtnﬂight '
Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"72","1 3
F i g u re 1 3

35a% g
g
.3

mm
m H '4
4% § 2mg ~ r“: wz
g “‘3 .
Q9 9
:i:::: V
E: 35m

9 W 2% 3&3 4% §@ 6%
Percentage Decrease in Fiber Diameter
Downloaded from 3’ Physical (jmjitaysaamg) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"73","“M
F iguve 14
. a ,1;
9? 353. A
8 ‘ . Q Q '
_. m 3.9 3
5.0) if I ['7
2 M; £33. 03
”E g M n
o cg
F: 53-5 i“ éévn‘i ,
m
1-530 1750 23m} 2250 2506 275i} Eﬂfﬁﬁ 3250 3588 '
‘ ""311.7111 lfilamcm Num bcr per sq Miami:
1,3
:23:-
1g 1.6 O o B""
‘3‘ 1-4 '
m 43 ‘
.g 0.8 3? ?— 8‘31 ‘
o
1 5653-0 ??’59 20-09 2259 255% 5-2:?50 3000 3250 3500
' ﬁﬁﬁn Filament Number per sq Micrm
Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"74","”E 5
ﬁgure m 3

g4 3500

35'?"" 3250 O:

3’7 3;; 3000

E ‘5‘: I

g g: 258%

5% ' _: -

E 2250: 3 —- 0.7-;

I a 50 300 ‘250 200 250 300%
A ?rg-admill Use (min/wk}

ﬂ 3600

. é

.9: 3300 O 0

g: 35} ??CEQ

:2 5::

:15; “‘ 2:10:22 3- 0
E“? . —- 3 ‘ '

40- ‘ﬁﬁ 80 :00 1233 $40 $53 @853
B (730%: Ergome‘ie; Us: {minim}
Downloaded fmm J Physiol (jp.physcmarg) by guest on August 19, 2010

"
"75","16
Figure 16 .
Preﬂighﬁ Pog’iﬁﬁgm

VZ- - n M - 2

§
Néar Ovéﬂap Néar Néar

Z A M M

Downloaded from J Physiol (jp.physoc.org) by guest on August 39, 2030 I

"
