"","x"
"1","WHITE PAPER
2009-2010 DECADAL SURVEY ON BIOLOGICAL AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES IN SPACE
NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNClL/NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
Assessing the perceptual consequences of non-Earth environments
Laurence R. Harris, Michael Jenkin, Richard T. Dyde, HeatherJenkin, James E. Zacher
Centre for Vision Research, York University, Toronto, Ontario M3] 1P3 Canada
<harris@yorku.ca >
Summary: This white paper summarizes the need to measure the perceptual consequences of
long-term exposure to reduced gravity environments. Such information is essential to establish
astronaut comfort, optimum operational performance and for the design of appropriate living
spaces.
As part of the human spaceflight program, humans will live and perform in the challenging
environments that space travel and visits to mars and the moon present. Our perceptual
systems have evolved to operate with the constants and constraints that exist on Earth. It is
important that we understand the limitations and changes that result from living in these
unusual environments.
Our normal Earth-bound lives have provided a set of constants such as the continuous pull of
gravity, the fact that the sky is generally lighter than the ground, that trees grow roughly
vertically, that the horizon is level with our eyes and many more. Perception takes place in the
context of these constants. As a demonstration, figure 1 shows an example of the well-known
Thatcher illusion [1]. First view the figure with the page held upright. The two images appear
normal and relatively similar when viewed in this orientation but when the page is rotated 180
degrees structural differences become readily apparent. Recognition of faces is dependent on
their orientation relative to the viewer. Now rotate the page until it just becomes apparent
which face is distorted. This angle will change depending on the orientation of the body relative
to gravity. Even recognizing when a face is distorted depends on the context provided by
gravity!
The perceptual conundrum that an astronaut faces when operating in microgravity is illustrated
in Figure 2. Many of the ’natural’ perceptual cues that underlie our everyday existence are lost
in outer space. Here an astronaut is operating in the Shuttle payload bay. The astronaut’s field
of view is limited by the space suit. The lack of gravity leads to unusual activity in the various
gravitoreceptors within their body. The space suit also limits haptic feedback normally felt
_ 1 _

"
"2","a la|
' gr r ‘ J :
, ‘ x t}-
Figure 1. The Thatcher illusion. Large structural changes are easily overlooked in upside-
down faces but become readily apparent when viewed in their normal orientation.
through the skin, and the lack of gravity provides unusual perceptual cues to the idiotropic
(literally ”introspective”) senses including those associated with joint weighting and normal
muscle tension. Finally, the visual environment itself is unnatural. The normal visual cues
(ground, sky, surroundings) are missing, but more even more subtle effects are present. For
example, the lack of an atmosphere in space or on the moon eliminates the normal scattering
of blue light from the atmosphere which changes the apparent colour of objects with depth.
Given the critical nature of gravity to a wide range of V ‘
perceptual systems it is perhaps not surprising that astronauts [34 EPA 3559;: -
operating in microgravity have reported a wide range of Warm :
perceptual effects [2]. One important perceptual effect that is i """"3'ing""‘""~’uf) '
often reported in microgravity is the visual reorientation ’1‘; ’63.
illusion (VRI) in which astronauts suddenly experience walls, '
ceiling and floor surfaces changing identities [3]. VRI’s have i z ‘
been reported on Skylab [4], Spacelab [5] and continue to be i
reported to this day. A related perceptual effect is that the
perceived direction of up may vary with head tilt differently to
how it varies under normal gravity (see below). Illusions of this
type can be dangerous because they can lead to errors in
operating equipment (misinterpreting the orientation of a _ 2 i
. . . . . ‘ .‘iﬂ’M-‘LM' ’ 1-le
toggle SWItch) or naVIgatIng to erhergency statlens (turning left Figure 2. An astronaut
Instead of right). However, we still cannet .pr-edlct these floating in the Shuttle
perceptual phenomena or completely minimize their effects. payload bay.
Probes for measuring perceived orientation.
Long before the development of spaceflight and the need to understand the perceptual effects
of living in outer space, it was recognized that the definition of ”up”, or equivalently ”down”, or
which surface is the floor, were fundamental questions on Earth. For example, in our normal
_ 2 __

"
"3","day-to-day environment, one could imagine asking subjects a very simple question like ’where
is the floor?’ [6] and use this to measure the perceived direction of up, but other probes are
possible too including the use of luminous lines [7], shaded disks [8], and ambiguous characters
[9]. These can all be used to assess the effect of combined environmental cues to the
perception of up on broader perceptual tasks.
Each of these probes has advantages and disadvantages. For example, the luminous |ine probe
requires the subject to judge the orientation of a line relative to the perceived direction of
gravity -- a judgement that is meaningless when gravity is absent. But to illustrate perhaps the
simplest of these consider the probe that asks a subject to indicate which surface in their
environment is the floor. The floor is that surface in an environment that provides physical
support. In a normal environment the floor might be sensibly defined as the surface most
closely aligned with the gravity-defined horizontal. It turns out that this is not the only factor
taken into account in making this decision.
Given a probe, or a set of probes, it is then possible to quantify the processes that underlie our
perception of which way is up, and from this begin to understand the conditions that lead to
VRI’s and similar perceptual problems in unusual gravity environments.
Which way is up?
The direction of up can be modeled in a number of ways. idiotropic
Perhaps the most straightforward is to amalgamate the vector
various perceptual systems that transduce information "" /
about the direction of up into three broad categories; a , It\vector‘ sum
measure of the direction of up obtained from the visual ' gravity P
sense, a measure of the direction of up obtained from I
gravity-defined cues and most importantly the oto|ithic vision
division of the vestibular system which in collaboration i
with somatosensory cues provides cues as to the direction '
of gravity, and body-centric (idiotropic) cues, cues
obtained from the frame of reference anchored in the long
axis of the body. Mittelstaedt [10], and more recently
Dyde et al. [9], have argued that the direction of up can be Figure 3' Predicting the
modeled in terms of a weighted vector sum of cues as to perceived direction of upfrom
the direction of up provided by these three broadly its contributingfactors.
defined sources of information (see Figure 3).
This weighted vector sum model has proven to be effective in modeling the perceived up
direction and assessing the significance attached to each cue under a range of conditions
including ground-based [9], short-duration microgravity [11] and neutral buoyancy [12].
Different environmental conditions result in different emphases being placed on the three
components that make up the model. Within the context of this model, illusions such as VRI can
be seen as a consequence of a change in weighting of the available vectors.

_ 3 _

"
"4","When the body, visual cues and gravity are misaligned, the perceived direction of up is not
aligned exactly with any one of these cues but is a compromise ’best guess’ derived from the
weighted sum (figure 3). Changes in the weighting of the cues, such as can occur when gravity is
not present or is present at an unusual level, can lead to a distorted perception of upright and
potentially disastrous consequences.
In space, which way is up?
Surprisingly little is known about the full effects of the range of unnatural perceptual cues that
can be encountered in space travel and how they act and interact with the perception of up.
Visual cues. Astronauts operating in space habitats are presented with unusual and often
uniformly textured environments. Rack space is always a premium in spacecraft and as a
consequence cues provided by consistent alignment of equipment are often sacrificed. Highly
polarized scenes with natural objects are key to providing a visual up [13, 14]. The lack (or at
least reduction) of ”intrinsically polarized” objects [15] in the artificial environment found
within spacecraft further reduces the visual cues available to define a coherent direction of up.
When inferring 3D structure from shading information, the brain exploits the fact that on Earth
light comes from above [16]. Lighting in the interior of space habitats is often designed to
provide equal illumination on all surfaces and in all directions thus providing no coherent cue to
up based on lighting. The lack of a coherent lighting direction means that shape-from-shading
judgements are likely to be inconsistent with the judgements that would have been made on
Earth of the same object. Indeed, this is the basic premise behind the use of shape-from-
shading judgements as a probe to determine the direction of up [8, 17].
As astronauts move outside of their habitat onto the surface of planets or float above space
structures, further complications come into play. In addition to many of the effects that occur
indoors, astronauts are now faced with views of long distances that are not coloured naturally
by the blue shift found on Earth. Astronauts are also faced with the significantly reduced field of
view provided by their environmental suits. Given the critical importance of visual cues in the
perception of self orientation when gravity is not present, the limited field of view found in
space suits is likely to further reduce the ability of vision to provide an effective cue as to the
direction of up [18].
Haptic cues. The haptic system contributes to the sense of orientation on Earth by indicating
pressure points where the body touches support surfaces. The microgravity environment
reduces such cutaneous pressure and also unloads joints which can result in a loss of limb
position awareness [19] and contribute to disorientation [20]. The effect of such a reduction
can be assessed from the weighting assigned to body cues in the determination of up.
Body cues. The body provides a frame within which questions like ”which way is up?” can be
answered. Normally we have at least a partial view of our body and we can usually find where
our feet are. It takes an unusual environment indeed to break this fundamental idiotropic

_ 4 __

"
"5","representation. Wearing a space suit, unfortunately, provides such an environment in which an
astronaut cannot see their body and where visual cues to the ”floor” may not be useable.
Disorientation is induced when this situation is simulated on earth [21].
Gravity cues. Short-duration microgravity studies have demonstrated that when gravity is
effectively removed for short periods of time humans tend to rely more on the perceived
orientation of their body rather than visual cues [11]. Surprisingly, this also appears to be true
during periods of hypergravity as well. Human performance under long-duration microgravity
is less well understood, primarily due to the small subject pool of astronauts who have
experienced long duration periods of microgravity [22]. The Bodies in the Space Environment
(BISE) project, sponsored by the Canadian Space Agency, currently underway on the
International Space Station is studying the long terms effects of exposure to microgravity on the
perception of up. Although the BISE project will answer critical questions about the adaptation
of self-orientation perception to microgravity conditions, the question of human performance
under other gravity states is not as well studied.
Our preliminary experiments using parabolic flights to simulate other gravity conditions suggest
that lunar gravity conditions are more similar to Earth gravity conditions. Given that zero gravity
conditions (and hypergravity conditions) are significantly different from earth gravity, what is
the minimum gravity state that is necessary to provide Earth-like performance?
Perceptual measurements will help us live and work in space.
As we move from our constant one gravity environment to the harsh realities of outer space,
the moon and mars, we leave behind our normal gravity conditions. We will also leave behind a
range of perceptual cues that underlie much of human perception. We must expect that these
differences will have both short-term and long-term perceptual consequences. Ground-based
and short-duration microgravity experiments have demonstrated a range of systemic and
reproducible effects on our perception of self-orientation.
Many of the experiments needed to investigate perceptual phenomena can be carried out
using a laptop with controlled viewing conditions, currently available on the International Space
Station in the form of Neurospat, with appropriate software to control the display.
For humans to function properly in space it is critical that the effects of operating in that
environment be properly quantified. Such knowledge can be used to train space travelers to
understand the effects of the unnatural environment on their perception of self-orientation
and to aid in their training. The information may also be of value in terms of designing
appropriate countermeasures for these effects and in the design of habitats and equipment
that reduces or minimizes the severity of the effects.

_ 5 _

"
"6","References

[1] Thompson P (1980) Margaret Thatcher: a new illusion. Perception 9: 483-484

[2] Oman, C. M. (1987) The role of static visual orientation cues in the etiology of space
motion sickness. Proc. of Symp. on Vestibular Organs. Houston, TX. 25-37.

[3] Oman, C. M. (2007) Spatial orientation and navigation in microgravity. in Mast, F. and
Jancke, L. Spatial processing in navigation, imagery and perception. Springer; 209-247.

[4] Cooper Jr., H. (1976) A House in Space. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Austin, TX

[5] Oman CM, et al. (1986) M.I.T./Canadian vestibular experiments on the spacelab-l
mission: 4. Space motion sickness: symptoms, stimuli, and predictability. Exp. Brain Res.
64: 316-334

[6] Harris LR, et al. (2009) Where's the floor? submitted for publication

[7] Aubert H (1861) Eine scheinbare Drehung von Objekten bei Neigung cles Kopfes nach
rechts oder links. Virchows Archiven 20: 381-393

[8] Jenkin, H. L., et al. (2004) Shape-from-shading depends on visual, gravitational, and body-
orientation cues. Perception 33:1453-61.

[9] Dyde RT, et al. (2006) The subjective visual vertical and the perceptual upright. Exp Brain
Res 173: 612-22

[10] Mittelstaedt H (1991) The role of the otoliths in the perception of the orientation of self
and world to the vertical. Zoologische Jahrbucher - Abteilung fur Allgemeine Zoologie
und Physiologie der Tiere 95: 419-425

[11] Dyde RT et al. (2009) The effect of altered gravity states on the perception of orientation.
Exp Brain Res. 194: 647-60.

[12] Jenkin HL, et al. (2009) How do SCUBA divers know which way is up? The influence of
buoyancy on orientation judgements. Journal of Vision 9: 716a

[13] Harris LR, et al. (2007) The relative contributions of the visual components of a natural
scene in defining the perceptual upright. J. Vision 7: 303

[14] Oman, C. M. (2003) Human visual orientation in weightlessness. In Harris, L. R. and Jenkin,
M. R. Levels of Perception. New York: Springer Verlag; 375-398.

[15] Howard, I. P. (1982) Human Visual Orientation. John Wiley, New York

[16] Howard IP, et al. (1990) Shape from shading in different frames of reference. Perception
19: 523-30

[17] Jenkin HL et al. (2003) Multi-sensory contributions to the perception of up: Evidence from
illumination judgements. J. Vision 3: 638a

[18] Jenkin HL et al. (2007) Effect of field of view on the levitation illusion. J Vest Resl7: 271-7.

[19] Watt D, et al. (1985) Effects of Weightlessness on an Otolith-Spinal Reflex. Canadian J.
Neurol. Sci. 12: 181-181

[20] Gentaz E, et al. (1996) Role of gravitational cues in the haptic perception of orientation.
Percept. and Psychophys. 58: 1278-92

[21] Howard, I. P. et al. (2005) Visual orientation in a mirror world tilted 90 degrees.
Perception. 34:7-15.

[22] Young LR, et al. (1986) M.I.T./Canadian vestibular experiments on the spacelab-l mission:
1. sensory adaptation to weightlessness and readaptation to one-g: an overview. Exp.
Brain Res. 64: 291-298

_ 5 __

"
