"","x"
"1","mitten in W %
INTEGRATIVE NEUROSCIENCE doi:10.3389/tnint.2015.00013
Filling gaps in visual motion for target capture
Gianfranco 30500 ”2'3 *, Sergio Delle Monache”, Silvio Gravan02'3, Iole Indovina2'3, Barbara La Scaleia 3,
Vincenzo Maffei3, Myrka Zago3 and Francesco Lacquaniti1'2'3
7Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome ”Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy
2 Centre of Space Bio—medicine, University of Rome ”Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy
3 Laboratory of Neuromotor Physiology, IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy
Editedby: A remarkable challenge our brain must face constantly when interacting with the
Sharon G’Ila’Ie‘DOtan' UCL' UK environment is represented by ambiguous and, at times, even missing sensory
ReViewedby’ _ _ information. This is particularly compelling for visual information, being the main sensory
Hugo Merchant, UniverSIdad .
NaCI-Onamwdnoma de Mexico, system we rely upon to gather cues about the external world. It is not uncommon,
Mexico for example, that objects catching our attention may disappear temporarily from view,
We/berMar/nOV/C The University 07‘ occluded by visual obstacles in the foreground. Nevertheless, we are often able to keep
Queenyand'Ausna/[a our gaze on them throughout the occlusion or even catch them on the fly in the face
*Corresmndence’ of the transient lack of visual motion information. This implies that the brain can fill
Gianfranco 80500, Department of . . . . . . .
Systems Medl-CI-ne, UnI-VeFSI-tyof the gaps of missmg sensory information by extrapolating the object motion through
Rome ”TorVergata,”\/ia the occlusion. In recent years, much experimental evidence has been accumulated that
MOHTDe/""er 7/ 00733 Rome, lta/V both perceptual and motor processes exploit visual motion extrapolation mechanisms.
e‘ma’l‘b0500@med‘”mroma2""l Moreover, neurophysiologioal anol neuroimaging studies have identified brain regions
potentially involved in the predictive representation of the occluded target motion. Within
this framework, ocular pursuit and manual interoeptive behavior have proven to be useful
experimental models for investigating visual extrapolation mechanisms. Studies in these
fields have pointed out that visual motion extrapolation processes depend on manifold
information related to short—term memory representations of the target motion before
the occlusion, as well as to longer term representations derived from previous experience
with the environment. We will review recent ooulomotor and manual interception literature
to provide up—to—date views on the neurophysiologioal underpinnings of visual motion
extrapolation.
Keywords: visual motion extrapolation, eye movements, manual interception, internal representations, gravity
INTRODUCTION for the lack of sensory information. This ability appears to be
A remarkable Challenge our brain must face constantly when acquired rather early during post—natal development in humans.
interacting with the environment is represented by ambiguous Von Hofsten and colleagues have shown, in fact, that 4—5—months—
and, at times, even missing sensory information. This is old infants can anticipate where and when an occluded moving
particularly compelling for Visual information, the main sensory object will reappear (see Figure 2), and their predictions may
system we rely upon to gather cues about the external world. The reﬂect a representation of object velocity during the occlusion
issue can be exempliﬁed by typical situations occurring in the (Rosander and von Hofsten, 2000; von Hofsten et al., 2007).
sports ﬁeld. Let’s imagine a scene from a soccer game, such as that Ample debate eXists in the literature about the putative
illustrated in Figure 1: a goalkeeper dives to save the goal from an mechanisms that may account for the ability of predicting
opponent’slong distance shot, with the ball being hidden by other the objects’ Visual motion through periods of transient
players that occlude the goalkeeper View. Despite the temporary disappearance. An experimental paradigm that has been
disappearance of the ball from his ﬁeld of View, the goalkeeper commonly adopted to investigate this issue is the prediction
may be able to intercept the shot successfully and save the goal. motion (PM) task whereby subjects estimate the time of arrival
Apparently, the goalkeeper has been able to predict where and of a hidden Visual target at a speciﬁc location indicated by
when to intercept the shot by “guessing” the motion of the ball the experimenter. One early hypothesis to explain behavioral
through the periods of absent Visual motion information. In the responses to PM tasks involved a clocking mechanism by which
wilderness, similar mechanisms may be important for survival. observers may initially estimate the time to contact (TTC)
Predators, for example, are able to catch the escaping prey even using on—line optical variables, and then, at the time of object’s
though Visual obstacles like trees and bushes may hide it from disappearance, they may use a clocking process to count down
View, underlining the potential evolutionary pressure for the time until the estimated TTC equals zero (Tresilian, 1995).
development of predictive mechanisms, which might compensate While cognitive clocking mechanisms may account for PM
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 13 | 1

"
"2","Bosco et al. Visual extrapolation for motor action
2‘."" ., ‘ "" ' L3 f. ' _.,{"" l. ,. 32"")” _;; ""“1; _v~
, » ""n .4 : g g 2...,"" .. 2. . 1.5,, :
:....."":';;:':.;ff2::’: bfnnr.'-. 1 ""‘ ‘ \ 'lﬁomas ""'
a 51 '1 !
II
22 -
H _)
’ ‘7 l 'i .2 2“ v 3
{—W .
2:3. a 1; 1 .3 u: Wawpe
t; 1“}WL-&1 ”rfnmw 2”. "" ‘ ; . _. - 11575.. .1
12', fs‘ _'"".H , ”7-) 0
5,1; < : :1 .: :. ._ -» 2 if;
21/. ~ 2 2
i M"" C1 . ' ""
BC. ""5' . , .. .
i
FIGURE 1 | Free kick play in a soccer game, seen from behind the goalkeeper. In order to block the opponent’s shot, defendants stand side—by—side as a
barrier, which partially occludes vision of the ball to the goalkeeper.
responses to approaching objects along the line of sight (looming A fundamental question to understand the nature of
stimuli), they have been shown to generalize poorly to other the Visual extrapolation processes concerns, however, the
behavioral situations involving, for example, lateral motion of type of information potentially contributing to the internal
the Visual target (Lyon and Waag, 1995; DeLuCia and Liddell, representation of the hidden target motion built by the CNS.
1998). It has been, then, hypothesized that the brain adopts In this respect, much insight has been gained, over the last few
motion extrapolation mechanisms involving internal or cognitive decades, from studies examining the oculomotor and the manual
representations of the object’s Visible motion (Schiff and Oldak, interceptive behavior.
1990; Lyon and Waag, 1995). There is evidence that Visual
extrapolation can be sustained by a combination of several, EVIDENCE FROM OCULOMOTOR STUDIES
perhaps interdependent, processes such as imagery, corollary Experimental paradigms involving transient disappearance of
eye movement signals, and attentional shifts. For example, the Visual target have been used extensively to study the
observers may imagine the object continuing its motion after predictive component of pursuit and saccadic eye movements.
disappearance, and then respond as the imagined object gets to For example, when Visual feedback is transiently removed
the target. Interestingly, arecent fMRI study has shown that Visual during ocular pursuit, it has been shown that extra-retinal
motion imagery engages speciﬁc activations in occipital cortex, input may continue to drive the smooth pursuit, albeit at a
hMT/V5+ and IPL, regions involved in Visual motion processing reduced gain (Mitrani and Dimitrov, 1978; Morris and Lisberger,
(Kaas et al., 2010). Oculomotor tracking of the invisible target 1987; Pola and Wyatt, 1997). Continuation of smooth pursuit
may also reﬂect mental imagery processing, providing additional in the absence of a Visual target is believed to be under
information to the representation of the occluded target volitional control and mediated by the subject’s intention, as it
trajectory (Huber and Krist, 2004). Moreover, motion imagery is driven by the expectancy of the target to reappear (Becker
may be associated with Visuospatial attention shifts (de’Sperati and Fuchs, 1985; Bennett and Barnes, 2003; Madelain and
and Deubel, 2006). Therefore,visualextrapolation processes may Krauzlis, 2003; Barnes and Collins, 2008). In particular, a
also involve shifting an attentional “spotlight” (Lyon and Waag, series of seminal studies carried out by Bennett, Barnes and
1995; Kerzel, 2003a,b). Further evidence that Visual motion collaborators shed some light on the variables the oculomotor
extrapolation may demand additional cortical processing and control processes might take into account to maintain ocular
attentional resources comes from a series of experiments, which tracking of hidden targets. By imposing a systematic change in
showed that absence of Visual information may prolong the the target velocity during the invisible portion of the trajectory,
latency to suppress an anticipatory movement to intercept a Bennett and Barnes (2004) were able to show that recovery
moving target and affect the corticospinal excitability (Marinovic in eye velocity after the loss of Visual feedback was scaled
etal., 2010, 2011). and hence predictive of the upcoming target velocity. They
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 13 | 2

"
"3","Bosco et al. Visual extrapolation for motor action
variable gain mechanisms acting on the Visuomotor signals,
A which drive ocular pursuit. Moreover, when subjects were
, b 7 required to pursue accelerating targets that underwent transient
/ \ occlusions and were presented in either random or blocked
order with respect to the acceleration conditions, they showed
anticipatory smooth pursuit prior to target motion onset, scaled
to the velocity generated by the target acceleration, at least
/ during blocked presentations. This scaling in the eye velocity
prior to the target reappearance led to the interpretation that
.. \ a the oculomotor control system might use a target velocity
'- ', . representation to drive predictive pursuit (Bennett and Barnes,
- {.v. .__ ' E . ' 2006a).

ﬂL'+-_ ‘ . I Similarly, by using an occluded onset pursuit paradigm,
Collins and Barnes (2006) found that smooth pursuit started
B progressively earlier with respect to the target appearance as
the occlusion interval increased, and with increasingly higher
30 pursuit gains by the time the target appeared. The prolongation
20 ’1‘ ‘ of the anticipatory smooth pursuit throughout the occlusion was
E . interpreted again as reﬂecting storage of velocity information in

A 10 1 the form of working memory (Collins and Barnes, 2006).
g E E r {a Both pursuit and saccadic control use predictive information
:5; 0 5m. about target motion during extrapolation of occluded targets. In
13,2, I-E-I-I-‘n'. fact, subjects can correct for the error in eye position due to the
8 _10m-.-'-_-“ decrease in pursuit gain, by producing saccades that place the
’E . IE . eye ahead of the extrapolated position of the occluded object
_20 (Bennett and Barnes, 2006b). Further evidence for interaction
i between pursuit and saccadic system in the ocular tracking of
-300 5 10 15 20 25 occluded targets was provided by a study of Orban de Xivry et a1.
Time (sec) (2006), who found that eye veloc1ty at target reappearance was
inﬂuenced by expected target velocity, whereas saccades reﬂected

FIGURE 2 | Infant tracking a target moving through a visual occluder. the eXpeCted Change Of target POSition (see 3150 de Brouwer et 31-)

(A) The photograph illustrates the experimental set up. The infant was 2001)-

placed at the center Of a cylinder, Which screened him/her from external Besides target velocity) also target acceleration information

distractors. The “happy—face” object moved along a slit 60 cm long and appears to be used by the oculomotor control system for

magma:'22:;22?2132:2323:2:321:2-smash .h. Won of occluded .. a1. coon
movements and object motion were acquired through a motion analysis adopted an experimental paradigm Where target’s POSition and
system. (B) Infant’s gaze tracking plotted along with the object motion for velocity during the occlusion and at reappearance could not be
an individual trial. Gaze direction was derived from the sum of head and eye predicted Without extracting the acceleration Of the target before
directions, with head direction corhputed from the relative positions of its disappearance. They found that smooth and saccadic eye

three markers placed on the Infant s head Wlth respect to the aXIS of . . . . .

rotation of the cylinder where the infant was placed (which was movements discriminated between different levels of acceleration

approximately aligned to the infant’s body axis).The outerhorizontal lines after an initial €XPOSUI‘6 0f at leaSt 500 m5 (Bennett et 31-)

represent the boundaries of the occluder, whereas the inner horizontal lines 2007). Despite the fact that this result was Obtained by using

delimit the positions where the object was totally occluded. The horizontal non-ecological experimental conditions, its signiﬁcance may have
lines. in between the inner anol outer ones represent the 20 tolerance some bearing also With respect to more natural situations Where

outSIde thCh gaze was COhSIdered to have reached the other Slde of the , ,

occluder. The zero value along the ordinate corresponds to the middle mOV1ng ObJeCtS’ because Of the effects Of external forces (suCh as

position along the path of the target object. Modified with permission from gravity), d0 UOt mOVe at COUStant VelOCitY-

VON Hofsten et al- E2007) Visual extrapolation mechanisms driving eye movements
can also take into account dynamic directional changes of the
target motion, as shown by the results of experiments where

proposed that predictive changes of eye velocity were the subjects had to track targets along two-dimensional paths. For
result of scaled modiﬁcations of an internal gain signal. In example, Mrotek and Soechting instructed subjects to track
a later study (Bennett and Barnes, 2005), the same authors targets, which moved initially along a straight path and then
used target blanking of variable duration to examine whether followed the arc of a circle, just before disappearing behind
the timing of this anticipatory recovery could be inﬂuenced an occluder (Mrotek and Soechting, 2007). When the target
by the duration of the target disappearance. They found re-emerged after following the curvilinear path through the
that the recovery of the eye velocity was indeed timed to occlusion, gaze behavior indicated that subjects were able to
the target disappearance, perhaps as result of reactivation of predict the curvilinear target motion through the occlusion,
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 13 | 3

"
"4","80300 et al. Visual extrapolation for motor action
compatible with the idea that extrapolation of occluded targets interactions between the Visual target and the environment.
may include expectations about the time—varying behaVior of the In a series of experiments, Diaz et al. created an immersive
target motion. Virtual racquetball environment, which allowed them to study
Further eVidence along these lines comes from a study, both eye and hand interceptive movements made by unskilled
which investigated smooth pursuit and saccadic responses during players to hit Virtual balls that were projected in a parabolic arc
occlusion of targets moving along circular paths (Orban de consistent with the effects of gravity and bounced on ground
Xivry et al., 2008). In this study, subjects pursued Visual targets before arrival (Diaz et al., 2013a). The ball trajectories were
moving along counterclockwise circular paths that could vary manipulated parametrically such that balls varied in the launch
randomly across trials in both radius and frequency. The target, point, the location of the bounce, and the location where
initiallyVisible for at leastahalf—circle, underwent three successive they passed the observer. In addition, balls could differ in
periods of occlusion ranging from 0.4 to 1 s alternated with elasticity, and thus could follow different trajectories after the
Visible periods lasting between 0.8 and 1.5 s. Analysis of smooth bounce even when they had the same pre—bounce trajectories.
pursuit responses showed that, during target occlusions, the Consistent with the idea that predictions based on internal
smooth pursuit heading direction could predict accurately the models of the physical properties of the enVironment may
heading of the target. This result was best explained by a represent a signiﬁcant component of oculomotor control, Diaz
dynamic memory model that included time—varying information and colleagues found that pre—bounce saccadic movements
about target velocity during the occlusion period, suggesting accounted for changes due to both ball velocity and elasticity
that predictive pursuit was driven by a time—varying internal and predicted the time and location of the ball after the
representation of target motion. In addition, it was found that bounce. Moreover, subjects’ oculomotor behaVior was not
the predictive smooth pursuit system inﬂuenced the amplitude affected by a 100 ms period of Visual occlusion of the ball’s
of the predictive saccades but not Vice versa, underlining the trajectory immediately after the bounce, reinforcing the idea
complexity of the interactions between the pursuit and the that memorized information about the dynamic properties of
saccadic system. Besides maintaining smooth pursuit in the the moving object is incorporated in the oculomotor plan (Diaz
absence of the Visual stimulus, internal representations based on et al., 2013b).
expectancy of predictable target motion can also drive smooth In the same vein, target motion congruent with the natural
eye deceleration, direction reversal, and subsequent acceleration motion of an object rolling on the ground elicits faster
(Kveraga et al., 2001). anticipatory pursuit responses compared with incongruent
Dynamic internal representations driving eye movements do motion, suggesting that information about natural object
not incorporate only short—term Visual information acquired kinematics acquired through daily—life experience is taken into
before target’s disappearance, but they may also reﬂect cognitive account by oculomotor control processes (Souto and Kerzel,
factors and memory of target motion accumulated with previous 2013). In this respect, gravity represents a major factor since it
experience. This idea was tested directlybyaseries of experiments, affects invariably the motion of falling objects by imposing a
in which accelerative and decelerative target motions were constant accelerative force. While most of the eVidence in favor
presented in either random or blocked—order, and catch trials of the idea that the brain has internalized information about
with different target acceleration were interleaved randomly gravity effects for predictive control of motor behaVior comes
between blocked—order trials. It was found that the recovery from manual interceptive studies (which we will reView in the next
of the smooth pursuit following the target’s occlusion was section), there is recent eVidence that also the oculomotor control
better scaled in blocked—order than in random—order trials. may exploit such a—prioriknowledge.Delle Monache et al. (2015)
Particularly, in blocked—order trials, the reduced smooth pursuit analyzed the oculomotor behaVior of head—ﬁxed subjects. Subjects
gain during occlusion was compensated by modulation of the shifted a mouse cursor to intercept computer—simulated ballistic
saccade amplitude, such that the total eye displacement matched trajectories, which could be occluded for variable intervals before
well the target displacement. In catch trials, experimentalsubjects interception. The law of motion of the trajectories could be
could show scaled responses to the unexpected change in either congruent with Earth’s gravity (1 g) or perturbed with
target acceleration, albeit they also eXhibited transfer effects weightlessness (0 g) or hypergraVity (2 g) effects. Analysis of the
from the preceding blocked—order trial. Overall, these ﬁndings overall oculomotor behaVior during the manual interception task
were interpreted as eVidence that short—term predictions derived and of isolated periods of smooth pursuit of the ball trajectories
from online information can be combined with long—term showed that eye movements depended signiﬁcantly on the target
memorizedinformation from previous trials to generate accurate law of motion and occlusion, in ways compatible with the
predictions of the occluded target trajectories (Bennett et al., View that predictive mechanisms based on implicit knowledge
2010b). Similar predictive mechanisms, in effect, have been of gravity effects may contribute to oculomotor control (Delle
shown to account also for smooth pursuit initiation and Monache et al., 2015).
oculomotor responses to sudden perturbations of the target In sum, the idea emerging from reviewing these studies
motion (Kowler and Steinman, 1981; Kowler et al., 1984; Tabata is that control of predictive eye movements to overcome
et al., 2008). missing Visual information may take advantage of an internal
By simulating naturalistic conditions, recent studies of representation of the target motion, which combines time—
oculomotor behaVior have indicated that long—term information varying information (target velocity, acceleration) derived from
might include also experience—based models of physical Vision of the target motion prior to its disappearance and prior
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 13 | 4

"
"5","80300 et al. Visual extrapolation for motor action
knowledge of the target motion derived from heuristics and information acquired during the early part of Visible trajectory
from internalization of invariant physical characteristics of the to build a velocity representation of the occluded portion of the
environment. target motion and control the timing of the interceptive action
(Dubrowski et al., 2000). The idea that internal representations of
EVIDENCE FROM MANUAL INTERCEPTION STUDIES the target motion are built during the Visible portion of the target
Hand interceptive actions represent another particularly motion and then used to update or predict the future trajectory
interesting experimental model to study Visual extrapolation is supported also by experiments that examined the effects
mechanisms. These actions require accurate estimation of on the temporal accuracy and the kinematics of interceptive
the time and place for object interception, achieved through movements of Visual occlusions occurring after a sudden target
a ﬁne interplay of feedback and anticipatory mechanisms to velocity change. Compatible with this View, reduction of Visual
compensate for Visuomotor delays, which, depending on the exposure affected movement variability, but not the velocity of
compleXity of interceptive action, may make unusable the last the arm or the directional trend of timing errors (Teixeira et al.,
100—200 ms of Visual information about the target motion (see 2006).
Regan and Gray, 2000; Zago et al., 2008, 2009; Merchant et al., Use of the velocity information available before target
2009 for reviews on the psychophysics and neurophysiology occlusion for guiding the interceptive action may be somewhat
of interception). Thus, spatial and temporal aspects of the reminiscent of the controlmechanisms underlying ocular pursuit
interceptive action might reﬂect predictions of the objects’ of occluded targets described in the previous section. In effect,
motion, especially when transient occlusions of the interceptive some analogies with the smooth pursuit system have emerged
target or degradation of the Visual motion information, such as from a study, which examined the effects of occluding different
apparent motion stimuli, are introduced within the experimental portions of ball traj ectories approaching from different directions
paradigm. on the lateral hand movements to catch the balls (Dessing
et al., 2009). When the late portion of the ball trajectories
INTERCEPTION 0F OCCLUDED TARGETS was occluded, interceptive movements showed a signiﬁcant
One main issue that has been investigated by using Visual spatial bias, which could be interpreted as a result of incomplete
occlusion paradigms relates, for example, to the early work of motion extrapolation. In particular, the authors hypothesized
Whiting and collaborators who varied systematically onset and a reduction of the velocity gain similar to that observed in
duration of Visual occlusions of parabolic ball trajectories to the smooth pursuit system (Dessing et al., 2009). Conversely,
determine potentially critical Viewing time windows for successful another study, which tried to disentangle the use of position and
interception (Whiting et al., 1970; Sharp and Whiting, 1974). velocity information for the control of the interception position,
These original studies have been replicated recently by using suggested that target velocity might not contribute directly to
up—do—date technologies and it was found that the interceptive the spatial estimates of the interceptive action (Brouwer et al.,
performance deteriorates dramatically only when Vision is 2002). In this study, subjects hit Visual targets moving at constant
occluded from 150 to 200 ms prior to the movement onset, speed and disappearing after variable time intervals within either
albeit the probability of successful interception may vary, to some a stationary or a moving background. Hitting positions after the
extent, also with the overall length of time that the target is made target disappearance denoted the use of velocity information
Visible (Marinovic et al., 2009; LopeZ—Moliner et al., 2010). For only indirectly, perhaps Via a speed—dependent misperception of
batting movements, however, precise timing of the interceptive position, implying also differential control of spatial and temporal
actions may depend on whether Visual information is available estimates of the interceptive action (Brouwer et al., 2002).
during the swinging movement (Brenner et al., 2014). In effect, Moreover, studies that involved more compleX target motion
there is also evidence that sudden changes in target direction patterns have indicated that Visual extrapolation might include
could be estimated and the motion of the target extrapolated additional parameters besides target speed. For example, analysis
accurately with short Viewing times comprised between 50—150 of the initial direction of interception movements to hidden
ms, suggesting that, under certain experimental conditions, even circular and oval trajectories pointed out that extrapolation of
relatively small Viewing times may allow accurate interception target motion was based on target position,velocity and curvature
(Mrotek et al., 2004). Besides the extent of the Visible motion, (Soechting and Flanders, 2008). Along the same lines, when
timing accuracy in motion extrapolation tasks has also been subjects intercepted targets whose speed could be governed by
found to depend on the spatial properties of the target, such as three different laws of motion (i.e., constant speed, a power law
its size. Target size effects seem to be strongly modulated by the relation between speed and curvature, or a sum of sinusoids),
target speed, according to the velocity transposition principle by the initial direction of the interceptive movement could be
which larger targets are perceived to be slower (Sokolov et al., predicted by assuming that target position was extrapolated using
1997; Sokolov and Pavlova, 2003). a combination of target velocity and distance from the ﬁnger to
Target velocity, in fact, appears to be a major parameter the target (Soechting et al., 2009). The studies mentioned thus
of object motion taken into account by Visual extrapolation far dealt mostly with motion of the interceptive target along the
processes for the timing of interceptive actions. Experiments in fronto—parallel plane. Conversely, for target motion approaching
which a target moved across a computer screen with different the observer (i.e., looming stimuli), classical Views based on
velocity proﬁles and could be occluded either early or late in the Gibson’s ecological approach have argued that TTC information
trajectory, showed that subjects are able to use target velocity can be derived directly from optical variables, like tau, that is,
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 13 | 5

"
"6","80300 et al. Visual extrapolation for motor action
the ratio between the size of the object’s image on the retina and recorded from the biceps and ﬂexor carpi radialis during catching
its expansion rate (Lee and Reddish, 1981). As mentioned in a of free—falling objects. Subjects were allowed full Vision of the
previous section, when an occluder interrupts the ﬂow of optical falling object in some trials, while in other trials they were
information, TTC would be counted down by relying on internal instructed to keep their eyes closed. Moreover, in randomly
clocks (Tresilian, 1995). However, this View has been challenged selected trials the object stopped suddenly 12 cm above the hand,
by DeLucia (2004), who used computer—generated objects that so to dissociate the effect of impact anticipation from the reﬂexive
approached the observer and were partially concealed by either tactile response associated with the impact and determine the
stationary or moving occluders of variable size and shape. Results time scale of AMT control. The study found that the time—
indicated that both types of occluders affected TTC judgments, lags of the AMT responses were sufﬁciently long (121 ms, on
suggesting that TTC estimates of partially occluded approaching average) to include acceleration in the anticipation of the falling
objects is not based on tau but may involve information about object motion (Vishton et al., 2010). Predictive control based
heuristics and invariants. on acceleration timing information has been reported also with
In this respect, a growing body of research over the past respect to the initiation of batting movements when subjects
decade has explored the possibility that, in addition to short—term hit balls dropped from different heights and partially concealed,
memory of the target motion parameters, Visual extrapolation for even though prospective control mechanisms could be involved
the control of interceptive actions may take into account both in guiding the bat to ball interception (Katsumata and Russell,
short and long—term representations derived from past history, 2012).
cognitive cues or from internalized knowledge of the physical The ﬁnding that movement initiation when intercepting free
characteristics of the enVironment. falling objects takes into account gravity acceleration information
It has been shown, for example, that in PM tasks the target can be also seen within the probabilistic framework deﬁned
velocity of previous trials can affect current velocity estimates, by the work of Faisal and Wolpert (2009). In this study,
suggesting that subsequently encoded velocity representations subjects had either to estimate the landing location of parabolic
can be partially blended (Makin et al., 2008). Long—term trajectories or intercept the trajectory at a pre—deﬁned point
representations of the target motion could be derived also from by moving a Virtual paddle on the PC screen. In separate
abstract categorical information, as indicated by a later study experiments, either sensory or motor aspects of the task were
from the same research group, reporting that performance in a manipulated by varying the portion of Visible trajectory and
PM task was inﬂuenced by the color of the target, which was the time allowed to move the Virtual paddle, respectively. It
associated with different distributions of target velocities (Makin was reported that subjects’ decisions when to start moving were
et al., 2009a). statistically near optimal, provided individual sensory and motor
One interesting aspect, which we also mentioned in the uncertainties. In this respect, a—priori information about gravity
previous section, concerns the idea that internal models of acceleration could be seen as a factor reducing the sensory
physical characteristics of the Visual enVironment can be built variability.
over experience or extensive practice and used to predict and The relative contribution of various information sources to
intercept the motion of an object. This may be crucial to overcome the Visual motion extrapolation processes underlying the control
limitations inherent to the Visual system, like its poor sensitiVity of the interceptive action has been examined more extensively
for accelerating motion despite the fact that in nature objects’ by a recent study, which manipulated a computer—generated
motion is often accelerated by gravity or decelerated by frictional Visual enVironment representing a baseball game (Bosco et al.,
forces (Werkhoven et al., 1992; Watamaniuk and Heinen, 2003). 2012). Subjects intercepted simulated ﬂy—ball trajectories, which
For interceptive actions of free—falling objects performed under were either fully Visible or occluded for variable time intervals
full Visual guidance, there is plenty of experimental eVidence that before ball landing (Figure 4A). The natural ball motion could
TTC estimates reﬂect a combination of Visual motion cues with be randomly perturbed during the descending limb of the
prior knowledge of gravity effects on the object’s motion (see parabolic trajectory with effects of either weightlessness or
Zago and Lacquaniti, 2005; Zago et al., 2008, 2009; Lacquaniti increased gravity, or it could remain unaltered. In addition, to
et al., 2013 for reViews). The extent to which vertical accelerations examine the contribution of previous Visual experience with
could be extrapolated through brief occlusions was investigated the perturbed trajectories to the interception of the occluded
by experiments that presented Virtual targets descending on targets, the order of Visible and occluded sessions was permuted
a blank screen accelerated by gravity, decelerated by reversed among subjects. Interception of fully Visible targets denoted
gravity, or at constant speed (Zago et al., 2010). Targets could the combination of servo—controlled and predictive processes,
disappear for a brief, variable period prior to arrival or could whereas when intercepting occluded targets subjects relied mostly
remain Visible throughout their trajectory (see Figure 3A). on predictive mechanisms. Ball motion predictions were based,
Subjects’ response timing, during occluded trials, denoted better however, on different information depending on previous Visual
interceptive performance with 1 g targets compared to 0 g and exposure with the perturbed trajectories (see Figure 48). Subjects
—1 g targets (Figure 3B), arguing in favor of the idea that without prior experience of the perturbed trajectories showed
prediction of occluded vertical motion incorporates expectation interceptive errors consistent with predictive processes based
of gravity effects (Zago et al., 2010). on a—priori knowledge of gravity. Instead, subjects who had
Evidence in support of this View emerged also from a study, been exposed to the fully Visible trajectories showed interceptive
which evaluated the anticipatory muscle tensing(AMT) responses responses to the hidden targets compatible with the idea that
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 13 | 6

"
"7","Bosco et aI. Visual extrapolation for motor action
A B
§ 1g
A1 A2V/A20 A20/A2V A3
90 —
A 60
U)
E _
L
2
A a 30 ""I
no
.E
d E I
1 i: o - - I
i i “I ./ _
0
I 8
A1 A2V/A20 AZO/AZV A3
30
1; 0
15,
§
""V 5 -30
no
.5
‘- ' .§
I '— -60
I I V/
, I :1. 1 1 1"": £7.97. , 7...-
--"" i, ' ' “ ' ‘ ’_ -90
l -lg
A1 A3
0
-30
’3
E
L -60
2
”I a
A, .‘é"" -90
E
I ‘r i:
-1 -120
I l ’1 . El Visible
_ ,1 ,, ‘ 4‘” » 1-H - . I 1-, _150 I Occluded
FIGURE 3 | Manual interception of transiently occluded targets too late (bottom panel), the target was flashed red at the incorrect
moving along vertical trajectories. (A) Illustration of the experimental position of interception. (B) Interception timing in the different
setup. A red Circular target moved downward on the screen from a start experimental protocols tested by Zago et al. (2010). Experimental
black box on the top (top panel). In each trial target motion could be either protocols could include the presentation, within each session, of one, two
fully visible or transiently occluded. In occluded trials, the target was or three target acceleration types (A1, A2 and A3, respectively) and of
visible only during the first 300 ms and then disappeared from view. In either fully visible (V) or occluded (O) motion. Global mean values (iSEIVI)
separate trials, targets could be accelerated undergravity(1 9 trials), of time—to—contact (TTC) over all subjects of each group and all target
decelerated under reversed gravity (—1 g), or move at constant speed motion durations are plotted for the indicated protocols. Positive
(0 9). Subjects Clicked a mouse button when they thought the target (negative) TTC correspond to late (early) responses relative to target
arrived at destination (the blue square). If subjects Clicked within $30 nns arrival at destination. Note the overall better timing performance for I g
of target arrival, the target exploded blue to indicate successful targets during occluded trials (red bars), in agreement with the use of
interception (middle panel). If they intercepted too early (not shown) or predictive estimates based on anticipation of gravity effects.
implicit knowledge of the perturbed motion was also taken latter result is in agreement With another recent ﬁnding, Which
into account for the extrapolation of occluded trajectories. This indicated that subjects can learn, after relatively short practice,
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 13 | 7

"
"8","Bosoo et al. Visual extrapolation for motor action
A FIGURE 4 | Continued
to 0 9 trials, but rather Close responses to accelerated 1 g and 2 9 trials,
suggesting that knowledge of the visual properties of the perturbed
trajectories was combined with predictive information about gravity effects.
Modified with permission from Bosoo et al. (2012).
to extrapolate and intercept, through periods of Visual occlusion,
complex targets’ motion resulting from arbitrary accelerations
(de Rugy et al., 2012). Thus, at least within the context of
the experimental conditions used by these two studies, internal
models of arbitrary accelerations can be developed rapidly to
afford Visual extrapolation and interception of targets in absence
; of Visual feedback. Furthermore, the evidence that a—priori
knowledge of gravity is a primary factor taken into account
K ' I .70 for the interception of occluded projectile trajectories goes
~ ' along with results of a perceptual study, which investigated the
B possible representational analogue of the projectile trajectory. In
With priorvisual experience Without priorvisual experience a series of experiments, subjects observed Visual targets moving
200 zoo horizontally, either in the leftward or rightward direction, and
2 1°: 1°: . vanishing after a variable distance along the motion trajectory.
@100 t -100 t Subjects were asked to indicate the position of the vanishing
@332 t :2: target after a variable retention delay. Moreover, to control
E400 § _400 § for oculomotor factors, in different experimental trials subjects
-500 -500 were either constrained to ocular ﬁxation or they could move
09 1g 29 09 19 29 . . .
their eyes freely. It was found that the horizontal and vertical
A 2.5 2.5 components of the positional displacement in the subjects’
E . .
2, %: responses followed a different trend With respect to the length
g 0 g 0 l of the retention interval and to the oculomotor behavior. The
é a l perceptual localization of the vanishing position was shifted
é a t forward in the horizontal direction of motion with retention
-2-5 -2-5 delays up to 150 ms and remained constant or decreased at
09 1g 29 09 1g 29 . .
longer delays. However, the degree of the horizontal displacement
FIGURE4 | Manual interception of occluded projectile trajectories. depended signiﬁcantly on Whether subjects held ﬁxation 01‘
(A) The visual soene simulated the baseball fIy—ball play. The ball followed a pursuit the Visual target. Conversely, the vertical displacement
and landing on the right bottom. In separate sessions, ba|| trajectories could retention delays up to 150 ms, Whereas it increased downward at
be either fully Visible or occluded for variable time intervals before ba|| , h 1 , , 1 , , f h
landing. In different trials, the natural ba|| motion could be either perturbed constant rate Wlt onget: retention interva 3’ irrespective O t 6
during the descending trajectory with effects of weightlessness (0 g) or C0h3tralhed 01' unCOHStralhed OCUIaI' hehaVlOI'a perhaps reﬂectlng
increased gravity (2 g), or unperturbed (1 9). During each trial, participants internalization of gravity information (De Sé Teixeira et al.,
kept the head fixed on a Chin rest, while moving their eyes freely (the 2013).
yellow traoe shows a typical eye movement pattern). They intercepted the The idea that extrapolation processes underlying both
ball by controlling the outfielder’s movements with a PC mouse (cyan . .
_ _ _ _ _ perceptual and Visuomotor responses might have access to an
arrows refer to the possible movement directions) and indicated the _ _ . . .
interoeptive event with a button press. The white semitransparent oirole internal representation Of graVIty has been teSted also Wlthm the
around the hand of the outfielder delimited the valid area for target context of inclined plane motion by a recent study carried out by
interception. (B) Distributions Of timing (TE, top panels) and positional La Scaleia Ct a1. (2014) In these experiments) a ball rolled down
errors (PE, bottom panels) recorded during the Oooluded session of one an incline With different kinematics depending on the starting
experiment of Bosoo et al. (2012). Data—points represent average values 't' (1 th 1 f th . 1. I d'ff t . t
(iSElVI) computed for each ba|| acceleration among subjects that either had 13031.1(.)11 an _ e S ope 0 6 Inc H?e' n 1 61.61} eicperimen 3’
full visual experience of the ball trajectories by performing first the Visible partielpants intercepted the ball 33 1t tell Off the 1hChhea 01' they
session (left column) or did not (right column). Positive and negative TEs had to imagine that the ball kept moving after it was stopped
denote late and earlyresponses, respectively. Similarly, negative PEs at the end Of the incline and either intercept it or draw With
indicate horizontal underestimation of the landing position of the ball, while their hand in air the ima ined ball tra'ector Althou h the most
positive values indicated overestimation. Consistent with the use of a—priori b h , 1 fg J f yti , h f 11 , 'bl
knowledge of gravity, subjects who performed first the Oooluded session accurate. 6 aVIOra p.61. ormance was oun Wlt .u Y V131 6
showed 1 9 responses Closest to correct, 0 9 responses anticipated and bah m0t10h ahd haptlc teedhaek 0f the hahd'hah Impact, 3130
spatially underestimated, and 2 9 responses late and overestimated. when participants intercepted 0r drew the imaginary trajectory,
Instead, subjects who had prior visual exposure with the perturbed global aspects Of the target motion, such as its path, Speed and
trajectories, showed early and spatially underestimated responses . . . .
(Continued) arrival time could be estimated well (see Flgure 5). These results
might imply that the paths and kinematics of balls rolling down
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 13 | 8

"
"9","80300 et al. Visual extrapolation for motor action
may be affected greatly by identity/familiarity information about
A Interception of imagined targets the object, in addition to the retinal image expansion rates
5.5 (Hosking and Crassini, 2010). Experiments in which participants
intercepted targets sliding down either an inclined plane or a
A 5'0 tautochrone (i.e., the cycloid curve along which a point mass
E), ‘ slides to the bottom under gravity in the same time regardless
E 4'5 \. of the starting position) examined this possibility more in depth
g 4.0 . .. (Mijatovié et al., 2014). Although gravity acceleration affected the
E H 1:2'3175537"" targets similarly in both cases, the inclined plane represented a
a) 3.5 familiar situation, whereas the tautochrone did not (Figure 6A).
In these experiments, the gravity ﬁeld could be congruent with
3'0 1 5 10 15 either natural gravity or reversed gravity and the target motion
Repetition could be occluded from View for variable time intervals before
interception. Time shifts consistent with a—priori assumptions
B of natural gravity between the interceptive responses to natural
Drawing imagined targets and non—natural targets were found only for the familiar
condition of the inclined plane but not for the tautochrone (see
0 time1 “""192 “""193 time4 Figure 68), suggesting that target motion extrapolation depends
\ \ \ \ on integration of high—level cues about trajectory familiarity with
30° lower—level target kinematics information (Mijatovic et al., 2014).
'10 INTERCEPTION 0F TARGETS IN APPARENT MOTION
In addition to the target occlusion paradigms we considered so
0 far, there are other cases in which the kinematic information
E 450 about a target displacement is incomplete or degraded. One such
; condition is represented by a target that suddenly disappears and
-10 reappears at a different position, so called “target jump”. The
mechanisms involved in the interception of a jumping target will
0 not be covered here, because they have been reviewed extensively
60° elsewhere (Battaglia—Mayer et al., 2014). In this section, instead,
§ § §§ § we consider the case of intercepting long—range apparent motion
_1 0 (LAM). LAM is typically generated by ﬂashing a stationary target
0 1° ° 1° 0 1° ° 10 in sequence at different locations along the path, with a wide
X (cm) spatial and temporal separation between successive locations.
FIGURE 5 | Interception and drawing of imagined target motion. A ball There is Still no consensus as to Whether LAM represents a high—
rolled down an incline with different kinematics depending on starting level mOtion process diStinCt from low—level real mOtion (RM)
position and slope of the incline. Participants had to imagine that the ball or Whether both RM and LAM result from the activation Of
kept moving after it was halted at the end of the incline and either intercept spatio—temporal correlators by appropriate spatial and temporal
it OFfdlraixetrcee b31132 ?SErK/Iaesa: : :3 22/2199;Egbenitidoefnirgimiceerfarl combinations of the stimuli (see for instance, Adelson and Bergen,
:SZrIZIIISUbjeCFtS and kihehhatic cosditioris) is plotteoloas a function of I 1985; Watson and Ahumada, 1985; Cavanagh, 1992; Lu and
repetition (red). The black line represents the exponential best—fit, while the Sperling, 2001)- Irr€3P€CtiV€ 0f the Speciﬁc mechanism iHVOIVed)
dotted gray line indicates the 95% decrement. (B) Panels show data the SpatiO—temporal properties Of LAM differ Widely from those
recorded from a representative subjectdurihg the drawing task. The green Of RM (Gregory and Harris, 1984). Therefore, it is Of interest
lines represent the frontatplahe orOJectIOh of 95% conflolehce limits of to compare the interception mechanisms involved With LAM
hand paths over all repetition, while the orange llhes Indicate the actual ball
paths. The relatively small spatial errors in the two tasks suggest that and RM'
subjects were able to extrapolate to a good extent the motion of ball falling Georgopoulos and colleagues studied the manual interception
off the incline for both perceptual and visuomotor responses. Modified with of targets moving at constant speed along a circle in RM 01‘
permiSSiO“ from La Sca'eia et al- (2011” LAM in man and monkey (for a reView, see Merchant and
Georgopoulos, 2006). Subjects shifted a cursor to catch the
target within a given interception zone. The spatial angular error
inclined planes were extrapolated using both Visual information increased linearly with target speed and was larger for LAM than
and internal representations of the target motion (La Scaleia et al., RM (Port et al., 1996; Merchant et al., 2003). There was a similar
2014). trend of timing errors for both RM and LAM: subjects tended to
Finally, Visual extrapolation processes could be inﬂuenced by be early with slowly moving targets, and late with fast moving
the familiarity with speciﬁc environmental conditions, which targets. Overall, the results showed that there are similarities in
facilitates the interpretation of the underlying physical events. performance between RM and LAM, but the performance is
For example, time—to—contact estimates of approaching objects somewhat degraded in LAM.
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 13 | 9

"
"10","Bosco et al. Visual extrapolation for motor action
A normal reversed A '
incline '1 . 3’ h j .-
1"" I , .\ ,1;- ‘31 f ”r"", , , l. ’
LY . ‘ ,, . i .
. .9.- -‘ ' ‘ j ‘ 2%
, ' ’ - F 5; //‘ ,
tautochrone r - / , ’f ,' /
. I, ) . ﬁ/ ‘
: 3{.;1 ,«l . ,' . I .
i»; ti; 2"" 7 K ,v .. i {\ al.” '
i'x.’ ’ , 1 -‘ '. -._ 1—. /-- 5;
‘7- ’ v mug; 3‘ : .' , r
B '.""L;:. ”w! M N '-
80 *. -___, ,
+incline
70 +tautochrone B
60y 300
A 40’ 250 D LAM
UJ [ a, 200
2 20[ g
UJ
10- 0 150
g n.s.
0 a 100
-10 , §
-20- 50
270 300 330 0
Occlusion interval (ms) 1g 09 -1g
FIGURE 6 | Manual interception of familiar and unfamiliar trajectories. FIGURE 7 | Manual interception of targets in apparent motion.
(A) Visual scenes displayed during the experiments of |\/|ijatovic’ et al. (A) Visual scene and Long Range Apparent Motion (LAM) stimuli used in
(2014). Top and bottom rows show the inclined planes (familiar situation) the experiments by Matfei et al. (2010). The soccer ball moved vertically
and the tautochrones (unfamiliar situation). Left and right column panels relative to the scene first ascending from the box, bouncing on the building
depict the scenes used to produce “normal” and “reversed” kinematic cornice, and then descending back into the box. For 1 g motion, ba||
conditions, which were delivered in separate sessions. The red dot acceleration was consistent with the effects of natural gravity, making the
represents the visual target rolling on either the inclines or the ball decelerating upward and accelerating downward. For —1 g motion,
tautochrones, and the cross—hair at the right—most end of the path is the instead, ba|| acceleration was reversed relative to natural gravity and the ball
interception point. (B) Mean differences in timing error TE between the accelerated upward and decelerated downward. For 0 9 trials, the ball
“reversed” and the “normal” sessions (ATE) are plotted as a function of moved at constant speed. In Real Motion (RIVI) trials, the moving sphere
occlusion duration. For each occlusion duration, ATE values were averaged was displayed every 16.7 ms, i.e., 60 Hz refresh rate. In LAM trials, the
across all motion durations, starting positions and subjects. Vertical bars stationary ball was flashed for 50 ms at the 5 positions indicated in the
around the means indicate 95% confidence intervals. Note that systematic picture, with temporal sequences congruent with 1 g, —1 g or 0 9 law of
differences in TE between “reversed” and “normal” kinematics, which may motion. (B) The plot illustrates the effect of the law 01‘ motion (1 g, 0 g,
be indicative of a—priori assumptions of natural gravity, are found only for the —1 g) and of the type of motion (real, RIVI or Long Range Apparent Motion,
familiar condition of the inclined plane (open triangles) but not for the LAM) on the mean absolute interceptive errors (iSElVI). Black and white
tautochrone (filled circles). bars refer to RM and LAM, respectively. Asterisks denote statistically
significant differences at ,0 < 0.01. LAM visual stimuli produced a pattern of
absolute interceptive errors similar to that observed for RIVI. Modified with
Manual interception of accelerating/decelerating LAM was PermiSSion from Maﬁei et al- (2010)-
studied by Maffei et a1. (2010). Here, a target moved up and down
at 1 g, 0 g, or —1 g and randomized initial speeds, and subjects
had to press a button to intercept the sphere at the expected time Overall, the studies reviewed here on the interception of
of arrival at destination (Figure 7A). Because the target was never occluded and apparent motion targets, have contributed to
ﬂashed at the arrival point in LAM, subjects had to extrapolate identify critical information the CNS may rely upon when
the stimulus traversing the vacant space in order to intercept the ﬁlling the gaps in either degraded or missing Visual information.
target. The resulting pattern of absolute timing errors was very Interestingly, some of the evidence presented in this section
similar for LAM and RM, with signiﬁcantly smaller errors for 1 g appears congruent with that obtained by analysis of the
and 0 g targets than —1 g targets (Figure 7B). oculomotor behavior under similar experimental conditions, in
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 13 | 10

"
"11","Bosco et al. Visual extrapolation for motor action
that short—term low—level information about target kinematics that could be only in part explained by the oculomotor behavior
may be combined With long—term cognitive associations during the occlusion. This led the authors to conclude that eye
derived from either external cues or familiarity conditions and movements during occlusion may contribute, but do not uniquely
internalized information about physical invariants. In particular, specify information for accurate spatial or temporal estimation in
interceptive actions requiring haptic interactions With the Visual the manual task (Bennett and Benguigui, 2013).
target may make more compelling the use of a—priori knowledge On the other hand, there is also evidence that, even though
about invariant physical forces acting on the object, such as the independent control of arm and ocular responses may take
gravity acceleration. place, concurrent arm movements can improve the gain of
the smooth ocular pursuit during transient occlusions (Bennett
D0 COMMON PREDICTIVE SIGNALS DRIVE OCULOMOTOR et al., 2012). Analogously, the metrics of saccadic responses to
AND INTERCEPTIVE BEHAVIOR? memorized targets can be inﬂuenced signiﬁcantly by the metrics
As just noted above, strong commonalities With respect to of accompanying arm movements to the same targets, suggesting
the type of information contributing to the Visual motion that signals related to the metrics of limb movements inﬂuence,
extrapolation processes emerged by examining the oculomotor at a programming stage, those controlling saccade metrics
and the manual interception literature (see Table 1 for a (Kattoulas et al., 2008). Further evidence in favor of shared
summary). Although these commonalities might imply that predictive signals between oculomotor and manual interceptive
interceptive and oculomotor control share interactively predictive control comes from a study Which examined manual interceptive
signals about the target motion, the issue is still controversial. On responses to occluded Visual targets While subjects either ﬁxated a
the one hand, psychophysical studies have raised the possibility designated point of the Visual scene or tracked the Visual target
that predictive information could be weighted differentially, continuously (Bennett et al., 2010a). The study showed that
or could even be entirely different (Wexler and Klam, 2001; eye movements could facilitate accurate TTC estimation in the
Eggert et al., 2005). Moreover, based on analyses of the optical interception task, indicating that pursuit of the Visible portion of
variables accounting for oculomotor and interceptive responses the object motion could be crucial in providing both extra—retinal
in amotion prediction task, Benguigui and Bennett (2010) argued and retinal signals to the predictive processes for the control of
for no functional relationship and independent control of ocular the interceptive timing (Bennett et al., 2010a). The importance
pursuit and interceptive timing. In later experiments, the same of extra—retinal signals derived from eye movements for Visual
authors analyzed oculomotor and interceptive responses in a PM motion prediction has been remarked also by experiments
task using accelerating objects and found a general bias in the testing the perceptual judgments made by subjects on Whether
estimation of the reappearance position of the occluded objects a disappearing Visual target would hit or miss a stationary goal.
Table 1 | Summary table of the main factors contributing to the visual motion extrapolation processes, as reported by the oculomotor and
manual interception studies reviewed in the article.
Eye movements Manual interceptions
Target velocity Bennett and Barnes (2004, 2005, 2006a,b), Collins Port et al. (1996), Dubrowski et al. (2000),
and Barnes (2006), Orban de Xivry et al. (2006, Merchant et al. (2003), Teixeira et al. (2006),
2008), von Hofsten et al. (2007), |\/|rote|< and Soechting and Flanders (2008), Soechting et al.
Soechting (2007) (2009)
Target acceleration Bennett et al. (2007) de Rugy et al. (2012), Katsumata and Russell
(2012)
Target distance de Brouwer et al. (2001), Orban de Xivry et al. Port et al. (1996), Brouwer et al. (2002), Merchant
(2006) et al. (2003), Soechting and Flanders (2008),
Soechting et al. (2009)
Oculomotor etference copy Mitrani and Dimitrov (1978), Becker and Fuchs Bennett et al. (2010a), |\/|a|<in and F’oliakohc (2011);
(1985), Morris and Lisberger (1987), Pola and Delle Monache et al. (2015)
Wyatt (1997), Bennett and Barnes (2003),
Madelain and Krauzlis (2003), Barnes and Collins
(2008)
Target motion on earlier Kowler and Steinman (1981), Kowler et al. (1984), |\/|a|<in et al. (2008)
trials Tabata et al. (2008), Bennett et al. (2010b)
A—priori information about Diaz et al. (2013a,b), Delle Monache et al. (2015), Maffei et al. (2010), Vishton et al. (2010), Zago
physical properties (i.e., Souto and Kerzel (2013) et al. (2010), 80800 et al. (2012), Katsumata and
elasticity, gravity) Russell (2012), La Scaleia et al. (2014), Mijatovio
et al. (2014)
Cognitive associations with Not tested |\/|a|<in et al. (2009a)
external cues
Trajectory familiarity/ Kveraga et al. (2001), |\/|rote|< and Soechting Mijatovio et al. (2014)
expectancy (2007)
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 13 | 11

"
"12","80300 et al. Visual extrapolation for motor action
Results indicated again that motion direction predictions were spot was occluded. They used information theory analysis to
signiﬁcantly better when subjects pursued the target than when determine the type of information transmitted by the neurons
they maintained ﬁxation (Spering et al., 2011). in the three cortical areas, and found that LIP had the highest
Analogous differences were reported by Makin and Poliakoff percentage of neurons whose activity represented inferred motion
(2011), who tested subjects with both a perceptual (a two— of the spot, while MST and MIP activity was best related to Visual
alternative forced choice task with respect to the time of target motion and hand motion, respectively (see Figure 8A). However,
reappearance after the occlusion) and a PM task (subjects neurons in MST and MIP could also transmit information
indicated with a button press the time of target reappearance about inferred motion. This idea has received further support
after the occlusion). The two tasks could be performed under by neuroimaging and electroencephalographic studies in humans
conditions that either enforced ocular ﬁxation or allowed that have reported consistent activations of the posterior parietal
tracking the Visual target. Subjects showed signiﬁcantly different cortex, particularly of the IPS, during oculomotor and manual
performance in both tasks under ﬁxation compared to free tasks requiring Visual extrapolation of occluded targets (Lencer
eye movement conditions. More interestingly, eye movements et al., 2004; Olson et al., 2004; Ogawa and lnui, 2007; Shuwairi
during the occlusion were related to the subjects’ responses, et al., 2007; O’Reilly et al., 2008; Beudel et al., 2009; Makin et al.,
suggesting that overlapping systems govern eye movements and 2009b).
perceptual/motorjudgments on Visualmotion extrapolation tasks In addition to the extrapolation of occluded targets, the
(Makin and Poliakoff, 2011). Along these lines, a recent study role of posterior parietal cortex (area 7a) has been investigated
investigated the relationships between oculomotor behaVior and with respect to the manual interception of constant speed,
interceptive performance while subjects intercepted, by acting circular RM and LAM, and compared with that of the primary
on a computer mouse, projectile—like trajectories that could be motor cortex in the monkey (Merchant et al., 2004a,b,c, 2005).
either fully Visible or occluded for variable time intervals before Stimulus—related activity has been found to prevail in area
the interceptive event (Delle Monache et al., 2015). Interceptive 7a and hand—related activity in the motor cortex (see also
errors were related by means of multivariate regression models Merchant et al., 2001). Moreover, neural activity was selectively
to a number of oculomotor variables indicating where subjects associated with the stimulus angle during RM, whereas it was
directed their gaze throughout the trial, how many gaze shifts tightly correlated to the time—to—contact in the LAM condition,
occurred during the trial, how stable was the oculomotor behaVior particularly in the motor cortex (see Merchant and Georgopoulos,
close to the interception event, and how accurately subjects 2006).
tracked either the target trajectory or the mouse cursor just Premotor areas also appear to be involved consistently in
prior to the interceptive response. Interestingly, when subjects Visual extrapolation processes. For example, in studies where
intercepted the occluded targets, smaller interceptive errors were the experimental paradigm involved the production of an
associated with more accurate tracking of the target trajectories oculomotor response, such as a saccade to the moving target
and with a more stable oculomotor behaVior prior to the or a smooth pursuit movement, activity within the frontal eye—
interceptive response, supporting further the idea that efferent ﬁelds (FEF) during the periods of target occlusion showed
oculomotor information could contribute to the predictive activity compatible with this idea (Fukushima et al., 2002, 2008;
estimates of the target motion necessary for the interceptive Barboriea and Ferrera, 2003, 2004; Xiao et al., 2007; Ferrera
action. and Barboriea, 2010). Similarly, human FEF, along with the
prefrontal cortex, the angular gyrus and parieto—insular vestibular
PUTATIVE NEURAL SUBSTRATES cortex (PIVC), seem to be engaged during maintenance of ocular
With respect to the brain regions potentially involved in Visual tracking in the absence of a Visual target (Nagel et al., 2006).
motion extrapolation processes, both monkey neurophysiology Moreover, when tasks involve a manual response and/or temporal
and human neuroimaging studies attribute a critical role to the predictions, activations of human supplementary motor areas
posterior parietal cortex, particularly to the lateral intraparietal (SMA and pre—SMA) and, to a lesser extent, the premotor
sulcus (LIP) in monkeys and to the posterior part of the human cortex, have been reported in relation to transient occlusions
intraparietal sulcus (IPS), which is considered as the human of Visual targets (Ogawa and lnui, 2007; Shuwairi et al., 2007;
homologue of the simian LIP. Strong evidence has come primarily O’Reilly et al., 2008; Beudel et al., 2009). Instead, the evidence
from a series of electrophysiological studies in monkeys carried that Visual motion areas may also contribute to Visual motion
out by Assad and collaborators. By comparing the activity of extrapolation processes is more controversial. For example, while
parietal neurons during full Vision, target motion occlusion and Assad’s studies failed to show consistent activity related to target
Visual target blinks, it was found that parietal neurons retain motion during Visual occlusion in monkey area MST, Thier et al.
a sustained activity during the occlusion condition that might have shown activity in the same area (but not in MT) related
represent inferred target motion in the absence of Visual input to the motion of “imaginary” targets (Ilg, 2003; Hg and Thier,
or motor output (Assad and Maunsell, 1995). Eskandar and 2003). Also in human fMRI studies, activation of area hV5/MT+
Assad (1999) investigated this issue further by comparing the during Visual target occlusion has not been consistently found.
activity of LIP, medial superior temporal area (MST) and medial However, the ﬁnding reported by Olson et al. (2004) that activity
intraparietal area (MIP) neurons while monkeys used a joystick in hV5/MT+ was elevated during the occlusion period with a
to guide a spot on a computer display from the center of the similar trend as that observed in the IPS may be suggestive of
screen to peripheral targets. In some trials, Vision of the moving the possibility that hV5/MT+ does not exert a purely sensory
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 13 | 12

"
"13","Bosco et al. Visual extrapolation for motor action
Purkinje cells recordings in the D2 zone of the cat cerebellum,
A <2 Han d direction :> Which showed that .Purkinje cells maintain simple spike tonic
act1V1ty during transient disappearance of a mov1ng Visual target,
mfgls Visible Occluded Visible Occluded possibly reﬂecting the use of an internal model based on memory
| I I | I of the previous target motion (Cerminara et al., 2009).
<:' _ __ ‘_ ..— .. . .. .7 Visual motion extrapolation in complex perceptual and motor
§‘é 5| ; _ §l$ :él? tasks may require coordinated activity in many of these brain
Stimulus F"" .5: regions (see Figure SB). In fact, functional connectivity analyses
direction carried out by the study of O’Reilly et al. (2008) obtained
good indication that temporal predictions resulting from Visual
=> — —_ _— —‘ extrapolation processes may be subtended by interplay between
ganglia) with a parieto—frontal cortical network, including IPS, the
FEF and V5/MT+.
B Finally, a speciﬁc role of the posterior insula and lingual
gyrus for encoding gravity effects during interception of both
v 1' V ”-3“; ‘ linear RM and LAM has been revealed by fMRI (Maffei et al.,
u ‘ # Y‘Jiﬁh HA; 2010; Figure 9A). These regions seem to extract and process
/)I_ 9% ‘63; It; Visual gravitational motion across a wide range of spatial and
4/ ‘ ,1 . ﬁ?§wﬁj temporal frequencies (Maffei et al., 2010). In addition, a higher—
; n"" ”“3, . 55'1”!“ 1 order motion region located in the inferior parietal lobule Close
“ . P 5-“ to the temporo—parietal junction (so called HM—IPL region)
showed a preference for Visual gravitational motion in LAM
but not RM (Figure 9B). In previous studies, HM—IPL was
FIGURE 8 | Putative neural substrates of visual motion extrapolation. described as a substrate for high—level motion processing based
(A) Responses of Single neurons in monkey’s area LIP The monkey used a . . . . . .
joystick to guide a spot to a circular target, with vision of the moving spot on sahence’ being engaged by C010r_sallent’ isoluminant gratings
prevented for the first 300—400 ms in occluded trials. Arrows indicate the and by quartet—display LAM at 7 HZ (Claeys 6t 2110 2003)‘
directions of the hand movement and of the visual spot. The raster plots These imaging ﬁndings ﬁt With patients’ studies indicating
and histograms are aligned at the start ofjoystick movement, which that IPL lesions may impair LAM perception (Batteﬂi et a1.)
corresponds to the visual spot disappearance on occluded trials (vertical 2001).
line). Thick black lines beneath the histograms indicate the time during . . .
which the spot was visible, while line gaps on occluded trial histograms II? sum, Vlsual motion extrapolation processes appear to be
indicate the time during which the moving spot was not visible, on average. COHSIStenﬂy reﬂected by aCtiVity in the IPS) With several Other
Jagged lines in raster plots follow spot onset and spot reappearance events cortical and subcortical brain areas being engaged depending on
on single trials. Note the persistence of the LIP neuron’s firing activity the nature Of the behavioral task (purely perceptual, oculomotor
during periods of visual occlusion. Modified with permission from Eskandar or manual interception) and Of the Visual motion stimulus
and Assad (1999). (B) |\/|e3ia| proiectiori of the right hemisphere (left panel) .
and dorsal view (right panel, left hemisphere above) of the brain illustrate (smOOth or apparent m0t10n)‘
activity associated with temporal—spatial perceptual prediction. Statistical
parametric map highlights voxels with significantly higher activity in the CONCLUSIONS
temporal—spatialtaskrelatiye to the purely spatialtask. Activationfoci are The present article reviewed experimental evidence, drawn
located in the anterior inferior parietal cortex, in the ventral premotor cortex, mostly from the oculomotor and the manual interception
in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, in the anterior pre—supplemehtary . . . . .
motor area and in the cerebellum. Modified with permission from O’Reilly literature, concerning the nature Of Vlsual mono“ extrapolation
et al. (2008). processes, Which might allow efﬁcient motor interactions with
the environment when Visual feedback is lacking or degraded. We
concluded that several kinds of information contribute to Visual
function, but may also contribute to predictive processes. This motion extrapolation, including not only short term memory of
could be consistent with other ﬂVIRI evidence that hV5/MT+ the target kinematics, but also long—term information derived
activity may be modulated by stimulus predictability and with from heuristics, cognitive cues and internal representations
results of transcranial magnetic stimulation studies showing that of the physical properties of the Visual environment. In
that hV5/MT+ may be involved in the processing of temporal particular, we discussed a growing body of evidence indicating
predictions for targetinterception, as well as in motion prediction that predictions of objects’ motion in a natural environment
processes underlying apparent motion perception (Bosco et al., might be based on presupposed knowledge of gravity effects.
2008; Alink et al., 2010; Vetter et al., 2013). In addition, Visual Finally, with respect to the putative neural substrates, a critical
motion extrapolation processes appear to involve also subcortical role in maintaining a neural representation of the invisible
structures like the cerebellum, as suggested by neuroimaging target motion appears to be played by the intraparietal corteX
studies that reported cerebellar or basal ganglia activations along together with other cortical and subcortical areas that may be
with cortical areas (O’Reilly et al., 2008; Beudel et al., 2009). engaged differentially depending on the nature of the behavioral
Direct electrophysiological evidence, in this respect, comes from task.
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 13 | 13

"
"14","Bosco et al. Visual extrapolation for motor action
Battaglia-Mayer, A., Buiatti, T., Caminiti, R., Ferraina, S., Lacquaniti, E, and
A Shallice, T. (2014). Correction and suppression of reaching movements in
008 Insula R 016 Linoual . the cerebral cortex: physiological and neuropsychological aspects. Neurosci.

' ' [-20 -64 —12] Biobehav. Rev. 42, 232—251. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.03.002
Battelli, L., Cavanagh, P., Intriligator, 1., Tramo, M. 1., Henaff, M. A., Michel, E,

0-05 0-12 - RM et a1. (2001). Unilateral right parietal damage leads to bilateral deﬁcit for high-

level motion. Neuron 32, 985—995. doi: 10.1016/50896-6273(01)00536-0

0.04 0.08 Becker, W., and Fuchs, A. F. (1985). Prediction in the oculomotor system: smooth

pursuit during transient disappearance of a Visual target. Exp. Brain Res. 57, 562—

0 02 0 04 575. doi: 10.1007/bf00237843

I I Benguigui, N., and Bennett, S. 1. (2010). Ocular pursuit and the estimation of

time-to-contact With accelerating objects in prediction motion are controlled

0 1g 09 -1g 1g 09 -19 0 1g 09 -19 1g 09 -19 independently based on ﬁrst-order estimates. Exp. Brain Res. 202, 327—339.
doi: 10.1007/500221-009-2139-0

B Bennett, S. 1., and Barnes, G. R. (2003). Human ocular pursuit during the transient

disappearance of a Visual target. ]. Neurophysiol. 90, 2504—2520. doi: 10.1152/jn.
0.06 HM'IPL 01145.2002
/ \ ['64 ‘40 28] Bennett, S. 1., and Barnes, G. R. (2004). Predictive smooth ocular pursuit during the
g. (12)) 0-04 transient disappearance of a Visual target. ]. Neurophysiol. 92, 578—590. doi: 10.
' g 0 02 1152/jn.01188.2003
I ' 3 I Bennett, S. 1., and Barnes, G. R. (2005). Timing the anticipatory recovery in smooth
' a o —— —— ocular pursuit during the transient disappearance of a Visual target. Exp. Brain
* ’ '1' ""a I Res. 163,198—203.doi: 10.1007/500221-004-2164-y
_ ' o\° '0-02 l: LAM Bennett, 8.1., and Barnes, G. R. (2006a). Smooth ocular ursuit durin the transient
‘ P g
X A -0 O4 disappearance of an accelerating Visual target: the role of reﬂexive and voluntary
z = 28 19 09 49 19 09 49 c0ntr01.Exp.Bmin Res. 175,1—10.doi: 10.1007/500221-006-0533-4
Bennett, S. 1., and Barnes, G. R. (2006b). Combined smooth and saccadic ocular
FIGURE 9 I Brain activity in response to gravitational motion and L AM. pursult durlng the tran51ent occluswn of a movmg Vlsual ObJect. Exp. Bram Res.
. . . . . 168, 313—321. d01: 10.1007/500221-005-0101-3
(A) Mean aCtIVIty profiles (iSElVI) for the Insula (left) and the lingual gyrus . .

. . . . . . . . . . . Bennett, S. 1., Baures, R., Hecht, H., and Bengulgul, N. (2010a). Eye movements
(rlght) fool showmg statlstlcally significant effect of graVItatIOhal motion. , , , , , , , , .
Black bars refer to activity recorded during RIVI trials whereas White bars mﬂuence estlmatlon 0f tlme-to-contact 1n predlctlon motlon. Exp. Bram Res.
indicate activity levels for LAM trials. Signal Changes are plotted as a 206’ 399—407' d01: 10.1007/500221-010—2416-y , ,

. . . . Bennett, S. 1., and Bengulgul, N. (2013). Is acceleratlon used for ocular pursult
function of the stimulus conditions and are expressed as percent Change _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ,
With respect to _1 9 trials. (B) flVIRI effects of 1 g motion specific to LAM. and spatlal estlmatlon durlng predlctlon motlon? PLoS One 8:e63382. d01: 10.
The left panel shows the statistical parametric map overlaid on an IVINI 1371/}0urna1;p0ne.0063382 . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . Bennett, S. 1., O Donnell, D., Hansen, 8., and Barnes, G. R. (2012). Fac111tat10n of
template, Indicating a significant focus of actlvatIOh In a hIgh—order motion . . . . .
. . . . . ocular pursult durlng tran51ent occlusmn 0f externally-generated target motlon
region of the left Inferior parietal lobe (H lVI—IPL). The right panel shows the . . .
. . . . . by concurrent upper llmb movement. ]. V15. 12:17. d01: 10.1167/ 12.13.17
mean aCtIVIty profiles (iSElVI) m the HIVI—IPL focus. BOLD signals are _
. . . . Bennett, S. 1., Orban de lery, 1.-1., Barnes, G. R., and Lefevre, P. (2007).
plotted as a function of the stimulus conditions and expressed as percent _ , , , ,
signal Change relative to _1 9 trials. Foci coordinates in panels (A B) refer to Target acceleratlon can be extracted and represented W1th1n the predlctlve
the IVINI standard space Modified With permission from Maﬁei et al (2010) drlve t0 ocular pursu1t.]. Neurophyszol. 98, 1405—1414. d01: 10.1152/Jn.00132.
I I I 2007
Bennett, S. 1., Orban de Xivry, 1. 1., Lefevre, P., and Barnes, G. R. (2010b).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Oculomotor prediction of accelerative target motion during occlusion: long-
Th k d b h 1, , , , , term and short-term effects. Exp. Brain Res. 204, 493—504. doi: 10.1007/500221-
e wor was supporte. y t e Ita 1am Unlver31ty Mlmstry 010_2313_4
(PRIN grant) and the Itahan Space Agency (SLINK, COREA 311d Beudel, M., Renken, R., Leenders, K. L., and de 10mg, B. M. (2009). Cerebral
ARIANNA grants). The funders had no role in study design, data representations of space and time. Neuroimage 44, 1032—1040. doi: 10.1016/j.
collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the neumlmage°2008°09°028
- Bosco, G., Carrozzo, M., and Lac uaniti, F. (2008). Contributions of the human
manuscrlpt q
I temporoparietal junction and MT/V5+ t0 the timing of interception revealed
by transcranial magnetic stimulation. ]. Neurosci. 28, 12071—12084. doi: 10.
REFERENCES 1523/1NEUROSCI.2869-08.2008
Adelson, E. H., and Bergen, J. R. (1985). Spatiotemporal energy models for the Bosco, G., Delle Monache, S., and Lacquaniti, F. (2012). Catching What we can’t
perception ofmotion. ]. Opt. Soc. Am. A 2, 284—299. doi: 10.1364/josaa.2.000284 5333 manual interception 0f occluded ﬂy-ball trajectories. PLOS One 73349381-
Alink, A., Schwiedrzik, C. M., Kohler, A., Singer, w., and Muckli, L. (2010). d01: 10.1371/journalop0neo0049381
Stimulus predictability reduces responses in primary Visual cortex. ]. Neurosci. Brenner, E., Driesen, B» and Smeets, ]- B- J- (2014)- Precise timing when hitting
30, 2960—2966. doi: 10.1523/]NEUROSCL3730-10.2010 falling balls. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8:342. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00342
Assad, 1. A., and Maunsell, 1. H. (1995). Neuronal correlates of inferred motion in Brouwer, A- M» Brenner, E., and Smeets, ]- B- J- (2002)- Hitting moving objects:
primate posterior parietal cortex. Nature 373, 518—521. doi: 10.1038/373518a0 is target speed used in guiding the hand? Exp. Brain Res. 1432 198—21 1- d01: 10-
Barborica, A., and Ferrera, V. P. (2003). Estimating invisible target speed from 1007/500221'001'0980'X
neuronal activity in monkey frontal eye ﬁeld. Nat. Neurosci. 6, 66—74. doi: 10. Cavanagh, P- (1992)- Attention-based motion perception. Science 2572 1563—1565-
1038/nn990 doi: 10.1126/science.1523411
Barborica, A., and Ferrera, V. P. (2004). Modiﬁcation of saccades evoked by Cerminara, N. LnAPPS> R.) and Marple-Horvat, D.E.(2009).Aninterna1m0de10f
stimulation of frontal eye ﬁeld during invisible target tracking. ]. Neurosci. 24, a moving Visual target in the lateral cerebellum. ]- Physiol. 587> 429—442- d01: 10-
3260—3267. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.4702-03.2004 1113/JIPhYSiOI-2008-163337
Barnes, G. R., and Collins, C. 1. S. (2008). The inﬂuence of brieﬂy presented (3133752 K» Lindsey, D» De Schutter, E., and Orban, G- (2003)- A higher order
randomized target motion on the extraretinal component of ocular pursuit. ]. motion region in human inferior parietal 101311133 evidence from ﬂVIRL Neuron
Neurophysiol. 99, 831—842. doi: 10.1152/jn.01033.2007 40, 631—642. doi: 10.1016/50896—6273(03)00590—7
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 13 | 14

"
"15","Bosco et al. Visual extrapolation for motor action
Collins, C. 1. S., and Barnes, G. R. (2006). The occluded onset pursuit paradigm: Kaas, A., Weigelt, S., Roebroeck, A., Kohler, A., and Muckli, L. (2010). Imagery of a
prolonging anticipatory smooth pursuit in the absence of Visual feedback. Exp. moving object: the role of occipital cortex and human MT/V5. Neuroimage 49,
Brain Res. 175, 11—20. doi: 10.1007/s00221-006-0527-2 794—804. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.07.055
de Brouwer, S., Missal, M., and Lefevre, P. (2001). Role of retinal slip in the Katsumata, H., and Russell, D. M. (2012). Prospective versus predictive control
prediction Oftarget motion during smooth and saccadic pursuit. ].Neur0physiol. in timing of hitting a falling ball. Exp. Brain Res. 216, 499—514. doi: 10.
86, 550—558. 1007/500221-011-2954-y
Delle Monache, S., Lacquaniti, F., and Bosco, G. (2015). Eye movements Kattoulas, E., Smyrnis, N., Mantas, A., Evdokimidis,1., Raos, V., and Moschovakis,
and manual interception of ballistic trajectories: effects of law of motion A. (2008). Arm movement metrics inﬂuence saccade metrics when looking and
perturbations and occlusions. Exp. Brain Res. 233, 359—374. doi: 10. pointing towards a memorized target location. Exp. Brain Res. 189, 323—338.
1007/500221-014—4120-9 doi: 10.1007/500221-008-1427-4
DeLucia, P. R. (2004). Time-to-contact judgments of an approaching object that is Kerzel, D. (2003a). Attention maintains mental extrapolation of target position:
partially concealed by an occluder. ]. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 30, irrelevant distractors eliminate forward displacement after implied motion.
287—304. doi: 10.1037/0096-1523.30.2.287 Cognition 88, 109—131. doi: 10.1016/50010-0277(03)00018-0
DeLucia, P. R., and Liddell, G. W. (1998). Cognitive motion extrapolation and Kerzel, D. (2003b). Mental extrapolation of target position is strongest with
cognitive clocking in prediction motion task. ]. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. weak motion signals and motor responses. Vision Res. 43, 2623—2635. doi: 10.
Perform. 24, 901—914. doi: 10.1037//0096-1523243901 1016/s0042-6989(03)00466-8
de Rugy, A., Marinovic, W., and Wallis, G. (2012). Neural prediction of complex Kowler, E., Martins, A. 1., and Pavel, M. (1984). The effect of expectations on
accelerations for object interception. ]. Neurophysiol. 107, 766—771. doi: 10. slow oculomotor control-IV. Anticipatory smooth eye movements depend on
1152/jn.00854.2011 prior target motions. Vision Res. 24, 197—210. doi: 10.1016/0042-6989(84)
De Sé Teixeira, N. A., Hecht, H., and Oliveira, A. M. (2013). The representational 90122-6
dynamics of remembered projectile locations. ]. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Kowler, E., and Steinman, R. M. (1981). The effect of expectations on slow
Perform. 39, 1690—1699. doi: 10.1037/a0031777 oculomotor control-III. Guessing unpredictable target displacements. Vision
de’Sperati, C., and Deubel, H. (2006). Mental extrapolation of motion modulates Res. 21, 191—203. doi: 10.1016/0042-6989(81)90113-9
responsiveness to Visual stimuli. Vision Res. 46, 2593—2601. doi: 10.1016/j.Visres. Kveraga, K., Fendrich, R., and Hughes, H. C. (2001). Ocular pursuit of predicted
2005.12.019 motion trajectories. Exp. Brain Res. 138, 393—397. doi: 10.1007/s002210
Dessing, 1. C., Oostwoud Wijdenes, L., Peper, C. L. E., and Beek, P. 1. (2009). 100701
Adaptations of lateral hand movements to early and late Visual occlusion in Lacquaniti, F., Bosco, G., Indovina, 1., La Scaleia, B., Maffei, V., Moscatelli, A., et a1.
catching. Exp. Brain Res. 192, 669—682. doi: 10.1007/s00221-008-1588-1 (2013). Visual gravitational motion and the vestibular system in humans. Front.
Diaz, G., Cooper, 1., and Hayhoe, M. (2013b). Memory and prediction in natural Integr. Neurosci. 7:101. doi: 10.3389/fnint.2013.00101
gaze control. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 368:20130064. doi: 10. La Scaleia, B., Lacquaniti, F., and Zago, M. (2014). Neural extrapolation of
1098/rstb.2013.0064 motion for a ball rolling down an inclined plane. PLoS One 9:e99837. doi: 10.
Diaz, G., Cooper, 1., Rothkopf, C., and Hayhoe, M. (2013a). Saccades to future ball 1371/j0urna1.pone.0099837
location reveal memory-based prediction in a Virtual-reality interception task. ]. Lee, D. N., and Reddish, P. E. (1981). Plummeting gannets: a paradigm of ecological
Vis. 13:20. doi: 10.1167/13.1.20 optics. Nature 293, 293—294. doi: 10.1038/293293a0
Dubrowski, A., Lam, 1., and Carnahan, H. (2000). Target velocity effects on manual Lencer, R., Nagel, M., Sprenger, A., Zapf, S., Erdmann, C., Heide, W., et a1. (2004).
interception kinematics. Acta Psychol. (Amst) 104, 103—118. doi: 10.1016/s0001- Cortical mechanisms of smooth pursuit eye movements with target blanking.
6918(99)00056-6 An fMRI study. Eur. ]. Neurosci. 19, 1430—1436. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2004.
Eggert, T., Rivas, F., and Straube, A. (2005). Predictive strategies in interception 03229.X
tasks: differences between eye and hand movements. Exp. Brain Res. 160, 433— Lépez-Moliner, 1., Brenner, E., Louw, S., and Smeets, 1. B. 1. (2010). Catching a
449. doi: 10.1007/s00221-004-2028-5 gentlythrownba11.Exp. BrainRes. 206, 409—417.d0i: 10.1007/s00221-010-2421-
Eskandar, E. N., and Assad, 1. A. (1999). Dissociation of Visual, motor and 1
predictive signals in parietal cortex during Visual guidance. Nat. Neurosci. 2, 88— Lu, Z. L., and Sperling, G. (2001). Three-systems theory of human Visual motion
93. doi: 10.1038/4594 perception: review and update. ]. Opt. Soc. Am. A Opt. Image Sci. Vis. 18, 2331—
Faisal, A. A., and Wolpert, D. M. (2009). Near optimal combination of sensory 2370. doi: 10.1364/j0saa.18.002331
and motor uncertainty in time during a naturalistic perception-action task. ]. Lyon, D. R., and Waag, W L. (1995). Time course of Visual extrapolation accuracy.
Neurophysiol. 101, 1901—1912. doi: 10.1152/jn.90974.2008 Acta Psychol. (Amst) 89, 239—260. doi: 10.1016/0001-6918(95)98945-z
Ferrera,V. P.,and Barborica, A. (2010). Internally generated error signals in monkey Madelain, L., and Krauzlis, R. 1. (2003). Effects of learning on smooth pursuit
frontal eye ﬁeld during an inferred motion task. ]. Neurosci. 30, 11612—11623. during transient disappearance of a Visual target. ]. Neurophysiol. 90, 972—982.
doi: 10.1523/1NEUROSCI.2977-10.2010 doi: 10.1152/jn.00869.2002
Fukushima, K., Akao, T., Shichinohe, N., Nitta, T., Kurkin, S., and Fukushima, 1. Maffei, V., Macaluso, E., Indovina, 1., Orban, G., and Lacquaniti, F. (2010).
(2008). Predictive signals in the pursuit area of the monkey frontal eye ﬁelds. Processing of targets in smooth or apparent motion along the vertical in the
Prog. Brain Res. 171, 433—440. doi: 10.1016/s0079-6123(08)00664-X human brain: an MRI study. ]. Neurophysiol. 103, 360—370. doi: 10.1152/jn.
Fukushima, K., Yamanobe, T., Shinmei, Y., and Fukushima, 1. (2002). Predictive 00892.2009
responses ofperiarcuate pursuit neurons to Visual target motion. Exp. Brain Res. Makin, A. D. 1., and Poliakoff, E. (2011). D0 common systems control eye
145, 104—120. doi: 10.1007/s00221-002-1088-7 movements and motion extrapolation? Q. ]. Exp. Psychol. (Have) 64, 1327—1343.
Gregory, R. L., and Harris, 1. P. (1984). Real and apparent movement nulled. Nature doi: 10.1080/17470218.2010.548562
307, 729—730. doi: 10.1038/307729a0 Makin, A. D. 1., Poliakoff, E., Chen, 1., and Stewart, A. 1. (2008). The effect of
Hosking, S. G., and Crassini, B. (2010). The effects of familiar size and object previouslyviewedvelocitiesonmotionextrapolation.VisionRes.48,1884—1893.
trajectories 0n time-to-contact judgements. Exp. Brain Res. 203, 541—552. doi: 10.1016/j.Visres.2008.05.023
doi: 10.1007/s00221-010-2258-7 Makin, A. D., Poliakoff, E., and El-Deredy, W. (2009b). Tracking Visible
Huber, S., and Krist, H. (2004). When is the ball going to hit the ground? Duration and occluded targets: changes in event related potentials during
estimates, eye movements and mental imagery of object motion. ]. Exp. Psychol. motion extrapolation. Neuropsychologia 47, 1128—1137. doi: 10.1016/j.
Hum. Percept. Perform. 30, 431—444. doi: 10.1037/0096-1523.30.3.431 neuropsychologia.2009.01.010
11g, U. 1. (2003). Visual-tracking neurons in area MST are activated during Makin, A. D., Stewart, A. 1., and Poliakoff, E. (2009a). Typical object velocity
anticipatory pursuit eye movements. Neuroreport 14, 2219—2223. doi: 10.1097/ inﬂuences motion extrapolation. Exp. Brain Res. 193, 137—142. doi: 10.
01.Wnr.0000098750.87269.3e 1007/500221-008-1678-0
11g, U. 1., and Thier, P. (2003). Visual tracking neurons in primate area MST Marinovic, W., Plooy, A. M., and Tresilian, 1. R. (2009). The utilisation of Visual
are activated by smooth-pursuit eye movements of an “imaginary” target. ]. information in the control of rapid interceptive actions. Exp. Psychol. 56, 265—
Neurophysiol. 90, 1489—1502. doi: 10.1152/jn.00272.2003 273. doi: 10.1027/1618-3169.56.4.265
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 13 | 15

"
"16","Bosco et al. Visual extrapolation for motor action
Marinovic,W., Reid, C. S., P100y,A. M., Riek, S., and Tresﬂian, 1. R. (2010). Delayed Port, N. L., Pellizzer, G., and Georgopoulos, A. P. (1996). Intercepting real and
inhibition of an anticipatory action during motion extrapolation. Behav. Brain path-guided apparent motion targets. Exp. Brain Res. 110, 298—307. doi: 10.
Funct. 6:22. doi: 10.1186/1744-9081-6-22 1007/bf00228560
Marinovic, W., Reid, C. S., Plooy, A. M., Riek, S., and Tresﬂian, 1. R. (2011). Regan, D., and Gray, R. (2000). Visually guided collision avoidance and
Corticospinal excitability during preparation for an anticipatory action is collision achievement. Trends Cogn. Sci. 4, 99—107. doi: 10.1016/51364-6613(99)
modulated by the availability of Visual information. ]. Neurophysiol. 105, 1122— 01442-4
1129. doi: 10.1152/jn.00705.2010 Rosander, K., and von Hofsten, C. (2000). Visual-vestibular interaction in early
Merchant, H., Battaglia-Mayer, A., and Georgopoulos, A. P. (2001). Effects of optic infancy. Exp. Brain Res. 133, 321—333. doi: 10.1007/5002210000413
ﬂow in motor cortex and area 7a. ]. Neurophysiol. 86, 1937—1954. Schiff, W., and Oldak, R. (1990). Accuracy of judging time to arrival: effects of
Merchant, H., Battaglia-Mayer, A., and Georgopoulos, A. P. (2003). Interception 0f modality, trajectory and gender. ]. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 16, 303—
real and apparent motion targets: psychophysics in humans and monkeys. Exp. 316. doi: 10.1037//0096-1523.16.2.303
Brain Res. 152, 106—112. doi: 10.1007/500221-003-1514-5 Sharp, R. H., and Whiting, H. T. (1974). Exposure and occluded duration effects
Merchant, H., Battaglia-Mayer, A., and Georgopoulos, A. P. (2004a). Neural in a ball-catching skill. ]. Mot. Behav. 6, 139—147. doi: 10.1080/00222895.1974.
responses during interception of real and apparent circularly moving stimuli 10734990
in motor cortex and area 7a. Cereb. Cortex 14, 314—331. doi: 10.1093/cerc0r/ Shuwairi, S. M., Curtis, C. E., and 10hnson, S. P. (2007). Neural substrates of
bhg130 dynamic object occlusion. ]. Cogn. Neurosci. 19, 1275—1285. doi: 10.1162/j0cn.
Merchant, H., Battaglia-Mayer, A., and Georgopoulos, A. P. (2004b). Neural 2007.19.8.1275
responses in motor cortex and area 7a to real and apparent motion. Exp. Brain Soechting, 1. F., and Flanders, M. (2008). Extrapolation ofvisual motion for manual
Res. 154, 291—307. doi: 10.1007/500221-003-1664-5 interception. ]. Neurophysiol. 99, 2956—2967. doi: 10.1152/jn.90308.2008
Merchant, H., Battaglia-Mayer, A., and Georgopoulos, A. P. (2004c). Soechting, 1. F., 1uve1i, 1. Z., and Rao, H. M. (2009). Models for the extrapolation of
Neurophysiology 0f the parieto-frontal system during target interception. target motion for manualinterception. ]. Neurophysiol. 102, 1491—1502. doi: 10.
Neural. Clin. Neurophysiol. 2004, 1—5. 1152/jn.00398.2009
Merchant, H., Battaglia-Mayer, A., and Georgopoulos, A. P. (2005). Decoding Sokolov, A. N., Ehrenstein, W. H., Pavlova, M. A., and Cavonius, C. R. (1997).
of path-guided apparent motion from neural ensembles in posterior parietal Motion extrapolation and velocity transposition. Perception 26, 875—889.
cortex. Exp. Brain Res. 161, 532—540. doi: 10.1007/500221-004-2100-1 doi: 10.1068/p260875
Merchant, H., and Georgopoulos, A. P. (2006). Neurophysiology of perceptual and Sokolov, A., and Pavlova, M. (2003). Timing accuracy in motion extrapolation:
motor aspects of interception. ]. Neurophysiol. 95, 1—13. doi: 10.1152/jn.00422. reverse effects of target size and Visible extent of motion at low and high speeds.
2005 Perception 32, 699—706. doi: 10.1068/p3397
Merchant, H., Zarco, W., Prado, L., and Perez, 0. (2009). Behavioral and Souto, D., and Kerzel, D. (2013). Like arolling stone: naturalistic Visualkinematics
neurophysiological aspects of target interception. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 629, 201— facilitate tracking eye movements. ]. Vis. 13:9. doi: 10.1167/ 13.2.9
220. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-77064—2_10 Spering, M., Schiitz, A. C., Braun, D. 1., and Gegenfurtner, K. R. (2011). Keep your
Mijatovic’, A., La Scaleia, B., Mercuri, N., Lacquaniti, F., and Zago, M. (2014). eyes on the ball: smooth pursuit eye movements enhance prediction of Visual
Familiar trajectories facilitate the interpretation of physical forces when motion. ]. Neurophysiol. 105, 1756—1767. doi: 10.1152/jn.00344.2010
intercepting a moving target. Exp. Brain Res. 232, 3803—3811. doi: 10. Tabata, H., Miura, K., and Kawano, K. (2008). Trial-by-trial updating of the gain
1007/500221-014-4050-6 in preparation for smooth pursuit eye movement based on past experience in
Mitrani, L., and Dimitrov, G. (1978). Pursuit eye movements of a disappearing humans. ]. Neurophysiol. 99, 747—758. doi: 10.1152/jn.00714.2007
moving target. Vision Res. 18, 537—539. doi: 10.1016/0042-6989(78)90199-2 Teixeira, L. A., Chua, R., Nagelkerke, P., and Franks, I. M. (2006). Use of Visual
Morris, E. 1., and Lisberger, S. G. (1987). Different responses to small Visual information in the correction ofinterceptive actions. Exp. Brain Res. 175, 758—
errors during initiation and maintenance of smooth-pursuit eye movements in 763. doi: 10.1007/500221-006-0740-z
monkeys. ]. Neurophysiol. 58, 1351—1369. Tresilian, 1. R. (1995). Perceptual and cognitive processes in time-to-contact
Mrotek, L. A., Flanders, M., and Soechting, 1. F. (2004). Interception Oftargets using estimation: analysis of prediction-motion and relative judgment tasks. Percept.
brief directional cues. Exp. Brain Res. 156, 94—103. doi: 10.1007/500221-003- Psychophys. 57, 231—245. doi: 10.3758/bf03206510
1764-2 Vetter, P., Grosbras, M.—H., and Muckli, L. (2013). TMS over V5 disrupts motion
Mrotek, L. A., and Soechting, 1. F. (2007). Predicting curvilinear target motion prediction. Cereb. Cortex doi: 10.1093/cerc0r/bht297. [Epub ahead of print].
through an occlusion. Exp. Brain Res. 178, 99—114. doi: 10.1007/500221-006- Vishton, P. M., Reardon, K. M., and Stevens, 1. A. (2010). Timing of anticipatory
0717-y muscle tensing control: responses before and after expected impact. Exp. Brain
Nagel, M., Sprenger, A., Zapf, S., Erdmann, C., KOmpf, D., Heide, W., et a1. (2006). Res. 202, 661—667. doi: 10.1007/500221-010-2172-z
Parametric modulation of cortical activation during smooth pursuit with and von Hofsten, C., Kochukhova, 0., and Rosander, K. (2007). Predictive tracking over
without target blanking. an MRI study. Neuroimage 29, 1319—1325. doi: 10. occlusions by 4-m0nth-01d infants. Dev. Sci. 10, 625—640. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-
1016/j.neuroimage.2005.08.050 7687.2007.00604.X
Ogawa, K., and Inui, T. (2007). Lateralization 0f the posterior parietal cortex for Watamaniuk, S.N.1., and Heinen, S. 1. (2003). Perceptual and oculomotor evidence
internal monitoring of self— versus externally generated movements. ]. Cogn. of limitations on processing accelerating motion. ]. Vis. 3, 698—709. doi: 10.
Neurosci. 19, 1827—1835. doi: 10.1162/j0cn.2007.19.11.1827 1167/3.11.5
Olson, I. R., Gatenby, 1. C., Leung, H. C., Skudlarski, P., and Gore, 1. C. Watson, A. B., and Ahumada, A. 1. (1985). Model ofhuman Visual-motion sensing.
(2004). Neuronal representation of occluded objects in the human brain. ]. Opt. Soc.Am.A2, 322—341.d0i:10.1364/josaa.2.000322
Neuropsychologia 42, 95—104. doi: 10.1016/50028—3932(03)00151-9 Werkhoven, P., Snippe, H. P., and Toet, A. (1992). Visual processing of optic
Orban de Xivry, 1.-1., Bennett, S. 1., Lefevre, P., and Barnes, G. R. (2006). acceleration. Vision Res. 32, 2313—2329. doi: 10.1016/0042-6989(92)90095-z
Evidence for synergy between saccades and smooth pursuit during transient Wexler, M., and Klam, F. (2001). Movement prediction and movement production.
target disappearance. ]. Neurophysiol. 95, 418—427. doi: 10.1152/jn.00596. ]. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 27, 48—64. doi: 10.1037//0096-1523.
2005 27.1.48
Orban de Xivry, 1.-1., Missal, M., and Lefevre, P. (2008). A dynamic representation Whiting, B., Gill, E., and Stephenson, 1. (1970). Critical time intervals for taking
of target motion drives predictive smooth pursuit during target blanking. ]. Vis. in ﬂight information in a ball-catching task. Ergonomics 13, 265—272. doi: 10.
8:6. doi: 10.1167/8.15.6 1080/00140137008931141
O’Reilly, 1. X., Mesulam, M. M., and Nobre, A. C. (2008). The cerebellum Xiao, Q., Barborica, A., and Ferrera, V. P. (2007).M0du1ation of Visual responses
predicts the timing of perceptual events. ]. Neurosci. 28, 2252—2260. doi: 10. in macaque frontal eye ﬁeld during covert tracking of invisible targets. Cereb.
1523/1NEUROSCI.2742-07.2008 Cortex 17, 918—928. doi: 10.1093/cerc0r/bh1002
Pola, 1., and Wyatt, H. 1. (1997). Offset dynamics of human smooth pursuit eye Zago, M., Iosa, M., Maffei, V., and Lacquaniti, F. (2010). Extrapolation of vertical
movements: effects of target presence and subject attention. Vision Res. 37, target motion through a brief Visual occlusion. Exp. Brain Res. 201, 365—384.
2579—2595. doi: 10.1016/SOO42-6989(97)00058-8 doi: 10.1007/500221-009-2041-9
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 13 | 16

"
"17","80300 et al. Visual extrapolation for motor action

Zago, M., and Lacquaniti, F. (2005). Visual perception and interception of falling Received: 03 December 2014; accepted: 30 January 2015; published online: 23 February
objects: a review of evidence for an internal model of gravity. ]. Neural Eng. 2, 2015.

8198—8208. doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/2/3/504 Citation: Bosco G, Delle Monache S, Gravomo S, Indoviha I, La Scaleia B, Maﬁ‘ei V,

Zago, M., McIntyre, 1., Senot, P., and Lacquaniti, F. (2008). Internal models and ZagoM and LacquomitiF (2015 ) Filling gaps in visual m0ti0hf0r target capture. Front.
prediction of Visual gravitational motion. Vision Res. 48, 1532—1538. doi: 10. Integr. Neurosci. 9:13. doi: 10.3389/fniht.2015.00013
1016/ j .Visres.2008.04.005 This article was submitted to the journal Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience.

Zago, M., McIntyre, 1., Senot, P., and Lacquaniti, F. (2009). Visuo-motor Copyright © 2015 Bosco, Delle Monache, Gravomo, Indoviha, La Scaleia, Maffei,
coordination and internal models for object interception. Exp. Brain Res. 192, Zago and Lacquaniti. This is an opeh-access article distributed under the terms
571—604. doi: 10.1007/500221-008-1691-3 0f the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution and

reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s} or licensor

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was conducted are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with

in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which

as a potential conﬂict of interest. does not comply with these terms.

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 13 | 17

"
