"","x"
"1","IAC-06- A1.4.8
BONE PROTEOMICS EXPERIMENT (BOP): THE FIRST PROTEOMIC
ANALYSIS OF MAMMALIAN CELLS CULTURED IN WEIGHTLESSNESS
CONDITIONS
AUTHOR
Mr. Adalberto Costessi
Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, costessi@biotecnologi.org
E CO-AUTHORS
<C
§ Mr. Carlo Vascotto
5 University of Udine, Udine, Italy, studiovasco@hotmail.com
a Dr. Alex Pines
g University of Udine, Udine, Italy, pinesalex@hotmail.com
g Mr. Rogier Schonenborg
3 European Space Agency/ESTEC, Noordwijk, The Netherlands, rogier.schonenborg@esa.int
95? Dr. Milena Romanello
§ University of Udine, Udine, Italy, romane||@bbcm.units.it
55 Dr. Peter Schiller
EL European Space Agency/ESTEC, Noordwijk, The Netherlands, peter.schi||er@esa.int
g Prof. Luigi Moro
g University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, moro@bbcm.univ.trieste.it
(g: Prof. Gianluca Te||
g University of Udine, Udine, Italy, gtell@mail.dstb.uniud.it
E ABSTRACT
U
(:3 Bone mass loss is a major consequence of extended periods of weightlessness. Bone formation is
E reduced, osteoblast number, maturation and activity is impaired. In vitro experiments showed down-
8 regulation of osteoblast—specific genes and proteins but large proteomic studies have never been
% performed yet in the context of a space mission, although proteomics in ground research is providing
3 key contributions to the understanding of many biological processes. The technical limitations to space
2 experimentations are very tough and in this paper we discuss in detail our strategy to address some of
E them. We present results of biocompatibility tests on several glues that could be used in future
$2 hardware. During the BOP-Bone Proteomics experiment, MG-63 human osteoblast cells were grown
E in microgravity for five days and protein extracts obtained. We developed a dedicated hardware that
E provided 2000m""2 of tissue culture, temperature control and manual liquid handling. Our results show
D that exogenous administration of ATP was able to activate a signalling pathway leading to ERK1-2
phosphorylation, which had been shown to be down-regulated by weightlessness in different cells.
We also obtained 2—DE gels and started the analysis of the spot patterns. Preliminary results identified
a number of differentially regulated spots that are currently being identified. Taken together, our
results show that MG-63 cells are responsive to purinergic signalling in microgravity and that
proteomic studies are feasible in the context of a space mission and can contribute to the progress of
gravitational biology.
1

"
"2","INTRODUCTION |ine MG-63 in the context of purinergic signalling.
A growing body of evidence points to extracellular
nucleotides (i.e. ATP and UTP) as soluble factors
Bone loss and microgravity that are released by several cell types in response
Bone mass loss is a major consequence of to mechanical stimulation and that eventually
extended periods of weightlessness that could trigger an intracellular signal that results in gene
limit the ability of humans to explore the Solar expression changes. We have recently
System. demonstrated that ATP and UTP, as well as
Bone mass is lost especially in the bones normally mechanical stimulation, can activate two
more stressed by gravity at a rate of about 1-3% fundamental transcription factors, Runx2 and Egr-
per month of unloading, and calcium is lost at a 1, in the human HOBIT osteoblast cell line [6, 7].
rate that is almost 10 times greater than in a
postmenopausal woman [1]. The studies Aim of the BOP experiment
performed so far on astronauts and animals The aim of the experiment “BOP — Bone
showed that spaceflight conditions lead to Proteomics” was to investigate possible effects of
decreased bone formation, while bone resorption extracellular nucleotides in the molecular
8 is uncoupled from bone formation, contributing to responses of osteoblast cells to weightlessness
E: the bone loss. At the tissue level, the number, conditions. We focused in particular on two
g maturation and bone-producing activity of aspects:
2 osteoblasts are decreased, while the osteoclast 1. whether exogenous administration of ATP
g number and activity are not altered in most could reactivate key signalling pathways that are
g» studies [2]. known to be down-regulated in the osteoblast in
2 On the other hand, increased mechanical stress weightlessness;
g on bone as in athletes in high impact sports such 2. whether we could perform an unbiased analysis
g as gymnastics results in increased bone mass of the proteome of osteoblast cells exposed to
g and more resistant structure [1]. Dynamic weightlessness by two-dimension electrophoresis
'§ mechanical loading is able to promote in vitro (2—DE) coupled to mass spectrometry and identify
f5? osteoblast proliferation, differentiation and matrix new molecular targets.
E“ production. Recently, Plotkin et al. have showed At the time we designed the experiment, no
5 that mechanical stimulation by stretching reduces proteomic analysis had been performed yet on
i. osteocyte apoptosis via activation of ERK, thereby flown cells, whether of bacteria, plant or animal
g suggesting that this antiapoptotic effect might be origin.
é an important player in the transduction of
E mechanical forces into a biochemical signal [3]. Proteomics
% Experiments performed on bone cells cultured in Since the proteins are the key elements
E vitro during spaceflights showed that responsible for cellular metabolism and gene
[3 weightlessness can also (directly or indirectly) regulation in the cells, understanding protein
2'5 influence cells in these conditions, that means expression patterns is one way to unravel the
E outside of the body and independently of mechanisms behind biological processes.
8 hormonal regulation. Many molecular Recently, techniques that allow extensive
E mechanisms were shown to be affected by proteomic analysis have been developed and
; weightlessness, among which the cytoskeletal have started to be widely used. So far, most
g structure, signal transduction cascades and gene space experiments studied single genes and
3 expression [4]. Carmeliet et al. reported that proteins showing up-regulation or down-regulation
g cultures of the human osteoblast cell line MG-63 but there is a lack of extensive unbiased studies
Li flown for 9 days onboard the FOTON 1O mission of protein expression. For the purpose of this
5 didn’t show major differences in morphology as paper we define “unbiased” a technique like 2—DE
Q compared to in-flight 19 controls and ground analysis in which the experimenter doesn’t choose
controls [5]. However, the differentiation of MG-63 in advance which proteins to analyse as
cells after treatment with vitamin D3 and TGF- compared, for instance, to western blot.
beta was reduced in the space cultures. Therefore, 2—DE has the potential to unravel new
Several studies have described molecular molecular targets and on the basis of their
alterations of the bone cells during spaceflight, but modified expression levels.
we still haven’t conclusively defined what is the We have successfully applied a 2—DE analysis
primum movens, which structure(s) or coupled to mass spectrometry to the study of
mechanism(s) are ultimately responsible for another well-known topic of space biology: the
sensing load or unload and adjust to it. physiology of T lymphocites during clinorotation
[8]. We were able to identify modified expression
Bone cells and purinergic signalling of seven proteins involved in nucleic acid
To gain new insights into the molecular responses processing, proteasome regulation and
of bone cells to microgravity, we developed a cytoskeletal structure.
space experiment with the human osteoblast cell
2

"
"3","Recently, Sarkar et al. have published a
proteomic analysis on hippocampus from hind v
limb suspended mice that described the down- A 1,45% W
regulation of a handful of proteins among which / L ‘&
tubulin and pyruvate dehydrogenase [9]. “yes;
. ‘ e
The space capsule turned into a lab % X t "" .3
The astronautic era has challenged scientists and 0' “ “ J
physicians with since then unexpected findings, it
opened new research fields, and it has provided
scientists with exciting opportunities to better B ‘
understand biological and physiological aspects of Gas
terrestrial life. a—i—J— Medlun __ q} H
However, the peculiar conditions of a space flight £l ""
impose also serious technical limitations to
scientific experimentation, and in particular to
§ biological research, when compared to the normal C “ii‘fgze' Launch eTfféime Ag: 2mm Closeout
:ﬁ' working conditions of a research lab on the g ‘ l
g ground. Two kinds of challenges can be defined: t I II t I I H
2-2 first, the ones coming from weightlessness itself; I—*—T—'—I—ﬂ 25d 0h , _
h1 . . . ays 4 I 2h 30 20
g second, the ones coming from the spaceflight *—' Liar, *—+ i i
g» conditions. Hardware has to cope first of all with
E weightlessness: for instance, innovatiye design is Figure 1. BOP hardware and timeline. A, picture of
8 reqUIred to keep I'qu'ds m place but. St'” allow the BOP culture chambers (CC) assembled before
E IiClUid exchange and prevent formatlon 0t alt flight. B, schematic representation of a chamber. C,
g bubbles that can have negative effects. On the timeline of the flight experiment,
'§ other hand, the technical and engineering aspects
iii of a spaceflight are also extremely tough: In this paper we discuss in detail the strategy of
3%“ accelerations and vibrations during launch and pre-tests we set-up to address some 0f the
g return, the safety rules needed to preserve the technical constrains were confronted with, like the
8“ well being of the astronauts, the in-f|ight sub-optimal temperature profile that could be
3 availability of electrical power, the need of provided and the assessment 0f the
a particular temperature profiles (fridges, freezers), biocompatibility 0t materials and glues. The
E stringent limitations to the mass and volume of the preliminary results 0t BOP demonstrate that it’s
ES experiment, selection of materials to be used, etc. feasible to perform proteomic studies 0“
E All these aspects have to be addressed in such a spaceflight samples and we diSCUSS the first
:3 way that performing a sound space experiment is SClehtltIC tlhdlhge- By sharing our approach and
2'5 still possible. In most of the cases, however, we our results We hope to improve the development
(2 are quite far from the “easy” working conditions 0f future hardware and contribute to the
8 we experience in our labs on the ground. For advancement 0t space biology research.
g example, until now it has not happened seldomly
Q that during a mission samples could not be frozen
2;: or that an onboard 1g centrifuge was not W
5» available. The best and only way to cope with the
g limitations is to perform extensive tests to optimize
Li the experimental protocol and adapt it to such a m
E peculiar setting. Moreover, it is also a common In order to perform a proper 2'DE analysis
Q practice to perform a parallel experiment on the coupled to mass spectrometry, quite a large
ground reproducing the conditions of the space protein sample is required. We estimated that
experiment as far as possible about 70-90 cm""2 Of MG-63 CGIIS were needed.
So far many experimenters had to face similar or Some years ago ESA developed the so-called
identical technical challenges, like the selection of Plunger Boxes, that support IiClUid handling, bUt
a proper biocompatible glue or the development of they can provide only 2 cm""2 each.
a liquid handling system with pressure Therefore we developed a new dedicated
compensation. Unfortunately, structured records hardware that supported manual IiClUid exchange.
or databases of such hardware-related It was designed, manufactured and tested at
information do not exist and for instance it has ESTEC (European Space Agency, ESA, The
been very difficult for us, and in most cases Netherlands) (Fig. 1A)- The hardware comprised
impossible, to find any information about the glues three independent culture chambers (CCS); each
used in previous hardware and their chamber was divided into two compartments by a
biocompatibility characteristics. flexible and gas-permeable membrane (Fig. 1B).
The upper compartment was filled with 5% C02
3

"
"4","A ATPaS 5‘ (RT) ATP=S 5‘ {-20 C) C
_ —
—“""I- 234:1""
_ e. — II: 2:22;?
m m
8M urea. 4% CHAPS 4M urea. 4% CHAPS 1"""" a M"" '
B . ' ‘ .'
a '7 'mm ‘. - “—5”. --—— 4 ' Citotoxicitytest - 5 (lays
*= '4 ""-' “z 7“
“ ' ’ ‘ ' ’ 2 EISiIicon
g [I ‘3 g 3 _ mm W.
3;- 2M urea.4% CHAPS 1M urea. 4% CHAPS
3? — ,.__._-.~+ - _ t, I I§I §I
E) ,, 4-»— L L— "". “a ~1~ 0 5
£- : . -. ‘ '- ‘ Time[days]
“ ' '
g Figure 2. Results of pretests. A, western blot analysis of ERK1-2 phosphorylation (pErk) in MG-63 cells treated for 5
g minutes with ATPgS either stored at room temperature (RT) or at -20°C. As loading control, total Erk is shown. B, test of
f3 lysis buffer composition on carbamoylation of protein samples and quality of 2—DE gels. The part highlighted in the
g square shows an example of better resolution with the lowest concentration of urea. C, MTT assay to asses
g biocompatibility of glues and materials. Values are means of quadruplicate experiments, error bars show standard
8 deviation.
g air, while the lower one contained MG-63 human entered into orbit and reached weightlessness
g osteoblast cells and DMEM-F12 culture medium conditions.
:2 supplemented with Hepes. The cells were grown After spending two days in orbit, the Soyuz
a on slides obtained from conventional tissue- docked to the ISS on Flight Day 3 (FD 3) and the
8 culture treated dishes (Coming) in order to BOP experiment was transferred to the Russian
8 provide a normal substrate for attachment. module, where the manual operations were
(32 Each culture chamber supplied about 70 cm""2 of executed by astronaut Roberto Vittori (for a sketch
% tissue culture. The liquid inside the chambers was of the timeline, see Fig. 1C). On FD 3, half of the
% exchanged manually by operating pre-filled culture medium was exchanged with fresh
9 syringes through entry ports. medium without serum. Forty hours later (FD5),
(2‘ From the handover for installation in the Soyuz cells where challenged with 100 microM ATPgS
<2: until docking to the ISS, the cells were kept at (adenosine 5'-gamma-thyo triphosphate) for 3
ﬁ 37°C by buiIt-in heaters. After docking and until hours or 20 minutes, partially washed with PBS
g closeout of the experiment, the cells were kept at and eventually lysed (the final concentration of the
E 37°C in the Aquarius B incubator. lysis buffer being 1M urea, 4% CHAPS). The
8 All hardware components that needed sterilization hardware was then stored in the Soyuz capsule at
were processed by autoclaving, immersion in room temperature (18—20°C) until re-entry. At the
ethanol solution and/or UV irradiation. landing site, the hardware was recovered and
stored at +4°C during transport to ESTEC, that
Timeline of the experiment took one day. Upon arrival in the laboratory in
The BOP experiment flew during the Italian Soyuz ESTEC, the samples were recovered and stored
Mission Eneide to the International Space Station at -20°C until they were processed for protein
(ISS) and was sponsored by the ESA Success isolation.
2002 Student Contest awarded to the author. The
Soyuz capsule was launched from Baykonur Ground-control experiment
(Kazakhstan) on 15th April 2005 at 02:46 Central Detailed data on the temperature profile and
European Summer Time (CEST) and landed in timing of the spaceflight experiment were
Kazakhstan on 25th April 2005 at 00:07 CEST. available thanks to temperature data loggers built
About one minute after the launch, the Soyuz into the hardware, the logbook of the crew and
video recording of most of the operations. Based
4

"
"5","on this information, we performed a ground- the spots compared to the other buffers. This
control experiment at ESTEC a few weeks after combination was therefore chosen as |ysis buffer
landing. We applied experimental conditions that for the space experiment.
were as far as possible similar to those occurred
during spaceflight: we used the same batches of Citotoxicity/biocomQatibility of materials
cells and chemicals and the temperature profile As mentioned above, we were not able to find
was precisely reproduced. information about the glues previously used in
space hardware and so we invested significant
efforts to identify a biocompatible glue. We also
RESULTS OF PRETESTS tested Vitton (the material of which the O-rings in
the CCs were made of), and autoclaved
commercial vaseline.
Storage of ATP We used several methods to investigate the glues
During the Eneide Mission, no freezer was in contact with MG-63 ce||s. First of all we cured
available onboard to store the ATPgS solution the glues in standard petri dishes and then grew
from launch until use (FD5) and to store the cells for up to one week to analyse their
8 samples from the closeout of the experiment unti| morphology. In experiments of shorter duration
3: landing. (up to 3-5 days) we performed MTT assays to
g It is known that storage of a water solution of ATP measure cell viability (Figure 2C).
32 at room temperature can lead to hydrolysis to Our tests show that Araldite Rapid, Scotch Weld
g ADP, AMP and possibly adenosine. However, no 2216 and Scotch Weld 9323 cause the complete
g» data were available on the kinetics of such a disintegration of the cells after a few hours.
2 degradation process. We decided to test the Dow Corning Silastic Medical Adhesive Sylicon
g cellular effects of different concentration of ATPgS type A, Dow Corning Medical grade two-parts
g (1, 10 and 100 microM) either stored at -20°C or Polyurethane Potting Compound, commercial
g at room temperature (20-22°C) for five days. As a vaseline and Vitton didn’t induce any
'§ readout we analysed the phosphorylation levels of morphological change up to one week of direct
f5? pERK1-2 which we had characterized as a direct contact with the medium in which the cells were
3:? target of purinergic signalling. Figure 2A shows grown. In all these cases the cells spread until the
E that 1 microM of freshly thawed ATPgS promotes border of the materials. The MTT assay showed
i ERK1-2 phosphorylation, whi|e preservation at also a very high cell viability, and only the Potting
g room temperature results in decreased activation, compound gave slightly lower values, though it
a as expected. However, a higher concentration of didn’t induce any visible morphological change.
E 100 microM was enough to activate pERK1-2 and
% therefore we could use this concentration for the
E space experiment. PRELIMINAR SCIENTIFIC RESULTS OF BOP
U
LU
35 Lysis buffer and storage of samples
E It is common practice in the lab to keep and store Accurate data of the temperature profile inside
8 protein samples as much as possible at low each CC were recorded by data loggers during
g temperatures, but also in this case we didn’t have the whole mission (Figure 3A). The cells were
3 experimental data on the effects of temperature always kept at 37°C from handover unti| closeout
g on protein samples integrity. of the experiment, both by the bui|t-in heaters
3 Urea is a molecule used in the composition of (onboard the Soyuz) or the Aquarius B incubator
g |ysis buffers because it can denature proteins, (onboard the ISS).
Li thereby inactivating proteases, and it is The protein samples retrieved after landing were
5 compatible with 2—DE analysis. However, our first concentrated by precipitation with acetone and
Q tests confirmed that high concentrations of urea resuspension in a smaller volume of the standard
(BM) in a protein sample stored at room rehydration buffer used for 2—DE analysis. The
temperature can lead to carbamoylation of the samples were first analyzed by 1-D SDS—PAGE
proteins and this eventually results in chains of and Coomassie staining to estimate their
spots on a 2D gel that can severely impair the concentration and investigate their integrity.
analysis. As expected, we detected a fat band
We therefore decided to test a range of corresponding to bovine serum albumin coming
concentrations of urea (1, 2, 4 and 8 M) in from the medium that was still present in the
combination with 4% CHAPS. All buffers were chamber when the cells were lysed. For the rest,
efficient to |yse the cells (data not shown) and the the samples were judged suitable for western blot
protein samples were then analysed by 2—DE and 2—DE (Figure 38). Based on the Coomassie
(Figure 28). Analysis of the gels showed that the staining and the protein amounts we could
combination 4% CHAPS and 1M urea didn’t result estimate that the cells grew confluent in
in evident carbamoylation of the proteins and weightlessness, although we didn’t perform a
some areas of the gel showed higher resolution of precise quantification.
5

"
"6","Although some analysis is still ongoing, our
. results demonstrate the feasibility of such
A Boptemper't”'°”'°f""e proteomic studies in the context of a space
40 .,.r__.- .__.._. 7 7- RWM 7 mission.
30 hi-W-I. Ii We developed a new dedicated hardware in less
_8 lillnlllllllll. than nine months that provided 70 cm""2 per
E Q” n ‘ ————-*""""‘J' ""I chamber and a total of more than 200 cm""2 of
= IIIWﬂIIIIIiII.|Ilm tissuecunure.
1” IIIII-llllluﬂu We testes that two glues, namely Down Corning
D I ""_ '- Medical Silicon type A and Polyurethane Potting
y {93° 3 ff 09$ 93 $10? $9 996° fﬁly {19$ Compound, show good biocompatibility properties
0""“ 3""” 639 $9 «‘99 .36 $9 $3 r99 (g y 099 r99 r59 wt“? and can be safely used for the development of
Tim""S°ET=°MT+2“’ future space hardware also in direct contact with
FLIGHT cells and culture medium.
3 . 5m .. 10w , c m
C“ m m w m c” ‘ pm 1 -.... .- ,. ERK1-2 are crucial signal transduction proteins for
8 ' a the osteoblast and several studies on different cell
3: “9"".QHQ, ER"" ‘ lines showed that ERK1-2 phosphorylation is
g ' down-regulated in simulated microgravity. The
g 51:2}, , a BOP experiment provides the first evidence that
g i I I MG-63 osteoblastic cells in microgravity are still
i» 4 31:] I ‘ ’ . ' j responsive to purinergic signalling and that
S treatment with ATPgS is able to activate ERK1-2
c2 phosphorylation.
:0 Figure 3. Temperature profile and western blot results. A, These data come from a relatively large culture
E temperature profile of the whole space experiment was (70 cmA2) and therefore are the average response
§ acquired by data loggers PlaCEd inSide the CCS- B, 1-D of a large cell population. However, careful
f5? SDS'IIDAGE and ’[Coorgilassie Sltaini“? ESQ? :pacte t' _ replicate experiments would be needed to
e sam es. , wes em 0 ana Sis o - ac Iva Ion m - - - - -
i the rfrotein samples from the alight experiment show preCIser quantlfy the level Of thls actlvatlon.
i activation Of pERK1 2 followmg ATPgS treatment. Analysis of 2D gels revealed several differentially
g We tested by western blot the activation of regulated proteins in response to ATP treatment
5 pERK1-2 which are known targets of purinergic and spaceflight. We. hope the Identification of the
8 signalling. Our results indicate that administration SPOtS W'” offer new '“S'thsl ”“0 the. molecular
E of 100 microM ATPgS during spaceflight is able to b'OIOQY 0f human cells '“ micregrayity. Taken
(53 activate ERK1-2 phosphorylation during together, the resullts we show In this paper, our
8 spaceflight (Figure 3C). preVIous proteomic anaIySIs of T lymphOCItes In
E Clinorotatlon and the recent study of hippocampus
(é 2—DE analysis was performed as described before from unleaded mice [9] demonstrate that
8 [8] on samples from control cells and cells treated proteomic analysis '3 a valuable tOOI also for
E for 3 hours during spaceflight and ground control ; =
(<5 experiments. Shortly, each sample was run in _ _ T.
2‘ duplicate, the gel images scanned, the spots ""ﬁt? .5?
5* identified and matched with the Melanie 5 L”. ' ' 5- _
3: software. The spots that were not reproducible ""'K , H» f."" . ., . Flight
g between different runs were discarded from the :‘f' 1 "" _
5 analysis. Then images from differentsamples _ ' 1* .2 - ' .
were compared to each other, the spots matched H
and qualitative and quantitative differences “m“ “WWW-m
calculated with standard software functions. -- v... "" ..
The patterns of protein spots showed some __,:;_""'_- ._
differences between spaceflight and ground and "" *' 3' * -- . .
between untreated and treated samples in the two :23: - Emu“
conditions (Fig. 4). Several differentially regulated _ 4f : 5;, _ _: - , .-
spots were identified and are now being analysed n3 ' ' ' r --
by mass spectrometry.
CONCLUSIONS Figure 4. 2—DE gels of the samples from untreated cells
and cells treated for 3 hours with ATPgS during spaceflight
BOP is the first proteomic study of mammalian and the ground experiment. Detailed analysis ef thespots,
cells grown in weightlessness conditions. excluding the ones that were not reprodUCIble, Identified
several differentially regulated spots.
6

"
"7","space biology research that can identify novel
targets of molecular pathways that are altered in
microgravity conditions.
While proteomic analysis has become a standard
technique in ground research already since some
years, the BOP experiment is the first example of
such investigation on flown mammalian cells. We
believe that this is an example of a sort of “delay”
we experience in gravitational and space sciences
compared to the fast technical developments
occurring in “ground” molecular and cellular
biology. This for sure reflects the intrinsic
Challenges and enormous technical constrains of
developing and performing scientific experiments
during a space flight, that we discussed above.

8 However, at the same time it calls for more flying

3: opportunities and more investments in basic

g research in gravitational biology and physiology.

32 After serious delays, the construction of the ISS

g seems to have restarted. This will also lead to

g» major developments of the scientific

S instrumentation (i.e. the Columbus module). This

<2 should improve the experimental conditions during

g spaceflights and make it easier also to perform

g similar proteomic analysis as well as more

g advanced studies.

f. REFERENCES

z»

E 1. Cavanagh P.R. et aI. Gravitational and Space

E Biology, 2005 Jun;18(2):39—58

g 2. Collet et aI. Bone, 1997;20:547-551

% 3. Plotkin et al. J Bone Miner Res. 2006

C; Apr;21(4):605-15

35 4. Carmeliet G et aI. FASEB J. 1999;13

3 Suppl:S129—34

8 5. Carmeliet G et al. J Bone Miner Res. 1997

g Nov;12(5):786-794

j: 6. Pines A. et aI. Biochem J. 2003 Aug 1;373(Pt

g 3):815-24

3 7. Costessi A. et aI. Bone, 2005 Mar;36(3):418—

g 32

Li 8. Risso et aI. Proteomics. 2005 May;5(7):1827-

E 37

Q 9. Sarkar P et al. J Proteome Res. 2006

Mar;5(3):548—53.
7

"
