"","x"
"1","2003-01-2528 E
' Bacterial and Fungal Communities In BPS
Chambers and Root Modules
Cheryl M. Frazier, Julie B. Simpson, Michael S. Roberts and Gary W. Stutte
Dynamac Corporation
' Norman D. Fields and Juan Melendez-Andrade
-. E Bionetics Corporation
E Robert C. Morrow
' Orbitec Corporation
Copyright © 2003 SAE International
ABSTRACT load of various systems may affect the health and safety
of the crew as well as their food, water, and air supplies.
The PESTO (Photosynthetic Experiment System Testing As a result, a number of studies have been undertaken
and Operation) experiment ﬂew in the Biomass to assess the microbial community in various facilities
, » Production System (BPS) to International Space Station and space vehicles. For example. clean rooms of
f (ISS) on 31-3410 (Atlantis) April 3, 2002, and returned spacecraft assembly facilities have been investigated for
on STS-111 (Endeavour) June 19, 2002’ after 73 days in microbial contamination (Venkateswaran et al. 2001).
Space_ The ground Control was conducted on a two- Studies have been conducted to Characterize the
'week delay at Kennedy Space Center in a BPS unit microbial flora of astronauts before, during, and after
l~ under environmental conditions comparable to ISS. relatively short—term flights, e.g., the APONO program.
E Wheat (Triticum aestivum CV Apogee) and Brassica rapa The transfer Of microorganisms among aStronaUtS and t0
cv Astroplant were independently grown in root modules surfaces in the spacecraft has 8'30 been examined
, for multiple grow-outs. On-orbit harvests, root modules (Ferguson et al'.1975)'. Microbial samples. were taken
E exchanges and primings, seeds imbibitions, and gas and from the _ Russuan M"" space station Inner walls,
E water samplings occurred at periodic intervals; all were atmospheric humidity condensate, and from the potable
replicated in ground controls. Many operations required water systems (Novikova 2000; Kawamura et al. 2001;
g crew handling and open access to individual chambers, Skuratov et al. 2902; Ott, personal communication) and
allowing the exchange of microorganisms between the from the air (Novrkova 2900, Maklmura et al. 200N- The
E crew environment and the BPS modules. Upon landing, International Space Station ('33) water-processnng Uh|t
E [- BPS surfaces, containment bags, root modules, and has also been examined for bacterial contamination
i 2?; plant material were swabbed for recovery of microbes. (Kerkhof and Pickering, personal communication). If
E Water samples were collected from BPS nutrient delivery plants and/or animals are to share the spacecraft
E and humidity control systems (HCS), root modules, and ecosystem duringlspace missibns, they may add another
E IN wastewater bags. Swabs and liquid samples were plated layer 0t cbmpleXIty t0 the microbial community 0f the
E onto selective media; microbial and fungal colonies were closed enVIronment 0f the vehicle.
E )3 identified to the species level by metabolic profiling when
E Eﬂ‘i possible. Differences in bacterial and fungal species '33 offers an excellent opportunity to study changes in
l 9 and the number of species identified were detected microbial populations in air, water, and surfaces. To
E between the ﬂight and ground controls. date, only minimal information on microbial identifications
is available. Our study addresses the microbial
E _ 3‘5; INTRODUCTION composition of the PESTO (Photosynthetic Experiment
E System Testing and Operation) experiment and the
51} 35' - Biomass Production System (BPS) after spending 73
: i. E The lon -term resence of humans In space beyond low- . . .
i Earth 02bit reguires that a number of Advanced Life days. m space (on Shuttle and ISSE' Wheat (WOW
E Support issues be addressed before such missions will ?eet'Yum CV Apogee) was grown 'n root modules '""
be feasible. These include ensuring safe, adequate Indlvrdual Champers for three 14 to 21 day grow-outs per
supplies of food, potable water, and air. The microbial chamber; Brasswa r apa CV Astroplant was grown for 39'
'_~ day and 38-day grow-outs. On-orblt harvests of each
i 1 m

"
"2","chamber occurred, root modules were exchanged and PREPARATION OF SAMPLES FOR TRFLP ANALYSIS
primed, seeds were imbibed, and gas and water samples
were taken at various intervals. These in-flight Swab tips were placed into sterile tubes containing 0.5
operations required opening the individual chambers, mL sterile phosphate buffered saline (PBS), vortexed for
exposing the crew to microorganisms growing in the 2 minutes, and then swab tips were removed. Tubes
chamber environment and exposing the chambers to were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm (20,000 g) for 5 minutes,
microorganisms living on the humans and in ISS. the liquid was decanted, and the pellet resuspended in
Ground control operations were conducted in a BPS in 200 uL PBS to await DNA extraction. Liquid samples
the Orbiter Environmental Simulator (OES) chamber at were pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm (20,000 9)
Kennedy Space Center, FL, under similar environmental for 5 minutes, the liquid was decanted, and the pellet ;
conditions following the same time—Iine and procedures resuspended in 200 ill— sz to await DNA extraction. 1
as the operations on ISS. Upon landing. chamber DNA was extracted per protocol for isolation of nucleic E
surfaces, containment b393, root modules, and plant acids from bacteria or yeast using the Roche High Pure !
matter were swabbed. Water samples were taken from PCR Template Preparation Kit (Indianapolis, IN, USA). ;
the BPS nutrient delivery and humidity control systems Eluted DNA was stored at 4° C. Nine ground control ‘
(HCS), from the FOOL and from wastewater bags. Swabs samples were lost during the preparation process. ‘
and liquid samples were plated and microbial and fungal i
colonies were identified to species level whenever TRFLP ANALYSES
possible. Molecular analyses were conducted to profile I
the overall bacterial and fungal community. - Microbial community DNA was examined using the 1
Terminal Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism ?
MATERIALS AND METHODS (TRFLP) method (Liu et al., 1997) to separate and i
visualize the dominant ribotypes present in each sample
BPS CHAMBERS AND ROOT MODULES based on data from the DNA coding for the 168
ribosomal subunit. TRFLP served as a fingerprinting
Wheat was grown in root modules in individual chambers method to characterize both the bacterial and fungal
for three grow—outs and Brassica was grown for two. On- communities and to categorize them based on similarity
orbit harvests oCcurred, root modules were exchanged to one another rather than to assign identities to an .
and primed, seeds were imbibed, and gas and water individual ribotype. Fungal community PCR was .
samples were taken at various intervals. performed in 50-uL reaction volumes using fluorescently— ‘
labeled qurward (lTS1-F_6-FAMTM) and reverse
SAMPLE COLLECTION (ITS4__HEX ) oligonucleotide primers (synthesized by f.
Operon Technologies, Alameda, CA, USA) targeting the ,3;
Upon landing, sterile cotton applicators (Fisher) were intergenic transcribed spacer (ITS) region of the
used to swipe interior surfaces of the BPS chambers, ribosomal DNA operon of the fungal community, as
individual root modules, and containment bags, All swab described in Klamer et al. (Klamer et al., 2002). Bacterial 5
samples were collected by swiping across the interior community PCR was performed in 50-uL reaction
surface in an irregular pattern and were stored at 4 C ' volumes using a fluorescently labeled forward primer :‘
until processed. Liquid samples (approximately 10 — 15 (Bac-SSU27Fﬂ6-FAMW) and an unlabeled reverse .
mL each) were collected at various intervals on orbit and primer (Bac-SSU1492R) targeting the small subunit 168 ,
afterlanding from rootmodules, humidity control system, rDNA region of the ribosomal DNA operon. Primer 1.’
. nutrientdelivery system, and wastewater bags. Samples sequences and optimal annealing temperatures for
collected on-orbit and from the ground control were community PCR are shown in Table 1. Final PCR
stored at ambient temperatures until landing,.at which reagent concentrations were: 2.0 mM MgCiz, 1x Applied
time they were stored at 4 C, until processed. Biosystems Buffer II, 200 “M of each dNTP, 1.0 “M of
each primer, 0.4 pg/uL BSA (Bovine Serum Albumin),
MICROBIAL CULTIVATION AND IDENTIFICATION and 1.25 U AmpliTaq DNA polymerase. All amplification
reactions were performed in an MJ Research PTC-200 2;
All samples were transported to the Life Sciences Thermocycler (Waltham, MA, USA) with reagents
Services Contract’s Environmental Microbiology obtained from Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA,
_ Laboratory, Kennedy Space Center, FL, for processing. USA), with the exception of BSA that was obtained from
Aliquots (0.5 mL) were drOpped onto Blood agar and Roche Diagnostics (Indianapolis, IN, USA).
onto Sabouraud Dextrose agar plates for cultivation of Thermocycler reaction conditions for fungal IIS
bacterial and fungal isolates, respectively. Plates were amplification were: 5 minutes initial denaturation at 94 C
streaked into four quadrants and incubated at 37 C (24 followed by 35 cycles of 0.5 minutes at 94 C, 2 minutes
— 48 hours for bacteria and 7 -— 10 days for fungi). of annealing at 50 C, and 3 minutes extension at 72° C
Subcultures were evaluated by BIOLOG® and by Vitek followed by a final extension step of 5 minutes at 72 C.
assays. Bacterial 168-rDNA PCR amplifications were identical
except that the annealing temperature was 55 C.
Reaction yield was determined by 1.5% agarose gel

"
"3","' electrophoresis. PCR products were purified and Following restriction, samples were purified and desalted
concentrated using QlAquick PCR Purification Kit with QlAquick Nucleotide Removal Kit (Qiagen, Hilden,
' (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), digested with the appropriate Germany), denatured at 95° C for 10 minutes, and
restriction endonuclease at 5U per reaction according to separated by capillary electrophoresis in an ABI 310
manufacturer’s instructions (New England Biolabs, Genetic Analyzer in GeneScan mode (Applied
Beverly, MA, USA). The restriction endonucleases Hhal Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).
and Rsal were used to digest rDNA and |TS targets.
Table 1. Primer sequences used for T—RFLP microbial community profiling in this study. Small subunit ribosomal DNA
(SSU rDNA) and the Intergenic Transcribed Spacer (iTS) region of rDNA were used to target the bacterial and fungal
communities, respectively.
Domain Primer Primer Sequence (5’-3’)b Target and PositionC Melting Ref.
Specificitya Temp.
BACTERIA -__--
Most Bacteria SSU27f AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG 168 (380 rDNA):08-27
Most Bacteria SSU1492r GGTTACCTTGTTACGACTT 168 (880 rDNA):1492-1474
FUNGI _——--
Most Fungi ITS1~F CTTGGTCATTTAGAGGAAGTAA 188 (830 rDNA):455980—456001
Most Fungi ITS4 TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC 258 (LSU rDNA):455123—455142
aPrimer specificity within phylogenetic domains.
t’IUB nucleotide codes.
cPrimer positions for the Small Subunit (SSU) and Large Subunit (LSU) ribosomal DNA (rDNA) operon using the
Escherichia coli and the Saccharomyces cerevisiae (ACC No. NC___001144) numbering systems for bacterial and fungal
primer sets, respectively.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Eupenici/Iium, and Eurotium) were present in flight, but
not in ground control samples. Penicil/ium, Trichoderma,
MICROBIAL CULTIVATION AND IDENTIFICATION and Fusarium were the most common fungi isolated from
both flight and ground control samples. Neosartorya was
Fungi , much more common in flight than in ground control
V ,. samples. Four genera identified in this study,
,; Fungal genera isolated from ﬂight or ground control Penicillium, Cladosporium, Aspergillus, and Alcremom'umi
samples and identified by BIOLOG® 0r Vitek are listed in were 3m909 the 25 genera am} 126 Spesies of fungi
' Table 2. In general, more fungal genera were detected Isolated ”1 samples .from various locations ”1 M""
in flight samples than in ground control samples. (NOY'Iqua 2000)- _TWO genera (Aspergillus and
' Cladosporium was present in the ground control, but not Penicrllium) present in our samples we“? reported by
, in flight samples, while three genera (Acremonium, _ Novukova (2000) to be potentially pathogenic. Novrkova
’ , Table 2. Fungi identified by BiOLOG® or Vitek. CH = Chamber; W = Wastewater; B = Root Module Containment Bags;
; ' RM = Root Module; NDS = Nutrient Delivery System; HCS = Humidity Control System. X = Flight; 0 = Ground Control
y. __-------
Aspemuus spp. __----—-
l. Cladospon'um spp._ _—-—-——m
59 Eupenicmium spp. _---_-_
i —---—-_-
. ; Neosanorya spp. -----ll_-
Penicmium sop. -----m—m
‘ Trichoderma spp. ----a-—_—
3 » if 3 a

"
"4","also reported that Aspergillus, Penicillium, and ground control samples. Occurrences of Aeromonas, '
Cladosporium were considered to be biodestructive or Bacillus, Staphylococcus, Pseudomonas, Micrococcus,
corrosive to materials on Mir. All three fungal genera Burkholderia, Sphingomonas, and Gram-negative rods l
were present in PESTO samples and are common were reported in samples from Apollo missions
contaminants of both indoor and outdoor air. One (Ferguson et al. 1975) and Mir samples (Kawamura et al. .
isolate, Cladosporium sp., was detected in the ground 2001, Ott 2002, Skuratov et al. 2002). A total of 15 .
control HCS, but was absent in the flight HCS. It is likely genera and 24 species were identified in the I
that Cladosporium was present in the flight HCS, but was BPS/PESTO samples from flight. In contrast, Novikova 1
not detected. No novel genera were identified in PESTO (2000) reported the isolation of 40 genera and :
samples. 1088pecies from Mir, Progress, and Soyuz spacecrafts. ;
. Microbiological census data from the ISS are less i
Bacteria abundant to date, but 17 bacteria have been isolated !
from the ISS water-processing unit for identification. i
Bacteria identified by BIOLOG® or Vitek from flight and Several of these isolates are ubiquitous members of the I:
ground control samples are listed in Table 3. More or and B Proteobacteria (Lee Kerkhof, personal i
species of bacteria were identified from flight samples communication). Only two of the genera detected in . i
than were from ground control samples. Only BPS/PESTO samples (Staphylococcus and Bacillus) are g
Pseudomonas pyrrocinia and Sphingomonas capsulata considered to be opportunistic pathogens. These i
were unique to the ground control samples. organisms are also ubiquitous in nature and their I
Acinetobacter, Micrococcus, Sphingomonas, Staphylo- presence does not present additional risk to a healthy i
coccus, and Variovorax were found in flight, but not in crew. i
't
Table 3. Bacteria identified by BIOLOG® or Vitek. CH = Chamber; W = Wastewater; B = Root Module Containment Bag; ‘
RM = Root Module; NDS = Nutrient Delivery System; HCS = Humidity Control System. X = Flight; 0 = Ground Control .
_“nnmmm
Acinetobacteriwofﬁi -------- ‘
_----ﬂ--- .
Bacillusspp. um"": I
BurkhOIderia‘cepacia ---—--m ‘ :
Burkholderiaglumae m—U-m-m “
Burkholderia mwﬁvorans --m----- ' -
Burkholderia viemamiensis -—----mm
Chromobacterium violaceum mm-“m-m
Chwseobacterium 919w"" ---‘l----ﬂ
Chwseobacteriumindologenes ll------ﬂ
_m-— .
_------- :.
Nonfermenting GNR (Asaccharolvtic> mm-u-a-m -~
—-iIl-----m .
PseUdomonasﬂuorescens ----m-—m
Pseudomonas Wrocmia --m----m i :
—-i“l----ﬂ :
_----m-m '
Sphingomonascapswata ------m-a
Sphingomonas anCimObi/is -------- . .
Staphylococcusepidermidis -------- ~-
staphy’ococwssaprophyticus -_-----
Stenotrophomonasmaltophi'ia ------ﬂl-
'0 4 2; 0

"
"5","‘ The ground-based control humidity control system wastewater, and nutrient delivery system samples
contained significantly more genera of bacteria than did possessed more diversity than other samples (data not
the ﬂight system. The humidity control system presented). Of the ground control samples, wastewater
experienced mechanical problems and components samples possessed more diversity than any other
were replaced, which could have allowed contamination samples.
of the system.

Bacterial operational taxonomic units were greatest in
TRFLP Flight Chamber 1 (wheat), the Humidity Control System,
and the Nutrient Delivery System (data not presented)
Fungal species richness, i.e., diversity, was higher in The ground control sample exhibiting the most diversity
ﬂight samples than in ground control samples. Flight was the Humidity Control System tubing for Chamber 3..
Chambers 1 and 3 (in which wheat was grown),
Figure 1. TRFLP~generated electropherograms of community profile in wastewater. a = fungal community, flight; b =
~ fungal community, ground; 0 = bacterial community, flight; d = bacterial community, ground.
, i NMMMWWMM‘WWW mmmmsmﬂgmwgﬁw
Y, I .WWWWWWMWWWWWW*MW”W""¢* ”W“””““W""”W“M
;: - ,/ ""1 V V A 5%Rﬁ’ﬁlmwﬁﬁﬁfvggwywﬁ/g////xr9;i\';;;ﬁWV;JW/M‘VIW/x53;;JiJJJ&V;?;/lll/l/JM,Uoﬁ’v/Wlﬁ‘iﬁ’N/l/f/IJL'IJiWNb/I¢Wfiy;l;x(\‘IIINV«;\\\:’/l”!y&/éf\\%;f‘((VIJ®fffl’;‘( d -' ##mfg‘o’Amj-m-«(éﬁawzwié
t ..
g: y 64 bp <— 308 bp <——— 473 bp .;:
2’“? “ .23, )
?37522'1'13‘ , .5252 -::-::;e
\ '. » aw” 'w umwwvawwmuwuamwmows“”tw‘ﬁﬂi‘ wskwg’ﬁﬂt‘t ""
e5 ,, , ﬁaﬁﬁ’w’W‘WM ”
IJ‘ 4;; , , WI1‘5”“mﬂxﬁmﬁﬁmxwwﬁ‘w>\wwt’WNm‘ﬂ‘x‘kW/HW‘”WFMWWM?ki‘ﬂ>WWWW’nxv’uimm’fmtvmwvbmﬁ’ﬁwf«4&4W\\WWH~/%
'Jgtgfﬂf; ‘ -: ~ m:Awmmm,,”5”..s.»mmxxx,x~sxj,,,,,~9;;Mm,m:m~mmr,ﬂﬁwttLManE-mo,;,vmm“srattrasffmxmaimmMWzQMI/asbézzi/mmmwﬁw“\WQLMMt-tsggw,» '-‘--* v,,cftm,//,;misxﬂxxwtww
‘ <— 77 bp 204 bp 308 bp 473 bp
1 I: j g “Nwwﬂww‘ggﬁbw*‘éwdwﬁvh‘AiW3MmKW I""3M5?'ﬁ‘fﬁ’r’vﬁﬁ‘ﬁ'i‘"":133::559'IEVS >ﬂieszézl'éélwi‘Tkik‘??f1?”‘i?tf’/Akémtﬁg§gIEWWKI-‘XE11:93:""3:: .gtswfﬁs ii,3‘«$;3»'(4°¢mﬁiﬁ-tﬁzgzgézﬁjggz_., ’14325339Qgﬁﬂé3%,;gzz3§,-;:;zy;2,52.;:;:;:._;_._..;c:,c;3§§§g§_.-,§§;g5;;2;25,;321135-455m;;;g,-.;5_;2,?573;;‘3‘?3;:2};.32533%.;135;;$3.13.;55.315¢;§};:§3%é

"
"6","TRFLP-generated' electropherograms of wastewater ACKNOWLEDGMENTS j
samples from flight and ground control are shown in 1=
Figure 1- The greater number and size 0f peaks in the This research was partially supported through a NASA’s I
flight samples suggests that there is greater microbial Fundamental Biology Program NRA (NCC10-027) and '?
diversity present in the flight than ground COhtFOI NASA’s Life Sciences Service Contract at Kennedy ,'
samples. The presence of peaks at the same base pair Space Center, FL. 1'
locations suggests that similar microorganisms are I
present in both flight and ground control samples (ﬁgure !
1 a,b). The bacterial profiles (figure 1 c,d) each contain REFERENCES ~ I
peaks at 473 and 308 base pairs. The peak at 64 base 1 Ferguson James K Geral d R Taylor and Bernard ;
pairs is present in flight samples only, while peaks at 77 ' J Mieszl’wc 1975 Microbiolo ical Results of I
and 204 base pairs are present only in ground control ' ' .' . _ g . , . !'
samples. It is likely that the peak at 473 base pairs is Apollo, Chapter 2, Microblelogieal Investigations. In.
Burkholderia cepacia, which was also identified by thnstoun, R' S"" L' F' Dietlein, and C' A' Berry. :
microbial cultivation and identification methods. Biomedical Results Of Apollo, NASA SP“368- E
Scientific and Technical Information Office, National i
Microbial populations on earth are extremely diverse and Aeronautics and Space Administration, Washington,
extremely heterogeneous in their distribution. Given the D-C- I
extent of microbial diversity and the limitations inherent in W ’
the replication of flight experiments in matched ground 2. Gardes, M., and T. D. Bruns. 1993. ITS Primers With I
controls, it is possible that the compositional differences Enhanced Specificity for Basidiomycetes - i
observed between the flight and ground BPS units may Application to the Identification of Mycorrhizae and t
have less to do with the microgravity environment than Rusts. Molecular Ecology 2:113-118. I
with an inability to adequately capture sample diversity. 3. Kawamura, Y., y_ Li, H. Liu, x. Huang, 2, Li, ad T. i
It is also possible, however, that the differences between Ezaki. 2001. Bacterial Population in Russian Space .
flight and ground control microbial communities are due Station “Mir”. Microbiol. Immunol. 45:819—828. I
to the island-Iike biogeography of the ISS, an essentially 4_ Klamer, M., M. S. Roberts, |__ H. Levine, B. G. Drake, I
closed ecosystem. The microbiologists’ mantra that and J_ L. Garland. 2002. Influence of Elevated
“Everything is everywhere, the environment only selects ” Carbon Dioxide on the Fungal Community in a I
may be less true for ciosed “environments such as the Coastal Scrub Oak Forest Soil Investigated Using .'
:88. where muerobiologlcal diversity and recruitment '3 Terminal Restriction Length Polymorphism Analysis.
Imlted by sterilization and containment protocols. The A I' d d E . t IM' b' I 68
outcome of community assembly within closed ppie an . nvrronmen a '0er '0 ogy ‘ . .
ecosystems may be more profoundly affected by the 5' Lane, D‘ J' 1991' 168/238 'Sequencing. III“ I
limited pool of diversity than by the secondary effects of Goodfe'IOW’ M’ (ed) NUCIe'C. Acrd Techniques 'n '
microgravity on microbial processes. Bacterial Systematics. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New
York, NY pp 115-176.
CONCLUSIONS 6. Liu, W.-T., T. L. Mar.Sh’ H. Cheng, ?nd L.. J. Fbrney.
1997. Characterization of Microbial Dwersrty by
Differences were detected in both species richness and Determ'mﬁg Terminal Restriction Fragment Length .
in community composition between ground control and Polymorphisms 9f Genes EWCOd'hg 163 r RNA'
flight environments for the bacterial and fungal APPI'ed and EnVIronmental Microbiology 6334516""
communities associated with the PESTO/BPS. Both 4522-
cultivation-dependent and cultivation-independent 7- Makimura, Koichi, R310 Hanazawa, Kosuke Takatori,
methods were successful for the identification of Yoshiko Tamura, Ryuichi Fujisaki, Yayoi Nishiyama,
bacterial and fungal microorganisms. Differences in Shigeru Abe,Katsuhisa Uchida,YoshiakiKawamura,
community fungal and bacterial profiles between ground Takayuki Ezaki, and Hideyo Yamaguchi. 2001.
and flight environments were detected by TRFLP Fungal Flora on Board the Mir—Space Station,
analyses, bUt the community profiles were not Identification by Morphological Features. Microbiol.
remarkably different. The microbial composition of both Immunol. 45:357—363. I
the BPS ground and flight modules was dominated by 8. Novikova, Natalja D. 2000. Survey of the Microbial
common airborne fungi and bacteria, 9.9-. Y"" Contamination Knowledge On Board Manned ‘
Proteobacteria, typically associated with surficial water Russian Space Vehicles. Final presentation to the
and water distribution systems, and are not likely to European Space Agency. httng/industr;[.esa.int/ .'
present additional risk to the crew. ATTACHEMENTS/M14/n0vik0va. ; at .3
9. Ott, Mark. 2002. Microbial Monitoring of the 1..
International Space Station: Current Operations and '
Goals for the Future. Presented at the 5
Environmental Sentinals Symposium, Johnson '
Space Center, 17-18 September 2002.
I 6 *

"
"7","10. Skuratov, V. M., L. B. Zagibalova, and V. P. Pushkin. CONTACT
2002. Species Composition and Microbial
Contamination of Atmospheric Humidity Condensate Questions and comments should be directed to Dr.
and Potable Water from the Mir Water Supply Cheryl Frazier, Mail Code DYN-3, Kennedy Space
Systems During Mir Main Missions 4 Through 27. Center, FL 32899. Phone: 321.853.2494. Email:
Aviakosm. Ekolog. Med 36(2):28—32. frazicm@k3cems.k3c.nasa.gov
' 11. Venkateswaran, Kasthuri, Masataka Satomi, Shirley
Chung, Roger Kern, Robert Koukol, Cecilia Basic,
, and David White. 2001. Molecular Microbial
. Diversity of a Spacecraft Assembly Facility.
. Systematic and Applied Microbiology 24:311-320.
f E 12. White, T. J., T. Bruns, S. Lee, and J. W. Taylor.
E 1990. Amplification and Direct Sequencing of
E Fungal Ribosomal RNA Genes for Phylogenetics. In:
White T. J., (ed) PCR Protocols: A Guide to Methods
and Applications. Academic Press, Inc., New York,
' NY pp 315-322.
1 » V

"
