"","x"
"1","* Biomass Production System (BPS) Technology
.530; ' I I
Validation Test Results

R. C. Morrow, J. T. Iverson, R. C. Richter and J. J. Stadler

Orbital Technologies Corporation

t}? Copyright © 2004 SAE International

'

ABSTRACT because it is a monocot that has been used by the

research community in previous space biology

The objective of the BPS Technology Validation Test experiments. This plant produces a large amount 0t

'5, (TVT) ﬂown on the ISS as part of Increment 4 was to biomass that PUtS a large humidity load 0“ the BPS

, verify the functionality of environmental control environmental control subsystems. Brassica rape is a

J. subsystems and to measure the ability of the BPS to dicot considered a primary candidate test species for

g support plant growth and development in microgravity. space-based plant research (NASA, 1989)- Brassica
Additional TVT objectives included validation of rape was used to test a variety of differentcapabilities of

"" information acquisition systems, operations and support the BPS- First, it exhibits multiple development stages

systems, and component performance. All TVT (e-Q- flowering and seed development) in a relatively
objectives were successfully addressed. Most evaluation short time and in a small growing volume. This tested the

: criteria stipulated pre-flight were met. When there were ability 0f the BPS and its subsystems to support the

i deviations from pre-mission requirements, root causes growth Of a developmentally complex plant. Second,
were identified and subsystem configurations modified to crew intervention is required for Brassica pollination. This
eliminate these problems. Results from the TVT have tested the accessibility Of the BPS design for routine
been applied to the Plant Research Unit development to crew interaction With test specimens. Finally, these
reducetechnical risks and increase reliability. plants generate biological debris (e-Q- petals) that

allowed the BPS air flow and air filter subsystems to be
INTRODUCTION tested in microgravity.
The objective of the BPS Technology Validation Test
growth system and to identify functional and operational ?Tt‘g“ """"""

, issues that could impact the deVGIOPment 01‘ future plant $5 6""
growth Systems for Space An experiment to em)! Wheat feet? e“ ”t
productivity in micrograVitY, term ed PESTO, W88 8'30 wet?"" ' ..

rt H gt”

t The BPS mission was flown on the 'SS 33 part Of ‘ﬁg $5;
Increment 4 (Figure 0- Three of the four BPS chambers -‘ Q&TW
were used to 9‘0"""" wheat (WOW aestivum CV- Apogee) ff 2t?""
and the fourth chamber was used to grow rapid cycling We
Brassica (Brassica rapa cv. AST ROPLANT). Eleven ,1
planting/harvesting cycles were conducted during the
mission and harvested plants frozen or placed in fixative Figure 1_ On-orbit harvest of wheat plants
for post—ﬂight analysis. A ground control was conducted grown in the BPS.
on a two week delay using a second BPS unit. The TVT . _ . . . . . .
utilized one wheat planting and two Brassica plantings, Specrflc TVT obtectlves and evaluation criteria Included
while the remaining eight wheat plantings were part of basrc functionality parameters sum as plant health,
the PESTO experiment. However, results from the temperatyre and humidity control, etmospherrc
PESTO experiment were also considered when compesrtllon control (COzoanq ethytene), nutrleht delivery
evaluating the overall performance of the BPS hardware. and lighting. Further ObJeCt'VeS '“CIUd‘?d validation Of
The function of the TVT test plants was to provide Information acquusmon systems (e.g. vrdeo and .data),
different biological loads on the BPS subsystems to operations and 39990” systems(e.g.sample acquusrtlon,
verify their function in microgravity. Wheat was selected crew harvest actrvutles, and resupply), and component

’ 1

"
"2","T""
i
i
performance (6.9. tubing, filters). Information collected a . I
during the BPS mission was compared to evaluation 5""“; 'ygiifi.;_f
criteria identified prior to the mission to assess the ability 3‘33 g
of the BPS and “3 subsystems 1° function i“ micreg’eV‘ty 3; 3
and support healthy plant development and grth. 33w
TECHNOLOGY VALIDATION TEST RESULTS gm l
V 33W 333% 3 3 3 '- WW 3
The TVT comprised four performance categories, each
with a series of objectives and evaluation criteria. If an ' 33
evaluation criterion was outside an acceptable range, but ?%e Mme 3/}?
section 8. 11“,,“ ‘ e
The term plant “heath” is subjective and difficult to state 233’» pl
criteria relating to plant development were i d entified t0 iﬁigwgeéﬁ t dt
p‘°""ide ""“3 eva'uaﬁon- A 3990""“ criterion was deﬁned /
as having been successfully met if it fell in a pre—defined /ee33:/f§: 81
Physiological stage was determined by observation using *‘ ”
images from BPS on-board cameras. The criteria set for ' "" 3.. "" '
this parameter prior to flight were: i
‘ Figure 2. Flower development in Brassica plants at |
- Brassica: Acceptable days to flowering, $20 14 DAP (top-ﬂower buds just starting to open) and g A
. Brassica: Siliques develop after pollination 20 DAP(bottom-first pollination). 5 h
- Wheat: Acceptable Haun by day 15, >2.5 ‘ '1'
The daily prog ress of Brassica and wheat development «3 Wwee i g
in the BPS theht unit and the BPS ground control unit 3 1
wee tracked by e°""ee““9 dieite' images from the BPS 3, MW “
on-board cameras every two hours. These images 3%;3 ‘3 am?” ‘ a
allowed close tracking of developmental stage over the 3%”§ . 9
duration of the growing cycle For Bresstce ﬂower we «3‘ I e
opening was shown to begin at 14 days atter planting 33% 3353} i
(DAP), and was heavy by 20 DAP when the first manual 3,3 3.3;?“ t g
apparent that Siliques with seeds successfully form ed ﬁmgﬁg’éfeﬁggﬁ‘eigﬁfﬂﬁ ' Q
eﬁe’ the e'ente were ee'liheted (Figure 3)- Figure 4 3W3e» \
shows that the wheat plants exceeded a Haun stage of 333”“5 I
2.5 (2 leaves emerged. the third teat halt the length ot meeee y
' - Wegﬂm . I
Figure 3. Silique development in Brassica plants I
following pollination. i
2

"
"3","* Ti”? , V."" r ,, w» W ‘tt ._
' "" "" r '- , ts “ ” W“
- 7 g E 4. '
_; = Figure 5. Crew photographing wheat plants at harvest
j j? j Figure 4. Wheat development at 15 DAP. aboard [88'
Table 1. Germination rates (out of 32 seeds) for plants
w’ 4 i
F {5; : Based on the images obtained during the BPS mission germmatedm BPS durmg Increment4 mrssron
$4 and associated ground control, all preflight criteria for 1 Flight Ground E
_: 5e} physrologlcal development were met. In addition, no . Germ. Unit Germ. Control \
j- 2:: ; visually obvious differences between flight and ground Planting? ' Environ. Germo/o Environ. Germ.%
' . 3;; development rates were observed for either species. [
"" , Seed 99mm“ —_-—-_1!
.. Seed germination was determined from photographs —-”_l—
taken by the crew during on-board harvests (Figure 5) —“——t—
s and Photographs ﬂake“ 83. part of 9r°und based —m
j; harvests. The criteria set for thus parameter were: t—m1----_‘
. —§Wt
- Brassma: 50 % oftotal planted __m---2—
- Wheat: 60 %oftotal planted —\-u___—+
A total of 11 plant growth cycles (plant, prime, and * Date indicates flight planting date (2002). The ground
: 5 harvest) were conducted as part of the BPS experiment. control date was offset by 14 days.
Q '5, In the flight unit, four sets of plants were germinated at . .
3 19 (launches as seedlings) while seven sets were ShootWelght&ShootHelght
g germinated in reduced gravity conditions. Germination . _
i rates for both wheat and Brassica grown in microgravity ShOOt “95h W_e'9ht W33 ttetermlned from plants
A were equivalent to those grown at 19 (Table 1) and harvested post-fllght. Shootherghtwas determined using
' averaged over 96% meeting preflight criteria for photographs taken during on-orblt and post-fhght
. germination. In addition, except for- the one ground harvests. The criteria for these parameters were:
control wheat module that showed a 63% germination . .
rate, no real differences between flight and ground ' Brassrca: >59 fresh werghtper chamber
germination rates were observed for either species. A ' 3’333’033 10 plants >7 Cm
cause for the reduced germination observed in the one ' Wheat: >259 fresh weight per chamber
ground control module has not been identified. ' Wheat: 10-5 cm by day 20
A hardware (fan) problem in the Brassica chamber
during the second grow-out resulted in stunting;
therefore no fresh weights were obtained post-flight. Dry
, weights for the first planting obtained from frozen tissue
are shown in Table 2. There was insufficient data to
determine if there was any difference between flight and
ground grown plants, though it does not appear so.
There was no discernable difference in Brassica height
between flight and ground plants (Table 3). However,
only eight plants met the >7cm criteria. It was determined
3

"
"4","that elevated root zone temperatures caused some Canopy Cover SOIL
stunting in both the flight and ground grown Brassica. ; .000
The elevated temperature arises from the Brassica root This criterion applied to wheat, with the requirement ?.jThi!
zone being positioned immediately above the light cap of being a minimum of 50% of full canopy. With the high cha
the chamber below it. This resulted in a root zone germination rates observed and good wheat the
temperature about 3°C higher than the shoot development, this criterion was easilymet. Byday12the this
temperature (24°C), which has been found to cause a wheat was to the top of the chamber and began to fold
discernable reduction in Brassica height and weight, and over. ? cm
in rate of development (Stolp and Morrow, 2001). ii}
Because the root cause of the slight stunting was Silique Number and Seed Number 3' Chl
identified, these criteria have been considered met. { Bra
Insulation 0“ ""9W I'OOt module designs has been The criteria for this objective apply only to Brassica and diff!
increased and concepts for active temperature control of are: :' fligl
the root zone have been developed and tested at the et
bench top level. - Silique number(filled): avg. 2 per plant j: Chlt
- Seed numbercount: avg. 5 per silique ET the
Table 2' Dry weights for Brassma plants. Rows 2 & 4 and 1 & 3 for each Brassica root module be:
m were analyzed by different laboratories. Two to four ? pro
. Rows 1&3 . isd plants from each module were hand selected for j diff
chemical ﬁxation. The increased number of siliques Bra
obseryed for these plants (Table 4) IS a result of hand :23 gm
nd se'ecmn by “‘5'? crew 3“? a demo'TS‘fated b'as toward suc
larger plants wrth more Siliques. ThlS IS the reason the
hand selected plants met the pre-flight requirement,
’ while many of the remaining (frozen) specimens did not. Set
Table 3. Brassica heightdata. - The reduced number of siliques was also due to the
. elevated root module temperatures. The number of ln-l
mm_- seeds per Silique met pre-flight requirements and was mi:
Ci m7°m compara ble to previously published values for flig ht set
experiments (Kuang etaL, 2000). prc
/ ,2’ “‘5 1\/ Table 4. BraSSIca Silique characteristics. cyt
§“‘ ” \/; .. .. . .. . - . rar
13 & tc*4 ; ale
One module of wheat grown on-orbit for 24 days was mm— ha
harvested post-flight (the rest were harvested on-orbit). -_-—+ the
The wheat plants in that module had a total fresh weight *lndnvndualplants selected by crew and placed in Sti
of about 34 grams (Stutte, 2001), exceeding the chemical fixative if. gr:
requirement of 26 grams. Dry weights from all wheat ~.g tis.
harvests suggest that this module was representative. Root ADH Activity we
The wheat plants reached the top of the BPS chambers ,} prt
(15pm) by 12. DAP (F Igur e 6)’ meeting the requrrement The objective of this analysis was to use alcohol ref
defined pre-flight. dehydrogenase activity as an indicator of hypoxia in the m'
2? , a \ “tr BPS I'OOt l-TIOdUIeS' only the Wheat plants had SUfﬁCient : :2
‘ .a ' xg} In a previous experiment with Brassica on Ml R, soluble w:
Figure 6. Wheatplants in the BPS on-orbit (L) and in the carbOhYd’ateS were S'gn'f'cant'y e'evated '“ the :i.
spaceflight treatment compared to the ground control.
ground control (R) at 12 DAP. Th' . m
IS was Interpreted to be caused by a water logged root
zone environment (Stout et al., 2001). In the BPS tissue, ""5
no signification difference was found between the leaf ' g:
4

"
"5","soluble carbohydrate in spaceﬂight plants and ground distributed throughout the root zone and appeared
V control plants (21.5 ug/mg and 22.1 pg/mg respectively). similar between flight and ground control root modules.
it {59 This may suggest that the root zone in the BPS plant Wheat roots are much larger and filled a significant
3 i chambers was not hypoxic (Kuang et al., 2003). Because portion of the root module. The wheat roots were evenly
l2t the flight levels were equivalent to ground control levels, distributed throughout the root zone and were of a
'- this criterion was considered met. healthy white appearance. There was little observable
.5. difference between flight roots and those from the
~ Chlorophyll ground control modules. Root distribution throughout the
:' module suggests that the root zone environment
: r Chlorophyll concentrations were determined for both provided adequate moisture and aeration for good plant
, E Brassica and for wheat. There was no significant development. Based on observations, the criteria for this
_. .i difference in chlorophyll levels for Brassica between the parameter have been met.

Q; ﬂight grown plants and the ground control plants (Kuang
_' et al., 2003). There was also no difference in the Obiective - Temgerature/Humjd._it.1_C_no_ﬂ_n_.t.__r_o""I
’ E chlorophyll content, or chlorophyll fluorescence, between '
' . the flight and ground controlwheatplants (Stutte, 2004). The second objective under basic functionality was
E. ' In past spaceflight experiments, chlorophyll content has validation of the temperature and humidity control
E been a useful indicator of stress or senescence related subsystem.
I t processes (Musgrave et al., 1998). Because no
1: Li? differences in foliar chlorophyll, for either wheat or Temperature .
ii. E Brassica, were observed between microgravity and 19
l grown plants, this criterion is considered as being Detailed temperature performance data are provided in
, . e; successfully met. the BPS final report (ORBITEC 2003) and in lverson et
E al. (2003). The BPS control system maintained
l‘"" E temperature control within i 0.5°C during all nominal
E"" 7;} Seed Storage Reserves operating conditions throughout the entire mission, well
; E . . . . . within the .4.- 1.0°C requirement. An error frequency plot
E InI-fllghtfreuezmgdothrafsSIfabtlss:e grown durinfg th? BPS]: shows the distribution of temperature error (Figure 7).
l“ dtwesta‘rfh £201 éﬁforimfﬁ f‘r‘SrimECSSSfi‘i ﬁt One chamber Showed meased frequency
  d p d B, . ds The 3263's rod 05d d 9 compared to the others due to a fan failure. The
pro uce rassma see ° p . u urlng maximum time to reach a new setpoint was about 10
BPS were not fully mature due t9 the doratlon 0f the test minutes. The minimum temperature achieved in the BPS
f . cycles. Seeds produced In the flight unIt were at a wnder unit during temperature cycling tests was 20°C (with 15
range 0f developmental stages than the ground controls day old wheat, against an estimated cabin temperature
~. (Kuang et al., 2003). Flight seeds had less weight, more of 25°C)
; chlorophyll, and more starch than ground control plants. '
li Reference data from mature seeds produced on MIR Frequencyemupmg.mewa.=o.1c
E also showed that seeds grown on-orbit weighed less, ”°°”""”°""E'""“F""“°‘ .. .. ..- .
. had higher chlorophyll and higher soluble carbohydrates m“-3:11:23::3::;::;;:5:;°9°?=°°é
. than the ground control seeds (Musgrave et al., 2000). a. ' ' ‘ ‘ ' ' ',..'..S .' ' ' ' EndTim°<°H1W>=Jun°2°°°°°

. Storage reserve deposition was more advanced in the E I ICT'T°I°mm
f - - ‘5 |||| [EWL‘EIIII
i ~ ground control seeds. Blochemlcal analyses of the seed 3 3 . Chamw
E tissue are in agreement with previous microscopy that g m; : : : : “l-I
; was done on both immature and mature Brassica seeds 3‘5 ' ' L}: E' * ' ' ~....‘s......Chan...“
‘ produced during spaceflight. Seed size and storage mun""
.I reserve deposition seem to be affected by the : ' ' ‘ ‘ ' ' ""f ' ' ' '
’ microgravity environment. Because responses similar to E “““ﬂ”
It previous flights were observed this requirement is g ' ' 2' ' * '
i consideredmet- .::::::::::*:;_::::::::
I Root Appearance -3 ~2 -1 0 1 mm mime. 3

Temperature Error[ActuaI-Setpoint, degC] 9 9
Root appearance was assessed by observation of
returned root modules. The criteria for this parameter Figure 7. BPS ﬂightunittemperature error

- were that the roots have a healthy appearance, be frequency plot,
. evenly distributed through the root module, and be _ _
_ similar in appearance between flight and ground control Humidity
t modules. Because the root material had to be separated , _ _ .
-. from a particulate medium, good comparisons of root Figure. 8 shows that mostof the BPS missionrelative
E biomass could not be obtained. The roots of the Brassica hugmdity data fall well wnthm the BPS specmcation 0f i
i plants were very fine and difficult to assess, but were 10/°- The only data m"" shown '3 for one Of the four
5

"
"6","chambers (#2) that lost fluid prime part way through the largely due to the fact that seed respiration is producing . Opel
mission. Because maintaining prime is critical to humidity high levels of C02. This was anticipated because of the tran
control, control was marginal after the failure point. lack of a scrubber system. However, once plants began . sarr
Remaining deviations in humidity control were identified to grow, the control was well within the i10% wen
to result from integrator windup and subsystem power requirement. This was true for chambers 1 and 3, and for
limits. The integrator used in the BPS control system chamber2 until the prime was lost. Chamber4 contained m
caused an undershoot of humidity control when the the Brassica piants, which had insufficient biomass to ‘
transpiration rate was suddenlyreduced (e.g. dark cycle) pull 002 levels down fast enough for good control The
after an extended time of running above setpoint. accuracy. Small C02 level error spikes are the result of va|i<
Subsystem power limitations kicked in during vapor dark cycles and resulting C02 buiId-up due to lack of a BPS
pressure deficit tests when setpoint changes were made scrubbing system. C02 setpoints were reached in less bloc
and during C02 drawdowns, which increased than 20 minutes. redt
transpiration rates. Humidity rates between 65% and syst
90% were demonstrated. Setpoint change rates were 60% . . . . . . , . . . . light
less than 30 minutes. Some instability of humidity control mmmmmmm_ﬂ ope
was observed when the fan failure occurred. 50% *P'a—I McF
:2°°¢:::::::::L:‘.:th:grmsm M IIIIIIu-u ”II IIIIII“ prio
mm m EITIITII'53133734?°2'33333°° mmmmmmmmm :1:
_ i CH2.34% ad. ‘ l | I EndTime(Ch2}:Apnl1813.00| i §30% . . 1 F
mmmmmmwmm
a I I I CH3,33% ' :‘I I I I I I I I o iltllllll __
: :: mm -.
mmmiimmm WJMWMMMWMW
:— “e.""- 10/0 l||||||| . t w
mmmmmmm OJMIMWMMMMM I
“§- mm“! mm” ~2000 0 2000 4000 6:: En,“ [”23] 10000 12000 Avem:::(:mo~a|:(::: l
mum um: i
mm Hr“- .. _ _, _ _ t t t t Figure 9. BPS flight unit chamber 3 C02 control I %
-3o t 't t -10 0 M 30 error frequency plot for plant ages of t E 30‘
Relative Humidity Error[Actual-Setpoint,% RI-l] Averaging Tim°=6°05 1, 10 or 11, and 18 or 19 days 8"" 20‘
_ , , , , , Ethylene |
Figure 8. BPS ﬂight unit relative humidity error i ,0.
fr equency plot for all 8P 8 chamber 5. Ethylene removal in the BPS was done using a t
Because most of the BPS temperature and humidity data photocatalytic process- The requirement was to maintain I
were well within specifications, and because the root ethylene levels in the plantchambers at less than 50ppb- ’
causes of deviations that did occur were identified (and This was verified by the use of grab samples. Samples i
corrected in subsequent designs), temperature and collected from the '33 atmosphere ranged from 40-70 I F'
humidity criteria have been considered to be successfully ppb. The samples from the BPS chambers ranged from .’
met. about 25-40 ppb. All BPS chamber samples showed ”9
v ethylene levels below ISS ambient in samples collected The
_ . . at the same time. t Bpg
WW I hav,
‘ . , , , _ 002 control was maintained within specifications with the i and
The t_h'td objective under pasro functienality was exception of those times when there was insufficient ; ava
validation Of the atmesphenc eemposrtion control plant material to draw 002 levels down to setpoint (this ? f|ig|~
system. The atmospheric composntion control system was understood and accepted by Pls prior to flight) and ts sen
consrsted Of the C02 control and ethylene scrubbing when chamber 2 lost prime. Because the C02 control in f
systems. general was good, the root cause of all deviations was 5
identified, and ethylene samples were within required 1. CAT
Carbon Dioxide limits, the atmospheric control requirements are 5
consudered met. ‘ ; This
The BPS unit provided pure C02 to maintain setpoint, but Q Eac
did not have C02 absorbent. Therefore control to a Obiective _ Nutrient and Water Delivery 3 81
setpoint required sufficient plant material to draw C02 ! par:
levels d_own te below setpoint to trigger the injection The fourth objective under basic functionality was . thee
mechanism. Figure 9 shows the 002 control error validation of the nutrient and water delivery system. The ima
frequency plot for chamber 3. It can be observed that at nutrient delivery system error did not exceed the : werl
an early stage (one day after imbibition) the error is requirements of $0.15kPa during nominal (non-transient) E the
6

"
"7","E T operations. No instabilities were observed. Examples of The quaiity of the gas, fluid, and plant samples collected
E transient operations include root module priming and on-orbit was adequate for analysis and was impacted
Ti sample collections. All requirements for this objective primarily by the lack of a low temperature freezer. Over .
«'0 were met. 80 gas, 40 fluid samples and 300 tissue samples were T
If collected (flight and ground). Because no data were lost T
E. T? Objective - Lighting and a large number of samples of sufficient quality for E
T. - post-flight analysis were collected, the requirements for 'T-
‘I ~ 21' The ﬁnal objective under basic functionality was this objective are considered met.
Tf E; validation of the lighting system. The light output of the T
Er: BPS light caps was relatively constant. There was some CATEGORY - OPERATIONS SUPPORT T
_’ blockage of the light sensors by plant material and 1
15:2; 1. reductions in reflected light as the plants grew. The This was the third of the TVT evaluation categories. T
. LT system did not use feedback control. The degradation of Specific objectives included sample acquisition, plant a
. light cap performance was about 4% per 1000 hours of manipulation, servicing and resupply, and experimental T
T3 ~i ff operation, as predicted for fluorescent lamps (Sager and control. Operations support was evaluated through crew T
. McFarlane, 1997). The lamps started at about 300 umol assessments, on—orbit video, and post—flight crew T
Ea T E m'zs'1 pre-mission and had a degradation of about 4% debriefs. Crew responses indicated that BPS operations T
i' T prior to flight (due to pre-flight testing). During the were within acceptable parameters, but a number of T
la ,4, mission, the light system was operated at different crew suggestions to streamline procedures have been ‘
i, T; outputs to allow light response curves for wheat to be incorporated into hardware and procedure updates.
ﬂ obtained (Figure 10). Morrow and Stadler (2003) provide a review of crew
E . .f_f interaction with BPS during the Increment 4 mission. ;
% T'j"" Chamber One C02 and Light Level for 11112 May 02 9
6000 Hi h CO is enerated durin a x mm 350 CATEGORY - COMPONENT PERFORMANCE
:33: issues such as C02 drawdown and use measurement, i
T ’ . 1 a m, j 362313333;ggeprggnghmﬂ 25° 3 water use measurement, debris in the air stream, and
ET a 200% biofouling. The requirements for each objective were to
E Em L E obtain sufficient data to characterize the evaluation
-: 3 ' ri .
E 82000 S we a f
I 1°° Objective - COg Drawdowns and Use 1
a E The BPS had the capability to measure 002 uptake by ~
f «Tm 1224 1m 1712 1936220002 m M” 0 locking the C02 sensor onto the chamber to be 1
T ' ' ' ' Time ”mm. E ' E measured, setting a starting C02 concentration, turning
; off the control system, and monitoring the rate at which
. _ the plants took up C02 (Figure 10). Monitoring the 002
T Figure 70- CC)2 drawdowns performed at ﬁve d’ﬁgr‘??t injections required to maintain setpoint control provided a
n E light levels (apx. 2 75: 200, 125; 75 and 0pmol m S )- second method to track C02 use by the plants. A total of
. The control range and performance of the lamps met aboutT18 002 drawdown series were used by the PESTO
-, .~ BPS requirements. However, new light cap systems experiment to develop carbon oIOXIde and light response
. ’ have since been developed to take advantage of LED ouryes for photosyntheSIs '”_ rnrcrograwty. Resul’fs
' , and flat panel fluorescent technologies that have become Indicated that there were _”° Significant differences '“
E available. Based on recommendations from the BPS canopy leyel photosynthesrs responses to CO2 or ""9m
. flight, these new light caps contain the primary light between flight and ground samples (Stutte, 2004). It was
' sensor in the lightcap and utilize feedback control. oetermlned that 9:33 exchange measvrement COUId be
improved by making chambers fully Independent from
. each other (duplicating subsystems) or if necessary, by
. CATEGORY _ INFORMATION ACQUISTION optimizing multiplexing patterns to minimize cross—talk
- between the chambers.
This was the second of the TVT evaluation categories. . _
Each BPS unit (flight and ground) recorded the values of W
81 parameters every two minutes, for 136,884 _ . _ _ .
parameters per day (9,992,532 for the mission). None of During preﬂight testing, 't was determined that the
these data were lost. The BPS also collected 3,376 metering of water to the roots was more accurate than
images from the on-board cameras. Only 18 images the metering of humidity condensate collected due. to
' were missed, due to the system being powered down or pressure changes in the chamber caused by multiplexTng
the BPS unit being open during crew operations. between the four chambers. The balance of water gomg
7

"
"8","in and coming out of the chambers was offset by about and design changes made that will be implemented on
15%. This discrepancy was caused by measurement any new hardware developments. All TVT results that
error due to pressure changes, loss of water from differed from pre-flight requirements were the result of 9.
leakage and increased plant mass. one of three identified root causes:
Obiective - Debris Accumulation and Biofouling 0 Fan failure
0 Loss of prime (humidity system) 1(
The impact 0f plant debris 0” BPS components W35 0 Elevated rootzonetemperature (3C above shoot
evaluated by post-flight inspections. The coarse ﬁlters on temperature) '
the atmospheric control system (AC8) prevented
movement 01‘ plant parts We the ACS and showed ""0 Hardware modifications have been designed and 1'
increase in pressure drop across the filter for the extensively tested to resolve each of these issues. The
duration of the mission. Some debris adhered to the BPS TVT successfully demonstrated BPS environmental
POFOUS plate (only 0"" the flight unit), bUt net in sufficient control subsystems and components, control and data \
quantities to cause any decrease in performance. CFOSS acquisition systems, and accommodations for operations 1.
sections of fluid tubing showed that VitonTM tubing used and support. The findings from the TVT have been used ‘
for most fluid runs was clear of biofilms. However, the extensively to ensure that the next generation of plant
PharMedTM tubing used in the peristaltic pumps did show growth systems can operate at a high level of reliability
biofilm development (Figure 11). Though not enough to during very long duration space missions.
impact the BPS flight, it could have posed a problem on
a longer duration flight. All tubing now used is screened ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . C
for long duration resistance to bioﬁlm development. ;
Porous plates from the BPS humidity control system This work was supported by the NASA Small Business . R
showed reduced flow that was attributed to blocking of Innovative Research program through the NASA Ames ; O
the pores. To determine the root cause of the blocking, Research Center (Phase III) and the Kennedy Space . 1‘
porous plates from ﬂight and ground units were sent for Center (phase I and phase II). 3 M
destructive analysis using scanning electron microscopy. 1 6‘
Test reports showed that the clogging was caused by REFERENCES ‘ [I
tiny particles of iron, nickel, chrome and aluminum. The i
source of these articles was the corrosion of the inner 2 -
pore surfaces of [the stainless steel plate itself and some 1‘ lverson, J‘T"" .T' M' Crabb, RIC' Morrow, and M' C' .5
of the mounting parts. The stainless steel porous plates Lee. 2003' Biomass Produ.ctron System Hardware ;
were replaced in new designs by ceramic porous plates. Performance. SAE Technical Paper Series No.
2003-01-2484.
~ ,, 2. Kuang, A., ME. Musgrave, and RC, Morrow. 2003.
Analysis of Brassica rapa vegetative and ;
”3% reproductive material produced on ISS' ASGSB
, ’ 9 Bulletin17=43- ;
J . 2000- Pollination and embryo development in .
e JournalofPIantScience161:203-211-
' V ' i crew interaction with long-duration plant growth '
mee experiment. SAE Technical Pa per Series No. 2003-
W '  jfiii'fz? <3 : __ ; 01-2482. .
' ""33} f €333 ' --;_'j-3 5. Musgrave, M.E., A. Kuang’ Y, Xiao, S_C. Stout, G,E_ !
Bingham, L.G. Briarty, M.A. Levinskikh, V.N. Sychev, .
Figure 11. L'ongitudirial section of peristaltic and LG. Podolski, 2000. Gravity-independence of .
pump tubing showmg b’Oﬂ’m for matron. seed-to-seed cycling in Brassica rapa. Planta
210:400-406.
CONCLUSION 6. NASA. 1989. Life science research objectives and
representative experiments for the space station.
The BPS technology validation test evaluated objectives NASA TM 39445
using multiple evaluation criteria in four categories; basic 7_ ORBITEC. 2003. Biomass Production System: Flight
functionality, information acquisition, operations and verification payload science data and reports.
support, and component performance. Most of Document OTC-GSOO67-FR-02 Rev. B.
peﬂormenlfe reetquligements deflitnetih frzrgightt were 8. Sager, J.C. and J.C.MacFarlane. 1997. Radiation. ln:
success u me. or es resu s a I no mee . .
defined reguirements, the root cause was determined R'W' Langhans and T'W'T'bb'ts (eds) Plant Growth
8

"
"9","{‘3‘ E
Chamber Handbook. Special Report 99. Iowa State
E: University Press. P].
:3 9 Sato, K. 2001. Biomass Production System
Experiment Requirements Document for an
.""3 E International Space Station. NASA Ames Research
‘3, Center Document AQ-O4214 Rev. A.
3'10. Stolp, KM. and RC. Morrow. 2001. The impact of
,3? elevated root zone temperature on Brassica rapa cv. .
ASTROPLANT germination and deveIOpment.
f: ASGSB Bulletin 15:38.
11. Stout, 30, BM. Porterfield, L.G. Briarty, A. Kuang,
and ME. Musgrave. 2001. Evidence of root zone
“1 , ,‘Fi hypoxia in Brassica rapa L. grown in microgravity.
‘ f. Int. J. PlantSci. 162:249-255.
33.- E 12. Stutte, G. 2004. Photosynthesis and metabolism of
E wheat in microgravity. Report of activities for the
F PASTA/PESTO experiments: 1 year post—ﬂight
' E report.
,“ E CONTACT
{3 E Robert Morrow, Senior Scientist
E Orbital Technologies Corporation
*5 1212 Fourier Drive
E Madison,W| 53717
608/827-5000
morrowr@orbitec.com
E:
E E
E
E
E E
E
E
f 1
E
E
i. E 9
E

"
