"","x"
"1","v ' 2003-01 -2432
. V AnaIySIs of Crew Interaction Wlth Long-Duratlon
Plant Growth Experiment
:, Robert C. Morrow and Jacob J. Stadler
. Orbital Technologies Corporation
Copyright © 2003 SAE International
; ABSTRACT
' The Biomass Production System (BPS) was flown on the Operatiohs (PESTO)’ was included With the'BPS mission
ISS for 73 days as part of the Increment 4 mission. To to Investigate photosynthesus and metabolism of dwarf
5: obtain maximum benefit from the long mission duration, wheat plants In mlcrograwty.
1?: numerous manual crew procedures were incorporated
j into the BPS experiments. These procedures included The BPS was flown onlthe '88 for 73 days as part Of the
C is? gas sampling, root module priming, harvesting, ISS Increment 4 mussnon. A ground control was
j pollination, filter cleaning, water refill, and water COFdUCted on a two week delay “3'“9 a seconq BPS
:3 sampling. On-orbit crew assessments were filled out for umt. A total 0f 11 sets 0“. plants were grown, nme 0f
each of these procedures to evaluate the ability of BPS dwarf .wheat (Triticum aestivum CV- Apogee) and .two 0f
j, ’ 5 to accommodate them. The assessment asked BrasSIca rapa C5"". ASTROPLANTS- Te ebte'h the
questions about each phase of an activity and solicited maXImum beneﬁt from a long duration mlsston,
recommendations for improvements. Further analysis of numerous manual crew procedures were Inserted Into
_}f:;:” most procedures was provided by detailed video made the TVT and PESTO protocols. These procedores
on-orbit and multiple post-ﬂight crew debriefs. Most IthUded gas sampling, root module pnmmg, harvesting,
assessments indicated no need for improvements, but a Brassica poIIination, air fiIter cleaning, water refill, and
~ number of crew suggestions will be incorporated into watersamphng.
r hardware and procedure updates. .
5 As part of the TVT, It was necessary to evaluate the
INTRODUCTION ability of the BPS to accommodate manual experiment
gs' related activities. To do this, on-orbit crew assessments
"" The NASA Fundamental Biology Progra m has a were filled out after the second performance of each
I , mandated goal to provide the plant science community operation. The aeeessment ?Sted questions about each
’ ' with a plant growth facility capable of supporting long- phase of an actwuty and soIICIted recommendations for
¥ 1 duration flight experiments. The Biomass Production mgﬁemsfmf’héo gggeggsgit’e irgcrj'ct;2fec§)r%%ed:e:aT2:
‘{ System (BPS) was developed as a research platform for im Jrovements but a n mber of crew su estions were
1 the test and evaluation of hardware subsystems capable inc%r orated tnto harclijare and roce%g re u dates
"" of supporting plant growth and botanical experimentation p . . . p u p '
on boar d the International Sp a ce Stati on (ISS) The Further quantitative ana|y3|s of these procedures was
I . . . . . ' . provided by video taken of most of the procedures. The
i primary objective of the first BPS flight was to validate . . .
t the function of the BPS under microgravity conditions. amount 0f footage obtained. was greater than antICIpated
: '5 The BPS study that addressed this primary objective was agﬁingggyeﬁagztgifd gigegof fmgg:[:t'02:1insucgr:;
the Technology Validation Test (TVT). The objective of assessme’nts and Ei’deo Of crew refedurei' were
the TVT was to verify the functionality of the BPS . . p .
5 , environmental control subsystems and to measure its supplemented by multlple upost-fllght crew debrnefs and
' ability to support plant growth and development in post—fllght analysns 0f the mnssnon.
microgravity. Results from the TVT will help to reduce
- V the risks associated with the development of the Plant GROUND OPERATIONS
Research Unit (to be used in the ISS Centrifuge facility) 5 _ _ .
and to assure a high level of readiness and reliability for Ground operations provaded the basus for optimal. crew
, other plant growth systems to be utilized in space. A SUPPOFt 0f the BPS TVT and the PESTO expertment.
, second study, a peer-reviewed experiment called the Ground operations included such preflight actuvutles as
1 Photosynthesis Experiment and System Testing and writing crew procedures, training the crew, and the
f : Mission Verification Test (MVT), as well as the ground
' 5* control portion of the TVT and PESTO experiments that

"
"2","were performed during the BPS mission. The foundation The PTDR is essentially a practice run of the Crew
for all crew interaction with an experiment is formed and Familiarization Briefing and the hands-on training. This
strengthened during these activities, thus they are critical practice run is done with representatives from the crew i
fora successful mission. office and serves to ensure that the PD is adequately
prepared to train the crew. The PTDR is also used to '
PROCEDURE WRITING/VALIDATION certify the training instructor. !
l
The process of flying an experiment requiring crew The Crew Familiarization Briefing consisted of an
interaction starts long before the actual flight. The initial overview of the science experiments and their objectives
drafts of the BPS crew procedures were prepared more as well as a hardware overview. During hands-on
than three years prior to flight. The procedures were training the crew gained proficiency in nominal, alternate,
initially prepared by ORBITEC staff and were formatted and malfunction procedures. The importance of crew r
to meet Payload Operations Data File (PODF) standards training should not be underestimated. Training sessions
by NASA Ames Research Center (ARC) crew training provided the ISS crew members with access to hardware
personnel. Through the remainder of the process, ARC similar to that to be used on-orbit and the subject matter
took responsibility for maintaining and updating the crew experts to supply them with a sound understanding of the
procedures. Between ISS operations and STS hardware and science objectives. This proved invaluable
operations, the TVT and PESTO experiments required a during the course of the mission in allowing the
total of 32 nominal procedures, 29 alternate procedures, crewmember to respond as anomalies and unique
24 malfunction procedures, 11 cue cards, 19 procedure experiment opportunities arose.
logs, and 10 reference sheets.
In addition to training the ISS crew, it was necessary to
SSP 58700 (NASA, 2002a) details the PODF standard. It train the ascent and descent STS crews for BPS on the
states that procedures must be delivered for baselining subset of operations they would be required to perform.
at L-14 months and that all proceduresmust be validated These training sessions had the same requirements for
prior to crew training. Procedure validation is the process validated procedures and PTDRs.
by which procedures are checked for accuracy, proper .
execution, and achievement of desired results. The The ISS crew training process provided many
Payload Developer (PD) and mission Principal advantages to the BPS team. Interactions with
Investigators (Pl) are responsible for validation of the crewmembers and crew representatives provided a
procedures. valuable astronaut perspective to hardware designers, as H
well as recommendations that could be incorporated into .
In addition to the preflight procedure writing and BPS hardware design, procedures, and stowage
validation process, crew procedures required updates equipment. .
during the BPS mission, including new procedures
created to deal with unforeseen circumstances. MISSION SIMULATION
Procedure changes were submitted through the NASA .
Operational Change Request (OCR) process. As part of the Mission Verification Test (Morrow et. al.,
2002) conducted prior to the BPS mission, crew .
It was also necessary to inform the crew of slight surrogates were designated to perform the crew
deviations to as-written procedures. These small operations. The surrogates performed all crew
changes were communicated through execution notes operations with the most current procedures and
and daily summaries. stowage equipment (syringes, sample bags, etc.). The
surrogate crew provided feedback that was used to
CREW TRAINING ' make improvements to the mission procedures and
hardware prior to on-orbit operations. Mission
Like the crew procedure process, training the ISS crew simulations supported by the operations team are also
requires much time and planning. Training the crew important to familiarize support personnel with protocols
involved preparation of a Crew Familiarization Manual, and procedures that will be used to interact with the crew
presentation of a Crew Familiarization Briefing, and during the mission. Good communication among all
hands-on crew training. Prior to training the crew the PD ground teams (BPS had five teams; the mission
must have validated procedures on file with PODF and management and mission integration teams at ARC, the
have completed a Payload Training Dry Run (PTDR). PESTO PI and support teams at KSC, and ORBITEC as
The training process is documented in SSP 58309 hardware developer and PI for the TVT) during a large
(NASA, 2002b). experiment is critical to avoid confusion during
interactions with the crew, particularly when crew
As part of the training process, the mission Pls were availability is limited and quick responses are required.
involved both in preparing crew training personnel in
terms of science related operations, and in evaluating
crew performance of science operations during training
sessions.
2 .

"
"3","W This is particularly critical for biological experiments HARDWARE INTERACTIONS
IS containing specimens that cannot tolerate a long time-
W delay between identiﬁcation of a problem and the On-orbit crew interactions with the BPS hardware are
‘ly , implementation of a solution. described in the following subsections. These operations
0 are applicable to almost any plant related payload or
GROUND CONTROL experiment.
n ' , To support the ground control for the TVT and PESTO Samgle Acguisition '
3 experiments, crew surrogates performed all crew .
n operations using the same procedures and hardware as Sample acquisition activities included collection of water,
, the ISS crew members (Figure 1). The surrogate crew air, and plant samples. Water samples were collected
W was composed of individuals involved in the BPS crew from the BPS nutrient delivery system (NDS) and
.8 training. This allowed the Operations for the ground humidity control system (HCS) reservoirs and from
e I control test to be performed by personnel with harvested root modules. Air samples from BPS growth
r approximately the same level of training as the ISS crew chambers and the cabin were collected for atmospheric
e members, which helped to minimize experimental composition analysis. During harvest activities plant
e variables associated with performing operations on ISS tissue samples were collected, including samples stored
e and on the ground. in fixative and samples that were frozen. Sample
:9 vaUiSitIO“ aCtiVitieS were evaluated through crew
;0 a? 3 Plant Manipulatlon
.. «wwgt
j; W ”x The term plant manipulation refers to any operation that
’ r f § ~-~\”§ INVOIVeS PhYSICa' removal 0f the plants from the payload
I . g "" for experlmental purposes. In BPS these operations
g _ gag * § - Ma; Included pollination of the Brassrca plants and harvesting
h “ ﬁw mam seen as representative models that would apply to other
I' . w§a§t m: gig ﬁg (e.g. excising tissue samples). These operations were
§ﬁ§%%%.t‘ g3?“ evaluated usmg crew assessments and crew debrlef
i ”” =25: €54? contributed significantly to these operations, leading to
I 4% reﬁnements m tool kits and root module hand'mg support
Ii, v V w.:=:::‘::-.-.-:=-.'-::r-:=:=:=:=:::=:=:=.-=a. .:=:‘“""'=~' «5 -..~~:.:::::=:="" .-5r.::':E:E:E:E:€-'i:i:%=3$t$ --=i--====-====""¥""5=55""*?‘='-'*:-""=‘=""-""=""=""="""":"""" items (9-9 . root module hOlderS)-
i , 'V Figure 1. Surrogate crew member harvesting wheat as part of ground . . _ .
, , The BPS used a water recycling system where the
f humidity condensate was collected and pumped to the
1' NDS reservoir. However, due to sample collections and
. .
. ON-ORBIT OPERATIONS normal low level of atmospheric leakage. from .the
' chambers to the cabin, the NOS reservour requured
° . . . . occasional refills. It was also necessar to Chan e out
1 Though many BPS functions were automatic, Including . y g
. . . the BPS 002 supply tank when It was expended. Both of
I 002 draw-downs, crew Interaction was requrred to . . .
; .. . these Operations would likely be requured for most long
Il support several critical scrence and hardware test related . . .
I . . . duration plant experiments as the small experiment
operations. These operations Included sample . .
l' I ac uisition ollination harvestin servicing and supply volume Of rack payloads IlmltS the amount 0f
* I q . ’ p ’ 9’ . expendables that can be carried within the payload shell.
I I operations, BPS transfer and some experimental control. .
.- . . . . Though absorbent canisters (e.g. 002 absorbents) were
1.. 5 As these operations represent typical procedures that Will . . . . . . .
; i . . . . not used during this mussnon, these resupply actrvuties
1., be reqwred In the future to conduct mtensrve and . . .
I. . . . . were analogous to antrcnpated absorbent canister
I iterative plant scrence on-orbit, they were evaluated . . . .
ix, . . . change~outs In future mlssmns. These operations were
- usmg paralysns of collected samples, Video, photographs, . .
~.- round and f"" ht team logs and crew assessments evaluated usmg crew assessments, crew narrative,
I . g g ’ ' ground logs, and crew debrief comments.
I I
I ’
> I
l
I ! 3
I
i l

"
"4","BPS Transfer ASSESSMENT OF BPS PROCEDURES &
OPERATIONS 5; V
The BPS was transferred from the Space Shuttle (STS- v
110, Atlantis) Middeck to the ISS on PBS (12 Apr 2002) Video .
without incident (Figure 2). The BPS was transferred
from the ISS to the Space Shuttle Middeck (STS~111, During this mission the BPS team was extremely
Endeavor) on F062 (08 Jun 2002). The BPS Transfer fortunate to receive a Iarge quantity of video for a
crew assessment was not done by the crew at the number of BPS operations.
request of the POIC due to time limitations, but was
discussed in console logs and crew debriefs. Figure 4 shows a still photo from a video segment
{:5EZEE‘EV,~EV§£IE5£:==:w, -,--¢~' 0V3; ‘aogg,(/ V , .,r,,,V2ig;sg::s;:;:;::,::.;.:;:sv;gVV,zv-v-:;s;;V;V.V;;:,;;;;:'v""ggsgegeggageggz 2533332555523333:3;gig;i'f""'5""3'?‘5‘v5:333- ca ptu ring the BPS .Chambers being removed for harve-St'
Wﬁﬁﬁ“ gyf’WKQjTW procedures, chamber removal procedures and chamber '5
,«Fgﬁtmmﬂf 5% alﬁ ’ installation procedures. It also allowed the hardware
Tafﬁ developer to evaluate the forces required to open the
a ' ﬂea “ obtaining adequate leve rage in microg r avity to De rform g'
;.£*:,37fﬁk?%«% 1' these operations. Video feedback combined with cr_ew
V %V mechanisms more accessnble In a ve ry clutte red working -.
g   -' ""‘ environment-
"" hm ' ﬁﬁaﬁt‘ ‘3 Va; I
92.fspswomsShuureMaddecktolss. V4? .
aw
Exgerimental Control *4? i
s%*»,. i
The BPS control Interface was evaluated to assess the @422? ,5” s «W - I
design, layout, and usability of the BPS display, switches, ;. .. -' * , * |
cable connections, keypad and indicator lamps (Figure y w V i I
3). This interfa 69 is used to check the BPS operational V. “ , I
status and to conduct operations like manually overriding «géﬁ a -' . ‘ a
the automated on-boa rd cameras, recording video from hwy: 3”}... I
selected on-board cameras, and shutting down ,
chambers prior to their removal or deactivation. It was Figure 4. One of the four BPS plant chambers being removed from I
a|30 used to change operational modes, make changes BPS for harvesting. Note that the working area is cluttered with several I
in setpoints if desired and to respond to off-nominal power and data cables to the left and the Persohnel Equment |
conditions. A postflight assessment Of the BPS Restraint System (for holding miscellaneous objects)on the right. I
Experiment Control interface was provided by Dan V
Bursch during the crew debrief. I
'7?» ”a was also useful- Observation of the video and crew i
w Procedures to increase their efﬁca CY- Using the video, it I
a 00““ ”0t be done eﬁeCtive'y ”Sing 3“"" phOtOQ’aphy' I
, ‘3‘ Operate the KSC Fixation Tube (KFT) device.
' w‘i“;
Figure 3. Flight engineer Dan Bursch at control interface of BPS.
4 , I

"
"5","I} . . .E: .

.~ . j; w w, ' ground using the downloaded imageS- Photography W5""

‘E , i, wmg W a» llkel contlnue to be a rlma mechanism ’tO enable the

r' ,, 9.32:, ' ?:WWW M crew to collect data on-Orblt that cannot eaSIly be

I 1,, W M w Gol'ected from preserved SPeCImenS pOS’I-fllght- The

= W availability 01‘ digital micro-imaging cameras W0U|d

; ~ . ~ ' WW @Wgﬂ/ - Increase the types 0f Inform atlon that COUld be obtained

: fﬁ’ W‘“ WE? Whlle maintaining crew use efficiency.

, f/H gww -

a ' ' "" *Wﬁ $2» - '

Inl 1%? 53* Q w’mee a . .- \M x ‘

I WEE» ' ' I

I: 4' ""4: H 553‘”: M""“?iiﬁisiés'isisiéééﬁ’ 'IEE‘EEE'E'W'EEEiﬁi. ;,-‘_ "" 3 _I...-E::-:--:v:‘, : ':' -‘ . ‘g l: y“ 1‘5“?“ I“""-=-1-=-11225533;?”v-=-'-'I_a;3r=-=¢:=5WF=:=-=~'-=-'-=-'-""='=""""=~=~~‘W‘WIW'W'W'Wr-Wﬁr-W‘Ait5:-j:3:§:3:rc-'-=W1I1IWwww:WW W

I , ﬁg Wm , 9%; ' ' ' {’5} ,M M

I . Figure 5. Activation of KFT to preserve wheat plants In ﬁxative g; w?a‘ﬁ a

I: solution. ”ffx g “I ?’W

I. .-”//::l""\-/:1333‘s1;::I:lﬁﬁi‘ﬂ:l:7:25:1:I:$324:I:1:1:i:l:f:l;f:2;f:f;f'_>fi:2;2 "" ....-....-' "". :;:; .§;E>“v‘¥¢:§;z§€{_z-£ﬁ ,_ :-::::::' :-' 0‘mmt‘1‘1‘4331531/”yawzizizi'i'""""q Wifzizizj

I “w? ""W «1.; W

I1 Afﬁmwe 55;: ex 3239* =3; WW 5* f’ifvé‘W‘héé M/ﬂ/
ggégxﬁ’ﬂkw ‘ . a ‘3?’ ""?M”>

I1 EseW 2‘??? '5“ ‘ 9 ' ”W ,3;

F? w L‘ttﬂtetg

I :7 Vldeo was also useful 'n the evaluatlon 0f pollination grw‘i‘iiigér , @3ﬂﬂ

.- (Figure 6) and root module priming. These aCthltleS were 4,, ??%ij M m _-

_~ of great Inte rest to the prInCIpal Investigators. VIdeO 0f %ﬁ emuﬁgﬂw ‘ _

3 ~ "" Do"" In an o n a I lowed a S S e S S m e nt 0f th e pOI I I n at] 0 n ”i” ’ ‘cﬂé Wee»: 3 1-5-27.-12-'2'I'I.2:;;:;:i.‘ ‘ ‘E ="".--,,‘._-__W=‘=r==2=3=ir23521;;I-i;;;;2:2;2;;;2;:12:22:32.“ 44 14I4aIj;3j:3}?§E§§§E§§§E§E§f§igig§

: , technique as a causal agent in an observed reduction in

: ' seedpod formation In mIcrograVIty grown plants Figure 7. Wheat plants photographed in front of data grid to allow

compared to ground control plants. The manual root evaluation of plants by investigators on the ground.

‘ module priming operation was of great interest since this

_ ER.’ . .

procedure had not been tried on-orblt before and has

‘ , application in a number of plant related studies.

E E z r1144? .E:: m' ' “’3'rz ;:-.=’:’§5i‘>""3‘5""”'-.-. 3e: ,» ;;;;§;:§§:g

T E E E :- _ > > ,, E. ‘1» .1 .m- : .:.:5:=3§:5:5:::;::5: ‘ ?%‘f/ﬁgﬁ” E

$3“ ’ w ‘“ ngW EE ""

~ r W a: ' "" . w s, m - .

' ' ,. ' ~ M ///V: m ..

Wﬁ"" «» 9‘ W”- ?%x‘ﬁzv ’

E ' ” *~ /~4s -- .. ‘ "" /\$\ ;/ .  .*:‘-.~«

’= v 3-3255.- I/V; ""~,«’"""" “g; N use '=. 52;??? ‘3'* ;;IEa:=11:52.:s;s5s;s53;i53g§53g3;?gi;3232323;;;;;§;;i§=§;.;;j:.:53};//,/""// g ‘

'E 2‘ ” M {ﬁg 3 ,3? WWﬁ/Jﬁ ‘

-' Weegg .. $4M /% ..

, 10 ‘~ er Mm e «WWe . ~

‘ ' ' a {xﬁgew I . g - WWW~W

E V :'-E='v’..',EE.Ev'::::=.s:'-=;::.;-'-' ,di‘WW'xs-sv:;'E-'i':;isiziziE' 1'“ W“ ,v'iéig‘ 3-Way 3?” .~ E:E=E5E5=56$2EsisisEEs-EE9aEaE5555555553Estc’sﬁst-E-ziziéiri?-' “'3"";.E.‘5535253523s3s3sisisisisisis:s*i;:.:s.:.:isiﬁgisx:~.-‘I*:*‘I""1""2222“1219~.:E~~is:;32323i33iaiaisirii‘.‘~3:isisi;isisriri~if""'""~:=.:::~~.~.

W M5 . ,. wgﬂw” at:

m M «w», $5"" WW? ” r

, "" "" M"" W é "" , l ""f '

eﬁﬁew y “ ' ' E E ‘

‘mee‘ﬁmw

‘ I Figure 8. Process of photographing each row of plants during wheat

Figure 6. On-orbit Brassica pollination. harvesting operation.

I} '

If

Iv“ .

IE. ’ Photo ra hS Log Files

The BPS mission had a total of eight on-orbit harvests Console logs maintained by ground support personnel

~“ covering a total of over 245 plants. Although each plant were useful in tracking crew operations related to BPS

f. I was harvested mdavudually and preserved, It would have and documenting crew comments about specific

’ been impractical in terms of available crew time to make procedures.

measurements of each plant or to make notes about the

plants appearance or developmental stage. To allow Table 1 shows an example of crew comments related to

, data on the plants to be collected In a reasonable modifying BPS operations to increase efficiency in

f . amount of crew time It was deeded to have the crew microgravity.

, photograph the plants row-by row using a ruled backdrop

.‘E I 5

h j m

"
"6","i
Tab.e1.Exam..ieBPsW..o ' w I E
113/1052 Dan says that in working With the root mOdUIeS WW Wwae E
hand. 35 ‘
, -- m» _ ~ 1
that he was folding plants to get them into the '3: 3f a ”
foil thinks it might be better to leave ends out. _ '1 3W   1 7
do anything differently BPS tells POD th at a ” .. . ' t
we'd like PI to assess the video and give s/ 1 1
advice on how to work with the plantS- We will i \
get words back to him before next wheat . W 1 (
harvest. i *
Figure 9. Final priming step for BPS root module. 1 V
I
1 E
J
Logs maintained by the crew allowed the timing of the Harvest Procedure Assessment 1 1
crew procedures to be recorded and compared to _ _ 1 f
estimates developed prior to flight. Estimates are Harvest procedures Involved photographing plants, then 1
determined by having ground personnel perform each cutting the plants and placing them elther In flxatlve (3% 1 (
activity, and then adding a buffer to account for glutaraldehyde or RNA later in KSC Fixation Tubes) or t (
increased difficulty of performing the operation in wrapping them in t0"" and freezing them (Figure 10} The l I
microgravity. A typical rule of thumb is to increase time primary comment was that the chamber latches In the
allocated for the operation by 40%. The preﬂight BPS were stiff and somewhat difficult to operate when E
estimates proved to be relatively accurate. As would be removing a chamber for harvest. ’
expected, the crews pace increased as they performed _A _A 1 W t
me e; '
This 39‘5”” pr°VideS 3“ overview 0“ the crew’s response Rm
to various manuaiactivitses performed with the BPS. “e 1..., 1
Crew assessments were flown as separate time-Iined 4w [
that operational procedures we nt th rough. 5:1; ~W W, WM 1
BPS Gas Sampling Assessment W '- :2 1
Gas sampiing involved pulling a grab sample from the ﬂ M” “ii; 1
plant growth chambers and injecting it into 3 Mylar bag 593-951 * *’ 1 W I
for later analysis on the ground. The crewmember . _ . . _ . ‘ I I
reported that this process was straightforward and easy Figure 10.. Flight engineer Qan Bursch harvesting wheatwhtch 18 then
to do once he had gone through it a couple Of times. The wrapped m f0I| and stowed In an on-board freezer for post~flight 1
. _ _ analySIs. l
crewmember dld recommend that the PD avond usmg a 1
cap on the syringe valve if possible as this made the 1 1
process more complex than It needed to be. Brassica Pollination Procedure Assessment 1 1
R°°t MOdu'e Pr'm'“9 Assessment Brassica pollination involved the use of “bee sticks” to 1
. . . . . . cross pollinate flowers at three points during the growing .
$$$$$de'fh22m1231'g‘v‘133’egut'”giggftgfnrﬁﬁtemﬁgge1111:: cycle. The assessment indicated that this activity was not
(Figure 9) prior to insertion of the root module back into fﬁﬂgﬁaﬂy 3:232:12:anrﬁgdthﬂegtivgﬁg 2:23? hfxlggy
the BPS. The assessment indicated that this activity was the plants should be and how much plant debris should ‘
not _significantly different on-orbit than it was d‘urin-g be generated during the process so he could gauge if he t.
training. The Crew Assessment form for this operation IS was being gentle enough. There were no 1
attached 'n the Appendix as an example Of a standard recommendations made during the crew debrief related 1
BPS crew assessment form. to pollination. 1
. i
!
6 2
l

"
"7","‘ BPS Air Filter Cleaning Assessment W
, BPS air filter cleaning involved using duct tape to clean Excerpts from the CFGW debrief concerning gas sample
lint off the BPS front panel air intake screens. The collection are shown below:
1 , crewmember stated that it was very straightforward to
‘ clean screens and check status. Any problems in collecting the gas samples? No
~ problems. | used a knee board card to briefly list tasks.
, Water RefiIIOperation Assessment This is the type of procedure—mrepetitive and hand-
' intensive—that should go on the cue card.
3 The water refill operation involves the injection of water
into the BPS reservoirs through front panel connectors. Would you make any changes in the sample bag
g The crew was queried about the features of the Water design? None, but was concerned about some of the
3 Tubing Assembly, Water Refill Syringe, and BPS Sterile levers (valves) on the water bags interfering with the
2 Water Bag that made assembly or use difficult in zero valves from other bags, potentially causing one of the
L gravity. The crew responded that there were no problems bags to (inadvertently) open. Would be good to consider
7 with the use of this technique. a sample bag design that would prevent the valve from
opening. (This response was related to the large number
2' BPS Water Sampling Assessment of sample bags stowed together. The BPS team noted
; that all water bags and valves were intact upon return
7‘ BPS water sampling involved drawing water samples from flight. However, concepts to make the valves more
; from the NDS and H08 ports on the front of the BPS to secure have been developed for future use)-
obtain samples of the solution from each reservoir
(Figure 11). The assessment indicated that this activity Would you make changes in gas sampling procedures?
17’ was not significantly different on-orbit than it was during No. .
’ training.
4.: »» , Exgerimental Control Interface
.2 How would you assess the design, layout, and usability
tt’ cab’e connections, keypad and LED’s? Front Pane'
. M access to ether the power or data connector. access
ewe pliers, butsti"" had a hardtimeaccessing-
ye was me BPS display navigation intuitive 2° Would it have
s, twee: ' @Xh de voted to displa y ha vigation ? Display navigation was
I Mt arrosw was Overall no problems. Occasionally did
~; - ' Way %%e have difficulty with a name on the display, pro bably was
"" ' ' ”F’f‘.‘ ""’ due to ODF Sta n dards‘ B elleve it was the NDS and HCS
Figure 11. Collecting a reservoir fluid sample. reserVOir' Operations tended t9 get faStey as procedures
. were repeated, so no more training time IS really needed.
f A good idea on future programs is to have someone
: BPS Transfer Operations totally unfamiliar with the hardware look at the
~ nomenclature and procedures to see if they are
’i . Crew assessment of the BPS transfer was eliminated at confusing.
‘ the request of the POIC due to time constraints.
5; Instead of using the integrated BPS display/keypad
POST-FLIGHT interface, would you have preferred to use a laptop to
‘2' run the BPS interface software? You could use the
?- DEBRIEFS EXPRESS laptop — it was always powered. Using the
- 1 laptop for BPS would have worked fine as well.
1 A postfli ht assessment of the BPS Experiment Control . ,
, interfacegwas provided by Dan Bursch during the crew Rim? use a BPS—prowded laptop?'No. Anytime you
11 debrief. His responses are as follows. In the following bring m anf’ther laptop, you have to ﬁnd another power
~ subsections, texts in italics are questions provided by the source for 't' and have to talk W'th other people (share).
7P0 or Pls, or are clarifications of the crew response Need to provnde our own power plug on front panel “C .
3 . provided by the BPS team. HHR or other racks do not have available outlet.
2 | 7
.~ 1

"
"8","Root Module Priming Ogerations WW
Excerpts from the crew debrief concerning priming Excerpts from the crew debrief concerning harvesting
operations are shown below: operations are shown below: '
Was it difﬁcult to keep track of water additions to the root HOW did performing the procedures in space differ from
modules? Not difficult, was glad to use larger syringe earth? Used flat surface of rack instead of the
(60 ml). Most of the time used about 450 ml for priming maintenance work area (MWA) — there were enough ,
(refer to Iogs)_ Some entries may have been missed. In Velcro patches, and not much surface area is needed to t
the future, (Payload Developers) be sure to ask if you secure an item in microgravity (time savings was a big
notice any log entries are missing, Used knee pad to jot driver in using the flat surface). Using bungee cords to '
log entries, and entered them in later. Did not use the secure items was very helpful. The only difficulty in using
cue card. Counted (repeated waterlnjectlons) in head. the flat surface was in activities involving a pressing
motion downward onto the surface (for example, folding i
Was it possible to see when the wicks became wet? It the aluminum 7'0” samples). The less to UhStOW t0 5
was fairly easy to see when the wicks became wet. First prepare, the better. Don’t need to StOW items 80 secure, .
time I primed too fast which resulted in the wick on the such as the Plant Growth Chamber t0 the Root Module 5
furthest comer away from the injection point becoming Holder. When harvesting plants, used hand to react. t
wet, which was a bit unusual. For subsequent t
operations, slowed the priming rate. No consistency Did YOU notice any distinctive aromas when the 3
observed in what part of the root module became wet chambers were ﬁrst opened? COUtd smell the plants, 3
first, and all (areas) would not wick at the same rate. generally a grassy scent, and could notice an excess of 9
Based on earlier training, did watch to ensure that too water, but the scent was not overcoming. Was not ;
much water was not injected (water would appear by concerned about the potential of mold but thought the
gasket if too much water was injected). Russians were. I
Did the water bead up on the seeds when you added What were your selection criteria for a “typical” plant? ! I
water to the top? No water beaded up on the seed, but Reviewed notes prior to harvest and tried to pick the ‘ I
seemed to flatten around them instead due to surface plant based on the procedure instructions (no plants from i |
tension. ends of rows) and based on average size and color. i I
Did you observe any leakage during the priming How did the plants feel when harvested (thin, tender,
process? No, water stayed in the media and kept the thiCk, tough)? Plants overall seemed to appearlfeel l
wick wet. Made sure water did not leak out of the sides. healthy. Noticed ‘ browning 0t wheat leaves when they l
overgrew the length/size of the chamber. Brasslca got 3
Did you observe any changes in seed orientation during rather dry. Wheat sometimes had a moldy kthd 0f look, a i
priming? No, bit brown, but not blue. ‘
Did any media (Arcillite) escape from the root module? Was it difﬁcult to remove the plants by their roots from :
Some Arcillite did escape when pulling the roots out, but the media (Arcillite)? If so, how much resistance was felt t
not enough to irritate the eyes. Debris was seen when when the roots were removed? N0 difficulty in r emoving 1
root modules were pulled from their bags. For some plants from media. The intake 0t BPS W83 80 strong, it I
reason, the last root module (when unstowed) appeared tended to collect any debris (BPS 000”""9 fans located i
to have the most debris. (Not sure of the nature of this directly above wher e the plants were harvested). 90% 0t i
debris yet). the time, included root in harvest sample. Pulling the |
plant out was easier than using scissors. Also a time
What changes would you make in the priming saver. [ '
procedures? (Nothing speciﬁc to priming) For hands-on t t
operations, I would read through the procedures the HOW much water did YOU typically remove from the root 1 a
night before the operation. For second (and subsequent) module after a harvest? Amount was pretty much ! l
time performing the operation, I would create a consistent for each harvest, would need to refer to logs t .
consolidated version of the procedure on a knee board for the details. The removed water did have a different 1. |
card and use that instead of the original procedure, and COIOF and consistency, WhtCh made it easier to tell the i 1
knew the time limits. Since experiment was so hand3-on, difference between the sterile water and the used water. ! |
would write log info on knee board. Sent a copy of the Appeared to be “dirt” colored. MOSttY water removed; did l t
knee board card to MSFC. not get much air. I t
1
What changes would you make in the harvest . t
procedure? Cannot think of any improvements. Average 1
. time was anywhere from 20 to 30 minutes. I recalled that
8
> l

"
"9","one note mentioned +/- 15 minutes — I never got on the DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
:mmus side. The flat area was the size of a half rack and
Z} jiltgwas enough $9399 to carry OUt the harvest procedures. Crew availability greatly increased the amount of data
t :Mverall prettyustralghtfonNard, ”0 changes to procedure. that could be collected and facilitated a larger SCOpe of
use Of the digital camer a better because 't saved time. experimentation. The involvement of crewmembers in an
experiment allows feedback on aspects of plant
Othercomments made during the debriefincluded: development and equipment operation not discernable
' by standard instrumentation (e.g. scent). The crew
jg. Detected scents (plant and water) when Opening the provides the ability to aid in trouble shooting and
t '25; plantchambers, but none was overcoming. implement fixes. They also provide a mechanism by
which supplemental or add-on tests can be improvised if
i o Noted that the wheat plants generally appeared the time becomes available (e.g. a long mission
33 healthier on the lower parts than upper parts. The extension creates an Open time slot).
2 chamber size constraint with the upper parts of the
g“; ;_'j plants contacting the other side of the chamber may During the BPS mission, it was observed that it is
J 5‘5; have led to some discoloration. important that the crew be allowed the flexibility to adapt
, and modify procedures to increase efficiency as they
.: o The only recommendations made during the crew become familiar with the operation. The concept of
debrief related to NDS and H08 sampling was that maintaining a list of optional activities that the crew can
an improved sample bag valve design be used to do when they have available time provides a mechanism
prevent any inadvertent opening (was primarily a to increase science related activities while not
* f problem when Stufﬁng bags into stowage) and that it overloading the crew schedule and to allow the crew to
would be nice to take gas sample from the front of make productive use of openings in the schedule when
:‘~ the panel, such as for NDS and H08, and not have they happen.
33 to slide open the BPS drawer to obtain the sample.
Recommendations resulting from this analysis should
A subsequentconversation with Dan Bursch resulted in a result in significant savings in crew time in the future.
{gumber of comments related not to experiment specifics Examples range from small changes like swapping
3 @""ut to his perceptions about interacting with a plant standard size syringes for large volume syringes ’0 save
§ télated experiment_ They include: repetitive steps during fluid handling operations to more
‘ significant issues like the use of shorthand procedures to
‘i . Enjoyed working with Bps and found working and be used in place .of detailed procedures after the crew
fixing problems rewarding. The BPS experiments becomefamillarwnh an operation.
became his on—board hobby. Also thought plants
95;? were very beneficial psychologically. LESSONS LEARNED
o Said it was really great to smell the earthy aroma of A nurnber 0f hardware specifie lessons learned have
,the wheat plants when he opened a plant chamber been Incorporated into new desngns. Some of the more
for the ﬁrst time. Apparently there are not too many general (or Iprogrammatlic) lessons learned from ”""3
earth smells on ISS n one Of the few were fresh missuon relating to Interaction with flightcrews included:
, oranges that they would get sent up on Progress. He
75‘ liked the smell so much; he almost called over Carl ° ShOU'd be more Pl participation in training
and Yuri, the other crewmembers. PI’OCGSS-
EMISSION ASSESSMENT . The ability to modify procedures during a
' mission is important, but the changes in
5' j he combination of a long mission duration, high level of procedures must be communicated to all
f’crew involvement, participation of multiple NASA centers participants.
{'7 ' §and corporations, and the evolution of a new template for
Epayload integration combined to make BPS one of the o The turnaround time for modifying an experiment
_more complex biological payloads to fly to-date. The timeline or changing a procedure needs to be
""large numbers of automated operations conducted on less than the current baseline of three days
:'~t0p of manual operations required careful coordination when dealing with biological specimens.
fbetween replan activities, crew activities, and payload
?command files. All inputs from the flight and the ground 0 Backups to crew training personnel should
f] _;‘control experiments were evaluated and assessed and attend multiple training sessions to allow them to
ideveloped into inputs (lessons learned) toward have a complete understanding of the hardware
2i "" Ezexperiment hardware, software, operations, training, and and to allow the crew to be familiar with them.
1 mission support protocols (Lagel et al., 2002).
9

"
"10","0 Due to the extensive amount of time between 2. Megahed, A. 2002. The Use of Interactive 3D
the ISS crewmembers’ final training session and Simulation in Crew Training and Spaceflight
their first interaction With the payload 0“ orbit, Operations. SAE Technical Paper Series Paper No. '
reference material is essential to provide a 02ICES-52. .
refreSher- Virtual col'aborative training and 3. Morrow, R.C.. J.G. Frank, KM. Stolp and MC. Lee. I
operations simulation systems (Megahed, 2,002) 2002. Biomass Production System (BPS) ground
can 'be used to provnde crewmembers W'th a based performance testing. SAE Technical Paper
detailed model of the payload as well as help Series 2002012 482. .
{§§erl;:ggoﬁrzwmgmgelgsadmemorles concerning 4. NASA. 2002a. U.S. Payload Operations Data File I

p p y ' Management Plan. Document SSP 58700 I

. Provid e crew with a “kn e e—board card” 5. EIASAI.) 2002b. SPSaglgggogTrammg Implementation
procedure. During the crew debrief Dan Bursch an. ocument ' .
mentioned that having a brief procedure ACRONYMS i
highlighting the major operations was very useful ~'
once he had performed a procedure numerous ARC N ASA Ames Research Center '
times. The knee-board card allows the crew to BPS Biomass Production System I
have a summary of the procedure and keeps FD FlightDay I
their hands available for the operation. GMT Greenwich Mean Time ’

. . , _ HCS Humidity Control System 5

o Pl’s should prowde reference material to and In HHR Habitat Holding Rack I
qualitative assessment of somewhat intangible ISS International Space Station
parameters such as “plant health.” Color KFT KSC Fixation Tube I
reference charts and pictures of plants in KSC Kennedy Space Center .5
different states of distress would allow the L Launch I
crewmember to better perform the role of on- LED Light Emitting Diode I
orb't scientist MSFC Marshall Space Flight Center !

MVT Mission Verification Test I
0 Links to reference material should be included in MWA Maintenance Work Area I
procedures to make access easy for the crew. NDS Nutrient Delivery System I
OCR Operational Change Request I
On-orbit assessment of crew operations provided “real ODF Operations Data File I
life” input to hardware design and procedure PD Payload Developer I
development that will expand and improve the level of PESTO Photosynthesis Experiment & System Testing I
science in future payloads. and Operations
Pl Principal Investigator
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS POD Payload Operations Director I
. . PODF Payload Operations Data File
ThIS work was supported by the NASA Small busmess . .
Innovative Research program through the NASA Ames S?ECR EZYISZE ?giﬂ'ogs CSSEOI Center I
Research Center (Phase III) and the Kennedy Space TVT T yh l V r9; try T t I
Center (Phase I and u). The authors would like to 9° ""oogy 8' 8'0“ 93 I
acknowledge the BPS teams at ORBITEC and NASA CONTACT I
ARC and the NASA KSC science team led by Dr. Gary -
Stutte. We would also like to thank the K80 surrogate Jacob Stadler '
crew, Gary Stutte, Dave Chapman, and Bill McLamb for Operations Manager I
running the BPS ground control experiment. We would Orbital Technologies Corporation I
especially like to express our appreciation to Dan Bursch 1212 Fourier Drive -.
for his exceptional support of the BPS mission. Madison, WI 53717 l
608—827-5000 3
REFERENCES Email address: stadlerj@orbitec.com I
1. Lagel, K., R.C. Morrow, G. Stutte, K. Sato, B.W.

McLamb, K. Stolp, D. Chapman, D. Heathcote, J. I

Stadler, R. Berthold, M. Lee and D. Cox. 2002. Panel I

discussion: Lessons learned during a long duration I

life science experiment on the ISS. ASGSB Bulletin _ I

16:74. I |

l
i
10 I

"
"11","F APPENDIX: M4UEEXPRSBPSL031 - BPS ROOT MODULE PRIMING ASSESSMENT LOG
t

5-. OBJECTIVE: To assess the operation of this activity from a human factors perspective to aid
» in the design of the next generation plant facility, the Plant Research Unit
~. (PRU) and the development of its on-orbit operations.

.'

1r 1. Were there any differences in the injection of water into the root module in zero gravity?
t: S yes no

""L If yes, what

1 m

2. Were you able to remove water from the root module until no more air bubbles were

3 seen drawn into the syringe?

’~ yes S no

: If no, was it an operational issue? E

,: Was it a design issue? [:|

Any suggestions on how to improve?

: _ ——~————————-———-——-—-—————-—-—-———-—

§ ‘ ' 3. When using the imbibing tool to apply water to each row of plants did the water easily

j ‘14 y adhere to the paper strip?

t y If no, was it an operational issue? S

I ', Was it a design issue? E

j Any suggestions on how to improve?

4. Was it necessary to repeat confirmation of priming?

-? E yes no

i ..

f How many times? :I 1 E 2 C] 3 E 4+

5. Did water escape from root module?

; [:1 yes no

t

. If yes, approximately at which step did this occur and from where did it esca’pe

‘,

_...___..___._______________,____~______~__

if .

1 . 6. Please include any additional comments or suggestions:
WW
1; WW
4 W
|~ _ HELPFUL HINTS:

1 1

"
