"","x"
"1","PHYSIOLOGIA PLANTARUM 98: 901—908. 1996 Copyright © Physiologic Plantarum I996
.t'rt'nted in Dennwrk — all rights reserved ISSN 0031 .9317
Space stress and genome shock 1n developing plant cells
A. D. Krikorian
Krikorian, A. D. 1996. Space stress and genome shock in developing plant cells. —
Physiol. Plant. 98: 901—908.
In the present paper I review symptoms of stress at the level of the nucleus in cells of
plants grown in space under nonop-timizecl conditions. It remains to be disclosed to
what extent gravity “unloading” in the space environment directly contributes to the
low mitotic index and ""the chromosomal anomalies and damage that is frequently, but
not invariably, demonstrable in space—grown plants. Evaluation of the available facts
indicates that indirect effects play a major role and that there is a signiﬁcant biological
component to the susceptibility to stress damage equation as well. Much remains to be
learned on how to provide strictly controlled, optima] environments for plant growth
in space. Only after optimized controls become possible will one be able to attribute
any observed space effects to lowered gravity or to other significant but more indirect
effects of the space environment.
Key words — Chromosomes, microgravity, space biology, spaceﬂight, stress.
A. D. Krikorian (e-mail akrtkor@asterix.bio.sunysbsed'u), Dept of Biochemistry and
C ell Biology, State Univ. ofNew York», Stony Brook, NY 11794-52”, USA.
This paper is part of the contributions to the 1996 Annual Symposium of the Southern
Section of the American Society of Plant Physiologists. held in Orlando, FL. USA, 1
April, 1996.
Abbreviations — PGC, plant growth chamber; PGU. plant vestigate what kind(s) of plants would emerge in the
growth unit. continued absence of a l-g stimulus, it is important to re—
call that genes useful in novel ways can arise only from
The fact that evolution has occurred in the continuous. genes that already exist in the species, and these are al—
presence of l g has invited speculation from develop— ready engaged in performing specific vital functions.
mental biologists on more than one occasion (Markext Merely to substitute the new “useful” gene for an old
and Krikorjian l9‘93). The late E. W. Sinnott, a pioneer gene. serves no purpose. Any new adaptation is lost in
plant developmentalist and geneticist, put. it both elo— the swift and remorseless eradication of the mutant type
quently and succinctly when he reﬂected that “Gravity clespoiled of some vital function. Nevertheless, attractive
serves as the frame of reference to which the whole pat— as it might be eventually to test the hypothesis that sig-
tem of plant growth is regulated. A plant develops under m'ficant changes 1n plant phenotype W111 occur as a- result
the constant and uniform stimulus of gravity, and its tro— of protracted growth in weightlessness, it will be quite
pistic and morphogenetic responses —hardly to be distin- impractical for the foreseeable future to expose speci-
guished from each other here - are such that a specific mens through a sufficient number of consecutive genera~
bodily form is produced. Without this regulation to a tions to get a scientifically meaningful answer. Much
steady orienting directive, the general pattern of the more pragmatism must obtain for the near future tn
plant body would doubtless be much less specific and choosing questions to answer and to selecting systems to
might even fail to be developed. Because of their being work on in the context of plant space blology tsee
anchored in one spot, plants are much more sensitive of Kﬁkonan et a1. 1984, Halstead and Scott 1990, Knko-
such gravitational form control than are animals” (Sin— Man 1990, Halstead et a1. 1992 and references Clted
nott 1960, p. 355). While it would be interesting to in— therein, Mesland 1992).
my 1996
Physiol. Plant. 98. 1996 901

"
"2","What follows in this overview derives its impetus that cell division is an event that is sensitive to many pa-
from two kinds of spaceﬂight findings made in the au— rameters, and numerous sequentially, Spatially and tem-
thor’s laboratory. The ﬁrst of these emerged from a sim- porally controlled and modulated “decisions” must be
ple test designed to reveal whether there would be any made before it occurs (Van't Hof 1985, Grant ""1987, 121-
difficulties in achieving normal growth from embryo- cobs 1992). Obviously, when the cell division process is
genie plant cells in microgravity. Indeed. when embryo- malfunctioning for whatever reason, the consequences
genie somatic cells of wild carrot were exposed embed— for growth can be severe. and there is an inevitable cas-
ded in an agar nutrient medium in small petri dishes to eade effect (Dyer 1976a,b).
near—U g and on a l-g control centrifuge in a Soviet Bio— One important difference between the US shuttle—
satellite for nearly 3 weeks, the broad events of asexual grown seedlings and the Cosmos Biosatellite—grown em~
embryogenesis did occur as expected. But surprisingly, bryogenic carrot cells was that the former were exposed
the progression in microgravity from one developmental to space for a much shorter period (space shuttle ﬂights
stage to another was slowed down significantly, speeifi- have routinely been shorter). Also, the seedlings were
cally those stages where advanced embryonic forms not grown aseptically. Of greater concern was. the fact
with a distinct root and shoot pole were to have devel- that the physical substrate used to support the growth of
oped (cf. Krikorian 1989, 1991). The second kind of the seedlings, Le. a urethane foam sandwich with a fil-
finding derives from access to roots of seedlings grown ter-paper support was not specifically adapted to nonin-
in NASA’s plant growth unit. (PGU) on two US Shuttle vasive recovery of roots (Krikorian and O’Connor 1982,
missions as “mid-deek experiments” (Le. experiments 1984, Levine et al. 1990a,b). Hence the question of the
that are housed in that part of the space shuttle where the adequacy of the growing environment immediately sur-
crew reside) by US scientists doing space plant biology faced when low numbers of cells in division and cell
investigations with objectives that did not directly re— damage were encountered (Cf. Kriltorian and O’Connor
quire their using all available roots. “Extra” roots that 1984). (Parenthetically, elevated levels of ethylene have
might otherwise have been discarded enabled evaluation no apparent adverse effects on the chromosomes of any
of the chromosomal status of roots of oats and :sun- of the systems to be described.)
ﬂower. Given the small number of roots that would be There was no doubt about the reality of the karyologi-
available, mitotic index and chromosomal status, espe— cal disturbances including Chromosome breakage, dele-
cially at metaphase, were selected as arbitrary indicators tions and translocations; the cause of the damage was the
of the noaCe-grown root tips. Clearly, each of the many question. Significantly, damage was not encountered in
steps of the cell cycle must operate efficiently to achieve root tips of mung bean (Vigna mdiata) seedlings, even
high fidelity growth. If progression through pivotal con— through they were grown in space in the same culture
trol points in the cell cycle is not achieved, the eonse- apparatus or “hardware” and the growth conditions were
quences are bound to be profound. Figure 1 emphasizes supposedly the same. In the root tips of each of three

species examined, oats, sunflower and mun g bean. there

was substantial reduction in the number of dividing cells

5 DNA (cf. Krikorian and O’Connor 1982, 1984). Those- prelim-

52 mary fmdtngs of nntoward events'at the. nuclear level

OST’DNA SYNTHES \ cm 3 were taken as a Sign of some serious difﬁculty to be
t? 49 . - overcome before v1gorous growth of plants 1n space
/ could be routinely carried out. It also underscored the

PCP value of using a simple measure like mitotic index to as—

; sess curtailment or enhancement of growth potential.

0% PROPMSE :1 Similarly, various cytological and chromosomal struc—

‘2""- ""“”*""’”“SE ?m, tural parameters could be used as a reliable albeit gross
S E; T:::::::: m indicator of undisturbed and satisfactory growth poten- .

w ' tial in any system exposed to space much as the samt'

4% ...- criteria are used on earth (Dyer 1976a,b, Schmidt 1976.

o 155“""EGATE‘” Rost 1977, Davidson 1991). g

of? . The observations of chromosome damage and related

43“"" disturbances eventually led to a test aimed at evaluating j

PCP 53‘} whether morphologically (and cytolo-gically) norrna'é

.. "" ' P’RF—‘m‘pé roots could be generated de new in space, i.e. from

-/ \ \‘ I aseptically grown systems that had no pre-existing root

eoMPLETiE? prlmordia, and whether exposure to the near—earth space

LARGE? . environment results in higher levels of chromosomal .ab— ;
Fig. 1. Skeleton cell cycle showing some pivotal control points errattons 1n root and Shoat menstems when compared to
(PCPs) and critical events that must be executed accurately to those formed and grown on earth M 1 3' Procedures weI‘E
obtain high ﬁdelity cell division. developed to obtain quantities of space—generated roots
902 Physio]. Plant. 98, 1990

"
"3","Tab. 1. Special and potentially hostile features of the space environment to the growth of plants. * Designates that it has potential signiﬁ-
cance for biological experimentation 'in space. These features without an * are of virtually no concern insofar as they typify the environ-
ment normally exclusively external to the spacecraft.
*Weightlessness 10‘6 ‘0 “1 g
*No convective currents
*No buoyancy
*Surface tension dominates
*Solar electromagnetic radiation from wavelengths of .2 x 10“} to 102 m
*Solar corpuscutar radiation emitted in the soiar wind and during solar ﬂares; galactic cosmic radiation consisting of ca 86% protons.
12.7% He—ions,‘ 1.3% heavy ions with charge 2 greater than 2, and electrons
High vacuum with pressures up to 10‘1""t Pa
Extreme temperatures determined by the deep—spaee temperature 4K and by position of a body relative to the sun
for subsequent cytological examination, especially for hypothesis building. Although high quality ﬁxation in
potential aberrations observable at the level of ﬂight with materials from the plant growth chambers of
metaphase chromosomes (Krikorian et a1. 1983, Levine the PGU-type remains to be achieved routinely in space,
et al. 1990a, Scott et a1. 1990)., Roots of a wel1—eharae— fixation with eo'lchicine for metaphvase arrest was ac—
terized iiiiaceous monocotyledon, the garden daylily complished at recovery promptly enough to allow study
2n = 22, Hemerocallis (Krikorian et a1. 1989), and a di- of chromosomes in cells in their ﬁrst division on earth.
cotyledon, Haplopappus gractlis (Asteraceae), were ini- Contro1 ﬁxations on both ﬂight anti earth l—g material
tiated under aseptic conditions from rooted sheets which were atso performed with direct fixations using etha-
were trimmed on earth iess than 1 day prior to lift-off, n01zacetic acid (3:1, v/v) as weli to eliminate any poten-
ie. at the latest possible moment. The two species were tia1 of an enhanced sensitivity response of microgravity-
grown in NASA’S PGU modiﬁed with an air exchange exposed root meristems t0 colchicine, in short, to elimi-
system, a device that permits mid-deek cabin air to be nate artifacts. The results showed that even though shoot
scrubbed and passed through a HEPA (high. efficiency growth (Levine and Krikorian 1991, 1992a,b) and ample
partiC'uiate—free air)fi1ter and then circulated through the root production occurred (Levine and Krikorian 1996)
individual growth chambers (plant growth Chambers Chromosomes of all systems showed adverse responses
[PGCSD which in turn were inserted into the P‘GU (Le— to spaceﬂight (cf. Krikorian et at. 1992). (Since l-g een—
vine et a1. 1990b). Dayliiy has been of interest to us as a trifugation in space has not yet been possible with a
modet system capable of going from aseptic embryo— PGU-like facility to allow rigorous spaceﬂight controls,
genie cell suspensions to fully differentiatedi, eltonat it remains to be demonstrated that the effects are due to
p1ants which can ﬂourish in the soil (Krikorian et a1. microgravity [-see Mesland 1992, Krikorian 1996a,b for
1989., 1995, Smith et a1. 1989, Smith and Krikorian a discussion of the fulﬁllment of certain requirements to
1991). Haplopappus gracilis was also chosen because it, demonstrate unequivocaliy that a given response is due
too, has. well—eharaeterized chromosomes — the lowest to microgravity rather than more general or non-specifie
number among higher plants, 2n=4 - and has been responses to spaceﬂight].) Radiation dosimetry data, as
adapted to in vitro conditions (Kann et a1. 1991). Both in other low earth-orbit shuttle missions (Hayashi et a].
systems offered additional advantages because speci- 1996)., suggest that there is no convincing evidence to
mens could be managed on a number of levels, not the implicate it.) The radiation levels (order of 5 mad day“)
least of which was that they could be eioned, manipu— are below those expected to have significant effects on
lated biologicahy in ways. not possible with seedlings chromosome structure (Sax 1957,Kirk1and1990,Krike--
and grown reliably, for short periods at least, in the low rian et a1. 1992 and references cited therein).
light environment characteristic of the PGU (Kuang et Roots of haplopappus pliantl-ets that were phenotypi-
al. 1995). Three distinct but clonal Hapz'opappus popula- cally the- most mature (-capitulum origin) at the time of
tion types were used: (1) eapitulum (ﬂowering head)-de- space experiment initiation showed lower levels of dam-
rived tissue culture plantiets; (2) two lines of aseptic age when contrasted with those that were more imma—
seedling clones initiated from pre-sterilized, germinated ture, i.e. trimmed (rooﬂess. at the initiation of the experi—
seeds, (3') apex-derived tissue culture plantlets. These ment) seedlings. Daylily showed chromosomal damage
clonal populations were seteeted because of differences both in root tips and basal meristerns (leaf base areas).
in gross morphology, growth rates, branching pattern, The number of roots produced by day1i1y in the ﬂight
frequency of ﬂoral bud initiation and mode of root de- because of the mission duration were fewer than those
velopment (for instance, roots could form laterally from produced by haplopappus but we looked at daylily leaf
pre-f-ormed roots, or adventitiousty from the basal- or base meristems to supplement root tip meristem data.
cut-end portion of sheets or strictly de now) from pri- There were statistically significant (P <0.0=t) differences
mordia which were nonexistent at the outset of the ex- between each of the five ﬂight PGCS. An especially in-
periment). By using a range of biotypes it was antici- teresting feature of that experiment was that each popu-
pateci that any relationships between phenotype, physio- lation of plantlets in PG'C number 3 showed much re-
logical age and damage to chromosomes might facilitate dueed levels of chromosomal damage. It has not been
Physiol. Plant. 93, 1996 903

"
"4","possible to account for this. but the finding has particular lengths based on centromere position [Krikorian 1994] }
significance. It indicates that the space environment by might provide confirmation of earlier karyological find-
itself did not bring about the effect; otherwise damage ings using a different species with a different chromo-
would have been more widely, even uniformly, eneoun- somal profile and under yet a different set of growth en~
tered throughout the space-exposed population. In the- vironm-ent parameters. In the “wheat test”, jointly per-
ory, PGC 3 was to have been a replicate of PGC 4 and formed by myself and Norman Lewis and our eo-work-
PGC 5. There were, however, signs of increased level of ers with the involvement of investigators at Kennedy
air passing through PGC 3. One could speculate that this Space Center, we at Stony Brook specifically asked
eliminated adverse effects on cell division in root tips; whether: (l)norma1wheatroot and shoot morphology is
that is, it somehow acted as a counter measure, perhaps attained in microgravity, and whether the frequency and
through a wind-touch effect (suggestion of Dr Howard pattern of cell division (especially in the root tips) can be
G. Levine). Because there is no way to simulate on earth sustained upon exposure to the space environment; ('2)
the microgravity environment for longer than the brief- the ﬁdelity of partitioning of wheat chromosomes is
est of periods (Krikorian and Levine 1991, Halstead et maintained in cell division in root tips and basal areas of
al. 1992), it would perhaps be most appropriate to carry leaf sheaths during and after exposure to space; (3) phys—
out an experiment on a space. station to resolve that is— iologieal performance of wheat seedlings grown (a) in a
sue. One would have to use a rather complicated proto— horticultural foam substrate (Foam/Nitex System) and
col and that would render it impossible to execute. at (b) in a “nutrient pack” with an agar-based substratum
present. are comparable morphologically and cytologically. In
it is a fact that experiments performed in NASA’s the event nuclear or other cytological disturbances
PGU, a piece of equipment which was designed orig'i— showed up in wheat, a further objective was to establish
nally to grow small seedlings nonaseptically, and for a whether (a) they occurred in both types of substratum;
narrowly circumscribed experiment on lignin produe- (b) were of the same types in both kinds of substratum
tion, are difﬁcult to manage aseptically. It can be done, and (c) whether they were. similar to those previously en-
but it is very labor-intensive (e.g. Levine et al. 1990a,b, countered in other ﬂights that used other plant species
Levine and Krikorian 1992a,b, Kuang et al. 1995). like daylily, haplopappus and carrot. It was also to be de-
Moreover, some important environmental parameters termined whether the composition of residual liquid nu—
sueh as air ﬂow and water delivery are, or at least were, trient culture medium extracted from the horticultural
under the original PGU design, impractical to measure, foam substrate displayed similar preferential levels of
monitor, maintain and or even document with precision mineral component modifieation/depletion as was ob-
(Levine and Krikorian i992a,b). This is recognized by served before; and (d), whether the altered moisture re-
NASA, of' course, and work is in progress to improve tention characteristics of the foam substrate, attributable
and upgrade the PGU design. Even so, testing and vali— by us to microgravity in earlier ﬂights, could be con—
dation in space of any new apparatus, probably to be ﬁrmed (H. G. Levine and A. D. Krikorian, unpublished
called a plant growth facility, will be required to validate data).
its reliability. Clearly this is not a trivial endeavor. For Criteria for comparison included number of roots
example, fluid distribution properties in microgravity in formed and their quality based on subjective appraisal as
space have different wetting properties. This can ad- well as morphological and histological examination.
versely affected the ability of water and nutrients to sat— Karyotype analysis was carried out using division fig-
isfactorily reach the required root zones. Altered physie- ures from wheat mot cells stopped by pre-fixation with
ochemieai effects in microgravity which affect surface colchicine, but other stages in the mitotic cycle were to
tension and molecular attraction forces and, hence, both be studied as well by use of direct ﬁxation. Brieﬂy, the
ﬂuid/nutrient delivery and uptake also may be expected following was found: Roots from foam were more nu-
to take their toll Also, fluids tend to deposit in unex— merous and more branched and subjectively appeared
pected or undesirable ways on plant surfaces and growth more vigorous than agar—grown roots. Root tips from
substrates, which can also significantly impede either foam showed many cells in division, agar bag roots
uptake or air movement. fewer. Cell divisions and chromosomes. in the foam roots
A test in the PGU, carried out using two unaerated were much easier to analyze. Root tips in the agar bag
PGCs, with a superdwarf wheat as the experimental sub— system showed considerably fewer metaphases and the
ject has allowed an initial comparison of the foam block spreads were of relatively poor quality. Even so, the
system devised and perfected at Stony Brook for reeov- roots in the. agar nutrient pack clearly grew well albeit
ering roots for chromosome studies (Levine and Kriko— differently from those in foam. Not unexpectedly, the
rian 1992a) with an agar bag system developed by Dr foam system is better suited for the type of root growth
Gerard Hyenga and Professor Norman Lewis at Wash— most suited for chromosome studies.
ington State University. Despite being a very short-term Significantly, chromosomal aberrations, including
test in space, it was reasoned that a species like wheat breaks and laggards, were present in some wheat seed-
with different chromosome characteristics (such as DNA lings but these were few in number, less than 1% of the
content, ploidy and chromosome number, relative arm dividing cells. No damage was detected in ground com—
904 Physiol. Plant. 98, 1996

"
"5","trols. Controls of both substrate systems grew better than will require adequate resources and eo~ordinated effort,
flight test specimens (Tripathy et a1. 1996 and unpub— Spaceﬂight findings, taken as a whole, frequently sug-
lishecl data). Gross morphology of shoots showed no dif— gest macro— or miero—environmental involvement in
feren-ees but agar—bag root growth was morphologically growth perturbations. Indeed, it can be argued that they
distinctive in terms of branching (they branched much strongly detract from any interpretation that there are di—
less than those in foam). Biochemical and transmission rect effects of “gravity unloading” on plant development
electron microscopic analyses carried out at. the Institute and growth, at least in the short term (Albrecht—Buehler
of Biological Chemistry, Washington State University, 1991, Halstead et al. 1991). What then is responsible for
showed no major structural component clitferenees. the chromosomal anomalies that have been encountered,
(See, however, Tripathy et al. [1996] for data on the de- particularly in roots of several spaee-grown plants?
creased photosynthetic capacity of leaves of the space The most reasonable hypothesis is that perturbations
wheat seedlings from the foam substrate.) Thus, wheat such as chromosomal and nuclear anomalies which are
seedling growth in microgravity seems to have been ade- observable in some samples and not in others, are likely
quate and relatively unperturbed if not optimal. Recall, clue to a combination of factors including the Species, the
however, that the ﬂight was relatively short. biological status or level of development of the systems
Given the seeming inconsistencies in the. data from (e.g. embryonic vs mature, Mericle and Meriele 1967)
various tests, one has now, somehow, to reconcile all and the way things are grown and exposed to and, ulti-
pertinent ﬂight findings. Moreover, this must be mately “experience?” what may be referred to as space
achieved in the context of areasonably large body of lit» stress, through various agents. The following may be
erature that derives mainly from former Soviet block listed among indirect effects (Krikorian 1996b): those
work where a range, indeed “all kinds and levels” of due to radiation (including types that are not normally
“problems” have been encountered in space—grown encountered on earth, for instance, lack of atmospheric
plants (Halstead. and Butcher 1987., Dutcher et al. 1994). ﬁltration), spacecraft—associated vibration connected
All this emphasizes that the vast body of published in- with lift—off or periodic adjustment of orbit, etc., subtle
formation should be viewed as severely compromised effects due to lack of convective currents (which woulcl
since hardware systems that often failed to provide rig- affect both. heat or gas exchange), Change(s) in buoyancy
orously controlled or even defined environments were of ﬂuids associated with vital processes, e.g. dissolved
used. Despite attempts to use biological materials and gases easily come out of solution during fluid flow, and
experimental designs that. provide adequate controls, Change(s) in space in physical properties of fluids such
there is too much that remains to be learned about the. as the pronounced increases in surface tension. (These
behavior of such things as liquids in space (e.g. Ostrach could affect interfaces in or surrounding living tissues,
1982) to be sanguine about performing a perfectly con- e.g. effects due to Marangoni convection, that special
trolled experiment at this point in the learning curve. convection which is induced by surface tension differ—
For much of the US work in particular, experiments ences.) Water behaves differently iii space in a number
have also probably been constrained by relatively short of ways. Water suspended in a gas attracts itself and ap-
exposures to space. One might need ﬂights of longer du- pears as a sphere. Once water wets a. surface, it quickly
ration to minimize or eliminate any effects detectable at spreads out and flows in all directions along that surface,
the cellular level, for these might merely reflect short etc. Thepotential involvement of geomagnetic and weak
term adaptation responses rather than true microgravity electrical disturbances in cellular processes during
responses (Halstead et al. 1991). (Access to long, dura— spaceflight have not been addressed either and could be
tion experimentation in a space station seems justified the basis of yet other indirect effects (e.g. Robinson
for the latter reason alone because only then can one ex— 1985, Weaver and Atsumian 1990). Additional compli-
peet to disclose gravity-unloadihg effects on growth and cations might derive from the possibility that inﬂuences
physiology [Krikorian and Levine 1991, Krikorian may not only be additive but synergistic. lt is true, of
1996a and references cited thereinl.) course, that cells with severely damaged chromosomes
Clearly, the problems of carrying out controlled ex- will die and be deleted from the pool of meristematic
periments for longer than the briefest of periods cannot cells. Thus, gross chromosomal aberrations are perhaps
be minimized. Well—carried-out experimentation on unimportant since they are removed by diplontic selec-
earth in plant biology, as in all other scientific disoi- tion (that is during meiosis in sexual reproduction). Brut
plines, is the result of a long history of experience, it is well known that most agents or conditions that in-
which is obviously lacking in the still new context of crease ChIomosorne aberrations also increase frequency
spaceflight. Only when the environmental growth pa— of point mutations (Conger 1965, D’Amato 1977).
rameters can be reliably controlled in space, including Plants, especially those that are vegetatively multiplied,
delivery of water and nutrients and continuous provision like clonal. somatic embryos, can tolerate or even accu—
Of gases. of known composition, will it be possible, reli- mulate substantial Changes to their chromosomes. Less
ably, to pursue long—term work in a plant growth facility. severe changes to the genome such as variation in num-
That is not to say work is not worth doing now; it is, and ber of chromosomes, translocations and inversions, etc.,
indeed must be done. It is not an easy task though ancl are. not only tolerated, they may be passed on (of. D’Am-
Physiol. Plant. 98., 1996 905

"
"6","etc 1977, Krikerian et a1. 1983, Lee and Philiips 1988 statistics, the level of morphological complexity of test
and references cited therein). units can be controlled (ranging from cells all the way to
In an attempt to repeat and extend our results obtained well—cteveloped embryos and plantlets) and clonal mate-
with whole daylily plantl-ets, and to see if embryogenic rials of varying genotype (idiotype) can be made avail-
cells grown in vitro could yield the same kind of data, able for study. Work with aseptic somatic embryos is
somatic daylily cells were exposed to space in two petri considerably easier ""to achieve in controlled growth con-
dishes throughout an 8—day ﬂight mid—deck experiment. ditions than with mature, larger plants or tissue culture
We found the following. There was a substantial per— propagnles.
centage (more than 10%) 0f binucleate cells in ﬂight Thus, the dayliiy somatic embryogenic system is
samples. They were not uniformly present throughout uniquely amenable for use in a long duration, unattended
individual somatic embryos but were present among or minimally tended space environment. Our hope is that
normal-appearing, uninucteate celis. The ground control a unifying hypothesis can emerge. from work using the
samples were uniformly uninucleate. Since our method- daylily system. Until then, the fact remains that plants
ology for karyotype analysis involves treatment of cells can undergo substantial modification to their genomes if
and somatic embryos with colchicine, we took care to they are in a biologically vulnerable conditions; that is to
avoid the possibility of an increased sensitivity of the say they are inadequately pre-stressed physiologically 0r
ﬂight—exposecl ceils to eolehieine, leading to a doubling developmentally, prior to spaceﬂight (Krikorian 1995).
of the nuclei. We eliminated this since both ﬂight and By pre—stress in this context is meant growth for a criti-
ground controls were directly ﬁxed as well (i.e. without eal period in an environment that is more or less optimal.
colchicine) and the presence of double nuclei in ﬂight Presence of a well-formed epidermis on a somatic ern-
samples held, whereas no ground controls ever showed bryo, for example, minimizes vulnerability to stress —
double nuclei, or breakage. Serial sampling and examina- perhaps by serving as a protestant, a buffer—banier so to
tion of flight samples after recovery, beyond what we. re— speak, from a potentially detrimental environmental ef-
fer to as sampling 1; (Le. the first sampling after recov— feet. Conversely, epidermis—free units are more vulnera—
ery) indicated that the number of binucleate cells dimin- bie. Similarly, if normal growth is to occur in cells that
ished in some samples but did not disappear in any. This are, for lack of a better expression, “naive” (and there—
could reflect recovery of plant cells from space stress. In fore specially vulnerable to nenoptimal special, and p0-
addition to the condition of double nuclei, aberrations in tentially stressful features of their growing environ-
ehrornesome structure such as breaks, mieronuclei and m-ent), counter-measures must be taken to protect them.
microchromosomes were encountered. We are rearing From this Viewpoint, plant systems that (10 not show
ﬂight and control samples of embryo-derived plantiets t0 signs of damage when grown in space may be seen as
maturity to evaluate their ability to grow and flower. having experienced areasonably optimizedeulture envi-
Cells of some plants retained the double nuclear status ronment. That means the biological test system is ade-
but most have reverted to the normal uninucleate condi- quately protected by its genetics, state of development
tion (Krikorian 1996b). and prior exposure: to stress and thus has been ade—
Because of the hardware-limited replicate size of the quately accommodated for in its novel environment.
daylily somatic embryo test and inability to perform in— Hence such systems are much less vuinerable. My hope
ﬂight ﬁxation, the two petri dishes established feasibility is that it will eventually become clear how nonepti—
of gathering data on plant embryogenesis in space (Kriko— mized, inadequately pre—stressed systems respond to
rian 1996b). A slightly expanded version of the test was stresses. Some of the stresses in question must be space-
carried out on the International microgravity laboratory 2 ﬂight- specific since we. have been unable to induce chr0—
mission (IML—2) (14 days long) in July, 1994. There the mesomal damage on earth using either seedlings, tissue
number of dishes was. expanded from two to six and the euiture plantlets 0r embryogenic cultures, even when
protocol was to ﬁx (a “ﬁrst”with a US plant biology test) they are grown in a variety of nonoptimized environ—
half of them on orbit with 3% glutaraldehyde. This on— merits. Something(s) which is spaceflight—specific must
board ﬁxation permitted several levels of microscopy of be added to the equation to obtain the chromosomal
material “stepped in space”t0 be performed. damage (other than use of radiation, of course). What
The in-‘ﬂight ﬁxation emphasizes that the data from this means is that if we are fastidious in supplying opti'
prior post-reeovery ﬁxations for metaphase analysis mized growing environments to cells, tissues, organs, or
were valid and damage, etc., was not due to re—entry ef— intact plants, the adverse effects of spaee-speeific
fects. The same kinds of chromosomal anomalies were stress(es) observed in nonoptimized environments will
found in samples ﬁxed in Space, albeit as poorer quality not be manifest, at least at a signiﬁcant level. The appre~
preparations. The somatic embryo petri dish work has ciation of this seemingly obvious fact should enable a
emphasized in, general the advantages of using a well- quantum level leap in gravitational biology work with
defined, compact system as a modet for studying, at the developing cultured plant cells. At the same time it
cell level, higher plant development and growth in should be quite instructive to learn how the resulting
space. The number of biological specimens accommo— stresses to dividing cells, singly or in combination, as re— ’
dated in a small volume is large enough to allow good ﬂected by perturbations in the cell cycle and at the cellu-
906 Physio]. P1ant.98, 1991“ '

"
"7","lar and chromosome 1eve1 are brought about. Somehow — . Todd. P. & Powers, J . V. (eds). 1991. Gravity and the Celt.

one has to show how the stress is sensed by the cell and — Am- SOC— GTW Space BiOl- 31111- 4 (2):.‘1—260- .

expressed at the chromosome levei. No doubt plant cells, _ iCTOd‘EL P‘ & Powers"" J“ V“ (“159' 1.9912“ Chmsmﬁnﬁ 03‘1“?

. . . , , , , uges. Then“ use. Value, and Ltmntatlons 1n Graxlltatlonal B1-

espeCIally 01193 grown 1n ““0: are equISltely SBHSHWE ologica1Research. — Am. Soc. Grav. Space Biol. Bull. 5 (2):

to their environments (Ding and Pickard 1993, Krikorian 1-83.

1996a,b). It is worth repeating here that a wide range of Haggshi, T-kD'OIGif-‘s T11: Kilscusllg. t1, Ekgcgiwd}: Hagbelblgﬂé,
_ . _. . i . . gura, . ., agao a, ., - .a .0, . ' a war, . .

coanEd and COmmed msults delivered to deve10ptng Measurement of LET distribution and dose equivaient on

cells here on earth have not yet allowed duphcatnon of board the space Shuttle STS-65 (IML—Z). _ Radiat. Meas.

the chromosomal perturbations encountered in space. (111 1311358)- . ,

Eventually, centrifugal controls in space should a110w 130%9 T- 1992- C9990] 0f the CE“ CYCle- — DE“ 3101- 133-” 1—

resolmution 0f the .key question as to whether it is miero— Kann.'R. P., O’Connor. S. A.. Levine. H. G. & Krikorian, A. D.

grawty or a spec1fnc effect of spaceﬂlght on such thmgs 1991. Generation and multiplication of plantlets from ca11us

as fluids or gas exchange, etc. It may turn out that the dGerived dfrgn} :apitulum 0f IHQP'IOngPl/ws grgﬁﬂigNgt)

- . . , - , . ray an t' 61]“ aIyotype ana 1.1515: ant c1. 3.: ' 3— ' 3.
beSt way to “6""?” any one Of the SET‘ eral umquefeatures Kirkland, D. J. (ed.) 1990. Basic Mutagenicity Tests; UKEMS
0f the space envlronment as reﬂectmg a proverblal straw Recommended Procedures. _ Cambridge University Press.
that can “break the camel’s back”. The task would then Cambridge. ISBN 0—521-39347-7.

be to minimize or e1iminate the straw(s). Krikorian, A. D. 1989. Polarity establishment, morphogenesis.

and cultured plant ceﬂs in space. — 1n Cel1s in Space (1. D.
. _ _ , , Sibonga, R. C. Mains, T. N. Fast, P. X. Cal1ahan and C. M.

Acknowledgments — Thns paper 15 published as aﬂcontnbutwn Winget, eds), pp. 87—95. N AS A Conference Pub. 10034

from the Institute for‘Cell and Deve1opmema1 Blology, State NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA.

Unw. of New York at Stony Brook. Grantsuppon from NASA _ 1990‘ Plant biology research on ‘LifeSat’. _ SAE Technical

over the 3'63“ has Pdeed the Opportunity [0 WM}? on prob— Paper Series. 901227, pp. 16. 20th Intersociety Conference

lems 0f plant growth- and development usmg aeeptleﬂly CU"" on Environmental Systems. Wiﬁiamsburg, VA. July 9—12.,

tured plant ce1ls and ttseues aod has fostered sensuleatlon to the 1990,_ S oeiety of Automotive Engineers. Warrendale. P A.

needs of the _L1fe and Biomedtcal Setences and Appheatlons D1- _ 1991_ Embryogenie plant cells in microgravity. __ Am. Soc.

vmon. Specxa1 thanks go to Robert P. Kama who has done much Grav. Space 3101‘ Bull. 5 (2): 65—72.

of the whore WW1: 1n connectlon Wlth the space Imlestlgatlons _ 1994 Mitotic disturbances in space-grown higher plant sys-

and Stefama A- O Conhor who has performed the. karyolqgme‘ﬁ tems: Significance for understanding deveEopmental. meta-

.analyses. The eonmbuttons of Dr Howard G. Levme, earlier In belie state—specifie and stage—speeifie mechanisms and sen—

my laboratory and “03""?“ Dynamac Corp. Kennedy Space C6!“ sitivity to effects of the space environment. — Fifth Annual

ter, FL, to the early ﬂlght work 15 also gratefully acknowledged. Space Radiation Health Investigator’s Workshop. April 27_

28. 1994,, Houston, TX. Abstracts. pp. 10—12.
— 1995. Space stress and genome shock in developing p1ant

References Cells. — Am. Soc. Grav. Space Biol. Bull. '9 (1): 63.

~ 1996a. Strategies for “minimal growth maintenance"" of cell

Albrecht-Buehler. G. 1991. Possible mechanisms. of indirect cultures: A perspective on management for extended dura-
gravtty sensing by cells. -— Am. Soc. Grav. Space Biol. B1111. tion experimentation in the. microgravity environment of a
4 (2): 25—34. space station. — Bot. Rev. 62: 41—108.

Conger, A. D. 1965. The fate of metaphase aberrations. - Ra- — 1996b. Embryogem'c somatic ce1l cultures of daylily
diat. Bot. 5: 81—96. (Hemerocaﬂis): A system to probe spaceﬂight-associated

D’Amato, F. 1977'. Nuclear Cytology in R‘e1ation to- Develop- mitotic disturbances. — In Plants in Space (H. Suge, ed.) In-
ment. — Cambridge University Press. New York. NY. ISBN stitute of Genetic Ecology. Tohuku University, Sendai (In
0-521-25008-0. press).

Davidson, D. 1991. Ce11 division. —— 1n Plant Physiology: A — & Levine, H. G. 1991. Development and growth in space. —
Treatise, V01. 10 «(R. G. S. Bidwel]. ed), pp. 341—436. Aca- In Plant Physiology: A Treatise. V01. 10 (R. G. S. Bidweﬂ.
demie Press, San Diego, CA. ISBN 012-668610-6. ed), pp. 491—555. Academic Press. New York. NY. ISBN 0-

Ding. J. P. & Piekard. B. G. 1993. Mechanosensory calcium-se 12-668610-6.
lective cation channels in epidermaﬂ cells. — Plant J. 3: 83— — & O’Connor, S. A. 1982‘. Some karyoﬂogica] observations
]10_ on piams grown in space. — Physiologist 25: 8425426.

Dutcher, F. R., Hess. E. L. & Halstead. T. W. 1994. Progress in — & O’Connor. S. A. 1984. Experiments on plants grown in
plant research in space. — Adv. Space Res. 14: 159—171. space: Karyological observations. - Ann. Bot. 54 (Suppl. 3):

Dyer, A. F. 19763.. The visible events of mitotic cell division. —~ 49—63.

In Cell Division 'in Higher Plants (M. M. Yeoman, ed), pp. — O’Connor, 8. A. & Fitter. M. S». 1983. Chromosomal stabil-
49—110. Academic Press, London. ISBN 0-12—770550-3. ity in cultured plant cells and tissues. — In Handbook of Plant

— 1976b. Modifications and errors of mitotic cell division in Cell Culture (D. A. Evans. W. R. Sharp. P. V. Ammhato and
relation to differentiation. — In Ce1l Division in Higher Y. Yamada, eds). V01. 1, pp. 541—58]. MacMillan Publica-
Pla-nts (M. M. Yeoman, ed.), pp. 199—249. Academic Press, tions, New York, NY. ISBN ‘0—07-001588—0.

London. ISBN 0—12-770550—3. — . DeMaggio. A. E, Green, P. B., Heslop—Harrison, J. S. &

Grant, W. F. 1987. Genome differentiation in higher plants. —In Heslop-Hartison, Y. 1984. Development and developmental
Differentiation Patterns in Higher Plants (M. M. Urbansksa, genetics. ~11: Plant Gravitational and Space Research (T. K.
ed.), pp. 9—32. Academic Press, New York, NY. ISBN 0-]2- Scott and T. W. Halstead, eds). pp. 42—48. Workshop Sum-
7094253, maries-III. A Publication of the American Society of Plant

Halstead, T. W. & Butcher, F. R. 1987. Plants in space. — Annu. Physiologists, Rockville, MD. ISBN 0—943088-04-6.

Rev. Plant Physiol. 38: 317445. — , Kann. R. P. & Fitter, M. S. 1989. Daylilies. — 1n Handbook

— & Scott, T. K. 1990. Experiments on plants in space. — In of Plant Cell Cu1ture ( P. V. Ammirato, D. A. Evans and W.
Fundamentals of Space Biology (M. Asashima and G. Maﬂ- R. Sharp, eds}, Vol. 5, pp. 375—412.. MeGraw-Hill Pubiish-
aeinski, eds), pp. 9—19. Japan Scientiﬁc Societies Press, To— ing Co, New York, NY. ISBN 0-07-001588-0.
kyo and Springer—Verlag, Berlin. ISBN 4-7622-3606-3. — . Levme, H. (3.. Kann, R. P. & O’Connor, 8. A. 1992. Effects

Physio]. P12111198. 199-6 907

"
"8","0f spaceﬂight on growth and cell division in higher plants. — nautics Space Programs and Techno10gies Conference,
In Advances. in Space Biology and Medicine, V01. 2 (S. L. Huntsville, AL, 24 March 1992. NASA Technical Memo—
Bonting, ~ed.), pp. 181-209. J'AI Press, an., Greenwich, CT. randum 4502, pp. 35—39.

ISBN 1—55938-409—3. Me—ricle, L. W. & Meric1e, R. P. 1967. Mutation induction as in-

— , Kann, R. P. & Smith, D. L. 1995. Somatic embryogenesis fluenced by developmental stage and age. — Dtsch Akad.
in daylily (Hemerocallis). —In Biotechnology in Agriculture Wiss. Ber11n.K1. Med. Jhrg. 2: 65—77.
and Forestry, V01. 31 (Y. P. S. Bajaj, ed.), pp. 285~293. Mesland, D. A. M. 1992. Mechanisms of gravity effects on
Springer—Veﬂag, Ber1in. ISBN 3-540—57449—2. cel1s: Are there gravity—sensitive windows?— Adv. Space

Kuang, A., Musgrave, M. E., Matthews, S. W., Cummins, D. B. Biol. Med. 2: 211—228.

& Tucker, S. C. 1995. Pollen and ovule development in Ara— Ostrach, S. 1982.. Low—gravity fluid ﬂows. — Annu. Rev. Fluid
bidopsis rhaiz'ana in spaceﬂight conditions. —— Am. J. Bot. 82: Mech. 14: 313—345.
585—595. Robinson, K. R. 1985. The responses of cells to elecm'cal fie1ds:

Lee, M. & Phillips, R. M. 1988. The chromosomal basis of so- A review. — .1. Ce“ Biol. 101: 2023—2027.
maclona] variation. — Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Rost, T. 1977. Responses of the plant cell cycle to stress. — In
Biol. 39: 413—437. Mechanisms and Control ofCe11 Division (T. L. Rost and E.

Levine, H. G. & Krikorian, A. D. 1991. Shoot growth, root for- M. Gifford, eds), pp. 111—143. Dowden, Hutchinson &
mation .and chromosome damage results from the Ross, Stroudsburg, PA. ISBN 0-470-99082-1.

CHROMEX 1 experiment {Shutt1e Mission STS-29). — Am. Sax, K. 1957. The effect of ionizing radiation on chromosomes.
Soc. Grav. Space Biol. Bull. 5 (1): 28. — Quan. Rev. Biol. 32: 15—26.

— & Krikon'an, A. D. 1992a. Chromosomes and plant cell divi- Schmidt, W. 1976. The micronucleus iest. — Mutat. Res. 31: 9'—
sion in space: Environmental conditions and experimenta1 15.
details. —Adv. Space Res. 12: 73—82. Scott, 1)., Dean, B. 1., Danford, N. D. & Kirkland, D. J. 1990.

— & Krikorian, A. D. 1992b. Shoot growth in asepticany culti- Metaphase chromosome assays in vitro. — In Basic. Mutage-
vated daylily and haplopappus plantlets after a 5-day space- nicity Tests; UKEMS recommended procedures (D. .1. Kirk-
ﬂight. —Physiol.Plant. 864: 349-359. land. ed), pp. 62—86. Cambﬁdge University Press. Cam-

— & Krikorian, A. D. 1996. Root growth in asepticaﬂy culti- bridge. ISBN 0-521—39347—7.
vated plantlets 0f Haplopappus gracilis after a ﬁve day Sinnott, E. W. 1960. Plant Morphogenesis. — McGraw-Hill,
spaceﬂight. —J1. 'Grav. Physio1. (In press). New York. NY.

— , Kann, R. P., O’Connor, S. A. & Krikorian, A. D. 19903. Smith. D. L. & Krikorian. A. D. 1991. Growth and maintenance
Results from, the “Chromosomes and Plant Cell Division in of an emb-ryogenic cell culture of dayhly (Hemerocaﬂis) on
Space Experiment (CHROMEX)” flown aboard Shuttle hormone-free medium. —Ann. Bot. 67: 443—449.

Mission STS-29. — Am. Soc. Grav. Space Biol. Bull. 4 (1): — , Kelly, K. 8; Kﬁkorian, A. D. 1989. Ethylene~associated
78. phase change from juvenile to mature phenotype of dayhly

~ , Kann, R. P. & Krikorian, A. D. 1990b. Plant development (Hemerocalh’s) in vitm. - Physiol.P1ant. 76: 466—473.
in space: Observations on root formation and growth. — In Tripathy‘. B. C., Brown, C. S., Levine, H. G. & Kﬁkorian, A. D.
Proceedings of the Fourth European Symposium on Life 1996. Growth and phoiosynthetic responses of wheat plants
Sciences Research in Space, held in Trieste, Italy from 28 grown in space. — Plant Physiol. 110: 801—806.

May to 1 June, 1990. pp. 503—508. ESA Special Publication, Van’t Hof, J. 1985. Control points within the cell cycle. — In The
ESA SP—307, ESTEC-European Space Research and Tech- Cell Division Cycle in Plants (J. A. Bryant and D. Francis.
no’logy Centre,N00rdwijk. eds), pp. 1—15. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge.
Markert, C. L. .& Krikorian, A. D. 1993.. Life: Origin and evolu— 1SBN 0-521—30046—0.
[ion on earth; How can we escape? —In A Scientific Role for Weaver. J . C. & Astumian, R. D. 1990. The response of living
Space Station Freedom — How Space Platforms Can Serve ce1ls to very weak electric ﬁelds; The thermal noise limit. — ,
Research in Life Sciences A1AA-92.—1348. Presented at a Science 247: 459—462.
Symposium at American Institute of Aeronautics and Astro—
Edjied by M. E. Musgrave and T. M. Murphy
908 Physical. Plant. 93, 1996

"
"9","This document is a scanned copy of a printed document. No warrantyr is given about
the suitsurssyr sfths sspy. Users should rsfsr tn the original published version sfths
mstsrisl.

"
