"","x"
"1","B OtAMahy American Journal of Botany 100(1): 111—125. 2013.
GRAVITROPISM AND MECHANICAL SIGNALIN G IN PLANTS1
MASATSUGU TOYOTA AND SIMON GILROY2
Department of Botany, University of Wisconsin, Birge Hall, 430 Lincoln Drive, Madison, Wisconsin 5 3706 USA
Mechanical stress is a critical signal affecting morphogenesis and growth and is caused by a large variety of enVironmental
stimuli such as touch, wind, and gravity in addition to endogenous forces generated by growth. On the basis of studies dating from
the early 19th century, the plant mechanical sensors and response components related to gravity can be divided into two types in
terms of their temporal Character: sensors of the transient stress of reorientation (phasic signaling) and sensors capable of monitor—
ing and responding to the extended, continuous gravitropic signal for the duration of the tropic growth response (tonic signaling).
In the case of transient stress, Changes in the concentrations of ions in the cytoplasm play a central role in mechanosensing and are
likely a key component of initial gravisensing. Potential candidates for mechanosensitive Channels have been identiﬁed in Arabi-
dopsis thaliana and may provide Clues to these rapid, ionic gravisensing mechanisms. Continuous mechanical stress, on the other
hand, may be sensed by other mechanisms in addition to the rapidly adapting mechnaosensitive Channels of the phasic system.
Sustaining such long—term responses may be through a network of biochemical signaling cascades that would therefore need to be
maintained for the many hours of the growth response once they are triggered. However, Classical physiological analyses and re—
cent simulation studies also suggest involvement of the cytoskeleton in sensing/responding to long—term mechanoresponse inde—
pendently of the biochemical signaling cascades triggered by initial graViperception events.
Key words: Arabidopsis thaliana; calcium; columella; endodermis; gravitropism; MCAl; mechanosensitive channels; mi—
crotubule; MscS; signal transduction.

Sessile plants, unlike motile animals, cannot move freely In this reView, we will highlight some recent advances in under—
from their habitat, even if the environment Changes drastically. standing how plants perceive the physical force of gravity and
Therefore, plants must sense stimuli precisely and adapt them— elicit appropriate growth responses. We will also discuss recent
selves to their surroundings by Changing their growth and de— work that has implicated ionic ﬂuxes and the cytoskeleton as
velopment. Mechanical stress is one of the critical signals for critical players in transduction of the mechanical signal. However,
plant survival and can originate from exogenous environmental as we will see, the key, initial step(s) of gravity perception whereby
stimuli such as touch, herbivory, wind, and rain or from endog— the action of gravity on a cellular mass triggers a Change in a
enous stimuli such as the stresses and strains of turgor—pressure— mechanoresponsive sensor still remains to be deﬁned.
driven growth. The force of gravity also provides a constant
background of mechanical stimulation for the plant, acting as it
does upon elements ranging from organs to organelles. Indeed, THE THREE TEMPORAL PHASES OF GRAVITROPISM3
calculations of the signal generated in excess of thermal noise SENSING, TRANSMISSION, AND RESPONSE
by the action of gravity on cellular masses suggests that even at
the level of the organelle, gravity can generate signals for the Gravitropism, the oriented growth response of plants to the
plant. Thus, providing that the organelle is relatively massive, direction of gravity, is traditionally divided into three major
such as the nucleus or the dense, starCh—ﬁlled amyloplasts, the phases: sensing (the conversion of physical force to biochemi—
action of gravity upon it should generate a detectable directional cal signal), transmission (the eXport of biochemical signal to
signal within the cell (Bj orkman, 1992). cells that will exhibit gravitropic growth), and response (the

The importance of such physical phenomena on plant growth control of differential cell elongation that causes the organ to
has been recognized for centuries. For example, comprehensive reorient). While the molecular elements of the ﬁrst phase, sens—
descriptions of mechanical and gravity—driven responses were ing, remain largely mysterious, there has been remarkable prog—
presented by Knight (1803) and Darwin (1880) in the 1800s. ress in deﬁning components of the latter two phases.

Yet, despite this long history of Characterization and the central Thus, at the level of the growth response, there have been re—
role that gravity/mechanical responses play in shaping plant de— cent key steps forward in our understanding of how directional
velopment, the molecular mechanisms behind how plants trans- plant cell expansion can be controlled. For example, cellulose
late physical force to biochemical signal still remain unclear. ﬁber orientation plays a critical role in directing cell elongation,

and so the regulation of its production represents a critical com—

1 . . . ponent of the modulation of asymmetric growth during gravitropic

Manuscript received 7 August 2012; Manuscript accepted 9 November response. The dynamics Of the cellulose synthase complexes
2012‘ . . . . (CES) responsible for laying down these ﬁbers have now been

The authors thank Dr. S. Swanson for critical reading of the manuscript. . . .

This work was supported by grants from NSF and NASA to S.G. and from well CharaCteﬂzed (N? 11‘ and DeBOIt’ 201.1)’ and reglﬂatlon Of
TOYOBO Biotechnology Foundation, Grant—in—Aid for J SPS Fellows and CBS act1V1ty.by ClaSSIC Slgnallng meChanlsmS SUCh as through
Grant—in—Aid for J SPS Fellows for Research Abroad to MT. phosphorylation (Chen et 31-, 2010) haVe begun to be revealed.
2 Author for correspondence (6-111311; sgﬂroy@wisc.edu) Of particular relevance to tropic growth is the interaction of the
synthases with the cortical microtubule cytoskeleton through, for

doi: 10.37 32/ajb. 1200408 example, the CSLl linker protein (Li et al., 2012). The microtubule

American Journal ofBotany 100(1): 111—125, 2013; http://www.amjbot.org/ © 2013 Botanical Society of America
1 1 1

"
"2","112 AMERICAN JOURNAL OF BOTANY [Vol. 100
cytoskeleton plays an intimate role in the regulation of cell eX— biochemical signaling cascade. In the following pages, we will
pansion through its interplay with cellulose synthesis. Cortical therefore draw together current insights from the world of me—
microtubules beneath the plasma membrane most likely regulate Chanical sensing in plants and see how these might inform our
the orientation of cellulose microﬁbril deposition by modulating models of the networks controlling this initial perception phase
the insertion of the CES complexes into the plasma membrane of graVitropiC response.
and constraining their subsequent movement (Baskin, 2001;
Paredez et al., 2006; Gutierrez et al., 2009). Therefore, microtu—
bules must play an integral role in the regulation of asymmetri— THE TIMING OF PERCEPTION EVENTS:
cal growth response during graVitropism (Taiz, 1984; Carpita PHASIC VS. TONIC MECHANOPERCEPTION SYSTEMS
and Gibeaut, 1993; Baskin et al., 1994; Baskin, 2005). It is im—
portant to note here though, that recent evidence suggests this To put the potential mechanisms underlying plant mecha—
regulatory interaction may be more spatially complex than ﬁrst nosensory transduction in context, we ﬁnd it useful to divide
thought; for example, it varies across different faces of the same mechanical signals and mechanoreceptors into two types, both
cell (Chan et al., 2011). of which may play a role in either initial graViperception or in
Such detailed analysis of the regulatory dynamics of cellu— sustaining the graViresponse. Thus, animal researchers have tra—
lose synthesis represents just one aspect of the many advances ditionally divided mechanical stress in terms of its temporal
being made in our understanding of the growth response com— Character: (1) short, transient, or phasic stress and (2) continu—
ponent of tropisms. For example, proteins in the wall, such as ous, or tonic stress (Fig. 1A). Momentary touch or wind might
the eXpansins (Cosgrove, 2005), are also known to act as modu— be considered phasiC, whereas a response to gravity or turgor
lators of growth, and in the case of the eXpansins, they translate pressure requires a tonic perception/response system. Mamma—
wall acidiﬁcation to cell eXpansion (i.e., they mediate “acid lian cells have distinct mechanoreceptors for each kind of stress:
growth”). As discussed later in this reView, there is mounting rapidly adapting, low threshold phasic receptors and sustained
evidence for a role of the cytoskeleton and ionic signaling, in— actiVity, slowly adapting tonic receptors (Fig. 1B) (Schmidt
eluding proton ﬂuxes to the apoplast, in plant mechanoperception, et al., 1967; Janig et al., 1968). During complex plant mechano—
providing a Clear link between mechanical/graVity signaling stimulation such as during lodging, both receptor types would
events and their ultimate effects on growth. likely interact to generate a sustained response (Fig. 2). In plants,
Similar to our increasing insights into the response phase of whether there are separate tonic and phasic mechanoreceptors or
tropic growth, there have been recent signiﬁcant advances in there is a sustained downstream biochemical signal transduction
our understanding of the molecular interactions underlying the Chain triggered by, e.g., an initial, transient opening of a mecha—
transmission phase of tropic response. For example, in the nosensitive ion Channel, that can take the place of tonic receptors
1930s, Cholodny and Went proposed that asymmetric redistri— remains unknown.
bution of the plant hormone auXin modulated the differential
growth that drives tropic response (Went and Thimann, 1937).
This hypothesis is now supported by a wealth of experimental GRAVITROPISM:
evidence. Thus, in the root, graVistimulation has been shown to MECHANORESPONSE TO THE CONTINUOUS
trigger asymmetrical auXin response across the cap that is STIMULUS OF GRAVITY
thought to reﬂect the lateral redistribution of the hormone that
subsequently drives differential growth (Ottenschlager et al., In general, when plants are laid horizontally in darkness,
2003). In the vertical root, auXin levels appear to increase sig— shoots (e.g., coleoptile, hypocotyl, and inﬂorescence stem) and
niﬁcantly Close to the start of the elongation zone (Brunoud roots orient their growth directions upward and downward, re—
et al., 2012), and data from modeling auXin redistribution infers spectively, during a gravitropic response (Blancaﬂor and Masson,
a 2—fold increase in auXin levels on the lower side of the root 2003; Morita and Tasaka, 2004; Morita, 2010). After sensing a
within 5 min of reorientation (Band et al., 2012). Similarly, the Change in the gravity vector (gravistimulation), plants restore
auXin transporters such as the PIN, ABCB, and AUX families, their appropriate growth angle through differential growth. Dif—
responsible for supporting graVitropism—related ﬂuxes of this ferent organs can have different maintained angles relative to
hormone, have been identiﬁed, and for many of these proteins, the gravity vector, their so—called gravitational set—point angles
their sites of action have been localized (Petrasek and Friml, (Digby and Firn, 1995), and these can Change through develop—
2009). In addition, mechanisms for the regulation of these ment. This observation suggests a sophisticated regulatory sys—
transporters during tropic response are now being revealed, tem that not only triggers differential growth when an organ is
such as the recently deﬁned role of the GLOVEN secretory reoriented but that can also continuously monitor its angle rela—
peptides in modulating PIN2 turnover (Whitford et al., 2012). tive to gravity. Thus, graVitropiC response eXhibits both rapid
Along with the advances for auXin, there is evidence for the phasic and extended tonic components.
involvement of a host of other regulators of gravitropic response The most widely accepted hypothesis for the events trigger—
including an asymmetrical redistribution of cytokinin (Aloni et al., ing the initial phases of this response is the starCh—statolith hy—
2006), generation of reactive oxygen species (Joo et al., 2001), pothesis. It is thought that high—density, starCh—ﬁlled plastids
and asymmetrical accumulation of inositol—1,4,5—trisphosphate (amyloplasts) in specialized mechanosensory cells (statocytes)
(Perera et al., 2006). However, although these elements have all of the shoot endodermis and root cap columella sediment
been associated with the modulation of graVitropiC growth, through the cytoplasm in response to reorientation of the cells
there is remarkably little data linking them to the initial sensory and initiate tropic signaling (Sack, 1991, 1997; Kiss, 2000), al—
machinery, which itself remains largely undeﬁned. A discus— though a second sensor shootward of the cap has been proposed
sion of how graViperception could modulate, for example, the in maize roots (Wolverton et al., 2002). Signal generation may
distribution of auXin transporter actiVity is intimately linked to be through interaction with cellular components such as the cy—
the question of how physical force is translated into an initial toskeleton or more specialized structures such as the nodal ER

"
"3","J 21nu21ry 2013] TOYOTA AND GILROY—GRAVITY AND SIGNALING 113
A Short transient stress Continuous stress
:1) w '
‘05 ‘05 f
S g y
C .
5E threshold 3 . threshold
g — ———————————— 8 —‘:Vli-————————————t~“
2 E 4
1
Time Time
B Phasic (P) receptor Phasic (P) + tonic (T) receptors
2 2 ?
E g T
Tu Tu '
E 8»
a) t?)
i Time i Time i
signal 1 signal 1 (TI? signal 2
output output
Fig. 1. Two kinds of mechanical stress and mechanoreceptor generating distinct signals. (A) Time course of intensity of short transient (left) and
continuous mechanical stresses (right). (B) Time course of signal amplitude induced by short transient (left) and continuous mechanical stresses (right).
Conceptual phasic and tonic mechanoreceptors generating signal 1 and signal 2, respectively, are drawn.
found in the periphery of the root C21p columella (Zheng and shoot 21gr21Vitr0piC mutants such as Shoot gravitropist (sgr2),
St21ehe1in, 2001). Indeed, live cell imaging shows the complex sgr3, zig/sgr4, 21nd sgr9 h21ve nonsedimentable 21my10p121sts in
kinetics of 21my10p121st sedimentation upon gravistimulation in their endodermal cells. However, gr21Vitr0piC response and sed—
wild—type endodermal (S21it0 et 211., 2005) 21nd columella cells imenting 21my10p121sts were restored by selectively expressing
(Leitz et 211., 2009). the wild—type gene in the endodermis of each respective mutant
Consistent with such ideas, gr21Vitr0piC growth responses in line (Kato et 211., 2002; Morita et 211., 2002; Y21n0 et 211., 2003;
roots and shoots of starCh—deﬁcient mutants (e.g., phasphoglu- Nakamura et 211., 2011). These results 2111 suggest that sedimen—
camutase [pgm]) were inhibited and their amplitudes were 211— tation of 21my10p121sts plays 21 critic211r01e in gravity sensing 21nd/
m0stpr0p0rti0n211t0 the amount of starch content in 21 genotype or the following signal transduction. Because gravity is 21 force
(Kiss et 211., 1996, 1997; Weise and Kiss, 1999). In the case of in proportion to mass, the dense starch 0f the 21my10p121sts is
pgm-I , this lesion in tropic response was also correlated with 21 thought to increase the sensitivity of the cellular perception m21—
severely disrupted formation of the auxin gradient across the Chinery, amplifying the signal resulting from 21my10p121st inter—
root tip (Wolverton et 211., 2011; Band et 211., 2012). The reduced action with the graVi/mechanosensor (F21s21n0 et 211., 2002;
gr21Vitr0piC sensitivities in these mutants were restored by hy— Perb211 21nd Driss—Ecole, 2003; Leitz et 211., 2009).
pergr21Vity, which correlated with the resumption of sedimenta—
tion of their p121stids (Fitzelle and Kiss, 2001). Similarly, an
21my10p121st—1ess mutant (endodermal-amyloplast less I [66111]) 5”” g MUTANT HIGHLIGHTS A ROLE FOR THE
containing no intact 21my10p121sts in sheet endodermal cells eX— TOC PLASTID PROTEIN IMPORT MACHINERY 1N
hibited abnormal gr21Vitr0pism in inﬂorescence stems and hypo— GRAVISENSING
cotyls, whereas the roots of the same plant contained normal
21my10p121sts in columella cells and eXhibited normal gr21Vitr0p— Screens for Arabidapsis mutants showing 211tered gr21Vitr0piC
ism (Fujihir21 et 211., 2000; Morita et 211., 2007). Furthermore, responses have proven powerful tools to identify components

"
"4","114 AMERICAN J OURNAL OF BOTANY [Vol. 100
touch ¢ gravity
E 5
Time Time

Fig. 2. Two kinds of mechanical stresses exerted simultaneously to plants. Time course of intensity of transient touch stimulation (left) and continuous
gravity stimulation (right).
of the graViresponse machinery. For example, mutant agravit— activities (Mayer and Bukau, 2005), plus it contains a putative
ropic I (agrl ), found in a screen for reduced gravitropic growth, protein—protein interaction domain. To gether these features im—
led to the discovery of one of the PIN auXin efﬂuX facilitators ply ARGl could act as an adapter/Chaperone for components of
required to generate the hormone gradient that supports gravity— the gravity sensor complex.
related asymmetrical growth (Chen et al., 1998; Muller et al., Consistent with this model of plastid function being a entical
1998). Despite providing such critical insights into the molecu— component of the initial gravisensing machinery, analysis of the
lat components behind gravitropism, most of these mutant screens argl mutant has revealed a role for the plastid proteins of the Trans—
have revealed elements of the transmission and response path— locon of the Quter envelope of thoroplasts (TOC) in gravisensing
ways rather than genes contributing to initial signaling events. (Stanga et al., 2009). Thus, two TOC genes were identiﬁed as ge—
However, there are a few notable exceptions (see also the re— netiC enhancers of the reduced gravitropism phenotype seen in
View by Baldwin et al. [2013] in this issue). argl. The TOC complex acts to translocate preplastid proteins

Mutants in Altered Eesponse to gravity] (ARGI) show le— across the outer envelope in a GTP—dependent manner and Arabi-
sions in tropic response in both roots and shoots (Sedbrook dopsis has three major Classes of elements: TOC159, TOC75, and
et al., 1999). ARGI has two paralogs in ArabidopSiS,ARG-likel TOC34 ($011 and Schleiff, 2004). A hypermorphic allele of
and ARG—likeZ (ARLI and ARL2). Mutants in ARLI show no graV— TOC 75—11], which encodes one of the TOC75 isoforms that
itropic phenotype, whereas those in ARL2 show gravitropic de— forms the central pore of the translocation complex (B aldwin et 211.,
fects very similar to argl, as does the arlZ argl double (Harrison 2005), enhances the agraVitropiC phenotype seen in argl (Stanga
and Masson, 2008b; Luesse et al., 2010), implying ARGl and et al., 2009), although interpretation of this phenotype is complex
ARL2 operate in the same pathway. ARGl and ARL2 may well because this TOC75 allele has pleiotropic effects on growth and
interact with each other, with membranes and also with the aC— development. However, a second modiﬁer of the argl phenotype
tin cytoskeleton (Boonsirichai et al., 2003; Harrison and Masson, had a much more limited effect on the plant but also modiﬁed the
2008a). ARL2 is selectively expressed in gravisensing cells, and argl gravitropism phenotype. The responsible mutation was found
both arg] and arlZ mutants fail to relocalize the PIN3 auXin to be in TOC132,aparalog of TOCI59 (Stanga et al., 2009), which
efﬂuX facilitator thought to contribute to generating the asym— encodes a component thought to play a role in plastid preprotein
metrical auXin ﬂuxes that drive tropic bending (Harrison and recognition duIing translocation (Perry and Keegstra, 1994), i.e.,
Masson, 2008b). The agraVitropiC mutant phenotype of argl TOC132 may act as a receptor on the plastid surface. This observa—
Can be rescued by selectively expressing the wild—type gene in tion would ﬁt well with the starCh—statolith model for graVipercep—
only the statocytes of the plant (i.e., the columella of the root tion where TOC proteins, especially TOC132 would be well
cap or endodermal cells of the hypocotyl), further implying a situated to play a role in mediating plastid—graVisensor interac—
direct role in gravity sensing (Boonsirichai et al., 2003). Indeed, tions. However, deﬁning precisely how the TOC complex on the
analysis of amyloplast dynamics in the argl -2 mutant suggests amyloplast might play a role in gravisensing has proven difﬁcult.
it may inﬂuence tropic signaling through an effect on plastid On their own, these mutants in TOC show no gravitropic defects,
movement/sedimentation (Kumar et al., 2008). The structure of i.e., they must be in the argl background to impact upon gravitrop—
the protein, however, provides few Clues as to molecular func— ism (Stanga et al., 2009). Thus, at present, it seems less likely that
tion. ARGl does contain a J —domain found in many proteins that they play a direct role as components of a TOC/ARGl plastid—
interact with heat shock cognate 70 to promote chaperone—like localized gravity/mechanoreceptor.

"
"5","J anuary 2013] TOYOTA AND GILROY—GRAVITY AND SIGNALING 115
The potential complexity of an ARGl—related signaling com— IONIC SIGNALS IN PLANT GRAVITROPIC RESPONSES:
pleX is hinted at from analysis of the argl [92141-1 and CW pgm-I CA2+ CHANGES IN RESPONSE TO GRAVISTIMULATION
double mutants. The pgm-I gene is expected to affect the gravi—
ttOPiC response through its role in plastid function, but the 617291 Ca2+ is a ubiquitous cellular regulator in a great variety of
pgm-I and 0742 pgm-I mutants ShOW an enhanced inhibition in plant responses including growth, development, and morpho—
tropic response relative to either arg] or arlZ alone (Guan et a1., genesis (Bush, 1995; White and Broadley, 2003; Hepler, 2005;
2003), implying that pgm-I does hOt operate in the same genetic Dodd et a1., 2010), and a possible involvement of Changes in
pathway t0 gravitropic t 631301136 as these other tWO genes. Cell cytoplasmic [Ca2+] in gravitropic responses has been repeatedly
fractionation and localization of ARG1 fused to GFP suggest suggested (Trewavas and Knight, 1994; Sinclair and Trewavas,
that this protein associates with a variety of endomembranes in 1997; Fasano et 31;; 2002; Pickard, 2007); Indeed, recent ad—
puncta and may be related t0 vesicle trafﬁcking but hOt With vances in Ca2+ imaging technology have enabled the detection
plastids. ARL2 1S associated With the plasma and internal mem— of cytoplasmic [Caz‘t'] changes in response to gravistimulation
branes (Harrison and Masson, 2008b)- Thus, the genetic inter— in both roots and shoots. Thus, Gehring et al. (1990b) reported
actions between ARGI and T0C75-1H and T0C132 d0 h0t increases in [Ca2+] induced by gravistimulation in maize co—
seem to reﬂect a stable physical interaction at the plastid sur— leoptiles using acytoplasmic [(33%] ﬂuorescent indicator. [(33%]
face. Considering its protein—protein interaction and J {1011131118, increased in the lower side of the horizontally oriented coleop—
ARGI may be required fOY the correct targeting/folding Of a tiles several minutes after gravistimulation, suggesting that
0011113011th 0f the gravitropic sensing/transduction pathway. gravistimulation is transduced into [Ca2+] increase. However,
This function could occur in a compartment distinct from the neither detailed kinetics of the [(33%] increase, nor the underly—
sensing element supported by TOC action at the plastid. The ing molecular mechanisms have been examined. The lower side
TOC 001111316X might then act as a nonessential enhancer 0f the of the coleoptile is the expected site of growth stimulation trig—
action 0f the gravisensor complex. gered by accumulation of auxin, potentially placing the Ca2+
increases in the auXin response pathway.
In contrast, cytoplasmic [Ca2+] Changes induced by gravis—
RAPID IONIC CHANGES DURING GRAVIPERCEPTION timulation were not initially detected in roots of Arabidopsis
thaliana using a similar [Ca2+] ﬂuorescent indicator (Legue
If mutant screens have yet to Clearly deﬁne the perception et a1., 1997), although this lack most likely reﬂects the limited
machinery, could correlating potential signals to the timing of sensitiVity of the imaging system available at this time. More
gravitropic sensing help to identify candidates? The gravitropic recent imaging using the genetically encoded Yellow Cameleon
growth response plays out over many minutes to hours. Thus, it (YC) 3.6 Ca2+ sensor did reveal 21 gravistimulation—induced
takes more than 1 h for horizontally laid inﬂorescence stems of wave of Ca2+ on the lower side of the root that moves from root
Arabidopsis to bend perpendicularly (Fukaki et 211., 1996), and tip toward the elongation zone with the same kinetics as pre—
primary roots of Arabidopsis roots can take >6 h to reorient to dicted for auXin (Monshausen et a1., 2011), again potentially
the vertical from 21 900 turn (Blancaﬂor et a1., 1998). However, placing the Ca2+ increases in the auXin response pathway. To—
the induction of differential growth occurs much more quickly, gether with the ﬁnding that auXin itself can induce Ca2+ signals
e.g., it was eVident in a high resolution growth analysis of roots (Gehring et a1., 1990a; Tretyn et a1., 1991; Irving et a1., 1992;
within 10 min (Selker and Sievers, 1987; Mullen et a1., 2000), Ayling et a1., 1994; Plieth and Trewavas, 2002; Shishova and
setting a timeframe for the transmission and response phases of Lindberg, 2010; Monshausen et a1., 2011), these observations
gravitropic bending. Presentation time, the minimum time of suggest that the spreading gravitropic Ca2+ increase is likely
gravistimulation to elicit an obVious gravitropic growth response, reﬂecting auXin—triggered signaling during the transmission
is estimated at ~3 min in Arabidopsis inﬂorescence stems (Fukaki phase of the tropic response. The Ca2+ increase could regulate
et a1., 1996), less than 10 s in cress roots (Hejnowicz et a1., 1998), further auXin transport through Ca2+—dependent regulation of
or 1 s in a variety of species (Perbal et a1., 2002), indicating that elements such as the pinoid kinase (Robert and Offringa, 2008).
gravity sensing is carried out in this short period. Ca2+ may also trigger downstream Changes, for example, altera—
Behrens et a1. (1985) attempted to detect rapid Changes in tions in wall pH related to the modulation of cell elongation Via
membrane potential induced by gravistimulation in a columella acid growth (Monshausen et a1., 2011).
cell of cress roots to ask if ion Channel activities might be part GraVistimulation—induced cytoplasmic [Ca2+] increases were
of the initial rapid signaling system. Membranes in the lower— also seen in whole Arabidopsis seedlings expressing apoae—
side columella cells start to depolarize at 8 s after 45O—graVis— quorin, a Ca2+ sensitive bioluminescent protein (Fig. 3) (Plieth
timulation and reach a maximum depolarization at 170 s. This and Trewavas, 2002; Toyota et a1., 2008b). Hundreds of Arabi-
short latent period of 8 s (Behrens et a1., 1985) corresponds to dopsis seedlings were mounted on a rotatable wheel in front of
the presentation time in cress roots (Larsen, 1969; Hejnowicz a photomultiplier tube and subjected to 135O—graVistimulation
et a1., 1998). On the other hand, membranes in the upper—side by rotation. The seedlings showed a biphasic [Ca2+] increase
columella cells start to hyperpolarize at 58 s after gravistimula— consisting of a Ca2+ spike lasting ~20 s and second Ca2+ in—
tion and continue to hyperpolarize even without gravistimula— crease that peaked at around 90 s and declined within approxi—
tion. Similar results were obtained from outer cortical cells mately 15 min (Plieth and Trewavas,2002).Toyota and colleagues
within the elongation zone of mung bean roots (Ishikawa and (2008b) were able to extend these results to measurements
Evans, 1990). These results suggest that gravistimulation in— on single seedlings where the gravistimulated [Ca2+] increase
duces a rapid and characteristically asymmetric electrical re— was localized to the leaf petiole and hypocotyl. Furthermore,
sponse with respect to the gravity vector. Such electrical the second [Ca2+] increase was shown to be dependent on
Changes likely reﬂectionic ﬂuxes across the plasma membrane, rotational angle but not angular velocity, whereas the ﬁrst
suggesting that gravistimulation leads to the asymmetrical acti— [Ca2+] spike showed the opposite properties. These results sug—
Vation/inhibition of plasma membrane Channels and pumps. gest that the ﬁrst cytoplasmic [Ca2+] increase is induced by

"
"6","116 AMERICAN J OURNAL OF BOTANY [Vol. 100
ti 1 Ii
0° 180° 0°
l gravistimulation
70‘
8 3
U) 3
E 8 l
E o
3 E
,1 ‘9 0,,
11111111
—
wind
Fig. 3. Ca2+ concentration increases in response to two kinds of mechanical stresses: a short, transient wind and continuous gravity. Arabidopsis seed—
lings expressing apoaequorin were repeatedly stimulated by a wind with different forces (lower arrows), turned 180O (upper black arrow) and turned back
to 00 (upper gray arrow). (M. Toyota, T. Furuichi, H. Tatsumi, and M. Sokabe, unpublished data).
rotation/mechanical stimulation whereas the second is respon— in maize roots (Lee et al., 1983b; Bjorkman and Cleland, 1991)
sive to gravistimulation, a conclusion strongly supported by and oat coleoptiles (Daye et al., 1984). Gravistimulation also
experiments under microgravity (M. Toyota et al., unpublished caused 21 downward redistribution of apoplastic Ca2+ across
data) and hypergraVity (Toyota et 211., 2007). the horizontally oriented root tip of maize within approximately
Pharmacological analyses suggest that the second [Ca2+] in— 10 min (Lee et al., 1983a; Bjorkman and Cleland, 1991) that was
crease is induced by inﬂux through mechanosensitive Channels dependent on an intact root cap (B jorkman and Cleland, 1991).
at the plasma membrane and efﬂux from intracellular Ca2+— These observations suggest that the Ca2+ gradient across the
stores. The Ca2+ Changes were also partially disrupted by ap— roots is Closely related to gravity sensing and/or gravitropic re—
plication of latrunculin B, suggesting 21 role for actin ﬁlaments. sponse. In addition, when an agar block containing Ca2+ was
Intriguingly, actin has been shown elsewhere to play a role in asymmetrically applied to one side of the root surface, the roots
the activation of mechanosensitive Channels by mechanical bent toward the Ca2+ source (Lee et al., 1983b).
stress (Guharay and Sachs, 1984; Zhang et al., 2007; Hayakawa These apoplastic Ca2+ ﬂuxes appear to be intimately involved
et al., 2008; Kiyoshima et al., 2011) and to participate as a likely with auxin because auxin transport inhibitors such as triiodo—
inhibitor of the graViresponse (Hou et al., 2003, 2004; Palmieri benzoic acid (TIBA) or naphthylphthalamic acid (NPA) blocked
and Kiss, 2005) (see also the review by Blancaﬂor [2013] in the gravity—induced Ca2+ redistribution in maize and pea roots
this issue). Although the duration of this second [Ca2+] increase (Lee et al., 1984). Furthermore, polar auxin transport across
is short when compared to the extended time—course of full gravistimulated maize roots was enhanced by Ca2+ locally ap—
graVitropiC response (Fig. 3), Ca2+ is well Characterized as trig— plied to the root tip in an agar block (Lee and Evans, 1985). The
gering a host of Ca2+—dependent proteins such as calmodulin extended timing and interrelationship to auxin suggests such
and the Ca2+—dependent protein kinases (Poovaiah et al., 1987; apoplastic Ca2+ ﬂuxes may well represent part of the transmis—
Toyota et al., 2008a). These proteins could convert the transient sion/response systems of gravitropic response. Consistent with
ionic Change to a long—lived biochemical cascade and so con— such ideas, the physical properties of the cell wall are intimately
tribute to the extended phase of graViresponse. linked to Ca2+ levels through, e.g., Ca2+—dependent cross—link—
Although Ca2+ is usually discussed as a cytoplasmic regulator, ing of the acidic groups in pectin. Many enzymes are also sub—
apoplastic ﬂuxes of this ion may also play a key role in gravitro— ject to Ca2+—dependent regulation. Indeed, Classic Ca2+—dependent
pism. For example, gravitropic bending was nearly completely regulatory proteins such as calmodulin have been reported in
inhibited by extracellularly applied Ca2+ chelators such as EGTA the extracellular matrix (Cui et al., 2005 ). Thus, alterations in

"
"7","J anuary 2013] TOYOTA AND GILROY—GRAVITY AND SIGNALING 117
extracellular Ca2+ could play a very direct role in modulating et al., 1992; Haley et al., 1995; Legue et al., 1997). However,
wall properties and so help drive graVitropic growth. However, more recent work shows that high extracellular Ca2+ can sup—
the molecular elements such as Ca2+ pumps and channels that press the action of these inhibitors and that when assayed at
drive these apoplastic ﬂuxes and how an amyloplast—linked lower Ca2+ levels in the medium, the mechanically induced
perception system regulates these components have yet to be Ca2+ increase is blocked by their action, at least in roots
deﬁned. (Monshausen et 211., 2009; Richter et al., 2009). These results
In addition to Ca2+, pH is known to play 21 critical role modu— suggest the presence of mechanoresponsive channel actiVity at
lating both cytoplasmic and wall actiVities. Using ﬂuorescent both the plasma and internal membranes or that [Ca2+] inﬂux
pH indicators, several groups have reported gravistimulated through channels in the plasma membrane induces Ca2+ release
changes in pH in the columella cells of the root cap, coleoptiles, from intracellular stores in 21 phenomenon known as Ca2+—
and maize pulVini (Gehring et al., 1990b; Scott and Allen, 1999; induced Ca2+ release (CICR) (Ward and Schroeder, 1994;
Fasano et al., 2001; J ohannes et al., 2001). However, only in the Bewell et al., 1999).
maize pulVinus were the pH changes shown to be asymmetric The wind— and touch—induced [Ca2+] spikes resemble the ﬁrst
and so capable of carrying directional information as to the [Ca2+] spikeinduced by graVistimulation in terms of their kinet—
gravity vector (J ohannes et al., 2001). Changes in pH are likely ics (Fig. 3) (Plieth and Trewavas, 2002; Toyota et al., 2008b).
to affect many cellular actiVities ranging from enzyme function However, the ﬁrst [Ca2+] spike in graVitropism—related experi—
to the partitioning of hormones such as auxin. Thus, rather than ments is inhibited by Gd3+ and La3+ but not by ruthenium red
directly carrying gravitropic information, changes in pH may under conditions in which the touch—related changes showed
be acting as a more global regulator by altering the efﬁciency the opposite pharmacologicalcharacteristics (Toyota et al., 2008b).
with which gravitropic signals are exported from the perceiving Based on this result, it seems less likely that the gravisensor simply
cells. Consistent with these ideas, when pH changes in colu— reﬂects a specialized use of a general plant touch—sensing system.
mella cells were blocked by chemical agents such as baﬁlomycin
A1 (a vacuolar H+—ATPase inhibitor), benzoic acid, or photo—
release of H+ from chemically caged protons, root gravitropism MSL PROTEINS: PLANT MECHANORESPONSIVE
was reduced but not abolished (Scott and Allen, 1999; Fasano CHANNELS
et al., 2001).
Mechanosensitive ion channels have been widely postulated
as plant mechanoreceptors, paralleling their known role in
MECHANORESPONSIVE CHANNELS AND THE mechanoperception in other kingdoms (Kung, 2005), and much
GRAVIRESPONSE electrophysiological eVidence has accumulated for the exis—
tence of such channels in plants and algae (Table 1). These
Although gravity signaling and response appear closely re— channels generally show rapid adaptation to a steady stimulus
lated to ionic ﬂuxes, especially Ca2+, no mechanically respon— (Hamill and Martinac, 2001). As such, they should generate
sive channel has been directly linked to the molecular machinery rapid but short—lived signals in response to mechanical stimula—
of gravity perception. Indeed, up until a few years ago, there tion. A key question arising from these observations is what
were few molecular candidates for such channel actiVities in is/are the molecular identity of these plant mechanosensory
plants. However, an examination of ion ﬂuxes and channels re— channels? The molecular identiﬁcation of at least one class of
lated to the touch response in plants does provide some useful these channels came from comparison to perhaps the best char—
insights into how the graVisensor may be operating. acterized osmo/mechanosensitive channels known, the mecha—
Mechanically induced cytoplasmic [Ca2+] spikes have been nosensitive channel of large/small conductance (MscL/S) from
observed in tobacco cotyledons (Knight et al., 1991, 1993), bacteria.
mesophyll protoplasts, leaf epidermal strips, and guard cells Bacteria release cytoplasmic low—molecular—weight contents
(Haley et al., 1995; Wood et al., 2000), in the moss Physcomi- to the extracellular medium under hypoosmotic stress to resist
trella patens (Haley et al., 1995 ; Russell et al., 1996) and in uncontrolled increases in turgor (Ruffert et al., 1997). Thus,
Arabidopsis roots (Legue et al., 1997; Monshausen et al., 2009; MscL/S are activated by hypoosmotic stress (Cui et al., 1995)
Richter et al., 2009). The amplitude of the [Ca2+] spike was de— and protect the bacteria against cell lysis (Blount et al., 1997;
pendent on stimulus intensity (Haley et al., 1995) and frequency LeVina et al., 1999). The gating mechanism is well deﬁned for
(Knight et al., 1991; Legue et al., 1997). Similarly, wind also these channels, with tension in the membrane leading to phos—
induces a transient [Ca2+] spike in a stimulus—intensity depen— pholipids pulling on the transmembrane domains of the channel,
dent manner in Nicotiana (Knight et al., 1992; Haley et al., causing it to open in an iris—like fashion (Kung et al., 2010).
1995) and Arabidopsis seedlings (Fig. 3) (Plieth, 2001; Plieth There are 10 proteins that are homologous to the bacterial
and Trewavas, 2002). These results suggest that physical force MscS in Arabidopsis thaliana (Pivetti et al., 2003), named the
is transduced into ion ﬂuxes as a likely initial perception event, MscS—like (MSL) proteins (Haswell and Meyerowitz, 2006),
but unlike the specialized gravisensing cells of the endodermis and there are now many identiﬁed homologs throughout the
and columella, nonspecialized cells throughout the plant can plant kingdom. AtMSL3 rescued the hypoosmotic stress—
respond to such mechanical stress (Fig. 3). induced cell lysis of E. coli lacking its intrinsic mechanosensitive
The touch—induced [Ca2+] spike is blocked by ruthenium red, channels (Haswell and Meyerowitz, 2006), suggesting this gene
an endomembrane Ca2+ permeable channel inhibitor that is can function as a mechanosensitive channel, at least in E. coli
known to inhibit the Ca2+ permeable channels in the plant endo— (LeVina et al., 1999). Both MSL2 and —3 have an N—terminal
plasmic reticulum (B auer et al., 1998) and the SV channel in the chloroplast transit peptide, and as predicted, the subcellular lo—
vacuole (Pottosin et al., 1999). Early reports also suggested that calizations of their GFP—fusion proteins were the plastid enve—
these touch—induced changes were unaffected by the putative lope (Haswell and Meyerowitz, 2006) and overlapped with the
plasma membrane Ca2+ channel inhibitors Gd3+ or La3+ (Knight plastid diVision protein, AtMinE (Maple et al., 2002). Although

"
"8","118 AMERICAN J OURNAL OF BOTANY [Vol. 100
TABLE 1. Examples of stretCh—activated Channel activities in plants and algae.
Plant species Permeability Physiological properties References
Allium cepa
Epidermis of leaf sheath and bulb Ca2+, K+ Inhibited by Gd3+ and La3+ 3, voltage— and temperature dependent, Ding and Pickard, 1993a, b
scale mediated by cytoskeleton
F ucus spiralis or F . serratus
Rhizoid Ca2+, K+ Inhibited by Gd3+, voltage—gated Taylor et a1., 1996
Lilium longiﬂorum
Pollen grain and tube Ca2+, K+ b Inhibited by Gd3+ and a spider venom Dutta and Robinson, 2004
Viciafaba
Guard cell Ca2+, K+, Cl‘ C Cosgrove and Hedrich, 1991
Ca2+ Inhibited by Gd3+, voltage—dependent, osmosensitive; mediated by Zhang et a1., 2007
actin ﬁlament
Ca2+ Activated by amphipath trinitrophenol (TNP) Furuichi et a1., 2008
K+ Non—osrnosensitive Liu and Luan, 1998
Zostera muelleri
Epidermis K+ Garrill et a1., 1994
Arabidopsis thaliana
Hypocotyl Cation Inhibited by La3+ Lewis and Spalding, 1998
Valonia utricularis
Mother cells Cl‘ Heidecker et 211., 1999
Nicotiana tabacum
Suspension—cultured cell Anion Falke et a1., 1988
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
Chloroplast (MSC1) ‘1 Anion Hysteretic behavior upon gating Nakagawa et a1., 2007
Arabidopsis thaliana
Mesophyll cell Anion Activated by TNP Qi et a1., 2004
Root (MSL9 and MSL10) (Ca2+) 6, Cl‘ Cooperative or independent stretch—activated channel activities of Haswell et a1., 2008
MSL9 and MSL10
Mesophyll cell K+, Cl‘ Not affected by ATP, voltage—dependent Spalding and Goldsmith, 1993
Beta vulgaris
Root cell vacuole K+, Cl‘ Inhibited by Gd3+, slightly voltage—dependent, osmosensitive Alexandre and Lassalles, 1991
a Gd3+ and La3+ initially enhanced the SA Channel activity after their application and subsequently inhibited it.
b Two SA Channels permeable to Ca2+ and K“, respectively.
0 Three SA Channels permeable to Ca2+, K+ and Cl‘, respectively.
d MSC1 was functionally reconstituted in E. coli and electrophysiologically investigated.
6 Permeability for Ca2+ is much lower than that for Cl‘.
mle-I and msl3-I single mutants did not have obvious pheno— mechanical stress— or gravistimulation—induced [Ca2+] increases
types, mle-I msl3-I double mutants have greatly enlarged, is small. The msl4;msl;5msl6;mS19;mSll0 quintuple mutant
spherical chloroplasts when compared with wild type. These shows no detectable lesion in root gravitropic response.
results support the model that MSL2 and MSL3 regulate the
size and shape of plastids by Changing ion ﬂux in response to
membrane stretch, protecting them from hypoosmotic stress MCAI AND 2 AS REGULATORS OF
that occurs during normal plant growth (Veley et a1., 2012). MECHANOSENSITIVE CA2+ FLUX
Consistent with these ideas, a homolog of MscS, termed MSC1,
was also Cloned in Chlamydomonas and functionally reconsti— Further candidates for elements of a mechanically responsive
tuted in E. 6011'; results from its RNAi suppression are consis— Ca2+ regulatory Channel come from using Arabidopsis CDNA
tent with a role in plastid function (Nakayama et a1., 2007). to functionally complement a yeast mutant knocked out in a
MSC1 appears to be an anion—selective, stretCh—activated Chan— stretCh—activated Channel component named midl (Kanzaki
nel, most probably passing Cl‘. et a1., 1999; Nakagawa et a1., 2007). The resulting Clone was
The role of the other MSLs in Arabidopsis remains unclear. named MIDI-COMPLEMENTING ACTIVITY] (MCAI), and
Two of the MSL proteins, MSL9 and MSL10, localize to root its expression led to both increased Ca2+ uptake when expressed
cell plasma membrane and have been demonstrated to function in the mid] mutant and rescuing of this mutant’s lethal pheno—
as stretCh—activated Channels (Haswell et a1., 2008). Patch Clamp type. In plants, MCAI mRNA is expressed in multiple organs
analyses indicate that MSL9 and MSL10 form a heteromeric including roots, leaves, stems, ﬂowers, and siliques. The sub—
complex that generates a 10—pA stretCh—activated Channel, with cellular localization of GFP—fused MCAl in root cells was in
the three other root—eXpressed MSLs (MSL4, —5, and —6) playing the plasma membrane, which was consistent with the expres—
a similar but minor role. However, the quintuple knockout of all sion pattern in yeast. M CA1 overexpression in Arabidopsis
these genes showed no obvious phenotype in a range of abiotic seedlings showed enhanced [Ca2+] increases induced by hy—
stress, osmotic Challenge, and touCh—related screens (Haswell poosmotic stress, a result conﬁrmed with the tobacco MCAI
et a1., 2008); G. Monshausen (Penn State University) and S. Gilroy, homolog in tobacco BY2 cells (Nakagawa et a1., 2007; Kurusu
unpublished data). Much like MSC1 in Chlamydomonas, MSL9 et a1., 2011).
and MSL10 have higher permeability to Cl‘ than Ca2+. There— In an MCAI—overeXpressing line, the Classic touCh—induced
fore, the likelihood of a contribution of MSL9 and MSL10 to gene TCH3 was constitutively upregulated, implying that

"
"9","J anuary 2013] TOYOTA AND GILROY—GRAVITY AND SIGNALING 119
MCAI overexpression lines had become hypersensitive to me— possibly through regulation of microtubule dynamics (Wang
Chanical stress (Nakagawa et al., 2007), although it is important et al., 2011). Interestingly, CaM is known to be involved in
to note TCH3 expression is now known to be responsive to gravitropic signal transduction and is assumed to be a down—
many signals in addition to mechanical stress such as darkness stream response element of gravistimulation—induced [Ca2+]
(lee et al., 2005) or ozone treatment (Short et 211., 2012). Inter— increases (Poovaiah et al., 1987). CaM antagonists inhibited root
estingly, primary roots of 21 mm] null mutant failed to penetrate gravitropism in maize (Stinemetz et al., 1992) and Arabidopsis
21 hard agar layer, whereas wild—type roots could, suggesting (Sinclair et al., 1996), and the concentration of CaM in the root
that the meal null mutant could not sense and adapt to differ— tip was also much higher than other regions of roots in pea
ences in hardness of its surroundings. Taken together, these (Allan and Trewavas, 1985) and maize (Stinemetz et al., 1987).
data seem consistent with MCAl encoding a component of a Furthermore, mechanical stress upon gravistimulation may in—
Ca2+—permeable, stretCh—activated Channel involved in touch duce an upregulation of TCH genes because CaM actiVity in the
sensing in Arabidopsis roots. However, the precise role of this root tip of maize increased approximately 3—fold during gravit—
protein remains to be deﬁned. MCAl shows only 10% amino ropism. In cells of the gravity—perceptive maize pulVinus, tran—
aCid identity to mid1. It does contain a Classic EF—hand Ca2+— scripts of Ca2+ binding proteins such as calreticulin and CaM
binding motif and is predicted to have 1—3 transmembrane do— increased 5—fold within 15 min of gravistimulation (Heilmann
mains. MCAl is also known to form homodimers and tetramers et al., 2001). The upregulation of Ca2+ responsive proteins such
(Yamanaka et al., 2010; Nakano et al., 2011). Heterologous eX— as CaM and CML by gravistimulation might make cells more
pression of Arabidopsis MCAl increases mechanosensitive Chan— sensitive to slight [Ca2+] Changes (Sinclair et al., 1996) and so
nel actiVity in the plasma membrane of Xenopus laevis oocytes contribute to signaling during the extended component of the
(Furuichi et al., 2012). However, expression of the N—terminal gravitropic growth response. TCH2, —3, and —4 are also known
part of both MCAl (and MCA2, see below) containing a single to be upregulated by a [Ca2+] increase (Braam, 1992; Nakagawa
predicted transmembrane domain is sufﬁcient to induce accel— et al., 2007) providing a feed—forward loop that may also help to
erated Ca2+ uptake in yeast (Nakano et al., 2011), suggesting a extend the initial Ca2+—triggered signal.
possible regulatory actiVity rather than direct Channel—forming It is important to note here that TCHI—TCH4 do not repre—
role. sent the only genes whose expression is affected by mechanical
In Arabidopsis, MCAl has a single paralog, MCA2 (72.7% stimulation. For example, microarray analysis has shown that
identical at the amino acid level), and here the function seems up to 1600 genes can be rapidly up— or downregulated by me—
Clearer. MCA2 expression is restricted to the endodermis and Chanical stimulation (Kimbrough et al., 2004; Lee et al., 2005).
vascular bundle, and this localization along with the reduced Interestingly, there is a large overlap in the patterns of tran—
root Ca2+ uptake seen in the mca2 null is consistent with a role scriptional Changes after gravitropic stimulation (Kimbrough
in mediating symplastic Ca2+ uptake as part of the root’s min— et al., 2004). However, the transcriptional response to mechanical
eral transport system (Yamanaka et al., 2010). MCAZ knock— stimulation and gravitropic response are complex, and distin—
outs do not have an agar penetration phenotype, and the double guishing the primary signaling—related responses from the sec—
mutant between meal and mca2 acts like mcal, suggesting ondary effects remains a signiﬁcant Challenge.
these proteins have distinct roles within the plant. Until an elec—
trophysiological study on MCAl and MCA2 at the single Chan—
nel level has been done, whether these proteins function directly THE CYTOSKELETON AND EXTENDED
as stretCh—activated Channels or represent regulatory compo— MECHANOPERCEPTION/RESPONSE
nents of a larger Channel complex will remain unknown.
At present, the available data on signals such as Ca2+ Changes
in response to gravistimulation suggest activation of a rapid sig—
CANDIDATE RESPONSE GENES INVOLVED IN THE naling system to initiate reorientation. However, the gravitropic
EARLY IONIC MECHANORESPONSE response can play out over many hours, and so plants need a
regulatory system capable of generating directional information
The Arabidopsis TCH genes were the ﬁrst to be Characterized and controlling, e.g., auXin trafﬁcking, over these extended pe—
as being upregulated in response to mechanical stress, being riods. For example, recent eVidence suggests that during the
induced within 30 min after mechanical stimuli (Braam and 600 min that an Arabidopsis root can take to complete its gravi—
DaVis, 1990). TCH] encodes anArabidopSis calmodulin (CaM), tropic response (to 900 rotation), the lateral auxin gradient
CAM2 (Braam and DaVis, 1990), TCH2 and TCH3 encode (thought to drive growth) persists for only 100 min (Band et al.,
calmodulin—like (CML) proteins, CML24 and CML12, respec— 2012). This observation led to the proposal that the starch stato—
tively (Braam and DaVis, 1990; Sistrunk et al., 1994; Delk et al., liths in the columella act as “tilt switches” and that, once the
2005) and TCH4 encodes a xyloglucan endotransglycosylase, root cap reorients ~400, the sliding of the amyloplasts to the
an enzyme involved in cell wall remodeling (Xu et al., 1995; rootward end of the columella cell attenuates the tropic signal
Purugganan et al., 1997). Calmodulin is one of the most con— responsible for directing asymmetrical auXin signaling. The
served Ca2+—binding proteins in eukaryotes and acts as a Ca2+— rest of the reorientation response would then be mediated by
sensor (Yang and Poovaiah, 2003). In Arabidopsis, seven CaM persistent responses already set in motion by the 100 min of
and 50 CML genes have been identiﬁed (McCormaCk et al., auXin export. Yet, even in this case, the graViperception ma—
2005). If CaM or CMLs encoded by genes such as TCH], —2, Chinery must be sustaining directional signals capable of regu—
and —3, act downstream of plant mechanoresponses, multiple lating initial asymmetrical auXin trafﬁcking for nearly 2 h.
mechanical stress—induced [Ca2+] increases may well be de— Do plants have tonic receptors similar to those already Char—
coded by these proteins and transduced into a sustained bio— acterized as generating long—term mechanical signaling in the
Chemical response. Indeed, CML24 has been implicated in the nervous system of animals (J anig et al., 1968; Madiid et al., 2003)?
control of root growth in response to mechanical stimulation, To our knowledge, there are few reports of mechanosensitive

"
"10","120 AMERICAN J OURNAL OF BOTANY [Vol. 100
Channel actiVities that have these Characteristics in plants. How— systems that modulate cell elongation through their sensitiVity
ever, the cytoskeleton has emerged as a candidate element in to mechanical stress.
this long—term perception system as detailed next. Interestingly, although disruption of the microtubule cy—
As noted previously, the microtubule cytoskeleton plays an toskeleton affects the elongation growth required for extended
intimate role in the regulation of cell eXpansion through its in— graVitropiC response, it appears to be the actin cytoskeleton that
terplay with cellulose synthesis. Therefore, microtubules must plays a role in initial graViperception. Thus, gross disruption of
play an integral role in the regulation of asymmetrical growth the actin cytoskeleton leads to inhibition of growth, but when
response during graVitropism (Taiz, 1984; Carpita and Gibeaut, the actin depolymerizing drug latrunculin B is added at levels low
1993; Baskin et al., 1994; Baskin, 2005). Indeed, graVitropiC enough to support growth but disrupt actin structure, enhanced
stimulation is well Characterized as inducing Changes in the ori— graVitropiC response in both roots and shoots is observed (Hou
entation of cortical microtubules but only after graViperception et al., 2003, 2004; Palmieri and Kiss, 2005; Nakamura et al.,
has occurred. For example, graVistimulation resulted in Changes 2011). These observations imply that actin is acting as a nega—
in the orientation of cortical microtubules to longitudinal and tive regulator of tropic signaling. Precisely how actin is exert—
transverse directions at the epidermis of upper and lower ﬂanks ing its effects remains unknown but depolymerizing actin is
respectively, in maize coleoptiles or sunﬂower hypocotyls, but known to alter amyloplast positioning in statocytes and to affect
the timing indicated a role in growth control rather than graVi— their Characteristic motility (Hou et al., 2004; Palmieri and Kiss,
perception (Nick et al., 1990; Blancaﬂor and Hasenstein, 1993; 2005; Saito et al., 2005; Nakamura et al., 2011), suggesting that
Himmelspach et al., 1999). actin may be forming a dynamic network that is interacting
Interestingly, Fischer and Schopfer (1998) proposed a differ— with the amyloplasts to modulate signal generation. In animal
ent model for this cytoskeletal response based on their studies cells, actin is well known as a component of a biochemical
(Zandomeni and Schopfer, 1994; Fischer and Schopfer, 1997). mechanosensory network where, e.g., tension in the actin ﬁla—
Here, graVistimulation also induced similar Changes in orienta— ment can modulate its interaction with regulatory proteins such
tion of cortical microtubules within several hours, consistent as coﬁlin (Hayakawa et al., 2011), providing one model for how
with the above reports (Nick et al., 1990; Himmelspach et al., plant actin could operate to transduce even long—term mechani—
1999). However, when the horizontally placed (gravistimulated) cal stress to biochemical actiVity. Recently an Arabidopsis
coleoptile could not develop a graVitropiC bend when a weight E3 ubiquitin ligase has also emerged as an unexpected po—
was hung onto its tip, the asymmetrical reorientation of cortical tential link between amyloplast and actin network in shoot en—
rnicrotubule was not observed. When the horizontally placed dodermal cells (Nakamura et al., 2011), providing a potentially
coleoptiles were bent downward by a heaVier weight, the orien— key step toward deﬁning the components of this network in
tation of the cortical microtubules Changed to the transverse and plants.
longitudinal directions at the upper (extended) and lower (com—
pressed) ﬂanks, which is the opposite with respect to the gravity
vector. These results suggest that the Change in orientation of CONCLUSION
cortical microtubules is caused by the mechanical bending but
not by the graVistimulation itself. Similar experiments were Mechanical forces represent ubiquitous and fundamental sig—
carried out in azuki epicotyls with similar results (Ikushima and nals in plant growth and deVCIOpment. A11 organisms living on
Shimmen, 2005), Mechanical force supplied by hypergraVity Earth are eXposed to mechanical stress due to their own weight
(centrifugation) was also shown to be capable of directing mi— regardless of their size. However, plant biologists are still tak—
Crotubule orientation and subsequent growth in isolated proto— ing their ﬁrst steps toward deﬁning the plant mechanoresponse
plasts (Wymer et 31,, 1996), azuki bean epicotyls (Soga et 311,, system with molecular precision. We have focused this reView
2006), and Arabidopsis hypocotyls (Matsumoto et a1,, 2010), on dividing mechanical stress and mechanoreceptor actions in
These results support the model that cortical microtubules are terms of their time course. What emerges from this discussion
capable of responding to a continuous directional mechanical is that our understanding of the rapid signaling events to me—
stress. Furthermore, the mechanical bending—induced reorienta— Chanical/graVitropic stimulation iS much more complete than Of
tion of cortical microtubules was inhibited by extracellularly systems that must monitor and then modulate the extended
applied Gd3+, suggesting the possible involvement of stretch— growth responses that follow. This focus on short—term signal—
activated Channels in this slow mechanoresponse (Ikushima and ing and response iS likely inherent in the difﬁculties Of assign—
Shimmen, 2005), ing cause and effect to processes occurring over many hours.
Endogenous mechanical forces due to turgor pressure and Thus, although mechanosensitive 1011 Channels have been a fa—
growth may also alter microtubule orientation. Recently, a sim— vorite target Of mechanobiology, the duration Of Channel aCtiV-
ulation based on experimental data revealed that mechanical ity iS much shorter than the time needed t0 eXhihit a long—term
stress may pattern the shoot apical meristem through feedback growth reSponse such as gravitmpism. A plausible answer as to
Via reorientation of microtubules (Hamant et al., 2008). Hamant hOW transient signals can regulate such extended response is
et al. (2008) postulated that microtubules align along the direc— that the short signals are transduced into subsequent signals that
tion of mechanical stress in a surface. Based on their model of persist until the termination of the growth response. For gravit—
the meristem as a pressure vessel, i.e., an elastic shell inﬂated ropism, a series of poorly deﬁned transduction cascades need to
by an inner pressure, the predicted direction of principal stresses ﬁll in the gaps between activation Of the initial mechanosensi—
was consistent with their experimental data of microtubule ori— tive Channel (SCCOhdS t0 minutes), establishment Of a lateral
entations. These results suggest that the microtubule orientation auXin gradient (5 min in Arabidopsis roots), sustaining of the
to maximal stress directions is critical to regulate morphogen— lateral allXih gradient (1—2 h), and sustaining 0f the growth re—
esis of meristems possibly Via modulation of newly deposited Sponse (many hour8). However, the precisely maintained gravi—
cellulose microﬁbrils. Thus, it may well be that long—term me— trOpiC set—point angles seen in many organs hints at a much
Chanical response is hard—wired into the microtubule—dependent more dynamic system capable Of continuously monitoring and

"
"11","J anuary 2013] TOYOTA AND GILROY—GRAVITY AND SIGNALING 121

regulating an extended gravitropic stimulation/response. Al— BLANCAFLOR, E. B., AND P. H. MASSON. 2003. Plant gravitmpism.

though strain—induced remodeling of cytoskeleton may provide UnraVeling the 11PS and downs Of a complex Pr OCCSS- P [am PhySiOZOSy

one component of the long—term mechano/graviresponse, a ma— 1333 1677—1690 . .

j 01, goal for the gravitropism ﬁeld remains deﬁning both the BLOUIyT, P., M. J. SCHTQOEDER, AND C. KUNG. 1997. Mutat10ns 1n a bacte—

. . . . . r1a1 mechanosens1t1ve Channel Change the cellular response to 0sm0t1c

rap1d and extended percept10n machmery w1th molecular pre01— . . . ,

. . . . stress. Journal ofBzologzcal Chemzstry 272. 32150—32157.

Slon' New pmbes SUCh as the DH‘Venus auxm m0n1t01111g SyStem BOONSIRICHAI, K., J . C. SEDBROOK, R. CHEN, S. GEROY, AND P. H. MASSON. 2003.

(Band 6t 31-, 2912; BrunOlld 6t 31-, 2012) and Vastly ImPYOVed ALTERED RESPONSE TO GRAVITY is a peripheral membrane pro—

bloprobes for Slgnals SUCh as (332+ (C1101 Ct 31-, 2012) are pI‘O— tein that modulates gravity—induced cytoplasmic alkalinization and

viding us with an increasingly detailed picture of Cellular events lateral auxin transport in plant statocytes. Plant Cell 15: 2612—2625.

during the tropic response in which to place these elusive miss— BRAAM, J . 1992. Regulated expression of the ealmodulin—related TCH

ing pieces of the molecular puzzle of graviperception. genes in cultured Arabidopsis cells: Induction by calcium and heat
shock. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA 89:

3213—3216.
LITERATURE CITED BRAAM, J ., AND R. W. DAVIS. 1990. Rain—, Wind—, and touCh—induced eX—

ALEXANDRE, J ., AND J . P. LASSALLES. 1991. Hydrostatic and osmotic pres— pression Of calmodulin and calmodulin—related genes in Arabidopsis.
sure activated Channel in plant vacuole. Biophysical Journal 60: C6” 60: 357—364
1326—1336. BRUNOUD, G., D. M. WELLS, M. OLIVA, A. LARRIEU, V. MIRABET, A. H.

ALLAN, E., AND A. TREWAVAS. 1985. Quantitative Changes in calmodulin BURROW’ T‘ BEFCISMAN’ ET AL: 2012' _A novel sensor t0,maP auxm
and N AD kinase during early cell development in the root apex of response and d1str1but10n at h1gh spat10—tempora1 resolut10n. Nature
Pisum sativum L. Planta 165: 493—501. 482: 103—106' _ _ _ _ _ _

ALONI, R., E. ALONI, M. L ANGH ANS, AND C. I. ULLRICH. 2006. Role of cy— BUSL1, D. S. 1995. Celemm regulat10111n plant cells and 1ts role 1n s1gnal—
tokinin and auxin in shaping root architecture: Regulating vascular 1ng. Annual Revzew ofPlant Physzology and Plant Molecular Bzology
differentiation, lateral root initiation, root apical dominance and root 463 95—122' _
gravitropism. Annals ofBotany 97. 883—893. CARPITA, N. C1, AND D. .M. GIBEAUT. 1993. Structural models of pr1mztry

AYLING, S. M., C. BROWNLEE, AND D. T. CLARKSON. 1994. The cytoplasmic cell walls 1n ﬂowermg plants: C0ns1stency of molecular structure W1th
streaming response of tomato root hairs t0 auxin—Observations 0f the physical properties Of the walls during growth. Plant Journal 33
cytosolic calcium levels. Journal ofPlant Physiology 143: 184—188. 1-30-

B ALDWIN, A., A. W ARDLE, R. P ATEL, p. DUDLEY, S. K. P ARK, D. TWELL, CHAN, J ., M. EDER, E. F. CROWELL, J . HAMPSON, G. CALDER, AND C. LLOYD.
K. INOUE, AND 1). JARVIS. 2005. A molecular—genetie study Of the 2011. Microtubules and CESA tracks at the inner epidermal wall align
Arabidopsis T0075 gene family. Plant Physiology 138: 715—733. independently of those on the outer wall of light-grown Arabidopsis

BALDWIN, K. L., A. K. STROHM, AND P. H. MASSON. 2013. Gravity sens— hypocotyls. Journal ofCell Science 1243 1088—1094-
ing and signal transduction in vascular plant primary roots. American CHEN: S., D- W- EHRHARDT, AND C- R- SOMERVILLE- 2010- Mutations 0f
Journal ofBotany 100; 126—142. cellulose synthase (CESAl) phosphorylation sites modulate aniso—

BAND,L.R.,D.M.WELLS, A.LARRIEU, J. SUN, A.M.M1DDLET0N, A.P.FRENCH, tropic cell expansion and bidirectional mobility of cellulose syn—
G. BRUNOUD, ET AL. 2012. Root gravitropism is regulated by a tran— thase. P 1’ oceedings 0f the National Academy Of Sciences, USA 173
sient lateral auxin gradient controlled by a tipping—point mecha— 188—193-
nism. Proceedings of the National Academy Of Sciences, USA 109; CHEN, R., P. HILSON, J . SEDBROOK, E. ROSEN, T. CASPAR, AND P. H. MASSON.
4668—4673. 1998. The Arabidopsis thaliana AGRAVITROPIC I gene encodes a

BASKIN, T. I. 2001. On the alignment of cellulose microﬁbrils by cortical component 0f the polar—auxin—transport efﬂux carrier. P 7’ 06666117185 0f
microtubulesz A review and a model. Protoplasma 215: 150—171. the National Academy ofSciences, USA 95: 15112—15117.

BASKIN, T. I. 2005. Anisotropic expansion of the plant cell wall. Annual CHOL W- G., S- J- SWANSON, AND 5- GILROY- 2012- High—resolution imag—
Review Of Cell and Developmental Biology 21; 203422, ing of Ca2+, redox status, ROS and pH using GFP biosensors. Plant

BASKIN, T. I., J. E. WILSON, A. CORK, AND R. E. WILLIAMSON. 1994. JOWIWZ 703 118—128-

Morphology and microtubule organization in Arabidopsis roots ex- COSGROVE, D. J. 2005. Growth Of the plant C611 W311. Nature Reviews
posed to oryzalin or taxol. Plant & Cell Physiology 35: 935—942. 1140166011611” Cell Biology 63 850-861.

B AUER, C. 5,, C. PLETH, B. BETHMANN, 0, POPESCU, U. P. HANSEN, W. SIMONE, COSGROVE, D. J ., AND R. HEDRICH. 1991. StretCh—activated Chloride, potas—
AND G. SCHONKNECHT. 1998. Strontium—induced repetitive calcium sium, and calcium channels coexisting in plasma membranes of guard
spikes in a unicellular green a1ga.PlantPhysiology 117: 545—557. 06118 Of Vicia faba L. Planta 1862 143-153.

BEHRENS, H, M,, D, GRADMANN, AND A, SIEVERS, 1985 , Membrane— CUI, C., D. 0. SMITH, AND J . ADLER. 1995 . Characterization of mechanosen—
potential responses following gravistimulation in roots of Lepidium sitive channels in Escherichia coli cytoplasmic membrane by Whole—
sativum L. Planta 163: 463—472. cell patch Clamp recording. Journal ofMembrane Biology 144: 31—42.

BEWELL, M. A., F. J. MAATHUIS, G. J. ALLEN, AND D. SANDERS. 1999. CUI, S., X. GUO, F. CHANG, Y. CUI, L. MA, Y. SUN, AND D. SUN. 2005.
Calcium—induced calcium release mediated by a voltage—activated Apoplastic calmodulin receptor—like binding proteins in suspension—
Cation Channel in vacuolar vesicles from red beet. FEBS Letters 458: cultured cells ofArabidopsis thaliana. Journal ofBiological Chemistry
41—44. 280: 31420—31427.

BJORKMAN, T. 1992. Perception of gravity by p1ants.Advances in Space DARWIN, C. 1880. The power of movement in plants. John Murray,
Research 12: 195—201. London, UK.

BJORKMAN, T., AND R. E. CLELAND. 1991. The role of extracellular free— DAYE, S., R. L. BIRO, AND S. J . ROUX. 1984. Inhibition of gravitropism in oat
calcium gradients in gravitropic signalling in maize roots. Planta 185: coleoptiles by the calcium chelator, ethyleneglycol—bis—(B—aminoethyl
379—384. ether)—N’—tetraacetic acid. Physiologia Plantamm 61: 449—454.

BLANCAFLOR, E. B. 2013. Regulation of plant gravity sensing and sig— DELK, N. A., K. A. JOHNSON, N. I. CHOWDHURY, AND J. BRAAM. 2005.
naling by the actin cytoskeleton. American Journal of Botany 100: CML24, regulated in expression by diverse stimuli, encodes a poten—
143—152. tial Ca2+ sensor that functions in responses to abscisic acid, daylength,

BLANCAFLOR, E. B., J . M. FASANO, AND S. GILROY. 1998. Mapping the and ion stress. Plant Physiology 139: 240—253.
functional roles of cap cells in the response of Arabidopsis primary DIGBY, J ., AND FIRN, R. 1995. The gravitropic set—point angle (GSA):
roots to gravity. Plant Physiology 116: 213—222. The identiﬁcation of an important developmentally controlled vari—

BLANCAFLOR, E. B., AND K. H. HASENSTEIN. 1993. Organization of cortical able governing plant architecture. Plant Cell and Environment 18:
microtubules in graviresponding maize roots. Planta 191: 231—237. 1434—1440.

"
"12","122 AMERICAN J OURNAL OF BOTANY [VOL 100

DING, J . P., AND B. G. PICKARD. 1993a. Mechanosensory calcium—selective HAMILL, O. P., AND B. MARTINAC. 2001. Molecular basis of mechanotrans—
cation Channels in epidermal cells. Plant Journal 3: 83—110. duction in living cells. Physiological Reviews 81: 685—740.

DING, J . P., AND B. G. PICKARD. 1993b. Modulation of mechanosensitive HARRISON, B., AND P. H. MASSON. 2008a. ARG1 and ARL2 form an actin—
Calcium—selective cation Channels by temperature. Plant Journal 3: based gravity—signaling chaperone complex in root statocytes? Plant
713—720. Signaling & Behavior 3: 650—653.

DODD, A. N., J . KUDLA, AND D. SANDERS. 2010. The language of calcium HARRISON, B. R., AND P. H. MASSON. 2008b. ARL2, ARG1 and PIN3 de—
signaling. Annual Review ofPlant Biology 61: 593—620. ﬁne a gravity signal transduction pathway in root statocytes. Plant

DUTTA, R., AND K. R. ROBINSON. 2004. Identiﬁcation and Characteriza— Journal 53: 380—392.
tion of stretCh—activated ion Channels in pollen protoplasts. Plant HASWELL, E. S., AND E. M. MEYEROWITZ. 2006. MseS—like proteins control
Physiology 135: 1398—1406. plastid size and shape in Arabidopsis thaliana. Current Biology 16:

FALKE, L. C., K. L. EDWARDS, B. G. PICKARD, AND S. MISLER. 1988. A 1—11.
stretCh—activated anion Channel in tobacco protoplasts. FEBS Letters HASWELL, E. S., R. PEYRONNET, H. BARBIER—BRYGOO, E. M. MEYEROWITZ,
237: 141—144. AND J . M. FRACHISSE. 2008. TWO MscS homologs provide mechano—

FASANO, J . M., G. D. MASSA, AND S. GILROY. 2002. Ionic signaling in plant sensitive Channel activities in the Arabidopsis root. Current Biology
responses to gravity and touch. Journal of Plant Growth Regulation 18: 730—734.

21: 71—88. HAYAKAWA, K., H. TATSUMI, AND M. SOKABE. 2008. Actin stress ﬁbers

FASANO, J . M., S. J . SWANSON, E. B. BLANCAFLOR, P. E. DOWD, T. H. KAO, transmit and focus force to activate mechanosensitive Channels.
AND S. GILROY. 2001. Changes in root cap pH are required for the Journal of Cell Science 121: 496—503.
gravity response of the Arabidopsis root. Plant Cell 13: 907—921. HAYAKAWA, K., H. TATSUMI, AND M. SOKABE. 2011. Actin ﬁlaments func—

FISCHER, K., AND P. SCHOPFER. 1997. Interaction of auxin, light, and me— tion as a tension sensor by tension—dependent binding of coﬁlin t0 the
chanical stress in orienting microtubules in relation to tropic curvature ﬁlament. Journal of Cell Biology 195: 721—727.
in the epidermis of maize coleoptiles. Protoplasma 196: 108—116. HEIDECKER, M., L. H. WEGNER, AND U. ZIMMERMANN. 1999. A patch—clamp

FISCHER, K., AND P. SCHOPFER. 1998. Physical strain—mediated microtubule study of ion Channels in protoplasts prepared from the marine alga
reorientation in the epidermis of gravitropically 0r phototropically Valonia utricularis. Journal ofMembrane Biology 172: 235—247.
stimulatedmaizecoleoptiles.Plantloumal15:119—123. HEILMANN, I., J. SHIN, J. HUANG, I. Y. PERERA, AND E. DAVIES. 2001.

FITZELLE, K. J ., AND J . Z. KISS. 2001. Restoration of gravitropic sensitivity Transient dissociation of polyribosomes and concurrent recruitment
in starCh—deﬁcient mutants ofArabidopsis by hypergraVity. Journal of of calreticulin and calmodulin transcripts in gravistimulated maize
Experimental Botany 52: 265—275. pulvini. Plant Physiology 127: 1193—1203.

FUJIHIRA, K., T. KURATA, M. K. WATAHIKI, I. KARAHARA, AND K. T. HEJNOWICZ, 2., C. SONDAG, W. ALT, AND A. SIEVERS. 1998. Temporal
YAMAMOTO. 2000. An agravitropic mutant of Arabidopsis, endoder— course of graviperception in intermittently stimulated cress roots.
mal-amyloplast less I, that lacks amyloplasts in hypocotyl endoder— Plant, Cell & Environment 21: 1293—1300.
mal cell layer. Plant & Cell Physiology 41: 1193—1199. HEPLER, P. K. 2005. Calcium: A central regulator of plant growth and

FUKAKI, H., H. FUJISAWA, AND M. TASAKA. 1996. Gravitropic response of development. Plant Cell 17: 2142—2155.
inﬂorescence stems in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Physiology 110: HIMMELSPACH,R., C. L. WYMER, C. W. LLOYD, AND P. NICK. 1999. Gravity—
933—943. induced reorientation of cortical microtubules observed in ViVO. Plant

FURUICHI, T., H. IIDA, M. SOKABE, AND H. TATSUMI. 2012. Expression of Journal 18: 449—453.

Arabidopsis MCA1 enhanced mechanosensitive Channel activity HOU, G., V. L. KRAMER, Y. S. WANG, R. CHEN, G. PERBAL, S. GILROY,
in the Xenopus laevis oocyte plasma membrane. Plant Signaling & AND E. B. BLANCAFLOR. 2004. The promotion of gravitropism in
Behavior 7: 1022—1026. Arabidopsis roots upon actin disruption is coupled With the extended

FURUICHI, T., H. TATSUMI, AND M. SOKABE. 2008. Mechano—sensitive Chan— alkalinization 0f the columella cytoplasm and a persistent lateral auxin
nels regulate the stomatal aperture in Vicia faba. Biochemical and gradient. Plant Journal 39: 113—125.

Biophysical Research Communications 366: 758—762. HOU, G., D. R. MOHAMALAWARI, AND E. B. BLANCAFLOR. 2003. Enhanced

GARRILL, A., S. D. TYERMAN, AND G. P. FINDLAY. 1994. Ion channels in gravitropism of roots With a disrupted cap actin cytoskeleton. Plant
the plasma membrane of protoplasts from the halophytic angiosperm Physiology 131: 1360—1373.

Zostera muelleri. Journal ofMembrane Biology 142: 381—393. IKUSHIMA, T., AND T. SHIMMEN. 2005. Mechano—sensitive orientation of

GEHRING,C.A.,H.R.IRV1NG,AND R.W.PARISH. 1990a. Effects ofauxin and cortical microtubules during gravitropism in azuki bean epicotyls.
abscisiC—acid 0n cytosolic calcium and pH in plant cells. Proceedings Journal ofPlant Research 118: 19—26.
0fthe NationalAcademy ofSciences, USA 87: 9645—9649. IRVING, H. R., C. A. GEHRING, AND R. W. PARISH. 1992. Changes in

GEHRING, C. A., D. A. WILLIAMS, S. H. CODY, AND R. W. PARISH. 1990b. cytosolic pH and calcium 0f guard cells precede stomatal move—
Phototropism and geotropism in maize coleoptiles are spatially corre— ments. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA 89:
lated With increases in cytosolic free calcium. Nature 345: 528—530. 1790—1794.

GUAN, C., E. S. ROSEN, K. BOONSIRICHAI, K. L. POFF, AND P. H. MASSON. ISHIKAWA, H., AND M. L. EVANS. 1990. Gravity—induced Changes in intra—
2003. The ARGI-LIKEZ gene of Arabidopsis functions in a gravity cellular potentials in elongating cortical cells of mung bean roots.
signal transduction pathway that is genetically distinct from the PGM Plant & Cell Physiology 31: 457—462.
pathway. Plant Physiology 133: 100—112. JANIG, W., R. F. SCHMIDT, AND M. ZIMMERMANN. 1968. Two speciﬁc feed—

GUHARAY, E, AND F. SACHS. 1984. StretCh—activated single ion Channel back pathways to the central afferent terminals of phasic and tonic
currents in tissue—cultured embryonic Chick skeletal muscle. Journal mechanoreceptors. Experimental Brain Research 6: 116—129.
ofPhysiology 352: 685—701. JOHANNES, E., D. A. COLLINGs, J . C. RINK, AND N. S. ALLEN. 2001.

GUTDERREZ, R., J . J . LINDEBOOM, A. R. PAREDEZ, A. M. EMONs, AND D. W. Cytoplasmic pH dynamics in maize pulvinal cells induced by gravity
EHRHARDT. 2009. Arabidopsis cortical microtubules position cellulose vector Changes. Plant Physiology 127: 119—130.
synthase delivery to the plasma membrane and interact With cellulose J 00, J . H., Y. S. BAE, AND J . S. LEE. 2001. Role of auxin—indueed reactive OX-
synthase trafﬁcking compartments. Nature Cell Biology 11: 797—806. ygen species in root gravitropism. Plant Physiology 126: 1055—1060.

HALEY, A., A. J. RUSSELL, N. WOOD, A. C. ALLAN, M. KNIGHT, A. K. KANZAKI, M., M. NAGASAWA, I. KOJIMA, C. SATO, K. NARUSE, M. SOKABE,
CAMPBELL, AND A. J . TREWAVAS. 1995. Effects of mechanical sig— AND H. IIDA. 1999. Molecular identiﬁcation of a eukaryotic, stretch—
naling on plant cell cytosolic calcium. Proceedings of the National activated nonselective cation Channel. Science 285: 882—886.
Academy ofSciences, USA 92: 4124—4128. KATO, T., M. T. MORITA, H. FUKAKI, Y. YAMAUCHI, M. UEHARA, M.

HAMANT, 0., M. G. HEISLER, H. J ONSSON, P. KRUPINSKI, M. UYTTEWAAL, P. NIIHAMA, AND M. TASAKA. 2002. SGR2, a phospholipase—like protein,
BOKOV, F. CORSON, ET AL. 2008. Developmental patterning by me— and ZIG/SGR4, a SNARE, are involved in the shoot gravitropism 0f
Chanical signals in Arabidopsis. Science 322: 1650—1655. Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 14: 33—46.

"
"13","J anuary 2013] TOYOTA AND GILROY—GRAVITY AND SIGNALING 123
KIMBROUGH, J . M., R. SALINAS—MONDRAGON, W. F. Boss, C. S. BROWN, AND LEWIS, B. D., AND E. P. SPALDING. 1998. Nonselective block by La3+ of
H. W. SEDEROFF. 2004. The fast and transient transcriptional network Arabidopsis ion Channels involved in signal transduction. Journal of
of gravity and mechanical stimulation in the Arabidopsis root apex. Membrane Biology 162: 81—90.
Plant Physiology 136: 2790—2805. L1, S., L. LE1, C. SOMMERVILLE, AND Y. GU. 2012. Cellulose synthase in—

KISS, J . Z. 2000. Mechanisms of the early phases of plant gravitropism. teractive protein 1 (CSIl) links microtubules and cellulose synthase
CRC Critical Reviews in Plant Sciences 19: 551—573. complexes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA

KISS, J . Z., M. M. GUISINGER, A. J. MILLER, AND K. S. STACKHOUSE. 1997. 109: 185—190.

Reduced gravitropism in hypocotyls 0f starch—deﬁcient mutants of LIU, K., AND S. LUAN. 1998. Voltage—dependent K+ Channels as targets of
Arabidopsis. Plant & Cell Physiology 38: 518—525. osmosensing in guard cells. Plant Cell 10: 1957—1970.

KISS, J . Z., J . B. WRIGHT, AND T. CASPAR. 1996. Gravitropism in roots of LUESSE, D. R., C. A. SCHNECK, B. K. BERNER, B. JUSTUS, AND S. E. WYATT.
intermediate—starch mutants of Arabidopsis. Physiologia Plantamm 2010. GPS4 is allelic t0 ARL2: Implications for gravitropic signal
97: 237—244. transduction. Gravitational and Space Biology 23: 95—96.

KIYOSHIMA, D., K. KAWAKAMI, K. HAYAKAWA, H. TATSUMI, AND M. SOKABE. MADRID, R., M. SANHUEZA, O. ALVAREZ, AND J . BACIGALUPO. 2003. Tonic
2011. Force— and Ca2+—dependent internalization of integrins in cul— and phasic receptor neurons in the vertebrate olfactory epithelium.
tured endothelial cells. Journal of Cell Science 124: 3859—3870. Biophysical Journal 84: 4167—4181.

KNIGHT, M. R., A. K. CAMPBELL, S. M. SMITH, AND A. J . TREWAVAS. 1991. MAPLE, J ., N. H. CHUA, AND S. G. MOLLER. 2002. The topological speciﬁc—
Transgenic plant aequorin reports the effects of touch and cold—shock ity factor AtMinEl is essential for correct plastid division site place—
and elicitors 0n cytoplasmic calcium. Nature 352: 524—526. ment in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal 31: 269—277.

KNIGHT, M. R., N. D. READ, A. K. CAMPBELL, AND A. J . TREWAVAS. 1993. MATSUMOTO, S., S. KUMASAKI, K. SOGA, K. WAKABAYASHI, T. HASHIMOTO,
Imaging calcium dynamics in living plants using semi—synthetic re— AND T. HOSON. 2010. Gravity—induced modiﬁcations to development
combinant aequorins. Journal of Cell Biology 121: 83—90. in hypocotyls of Arabidopsis tubulin mutants. Plant Physiology 152:

KNIGHT, M. R., S. M. SMITH, AND A. J . TREWAVAS. 1992. Wind—indueed 918—926.
plant motion immediately increases cytosolic calcium. Proceedings of MAYER, M. P., AND B. BUKAU. 2005. Hsp70 chaperones: Cellular functions
the National Academy ofSCiences, USA 89: 4967—4971. and molecular mechanism. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 62:

KNIGHT, T. A. 1803. Account of some experiments on the descent of 670—684.
the sap in trees. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of MCCORMACK, E., Y. C. TSAI, AND J . BRAAM. 2005. Handling calcium sig—
London 93: 277—289. naling: Arabidopsis CaMs and CMLs. Trends in Plant Science 10:

KUMAR, N. S., M. H. H. STEVENS, AND J . Z. KISS. 2008. Plastid movement 383—389.
in the statocytes 0f the arg] (altered response to gravity) mutant. MONSHAUSEN, G. B., T. N. BIBIKOVA, M. H. WEISENSEEL, AND S. GILROY.
American Journal ofBotany 95: 177—184. 2009. Ca2+ regulates reactive oxygen species production and

KUNG, C. 2005. A possible unifying principle for mechanosensation. pH during mechanosensing in Arabidopsis roots. Plant Cell 21:
Nature 436: 647—654. 2341—2356.

KUNG, C., B. MARTINAC, AND S. SUKHAREV. 2010. Mechanosensitive Chan— MONSHAUSEN, G. B., N. D. MILLER, A. S. MURPHY, AND S. GILROY. 2011.
nels in microbes. Annual Review ofMicrobiology 64: 313—329. Dynamics of auxin—dependent Ca2+ and pH signaling in root growth

KURUSU, T., T. YAMANAKA, M. NAKANO, A. TAKIGUCHI, Y. OGASAWARA, revealed by integrating high—resolution imaging With automated com—
T. HAYASHI, K. IIDA, ET AL. 2011. Involvement of the putative Ca2+— puter Vision—based analysis. Plant Journal 65: 309—318.
permeable mechanosensitive Channels, NtMCAl and NtMCA2, in MORITA, M. T. 2010. Directional gravity sensing in gravitropism.Annual
Ca2+ uptake, Caztdependent cell proliferation and mechanical stress— Review ofPlant Biology 61: 705—720.
induced gene expression in tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) BY—2 cells. MORITA, M. T., T. KATO, K. NAGAFUSA, C. SAITO, T. UEDA, A. NAKANO, AND
Journal ofPlant Research 125: 555—568. M. TASAKA. 2002. Involvement of the vacuoles 0f the endodermis

LARSEN, P. 1969. The optimum angle of geotropic stimulation and its re— in the early process of shoot gravitropism in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell
lation t0 the starch statolith hypothesis. Physiologia Plantamm 22: 14: 47—56.

469—488. MORITA, M. T., C. SAITO, A. NAKANO, AND M. TASAKA. 2007. endodermal-

LEE, D., D. H. POLISENSKY, AND J . BRAAM. 2005. Genome—Wide identiﬁca— amyloplast less I is a novel allele of SHORT—ROOT. Advances in
tion of touch— and darkness—regulated Arabidopsis genes: A focus on Space Research 39: 1127—1133.
calmodulin—like and XTH genes. New Phytologist 165: 429—444. MORITA, M. T., AND M. TASAKA. 2004. Gravity sensing and signaling.

LEE, J . S., AND M. L. EVANS. 1985. Polar transport of 45Ca2+ across the Current Opinion in Plant Biology 7: 712—718.
elongation zone of gravistimulated r00ts.Plant& CellPhysiology 26: MULLEN, J. L., C. WOLVERTON, H. ISHIKAWA, AND M. L. EVANS. 2000.
1587—1595. Kinetics of constant gravitropic stimulus responses in Arabidopsis

LEE, J . S., T. J . MULKEY, AND M. L. EVANS. 1983a. Gravity—induced polar roots using a feedback system. Plant Physiology 123: 665—670.
transport of calcium across root tips of maize. Plant Physiology 73: MULLER, A., C. GUAN, L. GALWEILER, P. TANZLER, P. HUIJSER, A. MARCHANT,
874—876. G. PARRY, ET AL. 1998. AtPIN2 deﬁnes a locus ofArabidopsis for root

LEE, J . S., T. J. MULKEY, AND M. L. EVANS. 1983b. Reversible loss of gravitropism contr01.EMBO Journal 17: 6903—6911.
gravitropic sensitivity in maize roots after tip application of calcium NAIR, M., AND S. DEBOLT. 2011. Analyzing cellulose biosynthesis With
chelators. Science 220: 1375—1376. confocal microscopy. Methods ofMolecular Biology 715: 141—152.

LEE, J . S., T. J . MULKEY, AND M. L. EVANS. 1984. Inhibition of polar cal— NAKAGAWA, Y., T. KATAGIRI, K. SHINOZAKI, Z. Q1, H. TATSUMI, T. FURUICHI,
Cium movement and gravitropism in roots treated With auxin—transport A. KISHIGAMI, ET AL. 2007. Arabidopsis plasma membrane protein
inhibitors. Planta 160: 536—543. crucial for Ca2+ inﬂux and touch sensing in roots. Proceedings of the

LEGUE, V., E. BLANCAFLOR, C. WYMER, G. PERBAL, D. FANTIN, AND S. NationalAcademy ofSciences, USA 104: 3639—3644.

GILROY. 1997. Cytoplasmic free Ca2+ in Arabidopsis roots changes NAKAMURA, M., M. TOYOTA, M. TASAKA, AND M. T. MORITA. 2011. An
in response to touch but not gravity. Plant Physiology 114: 789—800. Arabidopsis E3 ligase, SHOOT GRAVITROPISM9, modulates the

LEITZ, G., B.—H. KANG, M. E. A. SCHOENWAELDER, AND L. A. STAEHELIN. interaction between statoliths and F—actin in gravity sensing. Plant
2009. Statolith sedimentation kinetics and force transduction t0 the Cell 23: 1830—1848.
cortical endoplasmic reticulum in gravity—sensing Arabidopsis colu— NAKANO, M., K. IIDA, H. NYUNOYA, AND H. IIDA. 2011. Determination of
mella cells. Plant Cell 21: 843—860. structural regions important for Ca2+ uptake activity in Arabidopsis

LEVWA,N., S.T0TEMEYER,N.R. STOKEs,P.L0UIs,M.A.JONEs,AND I.R.BOOTH. MCAl and MCA2 expressed in yeast. Plant & Cell Physiology 52:
1999. Protection of Escherichia coli cells against extreme turgor by 1915—1930.
activation of MscS and MscL mechanosensitive Channels: Identiﬁcation NAKAYAMA, Y., K.FUJ1U,M. SOKABE, AND K. YOSHIMURA. 2007. Molecular
of genes required for MseS activity. EMBO Journal 18: 1730—1737. and electrophysiological Characterization of a mechanosensitive Channel

"
"14","124 AMERICAN J OURNAL OF BOTANY [VOL 100
expressed in the chloroplasts of Chlamydomonas. Proceedings of the SAITO, C., M. T. MORITA, T. KATO, AND M. TASAKA. 2005. Amyloplasts
National Academy of Sciences, USA 104: 5883—5888. and vacuolar membrane dynamics in the living gravipereeptive cell of

NICK, P., R. BERGFELD, E. SCHAFER, AND P. SCHOPFER. 1990. Unilateral the Arabidopsis inﬂorescence stem. Plant Cell 17: 548—558.
reorientation of microtubules at the outer epidermal wall during SCHMIDT, R. F., J . SENGES, AND M. ZIMMERMANN. 1967. Presynaptie depo—
photo— and gravitropic curvature of maize coleoptiles and sunﬂower larization of cutaneous mechanoreceptor afferents after mechanical
hypocotyls. Planta 181: 162—168. skin stimulation. Experimental Brain Research 3: 234—247.

OTTENSCHLAGER, I., P. WOLFF, C. WOLVERTON, R. P. BHALERAO, G. SANDBERG, SCOTT, A. C., AND N. S. ALLEN. 1999. Changes in cytosolic pH Within
H. ISHIKAWA, M. EVANS, AND K. PALME. 2003. Gravity—regulated differ— Arabidopsis root columella cells play a key role in the early signaling
ential auxin transport from columella to lateral root cap cells. Proceedings pathway for root gravitropism. Plant Physiology 121: 1291—1298.
0fthe National Academy ofSCiences, USA 100: 2987—2991. SEDBROOK, J . C., R. CHEN, AND P. H. MASSON. 1999. ARG] (altered re-

PALMHERI, M., AND J . Z. KISS. 2005. Disruption of the F—actin cytoskeleton sponse to gravity) encodes a DnaJ—like protein that potentially inter—
limits statolith movement in Arabidopsis hypocotyls. Journal of acts With the cytoskeleton. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Experimental Botany 56: 2539—2550. Sciences, USA 96: 1140—1145.

PAREDEZ, A. R., C. R. SOMERVILLE, AND D. W. EHRHARDT. 2006. SELKER, J . M. L., AND A. SIEVERS. 1987. Analysis of extension and curva—
Visualization of cellulose synthase demonstrates functional associa— ture during the graviresponse in Lepidium roots. American Journal of
tion With microtubules. Science 312: 1491—1495. Botany 74: 1863—1871.

PERBAL, G., AND D. DRISS—ECOLE. 2003. Meehanotransduetion in graVi— SHISHOVA, M., AND S. LINDBERG. 2010. A new perspective on auxin per—
sensing cells. Trends in Plant Science 8: 498—504. ception. Journal ofPlam‘ Physiology 167: 417—422.

PERBAL, G., B. JEUNE, A. LEFRANC, E. CARNERO—DIAZ, AND D. DRISS—ECOLE. SHORT, E. F., K. A. NORTH, M. R. ROBERTS, A. M. HETHERINGTON, A. D.
2002. The dose—response curve of the gravitropic reaction: Are—anal— SHIRRAS, AND M. R. MCAINSH. 2012. A stress—speeiﬁc calcium sig—
ysis. Physiologia Plantamm 114: 336—342. nature regulating an ozone—responsive gene expression network in

PERERA, I. Y., C. Y. HUNG, S. BRADY, G. K. MUDAY, AND W. F. Boss. 2006. Arabidopsis. Plant Journal 71: 948—961.

A universal role for inositol 1,4,5—trisph0sphate—mediated signaling in SINCLAIR, W., I. OLIVER, P. MAHER, AND A. TREWAVAS. 1996. The role of
plant gravitropism. Plant Physiology 140: 746—760. calmodulin in the gravitropic response of the Arabidopsis thaliana

PERRY, S. E., AND K. KEEGSTRA. 1994. Envelope membrane proteins that agr—3 mutant. Planta 199 (supplement): 343—351.
interact With Chloroplastic precursor proteins. Plant Cell 6: 93—105. SINCLAIR, W., AND A. J . TREWAVAS. 1997. Calcium in gravitropism. A re—

PETRASEK, J ., AND J . FRIML. 2009. Auxin transport routes in plant develop— examination. Planta 203: S85—S90.
ment. Development 136: 2675—2688. SISTRUNK, M. L., D. M. ANTOSIEWICZ, M. M. PURUGGANAN, AND J . BRAAM.

PICKARD, B. G. 2007. Delivering force and amplifying signals in plant 1994. Arabidopsis TCH3 encodes a novel Ca2+ binding protein and
mechanosensing. In P. H. Owen [ed.], Current topics in membranes, shows environmentally induced and tissue—speciﬁc regulation. Plant
361—392. Academic Press, London, UK. Cell 6: 1553—1565.

PIVETTI, C. D., M. R. YEN, S. MILLER, W. BUSCH, Y. H. TSENG, I. R. BOOTH, SOGA, K., K.WAKABAYASHI, S. KAMISAKA,AND T. HOSON. 2006. Hypergravity
AND M. H. SAIER JR. 2003. Two families of mechanosensitive Chan— induces reorientation of cortical microtubules and modiﬁes growth
nel proteins. Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 67: 66—85 anisotropy in azuki bean epicotyls. Planta 224: 1485—1494.
table of contents. SOLL, J ., AND E. SCHLEIFF. 2004. Protein import into chloroplasts. Nature

PLIETH, C. 2001. Plant calcium signaling and monitoring: Pros and cons Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 5: 198—208.
and recent experimental approaches. Protoplasma 218: 1—23. SPALDING, E. P., AND M. GOLDSMITH. 1993. Activation of K+ channels in

PLIETH, C., AND A. J . TREWAVAS. 2002. Reorientation of seedlings in the the plasma membrane of Arabidopsis by ATP produced photosynthet—
Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld induces cytosolic calcium transients. Plant ically. Plant Cell 5: 477—484.

Physiology 129: 786—796. STANGA, J . P., K. BOONSIRICHAI, J . C. SEDBROOK, M. S. OTEGUI, AND P. H.

POOVAIAH, B. W., J . J . MCFADDEN, AND A. S. REDDY. 1987. The role of 0211— MASSON. 2009. A role for the TOC complex in Arabidopsis root
cium ions in gravity signal perception and transduction. Physiologia gravitropism. Plant Physiology 149: 1896—1905.

Plantamm71: 401—407. STINEMETZ, C. L., K. H. HASENSTEIN, L. M. YOUNG, AND M. L. EVANS.

POTTOSIN, I. 1., O. R. DOBROVINSKAYA, AND J . MUNIZ. 1999. Cooperative 1992. Effect of calmodulin antagonists on the growth and gravire—
block of the plant endomembrane ion Channel by ruthenium red. sponsiveness of primary roots of maize. Plant Growth Regulation 11:
Biophysical Journal 77: 1973—1979. 419—427.

PURUGGANAN, M. M., J . BRAAM, AND S. C. FRY. 1997. The Arabidopsis STINEMETZ, C. L., K. M. KUZMANOFF, M. L. EVANS, AND H. W. JARRETT.
TCH4 xyloglucan endotransglycosylase. Substrate speciﬁcity, pH op— 1987. Correlation between calmodulin activity and gravitropic sensi—
timum, and cold tolerance. Plant Physiology 115: 181—190. tivity in primary roots of maize. Plant Physiology 84: 1337—1342.

Q1, 2., A. KISHIGAMI, Y. NAKAGAWA, H. IIDA, AND M. SOKABE. 2004. A TAIZ, L. 1984. Plant cell expansion: Regulation of cell wall mechanical
mechanosensitive anion Channel in Arabidopsis thaliana mesophyll properties. Annual Review ofPlant Physiology 35: 585—657.
cells. Plant & Cell Physiology 45: 1704—1708. TAYLOR, A. R., N. MANISON, C. FERNANDEZ, J . WOOD, AND C. BROWNLEE.

RICHTER, G. L., G. B. MONSHAUSEN, A. KROL, AND S. GILROY. 2009. 1996. Spatial organization of calcium signaling involved in cell V01—
Mechanical stimuli modulate lateral root organogenesis. Plant ume control in the Fucus rhizoid. Plant Cell 8: 2015—2031.
Physiology 151: 1855—1866. TOYOTA, M., T. FURUICHI, H.TATSUM1, AND M. SOKABE. 2007. Hypergravity

ROBERT, H. S., AND R. OFFRINGA. 2008. Regulation of auxin transport polar— stimulation induces Changes in intracellular calcium concentra—
ity by AGC kinases. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 11: 495—502. tion in Arabidopsis seedlings. Advances in Space Research 39:

RUFFERT, S., C. LAMBERT, H. PETER, V. F. WENDISCH, AND R. KRAMER. 1190—1197.

1997. Efﬂux of compatible solutes in Corynebacterium glutamicum TOYOTA, M., T. FURUICHI, H. TATSUMI, AND M. SOKABE. 2008a. Critical
mediated by osmoregulated Channel activity. European Journal of consideration on the relationship between auxin transport and cal—
Biochemistry 247: 572—580. Cium transients in gravity perception of Arabidopsis seedlings. Plant

RUSSELL, A. J ., M. R. KNIGHT, D. J . COVE, C. D. KNIGHT, A. J . TREWAVAS, Signaling & Behavior 3: 521—524.

AND T. L. WANG. 1996. The moss, Physcomitrella patens, trans— TOYOTA,M.,T. FURUICHI,H.TATSUMI, AND M. SOKABE. 2008b. Cytoplasmic
formed With apoaequorin CDNA responds to cold shock, mechanical calcium increases in response to Changes in the gravity vector in hy—
perturbation and pH With transient increases in cytoplasmic calcium. pocotyls and petioles of Arabidopsis seedlings. Plant Physiology 146:
Transgenic Research 5: 167—170. 505—514.

SACK, F. D. 1991. Plant gravity sensing. International Review onytology TRETYN, A., G. WAGNER, AND H. H. FELLE. 1991. Signal transduction in
127: 193—252. Sinapis alba root hairs—Auxins as external messengers. Journal of

SACK, F. D. 1997. Plastids and gravitropic sensing. Planta 203: S63—S68. Plant Physiology 139: 187—193.

"
"15","J anuary 2013] TOYOTA AND GILROY—GRAVITY AND SIGNALING 125
TREWAVAS,A.,AND M. KNIGHT. 1994. Mechanical signalling, calcium and WOOD, N. T., A. C. ALLAN, A. HALEY, M. VIRY—MOUSSAID, AND A. J.
plant form. Plant Molecular Biology 26: 1329—1341. TREWAVAS. 2000. The Characterization of differential calcium signal—
VELEY, K. M., S. MARSHBURN, C. E. CLURE, AND E. S. HASWELL. 2012. ling in tobacco guard cells. Plant Journal 24: 335—344.
Mechanosensitive Channels protect plastids from hypoosmotic stress WYMER, C. L., S. A. WYMER, D. J . COSGROVE, AND R. J . CYR. 1996. Plant
during normal plant growth. Current Biology 22: 408—413. cell growth responds to external forces and the response requires in—
WANG, Y. C., B. C. WANG, S. GILROY, E. W. CHEHAB, AND J . BRAAM. 2011. tact microtubules. Plant Physiology 110: 425—430.
CML24 is involved in root mechanoresponses and cortical microtu— XU, W., M. M. PURUGGANAN, D. H. POLISENSKY, D. M. ANTOSIEWICZ, S. C.
bule orientation in Arabidopsis. Journal of Plant Growth Regulation FRY, AND J . BRAAM. 1995. Arabidopsis TCH4,regu1ated by hormones
30: 467—479. and the environment, encodes a xyloglucan endotransglycosylase.
WARD, J . M., AND J . I. SCHROEDER. 1994. Calcium—activated K+ Channels Plant Cell 7: 1555—1567.
and calcium—induced calcium release by slow vacuolar ion Channels YAMANAKA, T.,Y. NAKAGAWA, K. MORI, M. NAKANO, T. IMAMURA, H. KATAOKA,
in guard cell vacuoles implicated in the control of stomatal closure. A.TERASH1MA,K.IIDA,I.K0J1MA,T.KATAGIRI,K. SHINOZAKI, AND H.11DA.
Plant Cell 6: 669—683. 2010. MCAl and MCA2 that mediate Ca2+ uptake have distinct and
WEISE, S. E., AND J . Z. KISS. 1999. Gravitropism 0f inﬂorescence stems overlapping roles in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology 152: 1284—1296.
in starCh—deﬁcient mutants of Arabidopsis. International Journal of YANG, T., AND B. W. POOVAIAH. 2003. Calcium/Calmodulin—mediated sig—
Plant Sciences 160: 521—527. 1131 network in plants. Trends in Plant Science 8: 505—5 12.
WENT, F. W., AND K. V. THIMANN. 1937. Phytohormones. Macmillan, YANO,D.,M. SATO,C. SA1T0,M.H. SATO,M.T. MORITA,ANDM.TASAKA. 2003.
NeW York. A SNARE complex containing SGR3/AtVAM3 and ZIG/V T111 in
WHITE, P. J ., AND M. R. BROADLEY. 2003. Calcium in plants. Annals of gravity—sensing cells is important for Arabidopsis shoot gravitropism.
Botany 92: 487—5 1 1. Proceedings 0fthe NationalAcademy ofSCiences, USA 100: 8589—8594.
WHITFORD, R., A. FERNANDEZ, R. TEJOS, A. C. PEREZ, J . KLEINE—VEHN, S. ZANDOMENI, K., AND P. SCHOPFER. 1994. Mechanosensory microtubule re—
VANNESTE, A. DROZDZECKI, ET AL. 2012. GOLVEN secretory peptides orientation in the epidermis of maize coleoptiles subjected to bending
regulate auxin carrier turnover during plant gravitropic responses. stress. Protoplasma 182: 96—101.
Developmental Cell 22: 678—685. ZHANG, W., L. M. FAN, AND W. H. WU. 2007. Osmo—sensitive and
WOLVERTON, C., J . L. MULLEN, H. ISHIKAWA, AND M. L. EVANS. 2002. Root stretCh—activated calcium—permeable Channels in Vicia faba guard
gravitropism in response to a signal originating outside of the cap. cells are regulated by actin dynamics. Plant Physiology 143:
Planta 215: 153—157. 1140—1151.
WOLVERTON, C., A. M. PAYA, AND J . TOSKA. 2011. Root cap angle and ZHENG, H. Q., AND L. A. STAEHELIN. 2001. Nodal endoplasmic reticulum,
gravitropic response rate are uncoupled in the Arabidopsis pgm-I mu— a specialized form of endoplasmic reticulum found in gravity—sensing
tant. Physiologia Plantamm 141: 373—382. root tip columella cells. Plant Physiology 125: 252—265.

"
