"","x"
"1","i. Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ﬂaw:
ft] cuence Irec
ELSEVIER
Stayan In touch: mechanical Signals In plant—mlcrobe
Interactlons
- 1 - - 2 - ' 1
Dhlleepkumar Jayaraman , Simon Gilroy and Jean-Mlchel Ane
Mechanical stimulations play a significant role in the day to day direction, and morphology [1]. ‘Thigmomorphogenesis’ is
existence of plants. Plants exhibitvaried responses depending the term collectively used to denote plant growth and
on the nature and intensity of these stimuli. In this review, we developmental responses to MS [2,3]. Recent evidence
present recent literature on the responses of plants to shows that MS signaling is Closely linked With defense
mechanical stimuli, focusing primarily on those exerted during signaling pathways. Mutants in jasmoniC acid synthesis
plant—microbe interactions. We discuss how microbes are able and response have been found to display reduced MS
to apply mechanical stimuli on plants and how some plant responses, Whereas jasmonic acid overproduction mimics
responses to pathogenic and symbiotic microbes present MS [4']. MS results in the accumulation of jasmonic acid
striking similarities with responses to mechanical stimuli and promotes defense against the fungal pathogen Baliy-
applied, for instance, using micro—needles. We hypothesize It's ﬁner“; [4']. Jasmonic acid also acts as a commonly
that appropriate responses of plants to pathogenic and induced signaling molecule in wounding and MS. The
symbiotic microbes may require a tight integration of both transient elevation of endogenous jasmonic acid followed
Chemical and mechanical stimulations exerted by these by defense gene activation is a common response to this
microbes. wounding, and also in plants subjected to repeated MS
Addresses exposure [5]. In addition, wounding and MS also lead to a
1 Department 01‘ Agronomy, UniveFSity Of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, swift increase in the cytosolic calcium concentrations, and
:Jnlted States _ _ _ _ _ it is Widely believed that these Changes play a role in
Department of Botany, UnlverSIty of Wisconsm, Madlson, WI 53706, . . -
United States actlvatlng many downstream defense responses [6]. MS 1s
known to trigger Widespread Changes in gene expression,
Corresponding author: Ané, Jean-Michel (jane@wisc.edu) including upregulation of a Classic set of ‘touch—inducible’
(TCH) genes that encode calmodulin and the calmodulin—
Current Opinion in Plant Biology 2014, 20:104_109 llke protelns [7]. The calrnodullns and calrnodulln—hke
_ _ _ . . . . prote1ns have also been llnked to the malntenance of
ThlS reVIew comes from a themed Issue on Blotlc Interactlons 2014 innate immunity With, for example, mutants in TCHZ
Edited by Makoto Hayashi and Martin PamiSke showing impaired resistance to Pseudomonds syringde [8].
Interestingly, some mutants affected in plant—microbe
symbioses also present defects in their responses to MS.
For instance in the model legume Medicago z‘mnmz‘u/d
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pbi.2014.05.003 ’. . . . ’
_ _ 6/065 ”0; make mfm‘zom 2 and 3 (dmzZ and dmz3) mutants are
1369—5266“? 2014 Elsev'er Ltd' A” ﬁghts reserved affected in both nodulation and mycorrhization. The (/7722?
mutant is further affected in its ability to resume growth
after MS [9""], Whereas the dmz'3 mutant showed an
altered cytoplasmic response after MS [10""]. In addition,
dmz'Z mutants show more symbiotic responses to rhizobial
f r in h n h n in h r n f M
Background Notl aCto s t e abse ce t .a. t e .p ese ce .0 S,
. . . . . . 1ndlcat1ng that MS plays a cr1tlcal role 1n regulatlng the
Plants are exposed to a myrlad of stimuh durlng the1r llfe . . . .. .
. . . . . response to symblotlc s1gnals [9 ]. These observatlons
cycle and are Characterlzed by the1r1nab1hty to relocate to . . . .
. . . . . ra1se the questlon of relatlonshlps between systems
aV01d stressful enV1ronments [1]. Mechanical stlmulatlon . .
. . . . respons1ble for MS sens1ng and response, and those
(MS), Wthh 1nCludes the effects of graV1ty, Wlnd, turgor, . . . . .
. . . mediatlng plant—mlcrobe 1nteraCtlons; are the appearance
touch, pathogens or woundlng 1s an 1nescapable com— . . . .
, . . . of s1mllar response components 1n both systems functlon—
ponent of a plant s surroundlngs that s1gn1ﬁcantly affects . . . .
. ally llnked or just comeldence?
plant growth and development, morphogenes1s, repro—
duction, and survival [2]. Plants perceive and respond to
these mechanical cues at the cellular and organismal Pathogenic and symbiotic microbes can exert
levels [3]. Plants such as the Venus ﬂytrap (Dimmm M3 on plants
musw'pu/d), SundeW (Dmsem roluﬂdz'folz'd), and Sensitive Plants interact With a variety of microbes (from beneﬁcial
Plant (Mimompudz'm) respond Within seconds to MS due to pathogenic) in the environment. Microbes colonize
to the presence of specialized mechanosensory cells [1]. plants to satisfy their environmental, nutritional, or water
Most other plants, despite lacking these specialized cells, needs [11]. Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi form hyphopo—
also respond to MS by altering their growth rate, growth dia on the roots, and most pathogenic fungi and
Current Opinion in Plant Biology 2014, 20:104—109 www.sciencedirect.com

"
"2","Mechanical signals in plant—microbe interactions Jayaraman, Gilroy and Ané 105
oomycetes form appressoria 0n the leaves and hyphopodia Col/emm'céum z‘ﬂ'folz'z', Which develop hyphopodia of about
on the roots, at certain points of contact With the plant 15 [am and 10 lam, respectively[10""]. Similarly, the necro—
epidermis [12,13]. The appressoria develop a penetration trophic pathogen Pﬂama medicagz’m’s Whose hyphae measure
peg at their base that aids in the penetration of the plant approximately 4 lam, triggered a nuclear migration
cell, Whereas in the case of hyphopodia, the hyphae that response. In contrast, the eriCOid endomycorrhizal fungus
develop aid in invading plant tissues [14]. The turgor Oid'z'odmdmﬂ 772mm, With hyphae of about 1.5 lam, failed to
pressure of the hyphae provides the mechanical force elicit such nuclear repositioning in this study. It is con—
necessary for breaching the plant cell wall and entering ceivable that the lack ofnuclear movement in this case may
plant tissues [11,14,15]. It has been estimated that Magim- be due to a lack of sufﬁcient mechanical force generated by
porz‘éegﬂ'sm and Col/emm'céum species produce a force of 8— the thin hyphae [10""].

25 [LN to facilitate invasion of host tissues [14,16""]. The
appressoria 0r hyphopodia vary in size, Which in turn may Although, t0 the best of our knowledge, there is no
affect the force generated for penetration. For instance, in quantiﬁcation for the mechanical stimuli exerted by
Medicago z‘mnmz‘u/d, three fungi have been reported to bioﬁlms or bacterial colonies, there is evidence that
cause nuclear repositioning upon contact With the plant’s growing bacteria and micro—colonies develop a signiﬁcant
epidermal cell wall, an effect also seen in response to MS expansion force [17—19]. It is safe to hypothesize
(Figure 1 and see below). Nuclear repositioning has been that they may exert signiﬁcant mechanical stimuli
described in response to the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi especially When enclosed in relatively Closed structures
Gigaspom margarita and the hemibiotrophic pathogen such as the plant vasculature, infection threads or simply
Figure 1
Responses to Microbes
(a) Fungal pathogens (b) Arbuscular (c) Rhizobia
and oomycetes Mycorrhizal Fungi
1 . n
I
' ‘ 11%
(1!!
ll
1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3
\
c?"" 3r: 3r."" 3r: i-t-T- irr- ST 3:? a
1 2 3
o nucleus
A actin
~7\ .
\ microtubules
(d) Micro—needle
Responses to Mechanical Stimuli
Current Opinion in Plant Biology

Comparison of Changes at the subcellular level during interaction with microbes and application of physical stimuli. Changes are shown in response to
pathogenic fungi (a), mycorrhizal fungi (b), rhizobia (c) and physical stimuli (d). ‘Ia, position of nucleus (blue circle), actin (red) and microtubules (blue
filaments) before pathogenic fungal penetration. 2a, migration of nucleus, actin and microtubules to the point of contact and deposition of papillae at
the point of contact (green). 3a, papillae are formed at the point of contact of the fungi and the actin and microtubules do not revert back to their
original position. ‘Ib, position of nucleus, actin and microtubules before arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal contact. 2b, migration of nucleus, actin and
microtubules to the point of contact. 3b, nuclear movement guides the formation of pre—penetration apparatus and fungal infection. 10, position of
nucleus, actin and microtubules in the root hair cell before attachment of rhizobia. 20, migration of nucleus, actin and microtubules to the point of
attachment of rhizobia (orange). 30, nuclear movement guides the formation of infection thread apparatus and fungal infection. 1d, Position of nucleus,
actin and microtubules before the application of physical stimuli. 2d, migration of nucleus, actin and microtubules to the point of application of physical
stimuli. These events happen within 3—5 min after the application of physical stimuli. 3d, nucleus, actin and microfilaments revert back to their original
position after the removal of physical stimuli.
www.sciencedirect.com Current Opinion in Plant Biology 2014, 20:104—109

"
"3","106 Biotic interactions 2014
the plant apoplast. These forces may be required for plants, only recently has it been recognized as a émmﬁc/e
penetration into the host tissue in pathogenic and sym— signal [26]. eATP has been implicated in stress responses
biotic interactions. (both biotic and abiotie), including thigmotropism [26]. In
Améz'dopsz's, eATP is released in response to touch, and
Some responses to microbes are similar to this release is modulated by the heteromeriC G—protein
responses to MS complex [27]. In legumes, lectin nucleotide phosphohy—
As mentioned previously, nuclear repositioning within drolase (LNP) are Nod factor—binding proteins induced
the plant cell towards the site of contact is a common following rhizobial infection. Antibodies directed towards
response to MS, fungi, and symbiotic bacteria. This the LNPs decreased nodulation in Do/ztﬂos ﬂuoms and
nuclear repositioning appears to be a relatively generic soybean [28,29]. Knockdown of these LNPs resulted in
response to MS but it is affected by the size of the reduced nodulation in soybean and Lotus jdpomms [30,31]
touching object. For example, in Medicago z‘mnmz‘u/d, this but also reduced mycorrhization in L.jdp0m'cus [31]. LNPs
response is observed only in cells that are in contact with are cell wall—located eCto—apyrases that hydrolyze ATP
objects larger than 2 pm irrespective of the object — be it into ADP, suggesting that the knockdown in LNP should
a micropipette, fungal hyphae, or appressoria [10""]. cause elevated eATP levels. Addition of eADP partially
During plant—microbe interactions, such nuclear move— rescued the nodulation phenotype of soybean knock—
ments occur before cell penetration. Indeed, in the case of down lines suggesting that eADP could be a signal.
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi or rhizobia, nuclear move— Reciprocally, overexpression of the LNP resulted in
ment initiates the formation of a pre—penetration appar— increased rhizobial infection, consistent with reduced
atus and infection thread, respectively, that guides the ATP or increased ADP promoting the development of
infection process [10"",20']. At later stages of symbiotic symbiosis [30,32]. Rhizobial diffusible signals, Nod fac—
associations with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi, nuclear tors, may trigger eATP release as these Nod factors are
repositioning was also observed during arbuscule devel— similar to fungal Chitin elicitors, which have been impli—
opment suggesting a possible role for MS in this process, cated in ATP release [26]. As discussed further, MS may
too [13,21]. also reinforce this eATP release. The associated increase
in eATP would then be used to fuel eADP production by
Cytoplasmic streaming and aggregation in the plant cell the LNP [30]. Very recently a lectin receptor kinase—I.9
beneath the invading pathogen, including the reorganiza— (LeCRK—I.9) was identiﬁed as a receptor for eATP in
tion of cytoskeletal and endomembrane components, is Améz'dopsz's and named P2K [33""]. The eCto—apyrases
also a response common to several plant—microbe inter— may occur alongside the P2K receptor (as seen in animal
actions [10"",22—24], although, the precise dynamics of systems) and together may compete for the nucleotides
the response of the plant’s microtubule response differs that are released from plant cells in response to signals
with the invading microorganism [25]. MS exerted on such as mechanical, enVironmental, or pathogenic stress.
plant cells using glass or tungsten needles in leaf epider— The balance between these two systems, eCto—apyrase
mal cells or cotyledons caused a similar cytoskeletal and P2K could then determine the magnitude of the
reorganization, including the aggregation of aCtin micro— eATP signal generated by these stimuli and so govern
ﬁlaments beneath the contact site, the formation of a whether the plant would mount an appropriate response
microtubule—depleted zone, and the accumulation of [34—36].
endomembrane components, such as the endoplasmic
reticulum and peroxisomes, beneath the contact point.
Although the force generated by these needles is not MS work in concert With chemical stimuli to
known, these responses were rapid, occurring within 3— regulate defense and symbiotic reactions
5 min of stimulus application, and migrated to the region Responses to pathogens
where the stimulus (needle) was moved. In addition, Lipopolysaccharides are major components of the outer
these responses were abolished once the stimulus was membrane of Gram—negative bacteria and are essential for
removed but so far no cytoplasmic aggregation has been processes such as establishing contact with the host
reported in roots upon application of MS. Because plants during the early stages of infection and bacterial Viru—
are able to perceive and respond to the MS applied by the lence. Lipopolysaceharide mutants are affected not only
needles with Changes that mimic those triggered in in their ability to form bioﬁlms, but also in their Virulence
response to pathogens, it is likely that, in plant—microbe for phytopathogenic bacteria such as Pseudomonas syringae
interactions, MS exerted by the pathogens may be trig— and Xam‘ﬂomonas 62'er [37]. Because lipopolysaccharide
gering these responses [23""]. mutants often are impaired in bioﬁlm formation, they may
lack the mechanical force necessary to penetrate the host
A further similarity between microbial and MS—induced tissue. Améz'dopsz's leaves subjected to mechanical stress
responses in plants lies in their link to a common signaling eXhibit enhanced resistance to the fungal pathogen Baliy-
molecule, extracellular adenosine—S’—triphosphate, eATP. It's cinema. Here, the perception of MS leads to Changes in
Although eATP elicits several cellular responses in the calcium concentration and production of reactive
Current Opinion in Plant Biology 2014, 20:104—109 www.sciencedirect.oom

"
"4","Mechanical signals in plant—microbe interactions Jayaraman, Gilroy and Ané 107
oxygen species, two signaling molecules well Character— can be induced by Mye factors, diffusible signals pro—
ized as being generated by a Wide range of MS in plants. duced by arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. Interestingly, the
Indeed,reaetive oxygen species have been directlyimpli— frequency of calcium spiking is greater in root cells
eated in resistance to B. cinerea [38']. In the ease of containing arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi hyphae than in
P&yz‘opéz‘om, in addition to mechanical stimuli, this species the adjacent cells. It is conceivable that the arbuscular
secretes elicitins and effectors. Elieitins are 104 kDa mycorrhizal fungi hyphae not only produce Mye factors
proteins Which play a role in the uptake of sterols from but also exert MS in the infected cells, Whereas the
plant membranes and are recognized by leetin—like re— adjacent cells perceive only the Mye factors [13,40']
ceptor kinases, triggering the hypersensitive response. In and so may generate a response of lower intensity. Sim—
Péyz‘opéz‘om, four effectors have been identiﬁed so far and ilarly, in rhizobium—legume associations, diffusible Nod
are recognized by nueleotide—binding site—leueine—rieh factors trigger calcium spiking in their legume host.
repeat (NBS—LRR) proteins, leading to hypersensitive Knoeking—down LNP expression in L. jdpomms reduced
reactions. Taken together, a combination of Chemical and nodulation, myeorrhization and calcium spiking in
mechanical stimuli is produced by oomyCetes and fungi, response to Nod factors but not root hair deformations,
and both of these stimuli are detected by plants, leading suggesting that MS from the root hair curl or the hyphae
to the onset of the basal defense mechanisms. A success— may regulate the plant response to Nod and Mye factors
ful invasion occurs if the fungi can overcome the basal (including calcium spiking) Via eATP release and the
defenses and subsequent hypersensitive cell death that LNP [31]. Addition of eATP also caused oscillations of
are triggered by their elicitors and effectors [24]. the cytoplasmic calcium concentration in Arabidopsis

roots. However, there is no evidence that these calcium
Responses to symbionts waves originate from the nuclear envelope like calcium
In many legumes, rhizobia enter the root through intra— spiking [41]. In addition, Arabidopsis lacks the CASTOR
cellular infection of root hairs Via an infection thread. protein Which is required for calcium spiking in L. japo-
Entrapment of rhizobia in the root hair curl (shepherd’s mm. It is therefore unclear at this point that these
crook) and the formation of a miero—Colony inside of this oscillations of cytoplasmic calcium concentration are
curl are required for the initiation of the infection thread. related.
Nod factors produced by the rhizobia trigger root hair
curling and the purpose of the root hair curl may be to In addition rhizobia produce exopolysaeeharides that are
provide MS [9""]. Possible origins for the MS include: (i) Chief components of the bioﬁlm matriX. For instance,
the root hair curls on itself and pushes on its own shank; or Sinorﬂizoéium me/i/oz‘z' produces two distinct exopolysae—
(ii) the curl is necessary to entrap bacteria and form a Charides: a sueeinoglyean and a galactogluean. Both
miero—Colony, Which through its growth provides the MS. sueeinoglyean and Nod factors are essential for the
From an evolutionary standpoint, it is possible that the formation of an active infection thread. Rhizobial exo—
root hair curl may ‘mimiC’ hyphopodia from arbuscular polysaccharides may play a role in infection thread
mycorrhizal fungi. Interestingly, the size of the micro- formation Via signaling or by Changing the physicochem—
Colony in the root hair curl is approximately 10—15 lam, ieal conditions Within the infection thread and we
Which is roughly the size of the arbuscular myeorrhizal hypothesize that this Change may affect the MS exerted
fungi hyphopodia and we hypothesize that it may there— by the bacteria and/or exopolysaeeharides itself inside
fore provide a similar force [10""]. In many tropical the thread exerting MS, on host plant cells. Rhizobial
legumes, instead of entering through the root hairs, the exopolysaeeharides may alter free calcium concen—
rhizobia pass through the epidermis Via cracks, in a trations by binding to these ions, or the acidic exopo—
process known as crack entry. For instance, in Sesédm'd lysaeeharide alginate may Change the hydration of the
msz‘mm bacterial colonies, named infection pockets, are infection thread matriX by binding to water. Taken
formed at the site of infection and are required for the together, exopolysaeeharides may affect host—baCterial
further formation of infection threads. These infection interactions by Chemical but also mechanical means
pockets contain a dense bacterial population that can be [37,42—44]. Within the infection thread, it is speculated
seen as analogous to a miero—Colony in root hair curls and that physical movement followed by concomitant
may provide the necessary MS for further entry into host diVision of rhizobial cells occurs and exopolysaeeharides
cells [39]. may facilitate such movement. Furthermore, presence

of colonizing bacteria in Close Vicinity to the tip is
A precise combination of Chemical and mechanical essential for progression of the infection thread
stimuli may be essential for successful symbiotic coloni— suggesting that coordinated development of the infec—
zation. For example, during colonization by arbuscular tion thread is governed by some form of bacterium—host
myeorrhizalfungi, plant cells showaeharaeteristie repeti— communication. Nod factors in conjunction With MS
tive increase in nuclear and perinuelear calcium concen— generated by the growing infection thread may be key
trations, named calcium spiking, as part of the signaling signals controlling infection thread progression in rhi—
system allowing symbiotic associations. Calcium spiking zobium—legume symbioses [20'].
www.sciencedirect.com Current Opinion in Plant Biology 2014, 20:104—109

"
"5","108 Biotic interactions 2014
' 9. Esselin JJ, Lhuissier FG, Emons AM: A nonsymbiotic root hair
Conclusmn , u tip grovgvth phenotype in NORK-mutated legumes: implications
Mechanleal forces play a key role 1n plant growth and for nodulation factor-induced signaling and formation of a
development and although the inﬂuence of MS on plant ?;uétégigitfd root hair pocket for bacteria. Plant Cell 2004,
growth has long been recognlzed, our understandlng Of This paper provides the first experimental evidence that mechanical
the molecular mechanisms involved in MS perception stimuli cause a nonsymbiotic root hair tip growth phenotype in the nork
. . . . . mutants of the model legume Medicago truncatula. It also suggests that
and transductlon 13 SUH 1n the nascent Stages. The reallz— these mutants are unable to entrap the bacteria due to the mechanical
ation that MS may be a key Signal monitored by plants stimulithat are exerted by the plant’s own root haircells upon curling and
d th - - t t. - b t t bl. h b. touching its shank. In addition, this paper also suggests a dual signaling
an. . elf 1n erac lng mlcro es 0 es 3 .18 Sym .IOSCS or role for Nod factors: one involved in root hair curling and the other in
1n1t1ate pathogene31s should help plnpomt potentlal roles symbiotic gene expression.
for orphan plant mechanosensors. Thls neglected ﬁeld Of 10. Genre A, Ortu G, Bertoldo C, Martino E, Bonfante P: Biotic and
mechanosensmg and how MS regulate plant responses to u abiotic stimulation of root epidermal cells reveals common
pathogenic and symbiotic tnicrobes .and interact With gggsfoezgg; r3333: 2%:rbuscular mycorrh'za' fung"" Plant
dlverse Slgnallng systems 18 a mlssmg component 1n This paper demonstrates the non-specific nuclear repositioning of epi-
our understanding of many plant response pathways. dermal cells when subjected to mechanical stimuli greater than acertain
, , magnitude and also demonstrates that nuclear repositioning can be
The advent of new and reﬁned teehnlques 1n the ﬁeld uncoupled from cytoplasmic aggregation. This is supported by the lack
Of cell imaging, biomechanics, neXt—generation sequenc— of_cytoplasmic aggregation in the epidermal cell when touched with a
. . . . . . . . . . . micromanlpulator or a non-host fungi.
mg, and blolnformatlcs, 1n addltlon to an 1nterd1301phnary
' 11. Nezhad A, Geitmann A: The cellular mechanics of an invasive
research approach, should help to unravel the Slgnal lifestyle. J Exp Bot 2013, 64: 47 0 9_ 47 2 8.
transduetlon mechanlsm(s) of MS. Thls, 1n turn, W111
aid in future efforts to engineer defenses against patho— 12- Bonfant? P, Genre “Mechanisms ”nder'Ying.‘ beneﬁCia' plant—
. . . . . fungus Interactions In mycorrhizal symbuosus. Nat Commun
gens and assoc1at10ns W1th beneﬁc1al mlcrobes. 2010, 1:48.
13. Gutjahr C, Parniske M: Cell and developmental biology of
ACkhOWledgementS arbuscular mycorrhiza symbiosis. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2013,
This work was supported by a grant from the NASA (NNX13AM50G) to SG 29:593-617.
and a grant from the National Science Foundation (NSF#0701846) to JMA. _ _ _
14. Bastmeyer M, Delsmg HB, Bechinger C: Force exertion in fungal
_ infection. Annu Flev Biophys Biomo/ Struct 2002, 31 :321 -341.
References and recommended reading _ _
Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review, 15- Money PN: 'nSlghtS 0“ the mechanics 0f hyphal 9""0Wth- F unga/
have been highlighted as: 3’0] Flev 2008, 22571'76-
16. Bechinger C, Giebel K, Schnell M, Leiderer P, Deising H,
o of special interest on Bastmeyer M: Optical measurements of invasive forces
” of outstanding interest egggtezdsgyl 256p_re§953r|a of a plant pathogenic fungus. Selence
Using optical waves, this paper directly measured the force applied by a
single appresorium, indicating that the mechanical force exerted by some
1. Chehab E, Eioh E, Braam J: Thigmomorphogenesis: a complex fungi is sufficient to infect the plant hOStS-
Egant response to mechano stimulation. JExp Bot 2009, 60.43 17- Su PT, Liao CT, Roan JR, Wang SH, Chiou A, Syu W J; Bacterial
colony from two-dimensional division to three-dimensional
2. Scippa G, Trupiano D, Rocco M, Di lorio A, Chiatante D: development. PLoS ONE 2012, 7:e48098.
Unravelling the response of poplar (Populus nigra) roots to
mechanical stress imposed by bending. Plant Biosyst 2008, 18- Farrell FD, Hallatschek 0’ Marenduzzo D, Waclaw '35
142401-413 Mechanically driven growth of quasi-two-dimensional
microbial colonies. Phys Flev Lett 2013, 111:168101.
3. Braam J: In touch: plant responses to mechanical stimuli. New
Phytol 2005, 165:373—389. 19. Tuson HH, Auer GK, Renner LD, Hasebe M, Tropini C, Saliok M,
Crone WC, Gopinathan A, Huang KC, Weibel DB: Measuring the
4- Chehab E, Yao C, Henderson Z, Kim S, Braam J1 Arabidopsis stiffness of bacterial cells from growth rates in hydrogels of
' touch-induced morphogenesis iS jasmonate mediated and tunable elasticity. Mol Microbiol 2012, 84:874-891.
protects against pests. Curr Biol 2012, 22:701-706.
The results from this study shows that plants impaired in jasmonic acid 20. Fournier J, Timmers A, Sieberer B, Jauneau A, Chabaud M,
biosynthesis and response are affected in their response to mechanical o Barker D: Mechanism of infection thread elongation in root
stimuli. In addition, this paper also revealed that mechanical stimuli lead hairs of Medicago truncatula and dynamic interplay with
to enhanced jasmonic acid accumulation and results in enhanced resis- associated rhizobial colonization. Plant Physiol 2008, 148:1985-
tance to fungal pathogens. 1995.
_ _ _ This paper demonstrates that infection thread development is a discon-
5- Tretner 0’ HUth U, Hause B5 Mechanostlmulation °_f Medicago tinuous process and suggests that a combination of a physical stimulus
truncatula leads to enhanced levels ofjasmonlc ac'd- J Exp 301‘ provided by bacterial movement inside the thread and a chemical sti-
2008’ 5952847'2856- mulus provided by the bacterially secreted Nod factors is essential forthe
6. Romeis T, Herde M: From local to global: CDPKs in systemic progress10n Of the Infection thread.
defense signaling upon rnicrobial and herbivore attack. Curr 21_ Genre A, Chabaud M, Faccio A, Barker D, Bonfante P:
Opm Plant 8’0] 2014’ 20C'1'10' Prepenetration apparatus assembly precedes and predicts
7_ Braam J, Davis RW: Rain-, wind-, and touch-induced th_e eolonization patterns of arbusoular mycorrhizal fungi
expression of calmodulin and calmodulin-related genes in W'th'“ the root cortex 0f b°th Medicago truncatula and
Arabidopsis. Cell 1990, 60'357-364. Daucus carota. Plant CG” 2008, 20114074420.
8. Ma W, Smigel A, Tsai Y, Braam J, Berkowitz G: Innate immunity 22- Genre A, Chabaud M; Timmers T3 Bonfante P3 Barker D5
signaling: cytosolic Ca2+ elevation is linked to downstream Arbuscular_ myc0|jrh|zal fungi ellClt a novel Intracellular
nitric oxide generation through the action of calmodulin or a apparatus In Medicago truncatula I'OOt epidermal cells before
calmodulin-like protein. Plant Physiol 2008, 148:818—828. Infectlon- Plant Cell 2005, 17:3489-3499-
Current Opinion in Plant Biology 2014, 20:104—109 www.sciencedirect.com

"
"6","Mechanical signals in plant—microbe interactions Jayaraman, Gilroy and Ané 109
23. Hardham A, Takemoto D, White R: Rapid and dynamic 35. Joseph SM, Buchakjian MR, Dubyak GR: Colocalization
u subcellular reorganization following mechanical stimulation of ATP release sites and ecto-ATPase activity at the
of Arabidopsis epidermal cells mimics responses to fungal extracellular surface of human astrocytes. J Biol Chem 2003,
and oomycete attack. BMC Plant Biol 2008:8. 278:23331-23342.
This paper provides evidence that the application of mechanical stimuli _ _
on the epidermal cell surface elicits responses similar to those induced by 36- Alvarado-Castlilo C, I-iardeh TK, Boyer JL: Regulation 0f P2Y1
fungal or oomycete pathogens. This paper suggests that the perception receptor-medlated Signaling by th? ectonucleosude
of the mechanical force exerted by the pathogen during invasion may lead triphosphate dlphosphohydrolase Isozymes NTPDase1 and
to the mounting of the basal defense response by the plants. NTPDase2. MO/ Pharmacol 2005, 67:114-122-
24. Hardham A, Blackman L: Molecular cytology of Phytophthora_ 37. Bogino PC, Oliva Mde L, Sorroche FG, Giordano W: The role of
plant interactions. Austral Plant Pathol 2010, 39:29-35 bacterial biofilms and surface components in plant—bacterial
associations. Int J Mol Sci 2013, 14:15838—15859.
25. Hardham AR: Microtubules and biotic interactions. Plant J
2013, 75:278-289. 38. Benikhlef L, L’Haridon F, Abou-Mansour E, Serrano M, Binda M,
0 Costa A, Lehmann S, Metraux J: Perception of soft mechanical
26- Tanaka K, Gilroy S, Jones A, Stacey G1 Extracellular ATP stress in Arabidopsis leaves activates disease resistance.
signaling in plants. Trends Cell Biol 2010, 20:601-608. BMC Plant Biol 2013;13_
. . This paper demonstrates that plants can perceive mechanical stimuli,
27' \éVeeraSIcraighe RR’ Swgnzon 3% Okada SF,-Garret;c‘|§/IB, K'm EPFP which in turn leads to increased resistance to fungi. This paper also
rgizaege ihﬁgﬁiﬁggsis r2333 thiﬁgsonkgi'u-lrgcgz h?gﬁges suggests that this _resista_noe is mediated by the enhanced production of
heterotrimeric G-protein complex. FEBS Lett 2009, 583: 252 1 _ sR’cCr)eSssWhICh IS Implicated In the activation of defenses to biotic and abIotIo
2526. '
. . _ 39. D’Haeze W, De Rycke R, Mathis R, Goormachtig S, Pagnotta S,
28' Eigrkginﬁll‘s' ?écﬁm'rﬁtﬁ’aigfaegf Eétgiﬁ %o%u[§gz:1éAronoﬁg Verplancke C, Capoen W, Holsters M: Reactive oxygen species
Proc Natl Aca%l Sci U S A 1999 96' 5856-5861 ' and ethylene playa positive role in lateral root base nodulation
’ ' ' of a semiaquatic legume. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003,
29. Day R, McAlvin o, Loh J, Denny R, Wood T, Young N, Stacey G: 10011178941794-
Differential expression of two soybean apyrases, one of which 40 Sieberer B J Chabaud M Fournier J Timmers AC Barker DG' A
ilsogg early nodulln. Mol Plant—Mlcrobe Interact 2000, 13.1053- . switch in Ca2+ spiking signature is concomitant with
' endosymbiotic microbe entry into cortical root cells of
30. Govindarajulu M, Kim sv, Libault M, Berg RH, Tanaka K, Stacey G, _ Medicago tryncatula- Plant J_ 2012, 69:822-830. _ _ _
Taylor CG: 9352 ecto-apyrase plays a critical role during ThIs_study deter_m|neci that the oalolum spiking patterh IS different In the
soybean nodulation. Plant Physiol 2009, 149;994-1004_ cortlcal cells durlng rhlzoblal Infectlon thread progreSSIon and arbuscular
mycorrhizal pre-penetration apparatus progression. This paper also
31. Roberts NJ, Morieri G, Kalsi G, Rose A, StillerJ, Edwards A, Xie F, shows that these two microbes elicit a similar frequency of calcium
Gresshoff PM, Oldroyd GE, Downie JA et a/.: Rhizobial and oscillations during their entry into the cortical cells.
mycorrhizal symbioses in Lotus japonicus require lectin _
nucIeotide phosphohydroIase’ which acts upstream of 41. Tanaka K, Swanson SJ, Gilroy 8, Stacey GI Extracellular
calcium signaling. Plant Physiol 2013, 161:556-567. nucleotides elicit cytosolic free calcium oscillations in
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 2010, 154:705-719.
32. McAlvin C, Stacey G: Transgenic expression of the soybean
apyrase in Lotus japonicus enhances nodulation. Plant Physiol 42- Jones KM, Kobayashi H, Davies BW, T393 ME, Walker GC: HOW
2005, 137:1456—1462. rhizobial symbionts invade plants: the Sinorhizobium—
Medicago model. Nat Rev Microbiol 2007, 5:619—633.
33. Choi J, Tanaka K, Cao Y, Qi Y, Qiu J, Liang Y, Lee SY, Stacey G:
u Identification of a plant receptor for extracellular ATP. Science 43. Mendis HC, Queiroux C, Brewer TE, Davis OM, Washburn BK,
2014, 343:290-294. Jones KM: The succinoglycan endoglycanase encoded by
This paper used the ATP-induoed calcium response to identify the eon is required for efficient symbiosis of Sinorhizobium
receptor for extracellular ATP in plants, suggesting that these receptors meIiIoti 1021 with the host plants Medicago truncatula and
in plants are different than those present in animals. Medicago sativa (Alfalfa). Mol Plant—Microbe Interact 2013,
26:1089—1105.
34. Song CJ, Steinebrunner L Wang X, Stout SC, Roux SJ: Extracellular
ATP induces the accumulation of superoxide via NADPH 44. Rinaudi L, Giordano W: An integrated view of biofilm formation
oxidases in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 2006, 140:1222-1232. in rhizobia. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2010, 304:1-11.
www.scienoedireot.oom Current Opinion in Plant Biology 2014, 20:104—109

"
