"","x"
"1","S]. de Vet, R.Rutgers: From waste to energy: First experimental Bacterial Fuel Cells onboard the International Space Station
SJ. de Vet, RRutgers
From waste to energy:
First experimental Bacterial Fuel Cells
onboard the International Space Station
_
Bacterial F uel Cells are innovative energy systems that use bac— similar phases in the output under diﬁrerent gravitational condi-
terz'a to transform carbohydrates anaerobically into ﬁ‘ee elec- tions. Hence it can be concluded from a biologicalpoint ofvz'ew
trons and waste products. The bacteria deposit the electrons on that bacterialfuel cells do operate in space.
the anode and hence create a potential diﬂerence between the —'—_——_
anode and the cathode, yielding a 'bacterial battery ’. This prin- _
ciple may be favourably inﬂuenced by enhanced bacterial pro- 1 Introductwn
ductivity or bacterial growth in microgravity conditions, as is . . _
shown before in several other studies on bacteria in micrograv- Baetenal ﬁlel cells are nmovatlve energy systems that .use hac-
ity. Nonethetess, bacterial fuel cells have not been tested in tena that transform carbohydrates 1n anaerobic condltlons into
space before. Currently foreseen applications are very promis- free electr-ons and waste products. The bactena depOSIt the free
ing for sp a c e ﬂight and include waste disp 0s a I in m am e d Sp ace electrons 1n51de the feel cells on the anode of the fuel cell. Thls
vehicles. This study describes a 'space—ﬁrst’test ofbacterialﬁtel creates a potentlal dlfference between the anode chamher and
cells onboard the International Space Station using the the cathode chamber and henee 1t ylelds E} ‘baeterial bat-
Rhodoferaxferrz'reducens strain. We test ift't is possible to use a tery’.[1,2] The Rhodaferax ferrtreducens strain thnves on the
bacterialfuel cell in 1g and under both simulated (RPﬁ/I) and anaeroblc transformatlon 0f carbohydrates and electron tiona—
re a 1 mi cm 87‘ avity conditions. Du e to diferences in m agm'tu de 0f t10n to an eleetron acceptor. Thls straln pulls 0fthls.featW1th no
the output the data had to be normalized and cumulatively plot- use Of a medlator abld yv1th a very hlgh transformatlon ei‘ﬁc1en—
ted. In all, it can be concluded that bacterial fuel cells show cy. These charactenstics makes the stram very 1nterest1ng for
_ the use in bacterial fuel cells.[3]
' Bacterial fuel cells are very promising for future applications
such as the use as batteries for pacemakers (using glucose from
Rug the bloodstream as permaneht input for the system) or batteries
for systems that are 0therw15e not easﬂy accessible or where
8.1. de Vet battery replacement is costly. [4] Furthermore, bacterial fuel
Eﬂéﬁl°f£:$:ﬁ’:Zlas‘ﬁﬁegi‘egngzlﬁ Univemity 0f Tecmomgy cells could be very useful in manned space ﬂight, as they may
Universgy OfAmsterdam be convenient for converting organic waste into energy. An
E—mail: s.j.devet@student.uva.nl important question is whether those fuel cells have similar
R.Rutgers promising characteristics under microgravity conditions as they
Utrecht School of Econfimics, University of Utrecht. do on Earth'
Currently Faculty of Economics and Business, Several studies performed to date have shown the effects of
£122? Egliﬁg®econ W m microgravity on certain bacterial strains [5]. These effects
' ' g ' ' incorporate higher ﬁnal population concentrations under micro-
Address: p/a BugNRG science team gravity and an increased transfer rate of the food which may
RCigerSkamP 128’ 3607 HG Maarssen’ The Netherlands increase the efficiency of fuel cells in sense of the produced out-
© Z—Tec Publishing, Bremen Microgravity sci. technol. XIX-5/6 (2007) 225

"
"2","SJ. de Vet, R.Rutgers: From waste to energy: First experimental Bacterial Fuel Cells onboard the International Space Station

put. This is an important argument for studying bacterial fuel the carbon electrodes in the bacterial fuel cells according to net—
cells in space, although these positive gravity-effects may be reaction:

limited to non—rnotile bacteria. Nonetheless it is yet unclear

what effects could be expected for motile bacteria like C6H|206+6H20—> 6C02+24H++24e (1)
Rhodqferaxferrireducens as these are motile but optimally set-

tle themselves at the anode since this is the only place in the fuel In their natural environment the Rhodoferaxferrireducens strain
cell where they can dePOSIt free electrons. UP to now needs metallic particles in its environment to donate the elec-
Rhodofemxferrt’reducens 13 one Of the most promlsmg bacterl- trons to transform their food. Inside the fuel cells, the metallic
a1 strains for bacterial fuel cells since they can transfer electrons particles have been replaced by a carbon electrode that transfers
directly to the electrode i.e. without the use of a mediator limit- the electrons from the anode chamber to the cathode chamber
ing the (1033’ Of free electrons [11- When applied for electricity that contains an electron accepting solution. The used electron-
production purposes, thlS straln W111 have avery hlgh eﬁiCIency acceptor solution inside the cathode chambers was 0,25M
in transferring glucose into electricity inside bacterial fuel cells. K3Fe(CN)6.

Bacterial fuel cells have not been tested under microgravity R ho d0 ferax ferrir e du c en S was cultivated under the Optimum
c-onditiens before. Hence,- this study describes ﬁrst steps 1n get- growth condition of 25°C [3] and only the anode chambers of
tmg mSlght m the Operational aSpects 0f bacter1a1 fuel cells in the bacterial fuel cell were injected with the strain under anaer—
space by testlng them under different grav1tat10na1 condltlons. obic conditions inside a portable glovebox. The anaerobic con—
We tested whether it 1s poss1b1e to use a microblal fuel cell 1n ditions inside the glovebox were created via gas packs and an
spece. The BugNRG expernnent was t10wn during the DELTA oxygen level below 2% percent was maintained. The hardware
“118310.11 t0 the Intematlonal Space Stat10n 0n Soyuz ﬂlght SS to was cleaned with ethanol. All experiments used a Basai 1001
test thls hypOtheSIS' We proved that our bacterial fuel eells d0 growth medium inside the anode chamber, which was sterilized
“{qu on Earth and under S1mulated and real rnicrograVIty con— using an autoclave. This medium contained in total 0,19 mol of
d1t10ns. Clearly, due to the low n-value and the 1nab111ty to study glu c 0s e p er an 0 de chamber. A11 1i quids for the fuel cells were
the 1nte1'na1 processes 1n the fuel cells 1n space, we recommend ﬂ ush e d with anaerobic gas to ensure the exposure of the system
further research to reﬁne the r esults. to oxygen is negligible and to avoid disturbance of the cultures

. by other bacterial strains in the fuel cells. Additional experi-
2 Method and materlals ments were used to test that fuel cells without bacterial compo-
, _ _ _ _ nent or with bacteria but prepared aerobically do not generate
As prev10usly descr1bed, the BugNRG experlment utlllsed the any m easurabl e output
Rhodoferax ferriredttcens strain to produce electricity. The BugNRG—experiment made use Of specially designed
Rhodoferax _ferrt'reducens is capable of anaerobically trans- closed bacterial fuel cells. These bacterial fuel cells are com-
forming carbohydrates (1.e. glucose) and donatlng electrons to pri s e d oftwo cylindrical polycarbonate chambers that are com—
pressed onto each other with a threaded ring. The anode and
Fuse Hutunr
-— _ m Channel 1 “1' g
rﬂ e,
I-l 2
I t J 'I m Channel 2N) % _____.___‘_‘_|___
3 ""_'_
I—— C°mm°n 8 a . =:=.~:__1—.__ ' LL55!)
Oelectmns E 3 -- w—W— __________.-
Fuse- Eetlmr U) ' ' ' I ﬂ-L until“: r.. . .1 '. ' .
= m Channel 3(I) E _ .r . Iii: - .:e- 3?: 31‘5” ._ - .
L. -; --=.--_.-'-] r _ ""':*..=- "".--..'-. _- ._'
. t I m Channel 40/) B 735.1”; 4.; wt ' --_ ..--r-r""‘ - .. . L3,: ?L-t-Té; e
l}_l % ELEJE J _ . at; H.“
I— _:?-§ Temperature channel 2 . F-ttt'L‘L. 'rmzl'ri! :3 ""-. ’th 1. .3, IE; 1‘5le
cm renmemumne .1. :-:'= . ‘ "" ' "" - r
_ .- ; - _' :f-;:.""._'_t';=.; “ ﬂeas"" . atwtﬂ”
' : ,1 "" 42‘ 1i r; eh: *3
.:-1 -: ' - ._~=-:.-=-_..e =;;=T-.:§e'-5:.'""rti:-"":+=a:i-¢.— _ ' :i‘t'ert-it-‘tri-t
Fig. I.‘ A schematic overview of the hardware of the BtthRG expert- _. - - - L , . ﬁle? -
- ' -' . '-~""-'-'_»-.., 5; . -' '--.=._-. 11,}? a
ment. The bacteriatﬁtel ceHs are Shown on the Zeﬂ and are annotated -' ' - . ' ' . ' 3 -'“'-'LL-- ' ' ' '.‘.-_t"":_.;_.“.‘_' ' .-_""i
with the chemical solutions. The biock 0n the right shows the data-
tagger that was ttsedfor measuring and datastorage. Depleted
hctu'een theftte/ ceHs and the datalogger are the etectrom'cs used to Fig. 2- Disassembled BugNRG expertmentfaCthQI. Counter clock—
th's't'hmge the bactertatﬁtet cetls. wise: the expertment—bus also showing the temperature probe, 2nd
(eve! Ofcomat'nment and 3rd levet Ofcontat'nment
220 Microgravity sci. techno]. XIX—5/6 (2007)

"
"3","8.]. de Vet, R.Rutgers: From waste to energy: First experimental Bacterial F uel Cells onboard the International Space Station
cathode chambers are separated by a cation exchange mem— that were contained in two additional levels of containment. In
brane. To counteract leakage, a rubber o—ring has been incorpo- this conﬁguration it was possible to protect the ISS—crew 1"" rom
rated into the design and to maintain proper air tightness. To the bacterial and chemical contents of the fuel cells. The exper-
facilitate the ﬁlling and purging of the chambers when assem- iment—payload container also included a temperature sensor to
bled, a ﬁlling hole has been included. Each of the two chambers allow the registration of the ambient temperature experienced
of a fuel cell has a total volume of 10,7 mL and contains a by the fuelcells. The obtained temperature proﬁle was used dur-
sleeved carbon—felt electrode. This electrode is connected to ing the performance of the reference experiments. Figure 2
electrical wiring on the exterior of the fuel cell. shows the different parts of the BugNRG~experirnent facility as
The output of the fuel cells can only be measured if the fuel described above.
cells are discharged across a load. If this is not done, a ‘short cir- The ﬂight-experiment was partially prepared on-site. Fuel
cuit’ of the fuel cell will result [1]. The bacterial fuel cells of the cells containing cultivated bacteria were prepared inside the lab
BugNRG experiment were discharged using a load of 1k!) for in Amsterdam and were taken to the Baikonour Cosmodrome
measuring the produced current. Via the IkQ resistor the fuels via cooled transportation. Between 15 and 13 hours before
cells are shorted to ground Via the current measurement channel launch a fresh solution of glucose and growth medium was
of a datalogger. The fuel-cell voltage is measured by the data- added to the anode chambers and all the fuel cells were tested
logger via a current limiting resistor with a load of 31(39. A fuse for their instant output. These preparations took place inside the
separates the fuel cells from the rest of the circuitry. An adapt— portable glovebox of Bradford Engineering using gas packs to
ed Veriteq SP1000 datalogger was used to log the output param- obtain an anaerobic environment. A level of >1% oxygen was
eters (voltage and current) and the temperature. Figure 1 shows measured inside the glovebox during preparations. After leak-
a schematic version of the bacterial fuel cells and the electronic age testing, fuel cells ﬁt for ﬂight were selected and integrated
wiring. into the experiment facility. Activation of the experiment took
All necessary equipment for the experiment was integrated place 12 hours before launch. The experiment was stowed
into a single piece of hardware that could be ﬂown into orbit. inside the launch vehicle several hours prior to launch to reduce
The BugNRG—experiment facility consisted of two main sec- possible inﬂuences of the 1g environment. Two fuel cells were
tions; the experiment-bus and the experiment-payload. The launched onboard Soyuz—TMA4 and subjected to a ten—day
experiment—bus contained the datalogger and discharge elec- period of microgravity onboard the 188. At the end of the exper-
tronics. The bus was designed in such a way that the datalogger iment run the datalogger was disconnected by cosmonaut Andre
could be disconnected from the entire facility so it could be Kuipers and stowed for return to Earth.
brought back to earth for data—analysis. Due _to mass restrictions After obtaining the ﬂight data, including the temperature pro-
of the available return mass onboard the Soyuz, only the data- ﬁle, several reference experiments were performed. The post-
logger could be brought back to Earth and no fuel cells could be ﬂight experiment needed to be performed under the exact same
returned. The experiment-payload consisted of two fuel cells conditions as in the ﬂight experiment. To this extend these
Output in microgravity, during DELTA—mission Normalisedl cummulative comparison of Bacterial Fuel Cells
0.02 i 05*
0.010 :
_ 0.014 1— "" :3: ”-2 /
E 0012 - - - '1 .-' E
E | .. .. .. _ 1 _ o 0.
g 0.01 | ,. __' —! E
o 0.008 L: I g —0_2 / -
1 II 0
0.000 , _ J, .
0.004 ‘ [I -0.4 .r'
-. 1“““' __ —ug |
0.002 "" - i—MQTEI —0.0 ""' E: 19
- - - 0018812) RPM
0 0 2000 4000 5000 I 30F_ 10000 —6000 —40*00—f2000—0—20EE I 4000 I 6000 8000
Elapsed experiment time [x805] Samples
Fig. 3: The discharge-curves 0 f the twofuel ceIIs tha t were ﬂown to Fig. 4. Normalised cumulative presentation of the data offlre micro—
the International Space Station. grawty, RPM and 1g experiments
Microgravity sci. technol. XIX-5/6 (2007) 227

"
"4","SJ. de Vet, R.Rutgers: From waste to energy: First experimental Bacterial Fuel Cells onboard the International Space Station
experiments used a nearly identical preparation protocol to the curves of the post—ﬂight fuel cells studied in the 1g environ-
ﬂight-protocol. All post-ﬂight experiments were prepared in the ment. This demonstrates from a biological point of view that
same portable glovebox with gas packs as used in the prepara— fuel cells work in a both a microgravity environment and a 1 g
tion of the ﬂight-fuel cells. Back—up and reference experiments environment.
used the same batch of bacteria and chemicals. After depletion In order to better compare the data to reﬂect on the use of
of these supplies, a new batch of chemicals, as close to the used bacterial fuel cells in microgravity, and to correct for the
batch was used. observed differences in magnitude, the data was normalized and
The post-ﬂight experiment included reference experiments presented a different, illustrative way such that comparing the
and Random Positioning Machine (RPM) experiments. All discharge phases of the bacterial ﬁJel cells in all the different
these post—ﬂight experiments were performed inside an incuba- gravitations conditions would be possible. To this extent a num—
tor using the exact ISS temperature proﬁle. The reference ber of operations on the data were performed. The measure—
experiments took place inside the RPM of the Dutch ments were ﬁrst cumulatively plotted meaning: adding a value
Experiment Support Centre (DESC). Half of the fuel cells were to the sum of the previous values. This operation yields a
placed on a stable platform in order to simulate only the ISS stretched s-shaped graph that represents the different phases of
temperature proﬁle in a lg environment. The other half of the the bacterial activities. Through time, the lag-phase, growth-
experiments was performed under both simulated microgravity phase and extinction-phase are visible. These phases can
on the RPM and an ISS temperature proﬁle. During the refer- respectively be distinguished as the lowest left end of the graph,
ence experiments the data of >8 RPM-fuel cells and >10 1 g fuel the rising almost linear part, and the right upper end of the graph 1
cells was collected. that is levelling off. The stretched s-shaped graph is the shape '-
for a normal functioning bacterial (or biological) system. With
3 Results and discussion the use of this technique, one can eliminate bacterial fuel cells
from further calculations if they do not show a lag—phase. The
The ﬁrst observation of the data obtained from the ﬂight exper- obtained graphs were subsequently ﬁtted using a tenth order
iment demonstrates the hardware operated well, and the data polynomial function. Using the ﬁtted function, the points of
were recorded properly. The bacterial fuel cells that were ﬂown inﬂection were calculated. The obtained cumulative graphs
to the International Space Station (n=2) however produced an were normalized between values 0 and l and subsequently plot— ;
overall low output. Figure 3 shows the discharge-curve of the ted with the points of inﬂection at coordinates (0,0). The results '
two ﬂight-fuel cells. The ﬂight back—up fuel cells (n=2), which of all these Operations are presented in ﬁgure 4 and apply to the '
closest resemble the ﬂight-BFCS, and the post—ﬂight experiment data obtained in the microgravity, simulated microgravity and
(n>15) have neither produced similar low outputs. The output of normal gravity experiments. This ﬁgure only presents compara-
bacterial fuel cells in 1g range from 0—04 mA with a majority ble data. Non-comparable datasets (i.e. those not having a lag-
clusterd in the range of 0—0,] mA. Simulated microgravity phase) have been disregarded.
ranges from 0—0,35 mA. Microgravity ranges from 0-0,02 mA. Fuel cells in a 1g and (simulated) microgravity environment
The origins of the large range in the magnitude of the overall all show a lag phase that results in a growth-phase. During the
output in the performed experiments is not clearly known, but lag-phase, the output of the fuel cells is generally higher in the
may be attributed to the amount of bacterial cells present inside case of (simulated) microgravity. However, after the point of
the bacterial fuel cells at the beginning of the experiment. inﬂection, the fuel cells subjected to microgravity do not show
Discharge-curves of bacterial fuels can in general be the same kind of extinction-phase and thereby differ from the
described by several features that are related to the behaviour of observed behaviour of the l g fuel cells. The fuel cells in micro-
the bacteria based on observations in lg. In case of a normal gravity show a tendency to remain producing output on an
functioning bacterial fuel cell, the discharge-curve will show almost ‘stable’ level while the 1g bacterial fuel cells already
three phases. The ﬁrst phase of the curve is contributed to the start to level off as a result of their extinction-phase. It has to be
lag-phase during which the produced output remains constant or noted that due to the low n-value, such a difference in behaviour
only shows a slight increase. The lag-phase is succeeded by a cannot be statistically proven. Fuel cells on the RPM under sim—
growth-phase during which the output rises signiﬁcantly and ulated microgravity also show a delayed response to level off.
reaches a maximum after a variable amount of days. After
reaching a maximum value the output is reduced during the 4 Conclusion
extinction-phase. When taking the effects of convecti on and dif—'
fusion into account for the size of the bacterial ﬁlel cells, the Data from the BugNRG experiment has provided the ﬁrst
observed extinction is most likely the result of pollution caused insights on the operational behaviour of bacterial fuel cells in
by the bacterial waste products and possibly the depletion of the microgravity.
available nutrients for the bacteria. The large variety in the magnitude of the output of the bacte-
The phases in the discharge—curves of the fuel cells ﬂown to rial fuel cells, regardless of the gravitational environment,
the 188 show similarities when compared to the discharge- makes it difﬁcult to simply compare the output of bacterial fuel
228 Microgravity sci. technol. XIX—5/6 (2007)

"
"5","S.J. de Vet, R.Rutgers: From waste to energy: First experimental Bacterial Fuel Cells onboard the International Space Stalin”
cells. To overcome this problem, the used technique of nonnal- 332 (2005)
izing and cumulative plotting of data facilitates a better com_ [5] Klaus. D.M.: Space Micrebiology: Mierogranvity and Microorganisms.
. . . The Encyclopedla of Envnonmental Mlcroblology, G. Bntton (ed). .lullll
parlson 0f the dlscharge-curves 0f bacterlal fuel cells. When Wiley & Sons,NY, pp. 2996—3004 (2002)
applied, differences are Present in the behaViour 0f baCteTial [6] Logan, B.E., Regan, J.M..' Electricity—producing bacterial communities in
fuel cells in different gravitational conditions. In (simulated) microbialfueleellS-Trendsin Microbiologyavol- 14, issue 12,13,135]?
microgravity, the lag-phase of bacterial fuel cells is more pro- 518 (2006)
ductive and after the point of inﬂection 0f the cumulative nor-
malized graphs no, or at least a very slow extinction—phase is
present. The observed difference in behaviour can however not
be statistically proven due to the low n-value of the micrograv-
ity—experiments. What can be concluded is that bacterial fuel
cells show similar phases in microgravity as in normal gravity.
This proves from a biological point of view that bacterial fuel
cells operate in space.
Bacterial fuel cell technology is still in its infancy. Many
technical hurdles to transform waste into energy still have to be
overcome such as high internal (ohmic) resistance [6]. These
ﬁrst insights in the operation of bacterial fuel cells in space
' show that bacterial fuel cells are promising for the use in sys-
tems inside (manned) space vehicles.
In all, the results of the performed experiments pave the way
for a new hypothesis that bacterial fuel cells in space have the
same phases in the discharge curves as in 1g but the lag-phase
and extinction—phase can differ in shape when subjected to a
(simulated) microgravity environment. However, the low n-
_ value of the microgravity experiments endorses the need for
€ more experiments in microgravity. Further research would
1 hence be recommendable to get more profound knowledge of
' the inﬂuences of gravity on the output of bacterial fuel cells.
i Acknowledgements
|
_ The experiment was funded by the Dutch ministry of Education,
1. Culture and Science. We are grateful for the unique opportunity
l given by the Dutch government and the European Space
' Agency. Special thanks go to the involved staff at the European
I Space Agency, the Faculty of Aerospace Engineering of the
| Delft University of Technology, the Molecular Cell Physiology
: department of the Free University of Amsterdam and the Dutch
I Experiment Support Centre. The industries Dutch Space (N L),
; Bradford Engineering (NL) and Veriteq Instruments Inc. (CAN)
- are gratefully recognized for their sponsorship and support.
: References
[l] Chad/mri, SK. Loviey, D.R.: Electricity generation by direct oxidation
of glucose in mediatorless microbial fuel cells. Nature Biotechnology,
! v0]. 2], nr.10, 1229—1232 (2003)
[2] Rabaev 1.. Ossieur W., Verhaege M, Verstraere W.. Continuous microbial
fuel cells convert carbohydrates to electricity. Water Science and
Technology 5204): pp515-523 (2005)
[3] F inneran KI, Johnsen C. V, Lovley D.R.: Rhodoferaxferrireducens sp.
nov., a psychrotolerant, facultatively anaerobic bacterium that oxidizes
acetate with the reduction of Fe(IlI). International Journal of Systematic
and Evolutionary Microbiology. May;53(Pt 3):669-73 (2003)
[4] Loviy, D.R.: Microbial fuel cells: novel microbial physiologies and engi-
neering approaches. Current Opinion in Biotechnology. 17(3): pp. 327—
Microgravity sci. technol. XIX-5/6 (2007) 229

"
