"","x"
"1","HICDPS: HUMAN INTERFACE COMPUTER Beckers F, Verheyden B, De Winne F, Duque P, Chaput D, Aubert A E.
Hicops: Human interface computer program in space.
PROGRAM IN SPACE 1 1 J Clin Monit 2004; 18: 131—136
Frank Bakers.) PhD) MEZg’ Bart Verheyden’ A/gphyfbid’ ABSTRACT. Background. During long experimental set ups, a
Frank D e l/ane, MEi/Lg, Pedro Duque’ MEi/Lg, Dldler protocol book usually guides cosmonauts. This is not very easy to
CIWPW; M13748} cmd André E Aubert, P 141); M85] work with in microgravity conditions and is not very efﬁcient.
For the cardiovascular physiology experiment CARDIOCOG
during the Belgian Soyuz Mission (Odissea, November 2002)
we developed a software program that guided the cosmonauts
through the experiment. The software was developed in Lab—
VIEW thoroughly tested by CNES and the Russian space au—
thorities and transported to the 188 as a stand—alone application.
An adapted version was used during the Spanish Cervantes Mis—
sion in October 2003. Results. This program provided several
advantages: (1) error procedures could be easily dealt with in
using the program’s incorporated error structure; (2) the experi—
mental sequences were easy to follow for the cosmonauts; (3) the
experimental duration was exactly the same for all repetitions of
the experiment, since the program imposed the timing; (4) after
the ﬂight, we were able to reconstruct all sequences of the exper—
iment using a log—ﬁle that was automatically created during the
different steps of the experiment; and (5) we were able to impose
exact breathing frequencies to the cosmonauts using a Visual aid.
Conclusion. Less training was necessary for the cosmonauts to
learn the experiment. Reconstruction of the experiment timing
was easy. Exact breathing frequencies were Obtained at each rep—
etition. The program HICOPS worked to the overall satisfaction
of the cosmonauts and they preferred working with HICOPS
instead of with paper ﬂow sheets. Data for the cardiovascular eX—
periment during both missions were Obtained in a standardised
way.
KEY WORDS. Space software, graphic language, human interface,
Odissea, Cervantes, ISS, ESA Soyuz mission, medical informatics,
telemedicine.
INTRODUCTION
The scientiﬁc programs of short—duration space missions
are Often fully booked. Maximum amount of science (life
science as well as physical science experiments) is to be
performed on the few days spent on board the Interna—
tional Space Station (188). This is also the case for the
European Soyuz Flights, allowing the European astronauts
and Russian cosmonauts to work and live on board the
From the 1Laborat0ry of Experimental Cardiology Department 188.
of Molecular and Cardiovascular Research,2 Univer51ty Hospital For the Belgian TaXi Fligh t (Odissea Mission, November
Gasthuisberg, K.U. Leuven, Leuven,Belg1um, ESA astronaut, EAC, _ _
C Ologne, Germany, and the 3CNES, Toulouse, France. 2002).the protocols of the cardlovascular eicperlments were
Received 15 Dec, 2003, and in revised form 10 Feb, 2004. Accepted cornbmed to reduce the tOtal preparatlon tmlC' The prepa—
for publication 20 Feb, 2004. ratlons were 51mllar for all experlments. Durmg all experl—
, ments, ECG and blood pressure (ﬁnger cuffmethod) were
Address Correspondence to A.E. Aubert, Laboratory OfExperimen— . . . .
tal Cardiology, University Hospital Gasthuisberg O/N, Herestraat 49, recorded. contmueusly and In the dlfferent subpartspllYSi—
3000 Leuven, Belgium Ologlcal 1ntervent10ns were planned 1n order to e11C1t var1—
E—mail: Andre.aubert@med. kuleuven.ac.be ations in the autonomic control of cardiovascular function.
Journal ofClinical Monitoring and Computing 18: 131—136, 2004.
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands

"
"2","132 Journal ofClinical Monitoring and Computing Vol 18 N0 2 2004
The joint protocol, CARDIOCOG, consisted of four ware has been used for several years at the Laboratory of
parts: Experimental Cardiology, Leuven, Belgium [2—5], and has
excellent tools to create user interfaces. Also the possibil—
1, RHYTHM; (PI; Andre Aubert, K,U, Leuven, Leuven, ity to create stand—alone applications was an asset. Software
Belgium): baseline measurements theart rate variabil— development started in the ﬁrst months Of 2002 and the
jty (HRV), blood pressure variability (BPV) and spon— ﬁnal version of the program for the Odissea Mission was
taneous baroreﬂex sensitivity (1) presented on 19 July 2002 after a critical evaluation by the
2, RESPI; (PI; Manuel Paiva, ULB, Brussels, Belgium): French space organisation Centre National d’Etudes Spa—
inﬂuence of imposed breathing frequencies on HRV tiales (CNES). After this date, the pI‘OtOCOlS could be WI‘it—
and BPV ten and the ﬁnal tests of the hard disk were performed. The
3, STRESS; (PI; Claude Gharib, Lyon, France): Inﬂuence hardware and software were also evaluated by RosaViakos—
of mental stress and controlled breathing 0n HRV and mos, a Russian space agency. Special attention was given
BPV t0 the user interface of the program, which should be con—
4, TEXT; (PI; Martin ijj; VUB, Brussels, Belgium): sistent throughout the program, Clear and easy to use.
Cognitive tests and the relation with heart rate. The ﬁnal acceptance procedure went as follows: The
program was uploaded to the 188 on a removable hard disk
As a result, the total experiment lasted for 87 min during that allows to bring SPCCiﬁC software related to experiments
the Odissea Mission (Figure 13). For the Cervantes Mission, from a mission to the station. It also serves for data storage
a shorter protocol lasting for 30 min (Figure 1b) was worked for results from experiments Obtained during the mission.
out with Prof. Gharib, France, consisting Of the following: These hard disks have to be resistant to the harsh conditions
imposed by space ﬂight (especially mechanical constraints
1. RHYTHM: baseline measurement of ECG, BP and during lift Off and landing).
respiration; Once the software related to the experiments is loaded
2. FLEXION: 1 min ﬂexion of the head; onto the hard disk a validation phase is initiated to Check the
3. STRESS: inﬂuence of mental stress test on cardiovas— appropriate functioning Of each subroutine. Every com—
cular parameters; mand is tested in both nominal mode and degradation. It
4. IMPOSED BREATHING: inﬂuence oftwo controlled must be possible to work around every software defect in
breathing frequencies on cardiovascular variability. order to not endanger the correct execution of an experi—
ment. Training sessions and pre—ﬂight measurements add to
In the past, the cosmonauts were guided through such this validation.phase. Remarks about the ergonomy frorh
an experiment with a lively protocol book, which is difﬁ— the end—user, 1'6"" the eosmonaut, can be integrated until
cult to handle in microgravity conditions. Also in previous 3 months befere the mISSIOh' _ _
experiments using ﬁxed or controlled breathing rates, the The hard $115k is then Smeltted t0 testprogtams in C01—
- - - - laboration w1th R0sav1ak0sm0s before being shipped to the
respiratory frequency was timed using the wristwatches 0f _ _
the cosmonauts. This created deviations from the intended 188 by a Progress YCSSCI' This p ?Ogmm veriﬁes the test re—
frequency and was not very accurate and more demanding sults Oh the hard disk, Checking its integrity after Simulated
0n the subjects. The use Of the protocol books can also be space ﬂlght' Finally, every coinmand 0.fthe software p reseiit
very time consuming. For this reason, the exact timing of Oh the hard (hSk 1_S tested Wlth a dedicated p rogram' Th1s
an experiment was hard to predict and experiments were test is repeated tw1ce: ﬁrst time by ESA/CNES in Western
not standardised. Europe. All remarks are corrected when needed before the
Therefore, we opted to develo p a software program to second and ﬁnal test by R0sav1ak0sm0s 1n Russ1a.
guide the cosmonauts through the different protocols, in
a uniform manner, resulting in ﬁxed experiment timelines
and very standardised experimental procedures. APPLICATION
— The software program was used during the pre—ﬂight base—
PREPARATIONS line data collections to familiarise the cosmonauts with the
program. Also, the software was used during the hardware
The software platform Chosen was LabVIEW version 5.1 training sessions.
(Laboratory Virtual Instruments, National Instruments, The Odissea Mission with Belgian ESA astronaut Frank
Austin, TX, USA). LabVIEW is a graphical language using De Winne (ﬂight engineer), together with his two Russian
blocks as programming elements (subroutines). This soft— crewmembers, Sergei Zaletin (commander) and Yuri

"
"3","Beckers et al: Hicops: Medical Space Software 133
a Putting on
Equipment
16 min 20 min i 17 min 24 min
”—H r \ 10 min /——/¥—‘—ﬂ
Rhythm Respi Stress Text
Pace.d Stress Controlled
breathing test breathing
15-75-9-6-12
E .m I“
Putting off
Equipment
calib = calibration
basal = baseline recording of parameters
br/min = breaths/minute
b .
Putting on
Equipment
BASELINE FLEXION 'STRESS FREQ_1 FREQ_2
1 min 10 min 1 min 1 min 5 min 1 min 5 min 1 min ' 5 min
Putting off
Equipment
Freq_1: controlled breathing at 12 breaths/min
Freq_2: controlled breathing at 15 breaths/min
Fig. 1. Time line of the cardiovascular experiments during the Odissea Mission (a) and the Cervantes Mission ([9).
Lonchakov (ﬂight engineer), lifted Offon 30 October 2002 The software was used on ﬂight days 5 and 8. An adapted
at 03:11 UT (04:11 CET) from the Baikonur cosmodrome version of the software was used on the Spanish Cervantes
With a brand—new type of Soyuz spacecraft: the Soyuz— Mission With Spanish ESA astronaut Pedro Duque. The
TMA. They reached the 18$ 2 days later, on 1 Novem— launch took place from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in
her and successfully docked With the Station at 05:00 UT Kazakhstan at 07.38 CET on 18 October 2003. Docking
(06:00 CET). took place on 20 October.

"
"4","134 Journal ofClim'cal Monitoring and Computing Vol 18 No 2 2004
I) l .udmt:u:)1Hn<;lhIII Hump: Hh-a. F1135?
n: Tm
it‘s] . 'v ’ r-V ‘l i- '.‘ on: ‘A ’ I ‘7 ‘ 6:2;
1:"": .‘. e. 5r: ‘3 C C“ C C C C C 7,;
‘2‘, Baseline % Imposed Rastperiod % Baseline Stresstost m Controlled -W
5.3: 1 min measurement breathing ‘ measurement breathing 1 min ‘- .-
1. 15 minutes 19min 10 minutes ' 5minutes 5minutas 5minutes
2d 1 ‘ hf“
I"". ‘u L'
:3   c a a q a a. c o ,
‘31 15 br/min Rest 7.5 br/min Rest 9br/min Gbrlmin Rest 12 brfmin ‘2 ,1;
'2: 3min 1min 3min 1min 3min 3min 1min 3min 9}!""
23::
$7171
;; ""
3,2] l“ , ; 4 M] “iv ‘ ""‘2;""-‘» ,l'W. ‘I'f A 0,.“ . T-‘Z'l,
~ 1: :2’ ‘- 1“}: ' «i.-
. ., "". .‘ t .‘s- 'I'. -.’ '3.“
?€- .A h ' .t 1:. (.3: 1-.\ :4“
~.. '~ *v'.» ’ vs {'5'-
3; ' 63:3
'52 1 :4};
1 1‘3""»
'5"" %
V- 1?-
%; WWWWM‘CRFJJV:M'W U‘fn‘ﬁammw LW 3: {i
33? 2C!
‘3’: "",ITITIT[’7-TQTJEZTTTTTT : 1 1 , r i , i t {32
"" * ‘5'
9 f)» Go to other phase ﬁg.
.3: odﬂea eta""
V,‘ r.)
5; T :
r. ' “0 311:“.1 ‘ 'A 7'? 3"".152' '9' 2“ -""‘.‘."".""r ' ‘. ""‘x "" , > "" ' . "" “1 “.7‘-' ”Why"" 9’ “J. . .K' br-J'r""! 'N.—"" 7-"". tr..°\ "" ""b‘u‘tu'. “..A‘. ""WW1"" 0'4"". 'uJ‘L—""if’r 1'1 ""'--"" 1"" »'!.1.
Fig. 2. HICOPS user intey‘ace. Software translation of the Odissea protocol. The bar imposes breathing at ﬁxed rate.

The installation of the software on board 188 was re— There are strong arguments for developing more user—
ported as ‘easy’ by the cosmonauts. It was done by chang— oriented software. This approach allows standardised pro—
ing the removable hard drive of the laptop and rebooting cedures for physiological parameter recordings. It is also a
from the drive. All icons needed to conduct the experi— compulsory procedure for long—term ﬂights or deep space
ment were readily available on the centre of the desktop. missions where communication with Earth would suffer
Different icons were available for each crewmember, fur— signiﬁcant delays.
ther facilitating the start—up of the software. In the past, some software was developed to obtain an

The software was mostly self—explanatory, leading to an objective physical state evaluation [6] of cosmonauts, and
easy execution of the experiment. Indications were very accordingly make individual prescriptions for current state
clear and it was very easy for the crew to follow instructions, optimisation. This software can be developed into a com—
including the breathing rhythm, which was found very puter expert system for stand—alone operation during long—
intuitive by all crewmembers. Figure 2 shows the protocol term ﬂights.
translated into the HICOPS software. Other software was designed as an expert system allowing

to estimate the cosmonaut’s current psycho—physiological

— state and also to individualise the physical training programs
DISCUSSION [7] .

Another project consisted of developing a management

Space missions would have been impossible without the aid information system, including a database management sys—

of informatics. Ever since the ﬁrst space exploration more tem and a decision support system [8], to dynamically anal—

then 40 years ago (Y. Gagarin, April 1961), informatics has yse the variable nutritional content of foods grown and

been an important part of every ﬂight. However, most of prepared in an Advanced Life Support System such as re—

the software, if not the major part, are purely related to quired for long—duration space missions. A health mainte—

operational aspects. nance facility has been developed for use in the 18$ [9].

"
"5","Bakers et al: Hicops: Medical Space Software 135
Its essential component is a computerised medical decision procedures could be generated by hardware failures, or
support system to facilitate automatic decision—making be— by emergency tasks to be carried out by the cosmonauts,
fore making ground links with supporting physicians. A thereby interrupting the experiment execution.
supporting telemedicine network, connecting the partners 2. The experiment sequences were easy to follow for
on an organisational and technical level, facilitates the har— the cosmonauts because of the Visual time indicators.
monisation process and provides new means for effective Therefore, less pre—ﬂight training time could be assigned
cooperation between medical professionals [10]. to this experiment.

Our program is intended to be a personal manager for 3. The experiment duration was exactly the same for all
the crew during the cardiovascular experiments. It guided repetitions of the experiment, since the program im—
the subjects throughout the different phases of the exper— posed ﬁxed timings for each sequence of the protocol.
iments. Even in case of drawbacks, the program could be 4. After the ﬂight, we were able to reconstruct all se—
stopped and continued at any point after the problem had quences of the experiment using a log—ﬁle that was
been solved. Data loggers allowed to document all differ— automatically created during the different steps of the
ent phases and special events during the recording sessions. experiment. This log—ﬁle allowed us to monitor off—
Other versions for ground—based baseline data collection line the sequences of the program and the different user
and pre—ﬂight training were easily derived from the space interactions with the interface.
version. The software was easily adapted to the different 5. We were able to impose exact breathing frequencies to
set up during the Cervantes Mission and will be adapted the cosmonauts using a Visual aid for each repetition of
for the Delta Mission. Adapted versions of this application the experiment.
can be used for bed—rest studies or for Mars base simulation 6. The program is very versatile and could easily be adapted
studies at Concordia in the Antarctic continent. to other situations (pre— and post—ﬂight recordings,

adaptations for other space missions).
Roomfor improvements 7. Results of cardiovascular experiments during both the
Odissea Mission and the Cervantes Mission were ob—
On—screen instructions were only available in English, and tained in a standardised, uniform way for 311 subjects,
for Russian crewmembers it would have been easier to have as well for the pre— and post—ﬂight recordings as for the
the instructions also in Russian. in—ﬂight measurements.

Further more, not all instructions were displayed on the The program HICOPS worke d to the overall satisfac—
screen. During the procedure, the crew also had to ma— _ _ _

. 1 te the Porta res device. Porta res rocedures were tion of the cosmonauts and they preferred working w1th
I11Pu a P P P -

l ' 'l r but sli htl different throu hout the HICOPS instead ofpaper ﬂow sheets.
aways very s1m1 a g y g
whole experiment. These instructions were not presented
on the sereen so the crew had to use an additional crew ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
card, Wthh made the execution more difﬁcult. It was rec— —
ommended by the cosmonauts that once the software and . . . .

. . . We thank all persons haying supported our part1c1pation
Portapres installation is complete, the complete procedure . . . .
would be run from the laptop so that the crew would not H? the Odissea and Cervantes MISSIOHS: DWTC in Bel—
h f ds. gium and from ESA/ESTEC. We also thank the Odissea

ave to re er to crew car . . . .
and Cervantes crew for their efforts in making these mis—
sions a success. This study was supported by a grant from

CONCLUSIONS— the Belgian Federal Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc Affairs (PRODEX
— Program) and BUSOC.

Our application of medical informatics could also be

adapted for use in the ongoing development of telemedi— REFERENCES—
C1ne [11] to support eXtended space ﬂights. As space vehi— —
Cles move farther and farther from earth, current telemetry 1' Beékels. E Verheyden. B, Albert AB EVfﬂquD Of heart Fate
systems will not be able tot provide timely medical support. 333:??? £362? dunng and after Spaceﬂlght'l Grew” Physwl’
Hence, there Wlll be _a need for Oﬂboard medical support 2. Beckers F. Linear and non—linear analysis of cardiovascular vari—
SyStemS that are intelligent and autonomous [12l' ability: Validation and Clinical applications. Leuven University

Our program HICOPS provided following advantages. press, 2002.

3. Beckers F, Ramaekers D, Aubert AE. Approximate entropy of
1- Error Procedures COUId be easily dealt With by 11$ng heart rate variability: Validation of methods and application in
the program’s incorporated error structure. These error heart failure. Cardiovasc Eng 2001; 1: 177—182.

"
"6","136 Journal ofClinical Monitoring and Computing Vol 18 N0 2 2004

4. Aubert AE, Ramaekers D, Beckers F, et al. The analysis theart 8. Kang S, Both A]. A management information system to study
rate variability in unrestrained rats. Validation of method and space diets. Life Support Biosphys Sci 2002; 8: 191—197.
results. Comput Methods Programs Biomed 1999; 60: 197— 9. Gardner RM, Ostler DV, Nelson BD, Logan JS. The role of
213. smart medical systems in the space station. Int] Clin Monit

5. Beckers F, Ramaekers D, Aubert AE. ACTS: Automated calcu— Comput 1989; 6: 91—98.
lation Oftachograms and systograms. Prog Biomed Res 1999; 4: 10. Wilke D, Padeken D, Weber T, Gerzer R. Telemedicine for the
160—165. International Space Station. Acta Astronaut 1999; 44: 579—581.

6. Sonkin V, Kozlovskaya I, Bourchick M, Zaitseva V. Working 11. GrigorieV AI, Sarkisian A. A steps to the medicine of the fu—
ability ergometric testing of Russian cosmonauts during long— ture: Russian experience in telemedicine. Comput Technol Med
term ﬂights.] Gravit Physiol 1997; 4: 119—120. 1996; 2: 56—64.

7. Sonkin V, Zaitseva V, Bourchick M, Kozlovskaya I, Stepantsov V, 12. GrigorieV AI, Koslovskaya IB, Potapov AN. Goals ofbiomedical
Sonkin V: Elaboration of on—board automated training system. support Ofa mission to Mars and possible approaches to achieving
J Gravit Physiol 2000; 7: 163—164. them. Aviat Space Environ Med 2002; 73: 379—384.

"
