"","x"
"1","Nature Reviews Cancer | AOP, published online 12 Apri12013; doi:10.1038/nrc3507 R E V I E W S |
U ' b d ' t' t' t
' f h E th
Jeanne L. Becker and Glauco R. Souza
Abstract | Experiments conducted in the microgravity environment of space are not typically
at the forefront of the mind of a cancer biologist. However, space provides physical
conditions that are not achievable on Earth, as well as conditions that can be exploited to
study mechanisms and pathways that control cell growth and function. Over the past four
decades, studies have shown how exposure to microgravity alters biological processes that
may be relevant to cancer. In this Review, we explore the influence of microgravity on cell
biology, focusing on tumour cells grown in space togetherwith work carried out using
models in ground—based investigations.
Nuclear force Four fundamentalforces are at work in our universe: weak It is important to note that, for the purposes of this
The force holdingtogether nuclear force, strong nuclear force, electromagnetic force Review, the term microgravity applies specifically to
subatomic particles of the and gravitational forcel. Gravity is the attractive the conditions of reduced gravity that are experienced
“Udeus- force between all matter and is the most familiar force in the space environment. Studies conducted in space
. in everydaylife — so familiar that it is rarely considered have been complemented by the use of relevant cell
Electromagnetic force , , , , , . . . . .
The force associated with as an experimental parameter in biological studies. In culture paradigms that pr0V1de culture conditions akin
electric and magnetic fields. space, however, the force ofgravity is diminished, result— to those observed in the microgravity environment,
_ _ ing in microgravity. In the microgravity environment of including reduced ﬂuid shear, cellular colocation, opti—
M'Cr9f3rav'ty . space, the apparent weight of an object or a system is mized suspension and three—dimensional (3D) growth.
COHdlthﬂS of reduced graVIty b t t' 11 d d d °th 't t 1 . ht' C b' . th . . ht . d f b d'
experienced specifically in the su s an 1a yre uce compare w1 1 s ac ua weig in em ining e insig. game rom space— ase inves—
Space environment. standard gravity (1 g) on the surface of the Earth, and local tigations together With data from on—ground culture
acceleration experienced in space is a small proportion models that are capable of sustaining the culture condi—
Standard graVIty of that felt in 1 g [REF 2). For spacecraft in low Earth orbit, tions observed in space could afford a new approach to
The natural force of attraction h' 1 1 . ff f 11 d . h d f
exerted by Earth on objects at V6 1c es can trave in a state 0 rec a at spee s in excess t e stu y 0 cancer.
or near its surface. of 17,000 miles per hour, and gravitational force ranges
from 10‘4 g to 10‘6 g (REF. 5). For example, aboard the Early cell-based studies in microgravity
LOW Earth orbit . International Space Station (188), a full orbit around Initial investigations of the effects of microgravity 0n
Ac'rwlarorb‘teXtendmgtO the Earth is completed in approximately 90 minutes. human cells were carried out during the US Skylab
approx1mately],200 mlles I h 1970 h b d. d d P . h 1 1970 Th . .
above the Earth’s surface. 11 t e s, umans egan spen mg exten e rogram int 6 ear y s. ese m1ss10ns were car—
periods of time aboard orbiting spacecraft, thus paving ried out to gain insight into physiological and biomedi—
Gravity-dependent the way for conducting biological experiments in space cal changes that occur during extended exposure to
COhVGCthl’] . [TIMELIME). As fundamental investigations began in the microgravity in low Earth orbit, ranging from 28 days
2:123:21 deﬂgfrgxlxjilS/OF gas space environment, it became evident that biological to 84 days. Data from Skylab demonstrated that living
' properties change as gravitational force is diminished, biological systems, from humans to single cells, can read—
underscoring the relationship between physical force ily adapt and thrive in the space environment. WI—38
and biological function. Cells exposed to microgravity human embryonic lung cells cultured for up to 28 days
can be profoundly affected by the physical changes that during Skylab 111 showed no significant changes in
Nan03D Biosciences, 7,000 occur in this unique environment, which include the growth rate, chromosome banding, mitotic index or cell
Fannin Street, Suite 2140, loss of gravity—dependent convection, negligible hydro— cycle compared with ground control cells”. However,
Igouston T); 7 7 0:03 (152' dynamic shear and lack of sedimentation1’4’5. This results differences were observed in spent media constituents
orrésmn ence O ' '. ' in the ability of cells to colocate, coalesce and form between ﬂight and ground cultures, includingincreased
e-mall: [becker@n3dblo. com . . . . . . .
doi:10.1058/nrc5507 complex multicellular aggregates and 0rgan01ds,wh1ch glucose concentrations in ﬂight cultures, which sug—
Published online 12 April 2015 can be sustained for days or months in microgravity3’6. gests altered metabolism in microgravity. Examination
NATURE REVIEWS CANCER ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION 1
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

"
"2","At a glance of extracellular matrix, cell Polarization and spatially
— unrestricted cell—cell interaction16‘27. To date, monolayer
. In the microgravity environment Of space, cells assemble into multicellular culture is still one of the most commonly used methods
three—dimensional C°“$tr“Ct$- for growing cells, where gravity prevails as a dominant
0 Reduced gravitational forcehas been shown to have far—ranging effectson cell force. When anchorage—dependent cells are transferred
Igcgrowth anclil functﬁan, mcgldmg :fflectslon gene eypressnon, the production of soluble to a culture ﬂask, gravity drives them to the bottom of
actors, C'e‘ S'gna mg an Cytos e eta orgamzatlén' . . the container where they adhere, ﬂatten and divide as a
0 Suspensnon—based cell culture can be achieved usmg the rotating wall bIoreactor, . .

, , , , , , , , 2D monolayer. In contrast to growth m vzvo, monolayer

clmostat, random posntlonmg machme and magnetic leVItatIon.These models . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . culture yields art1f1c1alcond1tions in which cells interact
provnde certam conditions that are observed during culture In mncrogravnty, . . . . .
including lack of sedimentation, reduced fluid shear, optimized cellular colocation Wlth a Stlff’ ﬂat surface and he“? hmlted cell—cell inter—
and three—dimensional growth. connectedness. Therefore, 1t1s important to use 111 vztro

0 Research approaches derived from space—based investigations may be applicable to methods that support biologically representative models
advance our knowledge of tumour biology, as well as inform the development of new 0f the m VWO 3D growth enVironment.
anticancer technologies and therapeutic strategies.
The RWV bioreactor and Clinostat. The ability to
achieve unrestricted 3D growth in suspension on
of peripheral red blood cells from Skylab crew verified Earth, as occurs in microgravity, is a problem that was
previous spaceﬂight data demonstrating reduced red addressed by NASA (National Aeronautics and Space
blood cell mass on return from orbit9 and also revealed Administration) through the development of the rotat—
substantial alterations in the distribution of erythrocyte ing wall vessel (RWV) bioreactor28‘31. The RWV is a
shape, from discoid to echinocytic, with increased time in horizontally rotating vessel with no internal mechani—
spacelo. Interestingly, all erythrocyte shape changes were cal agitator. A central silicone membrane is present in
reversed within several hours of landing. Lymphocyte the RWV that delivers oxygen Via diffusion, avoiding the
counts remained unchanged in Skylab astronauts; production of bubbles that are disruptive to the growing
numbers of neutrophils were increased at landing, but cells. The vessel is completely filled with culture media
returned to baseline within several days. Lymphocytes and thus has no air—liquid interface [FIG 1). Because
W displayed varying amounts of surface microvilliw, and there are no internal moving parts, the vessel provides a
Stress arising in a fluid that is a decreased mitogen—induced blastogenesis has been culture environment that is characterized by low shear
function ofthe ﬂuid velocity observed9‘12. This work was the foundation for sub— and low turbulence. Within the RWV, adherent cells are
gradient and viscosity. sequent experiments that have further examined how grown on microcarrier beads to provide a solid sup—
_ _ reduced gravity affects the growth and function of both port; the cells readily attach and cover the surface of the
Sedimentation . . . . .
Th . . . normal cells and cancer cells. microcarriers. With continued growth, multiple cell—
e settlmg of SOlld materlal . .
from a state Of suspension. covered beads coalesce, undergo cellular bridging and
Relevant cell culture models on Earth generate high—density, 3D aggregate structures under
D‘iscoid Space—based research has been part of the paradigm conditions of optimized suspension and uniform mix—
EllsgjjliZITEape Of normal red shift in the field of cell biology, for which new tools have ing to allow for the effective transfer of nutrients and
' been created for culturing cells in three dimensions. It is metabolic wasteZ9‘31. As the RWV rotates, culture ﬂuid
Echinocytic now well understood that 3D growth environments that achieves near laminar ﬂow and the cellular aggregates pre—
Abnormally sha 106d red blood facilitate unrestricted cell—cell interactions are important sent in the ﬂuid are in a state of free fall, but never reach
C6”: exh'b'tmg blunt Sp'CUle for deﬁning the biology of cancer cells and tissue, includ— the bottom of the vessel owing to the constant rotation
pro mSlonS' ing tumour formation, the tumour microenvironment of the RWV. The RWV was originally designed to replicate
Spheroids and tumour progression13’14. Early studies by Emerman and certain conditions that occur in the reduced gravity enVi—
Three—dimensional multicellular collaborators15 demonstrated that the tissue—like struc— ronment of space, including the lack of sedimentation,
dimers 01' aggregates ture of mammary epithelial cells could be maintained substantially reduced ﬂuid shear and optimized cellular
Turbulence in 3D—type ﬂoating collagen gels. Work by Bissell and colocalization; the physics and engineering principles of
Disordered motion in a fluid Brugge on breast carcinoma has shown the importance RWV culture are described in detail elsewhere5’28’32.
yielding disru pted and irregular of 3D architecture for creating biologically representative The RWV has been considered as a specialized form of
ﬂow. in vitro cancer models16‘20. Nederman, Carlsson and col— Clinostat, as both culture devices operate by the process
_ leagues showed that human osteosarcoma, glioma and of clinorotation; that is, rotation about their horizontal
Laminar flow . . . . . 32 33 . . .
Fl . . . thyr01d carc1noma cells grown as multicellular spherOIds aX1s ’ . The slow—rotating clinostat has a long history
u1d ﬂow occurrmg m layers. _ _ . . . . . . . .
m vztro exhibit functional and structural characteristics of use in plant biology; more recently, the fast—rotating
Clinostat akin to growth occurring in vivo, including the expres— clinostat has been applied to microbial culture and cell
A hQViZOHtaW mating CUItUVe sion of complex extracellular matrix and lowered pH culture32’34’35. Like the RWV, the clinostat operates as a
dev'ce' within interior portions of the spheroid21‘25. Acker26 and completely ﬂuid—filled vessel and, Via horizontal rotation,
Clinorotation KunZ—Schughart et al.27 have suggested that 3D spheroids facilitates the suspension of cells as they fall through the
Rotation of a culture vessel cultivated in vitro represent ideal systems for examining culture medium. Although the RWV and the clinostat
about its horizontal axis. aspects of the tumour environment that are observed both supply near—laminar ﬂow, the RWV provides mem—
_ in vivo. In order to achieve an accurate representation brane oxygenation to the growing culture, which is not
Membrane oxygenation . . . . . .
Oxygen delivered to cells in of the tumour m1croenv1ronment,1t1s necessary that 3D a feature of the clinostat. In the clinostat, cells may be
a culture vessel via a multicellular constructs generated in vitro exhibit prop— cultured in a monolayer on glass slides, which is not a
gas—permeable membrane. erties that are observed in vivo, including the production feature of the RWV. lmportantly, neither culture vessel
2 ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION www.nature.com/reviews/cancer
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

"
"3","Gravitational vector removes the force of gravity; the continuous rotation subconﬂuent monolayer of cells is affixed to the centre
Unidirectional downward pull of the vessels yields a constant randomization of the of a platform in an interconnected framework that is
of the force of gravity. gravitational vector, but gravity remains present5’32’35. comprised of two perpendicular arms that rotate inde—
Both the RWV and the clinostat have been used to pendently of each other, to create continuous random
prepare for cell—based experiments to be conducted in directional adjustment of the culture ﬂask [FIG 2). The
space, as growth conditions in the two systems permit ﬂask is filled completely with media and aeration occurs
useful modelling for experimental design and ﬂight pay— Via a gas—permeable cap. During growth in the RPM,
load logistics. However, RWV technology has proved to cells can detach from the surface of the ﬂask and form
have broad applications for the generation of 3D archi— multicellular spheroids, hence incubation in the RPM
tecture for numerous cell types, including cancer cells. yields cell growth in suspension, as well as cells remain—
This cultivation technique allows for the production of ing adhered in 2D culture. In the RPM, the gravity vector
large batches (10 ml to 500 m1 volumes) of 3D multi— is constantly reoriented, as occurs in clinorotation, but
cellular aggregates, and supports the ability to obtain this occurs with increased directional randomization in
serial samples without the disruption of the culture as a manner such that no prevailing orientation occurs; the
a whole, which facilitates cell expansion and the long— physics and engineering principles of RPM culture have
term study of continued development of 3D cellular been described in detail elsewhere72‘75. The device may
architecture. Growth in the RWV has supported the be operated either as a clinostat, in which only one of the
development of models of breast cancer36‘38, cervical two supporting frames rotates, or in 3D mode whereby
cancer”, colon cancer40‘42, hepatocellular carcinoma43’44, both frames rotate. As described above for the clinostat
neuroblastoma45, melanoma46‘48, ovarian cancer“50 and and the RWV, continuous rotation of the RPM provides
prostate cancer51‘55. Clinostat culture has supported the constant randomization of the gravity vector, making
rowth of astroc toma56, e idermoid carcinoma57‘59, this device a useful ad'unct to re are for s aceﬂi ht
g Y P J P P P g
Leydig tumour“, melanoma“, neuiroblastoma62 and studies. The RPM has been used to develop culture
osteosarcoma cells63‘65. Key findings from these studies models of malignant glioma76, thyroid carcinoma“—71
are discussed in more detail below. and leukaemic cells77’78; the key findings from which are
discussed below.
The RPM. The random positioning machine (RPM; also
known as the 3D clinostat) can support certain condi— Magnetic levitation. Although various techniques are
tions of the space microgravity environment, including available to generate 3D architecture in vitro, includ—
the lack of sedimentation to facilitate cell colocation ing extracellular matrix protein ge1s18’19’79, liquid
and growth of multicellular spheroids66‘71. As opposed overlay using thin layer agalrosem‘25 and polymeric
to the RWV in which cells are cultured entirely in sus— scaffolds19’80‘83, these approaches do not maintain cells
pension, in the RPM a tissue culture ﬂask containing a in suspension, as is the case in the RWV, clinostat and
Timeline | Experimenting in space*
(1966—1969) Biosatellite (1973—1974) Skylab (1981—2011)Space shuttle programme: US STS. Reusable (1994—1998) Shuttle-Mir programmezjoint US and
programme: a series of programme: the first launch system for crew operations in low Earth orbit, Russian collaborative programme. Focused on
three US satellites US space station. functioning as a vehicle for servicing missions (for example, cooperation between US and Russian crew for
focused on fundamental Focused on human Hubble telescope and ISS construction) and as a platform operations and vehicle docking; biological and
science. After the physiological and for biological and physical research investigations physical research investigations were also conducted
termination ofthe biomedical research
programme, US in support of (1986—2000) Mir programme: the second Russian (1999—present) Shenzhou
colla borative biosatellite extended living in space station. The first modular space station and the programme: Chinese space vehicle.
efforts continued with space, as well as first consistently occupied space station in orbit. Current space laboratory Tiangong
participation in the studies on Earth and Focused on operations for long-term human presence is a test bed for modular Chinese
Russian Bion programme Sun observation in space and on biological and physical research space station to be developed
1966 1971 1973 1981 1983 1986 1993 1994 1998 1999
(1971—1986) Salyut programme (1983—1998) Spacelab programme: (1993—2003) US Spacehab (1998—present) ISS programme:
(includes Almaz programme): the first joint US and Europe collaborative programme: pressurized, largest space station constructed to
Russian space station, comprised of a programme. Pressurized, reusable reusable mixed use date. Efforts are focused on research
consecutive series of spacecraft. laboratory module flown on the laboratory module flown and development for both academic
Focused on crew operations in space, space shuttle that supported on the space shuttle. and commercial interests across all
as wellas engineering and biologicaland physicalresearch, as Capable of supporting majorscience disciplines
technology demonstrations, remote well as pallets for exposure to the biologicaland physical
observation and military applications external space environment research, as well as
habitat systems
(1966—1996) Bion programme: Russian biosatellite programme focused
on fundamental space biology and radiation experiments in insects,
plants and animals. Programme is scheduled to resume in 2013
ISS, International Space Station; STS, Space Transportation System.*The years refer to the dates in which the programme was in use in space.
NATURE REVIEWS CANCER ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION 3
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

"
"4","R E V | E W S
a b c using a warm bore superconductive magnet, although this
. ‘\\ w , tissue culture apparatus requires cryogenic tempera—
ﬁ, @ ° ﬁg“ ’1 I ' f tures (liquid helium) for cooling superconductive coils,
9 _ “(w )3?“ l» ‘(ul-al' . A , .5 and can subject cells to magnetic fields more than an
, // W E“ . 7 ‘ q: .. order of magnitude higher than those generated with
’ 0 g i?"" - permanent magnets93’94.
\sﬁ{ /'

_ . _ _ Advantages and constraints of the cell culture models.
Figure 1 | RWV bloreactot 3D cell culture. a |Aschematlc representation of the The connection between structure and function can
rotating wall vessel (RWV) Illustrating the motor (1), which powers a belt that rotates . .
the culture vessel (2) about its horizontal axis is shown. Incubator air is pumped in (3), be examinedusing 3D cell culture. The RWV and the
filtered and delivered to the growing culture. Sample ports on the vessel exterior magnetic leV1tation model can sup p or t the generation
facilitate media exchange and sample acquisition. b | A representation of Of large 3D constructs With complex cellular architec—
three—dimensional (3 D) constructs rotating within the vessel, about the horizontal axis is ture and str uctur 31 characteristics that are biologically
shown. c | A variety of vessel types permit culture volumes ranging from 10 ml to 500 ml. representative 0f in vivo—like growth [FIG- 4l. However,
Image in Part c courtesy of Synthecon, Incorporated, USA. the manipulation of cellular responsiveness on both the

single—cell and the multicellular levels may yield infor—
mation about how the physical interactions of cancer
RPM. The maintenance of 3D constructs in suspen— cells with each other, and with their surrounding enVi—
sion permits spatially unrestricted growth, and facili— ronment, are affected by architecture. In this regard, the
tates the transfer of nutrients to the growing culture. clinostat can support suspension or monolayer culture
An alternative means to counteract gravitational force and the RPM can support the transition from 2D mono—
and to achieve 3D growth in suspension is Via magnetic layer to 3D spheroid culture during continuous rand—
leVitation14’84’85. Magnetic levitation has been used to omized rotation, thus it has been suggested that the RPM
evaluate gravisensing (that is, gravity sensing) mecha— may facilitate the study of cellular events that occur dur—
nisms in biological systems“88 and has been applied ing this shift“. However, neither the RWV bioreactor,
to facilitate insight into the effects that may occur in the clinostat, the RPM nor magneticlevitation removes the
gravity conditions of Lunar and Martian environ— force of gravity from the system5’32’35. Rather, the mod—
ments89. In magnetic levitation culture, the suspension els may provide an environment that reﬂects some of
of cells occurs at the point at which gravitational force the conditions that are observed in the microgravity
is counterbalanced by magnetic force. A system to leVi— environment of space, including the lack of sedimen—
tate cells in 3D has been developed in which a magnetic tation, reduced ﬂuid shear, cellular colocation and 3D
nanoparticle assembly is electrostatically adhered to multicellular growth.
cells, allowing them to lift off the surface of the culture Each of the model systems offers operational advan—
dish in the presence of a static magnetic field, which is tages and constraints that can be used to approach
provided by a small neodymium magnet [FIG 5). The experimental problems [BOX 1). For example, large
cells coalesce adjacent to the air—media interface where constructs are difficult to maintain in suspension in
they quickly assemble into 3D multicellular constructs. the RWV, hence 3D growth can become size limited.
Magnetic nanoparticle levitation was originally applied However, because a small amount of ﬂuid shear is pre—
as a tissue culture model to facilitate the generation sent in the RWV, this system can be used to study the
of large 3D constructs of human glioblastoma cells inﬂuence of shear stress on cancer cell constructs, as
(FIG. 5). These aggregates exhibited high—fidelity cellular can the RPM. Fluid shear has an important role not
organization, compared with tumour cell xenografts, only in metastasis95‘97, but also in tumour cell shape
and supported the co—culture of the glioblastoma cells and cytoskeletal architecture98’99. Another consequence
with normal human astrocytes to establish an in vitro of 3D architecture in these models is the development of
3D suspension model of tumour cell invasion“. Using small areas of necrosis during continued growth. The
magnets of different geometries, varying shapes of presence of focal necrosis in the constructs might
3D constructs can be generated, thus facilitating the initially be perceived as a disadvantage of the culture
investigation of the inﬂuence of spatial configuration models. However, the regions of hypoxia surrounding
in constructs comprised of multiple cell types, includ— necrotic foci can lead to the establishment of micro—
ing malignant cells and normal cells. Moreover, using environments that are characterized by low tumour
different magnet geometries has enabled the adapta— cell metabolic activity, heightened drug resistance and
tion of this methodology to multiwell plate configura— epithelial—to—mesenchymal transition, all of which are
tions90’91 (FIG. 5f). This technique has been applied to 3D factors that inﬂuence tumour progression and metas—
culture of breast cancer, hepatoma, kidney cancer, lung tasisloo‘wz. The ability to model such tumour micro—
adenocarcinoma, melanoma, osteosarcoma and pros— environments in vitro could be an important advantage
Warm bore superconductive tate cancer (G.R.S., unpublished observations). The use to the study of tumour progression and chemoresist—
magnet of magnetic nanoparticle levitation in multiwell plates ance. Small, rapidly proliferating multicellular con—
Asmng ﬁeld MOQ T.Derm is compatible with standard and high—throughput lab— structs that do not contain necrosis may simulate
gradient) magnet, Similarto a . . . . . . . .
high—field nuclear magnetic ware, and can support the adoption of high—fidelity 3D actively growmg areas in a tumour that are responsive
resonance spectroscopic models for cancer drug screening”. Magnetic levita— to chemotherapeutic agents, where oxygenation and
magnet. tion of mammalian cells has also been accomplished nutrients are non—limiting. By contrast, large constructs
ﬂ
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

"
"5","R E V | E W S
exhibiting areas of necrosis may model bulky tumours Alterations in gene expression. Some of the studies men—
that have regions of low proliferative activity and tioned above examined changes in the expression of spe—
increased drug resistance. In fact, a similar approach cific genes, predominantly those encoding cytokines,
has been undertaken in spheroid models of colorectal during spaceﬂight114’115. The effect of microgravity on
cancer103 and pancreatic cancer“, in which diminished global gene expression was evaluated in human pri—
responsiveness to antitumour agents was observed as mary renal cortical epithelial ce11s118’119. The cells were
a function of multicellular architecture, reduced pro— cultured for 6 days on the Space Shuttle and readily
liferation and microregions of hypoxia. Multicellular grew into 3D aggregates. Microarray analysis of 10,000
drug resistance — that is, chemoresistance owing to 3D genes revealed that the expression of 1,632 genes was
structure — is not a new concept and has been stud— altered in microgravity, relative to 1 g controls118’119. The
ied for the past three decades22’24’26’27’105—108. This body changes in expression comprised a number of genes that
of work has shown that tumour cells cultured as 3D are not associated with cell stress responses, including
aggregates eXhibit significantly increased drug resist— decreased levels of Wilms’ tumour 1 (WTI),significant1y
ance compared with 2D growth in monolayer culture. increased levels of Vitamin D receptor (VDR) and Vil—

lin 1 (VIL1), as well as differences in several cytoskeletal
Cellular alterations in microgravity genes. These results from Hammond and colleaguesllg’119
Immune cell changes. Investigations of the effects of were the first demonstration of the ability of reduced
microgravity on immune cells carried out over the gravity exposure to elicit broad modulation of cellular
past three decades on the Space Shuttle, the ISS and gene expression. Scanning electron microscopy dem—
on Russian vehicles have yielded interesting, and con— onstrated that the renal cells grown in orbit achieved
ﬂicting, data. Leukocytes from rodents ﬂown in space larger sized 3D aggregates and displayed increased
eXhibited suppressed lymphocyte mitogenesis, inhibited surface microvilli, compared with controls. Microarray
natural killer cell cytotoxic activity, reduced cytokine analysis of 20,000 genes in Iurkat human leukaemic cells
production and alterations in the function and propor— cultured for 2 days on the Space Shuttle, compared with
tions of T cell subsets109‘113. By contrast, other studies ground controls, revealed differences in the expression
have demonstrated increased cytokine production by of several gene groups, including those involved in cell
spleen and thymus cells of space—ﬂown rodents, and cycle regulation, apoptosis, tumour suppression, signal
by immune cells cultured in microgravity, including transduction and cytoskeletal organizationlzo. These
interleukin—1 (IL—1), IL—3 and IL—6; tumour necrosis results validated previous morphological analyses of
factor (TNF); and interferon—a (IFNa) and IFNy114’115. space—ﬂown Jurkat cells that showed early microtubule
Despite the potential for the suppressed responsiveness disorganization (4 hours post—launch), with reorganiza—
of various facets of the immune system, mortality due tion occurring at 2 days in microgravity; cells exposed to
to cancer in astronauts is not increased relative to the reduced gravity also exhibited increased release of FAS
general population“? Moreover, the Longitudinal Study (also known as APOl and TNFRSF6)121. Space—grown
of Astronaut Health found that the incidence of cancer CaSki cervical carcinoma cells showed altered gene
among astronauts is reduced relative to the US National expression that generally corresponded to changes in
Cancer Institute’s Surveillance, Epidemiology and End genes regulating the cell cycle, cell morphology, apop—
Results database; prostate cancer was the most prevalent tosis and signal transduction122’123. Of note, Jurkat cells
malignancy noted in the studym. grown in microgravity also demonstrated enhanced
expression of plectin, which studies have suggested may
be a clinically useful biomarker for pancreatic ductal
a b | f adenocarcinomalz“. Plectin is a key cytoskeletal compo—
nner rame“ 150mm . . . . . . .
Outer Inner frame X nent, linking together intermediate filaments w1th actin
frame . ./ _. ,. ' _\ 150mm and microtubules125. Evidence indicates that plectin
‘ . 1‘4 can facilitate tumour cell migration and tissue invasion
’- ' 6°60 in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma126, and in
Platform ‘ '1. ?\9 : , colon carcinomam. Because reduced gravitational force
' )\ ' _'__:3-‘,.., _,‘ 1 50 mm can modulate the expression of genes including plectin,
‘ -\z y ‘ "" VDR and WT], each of which has known roles in cancer,
\ ' - ° it is tempting to speculate that additional investigations
L ’\ O of tumour cells exposed to a microgravity environment
‘- ‘ may be able to shed light on the regulation of other genes
. \ that have been shown to have a potential role in cancer
Outer growth and progression.
frame
Figure 2 | The RPM. a | A schematic representation of the random positioning machine Eﬂeets on cell Signalling. Although large—scale functional
(RPM) illustrating the inner and outerframes, which rotate independently of each other studies oftumour cells cultured in conditions ofreduced
(designated by curved arrows) is shown. The culture vessel is mounted in the centre of the gravity have been limited, experiments on cell signalling,
platform. b | The desktop RPM is composed of two motors that independently control secretion ofsoluble factors and evaluation ofcytoskeletal
the rotation of the two frames; sizes of the frames and platform are indicated. Part b is elements have been conducted in space. GI‘OWth 0fU937
reproduced, with permission, from REF. 75 © (2005) American Physiological Society. myelomonocytic cells for up to 4 days in microgravity
ﬂls—
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

"
"6","R E V | E W S
a b exhibited disordered microtubule polymerization when
\Q‘f—5 W eitposecl to microgravity for 3 days13oz,owhich coincided
l'i— Kl .--\,,."".If:-ff.;‘;'f . l) w1th heightened uptake of doxorubicm. These 1nvest1—
_\ . 5 v gators postulated that cytoskeletal rearrangement and
the ability of reduced gravity to alter PKC localization
c cl Minutes eould be contributing factors underlying the increased
. Levitated intracellular drug levels that are observed in the HL—60
Q “ cells cultured in space.
L4 Microtubule rearrangements were also observed
<24 hours . . in aggregates of MCF—7 human breast carcinoma cells
Magnet 3D leVItatIng _ _ _
_ exposed to micrograVIty for 2 days, and the cells eXhib—
l ited prolonged cycling times133. Growth of MIP—101
e human colon carcinoma cells was altered in space.
Magnet — Ground studies show that, when cultured as a mono—
‘i'_——’ layer, these poorly differentiated tumour cells secrete
--4-4——————~ ~ ~ ' - low levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA; also
known as CEACAMS) but produce increased levels
, '; —> ' _ when implanted into the peritoneum of nude mice“.
3"" Growth of MIP—101 cells as 3D aggregates for 6 days in
A microgravity resulted in decreased apoptosis, enhanced
; 1 3:3 3:323:23 4 differentiation and increased CEA production, relative
« \ 3 ' ° » to monolayer ground controls; changes in the expression
\ ' / . of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), TGFOL and
—* , “v_m“ TGFﬁ were also observed“. When cultured as 3D aggre—
-——— —> - 4 gates in the RWV bioreactor on the ground, MIP—101
f 7 cells produced CEA, but exhibited greater apoptosis and
¢ _. , 7 _ _ _, 7 reduced proliferation compared with 3D cultures grown
7 ﬂ. :1, , in space; MIP—101 cells grown as static (non—rotated) 3D
o..... ............ _
» .7 —{ ‘fjé , . ° . ‘ . . J : : : z : : °. 1 1 1 : cultures on the ground also showed less apoptos1s and
'*:.w:::: l ,o ,, i- . a o . o . . 3 '0 . Q f"" increased proliferation relative to rotated cultures, lead—
ing Iessup et al.“42 to postulate that rotation may increase
Figure 3 | Magnetic levitation 3D cell culture. a | Cells in monolayer culture are incu— apoptos1s in these COIOH carc1noma cells. Although. the
bated in culture medium with nanoshuttle—containing magnetic nanoparticles. b | After effect ofgrowth in space has not been reported, multicel—
incubation with nanoshuttle, cells are detached and transferred to petri dishes. lular spheroid cultures ofthyroid carcinoma cells grown
c | Magnetic drive is attached on top of the culture plate (order of application: top, mag— in the RPM also exhibited increased apoptosis compared
netic drive; middle, petri dish cover; bottom, petri dish containing nanoshuttle—treated with non—rotated cultures67’68’70’71. In addition, the thy—
Cells). d | Within minutes, cells rise to the air—liquid interface (top; indicated by upward roid carcinoma cells demonstrated upregulated thyroid—
arrows) then self—assemble into a three—dimensional (3D) configuration within 24 hours stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR) expression, and
(bottom; 3D aggregate indicated by arrow). e | A 3D culture of human glioblastoma cells decreased secretion of thyroid hormones66’67, which the
grown for 48 hours is shown; 1 mrh aggregate isindicateo (scale bar: 5 mm). With magnetic authors attributed to a weightless culture environment.
drive In place, the aggregate levntates at the anr—lnqund Interface (top). Followmg removal A fLNl human mixed mullerian ovarian
of magnetic drive, the 3D aggregate settles on the bottom of the petri dish (bottom). ggregates O
f | Magnetic nanoparticle levitation systems designed to fit 6—, 24— and 96—well tissue tumour cells were culturecl for 14 days on the 188 [FIG 5)'
culture plates. LN1 cells exposed to m1crograv1ty showed reduced
— expression of Vimentin and epithelial membrane antigen,
compared with ground controls135. Reduced expression
altered both the translocation kinetics and the intracellular of IL—6 and IL—8 was also observed in LN1 cells grown
localization of protein kinase C (PKC), with similar in space, relative to ground controls (].L.B., unpublished
results observed for space—ﬂown Iurkat cells128‘130. These observations). Both of these cytokines have been shown
studies showed that phorbol ester—stimulated transloca— to be associated with the growth of several types of
tion of PKCﬁII, PKCo and PKCe was reduced in Iurkat tumours, including ovarian tumours136‘140, and increased
and U937 cells cultured on the Space Shuttle, effects that expression of IL—6 and IL—8 has been observed in associa—
the authors speculated to be associated with alterations of tion with multicellular drug resistance in breast cancer
cellular architecture occurring in conditions of reduced cellsl‘“. Reduced expression of IL—6 and IL—8 was observed
gravity. Following treatment with dihydroxyvitamin D3 in multicellular thyroid carcinoma spheroids grown in
and transforming growth factor—ﬁ2 (TGFﬁ2), MG—63 the RPM, relative to higher levels of expression of these
osteosarcoma cells exhibited significantly reduced cytokines reported in the 2D adherent tumour cells in
expression of mRNA for collagen type I Oll (COLIAI), the RPM culture“; however, thyroid tumour spheroid
osteocalcin (also known as BGLAP) and alkaline phos— expression of IL—6 and IL—8 in space has not been deter—
phatase (ALP) during a 9—day spaceﬂight study, relative mined. Similarly, the investigation of whether LN1 cells
to lg controls, effects that correlated with reduced dif— undergo differentiation during time in the reduced
ferentiation131. HL—60 promyelocytic leukaemia cells gravity of low Earth orbit, as occurs in MIP—101 colon
ﬂ
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

"
"7","R E V | E W S
W carcinoma cells, will require further study in space. LN1 similar to that observed in viva“. Similarly, Ingram
Growth and differentiation Of cells have stem cell qualities; when grown as 3D aggre— and colleagues52 demonstrated that co—culture of PC3
cells to form specialized tissue. gates in the RWV bioreactor, the cells re—express the phe— human prostate carcinoma cells with prostate fibroblasts
notype of the original mixed lineage tumour from which in the RWV also yielded constructs with 3D tissue—like
they were derived”, characteristics that become lost in architecture that eXhibited upregulated expression of
monolayer culture”, thus underscoring the ability of 3D membrane—bound adhesion and extracellular matrix
culture conditions to support spatial geometries facilitat— molecules, including the expression of tenascin (TNC)
ing the in vitro expression of tumour cell properties and in the fibroblasts. PC3 cell invasion of fibroblast sphe—
the phenotypes eXhibited in vivo. roids was also observed. Increased levels of TNC, an
One of the most striking demonstrations of tumour extracellular matrix glycoprotein that is expressed in
growth in microgravity was a study of prostate carci— tumour microenvironments, have been shown to cor—
noma by Chung and colleagues53 conducted on the Space relate with tumour cell invasion and metastasis144’145.
Shuttle STS—107. Although a tragic accident resulted in Sung, Chung and collaborators54 also reported increased
the loss of the crew and vehicle, Video downlinked dur— levels of extracellular matrix molecules, including TNC,
ing the ﬂight showed that in less than 1 week LNCaP following 3D co—culture of human prostate cancer cells
human prostate carcinoma cells co—cultured in space and bone stroma in the RWV bioreactor. These findings
with osteoblasts developed into golf ball—sized orga— correlated with increased reactive stroma and advanced
noid structures, whereas aggregates grown in the RWV prostate tumour cell progression in the multicellular
on the ground only reached diameters of 3—5 mm53’143. constructs, leading these investigators to postulate that
In earlier work from this group, LNCaP cells co—cultured in spatial orientation due to 3D growth conditions allows
the RWV with prostate fibroblasts readily developed into the tumour cells and stroma to co—evolve, accelerating
3D constructs that displayed in vivo—like histogenesis and prostate cancer cell growth and metastasis.
exhibited dihydroxytestosterone—induced growth stimu—
lation and prostate—specific antigen (PSA) production Cytoskeletal changes in microgravity
A common outcome in nearly all cell types exposed
a to microgravity is the alteration of cytoskeletal ele—
‘ * I"" ments: actin, microfilaments and microtubules146.
a ‘ - ‘ T—47D cells ‘- h ,5 ‘ '5' Disorganization of basic cellular architecture can affect
1-way, A.‘ 7S“f‘;’:~‘,:.'.- ‘- :3}, A . 33:5 «I ‘ - 7.,“ activities ranging from cell signalling and migration
‘. -, ' "" l I ' f“ . .- '95 f M f x to cell cycling and apoptosis. In a series of investiga—
pf""; -. $7 ‘ J 'f' ’3: , t 2:; ‘ tions that examined microtubule organization in vitro,
ix . * #5,! : ~ ' _g .- 3* :, '3‘“ ‘ .ﬂ Tabony and collaborators147’148 hypothesized that both
‘ .1 ‘_ L' _ g 3' .' . :3 {ﬁr 1-. ~ 6 ‘ ' ‘ ha; gravity and spatial geometry affect the self—organization
V v «. i5"" ~v¢ ~ 313' «'4‘ —_, y. “a - ‘ N. of microtubule networks. Their studies demonstrated
w / ‘ :_ Z“ r 1&3 j. ..- , . ' ‘ .-, ‘ ‘ that tubulin assembles into microtubule structures in a
Microcarrier ; ‘ ﬂ _ L A» "" ' ""$a- . “ "" ' gravity—independent manner. However, the organization
bead 72-1 ”I -:-. 1::- . S f of microtubule networks occurs by gravity—dependent
y, — ' ‘- _. 1-. ' __, ' . ' — reaction—diffusion processes, which are characterized
b L by dynamic growth and the shortening of microtubules;
conditions of reduced gravity drive this process to pro—
duce alternative orientations relative to those that occur in
1 g. Sample vessel geometry also inﬂuenced microtubule
self—organization. Space experiments conducted in oval
(egg—shaped) containers resulted in reduced microtubule
organization compared with 1g controls, whereas those
conducted in rectangular containers exhibited almost no
microtubule organization. Similar ﬁndings were observed
using either clinorotation (as in, the clinostat) or magnetic
leVitation149. These fundamental in vitro studies demon—
strate that, when the effect of gravity is abridged, processes
that were previously controlled or masked by this force
may be free to occur in new ways. Cellular biophysical
Figure 4 | 3D tumour cell aggregates. a | Photomicrographs of T—47D human breast actions that affect tumour cell metastatic capacity, includ—
ductal carcinoma cells grown in the rotating wall vessel (RWV) bioreactor are shown. ing migration, adhesion and invasion, are inﬂuenced by
T—47D cells were cultured on Cytodex—B microcarrier beads for 42 days. Large. . cytoskeletal organization150‘152. Because microtubules
aggregates formed that were comprised of multiple layers of cells. The cells Initially grew . . . .
to cover the surface of the bead, after which the 3D outgrowth from the beads readily p rov1de architectural sup p ort for eellular organization,
occurred, and aggregates continued to proliferate in suspension. Scale bar: 200 pm. shape, motility and replication, It is tempting to specu—
b | Photomicrographs of human glioblastoma cells (labelled with green fluorescent late that disorder caused by exp osur e to microgravity has
protein) that were levitated for 8 days are shown. Cells coalesced and organized within the potential to substantially affect cell growth and func—
hours, formed spheroids by 24 hours, and substantially increased in size for the remainder tiOIl. Indeed, compared With 1 g CODtl‘OIS, microtubule
of incubation. Scale bar: 200 pm (left—hand image) and 80 pm (right—hand image). organizing centres were disordered in Jurkat cells121 and
W
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

"
"8","R E V | E W S
| Box 1 | Cell culture paradigms
Each type of on—ground cell culture method that models some of the conditions of space has characteristics that can be
used as an advantage or as a constraint (see the table), but none of the on—ground systems removes the force of gravity
from the culture environment. Monolayer culture facilitates good mass transfer of nutrients and metabolic waste via
frequent media changes, but does not yield three—dimensional (3D) growth. Culture in the microgravity environment of
space supports good 3D growth without fluid shear, but in the absence of mixing, mass transfer can become limiting,
resulting in the development of hypoxia and necrosis. The rotating wall vessel (RWV) readily supports 3D growth, but this
system produces low levels of fluid shear; fluid shear stress is a function of the 3D construct diameter and the difference
in density between the construct and the culture fluid. As 3D constructs become larger in size, the shear stress they
experience increases. Fluid shear levels of <05 dyn per cm2 have been reported in the RWV20 (reviews of RWV operating
parameters have been publishedzov”). The random positioning machine (RPM) supports 3D growth following the
detachment of cells from monolayers used for culture initiation. Cells grown in the RPM are also exposed to shear stress,
with levels of <1.0 dyn per cm2 reported"". Brief periods of mechanical strain may be experienced in RPM culture owing to
the force exerted on cell membranes by culture fluid momentum that can occur during sudden directional changes71v73'75;
a magnitude of <200 microstrains has been reported for cells grown in the RPM75 (reviews of RPM operating parameters
have been publishedn'”). 3D growth occurring by magnetic levitation provides conditions that mirror those observed in
space, although low—strength static magnetic field is introduced into the culture system (see REF. 14 for a review of
magnetic levitation operating parameters).
Condition Monolayer Space microgravity Rotating Random positioning Magnetic levitation
culture wall vessel machine
3 D growth — + + + +
Fluid shear — — + + —
Mass Not limiting Limiting without Not limiting Not limiting Limiting without
transfer of mixing: compensated mixing: compensated
nutrient and by scheduled culture by scheduled culture
waste media changes media changes
in MCF—7 cells133 cultured in space; the MCF—7 cells also also suggests that similar forces that are active on micro—
exhibited a more loosely organized perinuclear cytokera— tubules are integral to the maintenance of nuclear shape
tin network, in conjunction with prolonged time spent in and also proposes that the transfer of mechanical stress
mitosis, compared with 1g controls. Hence, with the wide across the cytoskeleton may link the alterations in cell
use of tubulin—binding agents in the treatment of cancer, and nuclear shape that occur during cell spreading and
including taxanes, Vinca alkaloids, colchicine site binders retraction156’157. In accordance with the tensegrity model,
and the newer epothilones, it is conceivable that the inves— lngber158 has proposed that cells exposed to microgravity
tigation of the alterations in cell cytoskeletal organization may undergo a reduction in prestress that yields altered
that occur in conditions of reduced gravity could pro— cellular architecture. Furthermore, the possibility for
Vide novel insight into the development of potential new microgravity—induced anomalies in nuclear architecture
antitumour therapeutic agents targeted to microtubules. to alter gene expression has also been suggested”?
Shape changes that occur in microgravity can alter
Alterations in cell shape. In space, both adherent and non— cellular adhesion to extracellular matriX, as was observed
adherent cell types undergo shape changes and become in rat osteosarcoma (ROS) 17/ 2.8 cells160. Growth of
more rounded6’146. The ability of a cell to maintain its these cells for 9 days in space resulted in a disordered
shape is the result of a variety of tensional forces that are cytoskeleton with significantly decreased focal Vinculin
active within individual cells and between cells interact— expression, which indicated reduced integrin—mediated
ing with each other and with the extracellular matriX. cell adhesion. Post—mitotic ROS 17/2.8 cells predomi—
Tensegrity (also known as tensional integrity) is believed nantly exhibited these effects; cells in other phases of
to have an important role in cellular architecture and the cell cycle showed little change relative to 1 g con—
mechanotransduction, as well as in the response of cells to trols. These studies also found no significant differences
stress and to their surrounding environment153’154. A cen— in cycling times between spaceﬂight and 1 g cultures.
Tensegrity tral tenet of tensegrity is the balance of prestress between The investigators hypothesized that mechanical forces
Also known as tensional tensile cytoskeletal elements that link to structural ele— associated with tensegrity may underlie the vulnerabil—
mlegf'lty- A biomeChamcal . ments that resist compression; the interplay, or push— ity of the post—mitotic ROS cells to exhibit these effects.
8:12:16215622Ctigtt1?;?;;;ensm pull, between these mechanical forces allows cells to Because cell adherence is a necessary step following the
stability and integrity in a respond to chemical and environmental cues. Mechanical completion of mitosis, microgravity—induced alterations
spatial system and that living cell deformation studies have demonstrated that of physical factors that produce unbalanced tensional
facilitates FeSponsiveneSS to mechanical loads are borne by microtubules, which are forces between the internal cellular cytoskeleton and the
enVlmnmental cues“ balanced by tensile forces in contractile elements of the extracellular matriX may lead to reduced adherence as a
Prestress cytoskeleton”? Moreover, the disruption of microtubules function of changes in cell architecture; this was shown
Resting tension that provides yields a transfer of forces to the extracellular matriX, a by osteosarcoma cytoskeletal disarrangement and cell
structural integrity. decrease in cell stiffness and altered cell shape. Evidence rounding, which remained after space—grown ROS 17/ 2.8
ﬂ
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

"
"9","R E V | E W 5
cell division was complete. Cytoskeletal disorganization is a r f _ z;- _ 7 7
observed in cancer cells and has been shown to be asso— ' i ‘7 ' ' - '.O r. .""3."" ti
ciated with changes in cellular mechanical properties "" , t, 1 i. Q ”C ‘ 1.5 °__ ‘ A
that contribute to enhanced cell deformability, reduced 'Té' 4' ‘_ O l * ‘5‘ ' ”” u 1"",“ :_ . m.
stiffness and increased metastatic potential99’161’162. ' ~ ' , _—_— 3:1 ' ‘
These studies illustrate that microgravity affects both f ~ "" [l — | ' .9 1 O
cell structure and function, which may not only affect l I E . —: —l n
cytoskeletal architecture but may also affect overall shape, ; , *1 ' -‘ ' , t l
as well as gene expression and signal transduction [BOX 2). -..- _ v ' j I I H
Moreover, although a full discussion is beyond the scope - '3 . — — ' | i
of this Review, space radiation can also affect cell growth ' V ' f . "" ' ——:f 5’— ‘
and function in microgravity Via damage to biomolecules, ' i ‘ _” A ”
including nucleic acids and proteins, as well as through I .
the induction of free radicals and cell damage owing to b
bystander effects163‘165. Certainly, radiation poses haz— ~ ~ - n
ards to humans during spaceﬂight, and studies suggest
the use of biomarkers to enable the prediction of risk B ~ ILIJJILIﬂLlJI
and to guide the development of appropriate mitigation __ N ..
strategies and biological countermeasures to decrease the "" K— \J \ n , ""’7"" ""’Mu‘w ‘ °
effects of exposure165‘168. Similarly, applying proteomic _, ‘ v ﬁx .
and genomic approaches to assess cellular pathways and t (w OO .- O K O I, O,
mechanisms that are affected by the space environment \\ ‘ ' 7"" f; 3"" e, F
in both normal cells and cancer cells may identify targets § . x ' .. O ‘ h ”'1 .
for new investigations169’170. The integration of biological .. t}? J , *9. . '5 “1 ..’.. K. ' ‘ T‘
- . . ’24,. ; - :: , + (I , . . . iii“
and physical approaches to enhance our understanding ‘ ' ‘ ""_""""'Ti"" ;‘_ ﬁiT-m‘"" ~
of cancer biology is an emerging field, and studies point L' ' ‘ l
to the need to apply novel approaches and new technolo— ' ' '
gies to broaden strategies for developing more effective c
treatment options for this complex disease98’171. pt
Space-based technologies for cancer therapy ‘7 ' , * ‘3‘
Aside from the cell—based investigations discussed I l \ A Th
above, other space—based work has been conducted that ' _. r \ ' 3c
is applicable to the study of cancer. Microencapsulation ' O ‘ ' -' ‘2 ’
research carried out on the Space Shuttle from 1996 to ' pt mm a
. . , -4
1998 evaluated the uptake and encapsulation of ﬂuid— O t x, 0 £1 7 .7)???
containing particles, imaging materials and anticancer ’ ‘ N g ,3 , 3.5 Qt
drugs in the ultra—low shear environment of micrograv— 1 . : f ‘ . - é‘ ,
ity. These studies paved the way for extended duration K‘ \ / f"" ‘
experiments conducted on the ISS, capitalizing on ACQV Spot Magn DetWDl'—l100 Hm
microgravity—induced modification of ﬂuid mechanics, 15.0 W 6.0 200x SE 10.8 BSTC Cell Run 080200 LN-1Day3
and led to the development of a new pulse ﬂow micro— . . . .
encapsulation technology for combining immiscible Figure 5 |Culture of LN1 human mlxed mullerlan ovarlan
liquids so that the interface of the ﬂuid is dominated tumour ,Ceus aboard the ISS' a I 96‘” were grown for
, , , 14 days In the Biotechnology Specnmen Temperature
by surface tension as opposed to ﬂuld shearm. Thls Controller (BSTC) hardware, resident on the International
technology facilitates the encapsulation ofparticles Of Space Station (ISS). The BSTC is a self—contained incubator
dissimilar densities and ﬂuids of different viscosities that supports the growth Of Up to 32 modules that contain
into complex multilamellar structures. The micro— cells. b | Tumour cells were grown in gas—permeable tissue
encapsulation technology was commercially acquired culture bags, housed in modular racks in the BSTC hardware.
and tested using a xenograft model of prostate cancer, in c | Scanning electron micrograph showing day 3 cultures of
which successful tumour treatment was observed when LN 1 C9115 QFOW'"" on Cytodex—3 microcarrier beads. Images in
encapsulated 5—ﬂuorouracil was administered alone or Part5 a, b, C courtesy Of NASA, USA-
in combination with cryotherapy173’174. These studies
used the microencapsulation technology developed in plant growth in microgravity. These studies revealed
space for the development of new drug delivery systems that good growth was obtained in reduced gravity,
administered on Earth. compared with that observed in ground controls, for
Light technology studies originally conducted on plants exposed to 12—hour periods of light delivery
plants cultivated in space were subsequently deter— using red and blue light—emitting diodes175’176. This
mined to be applicable to cancer therapy on Earth. space—based light technology was subsequently shown
Early work on the development of life support systems to have on—Earth applications for enhancing natural
to facilitate long—term space exploration examined healing in a mouse model of diabetes that eXhibits
ﬂlg—
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

"
"10",". . . Certain 1i ht thera studies carried out to im rove
Box 2 | Summary of cell changes observed In micrograVIty g p Y , , p ,
— astronaut health may also be applicable to increasing
Exposure to micrograVity may FeSUlt in our understanding of cancer. Because the spaceﬂight
' ' In uce mlcro raV|t . . . . .
and function“ Inﬁeus griwn m y g y ened stress, sleeplessness and fatigue, investigations into
5 ace, various c an es ave .
p . g . strategies to counteract these effects have been explored.
been observed, Including . .
Exposure to blue light at 420 nm to 460 nm induces potent
cytoskeleton rearrangement, Altered cell shape . f 1 . h' h 1 . . d
C Om ci d ent with a m ore suppression 0 me aton1n,w 1e can resu t in increase
rounded cell shape; alertness181‘183. Originally examined for the mitigation of
changes in cell signalling, Circadian disruption that is associated with shift work
including alterations to and travel across multiple time zones, this approach may
protein kinase C provide a non—pharmacological alternative to facilitate a
diStl’ibUtion and immune Altered cell Altered gene heightened state of awareness in orbit. However, studies
cell CytOk'”e release; anci signalling expression suggest that prolonged suppression of melatonin and dis—
Chaﬁgesf'“ gene eXpress'lonj ruption of the sleep—wake cycle may be associated with
ran In rom enes re U atln . .
g g g g , 9 an increased risk for breast cance1r184‘187 and colorectal
cell morphology to those Involved 188 . .
. . . . cancer . Taken collectively, data obtained from space—
m replication, tumoursuppressnon b d d' . 1. h h ff . . h . f
and signaltransduction (see the figure). ase stu 1es 1n 1g tt erapy 0 er insig t1nto a range 0
outcomes that affect cancer and human health.
impaired wound healing177 and for the treatment of Conclusions and outlook
oral mucositis in a study of patients undergoing bone Space presents an unlimited horizon for investigation and
marrow transplant178. In this clinical trial, the ability of discovery Controlled studies conducted in microgravity
extra—oral application of near—infrared light at 670 nm can further our understanding of the fundamental role
(administered daily for 2 weeks) was shown to signifi— of gravity in cancer cell growth and function and serve as
cantly reduce patient—reported pain in a randomized, a novel paradigm for innovation. Suspension—based 3D
double—blind placebo—controlled trial of patients cell culture is a useful complement for providing some
receiving myeloablative treatment followed by haemato— aspects of growth in microgravity, including the develop—
—0 I 't' poietic stem cell transplant for a variety of malignan— ment of spatially unrestricted growth, the generation of
ra muc051 IS . . . . . . . .

Inflammation and ulceration Cies, including leukaemias, lymphomas, myeloma, multicelhilar tissue—hkearchitecture, and the support

occurring in the mouth, Often Ew1ng s sarcoma and neuroblastoma, in addition to of colocation of cells of different types and size. In order

experienced as a side effect of other haematological syndromes (for example, sickle to address the complexities of cancer growth and regu—
receivmg cancerchemotherapy. cell anaemia, myelodysplastic syndrome and hae— lation, a broad View must be adopted that engages all

Myeloablative trea tmen t mophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis). The investigators capabilities inherent in model systems that are applica—

The use of antitumour therapy postulated that the mechanism of pain relief induced ble to the study of this devastating disease. Combination

to eliminate cancer in the bone by light therapy may occur Via the downregulation of of the resources available in the unique enVironment of

marrow. the inﬂammatory process, including reduced produc— microgravity with the tools and advanced technologies
_ tion of the pro—inﬂammatory cytokine IL—l, as well as that eXist in laboratories across Earth may inform new

Light therapy . diminished production of prostaglandins Via inhibition research approaches to expand the knowledge necessary

Administration ofvarymg . . . . .

wavelengths Of light to affect a of cyclooxygenase 2 (COXZ), as has been suggested in for improvmg treatment options, and enhanc1ng the

biological outcome. other trials of light therapy179’180. quality of life for those affected by this illness.

1 . van Loon, J. J. W. A. in Biology in Space and Life on 8. Montgomery, P. O. et al. The response of single human 1 6. Lee, E. Y., Lee, W. H., Kaetzel, C. S., Parry, G. &
Earth. Effects OfSpaceflight on Biological Systems (ed. cells to zero—gravity. In Vitro 14, 165—173 [1978]. Bissell, M. J . Interaction of mouse mammary
Brinckmann, E.) 17—32 [Wiley—VCH, 2007]. 9. Kimzey, S. L., Ritzmann, S. E., Mengel, C. E. & epithelial cells with collagen substrata:

2. NASA. What is Microgravity? [online], http://guest. Fischer, C. L. Skylab experiment results: hematology regulation of casein gene expression and
nasagov/smore/background/microgravity/Mcintro1. studies. Acta Astronaut. 2, 141—154 [1975]. secretion. Proc. NatlAcad. Sci. USA 82,
html [2013]. 10. Kimzey, S. L. in Biomedical Results from Skylab [eds 1419—1423 [1985].

5. Unsworth, B. R. & Lelkes, P. 1. Growing tissues in Johnson, R. S. & Dietlein, L. F.) 249—282 [Scientific 1 7. Petersen, O. W., Ronnov—Jessen, L., Howlett, A. R. &
microgravity. Nature Med. 4, 901 —907 [1998]. and Technical Information Office, 1977]. Bissell, M. J. Interaction with basement membrane

4. Todd, P. Gravity—dependent phenomena at the scale of 1 1 . Cogoli, A. Hematological and immunological changes serves to rapidly distinguish growth and differentiation
the single cell. ASGSB Bull. 2, 95—1 13 [1989]. during spaceflight. Acta Astronaut. 8, 995—1002 pattern of normal and malignant human breast

5. Hammond, T G. & Hammond, J. M. Optimized [1981]. epithelial cells. Proc. NatlAcad. Sci. USA 89,
suspension culture: the rotating—wall vessel. Am. 12. Cogoli, A. Space flight and the immune system. 9064—9068 [1992].

J. Physiol. RenalPhysiol. 281, F12—F25 [2001]. Vaccine 11, 496—503 [1993]. 18. Lee, G. Y., Kenny, P. A., Lee, E. H. & Bissell, M. J.
This paper reviews the engineering principles of 1 5. Bilodeau, K. & Mantovani, D. Bioreactors for tissue Three—dimensional culture models of normal and
suspension culture and presents mechanisms for engineering: focus on mechanical constraints. malignant breast epithelial cells. Nature Methods 4,
the changes in the properties of cells cultured in A comparative review. Tissue Eng. 12, 2367—2383 359—365 [2007].

suspension; the operating parameters for the RWV [2006]. 19. Nelson, C. M. & Bissell, M. J. Of extracellular
culture system are also detailed in this review. 14. Souza, G. R. et 0/. Three—dimensional tissue culture matrix, scaffolds, and signaling: tissue

6. Freed, L. E., Langer, R., Martin, 1., Pellis, N. R. & based on magnetic cell levitation. Nature architecture regulates development, homeostasis,
Vunjak—Novakovic, G. Tissue engineering of cartilage in Nanotechnol. 5, 291—296 [2010]. and cancer. Ann. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 22, 287—309
space. Proc. NatlAcad. Sci. USA 94, 13885—13990 This paper presents the operating parameters for [2006].

[1997]. magnetic levitation cell culture. 20. Debnath, J., Muthuswamy, S. K. & Brugge, J. S.

7. Montgomery, P. O. et al. in Biomedical Results from 15. Emerman, J. T & Pitelka, D. R. Maintenance and Morphogenesis and oncogenesis of MCF—1OA
Skylab [eds Johnson, R. S. & Dietlein, L. F.) induction of morphological differentiation in mammary epithelial acini grown in three—dimensional
221 —234 [Scientific and Technical Information dissociated mammary epithelium on floating collagen basement membrane cultures. Methods 30,

Office, 1977). membranes. In Vitro 13, 316—328 (1977). 256—268 (2003).

10 ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

"
"11","21 . Nederman, T, Norling, B., Glimelius, B., Carlsson, J. & 44. Tang, J. et al. A three dimensional cell biology model 66. Grimm D. et al. Effects of simulated microgravity on
Brunk, U. Demonstration of an extracellular matrix in of human hepatocellular carcinoma in vitro. Tumour thyroid carcinoma cells. J. Gravit. Physiol. 9, 39—42
multicellular tumor spheroids. Cancer Res. 44, Biol. 32, 469—479 [2011]. [2002).

3090—3097 [1984). 45. Redden, R. A. & Doolin, E. J. Microgravity assay of 67. Grimm, D. et 0/. Simulated microgravity alters

22. Nederman, T Effects of vinblastine and 5—ﬂuorouracil neuroblastoma: in vitro aggregation kinetics and differentiation and increases apoptosis in human
on human glioma and thyroid cancer cell monolayers organoid morphology correlate with MYCN follicular thyroid carcinoma cells. FASEB J. 16,
and spheroids. Cancer Res. 44, 254—258 [1984). expression. In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol. Anim. 47, 604—606 [2002].

23. Acker, H., Carlsson, J., Holtermann, G., Nederman, T 312—317 [2011]. 68. Kossmehl, P. et al. Weightlessness induced apoptosis
& Nylen, T Influence of glucose and buffer capacity in 46. Taga, M. et al. Melanoma growth and tumorigenicity in normal thyroid cells and papillary thyroid carcinoma
the culture medium on growth and pH in spheroids of in models of microgravity. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. cells via extrinsic and intrinsic pathways. Endocrinol.
human thyroid carcinoma and human glioma origin. 77, 1113—1116 [2006]. 144, 4172—4179 [2003].

Cancer Res. 47, 3504—3508 [1987). 47. Marrero, B., Messina, J. L. & Heller, R. Generation of a 69. lnfanger, M. et al. Long—term conditions of mickmicked

24. Carlsson, J. & Nederman, T A method to measure the tumor spheroid in a microgravity environment as a 3D weightlessness influences the cytoskeleton in thyroid
radio and chemosensitivity ofhuman spheroids. Adv. model of melanoma. In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol. Anim. 45, cells. J. Gravit. Physiol. 11, 169—172 [2004).

Exp. Med. Biol. 159, 399—41 7 [1983). 523—534 [2009]. 70. Infanger, M. et 0/. Simulated weightless changes the

25. Acker, H., Holtermann, G., Bolling, B. & Carlsson, J. 48. Licato, L. L., Prieto, V. G. & Grimm, E. A. A novel cytoskeleton and extracellular matrix proteins in
Influence of glucose on metabolism and growth of rat preclinical model of human malignant melanoma papillary thyroid carcinoma cells. Cell Tissue Res. 324,
glioma cells [C6] in multicellular spheroid culture. Int. utilizing bioreactor rotating—wall vessels. In Vitro Cell. 267—277 [2006].

J. Cancer 52, 279—285 [1992]. Dev. Biol. Anim. 37, 121—126 [2001]. 71 . Grosse, J. et al. Gravity—sensitive signaling drives

26. Acker, H. The use of human tumor cells grown in 49. Becker, J. L., Prewett, T L., Spaulding, G. F. & 3—dimensional formation of multicellular thyroid
multicellular spheroid culture for designing and Goodwin, T J. Three—dimensional growth and cancer spheroids. FASEB J. 26, 5124—5140 [2012].
improving therapeutic strategies. J. Theor. Med. 1 , differentiation of ovarian tumor cell line in high aspect 72. Borst, A. G. & van Loon, J. J.W. A. Technology and
193—207 [1998). rotating wall vessel: morphologic and embryologic developments for the random positioning machine,

27. Kunz—Schughart, L. A., Kreutz, M. & Kneuchel, R. considerations. J. Cell. Biochem. 51 , 283—289 [1993). RPM. Micrograv. Sci. Technol. 21, 287—292 [2007].
Multicellular spheroids: a three—dimensional in vitro 50. Goodwin, T J., Prewett, T. L., Spaulding, G. F. & This paper presents the engineering principles and
culture system to study tumour biology. Int. J. Exp. Becker, J. L. Three—dimensional culture of a mixed operating parameters for the RPM.

Path. 79, 1—23 [1998]. mullerian tumor of the ovary: expression of in vivo 73. Leguy, C. A. D. et al. Fluid motion for microgravity

28. Tsao, Y. D., Goodwin, T J., Wolf, D. A. & characteristics. In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol. Anim. 33, simulations in a random positioning machine. Grav.
Spaulding, G. F. Responses of gravity level variations 366—374 [1997]. Space Biol. 25, 36—39 [2011].
on the NASA/JSC bioreactor system. Physiologist 35, 51 . Zhau, H. E., Goodwin, T J., Chang, S. M., Baker, T L. 74. Huijser, R. H. Desktop RPM: new small size
549—550 [1992). & Chung, L. W. Establishment of a three—dimensional microgravity simulator for the bioscience laboratory.

29. Schwarz, R. P., Goodwin, T J. & Wolf, D. A. Cell culture human prostate organoid coculture under [online], http://www.descsite.nI/Publications/Other/
for three—dimensional modeling in rotating—wall microgravity—simulated conditions: evaluation of RPM—FS—MG—ROO—O17.pdf[2000].
vessels: an application of simulated microgravity. androgen induced growth and PSA expression. In Vitro 75. Pardo, S. J. et 0/. Simulated microgravity using the
J. Tiss. Cult. Meth. 14, 51 —57 [1992]. Cell. Dev. Biol. Anim. 33, 375—380 [1997]. random positioning machine inhibits differentiation

30. Jessup, J. M., Goodwin, T J. & Spaulding, G. F. 52. Ingram, M. et 0/. Three—dimensional growth of various and alters gene expression of 2T3 preosteoblasts.
Prospects for use of microgravity—based bioreactors to human tumor cell lines in simulated microgravity of a Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 288, C1211—C1221
study three—dimensional host—tumor interactions in NASA bioreactor. In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol. Anim. 33, [2005].
human neoplasia. J. Cell. Biochem. 51 , 290—300 459—466 [1997]. 76. Takeda, M. et al. Effects of simulated microgravity on
[1993]. 53. Wang, R. et 0/. Three—dimensional co—culture models to proliferation and chemosensitivity in malignant glioma

31 . Goodwin, T J ., Prewett, T L., Wolf, D. A. & study prostate cancer growth, progression and cells. Neurosci. Lett. 463, 54—59 [2009].

Spaulding, G. F. Reduced shear stress: a major metastasis to bone. Semin. Cancer Biol. 15, 353—364 77. Monici, M. et al. Modeled gravitational unloading
component in the ability of mammalian tissues to form [2005]. triggers differentiation and apoptosis in preosteoblastic
three—dimensional assemblies in simulated 54. Sung, S. Y. et al. Coevolution of prostate cancer and cells. J. Cell. Biochem. 98, 65—80 [2006).
microgravity. J. Cell Biochem. 51, 301 —311 [1993]. bone stroma in three—dimensional coculture: 78. Cuccarolo, P., Barbieri, F. Sancandi, M. Viaggi, S. &

32. Klaus, D. M. Clinostats and bioreactors. Grav. Space implications for cancer growth and metastasis. Cancer Degan, P. Differential behaviour of normal,

Biol. Bull. 14, 55—64 [2001). Res. 68, 9996—10003 [2008). transformed and Fanconi’s anemia Iymphoblastoid
This paper presents the engineering principles and 55. Clejan, S., O’Connor, K. & Rosensweig, N. Tri— cells to modeled microgravity. J. Biomed. Sci. 17,
operating parameters for clinorotation. dimensional prostate cell cultures in simulated 63—72 [2010].

33. Mazzoleni, G., Di Lorenzo, D. & Steimberg, N. microgravity and induced changes in lipid second 79. Han, J. et al. Molecular predictors of 3D
Modeling tissues in 3D: the next future of pharmaco— messengers and signal transduction. J. Cell. Mol. Med. morphogenesis by breast cancer cell lines in 3D
toxicology and food research? Genes Nutr. 4, 13—22 5, 60—73 [2001]. culture. PLoS Computational Biology 6, e1000684
[2009]. 56. Matsuoka, R., Ohkubo, S., Yoshida, M. & Nakahata, N. [2010].

34. Briegleb, W. Some qualitative and quantitative aspects Alteration of adenylyl cyclase type 6 expression in 80. Kim, J. B., Stein, R. & O’Hare, M. J. Three—dimensional
of the fast—rotating clinostat as a research tool. ASGSB human astrocytoma cells after exposure to simulated in vitro tissue culture models of breast cancer — a
Bull. 5, 23—30 [1992]. microgravity. J. Health Sci. 53, 534—542 [2007]. review. Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 85, 281 —291 [2004).

35. Kessler, J. O. The internal dynamics of slowly 57. Rijken, P. J. et al. Epidermal growth factor—induced cell 81 . Grifﬁth, L. G. & Swartz, M. A. Capturing complex 3D
rotating biological systems. ASGSB Bull. 5, 1 1 —21 rounding is sensitive to simulated microgravity. Aviat. tissue physiology in vitro. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol.
[1992]. Space Environ. Med. 62, 32—36 [1991). 7, 211—224 [2006].

36. Becker, J. L. & Blanchard, D. K. Characterization of 58. Rijken, P. J. et 0/. Altered gravity conditions affect 82. Boudreau, N. & Weaver, V. Forcing the Third
primary breast carcinomas grown in three—dimensional early EGF—induced signal transduction in human Dimension. Cell 125, 429—431 [2006].
cultures. J. Surg. Res. 142, 256—262 [2007]. epidermal A431 cells. ASGSB Bull. 5, 77—82 [1992). 83. Lee, J., Cuddihy, M. J. & Kotov, N. A. Three—

37. Kaur, P. et al. Human breast cancer histoid: an in vitro 59. Rijken, P. J. et al. Identiﬁcation of speciﬁc gravity dimensional cell culture matrices: state of the art.
3—dimensional co—culture model that mimics breast sensitive signal transduction pathways in human A431 Tissue Eng. Part B Rev. 14, 61 —86 [2008).
cancer tissue. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 59, carcinoma cells. Adv. Space Res. 12, 145—152 84. Molina, J., Hayashi, Y., Stephens, C. &

1087—1100 [2011]. [1992]. Georgescu, M. M. Invasive glioblastoma cells acquire

38. Vamvakidou, A. P. et al. Heterogeneous breast 60. Kaneko, T et 0/. Simulated conditions of microgravity stemness and increased Akt activation. Neoplasia 12,
tumoroids: an in vitro assay for investigating cellular increase progesterone production in l— 1 O Leydig tumor 45 3—463 [2010].
heterogeneity and drug delivery. J. Biomol. Screen. cell line. Int. J. Urol. 15, 245—250 [2008). 85. Lee, J. S., Morrisett, J. D. & Tung, C. H. Detection of
12, 1 3—20 [2007). 61 . lvanova, K. et al. Natriuretic peptide—sensitive guanylyl hydroxyapatite in calcified cardiovascular tissues.

39. Chopra, V., Dinh, T V. & Hannigan, E. V. Three— cyclase expression is down—regulated in human Atheroscler. 224, 3340—3347 [2012].
dimensional endotheliaI—tumor epithelial cell melanoma cells at simulated weightless. Acta 86. Valles, J. M., Lin, K., Denegre, J. M. & Mowry, K. L.
interactions in human cervical cancer. In Vitro Cell. Astronaut. 68, 652—655 [2011]. Stable magnetic ﬁeld gradient Ievitation oernopus
Dev. Biol. Anim. 33, 432—442 [1997]. 62. Cu, L. et 0/. Protective effects of flavonoids against laevis: toward low gravity simulation. Biophys. J. 73,

40. Goodwin, T J., Jessup, J. M. & Wolf, D. A. oxidative stress induced by simulated microgravity in 1130—1133 [1997].

Morphologic differentiation of colon carcinoma cell SH—SY5Y cells. Neurochem. Res. 35, 1445—1454 87. Valles, J. M. & Guevorkian, L. K. Low gravity on earth
lines HT—29 and HT—29KM in rotating—wall vessels. [2010]. by magnetic Ievitation of biological material. J. Gravit.
In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol. Anim. 28, 47—60 [1992]. 63. Granet, C., Boutahar, N., Vico, L., Alexandre, C. & Physiol. 9, 7—10 [2002].

41 . Jessup, J. M. et 0/. Induction of carcinoembryonic Lafage—Proust, M. H. MAPK and SRC—kinases control 88. Coleman, C. B. et al. Diamagnetic Ievitation changes
antigen expression in a three—dimensional culture EGR—1 and NF—kappa B inductions by changes in growth, cell cycle, and gene expression of
system. In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol. Anim. 33, 352—357 mechanical environment in osteoblasts. Biochem. Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 98,
[1997]. Biophys. Res. Commun. 284, 622—631 [2001]. 854—863 [2007].

42. Jessup, J. M. et al. Microgravity culture reduces 64. Kobayashi, K. et al. TNF—alpha—dependent activation of 89. Valles, J. M., Maris, H. J. Seidel, G. M., Tang, J. &
apoptosis and increases the differentiation of a human NF—kappa B in human osteoblastic HOS—TE85 cells is Yao, W. Magnetic levitation—based Martian and Lunar
colorectal carcinoma cell line. In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol. repressed in vector—averaged gravity using clinostat gravity simulator. Adv. Space Res. 36, 114—118
Anim. 36, 367—373 [2000). rotation. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 279, [2005).

43. Chang, T T & Hughes—Fulford, M. Monolayer and 2258—2264 [2000). 90. Daquinag, A. C., Souza, G. R. & Kolonin, M. G.
spheroid culture of human liver hepatocellular 65. Sarkar, D., Nagaya, T, Koga, K. & Seo, H. Culture in Adipose tissue engineering in three—dimensional
carcinoma cell line cells demonstrate distinct global vector—averaged gravity environment in a clinostat Ievitation culture system based on magnetic
gene expression patterns and functional phenotypes. results in detachment of osteoblastic ROS 17/2.8 nanoparticles. Tiss. Engr. Part C Meth. 19, 336—344
Tissue Eng. PartA 15, 559—567 [2009]. cells. Environ. Med. 43, 22—2411999]. [2013].

NATURE REVIEWS CANCER ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION 11

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

"
"12","91 . Tseng, H. et 0/. Assembly of a three—dimensional 11 5. Gridley, D. S. et al. Spaceﬂight effects on T lymphocyte 1 55. Hammond, D. K. et al. Antigenic protein in
multitype bronchiole co—culture model using magnetic distribution, function and gene expression. J. Appl. microgravity—grown human mixed mullerian ovarian
levitation. Tiss. Eng. Part CMethods 25 Feb 2015 Physiol. 106, 194—202 [2009]. tumor [LN1] cells preserved in RNA stabilizing agent.
[doi:10.1089/ten.TEC.2012.0157]. This paper presents microgravity-induced effects Grav. Space Biol. 18, 99—100 [2005].

92. Chitocholtan, K., Sykes, P. H. & Evans, J. J. The on T cells, as well as on the expression of 1 56. Wang, Y. et 0/. Regulatory effect of E2, lL—6 and lL—8 on
resistance of intracellular mediators to doxorubicin cancer-associated genes, and also reviews earlier the growth of epithelial ovarian cancer cells. Cell. Mal.
and cisplatin are distinct in 5D and 2D endometrial studies on the effects of reduced gravity exposure Immunol. 2, 565—572 [2005].
cancer. J. Trans]. Med. 10, 58 [2012]. on the immune system. 1 57. Duan, Z., Feller, A. J., Penson, R. T, Chabner, B. A. &

95. Hammer, B. E., Kidder, L. S., Williams, P. C. & 114. Chapes, S. K., Morrison, D. R., Guikema, J. A., Seiden, M. V. Discovery of differentially expressed
Xu, W. W. Magnetic Ievitation of MC5T5 Lewis, M. L. & Spooner, B. S. Cytokine secretion by genes associated with paclitaxel resistance using
osteoblast cells as a ground based simulation of immune cells in space. J. Leuk. Biol. 52, 104—1 10 cDNA array technology: analysis of interleukin [1L] 6,
microgravity. Micrograv. Sci. Technol. 21, 511—518 [1992]. lL—8 and monocyte chemotactic protein 1 in the
[2009]. 11 5. Miller, E. S., Koebel, D. A. & Sonnenfeld, G. A. paclitaxel resistant phenotype. Clin. Cancer Res. 5,

94. Qian, A. R. et 0/. Large gradient high magnetic field Influence of spaceflight on the production of 5445—5555 [1999].
affects the association of MACF—1 with actin and interleukin—5 and interleukin—6 by rat spleen and 1 58. Wang, Y. et al. Reciprocal regulation of 5 alpha—
microtubule cytoskeleton. Bioelectromag. 50, thymus cells. J. Appl. Physiol. 78, 810—81 5 [1995]. dihydrotesterone, interleukin—6 and interleukin—8
545—555 [2009]. 116. Reynolds, R. J. & Day, S. M. Mortality among US during proliferation of epithelial ovarian carcinoma.

95. Lawler, K., Foran, E., O’Sullivan, 6., Long, A. & astronauts: 1980—2009. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. Cancer Biol. Therap. 6, 864—871 [2007].

Kenny, D. Mobility and invasiveness of metastatic 81, 1024—1027 [2010]. 159. Yin, Y., Si, X., Gao, Y., Gao, L. & Wang, J. The nuclear
esophageal cancer are potentiated by shear stress in a 1 1 7. Longnecker, D. E., Manning, F. J. & Worth, M. H. [eds] factor—KB correlates with increased expression of
ROCK— and Ras—dependent manner. Am. J. Physiol. in Review ofNASA’s Longitudinal Study ofAstronaut interleukin—6 and promotes progression of gastric
Cell Physiol. 291 , C668—C677 [2006]. Health 24—25 [Institute of Medicine of the National carcinoma. Oncol. Rep. 29, 54—58 [2015].

96. Lawler, K., O’Sullivan, 6., Long, A. & Kenny, D. Shear Academies, 2004]. 140. Tran, H. et al. Prognostic or predictive plasma
stress induces internalization of E—cadherin and 1 1 8. Hammond, T G. et 0/. Gene expression in space. cytokines and angiogenic factors for patients treated
invasiveness in metastatic oesophageal cancer cells by Nature Med. 5, 559 [1999]. with pazopanid for metastatic renal—cell cancer: a
a Src—dependent pathway. Cancer Sci. 100, 1 1 9. Hammond, T G. et 0/. Mechanical culture conditions retrospective analysis of phase 2 and phase 5 trials.
1082—1087 [2009]. affect gene expression: gravity—induced changes on the Lancet Oncol. 15, 827—857 [2012].

97. Liang, S., Hoskins, M, Khanna, P., Kunz, R. F. & space shuttle. Physio]. Genom. 8, 165—175 [2000]. 141. Shi, Z. et 0/. Enhanced chemosensitization in
Dong, C. Effects of tumor—leukocyte environment on This paper details the first demonstration of multidrug—resistant human breast cancer cells by
melanoma — neutrophil adhesion to the endothelium microgravity exposure to elicit broad modulation of inhibition of lL—6 and lL—8. Breast Cancer Res. Treat.
in a shear flow. Cell. Mol. Bioeng. 1, 189—200 cellular gene expression. 155, 757—747 [2012].

[2008]. 120. Lewis, M. L. et 0/. cDNA microarray reveals altered 142. Becker, J. L., Papenhausen, P. R. & Widen, R. H.

98. Michor, F., Liphardt, J., Ferrari, M. & Widom, J. What cytoskeletal expression in space—flown leukemic T Cytogenetic, morphologic and oncogene analysis of
does physics have to do with cancer? Nature Rev. lymphocytes [Jurkat]. FASEB J. 15, 1785—1805 cell line derived from heterologous mixed mullerian
Cancer 11, 657—670 [2011]. [2001]. tumor of the ovary. In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol. Anim. 55,

99. Wirtz, D., Konstantopoulos, K. & Searson, P. C. The This paper details the first demonstration of micro- 525—551 [1997].
physics of cancer: the role of physical interactions and gravity-induced alterations of global gene 1 45. Twombly, R. Prostate modeling experiment success
mechanical forces in metastasis. Nature Rev. Cancer expression in Jurkat cells and provides insight into becomes part of legacy of shuttle astronauts. J. Natl
11, 512—522 [2011]. potential mechanisms underlying cellular Cancer Inst. 95, 505—507 [2005].

This paper reviews key elements of the effect of cytoskeletal disruption occurring in space. 144. Chong, H. C., Tan, C. K., Huang, R. & Tan, N. S.
physical forces on cancer cell metastasis in the 1 21 . Lewis, M. L. et al. Spaceflight alters microtubules and Matricellular proteins: a sticky affair with cancers.
context of a 5D configuration. increases apoptosis in human lymphocytes [Jurkat]. J. Oncol. 9 Feb 2012 [doi:10.1155/2012/551089].

100. Kim, Y. J. et al. Overcoming evasive resistance from FASEB J. 12, 1007—1018 [1998]. 145. Midwood, K. S., Hussenet, T, Langlois, B. & Orend, G.
vascular endothelial growth factor A inhibition in 1 22. Zhang, Z. J. et al. Spaceflight alters the gene Advances in tenascin—c biology. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 68,
sarcomas by genetic or pharmacologic targeting of expression profile of cervical cancer cells. Chin. 5175—5199 [201 1].
hypoxia—inducing factor 1 alpha. Int. J. Cancer 152, J. Cancer 50, 842—852 [2011]. 146. Lewis, M. L. The cytoskeleton in spaceflown cells: an
29—41 [2015]. 125. Guo, F. et al. Identification of genes associated with overview. Grav. Space Biol. Bull. 17, 1—11 [2004].

101 . Murat, A. et 0/. Modulation of angiogenic and tumor development in CaSki cells in the cosmic space. This paper reviews key concepts and mechanisms
inflammatory response in glioblastoma by hypoxia. Mol. Biol. Rep. 59, 6925—6951 [2012]. regarding cell shape changes and associated
PLoS ONE 4, e5947 [2009]. 1 24. Bausch, D. et al. Plectin—1 as a novel biomarker for cytoskeletal alterations induced by microgravity

102. Talbot, L. J., Bhattacharya, S. D. & Kuo, P. C. pancreatic cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 17, 502—509 exposure.

Epithelial—mesenchymal transition, the tumor [2010]. 1 47. Tabony, J. Gravity dependence of microtubule self—
microenvironment, and metastatic behavior of 125. Svitkina, T. M, Verkhovsky, A. B. & Borisy, G. B. organization. Grav. Space Biol. Bull. 17, 15—25
epithelial malignancies. Int. J. Biochem. 5, 11 7—156 Plectin sidearms mediate interactions of intermediate [2004].

[201 2]. filaments with microtubules and other components of This paper describes the influence of spatial

105. Roberts, D. L. et 0/. Contribution of HlF—1 and drug the cytoskeleton. J. Cell Biol. 155, 991 —1007 [1996]. configuration and gravity on microtubule
penetrance to oxaliplatin resistance in hypoxic 1 26. Katada, K. et al. Plectin promotes migration and reaction-diffusion processes.
colorectal cancer cells. Br. J. Cancer 101, 1290—1297 invasion of cancer cells and is a novel prognostic 148. Papaseit, C., Pochon, N. & Tabony, J. Microtubule self—
[2009]. marker for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. organization is gravity—dependent. Proc. NatlAcad.

104. Dufau, 1. et al. Multicellular tumor spheroid model to J. Proteom. 75, 1805—1815 [2012]. Sci. USA 97, 8564—8568 [2000].
evaluate spatio—temporal dynamics effect of 127. Mclnroy, L. & Maatta, A. Plectin regulates invasiveness 149. Glade, N., Beaugnon, E. & Tabony, J. Ground—based
chemotherapeutics: application to the gemcitabine/ of SW480 colon carcinoma cells and is targeted to methods reproduce space—flight experiments and
CHK1 inhibitor combination in pancreatic cancer. BMC podosome—like adhesions in an isoform—specific show that weak vibrations trigger microtubule
Cancer 15 Jan 2012 [doi:10.1186/1471—2407]. manner. Exp. CellRes. 517, 2468—2478 [2011]. self—organisation. Biophys. Biochem. 121, 1—6

105. Kobayashi, H. et 0/. Acquired multicellular—mediated 128. Schmitt, D. A. et al. The distribution of protein kinase [2006].
resistance to alkylating agents in cancer. Proc. Natl C in human leukocytes is altered in microgravity. 1 50. Korb, T et al. Integrity of actin fibers and microtubules
Acad. Sci. USA 90, 5294—5298 [1995]. FASEB J. 10, 1627—1654 [1996]. influences metastatic tumor adhesion. Exp. Cell Res.

106. Graham, C. H. et 0/. Rapid acquisition of multicellular 129. Hatton, J. P. et al. The kinetics of translocation and 299, 256—247 [2004].
drug resistance after a single exposure of mammary cellular quantity of protein kinase C in human 1 51 . Suresh, S. Biomechanics and biophysics of cancer
tumor cells to antitumor alkylating agents. J. Natl leukocytes are modified during spaceflight. FASEB J. cells. Acta Biomater. 5, 415—458 [2007].

Cancer Inst. 86, 975—982 [1994]. 15, 525—555 [1999]. 152. Kim, Y., Stolarska, M. A. & Othmer, H. G. The role of

107. Kerbel, R. S., St. Croix, B., Florenes, V. A. & Rak, J. 150. Hatton, J. P., Gaubert, F., Cazenave, J. P. & Schmitt, D. microenvironment in tumor growth and invasion.
Induction and reversal of cell adhesion—dependent Microgravity modifies protein kinase C isoform Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 106, 555—579 [201 1].
multicellular drug resistance in solid breast tumors. translocation in the human monocytic cell line U957 1 55. Wang, N. & lngber, D. E. Control of cytoskeletal
Hum. Cell 9, 257—264 [1996]. and human peripheral blood T cells. J. Cell. Biochem. mechanics by extracellular matrix, cell shape, and

108. Desoize, B. &Jardillier, J. C. Multicellular resistance: a 87, 59—50 [2002]. mechanical tension. Biophys. J. 66, 2181—2189
paradigm for clinical resistance? Crit. Rev. Oncol. 1 51 . Carmeliet, G., Nys, G. & Bouillon, R. Microgravity [1994].

Hematol. 56, 195—207 [2000]. reduces the differentiation of human osteoblastic 154. lngber, D. E. From cellular mechanotransduction to

109. Sonnenfeld, G. et al. Spaceflight alters immune cell MG—65 cells. J. Bone Min. Res. 12, 786—794 [1997]. biologically inspired engineering. Ann. Biomed. Eng.
function and distribution. J. Appl. Physiol. 75, 152. Piepmeier, E. H., Kalns, J. E., McIntyre, K. M. & 58, 1148—1 161 [2010].

191 S—1 955 [1992]. Lewis, M. L. Prolonged weightlessness affects 155. Wang, N. et 0/. Mechanical behavior in living cells

1 10. Lesnyak, A. T et al. Immune changes in test animals promyelocytic multidrug resistance. Exp. Cell Res. consistent with the tensegrity model. Proc. Natl Acad.
during spaceflight. J. Leuk. Biol. 54, 214—226 257, 410—418 [1997]. Sci. USA 98, 7765—7770 [2001].

[1995]. 1 55. Vassy, J. et al. The effect of weightlessness on This paper details cellular structure and

1 1 1 . Sonnenfeld, G. et al. Spaceflight and development of cytoskeletal architecture and proliferation of human biomechanics as governed by the principles of
immune responses. J. Appl. Physiol. 85, 1429—1455 breast cancer cell line MCF—7. FASEB J. 15, tensegrity.

[1998]. 1104—1106 [2001]. 156. Maniotis, A. J., Chen, C. S. & lngber, D. E.

11 2. Taylor, 6. R., Kostantinova, 1., Sonnenfeld, G. & 1 54. Wagner, H. E. et 0/. Characterization of the Demonstration of mechanical connections between
Jennings, R. Changes in the immune system during tumorigenic and metastatic potential of a poorly integrins, cytoskeletal filaments and nucleoplasm that
and after spaceflight. Adv. Space Biol. Med. 6, 1—52 differentiated human colon carcinoma cell line. stabilize nuclear structure. Proc. NatlAcad. Sci. USA
[1997]. Invasion Met. 10, 255—266 [1990]. 94, 849—854 [1997].

12 ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

"
"13","157. lngber, D. E. Tensegrity 1. Cell structure and 170. Grimm, D., Wise, R, Lebert, M., Richter, P. & 181 . Fucci, R. L. et al. Toward optimizing lighting as a
hierarchical systems biology. J. Cell Sci. 116, Baatout, S. How and why does the proteome respond countermeasure to sleep and circadian disruption in
1157—1173 [2003). to gravity? Expert Rev. Proteom. 8, 13—27 [2011]. space flight. Acta Astronaut. 56, 1017—1024

158. lngber, D. How cells [might] sense microgravity. FASEB 171. Cao, Y., DePinho, R. A., Ernst, M. & Vousden, K. [2005].

J. 13, 53—51 5 [1999). Cancer research: past, present and future. Nature Rev. 182. Brainard, G. C. et 0/. Sensitivity of the human circadian
This paper reviews how cells may perceive, Cancer 11 , 749—754 [2011]. system to short—wavelength [420 nm] light. J. Biol.

and respond mechanically, to alterations in 1 72. Canadian Space Agency. Cancer treatment delivery. Rhythms 23, 379—386 [2008].

gravity. International Space Station Benefits for Humanity 1 85. West, K. E. et 0/. Blue light from light—emitting diodes

1 59. Stein, G. S. et 0/. Implications for interrelationships [online], http://www.asc—csa.gc.ca/eng/iss/beneﬁts O9 elicits a dose—dependent suppression of melatonin in
between nuclear architecture and control of gene cancerasp (2012]. humans. J. Appl. Physiol. 110, 619—626 (2011].
expression under microgravity conditions. FASEB J. 175. Le Pivert, P. et 0/. Ultrasound guided combined 184. Blask, D. E., Dauchy, R. T., Brainard, G. C. &

13, 5157—5166 [1999]. cryoablation and microencapsulated 5—fluorouracil Haniﬁn, J. P. Circadian stage—dependent inhibition of

160. Guignandon, A. et al. Cell cycling determines integrin— inhibits growth of human prostate tumors in xenogenic human breast cancer metabolism and growth by the
mediated adhesion in osteoblastic ROS 17\2.8 cells mouse model assessed by luminescence imaging. nocturnal melatonin signal: consequences of its
exposed to space—related conditions. FASEB J. 15, Techno]. Cancer Res. Treat. 3, 135—142 [2004). disruption by light at night in rats and women. Integr.
2036—2038 (2001]. 174. Le Pivert, P. et al. Percutaneous tumor ablation: Cancer Therap. 8, 347—353 [2009).

161 . Xu, W. et al. Cell stiffness ifa biomarker of the microencapsulated echo—guided interstitial 185. Glickman, G., Levin, R. & Brainard, G. C. Ocular input
metastatic potential of ovarian cancer cells. PLoS ONE chemotherapy combined with cryosurgery increases for human melatonin regulation: relevance to breast
7, e46609 (2012]. necrosis in prostate cancer. Techno]. Cancer Res. Treat. cancer. Neuro. Endocrinol. Lett. 23, 17—22 [2002].

162. Guck, J. et 0/. Optical deformability as an inherent cell 8, 207—21 6 [2009]. 186. Blask, D. E. et al. Melatonin—depleted blood from
marker for testing malignant transformation and 175. Brown, C. S., Tibbits, T. W., Croxdale, J. G. & premenopausal women exposed to light at night
metastatic competence. Biophy. J. 88, 3689—3698 Wheeler, R. M. Potato tuber formation in the stimulates growth of human breast cancer
[2005]. spaceflight environment. Life Support Biosph. Sci. 4, xenografts in nude rats. Cancer Res. 65,

165. Todd, P. Overview of the spaceflight radiation 71—76 [1997]. 11174—11184 [2005].
environment and its impact on cell biology 176. Tibbitts, T. W., Croxdale, J. C., Brown, C. S., 187. Schernhammer, E. S. et al. Rotating night shifts and
experiments. J. Gravit. Space Phys. 11 , 1 1—1 6 Wheeler, R. M. & Goins, G. D. Ground—based studies risk of breast cancer in women participating in the
[2004]. and space experiment with potato leaf explants. Life nurses’ health study. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 93,

164. Manti, L. Does reduced gravity alter cellular response Support Biosph. Sci. 6, 97—106 [1999). 1563—1568 (2001].
to ionizing radiation? Radiat. Environ. Biophys. 45, 177. Whelan, H. T. et al. Effect of NASA light—emitting diode 188. Schernhammer, E. S. et al. Night—shift work and risk of
1—8 [2006). irradiation on molecular changes for wound healing colorectal cancer in the nurses’ health study. J. Natl

165. Cucinotta, F. A. Once we know all the radiobiology we diabetic mice. J. Clin. Laser Med. Surg. 21, 67—74 Cancer Inst. 95, 825—828 [2003).
need to know, how can we use it to predict space [2003].
radiation risks and achieve fame and fortune? Phys. 1 78. Hodgson, B. D. et al. Amelioration of oral mucositis Acknowledgements
Med. 17, 5—1 2 [2001]. pain by NASA near—infrared light—emitting diodes in The authors dedicate this article in memory of Neil Alden

1 66. Dieriks, B. et al. Multiplexed profiling of secreted bone marrow transplant patients. Support Care Armstrong, with grateful appreciation and respect for his
proteins for the detection of potential space Cancer 20, 1405—1415 (2012]. dedication and commitment to the exploration of space.
biomarkers. Mol. Med. Rep. 4, 17—23 (2011]. 179. Bjordal, J. M., Johnson, M. l., lversen, V., Aimbire, F. &

1 67. Durante, M. Biomarkers of space radiation risk. Lopes—Martins, R. A. Low—level laser therapy in acute Competing interests statement
Radiat. Res. 164, 467—473 [2005). pain: a systematic review of possible mechanisms of The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interests.

1 68. Albi, E. et al. Thyroid cell growth: sphingomyelin action and clinical effects in randomized placebo—
metabolism as non—invasive marker for cell damage controlled trials. Photomed. Laser Surg. 24, 158—168 DATABASES
acquired during Spaceflight. Astrobiol. 10, 811—820 [2006]. NationalCancer Institute Drug Dictionary:

(2010]. 180. Albertini, R. et al. COX-2 mRNA expression decreases http://www.cancer.gov/drugdictionary

169. Nichols, H. L. Zhang, N. (S: Wen. X. Proteomics and in the subplantar muscle of rat paw subjected to 5—fluorouracil | doxorubicin
genomics of microgravity. Physio]. Genom. 26, carrageenan—induced inflammation after low level
163—1 71 [2006). laser therapy. Inflamm. Res. 56, 228—229 (2007]. ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF

NATURE REVIEWS CANCER ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION 13

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

"
