"","x"
"1","E l

Accepted Manuscript a l
- a “1‘
c

Osteoprotegerin is an Effective Countermeasure for Spaceﬂight—Induced Bone "" L‘g .5 1.
Loss in Mice ‘ — ' F
Shane A. Lloyd, Sean B. Morony, Virginia L. Ferguson, Steven J . Simske, f I. 1. '1
Louis S. Stodieck, Kelly S. Warmington, Eric W. Livingston, David L. Lacey, - E 1""
Paul J. Kostenuik, Ted A. Bateman 213-? .
PII: S8756—3282(15)00332—4
DOI: doi: 10.1016/j.b0ne.2015.08.021
Reference: BON 10848
To appear in: Bone
Received date: 24 April 2015
Revised date: 28 July 2015
Accepted date: 21 August 2015
Please Cite this article as: Lloyd Shane A., Morony Sean B, Ferguson Virginia L., Simske
Steven J ., Stodieck Louis 8., Warmington Kelly 8., Livingston Eric W., Lacey David L.,
Kostenuik Paul J ., Bateman Ted A., Osteoprotegerin is an Effective Countermeasure for
Spaceﬂight—Induced Bone Loss in Mice, Bone (2015), doi: 10.1016/j.b0ne.2015.08.021
This is a PDF ﬁle of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication.
As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript.
The manuscript Will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof
before it is published in its ﬁnal form. Please note that during the production process
errors may be discovered Which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that
apply to the journal pertain.

"
"2","1
Osteoprotegerin is an Effective Countermeasure for Spaceﬂight-
Induced Bone Loss in Mice
Shane A. Lloydl, Sean B. Moronyz, Virginia L. Ferguson3’4, Steven J . Simske3’5,
Louis S. Stodieck3, Kelly S. Warmingtonz, Eric W. Livingst0n6, David L. Laceyz,
and Paul J . Kostenuikz, Ted A. Bateman3’6,
1Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, The Pennsylvania State University College of
Medicine: Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033
2 Metabolic Disorders, Amgen Incorporated: Thousand Oaks, California 91320
3 BioServe Space Technologies, Department of Aerospace Engineering and Science, University of
Colorado: Boulder, Colorado 80309
4 Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Colorado: Boulder, Colorado 80309
5 Hewlett-Packard Labs: Fort Collins, Colorado 80528
6 Departments of Biomedical Engineering and Radiation Oncology, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
Corresponding Author:
Ted A. Bateman, Ph.D.
Department of Biomedical Engineering
University of North Carolina
150 MacNider Hall
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7575
Tel: 919-966-3944
E-mail: bateman@unc.edu

"
"3","2

ABSTRACT

Bone loss associated with microgravity exposure poses a signiﬁcant barrier to long-
duration spaceﬂight. Osteoprotegerin-Fc (OPG-Fc) is a receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-
B ligand (RANKL) inhibitor that causes sustained inhibition of bone resorption after a single
subcutaneous inj ection. We tested the ability of OPG-Fc to preserve bone mass during 12 days of
spaceﬂight (SF). 64-day-01d female C57BL/6J mice (n=12/gr0up) were inj eeted subcutaneously
with OPG-Fe (20 mg/kg) or an inert vehicle (VEH), 24 hours prior to launch. Ground control (GC)
mice (VEH 0r OPG-Fc) were maintained under environmental conditions that mimicked those in
the space shuttle middeek. Age-matched baseline (BL) controls were sacrificed at launch.
GC/VEH, but not SF/VEH mice, gained tibia BMD and trabecular volume fraction (BV/TV)
during the mission (p<0.05 vs. BL). SF/VEH mice had lower BV/TV vs. GC/VEH mice, while
SF/OPG-Fe mice had greater BV/TV than SF/VEH 0r GC/VEH. SF reduced femur elastic and
maximum strength in VEH mice, with OPG-Fe increasing elastic strength in SF mice. Serum
TRAPSb was elevated in SF/VEH mice vs. GC/VEH mice. Conversely, SF/OPG-Fe mice had
lower TRAPSb levels, suggesting that OPG-Fe preserved bone during spaceﬂight Via inhibition of
osteoclast-mediated bone resorption. Decreased bone formation also contributed to the observed
osteopenia, based on the reduced femur periosteal bone formation rate and serum osteoealcin
level. Overall, these observations suggest that the beneficial effects of OPG-Fe during SF are
primarily due to dramatic and sustained suppression of bone resorption. In growing mice, this
effect appears to compensate for the SF-related inhibition of bone formation, while preventing
any SF-related increase in bone resorption. We have demonstrated that the young mouse is an
appropriate new model for SF-indueed osteopenia, and that a single pre-ﬂight treatment with
OPG-Fc can effectively prevent the deleterious effects of SF on mouse bone.
Key Words: spaceﬂight; osteoprotegerin; mice; bone loss; countermeasure

"
"4","3
1. INTRODUCTION

With the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) deﬁning a goal of
human missions to an asteroid and then Mars Within the next 20 years, the prospect of long
duration spaceﬂight beyond Earth’s orbit is quickly becoming a reality. In order to safely and
efﬁciently undertake these endeavors, it is important to ﬁrst understand the long-term
complications of exposure to the spaceﬂight environment. Constant exposure to microgravity (i.e.,
“‘Weightlessness”) results in a number of deleterious effects on human physiology — effects that
could compromise the safety of astronauts both during their mission and following their return to
Earth. Aside from the well-dooumented development of muscle atrophy [1, 2], spaceﬂight is also
known to produce deleterious changes in immune function [3] and cause metabolic disruptions [4].
Miorogravity also results in the mechanical unloading of the skeletal system, inducing an
osteopenio state similar to that found in patients conﬁned to bed for long periods of time [5]. In
the case of a Mars mission, the development of signiﬁcant bone loss could leave astronauts at
increased risk for fracture during mission activities on the planet’s surface. This scenario
represents a major obstacle for the ﬁature of long-duration spaceﬂight [6, 7].

In the microgravity environment, skeletal unloading leads to increased bone resorption and
the demineralization of load-bearing bones [6]. Studies have demonstrated an average net loss of
approximately 230 mg of calcium per day [8]. For astronauts that spent four to siX months on the
International Space Station (188), Lang and colleagues documented substantial trabecular and
cortical bone loss in the hip and spine [9]. Bone loss in these individuals was found to occur at a
rapid pace, With bone mass decreasing 0.5 -2.0% per month. Skeletal deterioration on this scale
could increase the risk of fractures. Other factors also contribute to fracture risk, including bone
quality, neuromuscular strength and coordination, and the speciﬁc physical activities being

"
"5","4
conducted. Regardless, it is clear that reduced bone integrity is a modiﬁable risk factor that
warrants attention. Indeed, comparisons of pre- and post-ﬂight ﬁnite element modeling
demonstrated that some astronauts may lose as much femoral strength as would be expected due
to a lifetime of aging on Earth [10]. With potential exploratory missions lasting from six to thirty
months, the possibility of in-mission fractures should not be considered trivial. Also a concern is
the fact that post-ﬂight recovery of bone mass takes two to three times longer than the period of
actual microgravity exposure [11]. A year after prolonged ISS missions, it was found that
astronauts” femoral bone mineral density (BMD) had made only a partial recovery [12]. To
minimize these deleterious effects, and ensure the long-term health of the relatively young
astronaut population, it will be necessary to develop safe and effective countermeasures.

Spaceﬂight-indueed bone loss occurs primarily as a result of the activation of osteoclast-
mediated bone resorption [13] with a concomitant decline in bone formation [6]. This is different
from more familiar forms of pathological bone loss, such as estrogen-deﬁciency osteoporosis,
where both bone resorption and formation increase, although the former to a greater degree. In the
case of pharmacological options for bone loss, the bisphosphonates are ﬁrst line drugs prescribed
for the treatment of post-menopausal osteoporosis. Bisphosphonates (e.g., alendronate,
risedronate, ibandronate, etc.) help maintain bone mass, inhibit osteoclast-mediated bone
resorption, and reduce the risk of both vertebral and n0n-vertebral fractures [14]. While
bisphosphonates can inhibit loss of bone mass and strength in ground-based disuse models,
examination of their utility during spaceﬂight is limited to a single human study. Leblanc and
colleagues examined the combination of alendronate and exercise in astronauts and found that it
was able to ameliorate nearly all deleterious changes in bone physiology during spaceﬂight [15].

Osteoprotegerin-Fc (OPG-Fc) is a monoclonal antibody with activity analogous to

"
"6","5
endogenous OPG, a secreted tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR)-related protein that acts as a
decoy receptor for receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL) [16] and is an
essential mediator of osteoclast activity [17]. RANKL binds to its receptor RANK on the surface
of osteoclasts, which leads to osteoclast activation, differentiation, and induction of bone
resorption [17-20]. OPG-Fo has been shown to prevent loss of bone mass and strength in ground-
based models of disuse [21], but spaceﬂight has the potential to have negative impacts on bone
beyond those directly related to skeletal unloading. Before contemplating the use of RANKL
inhibitors in astronauts, it could be important to determine whether RANKL inhibition can
mitigate bone loss resulting from the panoply of factors, including microgravity, that are present
in the unique setting of spaceﬂight. Considering this, it would be desirable to pursue various
avenues for the prevention of spaceﬂight-indueed bone loss, both in regards to mechanism of
action and route/frequenoy of administration.

In the present study, we sought to determine the utility of OPG-Fo administration as a
surrogate for human use of the drug denosumab to prevent spaceﬂight-induoed bone loss.
Denosumab is a human monoclonal antibody that, like OPG-Fo in mice, acts as an analogue to
endogenous OPG. Denosumab itself could not be used in this study because it is speciﬁc to
human RANKL. OPG-Fo and denosumab have been shown to have similar pharmacodynamio
effects, with the main difference being the signiﬁcantly longer half—life of denosumab [22]. To
accomplish this obj eotive, mice were ﬂown for a twelve-day mission on the Space Shuttle
Endeavour (STS-108) with and without prophylactic OPG-Fo treatment. A single dose of OPG-Fo
at 5 mg/kg was shown to markedly reduce osteoclast numbers for 20 days in normal rats [23] and
it was expected that a single dose of OPG-Fo at 20 mg/kg would adequately inhibit osteoclasts
throughout a 12-day space mission. At the time of this study, all previous animal studies on the

"
"7","6
space shuttle had utilized rats. Regardless, to date only three papers have been published where
spaceﬂight animals were subj eoted to therapeutic intervention [24-26]. Thus, this paper
documents not only the ﬁrst space shuttle ﬂight experiment with mice, but also the ﬁrst in-ﬂight
animal testing of an antiresorptive agent to prevent spaceﬂight-induoed bone loss. Given its well-
deﬁned role in skeletal homeostasis, it was hypothesized that OPG-Fc would be able to mitigate
the effects of microgravity unloading on bone. Furthermore, information regarding the activity of
OPG-Fo in mice during spaceﬂight could provide insight into the potential utility of denosumab
as countermeasure to bone loss in astronauts.

"
"8","7

2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.] Animals

Sixty, 64-day-old, female C57BL/6J mice (J aokson Laboratory; Bar Harbor, ME) were
utilized for this study. Mice were assigned to one of three groups: Baseline (n = 12), Spaceﬂight
(SF; 11 = 24), and Ground Control (GC; 11 = 24). Half of the animals in the SF and GC groups
(n=12/group) received a subcutaneous inj eotion of OPG-Fo (20 mg/kg) and half received vehicle
(VEH; phosphate-buffered saline, PBS) of equal volume (0.2 mL); baseline controls received no
treatment. Mice then received an intraperitoneal inj eotion of oaloein (20 mg/kg) and a
subcutaneous inj eotion of PBS (180 pL). Inj eotions occurred approximately 22 hours prior launch.
At this time, the animals were handed over to NASA personnel. The animals were 64 days old at
loading and 65-days old at the time of launch. The Animal Care and Use Committees of the
University of Colorado, Amgen 1110., NASA Ames Research Center, and NASA Kennedy Space
Center reviewed and approved the animal protocols for this study.

Mice were ﬂown on the Space Shuttle Endeavour (STS-108/UF-1), which lifted off from
the Kennedy Space Center (Cape Canaveral, FL) on December 5th, 2001, returning December
17th, 2001. The total mission time was 11 days and 20 hours, of which >11 days and 19 hours was
spent in the microgravity environment of low Earth orbit.
2.2 Flight Hardware & Housing

Both the SF and GC mice were housed in Animal Enclosure Module (AEM) hardware provided
by NASA Ames Research Center (Moffett Field, CA). The AEMs provide rodent food (NASA Rodent
Diet TD97071, Harlan-Teklad, Wisconsin, USA) [27] and water ad Zibitum. Because urine and feces
produced by the animals are free to ﬂoat around, the AEMs have a constant airﬂow mechanism designed

"
"9","8
to move waste towards an exhaust ﬁlter. Housing density was within National Institutes of Health (NIH)
guidelines with >45 01112 ﬂoor area per mouse in ground conﬁguration. Eight mice were housed per
AEM, with a divider separating half the mice. Ground control AEMs were housed in the Orbiter
Environmental Simulator (OES) at NASA’s Life Science Support Facility (“Hanger L”) at Cape
Canaveral Air Force Station (Cape Canaveral, FL). The CBS creates an environment that is able to
mimic the temperature, humidity, and C02 levels within the cabin 0f the space shuttle. Parameters of
concern on the space shuttle included atmospheric C02, which averaged more than 3000 ppm during the
STS-108 ﬂight, and a cabin temperature above normal room temperature. This level is normal in
spacecraft and is approximately ten times that of a well-ventilated room on Earth. All procedures for
ground control mice were identical to those of the ﬂight group, but 011 a 48 hours delay in order to allow
for adjustment of environmental conditions matching the ﬂight animals.

2.3 Necropsy

Approximately 3.5 hours after landing, the now 77-day-01d mice were weighed,
anaesthetized with isoﬂurane, and killed by exsanguination Via cardiac puncture. Hind limbs were
removed and both tibiae and femora were cleaned of all nonesseous tissue. The left femur of each
animal, required for mechanical testing and compositional analysis, was allowed to air-dry. The
right femur and tibia were ﬁxed in a 10% neutral buffered formalin solution for 48 hours, rinsed
with distilled water, and stored in 70% ethanol. Dissections were completed within five hours of
landing.

"
"10","9
2.4 Mechanical, Material, and Structural Assays

In order simulate in vivo properties, the air-dried left femora were rehydrated in PBS for 90
minutes prior to evaluation [28]. Three-point bending tests were performed using an Instron 5582
(Instron Corp.; Norwood, MA). Femurs were tested to failure with a 9 mm span length and a deﬂection
rate of 5 mm/rnin. All bones were tested in the same orientation: the single-point load was applied mid-
diaphysis on the anterior surface. The maximal force (Pm; N) and deﬂection at Pm (5m; mm) were
measured for all mechanically tested bones. These two properties were also determined at the elastic
limit (P6, 56) and the failure point. Stiffness (N/mm) was calculated from elastic foroe/elastio deﬂection
(Pe/Se)-

Two-dimensional, oross-seotional moments of inertia of the femur mid-diaphysis (IX and IY;
1111114) were also calculated. These values were calculated using the assumption that the periosteal and
endooortioal surfaces were in the approximate shape of concentric ellipses [29].

Femurs prepared for histornorphornetrio analysis were also utilized for testing the material
properties of the femur diaphysis by miorohardness indentation. Three miorohardness indents were
placed in extant bone within each sectioned and polished femur oross-seotion using a pyramid-shaped
Vioker’s diamond indenter (Fischer Soope-Hl 100 and WINHCU 1.3 software, Fischer Technology;
Windsor, CT) with a 50 g load for 10 see. In order to minimize edge effects, one indent length was
maintained between the indent site, sample edges, and Visible lacunae [30]. Pyramid diagonal lengths
were measured (25 0x), and the Vioker’s hardness number (VHN; kgf/mmz) was calculated using the
formula: VHN=(2Fsin(X/2))/d2, where F=applied load, x=pyramid angle (1360), and d=average measure
of the two diagonal lengths.

"
"11","10
2.5 F emur Cortical Quantitative Histomorphometry

Left femurs were placed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin for 48 hours, rinsed with
distilled water and stored in 70% ethanol. A11 bones were allowed to air-dry and were then
embedded with non-infiltrating EpoKwiek epoxy according to the manufacturers directions
(Buehler; Lake Bluff, IL) [30]. The epoxy disks were sectioned with a low-speed saw (Buehler;
12.7 cm X 0.5 mm diamond blade) at the mid-diaphysis 0f the femur. The sections were wheel-
polished to a ﬂat, smooth surface with 600-, 800-, and 1200-grit carbide paper, followed by a
cloth impregnated with 6 pm diamond paste. This allowed mierographs at 50x magniﬁcation to
be taken of bone eross-seetions under a blue light (400 nm). Green ealeein labels were Visualized,
indicating the bone formation sites present during the period of the study. Quantitative
histomorphometrie analysis was performed using these photographs and SigmaSean Pro software
(SPSS; Chicago, IL).

Measurements of femur cortical bone morphology [31] included total bone volume (TV)
enclosed by periosteal bone surface (Ps.BS) and volume of the medullary cavity (Med.V)
enclosed by the endoeortieal bone surface (ECBS). Bone volume (BV) was calculated as TV —
Med.V. Cortical thickness was measured at the medial, lateral, posterior and anterior location of
the femur diaphysis and averaged (AV.Ct.Th). The area between the ealcein label and the cortical
perimeter was measured as bone formation volume and divided by 12 days to provide bone
formation volume (BFR) values. BFR was normalized to BV for the Ps, EC and total (T) surfaces.
The linear content of the labeled perimeter was deﬁned as active mineralizing surface (MS; the
single labeled surface of ealeein administered 22 hours before launch). Mineral apposition rate

"
"12","1 1
(MAR=BFR/MS) was calculated and normalized to BS for the periosteal (Ps.MAR/BS) and
endocortieal (Ee.MAR/BS) surfaces.
2. 6 T rabecular Histomorphometry and Histology
The right proximal tibiae and ﬁfth lumbar vertebra (L5) were embedded in a methyl
methacrylate resin (Osteo-Bed; Polyscienees, Warrington, PA, USA) and cut into sagittal sections
with a thickness of 5 run using a tungsten carbide blade. Slides were unstained and coverslipped.
Quantitative histomorphometric analysis was performed using SigmaScan Pro software 011 the
mierographs captured at 10>< magniﬁcation under a UV light (400 nm). Histomorphometric
evaluation was performed throughout the metaphysis, starting approximately 0.25 mm distal from
the growth plate (excluding the primary spongiosa in L5) and extending a further 0.5 mm. The
following trabecular parameters were measured or calculated: BFR/BV, MS/BS; and MAR). The
presence of osteoclasts was determined by tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) staining of
the slides using a commercial kit (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and then counterstaining with
hematoxylin (Sigma) to allow identiﬁcation of osteoblasts. Surface measurements were quantiﬁed
relative to total bone surface (BS). These measurements included osteoblast surface (Ob.S/BS; %),
osteoclast surface (Oc.S/BS; %).
2. 7 Bone Mineral Composition
Mineral-content analysis was performed 011 the femora fractured for mechanical testing.
Prior to analysis, the ends of the femora were separated where distal and proximal metaphyses
join the diaphysis. Mineral content data was obtained separately from these bone ends and the
diaphysis itself. A properly calibrated analytical scale (Mettler Toledo UMT2; Columbus, OH)
was used for all measurements. Dry mass (Dry-M) was measured after heating the bones to 105°C

"
"13","12
for 24 hours. Mineral mass (Min-M) was measured after the bones had been ashed at 800°C for an
additiona124 hours. Organic mass was calculated as the difference between the two (Org-M =
Dry-M — Min-M). Percent mineralization was calculated as: %Min=(Min-M)/(Dry-M)*100.

2.8 Microcomputed T omogmphy

Trabecular bone architecture was analyzed using microeomputed tomography (uCT20;
Seance Medical AG; Brﬁttisellen Switzerland) with an isotropic voxel size of 9 pm with scan
settings of 55 KVp, 145 mA, and 200 ms integration time. Trabeeular microarehitecture was
scanned immediately distal to the growth plate in the proximal tibiae and proximal humerus.
Analysis of trabecular bone was performed 011 100 slices (0.9 mm total) for the tibia and 70 slices
(0.6 mm total) for the humerus, producing images for analysis. Bone morphometric parameters
were then quantified using Seance software. Trabecular bone parameters included: trabecular
bone volume fraction (BV/TV); connectivity density (ConnD); trabecular number (Tb.N);
trabecular separation (Tb.Sp); and structural model index (SMI).
2.9 Serum Chemistry

At sacriﬁce, samples of whole blood were collected by cardiac puncture and serum was separated.
The concentration of various bone turnover markers was determined using commercially available
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits. ELISAs were performed for tartrate-resistant acid
phosphatase 5b (TRAP-Sb; ImmunoDiagnostic Systems 1110., Fountain Hills, AZ), and osteoealein
(Biomedical Technologies Inc, Stoughton, MA). A11 ELISA procedures were performed according to the
manufacturers” protocols. In addition, serum levels of alkaline phosphatase (also a bone formation

"
"14","13
marker), calcium levels were determined using a chemical auto analyzer (Hitachi 717 Automatic
Chemistry Analyzer, Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN).

2.10 Statistics

Data are presented at mean i SEM. In all cases, 2-way-ANOVA differences are presented.
Signiﬁcant differences within Loading (GC vs. SF) 0r Drug (VEH vs. OPG-Fc) were tested by a Tukey
follow-up test (signiﬁcance set at P<0.05). Loading (L) indicates a signiﬁcant difference between GC
and SF within VEH 0r OPG-Fc; Drug (D) indicates a signiﬁcant difference between VEH and OPG-Fe
within GC 0r SF.
3. RESULTS
3.1 Mechanical, Material, and Structural Assays
3.1.] Effect ofSpaceﬂight

Spaceﬂight was found to have an effect on the mechanical properties of mouse femora (Figure 1).
The stiffness of femora isolated from vehicle-treated spaceﬂight (SF/VEH) mice was not signiﬁcantly
different from vehicle-treated ground controls (GC/VEH). Elastic force of SF/VEH mice was 23% lower
than GC/VEH. The effect of spaceﬂight 0n maximal force was more modest, with SF/VEH mice having
values 11% lower than GC/VEH and osteoprotegerin-treated spaceﬂight (SF/OPG-Fc) mice having
values 10% lower than OPG-Fc-treated ground controls (GC/OPG-Fc). The only significant effect of
spaceﬂight on failure force was found for mice treated with OPG-Fc: the femora 0f SF/OPG-Fe mice
had a failure force that was approximately 25% lower than OPG-Fc-treated ground control mice.

"
"15","14

There was no signiﬁcant effect of spaceﬂight 0n femur microhardness (Table 1). Imax 0f SF/VEH
mice was found to be 18% lower than GC/VEH mice. 1min was not signiﬁcantly different between
SF/VEH and GC/VEH mice.

3.1.2 Effect ofOPG-Fc

Femur stiffness in GC/OPG-Fe was 22% greater than that of GC/VEH mice, whereas OPG-Fe
did not significantly increase stiffness in the SF setting (Figure 1). The SF/OPG-Fe femurs exhibited
significantly greater elastic force (+18%) relative to SF/VEH controls, whereas the modest increase in
elastic force in the GC/OPG-Fc group did not reach signiﬁcance relative to GC/VEH controls. There
was no effect of OPG-Fe on either maximum force or failure force in GC 0r SF groups.

There was no effect of OPG-Fe 0n microhardness values for either ground control or spaceﬂight
mice (Table 1). No significant changes in Imax were observed for femora from GC/OPG-Fe 0r SF/OPG-
Fe when compared to their ground controls. However, when compared to SF/VEH, 1min was 10% greater
in SF/OPG-Fe mice.

3.2 Femur Cortical Histology and Dynamic Histomorphometry
3.2. I Effect ofSpaceﬂight

Spaceﬂight had modest effects on femur cortical BV and TV (cortical plus medullary volume),
decreasing these parameters 7% and 6%, respectively, for SF/VEH and SF/OPG-Fe mice when
compared to their ground controls (Table 2). Med.V was not affected by spaceﬂight for either VEH 0r
OPG-Fe-treated groups; however, AV.Ct.Th values for SF/VEH were 11% lower than GC/VEH mice.

T.BFR/BV for SF/VEH mice was 38% lower than GC/VEH mice (Figure 2). In addition,
SF/VEH mice experienced a 38% decline in both Ps.BFR/BV and ECBFR/BV when compared to
GC/VEH. For SF/OPG-Fe mice, T.BFR/BV declined 39% versus GC/OPG-Fe, while Ps.BFR/BV and

"
"16","15
ECBFR/BV declined by 36% and 39%, respectively. The pattern and magnitude of response was similar
when BFR was normalized to BS (data not shown).

Spaceﬂight caused a 13% decline in Ps.MS/BS for SF/VEH mice compared to GC/VEH (Figure
2). At the endocortical surface, Ee.MS/BS was 23% lower than GC/VEH. Ps.MAR for SF/VEH mice
was 33% lower than GC/VEH mice. A similar response was seen for EC.MAR. There was no effect of
spaceﬂight 0n Ee.ES/BS for vehicle-treated mice (Table 2). There was no effect of spaceﬂight 0n
Ps.MS/BS for SF/OPG-Fe mice, however Ee.MS/BS did decrease by 22% when SF/OPG-Fe was
compared to GC/OPG-Fe (Figure 2). Ps.MAR and EC.MAR decreased by 41% and 29%, respectively,
for SF/OPG-Fe vs. GC/OPG-Fc. There was no effect of spaceﬂight 0n Ec.ES/BS for SF/OPG-Fe mice
(Table 2).

3.2.2 Effect ofOPG-Fc

OPG-Fc treatment had no effect on BV, TV, or Med.V in either ground control or spaceﬂight
conditions (Table 2). AV.Ct.Th was signiﬁcantly greater for SF/OPG-Fe mice (+9%) compared to
SF/VEH. OPG-Fe had no effect on AV.Ct.Th in ground control mice.

Compared to vehicle, OPG-Fc-treated mice had a T.BFR/BV that was approximately 22-23%
lower than vehicle in both ground control and spaceﬂight conditions (Figure 2). This response was
mainly the result of changes at the endocortical surface. For SF/OPG-Fe mice, ECBFR/BV decreased by
24%, while there was no signiﬁcant change in Ps.BFR/BV. For GC/OPG-Fe mice, Ee.BFR/BV
decreased by 23%, while Ps.BFR/BV decreased by 22% relative to GC/VEH mice.

Compared to GC/VEH, Ps.MS/BS was 18% lower in GC/OPG-Fe (Figure 2). There was no
effect of OPG-Fe treatment on EcsMS/BS during spaceﬂight, and no significant effect of OPG-Fe 0n
Ec.Ms/BS in mice on the ground or in space. While MAR at the periosteal surface was not affected by

"
"17","16
OPG-Fc treatment, EC.MAR was signiﬁcantly decreased in both GC/OPG-Fe (-24%) and SF/OPG-Fe (-
26%) conditions when compared to their vehicle controls. OPG-Fc treatment was also found to have an
effect on Ee.ES/BS for both ground control (-40%) and spaceﬂight (-31%) mice (Table 2).
3.3 Mineral Composition
3.3. I Effect ofSpaceﬂight

Dry mass of whole femurs from SF/VEH mice was 7% less than GC/VEH mice (Figure 3).
While organic mass was not greatly affected by spaceﬂight, mineral mass was approximately 10% lower
in SF/VEH mice compared to GC/VEH controls. The only observed effect of spaceﬂight 0n the femoral
mass of OPG-Fc-treated mice was a 5% lower mineral mass in SF/OPG-Fe mice compared to GC/OPG-
Fe. The total femur percent mineral content of SF/VEH was signiﬁcantly lower than GC/VEH mice (-
3%). Percent mineralization in the diaphysis following spaceﬂight was not different from ground control.
However, in the metaphysis, percent mineralization in SF/VEH mice was 5% lower than GC/VEH mice.
The pattern of response for OPG-Fc-treated mice was similar.
3.3.2 Effect ofOPG-Fc
OPG-Fc treatment led to signiﬁcant increases in dry, organic, and mineral mass for both ground

control and spaceﬂight animals (Figure 3). OPG-Fe treatment lead to small increases in total femur
percent mineralization for both GC/OPG-Fe (+2%) and SF/OPG-Fe (+3 %) mice when compared to their
ground controls. These overall changes were primarily related to changes in the metaphysis, as there was
no signiﬁcant effect of OPG-Fe 0n diaphyseal mineral content. Percent mineral content of the
metaphysis in SF/OPG-Fe mice was 2% greater than SF/VEH mice. The effect of OPG-Fe 0n

"
"18","17
metaphyseal mineral content in spaceﬂight mice was much larger, with SF/OPG-Fe having a percent
mineral content at this site 6% greater than SF/VEH.

3.4 Trabecular Microarchitecture
3.4. I Effect ofSpaceﬂight

The effects of spaceﬂight 0n trabecular mieroarchitecture were complicated. In the tibia,
trabecular BV/TV 0f SF/VEH was 26% lower than GC/VEH, while C0nn.D was 27% 10wer(a1th0ugh
not significantly), Tb.Th was 16% lower, and SMI was 6% greater (Table 3). There was no effect of
spaceﬂight on any of these parameters when SF/OPG-FC mice were compared to GC/OPG-Fc.

At the proximal humeri, both BV/TV and C0nn.D were not changed by spaceﬂight (Table 3).

pQCT analysis of the proximal tibiae showed that spaceﬂight resulted in signiﬁcantly lower total
VBMD in SF/VEH mice when compared to GC/VEH (-11%) (Table 3). For SF/OPG-Fe mice, the total
proximal tibia VBMD was 4% lower versus GC/OPG-Fc. At the L5 vertebrae, VBMD 0f SF/VEH was 6%
lower than GC/VEH mice, while VBMD 0f SF/OPG-Fe was 4% lower than GC/OPG-Fe.
3.4.2 Effect ofOPG-Fc

Proximal tibia BV/TV for OPG-Fc-treated mice was greater than vehicle in all cases, with
increases of 14% and 56% for ground control and spaceﬂight conditions, respectively (Table 3). C0nn.D
was 77% greater for SF/OPG-Fe mice versus SF/VEH mice. C0nn.D was not changed by OPG-Fe
treatment in ground control mice. Proximal tibia SMI was decreased with OPG-Fe treatment under
spaceﬂight (-12%) conditions, but not ground control. Conversely, increases in Tb.N were seen for
GC/OPG-Fe mice (+10%), but not SF/OPG-Fe when compared to their vehicle-treated counterparts. A

"
"19","18
similar pattern of response was seen for Tb.Sp. Changes in Tb.Th were modest in ground control mice,
while SF/OPG-Fe mice had a Tb.Th that was 18% greater than SF/VEH.

At the proximal humeri, OPG-Fc treatment resulted in significantly increased BV/TV for ground
control (+34%) and spaceﬂight (+40%) animals (Table 3). C0nn.D was also significantly increased for
both ground control (+52%) and spaceﬂight (+40%) animals.

VBMD at the proximal tibia 0f OPG-Fc-treated mice was greater than vehicle-treated for both
ground control (+22%) and spaceﬂight (32%) (Table 3). VBMD at mid-LS vertebrae was also increased
approximately 13% by OPG-Fe treatment for both ground control and spaceﬂight mice.

3.5 Trabecular Histology and Dynamic Histomorphometry
3.5. I Effect ofSpaceﬂight

At the proximal tibia, trabecular BFR/BV at the proximal tibia 0f SF/VEH mice was
substantially greater than in GC/VEH mice (+71%) (Figure 4). Spaceﬂight had no signiﬁcant effect on
MS/BS 0r MAR for SF/VEH vs. GC/VEH.

Proximal tibia, Ob.S/BS and Oc.S/BS 0f SF/VEH was not different from GC/VEH (Figure 4). At
the ﬁfth lumbar vertebrae, Ob.S/BS 0f SF/VEH mice was not different from GC/VEH, while Oc.S/BS
decreased by 39%. There were no changes in any of these parameters when SF/OPG-Fe were compared
to GC/OPG-Fe.

3.5.2 Effect ofOPG-Fc

Proximal tibia trabecular BFR/BV 0f OPG-Fe-treated mice was 38% less than vehicle under
spaceﬂight conditions (Figure 4). There was no effect of OPG-Fe on bone formation for ground control
mice. OPG-Fc-treated mice experienced a signiﬁcant increase in MS/BS when compared to vehicle in

"
"20","19
both ground control (+68%) and spaceﬂight (+50%) conditions. Conversely, MAR was decreased with
OPG-Fc-treatment under ground control (-42%) and spaceﬂight (-54%) conditions.

At the proximal tibia, OPG-Fc treatment essentially obliterated both osteoblast and osteoclast
surface (Figure 4). Treatment with OPG-Fc resulted in lower Ob.S/BS under both ground control (-95%)
and spaceﬂight (-100%) conditions. Similarly, Oc.S/BS 0f OPG-Fc-treated mice was lower than vehicle
under both ground control (-100%) and spaceﬂight (-98%) conditions. At the ﬁfth lumbar vertebrae,
Ob.S/BS 0f OPG-Fc-treated mice was 98% lower than vehicle-treated ground controls. There was no
effect of OPG-Fc 0n Ob.S/BS in spaceﬂight conditions. Oc.S/BS at L5 was obliterated by OPG-Fc
treatment, decreasing 100% and 97% for ground control and spaceﬂight conditions, respectively.

3.6 Serum Chemistry
3. 6. I Effect ofSpaceﬂight

Serum chemistry analyses were conducted on blood collected from SF and GC animals at the
study endpoint. Serum osteocalcin and alkaline phosphatase are both systemic markers of osteoblast-
mediated bone formation, and spaceﬂight resulted in a significant decrease of both of these factors
(Figure 5). Osteocalein levels in SF/VEH animals were 19% lower than GC/VEH mice. Similarly,
alkaline phosphatase levels of SF/VEH mice were 41% lower than GC/VEH mice. Serum TRACP-Sb is
a systemic marker of osteoclast-mediated bone resorption. TRACP-Sb levels in SF/VEH mice were 241%
greater than that found in GC/VEH mice. For SF/OPG-Fc mice, osteocalcin and alkaline phosphatase
decreased by 26% and 42%, respectively, compared to GC/OPG-Fc. There was no change in the levels
of serum TRACP-Sb for these animals.

3.6.2 Effect ofOPG-Fc

"
"21","20

Treatment with OPG-Fo generally halved the levels of serum markers of bone formation for all
loading conditions, including animals with spaceﬂight-related reductions in bone formation markers
(Figure 5). Serum osteooaloin levels in SF/OPG-Fo were 57% lower than SF/VEH mice. Osteooaloin
levels were decreased a similar 54% for GC/OPG-Fo mice. Decreases in alkaline phosphatase level for
OPG-Fo treated mice were similar to that of osteooaloin, with these mice seeing approximately 48%
lower serum concentrations versus vehicle-treated.
4. DISCUSSION

Increased bone resorption, leading to deleterious effects on bone strength, fracture risk, and
propensity for renal stone formation due to elevated calcium excretion, represents a signiﬁcant obstacle
for the future of long duration spaceﬂight. In the present study, we have demonstrated for the ﬁrst time
that mice experience signiﬁcant, deleterious effects of spaceﬂight on skeletal mass, strength and
structure and that many of these effects can be ameliorated with a potent antiresorptive agent. The
antiresorptive agent, OPG-Fo, is a RANKL inhibitor that was administered once pre-ﬂight by
subcutaneous inj eotion. OPG-Fo was used as a surrogate for denosumab, a fully human monoclonal
antibody that inhibits RANKL. Denosumab is approved to reduce the risk of fractures in men and
women with seX hormone deficiency and those at high risk of fracture [32]. The subcutaneous route of
administration, and infrequent (twioe-yearly) administration schedule, suggest potential utility for
denosumab in male and female astronauts that are expected to lose signiﬁcant bone mass during long-
duration spaceﬂight. However, it is important to note that the safety and efﬁcacy of denosumab, or other
osteoporosis agents, has yet to be established in this unique population and would represent “off—label”
use.

A unique attribute of OPG-Fo and other RANKL inhibitors is their ability to markedly reduce
osteoclast numbers, which makes it relatively easy to understand the extent to which bone resorption

"
"22","21
was inhibited at the tissue-level [33]. Osteoclast numbers were markedly reduced by OPG-Fe in
spaceﬂight animals, indicating that inhibition of bone resorption explained the positive changes in bone
mass, geometry, architecture and strength with OPG-Fe in the spaceﬂight animals. In these relatively
young growing mice, the effects of exogenous OPG-Fe administration appear to compensate for the
spaceﬂight-related inhibition of bone formation, while also preventing any direct increases in bone
resorption due to skeletal unloading in microgravity. This study represents the ﬁrst ﬂight of mice on the
space shuttle, an important development in the use of animal models in microgravity. As such, we have
demonstrated that the young mouse can be considered an applicable model for spaceﬂight-induced
osteopenia [34]. Previous studies of pre- and post-ﬂight ﬁnite element models of astronaut’s proximal
femur following 4.3-6.5 month stays on the International Space Station (188) have demonstrated a rapid
decline in estimated strength of the proximal femur, 0n the order of 2.0-2.6% per month [10]. In fact, the
rate of decline in strength is more rapid than that of bone mineral density (0.4-1.8% per month) as
determined by DXA [7, 9, 12]. These results complement the ﬁndings of the present study, which
demonstrate a loss of strength and stiffness at the mid-diaphysis 0f the femur with spaceﬂight. There
were also signiﬁcant decreases in the rate of cortical bone formation and in the measured moments of
inertia. We did not observe any changes in material properties of bones that were assayed, suggesting
that the aforementioned structural properties contribute more to the observed changes in bone strength
with spaceﬂight compared to material properties.

The speciﬁc location of bone loss is also an important consideration. In the present study, there
was significant spaceﬂight-related loss of both trabecular and cortical bone volume and density, but
cortical bone appeared to be affected to a greater degree. Possible mechanisms for bone loss in these two
compartments could be important to understand, to the extent that OPG-Fe has direct effects on
osteoclasts but not on osteoblasts. For cortical bone, endocortieal and periosteal bone formation were

"
"23","22
significantly reduced with spaceﬂight and these reductions were further increased by OPG-Fe.
Nonetheless, OPG-Fe prevented decreases in cortical thickness and strength in spaceﬂight mice,
indicating that osteoclast inhibition with OPG-Fe fully compensated for the reductions in bone
formation. The salutary effects of OPG-Fe 0n cortical bone could be attributed to reductions in
endoeortieal eroded surfaces. In apparent contrast, trabecular bone formation in the proximal tibia was
increased with spaceﬂight, suggesting that the observed relative reduction in trabecular bone volume
with spaceﬂight was related to increased bone resorption. This is not consistent, however, with the
known uncoupled nature of bone remodeling during disuse. It may represent a unique phenomenon of
the loading pattern of the group-housed mice in the AEM or an artifact of the single label
histomorphometry. This phenomenon has been reported in other models of disuse osteopenia [35] and is
also very notable in the physiological state of lactational bone loss [36]. There are limited data on
trabecular bone remodeling in rodent disuse osteopenia models; Tian and colleagues showed a
significant reduction in trabecular bone formation rate at the proximal tibia after four weeks of hindlimb
immobilization, but there was no reduction in bone volume fraction, so it is not clear that this model
provides a catalyst for trabecular bone loss [37].

Cortical histomorphometry revealed declines in bone formation rate on the order of 20-40%,
depending on surface, during spaceﬂight. These ﬁndings stand in contrast to the lack of significant
changes observed in trabecular bone volume fraction (BV/TV) observed when spaceﬂight mice were
compared to ground controls. In addition, composition data revealed declines in total percent
mineralization of the femur in spaceﬂight mice, with similar losses on the order of 3-5% at both the
metaphysis and diaphysis. This compares to previous studies by Lang and colleagues which suggests
that bone loss tended to occur in the most non-load bearing compartments of the bone (i.e., trabecular
versus cortical bone) [9].

"
"24","23

Traditional forms of pathological bone loss, such as that which occurs in post-menopausal
osteoporosis, occur as a result of an increase in osteoclast-mediated bone resorption with a concomitant
increase in osteoblast-mediated bone formation. Although coupled, the net effect of these processes is
clearly in favor of bone loss. In contrast, current data in human models suggests that spaceﬂight-induoed
bone loss is mainly due to a rapid increase in bone resorption uncoupled from bone formation, which
remains stable or actually declines slightly [6, 8, 38]. These ﬁndings are primarily based upon assays
conducted on astronaut serum samples. Our quantitative histomorphometry data and serum markers
indicate spaceﬂight mice experienced an uncoupling of bone formation and bone resorption, but
balanced towards a greater inhibition of bone formation at cortical sites. This is consistent with other
experiments from rats and hindlimb suspension studies [39-41]. The decision to ﬂy 10-week old animals
was made after considering previous shuttle ﬂights with rats and the need to strike a balance between
mice that are not growing at an excessive rate and the logistical need to observe changes in a relatively
short twelve day period. The young age of the animals represents a potential limitation to interpretation
of the results. In particular, it is ultimately necessary to model an astronaut population that is generally
skeletally mature. Spaceﬂight animal studies currently in progress are utilizing skeletally mature (16-
week—old or greater) mice in order to address these concerns. A positive of using young animals is the
ability to examine changes in periosteal bone formation in a model where periosteal formation is active,
particularly when the duration of spaceﬂight was limited to 12 days,

The twelve-day duration of the study is also an important consideration in interpreting these
results, especially considering the mechanism of action of the osteoprotegerin administered and the time
to maximal efficacy. Although this study represents a space shuttle ﬂight of typical duration, there are
some limitations in extrapolation to longer-term missions (such as extended stays on the 188 or during a
prolonged ﬂight from the Earth to Mars). It was also important for us to consider the development of an

"
"25","24
immunogenie response to human OPG-Fe in mice and previous data from two-week shuttle missions.
Despite this, both the consistency and signiﬁcance of the results throughout this study make it an
important foundation for our knowledge of pharmacological prevention of bone loss in space.

The development of an effective therapeutic countermeasure t0 spaceﬂight-indueed osteoporosis
should not be undertaken without regard for the long-term health of the astronaut population. Excessive
antiresorptive treatment and severe inhibition of bone resorption may not be necessary to protect an
astronaut’s skeletal system from the temporary stress of the space environment. Previous studies by our
laboratory have looked at the use of more conventional bisphosphonate antiresorptives compared to
OPG-Fe [21]. Over the course of a series of iterative, proof—of—eoneept studies we were able to
demonstrate profound inhibition of bone formation at so-called supramaximal doses. Through a process
of dose refinement we were able to establish preliminary guidelines and a minimally efﬁcacious dosing
regimen that would be able to balance the need for inhibition of bone resorption with the deleterious
inhibition of bone formation already compromised by microgravity unloading. Combined with the
results of the present study, we can see how the practical implications of this ground-based study can be
put in to effect. A single dose of OPG-Fe was able to mitigate most of the deleterious effects of
spaceﬂight 0n the skeletal system of mice. The next step would involve the refinement of a dosing
regimen using ground-based animal and human data from denosumab clinical trials to maximize
protection of bone, while limiting the long-term effects of the therapy following return to Earth.

In summary, osteoprotegerin is a protein that causes sustained inhibition of bone resorption after
a single inj ection. In the present study, we sought to test the ability of OPG-Fe to preserve bone during
spaceﬂight. After landing, spaceﬂight mice treated with OPG-Fc had greater BMD than spaceﬂight or
ground control mice treated with inert vehicle. In addition, OPG-Fc was found to increase tibial
trabecular bone volume and VBMD in all groups. The effect of OPG-Fe provides a plausible mechanism

"
"26","25
for the preservation of bone during spaceﬂight; however, inhibition of bone formation appeared to be a
more significant mechanism for spaceﬂight-induced osteopenia. OPG-Fe did not result in any reversal of
spaceﬂight-related changes in bone formation parameters. These observations suggest that the beneﬁcial
effects of OPG-Fe on mouse bone during spaceﬂight are due to dramatic and sustained suppression of
bone resorption. Taken together, we have demonstrated that the young mouse is an appropriate model
for spaceﬂight-induced osteopenia and that a single pre-ﬂight treatment With OPG-Fc effectively
ameliorates the deleterious effects of spaceﬂight on mouse bone.

"
"27","26
5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author’s would like to acknowledge grant support from the National Space Biomedical
Research Institute (BL01302 through NASA NCC 9-58) and NIH 5 R01 AR059221-02. The authors
would like to thank and acknowledge Mark Rupert from BioServe Space Technologies at the University
of Colorado and Dr. Beverly Girten and the NASA Ames Research Center team. In addition, we thank
Ramona Bober for coordinating all animal activities at the Kennedy Space Center. Thanks to the
astronauts aboard STS-108 for their critical role in helping to manage this experimental payload and
bring it home safely to Earth. Thanks to Zhaopo Geng for histomorphometry support.

"
"28","27
REFERENCES
[1] Fitts RH, Trappe SW, Costill DL, Gallagher PM, Creer AC, Colleton PA, Peters JR,
Romatowski J G, Bain J L, Riley DA. Prolonged Space Flight-Indueed Alterations in the Structure and
Function of Human Skeletal Muscle Fibres. J Physiol 2010.
[2] Teseh PA, Berg HE, Bring D, Evans HJ, LeBlane AD. Effects of 17-day spaceﬂight 0n knee
extensor muscle function and size. Eur J Appl Physiol 2005;93: 463-8.
[3] Zayzafoon M, Meyers VE, McDonald J M. Microgravity: the immune response and bone.
Immunol ReV 2005;208: 267-80.
[4] Markin AA, Zhuravleva OA, Morukov BV, Vostrikova LV, Zabolotskaia IV, Poluektova VP.
[Characteristics of cosmonauts' metabolism after extended missions 0n the international space station].
Aviakosm Ekolog Med 2005;39: 36-41.
[5] Specter ER, Smith SM, Sibonga J D. Skeletal effects of long-duration head-down bed rest. Aviat
Space Environ Med 2009;80: A23-8.
[6] Smith SM, Wastney ME, O'Brien KO, Morukov BV, Larina 1M, Abrams SA, DaVis-Street JE,
Oganov V, Shaekelford LC. Bone markers, calcium metabolism, and calcium kinetics during extended-
duration space ﬂight 011 the mir space station. J Bone Miner Res 2005;20: 208-18.
[7] Tilton FE, Degioanni JJ, Schneider VS. Long-term follow-up of Skylab bone demineralization.
Aviat Space Environ Med 1980;51: 1209-13.
[8] Smith SM, Wastney ME, Morukov BV, Larina 1M, Nyquist LE, Abrams SA, Taran EN, Shih CY,
Nillen J L, DaVis-Street J E, Rice BL, Lane HW. Calcium metabolism before, during, and after a 3-1110
spaceﬂight: kinetic and biochemical changes. Am J Physiol 1999;277: R1-10.
[9] Lang T, LeBlane A, Evans H, Lu Y, Genant H, Yu A. Cortical and trabecular bone mineral loss
from the spine and hip in long-duration spaceﬂight. J Bone Miner Res 2004;19: 1006-12.

"
"29","28
[10] Keyak J H, Koyama AK, LeBlanc A, Lu Y, Lang TF. Reduction in proximal femoral strength due
to long-duration spaceﬂight. Bone 2009;44: 449-53.
[11] Lane HW, Smith SM. Physiological adaptations to space ﬂight. Life Support Biosph Sci 1999;6:
13-8.
[12] Lang TF, Leblanc AD, Evans HJ, Lu Y. Adaptation of the proximal femur to skeletal reloading
after long-duration spaceﬂight. J Bone Miner Res 2006;21: 1224-30.
[13] Tamma R, Colaianni G, Camerino C, Di Benedetto A, Greco G, Strippoli M, Vergari R, Grano A,
Mancini L, Mori G, Colucci S, Grano M, Zallone A. Microgravity during spaceﬂight directly affects in
Vitro osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption. FASEB J 2009.
[14] Fleisch HA. Bisphosphonates: preclinical aspects and use in osteoporosis. Ann Med 1997;29: 55-
62.
[15] Leblanc A, Matsumoto T, J ones J , Shapiro J , Lang T, Shackelford L, Smith SM, Evans H,
Spector E, Ploutz-Snyder R, Sibonga J , Keyak J , Nakamura T, Kohri K, Ohshima H. Bisphosphonates as
a supplement to exercise to protect bone during long-duration spaceﬂight. Osteoporos Int 2013;24:
2105-14.
[16] Boyle WJ, Simonet WS, Lacey DL. Osteoclast differentiation and activation. Nature 2003;423:
337-42.
[17] Lacey DL, Timms E, Tan HL, Kelley MJ, Dunstan CR, Burgess T, Elliott R, Colombero A,
Elliott G, Scully S, Hsu H, Sullivan J , Hawkins N, Davy E, Capparelli C, Eli A, Qian YX, Kaufman S,
Sarosi I, Shalhoub V, Senaldi G, Guo J , Delaney J , Boyle WJ. Osteoprotegerin ligand is a cytokine that
regulates osteoclast differentiation and activation. Cell 1998;93: 165-76.

"
"30","29
[18] Lacey DL, Tan HL, Lu J , Kaufman S, Van G, Qiu W, Rattan A, Scully S, Fletcher F, Juan T,
Kelley M, Burgess TL, Boyle WJ, Polverino AJ. Osteoprotegerin ligand modulates murine osteoclast
survival in Vitro and in ViVO. Am J Pathol 2000;157: 435-48.
[19] Suda T, Takahashi N, Udagawa N, J imi E, Gillespie MT, Martin TJ. Modulation of osteoclast
differentiation and function by the new members of the tumor necrosis factor receptor and 1i gand
families. Endocr ReV 1999;20: 345-57.
[20] Takahashi N, Udagawa N, Suda T. A new member of tumor necrosis factor ligand family,
ODF/OPGL/TRANCE/RANKL, regulates osteoclast differentiation and function. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 1999;256: 449-55.
[21] Lloyd SA, Travis ND, Lu T, Bateman TA. Development of a low-dose anti-resorptive drug
regimen reveals synergistic suppression of bone formation When coupled With disuse. J Appl Physiol
2008;104: 729-38.
[22] Kostenuik PJ, Nguyen HQ, MeCabe J , Warmington KS, Kurahara C, Sun N, Chen C, Li L,
Cattley RC, Van G, Scully S, Elliott R, Grisanti M, Morony S, Tan HL, Asuncion F, Li X, Ominsky MS,
Stolina M, Dwyer D, Dougall WC, Hawkins N, Boyle WJ, Simonet WS, Sullivan J K. Denosumab, a
fully human monoclonal antibody to RANKL, inhibits bone resorption and increases BMD in knock—in
mice that express chimeric (murine/human) RANKL. J Bone Miner Res 2009;24: 182-95.
[23] Capparelli C, Morony S, Warmington K, Adamu S, Lacey D, Dunstan CR, Stoueh B, Martin S,
Kostenuik PJ. Sustained antiresorptive effects after a single treatment With human recombinant
osteoprotegerin (OPG): a pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic analysis in rats. J Bone Miner Res
2003;18: 852-8.
[24] Turner RT. Effects of short-term spaceﬂight and recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) on
bone growth in young rats. Aviat Space Environ Med 1995;66: 763-9.

"
"31","3O
[25] Chapes SK, Simske SJ, Sonnenfeld G, Miller ES, Zimmerman RJ. Effects of spaceﬂight and
PEG-IL-2 on rat physiological and immunological responses. J Appl Physiol 1999;86: 2065 -76.
[26] Bateman TA, Zimmerman RJ, Ayers RA, Ferguson VL, Chapes SK, Simske SJ.
Histomorphometrie, physical, and mechanical effects of spaceﬂight and insulin-like growth faetor-I on
rat long bones. Bone 1998;23: 527-35.
[27] Zerath E, Holy X, Andre C, Renault S. Effects of space food bar feeding on bone mass and
metabolism in normal and unloaded rats. Nutr Res 2002;22: 1309-18.
[28] Broz JJ, Simske SJ, Greenberg AR, Luttges MW. Effects of rehydration state 011 the ﬂexural
properties of Whole mouse long bones. J Biomech Eng 1993;115: 447-9.
[29] Simske SJ, Guerra KM, Greenberg AR, Luttges MW. The physical and mechanical effects of
suspension-induced osteopenia on mouse long bones. J Biomech 1992;25: 489-99.
[30] Li C, Risnes S. A comparison of resins for embedding teeth, With special emphasis on adaptation
to enamel surface as evaluated by scanning electron microscopy. Arch Oral Biol 2004;49: 77-83.
[31] Parﬁtt AM, Drezner MK, GlorieuX FH, Kanis JA, Malluehe H, Meunier PJ, Ott SM, Reeker RR.
Bone histomorphometry: standardization of nomenclature, symbols, and units. Report of the ASBMR
Histomorphometry Nomenclature Committee. J Bone Miner Res 1987;2: 595-610.
[32] Suresh E, Abrahamsen B. Denosumab: A novel antiresorptive drug for osteoporosis. Cleve Clin J
Med 2015;82: 105-114.
[33] Morony S, Warmington K, Adamu S, Asuncion F, Geng Z, Grisanti M, Tan HL, Capparelli C,
Stames C, Weimann B, Dunstan CR, Kostenuik PJ. The inhibition of RANKL causes greater
suppression of bone resorption and hypercalcemia compared With bisphosphonates in two models of
humoral hyperealeemia of malignancy. Endocrinology 2005; 146: 3235-43.

"
"32","31
[34] Dalton P, Gould M, Girten B, Stodieek LS, Bateman TA. Preventing annoyance from odors in
spaceﬂight: a method for evaluating the sensory impact of rodent housing. J Appl Physiol 2003;95:
21 13-21.
[35] Bloomﬁeld SA. Disuse osteopenia. Curr Osteoporos Rep 2010;8: 91-7.
[36] Salari P, Abdollahi M. The inﬂuence of pregnancy and lactation on maternal bone health: a
systematic review. J Family Reprod Health 2014;8: 135 -48.
[37] Tian X, J ee WS, Li X, Paszty C, Ke HZ. Sclerostin antibody increases bone mass by stimulating
bone formation and inhibiting bone resorption in a hindlimb-immobilization rat model. Bone 2011;48:
197-201.
[38] Morey ER, Baylink DJ. Inhibition of bone formation during space ﬂight. Science 1978;201:
1 138-41.
[39] Bikle DD, Halloran BP. The response of bone to unloading. J Bone Miner Metab 1999; 17: 233-
44.
[40] Bikle DD, Sakata T, Halloran BP. The impact of skeletal unloading on bone formation. GraVit
Space Biol Bull 2003;16: 45-54.
[41] Vice L, Novikov VE, Very J M, Alexandre C. Bone histomorphometric comparison of rat tibial
metaphysis after 7-daytai1 suspension VS. 7-day spaceﬂight. Aviat Space Environ Med 1991;62: 26-31.

"
"33","32
TABLES
Table 1. Summary of material and structural assays properties of femora collected from female
C57BL/6J mice (77-days-01d at euthanasia). Mice were assigned to one of five groups (n=12/gr0up):
Baseline, Ground Control (GC) with Vehicle (VEH; phosphate-buffered saline), GC with
Osteoprotegerin (OPG-Fe; 20 mg/kg), Spaceﬂight (SF) with VEH, and SF with OPG-Fe. The duration
of microgravity exposure during SF was 12 days.
Ground Control Spaceﬂight
Baseline Vehicle OPG—Fc Vehicle OPG—Fc 2-Way ANOVA
—-———
Imax 184i9 238i6 229i9 196i9L 210i6 SF<GC
Data are presented at mean :2 SEM. 2-way-ANOVA differences are presented in the right-most column.
Signiﬁcant differences within Loading (GV VS. SF) 0r Drug (VEH VS. OPG-Fe) were tested by a Tukey
follow-up test (signiﬁcance set at P<0.05). Loading (L) indicates a signiﬁcant difference between GC
and SF within VEH 0r OPG-Fe; Drug (D) indicates a signiﬁcant difference between VEH and OPG-FC
within GC 0r SF.

"
"34","33
Table 2. Summary of cortical histomorphometrie structural parameters from femur mid-diaphysis cross-
sections collected from female C57BL/6J mice (77-days—01d at euthanasia). Mice were assigned to one
of ﬁve groups (11:12/ group): Baseline, Ground Control (GC) with Vehicle (VEH; phosphate-buffered
saline), GC with Osteoprotegerin (OPG-Fe; 20 mg/kg), Spaceﬂight (SF) with VEH, and SF with OPG-
Fe. The duration of microgravity exposure during SF was 12 days. Mice received an inj eetion 0f the
bone label caleein (20 mg/kg) approximately 22 hours prior to the start of the study.
Ground Control Spaceﬂight
BV (1111113) 0.65 i 0.01 0.70 i 0.01 0.71 i 0.01 0.65 i 0.01L 0.67 i 0.01L SF<GC
TV (1111113) 1.54 i 0.02 1.59 i 0.01 1.61 i 0.01 1.56 i 0.02 1.56 i 0.02L SF<GC
Med.V (1111113) 0.90 i 0.01 0.89 i 0.01 0.90 i 0.01 0.91 i 0.01 0.88 i 0.01 —
--———

Data are presented at mean :2 SEM. 2-way-ANOVA differences are presented in the right-most column.
Signiﬁcant differences within Loading (GC VS. SF) or Drug (VEH VS. OPG-Fe) were tested by a Tukey
follow-up test (signiﬁcance set at P<0.05). Loading (L) indicates a signiﬁcant difference between SF
and GC within VEH or OPG-Fc; Drug (D) indicates a signiﬁcant difference between OPG-Fe and VEH
within GC or SF.

"
"35","34
Table 3. Summary of proximal tibia and humerus trabecular mieroarehiteeture parameters and tibia and
ﬁfth lumbar vertebrae volumetric bone mineral density (BMD) collected from female C57BL/6J mice
(77-days—01d at euthanasia). Mice were assigned to one of ﬁve groups (11:12/ group): Baseline, Ground
Control (GC) with Vehicle (VEH; phosphate-buffered saline), GC with Osteoprotegerin (OPG-Fe; 20
mg/kg), Spaceﬂight (SF) with VEH, and SF with OPG-Fe. The duration of microgravity exposure
during SF was 12 days.
Ground Control Spaceﬂight
Baseline Vehicle OPG—Fc Vehicle OPG—Fc 2-Way ANOVA
Proximal
Tibia ”CT
BV/TV 5.7 i 0.4 9.2 i 0.5 10.5 i 0.6D 6.8 i 0.4L 10.6 i 0.3 D OPG-Fc>VEH
ConnD 3047 88 i 8 102i 10 64i7 113 47D OPG-Fc>VEH
SMI 3.08 4 0.06 2.63 i 0.07 2.52 i 0.06 2.79 i 0.05L 2.46 i 0.03D OPG-Fc<VEH
Tb.N 4.07 i 0.07 4.44 i 0.1 4.88 i 0.07D 4.61 i 0.06 4.80 i 0.08 OPG-Fc>VEH
L D SF<GC; OPG-
Tb.Th 35.9 i 0.7 40.4 i 0.4 40.2 i 0.9 33.9 i 0.8 40.1 i 0.5 FC>VEH
Tb.Sp 247 i 5 226 i 6 203 i 4D 217 i 3 206 i 4 OPG-Fc<VEH
Proximal
Humerus ”CT
D D SF<GC; OPG-
BV/TV 10.4 i 0.5 10.0 i 0.6 13.4 i 0.5 8.9 i 0.4 12.5 i 0.04 FC>VEH
ConnD 80 4 7 73 i 9 111 4 7 D 78 i 10 109 i 7D OPG-Fc>VEH
Proximal
Tibia pQCT
LD L D SF<GC; OPG-
Total VBMD 382 i 5 432 i 6 528 i 6 383 i 5 507 i 5 FC>VEH
L5 Vertebra
pQCT
D L LD SF<GC; OPG-
Total VBMD 298 i 6 311 i 5 345 i 4 291 i 5 331 i 6L FC>VEH
Data are presented at mean :2 SEM. 2-way-ANOVA differences are presented in the right-most column.
Signiﬁcant differences within Loading (GC VS. SF) or Drug (VEH VS. OPG-Fe) were tested by a Tukey
follow-up test (signiﬁcance set at P<0.05). Loading (L) indicates a signiﬁcant difference between SF

"
"36","35
and GC Within VEH 0r OPG-Fc; Drug (D) indicates a signiﬁcant difference between OPG-Fc and VEH
Within GC 0r SF.

"
"37","36
FIGURE LEGENDS
Figure 1. Mechanical properties as assessed by three-point bending of femora collected from female
C57BL/6J mice (77-days-01d at euthanasia). Mice were assigned to one of five groups (11:12/ group):
Baseline, Ground Control with Vehicle (phosphate-buffered saline), Ground Control with
Osteoprotegerin (OPG-Fe; 20 mg/kg), Spaceﬂight with Vehicle, and Spaceﬂight with OPG-Fe. The
duration of microgravity exposure during spaceﬂight was 12 days. Data are presented at mean i SEM. 2-
way-ANOVA differences are presented. Signiﬁcant differences within Loading (Ground Control VS.
Spaceﬂight) 0r Drug (Vehicle VS. OPG-Fe) were tested by a Tukey follow-up test (signiﬁcance set at
P<0.05). Loading (L) indicates a significant difference between Ground Control and Spaceﬂight within
Vehicle 0r OPG-Fe; Drug (D) indicates a signiﬁcant difference between Vehicle and OPG-Fe within
Ground Control or Spaceﬂight.

"
"38","37
Figure 2. Cortical quantitative histomorphometrie parameters from femur mid-diaphysis eross—seetions
collected from female C57BL/6J mice (77-days—01d at euthanasia). Mice were assigned to one of ﬁve
groups (11:12/ group): Baseline, Ground Control with Vehicle (phosphate-buffered saline), Ground
Control with Osteoprotegerin (OPG-Fe; 20 mg/kg), Spaceﬂight with Vehicle, and Spaceﬂight with
OPG-Fe. The duration of microgravity exposure during spaceﬂight was 12 days. Data are presented as
mean :2 SEM. 2-way-ANOVA differences are presented. Signiﬁcant differences within Loading (Ground
VS. Spaceﬂight) 0r Drug (Vehicle VS. OPG-Fe) were tested by a Tukey follow-up test (significance set at
P<0.05). Loading (L) indicates a significant difference between Ground and Spaceﬂight within Vehicle
0r OPG-Fe; Drug (D) indicates a signiﬁcant difference between Vehicle and OPG-Fe within Ground
Control or Spaceﬂight.

"
"39","38
Figure 3. Mineralization properties of femurs collected from female C57BL/6J mice (77-days—01d at
euthanasia). Mice were assigned to one of ﬁve groups (n=12/gr0up): Baseline, Ground Control with
Vehicle (phosphate-buffered saline), Ground Control with Osteoprotegerin (OPG-Fe; 20 mg/kg),
Spaceﬂight with Vehicle, and Spaceﬂight with OPG-Fe. The duration of microgravity exposure during
spaceﬂight was 12 days. Data are presented as mean i SEM. 2-way-ANOVA differences are presented.
Signiﬁcant differences within Loading (Ground Control vs. Spaceﬂight) 0r Drug (Vehicle VS. OPG-Fe)
were tested by a Tukey follow-up test (signiﬁcance set at P<0.05). Loading (L) indicates a signiﬁcant
difference between Ground Control and Spaceﬂight within Vehicle 0r OPG-Fe; Drug (D) indicates a
significant difference between Vehicle and OPG-Fe within Ground Control or Spaceﬂight.

"
"40","39
Figure 4. Tibia trabecular histomorphometrie parameters and tibia and ﬁfth lumbar vertebra
osteoblast/osteoelast indiees collected from female C57BL/6J mice (77-days—01d at euthanasia). Mice
were assigned to one of five groups (11:12/ group): Baseline, Ground Control with Vehicle (phosphate-
buffered saline), Ground Control with Osteoprotegerin (OPG-Fe; 20 mg/kg), Spaceﬂight with Vehicle,
and Spaceﬂight with OPG-Fe. The duration of microgravity exposure during spaceﬂight was 12 days.
Data are presented as mean :2 SEM. 2-way-ANOVA differences are presented. Signiﬁcant differences
within Loading (Ground Control VS. Spaceﬂight) 0r Drug (Vehicle VS. OPG-Fe) were tested by a Tukey
follow-up test (signiﬁcance set at P<0.05). Loading (L) indicates a signiﬁcant difference between
Ground Control and Spaceﬂight within Vehicle 0r OPG-Fe; Drug (D) indicates a signiﬁcant difference
between Vehicle and OPG-Fe within Ground Control or Spaceﬂight.

"
"41","40
Figure 5. Levels of bone formation (osteocalcin and alkaline phosphatase) and bone resorption (TRAPSb)
markers in serum collected from female C57BL/6J mice (77-days—01d at euthanasia). Mice were
assigned to one of ﬁve groups (11:12/ group): Baseline, Ground Control with Vehicle (phosphate-
buffered saline), Ground Control with Osteoprotegerin (OPG-Fc; 20 mg/kg), Spaceﬂight with Vehicle,
and Spaceﬂight with OPG-Fc. The duration of microgravity exposure during spaceﬂight was 12 days.
Data are presented at mean :2 SEM. 2-way-ANOVA differences are presented. Signiﬁcant differences
within Loading (Ground Control VS. Spaceﬂight) 0r Drug (Vehicle VS. OPG-Fe) were tested by a Tukey
follow-up test (signiﬁcance set at P<0.05). Loading (L) indicates a signiﬁcant difference between
Ground Control and Spaceﬂight within Vehicle 0r OPG-Fc; Drug (D) indicates a signiﬁcant difference
between Vehicle and OPG-Fe within Ground Control or Spaceﬂight.

"
"42","41
Fig. 1
El El Vehicle I OPG-Fc [:1 Vehicle I OPG-Fc
15 15
A L
E D a L
g 10 L g 10
3 L:
0 cu
'5 E
i“? 5 g 5
“J 2
O 0
Baseline Ground Control Spaceflight Baseline Ground Control Spaceﬂight
E
E] Vehicle I OPG—Fc |:| Vehicle I OPG-Fc
15 80
D
E E 60
g 10 L g
o :1:
LL m 40
e 2
2 5 E
E a 20
O 0
Baseline Ground Control Spaceﬂight Baseline Ground Control Spaceﬂight

"
"43","42
Flg. 2
W
D Vehicle I OPG-Fc |:| Vehicle I OPG-Fc D Vehicle I OPG-Fc
1.0 0.4 0.6
A ’S ’>.‘
E 0'8 D g 0.3 D g D
‘9 o °° 0.4
2: 0.6 L g L g L
> 02 L LO
LD 0:: m
g 004 E E
E EB 55 0.2
. - 0.1 -
I— 0.2 x :3
0.0 0.0 0.0
Ground Control Spaceflight Ground Control Spaceﬂight Ground Control Spaceﬂight
[I Vehicle I OPG-Fc E] Vehicle I OPG-Fc
A 50 A 100
>. >.
8 3
N‘ 40 L .2 80
5 D a L '-
E 30 E 60
3 3.
(D 20 (n 40
Q Q
g 10 2 20
vi 6
n. m
0 0
Ground Control Spaceﬂight Ground Control Spaceﬂight
E] Vehicle I OPG-Fc [I Vehicle I OPG-Fc
1.5 2.0
’>‘. ‘9.
ﬂ 1 o L 5 1'5
E ' E D L
5 L 3
n: n: 1.0 LD
< <
2 0.5 E
g [B 0.5
0.0 0.0
Ground Control Spaceflight Ground Control Spaceﬂight

"
"44","Flg. 3
E
40 CI Vehicle I OPG-Fc 14 |:| Vehicle l OPG-Fc 24 [:1 Vehicle I OPG-FC
3 a D
A 13 22
°’ 35 D g 5, LD
15, D a D 8
3 g 12 g 20
g 30 L '3 11 E 18 L
2‘ Ill l l a: ca '1'
D 9 '1' .E I I
25 0 10 5 1e
o]_l__|_l_l.-_I_L-_ 0]_|._|_l_L-_|_L-_ 0]_|__|_|_L-_|_L-_
Baseline Ground Control Spaceﬂight Baseline Ground Control Spaceﬂight Baseline Ground Control Spaceﬂight
69 E] Vehicle I OPG-Fc 66 E] Vehicle I OPG-Fc 66 E] Vehicle I OPG-Fc
: .E D .E D
g 66 L E 63 L0 3 54 L0
°\ 0 O
m l-
% Z 60 E
g 63 .c L g 62 L
:3. °- _
a 3 3
a é’ 57 °
60 "" 60
Baseline Ground Control Spaceﬂight Baseline Ground Control Spaceﬂight Baseline Ground Control Spaceﬂight

"
"45","44
Flg. 4
E
D Vehicle I OPG-Fc [:1 Vehicle I OPG-Fc E] Vehicle I OPG-Fc
3: 4 20 5
a A D
S =3 D 4
1— 3 w 15 SE a
> m a
g a i2 3
LL 2 D E 10 E g D
m a .- \ D
.n b .9 ”E 2
E '- 9 :L
|— 1 E 5 O- V
.9 {2 1
:9
|- 0 0 0
Ground Control Spaceﬂight Ground Control Spaceﬂight Ground Control Spaceﬂight
15 E] Vehicle I OPG-Fc 5 E] Vehicle I OPG-Fc
§ :5 4
U) U)
Q 10 Q 3
w. w.
.a o
O O 2
.9 5 .‘2
:9 .8
’- |- 1
D D D D
O 0
Baseline Ground Control Spaceflight Baseline Ground Control Spaceﬂight
A 5 E] Vehicle I OPG-Fc A 4 [I Vehicle I OPG-Fc
é .\°
0) (D
e 4 e 3
v: w.
.n 3 o
O O 2
a a
'5 2 a L
m o
E E 1
> 1 >
Baseline Ground Control Spaceﬂight Baseline Ground Control Spaceﬂight

"
"46","300 E] Vehicle I OPG-Fc Q 300 C] Vehicle I OPG-Fc
A D
73‘ o
g 200 § 200
s :1.
0
Tu ‘- g
§ 100 D a 100 D '-
3 L!) g LD
To
a:
o 3 0
Baseline Ground Control Spaceﬂight Baseline Ground Control Spaceﬂight
E
[3 Vehicle I OPG-Fc [j Vehide I OPG-Fc
20 A 11
L .1
° LD
9 '5 E
3
~— E 10
3 10 % D
3 D 7|:
0
'—
5 E 9
o '3 0144—14-44.!
Baseline Ground Control Spaceﬂight Baseline Ground Control Spaceﬂight

"
"47","46
Highlights
Bone loss associated With microgravity exposure poses a signiﬁcant barrier to long-duration spaceﬂight
We tested the ability of recombinant osteoprotegerin, a RANKL inhibitor, to preserve bone mass during
twelve days of spaceﬂight
Osteoprotegerin preserved bone mass in mice subj ected t0 spaceﬂight primarily through inhibition of
osteoclast-mediated bone resorption.
RANKL inhibition may be a plausible means to prevent the deleterious effects of long duration
spaceﬂight 0n astronaut bone health

"
