"","x"
"1","SPACEFLIGHT AND HINDLIMB SUSPENSION DISUSE
MODELS IN MICE
J effery R. Milstead, Steven J . Simske*, Ted A. Bateman
Clemson University Department of Bioengineering, Clemson SC 29634
>“BioServe Space Technologies, University of Colorado, Campus BOX 429, Boulder CO 80309
ABSTRACT
Keywords: disuse, unloading, mice, bone, spaceﬂight, osteoporosis, mineralization, osteoprotegerin
Osteoporosis is a disease characterized by low bone mass and structural deterioration of bone tissue,
leading to bone fragility and increased susceptibility to fractures. The microgravity of space creates an
extreme environment that provides a model for osteoporosis in humans. This greatly accelerated form
of osteopenia results in a 0.5-2% loss of bone mass per month. Rat models for this osteoporosis have
been examined on many occasions, but STS-108 was the ﬁrst Space Shuttle ﬂight to use mice. Data
reported to date indicate that spaceﬂight experiments With mice hold promise in predicting some
spaceﬂight effects on humans.
Due to the cost and infrequeney of ﬂights, ground-based models have been developed to mimic the
deleterious effects of the microgravity environment. Hindlimb suspension is one such localized model.
This model removes gravitational loading from the hindlimbs by suspending the animal by its tail to a
guy Wire that runs lengthwise across the cage.
Because mice had not ﬂown before STS-108, a direct comparison of this model’s ability to predict
spaceﬂight results has not been examined. The objective of this research is to closely repeat the STS-
108 proﬁle, With hindlimb suspension replacing spaceﬂight. This includes examining the ability of the
protein osteoprotegerin, an osteoclast-inhibiting therapeutic, to mitigate the deleterious effects of
skeletal unloading. It is expected that the results Will lead to better understanding of the mechanisms of
mineralization and bone remodeling to aid in development of countermeasures to prevent spaceﬂight
induced osteoporosis and aid the treatment of osteoporosis here on earth.
INTRODUCTION
Over 10 million Americans suffer from osteoporosis, With another 18 million at risk With low bone
density. Often called a “silent disease”, those suffering from it often do not know until they suffer a
sudden or traumatic fracture. A typical woman afﬂicted With Type I (post-menopausal) osteoporosis
may lose up to 2% of her bone mass per year.
It has been observed that the microgravity 0f spaceﬂight creates an environment that provides an
accelerated model for osteoporosis in humans [1,2]. According to Wolff s Law, bone remodeling occurs
in response to the stresses placed upon it. In space, removal of gravitational loading results in decreased
bone formation and increased resorption. Localized losses of up to 3% of bone mass per month have

"
"2","been observed. Although this creates a challenge for long-term manned space exploration, we can
exploit this model to aid in developing a countermeasure for the disease.
Animal models have been developed in order to provide subj eots for more invasive procedures than can
be performed on astronauts. The effects of spaceﬂight on the rat skeleton have been examined
extensively [3,4,5,6]. Though the resorption/formation balance in rats is somewhat different than
humans, spaceﬂight experiments with animals hold promise in helping predict spaceﬂight effects in
humans.
Mice have only recently been ﬂown in space because of prior concerns with odor (could reference
Dalton JAP paper here, but it is a pain to rearrange your refs). Space shuttle ﬂight STS-108 (December,
2001) was the ﬁrst study to examine the skeletal system of mice [7,8]. The principle beneﬁt of using
mice is the ability to study the role speciﬁc genes play in microgravity adaptation by using transgenic
mice. This is of heightened relevance with the recent completion of mapping the mouse genome and its
remarkable similarity with the human genome [9]. The beneﬁts of using mice extend to reduced Space
Shuttle resources (i.e. less oxygen consumption, carbon dioxide waste, food consumption) and improved
statistical power because there is the option for greater sample size compared to rats or humans.
Due to the high cost of spaceﬂight experiments and the infrequenoy of ﬂights, ground based models
have been developed to mimic the effects of microgravity. Hindlimb suspension, nerve
orush/neurootomy, and bed rest are all Viable models. Hindlimb suspension, however, is the only model
that completely removes loading from the lower limbs. The hindlimb suspension method has shown to
inhibit bone formation of developing rats [10,11,12] and more recently in mice [13]. A direct
comparison between hindlimb unloading and spaceﬂight effects has been performed in rats [11,14,15].
However, no investigation has determined the degree to which tail suspended mice can predict the
deleterious effects of spaceﬂight. It is hypothesized that hindlimb unloading will be locally predictive,
especially in the long bones of the hind limbs (i.e. femur and tibia). However, spaceﬂight may have
greater effects on bone properties due to systemic unloading.
The examination aboard STS-108 also involved the testing of osteoprotegerin (OPG), a naturally
secreted glycoprotein that blocks osteoclast formation and activity, for its ability to mitigate spaceﬂight-
induced osteopenia. OPG acts as a decoy receptor, inactivating RANK ligand binding to the RANK
receptor on the osteoclast, an essential factor required for osteoclast differentiation and activation [16].
MATERIALS AND METHODS
On Space Shuttle ﬂight STS-108, mice treated with or without osteoprotegerin were investigated to
determine the effects of spaceﬂight on trabecular bone. 65 day old C57BL/6J mice (n=12/group) were
given an inj eotion of OPG (20mg/kg, subcutaneously) or a placebo 24 hours prior to spending 12 days in
orbit. Ground control mice (age and mass matched) were housed in either AEM or Vivarium oaging,
receiving similar treatments beginning 2 days post-launoh.
For the hindlimb suspension comparison, the STS-108 experiment was be repeated, replacing the
spaceﬂight groups with hindlimb unloaded mice to determine what aspects of microgravity are

"
"3","mimicked by this technique. The parameters include mouse strain, seX, weight, and age, the duration of
the treatment, OPG/plaoebo administration and analysis techniques. The suspended mice were equipped
for hindlimb suspension using a modiﬁed protocol previously used in rats. Skeletal unloading is created
by attaching the tail of a rat or mouse with a casting material to a guide wire that runs across the top of
the animal’s cage. The suspension apparatus is a plastic dowel attached to a swivel. This is attached to
the animal’s tail using hypoallergenic duct tape. This lifts the hind legs of the animal off of the ﬂoor,
while the animal is allowed to move freely about the cage using its forelimbs. The ideal angle of
suspension is approximately 300 relative to the horizon. More acute angles allow the animal to pile up
bedding and may result in loading of the hindlimbs. Greater angles create a severe cephalic ﬂuid shift,
which may stress the animal, effecting normal behaVior including feeding and drinking among other
systemic effects [17]. Food and water were provided ad libitum. In order to quantitatively measure
bone modeling and/or remodeling, bone labels were administered. The ﬂuoroohrome oaloein, which
ﬂouresoenoes greem under ultraViolet light, was administered subcutaneously on day 0 of the study.
Prior to sacriﬁce, the mice were anesthetized using isoﬂourine. Blood was taken Via retro-orbital eye
bleeding using non-heparanized capillary tubes. The serum was separated and collected for analysis.
Although the mice were exsanguinated, cervical dislocation was performed to ensure death. The
hindlimbs were then removed and the tibiae and femora were cleaned of all nonosseus tissue.

One of the most indicative properties of overall bone strength is the bone mineral density. Although
weaker in tension, bone is particularly strong in compression due to calcium hydroxyapatie crystals.
Hydroxyapatite, the primary inorganic component of bone, is transformed from a soluble to a solid form
and spreads by accretion, or crystal growth. It has been demonstrated that spaceﬂight inhibits the
mineralization of bone in multiple species. Percent mineral composition is obtained by ashing the bones,
leaving only inorganic residuals. Ashing will be performed to determine if hindlimb suspension also
inhibits mineralization in the murine long bones.

Histomorphometry will be used to provide quantitative measurements of microscopic images to
determine how much bone remodeling has occurred during spaceﬂight. Using the oaloein bone labels as
references, the endooortioal and periosteal surfaces can be traced. This allows calculation of certain
properties including bone formation rate and area, endooortioal/oortioal bone ratio, and mineral
apposition rate.

The right femur was ﬁxed (10% neutral buffered formalin- 48 hours, stored in 70% ethanol until
embedding) and embedded in Epoxioure resin (Buehler). These were sectioned using a low-speed
diamond bone saw (Buehler, 300 um diamond blade) at the mid-diaphysis just below the troohanter. The
oross-seotions were then Viewed under a ﬂuorescent microscope (Carl Ziess, Inc. Axioskop with MRC
camera mount), illuminating the oaloein label. Miorophotographs were then taken at 50X.

A MioroCT ,uC T 20 by Soanoo© with a nominal resolution of 15 um (9 urn voxel size) was used for bone
modeling. It has been determined that this equipment allows for study bone mioroarohiteoture,
including: Bone mineral density and composition, as well as trabecular spacing, size, volume, shape and
connectivity [18,19] as well as moment of inertia. Trabeoular bone was analyzed from approximately
0.75mm length sections, taken from the proximal tibia, just distal of the growth plate.

"
"4","In addition to the aforementioned assays, several other tools Will be used to determine the efﬁcacy of the
hindlimb suspension model including: Fourier Transformed Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy provides a
minimally destructive tool by Which detailed chemical analysis can be performed, therefore permitting
for study of mineral deposition in speciﬁc regions of osseous tissue [20,21]. Mechanical testing Will be
used to determine strength properties of bone. Although three point bending tests are indicative of
overall strength, it must be considered that the microstructure (i.e. miorooraoks) is a determining factor
of ultimate strength. Serum chemistry will also help determine the balance between osteoblast and
osteoclast activity. The results of these assays Will provide insight on the mechanism by which
mineralization is inhibited during spaceﬂight.
RESULTS
Since the skeletal system grows in response to inherent stresses placed up on it, body mass is an
important factor When considering bone mass and density. Body weight is also a parameter that can
quickly reﬂect the health of an animal. Humans in space (and some previous experiments With rats)
tend to lose body mass, partially due to muscle atrophy and bone loss, but may result from other factors,
such as stress Which may result in abnormal eating/drinking behavior. Typically, hindlimb suspended
mice Will lose mass during the ﬁrst few days of suspension until they become accustomed to the device,
When they adopt normal behavior again.
Animal Masses
20
19.5
m +SF
19 /’—— +AEM Placebo
% "" +VIV Placebo
8 a +VIV OPG
17-5 \ —|— acebo
— —Ts
17 — +V'V
165 VIV OPG
16
Initial Weight Final Weight
Figure 1: Comparison of Animal Masses
As seen in Figure 1, both the spaceﬂight (-5%) and hindlimb (-2%) suspended mice lost weight over the
duration of the investigation. The loss of body mass for these groups supplements the induced bone loss
of these disuse models. Conversely, all control groups gained approximately 2-6% body mass over the
12 day experiment, as expected.
DISCUSSION

"
"5","The primary goal of this research is to determine Whether the balance between bone resorption and
formation are similar between hindlimb unloading and spaceﬂight. It is hypothesized that the relateive
turnover rates may not be exactly the same. Hindlimb unloading, and previous spaceﬂight experiments
With rats, has been shown to primarily inhibit formation, but 10-week old mice are somewhat older than
the age that is generally examined. In fact, the STS-108 mice experienced both an increase in bone
resorption and an inhibition of bone formation. It is anticipated that older hindlimb unloaded mice may
have a greater effect on increasing resorption. From these studies it can be determined if hindlimb
unloading affects the mechanical properties of mouse bones to the same degree as spaceﬂight. It is
hypothesized that the effect on the total skeleton Will be less in hindlimb unloaded mice as the forelimbs
are normally loaded and only the hindlimbs are unloaded. However in mice, the forelimbs may be
partially unloaded. Eventually this can determine if the effects on mineralization are altered in a similar
manner between different models. It has been shown that tail suspension reduces the microhardness (an
indicator of mineralization) of newly formed bone [22]. It Will be important to determine if the mineral
content of existing bone is compromised. Also, alteration of calcium-phosphate composition Will be
examined.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge support of this research from a NASA Headquarters Graduate Student
Research Program (GSRP) fellowship (NGT5-50440). This research used protocols approved by the
Clemson University’s Animal Care and Use Committee.

REFERENCES

1. RC. Rambaut, R.S. Johnson, “Prolonged weightlessness and calcium loss in man”, Acta Astron. V01 6, 1979,
pp.1113-1122.
2. C. Cann, “Adaptations of the skeletal system”, Introduction to Space Life Sciences. Vol 135, 1997, pp. 168.
3. ER. Morey, D.J. Baylink, “Inhibition of bone formation during spaceﬂight”, Science Vol 201, 1978, pp.
1 13 8-1 141.
4. SB. Doty, E.R. Morey-Holton, G.N. Durnova, A.S. Kaplansky, “Cosmos 1887: morphology, histochemistry,
and vasculature of the growing rat tibia”, FASEB J. V014, 1990, pp. 16-23.
5. RT. Turner, G.L. Evans, G.K. Wakley, “Spaceﬂight results in depressed cancellous bone formation in the rat
humeri”, Aviat., Space, Environ. Med. Vol 66, 1995, pp. 770-774.
6. T]. Wronski, M. Li, Y. Shen, S.C. Miller, B.M. Bowman, P.J. Kostenuik, B.P. Halloran, “Lack of effect of
spaceﬂight on bone mass and bone formation in group-housed rats”, J Appl. Physiol Vol 85, 1998, pp. 279-285.
7. P.J. Kostenuik, T.A. Bateman, S. Morony, K.S. Warmington, Z. Geng, S. Adamu, SJ. Simske, V.L.
Ferguson, C.R. Dunstan, D.L. Lacey, “OPG prevents relative osteopenia and deﬁcits in skeletal strength in mice
during a 12-day spaceﬂight”, J Bone Miner. Res. Vol 17, 2002, pp. S209.
8. TA. Bateman, S. Morony, V.L. Ferguson, SJ. Simske, D.L. Lacey, K.S. Warmington, Z. Geng, H.L. Tan,
C.R. Dunstan, P.J. Kostenuik, “Osteoprotegerin mitigates spaceﬂight-indueed changes in mouse bone mass,
density and mineral composition”, J Bone Miner. Res. Vol 17, 2002, pp. 8136.
9. C. Gunter, R. Dhand, “Human biology by proxy”, Nature Vol 402, 2002, pp. 509.

"
"6","10. ER. Morey, E. Sableman, R. Turner, D]. Baylink, “A new rat model simulation some aspects of spaceﬂight”,
Physiologist. V0122, 1979, pp. 823-824.

11. T.J. Wronski, E.R. Morey-Holton, “Skeletal response to simulated weightlessness: a comparison of
suspension techniques”, Aviation, Space, Environ. Medicine. Vol 58, 1987, pp. 63-68.

12. P. Patterson-Buekendahl, R.K. Globus, D.D. Bilde, C.E. Cann, E.R. Morey-Holton, “Effects of simulated
weightlessness on rat osteoealein and calcium”, American J. ofPhyS. Vol 257, 1989, pp. R1103-R1109.

13. 8.]. Simske, A.R. Greenburg, M.W. Luttges, “Tail suspension induced osteopenia in mouse femora: An
animal model for microgravity exposure”, J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. Vol 2, 1991, pp. 43-50.

14. D]. Simmons, B. Grazman, J .E. Russell, W.V. Walker, D.D. Bikle, E.R. Morey, “Simulating certain aspects
of hypogravity: effects on bone maturation”, Aviat. Space Environ. Med. Vol 54, 1983.

15. L. Vieo, V.E. Novikov, J .M. Very, C. Alexandre, “Bone histomorphometrie comparison of rat tibial
metaphysis after 7-day tail suspension VS. 7-day spaceﬂight”, Aviat. Space Environ. Med. Vol 62, 1991, pp. 26-
31.

16. D.L. Lacey, E. Timms, W.J. Boyle, “Osteoprotegerin ligand is a cytokine that regulates osteoclast
differentiation and activation”, Cell. V01 93, 1998, pp. 165-176.

17. ER. Morey-Holton, R.K. Globus, “Hindlimb unloading rodent model: technical aspects”, J Appl. Physiol.
V0192, 2002, pp. 1367-1377.

18. MB. Sehafﬂer, D.B. Burr, “Stiffness of compact bone: effects of porosity and density”, J. Biomech. V01 21,
1988, pp. 13-16.

19. J .D. Currey, “Effects of differences in mineralization on the mechanical properties of bone”, Phil. T rans. R.
Soc. Lond. 1984, pp. 304-311.

20. E.P. Pasehalis, O. Jaeenko, B. Olsen, R. Mendelsohn, A.L. Boskey, “Fourier Transform Infrared
Microspectropie Analysis Identiﬁes Alterations in Mineral Properties in Bones from Mice Transgenic for Type X
Collagen”, Bone. V01 19, 1996, pp. 151-156.

21. L.M. Miller, V. Vairavamurthy, M.R. Chance, R. Mendelsohn, E.P. Pashalis, F. Betts, A.L. Boskey, “In situ
analysis of mineral content and crystallinity in bone using infrared miero-speetroseopy of the V4 PO3' Vibration”,
Biochemica et Biophysica Acta. Vol 1527, 2001, pp. 11-19.

22. SJ. Simske, J .. Broz, M.W. Luttges, “Effect of suspension on mouse bone mierohardness”, J. Mater. Sci.
Mater. Med. Vol. 6, 1995, pp. 486-491.

"
