"","x"
"1","F? |89
C hapte r 20
E
E

O
E How Anlmal Models
g Inform the Debate
E.
E
Ted A. Bateman, PhD; Eric R. Bandstra, BS;Jeffrey S.Wille)/, MS;
E Shane A.]. Lloyd, BS;Yuyu Y.Yuan, PhD; and Jenny Bourne, MS
E
E
SU M MARY
For the past 30 years, bone loss has been a deﬁned consequence of exposure to
the microgravity environment, and bisphosphonates are a potential countermea—
sure. With a relatively well-defined problem and existing therapies, is further
study necessary? Why are animal models needed to support human exploration
of space? We posit that only a portion of the problem has been deﬁned, and the
complex mechanisms causin g bone loss are insufﬁciently understood. Astronauts
require the best and most current therapies to function in the extremes of space—
ﬂight. This is impossible without molecular—speciﬂc countermeasures, and ani—
mal models are the necessary and standard means of identifying and developin g
these a gents for therapeutic use.
, Ofcourse, microgravity is only one of several environmental components of
exploratory spaceﬂight; on lunar and Martian missions, astronauts wilé a(so be
exposed to space radiation, eievated carbon dioxide levels, physiologic htress,
reduced gravity, and altered diet and nutritional status. All these factors could
potentially aﬂect skeletal health. Additionaily, with the relative permanence of
future exploratory missions, plannin g for the eventuality of a fracture is necessaijy.
We propose that using animai modeis is a fundamental cost- and risk-
miti gatin g step in developin g the infrastructure for space exploration. T 0 support
this claim, we introduce a briefhistozjy of microgravity and bone loss models and
examine the additional chaiienges of space radiation and fracture repair. F inally,
therapies currently under consideration are presen ted, including bisphosphonate
: From the Department of Bioengineering. Clemson University, Clemson. SC.
5‘ Correspondence to Ied A. Bateman, PhD. Department of Bioengineering, SUI Rhodes Research Center, Clemson University, Clemson. SE
29634; e-mail: bateman@clemson.edu.
Dr. Bateman reported that he has received grant/research support from Amgen and Procter & Gamble. All other authors reported that
' they have no ﬁnancial relationships that pose a potential conﬂict of interest with this article.

"
"2","I90 / Animal Models
drugs, as well as agents interacting with the RANK/RANKL/OPG pathway. We
conclude that countermeasure developmentfor bone loss in space should be con-
sidered a dynamic process, with animal models being a critical part of the efﬁ-
cient optimization of this process.
INTRODUCTION
It is known that during extended stays on the International Space Station, astro-
nauts lose approximately 0.5% to 2.0% of their bone mass per month,l with
incomplete recovery of bone mineral density (BMD) at the femoral neck 1 year t 3‘
postﬂight.2 Strength is more adversely affected than BMD, declining an average
of 2.6% per month as opposed to the 1.5% per month loss in BMD measured in t
the femur.3 The cellular causes of this bone loss have also been established: a
sharp increase in osteoclast-mediated bone resorption, with either no change or a
slight Idegline in osteoblast—mediated bone formation.4 Bisphosphonates are a
potentialicountermeasure to bone loss. As inhibitors of bone resorption, bisphos—
phonates are the current ﬁrst-line treatment for typical estrogen deficiency
mediated osteoporosis.
With a relatively well-deﬁ-ned problem and available antiresorptive thera-
pies, why is further study of bone loss during spaceﬂight necessary? Are animal
models needed to support human exploration of space? The most compelling
answer to these questions is that only a portion of the problem has been deﬁned. N,
Animal models are essential to complete understanding of the complex molecu-
lar causes of bone loss in space (which are fundamentally different than traditional
postmenopausal osteoporosis), and to developing the best, most speciﬁc counter- %
measure regimens.
Microgravity is only one of several components of the space environment.

For example, astronauts on exploratory missions will also be exposed to space
radiation. Indeed, we recently identiﬁed radiation as potentially contributing to
bone loss during spaceﬂight (Figure 1):"" Ultimately, it is the complexity of the
problem and the interconnectedness of the physiologic effects of spaceflight on
biological systems that demand the use of animal models. 2'
In addition to environmental conditions causing bone loss, there are other
unknowns. For instance, the eventuality of a mission-critical fracture must be ‘
considered. During an exploratory spaceﬂight to the moon or Mars, it will be 1
important to understand if the combination of microgravity and partial gravity ' A
will impair current or future fracture repair. Moreover, the impact of a speciﬁc
countermeasure on fracture repair must be understood so that optimum healing ;
under these novel conditions can occur.
The treatment of otherwise healthy astronauts with an antiresorptive therapy
must be carefully considered and well understood. Will pharmacokinetics of bis-
phosphonatcs be altered by microgravity? What is the long-term impact of bis- ii
phosphonate therapy on bone quality and microarchitecture in otherwise healthy T33
astronauts? Do speciﬁc genetic predispositions make an individual more suscep- j
tible to a particular response to the space environment? Given the necessity of
treating numerous biomedical conditions associated with spaceﬂight, molecular- ‘

"
"3","How Animal Models Inform the Debate / |9l
$53 a ,_ 9,
h
a 3x33? ta;
Eaahl. Flgure l. MicroCT images5
”p ‘, f“ of trabecular bone from
W mouse proximal tibia from
- (a) control animals and .
i (a) Control from animals that have been
exposed to (b) 2 Gy iron
- ‘_ . ._ and (c) 2 Gy proton radia-
r7 g tion.A substantial decline in
-f _ a ‘ 3 33.3 t trabecular microarchitee-
, ' 7‘ LL gut “1?. ‘” ture can be seen followmg
_ "" ' irradiation.Adapted from
g 10 mm W Hamilton SA, et al. J Appl
(b) lron-irradiated (c) Protein-irradiated Physiol.2006;IOlz789-793,
"" used With permussnon.
‘j speciﬁc therapies, which will minimize side effects and interactions with other
1 countermeasures, are the treatments of choice. In fact, countermeasures may need
_. ~ to be speciﬁc, at some level, to an individual.
, The number of unknowns and the effects of long-termspaceﬂight on the
""7:"" health of astronauts require that the problems associated with bone loss be funher
57;? defined. Characterizing the individual effects of microgravity, space radiation,
i,“ and fracture repair is complex, and characterizing their interactions will be even
5'93 more involved. Any proposed therapy must ﬁrst be examined and understood in
. animals, both for its safety and efﬁcacy as well as its long—term impact on each
’ 0f the factors noted above.
2: We propose that animal models are a fundamental cost- and risk-ngitigating
step in the development of infrastructure for space exploration. First, We‘intro-
duce a brief history of microgravity and bone loss, both in spaceﬂight and
ground-based models. Second, we examine some of the additional challenges
beyond microgravity. In particular, radiation and fracture repair, two currently i11-
deﬁned variables, are discussed in greater detail. Finally, we present therapies
currently under consideration, including bisphosphonates, as well as agents that
x interact with the RANK/RANKL/OPG pathway.
ANIMAL MODELS FOR SPACEFLIGH'F-INDUCED
BONE Loss
3‘ Spaceﬂight was ﬁrst described as detrimental to the skeletal system almost 30
,, years ago.6 Many spaceﬂight experiments have examined the skeletal system
lg; using animal models. Rats were ﬂown on the Russian Cosmos missions 605, 782,
[f 936, 1129, 1514, 1667, 1887, and 2044 and on Space Shuttle missions STS-SIB,
'2 40, 41, 52, 57, 58, 60, 62, 63, 77, and 78.7 Mice were ﬂown on STS- [08.8 With

"
"4","I92 / Animal Models
the ﬁrst ﬂight of rats, sharp declines in osteoblast activity were observed, to the
degree that bone formation nearly ceased during the 20-day ﬂight.6

Bone mineral mass and density9 and trabecular bone volume, number, and
thickness10 all decrease in microgravity. Additionally, the inhibition of bone forma-
tion that occurs leads to a reduction in mechanical properties.11 Most published
studies suggest no signiﬁcant effect on resorption due to microgravity alone in
maturing rats. However, the combined effects of spaceﬂight and ovariectomy show
not only a decrease in bone formation but also an increase in bone resorption.12
Such ﬁndings highlight the importance of examining gender differences in response
to spaceﬂight. With improvements in biomedical monitoring, treatments should be
optimized for gender-speciﬁc differences, if not for individual variations. For rea-
sons of privacy, these differences can more easily be published in animal models.

In addition to gender, many other nonenvironmental factors can inﬂuence the
response of bone to spaceﬂight, including the age and strain of the animal, the spe—
ciﬁc b ne site studied, the duration of spaceﬂight, and the time after landing before
animal; are euthanized? In several ﬂights, in fact, no skeletal changes have been
observed.”14 The possible effects of how the study animals are housed (in groups
vs singly) and the hardware used have been recognized as possible contributors to
the observed variations in skeletal changes.7 Animal housing hardware used aboard
the Space Shuttle may have blunted the detn'mental effects of microgravity: group
housing and animal crowding cause artiﬁcial skeletal loading that opposes the
effects of microgravity. Physiologic and psychological stress and carbon dioxide
levels are additional variables that may have an impact on bone health.

To date, the only spaceﬂight experiment that studied the mouse skeletal sys-
tem demonstrated a decline in femoral elastic strength of 15% to 20% compared
with ground controls.8 This was mediated by a sharp decline in bone formation
and an increase in bone resorption. The use of mice rather than rats allowed for
the investigation of larger group sizes without the complications of artiﬁcial load-
ing due to crowding. The pn'ncipal scientiﬁc beneﬁt of conducting ﬂight experi-
ments with mice is that animals bred to overexpress or delete a particular gene
may be used to study the role speciﬁc genes play in the physiologic adaptation to
spaceﬂight. In addition, considen'ng mass requirements, volume, oxygen con-
sumption, and waste generation, greater experimental beneﬁt can be obtained
with mice in the resource-constrained environment of spaceﬂight.
GROUND-BASED ANIMAL MODELS
Ground-based animal models play a key role in space exploration. By providing
fundamental data for countermeasure development, ground-based models allow
efﬁcient use of infrequent ﬂight opportunities. Given the few remaining Space
Shuttle ﬂights and the absence of planning for animal hardware on the Space
Station, ground testing may be the only preclinical means to develop the thera-
peutic regimens necessary to prevent bone loss in astronauts. Hindlimb suspen—
sion (HLS) is the primary ground-based model used to simulate weightlessness
for study of the various aspects of musculoskeletal unloading. F irst used in rats
in the 19705 and then later modiﬁed for mice,‘5""6 the HLS model was originally

"
"5","How Animal Models Inform the Debate / I93
developed to study the consequences of skeletal unloading and reloading in a
manner similar to that occurring during and after spaceﬂight.”

In maturing animals, a suspension duration of 2 weeks is sufficient to observe
functional changes.”16 As with spaceﬂight data, most HLS data are obtained from
skeletally immature animals (S 3 months). However, in these rapidly growing ani-
mals, physiologic changes in bone are primarily due to disruptions in modeling
and growth. Studying skeletally mature animals better simulates normal bone
modeling in adult humans and eliminates the complications of growth superim-
posed on the disruptions in modeling.'7 In published studies, mature animals (aged
> 5 months) demonstrate a distinct difference from the response of growing ani-
mals. Adult animals must be suspended for longer periods (4 weeks is common)
to permit observation of declines in most bone properties (ie, calcium content,
density, and formation rates).”'18 Additionally, bone formation rates in mature ani-
mals continue to decline for up to 4 weeks after suspension is discontinued.17

Relative to ground controls, bones from HLS animals exhibit declines in tra-
becular osteoblast number, trabecular mineral apposition rate, trabecular bone
volume, cortical periosteal mineralization rate, total bone mass, calcium content,
and maturation of bone mineral. As in spaceﬂight, bone loss that results from
HLS is caused mainly by a decrease in bone formation rather than an increase in
bone resorption.l9 The HLS model has identiﬁed important effects of disuse on
the skeletal system, such as a differential gender response,”21 a resistance to ana-
bolic factors such as parathyroid honnone (PTH)22 and insulin-like growth factor-
I,23 and the efﬁcacy of novel antiresorptive therapies.24
SPACE RADIATION AND BONE LOSS
During exploratory missions, astronauts will face radiation from cosmic and solar
sources. The nature of space radiation is complex; components range from protons
to iron particles and include secondary radiation produced as heavy ions strike
shielding materials or the Martian atrnOSphere.25‘27 It is unclear how bong already
compromised by unloading will be affected by exposure to radiation. Clinicai radi-
ation exposure has been found to increase fracture risk,28 but the doses adminis—
tered are considerably higher than those applicable to spaceﬂight.

We recently identiﬁed functional loss of trabecular bone in mice 4 months
after exposure to a 2-Gy dose of multiple types of radiation (gamma, proton, car-
bon, and iron). Trabecular volume fraction was reduced 29% to 39%, and trabec—
ular connectivity declined 46% to 64% (Figure 1).5 Additionally, we have
observed bone loss in mice exposed to a l-Gy dose of proton radiation 4 months
after exposure (Bandstra et a1, 2007, unpublished data). These two studies sug-
gest that space radiation may increase microgravity-induced bone loss.

During lunar missions, unexpected solar particle events (SPES), such as solar
ﬂares and coronal mass ejections, are a crucial concern. Although shielding can
largely mitigate proton exposure caused by SPEs, the warning provided by surveil-
lance may not permit complete protection during extravehicular activities. Even with
shielding, infrequent, large SPEs can expose astronauts to unacceptably high doses
of proton radiation.29 Given the planned duration of lunar outpost missions (6 to 8

"
"6","I94 / Animal Models
months), 1 Gy of proton exposure is a signiﬁcant possibility and must be considered
for mission planning purposes.30 In addition to proton radiation from SPEs, back
ground cosmic radiation delivers a dose rate of approximately 1 mGy/d.31

Human exploration will eventually progress to Mars. Among the many vari-
ables that will affect the radiation exposure received in space are the amount and
composition of shielding material, the duration spent in transit and on the Martian
surface, and the level of solar activity during the mission.27 Since the duration of
a Martian mission could exceed 30 months, a resultant accumulation of doses
from heavy ions is possible.27 Although the inﬂuence of heavy ion impacts is
much less than that of protons, energy deposition from individual particles is
much greater.27 A range of heavy ion exposure, from 0.5 to 1.0 Gy, is considered
appropriate for planning purposes.30 For both lunar and Martian mission scenar-
ios, animal studies are necessary to identify the radiation-speciﬁc effects on the
skeletal system, interactions with other environmental conditions, and impact on
fractufe Pealing, and to develop and test countermeasures.
FRACTURE HEALING IN SPACE
During an exploratory mission to the moon or Mars, sufﬁcient bone loss could
occur to create fractures under normal loading conditions. The potential conse-
quences for individuals or for the mission would be so severe that precautionary
measures are necessary. In addition to neuromuscular problems, bone erosion,
infection risk, and other complications, the occurrence of fractures in space could
result in failure to perform tasks critical to the objectives of the mission. Preclinical
data suggest that microgravity may inhibit the fracture healing process.32

The normal fracture healing response on Earth includes impaction, inﬂam—
mation, primary soft callus formation, callus mineralization, and callus remodel-
ing (see Chapters 9 and 10). To investigate the inﬂuence of skeletal unloading on
this healing process, studies have been performed using rats in both spaceﬂight
and HLS models.”34 Animals in both groups exhibited poor callus development,33
inadequate bone fragment consolidation,34 increase of relative osteoid volume,
and a decrease in the number of active osteoblasts,34 which resulted in decreased
callus size and strength and poor mineralization compared with normal weight—
bearing groups. These ﬁndings suggest fracture healing will be impaired in
microgravity. In addition to its effects on in-ﬂight fracture repair, exposure to
microgravity may impair bone healing after an astronaut’s return to Earth-normal
gravity.” Further study in animal models is required.

Given the relative permanence of future space exploratory missions, frac-
tures will eventually be likely. Countermeasures that will both prevent bone loss
that could lead to fractures and improve the fracture healing process must be
developed. Bisphosphonates, which are potent inhibitors of bone resorption, have
been widely used to treat osteoporosis. However, bisphosphonates also greatly
reduce bone turnover, resulting in suppressed bone formation and microdamage
accumulation.35’36 Recently, concern has focused on whether bisphosphonates can
be safely administered to patients undergoing fracture healing.37 Studies utilizing
various animal models have shown that bisphosphonates increase callus size38

"
"7","How Animal Models Inform the Debate / I95
and delay the repair process.36 Impaired bone mechanical strength has also been
reported in humans after long-term bisphosphonate therapy.39

Bisphosphonates may not be an appropriate countermeasure for spaceﬂight-
related fractures due to their inhibition of bone turnover and delay of the healing
process and the associated accumulation of microdamage. In addition to the
mechanical-stimulation, antiresorptive, and anabolic therapies described below,
novel therapies, like pulsed magnetic ﬁelds, should be considered.40
COUNTERMEASURE OPTIONS:

CONTRIBUTION OFANIMAL MODELS

Bisphosphonates such as risedronate and alendronate were the ﬁrst class of
pharmaceuticals approved for treating postmenopausal osteoporosis. By acting
as analogues to pyrophosphate, these drugs are thought to inhibit bone resorp-
tion through their action on osteoclasts.“ Bisphosphonates help maintain bone
mass, inhibit osteoclast—mediated bone resorption, and reduce the risk of both
vertebral and nonvertebral fractures.42 Studies of rats subjected to skeletal
unloading through HLS have demonstrated that alendronate leads to an increase
in calciﬁed tissue in the proximal tibia and prevents the relative loss of skele—
tal mass that occurs in untreated rats.43 However, bisphosphonates have sup-
pressive effects on bone formation that are further aggravated by unloading.
Moreover, one of the problems associated with using bisphosphonates for the
prevention of spaceﬂight-induced osteoporosis is related to the route of admin-
istration. Oral agents often produce upper gastrointestinal tract ulcerations that
could be exacerbated by microgravity,44 and the complications of intravenous
administration of agents such as zoledronic acid in a microgravity environment
also present a challenge.

PTH is an essential mediator of calcium metabolism in the body. It has an
established effect in promoting bone resorption when administered continuously;
however, it is now recognized that intermittent administration of PTH has inibolic,
bone-building effects, particularly in trabecular bone.45 This has made? P H an
important agent for the treatment of osteoporosis. Administration of PTH at doses
as low as 8 pg/ 100 g/d results in a signiﬁcant increase in osteocalcin, a marker
for bone formation, and a 42% increase in trabecular bone volume in the
tibioﬁbular junction in unloaded rats.46 Combination therapies, such as PTH and
the previously mentioned antiresorptives, might further prevent bone loss in
osteoporosis.

Exercise regimens are a well-established countermeasure for the substantial
muscle atrophy incurred by astronauts in microgravity. However, resistance exer-
cise cannot adequately prevent bone loss in microgravity, possibly because of
insufﬁcient load or duration.47 The osteogenic ability of low-magnitude, high—
frequency stimuli (ie, 90 Hz, 0.25 g) has been shown to prevent bone loss in HLS
rats.48 Abandoning exercise and other mechanical therapies as potential counter-
measures would not be prudent; however, their effectiveness when used inde-
pendently or when combined with pharmacologic countermeasures should be
examined in animal models.

"
"8","I96 / Animal Models
IDENTIFYING MOLECULAR MECHANISMS
FOR BONE LOSS
Animal models, particularly from murine species, have been used to help identify
the chemical and molecular causes of bone loss. It is now clear that hormones (eg,
PTH) and multiple cytokines are associated with bone homeostasis and metabo-
lism. These cytokines link the state of the skeletal system with several other organ
systems, particularly the immune and circulatory systems. In fact, the term
“osteoimmunology” is now used to describe the growing ﬁeld integrating
immunology and bone biology.49
One example of this skeletal/immune interaction is the interaction of receptor
activator of nuclear factor (NF-KB) ligand (RANKL), its membrane-bound receptor
(RANK), and the soluble decoy receptor osteoprotegerin (OPG), which represents a
system of cytokines that snongly inﬂuence bone metabolism.5°’51 RANKL is produced
by a vanity of cells, including osteoblasts, ﬁbroblasts, stromal stem cells, and T cells.
When pr sented by osteoblasts in the bone microenvironment, this ligand will bind to
its receptor RANK on the surface of osteoclasts. The activated receptor initiates a sig-
naling cascade that will ultimately result in osteoclast formation and activation.52
OPG blocks the activity of RANKL by ﬁmctioning as a soluble decoy receptor?0
An imbalance in RANKL and OPG production will result in an imbalance
between bone resorption and bone formation. Overproduction of one of these
cytokines resulting from a pathologic condition can affect the state of bone.
Osteopenia, osteoporosis, and increased fracture risk are associated with chronic
inﬂammatory disease of the gastrointestinal tract.53 Rats exhibiting bone loss and
reduction of BMD due to arthritis express RANKL from both synovial cells and
inﬂammatory cells (eg, T cells). OPG treatment abolishes this reduction in
BMD.54 Alveolar bone loss resulting from periodontal disease in murine models
has been shown to be the result of RANKL production by T cells.50 Additionally,
RANKL has been reported to be involved in several cancerous conditions. An
imbalance of RANKL and OPG induced by the plasma-cell malignancy multiple
myeloma triggers increased bone resorption.55
In general, inﬂammation is characteristic of tissue exposed to ionizing radi-
ation, and elevation of proinﬂammatory cytokine levels (ie, interleukin—l B, inter—
leukin-6, and tumor necrosis factor—a) is an early, sustained response of tissues to
radiation?” These changes in cytokines can be observed after low-dose irradia-
tion.58 Increases in proinﬂammatory cytokine levels have been seen in both irra—
diated tissue and in circulating serum, resulting in local and systemic inﬂamma-
tion.‘50 Proinﬂammatory cytokines are active stimulators of bone resorption and
characteristic of many inﬂammatory diseases leading to bone loss.“63 Bone loss
via the catabolic effects of these cytokines can also be enhanced in combination
with (and inducing the production of) RANKL.64
It is our hypothesis that space radiation-induced bone loss is caused by an
immune system-mediated activation of RANKL and expression of proinﬂamma—
tory cytokines. Tissue irradiation can result in an inﬂammatory response. The
response, including cytokine production, may increase RANKL levels, ultimately
leading to bone loss.

"
"9","How Animal Models Inform the Debate / I97
CONCLUSION
In addition to microgravity, many other complex factors contribute to bone loss
during exploratory space missions, and these are not completely understood. We
have discussed space radiation and fracture repair in the context of animal stud—
ies since controlled clinical trials that purposeﬁilly expose humans to radiation or
fracture are not possible. Our preliminary data suggest that space radiation may
have a negative effect on skeletal mass.

Countermeasure development for spaceﬂight—induced bone loss should be
considered a dynamic process. More unknowns will be discovered and potential
therapies now under consideration will be improved upon or discarded in favor
of others. Astronauts require the best and most current therapies to function in the
extreme environment of space. Animal models aid in characterizing the role of
individual variables; they are a necessary cost— and risk-mitigating component
required for the development of space exploration infrastructure.
REFERENCES

l. Lang T, LeBlanc A, Evans H, Lu Y, Genant H, Yu A. Cortical and trabecular bone mineral loss
from the spine and hip in long—duration spaceﬂight. J Bone Miner Res 2004;19:1006-1012.

2. Lang TF, LeBlanc AD, Evans HJ, Lu Y. Adaptation of the proximal femur to skeletal reloading
aﬁer long-duration Spaceﬂight. J Bone Miner Res 2006;21:1224-1230.

3. Keyak JH, Koyama AK, LeBlanc A, Lu Y, Lang TF. Reduction in proximal femoral strength
aﬁer long-duration spaceﬂight. Trans Orthop Res Soc 2007;32:15.

4. Smith SM, Wastney ME, O’Brien KO, et al. Bone markers, calcium metabolism, and calcium
kinetics during extended—duration space ﬂight on the Mir space station. J Bone Miner Res
2005;20:208-218.

5. Hamilton SA, Pecaut MJ, Gridley DS, et al. A murine model for bone loss from therapeutic and
space-relevant sources of radiation. J Appl Physiol 2006;101:789-793.

6. Morey ER, Baylink DJ. Inhibition of bone formation during space ﬂight. Science
1978;201:1138-1141.

7. Morey-Holton ER, Halloran BP, Garetto LP, Doty SB. Animal housing inﬂuences the response
of bone to spaceﬂight in juvenile rats. JAppl Physiol 2000;853:1303-1309.

8. Bateman TA, Morony S, Ferguson VL, et a1. Osteoprotegerin mitigates Spaceﬂight—induced '
changes in mouse bone mass, density and mineral composition. J Bone Mgie Res :
2002;17:8136. f i :-

9. Caillot-Augusseau A, Lafage-Proust MH, Soler C, Pernod J, Dubois F, Alexandre C. Bone for— '
mation and resorption biological markers in cosmonauts during and after a lSO-day space ﬂight I
(Euromir 9S). Clin Chem 1998;44:578-585. '

10. Vice L, Chappard D, Palle S, Bakulin AV, Novikov VE, Alexandre C. Trabecular bone remod-
eling after seven days of weightlessness exposure (BIOCOSMOS 1667). Am J Physiol
l988;255(2 pt 2):R243—R247.

11. Shaw SR, Vailas AC, Grindeland RE, Zemicke RF. Effects of a l-wk Spaceﬂight 0n morpholog—
ical and mechanical properties of growing bone. Am J Physiol 1988;254(1 pt 2):R78-R83.

12. Cavolina J M, Evans GL, Harris SA, Zhang M, Westerlind KC, Turner RT. The effects of orbital
spaceﬂight on bone histomorphometry and messenger ribonucleic acid levels for bone matrix
proteins and skeletal signaling peptides in ovariectomized growing rats. Endocrinology
1997;138:1567-1576.

13. Wronski TJ, Li M, Shen Y, et a1. Lack of effect of spaceﬂight on bone mass and bone formation
in group-housed rats. J Appl Physiol 1998;85:279—285.

14. Bateman TA, Zimmerman RJ, Ayers RA, Ferguson VL, Chapes SK, Simske SJ.
Histomorphometric, physical, and mechanical effects of spaceﬂight and insulin—like growth fac-
tor-I on rat long bones. Bone 1998;23:527-535.

15. Morey ER, Sabelman EE, Turner RT, Baylink DJ. A new rat model simulating some aspects of
space ﬂight. Physiologist 1979;22:823-824.

16. Simske SJ, Guerra KM, Greenberg AR, Luttges MW. The physical and mechanical effects of

"
"10","I98 I Animal Models
suspension-induced osteopenia on mouse long bones. J Biomech 1992;25:489-499.

17. Bloomﬁeld SA, Allen MR, Hogan HA, Delp MD. Site- and compartment—speciﬁc changes in
bone with hindlimb unloading in mature adult rats. Bone 2002;31:149—157.

18. Vico L, Bourrin S, Very JM, Radziszowska M, Collet P, Alexandre C. Bone changes in 6-mo-
old rats after head-down suspension and a reambulation period. J Appl Physiol 1995;79:1426-
1433.

19. Wronski TJ, Morey-Holton ER. Skeletal response to simulated weightlessness: a comparison of
suspension techniques. Aviat Space Environ Med 1987;58:63-68.

20. Bateman TA, Broz JJ, Fleet ML, Simske SJ. Differing effects of two-week suspension on male
and female mouse bone metabolism. Biomed Sci Instrum 1997;34:374-379.

21. Hefferan TE, Evans GL, Lotinun S, Zhang M, Morey-Hollon E, Turner RT. Effect of gender on
bone turnover in adult rats during simulated weightlessness. JAppl Physio] 2003;95:1775-1780.

22. Turner RT, Lotinun S, Hefferan TE, Morey-Holton E. Disuse in adult male rats attenuates the
bone anabolic response to a therapeutic dose of parathyroid hormone. J Appl Physiol
2006; 101 :881 -886.

23. Bikle DD, Harris J, Halloran BP, Morey-Holton ER. Skeletal unloading induces resistance to
insulin—like growth factor I. J Bone Miner Res 1994;9z1789—1796.

24. Bateman TA, Dunstan CR, Ferguson VL, Lacey DL, Ayers RA, Simske SJ. Osteoprotegerin mit-
igates tail suspension—induced osteopenia. Bone 2000;26:443-449.

25. Edwatds AA. RBE of radiations in space and the implications for space travel. Phys Med
2(b1h7($upp1 1):147-152.

26. Cucinotta FA, Schimmerling W, Wilson JW, et 31. Space Radiation Cancer Risk Projections for
Exploratory Missions: Uncertainty Reduction and Mitigation. Houston, TX: Johnson Space
Center, J anuary 2001. J SC-29295.

27. Setlow R, Dicello JF. Radiation hazards to crews of interplanetary missions: biological issues
and research strategies. Washington, DC: Space Studies Board, National Research Council, and
National Academy Press; 1996.

28. Baxter NN, Habermann EB, Tepper JE, Durham SB, Vimig BA. Risk of pelvic fractures in older
women following pelvic irradiation. JAMA 2005;294:2587-2593.

29. Parsons JL, Townsend LW. [nterplanetary crew dose rates for the August 1972 solar particle
event. Radiat Res 2000; 153:729-733.

30. Cucinotta FA. Acute radiation risk and countermeasures for space radiation. In: Vazquez ME,
ed. NSBRI Medical Radiation Countermeasures Workshop. Vol 2007: National Space
Biomedical Research Institute; 2006.

31. Foullon C, Holmes-Siedle A, Crosby NB, Heynderickx D. Radiation Exposure and Mission
Strategies for Interplanetary Manned Mission: Radiation Hazard and Space Weather Warning
System WP 5000. Brussels, Belgium: Belgian Institute for Space Aeronomy; December 14,
2004.

32. Midura RJ, Su X, Androjna C. A simulated weightlessness state diminishes cortical bone heal-
ing responses. J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact 2006;62327-328.

33. Kirchen ME, O’Connor KM, Gruber HE, et al. EITects ofmicrogravity on bone healing in a rat
ﬁbular osteotomy model. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1995;(Sep 318):231-242.

34. Dumova GN, Burkovskaia TE, Vorotnikova EV, Kaplanskii AS, Amslamov 0V. [The effect of
weightlessness on fracture healing of rats ﬂown on the biosatellite Cosmos—2044; in Russian].
Kosm Bio] Aviakosm Med 1991;25:29-33.

35. Mashiba T, Hirano T, Turner CH, Forwood MR, Johnston CC, Burr DB. Suppressed bone
turnover by bisphosphonates increases microdamage accumulation and reduces some biome-
chanical properties in dog rib. J Bone Miner Res 2000;15:613-620.

36. Li J, Mori S, Kaji Y, Mashiba T, Kawanishi J, Norimatsu H. Effect of bisphosphonate
(incadronate) on fracture healing oflong bones in rats. J Bone Miner Res 1999;14:969-979.

37. Odvina CV, Zerwekh JE, Rao DS, Maalouf N, Gottschalk FA, Pak CY. Severely suppressed
bone tumover: a potential complication of alendronate therapy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2005;90:1294-1301.

38. Goodship AE, Walker PC, McNally D, Chambers T, Green JR. Use of a biSphosphonate
(pamidronate) to modulate fracture repair in ovine bone. Ann Oncol 1994;5(Suppl 7):S53-S55.

39. Ott SM. Fractures after long-term alendronate therapy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2001;86:1835-
1836.

40. Midura RJ, Ibiwoye MO, Powell KA, el al. Pulsed electromagnetic ﬁeld treatments enhance the
healing of ﬁbular osteotomies. J Orthop Res 2005;23:1035—1046.

41. Rodan GA, Fleisch HA. Bisphosphonates: mechanisms of action. J Clin Invest 1996;97:2692-
2696.

"
"11","How Animal Models Inform the Debate / I99

42. Fleisch H. BiSphOSphonates in ost60porosis: an introduction. Osteoporos Int 1993;3(Suppl
3):S3—SS.

43. Bikle DD, Morey-Holton ER, Doty SB, Currier PA, Tanner SJ, Halloran BP. Alendronate
increases skeletal mass of growing rats during unloading by inhibiting resorption of calciﬁed
cartilage. J Bone Miner Res l994;9:1777-l787.

44. Schnitzer T, Bone HG, Crepaldi G, et a]. Therapeutic equivalence of alendronate 70 mg once-
weekly and alendronate 10 mg daily in the treatment ofosteoporosis. Alendronate Once—Weekly
Study Group. Aging (Milano) 2000; 12:1—12.

45. Lane NE, Kelman A. A review of anabolic therapies for osteoporosis. Arthritis Res Ther
2003;5z2l4-222.

46. Halloran BP, Bikle DD, Harris J, Tanner S, Curren T, Morey-Holton E. Regional responsiveness
0fthe tibia to intermittent administration of parathyroid hormone as affected by skeletal unload—
ing. J Bone Miner Res 1997;12:1068-1074.

47. Cavanagh PR, Licata AA, Rice AJ. Exercise and pharmacological countermeasures for bone loss
during long—duration Space ﬂight. Gravit Space Biol Bull 2005;18:39-58.

48. Rubin C, Xu G, Judex S. The anabolic activity ofbone tissue, suppressed by disuse, is normal—
ized by briefexposure to extremely low-magnitude mechanical stimuli. FASEB J 2001;15:2225—
2229.

49. Anon JR, Choi Y. Bone versus the immune system. Nature 2000;408:535-536.

50. Hofbauer LC, Heufelder AE. Role of receptor activator of nuclear factor—kappaB ligand and
osteoprotegerin in bone cell biology. J M01 Med 2001;79:243—253.

51. Simonet WS, Lacey DL, Dunstan CR, et a1. Osteoprotegerin: a novel secreted protein involved
in the regulation of bone density. Cell 1997;89:309-319.

52. Kong YY, Yoshida H, Sarosi I, et a1. OPGL is a key regulator ofosteoclastogenesis, lymphocyte
development and lymph—node organogenesis. Nature 1999;397:315-323.

53. Franchimont N, Reenaers C, Lambert C, et 31. Increased expression of receptor activator of NF-
kappaB ligand (RANKL), its receptor RANK and its decoy receptor osteOprotegerin in the colon
of Crohn’s disease patients. Clin Exp Immunol 2004;138:491-498.

54. Kong YY, Feige U, Sarosi I, et al. Activated T cells regulate bone loss and joint destruction in
adjuvant arthritis through osteoprotegerin ligand. Nature 1999;402:304—309.

55. Giuliani N, Colla S, Rizzoli V. Update on the pathogenesis of osteolysis in multiple myeloma
patients. Acta Biomed Ateneo Parmense 2004;75:143-152.

56. Akmansu M, Unsal D, Bora H, Elbeg S. Inﬂuence Oflocoregional radiation treatment on tumor
necrosis faetor—alpha and interleukin-6 in the serum of patients with head and neck cancer.
Cytokine 2005;31:41-45.

57. Ibuki Y, Goto R. Contribution of inﬂammatory cytokine release to activation of resident peri—
toneal macrophages after in vivo low-dose gamma-irradiation. J Radiat Res (Tokyo)
1999;40:253-262.

58. Liu 82. On radiation hormesis expressed in the immune system. Crit Rev Toxicol 2003;33:431—
441.

59. Rubin P, Johnston CJ, Williams JP, McDonald S, Finkelstein IN. A perpetual; cascade of
cytokines postirradiation leads to pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys' 1995;33:99-
109.

60. Anscher MS, Chen L, Rabbani Z, et 31. Recent progress in deﬁning mechanisms and potential
targets for prevention of normal tissue injury after radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 2005;62:255-259.

61. Lam J, Takeshita S, Barker JE, Kanagawa 0, Ross FP, Teitelbaum SL. TNF-cx induces osteo-
clastogenesis by direct stimulation of macrophages exposed to permissive levels of RANK lig-
and. J Clin Invest 2000;106:1481-1488.

62. Walsh NC, Crotti TN, Goldring SR, Gravallese EM. Rheumatic diseases: the effects of inﬂam-
mation on bone. Immunol Rev 2005;208:228—251.

63. Wang ML, Sharkey PF, Tuan RS. Particle bioreact'ivity and wear—mediated osteolysis. J
Arthroplasty 2004;19:1028-1038.

64. Boyle WJ, Simonet WS, Lacey DL. Osteoclast differentiation and activation. Nature
2003;423:337-342.

"
