"","x"
"1","Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2014) 26:385—396
DOI 10.1007/s12217—014—9403—z
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Transient Capillary Channel Flow Stability
Experiments on the International Space Station
Aleksander Grah - Peter J. Canfield -
Przemyslaw M. Bronowicki - Michael E. Dreyer -
Yongkang Chen - Mark M. Weislogel
Received: 18 December 2013 / Accepted: 21 October 2014 / Published online: 8 November 2014
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2014
Abstract Capillary channel techniques with free liquid sur— and which inﬂuenced the measurements, is compensated by
faces provide very reliable means for liquid management in a semi—empirical model for a feedback ratio.
space. However, capillary channel ﬂow is subject to lim—
itation due to liquid surface instabilities when a critical Keywords Capillary ﬂow - Critical ﬂow rate - Transient
ﬂow rate is reached. Steady ﬂow rate limitation is a conse— stability
quence of the choking effect and well understood. Critical
steady ﬂow rate computation with a one—dimensional model
is related to a numerical singularity which occurs at criti— Introduction
cal ﬂow. For transient ﬂow the singularity does not occur.
Therefore, a new transient stability model is defined. It is Capillary Channel Flow has been of great interest since the
based on the steady model, a simplified transient momen— beginning of space exploration because of its widespread
tum balance, the consideration of the capillary pressure application in liquid systems in spacecrafts such as in
Of typical Observed surface shapes, and on a simplified life support systems and propellant tanks. In propellant
dynamic inside the channel. The balance and dynamic tanks, liquid fuel may be displaced from the tank outlet
are defined by liquid and geometrical properties only and due to adverse disturbances. In such a scenario, the fuel
therefore significantly easier to compute than a transient system is at a high risk of feeding gas to the thrusters
differential equation system. In 2011, experiments were which could lead to Off—nominal thrust, engine damage
performed in cooperation with NASA on the International and ultimately to mission failure. This is why tanks are
Space Station (ISS) to confirm the model for steady ﬂow equipped with propellant management devices that ensure
and validate the new transient model. A new phenomenon the transportation of gas—free liquid fuel to the tank’s outlet
is discussed, the ﬂexibility effect, which provides signifi— (Rollins et a1. 1985; Kostner and 3311i 1990; Jaekle 1991;
cant additional transient stability for channels of sufficient Gilmore 1994; Srinivasan 2003). Vane—type propellant man—
length. An undesired feedback effect, provoked by the reuse agement deViceS consist of vanes which are typically
of the liquid in a circular loop of the experimental setup, mounted along the inner wall of the tank’s hull as shown in
Fig. 1.
One Of the most important methods used in propel—
— lant management deVices is the capillary effect, which
A- Grah is a combination of forces of adhesion between the liq—
Eumpean COMiSSion’ JOintResearCh Centre, uid and the solid surfaces and surface tension which is
1755 ZG Petten, The Netherlands . . . . . ’ .
caused by c0hes10n Within the liquid. The effect is used
P.J.Canfie1d - P.M.Br0n0wicki . M.E.Dreyer(E) in capillary channels formed by the vanes 0f propellant
UniVerSity 0f Bremen, 28359 Bremen, Germany management deVices. Capillary channels are designed to
email: dreyer@Zarm‘uni_bremen‘de always be in contact with the bulk liquid which may
Y. Chen . M. M.Weis10ge1 move around inside the tank when the spacecraft performs
Portland State University, Portland OR 97207, USA manoeuvres.
@ Springer

"
"2","386 MicrograVity Sci. Technol. (2014) 26:385—396
Fig. 1 Vanes of a propellant .
management device form \
capillary channels along the Outlet t0
spherical tank’s hull. Capillary 7 \ thruster 3
channelsof various shetpes can ﬂy \ ‘ Propellant LL
be establlshed. L1qu1d 1s 1 ,‘ l L management
captured within the channel and _ \ deV1ce
can be transported toward the ‘_ (l 1%
pump at the outlet. The free J’ Tank 111111
surfaces must withstand , I, / \
pressure differences to prevent Vane(s) /
gas ingestion into the liquid 7‘ Liquid pool
across the interface - \
_V_
Capillary channels
with free surfaces
A simple capillary channelconsists of two parallelplates of the free surfaces fails to balance the pressure differ—
with one or two free surfaces between them (Fig. 2). The ence between the liquid in the channel and the surrounding
pressure difference between the bulk liquid and the liquid in gas then the surfaces would collapse ingesting gas into
the channel provides an effective passive way to ‘capture’ the propellant system in the process. This phenomenon is
and transport the liquid to the outlet. In our model the liquid called choking. The collapse of the free surface is related to
is transported through the vane by a pump which is located the speed of a longitudinal capillary wave (Lighthill 1978;
further downstream. In real propellant tanks, the ﬂow is Rosendahl et al. 2004; Shapiro 1953; 1977; Wilson et al.
driven by a pressure in the propellant tank which drives the 1986). The computation of the critical steady ﬂow rate facil—
propellant through the piping and towards the thrusters. The itates a numerical singularity which occurs at the collapse
ﬂow causes the pressure to decrease along the ﬂow path of the free liquid surfaces.
and the free liquid surfaces bend inwards to balance the dif— The pressure difference between the liquid and the ambi—
ference between the pressure in the liquid and ambient gas ent gas is affected by steady and transient ﬂow condi—
pressure. tions. In steady ﬂow, the pressure difference is caused by
A typical problem of this method of liquid management molecular momentum transport and the change of the cross—
is the stability of the free surfaces. For example, increas— sectional area of the ﬂow. In transient ﬂow, the pressure
ing the ﬂow rate would decrease the liquid pressure causing difference is additionally inﬂuenced by the acceleration of
the free surfaces to bend further inwards. If the curvature the liquid. The inﬂuence of all these effects on transient ﬂow
stability are investigated in this work.
Steady ﬂow stability is well understood and a short
overview will be given. The experiments confirm the
Z _/x model for steady ﬂow which remains unchanged. For
f unsteady ﬂow, a new transient stability model is devel—
E _.g/’Q oped and discussed here in detail. The new model provides
i significant simplification. The studies are supported by
l i three—dimensional computations. The models are validated
' 4 with capillary channel ﬂow (CCF) experiments performed
_—:/ on the International Space Station in cooperation with
,V*'“'-- '-'-'-' ,,,__,4 NASA.
b The Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG) on the ISS
/ provides a unique experimental interface for long—term
a research under conditions of microgravity. Supervised by
scientists at the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in
Fig. 2 The capillary channel is consisting of two parallel glass plates. Huntsville, Alabama, N AS A a st 1‘ o n aut s i n st all e d the CCF
The channel length is l, the dlstance between the plates is a and the , , ,
width of the plates is b. The liquid is transported through the channel hardware Into the MSG' Durlng the 50 day period Of oper—
toward the outlet (arrow). The free liquid surface is on the top ations the experiment is operated remotely from a ground
Q Springer

"
"3","Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2014) 26:385—396 387
station. The communication, telemetry for real—time control, shown in Fig. 2. Furthermore, the channel may be opened
and data download is provided by NASA (Canfield et al. on both sides to form an parallel—plate channel or it may
2013). be closed on one side to form a groove shaped channel. In
this paper however, we consider a groove channel only as
shown in Fig. 3. Generally, both geometries result in similar
The CCF Experiment on the International Space Station behavior of the ﬂow.
The channel length can be varied on both sides by means
The technologies and instrumentation used in the eXperi— of two sliders (81, S2). In Fig. 3, one of the sliders ($1)
mental work have been tested extensively in drop tower tests is closed, which results in the groove channel configuration
and ballistic rocket ﬂights (Dreyer et a1. 1994; Rosendahl with only one free surface (F8). The main liquid loop is
and Dreyer 2007; Salim et a1. 2010). The setup for the CCF driven by a pump (P) which is connected to the channel’s
experiment on the 188 is shown in Fig. 3 (Canfield et a1. outlet. From the pump, liquid and, potentially, gas is forced
2013). The key part of the apparatus is the test section with further through a ﬂow meter (F) and into the phase separa—
the capillary channel. The channel consists of two paral— tion chamber (PSC). When the free liquid surface collapses
lel glass plates and its design resembles the channel in the and two phase ﬂow occurs, the gaseous phase is held back
tank in Fig. 1. The channel length can be varied within the by a porous screen (S). The gas bubble below the screen is
range 0 < l’ 5 48 mm. The distance between the plates is held in place by vanes (V) and may be removed by the gas
a = 5 mm and the width of the plates is b = 25 mm as plunger (K3). In the ﬂow preparation chamber (FPC), the
Fig. 3 Experimental setup of
the CCF experiment on the 188 i 0
(not drawn to scale). The § 0 q 2 C11
capillary channel, which consists C4 0 \\\ I \\\\\\\\
of two parallel glass plates, is O = \w \\\ CT
located in the test section (TS). O sy \
The channel length can be \\\“ \\
varied on both sides by means of V V l L !
two s1iders(Sl, s2). The o > \ o
notation is: free surface (FS), T
pump (P), ﬂow meter (F), phase
separation chamber (PSC), I O O
porous screen (S), vanes (V),
ﬂow preparation chamber
(FPC), perforated sheet (PS), 0 t 4 O
FPC valve (C9), nozzle (N), '_'
liquid plunger (K2), gas plunger 0 P O O ‘ O r O 1 O V .
(K3), compensation tube (CT), \: i i mIka
valves for operation (C4 and i i ' ‘
C11), valves for auxiliary ﬂuid .‘. F i i
I
control (C1 and C3) FPC’.»“‘“"" L‘“‘\\““
o"" i V
m "" \\\ 0»
§\\— ;\IL\\\{\\
7T? 1—.'.'
II “ “ II
V - ,
mm a a ""I“ W
PSC — —
i
s“— —\
\a
u
‘ E
_~\\“ E
:g 5
. s u- ..+
§ |
~ E
\\““‘ “““‘§ =
_‘;\m . __n\\\\\‘}\—\}g_ I
—ﬁT\\‘i“‘l‘\\\\\\V\'\§=— 03
@ Springer

"
"4","388 Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2014) 26:385—396
liquid is forced into rotation by deﬂectors (D) and passes (a) (b) (C)
through a perforated sheet (PS) which acts as a ﬂow recti— _ . .
fier. This maintains an equal velocity distribution over the o
cross—section of the inlet. The PSC valve (C9, depicted in
a half Open position) is Closed during shuttle launch and
Opened prior to the experiments. The nozzle (N) allows the
formation of laminar velocity profiles within the liquid ﬂow Gas LiqUid
before it enters the test section. The liquid volume in the . . .
loop is controlled by the liquid plunger (K2). The compen—
sation tube (CT) maintains a constant pressure in the system ' ' I ‘ ' I ' ' I
that is defined by a meniscus 0f the free surface (FS) with . . . .
. . . . Flg. 4 Experimental Video images of a groove Channel Image a shows
a radlus Of 30 mm. It also compensates displaced hqmd’ a subcritical ﬂow with a stable liquid surface. In image b, the stability
fOI"" instance When gas is ingested mm the test Channel. The limit is reached and the surface caves into the ﬂow. Gas ingestion is
effective distance between the CT and the TS is 388 mm. Visible in image (c). The surface has collapsed t0 the point where a
Valves C4 and (:11 are Open during Operation. Other valves gas bubble detaches and is subsequently carried downstream with the
(C1 and C3) are used for auxiliary ﬂuid control and they are hquld ﬂow
normally Closed.
The test liquid used in the experiments is 3M NovecTM
Engineered Fluid HFE—7500. Its properties are density in Fig. 4c, The ingested gas is held back by a screen in
,0 = 1639 kg m_3, kinematic viscosity 1) = 0.9 10—6 m2 the phase separation Chamber and accumulates there. At the
s_l, and surface tension 0 = 17.6 mN n1‘1 at 16 0C as same time the ingested gas displaces liquid and increases
estimated before ﬂight. Due to illumination the temperature the level in the compensation tube.
during experiment runs successively rose by 10—12 0C and Another effect in the presented setup may inﬂuence the
a variation of the properties of up to approx. 5% is assumed. stability of the free surface during the unsteady phase. This
The temperature is monitored at various locations within the is the feedback effect of the ﬂuid 100p. Due to the Circulation
liquid and gas loops using PT1000 resistance temperature of the liquid as shown in Fig. 3, liquid is not only drawn out
detectors. 0f the channel’s outlet but is also forced into the ﬂow prepa—
The experimental unit was transported to the ISS onboard ration Chamber at the same time. This may increase the local
the shuttle Discovery in April 2010 and installed into the pressure at the Channel inlet and consequently the stability
MicrograVity Science GlovebOX in December of the same of the surface during the transition. The feedback effect is
year. During the experiments, the system parameters (ﬂow significantly inﬂuenced by the amount of gas in the phase
rate, ﬂow acceleration, Channel lengths etc.) were controlled separation Chamber in Fig. 3. If there is no gas present, the
from a ground station to study the stability of the free liquid complete feedback effect takes place. Otherwise, a certain
surface. damping of the feedback occurs due to the compressibility
The liquid loop is driven by a pump as shown in Fig. 3, of gas.
which emulates a thruster’s demand for a supply of liquid as
suggested in Fig. 1. Increasing the ﬂow rate decreases the
pressure in the liquid phase in the test Channel. This causes State of the Art for One-Dimensional Modeling
the free surface of the liquid in the capillary Channel to bend
inwards as shown in Fig. 4. The new model (which is presented in Section Formulation
Figure 4 shows Video snapshots of an experiment in a of a New Model for Transient Flow Stability) is based on
groove Channel With a free liquid surface on the left—hand the existing model explained in detail in prior publication
side (only the left slider is Open, its outline is Visible in the (Rosendahl et a1. 2002; Rosendahl et a1. 2004; Rosendahl
upper—left corner). The sliders and the free surface appear and Dreyer 2007; Rosendahl et a1. 2010; Grah et a1. 2008;
b1ack(the surfaces due to refraction of the light source). The Grah and Dreyer 2010); it remains unchanged for steady
direction of the liquid ﬂow is from bottom to top. The ﬂOW ﬂow. For transient application significant simplification is
in Fig. 4a is subcritical and therefore stable. This means obtained with the new model. For the present model a
that the curvature of the free surface is sufficient to bal- general overview over the final equations is given here.
ance the pressure difference between the two phases. The In this one—dimensional model the liquid is assumed to be
deformation of the surface increases along the ﬂow path. An incompressible, isothermal, Newtonian, and perfectly wet—
indentation appears Close to the outlet. In Fig. 4b the stabil— ting with a zero degree contact angle. A11 distances in the
ity limit is reached and the surface collapses. Gas is ingested model are scaled by a /2 (in former publications x was
into the ﬂow and carried away by the liquid stream as shown sealed with the Channel length l’ ). The velocity v is scaled
@ Springer

"
"5","Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2014) 26:385—396 389
by the Characteristic velocity vc = W. A11 cross— The cross—sectional area for the ﬂow in the groove is
sectional areas are scaled by ab, the volumetric ﬂow rate 2
. . R0 - 1 RO—A+k.
Q by abvc, and the surface curvature h by 2/a. T1me t is A = 1 — marcst—O + T, k 2 A — 1, (3)
scaled by a/(2vc) and the Change Of ﬂow rate over time 6 by ﬂag + 1 — %) + %; k < A — 1,
219113. The dimensionless Channel length for frictional duct .
ﬂow I : Ohl’ “20%) (Rosendahl et a1. 2004) is defin e d with The pressure 1s related to the curvature 6f the free surface
the Ohnesorge Number Oh : /—,0v2/(20a); the hydraulic by thescaled Yoang—LaplacetGauss equatlon (Landau and
diameter is dh : 4a /(A_1 _|_ 2) for the groove geometry. Lifschitz 1959) With the pr1n01palrad11 R1 and R2
The aspect ratlo 1s defined by A = b/a: The scaling factor h = R1—1 + R2—1 : R1—1 + F2 dixkﬂ + F2(dxk)2]_3/2. (4)
1s F = a / (2l ). The Reynolds Number 1s Re 2 2vvCa/v <
103 and the ﬂow is assumed to be laminar (Rosendahl et al. The radius for the cross—sectional area R0 (1' = 0) and the
2004); hereby v is the dimensionless velocity and vvc is the first principal radius of the surface curvature R1 (1' = 1) are
physical velocity. (Rosendahl et a1. 2004)
The ﬂow along the Channel aXis x is assumed to be
0ne—d1mens10nal and Characterlzed by the mean ve1001ty v, 1+(A—k)2[1+1‘2(dxk)2]i . 2 2 _l. /2
the pressure (surface curvature) h, the surface contour k R- _ W916 2 A — [1+ F (dxk) ] 9
. , . l — x _.
(Elg. 5), and the Channel s crbss—sectional area A. The 1; k < A _ [1 + F2(dxk)2] 1/2.
d1mens10nless governlng equations (Grah et a1. 2008) are (5)
the unsteady momentum (1) and the unsteady continuity (2)
— = — . K ’""F 1 . . .
Btv Bxh + vaxv + 0 5 fl 1), ( ) The radius of the cross—sectional area for the ﬂow R0 1s
_at A : vax A + A 8w. (2) parallel to the y—z plane. The radius R1 is perpendicular to
the free surface. At the point of minimum cross—section (x =
For the steady ﬂow model the left—hand s1des 0f the equa— x*) both radii are identical R0 = R1 (compare Fig. 5b). R2
tion system are equal to Zero (Btu = BIA = 0). In that case is located in the x—z plane.
during computation a singularity occurs at the critical ﬂow The boundary conditions are given by the ﬂew velocity
rate. Slnce the s1ngular1ty 1s comparably easy to detect the at the Channel outlet v1 = Q (due to scaling of Q with the
effect can be facilitated for critical ﬂow determination (Grah Channel dimensions a and b), the pressure (surface curva—
and Dreyer 2010)- The largest ﬂow rate at Whleh the 31h"" ture) at the inlet, and the position of the liquid surface at the
gularity does not occur 13 cons1dered t9 be the critical ﬂow Channel inlet and outlet (where the surface is pinned at the
rate. For the transient ﬂow the singularity does not occur edges of the Closed ducts) (Rosendahl et 31. 2004)
at all. The pressure loss factor (Rosendahl et a1. 2004) is
Kf = Kpf + KSf. The Viscous resistance factor is Kpf = 1106 = 1) = U1,
76.4 for the groove Channel (White 1986). It is assumed that h(x : 0) : ho,
the ﬂow is not fully developed at x = 0 (Rosendahl et a1. k (x = 0) = k (x = 1) = A. (6)
2004), and that the additional pressure drop K 5 f caused by
the transition to a fully developed laminar ﬂow profile can The scaled pressure at the Channel inlet ho depends on the
be computed (Sparrow et a1. 1964). system pressure K 0, the pressure loss in the nozzle (defined
(a) (b)
A z
A' w.
Z W i k
B |
f5 y x l 5 I y
f i
l i
1 I
Fig. 5 Typical shape of the free liquid surface. Image a shows the half of the Channel’s Width). Image b displays the cross—section of the
cross—section of a Channel in the symmetry plane (y = 0). The surface Channel at the point of minimum surface contour height k (at the bot—
in the vicinity of the inlet is typically almost linear along the x axis tom point of the indentation, plane x = x*). The scaled radii at the
With one principal radius. Downstream, it forms an indentation Close stability limit are R0 = R1 = 1. Due to symmetry reasons the second
into the outlet With two principal radii (dimensions due to scaling With radius is assumed to be R2 = 1 as well
@ Springer

"
"6","390 Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2014) 26:385—396
by K1 and K2), and on the properties of the liquid col— outlet
umn between the capillary Channel and the compensation -10 -8 -6 -4 . -2
tube (Grah et a1. 2008). The inertia of the liquid column W
is defined by its length lo and the Viscous pressure loss of [9 [Pa]
the liquid column is defined by the factor K 3. The pressure
(surface curvature) at the Channel inlet may be expressed by .
Grah et a1. (2008)
K1 K2 2
ho = lOdIUO -|- K0 -|- TOhvo -|- YUO FS \
+K3Oh [v0 — v1], (7)
with the velocity difference v0 — v1 between Channel inlet
(x = 0) and outlet (x = 1). This difference occurs during
unsteady ﬂow and causes liquid to move from the Channel
into the compensation tube (Fig. 3) and Vice versa. Dur—
ing the ﬂow rate increase, the liquid column, which has a
scaled effective length of lo between the compensation tube .
and the Channel inlet, accelerates. The effective lengths of inlet
the liquid 0011111111 10 is defined by the nozzle lengths ZN Fig. 6 Three—dimensional model of the capillary channel with one
(between the PFC and the Channel inlet) and by the weighted instable free liquid surface (FS), the compensation tube (CT) with
length Of the compensation tube line 1 CT L (between the PFC another free surface, and the ﬂow preparation Chamber (FPC)..A super—
and the CT): 10 : ZN + lCTL/ACTL : 155.2 (388 mm); critical ﬂowreglme is shown; after surface collapse and gas lngestlon
. the bubble is carried upwards With the current. The pressure ﬁeld
the shape 0f the nozzle 13 neglected. The scaled system depicts the pressure decrease in ﬂow direction and along the line
pressure towards the compensation tube (a consequence of liquid displacement
after gas ingestion)
K0 = 2/RCT (8)
is maintained by the meniscus in the compensation
tube (CT, Fig. 3). The (scaled) radius of the compensation
tube RCT = 12 (30 mm) yields the system pressure K0 2 density of the numerical mesh (approx. half a million cells).
0.167. The coefficients for the pressure loss of the noz— The uncertainty of the critical ﬂow rate computed with the
zle, i.e. along the ﬂow path from the perforated sheet until three—dimensional model is estimated to be within :I: 5 %.
x = 0, were computed and published long before the ﬂight At the inlet (bottom of the image) uniform ﬂow is assumed;
to be K 2 = 1.4, and K 3 = Oh‘l, respectively (Grah et al. at the inlet and at the outlet (top of the image) the ﬂow rate
2008); K1 2 680 is obtained from three—dimensional com— of the pump is applied to model the Circulating loop of the
putation presented in Section Three—Dimensional Model of liquid as shown in Fig. 3. The PSC is assumed to be filled
the Channel. with liquid only. The effect of the gas bubble is therefore
The equation system of the one—dimensional model for not modeled. Rather, the model represents one special case
steady ﬂow is evaluated by a Newton method. Central which is discussed in detail in Section Formulation ofaNew
differences of second order are applied for the spacial Model for Transient Flow Stability. The part of the Circulat—
discretization. ing loop between the outlet and the inlet, consisting of pipes
and vessels with rigid walls (including the PSC), and which
are filled with incompressible liquid only, are not subject to
Three-Dimensional Model of the Channel modeling. The model assumes that the ﬂow rate increase of
the re—entering circulated liquid at the inlet is identical to the
For additional comparison and analysis of the feedback ﬂow rate increase at the outlet (with opposite sign).
effect three—dimensional computations are performed using The three—dimensional model is validated with mea—
OpenFOAM (2011). The solver interFoam (volume of ﬂuid surements for the stability of steady free surface ﬂow in
method) is used to compute the unsteady two—phase ﬂow Section 3. The new transient model does not depend on
in the capillary Channel, the nozzle, and the compensation the results of the three—dimensional computation. However,
tube. The model (Fig. 6) is based on a hexahedral grid three—dimensional computation turned out to be helpful to
created from a STL geometry with the SnappyHeXMesh understand and, consequently, eliminate the undesired feed—
tool (OpenFOAM 2011). Grid studies with more than one back effect of the experimental setup as presented in the
million cells have been performed to determine a suitable following section.
@ Springer

"
"7","Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2014) 26:385—396 391
Formulation of a New Model for Transient Flow The acceleration 60 of the liquid column in front of the
Stability Channel inlet is actually the system response to the tran—
sient pressure drop at the outlet induced by the pump. The
Compared to steady ﬂow, additional effects take place when acceleration of the liquid column may be considered to cor—
the ﬂow is transient. The most significant effect for ﬂow sta— respond to the ﬂow rate acceleration at the outlet (with a
bility in transient ﬂow is caused by an acceleration 6 of the certain delay) if the free surfaces remain stable during the
liquid at the Channel’s outlet which is defined as the tran— transition.
sition from one steady ﬂow rate Q t=0 to a higher ﬂow rate The momentum Change is balanced by the free—surface
Q = Q t=0 + A Q (with A Q > 0) within a time interval At indentation at the Channel outlet. A typical shape of the free
surface as a result of the ﬂow effects is shown in Fig. 5. The
6 = AQ/At. (9) surface is located at the top; the ﬂow direction of the liq—
Due to the aggregate of the steady e ffect (convective accel— uid is from the inlet at the left to the outlet at the right. The
eration) and the transient effect (local acceleration) it may surface in the “0.1th Of the lillei is typically almost 11n—
be expected that the maximum stable ﬂow rate Q decreases ear along the x aX1s With one pr1n01pa1rad1us. Downstream,
significantly with increasing acceleration 6. In other words, towards the outlet, 1t curves inwards and forms. an.1ndenta—.
the lower the ﬂow rate Q at which the transition ends the tion Close into the Channel s outlet With two pr1n01pa1 radii
higher the maximum stable acceleration is With this in of curvature. All dimensions are sealed with a /2 (half of
mind we may assume a maximum stable acceleration 50 the Channel’s width). The longitudinal length of the curved
is attainable for Q = 0, which requires a negative initial p art Of the surface at the outlet is lfo' For a sufficiently
ﬂow rate Q _ _ A Q As eX lained above the ressure long Channel with length l > lfo the surface in the region
at the Chanri:10irﬁe t is giyen by Iiiq. (7) and is time) depen— x < If is almost linear along x with one principal radius of
dent. At t 2 At the steady ﬂow effects vanish, because curvature. . . . . . .
Q = 0. However because the derivative of the ramp func— Since a free liquid surface tends to minimize its surface
tion is undefinable at t 2 At we consider the pressure energy it may be assumed that for small ﬂow velocities
function at t _> Ar and consequently Q _> 0 where vizm the indentation at the outlet is of almost hemispher—
steady ﬂow effects are non—zero but negligibly small. Con— ical shape. .This can also be. confirmed by observation 2.18
sequently the model assumes negligible ﬂow (v0 % 0 shown in Fig. 4. Thus, the d1mens1on of the indentation in
v1 % 0) ,infinitesimally Close to the end of the transition ﬂow direction is assumed to be equal to the Channel’s width
phase for the maximum possible stable acceleration Thus (WhiCh is 2 due to scaling). The transition from the linear
. . . . . ° ’ part of the surface to the indentation is assumed to take place
neglecting the terms for the VCIOCItleS in Eq. (7) yields the . . . , . .
ressure at the Channel inle t Within a distance of one half of the Channel s Width (which
p is 1). Consequently, the longitudinal length of the curved
ho : 10d: v0 + Kg, (10) part of the surface is estimated to be
for the maximum possible stable acceleration of the liquid lfo : 3' (13)
0011111111 (situated in ffOIlt 0f the inlet) 0f length 10; K0 iS the The stability limit is assumed to be at the maximum curva—
corresponding system pressure as defined in Eq. (8). Inte— ture of the indentation (minimum radii) as shown in Fig. 5a.
gration of Eq. (1) between the inlet ()6 = 0, h = ho) and the Due to the discussed geometry of the Channel the principal
point of minimum cross—section at the bottom of the free— radii for a hemispherical indentation in this case are equal to
surface indentation (x = x*, h = 11*, Fig. 5) yields for half of the scaled Channel’s width R1 = R2 = 1. According
v = 0 (and with Eq. (10)) to Eq. (4) this surface geometry yields a capillary pressure
x* at x = x*
lOdIUO + fodtvdx = [2* — K0. (11) h>t< : 2 (14)
Since [0 >> x>1< (and since the liquid in the Vicinity of for the stability limit. The balance in Eq. (12) yields the
the Channel inlet plays another role, as will be shown later) stab1hty hmlt
the integral in Eq. (11) is neglected. An additional benefit [050 < 2 _ Kg (15)
of this simplification is that Eq. (11) does not depend on the . . . .
length of the Channel, which is variable. Furthermore, the for the hemispherical shape of the indentation at the Chan—
acceleration may be simplified as dIUO : 50 which yields nel s outlet. As discussed for Eq. (8), the scaled system
for the momentum Change pressure K 0 is defined by the radius of the meniscus in the
compensation tube RCT (Fig. 3). It is assumed that the tran—
1060 = h* — Kg. (12) sient pressure drop in the Channel is a result of the inertia of
@ Springer

"
"8","392 Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2014) 26:385—396
the accelerated liquid column lo which is located between where no ﬂexible linear region is present, collapses at lower
the channel’s inlet and the compensation tube (Fig. 3) from acceleration.
which the required liquid is supplied. The model postulates that the transfer of liquid from the
During the acceleration phase, liquid actually may be inlet area towards the outlet results in a reduction of capil—
drawn from two sources, the compensation tube and the lary pressure during transition. However, this ﬂexibility also
phase separation chamber (Fig. 3). However, it can be has its limit, which is defined similarly as for the hemispher—
shown that the pressure drop at the screen in the phase sepa— ical indentation. The ﬂexible free surface at x 5 lf 2 l—lfo
ration chamber is sufficiently high to enable decoupling; the (Fig. 5) is supported by one radius. This is one half of the
accelerated liquid is assumed to be drawn from the compen— mean curvature in comparison to the surface area at the
sation tube (during transition). Consequently, 60 is defined indentation with two radii where the stability limit 60 is
by geometry and ﬂuid properties only and may be consid— defined. This results in a ﬂexibility coeﬁ‘iciem
ered to be a system constant. The stability limit (15) yields
the transient stability constant foo : 0'5 60’ (17)
50 = (2 _ K0)/ 10, (16) the maximum additional stability due to surface ﬂexibility
for a sufficiently long channel (If —> 00). Hence, a ﬂexibil—
which is the maximum stable acceleration with the final ity function f (f 75 0 for l > l f 0) for a particular channel
ﬂow rate Q = 0. This is clearly beyond the capabilities length can be defined as
of the measurements with the presented setup; the transient l
stability constant is considered to be a theoretical value for f : foo _f. (18)
the model. I
In addition, a new effect is observed in the experiments. As discussed in Section The CCF Experiment on the
Augmented stabilization occurs in channels longer than a International Space Station the so called feedback effect
certain value (I > lfo, Fig. 5). This effect is assumed to of the ﬂuid loop in the presented setup may inﬂuence the
be based on the ﬂexibility of the part of the free surface stability of the free surface. The circulation of the liquid
that is almost linear along x (situated in Vicinity of the inlet as shown in Fig. 3 may increase the local pressure at the
of the channel) as shown in Fig. 7a, which shows a steady channel inlet. As discussed in Section Three—Dimensional
state before the transition (t < 0) with almost no ﬂow, In Model of the Channel, the circulating liquid loop between
Fig. 7b the transition has begun (0 < t < AI) and the ﬂow the channel outlet (where the pump is situated) and the point
rate increases due to increased demand at the outlet. The of re—entry into the system at the PSC consists of ducts
typical hemispherical indentation occurs at the outlet. The with rigid circumference filled with incompressible liquid
surface at the inlet moves inwards (arrow). Liquid is relo— only. In the most simple case there is no gas present in
cated towards the outlet which satisfies part of the demand the PSC and it can be counted to the rigid loop. Conse—
and decreases the capillary pressure at the indentation. This quently, a ﬂow rate increase at the outlet of the channel
increases the probability for the surface to remain stable. results in an identical ﬂow rate increase of the re—entering
At the end of the acceleration(t 2 At), shown in Fig. 7c, circulated liquid into the PFC. It may be assumed that liq—
the surface is close to the stability limit but remains sta— uid is partly forced into the CT and partly into the inlet
ble. It can be observed that a surface of a shorter channel, of the channel. The local pressure in the channel increases.
filialJamnfiirii‘i‘iiﬁéepiiﬂfe (a) (b) (C)
which contain only contour 1‘ , V 7 x , v , ‘
data) to demonstrate the f 7 :1 _ :7 ' ' T i {E .' ' "" :1 77 :
ﬂexibility of the part of the free x .f t _ 7 , K E _ , .. x 5;; 3:55: , ' ‘
surface at the inlet during , . 7 :9 i . V a ‘ ‘ _ ‘_
transition. Image a: steady state e , 7 E 7 - “f A
before the transition. Image b: ' E ‘ ‘ / “ , E: ' /"" ‘
the transition begins and the V 7 E // / ‘ *
indentation at the outlet occurs. ; ' v .E ~ ' .
The ﬂexible surface at the inlet . V E, E — ‘ , . V .
starts to move inwards (arrow), E(“i '. ‘ 1 ‘ ‘ . ‘
liquid is displaced towards the l, '- ‘ E? '- ‘ E3 '- '
outlet. Image c: end of the j ' 7 ' |_.:> E ‘ _ ' '
transition; the surface is fully - r V' ‘ g ~ ‘ E , ~. ~ H E
stretched but remained stable ~ _ e E ‘ _ V ,E i :‘E ._ _ 1 M
@ Springer

"
"9","MicrograVity Sci. Technol. (2014) 26:385—396 393
The increased demand in the channel is partly covered by Experimental and Computational Results. A standard pm—
the forced liquid re—entry. Significant stabilization of the cedure preceding every measurement is used to determine
ﬂow may be assumed. The feedback is an undesired effect Vg using calibration data and the measured feedback effect.
which inﬂuences the measurement. To compensate it and The error of Vg for the transient stability measurements
Obtain genuine measurement results a semi—empirical model should therefore correspond to the scatter of the calibration
is developed. data.

In the model the feedback effect is considered to be the Finally, the transient stability limit can be formulated for
increase of the transient stability constant 60 (representing the maximum stable acceleration as a function of the ﬂow
the maximum possible stable acceleration) by an enhance— rate. Forr = 1 (no feedback) and f = 0 (‘short’ channel, n0
ment factor r. The effect is inﬂuenced by the amount of gas ﬂexibility effect), and for Q = 0 (n0 steady ﬂow effects) the
Vg in the phase separation chamber. For Vg = 0 the com— stability limit is defined by the transient stability constant
plete feedback effect takes place as discussed above. For 6 = 60 (point A in Fig. 9). For increasing ﬂow rates the
Vg > 0 a certain damping of the feedback occurs due to the stability limit is 6 2 60(1 — Q / Qm-t) and it decreases due
compressibility of the gas bubble in the PSC with volume to increasing steady ﬂow effects (line a in Fig. 9) until the
Vg. This effect is not instantaneous and results in a gradual critical steady ﬂow rate Qcm is reached for 6 = 0.
change of the pressure. Consequently, for Vg > 0 the feed— The ﬂexibility effect provides additional stability when
back effect can be assumed to be reduced, which coincides the length of the surface is sufficient. Since the ﬂexibility
with Observations. effect is a function of the geometry, the stability limit is

The three—dimensional computations outlined in shifted upwards by f for all ﬂow rates. This results in a
Section Three—Dimensional Model Of the Channel provide function for the stability limit 6 2 60(1 — Q / Qm-t) + f
an estimate for the limiting value of the feedback ratio (line b in Fig. 9).

r = r0 = 12, which is only valid when no damping occurs, For r > 1 the feedback effect provides enhanced stabil—
i.e. when Vg = 0. For a fully decoupled system no feedback ity. For Q = 0 and f = 0 the stability limit is 6 = r60
is assumed when the PSC is filled with gas (r —> r00 = 1, (point C in Fig. 9) and for increasing ﬂow rates the stability
Vg —> 00). A semi—empirical model for the feedback ratio r limit is 6 = r60(1 — Q / Qm-t) (line c). Since the feedback
is based on CFD simulations and experiment results and is effect is a property of transient ﬂow only, the value of the
formulated as limit at the critical steady ﬂow rate Qcm remains the same.

r0 _ r00 For f > 0 the stability limit is 6 = r60(1 — Q/Qm-t) + f
r = — + r00. (19) (line d in Fig. 9). The scaled transient stability model yields

1 + Vg / VC
. . . . 5 — f Q
The model for the feedback ratio is depicted by the solid W = 1 — 5- (20)
line in Fig. 8. VC 2 60 ml is a calibration coefficient for the
setup. It is defined by fitting the model (between m and rm)
to calibration measurements, Obtained by intensive gauging
0f Vg and measuring the corresponding feedback (Fig. 8,
Open symbols, slightly more scattered). The exes depict "" d
the transient stability measurements presented in Section
6
1E
12 .0: Measnrement X
“ Calibratmn 0
Model —

8 K
e :}f

4 '6 9‘3“ 9 0 O 0 1

Q/chit

0 Fig. 9 The transient stability model defines the maximum stable
0 1 2 V9 /VC 3 4 5 acceleration 6 as a function of the ﬂow rate Q (normalized with the
critical steady ﬂow rate Qm-t). The maximum possible stable acceler—
Fig. 8 The feedback ratio due to the damping effect of the gas Vg in ation for a simple system, i.e. without the ﬂexibility effect (f = O) and
the PSC. The model (solid line) is based on Eq. (19). The calibration without the feedback effect (r = 1), is defined for Q = O by the tran—
data are measurements performed to define the gradient of the model. sient stability constant 6 = 60 (point A) and it decreases for increasing
The exes represent the actual feedback ratio of the performed transient ﬂow rates (line a). The ﬂexibility effect f > 0 (line b), the feedback
stability measurements. At Vg/ VC 2 O calibration and measurement effect r > 1 (point C for Q = 0, line c for Q > 0), or a combination

overlap with r = r0 = 12 of both effects (line d) can provide enhancement of the stability
@ Springer

"
"10","394 Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2014) 26:385—396
15 During the experiments the Channel length is varied and
2% 2 measurements in the range of 1 to 48 mm (0.4 5 l 5 19.2)
a 1D — are performed.
Figure 10 shows the critical steady ﬂow rate versus
13 on . .
0% 1 On the scaled Channel length l. The critical ﬂow rate typ—
OB'D icall increases si nificantl for l —> 0 and decreases
089% y g y
Egogéggggmggnm - asymptotically for l —> 00. The one—dimensional model
__ MTMH'eu‘Egsge provides satisfying results for l 2 6. For shorter Chan—
0-5 nels, the assumption of the eXistence of the radii R0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 . .
l and R1 in Eq. (5) appears to be inadequate. The three—
. . . dimensional model covers the entire investigated range.
Flg. 10 The critical steady flow rate as afunction of Channel s length B 0th results suggest that the stability of steady ﬂow is
for the groove Channel. For increasmg Channel length (l —> 00) the 11 d d F h h (1
critical ﬂow rate seems to decrease linearly(Qm-t —> O).Experimental we un erstoo ' urt ermore, t. e Stea y measurements
values (EX) are shown in comparison With one—dimensional (1D) and SCI‘VC t0 validate the three—d1mens1onal computatlon applled
three—dimensional (3D) computations. The one—dimensional model is for studies of the feedback effect as discussed in Section
assumed to be valid forl Z 6; the error exceeds 6% below this 11m1t Formulation of a New Model for Transient FlOW Stability.
Results for a representative transient ﬂow stability mea—
For r = 1 the system is fully decoupled from the feedback surement are shown in Fig. 113, where the normalized
effect (line a for f = 0, line b for f > () in Fig. 9) and acceleration 6/60 is shown versus the ﬂow rate Q. The solid
the model applies e.g. for a capillary Channel of a propellant line represents the new transient stability model in ECI- (20)-
management device as shown in Fig. 1. As expected, the stability limit increases significantly when
the ﬂow rate decreases. This is a consequence of the aggre—
gate of the two effects causing the instability, the steady
Experimental and Computational Results ﬂow pressure (due to convective acceleration) and the tran—
sient pressure (due to temporal acceleration). The steady
Steady ﬂow measurements are performed by a stepwise ﬂow effect increases with the ﬂow rate and consequently the
approach Of the critical steady ﬂow rate. The step is defined surface collapses at lower accelerations. The transient sta—
as an increase of the ﬂow rate by 0.05 ml s‘1 per second. hlhty model In ECI- (20) prov1des a satisfying prediction for
That is about 1 % of the lowest observed critical ﬂow rate. the Stahlhty behaV1or 0f the hqthd 1h the capillary Channel.
The critical steady ﬂow rate is deﬁned as the maximum The slope is described accurately as well as the additional
measured ﬂow rate which results in a stable free surface. stability, which is defined by the ﬂexibility function f- The
(a) (b)
2 0.5
CR 0 '
0 ST 0 0,,
1.5 ' 9 TSM — A 0'4 “
0&3. O 2‘ .63“ 1 +
a O A ”‘3
.. :2 0.3 3-65 o
be 1 > + 4.61 ye
\ ' ’. O L"" o 5.19 x
m - l 0-2 ""” 5.77 a
- ' a- :0. + 5.96 A
0.5 0,1 + + 6.54 v
- 6.92 o
5; Z 12 O
0 0 T
0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Q 1 _ Q/chit
Fig. 11 Transient stability measurement in comparison to the tran— Image b shows the applied scaling that provides a common descrip—
sient stability model. Image a shows the ﬂow rate acceleration (nor— tion of all stability limits Within one diagram. Each point represents an
malized With the transient stability constant) vs. the scaled ﬂow rate average of two measurements, a stable one and the corresponding crit—
for a channel length of l = 10 (l/ = 25 mm) and r = 4.57 (Vg = ical neighbor measurement (at the same ﬂow rate) in image (a). The
125 ml). Experimental data for critical (CR) and stable (ST) transi— scaling disposes of the variance due to different Channel’s lengths and
tions are given. The solid line represents the transient stability model due to the feedback effect. The measurements are sorted by the feed—
in Eq. (20). The dashed line represents the stability enhancement that back ratio r Which obviously no longer inﬂuences the experimental
is ascribed to the (normalized) ﬂexibility function f / 80 in Eq. (18). results
@ Springer

"
"11","Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2014) 26:385—396 395
model’s value for the ﬂow rate at 6 = f corresponds to taken into account. Due to the aggregate of steady and
the critical steady ﬂow rate given in Fig. 10 (l = 10, transient ﬂow, the critical ﬂow rate and the critical acceler—
Qcm = 0.7). For low critical ﬂow rates (Qm-t —> 0, which ation are inversely proportional to each other. Furthermore,
applies forl —> 00 as demonstrated in Fig. 10) the ﬂexibil— an important parameter of the ﬂow system was identified,
ity function approaches f / 60 —> 0.5 according to Eqs. (17) i.e. the transient stability constant. It defines the maXi—
and (18). mum possible stable acceleration when ﬂow rate is zero
Furthermore, the applied scaling provides a common (at the end of the transition) and steady ﬂow effects are
description of all stability limits within one diagram as assumed to have no inﬂuence on the stability of the free
demonstrated by the feedback ratio r in Fig. 11(b) (different surface.
channel lengths and over 1000 data points are displayed). In The transient stability measurement may be significantly
Fig. 11(b), each point represents an average value of a sta— inﬂuenced by the feedback effect, which results from liq—
ble acceleration measurement and a corresponding critical uid circulation in the presented experimental setup. A model
neighbor (at the same ﬂow rate) as seen in Fig. 11(a). The for decoupling is developed, because the Observed feedback
inﬂuence of the undesired feedback ratio is Obviously ade— effect is generally not present in technical applications. As
quately modeled and, consequently, eliminated. For r = 1, a result, the ‘real’ transient stability constant for the ﬂow
which corresponds to a fully decoupled system, the phase system was identified.
separation chamber in Fig. 3 is Virtually filled with gas. This Finally, the ﬂexibility effect is explained. This applies
results in a large gas bubble that tends to oscillate, which to channels whose lengths exceed a certain limit. The
causes a certain distribution of the measurements, particu— ﬂexibility effect results in additional stabilization and it
larly for high ﬂow rates close to the origin of the diagram. is provided by the part Of the free surface which has
However, for decreasing ﬂow rates the Observations seem almost zero curvature in the direction of ﬂow and seems
to converge to the model from both sides and consequently to behave passively. It was shown that this part Of the
confirm the analytical prediction r —> 1 for Vg —> oo in surface acts as a damping system which relaxes the
Eq. (19). strain of the surface at the outlet during the acceleration
phase.
Summary
During the evaluation of experimental and numerical data ACknOWlédgmentS Th6 anthor S W0111d like to aCKIIOWlCdgC the SHP-
some new facts presented themselves. TO begin With, it port pr0V1ded by the NASA employees at Marshall .Space Flight
. . . . . . Centre. We thank NASA astronauts Scott Kelly, Catherine Coleman,
was conﬁrmed that I'lumenFal preclictions Of Cl‘ltlcal Steady and Mike Fossum, who installed and removed the experiment hard—
ﬂow rates are p0ss1ble With a high accuracy. For three- ware on board the 188. We also acknowledge the technical staff at
dimensional computations of the critical steady ﬂow rate, AStI‘lllIIl for manufacturing the experiment hardware and fOI‘ tCChIll-
an error Of about 5 % was Observed in the predictions. The cal support during the experiments. And we thank Lars K1ew1dt, R.
. . . . J enson, and W. Blackmore for the help during the CCF experiment.
computatlon tlme ls 1n the range Of days 01‘ WCCkS' The This experiment is realized in cooperation between NASA
predictions with the one—dimensional model result in a sim— and the German Aerospace Center (DLR). The project is sup—
ﬂar accuracy within the range of 8 S l S 192, where ported by the DLR through funds from the German Federal M111-
the error is about 2 %. The application limit Of the one_ istry of Economics and Technology (BMWi) under grant numbers
. . . 50WM0535/0845/1145.
d1mens10nal model may be c0ns1dered to be at l = 6; for
shorter channels the error exceeds 6 %. Nonetheless, the
one—dimensional model covers the range that is interest—
. . . . . References
mg for technical applications. Furthermore, when us1ng the
one—dimensional model, the com utation times of the stead
. . 1 ﬂ . h p f f d h' .y Canfield, P.J., Bronowicki, P.M., Chen, Y., Kiewidt, L., Grah, A.,
CHEN? OW rate are 1n t 6 range C.) 6W secon 3' T ls ls Klatte, J., Jensen, K, Blackmore, W., Weislogel, M.M., Dreyer,
10 times faster than 3D Computatlons. Consequently, the M.E.: The Capillary Channel Flow experiments on the Interna—
0ne—dimensi0nal model may be considered as the tool of tional Space Station, Experiment SCtup and first results- EXP-
choice Fluids 54, 1ndash14 (2013). doi:10.1007/s00348—013—1519—1

. . . . . . . Dreyer, M.E., Delgado, A., Rath, H.J.: Capillary rise ofliquid between

.leeWISe’.th.e new Stabﬂl‘ty model prOVIcleS 81m? 16 and parallelplates under microgravity. J . Colloid Interf. Sci. 163, 158—
reliable predictlons for trans1ent surface stability. It 1s based 168 (1994)
on steady ﬂow computations, which deﬁne one axis of the Gilmore, D.G.Z Satellite Thermal Control Handbook. The Aerospace
corresponding parameter space. It has been extended to a corporatlon’ El Segundo (1994) , ,

. b'l' d 1 . h' h h . . f h 1 Grah,A.,Haake,D.,R0sendahl,U.,Klatte,J.,Dreyer,M.E.:Stability
“31181611? St? 1 ﬂy m0 6 ’ 1n W IC t e inertia O t e acce _ limits of unsteady open capillary channel ﬂow. J . Fluid Mech. 600,
erated liquid column and the geometry of the surface are 271—289 (2008)

@ Springer

"
"12","396 Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2014) 26:385—396
Grah, A., Dreyer, M.E.: Dynamic stability analysis for cap— Rosendahl, U., Dreyer, M.E.: Design and performance of an experi—
illary channel ﬂow: one—dimensional and three—dimensional ment for the investigation of open capillary Channel ﬂows. Exp.
computations and the Equivalent Steady State technique. Phys. Fluids 42, 683—696 (2007)
Fluids 22—014101 (2010) Rosendahl, U., Grah, A., Dreyer, M.E.: Convective dominated ﬂows

J aekle, D.E.Jr.: Propellant management device conceptual design and in open capillary Channels. Phys. Fluids 22—052102 (2010)
analysis: vanes. AIAA Paper 91—2172, 1—13 (1991) Salim, A., Colin, C., Grah, A., Dreyer, M.E.: Laminar bubbly ﬂow in

Kostner, J .N., Sani, R.L.: LOW—Gravity Fluid Dynamics and Transport an open capillary Channel in microgravity. Int. J . Multiphas. Flow
Phenomena. American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 36, 707—719 (2010)

Washington (1990) Shapiro, A.H.: The dynamics and thermodynamics of compressible

Landau, L.D., Lifschitz, E.M.: Course of Theoretical Physics, V01. 6. ﬂuid ﬂow, vol. 11. Ronald Press (1953)

Pergamon Press, Oxford (1959) Shapiro, A.H.: Steady ﬂow in collapsible tubes. J . Biomech. Eng. 99,

Lighthill, J . Waves in Fluids, 3rd. Cambridge University Press (1978) 126—147 (1977)

OpenFOAM: user guide version 2.0 (2011) Sparrow, E.M., Lin, S.H., Lundgren, T.S.: Flow development in the

Rollins,J.R.,Grove,R.K.,Jaek1e Jr. D. E.: Twenty—three years of sur— hydrodynamic entrance region of tubes and ducts. Phys. Fluids
face tension propellant management system design, development, 7(3), 338—347 (1964)
manufacture, test and operation. AIAA Paper] (1985) Srinivasan, R.: Estimating zero—g ﬂow rates in open channels having

Rosendahl, U., Ohlhoff, A., Dreyer, M.E., Rath, H.J.: Convective capillary pumped vanes. Int. J . Numer. Meth. Fluids 41, 389—417
dominated ﬂows in open capillary Channels. Microgravity Sci. (2003)

Technol. 4, 53—59 (2002) White, F.: Fluid mechanics. McGraW Hill (1986)

Rosendahl, U., Ohlhoff, A., Dreyer, M.E.: Choked ﬂows in open Wilson, T.A., Rodarte, J .R., Butler, J .P.: Wave speed and Viscous
capillary Channels: theory, experiment and computations. J . Fluid ﬂow limitation, Handbook of Physiology. American Physiological
Meeh. 518, 187—214 (2004) Society (1986)

@ Springer

"
