"","x"
"1","Biological Sciences in Space, Vol.23 No.3, 115-120, 2009
Special Issue: Gravity Responses and The Cell Wall in Plants
Preparation and Out'ine unique equipments, the onboard operations
. by the ISS crew, the process by Wthh the
Qt Space'Based StUd'eS on experiments were monitored from the ground
Gravity Responses and brief information about plants germination
- - and growth stage under microgravity conditions
and C9"" Wall FormatIOh 'h Plants in space. We conclude with lessons learned for
future plant physiology experiments conducted
Motoshi Kamada‘, Katsunori Omoriz, in space. @2009 Jpn. Soc. Biol. Sci. Space; Article
Ryusuke Yokoyama2’3, Kazuhiko Nishitani2’3, ID: 092303011
Takayuki Hoson2’4, Toru Shimazu5
and Noriaki Ishioka2T Introduction
1Advanced Engineering Services Co., Ltd., _ _ _ _
Tsukuba-Mitsui Building, 1'6'1 Takezono, Tsukuba, It IS very dlfflCUlt t0 study the effects Of graVIty on
Ibaraki 3050032, Japan plantgrowth and rnorphogeneSIs using Earth-based
2 . . . . experiments, primarily because of the Inherent adaptive
ISS Scuence Proiect Office, Institute of Space and . . . .

. . mechanisms developed by plants In relation to gravnty.
Astronalitlcal SCIence, Japan Aerospace Therefore, research into the gravitational biology of
Exploration Agency, 2'1'1 Sengen, Tsukuba, plants requires conditions in which such mechanisms
Ibarakl 305'8505, Japan are not evoked. These circumstances can involve a
3Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku three-dimensional clinostat for simulating microgravity,
University, Aobayama, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, an agravitropic mutant, or the microgravity conditions of
Japan space or parabolic flight. A number of Japanese studies
4Graduate School Of Science, Osaka City on plant gravitational biology have been conducted
University, 3-3-138 Sugimoto, Sumiyoshi-ku, Osaka aboard the space ehuttle, and considerable information
558-8585, Japan about graVIperceptIon, growth, and gravnmorphogeneSIs
5Japan Space Forum, 2_2_1 Ohtemachi, Chiyoda—ku, has been obtained (Hoson et al., 1999; Takahashi et al.,

2000; Ueda etal., 1999; Wolverton etal., 1999).

T0kyo100-0004,Japan The Ja J A
panese space agency, apan erospace
Exploration Agency (JAXA), has proposed several
Abstract themes for plant gravitational biology research conducted
_ on the ISS, including seed-to—seed, gravity-induced cell
The Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency wall formation, gravity resistance, root hydrotropism,
(JAXA) recently conducted two spaee-based gravimorphogenesis, and transport of the plant hormone
P'ant PhYS'O'OQY exp?“""_‘e""t5 ""““Z'ng the auxin. Two of the themes, Cell Wall and Resist Wall
EUVRPea"" 'V'Odu'ar Cu't'Vat'O"" SYStem (EMCS) (CWRW) (Hoson et al., 2007; Koizumi et al., 2007),
tac'hty 0t the_European Space Agency (ESA)- were selected by the 5th International Announcement
These experiments were named Cell. Wall of Opportunity (IAO) in 2004. The CWRW experiments
anc! ReS'St Wall (CWRW)! and were deSIgned were conducted onboard the ISS between March 30
t0 Investigate_the fo-rmatlon_ 0t plant cell and May 23, 2008 in the European experiment module
walls and graVIty reSIstance In plantS- The COLUMBUS using the European Modular Cultivation
CWRW experiments were taken aboard the System (EMCS) facility of the European Space Agency
Internathnat Space Stat'Oh ('33) by space (ESA). The EMCS provides control of growth chamber
ShUtt'e m'SS'O"" STS'123 (“/A) 0"" Marc“ 11, conditions, including atmosphere, lighting, and humidity.
2008 and performed between March 30 an-d May The CWRW experiments were the 4th set of experiments
23, 2003- However: a ""umber 0f fa'mres ""1 the using the EMCS. The EMCS facility enables research
EMCS th'rthehtal _c°htr°| SyStem _resulted concerning the influence of gravity on perception and
'h the eXpehmehtS he'hg performed dIff_erent|_y signal transduction in plant tropisms, and the Iong-term
than planned._On June 14! 2008! {Arab’dOPS’s growth capability of plants (Brinckmann and Schiller
plants grown 'h the CWRW experiments_ were 2002). Space-based investigations of plant physiology led
recovered to Earth 'h the space ShUttte m'SS'Oh by a Japanese principal investigator (Pl) were initiated
31-3124 (12') and are currently he'hg analyzed. with the space shuttle mission STS-95 in October 1998.
th th'5 artIcle, we elaborate on the tlrnellne Thus far, there has been a ten-year interval between the
Of the CWRW experiments frem selectI-on to first Japanese study and the CWRW experiments. The
performance. we also describe experiment Japanese plant gravitational biology community held
high expectations for the CWRW experiments; however,
_— a number of failures in the EMCS environmental control
Rece'ved: Ju'y 6’ zoogtAcceptethUQUSt 4’ 2009 system resulted in them being performed differently than
tTO Whom correspondence Should be addressed: planned. However, there were many lessons learned from
Te“ +81'(0)29'868'3681? Fa” +81'(0)29'868'3956? the CWRW experiments. In the present report, we discuss

E-mail: ishioka.noriaki@jaxa.jp
— 115 —

"
"2","Preparation and performance of plant experiments in space
a numberoftopics concerning these experiments: community. The payload safety review panel met in
. . . October 2007 and the safety of the CWRW experiments
1) Timeline from selection to performance and related ISS crew activities were confirmed
2) Unique equipments of the CWRW experiments '
3) Onboard operations . . .
4) Brief information about Arabidopsis plants under Unlque EqUIpments Of the CWRW Experiments
microgravity conditions in space Plant Cultivation Chamber
5) Lessons learned. The Plant Cultivation Chamber (PCC) is a container
optimized for cultivating Arabidopsis that can be
Timeline from Selection to Performance integrated into the EMCS (Fig. 1). For the CWRW
experiments, growth pots with seven mini-Iid holes for
The timeline of the CWRW experiments—from sowing seeds were used; these are slightly modified
selection to onboard performance—is detailed in Table 1. versions Of ESA’s multi-generation Arabidopsis growth
The 5th IAO, International Research Solicitation for Space in space-1 (MULTIGEN1) pots, which have either three
Flight Experiments in the Fields of Life Science and or five hOIGS (Iversen 91‘ ale 2002; Johnsson et a/-,
Space Medicine in 2004, was opened on February 18, 2009). CWRW PCC assembly and seed integration were
2004 and closed on April 23, 2004, The purpose of this performed in a sterile laminar flow hood at the Norwegian-
IAO was to fund space-based experiments using model User SUPPOFt Operation Center (N'USOC) in Trondheim,
organisms like Arabidopsis thaliana and Caenorhabditis Norway between January 14 and 24, 2008. PCC growth
elegans to study plants and nematodes, respectively. pot sponges were sterilized in 25% (v/v) chlorine solution
Japan made applications in seven themes of research, for 10 min, rinsed With sterile distilled water four times,
five of which were announced as selection on November and dried overnight in a laminar flow hood. PCC growth
14, 2004. Two of the selected themes were addressed by pots were filled With zeolite sieved through a 0.5-mm
the CWRW experiments, the design and administrative filter and enriched with Murashige and Skoog media
aspects of which began in December 2004. For growing (Sigma; M2909, St. Louis, MO., USA). The seeds of four
Arabidopsis, the Plant Cultivation Chamber (PCC) strains of Arabidopsis thaliana were used in the CWRW
was purchased from Astrium GmbH (Friedrichshafen, experiments. These included the wiId-type (WT) ecotype
Germany) in December 2006. The equipment for the Columbia, the tubulin mutant lefty, and the mutant hmg,
onboard chemical fixation of Arabidopsis was the in which the synthesis of membrane sterols is defective
Kennedy Space Center Fixation Tube (KFT), purchased (Hoson et al., 2007). The fourth strain was the promoter
from Bionetics Corporation (Kennedy Space Center, FL., of cellulose synthaseA7 gene fused with B-glucuronidase
USA) in August 2007. Preliminary ground-based tests (GUS) gene construct (PCGSAZZGUS), a gene-modified
of Arabidopsis germination and growth were conducted Arabidopsis used to investigate genes related to the cell
using qualification and flight models of the P00 and the wall and preferentially expressed in the supporting tissue
ground model facilities of the EMCS (Kamada et al., that are responsible for gravitational responses (Koizumi
2007; Kamada et al., 2009). Flight models of the PCC
and KFT were received in December 2007 and March
2008, respectively. These were passed to the National ,/ 3 . 1,7. , ’
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) on .. ‘ '_-- _ .. _ .
March 9, 2008 and delivered to the ISS by space shuttle 1"" 3 iii“! ”“1039; ?1 ' - ,
mission STS—123 (1J/A) on March 11, 2008. The CWRW IIE' :’-‘ f .315 ‘
experiments were conducted using the EMCS facility 57/7 ==I-I :1 _ *7 ._ M/ g 3;
between March 30 and May 23, 2008. For the purposes ' =E=,1‘4 ’3IK: | <53 1- _ 3
of analysis, the Arabidopsis plants grown in the onboard _ f_M/=“, 7 ggjﬁjﬁe 5!,
experiments were recovered to Earth in the space shuttle ‘ If I""? A ’ g§7123 ,
mission STS—124(1J)on June 14,2008. W 5 {a f ’ i \F,. ,- _.
During the pre-flight preparation period, the \ ’ ﬁﬁjﬁmiﬁi , r xége 4’3: ' ' ""
experiments were twice simulated in a reaI-time operation .1 . 33-93% ‘1 3’ t 1 [5.1. 54:5“ 4 "" '
labeled “SIM” (July and August 2007). We prepared to . ”5'- ? . 15,333.: 5&4}: ‘75
obtain a prompt breakthrough plan in the simulation . .4: ‘3’“ """"1435:
even if the contingencies were generated in the onboard i wy
experiments. Crew training was undertaken at NASA’s . ~
Johnson Space Center (JSC) in August 2007. Three . '
astronauts, including the backup crew, were trained to set 5
up the EMCS and Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG) » .5 i . IQ
(De Parolis et al., 2002) and to harvest the Arabidopsis 1' “
plants. The multilateral Increment16 science symposium - '
was he|_d m September 2007: the 0bJeC_""VeS Of wh'Ch were Fig. 1. Arabidopsis plants grown in PCCs during ground-based
'0 PrOV'de PIS the opportunity '0 outllne the Importance CWRW experiments. The white arrow indicates the gravity
of their experiments to the ISS science and payload vector.
— 116 —

"
"3","Kamada, M. etal.
et al., 2007). Seeds were surface sterilized in Table 1 Timeline of the CWRW eXperiment
70% (v/v) ethanol for 5 min, and then soaked _—
in 2.5% (v/v) sodium hypochlorite containing
0.5% (v/v) Tween 20 for 5 min. They were _ _
then washed with sterile distilled water three
times and dried on sterilized tuter paper
were caret””y 59W“ t‘"" C-O'Or am"" Shape
under a stereomtcroscope, With only healthy
seeds selected for the CWRW experiments.
Selected seeds were integrated into the mini-
thh a thlh membrane made of 16.7% (v/v)
polyvinyl alcohol (PVA). Seeds were kept dry
and at the ambient temperature onboard the
Igss
te . i t swere reare orte .
CWRW apartments, with theppéc positions
in the EMCS and assignment at Arabidopsis
Kennedy space Center Fixation tube
‘KFT’ prtv'des t‘” ""‘6 ”e?essary 9°”ta'“me”t
of biological samples whtle allowmg them to
be harvested directly in the space shuttle or on
the ISS without a glove box (Paul et al., 2005).
In analyzing Arabidopsis specimens recovered from the for the failure. It was later determined that the main door
ISS, RNAIater solution (Ambion, Austin, TX., USA) was of the EMCS did not close properly, and that this was
used to characterize mRNA expression levels. Staining preventing the facility from starting. On the following day,
for GUS activity with 1/10 formalin (Sigma; HT501128) the ISS crew checked the main door of the EMCS, and
was conducted to localize the promoter activity of the removed a cable that was between the door and the rest
CesA7 gene (Hoson etal., 2007; Koizumi et al., 2007). of the facility.
Once the EMCS facility was successfully started,
onboard Operations hydration of the PCCs was initiated several times.
However, this appeared to make little difference to the
The CWRW onboard activities are listed in Table relative humidity Of the PCCS. The hydration Of PCC A1
3_ The operations were monitored from the Tsukuba was not sufficient to trigger the delta pressure sensor that
Space Center of JAXA and N-USOC. Still images of measured internal water content by directing air into the
the Arabidopsis plants being grown in the onboard PCC QFOWth pot. While there was enough water provided
experiments were downloaded in near real-time to for germination in PCC A1 (April 11), the seedlings were
N-USOC. in danger of drying out, and workaround solutions had to
On March 30, 2008, ISS crew inserted eight CWRW be implemented. As a short-term plan, the recycling water
PCCs into the EMCS: four on rotorA, which would rotate mode was used and the duration 0t exposure t0 light
at 1 G, and four on rotor B, which would not rotate and reduced.
thereby maintain the microgravity conditions. However, The '33 crew was 393th required to assess the
failures of the system resulted in microgravity conditions hydration problems, and performed the “Water Reservoir
being associated with both of rotors A and B. Initial Stowage Check”. Troubleshooting of the hydration
hydration of the seeds began with commands from the problems implicated the water reservoirs, WhtCh were
ground but progressed very slowly. After approximately replaced With new UhttS 0h April 22, despite the '33 crew
two days, it became clear that the hydration system was having confirmed that the correct reservoirs were initially
not functioning; the potential reason for this was thought installed.
to be incorrect connections between the EMCS Rotor Replacement of the original water reservoirs resulted
Based Life Support System (RBLSS) module boxes, in successful hydration of PCCs B1, B3, and B4. Seed
EMCS Water Reservoirs, and PCCs. The function of the germination was observed in PCCs B3 and B4 on April
RBLSS is described in a previous paper (Kamada et al., 26 and 27, respectively. Hydration 0t PCCS A1, A2, A3,
2007)_ The ISS crew was requested to verify that the A4, and B2 remained unsuccessful, with the seedlings in
EMCS water subsystem connections were configured PCC A1 Sti” th danger 0t drying OUt-
correctly. The ISS crew performed the “EMCS Water The '33 crew was once 393th directed t0 address
Flow Checks” on April 5 and reported no obvious reason the unsuccessful hydration 0t PCC A1, and requested t0
— 117 —

"
"4","Preparation and performance of plant experiments in space
exchange two PCCs on rotorAwith two PCCs on rotor B. On May 23, commands were sent to prepare the
The rationale for this was that hydration of PCC B1 was MSG facility for harvesting. The ISS crew then removed
possible, despite the failure of its seeds to germinate. the CWRW PCCs from the EMCS and the harvesting
It is likely that the seeds had received some water prior procedure was initiated. The onboard CWRW experiments
to the replacement of water reservoirs, but that this were concluded with the harvesting of Arabidopsis plants
was insufficient for germination, thereby causing their in PCCs B3 and B4. The plants from PCC BB, and the
deterioration. PCC A1 was thus exchanged with PCC B1 largest plants from PCC B4, were stowed in KFTs with
so that the small seedlings of the former could be saved. RNAIater solution. The smaller plants from PCC B4 were
The ISS crew was also asked to exchange PCC A2 with stowed in a KFT with formaldehyde, which was frozen
PCC 82, in line with a troubleshooting analysis of the for return immediately after harvesting (in a Minus Eighty
hydration issue on May 5. Despite these efforts, hydration Laboratory Freezer for ISS (MELFI) at —95°C). After three
of the small seedlings moved from PCC A1 to PCC B1 days, the two KFTs with RNAIater solution were relocated
remained unsuccessful. from a +2°C MELFI compartment to a —95°C MELFI
To determine if further watering was required, the compartment. All three KFTs were contained in double
delta pressure in PCCs B3 and B4 was checked on May cold bag and returned in a frozen state by space shuttle
7. N-USOC had advised against these checks because on June 14.
of the danger of flooding in the bottom chambers of the
PCCs. The delta pressure checks indicated full growth Brief information about Arabidopsis plants
pots for both PCCs. However, the procedure did lead under microgravity condition in space
to flooding in the bottom chamber of PCC B3 and the
air flow :S’topped. Several attempts to Start the humldlty The number of seed germination and growth stage
controls |_h PCC '33 were rnade bUt failed. Beeause there of the Arabidopsis plants under microgravity conditions,
was he elf “0W, the tlghtS lh PCC '33 were SW'tChed Ott t0 which were determined by down linked images from the
prevent an increase in temperature. After three days of '33, were shown in Table 2_ Among eight PCCs, the
continued attempts, the humidity controls in PCC '33 were Arabidopsis plants had germinated in three PCCs A1, B3
successfully started. and B4, but seed germination in five PCCs A2, A3, A4, B1
On May 13—20 days after the Inltlal hydration—the and 82 was not observed_
iight t_h PCC '34 was switched from reduced t0 t9” In the PCC A1 that was seeded WT and mutant lefty,
lhtehSItY- Observations were conducted every 5 m'h- seed germination was observed in April 11, although
th the subsequeht week, Images and sensory data the date of first effective hydration was unknown by the
Indicated that add't'Ohat water was needed ""1 PCC '34- hydration trouble. The number of seed germination of WT
Ah attempt t0 hydrate the PCC Wlth a commandtrom the and mutant lefty was 1 seed of total 4 seeds and 5 seeds
QFOUhd d'd not work. Further attempts alse failed, and of total 15 seeds, respectively. However, the Arabidopsis
reverse PUthPIhQ was unsuccessful. The “th ”1 PCC seedlings were naturally air-dried at the cotyledons
'34 W35 SWItehed from W” t0 reduced lhtehSIty, am? the developmental stage just after the germination due to the
temperature In the EMCS Incubator lowered t0 20 C t0 impossibility of additional hydration, and were recovered
aVOid dGhYdration. Wlth no indication that PCC B4 had on the ground without chemicaI treatment
received any water, JAXA requested for early harvesting.
Table 2 P00 positions, assignment of Arabidopsis seeds and growth results in microgravity
EMCS PCC See d assi nment Number of Number of Growth sta e
rotor position 9 seeds seed germination 9
A1
B1
32
— 118 —

"
"5","Kamada, M. etal.

On the other hand, in the PCCs B3 and Table 3 Onboard activities relating to the CWRW experiments
B4 that were seeded WT and pCesA7::GUS, _ _ _
respectively, the effective hydration was _
performed on April 23. Seed germination was
observed by 5 days after the initial hydration
and the number of germination of me as
6 seeds of total 7 seeds, respectively. The
growth of the Arabidopsis seedlings in these
until 15 days after the Initial hydration (May 7).
However, the plants in FCC B3 did not grow
”p “°m ”‘9 Wm“ ?’GV-empm-e“ Stage
due to a stopping of ventilation during May 7
to 10. The Arabidopsis plants growth of PCC M 23
B4 progressed smoothly, and many leave ay . .
were observed. On 18 days after the initial
hydration, the formation of the rosetta leaves
was confirmed in the plants growing in PCC
B4. After 26 days from the initial hydration,
unfortunately, the failure that hydration was not
possible in PCC B4 occurred. Since the failure was not autonomously on the ISS. However, this prevented
restored by troubleshooting, the plants had begun to fade effective troubleshooting, and the onboard CWRW
slowly. Therefore, the light intensity and temperature were experiments had to be discontinued. We suggest that
lowered to avoid more dehydration. After five days—31 future space-based experiments utilize equipment
days after the initial hydration—the Arabidopsis plants with water supply ports that can be operated manually
grown in PCCs B3 and B4 were harvested and treated if problems arise. In fact, there is an example which
with RNAIater solution and formaldehyde. restored the growth of the Arabidopsis plants by manual

operation of water supply when the Arabidopsis plants
Lessons Learned have begun to die because of automatic water supply
problem during the ground-based CWRW experiments

While the EMCS facility was not problematic in (Kamada et al., 2009). We also consider it is important
previous space-based studies (Driss-Ecole et al., that parameters like humidity and temperature be
2008; Johnsson et 3/” 2009; Kiss et 3/” 2008), there monitored in real-time, and that this is done on a 24-hour
were a number of environmental control failures during basis by members Of the experimental team during the
the CWRW experiments. These resulted in repeated critical phase 0t Arabidopsis QFOWth 50 that any problems
problems with PCC hydration and airflow. An investigation can be addressed as soon as they arise-
of the EMCS and related equipments returned on space Many Of the CWRW experimental protocols were
shuttle mission STS-124 (1J) identified an incorrect changed or not followed onboard the ISS. The increment
direction of the Quick Disconnects (QDs) towards the scientist (IS) discussed these alterations in Daily Science
fresh and waste water reservoirs of the EMCS RBLSS Tag (DST) teleconference meetings, and thUS, they
module as the primary reason for the environmental played a very important role in the onboard running Of the
control failures, and thus the primary reason for the experiments.
overall failure of the CWRW experiments. In the EMCS, Another space-based Japanese plant physiology
water is supplied in the PCC through the EMCS RBLSS experiment is scheduled to begin in the summer of 2009.
module from the water reservoir. However, during the This is a seed-to-seed experiment—Space Seed—in
onboard CWRW experiments, air instead of water flowed WhtCh the life cycle 0t Arabidopsis under microgravity
in the PCC by the incorrect direction of QD5_ This was conditions will be studied. Further experiments, “Ferulate”
caused by failure of water line connection in the RBLSS and “Hydro Tropi”, are scheduled for between May and
module assembled at factory on the ground. Furthermore, July 2010- These Wt” investigate gravity-induced ferulic
functional tests of this EMCS RBLSS module were not acid formation in the cell walls 0t rice seedlings, and
sufficiently performed before the launch hydrotropism mechanisms and auxin-inducible gene

It is important to review the check system in process expression in roots 0t cucumber seedlings QFOWh under
of manufacture and to perform the enough tests before microgravity conditions. Consideration Of the IGSSOHS
the launch since the normal EMCS RBLSS module was learned from the CWRW experiments Wt” help t0 ensure
installed by the MULTIGENt experiment carried out the success of these experiments, and thereby increase
before the CWRW experiments. their chances of identifying plant systems that overcome

The EMCS and PCC are highly automated, the negative effects associated with growth in space.
designed such that the experiments can be performed

— 119 —

"
"6","Preparation and performance of plant experiments in space
Acknowledgments Iversen, T-H., Svare, H., Fossum, K. and Johnsson, A.
(2002) Development of a plant growth support system
We wish to acknowledge the efforts of all members for experiments on the '33, J- Gravit. Physiol., 9, 369'
0f N-USOC for their performance of EMCS telemetry 370-
operations, helpful discussion, and advice. The authors Johnsson, A., Solheim, B.G.B. and Iversen T-H. (2009)
are grateful for the international cooperation and kind Gravity amplifies and microgravity decreases
considerations of the space agencies ESA and NASA. circumnutations in Arabidopsis thaliana stems: results
from a space experiment, New Phytol., 182, 621-629.
Abbreviations Kamada, M., Omori, K., Nishitani, K., Hoson, T., Shimazu,
T. and Ishioka, N. (2007) JAXA space plant research
CWRW: Cell Wall and Resist Wall on the ISS with European Modular Cultivation System,
DST: Daily Science Tag Biol. Sci. Space, 21, 62-66.
EMCS. European MOdUIar CUItivation System Kamada’ M” Omori, K” Nishitani, K” H030”, T”
ESA: European Space Agency Takeoka, H., Shimazu, T., Yoda, S. and Ishioka, N.
GU31 B-glucuronidase (2009) Germination and growth test in four strains
IAO: InternationalAnnouncement of Opportunity of Arabidopsis thaliana in the reference model of
IS: increment scientist European Modular Cultivation System, J. Jpn. Soc.
ISS: International Space Station MicrogravityAppL, 26, 249-254.
JAXA: Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency Kiss, J.Z., Kumar, R, Correll, M. and Edelmann, R.
JSC: Johnson Space Center (2008) The use of microgravity to study phototropism-
KFT: Kennedy Space Center Fixation Tube the TROPI experiments on the ISS. 37th COSPAR
MELFI: Minus Eighty Laboratory Freezer for ISS Scientific Assembly, Montreal, Canada, July 2008.
MSG: Microgravity Science Glovebox Koizumi, K., Yokoyama, R., Kamada, M., Omori, K.,
MULT'GEN“ ESA’S mu'ti'generation ArabidOPS’S Ishioka, N., Takeoka, H., Shimazu, T. and Nishitani, K.
growth 'n_ space-1 _ _ _ _ (2007) Reverse genetic approach to exploring genes
NASA: Nattonal Aeronauttcs and Space Admtntstratton responsible for ceII-wall dynamics in supporting tissues
N'USOC1 Norwegian-User SUPPOF’I Operation Center of Arabidopsis thaliana under microgravity conditions,
PCC: Plant Cultivation Chamber Biol. 30,; Space, 21, 48-55.
P'1pr'”c'pa_""”""es“gat°r Paul, A-L., Levine, H., McLamb, w., Norwood, K., Reed,
PVA199'YV'W'3'COhO' D., Stutte, 9., Wells, w. and Ferl, R. (2005) Plant
QD: QU'Ck Dtsconnect _ molecular biology in the space station era: Utilization
RBLSS: Rotor Based L'fe Support System of KSC fixation tubes with RNAIater, Acta Astronaut,
56, 623-628.
References Takahashi, H., Kamada, M., Yamazaki, Y., Fujii, N.,
_ _ _ Higashitani, A., Aizawa, S., Yoshizaki, |., Kamigaichi,
Brtnckmann, E. and Schtller, P. (2002) Experiments 8., Mukai, C., Shimazu, T. and Fukui, K. (2000)
t/Vtth small antmals tn_ BIOLAB and EMCS 0n the Morphogenesis in cucumber seedlings is negatively
Internattonal space statton, Adv. Space Res., 30, 809- controlled by gravity, Planta, 210, 515-518.
814' _ Ueda, J., Miyamoto, K., Yuda, T., Hoshino, T., Fujii. 9.,
De Pam's, M-Nw Co'e, 'V'w 00km, 0-19”, M- and Mukai. C., Kamigaichi, 9., Aizawa, 9., Yoshizaki,
Schuette, A- (2002) The ESA 'aboratory support |., Shimazu, T. and Fukui, K. (1999) Growth and
equtpment for the 'SSfMSG’ ESA BU”- (http://www. development, and auxin polar transport in higher
esa.tnt/esapub/pt/bullettnPl.htm)., 109’ 42'45' plants under microgravity conditions in space: BRIC-
Driss-Ecole, D., Legué, V., Carnero—Diaz, E. and Perbal, AUX 0n STS-95 space experiment, J. Plant Res., 112,
G. (2008) Gravisensitivity and automorphogenesis of 487-492.
lentil seedling roots grown on board the International Wolverton, C., Mullen, J.L., Aizawa, S., Yoshizaki, |.,
Space Station, Phy3i0’- P’amu 134’ 191'201- Kamigaichi, 9., Mukai, C., Shimazu, T., Fukui, K.,
Hoson, T., Matsumoto, 8., Sega, K., Wakabayashi, K., Evans, ML. and Ishikawa H. (1999) Inhibition of root
Hashimoto, T., Sonobe, S., Muranaka, T., Kamisaka, elongation in microgravity by an applied electric field, J.
S., Kamada, M., Omori, K., Ishioka, N. and Shimazu, PlantRes.,112,493-496.
T. (2007) The outline and significance of the Resist
Wall experiment: Role of microtubu|e-membrane-cell
wall continuum in gravity resistance in plants, Biol. Sci.
Space, 21, 56-61.
Hoson, T., Sega, K., Mori, R., Saiki, M., Wakabayashi, K.,
Kamisaka, S., Kamigaichi, S., Aizawa, S., Yoshizaki,
|., Mukai, C., Shimazu, T., Fukui, K. and Yamashita,
M. (1999) Morphogenesis of rice and Arabidopsis
seedlings in space, J. Plant Res., 112, 477-486.
— 120 —

"
