"","x"
"1","Eos, Vol. 88, No. 15, 10 April 2007
tance in this regard are the two incoherent In contrast with the situation during the
scatter radars (15R) located in the northern IGY, the ionosphere can now be described
polar region that will measure the iono- with three-dimensional, time-dependent,
spheriC state parameters (density, tempera- physics-based models. However, these mod-
ture, and velocity) simultaneously and els still fail to capture the full variability, and
almost continuously during the entire IPY. often the Climatology, of the region. A recent
The European Incoherent SCATter (EIS- example of this problem is the Sojka et a1.
CAT) Svalbard Radar (ESR), a powerful [SR [2005] comparison of the Utah State Univer— ' W
in northern Scandinavia, can monitor the sity (USU) Time Dependent lonospheriC _ _ _
ionospheric parameters along the local Model (TDIM) with a monthlong ESR data . Eli .""'_. ._ ""Ham. _*""
geomagnetic field lines threading the polar set. Given that the described lPY observa— I ""
cap, while the newly commissioned (Janu- tional campaign will focus on two lSRs oper— "" a; -.!| -
ary 2007) Advanced Modular lSR (AMISR) ating almost continuously and comple- I: m ' .
at Poker Flat, Alaska (Figure 2), can simi- mented by extensive ground-based and
larly monitor the ionosphere on the other satellite observations, a unique database will
side of the polar region. At different times be created that captures the seasonal and
of the day, these radars sample the polar shorter-term variability of the iohosphere. Fig. 2. European Incoherent Scatter Svalbard
cap, auroral oval, and subauroral iono- . The followmg Challenge is given to the Radar, Longyearbyen,SUalbard (78°09’11W,
spheres. Both of these faCIhties w111 create ionosphere-thermosphere modeling com- 16°01 ’44”E).
a nearly yearlong data set of ionospheric munity: Can we create model predictions
observations (ionization density, electron for these yearlong observations? Can we
and ion temperatures, and line-of-sight ion compare predictions with the observations
velocity) that began on 1 March 2007. and with eaCh other’s predictions to iden- References

Many other instruments thattmonitor tify model and theory Challenges? Can the Sojka,J.J.,M.DaVid, R.WSChunk, and A. Pvan Eyken
the ionospheric and atmospheric regions aeronomy community through focused (2005),]:01at111ayet modelobservation comparisons:
will augment these two lSR data sets workshops during the [FY upgrade their A neutralwind surprise,Ann.
through their normal operational sChed- models and, most important, the lower Geophys.,23,191—199.
ules. The Norwegian Research Council has atmosphere inputs, and then repeat the
provided incremental funding to allow the prediction-comparison cycle?

. . . —JAN SOJKA and ROBERT SCHUNK, Center for
ESR to operate essentially continuously The authors w111 hold a model-observa- Atmos h . d S S . Ut h St t U ._

. . . . . . p €l'lC an pace CIGHCGS, a a e n1
during the .first year of the IPY..Meanwhile, tion workshop at the Couplihg, Energetics, versity, Logan;TONY VAN EYKEN,EISCAT Scientific
the [SR faCIhties at Millstone Hill (West- and Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions Association,Kiruna,Sweden;JOHN KELLY,CRAIG
ford, Mass.) and Sondrestrom (Kangerlus- (CEDAR) meeting, 24—29 June 2007, in HEINSELMAN,and MARY MCCREADY, SR1 Interna-
suaq, Greenland) will operate for about Santa Fe, N. M. Interested modelers are tional,Menlo Park’Calif.

32 hours every 2 weeks to sample long-tim- encouraged to contact Jan Sojka (sojka@
escale variations not addressed by the pre- CC.usu.edu) to establish procedures for
Vious long runs (~30 days duration) con- making their lPY predictions electronically
ducted by these radars. available.
International Space Station nauts about their Earth observations targets.
. All data collected are cataloged and posted
Supports Internatlonal POlar Year on the Web site for downloading and assimi-
lation into lPY projects. Examples of imagery
PAGE 171 Although lighting conditions, ground track, and detailed information about scientific
and other Viewing parameters change With observations from the 155 can also be down-
The International Space Station (155) PYO' orbital precessions and season, the 51.60 loaded from the ISS-IPY Web site.
vides an excellent venue for observing Earth orbital inclination and 400-kilometer altitude . .
systems. Starting ill March 2007 and COlHCld- 0f the [SS provide the crew a unique vantage TO datea the database Of Imagery anUII’ed
ing Wlth the beginning Of the International point for collecting image-based data of by the Crew Earth Observations experiment
P0131” Year (IPY), NASA’S Crew Earth Obser— polar phenomena, including surface obsef. aboard the [SS (htth/efﬂ'JSC'nasa'gOV) con-
vations (CEO) payload lHVltBS IPY investiga- vations to roughly 650 latitude, and upper taIHS more than 54vOOO Images Of hlgh'latl'
tors to Smeit requests for relevant imagery atmospheric observations that reaCh nearly tude events SUCh asaurora, polar meso-
be collected from the 155. to the poles. spheric Clouds,.sea icethigh-latitude plankton
Every day, 155 astronauts photograph des— During the 2007—2009 time frame of the blooms, “91951910, eYUPUOHS’ end SHOW COVE”-
ignated sites and dynamic events on the lPY, polar observations will become a sCien- PreVIous selentific eollaborations using these
Earth’s surface using digital cameras tifiC focus for the CEO experiment; the data include coordinating obsert/ations of
equipped With a variety 0f 1611563 Depend- experiment is designated lSS-IPY. We soliCit aurora Wm] ground-based investigators, ,
ing on observation parameters, astronauts requests from scientists for observations observations Of planhton blooms Wlth ,Shlp',
can collect high-resolution (4—6 meter pixel from the 155 that are coordinated with or based experiments, imagery 9f volcanic aCth'
size; 366 J- Robinson and G Evans, 503 complement ground-based polar studies. The ity in the Aléutléns’ and tracking large ice-
Trans. AGU, 8307), 185, 2002) OF synoptic- CEO imagery Web site for lSS-IPY (http://eol. bergs over time in the southern oceans.
View (lower resolution bUt covering very jsc.nasa.gov/ipy) provides an online form
large areas) digital data in three (red-green- that allows IPY investigators to interact with —CYNTHIA A. EVANS and DONALD R. PETTIT, NASA
blue) color bands. CEO scientists and define their imagery Johnson Space Center, Houston Tex; E—mail: Cindy.
155 crews have daily opportunities to (100' requests. This information is integrated into evan5'1@nasa'g0""; Donald.rpett1t@nasa.gov
ument a variety 0f high-latitude phenomena. daily communications with the ISS astro-

"
