"","x"
"1","Special Issue Feature g
, Remote Sensing and GIS for Urban Analysis g} i
i - . .
nghttlme Urban Imagery from I <
' 2 ° ' 0 ° . o I I
; , : Intematlonal Space Statlon. Potentlal Applicatlons
° for Urban Analyses and Modeling i
' _ V By Kamlesh Lulla I
' I Remote sensing has played a vital role in the study of urban areas ,5 . . I
I L ' since its inception. Successful applications of urban remote sensing Exam’esfutstandmg imagery !
, I have been documented recently by Jensen (2000) and Lulla and LandanbyNight .: 3 . j . I ,
' Dessinov (2000), among others. Recent advances in geospatial tech- i. , , , , , ..;; ff‘: . .. . . I . . i
i nologies coupled with high resolution satellite imagery have ush- ~ , , ‘2 g ‘ .. I I
' ered in a new era of innovative urban remote sensing applications. In , ' I I . .
this article, an often underutilized source of remote sensing imagery - . . j: ..
: ' is described and discussed — the potential uses of the night-time . 3f ~ . . .
digital camera imagery from the international Space Station (ISS). It I _ ~ “31'“ H 3. . I i
I is anticipated that these images, combined with the nightime imag~ ~ _ , i _. ‘ g :5 . . . I
ery from the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program Operational ' ~ . . . '0 I
I Line Scan (DMSP 0L5), offer additional opportunities for analyzing . f f y ‘ . I I
I and understanding our sprawling urban systems. ~ I . Z 1
= , I ; E
3 Platform for Human-directed Urban msimagewacquisherﬂyaﬁefnzpmlocal ﬁmeon I
: . the eveni ' of February 4,231t a. imrsthat- low Clouds,
I or perhaps {103, is evidentinthe ﬁazzy aqmracter of patterns
é Astronauts on-board the ISS perform digital camera operations for some Ofthe surroundingsmalierdﬁes whi'l e that"" of the .
, through the optical quality window in the ISS Destiny module. The warmét urban centerissﬂﬂciearandsharp .
' imagery is then downlinked to the ISS payload management center interpretation OfthlSimagemVidesumque inSight Into
. and cataloged and archived for public use.1 Cameras used for these the city’surbandensityandinﬁ‘astructure as highlighted by '
3 image acquisition sessions are commercial Kodak Professional DCS electrical lighﬁngmebrightestareasare the most; popu- '
760 Digital Cameras with 6-megapixel CCD (3032 x 2008) and 18 MB maimereas thematmdensw drops of; rapidly from .-
I ﬁnished ﬁle size and 36-bit color (12 bits per color). the bright urbanmnteruntiiitreaches the viéinity of the z A,
I . . Orbital, an encirclingwayﬁeyonlle isolatedbrlght . ..
I An Innovative Experlment areas manqngthenumeroussmaiiercities and towns of the i
I In order to obtain long exposures for these nighttime images, Astro~ region, as farsoutheastasﬁasﬁngsenthe coast; London’s ‘ I
I naut Don Petit, ISS Expedition 6 Science Ofﬁcer, assembled a “tracker” ‘tWO major alrlts,HeathrewandGah~ick, and the particu- I
based on the ﬁne gimbal movements in the [MAX camera mount for . Early brightsmuousstremhcftherbitaltothe south‘of the; I '
I the ISS Destiny Lab window. He mounted a threaded screw and nut city are veiyncticabie :I I » T . . . ' 7
, and drives it with a Makita drill driver. As this drill turns the screw, . B , A.tN' t I I I I . .
‘ it moves the camera and its spotting scope. Astronaut Petit manually menostsaigh , I . ’ ’ . ' i ‘ '
I compensated for the station’s motion by looking through the Spot- ~ I »‘ , . . .
ting scope and running the drill at the same time. Using this inge- / ' , 1 . .3}? 1 g. j
nious device, he has successfully photographed many cities around 'I ‘ ‘ . I . '_
the world, including Los Angeles, London, and Buenos Aires. . I ' . ' .
conﬂnued on page 942 , n; » g} 1' '
Footnotes . . '
‘ The following websites provide detailed information: ~
9 a. for [SS orbital parameters and conﬁguration: http:// 5i ' A . I
WWW-spaceﬂiSht-naSa-sov -
b. for [SS digital camera systems: http://eol .jsc.nasa.gov misremarkabiy dear Image, acquired early on the morning 0f ‘
c. for [SS archived imagery: http://eol.jsc.nasa.gov Saturdayfebmmy 8, 2003, shows the ﬁghts 0f Argentina 5
G PHOTOGRAMMETRIC ENGINEERING & REMOTE SENSING September 2003 941 I
, . . , . .. _ .-T——,..ﬁ-—.=.wT——.-—~+__\_VM»M-J— -

"
"2","Special Issue Feature
capital city. Often called the “Paris of the $outh,i”<wi’t’h 12"" ‘ continued from page 941
million people, almost one thitd of all Argentines me in this» Potential Applications for Urban Analyses
city. The brightest area is the Old part of thedtycentered m * and M o d elin g A
the port and the presidential palace, theCasaRasadaTi-ie ,2 - . “g
I blackes t part of the scene is the River Platethegreatmtum Recently Sutton (2002) has elaborated on the applications of DMSP 51
of the Atlantic Ocean on whichthi5:3portatylslml‘l1tef~ OLS digital imagery for urban applications. The uses Of nighttime tc
pretation shows that brightnessOF thelitsexacﬂympw» imagery for population density modeling, enhancing census esti- la
sents the density of the urban pdpulatidn,whichdedin%all mates, and generating proxy measures for population load are well p
I the way to the blackness of the farmlandsthatsurrundthe documented. This [SS imagery has the potential to contribute to all A
city. i these applications at a scale not easily available from the other night- ﬂ
. The widest city thoroughfare, in the world—theAvemdag time imagery sensors. Regional cultural geographic and deveIOp- e‘
\ de julio __ with four m a] or roads runnmgparalielandsem» ment patterns can be analyzed from DMSP OLS imagery but can be A
rated by grassy swards is the'brightest linejnthgdgwﬂwn ﬁne tuned with the help of this imagery, especially in the developing a
; cluster. It appears as the IorigestnorthI-sousmmustinian part of our globe. lntraurban patterns of both cultural and resource b""
I of the port. Four majér highways canbeseenfrm interest can be studied; for example, the scale and information con- ti
. the city center. These highways maybemmvmamm tent of this imagery are suitable to assess the impact of Disneyland in h«
the weil-known »13tetni8httrafﬂcofweeausAires Anaheim on the greater Los Angeles urban area. a
3 The inner'part of Buérids Aires Zisfthe; leCmttaistﬁct, al
_ outlined bythe great. boulevard; AVBHIdaGenWPaame Summary . p
straight segments of; this boulevard anglemundthenorth This imagery adds a new dimension to the modeling of geospatiai a
and west sides of thefCity; i : f , ' - relationships within the urban regions and their interactions within ""I
. .. IE ‘ ’ s ' , . 7 3 : z » :5 'i I intraurban zones of activity. Readers are encouraged to view other 1‘.
f Los Angelesat nght II . : ' . ' nighttime urban views at http://eol.jsc.nasa.gov. 1 ﬂ
2 A =23, ' ' - References 3 ti
‘ - Jensen, J. R., 2000. Remote Sensing of the Environment-An it
~ ‘ .- Earth Resource Perspective, Prentice Hall, Inc., New Jersey. ""5
; . ' ». 3117f; I N ' "" A ’3 f Lulla, K. and Dessinov, L., 2000. Dynamic Earth Environments- E
. . 7 ~ » - ff ' *3 . . Remote Sensing Observations from Shuttle-Mir Missions, . ﬂ
. .. . . ,3 f John Wiley and Sons, New York. . n
I , II I II n .. I - Sutton, P. 2002. The lights come out at night, GeoWorld, Sep— '2
I . . I I I I .‘ . < ‘ .. :5“ I I tember. 1
. i I ' V I II Phillip,T. 2003. http://science.nasa.gov/ppod/y2003/ . ta
~ ""'I.‘ I- : I ., ' ‘th . I . 1, , iOapr_barndoor.htm. 3 n
‘ ”?;f3 .2 I ‘ ' "" ' i ; Acknowledgements 1
[I , . ~ “:35; ,« .g Several members of the NASA Johnson Space Center’s Earth Obser- j v
. v R .. ‘ N“ ~ vations group made contributions to this essay by providing captions c
f , and cataloging the imagery. I thank NASA Astronaut Don Petit for i g
. 1 ' v v v these unique views from the ISS. Thanks are due to Mike Trenchard, 1 e
This image was acquired shortiy'after iamincaitimen Kim Willis and Justin Wilkinson (all of Lockheed Martin) for assistance la
March 10, 2003. The sprawl ofAmerlca’sgseiargestciw, and interpretation and for [SS Earth Obs operations. I S
: as well as a number of itsvreriown'ed lanmarks,aredeariy + i :
visible and easily interpreted. In the n0rth,He~liywoedis Author 3
nestied against the south fsideifof the SantaMahlcaMaum Kamlesh Lulla : V
‘ tains. On the coast, Los Angeles lnternaAIﬁAx) NASA johnson Space Center ; Z
i and the port facilities at Long Beach NavaiShipymlsaxe Houston,Texas 77059 '
' bright spots. Finally,» even atthisstimeefnight.Mbﬁght ! 5
‘ lights of Disneyland in Anaheim: are a distinctfeature tl
After sunset the borders of “The. C1tyofAngets”arede- ’ ﬂ
ﬁnedasmuch byitsdarkterrainfeaturesasbyitsweﬂﬁtsrid p
of streets and freeways. Over 13 miilionpieinhabitthe ‘ u
coastal basin bounded roughlyibythe SantaMenicaandsan b
Gabriel Mountains to the n’or’thiand the ChineHEiisanSanta ; 1r
‘ Ana Mountains to the east and southeast : I:
’ i c
i - Q it
942 September 2003 PHOTOGRAMMETRIC ENGINEERING & REMOTE SENSING P

"
