"","x"
"1","earth mbservufmry @
F E ATURES
‘l ‘l 'l E'h'D-[ZIH FETTrT
PM m the ﬁght 1
If Iris, the goddess of the rainbow, had a sister she . _'
would be the goddess of Aurora. Glowing green 3
ripples form arcs that constantly transform their shape Li“ '1'"" .5;
into new glowing diaphanous forms: there is nothing ,__.+ A - _ ""I .—
static about aurora. It is always moving, always ”WE:
changing, and like snowﬂakes, each display is '“E'm 1:"" _
different from the last. Sometimes, there is a faint 2:232: ESeEtiEE‘nagosrc‘ilige
touch of red layered above the green. There are bright Ofﬁc er’Don Pettit Offers a uniq ue
spots W1th1nthe arcs that come and g0, and transform pemective 0n auroraS
into upward directed rays topped by feathery red
structures. Sometimes there Will be six or more rays,
sometimes none at all.
Where does the auroral light come from? Most of the This PhOtOQ'aPh Shows 'aYSOf
light is emitted by oxygen atoms excited from green 3 ”mm mpped by M 'n a

"
"2","bombardment by charged solar particles. Charged SOUthem Hemisp here ”9 ht Show-
particles consisting of atomic fragments released by It isone Ofa seriespfm—ate‘j
, fra_mes(1.0 MBQUIcktIme).
the Sun stream through space and run 1nt0 Earth’s 15500645 47517 W asta ken Ap n-I 20,
magnetic ﬁeld. When a charged particle moves 2003, using a 28 mm Ie ns.
through a magnetic ﬁeld, a force perpendicular to the
motion is created and that force diverts the particle
into a spiral path until it collides with atoms in the
upper atmosphere. In a sense, auroras are the neon
lights of the Earth’s poles. The upper atmospheric
collisions excite the atoms (oxygen and nitrogen) into
emitting light, in much the same way that electrons
pumped inside of a glass tube ﬁlled with neon gas
create a neon light. The green light emitted from
excited oxygen is centered around a wavelength of
558 nanometers, while the rarer red light is emitted
around wavelengths in the 630 nanometer region.
Because auroras follow Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld, we
observed them near the Earth’s poles. Further, we saw
auroras more frequently on the Canadian side of the
Northern Hemisphere than the Siberian side due to the
north magnetic pole lying in the proximity of Hudson
Bay. Auroral activity seems to be at its peak 180
degrees from the sun. When our orbit coincided with
local midnight at high latitudes, we looked forward to
turning down the lights and peering out a north-faeing
window.
From the ISS vantage point at approximately 400 km A“ aurora Pmﬁ'e—Gree“ aurora
extends upwa rd from the Ea rth’s

"
"3","above the Earth’s surface, we observe aurora proﬁles. airglow 'aYerin the Photograph
The edge-on View in the upper atmosphere allows above'tvléhen ”id axlémrda '5 b
aurora height scales to be estimated. Using the :1:er eln 27:2; .2112; esnaunggg
atmosphere as a ruler where its edge is taken to be “06-521591 wasta ken with a
about 50 kilometers in altitude, the green emissions 58 mm lenson February 2, 2003-
extend from the ever present thin-shell of airglow at 2
atmospheric thicknesses (about 100 km altitude) to
perhaps 6 atmospheric thicknesses (300 km). The red
emissions are at higher altitudes. They lie on top of
the green and extend beyond that layer by about 4
atmospheric thicknesses, thus placing them in the 300
to 500 km range (see image number ISSOO6-E-
21591)
”In- _
H-
)
Auroras form large concaved arcs 30 to 70 degrees Broad SNMSOfaUVO'a OVer
along the Visible horizon with well-deﬁned edges. canadé' Fora ee_rlse Ofaumra
. . . dyna mm 5, see this mOVIe (1.0 M B
From th1s large-scale are smaller curtaln-llke Quic ktime)_ ha ge ""064}
structures extend in southerly directions. One time the wt,
space station ﬂew through one of these curtains while
over northern Canada near local midnight. Our orbital
altitude was 388 km. Glowing green lines, some curvy
like a doodle on a scrap of paper and some spotted
like a connect-the-dot drawing were seen while
looking through a nadir-Viewing window. We were
most deﬁnitely above the aurora looking down onto
the structure. A glance through the north-facing
window was a sight to behold. We were in a dimly
glowing fog of red. It was like we had been shrunk
down to some miniature dimension and inserted into

"
"4","the tube of a neon sign. And it was just on the other

side of the windowpane we wanted to reach out and

touch! Afterwards, Ihad to clean a nose print off of

the window.

For a few days, our Viewing geometry was such that 5W ""15 0f brig ht green aurora

we enjoyed a celestial treat: we could see at the same ?boYe the airglow' The brig ht .
. . . Ilght In the lowerleft Isa small Clty

t1me the green glow of auroras and the 1r1descent in C a nada.-006-E-51691.

layers of orange and blue of the Earth’s horizon at

sunset. It was as if Iris and her sister of the night were

having a brief conversation. During one orbit, I

observed a green aurora in the blackness above the

sunlit atmosphere. But a red aurora glowed above the

terminator (the fuzzy line on Earth that separates day

from night). The red emissions seemed to follow the

path of the terminator as it moved westward until it

was no longer in sight. I was star-struck! Auroras, out

of all other natural phenomena, are the most deserving

of goddess stature.

"
"5","About the Images The 1556 crew enjoyed thisgreen
- - . aurona dancing overthe night
Astronaut phetographs eompr151ngthem0v1es and side Of the Ea rth justa ﬁersunset
were taken Wlth a Kodak DCS760 dlgltal camera The reds and bluesofsunset ""g ht
equlpped W1th both a 28 and 58 mm lens, and up the airlayerto the west.
provided by the Earth Observations Laboratory, Wage w wasta ken
J ohnson Space Center. The International Sgace Eenbsmary 16' 2003' W'th a 58 mm
Station Program supports the laboratory to help '
astronauts take pictures of Earth that Will be of the
greatest value to scientists and the public, and to make
those images freely available 011 the Internet.
Additional images taken by astronauts and
cosmonauts can be Viewed at the NASA/JSC Gateway
to Astronaut Photography of Earth.
This article is a modiﬁed excerpt from Don Pettit’s
Space Chronicles.
For more of Pettit’s images and descriptions of
auroras, see the space station movie from Saturday
Morning Science.
Subscribe to the Earth Observatory
About the Earth Observatory
Please send comments or questions to: eobmail@eodomo.gsfcnasa.gov
Responsible NASA ofﬁcial: Yoram Kaufman
NASA/GSFC Security and Privacy Statement
TE'HiS & I-lebinnt-z-r' Enpgr‘ight {I3} EIIIIII1 THUHDERETIIIHE - EPI, Inc.

"
"6","The above content is a copy of the originalposting of this article as it appeared on

httQ .'//earth0bservat01;y. nasa. gov.

Contact information regarding its posting in this archive is below:

Send questions or comments about this web page to the NASA Responsible Ofﬁcial at 9%
earthweb@mail. nasa. gov

Curator: Earth Sciences Web T eam

Notices: Web Accessibility and Policy Noticesz NASA Web Privacy Policy

"
