"","x"
"1","Microgravity Sci. Technol (2009) 21:257—268

DOI 10.1007/s12217-008-9091-7

A Novel Device Addressing Design Challenges for Passive

Fluid Phase Separations Aboard Spacecraft

M. M. Weislogel - E. A. Thomas - J . C. Graf

Received: 7 March 2008 / Accepted: 8 J uly 2008 / Published online: 6 August 2008

© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2008

Abstract Capillary solutions have long eXisted for the Keywords Capillary ﬂow - Microgravity -

control of liquid inventories in spacecraft ﬂuid systems Partial wetting - Capillary vane structures -

such as liquid propellants, cryogens and thermal ﬂuids Passive phase separations - Two-phase ﬂow -

for temperature control. Such large length scale, ‘low- Aqueous systems - Life support systems -

gravity,’ capillary systems eXploit container geometry Urine Processing

and ﬂuid properties—primarily wetting—to passively

locate or transport ﬂuids to desired positions for a va-

riety of purposes. Such methods have only been conﬁ- Introduction

dently established if the wetting conditions are known

and favorable. In this paper, several Of the signiﬁcant Capillary solutions are standard for the control of liquid

challenges for ‘capillary solutions’ to low-graVity multi- inventories in spacecraft ﬂuid systems such as liquid

phase ﬂuids management aboard spacecraft are brieﬂy propellant and cryogen management and thermal ﬂu-

reviewed in light of applications common to life support ids for temperature control. Such large length scale,

systems that emphasize the impact Of the Widely Varying capillary systems eXploit container geometry and ﬂuid

wetting properties typical of aqueous systems. A re- properties to passively locate or transport ﬂuids to de-

strictive though no less typifying example of passive sired positions for a variety of purposes. For example,

phase separation in a urine collection system is high- a simple interior corner (edge) formed in a spacecraft

lighted that identiﬁes key design considerations poten- fuel tank between the tank wall and a planar vane

tially met by predominately capillary solutions. Sample can act as a passive guide to transport large quantities

results from novel scale modelprototype testing aboard of liquid along the interior corner by capillary forces

a NASA low-g aircraft are presented that support the (J aekle 1991; Chato and Martin 2006; Weislogel and

various design considerations. Lichter 1998). Thus, Without moving parts, the shape of
the container can serve as a pumping mechanism to as-
sure that the liquid and gas/vapor are Where they ought
to be. It is unfortunate that such methods have only

M. M. Weislogel (IE) been conﬁdently established if the wetting conditions

Portland State University, Portland, OR, USA are known and favorable (generally perfectly wetting

email: mmW@CeCS-PdX-€du systems of contact angle 6 % 0°).

E. A. Thomas . J. C. Graf . It is also unfortunate that ii the system eXhibits a sig-

N AS A Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, US A niﬁcant degree of partial wetting (high contact angle up
to 6 $900) and/or wetting variability (contact angle hys-

E~ A:Thomas teresis), it is entirely possible that a certain container

e-mail: Evan.A.Thomas@nasa.gov - - - -
geometry Wlll not possess any unique capillary pumping

J. C. Graf properties at all and the location of the liquid inside the

e-mail: john.c.graf@nasa.gov tank Will depend in a truly complex manner on the ﬂOW

@ Springer

"
"2","258 Mierogravity Sci. Technol (2009) 21:257—268
history and local surface ﬁnish. This is why ‘capillary demonstration purposes, and where permissible, the
solutions’ for the processing of water-based ﬂuids results of recent theoretical and experimental investiga-
aboard spacecraft are not always employed in favor tions are cited and demonstrated as tools for the design
of forced ﬂows and separations (Hamilton-Sundstrand and analysis of such systems (as well as for the develop-
2003) (i.e. life support systems employing centrifugal ment of scaled systems for experiments using ground-
separations for urine, humidity condensate separations, based low-graVity platforms such as drop towers and
and space suit liquid separation). To be sure, relia- aircraft).
bility and performance often demand an active de-
sign approach for a ﬂuid system where contamination
and variability of use can lead to wetting conditions Fundamental Challenges for Capillary Systems
that are poor, highly variable, or entirely unknown
(Weislogel 2001). However, since capillary forces are Several years ago a survey was conducted of NASA
usually signiﬁcant when gravity is small, it seems pru- and the aerospace community to identify the funda-
dent to design systems to eXploit the capillary forces mental challenges inherent in ﬂuid systems aboard
unavoidably present. In this way, the system possesses spacecraft (Weislogel 2001). The report clearly iden-
built-in redundancy and can likely function, though per- tiﬁes interfacial phenomena as the ﬁeld of greatest
haps at a reduced level, in the event of primary system concern since veriﬁcation and validation are not read-
failure. Such capillary solutions do not incur power ily performed on Earth and are costly in space. Be-
draw penalties, nor do they always incur mass penalties; cause numerous ﬂuid systems consist of multiple ﬂuid
they merely require special design considerations for phases (i.e. condensers, evaporators, water processing
the system- or component-level geometry and wetting equipment, etc.), ﬂuid interfaces abound on space-
conditions. craft and must be understood before such systems
In certain situations it may be possible to avoid can be designed conﬁdently. This is especially true
the use of an active system altogether. Such systems for human-rated spacecraft requiring water processing
are expected to be essentially passive, low mass, and for life support. For certain processes the principal
potentially highly reliable. It is primarily from this per- challenge is simply one of separating two ﬂuid phases
spective that the present work is reported. Nonetheless, (e.g. condensate from a humid air stream). Without
whether exploiting the capillary force or not, the use of the aid of gravity, this normally triVial process is not
aqueous solutions aboard spacecraft demands a thor- immediately obVious and may be achieved by dedi-
ough knowledge of the impact of partial wetting since a cated methods including centrifugal pumping (Ozbolt
poor accounting can lead to deleterious results on orbit 1996), forced vortical ﬂows (Best and Ellis 1999; Tilton
(Weislogel 2001). and Tilton 1994), or even rocket ﬁring in the case of
propellant resettling (Weislogel and Collicott 2004).
Capillary forces can be eXploited as well and might
Scope include any combination of thermo-, electro-, mag-
neto-, acousto-, soluto-, or ‘other-’capillarity (Hasan and
In this paper,severalsigniﬁcant challenges for‘capillary Balasubramaniam 1989; Prins et al. 2001; Marchetta
solutions’ to low-graVity multiphase ﬂuids management et al. 2004; Oeftering et al. 2002; Rongy and De Wit
problems aboard spacecraft are brieﬂy reviewed in light 2006). Simple isothermal capillary phenomena is ad-
of applications common to life support systems. Such dressed herein and implied with each mention of ‘capil-
a discussion is pertinent to spacecraft propellant man- lary solution.’ Enhancements or reductions in capillary
agement and thermal ﬂuids systems too, but the speciﬁc performance are possible by adding any force or ‘other-
challenges of life support emphasize the impact of the capillarity’ to the system (i.e. combining a vortical ﬂow
widely varying wetting properties typical of aqueous with a capillary solution).
systems that are often absent in the former. The focus For two-phase ﬂuid-liquid separation operations the
of the discussion quickly narrows to example problems ultimate capillary solution would be one capable of
concerning two-phase gas-liquid ﬂows with low liquid- handling all ﬂow regimes and wetting conditions. The
volume fraction, where the objective of the capillary solution would be capable of separating developing and
system is generally to provide a means for passive phase transient ﬂows and would be able to passively recover
separation. The speciﬁc example of a urine collection from signiﬁcant excursions in background acceleration
system is highlighted that identiﬁes key system require- level. Such a system is non-eXistent to the authors’
ments met by predominately capillary solutions despite knowledge, though certain systems come close (Phillips
large anticipated changes in the system wettability. For et al. 1998)—the primary shortcoming being that cap-
@ Springer

"
"3","Microgravity Sci. Technol (2009) 21:257—268 259
illary systems do not accommodate Widely varying uid droplets may be introduced by any un/intentional
wetting conditions well and in such instances must rely means including the Rayleigh break-up of a liquid
on another non-capillary motive force. jet, the shattering or splashing of impinging liquid
In general, most applications require only a subset drops, and shear induced re-entrainment 0f wall-bound
of these ‘ultimate’ capabilities. For example, a sparse droplets into the air stream. Such ﬂows are inher-
bubbly ﬂow might be separated by a simple screen ently unstable and likely to transition to fully devel-
(Rollins et a1. 1985).But even in such instances variable oped annular, slug/plug, 0r bubbly ﬂows depending
wetting conditions between the liquid and screen might 0n the relative ﬂow rates, container dimensions, and
complicate the process leading to locally stable screen- ﬂuid properties. Partial wetting conditions can lead
bound bubbles in the case of poor wetting, or mobile to modiﬁed regimes (i.e. ﬁlm rupture in annular-slug
ﬂuid-driven spherical bubbles in the case of favorable ﬂows (Weislogel and McQuillen 1998)) or produce sep-
Wetting. Conversely, a sparse liquid droplet-laden gas arate regimes altogether, as in the case of the rivulet
ﬂow might be separated by any number of capillary ﬂow regime identiﬁed by Barajas and Panton (1993)
methods, the success of each depending critically on Where in circular tubes for low-liquid fraction ﬂows
the particular wetting conditions. For brevity, the scope and sufﬁciently large contact angles (9 250°) a rivulet
of this paper is restricted to the particular challenges of liquid meandering along the tube walls is the fully
associated With the latter and capillary solutions that developed state, as sketched Fig. 1. One can imagine
address partially wetting systems (contact angles 0 < 6 a once pristine and highly wetting aqueous annular
< 90°). Certainly other ﬂow types might be addressed ﬂow converting to a perhaps undesirable rivulet ﬂow as
in a like manner. contaminant effects compound over time. The converse
is also possible. (Note: The rivulet and multi-rivulet
regimes of Barajas and Panton replace the gravity-
Some Speciﬁc Challenges for Capillary Separations dominated (i.e stratiﬁed) wavy ﬂow regime for large
of Droplet Flows contact angles. The wavy regime disappears entirely
When gravity is negligible.)
Droplet ﬂows are herein deﬁned as any number of Since the natural transition of a droplet ﬂow to some
free liquid droplets moving in an air stream. The liq- other regime is in a sense a passive phase separation
Fig. 1 Qualitative depiction .
M ulti-Rivulet ﬂow regimes .
(adapted from Baraj as and Wm
Panton (1993)). The lower
diagrams .display . W
Characteristic regimes at least [:35— -_— - —
for 0 g 340, at least for .
e g 340 With g = 0, and for Rivuld
610 g 0 g 900, respectively
~_..———_—+ w
:3»...
Multi-tiwﬂel
E5 hubhlﬂ mm hﬂbhlﬂ dim bubble mm
H
: slug annular slug annular slug annular
E' plug plug plug
ﬁwﬂal
Gas‘hﬁlucily GasValu-uily @Wlucity
@ Springer

"
"4","260 Mierogravity Sci. Technol (2009) 21:257—268
process, the challenge for any low-graVity system might ~ 0(1 cm). Such large low-g drops also frequently
be best summarized by the question of how to complete eject % 50% diameter satellite drops on impact as
such a separation Within the conduit over the shortest reported during recent space experiments aboard
distance possible, for a variety of possible regimes con- ISS (Weislogel et al. 2007). The satellite drops
taining liquid droplets, for a variety of wetting condi- impact other dry walls Where they in turn adhere
tions. To do so in the shortest distance possible is an and eject satellite drops, the process repeating un-
effort to reduce system size and mass but adds the com- til a minimum adhered drop diameter is reached
plication of designing for developing two-phase ﬂows. halting further ejection. From the perspective of

Two perhaps unfamiliar wetting-based challenges for a capillary solution for phase separations in such

such a capillary solution are highlighted here for cases the challenges posed by this wetting regime

low-to-moderate Reynolds number ﬂows (low Weber in addition to subsequent unexpected satellite drop
numbers). The near absence of relative gravitational ejection is that the adhered wall-bound drops can
acceleration only ampliﬁes concerns for the often con- remain isolated Without any capillary connection to
ﬂicting design solutions available. say a developing rivulet. Such ‘drops’ can be quite

large in low-g environments and a method to collect

1. For highly wetting systems, thin liquid ﬁlms coat them must be integral to any separation process.
solid surfaces. Coalescence in such ﬂows is in- (Note: satellite drop ejections during drop-wall ad-
hibited as the drops prefer to skip, roll, or slide hesion events do not occur in i1-g environments to
across the liquid ﬁlms, particularly in the presence our knowledge despite attempts to observe them.)
of any surface contamination, Gilet et al. (2007).

These effects are perhaps most clearly demon-
strated on a large length scale during the entertain- Passive Phase Separations Relevant
ing space experiments of Pettit (2005) performed to Urine Collection
on the International Space Station (188). Such eX-
periments indicate that under continual forcing, Many of the mentioned characteristics of capillary sys-
coalescence may be postponed indeﬁnitely. This tems can be accounted for or even exploited in the
conclusion is supported by both small scale 1-g design of life support systems aboard spacecraft. The
experiments and large scale low-g experiments. If example application of onboard urine collection pro-
or When coalescence does occur an approximately Vides a case in point. Sample target requirements for
55% diameter satellite drop (Bach et al. 2004) is such a system are listed below. A conceptual design
frequently ejected that re-enters the gas stream addressing the capillary challenges discussed herein is
(Amarouchene et al. 2001). This phenomenon does then forwarded. The design and performance of a scale
not pose particular challenges in terrestrial gravity model for testing aboard a low-g aircraft is discussed in
environments because multiple (up to eight ob- summary.
served by Blanchette and Bigioni (2006)) rebound- The design requirements of a representative ‘full-
coalescence-drop ejection events can occur Within scale’ urine collection system might be speciﬁed
a fraction of a second and are for the most part simply by
imperceptible to the casual observer. Not so for . . . .
low-g systems Where the ﬁrst collision and rebound . Steacly state alt ﬂow rate (proVIded). 424.5 L /m1n
. . 0 L1qu1d ﬂow rate: 0 to 1 L/m1n (up to 1 min, peak
s1mply propels the ejected drop elsewhere—usually . .
normal to the surface of the liquid ﬁlm. In the ab- ﬂO.W.3 L/m1n 11.1 6 S) .
. . . 0 M1X1ng condu1t: 2.22 cm ID, from 0 to 76.5 cm in
sence of an ample additional force, and depending length
on the ﬂow parameters, longer conduit lengths than . . .
. . . 0 L1qu1d storage capa01ty: 1—2 L
otherW1se expected may be requ1red 1n low-g to . . . . . .
assure coalescence of drops in highly wetting and . Zero liqu1d carry oyer 1n alt eX1t.line . . .
. . 0 Zero to near zero air carry over 1nliqu1d eX1t line
potentially contaminated systems.

2. For partially wetting systems (say, 50° 5, 6 5, 90°), Further requirements such as system mass, materials,
thin liquid ﬁlms are statically and often dynami- volume envelope, usage proﬁle, life cycle, cost, delivery
cally unstable (Weislogel and McQuillen 1998) and schedule, etc. might also be speciﬁed. Such a system
large dry surfaces eXist on Which drop collisions employs a motive air stream mixed With a liquid stream
normally result in drop-wall adhesion events. Un- producing a two-phase ﬂow that is to be passively
like on Earth Where ‘drops’ are typically small separated downstream for subsequent processing With
~ 0(1 mm), drops in low-g environments are easily 100% air exiting through one conduit While % 100%

@ Springer

"
"5","Mierogravity Sci. Technol (2009) 21:257—268 261
liquid eXits through another. Passive capillary solutions hysteresis), a rivulet ﬂow is anticipated and can be
might be welcome and worth pursuing despite the po- achieved by design. This is determined by computing
tential for a signiﬁcant lack of control of the system the air and liquid ﬂow rates and using the tabulated data
wetting conditions over time. One simple system is of Barajas and Panton (1993) who include contact angle
introduced here to conﬁne the discussion to aspects as an experimental variable. Otherwise, without such
of the design process that highlight potentially critical knowledge, using the properties of water for the liquid,
design considerations. This discussion is limited by the superﬁcial Reynolds numbers (ReS = ,oVSD/u) for the
assumption of little to no control of the wetting condi- air and liquid would be computed and the regime maps
tions, provided 0° $6 r€900. This assumption might be of, for example, J ayawardena and Balakotaiah (1997)
considered a worst case scenario, but unfortunately, it employed to ﬁnd that a slug ﬂow regime for the inlet
is entirely possible due to a general lack of control of two-phase ﬂow would be predicted. For transient and
contaminants and usage in such systems. non-fully-developed ﬂows, intermittent droplet (dis-
A geometrically simple system is sketched in Fig. 2. persed) or even bubbly-slug ﬂow regimes might be
The dimensions and scale of the deVice are entirely de- anticipated. Regardless of the inlet ﬂow regime, the ob-
sign speciﬁc, but this schematic may be used to convey jective behind the design of Fig. 2 is to convert a range
potential methods for capillary control in partially wet- of low liquid content two-phase ﬂow inlet conditions
ting systems. This deVice employs ahelical coil of an ‘ice to fully separated ﬂuid phases by passive means. The
cream cone-sectioned’ tube (Concus and Finn 1990) as design accomplishes this task by choice of geometry,
an entrance section (A-A), a diffuser section (B-B), and which provides the following mechanisms to be demon-
a passive capillary collection and containment section strated in practice:
(C-C). In keeping with the possible requirements for
the s stem the air/a ueous 1i uid ﬂow with hi h air . . . .
y ’ . . . q .q . g . 0 Low-hquid content two-phase ﬂow 1s introduced
volume fraction 1s introduced 1n the tube 1n1et (the air . . . . .
. . into the helical ice cream cone-sectioned tube 1n
1s sucked through the system by a fan). The particular
. . . . any manner.
two-phase regime of the inlet ﬂow 1s determined by . . . . .
. . . . 0 In general, 11qu1d coming 1n contact With the wall of
the geometry of the m1X1ng conduit, Wthh for the ﬂow . . .
. . . the conduit w111 adhere to the wall and rapidly de-
rates and d1mens10ns spe01ﬁed, and the fact that the . . .
. . . . . . . . celerate whereupon it Will be driven further down-
11qu1d 1s likely to be Signiﬁcantly partially wetting (say .
O O . . O stream by the motive gas ﬂow.
contact angles 50 to 90 1nclus1ve of large % i20 . . . .

0 For large contact angle 11qu1ds, adhered liquid on
the walls will become isolated wall-bound drops
that grow with further adhesion and coalescence.
Larger drops offer less capillary and Viscous resis-

Q tance and are more readily dragged downstream by
A the air ﬂow. Thus, a maximum wall-bound drop di-
A—A .
ameter eX1sts and can be computed for the system.
Air A 0 A meandering rivulet two-phase ﬂow is anticipated
along the conduit were it a circular tube (Fig. 1).
However, the verteX of the ice cream cone section
B—B of the conduit serves as a guide for the rivulet.
Z-Phase C B B Once trapped there the rivulet is more energetically
stable and likely to remain there even if the tube
were straight. The centrifugal nature of the air
ﬂow does not accomplish this feat. For example,
Air ~ ~ an ‘unguided’ rivulet (circular tube heliX) simply
T ‘ ~ ~ ‘ meanders chaotically along the heliX as observed in
+ C C-C practice and depicted in Fig. 1.
Liquid * 0 The centrifugal ﬂow path provides several
. . functions:
L1qu1d

. . . . . o It provides a motive force to bring free liquid
Flg. 2 .Passwe phase separation. concept for urine collection droplets t0 the vertex 0 f the C011 duit where they

system. guided rivulet ﬂow established by section A — A, main- . . . .
tained through diffuser section B — B, and collected or otherwise W111 e1ther adhere When impacting dry walls or
wicked into containment section C — C coalesce when impacting other liquid surfaces.
@ Springer

"
"6","262 Mierogravity Sci. Technol (2009) 21:257—268
0 By accumulating the liquid along the vertex of o The geometry of the vane structure, primarily
the conduit, in the absence of adequate cap- the decreasing interior vane angles in the di-
illary pumping due to poor wetting, it can be rection of the ﬂow, provides a passive means to
more easily driven downstream by the air ﬂow draw trapped air bubbles out of the liquid as it

to the liquid collection section. moves downstream.

0 Free liquid drops brought into contact With 0 For controlled or at least known wetting con-
previously adhered liquid surfaces do not al- ditions (i.e. advancing contact angles less than
ways coalesce and, as discussed above, previous a known value, say, <50°, or <70°) the vane
ﬂight experiments have demonstrated the sig- device acts as a capillary pumping mechanism.
niﬁcance of this fact When the effect of gravity The increasing size and density of the vane
is lOW for both poorly wetting, well-Wetting, structure provides for a uniformly decreasing
and especially contaminated liquids—the drops capillary pressure along the ﬂow direction as
just rebound off liquid surfaces. Even When well as an increasing capillary reservoir. Thus,
such drops d0 coalesce they often eject satellite even Without air ﬂow, the device Will work
droplets into the free stream. Therefore, the to draw a majority of the liquid injected into
number of coils for the anticipated air ﬂow one connected mass, the majority of Which Will
rate must be predicted based on the required reside at the base of the device over the liquid
residence time and centrifugal acceleration nec— eXit port.
essary to coalescence all drops (all drops aris- o InterconnectiVity between vanes (not shown)
ing from inlet conditions, entrainment, ejection, permits the removal of the large liquid mass
etc.). Otherwise a drop might race around the through a single and relatively large liquid eXit
outer edge of the coil and never coalesce. Sta- port that Will not be as susceptible to plugging
tistical Earth coalescence data for the particular over time due to contamination.

s stem can be used to determine both the cen- .

y. . . . . 0 Between ﬂow cycles, the deV1ce may be sealed and
trifugal acceleration level (0011 diameter given . . . . . .

. . . the 11qu1d slowly Withdrawn W1th0ut gas ingestion
air ﬂow rate) and the contact t1me requ1red for . .

. for further processmg, or vented to space W1th0ut
coalescence (number of 0011s). A safety factor . . . .
. . Signiﬁcant loss of cabin air.

can be bu1lt 1n to assure a droplet-free ﬂow for
the shortest possible conduit.

0 The geometry of the coil allows for some ﬂeXi- Thus, (1) the entrance section provides means for
bility in deployment. an uncollected, though passive phase separation, (2)
. . . . the diffuser section reduces the rimaril motive air

0 The ice cream cone sectioned diffuser continues the . . . . . p. y

C . . , . ve1001ty W1th0ut impeding the 11qu1d ﬂow, and (3) the

gu1ded rivulet nature of the entrance section ﬂow . . . .

. . . . . . . collection section captures and/or Wicks and contains

While Signiﬁcantly reducmg the air ve1001ty W1th0ut . . . . .

. . . . . . . the separated 11qu1d 1n a Single mass over a Single

s1gn1ﬁcantly1ncreas1ng res1stance t0 the 11qu1d ﬂow. . . . .

. . . eX1t port. Air eX1ts downstream from a port not eas1ly
0 The vane structure 1n the ice cream cone-sectioned . .
. . . reached by the 11qu1d.

pass1ve separator section serves several functions: . .

If the range of wetting angles 1s known and not too

O For poorly wetting liquids it provides a method broad (say approximately 50° to less than 90°), accord-
of accumulating the liquid along the ﬂow path ing to the observations and claims herein, such a ﬁxed
to the point it can be dragged further down- design should perform satisfactorily as a capillary solu-
stream by the air ﬂow. In this way the vane tion forapartially wetting system. But, if contamination
structure serves as a capillary device only by effects reduce the contact angle (6 $450; n0 rivulet ﬂow
holding and containing the liquid in one piece, observed (Barajas and Panton 1993) for 6 5 340) such
facilitating removal of the liquid from a single that the guided rivulet ﬂow in the heliX transitions to
eXit port. an annular or annular-slug ﬂow, continuous liquid ﬁlms

0 The vane structure varies in effective size and along the walls Will enter the diffuser section. Despite
density along the ﬂow path to provide oppor- the high rate of passive capillary pumping capable of
tunities for drop adhesion on the vane walls the vane structure in this wetting limit, such lOW-VOlume
and drop coalescence With previously adhered ﬁlms can be driven along the rounded portion of the
liquids in the likelihood that such drops are diffuser and containment sections towards the air eXit
present in this section. port. Though the majority of the liquid would remain

@ Springer

"
"7","Microgravity Sci. Technol (2009) 21:257—268 263
g No_phaseinlet Assuniing g-levels 0n the order of 0.1 to 0.001 g0,
. __ .. ‘ Hem: a1 entrance the critical container Bond number condition Boer =
_ - -- “m.“ _ section ,0 g R L / a $1 must be satisﬁed to prevent destabiliza-
-' -» -- .- / (homing) tion of the liquid simply due to the variable background
5, 1. Diffuser Ix. .. - _ . . . . . .
ﬁryy \ -- -‘ ,. _ g-envnonment (,0 is the 11qu1d dens1ty, g is the accel-
j} ‘-._'l Collection . ,5. _' eration level of the aircraft, R and L are the effective
{1;} j Er“ E iﬁseaion \ ‘ '4:- Du a1 air exit p Om radius and length of the test article and a is the liquid
.J “V"" 3.3"" ijb. . *: surface tension). Stability is contact angle dependent
€:'_——_-.3’r f» ‘ . and pinned interfaces are most stable often allowing
digfifggildfglveztfm Liquid exit F . # Boer SJ 10. Inlet section, eXit sections, and port diam-
"" "" eters are speciﬁed in part by local Weber numbers
Sectional “W of collector (We 2 ,0 VZDP /0, Where D p here denotes port diame-
thmugh alremports l ter and V is the average local ﬂow velocity) and local
liquid depths (Satterlee and Hollister 1967). Weber
Fig. 3 Schematic of scaled prototype modelwith seetionalviews numbers below certain Values permit Stable capillary
0f diffuser and collector controlled ﬂows. For example, the inlet diffuser is de-
signed to signiﬁcantly reduce the gas ﬂow velocity in
contained in the vane structure, long duration opera- order to reduce the Weber number for liquid slugs
tion of the device might require special geometry and and drops that might inadvertently enter the diffuser
materials (i.e. wetting) considerations for the air outlet section of the test article. Capillary Wicking rates and
port to prevent liquid carryover in such cases. A ‘stove stability conditions for the liquid in the vane struc-
pipe’ air eXit port is pictured in Fig. 2 as a ﬁnal pinning tures are determined using results from a variety of
solution to halt such air driven liquid ﬁlm migration investigations addressing capillary driven ﬂows in inte-
With demonstrated success in prototype designs. rior corners (Weislogel 2003; Su and Lai 2004). These
in turn guide vane size, angle, and distribution deci-
sions. Benchmarked numerical models and modeling
Scaled Prototype Design and Low-g Demonstration are prized for related design exercises and routine for
others, but at present are not always possible or even
The general design of Fig. 2 is chosen to be geomet- cost effective for short delivery exploratory investiga-
rically simple such that it might be readily scaled and tions. An innovative, fast numerical solution method
fabricated for the purpose of demonstrating the design for steady ﬂows offers signiﬁcant potential for improve-
principles in the brief reduced-g environment afforded ment along these lines (Klatte et a1. 2008).
byaparabolic aircraft. Materials, surface ﬁnish, ﬂuid properties, electric
A schematic of a scaled prototype model is provided charge level, etc. determine surface wettability. Mate-
in Fig. 3. The approximately 1:5 scale model (R 1:125 rials and ﬂuids employed for this prototype are varied
scale for system volume) is constructed of transparent only to establish a variety of wetting conditions. The
materials Where possible such that orthogonal Views resulting scaled system requirements are speciﬁed as
may be exploited to determine the liquid interface(s) ranges and are listed below.
Within the test article. Transparent inlet and outlet sec-
tions can be monitored to identify the inlet ﬂow regime
as well as gas and/or liquid carry-over. Controlled air 0 Steady state air ﬂow rate: 3.9—7.8 L/min
and liquid ﬂow rates can be mixed in any manner for 0 Liquid ﬂow rate: 20—60 mL/min (ﬂow rates
introduction to the test article, but to simulate the assure ~ 100:1 air-to-liquid ﬂow ratio)
full-scale system, one must produce similar superﬁcial 0 Helical entrance Section: 6.35 mm ID With 40°
Reynolds numbers, entrance length ratio, and thus tWO- included interior corner, 360° turn on 7.62 cm ID
phase ﬂow regime. coil
0 Diffuser section: 40° included interior angle, R
fourfold increase in ﬂow area, R 5.08 cm in length,
Design Widening the cross section to R 2.54 cm across.
0 Capillary collection section: 3 tapered vanes in-
The dimensions of the device are limited by the g- serted into ice cream cone section With capillary
environment of the aircraft and the scaled ﬂow rates. communication (interconnectiVity) between vanes
@ Springer

"
"8","264 Microgravity Sci. Technol (2009) 21:257—268
Table 1 Fluid properties m
Density (kg/m3) 1,000 789 1,680 1,008.6
Kinematic Viscosity (10‘6 mz/s) 1.00 1.52 0.42 1.2
Adv. contact angle, deg. :I: ()
Titanium-64 70 (3) 26 (1) ~ 0 78 (3)
A1-7075 83 (2) 37 (3) ~ 0 88 (3)
A1-6061 81 (1) 18 (2) ~ 0 89(3)
88-316 65 (2) 20(2) ~ 0 88(3)
Teﬂon 117 (1) 65 (2) ~ 0 106 (3)
Polyethylene 107 (2) 35 (2) ~ 0 96 (3)
ULTEM 89(2) 30(3) ~ 0 94(3)
Acrylic 80 (1) 43 (2) ~ 0 —
(vane gaps), minimuminterior vane included angle diffuser section. Steady and transient tests are per-
of <15°, height % 3.57 cm length % 10.16 cm. formed and under conditions of 110 liquid eXit ﬂow, the
0 Total system internal volume: 25 mL device is designed to continue to separate and collect
0 Fluids: Distilled, de-ionized (DI) water, ethanol, the liquid in the vane device until it saturates. At this
and FC—72—refer to Table 1 for relevant thermo- point the liquid inlet ﬂow must cease or the liquid must
physical properties. The advancing contact angle be removed at a rate not to exceed a known maximum
values listed in the table are determined using an value until the vane structure is drained. The gas ﬂow
optical dynamic sessile drop method. Typical hu— can run continuously or may be turned off When the
man urine properties are also listed in the table liquid is being removed.
to note similarities With DI water. In particular, The vane density varies along the liquid ﬂow path.
the broader subject of urine wetting Characteristics This provides a favorable capillary pressure gradient
on treated surfaces Will be addressed in a separate for poorly wetting liquids, greater stability for liquids
publication. trapped by the vane, and a passive mechanism to force
entrained bubbles out of the liquid and into the gas
stream. Any separated liquid injected into the diffuser
Test Apparatus
Images of the experimental setup and test section dur-
ing operation are provided in Figs. 4 and 5. The air DiffusebaCkhght
and liquid ﬂows are driven and metered by peristaltic n3. '3""? 1. . . Video
pumps. The air ﬂow is buffered by pulsation damp- 12”...—-—--_~' ""’4???"" camera
eners both up- and down-stream 0f the test section. Test _ *1"" .. . ' m1! _ .
Pulsatile ﬂow in the liquid is deemed acceptable in amele - - II I ""I HI. fl 1
light of the system being modeled, but is nonetheless ‘ 1 ’ - _ -- - 1
reduced signiﬁcantly by high pump rotation rates and ' '""I . . ‘ .. ' ' . I ‘
long smalldiameter ﬂexible tubinglengths. The air ﬂow __. _n- 'f _ ‘21 - Q II
is operated in a closed loop, While the liquid ﬂow draws 1 111:1“ . ‘1 .14! .
from a syringe and drains to a syringe. TWO-phase ﬂow ' _ — - 4 - - _ 1; _ .
is introduced into the entrance of the helical section _ 1|. ‘7 "" -. .
(a CO-aXial ﬂow With core liquid jet). The ﬂow is then A” pump _ ' 5 1 _... -‘ ‘ . '*
pre-eonditioned (i.e. separated) by the coiled section 11"" ‘\I 1"" W ‘I .1
sized to create an effective 1-g centrifugal acceleration _ 1; 17"" I 7_ 'II\ 11 “
for free liquid drops in the ﬂow rate range speciﬁed. *' 1.3111 _ . 1 i1 -\ '-
Combined With the diffuser section, a predominately I I T L’rfi-ﬂd - _
singly-eonnected capillary liquid is injected into the test [1- 4'” ' ' . .
. . . . . L1qu1d pump
article Where it impinges 0n the vane structure. In this
design the vane structure consists of vanes emanating
from the corner of the collection section (ice cream Fig. 4 Image Of simple test apparatus identifying key
cone vertex) aligned effectively at a right angle to the components
@ Springer

"
"9","Microgravity Sci. Technol (2009) 21:257—268 265
F ig. 5 Images of the scaled Two—phase in
prototype model during low-g I .
ﬂight testing: left is DI water : _ _ ,___ _ _ .
E: t i803: zatigstiaaza i , -. . . . . f, __
(6 = 00), all at similar ﬂow Helical :‘Q “._'""'a.l f 11'. ' 3-1.
conditions. The ﬂow channel entrance 1:3 E * i-j' ‘1 r i'lﬂ '
is outlined at upper left and tl-i.‘ 1 "" H '.'._. i i f
bdelorffeach tililnalge isda sketch . EX“. . _ 1"""" l'.’\ . _
10220103123 ign preoiliﬁljwhich are Diffuser 11' {77.1.1} . 311-th 1! '. i I: q. .: _L
exaggerated Within the heliX :' '""""' . : ' "" :___ -. .11
for clarity Collector E ' T"" E - ..
Liquid out Air out
Two-phase in
w Guided Non-uniform it Non-uniform
* \, rivulet ° annular o annular
.° . flow .0 I flow 0° flow
Helical Q I
entrance
Liquid
Diffuser J \v / films
Collector
Liquid out Air out
possesses signiﬁcantly more inertia than the gas and A selection of the results is summarized here Which
cannot make the two 90° turns before reaching the gas represents the breadth of test parameters and test ﬂu-
eXit port. Such liquid impinges 0n the vanes Where it ids. It is observed that the limits of performance are
adheres and is driven further into the vane structure by bound below by large contact angle (i.e. 6 > 71 / 2 — 05)
air drag and weak capillary forces. (A similar and highly and low air-liquid ﬂow ratio (<<78) and bound above
successful design was employed for the separation of by high air-liquid ﬂow ratio alone (>217). A thorough
a perfectly wetting coolant for a low-g spray cooling presentation of both the experiments description of the
application (Weislogel et a1. 2006).) experimental results is expected to be reported in a
subsequent publication.
Example data from the low-g demonstration tests is
Tests listed in Table 2, Where the primary ﬁgure of merit,
liquid carryover prior to saturation, is recorded for a
The experimental conditions are selected to demon- variety of ﬂow rates and ﬂow rate ratios. For these tests,
strate the capabilities of such a device to collect highly n0 liquid removal occurs during the process and the
variable (partially) wetting liquids out of a tWO-phase upstream tubing and heliX are pre-primed with up to
stream for subsequent processing. Tests are speciﬁed 15 m1 of liquid to make the best use of the limited low-g
for transient and steady operation for a variety of initial time afforded by the aircraft (% 20 s). Total carryover
conditions, ﬂow rates, and ﬂow rate ratios. Camera values are listed along With estimates 0ftota11iquid V01-
locations are speciﬁed to evaluate the performance of umes contained Within the device. The design capacity
the device in terms of global interface location, ﬂow of the capillary collection and containment section is
regime(s), quantitative liquid carryover in the gas eXit 12 m1. This volume includes the vertex region of the
line, and gas carryover in the liquid eXit line. The liquid diffuser section (2 m1) and the vane structure portion of
volume accounting is achieved Via graduated cylin- the collection and containment section (10 ml). The to-
ders pre- and post-test. Over 50 tests were conducted. tal internal volumes of these elements are 5 and 20 m1,
@ Springer

"
"10","266 Mierogravity Sci. Technol (2009) 21:257—268
Table 2 Selection Of. Fluid Air ﬂow Liq. ﬂow Flow ratio Liq. injected Liq. drained Carryover Date/parabola
a:ligesentative experimental (1 /min) (ml/min) (ml) (ml) (ml)
DI water 6.5 30 217 7 7 0 8/2/07/9
3.9 40 98 12 9 0 8/2/07/11
5.2 30 173 9 8 <1 8/2/07/13
Ethanol 5.2 30 173 10 9 0 8/2/07/18
3.9 20 195 6 5 0 8/2/07/21
3.9 20 195 6 7 0 8/2/07/26
FC—72 3.9 50 78 12 6 <1 8/1/07/21
3.9 40 98 12 6 0 8/1/07/27
respectively. In all tests conducted carryover is certain For the highly wetting ﬂuids the vane structure and
for testsinjecting more than the 12ml cumulative value. general geometry of the device work well to collect
Estimates of liquid carryover volumes (always < 1 ml) all of the liquid by air drag and signiﬁcant capillary
are listed in the table for the total system liquid volumes driven ﬂow. However, the wetting and spreading nature
less than the design capacity of the device. It is clear the of the liquid leads to thin ﬁlms on nearly all, if not
device works well to separate and collect the liquid as all, interior solid surfaces. These ﬁlms are subsequently
intended. Even in the few cases of premature carryover, driven towards the air eXit line by the air ﬂow. To
design speciﬁc explanations and remedies are known, prevent liquid carryover in such cases a simple feature
but are reserved for a separate report. is desired to pin the advancing ﬁlms in a manner that
forces the liquid into a recirculation rather than carry-
over. A ‘stove pipe’ geometry is employed to this effect
Discussion herein as noted in Fig. 3, and re-sketched schematically
in Fig. 6. In the ﬁgure the ﬁlms reach the stove pipe edge
In general, as observed in Table 2 the demonstrations and the interface pins there. Further liquid dragged by
prove that Within the prescribed ﬂow rates (primarily the air ﬂow builds at this edge whereupon it makes a
air-liquid ﬂow ratios % 100), and provided the capillary signiﬁcant capillary connection With liquid contained
containment section of the device is not ﬂooded With in the vane structure and is Wicked away until the
liquid, 100% separation can be achieved during the vane structure itself is saturated. Provided the vane
process independent of the wetting conditions tested, structure saturation conditions are not exceeded, With
i.e. zero liquid carryover in air eXit line. This level continuous air ﬂow, the liquid in the ﬁlms simply re-
of performance is ideal. It is also particularly encour- circulates near the stovepipe Without liquid carryover
aging for capillary solutions applied to poor wetting into the air eXit lines.
systems such as water in polymer-based containers
(contact angle ~ 55° j: 20°). The more ‘favorably wet-
ting’ ethanol (6 % 10°), and the ideally wetting FC-72
(6 2 0°) performed similarly well and nearly identically StOVe Pipe
to each other. In fact, there appears to be two ﬂow
regimes for the device that are distinguished by the Air exit Thin AireXit
wetting conditions. These ‘regimes’ are exempliﬁed by 4— ﬁlms —>
the sketches below each image presented in Fig. 5. As \
was found by Barajas and Panton (1993), rivulet ﬂows
develop for sufﬁciently high contact angles ($450), Re-circulating
Whereas annular or even slug ﬂows can prevail for lower ﬂows
contact angles. This is likely the breakpoint for the Vane
present device as well. As seen in Fig. 5 for the air- structure
DI water test, the droplet-laden inlet ﬂow transitions
to a guided rivulet ﬂow in the ice cream cone heliX.
It thereupon decelerates intact in the diffuser section,
before being dragged further downstream and collected . . . . . . . .
in the capillary containment section. The more wetting Fig"" 6 891C tlonal .S°*{°I¥la“°.1“°5tr atmg the Ideallzed capﬂlaly 5.6“
, , Vice of a stovepipe air eX1t geometry for highly wetting liquids.
ethanOI and FC'72 ﬂu1ds behaVe differently than DI Thin liquid ﬁlms are exaggerated for Clarity. The air ﬂow is out of
water and are addressed separately belOW. the page turning 90° to eXit stove pipes to left and right
@ Springer

"
"11","Microgravity Sci. Technol (2009) 21:257—268 267
It iS Of course possible tO overdrive the system, shear- Acknowledgements The authors gratefully acknowledge the

ing large droplets into the air eXit line, overcoming the contributions of colleagues in the Crew and Thermal Systems Di-

contact line pinning forces at the stove pipe or overﬁll- Vision at NASA J ohnson Space Center: J . Sweterlitsch, S. Curley,

. . . . ’ D. Muirhead, O. Estrada, M. Casteel, M. Callahan, G. Cathey, J .

mg the Vahe Strueture Wlth hqthd such that the OVerhOW Fraughton and K. Pickering. Funding was generously provided by

entered directly into the air eXit line. However, With the the Crew Exploration Vehicle Technical Risk Reduction project.

demonstrated success of this device it is not a stretch

to imagine 100% passive separations for such aqueous

solutions With contact angles varying Widely up to 90°,

as is typical for water on many engineering materials. References

The Simpliﬁed scaled prototype demonstrates most of

the key CharaCtenSUCS .Of a passive phase separating de_ Amarouchene, Y., Cristobal, G., Kellay, H.: Noncoalescing

Vice: The model eXp101ts centrifugal forces to coalesce drops. Phys. ReV. Lett. 87(20), November (2001)

drops into a guided rivulet ﬂOW. The diffuser section Bach, G.A., Koch, D.L., Gopinath, A.: Coalescence and bounc-

reduces the air velocity Without impeding the liquid ﬁg 0f SEMIEZEEESSOI dropletS- J- Flmd- MBCh- 518» 157—181

. . . ovem er

ﬂow 3.8 des1red, and the c.0113?“ seetlon captures and Barajas, A.M., Panton, R.L.: The effects of contact angle on two-

eehtalhs the separated hqthd 1h 3 Slhgle mass OVer a phase ﬂow in capillary tubes. Int. J . Multiph. Flow 19(2),

single eXit port. 337—346 (1993)

Best, R, Ellis, M.: Experimental and analytical results of a liquid-
gas separator in microgravity. In: AIP Conference Pro-
ceedings, Space Technology and Applications International
Forum, vol. 458, pp. 779—784, J anuary 22 (1999)

Summar 0f Demonstration Models Blanchette, F., Bi ioni, T.P.: Partial coalescence of dro s at liquid
3' g P
interfaces. Nat. Phys. 2, 254 (2006)
- - - - _ Chato, D.J., Martin, T.A.: Vented tank resupply experiment:
In thlS Werk .the success Of prelimiuary ﬂlght denion ﬂight test results. AIAA J Spacecraft Rockets 43(5), 1124—
strations indicate that current des1gn cons1derat10ns 1130’ September—October (2006)
and tools for predicting advanced full-scale ﬂuid system Concus, P., Finn, R.: Capillary surface in microgravity, in
behavior, even for poorly wetting liquids such as water, IOW'graVltY ﬂmd dynémlcs and ”311590“ Phenomena- ID:
are capable O f specifying system geometry ﬂOW rates Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics, vol. 130, pp. 183—
. . ’ . ’ 204. AIAA, Washington (1990)
and Other properties usmg Shbseale models for teStlhg Gilet, T., Mulleners, K., Lecomte, J .P., Vandewalle, N., Dorbolo,
during the brief lOW-g environment Of the NASA air- 8.: Critical parameters for the partial coalescence of a
craft. For reasons highlighted herein, capillary solutions droplet PhYS- RGV- E 75(3), 036303, MafCh (2007) .
for water-based S stems aboard S acecraft are often Hamilton-Sundstrand: Hamilton Sundstrand System Solutions—
. y . p , Gas/Liquid Separation. Retrieved September 23, 2007, from:
1gh0red due to poor and unpredictable wetting prop- http://WWW.snds.c0m/ssi/ssi/SystemSolutions/gasliquidsep.
erties Which control ﬂuid conﬁgurations in capillary html. (2003)
dominated systemS. In this work, the capillary force Hasan, MUM, BalaSUbraTnaniam, R.. Thermoeaplllary mlgratlon
is exploited to at least hold the liquid together in a 381§;§§9g3}:§111:gry1?139§3f6' J' Thermophys' Heat TranSf'
continuous eehheeted piece for efheieht removal. In J aekle, D.E. Jr.: Propellant management device conceptual de-
one limiting worst case scenario of poor wetting and sign and analysis: vanes. In: AIAA/SAE/ASME/ASEE 27th
large contact angle hysteresis, the liquid is collected £01m PTOPUI%9:1((1:;911E§T€HC€> AIAA'91'2172> June 24—26»
. . . acramento,
by non-capillary means SUCh as centritugal and/or alt Jayawardena, S.S.,Balakotaiah,V.: Flow pattern transition maps
drag forces, bUt held together by capillary fereeS- In for microgravity two—phase ﬂows. AIChE J . 43(6), 1637—
an opposite, second limiting worst case scenario of 1640, June (1997)
perfect wetting, low volume liquid ﬁlms are produced Klatte, Jy Haake» D., WSISIOgel» M-M- Dreyer; M-3 A fast 1111-
and driven down stream by the airﬂow For interme- merical procedure for steady capillary ﬂow in open channel.
. . . . ' J Acta Mechanica (2008, in press)
dlated eases Where the wetting COIldlthIlS are known Marchetta, J ., Winter, A., Hochstein, J .: Simulation and pre-
and accounted for (i.e. urine on titanium Where 6 $200), diction of realistic magnetic positive positioning for space
vane structures can function as guides, collection, and 2315:1111? manageﬂefltsystefil/IS- 111} AIAﬁgoﬁﬁtﬂﬁttznd
. . . . - - - erospace Ciences eeting an X 1 1t, eno,
phase separation deV1ces Similar as they do in eX1st1ng Nevada, January 5—8 (2004)
propellant storage and tWO-phase thermal control SyS' Oeftering, R.C., Chato, D.J., Mann, A. III: Liquid propellant ma-
tems. With further development and modeling efforts nipulated acoustically,research and technology. NASA/TM-
along these lines, a new family of reliable and repeat- 0 bZPO3T-21A111919J03(2LO(E)A h' C 1 D V 1 7
. . . - z 0 t, . .: a re 1tecture ontro ocument, 0 . :
abledes1gn OpthIlS for the passwe COHtrOl Of partially Temperature and Humidity Control, Revision New, D683-
Wetting systems may soon be available for evaluation 1471944, Boeing Defense and Space Group, Missile &
and/or application in spacecraft ﬂuid systems. Space Division, Huntsville, Alabama, December 20 (1996)
@ Springer

"
"12","268 Microgravity Sci. Technol (2009) 21:257—268

Pettit, D.R.: Waves in a large free sphere of water on the In- Weislogel, M.M.: Survey of present and future Challenges in
ternational Space Station. Phys. Fluids. In: 22nd Annual low-g ﬂuids transport processes. NASA contract report
Gallery of Fluid Motion, September, (2005). (see also http:// C—74461-N, TDA Research, Wheat Ridge, CO (2001)
exploration.grenasa.gOV/balloon/blobhtm) Weislogel, M.M.: Some analytical tools for ﬂuids management

Phillips,A.L.,Fale,J.E., Gernert,N.J.,Sarraf,D.B.,Bienert,W.J.: in space: isothermal capillary ﬂows along interior corners.
Loop heat pipe qualiﬁcation for high Vibration and high- Adv. Space Res. 32(2), 163—170 (2003)

g environments. In: AIAA-1998-885, Aerospace Sciences Weislogel, M.M., Collicott, S.H.: Capillary re-wetting 0f vaned
Meeting and Exhibit, 36th, Reno, NV, J anuary 12—15 (1998) containers: spacecraft tank rewetting following thrust reset-

Prins, M.W.J., Welters, W.J.J., Weekamp, J .W.: Fluid control in tling. AIAA J . 42(12), 2551—2607, December (2004)
multichannel structures by electrocapillary pressure. Science Weislogel, M.M., Lichter, S.: Capillary ﬂow in interior corners.
291(5502), 277—280, J anuary 12 (2001) J . Fluid Mech. 373, 349—378, November (1998)

Rollins, J .R., Grove, R.K., Jaekle, D.E. Jr.: Twenty three Weislogel, M.M., McQuillen, J .B.: Hydrodynamic dryout in
years of surface tension propellant management system tWO-phase ﬂows: observations of 10W bond number sys-
design, development, manufacture, test, and operation. tems,spacetechn010gy and applications int. forum (STAIF-
In: AIAA/SAE/ASME/ASEE 21st J 0th Propulsion Confer- 98). Albuquerque, NM, AIP Conf. Proc. 420(1), 413—421,
ence, AIAA-85-1199, Monterey, CA, J uly 8—10, (1985) J anuary (1998)

Rongy, L., De Wit, A.: Steady marangoni ﬂow traveling With Weislogel, M.M., Weir, T., Dreyer, M.: Capillary solutions:
Chemical fronts. J . Chem. Phys. 124, 164705 (2006) passive containment and transport for low-g ﬂuids sys-

Satterlee, H.M., Hollister, M.P.: LOW-G liquid propellant be- tems, Habitation 2006. Int. J . for Human Support Research
havior, engineers handbook. LMSC—A874831, NAS 9-5174, 10(3/4), 244 February (2006)

May (1967) Weislogel, M., J enson, R., Klatte, J ., Dreyer, M.: Interim results

Su, S.K., Lai, C.L.: Interfacial shear—stress effects on transient from the capillary ﬂow experiment aboard 188: the mov-
capillary wedge ﬂow. Phys. Fluids. 16(6), 2033—2043 (2004) ing contact line boundary condition. AIAA-2007—747, 45th

Tilton, D., Tilton, C.: Entrained droplet separator. US Pat. No. AIAA Aerospace Sci. Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nevada,
5,314,529, May 24 (1994) J anuary 8—11 (2007)

@ Springer

"
