"","x"
"1","45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2007-747
8 - 11 January 2007, Reno, Nevada
Interlm Results from the Caplllary Flow Experlment
Aboard 188: the MoVIng Contact L1ne Boundary Condltlon
Mark M. Weislogel 1 and Ryan J enson 2
Portland State University, Portland, OR 97207
J Eng Klatte 3 and Michael Dreyer 4
Centerfor Applied Space T echnology and Microgravily, University OfBremen, Bremen 28359

This paper highlights the in-ﬂight operations of the Capillary Flow Experiment Contact

Line experiments (2 each) performed aboard the International Space Station (188) during

the period between Increment 9 and 13 (8/2004—9/2006). The CFE-CL vessels are simple

ﬂuid interface experiments that probe the uncertain impact of the boundary condition at the

contact line—the region Where liquid, gas, and solid meet. This region controls perhaps the

most signiﬁcant static and dynamic characteristics of the large length scale capillary

phenomena critical to most multiphase ﬂuid management systems aboard spacecraft.

Differences in ﬂuid behavior of nearly identical static interfaces to nearly identical

disturbances are attributed to differences in ﬂuid physics in the Vicinity of the contact line.

The CFE-CL experiments are conducted on ﬁve occasions by [SS Astronauts M. Fincke, W.

McArthur, and J. Williams. The number of tests performed including additional science

experiments is made possible by various centrifuge techniques employed by the astronauts

permitting the re-use of the once-wetted container. Several of these ‘extra science’

experiments are brieﬂy described herein. Intermittent real-time Video and audio downlink,

continuous communication With the ground crews at NASA J SC, MSFC, and GRC, and the

clear and entertaining commentary of the crew made the conduct of the tests on 188 an

enjoyable, laboratory-like experience for the science team on the ground. The ﬂight tapes

from the onboard cameras have been returned to Earth (name ﬂight) and are expected to be

digitized, reduced, and made publicly available in the near future. A concurrent blind

numerical analysis is underway to predict the experimental results using a generally

accepted CFD-tool With speciﬁed contact line boundary conditions.
I. Introduction: The Capillary Flow Experiment (CFE)

CAPILLARY ﬂows and phenomena are critical to myriad ﬂuids management systems in low-g environments:
fuels/cryogen storage systems, thermal control systems (e.g., vapor/liquid separation), life support systems
(e.g., water recycling), and materials processing in the liquid state. Under microgravity conditions, capillary forces
can be exploited to control ﬂuid orientation so that such large mission-critical systems perform predictably. The
Capillary Flow Experiment is a simple fundamental scientiﬁc study that can yield quantitative results from safe,
low-cost, short time-to-ﬂight, handheld ﬂuids experiments. The experiments aim to provide results of interest to the
capillary ﬂow community that cannot be readily achieved in ground-based tests. Speciﬁc applications of the results
center on particular ﬂuids challenges concerning propellant tanks. The knowledge may also help spacecraft ﬂuid

systems designers increase system reliability, decrease system mass, and reduce overall system complexity.

A brief review of CFE is repeated here before highlighting the status of the investigation following the ﬁrst ﬁve
successful tests of the CFE-CL vessels on the International Space Station (188). Further CFE details may be found in
Refs. 1 and 2. The simple handheld experiments are designed to operate on the Maintenance Work Area (MWA) in
the United States Laboratory of the 188 With the primary quantitative data being digital Video images from an ISS
onboard camcorder. The experiments constituting CFE are Contact Line (CL), Interior Corner Flow (ICF), and Vane

1Associate Professor, Department of Mechanical Engineering, PO. BOX 751-ME, member.

2M.S.M.E. Candidate, Department of Mechanical Engineering, PO. BOX 751-ME.

3PhD. Candidate, Research Scientist, Am Fallturm, Bremen Germany.

4Sr. Scientist, Professor, Am Fallturm, Bremen Germany.

1
Copyright © 2007 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. All rights reserved.

"
"2","Gap (VG). Only CFE-CL results are addressed herein. The design constraints for CFE are stringent and include:
zero hazards, low mass (< 2.5kg), low volume (< 2L), no electrical interfaces or power requirements, minimal to no
crew training, and a short hardware delivery schedule (months). The experiments are performed opportunistically as
crew time, crew interest, and 188 resources occasionally allow.

Description of CFE-CL Hardware

Two CFE-CL units were designed and fabricated by NASA to study a fundamental and practical concern for
low-g ﬂuid phenomena—the impact of the dynamic contact line. The contact line often controls the interface shape,
stability, and dynamics of capillary systems in low-g. A very simple experiment is employed here that provides a
direct measure of the extremes in behavior expected S th 1. d P' . 1. d
from an assumption of either the free or pinned contact moo cy m er mnmg cy 1n er
line condition. The two CL units are essentially identical ' _ . 1% #1 ﬂ. _ _ _
except for wetting characteristics. A photograph of the la 3 '___ __ 7“ mi """"
CFE-CL—2 ﬂight unit is provided in Figure l. - gig F11?“ ,3‘1...’ 4 -

The main body for the units is machined from a mu... _’ _::-._ --; 3"". ill""
single piece of cast acrylic (polymethylmeth-acrylate) -. r '$ 7'"" Tr' ' ..
and ﬁtted With aluminum pistons and stainless steel '1 i ' .' ﬂ
piston drive screws. Each unit is secured to an aluminum A J ‘ J IL/ f""
base plate With a slotted hole that is used to attach the 1 r? i"" _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _.-_ a H .r
unit to the MWA1 and allows for as much as 40mm - : '! - l I «' _.
lateral motion or adjustment. The reservoirs hold the test ' _ I .r _ I .. I '-
liquid and employ a piston to dispense the liquid into the . _ i ' i.“ T l"" g i__ __,._.,,

. . . --|—-|: -1- a.

test sect10n. Turning a knob connected to a drive screw -. ,. _:_- - __ ~ _ - _ - I ._,-r '_
moves the piston. The parts are sealed With O-rings in -_—. . M"" ""Li- ‘ 3""
such a manner that the test chambers are somewhat . ” -
pressurized during test operations. ReserV01r(s) FOV

. The general experimental objective is to ﬁll the Figure 1. Photograph of CL-2 ﬂight unit With
cylinders t0 IdentIQal levels. Wlth the same ﬂmd Smooth and Pinning cylinders indicated. The
estab11sh1ng nearly 1dentlcal interface conﬁgurations. primary camera ﬁeld of View is identiﬁed by the 4”
The only difference between the cylinders 1s that one of by 2.67” Window.
the contact lines is pinned at a pinning edge created by a
groove machined into the cylinder walls. Because the . ‘\i""""_‘ . -- 1M r

. . . ,- a --’ ‘ .g - _,‘ E:\LAA . .. =
cylinders are closely and rigidly coupled, any —---—-- ‘ . ~"" ~ ~ ' -
disturbance imparted to the vessel produces nearly ' 1'7, ‘u I . Dy ,. « FOV ~- -
identical disturbances to both Smooth and Pinning I gig 3' 3’ I i"" lW-l'f I? ijt 1%
cylinders. The disturbance input and responses of the ! fl lillj‘i' “j-Wl 'l ls] j) 5 W l CL
interfaces (i.e. frequency and damping rates) are - J [I‘LL 4| giil L: ‘ j
quantiﬁed from the Video data. Comparisons of the data ‘5 l . vi»: - V l f ”t L
for a variety of disturbances identify the physical bounds ' m _ .- ,_ , r~::-—_v -

- . . ~ + “L ir- um - .13.-.-

that can be expected for the assumptlons of free and . . .2 .I.
pinned contact lines. Idealizations of these limiting ; 5'39? ; er-,~:;—:L ‘_ MW A 4'
conditions are often imposed by numerical methods used Figure 2. CL engineering model on MWA in [SS
t0 predict such phenomena and can lead t0 signiﬁcant mock—up, Primary ﬁeld of view shown in Camcorder
departures from observations (see Ref. 3 for low contact monitor.
angles, Ref. 4 for large contact angles.)

One of the CFE units CL-2 tests a perfectly wetting ﬂuid (20s Silicone oil) and the other CL-l tests a partially
wetting ﬂuid With contact angle of 50° (i.e. 20s Silicone oil on FC724, a transparent surface coating manufactured by
3M). The cylinder diameter is 1.5” and constrained by an ISS safety requirement for maximum ﬂuid volume (< 5000
per reservoir). The cylinder diameter is thus sized to be as large as possible, but is not large enough that the
crewmember can easily breakup the interfaces. Other container speciﬁcs include:

. For CL-2; contact angle 6 = 0"", height from base to pinning lip is 2.0”, ﬂuid volume in cylinder 43.4400, and
for experiment control purposes the interior surfaces of both lids are coated With FC—724. The walls above the
pinning edge are also coated With FC-724 (6: 50°) to provide a passive means of return of ﬂuid from above the
pinning edge to below it Via a favorable wetting discontinuity across the pinning edge.

2

"
"3","I For CL—l; 6 = 50°, height from base to pinning lip is 1.451”, ﬂuid volume in cylinders is 390400, and all
interior surfaces of the cylinders are rinse coated With FC—724.

The important ﬁeld of View (FOV) for the Video recordings is sketched schematically in Figure 1. This ﬁeld of
View is Visible from the LCD screen pictured in Figure 2 during a lighting check conducted using a prototype vessel
in the ISS/MWA mock-up at NASA J SC.

CFE CL Space Experiments Chronology
A brief history of the CFE-CL experiments development and performance is as follows:
I March, 2003: Authority to proceed With design and fabrication
I September, 2003: CL—2 Pre-Ship and Phase 111 Safety Reviews, Hardware Turnover (J SC)
I November, 2003: CL—2 Shipped to Russia
I J anuary 29, 2004: CL—2 launched to ISS on Progress mission, 13P
I February 2, 2004: 1.5hr Crew Training, M. Fincke (J SC)
I August 28, 2004: 1St Performance of CL—2 experiment by M. Fincke, Expedition-9, Nominal Science Operations
I September 18, 2004: 2nd Performance of CL—2 experiment by M. Fincke, Expedition-9: Extra Science
I February 1, 2005: 1.5hr Crew Training, B. McArthur (J SC)
I February 2, 2005: 1.5hr Crew Training, J . Williams (J SC)
I February 9, 2005: CL—l CL—2 Preship and Phase 111 Safety Reviews, Hardware Turnover (J SC)
I July 10, 2005: CFE-CL—l (With CFE-VG and -ICF vessels, 2ea) launched to ISS aboard Shuttle STS-114
I December 20, 2005: 3rd performance of CL—2 by B. McArthur, Expedition-12, Extra Science
I April 18, 2006: 4th performance of CL—2 by J . Williams, Expedition-13, Extra Science
I August 30, 2006: 1St performance of CL—l by J . Williams, Expedition-13, Nominal Science Operations
I September 5, 2006: 1St performance of CFE-VG-l by J . Williams, Expedition-13, 1/2 of Nominal Operations
I September 21, 2006: Flight data tapes for CFE operation on ISS to date returned to Earth (including data for CFE-
VG-l) aboard Shuttle ﬂight STS—l 15 (received by P1 team 12/2006)
5:12-”: , Ix ,., ' - . 'lefuse '(pape. sgnee ~n- .-
\‘ ""' '2’? 3,3 ""’ - -~ ii «a’ -
1 1.3.411, 4'}; :[1-1'} 1 ..' . "" .. 'I'Iﬂilk, I' . ._ Iii"": _ ' Jﬁ-L - I.
. '.r l -, ,,-+ r- t, -.,,_.. - ~ .3: - . . .
_. - I‘m-‘H‘ 51,}, . - _éﬂ . .. ' V” _‘ .
mi?” a- - ‘- I 'i‘iat __. 1' ﬂ * ' MWA ‘ ‘
- ”h. - ,3 ISS Came 131, u; ,2: .. ,x i ,,
.r' ' '-’..
Figure 3. Astronaut J . Williams on ISS With CFE-CLl.
Overview of CFE-CL: Procedures and Performance

A narrative of the CFE-CL ﬂight experiments performed by Astronaut Michael Fincke is provided in Ref. 2. A
brief review of the general CFE-CL experiment operations is provided here before summarizing the tests performed,
extra science data, and progress towards data reduction and publication.

Performance of the CFE-CL experiments requires several hours (up to 3) for set-up, nominal operations, and
tear down. To date, ample real-time Video and audio downlink are available during the experiments to provide the
ground-based science team With a feeling similar to conducting the experiments in person. Following the
experiments, the astronauts also downlink several continuous portions of the Video data from the ﬂight tapes. All
real-time and post-experiment downlink Video data is stored on the ground for analysis despite its decreased pixel

3

"
"4","resolution and reduced frame rate (as low as 8 frame/s). The ﬂight tapes (40 minute ISS DVCam Videotapes) for the
CFE-CL experiments were returned to Earth during Shuttle mission STS-l 14 and now serve as the source for all of
the nominal resolution data reduction. However, signiﬁcant science events were recorder by downlink Video during
periods when the ISS camcorder was not operating. These data certainly compliment the ﬂight tapes and are
analyzed to all extents possible.

A typical experiment set-up is shown in Figure 3 after astronaut J eff Williams. The initial ﬁlling of the cylinders
is provided in Figure 4 where the uniformity of the two interfaces is readily observed.

Because the two cylinders are rigidly and closely connected any disturbance imparted to the vessel is nearly
identical to both ﬂuid interfaces and signiﬁcant differences in ﬂuid response is largely a consequence of the different
conditions at the contact line—either the free or pinned condition. The astronaut then irnparts several disturbance
types manually. These disturbances include: Tap, Push, Slide, Multislide, Swirl, Displacement, and Bubbles. AXial
disturbances were added to the ﬂight procedures on orbit, once it was discovered how to impart them. Each
disturbance begins weakly, increasing primarily with amplitude during subsequent disturbances. Both linear and
nonlinear interface oscillations are investigated in this manner. Except for the Displacement disturbance, care is
taken to try not to disturb the interfaces to the point the Pinning cylinder interface de-pins from the pinning lip. A
‘wait time’ is speciﬁed between each disturbance for all Visible interface oscillations to decay, typically 5-60
seconds.

Because the disturbances are imparted manually, the possibility of precisely repeating a given disturbance is
unlikely. Nonetheless, image analyses are used to quantify the .
frequency and amplitude of each disturbance such that all | I i L. i ‘
disturbance inputs are known with reasonable accuracy. Brief ' 1° {
descriptions of all disturbances imparted to the vessel are provided , ‘q ° - "" L '
in Ref. 2. The Tap, Push, Axial, and Slide disturbances result in ‘7 l 'l 9‘- ' »
damped slosh-type 0r aXial-mode oscillations that are readily \ r H"" V”: [I ‘1
compared by superimposing the digitized transient interface \ \ g _. -7 by J ' ""-5\:'=« .- "";5%
locations for both Smooth and Pinning cylinders. Clear comparisons ‘, ’- 7- - . "" . ""‘ "" ' ..
are in hand and will be presented in a subsequent publication once I
parallel numerical predictions have progressed to a sufﬁcient level. I
Sufﬁce it to say that the impact of conditions at the contact line is f l
obvious from observations of the data reduced thus far. ..

II. Summary of Selence results for CFE-CL an ISS Figure 4. Interface conﬁgurations following

It is estimated that well over 200 individual data sets for CFE- ﬁll procedure. (ID 031, 2006/ 108/830)

CL were collected towards the primary science obj ectives. Many additional ‘data sets’ (>50) were also collected for
what is considered ‘extra science.’ A chronology of experimental efforts by the astronauts is provided below that
includes the extra science ﬁndings to be discussed further:
I lSt Performance CL-2 (Fincke): Nominal Science Run
0 Successful completion of all science objectives
0 Demonstration of centrifugal technique to reset experiment for certain repeat runs
0 Identiﬁed controlled method to impart axial mode disturbance using MWA
o Noteworthy additional science: droplet ejection, drop-wall impacts and rebound, hourglass
formation
I 2nd Performance CL—2 (Fincke): Extra Science
0 Repeat Push, Slide, and new data using AXial mode
0 Noteworthy additional science: Depth effects to Push disturbance
I 3rd Performance CL-2 (McArthur): Extra Science
0 Demonstrate augmented version of Fincke centrifuge method to fully clear pinning lip of liquid
allowing for the indeﬁnite repetition of the experiments
0 Repeat Push, Slide, and AXial rnode (camera mounted to MWA)
o Noteworthy additional science: more droplet/j et ejections, drop-wall impacts, and rebound
I 4th Performance CL-2 (Williams): Extra Science
0 Perfection 0f McArthur’s augmented centrifuge method
0 Repeat Push, Slide, and AXial rnode (camera mounted ISS rail)
4

"
"5","o Noteworthy additional science: signiﬁcant droplet/jet ejections and manifold droplet-wall and free
surface impacts and rebound events

. lSt Performance CL-l (Williams): Nominal Science Run

0 Successful completion of all science Objectives

0 Noteworthy additional science: some depth effects
Extra Science Observations and Data

In addition to the foundational Axial-rnode tests, which was itself originally considered as ‘extra science,’ a

signiﬁcant number of extra science measurements and Observations were made of dynamic interfacial phenomena of
both general and practical interest. Some Of these tests are highly complimentary to the CFE-CL investigation, such
as liquid depth effects to slosh-type disturbances. Others tests, such as the behavior of ejected drops and their
impacts with solid and ﬂuid surfaces, have nothing to do with the original CL science Objectives. Four such ‘extra
seienee’ tests are reported here all Of which yield quantitative data—the last receiving the most attention. A detailed
summary with supportive digitized data is anticipated in a subsequent publication.

1. Depth effects for pinning cylinder in slosh and axial mode oscillations: CFE-CL-2 Push Disturbance, CFE-CL-
1 Push and Axial disturbance. These tests were brieﬂy reported in Ref. 2. For the most part, the depth of the
ﬂuid is essentially equal for both Smooth and Pinning cylinders for both CL-2 and CL-l. However, several
depth effect tests and conducted to provide experimental data quantifying the effect of variable liquid depth on
the surface oscillations and overall damping. These experiments are performed on the Pinning cylinder only.
For CL-2, at a minimum, linear and nonlinear Push disturbances are imparted to the vessel at ﬂuid volumes of
approximately 75%, 50%, and 25% 0f the original volume by retracting the desired amount of ﬂuid from the
Pinning cylinder by reversing the reservoir piston. For CL-l, volumes not less than 50% are tested. The input
disturbances and interface responses are recorded on Video.

2. Hourglass formation: CFE-CL-2. During the ﬁrst Slide tests, Fineke quickly Observed the gradual development
of an ‘hourglass’ conﬁguration following repeated large amplitude disturbances in the perfectly wetting
smooth cylinder only. This n0n-equilibriurn conﬁguration was also highlighted in Ref. 2. The conﬁguration
was a nuisance for the primary Objectives and was frequently erased using the centrifuge methods, but data on
the rate of its formation to a variety of input disturbances, its dimensions, its passive recovery to the desired
equilibrium state, and its drainage under noticeable background accelerations was recorded and will be reduced
and investigated. Such conﬁgurations are of practical interest because they readily form in highly wetting
systems subject to various disturbances and time-dependent acceleration ﬁelds not uncommon to spacecraft
fuel tanks.

3. Assessment of DC g-levels frorn bubble rise method. During certain tests, bubbles formed in the liquid during
the disturbances are observed to steadily migrate across the test cells along linear trajectories at rates
proportional to their diameter. The process can require minutes to complete and often results in the coalescence
of the bubble(s) with other free surfaces. Knowing the migration rate, bubble diameter, and ﬂuid properties, the
background g-level can be computed assuming (and conﬁrming) a Stokes ﬂow in a similar manner as previous
researchers. This acceleration value can in turn be used to compute other ﬂows Observed during the CFE-CL
experiments. For example, during certain, but not all, periods, the hourglass conﬁguration was observed to
drain back into the bulk ﬂuid body at rates much higher than those predicted for purely passive capillary-driven
ﬂow. The g-levels predicted by the bubble rise method may be used in turn to predict the hourglass (or thin
ﬁlm) drain rates in such instances. Such predictions can serve as indirect measures of limiting ﬁlm thickness
and may be exploited to compute draining transients within containers partially ﬁlled with highly wetting
liquids.

4. Drop Impacts, Rebounds, etc. Particularly during the large amplitude AXial-rnode disturbances, drops of
various sizes are produced simultaneously in both smooth and pinning cylinders. The drops are either ejected
directly from the surface, or are formed during the Rayleigh break—up ijets (a.k.a. geysers) produced by such
disturbances. A series of images from such an event is presented in Figure 5. The long duration low-g
environment of the 188 provides a unique Opportunity to study the behavior of such drops on the various
surfaces present in the CFE-CL containers. For example, data of drop interactions such as wall adhesion, ﬂuid
surface coalescence, rebound, satellite drop ejections, and drOp-to-drop collisions are plentiful and quantiﬁable
in terms of droplet size, velocity, and impact angle. Such phenomena are receiving signiﬁcant scientiﬁc

5

"
"6","attention on Earth3 Where gravity yields certain coalescence, often at such rates that rebounds are
imperceptible. However, in the absence of signiﬁcant g-forces coalescence can be thwarted indeﬁnitely Which
could have a signiﬁcant impact on the performance of certain spacecraft ﬂuids systems relying on accepted
ground-based methods for drop collection and perhaps passive phase separation. Though many lOW-g
experiments could be cited Where such drop phenomena has been observed, in perhaps the most striking
example, astronaut D. Pettit (ISS EXp-6 Expedition 6, 11/23/02—5/3/03) demonstrated beautiful and manifold
drop-interface interactions in a containerless scenari04. The CFE-CL drop data add the parameters of a solid
wall With various wettabilities and With and Without coating ﬁlms. Primary, secondary, tertiary, etc. impacts
yielding satellite drops may be tracked. These data Will be studied more quantitatively, but a superﬁcial effort
is made here to report on initial ﬁndings of satellite drop ej ections during dry wall adhesion events for a drop-
wall contact angle of 50°. For example, drop trajectory and velocity ~ O(lcm/s) data for several events of this
type is gathered Where impact Weber numbers (We = szR/a) are typically < 0(1). Wall adhesion occurs
because the wall surface is dry. If a liquid ﬁlm is present the drop normally rebounds off the surface. At least
for contact angles ~ 50°, a satellite drop is ejected during each drop adhesion event. From the CFE-CL data
processed to date, each satellite drop ejected is approximately 1/8 the volume of the parent drop (~50%
reduction in diameter). Each adhesion appears to ej ect a drop at a higher velocity and With increasing normality
t0 the solid wall. At some point, Viscous damping overcomes the capillary wave that produces the ej ected drop
and the drop adheres Without an ejection. The size of this ﬁnal drop is an important design parameter for
certain systems. By balancing Viscous and capillary forces Within the drop the Suratman number (Su = paR/yz)
arises as a dimensionless parameter governing the process. Limited to our resolution of ~ 250,um, data from a
number of multiple adhesion—ejection events terminating in a wall-bound drop much smaller than its parent
drop indicate that Su ~ const. ~ 4847, from Which
2
R g 4850”— (1)
pa

Where ,0 is the density difference across the ﬂuid interface, 0 is the interfacial tension, ,u is the dynamic
Viscosity, and R is the ﬁnal drop radius. Eq. (1) is a tentative criterion from Which to expect that drop impacts
on dry walls below this diameter Will not produce satellite ejections, < 1.7mm for the 20s Si Oil CFE-CL test
ﬂuid (well above the worst case image resolution). In the absence of other data, this criterion could be used as
a design guide for droplet collection deVices for ﬂuids management applications on spacecraft. A signiﬁcant
effort Will be made to quantify all such impacts in a systematic manner. Drop coalescence following impacts
With liquid interfaces is rare and Will be reported similarly following further analysis.
'1 4th' ' . é i'ﬁ-“' } 3?? l '- a . "" -- . j g 3;;5"" *-‘- l

: "" ‘ w ‘ i L? ‘ ‘ i \‘ 3 1 n“ '9 ' '

i . z :‘i i 1' ') iii in
“i l,"" - 1- i “ -’ ‘7 ’0’ .i‘ 1"" i; i‘ l‘,
.|--- - ‘ H .' 5 ' ‘
Q §’ ' ' ‘ i. ,. "" :\'..,. Hm
Kw'l‘h ts; . W --i 3..., ILA - ,. .‘
“4-1 _.—- .tgé-w.‘ Ava .__., .-nséﬁ— _,
Figure 5. Sequence of images following large amplitude Axial Disturbance in CL-2 at
approximate times 0, 1, 6, and 11s. Coalescence in Smooth cylinder on left is retarded due to low
efﬁciency impacts With liquid ﬁlms on the cylinder walls. Partial wetting surfaces of Pinning
cylinder result in high efﬁciency adhesion events With dry walls (100%), but eject satellite drops
of decreasing size With each successive adhesion.
6

"
"7","111. Status of Data Reduction and Analysis

The ﬂight DVCaIn Tapes contain the highest quality data and their receipt several weeks before this writing
initiates the ofﬁcial data reduction effort. However, signiﬁcant data reduction has been completed using the lower
resolution Video data of the real-time downlinks and subsequent Video dumps to ground. Over 150 tests have been
reduced to date With at least an equal number to be processed. A brief description of the data analysis method is
provided in Ref. 2 and Will be discussed in greater detail in subsequent publications. A database is under
construction that links each data set (i.e. test number, test container, disturbance type, etc.) to the digitized data
tables of the input disturbance and ﬂuid response, as well as to the original image (i.e. Video ﬁle) of the event. The
database is being developed With the intention of being made publicly available following its completion. In this
paper, a detailed public presentation of the data is postponed in favor of a light discussion of the initial numerical
analysis Which must remain blind to experimental results, as originally planned, until the ﬁrst complete quantitative
comparison.

Blind computer predictions of the experimental conditions have begun and are performed thus far using FLOW-
3D5. This portion of the work is led by authors Klatte and Dreyer in a purposefully independent manner. Fluid
properties, test cell dimensions, and precise disturbance information are provided to the numerical analysts. Their
predictions can employ any contact line boundary conditions including successful correlations if necessary. Such
comparisons are perhaps easiest and have begun for the axial mode disturbances Which have received signiﬁcant
attention using drop towers test data6 and can be modeled using simplifying 2-D approximations. The comparisons
focus on frequency and linear decay period, but also the full interface proﬁle history including the disturbance
period is compared When possible.

Some of the Challenges of the computational component of this work are only brieﬂy introduced here. For
example, numerical predictions for a variety of Axial and Push disturbances to date serve as fair tests of the
quantitative nature of the numerical approach. Despite the fact that FLOW-3D has been benehmarked by the authors
for several large length scale capillary ﬂows pertinent to ﬂuids management on spacecraft, Changes to the system
geometry are almost certain to require a re-assessment of the numerous numerical parameters of the code Which can
at times amount to a parametric study in itself for each neW geometry computed. The common trade-offs between
spatial resolution and run time convergence are understood, but for free surface ﬂows using FLOW-3D the fact that
resolution limitations lead to free surface position ﬂuctuations prevents the initially transient numerical solutions
from ever naturally converging to a steady state. As a result, initial equilibrium conﬁgurations must be computed by
other means (either analytically for simple geometries or using a separate numerical method such as Surface
Evolver7), or the ﬂuid Viscosity must be set to an artiﬁcially high value to damp out the numerically induced
oscillations. Long time steady states cannot be computed Without time averaging. Additionally, the grid resolution
impacts the contact line boundary condition, Which for low contact angles often leads to the unphysieal migration of
ﬂuid along the walls and additional Inass accounting challenges. The use of non-uniforIn grids in such problems can
also be problematic. But FLOW-3D is well suited to relatively ‘high-speed’ free surface ﬂows Where the capillary
force is more in balance With inertia, and interface deﬂections, if present, are notably larger that the grid resolution.
FIDAP8 is another excellent numerical tool for such ﬂows and has been employed and benehmarked by this research
team on several occasions. It is perhaps best suited to relatively ‘low-speed’ ﬂows Where the capillary force is more
in balance With Viscous resistance. The code is capable of tracking ﬁne interface dynamics, but trades run time to do
so (~ days compared to ~ hours for FLOW-3D). Large scale capillary systems can still require many days for each
computational run.

An opportunity for the numerical analysts to revise calculations Will be provided following the initial
comparisons and the modiﬁed numerical boundary conditions Will then be employed to predict the behavior of the
full 3-dimensional linear and nonlinear slosh modes studied experimentally. Agreement might be considered
unlikely in light of previous analytical investigations, but the process is expected to be enlightening: either
identifying accurate boundary conditions for numerical solutions to ‘large’ length scale capillary dominated
phenomena, or identifying the shortfall in our ability to predict such ﬂows Without the guidance of geometry speciﬁc
data. The range of response of the interfaces for the free and pinned conditions Will certainly be determined.
CFE-CL Directions

Data reduction and numerical computations Will continue using the ﬂight tapes recently received by the authors
and the non-overlapping Video downlinked to ground during the operations. The bulk of the effort Will focus on the
Axial- and Slosh-Inode disturbance, in both linear and nonlinear regimes, for wetting and partially wetting systems,
With pinned and free contact angle boundary conditions. However, a concerted effort Will also be made to pursue the
‘extra seienee’ experimental results collected by the astronauts, several of Which are discussed herein.

7

"
"8","IV. Summary

The handheld CFE-CL experiments were conducted on ﬁve occasions by 188 Astronauts Michael Fineke (2),
Bill McArthur (1), and Jeff Williams (2). In several instances the experiments were performed during the crew’s
personal time in Saturday Morning Science mode. The experiments were completed successfully with many
additional tests conducted providing additional science made possible by an augmented centrifuge technique
developed and perfected by the three astronauts. The technique allows the experiment to be reset any number of
times for further study. Intermittent real-time video and audio downlink, continuous communication with the
ground crews at JSC, MSFC, and GRC (CAPCOM, PAYCOM, POD, PHANTOM, etc.), and the Clear and
entertaining commentary of the astronauts made the conduct of CFE-CL on 188 an enjoyable, laboratory-like
experience for the science team on the ground. The Video data reduction continues now centering on the onboard
ﬂight tapes that have been recently received. Publication of the experimental results will follow quantitative
comparisons of the experiments with parallel blind numerical predictions.

Acknowledgment

The authors are deeply indebted to astronauts Michael Fineke, William (Bill) MeArthur, and Jeff Williams for
successful space experiments performed on 188, Expeditions 9, 12, and 13, respectively. The authors would also like
to thank the NASA support cadre at JSC, MSFC, and especially GRC for assistance during the mission and in
meeting the demanding development schedule for CFE. Special thanks are due to Charles Bunnell of Zin
Technologies for an enduring commitment to the engineering success of CFE. This work is supported by NASA
through contract NNC05AA29A monitored by Dr. Allen Wilkinson.

References

1M.M. Weislogel, S.H. Collieott, DJ. Gotti, C.T. Bunnell, C.E. Kurta, E. Golliher, The Capillary Flow
Experiments: Handheld Fluids Experiments for the International Space Station, AIAA-2004-1148, 42nd AIAA
Aerospace Sci. Mtg. and Exhibit, Reno, Nevada 5-8, Jan. 2004.

2M.M. Weislogel, C.T. Bunnell, C.E. Kurta, E.L. Golliher, R.D. Green, J .M. Hickman, Preliminary Results from
the Capillary Flow Experiment on 188: the Moving Contact Line Boundary Condition, Paper No. AIAA-2005-1439,
43rd AIAA Aerospace Sci. Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nevada 10-13, J an. 2005.

3Blanehette, F., Bigioni, T.P., Partial coalescence of drops at liquid interfaces, Nat. Phys., Vol. 2, p. 254, 2006.

4Pettit, D.R., Waves in a large free sphere of water on the International Space Station, Phys. F Zuids, 22nd Annual
Gallery of Fluid Motion, September, 2005. (see also http://eXploration.gre.nasa.gov/balloon/blobhtrn)

5Flow Science Inc., FLOW-3D Modeling Tool, http://www.ﬂow3d.eorn.

6Dreyer, M. E., Free Surface Flows under Compensated Gravity Conditions, Series: Springer Tracts in Modern
Physics, Vol. 221: Springer-Verlag (2006).

7Brakke, K.A., Surface Evolver program, available free at http://www.susqu.edu/faestaff/b/brakke/.

8ANSYS, Inc., FIDAP Flow Modeling Software, http://www.ﬂuent.eorn/.

8

"
