"","x"
"1","43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2005-1439
10 - 13 January 2005, Reno, Nevada
43m| AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit
10 — 13 January 2005, Reno, Nevada
PRELIMINARY RESULTS FROM THE CAPILLARY FLOW EXPERIMENT ABOARD
ISS: THE MOVING CONTACT LINE BOUNDARY CONDITION
Mark M. Weislogel*
Portland State University, Portland, OR 97207
Charles T. Bunnelli and Carol E. Kurta#,
ZIN T echnologies Ina, Brook Park, OH 44142
Eric L. Golliheri, Robert D. Greeni, and J . Mark HickmanH
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 44135
Abstract
The large data set is being reduced for
The Capillary Flow Experiment (CFE) consists comparisons to the blind predictions of a group
of siX approximately 2kg test vessels constructed of numerical analysts assembled to gauge the
by NASA to probe certain capillary phenomena accuracy of present methods to predict large
of fundamental and applied importance. The length scale capillary dynamics critical to ﬂuids
lightweight, low-Volume hardware can be management in spacecraft (i.e. fuels, eryogens,
shipped to orbit on short notice as cargo space water). The success of the experiment reported
permits and the experiments performed in stand- herein serves as a testimony to astronaut
alone mode by a single crewmember on, for ingenuity and the perhaps surprisingly ﬂexible
example, the Maintenance Work Area ﬂuids laboratory of the 18$ for safe and simple
(workbench) 0f the International Space Station. ﬂuids experimentation.
Video images from the simply performed crew
procedures provide highly quantitative data for Program Overview
the conﬁrmation of current analytical design
tools as well as directions for further theoretical In the interim period between the Space Shuttle
development. Columbia accident and the return to ﬂight of the
shuttle ﬂeet, new Opportunities for science
This paper presents a narrative of preliminary experiments aboard 188 have arisen for safe and
results from the ﬁrst Capillary Flow Experiment small, fast-tO-ﬂight experiments. Since the
(CFE) conducted aboard 188 in August- shuttle is unable to ferry planned science
September, 2004. The tests are performed as part equipments t0 the ISS, NASA sought substitute
of NASA’s Saturday Morning Science Program candidate science experiments to take advantage
on 188 and are completed in good order by of available crew time. The design constraints
Astronaut Michael Fineke Who collected for such experiments are stringent and include:
approximately 100 data sets that compare large safe Operation, low mass (< 2.5kg), low volume
length scale capillary surface oscillations and (< 2L), minimal electrical interfaces and power
damping for two otherwise identical cylindrical requirements, minimal to no crew training, a
tanks differing only in respect to a critical yet short hardware delivery schedule (months), and
uncertain boundary condition at the contact line. low costs. This list is not exhaustive, but
Linear, nonlinear, and destabilizing slosh, swirl, certainly restrictive, and stems from NASA’s
aXial, and other disturbances are studied. plan to use the Russian Progress and European
— ATV vehicles to deliver the unscheduled science
*Associate Professor, member experiment hardware to the 188.
1Design Engineer
:SYSFemS Eflgifleer A class of ﬂuids experiments can be posed that
ﬁrm?“ 8016mm ﬂt such requirements, and the Capillary Flow
PI‘OJGCtManagGI‘ EX rim nt (CFE) was re 0sed to NASA and
P9 e P P
competed 0n the basis of science and strategic
1
Copyright © 2005 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. All rights reserved.

"
"2","research merit for NASA. The experiments experiment procedures are simple and intuitive.
address questions of both scientiﬁc and Hardware and test procedure details for Interior
engineering importance and concern certain Corner Flow (ICF) and Vane Gap (VG) vessels
capillary phenomena as it relates to the large are provided elsewherel. The Contact Line (CL)
length scale ﬂuid systems that arise commonly vessel is the subject of this paper and is
aboard spacecraft. Such systems and ﬂow described below. Similar reports for ICF and VG
regimes cannot be reproduced in terrestrial vessels Will be presented after they too are
laboratories. conducted on 188.
A brief review of CFE is provided here before Contact Line (CL)
highlighting the results of the ﬁrst ﬂight test
(ﬁrst of six). Further CFE details may be found Two CFE—CL units have been constructed and
in Ref. 1. The simple handheld experiments are ﬂight qualiﬁed by NASA to study an important
designed to operate on the Maintenance Work fundamental and practical concern for low—g
Area (MWA) in the United States Laboratory of ﬂuid phenomena—the impact of the dynamic
the 188 With the primary quantitative data being contact line. The contact line controls the
digital Video images from an ISS onboard interface shape, stability, and dynamics of
camcorder. The experiments constituting CFE capillary systems in low-g. A very simple
are Contact Line (CL), Interior Corner Flow experiment is employed here that provides a
(ICF), and Vane Gap (VG). direct measure of the extremes in behavior
expected from an assumption of either the free or
The Capillagy Flow Experiment pinned contact line condition. The two CL units
are identical except for wetting characteristics. A
Capillary ﬂows and phenomena are critical to sketch of the CFE—CL-2 ﬂight unit is provided in
myriad ﬂuids management systems in low-g: Fig. 1. A photograph of the vessel is provided in
fuels/cryogen storage systems, thermal control Fig. 2.
systems (e.g., vapor/liquid separation), life
support systems (e.g., water recycling), and cylinders
materials processing in the liquid state. Under
microgravity conditions, capillary forces can be _ |—’____ '
exploited to control ﬂuid orientation so that such 1 ""I
large Inission-critical systems perform pre-
dictably. The Capillary Flow Experiment is a
simple fundamental scientiﬁc study that can
yield quantitative results from safe, low-cost, reservoirs
short time—to—ﬂight, handheld ﬂuids experiments. . .
The experiments aim to provide results of critical ‘
interest to the capillary ﬂow community that __ _
cannot be achieved in ground-based tests. ""' i ' E=—-_ I ""
Speciﬁc applications of the results center on .
particular ﬂuids challenges concerning 1nterfaces Pinning lip
propellant tanks. The knowledge may help Fig. 1. Design for CL-2 ﬂight unit with free and
spacecraft ﬁllid systems designers increase pinned contactlines. Dashedlines identify equilibrium
system reliability, decrease system mass, and menisci shapes in microgravity environment. The
reduce overall system complexity. primary camera ﬁeld of View is identiﬁed by the 4” by
2.67” window.
Descrip_tion of Hardware
The main body for the units is machined from a
CFE is comprised of three related experiments (2 single piece 0f cast acrylic (polymethyhneth—
units per experiment—6 units total). All units acrylate). The PiStOhS are made 0f aluminum; the
use similar ﬂuid injection hardware, have simple valves and PiStOh drive screws are made 0f
and similarly sized test chambers, and rely solely stainless steel. Each Uhit is secured to an
on Video for highly quantitative data. aluminum base plate With a slotted hole that is
Differences between units are ﬂuid properties, used to attach the Uhit t0 the MWAI and allows
contact angle 6, or test cell cross—section. The for as much as 40mm lateral motion or
2

"
"3","adjustment. The reservoirs hold the test liquid 3M). The cylinder diameter is constrained by an
and employ a piston to dispense the liquid into 188 safety requirement for maximum ﬂuid
the test section. Turning a knob connected to a volume (< 5000 per reservoir). The cylinder
drive screw moves the piston. The parts that diameter is thus sized to be as large as possible
contain the liquid in the reservoir and test section and is not large enough that the crewmember 0an
(lids, pistons, valves) are sealed With Buna—N or easily breakup the interfaces.
nitrile O—rings. The test cells are sealed
chambers and are thus somewhat pressurized Both Smooth and Pinning cylinders are 1.5” in
during ﬁll and operation procedures. diameter and employ 20s Si Oil. CL-2 speciﬁcs
include: contact angle 6: 0"", height from base to
Smooth cylinder Pinning cylinder pinning lip is 2.0”, ﬂuid volume in cylinder is
_ _ _ 43.4400, and for experiment control purposes the
5 _ ""F? 33-51 F?! .- -. . interior surfaces of both lids are coated With FC-
. v iégf ""gu'k y}: _ ' 724. The walls above the pinning edge are also
-' ' -J-'.:;§g._:‘-_ --_:_§f- -._‘;,_',""---* . coated With FC—724 (6 = 50°) to provide a
' ﬂ “'5 J - - ' ' passive means of return of ﬂuid from above the
‘1 J J' _ J J pinning edge to below it Via a favorable wetting
'J' _ J] ' _ J J; J discontinuity across the pinning edge.
. 1’
' 7 _' .- ' I CL-l spe0iﬁ0sin01ude: 6: 50"", height from base
. "" 11 ~- 'Ji T i J x :- . to pinning lip is 1451” ﬂuid volume in
__ J, . _ _ . . ,
. ""+‘"" +'—— F..- 7—.— '*’ _ 1' 0ylinders is 39.0400, and all interior surfaces of
I .. ' ' - the cylinders are rinse coated With FC—724.
Fig. 2. Photograph of CL-2 ﬂight unit with Smooth
and Pinning cylinders indicated The important ﬁeld of View for the Video
recordings is sketched schematically in Fig. l.
T he general experimental objective is to ﬁll the This ﬁeld of View is Visible from the LCD screen
0ylinders to identical levels With the same ﬂuid. pictured in Fig. 3 during a lighting check
The dashed lines sketched in Fig. 1 identify the conducted using a prototype vessel in the
anticipated initial equilibrium ﬂuid interface ISS/MW A mock—up at N AS A JSC.
orientations. The only difference between the
cylinders is that one of the contact lines is 7 w“ ._ ‘M '
pinned at a pinning edge created by a groove ' ~ V ""‘ “‘04 ' “ ‘
machined into the cylinder walls. Because the "" f,1 i'.’ Max B - .. :- ~V ” ‘1"".
cylinders are closely and rigidly coupled, any ‘_| Jig. gJJJ Jifl J ﬁf$
disturbance imparted to the vessel produces J J J11: ‘ J J NJ ':.’ J ‘ J ; CL
nearly identical disturbances to both Smooth and ixﬁﬁilh J3 T ‘ ' in : L
Pinning 0ylinders. The responses of the '- J . I 2:; »,
interfaces (i.e. frequency and damping rates) are ' '. ""‘2' '5 ‘4‘” Wig): ~
. . Cam €T,“:——Q—q . . MW «a
measured from the V1deo data. Comparisons of ”saw :1; J :‘,
the data for a variety of disturbances identify the Fig- 3- CL engineering médel 0n MWA in 133 “1001(-
physi0al bounds that can be expected for the up. Primary ﬁeld Of Vlew Shown “1 Camcorder
assumptions of free and pinned 00nta0t lines. monltor'
Idealizations of these limiting conditions are .
often imposed by numerical methods used to W
predict su0h phenomena and can lead to . . .
signiﬁcant departures from observations (see A brief history 0f the CFE'.CL'2 experiment
Ref. 2 for low contact angles, Ref. 3 for large development and performance is as follows:
contact angles.) _ _
. March, 2003: Authority to proceed W1th
One of the CFE units (CL-Z) tests a perfectly des1gn and fabrication. . .
wetting ﬂuid (i.e. Silicone oil) and the other I September? 2003: CL Executlve Preship
(CL-l) tests a ﬂuid With a contact angle of Rev1ew, Hardware Turnover. (NASA
approximately 50° (i.e. Silicone oil on FC724, a JSC)’ and Phase 111 Safety Rev1evy.
transparent surface coating manufactured by I November, 2003: CL'2 Shipped to Russ1a
3

"
"4","I January 29, 2004: CL-2 launched to 188 on subsequent mission (perhaps the shuttle return-
Progress mission, l3P. to—ﬂight mission LFl, STS—l 14).
I August 28, 2004: lSt Performance of CL-2
experiment by M. Fincke, EXp—9. Crew Procedures and Performance
I September 18, 2004: 2nd Performance of CL-2
experiment by M. Fincke: extra science. The speciﬁc experimental objectives and
preliminary observations will be presented here
Flight Exgeriment Narrative Via a narrative of the crew procedures. Prior to
conducting the experiment astronaut Michael
The CFE-CL-2 vessel was delivered to 188 Fincke reviewed a CFE-CL crew familiarization
January 29, 2004 Via Russian Progress resupply Video on an ISS notebook computer. The digital
mission l3P during Expedition 8 (Oct. 20, Video was made with the support of NASA
2002—April 29, 2004). US astronaut Michael MSFC crew training personnel and uplinked to
Foale was brieﬂy trained to operate the unit at 188 using the FTP server. The Video was used
NASA JSC on August 27, 2003, however, for the purpose of an efﬁcient review of the
sufﬁcient time to conduct the CL-2 crew essential elements of the experiment: objectives,
procedures was not available during Expedition procedures, and cautions. It also served as a
8 despite several scheduling efforts. Astronaut supplement to the formal detailed step-by-step
Michael Fincke replaced Foale on 188 for procedures used by Fincke during all
Expedition 9. Fincke was also brieﬂy trained to experimental operations.
operate the CFE-CL unit at NASA J SC on
February 2, 2004. During his 187 day mission , Crew procedure dismayed _ u .
(April 18, 2004—Oct. 23, 2004), Fincke was _ 0“ compmer ”—5 ff"" m‘
able to dedicate a signiﬁcant amount of his ‘ ""C5. :1 l'“\'
efforts to the conduct of science experiments, Fri/ 7% gifilsemager)
including experiments conducted during his 4,. . #Zcm’égsa vamgroun
personal time in what is referred to as ‘Saturday .. _ ,7 - ' ,1: """" _ '1?
Morning Science’ initiated by Astronaut Don ‘7 ‘ pk""; 73’
Pettit on 188 during Expedition 6 (Nov. 23, y 4% "".2. “l1. -,
2002—May 3, 2003). a \' "" [/h' E:- ” W ,
g. 7 L “,3,” '- ‘ ‘~_ Camcoitler ‘ _ g
CFE-CL-2 was conducted in the Saturday . * i l' 1 . ' ‘ . ' '
Science mode by Fincke ﬁrst on Aug. 28 and Fig. 4. Astronaut M. Fincke hoyermg over the CL-2
, test set—up during nommal operations.
then again on Sept. 18 2004. The ﬁrst
performance required several hours of crewtime Fincke set-up the MW A for the CL—2 tests as
anti saccessfully completed all required solence pictured in Fig. 3. An inﬂight photo is provided
objectlves. The second performance was in Fig. 4. A piece of paper is used as a diffuse
exp101ted t0 condact repeat eigperiments :‘IS W611 white background for the nominal ISS indirect
as several new solenoe exoeriments inspired by cabin lighting. Prior to ﬁlling the test cylinders
the results 9f the 1:1an6 S ﬁrSt performance. with ﬂuid the camera is set to record. The audio
Ample real-time V1deo andaudlo downlinl< were track of the ﬂight tapes is used by Fincke to
avallable durlng. the experiments to p.r0V1c.le the record a running commentary of the progress of
ground-based selence team w1th a feeling Similar the experiment, cabin t emp erature, GMT, etc. A
to COPdUCtmg the experiments .m person. portion of this commentary is also recorded on
FOHOng the experiments, Flkae also the ground during periods of real-time downlink.
downllnked several contlnuous portions of the
Video data from the ﬂight tapes. All real-time Performance 1: CL-2
and post—experiment downlinked Video data was —
stored on the ground for analysis despite its FillProcedure
decreased pixel resolution and reduced (up to 4-
WD frame rate- The c?mplete hlgh'resomflon The Smooth cylinder is charged with Si on ﬁrst
data for , CFE'CL'Z is currently oontained by opening its reservoir valve and slowly turning
onboard SlX 40 minute ISS DVCam Videotapes the piston knob. An approximately 2.5 ml air
that are expected to return to Earth on a bubble residing in the reservoir to accommodate
thermal expansion of the liquid during transit is
4

"
"5","also injected into the Smooth cylinder Where it
coalesces at the surface. The Pinning cylinder is Because the disturbances are irnparted manually,
ﬁlled similarly and Without incident. An image the possibility of precisely repeating a given
following the initial ﬁlling of the cylinders is disturbance is unlikely. Nonetheless, image
provided in Fig. 5 Where the uniformity of the analysis techniques are used to quantify the
two interfaces is readily observed. frequency and amplitude of each disturbance
such that all disturbances are known With high
l accuracy. This proves important for numerical
1 analyses that require accurate forcing data. Brief
I _ descriptions of the disturbances imparted to the
_ V vessel are provided below:
Tap: Solitary Taps 0f gradually increased
magnitude are imparted to the rigidly mounted
F test vessel beginning With the pad of a ﬁnger and
ending With light wraps With a knuckle. LOW
_ amplitude high frequency darnped oscillations of
- _——_I——_- the interfaces result that must be resolved from
Fig. 5. Interface conﬁgurations following ﬁll the ﬂight tapes.
procedure.
Push: The screw fastening the CL-2 unit to the
Disturbances MWA is loosened for this and other disturbances
to follow such that the vessel may slide left to
Since the two cylinders are rigidly connected any right in the ﬁeld of View yet remain ﬂush With
disturbance imparted to the vessel is nearly the MWA surface. The Push disturbance is a
identical to both ﬂuid interfaces and signiﬁcant half—period lateral oscillation and is introduced
differences in ﬂuid response is largely a When the Push stops and the ﬂuid experiences a
consequence of the different conditions at the larger amplitude lateral impulse. The Push is
contact line—either the free or pinned condition. imparted by slowly and at an approximately
Before purposeful disturbances are imparted to constant rate pushing the vessel With a ﬁnger a
the vessel, Video data is collected 0f the given distance (~ 10, 15, 20, 25, and 30mm) to
interfacial response to the quiescent 188 the left across the ﬁeld of View. The data
background g—level. Analysis of the downlink reviewed to date of the Push disturbances shows
data during this Background test reveals a collection of slosh—type disturbances of
motionless interfaces. However, the ﬂight gradually increasing intensity from linear to
Videotapes contain images of signiﬁcantly nonlinear regimes. This disturbance type is
improved resolution (~ 3-fold) and may indicate repeated during the second performance of CL-
0therwise. The detailed ISS-environrnent g-level 2.
data is yet to be reviewed during this period.
Slide: Similar to the Push, the Slide disturbance
Following the Background test the astronaut is a single full-period lateral oscillation
irnparted several disturbance types manually. completed Within the ﬁeld of View at the
These disturbances include: Tap, Push, Slide, approximate natural frequency of the interfaces
Multislide, Swirl, Displacement, and Bubbles. Which Fincke found rather easy to identify. The
Each disturbance begins weakly, increasing peak—to-peak amplitude of the full period
primarily With amplitude during subsequent disturbances is varied (~ 10, 15, 20, 25, and
disturbances. Both linear and nonlinear interface 30mm) While the frequency of the Slide is held
oscillations are investigated in this manner. approximately constant. Like the Push
When possible, for the Tap, Push, Slide, disturbance the Slide disturbances are well
Multislide, and Swirl tests, care is taken not to performed using gradually increasing amplitudes
disturb the interfaces to the point the Pinning from linear to nonlinear regimes. The larger
cylinder interface de-pins from the pinning lip. It amplitude Slide disturbances eventually led to a
is speciﬁed that sufﬁcient time be allowed after quasi-steady ‘hourglass’ interface conﬁguration
each disturbance for all Visible interface in the Smooth cylinder to be discussed in greater
oscillations to decay, typically 5-60 seconds. detail shortly. This disturbance type is also
5

"
"6","repeated during the second performance of CL- successfully from the destabilized surface
2. conﬁgurations.
Multislide: A Multislide disturbance is deﬁned Bubbles: The Bubble disturbance is not a test for
as a multiple (2, 3, 4) period lateral oscillations contact line dynamics, but is added to the crew
completed Within the ﬁeld of View at the procedures to observe coalescence phenomena
approximate natural frequency of the interfaces. as a function of bubble density and contact
The peak—to—peak amplitude of the full period angle. The bubbles are created by removing the
disturbances is varied (~ 10, 15, 20, 25, and CL-2 vessel from the MWA, manually shaking
30mm) While the frequency of the Slide is held the unit Within the camera ﬁeld of View, and
approximately constant. The larger amplitude quickly though gently returning the vessel to the
Multislide disturbances eventually lead to MWA. At ﬁrst only a small number of large
‘hourglass’ conﬁgurations in the Smooth diameter bubbles are developed Via light
cylinder. Fincke’s centrifuge method is agitation Which require many minutes to
employed to recover successfully from each coalesce. Vigorous shaking 0f the container
event as is described shortly. produces many bubbles, the smallest of Which
appear to coalesce before the test cell can be
Swirl: The Swirl disturbance is deﬁned as a returned to the MWA and a foam-like state could
swirling slosh mode induced to the ﬂuid using an not be established. The coated Pinning cylinder
elliptical or circular sliding motion of the CL-2 wall above the pinning edge hosts an assortment
vessel in the plane of the MWA. The fastener is of wall-bound drops following each Bubble test.
removed for these tests. The Swirl disturbance
diameter is approximately 30 to 40mm With The Tap, Push and Slide disturbances are
swirl periods increasing incrementally from 1 to completed nominally, resulting in damped slosh-
5. Particularly for the Smooth cylinder, the large type oscillations that are readily compared by
amplitude multiple period Swirl disturbances superimposing the digitized transient interface
produce more of a vortical wall ﬂow than typical locations for both Smooth and Pinning cylinders.
swirling slosh mode interface oscillations. The Clear comparisons are in hand and Will be
larger amplitude Swirl disturbances eventually presented in a subsequent publication. Further
lead to ‘hourglass’ conﬁgurations in the Smooth discussion of the image analysis methods is
cylinder, a de—pinned interface in the Pinning provided shortly. The impact of conditions at the
cylinder, or signiﬁcantly displaced or contact line are obvious from such methods.
fragmented interfaces in each. Fincke’s 7 _ 7 7 7' _ _7
centrifuge method is employed to recover the 1"": * - 5 I! ' *
desired initial conditions in such instances. ' lobe i
Displacement: The Displacement disturbance is / I 1
similar to a rapid Push. It is accomplished by any a
fairly rapid lateral translation of the CL-2 vessel .- _ . l -
Within the ﬁeld of View that is increased - t 1 . i
gradually in magnitude to the point the Pinning I I Q J; '
cylinder interface is repeatedly destabilized. The . ,
Displacement disturbance is written in the crew -, -
procedures, but the formal procedures are _ l I
foregone .durlng the ﬂlght eXpei‘lments because Fig. 6. Image of non-equilibrium hourgass interface
the preyiously conducted SWirl disturbances in Smooth cylinder following large amplitude
fully destabilized the interfaces. However, Multislide disturbances.
numerous destabilizing disturbances occur
during the experiment either following large Fincke’s Centrifuge Method
amplitude oscillations 0r inadvertently during the
routine handling of the vessel. In such instances, During the Multislide tests Fincke observed the
critical Bond numbers are determined for each slow recovery of the ﬂuid in the Smooth cylinder
destabilizing Displacement disturbance. Fincke’s t0 the desired initial conﬁguration for each test.
centrifuge method is employed to recover Fluid migration along the walls is enhanced by
the larger amplitude slide and Multislide tests
6

"
"7","forming an hourglass shape as described by near future. A still image is provided in Fig. 8
Fincke. An image of such a non—equilibrium that shows the CL unit in Fincke’s right hand as
surface is shown in Fig. 6. he rotates about an aXis normal to the cylinder
axes. Fincke used the method to rapidly recover
6: 50° from most large amplitude disturbances—in
particular those that led to an exaggerated
hourglass conﬁguration, the de-pinning 0f the
9:0"" 9:0"" interface in the Pinning cylinder, or the break—up
of either of the interfaces. The centrifuge method
enables repeat runs of any given test as well as
many additional tests not detailed in the original
crew procedures.
a. b. c. d.
Fig. 7. Interface conﬁguration in Smooth cylinder: a.1~ _—_ _ ei'. 2' H I j— t ""TIT?
idealized initial condition, b. equilibrium condition, c. -;t _ - F Ir? * ,t'_ ;'
nonequilibrium hourglass conﬁguration following i - . -i— '1 J II”. t ‘T' '_j
repeated large amplitude lateral oscﬂlations __ ﬂ 5 h . ‘ _-‘
(Multislide, Swirl, ete.), d. non-minimizing local I3“- t L . *' . E ‘1‘ #.'~_
equilibrium conﬁguration. # l' l L. - \- ?_I; Gil""
E w. - n.“ ' "" F '1;-
The 20s Si Oil is a perfectly wetting van der “'t‘ 1'“ ‘31. «1:1 i . b.
Waals ﬂuid4 6 = 00 0n the uncoated acrylic l: .: ”‘- \ ‘ .. ' t t
surface and if allowed Will passively coat all ,1""? _ A g- _-
surfaces of the Smooth cylinder by spreading "" ll“ *‘L- __ '
over its own adsorbed ﬁlm, ultimately achieving F' - ’4‘ . ' . .
. . . 1g. 8. Image of chke performmg centrlfugal
the minimum energy conﬁguratlon as that reorientation ofliquid.
sketched in Fig. 7 d, for example. To prevent this
situation the lid of the Smooth cylinder is coated Performance 2: CL-2 (GMT 262)
With FC-724 (6 = 500) and the liquid ﬁlm rises
by wetting forces until the interface pins at the A second opportunity was exploited to conduct
junction of the lid and the circular cylindrical further CL—2 tests on September 18, 2004.
walls (Fig. 7b). The idealized initial condition Fincke conducted this second performance of
for the Smooth cylinder is sketched in Fig. 7a. CL-2 again in the Saturday Morning Science
The true long time equilibrium conﬁguration is mode. Extra science scenarios are prepared for
sketched ih Fig. 7h Where the ﬁlm thickness all space experiments. For the case of CL-2, the
alohg 5the walls is greatly exaggerated for results obtained during the ﬁrst performance
clar1ty - The non—equilibrium hourglass directed in part the tests to be pursued in the
conﬁguration is sketched in Fig. 7c. The initial second performance. These included repeat runs
rates of passive return of ﬂuid from the lobes to of the Push and Slide disturbances, new Axial
the biiih are measurecl, but are proportional to f mode disturbances, Depth effects for the Push
requlrmg substantial time to complete. T0 disturbances, and the draining 0f the containers
speed this return 0f the ﬂiiid t0 the desired initial prior to stowage. A brief discussion of these tests
condition, Fincke removed the CL-2 unit from is provided here.
the MWA and using a centrifugal method
returned the liquids to the desired initial Repeat Runs: Push and Slide
conditions. The ﬁrst initial state of the interface
closely resembled the idealized state of Fig. 7a, After the ﬁrst performance of the experiment
With subsequent initial states resembling Fig. 7b. Fincke was familiar With all procedures and the
Thus, the contact line condition for the Smooth additional science procedures could be simply
cylinder is more correctly described as an uplinked to orbit. The MWA was conﬁgured and
interface moving across a thih ﬁlm—a common repeat experiments conducted for both Push and
model for the moving contact line boundary Slide disturbances. These tests are conducted to
condition. Fincke was considerate to ﬁlm his increase the number of test cases Where the
centrifuge method, a movie of Which Will likely initial conﬁguration of the Smooth cylinder
be made available on a CFE web page in the interface is not the hourglass conﬁguration,
7

"
"8","which was reduced dramatically by the MWA thus serves as a highly damped cantilever
centrifuge method Fincke mastered during the inputting an easily variable aXial disturbance into
ﬁrst performance after the ﬁrst Push and Slide the cylinders. Linear and nonlinear perturbations
disturbance tests had been completed. Good data are imparted in this manner with amplitudes
is collected during this second run and recorded increasing to the point of drop ejection as shown
on the ground during real time downlink. in Fig. 9. In this test, the aXial perturbation is just
enough to eject two nearly equal volume drops
Axial Mode Disturbances from the surfaces with low drift velocities. The
drops are re—collected for repeat runs.
One of the simplest interface oscillations to
model is the 2-dimensi0nal aXial mode. A Depth Effects: Push Disturbance
signiﬁcant amount of drop tower data is
available for such modes7 and recent work has The depth of the ﬂuid is equal for both Smooth
made progress towards accurate analysis for and Pinning cylinders. For disturbances that lead
large contact anglesg. However, the initial to an hourglass—like conﬁguration in the Smooth
interface condition in ground-based tests is cylinder the depth of the ﬂuid in the Pinning
predominantly ﬂat due to gravity for ground— cylinder is reduced by the amount of ﬂuid
based studies. This conﬁguration is unlike an remaining on the Smooth cylinder walls at the
interface originally in its low—g state which time of the subsequent disturbance. Several
requires more time to establish than is available depth effect tests are conducted to provide
in current drop towers. Also, the opportunity to experimental data quantifying the effect of
collect ﬂight data for aXial disturbances for a variable liquid depth on the surface oscillations
variety of input amplitudes provides an excellent and overall damping. These experiments are
control for theory that might be considered in performed on the Pinning cylinder only to
hand. But model boundary conditions at the minimize the hourglass effect due both to the
moving contact line for the aXial modes are not presence of the pinning lip and the FC-724
necessarily applicable for slosh modes and coated surface above it. At a minimum, linear
several related questions remain unanswered9’10. and nonlinear Slide disturbances are imparted to
. the vessel at ﬂuid volumes of approximately
I"" I I - i! 75%, 50%, and 25% the original volume by
I j _ i E: retracting the desired amount of ﬂuid from the
i Ejected ii i Pinning cylinder by reversing the reservoir
i (“OPS ”I 1 piston. The interface responses are recorded for
>/ 'i 1 It. i later analysis.
ll U Cylinder Draining
Prior to permanently stowing the CL-2 hardware
- a Drain test is conducted by attempting to
,- 1- l' "" remove as much ﬂuid as possible from the
Fig. 9. Image of Axial disturbance: drop ejection. cylinders by reversing the reservoir pistons. The
Smooth cylinder could not be fully drained due
The initial condition for the Axial mode tests is to residual liquid volume in the hourglass
again that Of Fig. 5. Large amplitude axial conﬁguration at the moment the drain procedure
oscillations are initially imparted by removing was initiated. The liquid in the hourglass
the vessel from the MWA, displacing the conﬁguration could not passively collect at the
container axially much like a vertical Slide cylinder base at the rate liquid was removed by
disturbance, and replacing the vessel on the the piston. The contiguous volume of the
MWA to record the decay of the disturbance. Pinning cylinder could be completely drained.
After several attempts at this method it was Approximately 71% 0f the ﬂuid was returned to
found that signiﬁcantly increased control over the reservoir for the Smooth cylinder with 94%
the input disturbance could be managed by being returned for the Pinning cylinder.
ﬁxing the CL-2 vessel to the MWA and
displacing and releasing the MWA table itself,
much like a diver does to a diving board. The
8

"
"9","easiest and Will begin for the aXial mode
Status 011 Data Reduction and Analysis disturbances. The comparisons Will focus on

frequency proﬁle and linear decay period, but
The ﬂight DVCam Tapes contain the highest also the full interface proﬁle history including
quality data and their receipt begins the ofﬁcial the disturbance period if possible. An
data reduction effort. However, signiﬁcant lower Opportunity for the numerical analysts to revise
resolution Video data is currently in hand due to calculations Will be provided following the
real-time downlinks and subsequent Video initial comparisons and the modiﬁed numerical
dumps to ground by Fineke. All tests described boundary conditions Will then be employed to
herein are expected to yield quantitative data predict the behavior of the full 3-dimensi0nal
With approximately 100 tests conducted. A brief linear and nonlinear slosh modes studied
description of the data analysis plan is provided experimentally. Agreement is unlikely in light of
here. previous analytical investigations”, but the

process is expected to be enlightening: either
Image analysis tools are employed for the identifying accurate boundary conditions for
primary data reduction requiring that both input numerical solutions to ‘large’ length scale
disturbance and interface oscillation be tracked capillary dominated phenomena, 0r identifying a
in time for each disturbance type for each critical shortcoming in our ability to predict such
interface. The NASA Spotlight image analysis ﬂows. The range of response of the interfaces for
software11 has already been adapted for this the free and pinned conditions Will certainly be
purpose With results to be publicly presented determined.
following the numerical investigation.

CFE Directions

In general, the image analysis begins With
mapping the scale factor ﬁeld (mex) for the Data reduction and numerical computations Will
vessel such that quantitative dimensions may be continue using the lOW-resolution downlinked
determine at all locations in the 2-dimensi0nal Video data until the ﬂight tapes are returned to
pixel ﬁeld of the camera CCD array. This is Earth, at Which point the measurements Will be
accomplished by determining the local scale repeated using the ﬂight tapes. The second CL-l
factor at several locations in the ﬁeld of View vessel (6’ = 50°) is ﬂight qualiﬁed and in
and computing the equation of the plane stowage at NASA J SC awaiting shipment to 188
containing both axes of the cylindrical vessels. during an upcoming launch.
With the scale factor ﬁeld known any lack of
orthogonality between the camera and the front The CFE ICF and VG units are also tentatively
face of the CL-2 vessel may be corrected for scheduled for ﬂight on the maiden voyage of the
each frame and thus the interface oscillations of BSA Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV-l) late
the Smooth and Pinning cylinders may be in 2005. On-orbit operations Will be scheduled
superimposed With good spacial accuracy, i2%. at a later time.
Such comparisons provide the quantitative data
required to assess the impact of the contact line Prelimina1_""y Conclusion for CFE-CL-Z
boundary condition and provide unambiguous
data for analysts modeling such ﬂows and The CFE-CL-Z vessel is a simple experiment
phenomena. The data reduction procedure and that probes the uncertain impact of the boundary
results Will be discussed in greater detail in condition at the contact line—the region Where
subsequent publications. the three phases meet. This region controls

perhaps the most signiﬁcant static and dynamic
A group of numerical analysts from both Europe characteristics of the large length scale capillary
and the US has been contacted to conduct blind phenomena critical to most multiphase ﬂuid
computer predictions of the experimental management systems aboard spacecraft. The
conditions. Fluid properties, test cell dimensions, experimental conditions are such that the
and precise disturbance information are provided physical extremes in the contact line boundary
them. Their predictions using state of the art condition are achieved, namely, both free and
contact line boundary conditions including age- pinned conditions. Differences in ﬂuid behavior
old correlations Will be compared With the of nearly identical static interfaces to nearly
experimental results. Such comparisons are identical disturbances are attributed to

9

"
"10","differences in ﬂuid physics in the vicinity of the 2P.J. Haley, M.J. Miksis, M.J., Dissipation
contact line. The results of this simple and contaet-line motion, Phys. Fluids A, Vol. 3,
experiment are expected to provide guidance to N0. 3, March 1991, pp 487-489.
NASA and the aerospace community as to 3G. Wélk, M. Dreyer, M., H.J. Rath, M.M.
whether to increase or decrease practical Weislogel, Damped Oscillations Of a Liquid/Gas
concerns attributed to the wealth of unknowns Surface Upon Step Reduction in Gravity, J.
still surrounding the moving contact line Spacecraft and Rockets, V01. 34, N0. 1, pp. 110-
boundary condition as it relates to the ﬂuid 117, Jan.-Feb. 1997.
phenomena 0n spacecraft. 4J. Israelaehvili, Intermolecular and Surfaces
Forces, Academic Press Inc., San Diego, CA,
The handheld CL-2 experiment was conducted 1992.
on two occasions by 188 Astronaut Michael 5H. Wong, S. Morris, C.J. Radke, Three-
Fineke who graciously performed the tests Dimensional Menisei in Polygonal Capillaries, J.
during his personal time during Expedition 9 in Colloid and Im‘. Sci., Vol. 148 N0. 2, Feb. 1992
Saturday Morning Science mode. The pp. 317-336.
experiments were completed excellently and 6P.S. Hammond, Nonlinear adjustment of a
successfully with many additional tests thin annular ﬁlm of Viscous ﬂuid surrounding a
conducted providing additional science made thread of another within a Circular pipe, J. F Zuid
possible by a centrifuge technique employed by Mech, Vol. 137, 1983, pp. 363-384.
Fineke permitting the re-use of the 0nee-wetted 7M.M. Weislogel, H.D. Ross, Surface Re-
eontainer. Intermittent real-time Video and audio orientation and Settling in Cylinders upon Step
downlink, continuous communication with the Reduction in Gravity, Microgravily Sci. T echnol.
ground crews at JSC, MSFC, and GRC III (1990), 1.
(CAPCOM, PAYCOM, POD, PHANTOM, 8M. Miehaelis, Kapillarinduzierte Schwing-
etc.), and the Clear and entertaining commentary ungen freier Flussigkeitsoberﬂéiehen, Fortschritt-
0f Fineke made the conduct of CFE-CL-2 on 188 Beriehte VDI, Reihe 7 Strémungsteehnik, Nr.
an enjoyable, laboratory-like experience for the 454, 2003. (Ph.D. Thesis, submitted for
science team on the ground. The Video data is publication)
currently being reduced for comparisons with 9EB. Dussan V, E. Raine, S. Garoff: On
numerical predictions. Publication of the detailed indentifying the appropriate boundary conditions
results will follow such comparisons. at a moving contact line: an experimental
investigation, J. Fluid Mech. 230297 (1991).
Acknowledgment 10L.M. Trefethen, R.L. Panton, A.C.
Humphrey, A.C., Some Unanswered Questions
The authors are deeply indebted to Michael in Fluid Meehanies-1993, 93-WA/FE-1ASME
Fineke for a successful space experiment Winter Annual Meeting, New Orleans, NOV. 28-
performed on 188, Expedition 9. The authors Dec. 3, 1993, pp 1-16. See F. Dodge, Slosh-
w0uld also like to thank the NASA support Wave Damping in Microgravity, p. 14.
cadre at J SC and MSFC for assistance during the 11RB. Klimek, T.W. Wright, R.S. Sielken,
mission and in meeting the demanding Color Image Processing and Object Tracking
development schedule for CFE. This work is System, NASA Technical Memorandum
supported by NASA’s Exploration Systems 107144, NASA Glenn Research Center, 1996.
Mission Directorate, Life Support and Habitation 12L.M. Hocking, The damping of capillary-
Program through contract NAG3-2741 gravity waves at a rigid boundary, J. Fluid
monitored by E. Raine. Mech. (1987), Vol. 179, pp. 253-266.
References
1M.M. Weislogel, S.H. Collicott, D.J. Gotti,
C.T. Bunnell, C.E. Kurta, E. Golliher, The
Capillary Flow Experiments: Handheld Fluids
Experiments for the International Space Station,
AIAA-2004-1148, 42nd AIAA Aerospace Sci.
Mtg. and Exhibit, Reno, Nevada 5-8, J an. 2004.
10

"
