"","x"
"1","A MODULAR SUITE OF HARDWARE ENABLING SPACEFLIGHT CELL CULTURE
RESEARCH
Alexander Hoehn, David M. Klaus, and Louis S. Stodieck
BioServe Space Technologies, Department ofAerospace Engineering Sciences,
University of Colorado at Boulder
Hoehn, A., D.M. Klaus, and LS. Stodieck. A modular suite of hardware enabling spaceflight cell culture research.
]. Grav. Physiol. 11(1):39-50, 2004. BioServe Space Technologies, a NASA Research Partnership Center (RPC), has
developed and operated various middeck payloads launched on 23 shuttle missions since 1991 in support of com-
mercial space biotechnology projects. Modular cell culture systems are contained within the Commercial Generic
Bioprocessing Apparatus (CGBA) suite of flight-qualified hardware, compatible with Space Shuttle, SPACEHAB,
Spacelab and International Space Station (188) EXPRESS Rack interfaces. As part of the CGBA family, the Isothermal
Containment Module (ICM) incubator provides thermal control, data acquisition and experiment manipulation
capabilities, including accelerometer launch detection for automated activation and thermal profiling for culture
incubation and sample preservation. The ICM can accommodate up to 8 individually controlled temperature zones.
Command and telemetry capabilities allow real-time downlink of data and Video permitting remote payload oper-
ation and ground control synchronization. Individual cell culture experiments can be accommodated in a variety of
devices ranging from ’microgravity test tubes’ or standard 100 mm Petri dishes, to complex, fed-batch bioreactors
with automated culture feeding, waste removal and multiple sample draws. Up to 3 levels of containment can be
achieved for Chemical fixative addition, and passive gas exchange can be provided through hydrophobic mem-
branes. Many additional options exist for designing customized hardware depending on specific science require-
ments.
Key words: Biotechnology, Microgravity, Gravitational biology, Thermal control, Telescience, Life sciences
INTRODUCTION cultural (plants) and biotechnology (cell culture)
areas. Unique research ﬂight hardware, described in
The mission of BioServe Space Technologies, a this paper, was developed to conduct these industry-
NASA Research Partnership Center (RPC), is focused sponsored microgravity research experiments.
on establishing applied research consortia with NASA established the RFC Program (previously
industry, academia and government partnerships to known as ’Commercial Space Centers’) in 1985 to
develop new products and processes through space encourage the commercial development of space.
life sciences research. BioServe’s Vision is to develop These non-profit Centers, located at universities
valuable life science applications using the unique across the country, operate through cooperative
environment of space to create breakthroughs that agreements with NASA to explore commercial uses of
benefit humanity. BioServe has conducted life science space by forming consortia consisting of industry,
experiments on 23 space missions flown between academia and government. The research activities are
1991 and 2003, including sortie flights on the Space expected to provide the consortia members with a
Shuttle, t0 the Russian space station Mir, and onboard competitive advantage, offering potential for eco-
the International Space Station (188). The supported nomic growth. BioServe, with its life sciences research
experiments have encompassed a wide variety of focus, is part of the NASA Innovative Partnerships
applied research projects in biomedical (animal), agri- Program in the Exploration Systems Mission
Directorate, under the direction of the Space
Partnership Development (SPD) Office at the
ﬁlddress for correspondence: Marshall Space Flight Center.
exander Hoehn, PhD. . . . . .
BioServe Space Technologies BleServe pr0V1des .sc1ence and engmeermg
Aerospace Engineering Sciences expertlse, as well as the ﬂlght-quahfled, customlzable
University of Colorado hardware needed to conduct life sciences experi-
429 UCB ments in a microgravity environment. NASA pro-
Boulder’ CO 80309—0429’ USA Vides flight opportunities to conduct the
Email: Hoehn@sp0t.colorado.edu . . .
consortla-sponsored research based on selectlon crlte-
Copyright © 2004 Galileo Foundation 39

"
"2","MODULAR SPACEFLIGHT CELL CULTURE RESEARCH HARDWARE
ria, and industry guides and funds the research. The tation to changing science or mission requirements.
flight hardware is also made available for use by
peer-reviewed, NASA funded investigators as need- The CGBA Temperature-Controlled Incubator Family
ed. Most space life sciences experiments require
accurately controlled thermal environments to help
Space Experiment Accommodation isolate the effects of gravity on the development of
A ’middeck locker’ offers convenient means of living organisms or biochemical reactions. BioServe,
experiment accommodation aboard the Space Shuttle therefore, developed a series of efficient temperature-
with a working volume of approximately 571iters (W controlled incubators that, together with the science-
44.1 cm x H 25.3 cm x L 51.6 cm). The relative sim- specific experimental inserts, are compatible with the
plicity of the standard interfaces (23) and ease of power, volume and mass constraints associated with
accessibility of these lockers pre- and post-ﬂight spaceflight research. The Isothermal Containment
allows for loading into the Shuttle to occur as late as Module (ICM) incubator fleet (see Fig. 1) uses a liq-
18 hours before launch. This capability greatly facili- uid circulation system to allow heated or cooled tem-
tates life sciences research, which usually requires perature control. Thermoelectric heat pumps are
that limited shelf life samples be stabilized for on incorporated to modulate the temperature of the cir-
orbit initiation. Maximum limits of power (130 Watts, culation loop or distributed experiment locations (9).
28 V DC) and mass (24.5 kg) for a single middeck The circulation system allows for up to eight individ-
locker type experiment, on the other hand, can signif- ually controlled experiment zones, where tempera-
icantly constrain experimental possibilities (9). tures can be maintained uniformly constant or
BioServe has developed several payloads in sup- individually profiled for automated, temperature-
port of its applied research mission to accommodate based experiment initiation and termination, or ther-
animal, plant and cell culture experiments. The mod- mal preservation of samples on orbit. Temperature
ular series of hardware elements developed under the control set point ranges from -160 to +37OC, depend-
collective name of Commercial Generic Bioprocessing ing on incubator configuration. A precursor to the
Apparatus (CGBA) is primarily used for cell culture more advanced water-circulation based ICM is the
and commercial biotechnology research (15, 17, 19, CGBA incubator (INC). This initialincubator featured
20). A CGBA experiment typically consists of an incu- resistive heaters for accurate temperature control, but
bator unit, such as the Isothermal Containment only for above ambient ranges (370C). It supported
Module (ICM), and a variety of modular, mission- manually activated Group Activation Packs (GAPS),
unique internal science experiment inserts. The ICM with the ability to record on-orbit optical density
features standard interfaces to the spaceflight carrier. measurements of 8 individual Fluids Processing
This ’generie’ design philosophy permits accelerated Apparatus (FPA) ’test tubes’ (described later).
payload integration schedules, as well as rapid adap-
.;_ ._ i t . :1: I) 1 \\\ f .
. . -- ,4, ~ w
it“: 1 _'-II. x;- . '_ A I”. i ' ‘ ‘2 ' ' . ‘* :éffﬂe‘rikiﬁ , “7.2,;5-7-
I! 3-}. ¥'_ ' :~ -' ~ '- I ' '
'3 I x. ﬁt! a I! 1 "" .1! ii. 9
ll.._ __ 4— LI . 1 2...;- 1%.-L E71"" -_. v ,
-3325??? 5-1? i” 1 'e- .. 53.3 ' 1' . '9 a _- ‘ ,_ "" A 7
Y—ﬂ ' I.__.g .=='___ “-2,:155 ' 3§'.=5T""}-EE ‘ 2'12} .-'. ‘51!) C: V,
(a) ICMV1 — Single (b) ICMV2 — Single (C) ICMV3 — Between 2 (d) ICMV3 Freezer -
temperature zone with temperature zone with and 8 individually Enhanced vacuum-
water Circulation loops in computer-upgrades for controlled temperature panel insulation for
all 6 walls. space station use. zones. control as low as -16°C.
Figure 1. The Commercial Generic BioProcessing Apparatus (CGBA) family of Isothermal Containment Module (ICM) incuba-
tors features a common design base and standardized NASA interfaces to allow fast integration and quick reflight opportunities,
with rapid experiment-specific adaptation based on unique research needs. All ICM incubators feature a thermoelectrically con-
trolled water Circulation system for efficient temperature control of the science inserts.
40 Journal of Gravitational Physiology 0 Vol 11(1) 0 2004

"
"3","HOEHN, ET AL
Incubator—External Interfaces heat exchange areas, can provide thermal control in a
External interfaces between the different versions single, or multi-zone (2-8 zones) arrangement, with
of the CGBA incubator family and the NASA carrier options for steady state temperature, or automated
facilities remain intentionally unchanged to facilitate temperature profiles. Depending on the configura-
rapid mission integration (6-12 months achievable) tion, temperature set points can range from —160C
and ease of crew training. All incubators use the same (Freezer) 0r +4OC (ICMVZ) t0 +37OC (all ICMs).
power, data, Video, structural and thermal interfaces Thermal gradients within the science inserts are typi-
for integration aboard the Space Shuttle and 188. cally less than 10C.
Therefore, each mission, even with new or modified The ICM can accommodate experimental vol-
science inserts, can qualify for ’reflight’ or ’series- umes of up to approximately 26 liters (W 38.7 cm X H
evolved’ integration processing, with robust, well- 19.7 cm X L 34.5 cm), mass of up to 14 kg and can pro-
known and well-verified interfaces, flight heritage Vide up to 20 Watts of electric power for the science
and common, proven design features. The internal insert, depending on configuration and temperature
science accommodation, however, can still be set point. These values represent available resources
Changed rapidly to accommodate ’lessons learned’ for the science inserts, after accounting for the ICM
and to address mission-unique experiment require- infrastructure requirements.
ments, without significantly affecting the integration The data acquisition and control computer com-
process. A new safety assessment is only necessary mands and monitors the ICM operational and safety
for the new science insert, as the CGBA incubator and functions, as well as any science insert-specific
its interfaces remain unchanged. parameters, including temperature, experiment acti-
vation and termination, and launch detection. Data
Incubator—Internal Science Insert Interfaces from all sensors and still Video images, if available,
The CGBA ICM provides a support platform for are stored on compact flash disks, and can also be
the mission-specific science inserts (9). The tempera- downlinked to Earth in near real time for ground con-
ture-controlled water Circulation system, in combina- trol synchronization. Experiment parameters associ-
tion with thermoelectric heat pumps and designated ated with activation, feeding, termination, sampling
Table 1. Suite of flight-qualified CGBA science insert modules. Some experiment modules can be used in a stand-alone fashion,
while others require the ICM incubator for processing, power, and/ or thermal control.
Science Module Description and Notes
FPA Fluids Processing Apparatus Glass barrel, “microgravity test tube”, ~7 ml volume,
sealed 0r ventedl.
GAP Group Activation Pack ~1 liter generic science container, sealed* 0r ventedl, manual or
automated activation. Holds 8 FPAs.
BPM BioProcessing Module 3- 0r 4-syringe based sequential mixing, sealed*.
GEFA Gas Exchange Fermentation Ventedl, passive containment, using silicone gas-exchange
Apparatus culture bag.
ICV Illuminated Culture Vessel Sealed* 0r ventedl, passive. LED lighting.
BCA BioServe Culture Apparatus Sealed* 0r ventedl, sampling and preservation, using FEP TeflonTM
gas exchange culture bag.
STARS Space Technology and Miniature habitats (terrarium, aquarium, biochemistry), ventedl,
Research Students Video documentation with downlink.
MOBIAS Multiple Orbital Bioreactors Ventedl, sampling, culture feeding / waste removal, cold-stowage
with Instrumentation and preservation. Silicone 0r FEP TeflonTM culture bag.
Automated Sampling
FREEZER Single volume, low Temperatures as low as —160C for preservation, networked micro-
temperature incubator processor control option for GAP 0r BCA units.
*Sealed = no gas exchange.
7L Vented = diffusive gas exchange (via various membranes) for metabolic support and cabin pressure equalization.
Journal of Gravitational Physiology 0 Vol 11(1) 0 2004 41

"
"4","MODULAR SPACEFLIGHT CELL CULTURE RESEARCH HARDWARE

Table 2. Science Accommodation Considerations for Spaceflight.

Criteria Spaceflight Consideration

Containment Safety concern for astronaut health in sealed environment. Fluid behavior dominat-
ed by surface tension forces and less predictable.

Microgravity In addition to containment issues, mixing and gas-liquid separation and gas
exchange into liquid media require attention.

Pressure Change Cabin pressure may change rapidly and hardware must sustain differential pres-
sures 0r accommodate venting while maintaining containment.

Biocompatibility Containment hardware, non-standard materials when compared to commercial off

Materials Compatibility the shelf laboratory equipment and the sealed environment aboard spacecraft may

Offgassing affect the science outcome. Long mission/exposure durations aboard ISS require
additional test time. Offgassing and accumulation of trace gas contaminants in
sealed space habitats may affect organisms.

Gas Exchange Typically provided through gas exchange membranes (PTFE TeflonTM, FEP TeflonTM,
Silicone) 0r gas-exchange tubing (Silicone) to maintain liquid containment. Gas bub-
bles (two phase fluid mixtures) are more difficult to handle in microgravity and can
block fluid transfer.

Delayed Initiation Experiment may need to remain in a state of reversible stasis (lyophilized, cold,
inhibitor) for days, weeks or even months between handover to NASA and actual
experiment initiation. Some experiments need to be intentionally delayed (’timed’)
with respect to a planned landing due to limited sample stability after experiment
initiation.

Delayed Analysis Actual experiment return from 188 depends on Shuttle transportation availability.
Samples are often preserved for weeks to months prior to subsequent landing and
post-flight analysis. Post-experiment preservation often has to occur at ambient
temperatures in the absence of cold stowage capabilities.

or Video observations can also be Changed from the Science Accommodation

ground during flight if needed. An internal Spaceflight experimentation and the enabling

accelerometer system provides launch detection hardware often require additional considerations and

capabilities through acceleration profile integration to compromises when compared to established research
eliminate false starts and to provide autonomous, protocols in Earth-based laboratories as summarized

’earliest possible’ on orbit experiment initiation, thus in Table 2. Spaceflight safety concerns often require

minimizing processing delays. The science inserts can multiple, redundant levels of containment, further

be monitored and controlled using an internal RS485 complicating the fluid management operations of
communication network for greatest flexibility in two and three phase life sciences systems, such as
experiment integration and rapid module change out. fluid mixing, gas exchange and bubble formation in
suspension cultures (27).
Modular Suite of Life Sciences Experiment The uncertainty about exact launch and landing
Accommodation times, combined with long (and potentially extend-
In addition to the basic thermal control capabili- able) on-orbit periods, require atypical experimental
ties common to all ICM incubators, science-specific protocols to be developed, including prolonged pre-
inserts are available to accommodate mission- and initiation stasis and extended post-experiment sam-
organism-unique needs, such as on-orbit experiment ple preservation before samples can be analyzed on
initiation from stasis, life support, observation, sam- the ground post-flight. Future on-orbit enhance-
pling and preservation in a microgravity-compatible ments and new infrastructure elements aboard the
fashion, and ensuring safe containment of the often 188, as well as newer payload designs, may add in situ
hazardous experimental samples. Table 1 summa- analytical capabilities and reduce the reliance on
rizes the type of science inserts developed to date. delayed post-flight analysis.
42 Journal of Gravitational Physiology 0 Vol 11(1) 0 2004

"
"5","HOEHN, ET AL
The following descriptions introduce some of the The FPA provides two levels of containment in its
modular science inserts designed for, and used with, basic form. Gas exchange is possible through the use
the CGBA family of incubators in support of com- of hydrophobic PTFE TeflonTM membranes (0.02 um,
mercial space life sciences research since 1991. Some >700 kPa (100 psi) water entry pressure). Fixation is
experiment modules may also be used in a stand- typically accomplished by addition of the final fluid;
alone fashion as indicated. however, no externally drawn samples can be taken.
The FPA design features excellent bio- and materials-
Fluids Processing Apparatus (FPA) compatibility (glass, Bromobutyl rubber or
The Fluids Processing Apparatus (FPA), or ’micro— Chlorobutyl rubber), and provides up to 3 levels of
gravity test tube’ (see Fig. 2), is a relatively simple containment when assembled into a Group
device that has supported a wide variety of experi— Activation Pack (GAP) as shown in Figure 4. When
ments. It consists of a glass barrel that can be initially used alone, the FPA allows for optical assays such as
configured to isolate 3 separate volumes between turbidity measurement, Visual inspection and limited
moveable rubber septa as shown in Figures 2A and Video observation capabilities.
23. All components that contact experimental sam- In the sealed FPA configuration (i.e., using rubber
ples can easily be sterilized. An outer polycarbonate septa), microbial cultures become anaerobic and
sheath provides an additional level of containment growth of cell cultures is limited by the available
and houses the activation plunger. When depressed nutrients. This limits plant seedling studies (10, 28) to
manually or through an automated drive mechanism, short experiment times, as ethylene accumulation
the plunger pushes the septa forward, forcing the and oxygen depletion become limiting factors.
upstream ﬂuid into its adjacent distal volume through Scrubbers (Potassium Permanganate, PurafilTM) may
a small bypass molded into the glass barrel. be used to mitigate some of these effects, as shown for
Independent mixing of up to 2 ﬂuids (total S 3.5 ml) the Plant-FPA in Figure 3 (right). When fitted with
into a third chamber ($3.5 ml), for a final mixed V01- gas exchange membranes, some experimental dura-
ume of S7 m1, can be achieved in this manner. tions can be extended, depending on the metabolic
Therefore, through controlled, 2-stage sequential fluid rates of the organisms. Internal pressure buildup
addition, experiments can be activated and terminat- through metabolic activity may require special atten-
ed on orbit. Typical FPA experiments may consist of a tion. The pressure can be limited through available
precursor medium (fluid, lyophilized cells or seeds), nutrients, gas availability or scrubbers (Barium
an initiation fluid (typically aqueous, nutrient media) Hydroxide, Baralyme TM). During yeast fermentation,
and a fixative, with numerous possible variations for example, internal FPA pressures can reach 700 kPa
depending on the specific research needs as illustrat- (100 psi) (30).
ed by the examples in Figures 2C - 2E. FPAs have been used for a variety of scientific
""— [_- 5'1"" —--- .“ ""-1: r: ?ag..__
. _. - II a- L -4
hull: . .1'4 i' I u“
' 2'.I;"". .. 1% m H. ..
_.__ i.-. "" -. ' I _ 5 j
L . ;...._ -. . - . - .
i ‘- =1 11 - _. J M-
'- ' ., 1 {Hi t""! * .
. :- .-_ .‘ ‘5 ' a - |
.5: E: If ._ '4 J. . . I
3-: 5 li 3H... - '- - = .
A B C D E
Figure 2. The Fluids Processing Apparatus (FPA) — a microgravity ’test tube’, image (A) and schematic (B), showing the three ini-
tially isolated, sequentially mixable chambers. FPAs have been used to accommodate a wide variety of research samples ranging
from plant seedlings (C), protein crystals (D) and cell cultures (E), as well as insects and other small aquatic organisms. The FPA
is operationally modular by design.
Journal of Gravitational Physiology 0 Vol 11(1) 0 2004 43

"
"6","MODULAR SPACEFLIGHT CELL CULTURE RESEARCH HARDWARE
= m w - - -
1W"" . f .Je.
_ . , r‘ '
_ “h"" I‘ I x ~ =
3"" ' “ (75;, a g; -
' . . ,- . J ‘ - ” Tiii“9i:iii-‘;r
' l""! d h - H] ‘I ll ‘1 .r '1! ‘wif’r '5 ""??;«i‘é \
5,” l;'""i'ﬁ‘ll£§3®.% . ' ~.; ~ 15.- l
' L«‘« - ’4‘? .
- :1?"" . ‘7?” iii: '3 '
3:13;? "" -‘ 415352237722.114:. ,.‘-‘s-:' .
Figure 3. The Gas Exchange Fluids Processing Apparatus (GE-FPA) provides two independent levels of liquid containment, while
enabling passive (diffusive) gas exchange through 0.02um or 0.1 mm PTFE TeflonTM membranes. Gas exchange rates are sufficient
for aerobic growth of many cultures. For the application shown (left), dried yeast cells on filter disks are re-hydrated by addition
of nutrient solution, while the air vents through the PTFE TeﬂonTM membranes in the septa (arrows). Internal venting (center) with-
in the sealed FPA, or venting to ambient air through the FPA end cap (right) is available as well, for non-hazardous fluids only
(right). Surface tension controls ensure that most air vents through the hydrophobic membrane before it is covered with liquid.
Once wetted, the membrane no longer passes gaseous air, but gas exchange continues by diffusion through the liquid.
', \ , I 1' "" h. f..- 1%...
M i. f - I ., ._ H ""II
\. , t1 , ; 5,- r I
:5 ~ - :_ 1.| 1 . _.
. ‘ ‘ I '3. ~ , .I _ [' p: _
, ' ‘ r"" - (l) , A‘ ll ‘ ' I ll"" III“: ' i'él .‘
l ' l 4‘: “ V l""; f ‘ '. -:.. - _ T7 ‘ :
l ‘. 1 ‘ I: "" . l-. _ '. ' ' .
, ,_ -. g, . __ Wig I _..H. '_
b , ; a f. - ‘1‘ I .—.. ' |l' I I
nu ;‘ ‘ .~A _ . ‘ - ‘23....- ‘-. -—_—— A
""*lqofgacoitrtesyAMMK: 7 W I
Figure 4. Experiment initiation using a manual GAP containing 8 FPAs is shown in conjunction with the CGBA incubator (INC)
aboard the Spacehab research module during STS-63 (left). The GAP hardware can also be activated autonomously using ICM
control and either the external motor auto-GAP (center-left), or the internal motor (IM-GAP) with aluminum shell (center-right,
right).
research objectives ranging from fermentation (20, based on Mission Elapsed Time (MET), either by a
30), plant seedling growth (5, 10, 28), mammalian cell crewmember or autonomously, based on accelerome-
cultures (2, 6), mammalian tissue culture (18, 33), a ter-based launch detection software. In addition to
variety of bacterial cell cultures (11, 12, 13, 16, 22, 32), batch activation of 8 FPAs, the GAP also provides an
as well as other biological systems (7, 24, 25, 29) and additional level of containment. Depending on the
whole organism development (3, 26). FPAs can also NASA-assessed hazard level (toxicity) of the samples,
be exposed to electro-magnetic fields (31) or a light up to three independent (redundant) levels of con-
source. tainment must be provided. The GAP shell can be
manufactured from aluminum or polycarbonate,
Group Activation Pack (GAP) depending on thermal and materials compatibility
The GAP hardware (Fig. 4) is designed to simpli- requirements, and experimental fluids used.
fy the activation of eight individual FPA experiments, Hydrophobic gas exchange membranes (0.1 pm PTFE
either manually or by computer-controlled motors. TeflonTM) can support metabolic activity through dif-
Activation occurs on a pre-planned time schedule fusion to the crew cabin while maintaining liquid
44 Journal of Gravitational Physiology 0 Vol 11(1) 0 2004

"
"7","HOEHN, ET AL
containment. The use of gas exchange membranes, BioServe Culture Apparatus (BCA)
however, requires that the experimental fluids do not The BCA cell culture system (Fig. 5), contained in
pose a vapor hazard. The GAP, in conjunction with a GAP-sized form factor for interchangeability, fea-
FPAs, has been certified for some hazard level 3 liq- tures two clear FEP gas exchange culture bags.
uids, such as Trizol (Phenol) and Glutaraldehyde. Sampling is accomplished through vacutaineirsTM
Small self-powered temperature / humidity recorders (2 per culture bag), and a fixative can be injected into
or radiation monitors may be also placed within the the culture bag to preserve residual cultures for post-
GAP to record local environmental conditions as flight analysis. When combined with the ICMV3 (8
needed for science documentation, including during individual temperature zones), each BCA can be con-
unpowered transport. trolled to a unique thermal environment. Motor acti-
The original GAP geometry has been maintained vation for sampling and preservation, as well as
for compatibility within the CGBA incubator family. optional thermal profiling, is controlled by the ICM
An aluminum GAP reduces thermal gradients and control computer through RS-485 networked micro-
provides better materials compatibility for a wider processors on each BCA.
range of experimental samples, but can only be acti-
vated by a motor, while the manually operated GAP Gas Exchange Fermentation Apparatus (GEFA)
requires clear polycarbonate for Visual control during To facilitate higher gas exchange rates, a series of
manual operation. The aluminum GAP can also be cell culture inserts were developed around commer-
fitted with PTFE TeflonTM gas exchange membranes. cially available silicone gas exchange culture bags
Variations of the GAP hardware include a single-vol- (SiCulture, TC Tech, Minneapolis, MN). The cells are
ume aquatic balanced ecosystem (1, 21), the FEP grown within the silicone bags as the first level of
TeflonTM culture bag based BioServe Culture containment. To minimize water losses through evap-
Apparatus (BCA), and a gas exchange version that oration, which results in ’bloating’ of the silicone cul-
holds up to 9 standard 100 mm Petri dishes for insect ture bag with air, the culture system is contained in a
development studies. second level of containment with high humidity con-
tl - 7 - - .- *~
|l _- i j r. _ .1 _ .
l l';_ -| .'_ . ' 'i_ I §
F :1; . Ill- .. g ..""H
Figure 5. The BioServe Culture Apparatus (BCA) cell culture system using FEP gas exchange culture systems (left); and the Gas
Exchange Fermentation Apparatus (GEFA), using silicone gas exchange membrane systems (center and right). Both culture sys-
tem bags are housed in a second level of containment vented with PTFE gas exchange membranes to minimize evaporative water
losses and subsequent ’bloating’ of the culture systems. The aluminum structure of the 2nd level of containment also reduces ther-
mal gradients when used within an ICM incubator.
. '."";-"".'“' . -_.*-—- [H H! ..;'-' ' - :
n H -- ' ___,W .. .m ! 35} E"" EI- ' rm 1' ' - 4 I
ll . . -, .. E ' __ f Fug I .""__ {93:15:} a
p: i .__ __ ”:TE-:;- ,- _ “w 5.- .
U] l: _-. .-._-._-.;.,.i...,.......#_ * ﬂ W: i LE.) 3.»: {Fa . .: - “ﬂ _
l ; _. "" "" 1.. - IL,- _-__:___... NM *1; Wm m _
gg; . ._ A 4.- W - I .F _ _,_....._. me . -
. . - ""~*- --—W—...— i..ﬁ_ {'I'ﬂ. _. -II::I<'.

_. ' ' . I “-~— -- '5'""? l' ur—Hi -- iﬂ: ""

.h' .-..... _' ,'""—'—__'__ ""'— . I - "" -_._ ""_' —._n _._..._._.'_.:._——'—'—E
Figure 6. The NASA-designed BioProcessing Module (BPM) provides sequential mixing of up to 4 fluids using off-the-shelf
syringes coupled with a 3- or 4-way valve. Heat-sealed clear FEP TeflonTM bags provide additional redundant levels of con-
tainment (not shown).

Journal of Gravitational Physiology 0 Vol 11(1) 0 2004 45

"
"8","MODULAR SPACEFLIGHT CELL CULTURE RESEARCH HARDWARE
tent (>90%). The second level of containment consists cial off the shelf (COTS) syringes allows larger fluid
of an aluminum enclosure with PTFE gas exchange quantities (5-10 ml per syringe) than the FPA (< 7 m1
membranes. The aluminum enclosure also minimizes total, 3.5 m1. max. injection). BPMs can be cultured
thermal gradients and provides a better means of after activation in temperature-controlled environ-
active thermal control. GEFA (see Fig. 5) was devel- ments of an incubator (such as the ICM) or used as
oped as the precursor to the Multiple Orbital stand-alone experiments (19).
Bioreactors with Instrumentation and Automated
Sampling (MOBIAS) described later, but provided no Illuminated Culture Vessel (1C V)
mixing capabilities, and thus requiring pre- and post The ICV provides a sealed, balanced microbial /
processing thermal stabilization. plant eco—system, and has been used aboard the space
station Mir (Fig. 7). Light is provided by red LEDs.
BioProcessing Modules (BPM) Thermal gradients from the illumination are mini-
The NASA-designed BPM (Fig. 6) allows liquid mized through a highly conductive aluminum enclo-
mixing for experiments using relatively benign fluids sure, contained in the water-cooled ICM incubator.
without gas exchange requirements. The BPMs are The ICV provides two levels of containment and can
manually operated by an astronaut and are contained also be used with gas exchange membranes.
in clear FEP TeflonTM heat-sealed bags for additional
redundant levels of containment. The use of commer- Modular Orbital Bioreactors with Automated Sampling
(MOBIAS)
MOBIAS is based on the same COTS silicone cul-
_ . ture bags as GEFA, but adds continuous or fed-batch
_ 5t ' ' _ _ modes and sampling with cold stowage. As with
(3"", . ' _ GEFA, the silicone culture bags must be contained
"" ; .- . '- - _ ' ‘ -- within a high humidity environment to minimize
T; . '1; -.: water loss from the cultures and to avoid bubble for-
, ' '.'. 1""? :3: mation. Feeding the culture expands the bag against
"" y . the flat geometry containment (Fig. 8), creating a
,F. ' _ more uniform gas diffusion path length across the
culture, and therefore more uniform growth condi-
Figure 7. The Illuminated CultureVessel(ICV,1eft)supp0rts a tions, The aluminum enclosure around the silicone
sealeci, balanced p1ant-micr0be ecosystem, as was dene abeard bags and level Of containment) is also actively tem-
Ehe M” Space Statlon' Phqtosynthetlc hght ?Dergy ls prOVIded perature-controlled. Each of the 6 individual cultures
rom red LEDs. The aluminum enclosure (right) reduces ther- ,
mal gradients during illumination when used inside the ICM 1n MOBIAS has up to 8 non-permeable sample bags
incubator. (5 ml each, with fixative, cooled) for sample preserva-
- -. : : .""1 ~1- ﬁt __ ..
E ' ' ' -34? .
_ - -..-a~ 1, w. 5:; :4. :74;
Culture- Medlu Waste: r- ."" I ' .
. . 1 1L"" ER é: a .. -. z"". 3:.5;
7 WI - - _.-. ”.z/O .
- E'F—P"" '* i ' -
' . ""‘"" ' .* --"". ' 5:43
+ I ,. _ Hg "" .
+ ,_1ir ' ‘
EH -
Mnnifnld . : ‘ ._____ j} g:
5E.- SnmplnE-s - I' .
Figure 8. The Modular Orbital Bioreactors with Automated Sampling (MOBIAS) accommodates 6 independent cultures, each
with up to 8 cooled samples. The cultures are fed in a batch mode. Passive gas exchange by diffusion provides adequate gas
exchange for relatively slow-growing, 10w metabolic rate cell cultures. Temperature control, power and process control is pro-
vided by the ICM incubator.
46 Journal of Gravitational Physiology 0 Vol 11(1) 0 2004

"
"9","HOEHN, ET AL
Table 3. Summary of the modular science inserts and experiment support capabilities of the CGBA cell culture elements as dis-
cussed in the text.
Activation Termination Gas
Initiation Add Fixative Feeding Sampling Exchange Instrumentation Notes
FPA Yes Yes (N0) N0 Opt. N0 Sealed 0r
Gas Exchange
GAP Yes Yes (N0) N0 Opt. N0 Sealed 0r
Gas Exchange,
Manual or
Automated
BCA Yes Yes (Opt) Yes Yes No Sealed 0r
Gas Exchange
GEFA N0 N0 (N0) No Yes No Passive,
Gas Exchange
MOBIAS Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Automated /
instrumented
ICV N0 N0 N0 N0 Opt. N0 Passive,
LED lighting
STARS Opt. N0 (Opt) (Opt) Yes Yes Customizable
habitats, Video
tion. MOBIAS provides two levels of containment. ing students from around the world a chance to
All feeding, sampling and data acquisition is con- design and conduct spaceﬂight experiments. The stu-
trolled by the ICM through RS-485 networked, micro- dent experiments flown aboard STS-107 on Columbia
processor-based, computer control algorithms. The included a series of miniature habitats such as the
fermentation schematic is shown in Fig. 8, but could Japanese Medaka fish experiment; a Chinese silk-
be modified for other purposes such as plant seedling worm experiment; an American Harvester ant exper-
germination and fixation. iment; a Carpenter bee experiment from
Commercial research conducted in GEFA and Liechtenstein, an Australian Orb Weaver spider
MOBIAS involved Actinomycin D production in experiment; and abiochemical silicate crystal growth
space, which in GEFA, was found to be up to 75% experiment from Israel. Each habitat is custom-built
greater than matched ground controls, but still rela- to meet the specimen’s individual needs, including
tively low when compared to optimized ground- passive gas and humidity control, lighting, feeding
based culture systems (19, 20). Actinomycin D areas and containment, as well as a means of observ-
ground control production in MOBIAS was equiva- ing and documenting behavior through automated
lent to shaker flask levels in the laboratory (14), with Video recording and downlink for distribution
subsequent ﬂight results from 188 8A being prepared through the World Wide Web (8, 34).
for publication.
Mission Operations
Other Science Inserts (insects, crystals, invertebrates, fish, The BioServe support services to consortia mem-
ecosystems, etc.) bers typically include science support hardware,
A series of miniature habitats housing several dif- interface, safety and initial science verification along
ferent types of biological specimens and one bio— with payload integration, performed in close coordi-
chemical experiment were developed in support of nation with the experiment scientist. Mission-parallel
the SPACEHAB Inc. educational program called ground control experiments can be conducted in
“Space Technology And Research Students” (STARS - ﬂight-like (backup) hardware. In order to further
see httpzz [www.starsacademyeoml ). The STARS reduce differences between on-orbit samples and
experimental hardware consists of a mission-unique mission-parallel ground controls under nominal
insert compatible with the CGBA ICMVZ single tem- gravity, launch loads and Vibrations can also be sim-
perature zone incubator. STARS allowed participat- ulated. Depending on the science requirements, con-
]ournal 0f Gravitational Physiology 0 Vol 11(1) 0 2004 47

"
"10","MODULAR SPACEFLIGHT CELL CULTURE RESEARCH HARDWARE
current Clinorotation and centrifugation experiments ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
can provide additional unique variable gravity envi-
ronments (4, 17). This work was supported by NASA through the
Engineering and science data are available BioServe Space Technologies — Research Partnership
throughout the mission Via downlink from the Space Center under a Cooperative Agreement (NCC8-242).
Shuttle or the International Space Station, including Additional information on the ﬂight hardware can be
the option of remote control or parameter updates. found online at: http:/ /www.c010rad0.edu/engi-
Data is received through Marshall Space Flight neering/BiOServe/ spaceﬂighthtml.
Center (MSFC) and transmitted directly to a ’remote
Payloads Operations and Control Center’ (r-POCC) REFERENCES
site located at the University of Colorado in Boulder,
which can then be made available to the scientist 1. Anderson, G.A., T.K. MacCallum, ].E. Poynter, and
using the World Wide Web. D.M. Klaus. Autonomous Biological System — A
Experimental samples can typically be retrieved Unique Method of Conducting Long Duration
within 4 hours of landing. The uncertainty of Shuttle Spaceflight Experiments for Pharmaceutical and
landing sites due to weather, however, may require Gravitational Biology Research. In Space Technology
science support teams to be present for possible land- and Applications International Forum (STAIF), CP 420,
ing in Florida or California. MS. El-Genk (ed), The American Institute of Physics,
DOE CONF 980103, 1998, p.616-621.
Hardware Availability 2. Armstrong, ].W., R.A. Gerren, and SK. Chapes. The
The hardware resources described above were effect of space and parabolic flight on macrophage
primarily developed for commercial (applied) space hematopoiesis and function, Exp. Cell Res. 216(1):160—
research, but are also made available to the broader 168, 1995.
international science user communities 3. Bennett, R.L., M.K. Abbott, and RE. Denell. Insect
(http:/ / peer1.nasaprs.C0m). Analytical and physical gravitational biology: ground-based and shuttle flight
mission integration and verification, as well as mis- experiments using the beetle Tribolium castaneum, ].
sion operation support can be provided as needed. Exp. Zool. 269(3):242—52, 1994.
Interested users are responsible for securing their 4. Brown, R., D. Klaus, and P. Todd. Influence ofinertial
own flight opportunity. Some of the science hardware forces associated with weightlessness, Clinorotation
(FPA, GAP, BPM) can be used without the CGBA and centrifugation on E. coli growth efficiency,
incubator, and has recently been launched to 188 Microgravity Sci. and Tech. XIII/4z24-29, 2002.
aboard Russian Progress supply ﬂights. 5. Campbell, 1., M. Pecaut, and M. Luttges. Prevalence
and arrangement of lignified vascular elements in 6-
CONCLUSION day-old Alfalfa (Medicago sative L.) seedlings raised in
reduced gravity. ]. Plant Physiol. 149:539—547,1996.
The modular experiment environments presented 6. Chapes, S.K., D.R. Morrison, ].A. Guikema, M.L.
in this paper (summary Table 3) provide unique Lewis, and 3.8. Spooner. Production and action of
research capabilities aboard the Space Shuttle and the cytokines in space, Adv. Space Res, 14(8):5-9, 1994.
International Space Station. With currently reduced 7. Forsman, A.D., A.R. Herpich and SK. Chapes.
crew time availability and limited onboard infra- Improved soft-agar colony assay in a fluids processing
structure elements such as refrigerators, freezers and apparatus. In Vitro Cell and Devel. Biol. 35:55-60, 1999.
glove boxes needed for routine life sciences experi- 8. Goulart, C.V., S. Woodard, M. Rupert, and LS.
mentation (2003/2004), the CGBA science elements Stodieck. Performance Of the STARSlife sciences habi-
currently enable numerous life sciences research tats in spaceflight and ground controls, Proceedings,
opportunities. Although CGBA experiments must be ICES 2004, Colorado Springs, SAE-paper 2004-01-2394,
prepared and loaded pre-ﬂight and analyzed post- 2004.
flight on the ground, their relatively small size, 10w 9. Hoehn, A.,].B. Freeman, and LS. Stodieck. Incubator
mass and low power allow adequate research capa- designs for spaceflight application - optimization and
bilities even now (2003/2004) when space transporta— automation. Proceedings, ICES 1999, Denver, SAE-
tion options are highly limited. The combination of a paper 1999-01-217 7, 1999.
standardized incubator design with mission-unique 10. Hoehn, A. Effects of gravity and light on plant growth
science experiment inserts provides the necessary and performance in normal and reduced gravity.
flexibility for rapid adaptation to Changing science DoctoralThesis,University 0f C010rad0,B0ulder, 1993.
needs and available launch opportunities.
48 Journal of Gravitational Physiology 0 Vol 11(1) 0 2004

"
"11","HOEHN, ET AL
11. Kacena, M.A., G.A. Merrell, B. Manfredi, E.E. Smith, 23. NASA Middeck Interface Definition Document,
D.M. Klaus, and P. Todd. Bacterial growth in space- Revision B. NSTS—21000—IDD-MDK. Prepared by
flight: logistic growth curve parameters for Escherichia Boeing North American, InC., Reusable Space Systems,
coli and Bacillus subtilis. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. Subcontract 1970483303, January 6, 1997. Available
51:229-234, 1999. online: http: / / www.unitedspacealliance.Com/ icd/
12. Kacena, M.A., E.E. Smith, and P. Todd. Autolysis 0f mdkidd/ contentshtml, 1997.
Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis cells in low gravity. 24. Roedersheimer, M.T., T.A. Bateman, 8.]. Simske.
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 51:229-234, 1999. Effect of gravity and diffusion interface proximity on
13. Klaus, D.M. Space Microbiology: Microgravity and the morphology of collagen gels. ]. Biomed. MaterRes.
Microorganisms, In: The Encyclopedia of Environmental 37:276-284, 1997.
Microbiology, G. Britten (ed.), John Wiley & Sons, NY, 25. Roedersheimer, M.T., C.R. Nunes, and SJ. Simske.
2002, p.2996-3004. Collagenase digestion of bone fragments in micrograv-
14. Klaus, D.M., M. Benoit, J. Bonomo, J. Bollich, J. ity. Biotechnology and Bioengineering 50:211-216, 1996.
Freeman, L. Stodieck, G. McClure, and KS Lam. 26. Rosowski, ].R., M.A. Gouthro, K.K. Schmidt, 3.].
Antibiotic production in space using an automated Klement, B.S. Spooner. Effect Of microgravity and
fed-bioreactor system, In: Proceedings, AIAA hypergravity 0n embryo axis alignment during pos-
Conference on 188 Utilization, AIAA 2001-4921, 2001. tencystment embryogenesis in Artemia franciscana
15. Klaus, D.M. Commercial microbial research: from (Anostraca), ]. Crustacean Biol.15(4):625—632, 1995.
Spacelab t0 the International Space Station, in: 27. Simmons, D., M. Benoit, J. Freeman, J. Genova, and
Proceedings, The Spacelab Accomplishments Forum. I. A. Hoehn. Designing fluid handling systems for space
Emond (ed.), NASA/CP-ZOOO-ZI0332:223—238, 2000. life science experimentation, Proceedings, ICES 2002,
16. Klaus, D.M. Microgravity and its implication for fer- San Antonio, SAE-paper 2002—01 -2281, 2002.
mentation technology. Trends in Biotechnology 16 28. Smith, ].D., L. A. Staehelin, and P. Todd. Clover ger-
(9):369-373, 1998. mination, early growth and root cap morphology in
17. Klaus, D.M., P. Todd, and A. Schatz. Functional space and on a two—axis Clinostat, ]. Plant Physiology,
weightlessness during Clinorotation of cell suspen— 155: 543-550, 1999.
sions. Advances in Space Research 21(8/9):1315-1318, 29. Spooner, 3.8., J. Metcalf, L. DeBell, A. Paulsen, W.
1998. Noren, and ].A. Guikema. Development Of brine
18. Klement, B.]., and 3.8. Spooner. Mineralization and shrimp Artemia is accelerated during spaceflight. ].
growth of cultured embryonic skeletal tissue in micro— Experimental Zoology 269:253-262, 1994.
gravity, Bone, 24(4):349-359, 1999. 30. Sterrett, K.S., M.W. Luttges, SJ. Simske, C.L. Edelen,
19. Lam, K.S., D.R. Gustavson, D.L. Pirnik, E. Pack, C. and H. Patino. A study of saccharomyces uvarum fer-
Bulanhagui, S.W. Mamber, S. Forenza, L.S. Stodieck, mentation in a microgravity environment, Tech. Q.
and D.M. Klaus. The effect of spaceflight 0n the pro— Master Brew. Assoc. Am. 33(1):33-38, 1996.
duction of actinomycin D by Streptomyces plicatus, ]. 31. Todd, P., ].F. Doyle, P. Carter, H. Wachtel, M.S.
Industrial Microbiology and Biotechnology, 29(6):299-302, Deuser, ].C. Vellinger, ].M. Cassanto, U. Alvarado, J.
2002. Sygusch, and TB. Kent. Magnetic space shuttle exper-
20. Lam, K.S., S. Mamber, E. Pack, S. Forenza, P. iments, ]. Magnetism Magnetic Mat. 194:96-101, 1999.
Fernandes, and D.M. Klaus. The effects of spaceflight 32. Todd, P., D.M. Klaus, L.S. Stodieck, J. Smith, A.
on the production of Monorden by Humicola fuscoatm Staehelin, M. Kacena, B. Manfredi, and A. Bukhari.
WC5157 in solid state fermentation. Applied Cellular responses to gravity: extracellular, intracellu-
Microbiology and Biotechnology, 49(5):579-583, 1998. lar and in—between, Adv. Space Res. 21:(8/ 9):1263-1268,
21. MacCallum, T., G. Anderson, J. Poynter, L. Stodieck, 1998.
and D. Klaus. Autonomous biological systems exper- 33. vanTwest ].S., A. Paulsen, and BS. Spooner. In Vitro
iments, Biological Sciences in Space (Special Issue: Chick pre-cardiac explant tissue differentiation during
Ecology in Space), 12(4):363-365, 1998. spaceflight 0n SpaceHab-02., Acta Anat. (Basel)
22. Marchin, G.L. Resistance to Chemical disinfection 154(3):169-180, 1995.
under conditions of microgravity. Space Technology 34. Woodard, S., C. Goulart, and A. Hoehn. Performance
and Applications International Forum —1998. The of the STARS life sciences payload during bench top
American Institute Of Physics, p. 765-768, 1998. testing and mission simulations, Proceedings, ICES-
2003, Vancouver, SAE-paper 2003-01-2530, 2003.
Journal of Gravitational Physiology 0 Vol 11(1) 0 2004 49

"
"12","MODULAR SPACEFLIGHT CELL CULTURE RESEARCH HARDWARE
50 Journal of Gravitational Physiology 0 Vol 11(1) 0 2004

"
