"","x"
"1","giof Available online at www.sciencedirect.com =
3 . . ADVANCES IN
1%? ScuenceDIrect SPACE
E RESEARCH
ELSEVIER Advances in Space Research 40 (2007) 483—490 M
WWW.elseVier.com/locate/asr
Chromosome aberrations in astronauts
K. George a’*, M. Durante b, FA. Cueinotta C
a Wyle Laboratories, I290 Hercules Drive, Houston, T X 77058, USA
b University Federico II, Department Of Physics, Napoli 80126, Italy
C NASA, Johnson Space Center, SK, 2101 NASA Parkway, Houston, T X 77058, USA
Received 3 October 2006; received in revised form 8 February 2007; accepted 8 March 2007
Abstract

A review of currently available data on in viva induced chromosome damage in the blood lymphocytes of astronauts proves that cyto—
genetic biodosimetry analyses on blood collected Within a week or two of return from space provides a reliable estimate of equivalent
radiation dose and risk after protracted exposure to space radiation of a few months or more. Recent studies indicate that biodosimetry
estimates from single spaceﬂights lie Within the range expected from physical dosimetry and biophysical models, but very large uncer—
tainties are associated With single individual measurements and the total sample population remains low. Retrospective doses may be
more diﬂicult to estimate because of the fairly rapid time—dependent loss of “stable” aberrations in blood lymphocytes. Also, biodosi—
metry estimates from individuals Who participate in repeated missions, or very long (interplanetary) missions, may be complicated by an
adaptive response to space radiation and/ or changes in lymphocyte survival and repopulation. A discussion of published data is pre—
sented and speciﬁc issues related to space radiation biodosimetry protocols are discussed.
© 2007 Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of COSPAR.

Keywords: Biodosimetry; High-LET; Chromosome; FISH; Space radiation
1. Introduction cancer and other late effects of high energy heavy ions is
poorly understood.

Human spaceﬂight missions have increased in duration The space radiation environment is a complex mixture
over the years. From brief forays lasting up to a few days, of different types of radiation that is very different from
missions have extended to months onboard the Interna- the terrestrial radiation environment. The primary sources
tional Space Station (ISS), and future Mars exploration of radiation in outer space derive from galactic cosmic rays
missions could extend as long as three years. This increased (GCR), protons and electrons trapped in the Earth’s mag-
time in space has raised concerns about the potential health netie ﬁeld, and infrequent solar particle events (SPE). In
effects from radiation exposures incurred during missions. addition, secondary radiation, such as neutrons and light
Since cancer is the main health concern related to space charged particles, are created by interactions of high-
radiation exposure, limits for low Earth orbit are based Charge (Z) and high-energy (E) nuclei (HZE particles) With
on the lifetime excess cancer risk, (Cueinotta and Durante, spacecraft shielding material and With the human body
2006), and are currently restricted to an excess lifetime can- itself (NCRP, 2000). Although HZE particles contribute
oer mortality risk of no more than 3% (NCRP, 2000). Lim- only a few percent to the particle ﬂux in space, the signiﬁ-
its for the 188 are not applicable to exploration missions cantly higher ionizing energy and greater penetration
because of different ethical, socio-eeonomie considerations power of this type of radiation could contribute signiﬁ-
for such missions, and because the scientiﬁc basis for cantly to biological effects.

Organ doses to crew members are currently assessed
from physical measurements of radiation dose measured
mponding author. using passive thermoluminescent dosimeters (TLDs), and

E—mail address: Kerry.A.George@nasa.gov (K. George). radiation transport codes (Cueinotta et a1., 2000).
0273-1177/$30 © 2007 Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of COSPAR.
doi:10.1016/j.asr.2007.03.100

"
"2","484 K. George et a1. / Advances in Space Research 40 ( 2007 ) 483—490
Additional information from plastic nuclear track detec— recently these techniques were tested on crew members par-
tors (PNTDs) or tissue equivalent proportional counters ticipating in longer-duration ﬂights on board the Mir space
are available for some missions (Badhwar et al., 2002). station (Testard et al., 1996; Obe et al., 1997; Federenko
Measurements provide accumulated absorbed skin doses et al., 2001). Testard et al. (1996) studied seven crew mem-
that are combined with computerized anatomical models bers, two of whom participated in ﬂights lasting three
and radiation transport codes that estimate the eﬂeets of weeks or less and had no signiﬁcant elevation of chromo-
shielding (Cucinotta et al., 2000, 2003). These data are used some damage post ﬂight, and ﬁve of whom participated
to calculate radiation doses to speciﬁc organs and to assess in a siX-month mission and had increased chromosome
the corresponding health risk. However, in this process damage post ﬂight. Biological dose estimates for the
substantial limitations arise that lead to signiﬁcant uncer- longer-duration ﬂights were calculated using established
tainty in estimating the biologically important dose (Cucin- in vitro calibration curves for X-rays, and varied among
otta et al., 2001, 2006; Cucinotta and Durante, 2006). individuals, with values ranging from 130 to 455 mGy.
Quality factors for space radiation risk eoeﬂicients (mostly Obe et al. (1997) studied crew members who participated
derived from the A-bomb survivors database), and the dose in space ﬂights lasting from 120 to 198 days and they
and dose-rate eﬂectiveness factor, are all quantities aﬂected reported signiﬁcant elevation in chromosome damage post
by large uncertainty. In addition, the location of crew dosi- ﬂight for siX of the seven individuals studied. Pooled data
meters can not always be assured, individualradio-sensitiV- for the siX individuals who had increased chromosome
ity is totally neglected in the risk models, and synergism damage showed a post ﬂight dicentric yield that was
between microgravity and radiation is still poorly under- roughly 3.5 times that of preﬂight values. Individual bio-
stood. Recently, biodosimetry programs have been intro- logical doses were estimated using published in vitro X-
dueed that derive equivalent dose or risk from direct ray-induced dose-response curves, and values ranged from
measurements of eytogenetic damage in the peripheral 50 to 290 mGy depending on the individual. Limited phys-
blood lymphocytes of crew members (George et al., ical dose measurements were reported for the two studies
2001a,c). These data have the added advantage of taking described above, but data indicated that the frequencies
into account individual radio-sensitiVity in addition to the of aberrations roughly correlated with absorbed radiation
inﬂuence of microgravity eﬂeets and other stress condi- dose. A study by Federenko et al. (2001) of 22 individuals
tions, and can be very useful to benchmark the current who participated in space missions lasting an average of 4
models used to estimate the risk from physical dosimetry to 6 months also reported that the mean yields of dicentrics
measurements (NCRP, 2002). were about 3-fold greater after ﬂight than before ﬂight.
Cytogenetic biodosimetry methods have been used However, large inter-indiVidual variations were reported
extensively for assessing radiation exposures, and remain for this group, with some individuals haVing no appreciable
the most sensitive in viva indicator of dose available to date increase in dicentric yield post ﬂight. The biological dose
(IAEA, 2001). Dicentric chromosomes have been used for estimates for the individual crew members with increased
many years to evaluate accidental radiation exposures dicentric yields varied from 20 to 280 mGy. No compari-
because they can be easily identiﬁed in Giemsa-stained sons with physical dose estimates were given for this study.
chromosome preparations and pre-eXposure background Evidence from these eytogenetic studies strongly
levels are very low. However, the astronaut population indicates that the radiation dose accumulated during a
is unique in that they consent to considerably higher occu- long-duration ﬂight of a few months or more can induce
pational radiation exposures than terrestrial radiation a measurable increase in the yield of chromosome damage,
workers and, unlike the situation with accident Victims, whereas the eﬂects of the dose encountered during shorter
pre-eXposure levels of chromosome damage can be accu- missions of a few weeks or less are below the threshold for
rately assessed in astronauts, allowing for greater sensitiV- detection using this technique. However, the type of Chro-
ity in biological dose estimations. mosome aberration selected for evaluation is an important
factor when considering these data. All the studies
2. Measured yields of exchanges in the peripheral blood described above focus on the detection of dicentric Chro-
lymphocytes of astronauts mosomes, and it has been well documented that radia-
tion-induced dicentrics undergo time-dependent decay in
The ﬁrst in vivo studies of chromosome damage in the blood lymphocytes. Dieentrics have been estimated to have
peripheral blood lymphocytes of crew members were con- an average half-life of about three years in human periph-
ducted in the 1960s during the Gemini program. Bender eral blood lymphocytes, but recent studies indicate large
et al. (1967, 1968) used solid Giemsa staining techniques variability in decay rate among individuals (Durante,
to assess dicentrics, rings, fragments, and Chromatid aber- 2005). It would follow that the use of dicentric aberrations
rations in blood samples obtained from astronauts who for biodosimetry analysis after missions lasting several
participated in the Gemini-III and Gemini-XI missions, months or more may not be reliable due to the loss of aber-
which lasted about 5 h and 3 days, respectively. No signif— rant cells during the mission. In addition, any signiﬁcant
icant increase in damage was detected when samples 001- individual variability in the rate of loss of cells with dieen-
leeted before and after ﬂight were compared. More tries would indicate that yields could not be accurately

"
"3","K. George et a1. / Advances in Space Research 40 ( 2007 ) 483—490 485
corrected for elimination of this type of exchange from the 300
blood.
The introduction of the ﬂuorescence in Sim hybridiza-
tion (FISH) chromosome painting technique radically 240
improved the ease and accuracy of assessing yields of U
monocentric aberrations such as translocations (e.g. Lucas, u;
1997). These types of so-called “stable” chromosome aber- (g 180
rations have a higher probability of survival after cell diVi- a"" |
sion than unstable aberrations, and are therefore é
commonly believed to persist in peripheral blood cells for a 120 l
many years. This indicates that translocations would be a g _
more appropriate tool than dicentric analysis for assessing 135 \I
the effect of chronic radiation exposures such as those 60 I
encountered during long-duration missions, as well as for ! w
assessing retrospective radiation doses. Background levels |‘
of translocations are higher than those of dicentrics; they 0 .
are known to increase with age and show considerable var- 0 Eggective D OS 6, $32, 180
iation between individuals (e.g. Tucker, 2001). Although
this can be a challenge for situations where pre-eXposure Fig. 1. Biological doses for individual astronauts estimated from increase in
levels 0 f translocations are not available, such as after acci- totalchromosomeexchangesindnced during the n11ss1on and calculated us1ng
, , , , a pooled population based m vztm dose response curve for gamma rays.
dental radlatlon €Xposum9 It IS nOt 3' prOblem for space Effective dose was calculated using personal TLD measurements and
ﬂight biodosimetry bCCaUSC samplﬁls 08.11 136 Obtained bCfOI‘C transport codes for shielding effects. The line represents alinear regression ﬁt.
ﬂi ht.
gGeorge et al. (2001a) used chromosome painting to assess uncertainties and small variation in mission duration pre-
the yield of chromosome exchanges in the peripheral lym- clude a deﬁnite conclusion on the level of correlation
phocytes of siX crew members before and after they partici- observed.
pated in space missions lasting three months or more and in
two crew members who participated in a 10-day shuttle mis- 3. Biologically based risk estimates
sion. Post-ﬂight increases in chromosome damage were
detected in all the crew members of the longer-duration mis- A direct comparison of risk estimates based on physical
sions, whereas no signiﬁcant change was detected in crew dose measurements and application of models (NCRP,
members of the shorter shuttle mission. Doses were deter- 2000) with estimates based on biological measurements is
mined using preﬂight in vitro dose-response curves for possible because chromosome aberrations in peripheral
gamma rays that were generated using the individual crew blood lymphocytes have been validated as biomarkers of
members’ blood lymphocytes. Preﬂight levels of transloca- cancer risk. Risk projections for long-term missions in
tions were shown to vary considerably between individuals. low Earth orbit (LEO) can be obtained from biodosimetry
Doses estimated from total chromosome damage ranged data using the quantitative approach derived from the
from 31 to 166 mGy, depending on the individual and these European Study Group in Cytogenetic Biomarkers and
values roughly correlated with the physical measurements of Health (ESCH) database, where it was found that a two-
dose. These data conﬁrm the results of an earlier study by fold increase in the yield of chromosomal aberrations cor-
Yang et al. (1997) in which FISH chromosome painting responds to an increased excess relative cancer risk of
was used to assess aberrations in three crew members who around 23—24% (Bonassi et al., 2000, 2005). The post-ﬂight
participated in a space mission lasting 115 days. Average rel- relative increase in aberration frequency can then be used
ative biological effectiveness (RBE) was estimated by com- directly to estimate the cancer risk, and this biologically
paring biological dose estimates with measured physical based estimate can be compared with conventional risk
doses. Average RBE values were in excellent agreement with estimates based on physical dosimetry and models (NCRP,
the average quality factor of 2.5 that was calculated from 2000). Through analysis of the cytogenetic data described
physical readings corrected for the HZE component of the above, it has been determined that the average excess rela-
exposure and adjusted to representative doses at organ loca- tive risk (ERR) of cancer induction after long-term mis-
tions. Fig. 1 shows preliminary biological dose estimates for sions in LEO is 0.09, with large inter-indiVidual
several different astronauts calculated using the increase in variations (ranging from —0.08 to 0.42) (Durante et al.,
totalchromosome damage measured by FISH chromosome 2001; Durante, 2005). These estimates depend both on
painting and a single pooled population based in vitro cali- the background and post-ﬂight level of translocations
bration curve generated using gamma rays. Values for bio- observed in each astronaut, and are confounded in cases
logical dose show good correlation with the effective dose where small or no background levels are observed. Individ-
for the respective individual that was calculated using phys- ual risk estimates in this same cohort using conventional
ical dosimetry and transport codes. However the statistical assessment leads to an average ERR of 0.02, with a range

"
"4","486 K. George et al. / Advances in Space Research 40 ( 2007 ) 483—490
from 0.01 to 0.03. Despite the large spread in the “biolog- densation (PCC) technique for analysis, in which chromo-
ical” values, it is interesting that the two estimates lie in the somes in the G2 phase as well as metaphase are assessed.
same range. In comparison with calculations of equivalent Cytogenetic analysis using FISH painting of lympho-
doses in the NASA study (George et al., 2001a), these cytes from ten astronauts after long-term space missions
results suggest that current average risk estimates for astro- of three months or more revealed that the frequency of
nauts in LEO are accurate to within a factor of 3 or less complex damage was very low and in most cases only
(Durante, 2005). ERRs derived from chromosome aberra- one or two complex exchanges were detected in several
tions present a wider scatter than those calculated from thousand PCC samples analyzed for each indiVidual
dose. Certainly, statistical error involVing aberration mea- (George et al., 2003b). A low background level of complex
surements accounts for most of the widened distribution, damage was also detected in preﬂight samples, hampering
but inter-indiVidual variability in risk may also contribute statistical signiﬁcance. Similar results were obtained in a
to this variance. cohort of Russian cosmonauts (Durante et al., 2004). In
a another study, Hortsmann et al. (2005) used a multiplex
4. Cytogenetic signatures of space radiation exposure FISH technique (MFISH) to assess all chromosomes
simultaneously in each cell and detected no compleX-type
In addition to detecting simple reciprocal-type chromo- exchanges in a total of 3590 lymphocyte cells pooled from
some exchanges, FISH chromosome painting can be used astronauts involved in short- and long-duration space mis-
to detect compleX-type exchanges, deﬁned as exchanges sions. However, this study was conducted using standard
involving three or more breaks in two or more chromo- metaphase analysis and therefore does not discount the
somes. Many studies have demonstrated that no signiﬁcant possibility that complex damage was not expressed due to
increase in complex exchanges is detected after low-linear extensive cell-cycle delay. In addition, both Testard et al.
energy transfer (LET) radiation such as gamma rays and (1996) and Obe et al. (1997) reported a very low frequency
X-rays at exposures below 2 Gy, whereas low doses of of highly damaged metaphase cells after long-duration mis-
high-LET radiation, such as the HZE ions in space, are sions. However, these studies were limited to so-called
capable of producing extremely complex patterns of Chro- “rogue” cells containing multiple dicentric and acentric
mosome damage (George et al., 2003a; Durante et al., fragments because analysis was conducted using solid
2002). This eVidence suggests that compleX-type damage staining techniques, and again cells were analyzed using
can be induced by a single particle’s traversal through a cell standard metaphase techniques. The nature of the “rogue”
and indicates that this type of damage can be a biomarker cells is still unclear, but they are generally considered to be
of exposure to low doses of high-LET radiation (Anderson unrelated to radiation exposure (Mustonen et al., 1998).
et al., 2002). It follows, then, that any increase in compleX- Intrachromosomal exchanges (inversions) have also
type chromosome damage detected in blood lymphocytes been suggested as a biomarker of exposure to densely ion-
of crew members after space ﬂight would be due entirely izing radiation (Hande et al., 2003). Only one group so far
to the high-LET component of the exposure. (Hortsmann et al., 2005) has attempted to assess the fre-
However, one confounding factor in the assessment of quency of intrachromosomal exchanges in blood lympho-
high-LET radiation-induced chromosome damage is the cytes after space ﬂight. For this study, a high-resolution
inﬂuence of delays in progression of the cell cycle from multicolor ﬂuorescence banding (mBAND) probe for Chro-
G2 to metaphase. Recent ground-based studies have indi- mosome 5 was used, and no inversions were detected in
cated that high-LET-induced chromosome damage under- 2800 cells pooled from 11 astronauts involved in long-
goes a complicated pattern of mitotic delay (Lee et al., and short-duration missions.
2005; Nasonova and Ritter, 2004; George et al., 2001b),
and it is assumed that this is due to the less homogenous 5. Persistence of space radiation-induced cytogenetic damage
nature of this type of exposure compared with X-ray or
gamma-ray irradiation. When chromosomes in the G2 It has been commonly believed that chromosome trans-
phase of the cell cycle are used for the analysis of high- locations would persist in the blood lymphocytes for many
LET-induced cytogenetic damage, much higher yields of years. However, as more data become available, eVidence
damage are obtained than with standard metaphase analy- suggests that this may not always be the case (reViewed
sis. This is due to extensive G2-metaphase cell cycle delays. in Tucker, 2001; IAEA, 2001; Durante, 2005). Some lim-
It is therefore possible that post-ﬂight expression of com- ited data are available on the persistence of chromosome
pleX chromosome damage in crew members’ lymphocytes aberrations in astronaut peripheral blood lymphocytes.
could be inﬂuenced by a complicated pattern of mitotic Durante et al. (2003) Clearly demonstrated that dicentric
delay after exposure to the mixed radiation ﬁeld encoun- yields in astronauts decay with time after ﬂight. The
tered in space and consequently it could be underestimated authors could not measure the complete time dependence
in metaphase samples collected at one time point. To of translocations using FISH painting, but their results
ensure that chromosome damage is not underestimated in show a lack of correlation between time in space and trans-
astronauts’ bloodlymphocytes, it may be more appropriate location yields (Fig. 2a). No signiﬁcant correlation was
to use the Chemically induced premature chromosome con- observed between yields of dicentrics or translocations

"
"5","K. George et al. / Advances in Space Research 40 ( 2007 ) 483—490 487
and duration of ﬂight or absorbed dose. The yield of aber- terrestrial radiation exposures. It is possible that confound-
rations declined rapidly during the time interval between ing factors from exposure to the space environment, such
ﬂights, and after repeated ﬂights translocation yields were as stress and microgravity, could induce cell instability. It
similar to background levels before the ﬁrst mission has been shown that space ﬂights induce drastic Changes
(Fig. 2b). in the immune system, and the ability to respond to Chal-

George et a1. (2005) analyzed blood samples collected at lenges such as infection is reduced in the space environment
various times, beginning directly after return from space to (Sonnenfeld et a1., 2003; Todd et a1., 1999; Taylor et a1.,
more than 5 years after ﬂight. For ﬁve of the six astronauts 1997).
studied, the analysis of individual time courses for translo- The complex time dependence of the Chromosome aber-
eations revealed a temporal decline of yields With various ration yield is apparently a severe limitation on the use of
half—lives ranging from 10 to 58 months. Since the level cytogenetic endpoints to estimate equivalent dose or risk.
of stable aberrations depends on the interplay between nat- In fact, the result of the biological test Will be strongly
ural loss of circulating T lymphocytes and replenishment dependent on the time after sampling. However, it can be
from the stem or progenitor cells, the diﬂerenees in the argued that the “time factor” does not necessarily reﬂect
rates of decay could be explained by inter-indiVidual varia- a technical limitation of the cytogenetic biomarker, but
tion in lymphocyte turnover. The results indicate possible rather provides an individual risk assessment rather than
complications With the use of stable aberrations for retro- the average risk estimate based solely on absorbed dose
speetive dose reconstruction or risk estimates from biolog- (Durante, 2005). As in the ease of individuals Who quit
ieal data. It should be stressed that space is a unique smoking at a certain age after years of chronic exposure
environment and these results may not be indicative of to carcinogens in the Cigarette smoke, radiation relative

a
m 25
O)
‘5;
E 20
Q.
E
a
o 15
D
E 0
E 10"" ‘
(0
g - .}
a !. ‘
) {
a ' f
C
(U
.: 0
0 100 200 300 400 500 000 ?00 800
Time in space (days)
b 10
Cosmonaut 10
1 2 3 4
e
0')
2
Z?
1; 6
r
O
8 4
E
8
a 2 I
O)
.2
o r |
° I ‘
-500 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
Time after ﬁrst blood draw (days)
Fig. 2. Time-eourse of chromosomal aberration in a study on 22 Russian cosmonauts. (a) Relationship between translocation frequency (WGE) and total
duration of space sojourns for cosmonauts involved in multiple space ﬂights. Each symbol represents a different cosmonaut. (b) Kinetics of dicentrics in
one cosmonaut involved in four spaceﬂights. The dicentric frequency (per 1000 lymphocytes) is plotted vs. the time from the ﬁrst blood draw used for the
cytogenetic test. Vertical bars indicate the time of launch and landing for the mission, and the number between the bars the ﬂight number for the
cosmonaut. The line connecting the datapoints is a guide for the eye. Plots from reference Durante et a1. (2003), reproduced With permission of Karger
Publishers, Basel.

"
"6","488 K. George et a1. / Advances in Space Research 40 { 2007 ) 483—490
risk decreases with time after exposure (as shown in the that any cells undergoing extensive G2-M oell-oyole delay
recent analysis of A-bomb survivors, see Preston et al., will still be included in the analysis. As mentioned above,
2003), and the decrease is likely to show a large inter-indi- this method has been shown to help avoid population bias
Vidual variability, caused by physiological, enVironmental, after high-LET radiation in vitro and may ensure correct
and genetic factors. Since these factors are not taken into yields of complex damage induced in viva, although this
account in biophysical models of radiation action, a reli- has yet to be proven. In addition, PCC samples generally
able picture of the relative risk for an individual at a given have a higher index of analyzable cells, so that using them
time after exposure may be derived only by biomarkers of makes it easier to obtain suﬂicient cells from samples that
risk. are consistently diﬂicult to culture.
6. Methodology considerations and suggestions for 6.2. Assessment of chromosome damage
standardized protocols
Since it has been well documented that radiation-
After all available data are considered, it appears that induced dicentrics undergo fairly fast time-dependent
cytogenetic biodosimetry can be used reliably to reoon- decays and will certainly be lost from the blood during a
struct radiation dose after protracted exposure to space longer space ﬂight mission, stable monocentric aberrations
radiation, and these data can potentially be used to assess will provide more accurate assessments of dose. A combi-
individual health risk. However, it is becoming clear that nation of three FISH painting probes for the larger Chro-
compared to terrestrial-based biodosimetry methods, space mosome pairs that comprise about 20% of the genome is
radiation biodosimetry has some unique challenges, which recommended for analysis. This technique allows damage
must be addressed before a standard procedure can be to be scored quickly, and if each chromosome is painted
established. It is apparent that several major areas should with a diﬂerent color, the detection of complex damage will
be considered, as addressed below. be maximized while exchanges within the painted chromo-
somes can also be detected. Data for analysis of individual
6.]. Collection of chromosome samples combinations of chromosomes can be extrapolated to
whole-genome equivalent values using the appropriate cal-
Lymphooytes must be examined in blood samples that culations (for example, see George et al., 2001a). Use of
were collected before ﬂight to establish accurate preﬂight MFISH techniques is not recommended for routine biod-
yields of damage. This not only provides an individual osimetry analysis because analysis of individual cells takes
baseline for translocations, which are highly variable a considerable amount of time.
between individuals, but also increases the dose sensitiVity The analysis of compleX-type exchanges could provide
of the assay. Considering that chromosome damage may valuable information about the high-LET component of
undergo a fairly rapid time-dependent decay, post ﬂight radiation exposure, as any signiﬁcant increase will likely
samples must be collected within a week or two after the be due to heavy ions. However, it appears this type of
mission. Some studies have used samples collected the exchange is quite rare and it is unlikely that valuable data
day after return from space. However, it has been noted can be obtained using the average number of cells analyzed
that response of lymphocytes to phytohemagglutinin for these tests.
(PHA), a chemical that is used to induce lymphocytes to One other important consideration when scoring Chro-
undergo cell diVision, is severely suppressed on the day of mosome damage for dose estimations is that Clonal
return from space. The mitotic index was drastically lower exchanges must be identiﬁed and excluded. Several recent
in samples collected from three crew members on the day studies have indicated that some individuals’ blood lympho-
of return from a 3-month space mission than it was in pre- cytes possess cells with balanced Chromosome abnormalities
ﬂight samples collected from the same individuals (Yang that have Clonally expanded in viva, resulting in a population
et al., 1997). In addition the number of cycling cells was of cells with identical rearrangements. Including these Clonal
much lower, and progression through the cell cycle was exchanges can result in an overestimation of radiation-
muoh slower. This phenomenon, which may be related to induced damage and, therefore, inﬂuence the accuracy of
changes observed in the immune response and/or other dose calculations. Clonal exchanges may be more prevalent
stress and microgravity eﬂeots, seems to last only a few than previously thought. In fact, in one study Clonal aberra-
days. The growth kinetics of PHA-stimulated lymphocytes tions were identiﬁed in three of twelve astronauts (George
collected 9 days after ﬂight were almost the same as those et al., 2004). These Clonal cells were present in samples col-
in preﬂight samples. Given the challenges of collecting leoted both before and after space ﬂight, and yields were
chromosome samples within a few days of return from higher than those previously reported for healthy individu-
ﬂight, a later sampling time (7—14 days after ﬂight) is als. The individuals with Clonal aberrations were followed
preferable. up over several months and the yields of all Clones decreased
The analysis of Chemically induced PCC samples, which during this period. It is possible that the inclusion of Clonal
contain G2-phase as well as metaphase cells, is preferable exchanges could explain some of the inter-indiVidual biolog-
to standard metaphase analysis. PCC analysis will ensure ioal diﬂerences in dose estimates for astronauts. Since Clonal

"
"7","K. George et a1. / Advances in Space Research 40 { 2007 ) 483—490 489
aberrations may be associated With increased risk of tumor- a 007
igenesis, it is important for risk assessment as well as biod-
osimetry to accurately identify cells containing clonal 006 v
rearrangements. _ 3.
T3 0.05 g4
63. Dose limitations 3 __
g 0.04 ""
The radiation dose incurred during shorter space ﬂight g
missions does not produce eﬂects detectable by currently E 0-03 3
available cytogenetic biodosimetry techniques. The lowest 7% a:
dose that can be assessed seems to be around 10 CGy. This F 0'02
generally restricts the use of biodosimetry to missions last-
ing at least 3 months. Using the FISH technique, several 001- '
thousand cells should be analyzed in both pre- and post 0-
ﬂight samples to obtain statistically signiﬁcant data, 0 10 DOSCXECGy) 30 40
although exact numbers can vary depending on the individ-
ual’s background frequencies of damage. [3 0-03
64. Individual sensitivity # 0-025
8
Recent data indicate that in vitro dose response for ChI'O- a 0-02
mosome damage may vary for some individuals (Fig. 3). If this 3‘30
is the case then one standard calibration curve can not be used E“ 0015
for all individuals and it is necessary to generate a preﬂight E %
in vitro calibration curve from the blood lymphocytes of each 3 0'01
crew member before participation in their respective space 3
mission. This Will indicate if the particular individual has a 000533 ""
greater predisposed sensitiVity to radiation and should be :5
monitored more closely. In addition, if the same combination 0 0 10 20 30 40
ofchromosomes is assessed before and after ﬂight and indiVid- Dose (CGY)
ual dose-response curVeS are used: then the reSUItS can be 00m' Fig. 3. Dose response data for chromosome damage induced after in vitm
pared directly Without the need for subtracting background irradiation of blood lymphocytes With gamma rays. (a) Comparison of
yield Of chromosome damage. This results in substantially different crew members. Each symbol represents a different crew member.
decreased error in dose estimations. (b) Same crew member assessed at four different times over a 5 year
. . . period. Each symbol represents a different analysis time. In both plots the
Recent estimates have p ut the overall p ercentage Of 111d1- values represent Whole genome equivalent yields of chromosome damage
Viduals heterozygous for the ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) and bars present standard error.
gene at around 3% of the human population. These indi-
Viduals have defective DNA repair capabilities that results ferent doses are required for the calibration curve, and
in a higher sensitiVity to radiation and they are Clearly at using the probes that comprise 20% of the Whole genome,
greater risk of health eﬂects due to radiation exposure (Hall several thousand cells must be analyzed to generate suﬂi-
et a1., 2005). If these percentages are correct it is very likely eient data for curve ﬁtting.
that the astronaut population includes some A-T heterozy-
gous individuals. Clearly the issue of individual sensitiVity 6.6. Inﬂuence of repeat ﬂights
to space radiation is very important and data are limited.
More study is required in this area. The recent study of crew members after multiple ﬂights
(Durante et a1., 2003) indicates that individuals Who have
6.5. Dose estimations been involved in several missions may have an adaptive
response to space radiation exposure. Given that these
As mentioned above, if the same combination of ChI'O- individuals may have less of an increase in chromosome
mosomes is assessed for each sample, then post ﬂight damage than expected after multiple ﬂights, it may not be
increases can be obtained by subtracting preﬂight back- possible to accurately assess their dose using cytogenetic
ground yields from the post ﬂight yield and biologically methods. It is important, therefore, to research an individ-
determined dose can be calculated directly using the curve ual’s previous radiation exposure from earlier space ﬂights
ﬁt for the preﬂight calibration curve. At least two doses and possibly medical procedures, and to take this into con-
below 10 eGy should be used for the in vitro calibration sideration When evaluating biodosimetry data. This study
to increase the accuracy of the curve ﬁtting for doses Within of adaptive response is very interesting and it is important
the range encountered during space ﬂight. At least ﬁve dif— that the phenomenon be investigated further.

"
"8","490 K. George et a1. / Advances in Space Research 40 ( 2007 ) 483—490

References George, K., Wu, H., Willingham, V., Cucinotta, FA. The effect of space

radiation on the induction of chromosome damage. Physica. Medica

Anderson, R.M., Stevens, D.L., Goodhead, D.T. M-FISH analysis shows 17’ 224—228’ 20010 _ _ _
that complex chromosome aberrations induced by alpha-particle George, Kj’ Duiante, M., Willingham, V"" Wu, H., Yang, T.C., cuCIPOtta’
tracks are cumulative products of localized rearrangements. Proc. FA. Biologicaleﬂectiveness 0f accelerted particles for the induction of
Natl. Acad. Sci. US A 99 12167—12172 2002. chomosome damage measured in metphase and interphase human

Badhwar, G.D., Atwel, W., BadaVi, F.F., Yang, T.C., Cleghorn, T.F. 1ymph0yctes.Rad1at. Res. 160’ 425—435’ 2003a. _ _
Space radiation absorbed dose distribution in a human phantom. George, _K"" Durante, M"" Wu, H"" Willingham, V"" Cucmotta, F'A' In VIVO
Radiat. Res. 157 76—91 2002. and in Vitro measurements of compleX-type chromosomal exchanges

Bender, M.A., Gooch, P.C., Kondo, S. The Gemini-3 S-4 spaceﬂight— induced by heavyions. Ady..Space Res. 31’ 1525—1535’ 2003b
radiation interaction experiment. Radiat. Res. 31, 91—111, 1967. George, Kj’ Durante, M"" Willingham, V"" (?ucmotta, F'A' Chromosome

Bender MA. Gooch P.C. Kondo S. The Gemini XI S-4 spaceﬂight— aberrations of clonal origin are present in astronauts’ blood lympho-
radiation interaction experiment: the human blood experiment. cytes. Cytog?‘}€t- Genome Res.. 104’ 245—25 1’ 2094'

Radiat. Res. 34 228—238 1968. George, K., Willingham, V., Cucmotta, FA. Stability of chromosome

B onassi S. Hagmai L. Str'o'hqberg U. Huici M ontagud A. Tinnerberg aberrations in the blood lymphocytes of astronauts after space ﬂight
H., Forni, A., Heikkiléi, P., Wanders, S., Wilhardt, P., Hansteen, I.- L., by FISH chromosome painting. Radiat. Res. 164’ 474—480’ 2005'
Knudsen L.E. Norppa H. For the European Study Group 011 Hall, E.J., Brenner, D.J., Worgul, B., Smilenov, L. Genetic susceptibility
Cytogenetic Biomarkers and Health (ESCH), Chromosomal aberra- to radiation. Adv. Space Res. 35’ 249—253’ 2005' _
tions in lymphocytes predict human cancer independently of exposure Hande, M'P"" A21zova, TV? Geard, C'R"" Burak, L'E"" MltChell’ C'R""
t0 carcinogens. Cancer Res. 60 1619—1625 2000. Khokhryakov, V.F., Vas11enk0, E.K., Brenner, D.J. Past exposure to

B onassi S. Ugolini D. Kirsh-Vo,lders M. S,tromberg U. Vermeulen densely ionizing radiation leaves a unique permanent signature in the
R., Tucker, J.D. Human population studies With cytogenetic bio- genome. Am. J' Hum. Genet. 72 (5)’ 1162—1170’ 2003' _ _
markers: review of the literature and future perspectives. Environ. Hortsmann, M.,Durante,M.,Joh2tnnes, C.,P1eper,R.,Obe, G' Space “913“?“
M 01. Mutagen. 45 258—270 2005. does not 1nduce 21 Signiﬁcant increase of intrachromosomal exchanges in

Cucinotta, F.A., Wilson, J .W., Williams, J .R., Dicello, J .F. Analysis of astronauts’ lymphocytes. Radiat. EnYirOP- Bioph. 44’ 219—224’ 2005' _
Mir-18 results for physical and biological dosimetry: Radiati on IAEA, Cytogenetic analys1s. for radiation dose assessment. Technical
shielding effectiveness in LEO. Radiat. Meas. 132, 181—191, 2000. Report NO' 405' International Atomic Energy Agency, V169“: 2001'

Cucinotta, F.A., Schimmerling, W., Wilson, J.W., Peterson, L.E., Saganti, Lee, R"" Nesenova, E"" Ritter, 8' Chroniosometaberration 3716qu ahd
P., Badhwar, G.D., Dicello, J.F. Space radiation cancer risks and apopt0s1s in human lymphocytes irradiated With Fe-ions of differing
uncertainties for Mars missions. Radiat. Res. 156, 682—688, 2001. LET' AdV' Space Res. 35’ 268—275’ 20951 _ _ _

Cucinotta FA. Wu H. Shavers M.R. George K. Radiation dosimetry Lucas, J .N. Dose reconstruction for 1nd1V1duals exposed to ionizing
and biophysical models of space radiation effects. Gravit. Space Biol. radiation 1131113 chromosome painting. Radiat. Res. 148’ 33—38’ 1997'
Bull. 16 11—18 2003. Mustonen, R., Lindholm, C., Tawn, E.J., Sabatier, L., Salomaa, S. The

Cucinotta, F.A., Durante, M. Cancer risk from exposure to galactic incidence oi cytogenetically abnormal rogue cells in peripheral blood.
cosmic rays: implications for space exploration by human beings. Int.J.Rad1at.Biol.74, 781_78_5’ 1998' _ _ _ _ _ _
Lancet One 01. 7 431435 2006. Nasonova, E., Ritter, S. Cytogenetic effects of densely 10n1s1ng radiation in

Cucinotta, F.A., Kim, M.Y., Ren, L. Evaluating shielding effectiveness for lymphoytes: impact Of cell cycle delays. Cytogenet. Genome Res. 104’
reducing space radiation cancer risks. Radiat. Meas. 41, 1173—1185, 2006. 21642012904 _ _ _ _ _ _ _

Durante M. Biomarkers of space radiation risk. Radiat. Res. 164 NCRP, Radiation Protection Guidance for Act1V1t1es1n LOW-Earth Orbit.
467—473 2005. ’ NCRP Report No. 132, Bethesda, Maryland, 2000.

Durante 1V1 Bonassi S. George K. Cucinotta FA. Risk estimation NCRP, Operational Radiation Safety Program for Astronauts in LOW-
based on chromosomal aberrations induced by radiation. Radiat. Res. Earth Orbit: 21 B3510 Framework. NCRP Report NO' 142’ Bethesda,
156, 662—667, 2001. Maryland: 2002- _ _

Durante, M., George, K., Wu, H., Cucinotta, FA. Karyotypes of human Obe, G., Johannes, 1., Johannes, C., Hallman, K., Reitz, G., Fac1us, R.
lymphocytes exposed to high-energy iron ions. Radiat. Res. 158 Chromosomal aberrations in blood lymphocytes of astronauts after
581—590 2002. ’ long-term space ﬂights. Int. J . Radiat. Biol. 72, 727—734, 1997.

Durante, M., Snigiryova, G., Akaeva, E., Bogomazova, S., Druzhinin, 8., Preston, D'L"" Pierce, D'A"" Shimizu, Y"" .Ren, E"" Mabuch1,.K. Dose
Federenko B. Greco 0. Novitskaya N. Rubanovich A. Shevchenko response and temporal patterns of rad1at10n-ass001ated solid cancer
V., yon Recklinghausen, U., Obe, G. Chromosome aberration dosimetry “Sks' Health Phys. 85’ 43—46’ 2003 ' _
in cosmonauts after single or multiple ﬂights. Cytogenet. Genome Res. Sonnehfeld, G"" Butel, J.S., Shearer, W'T' Etﬂects Of the space ﬂight
103 40—46 2003. enVironment on the immune system. ReV. EnV1r0n. Health18, 1—17,2003.

Durante M. ’Ando K. Furusawa Y. Obe G. George K. Cucinotta Taylor, G.R., K0nstantin0va,1., Sonnenfeld, G., Jennings, R. Changes in
FA. C omplex chromosomal rearrangements in duce d in V1VO by heavy the immune system during and after spaceﬂight. Adv. Space Biol. Med.
ions. Cytogenet. Genome Res. 104, 240—244, 2004. 6’ 1_32’ 1997' _ _

Federenko B. Druzhinin S. Yudaeva L. Petrov V. Akatov Y. Testard, L., Ricoul, M., Hoﬂschir, F., Flury-Herard, A., Dutrillaux, B.,
Snigirybva ’ G. Novits,kay;1 N. She’Vchenko V., Rﬂbanovich A? Federenko, B., Gerasimenko, V., Sabatier, L. Radiation-induced
Cytogenetic studies of blood lymphocytes from cosmonauts after long- chromosome damage in astronauts’ lymphocytes. Int. J . Radiat. B101.
term space ﬂights on Mir station. Adv. Space Res. 27, 355—359, 2001. 70’ 403—41 1’ 1996' _ _

George K. Durante M. Wu H. Willingham V. Badhwar G. Todd, P., Pecaut, M.J., Fleshner, M. Combined effects of space ﬂight
Cucinotta, FA. Chromosome aberrations in astronauts’ blood lym- factors and radiation on humans. Mutat. Res. 439’ 211—221’ 1999'
phocytes after space ﬂight. Radiat. Res. 156 731—738 2001a. Tucker, J .D. FISH cytogenetics and the future of radiation b10d0s1metry.

George, K., Wu, H., Willingham, V., Furusawa, Y., Kawata, T., Radiat. Prot. Dosimetry 97’ 55—60’ 2001'

Cucinotta, FA. High- and low-LET induced chromosome damage Yang, T'C_"" George, K"" Johnson, A_S"" Dyrante’ Mj’ Fedorenko, B'S'
in human lymphocytes: 21 time course of aberrations in metaphase and B10d0s1metry results from space ﬂight M1r-18. Radiat. Res. 48, 17—23,
interphase. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 77, 175—183, 2001b. 1997-

"
