"","x"
"1","Acta Astronautica I (IIII) IlI—III
‘n:,f""f;_j‘-;Z{;:,;t.g; Contents IIStS available at SCIVerse SolenceDIrect ' ’
«r; {4 Acta Astronaut1ca /
ELSEVIER journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/actaastro :: tl._':(.: ,ny
—
Cytogenet1c b1odos1metry us1ng the blood lymphocytes of astronauts
b . . . d
Kerry A. George 3""“, Jordan Rhone , Lon J. Chappellc, Franc15 A. Cuc1n0tta
a Wyle Integrated Science and Engineering Group,1290 Hercules Drive, Houston, TX 77508, USA
b University of Houston, Houston, TX, USA
C USRA, Division of Life Sciences, Houston TX, USA
d NASA, Lyndon B. johnson Space Center, Houston TX, USA
ARTICLEINFO ABSTRACT
Article history: Cytogenetic analysis of peripheral blood lymphocytes is the most sensitive and reliable
RECEIVEd 5 Decémber 2011 method currently available for in vivo assessment of the biological effects of exposure to
RECEIVE? 1“ rEVISEd form radiation and provides the most informative measurement of radiation induced health
i3 A1331 C123; 2012 risks. Data indicates that space missions of a few months or more can induce
CCEP e ay measureable increases in the yield of chromosome damage in the blood lymphocytes
— of astronauts that can be used to estimate an organ dose equivalent, and biodosimetry
KéyWOdef estimates lie within the range expected from physical dosimetry. Space biodosimetry
BIOdOSImEtrV . poses some unique challenges compared to terrestrial biological assessments of
Chromosomal aberratlons - - - - - -
S ace radiation rad1at10n exposures, but data prov1des a dlrect measurement of space rad1at10n damage,
HpZE nuclei which takes into account individual radiosensitivity in the presence of confounding
factors such as microgravity and other stress conditions. Moreover if chromosome
damage persists in the blood for many years, results can be used for retrospective close
reconstruction. In contrast to physical measurements, which are external to body and
require multiple devices to detect all radiation types all of which have poor sensitivity
to neutrons, biodosimetry is internal and includes the effects of shielding provided by
the body itself plus chromosome damage shows excellent sensitivity to protons, heavy
ions, and neutrons. In addition, chromosome damage is reﬂective of cancer risk and
biodosimetry values can therefore be used to validate and develop risk assessment
models that can be used to characterize health risk incurred by crewmembers. The
current paper presents a review of astronaut biodosimetry data, along with recently
derived data on the relative cancer risk estimated using the quantitative approach
derived from the European Study Group on Cytogenetic Biomarkers and Health
database.
© 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
1. Introduction radiation exposures than terrestrial radiation workers.
The primary sources of radiation in outer space derive
Radiation exposure is one of the main risks for long from Galactic Cosmic Rays, protons and electrons trapped
duration manned missions in space. The space radiation in the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld, and from infrequent Solar
environment is very different from that in the Earth’s Particle Events [1]. In addition secondary radiation, such
surface and the astronaut population is unique in as neutrons and light charged particles, are created by
that they consent to considerably higher occupational interactions of high—charge (Z) and —energy (E) nuclei
(HZE particles) with spacecraft shielding material and
with the human body itself [2,3]. Although HZE particles
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +281 4839593; fax: +281 4833058. contribUte only a few percent to the partide ﬂux in space,
E-mail address: kerry.a.george@nasa.gov (I(.A. George). the signiﬁcantly higher ionizing energy and greater
0094—5765/$ — see front matter © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2012.05.001
Please cite this article as: I<.A. George, et al., Cytogenetic biodosimetry using the blood lymphocytes of astronauts, Acta
Astronautica (2012), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2012.05.001

"
"2","2 ICA. George et al. / Acta Astronautica I (IIII) IIl—III
penetration power of this type of radiation could con— blood lymphocytes, but recent studies indicate large varia—
tribute signiﬁcantly to biological effects. bility in decay rate among individuals [12]. It would follow
Because cancer is the main health concern related to that the use of dicentric aberrations for biodosimetry analysis
the exposure to space radiation, astronaut’s radiation after missions lasting several months or more may not be
exposure limits are based on risk of exposure induced reliable due to the lost of aberrant cells during the mission. In
death (REID) for cancer [4]. Currently accepted radiation addition, any signiﬁcant individual variability in the rate of
exposure limits restrict cancer mortality risk to no more loss of cells with dicentrics would indicate that yields could
than 3% REID [4—6]. Health risks to crewmembers are not be accurately corrected for elimination of this type of
currently assessed from physical measurements of radia— exchange from the blood.
tion dose, which introduces inherent limitations. Multiple The introduction of the ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization
devices are required to detect all radiation types and all (FISH) chromosome painting technique radically improved
current devices have poor sensitivity to neutrons. In the ease and accuracy of assessing yields of monocentric
addition physical measurement can only provide accu— chromosome aberrations. With the FISH chromosome
mulated absorbed doses to the skin and doses to the painting method it is possible to “paint”individual chromo—
internal organs must be computed using anatomical somes with different colors, and aberrations can be easily
models and radiation transport codes that estimate the identiﬁed as multi—color chromosomes. Since moncentric
effects of shielding. There are large uncertainties in chromosome aberrations do not impose mechanistic inter—
estimating radiation cancer risks including values for ference to cell division, lymphatic stem cells should be able
radiation quality factors estimated from radiobiology to produce new lymphocytes containing stable aberrations,
experiments and risk coefﬁcients, which generally are and yields of this type of exchange are, therefore, considered
calculated using data derived from the A—bomb survivors to be stable with time and are commonly believed to persist
for acute gamma—ray exposures. There are additional in peripheral blood cells for many years. This indicates that
uncertainties in estimates of dose— and dose—rate reduc— translocations are a more appropriate tool than dicentric
tion effectiveness factors (DDREF) used to scale acute analysis for assessing the effect of chronic radiation expo—
radiation data to low dose and dose—rates [5—8]. In sures such as those encountered during long—duration
addition, the location of crew dosimeters cannot always missions, as well as for assessing retrospective radiation
be assured, individual radiosensitivity is totally neglected doses. Background levels of translocations are higher than
in the risk models, and synergism between microgravity those of dicentrics; they are known to increase with age,
and radiation is still poorly understood. and show considerable variation between individuals.
Biodosimetry programs have been introduced that However, unlike accident victims, pre—exposure levels of
derive organ dose equivalent or risk estimates from direct chromosome damage can be accurately assessed in astro—
measurements of cytogenetic damage in the peripheral nauts, allowing for greater sensitivity in biological dose
blood lymphocytes of crewmembers [9]. These data have estimations. The level of stable chromosome aberrations
the added advantage of taking into account individual depends on the interplay between natural loss of circulating
radiosensitivity in addition to the inﬂuence of micrograv— T lymphocytes and replenishment from the stem or pro—
ity effects and other stress conditions, and can be very genitor cells. It has been shown that space ﬂights induce
useful to benchmark the current models used to estimate drastic changes in the immune system including alterations
the risk from physical dosimetry measurements [3]. in lymphocyte turn over and migration. The altered rate of
lymphocyte turnover under microgravity conditions could
2. Unique challenges of space radiation biodosimetry complicate comparisons with terrestrial exposures. This
using cytogenetic damage does not necessarily reﬂect a technical limitation of the
Cytogenetic Biomarker for space radiation assessment,
Cytogenetic biodosimetry methods have been used exten— rather that space is a unique environment and these results
sively for assessing radiation exposures, and remain the most may not be applicable to terrestrial radiation exposures.
sensitive in vivo indicator of dose available to date [10]. Another confounding factor affecting the assessment
However, space radiation biodosimetry has some unique of high—LET radiationinduced chromosome damage is the
challenges compared to terrestrial based methods [11,12]. inﬂuence of delays in progression of the cell cycle from G2
Dicentrics have been used for many years to evaluate to metaphase. Ground—based studies have indicated that
accidental radiation exposures and this method is considered high—LET—induced chromosome damage undergoes a com—
“the gold standard” for cytogenetic biodosimetry because plicated pattern of mitotic delay [13,14],and it is assumed
dicentric chromosomes can be easily identiﬁed in Giemsa that this is due to the less homogenous nature of this type
stained chromosome preparations and pre—exposure back— of exposure compared with X—ray or y—ray irradiation.
ground levels are very low. However, multicentric or acentric When chromosomes in the G2 phase of the cell cycle are
chromosome aberrations are unstable aberrations because used for the analysis of high—LET—induced cytogenetic
this type of damage imposes mechanistic interference with damage, much higher yields of damage are obtained than
cell division. Radiation induced dicentrics undergo time with standard metaphase analysis. This is due to exten—
dependant decay in blood lymphocytes, which limits this sive G2—metaphase cell—cycle delays. It is therefore possi—
method to assessment of acute radiation exposures in cases ble that postﬂight expression of complex chromosome
where samples can be obtained fairly soon after the exposure damage in crewmembers’ lymphocytes could be inﬂu—
has occurred. Dicentrics have been estimated to have an enced by a complicated pattern of mitotic delay after
average half life of about three years in human peripheral exposure to the mixed radiation ﬁeld encountered in
Please cite this article as: I<.A. George, et al., Cytogenetic biodosimetry using the blood lymphocytes of astronauts, Acta
Astronautica (2012), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2012.05.001

"
"3","ICA. George et al. / Acta Astronautica I (IIII) IIl—III 3
space and consequently it could be underestimated in ,3 300
metaphase samples collected at one time point. To ensure 5 250
that chromosome damage is not underestimated in astro— :
nauts’ blood lymphocytes, it may be more appropriate g 200
to use the chemically induced premature chromosome E 150 } jt
condensation (PCC) technique for analysis, in which i H +
chromosomes in the GZ phase as well as metaphase are g 100
assessed. (—3 50
0 r g
3. Cytogenetic damage in the peripheral blood '3
lymphocytes of astronauts O 4 8 12 16 20 24
Astronaut, i
In ViVO StUdies 0f Chromosome damage in the peripheral Fig. 1. Biological doses for 23 astronauts who participated in long
blOOd lymphocytes Of crewmembers from Russian Mir duration mission of 3 month or more onboard the ISS (Cucinotta et a1.
space station missions were conducted using dicentric [20.]). Astronauts are nnmbered 1 to 26.. Solid line represents results of
analysis in metaphase cells [15_17]' Crewmembers parti— weighted linear regressmn model for estimating theeffective close using
, , , , , , phy51cal measurements. There IS a Close relationship between effective
c1pat1ng 1n missmns last1ng three weeks or less showed no dose estimates and biological dose equivalent
signiﬁcant elevation of Chromosomes damage post ﬂight,
whereas most crewmembers participating in long duration
missions for 4 months or more onboard the Mir space preﬂight in vitro dose response curves for gamma rays that
station had elevated yields of dicentrics post ﬂight. Pooled were generated using the individual crewmember’s blood
data from individuals with increased chromosome damage lymphocytes. Fig. 1 (published in Ref. [20]) gives the doses
showed a post ﬂight dicentric yield that was elevated measurements attained using cytogenetic biodosimetry for
roughly 3 fold compared with preﬂight values. However, 23 astronauts involved in long duration 155 missions of
large inter—individual variations were reported with some 3 months or more. Doses estimated from total Chromosome
individuals having no appreciable increase in dicentric yield damage ranged from 31 to 166 mGy—Eq. depending on the
post ﬂight. Limited close measurements were reported for individual. The solid line on this graph represents results of
these studies and data indicated that the frequencies weighted linear regression model for estimating the effec—
of aberrations roughly correlated with absorbed radiation tive close using physical measurements and these values
close. Evidence from these cytogenetic studies strongly roughly correlated with the biological measurements of
indicate that the radiation dose accumulated during a close. Average Relative Biological Effectiveness (RBE) was
long—duration ﬂight can induce measurable increases in estimated by comparing biological close estimates with
the yield of chromosome damage, whereas the doses measured physical closes and values were in excellent
encountered during shorter missions of a few weeks or less agreement with the average quality factor of 2.5 that was
are below the threshold for detection using this technique. calculated from physical readings corrected for the HZE
However, as mentioned above, the type of chromosome component of the exposure and adjusted to representa—
aberration evaluated is an important factor when consider— tive close at organ locations using radiation transport
ing this data. All the studies described above focus on the codes [20].
detection of dicentric Chromosomes and it has been well
documented that radiation induced dicentrics undergo time 4. Persistence of chromosome damage in blood
dependant decay in blood lymphocytes. lymphocytes of astronauts
Studies using Chromosome painting to assess the yield of
Chromosome exchanges, including monocentric exchanges, It was commonly believed that radiation induced
conﬁrmed that longer duration missions increase chromo— monocentric chromosome aberrations would persist in
some damage in the peripheral lymphocytes, whereas the blood lymphocytes for many years after exposure.
no signiﬁcant change was detected in crewmembers of the However, as more data becomes available, evidence sug—
shorter shuttle mission, and biodosimetry estimates lie gests that this may not always be the case [10,12,21].
within the range expected from physical dosimetry Durante et al. [22] analyzed chromosome damage in
[17—20]. NASA has implemented a biodosimetry program Russian cosmonauts and reported a lack of correlation
that utilizes the FISH Chromosome painting technique to between time in space or absorbed dose and translocation
assess cytogenetic analysis on all US astronauts who parti— yields, although no individual time dependence of translo—
cipate in long duration missions of 3 months or more cations was presented in this study.
International Space Station (155). Chromosomes are exam— There have only been very few in vivo studies con—
ined in thousands of lymphocyte cells to identify any ducted on the temporal response of radiation induced
structural alterations. Preﬂight levels of translocations were chromosome damage in human lymphocytes and evalua—
shown to vary considerably betweenindividuals and for all tions are limited to follow—up studies of accidentally
individuals the frequency of Chromosome damage mea— irradiated subjects where reliable physical dosimetry
sured within a month of return from an ISS mission of 3 measurements are available and these studies are often
months or more was higher than their preﬁght yield [19]. complicated by the lack of initial translocation data.
The increase in the frequency of chromosomal aberrations is Follow—up analyses were performed on seventeen astro—
used to estimate the equivalent radiation dose using nauts at intervals ranging from around six months to
Please cite this article as: K.A. George, et al., Cytogenetic biodosimetry using the blood lymphocytes of astronauts, Acta
Astronautica (2012), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2012.05.001

"
"4","4 ICA. George et al. / Acta Astronautica I (IIII) IIl—III
many years after a long duration ﬂight [23]. Data showed include ranges of increased risk for individual astronauts
large inter—individual differences in the temporal after 155 missions of 3 months or more in space, and results
response of chromosome aberration yields after space are presented for the ﬁrst time in the present manuscript.
ﬂight. Some individuals showed a signiﬁcant temporal Our study included 30 astronauts. Chromosome damage
decline in chromosome exchanges, whereas the yield was assessed in each astronaut using a combination of
of chromosome damage in other individuals actually three FISH whole chromosome paint probes and yields of
increased with time after ﬂight. When total chromosome damage were extrapolated to whole genome equivalent
damage is analyzed, pooled data indicated a temporal values (WGE) as described previously[9]. Preﬂight samples
decay in yield that is more signiﬁcant for samples col— were collected within the 3 month period before ﬂight,
lected more than 220 days after return from ﬂight. When post ﬂight samples were collected within three weeks of
analysis was restricted to data collected within 220 day of return from ﬂight, and follow up samples were collected
return from the mission there was no relationship from 26 0f the original astronauts between 6—18 months
between total exchanges and time. Yields of monocentric after return from the mission. Yields of chromosome
exchanges varied more between astronauts and pooled damage in blood lymphocytes generally increase with
statistical data for these aberrations indicated no change age and samples from each individual in this study were
within 220 days after return from the mission and only a collected over an average time period of around 2 years.
small non—signiﬁcant decay at later sampling times after T0 accurately assess the effect of space ﬂight, the chromo—
ﬂight. some aberration yields were adjusted to account for
natural increase in aberrations over the time period of
5. Chromosome aberrations and risk estimates the sampling. To accomplish this we used age adjusted
values for each astronaut by modifying the aberration
Chromosomal aberrations in peripheral blood lympho— frequencies to values predicted at age 45 with no space
cytes have been used as biomarkers of cancer risk and ﬂight experience.Linear regression analysis was performed
cytogenetic damage can therefore be used to characterize 0n the frequency of chromosome damage as a function of
excess health risk incurred by individual crewmembers age for the 30 individual astronaut’s preﬂight measure—
after their respective missions. Traditional risk assessment ments in our study (see Fig. 2) to determine an average
models are based on epidemiological data obtained on value for a 45 year old individual and the residuals from
Earth in cohorts exposed predominantly to acute doses of the regression were added to the average estimated
gamma—rays, and the extrapolation to the space environ— aberration frequency to provide a predicted individual
ment is highly problematic, involving verylarge uncertain— values for each astronaut at age of 45. We labeled this
ties. Cytogenetic damage could playa key role in reducing value the age adjusted total exchanges and kept the
uncertainty in risk estimation because it is incurred individual standard errors from the original chromosome
directly in the space environment, using specimens from analysis. The population of 30 astronauts was divided into
the astronauts themselves. three groups of 10, each group representing Low, Medium,
The European epidemiological study on Cytogenetic and High yields of chromosome damage measured before
Biomarkers and Health database has shown that chromo— ﬂight. The ranges were determined as < 4.91, 4.91—8.45,
somal aberrations in human lymphocytes are a predictive and > 8.45 chromosome exchanges per 1000 cells, for the
bio—indicator for future cancer risk reﬂecting both expo— L, M and H groups respectively. These values differ from the
sure to genotoxic agents and individual sensitivity [24]. ranges presented in the European Study Group but this is
In a study of over 22,000 persons in 11 European nations,
levels of chromosomal aberrations are shown to be highly
reﬂective of cancer risk 10 to 30 years after the measure—
ment of chromosome aberration frequency. Individuals PreSpaceFI-ght
were grouped into Low (L), Medium (M), and High (H) 30
levels of chromosomal aberrations and follow—up studies
showed a signiﬁcant increase in cancer incidence and % 25
mortality in groups within the M and H groups compared g |
to the L group. Values for L, M, and H varied somewhat if 20
across the different laboratories participating in the study. “3’ l
Typical values of < 1, 1 t0 3, and > 3 chromosomal “g 15 .7 ’°, 2 "" |
aberrations per 100 cells are found in the L, M, and H g 10 , °3 . °°O
groups. A limitation of the study is the broad uncertainty Li; 7 ° , °. .- _-~-~g°""“';':rfrfaf' |
ranges with overlapping conﬁdence intervals between the E 5 a :‘:i;;i:;;i:ffﬁjifif:WM,.,,,.,W.,m
M and H groups. rgraerroo $ 7 o? a o |
The quantitative approach derived from the European 0 . °
Study Group has been used in the past to estimate an 35 40 4'5 50 55
average value of relative cancer risk for astronauts after age
space missions ranging from around 3—8 months and it .
was determined that cosmic radiation will likely lead to a F'g' 2' The frequency Of Chromosome damage for eaCh. asironam heme
, , , , space ﬂight plotted by age at time of analy51s. The solid line represents
1-2 tlmes IncreaSEd rdatlve rISk (RR) 0f cancer for these the linear regression and the dotted lines are the 95% conﬁdence
astronauts [25]. Recently WE extended the analysis to intervals. Error bars represent the standard errors of the mean values.
Please cite this article as: I<.A. George, et al., Cytogenetic biodosimetry using the blood lymphocytes of astronauts, Acta
Astronautica (2012), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2012.05.001

"
"5","ICA. George et al. / Acta Astronautica I (IIII) III—III 5
A of radiation risk after the protracted exposure to space
20 Lo. I “ed m A H‘gh radiation of more than a few months or more, if blood is
15 ,v collected within a week or two of return from space. One 0f
10 * 3 ﬁ .45 the main advantages of the methods used at NASA is
5 .. I! r i .91 the excellent sensitivity of the FISH method to heavy ions
0 ; ~ — i ‘ ~— 7. I and neutrons that comprise a signiﬁcant portion of crew

g * exposures. Results indicate that biodosimetry estimates

3 35 4° 45 50 55 from single spaceﬂights lie within the range expected from

% A99 physical dosimetry and biophysical models. Individual risk

0 . . .

g B rankings increased after space ﬂight and crewmembers

33 30 if with rankings in the high category are projected to be at

8 1 , greater risk of developing cancer.

3 20 it; [L A

5 ] § g i *

5 10 1 8. References

>< ,, I 4‘

LU

To 0)] . . . . .

E a_— [1] MY. Kim, K. George, F.A. Cuc1notta, Book Chapter 2.5 Radiation in

U 35 40 45 50 55 Principal of Safety Design for Space Systems, International Associa—

% Age tion for the Advancement of Space Safety, Elsevier, 2009 Book

% published March.

:3 C [2] Radiation Protection Guidance for Activities in Low—Earth Orbit,

2 25 NCRP Report No. 132, 2000 Bethesda, Maryland.

20 ‘ g [3] Operational Radiation Safety Program for Astronauts in Low—Earth

] é .. t Orbit: a Basic Framework, NCRP Report No. 142, 2002 Bethesda,

15 $ é t Maryland.

10 ~ g .45 [4] FA. Cucinotta, S. Hu, N.A. Schwadron, K. Kozarev, L.W. Townsend,
5 _ -9 M.Y. Kim, Space radiation risk limits and Earth—Moon—Mars envir—
O J .. onmental models, Space Weather 8 (2010) 500E09.

%— [5] FA. Cucinotta, L]. Chappell, Updates to astronaut radiation
40 45 Age 50 55 limits: radiation risks for never—smokers, Radiat. Res. 176 (2011)
102—114.

. . - - _ [6] FA. Cucinotta, M.Y. Kim, L]. Chappell, Space radiation cancer risk
Fig. 3. Age adjusted tertile rankings fer astrohauts assessed from pre , projections and uncertainties, N AS A TP (2011) 2011—216155.
post—, and follow up samples. Age adjusted yield of total chromosome . . .
c1 . 1 d f h' d' . c1 1 E b h c1 c1 [7] FA. Cuc1notta, M. Durante, Cancer risk from exposure to galactic

amage 15 p otte or eac in WI ua ' rror ars representt e stan ar cosmic rays: implications for space exploration by human beings,
errors of the mean values for actual chromosome aberration measure— Lancet Oncol. 7 (5) (2006) 431_435_
merits. Solid lines indicate the cut off for the low, medium, and high [8] M. Durante, F.A. Cucinotta, Heavy ion carcinogenesis and human
groups. Values for chromosome aberrations in 3 chromosome pairs are space exploration, Nat. Rev. Cancer 8 (2008) 455_472_
extrapolated to Wh01€ Genome Equivalent(WGE)values. [9] K. George, M. Durante, H. Wu, V. Willingham, G. Badhwar,

F.A. Cucinotta, Chromosome aberrations in astronauts’ blood lym—
phocytes after space ﬂight, Radiat. Res. 156 (2001) 731—738.
[10] Cytogenetic Analysis for Radiation Dose Assessment, IAEA. Technical
to be expected as the European group used a different [11] R6132” DO 40131, Igtemationallmomic Enefg’ Ageflcy’ Vieilav 2001-
- - . eorge, . urante, romosome errations 1n stronauts,
mEthOd Of Chromosome analYSIS- Our analySIS was gener_ Book Chapter 25, Chromosome Alterations: Methods, results, and
ated from chromosome palnt technlques were mon0— importance in human health, Springer book published, 2007.
centric exchanges can be visualized, whereas these [12] [V1.Du)rante, Biomarkers of space radiation risk, Radiat. Res. 164
- - - - - 2005 467—473.
mqnocegtuc aberratlons WOUld nOt be VISIble usmg the [13] K. George, H. Wu, V. Willingham, Y. Furusawa, T. Kawata,
5011C] Stalnlng tEChnlques emplOYEd by the Eur0pean StUdY- F.A. Cucinotta, High— and low—LET induced chromsome damage in
The age adjusted preﬂight tertile rankings are shown in human lymphocytes: a time eourse of aberrations in metaphase
Fig. 3 panel A and the solid lines indicate the cut off for the and Interphase' Int' 1' Radlat' 3101377 (2001) 175—183'

. . , , [14] K. George, M. Durante, V. Willingham, H. Wu, T.C. Yang,
10W, mEdlumv and hlgh grouPS- Pand B In Flg- 3 ShOWS F.A. Cucinotta, Biological effectiveness of accelerted particles for
pOSt—ﬂight chromosome yields in the same individuals the induction of chomosome damage measured in metphase
within three weeks of return from ﬂight adjusted into 23;] Alggerphase human lymphoyaes' Radlat- Res- 160 (2003)
tertile rankings deriVEd from the preﬂight values' IndiVi' [15] G. Obe, 1.]ohannes, C. Johannes, K. Hallman, G. Reitz, R. Facius,
dual tertile rankings increased after space ﬂight and only Chromosomal aberrations in blood lymphocytes of astronauts
one individual remained in the low category. Analysis of gfztgr7l3()4ng—term Space ﬂlghts’ Int- 1- Radlat- 3101- 72 (1997)
fOllOW Up 531111311th from 26 Of the 0r1g1nal30 astronau’ts [16] L. Testard, M. Ricoul, F. Hoffschir, A. Flury—Herard, B. Dutrillaux,
taken at least 6 months after their respective ﬂights are B. Federenko,V. Gerasimenko, L. Sabatier, Radiation—induced chro—
Plotted in panel C Of Fig. 3 and ShOW that the tertile 833%?2513332316 in astronauts’ lymphocytes, Int. J- Radiat. BiOI- 70

. . . . o _ _

rankings rémélﬂw 1n the hlgh catEgory f01‘ 11101‘6 than 50/0 [17] B. Federenko, S. Druzhinin, L. Yudaeva, V. Petrov, Y. Akatov,
Of these 1nd1V1dualS- Crewmembers that lnCrease and G. Snigiryova, N. Novitskaya,V. Shevchenk0,V. Rubanovich, Cytoge—
remain in the high category are projected to a signiﬁcant netic studies of blood lymphocytes from cosmonauts afterlong—term
increase in life—time cancer risk space ﬂights on Mir station, Adv. Space Res. 27 (2) (2003) 355—359.
' [18] T.C. Yang, K. George, A.S. Johnson, M. Durante, B.S. Fedorenko, BS,
Biodosimetry results from space ﬂight Mir—18, Radiat. Res. 48
6. Conclusions (1997) 17—23.
[19] K. George, V. Willingham, F.A. Cucinotta, Stability of chromosome
, , , , , aberrations in the blood lymphocytes of astronauts after space
Cytogenetic bIOdOSImEtry can be USEd reliably t0 est1— ﬂight by FISH chromosome painting, Radiat. Res. 164 (2005)
mate organ dose equivalent and provide an estimate 474—480.
Please cite this article as: I<.A. George, et al., Cytogenetic biodosimetry using the blood lymphocytes of astronauts, Acta
Astronautica (2012), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2012.05.001

"
"6","6 ICA. George et al. / Acta Astronautica I (IIII) IIl—III
[20] FA. Cucinotta, M.Y. Kim, V. Willingham, I(.A. George, Physical and [23] K. George, L]. Chappell, F.A. Cucinotta, Persistence of space radia—
biological organ dosimetry analysis for international space station tion induced cytogenetic damage in the blood lymphocytes of
astronauts, Radiat. Res. 170 (2008) 127—138. astronauts, Mutat. Res. 701 (2010) 75—79.
[21] ].D. Tucker, FISH cytogenetics and the future of radiation biodosi— [24] S. Bonassi, et 3]., Chromosomal aberration frequency in lympho—
metry, Radiat. Prot. Dosim. 97 (2001) 55—60. cytes predicts the risk of cancer: results from a pooled cohort study
[22] M. Durante, G. Snigiryova, E.Akaeva, S. Bogomazova, S. Druzhinin, of 22, 358 subjects in 11 countries, Carcinogenesis 29 (2008)
B. Ferenfo, O. Greco, N. Novitskaya, A. Rubanovich, V. Shevchenko, 1178—1183.
U. von Recklinghausen, G. Obe, Chromosome aberration dosimetry [25] M. Durante, S. Bonassi, K. George, F.A. Cucinotta, Risk estimation
in cosmonauts after single or multiple ﬂights, Cytogenet Genome based on Chromosomal aberrations induced by radiation, Radiat.
Res. 103 (1—2) (2003) 40—46. Res. 156 (2001) 662—667.
Please cite this article as: I<.A. George, et al., Cytogenetic biodosimetry using the blood lymphocytes of astronauts, Acta
Astronautica (2012), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2012.05.001

"
