"","x"
"1","Available online at www.sciencedirect.com —
“4% d) ADVANCES IN
111/ SGIENGE< DIRECT® SPACE
Egg RESEARCH
ELSEVIER Advances in Space Research 35 (2005) 180—184 M
WWW.elseVier.com/locate/asr
Ground-based research W1th heavy ions for space radiation protection
b
M. Durante a’*, A. Kronenberg
a Department Of Physics, University Federico II, Monte S. Angelo, Via Cintia, 80126 Naples, Italy
b Department Of Biophysics, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA
Received 5 September 2004; accepted 9 December 2004
Abstract
Human exposure to ionizing radiation is one of the acknowledged potential showstoppers for long duration manned interplan—
etary missions. Human exploratory missions cannot be safely performed Without a substantial reduction of the uncertainties asso—
ciated With different space radiation health risks, and the development of effective countermeasures. Most of our knowledge of the
biological effects of heavy charged particles comes from accelerator—based experiments. During the 35th COSPAR meeting, recent
ground—based experiments With high—energy iron ions were discussed, and these results are brieﬂy summarised in this paper. High—
quality accelerator—based research With heavy ions Will continue to be the main source of knowledge of space radiation health effects
and Will lead to reductions of the uncertainties in predictions of human health risks. Efforts in materials science, nutrition and phar—
maceutical sciences and their rigorous evaluation With biological model systems in ground—based accelerator experiments Will lead to
the development of safe and effective countermeasures to permit human exploration of the Solar System.
© 2005 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Space radiation; Accelerators; Iron ions; Fragmentation
1. Introduction miologieal investigations, most notably the cohort of
survivors of the atomic bombs dropped in 1945 in Hiro-
“Keep your eyes on the stars, and your feet on the shima and Nagasaki. In contrast, crews of manned
ground” (Theodore Roosevelt). space missions are exposed to a higher proportion of
Humans on Earth are continuously exposed to ioniz- hlgh-energy p rotons .and heavy .iOIiS (HZE p articlee)
ing radiation. However epidemiological studies are not contrlbuted by galactic eosmle radlatlon. Charged part1-
helpful in the assessment of the magnitude of potential ole ex p osures from the trap p ed radlatlon belts and solar
health risks of exposure to high-energy heavy charged p artlele events .are also 1mp ortant to consider. Large
particles Mos t of the annual e ffee tive dose to the popu— seale human epidemlologle studles do not eX1st forthese
lation comes from oc-partieles (from radon in air) y- and kind Of exposuree, and although there are reports in the
B-rays (from natural in ternal and terrestrial sources) literature deserlbing late effects in normal tlssues 1n pa-
and X-rays or radionuclides ( from dentistry diagnostic t1ents treated W1th charged partleles for cancer and other
. . . ’ . diseases and cataract incidence in astronauts these
radiology, or nuclear medlclne procedures). Proteetlon . . ’
standards for ionizing radiation exposures on Earth reports and other related studies generally 1nvolve rela-
. . . . tively small data sets and limited descriptions of the of-
are based on sohd selentlﬁc eV1denCe from cellular stud- ten com lex radiation ﬁelds or other otentiall
ies, in Vivo investigations in animal models, and epide- p p y
confounding exposures (Blakely and Chang, 2004;
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +39 081 676 440. Cueinotta, 2001a). Consequently, the uncertainties asso-
E—mail address: durante@na.infn.it (M. Durante). ciated With cosmic radiation risk estimates are very high,
0273-1177/$30 © 2005 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.asr.2004.12.034

"
"2","M Durante, A. Kronenberg / Advances in Space Research 35 ( 2005 ) 180—184 181
and currently lie between 400% and 600% for a Mars DNA strand break repair in yeast (Pross et a1., 1994,
mission (Cueinotta et a1., 2001b). Radiation risk uncer- 2000). In both cases, the initial reports indicated in-
tainties for extended interplanetary missions have been creased radiation eﬂects in conjunction with micrograv-
dominated by the scarcity of knowledge of the biological ity, but these eﬂects were not conﬁrmed in the replicate
eﬂects of HZE particles, as shown in Fig. 1 (NASA, experiments in space.
1998). Most of our current knowledge of the health eﬂects of
Owing to the paucity of robust human studies, our cosmic radiation exposures has been obtained from
knowledge of biological eﬂects of space radiation is ground-based experiments at accelerators (reViewed in
dependent on in Vitro studies with human or animal cells Blakely and Kronenberg, 1998). The evaluation of can-
and in Vivo research using animal models. In principle, didate materials for space radiation shielding is also
space radiation eﬂects can be studied directly in space. commonly performed at accelerators (Miller et a1.,
This approach has the advantage of including all other 2003). Earlier reports have summarised heavy-ion radio-
space environment factors (microgravity, stress, Vibra- biology experiments performed at the BEVALAC at the
tion etc.) in the experiment. Several radiobiological Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in Berkeley,
studies have been carried out during space ﬂights (re- CA, USA (Blakely et a1., 1983), the SIS and the Unilac
Viewed in Horneck, 1999; Kiefer and Pross, 1999; Ohni- at the Gesellschaft fur Schwerionenforsehung in Darms-
shi et a1., 2002), but most of the results gathered thus far tadt, Germany (Kraft, 1987), the HIMAC at the Na-
have been inconclusive. Several factors contribute to the tiona1 Institute for Radiological Sciences in Chiba,
diﬂiculties in interpretation of charged particle radiation J apan (Ando, 2001), and at the AGS at Brookhaven Na-
eﬂects from space ﬂight experiments. The average dose— tiona1 Laboratory in Upton, NY, USA (Lowenstein,
rate in low Earth orbit, though substantially higher than 2001). The completion of the NASA Space Radiation
on Earth, is still fairly low (<1 mSV/day). The resultant Laboratory (NSRL) in October 2003 at Brookhaven
biological eﬂects are small and are often below the detec- (Schimmerling et a1., 2003) adds a new high-energy ma-
tion threshold of most assays, even for long-term mis- chine to the scientiﬁc arsenal and a commitment to a ro-
sions on the International Space Station. For this bust experimental program designed to speciﬁcally
reason, radiobiology experiments in space often include address the open issues in space radiation hea1th protec-
high-dose radiation exposure of the sample pre-ﬂight or tion. It is expected that results ﬂowing from those accel-
onboard, which further complicates the experiment and erators and new facilities under construction will
its interpretation. Second, ﬂight experiments are expen- contribute decisively to the reduction of radiation risk
sive, diﬂicult to control, restricted to limited sample uncertainties and to the development of eﬂective coun-
sizes, and hard to repeat. Very few radiobiology experi- termeasures that will enable human space exploration
ments in ﬂight have been repeated and, in the rare cases while limiting the risks to crew hea1th.
where this was possible, poorly controlled experimental Although, the galactic cosmic radiation is composed
conditions led to inconclusive ﬁndings. Two examples of 87% protons and 12% helium, the rare heavy ions
where replicate experiments were performed in space provide major contributions to the doses encountered
are the measurements of Chromosomal aberrations in by crewmembers in space. In fact, 56Fe is probably the
human lymphocytes (Bender et a1., 1967, 1968) and most important contributor in terms of dose equivalent
among all ions in the galactic cosmic radiation spectrum
(Fig. 2). Not surprisingly, most of the research in the
Shielding ﬁeld of space radiobiology is focussing on iron ions
materials accelerated in the energy range 0.1—10 GeV/n. For these
. . reasons, Dr. Eleanor Blakely proposed that a session be
Radiation . . . . .
environment dedicated to reV1ew1ng the current state of Fe-ion biol-
ogy and physics experiments during the 35th COSPAR
Biological in Paris in July 2004. The meeting included 23 ora1 pre-
effects of sentations and one round table, chaired by Dr. Jack
j charged Miller. The proceedings of the meeting are included in
i particles this volume, and a few highlights are given below.
Bio:Ijnggi‘czeill.effetctsﬁ '
oflowdosesand
1DWJdDiSIB'i-Ea‘tels: 2. Computer simulations and physical measurements of
the iron beams
"" r * The session on accelerator physics aimed to provide a
Fig. 1. Contributions to space radiation risk uncertainty of the main detailed Characterization Of the iron beams used for
biological and physical endpoints. Adapted from NASA (1998). radiobiology experiments, with emphasis on the

"
"3","182 M Durante, A. Kronenberg / Advances in Space Research 35 ( 2005 ) 180—184
1,E+00 -
|
1: 1.5-01 _‘ , . n
o N 1 ,_ .2 2 ,1 ﬂ
‘3 II”! I I H"" [I II ""I'IIII'IIII'
E 115-03 11 1 ﬂ 1 1 1 . 11 “
o _ 1
rm H ll'lrll'llllllllllllll
EMII | | | | I | [I | | I III II'H'II'II'H II
.2 |||I||||||||||||||||||||||I|
1,E-06 1: 1 r ‘ 1 . 1 1
| .l .I .I _.I ill ,_I ,| ,| ..| ,Al _4| ,il .l .I ,.| ,I | 1| [I ,l ..| _,| _| “I l [I
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 910111213141516171819202122232425262728
Atomic number (Z)
Fig. 2. Relative contribution of different ions to ﬂux, dose, and dose equivalent from galactic cosmic radiation. Nuclei heavier than nickel are very
rare. Calculation by HZETRN kindly provided by Dr. Frank Cucinotta and Dr. Cay Zeitlin.
1 GeV/n Fe-beam at the NSRL facility. Simulations strongly on the detailed experimental conditions and on
with three different computer codes (HZETRN, PHITS, the inclusion of electrons and light fragments.
and FLUKA) were compared to measurements per- Discussion during the round table pointed out the
formed with silicon detectors (from the Lawrence Berke- need for more experiments aimed to measure fragmenta-
ley Laboratory group) or plastic nuclear track detectors tion eross-seetions, which in turn can be used to improve
(from the University of Naples Federico II). The set-up the codes. Dr. Gregory Nelson proposed to single out a
used during the experiments and simulated by the codes set of physical parameters (e.g., ﬂuenee, energy, dose-
is schematically shown in Fig. 3. A fair agreement be- average LET) to be provided by authors of radiobiology
tween experiments and simulations was observed, papers using heavy ions. This session demonstrated that
although HZETRN overestimated the yield of protons the beam physics must be considered and critically eval-
detected. In fact, HZETRN uses a forward approxima- uated to enable proper comparison of aeeelerator-based
tion for the production of secondaries, while protons are radiobiology experiments and to avoid misinterpreta-
seattered at wide angles, as shown by the Monte Carlo tion of results.
codes (PHITS and FLUKA).
The results show that the dose per incident particle on
the shield decreases by inereasing the shield thiehness, ow- 3. Biological effects of energetic iron ions
mg to the severe prOJeetile nuclear fragmentation. Frag-
ment spectra have been measured and calculated, and This sessions included four reports on DN A damage,
from these spectra the dose- and traek-average LET Of ﬁve reports on genotoxieity and mutations, two reports
the bearn can be evalnated. Whlle the elose-ayerage LET on chromosomal aberrations, and three reports on cellu-
slightly increases by 1nereas1ng the Shleld thickness, the lat effects and transformation. Three reports described
traek-average LET deereases..A preeise assessment of experiments performed at the HIMAC in Japan, one
the track-average LETis very d1ﬂieult,because1t depends was relative to results obtained at GSI in Germany,
and the remaining covered experiments at NSRL in
Brookhaven. DNA damage studies are summarised ﬁrst.
The complex nature of energy deposition in lesion pro-
duction by heavy ions was presented by Dr. Hiroshi
56Fe beam DeteCtor Ide in studies employing supercoiled plasmid DNA.
/’ The efﬁciency of speciﬁc repair enzymes was tested di-
‘ @ reetly on heavy ion-irradiated DNA or with model sub-
strates containing speciﬁc lesion combinations. Lesion
removal was reduced under certain conditions of dam-
age Clustering. Dr. Honglu Wu presented examples of
the variability of y-HZAX staining, thought to reﬂect
the complexity of DNA double-strand breaks, after
, , , exposure of human cells to high-energy Fe ions or Si
Fig. 3. The set-up used for fragmentation studies of 1 GeV/n Fe-beam . . . .
from NSRL. This same set-up was used for experimental measure- 10118. There was an 111dlcat1011 that the mean number
ments (using silicon detectors 0r CR-39 nuclear track detectors) and Of phosphorylated CluSterS was LET dependent.
simulation using computer codes. Follow-up studies describe the removal of these

"
"4","M Durante, A. Kronenberg / Advances in Space Research 35 { 2005 ) 180—184 183
“tracks” of y-HZAX staining. Studies presented by Dr. The complex and important topics of genetic hetero-
Ryuiehi Okayasu reported on the involvement of the geneity, genetic susceptibility and risk assessment were
non-homologous end-joining pathway on the rejoining introduced by Dr. Eric Hall who presented several in
of heavy ion-indueed PCC breaks at short times post- Vivo approaches to these issues now in development by
irradiation. Dr. Mauro Belli presented studies on the en- his group. Important results were reViewed regarding
ergy dependence of Fe ion-indueed DNA double-strand an elevated susceptibility to cataract in ATM heterozy-
break induction and rejoining in human ﬁbroblasts gous mice, and a new approach was described based
using pristine beams from 115 MeV/n to 5 GeV/n, and on thymocyte apoptosis as an indicator of radiation sen-
deseribed the variable effects of shielding on the out- sitiVity in different single and double transgenic and
come. While shielding was protective for the very knockout models. This talk was followed by a presenta-
high-energy beams, shielding materials did not reduce tion by Dr. Basil Worgul, who gave a more extensive
the damage introduced by 414 MeV/n Fe ion beam description of the enhanced cataract incidence in ATM
and may have potentiated its effects. heterozygotes as a function of dose, radiation quality,
Two presentations focused on chromosome aberra- and cataract grade.
tions following exposure to Fe ions. The ﬁrst, presented The long term consequences of Fe ion exposures were
by Ms. Ryonfa Lee from GSI, described the substantial addressed in work presented by Dr. Danie11a Bettega on
cell cycle effects on human lymphocytes exposed to dif— delayed reproductive death in normal human ﬁbro-
ferent types of charged particle radiation, including b1asts. Delayed reproductive death is one of a suite of
some at extraordinarily high LETs (e.g., Cr ions at indicators of genomic instability in the progeny of the
4.1 MeV/n). A complex suite of endpoints was pre- irradiated cells. The energy dependence of the occur-
sented, including metaphase analyses, GZ-PCCs and renee of delayed reproductive death was presented for
apoptosis. The second talk, given by Dr. Markus Horst- three energies of Fe ions, one energy of Ti ions and
mann, presented mBAND analyses of chromosome one energy of Si ions. The RBEs for delayed reproduc-
aberrations in cells exposed to 500 MeV/n Fe ions, X- tive death varied depending on whether dose or ﬂuence
rays, or the restriction endonuclease AZuI. The principal was considered in the deﬁnition. Dr. Tom Hei intro-
conclusion was that the pattern of Chromosomal frag- dueed studies with telomerised small airway epithelial
mentation and rearrangements was different for Fe ions cells which will complement his ongoing work with nor-
vs. X-rays, with an indication that a high C—ratio (the ra- mal human bronchial epithelial cells and Vira11y
tio of complex interchanges to simple exchanges) might immortalised BEPZD bronchial epithelial cells. The fo-
serve as a biomarker for high-LET exposure. cus heretofore has been the identiﬁcation of genes that
New model systems were introduced to address the govern tumorigenie conversion, while the new model
importance of tissue architecture as a mediator of the system may permit the unmasking of earlier stages in
mutagenie effects of exposure to Fe ions. Dr. Esfandiar the process of neoplasia following exposure to Fe ions.
Behravesh focused on studies with rat ﬁbroblasts in The ﬁnal talk of the session, presented by Dr. Jerry Wil-
which the lac] gene is inserted in a tandem array eover- lianis on behalf of Dr. John Dieello and their NSBRI
ing 45.5 kb. Here, the importance of irradiation in 2D colleagues, reViewed an extensive series of studies on
vs. 3D cultures was introduced using a bioreaetor to al- mammary carcinogenesis in Sprague—Dawley rats eX-
low formation of the 3D cultures. Key ﬁndings included posed to low to moderate ﬂuenees of Fe ions, protons
a dose-dependent loss of packaging efﬁciency of the or y rays. Fe ions were shown to be the most potent
phage, and a reduced mutant frequency in 2D vs. 3D for the induction of mammary cancer, and tamoxifen
culture conditions. Dr. Amy Kronenberg introduced a was shown to be an effective ehemopreventive agent.
comparative study on autosomal mutagenesis at the aprt Other chemical countermeasures were introduced, and
locus using isogenic mouse kidney epithelial cells eX- a cocktail of antioxidant enzymes was most effective at
posed either in Vitro or in situ in the animal. Preliminary reducing Fe-ion-induced oxidative stress in short term
results indicate a dose-dependent increase in aprt mu— assays performed in irradiated rats. Mechanistic studies
tants at low ﬂuences in epithelial cells exposed in Vitro, on Fe-ion-induced mutagenesis in transgenic mouse
and strain speciﬁcity for susceptibility to the toxic effects models were also reViewed, and reveal tissue speciﬁcity
of high-energy Fe ions. for the genotoxie effects of densely ionizing Fe ions.
Dr. Gregory Nelson presented a complex suite of The breadth of the studiesintroduced here1ends hope
experiments with a focus on gene expression in Caeno- to the notion that the next few years will see an explosion
rhabditis elegans. The effects of Fe ions on gene expression in the available data beyond what was presented in this
were eompared/Contrasted with the effects of high-energy session. Continued collaborations between theoretical
protons or X-rays. Certain responses were conserved for physicists, experimental physicists, and biologists should
the three different radiation qualities, but substantial dif— enable those who are tasked with the analyses of risks and
ferenees were also noted using advanced genomics the uncertainties associated therewith to narrow the range
approaches. of risks with some conﬁdence in the forseeable future.

"
"5","184 M Durante, A. Kronenberg / Advances in Space Research 35 ( 2005 ) 180—184
Acknowledgements Cucinotta, F.A., Manuel, F.K., Jones, J ., et 211. Space radiation and
cataracts in astronauts. Radiat. Res. 156, 460—466, 2001a.
The authors (M80 and D0 of the session) are grate- cuCinO.tt8’ F'A"" Sghimmerhng’ W."" .Wilson’ JW"". .et 31' Space
, , , , , radlatlon cancer rlsks and uncertalntles for Mars mlssmns. Radlat.
ful to Tom K. He1 and Jack M111er for ed1t1ng thls V01- Res. 156, 682—688, 2001b.

111116. we thank 1316211101” Blakely fOl‘ prOposing th€ Horneck, G. Impact of microgravity 0n radiobiologicalprocesses and

session during the 34th COSPAR meeting, and the efﬁciency of DNA repair. Mutat. Res. 430, 221—228, 1999.

members Of the Organizing Committee: Y. Furusawa, Kiefer, J ., Press, H.D. Space radiation effects and microgravity.

- - Mutat. Res. 430, 299—305, 1999.

J . Han, G. Nelson, W. Sehlmmerhng, and B. K . . . . _ . . .

raft, G. Radloblologlcal effects of very heavy lens. mactlvatlon,

Sutherland. induction of chromosome aberrations and strand breaks. Nucl. Sci.

Appl. 3, 1—28, 1987.
Lowenstein, D.I. BNL accelerator-based radiobiology facilities. Phys.
Med. 17, S26—S29, 2001.

References Miller, J ., Zeitlin, C., Cucinotta, F.A., et a1. Benchmark studies of the

effectiveness of structural and internal materials as radiation

Ando, K. High LET radiobiology at NIRS—current status and future shielding for the International Space Station. Radiat. Res. 159,
plan. Phys. Med. 17, S292—S295, 2001. 381—390, 2003.

Bender, M.A., Gooch, P.C., Kondo, S. The Gemini-3 S-4 spaceﬂight— NASA. Strategic Program Plan for Space Radiation Health Research
radiation interaction experiment. Radiat. Res. 31, 91—111, 1967. (NASA, Washington, DC), 1998.

Bender, M.A., Gooch, P.C., Kondo, S. The Gemini XI S-4 spaceﬂight— Ohnishi, T., Takahashi, A., Ohnishi, K. Studies about space radiation
radiation interaction experiment: the human blood experiment. promote new ﬁelds in radiation biology. J. Radiat. Res. 43, S7—S12,
Radiat. Res. 34, 228—238, 1968. 2002.

Blakely, E.A., Chang, P.Y., Late effects from hadron therapy, Press, H.D., Kost, M., Kiefer, J . Repair of radiation induced genetic
Radiother. Oncol. 2004 (in press). damage under microgravity. Adv. Space Res. 14, 125—130, 1994.

Blakely, E.A., Kronenberg, A. Heavy-ion radiobiology: new Press, H.D., Casares, A., Kiefer, J. Induction and repair of DNA
approaches to delineate mechanisms underlying enhanced biolog- double-strand breaks under irradiation and microgravity. Radiat.
ical effectiveness. Radiat. Res. 150, S126—S145, 1998. Res. 153, 521—525, 2000.

Blakely, E.A., Ngo, F.Q.H., Curtis, S.B., Tobias, CA. Heavy-ion Schimmerling, W., Cucinotta, F.A., Wilson, J.W. Radiation risk and
radiobiology: cellular studies. Adv. Radiat. Biol. 11, 295—390, 1983. human space exploration. Adv. Space Res. 31, 27—34, 2003.

"
