"","x"
"1","lg:
Ikol
I‘—.|I
I .I
IOI
IONI
KAI
:53:
15%:
Igl
IOI . .
Convection and Interfaaal Mass
Exch an ge
Mass—exchange through fluid interfaces is “gofﬁwfgﬁm
ubiquitous in many natural and industrial 24.0
processes.Yet even basic phase-change 230 ‘
processes such as evaporation of a pure 22.0 ‘1 4
liquid are not fully understood, in particular 21-0 ' t i
when coupled with fluid motions in the 2‘10
vicinity of the phase—change interface, or .2 1:: 4% b , _
with microscopic physical phenomena in the 17.0 ‘ .
vicinity of a triple line (where the interface 13..)
meets a solid). Nowadays, many industries ‘
recognise that this lack of fundamental Fig. 1. Infrared image of the temperature ﬁeld at the free surface
knowledge is hindering the optimisation of ofaIayerofFIuorinertFC—72 evaporating underastream ofairat
existing processes.Their modelling tools are mom tempe’ature'
too dependent on empirical correlations with
a limited — and often unknown — range of
applicability. In addition to the intrinsic multi-
scale nature of the phenomena involved in
typical industrial processes linked to of the research concerns pure liquids
interfacial mass exchange, their study is undergoing evaporation (Fig. 1), processes
highly multi-disciplinary, involving tools and involving binary fluid mixtures are also
techniques belonging to physical chemistry, considered. From the fundamental point of
chemical engineering,fluid dynamics, view, emphasis is placed on the
non-linear physics, non—equilibrium understanding of:
thermodynamics, chemistry and statistical
physics. From the experimental point of view, —— surface tension—driven instabilities
microgravity offers a unique environment to accompanying evaporation, leading in
obtain valuable data on phase-change some cases to interfacial turbulence (ITEL
processes, greatly reducing the influence of and ClMEX-1 experiments);
body forces and allowing the detailed and —— micro—scale effects always present near
accurate study of interfacial dynamics. In contact lines and affecting the
turn, such improved understanding leads to evaporation dynamics (ClMEX—2
optimisation of industrial processes and experiment);
devices involving phase-change, both for —— mechanisms of flows and instabilities
space and ground applications. affecting evaporating drops and vapour
bubbles (ClMEX-4 experiment).
1. Introduction From the applied perspective, the focus is on
The convection and interfacial exchange the expected increases in energy— and mass-
‘ (ClMEX) programme is investigating transfer rates resulting from such
fundamental and applied aspects of mass phenomena,which are expected to be
transfer through fluid interfaces.While most determinant in microgravity because of the
168
© European Space Agency 0 Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

"
"2","12;:
IOI
IONI
KAI
:53:
15%:
15%:
,3, Report of the
E“: ESA MAP Team in Physical Sciences
Fundamental and Applied Research r '0 ‘ I
on Convection and Interfacial ‘
Mass Exchange (CIMEX) A ‘
(MAP—99—1 10) ‘;_ J
absence of convective flows due to 1‘ I
buoyancy. In collaboration with industry '
partner EHP, several types of high— Fig. 2. Left: Schlieren snapshots of the 15 mm-diameter
performance grooved Surfaces are being evaporation ZONE during the ITEL-T flight.Redarrows indicate the
tested to optimise the efficiency of heat directioh of the nitrogeh ﬂovy. The time step between images is
. 0.4 5. Right: 3-D numerical Simulation (FLUENT) of the ITEL
pipes (Dagobert, Heat and TEPLO conﬁguration, showing the free-surface temperature ﬁeld, with
experiments). In addition, improved superimposed velocity venom
modelling and design tools used by the
industry are being developed and validated
by accurate microgravity experiments. In , : a I d
paraIIeI, other applications involving mass * ”I ‘1 ‘ NM '1 I
transfer through interfaces are being studied ‘ "" I Q , y i . y; ""I
by some of the team members, such as “:1”? 1.; ' V ‘ f i L .. I 1
condensation and separation in microgravity ‘ H V ""M
(parabolic flightS), boiling, W ~ I I 250
absorption/desorption and micro— M’M , ’ E'73‘ifjj;:_y W A
encapsulation by solvent extraction. I gt” 6, I I- 7
‘9 é ', . \ ""
2. Mass Transfer-Driven Instabilities and ”f3 t” 1?, ‘ .. . '_ _ 23.5w;
Interfacial Turbulence A ,. ?\“1
2'1 Interfacial Turbulence in Evaporating 5;ng ”K. , A V_
Liquids: the ITEL Experiment w W;
During the Maser-9 (March 2002) and
Maser-I 0 (April 2005) sounding rocket Fig. 3. Left: the ITEL module. Right: thermal maps atdifferent
campaigns, interfacial flows and weak depths through the ethyl alcohol layer (from the top : 0.5, 1.5, 2.5,
turbulence were observed in a 5 mm-deep 3:5 ahd 4.5 mm'below the'freesurface). The arrowshows the
. direction of the Imposed nitrogen ﬂow along the free surface,
ethyl alcohol layer when a nitrogen flow was which resultsinasigniﬁcant cooling byevaporation,generatinga
forced to flow along the quuid—gas Interface strongMarangonif/ow.
(Legros et aI., 2001; Colinet et aI., 2001a;
Colinet et al., 2003). Such surface tension—
driven flows generally increase the global
evaporation rate (Colinet et aI., 2001 b), and
induce smaII—scale surface ripples whose algorithm.The ITEL module was developed by
chaotic evolution were visualised using a Swedish Space Corporation, and the optical
Schlieren set—up orthogonal to the free set—ups by Lambda—X (Nivelles, Belgium).
surface (see Fig. 2). In addition,the 3—D In addition to demonstrating the operation
thermal field in the liquid layer was of such optical diagnostics in microgravity,the
measured by interferometric tomography ﬂights of the ITEL module tested and
‘ (Joannes et al., 2001), using six views in validated several concepts to be used during
different directions parallel to the free the ClMEX-1 experiment planned for the
surface and a dedicated reconstruction International Space Station (ISS). Among
169
© European Space Agency 0 Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

"
"3","I‘—.”

I .I

IOI

Iml

KAI

:33:

Igﬂl

I(LTfJ“

:3:

RI

V L, m 5' Fig. 4. Left:snapshot ofthe temperature at the evaporating free
surface (numericalsimulation) in a typical turbulentregime,
5 ' i ~ reached at three times the criticaIMarangoninumber when the
0"""" 2 _ if -- f Biot number is high (here, Bi = 5). The Prandtlnumber Pr = 6.
4 ”g '71 ‘. 3‘. Right: direct3-D numerical simulation (FLUENT) of the 2-Iayer
"" ”s” ' 3%"") y .. ?Jﬁwk .1 ' ‘1 system with nitrogen ﬂow along the free surface (red arrow).
y , W 7» h ‘ ‘:""&;)\g( E : g Top: concentration boundarylayer in the gas phase; bottom: free-
i ‘ , ‘1: ,, w z surface temperature ﬁeld.

ULg considered in a first step a one-sided
model,with a Biot number (dimensionless
heat transfer coefficient at free surface)
depending on the wave number of

these, the regulation of the free-surface convective disturbances (Dondlinger et al.,
flatness using a dedicated control algorithm 2005), as proposed by ULB (Colinet et al.,
based on the Schlieren image typically 2002; Haut & Colinet, 2005) for the linear
maintained the interface flat at up to 50 pm. case.Water-air and ethanol—air systems were
In addition, the delicate filling of the cell both considered. It was found that hexagons
during the microgravity phase was found to are the first convective pattern appearing
be nominal and reproducible during both past the linear stability threshold. Rolls
ITEL—i and |TEL—2 flights. (respectively squares) are stable only above
The occurrence of interfacial turbulence (respectively below) a critical value of the
was demonstrated in weightlessness, and the liquid depth.This critical depth is greater for
results greatly helped understanding of the an ethanol-air system than for water—air. ULg
role of the gas—phase dynamics on the large— introduced the 1.5—sided model (Margerit et
scale thermal field in the liquid (Fig. 3), al., 2005),which removes the assumption of
measured using the optical tomograph. Even a Biot number either constant or dependent
though the 6 min of microgravity were on the critical wave number.The model is
insufficient to reach a steady state, such characterised by a Biot number that is a
preliminary results are essential because they non—Iocal function of the interfacial
clearly demonstrate the importance of temperature.The corresponding results were
surface tension—driven flows during shown to be in very good agreement with
evaporation of pure liquids into inert gases, a the simplified Biot approximation
finding confirmed by direct numerical introduced in one—sided models.The 1.5—
simulations. sided model thus provides a strong
theoretical justification of the Biot
2.2 Theoretical and Numerical Modelling of approximation. Studies were also conducted
Mass Transfer—Driven Instabilities on the role of surface deformation (Moussy
As seen in Fig. 3, evaporation of a liquid layer et al., 2004) and interfacial temperature
results in a temperature reduction at the top discontinuities (Margerit et al., 2003).
surface that can give rise to thermo— BTU computed the linear stability of a
convective instabilities.The system studied 2-Iayer system with evaporation (Merkt &
by ULg and ULB consists of an infinite Bestehorn, 2003). It was shown that
horizontal fluid layer in contact with a evaporation can be modelled in the 1-layer
mixture of its vapour and an inert gas. BTU system by a large effective Biot number, in
considered a volatile oil in contact with the agreement with the results of ULg and ULB.
atmosphere. Linear and non—linear analyses Numerical integration of the 1—layer system
‘ of these systems were carried out by the in 3—D showed the sequence conduction—
three groups, and the results were compared hexagons—squares-turbulence as the
those from experiments run by ULB. Marangoni number was increased (Fig. 4).
170
© European Space Agency 0 Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

"
"4",":g:
:3:
5:5
:3:
D4
ILLEI
lg:
INI
Another approach to the system is in separators was carried out.The strong
provided by the phase—field model, which influence of gravity on condensation heat
was extended by BTU to thermo—capillary transfer was studied.Variations in the
instabilities (Borcia & Bestehorn, 2003; Borcia temperature of the condenser wall of up to
et al., 2004) and to evaporative systems 8-12K were measured during one cycle of
(Borcia & Bestehorn, 2005). It is planned to normal gravity — hypergravity — microgravity.
extend the work to more complicated The experiments confirmed that heat transfer
surface geometries, such as drops or bubbles, intensity and hence the condensate film
in cooperation with |USTI. behaviour are different on Earth and in
microgravity. Gravity stratifies the liquid
2.3 Parabolic Flight Experiments on inside a condenser tube, so it has a positive
Condensation and Separation effect on the heat transfer at the top of the
Condensation is encountered in many condenser and a negative one on the bottom
engineering fields and, particularly, in space part.
applications.The objective of the ULB team
in this research area is to achieve a better 2.4 From ITEL to CIMEX-1
understanding of condensation phenomena While ITEL studied the transient effects
and to study the possibilities of improved occurring during evaporation of a pure liquid
heat transfer in microgravity with a view to in the presence of an inert—gas flow, ClMEX—l
applications in space thermal control will yield detailed maps of permanent (i.e.
systems.The work is performed in asymptotic) regimes and mass-transfer rates,
collaboration with industrial partner EHP and in addition to testing different fluid depths
the Institute ofThermophysics (Novosibirsk, and liquids, including binary mixtures.Other
Russia). Current investigations are also a step diagnostics will be used, such as infrared
in preparing for the ClMEX—l experiment; thermography of the free surface, and
optimising its dedicated possibly velocimetry using tracer particles.
condenser/separator system was the main A new feature of CIMEX—1 is that the
goal of the parabolic flight experiments. produced vapour needs to be recondensed
The vapour of FC-72 was condensed in a (because there is no vacuum line in the host
tube with longitudinal fins (produced by Fluid Science Laboratory) and possibly fed
EHP) and liquid was separated from the back to the evaporator, similarly to the
nitrogen gas flow in two separators. A functioning of a heat pipe.This will be
moving liquid meniscus in a 10 pm achieved thanks to a new condenser—
cylindrical micro-channel was used as a separator system developed and tested at
liquid lock the main purpose of which was to ULB, in collaboration with the Institute of
prevent penetration of the gas phase in the Thermophysics.
liquid line at small flow rates of the In parallel with the ongoing development
condensate.The principle of the system was of the flight container, ground experiments
tested on the ground and in microgravity, are being run to identify critical parameters,
and the overall performance was confirmed. optimise scenarios and diagnostics, and
Visualisation of the dynamics of 2—phase flow understand the delicate coupling between
© European Space Agency 0 Provided by the NASA Astrophysics D'léta System

"
"5","lg:
I©I .
IT:
IOI
I®I
KAI
15;:
ngl
:ES:
Igl
IQI
INI
buoyancy and surface—tension forces. In gradients serving as driving forces.The
parallel, the numerical codes are being surface—tension effect leads to increased
continually improved, taking into account curvature along the flow.The volatility of the
physical effects such as the diffusion of curved interface is reduced in comparison to
vapour in the gas and evolution of that of a plane interface, so the equilibrium
boundary layers, in order to reach full interface temperature rises with increasing
agreement with ground and flight curvature.Adhesion forces tend to reduce
experiments. the curvature of the liquid—vapour interface,
In addition to the ground experiments so the evaporating meniscus ends in a
performed in a 3—D configuration non-evaporating thin liquid film that is
(ClMEX1-3D), other tests are being run in a adsorbed at the wa||.The adhesion forces
2—D configuration.The liquid is sandwiched also reduce the volatility of the liquid, leading
between two transparent flat plates and to an increased interface temperature.
visualised using interferometry A model of fluid flow, heat transfer and
(CIMEX1-2D).This arrangement is known as mass transfer at the micro—region was
a Hele—Shaw cell, and it turns out to be quite developed at TUD (Stephan & Busse, 1992). In
useful for understanding the origin of small— this model, the liquid-interface shape at the
scale surface ripples and the mechanisms of micro—region is described by a set of highly
the transition to chaotic regimes. non-Iinear ordinary differential equations.
The heat— and mass—transfer characteristics of
3. Micro-Scale Effects in Evaporation and the micro—region can be derived from the
Advanced Capillary Structures calculated shape.The developed model
3.1 Theoretical Modelling of Micro-Scaie allows the coupled micro-scale and
Effects on Evaporation macro—scale evaporation problem to be
In spite of the extreme technological solved for different types of applications.
importance, the transport processes
responsible for heat transfer in thin films are 3.2 ClMEX-Za Experiment on Evaporation
still not fully understood.The heat and mass at a Meniscus
transfer during evaporation from a liquid Experimental investigations of local heat
meniscus is governed by the processes transfer and wetting characteristics at an
taking place in the vicinity of the triple line, evaporating meniscus are necessary to
where the solid wall, liquid and vapour are understand the phenomena in the micro-
in mutual contact ('the micro-region’). region and to validate the numerical models.
In this region, the liquid layer on the wall ClMEX-2a aims to:
is extremely thin (sub—pm), which leads to a
drastic reduction of the thermal resistance —— investigate wetting and heat transfer
of the liquid, and, hence, to the characteristics in close proximity to an
intensification of evaporation.This evaporating liquid meniscus in the
evaporation induces a transverse liquid flow micro—region at pg conditions;
from the bulk to the micro—region, with the — quantitatively verify the numerical results
surface curvature and the adhesion force of the model developed by TUD.
© Europealvgpace Agency 0 Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

"
"6","Ii—ll
I :I
IOI
I®I
:3:
I(ijl
Igﬂl
:33:
Igl
IQI
INI
"" ‘Fig. 5. Temperature distribution around the micro-region. iiquid meniscus
stainless steei foil
V i ‘ a H i i \ biack paint
‘ “\W .g.7__m/«————Plexiglas
[°C] , . H a .
27.30 g ,
In the current breadboard ground
experiment,thermochromic liquid crystals {IE
(TLCs) are used to measure the temperature 2720 52H? '""
distribution close to an evaporating » gﬂf .
meniscus.The experimental cell consists of a 27.10 §H’ 1'
Plexiglas container partly filled with the 35;
working fluid. A single liquid—vapour 27.00 HwiH H Ir 1, ,H‘ . H Hg!
meniscus is established in a capillary slot f» “g ‘ ‘i‘ W i ""' H
between two parallel flat walls immersed in ”i 1/;
the liquid pool. One of the walls consists of a 7-630 , k, «
thin (10 pm) electricalIy-heated stainless lg
steel foil with TLCs applied to the back side; 2580 3H:
this wall is supported by a Plexiglas plate. 1
The uniformly heated foil causes 25.70 W _
evaporation at the liquid—vapour meniscus. o 100 200 300 400 500 [Pixel]
Theheatremovalatthemeniscusleadstoa g,,.,.,,,.;,..., m.,...,,,...,,,.....,g,.
temperature gradient at the liquid—foil ° “’0 2°” 30° 4°“ [um]
interface. Owing to the thinness of the foil
and the high spatial resolution of the TLCs,
the measured temperature distribution at
the back side of the foil is a characteristic
representation of the temperature the liquid from the condenser side to the
distribution at the liquid—foil interface evaporator and spreads it over the heated
(Héhmann & Stephan, 2002).The upper part surface.The evaporation process from the
of Fig. 5 shows the liquid meniscus and the liquid meniscii in the capillary structure
heated wall with TLCs, all rotated by 90°.The crucially affects the HP performance. Care
lower part of Fig. 5 shows the corresponding must be taken that the capillary structure is
temperature profile measured from the able to sustain the liquid supply to the
macro—region to the adsorbed film. evaporator in any operating state.Taking into
A concept for the space experiment has account these various requirements, the
been developed.The cell will be a flat heat design of an HP’s capillary structure is an
pipe with a single evaporating meniscus. optimisation problem.
For optimising grooved capillary
3.3 Dagobert Experiment on Foton-MZ structures,two main ideas arose from
In Sections 3.1 and 3.2, it was shown how theoretical considerations.The first is to
micro—scale effects influence the increase the efficiency of the evaporation
evaporation from a liquid meniscus. From an process by increasing the surface area where
applications perspective, this subject plays the micro—regions are located.The second is
‘ an important role in heat pipes (HPs; to use large groove diameters for low flow
Stephan & Busse, 2002).The interior of an HP resistance,together with small capillary slots
is lined with a capillary structure that sucks for high capillary pressure (Brandt et al.,
173
© European Space Agency 0 Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

"
"7","lg: - .e .
Ikol ' '
II—ll
I :I
IOI
Iml
KAI
I
:33.
Igﬂl
ICLTGJI
I
lg.
IQI
INI
"" "" _' -' . ' 4: f ' i ' ;. ""'f . - ‘ _ V” Fig. 6.Advancedgroovedcapillarystructure.
34,4)?” 1%. v _ 3, a 2 \
fa ' ’” ' ~~-.
emmagm,‘ -
*2” ‘ ,
1. fﬁﬁﬁe
begin ground experiments with such novel
2000; Stephan & Brandt, 2004).These ideas grooved capillary structures in order to make
led to the design shown in Fig.6. a scientifically—supported decision on a
The Dagobert experiment conducted possible future application in ClMEX-Zb.
during the Foton—M2 mission in 2005 was
devoted to the study of the evaporation 4. Microgravity Experiments on
process occuring in such capillary structures High-Performance Heat Pipes
in pg conditions.The scientific objectives 4.1 Heat Experiments onboard ISS
were the verification of theoretical models The ’Heat’ experiment (Fig. 7), developed with
and their numerical results, the visual the Microgravity Research Centre (MRC—ULB)
observation of the liquid distribution in the and with the support of Dutch Space for the
grooves (which differ from observations on driving electronics box, was part of the ESA—
the ground), and tests of the evaporator Dutch Delta mission to the ISS in April 2004.
performance under typical space The experiment was part of the ESA
conditions. AlphaBus telecommunication satellite
platform high—performance constant-
3.4 ClMEX—Zb Experiment on Advanced conductance HP pre-development. Delta
Capillary Structures provided a unique opportunity to develop, in
Dagobert also served as a precursor for the a short time, an experiment to be
future ClMEX-Zb experiment, so Foton—M2 accommodated and run in the Microgravity
provided a comprehensive proof—of— Science Glovebox facility in the ISS Destiny
concept.This includes the question of how US laboratory module.
to accomplish the experiment and its The experiment was delivered by a
requirements in the new environment of Russian Progress ferry in January 2004 and
the FSL aboard the ISS, as well as of how to stowed until the arrival of the ESA-Dutch
advance the Dagobert scientific flat—plate astronaut André Kuipers. Additional tests
HP concept itself. were carried out by US crewman Mike Fincke
Furthermore, it is intended to incorporate as voluntary ’Saturday science’activities.The
the latest scientific work at TUD, which achieved Heat experiment objectives were:
means that a different kind of capillary
structure could be used in CIMEX—2b.This — the maximum power transport capability
goal is based on numerous ground was validated in 09,1 9 and 1 g-rotation
performance tests with grooved capillary environments;
structures (Stephan & Brandt, 2004) that — the heat-transfer coefficients were
indicate improvement of capillary structures measured and 09/1 g—rotation tests
requires extension of the surface area showed an improvement factor of up to
occupied by micro-regions.The idea now is 2.3 times the 1 9 measured
to replace the micro-grooves shown in Fig. 6 performances;

‘ by a thin porous |ayer,which could — the evaporator heat transfer is mainly
enormously increase the number of micro— from the micro—region heat transfer
regions per unit area.TUD is planning to located at the edge of the interface
174

© European Space Agency 0 Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

"
"8","5%; 3111 Ef‘t
I‘—.”
I .I
IOI
Iml
ISI
:33:
I,<1:""I
:33:
Igl
RI
"" 'Fig. 7. The ’Heat’eXperimentbox hardware. ‘ “m
1 it 1 x 5;
1 j ,. “Ti {*1 ~ “7%
between the liquid meniscus and the 1 g ' [i’l‘ :5, A 7
groove wall; ” gt - t w 'i
— mathematical modelling results were in ‘ L 5"" 5', ‘L I _‘ -. m i. ,. afg
line with the measured performances in L"" ‘ . =4? n: ,, I \t“
—— the flight test demonstrated that a w ha 1 1 _ “it
provides a smooth transition as the M ‘ Z ‘ '
evaporator dries out;
— new pg tests are needed to confirm the
Heat results with tests through the
operational temperature range and with
other HP sizes. to transported heat. Nevertheless, the
difference between ground and on—orbit HP
4.2 Preparation of the TEPLO Experiment performance is more pronounced for larger—
for Foton-M3 diameter HPs owing to puddle effects during
HPs and HP networks are widely used to ground testing. An experiment under
equalise the temperatures of satellite microgravity conditions is therefore
elements of various sizes, to collect heat mandatory.
dissipated by satellite payloads and The TEPLO experiment consists of an HP
platform equipment, and to transport heat equipped with thermal sensors, heaters and
from the HP collection networks to the coolers, and an electronics box for heater
satellite fixed radiators. control and data collection.The device is an
The performance of relatively small— aluminium axially—grooved HP with a new
diameter HPs (typically 11-15 mm) was until internal design being developed under
recently sufficient for constructing the heat— another ESA contract. It will have a circular
collection and heat—transport networks. section of 19 mm of diameter.The length will
However, the efforts of recent years to be carefully selected to meet the experiment
develop large telecommunications satellite objectives. Its layout (evaporator, adiabatic
platforms (with or without deployable and condenser section lengths and locations)
radiators), have revealed the need for larger- will fit the allocated space in the Foton—M3
diameter HPs (typically 18—25 mm) with capsule in late 2006.
greater heat-transport capabilities to satisfy The goal is, first, to validate the design in
the increasing level of satellite payload heat microgravity because the classical method of
dissipation under a stringent thermal 1 9 performance extrapolation to 0 9 will
control mass budget. probably not be accurate enough owing to
A smaller number of high—performance increased HP puddle effects. Secondly,the
HPs are thus preferable to a larger number flight will provide the measurement data to
‘ of small HPs.The large-diameter axially— calibrate and validate the large—diameter HP
grooved HPs with carefully designed mathematical models currently under
grooves will have an attractive ratio of mass development.
175
© European Space Agency 0 Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

"
"9","I©I
I‘—.”
I .I
IOI
I®I
KAI
13;:
I,<]:""I
ICLQI
:3:
RI
"" "" ,. . ’ ._ Fig. 8. Photographs showing in ahorizontalplane the oscillatory
. * 1 ' {V made every 1.04 5 via injected tracerpartides (Rb = 3.1 mm;
* , . ’ gradient2.1K/mm).
~ (1) ' «~ ’ <2) <3)
(4) .. . I (5) ' . i (6) around a single air bubble (Reynard et al.,
2005).The bubble was introduced under a
downward—facing heating element into a
liquid layer heated from above and cooled
from below (silicone oils Pr = 16.7 and
Pr = 228 or FC—72, Pr = 12.3). In the steady—
state case, the thermocapillary convection roll
5. Evaporation of Sessile Drops and around the bubble had a toroidal shape and
Bubble Flows and instabilities the tracer particles accumulated in the centre
5.1 Parabolic Flights of the primary vortex.Visua|isation in the
During several series of parabolic flights, horizontal plane revealed the particles in a
|UST| studied the heat transfer induced by ring around the bubble.This led to the
stationary and oscillatory thermocapillary axisymmetrical structure of the steady
convection around an air bubble injected thermocapillary state flow.
under a rigid wall in a liquid layer (silicone In the non-steady—state case, a 3—D
oil) heated from above and cooled from oscillatory mode was found.The convection
below. It was quantified under reduced— became periodically space— and time—
gravity for several operating conditions dependent.The particles stayed in the centre
(bubble sizes, temperature gradients, Prandtl of the primary vortex but the initially circular
numbers).The influence of the gravity level structure was distorted.The particles
on the 3—D periodic thermocapillary state accumulated in a periodic structure with
was studied. It was shown that the outward and inward extrema that were not in
thermocapillary roll around the bubble was the same horizontal plane (Fig. 8).
distorted periodically.There are generally two Wall heat transfer was measured under
extrema that rotate around the bubble, but several operating conditions. A systematic
their number depends on the operating study versus the temperature gradient and
conditions (the bubble size and/or the the bubble radius was carried out.The ratio
temperature gradient). For two extrema, the between the heat flux with the
wave number is equal to 2; for three, the thermocapillary effect and without it
wave number is 3. remained quite low;the maximum value was
The heat transfer is found to depend on less than 1.3. It did not depend on the
the Marangoni number under reduced temperature gradient or on the state of the
gravity;the enhancement may reach a factor thermocapillary convection.The occurrence
of 3. For liquids with low Prandtl number,the of the oscillation did not modify the heat
heat transfer does not change whatever the transfer. Moreover, the heat transfer changed
state of the thermocapillary convection only with the bubble size, which led to a
modification of the thermocapillary roll size
5.2 ClMEX—4a Experiment on Flows around and then of the convective heat—exchange
‘ Bubbles surface. Finally, heat transfers and geometrical
Marangoni convection induced by a characteristics of growing vapour bubbles
temperature gradient was investigated were also studied (Barthes et al., 2005a).
176
© European Space Agency 0 Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

"
"10","It—jl
I .I
IOI
I®I
ISI
15;:
ngl
:ES:
Igl
RI
"" "" Fig. 9. Evaporation rate as afunction of wetting radius for several 0912 .
aluminium substrate temperatures. .
0,]
@008wmmwWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWMWWWWWWWWWWW
fa” ’
' , 7:
0,02 - ,. T v i M“ ""
0 i ,
5.3 CIMEX-4b Experiment on Evaporation 0 1 2 3 4
of Sessile Drops Wetting radius (mm)
The evaporation of a sessile bidistilled water
drop (5 < V< 7O mm3) was studied on two
different surfaces: a wetting surface (polished
aluminium) and a non-wetting surface (PTFE)
heated from below (wall temperature 30— absorption/desorption occur in a variety of
90°C).Two evaporation processes were situations (thin—film evaporators, dryers,
found, according to the surface substrate.The bubble columns and other gas—liquid
first corresponded to a pinned drop with a contactors), and it is essential to quantify the
constant contact line and a decreasing influence of several physico—chemical
wetting angle.The second was a non—pinned mechanisms in these situations, in order to
drop with a constant wetting angle and a improve the predictions and correlations for
decreasing contact |ine.The evaporation interfacial heat— and mass—transfer
process of a pinned drop of water does not coefficients.
depend on the substrate (nature and In this framework, it is planned to measure
roughness): the substrate influences only the carbon dioxide absorption rates in water, in
initial contact of the drop.The evaporation collaboration with the Solvay industrial
rate is a linearly- increasing function of the partner and the Chemical Engineering
wetting radius and of the support Department of ULB. A new feature in this
temperature (Fig. 9). It was observed process is the occurrence of a bulk chemical
experimentally and numerically that the reaction involving the absorbed carbon
nature and the state of the support surface dioxide when the pH is made sufficiently
influence only the drop initial contact angle high by the addition of a basic agent.This
and the wetting perimeter. It was found that process plays a crucial role in the sodium
the evaporation phenomenon is located carbonate— and bicarbonate—production
mostly near the contact line (Grandas, 2004; process invented and used by Solvay. In
Grandas et al., 2004; 2005; Mollaret et al., parallel with the development of a set-up to
2004). Other studies also focused on the measure exchange rates, a theoretical model
evaporation of liquids in capillaries, is being developed to quantify the
considering Marangoni—driven motions evaporation and absorption rates, and to
(Sefiane et al., 2004; Steinchen & Sefiane, understand limiting mechanisms.
2005).
7. Interfacial Studies of Emulsions for
6. Research on Absorption/Desorption Industrial Microencapsulation
Processes Processes
The industrial applications of the CIMEX Microencapsulation involves a large number
programme are not limited to heat—transfer of processes in order to entrap active
devices. In chemical engineering,flows of material in spherical particles, immobilising
gases along free surfaces undergoing mass it, protecting it, controlling its release and
exchange such as evaporation or providing new physical properties or
177
© European Space Agency 0 Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

"
"11","I©I
Ii—ll
I .I
:3:
KAI
15;:
I,<]:""I
:ES:
:é:
mmme"" + “went Fig. 10. Microencapsulation by emulsion/solvent evaporation:
sm‘mm 3°‘Vem 3°lvem 3°lvent inﬂuence of the pressure on the evaporation site.
{)0 I .1 ,1 ,1
0
O Q P > Ps P = P8 P < PS
Water 3 f f z :
a a a
I I 8. Conclusions
This MAP project has proved to be successful
at associating specialists in fundamental and
applied research related to interfacial
functions.The range of applications of processes.This combination of skills is
microcapsules is very wide, but little—known essential for significant progress and new
to the public. Most large industries are ideas, leading to the improved performance
involved in encapsulation, either as of heat exchangers and improved modelling
producers or users. tools for industry. CIMEX has also greatly
There are many encapsulation methods, benefited from the parallel research
including interfacial polymerisation, simple conducted by the lnterfacial Convection and
and complex coacervation, spray coating and Phase Change (ICOPAC) network funded by
spray drying.The present study concerns the European Union 5th Framework
production by emulsion/solvent evaporation Programme, with several partners in
(Fig. 10). A solution of polymer and volatile common.The concept of the Topical Team
solvent is dispersed in aqueous phase and promoted by ESA is also very helpful for
the solvent is extracted by reducing the fostering collaboration between European
pressure.While engineering allows us to partners.
figure the macroscopical properties of the
capsules and the process performances, the References
internal dynamics inside the beads and, Barthes, M., Reynard, C., Santini, R. & Tadrist, L.
especially, at the interface control the (2005a). Analyse des transferts de chaleur
structure, and hence the real properties of lors de la croissance d’une bulle de vapeur.
the microcapsules.The aim of the project is In Congrés Frangais de Thermique SFT
to integrate the multi-scale approach of the Reims, France (30 May — 2 June 2005) (Eds.
process to offer an improved and controlled J. Padet, C. Bisseux, C. Padet, M. Lachi &
industrial process. H. Pron), pp45-50.
As a first step, a laboratory-scale reactor Barthes, M., Reynard, C., Santini, R. & Tadrist, L.
was established and data collected to (2005b). Determination des
identify a macroscopic model and its caractéristiques géométriques de la
parameters.The model includes mass transfer croissance d’une bulle de vapeur et des
in the different phases following simple Fick’s transferts de chaleur associés :influence
laws.The model will be extended to take des incondensables sur le déclenchement
account of heat transfer. d’instabilités convectives. Mécanique &
As a second step, a single-droplet system Industries 6, 257—262.
will be set up to study and model the Borcia, R.& Bestehorn, M. (2003). Phase-Field
pheromone at the droplet scale and, later on, Model for Marangoni Convection in
at smaller. In parallel,the macroscopic model Liquid—Gas Systems with Deformable
. will be tested to define under which Interface. Phys. Rev. E 67, 066307.
conditions the process is driven by Borcia, R. & Bestehorn, M. (2005). Phase—Field
mechanisms at the droplet scale. Simulations for Evaporation with
178
© European Space Agency 0 Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

"
"12","lg: . , . ;
:O':
E:
:m:
E:
ILLEI
IOI
:8:
Convection in Liquid—Vapour Systems. Eur. Sounding Rocket Experiment.Adv.Space
Phys.J. B 44,101—108. Res. 32, 119-127.

Borcia, R., Merkt, D. & Bestehorn, M. (2004). A Dondlinger, M., Margerit, J. & Dauby, RC. (2005).
Phase-Field Description of Surface— Weakly Nonlinear Study of Marangoni
Tension-Driven Instability.lnt.J. Bifurcat. lnstabilities in an Evaporating Liquid Layer.
Chaos 14,4105. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 283, 522-532.

Brandt, C., Stephan, P., Dubois, M. & Grandas, L. (2004). Evaporation d’une goutte
Mullender, B. (2000).Theoretica| sessile: Etude expérimentale des transferts de
Investigation of Adcanced Capillary chaleur et de masse. These de Doctorat de
Structures in Grooved Heat Pipe I’Université de droit, d’e’conomie et des
Evaporators for Space Applications. In Proc. sciences d’Aix—Marseille, France.
30th Internat. Conf. on Environmental Sys. Grandas, L., Veyret, D., Santini, R. & Tadrist, L.
(ICES) and 7th Euro. Symp. on Space (2004). Heat and Mass Transfer of an
Environmental Control Sys, Toulouse, France, Evaporating Sessile Drop: An Experimental
SAE 2000—01—231 9. and Numerical Investigation. In 3rd lnternat.

Colinet, P., Joannes, L., lorio, C.S., Kabov, 0., Symp. on Two—Phase Flow Modelling &
Dupont, 0., Gorza, S.—P. & Legros, J.C. Experimentation, Pisa, Italy, 22-24 September
(2001 a). ITEL: A Sounding Rocket 2004, CD-Rom, paperjb14.

Experiment Dedicated to the Study of the Grandas, L., Reynard, C., Santini, R. &Tadrist, L.
Evaporation Process. In Proc. 15th ESA (2005). Etude expérimentale de

Symp. on Euro. Rocket and Balloon Progs. I’évaporation d’une goutte posée sur une
and Related Research, Biarritz, France, ESA plaque chauffante. Influence de la
Publication Division, Noordwijk,The mouillabilité. Internat. J. Thermal Sci. 44,137—
Netherlands, SP-471, 423—427. 146.

Colinet, R, Legros, J.C. & Velarde, M.G. (2001b). Haut, B. & Colinet, P. (2005). Surface-Tension-
Nonlinear Dynamics of Surface—Tension- Driven lnstabilities of a Pure Liquid Layer
Driven lnstabilities, Wiley-VCH, Berlin, ISBN Evaporating into an Inert Gas.J. Colloid &
3-527—40291—8. Interface Sci. 285, 296-305.

Colinet, P., Haut, B., Margerit, J., Peters, F., thmann, C. & Stephan, P. (2002). Microscale
Legros, J.C. & HaIIoin,V. (2002). Influence of Temperature Measurement at an
an Inert Gas on Surface-Tension—Driven Evaporating Meniscus.J. Experimental
lnstabilities of Pure Evaporating Liquids. Thermal & Fluid Sci. 26(2—4), 157-162.

Proc. CHISA 2002, 15th Internat. Congress of Joannes, L., Dupont, 0., Gorza, S.P., Colinet, R,
Chemical & Process Engineering, Prague, Legros, J.C., Lanen,T. & Oksuzoglu, H. (2001).
Czech Republic, CD-Rom (ISBN 80-86059- A Compact Interferometric Optical

33-2), paper 858. Tomograph for 3-dimensional Investigation

Colinet, P.,Joannes, L., Iorio, C.S., Haut, B., of Liquids in Microgravity Conditions. In
Bestehorn, M., Lebon, G. & Legros, J.C. Proc. Fringe 2001, 4th lnternat. Workshop on
(2003). Interfacial Turbulence in Automatic Processing of Fringe Patterns (Eds.
Evaporating LiquidszTheory and W. Osten & W. JUptner), Elsevier Science,
Preliminary Results of the ITEL/Maser—9 Paris, France, 506-513.

179
© European Space Agency 0 Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

"
"13",":3:
E:
IE:

Legros, J.C., Colinet, P., Joannes, L., Stephan, P., (2004). Evaporation Self—lnduced
Bekaert, G., Lebon, G., Cerisier, P., Delil, A. & Marangoni Motion in Fed Capillaries for
Bestehorn, M. (2001). Convection and Volatile Liquids in Open Air.J. Non—Eq.
lnterfacial Mass Exchange (CIMEX). In Proc. Thermod. 29,177-198.
1$t Internat. Symp. on Microgravity Research Steinchen, A. & Sefiane, K. (2005). Self-
&Applications in Physical Scie. & Organised Marangoni Motion at
Biotechnology, Sorrento, Italy, ESA Evaporating Drops or in Capillary Menisci -
Publications Division, Noordwijk, The Thermohydrodynamical Model.J. Non-Eq.
Netherlands, SP—454, 53—60. Thermod. 30, 39—51.

Margerit, J., Colinet, P., Lebon, G., Iorio, C.S. & Stephan, P. & Busse, C.A. (1992).Analysis of
Legros, J.C. (2003). lnterfacial Heat Transfer Coefficient of Grooved Heat
Nonequilibrium and Bénard-Marangoni Pipe EvaporatorWalls. Int.J. Heat Mass
Instability of a Liquid-Vapor System. Phys. Transfer 35, 383—391.

Rev. E 68, 041601. Stephan P. & Brandt C. (2004). Advanced

Margerit, J., Dondlinger, M. & Dauby, P.C. Capillary Structures for High Performance

(2005). Improved 1.5—sided Model for the Heat Pipes. Heat Transfer Engineering 25,
Weakly Nonlinear Study of Bénard— 78 — 85.
Marangoni lnstabilities in an Evaporating
Liquid Layer. J. Colloid Interface Sci.;
Accepted for Publication.

Merkt, D. & Bestehorn, M. (2003). Benard—
Marangoni Convection in a Strongly
Evaporating Fluid. Physica D 185, 196—208.

Mollaret, R., Sefiane, K., Christy, J. & Veyret, D.
(2004). Experimental and Numerical
Investigation of the Evaporation of a Drop
on a Heated Surface. Chem. Engineering
Res. & Design 82, 471 -480.

Moussy, C., Lebon, G. & Margerit, J. (2004).
Influence of Evaporation on Bénard-
Marangoni Instability in a Liquid—Gas
Bilayer with a Deformable Interface. Euro.
Phys.J. B 40, 327—335.

Reynard, C., Barthes, M., Santini, R. & Tadrist, L.
(2005). Experimental Study of the Onset of
the 3D Oscillatory Thermocapillary
Convection around a Single Air orVapor
Bubble. Influence on Heat Transfer.

J. Experimental Thermal & Fluid Sci. 29, 783—
793.
Sefiane, K., Snodgrass, M. & Steinchen, A.
180
© European Space Agency 0 Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System

"
"14","lg:
ILOI _
I‘—.|I
I .I
IOI
I®I
KAI
15;:
ngl
:8:
Igl
IQI
INI
MAP Team Members
Academic Partners Prof. L.Tadrist & Prof. P. Cerisier
Dr P. Colinet & Prof.J.C. Legros |USTI Polytech’ Marseille, UMR CNRS 6595,
ULB Université Libre de Bruxelles, Service de Technopéle de Chateau Gombert,
Chimie Physique E.P., 50 av. F.D.Rooseve1t, 5 rue Enrico Fermi, F-13453 Marseille
C.P. 165/62, B-1050 Bruxelles, Belgium. Cedex 13, France.
Tel: +32 2 650 6570 Tel: +33 4 91 1O 68 93
Fax: +32 2 650 3126 Fax: +33 4 91 1O 69 69
Email: pcolinet@ulb.ac.be Email: Lounes.Tadrist@polytech.univ—mrs.fr
Prof. P.C. Dauby & Prof. G. Lebon Prof. D. Poncelet
ULg Université de Liége, Institut de Physique, ENITIAA UMR CNRS GEPEA 6144, Route de la
Allee du 6 aoCIt 17, bat. B5a, B—4000 Géraudiére, BP 82225, F-44322 Nantes
Liege 1, Belgium. Cedex 3, France.
Tel: +32 4 366 2357 Tel: +33 2 51 78 54 25
Fax: +32 4 366 2355 Fax : +33 2 51 78 54 67
Email: PC.Dauby@ulg.ac.be Email: poncelet@enitiaa—nantes.fr
Prof. M. Bestehorn Industrial Partner
BTU Brandenburgische Technische Dr L. Barremaecker
Universitaet Cottbus, Postfach 10 13 44, EHP Euro Heat Pipes sa, Rue de l’lndustrie 24,
D-O3013 Cottbus, Germany. B-1400 Nivelles, Belgium.
Tel: +49 355 693186 Tel: +32 67 88 94 75
Fax: +49 355 69301 1 Fax: +32 67 88 94 99
Email: bes@physik.tu-cottbus.de Email: laurent.barremaecker@ehp.be
Prof. P. Stephan
Darmstadt University of Technology,
Petersenstr. 30, D-64287 Darmstadt,
Germany.
Te|:+49 6151 16 3159
Fax: +49 6151 16 6561
Email: pstephan@ttd.tu-darmstadt.de
81
© European Space Agency 0 Provided by the NASA Astrophysics bata System

"
