"","x"
"1","|AC-O8-A2.1 .07
COMBUSTION RESEARCH ON THE INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION
Terence F. O’Malley
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH, USA
tfomalley@nasa.gov
William A. Sheredy
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH, USA
William.A.Shered nasa. ov
Dennis P Stocker
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH, USA
Dennis.P.Stocker@nasa.gov
ABSTRACT
This paper will discuss recent and future plans for combustion research on the International Space
Station (ISS). Results from the Smoke Aerosol Measurement Experiment (SAME), will be discussed and
future utilization plans for the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) will be detailed
The initial payload in the CIR is the Multi-User Droplet Combustion Apparatus (MDCA), which will perform
the Droplet Flame Extinguishment in Microgravity experiment (FLEX). MDCA will also perform the FLEX-2
set of experiments which include the following objectives: Investigate bi-component fuels, Examine the
influence of sub-buoyant convective flows, Study practical fuels, Extend single droplet studies to binary
arrays of droplets.
The next payload being developed for the CIR is the Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments
(ACME) insert. This group of investigations will focus on gaseous combustion experiments. Some of the
objectives of this research include: combustion structure and stability near flammability limits; soot
inception, surface growth, and oxidation processes; emission reduction through nitrogen exchange; and
combustion stability enhancements via an electric field.
The third payload envisioned for the CIR is the Flammability Assessment of Materials for Exploration
(FLAME) insert. FLAME will examine critical parameters for modeling material flammability in three flow
configurations: boundary layer, wake and stagnation flows.
INTRODUCTION SMOKE AND AEROSOL MEASUREMENTS
EXPERIMENT
With the launch and installation of both the
European Space Agency’s Columbus Research The Smoke Aerosol Measurement Experiment
Laboratory and the Japan Aerospace (SAME) is a combustion science flight
Exploration Agency’s Japanese Experiment experiment that investigates the formation of
ModuIe/Kibo in the past year, the opportunities smoke aerosol (solid particulate and liquid
for research onboard the International Space droplets) in microgravity. The Principal
Station (ISS) are increasing. Combustion Investigator (PI) is Dr. David Urban, NASA
research in micro—gravity is one of NASA’s Glenn Research Center. The purpose of SAME
significant research disciplines on ISS. This is to make measurements of smoke particle size
paper will outline recent research and current distributions in order to enable the design of
plans for combustion research in micro—gravity. future smoke detection systems that are more
sensitive and specific. The SAME data is
1

"
"2","important to the success of the Vision for Space and will provide the intended measurements
Exploration by improving crew health, safety and needed to guide the rational design of future
mission assurance in that it provides data spacecraft smoke detectors. Preliminaryresults
necessary to ensure reliable detection of indicate that the smoke particulate produced in
incipient spacecraft fires should one occur low-gravity from the four solid materials all had
during an exploration mission. count mean diameters smaller than 300 nm,
suggesting that discriminating smoke from
The absence of buoyant flow increases the spacecraft dust could possibly be achieved by
residence time in microgravity fires, causing detecting in the sub-micrometer range. This
substantial changes in flame structure and would require the design of a detector that was
consequently, changes in the properties of the more sensitive to small particulate than the ISS
smoke produced. In particular, the increased detector, but was not overly sensitive to large
residence time in the high temperature zone particulate(dust).
where the smoke is formed can increase the 7
opportunity for growth in the size of the smoke . \ lit ~- \
particulate. However, no measurements of the -.
properties of smoke from microgravity fires had ' ‘
been made at the time when the detectors were ' “1,
designed for both the space shuttle and the 3- § ﬁg: , . ’ ‘
International Space Station (ISS). This absence » "" ~ “ ‘; e
of data caused the designers to base the H. “3'“
designs on 1-9 information and the current state ‘ ' *- ; ‘ "",
of the art. As a result, the two detectors were ' , \. '
designed using different detection technologies a: t
which have very different particle size 1‘ ""‘ 5' ' ' , I ,
sensitivities. ; _.“ _ *1.
The SAME experiment studied smoke produced f, ' 9‘ --:-=
from four typical spacecraft materials including ' O ' I ' ‘
TeflonT'V', KaptonT'V', cellulose and silicone ' ' I
rubber, and a reference material, dibutyl- . ’
phthalate (which was deposited on a porous ’- .
wick). The samples of each of these materials ' '7] 93“ 1 l '
were tested at different airflow rates, pyrolysis h m -
temperatures and smoke aging durations. SAME ‘ .; 4 W '
measured moments of smoke particulate size - _ “#5,-
distributions using three separate instruments. T’ ‘g 5
Two are industrial hygiene instruments ’ I ’2. ii
manufactured by TSI, Inc. and one is a modified _ ‘ if
residential smoke detector. Smoke detectors ""“
used on the ISS and Space Shuttle were Fi9-13AME in the MSG onboard the '33-
included in the SAME system in order to
characterize their microgravity performance W
under controlled conditions.
The cornerstone of NASA’s combustion
SAME was launched for delivery to the ISS on research program iS the FIUidS and Combustion
STS-118 on August8, 2007, and it was installed Facility (FCF) Combustion Integrated Rack
in the Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG) on (CIR)- The FCF iS designed to support physical
September 5, 2007. Flightoperations began on and biological research as well as technology
September 9 and were completed on October 5, experiments in space that Will support bOth the
2007. In all, 47 test points were conducted with ViSiOh for space exploration and non-exploration
the 30 samples provided, with 17 additional research. The FCF consists of two modular,
repeat points being conducted primarily with the reconfigurable racks: the CIR, Shown in Fig.2
reference sample material (dibutyl-phthalate). and the FIUidS Integrated Rack (FIR)- The initial
Data analysis is undenNay, but initial results payload in the CIR iS the Multi-User Droplet
indicate that the experiment was very successful Combustion Apparatus (MDCA) and the initial
2

"
"3","FIR payload is the Light Microscopy Module each individual rack describe the subsystems
(LMM) These payloads along with the racks will unique to each one.)
be in the U. S. Laboratory Module and will
operate primarily by telescience with only International Standard Payload Rack
reconfiguration and maintenance performed by The International Standard Payload Rack (ISPR)
the crew. provides the supporting and mounting elements
.:' 6' for the CIR and FIR subsystems and mechanical
_ I . _ _ connections to the U. S. Laboratory Module. A
./‘ a 2%. set of slides mounted on the vertical sides of the
4—"" . _ '0. "" 3 .0 ' rack provides attachment for an optics bench.
. _,7 ,. ;., 1. w; f The optics bench can translate out and rotate
;.:__£, Kb} down for access to both sides as shown in Fig.
4t 2, .""..'.,.t, .32.— , - ~ 3. Both racks provide bi-fold doors with upper
' LE ‘7 ;:""'1:'_'—\; E; P and lower halves. The doors are closed during
33, 1/ ;“’;_.T—_”-i-:.-ll 5;]; §z ‘ powered operations.
EEK 253:1. "" : at. '-. '33 ‘
‘ é? ' ' ""L Electrical Power System
. .ju.‘ . '3}: '3} The Electrical Power Conversion Unit (EPCU)
‘; ‘ l 4 f '_ “t #315 functions as the main power conditioning unit
r 5' i! t_y ' ‘ . , ‘13 7‘15‘ and power supply for each rack. The EPCU
I, i ’7' ’ .1“. 'li takes the 120 VDC power provided by the ISS
' itiﬁég. -;L ""-c ‘ and converts it to the 28 VDC required by most
.31 "" 12g""??? ‘ .3: ‘ FCF packages. In addition, it makes available
‘ {i ..‘;,-,7t<$\ ”1“, 1 120 VDC for the Fire Detection and Suppression
,‘_;-_ t , , ""‘ . :1 System smoke detector, the Active Rack
3 '* ‘W""? F: Isolation System controller, and, if it is required,
H \:;.____\___ 7‘ \ﬂ.’ ‘ y- to the sub-rack experiment. A total of 1600 W is
.5- k2; ' 4;: . "" available at 28 VDC and 1450 w at 120 VDC.
' 3 l . Environmental Control Subsystems
' / The FCF provides environmental control
subsystems (ECS) that remove heat, provide fire
Fig. 2: The Fluids and Combustion Facility detection and suppression, and provide
Combustion Integrated Rack. At the top interfaces to the ISS-supplied gases and
is the FuelIOxidizer Management vacuum ventlines.
Assembly, in the center is the
combustion chamber, and at the bottom The Water Thermal Control System (WTCS)
are the Electrical Power Conversion Unit provides water-cooling of all FCF equipment by
(left) and Input] Output Processor (right). removing their heat and transferring it to the ISS
Internal Thermal Control System Moderate
The CIR will accommodate experiments that Temperature Loop- The WTCS provides cooling
address critical needs in the areas of spacecraft to the A"" Thermal C-ontrol UU't (ATCU) and
fire prevention, detection and suppression, as other FCF hardware '“ the primary IOOP- A
well as basic research. secondary loop may cool payload hardware as
required. Flexible hoses with quick disconnects
allow for reconfiguration. The WTCS can
remove up to 3000 Watts of waste thermal
COMMON RACK COMPONENTS energy.
This section describes the subsystems common
to both FCF racks. The use of common
hardware reduces the design, development and
life cycle costs, increases crew efficiency by
using common procedures, and allows for
common sparing on orbit. (The sections on
3

"
"4","provides for removal of waste gases from the
_ ‘ "" “* ~ “ “ i system. The VRS is a Iow-flow system used
: primarily to maintain rack sub-systems at a
7 , - g ; _ i. vacuum. The rack sub-systems or experiment
. t ’5‘ 7 . gases must meet ISS-allowable limits for
it t ' ” “""ﬁfll ‘ contaminants to be eligible for venting through
i“. ‘1 , _ _ j _ i __ the ISS vent line.
i . . . . .,
‘ t. t ,. i ' ; .1 Avionics Subsystems
_ 1-! 1*“ e - ' at} The CIR and the FIR use several common
' = "" Q _3"" ' avionics subsystems: the Input/ Output
E . ”3 j. r;;=;Er“ ' ' .5: -u— ﬁg. ‘. ' Processor (IOP), Image Processing and Storage
. l. h ‘ y—r ' .v -. Unit (IPSU), and the Station Support Computer
1 - 3,“ . t , _ L - _‘ ~' ‘ (SSC).
[ if‘ ' ' '%2 i ' , , t The IOP is the main processor within the CIR
‘ ’92 t - .\ ' 2' ' "" r and the FIR. It provides rack-Ievel health and
l‘ '{_A__._ _, :j‘ ' . . ' status monitoring, command and data
'1.- {F‘fhfgti ' ' g - processing, data management, control functions,
wits...” A and time synchronization. The IOP provides
communications with the ISS through Ethernet
and low and high rate data lines. It stores data
‘ t _ on two 180 GB removable hard drives prior to
*1 '— 7— ~—,- --~ _, r , '* "" downlinking by the ISS. The IOP accepts
, Q t . commands from either the ground by uplink to
Fig. 3: The Combustion Integrated Rack with the '33, or from the SSC-
the optics bench translated and rotated.
Visible on the back of the optics bench is Either rack can use common IPSUs. The IPSU
the combustion chamber. supports a variety of camera formats. Two
models of the common IPSU are available: the
The ATCU resides in the top of each rack. |t C'IPSU and the C'IPSU'A- The C'IPSU
contains an air/water heat exchanger and two supports image quUiSitiOh from high-speed
fans that circulate cooling air to the rack digital and IEEE 1394 (Firewire). The C'IPSU'A
packages. In the CIR, the fans draw warm air supports image quUiSitiOh from IEEE 1394 or
from the rear of the rack and push it through the analog video. The IPSUS have tWO 36 GB hard
heat exchanger into the optics bench. In the drives and provide analog video OUtPUt for
FIR, the fans draw air from the optics bench in experiment monitoring.
the rear of the rack and push it through the heat
exchanger into the front of the rack. The ATCU The SSC iS a laptop computer supplied by the
can remove up to 1650 Watts of waste therma| ISS that COHHGCtS t0 the IOP. It mounts on the
energy. front of the rack. The SSC allows the crew to
view all science, health and status, and
The Fire Detection and Suppression System command screens. The crew can use the SSC
provides detection and suppression in case of to communicate With the FCF racks.
fire in the rack. The ATCU provides rack air
circulation past an ISS smoke detector. The W
ISS shuts off power to the rack if the detector A Space Acceleration Measurement System
triggers. Then, if required,acrewmember could (SAMS) triaxial sensor head measures the
discharge an ISS Portable Fire Extinguisher microgravity acceleration environment in the
containing carbon dioxide into a hole on the front rack at itS location 0“ the optics bench. SAMS
panel efthe rack to extinguish any fire_ can gneasure microgravity accelerations from
1x10' to 0.01 g and provide three orthogonal
The Gas Interface Subsystem provides access measurements from 0-01 to 200 HZ-
to ISS-provided gaseous nitrogen and Vacuum
Exhaust and Resource Systems. Nitrogen gas
is available up to 827 kPa (120 psia). The VES
4

"
"5","Software Each investigation will customize the facility with
The FCF makes extensive use of software experiment packages that contain a small
because it is designed to operate primarily amount of hardware and software. The CIR
without crew involvement. The Telescience design allows for the removal and replacement
Support Center (TSC) at the NASA Glenn of different experiment packages within the
Research Center will support flight and ground combustion chamber. A replaceable Principal
operations. The software accommodates new Investigator (PI) Avionics box mounts on the
hardware and software upgrades. It is modular optics bench and provides for PI command and
to minimize the amount of new software required control of the experiment.
for a new configuration. The ground operators
can modify the flight software by uplinking new Passive Rack |so|ation System
software from the ground. The ISPR contains a Passive Rack |so|ation
System (PaRIS) to isolate it from ISS and U. S.
The FCF flight software performs command and Laboratory vibrations. PaRIS isolates the entire
data processing, control, caution and warning, ISPR. The PaRIS system provides passive
health and status monitoring, and timing attenuation by eightspring-damperisolators.
functions. The operating system is VxWorks®.
Programming languages are C++ and Java. Ogtics Bench
Common subsystems software interacts with the The optics bench provides structural support,
IOP, ATCU, WTCS, C-IPSU, C-IPSU-A, and electrical connections, and mounting locations
SSC. Packages unique to the CIR or the FIR for other hardware, such as a chamber, gas
have rack-specific software written for them. handling system, and diagnostics. |t spans two-
thirds of the rack vertically and mounts on slides
The FCF ground software performs so that it slides out from the rack and folds down
commanding of the flight unit, and receiving and for access to both sides. The wiring harnessing
viewing telemetry. FCF sends much of the data and cooling airflow are internal to the bench.
to the Earth via downlinking. The TSC receives Diagnostics are interchangeable via a quick-
and processes the payload data, and provides it latch mechanism at any of eight universal
to the experiment team, who can then use it to mounting locations around the combustion
plan further experiment operations. The FCF chamber. These locations provide air-cooling,
operators at the TSC will have operator electrical power, and communication and data
interfaces to display health and status, data, interfaces.
command and control, crew display, operator
logs, and reporting. The TSC wi|| archive the Combustion Chamber
data for a ten-year period. Ground support The combustion chamber is a cylindrical
units, crew trainers, and simulators also use pressure vessel with domed end caps that
ground software. mounts centrally to the optics bench. It has a
volume of 100 liters and an internal diameter of
0.40 m and a length of 0.78 m. The front lid
CIR COMPONENTS opens for on-orbit access to the inside of the
chamber. The chamber has eight replaceable
The CIR contains most of the hardware and windows. The first launch set is made of
software necessary for conducting combustion sapphire. The chamber has a maximum design
experiments. It will accommodate a range of pressure differential of 827 kPa (120 psia). Four
combustion experiments while meeting the ISS pressure transducers provide for pressure
requirements and limitations such as safety, measurements. Electrica|,vacuum,gas,venting
power and energy, cooling, mass, crew time, and other resources connect through an
stowage, resupply flights, and data downlink. interface resource ring near the front of the
The major subsystems of the CIR are the ISPR, chamber.
Passive Rack |so|ation System, optics bench,
combustion chamber, diagnostics, fuel/ oxidizer Diagnostics
management assembly, environmental control The diagnostics measurement systems perform
subsystems, electrical power system, avionics measurements of the combustion phenomena
subsystems, flight and ground software, and and are segmented into two categories. The
interfaces for experiment—specific hardware. CIR provides one set entirely, including the
measurement device, power, control, and data
5

"
"6","collection and storage. These include visible
and ultraviolet imaging, pressure measurement, A gas chromatograph (GC) analyzes the
gas composition, and accelerometry. The chamber contents. The GC is a repackaged
experiment team and the CIR jointly provide the commercial unit with three independent column
other set of diagnostics. The diagnostics may modules that use helium and argon carrier
include infrared and color imaging, temperature gases. Two 500 mL bottles, which are
measurements, and flame radiation. changeable by the crew, contain the carrier
gases. The GC can detect oxygen, inerts such
The diagnostic devices provided by the CIR are as nitrogen or helium, fuels such as hydrogen,
the High-Bit Depth Multispectral Imaging methane, methanol, and propane, and
Package (HiBMs), the Illumination Package, and combustion products such as carbon dioxide,
the Low-Light Level Ultraviolet Imaging Package carbon monoxide, benzene, and formaldehyde
(LLL-UV). The HiBMs consists of a telecentric at compositions ranging from 0.1 to 100%. The
optical system and a high resolution, 12-bit GC is not planned for use at initial installation of
digital camera. The initial use of the HiBMs is the CIR in ISS.
for viewing backlit droplet images. A tunable
liquid crystal spectral filter in conjunction with the A filter cartridge removes particulates, water,
Illumination Package allows for soot volume and other contaminants from the gas to
fraction and soot temperature measurements. condition it for the next test point or prior to
The Illumination Package provides an venting. The recirculation pumps pull the gas
illumination source that consists of a collimated through the cartridge at a rate of 9 slpm. Each
optical system and two identical light-emitting experiment customizes the adsorber cartridge,
diode sources. The initial use of the Illumination which may contain substances such as lithium
Package is as a backlight source for the viewing hydroxide, activated carbon, silica gel, and
of droplet images. The LLL-UV provides images molecular sieve.
of flames or objects at low radiance levels. The
LLL-UV has an intensifier with a spectral range FOMA Control Unit
of 280 to 700 nm coupled to a monochrome The FOMA Control Unit (FCU) controls the
camera. A filter at 310 nm provides for imaging FOMA components in the CIR. |t monitors and
of OH emission from flames. stores all pressures, temperatures, and mass
flow rates during gas blending and experiment
FueI/ Oxidizer ManagementAssembly operations, controls the GC for chamber
The Fuel/ Oxidizer Management Assembly sampling, and monitors the status of all FOMA
(FOMA) provides gaseous fuels, oxidizers, and hardware for transmittal to the ground via the
diluents to the combustion chamber. The FOMA IOP. The FCU commands set points of devices
also provides gas sampling and analysis of the such as valves and mass flow controllers.
chamber contents, and cleanup and venting to
space through the ISS vacuum exhaust system.
The gas delivery system contains gas supply
bottles, valves, pressure regulators and MULTI-USER DROPLET COMBUSTION
switches, and mass flow controllers. The gas APPARATUS
bottles may be 1.0, 2.25, or 3.8 liters and mount
on the front of the optics bench for easy The MDCA is the initial payload in the CIR. |t
replacement by the crew. Up to four bottles may contains the hardware and software required to
be used at one time. The maximum mole conductunique dropletcombustion experiments
fraction of oxygen allowed in the bottle depends in microgravity. The first experiment is the
on its size: 1.0 liter up to 80% 02, 2.25 liters up Flame Extinguishment Experiment, which
to 50% 02, and 3.8 liters up to 30% 02. The involves assessing the effectiveness of flame
maximum oxidizer flow rate is 30 standard Liters suppressants in microgravity, quantifying the
per minute (slpm) per manifold for a total of 90 effect of candidate exploration atmospheres on
slpm (using three manifolds); maximum fuel flow fire suppression characteristics, and providing
rate is two slpm for propane. The gas delivery data to develop simplified combustion models.
system performs on-orbit gas mixing by either MDCA consists of a Chamber Insert Assembly,
partial pressure or by dynamic blending in the an Avionics Package, and a suite of diagnostics.
chamber. |ts modular approach permits on-orbit changes
6

"
"7","for accommodating different fuels, fuel flow _ /
rates, and varying droplet support and _ . , 33.. ‘ .- . o
translation mechanisms to accommodate ..., .. ‘/ . (Vﬂﬁ
multipleinvestigations. {- {I _ .;‘- ' “5 3..., a
, ?.."".'.'.7"".,-1""..‘. m€113>2 ‘
Single combustible fuel droplets of varying sizes, H ;"" {fugaﬁ ’léxj} M3 V
freely deployed or supported by a tether are 3 *ﬁt’ \ ‘31,- 3;) .'- 9‘""
planned for study using the MDCA. Such ‘4 ° ~‘ tug ,3
research supports how liquid-fuel-droplets ignite, .. s ’ “3‘4.:.\\<‘ {J}: W; .
spread, and extinguish under quiescent ' ; . ~“u .. \ﬂgﬁ -
microgravity conditions. "" '. ' __ / , "". -‘ § ,. .
'3’ M.“ O ( .r‘ﬁ
MDCA Subsystems t ,' .2‘ 4,1 -
The MDCA Chamber insert Assembly (CIA) .. m '. ° Qty
provides all necessary hardware and interfaces Fig. 4, The chamber insert assembly is used
to perform Pl science on one platform. Most for studying flame suppression with
experimental functions occur within the CIA droplet combustion.
structure. The CIA consists of two major
componentsr an Experimental Mounting Princigal |nvestigator(Pl)Avionics Package
Structure (EMS) and an Internal Apparatus (IA). The PI Avionics Package provides the
processing and control interface hardware for
The EMS provides the main structure for the CIA controlling the MDCA and communicating with
and acts as the primary mechanical interface the CIR hardware. The avionics controls the
With the CIR combustion chamber. The IA CIA motors, provides the functions for input and
provides the primary mounting platform for all output data control, and is the source for
experiment specific hardware and functions experimental data collection. The package will
including droplet dispensing, deployment, and receive electrical power at 28 VDC from the CIR.
ignition. DC-DC converters within the avionics will
convert the voltage necessary for MDCA
The IA encompasses all motors used for the operation. The package will acquire health and
operation 0f the experiment, water-cooling, status data from the CIA via dedicated
radiometers, and an internally mounted color input/outputlines. The data will be downloaded
camera. Other subsystems Oh the CIA include to the CIR Input/Output Processor (IOP) via the
the Droplet Dispensing System, Droplet ethernet connection for downlink. MDCA
Deployment System, Fiber Support System and commands will be uplinked from the ground to
Ignition System. There are tWO independent the IOP, or issued from a Station Support
replaceable dispensersystems on the IA. Each Computer (SSC) to the IOP_ The IOP will
system consists of a motor housing, replaceable transmit the commands to the avionics package
fuel reservoir filled with the Pl specific fuel, and via the ethernet. The enclosure of the avionics
fuel isolation valve. Flexible tubing connects the package will provide the Electromagnetic
fuel system to the deployment needles. Fuel iS Interference (EMI) shielding and provide the
dispensed by means of a lead screw on the grounding to the CIR optics bench.
motor, which in turn pushes the plunger on the
syringe. The Chamber Insert Assembly is MDCA Diagnostics
Shown in Figure 4- MDCA provided diagnostics hardware includes:
The Color Camera is mounted on the CIA and
provides enhanced color imaging of combustion
experiments and an overall view of the droplet
combustion.
The radiometers are mounted on the CIA
providing measurement of wide band and
narrow band radiation during combustion.
7

"
"8","MDCA Ogerations extinguishes at a finite droplet radius in a
Once on-orbit, the MDCA is managed from the quiescent ambient. During the experiments
GRC Te|escience Support Center (TSC). The involving binary droplet arrays, two droplets are
MDCA and FLEX operations team reside at the placed along a support fiber at known locations
TSC. Data is transmitted to the Pl’s at their and the droplets are ignited simultaneously and
home sites by means of workstations, allowing the subsequent burning is recorded. In the
directinteraction between the PI and operations convective flow tests a single droplet is
staff to maximum science. Upon completion of subjected to a known and controlled sub-
the FLEX experiment, the MDCA is reconfigured buoyant flow.
for the next experiment or ultimately removed The following discussion of the research
from the CIR, placed into stowage, and returned objectives is grouped by the four basic
to Earth. experimental configurations which will be
employed on the ISS. These configurations
FLAME EXTINGUISHMENT EXPERIMENT comprise (i) the pure fuel experiments, (ii) the
fuel mixture experiments, (iii) the convective flow
The overall objectives of FLEX are to (1) assess experiments, and (iv) the binary droplet array
the effectiveness of different suppressants to experiments.
suppress a fire in microgravity, (2) quantify the
effect of candidate exploration atmospheres for Pure Fuel Exgeriments: The objectives of the
the habitable volume on fire suppression pure fuel studies are to examine steady and
characteristics, and (3) provide data that can be unsteady liquid and gas-phase phenomena,
used to direct the development of and define fire flame extinction, soot formation mechanisms
suppression system verification tests in both and radiative heat transfer. Decane (C1OH22)
ground-based |ow-gravity facilities and future and ethanol (CZHSOH) fuels were chosen
flight experiments. The MDCA facility will deploy because of their combustion properties and to
single droplets of fuel of predetermined and build on results from earlier flight experiments
reproducible sizes (i.e., 2.0 mm to 6.0 mm) for (Le, DCE, FSDC-1 and FSDC-Z) which also
combustion studies designed to determine the used an alkane and an alcohol; i.e., heptane and
efficacy of fire suppressants under varying methanol. In these experiments droplet burning
oxygen and pressure combinations and the rates, flame dimensions, radiative emissions,
propensity of a range of proposed habitable and soot volume fraction are measured as a
atmospheres to support combustion. The use of function of time and initial droplet size for
a droplet configuration for these experiments is different ambient conditions. When flame
significant because it allows a large number of extinction occurs, the diameter of the unburned
test conditions to be performed while minimizing droplet at extinction is also determined. The
the up-mass and crew time. For this screening objectives for these experiments are as follows:
of fire suppressants in Iong-duration reduced
gravity, the parameter space includes the - Determine the diffusive and radiative flame
variation of suppressant type (3), fuel type (2), extinction boundaries for ethanol and decane
flow velocity (3) and various combinations of 02 droplets in test atmospheres containing N2 or
concentration and ambient pressure (230 test He at pressures ranging from 0.5 atm to 2.5 atm.
conditions). Furthermore, the droplet - Measure droplet extinction diameters for
configuration is amenable to modeling which will ethanol and decane fuels for validation of
allow us to more fully understand the results so detailed and reduced chemical kinetic models.
they can be extended to more challenging - Measure soot volume fractions and soot
models of fire suppression on solids in later flight temperatures for a range of initial conditions to
experiments. determine influence on droplet burning and
flame extinction.
FLAME EXTINGUISHMENT EXPERIMENT-2 - Measure radiant emissions from both luminous
and non-Iuminous flames in test atmospheres
The FLEX-2 experiments involve dispensing, containing N2 or He and at pressures ranging
deploying and igniting either a single droplet or a from 0.5 atm to 2.5 atm.
pair of droplets, depending on the experiment
configuration, in a known and controlled Fuel Mixture Exgeriments: Bi-component fuel
gaseous environment. The ignited droplets mixtures are chosen to examine the role of liquid
either burn to completion or the flame phase transport effects as well as to study the
8

"
"9","burning characteristics of simulated ‘real’ fuels the droplets for various L/DO ratios using pure
(i.e, surrogate fuels). PropanoI/glycerol and fuels. The specific microgravity experimental
heptane/hexadecane mixtures are used to objectives are as follows:
examine the role of liquid phase diffusion,
preferential evaporation, and mixing on the - Determine the flammability map (diffusive and
burning characteristics of fuel mixtures. radiative extinction limits) for a binary droplet
Heptane/octane and decane/propylbenzene array as function of L/DO ratio.
experiments focus on simulating the - Measure variations in the burning rate
characteristics of ‘real’ fuels, like gasoline and constant, K , as a function of L/DO for a range of
jetfuels, which contain avariety of hydrocarbons ambient conditions to verify theoretical
with differing volatilities. The measurements predictions.
made during these experiments are similar to
the pure fuel studies; however, the initial fuel ADVANCED COMBUSTION VIA
composition and the interpretation of the results MICROGRAVITY EXPERIMENTS
are different. The primary objectives for this set
of experiments are as follows: ACME is now under development with a set of
four independent experiments which are each
- Measure the droplet diameter, dc , at the onset focused on advancing combustion technology
of flame contraction relative to the initial droplet through fundamental research. The current
diameter d0. Correlate with theoretical ACME experiments are specifically directed at
predictions and provide estimates for effective addressing energy and environmental concerns.
liquid diffusivities. The overall goals are to improve our
- Measure burning rate, burning time, extinction understanding of (1) combustion at fuel |ean
diameter, and flame luminosity for the JP8 conditions where both optimum performance
surrogate fuel mixtures. and low emissions can be achieved, (2)
combustion of fuels with increased hydrogen
Convective Droglet Exgeriments: The overall content which could enable reduced greenhouse
objectives for this set of experiments are to emission, (3) soot control and reduction, (4)
investigate the effects of slow convective flows oxygen enriched combustion which could enable
on the burning characteristics of liquid-fuel practical carbon sequestration, and (5) use of
droplets. The imposed flow velocities are such electric fields for combustion control. Unlike
that the Reynolds number based on initial FLEX-1, ACME is not focused on the
droplet diameter is of the order unity. The advancement of spacecraft fire safety
specific objectives of the present flight technology, although it is likely that some ACME
experiments are as follows: findings will be relevant. While distinct, the
experiments share several significant traits.
- Obtain radiative and diffusive flame extinction The principal unifying feature of the ACME
limits in the low Reynolds number flow regime experiments is their use of gaseous fuels (e.g.,
over a range of ambient test pressures and methane and ethylene) rather than liquid or solid
oxygen concentrations. fuels. With this in common, the experiments will
- Measure droplet regression rates for sooting be conducted within CIR through the use of a
(decane) and non-sooting (ethanol) fuels as a single modular insert. In addition to the fuel
function of imposed flow at low velocities over a state, the current set of ACME experiments a||
range of ambient oxygen concentrations and use laminar, non-premixed (i.e., diffusion)
pressures. flames for their studies. To simplify analysis,
- Measure flame stand-off distance, flame these flames are either one or two dimensional,
shape, and temperature field measurements in depending upon the experiment.
low flow velocities under a range of test
atmospheres for use in validation of detailed The purpose of the Spherical Flame (s-Flame)
theoretical models (i.e., radiative and finite-rate experiment is to advance our ability to predict
chemical kinetic effects). the structure and dynamics, including extinction,
of both soot—free and sooty flames. The
Droglet Arrays Exgeriments: The objectives of spherical flame, which is only possible in
the droplet array experiments are to investigate microgravity, will be created through use of a
the droplet droplet interactions on the diffusive porous spherical burner from which a fueI/inert
and radiative extinction of the flame surrounding gas mixture will issue into the CIR chamber.
9

"
"10","Flames will be ignited at non-steady conditions verifying chemical kinetic and soot formation
and allowed to transition naturally toward submodels. The dependence of normal coflow
extinction. Tests will be conducted with various flames on injection velocity and fuel dilution wi||
inert diluents, in both the fuel and chamber be carefully examined for flames at both very
atmosphere. The fuel gases include hydrogen dilute and highly sooting conditions.
and methane for soot—free flames, and ethylene Measurements will be made of the structure of
for sooty flames. One experiment objective is to diluted methane and ethylene flames in an air
identify the extinction limits for both radiative and coflow. Lifted flames will be used as the basis
convective extinction (i.e., at high and low for the research to avoid flame dependence on
system Damkohler numbers, respectively). heat loss to the burner. The results of this
Another objective is to determine the existence, experiment will be directly applicable to practical
onset, and nature of pulsating instabilities that combustion issues such as turbulent
have been theoretically predicted to occur in combustion,ignition,f|ame stability, and more.
such flames with fueI/diluent mixtures that are
aboveacriticalLewis number. Electric fields can strongly influence flames
because of its effect on the ions present as a
The primary goal of the Flame Design result of the combustion reactions. The direct
experiment is to improve our understanding of ion transport and the induced ion wind can
soot inception and control in order to enable the modify the flame shape, alter the soot or
optimization of oxygen enriched combustion and flammability limits, direct heat transfer, and
the “design” of non-premixed flames that are reduce pollutant emission. The purpose of the
both robust and soot free. An outside review EIectric-Field Effects on Laminar Diffusion (E-
panel recently declared that Flame Design FIELD) Flames experiment is to gain an
could lead to greatly improved burner designs improved understanding of flame ion production
that are efficient and less polluting than current and investigate how the ions can be used to
designs."" Flame Design will investigate the soot control non-premixed flames. Outside reviewers
inception and extinction limits of spherical recently concluded that the experiment wi||
microgravity flames, created in the same contribute to our critical understanding to our
manner as for the s-Flame experiment. Tests knowledge of combustion processes in the
will be conducted with various concentrations of presence of electric fields.” The experiment will
both the injected fuel (i.e., ethylene or methane) be conducted with a normal coflow flame (as in
and the oxygen enriched atmosphere in order to the OLD Flame experiment) or perhaps with a
determine the role of the flame structure on soot simple gas-jet flame, where there is no
inception. The effect of the flow direction on surrounding coflow. An electric field will be
soot formation will be assessed through the use generated by creating a high voltage (up to 10
of a coflow burner which can allow for either kV) differential between the burner and a flat
normal or inverse flames. In the case of the circular mesh suspended above (i.e.,
inverse flames, the oxygen/inert mixture is downstream of) the burner. Measurements, as
injected from a central tube, while the fuel is a function of field strength and fuel dilution, wi||
ejected from a surrounding annulus. The Flame be made of the ion current through the flame
Design experiment will explore whether the and the flame’s response time to electric forcing.
stoichiometric mixture fraction can characterize
soot and flammability limits for non-premixed Ageneralgoalofthe currentACME experiments
flames like the equivalence ratio serves as an is to gain fundamental understanding that can
indicator of those limits for premixed flames. enable improved efficiency and reduced
emissions in practical combustion processes, for
Research, especially including that already example through the development and
conducted in microgravity, has revealed that our verification of models for chemical kinetics and
current predictive ability is significantly lacking transport processes in computational
for flames at the extremes of fuel dilution, simulations. In addition to enhanced
namely for sooty pure-fuel flames and dilute performance, improved modeling capability can
flames that are near extinction. The general lead to reductions in the time and cost for
goal of the Coflow Laminar Diffusion (CLD) combustor design. In summary, microgravity
Flame experiment is to extend the range of investigations of non-premixed flames could
flame conditions that can be accurately lead to eco—friendly combustion systems
predicted by developing and experimentally
1O

"
"11","providing our nation with green power for the
future.
Flammability Assessment of Materials for
Exgloration

The Objective of FLAME is to develop a small-
scale facility for study of solid material
flammability in Iow-gravity. Material flammability
for thick practical fuels has received limited
study to date. FLAME will examine critical
parameters for modeling material flammability in
three flow configurations: boundary layer, wake
and stagnation flows. The experiment will
establish and validate CFD models to extend
data usability, and use results to establish
advanced fire prevention strategies for Iow-g
and reduced-g environments.

DEVELOPMENT STATUS
NASA Glenn Research Center in Cleveland,
Ohio is develops the experiment hardware under
a prime contract with ZIN Technologies, Inc. The
CIR, and MDCA/FLEX, have been delivered to
the NASA Kennedy Space Center and have
completed launch processing. The current
schedules show launch of the CIR/MDCA on
ULF-2 in November 2008. Launch of the FIex-2
in December 2009, and ACME in 2011.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The NASA Headquarters Exploration Systems
Directorate provides funding for the FCF, MDCA
and LMM and support for combustion and fluid
physics experiments. The authors gratefully
acknowledge the project teams at NASA Glenn
Research Center and ZIN Technologies, Inc. for
their excellent work and contributions to develop
the Combustion Research on the ISS.

11

"
