"","x"
"1","Respiratory Physiology 82 Neurobiology 1695 (2009) 555—558
2.33:3:{igg‘4ggg Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Iliam‘wwﬂmm
V/ /‘L
J z: ‘19; Resplrato ry Phy51ology 82 Neuroblology Q3452)
““2”“ H
ELSEVIER journal homepage: www.e|sevier.com/Iocate/resphysiol
—
24—h blood pressure 1n Space: The dark Slde of be1ng an astronaut*
John M. I(aremal<er*, Janneke BereCki—Gisolf
Department of Systems Physiology, Academic Medical Center at the University of Amsterdam, PO. Box 22660, 1100 DD Amsterdam, The Netherlands
ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT
Article histOTJ/I Inﬂight 24—h proﬁles of blood pressure (BP) and heart rate (HR) were recorded in 2 ESA—astronauts by
Accepted 20 May 2009 automatic upper arm cuff measurements. In one astronaut this was combined with PortapresTM contin—
— uous ﬁnger blood pressure recordings. It was the intention to contrast the latter to 24—h recordings in an
KeJ/words: earlier Head—Down—Tilted (HDT) bed rest study [Voogel, A.J., Stok, W.J., Pretorius, P.J., Van Montfrans, G.A.,
SYStemlC vaSCUIar FESiStance Langewouters, G.J., Karemal<er,J.M., 1997. Circadian blood pressure and systemic haemodynamics during
Elijggﬂlrgeitsure 42 days of 6 degrees head—down tilt. Acta Physiol. Scand. 161, pp. 71—80].
ES A p BP—levels in Space were not very much changed from preﬂight; the circadian BP—rhythm seemed damp—
HDT—bed rest ened. Only daytime diastolic pressures (both subjects) and nighttime HR (one subject) were signiﬁcantly
Microgravity lower in Space. However, compared to the effect of a control tilt manoeuvre on the ground, even lower BP
portapres values might have been expected. Striking were the BP— and HR—surges during the working days in Space,
Psychological stress often related to stressful moments like live appearances on public TV. Systemic vascular resistance (SVR)
dropped during the night, unlike HDT. Thus, actual spaceﬂight refuted our earlier ﬁndings in HDT both
for BP—levels and for daytime to nighttime changes.

The combined observations lead to the hypothesis that short—lasting spaceﬂight may induce strong
psychological stress in astronauts. When interpreting space—physiological observations this must be taken
into account.

© 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction This sketch may be considered a caricature, but it holds particu—
larly true for countries like European Space Agency (ESA)—member
In earlier studies (Fritsch—Yelle et al., 1996) the matter of how states where chances of becoming an astronaut are low, and even
microgravity affects the circadian pattern of the cardiovascular sys— when someone has made it to that level, the waiting time to get
tem seems to have been settled once and for all: Blood pressure assigned to a ﬂight can take a persons’ best years. Under these cir—
(BP) and heart rate (HR) are slightly decreased, the circadian pat— cumstances the circadian pattern of inﬂight blood pressure may not
tern is almost unchanged. In contrast to these ﬁndings, sympathetic represent a truthful image of the effect of microgravity alone.
activity was found to be slightly increased, probably to compensate The present study was designed to compare the circadian pat—
for the reduced blood volume in the circulation (animal studies tern of blood pressure and heart rate in actual spaceﬂight to what
by I(vetnansky et al., 1981, conﬁrmed in human studies by, among we had observed earlier in HDT—bed rest (Voogel et al., 1997). The
others, Christensen et al., 2005 and in the Neurolab—mission, see initial hypothesis was that simulation and spaceﬂight would show
below). In general, the approach of scientists to the loss of gravity the same day/night changes. HDT had shown a dampened day/night
in spaceﬂight has been to consider their subjects of study just as systolic pressure pattern, with almost equal diastolic pressures day
that: subjects more or less passively undergoing the effect of the and night, the same diastolic pressure as during a control night.
changed gravity. This view takes only part of the story into account. This was combined with almost unchanged heart rate (HR) and car—
It leaves aside the fact that for most astronauts “their” spaceﬂight diac output (CO) patterns but reversed systemic vascular resistance
is a life—event, the culmination of a long period of training after a (SVR) pattern, nighttime—SVR being higher than during the day.
selection procedure which lifted them from the competing crowd We had the co—operation of 2 ESA—selected astronauts to inves—
for their special capacities. tigate their circadian blood pressure and heart rate when they
took part in Soyuz—Taxi—ﬂights to and from the International Space
Station as short—stay cosmonauts. Such a ﬂight brings up a fresh
Soyuz—module to dock to the International Space Station to serve
mp6 is part of a supplement entitled “Cardio—Respiratory Physiology in as emergency_r6turn mOdUIe for .the HEXt perlOd Of half a. 316311.01:
s ,, t_ dit d b P Nor k and D Linnar 0n the crew of 3 cosmonauts 2 remam on the 155 for the commg sh1ft.
pace ,gues e e y . s . ss . , , ,
* Tel.: +31 20 5664827_ The th1rd crew member returns w1th 2 replaced ISS—Crew 1n the ‘old’
E-mail address: j.m.karemaker@amc.uva.nl (].M. I(aremaker). Soyuz—module after 10 days. (Candidate—) astronauts from the ESA—
1569—9048/$ — see front matter © 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.resp.2009.05.006

"
"2","556 ].M. Karemaker, ]. Berecki-Gisolf/ Respiratory Physiology &Neurobiology 169$ ( 2009) 555—558

TableI 4 o’clock at night. Every blood pressure data point is referenced
Subject data and experiment days in relation to launch of spaceﬂight. to that level (in mmHg). Subjects participated in the experiments
Subject Age(y) Height(m) Weight(kg) Preﬂight Inﬂight Postﬂight after written informed consent. The protocol had been approved
m both by the local ethics committee of the Academic Medical Center
13 45 135 87 L—50/L—49 FD 5/FD g R+4/R+ 10 and ESA’s Medical Board. The study complies with the declaration
— of Helsinki.

corps can have the role of the third Soyuz crew member, staying on T0 measure the circadian b100d pressure pattern an automatic
the 15$ for the intervening 10—day period. This gives the member upper arm Cliff device W35 used (equipment provided by ESAI
states an extra opportunity to have microgravity experiments per— TM 2430PC 13050 —Germany and space—qualiﬁed by I(ayser—Threde
formed on 155. In general, this implies that the short—stay astronaut GmbH). ThiS device automatically measures b100d pressure and
has a heavy load of experiments to be carried out in the short period heart rate by an oscillometric method every 15 min during the
on the 155, on top of the extra training and language lessons which waking period and every half hour during the period reserved for
are required to be able to work the Russian module. sleep. For continuous recording of ﬁnger pressure by the Finapres

We followed the Circadian pattern of blood pressure and heart technique a space—qualiﬁed version ofPortapresTM (BMI—TNO,Ams—
rate by a portable device that made automatic upper arm cuff mea— terdam, NL) W35 used. ThiS instrument has been integrated by CNES
surements at set intervals. Additionally, in one of the 2 astronauts (Fra) into the physiological measurement suite ‘Cardioscience Sys—
this was complemented with continuous blood pressure record— tem’. Portapres W35 programmed to SWitCh between measuring 011
ing by the Finapres/PortapresTM technique. This would enable us to the middle— and ring—ﬁnger every half hOUF- The various modules
analyze beat—by—beat changes in blood pressure and heart rate dur— are available onboard the 155 through BSA and CNES (the French
ing (parts of) the ‘normal’ day and night of an astronaut in Space. Space Agency) for investigators.

Moreover, by pulse contour analysis of the arterial wave form (rela— Subject B, the second astronaut WhO underwent recordings 0f

tive) changes in stroke volume and systemic vascular resistance can upper arm Cliff pressure measurement and Portapres together,

be tracked (Wesseling et al., 1993). This would allow the analysis COUTd only C10 50 at moments where the ﬁnger pressure measure—

thhe Changes that underlie observed changes in blood pressure, in ment would not interfere With normal daily activities that required

particular in the transition from day to night. the use of both hands. This restricted the application of Portapres
to more or less quiet moments of the day and the late evening pre—

2. Test subjects and methods sleep to sleep transition. When exactly Portapres would be applied
was left to the discretion of the astronaut.

Two ESA—astronauts scheduled for Taxi—ﬂights participated in The main problem to use the ISS—onboard Portapres in a ‘free—
this study. Subject data and recording days are given in Table 1. To ﬂoating’ application rather than on a power—wire connected to
protect the identity and privacy of the subjects as much as possible the equipment was to ﬁnd rechargeable batteries that would ful—
in this case where only 2 astronauts participated, these data must ﬁll the stringent safety requirements for the ISS. NASA technical
be limited. We will refrain from giving exact blood pressure lev— crew pointed out that the onboard MakitaTM power tools (used for
els and zoom in on the changes that were observed on the various drilling and screwdrivers) do have rechargeable packs that fulﬁll
experiment days. Therefore, we have set the average diastolic blood the requirements of Portapres. Therefore the 2nd astronaut carried
pressure over the nadir of 2 nights of preﬂight recordings as refer— 2 adapted Makita power tool handles to the 155 to be used with
ence level 0. This is explained in Fig. 1; the nadir occurring around these battery packs for the planned Portapres recordings.

(A) Subj.A on L-30 preflight (B) Subj.A on FD 8 inﬂight
. _ 75 _ . 75
E - - -- 7 . .. .
é 8° MM 5° 8° — 5° g
E i “m ' 25 :7 “A f mmW"" 25 %
a
_‘-'- m
-20 0 -20 0
08:00 14:00 20:00 02:00 08:00 06:00 12:00 18:00 00:00 06:00
Subj.B on L-50 preflight Subj.B on FD 8 inflight
E80 . ‘ a - A 50 80* ‘ 50 E
E e
E 25 W 25 tr
1 m I
m : c 7 V . vv huh. .
-20 , 1 0 -20 a 0
06:00 12:00 18:00 00:00 06:00 08:00 14:00 20:00 02:00 08:00
Time of day Time of day
Fig. 1. 24—h blood pressure and heart rate recordings before and during spaceﬂight. All blood pressure levels are referenced to the nadir of diastolic values in the 2 nights of
the preﬂight baseline recordings (ellipses in panels A and C). L—50 denotes 50 days before launch, FD 8 denotes ﬂight day 8. The darkened portions indicate the sleep period.
Due to logistics not all recordings are starting at the same time of the day, time scale is indicated. Symbols: (l ) denote HR values (right hand scales), (A) systolic pressures
and (V) diastolic pressures. To improve readability a moving average of 4 has been applied to the various data sets.

"
"3","].M. Karemaker, ]. BereCki—Gisolf/ Respiratory Physiology 8’ Neurobiology 169$ ( 2009) 555—558 557
.___, Table 2
. i 30.5,. _ i i . . . Averaged circadian blood pressures and heart rates.
8P3? I , , I'm“ . . , ; ‘ .' III I! 1] || ‘ ‘ ‘ :1. ‘ l. v l | ‘ .| Day Night Day Night Day Night
(mmHg) 1 V... ,, 7,. , A Systolic(ref) 58.8 43.3 55.7 42.2 n.a. n.a.
0 Diastolic (ref) 15.0 2.3 4.9* —1.0 n.a. n.a.
HR 65.2 51.6 67.9 50.6 n.a. n.a.
Fig. 2. Portapres recording inﬂight at the moment of ‘ofﬁcial’ picture taking during B Systolic (ref) 78.2 525 74_1 50.4 81.4 60.3
a meal (actual photo moment marked by up arrow). Probably clue to movements Diastolic (ref) 22] 32 133* 8.0 192 8.6
the Portapres signal had become unstable, as evidenced by the repeated ‘staircases’ HR 81.9 65.2 751* 56.1* 87.7* 69.9
in the recording where the Physiocal© mechanism cuts in to check volume clamp —
conditions required for a stable recording (Cf_ Imholz et 31” 1998). Systolic and diastolic pressures (in mmHg) are referenced to the preﬂight diastolic
nightly trough, as indicated in the text. HR is in beats/min. Signiﬁcances are signalled
by * and bold type in comparison to preﬂight values. A value is considered signiﬁ—
3. Results cantly different when outside the range of the preﬂight value +/— 3 x SEM; n.a. = not
applicable; this astronaut was not available for postﬂight measurements.
As implied in this study, the obtained results must be seen as
‘anecdotal’ since only 2 subjects participated. Subject A was on his in Space, earlier recordings having failed due to various technical
second spaceﬂight, he had earlier experience on the Shuttle, sub— reasons.
ject B was a Space—novice. As shown in Fig. 1A already the preﬂight Table 2 presents a condensed overview of all measurements of
circadian pattern of BP and HR in subject A had only a clear—cut circadian BP and HR in both astronauts, pre—, in— and postﬂight,
increase and some variability in HR during daytime, BP—day/night respective values taken together as appropriate. It substantiates the
pattern was not very conspicuous. The inﬂight pattern was even impression given by Fig. 1 that, indeed, there are subtle changes
less outspoken (Fig. 1B), almost no clear day/night pattern in dias— in the circadian pattern of BP and HR inﬂight compared to pre—
tolic BP, only some BP increases related to work at the 155, HR being ﬂight. Values were considered signiﬁcantly different when they
as ‘reactive’ in Space as it was on the ground. Fig. 1C/D shows for were outside the range of preﬂight value +/— 3 x SEM. In view of
subject B that his baseline BP—increase of around 20 mmHg dur— the low number of subjects (and few repetitions of the recordings)
ing daytime had become much more variable during the working this seemed a reasonable compromise. Daytime inﬂight diastolic
clay in Space, mostly situational related. For some of these data pressures are signiﬁcantly lower than preﬂight in both astronauts.
points we had concurrent Portapres recordings, which documented HR values in subject B are inﬂight signiﬁcantly lower, clay and night,
this instantaneous impact as shown in Fig. 2 where pictures were and signiﬁcantly higher during daytime postﬂight.
taken during mealtime. Remarkable were the increases in BP and
HR during a live TV—interview with ofﬁcials from his home state. 4. Discussion
Since the values in Fig. 1 are smoothed with a moving average of
4 adjacent points to increase readability these extremes are not The heart is a mirror of the soul. That is one of the reasons why
readily observed in the pictures. However, the distribution width physiologists and psychologists alike have such interest in heart
of daytime inﬂight systolic pressure values had doubled compared rate and blood pressure since they are supposed to tell the underly—
to preﬂight as an expression of this variability. Sleeping HR was ing story of the (autonomic) nervous system. In this study we have
remarkable in subject B: inﬂight it dropped to values around 50 bpm followed astronauts in their daily activities with portable blood
which he did not have on the ground, neither before nor after space— pressure recording devices. In view of the Space—conditions it is
ﬂight. not easy to virtually block the use of one hand for measurement by
The results of the wake—to—sleep Portapres—recordings refuted the Portapres technique. In microgravity hands are the best instru—
the earlier HDT—observations. Preﬂight we observed a conspicuous ments for propulsion and steering, legs having almost no function.
drop in systemic vascular resistance on falling asleep (to 65% of This fact limits the occasions where Portapres can be used without
awake in the ﬁrst half hour). Inﬂight this was less: a drop to 85% in too much hindering the normal activities of the crewmember. And
the ﬁrst half hour. This picture was mirrored by increases in stroke even then it is almost impossible to prevent artifacts clue to bending
volume during sleep: +55% preﬂight to +20% inﬂight. In view of a the ﬁngers or bumping into objects or the surrounding walls.
peculiarity of Portapres we have to restrict our comparisons to the In view of the absence of gravity, it was to be expected that
ﬁrst half hour of the sleeping period, even though more data are BP and HR would mainly be determined by physical activity and
available. Fig. 3 shows how the blood pressure tracing jumped by psychological status.An earlier study in 12 male astronauts (Fritsch—
some 20 mmHg when the recording site changed from one ﬁnger Yelle et al., 1996) had documented subtle changes in circadian
to the other every 30 min. This did not occur in all recordings, but patterns of BP and HR, comparable to what we observed here. Both
it spoiled this one good Portapres sleep recording that we obtained astronauts showed decreased diastolic pressures during the day.
Here the question arises if the preﬂight circadian pattern should be
considered the gold standard for spaceﬂight comparison. Usually BP
«1—m» . , ~ ~ II is referenced to heart level, daytime BP is mainly upright BP. In that
posture a hydrostatic pressure difference exists between the carotid
80 7] : _ i ‘ , ‘ ' j 3 4 ' . \ sinuses and the heart. As a consequence, the carotid sinuses will sig—
BPref _ . . ‘ - . ! . ., I ., ‘ ; nalalowered pressure(by some 20 mmHg)afterarise from supine.
(mmHg) ‘ ‘ . . In the upright posture this will add to the up regulation of BP at heart
0 . . “mwl level. Therefore, it is more appropriate to compare the condition in
1 Space to the awake, supine BP on the ground when all hydrostatic
Fig. 3. Portapres recording inﬂight during the ﬁrst hours of sleep (ﬂight day 10, effects are minimized, Since both astronauts had taken part in yet
additional reeording). This 3.5h recording shows a pecnliarity of the automatic another experiment in our laboratory, we do have preﬂight tilt—
ﬁnger—sw1tch1ng feature of Portapres: after 30 mrn runn1ng on the rmddle ﬁnger table recordings in both. In the head—up tilt test Of subject A WE
automat1cally the measurement sw1tches to the adjacent cuff on the r1ng ﬁnger and , , , , ,
vice versa. However, the set point algorithm ﬁnds and maintains different pressure ObserVEd n0 Change In SYStOhC pressure and an Increase 0f dlaStOhC
levels in the two ﬁngers, resulting in spurious pressure jumps every half hour. pressure by 11 mmHg; subject B showed and increase Of 17 mmHg

"
"4","558 ].M. Karemaker, ]. BereCki-Gisolf/ Respiratory Physiology (?Neurobiology 1695 (2009) 555—558
of both, systolic and diastolic pressures. Upright HR increased by Acknowledgments
26 bpm in A and by 18 bpm in B. This makes the observed drop in
diastolic BP in subject A (10 mmHg, Table 2) a value to be expected, This study was supported by the Dutch Space Research Organi—
and the drop in subject B (8 mmHg) even less than expected. The zation Netherlands (SRON)by several grants.We are very grateful to
same holds true for inﬂight daytime HR, which dropped less in B the ESA—test subjects,i.e.the astronauts and their baCk—ups who cor—
than to be expected from the tilt test and it did not Change at all in dially took part and helped at various moments in these studies. The
A. help by ESA, NASA, CNES, Medes and IBMP is gratefully acknowl—
The reports of the Neurolab—mission in 1998 (Cox et al., 2002; edged. We mention in particular the BMI—TNO crew who helped us
Ertl et al., 2002; Eckberg, 2003) have documented an increase in out on many occasions and the representative of the Dutch Depart—
sympathetic nervous system activity in Space for the ﬁrst time ment of Economic Affairs who eased our way throughinternational
by direct measurement of neural efferent trafﬁc in man. This was diplomacy.
explained as adaptation to the condition of hypovolemia. In the The authors are indebted to their co—workers who helped to
present study indications of systematically increased sympathetic carry out these experiments. The interpretation given in this paper
activity are only indirect. As argued above, in subject B the inﬂight is entirely their own and need not necessarily represent the views
daytime values for BP and HR are higher than to be expected and of Wim J. Stok and Gert A. van Montfrans.
in A only HR was higher. Additionally, in both astronauts inﬂight
daytime values are more variable than on the ground, situationally References
determined.
Recovery period measurements were only possible in subject B, Christensen, N.]., Heer, M., Ivanova, I(., Norsk, P., 2005. Sympathetic nervous activ—
. . . . ity decreases during head—down bed rest but not during microgravity. J. Appl.
Slnce he had been a551gned to stay in Star—c1ty for follow—up mea— Physi 01 99 15524557
surementsl SUbjECt A W35 HOt available to US postﬂight. AS ShOWn Cox,].F., Tahvanainen, I(.U., I(uusela, T.A., Levine, B.D., Cooke, W.H., Mano, T., Iwase,
in Table 2, postﬂight BP values ShOW a tendency to be higher than S., Slaito, M., Sugiyama, Y., Ertl, A.C., Biaﬁrgioni, I., Diedlrichl, A., Roberltson, R.M.,
- - - Zuc (erman, ].H., Lane, L.D., Ray, CA, W ite, R.]., Pawe czy <, ].A., Buc <ey Jr., ].C.,
preﬂight and dEﬁnltdy SO for HR' A long recovery perlod after ShOl‘t Baisch, F.]., Blomqvist, C.G., Robertson, D., Eckberg, D.L., 2002. Inﬂuence ofmicro—
spaceﬂight has been Observed before (MlgeOtte et 31-, 2003)-Th15 gravity on astronauts’sympathetic and vagalresponses toValsalva’s manoeuvre.
has been conﬁrmed in a study by Verheyden et al., 2007, who J-Physi01-538.309-320- .
followed cardiovascular reﬂexes among others in the same test sub— Eckberg, D.L., (for the Neurolab Autonom1c Nervous System Team), 2003. Burst—
, , , , ing into space: alterations of sympathetic control by space travel. Acta Physiol.
jECtS as we d1d.They showed that It took at least 25 days postﬂight Scam 177, 299311
for these reﬂex responses to return to preﬂight levels. Ertl,A.C., Diedrich,A., Biaggioni, I., Levine, B.D., Robertson, R.M., Cox,].F.,Zuckerman,
The inﬂight changes that we had expected from our earlier HDT— ].H., Pawelczyk, ].A., Ray, C.A., Buckey Jr., ].C., Lane, L.D., Shiavi, R., Gaffney, F.A.,
. . . . . Costa, F., Holt, C., Blomqvist, C.G., Eckberg, D.L., Baisch, F.]., Robertson, D., 2002.
exPerlepce at ﬁrSt seemEd t9 materlahze 1n SUbJECt Av bUt only as Human muscle sympathetic nerve activity and plasma noradrenaline kinetics in
far as his pattern of d1astollc pressures was concerned. The day— space. J. Physiol. 538, 321—329.
time stresses in actual spaceﬂight probably make for more arousal Fritsch—Yelle,].M., Charles,].B.,]ones, M.M.,Wood, M.L., 1996. Microgravity decreases
h . . C1 C1 . HDT b d S b. B, P heart rate and arterial pressure in humans]. Appl. Physiol. 80, 910—914.
t an 18 experience urlng e rESt' u JECt S ortapres Imholz, B.P., Wieling, W., van Montfrans, G.A., Wesseling, I(.H., 1998. Fifteen years
recordings dld not ShOW the expected reversal Of SVR—pattern: experience with ﬁnger arterial pressure monitoring: assessment of the technol—
nighttime—SVR higher than daytime in HDT, lower in Space. How— 0331- Card10V3_SC- RES- 33’ 505-515, REVIEW . .
b'eCt B alread had a ver outs oken SVR— attern reﬂi ht I(vetnansky, R., V1gas, M., T1granyan, R.A., Nemeth, S., Macho, L., 1981. Act1v1ty 0fthe
eve}: su J . y y p . p p g ’ sympathetic—adrenomedullary system in rats after space ﬂight on the Cosmos
Wthh was different from what we had found in our 7 HDT—test biosatellites.Adv.SpaceRes.14,187—192.
subjects. Migeotte, P.F., Prisk, G.K., Paiva, M., 2003. Microgravity alters respiratory sinus
- - - - - - - arrhythmia and short—term heart rate variability in humans. Am]. Physiol. Heart
In conclu510n, we have shown the iea51b1l1ty of extenswe inﬂight Circ_ Physiol_ 284’ H1995_2006_
cardlovaSCUlar measurementS, even 1n busy 35tr0n3Ut5, Whlle they Verheyden, B., Beckers, F., Couckuyt, I(., Liu, J., Aubert, A.E., 2007. Respiratory
are performing many of their normal duties, From these obser_ modulation of cardiovascular rhythms before and after short—duration human
- - spaceﬂight. Acta Physiol. (Oxf.). 191, 297—308.
vatlons, we have ,leaFHEd to take the, pSyChOlOglcal aspe,CtS Of Voogel, A.]., Stok, W.]., Pretorius, P.]., Van Montfrans, G.A., Langewouters, G.]., Kare—
spaceﬂight more into account When JUdglng the adaptation to maker,].M., 1997. Circadian blood pressure and systemic haemodynamics during
microgravity. The waking blood pressure and heart rate values 42 days of6 degrees head—down tilt. Acta Physiol. Scand. 161, 71—80.
are determined both by the psychology and the physiology Of the Wesseling, I(.H.,]ansen,].R.C., Settels,].]., Schreuder,].]., 1993. Computation ofaortic
. . . . . . ﬂow from pressure in humans using a nonlinear, three—element model. J. Appl.
welghtless condltlon. Our earl1er ﬁnd1ngs 1n HDT have not been physi01_ 74’ 2566_2573_
conﬁrmed.

"
