"","x"
"1","INVESTIGATING HUMAN COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE DURING SPACEFLIGHT
Nathalie Pattyn 1’2’ 3 ; Pierre-Franeois Migeotte 4 ; Wim Demaeseleer1 ; Régine Kolinsky 2; J osé Morais 2 ;
Martin Zizi 1’ 5
1 Dept. Physiology, Medical School, V. U.B, Brussels, Laarbeeklaan 103, 1090 Brussels, ngaz‘ﬂnngubaabe,
Belgium, 2 Unité de Recherche en Neurosciences Cognitives, U.L.B., Brussels, 3 Royal Military Academy, Brussels,
4Lab0mt0ire de Physique Biomédicale, U.L.B. Brussels, 5Epidemi010gy and Biostatistics, Ministry ofDefence,
Brussels.
ABSTRACT METHODS
Although astronauts’ subjective self—evaluation of Subjects: Students, jet ﬁghter pilots and astronauts. The
cognitive functioning often reports irnpairrnents, to date control group of pilots (N=13) was carefully matched to
most studies of human higher cognitive functions in the Characteristics of the astronaut subjects
space never yielded univoeal results. Since no golden (demographics, professional background, family
standard eXists to evaluate the higher cognitive functions, situation). The data collection on the astronauts was done
we proposed to assess astronaut’s cognitive performance at 6 measurement points: Launeh-44 days (BDCI); L-9
through a novel series of tests combined with the (BDCZ); 5th day inﬂight (FDl); 8th day inﬂight (FDZ);
simultaneous recording of physiological parameters. We Return+4 days (PFl); R+25 days (PFZ). Variables: We
report here the validation of our methodology and the analysed reaction times (RTs) and accuracy (A00) for the
cognitive results of this testing on the cosmonauts from different interference effects. Statistical analysis: To
the 11 days odISSsea mission to the 188 (2002) and on a overcome the known problem of the scarcity of subjects
control group of pilots, carefully matched to the in space life science research, we used routinely applied
Characteristics of the subjects. For the ﬁrst time, we show statistical methods from neuropsychology: comparing one
a performance decrement in higher cognitive functions subject to a carefully matched group of controls with
during space ﬂight. Our results show a signiﬁcant revised signiﬁcance criteria for the analysis of variance.
performance decrement for inﬂight measurement, as well Cognitive testing: A Colour-word Stroop task, a general
as measurable variations in executive control of cognitive emotional Stroop task (presentation of emotionally loaded
functions. Taken together, our data establish the validity stimuli related to personal concerns) and a speciﬁc
of our methodology and the presence of a different emotional Stroop task (presentation of rnission-related
information processing in operational conditions. emotionally loaded stimuli), in combination with a
recognition task regarding the presented rnaterial,
INTRODUCTION followed by a numerical Stroop task. The latter was
performed before and after hyperventilation (HV).
Reliable and remote assessment of cognitive performance
is one of the crucial needs for future long duration RESULTS
mission planning [1]. Although astronauts’ subjective
evaluation often reports irnpairrnents, -to date - rnost Validation Of 0111' methodological assumptions:
studies assessing human performance could not measure (i) Emotion can be a measurable signal through speciﬁcity
any signiﬁcant decrement in higher cognitive functions and attention allocation in a normal population. As shown
during space ﬂight [2]. Cognitive performance can only in Fig 2» we demonstrated a speciﬁc emotional Stroop
be assessed through indirect measurements and no golden effect in our student population (delay in RTS for
standard eXists to evaluate the higher cognitive functions. emotional rnaterial, proportional to the speciﬁcity 0f the
As this discrepancy between subjective evaluation and presented material). Furthermore, this delay in RTS is het
experimental results could be methodological, we due to a general Slow down effect, hUt to attention
explored the possibility to maximize both the validity and allocation, as indicated by the higher diserirninability (d’)
the sensitivity of such testing. Potential improvements we for speciﬁc emotional material in the recognition task
identiﬁed were: (data not shown). These results support the relevance of
1. Increasing the signal-to-noise ratio of the testing. This inciuding an emotional dimension to our experimental
can be reached by (i) adapting the test to the subject- des1gn.
population; (ii) including an emotional dimension; (iii) (h) Cognitive testing ought to be population speciﬁc.
using multidimensional tasks. Comparing students and jet ﬁghter pilots on the Stroop
2. Assessing an effect rather than an absolute performance eolour-word task (Fig 1) and Oh the emotional Stroop task
(i.e. built-in control). (Fig 2) shows that pilots are less subject to interference
3. Combining physiological measurements and cognitive frorn non-relevant stimulus dimensions. They were also
testing (data not shown here). faster and less prone to errors than students. These results
indicate that highly trained and selected population (like
astronauts are) should be tested through adapted tools.

"
"2","1200 Fig 3: Ace across measurements The drop in ACC f0r the
* personal emotional material was signiﬁcant for both the last
I BDC and the ﬁrst inﬂight measurement [F(12) = 18,36;
“00 p<0,001]. For the professional emotional material, it showed
signiﬁcant f0r the both inﬂight measurements [F(12) = 20,93;
jg: 1000 P< 0,001]-
|—
n: 900 V V V (ii) We observed that the decrease in interference we
% % % % measured before HV was replaced by an increased
' f f 11 ' H 1 ' ' ﬂ. h
800 g g g % 1nter erence 0 .0W1ng . V. 011 y durlhg 1n 1g t
Congruent |ncongruentlnv—Neg-PrimingNeg-Priming measurements (Flg 4) Whlle IHdIICCtly Obtalned (by the
Condition imposed HV), this effect could still indicate an overall
performance decrement, since it is related to a higher
Fig 1: RTS 0f the Stroop C0l0ar Ward T ask performed by sensitivity to interference in cognitive processing.
students and pil0ts. The analysis ofvariance with ""colour"" as a
singlefactor with 4 levels showed signiﬁcancefOr students [F =
65, 7;]? < 0,000] as well asf0rpil0ts [F = 4,45;p< 0, 005]. 120
”a 100 '-
‘E’ 80 /l I
-Students E ' /
g 40 ' /.
1200 E 20 .
:13: o / 3‘""
1100 c
,5. 8 —20
g .s .
E 1000 < '40
BDC1 BDC2 FD1 FD2 PF1 PF2
900 W % % Measurement
Nemra' Emo'gfrtera' Emo'specmc Fig 4 Magnitude of the interference eﬂect (RTimongmem-
cond't'on RTcongmem) f0r the numerical Stroop bef0re and after
hyperventilation (HV). The eﬂect remains signiﬁcant
. . [F(2,22)=7, 83;p<0, 005] across all data points.
Fig 2: RTs 0f the Em0tional Stroop performed by students and
pil0ts. The analyszs 0fvariance with em0t10n as a smglefactor DISCUSSION AND C ON CLUSI ON
with 3 levels showed Signiﬁcance only for the students cohort
[F = 5,08; 19 < 001]. Pairwise comparisons were performed , ,
with paired samples t-tests. Only the diﬁ‘erence between the F.“ the ﬁrst tlme, WC. Show 3. performanee decrement 1n
speciﬁc emotional words and the neutral words was signiﬁcant hlgher cognltlve funCtlonS durlng space ﬂlght.
[t = 3,038; p < 0,005], Bes1de th1s performance decrement, our data also show a
measurable difference regarding executive functions.
Results from the Odissea mission: Oct 29-N0V 8 2002, Since there are also some effects during the last pre-ﬂight
(i) For the last BDC and the inﬂight measurements, we and the ﬁrst postﬂight measurement, the Observed effects
found a signiﬁcant performance decrement in response are DOt likely to be due to Hg in SC, 131“ rather to an
accuracy on emotional material, both personal and job- interaction between high workload and stress (as shown
related (Fig 3), by the decrease on testing involving emotional material).
Taken together, our data establish the validity of our
methodology and the presence of a different information
processing in operational conditions. However, future
research is needed to further investigate the mechanisms
1’00 \\ 1/ at stake.
g ‘—A —-—congruent REFERENCES
:23 0,75 3:23:35“ [1]. Bioastronautical Critical Path Roadmap (2004), NASA
Lngjtrr‘glmem Document # JSC 62577.
hon-word _ _ [2]. Casler J.G. and Cook JR. (1999) International Journal of
?;gefgﬁggig'pr'mm Cognitive Ergonomics 3, 351-372.
050
’ BDC1 BDC2 FD1 FD2 PF1 PF2
Measurements ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Support: Prodex #90030 (ESA/BE Federal Gov’t), grant RSTD# HF10
(BE DOD), an Euro Space Foundation grant.

"
