"","x"
"1","Acta Astronautica 129 (2016) 193—200
Mié“\”yj‘,§ Contents lists available at ScienceDirect . / /
ngifﬁ ,
ﬁve; Acta Astronautlca
.. ,-...\ (3“
ELSEVIER journal homepage: WWW.elseVier.com/locate/aa IT? I: f
—
Impact of commumcatlon delays to and from the Internatlonal Space (D CrossMark
Statlon 0n self—reported 1nd1v1dual and team behaV10r and performance: A
mlxed-methods study
. . . . b . . d
Natalle M. Klntza, Chlh-Plng Chou , Wllllam B. Vesseyc, Lauren B. Leveton ,
Lawrence A. Palinkasa’*
a USC Suzanne Dworak-Peck School of Social Work, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, United States
b Department of Preventive Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90032, United States
C KBRwyle, Houston, TX 77058, United States
d Behavioral Health and Performance, Human Research Program, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX 77058, United States
ARTICLEINFO ABSTRACT
Keywords: Deep space explorations will involve signiﬁcant delays in communication to and from Earth that will likely
Behavioral health impact individual and team outcomes. However, the extent of these impacts and the appropriate counter—
AStronaUtS. . measures for their mitigation remain largely unknown. This study utilized the International Space Station (ISS),
Long'duratlon Spaceﬂlght a high—ﬁdelity analog for deep space, as a research platform to assess the impact of communication delays on
Countermeasures individual and team performance, mood, and behavior. Three astronauts on the ISS and 18 mission support
personnel performed tasks with and without communication delays (50—s one—way) during a mission lasting 166
days. Self—reported assessments of individual and team performance and mood were obtained after each task.
Secondary outcomes included communication quality and task autonomy. Qualitative data from post—mission
interviews with astronauts were used to validate and expand on quantitative data, and to elicit recommenda—
tions for countermeasures. Crew well—being and communication quality were signiﬁcantly reduced in
communication delay tasks compared to control. Communication delays were also signiﬁcantly associated with
increased individual stress/frustration. Qualitative data suggest communication delays impacted operational
outcomes (i.e. task efﬁciency), teamwork processes (i.e. team/task coordination) and mood (i.e. stress/
frustration), particularly when tasks involved high task—related communication demands, either because of
poor communication strategies or low crew autonomy. Training, teamwork, and technology—focused counter—
measures were identiﬁed to mitigate or prevent adverse impacts.
1. Introduction tion delays may lead to conﬂict, misunderstandings and reduced trust
among dispersed team members [8,9]. However, the extent of these
Long-duration space explorations will involve signiﬁcant delays in impacts on distributed space teams and the appropriate counter-
communication between astronaut crews in space and mission support measures for their mitigation remain largely unknown.
personnel on Earth. On a crewed mission to Mars, for example, a one- To date, research on the behavioral and performance-related
way transmission could take up to 22 min to receive. Such delays will impacts of communication delays across distributed space teams has
likely impact individual and team performance, behavior, and mood relied extensively on ground-based analog environments. For example,
unless teams are provided with the tools and training to overcome or some studies have explored issues related to delayed voice commu-
prevent these challenges [1,2]. Concerns about the adverse impacts of nication as part of the larger topic of crew autonomy. These studies
communication delays across distributed teams are not new, and are suggest space crews will need to be more autonomous from mission
not unique to spaceﬂight operations [3—5]. Research suggests inter- control during long-duration space missions [10,11]. In addition,
rupted communication between distributed team members may lead to research from analog environments on Earth indicate communication
perceptions of an uncertain work environment, which in turn can yield delays are associated with decreased task efﬁciency, reduced situational
negative individual and organizational outcomes such as increased awareness, and weakened rapport between crewmembers and mission
stress and decreased job involvement [6,7]. Furthermore, communica- support personnel [12,13]. Although these studies provide important
* Correspondence to: USC Suzanne Dworak—Peck School of Social Work, University of Southern California, 669 W. 34th Street, MC0411, Los Angeles, CA 90089—0411, United States.
E—mail address: palinkas@usc.edu (L.A. Palinkas).
http://dx.d0i.0rg/10.1016/j.actaastr0.2016.09.018
Received 26 July 2016; Accepted 15 September 2016
Available online 16 September 2016
0094—5765/ © 2016 Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of IAA.

"
"2","N.M. Kintz et al. Acta Astronautica 129 (2016)193—200
Table 1
Study tasks by experimental condition and complexity level.
Task # Experimental Condition Complexity Description
Critical Novel
1 Control High High Crew replaced broken equipment used to support ISS habitability
2 Control Low Low Crew performed weekly cleaning activities
3 Control Low High Crew conducted scientiﬁc experiment
4 Delay Low Low Crew performed weekly cleaning activities
5 Delay High High Crew performed extravehicular mobility unit maintenance
6 Delay High Low Crew began loading disposal items into the Cygnus spacecraft
7 Control High Low Crew transferred cargo from the automated transfer vehicle to ISS
8 Control High Low Crew conducted scientiﬁc experiment
9 Control High Low Crew conducted scientiﬁc experiment
10 Delay Low High Crew replaced broken equipment used in human physiology research
insights, they are limited in number and ﬁdelity to actual spaceﬂight familiarity with task scheduling and procedures served as subject
operations. Importantly, the reported impacts of communication matter experts (SMEs) and identiﬁed a set of tasks representing
delays in low ﬁdelity environments may be underestimated, particu— variation on two dimensions of task complexity, criticality (low or
larly for tasks involving highly complex, dangerous, and/ or off—nominal high), and novelty (low or high), and meeting the following require-
situations [1 1]. Given these limitations, there remains an urgent need ments: 1) task duration was at least 60 min (to ensure sufﬁcient time to
to further explore the behavior and performance-related impacts of capture behavioral assessments and complete ratings); 2) tasks in-
communication delays on distributed space teams, preferably in high volved communication between crew and ground (> 4 transmitted
ﬁdelity environments. messages); 3) at least two astronauts on the ISS were involved in the
The current study, conducted by the Behavioral Health and task (team-level task); 4) delays in communication involved all com-
Performance Element (BHP) of the NASA Human Research Program, munication mediums (i.e. voice/text/Video) but did not include tele-
eXpands on these ﬁndings by utilizing the International Space Station metry or other hardware and/ or system communications; 5) a different
(ISS), a high-ﬁdelity analog for deep space, as a research platform to task was completed each day over a 4-day period early in the mission
examine how interdependent teams (astronauts in space and mission and late in the mission, and two additional tasks were completed at the
control personnel on Earth) interact and perform tasks with and mid-point of the mission (to control for team effects over time); and 6)
without communication delays between the team elements [14]. After tasks for this particular study targeted a speciﬁc ISS increment
each task, participants were asked to complete post-task questionnaires consisting of three astronauts aboard the ISS, as well as participating
that included questions about their perceptions of individual and team mission support personnel.
performance and well-being. Secondary outcomes included commu— The original study protocol called for evaluation of 16 tasks (8
nication quality and task autonomy. Qualitative data from post-mission under control conditions and 8 under conditions of a 50-s one-way
interviews conducted with astronaut participants were used to validate delay) that varied by task complexity. However due to task require-
and expand on the quantitative ﬁndings and to elicit recommendations ments and concerns expressed by the MOD, only 10 tasks were
for countermeasures. identiﬁed by SMEs as sufﬁcient and acceptable (results related to the
feasibility and acceptability of conducting the study on the ISS with
2, Methods regard to study design challenges and limitations are reported else-
where [15]). The tasks were completed over a three-month window
21. Subjects during the 166-day mission. Six of these tasks were completed under
control conditions (no delay in communications) and four were
The study included three astronauts on the ISS and 18 participating completed under a 50-s one-way delay in communications. The
mission support personnel such as the CAPCOM (capsule conﬁrm- imbalance (6 control vs 4 communication delay) in tasks was due to
nicator; the individual who communicates with the crew from mission the inability t0 identify a ﬁfth task that met study criteria and was
control) and Mission Director. All subjects were ﬂuent English speak- acceptable to the MOD that could be conducted under the 50-s one-way
ers. Additional details on mission increment and demographic char- delay during the three-month interval, and the unanticipated 0131301“
acteristics were withheld to preserve subject conﬁdentiality and tunity to collect data during performance of an additional task under
anonymity. All procedures for data collection were reviewed and control conditions [15]. A description of study tasks by task order and
approved by the Institutional Review Boards of NASA's Johnson experimental condition iS provided in Table 1 below.
Space Center and the University of Southern California. Prior to the
start of the study, all subjects signed written informed consent. 2.3. Post-task assessments
2.2. Procedure After each task, participating astronauts and mission support
personnel were asked to complete post-task questionnaires that
Participating astronauts and mission support personnel were asked included questions about 1nd1V1dual and team behavior, performance
to perform tasks with and without communication delays to-and-from and mood. The post-task questionnaire tOOk approximately 10 min to
the ISS. A 50-s one-way interval in the delay in communications complete and included the following items grouped by topic:
between sender and receiver was used. This delay was suggested by
NASA's Mission Operations Directorate (MOD) as adequate for con- 2.3.1. Performance (individual, crew and team)
ducting the study without jeopardizing operations on the ISS. The
communication delay ﬁlter was only employed during completion of All subjects were asked to rate their performance (Individual), the
designated study tasks, all communications returned to normal upon performance of the astronauts (Crew), and the performance of the
completion of the task. entire team including both the astronauts and mission support
Three NASA employees with mission control experience and personnel (Team). Each item was rated on a 9-point scale ranging
194

"
"3","N.M. Kintz et al. Acta Astronautica 129 (2016)193—200
from 1 (poor) to 9 (excellent). recommendations for countermeasures to mitigate or prevent adverse
impacts (see Appendix A). The primary investigator and two behavioral
2.3.2. Crew well-being (team mood) research scientist co-investigators conducted the interviews. Post-
mission interviews lasted approximately 45 min and were digitally
Participating astronauts were asked to complete a short instrument recorded.
containing three items from the Moos Group Environment Scale [16]: Qualitative feedback from post-mission interviews was analyzed
1) “Each of the participating crewmembers was given the freedom to using an inductive coding approach based on “Consensus, Co-
cope with the demands of completing the task in his or her own way”; Occurrence, and Comparison” [18]. This qualitative coding methodol-
2) “The crew had no difﬁculty getting along with one another while ogy allows researchers to analyze both a priori and emergent themes in
completing the task”; 3) “Participating crewmembers were able to focus the data. The coding scheme was developed in an iterative process.
on getting the job done without distractions”. Each item was rated on a Brieﬂy, audio transcriptions of the post-mission interviews were
5-point scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). transcribed by the lead author, and then reviewed by the primary
Team Mood represents the sum of the three items. The inter-item investigator. The raw data from the audio transcriptions was con-
reliability (Cronbach's alpha) for the 3-item measure was 0.74. densed into analyzable units, and a comprehensive set of themes were
developed. The themes were ﬁrst identiﬁed on the basis of syntax. For
2.3.3. Individual well-being (stress/frustration) example, the theme ‘communication skills’ was ﬁrst assigned to a
number of different phrases such as: be concise; not ambiguous,
All subjects were asked: “Please comment on how you felt at the end precise, repeat yourself, pre-call etc. However, as we went through
of each task (e.g. more or less frustrated than usual, more or less the transcripts in more detail, we noticed instances where a pure
stressed than usual)”. Responses were scored on a scale from 0 (not syntaX-based system was insufﬁcient. For example, in some instances
stressed/frustrated) to 1 (stressed/frustrated). Examples of responses the astronaut would simply state the communication skill (i.e. “we
scored as 0 include: “Neither frustrated nor stressed afterwards,” and started pre-calling”), but in other instances the astronaut would talk
“Normal.” Examples of responses scored as 1 include: “A bit more through an example of the communication skill (i.e. “your next call
frustrated because several areas were more difﬁcult to understand than becomes ‘Houston station on 2 for smoke detection.’ And then you
expected,” and “More stressful and frustrated than normal.” need to call in like 3 s so everybody, you got that little time before that
call comes in for everybody to perk up in mission control”). To account
2.3.4. Communication quality for this, themes were identiﬁed on the basis of syntax and content.
After the preliminary set of themes were developed, the interview
All subjects were asked to indicate their level of agreement with the transcriptions were coded by the lead author and then reviewed by the
following statements regarding communication with remote team primary investigator. Rather than using the entire theme name to
members: 1) “I understood what was being communicated”; and 2) indicate when a theme was present in the transcript, the themes were
“I felt the other person understood what I was trying to communicate”. assigned a particular reference code for data analysis (for example, the
Each item was rated on a 5-point scale ranging from 1 (strongly theme ‘confusing communications’ was assigned the code COMM1, and
disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). Communication quality represents the the theme ‘tasks took longer to complete’ was assigned the code
sum of the two items. The inter-item reliability of the 2-item measure PERF1). When a particular phrase contained multiple units of mean-
was 0.83. ing, all relevant codes were assigned. Differences in assigned codes for
particular segments of text were resolved through consensus among
2.3.5. T ask autonomy research team members. The data was then inspected to ensure the
comprehensiveness of the coding scheme. Coded-themes that did not
Participating astronauts were asked to complete a short instrument represent substantially different units of meaning were combined. Low
containing three items adapted from Hackman and Oldman [17]: 1) frequency codes were reviewed to determine whether they represented
“We had signiﬁcant autonomy in determining how we do this job”; 2) a truly unique meaning or if they could be effectively subsumed under a
“We could decide on our own how to go about doing this task”; and 3) more frequently coded-theme.
“We had considerable independence and freedom in how we did this After the coding process was complete, the coded-themes were
task”. ISS crewmembers were also asked if they required autonomy in grouped together using the principle of constant comparison in order
completing the task: 4) “We required signiﬁcant autonomy in deter- to develop higher order organization of the data [19]. The ﬁnal
mining how we do this job”; 5) “We had to decide on our own how to go structure consisted of three levels: themes (codes), subcategories,
about doing this task”; and 6) “We required considerable independence categories. The frequency of each theme was calculated by summing
and freedom in how we did this task”. Each item was rated on a 5-point the number of times the code appeared in the transcripts. The
scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). The items quantiﬁcation of qualitative data was intended merely for description
representing need for and possession of autonomy were highly of frequency of occurrence of certain topics and not for quantitative
correlated (r=0.66, p < 0.001), and factor analysis found inconclusive hypothesis. Given the small sample size, the frequencies were intended
evidence of two separate factors, so all six items were combined into to illustrate the opinions of a single crew rather than examine the range
one scale. Task autonomy represents the sum of the six items. The of opinions expressed by three separate individuals. Nevertheless, the
inter-item reliability of the 6-item measure was 0.89. comments from the three individual astronauts were similar in content
and number.
2.4. Post-mission interviews
2.5. Statistical analysis
Due to the small sample size, and limited number of study tasks and
post task-questions, qualitative data from post-mission interviews Upon completion of the study, a total of 37 post-task assessments
conducted with the participating astronauts were used to validate were collected from participating astronauts (22 assessments) and
and expand on quantitative ﬁndings. Individual semi-structured inter- mission support personnel (15 assessments). The number of post-task
Views were conducted with each astronaut less than 21 days post- assessments collected for each task varied based on the number of
mission to obtain their opinions about their experience with the study, astronauts and key mission support personnel involved in the parti-
including: perception of the impacts of communication delays; factors cular task [15]. Primary outcomes included individual, crew and team
that might have inﬂuenced behavior, performance and well-being; and performance, crew well-being (team mood) and individual well-being
195

"
"4","N.M. Kintz et al. Acta Astronautica 129 (2016)193—200
(stress/frustration). Secondary outcomes included communication delays (25.4% of comments). These comments were grouped into seven
quality and task autonomy. We hypothesized communication delays themes, which were further grouped into three subcategories: 1)
would be inversely associated with performance, team mood, and ‘performance’ (14.8% of comments), 2) ‘mood’ (7.9% of comments),
communication quality, and positively associated with task autonomy and 3) ‘positive outcomes’ (2.6% of comments).
and stress/frustration. For continuous outcomes (performance, team The ‘performance’ subcategoryincluded three themes related to the
mood, communication quality, and task autonomy), responses from impact of communication delays on operational outcomes and team-
participating astronauts and mission support personnel were averaged work processes. Within this subcategory, the astronauts most fre-
for each task, and compared across control (N=6) and delay (N=4) quently reported ‘more time wasted’ (waiting for communications)
tasks using an independent samples t—test. This method evaluates under situations of communication delays. For example, one astronaut
differences between control and delay tasks weighted by the number of stated, “Things you could do independently were ﬁne, things where you
post-task assessments collected for each task, and was employed to relied on the ground resulted in lots of time lost and frustration, which
help control for the uneven number of post-task assessments collected is just not going to work.” Similarly, the astronauts reported ‘tasks took
from the different study tasks. Normality of the task-averaged data for longer to complete’ under situations of communication delays. For
communication quality, performance, crew well-being and task auton- example, one astronaut suggested, “You can say there was performance
omy was assessed through Visual inspection of Normal Q-Q plots, and degradation because it took longer. But really then it depends on how
the Shapiro-Wilk Test (p > 0.05). For individual well-being, a Fisher's you deﬁne performance. The ‘task’ was not done worse or better by that
exact test was conducted to compare reports of ‘stress/frustration’ (the delay)” Furthermore, ‘reduced situational awareness’between the
verses ‘no stress/frustration (coded 1 or 0 respectively) across control ISS crewmembers and the mission support team was reported as a
and communication delay conditions (N=23, 14 of the 37 observations performance-related challenge.
were omitted due to missing data. All 14 of the missing observations The ‘mood’ subcategory included two themes related to the impact
were from ISS crewmembers, 5 from communication delay tasks, and 9 of communication delays on morale and well-being. Within this
from control tasks). All statistical analyses were performed with SPSS subcategory, ‘stress and frustration’ was most frequently reported.
and setting 1-tailed alpha at 0.05 for hypothesis testing. For example, the astronauts indicated, “Stress levels did increase with
comm. delay, particularly the cargo ops ones, because you could not get
3. Results info in a timely fashion” and, “The only frustrating thing was dealing
with conversations where you needed a back and forth with multiple
3.1. Quantitative analysis questions and answers.” In addition, ‘disappointment’ was reported as
a mood-related challenge.

As predicted, team mood was signiﬁcantly lower in communication The third subcategory included two themes related to positive
delay (M=12.46, SD=0.71, N=4) compared to control (M=13.87 SD=0.79, impacts of communication delays. Within this subcategory, ‘increased
N=5) tasks [t(7)=2.762, p=0.014, Fig. 1a]. Communication delays were crew-crew communications’ was most frequently reported. For exam-
also signiﬁcantly associated with individual well-being (Fisher's exact test ple, one astronaut mentioned, “You have crew discussions popping up
one-sided =0.030), where stress/frustration was more frequently reported instead of just calling down to grounds and waiting for the answer to
in communication delay compared to control conditions: 9 of 12 come back.” In addition, one astronaut suggested he felt liberated
responses (75.0%) versus 3 of 11 responses (27.3%), respectively under situations of communication delays.

(Table 2).

On the other hand, there was no statistical difference between 3.2.2. Contributing factors
control (N=6) and communication delay (N=4) tasks for individual
[t(8)=—0.011, p=0.496], crew [t(8)=0.592, p=0.285], or team [t(8) There were 62 comments related to ‘factors’ that may contribute to
=0.887, p=0.200] performance. Sample means for individual (control adverse impacts (32.8% of comments). These comments were grouped
M=6.93, SD=0.98; Delay M=6.94, SD=0.90), crew (control M=7.79, into ten themes, which were further grouped into four subcategories: 1)
SD=0.68, delay M=7.46, SD=1.11) and team (control M=7.71, ‘task-speciﬁc factors’ (13.8% of comments), 2) ‘communication factors’
SD=0.41; delay M=7.21, SD=1.31) performance are showed in (9.5% of comments), 3) ‘other factors’ (4.2% of comments), and 4)
Fig. 1b—d respectively. ‘non-contributing factors’ (5.3% of comments).

The study also examined whether communication delays were The ‘task-speciﬁc factors’ subcategory included three themes re-
associated with secondary outcomes including communication quality lated to how certain types of tasks contributed to challenges associated
and task autonomy. As predicted, communication quality was signiﬁ- with communication delays. The astronauts most frequently suggested
cantly lower under conditions of communication delay (M=7.88, ‘high communication tasks’ contributed to adverse impacts. For
SD=0.98, N=4) compared to control (M=9.13, SD=0.46, N=6) tasks example, one astronaut stated, “If we have to wait every time for
[t(8)=2.740, p=0.0127, Fig. 2a]. However, task autonomy was not ground to give us a go or no go, it becomes almost impossible to do
statistically different across communication delay (M=17.71, SD=3.27, certain tasks.” In addition, they suggested ‘compleX tasks’ and ‘time-
N=4) and control (M=17.44, SD=4.7, N=6) tasks [t(8)=—0.097, critical tasks’ contributed to performance and mood-related challenges.
p=0.463, Fig. 2b]. The ‘communication factors’ subcategory included two themes

related to how poor communication strategies contributed to commu-
3.2. Qualitative analysis nication delay challenges. The astronauts indicated ‘confusing commu-
nications’, and ‘missed calls’ contributed to the adverse impacts. For

Qualitative analysis of the post-mission interviews identiﬁed 25 example, one astronaut said, “Ground came back and they kind of
themes which were grouped into ten subcategories and ultimately three answered in a little bit of an ambiguous way which forced me to call
categories: 1) ‘impacts’ of communication delays, 2) ‘factors’ that may again and clarify. And of course that is something that you want to
contribute to adverse impacts, and 3) ‘countermeasures’ to mitigate or avoid in a comm. delay situation.”
prevent adverse impacts. Frequencies and percentages of total com- The third subcategory, ‘other factors’, included two themes describ-
ments for the 25 themes are presented in Table 3. ing individual and environmental processes that contributed to com-

munication delay challenges. The astronauts indicated individuals with
3.2.1. Impacts ‘no prior experience with communication delays’ contributed to
performance and mood-related challenges because they had not yet

There were 48 comments related to the ‘impacts’ of communication learned to adapt the way they communicated to the delayed conditions.

196

"
"5","N.M. Kintz et al. Acta Astronautica 129 (2016)193—200
Crew WeII-being 11 Individual Performance
*
15.0 n—u 9.0
g e
o 10.0 8 s_o
‘0 0)
0 a:
5’ U)
E E
g 5'0 g BID
4: <
0.0 0.0
Control Delay Control Delay
Crew Performance Team Performance
g g
o 6.0 u 6.0
U) U)
Q) G)
O) U)
s e
4’ 3.0 4’ 3.0
> >
< <
0.0 0.0
Control Delay Control Delay
Fig. 1. Assessment of a) crew well—being, b) individual performance, c) crew performance and (1) team performance across control (N26) and communication delay (N=4) tasks.
Independent samples t—test statistics (*p < 0.050). Data are Mean :t SEM (11=task averages calculated from ISS crewmembers only, 1 of the 6 observations for control tasks was omitted
due to missing data).
Table 2 that did not contribute to performance and mood-related issues
Association between communication delays and individual well—being: frequency and associated With communication delays during this study. The crew—
percent of 1respoinses indicatilng (sitrless/frustration verses no stress/frustration by members indicated the ‘quality Of support’ (from the mission support
eXpenmenta con 1t10n (comm or e ay)' team) was good regardless of experimental condition. In addition the
NO StreSS/frustration StreSS/frustration Total N (%) p Value crewmembers mentioned ‘personal issues’ external to the study did not
N (%) N (%) impact task performance or mood. For example, one crewmember said,
“I could deﬁnitely see...if you were having some sort of family
Control 8 (72.7%) 3 (27.3%) 11 (100.0%) 0.030a I th'n ltk th t b '11 f t I‘ h re 0
Delay 3 (25.0%) 9 (75.0%) 12 “000% emergency... can see some 1 g 1 e a .e1 g a ac o , w e y u
Total 11 (47.8%) 12 (522%) 23b (100_0%) are gettlng d1stracted because some out51de 1nﬂuence. But for me, the
— situation was no. We really didn’t see any, I didn’t see any.” Lastly, the
:Fisher's exacttest(1-sided). crewmembers mentioned they did not notice a difference in perfor-
14 er the 37 ebsewattehs were emttted due to mtesmg data' mance or mood when two verses three crewmembers collaborated on a
communication delay task (‘crew size’).
For example, one astronaut stated,

There was deﬁnltely one weekend when (an mdzvzdual wzth no 323. Countermeasures

comm. delay experience) was on as ﬂlght d1rector. And a lot of 1118

calls were very brlef, very typlcal calls you would make to a crew. There were 79 comments related to ‘countermeasures’ to mitigate

Btlt we were mlssmg all of them. tththk we mlssed 374 of them and or prevent adverse impacts (41.8% of comments). These comments

we were left scratchlng our heads...but It seems 11ke overall the were grouped into eight themes, which were further grouped into three

learnlng curve was good. '1‘he ground started to understand what we subcategories: 1) ‘training-fo cu s e d’ (18.5% of c o m m e nt 5), 2) t e a m-

would need. Because I ththk they were experlen01ng the exact same work-focused’ (15.9% of comments), and 3) ‘technology—focused’ (7.4%

frustratlon on the ground that we were experlencmg up there. of comments).

In addition, they suggested ‘space-related cognitive disturbances’ The ﬁrst subcategory included three themes related to training-
that impacted some crewmembers on the ISS (i.e. working memory and based mitigation and prevention strategies for long-duration missions.
cognitive processing difﬁculties) exacerbated adverse impacts asso- Within this subcategory, the astronauts most frequently reported
ciated with communication delays. training focused on improving ‘communication skills’ may prevent or

The fourth subcategory included three themes describing factors mitigate adverse impacts. F01"" example, they stated, “YOU want to be

very concise and precise, and give options for answers and make sure
197

"
"6","N.M. Kintz et al. Acta Astronautica 129 (2016)193—200
Communication Quality Task Autonomy 1]
‘k
1 0.0 |—| 20.0
9 8'0 9 15.0
0 O
U O
m 6.0 w
G) d)
5, o, 10.0
E 4.0 E
9 3
< 2 0 < 5.0
Control Delay Control Delay
Fig. 2. Assessment of a) communication quality and b) task autonomy across control (N26) and communication delay (N=4) tasks. Independent samples t—test statistics (*p < 0.050).
Data are Mean :t SEM (11: task averages calculated from ISS crewmembers only).
Table 3 themes related to team and task coordination. The astronauts su -
a a a a a a a g
Quahtathe analYSIS 0f I’OSt'mISSlOn IntemeWS- gested efforts should be made to ‘increase crew autonomy’ and ‘reduce
Cate O Subcate 0 Theme Fre uenc (°/) back-and-forth communications’ between astronauts and mission
g ry g ry q y 0 control during long-duration missions. For example, one astronaut
Impacts Performance More time waited 13 (6.9%) stated, “I think if we ﬂy to Mars we are going to have a spaceship that is
Tasks took longer to 9 (48%) more autonomous than the ISS. So you don’t have as much low-level
complete , , comm. with the ground on each of the steps of the procedures.”
Reduced Sltuatlonal 6 (3.2%) Th h. d b , 1 d d d ,b, 1
awareness e t 1r .su category me u e com.ments .escri 1ng too s to
Mood Stress/frustration 12 (6.3%) prevent or mitigate adverse 1mpacts. Within this subcategory, the
Disappointment 3 (1.6%) astronauts recommended developing a ‘recording tool’ for voice com-
POSltlve outcomes Increased crew'crew 4 (21%) munications, and they suggested implementing ‘text or Video-based
comms. . . , . . .
Crew felt liberate d 1 (0.5%) communications fonlong-duration m1ss1ons. The astronauts reported
these strategies prov1de crewmembers Wlth a phys1ca1 record of what
Factors Task—speciﬁc High comm. tasks 13 (6.9%) was said, which may reduce working memory demands (i.e. reduce the
factors Complex tasks 8 (42%) need to remember detailed information over long delay periods), and
' _ ' ' 0 . . . .
, , Tlme crltlcal ml“ 5 (2'6/‘0 ultimately may reduce back-and-forth communications (1.e. the need to
Communlcatlon Confusmg comms. 9 (4.8%) d d 1 . . . . I d d. . h
factors Misse d calls 9 (48%) request repeate an /or c arifylng communications). 11 a .1tion, t e
Other factors NO prior experience 5 (26%) astronauts indicated the ‘AMO [autonomous m1ss1on operations] soft-
with comm. delay ware’ helped increase crew autonomy under situations of communica-
SPaC?jrelated 3 (16%) tion delays. The AMO software was developed as part of the
3?:Tlﬁgces Autonomous Missions Operations Project, and is designed to help
Non—contributing Quality of support 4 (2.1%) crewmembers operate more autonomously from mission control [11].
factors Personnel issues 4 (2.1%)
Crew—size 2 1.1% , , ,
( ) 4. Dlscussmn and conclusmns
Countermeasures Training—focused Comm. Skills 14 (7.4%)
Task—speciﬁc training 11 (5.8%) Although the impacts of delayed and asynchronous communication
COTnTn- delay Spemﬁc 10 (53%) likely to occur during long-duration missions have been documented in
training _ . . .
Teamwork—focuse d Increase crew 15 (7.9%) ground based analog env1ronments,. this is the ﬁrst study of such
autonomy 1mpacts us1ng the ISS. The quantitative results suggest self—reports of
Reduce back—and— 15 (7.9%) crew well-being and the quality of communications were signiﬁcantly
forth 00mmS- reduced in communication delay tasks compared to control. In addi-
_ ' 0 . . . . . . .
EeChn‘zilogy flieCS/rqglg tSOI d Egg? tion, both quantitative and qualitative data suggest communication
OCUSC 6X V1 60 ase . 0 . . .
comm delays were assoc1ated Wlth stress and frustration. Even though these
AMOa software 3 (1_6%) ﬁndings are consistent with previous ground-based analog studies [5—
— 7], the association between communications delay and reports of stress
AbbreViation55 *Comm(5)-=?0IPmunicatién(S)- and frustration in the current study was somewhat surprising. Based on
AMOZAutonomous M15510“ Operatlons‘ information collected during the pre-ﬂight interviews, we did not feel
. . . ” “ . that the study participants were primed to report stress and frustration
there is still useful understanding and, Announce your call being during the p ost-task assessments any more than they were primed to
made or you make your call twme 1f 1t's important, so you’re not foreing r ep ort effects on p erforman ce, aut on omy, communi cati on quality, or
the crew, If they dldn’t hear It to call back to say ‘Hey can you say that communication-related demands. In fact, the Astronaut Ofﬁce advised
again and .that ta1<es another “?‘lnd H.113: 1,11 addition, the astronauts against including a standardized questionnaire assessing levels of
suggested 1ncreas1ng task-spec1ﬁc training for both astronauts and stress in the belief that astronauts would be unlikely to report any
missign support personnel, .and including communication delay"" stress [15]. The open-ended question as worded was recommended as
spe01 c training in analog training env1ronments on Earth. an alternative. However, given the high number of missing observa-
The teamwork-focused subcategory included two 1nter-re1ated tions from the stress/frustration measure, particularly from ISS
198

"
"7","N.M. Kintz et al. Acta Astronautica 129 (2016)193—200
crewmembers, the quantitative data should be interpreted cautiously. during deep space missions, and efforts should be made to reduce back-
Furthermore, the high number of stress and frustration-related com- and-forth communications. Speciﬁcally, they suggested revising task
ments during the post-mission interview compared to other mood- procedures so crewmembers are not required to check in with the
related challenges may be explained, at least in part, by the fact that the mission support team after each step of a procedure. Lastly, a number
astronauts were speciﬁcally asked about stress and frustration of tools designed to reduce task-related communication demands and
(Appendix A). facilitate crew autonomy were identiﬁed.

Unlike communication quality and well-being, no signiﬁcant differ- In drawing conclusions from this particular study, certain limita-
ences in any of the self—reported performance measures were observed tions should be kept in mind. To start, the current study was limited in
across control and delay tasks. The qualitative data expanded on these terms of the number and type of tasks included. Prior to conducting the
ﬁndings. The astronauts reported the quality of support from the study, there were concerns expressed by the Mission Operations
mission support team was good regardless of whether or not there were Directorate about the potential impact of communication delays on
communication delays. Furthermore, the performance-related chal- ISS operations and the health and well-being of the astronauts.
lenges that were reported under situations of communication delays Accordingly, it was a challenge to identify a sufﬁcient number of tasks
were not explicitly linked to individual or team failures, but rather that were both acceptable and met the study criteria, thereby making it
involved operational outcomes and teamwork processes, such as difﬁcult to generalize the study ﬁndings to a wide range of tasks (these
reduced task efﬁciency and decreased situational awareness. Given challenges and limitations are discussed in more detail in a separate
these ﬁndings, future studies should consider including post-task manuscript). Importantly, since safety and operations on the ISS were
questions that assess efﬁciency and team/task coordination issues. maintained in the current study, future studies may have stronger

Apart from the small sample size, and limitations related to the use leverage to study additional types of tasks under situations of commu-
of self—reported measures, the lack of a statistically signiﬁcant associa- nication delays. Second, the small sample of participants limits the
tion between communication delays and performance aboard the ISS ability to generalize to other astronauts, other ISS increments, and
may be attributed to a number of factors. For instance, the 50-s other mission support personnel that are engaged in performance of
duration of the delay in communications may have been insufﬁcient to other tasks. Given the small sample size, the quantitative analysis was
detect meaningful and statistically signiﬁcant differences in perfor- intended to provide preliminary insight into the impacts of commu-
mance. Other studies of the impact of communication delays that have nication delays across the entire distributed team. A larger sample may
documented such differences have ranged from 5 to 20 min [13,20]. provide the opportunity to examine individual and/or group differ-
Reliance on single items to assess performance and concerns about the ences in the outcome measures across the different task conditions.
implications of assessment of one's own performance and the perfor- Moving forward, future studies will need to include additional incre-
mance of other team members is another potential explanation for the ments to achieve an adequate sample size. Third, similar semi-
lack of signiﬁcant differences between the two experimental conditions structured post-mission interviews with astronaut participants were
[21]. The limited number of study tasks and inability to implement a not conducted with mission support team, thereby limiting the
cross-over design that matched control and delay tasks by task novelty qualitative analysis to the comments from the ISS crewmembers. The
and task complexity as originally proposed may have also limited the quantiﬁcation of qualitative data was intended merely for description
power to detect signiﬁcant associations [15]. of frequency of occurrence of certain topics and not for quantitative

Qualitative data from post-mission interviews also identiﬁed factors hypothesis. Again, given the small sample size, the frequencies were
that contributed to performance and mood-related challenges of intended to illustrate the opinions of a single crew rather than examine
communication delays, including task-speciﬁc factors such as high the range of opinions expressed by three separate individuals. A larger
task-related communication demands (either due to low crew auton- sample might provide an opportunity to examine such variation; more
omy or poor communication strategies), complex tasks, and time- crews might provide an opportunity to examine occurrence of themes
critical tasks. The astronauts reported communication delays interfered across crews as well as between individual crewmembers.
with the crewmembers ability to receive the support they needed in a Despite these limitations, ﬁndings from this study provide impor-
timely fashion, which in turn made it difﬁcult to move forward with the tant insights into the impacts of delayed communication on the ISS.
task procedures, and importantly, these challenges were ampliﬁed in Importantly, these ﬁndings are consistent with previously published
tasks that involved high levels of back-and-forth communications. research. For example, previous work also demonstrates communica-
Given these ﬁndings, and the limited availability of crewmember time tion delays adversely impact task efﬁciency, communication quality,
on the ISS, future studies should prioritize research time on the ISS to and situational awareness in simulated space tasks and in analog space
include tasks that are most likely to negatively impact individual and environments on Earth [12,13]. With regard to countermeasures,
team outcomes. previous research also suggests crewmembers will need to be more

Interestingly, a few positive outcomes of communication delays autonomous from mission control duringlong-duration space missions
were reported during the post-mission interviews, including increased [10,11]. In addition, recently published work supports the use of
ISS teamwork and communication. It is important to note astronauts training measures focused on improving communication skills and
were not speciﬁcally asked about positive outcomes, so this does not adapting communications strategies to mitigate adverse impacts [22].
reﬂect an extensive list. Nevertheless, these ﬁndings suggest crewmem- Furthermore, text-based communications and autonomous mission
bers adapted to the constraints of their environment in an effort to operation tools have also been shown to improve outcomes under
mitigate or prevent adverse impacts associated with communication situations of communication delays [11].
delays. Future studies should further explore these positive outcomes. Overall, these data suggest communication delays impacted opera-

Furthermore, three types of countermeasures were identiﬁed to tional outcomes (i.e. task efﬁciency), teamwork processes (i.e. team
mitigate or prevent adverse impacts. To start, the astronauts suggested coordination/cohesion), and individual well-being (i.e. stress/frustra-
training-focused countermeasures designed to increase task knowledge tion), especially when tasks involved a high level of back-and-forth
and facilitate team communication may improve team and task communications. Training, teamwork and technology-focused counter-
coordination under situations of communication delays, which in turn measures that increase crew autonomy and decrease task-related
may improve the quality of communications, task efﬁciency and communication demand may help prevent or mitigate adverse impacts.
situational awareness, and decrease stress and frustration. In addition, Future studies should build upon this work by examining more
although task autonomy was not associated with communications delay subjects, including more communication delay tasks and scenarios,
in the quantitative analyses, the astronauts suggested crewmembers and conducting post-mission interviews with mission support person-
will need to be more autonomous from the mission support team nel. Understanding the impacts of communication delays on the ISS

199

"
"8","N.M. Kintz et al. Acta Astronautica 129 (2016)193—200
may beneﬁt the characterization of risk of communication delay on the Increment, that might have affected your own performance and
performance and well-being, the selection and composition of future well-being or the performance and well-being of your ﬂight team
spaceﬂight teams, the development of countermeasures to support during the weeks you were performing study-related tasks?
autonomous operations, and the future of team communication and
coordination around the world. 0 When did it occur?
a How did it affect you or the ﬂight team?
Acknowledgments
14. Overall, what did ou think of the communications dela stud ?
y y y
This work was supported by NASA [NNX 12AR21A]. We are
grateful to our colleagues: Erik Hougland, Kathryn Keeton, Daniel ' Were there any features 0f the study that YOU hked?
Garcia, David Korth, Lauren Landon, and Holly Patterson for their ' Were there any features 0f the study that YOU felt reﬂected the
support. challenges astronauts are likely to face during a mission to Mars?
0 Were there any features of the study that you did not like?
Appendix A. Post-mission interview 0 Were there any features of the study that you felt did not reﬂect the
realities of living and working under conditions of delayed commu-
nication?
1. Did you experience any changes in your role as a crewmember 0 HOW might we make it more realistic?
when the tasks were performed under the conditions of delayed 0 HOW might we make it more feasible to conduct from a research-
communication compared to the baseline condition? If so, how did operational perspective?
they change? a How might we better involve you as research participants and
2. Did you ﬁnd performing the task under conditions of delayed collaborators?
communications any more stressful than under the baseline con-
dition? If so, what was stressful to you that was different from the Thank YOU very much for the time and effort you PUt 1ht0 th1s
baseline test? project and providing us with this valuable information.
3. Did you experience any difﬁculties in communicating with any of
your fellow ISS crewmembers during the communications delay References
tasks? If so, what kinds of difﬁculties did you experience? Did you
do anything in particular to cope with these difﬁculties? [1] N. Kanas, D. Manzey, Space Psychology and Psychiatry, 2nd ed., Springer, New York,
. . . . . . . . . . 2008.
4' Dld you experlence any dlﬂilCU‘ljueS 111 communlcatlng Wlth 121881011 [2] Institute of Medicine, Safe Passage: Astronaut Care for Exploration Missions, The
control dur1ng the communications delay tasks? If so, what kinds of National Academies Press, Washington, DC, 2001.
difﬁculties did you experience? Did you do anything in particular to [3] RM. Krauss, P.D. 13r1eker, Effects of transm1ss1on delay and access delay on the efﬁc1ency
. . . 9 of verbal communlcatlon, J . Acoust. Soc. Am. 41 (1967) 286—292.
cope Wlth these dlfﬁmﬂtles' [4] D. Jude-York, Technology enhanced teamwork: aligning individual contributions for
5. Did the physical habitat (location on ISS, size of space, ambient superiorteam performance, Organ. Dev. J. 16 (1998) 73—82.

- - - - - - [5] BS. Caldwell, N.C. Everhart, Information ﬂow and development of coordination in
119156) contr1bute 111 any way t0 the quahty Of the communtcatlons distributed supervisory control teams, Int. J . Hum.-Comput. Interact. 10 (1998) 51—70.
Wlth your Space crew 01‘ the ground COHtrOl team dur1ng the [6] G. Olson, J. Olson, Mitigating the effects of distance on collaborative intellectual work,
communication delay tasks? If SO, how? ECOH. Il’ll’lOV. New Technol. 12 (2003) 27—42.

6 H d d th . f th . t th f f t k [7] DC. Ganster, J . Schaubroeck, Role of stress and worker health: an extension of the
‘ CW 1 e Slze 0 6 crew 1mpac e per ormance O as S plasticity hypothesis of self—esteem, J . Soc. Behav. Personal. 6 (1991) 349—360.
dur1ng the communlcatlon delay COIIdlthIlS? Was It any dlfferent [8] S.W.J. Kozlowski, D.R. Ilgen, Enhancing the effectiveness of work groups and teams,
than during the baseline tests'? Psychol. Sci. Public Interest 7 (2006) 77—124.
, , . , , [9] J .R. Keebler, A.S. Dietz, A. Baker, Effects of communication lag in long duration space
7- Dld you experlence any frU-Stratlon When completlng the taSkS ﬂight missions: potential mitigation strategies, in: Proceedings of the Human Factors and
during the communication delay condition? What was most Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 59, 2015, pp- 6-1.0- .
frustrating tO you about completing tasks during thiS condition? [10] N. Kanas, S. Saylor, M. hams, T. .Neylan, J. Boyd, D.S. Welss, et al., H1gh versus low
crewmember autonomy 1n space s1mu1at10n env1ronments, Acta Astronaut. 67 (2010)
8. What do recommend as countermeasures that would help you 731—738,
perform better during communications delays? [1].] J. Frank, L. Spirkovska, R.MCC3.I1I1, L. Wang, K. Pohlkamp, L. Morin, Autonomous
. mission operations, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Aerospace Conference, 2013.
9‘ What do you thlnk WOUld be the beSt way to prepare the teams [12] U. Fischer, K. Mosier, The impact of communication delay and medium on team
(ground and ﬂight teams) for communication delays that are likely performance and communication in distributed teams, in: Proceedings of the Human
' - - - Factors and Er onomics Society Annual Meeting vol. 58 2014 pp. 115—119.
ern r1nf err1nm11n? g ’ ’ ’
to be p e a e t du g Utu e e p O at 0 SS, 0 S [13] S.G. Love, M.L. Reagan, Delayed voice communication,Acta Astronaut. 91 (2013) 89—95.
10- HOW mU-Ch support from your ﬂlght team dld you feel you had [14] KB. Keeton, A. Whitmore, A.H. Feiveson, R. Ploutz-Synder, L.B. Leveton, C. Shea,
during the communications delay tasks versus the baseline tasks? Analog assessment tOOl report, NASA/TP-2011-216146, Human Research Program,
H 1 d h th t . f 1d? Behavioral Health & Performance Element, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX,
ow wou c ange a 1 you cou . . 2011.
11. HOW much support from the ground team dld you feel you had [15] NM. Kintz, L.A. Palinkas, Communications delays impact behavior and performance
during the communications delay tasks versus the baseline tasks? aboard the Internatlonal Space Statlon, Aerosp. Med. :Juman Perform. 87 (2016).1—7.
, [16] RH. Moos, Group Env1ronment Scale Manual, 4th ed1t10n, Consultlng Psychologlsts
How would you change that if you could? Press, Palo Alto, CA, 2002.
12. NOW I would like to focus on the instruments themselves [17] J .R. Hackman, G.R. Oldman, Work Redesign, Addison Wesley, Reading, MA, 1980.
[18] D.G. Willms, J .A. Best, D.W. Taylor, J .R. Gilbert, D. Wilson, E.A. Lindsay, et al., A
, , , , systematic approach for using qualitative methods in primary prevention research, Med.
0 Did the questlons being asked make sense to you whlle you were on Anthropol. Q. 4 (1990) 391409.
your mission? [19] B.G. Glaser, A.L. Strauss, The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative
- - - - Research, Aldine de Gruyter, New York, 1967.
. Were there any spec1ﬁc questlons 01‘ sets Of questlons that dld not [20] W.B. Vessey, L.A. Palinkas, L.B. Leveton, Supporting teams and individuals under
make sense tO you? conditions of communication delay: lessons learned from NEEMO 16, Aviat. Space
0 Were there any questions or sets of questions that you felt were not EnV}r0n- Med 84 (4) (20213)- _ _ _ _ _
. . . . . [21] Natlonal Research Counc11,A Strategy for Research 1n Space B1010gy and Med1c1ne 1n the
relevant to your experlence 1n on the ISS dur1ng th1s Increment 1n New Century, The National Academies Press Washington, DC, 1998.
general 01‘ when completing study—related tasks? [22] U. Fischer, K. Mosier, Communication protocols to support collaboration in distributed
- - teams under asynchronous conditions in: Proceedings of the Human Factors and
. ’
(11s Sherfganything you felt we should have been asking about that we Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 59, 2015, pp. 1_5.
1 110 .
13. Was there anything else going on, either in your own life or during
200

"
