"","x"
"1","46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2008-1 130
7 - 10 January 2008, Reno, Nevada
Seml-Automated DlagnOSIs, Repalr, and Rework of
Spacecraft Electronlcs
Peter M. Struk1
Richard C. Oeftering2
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 44135
J ohn W. Easton3
National Centerfor Space Exploration Research, Cleveland, OH 44135
Eric E. Anderson4
Arctic Slopes Research Corporation, Cleveland, OH 44135

NASA’s Constellation Program for Exploration of the Moon and Mars places human crews in extreme
isolation in resource scarce environments. Near Earth, the discontinuation of Space Shuttle ﬂights after 2010
will alter the up- and down-mass capacity for the International Space Station (188). NASA is considering
new options for logistics support strategies for future missions. Aerospace systems are often composed of
replaceable modular blocks that minimize the need for complex service operations in the ﬁeld. Such a
strategy however, implies a robust and responsive logistics infrastructure with relatively low transportation
costs. The modular Orbital Replacement Units (ORU) used for 188 requires relatively large blocks of
replacement hardware even though the actual failed component may really be three orders of magnitude
smaller.

The ability to perform in-situ repair of electronics circuits at the component level can dramatically reduce
the scale of spares and related logistics cost. This ability also reduces mission risk, increases crew
independence and improves the overall “supportability” of the program. The Component-Level Electronics
Assembly Repair (CLEAR) task under the NASA Supportability program was established to demonstrate the
practicality of repair by ﬁrst investigating widely used soldering “materials and processes” (M&P) performed
by modest manual means. The work will result in program guidelines for performing manual repairs along
with design guidance for circuit reparability.

The next phase of CLEAR recognizes that manual repair has its limitations and some highly integrated
devices are extremely difﬁcult to handle and demand semi-automated equipment. Further, electronics
repairs require a broad range of diagnostic capability to isolate the faulty components. Finally repairs must
pass functional tests to determine that the repairs are successful and the circuit can be returned to service.
To prevent equipment demands from exceeding spacecraft volume capacity and skill demands from
exceeding crew time and training limits, the CLEAR project is examining options provided by non-real time
tele-operations, robotics, and a new generation of diagnostic equipment. This paper outlines a strategy to
create an effective repair environment where, with the support of ground based engineers, crewmembers can
diagnose, repair and test ﬂight electronics in-situ. This paper also discusses the implications of successful
tele-robotic repairs when expanded to rework and reconﬁguration of used ﬂight assets for building
Constellation infrastructure elements.

I. Introduction
NASA’S plans for long duration missions to the Moon and, especially, to Mars require a much greater degree of
self sufﬁciency on the part of the crew than ever before. Such missions will have greatly reduced logistic
support from Earth, compared to International Space Station (188) operations. Returning to Earth in the event of an
emergency may not be an option either, as a lunar return ﬂight could require two to three days, and a Martian return
ﬂight will require much longer.

One area of mission support that NASA must plan for is electronic repairs. Despite the rigorous testing required
by NASA, electronics faults have already occurred in both Space Shuttle and 188 operations, leading to the use of
backup systems or loss of capability to some degreel’z. While the electronics and other systems used in a long
duration space mission will undergo rigorous testing, the crew of such missions will most likely encounter an
1 Aerospace Engineer, 21000 Brookpark Rd., MS 110-3, AIAA Member
2 Electrical Engineer, 21000 Brookpark Rd, MS 86-5
3 Associate Staff Scientist, 21000 Brookpark Rd., MS 110-3, AIAA Member
4 Electrical Engineer, 21000 Brookpark Rd., MS ASRC

1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

"
"2","electronics failure at some point in the mission. With the design of the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) already
beginning and likely inﬂuencing the design of future spacecraft and hardware, it is not too early for NASA to begin
exploring and designing techniques and tools for crew members conducting electronics repair during long duration
space mission. These considerations include system design (for accessibility, parts type and sizes, and board
complexity), repair infrastructure (including diagnostic capabilities, tools, and other needed equipment), and
logistics constraints. The decisions on how to approach each of these considerations depends on the overall repair
strategy chosen.

The historical approach to electronics repair on manned spaceﬂight missions (particularly those aboard the
International Space Station, or 188) has been to replace modular subassemblies called Orbital Replacement Units
(ORU’s). The astronaut simply replaces the malfunctioning ORU with a spare, and then returns the faulty ORU to
Earth, where it is diagnosed and repaired, then returned to a pool of spares awaiting re-use in space. This approach
allows for simplicity in the diagnosis of the problem, as the fault only has to be isolated to a given ORU, rather than
determining the fault down to the component level. Crew training and experience in performing repairs are
minimized. Also there is a high degree of conﬁdence in the repair, as the ORU can be tested extensively on the
ground prior to being re-launched to the ISS.

Conversely, this approach carries with it a severe penalty in terms of the logistics support required (and overall
cost to the program). Conceptually, it is easy to imagine the penalty in mass and volume that is levied when an
entire ORU (which may weigh ~25 lbs or more on Earth) is launched to remedy a failure of a single, small
component such as a resistor, transistor, or other electrical component. While this approach is expensive, it may be
acceptable for low Earth orbit (LEO) missions if they are re-supplied regularly since large quantities of spares would
not need to be stored on orbit.

Alternatives to the ORU are lower-level repairs which can include shop—replaceable units (SRU) such as circuit
board-level swap—outs and / or a cornponent-level repair strategy. This could serve to greatly reduce the planned-
spare ORU requirements, while providing a capability to handle unforeseen repair contingencies. The need to
handle such unexpected events has been illustrated by several events in NASA ﬂight history. The successful
conclusion of the Apollo 13 rnission, after an explosion severely damaged the serVice module, highlights the
beneﬁts of having the capability to implement on-the-spot repairs. The consequence of failing to allow for off-
norninal repairs was demonstrated in the tragic loss of the shuttle Columbia; even if the crew had been aware of the
problems with the leading edge tiles, they were not equipped to make repairs in-ﬂight. Since that incident, NASA
has made considerable efforts to allow for contingency repairs of problems of that nature3.

The Component-Level Electronics-Assernbly Repair (CLEAR) project under the NASA Supportability program
was established to develop and demonstrate the technology necessary to allow crew-rnernber to effectively perform
electronic repair down to the component level. CLEAR involves collaborative efforts between NASA’s Glenn
Research Center, Langley Research Center, Johnson Space Center, the National Center for Space Exploration
Research, and the US. Navy. The overall processes involved with repair which are the objectives of the CLEAR
task are composed of four primary elements:

1. Capability to diagnose an electronics assembly and identify the faulty cornponent(s) with equipment that

ﬁts within the rnass-volurne and power constraints of spacecraft.

2. Capability to repair electronics down to the cornponent-level on-orbit with processes and materials that

are safe and compatible with the space environment which allows the crew to make the necessary repair.

3. Capability to evaluate and determine that the repaired circuit is safe to return to serVice.

4. Capability to augment the ﬂight crew with knowledge and skills to diagnose faults and perform repairs

without expanding crew size.

This rnulti-faceted program utilizes a cross-disciplinary approach to examine pre- and post-repair diagnostics and
functional test; material and process for repair such as component soldering, conformal coatings removal and
replacement; and electronics design for supportability. These areas are investigated by a combination of trade
studies, analysis, ground based testing, reduced gravity aircraft testing, and actual spaceﬂight testing aboard the 188
in multiple experiments. This paper provides an update to this task since previously reported at this meeting in the
previous year.4'5

II. CLEAR Task Overview
A. Manual Electronics Repair

All repair scenarios for the Constellation Program (CXP) will include some manual repair capability in which the
crew can make electronic repairs. Currently, the 188 has a soldering kit aboard which offers a very basic capability
and is a logical baseline for future capabilities. The soldering kit and tools available on-orbit are capable of basic

2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","repairs (e.g. wire splicing and some limited component—level repair). However, component—level repair has not been
actually demonstrated using this equipment aboard 188. The experience of the US Space Program with repairs is
limited to a very few cases (e.g. ARCTIC—l repair discussed below) and some basic experiments6. Before mission
planners can expect to have a repair capability, it must be demonstrated in the ﬁeld (i.e. to raise the technology
readiness level, or TRL, to a level SlX7).

In a series of 2 ﬂight experiments, the CLEAR project will demonstrate manual component—level repair using an
augmented version of the soldering capability currently on 188. The ﬁrst experiment, called SoRGE, uses the
soldering kit to investigate the basic materials and processes
(M&P) involved with soldering in a microgravity environment r; .
using a through-hole conﬁguration. The second experiment, "" '
called Component Repair Exp-l, intends to demonstrate all of the ’ I ' x
physical processes of end-to-end component—level repair of a "" . s_ I \“U;-#
circuit board. These experiments, which are discussed further - M V
below, utilize the Space-station Development Test Objective ;. 51
(SDTO) process to get aboard ISS (ref). {.1 \fu
1. Soldering in Reduced Gravity Experiment (SoRGE) . "" *‘f i,""

SoRGE is an experiment which is investigating the formation I
of solder joints in amicrogravity environment.(Figure 1). Results Figure 1: External proﬁle of solder joint
frorn earlier aircraft testing showed that void rlefects (bubbles (left), and cross section of joint (right)
/V01ds trapped Within the solder) increased in. Joginzts formed in showing internalvoids.
reduced grayity as those formed in normal graV1ty . J 01nts were
formed in various reduced-gravity environments including — ""’
(nominally) Martian, Lunar, and zero gravity levels*. In these ' .
tests, the void fraction increased as gravity level was decreased. ’ z. ‘ '
For joints formed in a nominally zero-gravity environment, the .- .
void fraction was 3-times higher than those joints formed in ' - . ' i F - 3 “ ' i -
normal gravity. Changes in joint geometry were also observed, ' ' x; "" ' ‘-'\ 3 '
with the reduced-gravity joints being more symmetric. I. ‘ .

The 188 experiment SoRGE is examining several techniques x
which may serve to mitigate the formation of voids in the solder ‘
joints. This experiment is comprised of a series of small circuit . .
cards, with small electrical components (resistors) attached to the . '
surface (Figure 2). The experiment has several kits, each of ”M”
which is looking at various solder and ﬂux combinations, to Figure 23 An image 0f the tBSt card “59d
quantify and minimize the amount of void formation in solder during the SORGE experiment.
joints. Also, this experiment will yield valuable information __ “I; .. .
regarding the physical process of soldering in low-g with a crew- . 1 "" -' .u-I _
member who received only limited training. ' 1' f

This experiment was brought to the 188 by the Shuttle I
Atlantis during STS—llS and soldering was accomplished by _ l - J. ~
Astronaut Sunita Williams (Figure 3) during February and May ._ -
of 2007. Half of the available 12 test kits were completed and _-_.,_ - ' ‘fU—ﬂ. ‘
returned to Earth aboard STS-118 in August 2007. The samples '3' .35. _ _ 1
were returned to GRC in October 2007 and are currently w ~ ~
undergoing analysis. The planned analysis consists of a Visual - ' - -' -... -* 1 n. ' -
examination for solder process quality as well as non-destructive ' V _- '3'. I ‘
analysis to look at solder joint voiding. The results of this mum
research will help specify the soldering process used in future in- Figure 3; Astronaut Sunita Williams
space repairs. conducting the SoRGE experiment during

Expedition 14 aboard the ISS.
* Brief periods (~25 seconds) of reduced-gravity are experienced aboard these aircraft as they ﬂy parabolic trajectories which are calculated to
provide the desired relative acceleration levels.
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","2. SDTO2: Component Repair Exp-I (CRE—I) 1,; __ II I I I :4 a4 .' —:.
CRE-l will demonstrate the physicalprocesses of an end- Eli ll ‘ 'F1 1"". III .1"" :IIIEII [:5 ‘ Q
to-end manual electronics repair in a microgravity 1 1 I 1 I | h 1' [ IHI LI”? I. 'I iIIII‘i;.
environment. The physicalprocesses include: “Ll 'n! REI up. I I—-| | . '
---I3-Iﬂ"". “ 1 I' I. [.'II; II II Emﬂtinl
°C0nf0rmalcoating removal 0' ?.?.T .‘ l-« i II- III | ||--—'I“
' Component removal ""...""—..'.—- .. .1 II . I.. I I I
. Board Cleaning III:'II| ILLI-III1I‘IIIJI‘1I II—I1I |I-_'I:'. -;I:'-L'I Ir_I -|I_III P171“ II_|'II'}”_'!_“I1 _II'IIII‘II——""' _ _._
- Soldering a new component in place I .. L-I-‘IIIli'J _'f'-'.'-_'--' :. ."";'.' Ii; $11-13."" 1—.I;1:L'_']'_I!I""_.],I r;
- Reapplying conformal coating 1:1! ElrI‘I I'. .I: €551: | 1_.le:_:, I III.III.I.
-- -' ii .--I 6'“! ""1 3""}. '"" :
Crew members Will work on functional circuit boards ; Ii .:.: a i I _ ' II I _I___IEI _ H: I_,., H i;
designed to mimic those already in use. These board designs ' I I II
use standard circuit components and component spacing. Figure 411111326 0f CRE-l Cil'CUit b03111
These standard circuit components include through-hole
parts, standard-pitch surface mount devices (SMD), and ﬁne
pitch SMDs With typical component spacing (Figure 4). The “I 'III‘. -""I - .. I""‘ -- II\
circuit boards also have three thicknesses of silicone room- I; h. ”I III II I 1‘2 '
temperature vulcanizing (RTV) conformal coating: a primed, ‘ ._ ' _ . I
4-mi1 coating; an unprimed 15-mi1 coating; and n0 coating, ‘- '. TEN :13..- ‘1 _ ‘* _
allowing for continued operation should the crew encounter 3 I a «I i ' .iI II“ 1 ﬁI *-
difﬁculties removing conformal coating. The repairs Will be ‘1 ~ .. . ' - .___1 f1; '-
conducted Within the Maintenance Work Area (MWA) ' 'I 1 . n * £1.17 ' hi *3 I
aboard the 188 (Figure 5). The experiment will utilize the . _ - . L '11“ *1
soldering kit available aboard the 188 as well as an augment I? II-f I , .i'
tool set provided by the CRE-l experiment. The goal of the ‘ -_ ?:1‘1 1 I31"" "" ""
tests is to evaluate the feasibility of performing component I_ _ .- 1 i _ ﬁwih
level repair and evaluate processes so recommendations to _H'I-i... - __q - i “JII'rI ""~
procedures, tool selection, crew training, as well as board __ I_-_i:':_—...L.n I
design may be made. CRE-l is currently at Kennedy Space 7"""" - '
Center awaiting a manifest opportunity to ﬂy to the 188. Figure 5: Testing of the CRE—l experiment
in the MWA mock-up at Johnson Space
3. Manual Repair Process Recommendation Center. Shown in the image are the
The primary goal of the manual repair efforts is to auxiliary tools used to conduct manual
develop a series of recommendations to the NASA CXP for repair of electronics.
processes, materials, tools, and training for crew members to
perform manual electronics repairs during space missions. These recommendations Will be built from the results of
the on-orbit testing, ground based testing on the C—9 reduced gravity aircraft, and work in consultation With the US.
Navy at the Naval Surface Warfare Center in Crane, IN. Additional work expected to begin in 2008 includes
examination of possible conformal coating selection, both in manufacture and after a repair, that would help enable
manual repair. It is anticipated that this recommendation Will include future development areas needed to reﬁne
manual repair.
Analysis of Arctic Freezer Samgles . I
Studying the results of electronics repairs actually he _ I
...
performed on orbit Will provide an insight into the actual, _ ' *7 '. L
current capabilities and constraints of crew members ""—-'."";JI ._ '
performing these repairs. During Expedition-6, Astronaut . """"Iq'ﬂ—I “71
Don Pettit attempted the repair of ARCTIC—l (or the Arctic
Freezer), a module used for the cold storage of experiment I_ —
samples. This work included some aspects of electronics
repair, including joining wires and connecting wires to
component tabs (Figure 6), With the use of the soldering kit
on the ISS. Nondestructive analysis and Visual inspection of Figure 6: Typical solder joints examined
these joints, as well as, similar joints formed in normal from the I""3P3” 0f ARCTIC'I freezer
gravity for comparison, is on-going and will aid in aboard the 155°
4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","evaluating the effectiveness of soldering in reduced gravity, especially in the mitigation of voids Within solder joints.
C—9 T est Analysis

In February 2007, a series of solder tests were conducted on the C-9 reduced gravity aircraft Which included the
examination of various solder and ﬂuX combinations, most focusing on the use of no-clean 0r water—clean ﬂuxes
With eutectic solders. This work builds on previous aircraft tests8'12, and Will provide insight into general soldering
and void mitigation techniques for reduced gravity operations. The analysis includes discriminating between
samples based on the quality of the given in-ﬂight performance (the aircraft parabola) as well as acceptance by a
NASA ﬂight qualiﬁed technician, based on NASA standards. Acceptable samples are nondestructively analyzed for
void formation. Results from this analysis of a subset of these tests are presented in a complimentary paper at this
conference13 . These results Will help develop criteria for selecting solder, ﬂuX, and techniques to be used for in-
ﬂight repair of electronics.

Crew T raining; Reguirements (with US. Navy)

Crew training prior to a mission is Vital for electronics repair. Crew members are presumed to have little or no
prior experience in performing repairs, s0 training materials must prepare and reinforce the repair process. The
team, working With a group at the Naval Surface Warfare Center in Crane, IN, responsible for preparing training
materials for the US. Navy, Will prepare and test crew training courses of 4, 8, and 16 hours, allowing NASA to
tailor and choose a course suitable for electronics repairs. These materials are also planned to be available during
ﬂight as a refresher course and to prepare a crew member immediately prior to performing a repair. The team,
together the US. Navy, Will propose a tool set tailored to the level of crew training to allow crew members to
effectively conduct the repairs they have been trained to perform.

B. Semi-Automated Repair

The previous section discussed hand or manually operated repairs used in the soldering and desoldering process.
Manual repair Will always provide an important repair capability, but it requires training and periodic practice to
maintain proﬁciency. Manual repair also requires direct crew involvement throughout the repair process. A fully
automated process such as in manufacturing requires special ﬁxtures and equipment, along With a great deal of
experimenting or system “tuning.” For single unit repairs a mix of manual and automated operations is more
practical and is most likely to achieve successful repairs Within the spacecraft weight and volume constraints.
Certain operations, such as Wiping away process residues, are simple if performed manually but can be very difﬁcult
to accomplish by robotic means. Heating devices to narrow temperature bands and then quickly and precisely
placing them demand automated operations. Semi-Automated repairs reduce the demand for high skill While
increasing productivity.

Rework Stations (Figure 7) that melt or “reﬂow” solder With Hot Gas
or Infrared heat evolved to handle complex devices. Such systems are
semi—automated Where manual operations involve alignment With optical
aids but employ automated heating systems and mechanically guided
placement. In this way, Semi-Automated rework stations extend repair .- ll. _
capabilities to circuits not amenable to manual repair. _ _

Figure 8 is a qualitative representation of how semi—automated ||""- - i '
technology can extend a repair capability. The vertical axis of Figure 8 : ' "" .,
qualitative represents how increased PCB layering increases board thermal ] ﬂ __
conductivity. The increased conductivity increases heat transfer away ' Eff]
from the solder joint(s) and may exceed the manual soldering iron’s . '.————'H w; 1 !
capacity. More advanced manual techniques (more advanced soldering ;. -
tools than available on 188) may include custom tips and board heaters to \
preheat the entire board to temperatures just below the reﬂow solder u /
temperature. However, the high heat loads and long heating cycles require Ii 'LLH"" “'3‘—
to solder the conductively cooled circuit boards, common in spacecraft, '1.
are more likely to be successfully repaired by semi-automatic systems.

The horizontal axis of Figure 8 shows increasing complexity in device Figure 7 : An ATCO AT-707 is
packaging and lead count. At the extreme right is the Ball Grid Array typical of a commercial rework
(BGA) Where lead counts may exceed 1000 and are impossible to solder station capable of replacing high
by hand. Large integrated circuits like BGAs require simultaneous solder density integrated circuits. Photo
or desolder of many pins or solder balls and are best handled by semi- from http://atc0-us.c0m/.

5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","E'féﬁgh 32%: Mount J-lead. Pm Grid and Ba“ automatic equipment to provide precise parameter
hple GndArrav control, such as, placement, coordlnated motion,

A r—Ja temperature ramp and soak proﬁles, and critical

timing.
Thermal It is likely that the ﬁrst operational need for
SemI-Automatlc ‘ , . . . . . . .
b """"""'""""""""""""""""'""""""'""E gfanndeua'on repair capabihties 1s dunng long-duration outpost
2g : stays on the Moon and especially Mars.
‘12) E However, the 188 is a prime location to evaluate
§ E such technology and, because of the retirement of
E l“""-""—""'-""'—. E ,Mumlayer the space-shuttle in 2010, may beneﬁt from a
E i repair capability to help sustain systems With
reduced logistical support. While the ISS and
}’2law outposts share many similarities in terms of the
ComponentComplexity environment, the prime difference is that there is
signiﬁcant gravitational force for the outpost
Figure 8: Graphic showing the increased I""3P3” whereas for 188 there is not. The semi-automated
capability offered by semi—automated repair technology. system is expected to employ or accommodate a
variety of functions that include machine set-up,
optical examination, process monitoring, a variety of mechanical repair operations (including soldering and de-
soldering), handling and application of a variety of process ﬂuids, and containment of solid debris and volatile
products Within the tight conﬁnes of a spacecraft or habitat. Before investing in specialized equipment, studies need
to determine if the processes have any signiﬁcant reduced gravity dependence, outgas, or other space environment
sensitivity. The CLEAR task is in an early evaluation phase examining the general operation and capability of these
stations, as well as the beneﬁts and challenges for adapting them for use in space ﬂight.
C. Diagnostics and Functional Test

While the physical repair of electronics in spacecraft and habitats is challenging, diagnosing faults down to the
component level represent a bigger challenge. Furthermore, conﬁdence of a successful repair must be accomplished
Via a functional test of the repaired board and/or subsystem. On the ground, NASA, the military, and industry all
have practices, technicians, and equipment in place to perform diagnostics and repairs of electronics. Each group
has adapted standard test equipment as well as customized equipment to perform the diagnostics particular to their
requirements. None of these cases, though, have the volume, mass, power, and user experience level limitations
imposed on them as for a long duration space mission.

Currently, 188 diagnostic and test equipment is limited to a portable Fluke Scope Meter®, a laptop logic
analyzer and a limited output power supply and a special test set up to speciﬁcally test on-orbit multiplexer/de-
multiplexer units. Such hardware is far from a complete diagnostic instrument set suited to test the array of systems
including: electrical power, command & data handling, communications & tracking, guidance & navigation, and
controls & display systems throughout spacecraft. Even if provided detailed information, it is beyond the most
capable crews to fully understand diagnostic measurements of every spacecraft component. The next sections
describe the strategy and technology that CLEAR is evaluating for diagnostics and test capability in future manned
space missions.

Diagnostics
”7-3-3 ...,.,., ., . Repairs of circuit board assembles requires isolating faults
3.3""“???35""; V. '}r7*4""i’“':°+ ° 1"" -""~ '7 ' to the component level. There is no single technology
V. E E E ‘ ; ?éi:1° $.12 1!‘ solution but success lies in focusing on the fundamentals
' '. ‘2' E E I - l l_ 7,0 w M; ,. of measurements rather than stacks of instruments. The
a 55""' all."" «u; ' challen ' 1 t' ' t d/ d 1 '
, 7 A _ a -- _ , i . ,_ ‘ ge 1s se ec 1ng equlpmen an or eve oplng

f"" _ __:__ W‘Q. . . ; ° I hardware that can cover the majority of diagnostic needs

"" ' ""L '7 '. i. . .. - H . (as well as functional test discussed below) Within the

i allowable mass and volume constraints of a spacecraft or

Figure 9: A representative National Instruments habitat. .The _PXI (2C1 CXFCHSionS for instrumentation)
PXI chassis populated With a variety of baseci su1te of 1nstruments (Flgure 9). may be one potential
instruments from different manufacturers. solution. The advantage of such deV1ces 1s the space saved
Photo from http://www.pxisa.org/. by combining many PXI-based 1nstruments 1nto one bus.
The drawbacks include requirements for 1nstruments to be
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","redesign into card format Which is compatible With the bus

architecture. Further, bus architecture often becomes obsolete. For 1., ' ‘1'!

example, the PXI architecture is currently being displaced by the ' _

new PXI Express. - - '- ' .

Another approach would be to use Local Area Network (LAN) h 1%. j
technology such as LXI (LAN Extension for instrumentation). LXI _ ._-__:-' --
instruments can be used in a coordinated suite of instruments or _ If '13:"": . '-
broken out as independent and portable instruments. High speed . ""

LAN based instruments are expected to resist obsolescence much ' __ -
longer. LXI instruments however, are not as compact as PXI. ....__ . -
Recent industry trends indicate that a mixed system of LAN and ""

Bus based instruments provide the best solution. I

Diagnostics are often comprised of instruments that are used
manually or programmed to automatically make measurements in a Figure 10: Huntron® ACCESS unit is
prescribed sequence. The instruments usually send stimulus signals an automated diagnostic system that
and capture responses from the target circuit. For automated employs circuit computer aided design
diagnosis, the same motion control capability used in repair can (CAD) data and imaging to help guide
provide probing for diagnostics. One promising technology is the the probing process. Photo courtesy of
Analog Signal Analysis (ASA) technique used by the Huntron® Huntron. Inc.

ACCESS instrument to probe circuit nodes With a very low power

signal that Will not harm the circuit (Figure 10). This signal energizes single nets on the card to determine a
characteristic waveform. A net is a common connection Where multiple components are connected. This waveform
is then compared With a known good board signature. If there is signiﬁcant difference between the measured
waveform and the known good waveform, one or more of the components attached to the net are defective. This
approach reduces the number of components required to be replaced and minimizes the operator’s skill
requirements. However, ASA may not always isolate a fault to individual components, particularly, if they are not
directly accessible. Complex Signature Analysis (CSA), being developed by CLEAR, is an alternative approach
that relies on characterizing a Circuit’s self resonant and network resonant behaviors. CSA is expected to detect
faulty devices that are inaccessible to ASA techniques. ASA and CSA both provide the ability to diagnose a circuit
in a “power OFF” condition. Should ASA/CSA fail to isolate faults using a “known good board” technique,
ASA/CSA can still capture measurements that could be further examined by knowledgeable ground based
engineering. ASA/CSA operates on circuits in a “Power Off” condition Which affords extra safety. However, it is
often necessary to run tests on a circuit in a “Power On” condition to isolate functional problems such as software
faults.

F unctional T est Equipment

Functional testing is used to determine if a circuit is capable of performing its intended function before it is
integrated into a system. It is often used to verify software functions that cannot be measured by fundamental
diagnostic measurements. The actual functions of an ORU electronic circuit may be simple and repetitive. Most
ORUs are part of a larger system and thus functionality may require interaction through multiple external interfaces.
Functional test equipment often emulates the external system and operational conditions and includes additional
“breakout” instrumentation to monitor interactions. Automatic Test Equipment (ATE) is employed When the
number of channels and execution speed exceeds the capability of human operators. Typically, ATE systems are a
combination of custom and off—the-shelf test equipment and software, With a software executive that governs the test
process.

It is not uncommon for a single avionics box to require multiple racks of test equipment. In their terrestrial form,
the weight and volume required for functional testers prohibits their use aboard spacecraft. However, functional test
is an important part of any repair process and must be available. The ability to perform functional testing at the
board level enables the generation of engineering data during the debug process. It also allows for the functional
testing at the board level to minimize the risk of a circuit card damaging the system. Therefore, strategies for
functional testing in spacecraft or habitat volumes require signiﬁcant reduction of both mass and volume of
terrestrial systems or newer technology. One such technology is offered by synthetic instruments.

Synthetic Instruments

Synthetic Instruments (SI) refers to an approach that exploits software and reconﬁgurable hardware to maximize

the ﬂexibility of test systems. Synthetic Instruments are implemented on generic hardware, typically, Field
7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","Programmable Gate Arrays, (FPGAs). FPGAs are designed to provide a vast array of logic gates that can be
conﬁgured to provide distinct data and control functions. Unlike software executed by microprocessors, the
“Synthetic Instrument” programmed into the FPGA executes at extremely high speeds and with high levels of
parallel processing. The FPGA can be reconﬁgured, on demand, as a completely new Synthetic Instrument. The
latest generation of FPGAs can provide real-time signal processing which was once the domain of Digital Signal
Processors. The main advantage of SI is that it allows us synthesize high performance instruments on an “as
needed” basis.

The Department of Defense regards SI as a major advance in reducing (a) life cycle costs (b) time to develop and
ﬁeld new or upgraded test equipment, (0) test system logistics footprint, and ((1) test systems physical footprint”.
The strategy behind SI is to allocate any digitized functions to software. Innately analog functions, such as sensors,
analog signal devices, and power sources are handled by modules that can be reconﬁgured electronically to provide
wide operating ranges. In addition, to handle the vast variety of connector conﬁgurations, SI provides an upfront
analog switching matrix that routes signals from a target test Circuit to a selected analog instrument module. The
CLEAR project is evaluating SI as part of a strategy to provide both diagnostic and functional test capability for a
wide range of spacecraft electronics using only a small amount of physical hardware.

Both repair and diagnostics require signiﬁcant skill and knowledge related to the Circuit under test. Therefore, it
is anticipated that the crewmember will require signiﬁcant ground based support to debug issues. Furthermore,
many of the process described above can be automatically controlled from the ground in a non-real time fashion. To
keep the crew workload to a minimum, the semi-automated diagnostic and repair system should be amenable to tele-
operations. Such operations also will allow data from the Circuit under test to be available to ground personnel.

D. Tele-Operations: Linking the Crew t0 Knowledgeable and Skilled Support

In light of limitations on available teehnieian-level skill and designer knowledge of the electronic systems, the
key to success is to link the process to knowledgeable and skilled engineering staff though tele-operations. Other
tele-robotie experiments focus on real-time control and real-time feed back while other robotic efforts focus on
achieving total robot autonomy. Although crew autonomy is the desired goal, a likely strategy for a semi-automated
diagnostic and rework station in spacecraft and habitats is to provide timely but not real-tiIne interaction. The
preferred mode is to avoid real-tiIne “joystick” interaction with the hardware because the current infrastructure is
prone to interruptions and signal delays.

For Lunar operations, the 4 second round trip transmission and system delays make real-tiIne control awkward
and even dangerous. The vast range of delay times for Mars makes real-tiIne control impossible. Even the 188 has
delays but also frequent “loss of signal” events which makes real-tiIne control unreliable. Avoiding real-time
interaction simpliﬁes the communications and interaction and also provides an opportunity to “validate” commands
prior to sending them to prevent costly and possible hazardous mistakes. Pre-seripted repair routines for anticipated
needs will be developed. A potential solution to avoid the cost of a of support staff on standby, repair depots and
manufacturers could support repairs on an “as needed” basis. The use of such a tele-operations capability is best
captured by a Semi-Automated Diagnostic and Repair Operations scenario we describe below. This scenario is
intended to illustrate how a diagnostic and repair tele-operation might proceed with a repair capability as shown in
Figure 11.

Semi-Automated Diagnostic and Repair Operational Scenario

A vehicle health monitoring system reports a fault in a system ORU package. The faulty ORU is removed and
replaced with a spare ORU which restores functionality to the system. Subsequently (as crew time permits and
eritieality requires), the faulty ORU is further diagnosed with a computer connected Via an ORU test port. An
internal Built-In-Tests (BIT) checks the diagnostic codes on all Circuit boards. Ground support observes the
diagnostics data Via tele-operations. One Circuit board fails to respond to BIT initiation. The subject board is
removed from the ORU and interconnections were found to be good. Ground support asks the crew to move the
board to the Semi-Automated Diagnostic and Repair Station and set up for further diagnostics and possible repair.

The board’s failure to execute the BIT implies that the main processor is non-funetional due to internal fault or
failed supporting component. The ground support engineers examine high-resolution camera images down-linked
from workstation but no Visible damage is found. The Circuit is equipped with a J TAG port and supports “boundary
scan teehniquesS”. The JTAG Boundary Scan Analyzer ﬁnds no problems at the I/O ports but reveals that several
5 Boundary scan, also known as J TAG 1149, was developed by the Joint Test Action Group to allow board makers
to Check individual devices while isolating them from the external Circuit15 .

8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","- Apparatus Programming
- . Image and Data Analysis
. . . . Instrument S nthesns
— ~ - . ?. ,. *JLJ . Program Up-Llnk
Examlnatlon -— Userlnterface t g? "" w; 7“ gg Q»
E TeIe-ops Llnk l :3 iv; ‘ 23%, ‘
‘ \
- Diagnostic Probe k Tele-O-peratlons
f— I'A E“9'“°'""""“9
“ -
— _ ‘ ’
[3/ . bi‘ ,-

::-:; 575i5i3i:i:iiztttttttié-i-i-i :7 s ‘l‘g._J\
Environment Enclosure Manual TOOI 59' \ PC
Diagnostics 8. Semi- \’ I -\

\/
automated Repalr Statlon Pre-ﬂight 8. in-flight training
Figure 11. Diagnostic and Repair concept (including both manual and semi—automated processes) being
evaluated by the CLEAR team.
registers are irreparably damaged, possibly due to radiation. Having isolated the component, the repair workstation
is set up to remove and replace the device.

The ground crew determines that no prior repair routine exists so they go “ofﬂine” to create a repair program
while the crewmember resumes other activity. Assisted with information from the vendor, the ground crew loads
the Circuit’s Computer Aided Design (CAD) data into a Repair Process Modeling Tool that aids in programing
robotic operations of the rework station. The Circuit’s registration points and exclusion zones are deﬁned to prevent
collisions with clamps and some taller board components. The Repair Process Modeling Tool deﬁnes motion paths,
tool change points, including the component pick & place operations. Reﬂow heater position, heating proﬁle are
calculated using a reﬂow thermal simulation tool developed as part of the rework station. When the control code
script is complete, it is run through a veriﬁcation tool that simulates the process and shows a 3D animation of the
process. Tool collisions discovered in the simulation are corrected and the code is determined to be error free.

On-orbit a “touch-off’ of circuit registration points assures the machine motion is calibrated. The ground crew
has determined that the conformal coating around the component should be removed manually because jumper wires
interfered with mechanical methods. The workstation enclosure circulation ﬁlters capture any stray debris as the
crewmember strips away the coating.

The control is then switched to automatic mode and the process is initiated. After the reﬂow heat cycle, a
robotic pick & place tool removes the component. A quick manual wipe 0f the site removes any residue and a
solder paste dispenser applies new solder. Another reﬂow cycle melts the paste while a component pre-heater
prepares the new device. The robotic suction tools picks up and positions the new device and holds it until the last
reﬂow heat cycle is complete.

An imaging camera scans the board for completeness and looks for debris. The tool is changed to an Analog
Signature Analysis Probe and the preprogrammed probing sequence reveals that the board’s signatures are normal.
Subsequent JTAG boundary scan and register checks are normal. Power up BIT tests also return normal results.
Finally, the ground team has come up with code to program the SI system available on orbit to do a function test on
the card. The board is connected Via a cable assembly and the instruments go through a functional checkout 0f the
circuit board with normal results. The board is then re-integrated into the ORU and BIT tests indicate functionality.
The ﬁnal assembly is complete and any conﬁguration information is noted. Since the original ORU was replaced
with a spare, this unit now becomes the next serviceable spare until needed. The ground updates any lessons learned
and reﬁnes the repair program. After further simulations, the repair script is “canned” as a ready-to-run routine for
future use.

9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"10","Impact on the Future of Constellation

Extrapolating a future capability based on Earth based practices is not enough. On Earth, the economy of mass
markets, low cost labor, low cost transportation, and very high production rates results in Circuits that have short
service life and are un-repairable “throw-away” electronics. Further, the design, materials, and processing Choices
are based on meeting economical production needs and often involve waste, aggressive Chemistry and materials that
are unsuited for space.

Understanding the behavior of basic materials in 10w-g and high vacuum and making the effort to fully exploit
processes that are innately suited for space will lead to in-situ repairable electronic Circuits. The extremely high cost
of launching replacement hardware drives us toward electronic designs that provide long service life, but are also
repairable, and can be reworked and reconﬁgured to serve alternate uses.

The spacecraft constraints imposed on the addition of new equipment are formidable. The development of
several key capabilities will enable us to repair and rework spacecraft electronics without relying on Earth launched
logistics. The CLEAR task is considering the strategy of compressing large test systems to small scale because of
the huge cost of redesigning every known instrument into a small form factor. We are seeking alternate ways of
diagnosing Circuits by exploiting built in features where possible such as the J TAG Boundary Scan, and by looking
at potential technology solutions such as Synthetic Instruments. Such concepts can be the ﬁrst steps for a fabrication
capability to help build infrastructure to support future missions.

The tele-Operations developed for robotic repair can evolve into a fabrication capability as well. The experience
learned from conducting repairs as well as the underlying materials and processes directly translates to Operations
for manufacturing with in-situ resources. Another possibility is to build additional infrastructure by reworking spent
ﬂight hardware for different functional use. This strategy need not wait for Mars — it can be employed and perfected
in the Lunar Outpost phase. The near term need not be overlooked as the impact on logistics is already being felt as
Space Shuttle support for 188 begins to draw to a Close. By delivering capabilities starting with the ISS and then
the Lunar Outpost, we can beneﬁt from cost savings and early return on our development investments as well as
gain conﬁdence in their capability by the time we send humans to Mars.

Summary

NASA’s historical solution to the problem of in-ﬂight electronics repair has been the replacement of sub-units
called Orbital Replacement Units. This approach requires signiﬁcant logistical support through regular re-supply
ﬂights. For long-duration space missions, resupply ﬂights are limited. Therefore, NASA is investigating
component-level repair of electronics as a potential way to reduce the logistical footprint required to support future
missions.

The Component-Level Electronics-Assembly Repair (CLEAR) project under the NASA Supportability program
was established to develop and demonstrate the technology necessary to allow crew-member to effectively perform
electronic repair down to the component level. CLEAR is looking at ways future exploration crew can, within the
constraints of a spacecraft 0r habitat, (a) diagnose electronic assemblies and identify the faulty components, (b)
repair electronics down to the component-level, (C) evaluate the Circuit post repair Via a functional test, and (d)
augment the ﬂight crew with knowledge and skills to diagnose faults and perform repairs without expanding crew
size. These areas are investigated by a combination of trade studies, analysis, ground based testing, reduced gravity
aircraft testing, and actual spaceﬂight testing aboard the 188 in multiple experiments. This paper provides an update
to this task since previously reported at this meeting in the previous year.

Disclaimer

Certain commercial entities, equipment, or materials may be identiﬁed in this document in order to describe an
experimental procedure or concept adequately. Such identiﬁcation is not intended to imply recommendation or
endorsement by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, nor is it intended to imply that the entities,
materials, or equipment are necessarily the best available for the purpose.

Acknowledgments

The authors wish to acknowledge Dr. Richard Pettegrew for his valuable technical contribution and leadership in
the development of the CLEAR task. Also, the authors wish to thank Mr. Due Truong 0f the NASA Glenn Research
Center for his work and dedication. This work is funded by the Supportability Project in NASA’s Exploration
Technology Development Program Ofﬁce (Mr. Barmac Taleghani, Program Manager, NASA Langley Research
Center).

10
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"11","References

1 Beddingﬁeld, K.L., Leach, RD, and Alexander, M.B. (editor), “Spacecraft System Failures and Anomalies
Attributed to the Natural Space Environment”, NASA Reference Publication 1390, August, 1996.

2 Rutledge, P.J., Mosleh, A., “Dependent—Failures in Spacecraft: Root Causes, Coupling Factors, Defenses, and
Design Implications”, Proceedings of the IEEE Annual Reliability and Maintainabilily Symposium, 0149-144X/95,
(1995), pp. 337-342.

3 Columbia Accident Investigation Board, “Columbia Accident Investigation Board Report” [online report], Vol.
1, August, 2003 URL: http://eaib.nasa.gOV/neWS/report/Volume1/defau1t.htm1 [cited 26 December 2007].

4 Pettegrew, R.D., Easton, J .W., and Struk, P.M., “Repair of Electronics for Long Duration Spaceﬂight”, 45th
AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, J anuary 8-11, 2007, AIAA-2007-1364.

5 Easton, J .W., Pettegrew, RD, and Struk, P.M., “Electronic Repair Concepts for Long-Duration Spaceﬂight”,
45 ”1 AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, J anuary 8-11, 2007, AIAA-2007-545.

6 Grugel, R.N., Cotton, L.J., Segre, P.N., Ogle, J .A., Funkhouser, G., Farris, F., Murphy, L., Gillies, D., Hua, F.,
and Anilkumar, A.V., “The In-Spaee Soldering Investigation (1881): Melting and Solidiﬁeation Experiment Aboard
the International Space Station”, 44’hAIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, January 8-12, 2006,
AIAA 2006-521.

7 Mankins, J .C., “Technology Readiness Levels: A White Paper” April 6, 1995, Advanced Concepts Ofﬁce,

Ofﬁce Of Space Access and Technology, URL: http://WWW.hg.nasa.gOV/Ofﬁee/Codeg/trl/trl.p_df [cited 26
December 2007].

8 Watson, J .K., Struk, P.M., Pettegrew, RD, and Downs, R.S., Experimental Investigation of Solder Joint
Defect Formation and Mitigation in Reduced-Gravity Environments, AIAA Journal ofSpacecraft and Rockets, V01.
44, N0. 1 (Jan-Feb 2007), pp. 174-182.

9 Pettegrew, R.D., Struk, P.M., Watson, J .K., Haylett, DR, and Downs, R.S. Gravitational Effects on Solder
J Oints, Welding Journal, 2003, pp. 44-48.

10 Struk, P.M., Pettegrew R.D., Downs, R.S., and Watson, J .K., The Inﬂuence Of Gravity on Joint Shape for
Through-Hole Soldering, 43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, January 10-13, 2005,
AIAA-2005-0541 and NASA TM-213589, 2005.

11 Struk, P.M., Pettegrew, R.D., Downs, R.S., and Watson, J .K., The Effects of an Unsteady Reduced Gravity
Environment on the Soldering Process, 42nd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, J anuary 5-8,
2004, AIAA-2004-1311 and NASA-TM 212946, 2004.

12 Pettegrew, R.D., Struk, P.M., Watson, J .K., and Haylett, D.R., Experimental Methods in Reduced Gravity
Research, NASA TM-211993, 2002.

13 Easton, J .W., Struk, P.M., and Rotella, A., Imaging and Analysis Of Void-Defeets in Solder Joints Formed in
Reduced Gravity Using High-Resolution Computed Tomography, 46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and
Exhibit, Reno, NV, J anuary 7-10, 2008, AIAA-2007-0824.

14 Humprey, R., Addressing future test Challenges Via synthetic instrumentation, Military Embedded Systems,
May 2006, URL: http://WWW.mi1-embedded.eom/artieles/authors/humphrey/ [Cited 26 December 2007].

15 Wikipedia contributors, “Joint Test Action Group”, Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, 16 December 2007,
URL: http://en.wikipedia.org/W/index.php?tit1e=J0int_Test_Aeti0n_Gr0up_&01did=178335316 [Cited 26 December
2007]

1 1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
