"","x"
"1","46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2008-824
7 - 10 January 2008, Reno, Nevada
Imaglng and Analys1s of V01d-Defects 1n Solder J omts
Formed 1n Reduced GraVIty Us1ng ngh-Resolutlon
Computed Tomography
J ohn W. Easton1
National Centerfor Space Exploration Research, Cleveland, OH, 44135
Peter M. Struk2
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH, 44135
and
Anthony Rotella3
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, 44106
As a part of efforts to develop an electronics repair capability for long duration space
missions, techniques and materials for soldering components on a circuit board in reduced
gravity must be developed. This paper presents results from testing solder joint formation in
low gravity on a NASA Reduced Gravity Research Aircraft. The results presented include
joints formed using eutectic tin-lead solder and one of the following ﬂuxes: (1) a no-clean
ﬂux core, (2) a rosin ﬂux core, and (3) a solid solder Wire With external liquid no-clean ﬂux.
The solder joints are analyzed With a computed tomography (CT) technique Which imaged
the interior of the entire solder joint. This replaced an earlier technique that required the
solder j oint to be destructively ground down revealing a single plane Which was subsequently
analyzed. The CT analysis technique is described and results presented With implications
for future testing as well as implications for the overall electronics repair effort discussed.
1. Introduction
In recent years, NASA has set a series of goals for a continued, expanding presence in space. This includes
completion of the International Space Station (188), returning to and beginning a long duration mission to the
moon, and a manned mission to Mars. These expanding missions, With longer distances and time away from Earth
and ground-based material support, Will require expanded self sufﬁciency by the crew of these missions. Launching
spare or replacement parts, consumables, and new equipment on demand from Earth Will be difﬁcult for both lunar
and Martian missions. Recent events on the 1881’ 2 show that such support is difﬁcult even for missions in low Earth
orbit, and that unexpected problems arise even With highly planned and tested activities. One area Where crew
members can increase self sufﬁciency is in performing electronics repairs.

Given appropriate tools, training, and guidance from ground support teams, creW-performed electronics repairs
can help increase the probability of mission success in a number of ways. First, it provides a recovery mechanism
for unexpected failures by allowing crew members to repair failed components Without sending faulty units to Earth
and waiting for replacements. Having appropriate tools for electronics repairs decreases the risks involved in
performing repairs With improvised tools and techniques, increases the reliability of repairs, and decreases the down
time of faulty systems. Providing a repair capability Will also reduce the mass and volume required for spare parts.
While a repair capability Will not eliminate the need for spare electronics units, it Will reduce the number needed,
allowing crew members to replace a faulty unit With a spare and then repair the faulty unit, Which then becomes a
spare itself. The reduction in mass and volume of spare parts then allows for the storage of other materiel or a
1 Associate Staff Scientist, 21000 Brookpark Rd., Mail Stop 110-3, AIAA Member
2 Aerospace Engineer, 21000 Brookpark Rd., Mail Stop 110-3, AIAA Member
3 Student Researcher, 10900 Euclid Avenue

1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

"
"2","reduction in the total vehicle mass. The Component Level Electronics Assembly Repair (CLEAR) proj eet at NASA
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH, is exploring and developing tools and processes to test, diagnose, and repair
electronics at the lowest possible level, providing the advantages of electronics repair to future long duration
rnissions3’ 4’ 5.

A key aspect of performing electronics repairs in space is the ability, and consequences, of soldering in the self-
eontained, reduced gravity environment of a space vehicle or habitat. Previous work has examined the effect of
reduced gravity on the formation of solder joints6’7. This work studied the formation of solder joints in normal and
reduced gravity, using 60% tin, 40% lead solders using rosin ﬂuxes, both as a core material within the solder wire
and as an external liquid used with a solid solder wire. In general, this work found that, using standard soldering
techniques, solder joints produced in reduced gravity formed more internal voids than similar solder joints produced
in normal gravity. Minimizing the formation of internal voids in solder joints is important because the voids can
adversely affect the electrical conductivity, heat transfer, and mechanical strength of the solder joint. The authors
hypothesize that gas bubbles within the molten solder joint cannot escape in reduced gravity due to reduced buoyant
forces compared to normal gravity, thus increasing the porosity of the joint formed in reduced gravity. Further
testing showed that solder joint voids can be reduced by using solid core solder wire with external liquid ﬂux, and
by increasing the amount of heat applied to the solder joint by keeping the soldering iron in contact with the joint for
a longer time.

Recent tests conducted in the NASA Reduced Gravity Research Aircraft8 expand on this previous work by
focusing on the use of eutectic solders and no-elean ﬂuxes, both external liquid ﬂux and ﬂux-eored solder wire. The
components of eutectic alloys solidify at the same temperature from the molten state; the authors hypothesize that
this behaVior could help in reducing the amount of voiding found in solder joints produced in low gravity. Eutectic
alloys do not exhibit a plastic state, where one component begins to solidify while the other remains liquid when the
temperature reduces from the melting point. This behaVior may reduce the amount of voids formed within a solder
joint by keeping the joint molten for a longer time than other tin-lead solder alloys. No-clean ﬂuxes are expected to
be important for use in electronics repairs during space missions, as these ﬂuxes require little or no Cleaning after
use, reducing the requirements for water or isopropyl alcohol and decreasing containment concerns arising when
using liquids in a reduced gravity environment.

The current work also uses a different analysis technique than those used in the work described above. In this
case, computed tomography (CT) scans provided a sequence of images along the length of the entire solder joint,
rather than a single cross section at one plane in the joint. This reduced the number of required samples for statistical
analysis, and provides a more complete picture of solder joint formation in reduced gravity. The use of this analysis
technique also required the development of an image analysis process to extract the relevant data from the CT
images.

This paper will discuss the results of three sets of soldering tests in reduced gravity using eutectic solder; ﬁrst
with no-elean external liquid ﬂux and solid solder wire; second using solder wire with a core of no-elean ﬂux; third
using solder wire with a core of rosin ﬂux. All joints are analyzed using nondestructive CT analysis. The paper will
ﬁrst focus on the experiment setup and operation aboard the NASA Reduced Gravity Aircraft. It will also brieﬂy
describe the CT scanning process, and image analysis performed once the CT analysis was complete. Following this
is a discussion of the various types of solder and ﬂux tested, both in reduced gravity as well as in normal gravity for
comparison. The solder and ﬂux combinations will be compared with the results of this study as well as the previous
studies already mentioned. Finally, the implications of these results will be discussed, as well as recommendations
for use in reduced gravity as well as future work.

11. Experiment Description and Data Analysis

As already mentioned, this experiment focuses on determining the formation of solder void defects within solder
joints formed in reduced gravity. The NASA Reduced Gravity Aircraft8 provided a facility for operating in reduced
gravity. The modiﬁed C-9 aircraft ﬂew a series of parabolic trajectories, allowing for 20-30 seconds of operation at
gravity levels of 0.050 g or less. The experiment rig shown in Figure l, bolted to the aircraft ﬂoor, provides a
platform for forming solder joints, Video recording the joint formation process, recording three-axis acceleration
measurements on the rig, and providing power for lighting, the soldering tool, and data collection equipment. A
glovebox section of the rig contained a soldering iron (Weller model TCPlZ), Circuit board holder, and backlights.
The glovebox itself was manufactured with Lexan windows for the user to see the operation, and glove ports for
user access to the tools, Circuit board, and other materials. A Video camera with 105 mm lens recorded the solder
process with an edge View of the Circuit card, as shown in Fig. 2. An accelerometer, a Crossbow model CXL01LF3-
R, output acceleration data which was recorded using a National Instruments CB-50LP data acquisition board with a

2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","National Instruments DAQCard 700 interface card and laptop computer. Acceleration data was recorded in all three
axes at 100 Hz, though only the vertical aXis data was analyzed, as this was the direction of the g-Vector. The data
acquisition system also toggled a Video overlay generator 011 or off, allowing for correlation between the Video and
acceleration data. This is the same experiment rig used in previous studies6’ 7, though the accelerometer and data
acquisition systems used are new for this series of experiments.
—|3II-E|T.-!-.L vcafnunnﬂﬁ
IE / JED TITLE HhHEFI'
=.-;—_ GLU‘IﬂIEiz-mf amummre — lfﬂ'ﬁ'
— — mcnmcnpz
— 'fE'! LENSEWEE‘H
Pi. 5mm: HEILIIIEﬁ' F‘q_|'
'I.-'EHT wwE EEEE '
mm ""El""!
Ea I m: ElIL. ll..
' “1—H E-_E__ Fl 3_ 241W"":
E :3— EMS P5. 12w: -— F'H |I.-'|ETEFI'
; mm ”W #
Figure 1. Schematic of aircraft test rig. Soldering operations are performed in the glovebox, With the
rack contains support equipment.
The circuit boards used as test samples
for these experiments allowed for simple ”'7.
mounting and alignment in the Video [9'32“ _ I
camera ﬁeld of View and minimized 7 —*
problems handling parts during aircraft
operations. The circuit cards are two layer {.5- -_
boards with plated through hole lands. "" ’ . h
Quarter watt resistors were attached to the .i.’
circuit boards with an adhesive prior to use, '
with the resistor lead formed and inserted
through a plated through hole. The
experiment studied varying combinations
of ﬂux and solder, shown in Table 1. These
solders were all eutectic alloys of tin and
lead (63% tin, 37% lead by weight). One
solder wire had a core consisting of a n0-
clean ﬂux, a second wire type had a core of Figure 2. An image of a solder joint formed in reduced
rosin ﬂux, and the third solder was solid, gravity, taken during operations on the research aircraft. The
with an external liquid no-clean ﬂux text in the upper left corner changes When acceleration data is
applied prior to soldering. All solder wires recording or stopped recording. The image also shows the
had an outer diameter of 0.031 inches. j oint ﬁllets, circuit board, and lead.
The experiment process proceeded as
follows. Prior to the beginning of the reduced gravity portion of a parabola, the operator applied a droplet of external
liquid ﬂux 0n the joint area to be worked on, if the test matrix called for external ﬂux. As gravity reduced, a co-
worker toggled a computer trigger to begin recording acceleration data and add an overlay character on the Video
stream. The operator waited for the gravity level to fall below 0.05 g, then began soldering work. Using a “mental
count,” the operator heated the joint area with the soldering iron for three seconds. He then added solder to ﬁrst form
a heat bridge between the soldering iron, circuit board land and component leg, then continued adding solder to form
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","the joint, and ﬁnally removed the solder wire. The operator kept the soldering iron on the joint for an additional
three seconds and then removed the soldering iron. The timing pattern is that recommended by previous work6’ 7. At
the end of the reduced graVity period, the assistant again toggled a computer trigger stopping acceleration data
recording and removing the Video stream overlay character. For comparison, four solder joints using the same solder
and ﬂuX combinations as well as equipment used in the ﬂight were formed in normal gravity, using the same process
as in ﬂight, with the exception of not recording acceleration data.

Table 1. T OBS of solder and ﬂux tested.

A. Data Analysis

The analysis of the solder joint samples generated in both reduced and normal graVity requires a series of steps,
outlined here. The ﬁrst step focused on correlating the Video and acceleration records of joint formation to select
solder joints formed in reasonable acceleration environments. J 0ints passing these criteria were then inspected by a
NASA technician for surface defects or indications of poor joint formation. These solder joints were then removed
from the circuit board and sent for CT scanning, revealing the internal structure of the solder joint. Images from this
analysis were then analyzed using a freely available software package for image analysis, with an analysis scheme
developed by the authors.

Data analysis began with

'13 ., E E E E g correlating the acceleration data

g E g g g with the recorded Video data.

5 E E E E Figure 2 shows a still image

,-.. ”-1 5 — E E t E i from the Video record, providing

3 * i an edge View of the solder joint

E g ' during formation as well as the

E '11 ""__ 5 Video overlays. This image also

% ' ._ i shows the three main features of

3 i i a joint, the ﬁllet that forms on

i ”'35 - .. ;; , 1 e i. 1 i. the circuit board land and lead

E f :r -- (3.: * external to the circuit board, and

H “H; -' "" + 1"" * the location of the annular

'3 "" region formed by the circuit

board through hole and the

component leg. As mentioned

4135 earlier, these Video overlays

D 5 1D 15 2'] 2'5 allowed for correlating actions

Time 'Isemds} in the Video record with the

Figure 3. Graph of acceleration environment during a parabola 0n the acFeleratiorliddata. .The goal lbs to

NASA Reduced Gravity Research Aircraft. SC 60¢ .80 er J 01nts W ere

graV1tat10nal level was both as

small as possible and as stead as possible while the solder was liquid. Figure 3 shows the acceleration data from one

such joint, as well as indicators from the Video record. These indicators show when the soldering iron is applied,

when solder is applied (which marks the beginning of the critical time when molten solder is present), when the

solder wire is removed, when the soldering iron is removed, and when the solder freezes, ending the critical joint

formation period. This process removed many solder joints from consideration for analysis due to high overall

gravity levels, “g—jitter” caused by turbulence, winds aloft, or ﬂight proﬁles causing spikes in acceleration, 0r

Vibration within the aircraft negatively effecting the acceleration environment during the critical period when the
solder is molten.

Next, a certiﬁed NASA technician inspected the solder joints that passed the acceleration criteria. The technician
judged the joint quality, looking for surface defects, wetting defects, or ﬂaws in the soldering operation. These
criteria are based on standards established by NASA for solder joint formation and acceptability9. Solder joints
passing both the acceleration and inspection criteria were sent for computed tomography (CT) scanning, revealing

4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","the internal structure of the solder joints.
This process requires removing the solder
joint from the Circuit board, Which is
accomplished by cutting the component 1mm
lead and using a small saw to cut a p
rectangular section of the Circuit board 0
containing the solder joint out Of the Circuit
board.

The CT scans of solder joints are
performed by PhoenixlX-Ray Of St.
Petersburg, Florida using their Nanotom lead
instrument. The following is a brief
description of the imaging process; a more
detailed description can be found in the
literaturelo’ 11. The sample is placed in a
ﬁxture between an X-ray source and void
detector. The sample translates and rotates
in a precise pattern, With X-ray images
taken at each position. The image intensity
at each position is a function of the density
along the line of sight for the speciﬁc 0 n
position. By combining these data, the ___
technicians construct a three-dimensional
model of the sample, including internal
features. This model is composed of
“vexels”, or a cube similar to a pixel in
standard two dimensional images. With the
solder samples analyzed, the limiting voxel
size is on the order of 10 micrometers per 0 o
voxel side, With some variation from -'
sample to sample due to sample
preparation and mounting. Each three
dimensional model allows for the
generation of a series of two dimensional
images, in this case an axial View (imaging
along the component lead), a sagittal View
(imaging perpendicular to the lead), and a
second sagittal View normal to the ﬁrst.
This analysis used the axial View
exclusively.

Figure 4 shows a sequence of images
along the axial View from a solder joint.
The ﬁrst image shows the top of one ﬁllet,
With the dark lead in the center of the
image surrounded by brighter solder. The r’ﬁ
next image shows a section of the same L
ﬁllet, Closer to the Circuit board plane,
demonstrating how the joint diameter
increases along the ﬁllet moving Closer to . . , ,
the circuit board. The image also shows F1gure4: A sequence bf Images from solder JOIIlt 49-30,
dark areas Within the solder region. The formed In reduced graVIty llSlIlg a no-clean ﬂux cored solder.
exp eri en 0 e of the CT company With similar Images a-d are from one ﬁllet Wlth 0.25 mm between 1m.ages, e-
work in the past indicates that these dark h are. from the annular reg10.n Wlth 0.43: mm between Images,
sections, distinguished from the component and 1-1 are from the 0pp0s1te ﬁllet Wlth 0.25 mm between
lead, are internal void defects. Future images. The images also demonstrate the lead and an example
destructive testing Will verify this ofa VOId'

5
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","hypothesis, but this data is not complete at this time. The next series of images show the solder joint structure Within
the circuit board through hole, or annular region. This Clearly shows the lead, solder, and void defects, but the area
of the joint is constrained by the Circuit board. Finally, the next series of images shows the ﬁllet 0n the Opposite side
of the Circuit board, again With the largest solder diameter Closest to the Circuit board, With the area decreasing
further from the Circuit board. With the limits of X-ray instrument used to gather this data and the size of the solder
joints, a joint would typically require a sequence of 250-300
images to completely describe the solder joint.
Once the interior of the solder joint has been imaged, the next
step is to analyze these images and determine the void fraction of
the speciﬁc solder joint. The free software package ImageJ 12’ 13
provides a platform for analyzing the series of images generated
“5 by the CT analysis Of a solder joint. The authors used the
. 3}. available macro language to create a script for analyzing a series
3‘. ,3‘ of images. The ﬁrst step in the analysis is to determine the total
. 3, area of a solder joint. For the ﬁllet regions, the algorithm used a
threshold Operation to isolate the bright solder region from the
dark background, While counting the dark void regions enclosed
in the solder. This is shown in Fig. 5. For the annular region,
Which has a constant area because it is constrained Within the
Circuit board through hole, an oval tool bounding the joint area
provided an area measurement. The next step was to measure the
Figure 5. Solder joint image after solder void area. The ﬁrst step in this process used the “Unsharp
performing ""Unsharp Mask"" and Mask” feature of ImageJ to accentuate the intensity differences
despeekle routines in ImageJ. between dark Objects (voids in this case) from bright Objects, in
this case the solder. Next, a despeekle Operation replaces each
pixel intensity With the median intensity of a 3-by-3 matrix
centered on the pixel, eliminating noise introduced by the
“Unsharp Mask” Operation. After applying these two processes, a
threshold Operation separated voids from solder, and a watershed
ﬁlter Closed voids left Open due to the void location near the joint
or lead edge, shown in Fig. 6. This process reported a void plus
lead area measurement for each slice of the joint. (The process
could not distinguish between a void and the lead.) A ﬁnal,
manual measurement of the lead area, using an oval tool as in the
task of measuring the joint area for the annular region, provided
the last necessary information on the interior of a solder joint.
With these pieces of information — total joint area, void area,
and lead area — an analysis Of each slice and 0f the joint as a
Whole can begin. First, the lead area is subtracted from both the
total area and the void area, as it is included in both
measurements. The void fraction for each slice can then be
Figure 6. Solder j oint image after calculated by dividing the void area by the total area, as shown in
thresholding to isolate voids. Eq. (1). Next, the total voiding is calculated as the sum from each
image slice of the void areas divided by the sum of the total area,
shown in Eq. (2). The average voiding is the mean of the void fraction across all slices in the solder joint. The data
also allows for plotting the void fraction for each slice, indicating the locations Within the solder joint With large
amounts of void formation.
Voidchtion = W (1)
T oralA rea
Z VoidA rea
T oral Voiding = —Slm (2)
Z T oralA rea
Slices
6
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","III. Results

The following section discusses the results from examining solder joints formed in both reduced and normal
gravity eutectic solder wire and three ﬂux combinations: no-clean ﬂux cored wire, rosin ﬂux cored wire, and solid
wire with externally applied, liquid no-clean ﬂux. All solder joints passed a Visual workmanship inspection by a
NASA certiﬁed electronics technician, exhibited low gravity levels and ﬂuctuations (for joints formed in reduced
gravity), and were internally analyzed using the techniques described earlier.

Figure 7 shows the void fraction for

02 each slice (given as distance along the

J°‘""‘49'3° Note: Shaded joint) of two solder joints. Both solder

0‘18 - 3231:3339, joints used solder with a no-clean ﬂux core,

0.15 4 2:1: gzrzmgzgf with one joint formed in reduced gravity

c 0114 - (top) and the second formed in normal

g :2“: gravity (bottom). Each graph shows data

3 0'12 ‘ J_Fﬁ: us from the three regions of the solder joint,

28 0-1 ' namely each ﬁllet and the annular through-

3008 , hole region. The solder joints formed in

E’ reduced gravity showed void formation in

w 0‘06 ' both ﬁllets and in the annular region, while

0-04 4 joints formed in normal gravity showed

002 , most (but not all) voiding in the annular

region. Void fraction at either end of the

0 0 ‘ 0:5 1 15 , 2:5 . . 3' 3‘5 joint (small slice number or large slice

Distance Along Joint (mm) number) can be large because the total

02 22,. -__ solder area is small; voids forming in this

' Jam 51,26 Note. Shaded area . can represent unusually large void

0‘8 —Fillet ,egio'nscoum fractions because there is little solder in

0.16 3:21: :33: area. Voids may also form in a series of

c 0.14 —F""'°t of board plating. pockets, shown as the multiple peaks in the

% annular region of the reduced gravity joint.

E 0'12 This is typical of all solder joints, and may

% 0-1 occur in the ﬁllets as well as the annular

Z 0.08 region. The plating on the circuit board did

g not seem to have an effect on the formation

«3 0‘06 of voids in either reduced or normal

00“ gravity. The data show neither a consistent

0.02 trend of void formation near the plated

0 ‘ region, nor a consistent lack of void

0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 formation near the plating. The data in Fig.

Distance Along Joint (mm) 7 support this, with some regions near

. . . . circuit board plating showing void

Flgure 7. V01d fractlon for each sllce of a no-clean ﬂux core formation and some showing no void

joint formed In reduced and normal graVIty. Top ﬁgure 1s from formation, in both re du c e d and normal

reduced gravity, bottom from normal graVIty. gravity. Overall, j oints formed in reduced

gravity showed more overall void formation, and more regions of void formation, than joints formed in normal

gravity. The data in Fig. 7 show much larger peaks in void fraction as well as more concentrations of void formation
in the reduced gravity data set than the normal gravity set.

The data in Table 2 shows the average voiding, total voiding, and maximum slice void fraction for all joints
analyzed that used eutectic solder wire with a no-clean ﬂux core. Overall, solder joints made using this solder wire
and ﬂux combination form more voids when the joint forms in reduced gravity, compared to those formed in normal
gravity. Average voiding for reduced gravity joints ranged from 1.5% to 10.5%, though 3 of the 4 joints presented
had average voiding between 1.4% and 2.1%. The total voiding for these reduced gravity joints ranged from 1.7% to
10.4%, with most joints in the lower 1.7% to 3.2% region. Maximum slice void fraction ranged from 12.5% to
23.4%, showing that for the worst slices one eighth to one quarter of the possible solder area was replaced with a
void. Joints formed in normal gravity showed much smaller voiding characteristics. Both the average voiding and
the total voiding in these cases was 0.1%, with the largest maximum slice void fraction measured as 1.2%.

7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","Table 2. Void fraction results for solder joints formed using eutectic solder With a no-clean ﬂux core in
reduced and normal _ravit .

Number Level (%) (%) (%)
—-_———
—-_———
—-_———
—-_———
————n_

The summary data presented in Table 3 presents the void formation data for solder joints formed using a resin

ﬂux core. The average voiding in these cases ranged from 3.7% to 13.5%, with 3 0f the 4 joints analyzed exhibiting
6.9% average voiding or less. T0ta1 voiding ranged from 2.9% to 13.8%, while the maximum slice void fraction
ranged from 16.7% to 38.4%. For the worst slices in the reduced gravity case, more than one third of the area
available for solder was instead taken up by voids. The joints formed in normal gravity showed considerably less
void formation with this ﬂux than joints formed in reduced gravity. The average voiding was less than 0.5%, total
voiding less than 0.6%, and the maximum s1iee void fraction was approximately 8.5% for these cases.

Table 3. Void fraction results for solder joints formed using eutectic solder With a rosin ﬂux core in

reduced and normal gravity.

Number Level (%) (%) (%)
—-_———
—-_———
—-_———
———-_“
———-_-_

The data in Table 4 presents the average voiding, t0ta1 voiding, and maximum s1iee void fraction for solder joints

formed using a solid solder wire with an external, liquid no-elean ﬂux. For the three reduced gravity eases analyzed
the average voiding ranged from 6.2% to 38%, with the total voiding ranging from 3.7% to 25.1%. The maximum
s1iee void fraction ranged from 23.7% to 84.1%; in a region of the annulus for this joint (23-1), more than half of the
area available for solder was instead taken by a void. The single normal gravity ease analyzed here showed average
voiding 0f 1%, total voiding of 0.8%, and a maximum s1iee void fraction of 15.1%. These values are much smaller
than those for reduced gravity cases using this solder and ﬂux combination.

Table 4. Void fraction results for solder joints formed using eutectic solder With a no-clean external ﬂux

in reduced and normal gravity.

Number Level (%) (%) (%)
—-_———
—-_———
—-_———

33-28 1 1-0 0-8 15.1

IV. Discussion
The current results as well as previous research both show an increase in voiding for solder joints formed in
reduced gravity compared to normal gravity. This previous work suggested a number of causes for an increase in
void formation for solder joints created in reduced gravity compared to normal gravity6’ 7. One cause is the reduced
effects of buoyancy in reduced gravity, increasing the amount of time required for a gas bubble generated during
soldering to escape from the joint. In normal Operations, the soldering iron is removed from the solder joint one
second (or less) after the solder wire is removed. When this technique is used in reduced gravity, there is not enough
time for gasses generated within the solder joint to escape before the solder solidiﬁes, generating voids within the
solder joint. In both the previous and current work the soldering iron remains on the solder joint for an extended
8
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","period (approximately three seconds) after the solder wire is removed to provide more time for gas to escape the
still-liquid solder joint. This increased heating time may have an adverse effect as it may allow continued
volatilization of ﬂux residue and vaporization of moisture trapped in the Circuit card, which are potential sources of
voids. Future work will be required to determine the optimum heating time.

Another difference between the previous work and the current work is the data analysis, speciﬁcally the previous
analysis using a destructive technique where the solder joint is ground down to a speciﬁc plane (usually the joint
midplane) and imaged6’ 7 as opposed to the current use of CT scanning, which images the entire volume of the joint
without destroying the joint. The earlier technique required a large number of samples for statistical relevance, as
each analyzed joint provided only one image of the joint interior (the previous work also required analysis of the
acceleration environment and inspection for joint quality before analysis). The current analysis technique provides a
much greater number of images per solder joint, providing more information on the joint structure. However, this
work relies on a much smaller number of solder joints for analysis, which is desired due to limited availability of the
NASA Reduced Gravity Research Aircraft. Future work must include a larger sample of solder joints for analysis
using the techniques outlined here, to provide a larger sample population and greater conﬁdence in the results.

These results could impact efforts currently underway to develop an electronics repair capability for future space
missions”. The selection of a solder and ﬂux for use in these operations is an important part in allowing crew
members to produce good, high reliability solder joints. The presence of voids within a solder joint can lessen the
reliability of a solder joint, in terms of electrical connections, heat transfer, and mechanical attachment during high
Vibration or high forces. This must be balanced with the ease of use by an inexperienced crew person in an enclosed
environment. While no-elean ﬂuxes have, in this case, produced increased voiding, they are attractive for use
because they do not require Cleaning the Circuit board and joint area after forming the solder joint. Rosin or other
active ﬂuxes are mildly acidic; over time, the residue from these ﬂuxes can damage the solder joint, Circuit board
lands, or leads. Cleaning the Circuit board requires the use of solvents, but this is problematic in an enclosed
enVironment. Even relatively benign solvents, such as isopropyl alcohol, can damage other equipment and systems
in a space craft, including air recycling and reclamation equipment. Future work must focus on reducing the
presence of voids within solder joints using no-elean ﬂuxes, but may also pursue a determination of the effects of
voiding. This future work would focus on ﬁnding a potentially acceptable level of voiding, in terms of Circuit
reliability and robustness. If the amount of permissible voiding is small, other materials or techniques must be
developed to reduce voids in solder joints produced in reduced gravity.

The small sample size in the current work makes identifying trends difﬁcult in the data. The average voiding,
total voiding, and maximum slice void fraction can vary widely from test to test. Future work should increase the
number of solder joints of each type available for analysis, and use the analysis methods outlined in this paper. One
ﬂux type to focus on in this future work is the eutectic solder with a no-Clean ﬂux core. This solder type showed less
void formation in both normal and reduced gravity than the other solder types. Characterizing a solder with no-elean
ﬂux would also aid in the overall work of developing a capability for performing electronics repairs during a long
duration space mission, as these materials would not require Cleaning, or reduced levels of Cleaning, in the enclosed
spacecraft, easing the burden on crew members, support equipment, and habitat.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Richard Pettegrew, formerly with the National Center for Space Exploration
Research, Cleveland, OH, and currently with IEC, Cleveland, OH, for speciﬁc assistance in performing these
experiments as well as many years of effort on this project. The authors would like to acknowledge the efforts of the
Reduced Gravity Aircraft Facility at NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, for their help in readying the
experiment rig for operation and providing a platform for performing the experiments. Thanks also go to Gary
Goreeki, NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH, for his efforts in preparing the Circuit board and solder wire
samples, as well as preparing the aircraft rig for operation. This work is performed as a part of the Component Level
Electronic Assembly Repair (CLEAR) project at NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH, managed by Due
Truong. Funding for this work is through the Exploration Technology and Development Program, managed by
Barmae Talaghani at NASA Langley Research Center, Langley, VA.

References
1 Oberg, James, “Space Station: Internal NASA Reports Explain Origins of June Computer Crisis”, IEEE
Spectrum, October 4, 2007.
9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"10","2 Spotts, Peter N., “A Reality Check On Dreams For Space: The Repairs”, Christian Science Monitor,
November 5, 2007.

3 Pettegrew, R.D., Easton, J .W., Struk, P.M., Anderson, E.E., “In-Flight Manual Electronics Repair for Deep-
Space Missions”, 2007 IEEE Aerospace Conference, March 3-10, 2007, Big Sky, MT, Paper#1208 (2007).

4 Pettegrew, R.D., Easton, J .W., and Struk, P.M., “Repair of Electronics for Long Duration Spaceﬂight”, 45th
AIAA Aerospace Science Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, J anuary 8-11, 2007, AIAA-2007—I 3 64 (2007).

5 Easton, J .W., Pettegrew, RD, and Struk, P.M., “Electronic Repair Concepts for Long-Duration Spaceﬂight”,
45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, January 8-11, 2007, AIAA-2007—545 (2007).

6 Watson, J .K., Struk, P.M., Pettegrew, RD, and Downs, R.S., Experimental Investigation of Solder Joint
Defect Formation and Mitigation in Reduced-Gravity Environments, AIAA Journal ofSpacecraft and Rockets, V01.
44, N0. 1, pp. 174-182, (Jan-Feb 2007).

7 Pettegrew, R.D., Struk, P.M., Watson, J .K., Haylett, DR, and Downs, R.S. Gravitational Effects on Solder
Joints, Welding Journal, pp. 44-48 (2003).

8 JSC Reduced Gravity Program User’s Guide, AOD 33899, August, 2005.

9 Soldered Electrical Connections, NASA-STD-8739.3, 1997.

10 Kak, Avinash C., and Slaney, Malcolm, Principles of Computerized T omographic Imagining, IEEE Press,
1988.

11 Brunke, 0., Odenbach, S., Jurgons, R., Alexiou, C., Hilger, 1., and Beckmann, F. J . Phys.: Condes. Matter,
V01 18, 82903-82917, 2006.

12 Rasband, W.S., Image], U. S. National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA,
http://rsb.inf0.nih.g0V/ij/, 1997-2007.

13 Abramoff, M.D., Magelhaes, P.J., Ram, 8.]. ""Image Processing With ImageJ"". Biophotonics International,
volume 11, issue 7, pp. 36-42, 2004.

10
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
