"","x"
"1","The Cosmic Ray Energetics And Mass (CREAM) Instrument
H.S. Ahna, P. Allisonb, M.G. Bagliesic, J .J . Beattyb, G. Bigongiaric, P. Boyled, J .T. Childerse, N.B. Conklinf,
S. Coutuf, MA. DuVernoise, O. Ganela*, J .H. HangT, J .A. Jeong, K.C. Kima, J .K. Leeg, M.H. Leea, L. Lutza,
P. Maestroc, A. Malinina, P.S. Marrocchesic, S.A. Minnickh, S.I. Mognetf, S.W. Namg, S.L. Nutteri, I.H. Parkg,
N.H. Parkg, E.S. Seoa’j, R. Sinaa, S.P. Swordyd, S.P. Wakelyd, J . Wua, J . Yangg, Y.S. Yoona’j, R. ZeiC and S.Y. Zinna
alnstitute for Physical Science and Technology, University ofMaryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
bDepartment ofPhySiCS, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
CDepartment ofPhySiCS, University ofSiena and INFN, Siena 53100, Italy
dEnrico F ermi Institute and Department ofPhySiCS, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 6063 7, USA
65612001 ofPhySiCS and Astronomy, University ofMinnesota, MN 55414, USA
fDepartment ofPhySiCS, Penn State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
gDepartment ofPhySiCS, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 120-750, S. Korea
hDepartment ofPhySiCS, Kent State University Tuscamwas, New Philadelphia, OH 44663, USA
iDepartment of Physics and Geology, Northern Kentucky University, Highland Heights, KY 41099, USA
jDepartment ofPhySiCS, University ofMaryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
ABSTRACT
The Cosmic Ray Energetics And Mass (CREAM) experiment is designed to investigate high energy (1012 ~ 1015 eV)
cosmic rays over the elemental range from hydrogen to iron (1 S Z S 26), through a series of long balloon ﬂights.
Originally planned to be ﬂown on the first of the new Ultra Long Duration Balloon (ULDB) being developed by
NASA, the CREAM instrument was launched as a long duration balloons (LDB) payload from McMurdo Station,
Antarctica on December 16, 2004 and ﬂew for a record-breaking 42 days. A second CREAM ﬂight one year later
lasted 28 days. The CREAM design is unique in that it obtains two independent energy measurements using a
tungsten/scintillator sampling calorimeter and a Transition Radiation Detector (TRD) with up to four independent
Charge measurements of incident particles using a novel Timing-based scintillator Charge Detector (TCD), a plastic
Cherenkov Detector (CD), scintillating fiber hodoscopes, and a Silicon Charge Detector (SCD). The energy limits
are determined by trigger efficiency and telemetry bandwidth at the low end and by statistics at the high end.
1 INTRODUCTION
The origin, acceleration mechanism and propagation through the inter-stellar medium of cosmic-ray
nuclei are some of the most fundamental problems in cosmology today. Theorists have developed a
convincing model of acceleration by diffusive shock waves from supernova explosions that provides a
natural explanation of the power law spectrum observed at energies above a few 1010 eV and up to a few
1015 eV [1]. This model predicts a sharp break at about Z><1014 eV, which has yet to be observed in any
single-element spectrum. The all-particle spectrum observed by ground-based experiments shows a kink,
the so-called ‘knee’, at about 3x1015 eV, and some have reported an increase in the fraction of iron-like
nuclei compared to proton—like nuclei around the knee [2,3], offering some support to the model. Direct
measurement of a knee in the proton spectrum, however, would provide the most convincing evidence to
support the model. To date, experiments such as ATIC [4] have made accurate direct measurements of
the charge and energy of incident nuclei, but only up to about 1013 eV due to the limited collecting power
of these experiments. Others, such as JACEE [5] and RUNJOB [6] have made direct measurements to
above 1014 eV, but with very limited energy and charge resolutions. TRACER [7] has ﬂown a large TRD
(5 m2 SI) for over 10 days, but with a charge range starting from oxygen, and with limited charge
resolution preventing separation of rare nuclei. CREAM is poised to extend accurate direct
measurements by more than an order of magnitude, to above the expected proton spectrum knee. Section
2 below lists the science and measurement objectives of CREAM. The instrument design and the
reasoning that determined it are described in detail in section 3. Section 4 describes beam tests and
calibration runs conducted from 2001 to 2003 at CERN, the European high energy physics lab, as well as
the first ﬂight. Conclusions are presented in section 5.

"
"2","2 CREAM OBJECTIVES

The science objectives of CREAM include the measurement of elemental spectra up to iron, determining
if the proton spectral indeX is different than that of heavier nuclei, searching for potential spectral features
such as a knee in the proton spectrum, and measuring the energy dependence of the ﬂuX ratio between
secondary nuclei (e.g. boron) and primary nuclei (e.g. carbon). To achieve these objectives, the CREAM
measurement objectives are as follows. An elemental coverage is required from hydrogen to iron
inclusive (1 3 Z S 26), With a charge resolution sufficient to resolve each element in the range. The
energy resolution is designed to be better than 50% over the energy range, With an absolute calibration
better than 10%.

CREAM has a larger effective geometry factor for protons and helium than any previous, current, or
planned instrument until ACCESS (Advanced Cosmic—ray Composition Experiment for the Space
Station) or a similar detector is ﬂown. Since no such instrument has been approved yet, none such is
expected to be deployed until at least 2010. With its first ﬂight CREAM has more than doubled the total
world data of directly measured high energy (>1 TeV) cosmic—ray nuclei With reasonable energy
resolution, and has the first high statistics data sample allowing accurate boron to carbon ratio to be
expanded to the 100 GeV/nucleon region [8 and references therein]. The ultimate goal of the CREAM
program is to collect at least 500 events each above 1014 eV, for protons, He, CNO, Ne—Si and the Fe
group, and to produce elemental spectra for all nuclei up to iron, With the proton and helium spectra
extending above 1015 eV.

3 THE CREAM IN STRUMEN T

One of the greatest challenges in designing an instrument intended to directly measure high energy
cosmic—ray particles is the enormous dynamic range needed to cover the energy range, along With the
limited means of calibration. For low charge particles such as protons and helium nuclei, the only
practical means of measuring energies above 1012 eV is through the use of a calorimeter. This technique
will work as well for heavier nuclei, but ﬂight calorimeters are limited by the large mass required to allow
a sufficient geometric acceptance for these lower ﬂuX particles. In addition, calorimeter calibration
requires the use of accelerator beam particles of a known energy, Which is limited by current technology
to a few 1011 eV. This calibration was extended to about 1013 eV by use of nuclear fragment beams (see
Section 4 below). For nuclei With Z > 3, a TRD can measure the Lorenz factor (y), Which When paired
With knowledge of the particle mass, Via charge identification, provides an energy measurement. The
relatively low density of TRDs allows the larger geometric coverage needed for lower ﬂuX particles, With
an acceptable detector weight. Since the TRD measures y rather than energy, one can calibrate this type
of instrument using a variety of particles With varying masses (e.g. electrons, muons, pions and protons),
so that a combination of beams can cover a range from y < 102 and up to y > 105, nicely covering the
CREAM energy range of interest. However, TRDs cannot accurately measure high energy protons and
helium nuclei, and their energy resolution is strongly energy dependent, making it more difficult to
extract accurate spectra. By combining a calorimeter and a TRD in the same experiment, one can cross-
calibrate between the two for a large sub-sample of events, for optimal energy determination [9].
Additionally, since the two detector types have different sources of systematic errors, combining the two
reduces systematic uncertainties of the energy measurement.

One of the consequences of having a high density calorimeter as part of the experiment is the large
number of secondary shower particles generated in the calorimeter absorber, some of Which are scattered
back up towards the top of the payload. This complicates the design of charge measurement devices that
attempt to identify the incident primary particle. As the incident energy increases, so does the number of
these back—scattered secondaries and their energy deposit in any charge detectors [10]. To overcome this

"
"3","challenge the CREAM design includes a large number of charge detectors, using a variety of
measurement principles. These charge detectors are (from top to bottom) the TCD, the CD, the SCD, and
the scintillating fiber hodoseopes (80/81 and S2). The TCD utilizes a fast readout system that takes
advantage of the brief time interval between the primary’s traverse and the arrival of the first secondaries
to complete its charge measurement, thereby preventing the baek-seatter noise from impacting its
measurement of primary charge. The SCD is spatially divided into pixels of 2.12 cm2 area each, Which
minimizes the number of back—seattered particles hitting the same pixel that measures the primary
particle. The CD only measures the Cherenkov radiation produced by relativistic particles, effectively
rendering it blind to most back—seattered particles Which have relatively low momenta. The fiber
hodoseopes also use spatial segmentation, by reading out separate fibers With a cross section of only 2><2
mm2 and a length of 78 em in 80/81 (64.6 cm in S2). Since back—seatter is concentrated near the primary
path, most of the fiber area sees little if any baok—seatter. For simulated protons in the TeV energy range
the rates of charge n1is-identifioation for protons using 3.0 x 3.3 cm2 pixels have been estimated to be at
the level of ~1% [11]. For the 2.12 cm2 pixels of the CREAM SCD this rate should be even lower. The
hodoseopes are used mostly for enhancing trajectory reconstruction to improve charge identification by
other systems, Which function is not affected by back—seatter to any great extent.
The CREAM instrument (Figs. 1, 2) is comprised of several major detector sub-systems. At the top of the
experiment is the TCD — a charge detector made up of two crossed layers of large—area thin scintillator
paddles read out Via fast, low-jitter photo multiplier tubes (PMT). Below the TCD are two TRD modules
instrumented With thin—walled aluminized Mylar tubes containing a 95% xenon, 5% methane gas mixture.
Between the TRD modules is a plastic Cherenkov detector to veto low-energy background particles
present above Antarctica due to the low geomagnetic cutoff there. Below these is the calorimeter module,
comprised of several parts. At the top of this module is the SCD, providing coverage for those particles
that miss the TCD and enter the calorimeter module, as well as an independent charge measurement for
those that traverse the TCD. Below the SCD is a four-layer scintillating fiber hodosoope (SO/Sl),
providing position measurements and a supplemental charge measurement, followed by a densified
graphite target (T1), a two-layer fiber hodosoope (S2) for another position measurement and nuclear
interaction detection, a second graphite target (T2), a single fiber layer shower detector (S3) read out by
TCD-type PMTs to provide a reference time for the TCD, and finally a tungsten/sointillating fiber
sampling calorimeter.
V - 7‘ I -’ - _...'.s¥ c.
l I ,.,_._~ 4 u 3-“. \ . '
\ i“ f: . A 9?; 3' /
-— \\ ‘1'“ “' ‘ y * . l ,I ‘ W“ ‘
. V . ‘ y , .1 _
‘ I i . \‘M i ‘ ‘ 7‘
\ ‘l V V K \ .‘ )3
1‘ V. * Vi \.\ V: .
- ‘ ElﬁZé: . r‘.\\ _ f. .:
Figure 1. Photo of the CREAM Instrument during integration.

"
"4","TCD' E(—E—L—ﬁ\ili _
Top TRD I 3;."" \b' _‘
4’ f - ‘.
cn ! E'ﬂiI—li—l—l"" l
i. d
Bottom TRD '
SCD _‘—;=_=w_m_uu_w , .
30/51 - |_ .
Targets E i; — ‘;**——~.‘: .1
Calorimeter ‘1 = r] I E §- \ - . .'
I +~ \
Figure 2. Schematic cross section drawing of major CREAM detector systems.
3.1 T CD & S3
The most interesting events CREAM measures are those where a high energy nucleus enters through the
top of the instrument, interacts in the graphite target and eXits through the bottom of the calorimeter
(section 3.5 below). In such events a large number of secondary shower particles are thrown back
towards the upper detectors. This so-called back—scatter effect can interfere severely with accurate charge
measurement of the primary nucleus, especially for lower-charged nuclei. Most charge detectors ﬂown
on similar experiments have thus been designed with fine spatial segmentation (e.g. pixels or strips) that
minimize the area over which measurements are integrated (e.g. see sections 3.3 and 3.4, respectively,
below). The TCD [12] takes advantage of an aspect of such events not previously utilized — their time
structure. In CREAM, the arrival of the light signal from a primary nucleus at the TCD photo—multiplier
tubes (PMTs) precedes the earliest possible arrival of a light signal from a back—scatter particle by 3 ns.
Thus, using an ultra-fast readout one can separate the primary signal from back—scatter noise without
resorting to high channel counts.
The TCD is comprised of two layers, each with four 120X30><05 cm3 fast scintillator paddles (Saint
Gobain BC-408, with vacuum compatible ﬂuors) side by side. The paddles in the two layers are oriented
with their long axes perpendicular to each other. Each paddle has an adiabatically shaped light guide
(Fig. 3) glued to each of its two ends using Saint Gobain’s BC-6OO optical epoxy. The light guides
gradually change cross sectional shape from a narrow rectangle at the scintillator glue-joint, to a nearly
round cross section where they are glued to Photonis XP2020UR fast PMTs, without altering their cross
sectional area. The light guides are UVA acrylic, where the UV absorption reduces the effects of
Cherenkov radiation generated by particles traversing the acrylic, without significant reduction of the blue
scintillation signal. The entire assembly is covered with crinkled aluminum foil and DuPont black Tedlar
to assure light-tightness. Figure 4 shows a single (upside down) TCD paddle with light guides and PMT

"
"5","assemblies at its two ends. This arrangement produces at least 100 photo-electrons (p.e.) at each PMT
from a singly-charged minimum ionizing particle (MIP) vertically incident at the center of a paddle. The
charge resolution achievable with this technique is determined by ﬂuctuations in ionization energy loss in
the paddles, convolved with the scintillator response, and is O.2e at oxygen, degrading to 0.35e at iron due
to scintillator response saturation (Burke’s law). The contribution from photon—statistics is negligible.
The high speed needed from the readout electronics requires borrowing from the techniques of time-of—
ﬂight detectors. A series of 4 comparators with different thresholds are read out with fast (50 ps time
resolution) custom fixed-threshold design time-to-digital converter (TDC) circuits. By reconstructing the
time profile of signal increase in the first 3 ns one can measure the signal slew rate, and correcting for
path length due to the angle of incidence, one can extract the square of the incident particle charge. For
nuclei heavier than boron (Z > 5) the signal from the primary is expected to have a higher peak value than
any back—scattered particle. Accordingly, an ultra-fast peak detector can capture this signal with a 3 ns
rise time, which is then digitized using analog to digital converters (ADCs). The uncertainty in charge
measurement contributed by this technique is still small with respect to that caused by the intrinsic
ﬂuctuations of energy loss in the scintillators. The TCD readout utilizes both systems to measure incident
particle charge. The TCD data system consists of nine data acquisition units, or concentrators, running
uClinuX, each unit reading out two PMTs. Eight units read out the PMTs at the ends of the TCD
scintillation counters, while the ninth unit reads out the two PMTs of the S3 detector. Each of the nine
units houses two peak detector boards and two TDC boards, one each for each PMT. Each peak detector
board contains four 12 bit AD7854L ADCs, to capture the peak voltage of four different dynode taps for
increased dynamic range. The TDC boards also contain four 12 bit channels each, two to measure the rise
time of the anode and two for the rise time of the 11th dynode (of the 12 stage PMT, corresponding to
about 1/5 the anode gain). The thresholds on the anode were set to 100 mV and 600 mV throughout the
ﬂight, corresponding to ~02 MIPs and ~1 MIP, respectively. The 11th dynode thresholds were changed
during the ﬂight to best tune for the boron and carbon peaks, and were ultimately left at 300 mV and 1500
mV, corresponding to about 3.5 MIPs and 20 MIPs, respectively.

, .. - , ~ f

I .. -- ; e /

1i :1- \¥

: A 11' T 32. "" - _ 'I.
_. _ ' c ’ . .
'2. ‘ : -—-.ur '-.
Figure 3. TCD adiabatic light guide.
Figure 4. Individual TCD paddle with potted PMT
assemblies at its ends.

To further reduce uncertainty due to back scatter, a layer of 2><2 mm2 scintillating fibers (Saint Gobain
BCF-12MC) is positioned directly over the calorimeter stack. This detector, labeled S3, measures the

"
"6","time at which back scattered particles start their way back to the TCD. From simple geometry and the
speed of light one can then calculate the time at which the primary particle would have traversed the TCD
scintillators, with an accuracy of < 0.1 ns.
3.2 TRD and Plastic Cherenkov Detector
The electric field around a charged particle changes as it moves from one medium to another with a
different dielectric constant. By forcing such a particle to experience many such transitions very rapidly
one forces oscillations in the electric field strength, generating so called transition radiation (TR). One
can select the types of materials and the typical thicknesses to tune the TR to the X-ray region. Detectors
that use this technique and measure the X-rays are called transition radiation detectors (TRDs). TRDs
measure the Lorentz factor (y) of incident particles, and can also reconstruct the particle trajectory
through the detector.
The TRD (Fig. 5) [13] is comprised of two essentially identical modules, each with an active volume of
120><120><35 cm3 with a CD (see below) between the two. Each module has 4 layers of Dow Ethafoam
220, serving the dual purpose of radiator and light-weight mechanical support. This polyethylene foam
has closed cells with typical cell spacing of 870 um, cell walls of 35 um, and a density of about 0.036
g/cm3. Each foam layer holds two layers of 32 thin—walled aluminized Mylar proportional tubes filled
with a 95% Xenon, 5% Methane gas mixture, for a total of 512 tubes. Using such tubes obviates the need
for a pressure vessel, significantly reducing the weight of the detector. The sense wire is maintained at
1.5 kV relative to the grounded tube. The tube end pieces are designed especially to reduce the leak rate
through the ends to less than that through the 75 um thick three layered Mylar walls using Resiweld 350
two—component epoxy.

/‘ I . $00, 3‘!

’ .

Fig. 5. TRD 3D schematic with cut through center plane to show tubes in both modules.
Measurements in the lab have shown that gas losses in a 100 day ﬂight would be lower than the amount
of reserve gas included in the system. In CREAM’s first ﬂight, over 42 days, no gas refill was needed.
The manifolds were periodically connected to each other during the ﬂight to balance pressure differences
due to slightly different leak rates from different manifolds. However, the main valve to the reserve
bottle was never opened (a schematic of the gas system is shown in Fig. 6). Pairing the tube layers allows
full coverage in each orientation, as each pair is oriented perpendicular to the previous pair, providing 3-

"
"7","dimensional track reconstruction (Fig. 7). Charge pulses are generated When electrons are stripped, either
by direct ionization of the gas by the primary incident nucleus or at higher energies by the TR X-rays.
These stripped electrons are accelerated to the sense Wire Where they are measured by a readout system
using AmpleX 1.5 application specific integrated circuits (ASICs), With two ranges utilized to cover the
12-bit dynamic range needed to measure the energies from a lithium nucleus at y = 103 to a nickel nucleus
at y = 105. The AmpleX cards are mounted in boxes situated around the periphery of the TRD modules.
The majority of the readout electronics are housed in a main electronics box. This box includes circuitry
to control and read out the AmpleX cards as well as Circuitry to read out signals from the 8 CD PMTs.
The box also provides a trigger input driven by the fast Cherenkov signal to form part of the TCD’s ZHi
trigger (see Section 3.8.3 below). The design uses a standard VME 6U form and backplane, but not VME
electrical standards because of their large power draw Which is not appropriate for balloon payloads. The
bus interface is custom-designed for the TRD AmpleX cards and the CD readout. The TRD is tuned for
103 < y < 105 and achieves an energy resolution of 15% for carbon nuclei and 7% for iron nuclei at y =
3000 [14]. An energy calibration of a single layer was carried out at CERN using beams of highly
relativistic pions, protons, and electrons [14]. For particles With Z > 1 one can scale by the square of the
charge since the TR response depends only on linear electromagnetic properties of the materials involved.
P1
0 A O O EM Latching Valve
H o Mama. vm
. . A Pressure Transducer (0 - 30 PSIA)
H A Pressure Transducer (0 - 600 PSIA)
. .
[1 Mechanical Gauge (0-30 PSIA)
P5
. A . I MechanicalGauge(O-1000 PSIA)
. -
v14 V18 .
9 10 I P11 V19
0 n Gas Tank
0
v10
Figure 6. Schematic diagram of TRD gas system.
Between the two TRD modules, a Cherenkov layer is inserted to veto non-relativistic particles. This
reduces the High—Z trigger rate due to the low geomagnetic cutoff in Antarctica Where CREAM ﬂew, to
an acceptable level of < 30 Hz. This detector is read out by eight 0.5” Photonis XP1910 PMTs Via four
wave-length shifting bars, held against the radiator by a system of springs. The CD PMT signals are
digitized using 12-bit peak sensing ADCs. Since the Cherenkov signal is also proportional to the square
of the incident particle charge, this detector provides yet another independent charge measurement for
relativistic charged particles. The readout is accomplished by custom—built shaping amplifiers connected
to each PMT’s tenth dynode. These are converted to digital counts by 12-bit ADCs in a custom circuit
residing in the TRD main electronics box described above. The 8 PMT anode signals pass through a fast

"
"8","summing amplifier unit, the output of Which is fed to a fast discriminator to provide an input to the TCD
Hi-Z trigger. When this trigger is not vetoed by the TCD, the TRD signals are read out.
X-Tubes Track Y-Tubes Track
I OOOOGu’iOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
I OOOOO‘C'dOOOOOOOOOO@OOOOOOOOOOOO
OOOOCDMOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
I OOOOOOLQOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
I OOOOOOOk‘OOOOOOGOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
OOOOOOOHOOOO OOQOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
I OOOOOOOOCO'IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
| OOOOOOOOC‘O’OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
80|cm ‘
I OOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.J‘)°°O®00000000000000OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
| OOOOOOHOOOOGOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
OOOOOO'IOOOOOOCDOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
I OOOOO®®OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
I OOOOIDOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
OOO'OOOOGOOOOOO\OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
I OOOOOOOOOOOOOGOOOQOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
Figure 7. X-Z and Y-Z Views of oxygen nucleus track through the TRD.
3.3 SCD
Positioned only 25 cm above the top of the calorimeter tungsten stack, the SCD uses fine segmentation to
minimize back—scatter noise. The SCD [15] is comprised of 26 ladders arranged in an aluminum frame.
Every ladder holds 7 sensors, each fabricated from a single high resistivity n-type 5” round silicon wafer,
380i15 pun thick. Each sensor is segmented into a 4X4 array of 1.5 5><1.37 cm2 pin-diode pixels, for a
total of 2912 channels (Fig. 8). The sensors are slightly tilted and overlap each other in both lateral
directions, providing full coverage in a single layer, With a 779x795 mm2 coverage area. The analog
readout electronics, incorporating a 16-channel AmpleX CR-1.4A AS IC [16], are located directly under
the sensors, With ﬂexible Kapton cables connecting the two. The signals are digitized in 16-bit ADCs 011
readout boards on two Opposite sides of the SCD (for 13 ladders each). To maximize geometric
acceptance, the SCD thickness is kept at 7 mm for the detector, With an additional 15 mm height allowed
for the 818x818 mm2 mechanical enclosure.
‘ 5f * ”FE 62‘
.J ‘ ﬁ. \\ ""
I 1:; v r ‘\ -
Figure 8. Photo Of SCD with sensors and the two readout boards Visible.
The SCD has a sufficient dynamic range to measure charges from Z = 1 (hydrogen) to 28 (nickel). With a
pixel area of ~2.12 01112, the rate of charge mis-identifieation for low-Z nuclei at 1015 eV is expected to be

"
"9","no more than 2 — 3%. For higher Z nuclei, the impact of back—scatter noise on the S/N ratio is lower, so
mis-identification is less frequent. For lower energy showers fewer particles are baCk-scattered, so for
that Class of events too, the mis-identification fraction should be lower. A nearly fully populated SCD
was placed in a beam of 158 GeV/nucleon A/Z = 2 nuclear fragments at CERN in November 2003,
demonstrating that the design resolution was exceeded (see section 4 below). In ﬂight, over 98% of
channels operated nominally, With the remainder masked as either dead or noisy [17].
3.4 Fiber Hodoscopes
The calorimeter (Section 3.5 below) is designed as thin as possible to increase the geometric acceptance.
The trajectory reconstruction lever arm is lengthened by instrumenting the volume above and between the
two graphite targets With fiber hodoscopes [18]. Directly above the upper target are 4 crossed active
layers dubbed 80/81, with each layer comprised of 360 2><2 mm2 scintillating fibers (Saint Gobain BCF-
12MC). Each fiber is polished on both ends and aluminized on one end to increase light signal reaching
the readout end. This also increases the effective attenuation length and makes the fiber signal more
uniform for particles traversing different positions along its length. Fibers are read out on alternate ends
for mechanical convenience. The layer active area is approximately 78x78 cm2, and the readout end of
each fiber is glued to a short length of clear fiber of identical cross section (Saint Gobain BCF-98). The
Clear fibers are routed to square holes in 6 aluminum cookies per side (24 total), Which are mounted on
the end of a rectangular funnel-shaped light-tight enclosure (Fig. 9).

7 g ’1

'< >1:

Hg >1!

E e

h
Figure 9. 80/81 with top cover partially open to show Clear fibers fanning in to HPD cookies.

Each cookie has a readout box With a 73-pixel hybrid photo-diode (Delft Electronics Products BV’s
PPO380BB HPD) mounted to it. Of the 73 pixels, 64 are read out [19] using four 16-channe1 AmpleX
CR-1.4A ASICs, With 30 pixels reading out fibers from the upper layer pair, 30 reading out fibers from
the lower layer pair, and 4 reading out signals from blue light emitting diodes (LEDs). The LED signals
are used to optimize pixel-to-fiber alignment, and in ﬂight for aliveness testing and calibration. 80/81 is
used to aid track reconstruction and to provide supplemental charge identification. Another hodoscope
With one crossed pair of fiber layers, S2 [20], is mounted between the upper and lower targets. The fibers
in this detector are the same type and are read out in a similar manner, but with 3 HPDs per side (12 in
total). In S2, only 3 pixels in each HPD are illuminated by LEDs. Since the targets are shaped as
trapezoids Which become narrower lower down, the active area of S2 is smaller, at 64.6><64.6 cmz, with
shorter scintillating fiber, at 64.6 cm. S2 serves as another source of tracking information and helps
determine if an interaction occurred in the upper target. Two neighboring SO/Sl HPDs and the S2 HPD
below them are powered together by a single DEP PPOlOOBL 12 kV high voltage power supply (HVPS).

"
"10","3.5 Calorimeter and Graphite Targets
With a calorimeter intended to measure the spectra of cosmic—ray nuclei, an energy resolution of 45-50%
is sufficient. The driving concern then becomes collection power, Which is increased by maximizing the
calorimeter area, keeping the thickness to the minimum required to contain the electromagnetic core
generated at the first interaction, and preceding it With a ﬂared low-Z target as a weight-efficient means to
generate showers [10]. In CREAM, two 9.5 cm thick targets With a 300 ﬂare angle are mounted over the
calorimeter (Fig. 10). These targets are comprised of blocks of densified graphite (p = 1.92 g/cm3)
cemented in carbon/epoxy composite cradles. The targets induce nuclear interactions for approximately
half of incident protons and up to 60% of incident Fe nuclei Within the geometric acceptance, allowing the
calorimeter to measure incident energy through the resulting showers. The calorimeter is a sampling
tungsten/scintillating fiber device, With twenty (99.95% pure) tungsten plates 50.1><50.1><0.35 cm3. Each
tungsten plate is followed by a layer of 0.5 mm diameter scintillating fibers, arranged in 50 ribbons, each
10 mm Wide, 503 mm long, and comprised of 19 fibers. This design allows a signal to be sampled
approximately every radiation length (X0), With a sampling fraction of ~0.3%. The small sampling
fraction is sufficient for the multi-TeV showers being measured With the calorimeter, and helps minimize
the stack height, maximizing geometric acceptance. A vertical depth of 20 X0 (less than 10 cm!) provides
sufficient containment of the electromagnetic core of the initial interaction, and contains the shower
maximum for nuclei within the energy range of interest.

‘_ 5‘ ‘ ‘ »/l’_4 .x > ‘\\.\>\‘W_4§;

_ \\\\ '
- * 3h J r: -
n V"" ‘ f. V
T . « ?=-
s, \\\“ ' , ' "" '3’ :73 ~
(4 \W , .
Figure 10. Calorimeter mounted under graphite targets during assembly of the calorimeter module. Shown in the
foreground are the IFO fiber bundles carrying light signals through light-tight wall to a readout box.

The radiation length of tungsten, at 6.76 g/cm2, is comparable to that Of lead (6.37 g/cmz), but With a
density 70% higher, tungsten layers are 37% thinner per X0, again increasing the geometric acceptance.
At the center of each but the top tungsten layer is a 0.9><0.9><500.9 mm3 stainless steel Wire for mechanical
support (needed to sustain the 10g parachute Opening shock at ﬂight termination). At the corners of each
tungsten plate are machined tabs With mounting holes used to bolt the 350 kg stack to an aluminum
honeycomb pallet at the base of the instrument. The ribbons are polished at both ends, aluminized at the
n0n—read0ut end, With neighboring ribbons read out in Opposite directions, all for similar reasons as in the
hodoscopes. The readout end of each fiber ribbon extends only 2 mm past the tungsten (to minimize the
volume in which the calorimeter sampling fraction increases from 0.3% to near 100%), and is glued into a
slot in a UVT acrylic light guide. The light guide design changes its cross section from nearly rectangular
at one end to nearly circular at its other end (Fig. 11a). A bundle of 48 thin (256 um diameter) clear
fibers, jacketed in black polyethylene (Industrial Fiber Optics LG48) is glued into the round end of the

"
"11","light guide, With the other end of the bundle separated into smaller bundles (37+5+1) each read out
separately. This optical division is used in addition to neutral density (ND) filters (Wratten 0.3 OD &
Wratten 0.8 OD, Where OD is short for optical density) to provide low-range, mid-range, and high—range
readouts. Half the ribbons in each layer are mounted on either side of the stainless steel Wire, With each
group wrapped in DuPont black Tedlar for light-tightness, and With ribbons in each layer oriented (With
the steel Wire) perpendicular to those of the nearest layers above and below them, providing 10 layers
read out in one direction alternating With 10 in the other, allowing 3-din1ensiona1 track reconstruction.
The ribbons of the lowest layer are mounted on an aluminum plate With identical shape and dimensions to
those of the tungsten, allowing mechanical clearance for the light guides of the lowest active layer. For
additional light-tightness a black Delrin plastic wall surrounds the calorimeter stack (Fig. 10), With
machined grooves from above and below forming round holes for the jacketed fiber bundles, and With
black GE RTV-103 silicone closing off any gaps in the wall around Where the fiber bundles eXit it. The
thin clear fibers are routed into holes in 40 black Delrin cookies, With each cookie receiving the fibers
from 25 ribbons of one readout direction of one layer (Fig. 11b). The low-range and mid-range fiber
bundles are each routed into one hole per ribbon, and the high-end fiber bundles are collected in groups of
five to reduce the channel count (the high—range readouts are expected to be used only for energy
summation Where segmentation is not important). Each cookie is potted With black epoxy (Appli-Tec
5105) for light tightness and to minimize optical cross-talk, and is mounted onto an aluminum alignment
plate at the top of the readout box.
a b .~
£3 + \
\

Figure 11. Calorimeter fiber ribbons with light mixers & black jacketed Clear fibers (a); and calorimeter cookie (b).
Each readout box (Fig. 12) mounts 10 HPDs powered by two HVPSs (all of the same types as in the
hodoscopes), With readout Circuitry [19] based on a pair of 32-ohanne1 IDEAS VA32HDR2/TA32C ASIC
per HPD. The TA32C portion provides layer-based triggering (Section 3.8.2 below). Each HPD has 64
of its 73 pixels read out, covering the 25 low-range, 25 nlid-range, and 5 high-range readouts of one side
of one layer, 3 LED signals for alignment and in ﬂight calibration, and 6 channels With no optical input to
provide coherent electronic behavior information (e.g. pedestal drift, external RF noise, etc.). HPDs in
the box on the opposite side of the instrument cover the alternate ribbons of the same layers. While the
HPD is linear over a range of 1,000,000:1, more than sufficient for the 200,000:1 range needed for
showers from 1012 eV to 1015 eV, the VA32HDR2 ASICs linear dynamic range is just under 11 bits.
Using three readout ranges (Via the optical division described above), With a sensitivity ratio of ~15:1
between low- and nlid-range, and ~36:1 between mid- and high-range, solves this problem, while
providing sufficient overlap between the ranges for inter-range calibration using the data.

3.6 High Voltage Systems

At typical LDB and ULDB ﬂoat altitudes the atmospheric pressure is in the 2 — 8 mbar range, near the
minimum of the Paschen voltage breakdown curve, Where discharges can occur between nearby points
With as little as 100 V potential difference. Some LDB experiments [4] use pressure vessels to avoid high

"
"12","voltage discharges. Designed for mission durations of over 100 days, it would have been difficult to
maintain the pressure inside such a pressure vessel for CREAM. In addition, the more strict weight limits
expected in ULDB missions guided the CREAM design to avoid the large weight penalty of such an
approach by encapsulating high voltage systems instead. To protect against breakdowns, the HV portions
of the HPDs and HVPSs circuits are potted using Conap EN-4/EN-11, with a sen1i-resistive coating to
prevent surface charge accumulation.
, 2.1-:— F . g 4* ‘A;-‘_‘§""“—r 2;, ; -_\ .
C; ma __ ___‘L .___.. w: _“ ' .
a .5 A , . 2,4 H ” ” A
11‘ Q—ﬁigw’- '..- ,2 ‘
\, 1“ ,,
/ 7 C” [y “1
Figure 12. Calorimeter readout box with 10 HPDs (here covered for protection) & EN-11 HV potting.
In the TCD, the four PMTs on each side of the instrument are supplied by a single Ultravolt potted power
supply (model 4A12-P4-F). The same type power supply is used for the two S3 PMTs. The TCD PMTs
are arranged such that all four on each side of the instrument are roughly gain-matched. Further gain
matching is accomplished with series resistors. Each Ultravolt supply is potted in an aluminum box, with
the board containing the matching series resistors potted in a separate box. The boxes and PMT voltage
dividers are all primed with 311 primer and then potted with Emerson and Cuming Stycast 4640 White
sealant with Catalyst 50. Extensive vacuum testing was performed for each circuit prior to ﬂight, with no
failures attributable to operation in the near-vacuum at ﬂoat altitude. High-voltage vacuum-safe Reynolds
coaxial cable (Type L) is used for all interconnections. The TRD and CD high voltage is provided by
three Ultravolt 2a2a-p20 (0-2kV, 20W) supplies, one for the top TRD module, one for the bottom, and
one for the CD. Each is potted in an aluminum box with the same materials as the TCD HV supplies. The
resulting units were tested under vacuum for over 30 days, assuring there would be no problems with
these units during ﬂight. The TRD high voltage was set to 1.4~1.5 kV throughout the ﬂight.
3.7 Data Sparsification
The CREAM instrument has 2560 calorimeter electronic channels, 2304 hodoscope electronic channels,
2912 SCD electronic channels, 144 TCD channels, 1024 TRD channels, and 8 CD channels, for a total of
8952 channels. With a trigger rate of ~30 Hz, sending 16 bits for each of these channels through the
telemetry link for each event would require a bandwidth of nearly 4.3 Mbps. Using a high gain antenna
in conjunction with the NASA Telemetry Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), CREAM has a
bandwidth of 85 kbps available, of which 35 kbps is reserved for playback of archived data when the
payload resumes telemetry after an outage, and 10% of the bandwidth is used for packet management. It
is clear that the data rate must be reduced significantly to fit through the link. Since most particles
traverse the TRD, TCD, CD, and SCD before interacting, and since the density of the tungsten keeps the
lateral shower profile to within ~5 ribbons per layer for interacting particles, nearly all channels will only
contain pedestal readings in most events. By using several algorithms (allowing thresholds to be set per
channel as the channel’s pedestal mean plus a constant, or its pedestal mean plus a multiple of its RMS

"
"13","Width) in both hardware and software, the data stream is reduced to fit all of the (~0.3 HZ) high energy
shower events (see calorimeter trigger in Section 3.8.2), and up to 1/10 of the (~30 HZ) non—interacting
high-Z events (see high—Z trigger in Section 3.8.3) in the available bandwidth. The remaining high—Z
events are written by the science ﬂight computer (SFC, see Section 3.12) to a 43 GB ﬂash drive, retrieved
following the ﬂight.

3.7.1 Calorimeter Module Data Sparsification

The three calorimeter module data sparsification boards, located near and powered by the SFC, perform
two main functions for the nearly 7800 channels of the module — data collection and data sparsification.
Event processing begins upon receipt of a signal from the trigger system or an external source. A
programmable time delayed pulse is forwarded to the calorimeter and hodoscope HPD boxes, to activate
the hold circuit Within the ASICs of the readout systems. Additional delay time is added on the ASIC
boards to match the specific peaking time of each ASIC. The data collection phase requires the
generation of all timing signals needed to operate the analog output multiplexers Within the ASICs, and
the serial ADCs. The serial data from the ADCs is temporarily stored in serial-in/parallel-out shift
registers, implemented in Actel field programmable gate arrays (FPGA). All ADCs controlled by a
particular sparsification board are operated simultaneously. At the end of each conversion cycle, the
sparsification process transfers all significant data to dual-port memories to be presented to the SFC.
Each HPD pixel has a unique address as determined by the ASIC channel number and ADC number. The
sparsification process sequences through each channel immediately after the A/D conversion, and
compares the digital value stored in the shift register With a corresponding sparsification threshold for that
channel using a simple magnitude comparator. If the data exceeds the threshold (by 5 counts for
calorimeter, 10 for hodoscope, or 15 for SCD) the data and corresponding address are written to the dual
port memory, and the memory address counter is incremented; otherwise nothing is written to memory
and the next channel is evaluated. The sparsification threshold values are also stored in dual-port memory
so they can be updated by the SFC as often as required. At the end of the cycle the total number of
channels written to memory is stored in a 16 bit latch. This number, along With a unique 32 bit event
number is written to the beginning of the memory buffer, and the buffers are swapped so the new one
becomes available to the SFC. The data record consists of a number representing the total number of
channels written to memory, a 32 bit event number, and a series of 32 bit data points, each consisting of
16 bits of ADC data and a 16 bit address. The sparsification boards provide trigger-disable outputs to the
Master Trigger board to indicate a conversion is in process and triggers are not accepted. An U0 port is
used to indicate to the computer When new data is available, and for the computer to acknowledge When it
is finished reading the data. Sparsification thresholds are automatically updated (within commandable
limits) by the computer. The threshold of each channel is determined by one of two algorithms, set by
command to the one judged to best fit its behavior. The first algorithm checks the pedestal mean and
RMS width of each channel periodically (every 5 minutes in ﬂight), and sets the threshold to a
commandable multiple of the pedestal RMS width above the mean pedestal. The alternate algorithm sets
the threshold to a commandable number of ADC units above the mean pedestal value. These values are
stored in a dual port memory chip physically located on a PC-104 interface board (Section 3.12 below).
The memory sections are physically split between the two boards in this manner such that only data is
presented across the interface, Without any fast signals or edge dependent signals at the interface. The
sparsification boards accept commands from the command processor, including hold circuit delay time,
sparsification on/off, calibration mode on/off, and ASIC multiplex channel selection while in calibration
mode.

3.7.2 TCD Data Sparsification

Each electronics unit reads out two neighboring PMTs using 16 channels (8 ADC and 8 TDC). Including
the electronics for the S3 detector, 72 ADC channels and 72 TDC channels are read for each event, for a

"
"14","total of 144 channels. TDC channels Without a valid bit (generated When the threshold for that channel is
crossed) are not stored. Also, TDC and ADC channels With values below a set cut Off are not stored, With
the cut Off set just above pedestals. The remaining channels are packed into a variable-length data
structure and stored.
3.7.3 TRD Data Sparsification
There are 512 tubes in the TRD, each With two 8-bit numbers recording the signal amplitude in a high-
gain and a (x12 lower) low-gain channel. Only signals with sufficiently large amplitudes are recorded
onto the onboard ﬂash drive. A subset (~10%) of the TRD data is sent through the telemetry downlink to
verify data quality during the ﬂight. The signals to be recorded are identified by a hardware system
Which only passes through signals greater than the pedestal mean value plus a fixed number of ADC
counts (set at 3 for ﬂight). The pedestals 0f the TRD are determined every 5 minutes during the ﬂight
With a separate pedestal cycle. In ﬂight, the pedestal variance in the TRD over that 5 minute period was
typically < 1 count.
3.8 Trigger System
TWO classes of events are of interest for CREAM: high—energy shower events, regardless of the incident
particle charge, and events With high—charge incident nuclei, whether or not they interacted and generated
a shower in the calorimeter. The trigger system (Fig. 13), designed to initiate data collection for both is
comprised of a Master Trigger, With inputs from the two detector trigger systems, calorimeter trigger and
TCD trigger. The calorimeter trigger is designed for high energy shower events, While the TCD trigger is
designed for events in Which a high-charge nucleus traverses the TCD/TRD.

DataReadout IIIIIE ........... TriggerPath

— Data Path
TCD/TRD - TCD/TRD . _ , _ ,
Module Trigger 3‘ nght Path
/ ,X Fast Master Trigger &
. ‘ . Event Counter To SF C
Calorimeter Calorimeter .3 .
' 5 I Prescaler Settings
E from Command System
Calorimeter ' ' ' ' ' '1 '------- External Trigger
Data Readout To SFC
Threshold Settings
from Command System
Figure 13. Trigger signal ﬂow.

3.8.1 Master Trigger
The Master Trigger generates the signal initiating data collection from the sub-detectors and the building
of this data into an event record. The Master Trigger accepts inputs from the Calibration System,
calorimeter, and TCD. It provides 8-bit pre—scalers for the calorimeter and TCD to adjust the trigger rates
in ﬂight in steps of approximately 0.5%, allowing separate control over the rate of each trigger type.
Each valid trigger input produces trigger and event number outputs to each of the instrument subsystems,
as well as trigger ﬂags for the SFC to determine Which trigger inputs are active. Each subsystem

"
"15","produces a data record for the SFC, which includes the event number. The SFC uses the event numbers
to verify that all subsystems are providing data from the current event.

The Master Trigger electronics are designed with 74HC series high speed CMOS components, with a
long history in the spacecraft industry. The trigger inputs and outputs are produced with LVDS (Low
Voltage Differential Signaling) circuits, and distributed on twisted, shielded pair cables, to maintain fast
signals with very low radiated emissions. The event number outputs use RS-422 circuits, which are
distributed on twisted pair ribbon cables. The interface to the SFC consists of parallel U0 signals which
are connected to a commercially available PC/ 104 board within the SFC.

3.8.2 Calorimeter Trigger

The calorimeter trigger, built around an Actel antifuse FPGA, requires N consecutive layers (with N set
Via the Command System to be 4, 6, 8, or 10) to be active to generate a high energy shower trigger.
Simulation studies show the high energy shower trigger has an estimated efficiency above 90% for
incident protons above 1 TeV, with a residual efficiency of about 20% at 100 GeV. However, the data
rate after sparsification is low enough for the telemetry bandwidth, even with the high rate of lower
energy particles. Further, this trigger model reduces biases to a minimum, allowing ofﬂine event
selection to carefully remove background events. The calorimeter trigger board accepts the trigger
signals generated from each of the calorimeter HPD boxes, and produces a trigger output to the Master
Trigger whenever the selected consecutive layer requirement is met. The calorimeter HPD boxes provide
40 half—layer signals, which are combined to form 20 layer signals. A layer is considered active if at least
one ribbon’s low energy range (out of 50) registered a signal exceeding a commandable threshold,
typically set at about 60 MeV. The rate for this trigger in ﬂight ranged from 0.2 Hz to 3 Hz, depending
on altitude and threshold setting. In case a malfunction of some portion of the readout system disables the
input from one or more layers, those layers can be bypassed (equivalent to “always on”) to allow
continued triggering. The calorimeter trigger accepts commands from the Command System to modify a
“layer bypass mask” and/ or modify the number of consecutive layers required for the high energy shower
trigger.

3.8.3 TCD Trigger

The TCD trigger system uses a redundant set of coincidences between several PMT signals and the CD
(Fig. 14). High—Z triggers are generated, at a rate between 10 Hz and 30 HZ, when a particle with high
enough charge and energy traverses the TCD and generates a signal in the CD (the threshold for this
trigger was initially set for Z 2 3, but was raised several times in ﬂight to optimize for boron and carbon
nuclei). When a particle of Z 2 1 passes through the TCD, produces a sufficiently high signal in the S3
and a confirming signal from the calorimeter arrives within 100 us, a Low-Z trigger ﬂag is generated.
The eight concentrators used to read out the scintillation counters are arranged such that each unit reads
out two adjacent PMTs (each attached to one end of two neighboring scintillator paddles). A single side
of the TCD is triggered by a logical OR of the four PMTs from that side. The trigger from each side of
the instrument is sent to the TCD trigger board Via a ribbon cable using LVDS logic. The Low-Z trigger
ﬂag is generated when a threshold is crossed on the anode signal of one or more PMTs on at least 3 sides
of the TCD, and the same condition is met for at least one side of S3, and a confirming calorimeter trigger
is generated within 100 us. A High—Z trigger signal is generated when a threshold is exceeded on the
dynode 11 signal of at least one PMT per side, again requiring at least a 3-side coincidence, and the CD
signal exceeds a set threshold, indicating that the incident particle is relativistic. This last condition
reduces the background from the plentiful low energy, high—charge nuclei expected above Antarctica,
where the geo-magnetic cutoff is much lower than at equatorial latitudes. For ground tests with cosmic
muons, the TCD trigger’s High—Z and Low-Z outputs can be swapped to allow triggering on Z = 1
particles that do not generate a shower in the calorimeter.

"
"16","ThrO
ADC TDC
Amp Disc. :’
1 V II
2» lil'J
North
PMTs 3 > ﬁ%
4 > I'II—,
ThrO
ADC TDC
Amp Disc. r, I
1 F ll _3 F_old
2 > #— IC-dence
m3 , ligilllJ |_-
4 > .III—,
ThrO
ADC TDC
”4-) 6.3
- OI‘IC ence
2 > |!iil I
PMTS 3 > .I1l
4 > ﬁII—,
ThrO
Am:DC Dislor, - LoZ Trigger
1 D II |
West 2 ’ ﬁa
PMTs 3 > gal
4 > IIE, - HiZ Trigger
ADC TDC
A>p DI. Thro
1
, lil—)
Figure 14. TCD trigger logic diagram.
3.9 Command System
The Command System is designed to allow individual commands and command scripts to be sent Via
NASA’S Integrated Test and Operations System (ITOS) system. Instrument commands are entered Via a
text-based interface or through a graphical user interface (GUI) to a dedicated Linux workstation in the
Science Operations Center (SOC) at the University Of Maryland (UMD) from Which they are sent to the
Engineering Support Center (ESC) at NASA’S Wallops Flight Facility (WFF) through the internet. The
commands are forwarded to White Sands, NM to be sent up to the payload through TDRSS. Commands
are received by the TDRSS transponder in the Command and Data Module (CDM) Which checks if the
commands are intended for its internal systems. If not, the commands are forwarded to the SFC, Which

"
"17","determines if the commands are to be implemented internally, and if not, forwards them to the Command
System’s Atmel 89S 8252 processor Via a standard RS-232 serial port as ASCII characters. The processor
formats the commands as appropriate, forwarding them to the correct bOX as RS-422 differential signals,
and then sends an acknowledgement to the SFC. A reset signal is included in the command interface,
Which can be activated as a global reset or on a per bOX basis. When the balloon traverses a TDRSS zone
of exclusion (ZOE) and none of the TDRS satellites is in View, a backup link using the Iridium satellite
system can be used for command uplink and/or to down-link a reduced stream (up to 2.4 kbps) 0f
housekeeping data. The Atmel 89S8252 processor is based on the Intel 8051 architecture, providing a
reasonable instruction set, good bit-level instructions, and a Wide variety of development tools. This
device has the additional advantage of internal ﬂash memory, Which is in-Circuit programmable through a
simple serial interface. This quick re—programmability feature greatly reduces development and
debugging effort. Redundant program memory is used to increase reliability by including a provision to
switch the execution memory between internal ﬂash and external erasable programmable read only
memory EPROM (Erasable Programmable Read-Only Memory). This processor is readily available in
industrial temperature range, and is Operated at 3.7 MHZ to keep the power consumption very low.

3.10 Housekeeping System

The Housekeeping System monitors and periodically reports the readings of nearly 400 sensors and rates
to monitor the health of the instrument. The system is built around the same Atmel 89S8252 processor
used in the Command System. In this system too, a provision to switch the execution memory between
internal ﬂash and external EPROM improves reliability and the processor is Operated at 3.7 MHZ to keep
power consumption very low. The Housekeeping System has 256 individual analog inputs With some
channels sub-multiplexed and synchronized With RS-422 control signals to acquire 130 multiplexed
analog signals from the SCD. Housekeeping requests and returned data are communicated to the SFC Via
a standard RS-232 serial port as ASCII Characters. Reporting frequency can be Changed by command,
and was typically set to send a packet every 5 to 10 seconds in ﬂight. The system monitors a total of 96
temperatures, 85 voltage levels, 149 current levels and 12 pressure levels. In addition, housekeeping
packets report the rates of each trigger type from the Master Trigger, the rates of the 40 individual
calorimeter half—layer trigger signals, GPS location from the CDM, the remaining free space on the ﬂash
disk (Section 3.12.1), and the levels of several data buffers in the SFC. Where appropriate (e.g. power
consumption, temperature, voltage and/or currents) each level being monitored is compared to “yellow”
and “red” limits to alert the science shift Operator to any incipient problems and emergency situations,
respectively. By monitoring for changes following commands, the Operator is able to use the
Housekeeping System to verify command execution. The Housekeeping System also includes a pair of
48-bit counters to keep track of cumulative total time and live time.

3.11 Calibration System

To allow correct interpretation of ﬂight data, calibration systems are implemented for the different
detector systems. These use a variety of means to check aliveness, measure the noise in the absence of a
physics signal (pedestal values), and determine the gain of each channel. The TRD and CD use science
event data for calibration, so no dedicated calibration system is implemented for these.

3.11.1 Calorimeter and Hodoscope Calibration System

The calorimeter/hodoscope Calibration System is designed to provide triggers and voltage pulses to
collect pedestal, charge injection and LED ﬂasher data. The rates, pulse amplitude, and pulse width are
all adjustable by command. The frequency is selectable from 1 kHz down to about 0.06 Hz in multiples
of 2. Charge calibration pulses from 0 to 2V are provided by 24 pulsers With 14-bit resolution. Light
pulses are provided by 8 LEDs driven by voltages from 0 to 8V With 14-bit resolution. The pulse Widths

"
"18","are adjustable from ~6OO ms to 5 us. Pedestal runs were collected every 5 minutes in ﬂight to account for
pedestal drift of 12 (12-bit) ADC counts per degree C for the calorimeter and 18 (16-bit) ADC counts per
degree C for the hodoscope, during the diurnal cycle. The mean value and RMS width of the pedestal are
calculated for each channel and used to update the sparsification threshold values using the selected
sparsification algorithms. The pedestal values are included in the data stream to allow Ofﬂine subtraction
of the mean Offset level of each channel. Periodic runs of charge injection events are collected and
included in the data stream to allow Ofﬂine gain calibration of the calorimeter and hodoscope data. The
LED system is used during integration and testing to align the HPD pixels with the fibers carrying the
light signal from the detectors. This is done by rotating and moving either the cookies holding the fibers
(calorimeter) or the HPD boxes (hodoscopes) while ﬂashing the LEDs, and monitoring cross-talk in the
channels surrounding the LED channels. Once the cross-talk around the LEDs is balanced, the alignment
is deemed to be done. In ﬂight, the LEDs were used on occasion to check the aliveness 0f HPDs. The
calorimeter and hodoscope data is compared to sparsification thresholds (Section 3.7) updated based on
the constantly revised pedestal levels. This sparsification is applied to all but 40 calorimeter and 36
hodoscope channels (one per HPD) to allow removal of coherent noise.

3.11.2 SCD Calibration System

The SCD Calibration System is designed to provide charge injection pulses up to 3.2 pC into the SCD
readout system to monitor gains. The system can be used to collect data with no charge input to monitor
pedestal levels. In ﬂight, pedestals were collected every 5 minutes to allow accurate pedestal subtraction
in Ofﬂine data analysis, as pedestal variations due to temperature are about 20 (16-bit) ADC counts per
degree C for most channels. The diurnal variation in sun angle changes the solar ﬂuX 0n the payload,
causing the SCD temperature to vary within a 4C range, translating to an 80 ADC count range. Charge
calibration was carried out every 2 hours, showing stable gain throughout the ﬂight. The SCD data is
compared to sparsification thresholds (Section 3.7) that are updated based on the constantly revised
pedestal levels. Sparsification is applied to all but 26 SCD channels (one per ladder) to allow removal of
coherent noise.

3.11.3 TCD Calibration System

Before ﬂight, the high voltage to each PMT is set to provide a clear muon peak in the ADC output, well
separated from the pedestal. Using information from the CERN beam tests (Section 4.1.3), the TDC
values are set to provide the Low-Z and High—Z triggers described in Section 3.8.3. Flight data were also
examined in near real-time to ensure that signals due to helium nuclei did not “leak into” the High-Z
trigger. The four ADC channels per PMT are designed to overlap for a portion of their sensitive range,
allowing ﬂight data to be used for inter-calibration 0f the gains.

3.12 SFC

The instrument is Operated and monitored Via a central computer, the SFC. The SFC builds data from the
different detector subsystems into a single event record each time the Master Trigger signals a valid event
has occurred. The SFC then splits the event record into packets that it sends to the CDM for archival
and telemetry t0 the ground. Hardware commands are passed through the CDM and SFC t0 the
various modules, with software commands modifying how the SFC operates.

3.12.1 SFC Hardware

The SFC is based on a single—board computer with a PC/ 104 interface. This architecture is chosen based
on past experience of the Columbia Scientific Ballooning Facility’s (CSBF) Science Interface Package

"
"19","(SIP) and the NASA/WFF CDM. It has the advantages of low power consumption and a simple bus
interface for instrument subsystems to integrate with. Although thermal strapping is required on the
computer board, it is relatively easy to build interfaces for this bus that dissipate low enough power to
avoid the need for any special thermal provisions.

Each instrument subsystem has its own PC/ 104 interface card, with the exception of the TCD which
interfaces Via Ethernet, and the Command and Housekeeping modules, both with low enough bandwidths
to be accommodated with standard serial ports. The calorimeter, hodoscopes and SCD each use an
identical custom-designed interface, with sparsification thresholds stored in a dual-port RAM, and a
PC/ 104 interface implemented in an Actel antifuse FPGA. The TRD uses a commercially available
PC/ 104 board, with a PC/ 104 interface implemented in a XilinX Spartan-2 FPGA. The Master Trigger
uses a commercially available parallel interface card, with additional U0 capacity for various single bit
control functions. To provide additional archiving of lower priority data not expected to be sent Via
telemetry, the SFC also has a 43 GB BitMicro E-Disk EIDE solid-state ﬂash drive, mounted on top of the
SFC box. Data from this archive are merged post-ﬂight with telemetered data and those archived in the
CDM to build up the complete set of ﬂight data.

3.12.2 SFC Operating System

The SFC utilizes a RedHat 7.3-based Linux operating system, stripped of unused components, and
consisting of the kernel and the utilities to allow self—hosted development. Real-time extensions to the
Linux kernel were evaluated, but were not needed to maintain the required data-ﬂow or interrupt
handling. The operating system choice was frozen early in the payload development as stability was
deemed significantly more important than software upgrades. The ﬂight operating system, utilities, and
ﬂight software all fit in 256 MB. The operating system and ﬂash drive worked well during the nearly 42
day ﬂight, though the Ethernet switch connecting the TCD, SFC, and CDM did require several reboots.
This latch—up behavior was not observed on the ground and may have been due to single-event upsets at
ﬂoat altitude.

3.12.3 CREAM Data Acquisition (CDAQ) Software and Telemetry

The CDAQ [21, 22] is required to provide a very robust tool for processing commands from the ground
through the CDM, and for consolidating science, calibration and housekeeping events, transferring this
data to the CDM with the necessary error-checking information. As such, the CDAQ is required to
initiate and collect scheduled calibration and housekeeping events, but at the same time react quickly
whenever a command is received from a CDM computer, or a trigger signal is issued by the Master
Trigger. The CDAQ has limited hardware resources given the power and interface constraints that
determine the hardware, and as such its design principles are simplicity, reliability, and ﬂexibility. A
server/client model is adopted as best suited for telemetry of commands and data, with the ground
operations center software set up as the Client, and the SFC set up as the server. Wherever possible, the
number of processes active on the SFC is minimized, with a master process managing all other processes.
Circular ring buffers based on shared memory with semaphore locks allow processes to pass commands
or event data efficiently. Threadng and real-time schemes are adopted for communications with the
CDM to allow efficient and stable long-term function. The communications process also splits up event
records into packets, adding packet management and checksum bits. These packets are further processed
by the CDM, adding another layer of packet management and checksums, and are sent to the ground Via
the TDRSS high gain antenna. To maximize telemetry efficiency, event records are tightly packed and
allowed to cross packet boundaries. On the ground, the process is reversed, with the computers at the
ESC reconstructing the data to match what the CDM received from the SFC and sending it Via the internet
to the SOC at the University of Maryland. There, ground operations computers reconstruct events from
the packets received from the ESC, with a fraction of science events passed to an event monitoring

"
"20","software, and all housekeeping records updating a housekeeping Viewer. Whenever CREAM is in a
TDRSS ZOE, the CDM archives data, playing it back upon the payload’s exiting the ZOE. Such
playback data are recorded to disk but are not used to update any online monitoring, as they are
superceded by later data. Separate processes handle housekeeping, calibration, and event data so that
failure of one process does not interfere with the function of the others. The event data process constantly
monitors the Master Trigger and builds events whenever a trigger signal is issued. Ground operations
machines run remote commanding and GUI processes to allow operators to issue commands to the
instrument systems. To make operations more efficient and reliable, predefined scripts are stored on the
ground operations machines for routine procedures that require dozens of individual commands (e.g.
turning on boxes, starting high voltage ramping, etc.).

Communication between the SFC and the CDM computer is Via a custom UDP (User Datagram Protocol)
Ethernet protocol. Being connectionless, this protocol makes it easier to re—establish communication if
one of the sides loses power temporarily. Information is passed Via fixed length packets, with connection
status packets exchanged in both directions every five seconds asynchronously. This allows the SFC to
determine which of the redundant CDM computers is active and what port it is on, so that the address can
be modified whenever a change is detected (only the SFC UDP port number is specified in advance).
Event and housekeeping data is passed Via 255 byte packets, with 5 of those bytes providing packet
management. Since event record sizes depend on the physics of the event and the settings of the
Sparsification System, ranging from 4 bytes to 64 kB, a packet can hold dozens of event records, or be a
small fraction of an event record. Whenever the SFC sends a data packet, the CDM computer is expected
to send back an acknowledgement packet. Lacking this acknowledgment, the SFC will repeatedly send
the same packet every second until it is acknowledged or 30 attempts have been made. If no
acknowledgement is received after 30 attempts, the SFC drops the connection, pings both CDM
computers, and re—establishes the connection. Once communication resumes, the SFC starts over with the
same packet it attempted to send before. To avoid an infinite loop, a packet will ultimately time out, and
the SFC will proceed to the next packet. In ﬂight, nearly 100% of packets were acknowledged without
retry. Whenever the SFC receives a command packet from the CDM, it checks a CRC2 (Cyclic
Redundancy Check) checksum and sends an acknowledgement packet. Command packets can be either
an 8 byte command or a 1050 byte fragment of an extended command. The SFC communications process
reassembles the 8 fragments of an extended command, providing the capability of egg. updating
sparsification threshold value tables, transferring files to the SFC, etc. Since satellite links occasionally
corrupt packets, the SFC generates a 16-bit CRC for each packet, and includes the least significant bit in
the packet (one of the 5 packet management bits). Such corruption was experienced in ﬂight mostly
during entry into or eXit out of a ZOE. The error checking was nearly perfect, and in fact only 29
telemetered events were corrupted. This constitutes an error rate of less than 10'6 of events, or 10'10 bits,
compared to the requirement of 10'6 bits. These events were later recovered from the CDM archive disks.
3.13 Power System

Fused +31 VDC power is provided by the balloon-craft power system inside the CDM to siX separate
circuits, with separate relays. These power the calorimeter power converter, the hodoscope power
converter, the SCD power converter, the TCD power converter, the TRD power converter and the SFC,
with a total of 379 W.

3.13.1 Calorimeter Module Power Systems

The power systems for the calorimeter, hodoscopes, and SCD each use three Vicor VI-JOO series DC/DC
converters with VI-RAM active output filter modules, to convert the 28i5 V input from the balloon—craft
main power bus to the voltages needed to power their respective detector systems (calorimeter i3.5 V &

"
"21","12 V; hodoscopes i6 V & 12 V; SCD i6.5 V & 12 V), with a total power of 185 W. Common-mode
Choke filtering is used to reduce the conducted emissions on the power system input bus to acceptable
levels. A power control board, mounted over the converters, provides power switching for the control of
the three voltages distributed to the 14 individual boxes. High—side current monitoring is provided for
each voltage distributed to each box. The monitored currents (represented by a voltage) are sent to the
Housekeeping System. The three primary voltage levels are also sent to the Housekeeping System for
monitoring. The control board accepts commands from the Command System to turn on or off the power
to each of the individual boxes through logic circuits. An over-current shutdown function using
comparators to compare to a set of thresholds (set by resistor selection) allows switching circuits off
through the same logic circuits when needed. This protection feature includes a delay override to prevent
spurious shutdown due to fast transient spikes at turn-on or from noise. A power-on reset circuit ensures
that all power to each individual box is switched off when the logic circuits are first powered on.

3.13.2 TCD Power System

The TCD power system mounted on the pallet supplies the various regulated voltages (-2 V, +3.3 V, i5 V
& +12V) needed by the TCD system, with a total power of 110 W. Each voltage is provided by a circuit
board consisting of an industrial grade Vicor DC-DC converter module and a Vicor ripple attenuation
module from the same series as used in the calorimeter module power systems. The input to each board
also contains a resettable fuse and an LC filter.

3.13.3 TRD & CD Power System

The TRD and CD power systems are based on Vicor VI-200 series converters providing +5 V & i12 V
from the main balloon-craft power bus. These Vicor supplies have been used successfully on many
previous balloon payloads and have a high efficiency (above 90% at full load). The TRD/CD power
system is designed to keep power consumption as low as possible. The overall power consumed by the
TRD is ~37 W while the power for the Cherenkov Detector is ~10 W.

3.13.4 SFC Power System

A commercial wide-temperature range PC/ 104 power supply is used to convert the main balloon-craft
power bus 31 VDC to +5 V and +12 V for computer use. The SFC Power System also supplies power to
the Master Trigger and Housekeeping modules.

3.14 Weight and Power

Two major considerations in balloon experiments are the limited weight the balloon can carry to ﬂoat
altitude, and the limited power that can be provided by either batteries or solar arrays. The CREAM
instrument is designed to optimize both the weight and power while collecting high quality data at as high
a rate as possible. The 40 million cubic foot “light” zero pressure balloon used by NASA allows a
suspended weight of up to 2727 kg. After considering the ﬂight train (cables, parachute, etc.), support
systems (power, telemetry, rotator, crush pads, etc.), an instrument weight of about 1143 kg (Table 1)
allows 500 kg of ballast. Such a relatively large ballast weight makes extended ﬂight durations more
likely. The power system is designed to provide sufficient power for extended ﬂights, where the sun
angle could dip low, reducing the solar ﬂuX and the generated power. With a 10 panel solar array, the
power system was able to generate about 1400 W at altitude during the first ﬂight (see below). During
the first few days, about 200 W of excess power was routed to shunt resistors mounted under the legs of
the payload where it was radiated away. As the ﬂight continued, less excess power was generated. The
support systems use an average of about 400 W, with another 379 W used by the instrument (Table 1).
The dimensions in Table 1 are general ones, with the total size being the lateral size of the pallet

"
"22","constituting the base of the instrument support structure, and the total height measured from the top
surface of the pallet to the top of the uppermost detector — the TCD.
———-m
Table 1. Weight, power and dimensions of instrument subsystems.
4 BEAM TEST and FIRST FLIGHT
4.1 Beam Tests
Over the course of the 3 years prior to the first ﬂight, various sub-detectors were exposed to high energy
particle beams at CERN’s Super Proton Synchrotron (SPS) facility. In 2001 a partially populated full
depth calorimeter was tested, along with a one—layer prototype of the TRD. In 2002 a fully instrumented
calorimeter was tested to verify its performance, along with a prototype hodoscope. A prototype SCD
sensor was also exposed that year to validate the design and performance. In 2003, a TCD paddle was
tested along with the hodoscopes (with partial readout). In parallel, the fully instrumented calorimeter
was calibrated. In late 2003, a crossed pair of TCD paddles (with prototype readout electronics), the
calorimeter, hodoscopes, and SCD were all exposed to a beam of A/Z = 2 fragmentation products from an
indium beam with 158 GeV/n momentum. With these beam runs, various detector system designs were
validated, and where needed, design improvements were implemented.
4.1.1 Validating and Calibrating the Calorimeter
To calibrate the calorimeter one needs to deposit known amounts of energy in each of the 1000 fiber
ribbons. Given sufficiently high signals, it is reasonably simple to equalize the response from the 50
ribbons in a given layer, by moving the detector in steps of 1 cm vertically or 1 cm horizontally, such that
a high energy electron beam is centered each time on the center of a different ribbon in each X or Y layer.
Using Monte Carlo simulations of electron showers it is also possible to calculate the energy deposit
expected along the shower core in each layer. This allows one to equalize the ribbon responses between
layers. The calorimeter is designed to measure the energy deposit from showers initiated by nuclei with
energies up to 1015 eV and higher. This is a sampling calorimeter with a sampling fraction of about 0.3%
for minimum ionizing particles, where isotropically incident TeV proton showers initiated in the graphite
targets deposit about 0.2% of their incident energy in the active media. With such low sampling, and with
electron test beam energies of 150 GeV or less, only 8 to 10 layers around the shower maximum register
enough scintillation to allow calibration. To address this, the calibration scan was carried out in three sets
of runs. In the first set, intended to calibrate the center 10 layers, the calorimeter and graphite targets
were positioned horizontally in the beam, simulating vertically incident particles. In the second set, 5
radiation lengths of lead were placed in the beam immediately before the graphite targets, thereby moving
the shower maximum up and allowing the first 4 layers to be calibrated. Following that, the experiment
was rotated such that the beam was incident through the aluminum honeycomb pallet and the bottom of
the calorimeter, to calibrate the bottom 4 layers. In this orientation, the same 5 radiation lengths of lead
used in the second run would be insufficient, since unlike the top of the calorimeter, where a tungsten
plate precedes the first active layer, the bottom calorimeter plate is made of aluminum. In addition, the 1
radiation length target in this configuration is behind the calorimeter. Thus 2 radiation lengths of tungsten
were placed in the beam along with the 5 radiation lengths of lead, both just in front of the pallet bottom

"
"23","surface. Following this calibration, the data were compared to simulated 150 GeV electrons (Fig. 15)
showing excellent agreement [23]. Inter-calibrating between the 10w- and mid-energy ranges, and
between the mid- and high—energy ranges requires very high energy particles, which are beyond the range
of test beams available at this time. However, this inter-calibration can be carried out with ﬂight data by
comparing the signals from two ranges of the same ribbon generated by the same shower. Using only
those cases where both ranges register significant signals, but where neither range saturates, one can
extract the gain constant between the two ranges.
.2250 II
g I
d)
3200 l
d)
.D
E
z
150 1
100
I ..
50
+ - _
.. . . -I—l Ina _ _
900 400 500 600 700 800 900 1 000 1 1 00
Energy (MeV)
Figure 15. Energy deposited in calorimeter by 150 GeV electrons — data (markers) and simulation (histogram).
4.1.2 Validating the SCD
In November 2003 the SCD was exposed to a beam of (A/Z = 2) nuclear fragments generated from a 158
GeV/n indium beam incident on a thin target at CERN [24]. The beam was collimated to hit only one
pixel at a time (less than 2 cmz), and the SCD was moved up/down and left/right with respect to the beam
to expose different sensors to the beam. The results (Figs. 16, 17) show clear separation of all peaks from
Z = 2 to well above Z = 28, with a charge resolution of < 0.2e based on a Landau fit of the He data.
314000 + g 90
E1 2000 + (a) E 30 H (b)
é10000 + g 60:1
g sooo w 3 503 1 H1 1131+
6000 + 4° 31 +11 1. +51 .1 1
4000 ﬂ 1 + 1.1 3’1 1. 11
1+_5 1_3 2 2_2 2_4 2.6 2.8 3 22.5 23 23.5 2424525 25526 265 ””27 27.5
ZSCD ZSCD
Figure 16: Distribution and Landau ﬁt of measured SCD Charge for events from indium beam fragments at CERN
with Z = 2 (a) and 23 S Z S 27 (b). The resolution achieved exceeds the required 0.2e for helium and 0.3e for Fe.

"
"24",".0
5wmwgmmémmmammémmammm
05 5 1o 15 20 25
Z
Figure 17. SCD reconstructed Charge vs. actual Charge showing excellent linearity beyond Z = 26.
4.1.3 Validating the TCD
Components of the TCD were tested at CERN in the same A/Z = 2 beam as the SCD. The TCD
components in the test consisted of two crossed scintillation counters and prototype ﬂight electronics,
including a dedicated computer running “Clinux, a trigger board, four TDC boards, and two peak detector
(ADC) boards. This allowed each tube to be instrumented with two TDCs and two ADCs, all read out Via
Ethernet. Excellent charge resolution was Obtained from the ADC readouts, ranging from about 0.2e for
0 nuclei to about 0.35e for Fe nuclei, as shown in Fig. 18.
C .
9
LL] He
“5 a
g 104 g
2 2%
% Li B C
10 3 ﬂ E N 0 Ne Mg
- i- m g. F Na Al
.g g :5 5 g . Si P
‘x‘éﬁ ‘4 §.'- S
Sé/fg’gé- Ag; ‘ Cl ArK
102 52% g a g Ca Ti
'2’ :2; ‘x‘ ”.2 . s v
'5’ » ‘ “ 1/ {$.25
Lg"" 7~ 1. age“ NF“
.5’ _’ ‘ . 7521: off 5’}; 53:?“ t ’ '
‘0 a 2 {W3 ,..= ,
i- - q"" /. 'éagie.
7: ’ ,o 3”,»? #‘ﬁdihu ,
1 IE”; _._. (g; ’...;.:z?§fr;;. .Mas. .
o 5 10 15 20 25 30
Measured Charge (e)
Figure 18: Distribution of measured TCD Charge for events from A/Z = 2 nuclear fragments at CERN.

"
"25","4.1.4 Validating the TRD
A prototype of the TRD was exposed to accelerator beams at CERN in 2001. Part Of the purpose of this
calibration was to Optimize the foam material used as a radiator upstream 0n the xenon-filled tubes. The
combination of tube, gas and wire parameters provides a signal clearing time Of ~500 ns well matched to
the AmpleX 1.5 ASIC shaping time. For the beam test an auxiliary tracking detector was built to identify
the particle location with an accuracy of ~100 um using two small multi-wire chambers with charge
division readout in the direction perpendicular to the sense wires. These were instrumented with the same
AmpleX-based systems used for the TRD tubes. The assembly was exposed to a range of beam momenta,
and the calorimeter could be used for particle tagging. The Lorentz factors associated with electrons,
muons, pions and protons were used to find the response over a range of values. In addition, the plastic
foam radiator was removed from the test setup for some of the runs and replaced with an equivalent
thickness of solid plastic to provide a “no-TR” response. The results of these measurements are shown in
Fig. 19, where they are used to confirm a GEANT4 TR simulation of the device (upper and lower curves).
The markers show measurements for protons (squares), muons/pions (inverted triangles) and electrons
(triangles). The upper curve, representing the Ethafoam configuration ultimately used in the ﬂight TRD,
shows that the TR signal becomes significant above Lorentz factors of ~1000. The lower curve,
representing the solid plastic configuration, shows the “no-TR” response, consisting essentially of the
relativistic rise of ionization in the xenon gas.
350_ - . i . . < , . '_
300 5 ”M ~
A - Radiator -
g ; J :
: 250 _— ,- “
2 Q ,-’ ;
.9 200 _ __
w - _; -
n : ,r _ ;‘
E .g-._-.,,.,£1529512r ;
100 _, kJ/‘J- i
50 __— —___
00 1 2 a 4 5
Log1o(Lorentz Factor)
Figure 19. Prototype TRD signal in beam test (markers) vs. simulation (curves).
4.2 First LDB Flight
CREAM was first launched from Williams Field, outside McMurdO Station Antarctica on December 16,
2004, carried by a zerO-pressure balloon and remained aloft for a record breaking 41 days 21 hours and 36
minutes, circumnavigating the South Pole three times. During this ﬂight CREAM recorded 48.9 GB of
data, including over 43,000,000 high—Z events, over 500,000 high energy shower events (e.g. Fig. 20)
with several above 100 TeV, and over 2,000,000 calibration and housekeeping records. The detector
performed as expected, and preliminary data analysis shows great promise [25 and references therein]. A
second CREAM ﬂight was launched a year later to the day collecting data for nearly 28 days. In both
ﬂights data were received, stored and a subset was processed for quick—look analysis at the SOC. The
SOC monitored the health of the instrument through housekeeping sensor data and generated the
commands necessary to trim and maintain Optimum science output from the package.

"
"26","— ...... .. _ _ ___ _;_—— -- ---—_::_
f— in... -. -. -. - l== :: i=i-I
‘ f ‘_-‘-;.;5:_ I-=” LiiI-I
— | |||I| I
Figure 20. Online monitoring Event Display of a typical high energy shower event from the 2004/05 ﬂight.
5 CONCLUSIONS
The CREAM experiment was designed to ﬂy as a balloon payload under NASA science balloons (LDB
and ULDB), directly measuring high energy cosmic-ray nuclei from hydrogen to iron, in the energy range
from about 1 TeV to over 1000 TeV. The experiment was optimized to enable as large a geometric factor
and ﬂight duration as possible given the constraints of the available balloon technology. CREAM is
unique in that it employs redundant measurements of both energy and charge of the incident nuclei. As
part Of the extensive development program, the CREAM sub-detectors were tested and calibrated at
CERN’s SPS accelerator facility, proving that the detectors work as designed, and showing that the
simulation correctly describes them, allowing extrapolation to the energy range of interest. With a total of
70 days ﬂight duration for the two ﬂights [26], the CREAM program now has produced what is arguably
the largest and most exciting set of data for directly measured high energy cosmic—ray nuclei, with
energies as low as 10 GeV and up to well over 100 TeV. With further ﬂights planned for these detector
suites after refurbishment, the CREAM data set is expected to grow even more interesting in the coming
years.

"
"27","6 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The work reported in this paper was funded by NASA research grants to the University Of Maryland, the

University Of Chicago, Penn State University, and the Ohio State University, by the Korean Ministry Of

Science and Technology in Korea, and by INFN in Italy. The authors Wish to acknowledge NASA/WFF

for provision and Operation of ﬂight support systems; Art Ruitberg, Suong Le, and Curtis Dunsmore 0f

NASA/GSFC, and Carlos Urdiales of Southwest Research Institute for assistance With HV design and

potting; CERN for provision of excellent accelerator beams; the Fermi National Accelerator Lab Thin

Films Group for high quality polishing and aluminization of Optical elements; and Columbia Scientific

Ballooning Facility, National Science Foundation’s Office Of Polar Programs, and Raytheon Polar

Services Company for outstanding support of launch, ﬂight and recovery Operations in Antarctica. The

TCD group acknowledges engineering contributions made by L. Engel, J . Passaneau and S. Posey. The

TRD group acknowledges engineering contributions made by R. Northrop and GA. Kelderhouse. The

SCD group acknowledges contributions made by W. Han, H.J. Hyun, H]. Kim, M.Y. Kim, KW. Min, H.

Park and KL Seon. The S2 group acknowledges engineering contributions made by A. Basti.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[1] PO. Lagage & C.J. Cesarsky: Astronomy & Astrophysics 118, (1983) 223.

[2] H. Schieler et al. (KASKADE Collaboration), Proc. of SPIE, Particle Astrophysics Instrumentation,
V01. 4858, (2003) 41.

[3] T. Antoni et al. (KASKADE Collaboration): Astroparticle Physics 24, (2005) 1.

[4] T.G. Guzik et al. (ATIC Collaboration), The ATIC long duration balloon project, in The Next
Generation in Scientiﬁc Ballooning, Advances in Space Research 33/10, (2004) 1763.

[5] K. Asakimori et al. (J ACEE Collaboration), Cosmic Ray Proton and Helium Spectra - Results from
the JACEE Experiment, Astrophysical J ournal 502, (1998) 278.

[6] V.A. Derbina et al. (RUNJOB Collaboration), Cosmic-ray spectra and composition in the energy
range of 10-1000 TeV per particle Obtained by the RUNJOB experiment, Astrophysical J ournal 628,
(2005) L41.

[7] D. Muller et al. (TRACER Collaboration), Measurements With TRACER: discussion of results and
future prospects, Proc. 29th ICRC, Pune, India, 3, (2005) 89.

[8] S.P. Wakely et al. (CREAM Collaboration), First measurements of secondary nuclei at high energy
with CREAM, Advances in Space Research, (2007) in press.

[9] O. Ganel et al. (CREAM Collaboration), Cosmic Ray Energetics And Mass (CREAM): Calibrating a
Cosmic Ray Calorimeter, Proc. 10th International Conference on Calorimetry in Particle Physics,
Pasadena, CA, (2002) 133.

[10] O. Ganel et 211., A Guide for ACCESS Design Considerations, Proc. STAIF - 1999, AIP Vol. 458,
(1999) 272.

[11] ES. Seo et al. (ATIC collaboration), The Advanced Thin Ionization Calorimeter (ATIC)

Experiment: Expected Performance, in Gamma-Ray and Cosmic Ray detectors, Techniques, and
M issions, Proc. SPIE International Symposium on Optical Science, Engineering, and Instrumentation,
V01. 2806, (1996) 134.

[12] J .J . Beatty et al. (CREAM collaboration), The Cosmic Ray Energetics and Mass (CREAM)
Experiment Timing Charge Detector, Proc. SPIE, Particle Astrophysics Instrumentation, V01. 4858,
(2003) 248.

[13] ES. Seo et al. (CREAM Collaboration), Cosmic-ray energetics and mass (CREAM) balloon project,
Advances in Space Research 33/10, (2004) 1777.

[14] P.J. Boyle, S.P. Swordy and S.P. Wakely, Comparison Of a transition radiation detector response
with numerical simulations, Proc. 28th ICRC, Tsukuba, J apan, (2003) 2233.

[15] I.H. Park et al. (CREAM collaboration), Silicon charge detector for the CREAM experiment, Nucl.

"
"28","Instr. & Meth. A570, (2007) 286.

[16] J .H. Adams Jr. et 211., CR-1 chip: custom VLSI Circuitry for cosmic—rays, Proc. 26th ICRC, Salt Lake
City, Utah, 5, (1999) 69.

[17] NH. Park et 211. (CREAM Collaboration), The First Flight Of the CREAM Silicon Charge Detector,
JKPS 49/2, (2006) 815.

[18] Y.S. Yoon et 211. (CREAM collaboration), Design and Tests of the Scintillating Fiber Hodoscopes in
the CREAM Instrument, Proc. 29th ICRC, Pune, India, 3, (2005) 433.

[19] M.H. Lee et 211., Electronics for the CREAM calorimeter 21nd hodoscopes, Proc. 29th ICRC, Pune, 3,
(2005) 409.

[20] P.S. Marrocchesi et 211. (CREAM collaboration), Construction and test of 21 scintillator hodoscope for
the CREAM experiment, Nucl. Phys. B — Proc. Suppl. 134, (2004) 75.

[21] S.Y. Zinn et 211. (CREAM collaboration), The Data Acquisition Software System Of the 2004/05
CREAM Experiment, Proc. 29th ICRC, Pune, India, 3, (2005) 437.

[22] S.Y. Zinn et 211. (CREAM collaboration), Design, Implementation, and Performance Of CREAM Data
Acquisition Software, Nuclear Physics B (Proc. Suppl.) 150, (2006) 304.

[23] M.H. Lee et 211., The CREAM Calorimeter: Performance In Tests and Flights, Proc. 12th International
Conference on Calorimetry in High Energy Physics, Chicago, IL, AIP Conference Proceeding 867,
(2006) 167.

[24] I.H. Park et 211., Heavy ion be21mtest results of the silicon charge detector for the CREAM cosmic ray
balloon mission, Nucl. Instr. & Meth. A535, (2004) 158.

[25] ES. SeO et 211. (CREAM collaboration), The Record Breaking 42-day Balloon Flight of CREAM,
Proc. 29th ICRC, Pune, India, 3, (2005) 101.

[26] ES. Seo et 211. (CREAM collaboration), CREAM: 70 days Of ﬂight from 2 launches in Antarctica,
Advances in Space Research, (2007) in press.

"
