"","x"
"1","COPYRIGHT
. 2002-01 -2282
Habitat Development In Support of Small Scale Biological and *
Biochemical Space Experiments
Carla Goulart, Mark Rupert, Sherry Woodard and Alex Hoehn
BioServe Space Technologies
Copyright © 2002 Society of Automotive Engineers, lnc.
ABSTRACT - Weaver spider web—building behavior, and the
observation of ﬁber growth from crystals. The
BioServe Space Technologies is developing a set of experiments were proposed by students from the USA,
habitats which will support various biological specimens Liechtenstein. Japan. China. Australia. and Israel.
and one biochemical experiment. The habitats are being respectively.
developed to support a spaceﬂight educational payload
called Space Technology and Research Students From a hardware point of view, the development process
(STARS). The STARS program entrusts high school of the STARS payload has much broader application
students with the development and design of their own than just the educational focus. These small habitats
spaceflight experiments. Experiments are solicited from pose many challenges in meeting requirements for life
various countries and primarily focus on the life sciences. support and science success. Each sample must have
Once selected, all experiments must be accommodated the necessary containment levels as per NASA safety.
within one middeck locker sized payload, the Each sample must have adequate gas exchange for
Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus, respiration and moisture control, as well as pressure
equilibrium during cabin decompression. In each case,
INTRODUCTION video and still pictures of the specimens, as well as
environmental data collection are required for the real-
The STARS program was designed by SpaceHab Inc. to time science analysis and mission-parailel ground
encourage students at the high school level from all parts controls. The video requirement leads to issues With
of the world to participate in conducting research in proper lighting, material selection *0 reduce glare, and
space (www.spacehabﬁom/STARS), Students devise lens selection with appropriate resolution to observe '
proposals on conducting research aboard the US Space spider WBbS, Of observe animal behavior. in addition to
Shuttle in the Spacel-lab module and then submit those these requirements, the habitats must be small and
ideas for selection. The first STARS mission was in the easily manufactured in order to be used in several
summer of 1999 on Space Shuttle mission STS-93. On classrooms for QFOUhd control experiments. This paper
STS-93, students evaluated the predatory behavior of details the requirements, the design process and
ladybugs in an aphid-infested wheat stand, root growth of manufacturing, and mission operations aspects of these
sweet potato cuttings’ and the growth cyc|e of Painted miniature habitats, together Wlth detailed anaIYSiS, trade-
Lady butterflies [Poynter et al., 2001]. The next STARS offs. and design guidelines,-
flight is scheduled for the summer of 2002 aboard STS-
107. For the STS-107 mission, BioServe’s Isothermal DEFINING THE REQUIREMENTS
Containment Module (lCM, a life sciences incubator) will
accommodate five different life sciences experiments, OVERVlEW
and one crystal growth experiment. The lCM provides a
temperature-controlled volume to house the experiments The first task was to collect the requirements from each
in, as well as imaging equipment, sensor and parameter of the individual experiments, compile them, and then
monitoring, automated day/night cycle, and automated determine which ones would be addressed by the
activations and/or terminations where needed. The existing lCM incubator capabilities, and Wthh ones
experiments require individual habitats, sensors, and WOUld be addressed by the design 01‘ the individual
cameras needed to collect data. The STS-107 habitats.
experiments will investigate the tunneling and social
behavior of Harvester Ants, the wood-boring capabilities The student experiment teams were asked to determine
of Carpenter Bees, the developmental cycle of Medaka the requirements for temperature, humidity, lighting, 935
Fish from eggs to fry, the Chinese silkworm lifecycle, Orb exchange, food supply. geometric configuration,

"
"2","materials, imaging, and activations or deactivations, and use of gel also allowed for good viewing of tunnel
anything else needed to provide life support or science formation. The ants would have to be separated from
support for their experiment. Temperature and humidity the gel until orbit was reached in order to prevent
were to be defined in terms of ideal value and acceptable tunneling while still in 19. Use of the gel as the tunneling
value range. Thermal gradient tolerances and effects medium would have to be addressed in the design of the
were also to be identified. Gas exchange was assumed habitat. Because ants can survive without food and
critical for all but the Crystal Fiber Growth experiment water for up to 5 days and remain viable, this would not
since they involved living specimens. Lighting pose a problem. Ants do well in a wide range of
requirements were to be defined in terms of intensity, temperatures, but ideally they should be kept at 23 +/- 2
wavelength, direction, and cycle. Other considerations °C and 75%+/-20% relative humidity. Temperature of
included launch condition and orientation, specimen the area surrounding the experiment habitat should be
viability, contamination, habitat dimensions, and any measured. No specification as to light cycle was made,
science-specific requirements. The design team also except to have some period of normal daytime and
had to address NASA safety concerns. These included nighttime. in addition to these life support requirements,
proper levels of containment, absence of sharp edges on in order to accomplish the necessary science, video
any surfaces, no shock-hazards, and safe touch images must be provided throughout the mission.
temperatures. Any potential problem with odor also had imaging, therefore, must have sufficient resolution, depth
to be addressed. of field, and field of view, to observe ant behavior, and to
be able to distinguish tunnels clearly.
For imaging, the particular factors that had to be
examined were resolution, field of view, depth of ﬁeld, Bee Habitat
contrast, timing, duration, and frequency. These criteria .
had to be accounted for in both the video and in the still The Spice Bees in Space experiment will be conducted
images. Each experiment also had to determine if any by Gymnasium Liechtenstein in Vaduz, Liechtenstein.
activation or deactivation stages were necessary, and if The purpose of this experiment is to investigate
so, should they be automated, or manual? Time of carpenter bee wood-boring behavior and observe
activation and /or deactivation also had to be defined. differences in characteristics of space-built versus
Additionally, each experimentteam was asked to identity ground-built nests. Post-flight, development of young
any need for sample handling either to collect samples, larvae and pupae will also be examined. For
change samples, or to conduct direct observation or requirements, sufficient gas exchange must be provided
analysis of samples. If any of these applied, what were to maintain the health of the bees, and the experiment
the time constraints and methods? volume must be suitable for 4-6 Carpenter bees and 2
each pupae and larvae. Carpenter bees were chosen
Last, each team had to deﬁne the need for sensors, because of their unique characteristic of building nests in
either to be used as an active control, or simply for data wood by “boring tunnels"" into the wood. They are also
collection. readily available in the US, and they are a relatively large
species so they are easily visible by camera. A food and
HABITAT REQUIREMENTS water source must be accessible to the bees at all times.
The food mixture must remain moist throughout the
Ant Habitat mission. The temperature must be kept at 23 +/- 2 °C to
maintain health and normal behavior. Temperature of
The first habitat houses the Ants in Space experiment, the area surrounding the experiment habitat should be
conducted by George W Fowler High School students in measured. Relative humidity should be maintained at ,
Syracuse, NY. The goal of the ant experiment is to 75%+/-20%. A natural light cycle should be used. Two
observe differences in ant “tunneling"" and social distinct areas must be included in the habitat design, one
behavior in microgravity. The students determined that “free” area, to facilitate the bees fluttering their wings,
the experiment volume must be suitable for 15-25 and a second area that contains the wood block for nest-
Harvester ants. Harvester ants were chosen because building. Video images must be of suitable quality to
they are a hardy species, readily available by a supplier, view and determine bee activity, and observe changes in
and because they are a relatively large species and nest over time. It is also critical to “see"" bee activity
easily visible by camera. The ants need food and a inside the wood nest.
source of water accessible to them at all times while on
orbit. Additionally, a means must be provided to prevent A_gueﬂgﬁabjtat
the spread of fungus in the habitat, which ants naturally
carry in their bodies. To address all of the above needs A student at Oohanomizu University in Tokyo, Japan
and provide both a source of food, water, and prevent designed the Flight of the Medaka Fish experiment. The
infection, the students determined that a gel mixture experiment is designed to examine the development and
(provided by Assaf Gun, Plant Cell Technology, behavior of Medaka fish embryos and fry in microgravity.
Camden, NJ) made up of nutrients and containing a Life support for the eggs and fry is provided by a self-
fungicide would be used as the tunneling medium. The contained ecostystem developed by Paragon Space

"
"3","Development Corporation of Tucson, AZ [Poynter etal., from the Royal Melbourne 200 will be used. This
2001; MacCaIlum et al., 2000]. Therefore, the habitat species was chosen because of its ability to build perfect
designed to house the Medaka experiment need only orb webs. it is non-poisonous, and has a placid nature.
provide light, temperature control, and imaging Spiders of about 5mm body size will be flown and will
capabilities. The habitat must be a sealed, watertight readily build a web in a volume of approximately 400 cm3
compartment with a volume of 800 — 900 ml. In order to with one side being 150m minimum in length. Anchor
keep the ecosystem healthy and balanced, an .intemal material for the spider to attach its web to must be
habitat temperature must be maintained ideally at 25 +/- included in the habitat. This material must be affixed
2 °C. Lower than this temperature decreases hatch rate. with non-toxio adhesive. There will be one primary
29°C or higher changes the internal dynamics of the life- spider which should have ‘free range’ of the entire
supporting ecosystem inside the habitat. The light must habitat, and accommodations for seven back~up spiders
be of sufficient intensity for photosynthesis. The light which can be kept separate from the ‘free range’ area.
cycle should be a natural combination of day/night time. The back—up spider containers must not be shaded, to
Video images must be of suitable resolution, field of ailowfor viewing by the astronaut in the case where the
view, and depth of field to view fry activity, and to main spider dies or fails to weave a web. The primary
observe the try hatching. Temperature of the area spider must have access to water at all times. The food
surrounding the experiment habitat should be measured will be in the form of time-released fruit flies. Fruit ﬂy
so as to ensure the internal ecosystem temperature does larvae will be held in an agar gel until they develop and
not exceed 28°C. emerge from the gel. The fruit fly must be able to leave
the agar area and have access to the ‘free range’ area of
§ilkwgrm Habitat the habitat. Temperature should be maintained between
20°C and 28°C. Since the spider will primarily build its
The Silkworm Lifecycle During Space Flight experiment web at night, the habitat should be shielded from any
was designed by the Jingshan School in Beijing, China. stray light during the night cycle. A normal day/night
This experiment‘s goal is to observe the differences in cycle is required, with a source of red light for nighttime
the developmental stages of the silkworm as they web-buiiding viewing. Camera resolution and lighting
develop in microgravity vs. on the ground. A habitat must be such that spider activity can be observed, and
supporting the silkworms must provide sufficient food for clear view of the web is also possible. Web material will
four to six worms for at least 16 days of flight. Also, the be analyzed post-flight for tensile strength, therefore,
habitat should allow sufficient space to mount cocoons some means of collecting web samples during the
prior to launch so that emerging moths can be observed mission must be provided.
during flight. The food source, a mixture of mulberry
leaves and nutrients, must remain moist for the mission Cilﬂgalﬁaﬂen—Hamm
duration to ensure the food won’t become loose or dried
out and unpalatable. The design also must ensure that The Chemical Garden experiment was designed by
the worms cannot hide or become lodged behind the students at the Mortzkin Ort High School in Haifa, lsrael.
food area. Temperature should be maintained at 25°C The students will investigate the mechanism responsible
with atolerance of :t 12°C. The ideal relative humidity is for development of metallic salt crystal fibers in
80% with a range of 75% to 85%. Appropriate relative microgravity. Two types of crystals will be used, calcium
humidity is necessary not only to maintain silkworm chloride, and cobalt chloride. To ensure science
health, but also to prevent fungal growth within the success, redundancy of samples must be provided. The
habitat. Sufficient volume must be provided for the growth chamber should be approximately 10-20 mm in
emerging moths to move about for mating. Due to the diameter and 40-60 mm in height in order to allow for
unpleasant odor of the food, some means of odor control sufficient ﬁber growth. 3 to 6 mm3 cubes of each type of
must be provided. Because young worms require crystal will be used. A mechanism for introducing the
brighter light than older worms, two distinct areas of crystals into a silicate solution to initiate crystal fiber
brightness should be provided within the habitat. Video growth must be provided. Temperature inside each
downiink should be provided during the cocoon-building vessel is not critical, ambient “room-like” temperature will
and emergence stages. be sufficient. The experiment must only be activated
after it reaches microgravity. Therefore, the crystal and
Spider Habitat silicate solution must not come into contact with each
other prior to activation. Fiber growth is expected to
The Astro-spiders experiment was developed by the begin immediately after crystals are introduced into the
Glen Waverely Secondary College in Melbourne, silicate solution, and could last up to several hours.
Australia. This experiment will observe differences in Video images must be of suitable quality to view fiber
web-buiiding and predatory behavior of spiders in growth and must cover the potentially long period of fiber
microgravity. Web material will also be analyzed post- development.
ﬂight. Australian Garden Orb-Weaver spiders acquired

"
"4","MEETING THE REQUIREMENTS V between the habitat and the cooling loops. The humidity
level for each habitat is controlled passively by varying
At the beginning of the design process, the use of the the area of gas exchange membrane used. The
. ICM incubator facility was a given. humidity level within a habitat will equilibrate with the ICM
incubator and Shuttle ambient humidity with enough gas
The ICMvz is a middeck locker inseit [Hoehn et at, exchange surface area. By limiting the surface area
1999]. It is a single, uniform temperature-controlled, where gas exchange is allowed to take place. humidity
incubator facility with interfaces between the NSTS / ISS level within a habitat is passively CONVOHBU-
and the lCM internal, science-speciﬁc components such
as STARS. The ICM provides data acquisition and The habitats will be lighted during the day cycle by cold
control, as well as a uniform thermally controlled cathode fluorescent lamps (CCFLs). Night cycle lighting
environment, for the science complement of the STARS is required for viewing spider activity and 10 orient the
insert. A preportional, Pulse Width Modulator (PWM) medakaﬁsh. This lighting is provided by LEDs — red for
based current controller (MAlN-TEC) controls the the spiders and a single white LED for the ﬁsh-
thermoelectric heat pump of the water coolant system.
The coolant ﬂuid is a mixture of distilled water, and up to The small single~board COIOl video cameras provide
10% ethyl alcohol. high-resolution National Television Standard Color
(NTSC) analog video signals with 480 iines of resolution.
. __ a , These images can be downlinked to Earth as video
. 7- “hﬁ-‘fﬁ'ii’ﬁV ‘ r ‘ §‘y -; signals, or captured on-board by the lCM frame grabber
_ E3 «2. 1?. ' f: . E 5‘ 7 (still images).
""*5 if? 5 ’
a E $7 ‘1 ""f 5;; ‘5‘?” All habitats are installed on a common baseplate that
. - s n a ' t. ' . . serves as the interface with the ICM. The insert was
w >~ - ' » designed as a stand-alone assembly. The need for
better thermal conductivity between the baseplate of the
Figure 1. lCMv2 Incubator, Facepalte Air Inlet, Air Outlet and STARS insert and the ICM bOﬂom 000mg '00P
Computerlnterfaces. necessitated the application of thermal grease between
the two surfaces.
Three electrical connections, for power, data, and video,
are made between the ICM and the STARS insert. Eight
The available experiment volume of the lCM is 15.274” fasteners are installed to secure the insert to the ICM.
wide X 13.500” deep X 7.8” tall, just under one cubic Air circulation fans are located on the lid of the ICM to
foot. This available volume will need to house six allow heat produced by the lamps inside the ICM to be
different habitats, 11 cameras, lighting for each habitat, transferred to the cooled lid. In this location, the fans are
various sensors, air circulation fans, two web sampling also not in the field of view of the cameras.
tools, the wiring harness, and the electronics to control
video, stills, and lighting. The payload can be connected Video Electronics
to the Spacehab Ethernet data and video system for data Mum Habi‘a‘
downlink to Earth, as well as remote commanding, if 6cmms \T' / Silkworm
necessary. The STARS payload operates autonomously ' ,- /
throughout the mission (automatic video downlink, day/ Bee Habitat 9-. _ ,, 41” 5 .
night cycle and temperature control), but requires «’55:;5‘ f 1.‘ “a
minimal crew time for air inlet screen cleaning, activation /:’ i? ’ a
(ant, spider), sampling (spider), and sample rotation for ' f"" ‘ _/
Chemical Garden. Since the payload has data downlink, “[34, rt"" ""3‘? _ ;
. . . Q 5; .3,- ‘._‘ '_ . , Ants
proper function can be venfled on the ground. 17.; - g , .f‘ 5 ~
”3/9 I \
THE HABITATS Spider Habitat ' ' /, "" 4Cameras
Qvervi W Chemical Garden - ,
Based on the defined requirements, each habitat needs 2&9; ifzgggrfgsg’ggfTn‘t’wézz“‘ACl'j‘g-ﬁcpgsbﬁbzaxg 3'9
lighting, Imaging, temperature, ai'id hum'd'ty comm"" .The Chengcal Garden), while Ste Silkwerm habitat is in the back right
temperature 0f the hab‘tats '5 controlled by e'ther comer. Cameras (11x) are mounted on the perimeter of the STARS
isolating the top and/or bottom of the habitat from the insert.
ICM cooling loops or by enhancing thermal conductivity

"
"5","For the basic layout of the pallet, five of the habitats are iiquid-tight level of containment. The Aquatic habitat is a
located down the center of the pallet, back to back with liquid tight, sealed container with two independent levels
the sixth and largest habitat located in the right rear of containment. The Bee, Spider, Ant, and Silkworm
comer. The cameras are placed along the “walls” of the habitats each provide one level of containment. The
pallet, opposite the habitats. Metal powder coated, Chemical Garden and the Aquatic habitat have two
textured btack shrouds helped to reduce reflections of levels otcontainment.
the cameras, electronics, and wiring in the habitats. The
only camera that could not be place directly across from The hydrophobic membrane area and the penetrations
its respective habitat was the camera for the large through the habitat walls are dimensioned such that an
Silkworm habitat. It had to be located on the ﬂoor of the adequate vent rate for an emergency depressurization
insert and far enough away from the habitat that its field and an adequate gas exchange rate for the animals can
of view (FOV) would include the entire habitat. be provided, while keeping the animals contained. Holes
SolidWorks was used to model the habitats and the machined through the habitat wall, and covered with the
cameras with the FOVs of the different lenses. it proved membrane on the outside, are smali enough so that the
invaluable in finding the correct placement for the animals can neither reach, nor potentially damage the
cameras and other hardware. membrane, nor penetrate and escape through the
hydrophobic membrane. To date, none of the
Ag considered animals has ‘attacked’ the membrane, or
“MM“; 7‘ . ix‘f fqgsw-‘b; _m: ‘VSN escaped from any of the habitats. The membranes and
,. '3: §$§§ 9.f,' .m ""'"""":""~'; V§S§I the habitat hole(s) covered by the membrane on the
'3' L 35%;: '_J $ ‘3‘“ -. i. ; ‘ >7 7 75¢) outside of the habitat can be seen on the habitat pictures
,h 3:323; \x $31.5 -- ‘7‘7'5_;_'_ 171:1?) as white circles. The membrane—covered habitat is
% “n‘i: »\ :t ‘11:; ' Q watertight, and acceptance tested before ﬂight to be
f ; 5 t 7 7 ‘5 V 3 : ~\Q\2§C\‘-E§§jj watertight.
t . r: ~ 3‘; .x T“
; vat; ""‘i-té- “: 3N $5., . * ‘43? The Silkworm habitat is the largest habitat, occupying
i. .v—\« x .m ...- .\ a .
~-hx\ 93$“? «- 2:5 . '. s 1. _ 2200 cm. Since crew on-orblt access was not
’ ‘- t i§$ 7;: K .4 - 's ' , necessary, it is located on the back of the pallet. The
5: "" ”WE £239- -- \- : Aquatic habitat (AHAB) is next to silkworms in the back.
3 77,;{3§~ R? 93433: ‘ ‘1‘ It also will not be removed from the insert once installed.
thy; R H?"" “tax; 5 4 When filled with water, it is the heaviest of the habitats.
‘ § 445%}: 5?; ‘3 ""er 7 . ~ Placement on the back of the insert helped to stay within
‘ ‘ """"«uii‘,§'sgg7? $5?” the weight and CG limits imposed on the payload for
——-— x s. i -""- r ‘ flight.
i $.23: :34; ~i§\i""
‘ M Crew access while on-orbit necessitated the use of
latching mechanisms to hold the 4 habitats in front in
Figure 3. Model of habitats and the cameras demonstrating the place while the ICM is open. The lid of the [CM will
“9mm” “the FOVS °f seeded ""”1399"" house small, shrouded air cooling fans, lighting, and
cabling, which are shielded to prevent crew contact but
the payload is not powered during ﬂight crew access.
, , _ , The Ant Habitat
The footprint available for each habitat was determined
by the size Of the cameras, the depth Of field_needed to The size and configuration of the Ant habitat was
get'good .resoiution images, .and by the “m‘ted spaoe fashioned after commercially available ant farms. In this
available in the iCM. By trying out different layouts In way, many other schools could participate in the
SoiidWorks, it was discovered that a minimum of experiment within their own classrooms, using
approximately 3"" from the tip 0‘ the oamera to thefr ont 5” commercial, off-the-shelf, readily available ant farms.
the habitat would ;result In 900d images. US'""9 ”""5 The flight unit was made the same thickness and roughly
gundelme: the maxnmum habitat erlvelope turned out to the same iayout as acommercial Ant habitat, but as wide
be 4375, w:de X 3'000” deep X 7'8 tail. and as tali as possible given the allowed volume within
, , , the ICM. The thickness is 0.250”. The overall habitat
Bee, SP'de” Antsv and S'WO'm hab'tatS: as we"" as the height is 7.5"" and width is 4.375"". The height is short of
second level of containment for chemical garden, are the 7.8” maximum so as not to cause any interference
intentionally vented containers, using 0.2 micron pore- with the ICM lid.
size, hydrophobic Polytetrafiuoroethylene (PTFE) gas
exchange membranes on the outside 0f the habitats to The habitat is divided into two sections, an airspace, and a
allow water vapor, 92' and .002 levels inside the habitats tunneling section, as in a commercial ant farm. The air
to remain near cabin ambient levels, while providing a space occupies approximately 1/3 of the habitat and the

"
"6","tunneling space occupies the remainder. The air space they are loaded. The Bee habitat is 2.5 cm thick instead of
serves as room to discard tunneling medium as the ants 6mm to accommodate the much larger carpenter bees
dig, open space for the ants to move about in, and and their balsa wood. The body is made of aluminum
contains air holes covered with gas exchange membranes instead of polycarbonate to prevent the bees from chewing
for respiration and pressure equilibration. The gas through and escaping. in the wild, the bees have been
exchange membrane also serves as a passive humidity known to chew through all kinds of plastics and wood
control for the habitat. The more membrane area there is materials, so great care was taken not to give them an
available, the lower the humidity inside the habitat. edge of any non-metallic material inside the habitat to
chew on. The bees have twice as much air hole area as
The temperature of the Ant habitat is maintained by the the ants to accommodate their size and the
lCM cooling loops and circulation fans. The set point depressurization rate for the larger habitat volume.
temperature for all habitats except the Aquatic habitat is
23°C +/- 2°C. Back lighting of the Bee habitat was not possible
because of the aluminum habitat body and the balsa
The students will track the progress of their experiment wood. A single CCFL was attached on the base of the
by analyzing pictures of the ants and their tunnels. To habitat in front of the faceplate to provide lighting.
allow good viewing for this process the habitat will be .
backlit with an electroluminescent (EL) sheet. This
provides excellent contrast between the ants and the gel. v 7‘ ..W;._. . ‘
Tunnels are easily viewed and mapped and the ants are ‘ ’3 ‘~ "" ‘
clearly visible. The EL sheet stays relatively cool during _
operation. The majority of the heat is produced by the $3; .
inverter mounted on the back of the activation assembly ‘in _
attached to the habitat, rejecting its waste heat directly to 5' '
the coolant loop.
«m: t».
“i is: ‘4“,
?'S ~35 ‘3
RS. ' ~. . ‘ . .-..-.':-;F,.-~»-- .4 ‘
...‘ 5-2:, ,_ .:
5:1; 9: -'
K333?» ' 3175‘ W. ; Figure 5. Bee Habitat with Bees and Balsa wood, ready for Mission
\l‘ﬁh‘x ;, ,1 * ' Simulation.
3% 3”"" t -
w. ‘ ' , The Aggatig Habitat
The Aquatic habitat posed a challenge on many different
Figure 4. AntHabitatreadyfor Mission Simulation. Ants (in chamber tevets- First it had to hOId 800 mL 0f water- The
behind airspace, left side) are keptseparate from tunneling media available envelope for each habitat was only 11.1 cm x
(right side) until activation 7.6 cm x 19.8 cm which gives a total available volume of
1678 mL. Also, this volume had to house not only the
water containing the ecosystem to sustain the fish, but
also the structure to contain it within, with two
independent levels of containment; the nest to keep the
W eggs and fish from moving out of camera view; the
lighting for day time viewing and to sustain the
The Bee habitat is similar to the Ant habitat in design. The ecosystem; a night light to orient the fish during the night
differences are that the body Of the Bee habitat is cycle; and the inverters for each of the lights.
aluminum instead of polycarbonate, it is thicker than the
Ant habitat, and it does not have a holding chamber forthe An O-ring and a gasket provide two independent and
bees during launch. The bees are allowed immediate redundant seals for the otherwise single—walled habitat.
access to the weed and food inside the habitat as $00"" as The contained aquatic organisms and the water were all

"
"7","assessed a hazard level 0 by the Johnson Space Center W
Toxicology office. O-ring and gasket seals will be tested
independently, and the entire assembly will be vacuum The Silkworm habitat is the largest in the STARS insert.
tested after assembly and before flight. The habitat wall It is a modification of the Butterfly habitat that flew on
is a single, vacuum-molded piece of polycarbonate to STS~93. Six silkworms will be flown in varying stages of
avoid potential failure of glue joints. . development. Two will be launched in the cocoon stage
so they will emerge as moths on orbit. Two worms will
The faceplate does not obstruct viewing of the fish eggs be flown that should cocoon on orbit and two younger
and fry. The contents of the ecosystem are considered a worms will be flown so their growth rate can be analyzed.
hazard level 1 and so must be contained by two
independent levels of containment. The first level of The silkwon'ns grow rapidly and consume large amounts
containment is a piston seal O-ring that is compressed of food. The food is a mulberry leaf paste that has a
between the body of the habitat and the lid. The second distinct smell to it. The paste must be kept moist
level of containment is a silicone gasket between the because it serves as a water source for the silkworms, it
flange of the body and the lid. The gasket is held in must remain palatable so the worms will continue to eat,
place and compressed by 34 screws around the lid of the and to ensure the food will not dislodge from the tray. A
habitat. The lid and body are polycarbonate. The body food tray was designed to hold roughly 2.5 cm"" of food
of the habitat is thermoformed in clear polycarbonate to which was determined to be enough to sustain 4 to 6
allow light to penetrate to the ecosystem and to eliminate worms for the mission duration. The moisture content of
extra seams where water could leak. The large number the food is passively controlled by the gas exchange
of screws are needed to compress the lid evenly and membranes. Early testing showed the food could easily
correctly onto the gasket. be kept moist because the habitat quickly reached 100%
humidity. This was good for the food, but undesirable for
Four large CCFLs will be used to illuminate the habitat. the silkworms. Silkworms cannot tolerate levels of
They are mounted two on each side of the shroud that humidity above 80%. When subjected to higher levels of
encloses the back of the habitat in the area created by humidity they become diseased and die. Testing was
the 3° draft used to mold the body. The inverters for the conducted over several weeks to find the balance of gas
lamps are heat sunk and conformal coated into an exchange membrane needed to keep the food moist, but
aluminum plate that fits in the top of the shroud again in not exceed 80% humidity within the habitat. 13.5 cm2 of
the area created by the draft area. This allows good membrane surface area provided the best conditions
thermal conductivity between the heat producing within the habitat. A carbon ﬁlter was added to the base
inverters and the top of the ICM where a coollng loop is of the habitat to adsorb the odor of the mulberry paste.
located. The Aquatic habitat uses more lights than all
other habitats and therefore must reject more heat than Two different lighting levels were required for the worms.
any other habitat to maintain a temperature where the The younger worms needed a brighter, more intense
fish will remain viable. The habitat is equipped with two light, the older worms preferred dimmer lighting. To
thermistors to measure the temperature at the bottom of accomplish this, a CCFL was added along one side of
the habitat and the middle back of the habitat. the habitat and allowed to diffuse through a 1.6mm thick
sheet of white polycarbonate. The area closer to the
side panel was brighter for the young worms and the
older worms could move further from the light source into
. - - ' ' - ‘3'"" a dimmer area of the habitat.
vi
i Y. A g Cocoon cups were also added to the habitat to contain
_ ‘ . __~: :3 the cocoons that would emerge on orbit. The cups are
‘ ; ""4‘s: 3.4-» . located on the far side of the food tray away from the
.1 -5; L1: light source. The corners of the habitat provide plenty of
' ‘"" "" . ﬁg ' locations for the silkworms to spin their cocoons on orbit.
' _ ""'?""'.3,<~ .. r: ‘ .'f The Silkworm habitat is the only habitat that has oniy one
T» ""r -, camera. The camera is located far enough away so that
' ‘ § ' ; ' the entire habitat can be viewed clearly.
~ ""KN“:‘SWSF r q! .1.
-.. ?‘.‘_§‘¢;§3;;3€?1s ,9, M _. ,5;
. ~<30 . _ .. $557:-
.-.,<. m- 4M ‘, “ ’~‘~ 1,”: \‘i‘sm’b's t: '
Figure 6. Loaded Aquatic Habitat (AHAB) with “nest"" for holding eggs
and fry in place.

"
"8","then moves the sampling tool around the inside of the
.4 ..‘. imam... m: t. t. . . habitat to collect the web. When finished, the tool is
R J ‘~ 1' ~ .1 \« pulled back up and screwed counter clockwise to re-seat
‘- \‘g 3.5 ’3; s i “Q. the fitting into the port. A twist tie is then used to secure
iii 5;. ; the end of the bag and ﬁnally the O-ring is removed from
'37:? ‘3 ‘3. ~ the port and the web sampling tool with the web is
3?:1: 8 j: ' returned to stowage inside the insert.
i133. ‘ s). . i.
_4\ J x t g 33 ,i c: -_ Another challenge was to ﬁlm the spiders at night when
k; f' 13-”: f‘ they are most active. A CCFL covered with ruby red
3 5 ¥ 43¢ lithographic tape was used to make a red light for night
{253-7 f 1 x j; i 'Q filming. The Spider habitat is also equipped with its own
1:: - § :;. \ -, temperature and relative humidity sensor.
2""};1‘ t . ‘2‘ R: t' £
I {‘2‘ 2;, : ~ ‘ L‘I’ut‘ ’
ﬁn.“ ’Q ., '_ t. ' ‘.
44» ' -‘ a e 9 e :- ' ~ 9
Figure 7. Silkworm habitat with sitkworms and food tray loaded ready . Q ‘ '
for Mission Simulation. . t
-:.-.5 G,
Q. t : -
e. ‘ 1 , , 11
The Spiger Habitat 3;; 3/4.- :.
,. ‘:4 . W . \t
The Spider habitat is one of the more complicated -- $2 _ ' ’ “hut
habitats because of the need for a sustained food gs t‘j , §EQS
source. The spider needs to be fed every few days. The 3\.r}\ \ %§\ ‘
Australian student team devised a process for making Jrgkeem ‘ I 9 “TR:
agar with time-delayed release of fruit flies. The fruit fly : 9\§§“‘§I’4§§\ s“ 3330
agar is placed in the base of the Spider habitat. “ ““ ~ ""4 t i ‘ ‘ ‘
Additionally, sevetat spiders mUSt be ﬂown as baCKUpS m Figure 8. Spider habitat ready for Mission Simulation. Spider
case there ts a high mortality rate- The Sptders 3"" mUSt “cubbies” visible in corners. light attached at bottom.
be kept separate because of a tendency to eat each
other if left together in small areas. To address this
issue little “cubbies” were constructed in the comers of
the habitat for the extra spiders to be retained in. One
spider is launched “tree-range”, loose in the habitat The Chemical gardgn
volume and the others are tucked away in the cubbies.
In the case that the original spider expires or does HOt The Chemical Garden, 3 crystal growth experiment.
spin, a crew member Wt"" Open a door to one Of the consists of two independent sets of polycarbonate
“cubbies” and free another spider totake its place. containers, mounted back to back. Each container is
comprised of 4 sets of crystallization chambers, two
There is 3'30 a r equirement to take web samples from small motors, and a drive screw to initiate crystal growth
the habitat while 0"" orbit. TWO separate web sampling automatically. Each chamber will receive one crystal
activities are scheduled to occur during the mission. during activation.
This activity must take place while maintaining one level
0t containment at all times. A port was added to the top The crystallization chamber contains dissolved 10%
Of the habitat to accomplish this- The port is easily sodium silicate solution. During the activation, seed
accessible to crew members when the payload is open. crystals on a rod are introduced into the solution through
There will be two web sampling tools located inside the a duckbiil valve, which initiates crystallization. This
STARS insert. The crew member Wt“ remove a web activation requires a motor activation of approximately 2
sampling t00'» insert it into the port 0“ top Of the habitat minutes to introduce the seed crystal with a minimum of
and then snap an o-ring attached to the web sample bag disturbance to the somﬂon,
around the outside of the port. This establishes the level
0f containment. The web sampling tOOt is then rotated The Chemical Garden crystaI growth experiment
clockwise to disengage a fitting inside the port allowing requires two independent levels of containment due to
access to the inside Of the habitat. The crew member the high pH level of the sodium silicate solution used to

"
"9","“grow” the calcium chloride and cobalt chloride crystals. The spider, bee, ant, and Chemical Garden habitats can
The students would like to “grow” as many crystals as be removed on~orbit by crew members if desired by
possible. Each 3t06 mm crystal needs aminimum of 25 disconnecting one electrical connection. Each habitat
mL of sodium silicate solution. The experiment also has its own individual lighting and imaging hardware.
needs to be activated autonomously because of the lack Lighting and imaging are customized for each habitat.
of crew time available. Each of the crystal growth
chambers (eight total) contain 25 mL each of 10% No direct contact / interaction with the specimens is
sodium silicate solution. The crystals are mounted on a required or possible. All habitats are watertight
rod attached to a small motor and pulled through a enclosures, and the specimens cannotescape.
duckbill valve into the sodium silicate solution. The first
level of containment consists of the silicone duckbill CONCLUSION
valve, polycarbonate, and a stainless steel plug. The .
second level of containment is an intentionally vented The goal of the STARS program is to provide an
container of aluminum and polycarbonate with gas educational experience to High School students by giving
exchange membranes. The Chemical Garden houses all them the opportunity to design their own spaceflight
of the electronics to control the motor and internal lights. experiment, work alongside scientists and engineers as
After the first side is activated, a crew member will turn their experiments are developed, and to see their project
the habitat around so that the other side faces the through to completion by collecting data from their
cameras. The Chemical Garden is then activated 3 experiments during real-time spaceflight operations. Still
second time later in the mission. During each activation, weeks away from the launch and the students have
the students will watch the crystal fiber growth progress already benefited from an unforgettable, life-changing,
by video downlink and via the internet. There is no educational experience. Furthermore, they are not the
requirement for temperature, other than ambient and only ones who have benefited. Working through the
constant, or humidity levels for the Chemical Garden. technical challenges has proven to be just as educational
- tor the design team. The knowledge gained through the
«r "" ' -. process of developing these small scale biological
~21: .7 ' -. habitats will not be lost once the payload returns from its
1 “m mission, but instead will be applied to similar, and
, 3’ f, . Q ' possibly larger-scale, life support systems in the future.
. . _."" ‘5‘ ,
b ' , \ :i ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
. _ ..... ., 4:;
""“744-3- wl' ‘ ¢m‘54‘ Agreements between SpaoeHab inc. and BioServe
91 ”ﬁt .‘4' Space Technologies support all activities conducted at
? ﬁg“. 3: BioServe related to the STARS project. Kimberly
§§‘ic-l Campbell, STARS Program Manager, Janet Morgan, and
“1&4“ f LaDonna Neterer have provided outstanding program-
2. ' 59 '3 x: l a related support.
£573 ‘5, , ‘ \if The authors acknowledge and thank Jane Poynter and
- d“ ‘3; f ,7 Paragon Space Development Corporation for providing
71..-“: 75;” expertise on the ant and bee experiments, and for
M:.-\r‘f”,‘.§3‘x , providing the exquisite ecosystem supporting the
Medaka Fish experiment.
Figure 9. Chemical Garden habitat prepared for Mission Simulation. in
un-activated conﬁguration. Fourchambers visible, crystals mounted The authors a'so wish to thank Kirsten Carpenter,
on rods beneath duckbill valves, silicate solution in chambers. Tyrone Cunningham, Don Geering, Jon Genova, Kevin
Gifford, Bill Kalinowski, Casey Shafer, David Simmons, r
and Jeff Sweet, for their hard work and persistence in the r
design, testing, and manufacturing of hardware and
INTEGRATION AND OPERATION OF THE Eiftware systjnlws In the face of both time crunches and
gmlssmn eays.
HABITAT INSERT AND THE ICM
Finally, we wish to thank the students of George W
After all samples and habitats are loaded, check-out Fowler High School, Syracuse, NY, Gymnasium
procedures must be completed 0” each habitat checking Liechtenstein, Vaduz, Liechtenstein, Jingshan School in
for leakage and sharp edges. Beijing, China, Glen Waverely Secondary College in
Melbourne, Australia, and Mortzkin on High School in ‘
Haifa, lsrael.

"
"10","REFERENCES CG: Center of Gravity
1. A. Hoehn, J. B. Freeman, M. Jacobson, L.S. EL: Electro luminescent
Stodieck (1999): Incubator Designs for Space Flight
Application, Optimization and Automation. SAE FOV: Field of View
paper 1999-01-2177.
2. J. Poynter, T.MacCallum, G.Anderson, M. Rupert, ICM: IsothermalContainmentModule
S.Woodard, C. Goulart, K. Campbell (2001): The
Development and Testing of Visualization and
Passively Controlled Life Support Systems for
Experimental Organisms During Spaceﬂight. SAE-
paper 2001 -01-2288.
3. T.K. MacCallum, G.A. Anderson, J.E. Poynter et al.
(2000): The A88 (Autonomous Biological System):
Spaceflight Results from a Bioregenerative Closed
Life Support System. SAE-paper 2000-01-2340
4. SpaceHab Inc.: Science Technology and Research
Students website: htth/www.spacehab.com/STARS
CONTACT
Carla Goulart and Sherry Woodard are employed by
BioServe Space Technologies, a NASA Commercial
Space Center located at the University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO. They can be reached at BioServe Space
Technologies, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO
80309-0429 USA. Tel: +1-303-492-3607, and +1-303-
492-5481, respectively. Fax: +1-303-492-8883. Email:
goulgrt@spotcoloradoedu,
wgodard@spot.colgrado.edu
ACRONYMS
AHAB: Aquatic Habitat
CCFL: Cold Cathode Fluorescent Lamp
LED: Light Emitting Diode
mL: milliliters
NASA: National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NTSC: National Television Standard Color
psi: pounds per square inch
PTFE: Poiytetrafluoroethyiene
PWM: Pulse Width Modulator
SMAC: Spacecraft Maximum Allowable Concentration
STARS: Science Technology and Research Students '
STS: Space Transportation System
TEC: Thermoelectric Cooler
VDC: Volts Direct Current

"
