"","x"
"1","COPYRIGHT .
2005-01-3102 -
STARSTM (Scuence Technology and Research Students): A ;
Hands-on, Interactive,Sc1entIf|c and Cultural Exchange Lesson - ‘
Carla V. Goulart and Sherry Woodard

BioServe Space Technologies, University of Colorado '~‘ '.
Kimberly Campbell 1. ’
SPACEHAB, Inc. t .

- - U5 ' 3 t «H'E'm ""3”"" V“ ‘ leum ‘
Copyright©2005 SAElnternatlonal 6‘ W/jé‘wfsﬁ ﬁg ¥§Rtiﬁx i. 9
ABSTRACT However, the opportunity to simply observe a shuttle
launch, or to have access to microgravity data, does not '
The STARS (Science Technology and Research - provide the “hands-on” and interactive experience that f
Students) Program developed by SPACEHAB, Inc., is a evoke a stronger and longer-lasting impact on students. ,
commercial educational initiative which leverages the The STARS program was created 33 a way to inspire J.
excitement of space to inspire students’ interest in the and prepare today's YOUth for the career challenges they 5
areas of engineering, mathematics. and science by Wi” face by taking advantage Of opportunities that exist . '-
means of a hands-on. interactive approach. In January today in an exciting, bUt 3'50 direct and experiential - _
2003 students from six countries participated in, and Iearning environment. . j
tracked the progress of, their own space-based '

experiments ﬂown aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia. STARS PROGRAM OVERVIEW

The students participated in every development stage of t
their experiments from hypothesis deﬁnition to the The STARS program was created in 1998 as a unique '
analysis of data collected during the flight. By taking this commercial educational initiative utilizing a hands-on, -
approach students gained a wealth of knowledge in the interactive approach to providing students with
areas of math, science, and engineering, while experience in science. math, and engineering within the ‘ 1
simultaneously learning to work as a world-wide, multi- exciting arena of microgravity research. in addition. the T. ?
cultural team. Results were gathered from a distributed program also had the goal of exposing students to other ' 5
survey and from post-mission activities. cultures by recruiting schools located around the globe I '
to work as part of a multicultural team. Student .
INTRODUCTION ' participants ranged in age from 11-21 years old (1). ‘ ”
Through the STARS program students participated in, .
The working world that today’s students will face wlll be and tracked the progress 0t, real space-based '
one quite different from the one we live in today. experiments flown on NASA'S Space Shuttle 0f the '
Businesses and organizations are becoming more global International Space Station. The STARS program '
in nature. Work environments increasingly include provided students With a total experience 0f designing, ‘
cooperative efforts, with people from avariety of cultural loading, and COhdUCtihQ their OW“ microgravity i
backgrounds participating in joint international projects. experiments. Students worldwide worked directly With ‘ t
Members and leaders of global teams must be able to SCtehtiStS. engineers, and managers to gain direct T
avoid cultural mistakes 'and behave in a manner that knowledge 0f the SCtehttﬁC research process. The ' .
demonstrates knowledge and respect for other STARS program was hOt designed to pfOthe worid-
countries. It has aiso been observed that American class research as the final outcome. The science
students are falling behind the curve in the areas of knowledge gained, although valuable, W38 secondaryto 1
math, science, and engineering. If the United States is the main purpose — to emphasize and 80‘1““ . *
to stay competitive in an integrated global economy, its experiential knowledge regarding the complexity 0f ’

students must be educated and prepared in ways that processes and systems regardless Of the subject matter,

will contribute to maintaining the US. as a world leader. The three primary objectives 0f the program were: 1 I
Exciting events, such as Space Shuttle launches. have 0 T0 inspire StUdehtS in the areas of science, math.
long been used as a way to generate interest among and engineering by exposing them to those who ""
students in the areas of science, math, and engineering. 1
664 7

"
"2","work in these ﬁelds leveraging the excitement of Foundation and the Japan-US Science, Technology and .
being directly involved in a space mission. Space Applications program were co-sponsors.
. To help students gain a better understanding of the
scientiﬁc method, beyond the classroom, that Jingshan School, a private elementary school in Beijing,
includes identifying the subject matter, establishing a China, was chosen to participate in the STARS program '
hypothesis, testing the hypothesis, analyzing the after their idea, the Chinese Silkworm experiment, was
data, and reporting the ﬁndings. selected out of nearly 900 responses as the winning l
. To help students gain a better understanding of proposal. A fifth grade student from the school’s multi-
complex project management; to learn how project grade science classroom was the one who conceived '
components can be broken down into manageable the silkworm experiment. The students in China worked
pieces so that any life problem or oareer—based in conjunction with a school in Los Angeles, California.
project can be more effectively executed and The China Times Network provided general support to .
controlled. Jingshan School for this experiment. ;
0 Finally, to expose students to a “tool kit” of coping '
and management skills that would ultimately help FowlerHigh School in Syracuse, New York was selected .
them in many life scenarios. (1) to conduct their Harvester Ant experiment. Twenty—four '
student volunteers, ages 15-17, worked many hours '
- To date the STARS program has ﬂown two sets of after school to accomplish their spaceflight experiment. .’
experiments on the Space Shuttle and one on the Syracuse University assisted the FOWIBF team With '
International Space Station. The ﬁrst set of STARS experiment development and technical issues. ;
experiments ﬂew aboard the shuttle in July 1999. For Congressman James Walsh was a key player in making :
this mission students from an aII-girl high school in sure students within his district had the opportunity to
Santiago. Chile, observed the effects of low gravity on participate in this program.
the predator-prey relationship between ladybugs and
aphids. Another experiment was designed by physically Liechtenstein Gymnasium, a public High School in ;-‘-
and mentally challenged high school students from the Vaduz, Liechtenstein, proposed the Carpenter bee .;
. Albany High School High Tech program in Albany, experiment. The sponsor for this European high school 5,:
Georgia. Students studied the effects of microgravity on was the VP Bank Gruppe. An American company. the 3
the growth cycle of Painted Lady butterﬂies from cocoon Bee Works, provided technical expertise fOr the f
formation through metamorphosis to emergence (2). In carpenter bees. . .
February 2001, a second STARS program experiment, .
""Ecosystems in Space,"" was launched to the A 9th grade class at Glen Waverly Secondary College, a -
International Space Station on a Russian Soyuz rocket. public high school in Melbourne, Australia, proposed the z
The focus of the current paper will be on the third and Orb Weaver spider experiment. They were selected to r '
latest suite of student—designed experiments that flew participate in the STARS program when their teacher ‘;
aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia in January 2003. won a contest conducted by the Victorian Government. '3
The Melbourne 200 assisted the students by donating '
STARS ABOARD COLUMBIA spiders and essential equipment. The Aerospace
Department of the Royal Melbourne Institute of
For the latest STARS mission, students from several TeChUOIOQY provided valuable technical support With the
countries around the world applied for six experiment expenmenthardware.
slots to be ﬂown aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia 3
inside the SPACEHAB Research Double Module. The Three middle schools in Haifa. Israel competed for
set of six student-designed experiments were housed participation in the Columbia STARS mission by
within a single middeck locker insert that provided submitting multimedia presentations on their experiment
temperature control, power, and data downlink for the ideas. Judges from Teohnion University, area SChOOlS, ’
internal experiments. Temperature and humidity data, and SPACEHAB- “‘0 reviewed the various student
images, and video were also down-linked from the presentations, experiment descriptions, and learning
Module and broadcast via the internet for students to objectives to select the winning SChOOI- The MOtZkih-Oi‘t
view and analyze. The selected experiments included a School won this cornpetitlen With their Chemical Garden
Japanese Medaka ﬁsh experiment; a Chinese silkworm experiment. Technion University, the oldest university in
eXperiment; an American Harvester ant experiment; 3 Israel, also prOVIded valuable tBChntcal and ﬁnanCial
Carpenter bee experiment from Liechtenstein, an SUPPOMO the students.
Australian Orb Weaver spider experiment; and a
biochemical crystal growth experiment from Israel. SUPPORT STRUCTURE AND HARDWARE
THE STUDENTS
Although the STARS payload contained student-
A graduate student from Ochanomizu University in designed experirnents, all the USUB' stringent
Tokyo’ Japan [ed a team of several secondary schools rGQUirements for ﬂlght aboard the Space Shuttle had to
in Tokyo as part of her thesis program for the Medaka be rhet. To provide this service for the student
Fish experiment. The Tokyo Institute of Technology experiments, BioServe Space Technologies, a NASA
665

"
"3","Research Partnership Center, took the lead in PHASE i: PRELIMINARY DESIGN REVIEW ,
developing the flight habitats, support equipment and
structure, and integrating the hardware for spaceflight. Representatives from the STARS team held numerous
The team of engineers worked diligently with the initial teleconferences with the schools to deve|0p their
students to capture all that was required to successfully experiment concept. Information regarding the STARS
ﬂy each team’s experiment. The focus of the interaction locker, individual habitat design, general experiment
was to give the students as much control as possible objectives, and hardware requirements were ‘
over their experiments without compromising quality or determined. STARS status reports containing
safety. information about the shuttle, crew, and mission, as weli
as the other schools’ activities. were sent out frequently 3
Ultimately, each experiment was housed in a custom to keep the students infomied and involved in the entire
designed enclosure or habitat developed to address experience. 3
each specimen’s individual needs. (3) This was
accomplished through an iterative design process PHASE Ii: EXPERIMENT CONTROL DOCUMENT
between the engineers and the students. Some habitats
contained individual temperature and/or humidity Similar to other technical documents required for space
sensors while others relied on ambient data taken from ﬂight, the students and STARS representatives
sensors mounted within the general experiment volume. developed a joint Experiment Control Document (ECD).
The habitats were placed on a common paiiet inside The ECD served as the governing document for f
BioServe’s Commercial Generic Bioprocessing experiment requirements and capabilities. Locker and f
Apparatus (CGBA). CGBA is a single middeck locker experiment speciﬁcs such as power capabiiities, camera
insert providing controlled temperature, lighting, and angles, temperature and humidity boundaries, day and
data acquisition and reporting. Experiment—speciﬁc nightiightcycles, and more were documented.
cameras were mounted on the pallet insert to collect
images and video from each experiment based on PHASEHI: CRITICAL DESIGN REVIEW
student-defined requirements.
- STARS representatives visited each of the schools to
' 3 3 conduct a critical design review (CDR) intended to
' ”j - finalize hardware and experiment design and
Pf 3 development. Over the course of the 3-day event, ‘
- t. K "" , 3 students presented information about their experiment .3
3 f 63;. t (‘3 “ hypothesis, approach, and requirements, and results /
3:333 "" ' 3 f I ' from testing that had been completed. Likewise, the 1a..
g :m i W 1/: 35%: 3 STARS team presented information to the students ;_.
3 -, jg“), i‘mﬁl‘» regarding everything from shuttle launch scenarios to .5
i i C “if; Qiﬂm; 333;; ‘3 CGBA environmental data and camera details ’3;
3 f"" 3 {1‘ ” 6.; . 3 3 Prototype hardware was left with the students for further
r “ {933:5 52‘ , #3,,“ habitat—speciﬁc experimentveriﬂcation testing.
ﬁgure 1. CGBA containing the six student-designed STARS PHASE IV: MISSION SlMULATlON TEST 3:3
experiments aboard Columbia. Chemical Garden in view. 3
Approximately three months prior to launch, the students 3‘93
convened in Colorado to conduct a mission simulation '2""
This dry-run Included the loading and launch process
Environmental data, images and video were downlinked goggieéiirwgnsﬂight-hke habitats, accurate procedures, I”.
from the shuttle to Johnson Space Center Mission p ' .,J‘
Control where STARS team representatives sent the ,. T -
data gathered by the sensors and miniature cameras to ”"" , .3, ""M,
students via the internet. -' ~ W ""
. .AP‘K: '— ""
STARS PHASES r 5 . __ ‘ “5 ‘ 3
Once the students were selected. the program used an 3, "" ;_ 3..., _ ? '
experiment development process similar to what other , ‘ , .333 ' ’ . 3 '
science investigators and program managers use for 3. r 33“, ~19; , g.
preparing an experiment for ﬂight. This process was ~ 7 3:. “ea, .~.3i. 3M ' t""; a'}
planned to be a 1—2 years in length, but due to numerous ' - j"" “, ""1 _ ‘ "" t .3 :1
launch slips, the students worked through the phases of . - . z“; 7"""" - r- A 5: ft},
their projects for nearly 3 years. The process included """" . ' j @313. 1‘ ‘ t 43‘
SIX d'Stht phases, 8“ cntlca! for a successml mrssron. Figure 2. Chemical Garden tean“; and Carpenter Antteam preparing 33$
habitats for Mission Simulation in Boulder, Colorado. .13
666 f

"
"4","During this event, the students had theirﬁrst Opportunity ground control and was delivered to the SPACEHAB '
to meet other STARS students from around the world. Payload Processing Facility. Each back up habitat was
They worked together an integrated, multi-cultural team held in reserve to replace the primary ﬂight habitat if it
in preparation for the real launch. The students became necessary to reload the STARS locker due toa
presented their experiment hypothesis and objectives to launch delay. Because the experiments were contained '
the entire group of other students, scientists, engineers, within the same locker environment and had to share
and managers. They set up laboratory environments in resources, issues regarding things such as optimal
which to prepare their habitats, and loaded their temperature and humidity. video and image storage and -
assembled experiments into the STARS locker. The downlink, and budgeting of crew time, had to be
locker was placed in a centrifuge to simulate launch discussed and worked out. Compromises had to be ~
conditions, and then the cameras were turned on for the made where necessary. The students were required to
16-day period following “liftoff"" to study the results. (4) work as one team, toward one common goal: the
This ""dress rehearsal” provided the opportunity for success of the entire STARS payload. The ﬁnal several ‘
students and engineers to address any issues if days before launch provided a multi—cultural group of
something did not perform as expected. Amidst all the students with the opportunity to act as one unified team,
work that goes into a mission simulation, there was communicating and interacting while working toward that
plenty of time provided for cultural exchanges. Students common goal.
participated in outings including billiard tournaments, .
laser tag competitions, and pizza parties. The students On the day of the launch the students were bused to the
exchanged information about their home countries and Banana Creek viewing site for VIP treatment. Each
life as students in other parts of the world. team had their own unique way of celebrating the .;
moment of launch from singing their national anthem to i
PHASE V: LAUNCH PREPARATIONS waving their homeland’s ﬂag. Immediately following the _
launch, all STARS participants attended a post launch
One week before lift—off. the students gathered at Cape celebration.
Canaveral, Florida for preparation for the launch. Each '
team of students prepared and loaded three identical ,.
habitats at SPACEHAB’s Astrotech facility in Titusville, ‘ ﬂ. . f |
Florida. - . .. .. ”3."", _ X"" ,1 i
- »'-...-2x77 ’ t / ‘ l3"" -
‘ “5:0,? 4 ‘3 Q n -‘
. "" ‘x 3%? 1m”? ': 5 if t ' - ' -'
:0; ' » §— ’ ti “. -. ’3..- :“H {a “ 35-527,: m“?
i. - "" —-- ~' ; 1.. at Mr; ’Es‘ps e
r.’ _ _ . J} j \ng ‘ _
""v’ I .‘L‘ r' 7/ Ixfar /‘ (\ﬁ
_ ' u»— 4:7"" ”0"" ' ‘B- ‘ "" .‘L .
' ‘. . A Fi ure 4. Students await the launch of Columbia at the Banana Creek
3 ""t '1'? ~ 3 ‘ VI?D viewing site.
I , ‘3 €93..pr
Figure 3. Students preparing silkworm experiment at the Astrotech '
Facility in Titusville. FL alongside a BioServe engineer. PHASE VI; THE MISSION
. Within several hours after launch, experiment data such
as temperature, relative humidity, still images, and video ' '
. began being down-linked to Johnson Space Center
From the three loaded habitats students selected one to (JSC) Mission Control and continued throughout the rest ,
be the primary flight unit, one as the secondary ﬂight of the mission. Ground unit data was similarly
unit, and one as a back up. A best effort was made to transferred to JSC from its location at the SPACEHAB
load all habitats identically. Once complete, the Payload Processing Facility in Florida. CGBA
students signed off on their loading procedures and performance data was also downlinked and monitored '
turned over their loaded habitats for ﬁnal flight by the BioServe mission operations team at both JSC ’
veriﬁcation testing, certiﬁcation, and photo- and the remote Payload Operations Control Center
documentation. The primary and secondary ﬂight located in Colorado. Selected experimentdata was then
habitats were then loaded into the STARS lockers. The posted on the STARSTM website
primary ﬂight unit was loaded aboard the Space Shuttle (www.starsgrogram.com) to be analyzed by the students
Columbia. while the secondary ﬂight unit became the from their various locations around the globe. (5)
_ 667

"
"5",". During and after the mission students anaiyzed their . _ ‘
data to determine if their hypotheses had proven correct. INSplratlon T
The schools reported their ﬁndings in ﬁnal reports so - 3
that future students could learn from and build upon their 40% 3“”‘""""”‘T"""""">T-""“""T‘”""'”""""‘T‘""’g
research and hard work. 35% "" U . i , ' - ‘ ’ 3 “N“""""‘“‘""‘ i
30% - yt- ,3 --~ “w ~. «,I IA :
RESU TS 25%3 7.: 3.3 } 3.:Armie bit 3
L 20% § "".1 .' ff'f 4“: a "" :1 . DSome ':
15% 3% r- t '1"" 3:275 a “f 3‘ UQuiteabit
Based on the kinds of tasks performed and interactions 10%” ii ’ -’ -, 3-; f 3 'j A greatdeai’
experienced throughout the STARS process it can be 5% 3% I E | -; ' | t l i%' - q . """"""""““"" '
concluded that the overall objectives of the STARS 0% . ' 3 z ‘ a 5 ‘
program were met. However, in order to objectively 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
determine how well the objectives were met, a survey Type of Inspiration
was distributed to the STARS participants. The survey
was distributed approximately two years following the
mission in order to allow sufﬁcient time for any impact to Figure 5- ReSPonsestO questions regarding inSpiration from STARS ‘
take affect. Surveys were sent to the thirty student program particihation: tscientitio research 2 Ehgineeﬁng 3Math
participants. Eight responses were received. The bw 4Space operations 5Commumcatrons 6Creative Design 7Project
response rate could be attributed to students having Management
graduated, or to invalid email addresses due to the
elapsed long period of time. Replies were received from
Australia (2), New York (2), Liechtenstein (3), and Japan
(1)-
Experience Gained
To meet the ﬁrst objective, “to inspire students in the
areas of science, math, and engineering,"" tasks typical 50% ~ ""MMW‘W‘W-""Mj ._
of these disciplines were performed. The students 50%""“' "" f' ~: "" ' ' ' i .E’Ag'ea'df’a“.
worked alongside professionais specializing in these 40% i3: ‘ "" ""T """"‘l‘ “' “ i ""°““°”“ ': ""
areas, ali within the framework and excitement of a 30:54 ' 1' 3‘“ ’ '5 'DS°_""‘° , , _
spaceﬂight mission. The survey measured the objective 330/13. "" 7; z ; 12:33:19“ 3 .3
- with a series of questions regarding the experience 00/” _ I; E {II gl gl I‘ ». ----———
gained and inspiration resulting from the STARS ° 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 ' _
Program.
- Type of eXperlence 3-;
Participants were asked to rate how much they were 1’
inspired in these three speciﬁc areas as a result of the Figure 6- Responsesto questionsregarding experience gained ,3
STARS Program. The greatest inspiration was in the through STARS program: 1Scientificresearch 2Engineering 3
area of communications, secondiy in project Math. 4Space operations 5Communrcations SCreative Design ‘-
management, and then creative design. All other areas 7 PM“ Management
wererated between “not applicable,"" “a little bit,” and
“some"" with math being the lowest rated discipline.
Participants were also asked to rate how much . . u , —,
experience was gained in the areas of scientiﬁc The seconq objective wasto help students gamabetter F
research, engineering research, math, space- understandmg of the sorentrﬁc method. This was .7
operations, communications, creative design, and addressed by requiring the StUdeOtS t0 §t§p through the f
project management. They were to choose from “not process 0f deYe‘me 2.1 hypothés'S' deVismg how to teSt
applicable."" “a little bit,” “some,” “quite a bit,” and “a the hypotheSIs, tnciudmg defining the dependant and r.
greatdeal.” Independent variables. and then determining a data .4.—
coliection and analysrs method and reporting the results. ;
12:1ragiﬁgzgnifperlgrggzvga‘negesgar: m :2: 8:382: The sqrvey asked participants if they were familiar with
management, equally, and then scientiﬁc research. the SCIentiﬁC .method prior to the"" STARS experience.
Experience in space operations was also fairly high. whether they used the screntlﬁc methed in carrying out .,
Experience in engineering and math were deemed much the"" experiment, and . ‘f . they gamed a deeper ‘t
less. understanding of the screntiﬁc method as a result of 3.;-
oonducting their STARS experiment. 71% of
Overall, results show that while 66% feel that they participants had prior experience With. the soientiﬁc .31 7
learned “quite a bit” or a ""great deal” from the STARS method anid employed ”‘5“ kilow'edge '.n 03eran out
experience in general, only 26% felt ""quite a bit” or “a the"" experirne’hts, and 51./° said they gamed a deeper
great deal"" inspired as a result of the program and 51% understanding. 0f the screntrfic method 9.9 a result 0f ‘3
felt at I east a ""iitti e bit"" or “some"" inspiration. conducting their STARS experiment. Additionaiiy, those
668 33

"
"6","who gained a deeper understanding were those involved .1 .. _. '- - ' ,3
more in the science aspects of the projects. 5;"" 3, 3: Si,“ '
. r... § 7' TiLLu’r 4‘,- _ _' gt???” '
The third objective “to help students gain a better , .5; 5“”, $3: ..
understanding of complex project management was ,1“ “’3‘: , = 3‘2”“ ‘
addressed by allowing each student team to decide how a f ‘ , - 5Q: ’ .-
they would divide the workload and manage the different ‘ ‘t 3%, ,' f :2, '93 '5
aspects and phases of the project. Teachers provided r’f 2:.» ~34"" i e if
guidance and STARS team engineers and managers ’ . _ -15‘93gf5», ““
provided the general structure and required project *
components. The survey addressed this objective in two . 2,
3 ways. First, with two speciﬁc questions with “yes, no” ..
answers, and second, with a rating scale. When asked
in the survey if they had any previous experience in 3, , ,
- managing a project, 86% said ""no"" and only 14% replied Figure 7. ”STARS studentstakea break for pizza during the mission
. ""yes.” However, 86% said they gained additional project s'mu'aﬁm‘
management skills from participating in the STARS
program, and only 14% did not. This response is also
' substantiated by the high rating given to Project
Managementexpenence gained In the STARS program. Finally, as an inherent a d de d benefit. the STARS
Although it was not a stated objective, it was a goal to experience would expose ,students to a :‘tool k't” Of
help the students gain insight into other cultures and to coping, and management Shms that would, ultimately help
teach them how to work as a member of an international “‘9’."" 'n many “f6. scenarios. (3) The last pomt '3
team. To meet this goal opportunities were provided obwous when looking at, the various ways each of the
throughout all the latter phases of the process which teams found to ,cope, Whh the tragic outcome 0f “""5
required the teams to communicate with each other, and h'etehe .Co/gmbla miseron. , Each school felt the
. in the end, to work together. Several opportunities were devastating impact 9‘ the acadent and found varying
also provided which allowed them to interact socially ways to deaIWJththeirloss.
with one another. All participants stated that they , . ,
learned about other cultures from their experience in the TheAustralian government held e memorial serwce,
program. Some stated that they had only a little bit of Invmng students to partielpate and ring a bell m honor of
contact with students from other cultures, but more of the lives lost. In. lsrael, a mural designed by the
them stated they had a lot, or quite a bit, of contact. Two students was hung 'h the schoot, covered Whh thoughts
replied that they had formed lasting friendships with and prayers for the crew and the"" families.
students from other cultures. Most of the contact came ,
from internet and email communication, launch in New York, the students de3igned and developed an
preparation, and post_ﬂight activities. The mission STS-107 mernonal to the fallen heroes. Encouraging
simulation also provided some contact. Examples of the commun'tys Involvement, the ,students sold
what they learned were: academic levels differ in other personalized bricks that lay as the shuttle s plume.
countries, there are differences in schools and teaching
methods, there are differences in governments and In the recovery efforts that spanned several states, only
societies. different cultures perceive world events a fraction 0f the shuttle debris was located. From the
differently, the general outlook in other cultures is STARS locker generally only fragments 0f metal and
. different from their own, and teens are the same all over circuut boards were found. One surprising and poignant
the world. discovery was the delicate ﬁsh egg nest made of plastic
and mesh that survived virtually unscathed.

‘ in the ﬁnal report from Liechtenstein the students made
the following dedication: “We never thought that such a
tragedy could ever happen. After this successful
mission we never expected something like this. Filled
with sorrow we said goodbye to our heroes. Our
analysis is dedicated to them and their families.""

l

669

L.

"
"7",", - ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ‘ ‘
I _ Once again, we owe our deepest appreciation to the "" , 1
1 . STS-107 Columbia crew for their outstanding dedication -
i to microgravity research and for reaching out to the l
s - young scientists who participated in the STARS --; j ;
g , - program. I
N . _ We also wish to thank the students of George W. Fowler -
' ' ‘ High School, Syracuse, NY; Gymnasium Liechtenstein, 1%»
Vaduz, Liechtenstein; Jingshan School in Beijing, China; '
Glen Waverly Secondary College in Meiboume,
Australia; Motzkin—Oit High School in Haifa, Israel; and 5
_. w Maki Niihori, now a graduate student at Ochanomizu
rf- . a ‘I University in Tokyo, Japan. 1
ﬂ \ ~ - V « -'
'3 Qt“ I.“ as: "",1?- "" ""j - 3‘ I
3-73- 4- 4 , .
, .. - o J. i ' ""
E. J ' ‘ ‘K n | I .
V“ r, .. «WW 4 .2,‘ 1 3 A :‘I
Figure 8. Student-created memorial to the STS-107 Columbia crew at 'm 417%} r a 3 5:33 . .; _ ’ E23"" “1' ' ..
Geor eW. Fowler Hi hSchooIinS cuse. NY ~ 12"".“. ..,y ' Ci"" "" "" '
g . g yra . .3""! in. .t m ' ﬂ Eggi '1-
,, . i ‘3 i L , -
i "" ' 5'4 . '
CONCLUSION a “i ' ""I -I -
The numerous ways in which programs impact and .. . .' 3'2 I ..-
3222215? S$ﬁeené§r2ir§8ngiozlggsaﬁggg”t: “3:33:13 at: $9133th STARS teams gathered together for ﬁnal Group Photo prior ""
educational experience to High School students by ‘
giving them the opportunity to design their own ' .‘
spaceﬂight experiment, work alongside scientists and
engineers as their experiments developed. and to see ""-
their project through to completion by collecting data REFERENCES '?I g
from their experiments during real-time spaceﬂight . a -.
operations. Subsequent to the latest STARS Program 1- K- Campbeii (2004): Reaching for the STARS —The - '
experience. the authors attempted to capture some of STS‘107 Mission. AlAA paper. ' :3 '..
those effects on its participants. it is clear that the 2- J- Poynter. T .MacCaIlum, Genders, M- Rupert, 3' ; 7
program provided a unique experience for its students Woodard, 0- Goulart, K. Campbell (2001): The
and they believe, in general, that the experience was Development and Testing 0f Visualization and -' ;
beneﬁcial. A large majority of the students were at a Passively Controlled Life Support Systems for , j
high school ievel during the program and now, two years Experimental Organisms During Spaceﬂight. SAE— ""
post-mission, are beginning to make choices regarding paper2001-01-2288. .
higher education and other career decisions relevant to 3. S. Woodard, C. Goulart. A. Hoehn (2002): Habitat , .
their futures. Although this ﬁrst survey indicates a DevelOpment in Support of Small Scale Biological & . .
positive, beneﬁcial affect from the program, it is still too Biochemical Space Experiments. SAE paper 2002'
soon to conclude just how much impact that experience 01-2282. . i
will have on the lives of the participants in the long term. 4, s. Woodard, C. Goulart, A. Hoehn (2003). a
Future surveys with the same group of student Performance of the STARS Life Sciences Payload . '
respondents should be conducted in another 2 to 5 During Benchtop Testing and Mission Simulations. I ‘
years to note any differences in their responses as a SAE paper 2003_01_2530_ ‘
result of the passage of time, increasing levels of 5. C. Goulart, S. Woodard, M. Rupert L. Stodieck ‘? _
.matumy' and ”'9 °PP°“P“""Y ‘0 imp'emem any (2004): Performance of the STARS 'Life Sciences ""
[taglgence the STARS experience may have had on Habitats in Spaceﬂight and Ground Controls. SAE -‘
' paper04ICES-88. ~ _
670 ; '

"
"8","CONTACT Program Manager at SPACEHAB, Inc. in Houston. TX.
. She can be reached at:
‘ Carla Goulart is employed by BioServe Space . Tel: +17113-5553-5049
Technologies, a NASA Research Partnership Center Email: Cam bell S acehab.com
located within the Department of Aerospace Engineering
at the University of Colorado in Boulder, CO. She can ADDITIONAL SOURCES
,- be reached at:
Science Technology and Research Students website
, Tel: +1-303-492-3607 / Fax: +1-303-492-8883 (STARSTM): httpzllwww.starsacaderny.com
. Email: goulart@colorado.edu
BioServe Space Technologies
: UQB429 DEFINITIONS, ACRONYMS, ABBREVIATIONS
UniverSIty of Colorado
Boulder, CO 803090429 USA' CGBA: Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus
Sherry Woodard is employed by Lockheed Martin Space . . . . . .
Systems Company in Denver, CO. Sh e can be reached NASA. National Aeronautvcs and Space Administration
at. STARS”: Science Technology and Research Students
Tel: +1-303-971-6421 / Fax: +1-303-977—0829
Email: sherm.l.woodard@lmco.com APPENDIXA
Kimberly Campbell is Vice President of Corporate STARS Program Evaluation Form
Marketing and Communications and the STARS
.‘ : ._;~
. ’ (N. I ~ H ‘ ‘54—'- ~ § I @171
Ml 0f us at BioServe express. a _ ‘ ‘ - k at ""w‘ ' i 5‘»-
nur deepest sympathies to the ” \ f- f’ 3‘ a
families ofﬂte S'l‘S-HW crew. 'l'hey ’ N "" 0,6 m 3“,“, .. f
were our colleagues and our friends. ‘ ”~75; ' , fiﬁ: M: I
and will be greatly missed in our lives. (“a . Q .. ' , ’
l
671 g,
i

"
"9","APPENDIXA - STARS PROGRAM EVALUATION FORM - 3
General Information '
Name: ‘
School Name: ..
STARS Project Title:
Term/Date of participation: ‘
1. Primary responsibility on STARS project:
2. Areas of interest prior to STARS program:
3. Did your areas of interest change as a result of your STARS experience? Yes 1:] No 1:!
If yes, how? >
4. Have you participated in a similar program before? Yes 1:] No C]
If yes, please describe:
If yes, did your areas of interest change as a result of your experience? Yes E] No 1:]
If yes, how?
Experience gained from the STARS program
NM 1 little hit some qullo a bit a great deal I
1. Scientiﬁc research experienceO 0 1 2 3 4 .
2. Engineering experience 0 1 2 3 4
3. Math experience 0 1 2 3 4 .
4. Space-operations experience 0 1 2 3 4 '
5. Communications experience 0 1 2 3 4
6. Creative Design experience 0 1 2 3 4 '
7. Project Management experience 0 1 2 3 4 .
8. Other valuable experience not listed:
Comments: »“
Inspiration resulting from the STARS program 9‘
m a mate hit some qullo a bit a great deal :
1. The program inspired me to pursue Scientiﬁc Research 0 1 2 3 4 3
2. The program inspired me to pursue Engineering 0 1 2 3 4 .
3. The program inspired me to pursue Math 0 1 2 3 4 y
4. The program inspired me to pursue a space-related career 0 1 2 3 4 ,g
5. The program inspired me to pursue Communications 0 1 2 3 4 '_
6. The program inspired me to pursue Creative Design 0 1 2 3 4
7. The program inspired me to pursue Project Management 0 1 2 3 4 '
8. The program inspired me to pursue: --
Comments: E
Cultural Experience gained from the STARS program "":
1. How much contact did you have with students from other cultures? ;
2. From your experience in this program did you learn about other cultures? Yes 1:] No [:1 -
If yes, give some examptes of what you learned:
f1.
:3:
. 672 a

"
"10","3. From which of the following sources did you learn about the social and cultural aspects of the other
j participating countries? Check all that apply:
4 lnternet/email communication [:1
1 School visits by the STARS team I]
. EXperiment preparation D
' Mission simulation [:1
Launch Preparation [3
Real-time operations E]
Post-ﬂight activities D
Other D
(please specify)
l STARS program Evaluation
‘ 1. Were you familiar with the Scientific Method prior to your STARS experience? Yes [:I No [3
2. Did you use the Scientiﬁc Method in carrying out your STARS experiment? Yes [:I No C]
3. Do you have a deeper understanding of the Scientiﬁc Method as a result of conducting your STARS
experiment? Yes [:I No D
If yes, in what way(s)?
4. Did you have any experience with managing a project prior to your participation in the STARS
program? Yes D No [:1
if yes, describe briefly:
5. Did you gain any project management skills while participating in the STARS program? Yes [:1 No [:1
If yes, describe briefly: '
6. Did you have any experience working as part of a team prior to your participation in the STARS
program? Yes I] No |___]
If yes, describe briefly:
7. Did you learn anything about working as part of a team while participating in the STARS program?
Yes El No [:1
If yes, describe briefly:
8. Did you have any experience working Iong-distance with others prior to your participation in the STARS
program? Yes E] No [:1
If yes, describe brieﬂy: '
9. Did you learn anything about working long-distance with others while participating in the STARS
program? Yes [:I No [:1
If yes, describe briefly:
10. Describe the most useful/helpful experience that you gained from participating in the STARS program:
11. Were your expectations for the program met? Yes [:1 No [:l
Please describe: '
12. Would you recommend this program to other students? Yes D No [:1
Why or why not?
13. Have you received any job offers or college entrance due to your involvement in the STARS program?
; Yes [:1 No [:1
E If yes, what are they and where?
l 14. lf you could change something about the STARS Program, what would it be?
3 THANK YOU FOR YOUR VALUABLE INPUTtl
L 673

"
