"","x"
"1","2007-01-3188
Scuence Research and Education Modules for the CGBA
Spaceflight Incubator
Alex Hoehn, Stefanie Countryman, Jake Freeman, Kevin Gifford, Carla Goulart, William
Kalinowski, Paul Koenig, Sebastian Kuzminski, Shea Williams, Louis Stodieck
BioServe Space Technologies, Aerospace Engineering Sciences, University of Colorado
Copyright © 2007 SAE International
ABSTRACT The CGBA incubators have also supported a variety of
passive experiments requiring only thermal control,
Several small life sciences research modules were either to a fixed temperature or to a desired thermal
designed to accommodate both scientific research and profile. More recently, powered research modules have
K-12 educational objectives on the same Spaceﬂight been designed and/or flown, taking full advantage of the
mission. The K-12 educational objectives are power and networked control interfaces, including the
accomplished by participating students around the globe “Single LOOP for Cell Culture” (SLCC, Hoehn et 8L,
and complimented by ground experiments conducted in 2006), and the CSI-
their own classrooms. The spaceflight research is
analyzed by students through image analysis of The first flight of the CGBA Science Insert (CSl-Ol) was
downlinked video and still images. The science launched 0“ board 313-116 (December 2006) and
objectives of the mission often require sample return for included tWO C.elegans (nematode) habitats (C-Hab),
more detailed sample analysis on ground. Integration of and an automated seed germination habitat (G-Hab),
new modules as part of a CGBA Science Insert (CSI) along with nine macroscopic and microscopic video
into the CGBA incubator is facilitated through cameras for near-real time experiment viewing. CSI-02
standardized interfaces. Engineering challenges, trades as planned for 31-3-1 18 (August 2007) adds cell culture
and system architecture designs are presented for the habitats, a silicate garden (SG-Hab) and a plant
CGBA Incubator and the CSI life sciences habitats development (PD-Hab) habitat experiment. This paper
currently on board oflSS_ introduces the mission concept and the engineering
challenges, trades and design of the various habitats.
INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND
The Commercial Generic BioProcessing Apparatus I I
(CGBA) incubator has supported a variety of life CGBAI has IPrIeVIOUSIY supported tWO dedicated
sciences and education payloads in Spaceflight since educational ImISSIOnS for Spacehab Inc., one on STS-93
1992 (Hoehn etal.,2004,1999).CGBAincubators can (Ladybugs In Space) and one on STS-10T7M (Space
be flown in various science- and mission-specific Technology and Research Students, STARS ,Flg- 1,
configurations on the Space Shuttle, MIR and the see W, Spacehab I'wa
International Space Station (ISS). The CGBA incubator 2903)- BU'tt 0“ the SllCCGSSGS Of these educational
volume can accommodate a variety of specialized m'SS'OhS’ theICGBA Solence Insert (CSI) program was
science research modules (SRM). Through standardized created, sharIIngIresources 0“ the sarne tllght between
interfaces for switched power, analog NTSC video signal solence objectives from . academic or I I Industry
routing and a multi-drop networked communication researchers IW'th edIucational opportunities for
system, science research modules can also be launched elementary, middle and hlgh SChOO' students.
independently from the CGBA incubator. Module-
specific software parameters to control experiment MSW
monitoring, control and video / single frame video
capture can be uploaded to the CGBA through the As an educational tool, CSI is designed to excite and
EXPRESS Rack data and command interface aboard inspire K42 students in the areas 0t science,
the International Space Station. Data is returned in near technology, engineering and math (STEM)- Through its
real-time to a remote payload operations and control partnership programs, CSI provides students the
center (POCC), and data / video can be displayed opportunity to participate in actual, near real-time,
through the world-wide web to distributed investigators. science experiments conducted onboard the
International Space Station (ISS). Each experiment is
designed to be easily reproducible in the classroom (Fig.
1

"
"2","2), providing hands-on experience to students while and non-profit educational organizations such as the
comparing the same experiment with and without ‘Adventures of the Agronauts’ program in North Carolina
gravity. (htt9://www.ncsu.edu/Qroiect/agronauts/iss/index.html),
‘Orion’s Quest’ (www.orionsguest.org), as well as
’ 1S” supporting commercial organizations.
‘ Pg - .wtrr. f?
v x .2,
h l 0/ N? ’3‘ “'7?“ ”I , * I; .. _
' ~ ' ‘ ‘ t w- t i'-
, _ . .3 A 2"""" ‘38"" ‘J' ""' .. ‘. _ _ _
t -.‘ _ “va. ’ 9 {53“. ’\_ ‘ "" f, a
I ' I I X330 l, x )i‘ﬁ] i .‘_. ‘_._ - _ "",5'1.‘ .- i :ﬁr
Figure 1. The STARSTM payload aboard STS—107 during crew J; ﬂ 1:. + i 2:;
operations for activation of the Chemical Garden experiment in the ' ' "",1
Spacehab module. ‘
Figure 2. CSI—OI Classroom activity investigating seed germination
The CSI program is provided on an annual basis to and gravitropism.
elementary, middle and/or high school teachers. A
standards-based curriculum supplement that includes The CSI-O1 Exgeriments
ground-based student activities is provided by the
program’s partners to participating teachers. The The first set of CSI experiments (CSI-O1) was launched
program provides the students and teachers the in December 2006 on Space Shuttle flight STS-116 to
opportunity to participate in an actual space life science the International Space Station. Once the Space Shuttle
experiment. This is achieved through classroom ground docked with the ISS, CSI-O1 was transferred to the ISS
controls (Fig. 2) that are conducted in conjunction with and then powered and controlled inside the CGBA
the near real-time research being completed on board incubator which is located in an EXPRESS rack. CGBA
the Space Shuttle or International Space Station. automatically runs the CSI-O1 experiments and sends
Images and data from the space based experiment are data down to Earth through the resources provided by
down-Iinked to the BioServe Payload Operations and EXPRESS, namely electric power, digital data and
Control Center (POCC) on a daily basis while the command link through Ethernet, and analog video
experiment is active. This data is then made available capture and digital downlinkto Earth.
through a web site that is accessible by the Classroom
teachers for comparison of their ground controls. This One of the CSI—01 experiments, the soil nematode
website also includes all classroom materials that are Caenorhabditis elegans (C,elegans) was chosen both
needed by the teacher in order to complete the because of its previous flight experience and because it
Classroom lessons, experiment and overall program. is commonly used in laboratories as a model specimen
EaCh experiment associated with the program lasts aimed at understanding processes relevant to Astronaut
approximately2weeks. health such as muscle atrophy and radiation damage.
The nematode investigation focused on researching and
Once the experiments are completed and all data are understanding multi-generational (20-30) exposure to
collected, students and teachers have access to all the weightless environment of space aboard ISS.
experiment results. Teachers that do not wish to conduct Through image analysis, participating middle school and
the ground control experiments in “near real-time” have high school students conducted blinded analysis of both
the option to conduct the experiments anytime during flight and ground based images of the C.elegans. These
the school year after the space-based research is students, through the CSI-O1 program and BioServe’s
complete. All experiment data will remain on the educational partner, Orion’s Quest, teamed up with
appropriate website available for teacher access and scientists from BioServe Space Technologies, the
use once the actual experiment is completed. Malaysian Space Agency, Simon Fraser University, and
the University of Pittsburgh to study the effects of long
The CSI program brings cutting edge technology, duration organism growth in space. During ISS
advanced engineering techniques and the experience of Expeditions 14 and 15, thousands of tiny C.elegans
space-based research into the Classroom for children worms grew and reproduced on board the International
who may otherwise not have this opportunity. CSI is a Space Station inside the CSI habitat. While students
joint partnership between NASA, who provides the documented population and growth rates of the worms,
launch and on-orbit infrastructure, BioServe Space scientists will calculate the effects of radiation on
Technologies (payload development and integration), mutation rates, muscle and the immune system. The
2

"
"3","results of these analyses will give scientists an idea of Ampro Single Board Computer with a PC104 expansion
how an animal adapts to and is affected by the bus for data acquisition and control and for video frame
spaceflight environment. The C.elegans are grabbing (Gifford, 2001). The operating system, software
accommodated in the C-Hab habitat. and data are stored on a dual compact flash (CF) solid
state drive system with 1 or 4 GB of memory each.
A second CSI-02 experiment, a seed germination r
experiment, was used for educational purposes only and - r — -- 1‘ ' .:- _. ...- -. . t ""'u- - *
was geared towards 3rd to 6th graders through the I ' .1 .H'W -“ "" ”“330 m _-
‘Adventures of the Agronauts’ program at North Carolina 3,}? . ' ___.. a ... ' ' ""
State University. On orbit, the CSI habitat called Garden _________J' ‘ __ w?” '- Fm ..
Habitat (G-Hab) was used. The G-Hab has 4 small .. - _’3 ‘ __ -- 13.31 1:: ._ __'_ .
compartments on each side in which two sets of radish i .1 ' _., .2 "" :::: -.
seeds and two sets of alfalfa seeds were sown into a _ q ‘ J4. '{x' "" .... .'::'.‘
Clear gel called PhytageIT'VI (Sigma Aldrich, 2007). The :_ _;..“g-_-'—: ..'.r‘_ ﬁﬁ‘ ' . f“ . ' - -
PhytageIT'VI was used to allow seed germination and '5"" _g _'i ' I ._
sustain plant growth for the necessary time period «'h—-—-_""_-""-- .-.-‘._---
Eggdggefireggrlgriglﬁtgtdd‘:\(l):|to3:33:11IaEnZC2:eet“?(:oie:S”S Figure 3. CGBA empty incubator volume (left), and CGBA inside
. . . ' EXPRESS rack aboard ISS with acoustic noise reduction muﬂlers
Students were prOVIded classroom kIts that Included the (right).
same radish and alfalfa seeds, PhytageIT'VI and
instructions on orienting the seeds for germination. CGBA THERMAL PERFORMANCE
Students germinated these seeds in the Classroom and
compared the-rate- Of growth and the ability Of the seed Thermal testing of the evolved CGBA Incubator design
to correctly orient Itself once It germinated to the space showed a temperature capability of —14°C to +37°C with
germinated seeds. The experiment taught students the zero internal heat load. Performance data of the evolved
cencept Of graVItropIsm and photo-troplsm as well as thermal design showed that the new design was equal to
different aspects of seed germination and early plant or better than the previous liquid coolant design.
development. Thermal testing of the CGBA incubator occurred within
the environmental test facilities at BioServe (Boulder,
CGBA'NCUBATOR EVOLUTION Colorado, ambient pressure at 80 kPa / 12.2 psia).
BioServe houses a waIk-in environmental chamber with
The Commercial Generic BioProcessing Apparatus temperature and humidity control with an operating
(CGBA) incubator has evolved over the past 15 years temperature and humidity envelope of +2°C to +55°C
from supporting short Space Shuttle sortie flights 0“ the and 10% to 100% rH, respectively. ISS temperature and
order of two weeks in duration (Hoehn et a|., 1999), to humidity conditions vary, but are typically near +25°C
providing a semi-permanent multi-use/multi-payload and z500/0 rH.
function aboard the International Space Station (ISS;
Hoehn et a|., 2004; Fig. 3). To accommodate CGBA’s ""amenwcienceInserttememneratures
new mission for CSI, the thermal system has been “5 8833333: 45
upgraded from utilizing an internal water-based coolant 4o . 40
loop to using only solid state components (excluding 35 [L 35
fan). The upgraded thermal system design drastically _
reduces single points of failure in the system and 3"" i 3""
creates a much more robust system with an increased 3 25 L ‘ 25
lifetime and expanded operating temperature envelope. 3;. 20, V 20
The necessary qualification and acceptance tests of the U '
new design consist of only a subset of those for the 15 I 15
previous design, which reduces required ground support 10 10
equipment and the risks associated with a liquid coolant 1
system. These design Changes were accomplished 5 V 5
under the constraints of not Changing any launch vehicle 00312: W W 0W 0W 0W W W 0W W m;
(STS)’ '88 hOSt raCk (EXPRESS, Fig.3), or- internal 16:00 16:30 17:00 17:30 18:00 Tim1e3:(360m) 19:00 19:30 20:00 20:30 21:00
science research module user interfaces. The CGBA . . .
computer required software updates to accommodate Fzgure 4. CGBAmcubator temperature response (setpomt andactual
the flexibility required for on-orbit Change-out Of Science {ncugator controller temperature) wzthout a thermal load m the
Research Modules (SRMs). The habitat-specific SRM me” am (empty)
software can be integrated into existing modular CGBA CGBA was tested both at this nominal ISS condition as
software infrastructure without affecting the interfaces to well as “worst case” conditions such as maximum 188
the payload host, and without affecting CGBA operations cabin temperature and maximum ISS dew oint
as the software is not safety-critical. The flight computer Dynamic responses to Changes in setpoints are shown
runs a Linux operating system, implemented on an in Fig. 4 and 5. Since CGBA rejects heat through
3

"
"4","exchange with ambient cabin air, the thermal At extreme setpoints (Fig. 6), and with internal power
performance of CGBA is directly related to the ambient dissipation from a science research module such as
temperature, pressure and humidity. During thermal CSI, internal gradients OH to 2°C exist (Fig. 6).
testing in Boulder, Colorado, it was observed that the
minimum CGBA freezer temperature was —14°C with an Below Dewpoint Ogeration
ambient temperature of +20°C, but only —12.5°C with an
ambienttemperature of +25°C(Fig.6). Since CGBA has the capability to cool the incubator
volume to temperatures well below ISS dew point (ISS
For the tests shown in Figure 4 and 5, the incubator dew point is typically at or below +17°C), it is essential to
volume was empty, without a powered science research ensure that any ambient air—exposed surfaces remain
module, and therefore no power was dissipated within above dew point to avoid condensation. Although
the incubator volume. Significant gradients exist only condensation is unavoidable inside the freezer volume
during transients (Fig. 5), while steady state (as is with a household freezer), the total amount of
temperatures are uniform throughout the incubator at condensation inside of the freezer can be limited by a
moderate setpoint temperatures (Fig. 4, 5). vapor barrier sea| around all openings to the freezer box.
During the development of this seal, testing uncovered
45 ”W“ Tempmtw‘e 45 that even a compressed liquid barrier open cell foam wi||
533:: not prevent additional vapor transmission into the
40 ‘t age+ 40 freezer volume over periods of 1-2 weeks. Over time,
35 r 35 additional condensation/freezing of humidity in the air
will result in degraded thermal performance of the
30 .. 30 freezer. After a closed cell foam barrier or gasket seal
25 '5' 25 around the freezer volume was installed, very |itt|e
: 20} \ 20 condensation was observed after Iong-term tests
3;» i , = (months).
15 I ' 15
10 * , ” 10 With inadequate gasketing, over time, more and more
‘ ‘ condensation forms within the CGBA freezer volume
5 . 5 and the heat of condensation exceeds the heat pumping
o ‘ 0 capacity of CGBA resulting in rising temperatures inside
_5 _5 the freezer volume. However, with proper gasketing, the
321:: 2:33; 22:33; :23; 2:3: 32:32 2:23; 233; 2312:; 2323:; 22:32; freezer temperature remains steady over extended
nmeccm periods of time and very little condensation/precipitate
Figure 5. The incubator temperature is controlled from the front appears at the COIdeSt location on the freezer bOX' The
through conduction through the 6 mm thick aluminum walls. Even data received from the payload over time allows an
with vacuum panel insulation, gradients exist between the ‘back’ — assessment 0f thermal performanCe and DOSSible
furthest away from controller, and the ‘front’ (nearest controller) indication Of condensation through Change Of power
temperature sensor. The software controls to the average of the two draw at fixed setpointS, after correcting for ambient
fememmre SWISOVS- temperature Changes.
-10 Fm Temperature -10 Effects of Acoustic Noise Silencer
” "" .. F523: 3:
HVBPage + Freezer Temperature
-11 '11 —:3
Back Temp —|—
"" i 4 Front Temp +
-12 ’ ' ‘ ‘ ‘ —12 '5' Huerage Temp +
' -1CI
,_, -13 '13
. L, '11 ‘ m
§ -14 Q -14 g —12
-15 _15 t -13
-14
-15 —16 E
-15
450/05 10:06 lOXOB lOKOB 10/08 10/08 10:06 10/06 10/08 10/0—81? ﬂfﬂfﬂﬁlﬂfﬂﬁlﬂfﬂﬁlﬂﬁﬂﬁlﬂfﬂﬁlﬂflﬂlﬂflﬂlﬂﬁlﬂlﬂflﬂlﬂflﬂlﬂflﬂlﬂﬁlﬂlﬂﬁlﬂlﬂflt
22:00 00:00 02:00 04:00 05:00 03:00 10:00 12:00 14:00 15:00 HmmmmiammEUmUEEmDUmmozmmﬂaimomaxﬂmamoimm12:0014mt315mt
Time (GMT) Time {GMT}
F igur e 6' Eﬁ’ect ?f ambient ”WWW“ At maximum cooling Figure 7. Eﬂect ofmuﬂlers. Initially, CGBA was operating at steady
capacity, the ambient temp er atur e ZS changed from 250C to 200C state with the muﬂlers attached at peak power. The muﬂlers were
reducing the pesszble ihtemal temp er atur e by 1'40C due f0 reduced then removed and the system established a new steady state at a
[9 ar as lth heat into the incubator and lower the]? m al $1141.6me the colder incubator temperature. The ambient temperature during this
thermoelectric heatpump (50% rH, 80 kPa ambient condition). period was held constant at 25°C.
4

"
"5","The space station program requires that CGBA operate power and data / command connection and video signal
with a muffler (Fig. 3), or passive sound suppression, in transfer to CGBA through two quick-disconnect wire
order to attenuate noise emitted by the fans of the harness connections.
thermal system. These “mufflers” result in decreased air
flow and increased back pressure within the flow pattern .EF-_ I E1 __ -_. Tr ‘
of the air heat exchanger. As a result, thermal ' . "". _. .._-
performance of CGBA is degraded when the mufflers -- ' -- '- “At.- ""i’ ""
are installed. For the tests depicted in Figure 7, CGBA _ f” --
can cool approximately 3°C lower without the mufflers at 1.- 1““ -
an ambienttemperature of 25°C "" ' , .
Effects of Humidity Release Within Incubator "" ”‘5' - .1 ' .
In flight data for humidity in the CGBA Freezer volume 1\ F, .111
with the CSI-O1 experiment is interesting because it """"1 ._'.. - ' -.._""'""-
shows a slow ramp in humidity over time as the habitats, I' -- 111-"" 1“ 1""...""
with their gas permeable membranes, slowly transfer . "" 1 _ '
liquid water to vapor. A rapid increase in G-HAB t '
humidity in the middle Of February corresponds to the Figure 9. The CSIinsert can be transported without CGBA in its own
activation of that habitat, in which seed holders Nomextransportbag.
punctured the previously sealed water gel (agar or
PhytageIT'V') root growth chambers (Fig. 8). In late April, COMMUNICATIONS AND CONTROL
CGBA was shut down, and accessed by the Space
Station crew. Following this activity, the humidity within The BioServe Communication Stack (BCS, Gifford,
CGBA dropped, presumably due to mixing with the drier 2001) has been in use since 1996 for two-way (duplex)
ambient Space Station environment as well as potential communications between Shuttle and ISS experiments
effects of CSI related hardware interfering with a proper and ground-based Payload Operation and Control
freezer gasket seal, allowing more gas exchange with Centers (POCCs). The BCS provides multiplexed
the cabin atmosphere. message delivery between remote systems (e.g., a flight
payload and groundside operations workstation). The
100 1511111111111 100 BCS is agnostic to the underlying transport, network,
1 532?: and data-Iink protocols. A typical implementation uses
‘ I ._ either TCP or UDP at the transport layer, IP at the
80 ”mm""IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII 30 network layer, and Ethernet at the data-Iink layer. The
""IIIIHI"" primary goal of BCS, or any delay-tolerant
""IIIIII!!!|!||l!!!lllllll~ll~'!IIII‘""‘ I ; communication system, is to provide reliable
5° 'H 1 ' ' 5° uplink/commanding and complete groundside telemetry
f: ‘ * I .1 receipt.
40 40
The BioNet middleware (Gifford et a|., 2006) provides
asynchronous messaging between distributed
20 20 applications and distributed data-generating endpoint
sensors or systems. The BioNet system architecture
provides the necessary framework to facilitate the
0 ‘ 11111 ‘ 1211 03111 1111 ' 01/11 15/010 incorporation of heterogeneous wired and wireless
18:00 04:00 15:00 01:00 12:00 22:00 . . . . .
11118111111 sensmg and control deVIces Into a unified data system
Figure 8. Slow increase of humidity within incubator due to habitat Wlth a. Standardlzed ap‘f‘allcatlon Interfﬁce: In the CGBA
activation and Slow evaporative water losses. experiments, mOdUIar plug-and-play BioNetisoftware
modules are composed to control and communicate With
the different experiment hardware contained in the SRM.
SCIENCE INSERT INTEGRATION WITHIN CGBA BCS and BioNet together provide the capability to uplink
The CGBA incubator volume can accommodate passive any binary image to remote locations WhiCh allowsiuplink
or active components that require thermal control. Small Of updated eonfiguration files W'th automated application
items can be kept in place and in good thermal contact restart, .uplink Of updated application programs, and
with the walls using a restraint net. Larger items such as Installation Of updated or. additional. deVIce drivers for
the CGBA Science Insert can be transported new deVIce-data Integration — a|| Without affecting the
individually, and attached to a generic threaded hole Iexedcuélng ?'ON.et m|_c|i_ﬁieware,bt?e BCS-,dor ?peratlenl Of
pattern in the walls of the CGBA incubator volume using foﬁ e app Icationsd '3 CED? ' 'ty provn :3 or partia or
captive threaded fasteners (example: Fig. 11). A Nomex u system Iu-pgra es an everages t e remote re-
transport bag (Fig.9) is used for transport to / from programmablllty of advanced systems, a fundamental
CGBA. Active inserts can connect to CGBA for switched
5

"
"6","concept of advanced space communication serves as a power and data hub (Fig.10). Each of the
architectures (Schier et a|., 2005). control modules contains 3 NTSC analog video cameras
with fixed focal length and field of view, which is
adjusted preflight (Fig. 11). Macroscopic and
cs| DESIGN microscopic cameras can be used depending on the
science or educational requirements.
The CGBA Science Insert (CSI, Fig.10) evolved from
earlier education inserts within CGBA, with special The control boards are all networked t0 the CGBA
attention to Iong-term use aboard ISS, and a manual control computer using an RS485 multi-drop network.
installation by the flight—crew of the science insert into The master control board provides all power switching
CGBA vs. ground installation prior to launch. for lights, motors and cameras, as well as analog data
acquisition and analog video multiplexing and routing.
We Analog video signals are digitized by the CGBA frame
- 1r- ~""'*~. * _ W grabber for single frame JPEG-Compressed images or
g” ‘ I i . LE: short MPEG movies. These digital files can be
a ""' _- _ downlinked using the EXPRESS rack Ethernet data link.
_ . _ . Additionally, the analog video signal can be sent to
._ . _-:' . . EXPRESS as a differential analog video signal, and
. i .-*-- .I-‘\ _' r downlinked as digital ISS signals independent form the
* tr '1‘ 1 EXPRESS Ethernetdatalink.
.“ ii} The CSI layout within the CGBA incubator allows the
_- E ' 1' habitats to be positioned with sufficient accuracy in the
(I, . IE; _ proper location in front of the camera views (Fig.11).
- ‘--- .|l__-]|--II[|-_].I-.-]|.. J ,- _ I .__ﬁ_._1,:...-
‘- ./ 2 Tu N .""""|_“—l__II‘,_ IIID D L ﬁg?! :I
. i _ s. P"". LI ,,:::~--:-“ I ?%1‘u‘ua
\ . “ta: "" . 9122:? '” 'e%.. - —i""'
\ II I,. .. . g—Iﬁ .. c: -1- I_ . - . - . _IIIIIIIIIIII
IIIIIIII III: I -_~.,_IIIIII/s - II.__I—I ___
Figure 10. The CSI—OI habitats and their associated camera modules F igur e 11' CSI camera modules. The camera modules also provide
within the CGBA incubator volume. The habitats can be removed habitat control through a micr 019’” ocessor -based, RS485 networked
individually (orange Kapton tape handles). controller, and video routing and multiplexing. LED light sources
illuminate the habitats.
CSI DESIGN LAYOUT
THE CSI HABITATS
To provide real-time data on the progress of the I I I I I I
experiment, and to allow student participation during II-Iabitat desngns for educgt'onal mnssnons W'th CGBA
flight when samples are not yet available for post—flight Included lady pUQS’ butterflies, and potatoIcuttIngs (STS'
analysis, CSI relies heavily on an array of multiplexed 93), ants, Silkworms, spiders, aquatic ecosystem
analog video images, both with microscopic and (MacCaIIum et a|., 2000, 1998; Poynter et a|., 2001),
macroscopic capabilities (color or black and white for carpenter bees and Chemical garden (81-8407),
highest resolution). Each habitat has two Clear C.elegans and seed germination (98""01’ STS'HG)’
polycarbonate windows which, together with the and plant and yeast cell cultures, Silicate garden and
aluminum structure, provide the first level of containment plant development (CSI-02, STS'1I16)- The ISTS'1O7
for the biological and chemical materials. STARST'V' habitats and their educational mlssmn have
been described previously (Goulart et a|., 2005, 2004,
Each habitat has an associated camera and control 2002,Woodard eta|.,2003).
board module. Habitats and control module are located
within the incubator volume, and electrically connected
to the ‘master’ control and camera module, which also
6

"
"7","Cell Culture/C.elegans habitat (C-Hab) For video microscopy, a mirror between the third and
second OpticeIIT'V' provides reflected backlighting from
The C-Hab is designed around 6 interconnected, white LEDs for the objects in the field of view and field of
commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) culture systems called depth (Figure 13).
‘OpticeIIT'V"" (BioCrystaI, Ltd., 575 McCorkIe Blvd.,
Westerville, OH 43082, USA, httQ://www.ogtice||.Coml). A small cutout allows viewing of the third OpticeIIT'V' by
OpticellsT'V' feature optically Clear, gas-permeable film the 3rd camera through the first two OpticeIIT'V'. The first
windows, and two septa ports, for a usable growth OpticeIIT'V' is less interesting, as it contains the living
volume at equal media thickness of z12 mL. Three culture at launch, while the 2nd and 3rd OpticeIIT'V' contain
miniature peristaltic pumps, each with a dual pump the space-grown cultures after on-orbit inoculation by
head, allow periodic sub-oulturing by ‘passing’ a metered passing a small volume of sample from the previous
volume from one OpticeIIT'V' to the next (Figs. 12, 13). OpticeIIT'V' (Figure 14).
OpticellsT'V' have been previously evaluated for
spaceflight (C.elegans and S.cerevisiae (yeast), Fahlen The C-Hab has two windows, and astronaut time is
et al., 2005) as passive culture systems without on-orbit required to rotate the habitat to visualize the second
sub-oulturing or sampling provisions. OpticellsT'V' have habitat side, as cameras are only able to see one habitat
flown for passive observatories for experimental side. This manual operation is, on the other hand, an
microbial systems (POEMS) on ISS (Miller, 2005, opportunity for engaging the crew in educational
Roberts and Reed, 2005). objectives.
.- ' . E -
4f 3' Q4 3 E I-l 5'.
l . J ' .. . e a E E
__; ' - ' I ‘31P. :‘*Ii:'---..' _ E H In. in
I . Item L” (Q: LEEI- : =‘ g LED
. ' ._ ?'fglh'fl : : LEEI 3 (ﬁt
— Mirror
Figure 12. The CS] habitat with 6 OptieellsTM and 3 peristaltic W. per-
pumps. A ﬁxative container with toxicity hazard level 1 (RNAlaterTM, ' 3 '
alcohols, some aldehydes), or an oxygen sensor can be located in the
center of the habitat. _ ﬂ —
:-
The C-Hab design is largely derived from the ‘Single 6:)
Loop for Cell Culture’ (SLCC) design (Hoehn et al., N: .-
2006). The plumbing in C-Hab can be configured to -55
have 6 sequential cultures, or two parallel cultures with 3
sequential OpticellsT'V' each, depending on the research —Min’ﬂr—
“eedS- m
i ,o m =1“: ”5
I ' Figure 14. Plumbing diagram for 6 sequential cultures, with a ﬁnal
a ﬁxed sample (RNAlaterTM ﬁxative in syringe in center). Each pump
has a dual pump head. The OptieellsTM are ﬂexible enough to
f ’ accommodate small inoculation volume additions during passaging
. ' ' . ofsamples between OptieellsTM.
4 ‘ ’
The same C-Hab design can be used to support a
t . , ‘ variety of educational and scientific research. It has
; I been used for C.elegans cultures during CSI-01
' ‘ ' (launched STS-116), and is configured for plant cell
' I culture and yeast studies during CSI-02 (to be launched
r on STS-118). C.elegans are grown in a defined liquid
1 / Q media (Szewczyk et al., 2003; Fahler et al., 2005). For
' ' the growth of yeast, limited nutrients avoid the excessive
Figure13. A microscopic view of the C.elegans inside C—Hab metabOIiC formation Of gas (Fahler et al., 2005)-
(horizontal image width is 2mm).
7

"
"8","Garden Habitat (G-Hab) Using the same basic hardware configuration as the G-
Hab, dry seed crystals, attached at the end of gold-
The G-Hab used hardware originally developed for the plated rods, are pushed into a silica solution on orbit,
Chemical Garden research on STS-107. The same and the dynamics of the crystal deformation is observed
basic design can be used as a level of containment and over several days. The crystal deformations in
for activation of the crystal deformation experiments spaceflight form slower than on Earth, and are not
(Chemical Garden / STS-107, Silicate Garden SG-Hab/ subject to the buoyancy forces seen in ground
CSI-OZ), as well as for simple seed germination experiments (Fig. 16).
experiments (CSI-O1 G-Hab / STS-116). For seed _
germination, the chambers are filled with a plant nutrient ' W
gel (99% water, 1% gelling agent, plant nutrients). The ,i' .
motor ‘injects’ seeds into the gel to initiate germination. : '1 ‘
Cameras observe the seed germination and early plant '1' t v. I
growth. LED light sources assist in a phototropic ’1. .
response and provide illumination for videography. The J
G-Hab has two sides, only one can be seen by the ' t' -'
camera module at a time. It is therefore necessary to 9,,
access CGBA/CSI, remove the G-Hab and re-insert it y 9
turned 180 degrees so that the camera can observe the ' , /‘ } \\_
second seed germination experiment. Each side has 4 \""\ ,, ‘
individual Chambers, and each Chamber contains 2—3 '*‘ \‘
seeds for redundancy and for different seed orientation.
Evaporative water losses and the limited size ultimately a - . - —-‘ A , ' W * *‘2”
limit the eXperiment- All samples (gel, seeds) are non' Figure16. Calcium Carbonate silica garden grown in space on
hazardOUS- board space shuttle mission STS—107 (Columbia). Ground (left) and
ﬂight (right). Asﬂown 0n STARSTM.
«3.29 E _ i ""'-.. Future Habitats
:1I ' ‘ ti“ I I Habitats previously flown on STS-93 and STS-107 for
_ Egg;- * r ‘_ the STARST'V' program can be adapted to the CSI form
ﬁg; g? *1 . - factor. A passive Plant Development Habitat (PD-Hab) is
.3}??? 9 e ' developed that would allow crew interaction for
/ 9” "" ""-‘T 77' educational missions, allowing repeated plant
‘ ft"" . germination with enhanced visualization and volume for
9 1i .3: ‘ plant development of up to 2—3 weeks, limited by the
. r tit ' slow evaporative water losses through the gas exchange
\ M :__'_.""t'-j'-;-!' membranes of the habitat once initiated. Dry seeds are
I ”i "" F!"" '3'_ i - 4' stored separately from the water gel / plant nutrient
\gfr media. Germination is initiated by manually inserting a
seed-containing ‘plug’ into the initially vapor—tight sealed
Figure15. The Garden Habitat (G-Hab) features 4 geZ-ﬁlled gel base, hydrating the seed- After insertion Of the dry
Chambers 011 each side. Two to three seeds per Chamber can be seed plug, the PD-Hab iS Closed With a Clear lid, and
automatically injected into the gel to initiate germination. White seed germination and plant growth can be observed
LEDS provide video illumination and blue-rieh light for through the CSI cameras from the top and side_ Once
phOtOtmpism- too much water has been lost through evaporation to the
crew cabin atmosphere, the PD-Hab can be placed in
Automated procedures for CSI'Ot include the activation on-orbit trash, while maintaining containment for residual
0t each side Of the Garden Habitat (G-Hab) by issuing plant material and gel. The location of PD-Hab in CSI
commands from the BioServe POCC using real-time allows the root zone to be coolest, and the aerial tissue
downlinked video as feedback to determine the correct volume to be slightly warmer through the LED |ights_
placement Of the SGGdS within the growth medium. The This provides passive means of recycIing some of the
ground unit is similarly activated at roughly the same evapo-transpiration water from the aerial volume back to
time 33 the flight unit the roots to extend the usable experiment duration.
WM) ON ORBIT OPERATIONS AND CREW INTERACTIONS
Chemical gardens are the plant—Iike structures formed For the educational objectives, crew interaction is
Oh placing together a soluble metal salt, often in the form desired, but often not available due to limited resources
Of a seed crystal, and an aqueous SOIUtiOh 0t one 0t and scheduling conflicts. Therefore, the majority of CSI
many anions, often sodium silicate (Cartwright et 8""! activities are automated and can be controlled and
2002; Jones and Walter, 1998).
8

"
"9","scheduled from ground, based on science or educational allowing educational participation with increasing
objectives such as academic school calendar for the numbers of students, demonstrating the value of
class room activities. Mandatory crew interaction include research on ISS.
the initial transfer of the CSI insert (with or without
CGBA) to the ISS and installation inside EXPRESS, as
well as habitat rotation for those habitats that have a ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
‘back side’ requiring videography, as the cameras have
only access to one Of the tWO habitat sides. This work was supported by the NASA Cooperative
Agreement (NCC8—242) for BioServe Space
The methOd Of ISSUIng commands and UtIIIZIng reaI-time Technologies _ A NASA Research Partnership Center,
Video downlink aS feedbaCk IS also employed to aCtivate as we” as support from the MaIaysian Space Agency,
the Silicate Garden habitat. The ‘passage’ of C.elegans, Angkasa. Special thanks to Melissa Kirven-Brooks
plantcells, or yeastcultures between the OpticellsT'VI ofa Catharine A. Conley (NASA Ames Research Center),
C-Hab i3 preprogrammed t0 OCCUF at specified intervals, and Nathaniel Szewczyk (University of Pittsburg), as
however, these times can be modified if necessary by well as all the C-Hab scientists for their valuable
issuing commands from the BioServe POCC as well, contributions to testing the C.elegens hardware,
based on reaI'tIme CUIture Observations. The Change Of preparing the science for flight and supporting the
‘fluid passaging’ (i.e., sub-culturing and inoculation or education program. BioServe would also like to
ﬁxation) can also be used to accommOdate mOCIIerCI acknow|edge its education partners Orion’s Quest
mission parameters and launch delays. (www.orionsguest.org), and North Carolina State
University’s “Adventure of the Agronauts” program
(httg://www.ncsu.edu/groiect/agronauts/iss/index.html).
EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM STATUS
Over 5,000 elementary, middle and high school students REFERENCES
participated in the CSI-01 experiments. For the seed
germination experiments students were able to see 1. Cartwright,J.H.E.,Garcia-Ruiz,J.M., Novellay,M.L.,
differences in both germination rates between space and and Otalora, F. (2002)» Formation of Chemical
ground as well as differences in the ability of the plant, Gardens.” J_ Colloid Interface Sci. 256, 351459,
once growth started, to orient itself in space. 2002
Approximately 3,000 middle and high school students 2' g?nh;e[’_Ts'gtsountga’géﬁiisgij ??ggﬁégggmmﬁf
analyzed data from over 900 downlinked C.elegans and ’Rei’ss-Bu’behheim D, (2065). “Methods fer the
images. The first automated culturing of C.elegans has Culture of C elegans- and ' S cerevisiae in
been successfully demonstrated. C.elegans is now the M' 't ,, A. . S . t G. 't t' l d
animal to have undergone the most successive Icrograyi y. merlcan OC’ey raVIanna an
generations of growth in space, thus demonstrating that Space Biology, VOI' 18_(2,),’ p91-92, June 2005'
no issues are anticipated with normal animal growth and 3' Gifford, K'K' (2091); A Modular Apl’0r0ach to
development during an extended period in space Payload Commurtleatlens and Control. October
(roughly equivalent to 250 human years). Preliminary ZQOI’AIAAISS Utililzation Conference .
results also indicate that these animals can appropriately 4- Gifford, K.K., .Kuzminsky, 8., Williams,. 8., and Saiz,
be used to assess the biological implications of radiation J., (2006): “BIoNet: A Developer—centric Middleware
exposure as opposed to inferring implications based Architecture for Heterogeneous Devices and
upon non_bio|ogic dosimeters_ Protocols.” IEEE Wireless Communications and
Networking Conference, Las Vegas, NV, April, 2006.
5. Goulart, C.V., Woodard, 8., and Campbell, K.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION (2005): “STARSTM (Science Technology and
Research Students): A Hands-on, Interactive,
CGBA has evolved in capability. Through CSI, CGBA Scientific and Cultural Exchange Lesson” SAE-
has proven to be an excellent general purpose, flexible paper 2005' 07-3702-
and quite capable facility aboard ISS. Given future 6. Goulart C.V., Woodard, 3., Rupert, M, and
potential interest in scientific, commercial, and Stodieck, LS. (2004): “Performance of the STARST'V'
exploration research, and as the International Space life sciences habitats in spaceflight and ground
Station moves towards completion with added controls.” SAE-paperlCES 2004-01-2394.
resources, CGBA can accommodate a wide variety of 7. Goulart, C., Rupert, M., Woodard, 8., Hoehn, A.
research through its infrastructure and modular facility (2002); “Habitat Development in Support of Small
design Scale Biological & Biochemical Space Experiments.”
SA E-paper 2002-01-2282.
CSI-01, as one Of the recent CGBA ‘customers’, has 8. Hoehn, A., J.B. Freeman, P. Koenig, L.S. Stodieck,
shown that even small integrated packages with few on- M. Vellone, s. Williams, J. deLuis, w. Feenstra, J.C.
orbit resources can support exciting research while Parrish, S. Pretorius, |__ Sun, S. Dyble, N. Searby, D.
9

"
"10","Vandendriesche (2006): ""Single Loop for Cell Science Payload During Benchtop Testing and
Culture (SLCC) — Development and Spaceflight Mission Simulations.”SAE-paper2003—01-2530.
Qualification of a Perfusion Cell Culture System.""
SAE-paper 2006-01-2212. CONTACT
9. Hoehn, A., Klaus, D.M., Stodieck, LS. (2004): ""A
Modular Suite of Hardware Enabling Space Flight Dr. Alex Hoehn is the associate director of engineering
Cell Culture Research.” Journal of Gravitational of BioServe Space Technologies, a NASA Research
Physiology, Vol. 11(1), pp. 39-50. Partnership Center, located at the University of
10. Hoehn, A., Freeman, J.B., and Stodieck, L.S. Colorado, Aerospace Engineering Sciences. He can be
(1999) “Incubator Designs for Space Flight reached at: BioServe Space Technologies - University of
Application - Optimization and Automation.” SAE Colorado, 429 UCB, Boulder, CO 80309-0429, USA-
paper1999—01-2177. Tel. +1-303-492-5875, email: mm. For
11_ Jones, D.E.H. and U. Walter, U. (1998): “The additional contact informatioh, see web information at:
Silicate Garden Reaction in Microgravity: A Fluid EW-
Interfacial Instability.” J. Colloid. Interface Sci., Vol.
203, pp. 286—293, 1998.
12. MacCallum, T.K; Anderson, G.; Poynter, J.; DEFINITIONS: ACRONYMS: ABBREVIATIONS
Stodieck, L. and Klaus, BM. (1998): “Autonomous
Biological Systems (ABS) Experiments.” Journal of BCS 2 BioServe Communication Stack
Biological Science in Space. Vol. 12(4): pp. 363-365. cm, cm centimeter, centimeter Squared
13. MacCallum, T. K., Anderson, G. A., Poynter, J. E., ccm CUbiC centimeters, 1 ccm = 1 mL
Ishikawa, Y., Kobayashi, K., Mizutani, H., Kawasaki, C.elegans Caenorhabditis elegans, a tiny roundworm
Y., Koike, J., Ijiri, K., Yamashita, M., Sugiura, K. and Often used as a mOde' organism for genetics
Leigh, L. s. (2000): “The ABS (Autonomous researc“ , , , ,
Biological System): Spaceflight Results from a CGBA Commercnal GenerlclBloFl’rocessmg
Bioregenerative Closed Life Support System.” SAE— Apparatue, a spaceflight Incubator
COTS Commercnal Off-The-Shelf
p ap er 2000-01-2340' CSI CGBA Science Insert
14. Miller, G (2005): “Passive Observatories for EXPRESS Ex d't th P . fE . t t th
. . . .. . pe le e rocessmgo Xperlmens 0 e
Experimental MICFObIaI Systems- Verification of the Space Station
Spaceflight Experiment.” Poster, ASGSB Annual 9 Earth gravity, 9.81 ms'2
Meeting, Reno, 2005. ASGSB, Vol. 19(1), p. 5. IP Internet protocol
15. Poynter, J.E., MacCallum, T.K., Anderson, G.A., ISS InternationaISpace Station
Rupert, M., Woodard, S., Goulart, C.V., and k kilo, 103
Campbell, K- (2001): “The Development 30d Testing K-12 Kindergarden through 12th grade high school
of Visualization and Passively Controlled Life education
Support System for Experimental Organisms During kg Kilogram
Spaceflight.” SAE-paper 2001-01-2288. mL miIIi-Liter
16. Roberts, MS. and Reed, D.W. (2005): “Passive NASA NationalAeronautics and Space
Observatories for Experimental Microbial Systems Administration
(POEMS): Microbes Return to Flight.” SAE paper NTSC NationalTeIevision Standards Committee
2005-01-2984. Pa Pascal; 101,325 Pa = 14.7 psi
17. Schier, J.S., Rush, J.J., Williams, W.D., and Vrotsos, Phytagel PhytagelTM, Sigma Aldrich, Product No.
P. (2005): “Space Communication Architecture P8169, a gelling agent, is an agar substitute
Supporting Exploration and Science: Plans and POCC Payload Operations and ControlCenter
Studies for 2010-2030.” 1St Space Exploration Psi, psia pounds per square inch (pressure)
Conference: Continuing the Voyage of Discovery, I'H Relative humidity[%]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics RS recommended standard (R3232, RS485)
(AIAA), Orlando, Florida, Jan. 2005. SLCC Single Loop for Cell Culture
18. Sigma Aldrich (2007): “Gelling Agents, Preparation SRM Science Research Module
and Use”. Company publication from web site, last STARSTM Space Technology and Research Students
accessed May 2007, http://www.sigmaaldrich.com. STEM Science, Technology, Engineering 309
19. Spacehab Inc (2003): “Welcome to the STARSTM Mathematics
program» Web page last accessed 12 may 2007_ STS Space Transportation System (Space Shuttle)
http://www.starsacademy.com/ T Temperetqre
20. Szewczyk, N.J., Kozak, E. and Conley, CA. (2003): TCP Transm'SS'O“ Contm' Pr0t000'
“Chemically Defined Medium and Caenorhabditis ”DP UserDatagram PFOtOCO'
elegans.” BMC Biotechnol. 2003, Vol. 3(19).
21. Woodard, S., Goulart, C.V., Rupert, M. and Hoehn,
A. (2003): “Performance of the STARST'V' Life
10

"
