"","x"
"1","2001 -01 -2288
The Development and Testing of Visualization and Passwely
Controlled Life Support Systems for Experimental
Organisms During Spaceflight
Jane Poynter, Taber MacCallum and Grant Anderson
Paragon Space Development Corp.
Mark Rupert, Sherry Woodard and Carla Goulart
BioServe Space Technologies Inc., University of Colorado
Kimberly Campbell
SPACEHAB Inc.
Copyright © 2001 Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc.
ABSTRACT Paragon Space Development Corporation’s patented
Autonomous Biological System (ABS) technology
This paper describes the development and ground-test (Poynter et al. 1996), which has been previously tested
results of three passively controlled life support systems during a 10-day experiment on the US Space Shuttle
for experiments currently onboard ISS, and scheduled (Ishikawa et al. 1996), and two 4-month Mir experiments
for flight on STS—107 as part of the Space Media Inc. (MacCallum et al. 2000).
(SMI) Science and Technology Research Student
(STARS®) global education program. The three life support systems are developed for initial
use as part of the Space Media |nc.’s STARS® global
Two experiments use the Autonomous Biological education program. Participating students perform the
System (ABS) technology, which has been tested during experiment in their classrooms during the ISS and STS-
two 4-month Mir experiments. One ABS will house 107 missions. Along with the ABS experiment on ISS,
embryos and fry of the Japanese Medaka Fish, Oiyzias STARS® is flying seven educational experiments on
latipes, A second ABS contains a complex ecosystem STS—107, which are sponsored by schools from around
experiment. The third system uses a passive life support the world. The six experiments are: tunneling behavior of
system based on agar gel for the harvester ant Harvester Ants in microgravity, USA; silkworm lifecycle
Pogonomyrmex occidentalis. during space flight, China; effect of microgravity on the
development of Medaka Fish, Japan; effects of
Thermal control, lighting and still and streaming digital microgravity 0n crystal growth, Israel; effects 00 Garden
imaging during the experiments are provided by the Orb Weaver Spider web PFOdUCtiOH, Australia;
Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus - Isothermal adaptation of the Arizona Carpenter Bee to the
Containment Module (GBA—ICM). microgravity environment, Liechtenstein; and, Star
Navigation, USA.
INTRODUCTION
ISS ABS
Opportunities for Iong-duration space biology and
gravitational ecology research will increase as the An ABS was launched to the ISS on a Russian Soyuz
International Space Station (ISS) becomes operational. rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrcme, Khazakhstan, on
Organisms used in the research will need a life support February 26, 2001. After approximately 72 hours of
system that will operate reliably in space over periods of darkness the ABS was removed from the Progress
months or even years. This paper describes the Module and placed on a dedicated panel in the Zvezda
development of three passively controlled life support Service Module above the crew dining table. The ABS is
systems for experiments currently onboard ISS, and currently scheduled for a 3-month experiment on board
scheduled for flight on STS—107 in April 2002. ISS, with the possibility of a longer duration stay. The
ABS contains an aquatic ecosystem with plants and
One system uses agar gel to provide food, atmospheric animals, including the small red shrimp Halocaridina
moisture, water and disease suppression to a colony of rubra, snails and several species of small crustacea.
worker ants. The remaining two experiments use
hermetically sealed, gnotobiotic, aquatic ecosystems to The ABS 0n ISS is being used for an educational
provide oxygen, food and clean water to fish embryos experiment conducted by students as part of Space
and fry, and to shrimp. These systems are based on Media |nc.’s global STARS® program. Over 600 schools

"
"2","across America, Asia and Australia will participate in the placed within a foam transport storage assembly, or
experiment. The objective of the experiment is to study Insulating Launch Container, designed and
the behavioral adaptation of the animals within the ABS manufactured by SPACEHAB, Inc. The assembly is
to the microgravity environment, with emphasis on H. made of two layers of 0.5” thick LF200 2pcf Municel®
rubra, and the long term effects of microgravity on the foam, covered with a layer of Gortex®. The assembly
ABS ecosystem. Students participating in the program helps prevent the ABS from experiencing fluctuations in
build their own ground control ABS in their classrooms, temperature and protects against impacts during the
to which they compare biweekly observations and video Progress Vehicle loading, launch, orbit and rendezvous
images made by cosmonauts of the ISS ABS available operations. It was removed from the ABS immediately
to the STARS students on the Internet. Ground controls upon destow from the Progress Vehicle and discarded.
are also maintained at Paragon for the duration of the
experiment.
HARDWARE DESIGN AND ON-ORBIT OPERATIONS
The ABS hardware design was based on the previously
flown T-GAP configuration designed by BioServe Space
Technologies, Boulder, Colorado. The T-GAP was used
for three previous ABS flights on the Shuttle and Mir ""
Space Station, and consists of a hermetically sealed
840ml Lexan® polycarbonate cylinder, sealed within an -
outer Lexan® cylinder. Both the inner and outer
cylinders were sealed and tested for leakage in a . ""
vacuum chamber prior to being placed within a third
layer of containment provided by a heat sealed Aclar® - -'
envelope. Gortex® endcaps were applied to either end
of the cylinders with attached Velcro® strips for
attachment to the ISS Zvezda Service Module dedicated
panel. The third layer of containment was designed and
manufactured by SPACEHAB Inc. Four ABS were . _ _
manufactured and approved for flight, one of which was F'g 2' ShOWSthe '“Su'at'ng Lamc“ contamer'
ggﬁggnciriggﬂaytgfyfgé sped”giéecgenrﬂgllnudrﬁrswere kept m Once on orbit and installed within the Zvezda module,
lighting and temperature control are provided by the
ambient conditions within the Service Module. The
location of the ABS was chosen to place the unit close to
two lighting fixtures to ensure proper lighting conditions
' . ' ' of between 300 — 2000 LUX, for a16-hour light cycle in a
' . _ . 24 hour period. The temperature within the module is
-_ v.5 -- -' maintained at 18 — 22C.
1. '::-""-'I_' -'; _ The ABS is passively controlled, with no astronaut or
-'.Z_-Z_'.f-_I-_'5: _ _ cosmonaut time required for the operation or
';.'.‘f,:_-'-._-_;'-::_,'_;_f'.2'1;_':r _._ - -J ' _ maintenance of the system. However, in order to meet
r-ﬁ-iii; '_ ' the STARS® program experiment requirements, the
i: 1:1,:- g ' ' cosmonauts provided biweekly observations of the
'—‘.: . "" '- ' ' animal behavior and ecosystem changes, recorded on
T '.JLfE-fif;I.l'-.‘7“~.'~"":_‘J""_""-j_. ‘_ -- _. .. ""- ' _ _- video. Every two weeks, three minutes of video is
-' ‘ ""T""? 1"""" "" “r ' - ' -- ' - recorded of the ecosystem with observations made by
F. 1 h th ﬂ. ht mc- r t. n fth Iss ABS _th v I r ® the cosmonaut according to a set list of quantifiable
stggsiorasttaccvhisngtithlgdegicatgggalﬁeli: Zveezda Service hV/‘Iloduleéco Par.ameters’ .SgCh as number Of species, number or
IndIVIduaIs Within the specnes, water clarity etc., repeated
Two Active Thermal Carriers were used for transporting at each observation sessnon.- Each observation session
the four ABS to Houston and Moscow for Flight '3 downlinked t0 RSQ-Energia m MO§COW Wh‘? provndes
Acceptance Testing, and to the launch site in the data to SMI for dissemination Vla Its web snte.
Kazakhstan. The Active Thermal Carriers are Igloo®
Coolers, modified by Paragon to provide thermal control WETWARE DESIGN
and lighting to the ABS, and operate in 12V, 110V and _ _
220V power systems. The ABS ecosystem desngn was derived from a system
flown prevnously on one 10-day Shuttle and two 4-month
For launch of the ABS and transport to ISS within the M"" _ experiments, containing primary producers,
Progress Module, the entire flight configured unit was herbivores, detrItIvores, and decomposersthrough which

"
"3","materials would flow and ecosystem structure would Eightindividuals of H. rubra,threeindividua|s ofthe snai|

develop (MacCallum etal., 2000). Amethod for passive species, 5-6 ostracods and copepods, 3 Daphnia

control of the ABS was developed by Paragon to individuals, and 10 Hyalella were introduced into each

increase the eoosystem’s resilienoe—the ability to return ABS. The ABS was inoculated with nitrifying bacteria

to prior conditions after a perturbation occurs. populations of the species Nitrobacter wynogradskyi and

Perturbations may be the death and decomposition of a Nitrosomonas europea along with a ubiquitous species

large animal or plant damage during launch, both of filamentous algae found in aquarium tanks. While the

resulting in nutrient release. The system works by algae were a source of food for some of the animal

limiting specific nutrients in the system, forcing a balance species, they were the primary autotrophic component.

in the material exchange of those nutrients between A dried piece of Gorgonia sea fan was placed in the ABS

autotrophs and heterotrophs. With nutrient availability to serve as surface area for the bacteria and algae to

rather than light restricting growth in the system, inhabit. Given the relatively short life spans of some of

organisms can respond with increased assimilation in the invertebrates, it is necessary for several successive

the eventofanutrientreIease.An energy-Iimited system generations to successfully breed in space for the

could not respond as rapidly. In essence, the material species to survive the 3-month flight.

storage buffer in the ABS is maintained at the equivalent

of empty so there is no excess of certain nutrients within Of the species flown, all have previously been in the

a system where light is not a limiting factor. microgravity environment for long duration experiments
with the exception of the shrimp H. rubra. Results and

The passive control system also requires a means of further descriptions of the ABS system were reported at

material transfer between producers, consumers and the ICES 2000 (MacCallum, et a|., 2000).

decomposers. In its simplest form, the ABS uses

aquatic plants and animals in a modified hydroponics The ecosystems were assembled and sealed in each of

nutrient medium. Materials circulate by means of the four flight cylinders six weeks prior to launch, four

diffusion and, during flight, through Maragoni convection. weeks earlier than for previously flown ABS
experiments. Two weeks are required to allow the

A final draw-down of nutrients with an increase in 02 and ecosystem to develop and a state of dynamic equilibrium

pH was accomplished by introducing carbonates prior to the perturbation of launch. The reason for the

immediately before closure of the ABS. During the Mir extended period was due to the fight approval of the

experiment the use of the carbonates in photosynthesis hardware having to be performed on flight ready articles,

after closure increased the concentration of 02 to which included the ecosystem, and a two week launch

between 26 and 28% in the 100ml gas headspaoe, slip.

causing a commensurate rise in system pressure,

slightly increasing the system C/N ratio. (ref). This step ISS ABS EXPERIMENT UPDATE

provides extra metabolic oxygen and pH buffering in

anticipation of extended periods with no electrical power, First downlinked images from the ISS ABS showed that

when no light can be provided for photosynthesis, such the ecosystem is healthy and the animals active. No

during launch and transport to ISS where the systems further data is available as of the writing of this paper.

are in complete darkness for approximately 72 hours.

Partially decomposed materials derived from the plants ' _ __ _ g

and animals to be used in the ABS were introduced as a .= '5 4+ - __ ' .. _; ,

source of slowly decomposing recalcitrant carbon to i ._ """" - .

make up for that being deposited in the system by plants . _ '.; ht - - ‘ .

and animals. The amount of recalcitrant carbon in an ' J5 - _ i ' ' .

ABS is a function of its decomposition rate and the rate 4- 1'“ '3' .1- -' t: ' '

at which it is created through the death of animals and .. , . ' '-‘.‘_.. I

plants in the normal course of ecosystem function. ""i! _ .._._.F -_..Jr-"" .

Adding this s|ow|y decomposing carbon source is - .7! ' - .-

necessary for the long term stability of the ABS. Double ' 55 -—-""*..;i; _ T""

the amount of detritus per ecosystem volume was used i, _""?,T '- ' . + 1

in the ISS ABS compared to the previously flown ABS to - . -.. _- _ _ “*- ' ; :;

allow for increased populations of animals to develop - - '3‘ ' _' 'E h -

within the ecosystem. ' ‘ “@k t .1 -

There is one species of vascular plants in the ABS "":5? ”i t ' * "".'. ¥§a ""

onboard ISS: the root|ess, tiny floating aquatics, Wolfﬁa . - 1"" ‘ 3 .

sp. The aquatic invertebrate animals were introduced as ' .- ._ .

populations with the exception of one, Halocaridina _______ ____ A!

rubra, and also included: one species of gastropod,

Helisoma planorbis.; ostracods; Daphnia sp,; the Figure 3 shows an image of the ABS 1 day after delivery to ISS.

amphipod Hyalella azteca and cyclopoid copepods. Shrimp can be seen behind the air bubble near the top of the
photograph.

"
"4","STS-107 EXPERIMENTS ‘9 -' tr” *
The us. Space Shuttle STS-107 is a 16-day science “if” _ tﬁﬁh
mission, currently scheduled for launch in April of 2002. f. ﬂit ‘ 'HH ""'ﬁfyﬂuﬁ ti”
Seven STARS® experiments are under development for "":5. w ""it; g“ {1 t+ﬁ%ﬂ1 % «tn
STS-107, of which six will be housed within BioServe’s ...... _ ""' __ :- -. f“; "" .
Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus - Isothermal 1 & 1% ' "".ii- 4' . _-
Containment Module (GBA-ICM). Two of these ' ﬂ 1 .- 52;:
experiments are described herein. The first habitat "" _ _... --_-_'
houses embryos and fry of the Japanese Medaka Fish, ’ ' ‘ r. . 't t
Oryzias latipes. The experiment is designed in Kai!!! _ W.
collaboration with Ochanomizu University, Japan, and is - . ‘W ..
a study of the effects of microgravity on the development , t 1'? h
and behavior of the Medaka Fish. hmmmmm
The second system uses a passive life support system Figure 5- STARS® STS-107 habitats in prototypeinsert-
based on agar gel for the harvester ant Pogonomyrmex
occidentalis. The agar gel simultaneously serves as the . .
ants’ source of food, atmospheric moisture, water, 1: , -. . 5. _.__“-
disease suppression and tunneling medium. The - "" ' .
experiment is supported by the University of Syracuse ' 1-H
and an associated high school, and focuses on the i Unifom Temperature
tunneling behavior of a worker colony of harvester ants Q ' If - f J
in microgravity. ' g ' .
I * '-'
HARDWARE OVERVIEW: ICM, AUTONOMOUS ]_ _ , .__.l
IMAGERY _ - _ _ - 33‘
. . . . . 1% I t-
The ICM IS a middeck locker Insert (Figure 4) Which i 1' --.'~.
houses biological experiments. It interfaces with the ' r h *1 chi :1.
Shuttle and ISS. The ICM provides its science specific I' _ __ _,'_,_.. h"".
components with a uniform thermal environment. It also .i ..‘ 1 _-"" "" ""ﬂ . IT I"" . _.
provides data acquisition and control as well as analog 1 _ .1 T"" .""-
and digital imaging capabilities. The ICM has previously ‘3 - 'f' L'--' 1
flown on STS-95 (2 units) and STS-93 (2 of 3 units). In"" ' _ . .
The STS-107 habitats are shown on the prototype insert *5; :.'.' :1r
in Figure 5. The STARS® experiments rely heavily on 3. '. 5:351?- ——— ' . . _ .
video observation of the habitats on orbit, video downlink W ’3“ Inlet’ behmd' .COOIant ﬂuld
. . . eat exchanger W1th
of these Images, and mnssnon-parallel ground control thermoelectric heatpump,fan,
experiment at the student’s home sites. Flight images ﬁnned air heatexchanger
are provided through the Internet to each school.
Figure 6. ICM in the STARS® conﬁguration as flown aboard STS—93 as
CGBA-2 (Ladybug - left). Shown in center row: Two Ladybug habitats
(one with and one without aphids), one sweet potato rooting
experiment. The Butterﬂy habitat is on front left. The spare Ladybug
.91.} ”_- _ _ _1 . habitat shown on lid served as replacement for ladybug-loaded habitat
f3 """" '-- .""' . '. ' in case ladybugs in primary habitat did not survive launch.
f # = "" MEDAKA FISH EMBRYO EXPERIMENT
' "" While reproduction of the Japanese Medaka fish,
-- . Oryzias latipes, has been demonstrated in microgravity,
- - ._ only three to four days of post-hatching embryo
. development has been observed in space (Ijiri, 1994).
""N _ The proposed experiment will examine the development
_ 4 and behavior of Medaka embryos and larval fry once
they hatch in microgravity for the 16-day duration of
STS-107. Three, five and seven-day old Medaka eggs
53;; toms?“b-ztgctafgtzei“:iie .l‘e szg°gt2121pg°tizt£tdit Wi"" be ﬂow“ in an aquatic anima' habitat With a
| ml W ' ' ' - -
on STé-1O7F3. Tl: insert will be removeo ttirom the locer and opceii; bIOIOglcally. based Ilfe support SyStem' TWP Vldeo
on orbit to allow manual sample processing and activations once cameras WI” record the deveIOpment and behaVIor Of the
power is turned off and cables have been disconnected. embryos and fish during flight. A biologically balanced

"
"5","ecosystem, or ABS, maintains water quality for the primary 02 production and maintenance of water quality,
embryos and fry, and provides food and oxygen for the along with several species of microbes and algae,
duration of the experiment. including the nitrifying bacteria Nitrobacter wynogradskyi
and Nitrosomonas eruopea. Detritus, plant material,
Habitat Design algae and snail feces from Helisoma planorbis are used
within the system to support a mixed culture of infusoria
The habitat housing the Medaka fish experiment is a and rotifers, which is the principal food source for the
singIe-walled vacuum molded polycarbonate body with a Medaka fry. An infusoria refugium is used to prevent the
single layer lid. |ts outer dimensions are approximately fry from reducing the population of infusoria below a
19.8120m (7.8 inches) high, 8.014cm (3.155 inches) level capable of reproducing fast enough to sustain the
deep, and 11.113cm (4.375 inches) in width. The inner fish. The refugium houses boiled wheat kernels as a
dimensions give the habitat an internal volume of food source for the microfauna on which the infusoria
approximately 842ml. The body is molded out of a solid thrive. The wheat kernels are inoculated in a culture of
piece of polycarbonate to eliminate seams that might infusoria prior to insertion into the ABS. A population of
leak and to eliminate any materials incompatibility with Daphnia PU/GX provides additional f00d for the fry, as the
the samples contained within the habitat. The lid is made one week old fry will consume the newly hatched
of polycarbonate and is secured to the main body with a daphnia. The adult daphnia are too large for the fry to
series of screws about its perimeter. It is sealed via an consume which prevents the species from being
o-ring and a gasket. The lid is clear to allow for video eradicated by the fry.
images to be taken of the activity within the habitat. A
mechanical drawing of the habitat is shown in Figure 7. Prior to the Medaka embryos being inserted into the
system, the ecosystem is assembled and allowed to
equilibrate for two weeks under similar temperature and
lighting conditions to that provided on orbit (23C, 16
- . hours of light/day).
t at:-
. ' “1K. 5 Within the habitat, the Medaka embryos are placed
H“ singly into a netted enclosure, which maintains the eggs
t3 in one clustered location for ease of visualization. This
1 Jth ~ enclosure also allows the different ages of eggs to
' 5' develop and hatch separately, making recording the
ﬁt development of individual embryos practicable. The
mesh of the enclosure prevents the eggs from passing
- iii through, but allows the fry to escape the enclosure once
_ | i hatched. The mesh a|so excludes most of the animals
= if- ' from reaching the eggs, which is particularly important in
, J the case of snails, which might eat the eggs if they had
""hl access to them.
ﬁlaiﬁ'wzc- TI ' '
ﬁE-EL :3 Test experiments In the Paragon laboratory have
$332 31: succeeded in realizing 100% hatch rate of all fertilized
“3:: {J- -‘= eggs (in two experiments one unfertilized egg was
mistakenly placed into one flask in each experiment)
Figure7 Mechanical drawing Ofaquatichabitat with 100% survival of fry for the duration of the
' ' experiment scenario. The full test experimenttime is 22
Wetware days to allow for integration, load, launch scrub and
— weather delays plus 16 days of on-orbit mission time.
. . . Two to six eggs have been placed into the test ABS and
To prevent cabIn atmosphere contaminants from altering . . .
. . . . successfully supported under flight-Ilke envnronmental
experimental parameters or causmg stress In the flight . . .
. . . . parameters. The carrying capaCIty of the ABS IS not yet
animals, the aquatic habItat IS a completely sealed . . . . .
. . . . . known, but It IS antncnpated that the ABS WIII eventually
container. The aquatic habItat WIII contaIn a . .
. . . . support eight — twelve fry of the appropriate ages on
bIoregeneratIve life support system for experimental . . . . . .
. . . . orbit. The aim IS to maintain twelve fry for the duration of
aquatic plants and animals, Similar to the ABS used for . _
. . . the experiment. four of each age group of 3, 5 and 7
ISS described above, and uses Similar methods of .
. . . . day-old embryos at the tIme of launch.
passwe control of water quality and ecosystem stabIIIty
mechanisms. It can readily maintain all the fry once they 8 . d t . | t' ff. h
have hatched and continue to develop through the W
C! t' fth fl' ht. . . . .
ura Ion 0 e lg Medaka fIsh were selected as the fIsh speCIes for thIs
. . . . ' t because they have been successfully flown
The biological life support system IS made up of the expenmen . . .
vascular plant Ceratophyllum demersum, used for m space, Including a ﬁght on IML'Z’ where adults
successfully bred. An extenswe body of knowledge

"
"6","exists with regard to the embryology, developmental harvested and maintained in the standard embryo
biology and laboratory care and maintenance of these rearing salt solution for freshwater teleosts with added
animals. In addition, they are a very hardy species; the mold inhibitor. At the appropriate day of development
eggs and fry are robust and are tolerant of varied 02, pH (one, three and five days, or approximately development
and temperature regimes. Two strains are under stages 17, 28, and 31) the eggs will be examined for
consideration for the experiment. One is a strain that proper initial development and selected for flight and
has been developed to adapt very well to the ground controls. This daily procedure will be started far
microgravity environment, ccT strain (Ijiri, 1994). A enough in advance ofthe flight such that embryos at the
second wild-type strain of Medaka is being tested that is appropriate stages of development will be available on
commercially available in the U.S. the day of payload integration and later in the event of a
launch delay or scrub.
Experiments have been conducted during a parabolic
flight campaign onboard a Novespace Airbus 300 Shortly before final integration of the experiment
airplane in December 2000, which gave a total of 77 package, ten to fifteen selected eggs of the appropriate
parabolas. Each parabola produces 22 seconds of age will be placed into the egg restraint. Each egg is
microgravity. Adults of 3 strains of Medaka were flown visually inspected using a dissecting microscope to
(including the commercially available wild-type, but verify that the egg has been successfully fertilized. The
excluding the ccT strain), and 75 larval fry were flown of number of eggs has yet to be determined based on
the 3 strains. As anticipated, most of the adult fish laboratory experiments to verify and maximize the
demonstrated some level of disorientation in the carrying capacity of the ABS. The egg restraint will be
microgravity environment, somersaulting and placed into the operating aquatic habitat. The habitat
corkscrewing, as has been previously observed on orbit. will be sealed and vacuum tested, whereupon it will be
However, not one larval fry was observed swimming transferred to the GBA-ICM for closeout and loading on
abnormally during insertion into the parabola or during the Shuttle.
microgravity. These recent microgravity trials
demonstrate that for the purposes of behavioral The eggs are expected to hatch on days 3, 5 and 7 of
adaptation of larval fry to the space environment, the the flightunder normal launch and operational scenarios.
strain of Medaka fish is not important. Furtherlaboratory During the flight, video and still photographs will be
trials are undenNay to determine which strain is the taken each day to record the development of eggs and
hardiest and thrives bestwithin the flightconfiguration. fry, and the behavior of the fry. Upon retrieval after
landing, observations will be taken and recorded of the
' flight and ground control animals’ gross morphological
attributes as well as the swimming and feeding behavior
of the fry. The young fish will then be transported to
Ochanomizu University, Japan, for grow out to maturity
whereupon their behavior, reproduction and morphology
will be observed.
The control vessel will be maintained within the ground
control GBA-ICM at the SPACEHAB Astrotech Facility at
' Fish A Cape Canaveral for the duration of the flight.
Three to four months prior to the launch date, a full
ground-based experiment will be performed under flight
like conditions within the GBA-ICM at BioServe to verify
' Fish B proper functioning of the hardware, wetware and
protocols.
Figure 8 shows swimming behavior in 2 adult Medaka ﬁsh during ANTS IN SPACE EXPERIMENT
parabola induced microgravity. Fish A is somersaulting rapidly, while
fish B is swimming normally- Although the harvester ant, Pogonomyrmex occidentalis
has been subjected to the microgravity environment
W during a series of parabolas on board the Novespace
Airbus 300 in December 2000, no experiments have
Several wild-type Medaka ttSh breeding pairs, along With been conducted with these animals on orbit. The
the space adapted Medaka strain CCT will be induced to objective of this experiment is to observe and
mate using the standard regime Of a photoperiod 0t 15 characterize the effects of space flight on the tunneling
hOUFS Of light and temperature at 78F. The fiSh generally behavior of harvester ants during a 16—day |0ng space
complete the mating behavior Within two hours after shuttle flight. Particular attention will be focused on the
onset 0t light in the daily light cycle. After mating, eggs activity level of the ants and their social interactions.
are laid by the female and form a cluster attached to the Upon their return, the ants and their tunnels will be
fish’s abdomen. Within one hour of mating the eggs are

"
"7","examined and compared to an equivalent colony kept The ants tunnel through the gel in a similar manner to
under similar environmental conditions on the ground. the way they would tunnel through sand, soil or other
standard medium. The workers bite off pieces of
Laboratory experiments using the life support system medium and carry it out of the tunnel, placing it outside
design and methodology described below have verified the tunneling medium area, as they would with pieces of
that queenless ant colonies can be maintained for sand.The gel is colored to provide contrast with the ants
extended periods with no addition of food or water, and for easier visualization with the video. A starter tunnel of
minimal gaseous exchange. Colonies have been approximately 10m in depth is provided in the gel to
maintained for over eight months in Paragon laboratories stimulate the ants to commence tunneling once inserted
and are still living at the time of this article. Upon into the tunneling area of the habitat.
completion of a successful flight test as provided by the
STS—107 shuttle mission, a system will be complete that
allows for Iong-duration maintenance of ants on orbit for
months on ISS, with the possibility of use with other mfﬂi
insect species. Experimentation with alternate insect
species has not yet been done. m 1' '
. '1.
Hardware DeSIgn '
The containment hardware for the ant experiment has
external dimensions of approximately 11.113cm wide
(4.375 inches), 1.27cm deep (0.5 inch), and 18.415cm in
height (7.25 inches). The volume is composed of a F“ _
larger rectangular area containing the agar/food gel, and . - ' ﬁn. -.
a smaller side passageway providing an area for r ' Tee""-
depositing tunnel material. A small space in the wall
separating the two sections allows the ants to access the ""
321/3); tarerrftljlpaghe Egsetewhféﬁtivﬁlnktehee OUter Sldewa-HS Figure 9. shows worker ants within tunnels they have made through
, p the ants InSIde the agarget
while allowing air to enter the habitat and thus controlling
the humidity. A small chamber or nest attached to the The agar gel contains sucrose to stimulate the ants to
outer passageway keeps the ants from tunneling ”th eat it. Amino acids vitamins and minerals are added to
they are released on-orbit by a crew-activated plunger the gel to provide an appropriate diet for the ants. As
mechanism. the agar gel is largely made up of water, the ants also
receive all their water from the gel as they eat it. Both
—g_Wetware and e| the metabolizing of the gel by the ants, and the
_ evaporation of water from the gel provides humidity
Workers ef the Harvester ant speCIes Pogonomyrmex within the tunnels. Adequate ventilation in the habitat
OCCIdental/s W'” be placed mm a single experiment ensures that no water collects within the tunnels or
enclosure. P. occcidentalis was selected, as it is a very habitat area.
hardy species, thriving in broad temperature and
humidity ranges, and typically lives up to one year in the Unlike the sealed systems based on the ABS design, the
wild and have been maintained for eight months under ant system depends on limited gas exchange with the
laboratory conditions In the Paragon faCIIItIes. cabin atmosphere for removal of C02, supply of Oxygen
Additionally, these ants are advantageous because they and removal of water vapor. Gas exchange occurs
are. large, allowing for 900d visualization Of the ants, through Millipore brand 0.5-micron filter paper. Six
their behaVIor, and their large tunnels. openings of 6mm diameter each with a filter are
_ _ _ distributed across the headspaoe of the system.
The tunneling medium IS an agar—based gel. Numerous Distributed openings reduce the chance that gas
tests were performed W'JFh several types of. standard exchange will be precluded by the ants depositing gel
captive ant tunneling media, such as sand, son, pumice over the openings.
and vermiculite. With all of these media the tunnels risk
collapse due tolthe vibration Of Iehd'hg’. and tend to be The gel provides disease control by suppressing fungal
prone to fungal Infection If an ant dies Within the habitat, and mold growth _ the primary cause of death in captive
or front food molding. Thelagar gel was chosen as the colonies after desiccation. As the animals tunnel
tunnetlng medium as 't '3 firm enough to. maintain through the medium and eat it, the mold inhibitor
Integrity during launch and landing vnbratronst and contained in the gel eradicates mold and fungal spore,
prowdes fungus and .mold suppressnonthrough Inhibitors which also prevents the ants from being a source of
'h the gel. The gel '3 prowded by Plant Technologies, infection in the case of the death of one of the workers.
Inc., New Jersey.

"
"8","Exgeriment Samgles and Materials REFERENCES

Ten days prior to integration of the experiment into the A. Hoehn, J. B. Freeman, M. Jacobson, L.S. Stodieck. 1999.

GBA-ICM, the ants are placed onto a diet of agar gel, SAE Proceedings, 1999-01-2177-

similar to the gel used for the flight medium. This

ensures that the exterior of the animals’ exoskeletons K- 'tttt- 1994- Bio’ SCI Space 83231'233-

and their digestive tract, are free Of fungal spore that Ishikawa, Y. Anderson G., Poynter J., MacCallum T., Frye R.

00”” tater COhtam'hate the eXPehmeht 0“ OVh't- Kawasaki Y., Koike J., Kobayashi K., Mizuttani H., Sugiua K.,
Ijiri K., Ishikawa Y., Saito T., and Shiraishi A. 1996. Biol Sci

Several hours prior to the final integration of the Space 10(2);1o5-111_

experiment payload for the shuttle launch, the harvester

ants will be placed into an activation chamber, located Ishikawa, Yoji, Kensei Kobayashi, Kotaro Seki, Hiroshi

within the experiment habitat, to maintain them Mizutani, Yukishige Kawasaki, Junpei Koike, Kenichi Ijiri,

separated from their tunneling material. A small amount MasamiChi YamaShita, KatSUFa Sugiura, Jane Poynter, Taber

0f the agar gel is placed in the activation chamber to MacCallum, GrantAnderson. 1998. BiolSciSpace12(4):366—

provide food and water for the time the ants remain 372'

within the activation chamber, which is expected to be .

- - MacCallum, T., G. Anderson, J. P0 nter, Y. Ishikawa, K.
approxtmate'y 43 hours under a “om'na' 'aunCh Kobayashi, H. Mizutani, Y. Kawasaki): J. Koike, K. Ijiri, M.
scehaho- Yamashita, K. Sugiura, L. Leigh. 2000. 00lCES-164.

Once on orbit the activation chamber will be opened bya Poynter, J” T. MacCallum, G. Anderson. 1996. Patent
crewmember, thus activating the experiment and 5865141. US PatentOfﬁce_
allowing the ants to have access to the experiment
volume. CONTACT INFORMATION
Video and Still images are recorded daily 0f the ant Jane Poynter is co-founder and CEO of Paragon Space
habitat. Students at the participating SChOOtS maintain DevelopmentCorporation, Tucson, Arizona. Launched in
ground control habitats intheir classrooms, and compare 1993, Paragon provides aerospace engineering and
the ant tunneling and aCtiVity to that Of images Of the on- consumng services to both the commercia| and non-
orbit ant habitat. High fidelity ground control habitat is commercial aerospace sectors. Paragon also provides a
maintained Within a GBA'ICM at the SPACEHAB range of services and technologies for human space
Astrotech Facility at Cape Canaveral for the duration 0t flight and biological experiments. These services include
the nominally 16-day Shuttle flight. closed and open loop environmental control and life

support systems for humans and experimental
Three to four months prior to the launch date, a full organisms, as well as EVA, IVA, and biomechanics
ground-based experiment will be performed under flight research and consulting.
like conditions within the GBA-ICM at BioServe to verify
proper functioning of the hardware, wetware and (520) 903-1000 ext. 11 (phone)
protocols. (520) 903-2000 (fax)

jpoynter@paragonsdc.com
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The ISS ABS flight program and the STS—107 STARS®
experiment package would not have been possible
without the focused teamwork of people representing
academic, government and industrial entities in the US
and Russia. Invaluable assistance was received from:
Cosmonaut Yuri Usachev during the ISS ABS mission,
JUSTSAP, Mitsubishi Corp., Ochanomizu University,
RSC-Energia, SPACEHAB |nc., Space Media Inc.,
University of Syracuse, Becky Difard, Assaf Guri, Alex
Hoehn, Irina Lazieva, Marv LeBlanc, Mark Lindley, David
MacMahon, Maki Niihori, Prof. Osamu Odawara, Jim
Royston, Irina Sergeeva, Eric Spina, Hans Stromeyer,
and Evgeny Vasilliyev.

"
