"","x"
"1","SAE TECHNICAL hum .d‘i Qn'7).7\.'g.-:u:.2u323244.x71’
PAPER SERIES 2003-01 -2530
—
Performance of the STARS Life Sciences
Payload During Benchtop Testing and
Mission Simulations
Sherry Woodard, Carla Goulart and Alex Hoehn
BioServe Space Technologies

COPYRIGHT

33rd International Conference on
Environmental Systems (ICES)
Q. E - ""‘ Vancouver, B.C., Canada
WIS ll? ternat/ona/ July 7-1 o, 2003
—
400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA15096-0001 USA. Tel: (724) 776-4841 Fax: (724)776-5760 Web: www.sae.org

"
"2","‘ l,iccmcd tn ‘. \NK 'nhu. n \pHCl' (‘1 Aer
' l ‘. - at h .11: Hit 5.\I~'. Dalila! lilirar) ('n :yrighl 21112 3- \3 lnlcrnariunul
L-nm':‘.n;:. cop_ in}: and internet p0 tint: ill'L‘ prohibited
Umnlr Idcd Thu; ~74). '-u;1u.~t ill. 201235341171“!
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior written permission of SAE.
For permission and licensing requests contact:
SAE Permissions
400 Commonwealth Drive
Warrendale, PA 15096-0001-USA
Email: permissions@sae.org
Fax: 724—772-4891
Tel: 724-772-4028
GAE
w®
Global Mohllrty llatahase®
AI! SAE papers, standards, and selected
books are abstracted and indexed in the
Global Mobility Database.
For multiple print copies contact:
SAE Customer Service
Tel: 877-606-7323 (inside USA and Canada)
Tel: 724-776-4970 (outside USA)
Fax: 724-776-1615
Email: CustomerService@sae.org
ISSN 0148-7191
Copyright © 2003 SAE International
Positions and opinions advanced in this paper are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of SAE.
The author is solely responsible for the content of the paper. A process is available by which discussions
will be printed with the paper if it is published in SAE Transactions.
Persons wishing to submit papers to be considered for presentation or publication by SAE should send the
manuscript or a 300 word abstract of a proposed manuscript to: Secretary, Engineering Meetings Board, SAE.
Printed in USA

"
"3",". liccuwdm ..-\.~ rJulmsun s .m- (“cuter
ticcnwd irumtm-Mt n. 'I ilihrur) (‘upmtm 2012M! Inu-nmimmi
1 m:t.‘.ing. cup; tug =qu in ~ vm-t , ustfu-t air: prohii ‘1~ a
Um -. ”mm Ih- at: ,x. ugu 1101.3'113:44:!71'.T
2003-01-2530
Performance of the STARS Life Scrences Payload During
Benchtop Testing and Missmn Simulations
Sherry Woodard, Carla Goulart and Alex Hoehn
BioServe Space Technologies
Copyright © 2003 SAE International
ABSTRACT the development of Medaka ﬁsh from eggs to fry, the
lifecycle of silkworms, the tunneling and social behavior
BioServe Space Technologies has developed and ﬂown of Harvester ants, the wood-boring and social behavior
a series of miniature habitats to house several different 0t Carpenter bees, the web bUitdihQ behavior 0f
biological specimens and one biochemical experiment. Australian Orb Weaver spiders, and the deformation Of
This effort was in support of an educational program, calcium chloride and cobalt chloride crystals. Each
Space Technology and Research Students (STARS), experiment was proposed and designed by students.
developed by SPACEHAB Inc. The STARS program The students also conducted their own research and
gives students from around the world a chance to design developed their OWh procedures. 'h preparation for the
and conduct their own spaceflight experiments. STARS- actual mission they participated in a mission simulation
Bootes, the payioad ﬂown on 31-3407, housed a in which they were required to prepare and load their
Japanese Medaka ﬁsh experiment; a Chinese silkworm indiVidua' habitats for a SimUIated launCh and miSSion.
experiment; an American Harvester ant experiment; a The students 3'30 prepared and loaded flight, ground,
Carpenter bee experiment from Liechtenstein, an and back-up habitats at the Astrotech facility in Florida
Australian Orb Weaver spider experiment; and a for the STS-107 launch on 16 January 2003. Experiment
biochemical crystal growth experiment from Israel. Each data SUCh as temperature, r eiative humidity, Stt"" images,
habitat was custom designed to suit each specimen’s and Video was downlinked from the Shuttle, pOSted on
individual needs. The habitats provided passive humidity the STARS website MW), and
control, lighting, feeding areas, and containment as well monitored by the students
as an artiﬁcial environment for the specimens to be
observed in. Some habitats were also ﬁtted with This paper deals With the performance 0f the hardware,
individual temperature and/or humidity sensors. The primarily the STARS insert, during the benchtop testing
habitats were placed on a pallet that provides the and mission simulations that were conducted prior to
imaging equipment, cooling/mixing fans, storage for ﬂight.
tools, and ambient environment sensors for temperature
and humidity, The habitats plus the pallet combined to Flight and ground data obtained during the actual STS-
form the STARS insert. The STARS insert was housed 107 mission will be reported in a subsequent paper-
in BioServe’s Commercial Generic Bioprocessing
Apparatus (CGBA). CGBA is a single middeck locker STARS HARDWARE PERFORMANCE
insert that provides temperature control, power, and
computer control to the STARS insert. Test results from CGBA OVERVIEW
benchtop testing and mission simulations in preparation
0f flight Wt“ be presented. The CGBA provides power, data acquisition and control,
for the STARS insert, as well as the interfaces between
INTRODUCTION the SPACEHAB rack and the STARS experiments
(Figure 1). It also provides for general temperature
The STARS education program was developed by control of the experiment volume where the STARS
SPACEHAB Inc. to encourage students from around the pallet is located via two coolant loops, one situated on
world to participate in spaceﬂight research. The ﬁrst top of the volume, and the other on the bottom.
STARS mission was flown in 1999 on STS—93. Students
observed the predatory behavior of ladybugs, root growth
of sweet potato cuttings, and the life cycle of Painted
Lady butterﬂies. For the second STARS mission that
ﬂew on STS-107 in January 2003, students evaluated

"
"4",". ’ ltiruxcdtu \.~\‘ . lu.rwm\‘pzu-(""culc|1
l . 1-us- ha .1 thc' \P _ igiu' i it. m1} ( unwighl 2'1]2!Z\l.lutc:1n- 'mml
l '..1;;:':.':.',‘;:i‘;:j flsm‘fzr::itlt‘:'5""e-‘t""
WWW?” ””7"""" 1” A prototype AHAB was built and sent to Paragon for
. testing. The prototype could be conﬁgured to use 2, 4, or
7 6 cold cathode ﬂuorescent lamps (CCFLs) with an equal
311*. . . number of lamps on either side of the habitat. The top of
’ t f}: the polycarbonate vacuum molded body contained a hole
A to accommodate a temperature probe which could be
"",""'"""" 1 inserted to measure the temperature of the water inside
:1» . _ the habitat. Tests showed that all 6 CCFLs were needed
1, ”rt” : ‘ 145:? to support the ecosystem, but using all 6 lamps created
.15»: . iai— ‘\ "" considerable heat that was eventually transferred to the
_ ' __ ;_ h \1 water inside the habitat. To keep the water temperature
""L‘é ' 17 . .v "" below 28°C at all times, a new shroud was designed for
, ' .. “ ' ' "" ,’ ' the AHAB. The new shroud located the ballasts for the 6
""“ . 3 . CCFLS in the aluminum base (Figure 3) of the habitat
”11* “Win: ' where the heat could be transferred more efficiently to
Figure 1 CGBA with STARSinsenm'taﬂed ' the cooling loop located in the floor of the CGBA. A
' ' polycarbonate ﬁlm barrier was also placed between the
BENCHTOP TESTING CCFLS and the body of the habitat to separate the warm
air around the CCFLs from the rest of the habitat. Sil-
Benchtop testing took place throughout the design pad and thermal areasewere then applied to the tOP ?f‘d
process and the testing phase of the project. Each bottom of the habitat to Increase the thermal conductlwty
habitat presented it’s own set of challenges to be between the habitat ShFOUd and the top and bottom
addressed and overcome. cooling loops of the CGBA. When the CGBA lId was
closed, the AHAB shroud was compressed between the
- - lid and STARS pallet base. The new shroud, combined
Agu_atl_<_:ﬁaﬂt_a_t with good compression of the AHAB between the CGBA
The Aquatic Habitat (AHAB) housed the Japanese COOIIng loops, SO'Ved the prObloem. The AHAB water
Medaka ﬁsh experiment (Figure 2). This experiment was temperature stayed below 28 C W'th all 6 CCFLS
designed to look at the development and behavior of powered for the entire16 hour day cycle.
Medaka embryos and fry in a microgravity environment. - _
The AHAB had requirements for volume, lighting, 1- -
temperature control, and imaging. The lighting and ..
temperature requirements were to support the
ecosystem developed by Paragon Space Development
Corporation. The ecosystem, comprised of nutrients, a - ._
plant, algae, and other small animals, would in turn
support the Medaka fry after they hatched. A day/night
cycle of 16 and 8 hours respectively was needed. The
lighting also had to be of sufﬁcient intensity to promote
photosynthesis. The temperature would ideally be _ ‘_ 1, ; .‘ .
controlled to 25°C +/- 2°C. “'5“ ’Ej ,1. I111-
. . ’ _' .3 ,' ""' "". .33""— 8:31:2' LIgﬂm
‘ M .. _ ,7 , ""L’ﬂi; . _‘ 1 1’7}, 1.
' 1 “ : , j ' Figure 3. CCFL ballasts embedded in AHAB base. The
» -1 ; ' polycarbonate ﬁlm can be seen covering the CCFLs on either side.
' ,f . Silkworm Habitat
. 1 l The Silkworm Habitat (SWHAB) was to support 4 worms
, ‘ during their vigorous growth phase and up to 4 cocoons.
i ._: »-..-I The requirements called for maintaining a temperature of
1 Q ' 25°C +/- 2°C, a relative humidity range of 75% to 85%, a
- - 1~ _1 _ . day/night cycle, keeping the food moist, and odor control.
1 The food, which is basically a thick paste made from
""1‘“ ' ‘ 1 mulberry leaves, had to be kept moist for the worms to
' ‘f — 1 ' consume before they started spinning their cocoons.
1 . .- ' ' The worms would not eat the food if it dried out. The
1"" ’ . ' 4 1 food was also driving the requirement for odor control.
Figure 2- AHAB With P’O‘O‘ype Medaka f’ynesm P’ace- 7 Several benchtop tests were conducted to determine
how much food was needed, how to keep it moist for at

"
"5",". ‘ 7 icon. 11 IU ‘ .~\‘ ‘t'Jilmwm Spat,- . cuter
[Lcmcd Iu UIL' SH“. Hit N l..-'.rau} (0p_\fighl Bull ‘ [. lnlcmntiunal
'—m..;m_ cu pintzuljinu'l'ut'l])t:‘~'lingul’t pl'nhilﬁLd
: (m. 'uchtl ilursila). \ugu"" ill. li|123:4-t:l7 [”1
least 8 days until the worms were cocooned, and how to Tests were also conducted for odor control. The
keep the odor from causing a problem. Food trays in challenge was to maintain gas exchange with the
different configurations were packed with food and ambient air inside of the CGBA experiment volume while
allowed to sit in the habitats under flight conditions. limiting the odor from the food that escaped from the
Some of the trays had only food in them. Others had habitat. The ﬁrst method tested used a carbon ﬁlter in
disinfected sponges cut to size that were pressed into the base of the habitat to adsorb the odor. The habitat
the bottoms of the food trays and injected with speciﬁc base had holes covered with gas exchange membranes.
amounts of water. The food was then loaded into the The holes on top of the base were open to the habitat
trays on top of the sponges. It was determined that the interior and the holes around the perimeter of the base
sponge method worked best with 20 mL of water added Opened into the ambient environment. Air had to pass
to the sponge before the food was loaded. This kept the through the carbon ﬁlter before it was released into the
food moist enough for the worms to consume for 10+ ambient air. This effectively took care of the odor
days under flight conditions. This would be long enough problem. An iterative process was used to determine the
for the worms to begin spinning their cocoons. The proper area of gas exchange membrane needed to keep
relative humidity inside the habitat needed to be kept at the food moist and the relative humidity below 85%. It
approximately 80% for the worms to be healthy. At was determined that approximately 13.5 cm2 of
humidity levels over 85%, the worms tended to develop a membrane surface area was needed to maintain
fungus and eventually die. optimum conditions inside the habitat (Figure 5).
At first, it was planned to ﬂy worms at two different _ 1
stages of development. The worms prefer different in l
amounts of light depending on their age. The younger 013 I
worms preferred brighter light while the older worms *. ' ' ,
getting close to cocooning preferred dimmer light. Tests .3 l l
were conducted to determine how lighting could be '~ t f; i
provided that would satisfy both sets of worms. Lighting , ' 35 i
was tested placing the CCFL in different locations ; g3 '
relative to the habitat, with and without shielding. l. J! i
Aluminum and white polycarbonate shields were used. ,3. r31! l
Testing showed that the white polycarbonate, when t '. i ;
placed between the CCFL and the habitat, produced a i
nice diffuse lighting that was brighter close to the lamp ‘ i
and dimmer further away. This lighting method was l
incorporated into the habitat by making the left side wall _+
a white polycarbonate panel with the lighting ﬁxture 9""
mounted on the outside of the panel. This allowed for an '
area of brighter light closer to the left wall, and an area of ‘ ' ‘ |
dimmer light towards the right side of the habitat, while N
5“” maintaining 900d ViSibmty throughout the entire Figure 5. The SWHAB nearthe end ofMission Simulation 3. Two
habitat for Still images arid VideO. This drove the worms have spun cocoons in the uppern'ght comer and two moths
placement of the food tray and cocoon cups within the have emerged from their cocoons and laid 9998-
habitat. The food tray was positioned on the left side of .
the habitat in the region where the light was brighter. W
The cocoon cups were to the right in the dimmer light .
that the older worms about to start spinning preferred The Pyrpose 0f the ?“t experiment was to document “’39
(Figure 4). behavuor and tunneling abilities of 10 Harvester ants In
microgravity. The requirements for the Ant Habitat
. ‘ T -' (ANTHAB) were to maintain a temperature of 23°C +l-
'-"" J 2°C, a relative humidity of 75% +/- 20%, and to provide
"" good imaging of tunneling and of ant behavior. The
. x . ANTHAB was divided into two sections, tunneling space
-.; , and air space. The tunneling space was filled with an
'1‘ ‘ ‘7 agar-based gel that provided the ants with a medium that
a . . . . . .
. was suntable for tunneling and prowded nourishment, and
7 2 water (Figure 6). The agar also contained a fungicide
. that kills a fungus commonly carried inside Harvester
. ' _ x __ ants. The students pre-fed the ants with the agar for at
* ~- ' — “ ‘ least one week prior to loading into the habitat to rid
Figure 4. Young silkworms are shown eating from the foodtray. The them Of the fungus. Without this treatment, the fungus
CCFL assembly is housed on the outside of the SWHAB on the left. would spread to the inside of the habitat, obscure the
The white polycafbonate panel diffuses the light and provides a bright ants’ activities, and eventually kill them.
area for the growmg worms. The cocoon cup IS located to the right of
the food tray.

"
"6",", l ccnwdlu '..-\ \‘.."" 1m 1118]: .ct-(cnlm
' Ltns' .t.1:-nthcl-~\ill.i; iLi' ur} (""apprigln I.""12 “ lnlmcrnajunul
t - . 2. i .:'. cu yin; and illJ‘llltl pasting; ru prohibited
Dm ,LJ-zdcd Ilmrsda}. «uguu 02. 2012 3:44;]? P ‘1
ma » _ -- 1 *- ..""‘""""'*+‘T
;-” WJA’Q. ,' a. "" ‘~. . II - ﬂ «' ' ,i-
.§'\"" - '1‘: / ‘3‘”- : w.“ ‘
"" a _ ' r: ’3‘ [If "" a ‘
1 a 1 4- ‘ ‘3
K : :1“. I ' ‘ "" 1.
.' . . .t {I .' . , t
t ' j. _’ _
: MM... ,;;Li-...';-.__s,»____._._.w... 5 _ . ii t
Figure 6. A close-up of the ants tunneling inside the ANTHAB. , - -1 , 3 -
Early testing was done to determine the best way to L I ;
image the ants in their habitat. Based on previous . o 3. '
experience with illumination, a back lighting approach ' :_ i!
was chosen for the ﬁrst imaging tests. An electro 1%
luminescent (EL) sheet was placed behind an ant habitat {5-7 j;
that had been machined out of clear polycarbonate. The 3: f.‘ ‘
results were even better than expected. The EL sheet lit ‘; "" _ ~ f
up the entire gel area of the habitat. The ants and their .. ‘ i. _ Li:
tunnels showed up very clearly with details of the tunnels '91.; '- A g 5
in sharp focus. Brackets were designed to hold the EL ' e:;'_.. .. a _ . ' ‘
sheet about 1/2” away from the back of the ant habitat so \ :31
as not to block the air holes. Later, as discussed in the ' 1 I "" ' '-‘_r i
bee habitat section of the paper, these brackets were ‘ ' ' ‘1
removed and mounted to the bee habitat, located behind
the ANTHAB. Once the EL sheets were ordered for
ﬂight, they were much brighter than the original EL Figure 8. A composite picture showing both the top and bottom ofthe
sheets used for testing and caused the images to be ANTHAB-
washed out. To address this problem a thin white Th xt . ft t th t rf
polycarbonate sheet was cut to ﬁt the back of the e ne series 0 ess a .were pe ormed wereoto
ANTHAB to diffuse the light. This approach reduced the determine the correct agar mixture. Benchtop testing
brightness sufﬁciently to allow the cameras to was used to determine agar percentage and ?Sa’.‘ype to
compensate appropriately and not produce a washed out 8""0“! ant tunneling and to p revent water precupltation and
. . . pooling In the habitat. There were problems With the ant
Image (Figure 7) (Figure 8). . . .
agar supplier not conSIstently usmg the same type of
V . , j, agar. The ﬁrst batches of agar were acceptable — the
=. f“ “ ants tunneled in it and the water did not precipitate out.
‘3 But subsequent batches were made with a different type
g {i of agar and did not perform as well. Eventually, graduate
ii a; students working at BioServe came up with a new recipe
‘ i for the ant agar that worked well and could be
"" f consistently replicated. They tested high strength agars,
; puriﬁed agars, and low water content agars. The puriﬁed
_ agar worked best and was used for the ﬂight ant agar.
, i . Bee Habitat
; i ; The bee habitat had to support 3-4 Carpenter bees of
‘ O i a ’ approximately 30 cm in length by providing an air space
Figure 7. Awashed out view of the top half of the ANTHAB. Some and a separate balsa wood nest area The bees
condensation can also be seen in the airspace in the dark region on required a temperature Of 23°C +/_ 2°C, 8 relative
”’e’eﬁ- humidity of 75% +/- 20%, a day/night cycie, gas
exchange, and clear imaging into the nest area. Early
on, a problem was discovered when the Bee Habitat
(BHAB) inhabitants expired soon after being loaded into
the habitat. After close examination, two possible

"
"7","litmxd ~ .\ .lulm 115;..u. C utcr
l iccnsnil lrum .i t 3' \f' Ix. -' il l,ilir u) ('c p} riuln .ZUIZ ;' \Iz lmm'natimml
mu lix_ can_:_\in;:=11:'l inlm’m'tpusliu, m1- prnhil; :d
l"" :t' «1.. 1.,ur'.l""'.»\ugu\t 02.3112 3:44:17m
causes were found. Students who had loaded the ‘
habitat had used a fairly large amount of aquarium ‘
sealant to secure the balsa wood block to the inside of ' ,
the habitat just prior to loading the bees. The aquarium '~ ' ‘
sealant is silicone based and is considered inert after a l l
24-hour cure time. However, if the habitat was sealed i l
soon after the sealant was applied without allowing the “ ' ‘ i
proper time to cure, the bees could have been 11%.:-
asphyxiated when sealed into the habitat by the off- '
gassing sealant. The other theory was that the bees that ‘ ‘ .1:
were loaded into the habitat were unrelated females. In i .
nature it is known that unrelated female carpenter bees 3 'i
will not get along. Benchtop testing was conducted to ~
ﬁnd out a) if related female bees would live together 1'
inside the habitat and b) if the bees would thrive in the i ;
habitat if aquarium sealant was not used. Two habitats ‘-
were loaded — one with 3 sister bees (Figure 9) and the g.
other with 4 unrelated females. Aquarium sealant was i. .
not used in either habitat. Wooden shims were used 5, a 9""
inStead t0 wedge the balsa WOOd block 'nto place. The Figure 10. A side view of the BHAB showing the brackets supporting
sister bees lived happily inside the habitat for 8 months. the EL sheet and associated wiring,
The unrelated females, however, did not fare as well.
They fought and only lasted a few days. W
The temperature requirement for the spider habitat
(SHAB) was between 20°C and 28°C, which was easily
accomplished. Sufﬁcient humidity was provided by the
agar loaded into the base of the habitat. The agar was to
provide time released fruit flies throughout the mission as
food for the spiders. Imaging requirements and web
sampling, however, posed great challenges. Imaging
would require both daytime and night-time viewing of the
spider and its web, and samples of the ?-gravity spun
webs would need to be taken twice during the mission.
The spiders varied in size from an abdominal diameter of
. a . 2mm to 5mm. While the larger ones were easily
\33 captured on video and in still images, the smaller ones
Figure 9. Three related female Harvester bees in the BHAB awn?” were more difﬁcult. The Wiab was an even bigger
benchtop testing, obstacle. Testing showed that If the CCF L was placed at
the top of the habitat, slightly off center from the web, the
While the test described above was being conducted, it web could be seen in the images if the web was parallel
was discovered that if the habitat was placed near a light to the viewing surface. Getting the spider to spin its web
source and allowed to warm up a couple of degrees, the in the center of the habitat, parallel with the front
bees were more active. 80 we moved the ballast for the faceplate posed yet another challenge. The Australian
BHAB CCFL to the back of the habitat. This one ballast students came up with a simple solution to encourage
did not warm the habitat enough to effect any changes in the spiders to spin their webs in the correct location and
the activity level of the bees. So it was decided to orientation. They found that if Kevlar strands were
remove the EL sheet and its brackets and ballast from placed along the sides of the habitat, the spiders would
the ANTHAB and fasten them onto the back of the BHAB often choose to spin their webs using the strands as
to provide more heat (Figure 10). With the CCFL ballast anchor points. This greatly increased the chances of
and the larger EL sheet ballast attached to the back of getting good images of the web. Night-time viewing of
the BHAB, the habitat was warmer and the bees a little the web created yet another obstacle. Several different
more active. lights and lighting conﬁgurations were tested before
choosing the ﬁnal design. One conﬁguration used a
CCFL wrapped with photolithographic ﬁlm (Figure 11)
and placed at the bottom of the habitat. Another used
red LEDs mounted to the inside of the lid, and another
used infra-red LEDs mounted to the inside of the lid.
Each conﬁguration was tested with the standard color
cameras used for all of the habitats as well as a higher
resolution black and white camera that was sensitive to
infra-red. Results showed that the optimal conﬁguration

"
"8","l icon- .(I In \-\'. \-Jul 'sun pace (‘cmcr
Izt-t-n.t-uln.sn t-t: u t)i;,-..ul 1 ""ma, ( uppriglu 2012 M; 1m :11 iunul
. anaii} A:. c: vying :qu ium-m't posting ‘dl'L‘ ptuh': u:
n.- m; ..ul lhu. da}..~\u;;u\l 02. am: 3:4 217 pm
was to use four infra-red LEDs mounted on the inside of This kept the operation of web sampling simple and
the habitat on the lid in conjunction with using the high quick. Also, the web, and contents of the habitat,
resolution black and white camera (Figure 12). needed to remain within one level of containment at all
times. The result was a rod surrounded by a thin,
""ﬁf- ._ pliable, Teﬂon sleeve that would be attached to a sealed
,- 1 "" ' P _» port at the top of the habitat. The rod could then be
age - '. 1; inserted into the habitat via the port to obtain the web
;_ - ""‘ and then pulled back out of the habitat and back into its
. sleeve, always keeping the rod either contained within
’ . the habitat, or by the sleeve. Another issue to be
""7 { .'. ‘ . addressed was what material to construct the rod out of
' . so that the web would easily adhere to it. To answer this
w. i . question, several different materials were used to
. . construct the rod. Rods of smooth aluminum, bead
. :,-_,-._'_ blasted aluminum, knurled aluminum, smooth wood, and
,. £3 .~ 2,, . roughened wood were manufactured. Each of the
""r ~13 different rods was then used to collect web samples.
' '. ‘.-l""_ 3'. The smooth metal and wood rods did not work well. The
' 1} rough wood and bead blasted aluminum worked fairly
'2 ’~ ,' Q well, but the knurled aluminum rod worked best. This
~.. M 2 ‘ . rod easily collected the web as it passed through it and
. ‘- N‘“’ the web stayed in place once it was collected (Figure
*' ' 13).
.I"" . - ' i la,
Figure 11. The SHAé ieshown here during behchtop'testing using a "" d 'l
CCFL covered with photolithographic tape. A small spider can be
seen in the habitat about half way up and a little to the left.
5
. H ’ ~. - '1 '4 '
; . snip” ;.
.\ .. t t t.
‘ "" ' i:- - {a J m. 1. g? H” 1' f . _ ’m
.. - . . ~ o “a
e Jig _ -
I ='v..,‘ ""‘ .. - M... , ' ,- -
4 ' Figure 13. Using the Web Sampling Tool during a crew training
' ‘ SGSSIOH.
. W
i ; ‘ Temperature and humidity were not considerations in the
"" . design for the crystal deformation experiment. Ambient
temperature and humidity readings would be recorded,
. but not controlled. However, other issues did have to be
. ' “ addressed. A method of making the starter crystals,
- q ‘ ' calcium chloride and cobalt chloride (Figure 14), had to
‘ 7’52); , .9 ‘ k be developed so that the crystals remained intact during
, rt? ‘ , ' activation. Also, the crystals had to be kept separate
. r . . ‘ "" from the sodium silicate solution until initialization of the
Figure 12. SHAB image testing. This photo was taken during the experiment. Benohtop teStmg was used to optimize the
nightcycle using the IR-LEDs and the black and white high resolution methOd for formmg CWStaIS and for keeping crystals
camera. separate from the sodium silicate solution. The original
method called for crystals to be selected that were
Another series of tests was conducted to determine the approximately 3-6 mm3 in volume. The crystals would
best way to sample the web. The basic design for the then be attached to the end of a rod with a two-part
web-sampling t00' was driven by safety considerations epoxy. This method proved to be unreliable. First, it was
and operational constraints. The web tool had to enter difficult to ﬁnd crystals of the proper size and shape to fit
the habitat to gain access to the web via a port in the ""d. within the volume available inside the ports of the sodium

"
"9","‘ l .-cnwd to ‘.-\h \r'Jnlmsun ~ \au- (‘cntcr
l it'cnvﬁ hum the 5-H Digital library ( ..,i_\..;;ht 1' 12 .' \L lutemalion.
L-r .iling. mming and inu-rncl _:u- tizu: :n v prnhilmed
l m nluarlctl lhur . ax. itlguut ill. ‘Jll 3:44:17 F‘J
silicate solution chambers. Second, it was difﬁcult to ‘
epoxy the crystals to the rods such that they would ._ -.
adhere to the rods and remain attached before and ‘ tm- .
during activation. Benchtop testing was conducted to l . it
ﬁnd a more efﬁcient and reliable method of attaching the ‘1 i ' ' i . "" 1..
crystals to the rods. The crystals were mixed with the it .
epoxy and then pressed onto the rods as spheres. This E. l l ‘
method was effective in keeping the crystals attached to .§ \
the rods, but it didn’t work well for keeping the crystals 1 1"" I ' "".I
within the allowable envelope for the ports. Finally, a I ' - ¥ 5“
method was developed where the crystals were crushed a l i ‘
and separated into very ﬁne pieces. These pieces were ‘ ' l‘. .
then mixed with an equal amount of two-part epoxy. The ‘
crystal-epoxy mixture was then forced into a Teflon mold ‘ i
with the rod inserted into it. After a couple of hours of i : . '
cure time, the crystal “lollipOps” were removed from the . 2: - E
mold and loaded into the Chemical Garden. The mold ' , ‘ ‘
insured that each and every crystal was the same size ‘ '
and shape so that they would always ﬁt into the chamber
ports without piercing the foil disk between the sodium
silicate solution and the crystal. - ~ - x.
i. r» l _ A ~ v_‘_ Asp
2"" f ; 5y rag. . J
‘ 3‘ . ff Figure 15. The Chemical Garden shown during functional
1 . ; 3"" . s . . ' testing.
ll *3
‘. ""g , 3 ‘ Over time, another problem became apparent. The
»"" l ,l ’x 2: stainless steel rods on which the crystals were mounted
.3. ' 'l would corrode when left in contact with the sodium
. -. ‘ ‘ ' silicate solution for long periods of time. The corrosion
' would sometimes prevent the chemical garden from
activating correctly. The rods were gold-plated to
remedy this problem.
-. J :1! :1: . w MISSION SIMULATIONS
Figure 14. The calcium chloride crystals are shown on the left against
a blue background. The cobalt chloride crystals are on the right in . . . .
front of the white background. W
A series of tests to determine the best method to keep The ﬁrst mission simulation was conducted at BioServe
the sodium silicate solution separate from the crystals Space Technologies in April of 2001. The primary
before activation were conducted as well. The STARS ﬂight unit was used. Teams from each of the
conceptual design called for duckbill valves to be used schools involved (except for China) were present to
between the sodium silicate solution chamber and the air prepare and load their speciﬁc habitats with specimens.
chamber holding the crystals. The duckbills worked well Loading procedures were developed and then reﬁned as
as long as the chemical garden was not disturbed. the process progressed. Several problems manifested
However, vibrations during launch and during other themselves during the mission simulation. First, the
handling made the duckbill valves leak. Once the bees died fairly soon after being sealed into their habitat.
sodium silicate solution leaked into the crystal port, the Subsequent testing proved that related female bees
crystal would start deforming immediately. To address could live quite a long time in the habitat as long as no
this problem, an aluminum foil disk held in place with an off-gassing of sealant occurred. Second, the AHAB
o-ring seal, was used in place of the duckbill valve. This stayed within the originally required temperature range
worked well to keep the solution and crystal separate (Figure 16), but toward the end of the simulation an
during handling and launch vibrations and so was algae bloom developed and therefore the acceptable
chosen as the ﬂight conﬁguration (Figure 15). upper limit on the temperature range requirement had to
be decreased by one degree. Third, the ant habitat
developed a small amount of condensation in the air
space as well as within the tunnels that the ants made in
the agar. Follow—on testing found a solution of
appropriate agar type and concentration to eliminate this
problem. Fourth, the images of the spider habitat did not
show the web during the day, and there was no nighttime
viewing as required. Tests conducted subsequent to the

"
"10","liven. (lit: 71.“ . Jnlmwn ‘ ; (“ tcr
[Len «in when: nmiLiLiimr) («iptr'gi 2-.12 ,xi iuu-n: mm '
i -; -uiling. copying and i: .‘ rt putting arr prolii’ 11 d
Dlmnllmdull Ih'J tin. . -\u 'usl LL. lell 3:44:17 F'i
mission simulation with lighting, and image sequencing and replaced to solve these problems. The AHAB
addressed these issues. The spider habitat was also temperature was still too warm because the thermal
overrun with a large infestation of fruit ﬂies near the end grease had not been applied properly. The two
of the simulation. The Australian student team Chemical Garden cameras and the silkworm camera did
determined that they must adjust their agar preparation not work because they were only getting approximately
to account for fruit ﬂy reproduction rates in the ﬁnal 9.8V instead of the required 10.5V. The voltage was
configuration for ﬂight. Fifth, the Chemical Garden did adjusted so that they were receiving 10.5V and were
not activate as planned. A problem with the internal working properly. This simulation was also plagued with
Chemical Garden control board was discovered and several other minor electrical problems. As a result, the
repaired. Sixth, even though the silkworm habitat secondary STARS ﬂight unit had to undergo many
performed well, it had been loaded with younger worms updates and some rewiring.
than those planned for ﬂight so the test would have to be
repeated with appropriate aged silkworms. Last, the Mission Simulation Three
data and image transfer to SPACEHAB was incomplete.
The third mission simulation took place in July 2002
using both the primary and secondary STARS units. The
AHAB'TemP VS'T'me required AHAB temperatures were met using the new
4/27/02' 5/12/02 shroud design and properly applied thermal grease. The
spider viewing during day and night met all the
30 requirements. Some miscellaneous camera and video
’r‘wn nmnnm malfunctions were experienced mainly due to timing
0 25 ngllﬂgaui-Ea'n mistakes, but were easily remedied. The chemical
2,- 20 M... H II. III“. garden did not activate as planned, and the lights did not
5 .mmllnlll come on during some of the video sessions. The
g 15 “I'lllml. ll chemical garden had to undergo more benchtop testing
2' 10 ~« J ‘ "" I ' as well as testing within the STARS unit before all these
.9 5 II -‘."".III""':. "" problems were corrected. The remaining habitats
0 INHIIIII-ll I... performed as expected and were ready to be shelved
' until time for ﬂight preparation to begin.
Time g“ *~--
1»
Figure 16. Graph showing elevated AHAB temperature during Mission .’-’-."" . . l ' H ‘
Simulation 1. l- . m ”4.: am}. i WV];
‘ ."""" I ‘ r '
Mission Simulation Two *3 ‘ i""! 1' .-
The second mission simulation was conducted in June of l‘ g: g:
2002. For this simulation the secondary STARS ﬂight gt , ,5 t; .~ .
unit was used. It also was plagued with a variety of f; ‘ i_______..., "" ° ""
difﬁculties from the start and the simulation was - ‘ _ 7
terminated prematurely. ....,- mi; “ “ ‘ ”‘75,;
Even before the simulated “launch” (Figure 17), a large . ‘ "" ‘
temperature differential W35 “Oticed between the spider Figure 17. dneof the STARS payloads ready forsimulatedlaunch.
habitat and the silkworm habitat. These two habitats had
the two CGBA control thermistors attached to them. The CONCLUSION
computer takes the average of these two readings to
determine the ambient temperature of the experiment In conclusion, each habitat was thoroughly tested on the
volume. It then heats or cools as needed to maintain the bench and inside the CGBA on the STARS pallet. All
correct set temperature. After some investigating, it was issues were ultimately resolved before the payload was
found that a bulkhead fan had been installed to increase prepared for ﬂight. A high level of conﬁdence was
air circulation within the experiment volume. This reached that all habitats would perform as expected
bulkhead fan was pulling warm air from the heat during ﬂight. Although the STARS payload did not return
exchanger in the front compartment of the STARS unit home, data, images, and video downlinked during the
and blowing it directly onto the Spider habitat control mission all indicated that the habitats worked as
thermistor. The bulkhead fan was removed and the expected during the 16 day STS-107 mission. Only a
problem was resolved. few minor glitches occurred. The students were
provided with a wealth of information as their
Additionally, the frame grabber (part of the computer experiments orbited the Earth.
used to acquire still images), and the EL screen display
did not work properly. The computer had to be removed

"
"11","' lice din \5 Johnson "".m (""en i
1 3m. cu hum :. t- x : n:_-m1 Library ( up. rig... 2m: '- ‘L International
. -m:;ilincu1 ginguml inmnctpm i-- arr p, nhilritcd
l)un:.' . ‘dt'd Thursdzi}. «um ll)... Ill 3:44:17 P51
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Sherry Woodard, Carla Goulart, and Alex Hoehn:
Tel: +1—303—492-5481 , +1-303-492-3607,
Many thanks to the following BioServe students and staff and +1-303-492-5875, respectively.
for their outstanding help during testing and simulations Fax: +1—303-492-8883.
of the STARS payload: Kunmi Ayanbule, John Bollich, Email:
Kirsten Carpenter, Tyrone Cunningham, Jake Freeman, woodard@buffmail.colorado.edu
Don Geering, Jon Genova, Kevin Gifford, Lisa Harris, Bill goulart@colorado.edu
Kalinowski, Chris Madsen, Jon Pineau, Mark Rupert, Jim Hoehn@colorado.edu
Russell, Casey Shafer, Ken Stroud, and Jeff Sweet.
BioServe Space Technologies
We wish to express our deepest sadness at the loss of University of Colorado
the STS-107 Columbia crew. They will be missed, but Boulder CO 80309-0429 USA.
forever remembered for the sacriﬁce they made toward ’
the advancement of the space frontier and the
advancement of science and education in the micro- ADDITIONAL SOURCES
gravity laboratory. Further, we wish to acknowledge their _ .
outstanding assistance with these student experiments Scuence Technology and Research Students webSIte
from beginning to end. We also wish to send our (STARS): MW
deepest sympathies to the families and friends of
Columbia’s crew.
DEFINITIONS, ACRONYMS, ABBREVIATIONS
The STS-107 Columbia crew touched our lives through
their warm personalities, their passion to pursue the AHAB: Aquatic Habitat
dream of human space ﬂight, and their dedication to the
advancement of micro-gravity research. Their inspiration ANTHAB: Ant Habitat
will live on in many ways as evidenced by the beautiful
memorials created by the various STARS student teams BHAB: Bee Habitat
around the world. Countless new ambitious minds will
take on the dream ef Columbia 5 crew, and some Will be CCFL: Cold Cathode Fluorescent Lamp
sure to follow In their footsteps.
REFERENCES CGBA. CommerCIal Generic Bioprocessmg Apparatus
EL: Electro luminescent
1. A. Hoehn, J. B. Freeman, M. Jacobson, L.S.
Stodieck (1999): Incubator Designs for Space Flight LED: Light Emitting Diode
Application, Optimization and Automation. SAE
paper 1999'01'2177' NASA: National Aeronautics and Space Administration
2. J. Poynter, T.MacCa|lum, G.Anderson, M. Rupert,
S.Woodard, 0- Goulart, _K- CamPF>e” {2091): The STARS: Science Technology and Research Students
Development and Testing of Visualization and
Passively Controlled Life Support Systems for SHAB: Spider Habitat
Experimental Organisms During Spaceflight. SAE-
Paper 2001-01-2288- SWHAB: Silkworm Habitat
3. T.K. MacCallum, G.A. Anderson, J.E. Poynter et al.
(2000): The ABS (Autonomous Biological System): STS: Space Transportation System
Spaceflight Results from a Bioregenerative Closed
Life Support System. SAE-paper 2000-01-2340. VDC: Volts Direct Current
4. S. Woodard, C. Goulart, A. Hoehn (2002): Habitat
Development in Support of Small Scale Biological &
Biochemical Space Experiments. SAE paper 2002-
01-2282.
CONTACTS
The authors are employed by BioServe Space
Technologies, a NASA Research Partnership Center
located at the University of Colorado, Boulder, CO. They
can be reached at:

"
