"","x"
"1","Educational Outreach
Butterﬂies and Spiders in Space: Space Life Science Investigations for the
Classroom
Nancy P. Morenol, Gregory L. Vogtz, J ames P. Denkz, Stefanie Countryman3, Louis Stodieck3, and
William A. Thomson1
1 Professor and Senior Associate Director, Centerfor Educational Outreach, 2 Assistant Professor, School OfAllied
Health Sciences, 2 Instructor, School OfAllied Health Sciences; 3 Business Development Manager, BioServe Space
T echnologies, 3 Director, BioServe Space T echnologies, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO; 1 Professor and
Director, Centerfor Educational Outreach, Baylor College OfMedicine, Houston, TX 7703 0, USA
ABSTRACT additional experiments and 80% of students
Two experiments were conducted aboard the expressed interest in science careers. The second
International Space Station (188) in 2008 and program, Butterﬂies i.n Space, enahled students to
2009 that engaged elementary and middle school obserye and tnvestlgate the .hfe. eycle and
teachers and students worldwide in authentic behaV1ors of pamted lady butterﬂles 11V1ng on 188,
science investigations designed to increase student and. compare them to butterﬂles hemg stud1ee1 1n
knowledge of and interest in biology and space then own classes. Combmmg thlS near real-tlme
life science studies and biomedical careers. In the experltnent WTth hands-oh exploratlohs ahd web-
. . . . based mstructlonal strategles, Butterﬂles 1n Space
ﬁrst preject, a p110t called Butterﬂles and Splders .
in Space 1 876 middle school students tested a reaehed more than 3’000 teachers, representmg an
protocol for comparing at near-real time the estlmated 180,000 students (grades 3-6) or more
behaviors of orb-weaverjspiders and painte (1, 1a dy worldwide. It also received international coverage
butterﬂies living in microgravity (aboard 188) to from a varlety of.med1a. Invest 1gaters at BloServe
those of comparable subjects in students’ Space Technologles of the Unlversﬁy of Colorado
classrooms. Teachers reported that, as a result of descligned inc]: 3111151. the chanﬁbers dm Wilslgh th:
project activities, 33% of their students designed sp1 ers at} u er lesseere ouse. on ’ an
led technlcal and loglstlcal operatlons for both
= programs. Baylor College of Medicine (BCM)
educators and scientists developed the education
Key WOIdef InFematiODal Space StatiOI}; . framework and managed the web-based
lg/Ilcrggvﬁy; StUdeSntfl T61332111131§OEY§1L£€ distribution of project data and teaching resources.
yc e; ementary C 00; 1 e C 00;
NSBRI; NASA; Experiment Design INTRODUCTION
Correspondence to: Nancy P. Moreno The President’s Council of Advisors on
Professor and Senior Associate Director Science and Technology recently highlighted
Center for Educational Outreach national needs for preparing and inspiring the next
Baylor College of Medicine generation of professionals in science, technology,
One BayIOT Plaza M3411 engineering, and mathematics (STEM) ﬁelds
H0us§0noTX9 77030 (PCAST, 2010). Unfortunately, students’ STEM
Eﬁmaltz;go7rggogggmedu learning experiences often are limited to readings
one' ' ' from textbooks or preparation for high-stakes
standardized assessments. At the same time, a
Gravitational and Space Biology Volume 26 (1) Apr 2012 -- 77

"
"2","Moreno et al. -- Butterﬂies and Spiders in Space
growing body of research indicates that created for this project (and offered free of
immersing students in authentic scientiﬁc charge) with their students.
investigations builds interest and proﬁciency Both the pilot project and the large-soale
(Minner et a1., 2010; Geier et a1., 2008). Butterﬂies in Space program were designed to be
In 2008 and 2009, Baylor College of easily replicable in any classroom. Images and
Medicine (BCM) and BioServe Space Video of the butterﬂies and spiders ﬂown on 188,
Technologies at the University of Colorado as well as downloadable teacher guides and other
collaborated on two educational programs resources, remain available on BCM’s BioEd
designed to 1) engage students and their teachers Online (http://www.bioedon1ine.org/spaoe/) and
in open-ended scientiﬁc investigations involving K8 Science (http://www.k8soienoe.org/spaoe/)
organisms living aboard the International Space websites for any teacher or class wishing to
Station (188); 2) increase students’ science conduct the investigations.
knowledge, understanding of, and participation in Both projects used “life in space” as a topic
the scientiﬁc process, and interest in science to engage students in guided and open-ended
studies and careers; and 3) determine the science investigations that address National
educational value of spaoe-based, investigatory Science Education Standards for grades 5-8
educational programs. The ﬁrst project, a pilot related to scientiﬁc inquiry, structure and function
called Butterﬂies and Spiders in Space, featured in organisms and living systems, and Earth and
two orb-weaver spiders and siX painted lady space science (NRC, 1996). We focused primarily
butterﬂy larvae ﬂown to the 188 via Space Shuttle on elementary and middle school because early
Endeavor (STS-126). Twenty-ﬁve participating educational experiences are critical in establishing
teachers and their students conducted classroom students’ interest and aptitude in science, and they
investigations to test a protocol for determining 1) contribute to later interest in other science courses
the impact of microgravity on the butterﬂies” life and even science careers (Tai et a1., 2006).
cycle (larva to adult butterﬂy) and 2) the ability of However, Butterﬂies in Space was open to any
an orb-weaver spider to spin a web, feed, and interested teacher, and some high school teachers
remain healthy in space. Though limited in size, did participate with their students.
Butterﬂies and Spiders in Space demonstrated the By serving to “publicize to the intramural
feasibility and strong appeal of using “real-time” and extramural communities, the availability of
space life science as a focus for classroom 188 as a research environment that can
experiments. accommodate a variety of experimental
Building on the Butterﬂies and Spiders in approaches, and address a vast range of research
Space experience, BCM and BioServe set out to questions,” the Butterﬂies and Spiders in Space
reﬁne and amplify the scope of the pilot project pilot and the full-soale Butterﬂies in Space
with another “butterﬂy investigation,” to be ﬂown initiative also supported the Memorandum of
on Space Shuttle mission STS-129 (November Understanding between the NIH and NASA for
2009), with support from NASA and the National Cooperation in Spaoe-Related Health Research.
Space Biomedical Research Institute (NSBRI). The 2007 Memorandum sets forth a framework of
The second, full-soale project, Butterﬂies in cooperation between NIH and NASA and
Space, followeda similar design as Butterﬂies and designates the US portion of 188 as a national
Spiders in Space. Its objective was two-fold: 1) laboratory focused on areas of research related to
increase students’ interest in, and understanding health and microgravity (NIAMSD, 2007).
of space life science by engaging them in
classroom experiments in which they collect and BUTTERFLIES AND SPIDERS IN SPACE
share data and investigate their own questions (PILOT PROGRAM)
related to biological responses. to the microgravity The Butterﬂies and Spiders in Space pilot
enVironment aboard the ISS, and 2) determine . . .
. . . . pI‘OJeCt launched on November 14, 2008, With s1X
whether teachers, limited by rigid schedules and . .
test-driven curricula, would use the content Vanessa cardul(pa1nted1ady)butterﬂylarvaeand
two orb weaver spiders of the family Araneidae
transported aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavor
78 -- Gravitational and Space Biology Volume 26 (1) Apr 2012

"
"3","Moreno et al. -- Butterﬂies and Spiders in Space
(STS-126) to the ISS. BCM developed a set of how to build inexpensive, easy-to-assemble
accompanying educational materials and activities habitats, and grow the organisms in their
to engage classes in ground-based experiments classrooms. Students prepared their habitats in
similar and concurrent to those being performed advance, so that classroom pilot testing could be
on 188. (These resources, with Video and images synchronized with the ﬂight investigation.
from the ISS, remain available, free of charge, on Classes had access to space ﬂight (from the
BioEd Online). The Commercial Generic 188) and ground control images almost
Bioprocessing Apparatus growth habitats immediately after the spider and butterﬂy habitats
(approximately 18 X 13 X 9 cm in size), in which were transferred to the ISS. Those images and
spiders and butterﬂies lived while on the 188, other data from the Space Station were made
were designed and built by BioServe to provide a available for students to View and download, in
suitable living environment, and to allow near real-time from BCM’s BioEd Online
photography, at regular intervals, of the subjects” (www.bioedonlineorg) and K8 Science
life cycles and behaViors in microgravity (e.g., (www.k8soienoe.org) websites. Students
eating patterns, web spinning, ﬂight, emergence conducted their own olassroom-based experiments
from Chrysalis). Speciﬁc project objectives were to compare the life cycles and activities of their
as follows: Earth-bound animals with those of the butterﬂies
and spiders in the “live” experiments conducted in
1. Investigate the feasibility of transporting and microgravity aboard the ISS.
maintaining painted lady butterﬂies and orb- Because crew time is in high demand on the
weaver spiders in specialized chambers on Space Shuttle and 188, BioServe’s butterﬂy and
the International Space Station. spider habitats were set up to require very little
2. Enable students to compare observations intervention. Twice during the ISS mission,
from the ISS-based experiments to their own astronauts had to eXpose fresh food for the
data collected during ground-based control butterﬂies (the spider chambers were self-
investigations in classrooms. sustaining because they also contained fruit ﬂy
3. Obtain estimates of students’ and teachers’ cultures). Through the use of different lighting,
interest in investigating space life science- the habitats provided a day/night cycle, with
related questions. dozens of images captured during each hour of
4. Develop, ﬁeld test, and evaluate an “daylight.”
edooational package including educators, Outcomes. Unfortunately, the food for the pilot
guides and recommended materials, teachers .
. . test butterﬂy larvae was defective, so the larvae
tools, and supplies for real-time classroom .
support of the investigation. failed to pupate. The same lack of development
plagued the ground control larvae. The pI‘OJeCt
Procedure. For geographic and logistical reasons, team identiﬁed the problem (defective food) with
middle school teachers in Colorado and Texas the help of students who were conducting the
were recruited to participate in the Butterﬂies and investigation with a different batch of food. Those
Spiders in Space project. A total of 25 teachers students’ larvae successfully pupated, and the
(representing 1,876 students) piloted BCM’s problem was resolved prior to the full-soale,
classroom protocol for growing and investigating follow-up mission on STS-129 (described below).
butterﬂies and spiders similar to those being The orb-weaver spiders, on the other hand,
ﬂown on 188. (Painted lady butterﬂies and orb thrived for many weeks in space. Originally, the
weaver spiders are appropriate classroom two spiders were carried in separate chambers
organisms because they are readily available from (one as a “spare” in case the primary spider did
science suppliers and care is easily managed.) not survive). But early in the mission, the
Prior to the start of the investigation, each “backup” spider found its way into the main
participating school received a draft educational spider’s chamber and begin to build its own webs.
kit, consisting of educators” guides, control For a short time, it was unclear where the
experiment butterﬂies and spiders, and other secondary spider had gone, and a comment by one
necessary materials. Teachers were instructed on 188 astronaut led to the mistaken belief that the
Gravitational and Space Biology Volume 26 (1) Apr 2012 -- 79

"
"4","Moreno et al. -- Butterﬂies and Spiders in Space

spider had escaped into the Space Station. This from student questions that arose during the
observation led to signiﬁcant interest among investigation—and from the fact that these
various media outlets and prompted headlines inquiries were appropriate and relevant. Typical
such as, “Lost in space: Now spider goes missing questions, as reported by teachers, included: How
on orbital station 200 miles above Earth” (Bates, does Space affect the angles at which a Spider
2008). Eventually, we learned that the second makes a web? the number of U-tums in a
spider was simply momentarily out of View in a spider’s web? the positioning of the hub in a
corner of the main chamber. web? the position of the Spider in its web?

At the completion of the investigation, the 25 The spider portion of experiment provided
participating teachers were surveyed regarding the opportunities for students to ask original scientiﬁc
quality, usefulness, and overall appeal of the questions and focus on particular aspects of the
project and supporting materials. As can be seen spiders’ activities in microgravity. For example, a
in Table 1, teachers were highly enthusiastic about 7th grade student at Aurora Hills Middle School
participating in similar programs, and they in Aurora, Colorado, presented the outcomes of
reported a high level of interest among their her investigation as a poster at the American
students. Teachers also reported that, as a result of Araohnologioal Society’s 2009 Annual Meeting in
project activities, 33% of their students designed Russellville, Arkansas. The poster, which received
additional experiments and 80% of students a special award, compared the web hub placement
expressed interest in science careers. Further of a spider in microgravity to that of a control
evidence of the project’s impact can be gleaned spider in the student’s classroom.

Table 1. Pilot—test Teacher Survey Outcomes (N = 25 teachers)
Question Mean StDeV
Please rate your students’ interest in the proj ect by checking the number that most
closely represents your oplnlon. 4.7 0.52
(I =N0t1nterested; 5 = Very Interested)
Did this proj ect support your curriculum obj ectives?
4.7 0.67
(I =N0t Supportive; 5 = Very Supportive)
If there were an opportunity for you and your students to participate in an improved
. . . 9
vers1on of th1s pl‘OJCCt, would you. 4.8 0.42
(I =Deﬁm'tely Would Not; 5 =Deﬁnitely Would)
How interested were your students in learning about the organisms used in this
. . . 9
1nvest1gatlon. 4.7 0.48
(I =N0t1nterested; 5 = Very Interested)
How interested were your students in caring for the organisms used in this
. . . 9
1nvest1gatlon. 4.6 0. 52
(I =N0t1nterested; 5 = Very Interested)
BUTTERFLIES IN SPACE (FULL-SCALE gathered and lessons learned, BioServe reﬁned the
PROJECT) original technical model—most notably the
. . . rooedures for feedin ainted lad butterﬂ
The success of the Butterﬂies and Spiders in p . .g p . . y y
. . . . larvae and adults w1th1n their habitats. BCM and
Space pilot in 2008 led to the implementation of a . .
. . . . . BioServe then set out to des1gn and conduct a full-
s1m11ar experiment the followmg year us1r1g . . . .
aint d 1 d b tt r ﬂ 1 r A 1 in d t scale ISS investigation that involved students
p e a y u e y a vae. pp y g a a nationally, even globally, in a project that
80 -- Gravitational and Space Biology Volume 26 (1) Apr 2012

"
"5","Moreno et al. -- Butterﬂies and Spiders in Space
combined the excitement of an authentic, real- and caring for butterﬂy larvae and adults, and siX
time spaoe-based experiment with hands-on guided inquiry lessons that provide a foundation
classroom explorations and engaging web-based for students’ own investigations. Since little is
resources. While students collected and shared known about how or whether butterﬂies rely on
experiment data and observations related to their gravity for growth and development, orientation,
own inquiries about life on Earth and in feeding, or wing expansion, this experiment
microgravity, project managers sought to enabled students to investigate unique questions
determine whether teachers, limited by rigid and even contribute to general scientiﬁc
schedules and test-driven curricula, would use the knowledge.
content created for this project (and offered free of BioServe handled all Butterﬂies in Space
ohar e with their students. mission-related re uirements, inoludin a load
g q g P y
. . integration, safety, mission planning, payload
Braieduge'. Buugﬂlgs ttm ﬂSpaoe dfCéllozlved .a veriﬁcation, and ﬂight certiﬁcation. BioServe also
21ml ar 6.8 1gtn 1:118 e u er letshand p1 er: in conducted crew training; supported the required
pace prOJeC' owever, given e .1sappoin lug NASA ﬂight bench reView; performed ﬁnal
and incomplete outcomes of the pilot prOJeot s a load inte ration testin and ﬂi ht
butterﬂy component we focused the second p y. . g ’ g, .g
. . . ’ . certiﬁcation processes at a NASA faoility;
investigation S9161}, on butterﬂies. in November communicated regularly with science teams on
200.9’ the SUbJeCtS Of the Butterﬂies in Space payload status; and received payload at turnover
prOJeot (Vartessa cardm butterﬂy larvae) welfe from NASA after the orbiter landed. Still and
transported into space on Space Shuttle Atlantis Video images of the butterﬂies were recorded at
(STS_.129). and housed on the 188 in Commeroial regular intervals and transmitted to BioServe’s
Generic Bioprocessmg Apparatus habitats created servers from where they were relayed to B CM for
by BioServe. (Prior to launch, ground—based posting, on project web pages An example is
butterﬂies living in the same habitats were . . . °
. . . prov1ded in Figure 2.
cons1stently being cultivated through complete Utilizing the Internet to disseminate
life eyeles.) Butterﬂy habitats for elassroom educational content and products globally
investigations featured an 11163136118”? clear immediately and at relatively low cost BCM was
Elastic 93am—8hill boxdang p(liastirlohportionl :ups able to share Butterﬂies in Space with classrooms
.0 p170“? wa er an 00 ' e rea _ 1me around the world Via its BioEd Online and K8
investigation spanned November and December Science websites (Moreno and Erdmann 2010)
2009Wh1 1 . th B tt ﬂ‘ . S various email lists of science educators, and social
r . t 53623151 arming de u er. 1es (int pace; media sites, such as Facebook and Twitter.
p OJ?” ’1 etonvened an expterienie ear? 0 Classes conducting butterﬂy experiments had free
fun? 1: um gm 6? an d eva ua 0:: O3 o8rea e'tﬁ access to near real-time photo and Video archives
eao. e1 gui e,t toeiihset on f gradesk _ ’ .W1 of the butterﬂies on the 188, which they could
currioutar CO? fnd ta rein oroe 1. f ey soienoe compare to the painted lady butterﬂies living in
oonoep S .tre a ed 0 ﬂ'SIliilcéfh 1Be tt sfolienoe, their own classrooms. In addition, BCM provided
Isniorogravry, lan spage 1E ' .e Fu er 1168 m online streaming Video demonstrations showing
pace curriou um gui e S own m igure was key portions of each student activity, with user
published in 2009, for teachers and students to use tips and interactive vocabulary connections a
m COHJUIICUOII With this. experiment (Vogt et al., trouble-shooting section for common questions
2009)’ Along Wlth? series Of manuals created by about procedures and outcomes of classroom
BCM. tot £26131“? te. suéoessfull otlasstroonl activities; downloadable PDF ﬁles of teaching
expermaen S es1gning . 0}? nves 1ga 101% resources (e.g., lesson plans, handouts, aotiVity
Soientiﬁo Image Processing, and Naturalist worksheets student reading and mathematics
Jougnals )thelfrbele Butteiﬂiegcijri/ISpaoeb curriculum; extension materials); references or links to other
guile 1s alzai a e ton e b k we (181 es {10 e background or student materials that could be
ear 1er. . eon ains ao groun soierioe used to enhance or extend the activities; and a
information on painted lady butterﬂies, password-proteoted discussion forum for
instructions for creating an Earth-based habitat instructors
Gravitational and SpaceBiology Volume 26 (1)Apr2012 -- 8]

"
"6","Moreno et al. -- Butterﬂies and Spiders in Space
Bi(f)Ed”"" Bk )E¢ l
B 77 f7 ' D ' '
ﬁm $p@@@ Y
‘. . .. Investigation
‘ . ‘ O WK“ ' O '. ‘ 2
“. W? '1 ""M » E “:E“:;~—-- .,.
§‘3‘o‘ _ .mgwy , ‘¢
$.‘L 1‘. A x . ~_ L V
V r . , ’ K 4“ __ qt
, , I 1:,
TEACHII'S GUlDE k —
3L22‘;’3‘..Zf.'§;,‘3.°s _ Gregory L. Vogt. ED. and
Stcianio CountrgvmoﬂMBA 3351???? Nancy P Moreno’ Ph.D.
S ' t ' f'
“ ""“‘ Processing
. ."""" A _ / - ‘ :‘\ ‘ 2 [-2 ._
‘ - “ ~ ’2' 2""”
'9 \E g E ‘ '37 f: l ‘ :.-
Hm llhllllllyllllllw‘lljﬂl’ .
3, _ .‘ ”.1 ‘
—
Gregory LVogt, EdD. and by
Nancy P. Moreno, Ph.D.
Figure 1. Teacher and student guides for space—based investigations. BCM created and published a teacher
guide and several supporting manuals that provide classroom lessons, procedural/technical
recommendations, and background information for classes conducting Butterﬂies in Space investigations.
82 -- Gravitational and Space Biology Volume 26 (1)Apr 2012

"
"7","Moreno et al. -- Butterﬂies and Spiders in Space
. r ‘ o - ' ~Y - ., .1 ‘ ’ ' ' V .‘ ’ .
.-A o“‘ '. .'£A.,oo W i’w . 7- ’ . _,._ ‘ 'if _* .d . .' pf:
. ' u.‘ “‘7”""’“ ----»-o.-_ :. . -
B - I .0 e . . ' 2
93 _. '9‘ ' ' t” 7' 721 ‘ ~ .- O -
' - ﬂ . . . ’ .-.
‘ u ’ g ‘ -‘ . . a '
‘ O 3' ' ' «'1 I I
‘ +. - - 1 _ \}’_ ‘
‘ J *a. I."" ‘ ' o n . , (I ' “ i.
o ‘O . '
r .. .~ n
.' ' - ' ""53 'i -‘ -' ' 2*"" '2.---
IO 2 ' ' I ‘ O ‘ } 'w '-
II .I a. ﬁg"" .; ..‘.’ ‘g- y . ’ - . '.,.: '~
. ‘ p r . ,3 . . ‘ 0_ , v-
. ' 7 . ‘ 1:.“ :1. I .~ .P V
I:- ‘ .' ‘ ‘ -
I I. l _ f I ‘Q- . r I i. 4 |
_ 5-7-31??? _ .-. - — J I ‘ ' -
. "" .‘r'b‘ﬂj -'- é ."" 1 \a‘ ‘4‘ -‘ ‘t- ""
.. u: ‘ J. ""Id. ..iL'E .' ‘ ~ .
*- I o, "" AIT... \1; ﬂ . _ ' . -
__. %‘ Q. 5% ""3 ' I -.__ ' - ‘a ‘
6'9 “M ‘ ‘ ” '
Center food slot = Date Time
3.3 cm x 1.0 cm 2009-12-02_06-57-31
Figure 2. Space butterﬂies. Still shot from Video of fully emerged Painted Lady butterﬂies and ﬂoating
debris aboard the [88. Via the BioEd Online and K8 Science websites, images and teaching materials from
the Butterﬂies in Space project were disseminated to thousands of teachers and students globally.
Upon conclusion of the Butterﬂies in Space improve the teaching materials and project
project, BCM emailed a link to a web-based delivery.
survey to all registered participants. The survey . . . .
asked Whether registrants and their students had Outcomes. The STS._126 p110t mvestlgatlon
participated in the experiment. It also collected prov1ded1nvaluable gurdanoe for the t1es1gn Of the
basic information about the kinds of activities STS‘129 .Botterﬂles 1n Spaie pI'OJCCt. In the
carried out by students and teachers (e.g. raised second m1ss1on, all four (100 A’) Of the butterﬂy
butterﬂies downloaded images asked research tarvae aboard the ISS successfully fed, pupated
questions analyzed space images entered 1nto ohrysahses, and emergeo as adults. Photo
butterﬂy projects in science fairs, participated in albums Of the space butterﬂles. at ”Flo“ 11fe
. . . . stages were archlved and remaln avallable on
the Butterﬂles 1n Space poster competltlon held B' E d O 1. (1 K8 S . B th (1 f
after data collection had ended). The survey also 10 11 me an .olehoe. y .e en 0
served as a formative assessment because December 2009’ the pI'OJCCt s four pamted lady
respondents provided suggestions aboat ways to butterﬂies ﬂown to the International Space Station
Gravitational and SpaceBiology Volume 26 (1) Apr 2012 -- 83

"
"8","Moreno et al. -- Butterﬂies and Spiders in Space
had completed their normal lifespans, and data guide. Registering teachers indicated their intent
collection from space ended. The ﬁnal two images to use the guide’s activities With their students,
from the ISS, taken 11 minutes apart on and also estimated the number of students Who
December 10, 2009, show that all movement by would be involved. Following the mission in
the adult butterﬂies had ceased. November-Deeember 2009, the total number of
As illustrated in Figure 3, Butterﬂies in teachers Who registered and downloaded the guide
Space engaged thousands of teachers and students increased to 3,076. Butterﬂies in Space lessons
around the US and the world. Many classes raised and accompanying resources were developed
their own painted lady butterﬂies to compare With primarily for US grades 3-6, but actual project
those on the ISS. Through December 2009, more participants represented a much Wider range of
than 3,000 teachers, representing approximately grade levels. To date, an estimated 3,600 PDF
180,000 students in all 50 states and more than 23 copies of the teacher guide have been
countries, had registered on BioEd Online to downloaded.
download the free Butterﬂies in Space teacher
Butterflies In Space Investigation
STS-129 and the
a 1 lnternationalSpace Station 9
.L “IQ b A65 11
n 9%
'I ,‘ 4 DE: 3
v ”1%.
l DC: 6
27 ’ “L
c l. n
, kn PR: 1
ﬁ VI: 1
«(,4 17 ,,
m [f I’
t 0%; .0
11mm gym , , 0 3,076 Registered US Teachers
-. ; ., Q: Q, plus 91 Registered Teachers in 23
f9. - "" 89b® Foreign Countries
Figure 3. Distribution of teachers registered for Butterﬂies in Space. The Butterﬂies in Space project reached
thousands of teachers and students in the US and globally.
84 -- Gravitational and Space Biology Volume 26 (1) Apr 2012

"
"9","Moreno et al. -- Butterﬂies and Spiders in Space
Beyond its appeal to teachers and students, ° Offer additional teaching materials, such as
Butterﬂies in Space generated signiﬁcant interest data sheets, graph templates, related lessons,
from US and international media outlets. and links to supporting resources.
Hundreds of websites covered the project, ° Provide opportunities for students to
including those of Discovery News, Scientiﬁc communicate with each other about the
American, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, project, or with astronauts or scientists.
Cornell University Department of Astronomy, ° Provide quantitative data from experiments
Google News, NASA, India T imes, The Register on the 188, in addition to photographs.
UK, USA T Oday, Yahoo News, and Space.com. ° Send regular project updates and notices Via
TV stations and newspapers in many states also email, in addition to posting them on the
reported on the activity. Live streaming Video of Web.
the ground-based larvae attracted more than ° Add lessons that link the project to other
400,000 Viewers from around the world, and subject areas, such as mathematics.
several Videos of the larvae and adult butterﬂies . . .
on the 188 have been Viewed more than 100 000 A posteroornpetition held at the oonolus1on Of
times. Additional dissemination Via Faeebookjand the Butterﬂ 1es m Space pI‘OJGCt ?HOWGd students
Twitter up dates poste d by NSBRI reaohe d to submit, .eleotronioally, seientiﬁo posters
thousands o f a d ditional followers. reﬂecting their outcomes. A poster template was
The project’s follow-up online survey proyided on the Butterﬂies in Space wehpage, and
produced 373 completed questionnaires, a ind1V1duals or groups Of students Submltted their
response rate of 12%. Of the respondents, 72 investigations as posters. The Winning upper
percent stated that they had participated in the d1V1s10n.poster, created by students m grade
Butterﬂies in Space investigation by raising ser/en, investigated mierograV1ty S effect on
butterﬂies or downloading ﬂight images. painted lady.butterﬂy wingspans, and presented
Registrants indicated that their students had the oonolus1on that .the average butterﬂy
participated in the investigation in the following Wingspan on the ”188 is larger than 01.“. test
ways. subjects on Earth. The Winning lower d1Vis1on
poster asked, “What effect does graV1ty have on
° 67% of students downloaded images. butterﬂy larvae frass?” The second grade students
° 50% of students raised butterﬂies. who created the poster predicted that frass would
- 42% of students analyzed images from space. ﬂoat in space, but would remain on the ﬂoor of
° 33% of students asked research questions. the habitat in their classroom. The winning posters
- 4% of students entered butterﬂy projects in a can be seen on BioEd Online.
science fair.
° 3% of students entered the Butterﬂies in DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
Space poster contest. The Internet enabled BCM to promote
In addition, 39% of the survey respondents Butterﬂies in 5133196» distribute 5111??“ng
reported that their students participated in other materials, communioate ,Wlth partioipants,
ways, such as writing poetry, using measurement disseminate near real-time ﬂight data, and rapidly
data for math problems in an Algebra class, engender worldw1de participation among
planting a butterﬂy garden, and keeping butterﬂy thousands of teachers and students, many. of
journals. Teachers also made suggestions for whom would not have been aware Of the pI‘OJeCt
improving future similar projects. The most or able to participate otherwise. Furthermore,
common recommendations are listed below. although the ﬂight investigation has concluded,
the project images and data are permanently
° Provide more advance notice before the archived on the BioEd Online and K8 Science
experiment begins, SO that teachers have websites and available for further study. Teachers
enough time to plan activities and obtain and students can construct habitats, obtain
materials. butterﬂy larvae, and repeat the ground
investigation at any time.
Gravitational and Space Biology Volume 26 (1) Apr 2012 -- 85

"
"10","Moreno et al. -- Butterﬂies and Spiders in Space

Indeed, the investigation exempliﬁed the value Further, Butterﬂies in Space demonstrated that
of the World Wide Web in communicating the teachers and schools will involve students in
availability of unique educational resources and open-ended science experiments when the
enabling teachers and students to participate in experience has merit, is available free of charge,
authentic scientiﬁc research. Enlistment of the and does not occupy excessive amounts of class
public to collect scientiﬁc data and contribute to time. Active engagement of students in scientiﬁc
science knowledge has been shown effective in a investigations has been found to be more effective
number of activities, such as species inventories in increasing conceptual understandings than are
(Bonney et al., 2009), mapping and monitoring of passive strategies that simply aim to prepare
species distributions and migrations, and even students to pass standardized assessments
hypothesis-driven research, such as the Evolution benehmarked to local or state standards (Minner
MegaLab study of shell polymorphisms in et al., 2010). Thus, it is critical for science
European banded snails (Silvertown, 2009). The educators to continue to design and implement
Global Learning and Observations to Beneﬁt the low-eost learning experiences that bring real-
Environment (GLOBE) program, in particular, world science experiences to students of all ages.
has successfully engaged students, teachers, and Following the Butterﬂies in Space project,
scientists worldwide in large-seale data collection BCM and BioServe extended their educational
and inquiry investigations related to environment collaborations to conduct two additional space-
and climate (Gazal et al., 2008). The 10-year based missions featuring spiders and plants,
evaluation of that program concluded that respectively. Thousands more teachers and
engaging students with subject matter content and students participated in these projects,
data analysis contributed to the improvement of demonstrating both the validity and appeal of this
their science inquiry skills (Penuel et al., 2006). approach. Reﬁnements continued to be made to
Butterﬂies in Space differed from these programs, the protocol (for example, 188 habitats for a 2011
however, because the project did not involve data spider mission were remodeled to allow clearer
collection in different locations over multiple photos), and new concepts were explored (Plants
years. In addition, students and teachers in Space, conducted in 2011, used a common
participating in Butterﬂies in Space generated classroom plant, Brassica rapa, to investigate and
their own hypotheses, and used observations from compare plant root growth in microgravity and on
a common data set and their own ground-based Earth). Given the inexpensive materials required
controls as evidence, rather than contributing data for these experiments, the open-ended nature of
related to an overarching question posed by student investigations, availability of free
project investigators. Nonetheless, it reinforced curricular guides and resources, and the ongoing
the View that “non-seientists” can participate in, interest in spaee-based content, this model is
and make relevant contributions to, scientiﬁc highly replicable and likely to appeal to students
research, and that engagement in shorter duration, and teachers across wide segments of the K-12
authentic experiments contributes to students’ population.
interest and skills development in science.

Butterﬂies in Space also highlighted the ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
growing importance of social media in science The projects reported here were supported by
education. Faeebook posts by NSBRI and BCM National Space Biomedical Research Institute
generated additional trafﬁc back to BioEd Online, through N AS A NCC 9-58, grant number
WhiCh on peak project days had more than 49000 E001507. Special thanks go to Julie Robinson,
unique Visitors. Project Videos posted on the Video PhD, ISS Chief Program Scientist, N AS A; and
hosting site, YouTube, attracted hundreds .of Jerry Hartman, N AS A Human Exploration and
thousands Of Views Of the painted lady butterﬂies Operations Mission Directorate Education Lead.
“in action” on 188. The experiments were covered
by general and science news organizations, and REFERENCES
?enerated numerous pages of posts on discuss1on Bates, C. 2008. Lost in space: Now spider goes
orums and blogs. . . . . .

miss1ng on orbital station 200 miles above

86 -- Gravitational and Space Biology Volume 26 (1) Apr 2012

"
"11","Moreno et al. -- Butterﬂies and Spiders in Space
Earth. Mail Online [online document, Memorandum of understanding betweeh the
accessed November 21, 2008]. Natlonal 1nst1tutes of Health and the Natlonal
http://WWW.dailymail.co.uk/seieneeteeh/artiel Aeronautles and Space Admmlstratlon for
e-1088156/Lost-s aee-Now-s i der- oes— Cooperatlon .m Spaee-Related Health
—p—p_g_ Research. [onhne document, Accessed NOV.
m_g—lssm -orh1ta1—stat10n-200—m11es— 23, 2010]. http://www.niams.nih.gov/
Earth.html#1xzz 1 164 HVUh News_and_Events/NIH_NASA_AetiVities/ni
Bonney, R., Cooper, C., Dickinson, J ., Kelling, S., h_nasa_mou.asp
Phillips, T.) Rosenber, K., and Shirk, J. 2009. [NRC] National Research Council. 1996. thional
Citizen science: A developing tool for science education stqndards. Washlngton,
expanding science knowledge and scientiﬁc Penugc Watlgilnﬁggviilinlei/[PreSgallagher L
11teracy. BioScience.5.9(11): 977-984. Khrbaeh, C., Sussex: W.,, Yamaguchi: R.:
Gazal, R., Wh1te, M., Gllhes, T., Rodemaker, E., and Fishman, B. 2006. GLOBE Year 10
Sparrow, E., and Gordon, L. 2008. GLOBE Evaluation: Into the Next Generation. SR1
students, teachers, and scientists demonstrate International. Accessed. online, March 29,
differences between urban and rural leaf 2012, . htt {#0135510- lobe. OV/fSI/html/
phenology. Global Change Biology 14(7): W . .
1568-1580. [PCAST] Pre51dent’s Counell 0f AdV1sors 0n
Geier, R., Blumenfeld, P., Marx, R., Krajeik, J., Science and Technology. 2010. Prepare and
Fishman B. Soloway E. and Clay- inspire: K-12 Education in Science,
Chambers, J. 2008. Standardized test T 60’1”“ng Engineering, and Math (STEM
outcomes for students engaged in inquiry- for Amerzca S Future. Washmgton, DC 3
based science curricula in the context of Executlve Ofﬁce of the Pre51dent 0f.the Unlted
urban reform. Journal ofResearCh in Science 3583;? h_p—p_g—tt ://hub.ms net.0r /1ndeX.Cfm/
Teaching 45(8): 922-939. 81 —' J 2009 A d f , ,
Minner, D., Jurist Levy, A., and Century, J . 2010. 1 WWW“, ' d. , new] awn or Clltlzfm
Inquiry-based science instruction—What is it 2:15;)?26771 267711 S m ECO ogy & Evo utzon
o 9 o - 0
andﬂiioes 1t matte1r§8§eiultgotggm Ja reseeltreh Tai, R., Liu, C., Maltese, A., and Fan, X. 2006.
syn 6515 years , O , ' ouma of Planning early for careers in science. Science
Research on Sczence Teachmg 47(4): 474- 312(5777): 11434144.
496. Vogt, G.L., Moreno, N.P., and Countryman, S.
Moreno, N.P. and Erdmann, DB. 2010. 2009. Butterﬂies in Space: An experiment
Addressing science teacher needs. Science aboard the International Space Station.
327(5973): 1589-1590. Houston, TeX. : BioEd.
[NIAMSD] National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases. 2007.
Gravitational and Space Biology Volume 26 (1) Apr 2012 -- 87

"
