"","x"
"1","Up] | MlcrograVIty www.nature.com/npjmgrav
ARTICLE OPEN
The grav1ty-1nduced re-locallzatlon 0f auxm efﬂuX earner
CsPINl 1n cucumber seedhngs: spaceﬂlght experlments for
1mmun0hlstochemlcal mlcroscopy
Chiaki Yamazakit'z, Nobuharu Fujiit, Yutaka Miyazawa3, Motoshi Kamada4, Haruo Kasaharas, Ikuko Osadas, Toru Shimazu2'6,
Yasuo Fusejimaz, Akira Higashibata6, Takashi Yamazaki7, Noriaki Ishioka8 and Hideyuki Takahashi1
Reorientation of cucumber seedlings induces re-Iocalization of CsP|N1 auxin efﬂux carriers in endodermal cells of the transition
zone between hypocotyl and roots. This study examined whether the re-Iocalization of CsP|N1 was due to the graviresponse.
Immunohistochemical analysis indicated that, when cucumber seedlings were grown entirely under microgravity conditions in
space, CsP|N1 in endodermal cells was mainly localized to the cell side parallel to the minor axis of the elliptic cross-section of the
transition zone. However, when cucumber seeds were germinated in microgravity for 24 h and then exposed to 19 centrifugation in
a direction crosswise to the seedling axis for 2 h in space, CsP|N1 was re—Iocalized to the bottom of endodermal cells of the
transition zone. These results reveal that the localization of CsP|N1 in endodermal cells changes in response to gravity. Furthermore,
our results suggest that the endodermal cell layer becomes a canal by which auxin is |atera||y transported from the upper to the
lower ﬂank in response to gravity. The graviresponse—regulated re-Iocalization of CsP|N1 could be responsible for the decrease in
auxin level, and thus for the suppression of peg formation, on the upper side of the transition zone in horizontally placed seedlings
of cucumber.
npj Microgravity (2016) 2, 16030; doi:10.1038/npjmgrav.2016.30; published online 15 September 2016
INTRODUCTION on each side of the transition zone, even when seedlings are
Plants respond to gravity by changing their growth orientation and germinated ih a horizontal POSitiOh-7 This suggests that gravity-
morphology}2 The formation of a specialized protuberance, the modiﬁed transport 0f auxin is required for the differential
peg, in cucurbitaceous seedlings is a unique gravimorphogenesis?’3 decrease ih auxin level Oh the upper side 0f the transition zone
When cucumber seeds (Cucumis sativus L.) are placed in a in cucumberseedlings grown in a horizontal position. By contrast,
horizontal position and allowed to germinate, a peg forms on the the lower side Of the transition zone can maintain the higher auxin
lower side of the transition zone between the hypocotyl and level required for peg formation.”
the root. The peg anchors the lower seed coat in soil so that the Plasma membrane-Iocalized auxin efﬂux proteins 0f the PIN—
elongation of the hypocotyl pulls the cotyledons out of the seed FORMED (PIN) and P—glycoprotein families facilitate the transport of
coat. The peg therefore facilitates the emergence of seedlings from aUXih-8_1O In particular, the polarity 0f PIN localization corresponds
the hard seed coat. Cucumber seedlings have the potential to to the direction 0f auxin transport.”'12 'h Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis
develop a peg on each side of the transition zone as, when seeds thaliana), AtP|N3 and AtP|N7 proteins that are expressed ih
are placed before germination in a vertical position with the gravisensing columella cells, respond to reorientation 0f roots by
radicles pointing down or under microgravity conditions, a peg changing their localization to the side that has newly become the
develops on each side,4 However, peg formation on the upper side lower side Of the cells.13'14 Similarly, reorientation Of Arabidopsis
of the transition zone is suppressed in response to gravity when the hypocotyls induces the re-Iocalization 0t AtP|N3 t0 the lower side of
seedlings are grown in a horizontal position on the ground.4 gravisensing endodermal cells.15 In cucumber, we have shown that
A phytohormone, auxin, has an important role in the lateral reorientation of seedlings from a vertical position to a horizontal
placement of peg formation in the transition zone.2'3 Application position induced changes in CsP|N1 localization in endodermis as
of indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), the main auxin in plants, promotes well as asymmetric redistribution of auxin within 30min of
peg development, and its endogenous concentration is signiﬁ- reorientation in the transition zone.6 These observations led to
cantly reduced in the peg—suppressed side (the upper side) of the the hypothesis that the change in CsP|N1 localization in the
transition zone.2'5'6 Furthermore, treatment of seedlings with endodermis following the reorientation inﬂuences auxin transport
the auxin transport inhibitors 2,3,5-triiodobenzoic acid or 9- through the endodermis, which results in asymmetric auxin
hydroxyﬂuorene-9—carboxylic acid blocks the suppression of peg distribution in the transition zone.6 However, because these studies
formation on the upper side and causes the development of a peg of CsP|N1 and AtP|N3 localization were studied using longitudinal
1Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan; 2Department of Science and Applications, Japan Space Forum, Tokyo, Japan; 3Faculty of Science, Yamagata
University, Yamagata, Japan; 4Future Development Division, Advanced Engineering Services Co., Ltd, Tsukuba, Japan; 5ISS Utilization and Operation Department, Japan Manned
Space Systems Co., Tokyo, Japan; 6JEM Utilization Center, Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, Tsukuba, Japan; 7Graduate School of Medicine, Teikyo University, Tokyo, Japan
and 8Institute of Space and Astronautical Science, Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, Sagamihara, Japan.
Correspondence: N Fujii or H Takahashi (nobuharu@ige.tohoku.ac.jp or hideyuki@ige.tohoku.ac.jp)
Received 11 April 2016; revised 17 June 2016; accepted 17 July 2016
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA npj Eiﬁrggartner

"
"2","' Gravity-inducible change in CsP|N1 localization
an C Yamazaki et a/
2
sections,6'13'15the pathway ofauxin transport via endodermal layers the seedling axis (Figure 1d,g). On the other hand, roots grew
has been poorly understood not only in cucumber but also in other straight and followed the direction of gravitational force when 1g
plant species including Arabidopsis. Furthermore, the gravity— was applied longitudinally for 2 h (Figure 1h). Similarly, when
inducible change in PIN proteins remains to be veriﬁed in seedlings were exposed to 1g in the crosswise direction to the axis
microgravity. of hypocotyI—root for 2 h their roots bent downward, due to the
Here we examined the CsP|N1 localization using the cross- 1g vector generated by centrifugation (Figure 1i). We compared
sections of the transition zone of cucumber seedlings grown the root lengths of seedlings grown in microgravity with those of
under microgravity conditions. The results showed that endoder— clinorotated seedlings on the ground, Although root length
mal CEIIS re-|oca|ize CSP|N1 due to gravistimualtion and laterally tended to be slightly longer in space, there was statistically no
transport auxin from the upper to the lower ﬂank, WhiCh explains differences observed and there appeared to be continuously
the redistribution of auxin responsible for the lateral placement of growing for 2 h treatments after 24 h of germination (Figure 1]),
peg formation in cucumber seedlings.
Effect of centrifugal 1g on CsP|N1 localization in cucumber
RESULTS seedlings grown in microgravity
Growth and morphogenesis of cucumber seedlings in We immunohistochemically.staineel cross—sections of the transition
microgravity zones of cucumber seedlings wrth antI—CsPIN1 antibodies. To
. . characterize CsP|N1 localization in the endodermal cells of the
We prevrously reported that, when 24—h-old cucumber seedlings . . . . .
grown vertically were placed in a horizontal position, the transrtlon gone, we deeded the endodermal cell We“ Wh'Ch was
localization of CsP|N1 in the endodermal cell layer of the transition observed In half 0f the cross-sectron Of the transrtlon gone, Into
zone changed.6 We conducted spaceﬂight experiments on the the thfee regions shown m Figure 2‘3?“ The cross-sectlon Of the
International Space Station (ISS) to investigate the effects of transition zone appeared elliptical m shape. The half Of the
gravistimulation on CsP|N1 localization. transrtlon zone of a non—gravrstimolated seedling was further
Before spaceﬂight experiments, we examined the effects of d'vtded 'hto halves tlabeled one srole and other srde) by the
gravistimulation on peg formation using 24—h-old cucumber rnajor am of the elliptical eross—sectron (Figure 2a). Both halves
seedlings in ground control experiments. For this experiments, Included endodermal cellls Situated In the abaXIaI (In the plane of
we used a two-axis clinostat to rotate cucumber seedlings through the cotyledon srde) and iateral ('h the plane 9f the non-eotyledon
three dimensions, because clinorotation randomizing the position srde) regions 0f the transrtlon zone. L'_keW'Se' 'h the transrtlon zone
of plants against gravity direction is used as an analog for some 0f seedlings e>.<posed to t9 centrifugal force applied 'h the
plant responses under microgravity conditions.16‘18 When cucum— crosswrse direction to the am of hypocotylt—rootl, the endoderma!
ber seedlings were grown under clinorotated conditions for 24 h cell. layers were srtuated 'h both the centripetal and centrifugal
and then either maintained continuously on the rotating clinostat regions d'V'ded by the major axrs 0f the cross—sectIon. (Figure 2b)°
or transferred to stationary conditions in a vertical position for 48 h, We further categorized the types 0f endodermai cells W'th reference
over half of the seedlings developed a peg on each side of the to the polarized localization of CsP|N1 srgnals Wlthlh the cells. In the
transition zone (Table 1). On the other hand, when cucumber transition zones of non—gravistimulated seedlings grown either in
seedlings were clinorotated for 24 h after seed imbibition and then microgravity or exposed to 19 centrifugal force applied in the
gravistimulated by placing them in a horizontal position, most longitudinal direction to the axis 0f hypocotyI—root (Figure 23),
seedlings developed a peg only on the lower side of the transition CsP|N1 in type A endodermal cells localized to the direction of the
zone after 48 h of growth (Table 1) It was shown that a peg formed abaXiaI/One Side; CSP|N1 in type B CGIIS localized to the CE” Side
on the new lower side but did not form on the new upper side when parallel to the minor axis of the elliptic cross-section; and CsP|N1 in
the horizontally grown ~24—h-old cucumberseedlings were inverted type C cells localized to the direction of the abaxiaI/other side.
up_5ide down.3 These results suggest that 24-h-0Id seedlings are still Endodermal CEIIS in Wthh the CSP|N1 localization pattern was not
able to respond to gravity in determining the position of peg distinct were classiﬁed as type D. The type D included cells that
formation.To examine the gravity-inducible re-|oca|ization of CsPIN1, ShOW CSPINt on all around the plasma membrane or no CSPINt
therefore, we grew cucumber seedlings in space microgravity for signals at all. In the transition zones Of seedlings exposed to 1g
24 h and then exposed them to three different gravitational centrifugal force applied in the crosswise direction to the axis of
conditions for 2 h as follows: (i) a continued microgravity environ- hypocotyl—root (Figure 2'0), CSPth in type A and C endodermal
ment, (ii) a 1g centrifugal force in a longitudinal direction to the axis cells localized to the direction of the ’centripetal’ and ’centrifugal’
of hypocotyI—root of the seedling, and (iii) a 1g centrifugal force in a sides, respectively, and in type B cells CsP|N1 localized to the cell
crosswise direction to the axis of hypocotyI—root of the seedling. side parallel to the minor axis of the elliptic cross-section; again, cells
The germination rate of cucumber seeds in our spaceﬂight other than types A, B, and C were classiﬁed as type D.
experiments was 100% (Figure 1a—i). The roots of seedlings grown When cucumber seedlings were grown in microgravity for 24 h,
in microgravity grew in various directions slightly deviating from CsP|N1 signals were detected at the cell side parallel to the minor
Table 1. Effect of gravistimulation on the frequency of peg formation in clinorotated cucumber seedlingsa
Growth conditions Number of seedlings Total
With one peg With two pegs
Clinorotation for 72 h 13 15 28
Clinorotation for 24 h+vertica| for 48 h 10 17 27
Clinorotation for 24 h+horizonta| for 48 h 27* 1* 28
aGrowing cucumber seedlings were rotated on the clinostat for 24 h and then placed in a vertical or horizontal position for 48 h. As a control, growing
cucumber seedlings were rotated on the clinostat for 72 h. Values indicate the number of seedlings that formed one or two peg(s). Experiments (n = 6—7) were
repeated four times. Asterisk indicates a statistically signiﬁcant difference when compared with clinorotation controls (Fisher’s exact test, P < 0.01).
npj Microgravity (2016) 16030 Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

"
"3","Gravity—inducible change in CsP|N1 localization '
C Yamazaki et al an
3
24 h HG 24 h [JG
+ +
24 h [JG + 2 h [JG 2 h 1G/10ngltUdlnal 2 h 1G/Crosswise
a j b :‘g ' c
i- “ I '. .
1VI ‘ O '
11 i ’-
0 h c c
I
'1 1""“ ‘ 'L"" :.1 l‘ . 1""
d f . .f ,
g a
24 h , , . ‘ '
I { ‘
‘ ' 1 ‘ ' 'v‘ ‘ _., L . i ‘ ' I - . . : i w i
9 Fig. * i . f
5; i
.+ 2 h k, . , ' ’
t 4 ‘ i '.
G Forcel/ G Force¢
ll: -n. . u"" L1,: . o"" ‘1. . i -l i
i
3
be C .
A 2.5 ab be be I Clinorotated
E
E, 2 ab D MG
5
g? 1.5 a a
9
*5 1
n?
0.5 I
O
Clinorotated Clinorotated Longitudinal Crossmse'
or ,uG orpG /1G /1G
24 h 24 h + 2 h
Figure 1. Seed germination and seedling growth of cucumber in space. The water—absorbent plastic foam in the container was supplied with
water (a—c), and then germinating seedlings were grown in the microgravity compartment of CBEF for 24 h (d—f). Then, cucumber seedlings
were either maintained in microgravity (g), or exposed to a 1g centrifugal force applied longitudinally (h) or in a crosswise direction (i) for a
further 2 h. Photographs of the seedlings were taken on the ISS before ﬁxation. After storage in ﬁxative for ~ 1 month in space and returning
the spaceﬂight samples to Earth, the root lengths of these seedlings were measured (j) and these seedlings were analyzed
immunohistochemically. Each datum represents the meanis.d. of seven cucumber seedlings, and different letters indicate statistically
signiﬁcant differences between groups at P< 0.05 using Tukey’s method (j). Arrow (G), the direction of centrifugal force. CBEF, Cell Biology
Experiment Facility; ISS, International Space Station.
axis of the cross-section of the transition zone (Figure 2c—f,k). applied in a crosswise direction to the axis of hypocotyI—root for
When 24—h-old cucumber seedlings grown in microgravity were 2 h, the pattern of CsP|N1 localization in the abaxiaI/centripetal
incubated for a further 2 h in microgravity, the pattern of CsP|N1 side and the lateral side signiﬁcantly differed from that of 24—h-old
in the abaxial sides but not in the lateral side slightly differed from cucumber seedlings grown in microgravity at P < 0.01 level
that of 24—h-0Id cucumber seedlings grown in microgravity at (Figure Zg—j,k). This re-Iocalization of CsP|N1 due to gravistimula-
P< 0.05 level (Figure 2k). In cucumber seedlings grown for a tion was much pronounced in the lateral side (Figure Zg,i,k). The
further 2 h with 1g centrifugal force applied in a longitudinal localization pattern of CsP|N1 in the transition zone in cucumber
direction to the axis of hypocotyI—root, the pattern of CsP|N1 in seedlings after exposing to 1g centrifugal force for 2 h was
the abaxial side did not differ from that of 24—h-0Id cucumber characterized as an increased number of type C cells that localized
seedlings grown in microgravity or that of the seedlings grown for CsP|N1 in endodermal cells at the abaxiaI/centripetal and lateral
further 2 h in a vertical position (Figure 2k). However, when 24—h- sides (Figure Zg—i,k). In the abaxiaI/centrifugal side of the
old cucumber seedlings were exposed to 1g centrifugal force transition zone of cucumber seedlings exposed to 1g centrifugal
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA npj Microgravity (2016) 16030

"
"4","' Gravity-inducible change in CsP|N1 localization
an C Yamazaki et a/
4
24 h 11G 24 h pG + 2 h 1G/crosswise k
100
a C Q Abaxial side I One (Centripetal) side
Abaxial [ |
One Side AbaXial Side E .g 80 ""P: 0.007
0030 Vb
a Vb é 'P=0.02
22 40
Lateral e ' g
Side 3 Majoraxis A daxial ‘ z 20 I I I
.9 vb 0
E) ii vb .
o g 100 Lateralside ""P=0.0009
090 S We :3 i
Other side Abaxial side (3' h 16 g 60
Abaxial ‘ C C g
B C 6 40
b — —
. Abaxial
C t t I . =
sigg npe a Abaxial side 9 | Z 20
a c D
D
09 0 ~ 0 0
a B 100 . . . .
<1) 2 B AbaXIaI sude / Other (Centnlugal) sude
g e A 80 I A E] B I c I D
7‘, Lateral e C D §
3’ side Majoraxis A d axial B E
E, a C g 60 ‘P=0.03
8 g B 3
O 1‘.’
‘3 _ 0 “3i “° q
0 2 g
. Z 20
0130 f 1.3 D A D l I I
Centrifu al , , A “ -. B . 0
side 9 AbaXIal snde B B D \1/ B C #6 #6 1G 1G
Abaxial - - 1 G Ilongitudinal Icrosswise
24h 24h+2h
Figure 2. CsP|N1 localization in the cross-sections obtained from the transition zone of cucumber seedlings grown in space. Schematic
representations for the classiﬁcation of the endodermal cells based on CsPINi localization patterns in the transition zone are shown (a, b). The
types of endodermal cells of the cucumber seedlings grown in microgravity or exposed to 19 centrifugal force in the longitudinal direction
were classiﬁed according to a, whereas those of the cucumber seedlings exposed to 19 centrifugal force in the crosswise direction were
classiﬁed according to b. Four types of endodermal cells with different localization of CsPINi (green crescent shaped) are indicated by the
capital letters, A—D, in each cell. Micrographs show CsPINi localization (c—j); a half of the cross-section of the transition zone in seedling grown
in microgravity for 24 h (c) and in seedling exposed to 19 for 2 h in a direction crosswise to seedling axis following 24-h microgravity (g). The
top, left, and bottom boxes drawn by white lines in c were enlarged in d—f, respectively. The top, left, and bottom boxes drawn by white lines
in g were enlarged in h—j, respectively. Signals for antibody staining appear green. Staining of the cell wall by Fluorescent Brightener 28
appears magenta. vb, vascular bundle; scale bar: 100 pm (c, g); 25 pm (d—f and h—j); arrow (G), direction of gravitational force. Cell types, A—D,
are distinguished in d—f and h—j. The numbers of endodermal cells classiﬁed into each type of CsPINi localization in each endodermal region
observed are shown (k). Seedlings were grown in microgravity for 24 h (24 h “6), before being either continuously grown in microgravity (“6),
or exposed to 19 in a direction longitudinal (iG/Iongitudinal) or crosswise (iG/crosswise) to seedling axis for a further 2 h. Black, white, red,
and blue bars indicate cell types A, B, C, and D, respectively. Each datum represents the mean : s.d. of 6—1 0 images obtained from three to ﬁve
cucumber seedlings. *Single asterisks and **double asterisks indicate statistically signiﬁcant differences when the number of endodermal cells
that were categorized in the control (24 h “6) were compared with those of the others using Fisher’s exact test at P< 0.05 and P< 0.01,
respectively.
force for 2 h, the pattern of CsP|N1 localization did not differ from horizontally placed seedlings of cucumber.6 This result suggested
that of 24—h-old cucumber seedlings grown in microgravity that the pronounced auxin efﬂux due to CsP|N1 causes a decrease
(Figure Zg,j,k). These results suggested that gravistimulation to in auxin level in the upper side of the transition zone.6 Here our
the space—grown cucumber seedlings with a 1 g centrifugal force spaceﬂight study demonstrate that CsP|N1 re-Iocalization is a
applied in the crosswise direction induced a change in the graviresponse, which could results in auxin redistribution in the
localization of CsP|N1 and caused it to accumulate at the bottom transition zone of cucumber seedlings. In addition, the results of
of the gravisensing endodermal cells in abaxiaI/centripetal and this study reveal that endodermal cell layer with the polarized
lateral sides of the transition zone. CsP|N1 localization could become a canal for the lateral auxin
transport from the upper to the lower ﬂank of the gravistimulated
transition zone.
DISCUSSION Auxin distribution in Arabidopsis is mainly regulated by the
Previously, we reported that CsP|N1 in the endodermal cells re- directional transport of auxin as follows: auxin synthesized in the
localize to the bottom side upon reorientation of the seedlings, shoot apex is transported toward the root tip through vascular
which is observable on the upper endodermal cells in the bundle cells by basipetally localized auxin efﬂux carriers, such as
transition zone between the hypocotyl and the root of the AtPINi.11 Root columella cells expressing the auxin efﬂux carriers
npj Microgravity (2016) 16030 Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

"
"5","Gravity-inducible change in CsPlNl localization '
C Yamazaki et a/ HP]
5
AtP|N3 anol AtP|N7 transport auxin toward the lateral root cap a
cells.t3'14 Epidermal cells, which accumulate the AtP|N2 auxin
efﬂux carrier, transport auxin from the lateral root caps to the
elongation zone, in which bending occurs due to a differential
growth.12 The reorientation of roots from a vertical to a horizontal
position induces the re-localization of AtP|N3 anol AtP|N7 to the
lower side of the columella cells.t3't4'19 As a result, auxin transport Vb Vb
occurs asymmetrically from the columella cells to the lateral root
cap cells and then to the lower ﬂank of the elongation zone in a
horizontal position. This mechanism provides a good explanation vb Vb
for root gravitropism known as the Cholodny anol Went
hypothesis, which holds that gravitropic curvature of a growing ~
plant organ depends on asymmetric auxin distribution.2t""21
In contrast to roots, which sense gravity via columella cells, lateral
auxin transport in hypocotyls and shoots, in which endodermal cells
undergo gravistimulation, is poorly understood. Reorientation of b
cucumber seedlings from a vertical to a horizontal position
increases CsPINl accumulation on the lower side of endodermal
cells in the upper endodermis of the transition zone,6 and in
horizontally oriented hypocotyls of Arabidopsis, AtP|N3 accumula-
tion decreases in the outer side of the upper endodermal cells and Vb b
in the inner side of the lower endodermal cells.15 This suggests that V
endodermal cells in the upper endodermis prevent auxin transport
from vascular cells to cortical cells in the transition zone of
cucumber and in Arabidopsis hypocotyls. They could also promote Vb Vb
auxin transport from the endodermis to vascular tissue in the upper
ﬂank of the gravistimulated tissues. In the lower side of the
gravistimulated hypocotyls of Arabidopsis, however, localization of Gi
AtP|N3 at the lower endodermal cells can facilitate transport of
auxin from endodermal cells to cortical cells.15 These models were . . . , ,
based on the observation of the longitudinal sections and two- F'gute 3' , A.mo.de| for the graVIresponse 'hdti'Ct'Oh Of asymmetrIc
dimensional images of the transition zone and hypocotyls.e'15 aUXIn .dIStrlbUthn by CsPINl-medIateol auxm transport In the
However the re-localization ofauxin efﬂux carriers including AtP|N3 tranSItIon zone Of the cocumber seeoIIIngs. Endodermal cells and
, ' , , , , the locaIIzed CsPINi auxm efﬂux carrIers are shown by the purple
In endodermal layers In response to graVIstImulatIon on the cross— line and green color, respectively. vb, vascular bundle; orange arrow,
SECthhS has hOt bEEh ShOWh before. Our VESUltS using CVOSS‘ direction of auxin ﬂux; arrow (G), the direction of gravitational force.
sections showed that, following horizontal placement of cucumber Auxin synthesized in cotyledons or the shoot apical meristem is
seedlings, the number of endodermal cells in which CsPINl was transported toward the root.3 CsPINi is an auxin efﬂux protein
localized at the lower side of the cells in the upper and lateral basipetally localized in cells of the vascular bundles and contributes
endodermis (Figure 2; abaxial/centripetal and lateral sides) of the to this .directional auxintransporte When cucumber seedlings are
transition zone increased. This observation implies that endodermal grown 'h a vertIcaI pos't'Oh ,Oh the ground or ',h mIcrograVIty, auxm
cells laterally transport auxin to enable a greater accumulation of Ican lee prevented from movmg fro“? vascular tIssue to the cortex hy
. . . . ocaIIzatIon of CsPINl along the mInor aXIs of endodermal cells In
eux'h 'h the lower ﬂank 0f the trehs't'Oh zone. _ _ _ the transition zone (a). When cucumber seedlings are reoriented to
When cucumber seeds are placed and grown eIther 'h a vertIcal the horizontal position, CsPINl re-localizes to the lower side of the
POSlthh or lh microgravity conditions, a peg develops 0h each endodermal cells in the lateral endodermis of the transition zone,
Side of the transition zone.4 We observed that, in the transition and thus the endodermal cell layer laterally transports auxin from
zone of cucumber seedlings grown in a vertical position or in the upper to the lower side (b). Localization of CsPINi may therefore
microgravity, CsPINl signals in the abaxial endodermal cells were have a role in facilitating the decrease in auxin IGVelS 0“ the Upper
detected at the adaxial side and the cell side parallel to the minor Side Of the transition. zone in gravistimolateol cucomber seedlings,
axis of the cross-section of the transition zone (Figure 3a). Under and thus 'h suppressmg peg formatIon 'h th's regIon.
these growth conditions, a peg develops on each side of the
transition zone, and thus this pattern of CsPINl localization does
not affect the symmetrical auxin distribution and cannot cause the
reduction of auxin required to suppress peg formation. This The present study suggests the endodermal cell layers of the
conclusion was consistent with that auxin—inducible CslAAi transition zone become a canal for auxin transport from the upper
messenger RNA symmetrically accumulated in the transition zone to the lower side of the transition zone (Figure 3b). This lateral
of cucumber seedlings grown in microgravity.5 These results of auxin transport pathway composed of endodermal layers may
expression of auxin-inducible CslAAi gene, the localization of induce an asymmetric distribution of auxin across the transition
CsPINl proteins and peg formation suggest that the cucumber zone of cucumber seedlings. In addition, localization of CsPINl to
seedlings grown in a vertical position and those grown in the lower side of endodermal cells on the upper side of the
microgravity conditions possess physiologically a similar status. transition zone could contribute to the graviresponse negatively
Recently, it has been described that the expression of auxin regulating peg formation by preventing auxin transport from
reporter gene (pDR5r::GFP) in Arabidopsis grown in microgravity vascular tissue to the cortex and epidermis and/or by removing
was identical to that of the ground control, although the auxin from the cortex and epidermis. This model is probable,
expression of cytokinin reportergene (pARR5::GFP) in microgravity because asymmetric expression of an auxin—inducible gene,
differed from that on the ground.22 Therefore, the responses of CslAAi, is detected in the epidermis and cortex across the
plants to lg would not affect auxin status but those to the transition zonest'ze""24 Regulation of auxin levels in the cortex and
direction of gravity would affect the PINs’ localization and then epidermis in this way may be an important factor responsible for
auxin distribution. the lateral placement of peg formation in cucumber seedlings.
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA npj Microgravity (2016) 16030

"
"6","n ' Gravity-inducible change in CsPIN1 localization
p] C Yamazaki et a/
6
In conclusion, our Spaceﬂight experiments demonstrate that transition zone, the types of endodermal cells were classiﬁed based on
gravistimulation induces re-Iocalization 0f CsPIN1 auxin efﬂux CsPIN1 localization in 6—10 images in half of the cross—section that were
carriers in endodermal cells in the transition zone of cucumber obtained from three to ﬁve cucumber seedlings (both halves Of the cross-
seedlings. Our results further suggest that re-localization of CsPIN1 Seetiehstwere used). The numbers 0“ eaCh Ge” type were FOUhted hy
auxin efﬂux carriers in endodermis due to gravistimulation enables 5'“9'e'b.""“d assay as fOHOW5° The ﬁle names 0f 'mages 0f 'mmunOh'S'
endodermal cell layers to transport auxin from the upper to the tochernlstry were changed, and the changes were recorded. Then, one
lower side of the transition zone of cucumber seedlings. who dId not know the change classrﬁed the endodermal cells by CsPIN1
localization. After classiﬁcation, the numbers of classiﬁed cells in each
experiment were counted based on the records.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Plant materials and ﬁxation Statistical analysis
On the ground, seven seeds of Cucumis sativus L. cv. Shinfushinarijibai Tukey’s method, using KaleidaGraph Ver.4.1J (Synergy Software, Reading,
(Watanabe Seed Co., Kogota, Miyagi, Japan) were vertically or horizontally PA, USA), W35 adopted to analyze the root lengths 0f cucumber seedlings
inserted into a crack within a water—absorbent plastic foam placed in a according to manufacturer’s instrument. For analyses 0f the effects 0f
plastic container, as shown in Supplementary Figure S1 A metallic pipe gravistimulation and Clinorotation 0n peg formation and Of the EffECtS Of
containing small holes and connected to a port for the injection of water gravistimulation on CsPIN1 localization, Fisher’s exact (two—sided) test was
was inserted into the water—absorbent plastic foam (49 x 15 x 10 mm), The performed using ’ﬁsher.test’ that was a default command in R, version 3.1.3
plastic containers holding the seeds, together with other instrumentation, (http://www.r—project.org; R Development Core Team, Boston, MA).
were loaded into the STS—133 space shuttle, Discovery, and launched from
the Kennedy Space Center on 24 February 2011.While in orbit on the ISS, a
plastic syringe ﬁtted with a tap and a tube for drawing water from the ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
water reservoir was connected'to' the port Of the plastic container. Phshthg We thank the ISS crew, Dr Satoshi Furukawa and his colleagues, for their in-orbit
a plunger supplled 10 ml hhct'St'hed water to'the foarh 50 that 'mb'b't'oh operations of our spaceﬂight experiments. We are also grateful to all members of
Of cucumber seedswas 'h't'hted' The hIaSt'C container was placed 'h JAXA Flight Control Team for their preparation and ground operations of the
(l\j/leasurement E)|('pehrlment ,Uh'tdh’dwhmh '5 ﬁttgd mm a Charge—Coupclled spaceﬂight experiments. This study was conducted by the ’Ground-based Research
Themlthecaiumrgthlerttg Eighnrilthlgrgt UlroiiteB hvrgspthzh pIZCteedmihethteurCeeIIreBCiOorIOS; Announcement for Space Utilization’ promoted-by the Japan Space Forum. This work
. . . . . . . . . was also supported by a Grant-In-Ald for Screntlﬁc Research (B) (no. 020370017) from
Experiment Facrlrty, an Incubator unIt consrstlng of a mrcrogravrty . . . . . . .
compartment and a centrifuge compartment, which can provide the Japan Socrety fotthe Promotion of SCIence (JSPS), andaGrant-In-Ard for Screntrﬁc
centrifugal force from 0.1 to 2.0 g. Cucumber seeds were allowed to Research on Innovative Areas (no. 24620002) from the Ministry of Education, Culture,
germinate and the resulting seedlings were grown in microgravity or Sports, Scnence and Technology of Japan, the Global COE program )03 (Ecosystem
exposed to lg centrifugation at 25:1 °C in the dark. After incubation, the Management Adapting to Global Changes) to H.T., by a Grant-In-Aid for Screntrﬁc
seedlings were photographed and ﬁxed with a ﬁxative, acetic acidzethanol: Research (0 (.K15K1 19130) from the JSPS to N.F., by the JSPS Research Fellowships for
diStiIIEd water (5:63:32), using the Kennedy Space Center Fixation Tube Young SCIentIsts (K0219981)to C.Y.,and by the Funding Program for Next-Generation
(KFT). For ﬁxation in microgravity, each piece of water—absorbent plastic world'teadihg ResearCherS (65002) to “W
foam holding seven cucumber seedlings was detached from its container,
put into the KFT containing the ﬁxative, and stored at 4 °C in the Minus
Eighty Degree Celsius Laboratory Freezer for ISS until they were returned CONTRIBUTIONS
to Earth by the space shuttle Atlantis (STS—135) and sent to our laboratory. C.Y., N.F., Y.M., H.T., M.K., H.K., I.O., T.S., Y.F., A.H., T.Y. and NJ. designed the research
The seedlings were kept refrigerated at 4 °C during shipping and were and performed the experiments. C.Y., N.F., and HT. analyzed the data and wrote the
stored in ﬁxative for ~1 month. After the KFT was opened, the samples paper. All authors read, reviewed, and approved the manuscript.
were inﬁltrated with newly prepared ﬁxative, acetic acid: ethanol: distilled
water (5:63:32), and stored overnight at 4 °C.
For ground experiments, the plastic containers were placed on theftwo— COMPET|NG |NTERESTS
axrs Icllhostat'and three dimensronally rotated at 2 rpm. for 24 h. For The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
gravrstlmulatlon of the seedlings, the containers were detached from the
clinostat and placed on the ground ensuring that seedlings were placed
either 'In a vertical or a horizontal posttion for 2h or 48h. For non- REFERENCES
gravrstrmulatron, seedlings were further cllnorotated for 2 h or 48 h. These
experiments were performed at 25 i 1 °C in the dark. After incubation, the 1. Trewavas, A. J. What remains of the Cholodny-Went theory? Plant Cell Environ. 15,
samples were photographed. 761—794 (1992),
The length of r00tS 0f cucumber seedlings was measured using the 2. Takahashi, H. Gravimorphogenesis; gravity-regulated formation of the peg in
photograph images and ImageJ ver. 1.42 software (NIH, Bethesda, cucumber seedlings° Plant“ 203' 5164—5169 (199”
MD, USA). 3. Witztum, A. & Gersani, M. The role of polar movement of IAA in the development
of the peg in Cucumis sativus L. Bot. 602. 136, 5—16 (1975).
4. Takahashi, H. et al. Morphogenesis in cucumber seedlings is negatively controlled
Immunohistochemical analysis by gravity. Planta 210, 515—518 (2000).
Histochemical staining for immunolocalization 0f CsPIN1 was performed as 5. Kamada, M. et 0/. Control of gravimorphogenesis by auxin: accumulation pattern
previously described,6 With some modiﬁcations. Although previously of CS-IAA1 mRNA in cucumber seedlings grown in space and on the ground.
ethanolzchloroformzacetic acid (6:3:1) was used as a ﬁxative for immuno— Planta 211, 493—501 (2000).
histochemical analysis of CsPIN1, this was changed to acetic acidzethanolz 6. Watanabe, C. et al. Gravistimulation changes the accumulation pattern of CsPIN1
distilled water (5:63:32) because of the safety regulations on the ISS. The auxin efﬂux facilitator in the endodermis of the transition zone in cucumber
hypocotyl side of the transition zone contains four vascular strands and seedlings. Plant Physiol. 158, 239—251 (2012).
develops endodermal layers around each vascular strand whereas 7. Kamada, M., Yamasaki, S., Fujii, N., Higashitani, A. &Takahashi, H. Gravity-induced
endodermal layers that surround two vascular strands fuse in the root— modiﬁcation of auxin transport and distribution for peg formation in cucumber
side transition zone. CsPIN1 signals in seedlings ﬁxed by the two ﬁxatives seedlings: possible roles for CS-AUX1 and CS-PIN1. Planta 218, 15—26 (2003).
were compared in advance: the signal intensity on the hypocotyl side of 8. BIakesIee,J.J., Peer,W.A.&Murphy, A. S.Auxin transport. Curr. Opin. PlantBiol. 8,
the transition zone was much stronger in seedlings ﬁxed with ethanol: 494—500 (2005).
chloroform:acetic acid (6:3:1) than in those ﬁxed With acetic acidzethanol: 9. Bennett,T. PIN proteins and the evolution of plant development. Trends Plant. Sci.
distilled water (5:63:32). CsPIN1 signal intensities on the root side of the 20, 498—507 (2015).
transition zone, however, were similar in seedlings ﬁxed With the tWO 10. Hellsberg, E., Montanari, F.&Ecker, G. F. The ABC of phytohormone translocation.
ﬁxatives. Thus, we analyzed the root side of the transition zone in this Planta Med. 81, 474—487 (2015).
study. Fixed segments were used for immunohistochemical analysis as 11. Galweiler, L. et al. Regulation of polar auxin transport by AtPIN1 in Arabidopsis
described.6 To evaluate localization of CsPIN1 in endodermal cells of the vascular tissue. Science 282, 2226—2230 (1998).
npj Microgravity (2016) 16030 Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

"
"7","Gravity-inducible change in CsP|N1 localization n '
C Yamazaki et al p]
7
12. MUIIer, A. et al. AtPINZ deﬁnes a locus of Arabidopsis for root gravitropism control. 21. Went, F.A.F.C. Die Bedeutung des Wuchsstoffes (Auxin) fUr Wachstum, photo-
EMBO J. 17, 6903—6911 (1998). und geotropische KrUmmungen. Naturwissenschaften 21, 1—7 (1933).
13. Friml,J.,Wisniewska,J., Benkové, E., Mendgen, K. & Palme, K. Lateral relocation of 22. Ferl, R. J. & Paul, A.—L. The effect of spaceﬂight on the gravity-sensing auxin
auxin efﬂux regulator P|N3 mediates tropism in Arabidopsis. Nature 415, gradient of roots: GFP reporter gene microscopy on orbit. npj Microgravity 2,
806—809 (2002). 15023 (2016).
14. Kleine-Vehn, J. et al. Gravity-induced PIN transcytosis for polarization of auxin 23. Shimizu, M., Miyazawa,Y., Fujii, N.&Takahashi, H.p-ChIorophenoxyisobutyric acid
ﬂuxes in gravity-sensing root cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 22344—22349 impairs auxin response for gravity-regulated peg formation in cucumber (Cucu-
(2010). mis sativus) seedlings. J. Plant Res. 121, 107—1 14 (2008).
15. Rakusové, H. et al. Polarization of PIN3-dependent auxin transport for hypocotyl 24. Fujii, N., Kamada, M., Yamasaki, S. & Takahashi, H. Differential accumulation of
gravitropic response in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J. 67, 817—826 (2011). Aux/IAA mRNA during seedling development and gravity response in cucumber
16. Hoson, T., Kamisaka, S., Masuda, Y., Yamashita, M. & Buchen, B. Evaluation of the (Cucumis sativus L.). Plant Mol. Biol. 42, 731—740 (2000).
three-dimensional clinostat as a simulator of weightlessness. Planta 203,
5187—5197 (1997).
17. Kraft,T. F.,van Loon,J.J. & Kiss,J. Z. Plastid position in Arabidopsis columella cells This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
is similar in microgravity and on a random-positioning machine. Planta 211, av International License. The images or other third party material in this
415—422 (2000). article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated
18. Herranz, R. et al. Ground-based facilities for simulation of microgravity: organism- otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons
speciﬁc recommendations for their use, and recommended terminology. Astro- license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the
biology 13, 1—17 (2013). material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/|icenses/
19. Harrison, B. R. & Masson, P. H. ARL2, ARG1 and P|N3 deﬁne a gravity signal by/4.0/
transduction pathway in root statocytes. Plant J. 53, 380—392 (2008).
20. Cholodny, N. Wuchshormone und Tropismen bei den Pﬂanzen. Biol. Zentralbl. 47,
604—629 (1927). © The Author(s) 2016
Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the npj Microgravity (http://www.nature.com/npmgrav)
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA npj Microgravity (2016) 16030

"
