"","x"
"1","48th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting Including the New Horizons Forum and Aerospace Exposition AIAA 2010-1481
4 - 7 January 2010, Orlando, Florida
The Constralned Vapor Bubble Experlment for 188 —
’ 0
Earth s GraVIty Results
Arya Chatterj eel, J oel L. Plawsky2 and Peter C. Wayner, Jr3 .
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, T my, N Y, 12180, USA.
David F Cha04, Ronald J Sicker5 ,
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH
and
Tibor L0rik6, Louis Chestney7, J Ohn Eustaceg, J Ohn Zoldak 9
Zin T echnologies, Cleveland, OH
The Constrained Vapor Bubble (CVB) experiment scheduled to ﬂy aboard the
International Space Station in the near future promises to give us new insight into the
fundamental science of interfacial thermophysics. The evaporating meniscus formed at the
corner of the vapor bubble is expected to behave in a signiﬁcantly different manner in the
microgravity environment as compared to the earth’s gravity environment. Since the CVB
can also behave of as a micro heat pipe, it will additionally help in gaining a technical
understanding of the performance of a micro heat pipe in the space environment. Earth
based experiments have been conducted for the past two decades to gain a better knowledge
of the rich phenomenon observed in the relatively simple CVB setup. Here we present some
recent earth’s gravity environment based data obtained on a 30mm long CVB. The data was
ﬁtted to a model and a self consistent value of the inside heat transfer coefﬁcient was
obtained. These ground based experiments form a calibration against which the future data
from space based experiments will be compared.
Nomenclature
A z = cross-sectional area of the liquid channel formed by the corner meniscus, 1112
A, = cross-sectional area of the vapor channel formed by the bubble, m2
g = acceleration due to gravity, m2/sec
hfg = latent heat of vaporization of working ﬂuid, J/kg
hm = internal heat transfer coefﬁcient from solid to the liquid accounting for evaporation, W/mZK
hour = external heat transfer coefﬁcient from solid to ambient due to natural convection, W/mZK
klf = liquid channel friction factor
klv = vapor channel friction factor
LLW = length of liquid in contact With the wall thus experiencing shear, m
LW = length of vapor in contact With the wall thus experiencing shear, m
P; = pressure in the liquid, Pa
1 Graduate Research Assistant, Isermann Department Of Chemical and Biological Engineering.
2 Professor, Isermann Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering. Member AIAA.
3 Distinguished Research Professor, Isermann Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering. Member
AIAA
4 Proj ect Scientist, NASA Glenn Research Center.
5 Proj ect Scientist, NASA Glenn Research Center.
6 Project manager, ZinTech.
7 Software Lead, ZinTech.
8 Mechanical Lead, ZinTech.
9 Systems/Electrical Engineer Lead, ZinTech.
1
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2010 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. All rights reserved.

"
"2","Pv = pressure in the vapor, Pa
PM = saturation vapor pressure of the working ﬂuid
qe = evaporative heat ﬂuX per unit length, W/In
Q” = net heat input, W/In2
r = radius of curvature of the corner meniscus at a particular aXial location, In
r0 = radius of curvature of the corner meniscus at a known aXial location, x0, In
T bot = temperature at bottom, K
U; = velocity of the liquid, m/see
U, = velocity of the vapor, m/see
x = aXial distance, In
Greek
,0; = density of liquid, kg/m3
,0; = density of liquid, kg/m3
0; = surface tension of the liquid, N/In
TLW = shear stress between the liquid and the wall, Pa
7W = shear stress between the vapor and the wall, Pa
1. Introduction
THE Constrained Vapor Bubble (CVB) is an ideal experimental setup — it lets the investigator study complex
phenomenon at multiple scales. It consists of a rather large vapor bubble and a pool of its liquid phase. Both of
these are contained in a Channel With a rectangular eross-seetion (or other eross-seetions formed by intersecting ﬂat
solid faces) Closed at both ends. The system is simple to setup, can be observed by noninvasive methods (like Image
Analyzing Interferometery), has levels of complexity that can be studied in the macroscopic and microscopic realms
Without fear of one affecting the other, and has immense practical importance as a micro heat pipe.

A CVB is illustrated in Figure l. The vapor bubble is constrained Within a rectangular solid cavity With the
liquid phase separating the vapor from the solid. At one end the liquid forms a thin ﬁlm on the ﬂat walls of the solid,
While it forms a curved surface at the corners (the menisci). For a perfectly wetting ﬂuid the walls Will be coated
With liquid, While for a partially wetting ﬂuid there Will be a thin adsorbed layer of vapor Which Changes the surface
interaction between the vapor and the solid. Similar to the perfectly wetting ease, the corner meniscus is formed if
the ﬂuid is partially wetting. Under Closer observation, it becomes apparent that for the ease of a perfectly wetting
ﬂuid the liquid surrounds the constrained vapor at all places — either With a thin liquid ﬁlm held in place by
attractive forces between the wall and the liquid or by a bulk liquid at the corners pushed up there by capillary
forces.

Heat pipes are a passive heat transfer device that relies on phase Change for transporting heat. The CVB can be
thought of as a micro heat pipe because phase Change phenomena occurring in it can be used to transport heat in a
passive manner. Cotter described the micro heat pipe as a heat pipe Where the capillary radius (inverse of the mean
curvature of the liquid-vapor interface) is of the same order as that of the hydraulic radius of the ﬂow Channell.
Figure 2 shows the functioning of a micro heat pipe Where a quartz euvette forms the solid wall and an alkane, like
pentane, forms the working ﬂuid. The operating principle of the device remains like a conventional heat pipe; the
evaporator region is formed by the region of the CVB containing the bubble While the condenser is formed by the
pool of liquid at the bottom. The heat applied to one end of the heat pipe vaporizes the liquid in that region and the
increasing pressure forces the vapor to move to the cooler end Where it condenses. As shown in the cross sectional
Views in Figure 2, the curvature of the liquid-vapor interface at the corner Changes resulting in capillary pressure
pushing the liquid up to the evaporator thus forming a continuous supply of fresh liquid. Since the corners transport
the liquid, no Wicking structure is necessary. The heat ﬂuX enhancement achieved by these devices is quiet large
even though the temperature gradient may be small.

2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","Q "" Qin
qrﬁ I Dryout
l-l Region
i""p l-iqu1'd1!luni:~cus Vapor Evaporator E
. _ _ Region
h-Ilcma-inrrpu: J"": l"". L l} - n
{'mnern M l i3 ll \ I
i ‘3‘ Condenser E]
., ‘Ir’ufmr IUII Region
JJ "" {lumidc m'thl: (Juan: GraVIty _ IE
{'ui'cltd:
I Liquid I Q
Q'mh I' - vi” Liquid I‘uul . .0!“
Figure 1. The Constrained Vapor Bubble and Liquid Figure 2. The CVB as a Micro Heat Pipe. The
P001 Dryout Region is due to the heat ﬂux Qin exceeding
the Capillary Limit. The cross—sectional Views show
the changing liquid curvature.

Devices that are essentially a CVB have been studied by various researches as micro heat pipes. Cotter presented
a steady state model that gave the variation in curvature as a function of the local heat ﬂuX. Babin et a1.2 did an
experimental investigation of a trapezoidal micro—heat pipe and built a model to determine its capillary limit, Which
is the maximum heat input to the heat pipe before the capillary pressure becomes insufﬁcient for pumping up the
ﬂuid. Ha and Peterson3 were able to obtain an analytical expression for the prediction of the dryout point, Which is
the location of the dried out region, in V shaped micro heat pipe grooves as a function of the applied heat ﬂuX.
Khrustalev and Faghri4 gave a detailed solution for the heat transfer in the evaporator and condenser and the axial
ﬂuid ﬂow in the corners for a triangular micro heat pipe. Longtin et a1.5 solved mass, momentum and energy
conservation to develop a model in one dimension. Ma et a1.6 studied the effect of the shear at the 1iquid-vap0r
interface on the ﬂow in the corner meniscus. Khrustalev and Faghri7 presented a model that took into account
surface roughness and the conduction in the solid 0f the capillary groove. Peterson and Ma8 developed a model that
took into account correction in ﬂow due to the shear at the 1iquid-vap0r interface. Later Peterson and Ha9 presented
a simpler approach by assuming the radius of the liquid varies linearly With distance. Bowman and Moss 10 used a
lumped inside heat transfer coefﬁcient for the heat pipe and compared its efﬁciency to that of a standard ﬁn.
Recently Suman et al.11 have created a model for a “V” grooved regular polygonal heat pipe geometry.

The curvature under non-isothermal conditions is different from that of the isothermal (equilibrium) interface
curvature because of the phase change in the evaporating section. The interface curvature dynamically adjusts to
create a pressure gradient that Will allow the liquid to be pumped up the corner. The gradient is such that there is
enough liquid left at the top for evaporation, failing Which the heat pipe reaches its performance limit (the capillary
limit) and dryout is said to have occurred. Thus an unknown factor in many theoretical studies is the interface
curvature. The experimental technique developed by Wayner and co-workers [11-15] ﬁlled this gap by providing
this unknown. The interferometry technique gives bulk curvature 12 Which provides the most Vital clue to the puzzle.
With the curvature known, the liquid pressure gradient along the axial direction can be calculated and thus the ﬂuid
ﬂow can be derived. Since the differential amount of ﬂuid is the amount being evaporated, With the knowledge of
the ﬂow derived from the curvature data, the heat transfer can be calculated. This forms the corner stone of our
research.

Wayner and co-workers have studied the CVB experimentally using a cuvette With a relatively large inside
cross—section (3 mm X 3mm) and developed models to solve for the ﬂuid ﬂow and heat transfer processes occurring
in the bulk meniscus. Huang 13 developed models for the CVB in the microgravity environment as well as the

3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","earth’s environment. He studied the effect of heat load on the curvature of the corner meniscus for a cell tilted with
the vertical. Basu 14 did a series of careful experiments with empty and ﬁlled cells to determine the effect of phase
change heat transfer in this speciﬁc setup. She calculated the fraction of radiative and convective losses and also did
preliminary drop tower tests to determine the effect of zero gravity on the shape of the constrained bubble. Wang 15
developed an iterative model to calculate the average inside heat transfer coefﬁcient for the evaporator section that
takes into account certain experimental observations like the measured temperature proﬁle and ﬁnal curvature at the
top. Zheng 16 obtained an analytical expression for the variation of curvature with the temperature data measured
experimentally for microgravity conditions.
_
A9?” _L 10000 | \001 w 'I :
mum W Apr, ADV 900(7) '044 W \ ‘ |
' \ 0.10 w‘ I
T .L A 8000 05 W \\ l I
Ape I ADV . , E 6000 \\ \ ‘
3 . Dh- Apt: :2 P \\\\\
i Apgf w ' U 4000
l....... ‘ Uquid Phase w/o ,
i A p.11. "" Body Forces 3000 ,
- - - I—g conditions - heater on top
‘tttttttti lHHHH' '0‘)“ _ 1
Heat Addition Adiobaﬂc Heat Regecﬂon . 0 .005 0.0l 0 .0 I 5 0 .02 0 .025. 0 .03
(Evaporator) Region (Condenser) x (m)
Figure 3. Graphical representation of the pressure Figure 4. Axial curvature gradients as a function of
drops in a heat pipe (from Peterson 1) heat input for microgravity and Earth gravity
conditions.

It is thought that the micro heat pipe with relative large internal dimensions will perform better in micro gravity
environment. Figure 3. shows a graphical representation of the pressure proﬁle distribution in a heat pipel. It can be
seen that the absence of body forces reduces the pressure difference between the vapor and the liquid, thus
increasing the capillary limit, which means that the heat pipe can transport more heat. Using the model developed by
Huang et al. 17, the maximum heat ﬂuX without dryout had been calculated by Basu et al. 14 for a 22mm vapor
bubble in the earth’s environment and in micro gravity. The curvature in the earth’s environment is compared with
those predicted for microgravity in Figure 4. It was shown by Basu that the same device might be able to dissipate
60 times more power in the microgravity environment.

In this paper we present data in an earth's gravity environment from the CVB experiment that is destined to ﬂy
on the International Space Station. We present for the ﬁrst time high image resolution data of the inside surface of
the cuvette at isothermal conditions and at various heat ﬂuxes. Temperature data of the outside surface was also
collected. Finally a model was developed to match the temperature data and meniscus curvature.

II. NASA CVB Experimental Setup

These experiments were performed as part of the ground run calibration using the same CVB experimental
apparatus that is to be ﬂown aboard the International Space Station (188). The hardware has been developed by
NASA and ZinTech as part of a series of experiments in basic ﬂuid physics and is to be housed in the Fluids
Integrated Rack (FIR) on board the 188. The Light Microscopy Module (LMM), developed as a part of the FIR,
consists of a completely automated optical microscope that can be used to perform a variety of experiments. It is
designed to accept small sized (about the size of a paperback) modules that an astronaut can load onto it. Once
loaded, the experiment can be conducted remotely by operators from earth. One of the ﬁrst experiments scheduled to
be performed using the LMM is the CVB. Figure 5 shows the setup of the FIR where the CVB is built as a small
module that can be one of the payloads for the LMM. As part of the experimental matrix, ground based experiments
are required which will be compared with experiments in space. The results described here are part of one such
ground based study.

4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","__,l —-—=’-——’ - \‘f .
ﬂ ‘ l ‘ i
y ii ' ‘ J, :i I: ll
“*1"": 3 . '""T' J =' J ""
5‘ + £3 -: + -~~
”I I. , > ‘ ‘ I i ""-—-m’- : ‘ i ‘- 'lmu .‘J‘;
i 0-— 1— s ( ' a h:
cva -; , gag ' - ..~. 41 l
Constrained Vapor Ej' ' '
Subme ’- , mm
‘7
Light Microscopy '1-
Module FIR
Fluids Integrated
Rack
Figure 5. The Constrained Vapor Bubble (CVB) experiment can be inserted into the Light
Microscopy Module (LMM) Which in turn goes inside the Fluids Integrated Rack (FIR) which will
be one of the science experiment racks in the International Space Station
A. Description of the Assembly
The CVB has been built in a modular fashion for easy insertion into the LMM by an astronaut. A schematic is
shown in Figure 6. The assembly consisted of a quartz (see Figure l) cuvette which was closed at one end. The
cuvette cavity was 3 X 3 mm on the inside and with a bubble length of 20 mm. Other assemblies also part of the
CVB experiment have bubbles that are 30 mm and 40mm long. The thickness of the cuvette wall was 1.25 mm,
making the outside dimension 5.5 X 5.5 mm. These were spectrophotometer cuvettes that have been manufactured
to very high tolerance speciﬁcations by the manufacturer for the CVB experiment. Speciﬁcally, they had sharp
corners, extremely ﬂat surfaces, and had square cross sections. The quartz is transparent for Visible wavelengths but
is a blackbody for thermal wavelengths”. At the closed end of the cuvette, a heater was attached which allowed us
to perform non-isothermal studies. The heater was insulated from all sides ensuring that all the electrical energy
supplied to the heater ﬂowed into the cuvette. The open end of the cuvette was sealed using a cold ﬁnger that was
kept at a constant known low temperature and drained the heat away to a large copper heat sink. The cold ﬁnger was
made of Invar to have a similar thermal expansion coefﬁcient to that of quartz. Therrno electric coolers attached to
the cold ﬁnger end actively removed heat from the cuvette and drew it off into the heat sink which was cooled by
circulating cold water. The cold end of the cuvette can be maintained at a pre-speciﬁed temperature using the
thermoelectric coolers which operate using the Peltier effect. Stainless steel pipes attached to the other end of the
cold ﬁnger formed a T-section, one end of which terminated in a pressure transducer while a valve was attached to
the other end. This valve was used to load the system with the working ﬂuid and then closed off. The cold ﬁnger had
tiny holes drilled through it which connected the space in the cuvette on one side to the space in the piping on the
other. The cavity formed by the piping and the cuvette was partially ﬁlled with pentane resulting in a vapor bubble
remaining inside the cuvette. To measure temperature, thermocouples were attached to the outside surface of the
quartz cuvette by drilling holes into the surface of the quartz. Pressure was measured using the pressure transducer.
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","I
., ~ ” ' Gravity
J 1 ' ~ J MIC- ;
’ Objective
Pressure .; l' J ‘ \fij /
Transducer "" '
. a :\ Cuvette E
. ~ -«~] ""\ J 9 . Heater
: fﬁ‘ J J_ J,.‘§r.g‘—\Heater '- _ --
.; 1*. 1f,“ ' "" "" ‘f:\ ' I-
i\ Y t"": i X» 9 I :
\f . ’2' ,7 J,» '. .- Thermocouples
s . “ -I""- . ,7 , .
I ‘ ': ' Cold
‘ "" F ' Plate Cuvette _ :
T-Section .i ,1.
Cooler 3 . ._
Cold i "" Pentane
Finger _. 1‘ P50'
E.
Figure 6. Schematic of the CVB assembly. The Module Figure 7. Surveillance image of the CVB. The
has its own electronics and control units to enable easy various components have been labeled. The
insertion into the LMM working ﬂuid is Pentane
B. How experiment is run — SW setup
The experiments have been completely automated since they would have been too long to be performed by an
astronaut. Thus scripts written in a computer language are run to perform the experiment and collect the scientiﬁc
data. There are three main computers in the LMM — the IPSU (Image Processing and Storage Unit), the FSAP (Fluid
Science Avionics Processor) and the 1/0 P (Input Output Processor). Together they collect the temperature, pressure
and image data during the experiment. All data are transmitted at the end of the experiment to a separate computer
system. During space experiments the data Will similarly be transmitted to earth. Telemetry received during the
running of the experiment ensures that it is progressing as planned and guidelines on maximum allowable
temperature and pressure ensure a safe experiment. Each non-isothermal experimental run has two phases - the
transient phase When the heater power is slowly ramped up and the temperature and pressure go through a transient.
Once a set of criteria has been satisﬁed signifying that steady state has been reached, the experiment goes into data
acquisition mode and the temperature, pressure and image data is acquired.
C. Image acquisition
The inside surface of the cuvette can be Viewed through the microscope. The CVB module can be easily inserted
into the Light Microscopy Module. Inside the LMM the module is mounted on a x, y and z translation stage. The
x and y translates the assembly While the z movement adjusts focus by moving it nearer or further from the
stationary microscope objective. Focus is found by a contrast enhancement algorithm whereby the image With the
maximum contrast is taken to be the focused image. Lastly the entire LMM can be tilted around its axis so that the
cuvette assembly can be oriented perpendicular or horizontal to gravity.

The full length of the cuvette can also be Viewed using a surveillance camera. These images, captured at the
beginning and end of each experimental cycle, ensure that the experiment is progressing correctly and that some
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","liquid pool remains inside the euvette. One such surveillance image is shown in Figure 7. The thermocouples are
Visible and the liquid pentane pool can be seen near the cold ﬁnger. From the location of the thermocouples, the size
of the bubble and the liquid pool can be estimated.

D. Temperature data acquisition

The temperature data was collected using the thermocouples that have been embedded into the surface of the
euvette. Of the four sides of the euvette, the side to be Viewed through the microscope was kept bare. Most of the
thermocouples were attached on the side opposite to the one being Viewed by the microscope, with additional ones
also attached on the two remaining sides. The thermocouple positions along the aXis of the euvette are shown in
Figure 8. The thermocouples had a stated accuracy of i0.50C . During the transient phase, readings were recorded
every 1 minute while during data acquisition rnode readings came at 2.40 second intervals. The pressure transducer
data too was collected at the same time intervals as the thermocouple data. The pressure transducer had a range of
5.4 to 19.3 psi with an accuracy of i 0.1 psi. Along with this data, some additional information such as the
electrical power input to the heater, the power supplied to the thermoelectric coolers etc. were also recorded.

For the present study the experiments in the earth’s gravity environment were performed in two steps. The
euvette was aligned vertically with the gravitational ﬁeld acting from the heater towards the cooler. In the ﬁrst step
the euvette was kept isothermal and no electrical energy was applied to the heater and cooler was also turned off.
This isothermal experiment served as a calibration, whereby the validity of the Young-Laplaee equation could be
determined. Next a series of non-isotherrnal runs were performed with the cooler set to a speciﬁed cold temperature
(15 CC) and various heater power supplied to the heater.

E. Data processing for Temperature data

The thermocouples have a very high spatial resolution and during the data acquisition phase, a very high
temporal resolution as well. The high accuracy of the data allowed us to determine the spatial temperature gradient.
Figure 9 shows the temperature proﬁle along the euvette during the initial transient and the subsequent data
acquisition phase for a typical run. For locations near the top of the euvette the temperature rose initially before
settling to a constant value. The temperature at the cooler end remained constant at the set value. The experiment
phase (data acquisition) was started after about 20 minutes. To calculate the spatial derivative of the temperature
proﬁle, the last few (here 20) readings were averaged to reduce inherent noise. This averaged temperature proﬁle
was ﬁtted to a cubic smoothing spline and a subsequent derivative was taken to obtain the temperature gradient.
Figure 10 (a) shows the variation of temperature with location during a run when the heater input was set at 0.4 W.
Distance is measured from the top of the euvette (including the top Closed end). A maximum of 0.3 % standard
deviation was shown by the temperature data that was considered for determining the spatial derivative.
Figure 10 (b) shows the temperature gradient along the euvette. It can be seen that the spatial derivative of the
temperature Changed its slope twice. The position of the ﬁrst Change in slope corresponded with the beginning of the
condenser region of a typical heat pipe and will be discussed in detail later. The position of the second Change in
slope (around the 21.5 mm mark) corresponded with the beginning of the liquid pool and the cold ﬁnger. The
accompanying Change in thermal conductivity caused the Change in slope. Pressure data was similarly computed by
taking a mean of the pressure reading from the pressure transducer for the last twenty data points.

F. Data processing for Image data

The image data for the experiments was collected by an automated script that moved the CVB assembly to
predetermined locations along the euvette and brought the inner surface into focus. A relatively low magniﬁcation
was used (10X) to take these images thus allowing a higher depth of ﬁeld and less refocusing upon moving to a new
location. Since the location of the corner meniscus could not be predicted, images were taken such that more than
half of the entire inside surface of the euvette facing the microscope could be mapped. This was done by having
three consecutive images at each X location where X is in the direction from the heater end to the cooler end. These
images at the three locations can then be joined together by means of an image processing algorithm such that a
composite image is generated. Such composites at each X locations can then be further stitched to create a composite
image of the entire inside surface of the euvette. Figure 11 shows the composite image generated for a typical run.

7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","; 1 -~ 3-; =.'.'; :_ B 4n ___—__
—————-—-—N "" . UP 35 __F:
- ' E J
- . E 30 E -
_. - :1:
EL
'_L.i LH A'A .- , E 25 -
-.-. z; r-
' '-'r'-'..‘-;_ 5:}
__. D 5 30 4E!
— —--¢—+—-¢—¢--¢—¢--+—+—-I—u--I—u--+—o--+-¢- _. -- QC”? 29' {ﬁaa
‘. . . _ . .'
i = II E #1 . Ewe, 25 n «:x
______—_:_. 3- : 3hr}?
A ! r | . _ I A '
: .....- . —— '__. I. .
a : 3‘ ; .
:i:..'..I l ' - I
I - i _. '- 1.-,I
I ' - I
1}_|-‘.I_. .3
Figure 8. Thermocouple placement on the cuvette Figure 9. Temperature measurement from
surface. For good contact, well are drilled into the quartz various thermocouples along the axial location
wall of the cuvette and the thermocouple junctions are of the cuvette plotted in time for one of the runs.
embedded in the walls. All dimensions are in mm. The temperature readings reach steady state
after about 20 minutes.
Figure 12 shows the relationship between the local interface curvature of the corner meniscus and the projected
length of the meniscus 0n the solid surface. The interface curvature at a given axial location is given by
1 1
K={_+_] (1)
RAx RTV
Where R Ax is the radius of curvature in the axial direction and Rn is radius of curvature in the perpendicular
(transverse) direction. Assuming that the local interface curvature of the corner meniscus surface has a relatively low
component along the axial direction (R Ax is large), it can be shown that the meniscus resembles a circle of radius
Rn intersecting a right-angle, With the two arms of the angle being tangent to the circle. This is particularly true for
perfectly wetting ﬂuids Where the contact angle is sufﬁciently small to be considered close to zero. Then it is easy to
8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","see that the length of the wetted surface is equal to the radius of the circle and thus the inverse of the circle gives the
curvature of the liquid-vapor interface. This is a straightforward way to determine interface curvature of the
meniscus using low magniﬁcation data. It was noted earlier that a thin ﬁlm of liquid remains adsorbed on the surface
of the quartz. The assumption here is that the effect of the thin ﬁlm in front of the meniscus and the contact line
region, While very important for micro scale transport phenomena, can be neglected in this millimeter scale transport
process along the aXial direction. Applying image processing techniques on the composite image of the inside
surface of the cuvette generated earlier, the edge of the meniscus can be determined. Also the edge of the quartz
substrate can be identiﬁed by noting that it forms a sharp boundary. A typical sequence of edge identiﬁcation to
determine thickness is shown in Figure 13. Figure 13 (a) shows the composite image of the top corner of the cuvette
Where one can clearly see the edge of the liquid meniscus at upper and side corners. The outline of the quartz cuvette
can also be made out. Figure 13 (b) shows the processed image Where the edge has been identiﬁed correctly by the
image processing algorithm. Figure 13 (c) shows the original image With the meniscus edge and the quartz surface
delineated. Once the edge of the meniscus is known in this manner, the distance from the corner can be easily
calculated and this gives the curvature With very high accuracy at all aXial locations of the heat pipe.
U 80
“a {3- Heater: 0.40 W
|_ 1.
as “ab
3 40 ‘04
E LO ' ‘5 4:3».
D. G‘Qaﬂ
g 20 0-8.5}
|—
(a) O 4 8 12 18 20 2428
Dist along Cuuette, X, mm
3 GU33
E “:3
E 2 ‘0 Location of
9 Change of slope
.. {3
851 .. J Opp a0
'3 {3‘4} Hg
0
(b) E} 4 8 12 18 20 2428
Dist alnng Cuvette, X, rnm
IIIIII iHIIUIIIII
_-I
Figure 10. (a) The temperature at various axial locations along the cuvette for a typical run. (b) The
temperature derivative With distance obtained from by differentiating a spline ﬁt of the data. The
location of the change of slope is shown. An image of the cuvette is included in the bottom to help
correlate the thermocouple positions With the data.
9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"10","Ind IVIduaI ..
A lma . es
Qin I Vapor I
Gravnty Q
‘ . out
Condensation
_ . . - u. - -- . .E’. mu. -4,

_ . Vapor w .m
Figure 11. Formation of a typical composite image showing the various zones corresponding to the
CVB schematic.

Vapnr ‘1
Gravity :
® r
Liquid -_..:.::.'.’..--.
Solid
‘Dbjective
Figure 12. The corner meniscus for a perfectly wetting ﬂuid (Where the contact angle is small) can
be imagined to be a circle touching the side walls. The projection of the circle can thus provide us
the curvature (l/r). Gravity is acting into the page, such that we are looking at a cross section of the
cuvette.
10
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"11",", . Quartz
Meniscus . /edge
» ‘ 6d 9 e ' Detected
‘ ’ edge
Figure 13. (a) Portion of the composite image obtained by stitching individual images. (b) Image
processing algorithms identiﬁes the inside edge of the corner meniscus (gray line) (c) The edge
detected by the algorithm superimposed on the original image. Also the edge of the quartz cuvette
is plotted. The distance between the detected edge and the wall can be used to calculate the
curvature of the corner meniscus.
III. Experimental Results from NASA CVB experiment.
In this section data from the NASA ground based setup is presented. This is macroscopic scale data and
isothermal and non-isothermal data will be discussed.
A. Isothermal data - Agreement With Young-Laplace Equation
For the isothermal experiment the heater and the cooler were both turned off and the inside surface of the cuvette
was imaged as shown in Figure 14 (a). Due to a bug in the computer program certain images got repeated and show
up as such in the ﬁnal composite image. Luckily most of these repeat images fell in the solid quartz part of the
cuvette and it was possible to extract the edge of the liquid meniscus using the image processing method described
in Section II.
The Young-Laplace equation gives
PV 43 =ﬂ (2)
r
where, PV is the pressure in the vapor, P; is the pressure in the liquid, 0; is the surface tension of the liquid (assumed
constant, though the authors acknowledge that in the micro-gravity environment, thermo—capillary effects would be
signiﬁcant), r is the radius of curvature of the meniscus at the axial location, X. For the isothermal case, neglecting
1 1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"12","variation of curvature along the transverse direction (i.e. assuming that the meniscus cross-section is circular) and
assuming that curvature varies because of the change in radius of circle formed by the meniscus,
dPV dPl (7] dr
———=——2— <3)
dX dX r dX
For the isothermal case, the pressure in the vapor can be assumed constant (the vapor density is negligible
compared to liquid density), While the pressure in the liquid is merely the hydrostatic pressure. Thus the radius is
given by
1
r : — (4)
101g (X 0 — X ) + i
01 7"" 0
where, r0 is the radius at the axial location X0. Figure 14 (b) shows excellent agreement of the isothermal proﬁle
from the experiment With the theoretical value predicted by Eq (4). Here the value of r0 was taken from an arbitrary
point X0 in the experimental data. The authors acknowledge that the equivalence of the theory and experiment
merely reﬂects that the Young — Laplace relation describes the phenomena and an independent proof similar to the
one given by Wong et a1. 18 is required and is proposed as part of the future work.
. . 1:7. ""‘1 . If I . . :- .5 !.-.1_- H 1:... lg...— x. ‘1, ""f“T‘ .. ”w __I *1“ ¢I__UT =‘P-FIIPE w 1-
(a) _ u. m ﬂ
Gravity _
0.4
E — Experiment I
E Young-Laplace Eq
.: 0.3 ""V
r If
E I
I
E 0.2 .- r’
p
E .a-Jr""
C) _ l '
E kW'Vﬁ
D 0.1 '
u:
E
'D
E
0.0
(b) [J _ 5 1 U 15 20
Dust alnng Cuvette, X, mm
Figure 14. (21) Composite image of the isothermal corner meniscus 0f 20 mm NASA cuvette at l-g
using 10X magniﬁcation. (b) Young-Laplace equation was used to compare the experimental data
With Eq (4). Gravity is acting from left to right.
12
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"13","B. Non-Isothermal data — Formation of Zones

For the non-isothermal experiment the cooler was set at 15 OC and the heater was set at various preset energy
input levels. In all heater settings some characteristic trends of temperature, pressure and internal liquid proﬁle were
observed.

Figure 15 shows the various zones identiﬁed in the non-isothermal cuvette liquid ﬂow at 0.40 W heater input.
The top region, Zone 1, corresponds to the evaporator region near the heater; the middle, Zone 2, corresponds to the
intermediate region 19 and the bottom, Zone 3, with the condenser region of a typical heat pipe. Zone 3 is easily
identiﬁed by the presence of condensate on the side wall as eVident from the fringes. A fourth zone Zone 4,
consisting of a central drop region, was also seen to form. This drop consists of pentane and upon using higher
magniﬁcation it is revealed that there is a thin line of liquid connecting it to the corner meniscus.

~ . . ""' ' . ' ‘II
Zone 4 : '
Znne1 g T ZDHE 2 4., . . 1M?“ ,Zune 3 _-
Approx. bndry. of zone 4 0.40 W
Gravity —
Figure 15. Composite image of corner meniscus of 20 mm NASA cuvette at l-g using 10X
magniﬁcation at 0.40 W heater input. The various zones are marked (see text for details). Gravity is
acting from left to right.
C. Non-Isothermal data — Movement of the Zones

With the change of heater power, it was noticed that the various zones shifted position. Figure 16 shows the
position of the four zones at various heater powers indicated by the numbers on the left corner of each composited
image. The white arrows mark the location of the beginning of the Zone 3 or the condensation section. The
beginning of the region of condensation moved away from the heater end (left side) and towards the cooler end
(right side) with increasing heater input. Thus, if one estimated the effective length of the condenser as being from
the beginning of the condenser region to the top of the liquid pool, which would lie further to the right of Figure 16
and whose position remains constant at all heat ﬂuxes, one would conclude that the total length of the condenser
region decreased with increasing heat input.

Similar to the shift of the condenser region, Zone 4, or the central drop on the surface on the cuvette wall also
shifted downwards. The approximate position of the central drop is marked in Figure 16 by a black arrow. A distinct
drop was not observed in the case of 0.20W heater input. The drop size seemed to be more or less constant at all heat
inputs.

The image data was processed using the algorithm described above and the edge of the corner meniscus was
determined. These are plotted in Figure 17 (a) for different input heat ﬂuxes. The presence of the drop (Zone 4)
caused the meniscus to be pinched at a location a little further down from the location of the drop, towards the
cooler end of the heat pipe. In this initial paper we conjecture that the drop is being formed due to the presence of a
local cold spot, the location of which is a function of the heater input. The drop could be the result of vapor
condensing on this cold spot because of the lower relative local vapor pressure in the liquid. On increasing the
magniﬁcation to study the drop region, it was revealed that the ﬂuid ﬂow was very complicated and micro-
convection currents might eXist that supplied the drop with ﬂuid from the corner meniscus.

D. Non-Isothermal data — Temperature-Condenser Region Location Correlation

The high accuracy and high spatial resolution temperature proﬁle allows us to calculate the spatial temperature
gradient. Figure 17 shows the correlation between the positions of the beginning of Zone 3 (condenser region) with
the change in the slope of the temperature proﬁle gradient. The arrows Figure 17 (a) mark the beginning of the
Zone 3 from the imaging data (as identiﬁed by the beginning of the fringes on the ﬂat side wall of the cuvette),
while the point in Figure 17 (b) marks the location where the temperature gradient proﬁle changes slope. There is a

13
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"14","strong correlation between the positions. The reader is reminded that temperature data was collected only at discrete
points on the surface of the quartz cuvette and hence the temperature gradient was evaluated only at those points;
while the image data has much higher spatial resolution.
1mm
0.20 f Zune 3 —
0-40 Zune 4 i
. -_ ._ . 'r-. . ,_ , . ' - ,. f __..-
0.60 .n i i i
"" 'r I 'h . .' 'i ""i ' “'1' "" "" ;- '3' TTM‘
0.80 t
1.20 f
1.60 f
2.00
Figure 16. The movement of the location of Zone 3 (condenser region for the heat pipe) and Zone 4 (
central drop) With increasing heater power. Heater power for each composite image is given on the
lower left corner. Gravity acts from left to right.
E. Non-Isothermal data — Pressure-Temperature Correlation
It is expected that the vapor pressure in the pentane vapor is almost uniform”. Since the vapor just begins to
condense at the start of the condenser, the vapor pressure of pentane at the temperature corresponding to this
location should be equal to the pressure of the pentane vapor in the bubble. The spatial derivative of temperature
was evaluated and the location of the change in slope of the temperature gradient was determined as outlined in the
previous section. Since this corresponds well with the beginning of the condenser region, the temperature
corresponding to the change of slope location, i.e. where the temperature gradient reaches a minimum (see Figure 17
(b)), was used to calculate the vapor pressure of pentane according to the Antoine equation:
B
10 P = A — — 5
g10( ) ( T + C) ( )
14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"15","Here A, B and C are constants given in Table 1 and P; is the vapor pressure of the liquid at temperature T (in 0C).
Figure 18 shows that there is a very good correlation between the pressure from the above calculation with the
pressure measured experimentally.

m 0.4
.E'
E 0.40 W
; E ‘13 f —U.60W
2. |
u — 0.80 W
E E . 0.2 I
c 3 -
0E} Ln: .
._ “ 0.1 m
m
E
c:
U 0.0
(a) 0 4 81218202428
Axial Distance, X, mm
7
6 0.40 W
E” E 5 — 0.60 w
E E 4 — 0.80 W
U c.)
E o 3
:9 .-
QE 2 1
E |— 1
{I
E a
(b) 0 +4 .3 12 15 20 24 23
Anal Distance, X, mm
Figure 17. (a) the corner meniscus thickness extracted from the experimental data With the arrows
marking the beginning of Zone 3 (b) The minimum in the temperature gradient indicating the start
of the condenser 0f the heat pipe.
Table 1 Antoine coefﬁcients for Pentane
Antoine equation coefﬁcients Validity range
Material A B C Tmin (0C) Tmax (0C)
Pentane 7.00877 1134.15 238.678 —129.73 196.5
F. Non-Isothermal data — Oscillations

At higher values of heat input the corner meniscus began to oscillate. This was apparent from the discontinuities
that were Visible in the composite image. Since the camera translates along the aXis and takes images at each aXial
location, the images in the composite are taken at different times. Thus the camera captured the meniscus in various
phases of the oscillations making the ﬁnal composite image 100k discontinuous depending on whether the meniscus
was at a receded or advanced state at the time of image acquisition. The oscillations were later captured by using
Video mode of the camera and their existence conﬁrmed.

15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"16","1 8
I Beginning of Condenser
0 Measured
1 5
Q- C
9.5 , I
a 12 .
a)
93
D.
O
9 I
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
Input to Heater, W
Figure 18. A strong correlation exist between the vapor pressure measured experimentally and the
vapor pressure at the beginning of the condenser region.
IV. Theoretical Modeling of Non-Isothermal Heat Pipe
G. Theory and Model Analysis

In the literature review section we encountered numerous references for models of the micro heat pipe. While
Wicked heat pipes use Darcy’s law to model the transport in the porous material, Wickless heat pipes use the Young-
Laplace equation to calculate the liquid pressure gradient. Sometimes the vapor phase may be neglected all together
since usually the vapor phase is very large and has very low density and thus the pressure gradient is lower in the
vapor phase. Some Of the assumptions made here are

The system is in steady state.

The vapor temperature is a constant and is T V

Fluid properties are constant, (p;, q,,u;,pv, 0V,,uv)

Laminar incompressible ﬂow

There is a single radius of curvature at a given axial location even though the radius of curvature is Clearly
changing axially. This is justiﬁed since the curvature in the axial direction is very small.

Here we present a one dimensional ﬂuid ﬂow model coupled With a two dimensional heat transfer model for the
ﬂow of heat in the solid. Considering the ﬂuid ﬂow, the Young — Laplace equation, Eq. (3), (repeated here for
convenience) gives the pressure gradient,

dPV dB (7] dr
——— = ——2— <6)
dX dX r dX
The equation for conservation of mass for the liquid phase is given by
61/1 d U q
U —l+ A —l ——e = O 7
[01de 101de hfg ()
and for the vapor phase by
16
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"17","dA d U
vav—V+vav—V+q—e=O (8)
dX dX hfg
Here U; is the one dimensional liquid velocity, U, is the velocity in the vapor, A; is the area of the liquid cross
section and AV is the area of the vapor cross section and X is the axial location. Since the total cross sectional area of
the cuvette is a constant (3mm >< 3mm), the area of the vapor can be calculated by subtracting the area of the liquid
from this constant. qe is the evaporative heat ﬂux, or in the condenser region, the condensation heat ﬂux and hfg is
the latent heat of vaporization of pentane. The value of A 1 comes from geometric considerations and is given by
A1 = 2C1V2 (9)
Where,
sin(a)sin(gj
Cl =——¢+sin(¢) (10)
. 2 a
Sin —
121
Here ais the vertex angle of the groove 7r/ 2 in our case, and ¢ = ﬂ/Z—ZQC Where 6’6 is the contact angle,
assumed to be zero here.
Likewise the equations for the conservation of momentum are
dP . dA d U
Al d—g+plgAl s1n(,6’)+,01Ul2 d—Xl+ 2P1A1Uzd—Xl_Lz,sz,w = 0 (11)
and
dP dA d U
A—V+ Asin + UZ—V+2 AU—V+L 7 =0 12
V dX pVg V (ﬂ) pV V dX pV V V dX V,W V,W ( )
for the liquid and vapor phases respectively. Here g is the acceleration due to gravity and ,6 is the inclination of
the cuvette t0 the horizontal (7r/ 2 for our vertically aligned case), TLW is the wall shear stress for the liquid, LLW is
the surface of the wall in contact With the liquid, 7m and LW are the corresponding quantities for the vapor phase.
The interphase shear stress has been neglected. While other authors Ma et 211.6 have shown that the interfacial shear
stress can be important, they can be neglected in this initial study since the relative velocity between the liquid and
the vapor phases in our system was low. Also adhesion effects can be neglected since the ﬁlm thickness is very
large.
The shear stress at the wall is based on friction factors and for the liquid phase is given by
kl L
T; W = f 1m”; (13)
, 16141101
Where klf is the friction factor for the liquid and is equal to 13.1 as given by Ayyaswamy et a1. 21. Similar equation
eXists for the vapor phase With a friction factor of 15.1 for a square cross section. Here it has been assumed that the
small area occupied by the liquid meniscus at the corner deforms the shape of the square by very little.
17
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"18","These ordinary differential equations (Eqs. (6) to (12)) are subj ect t0 the following boundary conditions
U1 |x=0 Z UV‘XZO Z 0’ r|x=0 = r0,
14
RIXZO=PW lexzo=limi ( )
V0
where m is the radius at the top of the cuvette, Psat is the saturation vapor pressure of pentane at the experimentally
measured temperature of the condenser region. The pressure of the vapor remains almost constant because of the
large volume of the bubble as compared to the liquid channel in the corner meniscus, even with the wide variation in
densities of the two phases. The initial pressure in the liquid is given by the pressure in the vapor less the interfacial
tension due to surface tension.
2.0
O
o
E) o
UT] 0
“>9 1.5 O O
""*3 o
E
0? 0
U
U)
7;; o
8 1.0 o M
_1
100 200 300 4002 500
Int. Heat Trans. Coeff., Hm, W/m K
Figure 19. Convergence for Hin. The error represents the sum of relative squared error between the
radius and temperature measurements with their respective model predicted values. A simple
search algorithm was used to determine the best ﬁt.

In equations (7) and (8) there is an evaporative heat ﬂux term, qe, which is an unknown. This heat enters the
liquid Via the solid quartz since the solid has a much higher conductivity and area than the liquid. Thus the heat from
the heater ﬂows through the quartz into the liquid, causing the liquid to evaporate. The vapor then transports the heat
as internal latent heat and releases it in the cooler end. Solving the heat equation in the solid will provide us with the
unknown qe. To solve for the heat ﬂow in the solid, a two dimensional ﬁnite element model (FEM) 0f the solid
quartz cuvette was developed. Figure 20 (a) shows the 2D heat transfer model developed with the various boundary
conditions. At the top, (X =0, Y = 0 to 1.25) there is a heat input of Q” of Q W/ (5.5 mm)A2 which represents the net
heat supplied to the solid, where Q is the total heater input e.g. 0.4 W. The inside of the solid, in contact with the
liquid meniscus has an unknown internal heat transfer coefﬁcient of km. The outside convective heat transfer
coefﬁcient is hour and equal to 8 W/mZK and has been obtained from correlations for a ﬂat surface with natural
convection. Radiation t0 the ambient was also included on this surface since quartz has a high emissivity (assumed 1
here) for thermal radiation. The temperature at the bottom is taken as the experimentally measured temperature, T bot.
Thus the heat equation in the solid can be solved and the net heat ﬂux into the liquid at the inside surface of the solid
can be determined. Under these boundary conditions the heat ﬂux into the liquid changes sign, as shown in Figure
20, where the positive portion represents the evaporator while the negative portion corresponds to the condenser.
Once the qe is known as a function of as a function of the axial distance, X, it can be used to calculate the meniscus
radius, r. Also the outside surface of the solid provides us with the temperature distribution which can be compared
with the experimentally measured temperature. The value of km is determined using a simple search algorithm. An

18
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"19","initial range of km is chosen and divided into ten equal sections. For each value of km, the relative error between the
meniscus radius and external temperature and their corresponding model predicted values are squared and summed
to provide the error estimate. Then the range of km is decreased to the region corresponding to the two minimum
error values obtained as shown in Figure 19. This process is repeated on the new range and so on. Progressively
smaller ranges in which to search for km to minimize the relative error are obtained. The variation in error was very
small after the 4th iteration and the hm corresponding to this was selected. This, in our case, was calculated to be
165.0 W/mZK. The reader is reminded that this is simply the heat transfer coefﬁcient associated with the inside
surface of the quartz and should not be confused with the evaporative heat transfer coefﬁcient. Wang 15 obtained an
inside heat transfer coefﬁcient from the surface of the meniscus. If it is assumed that all the heat leaving the inside
quartz surface is conducted to the meniscus surface, values given by Wang 15 can be scaled by the ratio of the
surface area of the meniscus t0 the surface area of the quartz surface. Thus scaled, the heat transfer coefﬁcients
match with the values presented here.
3: 10-3 Contour: Temperature [K] Arrow: Total heat flux [meg]
32?
4 2 2 T_ = 333 K
min = 0.4 W{5.5mm} h = 8 WIN“: K r 324
Gut
2 321
U = - ' ' ‘ 313
37""
_ 3 /
-2 “inside ‘ 11113 W! m K T = 333.? K 313
{a} 1' Ttam = 233.3
-4 313
0 0.005 0.01 0.015 0.02
5000 SUE
N
E 41333 3‘35
E
d” 2000 3‘33
’5'? 0 ER
— 300
LL ““h-J'
-2000 29?
(b) 0 0.005 0.01 0.015 0.02
Axial Distance, X, m
Figure 20. (a) The FEM solution to the heat transfer problem in the solid for a heater input of 0.4
W. The inside surface represents the solid-liquid interface. (b) The heat transfer proﬁle given by the
FEM model. The circle represents the location of zero heat ﬂux, i.e. Where the ﬂux changes sign
indicating a switch from the evaporator t0 the condenser region.

Figure 21 (a) compares the radius calculated with the experimentally measured values while Figure 21 (b)
compares the external temperature experimentally measured with the one predicted by the 2D FEM model. There is
some agreement between the observed and calculated values. The micro-convection setup due to the presence of the
central drop in Zone 4 causes the disagreement near the 6 mm aXial location. The drop could be forming due to
Marangoni ﬂows that are setup due to the temperature gradient between the corner and the ﬂat face of the quartz
surface. These ideas are being further investigated using higher magniﬁcations and studying transient behavior. The
location of the condenser region is determined in the model as the point where the heat ﬂux changes sign from
positive to negative. We found the calculated value to be 12.69 mm while the experimentally measured value was 14
mm. The location of the condenser, as determined from the image data was 12.11 mm. It is to be noted that the
experimentally determined location is given by the thermocouple position.

19
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"20","- 0.3
cg Qin = 0.40 W
<3 0 2 — Model
0) ' — Exp
3
g _. 0.1
E
g 0.0
o 0481216202428
(3) 340 Axial Distance, X, mm
|—“ '. --0— Exp
d 320
E, 310 \
g 300 N-
a)
'5' 290
O
(b) 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28
Axial Distance, X, mm

Figure 21. (a) Comparison between the experimentally measured meniscus radius and that obtained

from the model. (b) The external temperature proﬁle on the quartz cuvette surface compared With

the one predicted by the model. Qin = 0.40 W

Figure 22 shows the variation in pressure in the vapor and the liquid phases along the length of the cuvette.
There is very small variation in the vapor pressure since the volume of the vapor is relatively large. The liquid
pressure on the other had shows some variation that is due to the effect of both hydrostatics and the suction
generated by surface tension as it pulls the liquid up (towards the left of the ﬁgure). Figure 23 shows the variation of
the average liquid and vapor velocities. The negative value of the liquid velocity indicates it is travelling up towards
the evaporator, while the positive value of the vapor indicates it is traveling to the condenser. Note that the velocities
change sign near the condenser region indicating a reversal of ﬂow direction direction.

The heat loss to the surrounding from the outside surface of the cuvette had two components - the convective
heat transfer and the radiative (Figure 24 (a)). Radiative heat transfer is very important for the CVB experiment
since apart from the conduction of the heat through the quartz substrate, it will be the maj or heat loss mechanism in
the space environment where there is no gravity and hence no convection. It was found that about 30% of the heat
loss to the surroundings happens through radiation as shown in Figure 24 (b).

A second set of results for the heat input of 0.60 W is shown in Figure 25 for the case Of Qm = 0.60 W. As
before, an optimization was done to determine the value of km which was 150.8 W/mZK. There is good agreement
between the experimental values and the ones predicted by the model.

The model developed here is a relatively simple model for the heat pipe and it does an adequate job of
explaining the experimental observations. It does not use the simpliﬁcations such as constant heat ﬂux, but uses a
ﬁnite element model to obtain the heat ﬂux. It was also established that radiation is important for heat loss. The
ﬁnite element model supplied the inside heat transfer coefﬁcient which was optimized to get the best possible
agreement with the experimental values.

20
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"21","1.3773
1.3770 — P
g . , 1-0 Q. = 0.40 w
LO 1 .3767 — P 3 0 In
0 V '{3 a)
‘; 1.3764 2 ﬁ 0 5
- <1) E -
9 1.3761 .>_ E
3 O ..
<0 1.3758 :2. 3>
51-3755 0m “W > _
1.3752
(3) Axial Distance, X, mm
Axial Distance, X, mm 1
O
- -1
g o 2
a a 3
é’ E '
.‘9 E; —4
.3 3 -5
—: -6
b 0 4 8 1 2 1 6
( ) Axial Distance, X, mm
Figure 22. Pressure in the liquid and vapor phases as Figure 23. (a) Vapor and (b) liquid phase velocities
obtained from the model. obtained from the model.
V. Conclusion

Ground based experimental studies were done using the ﬂight hardware as a baseline to which results from
microgravity taken aboard the International Space Station would be compared.

The following conclusion can be drawn from this work.

1. Isothermal data agreed very well with existing theoretical predictions.

2. Non-isotherrnal data also agreed well with our present understanding of the wickless heat pipe. Zones were
identiﬁed and it was possible to locate the different regions like evaporator and condenser regions of the
heat pipe.

3. Temperature and pressure measurements were done which were consistent to each other. It was possible to
locate the position of the beginning of the condenser from temperature data and the vapor pressure of
pentane at that location correlated well with the experimentally measured vapor pressure. Also the location
of the condenser determined optically coincided with the one obtained from temperature measurements.

4. Oscillations were inferred to be occurring at higher values of heat ﬂux.

5. A model was developed to predict the radius of curvature as a function of aXial distance. The model requires
knowledge of the heat ﬂux from the solid quartz to the liquid meniscus. This was obtained by solving a 2D
heat transfer model of the solid using the Finite Element Method.

6. The micro scale interferometry data and observations obtained using higher magniﬁcation indicate that
complex gravity induced micro-convection is present in the vapor. Complementary data to be obtained on
the 188 will be used to further this hypothesis.

Further investigations are underway on other cuvettes. More comprehensive models are also under development.
Studies are also being made to determine the reason for the formation and behavior of the various zones identiﬁed in
this work.

21
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"22","0.4
“g 500 Qin = 0.40 w é Qin = 0.60 W
E“ 400 — Radiation 9 0-3 — Model
9 300 2 —Conv. (h = 8 W/mZK) g E — Exp
3 100 V E 0 1
E O , _ . ‘ (IE) .
m — 0
3°:""100 0 0 4 8 1216 20 24 28
(a) 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 (8) Axial Distance, x, mm
x Axial Distance, X, mm 350
.2 33 . . ¥, — Model
U- — Radiation / Total 1— 345 _,_ Exp
53 32 ci
0 E 330
'— (D
\ *"" 315
g 31 g
L; g 300
.9 3O
,3 . O 285
‘0
‘52 29 (b) O imafDiSEEncgax ?m 24 28
°\° O 4 8 12 16 20 24 ’ ’
(b) Axial Distance, X, mm
Figure 24. The external heat loss from the exposed Figure 25. (8) Comparison between the
surface of the cuvette. (a) contribution by the experimentally measured meniscus radius and that
convective and the radiative heat loss (b) The relative obtained from the model. (b) The external
contribution by radiation. Values near the inﬂection temperature proﬁle on the quartz cuvette surface
point should be ignored as they are ratios of two small compared With the one predicted by the model. Qin =
numbers. 0.60 W
Acknowledgments
This material is based on the work supported by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration under Grant
No. NNXO9AL98G. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this publication are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the View of NASA.
References
1. Peterson, G. P. An Introduction to Heat Pipes: Modeling, T esting, and Applications Wiley, 1994.
2. Babin, B. R., Peterson, G. P. & Wu, D. ""Steady-state modeling and testing of a micro heat pipe,"" Journal ofHeat
Transfer, Vol. 112, N0. 1990, pp. 595-601.
3. Ha, J . M. & Peterson, G. P. ""Analytical prediction of the axial dryout point for evaporating liquids in triangular
microgrooves,"" Journal ofheat transfer, Vol. 116, N0. 2, 1994, pp. 498-503.
4. Khrustalev, D. & Faghri, A. ""Thermal analysis of a micro heat pipe,"" Journal ofheat transfer, Vol. 116, N0. 1,
1994, pp. 189-198.
5. Longtin, J . P., Badran, B. & Gerner, F. M. ""A one-dimension model of a micro heat pipe during steady-state
operation,"" Journal ofHeat T ransfer Vol. 116, N0. 3, 1994, pp. 709—715.
6. Ma, H. B., Peterson, G. P. & Lu, X. ""The inﬂuence of vapor-liquid interactions on the liquid pressure drop in
triangular microgrooves.,"" International Journal ofHeat and Mass T ransfer, V01. 37, N0. 1994, pp. 2211—
2219.
22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"23","7. Khrustalev, D. & Faghri, A. ""Heat transfer during evaporation 0n capillary grooved structures of heat pipes,""
Journal ofHeat T ransfer, Vol. 117, N0. 1995, pp. 740-747.

8. Peterson, G. P. & Ma, H. B. ""Theoretical analysis of the maximum heat transport in triangular grooves: A study
of idealized micro heat pipes,"" Journal ofHeat T ransfer, Vol. 118, N0. 3, 1996, pp. 731-739.

9. Peterson, G. P. & Ha, J . M. ""Capillary performance of evaporating ﬂow in micro grooves: An approximate
analytical approach and experimental investigation,"" Journal of heat transfer, Vol. 120, N0. 3, 1998, pp.
743-751.

10. Bowman, W. J ., Moss, T. W., Maynes, D. & Paulson, K. A. ""Efﬁciency of a constant—area, adiabatic tip, heat
pipe ﬁn,"" Journal of T hermaphysics and Heat T ransfer, V01. 14, N0. 1, 2000, pp. 112-115.

11. Suman, B., De, S. & DasGupta, S. ""A model of the capillary limit of a micro grooved heat pipe and the
prediction of dry out length,"" International Journal ofHeat and F Zuid F low, V01. 26, N0. 3, 2005, pp. 495—
505.

12. Zheng, L., Wang, Y. X., Plawsky, J . L. & Wayner, P. C. ""Accuracy of measurements of curvature and apparent
contact angle in a constrained vapor bubble heat exchanger,"" International Journal of Heat and Mass
T ransfer, V01. 45, N0. 10, 2002, pp. 2021-2030.

13. Huang, J . in Chemical Engineering Department(Rensse1aer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, 1998).

14. Basu, S., Plawsky, J. L. & Wayner, P. C. ""Experimental Study of a Constrained Vapor Bubble Fin Heat
Exchanger in the Absence of External Natural Convection,"" Annals offhe New YorkAcademy ofScienceS,
V01. 1027, N0. 1, 2004, pp. 317-329.

15. Wang, Y. X. in Chemical Engineering Department (Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York, 2001).

16. Zheng, L. in Chemical Engineering Department(Rensse1aer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, 2002).

17. Huang, J ., Plawsky, J . & Wayner Jr, P. C. ""Modeling transport processes in a Constrained Vapor Bubble under
microgravity conditions,"" AIP Conference Proceedings, Vol. 504, N0. 2000, pp. 261.

18. Wong, H., Morris, S. & Radke, C. J . ""Three-dimensional menisci in polygonal capillaries,"" Journal of Colloid
and Interface Science, Vol. 148, N0. 2, 1992, pp. 317-336.

19. Karthikeyan, M., Huang, J ., Plawsky, J . & Wayner Jr, P. C. ""Experimental Study and Modeling of the
Intermediate Section of the Nonisothermal Constrained Vapor Bubble,"" Journal of Heat T ransfer, Vol.
120, N0. 1998, pp. 166.

20. Huang, J . in Chemical Engineering 271 (Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, 1998).

21. Ayyaswamy, P. S., Catton, I. & Edwards, D. K. ""Capillary ﬂow in triangular grooves,"" ASME J. Appl. Mech,
V01. 41, N0. 2, 1974, pp. 248—265.

23
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
