"","x"
"1","Chem. Eng. Comm, 196:658—696, 2008 -
Copyright (3) Taylor & Francis Group, LLC lﬁﬂggni‘ciﬂfnc's
ISSN: 0098-6445 print/1563-5201 online
DOI: 10.1080/00986440802569679
Rev1ew of the Effects of Surface Topography,
Surface Chemistry, and Flu1d Physms on
Evaporation at the Contact Line
JOEL L. PLAWSKY, MANAS OJHA, ARYA
CHATTERJEE, AND PETER C. WAYNER, JR.
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York, USA
Liquid—vapor phase-ehange processes are becoming increasingly important in a wide
variety of ﬁelds ranging from energy conversion, to microelectronics cooling, MEMS
devices, and ser-assembly. The phase change in these systems is governed by pro-
cesses that occur at the contact line, where three phases meet. Evidence suggests that
alterations of the surface Chemistry and surface topography 0n the nanoseale can be
used to dramatically enhance the phase-Change process. This article reviews the cur-
rent state of the art in nanoscale surface modification as applied to the enhancement
Ofevaporative processes.
Keywords Evaporation; Roughness; Wetting
Introduction
Liquid-vapor phase change is omnipresent in nature and occurs across the phase
boundary as an inevitable consequence of the laws of thermodynamics Whenever
equilibrium does not exist between the two phases. However, the introduction of a
solid phase results in a liquid meniscus and a place Where all three phases meet,
termed the contact line or contact region. In the meniscus and contact regions, the
resulting laws of thermodynamics are different from those for a ﬂat phase boundary.
The effects of intermolecular attractions between the solid and the liquid molecules
and the effect of the curvature of the interface become key to controlling any trans-
port processes that might occur. Phase change in a liquid meniscus is no longer just a
function of the difference in bulk temperature of the liquid and vapor, but also
depends on the surface properties of the solid-liquid-vapor system parameterized
by the contact angle and the Hamaker constant. Such an evaporating meniscus is
encountered in micro heat pipes (Kim and Wayner, 1996; Wayner, 1980, 1999),
nucleate boiling (Stephan and Hammer, 1994), evaporation from micropores and
micro channels (Hallinan et al., 1994; Schonberg et al., 1995), coating ﬂows and
self—assembly at the contact line (Brinker et al., 1999), and drying from a drop on
a surface (Deegan et al., 1997; Soltman and Subramanian, 2008) (see Figure 1).
It has also become important in modern applications like microelectromechanical
Address correspondence to Joel L. Plawsky, Department of Chemical and Biological
Engineering, Ricketts Building, 110 8th St., Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY
12180, USA. E—mail: plawsky@rpi.edu
658

"
"2","Evaporation at the Contact Line 659
Nucleate I
Boiling
77% t E
Drop
K ; | d //
/ Heat Pipe
Meniscus
"" x
m l E. -.
Porous ‘
Substrate Self assembly
by Evapotation
Figure 1. The evaporating meniscus is present in many natural phenomena and engineering
applications.
systems (MEMS) (Pettigrew et al., 2001) and drying from micropores. Conden-
sation, like evaporation, is also affected by the same parameters (Wayner, 2002).
Our primary focus for this review is to study the effect of chemical and physical mod-
iﬁcations to the system 011 the evaporation process, based on Which the condensation
process can also be understood.
The shape of the evaporating meniscus depends on the physical and chemical
properties of all three phases. In the case of a perfectly wetting ﬂuid, the meniscus
Adsorbed+§<— Transition _.._ Bulk
Film region region
Strong e ‘
Evaporation 0“ ,
cm i "" /
g I ~
7777?? 777777735577;
Adhesion
Force ,.~‘
__—'L—‘:\ zCurvature
X
-..-.----------"" \_——_———__—_—_—
Heat
. . . . . . 5' /Flux Resistance
Figure 2. Variation of adhesion force, curvature, heat ﬂux, and thermal resistance in the
contact line region for the evaporating meniscus.

"
"3","660 J. L. Plawsky er al.

Table 1. Summary of available work on physical modification categorized by the

length scale of the surface features

Scale Description Reference

Mini Brushes (e.g., 1111111 dendritic Oktay and Schmeekenbecher,

heat sink arrays in 1974

0.3—1 111111 miero-fins) Nakayama et al., 1984
Arrays of pyramidal Mudawart and

studs (58—115 mm) Anderson, 1989

Layers of bonded metal particles

Pressed ﬁns

Tunnels and pores Carvalho and Bergles, 1990

(1.1111111, 0.5 mm)
Micro Sprayed aluminum particles You et a1, 1992
(0.3—3 um),

Painted silver ﬂakes O’Connor et a1, 1995;

(0.3—5 um, 3—10 um) O’Connor and You, 1995

Painted diamond particles Chang and You, 1997

(2—70 “111)
Sandblast Oktay, 1988
Chemical vapor deposition of Kubo et a1, 1999
Si02 (1—3 um)
Laser-drilled holes (3—15 um) Hwang and Moran, 1981
Pin fi11s (50—60 “111, 30 11111 Honda et al., 2002
RMS roughness)
Nano Sputtered Si02 followed by wet Kubo et a1, 1999
etch (RMS: 18.711111)

CVD of Si02 (RMS: 309nm) Anderson and Davis, 1995
can be divided into three regions (see Figure 2) depending on the thickness and the
curvature of the liquid film:

1. The adsorbed thin film region, Which consists of a thin liquid film adsorbed onto
the solid surface. This adsorbed film is held in place by attractive forces between
the solid and the liquid and thus, there is little evaporation from the film.

2. The transition region, Where the attractive forces of the solid are much weaker and
the 1iquid-vapor interface has measurable curvature. The gradient in the thickness
and the curvature of the 1iquid-vapor interface drives the ﬂow of liquid towards
the transition region Via capillary and intermolecular forces.

3. The 19qu ﬂuid region, Where the curvature of the interface becomes nearly con-
stant. This region is the reservoir that replenishes ﬂuid to the transition region,
e.g., the corner meniscus in the ease of a heat pipe 01 the bulk liquid in the ease
of nucleate boiling.

Evaporation from a meniscus is a very complicated phenomenon. Figure 2
shows a schematic of a11 evaporating meniscus. A convenient way to describe the
phase-change phenomenon is to consider the problem from a thermodynamics per-
spective. The variation in chemical potential per unit volume in a gravitational field
is given by (DasGupta et al., 1995; Gokhale et al., 2004; Panehamgam et al., 2006a;

"
"4","EvaporatiOn at the Contact Line 661
Wayner, 1980):
plAhfg pthT ( xi )
A :—H—aK—1—TTV—Tv+ ,—111——1— Z
adhesion surface W a?“ hydrostatic
curvature temperature c on c entr ati on
Pvlv
: plngTlv1n(?v) (1)
Where Pv is the bulk vapor pressure and PM is the vapor pressure at the vapor-liquid
interface at height, 2. The interfacial free energy is affected by the surface curvature
(capillary pressure, 01K), the adhesion forces (disj oining pressure, H), the hydrostatic
head (plgz), the temperature jump across the interface (AT : T [V — T V), and the con-
centration difference across the interface 111(xi/xl-7ref). The disjoining pressure, H, is
given by
A
H = — 2
6n53 ( )
Also pm is the liquid molar density (moles/m3), While pl is the liquid density (kg/m3),
xl- is the concentration of ith species and xmf is the reference concentration of that
species in the bulk ﬂuid. The product of the density ,0; and the latent heat of vapor-
ization, Ahfg, is the volumetric heat of vaporization at the average phase-ehange
temperature, T. The 1iquid-vapor interface is in equilibrium if the chemical potential
per unit volume of the vapor is the same as that of the liquid, thus, Aug : 0. Under
isothermal conditions, a further constraint of no temperature variation across the
interface is imposed, making the temperature of the bulk liquid, T1, equal to the
temperature of the bulk vapor, T v. Under isothermal, equilibrium conditions,
the two vapor pressures, Pv and PM, are equal. Under isothermal equilibrium
(AT : 0, Aug : 0), for a pure ﬂuid (x,- : me : 1) Equation (1) reduces to:
H + 0K = ngz (3)
Which is the familiar Young-Laplace equation. However, under nonisothermal equi-
librium conditions (AT 7E 0, Aug : 0), for a pure ﬂuid, a positive disjoining pressure
and / or a capillary pressure (concave towards the vapor) Will result in a reduction
in the equilibrium vapor pressure in the liquid, Pvlv (Kelvin effect), and the tempera-
ture jump across the interface may increase (Clapeyron effect) correspondingly,
according to:
Ah
JlK—i—H—pngZplTng(Tlv_Tv) (4)
Supplying heat to a meniscus results in a nonequilibrium, nonisothermal
state (AT 7E 0, Aug 7E 0), and kinetic theory may be used to obtain the rate of
evaporation given the free energy jump across the interface. The rate of evaporation
can be expressed in terms of temperature and pressure driving forces across the
interface:
q” : ml’Ahfg : h[V(T[v — TV)
2 M _ W (5)
1/ 11% l/hﬁi’

"
"5","662 J. L. Plawsky er al.
Where
hi1] : ( C2MW )(1/2) VlmPVA/afg (6)
21Rg T [v Rg T [v
and
hii = (—C2MW )(1/2)MWPVAh%g <7)
21RgTZV RngvTv
Here, C is a proportionality constant of O(l), MW is the molecular weight, Rg is the
universal gas constant, and Ahm is the heat of vaporization. The classical heat trans-
fer coefficient, hgv in Equation (5), presumes the evaporation rate is due to a tempera-
ture jump only. It is replaced here by the coefficients for the temperature (11%) and
pressure (11%) jumps, both of Which contribute to evaporation. To determine the
evaporation from this interface, knowledge of the pressure jump can be obtained
from geometric considerations (measurements of thickness and curvature), While
the temperature jump at this scale is extremely difficult to determine since it is often
of the same order of magnitude as the ﬁlm thickness.

When the meniscus is heated, two things happen—the adsorbed liquid ﬁlm
thickness reduces to a new steady-state thickness and the curvature of the liquid-
Vapor interface adjusts to enhance the capillary ﬂow of liquid to the transition region
to fuel the high rate of evaporation occurring there. The adhesion force between the
liquid and solid decreases very quickly from a constant value in the adsorbed ﬁlm
region to a negligible value in the bulk region. This force decreases at a rate pro-
portional to 1/5"" Where 5 is the thickness of the liquid ﬁlm and n : 3 or 4 depending
on thickness. The curvature goes from zero in the adsorbed ﬁlm region to a constant
value in the ﬂuid bulk and, thus, the capillary force increases as one moves towards
the bulk ﬂuid region until it becomes almost constant. The curvature exhibits a peak
in the transition region according to experimental observations (e.g., tha et al.,
2006; Panehamgam et al., 2006b,e) and theoretical predictions (Chatterjee et al.,
2008)

The heat transfer process can be Visualized in terms of three resistances in series:
(1) the conduction resistance through the solid substrate can be small owing to the
high conductivity of the solid material; (2) the conduction resistance through the
liquid, Which changes With the thickness of the liquid ﬁlm; and (3) the liquid-vapor
interfacial heat transfer resistance, Which depends on the strength of the intermole-
cular forces. The overall thermal resistance in the adsorbed ﬁlm region is effectively
inﬁnite since there is no evaporation in this region (see Figure 2). The thermal resist-
ance reaches a minimum in the transition region Where the small ﬁlm thickness offers
only moderate conduction resistance, While the interfacial resistance decreases
throughout this ﬁlm thickness range. The resistance in the bulk ﬂuid region returns
to a high value driven by the large conduction resistance through the relatively thick
liquid ﬁlm.

Since resistance to heat transfer is lowest in the transition region, the heat ﬂux
reaches a maximum there. Therefore, the evaporative mass ﬂow should be enhanced
by extending the transition region. For example, assuming that the height above
Which the resistance in the ﬂuid becomes formidable is h, as shown in Figure 3,
for the liquid With lower apparent contact angle, en, the length of the transition

"
"6","Evaporation at the Contact Line 663
L1 I’
I”
L2 I’r”
4—» ,r’
Figure 3. The increase in wetting (decrease in contact angle) results in an increased area for
evaporation.
region is longer, L1, thus providing larger area for evaporation. The contact angle
can be altered by changing the physical and chemical properties of the liquid-
Vapor-solid system. Moreover, the length scale at which interactions in the adsorbed
film and the transition region occur is very small, ranging from a few nanometers to
a few microns. Thus, manipulations made at very small length scales lead to discern-
able results in the system scale. Even changes to the surface roughness would result
in a variation in the contact angle and a corresponding change in the length of the
transition region. Alternatively, the effective resistance of the ﬂuid could be
enhanced by using nanoﬂuids or surfaee-based nanostruetures that also affect the
contact angle by pinning the contact line to the substrate.

The evaporation of drops also occurs from a meniscus present at the contact line
region. This has been studied by various authors both experimentally and theoreti-
cally (Anderson and DaVis, 1995; Bourges-Monnier and Shanahan, 1995; Chao and
Zhang, 2001; Poulard et al., 2003), since the study of a spreading or receding drop of
a volatile liquid is important to applications like spray painting, spray coating, spray
cooling, and ink-jet printing. As shown in Figure 4, the location of maximum evap-
oration again occurs in the contact line region. The contact angle may be a function
of the evaporation process or may remain constant as in the ease of partially wetting
ﬂuids. Like spreading and wetting, evaporation and condensation also depend on the
surface roughness and chemical nature of any surface layers that may exist on the
solid.

Nueleate boiling has been shown to happen from an evaporating meniscus,
especially in the initial stages (Dhir, 2001) before bubble departure from the surface.
From Figure 4, we see that the meniscus is again the region from which the bubble
is fed with new vapor. A number of other parameters important to boiling such as

Vapor Vapor
Liquid
Liquid ,
; , Solid, ; ~~“'2j: ; / :\;""’;r/- / Solid, /
(a) (b)
Figure 4. Schematic drawing of a liquid drop and nucleating bubble on a solid surface.

"
"7","664 J. L. Plawsky et al.
bubble shape, bubble departure size, and critical heat ﬂux are controlled by the sur-
face properties of the substrate and the contact line dynamics.
Surface Modification—Isothermal Conditions
Physical Modiﬁcations
Contact Line Region for a Smooth Substrate
Young’s equation provides a theoretical definition of the macroscopic contact angle
(6mm, Figure 5) at the liquid-solid contact line. The macroscopic contact angle has
been one of the primary methods for characterizing the state of the contact line, and
the angle is defined as a function of the relative surface energies of the liquid, 0;, and
the solid surface, as:

as 2 031+ 0100s By (8)
where 61/ is the macroscopic contact angle (Young’s).

The “macroscopic region” is deﬁned here as the region of ﬁlm thickness larger
than about 5:0.1nm. The interfacial region lying below this film thickness but
above the adsorbed ﬁlm thickness, 50, is defined here as the “microscopic region”
or the “contact line region.” A schematic drawing of a drop, for systems of parti-
cular interest herein, is shown in Figure 5, and a schematic drawing of the interfacial
profile in the microscopic region was shown previously in Figure 2.

The transport processes that occur in the microscopic region, or the contact line
region, formed at the liquid-solid-vapor interface are of particular scientific interest.
As discussed in the previous section, the solid-liquid interaction forces that deter-
mine the shape of the contact line also control the various transport processes that
occur at the contact line. In the following sections, we Will discuss how physical and
chemical modification alters the interfacial Characteristics and affects the shape of
the contact line, the rate of transport at the interface, and the resulting heat transfer
or mass transfer that occurs.

Effect of Surface Structure on Contact Angle
The inﬂuence of surface structure on the contact angle and the corresponding wett-
ability of surfaces has a long history, dating back more than 50 years to the pioneer-
ing work of Wenzel (1936), Cassie and Baxter (1944), and Good (1952). Wenzel
(1936) proposed a relation between the apparent contact angle of a liquid on a rough
J9
Vapor
/// LIqUId
emacro "" ""
,Solid ‘ /
Figure 5. Schematic drawing of a liquid drop on a solid surface.

"
"8","EvaporatiOn at the Contact Line 665
surface (60) and the roughness factor of the solid surface, (r), given by Equation (9):
cos 6a : rcos 6y r : roughness factor : m (9)
geOmetrzc surface

According to Wenzel’s theory, on wetting surfaces (6Y< 900) the liquid-solid inter-
face increases When exposed to a rough surface and the net energy decrease that
occurs for such exposure favors more spreading. On non-wetting surfaces (6Y> 900),
the reverse is true, and the apparent contact angle increases on a rough surface.

Equation (9) was subsequently derived thermodynamically by Good (1952).

Cassie and Baxter (1944) proposed an extension of Wenzel’s equation to predict

the apparent liquid contact angle on a porous surface:

cosBa :VCOSHY —f2 (10)
Here f2 is a contribution from the porosity, and Equation (10) reduces to Equation
(9) in the absence of porosity, When f2 is zero.

Wenzel’s theory is applicable When the liquid completely fills the interstices
on the surface, resulting in a wetted surface. The Cassie-Baxter theory assumes that
the liquid rides atop the roughness features and thus rests on a composite air-solid
surface. Various researchers (Abdelsalam et al., 2005; Bieo et al., 2002; Fan et al.,
2004; Jopp et al., 2004; Kawai and Nagata, 1994; Lau et al., 2003; Meiron et al.,
2004; Miller et al., 1996; Onda et al., 1996; Pilotek and Schmidt, 2003; Shibuichi
et al., 1996) have fabricated patterned/rough surfaces by means of photolith-
ography, templation, plasma etching, plasma deposition, chemical deposition,
colloidal assembly, sol-gel Chemistry, phase separation, or crystal growth to study
the applicability of the Wenzel and Cassie-Baxter theories. Conﬂicting results have
been obtained depending on the system studied. Miller et al. (1996) studied the
apparent contact angle of a water drop on a smooth and a rough hydrophobic poly-
tetraﬂuoroethylene (PTFE) ﬁlm that was produced by vacuum deposition. They
found that the roughness of the substrate affects the contact angle in the same quali-
tative fashion as predicted by the Wenzel equation. However, they did not quantitat-
ively compare the theoretical prediction of the Wenzel equation With their
experimental results. Shibuichi et al. (1996) prepared super water repellent surfaces
of alkyl ketene dimer (AKD) by solidification of the AKD wax. The effective contact
angle observed in their experiments followed cos 6a : (Lf/lf)D_2cos 61/, Where If and
Lf are the upper and lower limit lengths of the fractal and D is the fractal dimension
of the solid surface, Which is calculated from the fractal dimension of the cross sec-
t1011 Dcross (1 < Dcross < 2) as D : Dcross + 1 thus (2 < Dcross < 3) This relationship 18
identical to the Wenzel equation if r is identified as the faetal dependent term. Kawai
and Nagata (1994) studied three different ﬂuids on surfaces prepared by lithographi-
eally patterning a photo resist, MCPR20000H (Mitsubishi Corp.) According to the
Wenzel equation, the slope of the plot between 6056a and cos 6y should be constant
for all ﬂuids and equal to the roughness ratio, r, of the solid. Kawai and Nagata
(1994) found this to be true for ethylene glycol and diodomethane, but they found
a signiﬁcant deviation When water was used as the working ﬂuid. Jopp et al.
(2004) also found an increase in the contact angle of water at higher roughness fac-
tors on periodically structured liquid-filled pores of a hydrophobic poly(dimethylsi-
loxane) (PDMS) surface, but the prediction of Wenzel’s equation lay signiﬁcantly
below the observed contact angle values. When a composite air-solid layer formed

"
"9","666 J. L. Plawsky er al.
below the water drop, the contact angle sealed well With the Cassie-Baxter equation.
When Fan et al. (2004) measured the contact angle of water on various silicon nano-
rod substrates, a deviation from Wenzel’s equation was observed When water
penetrated the pores of the hydrophilie as-prepared films. On the other hand, the
Cassie-Baxter equation could predict the contact angle on HF-treated hydrophobic
ﬁlms, Where air was present in the pores.
Alternatives to Wenzel and Cassie-Baxter
Based on the experimental results, it appears that the application of the Wenzel or
Cassie-Baxter theory is limited. Both theories depend on the geometric parameters
of the surface, and true surface roughness is difﬁcult to measure exactly, even With
an atomic force microscope. A liquid drop placed on a rough surface is preceded by a
thin film that propagates inside the roughness. The presence of this thin film at the
top of the rough solid produces a “smoothing” of the surface and so the effect of
roughness is reduced. In such a scenario, the drop is partially in contact With the
“high peaks” on the rough surface and the rest of the drop lies on top of the liquid
ﬁlled “valleys.” The resulting apparent contact angle, 6a, can be obtained from:
eos6angsoos6y+(1—gbs) (11)
Where gbs is the fraction of the “high peaks” or the solid surface area in contact
With the drop (ng < 1). The apparent contact angle obtained from Equation (11)
is larger than that obtained from Wenzel’s theory. It should also be noted from
Equation (11) that a wetting transition (6a : 0) cannot be introduced by texturing
a solid, similar to What is predicted by the Wenzel equation (Equation (9)). The
Cassie-Baxter equation is restricted to the case where air gaps are present, and
therefore Equation (10), though it can predict a wetting transition, is not valid for
a wetting transition.

The inﬂuence of line tension on the apparent contact angle for rough surfaces
has also been ignored in Wenzel’s equation. Line tension accounts for the difference,
per unit length of the contact line, between the actual energy of a three-phase system
and its assumed energy. Wolansky and Marmur (1998) have proposed a modifi-
cation to Young’s equation for rough surfaces by including the effects of line tension
that is directly proportional to (a) the geodesic curvature of the underlying surface
and (b) the directional derivative of the line tension. The proposed modification
of Young’s equation is:

oosHa :oos6Y—;(i+ﬂ) (12)

V50] rd drd

Where I is the line tension, rd is the radius of the contact line, 6a is the actual
(apparent) contact angle, 6y is the intrinsic contact angle, and r5 : \/l+lVSl2, Where
S is the surface profile.
T ransition between Wenzel and Cassie-Baxter States
The inherent assumption in Wenzel’s theory is that the magnitude of the surface
roughness is much smaller than the size of the drop; therefore, only large, aXisym-
metric drops tend to follow Wenzel’s prediction, as shown by Wolansky and
Marmur (1999). During the growth phase of a drop on a rough surface, as would
occur during condensation, the liquid thickness of the drop is initially comparable
to the surface roughness and in such a scenario, Wenzel’s theory breaks down.

"
"10","EvaporatiOn at the Contact Line 667
A similar scenario occurs during the ﬁnal stages of an evaporating drop. Cheng et a1.
(2005) have reported the observation of water condensation and evaporation
on lotus leaf surfaces. Neither the Wenzel nor the Cassie-Baxter model was
strictly valid for this situation. Since the scale of the leaf’s roughness is comparable
to the drop size, Cheng proposed that Young’s equation is valid locally on the
surface and that the contact angle of the water With respect to the bump on the leaf
is small. However, With respect to the plane of the leaf, this angle appears large.
Their results show that even at high contact angles, the drops have good adhesion
With the substrate in accord With their conjecture. Thus, the scale of roughness
in relation to the scale of the meniscus is important for determining the apparent
contact angle.

To account for the experimental deviations from the two basic theories He et a1.
(2003) have proposed that two energy states, corresponding to the Wenzel state and
Cassie-Baxter state respectively, are present on any surface. A crossover as shown in
Figure 6 can occur between these energy states When either (a) the geometric para-
meters of the underlying surface are Changed or (b) by application of an external
force. Their theory confirms the hypothesis on Which both older theories are based.
Whether a droplet attains its global energy minimum depends on the mode of
formation of the drop (for example, externally placed or condensation growth).
Recently, Marmur (2006) has proposed that the Gibbs energy curve for a real surface
has multiple local minima. In a situation Where the roughness features are compara-
ble to the size of the drop, a drop can have multiple contact angle values along the
contact line, and the Wenzel equation does not always predict the correct apparent
contact angle. Chen et a1. (2005) found anisotropy in the contact angles of a drop
residing on parallel grooves When measured either parallel or perpendicular to the
groove axis. According to Marmur (2004), the occurrence of a Cassie-Baxter state
on lotus leaves does not only have a lower contact area between liquid and solid
but is also less inﬂuenced by surface features such as the protrusion distance and
the steepness of the features present on lotus leaves. However, the lower-eontaet
angle Wenzel state is more thermodynamically stable and therefore the Cassie-
Baxter state must be metastable. Whether the liquid penetrates the pores of the surface
is determined by Equation (13) (see Bico et a1., 2002; Quere, 2002). If the contact angle
of the liquid on the smooth surface, 61/, is smaller than a critical angle, BC (6y < 66),

coserough ble
3 ‘b/v - : Low energy states
/ cosey ____' _ __________________
9 ll. 0 \ 14
Hill... \ :
\ I — Wenzel's
® .. \ - - Cassie's
. ° ‘ . . ' ' . \ \
' ' cosey(1+4H/a1) \/ ‘ ~ ~ _ _ _ _ _ _
High energy states
Figure 6. The changeover between Cassie—Baxter and Wenzel states as a function of the para—
meters of the underlying surface structure (ratios of b / a and H / a). The apparent contact angle
on rough surface is 9mg}; and ﬂy is the Young’s angle on flat surface (from He et al., 2003).

"
"11","668 J. L. Plawsky er al.
the liquid Will ﬁll the pores in the substrate.

1 _

cos BC : —( $3) (13)

(7' _ ¢s)
Filling of pores now follows two regimes: (1) 6a : 0, Where the liquid drop spreads
macroscopically 011 top of the micro-texture, and (2) 0 < 6a < BC < 71/ 2, Where the
liquid drop permeates through the pores by partial imbibitions, but the drop atop
the surface does not spread. Courbin et al. (2007) have studied regime (2) 011 a
patterned solid surface that had different spacing in the diagonal and horizontal
directions. They found that 011 such a solid surface, liquids form different shapes like
a circle or a square based on the contact angle of the liquid, Which in turn determines
the relative speed of spreading and thus affects the shape of the drop.

Further, the filling of the pores is not determined solely by the roughness ratio as
evidenced by Equation (13), but rather, the shape of the pore is also important
(Sheng et al., 2007). Linear pores exhibit a single stable state that is either a Wenzel
or Cassie-Baxter state. Convex pores can exhibit two stable states that are separated
by an energy barrier, While concave pores yield a single stable state With a partially
wetted roughness (see Figure 7). In agreement With the findings of Sheng et al.
(2007), Cao et al. (2007) fabricated overhang structures that had an intrinsic contact
angle 0f 740 With water but still exhibited super-hydrophobic behavior (Figure 8).
They used overhang structures Where the Hoverhcmg < Hﬂa, condition ensures that the
meniscus has a convex shape and the capillary force 011 the liquid is towards the out-
side of the pore. As a result, air gaps were created in the pores and a Cassie-Baxter
super-hydrophobic state was attained for Boverhang : 54.70 and By : 74o. Nosonovsky
and Bhushan (2005, 2007) have proposed design rules for surface features that
are required to optimize ﬂuid contact angles, the stability of a liquid drop on a

1.0 1.0

0.8 I\ / 0.8 I. 20

0.6 a ‘ ./ °° x b...

O.‘ W l “,1 04 W I
- 0.2 - 0.2
a a
8 0.0 .' .' .' .‘ 8 0.0

.02 .' ~02 (W, __ , .. - - * "" "" ""— — -. '— — ‘—

-0£ P 0.4 i + 0'8

-06 0.6

.03 0.8

-1 0 — -1 0

0,0 0.5 1.0 15 2c 0 2 4 6 8 1c
a H
(a) (b)
Figure 7. (a) Phase diagram for a cone showing Wenzel (W), partially wetted (P), and Cassie-
Baxter (CB) regimes; (b) phase diagram for a square pillar on pyramids showing Wenzel (W),
Cassie-Baxter (CB), and a metastable region where both Wenzel and Cassie-Baxter can coexist
(from Sheng et al., 2007).

"
"12","Evaporation at the Contact Line 669
Water Water Water
9overhang 9overhang 7 A 6overhang
(a) (b) (C)
Figure 8. Hydrophobic surface can be manufactured from intrinsically hydrophilic surfaces by
creating overhang structures in the solid surface. The hydrophobicity depends on the angle the
overhang structure makes With the solid surface. The three cross sections show the three cases.
(a) When Hoverhang is greater than the intrinsic water contact angle (Hﬂat), the water-air interface
(meniscus) inside the indent is concave When Viewed from the water side. The net force (F5)
generated by the meniscus at the water-air interface is toward the inside of the indent, Which
causes water to enter into the indent and have complete contact With the solid. (b) When
Hoverhang = Hﬂat, the water-air interface is ﬂat and stays at a circular intersection of the indent.
(c) When Hoverhang < Hﬂat, the meniscus inside the indent is convex. FS is toward the outside of
the indent, Which prevents water from entering into the indent. (From Cao et 211., 2007).
composite interface, the ability to support liquid pressure, and control of the slip
length during ﬂuid ﬂow for the Cassie-Baxter state on a rough surface. They found
that a hierarchical roughness profile With a small spacing between the asperities
would produce high contact angles. Slip length increases with height of pillars of
the rough surface. The ability to support liquid pressure refers to the stability of
the solid-air-liquid composite layer during ﬂuid ﬂow. Slip and the ability to support
liquid pressure are both related to the spacing factor, Sf = (D/P) (Figure 9(a)),
Y
. _. , liquid_ ,- "" ,.
‘ ~ .. . liquid - H ‘ ' _ ' ‘9'9 '_ - ff 9 lin-Jid.
‘ ’ ‘ “ ""“ A90 --
C'solid '- ' - =
' ~ 'solld . . 7-
: m I ""n'ww'a'f'EH—""I"" g R air
iAi<—L—_—__}i solid solid \
(a) (b)
Figure 9. (a) The ability to support a drop of given size on rough surface is dependent on the
spacing of the roughness scale. (b) Schematics of multi-scale roughness With small bumps/
grooves over large asperities (pilolars). The bumps may pin the triple line even in the case of
a hydrophilic material (00 < 90), because With advancing liquid-air interface, the angle
between the solid and the interface decreases (0< 00), While the grooves cannot pin the
interface (6> 00). Thus, bumps lead to stable liquid-air interfaces (multiple positions of
stable interface are shown With dotted lines), Whereas grooves lead to unstable interfaces.
(From Nosonovsky and Bhushan, 2007).

"
"13","670 J. L. Plawsky er al.

however, Sf affects the slip and the ability to support liquid pressure in opposing
ways. Therefore, a range of values of Sf can successfully achieve both desired effects.
Nosonovsky and Bhushan have also proposed that the nano-asperities should be
convex (bumps rather than groves) to pin the liquid-air interface and prevent the
occurrence of a Wenzel state.

Inﬂuence of Surface Roughness 0n Completely Wetting Fluids

The design of surface features for wetting on a self—affine rough surface in the
Wenzel regime depends critically on the roughness exponent, H , and the long wave-
length ratio, w/éf, Where w is the RMS roughness and (f is the correlation length of
the rough surface. H, A, and (f are obtained statistically by calculating the height-
height correlation function from the height data generated during an atomic force
microscope (AFM) scan. A typical plot of the height-height correlation function
and a measure of H, w, and (f are shown in Figure 10. According to Palasantzas
and de Hosson (2001), for wetting films (6y < 900), the apparent contact angle
decreases When (a) w/ E is increased at a constant H and (b) H decreases at a constant
w/éf. However, for non-wetting ﬁlms (6 > 900), the contact angle increases When (a)
w/éf is increased at a constant H and (b) H decreases at a constant w/éf.

Some heat transfer applications that employ sidewall menisci, for example, heat
pipes, involve the use of perfectly wetting ﬂuids. For the case of a perfectly wetting
ﬂuid (61/ = 00), a thin precursor ﬁlm forms in front of a spreading drop, even on a
rough surface. The long-range forces associated With the film generate the disjoining
pressure term, H, in Equation (1). The interaction potential, W, for these forces,
assuming only van der Waals interactions, is a function of liquid thickness, 5 and
is given by:

A
Ww) MW (14)
100
F; J, 2W2

NE / '
5
:5
£1” 10
3.
E” Slope ~2H
é’

1

1 10 100 1000
Horizontal distance (nm)
Figure 10. Height-height correlation function.

"
"14","EvaporatiOn at the Contact Line 6 71
A negative value of the Hamaker constant, A, favors thicker ﬁlms. Liquid ﬁlms also
have surface tension forces associated With them. The action of the surface tension
opposes the imposition of roughness in the ﬁlm surface and leads to a smoother ﬁlm.
Thus, for very thin liquid films, disjoining pressure, Which attempts to maintain a
conformal ﬁlm thickness over the roughness features, competes successfully With
the surface tension forces, Which try to smooth the liquid-vapor interface. Dispersion
and structural contributions to the disjoining forces limit the strength of those forces
at higher ﬁlm thicknesses, and so as the ﬁlm thickness increases, surface tension
dominates, and the liquid-vapor interface becomes smooth.

Garoff et al. (1989) used X-ray reﬂectivity to show that the roughness of the
underlying solid affects the roughness of the liquid-vapor interface of the thin ﬁlm.
To explain this, Robbins et al. (1991) and Leger and Joanny (1992) introduced a
“healing length,” Y, Which characterizes the competition between the surface tension
and disjoining pressure. Y is given by:

53 —A 1/2
Y _ a’ a _ (27:01) (15)
Where 50 is the mean length, or average adsorbed ﬁlm thickness.

The value of the healing length and the underlying solid surface wavelength
(correlation length, 63) determines the shape of the liquid-air interface. If the wave-
length of roughness is larger than the healing length Y, the roughness of the liquid
surface follows the roughness of the solid surface and surface tension plays a negli-
gible role. If the roughness of the solid surface has a wavelength (correlation length,
(3) smaller than Y, the liquid surface remains ﬁat.

Another related parameter has been deﬁned by Palasantzas (1995) as the critical
thickness, 1, or the thickness of the liquid ﬁlm above Which the ﬂuctuations due to the
solid roughness fall off. The critical thickness scales as a function of the correlation
length, 5, as given by:

(f N t? (16)

Roughness in the thin ﬁlm region generates a curvature effect in the Chemical
potential term. Robbins et al. (1991) have included the contribution from the curva-
ture that is produced in a thin ﬁlm on a nonuniform surface in the relationship
between the Chemical potential, Au, and the ﬁlm thickness for a self—afﬁne surface.
In the strong ﬂuctuations regime, Where w is the Characteristic length scale for the
roughness, or mean roughness, and H is the roughness exponent, the Characteristic
length of the ﬂuctuations in the thin ﬁlm Will be given as l 1/ H , being the mean ﬁlm
thickness, so that the curvature is [1—2/H . The chemical potential on such a surface is
given by:

0] l (1—2/H) —A

Au N w (w) + [3 (17)
and so the adsorbed ﬁlm thickness determines the surface potential for a liquid-solid
system. Since the adsorbed ﬁlm thickness is a function of roughness, this poses the
interesting problem of how to deﬁne the surface potential on a rough surface. Butt
(2008) has proposed a method to calculate the capillary pressure on rough surfaces.
He calculates the height distribution function of a rough surface based on the data
generated from X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) 0r AFM scans and in turn

"
"15","672 J. L. Plawsky er al.
multiplies this function With the area and Laplace pressure term, 01K, to obtain the
capillary pressure. Robbins et a1. (1991) and Palasantzas (1995) have addressed this
and presented Equation (18), Which relates the healing length, Y, the roughness
exponent, H, the correlation length, if and the RMS roughness, w, to the surface
potential. Y is a function of the mean ﬁlm thickness, the Hamaker constant, and
the surface tension as shown in Equation (15). As the surface becomes rougher,
the effective potential increases.
We(5)~ W(5)+§2Y—2 (0§H<1,<§<< Y) (18)
Where (2 % [0;w2 1n(Q§éf2)] /a(47r2); W(5) : 14/127152; QC : n/ao; and a is given by
a=(1/2H)[1— (1+aQ352)‘H] (0<H< 1) (19)
a : (1/2)1n(1+ aQiE) (H : 0)
and a0 is the order of the interatomie spacing, 1.6 A

Sweeny et a1. (1993) studied the capillary pressure in thin films on idealized
rough surfaces and reached a similar conclusion. They solved the augmented
Young-Laplace equation for one-dimensional and tWO-dimensional periodic solid
surfaces by employing a ﬁnite element approach. Their results show that on a rough
surface, the capillary effect in a thin film is low for strongly wetting films. However,
the capillary effect is prominent as the liquid becomes less wetting and the adsorbed
ﬁlm thickness decreases.

Chemical Modifications

Effect of Surface Chemistry on Contact Angle

Surface hierarchy in the form of multi-seale roughness can generate the Cassie-BaX-
ter state by trapping air pockets between the liquid and the solid surface. To attain a
true super-hydrophobie state that has contact angles as high as 1800, a combination
of surface structure and Chemical modification is required. Both methods of modifi-
cation act to make the precursor film as thin as possible. Recently, significant
advances have been made in preparing surfaces that are both super-hydrophobie
(Erbil et a1., 2003; Lau et a1., 2003; Li et a1., 2007; Miwa et a1., 2000; Nakajima
et a1., 1999; Roach et a1., 2008) and super-lyophobic (Cao et a1., 2008; Tuteja
et a1., 2007). These surfaces include a combination of surface patterning as well as
chemical modifications to present carbon- and ﬁuorine-based moieties to the liquid
that result in a Cassie-Baxter state for water on the super-hydrophobie surface and
for oil on the super-lyophobic surface. The solid surface can be altered Chemically
and physically to control the wettability of the surface in one, two, or three dimen-
sions (Kako et a1., 2004; Sun et a1., 2004; Figure 11). Chemical control has been
achieved by using self—assembled monolayers, surface coatings, or surfactants
(Ulman, 1996). Chemical modification serves to alter the capillary and intermolecu-
lar driving forces governing the physical extent of the transition region and the
hydrodynamics Within the transition region.

A Widely used Chemical modification process is based on the application of sil-
ane coupling agents. Reactive silanes form chemical bonds With any pendent —OH
groups on the surface of the substrate. The silanes modify the surface properties
of the substrate by presenting different functional groups, primarily CH3 or CF3,

"
"16","Evaporation at the Contact Line 6 73
- 63.5 93.2
25 C 40 C
g3“ ﬁg” WW <5 ‘I <1;
A )x _"" J> f3
o ”'0'"" o""‘o‘“ CWW‘W ' 3‘ S‘F -: (14.
A A T AX 1""
’ (ii) (LCST ’LCST
( ) (a) (b)
Figure 11. (i) Shapes of water droplets on prepared samples showing a range between super-
hydrophilie and super-hydrophobic surfaces: (a) View from a direction parallel to patterned
stripes; (b) View from a direction orthogonal to patterned stripes and grooves (from Kako
et a1., 2004). (ii) A polymer coating that undergoes conformational Change leading to either
a hydrophobic or hydrophilie surface (from Sun et a1., 2004).
to the ﬂuid (Tada and Nagayama, 1995). The contact angle, contact angle hysteresis,
and adhesion of mineral oil 011 silane-treated glass slides have been shown by Araujo
et a1. (1995) to increase With increasing carbon content in the silane coupling agent.
Using Surfactants
Wettability may also be enhanced by adding surfactants that adsorb onto the solid
substrate and thus alter the solid-liquid and 1iquid-vapor interfacial tensions. The
unique super-spreading properties of trisiloxane surfactants are one example
(Ananthapadmanabhan et a1., 1990; ChuraeV et a1., 2001; Knoche et a1., 1991;
Nikolov et a1., 2002; Wagner et a1., 1999; Zhu et a1., 1994). Ananthapadmanabhan
et a1. (1990) attributed the special wetting properties of trisiloxane surfactants to the
structure of their adsorbed molecules. Zhu et a1. (1994) compared spreading beha-
Vior of silicone surfactants dispersed in water and found that the dispersed surfac-
tant-rieh phase is needed for super-spreading and that the initial rate of spreading
increases With decreasing size of the dispersed surfactant drops. Wagner et a1.
(1999) showed that the spreading and phase behavior of the trisiloxane surfactant
are Closely related. They found that the highest initial spreading rate occurs for solu-
tions in the tWO-phase state lying above the single-phase, liquid-liquid coexistence
curve. ChuraeV et a1. (2001) investigated spreading and ﬁlm climbing of trisiloxane
surfactant solutions and developed a spreading model by including the concept of
a disjoining pressure isotherm in the Navier-Stokes equations. Their model, Which
includes the term for gradient of disjoining pressure of wetting films, was critical
for explaining the experimental observations regarding the problem of the super-
spreading effect of trisiloxane surfactants. Nikolov et a1. (2002) further suggested
that the spreading of trisiloxane surfactants is controlled by a surface tension

"
"17","674 J. L. Plawsky er al.
gradient along the spreading front and by the molecular configuration at the air-
water interface.

Gokhale et a1. (2005) studied phase-change processes using a poly-alkylene-oxide
modiﬁed heptamethyl-trisiloxane, called Silwet-L77, in water on a quartz substrate.
Surfactant-laden water formed a sidewall meniscus and a thin adsorbed film under
isothermal conditions. The change in vapor pressure during evaporation led to an
unstable adsorbed thin film of surfactant and the subsequent formation of water
drops on the silica substrate. These drops existed only in regions where there was
a stable surfactant bilayer. The breakup of the surfactant film into droplets upon
heating was explained by the disjoining pressure isotherm model of ChuraeV et a1.
(2001). The isotherm and associated phases (ﬂ and ac phase) for the surfactant s01-
ution are shown in Figure 12. During isothermal, equilibrium conditions, a thick
ﬁ-ﬁlm was observed (h > 11E). Upon heating, this film evaporated and eventually
became unstable because it fell below a critical thickness, 111;. A new, stable state
formed consisting of a much thinner, oc-phase ﬁlm (h < 11C) in coexistence with
micro-droplets (negative disjoining pressure, —H region).

During evaporation or condensation the shape of the surfactant-laden drops
evolved in a nonsymmetric manner since the drop was isolated from the solid and
the air by surfactant bilayers at the air-water and solid-water interfaces. The contact
line region was pinned by the surfactant bilayer, and a change in the overall diameter
of the drop was observed only after a “critical time” that occurred at a very late stage
during evaporation (Figure 13(a)). Evaporation continued until the surfactant
bilayer collapsed to its stable minimum, oc-phase thickness. A similar but reverse
effect was observed during condensation (Figure 13(b)). Fast movement of the con-
tact line at the end of evaporation and at the beginning of condensation was attrib-
uted to the rearrangement of surfactant molecules at the surface driven by an abrupt
change from oc-phase to ﬁ-phase behavior. The transition from a moving to a pinned

11
Mechamcallystable
BI'I F
film, 5 «:0
f»
hercharnicalestable E
film, E > 0 a
3‘1 D
C
Mechanicallystable U.-
an A B
ﬁlm, —<:IZI * -
3‘1 H H U -H
Figure 12. Schematic of disjoining pressure isotherm 0f the surfactant solution (from Gokhale
et al., 2005).

"
"18","Evaporation at the Contact Line 675
EU . 50 I El
E1 : E: El E] El Ell] U UUU
A CD] U] DUDE: : =- 45 '3
E"" 50 EC”? '1 :
3 : U=D.38umts ~: 4|] :
E m :2 E _
-.:: s .3 = a
g- E U 3' 3D ‘3 5
5 3D 5 r5 :
: :1 25 U=U.Qumfs :
20 . 23 :
U 50 100 1 50 330 250 480 SUD 52B 540 550
Time (s) Time {s}
(a) (b)
Figure 13. Drop diameter (based on the position of the zeroth order dark fringe) as a function
of time during (a) evaporation (the dotted line corresponds to a relative time, t: 170 s), (b)
condensation (the dotted line corresponds to a relative time, t: 505 3).
contact line occurred at a speciﬁc droplet volume regardless of Whether evaporation
or condensation was happening. On the basis of the experimental data, the critical
time instant (t : 505 8 during condensation and t: 170 8 during evaporation of the
drop), the apparent contact angles of the evaporating and the condensing drop
(2.3 and 2.50, respectively), and their base diameters, 47.5mm, were also the same.
Using these data, the critical volume of the drop was calculated to be 4.1 x 10—7 “L.
A 30
“' +Case1: TS=-1.5“C, GS=3.6‘C. CL
E
+Case 2: TS=21t1 C. 68:4.6 C. CL
g + Case 3: TS:-1.8“C. GS=22.3 (3. CL
2 25 +Case 5: TS=-1'C. 68:39.6“0. CL
8 20 '
L
cu
.“.'.' ,
c
2 15 ""
.c _
u
m
E
— 10 v
a: _ ,
.E
z ‘ .
g 5 . ,
4.:
c
O
U
0
0 10 20 3O 40 50 60
Wall Heat flux-Sensible Heat (chmz)
Figure 14. Contact line length versus the wall heat ﬂux corrected for sensible heating (from
Horacek et 211., 2005).

"
"19","676 J. L. Plawsky er al.

Conversion of a thin ﬁlm into droplets significantly increases the contact line
length and accelerates the rate of evaporation or condensation. Horacek et a1.
(2005) have shown an increase in evaporative heat ﬂux upon an increase in the con-
tact line area made effective by spraying smaller size drops in a spray nozzle experi-
ment (Figure 14). In this experiment the contact line length was increased by
spraying a bigger number of smaller size drops While keeping the transition region
of each individual drop constant. A similar effect on heat transfer can be produced
by increasing the transition region length by (a) breaking a thin film into droplets or
(b) increasing the wetting, Which increases the contact line length as shown pre-
viously in Figure 3. Use of surfactants causes pinning of the contact line, and the
drop diameter remains almost constant during much of the evaporation process,
further stretching the contact line region and promoting further evaporation.
Wetting Gradient—Genemted T ransport
The heat transfer coefficient during drop-Wise condensation is dependent on the
maximum drop diameter or the diameter of the departing drop. Tanasawa et a1.
(1976) measured the effect of departing drop diameter on heat transfer coefficient
under a constant heat ﬂux of 600 kW/mz, using gravitational, centrifugal, and vapor
shear forces to manipulate the departing drop diameter. The relationship between
the departing drop diameter and the heat transfer coefficient during condensation
is shown in Figure 15. The heat transfer coefficient increases With decreasing drop
diameter. Quick removal of condensing drops increases the available contact line
area during condensation, Which in turn increases the heat transfer significantly.
Drops can also be removed by creating a wettability gradient on the solid surface
that generates a pressure driving force, Which propels the liquid drop in a particular
direction. Chaudhury and Whitesides (1992) were the ﬁrst to experimentally demon-
strate the movement of a water droplet due to a chemical gradient—generated surface
tension imbalance and noted that the speed of droplet movement depended on the

(3‘ 0.6
g 0.5 .0 . .
E 0.4 '
.c“ o o
E 0.3 o O o o
:9 o Q‘A‘
E 0 Mg.
0 A2
‘3 0.2 0 Eggs: :1
(D I: n
“(7, External Force Surface
5 0 Vapor Shear Gold Plated n
|‘-_- o Vapor Shear Silicone Rasin
E
a) A Inclined Surface Olelc aCId
I
0.1
0.1 1
Departing Drop Diameter, D, mm
Figure 15. Dependence of heat transfer coefficients on diameter of departing drops for drop—
wise condensation (from Tanasawa et al., 1976).

"
"20","Evaporation at the Contact Line 677
surface tension, liquid Viscosity, and volume of the drop. Continuous removal of
condensing drops has immense application in the field of heat transfer since it pro-
motes drop-wise condensation in place of film-wise condensation. The presence of a
wetting gradient can enhance the speed of droplet movement by as much as an order
of magnitude when compared to a homogeneous surface. The heat transfer coef-
ficient, measured in the form of Nusselt number, Nu, on the gradient surface was
significantly enhanced, by as much as 10 times, as shown by Daniel et al. (2001). This
finding is significant for microgravity phase-change heat transfer applications where
the lack of gravity requires that the spontaneous movement of the ﬂuid be
accomplished purely on the basis of capillary forces. The velocity of drop propulsion
can be increased by causing a dynamic gradient between the drop and the solid sur-
face, as shown by Lee et al. (2002), who placed a drop containing n-alkylamine onto
a surface that had earboxylie acid groups (high energy). The amine (low energy)
adsorbed onto the surface from the drop and so produced a wettability gradient.
In this experiment, the velocity of drop propulsion increased with increasing Chain
length and concentration of the adsorbate. However, increasing the size of the drop
resulted in two competing mechanisms, the drag force and the kinetics of the absorp-
tion process. As the drop size increased, these two competing mechanisms lead to
saturation in drop velocity. Another novel droplet driving mechanism was demon-
strated by Lazar and Riegler (2005), who utilized the phase change of a solid alkane
to generate a liquid drop as well as a wettability gradient. The melting interface
induced the wettability gradient where drops could easily move, and this phenom-
enon was also reversible when the temperature was reduced below the freezing
temperature of the alkane.

A gradient in the contact angle can also be achieved by means of physical mod-
iﬁcations. Shastry et al. (2006) have generated a wetting gradient by means of vary-
ing the roughness of the surface. They have designed super-hydrophobic surfaces
made of pillars that trap air and varied the spacing between the pillars to generate
a roughness gradient. A combination of chemical as well as mechanical gradient
can also be utilized to obtain superior droplet movement, as shown by Petrie et al.
(2004). They have created Chemical gradients by depositing ﬂuorinated organosi-
lanes on porous silicon surfaces. The decreased contact area due to the presence
of air gaps on a porous surface further reduced the friction and increased the droplet
movement along the surface. In such a scenario, the liquid slip becomes prominent
and in turn increases the droplet movement from a Cassie-Baxter state.

Using Nanoﬂuids

Another approach to extend the transition region is to alter the net conduction
resistance through the thick liquid ﬁlm. Nanoﬂuids containing metal nanoparticles,
offer a means of altering the ﬂuid’s effective thermal conductivity as well as the wet-
ting properties of the ﬂuid. In a thin ﬁlm, the nanoparticles arrange themselves in an
ordered fashion to form layers. This ordering creates an excess pressure in the thin
film relative to the bulk ﬂuid, known as the structural disjoining pressure. Wasan
and Nikolov (2003) studied spreading and found that the structural disjoining press-
ure affects the spreading behavior of nanoﬂuids. They found that the ordering of the
nanoparticles that occurs at the contact line enhances spreading of the nanoﬂuid.
Sefiane (2006) concluded by studying an evaporating meniscus that the structural
disjoining pressure that arises as a result of nanoparticles at the contact line region
is responsible for enhancing the critical heat ﬂux during boiling. He showed that the

"
"21","678 J. L. Plawsky er al.

de-pinning 0f the contact line from the substrate for an evaporating drop was signifi-
cantly delayed by adding 1 t0 5% aluminum nanoparticles to ethanol, resulting
in higher evaporation rates. The results of Helseth and Fischer (2003) show that
pinning also occurs in miero-sized particles in ﬂuids. These larger particles too
self—assemble at the contact line and cause larger capillary forces.

The heat transferability 0f nanoﬂuids has been extensively modeled from a
molecular Viewpoint by Keblinski et a1. (2005). They have found significant increases
in thermal conductivity and critical heat ﬂux of nanoﬂuids in boiling heat transfer. A
high interfacial thermal resistance for carbon nanotube pillars was also reported by
them, indicating that the intermolecular force interaction between the ﬂuid and the
pillars may dominate over the macroscopic, effective medium thermal conductivity
enhancement. Tsai et a1. (2004) showed that adding 1% Au nanoparticles in the
working ﬂuid reduced the net sum of conduction resistance through the ﬂuid and
evaporation resistance at the 1iquid-vapor interface by 33%. The above literature
suggests improved evaporative heat ﬂux from nano-ﬂuids. Panehamgam’s (2006)
experiments With platinum nanoparticles suggest a good potential for the use
of nanoﬂuids in enhancing the efficiency of the evaporating meniscus. Addition of
nanoparticles increases the surface area of the solid surface, and the alteration in
area increases the wetting properties of the working ﬂuid (Figure 16). The adsorbed
ﬁlm thickness increased from 30 to 43 nm upon the addition of less than 1% 0f 50 nm
platinum nanoparticles t0 octane. The slope angle proﬁle decreased and the
curvature profile showed a jump in the transition region (see Figure 17) that is
similar to the observed effect on a rough surface. Liquid wetting and, thus, the
extent of the evaporating transition region increased as a result of the addition of
particles.

; T’“ '2 ""*
:- ""137,13""; u .0 .
‘ It.‘ a ‘. T . _ > _
. .-. ,.‘”_;‘.0
z ' "" a
y I .. ' s.
(a) l; ,- (b) 'ﬂ
. . '
,
(C) °
Figure 16. (a) Isothermal octane meniscus 0n the quartz surface, (b) isothermal octane men-
iscus containing Pt particles (~50 nm) on the quartz surface, (0) quartz surface containing Pt
particles (~50 nm) after complete dry-out (Panchamgam, 2006).

"
"22","EvaporatiOn at the Contact Line 679

0.10 \ 12000

- - - - Octane
‘\ - - - -Octane .
\ . 10000 — Octane+Pt Particles (50nm)

0.08 \ — Octane+Pt Particles (50nm)
§§- “ E 8000 “f
0:; 0-06 \\ 2. 6000 ———” \\

“:3 80:43 ""m 5 4000 \
g 0.04 x g
5 ‘ ~-————————— 5 2000
5.. '7 30 nm
0.02 .
0
0.00 -2000
18 20 22 24 26 28 0 10 20 30
Relative Distance, y, um Relative Distance, y, pm
(a) (b)
Figure 17. Comparison of (a) thickness profiles and (b) curvature profiles of the octane men—
iscus and octane meniscus containing Pt nanoparticles during isothermal state in the contact
line region.
Surface Modiﬁcations—Nonisothermal Conditions
Physical] T opogmphical Modifications
Condensation in the Wetzel and Cassie-Baxter Regimes
There has been a renaissance in the study of structured surfaces fueled by an under-
standing of the way nature uses structured surfaces for controlling wetting, adhesion,
and adsorption and our ability to tailor the structure of surfaces Chemically and
mechanically. However, these surfaces, especially those involving mechanical or
topographical modification, have only recently been explored as a route toward
developing efficient ehange-of—phase heat transfer systems. In this section, we Will
begin discussing the case where a collapse transition from a Cassie-Baxter to a
Wenzel state occurs during evaporation or condensation. This phenomenon offers
potential beneﬁts to phase-ehange operations since the ability to engineer surfaces
that can shift from wetting to non-wetting state allows for unprecedented control
over the configuration and processes that occur at the contact line. In condensation
for example, the Cassie-Baxter state promotes an increase in contact angle, an
increase in contact line length, and a decrease in hydrodynamic slip, thereby promot-
ing increased transport of liquid and heat transfer. By contrast, in evaporation the
Wenzel state serves to stretch the ﬁlm and decrease the conduction resistance
through the ﬁlm.

During a phase-ehange process the transition between a Cassie-Baxter and a
Wenzel state is dependent on the liquid pressure that is generated Within the drop.
This transition is driven by the Laplace pressure, 20'1/Rd, that varies due to a change
in the radius of the drop, Rd, as shown by Moulinet and Bartolo (2007) for a con-
densing drop. Such a collapse between the two states does not occur abruptly, but
the penetration of the liquid scales linearly With the pressure that is applied at the
interface, Which results in a gradual filling of the pores. Narhe and Beysens (2004)

"
"23","680 J. L. Plawsky er al.
found that the condensation of water on a grooved or a single-tiered super-
hydrophobic surface proceeds through multiple stages. They observed that initial
condensation occurs between, as well as Within, the grooves. As condensation pro-
ceeds, the drops in the higher regions coalesce to form a bigger drop that has an
air gap present in the valleys and thus forms a Cassie-Baxter state. However, con-
tinuing condensation causes merging of the liquid drops at the top and the bottom
and the liquid eventually transforms to a Wenzel state. Zheng et a1. (2005) have pro-
posed a critical condition for the pressure generated Within a drop for a solid
geometry that has a periodic but irregular pillar-like structure, as shown in
Figure 18(a). The calculated critical pressure is a function of the area factor, f,
and the diameter of the pillars, xi, given by:

1% = [01f 008(9Y)]/[(1 -f)/1] (20)
Where xi : A/L;f : A/AC.

Kusumaatmaja et a1. (2008) have proposed a critical drop radius and a critical

contact angle for the transition given by:
b
R = — — 21
dc 200s 6y ( )
, 2rd
s1n BC : — 700s BY (22)
Where a, b, and rd are shown in Figure 18(b).

The collapse of a drop also occurs When the height of the drop beneath the
pillar top is equal to the length of the pillar. This height of the drop is given by
Kusumatmaaja in Equation (23).

her : —/iS tan(6Y)/27r (23)
where 25 is the wavelength of the underlying surface.

Therefore, the three conditions to prevent a collapse are: (a) use long pillars,
since on smaller pillars drops collapse When the curvature increases such that the
drop touches the surface and eventually collapses, (b) use a high intrinsic contact
angle ﬂuid-solid system, and (C) reduce the spacing between the pillars. All these con-
ditions prevent the drop from touching the underlying substrate. In agreement With
Kusumaatmaja’s conclusions, Carbone and Mangialardi (2005) have also proposed

9.:""9/9/9 L

Cell 9
999 9y
9 ,9 ,9 =9 A” * U *
ll "" 4' -’—_--—_----_------_J ‘—rd'>
(a) (b)
Figure 18. (a) Irregular pillars manufactured by Zheng et a1. (2005): array of pillars and indi—
vidual pillar showing cross—sectional area. (b) Schematic diagram of a suspended drop, see
Equations (21) and (22) (from Kusumaatmaja et al., 2008).

"
"24","Evaporation at the Contact Line 681
the following critical condition for the amplitude of the surface features for a
Cassie-Baxter drop on a sinusoidal surface below which a collapse transition will
occur. These conclusions are in agreement with the design requirements proposed
by Nosonovsky and Bhushan (2007) to support a composite air-solid-liquid layer
on hierarchical surfaces.

The discussion in the preceding paragraphs is specific to the case of single-tier
solid geometry, for example, a pillar structure as discussed by Narhe and Beysens
(2004). Condensation on a single-tier surface eventually leads to formation of a
Wenzel state, which is not desirable for condensation heat transfer applications.
Naturally occurring multitiered surfaces, on the other hand, have shown immense
potential for maintaining a stable Cassie-Baxter state during condensation, a scen-
ario referred to as the lotus effect. These natural systems in some cases maintain a
stable impregnating Cassie state, which is referred to as the petal effect. Schematics
for both these states are compared in Figure 19. Zheng et a1. (2008) have shown that
during condensation 0n lotus leaves, the liquid drops pop out of the valleys as the
size of the drop increases, causing a reverse transition from a Wenzel to a Cassie-
Baxter state. Unbalanced capillary forces that are generated due to a difference in
the advancing and the receding contact angles of the growing drop drive the move-
ment of the drop from a valley such that the drop is suspended on a composite air-
solid interface. Similarly, Chen et a1. (2007) have shown a qualitative improvement in
drop—wise condensation of water from an artificial two-tiered super-hydrophobic
surface prepared by depositing carbon nanotubes 0n micro-machined posts. The
properties of this surface promoted condensed drops to remain in a Cassie-Baxter
state and thus promoted efficient removal of the droplets. On the other hand, Feng
et a1. (2008) have observed the presence of a stable, impregnating Cassie state when
a water drop was present on a rose petal surface. The water drop penetrated
the macroscale features present on the petal surface but air gaps were present in
the nano-asperities, thus generating super-hydrophobicity. In such a scenario, very
good adhesion is present between the solid surface and the liquid. The difference
between condensation occurring Via a “sliding” Cassie-Baxter state versus a

g I'Vatcr
ﬂ Solid
Petal ((‘ass‘ic impregnating netting state) Lotus (Cassie’s state)
Figure 19. Schematic illustrations of a drop of water in contact with the petal of a red rose (the
Cassie impregnating wetting state) and a lotus leaf (the Cassie state) (from Zheng et a1., 2008).

"
"25","682 J. L. Plawsky er al.

“sticking” Wenzel state is analogous to the difference between drop-Wise and film

condensation. Drop-Wise condensation is much more efficient than film conden-

sation; thus, a hierarehal roughness structure is required for efﬁcient heat transfer
during the condensation process.

Boiling from T extured Surfaces

Boiling and evaporative heat transfer has also been studied on microstructures of

various sizes (mm—nm scale). The topography generated can be categorized based

on the size of the surface features, namely, maero- (100—1n1n1), miero- (1—

1000 um), and nano- (10—1000 nm) scale features. The length scale of these features

determines the type of interactions between the solid and the liquid phase. Boiling

phenomenon on structured surfaces is discussed ﬁrst followed by evaporation.

Conclusions from the results obtained on the macro- and microseale features
have been summarized by Honda and Wei (2004) as follows:

0 Surface roughness of any type enhances nucleate boiling.

o A mieroporous structure is effective in decreasing the superheat necessary for
incipient boiling; however, the exact mechanism for this behavior is not well
understood.

0 Surface caVities and microporous structures both enhance nucleate boiling and the
critical heat ﬂux, qCHF.

0 6]CHF is increased most effectively by miero-pin fins.

0 Bubble nucleation sites on a micro-pin fin are very stable such that once the bubble
leaves the surface, a new bubble forms immediately. In the process of bubble depar-
ture, a small amount of vapor is left in the gap between the pin fins, and subsequent
evaporation between the pin ﬁns causes a signiﬁcant increase in the heat ﬂux.

The evaporative heat transfer performance of maero-sized (27 x 27 x 0.15 mm3),
3-D internally finned heat pipes has been studied by Liao et al. (2007). The introduc-
tion of such maero-sized fins increases the heat transfer coefﬁcient for condensation
(T v~600C) and evaporation (T v~94OC) by 50—100% and 100—200% respectively.
The resulting improvement is Claimed to be due to three factors: (a) an increase in
the surface area due to the incorporation of the fins in the evaporator section, (b)
an increase in nucleation sites due to surface nonuniformities, and (C) in the conden-
sation section, the capillary force present in the region between two fins causes the
liquid film thickness to become thinner than that observed on a smooth surface, thus
promoting higher condensation. Liao et al. (2007) also found that at higher heat
ﬂuxes, the area available on finned surfaces decreases and the original advantage
the ﬁnned surface showed disappears due to formation of a continuous liquid film
that covers the area.

The enhancement of the evaporative heat ﬂux by means of a combination of
chemical and microseale physical modification has been shown by Takata et al.
(2004). They utilized plasma irradiation to remove the adsorbed gas layer from stain-
less steel, copper, and aluminum surfaces and formed an active oxide layer that made
the surfaces hydrophilic. Moreover, the surface roughness also increased upon
exposure to the plasma, Which further reduced the contact angle of the water dro-
plets. As a result, the eevaporative heat ﬂux and Leidenfrost temperature increased.
The effect of miero-sized patterns on the motion of the contact line of a drop during
evaporation was studied by McHale et al. (2005). On a super-hydrophobic surface
Where the water drop is present in the Cassie-Baxter regime, they found that

"
"26","Evaporation at the Contact Line 683
evaporation initially occurs from a pinned contact line When the contact angle is as
high as 1500, thus stretching the contact line in the format shown in Figure 3. How-
ever, this initial pinning is followed by a step—wise contact line retreat. In some cases,
MeHale et al. also found a Wenzel-like collapse of the drop during the later stages of
evaporation.

At the nanoseale, the findings of Kubo et al. (1999) and Anderson and DaVis
(1995) indicate that surface roughness is effective in enhancing nucleate boiling, how-
ever, they also found that the trend is not directly related to the RMS roughness of
the surface. At the nanoseale, the role of intermolecular forces between the surface
irregularities and the liquid becomes prominent and as discussed previously, the sur-
face potential and subsequent intermolecular interactions are not only a function of
the RMS roughness but are also dependent on other surface features like the corre-
lation length, 5, and roughness exponent, H .

Evaporation from T extured Surfaces
The use of structured wetting surfaces to promote evaporation and condensation
processes mimics natural control surfaces such as those found in lotus leaves (Cheng
and Rodak, 2005, Figure 20) or the Namib Desert beetle (Zhai et al., 2006). Cheng
et al. have shown that the condensed water droplets on a lotus leaf are sticky, even
though they can have very high apparent contact angles. The sticky nature of the
drops was also evident during evaporation, Where the drops tried to maintain the
same base area While the reduction in drop volume occurred in form of a decrease
in the contact angle. Similar sticky behavior was also observed on water drops
present on rose petal surfaces, as shown by Feng et al. (2008). Zhang et al. (2006)
studied the evaporation of water droplets on super-hydrophobie lotus leaves and a
biomimetie polycarbonate polymer. They found that during evaporation the contact
line remains pinned but the contact angle of the evaporating drop undergoes
(a)‘ at; '~ T 1"" ~ F'N b) ”X g.
""A ‘1 ‘35” 1'"" 5.3“ ‘ '
3‘ ‘5 '1! “"" w ‘ In”
, p 2.. .7 ‘
_, ms. . A A
’..~“ 5 “ 7- ~' - ‘ , . . ' ‘
- ""?""6 ' .w'l , - '
* Labia: §u""\ 15."" ‘ 9‘.
‘\\"" "" 0'."" t. q‘ .,-. ‘
(c) [EB ‘ ' -
§‘.& r'i' __, . i i i 1‘ -
‘4’, 4.832;. .‘ '\V‘.: H's”
Figure 20. Condensation (a), (b) and evaporation (c), (d) from a lotus leaf (from Cheng et al.,
2005)

"
"27","684 J. L. Plawsky er al.

a sudden decrease below 1400. This sudden change in the contact angle at 1400 agrees
with the ellipsoidal cap model for evaporation that was proposed for water evapora-
tion on a poly-methylmethaerylate polymer by Erbil and Merie (1997). The presence
of nanoseale asperities on Cheng and Zhang’s surfaces prevents a step-wise reduction
of contact area observed in the results of McHale et al. (2005) using macro-sized
pillar surface geometry.

Recently, tha et al. (2006) have correlated nanometer-seale surface features,
namely, the RMS roughness, w, the correlation length, 5, and the peak-to-valley
height, RIM, with the wetting behavior of octane. Under isothermal conditions, the
wettability increased with w. Correspondingly, the adsorbed ﬁlm thickness increased
and the contact angle decreased (Figure 21(a)) with increasing roughness. From
these results it was found that the adsorbed film thickness scaled well with the calcu-
lated upper limit of the surface area for rough surfaces. The adsorbed film thickness
on the maximum rough surface was well within the range of intermolecular forces
between the liquid and the solid surface (~50 11m). Using an effective medium
approach, a very rough surface is equivalent to a lower density solid surface, and
hence the strength of the intermolecular forces between liquid and solid would
eventually decrease.

The curvature of the vapor-liquid interface was also measured as a function of
surface roughness. A peak was observed in the curvature profile under isothermal
conditions, and this peak value sealed with the RMS/correlation length, w/é
(Figure 22(b)) rather than just the roughness. Under nonisothermal conditions the
difference in wetting as measured by the contact angle and peak curvature became
more prominent (Figure 22(a)) and the peak curvature monotonically decreased with
an increase in the long wavelength ratio, w/E. The contact angle was found to be a
function of w/é as well under nonisothermal conditions, which is consistent with the
observation of Palasantzas (1995). The meniscus spread more on the rough surface,

50 42

u 45
3.. =
g 40 g.
0 O 37 3
5 35 7, g
3 30 f)
E 2 o i
‘8 5 32 E
g 20 E
s 15 g
g 27 :-
s- 10 8
<1 0 Area '5

5 <

. Adsorbed F ilrn
0 22
0 5 10 15
Roughness, w , nm
Figure 21. Adsorbed film thickness increases monotonically as a function of the interfacial
area, but eventually saturates at higher surface roughness.

"
"28","Evaporation at the Contact Line 685
16000
A 1.9 _<>_0w
8 A—‘————‘————‘-——-——A 14000 A —13—0.1ew
2 17 \\ \\ —o—0.22w
8 ' \ A12000 ‘\\ aﬁioysw
e \A TE \\
g 1.5 E 10000 \\\
o 3 n\
2 1 3 g 8000 o \\
2“ ' = X
8’ 2 6000 . \A
E 1.1 —<>—0W 3 .
g +0.18w ‘L 4000
g) . —O—O.22W
E 0'9 ——A——O.75W 2000
oxﬁ—M
0.7 ’ . 0
0.00 005 0.10 0.15 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
w/§ w/g
(a) (b)
Figure 22. (a) Contact angle at 100 nm meniscus thickness, (b) peak curvature as a function of
correlation length (w/é) of the rough surface (from tha et al., 2006).
resulting in a longer contact line region as shown schematically in Figure 3, Which
in turn is ideal for enhanced evaporation or condensation.
Using Mixtures to Enhance Evaporation
Fluid mixtures can also be used to enhance the evaporation process. The addition of
a dopant to the evaporating ﬂuid to enhance the stability and ﬂuid ﬂow to the tran-
sition region has been experimentally and theoretically studied (Kern and Stephan,
2003; Panehamgam et al., 2006a; Parks and Wayner, 1987; Pratt and Kihm, 2003;
Tung, 1982; Wayner and Parks, 1985; Wayner et al., 1983; Wee et al., 2006). The
improvement in heat transfer performance stems from the concentration gradient—
indueed Marangoni effect. The unavoidable thermo-eapillary effect induced by the
temperature gradient degrades wetting at the contact line region by imposing a stress
at the vapor-liquid interface that opposes the ﬂow of ﬂuid toward the contact line.
This process can be counteracted by adding a dopant ﬂuid, one With a higher boiling
point and a higher surface tension than the main ﬂuid. Since the temperature at the
contact line is higher, this region evolves to have a higher concentration of the less
volatile component. The less volatile component, chosen to also have a higher
surface tension, establishes a stress at the vapor-liquid interface that opposes and
overwhelms the thermo-eapillary stress. Early studies using mixtures were done by
Wayner et al. (1983), Parks and Wayner (1987), and Wayner and Parks (1985). Some
initial experimental data was obtained by Tung (1982), Who studied mixtures of vari-
ous alkanes and concluded that the interfacial curvature is strongly affected by even
small amounts of impurities and that the stability of the interface can also be
enhanced by a small amount of miscible impurity. This is unrelated to surfactant
effects mentioned earlier since the impurity does not preferentially distribute toward
the vapor-liquid or solid-liquid interfaces. The impurity results were later modeled
by Parks and Wayner (1987) and the interfacial temperature, the compositional vari-
ation, the mass ﬂow rate, and the evaporative heat ﬂux Within the contact line region

"
"29","686 J. L. Plawsky er al.
were calculated. Parks and Wayner showed that the temperature and composition
gradients establish significant composition-based Marangoni stresses, which were
responsible for much of the ﬂow from the bulk region to the evaporating contact
line. Subsequently Kern and Stephan (2003) used a similar model to obtain the
boiling heat transfer coefficient in mixtures. Kern and Stephan obtained good agree-
ment between the computed values and the experiment. They learned that although
the effective heat transfer coefﬁcient for mixtures is less than that for a pure ﬂuid, the
heat transfer can be improved with certain proportions of the mixture. Pratt and
Kihm (2003) studied the macroscopic effects of adding deeane to pentane. They con-
cluded that the thermal Marangoni stresses can be effectively counteracted by the
concentration Marangoni effects. Wee et a1. (2006) proposed a theoretical model
for the effect of adding deeane as an impurity to the pentane meniscus and showed
similar conclusions. Recently (Panchamgam et a1., 2006a,b) presented experimental
data and a model describing the effects of adding octane to an evaporating pentane
meniscus. They were able to demonstrate, using experimental observations, the
signiﬁcance of the concentration gradient-indueed Marangoni stresses in increasing
ﬂow to the contact line region (see Figure 23).
Effect of Slip on Evaporation
Since the evaporating meniscus is very thin, especially for perfectly wetting ﬂuids, the
lubrication approximation may be used in solving the NaVier-Stokes equations.
On the solid-liquid interface, the no-slip condition is assumed while on the
5
— P (Qin : 0)
4 —-- M<Q..=o> .9;
NE 0 P(Qin=0.076 W) o
E 3 u M (Qin= 0.076 W) 00
m a O
b 2 Tllll'lh O
V—t jﬁi] {1111]
X 'IIT‘T"" C'Il' O
= 1 mII‘TI"" II
6‘
I'llllllll'l'mm' ‘s I.
O . _ . OO»)))»))))»)»»)»))))»)))))D“)v ‘ 'JI
-1
0 10 20 30 40
Relative Distance, y, pm
Figure 23. Comparison of evaporative heat flux (q”) profiles of the pentane (P) and the binary
mixture (M) menisci during “isothermal” and nonisothermal (pseudo—steady) states. The
evaporative heat ﬂux profile for the binary mixture meniscus during nonisothermal state
was evaluated for X1(L) : 0.94 (Panchamgam et al., 2006a).

"
"30","Evaporation at the Contact Line 687
liquid-vapor interface, Marangoni stress, thermal and/or compositional, may be
assumed. However the liquid at the solid-liquid interface might still exhibit some
hydrodynamic slip. While polymer melts have long been known to show slip, there
is some evidence that liquids of even low molecular weight, and thus small chain
lengths, slip too. The hydrodynamic slip might be due to the presence of nano-
poekets of vapor or gas trapped at the solid-liquid interface (Sehmatko et al., 2006;
Tyrrell and Attard, 2002) akin to a Cassie-Baxter state, or could be due to the local
stress at the interface exceeding some critical level (Spikes and Graniek, 2003).
Roughness is known to decrease slip, but it seems that the slip length is not only
dependent on the average roughness (Zhu and Graniek, 2002) but also on the aspect
ratio of the peaks and valleys (Sehmatko et al., 2006). Hydrophobicity enhances slip,
especially for nonpolar liquids (Cho et al., 2004; Zhu and Graniek, 2001), while even
for the completely wetting ease, slip is observed (Bonaecurso et al., 2002). Molecular
dynamics simulations (Thompson and Robbins, 1990; Thompson and Troian, 1997)
have also shown the existence of slip at the interface, regardless of ﬂuid type.

The possibility of slip at the interface was investigated in theoretical studies by
Park et al. (2003) and Wee et al. (2005). They were able to show that the flow is
enhanced to the contact line region due to slip at the interface. Panehamgam et al.
(2006a) have shown that to account for the high pressure gradients observed exper-
imentally in the evaporating pentane meniscus, a slip condition is necessary at the
solid-liquid interface (see Figure 24). They developed a model for ﬂuid flow and heat
transfer using the experimentally obtained thickness, slope, and curvature profiles
and were able to determine the pressure gradient, the mass ﬂow rate, and the evap-
orative heat ﬂux in the contact line region. Slip at the interface became necessary for
obtaining sensible results that satisﬁed the experimental findings, yet the value for
the slip coefﬁcient was within the range observed and predicted for alkanes.

0.04
— P (Qin = 0)
Q _ ’ - M (Qin : 0)
g o P (Qin = 0.076 W) ((3%
w n M . = . 7

D. 0.02 (Q‘“ 0 0 6 W) o

g

o 11‘ ' -

c 1?: : El

7, 5 no

> . I"" ,3 D

D. “II III” “‘9‘ U

""—‘1 ... . mum"" ""‘ mmm‘“ "".9

<0 0.00 -__ ‘ , ~ -—

0 10 20 30 40
Relative Distance, y, pm

Figure 24. Comparison of evaporative heat flux (q”) profiles of the pentane (P) and the binary
mixture (M) menisci during “isothermal” and nonisothermal (pseudo—steady) states. The
evaporative heat flux profile for the binary mixture meniscus during nonisothermal state
was evaluated for X1(L) : 0.94 (Panchamgam et al., 2006a).

"
"31","688 J. L. Plawsky er al.

Oscillations

While oscillations have been observed in capillary pumped loop heat pipes (Ku and
Rodriguez, 2003) and in evaporation from porous media (Ku and Hoang, 1995),
instability and oscillations in an evaporating meniscus have not been studied
extensively. It had been observed by Zheng et al. (2004) that the oscillation in the
corner meniscus was set off at a high heat input. Buffone et al. (2005) Claim that
the instabilities observed are due to the interface temperature gradient due to evap-
oration at the meniscus region. Plawsky et al. (2004) also studied the oscillations of a
ﬂuorocarbon meniscus in a groove and noted that the adsorbed film thickness in
front of the meniscus increases during the advancing cycle and decreases during
the receding stage, While the peak curvature in the bulk region decreases during
advancement and increases during recession. AjaeV et al. (2002) found that the ﬁlm
thickness variation could be caused by temperature ﬂuctuations in the substrate.
Instabilities might be advantageous to heat transfer because over their cycle they
might increase net evaporation.

Conclusions

Great strides have been made understanding the nature of liquid-solid interactions
on a nanostruetured solid interface. Much of this understanding has arisen from
the discovery of naturally occurring surfaces that use Chemical and topographical
features to control the interaction of ﬂuids With their surfaces. Researchers have sue-
eessfully developed numerous forms of super-hydrophobic, super-hydrophilie, and
lyophobic surfaces. However exploitation of such surfaces for heat and mass transfer
applications by utilizing the underlying physics has just begun.

Patterning a surface either Chemically or physically alters three interrelated
phenomena that can affect a phase-change process: (1) the surface potential, (2)
the shape of the liquid-vapor interface, and (3) the resulting ﬂuid ﬂow. The size
and scale of the surface features determine Which solid/liquid/vapor interactions
are important. Maero-sized physical structures primarily serve to increase the
contact area between the heat transfer ﬂuid and the underlying solid. Miero-sized
features lead to a similar increase in solid-liquid interfacial area but also increase
nucleation sites for enhancing condensation or boiling. Finally, submicron, nano-
sized structures increase the surface potential (different adsorbed film thickness)
and can also lead to an increase in nucleation sites and interfacial area. Experimental
results and observations from naturally occurring systems both point to the need for
a hierarchical surface structure to achieve maximum performance in phase-ehange
processes.

Chemical modiﬁcation in the form of changes in surface Chemistry, the use of
surfactants, or the use of miscible ﬂuid dopants also exert strong effects on phase-
ehange processes, especially in the area of drop-Wise condensation and evaporation.
Both physical and Chemical modification are required to achieve ultra-large contact
angles, and the addition of ﬂuid dopants allows one to alter the Marangoni stresses
at the liquid-vapor interface and hence alter the ﬂow of liquid from the bulk to the
contact line region. All processes Whether physical or chemical modification have the
same goal in mind—maximizing the length of the contact line and hence the most
active area for phase Change. While great strides have been made, much work

"
"32","EvaporatiOn at the Contact Line 689
remains to be done to develop tailored surfaces for any particular liquid-solid com-
bination.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the funding agencies

NASA, Focus Center Research Program (FCRP) at RPI, and NYSTAR.

Nomenclature

A Hamakar constant

a Characteristic length scale that determines the healing length for a
liquid

C constant of O(l)

D fractal dimension

Dcmss fractal dimension of the cross section

f2 contribution from porosity in Cassie-Baxter equation

f area factor

g gravitational constant

11va heat transfer coefficient Claypron effect

hf‘vl heat transfer coefficient Kelvin effect

Ahfg enthalpy of vaporization

H long wavelength ratio

K curvature

If lower limit of fractal length

Lf upper limit of fractal length

L1, L2 lengths in Figure 3

m” mass ﬂux

MW molecularweight

P; pressure in the liquid

Pv pressure in the vapor

Pvlv equilibrium vapor pressure in the vapor

q” heat ﬂux

Rg universal gas constant

RIM peak-to-valley height

r roughness ratio

rd radius of drop

rdc critical radius for imbibitions

r5 roughness ratio

Sf spacing factor

T 1 temperature of liquid bulk

T [v temperature at the liquid vapor interface

T v temperature of vapor bulk

7 average phase change temperature

w RMS roughness

W surface potential for smooth surface

We surface potential for rough surface

xl- mole fraction of component i

xmf mole fraction of component i in reference ﬂuid

"
"33","690 J. L. Plawsky er al.

Y healing length

2 height above a reference for hydrostatics

Greek Letters

at, 6 phases in a surfactant solution

5 thickness of ﬂuid

50 adsorbed film thickness

(3 correlation length of rough surface

6a apparent contact angle

BC critical contact angle for penetration

6y contact angle (Young’s equation—smooth surface)

2 diameter of pillars

x15 wavelength of the substrate

Aug difference in chemical potential

H disjoining pressure

,0; density of the liquid

0; surface tension in the liquid

as surface tension in the solid

I line tension

16 critical thickness of liquid above Which surface ﬂuctuations die away

gbs fraction of solid surface area in contact With the liquid during Cassie-

Baxter state

References

Abdelsalam, M. E., Bartlett, P. N., Kelf, T., and Baumberg, J . (2005). Wetting of regularly
structured gold surfaces, Langmuir, 21, 1753—1757.

AjaeV, V. S., Homsy, G. M., and Morris, S. J . S. (2002). Dynamic response of geometrically
constrained vapor bubbles, J. Colloid Interface Sci, 254, 346—354.

Ananthapadmanabhan, K. P., Goddard, E. D., and Chandar, P. (1990). A study of the
solution, interfacial and wetting properties of silicone surfactants, Colloids Surfaces, 44,
281—297.

Anderson, D. M. and Davis, S. H. (1995). The spreading of volatile liquid droplets on heated
surfaces, Phys. Fluids, 7, 248—265.

Araujo, Y. C., Toledo, P. G., Leon, V., and Gonzalez, H. Y. (1995). Wettability of silane—
treated glass slides as determined from X—ray photoelectron spectroscopy, J. Colloid
Interface Sci, 176, 485490.

Bico, J ., Thiele, U., and Quéré, D. (2002). Wetting 0f textured surfaces, Colloids Surfaces A
Physicochem. Eng. Aspects, 206, 4146.

Bonaccurso, E., Kappl, M., and Butt, H. J. (2002). Hydrodynamic force measurements:
Boundary slip of water on hydrophilic surfaces and electrokinetic effects, Phys. Rev. Lett.,
88, 76103.

Bourges—Monnier, C. and Shanahan, M. E. R. (1995). Inﬂuence of evaporation on contact
angle, Langmuir, 11, 2820—2829.

Brinker, C. J ., Lu, Y., Sellinger, A., and Fan, H. (1999). Evaporation—induced self—assembly:
Nanostructures made easy, Adv. Mater., 11, 579—585.

Buffone, C., Sefiane, K., and Easson, W. (2005). Marangoni—driven instabilities of an evapor—
ating liquid—vapor interface, Phys. Rev. E, 71, 56302.

Butt, H. J . (2008). Capillary forces: Inﬂuence of roughness and heterogeneity, Langmuir, 24,
47154721.

"
"34","Evaporatian at the Contact Line 691

Cao, L., Hu, H. H., and Gao, D. (2007). Design and fabrication of micro—textures for inducing
a superhydrophobic behavior on hydrophilic materials, Langmuir, 23, 4310—4314.

Cao, L., Price, T. P., Weiss, M., and Gao, D. (2008). Super water— and oil—repellent surfaces
on intrinsically hydrophilic and oleophilic porous silicon films, Langmuir, 24, 1640—1643.

Carbone, G. and Mangialardi, L. (2005). Hydrophobic properties of a wavy rough substrate,
Eur. Phys. J. E Soft Matter, 16, 67—76.

Carvalho, R. D. M. and Bergles, A. E. (1990). The inﬂuence of subcooling on the pool nucleate
boiling and critical heat ﬂux of simulated electronic Chips, in Heat T ransfer: Papers
Presented at the 9th International Heat T ransfer Conference, Elsevier, New York.

Cassie, A. B. D. and Baxter, S. (1944). Wettability of porous surfaces, T tans. Faraday Soc, 54,
546—551.

Chang, J . Y. and You, S. M. (1997). Boiling heat transfer phenomena from microporous and
porous surfaces in saturated FC—72, Int. J. Heat Mass T ransfer, 40, 4437—4447.

Chao, D. F. and Zhang, N. (2001). Effects of evaporation and thermocapillary convection on
volatile liquid droplets, J. T hermaphys. Heat T ransfer, 15, 416—420.

Chatterjee, A., Plawsky, J . L., and Wayner, Jr., P. C. (2008). Continuum models With slip for
the evaporating meniscus and comparison With experimental results, paper presented at
ASME Conference on Nanochannels, Microchannels and Minichannels. Darmstadt,
Germany.

Chaudhury, M. K. and Whitesides, G. M. (1992). How to make water run uphill, Science, 256,
1539.

Chen, Y., He, B., Lee, J ., and Patankar, N. A. (2005). Anisotropy in the wetting of rough
surfaces, J. Colloid Interface Sci, 281, 458—464.

Chen, C. H., Cai, Q., Tsai, C., Chen, C. L., Xiong, G., Yu, Y., and Ren, Z. (2007). Dropwise
condensation on superhydrophobic surfaces With two—tier roughness, Appl. Phys. Lett,
90, 173108.

Cheng, Y. T. and Rodak, D. E. (2005). Is the lotus leaf superhydrophobic?, Appl. Phys. Lett,
86, 144101.

Cheng, Y.—T., Rodak, D. E., Angelopoulos, A., and Gacek, T. (2005). Microscopic observa—
tions of condensation of water on lotus leaves, Appl. Phys. Lett, 87, 194112—194113.

Cho, J. H. J ., Law, B. M., and Rieutord, F. (2004). Dipole—dependent slip of Newtonian
liquids at smooth solid hydrophobic surfaces, Phys. Rev. Lett, 92, 166102.

ChuraeV, N. V., Esipova, N. E., Hill, R. M., SoboleV, V. D., Starov, V. M., and Zorin, Z. M.
(2001). The superspreading effect of trisiloxane surfactant solutions, Langmuir, 17,
1338—1348.

Courbin, L., Denieul, E., Dressaire, E., Roper, M., Ajdari, A., and Stone, H. A. (2007). Imbi—
bition by polygonal spreading on microdecorated surfaces, Nat. Mater., 6, 661.

Daniel, S., Chaudhury, M. K., and Chen, J . C. (2001). Fast drop movements resulting from
the phase Change on a gradient surface, Science, 291, 633—636.

DasGupta, S., Kim, I. Y., and Wayner, Jr., P. C. (1995). Interfacial force field Characterization
in a constrained vapor bubble thermosyphon, AIChE J., 41, 2140—2149.

Deegan, R. D., Bakajin, 0., Dupont, T. F., Huber, G., Nagel, S. R., and Witten, T. A. (1997).
Capillary ﬂow as the cause of ring stains from dried liquid drops, Nature, 389, 827—829.

Dhir, V. K. (2001). Numerical simulations of pool—boiling heat transfer, AIChE J., 47, 813—834.

Erbil, H. Y. and Meric, R. (1997). Evaporation of sessile drops on polymer surfaces: Ellip—
soidal cap geometry, J. Phys. Chem. B ( USA), 101, 6867—6873.

Erbil, H. Y., Demirel, A. L., Avci, Y., and Mert, O. (2003). Transformation of a simple plastic
into a superhydrophobic surface, Science, 209, 1377—1380.

Fan, J .—G., Tang, X.—J., and Zhao, Y.—P. (2004). Water contact angles of vertically aligned Si
nanorod arrays, Nanotechnology, 15, 501—504.

Feng, X., Roy, S. C., and Grimes, C. A. (2008). Eliminating unwanted nanobubbles from
hydrophobic solid/liquid interfaces: A case study using magnetoelastic sensors,
Langmuir, 24, 3918—3921.

"
"35","692 J. L. Plawsky er al.

Garoff, S., Sirota, E. B., Sinha, S. K., and Stanley, H. B. (1989). The effects of substrate
roughness on ultrathin water films, J. Chem. Phys., 90, 7505—7515.

Gokhale, S. J ., Plawsky, J . L., Wayner, Jr., P. C., and DasGupta, S. (2004). Inferred pressure
gradient and ﬂuid ﬂow in a condensing sessile droplet based on the measured thickness
profile, Phys. Fluids, 16, 1942—1955.

Gokhale, S. J ., Plawsky, J . L., and Wayner, P. C. (2005). Spreading, evaporation, and contact
line dynamics of surfactant—laden microdrops, Langmuir, 21, 8188—8197.

Good, R. J . (1952). A thermodynamic derivation of Wenzel’s modification of Young’s equa—
tion for contact angles; together With a theory of hysteresis 1, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 74,
5041—5042.

Hallinan, K. P., Kim, S. J ., and Chang, W. S. (1994). Evaporation from an extended meniscus
for nonisothermal interfacial conditions, J. T hermaphys. Heat T ransfer, 8, 709—716.

He, B., Patankar, N. A., and Lee, J . (2003). Multiple equilibrium droplet shapes and design
criterion for rough hydrophobic surfaces, Langmuir, 19, 4999—5003.

Helseth, L. E. and Fischer, T. M. (2003). Particle interactions near the contact line in liquid
drops, Phys. Rev., E, 68, 42601.

Honda, H., Takamastu, H., and Wei, J . J . (2002). Enhanced boiling of FC—72 on silicon chips
with micro-pin-fins and submicron—scale roughness, J. Heat T ransfer, 124, 383.

Honda, H. and Wei, J . J . (2004). Enhanced boiling heat transfer from electronic components
by use of surface microstructures, Exp. T herm. Fluid Sci, 28, 159—169.

Horacek, B., Kiger, K. T., and Kim, J. (2005). Single nozzle spray cooling heat transfer
mechanisms, Int. J. Heat Mass T ransfer, 48, 1425—1438.

Hwang, U. P. and Moran, K. P. (1981). Boiling heat transfer of silicon integrated circuits chip
mounted on a substrate, in: Heat T ransfer in Electronic Equipment: Presented at the Win-
ter Annual Meeting of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Washington, D. C.,
November 15—20, 1981, 53—59, ASME, New York.

Jopp, J ., Grull, H., and Yerushalmi—Rozen, R. (2004). Wetting behavior of water droplets on
hydrophobic microtextures of comparable size, Langmuir, 20, 10015—10019.

Kako, T., Nakajima, A., Irie, H., Kato, Z., Uematsu, K., Watanabe, T., and Hashimoto, K.
(2004). Adhesion and sliding of wet snow on a super—hydrophobic surface With hydrophi—
lic channels, J. Mater. Sci, 39, 547—555.

Kawai, A. and Nagata, H. (1994). Wetting behavior of liquid on geometrical rough surface
formed by photolithography, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 33, 1283.

Keblinski, P., Eastman, J ., and Cahill, D. G. (2005). Nanofluids for thermal transport, Mater.
T Oday, 8, 36—44.

Kern, J . and Stephan, P. (2003). Theoretical model for nucleate boiling heat and mass transfer
of binary mixtures, J. Heat T ransfer, 125, 1106.

Kim, I. Y. and Wayner, J r., P. C. (1996). Shape of an evaporating completely wetting extended
meniscus, J. T hermaphys. Heat T ransfer, 10, 320—325.

Knoche, M., Tamura, H., and Bukovac, M. J . (1991). Performance and stability of the orga—
nosilicone surfactant L—77—Effect of pH, concentration, and temperature, J. Agric. Food
Chem, 39, 202—206.

Ku, J . and Hoang, T. (1995). An experimental study of pressure oscillation and hydrodynamic
stability in a capillary pumped loop, paper presented at 1995 National Heat Transfer
Conference, Portland, Oregon.

Ku, J . and Rodriguez, J . I. (2003). Low frequency high amplitude temperature oscillations in
loop heat pipe operation, SAE Paper No. 01—2386, Society of Automotive Engineers,
Warrendale, Penn.

Kubo, H., Takamatsu, H., and Honda, H. (1999). Effects of size and number density of micro—
reentrant cavities on boiling heat transfer from a silicon chip immersed in degassed and
gas—dissolved FC—72, Enhanced Heat T ransfer, 6, 151—160.

Kusumaatmaja, H., Blow, M. L., Dupuis, A., and Yeomans, J . M. (2008). The collapse tran—
sition on superhydrophobic surfaces, Europhys. Lett., 81, 36003.

"
"36","Evaporatian at the Contact Line 693

Lau, K. K. S., Bico, J., Teo, K. B. K., Chhowalla, M., Amaratunga, G. A. J., Milne, W. 1.,
McKinley, G. H., and Gleason, K. K. (2003). Superhydrophobic carbon nanotube for—
ests, Nano Lett, 3, 1701—1705.

Lazar, P. and Riegler, H. (2005). Reversible self—propelled droplet movement: A new driving
mechanism, Phys. Rev. Lett, 95, 136103.

Lee, S.—W., Kwok, D. Y., and Laibinis, P. E. (2002). Chemical inﬂuences on adsorption—
mediated self—propelled drop movement, Phys. Rev. E, 65, 051602.

Leger, L. and Joanny, J . F. (1992). Liquid spreading, Rep. Progr. Phys., 55, 431—486.

Li, X. M., Reinhoudt, D., and Crego—Calama, M. (2007). What do we need for a superhydro—
phobic surface? A review on the recent progress in the preparation of superhydrophobic
surfaces, Chem. Soc. Rev., 36, 1350—1368.

Liao, Q., Jen, T. C., Chen, Q., Li, L., and Cui, W. (2007). Heat transfer performance in 3D
internally finned heat pipe, Int. J. Heat Mass T ransfer, 50, 1231—1237.

Marmur, A. (2004). The lotus effect: Superhydrophobicity and metastability, Langmuir, 20,
3517—3519.

Marmur, A. (2006). Soft contact: Measurement and interpretation of contact angles, Soft
Matter, 2, 12—17.

McHale, G., Aqil, S., Shirtcliffe, N. J ., Newton, M. 1., and Erbil, H. Y. (2005). Analysis of
droplet evaporation on a superhydrophobic surface, Langmuir, 21, 11053—11060.

Meiron, T. S., Marmur, A., and Saguy, I. S. (2004). Contact angle measurement on rough sur—
faces, J. Colloid Interface Sci, 274, 637—644.

Miller, J . D., Veeramasuneni, S., Drelich, J ., Yalamanchili, M. R., and Yamauchi, G. (1996).
Effect of roughness as determined by atomic force microscopy 0n the wetting properties
of PTFE thin films, Polym. Eng. Sci, 36, 1849—1855.

Miwa, M., Nakajima, A., Fujishima, A., Hashimoto, K., and Watanabe, T. (2000). Effects of
the surface roughness on sliding angles of water droplets on superhydrophobic surfaces,
Langmuir, 16, 5754—5760.

Moulinet, S. and Bartolo, D. (2007). Life and death of a fakir droplet: Impalement transitions
on superhydrophobic surfaces, Eur. Phys. J. E Soft Matter, 24, 251—260.

Mudawart, I. and Anderson, T. M. (1989). High flux electronic cooling by means of p001 boil—
ing—Part I: Parametric investigation of the effects of coolant variation, pressurization,
subcooling, and surface augmentation, in: Heat T ransfer in Electronics, 1989: Presented
at the 1989 National Heat T ransfer Conference, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, August 6—9,
1989, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, New York.

Nakajima, A., Fujishima, A., Hashimoto, K., and Watanabe, T. (1999). Preparation of trans—
parent superhydrophobic boehmite and silica films by sublimation of aluminum acetyla—
cetonate, Adv. Mater., 11, 1365—1368.

Nakayama, W., Nakajima, T., and Hirasawa, S. (1984). Heat sink studs having enhanced boil—
ing surfaces for cooling microelectronic components, ASME Paper no. 84—WA/HT—89.

Narhe, R. D. and Beysens, D. A. (2004). Nucleation and growth on a superhydrophobic
grooved surface, Phys. Rev. Lett, 93, 76103.

Nikolov, A. D., Wasan, D. T., Chengara, A., Koczo, K., Policello, G. A., and Kolossvary, I.
(2002). Superspreading driven by Marangoni flow, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci, 96,
325—338.

Nosonovsky, M. and Bhushan, B. (2005). Roughness optimization for biomimetic superhy-
drophobic surfaces, Microsyst. T echnol., 11, 535—549.

Nosonovsky, M. and Bhushan, B. (2007). Hierarchical roughness optimization for biomimetic
superhydrophobic surfaces, Ultramicroscopy, 107, 969—979.

O’Connor, J . P. and You, S. M. (1995). A painting technique to enhance pool boiling heat
transfer in saturated FC—72, J. Heat T ransfer, 117, 387.

O’Connor, J . P., You, S. M., and Price, D. C. (1995). A dielectric surface coating technique to
enhance boiling heat transfer from high power microelectronics, IEEE T tans. Compon.
Packaging Manuf. T echnol. Part A, 18, 656—663.

"
"37","694 J. L. Plawsky er al.

tha, M., Dalakos, G., Panchamgam, S., Wayner, Jr., P. C., and Plawsky, J . L. (2006). Effects
of surface structure on contact line behavior, in: Fifth International Symposium on Contact
Angle, Wettability and Adhesion, ed. K. L. Mittal, VSP International Science Publishers,
Toronto.

Oktay, S. (1988). Departure from natural convection (DNC) in low—temperature boiling heat
transfer encountered in cooling microelectronic LSI devices, Heat T ransfer Eng, 9,
93—100.

Oktay, S. and Schmeckenbecher, A. F. (1974). Preparation and performance of dendritic heat
sinks, J. Electrochem. Soc, 121, 912.

Onda, T., Shibuichi, S., Satoh, N., and Tsujii, K. (1996). Super—water—repellent fractal
surfaces, Langmuir, 12, 2125—2127.

Palasantzas, G. (1995). Wetting on rough self—affine surfaces, Phys. Rev. B, 51, 14612.

Palasantzas, G. and de Hosson, J . T. M. (2001). Wetting on rough surfaces, Acta Mater., 49,
3533—3538.

Panchamgam, S. (2006). Interfacial phenomena and microscale transport processes in evapo—
rating ultrathin films, Ph.D. Thesis, 271, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, N.Y.

Panchamgam, S. S., Plawsky, J . L., and Wayner, Jr., P. C. (2006a). Inﬂuence of Marangoni
stresses and slip on spreading Characteristics of an evaporating binary mixture meniscus,
paper presented at 9th AIAA/ASME Joint Thermophysics and Heat Transfer
Conference.

Panchamgam, S. S., Plawsky, J . L., and Wayner, Jr., P. C. (2006b). Spreading Characteristics
and microscale evaporative heat transfer in an ultrathin film containing a binary mixture,
J. Heat Transfer, 128, 1266—1275.

Park, K., Noh, K.—J., and Lee, K.—S. (2003). Transport phenomena in the thin-film region of a
micro—Channel, Int. J. Heat Mass T ransfer, 46, 2381—2388.

Parks, C. J . and Wayner, P. C. (1987). Surface shear near the contact line of a binary evapo—
rating curved thin film, AIChE J., 33, 1—10.

Petrie, R. J ., Bailey, T., German, C. B., and Genzer, J . (2004). Fast directed motion of “fakir”
droplets, Langmuir, 20, 9893—9896.

Pettigrew, K., Kirshberg, J ., Yerkes, K., Trebotich, D., and Liepmann, D. (2001).
Performance of a MEMS based micro capillary pumped 100p for Chip—level temperature
control, in: T he 14th IEEE International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical
Systems, MEMS 2001, ed. J . F. Lopez, 427—430, Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers, Piscataway, N.J.

Pilotek, S. and Schmidt, H. K. (2003). Wettability 0f microstructured hydrophobic sol—gel
coatings, J. Sol—Gel Sci. T 66111101., 26, 789—792.

Plawsky, J . L., Panchamgam, S. S., Gokhale, S. J ., Wayner, P. C., and DasGupta, S. (2004). A
study of the oscillating corner meniscus in a vertical constrained vapor bubble system,
Superlattices and Microstruct, 35, 559—572.

Poulard, C., Benichou, 0., and Cazabat, A. M. (2003). Freely receding evaporating droplets,
Langmuir, 19, 8828—8834.

Pratt, D. M. and Kihm, K. D. (2003). Binary ﬂuid mixture and thermocapillary effects on the
wetting Characteristics of a heated curved meniscus, J. Heat T ransfer, 125, 867.

Quere, D. (2002). Rough ideas on wetting, Physica A Statist. Mech. Appl, 313, 32—46.

Roach, P., Shirtcliffe, N. J ., and Newton, M. I. (2008). Progess in superhydrophobic surface
development, Soft Matter, 4, 224—240.

Robbins, M. 0., Andelman, D., and Joanny, J .-F. O. (1991). Thin liquid films on rough or
heterogeneous solids, Phys. Rev. A, 43, 4344.

Schmatko, T., Hervet, H., and Leger, L. (2006). Effect of nanometric—seale roughness on slip
at the wall of simple ﬂuids, Langmuir, 22, 6843—6850.

Schonberg, J . A., Dasgupta, S., and Wayner, P. C. (1995). An augmented Young—Laplace
model of an evaporating meniscus in a microchannel With high heat ﬂux, Exp. T herm.
Fluid Sci, 10, 163—170.

"
"38","Evaporatian at the Contact Line 695

Sefiane, K. (2006). On the role of structural disjoining pressure and contact line pinning
in critical heat flux enhancement during boiling of nanoﬂuids, Appl. Phys. Lett, 89,
044106.

Shastry, A., Case, M. J ., and Bohringer, K. F. (2006). Directing droplets using microstruc—
tured surfaces, Langmuir, 22, 6161—6167.

Sheng, Y. J ., Jiang, S., and Tsao, H. K. (2007). Effects of geometrical Characteristics of surface
roughness on droplet wetting, J. Chem. Phys., 127, 234704.

Shibuichi, S., Onda, T., Satoh, N., and Tsujii, K. (1996). Super water—repellent surfaces result—
ing from fractal structure, J. Phys. Chem, 100, 19512—19517.

Soltman, D. and Subramanian, V. (2008). Inkjet—printed line morphologies and temperature
control of the coffee ring effect, Langmuir, 24, 2224—2231.

Spikes, H. and Granick, S. (2003). Equation for slip of simple liquids at smooth solid surfaces,
Langmuir, 19, 5065—5071.

Stephan, P. and Hammer, J . (1994). A new model for nucleate boiling heat transfer, Heat
Mass Transfer, 30, 119—125.

Sun, T., Wang, G., Feng, L., Liu, B., Ma, Y., Jiang, L., and Zhu, D. (2004). Reversible switch—
ing between superhydrophilicity and superhydrophobicity, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed, 43,
357—360.

Sweeny, J . B., Davis, T., Scriven, L. E., and Zasadzinski, J . A. (1993). Equilibrium thin films
on rough surfaces. 1. Capillary and disjoining effects, Langmuir, 9, 1551—1555.

Tada, H. and Nagayama, H. (1995). Chemical vapor surface modification of porous glass With
fluoroalkyl—functionalized silanes. 2. Resistance to water, Langmuir, 11, 136—142.

Takata, Y., Hidaka, S., Yamashita, A., and Yamamoto, H. (2004). Evaporation of water drop
on a plasma—irradiated hydrophilic surface, Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow, 25, 320—328.

Tanasawa, 1., Ochiai, J ., Utaka, Y., and Enya, S. (1976). Experimental study on dropwise con—
densation (effect of departing drop size on heat—transfer coefficients), J. Heat T ransfer,
42, 2846—2852.

Thompson, P. A. and Robbins, M. O. (1990). Shear ﬂow near solids: Epitaxial order and ﬂow
boundary conditions, Phys. Rev. A, 41, 6830—6837.

Thompson, P. A. and Troian, S. M. (1997). A general boundary condition for liquid ﬂow at
solid surfaces, Nature, 389, 360.

Tsai, C. Y., Chien, H. T., Ding, P. P., Chan, B., Luh, T. Y., and Chen, P. H. (2004). Effect of
structural character of gold nanoparticles in nanofluid on heat pipe thermal performance,
Mater. Lett, 58, 1461—1465.

Tung, S. C. Y. (1982). Evaporating heat transfer in the contact line of a mixture, Ph.D. Thesis,
Chemical and Biological Engineering Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,
Troy, N.Y.

Tuteja, A., Choi, W., Ma, M., Mabry, J . M., Mazzella, S. A., Rutledge, G. C., McKinley,
G. H., and Cohen, R. E. (2007). Designing superoleophobic surfaces, Science, 318,
1618.

Tyrrell, J . W. G. and Attard, P. (2002). Atomic force microscope images of nanobubbles on a
hydrophobic surface and corresponding force—separation data, Langmuir, 18, 160—167.

Ulman, A. (1996). Formation and structure of self—assembled monolayers, Chem. Rev., 96,
1533—1554.

Wagner, R., Wu, Y., Czichoeki, G., Von Berlepsch, H., ReXin, F., and Perepelittchenko, L.
(1999). Silicon—modified surfactants and wetting: II. Temperature—dependent spreading
behaviour of oligoethylene glycol derivatives of heptamethyltrisiloxane, App]. Organomet.
Chem, 13, 201—208.

Wasan, D. T. and Nikolov, A. D. (2003). Spreading 0f nanofluids on solids, Nature, 423,
156—159.

Wayner, Jr., P. C. (1980). Interfacial profile in the contact line region of a finite contact angle
system, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 77, 495—500.

"
"39","696 J. L. Plawsky er al.

Wayner, Jr., P. C. (1999). Intermolecular forces in Change of phase heat transfer: 1998 Donald
Q. Kern Award review, AIChE J., 45, 2055—2068.

Wayner, Jr., P. C. (2002). Nucleation, growth and surface movement of a condensing sessile
droplet, Colloids Surfaces A Physicochem. Eng. Aspects, 206, 157—165.

Wayner, Jr., P. C. and Parks, C. J . (1985). Effect of liquid composition on enhanced ﬂow due
to surface shear in the contact line region: Constant vapor pressure boundary condi—
tion, in: Multiphase Flow and Heat T ransfer: Presented at the 23rd National Heat T ran-
sfer Conference, Denver, Colorado, August 4—7, 1985, eds. V. J. Dhir, J. C. Chen, and
O. C. Jones, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, New York.

Wayner, Jr., P. C., Tirumala, M., Tung, S. C. Y., and Yang, J. H. (1983). Fluid ﬂow in the
contact line region of a mixture of alkanes—98 percent hexane and 2 percent octane, in:
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 18th T hermaphysics Conference,
Montreal, Canada, June 1—3, 1983, eds. G. Voulilekas and V. A. Wehrle, 9, American
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, New York.

Wee, S. K., Kihm, K. D., and Hallinan, K. P. (2005). Effects of the liquid polarity and the wall
slip on the heat and mass transport Characteristics of the micro—scale evaporating tran—
sition film, Int. J. Heat Mass T ransfer, 48, 265—278.

Wee, S. K., Kihm, K. D., Pratt, D. M., and Allen, J . S. (2006). Microscale heat and mass
transport of evaporating thin film of binary mixture, J. T hermaphys. Heat T ransfer,
20, 320.

Wenzel, R. N. (1936). Resistance of solid surfaces to wetting by water, Ind. Eng. Chem, 28,
988.

Wolansky, G. and Marmur, A. (1998). The actual contact angle on a heterogeneous rough sur—
face in three dimensions, Langmuir, 14, 5292—5297.

Wolansky, G. and Marmur, A. (1999). Apparent contact angles on rough surfaces: The Wen—
zel equation revisited,ColloidS Surfaces A Physicochem. Eng. Aspects, 156, 381—388.
You, S. M., Simon, T. M., and Bar—Cohen, A. (1992). A technique for enhancing boiling heat
transfer With application to cooling of electronic equipment, IEEE T rans. Compon. Pack-

aging Manuf. Technol, 15, 823—831.

Zhai, L., Berg, M. C., Cebeci, F. C., Kim, Y., Milwid, J. M., Rubner, M. F., and Cohen, R. E.
(2006). Patterned superhydrophobic surfaces: Toward a synthetic mimic 0f the Namib
Desert beetle, Nano Lett., 6, 1213—1217.

Zhang, X., Tan, 8., Zhao, N., Guo, X., Zhang, X., Zhang, Y., and Xu, J . (2006). Evaporation
of sessile water droplets on superhydrophobic natural lotus and biomimetic polymer sur—
faces, Chemphyschem, 7, 2067.

Zheng, L., Plawsky, J . L., Wayner, Jr., P. C., and DasGupta, S. (2004). Stability and oscilla—
tions in an evaporating corner meniscus, J. Heat T ransfer, 126, 169.

Zheng, Q. 8., Yu, Y., and Zhao, Z. H. (2005). Effects of hydraulic pressure on the stability and
transition of wetting modes of superhydrophobic surfaces, Langmuir, 21, 12207—12212.

Zheng, Y., Han, D., Zhai, J ., and J iang, L. (2008). In situ investigation on dynamic suspending
0f microdroplet on lotus leaf and gradient of wettable micro— and nanostructure from
water condensation, Appl. Phys. Lett., 92, 084106.

Zhu, S., Miller, W. G., Scriven, L. E., and Davis, H. T. (1994). Superspreading 0f water—sili—
cone surfactant 0n hydrophobic surfaces, Colloids Surfaces A Physicochem. Eng. Aspects,
90, 63—78.

Zhu, Y. and Granick, S. (2001). Rate—dependent slip of Newtonian liquid at smooth surfaces,
Phys. Rev. Lett., 87, 96105.

Zhu, Y. and Granick, S. (2002). Limits of the hydrodynamic no—slip boundary condition,
Phys. Rev. Lett., 88, 106102.

"
"40","Cnpyrighf n'F Chemical Engineering Cnmmunicuﬁnns is The prnperf}: n'F Tuylnr :5. Francis L1'd and HS
cnnfenf mu}: nn1' be cnpied cur emailed 1':- mulfiple sites cur pnsfed 1':- cl Iisfsew wifhnuf The cnpyrighf
hnlder's express wriHen permissinn. Hummer, users may print dnwnlnud, cur email urficles 'Fc-I'
individual use.

"
