"","x"
"1","’6ch
Q9 \‘\§‘ International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer xxx (2012) xxx—xxx
$ng 668
. 6"" (5 C . . . . .

a . ‘ .{9 ontents lists available at SCIVerse ScuenceDIrect ._._..-__....

.'~. ‘ﬁﬁgy $33???“

1. _ a 1.. .

Qﬁ‘gﬁj Internatlonal Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer
Q9 .. 7:33;- 2% ““

[{LSEV’IKR journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/|ocate/ijhmt
E
Exploswe nucleat10n 1n mlcrograVIty: The Constramed Vapor Bubble experlment
Joel L. Plawsky *, Peter C. Wayner jr.

Howard P. Isermann Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering. Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy. NY 12180. United States
mama
ARTICLEINFO ABSTRACT
Article history: Nucleate boiling was observed in the microgravity environment on International Space Station during
RECEiVEd 2‘ MaFCh 2012 operation of the Constrained Vapor Bubble (CVB) heat pipe experiment. Surveillance images of the boiling
Received in mm“ form 121““ 2012 dynamics within this constant volume system were correlated with transient liquid pressures and tran-
25:12:]: lg [$322212 sient temperature proﬁles. Nucleation events occurred in a non-periodic but non-random way and indi-
vidual events were recorded over a twenty (20) hour time period. Each nucleation event originated at the
———-———— heater surface and new bubble growth was accompanied by a shock wave that passed through the heat
£31223; pipe and partially collapsed the original vapor bubble. The critical size of the equilibrium homogeneous
Boiling nucleating bubble radius was determined using the experimental data and standard thermodynamic
Heat pipe descriptions of boiling to be on the order of 140 nm for a superheat of 42 K. Maximum heat input to
the heat pipe closely followed the timing of the nucleation event. Maximum heat loss. via thermal radi-
ation from the walls of the device, followed the timing of bubble motion and bubble coalescence in the
device. The whole process resulted in about a 10% increase in the overall heat transfer rate. Using liter-
ature data for an evaporating droplet on a surface, a I(elvin—Clapeyron model for incipient boiling was
used to compare the CVB and droplet experimental results. A simple model for the effect of location
on the nucleation probability in the CVB was developed.
F73 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
_——____ ————*___________
1. Introduction Both pool and ﬂow boiling phenomena have been studied for a
long time. There are many excellent papers and several compre-
“Wickless” heat pipes are passive heat transfer devices that rely hensive reviews on each topic [3—9]. It is impossible to reference
on liquid-vapor phase change to transport heat and capillary pres- all of them here. Despite the large number of 'papers, our under-
sure gradients to transport mass. They are particularly attractive standing of the phenomena involved is still incomplete [8,9], espe-
for thermal management of critical components in spacecraft since cially for boiling in conﬁned channels. While we have detailed ﬂow
they can transport heat over large distances without moving parts. regime maps that serve as a guide to the steady—state performance
Unfortunately there is only a small amount data on the steady- of these systems [4,7], recent work has focused on understanding
state performance and start-up of heat pipes in microgravity and the instabilities that develop and also the nature of bubble nucle—
virtually no detailed image data showing the internal liquid/vapor ation [10-17], which can often be explosive in nature [14,18,19].
distribution inside a working heat pipe in microgravity. Very little work has been done in conﬁned, constant volume sys-
The Constrained Vapor Bubble (CVB) is a transparent example terns [16] or conﬁned systems in microgravity environments [20].
of a wickless heat pipe that was operated aboard the International Kew and Cornwell [21,22] introduced the concept of a conﬁne-
Space Station over the course of several months in 2010 [1.2]. The ment number as a gauge of when channel conﬁnement would affect
experiment was speciﬁcally designed to look at the performance of boiling. Conﬁnement numbers in excess of 0.5 deﬁned the thresh-
a wickless heat pipe and to image the liquid/vapor distribution in- old where channel size became important and for the CVB experi—
side a heat pipe as it operated in microgravity. The CVB, as shown ment, the microgravity environment leads to conﬁnement
in the diagram of Fig. 1, consists of a fused silica cuvette that is par- numbers in excess of 2500. Thus, the channel walls have a very
tially ﬁlled with a working ﬂuid - pentane in this case. If one end of strong effect on the behavior of the liquid and vapor phases. In a
the cuvette is heated, the pentane in contact with the heated sur- series of papers, Seﬁane and Tadrist [10.12.23] investigated the
face evaporates and ﬂows toward the cooler section where it be— hydrodynamics and heat transfer during ﬂow boiling in microchan—
gins to condense. The condensate travels back to the heated end nels. They were able to follow ﬂow, pressure and temperature con—
through the sharp corners of the cuvette due to capillary action. ditions in the channel and documented bubble growth, nucleation,
and boiling instabilities. Several ﬂuids were investigated. but for the
mowing author. Tel; +1 518 275 5049 purposes of this paper. the work with n-pentane is most relevant.
E-mail address: plawsky@rpi.edu 0.1.. Plawsky). Periodic oscillations in channel wall temperature were observed
0017—9310/$ - see front matter fr”; 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http:/[dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2012.06.047
Please cite this article in press as: J.L. Plawsky, P.C. Wayner Jr., Explosive nucleation in microgravity: The Constrained Vapor Bubble experiment, Int. 1. Heat

"
"2","2 j.l.. Plawsky, RC. Wayner jr./Intemational journal of Heat and Mass Transfer xxx (2012) xxx—xxx
Nomenclature
A Hamaker constant (J) Qmp heat ﬂow due to evaporation (W)
Ac CVB cross sectional area (m2) Q"" heat flow into the CVB (W)
hfg heat of vaporization U/kg) rb critical radius for a nucleating bubble (rn)
j nucleation rate (m 3s 1) R0 radius of the CVB main bubble (m)
k effective thermal conductivity of CVB — 1.002 (W/mK) T temperature (K)
k3 Boltzmann’s constant (J/molecule/K) T. temperature in the liquid phase (K)
L distance of CVB main bubble from the heater wall (In) Th, temperature on the liquid side of a vapor-liquid inter-
MW molecular weight (kg/kmol) face (K)
Nm, Avogadro's number (molecules/kmol) TV temperature in the vapor phase (K)
Pd disjoining pressure (Pa) TW temperature of the CVB heater wall (K)
P1 pressure in the liquid phase (Pa) 6 ﬁlm thickness (m)
P"", pressure in the liquid phase outside of a nucleating bub- AL length of the CVB main bubble (m)
ble (Pa) AT temperature drop across the CVB bubble (K)
Pm, pressure on the liquid side of a meniscus (Pa) Arc curvature difference between the two ends of the CVB
Pv pressure in the vapor phase (Pa) bubble (1/m)
PW, pressure in the vapor phase inside of a nucleating bub- A0 interfacial tension difference between the two ends of
ble (Pa) the CVB (N/m)
Pm pressure on the vapor side of a meniscus (Pa) 0 interfacial tension (N/m)
Pref CVB reference or operating pressure (Pa) K vapor-liquid interface curvature (l/m)
Psat saturation vapor pressure (Pa)
as well as vapor bubble expansion instabilities that are speciﬁc to Initially. the CVB experiment was not designed to investigate
microchannels. Models were developed to simulate the bubble any aspect of boiling. However, due to the peculiar size of the
expansion instability and channel wall heating time periods and 20 mm module and the ﬂuid distribution due to forces at launch,
showed that the two phenomena are related. Nikolaev and cowork- we were able to enter into a regime where single nucleation events
ers investigated these types of instabilities in microchannels as well could be observed and recorded. We believe the results are sufﬁ-
[l3,15]. Two papers were concerned with boiling in near supercrit- ciently unique to add to the existing body of literature on boiling
ical ﬂuids using either CO; or H2 as the working ﬂuid [15,20]. The and expand our knowledge base.
authors looked into gas phase overheating and the possibility of
long-distance heat transfer using a pistoning effect. In the case of 2. Experimental apparatus
Hz, a novel magnetic gravity compensation technique was used to
levitate the vapor bubble. A major ﬁnding of the work was the exis- The CVB apparatus has been extensively described in other pub~
tence Of a very fast thermal response that propagated through the lications [1.2] and so the details will not be presented here. We will
ﬂUid when input power was changed. The response time was 01‘13’ just present a very brief overview of the features critical to this re-
limited by the heat capacity of the cell. Das et al. [13] investigated port. Fig. 23 shows an overall view of the CVB experiment. The CW-
oscillating ﬂOWS insidea capillary tube in the CODtEXt ofa pulsating ette section is where the bubble shown in Fig. 1 is located. The
heat pipe. They observed meniscus oscillations and developed a
new evaporation/condensation model that explained the large-
scale oscillations observed experimentally as well as the small- Q"",
scale oscillations near the threshold where oscillations appear. //\
in many of these systems. large-scale instabilities are observed :pr
. . . . hots 4w,
when rapid heating is attempted. This leads to the phenomenon of T \ tx‘ﬁﬂﬁe - l,‘
explosive nucleation or boiling explosions. Such phenomena have § I‘ll
been observed in large-scale systems in microgravity as part of
the Tank Pressure Control Experiment [16]. In this experiment high : ‘ :
liquid superheats were sustained for long periods of time and .s; ’ Liquid Meniscus
explosive boiling events occurred even at relatively low heat Wcmscopc & cm ""1 E {11'
. . . . r “a ‘
ﬂuxes. Pressure spikes in the tank were recorded during each Camera g i 3"" l; 1;
event. Once the explosive boiling event passed, sustained nucleate L4. "" g
boiling would occur. Explosive boiling of water in conﬁned systems {593%, j . f 1
was investigated by Li and Peterson [14] and Hetsroni et al. [18]. Li 0/: ‘ {L Vapor
and Peterson showed that on smooth surfaces where the surface ' =, l .
roughness is on the order of the critical bubble size for homoge- i z i , . _ .
neous nucleation, explosive boiling is the dominant boiling mode i j ! Com?“ °' m 0mm
. . l ‘ x matte
regardless of the applied heat ﬂux. Hetsroni et al. observed explo- ’ 2 . ;
sive boiling in triangular microchannels. The phenomenon was _ j V
shown to be periodic and signiﬁcantly different than annular ﬂow QM. . , f <’ — "" Liquid p00,
in microchannels. The trigger was seen to be the venting of , a »
elongated bubbles due to very rapid expansion in the channel. = ’
Explosive boiling was seen under conditions where periodic ﬂow
reversal occurred. These events were accompanied by large oscilla—
tions in the pressure. Fig. 1. Schematic of the heat pipe portion of the CVB experiment.
Please cite this article in press as: LL Plawsky, RC WaynerJr., Explosive nucleation in microgravity: The Constrained Vapor Bubble experiment. Int]. Heat

"
"3","J.L. Plawsky, P.C. Wayner 1r. /lnternational journal ofHeat and Mass Transfer xxx (2012) xxx-xxx 3
5 operating pressure of the system at intervals of 1 second. A set of
.. ~ "" ‘ ‘ type—E thermocouples, made from insulated, 36 gauge wire. were
. ‘ , drilled into the glass wall of the CVB at intervals of 1.5 mm along
a . _ the main axis of the device to provide an estimate of the tempera-
"" , . a ’ ture proﬁle along the length of the cell. One thermocouple was
. ‘ . drilled into the heater wall, 0.6 mm from the actual ﬂuid-glass
. interface. Another thermocouple was located at the heater/glass
' 3 interface. The thermocouples were multiplexed so that a set of
Pressure ._ . \)! readings could be taken every other second. The spool of thermo-
Transducer couple wire was calibrated and on average, temperature measure-
/’__:)‘\ Cuvette O ments were accurate to less than i0.5“C.
f7 ' ' x ‘ \ . /\/ "" ' Not shown in Fig. 2a is asurveillancc camera that was included
i ' $ E.‘ <(— Heater to determine an approximate size of the bubble and to assess
\ 1 ‘ . V 4 . 3,: ,4 ' 3.' \~/ £5 whether the entire bubble was located within the cuvette so that
m. "" "" .. 'v 77'2"" ”1“ ﬂ; ,7 "" the experiment could be started. The surveillance camera was con-
\ ‘32} ""J "" j _: f» A , ﬁgured to allow a maximum frame rate of only 8 fps. However, to
‘ ‘, a,“ l"" 13,""; 9x achieve that frame rate. only the internal memory of the camera
""a ""' F 7 was available to store images and so to record a nucleation event,
‘ ,‘J ’3: __ 5? . J Col d we had to accurately estimate the timing of each event.
. ~ Q/ Plate The pressure transducer measures the pressure in the liquid
T-Section pool of the CVB. Since the liquid-vapor radii of curvature are large,
Cooler .
on the order of 1.5 mm. and the reactive pressure due to evapora-
Fig. 2a. Overview of the assembled CVB experimental apparatus. tion is small, the pressure recorded by the transducer is approxi-
mately equal to the vapor pressure in the starting bubble. In
addition. previous research using the 30mm cell demonstrated
active part of the cuvette is 23.25 mm long, 5.5 mm square in outer that this measured pressure is equal to that obtained using the An-
dimension and 3 mm square in inner dimension. In the active sec- toine Equation and the temperature on the cuvette surface at the
tion. the pentane ﬂuid is heated using an electrical resistance hea- axial junction of the evaporation and condensation regions [1,2].
ter and partially condensed due to radiation to the surroundings. A The vapor pressure gradient in the starting bubble is also extre-
bank of thermoelectric coolers at the other end also controls the mely small. Since the liquid pressure gradient in the corners is also
process. Both the heater and coolers were electronically controlled relatively small for the small heat ﬂow rates discussed herein. this
so that the temperatures at both ends of the device could be effec— vapor pressure is also approximately equal to the pressure in the
tively set. Power input to the heater was controlled to within liquid where nucleation occurs. As demonstrated below. clue to
$0.01 W. The bank of four thermoelectric coolers were calibrated the evaporation—condensation processes. this saturation tempera-
and their temperatures could be controlled to within $0.512. ture varies with time. The measured temperature in the liquid
Acting as a ﬁn heat exchanger, energy is lost by thermal radia- was also found to vary with time.
tion from the sides of the cuvette to the surroundings in addition to Four different CVB modules were run. One was a dry. evacuated.
the energy transported down the axis of the heat pipe via the evap- calibration module whose purpose was to assess the degree of heat
oration/condensation process and by conduction down the glass loss from the cuvette surface by thermal radiation. The other three
wall. A pressure transducer. a Druck PDCR4000-A303, calibrated were partially ﬁlled heat pipe modules whose vapor bubbles were
within the range 0 to 350 kPa i 350 Pa. was located downstream nominally 20. 30, and 40 mm in length. The 30 and 40 mm mod-
from the coolers in a region occupied by (normally) only liquid ules were installed. started and operated without incident [1,2].
pentane. The pressure transducer was intended as a check to deter— The initial behavior of the 20 mm module was qualitatively differ-
mine whether the experiment had developed a leak during launch ent. Generally, the CVB consists of a central vapor bubble of pure
and/or storage. Leaking was a potential problem since pentane was pentane that represents between 85 and 90% of the CVB internal
distilled into the CVB during ﬁlling and thus the initial internal volume. As shown in Fig. 2b, the bubble in the 20 mm module is
pressure in the modules at room temperature was sub~atmo~ only between 50-55% of the CVB internal volume. The remainder
spheric. The pressure transducer was capable of recording the of the bubble is located outside of the ﬁeld of view near the
.clolo toovvslllli' .
«1: ca
‘5 ‘ - a Cold Finger g
0
I "" . a U
c
Fig. 2b. View of a ﬁlled 20mm CVB module.
Please cite this article in press as: ].L. Plawsky, P.C. Wayner}r., Explosive nucleation in microgravity: The Constrained Vapor Bubble experiment, Int]. Heat

"
"4","4 }.L. Plan sky, P.C. Wayner 1r. /lntemational journal of Heat and Mass Transfer xxx (2012) m—xxx
Hunt .nnnulil!‘ Lulu.” uumﬂll‘
v . an..— 4“: r .
1 ' . MiW—Aa ‘. '
Isothermal — Initial State o7;02;3o
(a) (b)
_ . .‘r I
mun ulunlll‘ lIﬂIOI‘-11IIUHIII‘
1-. o : I- m
.94.. .--.:~a-- «W W... - - .4 ~:uw*2-W -- . ' a t ‘
07:03:01 07:03:17
(C) (d)
tlllll'lll'k!‘l'l"" n!!ﬂll‘lll!¥9'|.l""
_ . I .
' m D
w
1,
07:03:18 07:03:34
(6) (f)
mun"" unulillﬁ auutwuuuilll""
_ I I . .
07:03:51 07:05:01
(g) (h)
Fig. 3. (3) Initial state under isothermal conditions. Bubble is attached to the cold ﬁnger. (b) Quasi-equilibrium. heated state. Initial and ﬁnal condition for the nucleation
sequence. (c) First image following the nucleation event. A new bubble has grown from the heater surface. The old bubble has collapsed to a near-spherical shape. (d) The old
bubble has traveled toward the new bubble prior to coalescence. (e) Bubble coalescence has occurred. Combined bubble remains attached to the heater wall. (f) Bubble
detaches from the heater wall. (g)(h) Bubble moves back toward its original. quasi-equilibrium position. Dashed lines represent the transition between evaporation (left) and
condensation (right).
pressure transducer (see Fig. 23 for a complete schematic of the and the glass wall of the cuvette to be 117 i 0.1 °C and the temper-
CVB). Such splitting of the primary bubble was generally observed ature of the cooler interface with the CVB to be 20 i 0.1 °C. These
as a consequence of launch and one portion of the bubble becomes temperatures were chosen for several reasons. The ambient tem-
attracted to the pressure transducer since there is a high-energy perature aboard the International Space Station hovers around
passivation layer protecting the transducer. However. it was a sim- 20 °C and the relative humidity around 70%. Therefore. the coolers
ple procedure to heat one end of the 30 or 40 mm modules. cool were set to insure that we would have minimal condensation on the
the opposite end, and so condense the bubble at the pressure external surface. Nucleation events would occur at lower and high-
transducer and grow the bubble in the visible region of the CVB un- er heater interface temperatures. Similar to the observations by Li
til it returned to its ground-based set point. Such was not the case and Peterson [14], nucleation events were more frequent at higher
for the 20 mm module. Start-up procedures did not lead to the surface temperatures, but so were the pressure excursions upon
evaporation/condensation process outlined above but to a series each nucleation event. The CVB experiment had a maximum pres—
of nucleation/bubble collapse events that were more reminiscent sure limit of 345 kPa that was dictated by safety regulations aboard
of behavior at the incipience of sub-cooled nucleate boiling. The the International Space Station and the burst pressure of the CVB
CVB design exhibits a unique boiling process because a substantial glass cuvette. Operation at interface temperatures above 118 °C
amount of energy is also removed at the cold ﬁnger. would trigger a safety shutdown and a four-hour restart procedure.
Fig. 2b shows that the 20 mm CVB module has a large region of Since time was limited aboard the 155. we tightly controlled the
liquid that is adjacent to the heated end. This conﬁguration along power supplied to the CVB to limit the interface temperature. Tem—
with the temperature gradient along the axis of the CVB makes peratures less than 117 °C were also investigated, however nucle—
the bubble nucleation process somewhat similar to sub-cooled ation events became so infrequent that it was difﬁcult to predict
pool boiling. The CVB also has a large, pre—existing vapor bubble when one would occur. A simple model that ties some of these ele-
spanning a confined channel with liquid continually ﬂowing ments together is presented in Appendix A We needed the ability
around it, primarily within the corners of the cuvette. Thus, the to predict an occurrence to be able to capture the image data we
operation of the CVB is also somewhat similar to ﬂow boiling in sented in this paper.Thus, operation at 117 °C represented the best
a conﬁned channel in the slug flow regime. compromise allowing us to observe and record the phenomena.
To obtain the data presented here. the CVB was operated at a The CVB experiment was oriented along the y-axis of the Inter-
power input that set the interface temperature between the heater national Space Station. The 155 has two acceleration sensor systems
Please cite this article in press as: 1.1.. Plawsky, P.C. Wayner 11:, Explosive nucleation in microgravity: The Constrained Vapor Bubble experiment. Int. J.VHeat
Mass Transfer (201 2), http://dx.doi.orgl10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2012.06.047

"
"5","1.1.. Plaxvcsky. P.C. Waynerjrﬂntemational journal of Heat and Mass Transfer xxx (2012) xxx—xxx 5
that measure acceleration transients. or g—jitter from station oper- If A_PL z 0 :> & = _ (E) (g) AI (5)
ations. The Space Accleration Measurement System (SAMS) re- ’ L L 0 AT L
sponds to frequencies in the range 001—400 [-12 and Microgravity
Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS) responds in the range
0—0.0] Hz. The CVB is insensitive to g—jitter especially at the high Were we able to accurately measur e the shape 0f the vapor-liquid
frequency end, However. averaging of MAMS data over the period interface using the surveillance camera, we could determine the
in which the experiments were run, shows that the average y—axis small curvature gradient involved and exactly hOW the ﬂOWS devel-
acceleration was 0.19 “g, oped and changed. However, it was impossible to simultaneously
perform interferometric measurements of ﬁlm thickness using the
3. Results and discussion microscope and obtain surveillance camera video to observe the
nucleation process.
3.]. Bubble motion and approach to pseudo—steady-state At this point. the bubble reaches a quasi-equilibrium location
shown in Fig. 3b that represents the starting conﬁguration for
Startup of the 20 mm CVB module occurred with the central va— the nucleation event. Fig. 3(th) show the general sequence 0f
por bubble attached to the lnconel cold ﬁnger as shown in Fig. 3(a). events. The central vapor bubble remains in its Fig. 3(b) state 35
Upon applying heat at the left-hand end, the bubble begins to heatis centinually pumped into the liquid from the heater and that
move toward the center of the CVB as shown in Fig. 3(b)- Motion heat is d1551pated through the glass walls of the device and the lim-
0f conﬁned bubbles under a temperature gradient was ﬁrst ana- 1ted evaporation/condensation process occurring within the hub-
lyzed by Bretherton [24] and simulated by Mazouri and Homsy ble. In this pseudo—steady-state, the heater/CVB wall temperature
[25] among others. An excellent review on the subject is given in was 117 1r 0.1 °C. the internal wall/liquid interface temperature
Ajaev and Homsy [26]. Here we will consider a much simpler was at 102.1 i 0.1 °C and the minimum pressure was stable at an
description of the recorded pictures. average value of 209 i- 0.5 kPa. Detailed image analysis presented
The Inconel cold ﬁnger was the high-energy surface in the sys- in [2] showed that the temperature associated with this pressure
tern and the bubble was attracted there under isothermal condi— is accurately estimated using the Antoine equation. At the steady
tions. Based on observations with the camera during the pressure above, the calculated vapor temperature was 59.1 °C. This
operation of the CVB, we can assume that at any point along its temperature also corresponds to the axial point where condensa-
length. the difference between the pressure in the liquid and pres- “eh 0f pentane ﬁrst begins. Thus, we can then deﬁne a superheat
sure in the vapor is small and given by: as the difference between this saturation temperature and the
internal wall temperature at the heater end. For the state of the
PL = P,, — UK (1)
The curvature is the inverse of the corner meniscus radius. Although 3
small, there is sufﬁcient curvature gradient for the ﬂow of the evap- 350*]0
orant. Now if we let the left hand side of the bubble be at x = 0 and ; . : ,1: . ,
the right hand side of the bubble be at x=L. then we can state 300' ' t]. i l l i l l. l: l”: , l. Iii I
approximately that: f“? _ u. 1| I I i I i l | I t I .' .
APL_AP,, AK Aa AT 2 % ' “HI"" || I - g ti; ! -l‘| .
T‘T‘UT—K<A—T')T H 5 mt lltl t| ' I‘ll -| ‘
3 ‘ ‘-..""'- .‘ - ' ’ wt”. -‘. I l t
Obviously, the ﬂow ﬁeld is very complicated and the following i “W “‘ ”W“? 'V' ’ hi‘lnttlitwﬁ.m' “twp
approximations can only partly describe the ﬂow ﬁeld. Before the 20° h '
heater was turned on, the shape of the bubble was symmetrical Reset
and the bubble curvature was highest in the corner at the midpoint
of the bubble. Since the vapor pressure in the bubble was approxi- } 33,0 AM 4:00 AM 3:00 AM 12:00 pM 4:00 pM 8:00 pM
mately uniform. the liquid pressure at the bubble ends was higher Time (hrzmin)
than at the center of the bubble. Thus, the forces balanced and
the bubble was stationary. Upon applying heat to the left-hand Fig. 4. Pressure readings in the CVB as a function of time for a 20 hour period on
end, the pressure in the liquid to the left of the bubble becomes omber 17' 2010' Heater ""1pm power was 1535 W'
slightly less than at the right due to evaporation. In addition, the
interfacial tension begins to vary along the length of the CVB.
Marangoni forces, resulting from this surface tension gradient, de-
tach the bubble from the cold ﬁnger and drive the bubble towards 6000
the hot end [26]. For the corner ﬂow, the effect of the curvature gra— "" r"" “
dient has to be greater than that due to surface tension gradient. We A 4000
can see this from: g 0W7.%<\\\\\\\\\e ‘
If&~0 A—T-'O E '0 (3) $2000 W , 0.}.
' L _ L ‘ AT ‘ ’6' t t i ‘
h' — - 5 i"" .;- N? 4 '19 ‘ ""
-zooo V““=?<~a//
In the case of the 20 mm module, the bubble length is short enough ~
that it never makes it all the way to the hot end. The temperature
gradient. interfacial tension gradient, and evaporation/condensa- 2'00 2‘25 2'50 2'75 3'00 3‘25 350x105
tion process conspire to balance the fluid forces and arrest the mo- Pressure (Pa)
tion 0f the bUbble- At this POint: W9 mUSt have: Fig. 5. Phase plot of the pressure data in Fig. 4. The closed and conﬁned form of the
graph indicates that the nucleation events were not periodic and not random.
Please cite this article in press as: J.L. Plawsky, RC. Wayner Jr., Explosive nucleation in microgravity: The Constrained Vapor Bubble experiment. Int. J. Heat

"
"6","6 1.1.. Pfawsky, P.C. Waynerjr./lnternationaljournal of Heat and Mass Transferxxx (2012) xxx-xxx
system in Fig. 3(b). the average liquid superheat prior to nucleation 3.3. Pressure measurements during the nucleation event
was 42 °C.
Fig. 4 shows the pressure readings over the course of 20 hours
3.2. Bubble nucleation, coalescence and return to steady—state 0f operation. Every pressure spike in the ﬁgure represents a nucle-
ation event and the ﬁgure is representative of similar pressure
At a given instant in time. we notice a nucleation event occur readings reported by Seﬁane and Tadrist [12] and for ﬂow boiling
(Fig 3c) and the presence of two separate bubbles in the CVB nucleation events. The ﬁgure indicates that the nucleation events
Due to the rather low frame rate of the surveillance camera, it ap- are not penodrc. nor are they totally random events. Flg‘ 5 shows
pears that the original bubble had split in two. however examina- 5' Phase Pom” P1“ 0f the pressure ”ad the ““13““ events
tion of many events of this type reveals that what actually been stnctly per10d1c,the plot would have appeared as a Single el—
occurred was the nucleation and rapid growth of a bubble originat- llpsi‘diad the ﬂueleftlgﬁ Events bjereln toil? ﬁranccllom: the 'plot
ing from or near the heater wall and the simultaneous collapse, due wou havelessentia y e spacg. ebwe ‘ e ne lpattern men""
to an increase is system pressure. of the original bubble as vapor in cates t at tie events are not ran om ”t, may resu t roni tnany
that bubble condenses. Such a collapse was necessary since the CVB frequencnes interacting leading to a chaotic, but deterministic se—
is a conﬁned, constant volum e system and the h eat er and c o 01 er quence. ThlS concluswn was supported by observations from those
sections of the device were tightly controlled. There was no way running the exgerlilment [since in forget to obtain Flg' 3 ' 1% was neci
to sustain an indeﬁnite increase in either bubble size or internal e‘ssary t: watc t c(le' evohution 0 [t e temperature ll”: 1 es in rea
pressure. Following the collapse of the original bubble. the remnant tlmhe/Ianh try to pref let wt’ en a Eucteagon event was 1 l: y t: oecug
of that bubble migrates towards the larger bubble due to Marang- . uc more in orma10na ou t e process can e 0 tame
oni forces as well as the establishment of a ﬂow from the right hand usmg the details Of an 1nd1v1dual pressure excursmn presented 1n
side of the larger bubble toward the heater wall (Fig. 3c). The two Flg’ 6.. The nucleation event c01nc1des Wlth the p ressure spike
bubbles eventually merge (Fig. 3d) and set up a ﬂow pattern nor- occurring at 7:03:01 m thlS ﬁgure. The event sends a shock wave
mally associated with a working heat pipe. However, the bubble down through the CVB that raises the pressure and forces the col-
in this case is not long enough to remain attached to the heater lapse of the orlginal bubble by condensation of the vapor Wlthln.
wall. The Marangoni ﬂow needed to keep the bubble attached to The response 0f the pressure transducer 15 not fast enough to re-
the heater is too weak due to the size of the bubble and the large cord the actual transient. Ifit were, the experiment could have shut
amount of heated ﬂuid that had been ejected from the heater end down since, based on the wall temperature, the peak pressure may
and pushed down by the growing bubble toward the center of have been on the order of 620 kPa. Dissipation of the shock wave
the CVB. In a d diti 0 n, d u rin g this ph as e the curvature at the h eate d and collapse of the original bubble leads to the collapse of the pres-
end of the bubble is larger than that at the opposite end.Thus, even sure. However: as the. wall temperature begins to use again, the
though the liquid at the heater end is hotter and Marangoni ﬂow pressure also uses until it reaches a secondary max1mum. Correlat-
toward the cooler end should occur. the liquid pressure near the mg images With the Prefsufe r eatilngs 1n dicates that the pomt Of
heater is smaller and excess liquid ﬂows towards the heater end secondary maximum comeldes Wlth the merging Of the two bub-
and d eta ch e S the b ubbl e from the wall (Fig. 3e and D. At this stage bles. At that pomt, the system becomes dominated by heat transfer
we must h av e' to the surroundings and the pressure undergoes a slow, dual time
' scale, exponential decay to its original short duration steady—state
AP AK K Ag“ AT value as indicated by the dashed line curve ﬁt.
If—‘~0:>—‘ —— — (6) - -
' L ' L "" a E L Two temperature traces are also shown in Flg. 6. The trace
whose decrease coincides with the nucleation event is the heater
The bubble slowly migrates back toward its original pseudo-steady- wall temperature. That temperature decreases as hot ﬂuid is
state position (Fig. 3g). This process occurred repeatedly over the ejected from the heater wall region and as the newly growing bub-
course of 3 days of testing representing a stable mode of operation ble cools the surface due to evaporation. The second temperature
for the heat pipe. However, due to the low heat flux and fluid ﬂow trace. that follows the secondary pressure maximum behavior. rep-
rates, the pressure gradient in the large corner menisci can still be resents the temperature at a thermocouple location corresponding
assumed small. to the “operating"" temperature of the CVB during the period prior
5 ‘ , 105
3'3““)
”'V- *‘ IV ,~'—’~_.r—.
3.04 Nucleation "" , —- -' '- "" h _. - ~ ’ ~ ’ .-
Shock \ , , ’ "" g :1:
I 3‘ g
A .I — Pressure 5:} 100 g
g 2.78 I - - Heater T g 2'
E - I, 'g Operating T r? g
g 2.52 I 1 e ' \ ‘ ‘1 Q g
l\/’ m»- “WWW” -ee...95 ’0‘.
""I‘lM'Bbble ‘2 8
am U ...:
2.00 ‘ 90
7:02 PM 7:04 PM 7:06 PM 7:03 PM
Time (hr:min)
Fig. 6. Details of one pressure spike from Fig. 4 showing the nucleation event and bubble coalescence. Two temperature traces. one from the heater wall. and a second from
the location where condensation was occurring during steady-state behavior are shown.
Please cite this article in press as: ].L. Plawsky, P.C. Wayner Jr., Explosive nucleation in microgravity: The Constrained Vapor Bubble experiment. Int]. Heat
Mass Transfer (2012), http://dx.doi.orgl] 0.1016]j.ijheatmasstransfer.2012.06.047

"
"7","8 1.1.. Plawsky. RC. Waynerjr./lntemationalJournal of Heat and Mass Transfer xxx (2012) xxx-xxx
0-15 ' ' ' ' ' 113130me
_\ Detachment
: — Pressure
52"" 0.14 [a ..~~""""'""""""\. I. a 3.40
_ , '0
E: 0.13 \<>\\ 3.00 <3
0: V. No a
.\- [5 35—9 :1
CC . «4 ~~~w-I‘, .v-C‘I; v
t, G
I 0.11 2.20
0.10 1.80
7:02:30 PM 7:03:00 PM 7:03:30 PM 7:04:00 PM 7:04:30 PM 7:05:00 PM
Time (hr:min:sec)
Fig. 8. Heat ﬂow from the body of the CVB corresponding to the transient event shown in Fig. 6. Heat ﬂow calculations assumed all the heat lost from the surface of the CVB
was due to thermal radiation.
0.15 - - 1.15
:;,- Radiation from Walls
—I- Conduction through Base
A 0.14 30 0 ° ,. g
E . "" -. 1.10 2’.
.3 “\~‘\ m
1;; 0.13 \x ._ _.
._ .3 3
‘8 N '0- 8
‘ 11""
01‘ 1.05 O
1- <
3 0.12 w
_ v: 0:!
LL v. ‘ -t.._.- O)
4.; (n
8 1.00 1
I 0.11 E
v
0.10 . . 0.95
7:02:30 PM 7:03:00 PM 7:03:30 PM 7:04:00 PM 7:04:30 PM 7:05:00 PM
Time (hrzminzsec)
Fig. 9. Heat ﬂow from the walls of the CVB via radiation compared with the heat ﬂowing into the CVB by conduction through the base of the cuvette. The base heat ﬂow tracks
the pressure pulse while heat flow to the environment tracks the motion of the bubble fragments.
period of the experiment, the nucleation process represented an
insigniﬁcant contribution to the total amount of heat transferred,
especially since the average time between nucleation events was
on the order of 10 minutes. What is most interesting about the
traces in Fig. 9 is the timing difference. The heat ﬂow through
the base tracks the timing of the nucleation event. The heat flow
PW, from the walls tracks the timing associated with bubble fragment
P11 motion within the CVB. The peak heat transfer from the walls of
V . . . . . .
P the CVB c01nc1des Wlth a mmlmum 1n heat ﬂow through the base
lb of the device. This behavior is to be expected since bubble motion
transfers hot ﬂuid from the hot end of the CVB toward the cooler
. ’ __ > = end and it takes several seconds for the heat to move from the
. , 5 ' _ _ '3 . .0 -- . : . hot ﬂuid into the walls of the CVB and out to the environment.
Fig. 10. An evaporating extended meniscus on a ﬂat surface with a vapor bubble.
3.5. I(elvin—Clapeyron equation for incipient nucleate boiling in a
meniscus
via radiation from the cuvette walls, the remainder is either con-
ducted to the cool end down the glass walls or is transported via Recently, Bon and Klausner [17.27] observed the “boiling hys-
evaporation/condensation mechanism within the device. Heat con- teresis effect"" (large superheat close to incipient boiling) at low
duction through the walls of the CVB represents a signiﬁcant ﬂuxes during an experimental study of the boiling of completely
amount of the thermal transport within the device. Over the entire wetting hexane on smooth, single crystal, silicon surfaces. Since
Please cite this article in press as: J.L. Plawsky, P.C. Wayner Jr.. Explosive nucleation in microgravity: The Constrained Vapor Bubble experiment,1nt.]. Heat
Mass Transfer (2012), http:l/dx.doi.0rg/10.1 01 6/j.ijheatmasstransfer.201 2.06.047

"
"8","j.L. Plawsky. P.C. Waynerjr./lntemational journal of Heat and Mass Transfer xxx (2012) xxx-xxx 9
Macroscopic This equation will be used to discuss two experimental studies: (I)
droplet for AT2 the above results for bubble nucleation in the CVB; and (II) bubble
Z nucleation in an evaporating droplet of FC-72 on a heated surface.
, .— ‘ Macroscopic In Case (I). the observed pressure gradient for axial liquid ﬂow is rel—
Vapor I r ’ ‘ \ drop“?t for AT] atively small due to the relatively large corner meniscus observed in
the cuvette. At bubble nucleation, there is a thick ﬁlm of liquid at the
I ' ""m heater end (see Fig. 3b) and probably a relatively thick ﬁlm in the ex~
nu tended meniscus on the ﬂat axial surfaces. In Case (II). the pressure
gradient for liquid ﬂow is very large in the meniscus portion of the
evaporating droplet presented below in Fig. 11 from Raj et al. [31].
The advantage of analyzing the results of these two studies is that.
in addition to the wall superheat. the pressure gradient for ﬂow in
. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ’ ~ ~ ~ - - - - - - - ' Fixed position the liquid and the apparent contact angle were also determined.
: (connection to _
: Steady ﬁlm I : macro region) In (%> = g4?!— (T1,, — 7-”) + (Pli’R—T—[ﬂ (9)
: proﬁle for AT‘ I ’ : v v w '0’ w
: x : Eq. (9) gives the change in vapor pressure at the liquid-vapor inter—
: Steady ﬁlm , I I face relative to a reference state at (Pv, TV). For the bubble, the li—
: proﬁle for ATz , ’ : quid-solid interfacial effects, Pd. will be neglected herein because
: ’ ’ : the macroscopic apparent contact angle is used in Case I] and the
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ , , ’ . extended ﬁlm is thick in Case 1. Depending on the location of the
[:1 numerical results, the disjoining pressure may, if needed, be in-
cluded for the liquid—vapor interface of the meniscus. The modiﬁca-
Fig. 11. illustration of the steady ﬁlm proﬁles for two different superheats [31]. tions of Eq. (9) lead [0;
.. . 1n(?ﬂ)=M—(T, —T )——""—""— (10)
Silicon surfaces are known to form extremely thin oxides on their Pu RTVTW "" ” p,RT,,,
rface ' ce w '—
( m
1 nm). The picture of the CVB bubble just before nucleation in sew?“ by the low magniﬁcation surveillancecamera appearedtobe
Fig. 8 shows the presence ofa thick ﬁlm of ﬂuid betw e e n the bub- relatively small and Will be neglected for this analySIS. Assoc1ating
ble and the silica surface. At nucleation, our heat ﬂuxes were low. P"" Wlth. the measured reference pressure in the CVB prior to the
Therefore, we ﬁnd that our results of a large superheat at nucle- nucleation event, Pref’ andTh, With the measured wall temperature
ation are consistent with the high superheats usually observed in at the heater, TW' Eq. (I 1) 15 obtained.
the boiling hysteresis regime. Large superheats would be expected P _ P hngw T T
in homogeneous nucleation close to the liquid-solid interface or on ”b _ ’efeXp RTWTV( W _ ""4 (11)
an extremely smooth, completely wetted, silica surface. , _
Since the RMS roughness for the CVB cuvette is on the order of At the surface 0f the nucleating bubble, PV"" = P” + ?a/rb. Expanding
1 nm. there are no large-scale cavities where nucleation can occur. the exponential and assummﬁ P’?“ Pref Eq. (12) 15 obtained. Thls
Each nucleation event is an example of explosive nucleation, which agrees w1th Eq. (A9) f0? equilibrium presented by L1” et al. [281'
coincides with the observations of Li and Peterson for smooth sur- We e0 not expand on this equation for the temperature drop ac'ross
faces [14]. Given the measured superheats, it is instructive to see the moment bubble [28] because our heat ﬂuxes are substantially
how large a nucleus is required fora nucleating bubble to grow. Gi— lower and we assume a uniform temperature at inCipience 1n the
ven the smooth surface. we can gain an estimate assuming a homo- extremely small bubble.
geneous nucleation process. 20'TW
An evaporating extended meniscus on a ﬂat surface with a va- r b = m (12)
por bubble is presented in Fig. 10. At incipience, the Young—Laplace
equation for the equilibrium mechanical pressure jump at the sur- Using Eq. (12) and the data in Table 1, the bubble nucleus radius in
face of a bubble of radius rb is given by Eq. (7) e.g. Liu et al. [28]. the CVB at Tw: 375 K and AT: 42 K' rb' is found to be 140 nm.
Case II: We also ﬁnd instructive to analyze the unique experi—
Pub __ Pu; : 2_0 (7) mental and analytical results given by Raj et al. [31] in which the
rb onset of nucleate boiling was observed in an evaporating droplet
The augmented Young—Laplace equation for the pressure jump at Of F972. in this case, the pressure gradients ale large in the ?vap'
the liquid-vapor interface of the extended meniscus is given by Eq. oratmg dmp‘f"". for ﬂow towards the contact line region m Fle'.“
(8) (e.g. [29,30]). if the ﬁlm is very thin, the disjoining pressure, from [311' ”T‘t.1a.”¥' ““Cleamn ‘5 “sum“ ‘0 occur.‘“.the ”39‘?“
Pa. accounts for the interfacial liquid-solid effect. where the disioimng pressure can be neglected. It 15 included in
the thinner regions though.
P _ P 2 P O'K P N i (8) Using Eq. (10) for a bubble at the solid surface in a droplet with
”‘” “"" d + "" _ 571-53 an apparent contact angle and curvature that varies with position
_ _ . _ gives Eq. (13).
Since bubble nucleat10n IS a function of both temperature and pres-
sure in the ﬂuid, we propose that the Kelvin—Clapeyron (K—C) model Tb = 20 (13)
[29,30] given by Eq. (9) expands the classical bubble nucleation PsazEXP[—p—%¥;(0K) +%(Tw _ Twa] -pr
equation that uses only the Clapeyron portion of the thermodynamic
changes. The K-C model, Eq. (9), was developed to analyze an evap— The reference conditions (Tsar, Pm) are taken to be the conditions at
crating extended meniscus and gives the change in equilibrium the liquid-vapor interface where one of the radii of curvatures
interfacial vapor pressure with liquid pressure and temperature. changes sign. The term, —E%g;(axl, gives the vapor pressure
Please cite this article in press as: ].L. Plawsky, P.C. Wayner Jr., Explosive nucleation inmicrogravity: The Constrained Vapor Bubble experiment, Int. J. Heat

"
"9","1.1.. Plawsky. RC. Wayner jr./lnternational journal of Heat and Mass Transfer xxx (2012) xxx—xxx 11
nucleation occurs in a thicker part of the dmplet. If it occurred at us to deﬁne the distance. L. without having to account for the dis-
this location. the ﬁlm would be unstable and likely rupture. tance from the bubble to the heater wall being a function of the

The reasons why cavitation in an ultrathin ﬁlm with relatively bubble shape.
low superheats is unlikely near the contact line were discussed At the pseudo—steady-state representative of the period that ex-
by Maroo and Chung [32—34] using the results of molecular ists between nucleation events, the temperature proﬁle in the li—
dynamics simulations and theoretical arguments based on the quid will be linear and due only to conduction.
work required to fracture a liquid [35]. While considerable pro~ T = C x + C (A 1)
gress has been made. additional research is needed to resolve the 1 0 '
question of where exactly a bubble can nucleate within an evapo— The boundary conditions at the two ends are best written in terms
rating meniscus. of ﬂuxes. At the heater end we know the input flux from experimen-
tal data. At the bubble end, we can use the I(elvin—Clapeyron model
4. Conclusions to determine the evaporative heat ﬂux. This will allowus, for a gi-
ven input heat ﬂux, to assess the effect of bubble location.
Surveillance images of microgravity boiling dynamics occurring dT Qm
in a small, closed cuvette (CVB) were correlated with transient li— X = O - M65 = Qin ' kC1 2 Tc (AZ)
quid pressures and transient temperature proﬁles. The nucleation
episodes were found to be aperiodic but not random events. The dT Zbo'
critical size of the equilibrium homogeneous bubble radius was X = L — “ca; = Qevap = Achfg [U(T — Tu) — R—]
determined using the data and standard thermodynamic descrip— 2b a 0 (A3)
tions of boiling to be on the order of 140 nm for a superheat of — kCl = hfg[a(C1L — Co - Ty) — R—]
roughly 42 K. The effect of boiling on the transient heat transfer °
from the system, which resembled a ﬁn heat exchanger, to the sur- The constants of integration are:
roundings was determined. During each nucleation event. heat
transfer to the surroundings increased by about 10%. Using a Kel- C1 = _ 931 C0 ___ 9311.1: +_9ﬂ_ + 232 + T0 (A4)
vin-Clapeyron model for incipient boiling. the CVB results were M6 M6 Achfga 0R0 ’
compared with literature data for boiling in an evaporating droplet The temperature proﬁle within the liquid layer is:
on the surface. A simple model was developed to describe the ef— Q Q 2bo
fect of main bubble location on the nucleation probability in the _ J _ in _
CVB. T — Me (I. x) +A—chfga + aRo + T” (A5)
and so the wall temperature (x = 0) is:
Acknowledgements Q L Q 2ba
m m .
The authors wish to acknowledge Ronald ]. Sicker and David F. TW _ M: + Achfga T 0R0 + T” (A6)
Chao of NASA Glenn Research Center, Tibor Lorik. Louis Chestney. . . .
. . The rate of bubble embryo formation can be approxmlated usmg
john Eustace. Raymond Margie and John Zoldak of Zm Technolo— l 'cal nucleation theor [36l'
gies, and Arya Chatterjee from Intel Corp. for their assistance with C 3551 y '
designing, building, and operating the experiment. We also would Nap 3Nav0' 1’2 167:03
like to acknowledge the Lead Increment Scientist for increment J = (m) (NT) exp —W] (A7)
25-26, for giving us the extra crew and operations time on the W W B wW sat( w) l]
International Space Station. This material is based on the work sup- where:
ported by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration un- ,
der Grant No. NNXOQALQSG. Any opinions. ﬁndings, and ,1 = exp [W]
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this publication leT-m
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the view Psat = 133,32{10l5'3522“i‘i§43]} (A8)
of NASA.
Now we can use the experimental data for pentane and the CVB
, , , , , operation to see how bubble location affects the nucleation proba-
Appendix A’ Nucleation probability in the CVB bility. The factors “a"" and “b” in the I(elvin-Clapeyron model under
Bubble nucleation of the kind shown in Fig. 3 was limited to the the conditions listed m Table 1 are.
20 mm module. As in the tank pressure control experiment, the
theory explaining this behavior is that explosive nucleation of a '13 2‘/%lW] = 202212
the kind observed here only occurs if the main bubble is located ” ” (A9)
far enough away from the heated wall that nucleation becomes MW lesat(TV)Mw
probable [16]. If it is too close to the heated wall. evaporation lim- b x 2 m [T] = 8-6463 _ 3
its the wall temperature and hence decreases the probability that a
nucleation event would occur. The magnitudes of “a"" and “b"" indicate that for the CVB situation.
To assess this idea in the simplest possible way for the CVB, we the wall temperature is virtually independent of the effect of the
can drastically simplify its operation to that shown in Fig. A]. Here interfacial temperature and pressure jumps on the evaporation rate.
we consider the walls of the CVB to be insulated and only look at We can use the experimental data in Table 1 to feed into Eq. (AS)
the region that exists between the heater end of the bubble and and obtain a model value for Q“. For a wall temperature of
the glass wall attached to the heater. To simplify the system even ~102 'C, a vapor temperature of ~59°C. and a bubble position,
further. we will make two additional assumptions. One is that 4 mm away from the wall, we ﬁnd QM: 0.326 W. Using Eq. (12)
there is no convection in the liquid layer between the bubble and for the critical bubble radius. Fig. A2 shows how the critical bubble
heater wall. The second is that we can replace the curved bubble nucleus size varies as a function of L for a constant Q”. The bubble
end by an equivalent ﬂat interface. The latter assumption allows diameter becomes equal to the ﬁlm thickness at L ~ 0.027 mm and
Please cite this article in press as: 1.1.. Plawsky, P.C. Wayner Jr., Explosive nucleation in microgravity: The Constrained Vapor Bubble experiment, Int]. Heat

"
"10","12 1.1.. Plawsky. RC. Waynerjrjlntemational journal of Heat and Mass Transfer xxx (2012) xxx-xxx
so for a bubble closer than this to the wall, we would expect no [7] A.Bar-CohenJRﬁheehamE-RihimleWO-Pgase ghetmaltlransmrtin microgap
- channels—theory. experimenta resu ts, an pre ictive re ations, Microgravity
“Udeatlon to occur. . . . Sci. Technol. (2011), http://dx,doi.org/10.1007/512217-011—9284-3.
EQ- (A7) for the ""Udeatlon rate, 15 dommatEd by the eXponen' [8] 5.6. Kandlikar. Fundamental issues related to flow boiling in minichannels and
tial term and Fig. A3 shows how —ln(nuc1eation rate) varies as a microchannels. Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. 26 (2002) 339-407.
function of bubble distance from the wall‘ There iS more than a [9] A.E. Bergles,V.J.H.Lienhard.G.E. Kendall. P.Grifﬁth.Boiling and evaporation in
. . . . small diameter channels. Heat Transfer Eng. 24 (2003) 18—40.
5-order 0f magmwde dlfference 1“ Im(DUCleatlon rate) between [10] J. Barber. K. Seﬁane. D. Brutin. L. Tadrist. Hydrodyanmics and heat transfer
where the bubble is originally located in the cell, and the cross- during ﬂow boiling instabilities ina single microchannel. Appl. Therm. Eng. 29
over thickness noted in Fig. A.2. So, in both calculations it is appar- (2009) 1299-13” , ‘ _ , . , . _
. . . [11] 5.6. Kandhkar, Nucleatlon charactenstlcs and stab1hty con51deratlons dunng
ent that the mam bUbble Deals to be a con51derab1e dIStancc away flow boiling in microchannels. Expt. Therm. Fluid Sci. 30 (2005) 441—447.
from the heated wall to allow for a nucleation event like the one [12]]. Barber. D. Brutin. K. Seﬁane. J.L. Gatdarein. L. Tadrist, Unsteady-state
observed in this paper and the resuhs presented herein may have ﬂuctuations analysis durin'g bubble growth in a rectangular microchannel. Int.
been a positive accident of launch 1' Heat Mass Tm'TSfer 54 (20“) 4784'4795' . .
' [13] S.P. Das. v.5. leolayev. F. Lefevre. B. Pottler. S. Khandekar. J. BODJOUI’.
Thermally induced two-phase oscillating ﬂow inside a capillary tube, Int. J.
- ' Heat Mass Transfer 53 (2010) 3905—3913.
Appendlx 8' CVB ﬁllmg procedures [14] J. Li. G.P. Peterson. Microscale heterogeneous boiling on smooth surfaces -
from bubble nucleation to bubble dynamics, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 48
The CVB system was designed to work with a pure ﬂuid, pen- (2005) 4316-4332.
tame, and it was important that no other substance was present [15] J. Hegseth. A. Optisan. Y.Gar1abos, C. Leeoutre-Chabot, V.S. Nikolayev. D.
. . . . Beysens. Near—crltlcal ﬂmd bOIIng overheatmg and wettmg ﬁlms. Eur. Phys.].
w1th1n the cuvette. Pentane was purchased from Slgma Wlth a pur- E. 25 (2008) 345353.
ity greater than 99.98%. That ﬂuid was the distilled through an [16] MM. Hasan.C.S. Lin. R.H.Knoll.M.D.Benz,Tank Pressure Control Experiment:
evacuated glass column to purify it further and to assist in degas- I332?“ Phenomena “1 Micrograww- NASA TEChnica' Paper 3554. (Mamh
smg the ﬂuld. The dlstlllate was COHeCtEd m a llqmd mtmgen com [17] B. 300. C.-K. Guan. ].F. Klausner. Heterogeneous nucleation on ultra smooth
trap and frozen to insure purity and to further remove any non- surfaces, Expt. Therm. Fluid Sci. 35 (2011) 746-752.
condensable gases. Once a sufﬁcient amount of pentane was col- [18] G. “ﬁtironi. A- hgosyalr. Ii Pigrhibrlwa: Z. SFelgal. Efﬁgy; ggilliggggf water in
- para e micro-c anne 5. nt. . u tip ase ow - .
leaed’ the SyStem was sealed and tranSported to the CVB ﬁllmg [19] MN. Hasan. M. Monde.Y. Mitsutake. Model for boiling explosion during rapid
apparatus- liquid heating. Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 54 (2011) 2844—2853.
The sample vial of puriﬁed and degassed pentane was attached [20] D. Beysens. D. Chatain, v.5. Nikolayev. J. Ouazzani. Y. Garrabos. Possibility of
to the CVB system. The CVB system was evacuated to a pressure of Eng}?i§§af§§1t$a§§ﬁ§6p°""'“ we‘gh‘lessness ""Sing SUPercritical HUids' Phys'
. . . . €V- -
1355 than 10—5 '30"" 115mg 3“ 011 free dlffu310n PumP- Once the Pres' [21] RA. Kew. K. Cornwell. Correlations for the prediction of boiling heat transfer in
sure was stabilized. the CVB was isolated from the pump and the small-diameter channels. Appl. Therm; Eng- 17 (.1997) 705-715.
valve connecting the sample vial was opened to ﬂash the pentane [22] S.L1n.P.A.Kew.K.Cornwell.Flow Bcllmg of Refngerant R1413 1n SmallTubes.
. . Trans. IChemE. Part A. vol. 79. (2001 ) 417—424.
mm the WB‘ The CVB W35 COOled and completely ﬁlled With pen- [23] J. Barber. D. Brutin, K. Seﬁane. L.Tadrist. Bubble conﬁnement in ﬂow boiling of
tane via this procedure. Once the system was completely ﬁlled FC-72 in a rectangular microchannel of high aspect ratio. Exp. Therm. Fluid.
' ' ‘ _ ‘ _ Sci. 34 (2010) 1375—1388.
With hqmd pentane, the valve was CIOSEd and the sample Vlal re [24] FJ’. Betherton. The motion of long bubbles in tubes, ]. Fluid Mech. 10 (1961)
moved. To generate the vapor bubble, the heater was turned on 1554“
and the valve at the ﬁlling end Of the CVB was opened. A vapor [25] A. Mazouchi, GM. Homsy. Thermocapillary migration of long bubbles in
bubble nucleated at the hot end of the CVB and pushed liquid from Cylindfical caP‘HW ‘Ubes- PW?- Flu‘ds ‘2 (2000) 542549.
. . . . [26] V5. Ajaev. GM. Homsy. Modelmg shapes and dynam1cs of conﬁned bubbles.
the entlre system. Heat was applled untll the bubble reached Its Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 38 (2005) 277407.
desired length. At this point, the ﬁlling valve was closed agam [27] B. Bon, j. Klausner. Pool boiling heat transfer of highly wetting ﬂuids on
and the heater turned off. smooth metallic surfaces, in: Proceedings of the ASME/JSME 2011 Eighth
Thermal Engineering Joint Conference. March 13-17 Honolulu. Hawaii. Paper
AJTEC2011-44045. (2011).
REfel'ences [28] D. Liu. P.-S. Lee. S.V. Garimella. Prediction of the onset of nucleate boiling in
microchannel ﬂow. Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 48 (2005) 5134—5149.

[1] Arya Chatterjee,]oe1 L. Plawsky, Peter C. Wayner Jr, David F. Chao. Ronald ]. [29] RC. Wayner]r.. Y.K. Kao. L.V. LaCroix. The interline heat transfer coefﬁcient of
Sicker. Tibor Lorik. Louis Chestney. john Eustace, john Zoldak. Constrained an evaporating wetting ﬁlm. Int]. Heat Mass Transfer19(1976)487-492-
Vapor Bubble Experiment for International Space Station: Earth's Gravity [30] ML Potash]r., P.C.Wayner_[r..Evaporation from atwo-dimensional extended
Results. J. Thermophys. Heat Transfer. 24. (2010) 400-408. meniscus, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 15 (1972) 1851-1863.

[2] Arya Chatterjee. Peter.C. Wayner [11, Joel L. Plawsky. David F. Chao, Ronald J. [31] R- Raj, C- Kunkelmann. P.5tephan.]. P13WSRY-J- Kim, Contact line behavior fora
Sicker, Tibor Lorik, Louis Chestney, john Eustace, Raymond Margie. John highly wetting ﬂuid under superheat conditions. Int]. HeatMass Transfer 55
Zoldak. The constrained vapor bubble ﬁn heat pipe in microgravity. Ind. Eng. (2012) 2554-2575-

Chem. Res. 50 (2011) 8917-8926. [32] SC. Maroo.J.N. Chung. Heat transfer characteristics and pressure variation in a

[3] R. Raj. ]. Kim. J. McQuillan, Gravity scaling parameter for pool boiling heat nanoscale evaporating meniscus.1nt.].HeatMassTransfer 53 (2010) 3335-
[ransfen J, Heat Transfer 132 (2010) 091501, [33] SC. Maroo. ].N. Chung. Nanoscale liquid—vapor phase change physics in non-

[4] V.K. Dhir, Boiling heat transfer. Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 30 (1998) 365-401. evaporating region at the three-phase contact line.) Appl. Phys. 106 (2009)

[5] JR. Thome. Boiling in microchannels: a review of experiment and theory. lnt.J. 054911-

Heat Mass Transfer 45 (2004)128—139. [34] SC. Marco. J.N. Chung. Negative pressure characteristics of an evaporating

[6] M. K. Jensen. Y. Peles. S.G. Kandlikar , Multiphase flow. evaporation. and meniscus at nanoscale, Nanoscale RES- LEW 50-011)”-
condensation at the microscale, in: N. Kockmann (Ed.). Micro Process [35] LC Fisher, The fracture ofliquids.j. APPL Phys. 19 (1948) 1052.
Engineering: Fundamentals. Devices, Fabrication. and Applications. Wiley— I361V-P» Carey, Liquid-Vapor Phase-Change Phenomena second Cdu Taylor &
VCH Verlag GmbH, Weinheim. Germany , 2008, (Chapter 4). Francis, New York. (2008)- P. 175-

Please cite this article in press as: ].L. Plawsky, PL Wayner Jr.. Explosive nucleation in microgravity: The Constrained Vapor Bubble experiment, Int]. Heat

Mass T ransfer (2012). http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2012.06.047

"
