"","x"
"1","2005-01-2930
Detection of Smoke from MicrograVIty Fires
David Urban, DeVon Griffin, Gary Ruff
NASA Glenn Research Center
Thomas Cleary, Jiann Yang, George Mulholland
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Zeng-guang Yuan
National Center for Microgravity Research
Copyright © 2005 SAE International
ABSTRACT SMOKE BACKGROUND — Smoke is a general term that
encompasses aerosol materials produced by a number
The history and current status of spacecraft smoke 0t processes. In particular it can include unburned,
detection is discussed including a review of the state of recondensed, original polymer or pyrolysis products that
understanding of the effect of gravity on the resultant can be either liquid or SOlid, hydrocarbon SOOt,
smoke particle size. The results from a spacecraft condensed water vapor, and ash particles. ASh particles
experiment (Comparative Soot Diagnostics (CSD)) and soot particles are the dominant particulate in
which measured microgravity smoke particle sizes are established fires while early ignition and fire
presented. Five different materials were tested establishment periods tend to produce higher
producing smokes with different properties including concentrations 0t unburned pyrolysis products and
solid aerosol smokes and liquid droplets aerosol recondensed polymer fragments. Given the constrained
smokes. The particulate size distribution for the solid environment on any spacecraft the target for any
particulate smokes increased substantially in detection system is necessarily the early ignition period
microgravity and the results suggested a corresponding and not after the fire has become established,
increase for the smokes consisting ofa liquid aerosol. A consequently, the primary target for detection is the
planned follow on experiment that will resolve the issues pyrolysis products and not the SOOt and ash.
raised by CSD is presented. Early results from this
effort have provided the first measurements of the PRIOR SPACECRAFT SYSTEMS - In the earliest
ambient aerosol environment on the ISS (International missions (Mercury, Gemini and Apollo), the crew
Space Station) and suggest that the ISS has very low quarters were 30 cramped that it was considered
ambient particle levels. reasonable that the astronauts would rapidly detect any
fire. The Skylab module, however, included
INTRODUCTION approximately 30 UV-sensing fire detectors (Friedman,
1992). These devices were limited to line-of sight and
The non-buoyant microgravity environment causes were reported to have difficulties with false alarms.
substantial Changes in flame structure and consequently .
Changes the properties of the produced smoke. In w ' The Space Shuttle Orbiter
particular, the increased residence time in the high was developed 'h a time (1970’s) 0t teP'd progress 'h
temperature zone where the smoke is formed, increases smoke detection for terrestrial. application's (BUkOWSkI
the opportunity for growth in the size of the smoke and Mulhollahd, 1978).. At the time, Ionization detectors
particulate. This change has hampered the rational were becoming readily available but photoelectric
implementation of spacecraft smoke detectors because (scattering or obscurattoh detectors) were generally
there is very little data concerning the resultant size of unavailable due to the d'tt'CUIty 0t producmg stabie t'ght
microgravity smoke particulate and the background dust sources. There was he Idata available coneerning the
aerosol size distribution. In the absence of any smoke particle Size distribution In Iow-graVIty and the
reference data, the ISS and STS (Space Transportation database of norrhaI-graVIty smoke Characteristics was a
System or Space Shuttle) Orbiter smoke detectors each fraction Of what '3 available. today. There was also no
were designed using different detection technologies data on spacecraft d'ust particle Size distributions but the
which have very differentparticle size sensitivities. absence 0t graVItatlonaI settling suggested that there
would be more large particles than are seen on earth.
Consequently it is understandable that the Orbiter

"
"2","design (figure 1) employed a variant of the accepted particles larger than 1 pm with sensitivity extending
ground based approach (ionization detectors). The down to 0.6 pm. The current requirements for the ISS
Orbiter has 9 particIe-ionization smoke detectors in call for two detectors in the open area of the module,
avionics cooling air return lines in the mid-deck and flight and detectors in racks that have cooling air—flow
deck and SpaceLab had six additional particIe-ionization (McKinnie, 1997)_
smoke detectors in the avionics lines. (Martin and DaLee
1993) While the design rationale is not completely The design developed for the ISS by Allied Signalt'VI
known, CelescoT'V' (later Brunswick DefenseT'V') based (figure 2) consists of a 2-pass laser diode to sense
their design on data that suggested incipient fires COUtd fonNard scattered light (30 degrees). There is also a zero
be discriminated by looking for particulate in the 0-4 to degree obscuration system that is used as a measure of
0-7 Hm range (L-G- Barr in National Research Come” the beam strength. The system is designed to alarm
1975)- Use Of a pump provided the opportunity to based on the magnitude of the scattered light signal
employ a particle separator allowing rejection 0f referenced to the beam intensity. Some level of dust
particulate larger than 1pm consistent With their discrimination is provided based on frequency analysis
understanding that incipient smoke particles were of the scattered light signal. The system is less sensitive
smaller than 1 pm. Furthermore, since the response to particles smaller than the wavelength of the laser
from ionization chambers is affected by the ambient air (near IR) than it is to larger particles. The minimum
velocity, implementing an ionization detector in a flow reported sensitivity is 0_3 Hm (Steisslinger et al 1993)_ It
duct was probably facilitated by the use Of an air pump draws relatively little power (1.5 W) and it has a long
to control the air flow through the smoke detector. This operational life_ The current alarm value of 2 volts is
air pump increased the power requirements and reduced calibrated to 3.3% obscuration / meter (1% obscuration/
the operational life for the detectors. foot) of visible light for punk type smoke in a UL smoke
N1 _ box. In this standard smoke detector qualification
'1 ' ._ _;;?_.""¥:‘ method, the detector is placed in a chamber filled with
5‘"" smoke which is adjusted to achieve a target level of
l, ' . attenuation of visible light passing between a lamp and a
‘ ' - ,  photocell in the box (UndenNriters Laboratory, UL-268,
- ' . 2003)
,/ MA /}
, _-'.*\ 7 . ,1 ,v' \ ”M B
t \ ?fﬁ ‘ , i a -. Q/X/
» YE ' _ 1,”; A 'l.
i. ’I 6’ <
I 1'34. C '4 1' I’II’II :
""s i 6”” ‘ C
s '- '. ’I, . \ ‘-
""'"" 93 u; 7 '5 .
""4 ,.,/’ 7
Figure 1: Brunswick DefenseTIVI smoke detector \q E, ’
used in the NASA orbiter fleet. The inlet is on the ‘ V .
right and the gas is expelled out the small plate on eii- 1‘ ;
thetop. .
ISS Detectors - At the time the International Space
Station (ISS) was being developed, stable laser-diode
light sources were readily available. Consequently, Figure 21 Allied Signal/Honeywell light-scattering
terrestrial smoke detectors using light scattering were smoke detector used in the '33- The near IR laser
becoming more readily available. This provided the beam emerges from the enclosure into the top
opportunity to produce a detector that required assembly (A) and is reflected by tWO mirrors (one
substantially less power, (1.5 Watts versus 9 Watts for visible at top right (3)) and is then reflected back to
the orbiter detector) (Steisslinger et a|., 1993) and, with the sensors in the enclosure (C)- One sensor
no moving parts’ was quieter with a much |Onger thGCtS the forward scattered Ilght and is
operational |ife_ The choice was supported by data referenced by another sensor that looks directly at
indicating that early smoldering fires produce larger the incident beam.
particulate than established flaming fires (Bukowski and
Mulholland, 1978)‘ The designated detectors (figure 2) It is interesting to note that the ISS and the Orbiter
for the '88 are laser-diode,-fonNarc-i-Iseattering, smoke or detectors have particle sensitivities that are nearly
particulate detectors. Their senSItIVIty IS greatest for

"
"3","mutually exclusive. In both cases the designs were SPACECRAFT ATMOSPHERE DUST BACKGROUND
based upon the best available data however, due to the — Any effort to detect fires must be able to discriminate
complete absence of low-g data concerning the nature against the ambient background and nuisance signals.
of particulate and radiant emission from incipient and In the case of smoke detection the background dust
fully developed low-g fires, different conclusions were aerosol conditions must be considered. The only
drawn concerning the optimal design for spacecraft fire spacecraft background aerosol particulate
detection. measurements to date were made on the Orbiter on
STS 32 in 1990 (Liu et al. 1991). These measurements
As described by Friedman (1994) there have been six included the results from two cascade impactors and a
overheat and failed component failures in the NASA light scattering device. The two impactors reported a
Orbiter fleet (Space Transportation System or STS). bimodal particle size distribution with ~ 40% of the
None of these events spread into a real fire but as particles in each of the 2.5 to10 pm and >100 pm
mission durations increase, the likelihood Of failures ranges_ The other two ranges <2_5 um and 10 to 100
increases. The experience on Mir in 1997 has shown Hm were very lightly populated(Table1). Each impactor
that failure 0t oxygen generation systems can have samples approximately 15 m3 of air over approximately
significant consequences. AS a result, improved 30 hours. These results showed substantially higher
understanding 0t spacecraft fire detection is critically concentrations than typical indoor measurements. These
needed (RUtt et al., 2005)- data were supported by the light scattering instrument
which made 17 measurements in 12 locations, all of
BACKGROUND IN LOW GRAVITY SMOKE - Other these reported mass concentrations ranging from 50 to
than the results reported here, the only combustion- 70 pg/m3.The low particle levels in the < 25 Hm bin
generated particulate samples that have collected near suggest a zone Of opportunity for Spacecraft ﬁre
the flame zone for well-developed microgravity flames detection since typical normal gravity fires produce
have been SOOt sampled from the Laminar SOOt substantial particulate in this size range (Bukowski et
Processes (LSP) experiment(Urban etaI-1998)-A||0f al. 2003, Bukowski and Mulholland 1978), and the
the other data either came from drop tower tests and average sizes that were recorded by CSD (below) are in
therefore only corresponded to the early stages Of a fire this size range. However more complete particle size
or were collected far from the flame zone. The fuel statistics are needed.
sources in the drop tower tests were restricted to laminar
gas-jet diffusion flames (Ku et al. 1995) and very rapidly Sample Particle Size Range
overheated wire insulation (Paul et al. 1993) and Location <2.50m 2.5-10 10-100 >100 Total
Srivastava, McKinnon and Todd (1998). The gas-jet um um um
tests indicated, through thermophoretic sampling, that Mass Concentration’Mg/ms
soot primaries and aggregates (groups of primary Shuttle 2.3 24.1 4.8 28.1 59.3
particles) in low-gravity may be significantly larger than ihume :2) 133-04 (13-5 311-58 583-55
those in normal gravity (1-g). This raises new scientific 0%: 3:4 3:2 2:7 1:9 11'2
questions about soot processes as well as practical Laboratory 2_9 4_8 2.0 2_4 12_1
issues for particulate size sensitivity and detection/alarm _ 3
threshold levels used in on-orbit smoke detectors. The Ave Shuttle 22 Averageggss COhCSegtrat'Oh 53/3” 564
overheated wire insulation tests in the 2.2 second drop Ave'_ Indoor 3:1 3'7 19 19 10:6
tower suggest that particulate generated by overheated Environment
wire insulation may be larger in low-g than in 1-g (Paul R t_ W C t t'
et al. 1993). One of the most surprising results was the a '00 ass once“ ta '0“3
determination by Srivastava, McKinnon and Todd (1998) ShUttIe/mdoor 0'71 5'1 2'9 15'8 5'3
that the Teflon wire coloring agent had a very strong
?.ffeCt 0.” the particle s1ze distribution and morphology. Table 1: Airborne Particle Mass Concentration:
ransmiss10n Electron Microscope (TEM) grids C . .
downstream of the fire re ion in the Wire Insulation ompaT'SO“ Of 81-8—32 t0 Indoor EnVIronments
.. . 9 (from Llu et al. 1991)
Flammability experiment (Greenberg, Sacksteder and ’
Kashiwagi 1995) as well as visual observation of long
string-like aggregates, further confirm this suggestion. CSD EXPERIMENT
Subsequently, the LSP experiment sampled soot from
ethylene and propane 93$ jet dittUSiOh flames in long- The Comparative Soot Diagnostics (CSD) experiment
term low gravity (Urban et al, 1998) the SOOt primary was conceived as an opportunity to examine smoke
particles were typically twice the size 0t SOOt from similar detection from conditions resembling incipient fires in
normal gravnty flames and the aggregates were more low-gravity. Materials representative of those used in
than an order of magnitude larger. The combined Spacecraft (paper, TeflonTM’ KaptonT'V' and silicone
impact of these limited results and theoretical predictions rubber, and candle wax (representative hydrocarbon))
is that, as opposed to extrapolation from 1-g data, direct were heated or ignited in a few cases to produce three
knowledge ef low-g cornbustion particulate is needed for types Of smoke (soot, recondensed liquid pyrolysis
more COhtldeht desngn 0t smoke detectors for products and recondensed solid pyrolysis products). The
spacecraft. smoke from these sources was exposed to spacecraft

"
"4","smoke detectors and physically sampled for over the ISS standard (due to misdiagnosed Iow-signal
Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) analysis. As from a prior engineering model). The analog signals
will be described below the tests were generally from the various instruments were displayed by digital
successful and produced unique results. The CSD readouts on the Far Field Box where they were recorded
experiment flew in the Orbiter mid-deck on the US byavideo camera for later transcription.
Microgravity Laboratory-3 (USML-3) mission (STS-75).
CSD EXPERIMENTAL CONCEPT - The CSD
experimental hardware consisted of two modules named
the Near—Field Module and Far-Field Box as shown in
figure 3. The Near—Field Module (figure 4) was installed ”g“ r.___
inside the Glovebox and contained the sample and the ‘ I {3
near field diagnostics. The Far-Field Box (figure 5) was ~~ . r? - ‘ a
external to the Glovebox and contained two spacecraft _ ~ ' E ' 5 Q 5
smoke detectors. Products from the near field tests were i _ T 5 ._. . Aj'..l“”"":. =41 j
transported to the Far-Field Box and subsequently back . ' ' ' ! . . . . . t -E -5851
into the Glovebox via Teflon hoses which entered the ._ 'f~ . _ }
Glovebox through ports in the airlock door. All of the ' - “a .- _ ’ ' ‘ _ _ 5;;
combustion products were contained in either the - ‘
Glovebox or the Far Field Box; by the time the
experiment was completed, all of the products were
returned to the Glovebox_ Figure 4: Near Field Module: Deployed
thermophoretic probe on left and a sample card
holding a candle to the right.
:‘\:?:;_\Jj . ~ ‘ "" w o 0 ,0 O . O ”a
. 15"""" - 2 f"" ‘ i"" @3351. :‘ . - ( T r
. (5 w . '7 ... “ u ‘ :20 *w H-i- H, P
. W...‘ a ' . ' -.r ' "" 5‘ '- ""' '! + ‘f- ’H .'.- . i-
l 53'- . 5.. I ‘/ .. _’ l/ .- ”0|
' ’ ‘ H t #4"";- E"" t O .‘\ » g ._ . o
' /'- Ti 35 2 .. .1"" ﬁ
‘3- 5 i / ' 3'1... :1; o; ‘ 'Q ‘T I 5 o
;_ — ; . FF, , 0 00000-0 055533 0. 0
Figure 3: CSD Hardware: The Near Field Module is f) . -- ~ ' ' ' . ‘ ' _ ‘
to the back left and the Far Field Box is to the right. ‘ __ .5: '
Connecting hoses and thermophoretic sampler are '
m the front. Figure 5: Interior of Far Field Box: Visible is the
interior duct with the ISS detector on the right and
The Near—Field Module (figure 4) consisted of a small the STS detector in the center.
test chamber fitted with a sample carrier that held the
sample being tested. A small fan blew air from the
Glovebox into the right side of the chamber past the .CSD EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE ' The crew
sample and out the left side where it entered the hose to Installed the near ﬁeld hardware m the Glovebox,
the Far-Field Module. The sample was ignited or attached the Far F'eld BOX to the Glovebox, and
overheated by a resistively heated KanthalTIVI wire. The positlened the V'deo cameras. The operator then ran the
smoke particulate was sampled by a rake of self diagnostic procedures on the two smoke detecters
thermophoretic probes and smoke production was and activated the video cameras, turned on the Igniter
detected by a laser light extinction system. TOT? predefined period Of. time (15 to 60 seconds), and
Initiated the thermophoretic soot samplers to sample the
The Far Field Box (figure 5) contained a duct and a fan smoke. The actual .duration Of eaeh combustion. event
to transport the smoke from the Near Field Module to was typically 2 minutes. After ﬂ'ght’ the particulate
two spacecraft smoke detectors, one matching the STS coilected on the thermophoretic prebes were analyzed
detector and the other identical to the ISS detector using T°‘ Trahsmission Electron microscope. (TEM) to
except that its signal was amplified by a factor of 6.6 determine primary and aggregate particle dimensions.

"
"5","The remains of the samples were weighed to determine Testing with the TeflonTM and KaptonT'VI produced lower
their mass loss. The digital data was transcribed from overall smoke concentrations. In the case of the Kapton
the video record and analyzed to determine the tests, the STS detector showed an early peak followed
response of the detectors. Once the flight mass loss by a rapid return to baseline while the ISS detector
rates were determined, 1-g operation conditions to reported signal for another minute (figure 8). This result
produce the same loss were determined. may be an artifact of the flow environment or a result of
the fact that the Kapton wire used on the Orbiter uses a
CSD EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS - In all, 25 tests were combination of Kapton“VI and TeflonTM layers and so the
performed, the bulk of which were overheated material STS detector may be responding to only one of these
tests in which the heating level was established to materials. Similar results were seen with the TeflonTM
produce a target weight loss rate without causing the testing (figure 9).
sample to develop a sustaining combustion reaction.
The intent of these tests was to produce smoke typical
of an incipient fire where much of the material is being 8 — ISS detector
heated but has not yet ignited. The candle tests and one 7 —ST8 detector- 5
of the paper tests were combustion tests where the 6 —|gnit0r
samples were ignited so the combustion products could A
be observed. Q 5
g 4
As discussed in the introduction, smoke encompasses E 3
various types of aerosol materials. In this experiment, 5-3” 2
the smoke sources can be divided into three types 1
based upon the type of smoke that they emitted: the
candle and burning paper produced soot, the TeflonTM O —
and KaptonT'VI produced particles composed of solid, -1
recondensed, pyrolysis products and the silicone rubber Time (s)
and pyrolyzing paper produced liquid droplets of
pyrolysis products. TEM images of the solid particulate
are presented below and will be discussed later. For the Figure 7. CSD results from candle test 6: Traces of
candle tests, the duct air flow was used to drive the smoke detector signals as a function of time for a
candle flame past the smoke point, causing it to emit candle test 6. The initial peak on both detectors is
soot. These soot tests produced varied results between wax vapor released by the ignition process. The
the two detectors as shown below (figures 6 and 7). In STS detector (solid line) shows downward
figure 6, both detectors showed rapid detection of the deflection with increased smoke level, the ISS
soot. In the case of figure 7, the STS detector shows a detector (dashed line) deflects upward.
strong signal while the ISS detector signal is quite weak
considering this signal has a higher amplification level
than the standard detector. 8
7
8 6 I L:
7 TI; 5 l
6 g 4 N — ISS detector
E5 2 3 I —STS detector-5
6 4 .9 l
5 ca 2 l _
E 3 — ISS detector 1 l —lgn|tor
O)
""7’ 2 —STS detector — 5 o — — J ——————
—|gn|tor '1
0 _ _______ Time (s)
Time (s) Figure 8. CSD results from KaptonT'VI test 9: Traces
of smoke detector signals as a function of time for a
Figure 6. CSD results from candle test 16: Traces Kraptonlj'v' test 9a d Tlhe .STS .dhetlector (sand linke)
of smoke detector signals as a function of time fora :7 OWS ownwar e ection W't Increase smo e
. . . . evel, the ISS detector (dashed line) deflects
candle test 16. The Initial peak on both detectors IS
. . . upward.
wax vapor released by the Ignition process. The
STS detector (solid line) shows downward
deflection with increased smoke level, the ISS The liquid smoke producing samples produced very
detector(dashed |ine)def|ects upward. different results as seen in figure 10 for the silicone

"
"6","rubber. Despite producing dense smoke that was 8
Clearly visible, the STS detector showed virtually no
signal while the ISS detector saturated. 7
6 i
The approach for the pyrolyzing paper samples was to ,3 5 i
heat them below the ignition temperature so they g 4 i
produced smoke without ignition. This produced similar ‘3' l _ Iss D t t
results to the silicone rubber with virtually no signal on g 3 l 990 or
the STS detector and a strong signal on the ISS '03 2 ' —STS Detector-5
detector. Notably in one test the sample ignited and the 1 ' _Ignit0r
STS detector signal Changed from the baseline to a O
substantial peak (figure 11) presumably because the .
smoke now contained soot in addition to the condensed '1 Time (s)
pyrolysis products.
Figure 11. CSD results from paper test 15: Traces
8 of smoke detector signals as a function of time for a
7 — paper test 15. The STS detector (solid line) shows
- downward deflection with increased smoke level,
6 the ISS detector (dashed line) deflects upward.
7,; 5 The onset of signal for the STS detector correlated
% 4 —STS Detector-5 with ignition of the paper.
‘_>"" —|gnitor
g 3
.27 2 Figure 12 contains TEM images of typical particulate
m 1 I from Teflon, Kapton and Candle tests. The three images
are at the same magnification and show the significant
0 =-——~——— variation in the particulate morphology for the three
_1 _ materials. The Teflon and Kapton particulate are
Time(S) reoondensed polymer material while the candle
particulate is typical of hydrocarbon soot. Table 2
. summarizes the results for the tests for which
Figure 9' CSD results fer TeﬂonTM test 13: comparable particulate samples were collected for 1-g
Traces Of smoke detector sngnals as a function 9f and |ow-g. Significantly, despite strong smoke levels
time for a TeﬂonTM test 3' The'STS cieteotor (SOI'd visible in the video record, no particulate material was
line) shows downward deflection With Increased found on the TEM grids for overheated paper and
smoke level, the '88 detector (dashed line) deflects silicone rubber tests. The suspected cause of this is that
upward. the particulate for these materials is actually liquid
droplets which later evaporated or spread out on the
8 grids’ surface, rendering them undetectable by the TEM
7
6 l
E 5 '
E 4 '
‘_"" l — ISS detector
09,, 2 —|gnitor
1
_,I
O _ -- _
Time(s)
Figure 10. CSD results from silicone rubber test 7:
Traces of smoke detector signals as a function of
time for a silicone rubber test 7. The STS detector
(solid line) shows downward deflection with
increased smoke level, the ISS detector (dashed
line) deflects upward.

"
"7","Table 3: Summary of runs where the smoke was
detected by the ISS and STS detectors.
' ——
Material Total Detected by Detected by
‘ ISS STS
detector detector
"" 0'
‘
mu
‘ Rubber
h J mu
4
In general the light scattering detector was more
successful at detecting the smoke particulate,
particularly for the cases where the smoke was a liquid
' ' aerosol (paper and silicone rubber). The results were
F t_l” more mixed for the cases where the particulate was
5' solid particles. The improved performance by the ISS
detector for the solid particulate is readily explained by
the large particle sizes reported in table 2. Unfortunately
for the liquid particulate, no particle sizes were obtained
because the liquid droplets on the TEM grids evaporated
Figure 12_ Transmission Electron Microscope before the grids could be evaluated in the TEM. Based
Images of smoke particles from Teflon, Kapton (left upon these results, the need for an experiment that
to right, top row) and Candle tests (bottom). Images ceule measure properties of the srhoke particulate size
are at the same magnification, for scale reference: d'Str'pUt'O“ on-orblt was established and a hew
candle soot primary particles are approximately 20 experimental concept was developed as described
nm. below.
. . SAME EXPERIMENT
Table 2: Geometric mean diameters for smoke
particulate generated in reduced gravity and in normal Although the CSD experiment produced useful
graVIty. information concerning the likely size of spacecraft
smoke particulate, the data set was not particularly large
-_— as the size statistics were obtained from TEM data and
(nm) (nm) critical details were not obtained for the liquid droplet
aerosols. To rectify this concern, another experiment
(Smoke Aerosol Measurement Experiment: SAME) is
under development. The SAME experiment seeks to
avoid the problems seen by the CSD experiment by
obtaining the particulate size statistics on-orbit without
as much dependence upon sample return to Earth. This
is a Challenging endeavor because most existing aerosol
instrumentation is typically large, requires large sample
The experiment was not configured to reproduce fire :23: andAgvotivliﬁ rgguiézsigigztjntéﬂloﬁmgls 2:32;:
tabulation of successful alarms is not straight forward. rbneasurde sWharate mcérnercijtstref the snze dtlsmpllljtlon Y3”
Since the experiment was developed as a test of light ugelijjleaégregaetre :farﬂstlir: eftheesgizrgiirirsirilbit‘i’gn provn e
scattering versus ionization technology rather than a test '
of the detectors themselves, the standard that was Th . .

. . . e measurements Will be made usmg smoke generated
selected to Indicate successful detection of the smoke b h t d s acecraft materials in much the same
from the background was a signal that was 20% of the y over ea eh CPESD . h h |
device operating range. Using these criteria, the results {nanner as t e . experiment owever t. e $a.mpe
are reported in table 3- emperature, flow field, and particle aging time Will be

more rigorously controlled.

"
"8","MOMENT METHOD — The approach used by the SAME
experiment is termed the ‘moment method’ for 00 00 “2
convenience. As will be described below, the approach 1n 0g 2 [JUDD-1an)2fN(D)dD/JfN(D)dD] (5 )
consists of measuring three moments of the size 0 0
distribution (zeroth, first and third) and using the
properties 0f the I'og-normal distribution to estimate the For the Iog-normal distribution, one finds that the various
geometric mean diameter and the standard deV'at'Oh- diameter definitions are related to the geometric mean
number diameter, Dg, via the equation [Raabe, 1971,
The average particle size and an estimate of the width of Reist, 1984]:
the size distribution will be estimated from various
moments of the size distribution. The number _ 2
distribution, fN(D), is defined as DP _ Dg eXp(p In eg) (6 )
dN For the arithmetic mean diameter, D05, and the diameter
fN(D) = — (1) of average mass, D15, the corresponding values of p are
“11) 0.5 and 1.5. As an example, for a Iog-normal distribution
I I 3 I with Dg=1.0 pm and 09:20, the corresponding values of
\C/jirhere dNb '3 the gumbgr [?erng'Clﬁl per cm tW'tt} D05 and D15 are1.27hm and 2.06 pm. Using equation
. Iameter etween an ' 'e momen S. o (4), one can relate cg to the ratio of D15 and D05 via the
Interest conSIst of the number concentration, M0, the first - .
. equahon.
moment M1, and the volume or mass concentration
moment, M3. “2
C79 2 9Xp(tn(D1.5 /D0.5)) (7)
MI. = le’fN(D)dD 1': 0,1,3 (2)
By combining these three moments it is possible to
. . compute three mean diameters of the size distribution
The first moment Wh'Ct], can also be theUth Of as the and the geometric standard deviation. Validation of this
diameter concentration or Integrated diameter per unit approach is discussed in Cleary Weinert and
volume is largely proportional to the ionization detector Mulholland (2003). These statistics erovide a strong
mornent (S'Qnal)' 'For particles m the me scattering basis for design of spacecraftsmoke detectors.
regime, particles Sizes from 0.3?» to about 3?» the light
scattering signal is proportional to the third moment. INSTRUMENTS _ These measurements will be made
From these moments, two mean diameters can _be using an assembly of three separate instruments. Two
computed: the arithmetic mean diameter (D05) or(d), are industrial hygiene instruments manufactured by
which is equal to M1/Mo and the diameter Of average TSITM and one is a modified residential smoke detector.
. . 1/3
mass (D15) or(dn—1), WhICh IS equal to (M3/MO) ' The The zeroth-moment instrument is a condensation nuclei
Iog-normal size distribution is widely used for describing counter “P-TrakTM” manufactured by TS|TMI This device
the size distribution Of aerosols including both flaming operates by passing the aerosol laden particle stream
and non-flaming smoke as in most aerosols; the bUlk 0f through a region where it is saturated with isopropanol
the number concentration is associated with smaller vapor and then into a cooler region where the vapor
particles (Raabe, 1971 and Reist, 1984)- In the case Of condenses onto the particles raising them all to a size
bimodal distributions, the Iog-normal distribution sti|| where they are readily counted by a |ight scattering
captures the overall distribution With a larger standard device. This instrument is very robust and operates over
deviation. The form of the distribution is the same as the a range Of 0 to 105 particles/cm3 and 20 nm to 1 Hm
normal distribution except that the diameter is replaced diameter. However, as will be described below, there is
With the In D 30 that one has a concern that the isopropanol condensate will not return
to the wick in |ow-gravity.
N: In D — In Dg
fN(D) = Wen) —2lf (3) The first-moment instrument is the ionization Chamber
( 7r) neg n 09 from a residential smoke detector. The devices use an
alpha-particle emitter to generate ions in a region inside
where N is the total number concentration of the aerosol a DC electric field which causes the ions to drift
(=Mo), and Dg and cg are the geometric mean number producing current. Aerosol particulate that enters the
diameter and geometric standard deviation defined by chamber attaches to some of the ions, increasing their
mass and thereby reducing their mobility and the
00 00 current. The required particle concentrations are on the
1111) :J-lanMDMD/J-deD (4) order of 105. particles / cm3 so the other moment
g 0 0 Instruments Will need to sample a diluted smoke stream
compared to the ionization chamber.

"
"9","The third-moment instrument is a light scattering device
“DustTrakT'V'” manufactured by TSIT'V'. The device uses
a 90 degree light scattering signal to quantify the aerosol ﬂ w“
mass density. For terrestrial dust particulate this signal \ ’1 ’1.
correlates well with the mass concentration, however v ‘1
additional compensation will be needed to account for
the range of particle sizes that will be seen in the SAME ' ,,
experiment. The device operating range is from 0.001 to y.
100 mg/m3 ~53, @
DAFT EXPERIMENT ff?” ‘
To reduce the risk of the SAME experiment, it was ‘ "" -- ,_
determined that an early test of the operation of a P- a . V
TrakTM in |ow-gravity was desirable. To accomplish this, ~ '
an experiment was developed that would use a P-TrakTIVI
and DustTrakTM on the ISS to test the ambient air and
an aerosol calibration source. At this point, the entire Figure 14: TSIT'V' P-TrakT'V' prepared for flight.
experiment has not been conducted but Initial results Clockwise from left' alcohol wick wick container
from tests with the DustTrakTM and P-TrakTM for the ISS . . . ' ’ ’
. . . . . . . Wle container Ild, P-TrakT'V', battery pack.
cabin during Expedition 10 are available. This IS a
notable result since these are the first measurements of
the particulate aerosol concentration on the ISS. RESULTS — Only four tests have been run to date.
Further tests will be conducted when other components
INSTRUMENTS - The instruments were a Dust TrakTM are launched on future flights. The procedure for each
(figure 13) and a P-TrakTIVI (figure 14). The P-TrakTIVI a test was to activate both instruments, attach a HEPA
type of Condensation Nuclei Counter (CNC) was (High Efficiency Particulate Air) filter to the inlet to
modified with microgrooves in the condenser to increase produce a zero baseline, connect the instruments to a
the alcohol transport back to the wick. The DustTrakTIVI common sampling hose, record the environment for
was unmodified other than typical flight hardening. several minutes and then reconnect the HEPA filters for
another baseline and then shutdown the instruments.
Tota| run time was limited due to the alcohol release
.- 1 from the CNC device. Tests were conducted on
. """" DoswfﬁhKM 1.. February 22, 2005 in the US Lab in front of Express
1 01““ Rack 4 and on March 4, 2005, in the us Lab, aft end,
A. ‘ _ . port side and in the node. Three tests sampled
“1 ‘ ‘\ i \ undisturbed cabin air and one test was used to validate
\‘1 ‘ \ Mk \g the instruments at high particulate levels by deliberately
'1 , ' . 1 separating VelcroTIVI at the device in|ets.
“‘3; \""- ’2}; Contrary to the high particulate |eve|s seen in the space
w - , Orbiter, all three tests that sampled the undisturbed
01. 99‘“ ' environment showed very low levels, (average less that
‘A \ . 0.005 mg / m3 from the DustTrakTM and less than 15
- particles /cm3 from the P-TrakTM with typical readings at
the zero baseline for both instruments. This is
dramatically lower than the values recorded on the
Orbiter (~ .050 mg / m3) (Table 1) by Liu et al. (1991).
. _ . These lower levels are to be expected because the ISS
Egtltjere 13' TSIthM Dost TrakT'V' Ereoarecghforbflight. US lab has HEPA filtration for the cabin air compared to
ry compa men '3 open 3 ow1ng e a ery a fine screen on the Orbiter air handler. Furthermore,
pack. the typical Orbiter crew of 7 can be expected to generate
much more particulate than the current ISS crew of 2.
Further measurements are needed at more locations in
the ISS as these limited observations cannot represent
the entire vehicle air volume. In fact as the test was
being initiated on March 4, 2005 a smoke detector in the
Russian segment (ionization device) triggered its alarm
indicating high particulate levels in its location.
Nevertheless, these low levels on the ISS suggest that
the particulate baseline level should be expected to

"
"10","reach low levels in sparsely crewed vehicles with Friedman, R., 1994. Risks and Issues in Fire
extensive air filtration. Safety on the Space Station, NASA TM 106430.
Ku, J.C., D.W. Griffin, P. S. Greenberg, , and J.
CONCLUSION Roma, 1995: Combustion and Flame, 102:216-218.
Greenberg, P. 8., K. R. Sacksteder and T.
Reliable detection of microgravity fires will require use of Kashiwagi. 1995. Wire Insulation Flammability
systems whose design is based upon thorough Experiment, NASA CP 3272 V II.
understanding of microgravity fire phenomena and the Liu, |3_ Y. H., K. |__ Rubow, P. H. McMurry, T. J_
ambient environment 0“ the spacecraft. The '33 30d Kotz and D. Russo. 1991. Airborne Particulate Matter
the Orbiter have dramatically different air filtration and Spacecraft Internal Environments’ SAE Technical
systems with the result that the ambient air varies from paper 911476, 21st International Conference on
substantially more Iparticulate than typical 9“ ea'rth EnvironmentalSystems,San Francisco,CA,Ju|y15-18.
(Orbiter) to substantially Cleaner than a terrestrial office McMurry, T., J_ Kotz and D. Russo. 1991_
bunlding ,(ISS)' '7',m'ted testing to date has shown that Airborne Particulate Matter and Spacecraft Internal
'OW'graV'ty cond't'on?’ favor §“b3t‘i‘nt'.a' Smeke part'c'e Environments, SAE Technical Paper 911476, 21st
growth and the particulate snze d'Str'bUt'On for smoke International Conference on Environmental Systems,
from Iow-graVIty fires can be 2 to 8 times larger than In S .
. . . . . an Fransisco, CA , July 15-18.
normal gravnty. Variations of thIs magnitude must be Martin C E and RC DaLee 1993 S acecraft
considered in future detector design which must also be . . ’ ' ' ' ' . ’ ' p _
coupled with an understanding of the performance of the Fire [?etection and SuppresSIon (FDS) Sy§tem3 An
air filtration systems. Overview and Recommendations for Future Flights, SAE
Technical Paper 932166, 23rd International Conference
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS (1)3 1Egvironmental Systems, Colorado Springs, CO, July
The authors acknowledge the contributions of the crews .McKinnIe, J"" 1997,‘ Fire Response Aboard the
of STS—75, ISS Increment 10 and the CSD and DAFT International Space. Station, SAE Technleal Paper
teams. 972334, 27th International Conference on EnVIronmentaI
Systems, Lake Tahoe, NV, July 14-17.
Certain commercial entities, equipment, or materials . National Research Council,1975.FireDetection
may be identified in this document in order to describe for L'fe Safety, National Academy Of Sciences,
an experimental procedure or concept adequately. Such Washington D-C-
identification is not intended to imply recommendation or Paul, M., F- Issacci, 3- E- Apostalakis 30d '-
endorsement by the National Aeronautics and Space Catton. 1993-ASME-HTD VOI- 235159-66-
Administration or the National Institute of Standards and Raabe, O.G., J. Aerosol Sci, 1971. 22 289.
Technology, nor is it intended to imply that the entities, Reist, P.C. 1984, Introduction to Aerosol
materials, or equipment are necessarily the best Science. Macmillan Pub. Co., NY, NY.
available for the purpose. Ruff, G.A., D.L. Urban, and MK. King, “A
Research Plan for Fire Prevention Detection and
REFERENCES Suppression,” A|AA-2005-0341, 43rd Aerospace
Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, January 9-12,
Bukowski, R.W. and G.W. Mulholland., 1978. 2005.
Smoke Detector Design and Smoke Properties. NBS Srivastava. R., J.T. McKinnon and P. Todd,
Technical Note 973. 1998. Effect of Pigmentation in Particulate Formation
Bukowski, R. W, R. D. Peacock, J. D. Averill, T. from Fluoropolymer Thermodegradation in Microgravity,
G. Cleary, N. P. Bryner, W. D. Walton, P. A. Reneke, AIAA 98-0814, Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno NV,
and E. D. Kuligowski, 2003. Performance of Home Jan12-15.
Smoke Alarms, Analysis of the Response of Several Steisslinger, H. R., D. M. Hoy, J. A. McLin and
Available Technologies in Residential Fire Settings NIST E. C. Thomas., 1993. SAE Paper 932291.
Technical Note 1455, December. Underwriters Laboratory, 2003. Smoke
Cleary, T.G., D W. Weinert, and G.W. Detectors of Fire Alarm Signaling Systems, UL Standard
Mulholland, 2003.”Moment Method for Obtaining Particle 268.
Size Measures of Test Smokes"", Natl. Inst. Stand. Urban, D.L., Z.-G. Yuan, P.B. Sunderland, G.T.
Techno|., NISTIR 7050. Linteris, J.E. Voss, K.-C. Lin, K. Sun and GM. Faeth,
Friedman, R., 1992. Fire Safety Practices and 1998. Structure and Soot Properties of Nonbuoyant
Needs in Human-Crew Spacecraft, Journal of Applied Ethylene/Air Laminar Jet Diffusion Flames, AIAA
Fire Science, 2:243-259. Journal, V36 p1346-1360.

"
