"","x"
"1","43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2005-341
10 - 13 January 2005, Reno, Nevada
A Research Plan for Flre Preventlon, Detectlon, and
Suppressmn 1n Crewed Exploratlon Systems
Gary A. Ruff* and David L. Urban.T
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, 44135
and
Merrill K. Kingi
NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC, 20546
Fire is a particularly critical danger in future extraterrestrial vehicles and habitats on
long-range, long-duration missions since, unlike in most scenarios here on Earth, escape is
not an option and the ﬁre department Will not be coming. In such vehicles and habitats, the
ﬁrst line of defense lies in determining the ignitability and ﬂammability of candidate
materials under reduced and microgravity conditions and at appropriate oxygen mole
fractions and then using this information to help select materials to be used in these vehicles
and habitats. If, despite our efforts to prevent a ﬁre, one does occur, our next line of
protection is fast and reliable detection of such occurrences (With minimum false positives)
and deﬁnition of their locations. After a ﬁre and its location have been identiﬁed, we must
have reliable means of extinguishing this ﬁre as quickly as possible With as little impact to
the mission and crew as possible. Finally, post—ﬁre cleanup, toxicology of ﬁre products and
products of the interaction of the ﬂame With the extinguishant, and Virtual simulation
training of the crew in ﬁghting ﬁres are also important areas Which must be addressed by
the research plan presented in this paper.
I. Introduction
The Vision for Space Exploration announced by President George W. Bush on January 14, 2004 directed
NASA to achieve the long-term goal of sending humans back to the Moon and then on to Mars. The amount of
knowledge that must be gained and the number of technologies that must be developed before such missions can
occur are certainly formidable. The performance standards required for these technologies are, in many cases, well
beyond those used on the International Space Station and the Space Shuttle and Will stretch our current knowledge
of living and working in space. Many of the challenges are aimed at ensuring the health and safety of the crew
during the entire mission. Fire Prevention, Detection, and Suppression (FPDS) is one of the technology development
areas identiﬁed Within the Life Support and Habitation element of the Exploration System Missions Directorate
(ESMD). The overarching goal for work in the FPDS area is to enhance crew health and safety on exploration
missions by reducing the likelihood of a ﬁre, or, if one does occur, minimizing the risk to the mission, crew, or
system. This paper presents the initial draft of the research plan that Will deﬁne technologies and methodologies to
be developed in the areas of ﬁre prevention and material ﬂammability, ﬁre signatures and detection, ﬁre suppression
and response, and development and analysis of ﬁre scenarios. In each of these areas, products or deliverables that
are required for use in future exploration spacecraft and habitats by the ESMD have been identiﬁed. These
deliverables may be hardware, design requirements, data for trade studies, test procedures, data libraries, or
recommendations for ﬁre response procedures depending on the area. To realize these deliverables, this plan Will
incorporate areas of combustion science, ﬁre safety engineering, risk assessment, and failure analysis. Implementing
the plan Will require a coordinated effort from numerous researchers as well as ﬁre safety professionals.
* FPDS Element Lead, NASA J ohn H. Glenn Research Center/MS 77-5, AIAA Associate Fellow.
T Branch Chief, Microgravity Combustion Branch, NASA J ohn H. Glenn Research Center/MS 77-5, AIAA Member
i FPDS Program Element Manager, NASA Headquarters, AIAA Fellow.
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

"
"2","A. Current Status of Spacecraft Fire Safety Systems and Procedures
Any discussion of ﬁre prevention practices and/or detection and suppression systems for exploration systems
must begin by deﬁning what is being or has been used on spacecraft. Of particular interest are areas where
knowledge has been gained since the design of the systems on the ISS and STS Shuttle that could impact the design
of next-generation systems. While the technologies to be developed in this plan are not intended for use on the ISS
and STS, 1ess0ns 1eamed from the ﬁre detection and suppression system aboard these systems are relevant and will
be identiﬁed.
1. F ire Prevention and Material F lammability
Existing materia1 ﬂammability acceptance test methods have been in place with little revision since the early
days of manned spaceﬂight. The criteria applied in these acceptance tests were developed more from a
phenomenological basis than the quantiﬁcation of the risk of a ﬁre. At this time, materia1 ﬂammabi1ity
characterization used in support of selection or rejection of materials for use in spacecraft is based on NASA-STD—
6001: Flammability, Odor, Offgassing, and Compatibility Requirements and Test Procedures for Materials in
Environments that Support Combustionl. The Upward Flame Propagation test (Test 1) is conducted in a normal
gravity environment with the ambient conditions (gas composition and pressure) set equal to that of the worst-case
environment to which the material will be exposed. As shown in Fig. 1, a vertical strip of material typically 5 cm
wide, 33 cm long and 0f the worst-case thickness is
ignited at the bottom and the ﬂame spread up the _
strip is measured. A material fails Test 1 if it burns Substrate 5 cm typical I /"" Test
more than 15 cm or drips ﬂaming debris on a piece for testing chamber
of K-10 paper placed 20 cm below the sample. of coatings
While this may represent a worst-case scenario on
Earth, research conducted in microgravity has T - r-
. . . . ”1°31 \- - --
shown clearly that the ignition behaV10r and ﬂame specimen “El s,
spread rate for any given material is quite different
under 10w— and microgravity conditions at various I‘ II
imposed (ventilation) ve1001t1es (including zero .
cross—ﬂtew) thadnt. undert thﬁ buoyanfyjdrixgteln Limiting ﬂame- IIIJIE.
convec 10n con 1 ions na ura y presen in e spread »
upward spread tests.2'4 Accordingly, the results of height L—
“‘35—!—
the NASA-STD-6001 Test 1 do not map Paper “mm“mm“;g \\\\\\\\\““\“\\\~ 20
quantitatively to those in the 10w- 0r partial—gravity sheet “ Wm“ 3
environment of an exploration vehicle or habitat. A below m,
second test (Test 2) uses a standard oxygen— specimen _. -—-' ""
consumption cone-calorimeter to provide
quantitative data on ignition delay times and burning Figure 1. Experimental conﬁguration for the Upward
rates of materials. However, the parameters Flame Propagation test (Test 1). The specimen is 33 x 5
measured by this test are also buoyancy dominated em and the “worst-case” thickness. A chemical igniter is
so their relationship to reduced gravity behavior is used if the 02 molefraetion is less than 50%. Otherwise, a
uncertain. silicone igniter is used.
2. Fire Detection
In terms of ﬁre detection, there is not unanimity as to the best system between the Russian and U.S. modules of
the ISS and the Space Shuttle. The Shuttle and the Russian modules of the ISS use ionization-based smoke detectors
whi1e photoelectric smoke detectors are used on the U.S. modules. (A photograph of the STS smoke detector is
shown in Fig. 2 while the ISS photoelectric detector is shown in Fig. 3) However, the Comparative Soot Diagnostic
(CSD) experiment, which ﬂew in the Glovebox 0n STS-75, provided data concerning the performance of NASA’s
smoke detectors in microgravity and provided particle size information for three types of solid smoke particulate.
The most important ﬁnding of CSD was that for liquid smoke aerosols, the microgravity performance of the space
shuttle (STS) smoke detector was substantially reducedfmm that in normal gravity. It was hypothesized that this
performance difference was due to extended growth of the liquid smoke particulate in 10w-graVity due to the
enhanced residence times in high smoke concentration regions. These ﬁndings have considerable implications for
the design of smoke detectors exploration vehicles but were unavailable when the design studies were performed to
select the smoke detectors 0n the STS or 188.
2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3",". f- - _| - If. '7: A
.r . - . ' ‘ i“ r:
.. __ S‘F- .. . n .. -- {.1 7- I. ._
h t” I” 4*; “5% «:33 -1.
. q ., EJ- 1 .~.. 1+"" E.
' 1.""
Figure 2. Brunswick DefenseTM
smoke detector used in the NASA
shuttle ﬂeet. The inlet is on the right Figure 3. Allied Signal/Honeywell light-scattering smoke detector
and the gas is expelled out the small used in the 188. The near IR laser beam emerges from the enclosure
plate on the tap. into the top assembly (A) and is reﬂected by two mirrors (one visible at
top right (3)) and is then reﬂected back to the sensors in the enclosure
( C ). One sensor detects the forward scattered light and is referenced
by another sensor that looks directly at the incident beam.
3. Fire Suppression
The Space Shuttle currently uses a Halon-based suppressant With
portable extinguishers available for crew use and a ﬁxed Halon a p
delivery system Within the avionics bays. The U.S. modules of the r‘b h».
188 utilize portable C02 extinguishers, shown in Fig. 4, while the l \
Russian modules use portable water-based foam extinguishers. The ‘
U.S. C02 extinguishers are charged With 2.7 kg of C02 gas at a —
pressure of 5.9 MPa at 21 deg C. The design requirement is that T
when discharged, the C02 could reduce the 02 concentration in an
International Standard Payload Rack (ISRP) (approximately 0.73 m
X 0.97m X 1.75m With a useable volume of 1.6 1113) by 50% Within 60 a
see. This is based on the requirements of the NFPA 12 regulations _' ‘
that require a C02 concentration of 50% be achievable When
extinguishing smoldering ﬁres and 34% for ﬂaming combustion.5
(NFPA 12 also requires that the 50% concentration for smoldering
ﬁres be held for 20 minutes to ensure the ﬁre is extinguished) Little Figure 4. Portable C02 ﬁre extinguisher
has been. done to determine Wthh of these approaches is most used on the U.S. modules 0fthe 188. The
effective 1n suppressmg a ﬁre and least 1nvas1ve 1n terms of post-ﬁre orcm ge j a cket provi ales thermalprotection
t0X1cology and cleanup. because the extinguisher gets cold during
discharge. The straight nozzle is Shown in
11- Assumptions the front pocket of the jacket.
To develop a plan for ﬁre-safe design of spacecraft, assumptions
must be made about (1) the deﬁnition and schedules for the exploration missions and (2) the most likely ﬁre
scenarios in the vehicles/habitats used on these missions. Without these deﬁnitions, the solution-space for the design
of any ﬁre protection system is simply too large to apply a rational design strategy. Our current understanding of
these underlying assumptions is discussed below.
A. Development Spirals for the Crew Exploration Vehicle
The primary goal of this plan is to deliver products that Will ensure the ﬁre safety of exploration vehicles and
habitats to the Exploration Systems Mission Directorate. The current requirements for these systems can be found in
the deﬁnitions and schedule for the development spirals 0f the Crew Exploration Vehicle. The spiral deﬁnitions and
schedule are as shown in Table 1, deﬁned as of September 10, 2004.
The objective of the spiral development strategy is to allow maturing technologies to be incorporated into the
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","design Of a vehicle rnore Table 1. Deﬁnition and Schedule of CEV Development Spirals
gradually by identifying a —
desired capability without Spiral Definition Duration Schedule
deﬁning the end state W
requirements. The 1 Lunar—capable CEV in Low Earth Orbit —— 2014
requirements are then reﬁned 2 Moon Landing Extended Stay 4 - 14 days 2015-2020
through system demonstration 3 Moon Landing Long Stay 60 - 90 days 2020+
and TiSk management. While 4 Human Exploration to Mars Vicinity 1 - 2 years 2025+
seemingly ideal for the 5 Mars Landing Short Stay TBD 2030+
development 0f spacecraft, the W
technology lead time 1s stlll
signiﬁcant. For example, as currently planned, a Design Readiness Review (DRR) would be held siX years prior to
deployment of a ﬂight system. However, according to the current schedules, one year of concept development and
deﬁnition of requirements, one year of technology development and about two years of system development and
veriﬁcation precedes the DR. Therefore, there is a total of about 10 years between the initial concept development
and deployment of a new vehicle. The initial concept requirements for Spiral 1 were developed late in 2004 so we
are already into the concept reﬁnement and technology development phases. For new FPDS technologies to be
incorporated into the Spiral 1 CEV, they would have to be sufﬁciently mature by 2008 at the latest. The concept
deﬁnition for Spiral 2 would have to begin in 2009-2010 for it to be deployed about 2020. While there is time for
new FPDS technologies to impact these spirals, this schedule can only be met by the aggressive implementation of a
focused research plan with both short and long-term objectives. Furthermore, it must make use of all the tools
available including testing in ground-based reduced-graVity facilities, modeling, and where absolutely necessary,
ﬂight experiments.
B. Use of Existing Flight Hardware

Because of the spiral development schedule, the maturity of the design for the Combustion Integrated Rack and
associated experimental inserts (Multi-User Droplet Combustion Apparatus (MDCA) and the Flow Enclosure
Accommodating Novel Investigations in Combustion of Solids (FEANICS)), the time required to develop new
inserts, and the limited ﬂight opportunities to get experiments on board the 188, the ﬁrst course Choice for any new
ﬁre safety investigations requiring space eXperirnents must be to use or to be based on eXisting experimental
concepts. Therefore, we have taken the approach of re-veetoring eXisting ﬂight science projects to address speciﬁc
questions required to deliver products in the three focus areas (ﬁre prevention and material ﬂarnrnability, ﬁre
detection, and ﬁre suppression and response). The re-veetoring of ﬂight experiments is difﬁcult because of the
unique requirements each experiment places on the design and operation of the CIR but it is required to obtain
critical data and veriﬁcations that cannot be obtained in ground-based reduced graVity facilities. While the detailed
requirements for these experiments are still being formulated and will undergo peer review when completed, this
plan describes the programmatic needs that the end products from these experiments must fulﬁll.
C. Pre-speciﬁed Flight Opportunities

The use of eXisting ﬂight hardware also imposes schedule constraints because the hardware has been scheduled
to ﬂy on speciﬁc shuttle ﬂights. Therefore, not only must the experiments make use of hardware that is partially
designed (completely, in some cases) but it would also be beneﬁcial for the experiments to be developed in time to
maintain these ﬂight opportunities. Table 2 shows a schedule of hardware availability and ﬂight opportunities as
currently planned (December 2004). Given the uncertainty surrounding the Return-to-Flight, these dates are
tentative and are likely to Change. However, the targets remain and expeditious development of the FPDS
experiments only increases the likelihood that they will be ready at the earliest ﬂight opportunity.

III. FPDS Deliverables

The research plan in the Fire Prevention, Detection, and Suppression sub-elernent is based on deliverables that,
when incorporated into the design philosophy and functional design of exploration vehicles and habitats will
quantitatively reduce the likelihood of a ﬁre and reduce the extent and degree of equipment damage should a ﬁre
occur. These products have been developed through a series of workshops focusing on spacecraft ﬁre safety. The
most recent workshops were held in 20016, 20037, and 2004; the ﬁrst workshop was held in 19868. At each of these
workshops, input was obtained from designers and operators of current spacecraft (STS and 188) and was used to
formulate the products required for exploration systems. (Even though no formal requirements have been stated by

4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5",". , , the Exploration Systems Mission Directorate, the
Table 2‘, thht Harﬂvyare Avallabllty (FHA) and issues and concerns Will undoubtedly be similar to
Space Fllght Opportunltles for FPDS Experlments (as those expressed by the designers and operators of
Of December 2004) current spacecraft, With the major exception that
m partial gravity performance Will also be important
m for lunar and Martian Operations.) Several other
FLEX May—O5 May—O7 reports that overview and recommend spacecraft ﬁre
FEANICS-1 JuI-O7 Jan-08 safety needs have been prepared and these also
FEANICS-2 JuI-O7 Jan-08 provided input to this plan.9'11 The needs identiﬁed
FEANICS-FPDS TBD 2010 from these workshops and reports consisted of
MSG suggestions for ﬂight hardware and experiments,
SAME Jan-06 JUI'OG ground-based test techniques and matrices, design
Express rules, and data bases in various areas of ﬁre safety.
DAFT'1 ’2 Sep-03 D9004 The entire FPDS research program Will be focused
DAF'I'3,4=Sep-03.M-O5 on developing the knowledge base and technology
solutions to produce these deliverables.
A. Fire Prevention and Material Flammability
1. Normal gravity materialﬂammabilily test to evaluate reduced gravilyﬂammabilily
Existing material ﬂammability acceptance test methods have been in place With little revision since the early
days Of manned spaceﬂight. The criteria applied in these acceptance tests were developed more from a
phenomenological basis than quantiﬁcation of the risk of a ﬁre. Mierogravity testing has identiﬁed that some
materials become more ﬂammable (as evidenced by a lower limiting oxygen index) in a reduced gravity convective
ﬂow than under normal gravity conditions2 indicating that this test may not be conservative in all cases, although the
actual margin of safety is unknown. The deliverable from this effort Will be a standardized test (or tests) that can be
conducted in normal gravity to accurately assess material ﬂammability in lOW and partial gravity levels. An
acceptance criterion Will be developed that is traceable to ﬁre behavior in reduced gravity. The accuracy of this
normal-gravity analog must be veriﬁed by in—space tests.
2. Materialﬂammabilily assessment in candidate atmospheresfor exploration transit vehicles and habitats
One design parameter that Will determine much of the design and Operational philosophy for exploration vehicles
Will be the composition of the
atmosphere and ambient pressure 100 Shuttlenss _ ,1 , .
for the habitable volume. The /'/ l,"" / —Normexic Equivalent 14
atmosphere of previous spacecraft 90 \\ ,// /l // :gﬁhxgrggrgiﬁio R= 1.4
has ranged from 100% 02, 34.5 80 ” / / — -60 min PrebreathetoR=1.4 12
kPa for Mercury, Gemini, and / / 111:8 2:: EEEEEZIE: I2: 1':
. x / .
Apollo missions to standard air ,5? 70 /'Shuttle'/E’\I/A‘ ’ -----‘240 min Prebreatheto R.=.1'4 10 g
(21% 02/79% N2, 1 atm) for 188 :- 60 //, (p . $333953 55%?” “m” 3
and STS. (Atmospheric conditions 5 ./""/ / ,— 8 5
prior to EVA were different from g 50 / / EarIyApoIIo Design<> g
the standard cabin atmosphere.) TE 40 \ 6 (—5
These design points are shown in :9 Sky'ab MercurV’Gemini’Apo'b E
. . 30 .
Flg. 5 and generally lie along the DeS'Q” Space 4
normOXic equivalent line, i.e., 20
having the same 02 partial 1o 2
pressure as 100 kPa, 21% 02 by
volume.12 In order to maintain O2 0 "" 0
. o 10 20 30 4o 50 60 7o 80 90 100
partial pressure along the
normoxic line, the %02 increases velume Percentoxygen
as the total pressure decreases. Figure 5. Design space for cabin atmosphere and pressure and 02
Yet, 1t 15 the 111016 haCtIOh 0f concentration. Space suitpressure is 29.6 kPa (4.3 psia); R is the
oxygen. . . that drives the bends ( T issue) ratio. At a bends (tissue) ratio 0fR=I.4, 4.5% offhe
susceptibility 0f materials to ﬁre. population will experience symptoms Ofdecompression Sickness.”
The increased material
ﬂammability Of these conditions is critical in terms of ﬁre initiation and suppression.
5
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","As evidenced by the range of atmospheres that have been used, there is no optimum atmosphere for space
vehicles with each mission requiring a detailed evaluation of the mission. Various trade studies have indicated
signiﬁcant advantages associated with operation at total pressures considerably lower than one atmosphere. For
example, Fig. 5 shows the design space obtained from one of these studies.12 The hypoxie boundary represents the
partial pressure of 02 below which human activity is impaired because of lack of oxygen. The pre-breathe lines
represent the duration required for pre-breathe before an EVA. A bends ratio of R = 1.4 is assumed and represents
the ratio of the partial pressure of N2 in the blood to the ambient (EVA suit) pressure. At higher ratios, more of the
population would experience symptoms of decompression sickness. The vertical line at a 30% volume of 02 is the
limit imposed by material ﬂammability because it was concluded in this study that below 30% 02, there are still a
sufﬁcient number and variety of materials that can be used based on their ﬂammability and ability to pass Test 1.
Obviously, the remaining design space for exploration atmospheres is rather small and, as designs develop, there
will be pressure to move it to even higher 02 concentrations. If, indeed, the oxygen mole fraction is raised relative to
Earth ambient, testing of all candidate materials at the selected mole fraction will be a critical part of the FPDS
activities.

An early assessment of material ﬂammability in candidate atmospheres would provide additional information to
be factored into the selection process. While it is not set, it will most likely fall into the range shown in Fig. 5 above.
Therefore, the deliverable from this task will be a quantitative assessment of the effect of high 02 mole fractions at
lower ambient pressures on the ﬂammability of a set of typical spacecraft materials. This assessment will be done at
various gravity levels so that design trade-offs can be made for various exploration missions using the appropriate
level of gravity.

3. Deﬁnition afrealisticﬁre scenariosfor exploration Spacecraft and habitats

The science of ﬁre protection engineering in terrestrial applications has developed considerably since the
speciﬁcations were written for either the STS or 188. Not only do we better understand the mechanisms of ignition,
ﬂame spread and ﬁre growth, we now possess better computational models that can be used to predict the
development and outcomes of the ﬁres. These tools have been developed to evaluate terrestrial ﬁre safety issues
such as the suitability of material ﬂammability criteria, the design of ﬁre detection and suppression systems, and the
adequacy of ﬁre response strategies and protocols to provide a quantiﬁable level of ﬁre protection. Even though an
equivalent evaluation and assessment is required by designers of exploration spacecraft and habitats, these tools
have not been applied in a systematic way to analyze ﬁre scenarios in microgravity and partial gravity environments.
When coupled with the knowledge of ﬂame spread and ﬁre development in reduced gravity, these tools can be
tailored to evaluate various ﬁre scenarios relevant for exploration spacecraft and habitats and yield practical
information upon which design and operational decisions can be based. At the very least, it would provide a rational
methodology to assess what information is known about ﬁres in reduced gravity and what data is required to
adequately deﬁne a ﬁre scenario.

B. Fire Signatures and Detection
4. Advanced detection system for gaseous and particulate pre-ﬁre and ﬁre Signatures

Smoke detectors on the 188 have proven to be sensitive to dust and have produced numerous false alarms. As
such, there is an immediate need for new ﬁre detector technology that eliminates nuisance alarms. This problem will
only be exacerbated on long-duration exploration missions in both transit vehicles and surface habitats. The
spacecraft ﬁre detection system developed in this work should be able to (I) detect a ﬁre with minimal false or
nuisance alarms, (2) minimize the time from the beginning of a pyrolysis or pre-ﬁre event to the time an alarm
sounds, (3) indicate to the crew the location of the ﬁre, and (4) identify the source of the ﬁre from the measured
signature. The tasks required to accomplish this goal include sensor development and veriﬁcation, development of
the logic to allow a distributed network of sensors to assist in locating and assessing a ﬁre, and quantiﬁcation of ﬁre
and pre-ﬁre signatures in reduced gravity. The Spacecraft Fire Safety Program at NASA GRC has funded the
development of miero-ehemieal sensors for combustion gases and particulates. However, this is only one of several
candidate technologies that could satisfy this need. An experimental evaluation of several sensor prototypes in both
normal and reduced gravity should be conducted so that relevant data is available for use in a trade study.

5. Veriﬁed models of the transport Ofcontaminants, smoke, and combustion gases throughout the habitable volume
of a Spacecraft 0r habitat

The effectiveness of even the most reﬁned and exotic sensor will be reduced unless it is located in the right place
and the time required for the contaminant to reach a detectable level at that location is known. If a distributed
network of sensors is used, the number of sensors in the system will undoubtedly be limited and the design goal will

6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","be to minimize the number of sensors required to provide adequate protection. The deliverable in this task is a
validated computer model for the large-scale transport of smoke and combustion products within a habitable volume
that can be used to evaluate ﬁre detector location and activation. This tool would be linked to vehicle models for
incorporation of this analysis into the structural design process. It will also be used to support the development of a
realistic crew training tool to be discussed in Deliverable 7.
C. Fire Suppression and Response
6. Design rules for suppressant system including effectiveness of suppressants, required concentrations, and

dispersion methods

Carbon dioxide was selected as the ﬁre suppressant on the ISS primarily because of its use in terrestrial
applications. The objective of this work is to develop rational data and guidelines for the design of ﬁre suppression
systems in microgravity, as well as the Lunar and Martian partial gravity environments. On-going projects in the
Spacecraft Fire Safety Program at NASA GRC are evaluating the effectiveness of suppressants in ground-based
reduced gravity facilities. These proj ects have resulted in new data that can direct future work but they also indicated
the need for continued assessment of suppressant effectiveness in microgravity (experiments in space and ground-
based facilities). Extinguishing agents to be evaluated include but are not limited to C02, N2, He, water mist, and
micro-encapsulated water.
7. Simulations ofﬁre and ﬁre-response scenariosfor system evaluation and crew training

Effective ﬁre detection systems and suppression techniques are only as good as the training the crew receives to
use them. Efﬁcient use of the learned skills and the tools provided under what most likely will be a very tense and
confusing situation is required to minimize equipment damage and limit the contamination of the cabin atmosphere
either by combustion products or the ﬁre extinguishing agent. Performing such a simulation in a cabin mock—up on
Earth is pointless because the ﬁre and ﬂuid transport will be dominated by buoyancy and will behave very
differently than in a reduced-gravity environment. The objective of this deliverable is to provide a Virtual reality
(VR) simulation in which the crew can experience a realistic ﬁre scenario during ground-based training.
Additionally, this simulation could be used to evaluate ﬁre response scenarios to evaluate crew response relative to
their capabilities and task demands.

IV. Formulation of the Program Plan

The deliverables listed above constitute the anticipated outcome of the FPDS element. The researchers in the
Microgravity Combustion and Reacting Systems Branch at NASA Glenn Research Center have formed teams
associated with each of these areas to address how the existing suite of funded projects can be utilized to achieve
these deliverables. The overall research plan will proceed through integration of ground-based testing, analytical and
numerical modeling which will permit use of the ground-based testing to predict space-based results, and limited
space-based testing to verify these procedures. The speciﬁc requirements for the space-based experiments are not
outlined in this plan. Instead, the plan identiﬁes the overall research objectives required to meet the programmatic
needs and a set of tasks that could be used to achieve that obj ective.
A. Fire Prevention and Material Flammability

The tasks that must be accomplished to deliver the products identiﬁed in Section III are identiﬁed in this section.
The philosophy of these tasks is to understand existing material ﬂammability testing and procedures, determine if
there are normal gravity tests from which we can deduce reduced gravity ﬂammability, and measure quantities that
will allow us to numerically model the behaVior of ﬂammable materials and eventually ﬁres in reduced gravity. This
philosophy can be translated directly into the primary tasks listed below (1) better understand what the existing test
methods tell us in terms of material ﬂammability in reduced gravity, (2) develop new test methodologies and/or
acceptance criteria for existing tests that give a direct indication of the material ﬂammability in reduced gravity, and
(3) measure quantities for ﬁres in reduced gravity that, through the application of performance-based ﬁre safety
analysis tools, can be used to evaluate material ﬂammability and ﬁre dynamics in reduced gravity environments. A
detailed discussion of each of these areas is beyond the scope of this paper but some important work that can give
the ﬂavor for the tasks can be identiﬁed.

7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","Objective 1 .' Evaluate existing test methods to determine if current test results can be made more quantitative or
relevant to reduced—gmvilyﬂammabilily

As described in Section II, NASA-STD-oOOl Test 1 is used to screen materials for acceptability in spacecraft.
The Material and Processes Technical Information System database (MAPTIS—II) contains the results of this test for
a wide variety of materials.§. The usefulness of this test lies primarily in the extensive experience that has been
gained applying this method for various types of materials. As previously discussed, the relation between the test
results and actual ﬂammability in reduced gravity is unclear. It was assumed that this test is conservative (meaning
that materials that pass Test 1 will not propagate a ﬂame in reduced gravity) because a strong buoyant ﬂow is
created that pre-heats the sample. However, Olson2 has shown that a material can be more ﬂammable in reduced
gravity at a velocity lower than that imposed by natural convection in normal gravity. More over, some eharring
foams will not propagate an upward ﬂame but will burn downwards. If Test 1 is over-eonservative, it could
eliminate materials from use that would not sustain a ﬂame in reduced gravity. Material selection based on incorrect
criteria can only increase overall system mass and complexity which could have direct implications for the
feasibility of exploration missions. Several of the tasks required to gain a better understanding of existing test
methods and what they imply about ﬂammability in reduced gravity are:

1. Evaluate the NASA-STD-oOOl Test 1: Upward Flame Propagation test conﬁguration and upward
ﬂame propagation in normal and reduced gravity facilities as required to better quantify and interpret
test results.

2. Obtain property data for various simple materials as well as other representative materials using cone
calorimetry and other standard tests for use in ignition and ﬂame spread models.

3. Model Test 1 and compare results with experimental results of Task 1.

4. Use this model to evaluate the effect of reduced gravity on ﬂame spread on the candidate material.

Some of this work is currently being performed with encouraging results. For example, Coutin et al.13 are
performing detailed experiments and simulations of an upward ﬂame spread (Test 1) conﬁguration to attempt to
translate the result from normal-gravity to microgravity. (PI: Professor S. Buckley, UniV. of California — San Diego)
Speciﬁcally, they are measuring the experimental ﬂame stand-off distance to extract an experimental mass transfer
number, a material-related parameter that could be used to assess the potential of a material to sustain eo-eurrent
ﬂame spread. This parameter could then be measured from Test 1 and provide a relative ranking of material
ﬂammability. Recently, Feier et al.14 have performed an experimental and theoretical investigation of upward ﬂame
spread over thin solids and found that the spread rates are proportional to pl'gg where p is the ambient pressure and g
is the gravity level. The signiﬁcance of this work is that using this sealing, it may be possible to simulate upward
ﬂame spread rates in partial gravity by conducting tests in normal gravity but at a reduced ambient pressure. This
work is continuing to establish the limitations of this sealing, the functional relationship for sample width, and the
effect of observed unsteady growing modes for upward ﬂame spread.

Objective 2: Develop and veriﬁ/ new normal gravity test methodologies that relate directly to reduced-
gravilyﬂammabilily

A normal-gravity ﬂammability test that provides information pertinent to the ignition, ﬂame spread, and burning
rate (heat release) of various candidate materials under reduced or microgravity conditions is strongly desired
because there are a very large number of materials that must be characterized over a wide range of possible ambient
atmospheres and we simply cannot run all of these test points under reduced gravity or microgravity. The general
method of attack which we are developing to solve this problem is to select a limited number of materials and test
them in various candidate ground tests as well as under microgravity conditions to ealibrate/verify models and
sealing hypotheses that could relate the ground test results and the microgravity test results. The following tasks are
planned to achieve this result:

1. Identify candidate test methods that provide results that can be related to reduced-gravity ﬂammability.

2. Evaluate these methods for a variety of materials to develop repeatable test procedures and conﬁdence
in the general applicability of the results.

3. Conduct veriﬁcations of these test methods using experiments in normal gravity, ground-based
reduced-gravity facilities, and modeling.

§ The MAPTIS—II database can be accessed at http://maptis.nasa.gov/indeX.html
8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","4. If necessary, conduct space ﬂight experiments to verify the conclusions drawn from the results of the
normal graVity tests.

In 2001, the Bioastronautics Spacecraft Fire Safety Program funded a joint project between NASA Glenn
Research Center and NASA White Sands Test Facility (PI: Dr. S. Olson (GRC) and Dr. H. Beeson (WSTF)). The
objective of this work is to develop the Earth-Based Equivalent Low Stretch Apparatus (ELSA) that could be a
normal graVity analog for many characteristics of reduced graVity ﬁres.15 The hypothesis here is that the material
ignition, ﬂame spread, and burning rate characteristics will be the same under normal gravity, reduced gravity, and
microgravity conditions at equal stretch rates. (For steady ﬂames,
ﬂame stretch is deﬁned as the tangential velocity gradient at the T
ﬂame surface. It has been postulated that the ﬂame spread rates Exhaust Analyzer
measured in two (or more) different experiments may be identical if
the surface velocity gradients are identical (all other factors such as
free-stream oxidizer concentration and solid fuel material remaining I E?
the same).16) If experimentally validated, the normal graVity test
results at a stretch rate that is equal to the expected stretch rate for —_:1__
given forced ﬂow conditions (ventilation ﬂow) at reduced graVity Flame
or microgravity to accurately predict ignition and ﬂame spread at T“ __...-:-'ii=-"":?.f
those conditions. The low stretch rates in normal graVity are ' Radiant
obtained using an inverted-cone geometry with the sample burning £313,
in a ceiling ﬁre (stagnation ﬂow) conﬁguration as shown in Fig. 6.

Parameters being measured in the ELSA apparatus include ignition 33::

delay times, mass loss rates, limiting stretch rates, critical heat ﬂux 1

for ignition, and toxic product generation rates. Results to date have midizer Flaw

veriﬁed the scaling of these parameters w1th stretch rate -- which .of Figure 6. C on c ept 0f ELS A apparatus,

these .parameters are .actually representatlve of reduced graV1ty showing fuel sample suspended above

behaV1or must be veriﬁed. Other poss1ble ground-based tests are radiant cone heater and oxidizer ﬂow

also being. examined, snch as the Forced Ignition and Spread Test j et. The enclosure reﬂects the WSTF

(FIST), w1th models being. developed to relate normal.graV1ty test C om‘r 0 [I e d Am 0 Sph er 6 Cone Calorimeter

results to results under various g-level and ﬂow conditions. Again, facility.”

space ﬂight testing will be required to verify these models. At some

point, a standard ground—based test will be deﬁned and incorporated into NASA—STD-6001.

Objective 3: Investigate the needfor and develop a screening test to characterize materials in terms of their
susceptibility to smolder initiation and transition to ﬂaming.

In 2001, a workshop was held in Cleveland, Ohio to identify research needs in spacecraft ﬁre safety. One of the
high—priority outcomes from the Fire Prevention and Material Flammability working group was the need to
understand the implications of non-ﬂaming and smoldering combustion in microgravity with respect to 18$
engineering materials. (At the time, only relevance to 188 was being considered although this issue will also eXist
for the CEV and other extended—mission vehicles and habitats.) Current NASA standard ﬂammability test
techniques do not take smoldering combustion into account so this data would ﬁll this apparent gap. Tasks to be
accomplished to ﬁll this need include:

1. Propose and develop a normal graVity test to screen materials for smoldering.

2. Perform reduced gravity tests to verify the relation between the screening test and reduced-gravity
smoldering.

3. Evaluate smoldering of materials at ambient conditions that are relevant for exploration vehicles and
habitats.

4. Deﬁne design rules for material selection and stowage that preclude the initiation of sustained
smoldering reactions in reduced graVity.

A ﬂight deﬁnition project was funded in 2001 by the Spacecraft Fire Safety program of the Bioastronautics
Initiative titled “Two-Dimensional Smoldering and Transition to Flaming in MicrograVity” (PI: Professor Carlos
Femandez-Pello, University of Califomia-Berkeley). The objective of this proj ect was to continue the investigations
on smoldering in microgravity begun by the Microgravity Smoldering Combustion (MSC) ﬂight project but to
examine the conditions by which a smoldering ﬁre may transition to a ﬂaming ﬁre in microgravity. This work is

9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"10","continuing but is being re-east to address the most relevant features of the FPDS program as well as developing a

normal gravity screening method materials that smolder, similar to the NASA-STD-6001 Test 1 for the upward

spread of ﬂaming ﬁres.

Objective 4: Assess materialﬂammabilily at totalpressure and 02 molefmction combinations Ofexplomtion
atmospheres

As discussed in Section III, the lOW pressure, high 02 mole fraction combinations that reduce the time required
for EVA pre-breath result in strongly increased ﬂammability. Therefore, a detailed evaluation of the trade-Offs is
required for each exploration mission scenario. The selection of the ambient conditions for any phase of an
exploration mission determines to a large degree the protocol that must be followed to assess the ﬂammability of
materials used in that mission, the requirements for the ﬁre detection system, and the amount and type of
suppressant that is required to suppress a ﬁre. This product derived from this task Will provide input to the
requirements/systems analysis teams on the ﬂammability of materials in atmospheres being considered for use in
exploration spacecraft and habitats.

B. Fire Signatures and Detection

In this section, the research Objectives and tasks in the area of ﬁre signatures and detection are presented. The
research to be performed can be divided into three maj or areas, namely (1) sensor development, (2) quantiﬁcation of
ﬁre signatures, and (3) modeling of smoke and contaminant transport. The primary objective of each of these areas
and a short description of each is given below.

Objective 1 .' Develop suitable sensorsfor Spacecraft applications

The sensors being considered in this program for use as advanced ﬁre detectors include both particulate sensors
and gas sensors. The types of particulate sensors being developed include those that simply detect the presence of
particles and others that could yield information on the range of particle sizes, 116., particle Classiﬁers. TWO types of
gas sensors are also being evaluated. These are (l) speeies-speeiﬁe sensors, 116., these that respond to a known
gaseous compound such as CO or C02, and (2) electronic nose technology that responds to many compounds that
can then be identiﬁed through training. Achieving this objective Will require both the scientiﬁc objective of
developing sensors having the required properties and Operating Characteristics as well as packaging this suite of
sensors into a useful device.

1. Develop packaged sensors for ground-based testing.

2. Develop a ﬂight—ready sensor package for continued evaluation in ground tests and potential
incorporation into space ﬂight eXperiments for veriﬁcation.

3. Develop an advanced ﬁre detector and/or detector strategy suitable for use in exploration vehicles and
habitats.

Speeies-speeiﬁe sensor development has been funded through the Spacecraft Fire Safety Program of the
Bioastronauties Initiative since 2001 With the joint funding of the Aviation Safety Program at NASA Glenn
Research Center. This has resulted in a suite of particulate and gas sensors that have demonstrated excellent
rej eetion of false positives While maintaining sensitivity to actual ﬁres. These sensors have been packaged for use in
reduced-gravity testing that Will be conducted during 2005. The development of electronic nose technologies has
recently been funded through the Mierogravity Combustion Science program. This technology is also being
developed at the J et Propulsion Laboratory for environmental monitoring and Will be evaluated for suitability in ﬁre
detection as well.

Objective 2: Quantiﬁcation of F ire Signatures

If Objective 1 is thought of as developing the tools, Objective 2 can be thought of as evaluating and verifying
that the tools perform as required. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁre signatures to be quantiﬁed Will depend on the sensors
intended to detect the ﬁre. Three major tasks have been identiﬁed that make use Of the sensors developed in
Objective 1 as they become available. The outcome of this work is a database of ﬁre signatures in exploration
environments that can guide the development of advanced ﬁre detectors to coincide With the spiral development of
the CEV. The tasks that Will be implemented include:

1. Evaluation of signatures in normal gravity from practical materials to quantify products and the effect
of heating rate, method, etc.
10
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"11","2. Perform ground-based rniero-and partial-gravity testing to determine if there are quantiﬁable
differences from the normal gravity results.

3. Develop a norrnal-gravity analog for reduced gravity ﬁre signatures.

4. Quantify ﬁre signatures during a space experiment to verify the accuracy of the signatures.

Work in this area was funded in the 1999 and 2002 Mierogravity Combustion Science NRAs. The Smoke
Aerosol Measurement Experiment (SAME) (PI: Dr. David L. Urban, NASA-GRC) is being prepared to conduct a
test in the ISS Mierogravity Science Glovebox to extend the CSD concept mentioned in Section I to provide in situ
particle size information for several smoke aerosols (solid and liquid). This data will further quantify the differences
in the particle size and quantify the particulate pre-ﬁre signatures of relevant spacecraft materials (KaptonTM and
TeﬂonTM, for example). This data will be used to guide the development of optimized smoke detectors.

A ground investigation funded in 2002 (PI: Dr. Randall L. VanderWal, NCMR) has the objective of quantifying
the gaseous ﬁre signatures from various materials in normal gravity and determining if the transient nature of these
signatures are Changed in reduced gravity. The tests are planned for NASA’s Reduced Gravity Aircraft and will
make use of the advanced ﬁre detectors developed for Obj eetive l as well as other analytical diagnostics.

Objective 3: Development of a computational model ofsmoke and contaminant transport

The effectiveness of even the most reﬁned and exotic sensor will be reduced unless it is located in the right place
and the time required for the contaminant to reach a detectable level at that location has been quantiﬁed. If a
distributed network of sensors is used, the number of sensors in the system will undoubtedly be limited and the
design goal will be to minimize the number of sensors required to provide adequate protection. The outcome of this
objective is a validated computer model for the large-seale transport of smoke and combustion products within a
habitable volume that can be used to evaluate ﬁre detector location and activation. This is also a primary deliverable
in the FPDS element and a eo-objeetive with the Advanced Environmental Monitoring and Control (AEMC)
element. This will be accomplished through the following tasks.

1. Develop models for detector activation that can be incorporated into codes for smoke and contaminant
transport.

2. Calibrate models for forced convection in reduced gravity using ground-based reduced gravity
facilities.

3. Evaluate detector location and activation scenarios in reduced gravity using the models developed in
Tasks l and 2.

In the 2001 and 2002 Mierogravity Combustion Science NASA Research Announcements, several projects were
selected to work on various aspects of this objective. Funding has recently been set in place and the projects are
being coordinated to align with these goals, particularly with regard to experimental veriﬁcations of the models.
Objective 4: Evaluation ofemerging technologies in sensor development

One of the primary features of the spiral development concept is that new technologies can be incorporated into a
design as they are matured. Early spirals will be based largely on existing technology. Technologies that are
currently in the early stages of development may make signiﬁcant contributions to later spirals. Advances in sensor
technology such as miniaturization, reduced power requirements, development of wi-ﬁ interfaces, and improved
sensitivity all may signiﬁcantly impact the ﬁre detection and response technologies in future spacecraft and habitats.
This technology development program must stay in touch with these advances and, where appropriate, create new
tasks to continue or hasten the development of promising technologies.

C. Fire Suppression and Response

Our understanding of the processes involved in microgravity ﬁre suppression, particularly with regard to the
practical technology for ﬁre extinguishrnent, is very limited. In general, ﬁre suppression in microgravity has only
been investigated in small scale experiments using idealized geometries. Nevertheless, the Shuttle and 188 both have
portable ﬁre extinguishers for use by the crew. Carbon dioxide is currently used as the ﬁre suppressant in the U.S.
modules and the planned Japanese and BSA modules of the International Space Station (188). (The Russian modules
use hand-held water-based foam extinguishers, similar to those used on the Mir space station.)

Before C02 was selected as the ﬁre suppressant on the ISS, trade studies were performed (Opfell17 and
Panzarella and Lewis”, for example) to evaluate potential suppressants. The criteria used to evaluate various
extinguishing agents and techniques included (1) effectiveness against potential ﬁres; (2) reliability; (3)

1 1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"12","maintainability 0f the suppressant system; (4) weight of the system; (5) required post-ﬁre Cleanup; (6) toxicity of the
suppressant and products of its interaction with the ﬁre; and (7) collateral damage caused by use Of the suppressant.
While the effectiveness of the suppressant to extinguish a ﬁre is a necessary condition for selection of a ﬁre
suppressant on board a spacecraft, it is not a sufﬁcient condition, as evidenced by the design considerations listed
above. The design features that will be addressed by FPDS research program are the determination of the
effectiveness for different suppressants, deﬁning deployment Options and procedures, and quantifying the potential
concentrations of the suppressant and post-suppression products in the atmosphere. The data in these areas required
to perform rational trade studies and make informed design decisions will be Obtained by achieving the Objectives
discussed below.

Objective 1 .' Determine suppressant effectiveness in reduced gravity

A large number of variables are involved in quantifying suppressant effectiveness including: type of suppressant,
type of fuel (phase and composition), atmospheric composition (02 and diluent concentrations), fuel geometry, ﬂow
velocity, and method of agent dispersion. As such, there is a large amount of data available for normal gravity
conditions for a wide range of suppression agents, fuels, conﬁgurations, etc. How this data relates to effectiveness in
low- and partial-gravity behavior is unknown so the number of variables again increases. Therefore, the approach
taken to achieve this obj eetive is to evaluate suppressant effectiveness in reduced gravity using a geometry which is
amenable to detailed computational analysis. A droplet geometry is appropriate because of the considerable
knowledge and simulation capabilities that have been developed through the Mierogravity Combustion Science
program over the years. These tests are currently being planned for the Flame Extinguishrnent experiment (FLEX) to
be conducted in the Multi-user Droplet Combustion Facility (MDCA) 0n the 188. The investigations of ﬁre
suppression experiments and modeling (Tasks 2 and 3) will continue while the ﬂight experiment is being developed
and performed.

Coupled with this experiment will be experiments in ground-based reduced gravity facilities and modeling
efforts that will evaluate difference suppressants, fuels, and conﬁguration. For example, several recent studies have
been eonduetedw'22 that have dealt with the effectiveness of various gaseous agents (CO2, N2, He, Ar, CF3H, and
CF3Br) on diffusion ﬂame extinguishrnent in low gravity both through experiments and computation. However, we
still require data from long-duration reduced gravity experiments to verify some of the conclusions from these
investigations. Based on this discussion, the tasks that will be used to achieve this objective are:

1. Baseline reduced gravity tests using a simpliﬁed geometry that is amenable to detailed computational
analysis.

2. Conduct tests in ground-based facilities using similar suppressants in a range of conﬁgurations.

3. Model ﬁre suppression in these conﬁgurations to extend the reduced-gravity test matrices.

The outcome from this work will be data on the concentrations of various agents required to suppress a wide
range of conﬁgurations in reduced gravity. The space ﬂight data will provide validation for the conclusions drawn
from the investigations performed in ground-based reduced gravity facilities.

Objective 2: Characterize large-scale agent deployment in reduced—gmvily

While certainly coupled to agent effectiveness, this Objective is focused on the delivery of the agent and how it
interacts with the local structures to arrive at the location Of the ﬁre. We anticipate that a combination of small scale
validation experiments and large-seale ﬂow simulations will be required to achieve this Objective. The ﬂow models
will most likely be those that are developed for smoke and contaminant transport to maintain consistency of the
computational tools that are developed within the program. In 2002, several projects were selected by the
Mierogravity Combustion Science program that will conduct the srnall-seale experiments on agent deployment in
reduced gravity that will provide some of the data that will be used to verify the sub-rnodels 0f the simulations. One
Challenging portion of this objective will be to conduct tests for code validation. By nature, these should use a
relatively large scale facility but would have to be performed in reduced gravity if actual agents because they would
settle in normal gravity. Alternatively, a neutrally-buoyant surrogate agent could be used for code validation tests.
These details will be considered and worked out as this work progresses. The tasks described above can be
summarized as follows:

1. Incorporate simpliﬁed reduced-gravity suppression models into rack and rnodule-scale ﬂow simulation
codes.
2. Computationally evaluate agent deployment strategies.
12
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"13","3. Perform code validation tests in reduced gravity using a relevant geometry.
Objective 3: Veriﬁ/ suppressant system design rules through reduced—gmvily testing afrelevantfuels and/or
geometries
The successful completion of Objectives 1 and 2 will yield data and analysis tools that can be used to design ﬁre
suppression systems for exploration vehicles and habitats. The extension of these computational models to the
suppression of ﬁres on realistic solid materials would be possible but the reduced-gravity validation would still be
lacking. Such a space ﬂight test could be conducted, probably in the FEANICS insert in the Combustion Integrated
Rack but would require considerable advanced planning so that the capabilities were incorporated into the insert.
These requirements and the impact on the FEANICS development effort are currently being assessed. Assuming this
path is feasible and selected, the tasks for this objective would be follows:
1. Extend the models to address other fuels and geometries.
2. Conduct reduced gravity tests to verify suppressant performance using relevant fuels/geornetries.
D. Deﬁnition and Evaluation of Fire Scenarios
The implementation of this research area brings together the capabilities developed in all of the other three areas.
It is listed as a separate area because of its importance and last because it draws on activities performed in all of the
other areas. However, these tasks are performed concurrently with those in the other areas, helping to deﬁne test
requirements and conditions while drawing on the most current data to better quantify and reﬁne the ﬁre scenarios
and deﬁnition of design ﬁres. A detailed discussion of the probabilistic risk assessment and performanee-based ﬁre
protection engineering procedures that will be applied in this area are beyond the scope of this paper; however, these
activities should be used to guide research needs and aid in the development of tests, tests conditions, and protocols.
Objective 1 .' Apply performance-basedﬁre safely analyses to quantzﬁ/ﬁre scenarios and response strategies
As discussed in Section III, identiﬁcation of the most probable ﬁre scenarios is required to deﬁne rational ﬁre
protection strategies. Previous studies11’23'25 have also made use of ﬁre scenarios and these will serve as starting
points for this analysis and these will serve as starting points for this analysis. This task will be performed
concurrently with those in the other area because of their inherent synergy. For example, while designing the tests
for Obj eetive 2 in the Fire Prevention and Material Flammability area, we will examine various scenarios that might
lead to ignition and burning of materials and develop an understanding of the most critical output parameters that
dictate the severity of a potential ﬁre. Using this information, we can establish rational pass/fail criteria for existing
or new tests that can be directly linked to the ﬂammability of the material in reduced gravity. Likewise, knowledge
of the types of ﬁres that are most probable could signiﬁcantly impact the selection of a suppression agent,
deployment strategy, and response procedure. Once this has been accomplished, we will develop a list of material
and ambient composition combinations which need to be tested and proceed with these tests. The speciﬁc tasks
required to perform this analysis have yet to be deﬁned; however, they are intertwined with many of the obj eetives
and tasks in the previous areas.
Objective 2: Create realistic visualizations ofﬁre response strategies to aid in assessment and crew training
This obj eetive would be achieved by combining the computational tools previously discussed to create a unique
tool that provides a realistic simulation of ﬁre scenarios and response on an exploration vehicle or habitat. The ﬁre
suppression simulations previously described would be incorporated into the smoke and contaminant transport
models to include the transport of suppression agent throughout the module upon deployment of a ﬁre extinguisher.
Simultaneously with the development of the computational tools previously described, a separate effort will be
conducted to allow Virtual reality Visualizations of the results of the simulations. The beneﬁts of this task would be
to assess ﬁre response strategies based on what the crew would actually experience during the event. Concepts of
human factors engineering could then be used to further develop the response. This could impact the location and
design of safety and ﬁre response equipment, crew communications, and ﬁre response procedures. Using these
Visualizations, VR crew training modules could then be developed that would better prepare the crew to address a
ﬁre emergency during a long-duration mission. These tasks are summarized below:
1. Incorporate ﬁre suppression simulations from Obj eetive 2 into ﬂow simulations with smoke and
contaminant transport models from the Fire Signature and Detection work area.
2. Use the ﬂow simulations to evaluate ﬁre response strategies for relevant ﬁre scenarios deﬁned in the
ﬁre Prevention and Material Flammability areas.
13
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"14","3. Produce Virtual reality Visualizations of these simulations to improve response evaluation and crew
training.
V. Schedule and Program Status

At this time, we have approximately 40 tasks (extramural and intramural) directed toward ﬁre safety on
exploration vehicles and habitats. We are in the process of mapping these to the tasks and deliverables identiﬁed in
this plan and will use this information to deﬁne technology gaps which we will ﬁll in future selections of research
and technology programs. In some cases, we have parallel approaches bring pursued toward a speciﬁc goal: down-
seleetion of some of these efforts will be made when appropriate. Deliverables, in the form of hardware, software,
and/or information (e.g., data libraries) have been deﬁned along with a timetable for the ﬁrst few years of many of
these efforts. Where possible, the work of several on—going projects will be coordinated to better address the
program needs. T . . . .

. able 3. Prellmlnar mllestone schedule for dellver 0f FPDS roducts

A detailed schedule for all of y y p
the tasks identiﬁed in this plan will we—m
b d 1 d as e examine each FIre Preventlon and Materlal Flammablllty

e eve ope W . . Identification of effective candidate ground-based tests 20 FY06
of the research ObJCCtIVCS 1n rnore Acceptance cirteria for reduced gravityflammability 4Q FY07
detail. However a preliminary Reduced gravity verification of normal gravity flammability tests 40 FY08

h d 1 f th (191- bl fth' Definition ofanormalgravitytesttechnique 3Q FY09
SC 6 u c 9r 6 e 1V6.1‘a CS 0 IS Fire Signatures and Detection
program IS ShOWIl 111 Table 3- Quantification of the ISS background particulate size distribution 20 FY05
Based on the development spirals Quantification of the size distribution of prefire pyrolysis particulate 4Q FY06
de ﬁned in Table 1 S iral 1 Reduced gravity tests of suite of gas and particulate sensors 30 FY06

. ’ p Database of fire and pre-fire signature in microgravity ZQ FY07
technologles must be set by Advanced fire detector suite 4o FY08
approximately 2008 while those Verified models of smoke and contaminant transport in microgravity 3Q FY08
for Spiral 2 will be set in the 2009- We guppféss'P"" and Resmnse . . . .

, , uantlflcatlon of suppressant effectiveness In micrograVIty 4Q FY07
2014 tirne-frarne, dependlng 0n the Design rules for suppressant system design and operation 30 FY08
pace of the development. The pace Reduced gravity verification of suppressant system performance 40 FY10
of the development of the FPDS V'sual'zal'wspf F're scenar'gs . .

. . . Reallstlc Vlsual representations of fire envnronment 4Q FY06
prOdUCtS 15 rapid bUt mUSt keep 111 VR Fire response module for analysis of scenarios and crew training 20 FY09
step with the planned pace of the
development spirals. As these are adjusted, we will modify our plans and schedules to provide the products that will
have the largest impact on the health and safety of the exploration crew.

VI. Summary and Concluding Remarks

This paper constitutes the ﬁrst draft of the research and technology development plan for the Fire Prevention,
Detection, and Suppression element. It has been developed through the input of individuals from various NASA
centers including GRC, MSFC, JSC, and WSTF, the National Institute for Standards and Technology, Research
Partnership Centers, combustion and ﬁre safety researchers in academia, and others working in the ﬁre safety
industry. This input has been received through several workshops that focused entirely on research needs in
spacecraft ﬁre safety as well as other meetings and forums over the last few years. The products and many of the
proposed tasks have been presented to the microgravity combustion science research communities involved with all
aspects of ﬁre safety with many of the comments incorporated into the tasks. Other input and comments collected
will be used to help formulate detailed plans for research tasks that were only mentioned in this plan.

In the next few months, this plan will undergo both internal and external reViews during which the obj eetives and
tasks will undoubtedly be modiﬁed. Additional details specifying how existing funded projects map to these tasks
will be added as well as process and logic diagrams for many of the work areas. The current goal is to produce and
baseline a document that will (a) deﬁne a tactical plan to deliver the FPDS products, (b) identify areas that are not
currently being addressed by on-going research, and (0) provide a means to deﬁne requirements and evaluate
proposed FPDS research. The ultimate goal is to ensure crew health and safety on exploration missions by reducing
the risk of ﬁre and giving them tools that would allow them to continue the mission should a ﬁre occur.

References

1National Aeronautics and Space Administration Technical Standard 6001, “Flammability, Odor, Offgassing, and
Compatiblity Requirements and Test Procedures for Materials in Environments That Support Combustion”, 1998.

2Olson, S.L. “Mechanisms of Microgravity Flarne Spread Over a Thin Solid Fuel: Oxygen and Opposed Flow Effects,”
Comb. Science and Tech, Vol. 76, 1991, pp. 233-249.

14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"15","3McGrattan, K.B., Kashiwagi, T., Baum, HR, and Olson, S.L. Olson, .Combust. F lame, Vol. 106, 1996, pp. 377-391.

4Prasad, K., Olson, S.L., Nakamura, Y., and Kashiwagi, T.; ""Effect of Wind Velocity 0n Flame Spread in Microgravity"",
Proceedings 0fthe Combustion Institute, V. 29, pp 2553-2560, July 2002.

5NFPA 12: Standard on Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing Systems. National Fire Protection Association, Quincy,
Massachusetts, 2000.

6Ruff, G. A. (ed.), Research Needs in Fire Safety far the Human Explaration and Utilization of Space: Proceedings and
Research Plan, NASA CP-2003 -212103, April 2003.

7Sacksteder, K. (ed.), Seventh International Workshop on Microgravily Combustion and Chemically Reacting Systems,
NASA CP-2003-212376, June 2003.

8Margle, J .M. (ed.), Spacecraft F ire Safety, NASA CP-2476, Aug. 1987.

9Apostolakis, G.E.; Catton, 1.; Paulos, T.; Paxton, K.; and Jones, 8., “Findings of a Review of Spacecraft Fire Safety Needs,”
NASA CR-189181 (UCLA ENG 92-19), 1992.

10Youngblood, W. N. and Vedha-Nayagam, M., “Advanced Spacecraft Fire Safety: Proposed Projects and Program Plan,”
NASA CR-185147, 1989.

11Reuther, J . J ., “Deﬁnition of Experiments to Investigate Fire Suppressants in Microgravity,” NASA CR 185295, 1990.

12Lange, K. E., Dufﬁeld, B. E., Jeng, F. F., and Campbell, P. D., ""Exploration Spacecraft and Space Suit Internal Atmosphere
Pressure and Composition,"" 2005 Bioastronautics Investigators' Workshop, Galveston, Texas, J anuary 2005.

13Coutin, M., Rangwala, A. S., Torero, J . L., and Buckley, S. G. “Material Properties Governing Co-current Flame Spread:
The Effect of Air Entrainment,” Seventh International Workshop on Microgravity Combustion and Chemically Reacting
Systems, NASA CP-2003-212376, June 2003, pp. 205-208.

14Feier, I. 1., Kleinhenz, J., T’ien, J. S., Ferkul, P. V., and Sacksteder, K. R. “Pressure Modeling of Upward Flame Spread
Rates in Partial Gravity,” 43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, AIAA-2005-0716, J anuary 2005, Reno, NV.

15Olson, S. L., Beeson, H., and Haas, J . P., “An Earth-Based Equivalent Low Stretch Apparatus to Assess Material
Flammability for Microgravity and Extraterrestrial Fire-Safety Applications,” Seventh International Workshop on Microgravity
Combustion and Chemically Reacting Systems, NASA CP-2003-212376, June 2003, pp. 213-216.

16Wichman, I. 8., ""Flame Spread in an Opposed Flow with a Linear Velocity Gradient,"" Combustion and F lame, V01. 50,
1983, pp. 287-304.

17Opfell, J ., “Fire Detection and Fire Suppression Trade Study,” Allied-Signal Aerospace C0. 85-22472, Rev. 1, 1985.

18Panzarella, L. N., Jr., and Lewis, P., “Crew Lock/Hyperbaric Chamber FDS Fire Suppressant Selection Trade Study,”
McDonnell Douglas (Houston) Memorandum A96-J753-STN—M-LP-900070, 1990.

19Hamins, A., Bundy, M., Puri, I. K., McGrattan, K., and Park, W. C., “Suppression of Low Strain Rate Nonpremixed Flames
by an Agent,” NASA/CP-2001-210826, 2001, pp. 101-104.

20Ruff, G. A., Hicks, M., and Pettegrew, R., “Assessment of C02, N2, and He as Suppressant Agents in Microgravity,” Spring
Meeting of the Western States Section/The Combustion Institute, Davis, CA, March 2004.

21Katta, V. K, Takahashi, F., and Linteris, G. T., “Suppression of Cup-Burner Flames Using Carbon Dioxide in
Microgravity,” Combust. F lame, Vol. 137, 2004, pp. 506-522.

22Takahashi, F., Linteris, G. T., and Katta, V. R., “Suppression Characteristics of Cup-Burner Flames in Low Gravity,”
AIAA-2004-0957, 42nd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, J anuary 2004.

23Sheridan, J. G., “A Systems Analysis of Fire Suppression Methods for the US. Space Station,” AFIT/GSO/AA/87D-5,
December 1987.

24Sribnik, F., Birbara, P. J ., Faszcza, J . J ., and Nalette, T. A., “Smoke and Contaminant removal System for Space Station,”
SAE Paper 901391, 20th Intersociety Conference on Environmental Systems, Williamsburg, VA, July 9-12, 1990; also SP-829 —
Space Station Environmental/Thermal Control and Life Support Systems.

25Heard, A., “International Space Station Probabilistic Risk Assessment Fire Analysis,” presented at the Seventh International
Workshop on Microgravity Combustion and Chemically Reacting Systems, June 2003.

15
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
