"","x"
"1","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)’ Sponsoring Organization.
(dam 1| “”6230
?_Egﬁé
AIAA 2001-0325
Applications of Protein Crystallography in
Structural Biology and Drug Design ‘
L. DeLucas
The University of Alabama at Birmingham
Birmingham, AL
th 0 O O O
39 Aerosp ace Selences Meetlng & Exhlblt
8-11 January 2001 '
Reno, Nevada
For permission to copy or to republish, contact the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
1801 Alexander Bell Drive, Suite 500, Reston, VA, 20191-4344.

"
"2","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)’ Sponsoring Organization.
2001—0325
APPLICATIONS OF PROTEIN CRYSTALLOGRAPHY IN STRUCTURAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DESIGN
Karen M. Moore, Marianna M.Long, and Lawrence J . DeLucas
The Center for Biophysical Sciences and Engineering
The University of Alabama at Birmingham
Birmingham, AL
Abstract have reduced the time required to determine structures
from several years to a matter of hours.14 This powerful
X-ray crystallography is a valuable tool for new capability, combined with the completion of the
determining the three-dimensional structure of large human genome sequence plus sequence determinations
biomolecules. Information gained from for more than 40 different bacterial and viral genomes,
crystallographic studies is used to determine the have stimulated researchers in academia and industry to
function of proteins and other macromolecules in begin to develop automated high-throughput
biological systems. A number of experimental crystallographic capabilities for all phases of the structure
processes are involved in determining the structure of determination process.
a protein by crystallography. Frequently, the most The National Institutes of Health (NIH) recently
difﬁcult step is producing large, single crystals for x— supported the development of seven national centers to
ray diffraction data collection. NASA’s develop technology to support high—throughput structural
biotechnology research program explores new Earth- proteomics. The Center for Biophysical Sciences and
and space—based techniques for crystallizing Engineering (CBSE) at the University of Alabama at
macromolecules. Under NASA ﬁmding, the Center Birmingham (UAB) was selected as part of a southeastern
for Biophysical Sciences and Engineering has collaboratory for one of the seven NIH centers. This
developed an extensive assembly of space ﬂight collaboration involves the development of an automated
hardware to explore the effect of the microgravity nanoliter—volume crystallization screening system,
environment on macromolecular crystal growth. The automated dynamically—controlled crystal growth
Center has conducted protein crystal growth systems, and new methods to rapidly determine .
experiments on 38 space shuttle missions. New crystallographic and nuclear magnetic resonance WMR)
crystallographic techniques for Earth- and space- macromolecular structures. In addition, the group is
based experiments have improved researcher’s ability developing automated data collection systems for
to produce high quality macromolecular crystals. synchrotron radiation that are estimated to produce a ﬁve—
The application of structural information to fold increase in thxoughput. Expectations from this new
understanding the ﬁmction of proteins and generation of crystallographic technologies, combined
developing new drugs is discussed. ‘ with the wealth of new biological/medical infomation as
a result of the blossoming ﬁeld of informatics/proteomics,
Introduction have created a new paradigm in drug discovery.
Pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies are
Crystallogmphic studies have played key roles in dramatically decreasing the time required to develop
establishing the structural foundations of preclinical drug candidates. This has positioned
biochemistry and molecular biology by revealing companies to simultaneously perform structure-based
relationships between structure and function of pharmaceutical research on a large number of different
biomolecules. Structure/function relationships are protein targets associated with disease. There is little
critical to understanding how macromolecules doubt that the technology for data collection and structure
operate in biological systems. Crystallographic determination will reach high-throughput capability in the
studies of proteins are currently being used by the near future. This leaves the ability to produce adequate
pharmaceutical and biotechnology industn'es to amounts of biologically active, puriﬁed protein and three-
provide necessary information for engineering dimensional crystals as the two key bottlenecks
proteins and developing new drugs. preventing high-throughput crystallography from
becoming a reality. With the advent of the International
X—ray crystallography is currently the Space Station (188), the space community is uniquely
predominent technique for determining the structure positioned to make a maj or contribution to structural .
of biological macromolecules. A number of recent biology and drug discovery.
advancements in methodology and instrumentation
Copyright B 1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)‘ Sponsoring Organization.
Protein Structure Determination Process (3.0 to 9.0) and buffer types, protein concentrations, ionic

The structure determination process can be strength, precipitating agent (also known as the
divided into six distinct areas: 1) protein crystallizing agent, these consist of various salts,
production/puriﬁcation, 2) crystallization, 3) data polyethylene glycols and alcohols), temperature and in
collection, 4) phasing, 5) initial chain tracing and 6) some cases detergent type. The process is labor intensive
structure reﬁnement. if performed manually yet most academic labs continue to

Step 1 — Protein puriﬁcation. Obtain 20 —50 do so.
milligram quantities of puriﬁed protein, properly Just as small molecules, such as sodium chloride
folded and biologically active (if relevant). crystallize, so do macromolecules. However, enticing
Recombinant DNA techniques have greatly large molecules to arrange themselves into a solid,
facilitated the production of milligram quantities of hydrated and ordered array, i.e. a crystal, is not a facile
pure protein, so the ﬁrst step in this process has been undertaking. This is because the number and strength of
simpliﬁed. Simple bacterial cells are transfected with bonds a macromolecule can fomi with its nearest
the gene for a target protein and induced to produce neighbors in a crystal lattice are much smaller and weaker
large quantities of the protein in relatively pure form. in proportion to its molecular weight than the number
A 6—histidine tag is inseited at either end of the formed in smaller crystals such as sodium chloride.5 With
protein’s amino acid chain to simplify the fewer, weaker interactions among molecules, 3
puriﬁcation process. Histidines binds to nickel, thus, macromolecular crystal is much more delicate and more
afﬁnity chromatography can be performed using a difﬁcult to create. Since macromolecular crystals are
nickel chromatography column. Often this is just the highly hydrated, being on average 50% water, with 3
initial chromatographic step, followed by size range of 30-90%, they are more like ordered gels with '
exclusion and ion exchange chromatography. extensive solvent channels and cavities.

The level of purity required for crystallization is To grow crystals the investigator searches for
often a major impediment to successful solution conditions that will maintain each
crystallization of the target protein. It is cn'tical that macromolecule's structural integrity yet favor the
the protein not only be pure (99.9%) with respect to formation of aggregated states that cascade into
other contaminating proteins, but also, that it be microcrystals and then into diffraction-size crystals.
homogeneous, stable for extended periods of time, These conditions usually involve the addition of
and relatively inﬂexible. Thus, the ultimate criterion precipitating agents such as ammonium sulfate, organic
used to examine the purity/homogeneity is a single solvents like ethanol and/or soluble synthetic polymers
band observed on an isoelectric focusing gel. such as polyethylene glycol. All of these agents work by
Although there are reasons other than fostering intermolecular interactions among the
purity/homogeneity that can affect the number of gel macromolecules. Salts work by competing with the
bands observed, a single band is the goal, even dissolved macromolecules for water, thus enhancing the
though there are many examples where excellent probability of macromolecule-macromolecule association.
crystals were obtained from protein that displayed Organic solvents raise the strength of the electrostatic
multiple isoelectric focusing bands. Generally, the ﬁelds that attract macromolecules to each other.
more pure and homogeneous a protein is, the higher Polymers promote both of these effects and also establish
the success rate in producing high quality crystals. a water network that tends to exclude the

A second obstacle is the inability of expression macromolecules.5 These precipitating reagents then bring
systems to produce milligram quantities of the a highly concentrated macromolecule solution to a point
desired protein and to produce the protein in its just below supersaturation. Supersaturation is achieved
biological, in vivo form (properly folded).' It is by the very slow modiﬁcation of some physical property
estimated that in more than 50% of the cases, of that solution such as protein concentration by vapor
molecular biologists are unable to achieve the diffusion or temperature variation. Supersaturation
crystallographically required quantities of the reduces a macromolecule’s solubility thereby inducing it
biologically correct form of the protein. This single to crystallize. The search for the optimal conditions for
roadblock has halted hundreds of exciting therapeutic crystal growth has been and continues to be the major
protein targets from utilizing 3-dimensional structure bottleneck in the process of determining macromolecular
information to guide and enhance the design of new structure and function by x-ray crystallography.
pharmaceuticals. The most common laboratory technique for growing

Ste}; 2 - Cystallization. Once milligram macromolecular crystals is the vapor diffusion method.
quantities of puriﬁed, properly folded, homogeneous This micro-technique allows the screening of a large
protein is obtained, crystallization screening is number of crystallization conditions fairly rapidly with
initiated. This involves preparing several thousand microliter quantities of protein. A small drop of protein
chemical conditions that include arange of pH values solution, mixed with precipitant, is suspended above a

’ 2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)’ Sponsoring Organization.
reservoir of more concentrated precipitant in a sealed Its basic component is usually a single repeating
chamber. Water molecules move from the protein entity of the substance forming the crystal, deﬁned by
droplet through the vapor space into the reservoir to crystallographers as the ""asymmetric unit"". Several of
establish equilibrium between the concentration of these asymmetric units can associate together in a
the precipitant in the droplet and the reservoir. As symmetrical fashion, mathematically called its ""space
the volume of the droplet decreases and the group"". Proteins containing L-amino acids have 65
concentration of the protein increases protein allowed space groups. The space group characterizes the
molecules crystallize in a regular array, if a number construct of asymmetric units that makes up the ""unit
of physical parameters are optimized. There are a cell"". The unit cell is an imaginary box that has the
number of robotic dispensing systems currently minimal volume to enclose the set of asymmetric units
available which signiﬁcantly reduce the time required deﬁned by the space group. There are six possible shapes
to prepare the large number of screening conditions. to unit cells and for most proteins their lengths can vary
However, these robotic systems generally require between 50 and 150 A. A crystal is a repetition of the
approximately 50 milligrams of puriﬁed protein to unit cell at periodic or regular intervals. The number of
screen 3,000 crystallization conditions. This molecules in such a crystal is staggering, up to 1015. To
requirement is due to the inability of commercially an x—ray beam, the crystal looks like an extended cloud of
available robotic dispensing systems to accurately electrons, whose density varies from place to place in
dispense viscous protein and crystallizing solutions in three dimensions but in a regular repeating way.6 The
small volumes. Producing 50 milligrams of protein beam reﬂects off of these planes of electrons. In Step 2 of
represents a major roadblock for a large percentage Figure 2, the single crystal is actually rotated in a
of proteins identiﬁed as therapeutic targets. Even if predetermined manner so that one after another of the
milligram quantities of puriﬁed protein are obtained, crystal's sets of diffracting planes comes into the correct
typical success rates for growing diffraction quality reﬂecting position. These diffraction peak intensities and
crystals approximate 30%. locations are used in mathematical operations to produce

A well-ordered macromolecular crystal is the an electron density map that indicates the distribution of
unique enabling material necessary to determine the electrons in the unit cell, and provides information about
x-ray crystallographic structure. The crystal is the atoms that possess those electrons. The
needed because the x-ray diffraction from single crystallographer develops a preliminary atomic model and
molecules is much too weak for detection. then optimizes and reﬁnes the model to deduce the
Diffraction intensities from an ordered array of macromolecular structure.
molecules are higher. This is due to constructive
interference (the additive nature of diffraction ?wztzfewxm
crystallographers characterize with a speciﬁc set of t
%%
Whigwfﬂﬁ ""
McPherson Wm There are two
ages“ in most university and pharmaceutical crystallography
eases depamems. and 2) synchrotron beamlines» that
%“w typicallx govemment-owned 311d operated faCIWCS
“g“:x where electrons are accelerated 1n large storage rmgs

» 3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)’ Sponsoring Organization.
(they generally extend more than a city block in size). produce this diffraction phasing infomation. These
X-ray beamlines, constructed tangentially to the ring, include:
are used to capture and focus x-rays emitted from the 1. Molecular Replacement (MR) -The structure of a
accelerating electrons. Four major synchrotron highly-homologous protein (if available) can be used
facilities are located in the United States and ﬁve to perform a rotation-translation search using the
additional facilities are in other countries. In each experimental x-ray data obtained from crystals of the
case, users are required to write proposals for protein whose structure is unknown.7 This involves
assigned time on these facilities, unless dedicated using the known homologous structure as an initial
time is purchased from commercial beamlines or model for the unknown structure. Since there are
signiﬁcant money is contributed to construct a now multiple examples of protein structures with
beamline at one of these facilities. somewhat homologous primary sequences exhibiting

Synchrotron sources provide several advantages highly homologous tertiary structures, this method
over conventional x—ray sources including 1) can be attempted on a large number of unknown
improved resolution/accuracy of the ﬁnal structure, structures with the realization that it will prove
2) speed of the data collection process (hours versus successful for approximately 10 to 20% of the cases.
days), and 3) ability to tune the wavelength, thereby However, when successful, the new structure solution

, allowing the use of multiwavelength anomalous is evident within a matter of days.
dispersion (MAD) and single wavelength anomalous 2. Multiple lsomorphous Replacement (MIR) via heavy
scattering. MAD is a new technique that enables atom derivative screening - If a complex of the
crystallographers to determine the complete three— protein with a heavy atom can be crystallized (0r
dimensional structure of large proteins in less than 1 alternatively, the heavy atom is soaked into existing
day. native protein crystals without disturbing the crystal

Unfortunately, most of the crystallographic lattice parameters), the position of the heavy atom in
community relies on laboratory sources due to the the protein can be located in calculated electron
inability to get easy access to synchrotron beamtime. density maps7. Once independent positions for two
Generally, it is necessary to collect several native heavy atoms are identiﬁed, this information can be
data sets and several deriviative data sets, which used to deduce the original phases for diffraction data
involves soaking existing native crystals with heavy of the native protein. This critical information allows
atom complexes such as mercury or platinum the structure of the protein to be determined.
chloride. Many different heavy atom concentrations Generally, as many as 50 different heavy atom
are screened in the search for a chemical condition complexes, each experimentally prepared at ten
that produces single site derivatives without changing different concentrations, are screened in an attempt to
the unit cell parameters of the original native crystal produce single binding site derivative crystals that are
(isomorphous derivative). This is a time consuming isomorphous (when compared to the native crystals).
process since most labs manually prepare the heavy X—ray diffraction data are used to analyze each
atom chemical solutions for crystal soaking. derivative crystal until the correct solution is found.

Step 4 — Structure determination. The protein Unfortunately, this classical approach has several
structure determination process can be divided into disadvantages for high-throughput crystallography
two categories based on whether there is a highly including laborious soaking procedures and long
homologous structure already determined for the soaking times. It usually does not work well for
protein under study. If there is, then it can be used as small and medium-sized molecules and most heavy
an initial starting model for determination of the new atoms require speciﬁc chemical coordination. This is
protein structure. If not, then other methods such as a time-consuming process, requiring many crystals
multiple isomorphous derivative (MIR) or multiple and signiﬁcant laboratory x—ray time, usually
anomalous derivatives (MAD) must be used to requiring 6 to 18 months to complete the structure
determine the structure. determination.

The use of each method requires that certain 3. Multiple Anomalous Derivative (MAD) Phasing - A
criteria be met for the crystallographic determination third, relatively new method involves the replacement
of the protein’s structure. Diffraction data provide of sulfur atoms with selenium atoms in all
two important pieces of information, diffraction peak methionines present in the protein’s sequenceg’ 9 The
intensity and location, both of which are related to structural solution method, known as MAD phasing,
the three-dimensional structure of the crystallized is accomplished by expressing the protein in a
protein. Unfortunately, one additional parameter, the bacterial expression system containing seleno-
phase of each diffraction peak, is critically needed to methionine. This method requires tunable radiation
solve the structure. Various methods are used to (only available at synchrotrons) so that the

wavelength of the x-ray beam can be matched to the
~ 4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)’ Sponsoring Organization.
absorption edge of selenium. If the selenium The ability to use one or more of these alternative
replacement is successful and if crystals can be approaches for determining a protein’s structure provides
grown of the seleno-methionine protein, the a powerful arsenal for ensuring that once crystallized, the
structure can be determined in a matter of hours protein structure will be determined. Furthermore, there
(provided a synchrotron beamline is available for is a signiﬁcant likelihood that the structure can be
the data collection). Some disadvantages of this determined in a matter of days to weeks.
method include laborious wet laboratory
procedures. It does not work well with certain Step 5 - Chain tracing. At the present time, Slicon
expression systems, nor does it work well when Graphics systems are used to display three-dimensional
the number of methionines is limited. It is also protein electron density maps. The linear sequence of
frequently difﬁcult to crystallize the seleno- amino acids in the protein is then used to “trace the chain”
methionine protein derivative. In spite of these to arrive at the initial structural solution. In most cases,
disadvantages, this is clearly the method of this chain ﬁtting is performed manually by experienced
choice for high-throughput crystallography. In crystallographers, using Silicon Graphics to display the
fact the CBSE is currently incorporating protein’s electron density. This process is rather
laboratory robotics systems to expedite these laborious, often requin'ng an iterative approach whereby
procedures. the x,y,z coordinates from a portion of the complete

4. A fourth method involves the use of a structure are used to recalculate phases in an attempt to
pressurized xenon chamber to produce xenon improve the map and structure.
derivatives of native protein crystals.10 This
method is successful in approximately ten Step 6 — Reﬁnement. Once the initial structure
percent of the cases tried. It is relatively simple solution is complete, the coordinates are subjected to a
to perform and when successful, it produces high series of least squares reﬁnements, thereby optimizing
quality derivatives that allow the structure to be bond angles/lengths plus steric and charge parameters
determined in less than a week. Thus, this associated with the protein structure. The process
method is also conducive to high—throughput generally requires multiple cycles to produce a structure
crystallography. with accuracy sufﬁcient for drug design, a process that
5. Flash derivatives - A ﬁfth method involves generally requires less than one month to complete.
soaking native crystals with halogens such as
bromine or iodine followed by ﬂash—freezing to Microgravity Experiments
rapidly produce halogen derivatives.”13 If For more than ﬁfteen years, NASA has sponsored a
successful, the technique allows structures to be research program to explore the effect of microgravity on
determined in a few days. The advantages of the crystallization of macromolecules. In the l—g
this technique compared to MAD phasing lies in environment of earth, both convection and sedimentation
' the fact that it can be accomplished with the play a role in the size and quality of protein crystals.
native protein crystals (no need to express and Gravity—driven convection currents impact the rate at
crystallize altered protein, i.e. seleno-methionine which protein molecules attach to the surface of a
replacement) and radiation with a wavelength of growing crystal. Therefore, different surfaces of a crystal
1.5418 A (conventional laboratory x-rays) can be may grow at different rates, depending on the convection
used to collect the data when iodine is used as currents. This differential may result in irregularities in
the halogen. This method presents a viable high- the crystal lattice and the inclusion of impurities.
thIoughput alternative to MAD, MIR or MR Sedimentation of growing crystals may also interfere with
methods. Flash freezing is quick and easy to uniform growth of crystals and result in crystals stacking
use, making it ideal for high-throughput projects. and growing in clumps that are not suitable for x-ray
The technique has a success rate greater than diffraction. In the microgravity environment of the space
95% for proteins with crystals of resolution 2.5 shuttle and the space station, both convection and
A or better. This means that the technique will sedimentation are dampened. Therefore, it was
generally be useful for those proteins with hypothesized that macromolecular crystals grown in
molecular weights of 60,000 daltons or less, microgravity might be larger and more perfectly formed.
since larger proteins generally do not produce Initial microgravity protein crystal growth
2.5 A diffraction data. However, it should be experiments were performed on Spacelab 1 in 1983 by
noted that a large number of potential therapeutic Littke and J ohn.I4 Crystals were produced of the enzymes
protein targets exhibit molecular weights below lysozyme and B-galactosidase that were much larger with
60,000 daltons. greater optical clarity than crystals grown in control
experiments on Earth. Subsequent ﬂight and ground
experiments, sponsored by NASA, have produced crystals
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)‘ Sponsoring Organization.
of many macromolecules that demonstrate . . . ~ ..
measurable improvements in x-ray diffraction H I WMWM
resolution, and now similar results have been ‘3"" :4 ,3? j
European Space Agency (ESA), the J apanese Space '1
Agency (J SA), the Russian Space Agency (RSA), the i; *-
Chinese Space Agency and the Canadian Space 2 ' ”'

The Center for Biophysical sciences and ;.
Engineering (CBSE) (formerly the Center for _ lif- , 'Exi‘ ' :
Macromolecular Crystallography (CMC)) began a , “Wm“
program of microgravity crystallization experiments 4. C""???._§3;§;;i;3§;?3§’1i.1e
in 1985 with funding from NASA- Crystallization w
missions. This program now involves an Figure 5: The ngh DenSIty Protein Crystal Growth
international co-investigator team located at more System (HDPCG)
than 40 universities and pharmaceutical companies. , . . .
Co—investigators provide valuable protein samples for The Center S new High DenSIty . Protem Crystal
microgravity crystallization and they are responsible Gthh System (HDPCG) has been Inamfested by NASA
for x—ray diffraction analyses of protein crystals using to ﬂy on the Internat1onal $133.06 Stat} on aboard increment
conventional laboratory equipment or synchrotron 6A' The payload WI“ launch in April, 2001’ ?board STS-
radiation. 100, and then be transferred to the International Space

A team of scientists and engineers from the Station for 60 days. The payload will ieturn to earth
CBSE have designed and built ﬂight hardware to aboard.STS-105. The HPPCG IS a yapor diffusion system
adapt laboratory crystal growth techniques to the cons15t1ng of 1008 1nd1i/1dualexpemnents. Thls compact
microgravity environment. The Center’s most recent anti efﬂuent system WI"" .be stored in a CRIM at 22° C
payloads included an assembly of vapor diffusion (Figure 5)' It W1"" ﬂy.1n an .Express RaCk on Space
experiments in the Commercial Vapor Diffusion Station: The HDPCG .13 manifested on several Space
Apparatus (CVDA) and temperature-induced batch Statlon Incrementsoso this sy'stem Will greatly expand the
crystallizati on experiments in the Protein number and duianon of micrograVIty expenments and
Crystallization Facility (PCF). The CVDA, pictured Signiﬁcant]?! increase the )t-ray crystallography
in Figure 3, is an assembly of 128 individual vapor community S access to space experiments.
diffusion experiments housed in a . . .
Refrigerator/Incubator Module (CRIM) and ﬂown in Although NASA'S ﬁrst micrograwty protein
3 Shuttle middeck locker or a Space Station Express crystallization experiments occimed more than a decede
Rack. ago, the total number of experiments performed remains
extremely small. This is due to the infrequency of US.
M”§i§w“» other factors including uncertainty in the launch SChed‘ﬂe’
”3”“‘wwzm the short duration of a typical space shuttle ﬂight (most

shuttle ﬂights do not exceed 10 days), and stability of
Figure 3; (A) Commercial Vapor Diffusion temperature control during sample transfer operations. In
Apparatus; (B) CVDA installed in incubator. spite of these difﬁculties, the space shuttle has proven to
be a valuable laboratory where macromolecular

The PCF, shown in Figure 4, is a large—scale crystallization experiments have demonstrated the
facility for producing crystals by temperature change. POSitiVC effect 0f microgravity on the process 0f crystal
This facility can accommodate protein sample 8T 0W1 The International Space Station (133) Will
volumes in the 1.0 ml to 500 ml range and is provide a sophisticated laboratory where long duration,
primarily ﬂown in collaborative research projects iterative crystallization experiments can be performed. In
with pharmaceutical companies. The PCF ﬂies addition, new hardware being developed will allow
installed in a CRIM, stored in a Shuttle Middeck scientists to analyze crystals via x—ray diffraction so that
Locker. crystallization experiments can be optimized on orbit.26

High—quality crystals will be robotically cryo-preserved
6 .
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)‘ Sponsoring Organization.
for subsequent analysis in Earth-based laboratories. provide an improved long-acting insulin. On both
missions, samples of insulin complexed with phenol or a
Results nontoxic phenol surrogate produced crystals that were
Optically and crystallographically superior to their earth—
Over the past ﬁfteen years, the CBSE has conducted grown counterparts. The crystals of insulin complexed
macromolecular crystal growth experiments on 38 with para-hydroxy benzamide (STS—60) were larger by a
space shuttle missions. The results of the vapor factor of 2 and diffracted x-rays to signiﬁcantly higher
diffusion experiments are summarized in Table 1. resolution (Table 2).
Table 1 Results of Microgravity Vapor Diffusion Table 2. Results of Temperature-Induced Crystallization
Experiments Experiments
19 Shuttle Missions 22] Macromolecules Mission Protein Diffraction Data
No Crystals Diffraction Improved (1118mm) gjrzfttegingcre .
Crystals Too Small -Sized Diffraction Ansstrlonqs ase m
for Crystals Data _ '
X—ray Data STS-37 Bovtne Increased I/O(I)
Collection ' STS-43 Bovme 0.4 (2.7“) 2.3)
STS-49 Bovine 0.4 (2.7~—> 2.3)
STS-60 T3R3+
These data show that of the 221 different STS—86 ¥henol3 82 895—11812
macromolecules ﬂown 27.2% produced crystals in STS—95 T6 0.6 (1390.9)1’2
the microgravity environment that were superior to STS—95 TGR 0'4 (1' 6"" 1'2) 2
crystal grown of the same compound in the l—g 3 3 ' ° '
environment. The improvement in quality is 1. Mosaicity studies showed ug—grown crystals had
measured by the increase in the quantity and quality smaller rocking widths than l-g—grown 0173313
of usable x-ray diffraction data. It is interesting to 2. Ground data: area detector; pg data: synchrotron
note that 16.7 % of the compounds ﬂown produced 3. Parahydroxybenzamide
no crystals although crystals of these compounds had R6, T3R3, T6 refer to different forms of human
been previously produced on Earth. In addition, insulin
26.2% of the macromolecules produced crystals in
the microgravity environment that were too small for The space-grown crystals provided 1. 4 A electron
x-ray .data collection. These data 1nd1cate that the density maps, which were superior to the 1.9A maps from
expemnent duratlon was too short to allow crystals to eaIth—grown crystals (grown with the identical protein
grow 1n the dlffuston—eontrolled envnonment 9f batch and crystallization system). The improved quality
space. If the .vapor dtfﬁlsmn results are evaluated .m of electron density maps for the space-grown crystals
hght Of this information, the overall success ‘3 qulte enabled researchers to determine the position of the para-
rernarkable. The 188 “fl“ proylde longer Erowth hydroxy benzamide molecule without ambiquity for the
, penods ,(moqths) cornbmed w,1th the , ab111ty F0 ﬁrst time. In addition, the electron density maps
perform Iteratlve expenments usmg multlple proteln generated by the space-grown crystals revealed that there
batches. This enhanced capability is expected to were actually two para hydroxybenzamide molecules
signiﬁcantly increase overall SUCCCSS rates as W811 as present in the binding site rather than one, as originally
the magnitude ofdifﬁaction resolution improvement. interpreted from data provided by numerous Earth-grown
, The .obJectwe. 0f the temperature-mductlon crystals. The para-hydroxybenzamide molecules are
mlcrogr av1ty expenments on 8:18—57 and STS'QO involved in an extensive hydrogen—binding pattern
was to, grow crystals Of recombmant human “18mm between pairs of dimers of the hexamer and two water
and lneuhn complexes to obtam structural molecules. In summary, the x-ray diffraction data were
mformatlon useful for the eventual development of a superior in every respect to those from Earth~grown
Pew , 1°.""g'a‘3‘mg tnsulln forrnulatlonz , Although crystals and the resulting electron density maps revealed
Insuhn ls actlve 1n Its monomenc form,.1t1s storetl as considerably more detail and completely new information
a zmc—complexed hexamer. Phenollc denvatlves than observed in corresponding maps generated from
bind to the zinc-insulin hexamer, retard its Earth-grown crystals.”
dissolution, and slow the bioavailability of insulin. A On STS-95 recombinant human insulin crystals were
non-toxic phenolic analog complexed to insulin could ’
7 .
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/orAuthor(s)' Sponsoring Organization.
grown, yielding a substantial improvement in the 2. Finzel, B. C. (1993) Software for macromolecular
diffraction resolution, 0.9A data. A detailed crystallography: a user’s overview. Curr. Opin Stmct.
evaluation of the crystal quality not only included the Biol 3, 741 -747.
x-ray diffraction resolution, but also the mosaicity of 3. Kottke T. and Stalke, D. (1994) Crystal handling at
the crystals. The mosaicity studies demonstrated that low temperatures. J . App]. Crystallogr. 26, 615-619.
the space-grown crystals were more ordered at the 4. Helliwell, J . R., (1992) Macromolecular
molecular level that the ground-grown crystals. This Crystallography with Synchrotron Radiation.
resolution improvement will allow the complete Cambridge University Press. Cambridge.
electronic structure of human insulin to be 5. McPherson, A.,(1989) ""Macromolecular Crystals"",
determined, providing valuable insight into the Scientiﬁc American, 260, 62-69
atomic/electronic forces responsible for the insulin— 6. Kendrew, J .C. (1961) ""The Three—dimensional
insulin and insulimwater interactions. Structure of a Protein Molecule"", Scientiﬁc

American, 205, 96-110.
Conclusions 7. Blundell, T. L., Johnson, L.N., (1976) Protein
‘ Crystallography, Academic Press, New York.
NASA’s protein crystal growth program has resulted 8. Murthy, H. M. H., (1996) Use of multiple-
in a number of exciting advances with regard to our , wavelength anomalous diffraction measurements in
understanding of the process of macromolecular Ab Initio phase determination for macromolecular
crystallization, factors that affect crystal quality and structure, in Crystallographic Methods and Protocols,
size, the development of methods to help predict ed. C. Jones, B. Mulloy, M.R. Sanderson, Humana
crystallization conditions for new proteins and the Press, Totowa, New J ersey, 127-152.
development of new crystallization techniques and 9. Hendrickson, W. A., Ogata, C. M., (1977) Phase
hardware that improve crystallization in Earth—based determination from multiwavelength anomalous
laboratories. Data obtained from space~grown diffraction measurements, in Methods in
crystals has contributed to new understanding of the Enzymology, Macromolecular Crystallogrpahy, ed.
structure/function relationships for several enzymes C. W. Carter, R. M. Sweet, Academic Press, Boston,
and is currently being used in the search for new 276, 494—523.
drugs or improved drugs. 10. Saier, 0., Schmidt, A., Kratky, C., (2000) Freeze-
The advent of new high-throughput x-ray trapping isomorphous xenon derivatives of protein
structure determination technologies plus the crystals, .1. Appl. Cryst. 30, 476.
availability of thousands of new proteins from 11. Y. Devedjiew, Z. Dauter, S.R. Kunzetsov, T.L. Z.
genome projects, have created a signiﬁcant demand Jones and Z. S. Derewenda, Crystal structure of the
for improved crystallization capabilities. The ISS Human Acyl Protein Thioesterase I from Single X—
will provide a sophisticated laboratory where crystals ray Data Set to 1.5A, Structure Fold Des., 8, 1137,
can be grown for extended time periods to take full 2000.
advantage of the inﬂuence of the quiescent 12. Hoover, D.M. Rajashankar, K.R., Blumenthal, R.,
environment of space. The enhanced space station Puri, A., Oppenheim, J .J ., Chertov, 0., Lubkowski,
capabilities will enable the research community to J., (2000). The structure of human beta-defensin-Z
realize the ﬁll] potential of microgravity to enhance shows evidence of higher order oligomerization. J.
crystallization and our knowledge of structural Biol. Chem. 275: 3291132918.
biology. 13. Dauter Z, Dauter, M., Rajashankar, K. R., (2000),
’ Novel approach to phasing proteins: derivatization by
Acknowledgements ‘ short cryo-soaking with halide, Acta Crystallogr D5 6,
232-237.
The authors greatly appreciate the help given by Dr. 14. Littke, W. and John, C. (1984) Protein single crystal
Craig Smith and Dr. Alex McPherson in preparing growth under microgravity, Science 225:20.
this manuscript. The research presented was 15 . DeLucas, L]. et a1. (1989) Protein crystal growth in
sponsored by the NASA Cooperative Agreement microgravity. Science 246, 651-654.
NCC8-126 and NASA grant NAS8-40189. 16. Strong, R.K., et a1. (1992) Long duration growth of -
protein crystals in microgravity aboard the MIR
References space Station. J ournal of Crystal Growth 119, 200-
214.
1. Pﬂugrath, J.S., (1992) Developments in x-ray 17. Long, M.M., et al. (1996) Protein crystal growth in
detectors. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2, 811-825. microgravity review of large scale temperature
induction method: bovine insulin, human insulin and
8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"10","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)‘ Sponsoring Organization.
human alpha interferon. J. Cryst. Growth, 168,
233~243.
18. Snell, E. et a1. (1995) Improvements in lysozyme
protein crystal perfection through microgravity
growth. Acta Crystallogr. D51, 1099-1102.
19. Koszelak, S, et a]. (1995) Protein and virus
crystal growth on international microgravity .
laboratory. Biophys. J . 69, 13-19.
20. Carter, DC, et a1. (1999) PCAM: a multi-user
facility-based protein crystallization apparatus
for microgravity. J . Cryst. Growth 196, 610—622.
21. Wardell, M.R., et a1. (1997)Improved diffraction
of antithrombin crystals grown in microgravity.
Acta Cryst. D53, 622-625.
22. Skinner, R., et a1. (1997) The 2.6A structure of
antithrombin indicates a confonnational change
at the heparin binding site. J. Mol. Biol. 166 601-
609.
23. Declercq, J .-P. et a1. (1999) A crystal of a typical
EF-hand protein grown under microgravity
difﬁacts x-rays beyond 0.9A resolution. J .
Cryst. Growth 196, 595-601.
24. Ng. J.D., et a1. (1997) Comparative analysis of
thaumatin crystals grown on Earth and in
microgravity. Acta Crystallogr. D53, 724-733.
25. Carter, D.C., et a1. (1999) Diffusion~controlled
crystallization apparatus for microgravity
(DCAM) ﬂight and ground-based applications.
J . Cryst. Growth 196, 602-609.
26. McDonald, W.T., et al. (1995) Protein
Crystallography Facility for the International
Space Station, American Institute of Aeronautics
and Astronautics Paper 95-3661, AIAA, Space
Programs and Technologies Conference and
Exhibit, Huntsville, Alabama, September, 1995.
27. Smith, GD. (1998) The phenolic binding site of
T3R3f insulin 1. J. Mole. Structure 469, 71-80.
9 _
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
