"","x"
"1","Short Communication
Double Containment Transfer Tool for Liquid Sample Manipulation on the
International Space Station
Michael A. (Andy) Kurk, Scott Moyers, Kenneth Barton, J ohn C. Vellinger, and Paul W. Todd
T echshot, Inc, 7200 Highway 150, Greenville, Indiana 47124, USA
—— INTRODUCTION
Key words: Sample Transfer; Space Syringe; Space With the terrnination 9f ﬂights Of the U' .S'
Pipette; Spaceﬂight Instrumentation; Biologic space shuttle, Wthh has historically returned life
Containment sciences and ﬂuids materials to Earth for post-
ﬂight analysis, there is an immediate need for on-
Correspondence to: Paul Todd orbit analysis capabilities. In many life sciences,
TCChSth, Inc. ﬂuids, and human research projects it Will be
7200 Highway 150 necessary to transfer ﬂuids from an experiment
GICCPYIHCESN 471;: facility to an analytical facility. This requirement
Egadlz3p—@—t3 5 91 Ct): zzzotbom is often in conﬂict With the NASA requirement
that ﬂuids classiﬁed as Toxicity Level-l must be
ABSTR A CT always doubly contained. In View of this need we
have des1gned, fabricated, and tested prototypes of
With the termination of ﬂights of the U. S. transfer tools capable of removing and doubly
space shuttle there has been an abrupt reduction in containing ﬂuids Without necessarily requiring 21
experimental sample return capabilities from the glovebox.
International Space Station (188). There is an
immediate need for an increase in on-orbit FEATURES
1 ' '1' ' h f f 1 - .
ana ys1s capabi 1i 1es and t ere ore or “mp e The Double Containment Transfer Tool
transfer capabilities. We have therefore des1gned
. transfers up to 1.0 mL and up to 5.0 mL of Tox-
and fabricated prototypes of transfer tools capable . . .
. . . Level-l ﬂuids from and to appropriately equipped
of removmg and doubly containing up to 1.0 mL . . .
. experimental deV1oes on 188. The oapaoity
and up to 5.0 mL of Tox—Level-l ﬂuids between . .
. . depends on the Size of a sterile, off—the-shelf
deV1oes on 188. The Double Containment Transfer . . . . .
. . oommeroial syringe that is installed in the Double
Tool accommodates oommeroially available . .
. . Containment Transfer Tool hous1ng. The transfer
syringe bodies and off—the-shelf needle-less luer . .
. . . tool accommodates oommeroially available
ﬁxtures in isolation from the spacecraft . . . .
. . syringe bodies and utilizes an off—the-shelf needle-
atmosphere. Experimental vessels can be modiﬁed
. less luer ﬁxture and septum. These elements are
With female connectors so they can be sampled by . .
. . enclosed so as to prevent their contact With the
or can receive ﬂuids from the Transfer Tool. . .
. spacecraft atmosphere. Various experimental
Prototypes have been subjected to leakage, .
. cassettes, vessels, and sample carriers can be
pressure, vacuum, and performance testing, and . .
. . . modiﬁed With female connectors so they can be
prototypes are available for testing in . .
. , . sampled by or can receive ﬂuids from the Transfer
experimenters laboratories.
Tool.
60 -- Gravitational and Space Biology Volume 26 (1) Apr 2012

"
"2","Kurk et al. -- Liquid Sample Transfer Tool for 188
Sealing Tune End ﬂap
/— ,.-'— Eeallng Tuna
..I' . _ I' H"" ' .-
' .- f"" “r I ”m”
I II- 1"""" ' - - -- .... _/ .
_' '_ i: _ . Syringe Hanging
. ”t"" _ .'j""'_' _ fr. -.. *- f
‘3‘ £&\ ""'u! 2/
— - ' - .....' ‘ _ “=- .'T""- ""' .'
. . -. ...-ll"" :. F__ I "" I “11‘!
.. ...” Eh- ., 3-.- _1:""""-;-r.'-.-. '
tan! Retainer Band -v "" -
DE ""' a . r E;
II r .
*' ~..., I la
‘3‘“:‘fi' I:
Eyﬂndrical Plunger —/
Figure 1. Photograph of one embodiment of the Double Containment T ransfer T 00]. The upper half (right) is
the housing for a commercial syringe. It is coupled to a sealing tube by a retainer band, Which seals the
syringe housing to the coupling and transfer mechanism that provides double containment during transfer
and allows disassembly for the insertion of the inner syringe. A cylindrical plunger glides through an O-ring
seal to prevent ﬂuid escape. The sealing tube terminates With a slitted rubber aperture sweep that prevents
the escape of drops into the cabin atmosphere. The sealing tube end cap is protective only and does not
provide a level of containment; it is normally tethered to the body of the sealing tube.

Several detailed features have been this septum remains protected With a tethered cap
incorporated in anticipation of safety certiﬁcation or plug. When a transfer is to be made the cover
requirements for crewed orbital ﬂight. During is removed from the female port and the tip of the
transport a simple package Will secure and protect tool is inserted. Once mated Within the female
the Transfer T001 during transport or storage. If port the Transfer Tool is rotated clockwise to lock
the plunger is accidentally depressed the sample the threaded male luer ﬁtting on the end of the
that is ejected Will be contained Within the Sealing tool With the needleless septum Within the female
Tube (see Figure 1). TWO levels of containment port. Upon internal luer engagement the syringe
are required through all phases of operations. housing is pushed forward and twisted clockwise
Double containment between the Sealing Tube to engage the needleless septum and syringe
and the ISS transfer site is maintained through housed Within the tool. Once engaged, the double
design of the target mating port. The target o-rings 0n the front of the tool provide and
hardware is required to have a female port that maintain a seal through the transfer process. Once
contains a needleless septum. When not in use the selected volume has been transferred by

Gravitational and Space Biology Volume 26 (1) Apr 2012 -- 61

"
"3","Kurk et al. -- Liquid Sample Transfer Tool for 188
Egiﬂltgfcigaflegferévtiltlﬁirslyntﬂge 2:25:12: isggéateg T est 4: Rapid depressurization/ re-pressurization
disengage the internal luer seal within the tool. Result: The Transfer Tool prototype was
The sealing tube is then rotated counterclockwise subjected to rapid depressurization and
within the mating female port to disengage the repressurization in both the ﬁlled and empty states
connection at the sample transfer site. Once in accordance with NASA Document SSP 5200-
disengaged, the Transfer Tool is removed from IDD_ERP ReV. H (NASA, 2009). In both the
the female port, the end cap is placed over the end ﬁlled and empty states the Transfer Tool
Of the tool, and the cap reattached t0 the female prototype experienced no leakage or structural
port. Both end caps are tethered to their failure.
respective devices. An o-ring ring seal provides . .
containment around the plunger, which has a T est 5 '° Rap “1 temper atur e cyclmg
cylindrical shaft. The “stock” syringe plunger Result: A water-ﬁlled Double Containment
provides the primary ﬂthd containing seal, while Transfer T001 prototype was temperature cycled
the o-ring prevents leakage in the eVeht Of a between 710 C and -400 C with a soak period of 3
plunger seal failure or ﬂuid ejection into the hours. During the cycling from 710 C to _ 400 C,
Sealing Tube. the Protective End Cap softened and deformed

The appearance and main features 0f the around the end of the Double Containment
Double Containment Transfer T001 are illustrated Transfer Tool. This occurrence was remedied in
in Figure 1. Prototypes of this tool are available the second prototype design with addition Of a
for ground-based laboratory testing in user thicker Protective End Cap that features a pressure
applications. relieving breather.

TEST METHODS AND RESULTS T est 6: F reeze/thaw cycling (empty and ﬁlled)

Extensive performance testing was conducted Result: When tested in the empty state the Double
on the Double Containment Transfer Tool Containment Transfer T001 prototype experienced
prototype. The battery of tests conducted on the no damage or failure from temperature cycling
initial prototype is summarized by the following from 240 C to '400 C In the ﬁlled state. the
categories: prototype did produce a 10 ML drop of ﬂuid Within

the Sealing Tube. This drop was the result of
T 651‘ 1: Mate and De-Mate With needle-less ﬂuid expansion during freezing and the drop was
septum P01” 1 (off—the-shelf Beeton-Diekinson “BD completely contained within the Sealing Tube.
Q-Syte Septum, 385100”).
Result: Mate and De-Mate connection performed A11 testing was doeumented for the sponsor,
as designed and any des1gn deﬁeieneies found through the
initial testing process were addressed with the
T est 2: Sample input/ withdrawal from fabrication and testing of a second generation
experiment cassette prototype. Testing of the second generation
R . . . Double Containment Transfer T001 proved the
esult. Sample of water containing green food .
coloring was successfully injected into a cassette des1gn updates to be successful and these results
‘6 . . . ,, have been formally recorded as reports to the
( Light Microscopy Module Dynamic Stage
(LMM-DS)) and was also withdrawn from the sponsor.
cassette as designed. The test procedure is seen in
the Figure 2 photographs. DISCUSSION
T 351‘ 3-' Containment 1651‘ng Fabrication and testing efforts to date are
Result: A leak path was found around End Cap consistent with the Double ContaininentTransfef
fasteners. This leak was avoided by a modiﬁcation T001 begomltlg available for exereises m users
that was successfully retested in a second laberatories ,m 2012 .and prepared for ﬂlght
prototype with a design mo diﬁeati on to the seal. certiﬁcation in 2013. Figure 3 shows an example
62 -- Gravitational and Space Biology Volume 26 (1) Apr 2012

"
"4","Kurk et al. —— Liquid Sample Transfer Tool for 188
of how the Double Containment Transfer T001 among speciﬁc life science facilities that might
would ﬁnd applications by transferring samples exist aboard 18$.
0 ,3; ; ~
”gee. ,
7 ' / ’ z \
’ ' -x"" . ,> '/\\r"" ’1‘"" v
‘ J\""’ i ' f .. , -. l? ‘
(1"";- I k ‘ ' ‘ §~
/ ' u..._"""" Q
Figure 2. Left: a photograph of the Transfer T001 engaged to the Needle-less Septum Port prior to the sample
input (see also image in Figure 3). Right: After being emptied into the cassette bag.
”lilihﬁi 7.1"" I""'IIL—_:l
‘1'”? _ ,.—-—- Multi-Speeimen
' - Hit“? -q__ _ / Variable — g
- ': 7- Platform (WP)
.. "" Sample with drawn frem the
Generic Specimen |L'hzllnteniner
_” _. by the Analytical Eenteinment
__ _.-__ "" Transfer Teel {ACTZ}
r . _
. . 5'5"" I
_ .1 --_""* / ""Wieye _
Sample teaded Intel the H. e:_ s_j' “ﬁe:
Light Miereeeepy Medule """"""' ~‘=--e .
fer en—erhit analysis . -' '
Figure 3. Example of an application of the Double Containment Transfer T001: Transfer of biological
suspensions between an experiment facility, such as a variable-g centrifuge With culture modules equipped
With a needle-less septum port, and a receiving cassette for microscopy.
Gravitatianal and Space Bialagy Valume 26 (1) Apr 2012 -- 63

"
"5","Kurk et al. -- Liquid Sample Transfer Tool for 188
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS REFERENCES
This research is supported by NASA SBIR NASA. 2009. EXpedite the PRocessing of
Contract NNXllCF84P. The skilled guidance Experiments to Space Station (EXPRESS) Rack
and management of this project by Yancy Payloads Interface Deﬁnition Document.
Young, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, is Revision H, International Space Station
speciﬁcally acknowledged. Program. NASA Document SSP SZOOO-IDD-
ERP Revision H. http://WWW.scribd.com/doc/
68750280/Ssp-SZOOO-Idd-egp-Express—Rack-Idd
64 -- Gravitational and Space Biology Volume 26 (1) Apr 2012

"
