"","x"
"1","61St International Astronautical Congress, Prague, CZ. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
lAC—lO—A2.5.l
DECLIC, FIRST RESULT S ON ORBIT
G. Pont
CNES, Toulouse, France, gabriel.pont@cnes.fr
S. Barde*, Ph. Bioulezl, D. Blondei, B. Zappoli§
Y. Garrabos”, C. Leccutrelir
D. Beysens“C
N. Berge0n§§, B. Billia***, N. Mangelinck—Noellll, A. RamirezW

R. Trivedi§§§

DECLIC is a multi—user facility to investigate critical ﬂuids behaviour and directional solidiﬁcation of transparent
alloys, developed in the frame of a joint NASA/CNES research program. The instrument is a miniaturized thermo
optical laboratory in which one can plug an insert containing a sample of the material to be studied.

Three inserts have been built so far.

— The ALI (Alice Like Insert) is dedicated to the study of SF6 as a near—ambient temperature critical
ﬂuid.

— The HTI (High Temperature Insert) is dedicated to the study cfpure water as a critical ﬂuid.

— The DSI (Directional Solidiﬂcaticn Insert) is dedicated to the study of the solidiﬁcation of transparent
alloys.

The DECLIC facility was launched, with the HTl and the DST inserts, on the l7—A Shuttle ﬂight (August 2009)
and is being operated in an EXPRESS RACK onboard the 188. The third insert (ALI) was launched on the l9—A
Shuttle ﬂight (April 2010).

The instrument monitoring is performed from the CADMOS control centre of CNES (France). Received real time
data is forwarded to a web—server so that the scientists can look after their experiments from their own laboratory. In
order to cope with communications limitations onboard the 188, the whole data is transferred to removable hard—
disks to be returned to the ground.

During the ﬁrst HTl sequence, we identiﬁed an unexpected radial thermal gradient over the cell, which origin is a
faulty thermc electrical (Peltier) element. We then had to implement a workaround that enabled HTl to recover a
good thermal conﬁguration. After ﬁve experimental sequences with the HTl insert, the ﬁrst results already are
available, like a ﬁrst approach of the water critical temperature, for the ﬁrst time in microgravity. The ﬂight HTl
program is now over.

To this day, two DSI sequences have also been performed, for which the results are very encouraging, with
outstanding optical quality of the taken images.

Experimental sequences with the DST insert are in progress while the ALI commissioning, followed by
experimental sequences, should take place in early 2011. The HTl and D81 are to be returned to the ground
(respectively with Shuttle ﬂights ULF—S and ULF—6) and refurbished to be launched again as soon as possible. The
objectives will be to study precipitation phenomena in salted water for the HTl and to change the sample
concentration for the DST.

* Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES), Toulouse, France, sebastien.barde@cnes.fr

T Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES), Toulouse, France, philippe.bi0ulez@cnes.fr

1 Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES), Toulouse, France, didier.blonde@cnes.fr

§ Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES), Toulouse, France, bernard.zappcli@cnes.fr

M CNRS, Pessac, France, garrab0s@ic1ncb—b0rdeauX.cnrs.fr

Tl CNRS, Pessac, France, lecoutre@ic1ncb—bordeauxcnrs.fr

H CEA, Paris, France, daniel.beysens@espci.fr

§§ AiX—Marseille Universitee & CNRS, Marseille, France, nathalie.berge0n@i1n2np.fr

*** AiX—Marseille Universitee & CNRS, Marseille, France, bernard.billia@ini2np.fr

W AiX—Marseille Universitee & CNRS, Marseille, France, nathalie.mangelinck@i1n2np.fr

m AiX—Marseille Universitee & CNRS, Marseille, France, anthony.ramirez@im2np.ﬂ

§§§ Ames Laboratory US—DOE & Iowa State University, Ames, United States, trivedi@a1neslab.g0v
lAC—lO—A2.5.l Page 1 0f10

"
"2","61St International Astronautical Congress, Prague, CZ. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
1.1NTRODUCTION z. """"” ' ""' ' ‘1”: 9
9 .~i;9tmu i »
As the vapour-liquid critical point is approached in §E‘ W9“ 5.“ j 3"""" F} 5;“
pure ﬂuids, the thermal diffusivity tends to zero and the °§. :‘91‘1 ~‘, '39 fl 9
isothermal compressibility tends to inﬁnity. Fluids near ""If at m'I-‘E; , .51 _‘ 9
their critical point at low temperature (as helium) or Q‘ "" 9—9 - '59 ’9 9‘.
high temperature (as water), cannot be studied properly ‘ 7 W giﬁgﬁj) ' 9‘-
under terrestrial conditions because they are compressed R"" A \Vﬁ- W73; 9 “
under their own weight. Similarly, the process of '_ /;V 9 ‘9 . \93‘ ”Y T""— ,‘
solidiﬁcation from the melt shows strong density ’ 0 ‘@§ eff ,_‘- .1
differences in the mother phase. Microgravity gives "" ‘. %;I 1.9 . .'
access to a convection-free observation of the interfaces. ‘x._ 2 ' .9 97‘;
This is presented in the ﬁrstpart. ‘ ,- 3??? _ 1 9 — 9 f9
Then the second part of the paper is devoted to a 932‘.“ ... .‘:: "" ‘
presentation of the facility dedicated to the above
science objectives. Developed in the frame of a joint 7
NASA/CNES research program, the DECLIC facility is ‘3? ‘ ’
dedicated to multi users and generally to transparent ~ 9,; .9 :
ﬂuid science domains. It has been designed as a service Fig 1' The DECLIC poaylad ﬁtted in the EXPRESS
module that can receive experiment—dedicated inserts, RACK 4 0f the ISS The two DECLIC lockers are
which can be either thermostats, ﬂuid cells or furnaces. located in the top right quarter 0 f the rack (photo
1ts architecture and operations have been designed to N AS A)
comply with an easy access to micro—gravity conditions '
on board the International Space Station. 11 S CIEN CE PROGRAM

Operations are performed in real time from the The science piogram has been given in details in [1]
CADMOS (Toulouse, France) and the telemetry is also Two main ﬁelds are addressed in the initial science
forwarded to the scientists’ laboratories (User Home r0 ram' henomena near the critical 0th and the
Base). This aspect is presented in the third part. (Pd g . ' 1p 1. d' f . f p d 1 . 1

The ﬁrst results obtained on orbit are presented in irectiena SO 1 1 ication O transparent me e matena 8'
the fourth part. Until now 5 HT1 and 2 D81 sequences Three Inserts (see §IH) have been built SO far, each Of
. ’ . . them belng dedicated to a selence domain: phase

have been run. We Will emphas1ze a HT1 1ssue (thermal . . . . .

. . . . trans1t10ns near the critical p01nt at room temperature,
gradient linked to a faulty Peltier element) for Wthh a critical ﬂuids and boiling crisis properties 0 f high
workaround has been successfully implemented. This is t ture su ercritical ﬂuid, like water and
an example of how open and versatile the DECLIC 61.11pm p . . . . .
systemis. microstructuies dynamics during the solidiﬁcation of

The last part of the paper is devoted to the remaining model materials.
program, using already onboard inserts, refurbished 111 Critical and su ercritical ﬂuids.
inserts, or new inserts. The hydrostatic pressure induces density gradient
that adversely affects ground based observation of near
critical ﬂuids. It is the main reason why it is mandatory
to perform microgravity experiments.

The initial program for this domain was built on 2
inserts, ALI and HT1, respectively dedicated to room
temperature and high temp erature critical ﬂuids.

11.1.1. Room temperature supercritical ﬂuids

ALI (Alice Like Insert) provides a relative
temperature regulation of a mK. It aims to follow the
program conducted onboard the MIR station between
1992 and 2000 with the ALICE apparatus [2].

The scientiﬁc objectives are directed to the coupling
phenomena involving hydrodynamics in highly
compressible supercritical ﬂuids and forced piston
effect. After the series of successful experiments on
board the MIR station in the ALICE facility, it was

1AC-10-A2.5.1 Page 2 0f10

"
"3","615t1nternational Astronautical Congress, Prague, CZ. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
decided to pursue the research program on the 188. The
main points to be addressed by this insert are :
- Visualisation 0f the boiling crisis. To address this
point, a speciﬁc planar heater was speciﬁcally
developed.
- Phase separation at very low volume fraction {4:
- Critical density ﬂuctuations in the direct space. 2. '
To reach those objectives, the ALI insert contains Fig. 111: The HT1 cell assembly. The cell itself is in
two cells containing SF6, whose critical temperature is the middle while the large screws are devoted to
close to room temperature (318.68 K). withstand high pressures (up to 500 bars) at high
‘ temperature (up to 600°C) [3].
* 0* . . . .
‘f . ‘ 11.11. The solidiﬁcation of transparent model materials
_‘ a * ‘ x g t, 7 The DSI (Directional Solidiﬁcation Insert) contains
-'~— 1“"" r - ‘1: 1;! k a directional solidiﬁcation furnace that gives very
La ‘ Q) l. Egg; accurate temperature gradient inside a sample of
r . "" :\ 1‘: j: succinonitrile- based model alloy.
Interferometer Cell <2: 5 The program addresses both fundamental physics
- ’71 i F2 and applied metallurgical questions of interest for
'. j\_ ,, f’ﬁmel A T '1 ‘ I ground based processing. In the ﬁeld of the self
. -1 . l fire?“ \ (1. Fa“ organization of matter, several topics are to be explored:
_ V, . 575*?“ 3 ' - the growth and Patterns in Non-linear Physics
, 7 . . 1mg - the dynamics of extended 3-D systems
; Sample‘lCell Holder - the birth ofMorphological 1nstabilities
- ' - the dynamics of formation and selection of cellular
Direct Observation Cell and dendritic a arrays
Fig. 11 I The ALI CGllS (IIItCI’fBI’OIIlBtBI‘ and DlI’CCt _the recoil 0fthe solidiﬁcation front
Observation) and their integration ih the sample cell - the coupling between solidiﬁcation and convection.
holder [3].
1n material processing DSI gives convection free
MW observations of microstructures engineering and well
The HTI (High Temperature Insert) is dedicated to deﬁned model experiments on technical alloys for the
the study of supercritical water (critical temperature 647 ground based process benchmarks.
K, critical pressure 22 kPa).
The main objective, for this insert, is to check if the
basic hydrodynamic behavior of water, including the
thermo mechanical couplings and the transport 7 ,-
processes, does not differ drastically from those mung:
occurring in supercritical ﬂuids at lower temperatures. ""'
This is called the universality of critical phenomena. ﬂ
More generally speaking, all the water properties close
to the critical temperature will be checked for the ﬁrst E
time in microgravity conditions.
To reach those objectives, the HT1 insert contains
one cell ﬁlled With pure water, as close as possible to Fig. 1V : the D81 cartridge. One can see on this picture
the critical density. . . . the quartz cartridge containing the succinonitrile-
. The development Of this cell, in order to WlthStand camphor alloy (left), the compensator and motorization
high pressures and temperatures and, at the same time, arm (right) [3].
meeting the ISS safety requirements, has been a real
technical challenge.
1AC-lO-A2.5.l Page 3 0f10

"
"4","61St International Astronautical Congress, Prague, CZ. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
111. PAYLOAD IV. GROUND SEGMENT
The payload has been described in detail in previous The control centre for DECLIC is the CADMOS.
papers [1] [3]. Its main functions are to provide services The CADMOS is a User Support Operation Centre
that are needed for experiments dedicated to the study (USOC) located at the CNES (Centre National d’Etudes
of transparent media. Thermal regulation of the sample, Spatiales) centre of Toulouse (France).
temperature measurements, optical diagnostics, data Fig. VI depicts how the data is transmitted from the
storage and tele-operation are the main functions. payload t0 the ﬁnal user (the scientist).
The DECLIC instrument is accommodated in two

Single Stowage Lockers (SSL) that are called the m 1:55 U

EXperlment Locker (EXL) and the Electronic Locker mu?

(ELL). T4.

The ELL houses all the power, data handling and /

high accuracy thermal regulation electronics, and , /

manages the whole system and the scientiﬁc experiment Tons Removable Hard Disk

execution. It is the interface, for signal and power, with (RHD)

the EXPRESS RACK. //

The EXL hosts the optical bench. Coherent and

incoherent light sources and optical sensors are {‘4

combined in order to provide various diagnostics like = CNES

wide or narrow ﬁeld of View, grid shadowing, light NASA meme:

scattering, interferometers, light transmission Ground l

measurement etc...). The EXL also receives the Systems VpN TReK

experiment container which is called the insert.

An insert accomodates a thermostat (ALI, HTI) or a

pulling furnace (DSI), respectively containing a sample

cell unit (SCU) or a cartridge with the material to be

studied. It also contains most of the electronics Internet

associated with user dedicated sensors (temperature,

pressure...). _

Laboratorles
The general architecture is given in Fig. V. Fig. VI: DECLIC data paths overview. Command and
. ‘ . Telemetry follow the black paths while the data stored
_ {Live}: 1“ 0n RHDs follow the blue path.
4“""; .,. . h. 3. _.
1 f r '4 ' Let us consider the Telemetry path as an example.
"". ' ﬁt - ""i j ‘ The data is transmitted from the payload t0 the NASA’s
~"" * |\ "" M 44-. H d t thr h 1 i 1 'TDRS t llit
r l M t 4‘ T . . . groun sysem oug c ass ca ways. sae es,
t 715.15! E “E?(e i”? ground statlons and networks.

' 4 ‘59"" 7. , i The Health and Status (H&S) packets are processed
""E’:T;:_ - 7- ~ 7%. l at POIC (NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center,
“— iF—kﬁsﬁf— ~44: Huntsville, USA) level in order to check the payload

» N I 4 status.
R ,L i, - T“ ,4 The other packets are transmitted Via UDP t0 the
MS. F - ’4- "" 44. ’ ’ CADMOS. They are then processed by TReK
."" . [t _ 1 ~.\ ‘ ;“ (Telescience Resource Kit) workstations. The data is
. '. ._ _. _. ' .1 ‘1 _>“J then forwarded to a webserver called VisuWeb.
‘~ 4_=;.=;=_s_4_4=_ :4; .4 :42: r..- ‘2=\ VisuWeb allows the scientists to look after their payload
‘3— -_ n . 1‘ in realtime from their laboratory. Fig. VII shows a

Fig. V: The DECLIC lockers. The ELL is at the bottom typical VisuWeb’s screen.

while the EXL is at the top and houses the insert. The Once a day, the whole previous day data is also

electrical connections between each component and the made available to the scientists on a dedicated FTP

water cooling connections (grey “pipes”) to the server.

EXPRESS RACK are also Visible. (Photo CNES), As the bandwidth is limited onboard the ISS, and
because DECLIC generates numerous data, it is not
possible to download all the data through telemetry
means. This is the reason why, at the end of each

IAC-lO-A2.5.l Page 4 0f10

"
"5","61St International Astronautical Congress, Prague, CZ. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
sequences, all the data is recorded on a Removable Hard V. FIRST RESULTS
Disk (RHD) which is sent back to the ground as soon as V.I DSI
possible once it is ﬁlled. DECLIC was sent with 6 The main objective of the present project is to
RHDs. identify and understand the physical phenomena which
These data are the reference data that will be govern the dynamics of the microstructure selection in
archived in the CNES’ dedicated systems, to which the 3D directional solidiﬁcation [5]. Acquisition of
scientist will be allowed to connect in order to retrieve experimental benchmark data in diffusive mode (188
needed data. experiments) is necessary to provide the scientiﬁc
community with a database; this is critical for the
validation and development of reliable theoretical and
“£69 ”“7 numerical models. In parallel, a ground experimental
plan similar to the ﬂight one is conducted at the lMZNP
—720m , laboratory for pg-l g comparative study.
Acquisition of benchmark data on the formation and
5355i characteristics of the microstructure in diffusive
m 33333323335 condition has been initiated. Two typ es of experiments
have been conducted accordingly: long solidiﬁcations 0f
::::::f;:::m__m_m 33:33: the whole cartridge at a given pulling rate V, as well as
Came’atHRl experiments with a velocity jump from V1 to V2 (V1 75
a V2) occurring in the middle of solidiﬁcation. The
——3 pulling rates range from 0.5 to 16 pm/s. Long
i 1 solidiﬁcations dedicated to the exploration and
—3— characterization of the microstructure map as a function
Fig. VII: VisuWeb server’s main page, showing real of growth parameters; an illustration of typical
time values ofparameters, last taken image and text logs microstructures obtained for different pulling rates
coming from DECLIC (solute concentration and thermal gradient ﬁxed) is
depicted in Fig VIII. Experiments with a velocity jump
are of prime importance in order to understand how a
quasi—stationary pattern responds to a variation of
parameter (ie. the pulling rate), with which dynamics
and by which mechanisms.
V=1um/s V=4um/s V=8um/s
Shallow cells Deep cells Dendrites
Fig VIII: Microstructure type versus pulling rate
(Succinonitrile — 0.24 wt% camphor ; G = 20 K/cm)

Quantitative characterizations of the patterns
obtained during the ﬁrst ﬂight experiments are in
progress. The study consists in investigating the
evolution, as a function of time and growth parameters,
of the parameters which characterize the structures
morphology, such as the primary spacing, tip radius,
order/disorder ofpattern, shape of structures.

Image treatments and analyses procedures have been
developed on both analySIS and Visilog softwares to
facilitate the exploitation of results. In order to illustrate
this point, let us consider in Fig VIII the raw image
obtained at 4 pm/s (quasi-stationary state). The ﬁrst step
is to obtain a binary image (Fig IXa) that is then used as

IAC-lO-A2.5.l Page 5 0flO

"
"6","61St International Astronautical Congress, Prague, CZ. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
an input for, on one hand, the cell detection to get the V.H HTI
primary spacing distribution and, on the other hand, the As stated above, the HTI is dedicated to the basic
use of speciﬁc procedures for characterizing pattern study of pure water in a high pressure and high
order/disorder and type: Minimal Spanning Tree (MST) temperature optical cell.
(Fig IXb) [6], number of ﬁrst neighbors (Fig 1X0), etc. The main objective is to provide quantitative data
. concerning the critical properties of water. For this
f: ff“. {ji [ purpose, measurements of turbidity and light scattering
3777;?j-1fl: intensity are performed together with the thermal
ﬂf.Z'j‘ififi-Ifhgvi' fig; .531} dynamics ﬁom the piston effect time scale (a few ms) to
the diffusion time scale (a few hours). The optical cell is
s; also designed to study the kinetic and morphology ef
j? H the vapour—liquid phase separation process by means of
(a) (b) (c) full—iield and microscopy observations. Evehtually, the
HTI—insert tests thermal stimuli for monitoring the
Fig IX : Images treatment and analysis procedures: a) temperature gradients. This latter study aims to prepare
Binarisation, b) Minimal Spanning Tree and 0) future studies in aqueous solutions that have to ﬁt the
Number of ﬁrst neighbours superposed t0 the image NASA safety standards concerning high temperature
(yellow: 4 neighbours ; green: 5; red: 6; blue: 7) and high pressure. (A more detailed presentation of the
For example, some results obtained during the optical cell and the HTI—insert can be fou mi in .[4]'. .
commissioning 0 f the DST are presented on Fig X. Illustrations 6f the loeal dens1ty distribution 1ns1de
the cell under m10r0grav1ty (188) are pr0V1ded by the
A260 three typical pictures given in Figure XI. In part (a) of
g Pause this ﬁgure, the supercritical one—phase water at Tc+1mK
3240 * (18 E I i|i ] is observed by optical transmission. The ﬂuid picture
£220 E - (grey) shows a circular turbid area (dark grey)
200 corresponding to a radial density gradient close to the
180 “H i external cell body (black part). (The cell is made with
HE inconel alloy). The internal bulk ﬂuid (clear grey) is
160 ﬂ 8 nearly homogeneous in density, as shown by the very
140 V=4 V=1 weak deformation of the grid shadowgraphy. The
120 remaining aXis—symmetrical density gradients are due to
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 the coupling between the radial piston effect that
Time (h) - - -
originates from the thermal exchanges With the
Fig X: Primary spacing = f(t) (Commissioning thermostat and radiative thermal losses along the optical
experiment ; SCN _ 0.24wt% ; G = 20 K/cm) aXis throughout the sapphire windows.
The experiment consisted in a sequence of three iii“
consecutive solidiﬁcations (about 20 mm each) that fret; 7 ‘
started at V = 4 um/s, followed by 1 um/s and 2;) ' 0
completed at 8 um/s. Regarding the primary spacing 9'?”
evolution as a function of time (refer to Fig X), it is
evident that the primary spacing depends on the pulling cameram (a) cameraiHm (b) cameram (0)
rate, and tends to stabilize at the end of each . . .
solidiﬁcation step. This is more striking for the Figure X1: (30' Supercritical one—phase water at
experiment at V: 1 um/s, where the time allocated for Tc+1mK observed by optical transiniss10n. (b) TWO""
the solidiﬁcation enables to observe a quasi—stationary phase water at Tc—99mK around eight hours after. a
state. Each solidiﬁcation step is associated with an cooling ramp of -2mk/mn rate, starting ﬁom the. Inlilal
evolution towards a better ordered pattern, with mainly state 0fthe preV10us picture. (C) Gas'bgbble distribution
an hexagonal tiling (cells with 6 neighbors). However, in thetwo—phase domain at T2351 OC’ 1'6"" ~23 0C below
our analyses pointed out a strong dependence on the the critical temperature ofwater.
initial interfacial pattern on the order/disorder evolution: , , , , , , ,
starting from rest or from already existing pattern Fig. X1(b) shows a 11qu1d—vap0ur distribution in the
involves different mechanisms. two—phase domain of water at T: Tc—99mK. The cell
was cooled from an initial one—phase state as in Fig. X
(a) with a cooling ramp of —2mk/mn rate. The above Fig.
IAC—lO—A2.5.1 Page 6 0f 10

"
"7","61St International Astronautical Congress, Prague, CZ. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
XI (b) pattern corresponds to 8 h. equilibration time. Most of the sensors are classical platinum sensors,
The external bubble distribution is initiated by the used as absolute or relative sensors. But the Peltier
boiling at the ﬂuid—body cell surface, while the central elements (called PEF and PEB on ﬁgure XII), which are
two—phase distribution is due a nucleation—growth used in Peltier mode during quenches, are also used in
rocess occurrin in the bulk li uid. The lon —time Seebeck mode durin ﬁne re ulation. In this assive
P g q g g g P
stability of the bubble distribution in the cell is mode, a Peltier element generates signal depending on
presumably correlated with the very low value that the the thermal difference between its two faces. It is a kind
liquid—vapour surface tension exhibits at such small of thermal ﬂux sensor. One of the regulation loops’ goal
temperature distance from To. is to minimize the signal given by the Peltier elements
Fig. XI (0) corresponds T=Tc—23 oC. The presence (i.e. the ﬂux going through the Peltiers).
of the large vapour bubble is presumably related to the
large value of the water surface tension at such a large During the ﬁrst HTI sequence, an unexpectedly high
distance from To. thermal gradient (500 mK or so, which is 10 times the
expected value), radial with respect to the cell axes, was
Concerning the value of the critical temperature of observed. This was very upsetting for the scientist
water, a ﬁrst approach has been made for the ﬁrst time because, when the ﬂuid critical temperature is neared,
ih microgravity, hUt the absolute value is Still to be the thermal expansion coefﬁcient ( (9 p/ p (9 T) diverges
conﬁrmed by ground testing when the insert is brought (p is density and T is temperature). The situation was
back to the ground (sensors calibration). paradoxically close to the one experienced on the
' ' ground with the effect of gravity!
mMam—W ' After some data processing, it was found that one of
Since the beginning 0f the operations, DECLIC has the Peltier elements (the PEF) signal suddenly stuck to a
experienced several kinds of anomalies. The two main zero value while it was not the case for the other.
(i.e. having impact on DECLIC performances or
inducing strong operational constraints) anomalies are
de icted here below. 380 a 1-5
p I‘H! 1 5
+ PEB Thermal gradient v
V.lll.l HTl Thermal Gradient 2370 EEE+PEF ThermalGradEﬁfé 0-5 ‘3
In order to reach the needed thermal regulation E’; =3 EEAE'! 0 E
performances at high temperature (the water critical $355 --§-rii‘ﬁ -05;
temperature being 647.096 K), a dedicated control gage , A -1 E
system, based on several Ple, had to be developed and % 355 Egiﬁﬁaiﬁlg 4.5g
0 timized. This control s stem takes into account data 0 EEF'ﬁE ‘rﬁaéﬁ' _ g
caning from the sensors shown on the ﬁgure below. 350 -Ilil-I‘: :3
E 311:48:00 11:16:48 11:45:36 12:14:24 12:43:12 13:12:00 13:40:48 _3
Time (hh:mm:ss)
Fig. XIII: HTI thermal behaviour during heating. When
: the cell approaches 369°C or so, the PEF signal sticks to
Sample ECell Unit a zero value.
3 As the signal remained stuck to zero during all the
end of the heating, the thermal control could not
' correctly regulate the temperature and the thermal
__._, __ '__ __” gradient value remained very high all sequence long.
A workaround to minimize the gradient had then had
I to be elaborated.
As the PEF gives the thermal ﬂuX going through one
' side of the Sample Cell Unit (or SCU), a good
“ correlation was found, on the Ground Model, between
the PEF value and a linear combination of SCUm and
; SCUr sensors difference.
E PEqu(SCUm-SCUr)+B [eq 1]
Fig. XII : HTI temperature sensors. The platinum
sensors are shown in green while the Peltier elements The PEF being included in one of the PIDs loops,
(PEF and PEB) are shown in blue. The cell (light blue) this loop was inhibited in the regulation system and a
is located in the Sample Cell Unit.
lAC—lO—A2.5.l Page 7 of 10

"
"8","61St International Astronautical Congress, Prague, CZ. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
new loop was implemented, taking into account the For power cuts of durations longer than 100 us or
calculation of the PEF as shown in [eq 1]. so, the SPVR is also shut down with all others
After some successful tests on the Ground Model, subsystems and DECLIC is thus completely powered
the modiﬁcations were uploaded on the Flight Model down, until the power comes back. This could explain
and, after tuning 0t and [3 values, the results were even the reboots.
better than expected. The thermal gradient value was Unfortunately, the EXPRESS RACK has a voltage
back at the expected value (50 mK or so). trip that rises only when the power cuts are of duration
longer than 1000 HS, so we cannot formally say that the
There are no explanations yet on what happened to shutdowns and reboots are linked to power cuts.
the PEF element. A thermo mechanical event that
affects the Peltier circuit electrical connections is In some conﬁgurations, a shutdown or a reboot can
suspected. As the HTI will be returned to the ground be dangerous for the sample because it leaves DECLIC
within a few months (see §Vl), the faulty Peltier will, of without thermal regulation. For the HTI, an unregulated
course, be assessed and replaced. cooling down can lead to a leak of the cell, while, for
the D81, it can lead to a cartridge breakdown, depending
Proving the extraordinary versatility of the DECLIC on the thermal conﬁguration and on the cartridge’s
system, this successful workaround implementation also position in the furnace.
shows that the cell’s radial thermal gradient can be
tuned. And this is an excellent result for the HTl-R As DECLIC team is not on console 24/7, and
program that will be detailed later in this article (§Vl). because DECLIC has to be quickly conﬁgured in order
to recover a safe thermal conﬁguration, procedures had
V.IH.II Reboots and Shutdowns to be set up in order to face that kind of event.
Since the beginning of the operations, the payload The Health and Status data packets coming ﬁom
has experienced 7 events called shutdowns and reboots. DECLIC are looked after at POIC. A reboot, a
What is called a reboot is when the payload shutdown, or even a loss of thermal regulation are
completely reboots by itself while a shutdown is when tracked in those packets and the FDIC has the ability, in
the payload is found in a very low power consumption case nobody is on console at CADMOS, to issue
mode and that we cannot interact with it anymore. DECLIC emergency commands by applying Ground
Mainly because those kinds of events appeared with Command Procedures (or GCPs) jointly deﬁned by the
two different inserts (D81 and HTI) at very different CADMOS and the FDIC. The goal of the corresponding
steps of the sequences (science activities, data commands being to recover, as quickly as possible, a
recording...), and also because nothing was found in the safe thermal conﬁguration.
parameters evolutions, nor in the logs generated by the
payload, the troubleshooting led us to propose two As a result, a shutdown or a reboot is not dangerous
explanations : for the material sample contained in the insert, mainly
because the ground procedures have been adapted to
- Inﬂuence of sensitive locations (South Atlantis react as quickly as possible. Nevertheless, in some
Anomaly, poles). Despite the locations of the events cases, that kind of anomaly can lead to an importantloss
(Single Event Processes (SEU, SEL) leading to reboots of time. When it arises with the HTI insert, for example,
and shutdowns) do not all correspond to these sensitive close to the critical temperature, the amount of lost days
locations, their inﬂuence cannot be ruled out. can be up to 4, mainly because the scientists sometimes
want to get close to the critical temperature as slow as
- Micro cuts of the power line. The 28V EXPRESS possible, with as less thermal disturbances as possible.
RACK power line has experienced micro cuts of various
durations. Because DECLIC is a kind of furnace, it VI.THE MID-TERM PROGRAM
needs quite a large amount of power (up to 500 W when The DSI sequences should last until the end of
heating up the HTI inserts). Thus, it is not ﬁtted with January 2011 and will be followed by the ALI program
capacitances large enough to withstand long duration (starting with the commissioning sequence).
power cuts. But the inserts utilizations will not end and the
Typically, for power cuts of durations shorter than following is planned for those two inserts :
100ns or so, the DECLIC supervisor (called SPVR) will - HTI—R. the HTI insert will be returned to ground
out all the other subsystems but itself, leading to a with the ULF-S Shuttle ﬂight (November 2010). The
power consumption of the order of magnitude of the one cell, containing pure water, will then be replaced by
observed after the shutdowns. This could explain the exactly the same cell containing salted water. The main
shutdowns. objective is to study salt precipitation phenomena close
to the critical temperature. To do so, and in order to
IAC-10-A2.5.1 Page 8 of10

"
"9","61St International Astronautical Congress, Prague, CZ. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
master the precipitation directions, the workaround ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
implemented to solve the thermal gradient issue (see The authors would like to thank all the companies
above) will be very useﬁJl. The objective is to launch involved in the development of DECLIC. ASTRIUM-
the so-called HTI-R insert with a Progress ﬂight in the ST (France), which was the prime contractor, but also
early days of 2012. SODERN (France), University of Amsterdam (The
- DSI—R. the D81 insert will be returned with the Netherlands), COMAT (France), EREMS (France), the
ULF-6 Shuttle ﬂight (March 2011). The cartridge will Thermoelectric materials laboratory from Ecole des
be replaced by another cartridge containing a different Mines de Nancy (France)...
camphor concentration. Consequently, another The Pls’ labs were also involved in the development
parameter (camphor concentration) will be added to the phases, not only by expressing their needs, but also by
parameters available onboard the payload (ﬁarnace’s developing the cells (ALI and HTI cells were built by
temperatures and cartridge’s speed). Again, the so- lCMCB-CNRS, France), or ﬁlling the D81 cartridges
called DSI-R insert will be launched as soon as possible, (IM2NP-CNRS, France).
but likely not before mid-2012. Last but not least, the DECLIC team is very grateful to
Mr Bart Van Deenen who is at the origin of the
In a longer term View, and as a logical follow-on of workaround that helped us solving the thermal gradient
the HTI and HTI-R experiments, a new insert in issue with the HTI.
envisaged. This insert, called SCWO for Super Critical
Water Oxidation, will be dedicated to the study of
oxidation phenomena in supercritical water. Very
preliminary activities have been performed and the
development is not formally decided yet.
VII. CONCLUSION
Launched in August 2009 with two inserts (D81 and
HTI), DECLIC has already shown very good results and
the HTI campaign already is over. The DSI tests will be
performed all fall 2010 long and the ALI tests should
start in the early days of 201 1.
Of the two main anomalies encountered, one is still
unexplained (unexpected shutdowns and reboots of the
payload) while the other (high thermal gradient over the
HTI cell) has been gone around by implementing a new
control process. This workaround implementation was
made possible by DECLIC architecture which is
opened and versatile and really allows to perform many
tasks ﬁom the ground.
So far, despite most of the data has to be processed, the
results are of ﬁrst order.
The HTI and D81 inserts should be reﬁarbished in order
to extend the science program by, respectively,
replacing pure water by salted water, and changing the
camphor concentration, and a new insert, dedicated to
the study of oxidation phenomena in supercritical water,
is planned.
IAC-10-A2.5.1 Page 9 of 10

"
"10","61St International Astronautical Congress, Prague, CZ. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
REFERENCES

[1] G Pont et A1. “Declic: a facility to study crystallization and critical ﬂuids” IAC-09-A2.6.4 (2009)

[2] B. Zappoli et A1. “Cooperative research in microgravity sciences during the French manned MIR missions”
LAF-OO-T.6.10 (2010)

[3] R. Marcout et A1. “Declic: a facility to investigate ﬂuids and transparent materials in microgravity conditions
in 188” IAC-06-A2.5.02 (2006)

[4] Y. Garrabos et A1. “Optical cells for study Of water properties near its liquid-gas critical point” JASMA V01.
25 No.3 2008

[5]N. Bergeon, R. Trivedi, B. Billia, B. Echebarria, A. Karma, S. Liu, C. Weiss, N. Mangelinck Advances in
Space Research 36 (2005) 80-85

[6] B. Billia, H. J amgotchian and H. Nguyen Thi Metallurgical T ransactz'ons A 22 (1991) 3041-3050

IAC-10-A2.5.1 Page 10 0f10

"
