"","x"
"1","65th International Astronautical Congress, Toronto, Canada. Copyright ©2014 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
IAC-l4,A2,6.5
STEPPING STONES TOWARD OXIDATION PROCESSES IN SUPERCRITICAL WATER
G. Pont
CNES, Toulouse, France, gabriel.p0nt@cnes.fr
B. Zappoli*
Y. Garrabosl, C. Lecoutrei, S. Marre§
M. Hicks**, U. Hegdell

Under supercritical conditions (i.e. when the temperature and the pressure of a substance are above its
thermodynamic critical point), water becomes a ﬂuid with unique properties that can be used to treat a wide variety
of wastes. For example, during Supercritical Water Oxidation (SCWO) organic wastes can be almost fully converted
into carbon dioxide and water.

Already used in a variety of terrestrial applications (for example onboard ships), SCWO technology, because of
its potential for extremely high waste conversion efﬁciencies, is of great interest in the context of—space—exploration
programs. A SCWO reactor could be used in the treatment of a number of waste streams typically found onboard
spacecraft used in long duration missions or as a part of the Environmental Control and Life Support (ECLS) system
for an extraterrestrial habitat.

As part of the DECLIC program, the ﬁrst two investigation phases motivated by the potential of future SCWO
applications in microgravity have either been completed or are currently in progress. The ﬁrst phase, using pure
water as a supercritical ﬂuid was studied with the HTI (High Temperature Insert) insert. The behavior of pure water
near its critical point, under a variety of different heating proﬁles and temperature non-uniformities is now well
understood. The insert was then refurbished (and called HTI-R), and launched back to the 188 with a dilute salt-
water solution (0.5% W sodium sulfate). The objective is to study how salt precipitates and is transported in a water-
salt mixture and preliminary results are available. This was motivated by one of the major technological challenges
associated with conventional SCWO reactors where inorganic salts precipitate in supercritical water leading to
signiﬁcant reactor fouling, corrosion and inefﬁcient operation. The investigation is designed to obtain insights into
the precipitate’s incipient size and structure, its tendency to agglomerate, and its dominant transport mechanism in
the presence of temperature gradients. The unique environment provided by the 188 allows these processes to be
carefully observed without the altering effects gravity.

A third phase (i.e., the HTI-RZ) will be decided when the HTI will be refurbished a second time in order to study
another mixture (to be chosen once the HTI-R program is over).

Following the HTI series of experiments current plans call for an additional set of experiments focusing on two
research themes:

- The “Mini-SCWO” studies will allow for the study of chemical reactions of various materials in
supercritical water or high pressure gaseous environments.

- The “SCWO” studies will demonstrate the ability to recycle liquid waste streams using supercritical
water oxidation processes.

Those kinds of studies are beyond the scope of the DECLIC program and new payloads will have to be
developed.

* Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES), Toulouse, France, bernard.zappoli@cnes.fr
l CNRS-ESEME, Pessac, France, garrab0s@icmcb-b0rdeaux.cnrs.fr
i CNRS-ESEME, Pessac, France, lecoutre@icnicb-b0rdeaux.cnrs.fr
§ CNRS-ESEME, Pessac, France, marre@icmcb-bordeaux.cnrs.fr
** NASA, Cleveland, United States, nihicks@nasa.gov
TT NCSER, Cleveland, United States, uday.g.hegde@nasa.g0v
IAC-l4,A2,6.5 Page 1 0f9

"
"2","65th International Astronautical Congress, Toronto, Canada. Copyright ©2014 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
1.1NTRODUCT10N 11. SUPERCRITICAL WATER OXYDATION
SCWO (§upergritical Eater Qxidation) is a gSCWO)
promising technology Which holds great promise for 11.1 SCWO Process
application in the space exploration program. It could be When water is taken beyond its critical point
used to treat wastes onboard spacecraft, during long (Tc=647 K and Pc=22.l MPa), it exhibits unique
duration missions, and could play a signiﬁcant role in properties, different from those of the normal liquid at
Environmental Control and Life Support (ECLS) atmospheric pressure. Like for all other supercritical
systems designed for extraterrestrial habitats. ﬂuids, the density is comparable With liquid density
1n the context of the DECLIC program, Which is a While the Viscosity and diffusivity are more like that of a
collaborative program between CNES and NASA, the gas. Moreover, the dielectric constant, Which decreases
two ﬁrst steps toward SCWO applications in With an increase in liquid temperature, drops When
microgravity have been negotiated, While the next steps water becomes supercritical.
have already been decided 0r discussed. ,
.1
. . . } 00mm
The ﬁrst part of the paper gives a brief overV1eW 0f .5 0.5
the SCWO process and its applications. g
. . . 00 200 400 6
Then, the stepping stones toward 0X1dat10n
processes in supercritical water, in the frame of the 50
DECLIC collaboration between CNES and NASA, is g;
presented in the second part of the paper, as well as a ﬁg 40 0mm“
program status. cm”
O0 200 400 600
I!
g. 100
3 solubility
E 50
‘E Benzene
§
3 O
o 200 400 500
3' 60
‘3' Sun
J 40 schoimy
é
a 20
5 o
o 200 400 600
Tempermuefc
Fig. 1: Properties of water at 25.3 MPa [1]
Even if the dielectric constant is not the only
parameter involved in the dissolving power of water for
organics, such a drop makes hydrocarbons miscible With
supercritical water, Which is not the case for the
inorganic salts, for Which the solubility is very lOW
above the critical temperature (see Fig. 1).
The advantages of a SCWO process, Which is the
oxidation of organics in water above its critical point,
are summarized in Table 1..
Gas-Iike low viscosity :> high mass transfers
Liquid-Iike density :> high solvation
Low dielectric constant :> high dissolution of organic materials
High temperature :> high thermal reaction rates
Table 1: SCWO advantages (from [1])
1AC-l4,A2,6.5 Page 2 0f9

"
"3","65th International Astronautical Congress, Toronto, Canada. Copyright ©2014 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
In a SCWO process, the oxidation is complete, With Those limitations, among others, have prevented
conversion efﬁciencies typically approaching 99.999% SCWO from becoming a Widespread waste treatment
With organic wastes converted into carbon dioxide and technology ([5]). One of the more innovative solutions,
water, With smaller concentrations of other products designed to avoid a build-up of salts on reactor walls is
such as salts, oxides, carbonates etc. the use of hydrothermal ﬂames, as an internal burner for
Moreover, the process can be performed in a closed sustaining reaction temperatures Without the need to
reactor With no contact With the outside and the heat through the reactor walls. The concept enVisions an
operating temperatures are much lower than those of a internal supercritical core region in the reactor vessel
classic incinerator (thus no production of NOX). that is surrounded by a subcritical annular ﬂow [7],
SCWO can thus be used as an environmentally Which serves to protect the reactor walls from the
attractive technology for the complete destruction of corrosive environment of supercritical water.
organic wastes.
11.1V Interest in Space Applications
11.11 SCWO Application Fields Human space missions generate a lot of waste. In
As the amount of organic and toxic wastes order to limit the launch mass, it is mandatory to look
increasing every year and With environmental for waste recycling technologies, especially When
regulations becoming increasingly stringent, SCWO is designing systems for long duration missions, to Mars
considered as one of the more promising organic waste or other targets [7].
treatment technologies. This technology has been under The advantages of SCWO as listed in the preceding
study and development since the 1980’s and a number chapters make it a promising technology for long
of advances, particularly in the area of innovative duration space missions [8]:
reactor design, have been made. — Required pre-processing of waste is
Both academia and industrial researchers have minimal
shown that SCWO reactors are able to treat a Wide — Product streams are benign, microbially
range of organic wastes, With high. Applications are inert, and easily reclaimed
found in toxic chemical treatment, waste water — Waste conversion is complete and
processing, pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical relatively fast
waste treatment, and chemical weapons destruction [2] — With proper design and operation,
[3]. reactions can be self—sustaining.
While the breadth of potential application is quite
expansive, the number of companies offering full scale The terrestrial reactors take advantage of the gravity:
commercial SCWO plants was limited to 6 as Of wastes are usually inserted in the top of the reactor and
January 2012, With a the number of new commercial go down through different temperature zones. This
plants currently under construction or planned limited to allows for the oxidation of organic materials in the
13 (5 being built and 8 being planned) [4]. upper zones of the reactor (Where the temperature is
supercritical) and for the dissolution of the precipitated
11.1118CWO Limitations salts in the lower zones (Where the temperature is
Despite the technology’s promise and, as the subcritical).
previous section’s discussion on the limited number of Under microgravity conditions, With the related
commercially operating plants suggests, there are absence of weight and convection, such a segregation is
serious limitations to the use of SCWO as a waste more difﬁcult to perform and preliminary studies and
treatment technology. Some of these are summarized by tests have been performed years ago [9], [10].
the following [5]: More recently, drop tower experiments have shown,
— Severe reactor corrosion is caused by acids through methanol oxidation tests, that gravitational
formed during the treatment of a Wide inﬂuences on reactant mixing and thermal transport Will
range of wastes. This limitation is quite need to be clearly understood in order to properly apply
signiﬁcant considering there are no SCWO technology in space [8].
materials that are universally resistant to
all acids. It is also interesting to take note that C02 as a
— Reactor corrosion and plugging caused by supercritical ﬂuid is also envisioned in space manned
precipitating inorganic salts. As shown in missions, for example in order to generate water from
Fig. 1, the solubility of salts is low in martian rocks or even extracting magnesium from
supercritical water. martian soil [1 l], [12].
- Cost evaluations are hard to perform, due
to the lack of experimental data on
industrial plants.
1AC-l4,A2,6.5 Page 3 of9

"
"4","65th International Astronautical Congress, Toronto, Canada. Copyright ©2014 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.

111. STEPPING STONES TOWARDS SCWO The main objective, for this insert, was to check, for
SPACE APPLICATION the ﬁrst time in microgravity conditions, all the water
properties close to the critical temperature.

111.1 CNES—NASA program To reach those objectives, the HT1 insert contains
111.1.1DECL1C and HT1 {High temperature Insert} one cell (Fig. 111) ﬁlled With pure water, as close as
CNES and NASA have an ongoing collaboration possible to the critical density.

mainly based on the DECLIC (DEVice for the study of The development of this cell, in order to Withstand

Critical Liquids and Crystallization) program. high pressures and temperatures and, at the same time,
DECLIC (Fig. 11) is a multi—user facility to meeting the ISS safety requirements, has been a real

investigate low and high temperature critical ﬂuids technical challenge.

behavior, chemical reactivity in supercritical water,

directional solidiﬁcation of transparent alloys, and more

generally, transparent media under micro—gravity

environment on board the International Space Station

(188). It has been described in details during past IACs

([13][14][15])-

II . _.._- e . If LiiT‘fi':"""" - _ ‘ ﬁg:
E£::'. 1H .-.-._:---— -. II p. .'F=-Eh,.-IL ' —- * :F1
1t liiﬁlﬂe‘u Fit? “NI . -1 pita:
E l! 1. 1% ’
II'iII bl"" :3. _'._. '- . ?ﬂi “5'?” III‘ . Fig. 111: The HT1 cell assembly. The cell itself is in
‘F’I: ' an! :1? 1.2.9? . -. {EL 'Fﬁi III? l the middle While the large screws are devoted to
I!"" _IE j ""‘E‘E‘thiKt-a. I'I Withstand high pressures (up to 500 bars) at high
- m5. _._ ._.. 953+ ”:in L._ tem erature u to 6000C 16 .
.. . tweef/Iﬂt p ‘ p ” 1
I: ._ -.1, ﬁ' ‘3. ——_I.-'*:;' ' .mI 111.1.110ng0ing CNES—NASA program
_. t"" . tﬁiiéj Taking into account the promising results obtained
I/ t 1' __ LI“ Itﬁ‘trﬂh """" l With HT1 (see below) and the fact that using the ISS
.. -. ”@ﬁ - "" - .3 1- ﬁﬁjﬁ 1 '2' gives us the opportunity to return hardware to the
' 0 a .. . ' ._I*""‘L._--I;—- ' = - I ground in order to refurbish it, a complementary
11:45 .. 5““? ' E:- h b b '1t b t 11 th ' 1 d
:LJ'"" REE; :1 IE program . as een m e ween a e invo ve
' - - | r._ partners (1.6. CNES, NASA and all the American and
.f - I; {I— French scientists).
. _ I _ . 1 |
I - ‘ I — II _-r-':-__ DECLIC SCWO FACILITIES
-' - 'I'I- ' '_' (POST-DECLIC)
-' -' -_ - SCWO
-- . ' . , , demo.
_ Sane d :13th shgi/iib i"" “G
: (C02) or
"" . IIII Pure (ﬂats?) Binary

Fig. 11: The DECLIC payload ﬁtted in the EXPRESS Wat” 2 4

RACK 4 Of the 188. The tWO DECLIC lOCkCI‘S are 3009-2911 2013-2014 2016-2017

located in the top right quarter 0f the rack (©NASA) Fig. 1V: CNES—NASA stepping stones toward oxidation

processes in supercritical water [7][17]
DECLIC has been designed to accommodate various

inserts containing the material sample to be studied. This program uses stepping stones toward a better

From the three developed inserts, one is Of particular comprehension and the use of oxidation processes in

interest for the present paper: the HT1 (High supercritical water under microgravity conditions. It is

Temperature Insert) Insert. summarized in Fig. IV.

The HT1 is dedicated to the study of supercritical
water (critical temperature 647 K, critical pressure 22 These are detailed in the following.
MPa).
1AC—14,A2,6.5 Page 4 0f 9

"
"5","65th International Astronautical Congress, Toronto, Canada. Copyright ©2014 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
The ﬁrst experiment, SCWM, using the HT1-R,
111.11 Pure water studies gHTI initialprogram) investigates the precipitation and dissolution of a salt

The HT1 was operated onboard the 188 from (Na2804) as the ionic solution transitions from sub-
October 2009 until September 2010 and a post-ﬂight critical to supercritical. The investigation focuses on the
ground sequence was performed in 2011. An example extent of precipitation, the agglomeration mechanism in
of an obtained image of the cell at 99mK below To is 0-g, and the transport of the precipitate under a
shown in Fig. V. temperature gradient.

The most signiﬁcant result might be that the relative The objective in this investigation is to study the
value of the critical temperature of pure water was formation of salt precipitation and its transport in the
obtained with 1 mK resolution and 5 mK presence of a temperature gradient by ﬁlling HT1 test
reproducibility. The absolute value was measured with a cells (originally ﬁlled with pure water), with a dilute
precision of 50 mK mixture of salt and water at the critical density of water.

This new mixture allows investigators to observe an
42320858 anticipated shift in the mixture’s critical point (i.e.,
temperature and pressure) along with precipitate
. '31‘"" formation, precipitate agglomeration (i.e., clustering),
.<~~Jle.../_ and transport at near-critical conditions (1.e., Just above

rft ‘1. if;- 9 and below the critical point of pure water).
91E“ ””3133! The HT1 insert was returned to the ground with the
¢g¢€91g1 ULF-S Shuttle ﬂight. The cell, containing pure water,
:{t‘i’3‘rﬁ was replaced by a similar cell containing a salt- water
‘gg‘piﬁu mixture. This reﬂight insert is referred to as the HT1-

= . r~§«.e Reﬂight(HT1-R).
‘ A The HT1-R was launched with the ATV-4 in June
2013 and ﬁrst operated in July 2013. As of today, 5
Camera : HR1 experimental sequences have been performed and 3 are
Fig. VI DlI'CCt WldC FlCld Observation at 99mK under still to come. The insert should be returned to the
Critical Temperature fOllOW11’1g 8 1101118 thermal ground in 2015 in order to proceed to a second
stabilization. refurbishment.

External bubbles: boiling at the interface To date, the salt water behavior has been compared to
Central two-phase distribution: nucleation-growth the pure water behavior in different regimes i.e, below
process in the bulk the critical temperature, above the critical temperature,
and transitioning through the critical temperature. The

The ability 0f DECLIC t0 tune the radial thermal critical temperature of the salt water mixture was found
gradient ll’lSldC thC HTI CCll was also demonstrated as a to be approximately 13K higher than that of the pure
preliminary step to the subsequent salt-water studies. water case. However, the repeatability of the critical

temperature measurement for different traverses through
WM the critical point is not as good as for the pure water

The SCWM (Super Critical Water Mixture) case. This raises the question of salt related phenomena
investigation is a follow-on experiment to the High impacting the repeatability and quite possibly
Temperature Insert (HTI) investigation and serves as a constituting an intervening mechanism that is not yet
prelude to the study Of oxidative processes in a future understood. This aspect is still under investigation.
supercritical water oxidation investigation. The SCWM An example of the salt water results shown in Fig. VI,
experiment is the ﬁrst 0f tWO planned re-ﬂight illustrates the dramatic impact the presence that a small
experiments 11’1VOlV11’1g the I'C-ﬂlght Of the 1611111318th amount of salt has on the behavior leading up to the
High Temperature 1nsert(HT1—R). critical temperature. The image shows the salt water in

These supercritical water re-ﬂight experiments are HTI Sample Cell at a temperature of Tc-100mK. It is
intended to study unit processes of practical concern seen that there is a large central vapor bubble and a
that arise in systems using supercritical water for waste number of smaller vapor bubbles interspersed in the
management and resource reclamation. Water polarity liquid phase located on the outside. This is different
decreases substantially as thC critical pOll’lt is traversed compared to the pure water case at similar distance from
so that ionic salts, normally soluble in water, begin to To shown in Fig. V.
precipitate out of solution. These precipitates tend to
deposit on heated surfaces, the reactor walls, and inﬂow
and outﬂow valves which hinder the operation of the
supercritical water processor.

1AC-14,A2,6.5 Page 5 0f9

"
"6","65th International Astronautical Congress, Toronto, Canada. Copyright ©2014 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
”quid region Type 1 or Type 2 salt will be made depending upon the
4% results of HTI-R and further ground-based studies.
V ’_ This experiment will enable the study of the impact of
343,353; ,;.j_ C02 on precipitation, critical temperature shift, and
3 ' «k , transport phenomena important for reactor fouling.
; giggg ,: Option 3: Dissolution of Organic Material in Near-
‘* .3 , ”’33“ ii ' 3:“ Hydrogen bonding between water molecules, which
u . {Y is very strong at ambient conditions, decreases
‘ ‘ 3* signiﬁcantly as water approaches its critical point. The
7 . Hf}??? result is that organic compounds become highly
l “ soluble in supercritical water. This experimental option
vapor region proposes the use of an organic material, non-soluble in
liquid water, whose solubility undergoes a reversal in
Fig. VI: Direct Wide Field Observation at lOOmK under near critical water. The intent .WOUld be to study. the
Critical Temperature for the salt water case following mechanisms O.f organic 80111131119] as water trans1tions
thermal stabilization. from sub-critical to supercritical. The proposed
experiment under this option would observe and
III.IV Mixtures studies [HTI-RZ] understand the phenomena associated with the
An a d ditional re-ﬂight of the High Temperature dissolution andtransport of an organic substance in
Insert (HTI-RZ) is propose d in or der to study unit water at near criticalconditions. The investigation will
processes of practical issues arisin g from the determine the shift in criticalpomt and W111 prov1de
supercritical water processing of waste streams detailed observations of the dissolution and transport
pro duce d during long duration space missions. Th er e processes. Results from this investigation Wlll prov1de
are two primary investigation proposals that are of observations that can enhance the fundamental
interest and the ultimate deﬁnition of the follow-on “?Clerswlndmg Of the mechanisnis. that govern the
experiment for HTI-RZ will depend on the ﬁndings of dissolution, . transport. .and nnx1ng . Of “game
ongoing groun d base d research. compounds in supercritical ﬂuids. This enpenment
serves as an excellent precursor to supercritical water
0 tion 1: Non- reci itatin T e 1 S alt [e . oxidation (SCWO) experiments in that it provides
NaCl] Solution: experimental observation .of the organic dissolution
The ﬁrst reﬂight, the HTI-R experiment, mechanism, the rate of dissolution, and the primary
investigates the precipitation and dissolution of a dilute transport processes Of a reaction .SyStel.” Pm t0. the
Type-II salt-water (NaZSO4) mixture during the .reaction. occurring. A difﬁculty With this option is in
transition from sub-critical to supercritical (as well as identifying a suitable organic material SO that the
the reverse phase transition) and the transport of the dissolution process is ievers1ble when the .water is
precipitate under a temperature gradient. For Optionl, brought back to subcritical conditions. This would
a Type 1 salt (NaCl) is proposed which has higher allow for repeated observations.
solubility near the critical point than Type 2 salts. This , , ,
would enable the study of critical temperature shift, W . . . .
turbidity, equilibration phenomena, and transport in the TWO types Of nncrograwty SCWO fa01lities are
presence of a temperature gradient in a salt-water proposed, which Wlll enable aresearchers to address a
solution in the absence of a precipitate. In conjunction Wide range Of the technology S current research “Peds
with the HTI and HTI-R results this experiment would Without the often. maSkmz‘?’ effects. Of graV1tational
generate a high ﬁdelity microgravity database of pure forces. Examples include .1nvestigations Of transport
water, Type 1 and Type 2 salt solutions transitioning Phenomega Of salt pre01pitates 1n non-buoyant .ﬂOW
through the critical point. This is important since ﬁelds or in the presence Of extreme thermal gradients,
practical supercritical water oxidation systems hydrodynamics Of injected reactant streams 19“)
generally have both Type 1 and Type 2 salts present. supereritical b?lk ﬂglds or continuous coaX1al
IDJCCUODS, spe01es nnx1ng and separation processes,
0 tion 2: Tertia Salt-Water-C02 s st e m reaction rate and mechanisms, and hydrothermal ﬂames.
Since a major product of supercritical water But, SUCh a program is well beyond the DECLIC
oxidation is C02 this option will enable the simulation program.
of salt behavior and transport in a practical
supercritical water oxidation system. The choice of
IAC-l4,A2,6.5 Page 6 of9

"
"7","65th International Astronautical Congress, Toronto, Canada. Copyright ©2014 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
III.V.I Mini—SCWO Facility or 3D) will be investigated to optimize the process. Note
The “Mini—SCWO” studies could be performed in a that the small reactor volume increases the safety
new “Cold Combustion” insert (i.e., at relatively low conﬁdence of such an experimental set—up.
temperature oxidation reactions ranging from ~4000C to That kind of experiment could ﬁt in a DECLIC
~8000C), that would allow for the study of chemical insert but its development is not compatible with the
reactions of various materials in supercritical water or DECLIC lifetime and the partners are discussing a
high pressure gaseous environments and could also be DECLIC—NG (New Generation) payload.
used for combustion investigations. Therefore, it would
allow for a great breadth of experiments as discussed III.V.II SCWO Facility
below. The “SCWO” studies will demonstrate the ability to
ICMCB and CNES have been working on the recycle liquid waste streams using supercritical water
development of a fully transparent microliter volume (~ oxidation processes. Many of the experiments
1—10 uL) continuous cell. After ﬁve years of envisioned in this category would likely require a
development, ICMCB is now mastering the scientiﬁc facility that would not ﬁt into a DECLIC—like payload
use of supercritical microﬁuidic tools and is now widely The strategy consists of developing a SCWO
recognized in this ﬁeld beyond oxidation chemical Facility accommodating a larger test cell and allowing
reactions. Also the implementation of the uSCWO for a ﬁow—through system, the conceptual design for
process was already demonstrated, ICMCB is now which is presented in Fig. XI. To accommodate
developing an ""all Sapphire"" technology to reach multiple investigations teams, with potentially disparate
temperatures (T > 5000C) and pressures (p > 40 MPa), science objectives, the proposed reactor is to be
compatible with the full investigations of such designed with a removable PI—speciﬁc reactor base to
chemicals reactions in SCWO allowing Visualizing and allow for different injection concepts and/or burner
analyzing ﬂames behavior depending on the operation conﬁgurations. It is envisioned that this SCWO Facility
parameters. will be placed in an Express Rack requiring the build—up
A conceptual design for a Mini—SCWO facility, is of new diagnostic hardware; comprising two cameras, a
shown in Fig. VII, with a reactor size in the range 1—10 collimated backlight, a Rainan spectrometer, and an
uL (typical envisioned dimension: Length: 2—5 cm, array of temperature, pressure and ﬂow sensors.
Width: 2—5 mm, depth: 25 — 250 um.
H20/ Oxidizer H ‘E;: Jet 5‘0“)
preheating channel a ‘
I? L ‘ Top view I '
Inserted Sa hire a . . . ,__-t ~-_,
capillaf: L , HI Caplllary t1p [um ' - if ' _ l
IIIII l.- .JI
1 cm @ Cross—section view I; ‘ ‘ "" “7
H20 / Oxidizer Cleaning i, j I‘ A , .~
Fuel Solvent H 1‘ ‘ . =
.. "" ‘ t ‘ I i"", .
Sample/Wastes ‘1 E"" '
Fig. VII: Conceptual design of the Mini—SCWO ' ‘
facility ""*-
The minireactor will accommodate either a 2D or a full ._—--—--E ’
3D coaxial injection and will be entrapped reversibly ’
(easy exchange) in a heating / compression part
allowing both feeding the reactor with ﬂuid and
controlling temperature and pressure. The full
transparency 0f the mini—deVice allows for Fig. VIII: Conceptual design of a SCWO Facility
implementing a wide range of in Situ characterization showing overall dimensions (inches) and main
techniques, from Visual observation to spectroscopy (IR, components. In this conﬁguration, the cut—away View
UV» Raman, etc.) in addition to temperature probes and shows a co—ﬂow burner attached to an interchangeable
pressure sensors. Several injection conﬁgurations (2D
IAC—l4,A2,6.5 Page 7 of 9

"
"8","65th International Astronautical Congress, Toronto, Canada. Copyright ©2014 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
PI-speciﬁc reactor base, with a Raman Probe inserted
from the top along the ﬂow axis.

IV. CONCLUSION

The DECLIC HTI (High Temperature Insert) insert
was developed to study pure water as a critical ﬂuid.
Taking advantage of the capability to return hardware to
the ground, CNES and NASA have decided to refurbish
this insert twice as stepping stones toward oxidation
processes in supercritical water.

By the end of the DECLIC program, the
supercritical behavior of pure water and mixtures will
be better understood and it will be time to proceed with
the next steps: demonstrations of the interest of SCWO
(Super Critical Water Oxidation) technologies under
microgravity in order to prepare for exploration
programs.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank all the companies
involved in the development of DECLIC. ASTRIUM-
ST (France), which was the prime contractor, but also
SODERN (France), University of Amsterdam (The
Netherlands), COMAT (France), EREMS (France), the
Thermoelectric materials laboratory from Ecole des
Mines de Nancy (France)...

IAC-l4,A2,6.5 Page 8 0f9

"
"9","65th International Astronautical Congress, Toronto, Canada. Copyright ©2014 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
REFERENCES

[1] S Yesodharan et a1. “Supercritical water oxidation: an environmentally safe method for the disposal of
organic wastes” Current Science, Vol 82, N0 9, 10 May 2002

[2] B Veriansyah et 211., “Supercritical water oxidation for the destruction of toxic organic wastewaters: a review”
J ournal of Environment Sciences 19 (2007) 513-522

[3] L Motamedi “Supercritical ﬂuid processing: application ﬁelds” Riza Werkdoeument N0. 96.072X

[4] P Marrone “Supercritical water oxidation — Current status of full-scale commercial activity for waste
destruction” The J ournal 0f Supercritical Fluids 79 (July 2013) 283—288

[5] P Kritzer et al. “An assessment of supercritical water oxidation (SCWO) existing problems, possible solutions
and new reactor concepts” Chemical Engineering J ournal 83 (2001) 207-214

[6] A Martin et 211. “Recent developments of supercritical water oxidation: 21 patents review” Recent patents on
Chemical Engineering (2011) 4 000-000

[7] M Hicks et a1. “Investigation of supercritical water phenomena for space and extraterrestrial application” 10th
International Symposium on Supercritical Fluids; 12 May 2012; San Francisco, CA; United States

[8] M Hicks et a1. “Diffusion limited supercritical oxidation (SCWO) in microgravity environments” SAE
technical paper 2006-01-2132

[9] W Killilea et a1. “Supercritical water oxidation: microgravity solids separation” SAE technical paper 881038

[10] Y Takahashi et a1. “Subcritical and supercritical water oxidation of CELSS model wastes”, Advances in
Space Research, V9(8) (1989) 99-110

[11] “Harvesting Mars” http://science.nasa.gOV/science-news/science-at-nasa/2003/20aug_supercriticalco2/

[12] T Wang “Supercritical ﬂuid extraction of minerals in martian soils” PhD in chemical engineering from the
Vanderbilt University 2013

[13] G Pont et A1, “DECLIC, soon two years of successful operations” IAC_11_A2_5_4(2011)

[14] G Pont et A1. “DECLIC, First Results on Orbit” IAC-10-A2.5.1(2010)

[15] G Pont et A1. “DECLIC: a facility to study crystallization and critical ﬂuids” IAC-09-A2.6.4 (2009)

[16] R. Marcout et A1. “DECLIC: a facility to investigate ﬂuids and transparent materials in microgravity
conditions in 188” IAC-06-A2.5.02 (2006)

[17] G Pont et A1. “DECLIC, now and tomorrow” IAC-13,A2,5.5 (2013)

IAC-14,A2,6.5 Page 9 0f9

"
