"","x"
"1","62nd International Astronautical Congress, Cape Town, SA. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
IAC-11.A2.5.4
DECLIC, SOON TWO YEARS OF SUCCESSFUL OPERATIONS
G. Pont
CNES, Toulouse, France, gabriel.p0nt@cnes.fr
S. Barde*, D. Blondel, B. Zappoli1C
Y. Garrab0s§, C. Lecoutrew
D. Beysenslir
M. Hicks”, U. Hegde§§
I. Hahn***
N. Bergeonlll, B. Billiam, L. Chen§§§, A. Ramirez****
R. Trivedillll
DECLIC is a multi-user facility to investigate critical ﬂuids behaviour and directional solidiﬁcation of transparent
alloys.
As part of a joint NASA/CNES research program, the facility was launched with 17-A Shuttle ﬂight (August 2009)
and has been operated onboard the 188 since October 2009 : when the IAC 2011 takes place, the instrument will
have performed two years of operations, monitored from the CADMOS (CNES, France).
The material samples to be studied are accommodated in dedicated inserts which can be sequencially inserted
into the instrument. The three developed inserts have been tested so far.
The DSI (Directional Solidiﬂcation Insert) is dedicated to the study of the solidiﬁcation of succinonitrile based
alloys, analogue of metallic ones.
The ﬂight sequences are over and have shown unprecedented and unique 3D observations. The results will also be
used as benchmark data concerning the solidiﬁcation interface pattern characteristics.
This insert was brought back with the ULF-6 Shuttle ﬂight (May 2011) for a post-ﬂight sequence and refurbishment.
The HTI (High Temperature Insert) is dedicated to the study of pure water as a critical ﬂuid.
It has produced fundamental results after having faced a perturbating thermal gradient that was ﬁnally solved
through software modiﬁcations [1]. A ﬁrst water critical temperature value has been approached for the ﬁrst time in
microgravity and interesting turbidity measurements have been performed.
The insert was ﬂown back with the ULF-S Shuttle ﬂight (March 2011) and is being refurbished.
The ALI insert is dedicated to the study of SF6 (sulphur hexaﬂuoride) as a near-ambient temperature critical
ﬂuid.
Its commissioning was performed in March 2011 and three experimental sequences have already been performed.
The program covers a whole characterization of SF6, ranging from thermodynamic quantities measurements
(thermal diffusivity, heat capacity and turbidity near the critical point...) to boiling effects studies thanks to a cell
fitted with a heating window.
The mid-term program is made of existing insert utilization (ALI) and inserts refurbishments and re-utilization
(HTI and D81), while the long-term program plans to develop new inserts.
* Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES), Toulouse, France, sebastien.barde@cnes.fr
l Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES), Toulouse, France, didier.blonde@cnes.fr
1 Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES), Toulouse, France, bernard.zappoli@cnes.fr
§ CNRS-ESEME, Pessac, France, garrab0s@icmcb-b0rdeaux.cnrs.fr
M CNRS—ESEME, Pessac, France, lecoutre@icmcb-b0rdeaux.cnrs.fr
ll CEA and ESPCI-ESEME, Paris, France, daniel.beysens@espci.fr
ii NASA, Cleveland, United States, mhicks@nasa.g0v
§§ NCSER, Cleveland, United States, uday.g.hegde@nasa.g0v
*** J et Propulsion Lab, Caltech, United States, inseob.hahn@jpl.nasa.g0v
W AiX-Marseille Universitee & CNRS, Marseille, France, nathalie.bergeon@im2np.fr
m AiX-Marseille Universitee & CNRS, Marseille, France, bernard.billia@im2np.fr
§§§ AiX-Marseille Universitee & CNRS, Marseille, France, liang.chen@im2np.fr
MM AiX-Marseille Universitee & CNRS, Marseille, France, anthony.ramirez@im2np.fr
WT Ames Laboratory US-DOE & Iowa State University, Ames, United States, trivedi@ameslab.g0v
IAC-ll-A2.5.4 Page 1 0f 12

"
"2","62nd International Astronautical Congress, Cape Town, SA. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights
reserved.
I. INTRODUCTION II. PAYLOAD, INSERTS AND GROUND
SEGMﬂ
As DECLIC is close to end its second year of This is a brief overview as those items have already
operation on orbit, the three developed inserts have been presented in details during past IACs [1], [2].
already given interesting results, showing the
performances of the payload and increasing the The DECLIC instrument is accommodated in
interest of the community for a follow—on of the two Single Stowage Lockers (SSL), called the
program. EXperiment Locker (EXL) and the ELectronic
Locker (ELL).
The aim of this paper mainly is to give a status of The general architecture is given in Fig. 11.
the operations and to look at What is expected next. I
,1: ' """"i-~ - 3.- 1%
The ﬁrst part of the paper gives an overview on ""$352 3 ‘ ’ ’1‘“,
the science program, the payload, the inserts, and the 3 3 wt 6, 9 .,I_ 3 3
ground segment. 3 ﬂ :33: \h }
Until now, both the HTI and D81 sequences are 3 932/2423 E 1 3» 33: I. “1
over, the two inserts have been ﬂown back to the ""I “we - 3
ground, and two ALI operational sequences have i 2w¥32 3 ”h"" _..
been run. The synthesis of the operations is ‘ FEET . F
presented in the second part of the paper, as well as .‘I W V3 #33 “ . 3
some preliminary results for the three inserts. ,‘ 3. Age #1 233223.. 3““ J .'.
t, ~' 3ﬂ— 33 . L; -‘ a”:
The mid—term and long—term programs, made of . l' — '223i1'372""._3, , II”? .. “I\ I .- .
use of existing inserts, inserts refurbishments, and A: .._.—. I m QQ '
new inserts development, are detailed in the last mm _=- 4—2.1--.”3‘
parts of the paper. ,. _ _.__... t .‘-\
I .._ --.-. . I ....—....._-_ . Fig. 11: The DECLIC lockers. The ELL is at the
_ .. "". _ _ 3 “'2' ""—— }- bottom While the EXL is at the top and houses the
_""""'3'~.'.3_':322 E3— . - insert. The electrical connections between both
m3. I';-_I . ""'_""— r=1-----1-_—._h 23% (”ﬁt I22 component and the water cooling connections (grey
”3'13; ”23%.“ 2533; 3 33-3 ""£1113! _- ‘5 “3&2 “pipes”) to the EXPRESS RACK are also Visible.
W22 33% {3:3- - Iﬂ: (Photo CNES)-
-:3‘ 23:332.. 4""""'-—-' II '- __- I I ' I I 'I—1‘:-I:E II ||.-' I
- I3 5 3 I‘"" . 3'33 EA—éﬂﬁ'i I'w'3'2I-13 [I The ELL houses all the power, data handling and
iii Eater 3 __- ﬂ '_ uﬁﬁﬁxi‘i‘x‘ﬂ"" J33 high accuracy thermal regulation electronics, and
'- ' ' _' 4U 3‘3: 2{:%*% I3”?- manages the Whole system and the scientiﬁc
2 ""'----.-_____I .. . FEM .; ""=-""'-:'.-'-'='~-'33: - 5‘ experiment execution. It is the interface, for signal
.53 - '- -3-'-I'III ﬁg? '33-. and plower, Witlhthe EiPRESS RIACK. h . .
/-""""l*-'.- _ I' \ﬁﬁ-ﬁ'ﬁﬁ—i 3:32 varilou: (1:554 :Sts like 012:; 0a benC 9 p?vlldhngf
_ .1"". .- .. ...~,. I e. :21."" I I gnos1cs 1 e W1 e or narrow 1e 0
2 3 'l33{.m..—e '_ t"". .:-I Efjﬁ I .- View, grid shadowing, light scattering,
3:3 32% I . . _::~i'.;""' WEE!“ _ ' 2-: interferometers, light transmission measurement
.. _3-J--T—'-'I--—_-:f"" 23M] - 3? etc...). The EXL also receives the eX eriment
= ' - ""r I I' 5.: container Which is called the insert.
I 3"".'..:_'f:"".'.3-_-_ . - - - 2 [3. Three inserts have been built so far, each of them
_ -' ' 5. being dedicated to a science domain:
' — Phase transitions near the critical point
' "" at room temperature, critical ﬂuids and
.' ' . - . _— boiling crisis are studied thanks to the
. -. . ' ALI (Alice Like Insert).
- - ' — Properties of high temperature
.. I supercritical ﬂuid like water are
”I ' . "" checked thanks to the HTI (High
Fig. 1: The DECLIC payload ﬁtted in the Temperature Insert)-
EXPRESS RACK 4 Of the 188. The two — Microstructures dynamics during the
DECLIC lockers are located in the top right solidiﬁcation 0f model materials are
quarter Of the rack (photo N AS A). studied thanks to the D81 (Directional
Solidiﬂcation Insert).
IAC—l 1—A2.5.4 Page 2 of 12

"
"3","62nd International Astronautical Congress, Cape Town, SA. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights
reserved.
An insert accommodates a thermostat (ALI, HTI) V. RESULTS
or a pulling furnace (DSI), respectively containing a V.I Ogerational Synthesis and anomalies
sample cell unit (SCU) or a cartridge with the As of July 2011, the instrument has seen 14 ﬂight
material to be studied. It also contains most of the sequences, leading to the following statistics :
electronics associated with user dedicated sensors -More than 8000 issued commands
(temperature, pressure...). - 5800 operating hours
- 1 TB of generated data
The control centre for DECLIC is the CADMOS.
The CADMOS is a User Support Operation Centre Since the beginning of the operations, DECLIC
(USOC) located at the CNES (Centre National has experienced several kinds of anomalies. Those
d’Etudes Spatiales) centre of Toulouse (France). having had impact on DECLIC performances or
As the team is not 24/7 on console, the payload’s inducing strong operational constraints are listed
Health and Status data is also monitored at the FDIC below.
(NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville,
USA) where Ground Commands Procedures allow V.I.I HTI Thermal Gradient
to quickly react to non nominal situations. As stated in [1], an unexpected thermal gradient
The real time data is made available to the was seen during the ﬁrst HTI ﬂight sequences. This
scientists Via a webserver. In addition, an archiving thermal gradient was suspected to be linked to a non
system (to which the scientists can also connect Via a linear phenomenon occurring in one of the two
web browser) allows to store the exhaustive Peltier elements involved as sensors (Seebeck effect)
reference data, which is retrieved Via Removable in the regulation loops.
Hard Disks, returned to the ground when full. We were able to implement a workaround in
order to put the thermal gradient within the cell back
The operations are organized in insert dedicated at expected values or so ; the faulty Peltier element
sequences which typically last 3 weeks and are was replaced, in the regulation loops, by a linear
separated by several weeks (3 at least typically). combination of two neighbour sensors.
That kind of arrangement allows the scientists to During the post-ﬂight sequence, the other Peltier
perform some data processing of a given sequence in element also failed.
order to tune the following sequence program. As the HTI is being refurbished for the HTI-R
program (see § V1.11), the Peltier elements have been
retrieved and some cracks were ﬁnd in the alumina
plates that accommodates the thermoelectrical
material (F6812) legs. That certainly explains the
observed phenomena but further investigation is
needed to conclude.

V.I.II Reboots and Shutdowns

Like the preceding anomaly, this one was already
stated in [1].

Since the beginning of the operations, the
payload has experienced 7 events called shutdowns
and reboots.

What is called a reboot is when the payload
completely reboots by itself, while a shutdown is
when the payload is found in a very low power
consumption mode and that we cannot interact with
it anymore.

Mainly because those kinds of events appeared
with two different inserts (DSI and HTI) at very
different steps of the sequences (science activities,
data recording...), and also because nothing was
found in the parameters evolutions, nor in the logs
generated by the payload, the troubleshooting led us
to propose two explanations : Single Event Processes
(SEU, SEL), or micro cuts in the 28V EXPRESS
RACK power line.

We have not concluded on the origin of the
anomaly yet, but there hasn’t be any occurrence
since July 2010.

IAC-11-A2.5.4 Page 3 of 12

"
"4","62nd International Astronautical Congress, Cape Town, SA. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights
reserved.
V.II DSI quasi—stationary pattern responds to a variation of
parameter, With Which dynamics and by Which
The main objective of the present project is to mechanisms.
identify and understand the physical phenomena
Which govern the dynamics of the microstructure Quantitative characterization of the patterns
selection in 3D directional solidiﬁcation [3]. obtained is still in progress but let us illustrate our
Acquisition of experimental benchmark data in work With the analysis of a long solidiﬁcation at a
diffusive mode (188 experiments) is also necessary constant pulling rate. The starting interface
to provide the scientiﬁc community With a database; corresponds to VP = 0 (n0 microstructure). After
this is critical for the validation and development of triggering of the pulling, morphological instability
reliable theoretical and numerical models. This initiates by forming linear ridges along sub—
database Will be established as a function of the boundaries that ﬁnally underline a rather complex
control parameters of the microstructure (solute array (ﬁg. IV a). Between these defects, in interface
concentration, thermal gradient, pulling rate) so that areas that are still smooth, some poxes may be
it is mandatory that these parameters are present: they can be described as circular
unambiguously controlled during one experiment. If 0ndulations 0f the interface. A quite uniform
we consider a pattern grown on ground (ﬁg. 111 a), it corrugation that corresponds to the initial Visible
is characterized by a very clear radial variation of wavelength of morphological instability then invades
size going from large cells in the centre to small the interface (ﬁg. IV b). The amplitude of all these
cells and even smooth interface at the crucible interface modulations starts to increase, channels are
border; this variation is due to convection that forming but it is still difﬁcult to identify cells. At
induces radial gradients in the microstructure control this stage, the interface dynamics is extremely fast
parameters along the interface [4]. In and pattern disorder high. There is then a progressive
contradistinction With 3D ground patterns, the decrease of disorder and a clear pattern of cells is
microgravity ones are very homogeneous as eventually reached (ﬁg. IV c). The dynamics then
illustrated in ﬁg. 111 : radial variation of size is no clearly slows down and is limited to progressive size
longer noticeable on the pattern grown in adjustment and array ordering (ﬁg. IV (1). All this
microgravity. In this last case, the Width of the size process is quantitatively characterized, for example
histogram is then fully representative of the selection in term of primary spacing evolution, and the
process (ﬁg. 111 c). mechanisms of spacing adjustment are investigated.
a) Vp = 4 pmls t=7.5 min
a Occurence c A W“
i ‘ - g; -' '-
\: . -'.°.'-f%‘25'£i‘fv:75‘45‘553 *
15” Po ﬂ ‘ ' ’~-
m» ~'-.-.°.o‘£:-“-'~ camera 3 HR? Camera : HR2
”£4“; |||| |||||| III. .- .- c) Vp = 4 pmls t=23.6 min d) Vp = 4 pmls t=100.0 min
Primaryspacing (normalized) ‘ i . a
Figure 111: Comparison between patterns grown ' '_ , Vi: .
(SCN — 0.1 wt%, VP = 10 ttm/s, G = 17 K/cm) l ' ,6 ""
— b) in microgravity “V
(SCN — 0.24 wt% Camphor, VP = 4 pm/s, - ' ‘ 2
amera : HR2 Camera ; HR2 _""""""""""_
The solute concentration of the sample is Figure IV: Patternsevolution as afunction 0f
adjusted on ground so that it can not be changed. ,tlm? , , ,
Two sets of thermal conditions, associated to two Thanks to the combination Of 1n s1tu.observat10n
values of thermal gradients, have been used. Long and extended homogeneeus patterns, It, was also
solidiﬁcations 0f the Whole cartridge at a given poss1bleto obtain very unique and Of mfg,“ interest
pulling rate, as well as experiments With a velocity observations of SFHDC. secondary instabilities such as
jump, have been performed. Long solidiﬁcations are multiplets 0r 0s01llating patterns. Analyses of these
dedicated to the exploration and characterization of phenomena are also in progress.
the microstructure map as a function of growth
parameters. Experiments With a velocity jump are of
prime importance in order to understand how a
IAC—l 1—A2.5.4 Page 4 0f 12

"
"5","62nd International Astronautical Congress, Cape Town, SA. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights
reserved.
V.III HTI 0.353 g, leading to the ﬁlling mean density

As the HTI was the ﬁrst insert to be tested p=pc+2% (to be reﬁned).
onboard DECLIC, few preliminary results have Three small (250 pm bead diameter)
already been presented at IAC 2010 [1] and more thennistors (THERMOMETRICS B10, 10 k9
detailed results Will be presented during IAC 2011 in resistance at 25 0C}) are located inside the ﬂuid
[5]. volume, so that three local temperatures are

measured close to the gas-liquid interface in
V.IV ALI microgravity environment, and labeled R5, R6 and

V.IV.I Hardware R7, respectively. The thennistors are Visible on the

The microgravity experimental program to picture of Fig. VI.
investigate the boiling crisis uses the ALI insert. For
that purpose, two optical pressurized cells integrate 493339708 99.28
respective in-situ heater devices, i) as a form of .1
massive ﬂux meter appropriate for interferometry of” m ""“
imaging of the bubble shape deformation during 69 ‘
heating, and ii) as a form of a transparent resistive 4. _ '
layer (~ 50 mm2 area), appropriate for light i}; 139 ”a
transmission observation of the liquid ﬁlm boiling. -. A, g? '17.; .12; \

Each cell is ﬁlled by SF6 and the critical .53 g? 131992;... ’ :11
coordinates (temperature, pressure, density) of the 37. 1 g , . '
gas-liquid critical point of SF6 are TC=318.737 K, 11: j ’F§§2 1?""

(45.587 oC), pc=3.73 MPa, and pc=742.6 kg 1113. «.J'Q Wee” _

As the results presented in this paper are ~. 3
focused on the Direct Observation Cell (DOC), the Thermistors Locations ‘ :iﬁmw '
design of this cell is reminded below. For more \
about the cells design, see [6]. . ._

. resistivelayer Camera 1 HR1

thermmor and connect'on phts Fig. VI. Wide ﬁeld and grid shadowscopy image of
‘ . 1"" r Direct Observation Cell (DOC) at equilibrium in the

I‘ .1“ ‘I two-phase range (T~Tc-300mK)

LIGHT h“_ . .

IN I OUT V.IV.II Preliminary Results
- Only the preliminary results obtained from the
—"" —. direct observation cell are presented in the
i following. These results are focused to i) the TC-
}. determination and phase separation process after the
\ A gas bubble TC-crossing down from a temperature quench of -100
- ttK depth, and ii) the relaxation of the boiling
'7 ﬂ phenomena after heat pulses delivered by the

‘ i l ’5' j. transparent resistive heater.

' ‘ "" '3' A ’ Turbidity measurements and phase separation
saPPhire 0°Iightscattering process are used to detennine the DOC critical
window CuCozBe window tem - -

perature With a resolution better than 50 ttK. The

Fig. V Schematic cross section (not to scale) 0f the Tc-crossing down is illustrated by the series of
expected microgravity gas-liquid distribution in the images given in Fig. VII Which show the density
Direct Observation Cell (DOC) dedicated to study changes from the initial (homogeneous) one-phase
the liquid ﬁlm drying due to boiling phenomena, domain above TC (a) to the (growing) two-phase
using a transparent resistive layer as a ﬂat 10031 domains When the temperature goes to below TC due
heating source. to a temperature quench of -100 ttK depth. We note
that the two-phase evolution is here observed over a

The ﬂUid sample volume observed by light period of 34 hours following the temperature
transmission corresponds to a cylindrical volume of quench, thanks to the high temperature stability (115
D2106 mm inner diameter and inner thickness MK) of the regulation system. We also note that the
e=4.115 mm. Moreover, the direct observation cell ﬁnal equilibrium state Where a single vapor bubble is
also allows collecting the light scattered at small surrounded by the liquid is not still reached.
angles and at 90°. The total ﬂuid volume of the cell
is 0.463 cm3 (including a dead volume mainly due to
ﬁlling holes), corresponding to a total SF6 mass of

IAC-l 1-A2.5.4 Page 5 of 12

"
"6","62nd International Astronautical Congress, Cape Town, SA. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights
reserved.
Camera : HR1 Camera : HR1 Camera : HR1
Camera : HR1 Camera : HR1 Camera : HR1
Camera : HR1 Camera : HR1 Camera : HR1
Camera : HR1 Camera : HR1 Camera : HR1
Fig VII. Wide ﬁeld images of Direct Observation Cell (DOC) for a Tc—crossing down When the temperature
change from above TC— to below TC is due to a temperature quench of —100 “K depth. Image (top—left) corresponds
to the initial (homogeneous) one—phase domain above TC. The following images (from right to left and top to
bottom) illustrate the density changes due to the evolution of the (growing) tWO—phase domains. About 34 h total
time between (top—left) and (right—bottom) images.

IAC—l 1—A2.5.4 Page 6 0f 12

"
"7","62nd International Astronautical Congress, Cape Town, SA. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights
reserved.
As shown in Fig. [V], the cell is ﬁtted With a
transparent resistive layer. AL! 3502 - 2011/06i13- Doc. R8_P19 : 3mW. 333. T-Tc = .3 mK
By using this layer, heating of the tWO-phase
domain, boiling phenomena and drying of this liquid 2:: , w ~ Al A , a 7 ~ ~ ,., - ,, ~4~~~
ﬁlm can be analyzed, through in situ measurements 12%;; ATHIA
0f the temperature changes (see below Fig. VIII) and 2:: {Hiaw- 7777*? ==
direct observations of the boiling and drying 3""”“i . II. I - : » i I -
processes during heating pulses and their related Sim:
relaxation after heating stop (see below Fig. IX). 5:? 3— 7 7 V 7 7 7 N i 4' 7' W 7 T ,_1.7.5-mK.,,
We recall that the resistive layer is made from a 5:: j—7 #33 T +TV 7—:
Sn alloy OXide [7]» 8 mm diameter and 200 nm 2:322:15; m; gag”; intact $25.75""; 15‘“; mt W;
thickness. The value of its resistance (106 Q) is l- 5”
temperature independent (dR/de7 m Q K'l) in the ““3‘°“°“’°“”""9
temperature range of present interest. The heater MM ' "" ,“m
resistance, covering a typical area of 50 mmz, is R6 ‘33? . i i . 3 i +5 . 3;; R7
supplied at constant adjustable voltage using two :: WV, —— __iykg___i %“i““
gold plate layers Which induce two non-transparent ‘L‘ii Whisk ‘~ =—.-.i ii:
regions in the ﬂuid volume (see the corresponding :é . J «‘4N""‘Wmm 3:12:35:
black areas in Fig. VI). The Declic instrument allows mug ii3§""i%§ E3 7 7""‘1i”?‘53jff ifii3*""’§3’f;1' 7 «3m
injecting an electrical power covering the typical m fee? i. . 22:32
range 0-3.4 mW, 0f 12-bits resolution. The heat 211$"" m” i i ' ” ‘W m“ 2333::
power per unit area Which is dissipated by Joule “QIQWW mm mm WWSSMW mm mm ma?!“
tiff??? $3??? :6 :O?;;::e§r;:;ﬁﬁ;a:§te 3115313231611; Figure VITI: (a) Measured resistance change for the
’ ' "" . . R5 thermistor during the electrical pulse (3 mW
(generally non-transparent) technical deV1ces of power 33 s duration) in the two phase domain
same area (and signiﬁcant larger thickness). The (T=T :3 mK)' related temperature change directl
realistic variation of the heat ﬂux dissipated into the 11168.81:er b 1916 and R7 thermistors y
ﬂuid can be estimated as a function of T-TC, thanks y '
t0 the effective heater design and the precise Fig VIII(a) gives the R5 thermistor response
knowledge of the singular thermal properties of SF6. from a heat pulse 0f3 mW 33 s duration performed
At TZTCHO mK for example, 90% Of the electrical 3 mK below the critical, temperature awhile Fig
power Will be dissipated inte the ﬂuid. In addition, VIII(b) gives the related temperatlire changes
the heating period (from a inimmum time Of 43 ins) measured by the two other in situ thermistors R6 and
can be adjusted (from time increments Of 43 ms)1n a R7. These results illustrate the resolution of the
iiyelgstlliferhhzeericis :rigriﬂggetso the ﬂmd temperature temperature measurements from the B10 sensors,
' Which is of the order of 100 MK, typically. We note
. . . that the temperature increase of order of 1.5 mK
. Flg' VIII and IX are the ﬁrst illastratioris Of the remains lower than the temperature distance to TC,
high-level performances of such heating deV1ce used probing that the thermal energ su lied to the ﬂ 'd
in microgravity conditions. y pp m
by the heat pulse does not change the two—phase
nature of the cell. Such a resolution in temperature
control and measurements is essential working at a
few mK from TC.
IAC-l 1-A2.5.4 Page 7 0f 12

"
"8","62nd International Astronautical Congress, Cape Town, SA. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.

Camera : HR1 Camera : HR1 Camera : HR1

13e95570

Camera : HR1 Camera : HR1 Camera : HR1

Camera : HR1 Camera : HR1 Camera : HR1

Fig. IX : Wide ﬁeld images of SF6 DOC at TC-T=10 mK, 20 mn (left column), 2 hours (mid column) and 5 hours

(right column) after three heating pulses of 0.02 mW/ 33 s (upper line), 0.1 mW / 22 s (mid line) and 1 mW/ 3 s

(lower line). The relaxation of the nucleated small vapor bubbles due to the boiling phenomena close to the triple

contact line liquid-gas-transparent heater is clearly observed.

Fig. IX shows typical Wide ﬁeld images of the V.IV.III Conclusions 011 the ALI Results
direct Observation cell at three times - 20 11m (left We have started the microgravity study of the
column), 2 hours (middle column) and 5 hours (right triggering mechanism at the origin of the boiling
column) - 0f the relaxation period of the boiling crisis by direct Observation of a gas bubble spread
phenomena after supplying three different pulses - over a transparent heater surface, during the heating
0.02 mW / 33 s (upper line), 01 mW / 22 s (mid line) of a critical two phase sample cell ﬁlled With SF6. The
and 1 mW / 3 s (lower line) - at TC-T=10 mK. Here preliminary investigations show that the high
we illustrate the use Of the grid shadowscopy 0n the capabilities of this instrument are irreplaceable
images of the upper lines, Which allows Visualization powerful tools for studying the boiling crisis for a
of the density differences between gas and liquid to three-dimensional spheroidal shape of the gas bubble,
probe the nucleation and coalescence of the small especially by monitoring of 10W heat ﬂuxes and by
vapor bubbles due to the boiling phenomena close to ﬁne tuning of the distance to the critical point to
the triple contact line liquid-gas-transparent heater. control the liquid-vapor properties.
IAC-l l-A2.5.4 Page 8 0f 12

"
"9","62nd International Astronautical Congress, Cape Town, SA. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
VI. THE MID-TERM PROGRAM V1.11 SCWM/HTI-R
Currently, the ALI is the last insert remaining on In many supercritical water applications, a solid
board the ISS, and more ALI sequences to study the phase consisting of inorganic salts eXists Which arises
boiling crisis phenomenon are planned until the from chemical reactions during oxidation or from
beginning of 2012. Further utilizations of the insert to impurities in non-reacting systems [9]. The presence of
study the critical phenomena have recently been added salts can severely limit the lifetime of system
to the program. The following scientiﬁc objectives are components due to their corrosive behavior and
deﬁned for the mid-term agenda of the DECLIC tendency to build depositions on critical thermal control
activities. surfaces, plug valves, and ﬂow passages, etc.
Precipitation occurs in the near-critical and supercritical
V1.1ALI-2 regimes due to an order of magnitude decrease in the
The objectives of the new proposed NASA science dielectric constant, e , of water compared to its value
investigation are to measure thermal diffusivity, heat under room conditions (i.e., g E 80 at T 2 300K
capacity at constant volume, turbidity, and coexistence compared to e E 5.4 at Tc ) [10]. The Debye ionic
curve ih two-phase domain Of a h‘hd sample near the screening distance is proportional to 81/2 so that at near-
liquid-gas critical point. This investigation Will utilize critical conditions the ionic charges are not well
the existing ALI insert as is. After completion Of the shielded. This leads to a recombination and eventual
original scientiﬁc objectives Of the ALI insert, precipitate agglomeration from dissolved salts.
additional experimental scripts Will be added to the The HTI insert was returned to the ground with the
DECLIC activities Oh board 188- ULF-S Shuttle ﬂight. The cell, containing pure water, is
_ _ _ being replaced by a similar cell containing a salt- water
TO measure the thermal d1ffus1V1ty and heat mixture. This reﬂight cell is referred to as the HTI-
capacity, a heat pulse technique Will be used using a Reﬂight (HTI-R).
heater and thermistors in the Interferometric The main objective is to study salt precipitation
Observation Cell (100- By monitoring the sample phenomena close to the critical temperature and in the
temperature after the heat pulse, thermal diffusivity and presence of a temperature gradient. To do so, the
heat capacity at. ctonstant volume can be obtained. The workaround implemented to solve the thermal gradient
thermal d1ffus1v1ty W111 be also determined by issue (see [1]) Will be very useful. The objective is to
monitoring the evolution of density profile of the launch the so-called HTI-R insert in 2012.
sample after the heat pulse using the interferogram. We The Super Critical Water Mixture (SCWM)
will also use the Direct Observation Cell (DOC) to experiment, using the HTI-R, will investigate the
measure the turbidity and coexistence curve of the behavior of an aqueous mixture ofa Type 2 salt (sodium
sample. AS the average density 0f the sample is “ZiOSO/O sulfate) in the vicinity of the water-salt mixture’s critical
higher than the critical density, we will measure the point. Of particular interest is the point at which
turbidity 0f the sample at this off-criticality as a precipitation occurs, the rate Of precipitate
function 0f temperature. The results Will be compared agglomeration, the precipitate’s spatial distribution, the
With the previous MIR/ALICE 2 results With the sample precipitate’s transport mechanism in the presence of
density at 08% Off criticality l8l- These turbidity salinity and temperature gradients, and the potential
measurements at two different densities in microgravity accumulation on the walls Of the test section.
condition Will enlighten the comparison With Ornstein-
Zernike theory. Density measurements ih the tWO-phase A test cell, Whose dimensions are close to the HTI
domain Will 3150 be performed by determination 0f the cell, has been built and tested at Glenn Research Center
volume of the gas bubble in the DOC. This is feasible (GRC) in order to prepare for the SCWM experiment.
because the bubble is expected ih middle 0f the DOC The testing includes veriﬁcation of the ﬁlling process in
cell due to its curved WithW- By measuring the volume order to make sure that the expected salt concentration
of the gas bubble at different reduced temperatures, the is reached when the cell is closed.
coexistence curve of the ﬂuid can be determined. The
experimental result Will be compared With predictions
of the recent crossover equation-of—state theoretical
models.
IAC-l l-A2.5.4 Page 9 0f 12

"
"10","62nd International Astronautical Congress, Cape Town, SA. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
from high temperature ﬂuid at the meniscus to lower
temperature ﬂuid at the base of the cell, begins to
develop. The downward drift of the salt-laden ﬂuid
(i.e., the darker ﬂuid) is momentarily retarded by the
fact that it is at a higher temperature, and consequently
less dense, than the cooler, less saline but denser ﬂuid.
_ _ This creates a salinity inversion that gradually
I ‘ diminishes as salt diffuses out of this dark band.
It was also found that the critical temperature
,..g:-i'_1£> increased slightly with addition of the salt. For example,
' . .. _ for a 1.5% weight Na2SO4 solution the critical
temperature was measured to be 647.8 K compared to
Fig. X. Experimental observation cell used in 1-g testing 647.1 K for pure water, which makes the SCWM
showing holes for four cartridge heaters and one of the experiments fully compatible with the HTI insert.
two orthogonal optical axes.
Results from experiments conducted suggest that
while salt is present in the vapor phase below, but close
to, the critical temperature, precipitation occurs mainly
in the liquid phase side, nucleating 0n the surfaces (e.g.,
windows) in contact with the liquid, and possibly with
smaller particulates (less than 15 microns) in the liquid
phase. An example of salt deposition patterns on the
cell window is shown in Fig. XI.
' ' (a) (b)
' Fig. XII Images of the ﬂuid during cool down. (a) Pure
ﬂL water (b) 10% weight Na2SO4 solution. Note the
"" stratiﬁcation pattern in the salt-water solution.
w
‘ The DSI insert has been returned with the ULF-6
Shuttle ﬂight. After a post-ﬂight sequence to take place
in October 2011, the cartridge will be replaced by
another cartridge containing a different camphor
concentration. Consequently, another parameter
(camphor concentration) will be added to the parameters
' '41-‘51“ - available onboard the payload (furnace’s temperatures
.- ‘- -r . '_'l 4"""" and cartridge’s speed). Again, the so-called DSI-R
'M: ._ i 13-th insert will be launched as soon as possible, but likely
_ ”?edﬂ ‘ ﬂu, ._ not before end-2012.
, , "" , , , VII. THE LONG-TERM PROGRAM
Fig. XI. Salt dep0s1t patterns V1s1ble 0n the cell w1nd0w
(a) in the vapor region after heating to pre-critical In a longer term View and as a logical follow-on of
temperatures and subsequent. 0001 down .and (b) the HTI and HTI-R eéperiments, a new insert in
magniﬁed Vlew Of salt dep0s1ts 1n the vapor region. envisaged. This insert, called SCWO for Super Critical
, , , , , Water Oxidation, will be dedicated to the study of
. An inteiesting stratiﬁcation pattern begins to appear oxidation phenomena in supercritical water. Very
1n the liquid during a quench after heating toeritical preliminary activities have been performed and the
temperature. As the temperature goes below critical, a development is not formally decided yet.
dark bandjust below the meniscusappears which sits There is also a strong interest in studying Super
above 3,1 lighter reg“? Thls, stratification pattern Of Critical ﬂuids as a function of density (i.e. a cell with a
alternating dark and hght regions (Flg' X1) might be tunable volume) and a new DECLIC insert could be a
explained by the thermal gradient that begins to develop g 0 0 d can di dat e in doing so.
upon cooling. As the test cell cools, a thermal gradient,
IAC-l 1-A2.5.4 Page 10 0f 12

"
"11","62nd International Astronautical Congress, Cape Town, SA. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
VII. CONCLUSION ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank all the companies
First operated onboard the 188 in October 2009, involved in the development of DECLIC. ASTRIUM-
DECLIC is close to 2 years of successful operations on ST (France), which was the prime contractor, but also
orbit. SODERN (France), University of Amsterdam (The
Despite some ALI sequences are still to be Netherlands), COMAT (France), EREMS (France), the
performed and most of the data has still to be processed Thermoelectric materials laboratory from Ecole des
for all the inserts, the results already are of ﬁrst order. Mines de Nancy (France)...
The HTI and D81 inserts are being refurbished in
order to extend the science program by, respectively, The science teams were also involved in the
replacing pure water by salted water, and changing the development phases, not only by expressing their needs,
camphor concentration, and a new insert, dedicated to but also by developing the cells (ALI and HTI cells
the study of oxidation phenomena in supercritical water, were built by ICMCB-CNRS, France), or ﬁlling the D81
is planned. cartridges (IM2NP-CNRS, France). Thanks to them for
With that mid-term program well engaged, their involvement and constant inspiration.
DECLIC will remain active until 2015 at least.
ICMCB team gratefully thank Eric Georgin for his
assistance during the cell integration, ARCOFLUID
company for it numerical simulation support and Jean
Pierre Manaud, Iyad Saadedin, and Guy Campet for
development and processing of the thin resistive layer
made of Sn alloy oxide.
IAC-ll-A2.5.4 Page 11 of 12

"
"12","62nd International Astronautical Congress, Cape Town, SA. Copyright ©2010 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
REFERENCES

[1] G Pont at A1. “Declic, First Results on Orbit” IAC—10-A2.5. 1(2010)

[2] G Pont at A1. “Declic: a facility to study crystallization and critical ﬂuids” IAC-09-A2.6.4 (2009)

[3] Bergeon N, Trivedi R, Billia B, Echebarria B, Karma A, Liu S, Weiss C and Mangelinck N (2005) Adv.
Space Res. 36 : 80

[4] Jamgotchian H, Bergeon N, Benielli D, Voge P, Billia B, Guérin R (2001) Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 : 166105

[5] D. Beysens et A1. «Non marangoni motion of a bubble under a temperature gradient” IAC-11.A 2.6.7 (2011)

[6] Y. Garrabos at A1. Acta Astronautica 66 (2010) 760—768

[7] Y. Saadedin, PhD thesis, University of Bordeaux, 2007, unpublished.

[8] C. Lecoutre, Y. Garrabos, E. Georgin, F. Palencia, D. Beysens, Int. J . Thermophysics, 30, 810 (2009).

[9] Hodes, M., Marrone, P. A., Hong, G. T., Smith, K. A., and Tester, J . W., “Salt Precipitation and Scale Control
in Supercritical Water Oxidation- Part A,” J ournal 0f Supercritical Fluids, V01. 29, pp. 265-288, 2004.

[10] Kim, Y. C., and Fisher, M. E., “The Critical Locus of a Simple Fluid With Added Salt,” Journal of Physical
Chemistry B, Vol. 105, pp. 11785-11795, 2001.

IAC-11-A2.5.4 Page 12 0f 12

"
