"","x"
"1","64th International Astronautical Congress, Beijing, China. Copyright ©2013 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
IAC-l3,A2,5.5
DECLIC, NOW AND TOMORROW
G. Pont
CNES, Toulouse, France, gabriel.pont@cnes.fr
S. Barde*, B. Zappoliir
Y. Garrabosi, C. Lecoutre§
D. Beysens**
M. Hicks”, U. HegdellC
I. Hahn§§
N. Bergeon***, B. Billialll
R. Trivedim
A Karma§§§

DECLIC is a multi-user facility to investigate critical ﬂuids behaviour and directional solidiﬁcation of transparent
alloys.

As part of a joint NASA/CNES research program, the facility was launched with l7-A Shuttle ﬂight and has been
operated onboard the 188 since October 2009.

The main instrument monitoring is made from the CADMOS (CNES, France).

All the three developed inserts have been tested so far and preliminary results have already been presented during
past IACs.

The results obtained with those three inserts have led the NASA and CNES founded scientists to ask for a
utilization extension, mainly based on inserts refurbishments and new inserts developments.

As a stepping stone towards the oxidation into supercritical water studies, the cell of the HTI (High Temperature
Insert) has been (containing pure water) changed by an identical one containing a dilute aqueous mixture of NaZSO4
— 0.5% w. The so-called HTI-R insert was launched with ATV-4 in June 2013 and ﬁrst operated in July 2013. The
main objective is to study salt precipitation phenomena in a temperature gradient close to the critical temperature of
the solvent. The DSI (Directional Solidiﬁcation Insert) is being refurbished in order to replace the cartridge by a
similar one containing a different camphor concentration. Consequently, another parameter (camphor concentration)
will be added to the parameters available on-board the payload (furnace’s temperatures and cartridge’s speed). The
so-called DSI-R insert should be launched with ATVS in 2014.

The upcoming program also includes a refurbishment of the ALI insert, as well as a second set of refurbishments
for the D81 and the HTI.

* Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES), Toulouse, France, sebastien.barde@cnes.fr
l Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES), Toulouse, France, bernard.zappoli@cnes.fr
i CNRS-ESEME, Pessac, France, garrabos@icmcb-bordeaux.cnrs.fr
§ CNRS-ESEME, Pessac, France, lecoutre@icmcb-bordeaux.cnrs.fr
H CEA and ESPCI-ESEME, Paris, France, daniel.beysens@espci.fr
H NASA, Cleveland, United States, mhicks@nasa.gov
ii NCSER, Cleveland, United States, uday.g.hegde@nasa.gov
§§ J et Propulsion Lab, Caltech, United States, inseob.hahn@jpl.nasa.gov
*** AiX-Marseille Universitee & CNRS, Marseille, France, nathalie.bergeon@im2np.fr
W AiX-Marseille Universitee & CNRS, Marseille, France, bernard.billia@im2np.fr
m Ames Laboratory US—DOE & Iowa State University, Ames, United States, trivedi@ameslab.gov
§§§ Northeastern University, Boston, United States, a.karma@neu.edu
IAC—l3,A2,5.5 Page 1 of9

"
"2","64th International Astronautical Congress, Beijing, China. Copyright ©2013 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
I. INTRODUCTION ll. PAYLOAD, INSERTS AND GROUND SEGMENT
The initial DECLIC operations program, consisting This is a brief overview since those items have already
in operating the three developed inserts, is over now. As been presented in details during past IACs [l], [2] and
the experiments have given interesting results, showing [3].
the performances and capabilities of the payload, the
interest of the community increased, and a The DECLIC instrument is accommodated in two
complementary program was proposed. Single Stowage Lockers (SSL), called the EXperiment
Locker (EXL) and the ELectronic Locker (ELL).
The aim of this paper mainly is to give an overview The general architecture is given in Fig. 11.
0f the program, including hardware modiﬁcations and I
development, and schedule. ,.’:‘:- 42;- . , m
(‘33: s 6: i 77,7
The ﬁrst part of the paper gives an overview of the I; F l 9. F ’
payload, the inserts, and the ground segment. ‘ . kg: . ':I..- ‘%h I I
The synthesis of the operations is presented in the l I ”F g; ,f‘ F; _. ‘1
second part of the paper. ‘ ._ A ‘ ‘59 I .
Then, the complementary program is detailed in the F r;- :33 :135: _ 2F
last parts of the paper. 1 {- ‘8‘ 13.3 a “:f 7. I. F
u:- .. “a q' . I L — i .7 r, . ' \\ .
“‘9.“ FFFFFWF ""3N . "" -_ F- .-_ L, . 1“\
mag: :1 !- - 3.. .. _— ' = .— _.._w..I..._...
Th 5;"" '4""'—' - - —_- ' - . 35‘: I ‘u -' I.:..| - Fig. 11: The DECLIC lockers. The ELL is at the bottom
- I""- F ""' ﬂ BFA— F '- i111. Fu-‘F: .' - F [I while the EXL is at the top and houses the insert. The
Fir] E III_ F_ ﬂ “'1': HEEHAXFKIIJ FF electrical connections between both component and the
..= -‘- ' . I- F“ ~4- .. IE? ??%Fm Li"" water cooling connections (grey “pipes”) to the
""--I----_____ .. .5 FE“ -; ""'=--"". ,_ IF'F"" .- EXPRESS RACK are also Visible. (Photo CNES).
II-_.F l' I _ tﬁﬁaiﬁﬂ LgLJ . The ELL houses all the power, data handling and
/ .. I I . 1- ﬁﬁ-F' ha“; I high accuracy thermal regulation electronics, and
a ”Irma "" - _,. :-I FEEiiFF' :' .;' manages the whole system and the scientiﬁc experiment
C F3) I . F '_.""""FF""F‘1.:-=i;;§: - .':-.'I;I'-II I ' 45' execution. It is the interface, for signal and power, With
.. FE: EMT - EFF the EXPRESS RACK.
= .. r . ""-' ' | Ii; The EXL hosts the optical bench, providing various
.F -- _. - :3. FT diagnostics like wide or narrow ﬁeld of View, grid
I . - .. '1 F shadowing, light scattering, interferometers, light
I -' 3 in transmission measurement etc...). The EXL also
' receives the experiment container Which is called the
""‘ insert.
. -. _ ' - Three inserts have been built so far, each of them
- ' being dedicated to a science domain:
. I - Phase transitions near the critical point at
""F ' . ' room temperature, critical ﬂuids and
Fig. l: The DECLIC payload ﬁtted in the EXPRESS boiling CFFSFS are studied thanks to the ALI
RACK 4 0f the 188. The two DECLIC lockers are (Alice Like Insert).
located in the top right quarter of the rack (photo ' Properties 0f high temperature
N AS A). supercritical ﬂuid like water are checked
thanks to the HTI (High Temperature
Insert).
IAC-l3,A2,5.5 Page 2 0f9

"
"3","64th International Astronautical Congress, Beijing, China. Copyright ©2013 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.

- Microstructures dynamics during the III. OPERATIONAL SYNTHESIS
solidiﬁcation of model materials are studied thanks to As of September 2013, the instrument underwent
the D81 (Directional Solidiﬁcation Insert). 480 days of operations smeared among 27 ﬂight

An insert accommodates a thermostat (ALI, HTI) or sequences, leading to 2.4 TB of data.

a pulling furnace (DSI), containing a sample cell unit

(SCU) or a cartridge With the material to be studied, 6 -—- 100

respectively. It also contains most of the electronics A _._NumberofSequences —90

associated to the user-dedicated sensors (temperature, 5 I -80

pressure...). 4 1“ — 70
- 60

The control centre for DECLIC is the CADMOS. 3 _ 50
The CADMOS is a User Support Operation Centre \'

(USOC) located at the CNES (Centre National d’Etudes 2 - / _ 4O
Spatiales) centre of Toulouse (France). V ' 30

As the team is not 24/7 on console, the payload’s 1 ' 20
Health and Status data is also monitored at the POIC - 10
(NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, o — 0
USA) Where Ground Commands Procedures allow to 21/22 23/24 25/26 27/ffcremeif/30 31/32 33/34 35/36

uickl react to non nominal situations. . .
q y - - - - - Fig. IV: Number of sequences and days of operations as

The real time data is made available to the selentists . , .

- - - - - a function of the ISS increment number
Via a webserver. In addition, an arch1V1ng system (to
Which the scientists can also connect Via a web browser) . . . .
- - - - The main results obtained Wlth the three inserts are
allows storing the exhaustive reference data, Wthh is b . ﬂ . d h ft .
retrieved Via Removable Hard Disks, returned to the me y summarize erea er.
round when full. . . . .
g - With the HTI, the most Signiﬁcant result might
be that the relative value Of the critical temperature
of pure water was obtained With 1 mK resolution
17A 19A ULF5 SpX—1 ATV-4 . . .
S/ N 001 30/08/2009 05/04/2010 24/02/2011 10/11/2012 15/06/2013 and 5 mK Ijepl‘Oductlbﬂl‘iY- The 31350111156 value was
measured Wlth a pre01s1on of 50 mK
SW 002 17A ULF5 ULF7 SpX—1 ATV-4
30/08/2009 09/03/2011 08/07/2011 10/11/2012 15/06/2013 42320858
17A ULF5 ULF7 SpX—2 -.; .'?;."",-(‘E-';,:','._.i,l,
btitx‘,
17A ULF6 46P SpX—2 p. ‘..
‘ ‘C‘VWJ:
n ‘ ‘ .‘
17A ULF6 46P \‘I‘uiﬁsr :-'- 5* -‘.
l-I-I-I 8”
17A ULF7 46P
_ b1 (1 _ k _ Camera : HR1
fig. 1in. R(IliDDs (Regnova ef 1615111. EISRH§SV69 Fig. V: Direct Wide Field Observation at 99mK
aunlc bels an returns. set 0 1g t S is under Critical Temperature following 8 hours
avai a e. thermal stabilization
Th , , d , , d d' (1 External bubbles: boiling at the interface
e operations are organize in insert- e icate Central two-phase distribution: nucleation-growth
sequences Wthh typically last 3 weeks and are -
, process in the bulk
separated by several weeks (3 at least). That kind of
arrangement allows the scientists to perform preliminary
data processing of a given sequence in order to set the
parameters of the following sequence of the program.

For more details concerning the ground segment and
the operations organization, one Will refer to [4].

IAC—13,A2,5.5 Page 3 of9

"
"4","64th International Astronautical Congress, Beijing, China. Copyright ©2013 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.

- With the DSI, extended experimental IV. COMPLEMENTARY PROGRAM
benchmark data in diffusive mode has been After the productive ﬁrst years Of operations, the
obtained. It was also possible to obtain very unique scientiﬁc community suggested to proceed With the
and of major interest observations of some refurbishment of the inserts in order to extend their use
secondary instabilities such as multiplets or to further studies.
oscillating patterns [5].

IV.I SCWM/HTI-R
1.- "" "".. Fang, -' H , .Iz'Lflz-i'. _ IV.I.I SCWM/HTI-R Science objectives
""' ihl‘lk""; :5"": “-4: The SCWM investigation is a follow-on

_r @ ‘ﬁiﬂ—Q- J {-155 experiment to the High Temperature Insert

. r a '. . i'l HE! .311. G. . 1; (HTI) investigation and serves as a prelude to

Ii: .“ 153:; ._--'_ f: R‘: . the study of 0X1dat1ve processes 1n a future

ielj'!!‘.‘rﬂ ' Ull- El, .‘ .ff..' supercritical water oxidation investigation. The

L!“ 9""” #5 ”ﬂ: ? _- h -_ SCWM experiment is the ﬁrst of two planned

331%.; i}! """" "" '_. -, ""‘ '_ ""'1 .' re-ﬂight experiments involving the re-ﬂight 0f

' *-""-.x*.ﬂ.ﬁfm~ :i L . _'""' - ‘- '. a refurbished High Temperature Insert (HTI-
Fig. VI: Direct and interferometric images of multiplets R),
(SCN—0.24wt% camphor; VP = 0.25 Hm/S; G = 12 . . .
K/cm) These supercntlcal water re-ﬂlght
experiments are intended to study unit

- With the ALI, a lot of data is still to be processes of practical concern that arise in
processed but the two main initial objectives have systems using supercritical water for waste
been achieVedI management and resource reclamation. Water

0 Thanks t0 3 dedicated transparent polarity decreases substantially as the critical
heat,” dePOSited 0“ one Of, ,the point is traversed so that ionic salts, normally
cell S wmdows’. the. bmhng soluble in water, begin to precipitate out of
phenomena, and in particular the . . . .
triple line behavior, has been solut10n. These prec1p1tates tend to depes1t 0n
studied. heated surfaces, the reactor. walls, and 1nﬂew

e The evolution Of the turbidity Of and outﬂow valves Wh1ch h1nder the 0perat1on
the SF6 close to its critical point of the supercritical water processor.
has also been measured The ﬁrst experiment, SCWM, using a

24dOCf6b refurbished HTI, the HTI-R, investigates the
gggggggiftfggﬂggosdw precipitation and dissolution of a salt (NaZSO4)
x as the ionic solution transitions from sub-
_ Jr critical to supercritical. The investigation
‘4, >4: ._ ' focuses on the extent of precipitation, the
/ -;:'f""9.zl_.iv' I ' , agglomeration mechanism in O-g, and the
{£71 $0 , . 3.! transport of the precipitate under a temperature
K ; P? ‘ 5? -' gradient.
xv“ . The objective in this investigation is to
“’ ’/ study the formation of salt precipitation and its
&EW"" transport in the presence of a temperature
"" ’ gradient by ﬁlling HTI test cells (originally
Camera: HR1 ﬁlled with pure water), With a dilute mixture of
Fig. VII: Transient triple-ligne contact during a heat salt and water at the critical density Of water.
1011156 This new mixture allows investigators to
observe an anticipated shift in the mixtures
critical point (i.e., temperature and pressure)
along With precipitate formation, mass
agglomeration (i.e., clustering), and transport
IAC—l3,A2,5.5 Page 4 0f9

"
"5","64th International Astronautical Congress, Beijing, China. Copyright ©2013 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
at near such critical conditions (i.e,, just above well as a ﬁrst attempt to measure the mixture critical
and below the critical point of pure water). temperature-
IV.I.II HTI-R Refurbishment ,e'”
The HTI insert was returned to the ground with the j“) _ w
ULF-S Shuttle ﬂight. The cell, containing pure water, g 5“ £r~_
was replaced by a similar cell containing a salt- water ?: ”:T‘T‘L ii: #g Q
mixture. This reﬂight cell is referred to as the HTI- 5? ”Egﬁh ‘Fﬁw‘k ,_
Reﬂight(HTI-R). "" "" y. "" ' L
As stated in [1], an unexpected thermal gradient was M A; . .-
seen during the ﬁrst HTI ﬂight sequences. This thermal 1‘ “94w“ "" '
gradient was suspected. to be linkerl to a non-linear T = 372.02 K T = 373.72 K
phenomenon occurring in the regulation loops due to a F' IX' B kl' t . h . th . . . t
misfunction of one of the two temperature-sensor Peltier 1g.. . '. ac. 1 images S ow1ng . e incipien
elements (Seebeck effect). During the ﬂight operations, preeipitation p01nt Of the Na2$O4 salt in the hqmd
we were able to implement a workaround in order to put region (L) Of the Sample C611 Umt (SCU)' Image at left
the thermal gradient within the cell back at expected shows streanis. Of small V3.19“ bubbles generated from
. . nucleate b0111ng, appearing as tendrils travelling
values or so ; the faulty Peltier element was replaced, in . .
the regulation loops, by a linear combination of two approxnnately radially from the SCU wa1.1t°the vapor
. . (V) region in the center. Image at right shows a
neighbouring sensors. . . .
As the HTI was being refurbished for the HTI-R coarsening of thesetendrils, after ateniperature increase
. . of 700 mK and a time lapse of 696 minutes, indicating
program, the Peltier elements have been retrieved and . . .
some cracks were ﬁnd in the alumina plates that the onset of salt preCIpitation along the ehannels created
. . by the vapor bubbles. This observation suggests an
accommodates the thermoelectrical material (FeSI2) . . . . . .
legs. interesting linkage between localized b01ling and
preCIpitation.
Five remaining sequences are planned until spring 2014.
IV.II DSI-R
IV.II.I DSI-R Science objectives
The new set of experiments in the DSI-R will focus
on the investigation of the formation of well-developed
dendritic array structures that are of direct technological
' -' relevance for the solidiﬁcation and casting industry. The
experiments will focus on elucidating:
I - the fundamental mechanism of sidebranch
formation
- the interaction of primary array and the
Fig. VIII: Peltier element found broken after the HTI secondary sidebranch structures
returned to the ground - the mechanism of the cell to dendrite transition
- the dependence of cell and dendrite tip shapes on
We then had to change the Peltiers assembly. Instead growth conditions.
of being wedged in between two rigidly mounted plates, Experiments already performed in the D31 have
spring washers were introduced in the assembly, so that yielded interesting observations 0f dendritic array
it could accommodate for the thermoelastic strains. structures (Fig. X), WhiCh suggest the existence 0f
During the refurbishment, the dismounted screws, possible coherent modes of dendritic sidebranching.
the seals and the insulating foils, were also replaced. HOWGVGI‘, fOI"" the SCN—0-24Wt% camphor 311035
dendrites were only observed in a high velocity regime
VLLH HTLR ﬁrst operations summary where the solidiﬁcation front developed signiﬁcant
The HTLR was launched with the ATV-4 in June 2013 curvature due to the combination of the rejection of
and ﬁrst operated in July 2013 for a three weeks latent heat and the much lower thermal conductivity of
sequence. the alloy than its quartz container wall. In addition,
The behaviour of water—salt mixture was observed, and dendrite tip radii are too small to be accurately resolved
in particular the salt precipitate spatial distribution, as at those high velocities. The new set 0f experiments in
the DSI-R will be conducted for a higher composition
IAC-l3,A2,5.5 Page 5 of9

"
"6","64th International Astronautical Congress, Beijing, China. Copyright ©2013 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
(SCN—0.5wt% camphor alloy) where dendritic arrays IV.III ALI-R
form at a lower pulling velocity where the front IV.III.I ALI-R Science objectives
curvature is minimized. Fig. 1(b-e) shows the results of Latest operations of ALI have shown that the
preliminary ground based experiments and phase-ﬁeld turbidity measurements can take beneﬁt from the high-
simulations, which demonstrate that well-developed quality thermal and optical environment of the insert
dendritic array structures form for a lower pulling speed and the microgravity environment of the ISS, allowing
VP = 10 nm/s for a thermal gradient G = 23 K/cm. The these measurements performed very close to the critical
ground based experiments and phase-ﬁeld simulations point. The preliminary analysis of the different
are in excellent agreement for theses growth conditions. theoretical formulation of the Ising-like equation-of—
In addition, those simulations predict a dendrite tip state models has also shown that the measurements of
radius of 14 pm, which should be sufﬁciently large to the singular properties at off—critical density (~1.7 % off
be accurately resolved by interferometry in the DSI-R. from the critical density) can still be an accurate probe
Additional simulations and ground based experiments for testing the recent classical-to-critical crossover
are in progress to develop the ﬂight matrix of growth models. However, only a test cell exactly filled at
conditions. critical density can be useful to discriminate the
contribution of the Green-Fisher critical exponent and to
i (a) (b) _ . 0 (e) evaluate the ﬂuid-dependent parameters when
33.36.?“1551‘; .,. , W : ' experimental data are covering the 1 mK temperature
§§ﬁ?‘§é}$‘§, . _50 y -' distance to To only attainable using DECLIC facility on
§~£§§W§:¢i ,/ board the 188. Despite the importance of the exponent,
éfgzi‘w‘f. '; z"" n, to describe how the correlation function behaves
4,; $«P*“;:3~ ‘ -1oo . asymptotically close to To, only a few theoretical works
i A E Q C: _) have been accumulated over the past few decades. To
_ 1 Ufa."" .. our knowledge, there is no precise experimental
a a 45011 J ': determination of the exponent in the liquid-gas critical
{‘21'- . 0 ‘ I point system to date. The difﬁculties in the experimental
.35., ‘ 11:14 W 1 tests are originated from the smallness of the exponent
\ a — -200 $_— 9
(c) (d) um -60 ~40 -2o 0 20 4o 60 between 0 and 0.05, the gravity effects, and non-
Fig. X. Experimental and simulated dendritic array negligible inﬂuence of conﬂuent singularities.
structures. (a) experiment in the D81 for a SCN-
0.24wt% camphor alloy with VP = 30 nm/s and G = 12 The ALI-R will measure experimentally the effects
K/cm. (b-e) Preliminary results for SCN—0.5wt% of the non-zero value of the Green-Fisher exponent in
camphor alloy to be used in the DSI-R with VP = 10 the liquid-gas critical point for the first time. By
nm/s and G = 23 K/cm: (b) phase-ﬁeld simulations of analyzing the theoretical predictions, a measurement of
dendritic array, (c-d) comparison of dendrite observed the turbidity of the SF6 sample with a precision better
in thin-sample ground-based experiments (0) and than 0.3% near the critical temperature (~ lmK above
simulated (d), and (e) longitudinal sections of the the TC) in microgravity condition could test the
simulated dendrites without (blue curve) and with (red theoretical predictions. In order to achieve this goal, a
curve) thermal ﬂuctuations; parabolic ﬁt of tip region new sample cell has to be prepared such that the average
(green dashed line) yields a tip radius of 14 um. density is closer to the critical density (< 0.1%) than the
current ALI sample cell.
IV.II.II DSI-R Refurbishment
The DSI insert has been returned with the ULF-6 IV.III.II ALI-R Refurbishment
Shuttle ﬂight. After two post-ﬂight sequences in The main objective of the refurbishment is to replace
October 2011 and J anuary 2012, the cartridge is being the direct observation cell by an identical cell ﬁlled with
replaced by another cartridge containing a different SF6, as close as possible to the critical density.
camphor concentration. Consequently, another To do so, ten new cells are being manufactures and
parameter (camphor concentration) will be added to the integrated. They will be ﬁlled and tested on the ground,
parameters available onboard the payload (furnace’s and the best (i.e. SF6 density closest to the critical
temperatures and cartridge’s speed). The so-called DSI- density) will be selected and integrated in the ALI
R insert will be launched as soon as possible, likely by insert.
mid-2014. As the ALI is going to return with SPX3 in J anuary
As for the HTI refurbishment, the dismounted 2014, and as a post-ﬂight ground sequence is being
screws, the seals and the insulating foils, were also required, the refurbishment is likely to start in March
replaced. 2014 and the insert should then be available for launch
by the end of 2014.
IAC-13,A2,5.5 Page 6 of9

"
"7","64th International Astronautical Congress, Beijing, China. Copyright ©2013 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
V. THE “R2” PROGRAM Option 1: Precipitation and Dissolution of Inorganic
While the complementary program has just started to in a Binary or Tertiary System
give the ﬁrst results, with the ﬁrst HTI-R sequence As previously noted in the discussion of the HTI-R
completed in July 2013, the scientiﬁc community experiment, water polarity decreases substantially as the
suggested proceeding with another set of refurbishments critical point is traversed causing the precipitation of
for the HTI and the D81. ionic salts, which are normally highly soluble in water
at sub-critical temperatures. These precipitates tend to
V.I DSI-R2 deposit on heated surfaces, the reactor walls, and inﬂow
The DSI ﬂight campaign was carried out on a and outﬂow valves which hinder the operation of the
succinonitrile — 0.24 wt% camphor alloy. This supercritical water processor. The first reﬂight, the HTI-
composition was very adequate to explore the largest R experiment, investigated the precipitation and
range of possible microstructure from the planar front to dissolution of a dilute Type-H saltwater (NaZSO4)
fully dendritic structures. In the dendritic regime, the mixture transitioned from sub-critical to supercritical (as
very interesting observations on DSI led us to choose a well as the reverse phase transition) and the transport of
higher composition for the DSI-R sample, as previously the precipitate under a temperature gradient.
explained. In the D81, very striking observations of The proposed experiment under this option would
secondary instabilities (multiplets, oscillating patterns) repeat the objectives of HTI-R and, depending on the
were also performed for the very first time in extended results of that experiment and further ground based
3D patterns close to the critical pulling rate that research, will use either the same salt-water mixture in a
corresponds to the transition between planar and cellular tertiary system incorporating C02 or a binary system
growth. Both thin-sample experimental studies ([6], [7], with a different salt-water, potentially a Type-I salt. The
[8]) and 2D computer modeling studies ([9], [10]) have tertiary system, with C02 , has the added beneﬁt of
shown that the stability domain of multiplets or replicating the behavior of salt formation and transport
oscillatory structures is usually limited to 1 to 4 times in a SCWO system, which has C02 as a major product
the critical rate and in DSI, these critical velocities were constituent.
very low (below 0.5 um/s for the applied thermal
gradients), so that those structures appeared only in very Option 2: Dissolution of Organic Material Hydrogen
narrow range of pulling rates. The set of experiments in bonding between water molecules, which is very strong
the DSI-R2 will focus on investigating those secondary at ambient conditions, decreases signiﬁcantly as water
instabilities of the cellular regime, using a lower approaches its critical point. The result is that organic
composition such as for example SCN— 0.1wt% compounds become highly soluble in supercritical
camphor. There are two primary reasons for this choice. water. This experimental option proposes the use of a
Firstly, the increase of onset velocity of the primary non-soluble (i.e., in water) organic material whose
morphological instability resulting from a reduced solubility undergoes a reversal in near critical water.
composition leads to an extension of the stability The intent would be to study the mechanisms of organic
domain in terms of pulling rate. Therefore, those solubility as water transitions from sub-critical to
secondary instabilities can be more easily studied supercritical.
experimentally over a wider range of parameters. The proposed experiment under this option would
Secondly, the lower composition will allow us to observe and understand the phenomena associated with
precisely measure this onset velocity and to deduce the dissolution and transport of an organic substance in
from this measurement the thermal gradient in the water at near critical conditions. The investigation will
Vicinity of the interface, which has been so far difﬁcult determine the shift in critical point and will provide
to precisely determine. detailed observations of the dissolution and transport
processes. This investigation will provide observations
V.II HTI-R2 that can enhance the fundamental understanding of the
An additional re-ﬂight of the High Temperature mechanisms that govern the dissolution, transport and
Insert (HTI-RZ) is proposed in order to study unit mixing of organic compounds in supercritical ﬂuids.
processes of practical issues arising from the This experiment serves as an excellent precursor to
supercritical water processing of waste streams supercritical water oxidation (SCWO) experiments in
produced during long duration space missions. There that it provides experimental observation of the organic
are two primary investigation proposals that are of dissolution mechanism, the rate of dissolution, and the
interest and the ultimate definition of the follow-on primary transport processes of a reaction system prior to
experiment for HTI-R2 will depend on the ﬁndings of the reaction occurring.
ongoing ground based research.
IAC—13,A2,5.5 Page 7 of9

"
"8","64th International Astronautical Congress, Beijing, China. Copyright ©2013 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
VI. CONCLUSION ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
DECLIC has been operated onboard the 188 for 4 The authors would like to thank all the companies
years now and the ﬁrst set of experiments, using the 3 involved in the development of DECLIC. ASTRIUM-
inserts, is over now. ST (France), which was the prime contractor, but also
One after the other, the inserts are returned to the SODERN (France), University of Amsterdam (The
ground in order to be refurbished. The ﬁrst refurbished Netherlands), COMAT (France), EREMS (France), the
insert, the HTI, has already been re-launched to the ISS Thermoelectric materials laboratory from Ecole des
and operated for a ﬁrst sequence. Mines de Nancy (France)...
It is foreseen that, at least 2 out of the 3 inserts will
be refurbished a second time, extending the DECLIC The science teams were also involved in the
utilization for a few more years. development phases, not only by expressing their needs,
but also by developing the cells (ALI and HTI cells
were built by ICMCB-CNRS, France), or ﬁlling the D81
cartridges (IMZNP-CNRS, France). Thanks to them for
their involvement and constant inspiration.
ICMCB team gratefully thank Eric Georgin for his
assistance during the cell integration, ARCOFLUID
company for it numerical simulation support and Jean
Pierre Manaud, Iyad Saadedin, and Guy Campet for
development and processing of the thin resistive layer
made of Sn alloy oxide.
IAC—l3,A2,5.5 Page 8 of9

"
"9","64th International Astronautical Congress, Beijing, China. Copyright ©2013 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
REFERENCES

[1] G Pont et A1, “Declic,soon two years of successful operations” IAC_11_A2_5_4(2011)

[2] G Pont et A1. “Declic, First Results on Orbit” IAC—10-A2.5. 1(2010)

[3] G Pont et A1. “Declic: a facility to study crystallization and critical ﬂuids” IAC-09-A2.6.4 (2009)

[4] G Pont et A1. “Declic Operations and Ground Segment: an Effective Way to Operate a Payload in the ISS”
IAC—12-B3.4-B6.5.8 (2012)

[5] N.Berge0n, D.T0urret, L.Chen, J .M.Debierre,R.Guérin, A.Ramirez, B.Billia, A.Karma and R.Trivedi,

Physical Review Letters 110 (2013) 226102

[6] Jamgotchian et al. Phys. Rev. E 47 (1993) 4313.

[7] Georgelin et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 79 (1997) 2698.

[8] W. Losert, D.A. Stillman, H.Z. Cummins, P. Kopczynski, W.-J. Rappel, and A. Karma, Phys. Rev. E 58,
7492-7506 (1998).

[9] P. Kopczynski, W.-J. Rappel, and A. Karma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3387-3390 (1996).

[10] P. Kopczynski, W.-J. Rappel, and A. Karma, Phys. Rev. E 55, R1282-R1285 (1997).

IAC—13,A2,5.5 Page 9 0f9

"
