"","x"
"1","JOURNAL OF SPACECRAFT AND ROCKETS
O O O O
Demonstratlon of Electromagnetlc Formatlon thht
O
and W lreless Power Transfer
Allison K. Porter,i Dustin J . Alinger,i and Raymond J . Sedwicki
University ofMaryland, College Park, Maryland 20742
J ohn Merki and Roedolph A. Oppermanﬂ
Aurora F light Sciences, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142
Alexander Buck,ﬂ Gregory Eslinger,ﬂ Peter Fisher,ﬂ and David W. MillerE
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
and
Elisenda Bouﬁ
O o o o o o
E Polytechmc Umverszly 0f Cataloma—BarcelonaTech, 08034 Barcelona, Spam
m
f. DOI: 10.2514/1.A32940
§
§ The Resonant Inductive Near-Field Generation System uses a single set of hardware to perform both
35 electromagnetic formation ﬂight and Wireless power transfer operations in a siX-degree-of-freedom microgravity
5 environment. The system serves primarily as a test bed for control algorithms, and operation onboard the
B International Space Station allows for more complicated and realistic algorithms to be tested. This offers an
95” advantage compared With the restrictive, dynamic environment of ﬂat ﬂoor facilities on the ground or the limited
g duration of reduced-gravity ﬂights. The hardware attaches to the formation ﬂight-test facility inside the International
g Space Station referred to as the Synchronized Position Hold, Engage, Reorient, Experimental Satellites. Design and
g development of the support hardware and electronics, as well as some test results from ground testing, a parabolic
f? ﬂight campaign, and preliminary test sessions on the International Space Station are presented. Ground tests and the
; parabolic ﬂight campaign results include preliminary inertia and thruster characterization of the combined Resonant
é Inductive Near-ﬁeld Generation System/Synchronized Position Hold, Engage, Reorient, Experimental Satellites
g” assembly. Preliminary on-orbit test results include data demonstrating Wireless power transfer of approximately 30 %
F0: and qualitative observations of electromagnetic formation ﬂight With one Resonant Inductive Near-Field Generation
g System unit restrained and the other unit free ﬂoating.
é‘
8
m N omenclature 600 = resonant frequency, Hz
Lu
E L = inductance, H
c; Plead = power d1331pated by the .load re31stor, W I. I nt 1‘ 0 du cti 0 n
o PRX coil = power losses in the receiver 0011, W . . .
2 Q 2 quality factor E netically generated forces and torques to maneuver satellites ma
8 R = resistance, 9 cluster, rather than expending propellant from thrusters. This 1S
E R L = load resistance, 9 advantageous for long-term or high-AV missions where the propel-
Q R L0 t = optimal load resistance, 9 lant supply could liinit the lifetime of the cluster. Energy requireci to
i ,7 p 2 power transfer efﬁciency generate the magnetic fields can be acquired by solar arrays, making
E ”Opt = optimal power transfer efﬁciency it a renewable resource. The ﬁrst proof of concept was demonstrated
ﬂ K = coupling coefﬁcient in 2005 by the Space Systems Laboratory at the Massachusetts
5;; Institute of Technology (MIT—SSL) us1ng two ground vehicles
.3; moving on air carriages for a two-dimensional environment and three
cg: Received 28 January 2014; revision received 18 June 2014; accepted for degrees 0f treedoin [11- QPCH' and Closed-loop COQUOI was 950d to
Q publication 25 June 2014; published online 25 September 2014, Copyright © direct the dipole interactions between the two vehicles. Additional
2014 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. All research has been conducted regarding EMFF, including trade
rights reserved. Copies of this paper may be made for personal or internal nse, studies of mission applications, dynamics and control of the magnetic
0h eehdltleh that the eeplef pay the $1000 Pef-COPY fee t0 the COPYI‘lght dipoles, and maturation of the hardware [2—é]. The Resonant
Chlearacrllce15C3e3nt6e;9ir;i4 22: :1???ng Dere’ Démvers’ hiAthgégé InCIude Induction Near-Field Generation System (RINGS) is the first
t e CO e _ an ' m COHGSPOH encewlt .t e ' . demonstration of EMFF in siX-degree-of-freedom microgravity
>tGiraduate Student, Department of Aerospace Engineering, 3181 Martin . .
Hall. Student Member A1 A A. enVironment and the ﬁrst system that combines .the same set of
TGraduate Student, Department of Aerospace Engineering, 3181 Martin hardyvare for Wireless power transfer (WPT).Capab111t1es. . .
Hall. Wireless power transfer usmg resonant inductive coupling IS a
iAssociate Professor, Department of Aerospace Engineering, 3181 Martin nonradiative means Of more efficiently transferring energy between
Hall. Associate Fellow AIAA. two coils separated by several meters. The magnetic field generated
§Lead Electrical Engineer, F0ur Carnbridge Center, 11th F1001 by current circulating in a primary coil passes through a secondary
lidechamcal Englheeh Feet Cambridge Center, _11th F1001 _ coil, inducing a current. By using a system with inductive and capac-
M Grﬁduate Etudent, Department Of Aeronautlcs and Asm’nautlcs’ 77 itive properties, the energy storage oscillates between the magnetic
aﬁsac usetts venue‘ . and electric field, which differs from a nonresonant coupled inductor
Professor, Department of Phys1cs, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Room 26— . . . . . .
505. setuphke that used in trad1t10na1 transformers. .Nikola Tesla first
“Professor, Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 77 Massachu— examined the concept Of resonant 1nduct1ve coupllng 1n the late 19th
setts Avenue, Room 37—327. Associate Fellow AIAA. century [9]: . . . .
§§Graduate Student, Electronic Engineering Department, Jordi Girona 3, RINGS IS deSlgHCd to Operate 1n tandem Wlth a small satellite
Campus Nord. test facility called Synchronized Position Hold, Engage, Reorient,
AIAA Early Edition / 1

"
"2","2 AIAA Early Edition / PORTER ET AL.
Experimental Satellites (SPHERES) which is a collection of identical Dis la Push Drive
microsatellites operating inside the International Space Station (ISS). Circuit
SPHERES was developed by the MIT—SSL and three satellite units
were launched to the ISS in 2006. The satellite Cluster serves as a test LCD 2
facility for developing algorithms for guidance, navigation, and Temp x
control for formation ﬂight in a risk—tolerant, microgravity environ-
ment [Z]. Previous test sessions for SPHERES included collision X8
avoidance, docking with fixed and tumbling targets, and various for- LowBaﬂel . Capacitor Bank
mation configurations [§]. The ﬂexible design features of SPHERES Microcontroller &
allow it to serve as a platform for experiments such as RINGS. For the R e s 0 n ant C 0 i1
RINGS hardware testing, SPHERES provides metrology regarding LowBamry
location and attitude within the ISS test space, determines control for Sensor
desired maneuvers, sends commands to RINGS, and stores data Hall—Effect
regarding RINGS during testing. - Sensorsx 3
Push Button SPHERES
C II. System Overview calmlmsxz
E The major components of the RINGS system are shown in Fig. l. Flg’ 2 RINGS blOCk dlagram’
2 The resonant coil is the central component of RINGS because the
3 current that 0s0111ates 1n the w1nd1ngs generates the magnetic field depicts the basic functionality of RINGS. A 1110 de must be com-
a necessary for EMFF and WPToperations.The resonant 0011 and most manded t0 RINGS before an current is allowed to ﬂow in the
S of the electronics are enclosed within a polycarbonate housing shell. . . y
.H. The area 0 f the housin that extends awa from the coil (toward the resonant 0011. After a mode 1s selected and conﬁgured by the RINGS
8 . g y . hardware, active commanding 0f the resonant coil current can begin.
_ center of the t0101d) encloses the electronics boards and 1s referred to . . . .
co . . . When demonstrating WPT, one RINGS un1t 1s des1gnated as the
‘5 as the power electronics bOX, as indicated by the shaded oval 0n the . . . . . . .
.3. right side of Fig. 1. The cuffs, struts, and sleeve provide structural p nmary by actively dr1V1ng current 1n 1ts resenant 9011' The other
§ support as well as 5 means for the physical connection to SPHERES. RINGS un1t 1s des1g11ated as the seconciary and H p ass1ve1y measuies
g The structural aspects of RINGS are described in more detail in the current ﬂ0w1ng 1n 1ts resonant 0011’ induced by the 0s0111at1ng
F: the subsystem sections about the housing and RINGS—SPHERES magnetic ﬁeld 0f the pnmary un1t. ,
E interface. A single SPHERES vehicle is installed into the center of .Several electronic boards and Targe components are eontained
8 each RINGS unit by sliding it into an aluminum sleeve. It is held in Wlthlh the RINGS power electronics box, as ShOWh 1h Flg- E The
3"" place by the friction between the sleeve and SPHERES, and by two liquid crystal display (LCD) 1s shown mounted to the outer surface of
53 captive thumb screws. For operation in EMFF mode, SPHERES the housing. An identical LCD is mounted to the bottom surface of
E calculates the current required of RINGS to achieve the force and/or the housing as well toallow Viewing from either side. The Tow-power
(00% torque for a particular maneuver. For WPT, SPHERES maintains a board and dr1ve Circuit are vertically stacked and secured 1n place by
8 ﬁxed position by using its own cold gas thrusters and commands a an assembly 0f bolts and standoffs. The low-power board is Oh the
55 current to observe power transferred from the primary RINGS unit bottom of the stack, and includes the fuses and battery protection
E (WPT transmitter mode) to the secondary RINGS unit (WPT receiver diotles, all Of the voltage regulators, the microcontroller, and the
(T) mode). Each RINGS unit is powered by two battery packs connected majonty 0f other penpher 31 components necessary to operate the
(L3 in series, as explained in the power plant subsection, The batteries RINGS electronics. The drive Circuit is separated from the low-power
(3; clip into mounts attached to the support struts of RINGS, board using standoffs to ensure Clearance of battery protection diodes
z The RINGS hardware serves as the primary source of force and that stand up from the board to accommodate heat sinks for convec-
8 torque during EMFF, while also collecting diagnostic and perfor- tive cooling. The communications board routes the communication
E mance information about the system. The block diagram in Fig. g lines to the appropriate positions on a standard 50 pin header that
2
T: Sleeve
Z
5 4 x Struts
5‘3; Housing Shell .
3 f ' h ~~
.. A I “ {$332
2 x Battery Mounts .4); '1' l/ "" :“\\ / .-_ f,“ i .2.
""i' ’f. _ \\,§ '
* '\ ‘9 i ‘- :
Lr‘ ' 5’ r y . 1 Power
.—' , W4; 1 - '""T ‘ Electronics Box
a l \\ . - #5"" V ' ll 5 ,
2 x Batteries ‘ I \V‘s o’\ ‘1‘ I "" i
',.. ,; 1‘ / \\‘\\‘\1‘/
V .1 'I"",,7;;. \ Kt ‘7 I. 7-“
x"" “,9,‘ C . .
. ' ""“‘ ea, /' ﬂ] , ommumcatlon
4 x Housmg Clamps /M ’9, port to SPHERES
-~ '\ '5'2'?j_,;,.__._;_,_ :51: /. , "" .
$7 , ' 7 é<= 10 x Coolmg Fans
Fig. 1 CAD model with labels for the primary RINGS hardware components.

"
"3","AIAA Early Edition / PORTER ET AL. 3
' Communication Port . ‘ ﬂ 1’ relaxes the wire into the desired radius of the spiral geometry instead
l W of retracting into the smaller original radius of curvature of the wire
14 /'17/‘""‘""""'/ f t ' lTh' h tt t t ' kn t
2/4, 'i;~""--4M” manu ac uring spoo . is ea .rea meh process is ownas as ress
\/«. . _ ""J W relief anneal and results in aluminum w1th material properties Similar
/ b . ' a /x ’ ' to the original 6061-0. An early attempt was made to achieve a more
/\\‘ o . ,_ .1, d , rigid 6061-T4 anneal with rapid coil quenching, however, this
, "" \ , o o f .1, 2 > ' ' resulted in undesirable warping of the coils.
Capacitor Bank \ /_‘ ” Two adjacent layers are shown in Fig. ﬂ. To improve heat dissipa-
|‘ ; tion and to reduce the dielectric losses associated with insulating
..*- . l ’ k 9’ 1 . . . material between windings, the wire is uninsulated. To maintain the
2455‘!!!- ‘/ s Dme C'rcu't , coil geometry and interwire spacing of 0.04 in. (1.02 mm), eight
i .. ._ i _ 7' / , polycarbonate combs with a width of 0.25 in. (6.35 mm) were equally
- - - - r . 7 ‘ spaced around the Circumference of the spiral between each pair of
-- , Low-Power Board , , , ,
1 NO SPST Relays , layers. Two of these combs are shown in Fig. g. The Wire is bonded to
V the combs using Permabond 820, a cyanoacrylate with a glass
transition temperature of 580C. Cyanoacrylate bonds well to plastic
Fig- 3 CAD Clltaway View Of the eleCtl‘OniCS bOX- and aluminum, and its low Viscosity allows the adhesive to ﬂow into
i the small space between the Channel walls of the polycarbonate comb
N . .
m and the aluminum w1re.
< o ' o o
S attaches tolthe SP¥E§?S exp¥Es1on p Oﬁ’ aid prayidets p ower for the Note that, to connect the layers in series, each must alternate
E 01’3“? 113:9 atgon (t)h tt tCh “1168' e fapaclitor oar.t1s S 03m trartltspar- between spiraling from the outermost to the innermost radius, and
2 en y in 1g. — SO a e arge rec angu ar capa01 ors un. ernea can Vice versa, because all layers must spiral in the same direction around
T be Viewed. The two large capa01tors make up the capa01tor bank for . . .
H . . . . the 0011, but adjacent layers must be connected on the same radial
8 EMFF operation, bringing the natural resonant frequency of the 0011 side
— down to 83 Hz. The smaller rectangular capacitor is used for setting ' . . . .
a0 . The os01llation frequency of the resonant system is dominated by
O. the resonant frequency of the system for WPT, Wthh operates at . . . . .
g . . the addition of external capa01tance. The 0011 is permanently con-
'3 462 Hz. These capa01tors are adhered to the lower portion of the . . . .
o- . . . . nected in parallel With 10 MF of capa01tance. This alters the natural
5 hous1n g and prov1de the structural mounting for the electronics board .
E . . . . . . resonant frequency to about 462 Hz for Wireless power transfer
'9; that s1ts above it. This board prov1des the electrical connections to the . . .
3: . . . operation. Normally, a resonant inductive coupled WPT system
i capa01tors, resonant 0011, and the normally open (NO) smgle-pole, . . .
v . . would operate in the MHz range, however, for the tightly wound 0011s
H smgle-throw (SPST) relays. The NO-SPST relays are vertically . . . . .
O . . used for RINGS, eddy currents are induced in the 0011 Windings due to
N“ stacked and attached to a mount that is adhered to the hous1ng shell . . . . . . . .
o . . the current ﬂowmg in neighboring Windings [9]. This is known as the
03 bottom. Hall-effect sensors to measure 0011 current and spike-and- . . . — . .
<1) . . . . proxnmty effect. As a result, the electrical res1stance of the 0011
43 hold Circuits to drive the relays are also located on the capa01- . . . . .
g tor board increases at higher frequen01es while the inductance decreases. The
(0% ' electrical resistance also increases at higher frequencies as a result of
g the skin effect, but this does not become important until much higher
55 III. Subsystem Description frequencies than RINGS operation. By experimentally Characteriz-
% The following section describes the major subsystems of RINGS mg. the ac res1st1ve and inductive Characlensucs Of the 0011’ the
U . . . optimum operating frequency for maX1mizing WPT efficiency was
m and some of the des1gn rationale that went into them. The resonant . . . . . .
o . . . . located. Additional details regarding the selection of this frequency
< 0011 is the central component because the current running through R are covered later in this a er and an extensive treatment of the to ic
95 generates the oscillating magnetic field. The remaining subsystems b f d , 10 Tlli p ’ 't h 1 th 1 d' 1 f).
E either support or observe the operation of the resonant coil. can ? oun {n [—]' , e capa01 ors ave a p 0 ye y ene 16 60,1“:
(A material that is appealing due to its low-loss tangent properties.
é , Materials with a high-loss tangent introduce more losses to the
O A. Resonant C011 . . . . .
2 . . . . . resonant system due to the d1ss1pation of electromagnetic energy in
(ft T0 913001113? the effectiveness 0f EMFF operation for a given their dielectrics. Energy transferred from the primary RINGS unit to
a power input, H is advantageous to r educe [?Oth the mass 0f the 0011 as the secondary RINGS unit during a WPT demonstration is dissipated
ﬂ well as the power it d1ss1pates.Acost function given by the product of in a 29 load resistor, which is selectively engaged using a NO-
ﬁé system mass and 0011 power consumption d1V1ded by the force SPST relay.
L; capabilities was used to motivate the selection of the 0011 attribtltes, The preferred frequency for EMFF is driven lower by the desire to
E saCh as diameter, numberofturhs ancimatenalselectioh.Theopt1mal be able to control the phase of the oscillation to around 1% in each
S126 Of the 0011s by thls .metric is as large as poss1ble, ancl the vehicle. This is important to maximize the forces and torques that can
selected Size of 75 cm diameter was Chosen based on operational
volume constraints and some baseline maneuvers of interest. The
metric also favors more turns of wire in the coil to increase the field _,
strength for a given power level. Most interestingly, this metric results -
in the desire to minimize the product of mass density and resistivity of -‘ ‘ ' __.____.———-——
the coil material, which resulted in the selection of aluminum over V
copper, reducing this product by roughly 30%. The wire for coil _-
construction starts as 6061-0 aluminum alloy with a rectangular 1
cross section and a 6.25 aspect ratio. This aspect ratio is similar to that _‘
of commercially available superconducting wire used for previous _ ""_ .
WPT experiments performed at the University of Maryland Space ‘ ‘3 “‘ ‘ J - ‘ ’ i _ .—~
Power and Propulsion Laboratory. This Choice was made primarily to ‘ 7 2 1""
apply heritage manufacturing techniques and traceability to future 37 -_— J.""
systems that may employ superconducting wire, however, higher ' ‘
aspect ratios do provide larger surface—to-volume ratios that improve .
both cooling and skin effect losses.
The wire is wrapped on the thin edge into a ﬂat spiral of 20 - -
windings and then ﬁve such spirals are stacked to form a 100 turn coil.
After each layer is wrapped, thermal heat treatment of the aluminum Fig. 4 Close up of two adjacent layers With polycarbonate spacers.

"
"4","4 AIAA Early Edition / PORTER ET AL.
be generated for a given power level. However, the frequency must housing in which the resonant coil is located. Slots at the top and
still be high enough that the rigid body modes of the vehicles do not bottom of the ﬁns are located near the fans and diffusers to force air to
respond significantly to the oscillatory force profile. An additional ﬂow through the coil before exiting the housing.
combined capacitance of 300 MF (two 150 MF polyethylene capac- At maximum power, the system will generate 315 Wofheat, which
itors connected in parallel with each other) is also connected in is primarily from the coil itself. Each of the 40 X 40 mm fans can
parallel with the 10 MF WPT capacitor, which lowers the resonant generate an unimpeded airﬂow of 6 ft3 / min, which would require a
frequency to about 83 Hz and satisfies both requirements. A second minimum of seven fans to maintain the temperature requirements
NO-SPST relay engages the capacitor bank when the EMFF mode of in steady state. A total of 10 fans were used, eight of which are
operation is selected. Like the relay that engages the load resistor, it distributed evenly around the outer Circumference of the housing to
receives commands to Close the contacts through a relay driver that provide uniform cooling to the coil. These eight fans only run when
boosts the signal from the microcontroller. the coil is active. The remaining two fans are located on the sides of
the electronics box. These operate constantly regardless of the state of
B. Housing and Cooling System the coil to cool the low-power electronics.
The resonant coil, electronic boards, and wiring are enclosed in a
semitranslucent protective shell. The toroidal shape of the shell is 0 Interface Between RINGS and SPHERES
primarily dictated by the geometry of the resonant coil. The shell is The structural interface between RINGS and SPHERES includes
O composed of two halves that overlap at a seam around the inner and an aluminum sleeve that wraps around SPHERES, four aluminum
E outer Circumference of the structure. An angled box extends from a cuffs around the minor diameter of the RINGS housing shell, and four
2 portion of the shell to enclose the majority of the electronics boards struts that radially extend from the sleeve to the cuffs like the spokes
S and the large external capacitors for the resonant system. The shell Of a wheel. ThiS assembly can be seen in Fig. §-
Ej material is polycarbonate that has been shaped using vacuum The sleeve is a continuous piece that wraps around three sides of
3 forming, which requires only a single sheet of polycarbonate to be the SPHERES vehicle, because the only IhOUht points are fOUhd
5 used for each half of the housing, while still allowing for complex around the SPHERES expansion port. ChtOUtS allow transmission
a) geometry such as the curvature around the cooling fans. Postforming and receipt 0f the SPHERES metrology signals (1th ared and ultra-
‘5_ cutouts allow for mounting of components such as the LCDs, push sound) and angled holes prevent occlusion 0f the exhaust plume from
g buttons, light—emitting diodes (LEDs), communication port, power the SPHERES C02 thrusters, which are normally the only means 0f
g switch, cooling fans, and standoffs for the electronics boards. Four propulsion for SPHERES Even though one Of the main objectives 0f
2 diffuser ports were also created by drilling a matrix of holes into the RINGS tS implementation 0f EMFF, the C02 thrusters are Stth used
E housing at four locations on the satellite-facing side of the shell, as for initial positioning 0f the SPHERES vehicles at the start Of a test,
3 shown in Fig. g. The air from the diffuser ports is directed toward the torque rnanagernent during EMFF, and maintaining POStttOh and
8“ center Of the toroid so that the ﬂow impinges primarily on the orientation during WPT. The two ends of the C-shaped sleeve are
% SPHERES vehicle. Early analysis showed that, if the diffusers were connected te the SPHERES expansion port using captive thumb
""é pointed radially outward, despite being symmetrically arranged, then screws. Captive thumbscrews are used instead 0f noncaptive types as
g small differences in ﬂow rate among them could generate unwanted a safety precaution to prevent the potential introduction 0f ﬂoating
g forces on the order Of tens Of millinewtons, which are comparable to debris 1ns1de the ISS where it could be hazardous to the astronauts.
3 what can be achieved by EMFF and thruster control. Having the ﬂow During the transportation process to the 155 (including launch), a
E impinge on the SPHERES vehicle allows for momentum cancellation plate connects to the ends 0f the sleeve at the same location. When
a of the air ﬂow coming out of each diffuser individually. Residual assembled by the crew Oh the 155’ the plate 13 r emoved and then used
0 disturbance forces were estimated at <l mN and could not be as a cover over the eXpansion port 0f the SPHERES vehicle, holding
CT) detected in ground experiments. the SPHERES side of the communication cable in place, as shown in
(3:4 A system Of cooling fans, ﬁn walls, and diffuser ports dictate air Fig. E. The other side of the cable has a small cover plate that screws
E ﬂow within the housing, as shown in Fig. 9. Eight fans are mounted into and protects the communication port on the side 0f the RINGS
% around the outer Circumference of the housing to direct ﬂow into the hous1ng (Flg- E); .
0 housing enclosure. Two additional fans are located on the slanted The only eleetrical eonnection between RINGSancl SPHERES
(:0: sides of the electronics box to provide cooling to the heat-generating hhlts are the s1gnal hheS required for communication. Optical
<2: elements on the electrical boards. Fin walls around the exterior and 1solators protect RINGS and SPHERES from potential current spikes
5» interior Circumference of the coil create an enclosed cavity within the due to any electrical shorts generated between the two units.
'0
E 9 X IR sensors D. Drive Circuit
E , 4- / . , The drive Circuit used to produce alternatin g current in the resonant
D /?‘x coil is a high-power H—bridge Circuit called the open source motor
"""" Arr; ' controller, which is made by Robot Power as a commercial-off-the-
.’ / v\v \' shelf (COTS) product. The product was originally developed for
' m sh, motor control for robot combat. The unit includes the full H—bridge
A .~; 4 x Diffuser {3.23.3 . . . . .
e . 2., ‘\ ports _‘ \A\ power amplifier and key features that'lmprove the safety and reli-
[I / QQt ’1 {,A \"" ability. The H—bridge driver includes internal logic that prevents a
I 0* \’ f ' ‘A‘ short from power to ground and a built-in time delay that allows for
l. v’\ = ‘~ g l \ switching between sides of the drive Circuit. The Circuit board includes
‘l .. ’ - . t‘ ' t 1’ reverse Schottky diodes in parallel across the source and drain of the
n“ "" O t “ J."" {l - ,""' metal-oxide—semiconductor ﬁeld-effect transistors (MOSFETs) to
/ \\ t ,4' . I” prevent transient current spikes, whereas transient voltage suppres-
_ / \O\ o’ ‘ I sion diodes prevent damage due to voltage spikes. Two electrolytic
\\ u \ i \N, capacitors ﬁlter the incoming supply voltage. The input commands
_ \.$‘/ \; 2 O for the H—bridge driver (labeled as “PWM” and “Hi/Lo”) are supplied
s2; \ I by a microcontroller and support logic on a separate custom low-
?%A/ . power board as indicated in Fig. §. Because the internal logic in the H-
. \ » V” bridge driver prevents both A-side or both B-side gates from being
\\‘ L/ Closed at the same time, only the low-side MOSFETs need input
. commands from the microcontroller. The overcurrent (labeled “OC”
Fig. 5 Diffuser port (diamond) and IR sensor (circle) locations. in Fig. §) line is tied to a three-way voting system for the Hall-effect

"
"5","AIAA Early Edition / PORTER ET AL. 5
e N
3. \ ,s 1' -’ , ‘ ~»-‘ ~
a) b)
Fig. 6 Representation of a) bottom half of RINGS housing shell With ﬁns and fans installed and b) close up of fin geometry for fan and diffuser port
locations.
E sensors. If an overcurrent event is detected by at least two of the three the ﬁrmware that can be bootloaded to the RINGS unit through the
§ Hall-effect sensors, the line to the inputs for the B low and A low UART by an external source such as a computer or a SPHERES
S MOSFETs will override the input supplied by the microcontroller. vehicle. This allows for modiﬁcations and upgrades to the RINGS
g This forces the high-side MOSFETs open and low-side MOSFETs code while the units are on the ISS without the need of an external
3' closed, allowing current to freewheel in the lower portion of H-bridge programming or debugger device.
5 circuit while the energy safely dissipates from the system. The H— The ﬁrmware is primarily interrupt driven. Three timer-triggered
3 bridge driver also has a disable pin that opens all of the MOSFETs, interrupts are tied with the pulse-width modulation for current
%” thus preventing any current from ﬂowing from the battery into the commanding, analog-to-digital conversion, and polling of digital
g resonant system. This feature is used to disable the H—bridge when the input sensors. Received communication is handled by the UART
g RINGS unit is operating as the secondary (receiver) during WPT. interrupt. The LCD push buttons are tied to a single digital input on
Q The current rating for the MOSFETs is 180 A, which far exceeds the microcontroller that triggers an external interrupt. Similarly, the
33:“ the operational limit of the RINGS. Heat sinks were added to the digital input detecting infrared (IR) pulses also trigger an external
; MOSFETs to help with heat dissipation. As a consequence of using an interrupt. This interrupt has the highest priority because time syn-
§ H—bridge setup for the drive circuit, the voltage that is applied to the chronization of the current commanding in RINGS is critical for
3“ resonant system is an ac rectangular wave. The frequency and duty phase control. All health- and safety-related interrupts also have a
3 cycle of this rectangular wave are controlled by the microcontroller. higher relative priority compared with interrupts required for normal
5 operation.
(“0% E. Microcontroller
E RINGS uses a PIC32MX microcontroller made by Microchip. The E Sensors
E microcontroller has a 32 bit core processor, 80 MHz primary oscillator, There are both analo g and digital sensors used on RINGS, depicted
% 16 channels of 10 bit analog digital converter channels, and 512 KB of in the sensor block diagram in Fig. g as blocks with arrows directed
C; ﬂash memory. Using the universal asynchronous receiver/transmitter toward the RINGS microcontroller. Three types 0f analog data are
3:) (UART) interface, the microcontroller processes incoming commands measured: current in the resonant coil, temperature of the resonant
(”5 regarding the mode of operation and the desired current amplitude in coil, and temperature of air exiting the RINGS enclosure. Digital
E the resonant coil through a serial connection to SPHERES, The output sensors include fault detection for the Hall-effect sensors, push
a comparator module is conﬁgured to translate the SPHERES current buttons for the LCD and microcontroller reset, low-battery indicator,
9 amplitude commands into pulse—width-modulation inputs for the H- and IR detectors. All analog and digital sensor signals are processed
(<5 bridge driver. The analog-to-digital converter module reads in analog by the microcontroller. . . .
<2: signals that are processed and then select portions of the data are sent to Current 1h the r esonant 0011 13 detected us1ng three Hall-effect
E the SPHERES vehicle for data downloading. The parallel master port sensors in series with the coil. The current is measured multiple times
E module is used to send character strings to the LCD for communicating per oscillation period to allow for the waveform of the resonant coil
E operational information to users. Additional digital inputs and outputs current to be resolved. The data are used by the microcontroller for
E on the microcontroller are used for conﬁguring the RINGS hardware rms calculations. In addition to providing time—resolved data 0f the
Q and for monitoring health and safety. The ﬂash memory is used to store resonant c011 current, the sensors have a built-in fault detection
capability configured to detect an overcurrent event. The threshold is
set to a peak value of 26 A, which corresponds to an rms value of
' .l' ‘ U 00 18.5 A. In the event of an exceeded current threshold, a digital signal
ﬂ 1 (13 i 0 00 is sent both to the microcontroller and to a hardware logic voting
' l I‘,“ "" | j I system. This system requires two of the three Hall-effect sensors to
‘9 I r i‘ I detect an overcurrent event for RINGS to enter safe mode. The output
' ’ I of the sensors feeds into an rms to digital circuit converter chip. The
1 output from this circuit can then be compared with the rms calcu-
l lation done by the microcontroller on the time-resolved current
1”” I ’%> measurements for verification pnrposes.
my 1 - “ ii? l / ' \ Temperature is. measured us1ng a linear temperature-to—voltage
' 'J “I I \ converter, which is read by the analog channels of the microcon-
1 J ‘ g ‘ troller. The two primary sources of heat generation are the resonant
’ v ' ' coil and the diodes in the main power line. These diodes are in place to
a r prevent the batteries from charging due to the energy oscillations in
' 9 the resonant coil. The temperature of the resonant coil is of interest
a) b) because high temperatures reduce the shear and tensile strength of the
Fig. 7 C AD model of communication port on a) SPHERES side with cyanoacrylate that bonds the aluminum wire to the polycarbonate
expansion port and b) electronics box on RINGS side. combs. For operational health of the RINGS, the resonant coil

"
"6","6 AIAA Early Edition / PORTER ET AL.
temperature is measured to ensure that it never exceeds 750C. The button is located on one of the side faces of the electronics box to
temperature sensor is located on the middle layer of the resonant coil, make it unlikely that it is inadvertently pressed during operation.
on the innermost turn, halfway between two diffuser locations to
measure the warmest accessible point of the resonant coil. The G. power Plant
diffuser air temperature is nieasured and is limited by the microcon- B ecause the RINGS units are free ﬂyers inside the ISS, an
“011“,“) 4500 Thls is driven by the maxnnuni allowable human independent power supply is attached to each unit. Each is powered
access1b1etouch temperature of 490C. The nncrocontroller measures using two 18 V, 36 W _ h lithium-ion rechargeable battery packs,
each location at a r ate 0f 1 HZ and places the RINGS hardware into a connected in series. The batteries are each composed of 12 cells and
safe mode that ceases the drive current if either the resonant coil or the have internal circuit protection. These battery packs, manufactured
diffuser air temperature limits are exceeded. In such an event, power by DeWalt, are normally used for power tools, and so their high-
to the cooling fans will remain active. A manual reset to continue current capabilities made them an ideal candidate to drive the
operation after such a fault would be required because it represents an resonant coils in RINGS. A similar spring-loaded clip—in mechanism
off—norninal and unexpected situation. and electrical interface found in these tools was custom built to
IR sensors are used for synchronizing the operation 0f RINGS9 connect the batteries to the RINGS units. These batteries were taken
3110“]ng for a pair 0f RINGS to drive currents either in or 0‘1t 0t through a rigorous testing and safety qualification process to allow
phase With each other..This capability is key for operating in EMFF them to be used onboard the ISS. Now that they have been certified,
0 mode where the direction of the fOTCCS and torques generated by the these batteries can be baselined for use with other experiments that
E magnetic fields are used to control the RINGS around a common might have high-current requirements.
2 center .Of mass: The IR sensors 0h RINGS are s1n111ar t0 the 1R The low-power board regulates the power distribution for all of the
g transmitter/reeeivers already m use for SPHERES operations. The electronics, excluding the energy input to the resonant coil. This
E» transnnss1ons1gna11s gener ated by the lead SPHERES vehicle tluring custom board includes voltage regulators for 12, 3.3, and 5 V. Two
2' operations. Nine IR sensors are pos1tioned on RINGS to receive the 12 V regulators provide power to the cooling fans. Other compo-
S SPHERES transmission, as indicated by the diamond shaded regions Dents, such as the relay signals, also receive power from one of the
E in Fig. i, ensuring that RINGS can detect the signal from any 12V1ines. The 3.3 Vregulator supplies power to the microcontroller
95” direction. The sensors are connected 113ng logic gates such that and regulates the high-Voltage level on afew digital input 1ines.There
g detection of the signal on any of the nine sensors results in a digital are two 5 V regulators that supply power for the majority of the
3 signal to the microcontroller. Testing has confirmed that reﬂections electronics, including the backlights 0f the LCDs, which draw the
g do not impact the timing of the IR pulses, which occur at a rate most current of 311 the low-power components.
33:“ 0f 5 HZ. At the maximum allowable operational current of 18 A (rms), the
g The battery charge level is measured using a comparator to charge in the batteries can be depleted in less than 15 min. Although it
§ determine a low-V01tage event. Two LEDS serve as Visual indicators is unlikely that the units will be operated at full power for an extended
3“ for the user, and the comparator also sends a digital signal to the period of time, the system requirements dictated that siX full-power
f: microcontroller. One LED is located on either side of the electronics demonstrations must be supported during a 2 h test session. For
g box so that it can be easily seen by users, regardless of the RINGS this reason, 24 battery packs and two dual-battery chargers were also
3 orientation. The output state of the low-battery comparator is polled included with the RINGS deliverables to the ISS. The battery
8 by the microcontroller at a rate of 5 Hz, along with the state of chargers are COTS chargers inserted into a custom case for cooling
33 the Hall-effect voting scheme and the fault detection lines for the and electricalinterfacing with the ISS, as shown in Fig. 2. The battery
E individual Hall-effect sensors. If an undesired state is read by the chargers will access 28 Vdc from the ISS through an EXPRESS
(L3 digitalinputs of the microcontroller, the RINGS systemis placedinto (expedite the processing of experiments to the space station) rack.
8 a safe mode. Because the state of the battery voltage comparator The dual chargers can charge two battery packs each in about 1 h.
E circuit is periodically polled by the microcontroller, a low-battery
2 event is latched to ensure that it is always observed by the microcon-
8 troller. The latched comparator output is reset when the circuit is IV' Performance
E power cycled. Performance evaluations of both EMFF and WPT have been
9 Each RINGS unit has three push buttons. Two Of the push buttons conducted with ongoing testing on the ground and during operations
(:ch are for changing the information shown on the LCD. This is the on the ISS. An analytical approach was used to predict the RINGS
a primary method for users to View any information or data about the wireless power transfer performance, allowing for selection of the
g RINGS system in real time. There is one LCD and one push button on operation frequency and load resistor. Models were used to simulate
5‘3; each of the two ﬂat sides of the electronics box. The information on motion of the system and develop preliminary control algorithms
% the two screens is identical, and pressing either push button changes for the RINGS during EMFF operation. Experiments to validate
5 both screens. The third push button is the master clear for the micro- the models before ISS operations were conducted using two-
Q controller, which triggers a soft reset when pressed. The master clear dimensional (2-D) motion on a ﬂat ﬂoor and three-dimensional
(‘O'I‘S II-bridgc (‘ircuit
r--------36\-'------l
I B Htgil—l—E‘High /__,|/’ t 77 t (.3 N0 Relay
_ _LO_“ 3036113311,: _ 1 I ”V A : Resonant I—.
: mm Hi/Lo Disable I ms °“° » - I (mt) ,2
I BHS v v 1 115
l '33 ' am am I (‘1
I -. "" )| BU B Low > , 7» A Low I
. ALI AL \‘ - N0 WPT Load
: D >- , l; ; m m: —— a ‘l ., a _» Relay
--____--_J mo
I — I
| 6N0 ON!) I
Fig. 8 H-bridge drive circuit With inputs and resonant load.

"
"7","AIAA Early Edition / PORTER ET AL. 7
‘ _ - - .. 80
s .W _ .. 7 «i s 4""“ _ _ _ . —RL = 2 Q
’ -. i '8 :0 l.' 5 ‘3 ‘\ Mlnlmurn Achievable ---R = 10 Q
.. ’ ‘ 3 60 {v .' E/Separatlon Distance.
.. . - ~ __ 9 \ ---R,_ = 18 o
o o ' ‘I _ g 40 "":1""; E \\‘\:“‘
. - 8 20
; g .t _ \N g ~...‘.::.::.-......._:: m.
V ,- a .. 0- 00 0.5 1 1.5
. , ~ Axial Separation Distance, m
‘ ‘i' ' "" Fig. 10 Wireless power transfer dependence on separation distance for
. \. . discrete load resistance [Q].
~ "" A in Fig. 1_0. The vertical dashed line labeled “Minimum Achievable
Fig. 9 Dual battery charger developed for the ISS. Separation Distance” is governed by the physical obstruction of the
0 two SPHERES vehicles that extend aXially beyond the circular plane
E of the RINGS.
Q (3-D), full siX-degree-of-freedom motion during a reduced-graVity Even though the power delivered to the load resistor increases with
3 ﬂight campaign. larger load resistance, the required smaller separation distance makes
E» the operational condition infeasible. For this reason, the selection
2' A. Model for WPT Performance Prediction of the load resistance is better determined by the baseline aXial
(2 The effect of coil geometry and selection of resistor value was separation distance Of 0'5 m.
:0 examined to predict wireless power transfer efficiency using a
g modified the Dowell method in Alinger et al. [Q]. As previously 3- Preliminary TeSting
.3 stated, the RINGS system uses large external capacitor banks to In addition to the two RINGS units that have been launched to
g reduce the resonant frequency of the coil from the natural fre- the 188, two identical ground units were constructed to allow for
E quency that would otherwise be solely dictated by the coil geometry. continued testing during transport and between on-orbit test sessions.
5 By modeling the RINGS resonant coils as a series resistor— Two-dimensional, three-degrees-of—freedom (per vehicle) testing is
E inductor—capacitor circuit, Alinger et al. [Q] found that the load available using the ﬂat ﬂoor facility at the MIT—SSL. As shown in
N“ resistor value that maximizes power transfer efﬁciency between the Fig. E, a support structure holds the RINGS so that the circular plane
a primary and secondary units is given by is orthogonal to the ﬂoor. Pressurized C02 canisters create an
ﬁg adequately frictionless gas buffer between the ﬂoor and gas pucks. In
4% RL 2 /L2K2w(% + R2 (1) the setup shown in Fig. E, the RINGS unit is integrated onto the
(3 OP‘ SPHERES vehicle as it would be during an on-orbit test session. A
D: Th . . . . . frame can be used to mark out the same phys1cal boundaries and
E e coupling coefﬁc1ent is the fraction of magnetic. ﬂux that passes provide the same metrology system as the SPHERES facility on-
a through the secondary 0011 as aresult Of current CHCUIath 1n the orbit. Preliminary testing on the ﬂat ﬂoor helped characterize the
C; P?Imary- Additionally, the maxrmum power transfer eff1c1ency 1s RINGS magnetic field and provide a baseline of EMFF maneuvers,
3:) given by such as aXially aligned repulsion or attraction and relative rotational
95 motion using torque and shear. A baseline of WPT was also estab-
% _ 1 + 2 — 2V QZK2 + 1 (2) lished to characterize power transferred as a function of aXial separa-
% ”Opt _ QZKZ tion distance. Power transfer efﬁciency drops due to misalignment
Q between the vehicles. This was observed but not characterized at this
(<5 The quality factor is a common dimensionless parameter used
E: to describe resonant systems based on inductance, resistance, and - -. u
g» resonant frequency. The coupling coefficient varies with both the W \V
g separation distance between the coils as well as with their relative W l , ii?"" 1 . ' , a
g orientation. For the test cases that will be considered, we will impose — . ‘ 9- ~ \\ \ 4;...
E an aXial alignment and a ﬁxed relative position between the coils. As (1.1. ’ ' ; . _.
D a result, the coupling coefﬁcient was treated as fixed for the analysis. ‘0 ‘ ' *4? ‘ '
Therefore, the efficiency is maximized when the quality factor is ‘. ' Q ‘ I - /’ “-
maximized. Because of the proximity effect, the inductance and resis- . A'_$ - "" '- ‘—
tance of the coil is frequency dependent. To determine the optimal § .ﬁ; \ ‘
operational frequency for wireless power transfer, and thus determine ' f ; '
the desired values of the external capacitance and load resistor, "" ~15 ‘t i ’2 ’
Alinger et al. [Q] performed an analytical frequency sweep, stepping . x . _ f 1' /
through a frequency range of l—8 kHz. For each frequency, the \\ \ . T‘ l. a), '
capacitance required for the system to have zero reactance was ' . x ”-5—“ K?! i""
chosen. A local frequency sweep close to the frequency in question ’. ’ »\ - ‘ ' ‘ - ‘: , m
produced curve fits for the inductance and resistance, which were in I » x w.
turn used to determine the local frequency at which impedance was _ ' ‘ - -""
minimized [Q]. Using the values of inductance and resistance at ”5“ ‘ \ V .. .
locations of minimized impedance, the frequency at which Q is ‘ I; . k 1...
maximized was found to be 460 Hz. This determined the operational ,‘ ' J.
frequency for wireless power transfer and the value added external t I.‘ \ ‘
capacitor bank.
After determining the frequency and capacitance, a curve fit
describing the coupling coefﬁcient as a function of separation diS- Fig. 11 RINGS ground unit with SPHERES ﬁtted to air carriage for ﬂat
tance allows for examination of discrete load resistor values, as shown ﬂoor testing.

"
"8","8 AIAA Early Edition / PORTER ET AL.
time because all tests to be conducted will have the units aXially ‘ . fl
aligned. He \\\‘ *
Before operations on the ISS, the ground units were tested in a . ‘ '~ \ g; ,4' - ""
simulated zero-graVity environment during four test ﬂights through I, “ ° \ 'Au
NASA’s Flight Opportunities Program. The primary objectives of the \ \\"" 5»; ‘ , / _‘ f -. , a - .55 ﬁx” :1
ﬂights were to determine the mass and inertia properties, validate the -g\, - ‘ \ ' ’\‘a t- L 3’ h ‘ '5
dynamic model of the RlNGS—SPHERES system, and demonstrate - ' * i L l .’ "" I ' . ' ‘
wireless power transfer. The mass of the integrated RINGS— -\ _, ,/ J , 9? £3 ‘1
SPHERES unit was determined using the inertial measurement unit \ v1.3 ' .N. '
(IMU) data generated from the SPHERES metrology sensors while ., r '; y ,
the satellite’s carbon dioxide thrusters rotated the system, because ’ ’ ﬂ . ”\3‘
forces due to the thrusters had been thoroughly characterized by ""7 w. ' '
previous tests of SPHERES on the ISS. Also during the test ﬂight, - , ‘\ e .— . ""
position data were collected using ultrasonic beacons fixed to the \ ‘.
corners of the working volume within the aircraft. This position data, . ,v \ \
in conjunction with the IMU data, were collected to verify the ' . w “
predicted actuation model of the RINGS units resulting from the ’— ' 1 '1'; .0/ f
i resonant COhS' Fig. 12 EMFF shear maneuver during reduced-gravity ﬂight test.
a For thruster characterization, pairs of thrusters were supposed ﬁre
:- to generate a force along the x, y, and z axes in positive and negative
g directions. The acceleration recorded by SPHERES for the positive g ~ - . - .. '2"" ~77 ~ ,L
g and negative x directions was within the noise for the accelerometers ‘ < ‘ ' . - ,_ ' . I ‘ ' i t
E. [E]. This result was expected because the positive and negative x ' h"" ‘ , t , ‘ ' .
8 directions align on plane of the coil, pointing from the center of . ‘ « ""‘ .3 {1, ta 4
E the satellite to the sides with the power box and battery mounts. The f ,‘ . f- ~ 51? g ' 1/:th ‘ j - "" _
g positive and negative y directions align out of plane of the coil. The ‘ «115‘ 25' 7 ‘7 a ""' .: ‘f $35 __ : é ‘
g thruster ﬁring tests were only able to run for about 3 s per test. :1 "" ' 1"" ‘ i""! . ‘ ~ § "" ”l a
g This was because the first several seconds of each test was required 1:: 2’ e h; -. t \ . . J 7.. ' ' ‘ t i ’ ..
E for the SPHERES metrology estimator to converge before the start '. ’9 . 3‘ ,_ ,l ; .. _ G ,\._-
a .. . . _ . . |*/'. \ ' ' :7 ;h .‘f‘-\
_ of thruster ﬁring. Despite the Simulated zero graV1ty time of the v - , _
E parabolas lasting up to 20 s per parabola, the large size RINGS re- ‘ J I A g r ~ 3 Qt. . ‘i u
g sulted in the units moving out of the test volume due to the drift of the ‘ . . 1 .’ . ‘ ,t L. “
3 aircraft. ( y .'—..‘ - - , q ‘ . ’ )3"" .h‘.‘ ,. -
E The data for the inertia about the x and z axes was collected by v, i g 355' ' f E
g ﬁring a thruster at an assumed force of 0.089 N and a moment arm of «:1: V: ' __; A ' '-""Y ‘ i \ _
(g 9.7 cm [E]. The average acceleration during the constant thruster :31 - “ 2 \ ' % \s.
:2 ﬁring lasting about 3 s was then used to calculate the inertia about a ' .' 7 _ - _ _ a - - ‘ .71 . 1 \
E particular aXis. The results from the inertia tests are shown in Table 1. Fig. 13 Astronaut Karen Nyberg positioning two RINGS during the
E However, full validation was not achieved due to Vibrations of the ISS hardware checkout.
:3 aircraft that were transmitted to the ultrasound metrology beacons.
E Although the dynamics model could not be completely veriﬁed as
m lanned, it was determined that rotation of the unit around the aXis ,
E grthogonal to the plane of the resonant could not be completely WET and EMFF testing. The SPHERES thrusters were not used
a stabilized. This was due to thruster impingement on the RINGS unit dunhg these.tests. For thls reason, one Of the RINGS units was
9 itself and was an effect that could not have been seen in the 2-D ﬂat restrained us1ng bungee cords 1h the middle 0f the control volume
(<0: ﬂoor testing. Although the thrusters are the only means of torque Wlth the plane 0f the RINGS facrng the forward wall 0f the Japanese
<2: control available to RINGS, the inability to control rotation about this experimental module. The other RINGS uh“ was either free ﬂoating
3» aXis does not affect the baseline EMFF maneuvers. 0? held by the crew member, roughly axrally aligned as shown 1“
8 Approximately eight Of the parabolas during the zero-graVity ﬂight Fig. Ehlnitial pos1tion1ng of the RINGS units to a ﬁxed pos1tion and
3 were used to conduct the wireless power transfer tests. This allowed orientation was not done because thrusters were not used.
E for the full capabilities of the RINGS as a dual purpose system to be The first test runs were WPT operations at frequencies at and
8 demonstrated for the first time in a reduced-graVity environment. around the expected resonant frequency. Each WPT test was
Figure 2 shows RINGS at the start of an EMFF shear maneuver performed at a ﬁxed dUtY cycle, meaning the Width 0f the waveform
during a test along with astronaut Greg Chamitoff. input for the H—bridge drive circuit remained constant during the
duration of the test. This does not fix the recirculating current level in
C. On-Orbit Testing the resonant coil because the coupling coefficient is a function of
The RINGS units were launched to the ISS on-board the Japanese separation distance and relative orientation. The slow depletion of the
HTV—4 transfer vehicle on 4 August 2013. The ﬁrst on-orbit test battery charge. also causes the .Voltage ap p 116d across the C011 to
s essi on was 27 August 2013. F 011 owin g a hardw are ch e ck out and decrease over time. Communication losses caused some of the tests to
up date of the firmware, the RINGS units underwent preliminary fail to run properly. There was successful power transfer during a test
run at 454 Hz, which is below the expected resonant frequency. The
primary (transmitter coil) was driven at a constant 40% duty cycle
Table 1 Moment inertia results from testing during the reduced- with the secondary (receiver coil) aXially aligned. The data collected
gravity campaign for both RINGS units are shown in Fig. ﬂ. Data were collected at rate
— of 5 Hz, but a marker ratio of l 2 10 was applied for clarity. It can be
Average Angular . . . . .
angular a C C e1 erati on M oment of M 0m em of noted that the eiut a1rte1nperature is higher than the eoil temperature.
acceleration, uncertainty, inertia, inertia uncertainty, For tests of this duration and duty cycle, the res1st1ve heating of
Axis rad/s2 rad/s2 kg . m2 kg . m2 the diodes that prevent the resonant coil current from charging
x 0.0459 £10014 0.3742 +0.0118/ _ 0.0110 the batteries is greater than the resistive heating of the resonant coil.
z 0.0308 10.0061 0,5577 +0.1377/ _ 00922 For tests of several minutes or high-duty cycle, the resonant coil
: temperature will surpass the eXit air temperature.

"
"9","AIAA Early Edition / PORTER ET AL. 9
Primary Unit - WPT Test at 454 Hz Secondary Unit - WPT Test at 454 Hz
40 40
35 35
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
30 3O
********** *************5¥ ************** ***** ****
25 ooooooooooooooooooooooo 0 25ooooooooooooooooooooooo
20 20
v Current (RMS), A V Current (HMS), A
*6 Exit Temperature, C * EX” Temperature, C
10 10 X Received Power, W
5 VVVVVVVVVVvvvvvvvvvvvvvvv 5 vvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvv
0 O
O 10 20 30 4O 0 1O 20 30 40
Test Time, 8 Test Time, s
E a) b)
3 Fig. 14 WPT test at 454 Hz, 40% duty cycle for a) primary and b) secondary units.
E
V3
g The power losses due to the electrical circuits is negligible positioning or alignment. It was observed by the crew member that
5 compared with the losses associated with the two resonant coils and the RINGS were able to generate an aXial attraction force. Significant
Q the power dissipated by the load resistor. The power input to the motion was not observed because the RINGS were restrained.
g system is, therefore, equal to the sum of the three primary power Follow-on ISS test sessions will involve unrestrained EMFF
g losses. The power transfer efﬁciency is expressed as the following: testing where motion will be observed and recorded by the SPHERES
§ metrology system. These future on-orbit sessions will also test open-
5? _ Plead 3 and closed-loop control algorithms. Table g shows a test matrix for
g“ It _ PTX coil + PRX coil + 1310:;1 d ( ) EMFF. The first test science was only a hardware checkout to
; show nominal operation in EMFF mode, and so it was not included
g The power dissipated by the load is determined using the in the matrix. The initial orientation I'CfCI‘S t0 either aXial 01‘ shear
g“ recirculating current level in secondary coil and the impedance of the (orthogonal) alignment 0f the coil axes relative to each other. Some
3 resonant system. A resonant coil impedance of 1.99 was used based tests starting the aXial configuration Will be station-keeping maneu-
g on the analysis and measurements performed by Alinger et al. for a vers, whereas other tests will involve motion alone aXis of alignment.
E duty cycle of 40% [E], Given the impedance and recirculating 1mg Additionally, thrusters may be used in some tests to maintain orienta-
8 current, the power transfer efﬁciency was found to be 30%, which thH in either OITC 01' tWO dimensions bCSldCS the aXlS Of motiorl. The
33 agrees well with the predicted performance as shown in Fig. l_5. The seeond testsess1or1. W111 he almost entirely open-loop contr 01 Wlth the
E uncertainty of the rms current is 3% for a current level of 4 A I‘mS. primary unit restrained usmg bungee cords. The third test sess1on Will
8 However, the error is dominated by the error in the Hall-effect sensor focus on motion With hOth units free ﬂoating in the test volume. Ah
8 and scales with the current. At the expected maximum current level rotational maneuvers (shear initial orientation) Will be open-loop
g of 18 A rms, the uncertainty is 30%. The uncertainty in the power tests, whereas all attraction or repulsion maneuvers (axial initial
(2 transfer for the data shown in Fig. 14b is 4%, a resultant of the orientation) Will use closed-loop control 0f tWO types. One type Will
8 uncertainty in the rms current and uﬁrtainty in the load resistor use thrusters to maintain the attitude 0f the moving RINGS unit
E value. The aXial separation was not recorded by the SPHERES relative to the test volume frame of reference, while the other unit
9 metrology during this test. It was Visually observed that the RINGS remains stationary. The other type 0f closed-loop control Will use
in: were separated by about 0.5 111 while being ﬁxed in the working thrusters to maintain attitude of the secondary relative to the attitude
z volume by bungee cords and the crew member. of the primary. Lastly, the fourth test session will use open- and
g The EMFF tests performed during the ﬁrst test session feeused on closed-loop control based on results from a more reﬁned simulation
5‘3; the ability to command the RINGS resonant coils to be closely in using data collected in the second and third sessions.
'3; phase or 180 deg out of phase. Both resonant coils were commanded
E to have a constant recirculating current value of either 3 or 11 A. This
differs from the preV1ous WPT tests that used a constant duty cycle to V. Lessons Learned
dictate the current driven in the primary 0011. Usmg the feedback , , ,
current measured by the RINGS sensors, the current controller The mostimportantlesson learned Was to start prototyping early in
maintains a commanded current level in the coil, independent of the development process. The project benefited greatly from
coupling and battery charge. With the SPHERES thrusters not in use, prototyping Of the bate}? mounts .usmg 3'1.) phhhhg' Thls allowed
the two RINGS were allowed to attract or repel without precise initial for , an easy interface verification Wlth batteries befor e exp ens1ve p r e-
crsron machinin g of the aluminum mounts used in the final as sembly.
The proj ect could have benefited greatly from earlier prototyping of
0-5 9., g _ R = 2 Q the custom electrical circuits. After major components had been
0 4 '\.\.¢‘ 3/ Minimum Ach'ievable . . RL = 10 Q Chosen and most of the firmware developed, prototyping would have
' separate“ D'Stance . RL _ 1 8 Q helped identify where reliability needed to be improved for nominal
CC? 0.3 ‘1 -. '- _ operation, as well as safety-related fault detection. Reliance on the
.8 5 Hz infrared pulse generated by the lead SPHERES for syncing the
E 0.2 RINGS in or 180 deg out of phase required multiple iterations late in
5 the testing phase due to reliability issues observed. However, the
0-1 t . t changes were made strictly to the firmware because it was too late in
0 5 """":""-=-‘-=:.-...-. .. ,- -. , _ testing to adjust the hardware conﬁguration. A more reliable method
0 0.5 1 1.5 of syncing the two RINGS units during operation may have been
Axial Separation Distance, m possible if prototype testing was done earlier to bring the short-
Fig- 15 WPT efﬁeieney fOI‘ Predieted Performance [El comings of the IR detection system to light.

"
"10","10 AIAA Early Edition / PORTER ET AL.
Table 2 On-orbit test matrix for EMFF
Initial orientation Thrusters? Control One unit restrained?
Session n0. AXial Shear No Yes Open Closed Yes No
2 X — — X — — X — — X — —
2 X — — — — X X — — X — —
2 — — X X — — X — — X — —
2 — — X — — X X — — X — —
2 X — — X — — — — X X — —
2 X — — — — X — — X X — —
3 — — X — — X X — — — — X
3 — — X X — — X — — — — X
3 X — — — — X — — X — — X
4 X — — X — — — — X X — —
4 — — X X — — — — X X — —
4 X — — — — X — — X X — —
4 X — — X — — X — — X — —
E
Q VI. Conclusions [2] Kwon, D. W., “Propellantless Formation Flight Applications Using
f- , , , Electromagnetic Satellite Formations,” Acta Astronautica, V01. 67,
3 One ef the primary goals ef the Resonant Inductive Near-Field Nos. 940’ 2010,1313. 1189—1201.
a Generation System is to pr0V1de the SPHERES satellite formation doi:10.1016/].actaastr0.2010.06.042
2 ﬂight test bed onboard the ISS with the functionality required for [3] Elias, L. M., Kwon, D. W., Sedwick, R. J., and Miller, D. W.,
5 actuating the vehicles using electromagnetic ﬁelds. This added “Electromagnetic Formation Flight Dynamics Including Reaction
3 capability will prove useful in testing control algorithms that cannot Wheel Gyroscopic Stiffening Effects,” Journal Of Guidance, Control,
95” be fully explored in the 1 g gravitational environment on Earth. Upon and Dynamics, VOL 30, NO- 2, 2007, PP- 499-511-
g completion of the on-Orbit test sessions, wireless power transfer Via (1013—102514/1'18679 _ “
8 resonantinductive coupling and electromagnetic formation ﬂight can [4] Ahsun’.U"" M111? I’ D' W"" and Ramrez’ J' L"" COP“? Of Elem“)—
‘ce . . . magnetic Satellite Formations 1n Near—Earth Orbits, Journal of
§ arguably be elevated to technical readiness level of Six. The hardware G ‘d C . _
a , , , m ance, antral, and Dynamlcs, V01. 33, N0. 6, 2010, pp. 1883
g is the ﬁrst complete system to independently demonstrate Wireless 1891.
E power transfer and electromagnetic formation ﬂight in a represen- doi:10.2514/1.47637
8 tative Operational environment. Additionally, it is the ﬁrst system [5] Zhang,Y.W.,Yang,L.P.,Zhu,Y. W.,Ren,X.H., and Huang,H., “Self.
3“ capable of demonstrating both technologies with a single integrated Docking Capability and Control Strategy of Electromagnetic Docking
5,? hardware set. Although the time for investigating electromagnetic T&ChHOIOgy,”Acta AstVOWWiCd, VOL 69, NOS- 11-12, 2011,1311 1073—
5 formation ﬂight control in the siX degree-of—freedom environment of 1031- .
(«2‘ the ISS is limited, tests involving additional control algorithms can (IOEW . .
8 still be conducted on the ﬂat ﬂoor facility at the MIT—SSL. The next [6] Tesla, N"" Experiments Wlth Alternate Currents 0f ngh Potential and
o: . High Frequency, The Electrical World, London Lecture, V01. 38,
m steps for future research efforts W111 hopefully address some of the N0 19 1892
E Issues Feahzed by thCRINGS hardware and help Progress 6160““ [7] Saenz—Otero, A., and Miller, D. W., “Initial SPHERES Operations
0 magnetic formation ﬂlght and Wireless power transfer to full-scale Aboard the International Space Station,” 1AA Small Satellites for Earth
(2) 0136f ational tCStng- Observation I V, International Academy of Astronautics Paper B6—0701,
m 2006.
(g [8] Saenz—Otero, A., Katz, J., Mandy, C., and Miller, D. W., “SPHERES
8 Acknowledgments Demonstrations of Satellite Formations Aboard the ISS,” 32nd Annual
E The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of both 82135633159118] ?ngoggmml Conference, Amencan AStronauucal SOC'
g: the DefenseAdvanced Researgh PrOJeCtS Agency Tactlcal Tail— [9] Dowell, P. L., “Effects Of Eddy Currents in Transformer Windings,”
<C HOIOgleS Ofﬁce and NASA? Wthh funded the prOJCC’t under NASA Proceedings of the Institution OfElectrical Engineers, Vol. 113, N0. 8,
E, contract NNH1 1CC33C. The tests conducted on the reduced-gravity 1966, pp. 1387—1394.
ﬂ campaign were made possible by the NASA Flight Opportunities doi:10.1049/Eiee.1966.0236
'0‘; Program. The authors thank Greg Chamitoff who gave supportive [10] Alinger, D. J., Porter, A. K., and Sedwick, R. J., “Optimization 0f
‘3; feedback that aided in the writing of International Space Station crew Resonant IHdUCtiVe Wireless Power TranSfef Using Multi—Layer Flat
5 procedures for the hardware. This publication has been approved for Spiral Coils,” Journal OfSPacecmﬁ and ROCketS (to be PUthhed)-
Q - - - - - - - d '10 2514/1 A32901
public release With unlimited distribution. 01:—' ' , , , ,
[11] Eslinger, G., “Dynamic Programming Applied to Electromagnetic
Satellite Actuation,” MS. Thesis, Massachusetts Inst. of Technology,
References 1230?; of Aeronautical and Astronautical Engineering, Cambridge, MA,
[1] Saenz—Otero, A., Katz, J., Mandy, C., and Miller, D. W., “SPHERES
Demonstrations of Satellite Formations Aboard the ISS,” 32nd Annual A. Ketsdever
AAS Guidance and Control Conference, American Astronautical SOC. Associate Editor
Paper 2009—01 1, 2009.

"
