"","x"
"1","50th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting including the New Horizons Forum and Aerospace Exposition AIAA 2012-0434
09 - 12 January 2012, Nashville, Tennessee
AggleSatZ Student Satelllte MlSSlOIl
John T. Gravesl, Joseph A. Perez2, Helen L. Reed3, Angela McLelland4
T exas A&M University, College Station, TX, 77843-3141
and
David B. Kanipes, Robert S. Provence6, Timothy A. Runkle7
NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, 77058-3696
AggieSatZ, Texas A&M University’s ﬁrst free-ﬂying spacecraft, operated for 230 days in
v low earth orbit (LEO) from its release from STS—127 Endeavour on 30 July 2009 until its de-
3 orbit on 17 March 2010. This mission was the ﬁrst in a four-mission campaign, called
g LONESTAR (Low Earth Qrbiting Eavigation Experiment for §pacecraft Testing
g éutonomous Rendezvous and Docking), partnering the Aeroscience and Flight Mechanics
E1 Division at NASA Johnson Space Center (JSC), AggieSat Lab8 at Texas A&M, and the
g University of Texas at Austin (UT) to promote space engineering education as well as
<2 research into novel, low-cost autonomous rendezvous and proximity operations techniques.
g The ﬁrst—mission requirement was to operate the global positioning system (GPS) receiver
§ built by NASA JSC called DRAGON (Qual BF Astrodynamic QPS Qrbital ﬂavigator).
g AggieSat Lab developed a ﬁve-inch cubesat for this ﬁrst ﬂight, with UT building a similar
7%; spacecraft, called Bevo-l.
E AggieSatZ and Bevo-l were launched together from the Space Shuttle and were designed
g to push apart and completely separate from one another for independent operations. The
3 separation however, was incomplete and this hindered communications through antennas
E; which were partially captive within the UT spacecraft. Over time, AggieSat Lab students
E were able to overcome this unforeseen challenge and establish basic spacecraft operations.
:2 AggieSatZ was an end-to—end process and served as a learning platform for all
E participating students. AggieSat Lab is looking forward to applying the lessons learned from
8 this mission to future ﬂight programs through the NASA J SC and UT partnership.
LU
é Nomenclature
z . , . . .
g a = 0rb1t s seml major aX1s (m)
:: Aarev = change in the semi-major axis per revolution (In)
E A P = geomagnetic index
3 c E 5160 / H
E C ir = circumference of the orbit (In)
7% C D = coefﬁcient of drag
E C Dmin.max = maximum variation of the CD value
C 0M = center of mass (In)
90 = eccentricity 0f the orbit
FD = drag force
F10.7 = solar radio ﬂux
GC = geometric center (In)
1Masters Student, Department Of Aerospace Engineering, johntgraves@gmail.c0m
2AggieSat Lab Manager, Department Of Aerospace Engineering, jperez.tamu@gmail.c0m
3Professor, AggieSat Lab Founder and Director, Dept Aerospace Engineering, helen.reed@tamu.edu , Fellow AIAA
4Masters Student, Department Of Aerospace Engineering, mclelland.angela@gmail.com
5Division Chief, Aeroscience and Flight Mechanics Division, dkanipe@tamu.edu
6Aeroscience and Flight Mechanics Division, robert.s.pr0vence@nasa.g0v
7Aeroscience and Flight Mechanics Division, timothy.a.runkle@nasa.gov
8http://aggiesatweb.tamu.edu
This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

"
"2","h = observed height of the satellite (km)
H = quotient of the mean asymptotic temperature value for the eX0sphere at large altitudes and the
integrated mean molecular mass value from the base of the therrnosphere t0 the speciﬁed height (km)

H = density scale height (111)

I L- = Modiﬁed Bessel Functions of order 1' and argument 6

IZ, 1y = rnass moments of inertias about the z and y axes (kg*rn2).

m = integrated mean molecular mass value from the base of the thermosphere t0 the speciﬁed height

11, n + 1 = index

P = period Of the orbit (sec)

R = orbit radius (111)

T = mean asymptotic temperature value for the eX0sphere at large altitudes (K)

v = velocity

xi = sensitivity—analysis variable
g [1, = universal gravitational constant (m3/s2)
E p = atmospheric density
i pp = atmospheric density at perigee (kg/rn3)
g T9 = torque produced by graVity gradient (Nm)
g TD = torque produced by drag (Nm)
(2 6 = angle between the center line and the zenith direction (radians)
g I. Introduction
3 AGGIESATZ and a counterpart satellite from UT, BeVO-l, were launched together on STS-127, OV-105 Space
7%; Shuttle Endeavour on 15 July 2009, and released from the shuttle payload bay on 30 July 2009 to begin
E independent Operations in space. Developed by the AggieSat Lab, Texas A&M’s student spacecraft laboratory [1 -2],
g AggieSat2’s primary mission was to obtain data from the DRAGON GPS unit developed at NASA J SC for space
3 navigation. The AggieSatZ/BeVO-l mission was the ﬁrst of a larger program of four missions sponsored by NASA
E; JSC to develop novel solutions for autonomous rendezvous and docking (ARD) and proximity operations. This
E program, called LONESTAR, is ongoing, and the three remaining ﬂights will each feature a spacecraft built by
34: Texas A&M and another by UT that will work together to demonstrate proximity Operations.
g AggieSat2 provided Texas A&M students their ﬁrst opportunity to Operate a spacecraft developed with their
(”3 own ideas and dedication. AggieSat2 was the culmination of a four year effort by students, faculty, staff,
(:3 government, and industry partners. While the mission itself was full of challenges, the rewards for students,
% fortunate enough to participate in the program, were vast and invaluable. AggieSat Lab encourages in-house critical
% thinking and decision making, development, and design whenever possible. Mentorship is welcome, but students are
% expected to maintain a large degree of independence and full personal responsibility in their work. AggieSat2 used
2 commercial radios, solar cells, and a GPS antenna, and a J SC-furnished payload and batteries, but no other standard
i equipment was used [3]. AggieSat2 was built from the ground up, tested and documented by the students at
i AggieSat Lab. Components of the design that were well understood, documented, and owned by participants
g performed well; while challenges were encountered in areas that were the less understood or lacked complete
3 engineering data. Students were allowed to experience this contrast and take engineering lessons with them. In this
E way AggieSat2 fulﬁlled AggieSat Lab’s overall mission: to develop and demonstrate modern technologies by using
5 a small-satellite platform, while educating students and enriching their experience.

11. AggieSatZ Mission Overview
The AggieSatZ/BeVO-l ﬂight was the ﬁrst of the four planned missions with the NASA J SC campaign. Each

mission is designed to incrementally test the complex systems needed to demonstrate successful proximity

Operations between a Texas A&M and UT spacecraft by mission 4. As planned, missions 2 and 3 will test various

combinations of navigation tools, docking equipment, attitude control, communications, and propulsion needed for

the ﬁnal ﬂight of the campaign. The ﬁrst mission, called DRAGONSAT, was scoped as a small mission to allow

each University to begin the campaign and Obtain spaceﬂight experience. NASA J SC speciﬁed a ﬂve-inch cubesat

form factor for each school, and provided the DRAGON GPS unit as a test Obj ective for this ﬁrst ﬂight. Each school

provided a supporting spacecraft designed to house and operate a DRAGON GPS unit while taking navigation

vectors for ground processing. DRAGON was designed to Obtain relative GPS measurements for space rendezvous

"
"3","and navigation in LEO. The main objective for AggieSatZ was to acquire two orbits (two 90 minute sessions) of
DRAGON navigation and measurement data.

The AggieSatZ spacecraft was a ﬂve-inch cube with a mass of 3.2 kg. AggieSatZ was similar in size to the
MicroElectromechanical PicoSat Inspector (MEPSI) and RAdar Fence Transponder (RAFT) spacecraft [4-5]. It was
designed for release from the Department of Defense (DOD) Space Shuttle Picosat Launcher (SSPL), a ﬂve-inch
cubesat launcher as used for the MEPSI and RAFT missions. AggieSatZ was packaged in this launcher for ﬂight
with the spacecraft developed at UT. The two satellites interfaced Via spring loaded UHF antennas and inhibit tabs
that extended inside the opposing satellite and engaged switches at the center of the mating faces. Upon release, the
two spacecraft were designed to push apart, with assist from the preloaded springs, and separate completely for
independent operations. Figure 1 shows the Texas A&M and UT ﬂight vehicles ready for delivery to J SC.

The exterior of AggieSatZ featured 24 body-rnounted gallium-arsenide triple-junction solar cells (in 4-ce11
panels, 1 per side), venting holes, a ground support connector, a UHF band monopole antenna, a 2.4 GHz patch
antenna, and a GPS patch antenna. The GPS antenna was a commercial Taoglas AP12A unit, while the UHF

v monopole and 2.4 GHz patch were custom designed and built by Texas A&M’s Electromagnetics and Microwave
3 Laboratory of the Electrical Engineering Department by students under the direction of Dr. Gregory Huff. The
g structure itself was machined from a block of 6061-T6 aluminum with recessed faces for mounting of the solar
g panels. Each solar panel was designed and built in house. Solar cell electrical connections were soldered into place
23 then mounted to PCB board plates with epoxy. The plates were then bonded to the spacecraft structure. Figure 1
3f highlights the exterior.
E
g F: ;; ._-.r-‘
i - , V , ‘ y
S“ ' , mi 7 . \i
2 . ,_ |
S
m n,
E
5 Figure 1. AggieSatZ (right) and Bevo-l (left) ﬂight vehicles at Oceaneering Space Systems prior to launcher
:3 integration.
D4
% The interior of the spacecraft was divided into three bays by two stainless steel plates. The plates provided
a structural rigidity, mass, and mounting area for the subsystems. The hinge-side steel plate housed a Digi (formerly
Q Maxstream) 24XStrearn 2.4 GHz radio and ballast in the ﬁrst outer bay. On the opposing side in the central bay, the
(:5: plate featured an aluminum battery bOX containing two CGR 18650 lithium-ion cells and a Microhard MHX425
i UHF data radio. The latch-side steel plate housed a stacked electrical power system (EPS) board and command and
g data handling (CDH) board on the central bay side, and the NASA J SC DRAGON GPS board on the other side in
E the second outer bay. The interior arrangement is shown in Figure 2.
E
a
3 EPS BOARD RADIOS
Hf
I .- .
.1"". , i‘
1.? ‘ u t ‘ ‘vi 1
~ _ -T¥£Pig:1=1= 4—; a
GPS UNIT CDH BOARD BATTERY
Figure 2. AggieSatZ spacecraft interior.

"
"4","The CDH board was completely designed and populated in house and built around the PIC18F4550
microcontroller. It featured onboard ﬂash memory, USART and SP1 interfaces for communicating with the other
subsystems.

The EPS board was also designed and built in house and featured power collection, storage and safety circuitry
needed to meet NASA requirements for ﬂight on Space Shuttle. Battery—pack assemblies were designed and
integrated at Texas A&M University and then qualiﬁcation units were rigorously tested at the NASA JSC Energy
Systems Test Area (ESTA).

111. Mission Development

In 2005, the Aeroscience and Flight Mechanics Division at NASA JSC began an effort to provide space
engineering education as well as promote research into novel solutions to the ARD problem. Under the direction of
Division Chief, Mr. David Kanipe, JSC forged a partnership with AggieSat Lab and UT to undertake a set of four

g joint missions meeting these goals. A team called the Mission Systems Engineering Team (MSET) composed of
E Texas A&M and UT students developed an initial iteration of a campaign plan. The four missions were notionally
§ deﬁned at a high level and the early requirements for AggieSat2 and BeVO-l were developed from this early
3 deﬁnition. An early result of such planning was that the DRAGON GPS unit was assigned to the ﬁrst ﬂight. At the
5 onset ofplanning, more complicated relative navigation and cross link communications schemes were discussed, yet
g such plans were dropped to ﬁt within the assigned ﬁve inch cube form factor given to each team.
9 Concepts and designs were developed throughout 2006. Early challenges were experienced in the radio and
g power systems due to the constraints on volume and mass. It was difﬁcult to ﬁnd radio units with good data rate
g speciﬁcations, and traditional nickel-cadmium battery systems were deemed too cumbersome. A lithium-ion system
3 was eventually selected, and the volume and mass saVings were traded for a signiﬁcant increase in the complexity of
E; qualifying the power system for safe spaceﬂight on a manned vehicle.
g In 2007 ﬂat sat prototypes were developed for the CDH and EPS systems, with the prototype boards earning the
g nickname “rnedusa” for the bulky nature of their extra long harnesses. Three iterations of these boards were
1;“ completed in a largely trial and error process. The patch and monopole antennas for AggieSat2 were designed at
<23? Texas A&M’s Electrical Engineering Department’s Electromagnetic and Microwave Laboratory. Anechoic chamber
g testing on each antenna showing gain patterns and voltage standing wave ratio were performed. Another major test
ES was conducted jointly during 2007 by both Texas A&M and UT to test the separation and spacecraft interface
E system. A fully functional replica of the DOD SSPL launcher was developed and constructed by Texas A&M
a freshmen. Design units with complete interface systems for both spacecraft were ejected from the replica SSPL on
E air bearings as shown in Figure 3. In two dimensions the units successfully released and separated.
(é , 7 ‘ - \r -
Q
<
—,« , ’ .
>~. - ' «
3 ~- i151)- l ,4"". , 7
Q” H» ‘ --
Q ~;‘wu ’ .

Figure 3. 2-D deployment and separation testing.

The Engineering Design Unit (EDU) for AggieSat2 was completed in the summer of 2008, and performed well
on a functional level. Unfortunately at this time the document-control habits of the student engineers were not
mature and many of the lessons being learned from the EDU were not captured in great detail, much of the software
documentation was incomplete, and the testing strategy for the unit was poorly deﬁned. As a result, the success
experienced with the EDU construction would not be repeated when the ﬂight unit began to take shape in December
2008. By late December, several major documentation discrepancies were identiﬁed when the initial harnesses were
brought together between ﬂight boards. All work was stopped and a massive effort was undertaken to ﬁX the
eXisting problems. Teams scoured the EDU and eXisting documents to properly deﬁne ground “truth”. Anything that

"
"5","was not properly documented 0r tracked was established in the record from the ground up by intense inspection and
investigation with multiple cross checks from several teams. The test plan was also re-Visited at this time and
expanded greatly in detail and scope.
T j ‘3' 5- r
z 3: ‘ 4 )‘a, 1' f """" ',
4-: ....t x f '\§ « ’5 ' ‘-
. I, ‘ g. ‘ -- i . - 1
g ll“ ' "" I fir ’L- i ‘I
g Figure 4. AggieSat students working on engineering design unit.
if Flight hardware was properly coming together with exacting documentation by the end of January 2009.
3? Students settled into a tempo of very trying, but very productive hours, working around the clock to ﬁnish the
g spacecraft ﬂight unit for the spring delivery. A continuous problem failure and conﬁguration management cycle
g developed as part of this tempo. After the initial documentation problems were addressed, new technical problems
g and challenges that developed during integration were handled and resolved by the students successfully.
g The tools for this level of conﬁguration management and quality control had always been available and
if provided by our Lab’s Director and Manager, but it took most of the program for the students to catch on to and
g appreciate many of the realities of this process. As per the mandate and intent of the AggieSat Lab, the students had
g maintained full responsibility for successful completion of the program. Students were allowed to experience
{3 problems that resulted in documentation and testing deﬁciencies - which were of their own making. The Director
E9 and Manager mentored and educated the students about the problems when they were critical, and then challenged
E the students to correct them. This process resulted in very tangible and hard-fought ﬂight hardware experiences for
:2 the students. Also during ﬂight build, the students received instruction in and then performed ﬂight-rated soldering,
E integration, and polymerics in a cleanroom environment for the ﬁrst time.
LU
U
E 'T .. “L.“ V.“
a J , ; 1 .
o , 2. ~ , '. -« = Hr , ‘ , ""a “s
(:0: '1 \o' .. ‘r "" "" ‘1' ""1 ' x . 7 '.. f?“ a 9
<1 » r g ’ "" ' k . , . . /
§ ‘Ps. i i - - ‘ '5‘ ~~ ’ =
,3 l; g. “ "" ...,“ t ’ ""
D
Figure 5. AggieSatZ ﬂight build, integration, and delivery.
Battery testing was undertaken in February 2009. Earlier in the year a batch of ﬂight-capable lithium ion cells
were made available to AggieSat Lab by NASA J SC. Multiple battery-pack qualiﬁcation units were built and sent to
ESTA at J SC. One unit was crush tested to destruction and others were put through under and over-charge tests with
a qualiﬁcation EPS board and safety circuit.
The spacecraft was delivered to Oceaneering Space Systems for integration into the SSPL launcher on 20
February 2009. Three-aXis Vibration testing was performed in parallel with the ﬁnal safety reView at NASA J SC 25-
27 February. On the third-aXis run, the spacecraft suffered a short on the subsequent functional check. The satellite
was rushed back to College Station for inspection and repairs. It was discovered that a programming header had
contacted the aluminum inhibit casing due to deﬂection of the inhibit wall during Vibration. The offending header
was cut away and metal on the inhibit casing trimmed. The ﬂight unit was re-integrated and delivered a second time
on 2 March 2009. [6-7]

"
"6","-4..\ 3&3 "",5,
Figure 6. Vibration testing at J SC.
3 The launcher with both spacecraft was shipped to NASA Kennedy Space Center and arrived on 5 March 2009.
§ Texas A&M students performed a ﬁnal aliveness test through a ground support access panel at the Space Station
§ Processing Facility. The ﬂight hardware was integrated into Endeavour at the Orbiter Processing Facility and rode to
if Pad 39B for Endeavour’s rescue duty for Atlantis’ STS-125 mission to the Hubble Space Telescope.
3 IV. Operations
g? In the months leading up to ﬂight, a ground station was established at Texas A&M’s Riverside Campus north of
g the main campus. This ground site features a 30’ tower and electronics that can be networked t0 AggieSat Lab
g facilities on main campus, and UHF and 2.4 GHz services were provided for AggieSat2.
3'
i
E;
2
8
m ‘ t). -
m at;
H )1
z
LU 4 ,
Q ~ -mkr. H,
U z—aw
<1 2
z
8
E Figure 7. AggieSat Lab Riverside ground station.
<
E Endeavour would be delayed ﬁve times which pushed the launch into July. On the sixth launch attempt on 15
5» July 2009, Endeavour ﬁnally left the pad with AggieSat2 and BeVO-l.
Pg _ . . ‘Iy .
E .
E - _ '- _ _
Q ‘~ ’3 * ‘ ; - - II. - '
‘l i i i‘- 7]? ""5‘4- : .' ?9’ ‘3’,"" 0°? ‘1
W- L‘"" fr” "" _ g ' ‘ V .
)9 t
. ' ‘ h I f. i 8
Figure 8. Launch of STS-127 Endeavour with AggieSatZ.
AggieSat2 spent two weeks with Endeavour at the International Space Station after launch. The crew of STS-
127 on Endeavour commanded the release of AggieSat2 and BeVO-l at 12:34:50 UTC on 30 July 2009, a day after

"
"7","departure from the Space Station. Deployment was performed over South America on the ascending portion of the
orbit. From the moment of release, it was apparent from down link Video that the two spacecraft did not separate
from each other as planned.

There were initial concerns from the Video that the spacecraft inhibits would not disengage since a separation
was required for this event to occur. This concern was short lived because amateur radio operators received
AggieSat2’s beacon in Italy during the ﬁrst orbit at approximately 13:00 UTC. It has since been concluded that
some sort of partial separation occurred, as enough distance had to separate AggieSat2 and Bevo-l in order for
inhibits on AggieSat2 to close and the spacecraft to power up. Complete separation was eventually ruled out because
the United States Air Force reportedly tracked only one object, 35690 DRAGONSAT, during the entire 230 day
mission.

“I ,r,‘ ‘ f"" fw‘ i
E 7 ,5; 53231 a T
:3 2 , (:5 V- /
E 17/"" ; ’ ‘i "" ‘
E Figure 9. AggieSatZ and Bevo—l in Endeavour’s payload bay [left, circled in red] and deployment from
i Endeavour [right] (NASA).
£1
g AggieSat Lab’s ﬁrst contact with AggieSat2 was on 30 July 2009 at 20:23 CDT when a single beacon was
2“ received at zenith. For the ﬁrst two and a half weeks, uplink was not achieved with AggieSat2. Various numbers of
E; beacons were received by Texas A&M and amateur operators globally during this time.
5
52
E
8 I ‘K
E
g r i \ ' .A. ‘ ‘
a 3 2.2.3. r1 V \ '1‘""; _ ‘2
Q 5""“ i ‘ "" ~\\
<3 .. .
(<2? ix .1 "" ’ .~"" .1 f.
A s. V. ,, _
E Figure 10. AggieSat Lab students receive ﬁrst beacons during pass on 30 July 2009.

On 17 August, the ﬁrst commands to send back basic health information were received successfully by
AggieSat2 and two-way communications were established. These communications were limited in duration and not
consistently achieved, but it was a start.

The difﬁculty in communication was attributed to some combination of the separation failure and the radio
system conﬁguration itself. The incomplete separation may have been a contributing factor because the UHF radio
antenna was partially captive and therefore obscured in some manner by the UT spacecraft. The radio system itself
was based on a frequency—hopping device and was not satisfactorily conﬁgured by the team to handle Doppler shift
tuning. This is explained in Section V.C.

On 2 September, the command to begin taking GPS data for one orbit was ﬁnally given. The ﬁrst part of this
data was downloaded on 10 October 2009.

The balance of September was spent performing retroﬁts and upgrades to the ground station. A specially
ordered ampliﬁer was procured in an attempt to boost signals to and from the ground station to improve
communication given the suspected problems. The radio was also relocated out of the ground station rack and onto

"
"8","the tower in a weatherproof box to remove as much additional loss as possible. The ampliﬁer was used in the loop
with the entire system for the ﬁrst time on 15 October and a few more kilobytes of data were obtained.

Throughout the rest of the operations, DRAGON data download attempts were made. Due to the slow transfer
rates, adjustments to procedures were made and exhaustively tested on the EDU in the Lab. Additionally, a process
was started on 20 February 2010 to modify and control the download byte start locations to “sample” the DRAGON
data at various places in the stream. This was to allow faster location Of samples that contained actual GPS satellite
contacts and vectors bypassing the kilobytes of startup and “search” data that had been collected previously.

Passes on 27 February, 5 March, and 13 March were used to gather some of the stored spacecraft health data for
engineering purposes. These passes accumulated temperature and battery data from the ﬁrst 29 orbits as well as a
sample from September that contained the period where the DRAGON GPS unit was in operation.

Operations continued until 17 March 2010 when AggieSat2’s orbit ﬁnally decayed. Figure 11 shows the altitude
history of AggieSat2. Table 1 is an Operations summary. The last ofﬁcial contact was a single beacon reception at
1:34 UTC on 17 March just hours before re-entry into the Paciﬁc Ocean. The last ofﬁcial elements were reported for

4 an epoch of 5:27 UTC on St. Patrick’s Day of 2010.
E
8 AggieSatE Altitude Histﬂrryr
3 Sam ——I
a 3.1mm +Apnapsis
>._; 331nm ._._.___._ — - = = -'~ :- T ”:1.” +Penap5Is
95? 230.00 I ; - __
E : 240-00 ——
g E m“ __
5 i Em ——
O
N“ 130m
2 ——
5"" mm —
é Hm —
55 12am]
E 31H ul 29-Aug Eﬂaﬂep 2W ET-N cw ET—D ec EE-J an EﬂFeb ET—Mar 25—Apr
LU
: Date
0
<3 . . . .
% Flgure 11. AggleSatZ altltude hlstory [8].
g
(A
E
g Table 1. AggieSatZ operations summary [8].
5,;
E» Date Time (UTC) Station
,9
'0
"":3: Deployment 7/30/09 12:34:50 Endeavour, over Chile
.2
E First Contact 7/30/09 13:00:00 IKlODO, Italy
Q

Last Contact 3/17/10 1:34:46 Texas A&M University Riverside Ground Station

Approximate Decay 3/17/10 5:27:02 North Paciﬁc Ocean’""

Mission Duration 230 days

Initial Orbit 333km X 326km

Final Orbit 163km X 157km

Texas A&M Contacts 99

Reported Amateur Contacts 30

Total Contacts 129
*Position at last reported elements

"
"9","V. Results
A. DRAGON GPS Results

Mission success requirements to download two full orbits of DRAGON GPS data were not achieved. However,
the DRAGON GPS unit was commanded to Operate for one 90 minute period and data samples throughout this
period were downlinked that show the GPS unit was in operation and tracking GPS satellites.

The orbit selected featured an ascending pass over College Station, thus allowing the student team to command
the satellite to begin data collection. Also, this put AggieSat2 in the northern hemisphere for the ﬁrst part of the run,
which was important because the satellite was passively attitude-controlled by a neodymium magnet and hysteresis
rods. The placement of the GPS patch antenna was such that it faced toward the GPS constellation while in the
northern hemisphere.

The 90 minute session was commanded at 2:50 UTC on 4 September 2009, and the satellite and DRAGON
began taking data 4 minutes later at 2:54 UTC.

4 The ﬁrst downloaded data set, collected from 10 October 2009 to 7 February 2010, contained the ﬁrst 216
3 seconds from the start of DRAGON operation. During this time the GPS unit searched through the entire GPS
§ satellite catalog and found none of them. The board reported an onboard temperature of ~9 degrees C. At this time it
g was decided, due to the extremely low data rates, to start sampling at intervals through the data to ﬁnd converged
E? solutions at later times. It was expected that the ﬁrst 10-20 minutes of the run would consist of the DRAGON
E searching and attempting to acquire GPS satellite vectors before ﬁltering navigation data.
8 The ﬁrst sample was taken at the 20% mark, by total onboard ﬁle size, which was approximately T+16 minutes
E into the session. At this time GPS Space Vehicle (SV) 4 was tracked successfully by the DRAGON.
g The next downloaded sample was taken at 22% mark which was approximately T+18 minutes to see if anything
g had converged after the acquisition of SV 4. At this mark, data was downloaded that showed the unit had a full lock
7?: 0n SV 4 and SV 7. Azimuth and elevation data were available on SV’s 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7. DRAGON ternperature
E was at 10.7 degrees C.
Q A mark at 23% and 21% was downloaded to search around the good data being shown at 22% and see if any
3 navigation ﬁlter solutions had been available. Eight seconds of data was captured at 21% and showed continued
E,» tracking of SV4 and good SNR (signal to noise ratio) on SV 25. Nine seconds was captured from the 23% mark and
5 showed a continuation of tracking on SV 4 and 7.
3‘: This last successfully downloaded data was retrieved on 15 March 2010. At this point the spacecraft was
E beginning to descend at a fast rate due to atmospheric drag. The subsequent passes in March were complicated by
8 the satellite’s 10w altitude and higher speed. The ground site slew motors were struggling to keep antennas pointed
<23 at AggieSat2 and published elements were not accurate for long periods of time. No additional data was taken and
% the satellite re-entered on 17 March 2010.
g The DRAGON GPS unit performed as commanded during AggieSat2’s ﬂight. It is believed that the unit was
é able to generate a solution later in the data stream due to the SV contacts it held in the downloaded data. The data
3 acquired shows the DRAGON unit performing satellite searches, tracking SVs, and locking onto satellites.
<2: B. Post Mission Drag Analysis
$3 Following AggieSat2’s de-orbit, members of the AggieSat Lab began exploring how the altitude data might
E beneﬁt future missions. Speciﬁcally, there developed an interest in creating a model capable of predicting a
E satellite’s drag coefﬁcient. This information, while not speciﬁcally deﬁned as a LONESTAR mission success
9 criterion, presented several potential beneﬁts for further LONESTAR obj ectives. In addition to quantifying the data
downlink rates necessary for mission success, drag coefﬁcient calculations could also help determine a satellite’s
attitude, total mission lifetime, and average descent rates.

The development of the aforementioned model was centered on an analysis of the drag force experienced by the
AggieSat2/BeV0-1 combined spacecraft and how this force contributed to orbit decay. In order to achieve this goal,
Equation 1 was used to calculate the magnitude of the orbit’s semi-major aXis decrease due to drag [9].

_ CDA 2 —C
Aam, — —27I7a ppe [10 + 29011] (1)
Here Aam, is the change in the semi-major aXis per revolution (m), pp is the atmospheric density at perigee (kg/m3),
C D is the coefﬁcient of drag, c E an/H, a is the orbit’s semi major aXis (In), ea is the eccentricity 0f the orbit, H
is the density scale height (m) [10], and I L- are Modiﬁed Bessel Functions of order i and argument 6.

"
"10","The following discussion highlights several key assumptions of the drag analysis, summarizes how such
assumptions may have affected the robustness of the ﬁnal model, and compares key aerodynamic parameters of the
AggieSatZ/Bevo-l spacecraft to the published information from satellites of similar mass and size.

Methodology

As an initial input into the simulation, AggieSat members compiled orbital-element measurements from the 230
days of the ﬁrst LONESTAR mission. These values, recorded at 104 irregular time intervals by the United States
Air Force Space Command and shown in Figure 11, were used to obtain the apogee and perigee altitudes of the
spacecraft for various days during the mission. The Air Force elements were compiled and saved for each day/time a
ground pass occurred during operations. In order to mitigate the irregularity of readings, a time dependent mean of
the system’s height was used for the totality of calculations. This mean was computed in the usual manner by
averaging the n and n + 1 indeX to ﬁnd a time independent height. The average satellite height was then used to ﬁnd
orbital characteristics such as, circumference, apogee, perigee, period, serni-major aXis, semi-minor aXis, and orbit

v eccentricity. Such calculations can be found in most introductory orbital mechanics books and were referenced, for
3 these purposes, from reference [9]. Additionally, rnass properties of the combined satellite were computed for the
g necessary attitude control analyses within the overarching drag calculation. Examples of such variables include the
g total mass of the AggieSatZ/Bevo-l spacecraft, the center of mass, both for the indiVidual satellites and the
if combined system, and the system’s moment of inertia about each of the three primary axes.

$ Following the computations of the physical parameters of the orbit, the velocity and atmospheric density for
<2 each orbit were calculated using Equations 2 and 3, respectively [10].

g _ Cir

g 1? — ? (2)
i; — h—175

g p = 6 x 10‘109 H (3)
i where C it” is the circumference of the orbit (In), a function of serni-major and semi-minor aXis [Equation 3]; P is the
E; period of the orbit (see); It is the observed height of the satellite (km); and H is the quotient of the mean asymptotic
E temperature value for the exosphere at large altitudes [Equation 4] and the integrated mean molecular mass value
:2 from the base of the thermosphere to the speciﬁed height [Equation 5] (km).

E It should be noted, that Equation 3, along with the subsequent supporting equations are only applicable to orbits
8 between 200 and 500 km, since these “orbits can be regarded as essentially circular” [l 1]. As all but two data points
(:3 of the AggieSatZ mission fell within these bounds, it was determined that this model would serve as an accurate
% measure of the physical conditions experienced by the system. It is also important to realize that the values of T and
g m, shown below, hold little material merit; yet are merely necessary inputs for the density model.

E T = 900 + 2.5 (F10.7 — 70) + 1.5AP (4)
<:

E» m = 27— 0.012(h—200) (5)
3 Above, T is the mean asymptotic temperature value for the exosphere at large altitudes (K), F10.7 is the solar radio
E ﬂux, AP is the geomagnetic indeX, and m is the integrated mean molecular mass value from the base of the
Q therrnosphere to the speciﬁed height.

Using these values, and the aforementioned mass properties, the drag force of the satellite system was
calculated by rearranging Equation 1, see Equation 6. This equation relates the decay of the serni-major aXis to the
force of drag experienced by the satellite yet remains independent of the system’s orientation.

vaarevm

FD — —4TL'(126_C [10+26C11] (6)
Next, a comparison between the effect of drag force and gravity gradient forces was computed. This comparison
used the fact that each force, or system of forces, would produce a net torque on the overall system and thus
inﬂuence ﬂight orientation. It was therefore assumed, that for any orbit during the mission, if the magnitude of the
drag induced torque overcame that created by the gravity gradient, one of the two smaller square sides of the
satellite would represent the total frontal facing area, see Figure 12. Conversely, one of the four larger rectangular
sides would lie normal to the velocity vector.

"
"11","Z
4.. T
‘ h
\ v
I \l/l)
Figure 12. Drag driven orientation.

§ The torques of both graVity gradient forces and the total drag force, Equations 7 and 8 [9], were computed and

g compared at an angle where 0 = 45°. It was determined that at this angle the equation for graVity gradient torque

g reached a maximum and therefore would dominate the torque produced at lesser angles.

(\1

5 TD = FD(GC — COM) cos(6) (7)

8

Q r = 3—“ |1 — I |sin(26) (8)

c6 9 2R3 Z y

E: where T9 is the torque produced by graVity gradient (Nm), GC is the geometric center (m), C OM is the center of

4%: mass (m), TD is the torque produced by drag (Nm), u is the universal graVitational constant (m3/s2), 0 is the angle

5 between the center line and the zenith direction (radians), R is the orbit radius (In), and IZ and [y are the rnass

3“ moments of inertias about the z and y axes (kg*m2).

2 Finally, with the resulting areas from the torque comparison, the coefﬁcient of drag was computed for the

‘2“ combined satellite, using a manipulated form of Equation 1. These results were then plotted and averaged to ﬁnd a

E density independent solution representative of the entire mission. A plot of these results and the sensitiVity of this

a analysis to measurements and assumptions is shown later in the report.

8

53 Key Assumptions

é Two prirnary assurnptions driving the accuracy of this analysis were the in-ﬂight combined mass and form

% factor of the AggieSat2/Bevo-l satellite. These uncertainties surrounding the actual ﬂight conﬁguration arose from

a both unavailable data regarding the Bevo-l ﬂight unit and the previously discussed release failure between the two

9 spacecraft. In order to address the ﬁrst of these uncertainties, the mass of Bevo-l was estimated to be 2.7 kg from

g the known properties of the UT Engineering Design Unit. While this model did not include such ﬂight speciﬁc

EC details as staking or conformal coating, it did include most of the major rnass components, and suggested that the

4: actual ﬂight unit had a relatively even density distribution. This information prompted AggieSat Lab to assume a

$2 uniform cube conﬁguration for the Bevo-l ﬂight unit as well as allowed the two satellites’ center of graVity,

ED moments of inertia, and graVity driven orientation to be determined.

5 The second of the aforementioned uncertainties was addressed using a series of photographs taken ﬂom
onboard Space Shuttle Endeavour (Figure 9). These images conﬁrmed that the rectangular, stowed conﬁguration of
the two satellites was maintained during deployment and for several seconds following. As previously discussed, it
is unclear whether this form factor was preserved throughout the duration of the ﬂight; however given no other
information, and for simplicity sake, a rectangular prism was utilized for the totality of the drag analysis. This
assumption, along with the known volumes of each satellite, aided in predicting the frontal area of the combined
satellite and the drag force, FD, experienced by the system.

In addition to the above conﬁguration assumptions, the AggieSat team also estimated several orbital
characteristics of the LONESTAR 1 mission. Namely, this was achieved with an averaging method used to
extrapolate between apogee and perigee readings. Due to the fact that this data was only explicitly captured at
speciﬁc, and often irregular, instances of time, there was an initial concern that these averages might not accurately
represent realistic mission behaVior. Fortunately however, the irregularity of readings was mitigated by the fact that
the AggieSat2/Bevo-l orbit decayed at a relatively slow rate. This guaranteed that the deViation between actual orbit

"
"12","values and predicted values would be minimal. Due to the relatively small deViations between the estimated values
and reality, orbit averages were excluded from the subsequent sensitiVity analysis.

Lastly, in calculating the drag force experienced by AggieSatZ, a simpliﬁed logic was employed to determine
the front facing area of the system. Rather than attempting to progressively estimate and model the angle of attack of
the satellite, members of the AggieSat team determined that an ‘if—then-else’ logical construct would achieve
acceptable levels of accuracy for the purposes of this analysis. The logic assumed that if the force of Earth’s gravity
gradient created a larger torque on the satellite than that created by the drag force then one of the four long
rectangular sides of the satellite would remain perpendicular to the velocity vector. Conversely, if at any point in the
mission the magnitude of the drag induced torque overtook that of the gravity gradient, it was assumed that one of
the two small, square ends of the satellite would become the front facing feature. The estimated value of area was
then used in the ﬁnal calculation of the satellite’s coefﬁcient of drag.

Model Robustness
v In order to determine the sensitiVity of this model to the assumptions stated above, an uncertainty analysis was
3 completed in which the variability of each measurement was accounted for and used to test against the original
g result. In the preliminary discussion of such an analysis, it was determined that the C D results of this simulation were
g strictly dependent on the accuracy of three parameters. These variables included the actual mass, altitude of the
E1 satellite and the solar geomagnetic indeX, A p reading. The A P indeX is a measurement of the solar actiVity at any
3% given instance of time and helps indicate how much or how little Earth’s atmosphere expands and contracts. This
<2 variability in the atmosphere plays an important role in determining the atmospheric density at given altitudes for
g both past and present rnissions.
§ In order to capture the minimum and maximum values for CD, a reasonable range of uncertainties was
3 researched for each of the three parameters. For example, the mass of the satellite was allowed to vary between
i; 7.13kg and 4.7 5kg. These values represent a 20% inﬂation and deﬂation; respectively and accurately capture the
E true mass of the combined ﬂight unit. Likewise, a range of variability was found for the density rnodel utilized in the
g C D calculation [11]. Despite retroactively computing the density, and therefore having actual historical readings
3 from which to work, there was an inherent uncertainty associated with the methods of data collection employed in
E; measuring A P. This variability arises from the fact that only thirteen ground stations across the globe measure and
E record A p indices, a fact that introduces geographical bias to the value [12]. Thus, in order to accurately express a
3‘: range of position independent AP readings, the daily measurements from both a mid-latitude and high-latitude
E station were used. Lastly, the sensitiVity of the altitude measurement was expressed as the uncertainty of tracking
5 measurements from the United States Air Force Space Command. These readings have been stated in public
(:3 literature to produce satellite range accuracy on the order of i5 km by measuring the GPS constellation [l3].
% Using these minimum and maximum values, an effective ‘error’ was calculated for each reading of the mission.
é Each error was then weighted using the partial derivative of Equation 1, solved for coefﬁcient of drag, and taken
E with respect to the relevant variables. The results, represented by Equation 9, were then used to constrain the C D
9 solution by upper and lower bounds. These sums, along with the computed value of C D, provide a range of potential
i C D ’s and highlight the dependency of this result on the assumptions of the analysis.
2
g 3 55D
""g CDmin,max = Z i=1{ximin.max * 6—961} (9)
a
E where C Dmin,max is the maximum variation of the C D value at each reading as a result of the combined sensitiVities at

either the minimum or maximum of each range and xl- is one of the aforementioned variables.

Comparison of Results

The drag analysis of AggieSatZ/Bevo-l was completed post mission and aimed at capturing the recorded
physical characteristics of the mission. While this analysis relied heaVily on the initial assumptions made, there is
positive data which suggest these assumptions accurately reﬂected the characteristics of the mission. The average
value of C D computed for the duration of the AggieSatZ/Bevo-l lifetime was 1.74, and the below ﬁgure depicts the
calculated CD at each measured altitude throughout the mission. These values match closely to reported C D values
for satellites of similar size and mass. For example, OSCAR—l, a 5kg satellite had a range of C D’s between 2 and 4
[9]. Also shown in Figure 13 is the range of possible CD’s for the AggieSatZ/Bevo-l mission. The sensitiVity
analysis of this model showed only a slight range in values of the average C D, 1.39 to 2.01. This suggests that despite
several assumptions, the calculation of C D remained robust and could serve as a reliable predictor for future
m1ss1ons.

"
"13","Cd of A682 and BI for Totality of LONESTAR 1 Mission
7
— Computed Cd
Minumum Cd with Sensitivty ,’
6 ——— Maximum Cd with Sensitivty I‘
}
|
I
I f
5 n J
h I
II I
A II |
'U h I
8 "" H
5:4 I l
e I t er;
0 ‘ :1 q /\’ 5
<1- ..5 .5 'II III r! 5-
m u 3 ’l l] 1 E
I 5 '; |||l r! I' f E
—< ._ 3 I '\ \ (I :
a 3% 3 II} I}: jf'I/\.I // \J
8' 8 n : I's'I , {I P,’ 1! V‘ ,/
E U H . IgI H I: I ;.If M
m 1 M n ;e\ H a ,II .2:
“1 n J I'\ ,\ ‘ \/ 1 ‘ EE\ ""I IN N: 52’ j
S 2 ' 1' r \\ M \ [I ‘ 1 5:: ‘ «I 1 1‘ “.i‘x’ 5 {ll
I I J «,4 \ :._ XV, ’” \r 1 I32 3 33‘... .’
,‘_; I: I J L J .‘-_ \IV \/ / LI—z ;} .‘ : 1"".
E E . J .. '
g 1 IV ' '
g , v/\\/P\ /\/.\/ .X/gi ‘
%
£1
Z 00 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
g Orbital Element Set Number (Proportional to time, 102 sets over ~7.5mths)
N
:5
>~.
:3
E Figure 13. Drag simulation results.
0
E5
; VI. Lessons Learned
8
m 0
35 A. Separatlon System
(”5 Due to limited information, the most difﬁcult problem to analyze and learn from was the separation failure
é between the A&M and UT spacecraft. The system used for separation on AggieSatZ and BeVO-l is illustrated in
g Figure 14. Each spacecraft included a monopole antenna with a spring loaded pusher ﬁxed to opposing corners of
E the spacecraft. Each antenna was compressed into a receiving tube. The entire assembly was held in by compression
(<0: of the SSPL launcher prior to deployment. Upon command from Endeavour, the door of the SSPL was to swing
E open and the satellites were to be pushed out. As the two satellites translated out, the antenna springs were free to
g push and force the spacecraft apart.
2?:
O
E
8
\‘ll l‘l‘ u\\\\\\\‘\\\\\\“V \V‘V.‘ |.' L“ ‘ L\\\\“““\‘\‘“V
§ AggieSatZ \ § _ \
§ § : t
s § § §
\ \ § N
\ 'é' \ \ N
k‘rcl \ ‘ N '
§ § ‘ \ .ﬁ.g-_g|eEiat2 ﬁn
k\\\\\\‘\\\\\\\\\\\ $\“\\\“\\\\\\\\\§
STOWED DEPLOYED
Figure 14. DRAGONSAT separation system.

"
"14","What is known is that upon release from Endeavour, the spacecraft were only separated slightly at one corner
and sometime between deployment at 12:34 UTC and 13:00 UTC, the separation extended enough for AggieSat2’s
inhibits to close and the spacecraft to activate and beacon. The U.S. Air Force never tracked more than one object
during the entire 230 day mission.

4; ~ ~ ‘\

\“‘-»\ ' ,. “ .
g Figure 15. Close up of spacecraft after deployment. AggieSatZ: left; Bevo-l: right. (NASA)
3 Several theories have been proposed as to why the spacecraft did not separate fully. These include a cold weld
‘2 or bonding of the spacecraft during storage and the two week ﬂight to the Space Station, material fatigue in the
g separation springs, torsion or some other dynamic effect during separation.
g Cold welding of metals cannot be ruled out. Welding by adhesives and treatments originating from AggieSat2 is
E considered highly unlikely due to the documentation record of the assembly. Logs and documentation ﬂom
f5? AggieSat2’s build indicate that the last procedures using epoxy were conducted on 28 February 2009 while
43‘: remedying the short encountered after the last Vibration aXis. The mating face featured 32 machine screws around
5 the periphery that were torqued and staked. Arathane 5753 was used for this staking and was speciﬁed to cure
i during a 24 hour room temperature cycle. The spacecraft was bagged and shipped back to J ohnson Space Center for
E, re-introduction into the launcher with Bevo-1 nearly 48 hours later on 2 March 2009. These epoxies were considered
E fully cured.
g; Spring fatigue was tested by putting an engineering design version of the antenna spring with the proper parts
a and casing in compression for a length of time representative of the time AggieSat2 sat stowed. This included
8 approximately ﬁve months of time during integration, time on the launch pad, and during ﬂight with Endeavour to
8 the Space Station. This test was started soon after the separation failure in July 2009 and run through J anuary 2010.
g Upon release the spring sti11 provided force.
% The remaining theory involves some unknown dynamic effect that occurred when the ﬂight unit separated in
a full weight1essness. The antennas themselves were made of soft brass and it is possible that something could have
9 deformed and bent or locked. Unfortunately two dimensional tests on the ground provided no clues as to what
i spacecraft features could have caused problems. While torsion effects could not be studied due to the constraining
2 effect of the air bearing plane, no bending or excess friction was observed at the mating face, antennas, or the inhibit
ﬁ sw1tches 1n tests. A three d1mens1ona1 test was proposed for NASA’s n11crograv1ty program on then DC-9 test
é aircraft (commonly referred to as the Vomit Cornet), but not accepted. The ﬂight separation was the ﬁrst time the
E spacecraft system was used in a full 6-degree of freedom environment.
Q

B. Radio System

AggieSat2 carried an uplink/downlink system based on the MHX425 UHF data modem by Microhard and a
downlink system based on a Digi Maxstream 2.4 GHZ data modem.

The Microhard was to be used initially for uplink and downlink and then for uplink only after the 2.4 GHz
system could be activated. The Microhard and Digi modems were selected for data rate and size. Both ﬁt easily into
the spacecraft and operated in excess of 19200 bps. However, the modems were frequency hopping spread spectrum
(FHSS) units and designed for ground networks. The modems would “hop” from frequency to frequency to
maximize available channel space for multiple radios in a ground network. This feature made it challenging for
creating a controllable center frequency that could be tuned due to Doppler effects. The sequences that these radios
used were proprietary and not readily available.

To address the frequency hopping, a “tuning system” was devised to update a text ﬁle to force the MHX425
unit to hop continually to one frequency so it could be tracked. It was intended for the ground unit to have its own
text ﬁle re-written real time to “tune” it as needed.

"
"15","Prior to ﬂight, antenna pattern measurements were made in a chamber at the Electrical Engineering Department
at Texas A&M. Power measurements of the entire system with attenuators were not successfully completed. Noise
and RF leakage problems plagued outdoor “range” testing with the equipment on hand. In the end the system was
described primarily by analysis.

During ﬂight the available “windows” to talk to the satellite were incredibly short, only about a minute at a time
during a pass instead of the expected four minutes. In addition, many passes did not result in contact of any kind and
it was difﬁcult to use the “tuning system” feature without understanding how the satellite was behaVing during the
passes. The separation failure added to this mystery. This signiﬁcantly reduced the time available to download GPS
data and contributed directly to the failure to achieve complete mission success. The problems encountered also
prevented an attempt to activate the 2.4 GHZ system.

Dropouts and missed passes could easily be explained by the incomplete separation because the primary UHF
antenna would have been obscured in some way by a partial separation. The problem with the communications
system, which is highlighted here, is that a great deal of test data was not obtained prior to ﬂight that could have

v helped troubleshoot and describe the mission download problems. A more comprehensive set of data, beyond
3 analysis, could have given rnission team members a better idea of how much the separation failure and
g communication system each contributed to the difﬁculties.

g Another consideration for future spacecraft would be to focus on a robust radio system in addition to trying to
if maximize data rate. In the end a “black box” radio was implemented that was not well under stood. A well
$ understood, but lower performance system would have likely gotten more data down for the same amount of time on
<2 orbit.

E“

g C. Engineering and Conﬁguration Management

3 The true importance and power of proper documentation and conﬁguration management control was not fully
i; realized by students until much later in the program. After troubles were found when transitioning from the EDU to
E the ﬂight unit, the student team learned very important lessons ﬁrst hand while setting the program on a more secure
g course.

3 In the end, the ﬁnal conﬁguration of the spacecraft and the assembly process of the ﬂight unit were captured
E; extremely well. The major problem rernaining was that the time for functional testing was shortened by the time
E needed to address problems during the ﬂight unit transition. One key area that was affected by this was software
34: testing which proved to be incredibly time consuming. By delivery there were still inefﬁciencies left in the packet
E handling system that made download rates even slower. This combined with the aforementioned download problems
8 (caused by some combination of the separation and radio system issues) made it more difﬁcult to capitalize on the
5 time available to download during the ﬂight.

g The other areas that could have beneﬁted from expanded testing were the communications and separation
% systems, which have been mentioned previously.

a The basic functional capabilities of the computer and electrical systems were well tested before delivery and the
2 spacecraft did everything it was successfully commanded to do during operations. All commands sent were acted on
i and in the expected fashion. The areas that encountered problems and challenges were all systems that retained
E unknowns at the time of delivery. Students were able to observe the power of conﬁguration management and quality
g assurance ﬁrst hand. Every aspect of the mission that had been given adequate testing, attention to detail, and proper
E docurnentation performed as designed.

Q

a

5 VII. Future Work

In the fall of 2010, the AggieSat team began work on a detailed design of the AggieSat4 spacecraft, a bigger 50
kilogram satellite, for the second mission in the NASA campaign. This satellite is once again intended to ﬂy in
tandem with a satellite from UT.

AggieSat4 and its partner satellite, Bevo-2, will be launched and released together from the International Space
Station (188) as a combined unit. After deployment from the ISS, AggieSat4 will release Bevo-2 and conduct on-
orbit operations. These operations will include stabilizing and pointing, imaging the separation of the two spacecraft,
operating DRAGON, and crosslinking relative naVigation solutions with one another. The launch date is now
expected in 2013. Two more missions in the campaign will occur after this with the last one culminating in a joint
rendezvous and docking between two satellites.

During 2011 the interface requirements for the launch vehicle and deployment systems were re-speciﬂed by
NASA so the overall external conﬁguration is being ﬁnalized to meet these requirements. Internally a single board
computer rather than the PIC rnicrocontroller used on AggieSat2 is being speciﬁed. A reaction wheel system and

"
"16","torque coils will provide attitude control, and radio systems will be featured for both uplink/downlink and crosslink
communications. In addition, there is provision for a third-party payload on AggieSat4 if an organization desires to
test a system or component in the space environment.

Relative naVigation solutions will be generated using a new generation of DRAGON GPS units onboard both
the UT and Texas A&M spacecraft. Texas A&M is also investigating a novel infrared beacon and relative
naVigation sensor system built from a re-purposed commercial off—the-shelf (COTS) inﬂared sensor that will likely
ﬂy for the ﬁrst time on the third and fourth rnissions [14-15].

AggieSat4 will beneﬁt greatly from the experience of AggieSat2. AggieSat2’s ﬂight build was well controlled,
documented, and executed to ﬂight standards after transition problems from the EDU were overcome. The utility
and importance of strict conﬁguration and quality control methods is now well understood by AggieSat students and
will be applied in force to future spacecraft. Experiences with AggieSat2’s operations are providing key insights into
making communications and control far more robust than before. AggieSat Lab students now respect what to expect
and what can happen during ﬂight and are using these lessons to full advantage for the next mission.

3 VIII. Conclusions
i The overarching objective of AggieSat Lab is to develop a 100 kg class reconﬁgurable spacecraft for future
3 rnissions. Team members take a cradle-to-grave approach to provide low-cost, low-risk solutions and test beds for
E multiple technologies that feed forward to other missions. The Lab goal is to research, develop and test, and
g)- ultimately collect veriﬁable data in the space environment to characterize and advance technologies such as close-
E proximity tracking and naVigation solutions; miniaturized sensors and effectors; responsive modularized
95° conﬁgurable space mission software, hardware, and architectures; and release and docking. Equally important is the
g education of systems engineers by providing hands-on systems-engineering focus from concept to operations;
g instilling cognizant engineering practices; and encouraging students to innovate, problem solve, communicate, and
E; use their social networking skills. The bulk of the systems designed, built and utilized at AggieSat Lab are
g developed by the students and not from kit parts common to small spacecraft.
g AggieSat Lab provided the freedom necessary for the students to have full, detailed responsibility and control
1;“ over their design work for AggieSat2. This even included the ability to make mistakes. The Lab provided
<23? meaningful leadership and mentorship that was available to the students when they needed it to help them learn.
g From the students” standpoint, the experience was complete, at times very stressful, but extremely rewarding.
% While rnission success was not completely achieved, AggieSat2 was designed, built, and operated all the way
E through end-of—life by Texas A&M students. The DRAGON GPS unit operated successfully in space even though it
C; was hoped more data could be downloaded. Undergraduate students managed, implemented, and documented the
E entire spectrum of the satellite life cycle. Many of those students also obtained real-time spacecraft operations
2 experience. The lessons learned on AggieSat2 are already being applied to our future, more complex spacecraft in
8 the next few years.
s
% Acknowledgements
E The authors would especially like to recognize and thank every student involved with AggieSat Lab over the
4: past ﬁve years.
$2 For our project AggieSat2, the authors are very grateful to the Aeroscience and Flight Mechanics DiVision at
g NASA Johnson Space Center, the United States Department of Defense Space Test Program, MEI Technologies,
5 Oceaneering Space Systems, our colleagues at the University of Texas at Austin, and every amateur radio operator
worldwide who contributed to operations. The team is very thankful to Lockheed Martin for its support. The team is
also grateful to PM&AM Research, SpreadSheetWorld, Microhard Systems Inc., Texas Space Grant Consortium,
Sandstorrn A&M Mother’s Club, and Dr. Gregory Huff and the Electromagnetic and Microwave Laboratory team at
Texas A&M for their partnerships.
References
[1] Reed, H., Perez, J ., Cheek, J ., Maeland, L., Graves, J ., Lucas, P., Stancliffe, D., Betts, H., Itkoe, Z., Loftin, S.,

Sewell, R., Smith, J . 2009. “AggieSat Lab: Nanosats and Cubesats”. AAS 09-081, 32nd Annual AAS Guidance

& Control Conference, Breckenridge, Colorado, 30 January - 4 February.

[2] Graves, J ., Sewell, R., Landivar, M., Lucas, P., Perez, J ., Reed, H. 2010. “The Role of Responsive Architectures
in Educating Students”. AIAA-RSS-2010-1003, 8th Responsive Space Conference, March.

"
"17","[3] “Cube Sat Kit,” Pumpkin Inc. [Company Website], URL: http://WWW.cubesatkit.c0m/ [Cited 12 April 2011]
[4] “Space Test Program — H2 - MicroelectrO-mechanical System-Based (MEMS) PICOSAT Inspector (STP-H2-
MEPSI)”. International Space Station, Station Science [Program Website], URL: http://WWW.nasa.g0V/missi0n_
pages/ station/ science/experiments/ STP-H2-MEPSI.htm1 [Cited 12 April 2011]
[5] Bruninga, B., “RAFT Satellite Project”. U.S. Naval Academy Satellite Lab [Program Website], URL:
http://Www.usna.edu/Users/ aero/bruninga/raﬁhtml [Cited 12 Apri12011]
[6] “AGS2 Main Assembly Certiﬁcation Assembly and Testing”. AGS2-01-10-002, AggieSat Lab Internal
Document, College Station, TX, 2009.
[7] “AGS2 Spacecraft Assembly Certiﬁcation Log Post Delivery/Checkouts”. AGS2-01-10-005, AggieSat Lab
Internal Document, College Station, TX, 2009.
[8] “Flight Log and Altitude History”. AggieSat Lab Internal Document, College Station, TX, 2010.
[9] Wertz, J . R., and Wiley, J . L., Space Mission Analysis and Design, 3rd ed., Torrance, CA: Microcosm, 1999, pp.
g 145, 366, 207.
g [10] Wertz, J. R., Everett, D. F., and Puschell, J. J., Space Mission Engineering: The New SMAD, Torrance, CA:
g Microcosm, 2011, pp. 1023.
Z? [11] Panwar, R., “Satellite Orbital Decay Calculations,” Australian Government Bureau Of Meteorology.
:- [12] Jones, E. C., “The Basics of Radio Wave Propagation,” Department Of Physics and Astronomy, University of
a Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37 996-1200.
g [13] Kelso, T. 8., “Validation of SGP4 and IS-GPS-200D Against GPS Precision Ephemerides,” 17m AAS/AIAA
g Space Flight Mechanics Conference, AAS 07-127, AAS Publication Ofﬁce, San Diego, CA, 2007.
if [14] Maeland, L., Stancliffe, D., Perez, J ., Reed, H. 2011. “An Improved Model for Coarse Sun Sensors to Include
f: Geometric and Optical Nonlinearities.” To be submitted to AIAA J ournal 0f Spacecraft and Rockets.
g [15]Maeland, L., Perez, J ., Reed, H. 2011 “Experimental Characterization and Model Validation of a Commercial
3 Coarse Sun Sensor for Use in a 6-DOF Relative Navigation System.” To be submitted to AIAA J ournal of
g.» Spacecraft and Rockets.
i.
g
E
z
8
8
§
2
8
E
‘2
§
<:
z
E
%
E
Q

"
