"","x"
"1","NASA/TM—2012-217022 CLEAR—RPT—007
luvlbvv 2!? i,

Component Repair Experiment-lz

An Experiment Evaluating Electronic
Component-Level Repair During Spaceﬂight

John W. Easton

National Centerfor Space Exploration Research, Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio

Peter M Struk

Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio

March 2012

"
"2","NASA STI Program . . . in Proﬁle
Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to the - CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected
advancement of aeronautics and space science. The papers from scientiﬁc and technical
NASA Scientiﬁc and Technical Information (STI) conferences, syrnposia, seminars, or other
program plays a key part in helping NASA maintain meetings sponsored or cosponsored by NASA.
this important role.
- SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientiﬁc,
The NASA STI Program operates under the auspices technical, or historical information from
of the Agency Chief Information Ofﬁcer. It collects, NASA programs, projects, and missions, often
organizes, provides for archiving, and disseminates concerned With subjects haVing substantial
NASA’s STI. The NASA STI program provides access public interest.
to the NASA Aeronautics and Space Database and
its public interface, the NASA Technical Reports - TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. English-
Server, thus providing one of the largest collections language translations of foreign scientiﬁc and
of aeronautical and space science STI in the world. technical material pertinent to NASA’s mission.
Results are published in both non-NASA channels
and by NASA in the NASA STI Report Series, which Specialized serVices also include creating custom
includes the following report types: thesauri, building customized databases, organizing
and publishing research results.

- TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of

completed research or a maj or signiﬁcant phase For more information about the NASA STI

of research that present the results of NASA program, see the following:

programs and include extensive data or theoretical

analysis. Includes compilations of signiﬁcant 0 Access the NASA STI program home page at

scientiﬁc and technical data and information http://www.sti.nasa.g0v

deemed to be of continuing reference value.

NASA counterpart of peer-reViewed formal - E-mail your question Via the Internet to help@

professional papers but has less stringent Srinasagov

limitations on manuscript length and extent of

graphic presentations. 0 Fax your question to the NASA STI Help Desk

at 443—757—5 803

- TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientiﬁc

and technical ﬁndings that are preliminary or - Telephone the NASA STI Help Desk at

of specialized interest, e.g., quick release 443—757—5 802

reports, working papers, and bibliographies that

contain minimal annotation. Does not contain - Write to:

extensive analysis. NASA Center for AeroSpace Information (CASI)

7 l 15 Standard Drive

- CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientiﬁc and Hanover, MD 21076—1320

technical ﬁndings by NASA-sponsored

contractors and grantees.

"
"3","NASA/TM—2012-217022 CLEAR—RPT—007
luvlbvv 2!? i,

Component Rep air Exp eriment-l :

An Exp eriment Evaluating Electronic
Component-Level Repair During Spaceﬂight

John W. Easton

National Centerfor Space Exploration Research, Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio

Peter M Struk

Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio

National Aeronautics and

Space Administration

Glenn Research Center

Cleveland, Ohio 44135

March 20 1 2

"
"4","Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Astronauts Michael Fincke and Sandra Magnus; team members Eric Anderson, Gary Gorecki,
Gregory Funk, Amber Krauss, Richard Oeftering, and Due Truong; Arthur Perry and Alyssa Mueller 0f the Station Detailed Test
Obj ective (SDTO) Ofﬁce; SDTO sponsor Kevin Watson of the Constellation Supportability, Affordability, and Operability ofﬁce;
SDTO sponsor Anthony Butina 0f the ISS Logistics and Maintenance Ofﬁce; Ivy Apostolakopoulos and Blake McCracken from
the Operational Support Ofﬁce at NASA J Ohnson Space Center. Finally, the authors thank Dan Dietrich and J ohn Mcbrine, as
well as the Astronaut Crew Ofﬁce, for their review of this document. This effort was funded by the Supportability Project of
NASA’s Exploration Technology Development Program Ofﬁce (NASA Langley Research Center) and the ISS Vehicle Ofﬁce
(NASA J Ohnson Space Center).
Trade names and trademarks are used in this report for identiﬁcation
only. Their usage does not constitute an ofﬁcial endorsement,
either expressed or implied, by the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration.
Level ofReview: This material has been technically reviewed by technical management.
Available from
NASA Center for Aerospace Information National Technical Information Service
7115 Standard Drive 5301 Shawnee Road
Hanover, MD 21076—1320 Alexandria, VA 22312
Available electronically at http://WWW.sti.nasa.g0V

"
"5","Component Repair Experiment-I:
An Experiment Evaluating Electronic
Component-Level Repair During Spaceﬂight
J ohn W. Easton
National Center for Space Exploration Research
Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
Peter M. Struk
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
Executive Summary

The Component Repair Experiment-l (CRE-l) examines the capability for astronauts to perform
electronics repair tasks in space. The goal is to determine the current capabilities and limits for the crew,
and to make recommendations to improve and expand the range of work that astronauts may perform.
CRE-l provided two-layer, functional circuit boards and replacement components, a small tool kit,
written and Video training materials, and 1 hr of hands on training for the crew slated to perform the
experiment approximately 7 months prior to the mission. Astronauts Michael F incke and Sandra Magnus
performed the work aboard the International Space Station (188) in F ebruary and March 2009. The
astronauts were able to remove and replace components successfully, demonstrating the feasibility of
performing component-level electronics repairs within a spacecraft. Several unsuccessful tasks
demonstrated areas in need of improvement. These include improved and longer training prior to a
mission, an improved soldering iron with a higher operating temperature and steady power source, Video
training and practice boards for refresher work or practice before a repair, and improved and varied hand
tools and containment system.

1.0 Introduction

Future long-duration human exploration missions will be challenged by constraints on mass and
volume allocations available for spare parts. Addressing this challenge will be critical to the success of
these missions. As a result, it is necessary to consider new approaches to spacecraft maintenance and
repair that reduce the need for large replacement components. On the 188, the maintenance concept for
avionics almost exclusively relies on the removal and replacement of entire Orbital Replacement Units
(ORU’s), with limited removal and replacement of circuit cards when possible. The next step to reducing
the size of the items being replaced would be to implement component-level repair. This mode of repair
has been implemented by the US. Navy in an operational environment and is now part of their standard
approach for maintenance. It is appropriate to consider whether this approach can be adapted for
application on future manned space missions. The Component-Level Electronic-Assembly Repair
(CLEAR) project at NASA Glenn Research Center has begun to explore the logistics, training, and
research and development required to provide this capability to future 188 operations as well as missions
to the moon and Mars.

There are a number of beneﬁts to in-situ electronics repair during a space mission. Providing a repair
capability can help relieve the costs of launching and storing full-sized spares, a signiﬁcant consideration
for any space mission. The ability to perform repairs adds to the ﬂexibility and range of activities
available to the astronauts, increasing the ability to recover from faults or damage, or to take advantage of
NASA/TM—2012-217022 1

"
"6","opportunities such as scavenging used equipment or adapting equipment to a new, previously unforeseen
opportunity. However, there are obvious differences between the repair capabilities of a ground-based
versus a space vehicle or habitat. Technicians on Earth are well trained and have years of experience,
while a crew member typically will not have this focused training and experience. A technician in a lab
has access to a wide variety 0ft001s, and is typically not limited in the power and volume or footprint
available for these tools; space travel limits tools in both respects. While a consideration on Earth,
containment and management of evolved fumes or debris are much more important in the contained,
closed-loop environment of a vehicle or module. An in-situ electronics repair plan must account for all of
these factors.

A necessary ﬁrst step in evaluating an electronics repair capability is to determine the current
capabilities to conduct electronics repairs. To do this, the CLEAR team developed CRE-l, a Station
Development Test Objective (SDTO). CRE-l has two main goals. The ﬁrst goal is to demonstrate the
feasibility of performing component-level electronics repair tasks during a space mission. This includes
understanding which component types and sizes are amenable to manual repair by an astronaut. The
second goal of this work is to determine ways to provide and improve an in-situ repair capability, with
recommendations for crew training, tools, and ways to expand the types of repairs a crew member could
perform during a mission. The next section describes the experiment including circuit cards, replaced
components, tools, facilities, and astronaut training followed by the results from the experiment including
a Visual inspection, a review of the operations and downlinked Video, and results from a crew debrieﬁng.
This document concludes with a discussion of the results and recommendations for future work and for
enabling an electronics repair program for future space ﬂight missions.

2.0 Experiment Description

CRE-l provided 188 astronauts a set of ﬁve realistic circuit boards, three sets of replacement parts,
and a small selection 0ft001s commonly used for electronics repair and manufacturing on Earth. These
tools supplemented some existing equipment already aboard the 188 as described below. CRE-l, as ﬂown
to the 188, was a scaled-back version of the experiment initially proposed. This initial experiment,
described in Appendix A, was reduced in scope to reduce the package volume to allow for manifesting
within the tight launch constraints available for SDTOs aboard the Space Shuttle.

2.1 Overall Design of Experiment

The astronauts performed ﬁve of the following siX tasks normally conducted to complete a
component-level electronic repairlz

1. Removal of conformal coating

2. Removal of defective component (both destructive and non-destructive)

3. Preparation of board surface for component replacement

4. Placement of new component

5. Soldering of new component

6. Replacement of conformal coating of repaired area

The last step, replacement of conformal coating, was not attempted during CRE-l as is discussed later
in this section.

1 In general, the ﬁrst step to component-level repair is fault diagnostics. This is required to understand what
component, if any, must be replaced. Fault diagnostics were not part of the CRE-l scope; astronauts removed and
replaced pre-determined components using hands-on training, written procedures, and Video training. The CLEAR
project does provide a detailed concept (Ref. 1) for conducting fault diagnostics within the conﬁnes of a spacecraft
environment.

NASA/TM—2012-217022 2

"
"7","2.1.1 Removal of Conformal Coating

F irst, the crew removed conformal coating from the joint area of the circuit board and component
legs. A conformal coating is a material applied in thin layers to a circuit board during the manufacturing
process. This layer protects the circuit and components from foreign obj ect damage, moisture and
humidity, and can help slow ﬂame spread during a ﬁre. This coating must be removed to provide direct
access to the soldered joint area. The method for removing the conformal coating varies based on the type
of material and can include mechanical methods, such as rubbing, scraping, or sanding with a hand or
motorized tool; heating, to melt or decompose the coating material; or using a chemical solvent to
dissolve the conformal coating. For CRE-l, the crew used a hand tool (a ﬁber-glass stickz) with a rub and
scrape technique to remove conformal coating from the board.

2.1.2 Removal of Defective Component (Both Destructive and Non-Destructive)

The next step is to remove the original, faulty component. There are two general methods for
performing this task and both were attempted by the astronauts during CRE-l. F irst, one may cut the
component legs and remove the component, leaving the remaining leg debris in the solder joint for
removal during the next step in the process. While simple, this process can cause damage to the circuit
board if a leg is not out completely, and can be difﬁcult when component legs are spaced close together.
This process can also make future diagnostic studies of the removed part difﬁcult, as the diagnostic
equipment must attach to shortened or removed component legs. Alternatively, a crew member may heat
a solder j oint or multiple solder joints along one side of the component, and once the solder is liqueﬁed
lift the component leg away from the j oint area. In CRE-l, all heating is performed using a resistively
heated soldering iron, described later. This process is more complicated than simply cutting the
component legs, and may damage a circuit board by attempting to remove a leg before the solder
completely liqueﬁes, but it keeps the component legs intact for future analysis and may be easier for
multi-legged components with closely spaced legs.

2.1.3 Preparation of Board Surface for Component Replacement

The third step is to prepare or clean the circuit board joint area of any leg debris and remaining solder
and conformal coating from the original joints. The leg debris may be removed by heating the joint and
removing the debris with tweezers or, for surface mount components, wiped with the remaining solder
into solder wick. The solder wick is also necessary for through-hole components, to remove the original
solder from the through-hole. The crew member must also remove remaining conformal coating, so it
does not contaminate the new solder joint or prevent the new component from resting ﬂat on the circuit
board surface. Stray particles of conformal coating must also be removed; tweezers or pressing a loop of
adhesive tape3 to the circuit board is typically sufﬁcient for this task.

2.1.4 Placement of New Component

The placement of components in reduced gravity was accomplished differently for through-hole and
surface mount device (SMD) components. There were two types of through-hole components: a resistor
and a multi-leaded integrated circuit (1C). To reduce crew time needed for conducting the repair, the
resistors were pre-bent so that they would ﬁt into the through-holes on the circuit card. For through-hole
components, the astronaut ﬁrst aligns the proper component leg with the correct through-hole, and then
inserts all legs fully into the through holes. Sometimes this required slight bending of the component legs.
Once inserted, one or two legs (depending on the component type) are bent ﬂush to the circuit board,
clinching the component in place. The excess lead length is then trimmed, if necessary, particularly for
through-hole resistors.
2Also called a spudger.
3When using adhesives, care must be taken to avoid generating electro static discharge (ESD) which can damage
components. Special ESD safe tapes were used during CRE-l which helped minimize this effect.
NASA/TM—2012-217022 3

"
"8","SMD components were tacked (Via soldering) into position using a small amount of solder placed on
one of the leads. Again orientation was very important in placing the component properly. The astronaut
aligned the proper component legs and circuit board pads, holding the component with tweezers while
reheating and ﬂowing the previously placed solder over the component leg, tacking the component in
place.

2.1.5 Soldering of New Component

After cleaning the circuit board to place the new component, the astronaut soldered the new
component into place. The astronaut added heat and solder to each joint, making a heat bridge, from one
side of the circuit board, ﬁlling the through-hole and forming a ﬁllet on both sides of the circuit board.
For SMD components, the astronaut added a small amount of solder to each of the circuit board pads and
legs, soldering each joint one at a time.

2.1.6 Cleaning the Joint Area and Replacement of Conformal Coating of Repaired Area

The ﬁnal step to performing an electronic repair is to clean the new joint areas and apply a new layer
of conformal coating. Cleaning the joint area removes residue from the solder ﬁuX used during soldering.
Some types of ﬂux, such as rosin active (RA) or rosin mildly active (RMA), are acidic and can, over time,
damage the solder joints. The ﬂux residue can, with many conformal coating materials, interfere with the
adhesion between the circuit board and coating material. The CRE-l experiment, however, did not require
cleaning the joint area. This was because the solder provided for CRE-lused a no-clean type of ﬂux; ﬁuX
residue from this material would not damage the circuit boards or joints, reducing or eliminating the need
to clean the joint areas. Furthermore, the manufacturer indicates that conformal coating can be reapplied
without any cleaning of the circuit board.

Typically, the cleaning of circuit boards after soldering usually requires large (~lOO mL) amounts of
solvent, usually alcohol. Managing such a large, free amount of liquid would be very difﬁcult in reduced
gravity. In addition, the air handling systems of the 188 can also be damaged by vaporized alcohols. For
the 188, only 1 mL of alcohol can be evaporated daily into the cabin. Nonetheless, the lack of cleaning
did not interfere with the validity of the CRE-l tests, despite these factors.

To complete the repair, conformal coating typically would be reapplied over the new solder joints,
legs, and component body, restoring the integrity of the coating and the protections it provided. The
coating material selected, and speciﬁed in a later section, is thick and Viscous, similar to petroleum jelly.
Unfortunately, reapplication of conformal coating was not performed during CRE-l operations. Although
part of the original experiment, the conformal coating was eliminated to reduce the mass and volume of
the CRE-l payload. This was an acceptable compromise since the CRE-l team believed that applying the
conformal coating material in reduced gravity would be no different than performing the same process in
normal gravity.

2.2 Circuit Board Description

The CRE-l team provided the crew members ﬁve functional circuit boards, such as the one shown in
F igure 1. The circuit boards are 3.1 in. long and 1.8 in. wide. Each circuit board has four sections. The
ﬁrst section, in the upper left quadrant of the circuit board, is used to accept and distribute power to the
other three, independent sections. The astronauts did not work on this section of the circuit board, and did
not power and use the circuit during the mission; it is only used by the CRE-l team to determine proper
function of the circuit board before turning the hardware over before launch, and after receiving the
hardware at the end of the mission. The other three quadrants are independent circuits which, when
powered and properly constructed, blink a LED at 1 Hz. The ﬁrst circuit, in the upper right quadrant, is
NASA/TM—2012-217022 4

"
"9","(uni! [I I p 5 Ci“ RL' . I:- -'R:3 R4 . '. "" Component
* .' +5! ' H ..p .. ._c5 r'%=- J R1
[i -,- g ,;
J] 2- ..1 ""l 932 L13 ...x I : :; _1__'
, “I.” ' . 1.. -i-__--:~-*i': ' 'I r
Egg 1 m,._ L]; ». m
1 ' 7 . :I - E C Cumpunent
*5 ma FEE R? r? [:13 PB ---+ i“ I I “2
{Lil} m m mﬁﬁﬂqﬁl‘ﬁl UBH HULL
5.: "": 1. FL? 2? i; [WE r;— ”='1'11I‘T-- [:3 C ""C '1 BE
' .1: "" ""' U .T- ;: '7” L|-'~'=-‘F' -1
Component __ﬁ'—J ”‘1 U5 :2 :1: ""_"""";13 El :-.; ”hi: ; 5; _= _!:-.3
' ' r. l, 1.. . __. -' ‘-‘ 't— 1 "" - "" Llr’ - '
U4 U 3'! in “T D PI “-‘H - arm .c I HE P I TI‘I‘H 3
Component U6 C 01111101191]! U7
Figure 1.—The CRE-1 circuit board highlighting the five components crew members removed and
replaced.
populated with through-hole components. The crew worked on two components in this quadrant: R1, a
resistor, and U2, an eight-lead dual in-line package (DIP). The second quadrant used “standard pitch”
surface mount devices which had a lead/pad spacing of 0.050 in. between adj acent component legs. The
astronauts removed and replaced U4, an eight lead small outline integrated circuit (SOIC) from this
section of the circuit board. The third quadrant is populated with ""ﬁne pitch"" surface mount components,
where the pad spacing is 0.025 in. Initially, the CRE-l team did not plan any crew work with these
components. During the course of CRE-l operations, additional crew time became available and the
astronauts attempted to remove components U6 and U7 as this would further the obj ectives 0f the CRE-l.
Table 1 lists the components worked by the crew, the type of component, and the section of the circuit
board where the component resides.
TABLE 1.—COMPONENTS WORKED DURING CRE-l OPERATIONS.

The CRE-l circuit boards are generally typical of those used in other NASA applications, particularly
in 188 science payloads. Three of the circuit boards (serial number 1, 2, and 3) have a conformal coating,
Dow 3140, with a thickness of 0.004 in. Two of the circuit boards (serial numbers 9 and 10) do not have
conformal coating. These uncoated boards were added as “contingency” boards, for use by the astronauts
as practice or if they encountered problems removing or working with the conformally coated circuit
boards. Ultimately, the CRE-l team was given enough crew time to add these uncoated circuit boards into
the test matrix, providing additional opportunities for the crew to work these tasks. The circuit boards are
a two-layer design, meaning the traces connecting the components run along the top and bottom surfaces
of the circuit board. This is not typical of circuit boards; most boards have additional interconnecting
layers within the circuit board. The original CRE-l circuit board design used four layers, but the team
NASA/TM—2012—217022 5

"
"10","learned during ground testing that the 600 °F soldering iron tip available on the 188 did not provide
enough heat to reliably reﬁow solder in the through-holes for removal. Changing to a two-layer circuit
board did not present this heat loss issue, at the cost of some ﬁdelity between standard ﬂight circuit
boards and the CRE-l circuit boards.

2.3 Tools

The CRE-l team provided a small tool kit for the crew to use during CRE-l operations. The tools
provided are standard tools used for working with electronics components, and are typically small, with
ﬁne points suitable for manipulating the small parts and working areas found in electronics repair. The
provided tools expand the capabilities of the ISS Tool Kit, which does not have the small tool sizes
needed for this work. A white fabric pouch, shown in Figure 2, stores the tools when not in use.

The tool kit includes two sizes of cutters, standard and ﬁne, shown in Figure 3. The cutters were used to
cut component legs, solder wick(described1ater), and solder wire, if necessary. The standard sized cutter
was used for through-hole components, solder wick, and solder wire. The ﬁne cutters were used on the
standard and ﬁne pitch surface mount devices.

The tool kit also contains three types of tweezers (Figure 4). One type is a standard tweezers, with
rounded tips. The second type is curved tweezers with ﬁne tips, and the third is a reverse tweezers with
rounded tips. The reverse tweezers open rather than close when the arms are squeezed, and act similarly
to a hand-held clamp. Providing different tweezers gave the crew a variety of options, depending on the
task at hand and personal preference. All the tweezers had smaller tips than those provided in the ISS
Tool Kit, with the curved tweezers tip having ﬁne points.

u _ ___ _'__________.- .. - '
i553! ' _ :_ 4 .15.:
11""- ‘-.._.'.1....*‘*-- _
v‘ .
- I L'iﬂﬂ'J‘i. ,' I I ii I
- _ g 1;; - -- .1: PR;
__' II- t ' mm“ ' .. i J. 1 T ' Ii
Q . z, I- . 'r.‘ .. '--r- it: ~ ’-“-‘* .i
,5}, I - ""___ 1' r; i {,fﬂ 1:3' r t 3.-
. g; '- ' i :1 —— .. *q; .1 i . I.' '.I
....::: .ﬂgéa‘a r 111-.. 1;,
:5 .. ‘ d’ _ ,
J-r.” '51 __--_-.:~'--"" In, ' . J . i
J .1.. _ ,‘. 1. '-_ .15: . .1 '5.—
' ‘+-_ _ - 1b 1|- . Llﬁi- 'L —‘-ﬁ-L ‘1‘
‘1, u, m; , i 1 -—--~r—-—----— -
m— __""III i. -- .—.-_='
Figure 2.—CRE-1 Tool Kit, unfolded.
NASA/TM—2012-217022 6

"
"11","Figure 3.—Standard (left) and fine (right) tipped cutters, part of the CRE-1 Tool Kit.
Figure 4.—Straight (top), curved (middle), and reverse (bottom) tweezers
included in the CRE-1 Tool Kit.
NASA/TM—2012-217022 7

"
"12","The tool kit contains a ﬁberglass stick (Figure 5) which is used to rub the conformal coating off the
circuit board and bend or clinch component leads. The dental pick (Figure 6) also cleans conformal
coating in tight areas of the circuit board and can be used to help position a component lead on a circuit
board pad. The tool kit also contained a spool of standard solder wick, a copper braid used to absorb
liquid solder when cleaning the j 0th area; a small spool of solder wire, a eutectic (63% tin, 37% lead)
alloy with Kester 245 no-clean ﬂux core, which has a diameter of 0.015 in.; and a syringe with Kester 958
liquid ﬂux, which is added to a joint area to help remove and clean the original solder.

The ﬁnal items in the CRE-l tool kit were two tips (Figure 7) for the US. Soldering Kit soldering
iron, a Weller PTA6, a 1/8 in, screwdriver tip, and Weller PTP6, a 1/32 in. screwdriver tip. The CRE-l
team provided the larger soldering iron tip to replace a similarly sized tip in the US. Soldering Kit. These
tips were required for work with the small standard pitch and ﬁne pitch SMD components. Additionally,
the existing tips in the US. Soldering Kit had shown damage in previous work (Ref. 2).

u
Figure 5.—Fiberg|ass stick, used for removing conformal coating, from the CRE-1 Tool Kit.
Figure 6.—Dental pick from the CRE-1 Tool Kit.
Figure 7.—Soldering iron tips
provided in CRE-1 Tool Kit:
1/32 in. (left) and 1/8 in. (right).
NASA/TM—2012—217022 8

"
"13","The CRE-l experiment also used equipment available on the 18$ for general repair work and other
tasks. This includes the Maintenance Work Area (MWA), a ﬂat table Which attaches to wall racks and
provides a work space for the crew. Mounting t0 the MWA is the containment area, a tent-like structure
used to contain vapors and debris generated during soldering or other work. The US. Soldering Kit
contains a soldering wand similar to a Weller TCP12P soldering iron, modiﬁed to accept rechargeable
batteries as a power source, as well as soldering iron tips, solder, solder wick, and heat sinks not used in
CRE-l. CRE-l also used the circuit board clamp provided With the MWA, but provided a longer vertical
rod to improve crew Visibility. CRE-l operations also required use of a vacuum line to remove vapors and
debris generated during the soldering process, a 15X magnifying Visor to improve Visibility for the crew,
and a still camera and lab Video camera to record the work in progress and provide real-time images and
Video to the CRE-l team on the ground, Which is discussed below. Figure 8 shows the setup of the MWA
and containment area during CRE-l operations.

During ground testing, the CRE-l team observed that the clamp holding the circuit board could not be
position close enough to the Viewing port of the MWA containment area. The shaft, along Which the
clamp can be fastened, was too short. Adequate Visibility of the circuit card is important for soldering
operations conducted While the containment area is sealed. Therefore, a 12.75 in. aluminum shaft (also
shown in Figure 8) was provided With the CRE-l hardware to allow the board clamp to be brought closer
to the Viewing port.

‘ '_ 1‘ ' 3. .; Leia: ‘3 -'
, ﬂ ' K; {'3‘ .h' i . ' r. -”‘ tiff""?
- .* (prOVIded as part of CRE-1 kIt) ‘ - .- - a 75: J. ‘-""'
' .9 ;.J:“.'r:': : _ i? ,1 3""- ‘_.‘.""~-."".,___~ :_ :1"" ”I H . ..-'""“""I .
' ""r I _;_ ‘ ""T
.. ”ﬂ.” aﬁ- ”I -..- Ii
.I _ :l'.._..+*] '_ L - . .
!. *1? .f- -.— a
‘ é . - ﬂ; m '* é“: £2 """" — '3
l'. .' - .35""! “f '__' .:r ._ - . hr .
1;... . . _: _. '1. 'i 1- L“? 1-
“a ' ' :. ‘- ' .1 ' ;
IssmsEﬂaqﬁm ' I ' ""
Figure 8.—MWA setup with containment area, soldering iron, and CRE-1 circuit board.
NASA/TM—2012-217022 9

"
"14","2.4 Training

The CRE-l team provided a number of training materials for the crew, who did not have prior
experience performing electronics repairs. The team prepared a detailed procedure outlining each step in
the removal, cleaning, and replacement process for component Rl, U2, and U4. The team also made a
training Video, demonstrating each step for each component. These materials were uploaded to the ISS
prior to operations and available to the crew during operations.

Prior to ﬂight, the astronauts received 1 hr of hands-on training in July 2009 (about 7 months prior to
conducting the experiment aboard the 188). The training was based on the written procedures and training
Video, and led by a NASA electronics technician and instructor. During this training, the crew members
practiced all of the necessary tasks for component repair. This includes soldering all of the joint types,
though not necessarily completing all the solder j oints for a particular component (i.e., soldering four of
the eight leads on U4). This limit on practicing the electronics repair skills was dictated by the amount of
time available with the astronauts. The astronauts were not shown how to identify ﬂaws in the work and
methods to remedy these ﬂaws. These aspects were not covered because rework was discouraged by the
team and the limited amount of time available for training preventing lessons on what to look for and how
to ﬁnd the ﬂaws (magniﬁcation and still photos, where on the component to look, etc.).

Additionally, the CRE-l team was able to provide some assistance during crew operations on the 188.
Live downlinked Video allowed the team to watch the crew member work, and note their progress and
some of the successes and difﬁculties the crew encountered. This View was limited by the ﬁeld of View of
the camera system, which was too wide to discern ﬁne details of the work. The team could also ask and
answer questions to and from the crew, and provide some updated procedures or questions at the end of
each day. The crew members also took still photos of the work, both to document the work as it
progressed and as a source of magniﬁed Views of their work, beyond what the magniﬁer Visor could
provide.

2.5 Post-Flight Analysis

One of the key areas of post-ﬁight analysis is identifying areas to improve crew training and tools,
and ﬁnding the current limits for electronics repair. F irst, the team inspected the downlinked Videos and
still photos to determine any problems or successes from the available information. Another key aspect of
the post-ﬁight analysis was the inspection of circuit boards returned from operations on 188. The
inspection was carried out by a NASA electronics technician who is qualiﬁed for this type of work. The
boards was inspected using a bench microscope (20-100 X magniﬁcation), typically used for populating
and inspecting circuit boards. The technician determined if the work passed the NASA Standard 8739.3,
Soldered Electrical Connections (Ref. 3). For joints that did not pass the standard, the technician also
noted if rework would be required to make the solder j oint functional, or if the joint is functional as-is. In
addition, the CRE-l team debriefed the ISS crew members, asking both general and speciﬁc questions
based on observations during the ﬂight operations as well as those based on results of ground inspections
of returned circuit boards. F inally, select solder joints were analyzed for void defects (Ref. 4).

3.0 Results

Component Repair EXp-l (CRE-l) experiment was launched to the 188 on November 14, 2008,
aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavor as part of STS-l26. Operations took place during Increment 18 from
F ebruary 19 to March 2, 2009. The ﬁve circuit boards were returned to Earth on March 28, 2009, aboard
the Shuttle Discovery after completing mission STS-l l9.

NASA/TM—2012-217022 10

"
"15","1 . -f 1 mg - ' a 5' ' _ _. _
1 ﬂ, ,. i ‘ .. ““-_,‘r'-.: r :__ 'u_f':'— 1!!
J '5"" "".1"" i - I , £1. ?€qu 5 _. _ . r, '

. _ ' "" . '-.. ._ J. ' . III. .
y )7 l’V}; 4 .51“?! *5 ?.1‘?‘ 'j'? . * _ .-
t. I ' I h - 12“! - ~— l.._ I .'

, ,. a -_ .5,“ 4-3-...- '
7“.” ' ,1' -
— ISSD1BEEI35?95

Figure 9.—Astronauts Michael Fincke (left) and Sandra Magnus (right) work on CRE-1 during Expedition 18.
3.1 Operations Summary

The following section describes the activities of Astronauts Michael Fincke and Sandra Magnus While
performing CRE-l operations on-board the 188 from February 19 to March 2, 2009. Figure 9 shows a
photo of each crew member working on CRE-l aboard the 188. The following sections list, day by day,
the operations conducted on that day, With some notes on the amount of time required for various tasks
and comments made by the crew or noticed by the ground team during the Video downlink. Each section
ends With a table listing, for that session, the component worked on, the type of work done, and an
estimate based on downlinked Video of how much time those tasks required. The durations of the tasks
are important to future mission planners. More detailed descriptions of each day’s activities may be
found in the Appendix B.

3.1.1 Day 1, February 19, 2009

Michael Fincke began operations by installing and conﬁguring the ISS and CRE-l equipment needed
for the work, including the Containment Area, Soldering Kit, and other tools. After completing these
tasks, he began work on CRE-l Board 1. Table 2 shows a summary of the tasks completed and estimates
of the time required to perform the work. The CRE-l team took the time estimates from the Video
downlink of the activities. Loss of Signal (LOS) periods required several activities to be grouped together
for these time estimates.

Astronaut Fincke completed the removal and replacement of R1 and the removal and cleaning of U2
during the allotted time. He also commented after the work that soldering in reduced gravity took longer
than in normal gravity training, and he worked on various techniques for positioning the soldering iron tip
and solder on the circuit board.

TABLE 2.—TASKS COMPLETED ON BOARD 1, DAY 1
under work min
Conformal coating removal; Component removal; Solder and
NASA/TM—2012—217022 11

"
"16","3.1.2 Day 2, February 20, 2009

Michael F incke continued working on Board 1 during this session. Prior to beginning work, he
commented that the batteries used with the Soldering Kit were not charging properly. He also commented
on molten solder ﬂowing differently in reduced gravity, with the solder not ﬂowing as freely as in normal
gravity training, requiring him to develop his own techniques in reduced gravity.

During this session, F incke completed the replacement of U2, and removed and replaced U4. He also
found a charged battery for use with the soldering kit. Table 3 shows the time required to complete these
tasks.

TABLE 3.—TASKS COMPLETED ON BOARD 1, DAY 2
under work mm
U2 U 4 Solder remaining0U2 joints; Remove U4 conformal coating; 0
(other, tasks) Remove U4; Begin cleaning U4 pads (ﬁnd good battery, take still 30
photos of U2)
Clean U4 pads; Solder new U4 on board 1; Take photos, resolder a
3.1.3 Day 3, February 23, 2009

Prior to beginning the session’s work, Michael F incke commented that using a good battery helped in
the soldering process, and that he was using the 188 still camera to both document his work and as a
magniﬁcation and joint inspection aid. During this session, he removed and replaced components Rl, U2,
and U4 from Board 2. F incke changed the order of operations, working task by task (removing conformal
coating from all three components, for example) rather than working one component at a time. With extra
session time, the CRE-l team recommended that F incke attempt removing U6 and U7, tasks which are
outside the original scope of CRE-l but would provide information on small components with closely
spaced component leads. The ground support team recommended using the same technique for removing
U4—cutting the leads then cleaning the solder and leg debris—for U6 and U7. F incke attempted this, and
commented that it was difﬁcult to cut one lead at a time, and must out two or three leads at a time due to
the size of the ﬁne cutters. This led to damage to one of the lands on U7, and F incke commented that
components U6 and U7 were at the limit of his capabilities. Table 4 lists these tasks and the time required
to complete them. With still more time remaining, F incke then worked on Board 9, removing and
replacing components R1 and U2; Table 5 lists the time required to complete these tasks.

TABLE 4.—TASKS COMPLETED ON BOARD 2, DAY 3
under work mm
and remalning conformal coating
———
NASA/TM—2012-217022 12

"
"17","TABLE 5.—TASKS COMPLETED ON BOARD 9, DAY 3
under work rnin
3.1.4 Day 4, February 24, 2009
Astronaut Sandra Magnus worked on Board 3 during this session and this was her ﬁrst session of
CRE-l. She removed and replaced Rl, U2, and U4. While removing the original U4 component, the
astronaut pulled three pads from the circuit board. During operations, the team speculated that the pads
were pulled during removal of the component. This was later conﬁrmed by ground inspection (see
App. C.3). Subsequently, Astronaut Magnus soldered the new U4 in place with the circuit board as-is,
using only the ﬁve remaining circuit board pads. Table 6 lists these tasks and the time needed to complete
them. During the process, Astronaut Magnus commented that the molten solder tended to wet and stay
near the iron tip, rather than ﬂow onto the pad area on the circuit board.
TABLE 6.—TASKS COMPLETED ON BOARD 3, DAY 4
under work rnin
coating
3.1.5 Day 5, February 26, 2009
Michael F ineke complete work on Board 9 during this session, removing and replacing U4. With
additional time remaining, he then removed U6 and U7, trying different techniques to remove the
components compared to his previous work. The astronaut heated each original solder joint and lifted the
leg out of the molten solder, using the dental pick. This process led to a damaged circuit board lead on
U6. This process was repeated on one side of U7, but on the other side, all leads where heated and lifted
at once, with some success. Again, the lead spacing on U6 and U7 were difﬁcult to work with using the
tools and methods provided. Table 7 list the time used to complete each task.
TABLE 7.—TASKS COMPLETED ON BOARD 9, DAY 5
under work rnin
resoldering one JOlnt)
NASA/TM—2012-217022 l3

"
"18","3.1.6 Day 6, March 7, 2009

During this ﬁnal session for CRE-l , Sandra Magnus worked on removing and replacing Rl , U2, and
U4 on circuit board 10. Table 8 lists each task completed and the time required for the task. The session
was successful in attempting and completing this work, with the use of still camera images to check and
retouch new solder joints on U2. During voice communications Astronaut Magnus mentioned that
forming new solder joints for U4 required positioning the soldering iron tip at the far end of the circuit
board pad, and positioning the solder wire near the component leg, which worked with some success.

TABLE 8—TASKS COMPLETED ON BOARD 10, DAY 6
under work inin
———
——-

3.2 Inspection results

On April 30, 2009, CRE-l team members, including the team electronics technician, inspected the
CRE-l circuit boards used during 188 operations by Astronauts Michael F incke and Sandra Magnus. This
inspection followed an inspection of the still photos taken by the crew and the down linked Video of ISS
operations by the electronics technician. Inspecting the circuit boards required the use of a standard bench
inspection microscope, with magniﬁcations varying from 7X for general inspection to 20X for close
inspection of speciﬁc joint features. The Visual inspection focused on the requirements of NASA Standard
8739.3, though the notes also indicate if the solder joint would be functional, if not meeting the
speciﬁcation. In addition, a power supply set for 9 VDC, 1% mA output provided power to the circuit
boards to test the circuit operation; the integrated ammeter in the power supply provided an estimate of
the peak current used in the circuit.

Table 9 summarizes the results of a Visual inspection and functional test of circuit boards 01, 02, and
03 (boards with conformal coating) and Table 10 summarizes the Visual inspection and functional test
results for boards 09 and 10 (boards without conformal coating). Each table lists the components worked
for each board, and if the component is functional, if it passes inspection based on NASA Standard
8739.3, and if further rework is necessary. Components are judged to be functional if the LED for that
section of the circuit blinked in the correct pattern. Examining components to the NASA Standard 8739.3
indicates that the work is of the same quality that technicians and engineers must meet for ﬂight
hardware, and is judged based on the geometry and surface ﬁnish of the new solder joints. The rework
comment indicates if, after failing the NASA Standard 8739.3 Visual inspection, further work is necessary
for the component to be functional. For example, component Rl on Board 03 failed the Visual inspection
due to excessive solder on the bottom of the solder joint. This failure of the Visual inspection, however,
does not lead to functional failure, and no further work is needed. For components U6 and U7, NASA
Standard 8739.3 does not apply, because those criteria focus on the characteristics of an installed
component. Since U6 and U7 were only removed and not replaced, a “N/A” has been used in Table 9 and
Table 10.
NASA/TM—2012-217022 l4

"
"19","TABLE 9.—SUMMARY RESULTS OF CRE-l ISS BOARDS Ol, 02, AND 03
Board 01 Board 02 Board 03
Functional? Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No
Pass 8739.3? Yes No No Yes Yes No N/A N/A No No No
Rework? No Yes No No No No No Yes No Yes Yes
TABLE 10.—SUMMARY RESULTS OF CRE-l ISS BOARDS 09 AND 10
Board 09 Board 10
Functional? Yes Yes No No No Yes Yes No
Pass 8739.3? No No No N/A N/A No No No
Rework? No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes
Figure 10 shows some of the soldering issues found in the initial inspection. This ﬁgure shows both a
good solder joint, and a solder joint that failed inspection and would require rework. The good solder joint
shows a ﬁllet on the top side of the circuit board, wetting the leg of the component. The second solder
joint does not have sufﬁcient solder ﬁlling the plated through hole; in practice, this solder joint would
require rework to ensure proper wetting of the solder and a functional circuit. Figure 10 also shows some
yellow residue on the circuit board near the soldering joints. This residue is believed to be from the ﬂux
used in the soldering wick which was not a no-clean type ﬂuX. The ﬂux used in the solder and provided
in the syringe was no-clean type and did not leaving signiﬁcant residue during ground bench testing.
H ' ' I '1 '4-
— i. ’ t i C
i. . . ‘,
Q —» ‘ ' I . -’
- a _, F"" . ‘ 1% i
’ ‘ w , g . 0‘ j
' ' t .' . ‘
'5 i ’7 . '3 ‘
a -, b . 0: ', ‘ \
u‘~4“ ""3“._ __ i
.- ; o. ' -, 5. .
F .2; . . P ‘A “l a
- -‘ x _ '“ Good solderJomt . W” ‘ . _ f,“ ,
.o.\ - :‘t‘ I ‘ T ‘ ‘ ' - '--"" ’
‘3’ ‘4 ‘3“ Ar
v”; ’. i ,' i“, 4‘ 7‘ .27"" . 4.;
q ‘ \ e a - 1 c ' .
. . ‘3 ‘ ) $""
A .
Em t lated throu h hole
K * ‘ 9
O "" a ,
Figure 10.—A good solderjoint (left) and solderjoint where solder did not fill the plated through hole (right) from
Board 01, component U2.
NASA/TM—2012-217022 15

"
"20","I | . - . ﬂwﬂ-I—I-I *‘iﬂF-m‘ ““
a . t -Mv:--ﬁ~=m~:m I i i
h
cm! .- II'I‘i. ‘: f} -~ .
. '1- . '
*9- i‘ ' ' _T - ' "" ' .
Figure 11.—Compenent U4, Board 02 where the component legs are not flat on the circuit board pads, but the
solderjoints bridge from the legs to the pads.
— , 3.? ‘+:"".IH’ ’1 - > "" ‘ gr ,1: .1
I IN . ' .1. I‘ V . I “M ' JD
"" ' ‘7 “' ""‘ ‘. "" 1 - g
""L ,,
w: ' . ‘ M- , -
1‘ .- - u ' , _ . ‘I’
Figure 12.—Component U4, Board 10, again without all the component legs flat on the circuit board pads. In this
case, a solder bridge between Leg 1 and pad 1 did not form.
NASA/TM—2012-217022 16

"
"21","‘ . ‘ OFF; ’0”: C 9 ‘ ‘ ‘ '
a . I“? ~ . Oi 4-2"" ' ‘ J?"" :J' “
‘ é ‘1’} -_.“—.LJ l ""-1“ [I . i‘ ‘
,3 a "" t ' .
. SMD STD _ _ _
Figure 13.—The area surrounding component U4, Board 03 (left) after removing the original component.

There is damage to pads 5, 6, and 7. The pulled leg and circuit board pad, attached to the original
component, are seen on the right.

Photos of the original U4 component from circuit board 3 show the cause of the difﬁculties
encountered during that removal and replacement (Figure 13). The returned chip shows circuit board pad
and circuit board traces still attached to the original component leads. This indicates that the original leads
were not completely out, and the pads and trace were pulled off the circuit board with the original chip,
under the assumption that the leads had been cut. This type of error can occur on the ground, and
indicates a lack of experience working with these components and tools, which can only be remedied with
practice.

A summary of results for each circuit board may be found in Appendix C.

3.3 Crew Debrief Notes

These notes are from the crew debrieﬁng held on May 6, 2009, at J ohnson Space Center. Astronauts
Michael Fincke and Sandra Magnus were present, as well as J ohn Easton, Peter Struk, and Gary Gorecki
from the CRE-l team at NASA Glenn Research Center, and Blake McCracken, an Operational Support
Ofﬁcer (080) at the NASA J ohnson Space Center. The crew made general comments about the CRE-l
work, and then answered speciﬁc questions, adding comments along the way.

The session began with J ohn Easton brieﬁng the crew on the method of analysis and the inspections
conducted to date, and described the results of those inspections. The crew was interested in the results,
and generally happy with the results.

When asked about the usefulness of the training, they felt that the hands on training were critical to
the experiment’s success. They also noted that the general soldering class conducted by 080 was also
very useful as a foundation, with the CRE-l training building on that foundation (author’s interpretation
of their words).

3.3.1 Question 1

What components (through hole resistor R1, through hole chip U2, and surface mount chip U4)
were easier to remove or replace, and which were more difﬁcult? What made the components easier or
more difﬁcult than the others?

Sandra Magnus felt that the through hole components were easier, as she didn’t have to worry about
damaging the circuit board pads. They were also bigger than the SMD components, which helped as well.
Michael Fincke also commented that U4 was difﬁcult because it was small; if there was a SMD the size
of U2—with corresponding pad sizes—then that would be easier to work on. Both crew members said the
size issue was the biggest difﬁculty. Additionally, Magnus felt she was scratching the circuit board during
NASA/TM—2012—217022 l7

"
"22","conformal coating removal, and that was another concern. The Visual inspection showed that she did not
damage the board during this process, alleviating that concern.
3.3.2 Question 2

Which tasks (removing conformal coating, or removing solder from a through hole, for example)
were easier for you, and which were more difﬁcult? What made these tasks easier or more difﬁcult?

Both crew members agreed that removing the conformal coating was the most difﬁcult process, and
the most time consuming. F incke felt that removing solder from the plated through hole after removing
the component was fairly easy. He also commented that the ESD Safe Tape was not sticky enough to use
as a trash collection strip during ﬂight; he simply used the vacuum hose to remove debris.

3.3.3 Question 3

Can you describe some of the techniques for the various steps in removing, cleaning, and replacing
a component you developed while performing the work? We would especially like to hear about the
soldering process; both Magnus and Fincke made comments about adapting a technique for forming
solderjoints.

F incke commented that in general the process for soldering in microgravity is similar to the process in
normal gravity. The solder ﬂowed a little differently, but it still ﬂowed as expected over pads and through
plated through holes. Magnus noted that the solder ﬂow seemed to be a function of how hot she got the
joint area. She found she needed to heat the area for a while with the iron—reminding herself to do this at
times—or else the solder would ball onto the tip of the iron. She tended to keep the iron tip further away
from the solder wire, similar to but exaggerated compared to her process on the ground. She also noted
that just as the solder melted, she would remove the soldering iron. F incke noted that small changes in
technique were the difference; using good batteries for the soldering iron helped him (this problem was
resolved before Magnus began work on her boards).

3.3.4 Question 4

How would you compare performing repairs aboard the ISS versus on the ground?

F incke commented that operating in space was not a big factor; all he needed was small technique
changes. Magnus noted that she would work faster on the ground than in space, and it was easier to get a
good ﬁllet shape on the ground. Both agreed that stabilizing their bodies was not an issue.

3.3.5 Question 5

Do you have any recommendations to possibly improve any of the procedure steps?

Magnus used the Video exclusively during operations based on F incke’s recommendation, and
commented that it would be hard to describe the work in words, that Video was much better. F incke
commented earlier that he read the procedures before beginning the CRE-l work, but did not use them
during the work. Both relied on the Video, going back and forth from it to the work for refresher
frequently during the work. F incke felt that following step by step procedures would take a long time to
do the work. He also commented that the Video was broken up in chunks that were a little awkward in
practice (talking about putting board away at the end of each component)—he understood why, but
suggested that such steps weren’t necessary. Both crew members agree that if something broke and they
needed to replace a component, the practice should be to make the best training Video possible showing
tools and operations, and have a section on inspecting the work. Then the crew could take photos, send to
Earth, and use ground team evaluations for further work if necessary.

NASA/TM—2012-217022 l8

"
"23","3.3.6 Question 6

Do you have any recommendations for adding or changing tools? Were there any tools you didn ’t
think helped in the work, and didn’t use?

Magnus would have liked more ﬁne point tools, including a ﬁner tipped solder iron tip. F ineke
commented that a better kit was needed so tools didn’t ﬂoat away. More magniﬁcation is also necessary,
and lighting is very critical (the use of the work light was important). Both crew members used the laptop
to zoom in on photos taken during work. This was difﬁcult to do during operations because it interrupted
the work ﬂow too much.

3.3.7 Question 7

Were the written procedures and video helpful? Do you feel that both were essential to successful
repairs? Was one better than the other?

This question was answered earlier in the debrieﬁng, and not asked.

3.3.8 Question 8

We noticed that the repairs were performed with the M WA opened. Do you feel that the repairs
could have been accomplished with the M WA closed?

Neither crew member wanted the MWA Containment closed; they felt that would be too difﬁcult to
work with. Both had the vacuum on continuously. F ineke commented that the only time he saw solder
balls was when wiping the solder off the iron tip; he kept the vacuum near the sponge for this reason. He
did not see solder balls while soldering. F ineke also commented that he worked with the containment area
open during another proj eet, ln-Spaee Soldering Investigation (1881) (Ref. 6).

3.3.9 Question 9

Would you be comfortable performing similar repairs on a criticalpiece of hardware?

Both astronauts indicated they would be comfortable performing critical repairs, given a good
training Video to prepare them for the work and observation by a ground support team watching the work
they do live, offering suggestions and critiquing the work. A practice board would be a good idea, using it
to ﬁgure out techniques. This, coupled with a good training Video, would help build skills and perform a
dress rehearsal of the repair. The Video should explain what can and can’t “break” or be damaged, what
the crew can and can’t do or attempt—let them know where the danger zone is in terms of the work. An
example was Magnus pulling a pad on U4—she didn’t initially realize that was a possibility. The Video
should also show what good, effective work and bad work that needs to be reworked should look like.
3.3.10 Question 10

How helpful was the visor magnifier?

The crew noted that the Visor magniﬁer was required, and that a better one (with higher
magniﬁcation) is needed.

3.3.11 Question 11

Do you have any additional comments, observations, suggestions, or questions for the PIS?

The crew added comments and observations throughout the debrieﬁng, and are captured in the
responses.

NASA/TM—2012-217022 l9

"
"24","3.3.12 Question 12 (for Magnus)

Regarding component U4, it appeared that the pads were lifted during one of the repairs. Do you
think this happened while cutting away the component, or when wicking solder from the joint?

Magnus believes the pad was lifted off the circuit board while lifting the old component off; she
didn’t know lifting the pads was a problem. She noted that she used both tweezers and solder wick to
remove legs on U4; frequently she could see the leg debris and could pick it off with the tweezers.
Magnus commented on the need for ﬁner cutters, and F incke commented that towards the end of his work
he used the ﬁne cutters exclusively. They commented on a need for the right tools, after discussing the
limitations of the cutter sizes and solder tip limitations, and on the need for better magniﬁcation and better
soldering iron tips.

3.3.13 Question 13 and 14 (for Fincke)

For the fine pitch components that were only removed and not replaced (U6 and U 7), please
describe your technique. Did you attempt to heat and lift all the legs on one side of the component?

What improvements, including tools and training, do you think are necessary to make the removal
and replacement of small components such as U6 and U 7 feasible?

F incke used tweezers and the solder iron to remove the legs of U7. He tried the cutters to cut a couple
of legs at once, and may have loosened a pad this way. He commented that direct conversation with the
ground would be good, especially for critical work, after discussing the removal method originally
proposed at the time of the work (laying the soldering iron tip along all joints on one side of the
component). F incke also commented on the need for proper tools, training, magniﬁcation, and lighting.
He also commented on not closing the work volume.

3.3.14 General Comment

Generally, the crew found the experiment useful, challenging, and fun.
4.0 Discussion

One of the goals of CRE-l is to test the limits of current capabilities and to ﬁnd the improvements
required to make in-situ electronics repair a Viable capability for future missions. The results of the
CRE-l operations show a great deal of potential for future astronauts to perform low-level electronics
repair during a mission. Each crew member was able to remove and replace components successfully,
demonstrating that with limited training and tools these low-level repairs are a realistic option for future
missions. However, each crew member experienced difﬁculties with some of the tasks. These problems
range from forming solder j oints that are functional but do not pass current standards, to failed solder
joints and damage to the component or circuit board. The difﬁculties encountered by the crew point to
areas requiring improvement. F urther, the crew members were not trained to identify and correct mistakes
or ﬂaws in their work, which contributed to the number of components which did not pass a Visual
inspection to NASA Standards. The results of the CRE-l work show two main areas for improving an
electronics repair capability: improving crew training and improving the tools provided. These areas
along with recommended future work are discussed below.

4.1 Crew Training

The CRE-l team provided the crew with limited training. This included 1 hr of hands-on instruction,
a training Video showing all steps in the repair process, and detailed written procedures. The training
Video and procedures were available to the crew during CRE-l operations, and the crew commented on
Viewing the Video before work as well as reviewing relevant segments of the Video immediately before
NASA/TM—2012-217022 20

"
"25","performing a speciﬁc task. While these activities and materials were helpful and key to the successes of
CRE-l , they were also too limited and point to a greater need for training to make in-situ electronics
repair a Viable option for future missions. Ways to improve the training of crew members include:

(1) emphasizing the fundamentals of soldering rather than speciﬁc tasks, (2) increasing the amount of
hands on training, (3) providing reinforcing and task—speciﬁc training Videos, and (4) ensuring that future
crews have at least one person with a background in electronics repairs. These recommended
improvements are further described below.

4.1.1 Fundamentals of Soldering

One area of improvement is in the emphasis of the training itself. The training for CRE-l was speciﬁc
for the components used and tasks required. The written procedures and training Video presented a step by
step process for performing the tasks necessary to remove and replace the speciﬁc components,
describing how to remove conformal coating from each component or how to cut component U2 from the
circuit board and remove the leg debris, for example. While this method contributed to the overall success
of the experiment, it did present some limitations to the current work and to future work if this paradigm
were used for future operations and repair capabilities. By emphasizing speciﬁc tasks and processes, the
crew was limited in their ability to anticipate difﬁculties and required more time to work around those
difﬁculties. Using this training regime would limit future crews to working with a select list of
components, or approaching unfamiliar components only by analogy to known tasks and processes. It
would also limit future crews abilities to evaluate and correct when necessary their own work (inspection
and correction of work are not aspects of the repair process explored in CRE-l).

A different training paradigm focuses on the fundamentals of repair work and soldering; the training
would focus on why speciﬁc tasks are performed and how the outcome should look and perform, while
allowing the crew to practice the speciﬁc tasks and methods leading to those outcomes. For example, the
training would discuss how a solder joint should look and what this indicates for the mechanical and
electrical connection, while training how to achieve this goal. Understanding this basic aspect of
soldering, for example, can then be applies to Virtually any solder joint a crew member may encounter
during a repair. Once the fundamentals of repair are taught, the training can then include more speciﬁc
techniques, demonstrating how the fundamentals apply to the more speciﬁc example. Understanding the
fundamentals also prepares the crew for working with unfamiliar components and tasks by providing
them a basic set of fundamentals applicable to Virtually any situation. For these reasons, the focus of
training should change from that used in CRE-l.

4.1.2 Increased Hands—On Training

A second improvement is to increase the amount of hands-on training the crew receives. While the
single hour of time used by the CRE-l team was sufﬁcient for the speciﬁc tasks, it will not be sufﬁcient
for a robust in-situ electronics repair program. A longer course, ranging from 4 to 16 hr, would provide a
number of beneﬁts. The CLEAR proj ect, working jointly with the US Navy, has made a recommendation
(Ref. 4) for an astronaut training course for manual component-level electronics repair including syllabus
topics and approximate course durations. The most important aspect of a longer training period is more
opportunity for hands-on practice with an instructor present to offer guidance for various soldering
techniques. The increased time will also allow for instruction in the fundamentals of electronics repair as
discussed, forming a solid foundation for future work in the class and during a mission. The increased
time also allows the crew to put these fundamentals into practice by working with a wide range of
components, well beyond the components used in CRE-l. The training may also include additional
aspects of electronics repair beyond the removal and replacement of components. This includes repairing
damage to the circuit board, such as land and trace repair, repair of connectors or jumpers, and other
repairs to damage or faults that may occur during a mission.

NASA/TM—2012-217022 21

"
"26","4.1.3 Reinforcing and Task-Speciﬁc Training Videos

An additional aid to in-situ repairs is to provide training materials and practice boards and
components for the crew. The crew should have a library of Videos documenting the training they have
received, as well as Videos documenting repair procedures they may not have speciﬁc training With, but
are Within their capabilities and are repairs that may occur. In cases Where the crew do not have a training
Video prior to a repair, ground support teams should produce one and send it electronically to the crew
prior to a repair. These practice materials and Videos Will help the crew maintain proﬁciency at the
repairs, and practice speciﬁc tasks prior to conducting the repair. One result from the CRE-l tests is the
crew preference for Video training over written procedures.

4.1.4 Crew Member With Background in Electronics Repairs

F uture crews should include someone With previous experience in electronics repair tasks. This
person’s experience could include experience as an electrical or electronics engineer, laboratory or
practical experience in another ﬁeld, and personal work as a hobby or side-interest, but does not require
this person to be an experienced, certiﬁed electronics technician. F urther, the entire crew should be
trained as described, With the “experienced” person receiving further training. Training the entire crew
can prevent the “experienced” member facing a backlog of repairs, and Will increase the ﬂexibility of the
crew for scheduling and/or conducting repair activities.

4.2 Improved Tools

The results of CRE-l point out three broad areas for improving the tools provided to crew members
for in-situ electronics repairs. The ﬁrst area discussed is the soldering iron, and some of the requirements
for a new instrument. The next area is in magniﬁcation of the work, a containment area, and crew
comfort. F inally, additional tools to the ones already provided by the ISS and CRE-l are proposed.

4.2.1 Improved Soldering Tool Set

The CRE-l experiment illustrated a number of improvements to the soldering tool set Which would
make in-situ electronics repair a Viable option. The ﬁrst improvement is providing a soldering iron With
higher temperature tips than the 600 oF currently available With the US. Soldering Kit soldering iron.
Typically, 700 0F is a suitable soldering temperature for most applications. The higher temperature Will
improve function by providing more heat to the joint area, a critical improvement for a number of
reasons. F irst, modern circuit boards use multiple internal conductive layers. These internal connections
allow for simpler design of circuit boards and denser component layouts, but draw heat away from the
work area When soldering. The CRE-l team learned of this problem When designing the circuit boards.
The original design of the CRE-l circuit boards used four internal layers; the relatively cool temperature
of the US. Soldering Kit did not provide enough heat to overcome loss through the internal layers,
leading to the redesign of the circuit boards. Second, higher temperatures Will melt the solder faster and
reduce the dwell time of the soldering iron on the joint, Which improves the joint formation and makes the
soldering task easier on the operator. Third, the higher temperature also compensates for the presence of
heat sinks or other heat loss paths on a circuit component or board.

In addition to the higher tip temperature, the soldering iron should have a fast recovery time,
returning the tip to operating temperature after contact With cold components and j oint areas. This Will
improve the quality of the joints and ease the work of the crew. The soldering iron should also have
accurate temperature control, to provide ﬂexibility to the crew for task—speciﬂc temperatures and helping
to ensure rapid tip temperature recovery time.

Another improvement is to provide the crew a Wider range of available tip shapes. A variety of shapes
allows the crew to work With a variety of component types and sizes, from Wide, ﬂat tips (or channel or
box shaped tips) for surface mount devices such as U4 on the CRE-l board to large, rounded tips for the
NASA/TM—2012-217022 22

"
"27","through-hole type components such as U2 on the CRE-l board. Soldering tips of different sizes and
shapes would also make the removal of components U6 and U7 easier for the crew.

Another improvement for the soldering iron is to address the power source for the soldering iron. As
discussed, the crew encountered difﬁculties when using the soldering iron in the US. Soldering Kit when
the rechargeable battery voltage dropped. This is also seen in the tip temperature testing the CRE-l team
performed after the ﬂight. A future soldering iron should be powered from a constant power source (i.e.
from the vehicle power system), or operate with improved batteries which hold charge for a longer work
time than currently available. F inally, mission outﬁtters and planners may consider additional, task
speciﬁc soldering tools. One example is a soldering iron with a vacuum line attached, which rapidly
removes solder from a repair site. Additional tools such as this are not required, but could ease the repair
task if provided.

Another soldering tool that should be provided is a back plane heater. This heater is placed below a
circuit board and radiantly heats the entire board prior to work. Heating the entire board provides a
number of beneﬁts. Heating the entire board to a temperature near, but not over, the solder ﬂow
temperature requires less heat from the soldering iron, resulting in shorter dwell times with the soldering
iron. Heating the entire board also reduces the temperature gradient between the joint under work and the
rest of the circuit board, reducing thermal stresses induced during work. The use of a back plane heater
also reduces the effects of multiple internal layers and the presence of heat sinks, because the thermal
gradient between these obj ects and the joint under work is reduced. The back plane heater will require
more power than operations with just a soldering iron, and require more care by the crew to avoid injury
or damage to the circuit board, and it does not relieve the need for higher temperature soldering iron tips
with better thermal recovery and control. The use of a back plane heater will make the repair tasks easier
for the crew, and help improve the results of a repair task.

4.2.2 Improved Magniﬁcation and Containment

A second area for improving electronics repair tools is in magniﬁcation and containment. As noted
earlier, the crew felt that the current magniﬁcation, a Visor magniﬁer with 15X magniﬁcation, limited
their capabilities to standard pitch surface mount components such as U4 or larger. The results of CRE-l
in replacing component U4 and removing components U6 and U7 support this statement. Providing
improved magniﬁcation to the crew will both increase the types of components they may work on as well
as reducing the difﬁculty of working with standard pitch surface mount components.

Two options for providing enhanced magniﬁcation are the use of a Video system and/or the use of a
microscope. Both systems are portable, require power (lighting for both, power for the camera and
monitor if Video magniﬁcation is used), and require some training and experience so the crew becomes
accustomed to working by watching a monitor or looking through eye pieces. These magniﬁcation
systems would be useful in a wide range of repair, operational, and research tasks and would be part of a
larger tool kit, not necessarily limited to an electronics repair kit. An additional magniﬁcation aid,
available to crew now, is the still camera with a macro lens. This lens can focus in on small features in the
joint and, with training and reference photos, allow the crew to use still images to judge the quality of a
repair and what, if any, additional work is required. This would help improve the end product, but would
not improve the ability or ease of the crew to perform the work.

The containment area provided to the crew could also be improved. During CRE-l operations, the
crew left the front panel of the MWA containment area open primarily to allow for better Visibility. A
solution should be provided which allows both good Visibility and containment of debris and fumes.
Other factors include comfortable operations for the crew, including the use of the soldering iron,
magniﬁcation tools, hand tools, and other instruments as required, while keeping the work area closed to
contain debris or vapors. The area will need feed through for power, Video, a vacuum line, and possibly
other instrumentation such as thermocouples. F inally, the containment area should be easy to set up and
disassemble (the current MWA requires approximately 30 min to assemble and another 30 min to
disassemble).

NASA/TM—2012-217022 23

"
"28","4.2.3 Expanded Set of Hand Tools

The third general area for improving electronics repair capabilities is to expand the set of hand tools
available to the crew. Currently there are very few tools on the ISS appropriate for electronics repairs,
Which required the CRE-l team to provide a small tool kit for operations. These tools are typically small,
such as the dental tools; small, pointed tweezers; and the two cutters, both of Which have smaller heads
than those available on the 188. These tools remain on the 18$ for any future use by the crew, but need to
be augmented for a robust electronics repair capability. Increasing the amount of tools Will expand the
capabilities of the crew for handling and manipulating different components, repairing circuit boards, and
make tasks easier by using the appropriate tool for a task rather than inappropriately adapting a tool. Note
that the tools discussed here are in addition to the soldering tools (including soldering iron tips) and
magniﬁcation aids already provided.

The crew should have access to a variety of probes or dental tools With varying head shapes and sizes.
These varying shapes are used for components With narrow lead spacing, removing various types of
conformal coating from a circuit board, and preparing damaged land, trace, and open circuit board areas
for repair. Additionally, an electronics repair tool kit should include a variety of cutters, With different
head shapes and cutting angles to allow work on a variety of components. The varying sizes are important
because small cutters, appropriate for small components, may be damaged When cutting leads or other
parts of larger components, While cutters appropriate for larger components may be too big for small
components. Varying cutter angles allow crew members to access components on tightly spaced circuit
boards and provide cut leads With the appropriate shape for the application. The authors, in conjunction
With the US Navy, have developed a recommended set of tools to enable a manual repair capability
(Ref. 4).

Additional tools, such as small sized sockets, wrenches, screwdrivers, heX drivers, and similar tools
are also necessary. While these types of tools are found in the ISS tool kit, they do not always
accommodate the small size parts found in electronics applications. F inally, specialized tools such as
forming tools Which bend component legs into speciﬁc dimensions and conﬁgurations, Wire strippers,
crimping tools, and specialized commercial repair kits for ﬁlling in damaged circuit boards and repairing
traces and lands Will all increase the capabilities of the crew.

4.3 Future Work

Component Repair Experiment-l demonstrated that With a small set of tools and limited training crew
members can perform electronics repair tasks in-situ With a degree of success. This work also
demonstrated areas for improvement, ranging from the focus and amount of time training the crew to
improvements in the tools and facilities provided for these tasks. The next step is to begin exploring and
implementing these suggestions. NASA should expand the training available to the crew, perhaps With
consultation With other agencies, to develop an in-situ electronics repair capability. An improved
soldering iron Will require work to select an existing tool from a vendor or design one, and make this tool
compatible With operations Within a space vehicle or habitat. Designers should consult With astronauts
Who have performed repair tasks during a mission for guidance in designing a containment area, and
should extensively test it for both containment and human factors considerations. F inally, the tools
provided should be augmented for the small, and sometimes specialized, nature of electronics repairs.
Adding an electronics repair capability Will allow future missions to become more self sufﬁcient, and
save mass and volume by replacing a large spares capability With the repair capability.

5.0 Conclusion

The CRE-l experiment demonstrated the feasibility of astronauts performing electronics repairs
during a mission. CRE-l provided circuit boards, replacement parts, tools, and training to two astronauts,
Who conducted work on the 188 during F ebruary and March, 2009. Both astronauts were able to remove
NASA/TM—2012-217022 24

"
"29","and replace components on the circuit boards, and one crew member was able to work beyond the test
matrix and extend the experiment. The results showed a number of areas that Will improve and expand the
capability for electronics repairs. F uture crews should receive more training prior to a mission, and should
have access to training Videos and practice circuit boards during a mission for refresher training or to
practice speciﬁc techniques prior to a repair. An improved soldering iron, With higher operating
temperature and more robust power supply Will make the repair tasks easier. Increasing the number and
type of soldering iron tips available to the crew Will expand the types of components that can be repaired.
Increasing and varying the hand tools available to the crew Will also improve the quality and type of work
feasible, as Will improving the magnifying and Visualization aids and the containment of the work debris
and vapors. CRE-l has shown that electronics repair is feasible during a mission, With the improvements
described.

NASA/TM—2012-217022 25

"
"30","NASA/TM—2012-217022 26

"
"31","Appendix A.—Original CRE-l Kit Design

Due to volume constraints, the ﬂown CRE-l kit was substantially reduced compared with the original
design. The original CRE-l hardware contained additional spare tools, conformal coating, more circuit
boards, and more replacement parts, reﬂecting a more ambitious experiment. This eXpanded test matrix
included removing a thicker layer of conformal coating, and attempting the removal and replacement of
additional standard pitch surface mount deVices as well as ﬁne pitch surface mount deVices. Two foam
trays, which were held together face-to-face by Velcro when not in use, held the various tools, parts, and
circuit boards, and is shown in Figure 14 and Figure 15.

The additional tools and conformal coating reﬂect the original plan, for crew members to replace
conformal coating after soldering a new component in place. The conformal coating was Dow Corning
3140. This material was used to coat the original boards, and the crew would apply the material to new
solder joints after soldering a new component into place. The tool kit included a second spudger, which
the crew would have used to apply and spread the conformal coating material in place. The kit also
contained three types of solder: the eutectic, no-clean ﬂux kept in the CRE-l experiment as well as a 60
percent tin, 40percent lead no-clean ﬂux wire and a 60 percent tin, 40 percent lead wire with no ﬂux core.
These other two solders were selected based on previous work (Ref. 2) in mitigating internal void formed
during soldering.

The extra circuit boards and parts provided additional conditions for the crew to test. The original kit
contained four circuit boards with a thin (0.004 in.) primed layer of conformal coating, four boards with a
thick (0.010 in.) unprimed layer of conformal coating, and four boards with no conformal coating. The
thick coating generated larger debris when removed, compared to the boards with a thin coating; testing
would determine which type of coating was easier to remove and manage debris. Uncoated boards were
provided, in the original and ﬂown kits, as contingency boards if the crew encountered problems
removing coating or if additional time was provided. The extra parts allowed for testing with a larger
variety of components: through hole chips with different conﬁgurations (C2, Ql) or more legs (U5);
standard pitch surface mount components of different sizes and legs (R5, U5, Q2); and similar ﬁne pitch
components (U6, R1 1, C15, R10), which would also challenge the crew to the limit of Visibility and tool
size available.

I I )--)-
m 1 —I
I 3.443; .
m i
I .1
Figure 14.—Top half of original CRE-1 tool kit, containing tools and materials.
NASA/TM—2012—217022 27

"
"32","l l I L Ia ""
' r . ' . I .\ Ii
.1 E I H J 1 i ‘
. l q. I: - ‘ .
I j I r. II- I .I
I .' : -.l
I I : I !J
. ' ' ' I' ' -2 '
I I ; I-
. """" -- - . . -' l
- —-:—'_._-h:-:-=.""'—:""’=FI -_-:1- - _
Figure 15.—Bottom half of original CRE-1 kit, containing circuit boards and
spare parts bags.

Ultimately, many of the circuit boards, tools, and parts were not ﬂown. The expanded test matrix,
using the various solder types, conformal coating thicknesses, and component types, was reduced to
accommodate limited crew time. Reducing the types of conformal coatings used, components removed
and replaced, and solders tested decreased the amount of time necessary to train the crew before ﬂight and
the amount of crew time used during a mission. These reductions resulted in the removal of many
components, decreasing the mass and, most importantly, volume of the kit, providing an opportunity to
perform the experiment on the 188. The reduced test matrix did not reduce the importance of the CRE—l
SDTO; the crew was still able to demonstrate the capability to perform electronics repairs during mission,
and provided insight on the capabilities and improvements towards an in—situ repair capability.
NASA/TM—2012-217022 28

"
"33","Appendix B.—Day-By-Day Operations
B.1 Day 1, February 19, 2009

Michael F incke performed operations on this day, setting up the Maintenance Work Area (MWA),
the Containment Area (CA), and CA support equipment as well as collecting the CRE-l Kit, U.S.
Soldering Kit, rechargeable batteries, vacuum, and other materials. The poles for the CA were not used
during assembly, as the CA held its shape on its own. He also assembled the PC Circuit Board Clamp
with the 12.75 in. shaft included in the CRE-l Kit, with the clamp jaws aligned so the circuit board plane
was (almost) parallel to the shaft. After completing these tasks, work began on CRE-l Board 1, which is a
coated circuit board.

Work on Board 1 began by removing the conformal coating from the joints on Rl. This task required
at least 15 min, followed by a 20 min Loss of Signal (LOS) period. At the end of this period (and 35 min
after beginning work) the conformal coating, original Rl , and solder from the circuit board through holes
had been removed. F itting a new Rl into the circuit board, trimming the leads, and soldering new joints
required 10 min. During this process, the ground team noticed the crew member leaving the soldering iron
tip on the joint area for 10 or more seconds; the training, written procedures, and training Video
recommend leaving the soldering iron tip on the joint no longer than 5 sec.

F ollowing work on Rl , work began on U2 with the removal of conformal coating at the start of a
35 min LOS. At the end of this period, the U2 chip and legs were removed and cleaning the remaining
conformal coating and solder was in progress. This continued for 25 min; the U2 joints were cleaned and
ready for a new component, with the day’s session ending.

After performing the work, the crew member provided general comments on the work. Astronaut
F incke noted that soldering took longer in 0g than in the l g training, and that he was trying various
techniques for soldering in reduced gravity. He also commented that the tools are helpful, but need a
better way to restrain them in 0g for temporary stowage; going back and forth to the tool kit was
cumbersome.

B.2 Day 2, February 20, 2009

Michael F incke worked on Board 1 again today, with the goal of completing the tasks (replacing U2
and removing and replacing U4) left over from the last session. Prior to beginning, the crew member
provided comments on the previous day’s work. F irst, he noted that the batteries used to power the
soldering iron were not charging properly; the batteries should recharge in approximately 2 hr, but some
had not received a full charged after charging overnight. He also noted that the solder wants to “grab
itself’ rather than ﬂow more in microgravity than on the ground, and he had to work out slightly different
soldering techniques than on the ground, mostly by holding the solder wire further from the soldering iron
in 0g than on the ground. These problems may have occurred due to the low power provided by the
battery, reducing the tip temperature and making soldering difﬁcult. He also seemed to have difﬁculties
holding the soldering iron tip and solder wire in position in microgravity, compared to ground tests.

This day’s work began with soldering a new U2 component to Board 1. The crew member completed 3 or
4 joints in 15 min. During the subsequent 30 min LOS Mike completed soldering the remaining U2 joints,
removed the conformal coating on U4 as well as the chip, and took still photos of the completed U2 and
found a good battery to power the soldering iron. After cleaning the solder pads, the crew member
required 20 min to reView the procedures and solder a new U4 chip to the circuit board. He used an
additional 5 min to take photos of the circuit, and resolder one of the U4 joints.

The ground team sent up a question based on a still photo from the ﬁrst day’s operations, showing
conformal coating debris in one of the U2 through holes. The team asked the crew member if he could see
to that magniﬁcation, and to try and clean the joint areas more thoroughly. He was unable to answer these
points today.

NASA/TM—2012-217022 29

"
"34","B.3 Day 3, February 23, 2009

The day began with Michael F incke calling down comments based on operations the previous day, as
well as a note sent to the 188 based on earlier work. He commented that the solder is ﬂowing differently
in 0g than in l g, and is positioning the soldering wire a little differently. He commented that using a tape
loop for debris is difﬁcult, and it is easier to simply allow the vacuum to suck debris from the tool tip
(tweezers, dental pick, or ﬁberglass stick). Using good, charged batteries also helps soldering, and may
alleViate problems encountered earlier. He is also going to use the still camera as a magniﬁcation aid in
addition to a record of work. He is using a 105 mm lens for this work; he used a 70 mm lens for each of
the ﬁrst two days.

The day’s work included attempting to remove and replace Rl , U2, and U4 on Board 2. The crew
member will work task by task (remove all conformal coating from all components, then remove
components, etc.) rather than work component by component. In the ﬁrst task, the crew member removed
conformal coating, removed components, and cleaned solder from R1 and U2. These tasks required 110
min, and include making sure conformal coating is removed after removing the component and solder
from the original joints, a task inﬂuenced by the note sent by the ground team at the end of day 2. The
crew member then took another 25 min to clean conformal coating from and remove U4, and then broke
for lunch.

After returning, the crew member required 9 min to solder a new Rl into place, noting that the solder
ﬂowed through the through hole. After this, he took 22 min to place and solder a new U2 component on
the circuit board (including LOS time). He noted in a call down that solder ﬂowed off the soldering iron
tip into the plated through hole, and asked why—the ground team did not have a good answer called up.
During a 14 min LOS, the crew member began soldering a new U4 component onto the circuit board, and
was using the still camera to inspect joints.

During a 20 min LOS, the crew member ﬁnished work on U4, then attempted to remove U6. This
work is outside the range of tasks for CRE-l, but was added to ﬁnd the limits of the crew’s capabilities
and to use the remaining time scheduled for CRE-l. The suggested method of removal is to use ﬁne
cutters to cut the legs, similar to the process used for U4. The crew member called down that working on
U6 was feasible, but work on U7, the next task, would be more difﬁcult. He used the next 14 min to clean
the pads for U6. Note that these times all include taking and looking at still photos, analyzing the images
for good solder j oints, clean pads, etc. The crew member then spent 43 min cutting and cleaning U7,
including taking photos. He commented that the ﬁne cutters did not ﬁt between indiVidual component
legs, requiring him to cut 2 or 3 legs at a time. As a result, the lower right pad on U7 was pulled. He felt
that working this far with U7 is the limit of his abilities.

With a surplus of time, the crew member then moved on to Board 9, which is not coated. Over the
course of 39 min, he removed and replaced R1 and U2 on this circuit board. After performing that day’s
activities the crew member commented that the soldering process was easier today. He spent more time
and attention cleaning the circuit board, and used the still camera as a magniﬁcation aid, looking for
conformal coating debris and new joint quality.

B.4 Day 4, February 24, 2009

This is the ﬁrst session Sandra Magnus worked, removing and replacing components on Board 3. She
began working on Rl , taking approximately 25 min to remove conformal coating, then spending 29 min
removing the component and clearing solder. Inserting and soldering a new Rl component required
14 min. The ground team noted that the crew member left the soldering iron on the joint for a long time,
as seen in earlier work. After soldering, she commented that the back side of each j oint has a nice ﬁllet,
but that the solder didn’t want to ﬂow through the plated through hole.

The crew member began work on U2 by stating that she will cut the component off before removing
the conformal coating; this seemed easier to her, as the component will be out of the way while removing
the coating. She spent approximately 20 min completing these tasks. Sandy then spent 55 min removing
NASA/TM—2012-217022 30

"
"35","leg debris and solder from the plated through holes, a period which included two LOS times, and periods
where she was out of the ﬁeld of View, presumably watching the training Video or reading procedures, or
conducting other 188 tasks. Sandy then takes 14 min to insert and solder U2 in place. She commented that
it was “tricky” removing the conformal coating. She also notes that the solder wets to the iron, instead of
ﬂowing to the joint area. The crew member developed a process where she adds a small amount of solder
to the joint, moves on to another joint, then comes back and uses the initial solder to help ﬂow new solder
and form a joint.

The crew member began work on U4 by ﬁrst replacing the battery in the soldering iron. This task,
with removing the component, required 13 min. After 12 min, the crew member called up that she had
removed the original solder from the joints, but had also removed three of the circuit board pads
(corresponding with legs 5, 6, and 7). The crew member stated she would use the remaining 5 pads to
attach a new component, which was accomplished during a 21 min LOS. At the end of the work, the crew
member noted that when removing the U4 legs, she heated the pad and removed the leg with tweezers,
similar to the method used to remove leg debris for U2. Her initial guess is that the pads came off with the
legs, though she noted that the pads “looked strange” after removing the chip. Photos of the board show
that the pads and some of the traces had been removed; the damage may have occurred during chip
removal, rather than leg debris removal.

B.5 Day 5, February 26, 2009

Michael F incke worked a brief, 1 hr session on this day to complete tasks begun on Day 3 with Board
9. His work began with removing U4 from the board for 5 min, followed by removing the leg debris by
heating the joint and removing it with tweezers, similar to the method used by Sandra Magnus in the
previous session for this component. This task required 5 min as well. The crew member required a
further 18 min to solder a new U4 into place. This included re-soldering joint 2, based on a Visual
inspection using the still camera.

After this work, the crew member began attempts to remove U6 and U7, similar to the work
performed on Board 2. In these cases, he attempted to heat the solder joints and lift the legs off the pad on
each side of the board, rather than out the leads. This process began with component U6, but the crew
member was attempting to heat one pad at a time with the iron perpendicular to the board, rather than
laying the tip along all the joints at once. He is able to heat the solder and use the dental pick to lift one
side of the chip up, but may have pulled pads off the board. He then heats the other side of U6, and lifts
the component off the board with tweezers. This process requires 10 min. The crew member tried the
same process on U7, without success. During a LOS, he was able to wick solder off the pads on one side
of the component, and lift each leg off the lead with the dental pick. He then heated the other side at once
and lift the chip off. His inspection did not reveal any damage to U7. This process required 20 min,
including a LOS.

As a general comment, the crew member noted that working on obj ects the size of U6 or U7 required
improved magniﬁcation; working on obj ects the size of U4 is currently feasible, using a still camera as a
Vision aid to check work.

B.6 Day 6, March 7, 2009

On this day Sandra Magnus worked on Board 10 (an uncoated board), removing and replacing the
primary (R1, U2, U4) components. The work began on R1 during a LOS, and after 14 min had the old
component removed, cleared the old solder, and had inserted the new R1 and trimmed the leads. Over the
next 18 min, she soldered the two R1 joints, taking photos during the process; it appeared that she
soldered each joint multiple times, and that she had trouble keeping the soldering iron tip in place on the
j oint, which seemed to “slip off” the j oint in the downlinked Video.

The crew member next worked on removing and replacing U2. She took 4 min to cut the component
off the circuit board, then an additional 4 min to remove the leg debris from the joints. This included time
NASA/TM—2012-217022 31

"
"36","attempting to use the curved tweezers to remove legs, then switching to the straight tweezers with more
success. The crew member then spent 15 min clearing solder from the through holes, and then broke for
lunch. She returned to work during a LOS; the new U2 component was attached to the board at A08,
ready for soldering. Over the next 13 min, she soldered the U2 joints, using photos to check the joints,
reworking joints 1, 2, 7, and 8 during this process. At completion, she commented that she does not have
ﬁllets on all the j oints. Two joints have solder balls sticking 0n the joints. She thinks solder went into the
plated through hole, but there is no topside ﬁllet. She is leaving the j oints “as is” for ground analysis.

The ﬁnal task for this day is to remove and replace U4. The crew member took 6 min to remove the
chip, then an additional 6 min to wipe the pads clean of solder and leg debris. She did this using the
technique described in the training materials, wiping the pad with solder wick and the soldering iron tip,
rather than heating each joint and plucking the leg off the pad. She then spent 19 min soldering the new
U4 onto the circuit board, alternating from one side of the chip to the other when soldering each leg to the
pad. She commented at the end of the work that it was hard to tell if U4 was on the circuit board. On the
left side of the chip, the solder climbed up the leg during soldering, and commented that a smaller
soldering iron tip might be helpful. On the right side of the chip, the middle legs (joints 6 and 7), she used
the following technique to solder the joint: she’d position the iron tip near the far edge of the pad, then
position the solder wire near the leg, and this technique seemed to work well. She commented that
working on the right hand side of the chip was easier than the left, and that she used the 1/32 in. soldering
iron tip for all tasks (R1, U2, and U4) during this session.

NASA/TM—2012-217022 32

"
"37","Appendix C.—Speciﬁc Circuit Board Inspection Results
The following sections describe the results of Visual inspection of each circuit board used in CRE-l.
These Visual inspections were conducted by a NASA certiﬁed electronics technician and instructor, using
NASA Standard 8739.3 (or “NASA Standard”) as a basis for judging the quality of the work. The
inspector also noted when a joint did not pass the NASA Standard, but was never the less functional. The
inspection also included a functional test of each circuit board, providing 9 VDC to the power section of
the circuit board with a bench-top power supply, current limited to 100 mA. This power supply provided
a measure of the current used by the circuit, accurate to 10 mA. The peak current draw is reported with
the results of the functional test.
C.1 Circuit Board 01
The Visual inspection for R1 revealed good ﬁllets on both the soldered side and ﬂowed side of the
component, passing the NASA Standard criteria. For component U2, all ﬁllets on the soldered side of the
circuit board passed inspection as well. On the ﬂowed side, pins 1, 4, 5, 6, and 7 passed the NASA
Standard without comments. Pin 2 passed, though no ﬁllet formed; solder in the board through hole is
sufﬁcient for passing the NASA Standard. Pin 3 did not pass, with no solder in the board through hole.
Figure 10 in the Section 3.0 shows this defect. Pin 8 passed, though no ﬁllet formed on the ﬂowed side of
the circuit board. For component U4, generally there was good contact between the legs and the pads with
good ﬁllets, though there was excessive solder. While this would not pass the NASA standard, rework
would not normally be required. Additionally, the left side (pins 1, 2, 3, and 4) were slightly elevated,
with the legs not ﬂat on the pads. Figure 16 shows both the elevated legs and excess solder. The legs on
the right side of the component (pins 5, 6, 7, and 8) were ﬂat on the circuit board pads, and acceptable.
When powered, all LEDs on the circuit board blinked normally, with a peak current draw of
approximately 40 mA.
Q
9'?! F H 8 ,1
w ii *‘
“2"" I '5 x
. , t 1
'h
Figure 16.—An image of pins 1 through 4 from component U4,
board 01. This images shows both excess solder and the
component legs floating above the board. This would not pass
NASA inpsections, but is usable.
NASA/TM—2012-217022 33

"
"38","C.2 Circuit Board 02
Both j oints for component Rl passed inspection, as did the ﬁllets on the soldered side of component
U2. On the ﬂowed side of U2, pins 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 passed inspection. Pin 8 on the ﬂowed side of
component U2 was acceptable, but on the border of not passing due to insufﬁcient solder, as no ﬁllet
formed though the plated through hole is ﬁlled with solder. The joints for component U4 were generally
good, though all had too much solder. In addition, the part is tilted, with pins 1 and 8 higher than pins 4
and 5, which are ﬂat on the circuit board pads, similar to the results seen for component U4 on board 01.
This does not pass the NASA Standard, but the solder j oints are functional. The removal of component
U6 was acceptable, with no damage seen on the circuit board, as shown in Figure 17. The removal of
component U7 did show some damage, as pad 8 was lifted from the circuit board, and other pads showed
some damage from removing the component, as shown in Figure 18. The circuit board passed the
powered functional test, with the LEDs in the plated through hole and standard pitch surface mount
regions blinking as expected, drawing a peak current of approximately 20 mA. The LED in the ﬁne pitch
surface mount region did not blink as expected, due to the removal of components U6 and U7.
1- * -—-_—- -_— _ _ r
E - ”1 . _
1. . - i. ll! ' '|""
g _: .. “E'- f. O . . 1|- -.
m- ' rt. :3“- .a. I
.-. ""
Figure 17.—Removal of component U6 from board 02. The removal was successful, with
no damage to the circuit board.
1 .. -‘ . I ' t. T u \ ‘ - 1
L d 1 ' I ‘ ' ' 1' “‘7‘ ' §
8“ ‘ Wm -~ Land 14
ﬂ' _‘ $\- . .3“ “14m: .. .. .
v . r '. $.l a I -‘ ' 3 '* a \ i
i ""’1 r ~11."" . "" ‘ 6
m- - w t, «ma
y. .- «In. . w .~~.«-.
i.‘. f --- l."" ‘ ""r"" ._ j
A i "" . ' . . ‘ . Ti :V
: ' \ s . ~ _ .
'o . ' '
Figure 18.—Lands from removed component U7, board 02. Land 8 shows damage to the land,
while lands 9, 10, and 11 show minor damage.
NASA/TM—2012—217022 34

"
"39","C.3 Circuit Board 03
For component R1, the ﬂowed—side solder joints show minimal but acceptable solder ﬂow through.
The soldered side j oints show excessive solder, though possibly acceptable. The j oints are functional. The
excessive solder on the soldered side and minimal solder on the ﬂowed side is due to insufﬁcient heat to
drive the solder through the circuit board and form a ﬂowed side ﬁllet. This is a technique problem and
not indicative of a problem with the soldering iron. Figure 19 shows these problems. For component U2,
the ﬁllets on the soldered side of the circuit board all passed NASA Standards, though the leads were not
clinched (that is acceptable). For the ﬂowed side of the circuit board, pins 3, 4, 5, 6, and 8 passed the
NASA Standard. Pins 1, 2, and 7 did not, due to insufﬁcient solder, though the joints are functional. For
component U4, pin 1 had solder on the component lead, but not on the pad, while pins 2, 3, and 4 were
acceptable but with excessive solder. A trace near pad 4 is exposed, which may have occurred when
removing solder. Pins 5, 6, 7, and 8 demonstrated some difﬁculties, arising largely from removing the
original component and cleaning the pads. The pads for pins 5, 6, and 7 were removed from the circuit
board, and traces from pads 6 and 7 were also removed. Much of this damage occurred during component
removal because the component leads were not fully cut, and the component pulled from the board.
Figure 13 shows the area around U4 after removing the component. The pad for pin 5 is still attached to
the original component lead. Leg 5 on the original component was not out completely, and the pad was
pulled off the circuit board when removing the component, also seen in Figure 20. This also damaged the
trace leading from pad 5, run under the component location. In functional testing, the LED in the plated
through hole and ﬁne pitch surface mount regions operated normally, drawing approximately 30 mA. The
LED in the surface mount region did not blink normally, due to the issues described for component U4.
‘ "" «""1 , :1? 7 i . ’-
.. ‘ ‘ ""(-- . .. i . . 1\ I 3""
. v- y: ' \. ,— . ""i .‘3' 1X ‘
huff, , \‘I 1 .' ...-
‘ ..-.';"". ‘. '-. _- ﬁg"" u‘ ‘11
"" 5 ‘ 3’}? xi?!"" . -i 3’ {I 4‘ i , - .' I: E
S}.- J. . _ ‘. i . . ' _ E: '- .
g e }}‘-i *""~':1i~'}-.7 , ii , [Iii "" 'I ‘1 , .. .1 1?: .
. ' z I 3.270 .. ‘ i d . .- 3 4:3 T- a.
- TV .I' ' a W ' ' .-
Figure 19.—Solderjoints for R1, board 03. The images of flowed side joints (left, right) show excess
solder, while the topside joints (middle) show problems with the solder flowing through the through-
holes.
NASA/TM—2012-217022 35

"
"40","l o I‘ to $
. - ﬂ ‘ ‘- 7
*i i“
I lv—
3
I 1""
:I I '
r -
Figure 20.—Component U2 from board 09, showing
poor wetting on pin 7. This defect would not pass
inspection criteria, but the component is functional.
C.4 Circuit Board 09
The inspection of component R1 showed that both the soldered and ﬂowed ﬁllets were good and
passed NASA Standards, though the “outside” lead was cut short; this is still acceptable work. The
soldered side ﬁllets for component U2 all pass inspection, as do all the ﬂowed side ﬁllets except for pin 7,
shown in Figure 20. This joint had insufﬁcient solder, where the solder did not ﬂow through the board’s
plated through hole. Component U4 showed problems with coplanarity, where pin 5 was low and pin 1
was high. Pin 1 was not ﬂat on the pad, though solder bridged from the pad to the lead. Pin 2 was also not
on the pad, and showed excessive solder, with solder dabbed on the joint with the soldering iron. Pin 3
does not appear soldered to the pad, though both the pad and lead are wetted with solder. Pin 4 has
excessive solder and was reheated, but is function. Figure 21 shows these four legs. Pin 5 passed
inspection. Pins 6 and 7 had excessive solder, but were otherwise good. Pin 8 had very excessive solder, a
solder spike, and overheated solder. The removal of components U6 and U7 also presented challenges to
the crew. For U6, the pads show little damage; there is minor damage to the solder mask on land 7, as
shown in Figure 22. The solder was not cleaned off the pads in any joint, as the solder was heated and
lead debris removed or peeled from the pad. For component U7, pads 4 and 5 showed damage to traces
from these pads which run under the component, shown in Figure 23. The damage may have arisen from
use of the dental pick, which may have gotten under the trace and removed a piece of the circuit board.
All other pads for this component pass Visual inspection. The functional test showed only the plated
through hole region of the circuit board operating normally, with a maximum current draw of
approximately 30 mA. The ﬁne pitch SMD section of the circuit is expected not to function, due to the
removal of U6 and U7.
NASA/TM—2012-2l7022 36

"
"41","t ‘9 ”r"" . C
”- ..
i a
1|. E
h ' i-
H”; :r I! ""r I
h .1
Figure 21 .—Component U4, Board 09. Leg 3 is not soldered tethe- circuit board,
while the other legs show excess solder and do not rest on the circuit board pad.
This component would not work, due to the problems with leg 3.
,t, I
h ‘ . _ . ’ f; ”(3* o O
.. , “ - . - . -.' 3‘. l». I,
- l #.’*~.,.41"" ""ﬂ. d "" f:{___ ’ .
‘ ‘ A - 3: ,
. PI. 7.; —' ) W .|_ I ' I
' 1 . I
Figure 22.—A photo of the lands after removing component U6, board 09. Land 7 shows some minor
removal of the solder mask. The original solder and leg debris remains on the pads.
NASA/TM—2012-217022 37

"
"42","mm: -P—w g , :- ., , q|\ ""vzm _ _f x
.--_i a -4 _.,__
M3?“ - Mr”?
. ‘ l‘ . .
I 3' —— ‘l ‘ -__- - - a
“ - -- \J . . ,
Figure 23.—Board 09 after removing component U7. Lands 4 and 5 show some damage to the traces.
C.5 Circuit Board 10
The Visual inspection of R1 showed good ﬁllets on both sides of the circuit board, though the outside

leg was cut short (as before, this is acceptable). For component U2, the Visual inspection found some
issues. On the soldered side of the circuit board, pin 1 showed insufﬁcient solder, and pin 2 had a large
solder ball where the solder attached to the joint, and reheating the joint formed a ball. Pins 3 and 4
passed inspection, while pin 5 showed evidence that the operator removed the soldering iron prior to
removing the solder wire. Pin 6 passed, pin 7 had a piece of solder wire attached to the j oint as in pin 5,
and pin 8 passed, though had the same problem as pin 7 with a small piece of solder wire attached to the
joint. On the ﬂowed side of the circuit board, only pins 3 and 8 passed Visual inspection. All other ﬁllets
showed evidence of insufﬁcient solder, as described previously. These results are shown in Figure 24.
Component U4 showed coplanarity problems, where leads 5, 6, 7, and 8 (the “right” side of the
component) were ﬂat on the circuit board pads, but leads 1, 2, 3, and 4 (the “left” side of the component)
were off the board. Further, pin 1 was not soldered to the circuit board, and pin 2 was soldered with a
reasonable amount of solder, but was overheated. Lead 3 was soldered, but there is no solder 0n the
circuit board pad. The lead and pad for pin 4 were soldered together, forming a bridge; while functional,
this is not ideal. Leads 5, 6, 7, and 8 passed the Visual inspection. Figure 25 shows these results. The
plated through hole and ﬁne pitch surface mount section of the circuit functioned properly, while the
standard pitch surface mount region did not. The circuit drew a peak current of approximately 40 mA.
NASA/TM—2012-217022 38

"
"43","M
. 7 , 4 ﬂ .
‘ :e ..  . «l- n .-
.__ 4 ‘.~ .. *W' 5 .
u. b . v , u.
x, e x- -— - —4 - w J, m. .\
‘ V; “g :' ‘ “c, I ‘of ‘ ﬁ , l -"" I
~ 1: ~ age ,a - c
. ,f I. . ;, .7"" 1,. ‘73:. i 31'. '3': ; ‘
L. fo-( / 4- I!!- ,1 ""1r 3 . 1'
$9123 9‘ f, ""77”.""! ' ‘2“ . r. ‘
?f'. I Q 7* .iJi 3""? - .151“?
_ - . «:14 , L. *3“? ‘ t .. 2' ? x
4"" .-"" 1: J'-‘I.’""-‘ ' .'--- r '5‘?” ”f"" I ~
'. ‘ .r. . ' f ' ,. ; .«9’9': 'Q - . '
1' \ ~. ‘. A . p;.ﬁ._ mi. 7 c ..'- j 2 .
a ’ '7? _-‘: .‘ﬂwh'g‘J 2""; ‘V - '.- .' _ I ‘ 7.: - ' . ’ ‘
' 6' .33} ""in 7 ' 28:, F— - -,
.W' . ‘ Ex ‘r.'°-‘.'.°.“-V ‘-'*',‘ § ""1' .' .- . ~' '.
53% ,, v“ :- ﬁt“? .- V"" ‘
2‘ u ;-"""".-.'.a: . -f “‘1 *a -.
'53 w .3?! n *‘_- . ﬂ-i ‘ ‘ "" l ' .<V“£.Ir‘_ (“‘M . . I“ -#;S._ . . 4
1 I :, ‘ ll .EH 7 I _ > . "" . a 8
, l: . A .7 R...” -‘ .V Wk-
‘ .I“ f“! J. _-._I.-‘ '*.'- 3N . - l‘ , --r
‘ , 7""; . '3 ‘( ”fl. 2;; j ‘1‘; 6’1""."" l’. -_
- "" iv; “ rﬂgﬂ~ n 19' ill u: Egan.
‘3 1* C ’gr"" , ‘- 4 f. * 3-. ‘IL..--_a_af:;‘>~. 3‘; ._ __
Figure 24.—Soldered (left) and flowed (right) views of component U2, board 10
II
n . ,. ,
:44; e' “ $1"" 3 Egg; av , ..
~- "" 7 4’“: iéi ~. .. ~ wage; war;
<' .' . '2' w'. - ‘ ""'ff'V‘ . V ‘5 '
g 3': F! ‘ .
, . J ‘ .. '
Figure 25.—Side views of component U4, board 10. Leads 1 and 3 are not soldered to the circuit board, while lead
4 shows the joint was remelted. Leads 5 through 8 are acceptable, though lead five has insufficient solder.
NASA/TM—2012-217022 39

"
"44","References

1. P. Struk and R. Oeftering, “Approach to In Situ Component Level Electronics Assembly Repair
(CLEAR) for Constellation,” presented at the AIAA SPACE 2009 Conference and Exposition,
AIAA—2009—6472, Pasadena, CA, 2009.

2. J . Easton and P. Struk, “Current Space Station Experiments Investigating Component Level
Electronics Repair,” presented at the AIAA SPACE 2009 Conference and Exposition, AIAA—2009—
6798, Pasadena, CA, 2009.

3. NASA, “Soldered Electrical Connections. NASA Technical Standard NASA—STD—8739.3,” ed:
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1997.

4. P. Struk, J . Easton, G. Funk, G Latta, A. Ganster, and B. Estes, “Recommendations for Enabling
Manual Component Level Electronic Repair for F uture Space Missions,” NASA/TM—2011-216933,
201 1.

5. J . Easton and P. Struk, “Void Analysis of Select Solder J oints from the Component Repair
Experiment-l ,” NASA TM, in preparation, 2011

6. R. Grugel, L. Cotton, P. Segre, J . Ogle,; G. Funkhouser, F . Parris, L. Murphy, D. Gillies, F . Hua, A.
Anilkumar, “The In-Space Soldering Investigation (1881): Melting and Solidiﬁcation Experiments
Aboard the International Space Station” presented at the 44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and
Exhibit, Reno, Nevada. AIAA-2006-521. Jan. 9—12, 2006.

NASA/TM—2012-217022 40

"
"45",""
"46","Form Approved
REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE OMB NO. 0704-0188
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this
burden, to Department of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports (0704-0188), 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302.
Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB
t | b .
EEEESEUSIO eb:0T RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS.
1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM—YYYY) 2. REPORT TYPE 3. DATES COVERED (From - To)
01-03 -2012 Technical Memorandum
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 5a. CONTRACT NUMBER
Component Repair Experiment-I: An Experiment Evaluating Electronic Component-Level
R ir D rin ﬂi h
epa u g Space g t 5b. GRANT NUMBER

5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER
6. AUTHOR(S) 5d. PROJECT NUMBER
Easton, J ohn, W.; Struk, Peter, M.

59. TASK NUMBER

5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER

WBS 431767040103
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
National Aeronautics and Space Administration REPORT NUMBER
J ohn H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field E'17687
Cleveland, Ohio 44135-3191
9. SPONSORINGIMONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSORINGIMONITOR'S
National Aeronautics and Space Administration ACRONYWS)
Washington, DC 20546-0001 NASA

11. SPONSORINGIMONITORING

REPORT NUMBER

NASA/TM-2012-217022
12. DISTRIBUTIONIAVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Unclassiﬁed-Unlimited
Subject Categories: 33, 38, and 12
Available electronically at http://www.sti.nasa.g0v
This publication is available from the NASA Center for AerOSpace Information, 443-75 7-5 802
13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES
14. ABSTRACT
The Component Repair Experiment-l (CRE-l) examines the capability for astronauts to perform electronics repair tasks in space. The goal
is to determine the current capabilities and limits for the crew, and to make recommendations to improve and expand the range of work that
astronauts may perform. CRE-l provided two-layer, functional circuit boards and replacement components, a small tool kit, written and
Video training materials, and 1 hr of hands on training for the crew slated to perform the experiment approximately 7 months prior to the
mission. Astronauts Michael Fincke and Sandra Magnus performed the work aboard the International Space Station (188) in February and
March 2009. The astronauts were able to remove and replace components successfully, demonstrating the feasibility of performing
component-level electronics repairs within a spacecraft. Several unsuccessful tasks demonstrated areas in need of improvement. These
include improved and longer training prior to a mission, an improved soldering iron with a higher operating temperature and steady power
source, Video training and practice boards for refresher work or practice before a repair, and improved and varied hand tools and
containment s stem.
15. SUBJECT TERMS
Soldering; Space maintenance; Astronaut training; Circuit boards; Microgravity; International Space Station; Solders; Space missions
16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 17. LIMITATION OF 18. NUMBER 19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON

ABSTRACT OF STI Help Desk (email:he1p@sti.nasa.g0v)
a. REPORT b. ABSTRACT c. THIS PAGES 19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (include area code)
U U PAGE UU 48 443-757-5802
U
Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98)
Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39—18

"
"47",""
"48",""
