"","x"
"1","8 JSTS Vol. 18, NO. 1
Electrostatic levitation method for containerless -
material processing in microgravity
I Takehiko ISHIKAWA, Paul-Francois PARADIS, Handing YU, Yasutomo ARAI,
' ' Naokiyo KOSHIKAWA, and Shinichi YODA
' National Space Development Agency of J apan
2—1-1 Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8505 Japan
, , TEL: +81-29w868-3651 FAX: +81-29~868~3956 ‘
, E-mail:Ishikawa.takehiko@nasda.g0.jp
Abstract ' ~
This paper describes the groundwbased vacuum electrostatic levitation furnace (ELF) developed as a
breadboard model for the ﬂight facility for the International Space Station (188). It ﬁrst discusses the
importance of containerless processing for material science, then describes the sample position and
' rotation control methods, and one of the most signiﬁcant applications to the ELF, thermophysical
property measurements. I
1. Introduction I
The use of a containerless technique for materials processing has many technological and scientiﬁc
advantages. The absence of a crucible allows the handling of chemically reactive maten'als such as
molten refractory metals, alloys, or semiconductors, and eliminates the Iisk of sample contamination
in overheated as well as in undercooled states. This offers excellent opportunities to characterize the
structure of materials and t0 detefmine accurately their thermophysical properties in those states. The
lack of the crucible also suppresses heterogeneous nucleation, thus reducing the critical cooling rate
and extending the glass forming range to new material compositions or larger samples. This further E
helps in studying homogeneous nucleation. ‘
To take advantage of containerless processing and of a microgravity environment, the National Space t
Development Agency of J apan (NASDA) wants to establish a containerless processing unit for the R""
International Space Station (188). Although preliminary test of an Electrostatic Levitation Fumace E
(ELF) on~board a sounding roeket showed promising result (Ref. 1), it was felt that before such a 4;""
facility could be operational 0n the 188, some ground~based work was required, in particular to
optimize the sample control capabilities (position control stability, and rotation).
2. Electrostatic levitation system 3
© Japanese Rocket Society

"
"2","9 JSTS Vol. 18, NO. 1
Experimental results reported in this paper were done with the vacuum electrostatic levitation furnace .
deve10ped by NASDA. The levitator was based on a design by Rhim et a1. (Ref; 2) with several
modiﬁcations (Ref.3). Fig. 1 depicts schematically this apparatus. It consisted of a stainless steel
chamber that was evacuated. to a pressure of around 10'5 Pa. The chamber housecl a pair of parallel
disk electrodes, typically 10 mm apart between which a positively charged sample was levitated. The
top electrode was kept electrically negative. These electrodes were utilized to control the vertical

,_ position. (z) of the specimen. The Coulomb force between the sample and these electrodes cancel the
gravity force. In addition, four spherical electrodes distributed around the bottom electrode were used

\. for horizontal control (x and y). Also surrounding the lower electrode, were four coils that generated a
rotating magnetic ﬁeld, used to control sample rotation.

”Via,” Samp.e\ ""'“minaﬁm'emp ~
\‘aiit I /~
mfg: - M'- a ..-
Camera 8‘ Position Detector
Oscillation Detector

’ Fig.1 Overview of the ELF (Left) and a schematic diagram (right).

Sample heating was achieved using two 100 W C02 lasers emitting at 10.6 tun. One beam was sent
directly to the sample whereas the other beam was divided into two portions such that three focused
beams, separated by 120 degrees in a horizontal plane, hit the sample. Sample temperature data were

measured using a pyrometer. The levitated sample was observed with a few cameras. '

Since the electrostatic scheme can not produce a potential minimum, feedback position control

system is necessary. Position sensing was achieved with a set of orthogonally disposed He-Ne laser

1 that projected a sample image on position sensors. One sensor detected the y~z position whereas

i another one was dedicated to the x direction. Fig. 2 illustrates the hardware arrangement for position

1 control. The beam of a He-Ne laser was expanded and impinged on a levitated sample. The size of the

.f resulting sample shadow was optimized with a lens to cover the area of the sensor such thatta good
dynamic range was obtained. In addition, a polarization ﬁlter was used to Optimize the laser intensity
reaching the sensor. The sensor was equipped with an interference ﬁlter at 632.8 nm to eliminate the
photon noise coming from sources Other than the laser. The sample position information read by the
sensors was then fed to a computer and analyzed by a program. The program used PID servo .

"
"3","10 JSTS V01. 18, NO. 1
algorithms for implementing the feedback system, thus allowing a sample to maintain a fixed position
in time. The computer then imputed new values of voltages for each electrode. The feedback rate was
720 Hz forthe z direction and 30 Hz for the x and y direction. a '

Top Electrode .
«ssz p018rizer Band pass fl lter
.4 ' I Position ,
E: ,V l:,..l;..,.;;.';',f.-’g¢ ""/ > I‘: D 8 LGCtOI‘
Bottom Electrode __ _
Side Electrodes (4) __ ‘
V Z High Voltage 110 ' i .
D/A 13/9 g
~ _ PID Cale.
High Voltage converter converter 4. A ‘
Slgnal Condltloner
Amp.
Fig.2 Schematic diagram of the sample position control. '
3. Sample position stability ' ' '

A precise sample position control is necessary for containerless material processing using the
electrostatic levitation for several reasons. At ﬁrst, the sample position should be stable so that the ’
heating laser can heat the sample. Second, the sample should be within the region where the
pyrometer can measure the temperature with good accuracy. Third, the sample should be within the
ﬁeld of view of the cameras. '

Fig.3 shows a levitated brass sphere at room temperature, for which the position stability exhibited,
with oscillation amplitude of less than 50 pm. However, when a levitated sample was heated by the i
heating lasers, special care had to be taken for horizontal motion. Fig.4 (a) shows horizontal motion of
a molten zirconium sample when the heating is done only in one direction. There are two possible
causes for this movement, the photon pressure and the anisotropic evaporation from the sample l
induced by the laser heating. T0 suppress this motion, a multi laser beam conﬁguration was adopted 1

|.

(Ref. 4). When the sample is heated by 3 beams of equal power which are 120 degrees apart from I
.l

- . iii

each other, the forces cancel each other. Fig.4 (b) shows the honzontal movement of the molten
sample of Fig.4 (a), with 3 heating beams. Side motion was suppressed substantially. The photon [
pressure induced by heating laser will become one of the biggest forces applied to the sample in (
microgravity environment. Therefore, multi~beam heating is more impmtant in experiment in space. i

"
"4","11 JSTS V01. 18, NO. 1
He
2“""ﬁs‘WMﬂﬁg‘m ~
Fig.3 A levitated sample in the ELF (left) and its magniﬁed image (right)
@ﬁﬁiﬁu’"" *
Masaha’ikm “““p‘mun
Fig.4 Side movement due to photon pressure from heating lasers: (a)1 beam (left), and (b) 3 beams.
4. Sample Rotation Control
Rotation control capability is a must for a contactless processing facility for scientiﬁc and
technological reasons. Sample rotation is preferable during material processing as it offers better
temperature homogeneity and its control helps the sample to maintain a spherical shape, which
simpliﬁes the data analysis for such thermophysical properties measurements as density or surface
tension. Rotation also contributes to ﬁning and could eventually be used to produce hollow spheres.
Besides the obvious disadvantages of excessive rotation for material processing (e.g. sample
deformation, instability, induced sedimentation), even a low rotation rate could induce non—negligible
g-forces that could be detrimental if the experiment is carried out in microgravity. Hence, rotation
control is important not only for ground-based experimental work but also to fully exploit
‘ microgravity environment.
' To apply a rotation torque to a levitated sample, a four~coil system was mounted below the bottom
E electrode (Ref. 5). These coils produce a horizontal magnetic field that rotates at an appr0priate
frequency (400 Hz in the present configuration).
The basic principle of the sample rotation mechanism is essentially same as the asynchronous
induction motor. The four-coil assembly in Fig.5 works as the stator while the levitated sample acts as
the rotor. According to the principle of the induction motor, if an ac current 11 at frequency ms is

"
"5","12 JSTS Vol. 18, NO. 1
applied to a stator, the torque TR experienced by the rotor (having its own resistance R2 and inductance
L2), which is rotating at an inStantaneous frequency (0 is given by
SR
n x 112w; m2 22 2 (1)
R2 + 5 L2 . . .
where ‘
a) ma)
5 a --‘5-~——~——- (2)
ms ?
Because inductance of sample (2mm metal sphere) is very small, R22>>SZI42 is well satisﬁed in
equation 1 and it can be simplified to; .
s
1' R m [30), «w (3)
R2
Equation 3 means that torque ’CR is inversely proportional to the electrical resistance of the sample. For
metal samples, torque which magnitude is approximately 2 x 10”11 N -m can be produced by 0.2 A coil
current. Fig.6 shows a molten zirconium sample, rotating at around 60 Hz. Substantial deformation
due to centrifugal force by high-speed rotation was observed. The degree of deformation is
detennined by centrifugal force and surface tension of molten sample. Therefore, if the rotation rate is
known, the surface tension can be calculated (Ref 6). A detailed deseliption of this technique can be
found elsewhere (Ref.5).
Top Electrode C) R1 R2
.5. m» f
0 Sample M _ _ _
Rotating Magnetic , i 5 I ‘
field 6 ' t: t;
L 1 .1: “T:
Bottom Electrode
. ’ Stator (Coils) Rotor (Sample)
' ,4 C031 ls (4) 1
Fig.5 Schematic of rotation control system (left) and its equivalent electrical circuit. . i
Fig.6 LeVItated molten ZlfCOIllum deformed by centrifugal force. .‘

"
"6","13 JSTS Vol. 18, NO. 1
5. Thermophysical properties measurements with the electrostatic levitation method
By combining such non-contact diagnostics apparatus as pyrometer 0r telephoto camera, several
thennOphysical preperties can be measured with the electrostatic levitation furnace. Property
measurements by containerless methods have several advantages compared with conventional
methods. First, samples are free from the risk of contamination from the container, and materials with
melting points higher than that of crucibles (e. g. Pt 0r Alumina). Second, since nucleation from the

1 container wall can be suppressed, molten sample can be maintained in deeply undercooled condition.
5.1 Density and constant pressure heat capacity (Ref. 7,8)

c The density and the ratio of constant pressure heat capacity to hemispherical total emissivity were
measured using methods described in the literature and summarized below for completeness. Once the
sample was molten, it took a spherical shape due to smface tension. Also, since the electrostatic
scheme did not input any heat, a heated sample experienced pure radiative cooling when the heating
laser beams were blocked. The resulting energy equation governing the cooling process is given as

$0129; m STAO'SBU‘“ 4;”), (4)
where m is the sample mass, M0 is the molar mass, Cp is the isobaric heat capacity, ET is the
hemispherical total emissivity, A is the sample area, 0313 is the Stefan~Boltzmann constant, and T and
Tam], are respectively the sample and ambient temperatures. The radiance temperature measured by the
pyrometer was calibrated by using the recalescence 0f the sample. After the sample started to cool,
both the images and the cooling curve were recorded to determine simultaneously the density and the
ratio of constant pressure heat capacity to hemispherical total emissivity. For density, the recorded
video images were digitized and matched to the cooling curve. Then, a NASDA developed program
extracted the area from each image. Since the sample was aXi-symmetric and because the mass was
known, density could be calculated at each temperature. The ratio of constant pressure heat capacity to
hemispherical total emissivity could also be calculated from equation 4 since all parameters were

7_ known and since the area was found from the images and dT/dt from the cooling curve. Using the total
hemispherical emissivity setting at the melting temperature on the pyrometers, constant pressure heat

~. capacity could be extracted with the assumption that the total hemispherical emissivity remained -
constant over the entire liquid range.

, 5.2 Surface tension and viscosity (Ref. 9) '

, The surface tension and viscosity were determined by the drop oscillation method, for which the

frequency of the oscillation of the levitated sample was measured around its equilibrium shape. In this

i .

"
"7","14 JSTS Vol. 18, NO. 1
method, a sample was molten and brought to a selected temperature. T hen, a P2(cose)—mode of drop
oscillation was induced to the sample by superimposing a small sinusoidal electric ﬁeld on the
levitation ﬁeld. Here, P2(COSB) is a Legendre polynomial of 2nd order. The transient signal that
followed the termination of the excitation ﬁeld was detected and analyzed using an in~house written
LabVIEWTM program. This was done many times for a given temperature and repeated for several
temperatures. Using the characteristic oscillation frequency (06 of this signal after correcting for
non—uniform surface charge distribution, the surface tension 3/ could be found from the following ‘ ~
equation
2 .
w: 2 [3%][1“g&%§£:]{1“f(%ﬂ)h (5)
where I
2 2 4 2
mamL———————i‘%iii1233;112:5335’
and r0 is the radius of the sample when a spherical shape is assumed, p is the liquid density, Q is the
drop charge, 80 is the permittivity of vacuum. The symbols q and Y are defined by
Q2
612 m m - (7)
and
Y2 m E21580 , - (8)
respectively, and E is the applied eleCtric ﬁeld. Similarly, using the decay time 1: given by the same
signal, the viscosity n is found by -
r2 .
n x ""95'3"" , (9)
The drop charge Q can be calculated by
mg m QE , (10) i
where g is the gravitational acceleration. 1
Fig.7 shows the measured thermophysical properties of niobium which melting temperature is 2742 i
K (Ref.10, 11). When available, other literature values are also plotted in Fig.7. Our measurements .
cover a very wide temperature range that includes the undercooled region. Besides niobium, I
’ thermophysical properties of Ti, V, Zr, Hf, Mo, and Rh were also successfully measured (Ref 12-15).
a The measured data showed good agreement with the theoretical calculation based on the modified i
hard sphere model (Ref. 16), and this proved the reliability of the non-contact thermophysicai i
property measurements with the ELF. . I

"
"8","15 JSTS Vol. 18, NO. 1
: HHIIIIIII : ?INWIIIII
IﬁﬁM-IIII magma!- ~
IIIHWMI Iggiaraas
i-Illiaﬂt f-IIIII
;1.....|l||ll I.‘=...II.III
1 m” ”m ""” ”242$“ ”9°"" ’°°° ”m m"" ’5‘” Tlﬁperaii; m?” ”m m
‘Z all!—
= aeeegyli  
aﬂiiihii
m ’5” (K, 3““
Fig.7 Thermophysical properties of molten niobium measured by the ELF.
6. Conclusions
A ground~based ELF together with thermophysical property measurement capabilities has been
successfully developed. Production of metastable phases from deeply undercooled liquid has been
recently initiated and the detailed results will appear in a future publication. The ELF is a powerful
tool for material processing not only for the ground but also in microgravity. The 188 version of the
ELF will be designed and developed based on the results of this ground-based facility.
7. Acknowledgement
The authors would like to acknowledge the J apan Society for the Promotion of Science for
supporting this research through a Grant~in-Aid for Science Research (B). i ..
References
6 1. J. Yu, N. Koshikawa, Y. Arai, and S. Yoda, H. Saito, ”Containerless Solidiﬁcation of Oxide
Material Using an Electrostatic Levitation Furnace in Microgravity”, J. Cryst. Growth, 231 (2001)
M. 568-576.
2. W.-K. Rhim, S. K. Chang, D. Barber, K. F. Man, G. Gutt, A. Rulison, and R. E. Spjut, ""An
electrostatic levitator for high-temperature containerless materials processing in 1-g"", Rev. Sci.
Instrum, 64 (1993), 2961-2970.
3. T. Ishikawa, P. F. Paradis, S. Yoda, “New sample levitation initiation and imaging techniques for
the processing of refractory metals with an electrostatic levitator furnace”, Rev. Sci. Instrum.,72,
; (2001), 2490-2495. . -

"
"9","16 JSTS Vol. 18, NO. 1
4. P.~F. Paradis, T. Ishikawa, and S. Yoda, ""Position stability analysis of electrostatically levitated
samples for thermophysical and stmctural properties measurements of materials"", Space
Technol. 22 (2002), 81-92. .
5. W.-K. Rhim and T. Ishikéwa, “N encontact electrical resistivity measurement technique for molten
metals”, Rev. Sci. Instrum, 69, (1998), 3628-3633.
6. W.-K. Rhim and T. Ishikawa, “ Non-contact Surface Tension Measurement by Drop Rotation”,
Rev. Sci. Instrum, 72, (2001), 3572-3575. ‘
7. S. K. Chang, D. B. Thiessen, and W. —K. Rhim, ""A noncontact measurement technique for the
density and thermal expansion coefficient of solid and liquid materials"", Rev. Sci. Instrum, 67, ‘
(1996), 31753181.
8. A. J . Rulison and W. -K. Rhim, ""A noncontact measurement technique for the specific heat and
total hemispherical emissivity of undercooled refractory materials"", Rev. Sci. Instrum, 65, (1994),
695-700.
9. W. “K. Rhim, K. Ohsaka, and P. “F. Paradis, ”Noncontact technique for measuring surface tension
and viscosity of molten materials using high temperature electrostatic levitation"", Rev. Sci.
Instrunz., 70, (1999), 2796-2801.
10. RF. Paradis, T. Ishikawa, S. Yoda: “Non-contact measurements of thermophysical properties of
niobium at high temperature”, J. Mater: Sci, 36 (2001) 16. 0
11. P. 9F. Paradis, T. Ishikawa and S. Yoda, “Non-contact Measurements of Surface Tension and
Viscosity of Niobium, Zirconium and Titanium Using an Electrostatic Levitation Furnace”, Int. J.
leemzophys., 23(2002), 825842.
12. P.—F. Paradis, T. Ishikawa, S. Yoda, ""Non—contact measurements of thmmophysical properties of
molybdenum at high temperature"", Int. J. Themzophys. 23(2002), 555-669.
13. P.-F. Paradis, T. Ishikawa, S. Yoda, ""Non-contact measurements of thermophysical properties of
hafnium—3%(Wt) zirconium at high temperature"", Int. J. leei7zzoplzys., 24 (2003), 239-25 8. ;
14. P.-F. Paradis, T. Ishikawa, T. Aoyama, S. Yoda, ""Thennophysical properties of vanadium at high }""
temperature measured by an electrostatic levitation furnace"", J. Chem. T hemzodynamics, 34 i
(2002) , 1929—1942. . I
15. P.-F. Paradis, T. Ishikawa, and S. Yoda, ""Thermophysical Property Measurements of Supercooled
and Liquid Rhodium"", in press, Int. J. of leemzoplzysics. I
16. T. Ishikawa, P.-F. Paradis, T. Itami, and S. Yoda, “Thermophysical preperties of liquid refractory I
metals: comparison betWeen hard sphere model calculation and electrostatic levitation I 2
measurements”, J. of Chemical Physics, 118 (2003),7912~7920. '
31

"
