"","x"
"1","54th International Astronautical Congress of the International Astronautical Federation, |AC-03-GHPO5
the International Academy of Astronautics, and the International Institute of Space Law
29 September - 3 October 2003, Bremen, Germany
ELITE SZ — A NEW INSTRUMENT FOR MULTIFACTORIAL MOVEMENT
ANALYSIS ON THE INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION
Contact author: G. Nerim
CO-authors: G. Ferrign0(2’3), A. Pedrocchi(2’3), G. Baronia’ 3), V. Zolesil), F. Bracciaferri(4), A. Pedotti(2’3)
(1 Kayser Italia S.r.l. — Piazza 1850 RA. Folgore 2/3, Livorno Italy
Ph.: +39-0586876111 Fax: +39—0586876208 email: g.neri@kayser.it
(2) Bioengineering Dept. Politecnico di Milano — Piazza L. da Vinci 32, Milan Italy
Ph.: +39-0223993371 Fax: +39—0223993360 email: giancarlo.ferrign0@polimi.it
(3) Bioengineering Centre Fnd Pro Juventute D011 Gnocchi ONLUS — Via Capecelatro 66, Milan Italy
Ph.: +39- 02403081 Fax: +39-024048919
(4) Agenzia Spaziale Italiana — Viale Liegi 26, Rome Italy
Ph.: +39-068567309 Fax: +39—068567320 email: fabio.bracciaferri@asi.it
ABSTRACT This is because a subject exposed to reduced gravity
within a space module experience the complete cut-
Experimental Observations of adaptation processes of Off Of sensory inputs related to the presence of the
the motor control system to altered gravity conditions gravity vector (graviceptors). In this condition
can provide useful elements to the investigations on healthy subjects become immediately sensorimotor
the mechanisms underlying motor control of human disabled “patients”, but with the difference that while
subject. The microgravity environment obtained on the specific effect of a pathology (for example
orbital ﬂights represents a unique experimental vestibular deficiencies of different etiology) on
condition for the monitoring of motor adaptation. The patients are difﬁcult to characterize, microgravity
research in motor control exploits the changes caused exposure elicits very well deﬁned and complete
by microgravity 0n the overall sensorimotor process, sensory deficiencies.
due to the impairment of the sensory systems Whose When an astronaut goes into space, the body
function depends upon the presence of the gravity immediately experiences alot Ofchanges, causing the
vector. Motor control in microgravity has been subject to feel different and to respond to the
investigated during parabolic ﬂights and short-term environmental changes. The main effects of these
space missions, in particular for analysis Of changes in stimuli and responses are Within the
movement-posture co-ordination. Analysis Of long- cardiovascular system, the blood composition, the
term adaptation would also be very interesting, endocrine system and the musculo -scheletal system.
calling for long-term body motion Observations Adaptation of the motor system to microgravity is a
during the process of complete motor adaptation to consequence of the overall adaptation of the nervous
the weightlessness environment. ELITE S2 is an system to weightlessness. The unique characteristics
innovative facility for quantitative human movement of the space environment allow the space
analysis in weightless conditions onboard the neuroscience to study how spaceﬂight affects the
International Space Station. This development is as a nervous system, and therefore help the understanding
part Of the Italian program for the exploitation of the 0f the normal nervous system functioning and
International Space Station (188). activity. Some interesting Objects of the space
neuroscience are the adaptation of the vestibular
ALTERED GRAVITY FOR MOTOR system to microgravity, the control of movement and
ADAPTATION MONITORING posture in weightlessness, the development of the
nervous system during microgravity conditions (even
Experimental Observations of adaptation processes of at cellular and molecular level) and the effects of the
the motor control system to altered gravity conditions space environment on the body biological clock and
can provide useful elements to the investigations on regulation of sleep cycles.
the mechanisms underlying motor control of human The research in motor control exploits the changes
subject. Artificial gravity, water immersion as well as caused by microgravity 0n the overall sensorimotor
parabolic and orbital ﬂights provide alteration of the process, due to the impairment of the sensory systems
sensory inputs included in the motor control chain, Whose function depends upon the presence of the
Whose effect is the incongruence between the gravity vector. The sensory organ mostly affected by
expected achievement of the act and its actual effect. the lack of gravity is the vestibular system. Absence
The microgravity environment obtained on parabolic of gravity invalidates completely the perception of
and orbital ﬂights represents a unique experimental body orientation (somesthetic perception). As a
condition for the monitoring of motor adaptation. result, astronauts during the first days Of microgravity
1
Copyright © 2003 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.

"
"2","exposure are often disoriented and, in many cases, of CM projection positioning, with the consequence
sick. In space, the weightless condition provides that the CM control would not be a primary
different stimuli to the otolith organs that on Earth controlled posturalvariable.
detect (at least partly) the body orientation. The
resulting signals no longer correspond to the Visual RATIONALE FOR MOTOR CONTROL
and other sensory inputs sent to the brain. This INVESTIGATION IN LONG—TERM
conﬂict of signals causes disorientation. In particular MICROGRAVITY
these organs do not provide the vertical reference
signal to the brain. Some receptors at muscle level Despite of the different conclusions, all the studies
also provide different stimuli to the brain. Since executed in short-term space missions conﬁrm the
muscle stretch receptors are sensitive to the external existence of a gradual reinterpretation of dynamic
forces acting on the limb, they are affected by vestibular inputs and muscular proprioceptive
changes in the gravitational environment. The lack of information, which would allow the subjects exposed
activation of weight-bearing muscles occurring in to microgravity to regain the ability to perform
microgravity is also contributing to the different set accurate motor tasks, as well as to recover a proper
of inputs sent by organs to the brain. postural regulation. The short-term adaptation
process would allow the subject to face the critical
SHORT-TERM MICROGRAVITY phase raising at the beginning of microgravity
INVESTIGATIONS FOR MOTOR exposure. A long-term adaptation would instead be
ADAPTATION active for weeks in space, acting on the remodeling
of the internal body scheme, elicited by sustained
Qualitative observations reveal that astronauts react sensory incongruence and leading to correct motor
to the strong effects of microgravity on vestibular responses in weightlessness. Existence of long-term
system within a short-term adaptation, resolving the adaptation would call for long-term body motion
disorientation and motion sickness. After a few days observations and analysis, aiming to confirm or
the subject learns to properly move around, and the neglect many assumptions and interpretations already
nervous system seems to respond more to sensory enunciate about the matter. The possibility to perform
inputs coming from organs having their function experimental observations on astronauts during
unaffected by the absence of gravity, such as the months of microgravity exposure means presumably
dynamic vestibular system and Vision. to monitor subjects during the process of complete
Motor control in microgravity has been investigated motor adaptation to the weightlessness environment.
during parabolic ﬂights and short-term space This represents a unique way to look for
missions (up to three weeks). These investigations experimental evidences supporting the existence of
have been, as common goal, the analysis of stereotyped motor synergies (based on invariant
movement-posture co-ordination. It has been variables) versus the hypothesis of a generalized
observed that, during the first days of microgravity development of microgravity-specific motor
exposure, the Center of Mass (CM) projection is behaviors.
significantly moved forward. After a few days, body The unique dataset of experiment T4 “Human posture
inclination was progressively corrected and the CM in microgravity” performed during the European
projection was again located inside the supporting Space Agency EUROMIR 95 mission on the MIR
base. Several studies investigated the role of the CM station represent the first long term quantitative
projection position control as a variable for postural investigation. 3D kinematics of different
control. Evidences of CM regulation have been found experimental protocols has been recorded by the
in microgravity, where the equilibrium control is no ELITE—S system. Typical posture and coordination
longer a constraint. Several studies have confirmed, protocols as well as some ergonomics protocols were
by means of kinematics and EMG analysis, the studied. Data are still under studied. First results
presence of motor strategies aiming to CM indicate the emergence of a microgravity specific
stabilization during short-term missions. Typical strategy developed by subjects after the first weeks of
terrestrial anticipatory postural movements microgravity exposure. Those results are now
controlling the equilibrium balance have been opening the interest toward multifactorial motion
detected during execution of protocols for arm raising analysis, where kinematics would be enriched by
and leg lateral elevation. Such elfects were brought EMG and dynamic data. Furthermore, only two
as evidence of the fact that CM position couls serve astronauts participated to EUROMIR 95 experiments,
as a stable reference point to organize voluntary thus it would be of great importance to confirm the
movements, even in weightlessness. Other studies hypotheses designed on their performances over
analyzing some reaching tasks reported no evidence other subjects.
2

"
"3","Video cameras 65
_:_ .. _ ;.. _ - I *-
_ ' H ' Central unit
2 I' If - Crewmember
-__ performing ELITE
protocol
Figure I EUROMIR 95 experimental set-up in the core module 0fthe Russian Space Station.
ELITE 82: A NEW FACILITY FOR PROJECT SIGNIFICANCE AND
MULTIFACTORIAL MOVEMENT ANALYSIS BACKGROUND
The ELITE $2 facility has been conceived with the This work deals with the development of the
purpose of providing asystern for observations on the hardware of a new autormtic motion analyzer for
body motor control during long-term exposure to space applications. As presented in the introductory
microgravity. ELITE $2 is intended to provide the sections above, motion analysis in space, in particular
means for quantitative human movement data for long-term observations, has been rarely
collection and analysis in weightless conditions performed although it can be extremely useful in
onboard the International Space Station. The many fields. By the end of ’95 the first long time
instrument is being developed by the Italian Space experiments were conducted by using the space
Agency (A81), in collaboration with Kayser Italia qualiﬁed Elite-S system installed on the Russian
S.r.l., the Department of Bioengineering of the Space Station MIR during a ESA mission EUROMIR
Politecnico di Milano and the Centro di ”951 (Figure 1) leading to a wide amount of data till
Bioingegneria of Fondazione Pro Juventute — under processing”. Three years after, the Kinelite
Politecnico di Milano. The Centre National d’Etudes system (Figure 2) was ﬂown by CNES on Neurolab
Spatiales (CNES) also collaborates to the A81 in the ’98 mission collecting data on ball catching
program, with the development of some subsystems. experiments4.
The instrument will be integrated in an EXPRESS The success of such experiences pushed towards the
rack of the US lab in the ISS. ELITE 82 will be used proposal of an updated version of the system to be
starting from increment 10. Launch is expected in installed on the International Space Station (188):
March 2005 (according to the present planning ELITE 82. A strong return in term of on ground
provisions). development of motion analysis systems is expected,
The project development is currently in its detailed as it is one of the ASI objectives, particularly for
design phase. An Engineering Model has being typical motion analysis ﬁeld such as rehabilitation
manufactured and the first full functional model and clinical applications.
(training model) is being integrated. Delivery of the
Flight Model to NASA is currently foreseen for mid ELITE $2 REQUIREMENTS
2004.
The process of definition of the ELITE $2 scientific
and technical system requirements was initiated in
the feasibility study. This exercise took into account
3

"
"4","l- -
I
- li ' -- -'
' i '1 I ' '7' :33 .' -
I ._.1'| I. iii - 11:. :
EEWI 1 - ""1'"" ~
. H |II E: 1-. :;-.-""-.‘ .
--"""" :I . E '
. : I 7325.“. K . 'I"" '
' I J- -.___#-l. ' -:.""I-*-. A
' - a l. .2 -.-""' ﬂ
3"""" -' I
_ .
I I- _
Figure 2 Kinelite scenario 0n Neurolab 98
the needs of the scientific community for a motion Cardio-respiratory physiology
acquisition instrument that could meet the - Integration between cardio-respiratory
requirements of the different research programs. In physiologicalparameters and motor activity.
order to collect as much information as possible and - Quantitative analysis of the chest wall
to establish the basis for a wide utilization of the compartment mechanics.
facility, interaction with scientists involved in life These experiments would require up to 8 cameras in
science in space and motion analysis on-ground was a smaller volume (suitable for the upper part of the
established, with the preparation and distribution of a human body).
questionnaire with detailed requests, useful for the
definition of scientific and technical characteristics of Ergonomics and human factors
the system. - Quantitative evaluation of the working posture.
The feedback from the scientific community was These experiments would require up to 4 cameras in
related to three main research fields of the human a volume suitable for the for a total body movement.
physiology.
From the assessment of the replies coming from the
Motor control scientific community and after the completion of the
- Analysis of sitting-to-stand protocol in feasibility study, the major system requirements were
microgravity. established, with the specification of a system
- Quantitative monitoring of postural response to capable to support full body and half body
opto-kinetic stimulation. experimental set-ups, with the use of up to eight
- Investigation on the role of sensory inputs in the cameras providing each one up to 250 frames per
organization of the locomotion patters second. The resolution of the optical sensor is 512 X
- Sensor—motor integration mechanisms in 512 pixel and a reasonable required accuracy was
pointing and reaching tasks. established to l millimeter over a 2 X 2 meters ﬁeld
- Postural responses to voluntary or unexpected of View. The real time operation is foreseen for
perturbations. feedback in Virtual reality applications and required
The proposed experiments could be carried out with to work up to 100 Hz of sampling rate.
2-4 TV cameras in a volume adequate for a total Due to the variability of the TV cameras number, the
body movement. Acquisition of analog channels for ELITE $2 facility design assures a consistent
EMG signal collection would also be necessary. ﬂexibility in terms of actionable optics sensors,
according to the speciﬁc protocol characteristics. The
4

"
"5","minimum number is assigned to be four sensors, but and to store on board the science data prior to
in principle the system allows to increase this number downlink them to the Earth (Interface
With a limited impact on the Whole system Management Unit—IMU, see figure 4).
architecture. ° A number of identical TV cameras to collect and
Two acquisition volumes are foreseen, one for Whole process the movement images, each one capable
body acquisitions and one limited to the upper torso. of re-constructing a bi-dimensional image 0‘ V
The possibility of defining a third small volume for Camera — TVC), including camera brackets to
acquisition of ﬁne control movements is considered restrain them to the module.
worth to be taken into account. The system is . An auxiliary sub-system, integrated in the IMU,
equipped With a set 0f A/D COHVCYtCY fOY the for collection of analog signals for multifactorial
synchronized acquisition 0f analog signals from experimental protocols (Analog Collection Unit -
external instrumentation associated to movement ACU).
performance. Presently, the system provides eight . A set of cables to connect the various
channels With a sample rate 0f 1 kHZ- components together (ELI T E S2 Bus Cable).
° A set of reﬂective markers, ﬁxed on the subject
W according to the specific experimental protocol.
The markers are hemispherical, so that they are
The following Figure 3 shows the ELITE 82 Visible in a 180° field of View.
functional concept. Retro reﬂective markers are . A set of tools for on-orbit calibration of the
placed on the subject in correspondence to anatomic optical parameters of the cameras (Flight
landmarks, according to the specific protocol and Support Equipment-FSE)
they move Within the working volume. The ELITE , Laptop computer software to provide the crew
82 cameras, equipped With infrared illuminator with experiment feedback and direction. The
devices, illuminate the volume and marker movement laptop computer s oftware will run on the
is captured and computed in real time by the image EXPRESS rack Laptop Unit.
processing devices (optics, camera and dedicated
processing electronics). The movement information C am eras are connected to the IMU through an
data are delivered to an acquisition. and collection umbilical cord, which provides for data and power
deV1ce. The collected data are stored in the EL.ITE 82 exchange among all the c o nn e ct e d d eVi c e s. P o siti 0 ns
system, for later download to the Earth by us1ng the of cameras can be exchanged Without any further
EXPRESS rack and ISS-provideci services. modification to hardware, as well as the number of
Analog s1gnals can also be acquired and collected by such devices. The system is very ﬂexible in this
dedicated electronics for multifactorial analysis. sense, all owing substitution of a camera in case of
Acquisition of analog channels can be synchronized ordinary maintenance or failure. The set of
Wlth,the motion oata, 1n the sense that the SYSFWI subsystems dedicated to the acquisition, processing
prov1des the poss1b111ty of correlating the acqu1s1tion and collection of the motion data is the Scientific
time from the two sources. Data Handling Unit (SDHU). The SDHU is a
, , , distributed system within ELITE 82, being it
Other deV1ces control the system functioning, by composed by the cameras, the custom harness and a
monitoring status and housekeeping, interpreting part of the IMU. The SDHU is the most innovative
comménds coming from the different sources and by component of the system, with respect to the previous
execmlng the necessary and Pre'ngrammed ELITE, ELITE s and Kinelite instruments. Its
corrective actions. Critical information on the system performances are quite challenging and therefore
functioning is delivered to the EXPRESS Rack they are presented in detail inthe following.
Interface Controller (RIC).
The images captured by the camera 5611.50“ are The main functional and performance requirements at
transferred for crew quick look and potentially for SDHU levels are the following:
download by means of other dedicated devices. . process up to 250 Video frames/sec
ELITE S 2 ARCHITECTURE AND ° Lietﬁgrylén real time at least 30 marker positions
W ° illuminate the scene With a light ﬂash
The principal components of the ELITE 82 system synchronized Wlth the sensor. acqu1s1tion ,
are the following. ° thelight wavelength to be in the near infrared
° A rack mounted active drawer to feature the region between 750 and 900 nm
power and data interface to the EXPRESS rack ° collect the .marker pos1tions to the on-board
storage media
5

"
"6","Workin volume . . . EXPRESS Rac%$%:rface Controller
%>_I_I -<§
realtime
I:> EXPRESS Laptop
4 (MMI)
Analog #
-I:>-
collection
Conditioning S . EXPRESS Racklglngrface Controller
=> <3 < )
(realtlme)
EXPRESS Laptop
Information
:> EXPRESS Laptop
formatter (MMI)
Figure 3 ELITE S2functi0nal diagram
° manage control commands and transfer internal necessary for detection of the markers according to
housekeeping information the ELITE 82 requirements and environmental
condition. Part Of the tests with the engineering
Within the SDHU, the T VC will serve the twofold model were the verification of the functional and
purpose of illuminating the working volume and performance characteristics of the illuminator and of
capturing the images to be processed for marker the electrical and mechanical interface of the rest of
trajectories computation. The illuminator device is the ELITE 82 TVC.
based on a new concept, developed by CNES after The other function of the ELITE 82 TVC is to
the Kinelite experience. In the ELITE—S version, the capture the images from the working volume and t0
illuminator was a ring of Light Emitting Diodes transfer them to the IMU for data processing and
(LED) coaxial with the camera Optical devices. In the collection. This function is performed by Optics, CCD
Kinelite the illumination source was a laser diode, sensor, Analog to Digital conversion and a data
whose light was set coaxial with the Optical path by formatting stage capable of transferring the digital
means of a set of mirrors. The advantage of the information thought the connection cable to the IMU
Kinelite with respect to the ELITE was the reduced at the maximum requested rate.
electrical power necessary to illuminate the working In order to achieve the required performances in
volume, but the drawback was a quite complex terms of accuracy, resolution and data rate, a
mechanicalarrangement. commercial digital camera has been selected. The
The ELITE 82 is conceived to overcome both camera meets the 512 X 512 image resolution and the
disadvantages, therefore the electrical design is taken 250 Hz frame rate requested to the system. The pixel
from the Kinelite, while the mechanical concept is size 10 um X 10 um and all the image area is
inherited from the ELITE. The light emitted by the photosensitive (100% ﬁll factor). Four pixels, eight
laser diode is taken to a ring placed around the bits each, are digitized and transferred in parallel to
camera Optical device by means of a bundle of Optical the output at a frequency of 25 MHz. This means that
ﬁbers. The bundle from one side is mated to a eight parallel bits have to be sent to the IMU at a rate
holographic diffuser that conveys the laser light to of 100 MHz. To achieve this rate at some 10 meters
the fibers. From the other side the fibers are displaced (which is the expected maximum distance between
around the Optics by means of a ring screwed to the cameras and IMU in the US lab), the data are
camera front side. The illuminator has been elaborated in an electronic stage developed for the
developed and breadboarded by CNES first as a very purpose by ASI making use Of fast LVDS
stand-alone device to validate the design concepts. encoders. Out Of this stage the data are then received
Then, a radiometric model was developed jointly by and decoded in the IMU by dual devices. An error
CNES and A81 to determine the electrical power
6

"
"7",". . HE E Iwﬂﬂmﬂﬂ'ﬂmi “ﬂ _ __ ""I _
.1; n“ 1'""? .ﬂi 1 .
«it at a a E 9 '
.n-jlll-II”'""“-'—i""‘—I""JI
' ; ‘13 I I""? “3.“ mm""; II
_.."" ' 1' .’ ‘ ""' ‘ ‘z . l
""ii i ii i I I t I -'- ,.--¢.‘. 1 r
I lrl-ILIJ l-‘F Iii] I .
Figure 4 ELITE S2 Interface Management Unit Drawer (Training Model)
rate better than 10'12 has been measured with 250 Hz and modifying the electrical levels of the signals
ﬁa me rate at 10 meters. from the camera.
Each TVC is equipped with an optics group, The next stage accommodates the core of the ELITE
providing the proper field of View to the image 82 marker detection. The local computation at this
acquisition sensor. Two different optics groups will stage is basically characterized by two main
be necessary to meet the required marker resolution, functions: the 2-D marker recognition and the marker
i.e. the minimum distance between two markers, that barycentre computation.
the local image processor is able to identify as In order to fulfil the requirements, the system design
separate. This parameter depends also from the has been completely revised with respect to the
relative position of the single TVC with respect to the previous realizations (ELITE, ELITE—S and Kinelite),
foreseen working volumes. except for the shape recognition algorithm adopted
The objectives will be mounted on the TVC in a for passive marker detection based on cross-
fixed position during the ground operations. This is to correlations, since it still represents one of the best
avoid this critical task to be executed by the solutions in terms of noise rejection and accuracy. An
astronaut. Once the mission scenario is defined and optimization of parameters for marker recognition
the experiment is selected, the objectives can be has been performed to assure an increased of the
mounted and the camera calibrated on ground. Since accuracy of the system of about 37% with respect to
the objective will no longer removed from the other systems6. This accuracy increase has to be
adapter on the TVC, it will not be necessary to added to the sensor resolution enhancement, which,
recalibrate the single camera. Only 3-dirnensional by itself, will double the accuracy.
calibration will be required on orbit. This is the Programmable logic from XilinX VirteX Field
process by means of which the 3-dimensional Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) has been selected
absolute coordinates are put in correlation with the 2- to execute both the marker recognition, by
dimensional coordinates of each camera. This process implementing the cross-correlation function
is always necessary when the cameras are displaced mentioned above and the barycentre calculation. Due
in the working volume. to its configuration, providing four input Look Up
The next stages of the SDHU are located in the IMU. Table (LUT) for each Configuration Logic Block
The first element is connected to the harness coming (CLB), it allows to easily perform an addition and a
from the camera and serves the purposes of decoding multiplication by a constant making it the best choice
in digital signal processing applications. Moreover
7

"
"8","Holographic
diffuser Laser diode
Bundle of optical
fibers ‘ // Lens
\‘ll ‘
it Iiiﬁ>
I \v
‘ nnular ring _ .
i
|
| ____
~ 1?
| /
I
.\ !
Figure 5 Illuminator concept
the VirteX series feature advanced DLL for high ° in order to reduce crew time, operators are
performance clock management, hierarchy for required to perform experiments on themselves,
memory resource and maximum I/O and memory thus requiring self—marking procedures
bandwidth. ° environmental and time schedule restrictions
limit the experimental resources;
The IMU foresees one FPGA -based board for each 0 operative microgravity conditions cause
TVC- This is 21 Printed Circuit Board (PCB): difficulties even in simple set-up operations.
accommodating one FPGA item, high-speed static Past experimental activities simply accepted the
RAM and high-speed 1/0 lines, to allow fast limitations related to these issues, but necessary
communication link with the digital camera and with premise fer the performance Of reliable kinematics
the down-stream processing elements. The outputs of data collection in space is to provide optimal
each FPGA are acquired by a commercial digital operative methods for future investigations on the
acquisition board, collecting the barycentres International Space Station. In this perspective, the
information from each camera, as processed by the ELITE 82 development has been characterized by the
FPGA and sending to the host PC- This is the final research of important innovations, not only from the
stage 0f the SDHU: providing the data recording and technical and scientific point of View (as described in
transfer to the EXPRESS RIC and Laptop through the previous sections), but also in terms of operability
the EXPRESS Ethernet. and possibility of integration With other
instrumentation. Strong efforts have aimed to get the
W best swiftness and easy to use of the system.
The two most important elements of innovation, in
Although previous experiences have demonstrated this sense, With respect to the existing motion
the feasibility 0f the use Of opto-electronic motion analysis systems are the calibration and the real—time
analyzer onboard orbital modules, it is out of doubt features performed by the system.
that there are factors affecting the reliability and The calibration on orbit (Figure 6) has been
accuracy 0f opto-electronic motion analysis ih space. completely re-designed in order to reduce the time
1h particular: requested and to ensure the required accuracy. The
° operators (astronauts) are not experts in motion subject will be requested to move a very swift
analysis;
8

"
"9",". IR - | VCs '
' :i_.'.'-=- .
. m E - i *
-. r :
r II ﬁg.“ mi: . _
559 f - 'l.’
I CHE ! I.
’ II
r“ ., ' r:
!
. .' SUbjeCt/
ELITE S2 in the [SS Operator
F igure 6 ELI T E S2 calibration envisaged scenario
calibration object, from two restrained positions center) are estimated. This solution guarantees the
successively, for few seconds and will have a prompt widest degree of ﬂexibility in the camera positioning,
feedback on the success of the calibration. in the optics selection, in the diaphragm and focus
more useful to the speciﬁc acquisition. The
The calibration of an opto-electronic system is calibration has been conceived as separated into two
always a critical aspect. This is particularly important steps. In the first, the multi-camera system is
for a space borne equipment, where the knowledge of calibrated in pairs: each pair owns a local reference
the system by the operator and the available system of coordinates located in the perspective
resources are verylittle. center of one of the two cameras. The core of the
During the preliminary phase of the project, a study calibration algorithm is based on an epipolar
was conducted to determine, among various geometry kernel and an evolution strategy kernel
calibration packages available for such opto- inside an iterative refinement of the solution. In the
electronic system, which one was closer to the ELITE second step, the camera pairs are registered with
$2 requirements, in terms of both performance and respect an external system of coordinates and each
operability. The exercise comprised the assessment of other by computing rigid transformations exploiting
algorithms, tools, required skill and level of difficulty the correspondence between 3D points reconstructed
in the understanding of the output parameters. On the in different coordinate systems.
basis of this study, the calibration method for the A requirement for the ELITE $2 is to be capable of
ELITE $2 on orbit calibration was determined. This processing and displaying in real time the 3-
method is based on surveying a rigid bar of known dimensional trajectories, including marker labeling
length that is moved inside the working volume. The and 3-dimensional reconstruction (i.e. each marker is
bar calibration allows exploiting the geometrical tracked separately from the other for all its path), as
calibration of a multi-camera system. With this well as graphic representation. The real time mode
method both exterior (location and orientation of the will provide the subject of on-line feedback in case of
cameras) and interior parameters (location of the each critical experiments set-up.
target with respect the corresponding perspective This will be possible at a frequency of at least 100
9

"
"10","Hz, while the Object to be tracked will be composed time available is very little), because at the end of the
by at least 6 markers (this could represent a joint in calibration exercise, the system provides information
the human upper or lower limb). The real-time and directions of possible portions of the volume n0t
Operation is Obtained mainly by the new electronics properly filled and instructs the subject to repeat the
architecture and design that fully implements 0n-chip procedure only in that limited part (with very simple
the marker detection and barycentre computation instructions, e.g. top right, bottom left). At the end of
algorithms, and by adopting powerful computational the data acquisition, the system computes the
platforms (Pentium processors) and data links (100 parameters and determines, without need of
Mb/sec Ethernet). This hardware was not available interpretation of the results by the crewmember,
up to a few years ago, while now the times appeared whether these parameters can be considered
mature enough to improve the world Of the motion acceptable for the current experimental protocol (on
analyzers, by exploiting newly available the basis of the required accuracy on the
technologies. measurement).
Finally, the possibility of integrating the system with Another critical aspect concerning the 0n-0rbit
other available technology on the Station for Operations consists in the phase of marking position
multifactorial movement analysis will be guaranteed This is strongly experiment-dependent, but in any
by the availability of analog devices synchronization case has to face the limitation that, in order to reduce
Options. Namely, the functionality of the ELITE—SZ crew time, Operators are required to perform
with dynamic sensors for kinetic measurements as experiments on themselves, thus requiring self-
well as with EMG (EDLS stand alone available on marking procedures. A study has been conducted
HRF)7 is currently under development. within the ELITE 82 program, with the purpose of
determining the criticality of such exercise for some
ON-ORBIT OPERATIONS experimental protocols that are typically used in
laboratories 0n the Earth. The study was mainly
Experimental runs will be characterized by a number directed toward the most critical aspect in such area,
of important activities for the preparation of the which is the correct repositioning of the markers
scientific protocols. Once the instrumentation is from trial to trial. Since the subject will most
deployed and set-up, the first Operation will be probably not an expert in anatomy, it could be
relevant to the calibration of the system. The difficult to locate some anatomical landmarks and
calibration procedure consists of two steps. In the place the markers with very little error in
first one a check is run to verify whether the repositioning. Tests were executed, for different
parameters determined in the previous run (or those protocols and different landmarks, 0n skilled and
fixed on ground for the first time) are still valid for na'1've subjects and the results analyzed by means of
the experiment to be executed. In this case, there is statistical methods. The Obtained results basically
no need for further calibration and some crew time confirmed the already published results of Della
can be saved. This check is performed by displacing Croce et al. (1999). In particular, the experts’
a number of control markers in fixed positions of the precision was almost the same, just a little smaller, of
working volume. The system compares the 3-D the inter—tester precision reported in that paper.
positions of the current registration with the 3-D However, it is out Of doubt that the unreliability of
reconstruction previously computed. The level of some “typical” landmarks, which are commonly used
acceptability of such procedure will depend on the as reference for remarking, implies to put forward
scientific requirements for the specific protocol under alternative solutions aiming to increase the quality of
execution. If calibration needs to be executed again 0n-0rbit kinematics data acquisition.
(mainly this could be due to re-positioning of
cameras), the Operator needs to move the calibration The recourse to anatomical calibration techniques
bar within the working volume. This volume is allows to overcome or at least to reduce the intrinsic
divided into two halves that are filled sequentially. unreliability of specific “classical” landmarks. The
One Of the major problems in the calibration of such idea is to replace each critical anatomical landmark
0pt0-electr0nic instruments is the possibility that the with at least three “technical” markers defining the
working volume is not properly filled by movement local (segmental) reference frame in which the
0f the subject with the calibration tool. This problem position of the critical anatomical landmark can be
typically causes necessity of repetition of the expressed. Under the hypothesis that each body
calibration procedure. The method conceived for segment is approximately a rigid body, the mutual
ELITE 82 solves this problems (that could be spatial relationships between anatomical and
particularly important on the 188, where the crew- technical markers are supposed to remain constant
10

"
"11","2 .
3
4 {:20 Acromion (calibrate d)
Cluster 1135*“ ‘§ 1'
""g” k: 6"" :- ‘11 Cluster 1C
qu’l,’ ""J- 9:;
’ .f’ '7: .t
Clu ster “a J J I I
(Elli (calibrated)
',1.” ”8“ star 2
J! “a ‘9'""
L1? r ..t Trochanter (calibrate d)
E Cluster3
L01
r__ L ""68 emoral Condyle (calibrated)
i Cluster4
Clusterﬁ ’ ~ ‘ g ‘ ateral Malleolus (calibrated)
VthMet. Head(ca1ibrateoi a ~- ’2’
F igure 7 Recommended remarking scenariofor sagittal marker distribution
during ﬂight, thus guaranteeing that the acquisition of REFERENCES
only the technical markers permits a reliable
reconstruction of the position of critical anatomical 1Ferrigno G. et al. J Biomech. Apr;32(4):431-6, 1999
points. The advantage of this technique is that the 2 G. Baroni et 211. Exp Brain Res. Oct;128(3):410-6,
technical markers can be placed anywhere on the 1999
body segments, possibly in correspondence of natural 3 G.Bar0ni et al. J. App1.Physi01. V01 9 (1) pp.205-
skin marks (scars, moles) or on previously ink— 215, 2001
marked references. Their accurate placement can be 4 Venet et 31., Acta Astronautica V01. 43 11. pp 277-
checked 0n-1ine by controlling their mutual distances. 289, 1998
In this frame it is important to underline the high 5 Ferrigno et 211. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng.
accuracy and precision in the repeated replacement of Nov;32(11):943-50, 1985
technical markers on ink-marked skin references. 6 Pedrocchi et al submitted Med. & Biol. Engin.&
This technique is largely used in laboratory motion Comput.
analysis activities. The advantages in terms of 7 Arnir et al. In Press IEEE Trans Instr. & Measur.
remarking quality have been assessed and published
in several papers.
As an example, Figure 7 shows the recommended
marking scenarios for the sagittal marker distribution,
which is one of the typical scenarios expected for the
ELITE S2 experimental protocols.
11

"
