"","x"
"1","IAC-09-A2.6.6
ELITE SZ — AN INSTRUMENT FOR MOTION ANALYSIS ON BOARD THE INTERNATIONAL
SPACE STATION
Gianluea Neri
Kayser Italia S.r.1., Livorno Italy email: g.neri@kayser.it
Vittorio Cotronei
Agenzia Spaziale Italiana, Rome Italy — email: Vittori0.eotr0nei@asi.it
Gabriele Maseetti
Agenzia Spaziale Italiana, Rome Italy — email: gabriele.maseetti@asi.it
Salvatore Pignataro
Agenzia Spaziale Italiana, Rome Italy — email: salvatore.pignatar0@asi.it
Valfredo Z01esi
Kayser Italia S.r.1., Livorno Italy email: V.zolesi@kayser.it
ABSTRACT
This paper describes the activities for utilization and control of ELITE S2 on board the International Space
Station (188). ELITE S2 is a payload of the Italian Space Agency (A81) for quantitative human movement
analysis in weightlessness. Within the frame of a bilateral agreement With NASA, ASI has funded a number of
facilities, enabling different scientiﬁc experiments on board the ISS. ELITE S2 has been developed by the ASI
contractor Kayser Italia, delivered to the Kennedy Space Center in 2006 for pre-ﬂight processing, launched in
2007 by the Space Shuttle Endeavour (STS-118), integrated in the US. lab and used during the Increments 16
and 17 through 2008. The ELITE S2 ﬂight segment comprises equipment mounted into an Express Rack and a
number of stowed items to be deployed for experiment performance (Video cameras and accessories). The
ground segment consists in a User Support Operations Center (based at Kayser Italia) enabling real-time payload
control and a number of User Home Bases (located at the A81 and HS premises), for the scientiﬁc assessment of
the experiment performance. TWO scientiﬁc protocols on reaching and cognitive processing have been
successfully performed in ﬁve sessions involving two 188 erewmembers: IMAGINE 2 and MOVE.
ALTERED GRAVITY FOR MOTOR different etiology) on patients are difﬁcult to
ADAPTATION MONITORING Characterize, microgravity exposure elicits very
well deﬁned and complete sensory deﬁciencies.
Experimental observations of adaptation processes When an astronaut goes into space, the body
of the motor control system to altered gravity immediately experiences a lot of Changes, causing
conditions can provide useful elements to the the subject to feel different and to respond to the
investigations on the mechanisms underlying motor environmental Changes. The main effects of these
control of human subject. Artiﬁcial gravity, water Changes in stimuli and responses are Within the
immersion as well as parabolic and orbital ﬂights cardiovascular system, the blood composition, the
provide alteration of the sensory inputs included in endocrine system and the musculoskeletal system.
the motor control Chain, Whose effect is the Adaptation of the motor system to microgravity is a
ineongruenee between the expected achievement of consequence of the overall adaptation of the
the act and its actual effect [1]. nervous system to weightlessness. The unique
The microgravity environment obtained on Characteristics of the space environment allow the
parabolic and orbital ﬂights represents a unique space neuroscience to study how spaceﬂight affects
experimental condition for the monitoring of motor the nervous system, and therefore help the
adaptation. This is because a subject exposed to understanding of the normal nervous system
reduced gravity Within a space module experiences functioning and activity. Some interesting Objects
the complete eut-Off of sensory inputs related to the 0f the space neuroscience are the adaptation of the
presence of the gravity vector (gravieeptors). In this vestibular system to microgravity, the control of
condition healthy subjects become immediately movement and posture in weightlessness, the
sensorimotor disabled “patients”, but With the development of the nervous system during
difference that While the speciﬁc effect of microgravity conditions (even at cellular and
pathology (for example vestibular deﬁciencies of molecular level) and the effects of the space
1

"
"2","environment on the body biological clock and For each experiment, a set of body landmarks are
regulation of sleep cycles. Motor control in identiﬁed and reﬂective markers are applied on the
microgravity has been investigated during parabolic astronaut operating the experiment (see Fig. 3).
ﬂights and short-term space missions, in particular
for analysis of movement-posture co-ordination. m 7
The accessibility of the MIR Space Station allowed 1 1,, ﬂ ‘
for the ﬁrst time during the EUROMIR 95 mission WWW?” ""W; l 0
experimental quantitative kinematic analysis 0f 11- ‘17”; 3;: 3:""; ”3:3“ .....— N:
long-term sensorimotor and postural adaptation t0 1% -“"""" m"" ‘ w, - . - 6
the weightless environment though opto-electronic , 3.117%,"" ' "" """""""" ‘ ”""°‘“ ° “W 0 ’ , '
techniques [2]. . A I . 9‘ M\e
Eventually, the availability of the 188 as a """" 1"""" 7 T 4- __ '— 1, .
permanent research laboratory in space, called for
the development of ELITE $2, the innovative 7 g I
facility enabling long-term body motion , j“, .= r , .
observations during the process of complete motor ' ’
adaptation to the weightlessness environment [3]. F ig. 1 EL] T E S2 Interface Management Unit
. .. ""av... - . ‘ :3: .-
ELITE SZ FEATURES AND , 7.1 «.I . ‘3': _ 47‘ _ . -‘..*""T‘¥.:.'t; ‘ .
CHARACTERISTICS U"": { a ""‘_:6 ﬂ '_' 3p o
The ELITE 82 system is a complete facility, ”333% ‘ m m "" ﬁg;
allowing 4,
0 experiments on board the 188 With the ﬂight ’T '
model F ig. 2 ELIT E S2 Video Cameras
’ crew training and baseline data collection on The astronaut performs prescheduled movements
ground by 115ng the training model located at While the Video cameras capture the trajectories of
NASA/JSC the body parts catching the light reﬂected by the
0 full real time monitoring and control of the on markers.
board operations by the payload engineers from This allows the system to record the kinetic and to
a User Operations Control Center (USOC) elaborate the three-dimensional trajectory data of
located at the Payload Developer Kayser Italia the movement.
in Livorno (Italy) and connected to the
Huntsville Operations Control Center (HOSC). ,
The MS are also able to monitor the payload :
operations in real time by means of voice 100p and
Video, by means of User Home Bases (UHB) __ .
provided by A81 and connected to the USOC and ‘ C
the HOSC. .- *6
O . 0
Flight Segment r
O
The ELITE SZ facility located on board the ISS -’
essentially consists in a central unit. (Interface Fig. 3 Upper Limb Markingfor ELITE S2
Management Unit, IMU) for the electrical power Experiment
distribution and the data handling (see Fig. 1) and
four Video cameras mounted on the walls of the The main technical features of ELITE 82 are the
laboratory and connected by cables to the IMU (see following:
Fig. 2), 0 process up to 250 Video frames/sec per camera
The instrument working principle is based on shape 0 512 X 512 pixel image resolution
detection of passive markers applied on the body, 0 identify in real time at least 30 markers per
illuminated by infrared light and captured by the frame per camera
Video cameras. 0 coverage of experiment operations in a
calibrated volume of 2m X 2m X 1m
2

"
"3","(corresponding to the Width and height of the 0 Health & Status data (130 Byte/sec)
US lab and the length of one rack) 0 Remote facility commanding
o reconstruction of the three-dimensional 0 Data set downlink control
traj ectory data With 1 mm accuracy Within the 0 Data loss recovery control
2111 X 2111 X 1m calibrated volume 0 Conﬁguration data uplink
o illumination synchronized with the sensor 0 Payload Video handling
acquisition 0 Facility camera images
0 light wavelength in the near infrared at 808 11m 0 Calibration and protocol activities
0 on board collection of the bi-dimensional Video coverage
marker positions by hardware real-time image 0 Voice 100p handling
processing
0 acquisition of 8 analog channels at 1 kHz The ground segment CODSiStS in a User Support
sampling rate for multifactorial data collection Operations Center (based at Kayser Italia) enabling
. on board fast and easy system calibration real-time payload control and a number of User
Home Bases (located at the A81 and HS premises),
3: ’ T —’— : ' ..,-1 K. for the scientiﬁc assessment of the experiment
1‘7, ‘,. . : W ""V” . execution. The UHB are provided on loan by the
. LB. ‘3 3. . A81 to the HS participating in the ELITE 82
J ' .1, a. program.
' , ;;:_ . L ,3. The ELITE.SZ USOC is connected through Internet
I .:::;-1-;; E115 us1ng a V1rtua1 Prlvate Network (VPN) t0 the
fl. r]. r‘. r 1; by )3329‘ HOSC for the following services:
1 “\%8§1‘~‘""-‘ £241.:22: :1 3' o payload plannlng .
~33; 1 ‘ ﬂex“:- k2,: o payload commandlng
. [ﬂ .” q "" I‘ ' -. #2233? 0 health & status
.3, ,‘ “:71 ’ "" ‘“‘-\. ' %% e 0 science data download
yﬁgpg/l (Rig ’t 1‘. 1 0 Crew Procedure Viewer
‘ L _~ 1"" ’1%,, \\t\}~e 0 ﬁle transfer
\. ..,; ti, titetmﬁ‘r‘h . “k 0 On board short term plan Viewer
'- 'j‘vwi ‘ 3‘ (:1. "" 11‘."" 1‘ J. 0 Voice Loop
{‘s ‘- --.
Fig. 4 Set ofmarkers in zz’plog bags at the bench For the real time Visualization of the 188 Video, the
review program has exploited the existing link established
in the frame of the agreement ASI / NASA for the
_ _ _ _ MPLM program. Within this program, the ALTEC
W1th1n the ELITE 82 ﬂlght segment, the IMU 1s an center in Turin is connected by means of the
ISIS drawer mounted into an Express Rack and the ASINet and it is able to receive from Houston TV
Video cameras, the cables, the markers and the other two Video feeds out Of the four outputs from the
accessories are stowed items to be deployed for 188. Channel selection is programmable Via
experiment performence. coordination With the Marshall Comm during
ELITE .82 was dehverecT t0 the Kennedy Space payload planning and operations.
Center 1n 2006 for pre-ﬂlght processmg, launched The ELITE $2 ground segment has provided two
hl 2007 by the Space Shuttle Endeavour (STS—118), Video encoders to convert into digital information
1ntegrated 1n the U.S. lab and used durmg the the two Video feeds received at ALTEC as analog
Increments 16 and 17 through 2008' Video signals and distribute them to the USOC and
then to the UHBs at the PI premises.
Ground Segment
_ The USOC is composed eventually 0f the following
The ELITE 8.2. ground segment pr0V1des the workstations to provide the required services:
followmg capablhtles: o iPV / PIMS/EHS Workstation
0 Telemetry data distribution and Visualization: 0 crew procedure Viewer
0 Science data (~200 MB per session, 3 o payload planning
session per increment) o OCR processing
0 System calibration data (<3MByte o EHS commanding
data set, leps approx) 0 TReK Workstation
3

"
"4","o payload commanding 0 crew training is often carried out much time
0 health & status display ahead of launch and operations and payload
0 science data download classes are very much compressed in time.
o IVODS Workstation Past experimental activities simply accepted the
0 Voice Loop limitations related to these issues, but necessary
0 RT Operations Log Workstation basis for the collection of reliable kinematics data
0 Real time display of payload in space is to provide optimal operative methods. In
operation messages, received in this perspective, the ELITE 82 development had
telemetry packets, converted in real been characterized by the research of important
time and displayed for detailed innovations, not only from the technical and
payload engineering monitoring scientiﬁc point of View, but also in terms of

0 TM Data Processing Workstation operability. Strong effort has been devoted to get

0 Real time analysis Of the received the best swiftness and easy to use of the system.
telemetry packets, With data 1055 The two most important elements of innovation, in
control and generation of this sense, With respect to the existing motion
commanding sequence for data 1055 analysis systems are the set-up, the calibration and
recovery the self marking.

0 RT 188 Video Workstation

0 Video decoder seﬂp

0 Video presentation on two separate
monitors for the two available Video The system has been designed to avoid any need for
feeds. the crew to operate on the optical parts of the

cameras (illuminators, lenses) or to try the best

Each UHB is composed of the following VieW for the position 0fthe cameras.

workstations to provide the required services: F0031 length, ﬁelds Of View and camera positioning

. IVODS Workstation had been pre-determined on ground during

0 Voice Loop experiment rehearsals, by simulating the laboratory

, RT 188 Video Workstation environment With the maj 0r protrusions present for

0 Video decoder the conﬁguration foreseen for the increments to be

0 Video presentation on two separate assessed. _ _ _ _
monitors for the two available Video Also, the system 1s able to pr0V1de a V1de0 s1gna1
feeds. from the cameras both to the crew on board and, in

real time, to the ground support team at the USOC,
so that immediate feedback and directions can be

CHALLENCES AND INNOVATIONS FOR ON pI‘OVidCd t0 the crew through the HOSC for

W possible corrections of the on board set-up.

Although previous experiences have demonstrated mg ,n. "" ;. -1"" ”Ir _

the feasibility of the use of opto-electronic motion . a f I .. j J 1 M

analyzer onboard orbital modules, it is out of doubt ‘ -. -.""‘"" P .J .___

that there are factors affecting the reliability and . 3 : '-

accuracy of 0pt0-electr0nic motion analysis in ~.. 3: l / .k '

space. In particular: _ ""; i"" .- t

o operators (astronauts) are not experts in motion 5 ._ lug} "" , "" . ...
analysis ' I _ .- 5.3-"" ""-_' ~ J .

o in order to reduce crew time, operators are 3-""- - 3r"" , *1... _--""'""""'"" - - ' .. '
required to perform experiments on r _ .-"" 3}. ‘1 W _
themselves, thus requiring self—marking j; 1' '* ix 1..
procedures .3 j 1- “1% ‘ﬁ‘ - Re

0 environmental and time schedule restrictions 1.; . ' ""
limit the experimental resources I _ 1. th -

o operative microgravity conditions cause 11 i3 '.-' -
difﬁculties even in simple set-up operations - - I '- ‘ ' ""

F ig. 5 ELIT E S2 Camera during set-up Simulations
at US lab mock-up NASA/JSC
4

"
"5","'MU CAMERA4
LAB101_L1 “8185.81
OVERHEAD
4 > a
; Q‘ X .
3
o
g AFT PORT
«’5 1 2
a "" '
LAB1D2
DECK
SDFR 2 GAMER“ CAMERA3
( ) 313332.? ”8105-81 CAMERA2 LAB1P5_82
LAB105_M1
F ig. 6 Elite S2 Camera set up 3D CAD drawing in the Crew procedure
As set-up instructions it was found very useful to orientation of the cameras) and interior parameters
include in the crew procedure 3D CAD drawings (location of the each target with respect the
showing the deployed items in the lab, together corresponding perspective center) are estimated.
with the text. This is because sometimes the This solution guarantees the widest degree of
astronauts tend to skip the full text of the ﬂexibility in the camera positioning, in the optics
procedure; therefore a good drawing can sometimes selection, in the diaphragm and focus more useful
prevent mistakes or misunderstandings. t0 the speciﬁc acquisition.
The calibration 0n orbit has been therefore designed
Calibration in order to minimize the crew time and to ensure
the required accuracy. The subject is requested to
The calibration of an opto-electronic system is move the bar calibration object for few seconds and
always a critical aspect. This is particularly then a prompt feedback is provided on the success
important for a space borne equipment, where the 0f the calibration.
knowledge of the system by the operator is basic
and the available resources are very little. Self-Inarking
During the preliminary phase of the project, a study
was conducted to determine, among various Another critical aspect concerning the 0n-0rbit
calibration packages available for such opto- operations consists in the phase of marking
electronic system, which one was closer to the position. This is strongly experiment-dependent,
ELITE SZ requirements, in terms of both but in any case has to face the limitation that, in
performance and operability. The exercise order to reduce crew time, operators are required to
comprised the assessment of algorithms, tools, perform experiments by themselves, thus requiring
required skill and level of difﬁculty in the self—marking procedures. A study had been
understanding of the output parameters. On the conducted during the ELITE 82 program, with the
basis of this study, the calibration method for the purpose of determining the criticality of such
ELITE 82 on orbit calibration was determined. This exercise for some experimental protocols that are
method is based on surveying a rigid bar of known typically used in laboratories 0n the Earth. The
length that is moved inside the working volume. study was mainly directed toward the most critical
The bar calibration allows exploiting the aspect in such area, which is the correct
geometrical calibration of a multi-camera system. repositioning of the markers from trial to trial.
With this method both exterior (location and Since the crewmembers are most probably not
5

"
"6","expert in anatomy, it could be difﬁcult to locate marker to be placed. This, associated to the request
some anatomical landmarks and place the markers to the crew to do the self-marking during pre—ﬂight
with very little error in repositioning. Tests were BDC as well, gave all the involved crewrnembers
executed, for different protocols and different good skills and adequate level of conﬁdence on the
landmarks, 0n skilled and naive subjects and the marking procedure, in terms of easiness, time and
results analyzed by means of statistical methods. reproducibility.
The obtained results basically conﬁrmed the
already published results of Della Croce et al.
(1999). In particular, the experts’ precision was J 1:
almost the same, just a little smaller, of the inter- .‘ .
tester precision reported in that paper [1], [3]. If I
However, it is out of doubt that the unreliability of l,
some “typical” landmarks, which are commonly .m. f' '-
used as reference for remarking, implies to put
forward alternative solutions aiming to increase the 3 cm in
quality of on-orbit kinematics data acquisition. "" _

__ . 1%,; _
The recourse to anatomical Calibration techniques a_EDw—Emrmlaidomho elbowjnli'ltnu hornund by palpmlngtho nan hum pramlnoncolnthi

Illusimiod posture. aboui 3 cm from “19 elbowtip (Type 1}
allows to overcome or at least to reduce the
intrinsic unreliability of speciﬁc “classical” Fig. 7Part 0f the ELITE S2 on board Man-
landmarks. The study developed the technique to machine Interface Showing aidsfor ser-marking
replace each critical anatomical landmark with at
least three “technical” markers deﬁning the local
(segmental) reference frame in which the position
of the critical anatomical landmark can be THE EXPERIMENTS
expressed. Under the hypothesis that each body
segment is approximately a rigid body, the mutual Two scientiﬁc protocols on reaching and cognitive
spatial relationships between anatomical and processing have been successfully performed in
technical markers are supposed to remain constant ﬁve sessions involving two 188 crewmembers:
during ﬂight, thus guaranteeing that the acquisition IMAGINE-Z and MOVE.
of only the technical markers permits a reliable These studies, still currently analyzing the data
reconstruction of the position of critical anatomical acquired during ﬂight performances and ground
points. The advantage of this technique is that the baseline data collections are aimed at understanding
technical markers can be placed anywhere on the the mental ability to represent the presence or
body segments, possibly in correspondence of absence of gravity effects on an object’s motion,
natural skin marks (scars, rnoles) or on previously understanding longer term adaptation of postural
ink—marked references. Their accurate placement control to microgravity and developing appropriate
can be checked on-line by controlling their mutual countermeasures for mental and postural distress of
distances. In this frame it is important to underline astronauts in space exploration. It has previously
the high accuracy and precision in the repeated been shown that an internal model of Earth’s
replacement of technical markers on ink—marked gravity affects automatic motor control. But does it
skin references. This technique is largely used in also affect cognitive processes such as mental
laboratory motion analysis activities. The imagery? Can we imagine (mentally Visualize) the
advantages in terms of remarking quality have been lack of gravity effects? Is there a progressive
assessed and published in severalpapers. adaptation of the gravity model to long-term
Eventually this technique was not further microgravity exposure? How do astronauts
implemented in the ﬁrst demonstration of ELITE coordinate posture and movement? These questions
82 over the Increment 16 and 17, where the have been addressed by these two different
experiments did not present critical marking protocols, IMAGINE (arm throwing/catching task)
challenges. It was found anyhow very helpful to and MOVE (coordination of trunk and arm
provide the crew with Visual material (high movements). Understanding the ability of the
deﬁnition pictures and detailed captions) uploaded human brain to mentally represent the presence or
with the ELITE 82 system that were displayed to absence of gravity is a key to train crewrnembers t0
the laptop during the execution of the procedure, complete tasks in a low gravity environment.
showing the sequence and accurate position of each
6

"
"7","There is now ample evidence from both ground are hard-wired into their brains through neural
and microgravity experiments that the human brain networks. The experiment IMAGINE-2 involves an
has an internal model of Earth’s gravity (1 g arm throwing/eatehing task in which astronauts are
model). The l g model is used to predict the motion asked to mentally represent the trajectory of an
of an external object or a limb segment from imaginary ball that they throw “upward” against the
expected kinetics in the Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld. ceiling and catch on the ﬂy on its way “downward”
Previous microgravity experiments showed very (see Fig. 8).
limited adaptation of the l g model for automatic
sensori-motor behavior, but they involved only
relatively short microgravity exposure. In the
perspective of long-term space ﬂights (Moon and
Mars), it is of enormous importance to be able to
establish the rate and extent of adaptation of the l g
model by means of medium—term exposure to
microgravity (such as that of current 188
missions). Understanding sensori-motor adaptation
is key to develop appropriate countermeasures, to
improve the ergonomic design of the shuttle cabin,
instruments, astronauts’ dresses etc.
While in space, astronauts experience motion
sickness, dizziness, and other disturbances typical
of vestibular disorders on Earth. The knowledge we
gain from space studies may help us understand
everyday health issues. The changes that astronauts
experience are very similar to those seen in people
who are less active or frequently conﬁned to bed
rest, such as elderly individuals. Thus Space
medicine and Earth medicine Will help US Fig. 8 T hree-dimensional reconstruction ofmarked
understand the best ways to arrive home from upper limb during IMAGINE 2 protocol
space, as well as the best ways to grow elderly. In
addition, diagnostic procedures that will be , ,
developed for astronauts when they return from W
space may become important to be used by major , , , , ,
medical centers to diagnose and treat patients Movement in orbital vehicle experiments (Ferrigno,
suffering head injury, stroke, Chronic dizziness and PequCChl’ Tagliabue Ct a111, l’olyteehnie Of Milan).
disorders ofthe central nervous system. This experiment evaluates .differenees 1n the way
Therefore, this study has important implications not the brain controls 00115010115 and uPCF’nSCIOUS
only for understanding basic mechanisms of motor motions suPh 3,5 bending trunk,. p01nt1ng. and
control, but also for rehabilitative training of reaching ObJeCtS 1n enVironments Wlth and Without
neurological patients with impaired motor control. gm“?- .The experiment MOVE mVOlVCS the
New rehabilitation techniques are based on Virtual CO9rCllnat10n Of trunl< and arm movements in
reality and mental rehearsal of motor actions. P9mtmg .toward stationary targets placed .at a
distance in front of the subject. The experiment
IMAGINE-2 Short Deseri tion acquires whole body pointing and reaching
experiments (see Fig. 9). Whole body pointing and
Imagery of object motion affected by gravity in null reaching are complex tasks involving many degrees
gravity experiments for Elite-SZ (Laequaniti, Zago, Of, freedom and. integrating balance control and
Miller et alii, University Tor Vergata and IRCCS pointing preeis1on. The comparison WW6?“
Santa Lucia, Rome). pointing (point to the target .only brushing . it,
On Earth, our ability to catch a ball depends on a Without making any support on 10 versus reaChmfé
mental model of the physical behavior of that (reach the same target as before but astronaut 1's
obj e et, a model that in elu des gravity. In a allowed to touch the target and then to support on it
microgravity environment, astronauts adjust their t9 stop. his motion) have been, conceived , to
motor control strategies to respond to new rules, but dlsimngh the stopping strategies. in m10rograv1ty,
still show evidence that the old gravity based rules Wthh emerged as the most erueial when nglty
was no more available.
7

"
"8","This is the case for example if a decision has to be
taken depending on the status of a mask on a
computer monitor, Where it is not easy to describe it
as procedure clue (if, then, else, etc) (see Fig. 10).
A lot of effort has been spent during the preparation
of the crew procedure and the payload display to be
sure of the consistence 0f the two environments and
to verify any possible presence of conﬂict, deal-
loek or missing steps that could block the execution
of the payload Operations on board. This task has
been carried out by the payload developed and the
display engineers at MSFC that eventually led to
the certiﬁcation of the ELITE 82 displays by the
Payload Display Review Team (PDRT) 0f the
Marshall Space Flight Center. It should be noted
that the displays are visualized on the 011 Express
laptop, but the software is actually running in the
ELITE SZ IMU. The architecture of the ﬂight
segment of ELITE $2 is arranged such that the
software in the IMU is a web server and What is
needed at the Express laptop for the display
Visualization is just a web browser. This
architecture led to two advantages:
0 no need to load any used software on board the
F ig. 9 T hree-dimensional reconstruction ofmarked Express iaptop. In this case It vyas not. required
who [6 body during MOVEpmtocol t0 estabhsh a software 1CD, With veriﬁcations
tests, conﬁguration controls, software load
issues, etc.
o possibility to remotely test the software and
ON BOARD UTILIZATION crew procedures by the display engineers and
PDRT at MSFC. For these tests, it was
Utilization of the payload on board is arranged possible, having the ELITE 82 system at
using: Kayser Italia premises, to connect the
0 crew procedures engineers located at MSFC by using their own
0 ELITE $2 on board displays computer With just a web browser through the
o payload Operations ground monitor and control Internet and let them Operate the payload
carried out by the payload engineers, A81 and remotely.
the HS, by means of the ground segment and
ground rules. The crew procedures and displays have been
The procedures and displays drive the erewmember developed to cover the following on board activities
in the execution of all the activities associated With [5] [6].
payload Operations. The baseline concept for
ELITE 82 was to have two different environments M12 (installation 0f the IMU ill the assigned
(CI‘CW procedures and displays) because in some EXpI‘CSS I‘Ele): carried out only tWiCC, as ELITE
eases the procedure syntaX and environment is W38 used initially in the ER5 and then in ERZ-
easier and more straightforward to be followed by
the erewmember.
In other cases it is better to have the display directly
tell the crew What to do Without switching back to
the procedure.
8

"
"9","GPS: 16Fehﬂ7 16:52:44
Callbratlon of the sem:e\;:;tilrr‘ri1:gl:rxceﬁgr;:¢ieﬁgi;east::tart to re callbrate the Health and Status
Current Calibration Mode Calibration 2 Calibration
Running J Ready.
Passed J Failed J Error’J ml
Calibration1 ’ Calibration2 ’ Calculate ’ Li
ii|Legem
ii .Complete
ii .Incomnlete Remarks 1
Exit ’
Start ) ”t M,
Shutdown ’
F ig. 10 ELIT E S2 Display: instructions depending on results ofcalz'bmtion are
given directly on the display, facilitating the crew operations
Cable set—uQ (installation of the four cables disposition of equipment for the increment and
connecting the IMU t0 the cameras): with the simulating the lab conﬁguration during the
purpose of saving crew time, this activity was experiment rehearsals, by the real situation can be
originally planned for execution at the beginning of much different, therefore, for this exercise as well
operations, leave the cables deployed in the lab for 188 Video downlink coverage was requested. At the
the duration of the increment and then remove them end of the test preparation activities, the payload is
at the end of utilization. The crew decided instead powered up and the health & status data are
to deploy the cables at every performance of the received at the USOC workstation.
experiment, preferring to have a cleaner
environment in the lab. T est calibration (calibration check and system
calibration); this was expected to be the most
Camera set—uQ (installation of the four cameras critical part of the operations, both for the crew
inside the lab): this activity was quite important, time uncertainties and for the impact on the
because the positioning of the cameras is critical for resulting science. All the passive optoelectronic
the correct capturing 0f the working volume. systems depend on the calibration and the better the
As previously discussed, crew training could not calibration the better is then the quality of the
give us complete conﬁdence in the operations, acquired data. As previously discussed, training
because of the limited time, the fact that it was classes cannot provide the crewmembers with high
carried out much time before actual operations. level of proﬁciency in such exercise, and the
Additionally it happened that sometime this activity quality of the data collected then during the
was carried out, by decision of the payload experiment demonstration strongly depends on how
operations planners at MSFC, by crew members the crewmember will conduct the calibration. For
never trained. For these reasons, the 188 Video this reason, as we discussed, the ELITE SZ
downlink coverage was requested during this calibration design had been thoroughly studied
operation to be able to capture potential mis- from the fundamental algorithms during the
handling and recover before actual utilization. development phase. This approach was successful,
considering that in all the on board sessions a
T est gregamtion (preparation of the lab for the positive calibration was achieved, which means
experiment demonstration): in this part of the that, within the calibrated volume, the system could
operations the crew has to carefully clean up the reconstruct the three-dimensional coordinates of the
laboratory from protrusions that might interfere markers with an accuracy of less than 1 mm. In
with the ﬁeld of View of the cameras. This job was terms of crew time, in some occasions it took
studied on ground, by assessing the foreseen longer than planned to complete the operations, but
9

"
"10","the fact that from ground the payload engineers for data stored at the HOSC data transfer with no
could in real time have access to all payload data, data loss can be considered possible. What is
188 Video and ELITE 82 Video cameras and be affected by loss is the communicating from the
connected in voice loop with MSFC and the crew payload to the ground. This I because, unless
through the HOSC, helped a lot and facilitated any speciﬁcally required as resource, there is no data
troubleshooting operation. storage on board the 188. Therefore, since we
T est execution (marking and execution of the already store all the data on board our own system,
experimental protocol demonstration): this part of we implemented a set of commands to ask the
the operations is the core of the scientiﬁc aspects; payload to transmit again compete or parts of
the HS are involved in the operations and given the telemetry packets, in case of data loss. On the
opportunity to monitor in real time the crew ground software then we elaborated the method to
activities in particular for this part of the operations. detect any data loss on the received telemetry
In case of problems with marking or the protocol packets and to prepare the sequence of commands
execution, the PI can, through the PAYCOM, send to be sent to the payload from the TReK station for
messages to the crew for dedicated directions for the re-transrnission of the complete or parts of the
correct operations. Marking operations were in packets affected by data losses. This system
general were much fast and accurate; again, the reduced a lot the time required for data download
preliminary study for selection of not difﬁcult body and reconstruction of science data.
landmarks, the presence of Visual aids at the ELITE Over the two increments 16 and 17 ELITE 82 was
82 displays and also the performance of the last used for 5 scientiﬁc sessions, with both
pre-ﬂight BDC a few days before the ﬂight helped experimental protocols, with two different
the erewrnernbers in positioning the markers crewmembers: ESA astronaut Leopold Eyharts and
correctly on the body and in a fast and efﬁcient NASA astronaut Garrett Reisrnan. The following
way. table shows the time distribution of these sessions

in the time.
Stowage (stowage of cables, earneras, other items):
at the end of every session, all cameras and cables -—
were removed, the calibration tools were put back 16
in their pouches and the used rnarker were trashed. S S S

e e 3
Data download (retrieve of science data): during a ‘5 R
the performance of the scientiﬁc protocols, the
. 17

selenee data are collected on board the IMU and not g g
directly transferred on ground. This was a design I.-
Choiee to preserve all the computational resource of 5 i
the on board processor for the really needed T 0
activities. Only health & status data and real time T ab. 1 ELITE S2 072 b 0 a r d S e S S i 0 n S
telemetry packet containing 1nforrnat10n on the
payload processing are downloaded for immediate In terms of crew time planning and real execution,
monitoring on the payload functioning, but the the following table gives a comparison between the
science data are stored on the on board computer planning, per OSTPV and the actual time, over the
for later download. Typically, one or two days after tWO increments where ELITE 82 has been used,
the scientiﬁc performance, the crew was requested including preparatory activities and data transfer
to turn on the ELITE SZ IMU, without any need to support. It can be seen a little overtime, for a total
mount earneras, cables or other items and all the Of less than 1 hour, which corresponds to an
data transfer were conducted from ground at the underestimation CITOI Of 3%.
USOC workstation, under coordination of the
HOSC, The download concept has been developed Considering that this iS a 116W payload, With quite
with ELITE $2 architecture taking into account complex technical and scientiﬁc operations which
possible presence of data loss in the downlink path. have to be carried out a single crewmember as test
The data transfer on ground between HOSC and the subj eet and operator, we are more than happy of the
USOC can be considered reliable, because, achieved results.
although the real time communications are UDP
based, data loss is possible, but in any case FTP The crew procedures had been prepared, tested and
transfer is available for the same services, therefore used during CICW training. As a matter Of fact they

have not been Changed during their utilization

10

"
"11","onboard and no problem has been encountered for the astronaut to use bioeide wipes to Clean the skin
their utilization by both crewmembers using them. in such case.
The data acquisition itself was smooth as well.
Date Total Total Overtime Each protocol foresees 48 trials, i.e. 48 exercises,
OSTP Time (hours) where the subject repeats the movement in a
(hours) (hours) slightly different way, driven by the man-maehine
m interface of the ELITE displays at the laptop
_—_n monitor. At every session these 96 trials were
m acquired and then later downloaded to ground Via
_-_— telemetry for reconstruction and distribution to the
22/02/2008 4'33 5'08 0'75 HS. 100% of the on board collected data have been
m then made available to the MS.
————I
————u —GR0UND OPERATIONS
————u
_-_n Ground operations consisted in the preparation of
27/03/2008 5.42 5.42 O the on board operations, the support during the
m actual ISS crew activities and all the participation in
' ' the training and pre-ﬂight and post—ﬂight scientiﬁc
m baseline data collection.
_-_n Regarding the preparation of the on board
m operations, the ﬁrst step was the certiﬁcation of the
ground station to be able to receive the payload
telemetry and to control the payload operations,
Tab. 2 EL] T E S2 Crew time utilization including command transmission. This certiﬁcation
In terms of technical and return of scientiﬁc data, was achieved through intensive technical testing Of
the ELITE 82 performance was also a complete the communication hhks between the USOC
success. The crew time utilization within the located at Kayser Italia. and the HOSC and .by
planned budget already demonstrates that the means of a number of snnulated m1ss1ons carried
system worked ﬂawlessly. The system was out together w1th all the ground. controllers
successfully calibrated ob board four out of the ﬁve involved In the Increment operations .(erew
working sessions. Only at the second utilization Simulators, payload developers, Cadre pos1tions,
with Leo Eyharts, one of the four camera other HOSC operators). Once the USOC, was
processors inside the IMU was not properly certiﬁed, the normal work to cover the m1ss1on
working during the calibration test and therefore it suPpert started: This work eons1sted In several
was not possible to complete the on board aet1V1t1es eXp101t1ng the resources made available
calibration (the on-board calibration is a simpler by the HO.S.C and the USOC ground stations:
reduced algorithm, running only with the complete ' Dehhlheh Of on boand operations to be
system working with full set of four cameras). This performed each day, taking into account crew
did not cause any problem in the following thhev deﬂoad constraints, data up / dOWh hhk
scientiﬁc data collection and eventually the system capabilities, real thhe coverage and other
calibration was carried out on ground off line after requirements Wlth potential bael<up strategies.
downloading all data a few days later with the The USOC team has to coordinate Wlth the
reduced set of three cameras (actually to have the Cadre 1h Huntsv1lle, ASL the PIS and ALTEC
ELITE 82 system functional only three camera are all the payload operations to mahe sure the
required; the fourth is for redundancy). As already selentiﬁe requirements are accomplished.
presented, the self marking was carried out in a 0 Scheduling of the daily activities to be carried
correct and efﬁcient way. No marker went lose or out for the execution 0f the experiment and the
removed from the skin during the execution of the resources needed for them. This task has to be
scientiﬁc protocol. The possibility of presence of performed together With the HOSC and the
sweat on the skin was foreseen during the mission other partners involved: they have to be
preparation as a potential risk of losing markers and informed about hOW much astronaut time and
it was captured in the crew procedures, by asking hOW much power are needed, which is the
expected amount of data to be downlinked, etc.
1 1

"
"12","Fig. 11 An oﬂ-duty ELITE S2 USOC room

0 Review the crew procedures for the astronauts 0 Provision of the downloaded scientiﬁc data to
in order to verify correct on board the scientiﬁc teams, both recorded 188 Video
conﬁguration, the availability of stowed items ELITE telemetry data.
and disposable accessories. This is in particular 0 Participation in simulations with the Cadre
critical for situation of re-allocation of the position and all the other partners involved in
payload to different locations (e.g. moving to the Increment operations to certify and train the
different Express rack, placing cameras to ground operators, exercising the activities that
capture different working volumes). Will be performed in real operations, including

0 Write / review Operations Change Requests possible off—nominal conditions, testing the
(OCR) regarding payload operations and communication links and the cooperation
operational activities on board. To process among the different partners expected to
these OCRs, unattended monitoring of the participate in the operations.
PIMS workstation was required, but during the o Accomplishment of the real time operations:
days the payload was not operated, messages short-term planning, real time re-planning,
were received by the HOSC requiring to get participation into the crew daily brieﬁng and
access to the PIMS and process pending OCRs. de-brieﬁng, verbal and written reporting to the

0 Development of displays for USOC operators, Cadre, monitoring and maintenance of ground
to command and monitor the payload systems, commanding and monitoring of the
processing and experiment execution, as well ELITE SZ payload, giving the crew conference
as veriﬁcation of its compliance With the held at the beginning of the increment to
payload telemetry and telecommand database. refresh the crew on the payload operations.

0 Real time analysis of the health & status data to
check payload conditions during utilization and Besides the support to the on board operations, ASI,
react to potential off—nominal conditions the payload engineers, and the HS have been
according to mission operations book committed to the operation concerning the

0 Analysis of the downloaded scientiﬁc data and preparation 0f the crewmembers participating in the
transmission of recovery commands for ELITE $2 demonstrations. ThCSC activities
potential data loss in the downlink comprise crew training, baseline data collection

0 Recording of all Video signals received from (BDC) and all the related activities. For a payload
188 (two Video feeds), both real time and doing science on human subjects, review of the
playback experiments involves a number of different boards,

for approvals not only for the safety, but also from
the medical, ethical, physiological point of View.
12

"
"13","Finally, the experiment needs the most important instrument and the meaning of procedures they are
approval which is that Of the erewrnernber doing the asked to follow in orbit. We found very much
demonstration. All training activities have to be interest in all crewmernbers met with this purpose,
prepared, rehearsed together with the hardware, regardless of their background or education, either
software and crew procedures and certiﬁed by a being them military pilots 0r scientists. Doing this,
erewmember prior to be used for actual crew we earned their motivation and interest in the
training, both for prime and back—up. The ELITE payload Operations.
S2 experiments required three pre-ﬂight and three The next table shows the summary of ground
post-ﬂight BDCs. These BDCs are linked to the Operations related to crew activities on ELITE S2.
launch / landing date, therefore in some cases re-
scheduling were needed on the bases of launch
ELITE S2 operations were initially manifested for Test
increment 15. Then, for crew rotation planning
problems, it was necessary to postpone them to
increment 16; therefore we lost the possibility to do Clay Anderson
science on board with a erewrnernber 0f increment 04/2007 Clay Anderson Training 2
15 who already had received training. Considering --_
all the Operations requiring erewrnernbers, in total 8 Garrett Reisman Training 1
astronauts from NASA and BSA have been __
involved in the ELITE 82 Operations (see Tab. 3
_ _ Pre-ﬂight BDC 1
Frank (13 Winne Training 1
--
(NASA) 118 Payload transfer to 18$ Pre-ﬂight BDC 1
11/2007 Leo Eyharts Pre-ﬂight BDC 2
mm» . prune --—
(NASA) 124 back—up Garrett Reisrnan Pre-ﬂight BDC 2
__
(BSA) . 122 prime 02/2008 Garrett Reisman Pre-ﬂight BDC 3
-_—
038A) . backup
(NASA) 123 prime ,
. . Post-ﬂight BDC 2
T ab. 3 Crewmembers zhvolved m ELIT E S2
Operatzons
Personnel from the Payload Developer and the two Tab. 4 Training /BDC sessions 0” ELI T E S2
PIs, together with ASI representatives have
supported NASA trainers during crew training
classes and during BDC. Such effort, although LESSONS LEARNED
expensive in terms of rnan-power and overseas —
travels, was found tremendously important for the After the complex and long period leading from the
success 0f the mission. In this way it was possible handover of the ﬂight hardware to the launch and
to have, bes1des the teleconferences to get the operation through two increments, many lessons
informed consent from the involved crew, a direct have been learned.
contact between the payload team, and the
astronaut, let them understand the science behind . Facility design
their activities, the working principle of the
13

"
"14","ELITE SZ implemented the astronaut user interface experiment. This problem is under discussion for
using a Web Based Technology. This Choice was possible next sessions. One possibility is that PI
found very good, because only a Web browser was give a sort of acceptance test to the subject, other
needed on the Express laptop (no user software to than a ﬁxed number of days (i.e. R+2, plus the
be loaded) and the software part resident on the ability of standing up for 30 rnin); also, PI should
IMU was a simple Web server with pages in give elements that could qualify the best scenario
HTML, so very easy to be developed, tested and for the BDC; also, a pre-sehedule interaction with
documented; as lesson learned, this system could be the ﬂight surgeon could help deﬁne the tolerance on
improved with a more realistic facility sirnulator, the BDC schedule; ﬁnally, it would be of great
with dynamic data for different system status: support if from NASA side it is possible to get the
calibration ok, fail, etc. .. clearest information on the scheduled agenda of the
Also, the mask development and reView processes subject.
should be scheduled in an early phases of the
project (Last UI update was loaded few weeks Data/video communications
before the payload packing for ﬂight). Data link among HOSC, USOC and UHB have
been good and reliable in all the on orbit session
0 On board procedures and ground simulations. Data losses during
telemetry download were expected, but they were
Calibration was ﬁnally executed differently than it less than estimated and only related to the segment
was planned, still with positive results; between the ISS and ground. No data were lost in
earneras/Cables/reference tools have been installed the ground link.
few times in wrong places. Some problems were found on user command
It could be useful for future operations to reconsider routing (PD/Trek <i> HOSC <i> ELITE) due to
the calibration concept and the system capability to errors in some database conﬁgurations; as this is
support a unique, simpler volume calibration, to possible to occur it could be helpful to issue
verify the on—board labeling, to improve training preliminary dummy command as transmission tests
and ﬁnally to improve crew procedures by using prior to actual operations.
additional sketches. The quality of the 188 Video, despite of the data
compression was also acceptable. A number of tests
0 Operations had been preliminarily carried out from Houston to
the USOC through ALTEC to validate the selected
On [90an crew activities concept and this concept worked well during
Crew activities were monitored using real time operations.
Video from 188 which has been proved to be a very
valuable resource. By means of this real time Video, W
the ground operators highly increase their Voice communications also were successful; we
awareness on the on-board operations and are able tOOk the decision to have in the voice 100p the
to provide proper inputs when required. payload developer for all the technical matter
This has been observed during both the nominal concerning the payload and the Operations planning
and the troubleshooting activities, with an added and leave the P15 directly the responsibility to speak
value when complex and/or sensitive equipment are in the 100p in case Of any question concerning the
involved. It was anyhow sometime difﬁcult to scientiﬁc utilization. For this purpose, the UHB was
follow the astronaut protocol execution. The 3150 certiﬁed as a node in the voice 10011 111 the
understanding of the current step was relevant to communication With the crew a fast reply is
support the re-planning 0f the activities. essential and this Choice was very good because we
avoided loss of time to repeat questions among the
Ground crew activities different ELITE 82 partners.
Sorne difﬁculties have been found for setting the
post ﬂight BDC. Due to a set of uncertainty (STS
landing date, health status of the subject, other W
duties in schedule), there’s no Clear indication
whether NASA can stick to PI’s request of ﬁrst So far, Elite 82 has performed as expected and has
BDC after subject reentry; ﬁrst post ﬂight BDC provided a faithful reconstruction of subject motion
should be as early as possible, but should be also in space. Despite the huge amount 0f data got
consistent with all ﬁrst post ﬂight BDC’s for same through the payload is Still being processed by the
14

"
"15","PI teams, the scientiﬁc results look promising as the
precision With Which the subject kinematics have
been captured is one order of magnitude higher than
previous similar experiments performed by ASI.
To date, it is the only 3D motion capture system on
board the ISS capable to adapt to any body
conﬁguration.
Contacts are ongoing between NASA and A81 for
the use of Elite S2 coupled With the ARED system
in order to collect 3D data of physical exercises of
astronauts on board the 188. Also, A81 is currently
planning With NASA further uses of the payload to
improve With neW data scientiﬁc signiﬁcance of
already performed protocols, and to perform neW
ones being today deﬁned by the Italian scientiﬁc
community. At the current stage, Elite S2 use is
being proposed for use on 188 by the Italian
astronaut Paolo Nespoli.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank the NASA and
BSA astronauts Who volunteered to join the ELITE
S2 experimental campaign on ground and on board,
as listed in Tab. 3, the Payload Integration Manager
Mickie Nagy, the Lead Increment Scientist Kenol
Jules and the NASA representatives for ASI
payloads (Space Ops Research Payloads/OZ4, ISS
Payloads Ofﬁce J SC) Alan Holt and James Pelosi,
Who all made the ELITE S2 operations possible.
REFERENCES
[1] Neri G, Ferrigno G, Pedroeehi A, Baroni G,
Zolesi V, Braeeiaferri F, Pedotti A, 54th
International Astronautieal Congress Bremen
[2] Baroni G, Pedroeehi A, Ferrigno G, Massion J,
Pedotti A. Aeta Astronautiea 2001 Aug-
Nov;49(3-10):199-213
[3] Ferrigno G, Pedroeehi A, Baroni G, Braeeiaferri
F, Neri G, Pedotti A. Aeta Astronautiea 2004
May;54(10):723-35
[4] Mini Experiment Document (ED) for Elite-S2
International Space Station Medical Project
November 2007
[5] ELITE S2 User Requirements Collection for
Increment 16
[6] ELITE S2 User Requirements Collection for
Increment 17
15

"
"16","INTERNATIONAL ASTRONAUTICAL FEDERATION
FEDERATION INTERNATIONALE D’ASTRONAUTIQUE
v'oqvgﬁhﬂ HOMI,1,(/4’oo
‘91» «9
Paris, 22 April 2009
Gianluca Neri
Kayser Italia Srl
Livorno
Italy
60th International Astronautical Congrees
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
12 — 16 October, 2009
Dear Mr. Neri,
On behalf of the International Programme Committee for the 60th International Astronautical
Congress, we are pleased to inform you that your paper, ”ELITE SZ — An Instrument for Motion
Analysis on Board the International Space Station” has been accepted for a 15' presentation in the
following category:
A2. MICROGRAVITY SCIENCES AND PROCESSES SYMPOSIUM
6. Microgravity Sciences onboard the International Space Station and Beyond
Scheduled for 15/10/2009, 10:00
Room: Technical Session #9
Please acknowledge receipt of this letter, with confirmation of your attendance and presentation, to
the IAF Secretariat (secretariat.iaf@iafastro.org) and Session Chairs, and inform your co-author(s)
that your paper has been accepted.
Your Session Chairs are:
Kenol Jules, kenol.ju|es-1@nasa.gov
Rodolfo Monti, monti@unina.it
Specific instructions on how to prepare your manuscript will be available on the author’s page
accessing your restricted area on www.iafastro.org. The manuscript submission period is now open
and closes on 18 September 2009 (absolute final deadline).

"
"17","INTERNATIONAL ASTRONAUTICAL FEDERATION
FEDERATION INTERNATIONALE D’ASTRONAUTIQUE
‘9»0“ HOMI'l/oboo
‘91» «9
We would like also to remind you that:

0 Students are eligible to compete for the IAF Student Awards 2009; please download the
”IAF student award 2009 competition guidelines” and also its entry form under ”Award info”
on www.iafastro.org in the Author’s page.

0 All selected authors who fulfil the requirements and wish to apply for the Luigi Napolitano
Award 2009 can download the ""Napolitano award 2009 Application Guide” under ”Award
Info” in the Author’s page.

0 Authors of papers for the IISL Colloquium who fulfil the requirements and who wish to
enter their paper for the ""Prof. Dr. I.H.Ph. Diederiks-Verschoor Award for best paper by a
young author"" may do so by downloading the form, under 'awards info' in the ”Author Page”
on www.iafastro.org and E-mailing form and paper to the IISL Secretary at the latest one
month before the IISL Colloquium. The full regulations are also under the 'awards' section on
the website.

Your support contact regarding Technical sessions at the IAF Secretariat is Philippe Moreels
philigge.moreels@iafastro.org.
For any question regarding the registration process to the congress, please visit www.iac2009.kr.
We look forward to seeing you in Daejeon!
Prof Min-Jea Tahk Prof Petr Lala
IPC Co-Chair IPC Co-Chair

"
