"","x"
"1","47th AIAAIASMEIASCEIAHSIASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Confere AIAA 2006-2039
1 - 4 May 2006, Newport, Rhode Island
Quallﬁcatlon 0f Elastlc Memory CompOSIte Hlnges for
Spaceﬂlght Applicatlons
Rory Barretti Will Francisl, Erik Abrahamsonl, and Mark S. Lake1
Composite T echnology Development, Inc., Lafayette, Colorado, 80026
and
Mark Scherbarth§
Air F orce Research Laboratory, Kirtland AFB, New Mexico, 8 71 1 7-5 776
Future small spacecraft Will have a need for lightweight, highly reliable, and cost-
effective mechanisms for the deployment of radiators, solar arrays, and other devices. To
meet this need, Composite Technology Development, Inc. has developed TEMBO® Elastic
Memory Composite (EMC) materials, Which accommodate very high folding strains Without
damage, While providing very high deployed stiffness- and strength-t0-weight ratios. Over
the past few years, CTD has developed and performed extensive ground testing on a
TEMBO® EMC deployment hinge for radiators, solar arrays and other deployable
spacecraft components. The present paper Will discuss the details of two ﬂight experiments
to validate the TEMBO® EMC hinge design 0n-0rbit. In particular, the paper Will discuss:
1) detailed design of the ﬂight hardware for both experiments; 2) gr0und-verificati0n and
acceptance testing of the ﬂight hardware; and 3) status of the ﬂight missions.
I. Introduction
Future small spacecraft will have a need for lightweight, highly reliable, and cost—effective mechanisms for the
deployment of radiators, solar arrays, and other devices. To meet this need, Composite Technology
Development, Inc. has developed TEMBO® Elastic Memory Composite (EMC) materials, which accommodate very
high folding strains without damage, while providing very high deployed stiffness— and strength—to—weight ratios.1 In
recent years, TEMBO® EMC materials have been used to design a wide variety of innovative deployment
mechanisms and structures with improved reliability and performance, lower mass, and reduced deployment shock
compared to traditional deployment mechanisms.2

In an early effort to explore the application of TEMBO® EMC materials to deployment mechanisms, CTD
developed a prototype TEMBO® EMC deployment hinge for radiators, solar arrays and other deployable spacecraft
components.3 Initial feasibility of the TEMBO® EMC hinge concept was established through the design,
fabrication, and ground testing of a drop—in—replacement hinge for shape memory alloy hinges on the NASA New
Millennium Program (NMP) Lightweight Flexible Solar Array (LFSA). Several subsequent iterations of the
TEMBO® EMC hinge design have been made to improve all aspects of its performance, and each iteration has been
veriﬁed through hardware fabrication and testing.4

The current TEMBO® EMC hinge design is shown in Figure 1(a). The key components of the hinge are two
semi—cylindrical TEMBO® EMC laminates with embedded heaters for actuation, and two end fittings for interfacing
with the deployable structure. Figure 1(b) shows a photograph of a TEMBO® EMC hinge bent and frozen into its
packaged shape. During deployment, the TEMBO® EMC blades straighten along their length and re—assume their
circular cross section shape to “lock” into their ﬁnal deployed shape (Figure 1(a)). The deployment motion is
controlled and well—damped due to the inherent Viscoelasticity 0f the TEMBO® EMC material during actuation.

CTD has developed two spaceﬂight experiments to qualify TEMBO® EMC hinge technology. The ﬁrst mission
will be the ﬁrst ﬂight of an EMC component and is the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL)—sp0nsored Elastic
* Sr. Program Manager, 2600 Campus Drive, Suite D, AIAA Member
l Engineer, 2600 Campus Drive, Suite D, AIAA Member
1 Chief Engineer, 2600 Campus Drive, Suite D, AIAA Associate Fellow
§ Captain, USAF, 3550 Aberdeen Ave SE

1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2006 by Composite Technology Development, Inc. Published by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., with permission.

"
"2","Memory Composite Hinge (EMCH) experiment that will validate operation of six TEMBO® EMC hinges in the
shirtsleeve, zero-g environment of the International Space Station. The second mission will be the ﬁrst ﬂight of an
EMC component in a non-critical structure, and is a pair of TEMBO® EMC hinges to deploy an experimental solar
array 0n the TacSat—2 Mission. The present paper will discuss the details of the EMCH and TacSat—2 ﬂight
experiments to ﬂight-validate TEMBO® EMC hinge technology. In particular, the paper will discuss: 1) detailed
design of the ﬂight hardware for both experiments; 2) ground-veriﬁcation and acceptance testing of the ﬂight
hardware; and 3) status of the ﬂight missions.
/
3 t.
xx
\\ , "" é?
(a) Deployed configuration. (b) Packaged conﬁguration.
Figure 1. TEMBO® EMC hinge.
II. EMCH Flight Experiment

The goal of the EMCH ﬂight experiment is to validate the robustness of TEMBO® EMC hinges to deploy in off-
nominal conditions in zero-g. In addition, this experiment will study degradation due to storage and repeated
operation in the International Space Station (188) environment. The speciﬁc objectives are to determine the
accuracy, repeatability and the stability of TEMBO® EMC hinge deployment under various thermal-loading
conditions, and to verify the deployment of a TEMBO® EMC hinge against a resistive torque. The EMCH
experiment is self—contained in a housing that occupies the volume of a full EXPRESS rack locker (see Figure 2).
The EMCH experiment is designed to be operated outside the locker (inside the ISS pressurized crew modules) by
188 crew, and requires power, Videotape recording, serial data connection, data downlink, and crew interaction for
operation.

_/f~»-“_~ P _ ~ .
,./ \""ﬁx- ‘9.
3““ ' ' ""‘ ~ ' "": .‘Kbif‘hxx i; r.‘ i '
‘4’: . . . i ‘7‘*;’,f\.:' p ~.} ”2., r.
‘~;‘:%\‘é\ﬁtf » L»::{: ’3'» ,7"". .7 .f/
.‘;~\ Q thgyx , ‘ x
' ‘§:"" I :x i‘. i < 7~ ' 's ,0"" ' '
w - ~-\__ ; m. ~ ,
j ‘ . ~5_ J"".- HEX ‘5‘ J _,<""f
1‘ 'w . w"" ' ~ ""
‘ ﬂ » o #i’ f.
- 6 t ‘ ~
9 "" ~ -3. EXPRESS Locker
Figure 2. EMCH Experiment.

The EMCH experiment contains six TEMBO® EMC hinges, each approximately 10-cm by 2.5-cm by 2.5-cm in
size (see Figure 1), assembled into three test article subassemblies containing two hinges each. The test article
subassemblies will be deployed through crew actuation, while their torque-rotation history and deployment accuracy
are recorded automatically. Each test cycle starts with the astronaut crew folding the hinge test articles using tooling
and procedures provided with the experiment. Then, the crew will deploy the test articles and record data. This test
cycle will be repeated many times throughout the ISS mission. The components of EMCH are described in the
following paragraphs.

2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","A. Housing

The external housing is a siX-panel frame fastened at the panel perimeters. There is a LexanTM window over the
test subassemblies. The top surface has a recessed switch panel and a recessed tool holder. The left side of the box
has a recessed area for the power and data connectors and the fuse box. Other than the switch panel and the
LexanTM window, all the materials are machined aluminum.

B. ControlPanel

Figure 3 shows a sketch of the EMCH control panel. wneer-ET 9.;an
There is a pull-lock toggle switch and LED indicator for j; J O encumma ”L"" .
main power and there is a red LED showing electrical or
ground fault. There is a three-position, pull-lock switch for «'10:. {mm ""W“ . . .
each test assembly. Switch positions in either the “Deploy” 0‘31"""" “VW‘WE . . .
or “Reset” position send current to the hinge heaters. 3'7..."" mm . . .
Current ﬂow is indicated by the green LED’s labeled m, "" “”7“ Trﬂmcf . . .
“Power”. When the hinge has reached the set point 7h; m
temperature, the amber “Temperature” LED is lit. Rotary 9‘5."" “0:! J J J
switches control the set-point temperature for each heater “""0"".

. . . . . . . WY! AMY! mm
string. These sw1tches are n1ne-pos1tion deck sw1tches w1th
detents for each POSitiOH- Figure 3. Control panel layout.
C. Test Subassemblies

Figure 4 and Figure 5 show the test .
subassemblies. There are three subassemblies, ' \
each with two TEMBO® EMC hinges fixed at one \ s
end to the EMCH housing and connected to one .-_ \‘ 7
another at their free end by a machined plate, < “ '
referred to as a panel Simulator, which constrains ‘ * ‘. *"" L. ‘
the hinges to move in a coordinated fashion like i '1' A I E ‘_ '
they would if they were deploying a solar array or ‘ ‘ , I "" .r’ , 7’ V '
radiator panel. Each subassembly is held with its ‘ ' ' :7 A I ,
own aluminum frame that includes a LexanTM ' ' ' *
window on top for ease of Viewing. Protractors ‘ . . ‘ f , ‘1
are installed on the top and bottom face of each i ‘ "" . ‘i i ,' ""7 , ‘
subassembly box to provide a reference to ' '. ___ ' . "" ”f. —— ‘ ’
determine angular and radial position versus time ‘i - 4 '
as the pair of hinges deploy. There is an indicator
at the top and bottom of the panel simulator that
moves relative to the protractors during . .
deployment. Video of each deployment will Flgure 4' Test subassembhes.
indicate position versus time.

The hinge heaters in each subassembly are wired into two separately controlled circuits, or heater strings, to
allow differential heating of the hinges to mimic off—nominal deployment conditions that might be encountered in
operational installations of the hinge. All three subassemblies are identical except for the heater-string wiring. In
subassembly l, heater string A includes both tapes of the upper hinge and heater string B includes both tapes of the
lower hinge. In subassembly 2 heater string A includes both tapes on the left side and heater string B includes both
tapes on the right side. Finally, subassembly 3 is identical to subassembly l with the addition of a constant—force
torque spring to resist the deployment of the hinges.

The hinges are re-packaged manually by the astronauts with a ﬂatten-and-fold mechanism that is included in
each subassembly (see Figure 5). Flattening and folding of the hinges is accomplished using two cam shapes that
are coordinated with spur-and-sector gears through a single astronaut—tool interface. The cams are identified as a
pinching cam and a folding cam. The folding cam is on a swing arm that allows the cam to retract from the folded
hinge without any hinge interference. The swing-arm interfaces with a detent in both the folded and retracted
positions. The cam surfaces are UltemTM, the shafts and gears are 316 stainless steel, the cam swing arm is
aluminum. Once the hinge tapes are ﬂattened, the hinge can be folded. The folding swing arm will be driven by the
astronaut and will engage the panel simulator and push it approximately 90 degrees to package the hinges.

3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","“’0 «A,
32.35"" “ZZ—v - a , '.""..‘
..§‘$:;\\ ‘1; i g I .. J. “’2'“; ~‘. '1‘! A; 8!».J. 51“"": i 1' ' ‘ “v. ‘ ‘>‘.j:‘£;4§£;;-. .
'1?"" ‘I: t , i i ' .17 NH‘ 1N! ' ‘ ~ "" ' 1‘ {-1}
H"". . ._. l _,' '.' \.Aa-.J 1’ \' fl .,.,l- |
'0')‘ ' ‘ D. .Lv' ‘ ‘ I ,N‘u ""‘.-ii i ' ‘ I i
”1"": iii"" ' I.‘ 7i: i"" J fili' \ ‘ ’153;'/ Iii.
.4. g t W. e. . . .0 «0
£911? gilt» +1... ' $2.11 5152433,, ‘1 l "" A"" ”W. {Jr a I | J-I'LJH’
111‘}. q 3 ~55 N 3 a I N
M '1‘» r v l 1. W.» h. : e"" m
‘fﬁ: 1': a ‘ ’ ’ 's‘x‘Ls 3i Yr“; 0 1y "" l: . 3 3
“‘3 "" » 1367‘ i; s: ‘1': #149” "" ‘I‘ J ‘J'
E n"" : a”; - ”'- . ‘ V‘sgfotz‘ J i ’.__“ J ,. l... I
ilk: ' i Ji’J ‘ {£33 ‘ .sg'é'e'fiifw ""55:57:?” ‘ I ['3 _’<f5"",1<:"""",
“.:;“\ '3' J,‘..A};,;ﬁ""""'. “‘\“i§:§\“ ii y ffffigcttl”
2-;jt’ﬁr'“ *5: -~.... ‘x‘f ii .3347
Figure 5. Test subassembly 3 with torque resistance.
D. Ground Verification and Acceptance Testing - f v)
The completed EMCH ﬂight unit is shown in —— - ' ,. . a ,
Figure 6 an identical training unit was built for g, ' _ g ‘3.
astronaut training and functionality testing. Three 9 ‘~ g! ” "" i; 4i .4; _, -
sets of six TEMBO® EMC hinges each (18 total) [J 7‘: ;'.1 135.9; I? 5 ‘~
were fabricated for the EMCH experiment: one set :3? - X :' T, g 4:33.; u‘.’ .ﬂ.’ 1 ' ‘
of ﬂight hinges, one set of training-unit hinges, and g u i Q If» tfi'l-r'a
one set of control hinges. Axial stiffness was 1 ”u ,‘-;:~:::r _ ‘-
measured for the ﬂight and control hinge sets. f“ , -—-—- .
Upon return of the experiment, axial stiffness will . ’ 4 I
again be measured for both sets of hinges and the y "" ._ ‘ L ’
data will be compared to determine if any i? > "" ’1 E 3 f“ ”1-1 x 7 ‘ , l
mechanical property degradation occurred over the . I z ,| 5' t .‘
nnmerous package-and-deploy .cycles on-orbit. q 93:12:? . ' -9,
F1gure 7 shows a typlcal load-dlsplacement curve ‘ "" ‘ a g , F. . z ‘
for one ﬂight h1nge. The control set of h1nges w111 , “$1? ,
also be used as spares should any problems arise
with the ﬂight hardware prior to turnover. , , ,
Two full runs of the proposed on-orbit Figure 6. Completed EMCH ﬂight unit.
experiment matrix (26 total fold-and-deploy
actuations) were performed, using the training set of 600
hinges. The hinges successfully completed both
experimental runs and no damaged was observed 500
upon inspection. The ﬂight hinges have been
functionally tested and folded/deployed at least once Load 400
in their respective assembly. (|bs_)
Before delivery to the Air Force Space Test 300
Program (STP) Ofﬁce, the EMCH ﬂight unit was 200
Vibe tested by CTD. The purpose of the Vibe test
was to verify structural integrity and workmanship. 100
The Vibration proﬁle enveloped any possible
mounting location for Shuttle or ATV. Figure 8 °
, , 0.0 0.001 0.002 0.003 0.004 0.005 0.006 0.007 0008
shows the test setup for the X-aX1s V1be test and the Displacement, in.
X-axis control plot from Vibe testing. After the Vibe
test, the ﬂaSh memory card was observed to be Figure 7. Load/displacement curve for one ﬂight hinge.
loose from the data logger, but all systems were
otherwise functional. Subsequent functional tests
veriﬁed there were no electrical or mechanical system failures. The ﬂash card ejection problem was solved with a
small clamp attached to the side of the data logger. The card cannot be removed with the clamp in place.
4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","‘ 1‘ T'Siéﬂ-K :37: ""11:7 “' ’ .i , 30"" ‘
’F‘: : “34""1 .: -_-_._-.._. ‘5‘ w
‘ “ ’ \. ﬁﬁ” °
‘3 \. nuzwm
. ‘H. I 2;...“
. .u WI."" - ’- 1' \ m
g ,- .
‘71, _ v a
Figure 8. Test set—up and control plot for X-axis Vibe test.

At the present time, EMCH is continuing to go through NASA acceptance testing and is gaining ﬁnal approvals
for ﬂight. As of early December, 2005, EMCH had passed off-gas and s0ftware-verification testing, and crew-
procedures veriﬁcation. The NASA Phase 111 Safety Review is pending approval on two minor comments to the
safety package. EMI testing uncovered two minor electronic anomalies, and the ﬂight hardware is currently being
reworked to correct these problems. EMCH will be re-tested for the EMI verification. Also, the ATV-l launch has
continued to slip, and STP is now looking for alternative launch opportunities, including a shuttle launch in the fall
of 2006. As a result of this slip the crew training for EMCH has been rescheduled for 2006. EMCH is currently
being reviewed for manifest 0n STS-116, increment 12A.1, scheduled for October of 2006.

III. Solar Array Hinges for TacSat—Z

The TacSat—2 mission will be the first ﬂight of TEMBO® EMC hinges in a non-critical deployable structure.
TacSat—2 is a 837-1bm satellite being developed by AFRL to demonstrate several new spacecraft technologies of
interest to the Air Force, including advanced solar array technologies. The Experimental Solar Array (EXpSA) on
TacSat—2 will provide ﬂight heritage for TEMBO® EMC hinges and for the MicroSat Systems, Inc. (MSI) Foldable
Integrated Thin-Film Stiffened (FITS)5 solar array deployment system. EXpSA consists of two experimental FITS
solar arrays deployed off of the two main spacecraft solar arrays (see Figure 9). The EXpSA arrays are identical,
With the exception of the hinges connecting them to the main array. TEMBO® EMC hinges are used on one Wing,
and conventional torsion-spring hinges (labeled “MSI Hinges” in Figure 9) are used on the other to provide
deployment force between the main solar array and the EXpSA solar arrays. Power produced by the EXpSA solar
arrays will enhance the TacSat—2 mission, but is not critical to mission success.

ExpSA a-Si
Wing / Restraint Panel
_ I g ExpSA CIGS
EMC Hinges , , {g
Main Array Tl"", . f, -
‘2'"" . if I- .279“;
"" "" MSIHinges
Figure 9. TacSat—Z EXpSA experiment.
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","A. Integration of Hinges onto TacSat—Z Spacecraft

The TacSat-2 EXpSA TEMBO® EMC hinges are essentially . - I .
identical to the hinges ﬂown on EMCH (see Figure 1). The "" J _. A 4 ‘
ﬂight hinges were delivered to MSI on December 30, 2004 - ‘

(one is shown in Figure 10 for spacecraft integration). One W ‘ ' '
notable observation made by MSI during integration was that ' ‘ , '

the TEMBO® EMC hinges alleviated a tolerance stack—up issue 5, ’, ""~.- ""

that was found on the conventional torsion-spring hinges ’ , § \

(labeled MSI hinges in Figure 9 and shown close-up in ) used 72;“, , , "" a x

to deploy the second FITS array. Tolerance stack—up in that ‘

array assembly resulted in the conventional hinges not fitting \. v, ‘~ ‘

together when it was packaged. To compensate for this, MSI '

had to disassemble and re-machine some of the components. A

similar tolerance stack—up issue existed on the solar array with Figure 10. TEMBO® EMC ﬂight hinge shown
the TEMBO® EMC hinges, but when this array was packaged, integrated onto ExpSA and packaged.

the packaged EMC hinges were compliant enough to easily

allow the solar panels to move as needed and fit together ‘

nicely, despite the tolerance stack—up. Once deployed, ’ 1 ,3

however, the EMC hinges held the solar panel in a very precise . ' m, "" f
position. v ‘ - ﬂ

For the TacSat—2 installation, the TEMBO® EMC hinges 11*. ‘ . J .
are wrapped in a single layer of aluminized polyimide thermal 5% h
shroud, as shown in Figure 12. This barrier reduces radiative , ‘ ; 1*"" . ’
heat transfer losses to the space environment while the hinges F \L j . ‘ .
are being heated for deployment. The thermal shrouds were ‘ . L f - '
installed after the initial deployment testing, so that the hinge “
could be easily observed during the initial tests. After ’ ‘
installation of the shrouds, testing was performed to ensure that Figure 11. Conventional torsion-spring hinges
the they did not present a snag hazard or prevent deployment in for EXpSA.
any way. Additionally, the graVity-off-load deployment tests, , _
discussed in this paper, were performed with the thermal __r
shrouds installed, and no problems noted. ~’ / , , . , < “—g - 3‘ .4.

I q . . 1. 7:24: . > 1 ,_
. .- ‘ "" ' “T'CTH‘JS i 7%. - 3'. .-
B. TacSat—Z EXpSA Assembly Random Vibration Testing 3 a ' 3 ,

Random Vibration testing was performed on the EXpSA
ﬂight hardware by the University of Colorado (CU) Center for 4 ‘ ‘
Aerospace Structures (CAS) at Ba11 Aerospace & Technologies
Corp. (BATC), Boulder, Colorado, under contract to M81. The - .1 ” .
test setup is shown in Figure 13. The system was fastened to 7 '1 . y ”é _, ' g; .
an interface plate that was geometrically equivalent to the main ' ' 1"" .2“
array that the EXpSA wi11 interface with in the ﬂight system ' ‘ "" '

(see Figure 9). The Vibration spectrum used for this testing was Figure 12. TEMBO® EMC hinges With thermal

was 9.2g RMS. The Vibration testing was successfully shrouds installed.

completed with no noticeable damage. Additional deployment ' _

and functional testing was completed after the Vibration testing, - M ' ‘-

verifying that no electrical or mechanical damage occurred. ' 2‘"" , r/v ‘ ‘ .
restraint ' / ‘ ' J

C. TacSat—Z EXpSA Deployment Testing _ plate ‘ ,_ .'

CU performed the EXpSA deployment testing in the CAS (g T ‘ ~~‘ ‘
laboratory under contract to MSI.6 Dr. Jason Hinkle and Joni . . i: , .“ Intcrﬁ‘lic!‘
Jorgenson designed the gravity-compensated test fixture (as , (\ /-é .' placid
shown in Figure 14) and protocol for the deployment testing. ’r‘ka‘r: ‘ . /} ""mi ' .

The test system is composed of three main components. The \ . ﬂ _ 2! ' , q. .9.—
first is a rigid, level mounting structure (see Figure 14) that the . .'\ ‘ o .3 . h ‘ ‘, $3“.-. "" ' :75 :
EXpSA interface plate is mounted to. The second is a set of
two Kevlar cables that are attached at the center of mass of Figure 13' Random Vibrationgtest setup for
EXpSA system With TEMBO EMC hinges.
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","each z-folded section. These cables are supported by a very low stiffness linear spring, and are attached to a ﬁxed
pivot point approximately ﬁfteen feet above the top of the panel. This point is located on the rotational axis of the
root hinges, thus insuring that the gravity compensation system induces no moments about this axis. The third
component of the test system is a Videometry data acquisition system to record the motion of reﬂective targets
placed on the EXpSA during the deployment.
Wire Teﬂon off-
harness /* load cables
.f
a .4 - _ __ _ ‘ ‘
L i ."" i ' Release
T l- U 'h‘ . . ' dev1ce
. . ’ . ""i .
Tri-fold "" ' i {Ad (I; 3,,
- \
Illnge "" A I ; EMC
llnes , - l . \v ~ .
* :I’A I
; ‘ \i g i ...L_
\/9 1 ' ’ ""
if f/ ‘ . Interface
E i' l' 1"" slate
l
i . ""’ ‘ Restraint
. ‘ slate
lag ' - Rigid
pwm \ mounting
structure
Figure 14. EXpSA deployment testing.

Three deployment tests were conducted to verify the functionality of the system. In all three tests a DC power
supply (set to the proper voltage to mimic the supply power from the TacSat—2 spacecraft bus) was used to power
the TEMBO® EMC hinges. The first deployment test was done at room temperature and allowed only the z-fold
hinge lines of the EXpSA to deploy, while constraining the tri-folded panels (see Figure 14) such that they could not
deploy. By looking out the tri-fold panels, this test was focused on only the first two stages of deployment: release of
the restraint plate, and deployment of the TEMBO® EMC hinges and the z-fold hinges. This deployment was
gradual, resulting in very low end-of—deployment shock (as desired), and positive locking of the solar array. This
test scenario was repeated three times with similar results.

The second deployment test was the same as the ﬁrst, except that the tri-fold hinge lines were not restrained,
which allowed the lower tri-fold panels to deploy downward with gravity. The upper tri-fold panels did not have
enough deployment force to overcome gravity and thus did not deploy. This test scenario was successfully repeated
twice at room temperature. Figure 14 shows the array at the end of one of these deployments. The third deployment
test was the same as the second, but conducted with the EXpSA assembly pre-cooled to a nominal temperature of -
40°C using liquid nitrogen. This test also demonstrated successful deployment of the TEMBO® EMC hinges.

D. TEMBo® EMC Hinge Deployment Torque Veriﬁcation

The deployment—torque-output requirement for the TEMBO® EMC hinges was derived from the maximum
hindering torque created by the wire harness that runs across the hinge line (see Figure 12). The wire harness design
was speciﬁed by MSI, but the maximum hindering torque created by this wire harness was not specified. Therefore,
CTD performed hindering-torque testing on samples of the wire harness, and torque-output testing on the TEMBO®
EMC hinges to verify adequate torque margin. This torque testing was done at CTD’s facility using a test apparatus
designed for pure-torque testing of ﬂexible members over large rotations (see Figure 15).

A typical set of hindering-torque data from a sample of the EXpSA wiring harness is shown in the brown curve
in Figure 16. Note that the ordinate axis is hindering torque (in in-oz), and a positive value hindering torque
indicates that the harness is hindering the deployment motion. Conversely, a negative value of hindering torque

7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","indicates that the Wire harness is aiding deployment motion. Also note that the abscissa is labeled packaging angle,
and a 0° packaging angle corresponds to the fully deployed conﬁguration, While a 180° packaging angle corresponds
to fully packaged.
I 20 V v v V ﬂarifnzvsiassse v
34"""". . a _ A _XSEZL‘B‘ZZ _
.__.-F '“t The a1 chamber 16
. _ _.e 12 , a ,
Stepper r otors/ i T"" '..'.l .- _' 8 ‘ ,
Jae, 93-8 i"" 1"" ' n - Z
I i- I i i E‘Specmlen E 4 M i
_l - I 1 lb... - E, 0|| 20 4O 6‘“ 2‘ 100 120 140 160 10
"".I .""jii'u -.,I it} E _8 A , 1 A , 1
i F 1 III"" 1f _ -""-._.:'-|'-I_ {1'17"" -12 , ' ' '
"" --,_-= if -.s- r .. I11 : -
d -- ' A_hear bearing .- __ .- ._ J: .- .16 r r r r
_f‘ﬂ .: ._T. .- .__.
CO L31 bog: ; "" I -.... .20
Packaging Angle (deg)
Figure 15. Torque-testing apparatus. Figure 16. Typical worst-case hindering torque.

The hindering-torque data are approximately linear and the slope of the curve is equal to the bending stiffness of
the Wire harness. The zero-torque point on the curve can be altered due to temperature cycling of the Wire insulation
material or plastic deformation of the wire. Therefore in order to be most conservative, the hindering-torque results
are shifted upwards (see red curve in Figure 16) such that the zero-torque point is in the fully packaged
configuration, and the harness is assumed to provide a positive hindering torque, of increasing magnitude,
throughout the deployment stroke.

Several different ExpSA wiring harness conﬁgurations were tested using this procedure, and the results are
compared in Figure 17. Two of the conﬁgurations provided very low hindering torque (see lower two, right—hand
photos in Figure 17). The first of these conﬁgurations requires the shielding to be locally removed from the three
twisted Wire pairs, and a small service loop to be included where the wires cross the hinge line. The hindering-
torque curve for this conﬁguration is shown in tan in Figure 17. The second Wire harness conﬁguration simply
routes the Wire harness diagonally across the hinge line to add length to, and lower the effective stiffness of, the
harness. The hindering-torque curve for this configuration is represented by the green curve in Figure 17. Plotted in
purple in Figure 17 are torque-output data measured from the pair of TEMBO® EMC hinges. Clearly, the hinges
provide at least twice the necessary torque-output throughout the deployment stroke for either of the two harness
installations just described. CTD provided these results to MSI for their consideration in determining the final design
for the wire-harness installation.

I I.
Static Deployment Torque for Roadrunner ExpSA l. ' 2'”. ll
36 7 >
32 —Combined RR ExpSA EMC Hinges 7
—-4OC Straight Harness - '- _
28 —-4OC Loop w/ no Shielding -?.| -. F ' 3—1.:
_-4OC,17.25inch DiagonalHarness ‘ I r m I
16 !‘I I 1 «hi?
0 o 20 4o 60 80 100 120 140 160 k; 180 I' I _ ""1. '
Packaging Angle (deg) -""-.___ 'Ir _
Figure 17 . Torque testing data.
8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","E. Deployed Stiffness Veriﬁcation
The stiffness requirement for the EXpSA hinges was derived from a minimum deployed frequency requirement
for the array of 0.5Hz. Assuming the fundamental Vibration mode of the system to be bending of the hinges in
response to rigid—body motion of the array, and assuming the hinges to be mounted to a rigid ground, the following
relationship defines the approximate bending Vibration frequency of the system, f, in Hz.
1/2
1 2kg
= _ _ 1
f 2311 ( m J ( )
In eq. (1), l is the length from the hinge t0 the array center of mass, k is the effective bending stiffness of each
T EMBO® EMC hinge, m is the mass of the rigid array, and g is the gravitational conversion constant. Re—ordering
eq. (1) gives the following derived bending—stiffness requirement for the pair of TEMBO® EMC hinges:
k 2 2(nlf)2 ﬂ (2)
g
The center of mass of the array is conservatively estimated to be its geometric center, so I is deﬁned to be 16
inches. The total mass of the array, m, is 2.2 lbm, which requires a conversion constant of g = 386 lbmin/lbfsz.
Substituting these values, and f = 0.5Hz, into eq. (2) gives the following requirement for the hinge bending stiffness.
k 2 7.2 in - lbf/rad (3)
To verify that the TEMBO® EMC hinge meets this requirement, the bending stiffness of the hinge was
determined using ﬁnite element analysis (FEA). A quarter—model 0f the hinge was used with symmetry conditions
and composite properties to represent each EMC laminate as shown in Figure 18. The results of the analysis are
summarized in Table 1. Clearly, the hinge design provides more than adequate deployed stiffness to meet the 0.5Hz
fundamental—frequency requirement for EXpSA. Indeed, the fundamental Vibration mode is a ﬂexible—body mode of
the solar array, not a hinge—bending mode.6
Figure 18. TEMBO® EMC hinge geometry and FEA model.
Table 1. FEA-Computed Stiffnesses for the TEMBO® EMC Hinge
Property
Bending stiffness 2883 in—lbf/rad
Extensional stiffness 1.39 E+05 psi
Torsional stiffness 27.58 in—lbf/rad
IV. Summary
Future small spacecraft will have a need for lightweight, highly reliable, and cost—effective mechanisms for the
deployment of radiators, solar arrays, and other devices. To meet this need, Composite Technology Development,
Inc. has developed TEMBO® Elastic Memory Composite (EMC) materials, which accommodate very high folding
strains without damage, while providing very high deployed stiffness— and strength—to—weight ratios. Over the past
few years, CTD has developed and performed extensive ground testing on a TEMBO® EMC deployment hinge for
radiators, solar arrays and other deployable spacecraft components. The present paper discusses the details of two
ﬂight experiments to validate the TEMBO® EMC hinge design on—orbit. The first mission is the Air Force Research
Laboratory (AFRL)—sp0ns0red Elastic Memory Composite Hinge (EMCH) experiment that will validate operation
9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"10","of six TEMBO® EMC hinges in the shirtsleeve, zero—g environment of the International Space Station. The second
mission is the TacSat—2 Mission on which a pair of TEMBO® EMC hinges will deploy an experimental solar array.

To date, essentially all design—validation, and hardware—acceptance testing has been done on the ﬂight hardware
for both the EMCH and the TacSat—2 experiments. Only minor discrepancies have been found throughout these test
campaigns, and design modiﬁcations for all but one discrepancy (EMI problem on EMCH) have been completed. In
all tests, the TEMBO® EMC hinges have performed up to, or beyond, expectations. In addition, general feedback
from indiViduals involved with the integration and testing of the hinges has been very complimentary and positive.

Key accomplishments of these tests include:

° TEMBO® EMC hinges have passed random Vibration testing for the EMCH and TacSat—2 EXPA programs.

° TEMBO® EMC hinges have successfully completed deployment testing for the TacSat—2 EXpSA at room
temperature and at —400 Celsius.

° Deployment—torque testing has been performed on the TEMBO® EMC hinges for the TacSat—2 EXpSA to show
substantial positive design margin.

° Analysis of post—deployed stiffness of the TEMBO® EMC hinges for the TacSat—2 EXpSA show substantial
positive design margin.

As of this writing, CTD was awaiting conﬁrmation of ﬂight manifesting for both the EMCH and the TacSat—2
payloads. EMCH is schedule to launch in late 2006 (at the earliest), and TacSat—2 is awaiting a launch—vehicle
assignment for either 2007 or 2008.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to acknowledge the support of Mr. Bill Zuckermandel of Microsat Systems, Inc. who
was responsible for integrating the TEMBO® EMC hinges into the EXpSA ﬂight hardware, and Dr. J ason Hinkle of
University of Colorado who led the one—g deployment test program for the EXpSA ﬂight hardware. The authors
would also like to acknowledge the Vehicle Systems DiVision of the Air Force Research Laboratory for their
technical guidance and support of the present work under Phase III SBIR Contract No. FA9453—04—C—0292. Finally,
the authors would like to acknowledge the support of the DoD Space Test Program Office, who is responsible for
manifesting and launching both the EMCH and the TacSat—2 payloads.

References

1Gall, Ken, Tupper, Michael L., Munshi, Naseem A., and Mikulas, Martin M., “Micro-Mechanisms of Deformation in Fiber
Reinforced Polymer Matrix Elastic Memory Composites,” Presented at the 42nd AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC SDM
Conference, April 16-19, 2001, Seattle, WA, AIAA Paper No. 2001-1419.

2Lake, M. S., Munshi, N. A., and Tupper, M. L., “Application of Elastic Memory Composite Materials to Deployable Space
Structures,” Presented at the AIAA 2001 Conference and Exposition, Albuquerque NM, 28-30 August, 2001, AIAA Paper No.
2001-4602.

3Beavers, F. L., et al., “Design and Testing of an Elastic Memory Composite Deployment Hinge for Spacecraft
Applications,” Presented at the 43rd AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC SDM Conference, April 22-25, 2002, Denver, CO, AIAA
Paper No. 2002-1452.

4Will Francis, et al., “Development and Testing of a Hinge Incorporating Elastic Memory Composites,” Presented at the 44th
Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference, 7-10 April 2003, Norfolk, Virginia, AIAA Paper No. 2003-1496.

5Clark, C., Wood, J., and Zuckermandel, B., “Self—Deploying, Thin-Film PV Solar Array Structure,” Presented at 16th
Annual/USU Conference on Small Satellites, SSC02-VIII-5, 2002.

6Jorgensen, J . R., E. L., Hinkle, J . D., Silver, M. J ., Zuckermandel, B., and Enger, 8., “Dynamics of an Elastically Deployable
Solar Array: Ground Test Model Validation,” Presented at the 46th Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference,
18-21 April 2005, Austin, Texas, AIAA Paper No. 2005-1942.

10
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
