"","x"
"1","A. Zin, S. Landenna et al: ENEIDE: an Experiment of a Space-borne, Ll/L2 Integrated GPS/WAAS/EGNOS Receiver
A. Zin, S. Landenna, A. Conti, L. Marradi, M S. Di Raimondo
o
ENEIDE: an Experlment of a Space-
borne, L1/L2 Integrated
GP S/WAAS/E GNOS Receiver
, , , , , , Introduction
The ENEIDE mzsszon eonszsted 0f 22 selentzﬁe experzments that
were carried out .0” the SWIM and 0n the International Space One of the main purposes of the ENEIDE experiment is the ver-
Statton (ISS) durzng the ﬂzght 0f the Soyuz 105 to the [SS m iﬁcation 0f the beneﬁts of having the real-time data availability
1.11pm] 2005' Aneong these experzments there WC.” the ENEIDE from WAAS/EGNOS satellites for integrity and positioning
Instrument, whzeh gave the name to the whole mzsszon. ENEIDE - - - -
. . . purposes. This concept can drive toward critical space-based
ZS a Spaee-qttalzﬁee’, dual-frequeney, zhtegmted GPS/WAAS' Operations by deﬁning new integrity standards for space borne
EGNOS reeezver azmedto the verzﬁeatzon 0f the tracktng (?f GPS receivers. Moreover, since EGNOS is an important part Of
GBSplus the augmentatzon systems from S1? ace. The reeezver ZS the future GALILEO constellation the ENEIDE experiment can
buzlt by Thales Alenta Space _ Itaha, Mtlan plant O‘ormerly be seen as a ﬁrst bridge toward integrated GPS/GALILEO oper-
Laben), 0n the baszs 0f the Spaee-quahﬁed dual-frequeney ations in space.
reeezver LA GRANGE that M” 19.6 a payload Ofseveml ESA and The mission environment of the ENEIDE experiment is quite
Itahan Space Agency mzsszons hke E5143 GOCE or the Itahan critical from an Operational point of View. The receiver was
COSMO SKYMED constellatzon t0 czte few examples. ThlS Operated by the Italian astronaut R. Vittori from within the
paper addresses the ﬁrst results of the ENEIDE ﬂzght data Soyuz and the 188 in seven pre-assigned observation slots. The
analyszs. ﬁrst three slots happened in the transfer phase of the Soyuz
toward the 188. Due to attitude constraints of the Soyuz module,
the bore sight of the receiver antenna, which is mounted on the
Soyuz external body, was in a “non-standard” attitude environ-
ment (Sun-pointing). This is a quite different Operational envi-
ronment for a GPS antenna which, by default, shall be pointed
toward zenith (i.e. outer radial). This type of attitude has large
impacts on GPS satellites Visibility. Moreover, during these
phases orbital and attitude manoeuvres were executed and were
reﬂected on the receiver raw data. The remaining observation
periods happened when the Soyuz was attached on the 188. Also
in this case the position of the ENEIDE antenna was critical in
terms of GPS Visibility. As an unexpected side-effect 0f the
antenna pointing, it was Observed that the GPS satellites can be
tracked down to the Earth limb. This peculiarity was useful in
order to analyse the GPS radio—occultation performances (in
terms of Ll/LZ tracking capabilities) of the receiver, consider-
ing that it was not optimised at all for this kind of application.
From a technical point of View there were different chal-
Authors lenges in this project. First Of all the time constraints: the proj-
ect started in August 2004 and the validated ﬂight model was
A. Zin, S. Landenna, A. Conti, L. Marradi, M. S. Di Raimondo ready in February 2005. This was only possible due to the AAS-
Thales Alenia Space -Italia
54 © Z-Tec Publishing, Bremen Microgravity sci. technol. XIX-5/6 (2007)

"
"2","A. Zin, S. Landenna et al: ENEIDE: an Experiment of a Space-borne, L1/L2 Integrated GPS/WAAS/EGNOS Receiver
I acquired experience in building and validation of GPS toring functions. All the data acquired by the ENEIDE RX were
receivers. The acquisition of the WAAS—EGNOS navigation stored on the laptop hard drive. At the end of the mission the
message required the addition of different SW modules w. r. t., data were transferred on a removable PCMCIA hard drive and
the standard LAGRANGE, like the Viterbi decoder. For this brought back to Earth by R. Vittori.
experiment the information obtained from the tracking of The ENEIDE receiver processes GPS signals in both the L1
WAAS/EGNOS satellites were not used in the receiver nominal and L2 frequency bands, allowing compensation of ionospheric
operations. Instead, they are checked on ground and its usabili- delays. WAAS — EGNOS signals (in L1 band only) are also
ty for real-time space applications is going to be assessed. The processed. A codeless adaptive tracking scheme ([1]) is imple-
eornrnunication between the receiver (which does not possess mented in order to process the encrypted P(Y) signals transmit-
st0rage capability per se) and the test equipment was done ted in the GPS L2 frequency band when Anti-Spooﬁng is on.
through a Mil Std 1553 I/O that connects on a laptop Operated The instrument was equipped with one hemispherical coverage
by the astronaut. antenna with (nominal) bore sight pointed to the Zenith direc-
Another important challenge of the experiment is the GPS ti0n.
satellite acquisition. Since n0r orbital n0r attitude information Twelve dual-frequency channels were available and divided
were available at the end, a fully cold-start procedure was in 10 channels for GPS tracking and 2 channels devoted to
implemented. This technique is an “enhanced blind-search” WAAS—EGNOS tracking. The receiver uses the AGGA-2a sig-
strategy that proved to be efﬁcient in the instrument validation nal processing chip ([1]) developed by the European Space
scenarios. On the ISS, time and orbit information were available Agency (ESA).
but the satellite Visibility was considerably worse, due to the
ISS attitude and the position of the Soyuz module on the station. The main data generated by the instrument are:
OVERVIEW OF THE ENEIDE MISSION AND INSTRU- ° L1 C/A-Code phase measurements (pseudO-ranges)
MENT CONFIGURATION from GPS and WAAS/EGNOS
° L2 P-Code phases from GPS (serni-codeless tracking,
The ENEIDE experiment can be ideally divided two main phas- [1])
es: the ﬁrst on the cruise phase of the Soyuz t0 the ISS and the ° L1/L2 integrated doppler from the GPS satellites
second after the Soyuz docking 0n the ISS. The following table ° L1 integrated doppler from the WAAS/EGNOS
shows the seven time slots and their duration: satellites
° Signal-to-Noise ratio at L1 and L2 bands for GPS
satellites
ENEIDE EXPERIMENT - MISSION PHASES (GPS Time) ° Signal to Noise ratio at Ll for EGNOS/WAAS
satellites
Phase 1 Soyuz cruise to ISS 06:24 _ 09:00 April 15 ° Filtered (Navigation Kalman Filter) and unﬁltered
. _ _ . (Single Point Solution) real-tirne navigation solutions
w using GPS L1 C/A signal
Phase 3 Soyuz cruise to ISS 15:26 — 03:30 April 16-17
Phase 4 After docking 0n ISS 0954 _ 1554 April 19 Additional information available from the instrument are the
. _ . GPS and GEO navigation message (for post-proeessing),
W receiver “detailed” internal status, Kalman ﬁlter covariance and
Phase 6 After docking on ISS 08:28 — 10.00 April 23 range residuals.
w DATA OVERVIEW ON SOYUZ
Table 1 .° ENEIDE Experiment Missian Phases
The quantity of data collected corresponds to ~ 45 hours of The ENEIDE receiyer perfgrrnecl according to expectations in
. . . all the Soyuz tracking sess10ns in terms of tracked satellites,
receiver act1V1ty. d 1 f b'l't' t I F' 1 th , t k'
The ENEIDE instrument is composed by a receiver, the RF ua requency capa 1 1 16,8 e. C' n .1gure e “96”“ rac 1ng
. . capabilities under Sun-p01nt1ng attitude (phase 3 in Table 1) are
cables that connects the receiver to the antenna and an herni- , , ,
. . . . shown. In the ﬁgure it can be seen how the Sun pornting makes
spherical antenna. The receiver was installed in the Soyuz . . . .
. the number of satellite V1s1ble t0 the antenna from 0 to 12 With-
Orbital Module and the GNSS antenna was mounted on the sur- . . . . . .
face 0 f the Soyuz. in an orbital period (~ 90 min). The docking time Of the Soyuz
An IBM ThinkPad Laptop was use d to interface the ENEIDE spacecraft to ISS is captured in the same ﬁgure, in which the
. . ﬁnal manoeuvres are V1s1ble starting from 30000 s. In the same
RX and connected to it us1ng a MIL-BUS 1553 data cable to ‘6 . . ,, . . .
. . . . . ﬁgure the d01ng NKF solution ﬂag (a quality indicator of the
provrde communication functions. The MMIpr0V1ded access to . . . . . .
. . . . . NKF solution status) is also V1s1ble, sh0w1ng essentially no loss
the main functions of the receiver for cornrnanding and mom-
MicrograVity sci. teehnol. XIX-5/6 (2007) 55

"
"3","A. Zin, S. Landenna et al: ENEIDE: an Experiment of a Space-borne, L1/L2 Integrated GPS/WAAS/EGNOS Receiver
of solution of all the analysed period of time except the docking EGNOS/WAAS TRACKING
phase, in which additional ranging sensors were activated on the
Soyuz that probably caused interference to the RX functioning. The added value of the ENEIDE mission was the geostationary
The equivalent SPS solution ﬂag (“doing SPS”) behaved as tracking of Satellite Based Augmentation Systems from the
expected, i.e. when the tracked satellite were below four it fell LEO orbit. The tracked satellites are listed in Table 2 :
down to zero. The docking phase is also evident from the oscu-
lating orbital elements obtained from the SPS solution. —
As a general statement, it can be said that even if the receiV- GEOSTATIONARY EGNOS / WAAS SATELLITES
er was not developed having in mind this kind of attitude enVi- —
ronrnent, it performed well, continuously providing ﬁltered Satellite PRN Norad Org.
navigation solution, SPS (when the number of satellites in View —
were enough) and dual frequency raw data for both GPS and WAAS AOR — W PRN 122 24819 Inmarsat 3F4
WAAS/EGNOS- WAAS POR — w PRN 134 24674 Inmarsat 3F3
DATA OVERVIEW ON 188 EGNOS AOR — E PRN 120 24307 Inmarsat 3F2
EGNOS Artemis PRN 124 26863 Artemis
AS for the S.Oyuz phases” ENEIDE Performed ae.cordnlg t0 EGNOS IOR — w PRN 126 25153 Inmarsat 3F5
expectations in all the ISS tracking sess10ns. The orbital att1tude m
of the 188 allows the tracking of satellites more similar to the a e ' _ sate lies ”ac e y '
default zenith pointing antenna attitude, but due to the peculiar . . . . . .
. . . . . The receiver s1gnal process1ng was modiﬁed in order to 1ntr0-
p0s1t10n 0f the antenna the resulting tracks are d1str1buted as . . .
shown in Figure 2 where a skyplot 0f the GPS satellite tracked duce a Vlterbl decoder rnodnle (rate U2) in order to. clemodulate
by ENEIDE can be seen. In the plot 0 degrees represents veloc- the EGNOS./WAAS naV1gat10n message. The acqu1s1t10n Of the
ity, 180 the anti-velocity directions. The center of the ﬁgure is GEO h staltellites wastperrnigted E y fath pre;l?ﬁfed alrntarliafl 1:
the local zenith (outer radial direction). The blue line represent W 10 e mean p0s1 ion 0 .eac 0 e. sa e es was S 0 e '
the local horizon (a plane de ﬁne (1 by Transverse and orbi t new telemetry packet was 1ntr0duced in order to transmit the
Normal) while the green circle represents the contour of the raw data and. the naV1gat10n message. . .
Earth as seen from 188 (N _ 20 degrees elevation). The tracking time .Of the GEO satellites during the Soyuz
Note that, as a side effect, the satellites were tracked down to phase .2 is shown in Figure 3} . . .
the Earth limb Due to the particular an tenna orientation the As it can be seen, the striking feature is the intermittent track-
maximum gain. 0 f the an tenna was toward _ 10 degrees eleva- ing of the GEO satellites. Moreover, SNR issues present in the
tion. This makes ENEIDE a radio—occultation and space weath-
er (ionospheric monitoring) sensor, even if not optimised at all ENEIDE on ISS _ 20 Apr 2005 - Azimuth I Elevation
for this application. In both phases of the experiment, the rele- 90
vant orbital elements are essentially those of the ISS, i.e. a=360 :_ -30
km, e ~ 0 and i ~ 52 deg. 120‘ ‘ ~%*—— :60
',_ ' \\ “V, / / _..-..
mmmwm S§3iféz . ‘ .
as 15 ‘. ‘ .g \_\_""F"" , «if 30
‘° 0 §~s\w\- ""
0o 0.3 1 1,5 gun”: a :5 a "":5 ‘ L. : -i '4 |
- 1 '. ‘. . ; ’ .. 18° ..... ”i o
2 1 ~ /,,"".‘--—- .0 0 ‘1
0I l l x ‘71,, ’ ""7' ‘ ’
o o: u 1.5 2 2.5 3 3: 4 45 _ ,3 ""Nix:
comm nd' ’ v, ,_ A, -.
oa . ,3, - ‘
as I Q/{_ ‘
3“]: l I’ (f \ ,‘
0:0 05 i I5 2 25 3 35 4 ‘5 240 r V“ 7;: —— __-l g 300
M v “a 270
F ig. 1 .° ENEIDE; session 3. Number 0ftracked satellites, number of Fig. 2; Sky-plot of GPS satellite tracked by ENEIDE 0n the ISS.
used satellites in the NKF solution and “doing NKF” solutionﬂag. More details on the text
56 MicrograVity sci. technol. XIX-5/6 (2007)

"
"4","A. Zin, S. Landenna et al: ENEIDE: an Experiment of a Spaoe-borne, Ll/L2 Integrated GPS/WAAS/EGNOS Receiver
Soyuz phases did not allow an optimal tracking to all the GEO have a different meaning for a space user: the most natural def-
satellites. It has to be pointed out that in order to continuously inition is to link these word to the orbital reference frame, and
apply the EGNOS—WAAS navigation message corrections to in particular the vertical direction can be linked to the outer
the raw data, continuous tracking of the GEO satellite would be radial (+R) while the “horizontal” is in the plane deﬁned by the
required. This can be hard to achieve for particular orbit incli- <T N> directions. This is of course one of the possible choices.
nations, like the polar orbits, in which periods of complete Another choice could be to still evaluate the East-North plane
blinding to the GEO satellites can be expected. Since the cor- centered on the satellite (i.e. the horizontal plane) and give the
reotions provided by the EGNOS—WAAS system have a time of horizontal protection level (HPL) referred to this plane, and the
applicability, the problem is how to cope with the missing infor- vertical direction, deﬁned to be the outer—radial R (i.e. “‘Up”) for
mation outside the validity time of applications. the Vertical Protection Level (VPL).
The GEO Navigation Message, described in [2], consists of
different message types, providing the user with different types EGNOS/WAAS APPLICATIONS ON ENEIDE
of information. Types 2-5 (Fast Correction) are corrections sent
to the user and intended for the correction of fast errors (typi- The main advantages of EGNOS/WAAS tracking are, among
oally clock errors, like S/A). These corrections apply directly on others, improved accuracy and availability of integrity. The lat-
the measurements, i.e. pseudorange data. Long Corrections ter basically translates into availability of the Protection Level,
(Message Type 24-25) provide the user with the means for cor- which provides the user with a bound to the navigation error
recting slowly varying effects like errors in the broadcast GPS that is usually compared against a speciﬁed Alarm Limit (dif-
ephemeris and clocks. Integrity values are provided together ferent for speciﬁc user application and criticality of application)
with these data, giving an overall accuracy of the solution after to state a “use/don’t use” ﬂag about the receiver solution output.
application of the corrections. It has to be evaluated if ionos- ENEIDE did not have, at experiment time, EGNOS/WAAS
pherio corrections (Message Type 26) can still be used, since “application software” on-board, only the tracking module was
they are usually deﬁned for ground (or airborne) users. In any present. Therefore it could not use the EGNOS/WAAS mes-
oase, the latter requires a ionospheric grid to be built and in sages in real-time. Since we are interested in see the beneﬁts of
order to do so several instances of the Message Type 18 may be SBAS applications in space we used an in-house developed off-
needed. The time to perform this operation may be critical due line software for simulation of the integrity functionalities. In
to the GEO Visibility constraints from the LEO orbit of interest. particular the off—line software is representative of the ENEIDE
In absence of GEO data it is always possible to compute a receiver in terms of PVT solution performances (it uses the
degradation factor (from Message Type 7) to the current cor- same pseudorange data as the receiver and GPS ephemeredes
rection data. It is the subject of the future analysis phase to taken from the Navigation Message and produces an output that
understand if this is enough to compute a reliable run-tirne hor- was veriﬁed against the true receiver). Inputs to the SW simu-
izontal and vertical protection levels. Note that, despite from a lator are the ENEIDE raw data (basically time-tagged pseudor-
standard ground user, the words “horizontal” and “vertical” ange for each satellite in View) and the decoded Geo Navigation
Messages (all collected in a ENEIDE Packet called 0XA4). A set
N 5mm? of data from Phase 3 (April 16, 2007) was used as proof of con-
cept since for this phase a reliable reference solution (computed
ofﬂine using dual-frequency pseudorange and GPS ephemere-
132 ‘ des kept ﬁxed on precise International GPS Service (IGS) GPS
orbits) was available. In this way the ENEIDE receiver SPS
130 ~ solution is corrected using the EGNOS/WAAS messages and
Protection Levels can be computed. The steps followed in this
120 _ process are:
E m _ _ _ - - Get ENEIDE raw data
° Correct raw-data and PVT using SBAS messages
° Estimate the PVT error by comparison of the ENEIDE
'2‘ "" -"" ‘ — ‘ PVT with the reference solution
° Compute Protection Level associated to the navigation
m — — ' - - ~ solution
m _ i, - ,,___ ,, , It is worth saying that the reference solution is not an high preci-
° 05 l mus: '5 2 "":5 sion solution since it is still a SPS PVT computed using pseudo-
range and not carrier phases, but still estimated to be better (i.e.
Fig. 3., ENEIDE, Phase 4’ EGNOS— WA A S tracking. few meters accuracy) than the ENEIDE real-time solution.
Miorogravity sci. teohnol. XIX-5/6 (2007) 57

"
"5","A. Zin, S. Landenna et al: ENEIDE: an Experiment of a Space-borne, L1/L2 Integrated GPS/WAAS/EGNOS Receiver
It is out of doubts that EGNOS/WAAS systems are designed for ing that only a short sample was used because also of Visibility
terrestrial applications (land, maritime and aViation). The use of constraints in Phase 3 (Sun-pointing attitude of Soyuz).
SBAS in space rise few concerns on the applicability of the pro- Even if there are few concerns about ionospheric corrections
posed SBAS 1CD corrections. In particular the ICD ask the user in space, this data sample shows that the possibility of having
to apply: real-time integrity in space is feasible. This seems to be a prom-
ising step for future missions in which integrity is a driver.
° Fast corrections Soyuz transfer vehicle is clearly one of these cases, even if the
° Long corrections peculiar Sun pointing attitude prevents the continuous track-
° Ionospheric corrections ing/Visibility of GEO satellites.
- Tropospheric corrections
CONCLUSIONS
By applying these corrections to the raw data the user is assured
that the residual UERE is speciﬁed to be within the bounds pro- All the analyses conducted up to now allow to say that the
Vided by the EGNOS navigation message errors. ENEIDE tro- ENEIDE experiment was carried out successfully. Being based
posphere error is zero since ENEIDE is above the tropospheric on a new instrument concept of integrated GPS/EGNOS—WAAS
layer. Therefore the tropospheric correction is not applied nor tracking, the possibilities of real-time use of this instrument for
the sigma associated (otmpo) considered in the PL computation. critical space operations in which safety is a critical component
The ionosphere correction requires more attention since the are addressed here. . .
Soyuz in inside the ionosphere. After an analysis it was decided ENEIDE prov1ded a benchmark for the validation of the
to exclude from the computation also this correction basically TAS'I receivers 0f LAGRANGE class. The different ehereh'
because ENEIDE did not collect all the needed ionospheric grid mental conditions 111 Whleh the receiver operated (Sun-pomting
point at a certain time. Moreover the ionospheric delay for a attitude, orbital attitude, peculiar antenna pointing constraints
space vehicle is an over—estimate of the ionospheric delay. etc.) make the experiment an important laboratory felt different
Therefore also the iono correction was excluded and the associ- applications hke attitude analyses, atmospheric sounding, space
ated (oUIRE) not considered. At the end fast-long corrections weather, real-time naV1gation and control.
where applied and for the variances oi ﬂt,(fast-long correction In .detail, the set-up (receiver + laptop) worked properly and
. . . . . ’ . tracking of the WAAS-EGNOS satellites allowed the download
res1dual variance) oair (receiver n01se and multipath, set con- . . .
. . . of the full GEO naV1gation message. The tracking of L1 and L2
servatively to 2 m) were the two components cons1dered 1n the . . . .
. frequen01es proved to be efﬁ01ent according to the expectation
PL computations. . . . .
. . . . . . of the predicted link-budget. At the end this experiment can be
The PL computations and naV1gation solution error in the hori- . .
. . . seen as a ﬁrst bridge toward integrated GPS/GALILEO opera-
zontal and vertical plane are shown in the follow1ng ﬁgure for a . .
tions in space.
short sample of data:
In this sample it can be seen that the protection level bounds
horizontally and vertically the navigation error. It is worth say-
,, HPL and Eul-Norm (horizontal) enor estimate for ENEIDE , VPL and vettical m estimate for ENEIDE
T '—'——————’FL:: so! ' ’ ' ' ' [———‘—L]- VeiucelProtecquevel ‘
_._ honzonw etror estimate —-— Vegucoterror eﬂmate ‘
so 7‘ 40:» . , . 4‘ . n a
""k’J‘v‘ """"""‘""""""‘ .~""f""'1’*‘t‘“.““-*’V‘~*‘A'~J""| L‘H“'.""""'M ~~ v-~
i i n“ 30;. J 1""“ h 1 “L 141-~A""u_4~v~_,,«_. -,,.;:‘
w ‘4 ""g; A»A...IL ”AA“ A 1 ,. .-_.«_ II :1.” 444A.» 4%., I ‘ 20:} ' ’
.i t . 1 it w i
i .‘.¥f 1 , ht «ﬁt» 10;— ""
_2o ‘ Ii”! Mm ‘:' ‘1‘ [l q"" . . . i
E. V ' . Wt.” li ' r i ‘ '5‘ 0' Mn, ML. ""
. W 4 i; H P W t? a l
l5 -10- Tilt l ’ M ' "" ‘
o '- ‘ . . . 9.95111 ‘t W \
.zolzgi t“; v , , V‘h‘ [ﬂ ' \ft
H‘— r 30} ~‘Lf.’1-,l-.\‘....‘r""w..r~¢n,re2¥ ""J'V""""~l J Tifﬁ‘f'“??£¥4r~ $ Al]
N. “-r'w‘wwrf’w 7,!“1 Li ""0? W‘
40 WW .11, a ‘ . l
. I I l l , . I l l '50, i
‘00 15° 20° 25° 30° “mi?! ‘00 ‘50 5°° 55° 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550
bmols]
F ig. 4: ENEIDE, Session 3 .° Horizontal and Vertical position error Wm. MPOD orbit estimate and evaluation ofProtection Level (HPL and
VPL).
58 Microgravity sci. technol. XIX-5/6 (2007)

"
"6","A. Zin, S. Landenna et al: ENEIDE: an Experiment of a Spaee-borne, L1/L2 Integrated GPS/WAAS/EGNOS Receiver
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Special thanks for their contribution to the following people:

Pasquale Di Palermo from ESA/ESTEC, Overall Project
manager of the integration of the experiments for the ENEIDE
mission; Daniel Paris from ESA/ESTEC, Project Integration
Manager for the ENEIDE experiment; Giovanni Fuggetta, TAS-
I Laben, Head Of Bus and Navigation Programs; Roberto
Vittori, the Italian Astronaut Who run the Experiment; S.
Casotto and B. Padovan (University Of Padova) for providing
the quick look MPOD orbits.

A particular acknowledgment t0 the Italian Space Agency
(A81) for the contribution to the LAGRANGE receiver devel-
opment.

REFERENCES
1. Silvestrin, PL. and Sinander, P The Advanced GPS/GLONASS ASIC
(AGGA) for Precise GNSS Sensor, in Proceedings of the GNSS '99
Conference, Genoa, Italy, May 1999.
2. RTCA, WAAS Minimum Operational Performance Standards (MOPS),
RCTA/DO-229A, 1998
Mierogravity sci. teehnol. XIX-2 (2007) 59

"
