"","x"
"1","2007-01-3149
Development of the Third Generation JPL Electronic Nose for
International Space Station Technology Demonstration
A. V. Shevade, M. L. Homer, H. Zhou, A. D. Jewell, A. K. Kisor,
K.S. Manatt, J. Torres, J. Soler, S.-P.S. Yen, and M. A. Ryan
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology
M. Blanco and W. A. Goddard, |||
Materials Simulation Center, California Institute of Technology
Copyright © 2007 SAE International
ABSTRACT Second Generation ENose, was tested extensively on
the ground, and was demonstrated to be able to detect,
The capabilities of the JPL Electronic Nose have been identify and quantify the 21 analytes at or below their 24-
expanded to include characteristics required for a hour SMACS [8]. The third phase of development is
Technology Demonstration schedule on the International designed to monitor spacecraft cabin air quality in near
Space Station (ISS) in 2008-2009 [1,2]. Concurrently, to real-time. In preparation for an upcoming, six-month
accommodate specific needs on ISS, the processes, technology demonstration aboard the International
tools and analyses which influence all aspects of Space Station (ISS) in 2008-09, the JPL ENose team is
development of the device have also been expanded. developing aThird Generation ENOSG.
The Third Generation ENose developed for this program N AS A has recently recognized a need to detect
9393 two types 0f 3993‘"" substrates, DGWIV developed elemental mercury vapor in crew habitat in spacecraft.
inorganic and organic sensor .materials, redesigned This is of concern because it is found in some lighting,
electronics, onboard near real-tirhe data analysns arid and may be released if lights are broken or cracked.
power and ldata '“teriaC?S specnfically for '83 _Th'S Detection of concentrations as low as single ppb Hg in
paper W'” d'SCU§S the Th'rd Geheration ENose With a breathing air is of great importance to the safety of
focus on detection of mercury In the parts-per-billion astronauts.
range. Development of the Third Generation JPL
ENose has required two major areas of development.
INTRODUCTION One area is the design and fabrication of an interface
The JPL Electronic Nose [3-7] is an event
monitor designed and built for near real time air quality ' \\
monitoring in crew habitat aboard the space 7 '
shuttle/space station. This is an array—based sensing =_\ .5 r. .
system which is designed to run continuously and to c \ ‘
monitor for the presence of selected chemical species in ‘ \‘i - .
the air at parts-per-million (ppm) to parts-per-billion (ppb) ‘ ' '3“ § .
concentration ranges. 7 \ 9
There have been three phases of development ‘f‘ﬁgfe, 5.2%
of the JPL Electronic Nose. In the first phase, a device as "" 5ihﬁé° a 9i!
capable of detecting, analyzing and quantifying ten M; '— 7‘
analytes at the 1-hour Spacecraft Maximum Allowable * . , - I
Concentration (SMAC) was developed. This device was “:- -
tested successfully in 1998 on Space Shuttle flight STS— . r
95 [6]. In the second phase, the ENose was .
miniaturized and the capabilities were significantly Figure1: The Third Generation ENose. The Sensor
expanded to_ include 21 analytes ancl detef’i'O“ at Unit is enclosed in the Interface Unit, which will be
varying humidity and temperature. This deVIce, the connected to the ISS EXPRESS Rack

"
"2","unit which will allow the ENose to be operated through chamber, where the response of a sensing array is read.
the EXPRESS Rack (EXpedite The PRocessing Of The air is directed either through a glass bead filter
Experiments To Space Station) on the ISS for a six- which serves as a particle filter and which is in line to
month technology demonstration experiment. In the provide a pressure drop equal to that in the charcoal
other area, the capabilities of the sensing platform, the filter, and an activated charcoal filter which is put in line
Second Generation ENose, including sensing materials, to provide cleaned air for baseline data. A solenoid valve
sensor substrate, and data analysis routines are being is programmed to open the path to the charcoal filter and
expanded in order to include the ability to detect provide clean airflowfora programmable period of time
additional inorganic species, mercury and sulfurdioxide, at programmable time intervals; otherwise, the air is
and to provide quasi-real time data analysis with read- directed through the glass beads. When air enters the
out. sensing chamber, resistance of each element in a 32-
This paper will focus on the development and sensor array is meastired. A baseline of clean air is
performance of organic and inorganic sensing materials established, and deyiations from that baseline are
to be used in the Third Generation ENose for Hg recorded as changes In reSIstance of the sensors. The
detection underavariety of environmental conditions. pattern Of d'Str'bUted response Of the sensors . IS
deconvoluted, and chemical speCIes to which the deVIce
DEVELOPMENT OF THE THIRD GENERATION has been trained are identified and quantified by using a
JPL ENOSE set of software anaIySIs routines developed for this
purpose. A block diagram of the Third Generation
The Third Generation ENose is a modified Second ENose (Interface Unit plus Sensor Unit connezieil to the
Generation ENose Sensor Unit coupled with an Interface
Unit, as shown in Figure 1. The Interface Unit is ISS OSS JPL
designed and built by Oceaneering Space Systems EXPYeSSRac"" InterfaceUnit SensingUnit
(088). The ENose Interface Unit fully encloses ENose $5338 Subsystem Subsystem
Sensor Unit and provides power conditioning and ethernet
distribution, thermal management and a display. It also AsZembly Assembly
includes computers for device control, data acquisition 28 Power Pneumatic
and data analysis and interfaces directly with the VDC
EXPRESS Rack for power and for data transfer. Computer .
g i :
_, Data 5 55 Assembly 5
The ENose Interface Unit receives power from the
EXPRESS Rack (28 V) and converts the power from the y
ISS into voltages compatible with interface unit computer
systems and functions as well as the electronic and EXHAUST
pneumatic systems Of the ENose Sensor Unit. The Figure 2: Block diagram of the 3rd Generation ENose.
computers In the Interface Unit manage data collection,
data storage and data analysis for the ENose. The EXPRESS Rack) is shown in Figure 2_
display on the Interface Unit may be configured to
display results 0t data analysis, although in the In previous versions of the JPL ENose, sensors in the 32
experimental phase, data analysis Wt” het be shown. element sensing array were made from polymer-carbon
Raw data as well as processed data and analysis results composite sensing films [1-7] and deposited 2 mm x 1
Wt” be downlinked frorn the ENose through the mm Pd-Au electrode sets, where electrode spacing is
EXIPRESS Rack communicationslsystem. The Interface approximately 250 um. Polymer deposition and the
Uh't 3'30 controls the thermal envnronment 0f the ENose electrode sets have previously been discussed in detail
Sensor Unit. [6, 7, 9]. In order to detect elemental Hg vapor, it has
been necessary to develop alternative sensing materials
The ENose Sensor Uhit consists Of an anodized as well as alternative sensor substrates. The substrates
aluminum chassis which houses the sensor array and developed have been designed to fit into the Sensor Unit
pneumatic system. The ENOSG Sensor Unit a|so platform with no changes to the Sensor Unit enclosure
contains the electronics to route power, relay data and and minimal changes to the electronics. Materials have
commands between the sensor array and the ENose been developed specifically to respond to Hg vapor.
Interface Unit. The Sensor Unit for the Third Generation
ENose is designed and built by JPL; it is based on the The sensor substrates developed for use with materials
platform developed as the Second Generation JPL to detect Hg are microhotplates, which allow sensing
ENose, which has previously been discussed in detail [1, and regeneration of the sensor to take place at
7]. temperatures ranging from environmental temperature
(20-25°C) up to 200°C. Microhotplate substrates were
Briefly, the sensor unit monitors the environment by selected in order to minimize the power requirements of
pumping air from the surroundings into the sensor heating the sensors.

"
"3","SELECTION OF SENSING MATERIALS groups, preferably primary or secondary. An example of
interaction energy calculations is shown in Figure 3,
As a first step in selection of materials to detect where Ebind is weak, ~ -O.4 kcal/mole; this would lead us
elemental Hg vapor, a literature search was done to to expect that a polymercarbon composite sensormade
determine what had previously been used [1]. It was from an 10 or 2° amine containing polymer would show a
clear from that search that while there were some weak response to the presence of vapor phase mercury.
developmental materials, metallic gold films are the most No binding was shown for other functional groups
reliable method of detecting mercury vapor [10]. 0 9
We have used several modeling approaches to screen 0.7 Amethtﬂalm'”? t.
materials for use in the JPL ENose, and we have : Od'met yamme '.
modeled the interaction energies of analytes with g 0-5 '.
polymers using molecular dynamics [11]. These Ta 03
interaction energies are used in semi-empirical models 3 ' :
developed using Quantitative Structural Activity "":5 0.1 ‘9
Relationships [12] to predict whether particular polymers 3% x
will respond to the presence of particular analytes with a L” -0.1 ‘Q ,9?”
change in resistance in a polymer-carbon composite _03 b 3""""
sensing film [12]. QSAR studies did not predict any ' '3'
response to Hg from polymers which had previously -0.5
been used as sensing materials in the JPL ENose. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
A second modeling approach, based on quantum _ R(fAnlgstroms) _
mechanical techniques, was developed to model the F'QWG 3:.Modeled binding energy. Of Hg W'th
interaction energies of analytes and functional groups am'“?3- Triangles are calculatedlbinding ?“GFQY Of
present on polymers [13]. Both inorganic and organic H_9 mm methylamine; _C'rC|eS dimthyl (2) amine.
materials were investigated as sensing materials for Hg. Lines are Morse potentials calculated separately.
This modeling technique predicted that polymers modeled.
containing amines could respond to Hg vapor. The
model and-its technique is discussed in detail elsewhere MATERIALS SELECTED FOR TESTING
[14] and briefly below.
Quantum mechanical modeling suggests that amine-
MODEL OF SENSOR-ANALYTE RESPONSE containing polymers may be used to detect Hg. Such
polymers have been developed for 802 sensing [2, 18],
A first principles, quantum mechanical model was used and were tested as mercury SGhSOtS- Modeling
to predict the strength of interactions between Hg and indicates that other polymer candidates ShOUtd have
organic molecules. This methodology involves very weak or “0 response to H9, and “0 additional
calculating interaction energies for organic-Hg binary polymers were selected as potential HQ SGhSOFS;
systems, using Jaguar 6.5 [14]_ Common classes of however, polymer-carbon composite films selected for
organic structures are considered as functionalities the array were tested for H9 response.
which may be found on polymer chains. The calculations
undertaken include interaction energies of alkanes, Previous work in development 0t sensors for H9
alkenes, aromatics, amines (primary and secondary), detection by other researchers have predominately
aldehydes, and carboxylic acids with sulfur dioxide. tOCUSGd 0“ USthQ thin ﬁlms 0t QOId and other noble
Interaction energies are calculated using B3LYP flavor metals to form a metal-mercury amalgam, and reading
of Density Functional Theory (DFT). These quantum the change in resistance With amalgam formation [10,
mechanical results are used to develop a first principles 19-271- In addition, palladium chloride With
force field for use in the calculation of binding (or tetrahydroxyethyl-ethylenediamine (THEED) has been
interaction) energies (Ebind) of Hg atoms with various used in one study Of HQ SGhSthQ [281- Inorganic material
functionalities which represent polymers [15-17]. Only candidates selected for testing for H9 SGhSthQ include
interaction energies less than zero (exothermic 90'0' tith, 90'0' sputtered 0“ polymer ﬁlms and PdCt2
reactions) will result in binding between analyte and films. Performance of these materials as sensors for
functional group such that there it may result in a change elemental mercury vapor is discussed bGIOW-
in resistance in a polymer-carbon composite film; strong
binding energies are on the order of 10 kcal/mole.
Results of modeled interaction energies of organic-Hg
systems indicate that a polymer candidate for Hg
detection would be one containing amine functional

"
"4","gold films at temperatures well in excess of 40°C, these
PERFORMANCE OF THIRD GENERATION sensors can be made only on miorohotplate sensors.
SENSORS FOR MERCURY DETECTION Thus, two miorohotplate locations were reserved for gold
films.
The objective of this work was to design, synthesize and
select sensing materials able to detect Hg in humidified The response of gold sensing films deposited on JPL
air at 3 ppb, as requnred by NASA tor th'e Technology ENose substrates and treated after deposition was also
Demonstration, and that can be. integrated 'hte the evaluated. The gold films were vacuum deposited, then
exnstmg JPL ENose sensor gh't platform wnth eh treated by physical abrasion by grit blasting, where
operating temperature 0t 20'32 C and a regeneration abrasive particles are accelerated in air and forcefully
temperature up to 200 0' directed against the gold films. The high speed abrasive
_ _ _ particles thin and roughen films; the films then exhibit
Gold t'tm sensing tor vapor phase elemental rheroury '3 greater surface area as compared to the sputtered gold
the stanldard technique heed 'h laboratory and he'd work. film initially deposited. As seen in Figure 4, the abraded
Golol films are saffioiently sensntive Ifor NASAOS gold films show good sensitivity to mercury in the ppb
application, bUt requnre temperatures as h'gh as 200 C range, but do not regenerate in air at room temperature.
for several minutes in a flow of clean airfor regeneration Such films may be used as a dosimeter but must be
[201- They have been selected as sensor elements for regenerated at high temperature or replaced after they
the Th'rd Generation El\lose. The h'gh terhperature no longer respond to Hg. It can also be seen that the
requnred for regeneration Will be prowded by sensing response of abraded gold films is repeatable for
rhiorohotplates embedded under the sensors w'th_ gold a single film, and that the magnitude of response may be
films. However, the ENose Program desnres dissirhilar used to determine mercury concentration, but the films
redundancy 'h sensing materials for Hg detection, are not reproducible. This lack of reproducibility from
alternate sensmg materials were Investigated along wnth sensor to sensor may be attributed to the challenges
evaporated gold films. involved in obtaining similar films through the abrasion
_ _ _ _ technique. This lack of reproducibility eliminated gold
I“ the current investigation, we considered ahd tested films treated with abrasion from consideration for this
several sensmg materials for Hg detection, Including application.
gold films, treated gold films, sintered palladium chloride
(PdCIZ) thick films, polymer-oarbon composite thick films, PALLADIUM CHLORIDE SENSORS
and thin gold films on polymer-oarbon composites. All
materials were tested in flowing, humidified air at 20- Palladium chloride has been used as a component in
25 0' Relative hum'd'ty'h a|ltests was ~30%' polymer-metal composite films used for Hg detection
[28]. That study found that a coating which was 50%
GOLD FILM SENSORS PdCl2 was the optimum preparation for detection of Hg in
_ _ _ _ _ the single ppm range. Reasoning that the polymer acted
Initial studies of Hg sensmg focused on repeating the primarily as a carrier for PdClZ, we chose to study
well-Known eb't'ty of th'h_ gold films. to amalgarhate Hg, sintered thick films of PdCl2 for mercury vapor sensing.
resulting 'h a decrease 'h oonoluotIVIty 'h the t'tm_[_te]- Palladium chloride sensing films were formulated by
Studies .showed that these films showed sufficnent preparing an aqueous solution of PdCl2 solution followed
change 'h COl‘ldUCthlty. and could. be Integrated 'hte the by solution casting and thermal curing on miorohotplate
JPL ENose sensor ”h't platform 't the films were made sensor substrates. The films were sintered in air at
~15 nm thick. With a NASA goal of keeping power 42500
utilization at a minimum, and the need to regenerate 002
0.020 35 I
. l 40
5’ 3° E E ’ t i I 35 2%
3 0.015 25 g E i a .. 30 g
3 g 3 t I l l J I 25 S:1B
'5 20 3 c 0.10 ‘5'
8_ 0.010 . * § §- ~ ~ ' 20 §-
8 ' 15 :5 Ea ‘ I 1 =
m g ,5 15 :3
3 10 A (D 0.05 l 10 .8-
m 0.005 . U = V
“t 1 t’ '3 Ililll'll | | 5
co 5 v
. lm‘. 0.00 L I I I I I 0
0-000 —"" 0 0 200 400 600 800 1000
0 100 200 300 400 Time (min)
Time (min) _ _
Figure 4_ Response of two abraded gold films on Figure 5: Response of four smtered PdCl2 sensors
ENose substrates to Hg vapor. Light, rectangular :10 Fgrvacpoonrclennﬁgﬁéﬁhtt rectangular traces are Hg
traces are Hg delivery concentrations. e we y '

"
"5","As seen in Figure 5, PdCl2 sensing films (s1, s2, s3, s4) two polymers were selected and made into polymer-
show good sensitivity and reproducibility of response to carbon black composite sensors. These two polymers
Hg concentrations of 2 - 10 ppb at 23°C in humidified air. EYN1 and EYN2 [1] are both pon-4-vinyl pyridine
PdCl2 sensor response magnitude does not increase derivatives with a quaternary and a primary amine, and
above 10 ppb Hg. These sensing films also show partial have also been used for detection of 802 [2, 18]. The
regeneration under mild conditions, temperatures polymers were synthesized from poly-4-vinyl pyridine
<40°C, and good repeatability of response for and made into polymer-carbon composite sensing films
concentrations10 ppb and under. using protocols which have been previously described
[6,7]. These films were loaded with 10-15% carbon by
The initial exposure of PdCl2 films to Hg vapor of any weight and solution cast onto microhotplate sensor
concentration results in responses about one order of substrates and onto ENose substrates. It was expected
magnitude greater than subsequent exposures (initial from the small magnitude of the binding energy that any
baseline not shown in Figure 5.) The sensors may be response of sensors made from these polymers would
regenerated by heating at elevated temperatures in be weak, as the binding energy is on the order of -O.3
flowing clean airforseveral minutes. kcal/mole, whereas the binding energy for these
polymers with 802 is on the order of -10 kcal/mole [2,
Figure 6 shows the results of repeated delivery of Hg 18].
vapor in humidified air (~30% relative humidity) at 23°C
on PdCl2 sensors. Sensor response is linear with As shown in Figure 7, polymer EYN1, with a primary and
concentration up to 10 ppb if the initial response points quaternary amine in its structure, has a weak response
are removed from consideration. At concentrations to mercury vapor at concentrations of 30 ppb and higher.
above 10 ppb, the magnitude of sensor response to Hg the three traces in the figure are sensors made with
does not increase. Initial response magnitudes are also different loads of carbon black for conduction; 15% (w/w)
linear with concentration up to 10 ppb. In operation, carbon black (red) has the largest response, while 10%
PdCl2 sensors will have been exposed to Hg vapor (green) and 12% (blue) loads have smaller responses.
before the device is turned on, so it will not be necessary In any case, the level of response found in this polymer-
to make a distinction between initial and subsequent carbon composite sensors is not suitable for a mercury
responses. The sensors may be regenerated at sensor at these concentrations, and so this sensing
elevated temperature. Alternatively, PdCl2 sensors may material cannot be used in the third Generation
be exposed to Hg in advance of their use and not Electronic Nose. However, the response is validation of
regenerated, to keep responses linear and repeatable
50
over the 0-10 ppb range.
A60 0.00
n? 40 :I:
31 : E -.002 u ‘3,
t g 1‘ l” 30
8 l I g ‘ - 20 g,
n: x a, -.006 o
'5 I 9‘ :5
2 I . a ,5
3 20 ' . :23; g ""008 “lhlm 1o 3;
'5 A sensor3 ‘0
ii, 1 v sensor4 ""010 M 0
E V o 25 50 75 100 125
g 0 Time (min)
0 5 1o 15 .
_ Figure 7: Response of three sensors made from
concentrat'on of mercurwppb) polymer EYN1 to Hg in air. Light, rectangular
Figure 6: Repeated delivery of Hg vapor to four traces are HQ delivery concentrations.
identical PdCl2 sensors at various concentrations.
the results of the modeled response. Further work and
optimization would be necessary to use these materials
POLYMER'CARBON COMPOSITE SENSORS as mercury sensors at higher concentrations.
Response of Modeled Polymer Sensors
Response of 1St and 2nd Generation Polymer Sensors
Based on the results of modeled quantum mechanical
binding energy between mercury and organic ligands, Polymers used in the first and second generation JPL
ENose were also tested for response to Hg in humidified
air. As expected, based on both QSAR and quantum
mechanical modeled results, these polymers did not

"
"6","respond to the presence of Hg in the ppb range. Imide, CONCLUSIONS
amide and amine containing polymers showed very
weak response at Hg concentrations well above the We have developed and tested several novel organic
required range. and inorganic sensing materials to detect vapor phase,
elemental mercury at ppb concentration levels at room
temperature. Sensing materials tested include thin gold
GOLD FILMS ON POLYMER SENSORS films, treated gold films, PdCIZ, polymer—oarbon
A novel approach to combining the sensing composites and gold sputtered on polymer. These
functionalities of polymer-oarbon composite films and materials have been tested suooessfuily (operated at“
gold films to achieve both mercury and other analyte regenerated), and selections for mCIUS'On into the Thtrd
detection is to deposit a thin layer of gold on a polymer- Generation Electronic Nose Technology Demonstration
carbon composite film. In this study, we investigated have been made.
sensin capabilities of several polymers with a 10 nm . .
gold filgrjn vacuum deposited on top of the polymer film. Materials Wh'Ch showed 900d response to merotiry
As seen in Figure 8, there is strong reproducible, vapor out Which Will not be used In the Third Generation
recoverable response to mercury in the ppb ENose Include abraded gold ﬁlms and goId-on-polymer
concentration range. films. Abraded gold filrns requnre further worif to make
the response reproduoible. Gold-on-polymer films have
excellent response to mercury vapor, and were initially
A 0'02 50 selected for inclusion in the Third Generation ENose, but
g I it was found that there was not sufficient batoh-to-batoh
“é 0'00 MM 40 a reproducibility in these films to include them in the
T; i g ENose sensing array now. Further work is required to
2 '0'02 ‘ 3o 3 determine how to control the batch characteristics.
a 3
3 ""0'04 20 gr. The two materials selected for inclusion into this
”5 3 Technology Demonstration are thin gold films, the
8 '0'06 1o ’6‘ standard material for vapor phase Hg detection, and
g o 08 E sintered PdCI2 thick films. This is the first report of using
' ' o sintered PdCI2 as a sensing material for Hg. With these
two materials, the Third Generation ENose includes
'0'10 o 100 zoo 300 400 500 dissimilar redundancy for Hg detection. Neither of these
Time (min) materials shows significant response to other analytes
Figure 8: Response of two sensors made of selected for this Technology Demonstration. In addition,
gold film deposited on poly(oaprolaotone) arnine containing polymers selected for SO2 detection
polymer-oarbon composite films to mercury in W'” show minor response TO Hg, and-may be ”390'. to
air at room temperature. Light rectangular follow clean up processes If there IS high. concentration
”9me 9m H“ dawn“, mnmmmﬁnm of mercury released Into the air by a containment failure.
Electron microscopy studies of the sensors shows that
the gold is distributed as partially interconnected islands ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
across the polymer-oarbon composite film. This
distribution 0t gold as islands allows the polymer to The research reported in this paper was carried out at
respond to organic vapors th the usual manner, by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of
sorption into the polymer and swelling, to reduce Technology under a contract with the National
conductivity, bUt also allows HQ t0 amalgamate With gold Aeronautics and Space Administration and supported by
and influence the overall COi‘idUCtiVity Of the film. Some the Advanced Environmental Monitoring and Control
gold will penetrate beyond the surface of the polymer Program, ESMD, NASA.
film, and Hg atoms or vapors of other targeted species
may enter the polymer matrix and cause a change in the REFERENCES
resistance of the film, either because of swelling in the
matrix [29] or because of changes caused to the 1. MA. Ryan, M.L. Homer, H. Zhou, K. Manatt, A.
conductive medium, such as through amalgamation or Manfreda, A. Kisor, A. Shevade and s_P_S_ Yen;
sorption. These films 0'0 not need to be used 0“ “Expanding the Analyte Set of the JPL Electronic
miorohotplate sensors, as they regenerate sufficiently at Nose to Include Inorganic Species;” Journal Of
moderate temperatures for use. Aerospace, SAE Transactions, 2005-01-2880
(2005)
2. MA. Ryan, M.L. Homer, H. Zhou, K. Manatt, A.
Manfreda, A. Kisor, A. Shevade and S.P.S. Yen;

"
"7","“Expanding the Capabilities of the JPL Electronic Functional of the EIectron-Density,” Phys. Rev. B,
Nose for an International Space Station Technology 37, 785(1998).

Demonstration”, Proc. 36“ Intl. Conf. on Environ. 17. X. Xin and W.A. Goddard III; “The X3LYP extended
Systems, SAE, 2179 (2006). density functional for accurate descriptions of

3. MA. Ryan, M.L. Homer, MG. Buehler, K.S. Manatt, nonbond interactions, spin states, and
F. Zee, and J. Graf, ""Monitoring the Air Quality in a thermochemical properties;” Proc. Nat. Acad. SOL,
Closed Chamber Using an Electronic Nose,"" Proc. 101, 2673 (2004).
27th Int]. Conf. on Environ. Systems, SAE (1997). 18. A.V. Shevade, M. Blanco, M.A. Ryan, M. L. Homer,

4. MA. Ryan, M.L. Homer, MG. Buehler, K.S. Manatt, W. A. Goddard, “Identifying Chemical Functionalities
B. Lau, D. Karmon, and S. Jackson, ""Monitoring in Polymers to Detect Sulfur Dioxide (802) using
Space Shuttle Air for Selected Contaminants Using Quantum Mechanics,” J. Phys. Chem. B (in
an Electronic Nose,"" Proc. 28th Int]. Conf. on preparation).

Environ. Systems,SAE(1998). 19. Q. Bristow, “An evaluation of the quartz crystal

5. MA. Ryan, M. L. Homer, H. Zhou, K. S. Manatt, V. microbalance as a mercury vapor sensor for soil
8. Ryan, and S. Jackson, ""Operation of an gases,”J. Geochem. Expt, 1, 55 (1972).

Electronic Nose Aboard the Space Shuttle and 20. B. Mazzolai, V. Mattoli, V. Raffa, G. Tripoli, D.
Directions for Research for a Second Generation Accoto, A. Menciassi and P. Dario, “A
Device,"" Proc. 30th Int]. Conf. on Environ. Systems, microfabricated physical sensor of atmospheric
SAE(2000). mercury monitoring,” Sens. & Act. A, 113, 282
6. MA. Ryan, H. Zhou, MG. Buehler, K.S. Manatt, (2004).
V.S. Mowrey, S.P. Jackson, A.K. Kisor, A.V. 21. T. Thundat, E.A. Wachter, S.L. Sharp and R.J.
Shevade, and ML. Homer, “Monitoring Space Warmack, ""Detection of Hg Vapor Using Resonating
Shuttle Air Quality Using the JPL Electronic Nose,” Microcantilevers,"" App. Phys. Lett, 66, 1695 (1995).
IEEE Sensors Journal, 4, 337 (2004). 22. J.J. Caron, R.B. Haskell, P. Benoit, J.F. Vetelino,

7. MA. Ryan, A.V. Shevade, H. Zhou and ML. Homer, ""Surface Acoustic Wave Mercury Vapor Sensor,""
“Polymer-Carbon-Composite Sensors for an IEEE Trans. Ultrasonics Ferroelectrics and Freq.
Electronic Nose Air Quality Monitor,” MRS Bulletin, Control, 45, 1393 (1998).

29, 714(2004). 23. C.L. Britton, R.L. Jones, P.|. Oden, Z. Hu, R.J.

8. Spacecraft Maximum Allowable Concentrations for Warmack, S.F. Smith, W.L. Bryan, and J.M.
Selected Airborne Contaminants, vols.1 & 2, Rochelle, ""MultipIe-Input Microcantilever Sensors,""
National Academy Press, Washington DC, 1994. Ultramicroscopy, 82, 17 (2000).

9. M. A. Ryan, M. L. Homer, H. Zhou, K. Manatt and A. 24. B. Rogers, L. Manning, M. Jones, T. Sulchek, K.
Manfreda,“TowardASecond Generation Electronic Murray, B. Beneschott, J.D. Adams, Z. Hu, T.
Nose at JPL: Sensing Film Optimization Studies;” Thundat, H. Cavazos, and S.C. Minne, ""Mercury
Proc. 3132‘ Int’l. Conf. Environ. Systems, SAE, 2308 Vapor Detection With a SeIf-Sensing, Resonating
(2001). Piezoelectric Cantilever,"" Rev. Sci. Inst, 74, 4899

10. J.J. McNerney, P.R. Busek and RC. Hanson, (2003).

“Mercury detection by means of thin gold films,” 25. F.L. Fertonani, E. Milare, A.V. Benedetti and M.
Science, 178, 611 (1972). Ionashiro, “Solid State Reactions of Mercury with

11. A.V. Shevade, M.A. Ryan, M.L. Homer, A.M. Pure Noble Metals, Part 2,”J. ThermaIAnaI. and Cal,
Manfreda, H. Zhou, K.S. Manatt, “Molecular 67, 403 (2002).

Modeling of Polymer Composite-Analyte Interactions 26. E. Milare, F.L. Fertonani, A.V. Benedetti and M.
in Electronic Nose Sensors,” Sens. & Act. B, 93, 84 Ionashiro, “Contribution to the Study of the Solid-
(2003). State Reaction of Mercury With Pure Rhodium,” J.

12. A.V. Shevade, M.A. Ryan, M.L. Homer, A.M. ThermalAnal. and Cal., 59, 617 (2000).

Manfreda, H. Zhou and K. Manatt, “Correlating 27. F.L. Fertonani, A.V. Benedetti and M. Ionashiro,
Polymer-Carbon Composite Sensor Response with “Contribution to the Study of the Reaction of Mercury
Molecular Descriptors,”J.Electrochem. 800.,153, With Platinum and a PIatinum-Iridium Alloy,”
H209 (2006). Thermochim. Acta, 265, 151 (1995).

13. M. Blanco, A.V. Shevade, M.A. Ryan, M. L. Homer, 28. D. P. Ruys, J. F. Andrade and OM. Guimaraes, ""Hg
W.A.Goddard,“ElementalMercurylnteractions with Detection in Air Using a Coated Piezoelectric
Organic Compounds: A DFT Study,” J. Phys. Chem. Sensor,"" Anal. Chim. Acta, 404, 95 (2000).

B(in preparation). 29. E.J. Severin and N.S. Lewis, “Relationship among

14. Jaguar, version 6.5, Schrodinger, LLC, New York, resonant frequency changes on a coated quartz
NY (2005). crystal microbalance, thickness change, and

15. A. D. Becke; “Density-Functional Thermochemistry resistance responses of polymer-carbon black
3. The Role Of Exact Exchange,” J. Chem. Phys., composite chemiresistors;” Anal. Chem. 72, 2008
98, 5648 (1993). (2000).

16. C. Lee, W. Yang, and R.G. Parr; “Development of
the CoIIe-Salvetti Correlation-Energy Formula into a

"
"8","CONTACT

Dr. M. A. Ryan

MS 184-105; Jet Propulsion Laboratory
California Institute of Technology

4800 Oak Grove Drive

Pasadena CA 91109

tel: (818) 354-8028

email: mryan@jp|.nasa.gov

"
