"","x"
"1","40th International Conference on Environmental Systems AIAA 2010-6122
Characterlzatlon of Unknown Events Observed by the Thlrd
Generatlon J PL Electronic Nose Us1ng Sensor Response
Models
A.V. Shevadel, M.A. Ryan2, M.L. H0mer3, A. K. Kisor4, L. M. LaraS, H. Zh0u6, K. S. Manatt7, and S. Gluck8
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of T echnology, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena CA 91109, USA
and
William A. Goddard 1119
N Materials and Process Simulation Center (MSC), California Institute of T echnology, Pasadena CA 91125, USA
El and
2 Mario Blanco10
35 Liox P0wer1nc., 129 N. Hill Ave, Pasadena, CA 91106, USA
5
Q
E
§ The Third Generation Electronic Nose (ENose) from the J et Propulsion Laboratory
g operated continuously and autonomously 0n the International Space Station (188) for more
E; than 6 months during 2008-2009. During this time, the ENose monitored air quality in the
E US lab and recorded anomalous events. The data gathered and analyzed showed that in
g addition to detecting several analytes 0n the target list (ethanol, methanol, Freon 218 and
or: formaldehyde), many events caused by chemical species outside the target list were observed
g and these were classiﬁed as “unknown."" We report an investigation to identify the chemical
E nature of the analyte(s) producing “unknown” events. The identiﬁcation is achieved by using
§ sensor response models based on molecular principles developed using Quantitative
g Structure—Activity Relationships (QSAR) and First Principles Molecular Dynamics
3 approaches. Molecular descriptors calculated from the models include dipole, hydrogen
g bond characteristics, molar refractivity, molar volume, and solubility parameters.
§ Calculated molecular descriptors were then compared with descriptors of analytes in the
5% Spacecraft Maximum Allowable Concentration (SMAC) database. The results indicate that
g a possible identiﬁcation of the unknown response is sulfur hexaﬂuoride (SF6).
2‘
E
B
E
L;
E
Q
1Technologist, Electrochemical Technologies Group, J et Propulsion Laboratory , Pasadena, CA 91109.
2Technologist, Electrochemical Technologies Group, J et Propulsion Laboratory , Pasadena, CA 91109.
3Technologist, Electrochemical Technologies Group, J et Propulsion Laboratory , Pasadena, CA 91109.
4Technologist, Electrochemical Technologies Group, J et Propulsion Laboratory , Pasadena, CA 91109.
5Technologist, Electrochemical Technologies Group, J et Propulsion Laboratory , Pasadena, CA 91109.
6Technologist, Bio-Inspired Technologies and Systems Group, J et Propulsion Laboratory , Pasadena, CA 91109.
7Mechanical Engineer, Chemistry and Astrobiology Group, J et Propulsion Laboratory , Pasadena, CA 91109.
8Software System Engineer, Instrument Software and Data Systems Group, J et Propulsion Laboratory , Pasadena, CA 91109.
9Professor of Chemistry, Materials Science, and Applied Physics, California Institute of Technology , Pasadena, CA 91125.
10Chief Scientiﬁc Ofﬁcer, Liox P0wer1nc., Pasadena, CA 91106.
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2010 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. The U.S. Government has a royalty—free license to exercise all rights under the copyright claimed herein for Gc

"
"2","Nomenclature

JPL = J et Propulsion Laboratory

ENose = Electronic Nose

188 = International Space Station

QSAR = Quantitative Structure-Aetivity Relationships

SMAC = Spacecraft Maximum Allowable Concentration

ppm = parts-per-million

ppb = parts-per-billion

GFA = Genetic Function Approximations

SF6 = Sulfur hexaﬂuoride

E10a = energy of polymer-analyte interaction term
N HBD = number of hydrogen bonding sites
3 MR = molar refractiVity
g AR/R = normalized change in sensor resistance
g 7V5 = activation energy of diffusion
% VS = molar volume
2 5i = Hansen solubility (i=1, 2 and 3 refer to electrostatic, dispersion and hydrogen bond components)
<2 ﬁt and R0 = Exponential coefﬁcients
E
3
i: I. Introduction
E An electronic nose has been developed at the J et Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). This JPL electronic nose (ENose)
g was developed to monitor spacecraft cabin air for anomalous events such as leaks and spills of solvents, eoolants or
m“ other ﬂuids with near-real-time analysis. The JPL ENose is an array—based sensing system which is designed to run
g continuously and autonomously to monitor for the presence of selected chemical species in the air at parts-per-
E million (ppm) to parts-per-billion (ppb) concentrations. The ENose recently completed more than 6 months of
§ continuous operation as a Technology Demonstration in the US Lab Destiny, 0n the International Space Station
E (188). For this 188 technology demonstration, ENose was designed to detect, identify and quantify eleven chemical
3 species (analytes), consisting of eight organic compounds as well as ammonia, mercury and sulﬁlr dioxidel’Z. It uses
£4 an array of 32 semi-seleetive chemical sensors; sensing materials are primarily polymer-earbon composite ﬁlms, but
§ also include inorganic and carbon nanotube sensors.
45 During its operation on 188, ENose detected several short lived2, low concentration events of ethanol, methanol,
g Freon 218 and formaldehyde. In addition, there were several events classiﬁed as “unknown,” events caused by
E chemical species outside the set of targeted analytes.
4: The obj eetive of this investigation is to describe the chemical nature of the analyte(s) producing these
$2 “unknown” events. This is achieved by using sensor response models to calculate analyte molecular descriptors,
g which in turn enables us to gain a better understanding of the chemical characteristics of the analyte(s) causing the
3 “unknown” events. These sensor response models for the polymer-earbon sensing ﬁlms used in the ENose are based

on developing a fundamental molecular understanding of the sensing mechanism, followed by correlating sensor

responses to molecular descriptors. The molecular descriptors used in the polymer-earbon sensing ﬁlms include

interactions of analytes with sensing ﬁlms, such as polymer-analyte interactions and solubility parameters, as well as

intrinsic analyte descriptors, such as molar refractivity, molar volume, number of hydrogen bond donor/aeeeptor

sites, and dipole. These sensor response models are discussed in detail in the following section.

2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","11. Chemical Sensor Response Models for Polymer-Carbon Composite Sensors

The JPL ENose polyrner-earbon sensing ﬁlms have been modeled using a multivariate mathematical technique,

Quantitative Structure Activity Relationships (QSAR) and a ﬁrst principles Molecular Dynamics model using

Hansen solubilities. Brief discussion on these techniques is provided below.

A. Quantitative Structure—Activity Relationships (QSAR) Model

QSAR is a multivariate statistical technique aimed at developing correlations between a set of physicochemical

properties (descriptors) and an activity (sensor response in our case). Statistical data analysis and regression analysis

methods are available for QSAR. Data analysis methods include principal component analysis (PCA) and cluster

analysis methods. Regression methods include simple and multiple linear regression methods (MLR), stepwise

multiple linear regression using genetic function approximation (GFA) methods, and partial least-square methods

(PLS). In our sensor response model development, we have used GFA. The advantage of using GPA is that
N thousands of candidate models are evolved (created and tested). Only the superior models survive, designated parent
3 models; these models are used for the creation of the next-generation candidate models. GFA can thus select the
E optimum number of descriptors in linear regression analysis automatically; it also constructs multiple linear
g regression models with any possible combinations of terms, including linear, higher order polynornials, splines, and
g3 gaussians. The numerous models produced and subsequently analyzed by GFA are in contrast to most statistical
2 methods, such as MLR and PLS, that focus on a single “best statistical” model.
(2 We used an approach based on QSAR to describe the activities of a polyrner-earbon composite chemical vapor
:0 sensor by using a novel approach in selecting a molecular descriptor set. The QSAR model methodology has been
E discussed in detail elsewhere3’4. In brief, we combined the default analyte descriptor set commonly used in QSAR
g studies with descriptors for sensing ﬁlrn-analyte interactions. Table 1 (Appendix) shows the descriptor set used for
if the development of the QSAR model. The default analyte descriptors are obtained using a combination of empirical
3:2“ and serni-ernpirioal Quantitative Structure Property Relationships (QSPR) methods; the sensor response descriptors
E are calculated using molecular simulation tools. In the development of QSAR models, a set of experimental data that
81 is used to develop the model is commonly referred to as the training set, while a subset of the data which is used to
2» compare model predictions is called the test set. We have developed a representative equation for each polymer-
g carbon composite sensor in the ENose sensing array.
g Experimental data for QSAR studies, used to develop sensor response models for the JPL ENose polymer-
Eg carbon composite sensors, was obtained by delivering measured analyte concentrations with controlled constant
8 humidity to the sensors. The experiments were repeated several times, over a range of analyte concentrations in ppm
g to sub-pprn levels. Sensor response is expressed as a normalized change in sensor resistance and is plotted against
(2 delivered concentration. Response data for each analyte and each sensor are ﬁt to an equation of the form y=A1X +
g A2X2 , where X is the analyte concentration and y is the normalized change in resistances. By selecting coefﬁcients
r: from the sensor response equation as the activity to be used in QSAR studies, we can develop an approach to
Q calculating response which is concentration independent. Since the quadratic terrn, A2, is generally three orders of
E, magnitude smaller than the coefﬁcient of the linear terrn, A1, the QSAR approach was used to correlate the only A1
g with molecular descriptors. Statistically validated QSAR models containing 3 or 4 terms were developed3’4 using 17
g sets of analyte training data. A statistically signiﬁcant model containing the polyrner-analyte (Epa) interaction energy
E term was selected to represent the activity of the polyrner-earbon composite sensing ﬁlm. The prediction capability
Q of this model was tested for 3 test analytes not included in the training set. The QSAR-oaloulated A1 sensor response

showed good predictability. Equations were developed for various polyrner-eornposite sensing ﬁlms in the array.

The functional form of sensor activity correlated to molecular descriptors for one representative polyrner-oarbon

composite sensor, polyethylene oxide-oarbon, is

Sensor activity (A1): 0.15207 13pa + 0.116727 HBD2 + 0.000241 MR2 (1)
In the above QSAR equation (1), the analyte descriptors that appear along with a term describing the energy of

polyrner-analyte interactions (Epa) are number of hydrogen bond donor sites (HBD) and molar refractiVity (MR). The

E10a term is calculated using atomistic simulations, and the HBD and MR descriptors are calculated using empirical

ﬁlnotional forms. The QSAR equation for each polyrner-oarbon sensor of the array will contain a polyrner-analyte

interaction term (Epa) along with any other combination of molecular descriptors listed in Table l.

3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","B. First Principles Molecular Dynamics Hansen solubility model
In the ﬁrst principles molecular dynamics Hansen solubility model, the relative change in resistance is assumed

to be directly proportional to the target analyte permeability. The resistive responses of the sensors are correlated
with the Hansen components of the cohesive energy of the polymer and solvent, as well as the molar volume of the
solvent6’7. This model elucidates the response of polymer-ﬁlm-based sensors on pure polymer ﬁlms and does not
take into account the carbon component of the polymer-earbon composites. The normalized sensor response of a
resistive polymer-carbon composite ﬁlm, AR/R, when exposed to a target analyte is given by

3

AR/ R = R0 eXp(-7VS)eXp[Zﬂi(5l-S - 51-” )] (2)

i=1
where 7V5 is the activation energy of diffusion of the solute in the polymer, proportional to the molar volume of the
target molecule, VS. 51-5 (i=l,2,3) are the Hansen solubility components of the target analyte; i=1, 2 and 3 refer to the

g electrostatic, dispersion and hydrogen bond components respectively. 5i]? is the i-th Hansen solubility component of

g the polymer sensing ﬁlm. Exponential coefﬁcients ﬂl are treated as best ﬁt parameters as well as exponential factor V

g and pre-eXponential term R0. A multi-sample molecular dynamics method was used 6’7, providing a feasible tool for

§ estimating Hansen solubility parameters without the need for experimental data. The ENose experimental data for

Z? given polymer-earbon sensing ﬁlms exposed to a known analyte set were used to obtain ﬁt and R0 terms of the

5 model. Hansen solubility parameters for polymers and analytes have been tabulated and researched extensivelyg.

é

E“

g 111. Approach to Identify Analyte Chemical Functionalities for Unknown Events

El Our obj eetive is to identify the chemical parameters of analyte(s) that produced the unknown events recorded by

g the Third Generation JPL ENose, and then to use those parameters to identify the unknown. For this investigation,

§ we used the QSAR sensor response models developed at JPL and the ﬁrst principles molecular dynamics Hansen

2; solubility model approach developed at Caltech. Our approach is to calculate molecular descriptors and then to

g determine whether any chemical identiﬁcation is possible using those descriptors. The approach for calculating

i molecular descriptors from unknown events using both sensor response models is described below.

Q

g A. Quantitative Structure—Activity Relationships (QSAR) model

% The ENose QSAR sensor response model correlates the sensor activity coefﬁcient A1 to molecular descriptors.

é Each sensor material has a unique equation using molecular descriptors; the coefﬁcient A1 is speciﬁc to the sensor

E material, not to an analyte. In order to apply the QSAR model to calculate values for molecular descriptors for

i ""unknown"" events, we made two assumptions First, the sensor response equation will be approximated as y=A1X,

i which assumes the quadratic coefﬁcient (A2) contribution to sensor response to be signiﬁcantly smaller than that of

g the linear coefﬁcient (A1). This assumption is justiﬁed by our experience with target analytes where the quadratic

E coefﬁcient (A2) is several orders of magnitude smaller than the linear coefﬁcient (A1). Second, we assume a

E concentration range, X, of 10-1500 ppm for the unknown event.

5 To start the process of calculating molecular descriptors, the ﬁrst step is to calculate the sensor activity
coefﬁcient A1 using the measured sensor response and concentrations x=10, 100, 1500 ppm; we denote this
coefﬁcient as Al(ealculated). Al(calculated) can be considered to be a value calculated with experimental inputs. For
one such case of Al(ealculated), we run an optimization where we start with presumed values for molecular
descriptors which appear in the sensor model. These presumed values will provide us with a new predicted value of
A1, let us call it Al(predicted). The optimization varies the molecular descriptors so that the objective function is
minimized to approach zero. The objective function deﬁnes error

QSAR model Obj eetive Function =[A1(caleulate d) - A1 (predicted )]2 . (3)

This optimization is run using the solver tool in Microsoft Excel, using the Generalized Reduced Gradient
(GRGZ) nonlinear optimization code. The descriptors predicted using the QSAR model are the polymer-analyte
interaction term and other analyte molecular descriptors. The set of molecular descriptors should be unique and
concentration independent.

4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","B. First Principles Molecular Dynamics Hansen solubility model
In the case of ﬁrst principles molecular dynamics Hansen solubility model, we follow a procedure similar to
that for the QSAR model. The assumption of concentration is not needed as the sensor response is directly available
from data analysis and used by the model.
. . . AR AR . 2
Hansen model Objective Function = [F (calculate d) - F (predicted )] , (4)
AR . . . . . .
where Y (calculate (1) refers to the normalized res1st1ve response calculated us1ng the data analys1s algorithm
for the raw sensor data. The optimization is run by varying the descriptors molar volume, electrostatic, dispersion
and hydrogen bond components of Hansen solubility parameter to minimize this value to approach zero. The values
§ of the descriptors predicted are then used to search the Chemical identity of the analyte comparing to values in the
g literature.
8
E The QSAR model provides a different set of molecular descriptors than the Hansen solubility model. When
E analyzing a given unknown event, the results predicted from these two models could be used as a cross Check to see
ﬁg if they show the same or different analyte predictions.
Q
9% IV. Results and Discussion
:5 During the technology demonstration on ISS, the ENose detected 59 unknown events initially. Further analysis
4% revealed that a ﬁngerprint pattern could not be extracted from 37 of these, owing to the small sensor array response.
5 These 37 events were rejected. Of the remaining 22 unknown events, the array response ﬁngerprint patterns were
8“ analyzed statistically to determine whether they were similar enough to be considered to be caused by a single
El stimulus. A 90% overlap in ﬁngerprint patterns is considered to be a result of the same stimulus. Of the 22 unknown
g events, 11 were Clearly caused by the same stimulus, with 90% or greater overlap. Five events were clearly similar
E to each other and possibly similar to the ﬁrst 11, with 80-90% overlap between these 5 and the ﬁrst 11 events. Five
jg events were unrelated to each other or other events. For this theoretical study the nine largest magnitude unknown
8 events caused by a single stimulus were considered.
g The molecular descriptors for the unknown events reported by the ENose were calculated using sensor response
(3 models based on QSAR and ﬁrst principles molecular dynamics Hansen solubility parameter approaches.
é Comparison of the calculated molecular descriptors with the literature chemical database to identify the Chemical
T: nature of the analyte(s) is a daunting task because of the database size for comparison and numerous possibilities
Q that may eXist. The ENose target list had organic target analytes consisting of alcohols (methanol, ethanol, 2-
i propanol), a ketone (acetone), an aldehyde (formaldehyde), an aromatic (toluene); and halogenated compounds
g (dichlorrnethane, Freon 218), as well as the inorganic analytes ammonia, sulfur dioxide and elemental mercury. We
3 compared the calculated values of molecular descriptors for the unknown Chemical species with analytes that were
E Chemically different from our target list. The selected comparators were either listed in the Spacecraft Maximum
Q Allowable Concentration (SMAC) database or were reported on ISS by the recent European Space Agency’s (ESA)
ANITA technology demonstration, a Fourier transform infra-red spectrometerg. We considered several analytes as
possible species that may have caused the unknown events, including sulfur hexaﬂuoride (SF6), a gaseous dielectric
which is used to calibrate breath-rneasuring equipment, 2-ethoxyethanol, a solvent for many hygienic and industrial
products/processes, brornotriﬂuorornethane (Halon 1301), the ﬁre extinguishant used on the space shuttle, ethyelene
glycol, used as a heat transfer ﬂuid, and hexarnethyl cyclotrisiloxane for use in cosmetic and personal care products.
To investigate the feasibility and applicability of the approach discussed in section III for the QSAR model, we
ﬁrst calculated the molecular descriptors for a sensor response to a known target analyte. Table 2 shows the
molecular descriptor results for a sensor response to ethanol. The column titled ""calculated"" contains the values
obtained running the optimization as discussed in Section III. The ""model"" values are the one used for the QSAR
model development. We see these values do not match exactly, as we are running an optimization to get a solution
for a problem that has multiple possibilities. In the optimization, all the descriptors (variables) are allowed to
Change. Note that the calculated dipole and number of hydrogen bond donor site descriptor values, match reasonably
well with the model values. The calculated molar refractiVity value does not match. Molar refractiVity is a function
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","of three parameters: ana1yte molecular weight, density and refractive index. Hence, small differences between
calculated and model values for these properties could lead to a large difference in the calculated and model values
for molar refractiVity. Nevertheless, this exercise provides us with conﬁdence that this approach for calculating the
molecular descriptors for unknown events wi11yie1d usable information.

Using QSAR sensor response models, the parameters molar refractiVity, hydrogen bond Characteristics, and
dipole parameters were calculated from the measured sensor response of 9 unknown events. The values for each of
these parameters is shown in Table 3, along with the values of these parameters for the ﬁve possible species listed
above. It can be seen that the calculated dipole value and hydrogen bond acceptor sites for the unknown events
suggest SF6 or hexamethyl cyclotrisiloxane as possible ana1ytes. The calculated molar refractiVity value comes close
to that of SF6. Similarly, the ﬁrst principles molecular dynamics Hansen solubility sensor response model was used
to calculate solubility parameter and molecular volume, and compared with known values for a selective list of
Chemical species. As can be seen from Table 3, the Closest match between the molecular descriptors for the
unknown events calculated by Hansen solubility model is sulfur hexaﬂuoride (SF6) or Halon 1301. Based on the
QSAR and Hansen solubility model calculations, the match between calculated descriptors and those of SF6 is not

a exact, but rather represents the best ﬁt among candidate Chemical species.
3 There are, of course, several Chemical species and possibilities of mixtures that might have parameters similar to
§ those calculated, and so this identiﬁcation of the unknown as SF6 is not certain. Calculated parameters do not match
g those of SF6 exactly, although they match SF6 better than any other species considered. As can be seen from Table,
ii there is a possibility that the unknown species is Halon 1301, and the unknown species may be some other
E compound or Chemical species not considered. In an earlier technology demonstration of ANITA, signals
8 corresponding to about 1 ppm SF6 were found several times in ISS air9 and Halon 1301 was detected during a
g shuttle docking. Thus, SF6 is a good candidate for the Chemical species which caused the unknown signa1 seen
g during ENose’s seven months of operation.
g A ground experiment with SF6 on the ENose ﬂight unit after it was returned to JPL showed that the sensing array
ff: responds to SF6 at concentrations above 1000 ppm and that the array ﬁngerprint matches the unknown ﬁngerprint
E with an 85% overlap. This degree of overlap indicates that the two ﬁngerprints may come from the same species.
g Thus, while calculations show that it is possible that the unknown species is SF6, experiment offers only moderate
3 support to this conclusion. It is possible that the unknown species is another species altogether, or a mixture of SF6
g with another species. The similarities of calculated values to literature values in Table 3 also gives support to the
E conclusion that the unknown is SF6, but the differences support the idea that the unknown is a mixture of species.
§ Further work wi11be necessary to reﬁne the understanding of sensor response.
E V. Conclusions
% Sensor response models based on molecular understanding of polymer-carbon sensing ﬁlm response to an
g ana1yte were used to identify the Chemical nature of the ana1yte(s) causing the unknown events reported by the Third
E Generation JPL ENose. The predicted molecular descriptors using unknown events show a close but not exact match
i to the molecular descriptors of sulfur hexaﬂuoride (SF6). The match represents the best ﬁt among candidate
E Chemical species. There are, of course, several Chemical species and possibilities of mixtures that might have
ﬁ parameters similar to those calculated, and so this identiﬁcation of the unknown as SF6 is not certain. In order to
T; reﬁne the understanding of the sensor response, further work wi11be necessary.
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","Appendix
Table 1: QSAR descriptor set for JPL ENose sensor response model development.
SensorResonse Descritors

> and y could be polymer (p), carbon black (Cb), analyte (a), or wate

(W). EXy represent interactions between various components in the
N loolymer-carbon sensing ﬁlm, as well With sensing ﬁlm componen
g interaction With analytes and water.
2' Exy
g | or example, interaction energy between the polymer (p) and the
E arget analyte (a) is denoted by E10a
g Other interactions include Epa, Epw, Ep_cb, Ecb_a, Ecb_cb, Baa, and EN.
Q
ff; Analyte Descriptors Description
E
E: Dipole-mag, Dipole moment magnitude and X Y and Z components
g Dipole-X, Y, Z ’ ’
E
CL
E
i”: . .
E PMI-mag . . . . .
Lg PMI-X, Y, Z Prmmpal moment of mertla magmtude and X, Y, and Z components
8 | | |

Rotlbonds Number of rotatable bonds
AlogP Log of the 00tan01/water partition coefﬁcient
7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","Table 2: Comparison of molecular descriptors of known ethanol using the QSAR model. Model column

refers to the descriptors that was used as in the QSAR sensor response model development. Calculated

column refers to the descriptors back calculated using the optimization procedure described in section 111.

Molecular Model Calculated
Descriptors
5
E
:3 Table 3: Comparison of molecular descriptors of chemical species and calculated descriptors for unknown
g events.
1;: Possible species Dipole M01. M01. H-bond H-bond Molar Solubility
g weight volume acceptor donor refractivity Parameter
i (A3) sites sites (cal/cm3 )1/ 2
: 2-eth0xyethan01 3.836 90.12 96.65 24.05 11.47
g Bromotriﬂuorome-thane 3.105 148 .91 61.93 4 15.54 4.83
g (Halon 1301)
g Ethylene glycol 3579 62.07 61.89 14.55 16.11
<c . .
E Hexamethyl cyclotrlslloxane 0.021 222.46 20937 _n 3970 —
a Unmwm -----_——
(Hansen sozubm ----———
8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the Advanced Environmental Monitoring and Control Program of NASA. This
work was carried out at the J et Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology under a contract with the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration. The authors thank Prof. Anton Hopﬁnger and Dr. David Rogers for
their very valuable suggestions in the QSAR model development and the Caltech Material and Process Simulation
center (MSC) for use of computing facilities.
References
1Shevade, A. V., Homer, M. L., Zhou, H., Jewell, A. D., Kisor, A. K., Manatt, K.S., Torres, J ., Soler, J ., Yen, S.-P.S., Blanco,
M., Goddard 111, W. A and Ryan, M. A., ""Development of the Third Generation JPL Electronic Nose for International Space
Station Technology Demonstration,"" Journal ofAerospace, SAE T ransactions, Chicago, 2007, 2007-01-3149.
2Ryan, M. A, Manatt, K. S., Gluck, S., Shevade, A. V., Kisor, A. K., Zhou, H., M. Lara L. and Homer, M. L., “Operation of
the Third Generation JPL Electronic Nose 0n the International Space Station,” Proc. 39th International Conference on
Environmental Systems, SAE, Savannah, 2009, 2009-01-2522.
§ 3 Shevade, A.V., Homer, M. L., Taylor, C.J., Zhou, H., Jewell, A.D., Manatt, K.S., Kisor, A.K., Yen, S.P.S.and Ryan, M.A.,
g “Correlating Polymer-Carbon Composite Sensor Response with Molecular Descriptors,” J. Electrochem. 506., 2006, Vol 153, pp.
§ H209-H21.
g 4Shevade, A.V., Ryan, M. A., Homer, M. L. and Zhou H. et a1. “Chemical Sensor Array Response Modeling Using
2‘ Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationships,” in Computational Methods for Sensor Material Selection (Integrated
g Microanalytical Systems), MA. Ryan, A.V. Shevade, C.J. Taylor, M.L. Homer, M. Blanco, J.R. Stetter, eds., Springer, New
5 York, 2009, Chaps 8.
3 5Zhou, H., Homer, M. L., Shevade A. V., and Ryan, M. A., “Nonlinear Least-Squares Based Method for Identifying and
95° Quantifying Single and Mixed Contaminants in Air with an Electronic Nose,” Sensors, 2006, 6, pp 1-18.
g 6Belmares, M., Blanco, M.,Goddard, W. A., et a1., Hildebrand and Hansen solubility parameters from molecular dynamics
g with applications to electronic nose polymer sensors. Journal ofComputational Chemistry 2004, V01. 25(15), pp. 1814-1826.
.2 7Blanco, M., Shevade, A. V., and Ryan, M. A.,“Quantum Mechanics and First-Principles Molecular Dynamics Selection of
E Polymer Sensing Materials,” in Computational Methods for Sensor Material Selection (Integrated Microanalytical Systems),
2 MA. Ryan, A.V. Shevade, C.J. Taylor, M.L. Homer, M. Blanco, J .R. Stetter, eds., Springer, New York, 2009, Chaps 3.
8“ 8Hansen, C. M., Hansen Solubility Parameter: A User's Handbook, CRC press. 1999.
E, 9Honne, A., Schumann-Olsen, H., Kaspersen, K., Limero, T., Macatangay, A. et al., ""Evaluation of ANITA Air Monitoring
E on the International Space Station"" Proc. 39th InternationalConference on Environmental Systems, SAE, Savannah, 2009, 2009-
3 01-2520.
Q
g 10Panayiotou, C., ""Solubility Parameter Revisited: An Equation-of—State Approach for its Equation"", F luid Phase Equilibria,
E 1997, V01 131,pp 21-35.
o
§
§
E
2
<:
m
<:
Z
5‘
""G
g
.35
Q
B
O
Q
9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
