"","x"
"1","2008-01-2044
Ground Validation of the Third Generation JPL Electronic Nose
M. A. Ryan, A. V. Shevade, A. K. Kisor,
K. S. Manatt, M. L. Homer, L. M. Lara and H. Zhou
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena CA 91109
Copyright © 2008 SAE International
ABSTRACT developing a Third Generation ENose which is designed
to monitor spacecraft cabin air quality in near real-time.
The Third Generation ENose is an air quality monitor
designed to operate in the environment of the US Lab on Development Of the Third Generation JPL ENose has
the International Space Station. It detects a selected required tWO major areas 0t development. One area is
group of analytes at target concentrations in the ppm the design and fabrication Of an interface unit Which Will
regime at an environmental temperature range of 18 - allow the ENose to be operated through the EXPRESS
30 °C, relative humidity from 25 - 75% and pressure Rack (EXpedite The PRocessing 0t Experiments T0
from 530 to 760 torr. The abilities of the device to detect Space Station) on the '33 for a six-month technology
ten analytes, to reject confounders as “unknown” and to demonstration experiment. The second area 0t
deconvolute mixtures of two analytes under varying development includes the sensing platform and the data
environmental conditions has been tested extensively in analysis software. Using the Second Generation ENose
the laboratory. Results of ground testing showed an as a base, the sensing materials, sensor substrate, and
overall success rate for detection, identification and data analysis routines are being expanded in order to
quantification of analytes of 87% under nominal include the ability to detect additional inorganic species,
temperature and humidity conditions and 83% over all mercury and SUttUF dioxide, and to provide quasi-real
conditions. time data analysis. The design and development of the
3rd Generation ENose has been discussed in detail
INTRODUCTION elsewhere [7,8]-
The JPL Electronic Nose [1_5] is an event monitor This paper will focus on extensive laboratory testing of
designed and built for near real time air quality the capabilities of the 3r Generation Electronic Nose
monitoring in crew habitat aboard the space (ENose) undera variety of environmental conditions.
shuttle/space station. This is an array—based sensing
system which is designed to run continuously and to
monitor for the presence of selected chemical species in
the air at parts-per—million (ppm) to parts-per—billion (ppb) ‘\\
concentrations. '0 ' ,
There have been three phases of development of the ﬁfe? ‘ "" 7 j
JPL Electronic Nose. In the first phase, a device f‘fg ,
capable of detecting, analyzing and quantifying ten ’3? ‘x ‘5
analytes at the 1-hour Spacecraft Maximum Allowable ""\‘ *s.
Concentration (SMAC) was developed. This device was a; Q
tested successfully in 1998 on Space Shuttle flight STS— \
95 [4]. In the second phase, the ENose was _ ' :
miniaturized and the capabilities were significantly ' 0
expanded to include 21 analytes and detection at
varying humidity and temperature. The Second
Generation ENose was tested extensively on the ground ' h ”‘3’”
and was demonstrated to be able to detect, identify and _ _
quantify the 21 analytes at or below their 24-hour Figure 1:. The Th'rd .Generatlon ENose. The
SMACs [6]. In preparation for an upcoming, six-month Sensor Unit IS enclosed In the Interface Unit, which
technology demonstration aboard the International W'” be connected to the '88 EXPRESS Rack
Space Station (ISS) in 2008-09, the JPL ENose team is

"
"2","requirement for this program; however, formaldehyde
was treated as a Tier 2 analyte for ease of testing.
THE THIRD GENERATION JPL ENOSE
The ENose was tested for response and ability to
identify and quantify eleven chemical species, shown in ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
Table1. A quantification is considered to be correct if
the concentration value reported by the ENose data The environmental conditions under which testing was
analysis software is +/-50% of the independently done were defined according to conditions which can be
measured concentration of the species. The error range expected in the US Lab on the ISS. Background air
of +/-50% in quantification is based on the approximate composition was based on allowed ISS atmospheric
range with which the Spacecraft Maximum concentrations of water, carbon dioxide and methane.
Concentrations (SMACs) are set; toxicities are not well Relative humidity (RH) may vary from 25-75% at
known for most chemical species, and SMACs are set temperatures of 18°C - 30°C, C02 concentration may be
very conservatively. as much as ~15 mm Hg partial pressure and CH4 may
be several hundred ppm). Atmospheric pressure in the
Success rate in analyte identification and quantification ISS may vary from 538 - 760 torr (10.4 to 14.7 psi) and
is the number of correctly identified and quantified may rise for brief periods (minutes) as high as 830 torr
deliveries of analyte, minus the number of false (16 psi).
negatives and false positives, divided by the number of
deliveries of analyte. A false negative is failure to detect Temperature may vary over the range 18 - 30°C (66 to
the delivery and presence of a targeted chemical 86 °F). Nominal conditions are 760 torr, temperature 21-
species. A false positive is a report of the presence of a 23°C and relative humidity 30-40%. Testing was done
chemical species when it was not present. under all conditions, but not all concentrations of all
Misidentification of a targeted species, for example analytes were tested under all conditions. For
identifying propanol as methanol, or identifying a repeatability in testing, water content was controlled as
confounder as a targeted species, is considered to be a ppm water rather than as relative humidity. Nominal
false positive. conditions on orbit in ISS correspond approximately to
21-22°C, 10,000 ppm water, and atmospheric pressure.
Table 1: Analyte List and Target Detection
Concentration; mg/m° is a pressure independent unit;
ppm is for1 atm. TRAINING SETS
ANALYTE ?AJRAgg-T ?:IRAélg-T As the ENose is an array-based chemical sensor device,
. 3 (ppm) before It can be used as an air quality menitor, training
m lm sets must be achIred. Based on the training sets, the
patterns of array response to targeted analytes under
-—_— specified conditions are included in the data analysis
———— a.gomhm.
Data from the ENose are recorded for each individual
-—_— sensor as resistance versus time. Because the ENose
-—_— is designed to function as an event monitor, the data are
-—_— analyzed as change In reSIstance vs. time. Individual
-—_— sensor teSIstances are recorded Simultaneously, With a
e ano pOInt being taken every twenty seconds. While It would
-——— be possible to take data more or less frequently than
-—_m three times a minute, this data rate has been established
as an optimumlrate to show fairlly rapid changes in the
enVIronment Without ovenNheImIng computer memory
with data. Our data analysis approach defines an
I I I I I I “event’ as a change in the composition of the
The chemical species m Table 1 are d'V'ded 'n’F‘? three environment which lasts longer than ten minutes, or
tiers, based on the 'mport‘fmcg to NASA Hab'tab'l'ty and thirty points at the standard data rate, in part because
Envnronmental Factors Office In detectingthese speCIes. events of duration shorter than ten minutes cannot
Formaldehyde was classifleci as Tier 3 because Its practically be addressed or mitigated using either
Identification and quantification was a goal, not a breathing apparatus or c|ean-up techniques. The data
analysis algorithm needs about ten points (~ three

"
"3","minutes) to establish that resistance has Changed Training sets can be used to judge the accuracy of the
significantly. Based on the data rate and needs of the identification and quantification algorithm even though
data analysis algorithm, training sets are established they are used to establish the coefficients. Accuracy of
using vapor deliveries, or events, of 30-45 minutes the algorithm has been computed using half the data to
duration. establish the algorithm and coefficients and the other
half to test the application, and using all the data for both
The data analysis algorithm is a Levenberg-Marquart functions. The statistical difference in results is
non-linear least squares fitting approach to insignificant. In the success rates for identification and
deconvolution of change in resistance across the quantification shown below, all the data are used for
sensing array into identification and quantification of the both functions.
analyte causing response in the sensors. The analysis
approach has been discussed in detail previously [9].
Training sets were established for the eleven analytes in SUCCESS RATES
Table 1. The environmental conditions for the training
sets vary only in water content. Because there is Tables 2 and 3 summarize the identification and
temperature control in the sensing chamber in the quantification accuracy results based on training sets. In
ENose, the environmental temperature does not these data, success in detection signifies that the
influence the temperature at which analytes are analyte was detected, identified correctly, and quantified
detected, identified and quantified. Detection within +/- 50% of the measured delivered concentration
temperature iS held at 25-270C for all training $9128. of anaIyte_ An “event” is defined as a change in
Detection temperature rises above 270C only when environment caused by the presence of a targeted
environmental temperature approaches 300C, the species. A false positive is detection of an “event,”
maximum temperature for ENose operation, in which either where there was no event, or mis-identification of
case detection temperature Wt” be 27-2800 The relative an event (e.g. identification of toluene as methanol.) A
humidity 0f the environment Wt” be altered it the false negative is failure to identify that an event has
temperature Of the sensing Chamber iS different from the happened, without respect to identification or
temperature of the environment, so for training sets, the quantification.
humidity is regulated as ppm water. Training sets were
made in a baCkground Of ﬁltered house air With water AS can be seen from both Tables 2 and 3’ accuracy in
concentrations 0t 5000: 10,000, 15,0000 and 20,000 identification of analytes is best at nominal humidity
ppm. These concentrations correspond roughlyto 20%: conditions, approximately 10,000 ppm water (30-40%
40%, 60% and 80% relative humidity at 210C, and cover RH). The overall success rate for identification and
the specified range 0t humidities for the specified range quantification is better when the water content of the air
oftemperatures. is not at its highest; for Tier 1 species, the overall
success rate at nominal temperature and humidity is
lnitial training sets where pressure was varied showed 93%, and for Tier 2 the overall success rate at nominal
that the sensor resistance Changes with respect to the conditions is 85%.
presence of analyte were not dependent on
environmental pressure, so a complete set of varied At conditions Of 50-60% relative humidity with
pressure training sets was not made. environmental temperature above 21-22°C, the
increased water absorbed by polymer based sensors
In designing training sets, the range 0t analyte lowers the sensor responses to other vapors. ln
concentration to which sensors are exposed is set at 1/3 addition, high water content in polymer based sensors
to 3 times the target concentration. ThIS range is lelde can resuIt in disso|ution of some Tier 2 compounds,
into 10-12 concentrations, and the sensor array exposed particularly oxygen-containing compounds, which will
to those concentrations at each water content. A total of result in a different type Of capture Of analyte molecules
1599 differentanalyte exposures were made to establish in the sensing ﬁ|m_ At high humidity, overall success
the training sets; 325 for Tier 1 compounds and 1274 for rate for Tier 1 species falls to 82% and to 74% for Tier 2
Tiers 2 & 3- The exposures were divided approximately species. Sensors for mercury are inorganic, and so are
equally among four humidity levels, although there was not significantly affected by humidity; the fall in success
a larger number at the tWO lowest humidities in both with humidity for Tier1 species is cause bya slightfall in
sets, Tier 1 and Tiers 2 & 3- Formaldehyde, the one Tier success with ammonia and a significant fall in success
3compound, had the fewest exposures, as it wasagoal for 302_ With Tier 1 species, lower, but not zero,
rather than a requirement in thiS program. humidity tends to be better for sensing, especially with
802, which reacts with water to form sulfuric acid.
Training sets give insight into the COhditiOhS under WhiCh Sensor response to ammonia falls off with humidity as it
the ENose operates best, WhiCh COhditiOhS cause does for the organic species in Tier 2; it is the same
difficulties in identification and quantification, and allow polymer sensors which are used to detect and quantify
calculation Of performance as accuracy Of identification organic compounds that are used in sensing ammonia
and quantification, number of false negatives and
number of false positives using a large number of trials.

"
"4","For Tier 2 compounds, lower humidity, 5000 ppm water, Because the concentration of formaldehyde is very low,
and slightly higher than nominal humidity, 15,000 ppm and because it is a small molecule, response to this
water, have similar overall accuracy, success rates of compound is masked by response to water at high
80% and 79%, respectively. The overall accuracy at the humidity. Although the ENose program has worked to
high end of humidity conditions, 20,000 ppm, is develop approaches to deconvolute response to an
significantly lower that at the lower humidities for Tier 2 analyte masked by high humidity, in the case of
species, as it is for Tier 1. formaldehyde, which has a very small signal in polymer
sensors, the sensor response cannot be separated.
The Tier 3 species, formaldehyde, is detected well at
nominal conditions, but poorly at high humidities.
Table 2: Analyte ID success rates for Tier 1 chemical species, based on training set data

Analyte at 25°C, 5000 ppm Number

H20 . 16% RH Correct False Pos False Neg of events

Ammonia (2 - 25) .m—“m

Mercury(.003-.03)

Sulfur Dioxide

Average, Tier1 —-m-m-m

Analyte at 25°C, 10000 ppm Number

H20 . 32% RH Correct False Pos False Neg of events

Ammonia (2 - 25) ———-m

Mercury(.003-.03)

Sulfur Dioxide

Average, Tier1 m-m-m-m

Analyte at 25°C, 15000 ppm Number

H20 . 43% RH Correct False Pos False Neg of events

Ammonia (2 - 25) ——-m-aa

Mercury(.003-.03) ———-m

Sulfur Dioxide

Average, Tier1 —-m-m-m

Analyte at 25°C, 20000 Number

ppm H20 . 64% RH Correct False Pos False Neg of events

Ammonia <2 - 25) ———-m

Mercury(.003-.03) ———-m

Sulfur Dioxide

Average, Tier1 m-M-m-Il

Number
Correct False Pos False Neg of events
verage, Ier overa
conditions 0.89

"
"5","Table 3: Analyte ID success rates for Tier 2 & 3 chemical species, based on training set data
—----
H20 - 16% RH Correct False Pos False Neg of events
———-m-m
————-Eﬂ
———-m-m
————-!E
————-!E
———-m-m
—----
H20 - 32% RH Correct False Pos False Neg of events
———-m-m
———-Eﬂ-=E
————-!E
————-!E
————-!E
————-!E
————-!E
————-E=J
—.na-ma-m—
—----
H20 - 43% RH Correct False Pos False Neg of events
———-m-m
————-m
——m
————-m
——m
————-m
————-m
———-m-m
_----
ppm H20 - 64% RH Correct False Pos False Neg of events
——m
————-m
——m
————-m
——m
———-m-m
Number of
—----
mum!!-
over all conditions 0.80 1274

"
"6","The reasons for lower success rates at lower humidity FOLLOW PROGRESS OF CONTAMINATION
with Tier 2 (organic) compounds are not Clear. A model EVENT
of sensor—analyte interaction developed under the JPL
ENose program has shown that the Interaction energy at In addition to identifying and quantifying the appearance
an analyte With the sensor matrix IS decreased as water of the analytes shown in Table 1 the function of the
content in the sensor increases; it might therefore be ENose includes following the progress of a
expected that air With lower humidity, 5000 ppm water or contamination event. That is, the ENose should show
RH about 20/9, WOUId result 'h better SECCGSS rates than both the rise in concentration of a targeted analyte as it
a't W'th nominal humidity (about 40/"" RH) [10’ 11]- is released into the environment, and the fall in
However, the data in Table 4 indicate that this is not the concentration as it is cleaned UP- The plots in Figures 2
case. It is possible that this phenomenon comes from and 3 show how resistance changes over time as
the methods used to select the sensor set. Data used 'h analyte is added to then removed from the environment.
selecting the polymer materials from which to make the
sensors were taken at 1OOQO'ppm water 'h att’I and 30 Figures 2 and 3 shows the development of resistance
the sensor set has been optimizee'for th'SI humidity level. change data for eight sensors after analyte is let into the
Future applications, where conditions might vary more sensing chamber. As seen in both figures, there is a
than typieal conditions on. ISISI W'” have to take that period of about 5 minutes after analyte is turned on at
variation Into account In optlmlzmg the sensor set. the vapor delivery system until the sensors show any
I I response as change in resistance. This lag time is
The rhoctel of sensor—analyte Interaction also shows that systematic; it is the time it takes for the concentration
the b'hd'thehetgy 0t analyte 'h a polymer sensor WI'” gradient from the vapor delivery system to reach the
decrease W'th “e'hQ temperature. Even a modest “Se 'h sensing Chamber and for analyte concentration to reach
temperature IS suffICIent to prevent weak bonding such its maximum in the sensing chamber. There is also a
as hyerogeh bonding between analyte and sensor. In time constant for response related to each analyte and
fact, It IS In. part because of thIs abIIIty'of modest each sensor. As can be seen by comparing the rise
temperature Increase to prevent weak bonding that the times for sensors in Figures 2 and 3’ sensors respond
polyrher senosors 'h the ENose are held at 28 C for more rapidly to ethanol than to toluene. For these 30
sensmg. 2e C '3 SUtt'e'eht to prevent polymer sensors minute events, sensors do not always reach equilibrium
from becoming saturated In sorbed water under nominal to every analyte, as can be seen for Sensors 5 and 6 in
humidity conditions. However, because the ability of a Figure 3_
polymer based sensor to detect analytes will be
expected to fall off W'th Increasmg temperature, a After the analyte delivery is stopped, there is a period of
balance between a sensor temperature h'gh enough to about 10 minutes for the analyte to be flushed from the
prevent saturation 'h water and low enough to. allow system; this period is reflected in a rapid but incomplete
sorption 0t most analytes had to be found. In add'tteh’ 't fall in sensor response after “analyte off.” This region of
has been shown by other researehers that optimum the sensor response is used to track the diminishing
sensmg can be aeoomplished only 't the envnronmental concentration of a Chemical species during a Cleanup
temperature (In thIs case temperature Within the ENose) operation. The complete recovery of sensors after
'3 lower than the temperature of the sensmg surface removal of analyte might take an additional 30 minutes
[12]- For tIh'S reason, the temperature of the sensmg after the environment is Clean, as analyte desorbs from
chamber. 'h the JPL ENose . '3 controlled by a the polymer sensors; however, quantification of the
combination of thermoelectric deVIces and fans. sensor response in this region will show the analyte
concentration to be below the lowest concentration to be
0.015 _S1 0.007 _ 1
f K :82 0.006 f \ —s2
analyte on analyte off _83 analyte on analyte off —s3
5‘ :‘5‘ 0.005 —:g
0.010 M —s6 —s6
—S7 0.004 —37
“Q t l —88 —S8
2 mqk mo 0.003
0.005 . to... M k E 0.002
W x . m. w»
W \am: 0-000 * 0 ﬁg” ”*‘aw-«AMM
0.000 “ . “M“ M WWF""7§~W~V7 WWW»,
-0.001
analyzed T analyzed T T
event start event finish '0-002 anal zed analyzed
event start event |n|S
'0-005 IIII|'""'|""""|""""|""''|'""'|""""|""""|""""|""""| '0'003|""""|""""|""""|""""|""""|""""|""""|""""|""""|""""|
620 630 640 650 660 670 680 690 700 710 720 170 180 190 200 210 220 230 240 250 260 270
TIME (min) TIME (min)
Figure 2: Sensor response to 1083 ppm ethanol. Figure 3: Sensor response to 37 ppm toluene

"
"7","reported by the ENose. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Analysis Of the onset, maximum and decline in these tWO The research reported in this paper was carried out at
examples Wt” tOHOW the rise and fall Shown in the PIOtS, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of
Table 4 ShOWS analysis for the ethanol event shown in Technology under a contract with the National
Figure 2- th the table, the single, overall event 0f the Aeronautics and Space Administration and supported by
appearance 0t ethanol lasts from 662 minutes to 693 the Advanced Environmental Monitoring and Control
minutes. The ethanol event is reported as four sub- Program, ESMD, NASA.
events; the first sub-event has a concentration of about
900 ppm, the second a concentration about 1150 ppm,
the third 900 ppm, and the fourth 349 ppm, showing the
rise and fall of the appearance of ethanol in the REFERENCES
environment.
Table 4: Rise and Fall of Ethanol concentration as 1' ||\:/|.AZ. Ryanakj.LéH<]3rrlﬁﬂr, M'G.‘ Buehlepr‘, K'S' :tﬂahatt,
determined by ENose Data Analysis algorithm ' ee, an ' ra ’ . onltorlng t e. W Qua'l'ty m a
Closed Chamber Usmg an Electronic Nose, Proc.
Event Event en d Analyte ID Analyte 27th Int]. Conf. on Environ. Systems, SAE (1997).
--- 2. MA. Ryan, M.L. Homer, MG. Buehler, K.S. Manatt,
(min) (ppm) B. Lau, D. Karmon, and S. Jackson, ""Monitoring
-__m Space Shuttle Air for Selected Contaminants Using
an Electronic Nose,"" Proc. 28th Int]. Conf. on
W“ syStemS’ SAE (1998’
3. MA. Ryan, M. L. Homer, H. Zhou, K. S. Manatt, V.
8. Ryan, and S. Jackson, ""Operation of an
Electronic Nose Aboard the Space Shuttle and
Directions for Research for a Second Generation
-__m Device,"" Proc. 30th Int]. Conf. on Environ. Systems,
SAE @000»
4. MA. Ryan, H. Zhou, MG. Buehler, K.S. Manatt,
V.S. Mowrey, S.P. Jackson, A.K. Kisor, A.V.
CONCLUSION Shevade, and ML. Homer, “Monitoring Space
Shuttle Air Quality Using the JPL Electronic Nose,”
In a total of 1599 exposures, the overall success rate for IEEE Sensors Journal, 4, 337 (2004).
Tier 1 s ecies was 89%, and for Tiers 2&3, 80%, over all
humiditi/3 and pressure conditions. Weighting the 5' M'A Ryan, A'V' Shevade,lH. Zhou and ML Homer,
success rates for number of Chemical species in each Polymer—Carbon-Qomposlte Sensors for an
category, the overall success rate for identification and Electronic Nose A” Quality Monitor, MRS Bulletin,
quantification of delivered species in training sets was 29’ 714 (2004)-
83% over all conditions. 6. Spacecraft Maximum Allowable Concentrations for
. .. . Selected Airborne Contaminants, vols.1 & 2,
Success rates at nongmal eondltlons, envnronmental NationalAcademyPress,WashingtonDC,1994.
temperature of 21-22 C, With analyte temperature
(sensing Chamber temperature) at 25°C, and 10,000 7- M-A- Ryan, M-L- Homer, H. ZhOU, K. Manatt, A-
ppm water (about 40% RH), the success rate for Tier 1 Manfreda, A. Kisor, A. Shevade and S.P.S. Yen;
species was 93%, and for Tiers 2 & 3 was 85%. The “Expanding the Analyte Set of the JPL Electronic
overall success rate for all species under nominal Nose to Include Inorganic Species;” Journal of
conditions was 87%. Aerospace, SAE Transactions, 2005-01-2880
(2005)
While, in eneral, success was im roved at lower
relative hurgidity, this was not true in artl cases; nominal 8' M'A' Ryan, ML' Homer, H' Zhou, K' Manatt, A'
conditions provided the bestsuccess rates. Future work ‘l‘Vlanfreda, A' Klsor, A.HSIhevade and S'P'S' Yeh;
will consider whether it is possible to optimize a sensor Expanding the GaPab'l't'eS Of the .JPL Electronic
set over all conditions, so that success rate does not N039 for an International $79309 Station Technology
vary with water content of the background air_ DemonStration”, PrOC. 36 Int]. Conf. on EnViron.
Systems, SAE, 2179 (2006).
9. H. Zhou, M. L. Homer, A. V. Shevade and M. A.
Ryan “Nonlinear Least-Squares Based Method for
Identifying and Quantifying Single and Mixed

"
"8","Contaminants in Air with an Electronic Nose;”;
Sensors, 6, 1 (2006).

10. A.V. Shevade, MA. Ryan, M.L. Homer, AM.
Manfreda, H. Zhou, K.S. Manatt, “Molecular
Modeling of Polymer Composite-Analyte Interactions
in Electronic Nose Sensors,” Sens. & Act. B, 93, 84
(2003)

11. A.V. Shevade, MA. Ryan, M.L. Homer, AM.
Manfreda, H. Zhou and K. Manatt, “Correlating
Polymer—Carbon Composite Sensor Response with
Molecular Descriptors,” J. Electrochem. 800., 153,
H209(2006)

12. E.J. Severin and N.S. Lewis, “Relationship among
resonant frequency Changes on a coated quartz
crystal microbalance, thickness Change, and
resistance responses of polymer—carbon black
composite Chemiresistors;” Anal. Chem. 72, 2008
(2000)

CONTACT

Dr. M. A. Ryan

MS 184-105; Jet Propulsion Laboratory

California Institute of Technology

4800 Oak Grove Drive

Pasadena CA 91109

tel: (818) 354-8028

email: mryan@jp|.nasa.gov

"
