"","x"
"1","Lending String: *RRR,OHS,YRM,UBY Call #: SPIE
Patron: Location: COLOR
A Journal Title: Proceedings of SPlE--the Date: 3-17-14
4 international society for optical engineering.
1—
1“ = Volume: 6490 Issue: ' '
3 g Montleear: 2007 EIGCtI’OHIC DGIIVGI’Y
m =
Q) E Pages: 64901p-eoa
_: i Borrower: NAJ
o E
D3 5 Article Author: sabbatini, m; gianfranco, v; collon, Shipping Address:
9—4 E m NASA Johnson Space Center
0 ""'—='= Bioastronautics Library-SD
% E Article Title: Stereo cameras on the International Bldg 37,Rm 201N2101 NASA Parkway
3.: E Space Station Houston, TX 77058-3696
m
5 :7, Fax:
a g Imprint: Bellingham, Wash. ; The Society Ariel:
C‘. ‘— Email: jsc-sdlibrry@mail.nasagov
D co
2 | L L 01""
1, la
53 ILL Number: 114761137 . . ..
—l ; 1‘. ﬂ.‘ .|-'
a |||||||||||||||||||||||||||lllllllllllllll|||||||||||||
NOTICE: THIS MATERIAL MAY BE PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT LAW (TITLE 17 US. CODE)
If you need to request a resend, please do so within
five (5) business days.
INDICATE PROBLEM:
University of Rochester Library (RRR)
Rochester, NY 14627
Phone: (585) 275-4454
Ariel: 128.151.189.155
Odyssey: 128.151.244.5

"
"2","Stereo cameras on the International Space Station
Massimo Sabbatini*,
Gianfranco Visentin, Max Collonl, Hans Ranebo, David Sunderland, Raimondo Fortezza
European Space Agency
ABSTRAC T
Three-dimensional media is a unique and efﬁcient means to virtually visit/observe objects that cannot be easily reached
otherwise, like the International Space Station. The advent of auto-stereoscopic displays and stereo projection system is
making the stereo media available to larger audiences than the traditional scientists and design engineers communities. It
is foreseen that a maj or demand for 3D content shall come from the entertainment area.
Taking advantage of the 6 months long permanence on the International Space Station of a colleague European
Astronaut, Thomas Reiter, the Erasmus Centre uploaded to the 188 a newly developed, fully digital stereo camera, the
Erasmus Recording Binocular. Testing the camera and its human interfaces in weightlessness, as well as accurately
mapping the interior of the 188 are the main objectives of the experiment that has just been completed at the time of
writing.
The intent of this paper is to share with the readers the design challenges tackled in the development and operation of the
ERB camera and highlight some of the future plans the Erasmus Centre team has in the pipeline.
1. 3D: A POWERFUL OUTREACHING TOOL
The European Space Agency (ESA) Erasmus Centre has a long standing experience in the full chain of 3D acquisition,
visualization, editing and distribution. The Centre’s real-time legacy application running on SGI computers is one of the
most accurate real time simulation of the International Space Station (188) in the world. Numerous 3D productions have
been done to date of the various assembly and testing phases of the Autonomous Tranfer Vehicle (ATV, the new
European space cargo). Live broadcasts have been successfully carried out in 3D over satellite links and various stereo
cameras have been developed for ground and space use.
The Erasmus Centre sent in 2003 an analogue stereo still camera on-board the ISS: the RBT 5X Type C (based on the
24x36 format NIKON FMlO) 3D camera. This is an analogue, ﬁlm based SLR camera, with a pair a NIKKOR 50mm F
mount optics, completely manual in its operations and capable of high quality pictures, with a stereo base of 6,5 cm.
With a 36 exp. ﬁlm it makes 12 pairs of stereo pair images. It was qualiﬁed and ﬂown for the Spanish Soyuz Mission
that lifted off from Baikonur on a Soyuz rocket on 18 October 2003. The spectacular stereoscopic images received are
very effectively used to increase the value of the Centre’s Virtual Reality model of the 188.
The magniﬁcent images that IMAX brought back from the initial assembly phase of the 188 back in 2001 have attracted
many people and inspired us to continue on that path. The Erasmus Centre aim is to share the experience of human
spaceﬂight with large audiences and 3D video is proving very effective at achieving that goal.
2. THE ERB EXPERIMENT
The idea of developing a ﬁll digital 3D camera came from the observation of the limitations of the interlaced analogue
models we had in house from various manufacturers: reduced vertical resolution, difﬁculties in editing due to lack of
plug ins in the main editing program suites but above all, the difﬁculty for the camera operator to evaluate the 3D quality
of the footage while shooting. The availability of miniaturized organic light emitting diodes (OLED) displays of
' WW, Erasmus Centre, Directorate of Human Spaceﬂight, Microgravity and Exploration, Noordwijk, the
Netherlands.
1 Cosine Research BV, Leiden, the Netherlands.
Stereoscopic Displays and Virtual Reality Systems XIV. edited by Andrew J. Woods, Neil A. Dodgson,
John O. Merritt, Mark T. Bolas, Ian E. McDowell, Proc. of SPIE-IS&T Electronic Imaging,
SPIE Vol. 6490, 64901P, © 2007 SPIE-IS&T - 0277-786X/07/S18
SPlE-IS&T/ Vol. 6490 64901P-1
Downloaded From: http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/ on 03/17/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.orglterms

"
"3","adequate resolution, together with the experience in gained in designing imaging systems for experiments on Sounding
Rockets and Russian Retrievable Capsules gave us the main idea of creating an innovative product where acquisition,
visualization and playback of 3D footage would be easy and that could be ﬂown to the International Space Station.

The experiment goals were threefold and some of the questions we tried to answer in a very pragmatic fashion are listed
hereafter:

- The development of a stereo camera for a manned spaceﬂight poses numerous W challenges: what
would be the best ergonomic arrangement to see stereo while operating the camera, a helmet mounted display or
an on—camera display set? Which media to use that would be radiation tolerant over time and easy to upload?
How to deal with the stringent space qualiﬁcations issues? How the various material and components behave in
the ISS environment over the relatively long time of 2 years.

0 Communications: would the low resolution images look good on very large display like in large event venues?
Would the images returned from the experiment integrate well in the existing virtual reality model of the 158 of
the Erasmus Centre? Would they provide the augmented reality value needed to improve the current aseptic
engineering model we have and, ultimately, would they be good enough to convey some increased sense of
presence in the viewers?

0 erational: can these images be useful for the training of European astronauts or of ISS ground controllers?
Can an accurate and up to date mapping of the inside of the ISS help the operations personnel keep track of the
current conﬁguration of the European payloads?

To answer these questions an experiment protocol was carried out that required the collection of images from three
different cameras: the ERB 3-D video camera, a Sony PD-150 video camera and a Nikon 3-D still camera. The last two
were already on-board the ISS and are being used both to calibrate and act as reference sources for the newly developed
ERB.
The launch vehicle that became available in the framework of the European-Russian Space Agencies Agreement known
as ASTROLAB Long Duration mission was the Progress 22P, an unmanned Russian carrier launched from Baikonour to
the 188 on the 29 June 2006. The European astronaut that carried out the experiment is Thomas Reiter: he is the ﬁrst
European astronaut to undertake a long-duration mission to the International Space Station. He launched into space with
the STS-121 Discovery mission on 4 July 2006. The Astrolab mission lasted ﬁve and a half months, concluding when
Thomas Reiter returned to Earth with Shuttle mission STS-116, landing at NASA's Kennedy Space Center, in Florida, on
22 December 2006. Together with him, also the last ERB experiment media were downloaded and reached the ERB
Principal Investigator by mid January 2007 in the Erasmus Centre in The Netherlands. The Astrolab Mission Review
took place in the Erasmus Centre on the 5, 6 and 7 February 2007: the feedback from Thomas Reiter after seeing the
stereo footage was very positive and encouraging. The results presented in this paper are therefore to be considered
preliminary.
4'
ac” e
r. ,. _ l
a i V ‘
I x "" 3"" "" t '
-_‘;,_4 ('2'.- ,
Figure 1, from left to right : 1) RBT 3D still camera; 2) Sony video camera PD-150 and 3) Erasmus Recording
Binocular.
SPIE-IS&T/ Vol. 6490 64901P-2
Downloaded From: http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.orgl on 03/ 17/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.orglterms

"
"4","3. THE ERB DESIGN
The design driver for the ERB was to act in a way similar to that of a binocular, with the addition of allowing the user to
digitally record what is shown in the viewﬁnder. This required the interplay of three parts: a stereo viewﬁnder, a digital
recording and a playback part, all controlled by an intuitively usable human interface.
The cameras, commercial-oﬂlthe-shelf digital CCD cameras with auto-focus, have a resolution of 640 X 480 pixels and
were both coupled to a PC-104 computer system, operating under Linux. Real-time software was developed to ensure
that both cameras could be read out at 25 frames per second and at 12 bit color depth. The software development was
complicated by the requirement of storing uncompressed data in its original quality, resulting in a video data stream of
1.3 GB per minute with in addition a stereo audio track.
Simultaneously to the recording, the images had to be shown in a viewﬁnder. A set of novel OLED displays was chosen
because of their low power consumption, the suitable 800x600 colour pixels resolution, the small size of the driving
electronics and the fact that very lightweight plastic Optics, suitable for operation onboard the 188, could be used. The
images, once captured, were sent both to the display driver and recorded on a hard—disk.
To playback the ﬁles the cameras were turned off and the content of the hard-disk could be immediately viewed in stereo
in the viewﬁnder. This allowed the astronaut assessing the quality and the “3D feeling” of the recorded scenes without
the need for specialized playback equipment.
The media consists of a modiﬁed 2.5” hard disks. Each of these 80 GB disks can hold ~45 minutes of uncompressed
video recordings. A custom made insertion/extraction mechanical slide was developed to allow for the replacement of
the hard-disks.
a
$5 ‘; ‘ I j
. ‘p'f 1‘ ‘ ' , ‘ .t
Figure 2 : Exploded view of the ERB camera elements
A human interface study brought the design to a solution that proved very efﬁcient. Camera controls are operated by
mono-function buttons and the on-screen menu is limited to a bare minimum. The main astronaut operations like
recording, playback and deletion of scenes are Operated with the thumbs. More advanced and not very often used
functions like focus, exposure and white-balance were operated by the other ﬁngers on the sides of the camera.
The Linux operating system was used to minimize startup time of the system, which in the end was 40 seconds from a
cold start.
SPlE-IS&TI Vol. 6490 64901P-3
Downloaded From: http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/ on 03/17/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.org/terms
a____________________________——————

"
"5","In the original design we struggled to achieve a mechanical solution to change the angle between the two cameras, the
vergence angle, in order to adapt the amount of overlapping of the left and right image in relation to the distance to the
target to be ﬁlmed: we concluded that given the relatively constrained set of scenes to be ﬁlmed and the ﬁx focal length
of the cameras, the additional mechanism was difﬁcult to be operated by the astronaut and its functionality difﬁcult to be
assessed without video processing equipment. We decided to mount the two cameras in a ﬁxed position, optimized by a
calibration procedure that could be repeated by the astronaut on the 15$.
4. THE SPACE QUALIFICATION
All equipment onboard a spacecraft need to fulﬁll a vast set of requirements for that speciﬁc spacecraft before it can be
qualiﬁed for ﬂight and then launched into space.
The Erasmus Recording Binocular was launched with a Russian Soyuz launcher, and then operated in both the American
and Russian segments of the International Space Station. The camera therefore needed to comply with both the Russian
Soyuz launcher requirements, as well as the American and Russian requirements for operation onboard the International
Space Station.
All equipment was tested before launch to ensure that it could withstand the environment during transportation and
ﬂight. This is done in laboratories with vacuum chambers, vibration tables, thermal chambers and Electro-Magnetic test
beds. There is a whole set of procedures for these tests, and also meetings and reviews with specialists to ensure that the
equipment complies with the applicable regulations and constraints. This is usually referred to as 'qualiﬁcation'.
Some of the requirements for manned space ﬂight, relating primarily to crew safety are listed hereafter:
0 The equipment should not cause hazard in case of electrical, mechanical or software malfunction.
0 The equipment shall sustain the acceleration load at launch and vibration tests are required to demonstrate it.
o The materials used in the equipment should not be ﬂammable or emit toxic gases in case of high
temperatures/buming.
0 The exterior should not have any sharp edges and corners that might injure a crew member.
0 Equipment containing shatterable material should be contained so that in case of damage the material is prevented
from spreading inside the spacecraﬁ.
0 The surface temperature of the equipment should not exceed 120 F (49 C) at any time.
0 The equipment should not explode or cause hazards if exposed to vacuum or rapid de-pressurization.
0 Radiated Electromagnetic Emissions (EMC) are to be measured and should ﬁt within a well deﬁned emission
proﬁle.
0 There are also restrictions on generated sound pressure levels, ergonomy and mechanical stability.
1.1 Power
We decided to power the stereo camera from batteries in order to avoid the requirements related to electrical connectors,
inrush currents, and power supplies onboard the Space Station. Batteries are usually very difficult to qualify for
spaceﬂight due to their often toxic chemical contents, their high energy density and the fact that they might explode if
exposed to low pressure. However NASA already have rechargeable batteries onboard the Space Station, and it was
agreed between NASA and BSA that we could borrow these batteries for our experiment.
1.2 Shatterable Materials
The commercial CCD cameras and OLED displays contained glass, but since these pieces were shielded by plastic
covers we assumed that the requirements related to shatterable materials would be ﬁJlﬁlled. However, this was not the
case, and we had to modify and redesign the camera enclosure half way though the development, in order to seal any
openings. This meant that the ventilation holes for the CPU had to be covered by a 50 micron mesh, which efﬁciently
blocked the cooling air from entering the CPU fan. Measurements showed that the camera could be powered for a
maximum of one hour after these modiﬁcations, before the electronics overheated.
SPlE-|S&T/ Vol. 6490 64901P-4
Downloaded From: http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.orgl on 03/17/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.org/terms

"
"6","1.3 Off-gassing
The materials used in the manufacturing had to be carefully selected in order to prevent ﬂammability or toxic gases in
case of ﬁre. This was a major constraint in the manufacturing. All electrical cables had to be replaced with Teﬂon®
coated cables and any trace of PVC was carefully removed. When cables could not be replaced they were sealed with
aluminum foil.

1.4 Electra Magnetic Radiation
An early test showed that the emission spectrum was exceeding the allowable level at higher frequency. Modiﬁcations
were done in order to limit the transmitted radiation like improving grounding/bond—ing and increasing the shielding
barriers, but these changes were not enough to bring the camera within the allowed levels over the entire range. The
discrepancy, however, since was limited to few isolated peaks at very high frequency (f>lGHz) had to be waived and an
exception was made in order to accept our camera for ﬂight.

1.5 Vibration Tests
In the design of a novel piece of hardware (not ﬂown before) the mechanical requirements are to be considered from the
start: the hardware has to be able to withstand a spectrum of vibrations that correspond to the mechanical stress it shall
experience at launch and during transport on ground. Therefore we decided to use our experience with the space
experiments on-board the Sounding Rockets and built the main hardware using the rugged industrial standard PC-104
and a mechanical set of metallic ribs developed for this standard: they provide the possibility to stack an indeﬁnite
number of electronic boards and guarantee the mechanical robustness required by the mechanical vibration tests. The
choice proved solid and adequate: on the minus side it must be noted that the choice of available CPU’s and peripheral
interfaces was rather limited. This main design choice determined the rather bulky form the ﬁnal mmera eventually took
5. CONCLUSIONS
At the time of writing the preliminary results analyzed and the tests done in various audiences all over Europe are very
encouraging: the ERB camera images are adequate for outreach purposes: the relatively low resolution of the two
cameras used is not a deterrent to the enthusiasm that animates the ﬁrst viewers (of all ages and background) that have
experienced the ﬁrst ERB sequences from the 158. Even on large screens (IMAX theatres equipped with linear
polarisation devices) the appealing content ﬁlmed by our European astronaut Thomas Reiter attracts all audiences and in
particular, needless to say, the younger ones.
The ﬁrst still photos and the high quality SD footage is being analyzed by various European experts in order to
reconstruct, by means of a reverse engineering process, with the ﬁnal goal of mapping the interiors of the ISS.
Contacts are already being sought for the broadcasting live to student audiences of 3D material mixed to PD programs in
a live format.
Efforts are already on-going for the integration and ﬂight of a successor of ERB in high deﬁnition.
6. ACKNOLEDGEMENTS
The design of this camera originates from the long co-operation of the author with the ESA Robotics group of the ESA
Technical Directorate, lead by Mr. Gianfranco Visentin. They use stereo vision as the main tool for the navigation of
rovers and tele-manipulation tasks in hazardous environments. Hans Ranebo, also a member of the Robotics section, has
been instrumental to the success of this project in the critical space qualiﬁcation exercise.
Our thanks goes also to the fruitful cooperation with the Dutch company Cosine Research BV, Leiden, The Netherlands,
whose engineers had the full responsibility of the initial prototyping phase.
The ERB project is the result of the efforts of many dedicated engineers and scientists, too many to mention in this
space: the realization of such a complex, innovative and reliable piece of space hardware in the reduced amount of time
and resources available required a remarkable dedication from all parties involved.

SPlE-IS&T/ Vol. 6490 64901 P-5
Downloaded From: http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/ on 03/17/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.org/terms

"
"7","7. FURTHER REFERENCES
Final results of this experiment, together with a ﬁJll list of relevant publications shall be made publically available in due
time on the on line Erasmus Experiment Archive database, at the following URL:
hgp://www.smceﬂight.esa.int/eea/index.cfm?act=search.record&id=l2695&search=ERB
SPlE-|S&T/ Vol. 6490 64901P-6
Downloaded From: http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrarymrgl on 03/17/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.org/terms

"
