"","x"
"1","Delawa re State Umversuty
~-+—- William C. Jason Library
Documents to You
A service of DSU Library’s Interlibrary Loan (ILL) office
Phone: (302) 857-6193 or 7909
Fax: (302) 857-6177
Email: ill@desu.edu
NOTICE
WARNING CONCERNING COPYRIGHT RESTRICTIONS
The copyright law of the United States (Title 17, United States Code)
governs the making of photocopies or other reproductions of
copyrighted materials. Under certain conditions specified in the law,
libraries and archives are authorized to furnish a photocopy or other
reproduction. One of these specified conditions is that the photocopy
or reproduction is not to be used for any purpose other than private
study, scholarship, or research. If a user makes a request for, or later
uses, a photocopy or reproduction for purposes in excess of fair use
that user may be liable for copyright infringement.

"
"2","Stereo Images from Space
Massimo Sabbatini, Erasmus Centre, European Space Agency, the Netherlands
Maximilien J . Collon, Cosine Research BV, Leiden, the Netherlands
Gianfranco Visentin, European Space Agency, the Netherlands
ABSTRACT
The Erasmus Recording Binocular (ERBl) was the ﬁrst fully digital stereo camera used on the International Space
Station. One year after its ﬁrst utilisation, the results and feedback collected with various audiences have convinced
us to continue exploiting the outreach potential of such media, with its unique capability to bring space down to
earth, to share the feeling of weightlessness and conﬁnement with the viewers on earth. The production of stereo is
progressing quickly but it still poses problems for the distribution of the media. The Erasmus Centre Of the European
Space Agency has experienced how difﬁcult it is to master the full production and distribution Chain of a stereo
system. Efforts are also on the way to standardize the satellite broadcasting part Of the distribution.
A new stereo camera is being built, ERBZ, to be launched to the International Space Station (188) in September
2008: it shall have 720p resolution, it shall be able to transmit its images to the ground in real-time allowing the
production of live programs and it could possibly be used also outside the 188, in support of Extra Vehicular
Activities of the astronauts. These new features are quite challenging to achieve in the reduced power and mass
budget available to space projects and we hope to inspire more designers to come up with ingenious ideas to built
cameras capable to Operate in the hash Low Earth Orbit environment: radiations, temperature, power consumption
and thermal design are the Challenges to be met.
The intent of this paper is to share with the readers the experience collected so far in all aspects of the 3D Video
production Chain and to increase awareness on the unique content that we are collecting: nice stereo images from
space can be used by all actors in the stereo arena to gain consensus on this powerful media. With respect to last
year we shall present the progress made in the following areas: a) the satellite broadcasting live of stereo content to
D-Cinema’s in Europe; b) the design Challenges to ﬂy the camera outside the 188 as Opposed to ERBl that was only
meant to be used in the pressurized environment of the 188; e) 0n-b0ard stereo viewing on a stereo camera has been
tackled in ERBl: trade Offs between OLED and LCOS display technologies shall be presented; (1) HD_SDI cameras
versus USB2 0r Firewire; e) the hardware compression ASIC solutions used to tackle the high data rate 0n-b0ard; f)
3D geometry reconstruction: ﬁrst attempts in reconstructing a computer model of the interior of the ISS starting
form the stereo Video available.
1. INTRODUCTION
The European Space Agency is Europe’s gateway to space. Its mission is to shape the development of Europe’s
space capability and share the beneﬁts amongst the Citizens of Europe. The Erasmus Centre (EC) is located in at the
ESA Technology & Research Centre (ESTEC) in Noordwijk (NL), under the responsibility of the Directorate of
Human Spaceﬂight, Mierogravity and Exploration. It is a physical and Virtual portal of information, with the main
function to produce and distribute validated reference information on all Programs of the Directorate and of BSA. It
is a content producer of 3D Video and VR products.
Stereoscopic Displays and Applications XIX, edited by Andrew J. Woods, Nicolas S. Holliman, John O. Merritt,
Proc. of SPlE-IS&T Electronic Imaging, SPIE Vol. 6803, 680315, © 2008 SPlE-IS&T - 0277-786X/O8/$18
SPlE-IS&T Vol. 6803 680315-1
Downloaded From: http://pr0ceedings.spiedigitallibrary.0rg/ on 03/19/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.0rg/terms

"
"3","Following the experience accumulated with VR productions and analogue stereo cameras, the Erasmus Centre
developed and space qualiﬁed the Erasmus Recording Binocular (ERBl), with the following 3 goals:
a) The development of a fully digital stereo camera for a manned spaceﬂight, that would be at the same time easy to
operate (short training time for astronauts), have an interchangeable media, provide stereo Viewing capabilities on-
board without additional equipment and withstand the ISS environment (radiations) over a relatively long period of
time.
b) Provide captivating images of the International Space Station and 0f the everyday life on board, in order to share
them with the public on earth 011 a new way, following the footsteps of the marvellous images received from the
IMAX camera back in 2001.
0) Provide stereo images that would enable an accurate 3D reconstruction of the interior of the 188.
The camera was uploaded with the Progress 22P, an unmanned Russian carrier launched from Baikonour t0 the 188
on 29 June 2006. The European astronaut Thomas Reiter, the ﬁrst European astronaut to undertake a long-duration
mission to the 188 used the ERB during his ﬁve and a half months mission. All images were received by mid
J anuary 2007 in the Erasmus Centre and were made available at various venues all over Europe.
1 . 4 .' i
. _.i _.__... [i 1.. _ rw‘
“-3"" J4 ' ' _.==-=-_*
. _ I
F igure 1: a) and b) ERB] during its acceptance test in Moscow, May 2006.
ERBl was uploaded to the 188 on July 2006 and has been used on-board till NOV. 2006: 2 hour of stereo footage
have been collected and used for communications purposes. The cameras shall be used again during the upcoming
ISS mission of European astronaut Leopold Eyarts, during the initial phases of installation and operations of the
Columbus module on the 188. This mission is due to start on February 7th, 2008.
SPIE-IS&T Vol. 6803 680315-2
Downloaded From: http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.0rg/ on 03/19/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.0rg/terms

"
"4","Still and motion pictures attracted large attention in all sort of audiences. The following tables summarises our
experience at various venues:
time Where they are being used
time Virtual Reality audiences screens, retro-proj ection,
3X2 111
Director’s Cuts, very small group 32” displays, With or With glasses (micro-polarisation
--—-
3D cuts
Large Productions Very large Back Proj ection, 15X10 Requires sensational content and
spaces
cheap glasses but low quality
--_-
Current proj ectors run at 24 fps,
difﬁcult to i/f
T able 1 .' feedbackfmm various venues where Space related 3D content has been exposed in 2007 by ESA.
SPIE-IS&T Vol. 6803 680315-3
Downloaded From: http://pr0ceedings.spiedigitallibrary.0rg/ on 03/19/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.0rg/terms

"
"5","‘ ( ‘ . ‘5: V ‘ { I. 7‘ {a
l 7—“ ' ‘1’; 3 '1 h -. ' 3 r4” 1‘ ‘ f: 1‘"" I k ..
l "" 7 '-— “5‘? 1 x» t ' 4 ‘ r ‘ I ‘9
' . x .. . C. 7 Q . . k v ‘ Q
ﬁll q 12.. . 41$ ~~x‘gfﬁ- .
t k “ 'r -' r. a .h r “1 ‘ , - ,
‘ A E ' . ‘ , "" (1—. | ’ .I‘ '
t ., “ IS- ' . ' 3‘ “‘10. ' .,
[I ‘ t. . ({ \ . I '. 7‘ q. ‘.‘ . . .
y ' _ ’ 3 . ‘K‘ j _ . 5.
, .1:
_ — \ ""z ‘7'! P ,.
. . A ~A~ .J‘ ,, e .-
‘ . .- ' “a ' j '1‘ '
I A’ ‘ ;.1 L . ‘ : g L
I, / \ . > K‘ ‘1"" \_
\ ‘ ‘ ‘l E ‘t
_ ’ . c ‘ N I»
“~— \ l. H M’ ; »
‘-\ _‘ _ ..
‘ ‘9."" ‘ ‘ ‘ \ ' -as. ' 4‘ ‘ ‘ ‘3 t
i‘ J ‘ '7 g g— g ‘7‘} '1; h i
‘ ' .4?"" \A‘ ° 1. ’”
I y . {(13 g . ’ «:pé‘ & g: . tr ,
. f g; .. . ?UJ ‘5,“ ‘im‘ 3i"" “g ti
I .' t, .51 V?if‘ \_._.
I ' ;; t. ' ' x h /
Figure 2: a) left and right image from ERB; [9) young audience at Le Bourget Air Show; 6) Slide rotary viewer in
use.
The positive feedback received from the astronaut and from the personnel in charge of the acceptance of space
hardware gave use a series of lessons learned that we took into consideration in the design of the next stereo camera
for the 188 that we are currently building. These requirements, together With the overall design envelop are provided
in the next section.
2. ERBZ DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
The 2nd generation of the European Recording Binocular requires two major improvements: (21) cameras and
displays With HD resolution and (b) the capability to perform live stereo broadcasting from the 188. The operation
principle of ERB-2 is based on ERB-l, since the astronaut gave very positive feedback on the user interface and the
SPlE-IS&T Vol. 6803 680315-4
Downloaded From: http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.0rg/ on 03/19/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.0rg/terms

"
"6","simplicity of the camera operation: no on-sereen menus, one hand operations, ﬁxed vergenee, record digitally on a
single interchangeable media capable to store ~ 40 min. of lightly compressed footage.
More in detail, the requirements consisted of:
o Operate like a binocular to collect stereo footage from inside the 188 at variable (low) light conditions, 0.5-10
meters focusing distances.
0 On-board stereo Viewing
0 Reduced volume (30X20X150m), power (40W) and weight (4 Kg) budgets
0 Full Space Qualiﬁcation Program for a manned space environment
0 Mass storage device adequate for operations in High Vacuum
o Audio-reeording and playback on board
0 Motorised lens system is being developed to keep 6.50m. Additional development for frame synchronisation
was also performed.
ERB-l was based on eornrnereial-off-the-shelf (COTS) components, which allowed fast development and exchange
of components. It was tried to apply the same design philosophy to ERB-Z, however especially the requirement on
live broadcasting and the associated strong compression and downlink Via the existing spaee-to-ground protocols
could not be handled by COTS components. Therefore we Chose for a dedicated electronics development. The ERB-
2 can be split into three modules: The display unit, the main electronics and the camera system.
1.1 Camera trade-offs
Several camera systems with similar resolution were compared during tests and a camera developed by the
Fraunhofer institute in Germany was selected as baseline. This camera has an HD/SDI interface, weighs only several
hundred grams, consumes only 4 W and is used for broadcasting. It has an exchangeable 2/3” CMOS sensor and
FPGA based electronics. The Choice for the objective was more complicated, since no COTS 2/3” motorized optics
could be found that are small enough to place to cameras at a distance of <65 rnrn. Therefore a dedicated
development for such motorized optics was initiated. Additional development for frame synchronisation was also
performed.
1.2 On-board stereo Display
Since ERB-2 is a HD stereo camera one also would like to have HD quality stereoscopic displays. Several display
systems (LCD, LCoS, OLED) were compared. ERB-l successfully used OLED displays with 852x600 pixels
resolution, however so far no higher resolution OLED displays are available on the market. Therefore we
investigated LCD and LCoS alternatives with the difﬁculty that the larger number of required components such as
light sources, beam splitters and ﬁlters creates a higher risk for Space missions. The main complication however was
the power consumption of about 14 W for two display systems: ERB-2 shall be able to run off batteries, as did ERB-
l. The power budget is about 35 W of which most is required for the frame grabbing, compression and storage.
Therefore the choice fell again on OLED displays, with the hope that SXGA resolution displays will become
available still in time for this mission.
1.3 FPGA trade-offs
For the main FPGA based electronics several key components were investigated: How to perform HD/SDI frame
grabbing, the compression system, the live downlink and the storage. The HD/SDI frame grabber has to be
developed from scratch. The wavelet compression system is based on existing space proven technology and will
allow performing different types of compression: weak (factor 10) for permanent storage and strong (factor 100) for
a satellite downlink a data rate of 4-30 Mbit/s. The live downlink is achieved with a Space Wire connection to the
EDR, a specialised rack inside the to-be-launehed European segment of the 188. This is a true novelty, since on
ERB-l one had to wait for the hard-disks to return to Earth before being able to judge the content. With this new
SPlE-IS&T Vol. 6803 680315-5
Downloaded From: http://pr0ceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/ on 03/19/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.org/terms

"
"7","capability ERB-2 can be used for mono and stereo broadcasting from the 188. It is expected that in the future the
downlink bandwidth will increase, thus allowing for better image quality. On the negative side such a cable
connection creates additional challenges in the design and qualiﬁcation of the camera. The storage will be based on
2.5” hard-disks or solid state memory devices. Hard-disks have successfully been used on ERB-l and are therefore
also the baseline for ERB-Z. The interface will be SATA based, in order to beneﬁt from the increased data rate
compared to a parallel IDE interface.
3. ERB-2 SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND WORK FLOW
A design concept, based on the requirements stated in Section 2 above, was developed together with an industrial
designer (see
Figure ) that considers the requirements for usage in Space by astronauts and that allows easy assembly and
maintenance on ground. The system is fully battery powered and can be operated by only 10 buttons, of which 4
control the basic operation of record, playback, delete and power.
l / ’ 'f - 773x633“ \ \ ~ I .1 I 2.; ’1
. l ”5"""" V ' . 75/ *""‘.‘“"";;“"" aﬁa'rvs - t . _ i '
é: ?‘""§f’/% (?%Wﬁa‘ .
..=/i.%~££x , ﬂy’a ' , / N l l
estge . . , — , A
7 / /\ If “AM Silt, .liilllii’hi'” H“ / s “ ‘( / mm________, ‘
F wit / ""i‘wgll"" (tn \W ' w
.o‘ﬂ ‘1 '
F igure 3: Design concept of the ERB-2. Inside the enclosure there are two HD cameras with auto-focus, the main
electronics, stereoscopic displays and the storage medium.
Courtesy of Cosine Research and Rob van Opdorp design.
One of the major difﬁculties of 3D ﬁlming is that no standardised workﬂow exists, yet. Therefore we have
developed a simple work—ﬂow that is efﬁcient to use both in space and on ground: The images and the sound are
recorded directly onto the camera where they are stored in three separate wavelet compressed ﬁles: left-eye, right-
eye and sound. Every time one starts a new recording a new set of ﬁles is stored. The content of the storage medium
can directly be played back and Viewed on the camera. If necessary the ﬁles can also be deleted. On ground the
storage medium is read by special computer software that de-compresses the movies and converts them to a
Premiere or Final Cut Pro compatible format. To playback the footage in an Auditorium no additional stereo editing
is in principle required, since the proper alignment of the cameras was already done before launch and since the
cameras are frame synchronised in hardware.
SPlE-IS&T Vol. 6803 680315-6
Downloaded From: http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/ on 03/19/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.org/terms

"
"8","4. LIVE BROADCASTING

The Erasmus Centre is pioneering since years the transmission of stereo live signals Via satellite, as a potentially
powerful outreach and educational tool: the interest raised by 3D projection increase the attractiveness of such
events especially for young audiences. We have followed basically three main lines of development: a) analogue
interlaced stereo, two full SD Channels and C) 2 full HD Video Channels.

In analogue interlaced stereo we use the traditional technique of alternating on the odd and even ﬁelds of a PAL
signal (but it could as easily be an NTSC one as well) the left and the right Channels of our stereo cameras. The
experimental trials and operational events we had back in 2002 provided interesting results in terms of assessing the
potential of the technique and the interest of the public, but the low resolution of the received resulting signal proved
ill suited to large projection systems required by large audiences in public venues like movie theatres. The technique
remains interesting because of its compatibility with the existing full broadcasting work ﬂow Chain available: the
signals can be recorded on normal Beta or DV tapes, edited and fed into a satellite DVB compatible Chain and any
receiving equipment can receive it without additional costs: all is needed is a de-multiplexer at the receiving end.
During the summer of 2007 we broadeasted 300 students large crowd in a Cinema theatre using a full 2 SD channels
transmission. Apart from making sure that the encoders and decoders of the MPEG-2 encoded signals were of the
same manufacturer, no additional device proved necessary in the synchronisation of the two signals that did not
suffer from noticeable differential delays due to the different transmission paths. The perceived quality at the theatre
gave disaeeording results: problems in the alignment of the two live cameras together with a (too) long script created
discomfort reactions in the audience. The production of the live show proved Challenging: it was possible to miX
recorded stereo productions (in Virtual Reality simulated animations of the exterior and interior of the 188, Video
stereo productions of the Centre) with the live signal of the Erasmus stereo camera using broadcasting personnel
(and not specialised IT guru’s) thanks to the use of a dual track digital player normally used in broadcasting studios.
But of course the real Challenge will be to pilot a stereo HD transmission. Plans are already in place, but it is still
vastly expensive to create two parallel HD up—link chains and also the hourly costs of the transponder are to be taken
in serious consideration. The standards at commercial level are not Clear: a bandwidth of 18 MHz seems to be the
target for a mono HD broadcast. Work is in progress within the European Space Agency, under the leadership of the
Telecommunication Directorate, to pilot some ﬁeld trials and to converge towards a standardisation of the satellite
transmission of stereo signals. The question may arise on the why this should be done for HD stereo, while it was
not done for SD. The answer is to be found in the transformation of movie theatres from ﬁlm based to digital
projection based systems. This technological shift together with new high quality 3D content is creating a new
market that did not eXist before. The direet-to-home broadcast may be following a suite, following the new
developments in the area of DLP based, 3D enabled teleVision sets.

5. 3D GEOMETRY RECONSTRUCTION

Goal: create an augmented reality VR model of the 188. In other words integrate synthetic images with camera-
aequired images. Geometry reconstruction requires 5 steps:

1. Internal camera calibration: This can be done beforehand using a calibration grid or by auto-ealibration
from at least 3 overlapping (single) images from different Viewpoints. In the latter case, the scene must not
be planar.

2. External camera calibration: This can be done automatically for single (internally calibrated) cameras and
static scenes, even if the scene is coplanar, like the walls of the Columbus module.

SPlE-IS&T Vol. 6803 680315-7
Downloaded From: http://pr0ceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/ on 03/19/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.org/terms

"
"9","3. Stereo matching: Dense stereo matching is possible from images With known, precise epipolar geometry
(i.e. internal and external camera calibration With sub-pixel accuracy). The results of this step are disparity
images that encode the matching.

4. Fusion of matching results: difﬁcult for 188 interior. 2.5D fusion works for landscapes and cities: one
height value is stored for each ground point. Unfortunately, every cable is represented as a wall in the
scene. Proper 3D fusion is needed.

5. Mesh creation and texturing: creating a complex 3D mesh from an unordered points cloud. The recorded
texture needs to be proj ected onto the reconstructed scene.

d‘g‘i fr: ' ’ . .

@‘Wf ' Purpose: to detect dlfferences/changes 1n

ﬁg} ” 2%” ’3: conﬁguration of ISS interior using an off-line

'13:??? i—J‘g‘: 4 1terat1ve process.

at) A 4% 3o -

ERB stereo pair Scene a-priori CAD model . Uses stereo pairs from ERB
Registration ° Registers an a-priori 3D model (CAD)
With the View of a given stereo pair
Stereovision . . .
' Computes a 3D Digital Elevation Model
(DEM) 0f the View
° Eliminates from DEM points belonging
to known obj ects/features in the CAD
' Assembles residual points in the DEM
into “new obj ects”
Matching and
decimation
F igure4: description of one of the approaches to 3D reconstruction
The development of the ﬁrst ERB was subject to enormous time and budget pressure that did not allow for selection
and qualiﬁcation of cameras and lenses better suited for computer Vision. Even With a-priori accurate calibration and
suitable image post—processing (un—warping) the quality of ERB pictures allowed only for very coarse 3D digital
elevation model (DEM) reconstruction. Consequently the matching and decimation step did not produce acceptable
results. For ERB2 computer Vision requirements are taken in account: the cameras and lenses shall provide a more
accurate relative alignment and a stable optical bench.
6. CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
The development of the new 3rd generation ERB camera is well advanced. A new Full HD camera shall be qualiﬁed
for the Space Station for a launch in the last quarter of 2008.
SPIE-IS&T Vol. 6803 680315-8
Downloaded From: http://pr0ceedings.spiedigitallibrary.0rg/ on 03/19/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.0rg/terms

"
"10","Pilot HD-3D live broadcast of 3D enriched programs to student audiences to public venues (space theme parks and
cinemas) shall be continued in 2008.
3D Geometry Reconstruction of the interior of the 188 shall remain difﬁcult, due to the intrinsic highly structured
nature of the panels and the many occlusions. A research contract is about to be granted to help customise the
necessary algorithms. Also the Virtual reality model of the International Space Station shall be migrated to more
popular modelling platforms.
It is highly recommended to solve the problem of reducing the redundancies intrinsic in a stereo signal for the
purposes of broadcasting at the source, by encoding and compressing only the disparity information instead of doing
it separately on two Channels. The solution should Obviously be compatible With existing broadcasting Chains.
Hopefully more research shall be driven by the increasing economical interest. 2008 shall see the premiere of a
handful of major 3D productions from the major Hollywood Studios and the transmission live of opera premieres
and sport events in HD is already a reality.
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Given the reduced resources available for the development and space qualiﬁcation of the ERBl cameras, the success
of the proj eet has been made possible by a small and dedicated team. We acknowledge the work of the ESA ESTEC
teams especially that Of the ESA Robotics section and 0f the Erasmus centre.
The ERB2 camera, given the more ambitious technological goals, requires a bigger industrial effort: ESA therefore
appointed an industrial consortium lead by Cosine Research (NL) and Techno System Developments (1).
No camera, regardless of its optical quality, can create engaging images Without a man behind it: we want to thank
particularly Thomas Reiter, the former European astronaut that during the Long Duration Astrolab mission on the
ISS demonstrated how 3D images can be attractive and for the support he provided to this project by means of his
enthusiasm for this novel media tool.
8. FURTHER REFERENCES
[1] Sabbatini, M., ""Stereo cameras on the International Space Station,"" Proe. SPIE 64901P, Page 64901P-1-6,
(2008).
[2] Final results of this experiment, together With a list Of relevant publications shall be made publieally available in
due time on the on line Erasmus Experiment Archive database, at the following URL:
http://eea.spaceﬂight.esa.int/?p_g=eXp_ree&0id=12695&t=1
SPlE-IS&T Vol. 6803 680315-9
Downloaded From: http://pr0ceedings.spiedigitallibrary.0rg/ on 03/19/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.0rg/terms

"
