"","x"
"1","NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 US. Code)
and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.
Haptics—l: Preliminary Results from the First
Stiffness J ND Identiﬁcation Experiment in Space
Andre Schiele1’3(E), Manuel Aiple1=3, Thomas Krueger3, Frank van der Hulst3,
Stefan Kimmer1’3, J an Smisek2’3, and Emiel den Exter3
1 Faculty Of Mechanical, Materials and Maritime Engineering,
Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands
{andre.schiele,manuel.aiple,stefan.kimmer}©esa.int
2 Faculty Of Aerospace Engineering, Delft University of Technology,
Delft, The Netherlands
jan.smisek©esa.int
3 European Space Agency, Telerobotics 85 Haptics Laboratory,
Noordwijk, The Netherlands
{thomas.krueger,frank.van.der.hulst,emiel.den.exter}©esa.int
Abstract. On July 28th 2014, 23:47 UTC, the European Space Agency
launched the HaptiCS—l Kit to the International Space Station (188) on
its last Automated Transfer Vehicle ATV—5. The Kit reached the station
two weeks later, marking the ﬁrst haptic master device to enter the 188.
The ﬁrst force—feedback and human perceptual motor performance tests
started to take place on December 30th 2014, and are the ﬁrst of their
kind in the history of spaceﬂight. Three astronauts participated in the
HaptiCS—l experiment until November 2015, allowing the investigation of
the effects of microgravity on various psyChO—motor performance metrics
related With the usage of haptic feedback. Experiments are conducted
following full adaptation to the space environment (after 3 months in
space). This paper introduces the HaptiCS—l experiment and associated
hardware. Detailed experimental results are reported from a ﬁrst stiffness
just noticeable difference (J ND) experimental study in space, carried out
on the ISS and pre—ﬂight on ground With 3 astronauts. The ﬁrst ﬁndings
from the experiment show no major alterations in—ﬂight, When compared
to on—ground data, if the manipulandum is secured in ﬂight against a
sufﬁciently stiff reference structure.
Keywords: Micro gravity - Just noticeable difference (JND) - Stiffness
discrimination - Space - Haptics
1 Introduction
To enable further human exploration to neighbouring celestial bodies, telero—
botic technologies Will have to be used extensively. In a scenario that is gaining
increasing popularity among the space community, operators Will stay in orbit—
ing stations (e.g. around Mars) and control robotic systems on the surface Via
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
F. Belle et al. (Eds.): EuroHaptics 2016, Part I, LNCS 9774, pp. 13722, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978—3—319—42321—0_2
NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 US. Code)
and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.

"
"2","NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 US. Code)
and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.

14 A. Schiele et a1.

haptio teleoperation [1, 5]. This way, they can remotely prepare human outposts

for later human arrival, or conduct ‘remote—in—situ’ geophysical and geosoienoe

research. In order to design haptio teleoperation devices for space, knowledge

about potential Changes to human motor performance in microgravity is impor—

tant. The perception thresholds for torque and stiffness, as well as the capability

to perform hand—eye coordinated position and torque tracking under long expo—

sure to microgravity, need to be better understood.

Previous studies suggest that microgravity deteriorates human perceptual—
motor performance. In [2] the authors showed a deterioration of human arm
movement control and stipulate that a decrease in muscle spindle sensitivity in
zero—G could be the cause. In general, Changes can be related to alterations of
cutaneous pressure or With different loading of the joints, muscles and associated
sensors. However, often it is unclear Whether observed Changes are caused by the
microgravity itself or by other contributing stressors related With spaceﬂight [3].
This is especially true for tests performed during short exposure to micrograv—
ity, such as during parabolic ﬂight. While existing perceptive motor—performanoe
tests on hand—eye coordination and reaching tasks have been performed in par—
abolic ﬂights and some during SpaoeLab missions With the Space Shuttle, studies
involving adapted humans (i.e. at least exposed to microgravity for more than
20 days) to the environment are scarce and limited to the analysis of mental con—
dition and rudimentary hand—eye coordination tasks [4]. Despite the extensive
body of literature available on kinaesthetic performance in terrestrial environ—
ments, hardly any work is available to date that quantiﬁes such performances
under microgravity. The effects of microgravity on torque and stiffness discrim—
ination capabilities in spaceﬂight are unknown.

It is the goal of this paper to introduce the Haptios—l experiment of the
European Space Agency, Which is being conducted on ground (pre—ﬂight) and
in—ﬂight on the ISS With multiple ESA, NASA and J AXA astronauts. This paper
introduces the Haptios—l study goals, its hardware Kit consisting of a high reso—
lution force reﬂective manipulandum (joystick) and its experiment environment
for automated in—ﬂight data acquisition. Moreover, it is the goal of the paper to
report ﬁrst results from a stiffness just noticeable difference (J ND) identiﬁcation
experiment conducted With 3 astronauts on ground and on—board ISS after full
adaptation (> 3 months) to microgravity.

2 Haptics-l Study Objectives

The Haptios—l experiment consists of seven individual protocols to measure (a)

the mechatronio performance stability of a haptio impedance controlled joystick

in space (system self—test), (b) the variations of human impedance during relax,

comply and resist tasks, (d) the hand—eye tracking performance and bandwidth

for position and force (e) tracking tasks, the just noticeable differences for (f)

force and (g) stiffness discrimination With the upper extremity up to the hand

and, (h) the detection thresholds for a combined stiffness and damping contact

tasks With Virtual environments.

NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 US. Code)
and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.

"
"3","NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 U.S. Code)
and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.
Haptics—l: Stiffness J ND in Space 15

The JND experiments are all conducted With the upper limb in a position
Closely matching a typical ‘joystick use case’, such as e.g. during aircraft piloting
or during robotic operation With a joystick.

All Haptics—l protocols are performed pre—ﬂight, in—flight 0n the ISS and if
applicable also post—ﬂight, after adaptation to the respective environments. The
protocols are performed in ‘Wall—mount’ condition and in ‘body—mount’ condi—
tion. In Fig.1, the haptic device (1DOF joystick) is depicted in ‘Wall—mount’
conﬁguration on a seat—track interface strip as available also on 188 Columbus
module experiment racks. During body—grounded condition, the joystick is worn
on a b0dy—vest directly attached to crew (depicted in the inset Fig.1). The
body—mount condition has been added to Check Whether creating a Closed—loop
force—path between joystick and the operator hand in space bears perceptive 0r
work—load related advantages. In this case, theoretically, external forces from the
joystick should not need to be counteracted by either gravity on ground, or by
additional postural control Via foot restraints in space. Therefore, this mounting
style could be ‘easier’ to use in space. Haptics—l is currently not intended as a
longitudinal study, mainly due to a limitation of available crew time on—board.

All protocols are trained on ground and conducted in space by the astronauts
under the help of an automatically guided experiment App on a touCh—screen
tablet PC (Fig.1). The Principal Investigator (PI) monitors the conduct from
ground Via real—time Video stream and is enabled to speak on the space—to—ground
voice loop With crew if needed.

0/""; l- ,» 3/;
‘ _ .i I: l
/ \ - - a a ‘
1% \ _ j ' '1‘“ y,‘ _
1‘ '; .J ‘jffm
Fig. 1. The Haptics—l ﬂight model before launch (1DOF haptic joystick and touch—
screen tablet PC) installed in wall—mount conﬁguration on two seat track strips in a
clean—room. The inset shows the b0dy—vest With the same seat track interface that is
used to mount the joystick in a body—grounded manner to crew.
NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 U.S. Code)
and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.

"
"4","NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 US. Code)
and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.

16 A. Schiele et al.

3 The Apparatus: Haptics-l Kit

The Haptics—l Kit contains the 10 of freedom joystick, the touCh—screen tablet PC

With custom experiment software and all required periphery components (LAN

Cables, power adapters, launch containers, storage devices, the b0dy—vest, etc.)

inside a ﬂame—proof Nomex experiment container.

The joystick receives 28V from a station portable power supply. The tablet
is connected to the joystick’s real—time computer Via a point to point LAN cable.
A reserve LAN interface exists on the joystick, allowing connection to the 188
Joint Station LAN for bilateral control experiments With a ground unit. The
Haptics—l App 0n the tablet PC is the sole graphical user interface (GUI) for
crew. It guides the user through all individual experiment steps and allows the
management (save, discard and retrieve) 0f the experiment data. For re—usability
0f the Kit, all software is easily exchangeable Via ﬁle up—load through USE. The
Kit is safety certiﬁed for human—in—the—loop (medical) data acquisition on—board
the ISS and withstands all environmental loads related to ground transport,
launch to space and use Within the ISS environment.

3.1 The 1DOF Joystick
The 1DOF joystick integrates an Intel Atom 1.6 GHZ computer running a Linux
operating system With a Xenomai real—time patch. This computer runs the
Haptics—l joystick and experiment control software that interacts With the GUI 0f
the Tablet. Via an EtherCAT bus, the real—time computer connects to a brushless
DC motor controller that controls an ILM50X14 RobODrive direct—drive actuator
Whose torque ripple is compensated to provide a smooth, ripple—free output to the
handle—bar. On the motor shaft, an absolute position encoder provides a 21 bit
position signal. The motor is connected Via a capstan reducer to a custom built,
strain—gauge based, joint—output torque sensor located just before the handle—
bar. The actively controlled joystick can act as a pure position or torque source,
or can render an impedance through its integrated Closed—loop joint torque con—
trol running at a cyclic ZkHz rate. Upstream current inhibitors, thermal fuses
(for touch temperature monitoring) and joint limit microswitches as well as
handle—bar dead—man microswitches ensure safe operation of the joystick under
all Circumstances When human—in—the—loop experiments are performed. The joy—
stick has a range of motion of $600 around the centre position depicted in
(Fig.1). The joystick can render a maximum continuous torque of $12.0 Nm.
The real—time computer running on the joystick encrypts all experiment data
With 4096—bit encryption to protect the ‘medical rated’ data. Data is automat—
ically transmitted Via Data Distribution Services (DDS) t0 the tablet PC for
retrieval Via USB by crew after the experiment.
3.2 J oint Control Performance
For the Stiffness J ND protocol, the joystick enters joint impedance control mode.
The joystick can then render stiffnesses in the range from 0—0.286 kNm/rad and
NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 US. Code)
and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.

"
"5","NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 US. Code)
and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.
Haptics—l: Stiffness J ND in Space 17
Pure Stiffness Plot for k=5Nm/dcg, b=ONrn*s/dcg
a /
4 /
a /
é 2 f
3 ,x""’
E? U x""
O i'
e
s —2 x/
o .
2
—4
-5 /
—4 —3 —2 -1 El 1 2 3 4
Position (dog)
Fig. 2. Stiffness response of the Haptics—l ﬂight—model joystick during an interaction
with an operator (simulated spring with constant k : 5 Nm/deg).
also damping in the range from 0—1.1 Nms/rad. The achievable torque resolution
in Closed—loop joint torque control is as low as 7mNm and torque ripple is less
than 6.7 mNm, which is hardly perceivable by an operator. A recording of a
rendered Virtual spring with stiffness k = 5 Nm/deg 0n the ﬂight—model joystick
is depicted in Fig. 2, during interaction with a human operator.

Individual step responses of the position and joint torque controllers are
depicted in Fig. 3. For the recording of the position step response, the joystick
output was free to move (Fig. 3a). For the torque step response recording it was
locked down at its output (Fig.3b). The joint position controller is intended

(a) Position controller (b) Torque controller
i
30 8 — Commanded
20 — Measured
a ' 6
b0 ﬂ
, S
i 10 a 4
g 0 , i i i y , V (D
35 —10 . g 2
CL
_20 L 0
_30 — Measured
i —2
20 40 60 80 50 60 70 80 90
Time [s] Time [S]
Fig. 3. Varying magnitude step responses of the Haptics—l joysticks joint position con—
troller (a) and joint torque controller (b). During recordings (a) the joystick was free
to move, whereas the joystick output was clamped mechanically in (b).(C010r ﬁgure
online)
NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 US. Code)
and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.

"
"6","NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 US. Code)
and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.
18 A. Schiele et al.
mainly for aligning the handle—bar to a reference pose during speciﬁc sequences
in any of the protocols. This is why it is tuned “soft” to exert appropriately low
speeds when the bar is handheld. The rise—tirne to 90 % output takes 550 ms. The
joint torque control is tuned very stiff, in order to allow crisp force feedback to be
rendered to the operator and also to enable the high bandwidth joint impedance
control. The rise—tirne to 90 % output for the torque control is less than 180 ms.
4 Stiffness J ND Identiﬁcation Ground vs. Space
Multiple stiffness just noticeable difference (J ND) tests have been performed as
part of the Haptics—l experiment campaign on—boarol the 188 in the time frame
between J anuary 5th and November 27th 2015. Three astronauts participated in
baseline data collection (BDC) on ground before ﬂight and in—ﬂight data collec—
tion on the 188. Two of the astronauts were trained U.S. air force test pilots and
the third one a medical professional with emergency room experience. All study
participants have provided signed informed consent Via NASA and integrated
188 medical boards, and the study was evaluated by the ethics commission of
Delft University of Technology.
4.1 Method
The JND experiment follows a 2—alternative forced Choice (ZAFC) design with
n = 200 trials in which a stiffness reference level (e.g. Stimulus A) is compared
with one of four modiﬁed test levels (e.g. Stimulus B) in multiple binary com—
parison tests. All trials are randomized with respect to A and B distribution as
well as with respect to the reference level locations within the 200 trials. The
experiment conduct can be considered olouble—blinoleol, since the experiment is
harol—oooleol and automated on the Haptics—l Tablet PC and 1DOF joystick.

The stiffness reference level is selected to be 1 Nm/deg., and the randomized
test levels were at $40 %, $25 %, $15 % and i5 % of the reference stimulus (50
repetitions each). The 5% test value is the lowest threshold that can still be
rendered accurately by the Haptics—l 1DOF joystick, which is why this ‘lowest
possible threshold’ series was Chosen. During each trial, a pair of two stiffness
samples is presented to the crew member Via the manipulanolurn’s impedance
controller. The astronaut can select which one of the two stimuli (A or B) to
probe Via the GUI. Following the probing of both stimuli (they are free to Choose
back and forth between them), the candidate is asked to select the stiffer one of
the two (A or B) Via a dedicated selection button on the GUI. After selection, the
next pair is presented to the astronaut until all 200 repetitions are completed.
Each crew member conducts two test sessions on two consecutive days, one
for the wall—rnount and one for the booly—mount data acquisition conﬁgurations
(Fig. 4). For all trials, the astronauts are instructed to keep their arm parallel to
a sagittal plane and similar to operating a joystick for robotic controls.

In space, the experiment was only performed after 3 months into the mission
of each crew member. This way, potential dominant effects related with other
NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 US. Code)

and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.

"
"7","NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 U.S. Code)
and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.
Haptics—l: Stiffness J ND in Space 19
‘l , 3- ' ""7' 3W"" V ' W?
. l {A?éfr' . "" ”Mi; {.4 “‘2? ‘4 Fa, ”Ll
. :.. R x"" L 2; ‘ .‘.-_-§53ij,1,_3' , y al-
4|. . .9; -
:1? * , ’3 y 2/ 7, . ?""3/’ f n“ ‘ V
F .153 . . ‘4’] T -. wk ﬁfaevﬁ. ‘ ‘
mm,- m -\ 5 r. ‘5 ‘3‘» ~. .~<\ W H a 6!!
- ~ .3. - - gs . /
;\ ‘55 ’4' “1,. “ .r c
(a) wall—rnount session (b) body—mount session
Fig. 4. Astronauts on—board the International Space Station (Butch Wilmore, NASA;
Kimiya Yui, J AXA) perform the Stiffness J ND protocol of Haptios—l. Joystick in wall—
mount setup in (a) and in body—mount (i.e. body—grounded force—feedback) in (b).
Experiments done on 188 3 months in ﬂight.
stressors are minimized. A static design With 200 trials and four levels was cho—
sen in order to present an overview over a large discrimination threshold range
(not only a minimum threshold). Moreover, the levels were tailored by ground
experiments With non—astronauts. The exact number of 200 trials was also a
trade—off between science return and available oreW—time on—board 188. Every
participating astronaut received ground training, performed pre—ﬂight BDC and
received a de—brief on—board prior to in—ﬂight experiment conduct.

For data post—prooessing, the crew ratings for each stimuli level are counted
and converted into a “percentage correct” for each test level and subject (50
correctly identiﬁed ‘stronger’ stimuli representing 100 % correct). A test subject
achieving a percentage of at least 75% correct estimates in one test level is
considered to ‘notioe the difference’ for the scope of this report. The paper reports
boxplots for the combined subject data of the 3 astronauts. The test data is
additionally Checked With 2—way ANOVA and paired t—tests along all dimensions.
5 Stiffness JND Results
5.1 Ground, Body vs. Wall Mount Measurements
The boxplots of Fig. 5 show that the two attachment conditions do not cause
stiffness JND results to differ on ground (conﬁrmed by paired t—tests on all
tested levels). The stiffness detection threshold lies between 5—15% for both
conditions, Which can be seen also Without the ﬁtting of a psychometric function.
The measurement range is appropriate in both cases to detect the transitioning
from above to below the 75 % detection threshold. The difference detection of
the 5 % level is more difﬁcult than the 40 % level detection for the entire group
(p < 0.02, F : 10.5) in wall—mount condition. In body—mount condition, the
effect is even stronger (p < 0.001, F = 64.1). While in body—mount condition

NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 U.S. Code)
and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.

"
"8","NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 US. Code)
and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.
20 A. Schiele et a1.
(a) Ground, wall—mount (b) Ground, body—mount
90 ; 90 El
4.7 T I 4; —
o 80 80
§ 75 - - g 75 !
8 70 - J— : 70
250 1 5
60 60 Q I__#
C C C
50 l—I 50 Iﬁ—I
. 1___|_______l
. C C
40 40
5 15 25 40 5 15 25 40
% of base stimulus level (1 Nm/Deg.) % of base stimulus level (1 Nm/Deg.)
Fig. 5. Group stiffness J ND results (three astronauts). Comparison of wall—mount (a)
V8. body—mount (b) conﬁguration on ground, obtained during pre—ﬂight baseline data
collection (0 :p < 0.02; n :p < 0.01; o o o :p < 0.002). (Color ﬁgure online)
there are no signiﬁcant performance differences between subjects, in wall—mount,
one subject performed worse than the other two, Which causes more spread of
the data.
5.2 Micro—G, Body VS. Wall Mount Measurements
The data presented in Fig.6 shows slight variations between wall—mount and
body—mount J ND thresholds in space. Whereas the detection threshold for the
wall—mount conﬁguration lies between 5—15 % of the base stimulus, the body—
mount conﬁguration indicates a worsening towards the 15—25% range for the
combined subject results. The difference between the detection rates for the
individual stimuli levels are more profound in space, With all levels different to
each other in wall—mount conﬁguration (19 < 0.01, F : 12.7) and more strongly
so in body—mount conﬁguration (19 < 0.002, F : 20.72). Paired t—test performed
between equal difference levels of the two mounting conditions reveals no differ—
ence between the mounting conditions.
5.3 Ground VS. Micro—Gravity
The only difference detectable between the ground and space data—sets is appar—
ent in the body—mount conﬁguration, in Which the 15 % difference level becomes
worse in—ﬂight With respect to ground (19 = 0.039), explaining the apparent wors—
ening of the overall detection threshold for the group in the boxplot in Fig. 6.
No overall difference in the combined wall— and body—mount data results can be
observed between in—ﬂight and ground measurements.
NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 US. Code)
and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.

"
"9","NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 US. Code)
and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.
Haptics—l: Stiffness J ND in Space 21
(a) micrO—G, wall—mount (b) micrO—G, body—mount
[Ar
90 E 90 Iil
g 80 = E 80
8 75 - g 75 i
g 70 Q g 70 _
60 60 i
I_—|
50 I 00 50 J_
00 II—I
40 40 O O O
5 15 25 40 5 15 25 40
% of base stimulus level (1 Nm/Deg.) % 0f base stimulus level (1 Nm/Deg.)
Fig. 6. Group stiffness J ND results (three astronauts). Comparison Of wall—mount (a)
vs. body—mount (b) conﬁguration in—ﬂight on board the International Space Station
(0 :p < 0.02; n :p < 0.01; o o o :p < 0002). (Color ﬁgure online)
6 Discussion
It appears from the data above, that humans are very good at adjusting to
novel environments, With no overall differences Visible in Stiffness discrimination
between ground and space after their 3 month adaptation to the micro—gravity
environment. Moreover, the results above show strikingly little variation between
subjects, considering that the background of test candidates was rather differ—
ent. This suggests that the protocol automatic conduct, the performance of the
hardware and the selection of experiment parameters are appropriate for this
experiment. Human palpation from orbit could potentially be performed With
the same perceptive capability than on ground, Which could be good news for
using telerobotics from space (if the teleoperation system itself doesn’t limit the
perception). Certainly, further analysis With additional subjects is ongoing, how—
ever, already the small sample of only 3 test subjects shows consistency. A more
detailed analysis With more subjects and psychometric functions Will allow to
further detail the threshold ﬁndings.

One observable effect, however, is apparent in the body—mount conﬁguration
data—set With the vest, Which seems to make detection of small stiffness differ—
ences in space harder. Two of the subjects, When asked during protocol conduct
on 188, reported that the b0dy—vest caused some additional compliance (“sway”)
in the experiment, Which made the stiffness identiﬁcation much harder in space.
This could be due to a sub—optimal design of the vest brace, not having sufﬁ—
ciently well located supporting points on the operator torso. Results show that a
rigid support for this task is better. The wall—mount conduct shows no alteration
in space compared to ground. The reaction forces imparted to a crew member
during this task, however, caused some ‘fatigue’ in the lower body as reported
by one crew member during space—tO—ground communication.

NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 US. Code)
and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.

"
"10","NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 US. Code)
and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.
22 A. Schiele et a1.
7 Conclusion
Stiffness discrimination thresholds in wall—mount conﬁguration show no vari—
ation between ground and measurement in space, after long exposure to the
space environment. The detection threshold lies between 5—15 % 0f the 1 Nm/deg.
base stimulus level, equalling a threshold of approximately 0.1 Nm/deg. or when
expressed as a linear stiffness, approximately 0.9 N / mm (the grip centre point
lies 0.113 m from the joint centre). The vest—mount conﬁguration tested in
this experiment causes a worsening of the stiffness discrimination threshold to
15—25 % 0f the base stimulus level in space, likely caused by sway in the mechan—
ical attachment of the body vest. Overall, n0 deterioration of stiffness detection
thresholds can be observed between space and ground for the combined data, if
the astronauts are exposed and adjust to 3 months in the microgravity environ—
ment.
References

1. Carey, W., Schoonejans, P., Hufenbach, B., Neergard, K., Bosquillon de Fres—
CheVille, F., Grenouilleau, J ., Schiele, A.: METERON: a mission concept proposal
for preparation of human—robotic exploration. In: Global Space Exploration Con—
ference, Washington DC. (2012)

2. Fisk, J ., Lackner, J .R., DiZio, P.: Gravitoinertial force level inﬂuences armmove—
ment control. J. Neurophysiol. 69(2), 504—511 (1993). http://jn.physiology.org/
content/69/2/504

3. Fowler, B., Meehan, S., Singhal, A.: Perceptual—motor performance and associated
kinematics in space. Hum. Factors J. Hum. Factors Ergon. SOC. 50(6), 879—892
(2008)

4. Manzey, D., Lorenz, B., Poljakov, V.: Mental performance in extreme environ—
ments: results from a performance monitoring study during a 438—day spaceﬂight.
Ergonomics 41(4), 537—559 (1998). pMID: 9557591

5. Schiele, A.: METERON — validating orbit—tO—ground telerobotics Operations tech—
nologies. In: 11th Symposium on Advanced Space Technologies in Robotics and
Automation (ASTRA) (2011)

NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (TITLE 18 US. Code)
and is not to be used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.

"
