"","x"
"1","Proc. of International Symposium on “SM/MPAC&SEED Experiment” Tsukuba, Japan, 10-11 March, 2008 161
MEDET IN-FLIGHT EXPERIMENT (MATERIALS EXPOSURE AND DEGRADATION EXPERIMENT)
DESCRIPTION AND FIRST RESULTS
Virginie INGUIMBERTI, Sophie DUZELLIERI, Jean-Michel SIGUIER1,Adrian TIGHE2 and Marc VAN EESBEEK2
1 ONERA, 2, Avenue Edouard Belin, 31 055 Toulouse, France,
2 ESA/ESTEC,PB 299, 2200 AG Noordwijk, The Netherlands
Keywords: Materials, exposure to space, degradation, contamination, MEDET, EUTeF, Columbus, 188
1. Introduction have to be characterised in terms of local pressure,
contamination rate, Atomic Oxygen (A0), X rays and UV ﬂux.
MEDET is a material experiment on board 0 0 .
EuTEF/Colurnbus. It is a fruitful collaboration between The experiment results are expected to give essential
ONERA, ESA, CNES and the University of Southampton. It information t9 the spacecraft designerbnz. . .
combines seven sub-experirnents devoted to the combined - the mechanisms of space damage, discriminating between the
measure of the radiative space environment in low earth orbit effects Of the 1nd1v1ciua1 components Of 0th? spacecraft
and its associated effects on materials. It allows for real time enVironrnent, and detecting also poss1b1e synergistic effects,
characterization of the local 188 environment (radiation and - the long-terrn characteristics of these materials with the aim to
contamination) and for the evaluation of material degradation indicate if they are appropriate for use in future space station
such as thermal coatings, polymers for inﬂatable structures... apphcatrons or other missions, . 0
The mission is planned to start on February 2007 (Atlantis - the validity of laboratory snnulation results from comparison
launch) and to last 1.5 years before the equipment return for to the space data, laboratory simulation being considered as
p ost-ﬂi ght investi gati on. imperative for prediction of materials degradation in space.
2. Objectives 3. Description
The three main MEDET scientiﬁc objectives are: A schematic View Of MEDET is. given in ﬁgure 1 and a
a) Evaluate the effect of the complex space environment on the snrnrnary descriptien Of. the experiments and. systems .m. the
0 0 0 0 ﬂight segment is given in table 1. More detailed descriptions
optical and therrno-optical properties of materials to be and diagrams are given in the following sections.
considered for utilisation on LEO spacecraft. This includes the
active measurement of therrno-optical properties (and more
exactly, their variation as a function of space exposure) for a
number of proposed spacecraft rnaterials. Among these
materials are anodizations, second surface rnirrors (SSM) and
new therrnal paints externally used onboard the Space Station
and LEO satellites.
b) Assessment of the effects of the ISS environment on optical
windows. Special emphasis will be placed upon the part of
degradation that is due to molecular contamination.
Contamination results from various sources, including
outgassing and degradation of materials, manoeuvres of service
vehicles, re-boost operations, ﬁrings of attitude control systems,
dumps and EVA.
0) Investigation of rnicro-particle and debris ﬂuxes (especially
their variation as a function of time) and, after retrieval, the
origin of the debris and the detectors’ behaviour.
In support of the above objectives, the local environment will
This document is provided by JAXA.

"
"2","162 JAXAS ecialPublication JAXA-SP-08-015E
P
Spactmneter sample drive :whEEI
'.
'| Illumination sensnr #2
Illuminaﬁurl EEFIEDF #‘1 Jr
R 1 _ _ . Micm—calurjmeters. {group Df 12}
{Q1 Iill Mlcrﬁ-calunmeters {QFUUP UT 2: .III DEM bﬂK #2 .-
. a ' II .-'
DEM box #1 f1 a I - x I
?%XET‘F 1‘3- I'll If f
mi x13""?— , ""HF — iii? . — ‘3 _ _j
m a .E' I‘“ ’ uh}; '9 :73; x” Fifi _ 7‘ _ ”6—-
x; H a :11; ""' ﬁg . _ - lg? ,f f.:- — _ I if ' f. 1
_,_ I 1!; ”£551: ”t -E M as 3 —\i- ' ’- é}.
e» -* w Q 1. __ - mt -
RAM PLATE _ _ _ W3 ' ‘ .c:=. 23515 ' - ’3’— am; .( - - ""ix
(.2.- ”I' - 4 _.I ME""U'HE""J 1!""- ' . -""I III”
_wa f .I"" .-:. a- ."" ﬁt
1 @2- _, M: . _ . _..-..‘~. a
Hf 3.» - _¢_E*_E5 . ' ' :ﬂx
Lilla.“ {Hall a I i 'I —_— .. ' * a . '._.I' II?
-ﬂﬁ=~if‘:~:£-—i 4: {£713 :1”; J; - I 1 E”
""1?? #6153323 T ET? _._: —~=- '-.;f_.__1__ ::-—_%—=E_—_-—§ a“ ""“3521
r eﬁﬁﬂﬁ 1 .ﬂ :3 kg‘a '5. a _ _—_ —_—__ *{F ff! STARBDAHD PLATE
: “ﬂ:— — - xi :1— — _ ‘ '~. - ""a _' .-
f; %F=‘=""JfE.-JI |H— —r’lf—— — _— _ L“ ‘ Ext IIIIII . El"". EH1 .I'y 4'5:
fr- as‘ﬁ'ﬂrﬁ? IE1 3""; HR Il'a En 1x1. 25%"" IE""
.. 1&1?— _d==l:;=§ .I'IL-IJ-Ir. ‘ III"". \ '1."" 1'51 3;? 3
Pressure gauge _._ ?ie‘7';%EfE—:::_— ______ __ ' '~. '.I - H1 1. J1 53%“ f
”""zrléﬁzg—E—f—E—iifﬁé ;::;_ 1 iif-‘r 1‘? f f
5:“; —‘ T——- —————-— —_—Z— :_—::_L-__= 2:: Ex; .
'J)’ I|_-""II / II T ————._—_ _ ."" 5.:
r' III II'.
I I III
STORM 'l SODAD K‘-
SDDAD test connectur 3E MTH PLATE
ﬁgure 1 : Schematics 0f MEDET experiment
An active MOS type impact detector,
SODAD to characterise the properties of micro
meteoroids and orbital debris particles Sub-Systems
An active spectrometer system, to An aluminium bOX-type structure to
measure Chan es in the 0 tical , r0 ide the h sical s ort for the
Spectrometer . g .p Mechanlcal support p V . p y upp
propertles of transparent Wlndow structure sub-experlments and other
materials. sub-systems, and to attach MEDET t0
EuTEF.
A collection of active quartz crystal A 1 1 , ,
Q CM microbalances, to measure the centra oglc umtd(LU), pQWGCrl
atomic oxygen and contamination SUPP y , (PDU) an 3550.013“?
ﬂ . . . electronlcs to control the operatlon of
11X Data Acqu1s1t10n
and ower control the sub-systems, store and transfer the
. p data from the sub-s stems to EuTEF
- t DAPC y
An actlve cold cathode type gauge, to um ( ) and receive commands from the
Pressure Gauge th 1 1
measure e oca pressure ground.
A passive detector, to capture micro .
AEROGEL meteoroid and orbital debris particles Used to keep the. experlments .and
Thermal control sub-systems W1th1n the spec1ﬁed
A collection of active and monitoring temperature limits. Consists of
. . microcalorimeters, to measure the system radiators, multi layer insulation
MlcrOCalorlmeters changes in the thermo-optical (MU), thermal washers, temperature
properties 0ftherma1 control coatings. S€HSOFS, heaters and thermostats
Southampton A collection of active detectors to Table 1; Summary description of the
Experiments measure the atomic oxygen, UV and MEDET sub-experiments and sub-system
(STORM) X-ray ﬂux
This document is provided by JAXA.

"
"3","Proc. of International Symposium on “SM/MPAC&SEED Experiment” Tsukuba, Japan, 10-11 March, 2008 163
3.1 SODAD system, consisting of photodiodes positioned under the Wheel,
is used to identify the location of the Wheel With respect to the
SODAD (Systerne Orbital de De'tection Active de De'bris) ﬁbre optic at any given instant (see Figure 2).
Will be used to actively measure the micro rneteoroid and
debris ﬂux in the Vicinity of the 188. The rniniature spectrometer modules consist of a grating,
optics and CCD detector. These are all rigidly housed within
The detector works on the principle of monitoring the the same case. The module is based on a standard laboratory
discharge of a parallel-plate capacitor containing a thin device (Zeiss MMS), has been adapted for space ﬂight use.
dielectric. The top electrode is made very thin and this surface However, in order to be operated safely on MEDET, which is
is exposed to the impacting particles. The device is operated an external payload, the miniature spectrometer modules are
With an electrical potential (bias) applied across the capacitor mounted in a pressurised cylinder. For redundancy, 2 sets of
plates : a charge is normally stored in the capacitor. When a pressurised cylinders (With 2 spectrometers in each) are
high velocity particle impacts the exposed plate With enough mounted behind the ﬁlter wheel.
energy, it can cause the dielectric to breakdown and results in a
discharge of the capacitor. 3“”“9” samples Whee.
The event is measured by monitoring the charge required to m1 I: 0W” — D E —. . . :1... . f
recharge the capacitor. After discharge the sensor is recharged Fibreo : 2 km” 8:”ng
to the nominal value Within a short time. Evaporation of the F 3 ggggrﬁwmor 8 8
electrode around the impact site usually prevents the e | | l l %
occurrence of a permanent short. The sensitivity of the sensor _ :
depends mainly on the dielectric thickness, the top electrode 5’ :mm ""mm g
material and thickness, the bias voltage, and also on the ""W“ mums
velocity of impacting particle. The device is best suited to the
detection of particles with diameter ranging from 0.5 urn to 100 MEDETelectronicssubsystem
wn- —’ :2:
The GIGCtTOHiCS COHSiStS Of a voltage doubler (providing the Figure 2 : Spectrometer experiment interface schematic
bias for the detector) and the circuits necessary for the
detection of the discharge events and the monitoring of the 3.3 QCM
detector status. The detection threshold is set at 95 % of the The Quartz Crystal Microbalance (QCM) experiment will be
bias voltage. In the event of permanent short of the sensor, the used to measure contarnination levels and the atomic oxygen
measurement is automatically stopped if the leakage current is ﬂux in the Vicinity of the Space Station. The sensors are
higher than 1100 hA- Standard mounting plates (120 X 120 X 50 modiﬁed versions of commercially available rniniature crystal
rnrn) accommodate 4 sensors With integrated electronics. Each oscillator packages. The package consists of a quartz crystal
sensor is divided into two independent parts th order to increase and an oscillator circuit contained Within a metal housing. The
the detection rate. quartz crystal is exposed to the space environment through a
round hole in the housing directly above the crystal, and the
3'2 SPECTROMETER oscillation frequency changes in relation to the changing mass
The spectrometer experiment is being developed speciﬁcally and temperature of the crystal. The oscillator circuit provides
for the MEDET project. an alternating voltage output.

It Will be used to follow the degradation With time Of To measure the contamination ﬂux, a bare crystal is used,
several types 0f optical windows (including synthetic ultra-pure and the oscillation frequency decreases as contamination is
SiO2 and other radiation stable materials). The optical spectral deposited on the surface Of the crystal and the mass Of the
transmission 0f the samples Will be measured by a system crystal increases. To measure the atomic oxygen ﬂux, a carbon
involving quartz optical ﬁbres, two rniniature spectrometer coated crystal is used, and the oscillation frequency increases
modules (to cover the solar spectrum from 200 to 1000 nrn) and as the atomic oxygen erodes away the carbon layer and the
two illurnination sensors. mass of the crystal decreases. For both of these techniques, the

relationship between the mass of the crystal and the oscillation

The materials to be tested are placed on a rotating Wheel, frequency can depend on the temperature Of the crystal.
containing 24 apertures. A stepper motor is used to positioh Therefore, a separate non coated crystal cut in the “Y—direction”
each sample above the optical ﬁbre entrance. The sun is used as is also used to independently monitor the crystal temperature,
the light source, so that measurements are allowed only When so that the mass data can be corrected for temperature
the sun is detected by the illumination sensor in a i 400 dependent effects.
acceptance angle. Only relative measurements are performed,
comparing the spectra of the sunlight direct With the spectra of Three types Of sensor will be ﬂown on board MEDET :
the sunlight observed through the tested materials. An encoder

This document is provided by JAXA.

"
"4","164 JAXA Special Publication (JAXA-SP-08-015E)

- Type 1 : 10 MHz Crystal with Au electrode for produced as a result of transient events such as extra vehicular
contamination deposition measurements. The sensitivity is activities, spacecraft docking and waste dumps, as well as
4.4X10'9gc1n'2Hz'1. general outgassing and degradation of materials. It may be

- Type 2 : 10 MHz Crystal with C-coating, to measure possible to correlate the pressure data with the contamination
Atomic Oxygen. The sensitiVity is 2.46X1015 O-atoms c1n'2 experiments on board MEDET, and the data will also be made
Hz'l. available to other instruments on board EuTEF.

- Type 3 : 11 MHz Crystal with Au electrode, for temperature
measurements. The sensitivity is 600 Hz/K. The output of this The experiment consists of a standard commercially
type of crystal will be used to correct for temperature variations available cold-cathode type pressure gauge, which has been
in Type 1 and Type 2. adapted and qualiﬁed for space use. The operation of the

cold-cathode pressure gauge is based on the ionisation of the

The response of each type of crystal is only linear within a residual gas molecules in the vacuum by electrons emitted from
limited frequency range. If a sudden large contamination a cold cathode. The ions are collected and the measured current
deposit were to occur, perhaps due to a thruster ﬁring in the can be correlated with the pressure. The probability of an
local Vicinity of MEDET, then the experiment would no longer electron hitting a gas molecule can be increased by trapping the
be operable. Therefore, a heater and thermostat will also be electrons in a electromagnetic ﬁeld of the correct geometry.
placed directly underneath each crystal oscillator package, so This has the effect of increasing the sensitivity of the deVice
that an attempt could be made to de-contaIninate and regenerate
the sensors by evaporating off the excess deposits (Figure 3 and 3.5 AEROGEL
Figure 4) The aim of the aerogel experiment is to capture, in an intact

Contamination. atomic. mygen state, residue from Inicro-particles so that they can be returned
to earth for chemical and physical analysis. This will provide
information about the origin of the particles i.e. whether they
are natural micro-Ineteoroids or orbital debris. Such

Huusinc . . . .
Quartz crystal “ information cannot be derived from the present generation of
active detectors. The experiment is passive in nature and
—— - consists of a block of Silica aerogel exposed directly to the
space environment. Silica aerogel is made up of amorphous
Dscillaturcircuit | grains of SiOZ, with diameters of 4 — 10n1n. It is a transparent,
highly porous material, with ultra low density (ranging from
E 0.05 to 0.15 gcm‘3). On colliding with silica aerogel, particles
Heater travelling at orbital impact velocities can be slowed down in
PTlUD the material without completely vaporising, leaving solid
residue at the bottom of the track. On return to earth, the

Figure 3 : QCM sensor in operational mode residue can be analysed using a sectioning technique. The

porous aerogel is ﬁlled with an epoxy and cured, after which it
can be sectioned along the length of the particle tracks to reveal
cnntammam"" the residue. The length and shape of the track can also give
some information about the original collision velocity and
direction of the particleAerogel has been used before in space
Hausmg applications, such as on the Stardust comet mission and various
ﬂu“: Wata' Space Shuttle science experiments.

I —_ 3.6 Microcalorimeters

. _ This sub-eXperiInent will be used to actively measure the
' — ' changes in the thermo-optical properties of spacecraft materials
' and coatings. The experiment consists of an array of space
Heater PT1CICI qualiﬁed micro-caloriineters mounted on the rain face of
MEDET. The calorimeter technique is based on a comparison
Figure 4 : QCM sensor in regenerate Inode between the temperature of a thermally insulated sample and
the temperature of a black-body reference sample. Using a heat
balance equation, the total emissivity and solar absorptance of

the sample can be deduced.

3.4 Pressure Gauge

This sub-eXperiInent will be used to actively measure The calorimeters which will be used on MEDET are based
changes in the concentration of gaseous products in the local on a standard design which has been ﬂown on many previous
Vicinity of the Space Station. Gaseous products could be missions. The samples are attached to an insulated thin plate

This document is provided by JAXA.

"
"5","Proc. of International Symposium on “SM/MPAC&SEED Experiment” Tsukuba, Japan, 10-11 March, 2008 165
using adhesive, painting or another form of bonding. The sensitive to adsorbed atomic oxygen. Analysis of the
sample plate is held within a guard ring which has the same non-steady response indicates that the initial rate of decrease of
area and is coated with the same material as the sample. This the conductivity of a fresh ZnO ﬁlm exposed to atomic oxygen
minimises heat losses from the sample plate to the surrounding is proportional to the incident A0 ﬂux. However, after a
casing of the calorimeter. In addition, the sample plate and relatively short exposure to A0 the sensor becomes saturated
guard ring rest on thin Kapton cylinders, and layers of MLI are and its response ceases. Nevertheless, the sensor offers the
placed between the guard ring and the casing. The temperature great advantage that, by heating to modest temperatures, the
of the sample is measured using a resistance thermometer sensor can be refreshed (or ""regenerated"") and is then able to
mounted on the rear side of the sample plate (see Figure 6) take further A0 measurements. The ZnO sensor comprises four

thin ﬁlms, two of which will be shielded from A0 attack by a
The black body reference calorimeter is of the same thin overcoat of silicon monoxide (silica).
dimensions and basic construction as the standard calorimeters. The carbon actinometer elements are fully exposed on the
However, the sample plate is covered by an array of thin edged ram face, whereas the ZnO ﬁlm array are partially covered by
blades packed tightly together, and the guard ring is painted the spectrometer wheel. One sensor is permanently shadowed
with a black silicate based paint, to give the surface of the from direct exposure to A0 by the wheel, whilst another is
calorimeter an Ot/e ratio close to 1. periodically covered/uncovered by the wheel. The other two
sensors are fully exposed on the ram face. ZnO sensor
samp'e p'ate regeneration will take place whilst the wheel covers two of the
Guard ring Kapton cylinder [31.100 Outer casing four sensors.

- X ray sensors
Four X-ray sensors are mounted on STORM. Two are
'- located on the zenith face of MEDET and two placed on the
ram face with one active and one redundant active sensor on
each of the faces. The X-ray sensors consist of silicon PIN

. —:— diodes. A beryllium window is placed over the diodes to ﬁlter

I _ out the signal from lower energy photons. X-ray ﬂuxes will
Multi_layermsulati0n be measured continuously, but the most important data will be
Kapton cylinder gathered during Solar X-ray ﬂare events when the X-ray ﬂux is
at its highest and most damaging levels.
Figure 6 Micro-calorimeter schematic - UV sensors
Eight UV sensors are mounted on STORM, four on the
3.7 STORM MEDET ram face and four on the zenith. The UV sensors
consist of solar-Visible blind aluminium gallium nitride
The Southampton University Transient Oxygen and photodetectors. These detectors are sensitive to an UV light
Radiation Monitor (STORM) consists of a package of sensors range from 120nm to 285nm, and this lower limit of the
which will be used to measure Atomic Oxygen, UV and X-ray wavelength range is important to be able to detect the
ﬂuxes. STORM is being developed speciﬁcally for the MEDET Lyman-alpha hydrogen line half the sensors (two on each face)
experiment. are ﬁtted with sapphire windows to cut out the UV spectrum
- A0 sensors below approximately 130nm.
Two A0 sensor types are incorporated into STORM, based
on carbon ﬁlm actinometers and thin-ﬁlm zinc oxide (ZnO)
detectors. Both are located on the ram-face of MEDET in an 4. Perspectives
area close to the rotating spectrometer wheel. The carbon
actinometer instrument comprises four thin carbon ﬁlms and an At the time this paper is written, only MEDET
AD590 temperature sensor, all mounted on an alumina commissioning was performed and the experiment has been
substrate. Incorporated onto the substrate is a low power heater working for only 3 days, The ﬁrst sets of data are being
element that will be used to stabilise the ﬁlm temperature since acquired and will be analysed soon. The total duration of the
carbon eXhibits a temperature dependent erosion rate. mission is expected to be of 18 months.
Zinc oxide is an n-type semiconductor material that is
This document is provided by JAXA.

"
