"","x"
"1","T HE VACUUM T RIBOLOGY MODEL (VTM) OF T RIBOLAB.
I. Garmendia, A. Landaberea, E. Anglada (h.
l Fundacion INASMET. Mikelete iPasealekua, 2. San Sebastian SPAIN)
g
R. Fernandez—Sanz, R. Santiago, F. Herrada, J . M. Encinas (2).
(2) INTA, Carretera de AjalVir km 4, 28850. Torrejon de Ardoz, Madrid (SPAIN)
Corresponding address: Fundacion INASMET. Mikeletegi Pasealekua, 2. 20009 San Sebastian (SPAIN)
Tel.: + 34 943 003700. Fax: + 34 943 003800. e—mail: inaki@inasniet.es
ABSTRACT
TriboLAB is a tribology instrument that is planned for The TnhOLAB instrument, Wthh W1} 1 be located in the
installation in the EuteF Flight Segment Platform [1] International Space Station along With other European
. . . ’ experiments in the EUTEF platform, Will perform tests
along With several other European seientiﬁc . . . . . .
. . W1th different lubricants and different devrces at bas1c
instrurnents. Eutef Wlll be ﬁxed onto an Express Pallet . . .
. . and component level respectively: pin—on—disk and ball
Adapter (EXPA), Which provrdes standard structural, b . T 'b L AB . t'b t d . th t
mechanical, electrical and communications interfaces to earing. r1 0. . 1s a t1 ome er, a eVice a
the Columbus External Payload Facility of the measures the friction coefﬁcrent between two surfaces
International S ace S tation (188) under the tribo—conditions investigated. The most usual
p ' triborneters rneasure only one sample at a time and the
AS a part Of the model philosophy, a vacuum users change the new sarnples. TriboLAB is meant to
tribological rnodel (VTM) has been developed to work Without any action from the astronauts at the
generate “on ground” tribological data 0f selected International Space Station. As more than one disk or
lubricants. The idea is to compare the results obtained ball bearing have to be tested, the concept of the
“on ground” with those that will be produced in the instrument is that of a rack of experiments, that will be
space, in order to investigate the different behaViors of tested sequentially. Expected duration time Of each
same tribological ﬁlms and to be able to compare the experiment in space is between two and four weeks for
performance 0f speciﬁc lubricants 111 LOW Earth Orblt the PoD and several months for the BB. This duration
(LEO) conditions. ﬁts uite well With the eX ected time of the Eutef
. .q p. . .
The VTM is composed of six double experiment cells rn1ss1on (3 years), and materials Wlll be studied after
that perform respectively ball bearing (BB) experiments returning back to Earth.
(With liquid and solid lubrication) and pin—on—disk
(PoD) tests of solid lubricants. Thin ﬁlms of alloyed — -
MoSz are being tested in the VTM under controlled ‘
vacuum conditions. __ ﬂﬂq; -1211; ""lit""- E-._.
In this work, the two sections of the VTM are described. Wei“. _- '1 ' LL.
INTRODUCTION . ' I ‘-""~——='~""L.-d ' .' 5:??-
The tribology is a well developed ﬁeld of science Which . i"":
has received signiﬁcant attention from research groups '
all over the world. The presence of the friction i:
phenomena is always a challenge for the design of - E. . '
mechanisms and machines: sometimes is used as a part _ ‘1'
of the functioning of the machine but other times is '
something to get rid of. The liquid and solid lubricants Figure 1: General View of the VTM.
and, specrallye thin ﬁlm lubricants have. been nsed in The data that Will be acquired during in orbit
ihaee apptllications fofr the purpose OfltdhmhlfShmig the functioning Will be sent to the ground station, Where it
.he 10h p enornena or many years. is e on rnos can be monitored and studied almost on line, according
importance thecorrect selection of the lubricant to be to the expected ratio of velocity of communications.
used In a specrﬁc application: It is a fact well known The data that Will be measured are the temperature in
that some of the failures of deployable antennas and the cell Where the experiment is being performed, the
other space rneehanisnis have been produeed. m the vertical or normal force that is applied on the disk, the
Jornts due, sornetinies, to a non adequate lubrication. AS horizontal or tangential force Which appears due to the
an example, Borrien .[2] and Fusaro et al [3] have friction and the friction coefﬁcient itself, ratio between
published. good rexf/tiews of tribological problems tangential and normal forces.
occurring in spacecra s.

"
"2","Due to the high effort of setting in orbit an experiment and data sent to the control computer, outside the
and due to the fact that the number of samples or tribometer.
experiments is very hmlted by the stringent conditions The motors are located in the basement (see Figure 1,
that rule in the space experiment world, a carefully . . . . . .
. . . . right part) and also the electronics are pos1tioned in this
selection of ﬁlms and experiments that Wlll be ﬂown 1s . .
. . . . . area. Some additional components complete the Whole
required to have a high probability of success in them. .
. . vacuum tribometer.
Moreover, it would be out of question to ﬂy a
completely new ﬁlm or lubricant liquid Without a A) Pin 011 DiSk tCStS
consoliclated record Of good behaV1our Of that Figure 3 illustrates the pin on disk test lay-out and its
lubricating ﬁlm in a set of experiments done on Earth. different components. This test set up consists in a
The purpose of the construction of the TriboLAB 6061th dlSk that rotates, attached t0 a main shaft that
Vacuum Tribometer Model (VTM) is thus double. On drives all eXperiments. The arm, containing a ball or
the one hand, it serves as a engineering-development spherically ended Plh at one extreme, IS made 0f tWh
model for the Tribolab Flight Model (FM) and on the stalnless steel ﬂexures and the ball at the end Is
other hand, it is used also as a bench for the testing of POSItIOhed 1h contact W1th the ChSk by means 0f 'ft PiVOt
different ﬁlm lubricants and comparison With 188 data ﬂexure (tors1onal spring, see Table I) that applies the
from FM. nominal contact force between ball and disk. The load
. . . . . .. l'db th' thdh b l'btdt 5N+/—
This contribution deals With a summarised description agaie y is me O as een cai ra e O
of the TriboLAB VTM, for details of the testing carried '
out, please refer to the work by 11, Oﬁate and 00- Table 1: Main characteristics of the pivot ﬁexure.
workersmthesepmceedmgs[41-
TRIBOLAB VTM 6024—400, Lucas Aero. Ref
M . 1 A181 410, A181 420
Figure 1 shows a general View of the already ateria stainless steels
constructed VTM. Twelve external gears can be seen in Torsional stiffness (N/O)
the photo. Its purpose is Just to transmit the movement Angular range (0)
that is generated by the motors to the different cells that S'
. . . . $19 x 30.5
are 1ns1de the tribometer. Figure 1 also shows some of . . ,
. . Radial stiffness (N/m) 18.2 X 10
the cables that are used to transmit the Signals from the . . ,
. AXial stiffness (N/m) 13.7 X 10
internal gauges to the computer that controls and
monitors the experiment. Each cell is composed of two The torsional spring is used for two main purposes:
experiments, one pin-on-disk and one ball bearing. This apply the required load between ball and disk and
can be seen in the CAD drawing of Figure 2. remove and change the experiments by separating ball
. . . and disk by the action of a cam.
Figure 2: Cross section of a VTM experiment cell,
The cam controls the angular position of the torsional
spring and the applied force. Its function is to select the
Ball Bearing test I'lr\ Pin on Disk fest disk to be tested, since only one pin-on-disk test is
/ lf? I»\ carried out at a time from a total of 6 positions
*‘ t O 'lable. This cam rotates attached to a shaft that is
’A ¢ , a avai
’I.l ‘IU )getli shared for all experiments; a ball at one end of the arm
0 [‘(Q \ - —{:§|.\\$)§“©\' O is in contact With the cam.
u (Q); > :2 16,» I . .
é) % Way / a Friction and normal forces are measured by means of
f?fl "" <56?“ W‘ FE? two sets of semiconductor strain gauges (see Table II)
III ’\@§§?3$(Q o n» 7 bonded on the ﬁexures, Which are deformed under the
Q l§§: g) ml @ action of these forces. Both ﬂexures are equipped With
‘ < ‘ #9333 full Wheatstone bridges to produce a voltage output
\; proportional to the friction and normal forces.

I"" Pin on disk tests in the TriboLAB are carried out With
showing the pin on disk test (right) and the ball bearing solid lubricant ﬁlms based in M082 alloyed With hard
test (left). phases [4-6]. The base material is AISI 440C

. . martensitic stainless steel.
The left part of Fig. 2 represents the ball bearing
experiment and the right one the pin-on-disk test. Two
motors move independently the shafts that support both
experiments. Forces are measured through strain gauges

"
"3","(torsional spring) and a cam that rotates attached to the

f shaft shared for all experiments; a ball at one end of the

\O BCIII arm is in contact With the cam. The friction torque is

u ‘ \ Arm measured by means of strain gauges bonded on the
l l i)
K J/ o 1 r 1 . ﬂexures.
¥x~£§§ PIVOt ﬂexure The measurement system is based on a set of strain
\ K ago) ’¢\ ‘ . - - -
_:%I (gt‘féﬁb gauges bonded on the cantilever ﬂex1ble arm, Which is
‘ Q“ ¢b U deformed under the action of bending forces.
Flexures with 9% '1 U/ Semiconductor strain gauges, all of the same type (see
strain gauges \ ®®§a§U Table II) are used to measure those forces.
' "" P . .
§/ \I‘Tal The VTM allows the testing of 6 pairs of angular ball
\’ bearings With the dimensions shown in Table III. The
bearin s are mounted and hard reloaded in a dedicated
g P
housing. A pin is joined externally to the outer housing
Fig. 3: VTM pin on disk test and components case to react on the ﬂexible arm and ﬁx the rotation of
the bearing outer race.
Table III: Bearings selected for testing.
Table 11: Main characteristics of the strain gauges.

Characteristic Value / Remarks AISI 440C
KSP'Z'lK'E4 / from K10W3 Inner race diameter (mm)
1000 Q / At 24°C Outer race diameter (mm) 44.45

Gauge Factor (GF) Width (mm) 6.35x2
Max. allowable strain i 3000 pun/ni Separators Width (mm)
MaX- allowable current
Thermal out ut 29.3 pun/In/OC / Apparent
p strain on steel
Temp. coefﬁcient of GF -0.27% /°C / 500 pun/ni g Bear'ng
(O!)
(V)
B) Ball bearing tests. M Pivo’r flexure
The ball bearing test initially shown in the cross section \D\\/‘@
of Fig. 2 is presented in more detail in Figure 4. Each téazéq‘ 0
experiment cell is independent, With the following main , ‘xO‘L’g’
- - Contact In Q) “v
components: a ﬂex1ble am With a ball at one end (the p 8 . “‘ /
. . 'QGB ’
arni contains one ﬂexure), a set of four strain gages §?-
(sensors) for friction torque measurements bonded at '
both sides of the ﬂexures, one pivot ﬂexure (torsional V
spring), one bearing to be tested and ﬁnally one cam.
In the ball bearing experiment, the bearing to be tested Figure 43 B311 bearing experiment lay-out and
is mounted in the housing Which is joined to a shaft components.
shared for all experiments. This shaft is supported at
both ends by bearings With a conﬁguration of a duplex V ACUUM CHAMBER
preloaded pair face to face bearing at one extreme and . . . . .
one single deep groove bearing at the other extreme. The VTM IS introduced foh testing 1ns1de a vacuum
The bearings shaft is rotated by a DC brushless actuator. chamber that has been des1gned and constitucted .tO
generate tribological data under ground conditions With
The arm is composed of the elements (Fig. 4): one this instrument (see Figure 5).
ﬂexure, a set of four strain gages (sensors) for friction . . .
torque measurements bonded at both sides of the The des1gn of the vacuum chamber was optimized for a
ﬂexure a main body attached to the torsional spring correct operation of the VTM.As1s usual in these cases,
With a ball at one extreme, a clamping piece to join the a tuPFHPg Of the different components was required in
ﬂexure to the main body and a support base for the the initial setup of the vacuum system, as Vibrations had
above assembly. to be minimized, and signals and correct vacuum levels
. . . guaranteed. These facts remark the idea of the need of a
The ar m niade Wlth ﬂexures 15 iotated t0 eontact Wllh a very high quality fabrication of the real components for
pm ﬁxed in the outer bearing ring to aV01d 1ts rotation. the Flight Model. The experience gained With the VTM
The ﬂexible arm position is controlled by a pivotﬂexure

"
"4","system, has been invaluable for application in the FM REFERENCES
TriboLAB.
1 J.S J.G' —El' R.S t' J.P
Not only the components but also the assembly of the [ ] erran~o, omez VH8.“ an lago, ,azos,
J . I. Onate, I. Garmendia and A. Rodriguez.
vacuum chamber presented some problems. One of . , . . th
. . . . TriboLAB. a space tribometer. Proceedings 9
them was the Vibration induced in the VTM due to the . .
. . . European Space Mechanisms and Tribology
frequency of rotation of the vacuum pump. The eX01ting . . .
Sympos1um, 19—21 Sept. 2001, Liege — Belgium.
frequency was not far enough from the ﬁrst natural . . . .
frequency of the tribometer, so a special rubber support [2] A- 31301111611- Tribological problems in spacecrafts.
were needed to avoid the negative inﬂuence of the 821 Meeting Of the AGRAD .SMP on “Tribology
Vibrations in measurements to be done, especially on the for Aerospace Systems”, 563111113113, Portugal 6'7
values obtained for normal and tangential forces. May 1996- CP'589, 10-1-10-9-
Finally, after sometime of work, the needed adjustment [3] W. Shapiro, F. Murray, R. Howarth and R. Fusaro.
was obtained. Partial results with the pin on (lisk test set Space Mechanisms Lessons Learned Study. Vols. I
up at the VTM are presented in these proceedings [4]. and II. N AS A TM—107046 and TM—107047.
NASA, 1995.
. -. -1u..-rr [4] J.I. Oﬁate, M. Brizuela, M. Bausa, A. Garcia —
' ﬂ “.- Luis and I. Braceras. Vacuum tribology testing of
' ] alloyed M082 ﬁlms at VTM Model of TriboLAB.
Fi-‘T '_ "" __4"" SP—524. Proc. of 10th European Space Mechanisms
_' E II *1 . J and Tribology Symp. San Sebastian, Spain 24—26
1| I . :[ ﬂ, -_ . Sept. 2003. ESA Public. DiV. ESTEC, Keplerlaan
: __ _ q 1 _ __ ' 1. 2200 AG Noordwijk (NL). Sept. 2003.
. J '1' ll ' ""'*-.-‘_ l. _ _ [5] J.I. Oﬁate, M. Brizuela, A. Garcia—Luis, I.
h.‘ :' ' ' -- Braceras, J .L. Viviente and J . Gémez—Elvira.
_' ' . Improved tribological behaviour of M082 thin
"" .__"":-T-: 'I '_ Solid Films alloyed with WC. SP—480 — Proc. 9th
_ European Space Mechanisms and Tribology
' '-__ h .. _ Symp. Liege, Belgium 19—21 Sept. 2001. ESA
"" ""_""= -- - Publications DiV. ESTEC, Keplerlaan 1. 2200 AG
Noordwijk (The Netherlands). Sept. 2001, pp. 257—
Figure 5: Vacuum chamber (right) and VTM at the 262.
center. [6] J . I. Oﬁate, M. Brizuela, A. Garcia—Luis, J .L.
Viviente, F.J. Garcia de Blas, A. Agiiero, F. Longo
CONCLUSIONS and A. Roman. Development and qualiﬁcation of
A vacuum triborneter model VTM has been designed, new .SOhd lubricant coatings. A tribology
. . experiment at the TriboLAB onto EuTEF. Proc. of
constructed and used as an engineering model for the “ . . ,,
d . . . . . 8th Int. Symp. on Mat. in a Space Env1ronrnent .
es1gn and validation of TriboLAB Flight Model.
. . . Arcachon—France, 5—9 June 2000. Ed. CNES.
Several difﬁculties were found in the process but
promising results with the developed ﬁlm coatings have
been obtained. Pin on disk and ball bearings tests are in
progress and computer programs for the statistical
treatment of data have been developed.
Work is in progress out to select the optimum thin
lubricating ﬁlms that will be ﬁnally tested at the FM
TriboLAB on board of the EuTEF platform at the ISS.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
. . Back to Contents
All authors acknowledge the ﬁnanCIal ass1stance from
the Spanish Ministry of Science and Technology
(Project PNE—008/2000—C—01 and 02).
A partial support by the Basque Government,
Department of Education, Universities and Research
(Project PI—2001—12) is also acknowledged by
INASMET.

"
