"","x"
"1","45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2007-545
8 - 11 January 2007, Reno, Nevada
Electronlc Repalr Concepts for Long-Duratlon Spaceﬂlght
J ohn Eastonlf and Richard D. Pettegrewi.
National Centerfor Space Exploration Researchf, Cleveland, Ohio, 44135
and
Peter M. Struk*
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, 44135
[Abstract] Constraints on the mass and volume that can be allocated for electronics
spares and repair equipment on long-duration space missions mean that NASA must look at
repair strategies beyond the traditional approach, Which has been to replace faulty
subsystems in a modular form, termed Orbital Replacement Units or Line Replacement
Units. Other possible strategies include component and board-level replacement, modular
designs that allow reprogramming of less-critical systems to take the place of more critical
failed systems, and a blended approach Which uses elements of each of these approaches,
along With a limited number of Line Replacement Units. This paper presents some of the
constraints and considerations that affect the decision on how to approach electronics repair
for long duration space missions, and discusses the beneﬁts and limitations of each of the
previously mentioned strategies.
I. Introduction
NASA’S plans for long duration missions to the Moon and, especially, to Mars require a much greater degree of
self sufﬁciency on the part of the crew than ever before. Such missions Will have greatly reduced logistic
support from Earth, compared to International Space Station (188) operations. Returning to Earth in the event of an
emergency may not be an option either, as a lunar return ﬂight could require two to three days, and a Martian return
ﬂight Will require much longer.

One area of mission support that NASA must plan for is electronic repairs. Despite the rigorous testing required
by NASA, electronics faults have already occurred in both Space Shuttle and 188 operationsl’z, leading to the use of
backup systems or loss of capability to some degree. While the electronics and other systems used in a long
duration space mission Will undergo rigorous testing, the crew of such missions Will most likely encounter an
electronics failure at some point in the mission. With the design of the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) already
beginning and likely inﬂuencing the design of future spacecraft and hardware, it is not too early for NASA to begin
exploring and designing techniques and tools for crew members conducting electronics repair during long duration
space mission. These considerations include system design (for accessibility, parts type and sizes, and board
complexity), repair infrastructure (including diagnostic capabilities, tools, and other needed equipment), and
logistics constraints. The decisions on how to approach each of these considerations depends on the overall repair
strategy that is chosen.

The current repair scheme used for the ISS focuses on orbital replacement units (ORU). An ORU is a modular
electronics assembly or system, designed to be replaced as a unit. When an electronic fault is detected, it is isolated
to speciﬁc ORU through system performance information. The crew then removes the entire ORU, replacing it With
a spare. Most replacement ORUS are ﬂown from the ground as needed, With limited spares on hand. Preliminary
designs for the CEV use a similar design for electronic systems, also referred to as line replacement units (LRUM)3 .

Previous work regarding electronics repairs during missions has focused largely on the economics of performing
repairs, in terms of crew time, upmass, and volume of spares. Accola et. a1.4 examined the implications of crew
members performing varying amounts of repair onboard the then-proposed Space Station Freedom. Their model
T Staff Scientist, NCSER, 21000 Brookpark Rd, MS 110-3, AIAA Member
* Aerospace Engineer, NASA GRC, 21000 Brookpark Rd, MS 110-3, AIAA Member
M This paper uses the LRU name convention for any modular electronics system onboard a spacecraft.

1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2007 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
The U.S. Government has a royalty-free license to exercise all rights under the copyright claimed herein for Governmental purposes.
All other rights are reserved by the copyright owner.

"
"2","predicted that increasing crew performed repairs could save on mass and volume of spares compared to reduced
levels of repair, up to eliminating repairs altogether and simply replacing faulty LRUs With good ones. These
repairs cost a small amount of crew time, With this cost more than offset by volume and mass considerations.

NASA researchers have also begun studies of soldering electronics components in reduced gravity. These
studies include a demonstration of soldering Wires in orbit5 as well as many studies of soldering aboard a reduced
gravity aircraft 1aboratory6’7’8’9’10. These later studies show an increase in solder joint void fraction in reduced
gravity compared to solder joints formed in normal gravity. An increase in joint void fraction indicates a greater
risk for the joint to fail over time; these results show a need for NASA to explore methods of mitigating the increase
in void fraction.

This paper Will discuss the factors that must be considered When choosing a repair strategy for long-duration
space missions, and several potential repair strategies are examined. The relative advantages and disadvantages of
each approach are discussed, as well as suggestions for a ‘blended’ approach, in Which elements of each may be the
optimal solution.

11. Factors Affecting Electronics Repair During Space Missions

A number of factors must be considered When selecting a strategy for electronics repair during a mission,
particularly since each of these factors needs to be addressed during the design of the spacecraft and the mission
proﬁle. For the purpose of this paper, these factors are deﬁned as Electronic System Design (Which includes design
considerations at the board level and subsystem level), Diagnostics, Repair Infrastructure (Which includes the tools
and equipment needed to perform the repairs, as well as the logistics of the spares stores) and Crew Considerations.
While the details on each of these topics are beyond the scope of this paper, each Will be discussed in a high-level
fashion in the following subsections.

A. Electronic System Design

The design of the electronics for a long-duration mission is one of the ﬁrst factors to be considered, since these
designs can enable or prevent elements of the different repair strategies, and decisions regarding the electronic
systems design are likely to be made early in the overall spacecraft design process. With regard to repair
considerations, electronic systems must ﬁrst be designed for accessibility, meaning the crew member must have
access to the system in order to repair it. While this may seem self—evident, volume and other design constraints
may make a signiﬁcant portion of the subsystems inaccessible to crew members from inside the craft. If this is the
case, then either robotic or EVA (Extra Vehicular Activity) provisions must be made to allow access.

If the selected repair strategy involves component—level (or board-level) repair, then the concept of accessibility

Fmﬁrpﬂmﬁrhwwu needs to be extended down several levels further. Individual boards
“”Z'M‘II‘I“'”“‘""””I"""" (Within the LRU or subsystem) must be accessed and disconnected,
_ . + ‘ _ ' _ - _ _ _ _ _ _ - . + i q 1 and, if components are to be replaced, then the conformal coating on
IIIIIIIII'I I IIIIIII II the board must be removable. While most coatings can be removed
IIIIII I II II I I I I I II II With various methods in ground-based facilities, limitations on
chemicals and equipment that can be ﬂown make conformal coating
I I I I I I I I I I I _I I I . removal an accessibility issue that must be considered.
II I I I II I I I II II The strategy of component—level repair, as well as the degree to
Which that strategy is implemented Will also require consideration in
I I II I I I I I : : : j : : : : ; : 1 3595 the design of circuit boards and the choice of components used. If
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I manually-operated repair tools (such as a soldering iron) are used,
‘ 1 1 I I I 1 i ' ‘ i ' ' ' ' ‘ ‘ I ' ' limits Will eXist on What components can be repaired. One example of
i“ m i“ l“ m- ili Ill 1“ ill : HII-lﬂll such a compohent. is the .‘ball .grid array’ conﬁguratioh of an
__ I I | | | | 55523; g; i l'iTt integrated Circuit (Figure 1), 1n Wthh the leads are not access1b1e to a
“* I _ 5-” -.-I E SE ' soldering iron. Other factors, such as the pitch of the leads, may also
. 1 ' make manual repairs intractable in some cases. While some of these
. . limitations may be addressed using other repair technologies (such as
Flgure 1: Example 0f ball—grld ari'ay a semi-automated repair station), such limitations may be minimized
(BGA) electronlc component, showmg or avoided through careful design.
the array of contacts on the bottom
side of the component.
2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","B. Diagnostics

Regardless of the repair philosophy chosen, the problem remains that diagnostics must be included to determine
Where the problem lies in a faulty system. At a high level, the ﬁrst layer of diagnostics Will include isolation of the
problem to a speciﬁc subsystem, or LRU. This may be through symptomatic diagnosis, or through system-Wide
levels of built-in tests (BIT).

If LRU replacement is chosen, this level of diagnostics is sufﬁcient. If component—level repair is to be
implemented, then further diagnostics are needed to pinpoint Which component is faulty. A trade study completed
by the authors11 determined that diagnostics needed for component—level repair are likely to include non-functional
test equipment, Which tests components in a non-powered state and compares their signatures against known good
data. These diagnostics Will also be needed for post—repair veriﬁcation, prior to returning a subsystem to service.
Additionally, crew members Will require standard diagnostic tools such as oscilloscopes, multimeters, etc., to
properly locate a faulty component. Diagnostic capabilities also require some levels of crew training, and may also
include a ground support Via telemetry.

C. Repair Infrastructure Requirements

Within the scope of this paper, repair infrastructure is deﬁned as the set of tools and spare parts required to
implement the repair. The tools requirements Will vary, depending on the strategy chosen. Most strategies are likely
to entail at least a limited set of small hand tools, for disconnecting fasteners, etc. Component—level repair Will also

require some specialized tools, such as
a soldering iron or other soldering
. technology, and specialized tools for
component removal. If a semi-
automated component—level repair is
_ implemented, then an X-Y positioning
I-l' ‘ 'I“ --——l.._ 1 1__ ' . stage (Figure 2) is also needed.

_ I-""""'|""'r ' _ [—- I: 3 "" The logistical aspect of spares
I —ﬂ_ _ J '4g:-'-___ : ' -‘ . represents a key element of the
' L_i i "" "" 5. .- infrastructure requirement, With Wide
—__ __.__ '_—L haiku. _ . variations between the requirements
L.E- for LRU replacement and component-
level repair. Careful choices must be
made to insure that adequate quantities
of spares are available, in the event of
Figure 2: Example of a semi—automated, electronics diagnostic multiple failures. , The issue 9f mass
system With X-Y translation stage. and volume required t9 prov1de that
number of spares is likely to be a
central issue When deciding on a repair

strategy.

D. Crew Considerations

An additional factor in the selection of a repair strategy is the skill and training requirements on the crew, as well
as time required to implement the various repair strategies. Each of the different repair strategies Will require
signiﬁcantly different speciﬁc skills and training to implement the repairs, although some of the skill requirements
may be partially mitigated through the use of a ‘tele-science’ approach, in Which speciﬁc portions of the diagnosis of
the problem are handled in conjunction With ground-based engineers. Up—linked training materials on speciﬁc repair
issues can also help minimize the need to pre-train the crew for every speciﬁc incident, though a baseline of
knowledge and experience Will clearly be needed.

Crew time required to perform a repair Will also be a relevant consideration. Critical systems may (in some
circumstances) require repair strategies Which can be implemented very quickly, While other repairs may not be
time-critical. Crew time is always considered a high-value resource, but the value of the crew time must be weighed
against all of the other considerations When examining the choice of repair strategy. Clearly, less crew time is
required for LRU replacement, but this may be overridden by the need to reduce the volume of spares for the
mission.

3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","III. Possible Strategies for Electronics Repair

The general strategies for addressing electronic failures during a mission can be classiﬁed broadly as:

1) LRU Replacement: This approach involves removing and replacing modular subsystems, Which are
comprised of ‘blocks’ of circuit boards.

2) Component-Level Repair: This approach entails repair of individual faulty components on a circuit
board

3) System Re-Programming / “Scavenging”: This approach involves the use of “common modules” (to
the degree possible) Which can be removed from service on less crucial systems, and re-programmed to
replace critical systems that have undergone failure.

4) Combined Approach: This approach uses a blended combination of each of the three distinct
strategies, in an attempt to provide an optimal repair/maintenance solution.

Additionally, the ‘component-level repair’ strategy can be divided into manually performed repairs (i.e., hand
tools only), and semi-automated repair (With mechanized aids for diagnostics, component placement, and soldering).
Each of these approaches has distinct advantages and disadvantages, in terms of system design requirements, the
diagnostics and repair infrastructure needed, and crew considerations. The following sections examine some
possible implementations of these strategies, With discussion of the beneﬁts and limitations of each approach.

I. LRUReplacement

LRU’s are modular subassemblies that generally contain a series of related circuit boards, designed to
collectively perform a speciﬁc function (or multiple functions) Within a larger system. These units are packaged for
relatively easy installation and removal, and require comparatively low crew time and training to use.

A representative range in LRU spatial dimensions is from about 3” X 3” X 3” to 28” X 17” X 7”, With mass
ranging from approximately 1 1b to 75 lbs. Figure 3 shows an example of a typical LRU”. When an electronic
system fails, the fault is isolated to a speciﬁc LRU, using system performance observations and some level of built-
in diagnostics. The crew member then removes the entire LRU and replaces it With a spare 0r relies on a backup

system. The faulty LRU then returns to Earth With
the shuttle, Where it may be repaired, tested and
returned to a pool of spares awaiting return to space.
The use of LRU’s affords several important
gﬂ beneﬁts. Since the unit can be thoroughly tested
_!_,F___——_—*;;’;: ulna: _ prior to ﬂight, the reliability of LRU replacement as
v? .—-—'-'_‘-'“j“._"".'-7-;' . a repalr strategy is very high. Also, the requirement
1' ifs -*"" _ e-x‘g'ihﬂ‘iuv} 0n crew training and experience is minimal, and the
i ; k”: ~$~f ?mi- LRU’s can generally be replaced fairly quickly and
""j:_=1_ ‘1”: 1‘.- (f ﬂ-“i‘f-‘ﬁ, ' With minimaltools.

\I.‘ .f‘ 999 ‘ d However, the LRU replacement strategy carries
“a ;_ .tm_-__f-""' l’ .‘9 . a high penalty in terms of mass and volume,
\\\\i .' g ' considering the likely requirements of multiple
“‘ '- ?:I ' spares per system. Furthermore, long-duration
"" missions may require travel times that prohibit re-
m"" supply from Earth, particularly Martian missions.
The mission must bring along all potentially-needed
Figure 33 Example Of an LRU (Electrical Power and spares With them. Given the complexity of a long
Control Unit, referred to as EPCU)12~ duration spacecraft, the number of spares required
for adequate mission safety for each LRU is

probably prohibitive.

2. Component-Level Repair

While LRU replacement approaches electronic repair from the standpoint of subsystem replacement, component-
level repair addresses the problem at the lowest possible level. This approach offers the greatest savings in terms of
mass and volume of spares, it does require at least some additional tools and infrastructure (such as additional

4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","diagnostics, beyond the BIT diagnostics already used in LRU’s). Further, crew training becomes much more
important, and time requirements to perform the repairs increase.

NASA has already begun investigation of eomponent-level electronics repair, with the CLEAR proj eet (standing
for Component-Level Electronie-Assembly Repair)13 . This effort, which is a combination of trade studies, normal
gravity demonstrations, and reduced gravity testing aboard aircraft facilities and the 188, is examining the feasibility
of manually-operated, eomponent-level repairs (i.e., with a soldering iron) for long-duration missions. Early efforts
have shown the general feasibility of electronics repair in this environment, building on previous research done on
the effects of the reduced gravity environment on the soldering process6'10.

An extension of that work would be to perform eomponent—level repair using a semi-automated re-work station,
as previously noted. Such stations use computer controlled translation stages and machine Vision to position
diagnostics or soldering/de-soldering devices on faulty components whose size or conﬁguration would not typically
permit manual repair. This capability would allow repair of a broader Class of electronic components, as well as
advanced soldering technologies such as infrared re-ﬂow, or convective heating re-ﬂow. Systems of this type would
allow inclusion of more components in the “repairable” category than manual repair (thereby further reducing the
need for spare LRU’s), and would help to minimize the need for crew experience in manual repairs.

3 . System Re-ngmmming / Scavenging

The notion of re-programming or scavenging systems to repair or work around failures is a strategy that could
have several embodiments. One version of this involves the use of existing, reprogrammable resources to reprogram
faulty subsystems and work around damaged components. Although there are several methods to implement this,
ﬁeld programmable gate array (FPGA) devices*** can be used as an example. With an FPGA, the actual
conﬁguration is typically loaded into the FPGA after power-up. The conﬁguration can be stored in non-volatile
memory and could be Changed. For example, if the failed subsystem were a power supply or power conditioning
module, re-programming could allow supply voltages to be programmed to different settings. The same approach
can be taken at the LRU level, where sub-systems could be comprised of items that could be transferred to different
applications. This could include computer cards, motion ampliﬁers/eontrollers, etc., with the different functionality
being determined by the FPGA code that is loaded.

Another strategy for recovering from electronic failures would be to scavenge existing parts or subsystems to
repair a faulty Circuit board, or work around a fault. With scavenging techniques, crew members would remove
components from a good board in another system deemed less crucial to operations and crew well-being than the
system with the damaged Circuit. Crew skill and time requirements for this approach are not very different from the
eomponent-level repair plan already discussed. This strategy, though, will require considerable work prior to
launch. Mission designers and planners will have to compile a list of components available that is easily accessible
to the crew or ground support teams, use common components across all Circuit boards to the greatest degree
possible, and prioritize systems and Circuit boards to aid in deciding which Circuit board to scavenge.

4. Combined Approach

The discussions of the strategies listed in this paper may seem to suggest that these strategies are exclusive of
each other, when the most practical approach is likely to be a combination of each of these. For example, a
comparatively small number of spare LRU’s may be required for critical systems, so that the functional system
could be brought back on-line while the faulty component is found and repaired in the original unit. Less critical
systems, in certain areas, may be addressed using a scavenging and re-programming approach, with the faulty LRU
being repaired, then re-installed in place of the scavenged LRU. An additional implementation could involve board-
level replacement within the LRU for components that are not easily repairable given the infrastructure or tools that
are available. This approach is a compromise between true eomponent-level repair and full LRU replacement; while
it does require more spare storage space than true eomponent-level repair, it requires considerably less space than
that of full LRU replacements. A combined strategy of eomponent-level repair on some (signiﬁcant) fraction of
parts, with non-repairable parts being replaced at the eircuit-Card level, along with a minimal number of LRU spares,
and LRU’s that are designed (where possible) for re-programming and re-use, would allow the greatest ﬂexibility in
repairing a range of faults while still minimizing the logistics footprint required, to the degree possible.

W FPGA’s are programmable hardware devices, in which the internal hardware conﬁguration is controlled Via
software, allowing implementation of custom logic circuits.
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","IV. Discussion

The previously described strategies represent three distinct approaches to electronics repair on long-duration space
missions. Each carries certain advantages over the others, along With corresponding disadvantages. For the purpose
of this discussion, comparisons Will be made in two broad areas; ease of repair / extent of crew training required,
and volume and mass savings. A major assumption in this discussion is that all of the three methods are in fact
practical, and can be implemented effectively from an operational standpoint. In practice, only the LRU
replacement method has been previously implemented, and therefore fully proven. While early results show
signiﬁcant promise, eomponent-level repair is a strategy still being investigated by NASA13 .

Ease ofRepair and Extent ofCrew T mining

The ﬁrst area of comparison is ease of repair and minimizing training, repair, and practice time for the crew.
Crew training and repair time is an important consideration because of the extensive amount of training for all
aspects of a mission prior to launch and the planned scientiﬁc, housekeeping, and maintenance exclusive of repair
during a mission. For these reasons, plans that reduce the training and repair workload for the crew are typically
given strong consideration by NASA planners.

Replacing LRUs has advantages over the other repair plans in terms of required crew training time, practice
time, and time spent performing a repair. Replacing a LRU requires little training beyond familiarity With electrical
and mechanical connectors for the LRUs, Which is required for any repair scenario. Replacement strategies can also
use a standardized set of procedures, Which also simpliﬁes the repair process. Replacing LRUs also limits the
amount of ground support required for the repair. Ground support teams Will most likely receive BIT results
regardless of the repair plan used, and need only adVise crew members as to Which LRU to replace, Where to ﬁnd the
replacement and stow the faulty unit, and any speciﬁc procedures for replacing the LRU in question.

The other repair plans require more crew training and time than simply replacing the LRU. Reprogramming
FPGA or similar devices requires training to open an LRU, ﬁnd the faulty component, and load a neW program.
This also requires extensive diagnostic testing, and involvement With a ground support team to properly diagnose the
fault, and to possibly send neW code for the failed device from Earth. Seavenging and replacing a failed component
may face many of the same ground support requirements as reprogramming components — aid in diagnosis and
planning and implementing a repair. These processes also require extensive crew training prior to the ﬂight. This
training includes soldering techniques With the available tools, performing diagnostic testing and some interpretation
of the results, and techniques for handling a Circuit board and components beyond soldering component leads. Crew
members may also require practice in soldering techniques to retain competency in performing repairs.

Volume and Mass Savings

Saving on the volume and mass of electronic repair tools and parts, as With any other system carried into space,
is of critical importance. Mass and volume savings in one area translates to allowances in other areas. Repairing a
board requires some volume and mass, both in tools and spare parts. This plan requires storing spare Circuit boards
and spare components, as well as providing diagnostic and repair tools. Seavenging and reusing or reprogramming
components saves mass and volume by reducing the amount of spare Circuit boards and components, but does not
eliminate the need for diagnostic and repair tools. Replacing LRUs, though, is likely to require much more volume
and mass, compared to the other methods. While replacement does not require the same level of diagnostic and
repair tools that may be required by the other methods, it does require full-sized LRUs to be stored. Given that an
entire LRU typically contains multiple boards, as well as a framework and external housing, it is Clear that replacing
an entire LRU is less efﬁcient, in terms of storage of spares, than the other methods. This is particularly signiﬁcant
When considering the need for multiple spares, to allow multi-fault tolerance (i.e., multiple or repeated failures or
damage to the same system).

Design and Support Considerations

For the implementation of any level of component or board level repair strategy to be successful, systems would
need to be designed so that “non-repairable” components were segregated, to the greatest degree possible, on
smaller ‘daughter’ cards, allowing a larger number of smaller cards to be carried. Further, the Circuit boards and
LRUs must be designed for repair, Which includes allowing accessibility to the boards, use of common components
When possible, board layouts that reduced the difﬁculty of performing a repair, common LRU and board interfaces
Where possible, and extensive BIT to reduce the diagnostic tasks left to a crew member. These techniques Will

6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","reduce the crew workload during a repair, and the amount of training time necessary for crew competence. Ground
support teams Who are able to examine diagnostic test results (With engineering models of electronics on hand) can
greatly aid in the diagnosis and repair of faulty electronics. Finally, one or more crew members should be
knowledgeable in the ﬁeld of electronics. This does not mean that a crew member should be an electronics engineer
or technician, but should be trained in some electronics repair similar to the U.S. Navy 2M program”, or similar
program focused on the types of repairs and components expected during a space mission.

V. Conclusions

This paper examines strategies for the repair of faulty electronics in long duration space missions. The
discussion ﬁrst focused on factors affecting the crew’s ability to perform these repairs. These factors include
designing the electronics so they can be repaired during a mission, the diagnostics required to both determine the
source of a fault and to test a repair before returning the system to use, and crew considerations including training,
experience, and ground support through te1eseienee. The paper then discusses three general strategies for
performing repairs during a mission: replacing a LRU, repairing components on Circuit boards Within a faulty LRU,
and reprogramming 0r scavenging parts from a less critical LRU for a faulty, but necessary, LRU. Finally, the
authors recommend a mix of replacing entire LRUs When the system is a critical component, having spare Circuit
boards for Circuits requiring complex repair techniques, and spare components for LRUs that are not mission critical
and do not require difﬁcult repair procedures. Combined, these methods reduce the volume and mass required for
spare parts and increase the capabilities and increase the likelihood of overall mission success.

While the development and implementation of such a repair capability will require effort and expenditure, the
cost of failing to provide a well-planned repair capability could be catastrophic, both economically and in human
terms, if the failure to make such repairs were to lead to mission failure and loss of life. When considered in those
terms, the efforts needed to explore, develop, and implement appropriate repair strategies to allow sustainable and
supportable long-duration missions don’t appear nearly as costly.

Acknowledgments

The authors Wish to thank Gary Latta and Andrew Ganster 0f the Naval Surface Warfare Center, Erie Anderson
of Zin Technologies, and Gary Goreeki of NASA Glenn Research Center for their assistance in this effort. This
work is funded by the Supportability Project in NASA’s Exploration Technology Development Program Ofﬁce
(Barmae Taleghani, Program Manager, NASA Langley Research Center).

References

1 Beddingﬁeld, K.L., Leach, RD, and Alexander, M.B. (editor), “Spacecraft System Failures and Anomalies Attributed to
the Natural Space Environment”, NASA Reference Publication 1390, August, 1996.

2 Rutledge, P.J., Mosleh, A., “Dependent-Failures in Spacecraft: Root Causes, Coupling Factors, Defenses, and Design
Implications”, Proceedings of the IEEE Annual Reliability and Maintainability Symposium, 0149-144X/95, (1995), pp. 337-342.

3 Constellation Architecture Requirements Document, NASA-CXP-70000, effective date September 18, 2006.

4 Accola, A., Fincannon, H.J., Williams, G. J ., and Meier, R. T., “Sensitivity Study of Space Station Freedom Operations
Cost and Selected User Resources,” 1AA Symposium on Space Systems Cast Estimation Methodolagies and Applications, San
Diego, May 1990.

5 Grugel, R.N., Cotton, L.J., Segre, P.N., Ogle, J.A., Funkhouser, G., Parris, F., Murphy, L., Gillies, D., Hua, F., and
Anilkumar, A.V., “The In-Space Soldering Investigation (1881): Melting and Solidiﬁcation Experiment Aboard the International
Space Station”, 44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, 2006, AIAA 2006-521.

6 Pettegrew, R.D., Struk, P.M., Watson, J.K., and Haylett, D.R., “Experimental Methods in Reduced Gravity Soldering
Research”, NASA-TM2002-211993 (2002).

7 Pettegrew, R.D., Struk, P.M., Watson, J.K., Haylett, D.R., and Downs, R.S. “Gravitational Effects on Solder Joints”,
Welding Journal, pp. 44-48 (2003).

8 Struk, P.M., Pettegrew, R.D., Downs, R.S., and Watson, J .K., “The Effects of an Unsteady Reduced Gravity Environment
on the Soldering Process”, AIAA-2004-1311 and NASA / T M -2004-21 2946 (2004).

9 Struk, P.M., Pettegrew R.D., Downs, R.S., and Watson, J .K., “The Inﬂuence Of Gravity on J oint Shape for Through-Hole
Soldering”, AIAA-2005-0541 and NASA / TM 2005-213589 (2005).

10 Watson, J.K., Struk, P.M., Pettegrew, RD, and Downs, R.S., “Experimental Investigation of Solder Joint Defect
Formation and Mitigation in Reduced-Gravity Environments”, AIAA Journal ofSpacecraft and Rockets, accepted for publication,
2006.

7
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","11 Pettegrew, R.D., Easton, J ., Struk, P.M., Anderson, E., “In-Flight Manual Electronics Repair for Deep Space Missions”,
IEEEAC Paper #1208, Submitted for IEEE Conference, March, 2007; also to be a NASA TM, spring, 2007 .

12 Combustion Integrated Rack Comprehensive Design Review, FCF-DOC-1421, 2004 (NASA document).

13 Pettegrew, R.D., Easton, J ., Struk, P.M., “Repair of Electronics for Long-Duration Spaceﬂight”, 45th AIAA Aerospace
Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, 2007, AIAA 2007-1364.

14 Naval Surface Warfare Crane center information, http_://www.crane.naﬂ.mi1/2m/2mpage.htm

8
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
