"","x"
"1","43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2005-337
10 - 13 January 2005, Reno, Nevada

43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA-2005-0337

January 10-13, 2005

Reno, Nevada

ISS ECLSS Technology Evolutlon for Exploratlon
Robyn L. Carrasquillo
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, AL, 35812
The baseline environmental control and life support systems (ECLSS) currently deployed
on the International Space Station (188) and the regenerative oxygen generation and water
reclamation systems to be added in 2008 are based on technologies selected during the early
1990’s. While they are generally meeting or exceeding requirements for supporting the [88
crew, lessons learned from hardware development and on orbit experience, together With
advances in technology state of the art and the unique requirements for future manned
exploration missions prompt consideration of the next steps to be taken to evolve these
technologies to improve robustness and reliability, enhance performance, and reduce
resource requirements such as power and logistics upmass. This paper discusses the current
state of ISS ECLSS technology and identiﬁes possible areas for evolutionary enhancement or
improvement.
I. Introduction

The International Space Station (155) as currently constructed consists of a multi-element complex capable of
supporting a permanent crew of three astronauts. By the Assembly Complete milestone, permanent crews of greater
than three may be accommodated through the addition of new modules and environmental control and life support
(ECLS) equipment. Figure 1 shows the planned distribution of the ECLS System at Assembly Complete.

Although the technology level of the Environmental Control and Life Support System (ECLSS) existing and
planned for the [SS surpasses all previous manned spaceﬂight missions, there is room for improvement and further
evolution/advancement to achieve an ECLSS that Will meet NASA’S needs for future exploration. The need to
achieve greater independence from resupply of ground resources, as well as minimize use Of on-Orbit resources, is
apparent. While the degree of oxygen and water loop closure is a key element for achieving long-duration self-
sufﬁciency, such advances are not all that is needed. Robust components immune to failures that require parts
replacement and eliminating dependence on limited-life 0r expendable components are also extremely important
factors. The goal of developing self—sufﬁcient ECLS technologies of the future must be pursued With careful and
balanced consideration of both performance and robustness. Development and Operational experience With the
baseline [SS ECLSS gives insight into some suggested areas of improvement With these factors in mind. In the
President’s Vision for U.S. Space Exploration, life support is recognized as a key enabling technology. The
challenge for NASA’S life support community Will be to apply lessons learned from past development and
Operational experience to the next generation technologies.

11. Description of the ISS ECLSS With Strengths and Weaknesses

As shown in Figure l, the [SS ECLSS is distributed throughout all elements. Both U.S. and Russian systems are
utilized, and in many cases provide redundancy for each other. A brief description of each subsystem area follows
along With associated strengths and weaknesses.

A. Temperature and Humidity Control
Temperature and Humidity Control is provided through ventilation fans, a lOW-temperature cooled
hydrophilic—coated condensing heat exchanger (CHX)/slurper, and rotary liquid separator to remove condensate
from the air stream. Advantages Of this technology include its long ﬂight history, relative simplicity, and gravity
insensitivity. However, 0n-0rbit data indicates a potential problem With sloughing 0f the CHX coating material
and subsequent liquid carryover. Also, the required lOW-temperature coolant complicates the associated thermal
control system and carries insulation penalties. Particulate and airborne microbial control is provided through

HEPA ﬁlters in the return air ducts. While this is a simple solution, the ﬁlters are expendable and require routine

replacement.

American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright C
This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

"
"2","HM
Water Storage (M only) mm] — ,
\ /Atmosphere Gas Bottles .' mm
L MPLM HTV JEM
léfg |.| ATV g _, Em
ll all Atmosphere and . \ It
Progress Module 0 UserGasQitles
% ”—5 I N d 1P rt ‘9 N d 2 N d_ J 5 III ”M
UpO a on 0 e O ‘ 5“ $555555"" 0 e a Ir
— (NOt Shown) Gbﬁﬁﬁ Metaleide
DC1 IIIIIII L
O‘I
Service Module mm] FunctionalCargo E Laborato Module
. Module(FGB) Node1 \ $1.1 1 Node2
...... = —
IOOIIII I um I III II I
HIDE = E HIDE ,
22?? HM / \ i/ mm]
(Exact .::55555:5. 1 / \
F632 Equipment Olmm] /Z\
in the Module is _ _
IIIIIII cu rrently being I ”1“ E I
- F mun: ;:E=EEE=’:; 1"" L
Carbon Dioxide Removal dlscussed) I WA m m
Trace Contaminant Control Made 3 mm] I]:I:I:I:I]
Oxygen Generation CAM
Major Constituent Analyzer \/ (On N ode 2
Sabatier s Zenith) ESA\ “
Water Storage _ oyuz \_ Columbus
9' Nitrogen Storage
(W,
Urine Processing 02 Compressor LEGEND w p- aryTe pe at e
.Q Facullty AirS v C m r r a y m Fﬂs,Valves,FIrlters,
Galley m a e o p 633° Pressure ControlAssembly elﬁ Vacuum System gireoéitPHegﬁfstgesr’SPm-table
Figure 1. 188 Environmental Control and Life Support System Distribution at Assembly Complete
B. Atmosphere Revitalization

Carbon Dioxide Removal is provided by a 4-bed molecular sieve containing zeolite for C02 removal and a
combination of zeolite and silica gel to desiccate the incoming air. Interstitial adsorbed air and desiccated water
are returned to the cabin While the C02 is desorbed to space vacuum With the aid of temperature. The
advantages of the Carbon Dioxide Removal Assembly (CDRA) include water and air-save features, ﬂight-
proven history on multiple programs, and better-than-spee C02 removal performance. It is fairly power-intensive
and complex, and in its on-Orbit [SS performance to date it has encountered difﬁculties With zeolite particle
dusting and contamination of downstream components.

The [SS Trace Contaminant Control System (TCCS) consists of an activated Charcoal adsorption bed and
thermal catalytic oxidizer With post-sorbent bed. The system is simple, provides broad spectrum contaminant
control, and has encountered no signiﬁcant on-Orbit problems. The activated carbon bed is an expendable
component Which requires routine replacement (projected to be 2.25 years based on 6-CreW [SS contaminant
loads)1, and the current catalyst must be protected from poisoning.

The chief atmosphere monitor 011 [SS is the Major Constituent Analyzer (MCA) Which is based on mass
spectrometry. While it has exhibited a stable, repeatable performance for analyzing N2, 02, C02, CH4, H2, and
H20, it has a number of drawbacks. It has a fairly complex control system, requires a roughing vacuum resource
for startup, and the ion pump has a limited life. Its assay is limited to the siX analytes listed above.

The Oxygen Generation Assembly (OGA) planned for, but not yet Operational 0n the ISS, is a water
electrolysis process that employs a solid polymer electrolyte. This is a well-eharaeterized technology used on

2
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","naval submarines. Its drawbacks include the need for high power (by nature of the electrolysis process) and the
production of oxygen is limited to ambient pressure Which makes it unable to be utilized to repressurize backup
oxygen storage tanks.

The baseline [SS air revitalization system does not include a carbon dioxide reduction assembly due to
NASA funding constraints, but sears are included in the Oxygen Generation System rack intended for later
incorporation of such an assembly based on the Sabatier technology. Ground development of the Sabatier has
advanced this technology to a Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of 4-5.2

C. Water Recovery and Management

The planned [SS Water Recovery System (WRS) consists of urine processor and water processor assemblies.
The urine processor is based on the Vapor Compression Distillation (VCD) technology, a phase Change process
Which recovers water from urine through low-pressure evaporation in a rotating distillation assembly. This
technology was successfully demonstrated in microgravity on STS-107 and is therefore at a TRL-7.3 Qual and
acceptance testing of the [SS ﬂight hardware is underway at the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). It has
the advantage of being a fairly power-efﬁeient process, but is admittedly a complex mechanical design and is
limited to a water recovery efﬁciency from urine of 85%.

The [SS water processor produces potable water from a wastewater stream Which includes urine distillate
from the VCD, cabin air humidity condensate, and other hygiene and miscellaneous waste waters. The
technology uses includes particulate ﬁltration, adsorption and ion exchange, and heterogeneous catalytic
oxidation, and employs rotary and rnernbrane-based gas/liquid separators. This combination of technologies has
been proven through many years of development testing and is robust in handling complex multiphase ﬂow in
microgravity. Drawbacks include expendable bed replacement and associated logistics penalties, and the higher
power and complexity associated With the high-temperature catalytic reaction process. The catalytic reactor has
also been susceptible to generation of particulates Which can impact valves and other components. A soft-stow
launch of this component and subsequent ﬂushing are planned to mitigate this risk.

D. Fire Detection and Suppression

The [SS Fire Detection and Suppression (FDS) system consists of distributed smoke detection and portable
C02 ﬁre suppression bottles (PFE). The smoke detector is based on photoelectric technology and detects smoke
through increased levels of obscuration compared to normal atmosphere background readings. It is a simple
design and proven reliable, but is somewhat susceptible to false alarm due to dust accumulation. The C02
suppressant was Chosen over other alternatives due to its effectiveness and ability to be removed easily by the
atmosphere revitalization system. Because C02 can reach toxic levels if large volumes of suppressant are
released, the [SS credible ﬁre zones must be partitioned into smaller volumes capable of being suppressed With a
single 6 1b. release of C02. Open cabin ﬁres not able to be suppressed by the PFE must be isolated and
depressurized.

E. Atmosphere Control and Supply

Components making up the Atmosphere Control and Supply (ACS) system on-board the [SS are high
pressure oxygen and nitrogen storage tanks for makeup gas, total pressure sensors, a vent and relief valve
assembly, and a pressure control assembly. Oxygen and nitrogen lines are distributed throughout the station to
supply the individual elements and equipment users. Emergency oxygen is available Via the use of portable
breathing apparatus Which can be connected to the oxygen supply system. This system is highly effective, but
currently must be resupplied either Via tank Changeout or by repressurization from the Shuttle Orbiter Via an
oxygen compressor assembly (ORCA).

III. Candidate Improvements to [SS Technologies

Given the strengths and drawbacks of the [SS technologies from the previous discussion, below are some
candidate areas of improvements that have been identiﬁed by MSFC and J ohnson Space Center (J SC) Space Station
ECLSS personnel. Thoughts are loosely organized according to primary beneﬁt — reduce resupply and
consumables, increase robustness/life/reduee complexity, or reduce mission vehicle resource requirements. It is
recognized that there are relationships and trades between these various factors, any of Which may be weighted more
heavily depending on speciﬁc mission requirements.

3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","A. Reduction of Resupply and Consumables

Even as resupply availability and capability to the [SS is a ﬁnite resource, one made even more constrained if
there is a loss of one of the cargo vehicles (Shuttle, Progress, Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV), HII Transfer
Vehicle (HTV)), as human spaceﬂight reaches further and prolonged destinations such as the moon and Mars the
reliance on resupply must be minimized. Resupplied items for ECLSS can include makeup atmosphere gases,
water, replacement parts for limited life and consumable items such as ﬁlters and pumps. On ISS, these items
represent a signiﬁcant yearly uprnass penalty, a parameter weighted heaVily in Advanced Life Support technology
and system trades. The following are several areas where improvements to the baseline [SS ECLSS in this area can
possibly be made.

1. Greater closure offhe air/water [00p — minimize losses

In the baseline [SS ECLSS, C02 and H2 are vented overboard from the resulting carbon dioxide removal and
oxygen generation processes. The addition of a carbon dioxide reduction system is a key missing link to Close the
air loop and recover precious water for crew consumption. The [SS ECLSS is scarred to accept the addition of a
Sabatier C02 Reduction Assembly (CRA) which would generate methane and water from the waste C02 and H2.
This system would recover 2000 lb/year of water for a crew of four and is currently at a development TRL of 5.
Because there is not enough stoichiornetrie hydrogen to reduce all the metabolic carbon dioxide with the Sabatier
reaction, the Sabatier CRA alone cannot completely Close the oxygen loop. An additional technology which either
pyrolyzes the resulting methane to solid carbon and hydrogen, or another carbon dioxide reduction technology such
as a Bosch reactor, must be utilized. These technologies are currently at an estimated TRL between 1 and 4, with
signiﬁcant development remaining to prove whether they would trade favorably over simply resupplying the
additional water not recovered.

While the planned [SS Water Recovery System is 93% efﬁcient in recovering potable water from waste water
(an average between the 85% efﬁcient urine processor and 100% efﬁcient potable water processor), there is room
for improvement in the amount of water recovered from the urine brine Via a brine post-proeessor. A key Challenge
for the brine processor is how to handle the solids effectively that will precipitate out of solution as more water is
evaporated. Technologies such as air evaporation appear to be attractive, as well as a system that may be able take
advantage of partial gravity for a lunar/Mars base application.

2. Decrease dependence on expendable beds

The Trace Contaminant Control Systern’s expendable Charcoal and post-sorbent beds are not regenerated in
place and must be periodically replaced. A regenerable adsorbent and catalyst substrate that is amenable to in-ﬂight
maintenance and addresses issues associated with pellet bed size attrition is emerging as a Viable improvement
solution. Development of metallic, short—ehannel length monolith substrates suitable for use in the thermal catalytic
oxidizer has been in progress since 1994.4’5 More recently, the metallic substrate has been adapted to adsorbent
media and initial ﬁndings indicate a nearly 70% reduction in trace contaminant control adsorbent bed size with
modest power consumption for regeneration.6 Near-terrn, the catalytic oxidation application of this substrate has
achieved a TRL of 6 and a preliminary design has been formulated for retroﬁt into the [SS is TCCS.7

The [SS Water Processor Assembly relies on expendable multiﬁltration beds to partially remove the contaminant
load in the wastewater. In addition, an ion exchange bed is required to remove products of oxidation from the
volatile removal assembly reactor. The associated resupply requirement is equivalent to 1040 lb/year. It is
anticipated that signiﬁcant reductions can be achieved over the baseline by employing a more efﬁcient catalytic
oxidizer in the cabin air system which would remove the bulk of the atmosphere contaminant load upstream of the
condensing heat exchanger, thus reducing the load remaining for the water recovery system.

Although the current service life analysis for the [SS cabin air bacteria ﬁlter elements predicts a replacement
interval of 2 years versus the initially expected l-year period 8, further improvements in particulate matter ﬁltration
may be required for extended operation of a habitat ventilation system beyond low earth orbit. The Challenge will
be to minimize the weight penalty associated with an expendable ﬁlter media, or to deVise an innovative method of
separating particulates from air without the use of expendable media.

3 . High Pressure Oxygen Supply

The high pressure oxygen gas storage system onboard [SS primarily supports EVA and if necessary provides
makeup metabolic oxygen. When depleted, these tanks must either be replaced or repressurized. Repressurization
from the Shuttle’s 900 psi cryogenic oxygen storage system to the 188 high pressure tank storage pressure of 2400
psi requires an intermediate oxygen recharge compressor assembly (ORCA). The ORCA has a limited life due to
wearing of its pumping diaphragms. Improvements to the ORCA to extend its life and improve pumping capacity
would minimize the impact of launch of replacement parts. Alternatively, a high pressure water electrolysis system
capable of generating oxygen at 2400 psi directly from an ambient pressure water source would provide additional
ﬂexibility without the need of a separate oxygen compressor. It is anticipated that the atmosphere control system for

4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","an exploration vehicle or habitat would have a similar requirement for a ready and reliable backup oxygen storage
system.
B. Increase Robustness/Reduce Complexity

Experience has shown that the more complex a technology, the more prone it will be toward failures. The
number of maj or components drives the number of associated sensors and effectors necessary to control and monitor
the system and meet safety fault tolerance and failure isolation requirements typical for manned spaceﬂight
hardware. The following are speciﬁc lessons learned from [SS ECLSS development history and associated
recommendations for future improvements.

1. Sensitivity to Particulates

A frequent contributor to [SS on-orbit problems has been sensitivities of various components to particulate
contamination. The generation, release, and migration of particulate matter are often substantially different in
microgravity than in l-g.9 If not properly accounted for in component design, unexpected problems can occur in
ﬂight. The following are some examples from 188 on-orbit experience:

Failure of the CDRA air-save pump, bed check valve, and selector valve resulted from small releases of
sorbent material from the packed beds. The failure manifested itself on orbit where the sorbent material was not
constrained by gravity and worked its way into downstream components. As a temporary solution, in-line ﬁlters
have been installed in the CDRA on-orbit to trap particulates and protect downstream components. A redesign
of the sorbent bed containment system is underway as a permanent solution to be implemented on the second
CDRA unit to be ﬂown on Node 3.

A similar failure occurred on the technology risk mitigation ﬂight experiment of the [SS Water Processor
Assernbly’s Volatile Removal Assembly (VRA) on STS—89. In that experiment, particulates generated within
the VRA’s packed-bed catalytic reactor migrated on-orbit to a pressure regulator and a membrane phase
separator downstream of the reactor, causing premature shutdown of the experiment. Post-ﬂight investigation
further revealed that migration of catalyst ﬁnes appeared to have occurred during pre-ﬂight ground testing but
went unnoticed due to the effects of gravity which masked the effects.

The unanticipated accumulation of a thick layer of lint on an intermodule ventilation fan’s inlet screen led to
degraded ﬂow on-orbit. The buildup was due to passage of small lint through the subsystems inlet ﬁlter screens
and subsequent aggregation into larger clurnps which caused the ﬂow blockage. As a result of the lack of ﬁne
particle settling in microgravity both the size distribution and quantity of particulate load differ substantially
from that upon which the ventilation system's inlet screen was designed. To resolve the problem on ISS, a duct
lint ﬁlter will be installed.

Ambient dust has caused the Node I smoke detector to trigger false positive alarms. Although the detector is
located behind the cabin fan’s inlet screen, dust is accumulating necessitating periodic cleaning by the crew.
Characterization and accounting for background dust levels must be accounted for, or an alternate, dust-
insensitive detector is needed.

Several failures have occurred during ground assembly and testing of the [SS Water and Urine Processors,
due to random particulate contamination of solenoid, check, or relief valves. Tightly-designed clearances in
these components make them more susceptible to even rninute particles generated during the manufacturing
process. Stricter cleaning processes have been implemented, along with installation of in-line ﬁlter protection.
In the future, trades between robustness of these types of components versus precision performance must be
made taking into consideration the likely particulate loading operating conditions.

2. Condensing Heat Exchanger Coating Degradation

The cabin condensing heat exchanger is designed with coatings to provide hydrophilic and biocidal properties.
Liquid carryover occurring in a set of heat exchangers in the US. Lab is believed to be due to a failure of the
hydrophilic coating, which is also believed to be releasing solids into the condensate stream when the heat
exchanger experiences frequent cycles from wet to dry. These solids end up fouling the downstream condensate
separator, check valves or ﬁlters. Degradation of the hydrophilic coatings through exposure to contaminants or
operating cycles needs to be accounted for in future systems designs.

3. Less complex, more reliable sensors

While the 155’s rnass spectrometry-based atmosphere monitor for major constituents provides stable, repeatable
measurements, it has life limitations associated with its ion pump and also requires a vacuum interface for startup. It
is a relatively large and complex piece of equipment for monitoring of only siX speciﬁc constituents. Simple,
optically-based sensors are emerging that can do the job with no need to maintain vacuum. Recent work in this area
has found fast-diode laser oxygen sensors, solid state infrared carbon dioxide sensors, and thin-ﬁlrn capacitive
humidity sensors to be Viable candidates for further consideration.10 Also, an array of single-analyte sensors targeted

5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","at speciﬁc trace species such as ammonia, formaldehyde, carbon monoxide, and oxides of nitrogen would greatly
enhance overall environmental monitoring.

Unlike open-loop spacecraft propellant supply and management systems which are charged with high purity,
very low dewpoint hydrogen prior to a mission, regenerative life support technologies generate and have to maintain
hydrogen containing traces of other gases and with high dewpoints. Stable, highly accurate hydrogen measurements
in the range required for reliable safety controls (typically 1% hydrogen in oxygen) are difﬁcult to achieve with
today’s technologies. Relatively short calibration intervals require frequent on-orbit replacement of these sensors
and represent a signiﬁcant logistics penalty. Stable, reliable sensors for this type of application are needed to
improve the current state-of—the-art for future systems.

4. Water Phase Organic Oxidation

The [SS Water Processor Assembly’s catalytic reactor employs a noble metal catalyst that has been shown to be
effective at oxidizing a wide range of trace organic contaminants in water in the presence of gaseous oxygen at
elevated temperature (275 F). However, system complexity is increased by the need to manage two-phase ﬂuid ﬂow
through a packed bed reactor in microgravity, by inherent power, packaging, and materials penalties associated with
elevated temperature operation, by the need to protect the catalyst from potential poisons through the use of
upstream expendable beds, and by the practical limit of the reactor’s oxidation capacity. A robust, single-phase, low
or ambient temperature catalyst with high oxidation capacity would be an attractive alternate which would both
simplify the process and reduce resource requirements. In-situ generation of the oxidant from the process water
itself could also provide beneﬁt over supply from stored tanks.

5. Passive Phase Separation

Membrane phase separators are an attractive choice for advanced life support designs due to their attributes of no
moving parts and low power consumption. However, surface properties of the membrane which are required for
proper functioning (hydrophilic or hydrophobic) are often susceptible to particulate, microbial, or organic
contamination, further aggravated in microgravity. Liquid condensation on the gas side of hydrophobic membranes
is also problematic and requires careful control of thermal gradients and dilution with dry gas. Alternate passive
phase separators which are tolerant of these conditions would be attractive.

6. Non-hazardous Urine Pretreatment

Pretreatment with chemical additives is required to chemically and microbially stabilize urine prior to
processing. Current pretreatment formulas rely on the use of toxic and acidic reagents which drive system design in
terms of hazardous ﬂuid containment, seal design for leakage control, and materials compatibility. Pretreatment
formulations which are based on nontoxic, neutral reagents would simplify urine processor designs. A method of
generating these pretreatment reagents in-situ from the constituents of urine itself would offer an added advantage.
C. Reduce Resource Requirements

In addition to reducing resupply requirements and increasing robustness, systems which minimize consumption
of vehicle resources such as initial launch weight, volume, power, and crew time for maintenance trade more
favorably, especially if these resources are Inission-limited, which has been the case historically.

By combining subsystems which have traditionally been treated separately, efﬁciencies in packaging, thermal
cooling, and power can be obtained. Care must be taken, however, to ensure proper system redundancy is accounted
for since, for example, a problem with one component can impact multiple life support functions at the same time.
Integrated, regenerative, carbon dioxide, humidity control, and trace contaminant control systems appear attractive
for next generation systems. Coupling the trace contaminant control and carbon dioxide removal functions into a
single atmosphere revitalization function along with a membrane-based process air drying stage has been studied.11
This concept uses the monolithic substrate for both the trace contaminant control and carbon dioxide removal stages.
The resulting system is fully regenerable, requires no process air pre-processing, and can provide high-purity C02 to
a Sabatier reactor.

It stands to reason that the previous discussions on reduction of expendables would also improve on-orbit
volume for spare component storage and crew time for replacement. Some of the suggested improvements in
robustness would also reduce crew time for repair, and in some cases reduce power requirements. These factors are
naturally related.

D. General Lessons Learned from ISS Development

Several more general, but key lessons have been learned from development of the baseline [SS ECLSS that

should be considered in future development efforts. One of these lessons is that even seemingly small design
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","changes made in the spirit of “improving” can often lead to unforeseen, negative consequences. In one example, the
development pressure sensor in the Urine Processor Assembly was manufactured from stainless steel and exhibited
stable performance over years Of testing. A change to inccnel was selected for the ﬂight system in order to improve
robustness in the pretreated urine environment. An unexpected drift in the ﬂight sensor reading was detected and
attributed to cffgassing 0f the inccnel in the sensor’s reference chamber. Similar drifts were experienced in pressure
sensors made from inccnel used in the oxygen generation assembly. A change back to the original stainless steel
sensor design is being made to both assemblies.

When a new technology is being developed, great attention is naturally given to the maj or components within the
heart of the system. However, in the course of ﬂight hardware development for the [SS Regenerative ECLSS
project, many times it has been the small, ancillary components that have presented the greatest challenges. Some
examples are check valves which required mods to springs, poppets, and valve bore surfaces to perform at the
required 10w cracking pressures, leaking relief valves which required process improvements in the seal molding,
faulty valve position indicators, water storage tank quantity sensors which required redesign of their potentiometers
to meet cycle life requirements, and solenoid valves subject to “sticticn” requiring redesign to increase solenoid
force. In development of the next generation ECLSS, care must be taken to thoroughly address all ancillary
components necessary for the complete subsystem so that these kinds of problems are not discovered so late that
they signiﬁcantly impact ﬂight hardware delivery schedules.

Another normal pitfall is the tendency to underestimate the effort and time involved in taking a subsystem from
what appears to be a fairly mature development stage (TRL-S 0r 6) to ﬂight hardware. We optimistically believe
that most problems have been solved in 1ab0rat0ry-type development testing and that the remaining task to produce
ﬂight hardware is relatively straightforward from that point. Also, it is human nature to project rather success-
criented schedules, neglecting to account for problems which, depending on their severity, may cause signiﬁcant
setbacks and rework. Depending on the corrective action, new 10ng-1ead parts may need to be ordered and the
design-analysis-drawing reView-rnanufacturing cycle repeated. When cne-cf-a-kind, prctcﬂight systems are built to
save cost over the traditional, qualiﬁcaticn/ﬂight article approach, additional schedule and cost risk is borne by the
project.

Finally, when trading subsystems at lower TRL’s, the additional burden of added sensors and effectors necessary
to meet safety critical and catastrophic hazard control requirements must be accounted for. Experience has shown
that a subsystem typically grows by at least 50% from the initial functional schematic to that necessary to meet
hazard controls. Depending on the inherent potential hazards of a particular technology, the impact could range
from relatively small to very signiﬁcant (e.g. packaging of the entire oxygen generation assernbly’s cell stack ORU
within a large pressure dcrne). Creative ways to manage hazards while minimizing the burden of additional
components, which adds another layer of complexity and decreases robustness, becomes even more necessary as we
plan for missions beyond 10w Earth orbit.

IV. Conclusion

Advances in Life Support System technologies can be categorized as either “evolutionary” 0r “revolutionary”.
While higher-risk, potentially higher payoff, revolutionary ideas should be pursued in parallel, evolutionary
advances over the current state of the art Offer a more logical starting point for the ﬁrst exploration spirals. The [SS
baseline ECLSS and associated lessons learned through development and on orbit experience has been discussed
along with suggested evolutionary areas of improvement for next generation systems.

References

lPerry, J.L., Cole, H.E., Crarnblitt, E.L., El-Lessy, H.N., Manuel, 8., and Tucker, C.D., “Post-Flight Sampling and Loading
Characterization of Trace Contaminant Control Subassernbly Charcoal”, SAE 2003-01-2487, SAE 2003.

2Murdoch, K., Smith, F., Perry, J., and Green 8., “Assessment of Technology Readiness Level of a Carbon Dioxide
Reduction Assembly (CRA) for Use on International Space Station”, SAE 2004-01-2446, SAE 2004.

3Hutchens, CF. and Graves, R., “Results of the Vapor Compression Distillation Flight Experiment (VCD-FE)”, SAE 2004-
01-2450, SAE 2004.

4Carter, R.N., Bianchi, J .F., Pfefferle, W.C., Roychoudhury, S., and Perry, J ., “Unique Metal Monolith Catalytic Converter
for Destruction of Airborne Trace Contaminants”, SAE 972432, SAE 1997.

7
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","5Perry, J .L., Frederick, K.R., Carter, RN, and Tatara, J.D., “Performance Demonstration of a Metal Monolith Catalytic
Converter for Trace Contaminant Control”, NASA/TM-1999-209262, NASA MSFC, April 1999.

6Roychoudhury, S., Walsh, D., and Perry, J ., “Microlith Based Sorber for Removal of Environmental Contaminants”, SAE
2004-01-2442, SAE 2004.

7Evans, T., “Design, Fabrication, and Test of a Developmental Metal Monolith Catalytic Converter for Trace Contaminant
Control”, NASS-40369-5152. Precision Combustion, Inc., North Haven, CT, August 2000.

8Thompson, D., “188 ECLSS Expendable Service Life Improvements”, SAE 2003-01-2492, SAE 2003.

9Chiramonte, ER, and J oshi, J .A., “Workshop on Critical Issues in Microgravity Fluids, Transport, and Reaction Processes
in Advanced Human Support Technology”, NASA/TM-2004-212940. February, 2004, pp. 14-22.

10Tatara, J .D., and Perry, J .L., “Spacecraft Cabin Atmosphere Major Constituent Monitoring Using Off—the-Shelf
Techniques”, SAE 2004-02-2541, SAE 2004.

“Mulloth, L.M., Perry, J .L., and LeVan, M.D., “System Design for Air Revitalization in Next Generation Crewed
Spacecraft”, SAE 2004-01-2373, SAE 2004.

8
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
