"","x"
"1","2009-01-2367
International Space Station United States Operational Segment Crew Quarters
On-orbit vs. Design Performance Comparison
James Lee Broyan, Jr.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Johnson Space Center
Melissa Ann Borrego
MEI Technologies, Inc.
Juergen F. Bahr
ERC Incorporated
This is the work of the US. Government.
ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION
The International Space Station (ISS) United States The International Space Station (ISS) Crew Quarters
Operational Segment (USOS) received the first two (CQ) provides an acoustically quiet and visually isolated
permanent ISS Crew Quarters (CO) on Utility Logistics area in which crew members can sleep, relax, and re-
Flight Two (ULF2) in November 2008. As many as four treat to a private area on board the ISS. These simple
CQs can be installed in the Node 2 element to increase functional requirements result in complex and competing
the ISS crew member size to six. The CQs provide crew sets of derived requirements for the hardware [1]. The
members with private space that has enhanced acoustic first two CQs were launched in a Multi-Purpose Logistics
noise mitigation, integrated radiation-reduction material, Module (MPLM) on Space Shuttle Utility Logistics Flight
communication equipment, redundant electrical systems, 2 (ULF2) in November 2008. These two CO were sub-
and redundant caution and warning systems. The rack- sequently transferred from the shuttle MPLM to the ISS
sized CQ system has multiple crew member restraints, Node 2, Harmony, equipment bay 5 port and starboard
adjustable lighting, controllable ventilation, and locations.
interfaces that allow each crew member to personalize
his or her CQ workspace. Four CQs will eventually be located in Node 2 to form
the “ring” configuration that is shown in Figure 1.
The deployment and initial operational Checkout during
integration of the ISS CO to Node 2 is described in this Current ISS Program plans are to launch a third CQ unit
paper. On-orbit to original design performance is also on ISS Assembly Flight 17A in August 2009 for in-
compared for the following key operational parameters: stallation in the Node 2 deck location. The fourth CO is
interior acoustic performance, airflow rate, temperature planned for launch on ISS Assembly Flight 19A in 2010
rise, and crew member feedback on provisioning and re- for installation in the Node 2 overhead location. Figure 1
straint layout. shows the on-orbit configuration for each CQ, including
the deployment of the pop-up (shown in magenta) and the
98 SAE Int.J.ofAerosp. |V01ume4 | Issuel

"
"2","Local mating hardware during requirements development.
vertical Additionally, several CQ project and design engineers
“ — ~ « _ ’ Node traveled to Kennedy Space Center (KSC) to view and
X _ standoffs document the flight Node 2 bay 5 hardware interfaces
/ prior to launch of that ISS element in May 2006. Finally,
I‘ Overhead t ¢ CQ used mating electrical connectors from the Node 2
_ ‘ ' '. , residual inventory to ensure compatibility. Yet despite
‘ this risk mitigation, the inability to perform an integrated
’ functional test with Node 2 has resulted in some minor
r—. on-orbit issues.
. I Part t“) Starboardl
\‘ f” The completed port and starboard CQs were scheduled
; ' to be shipped to KSC by the end of July 2008. However,
due to electrical assembly and test issues, only the
' structural elements of the C0 racks were completed in
t , '. I , , time to meet the required shipment date. Although this
‘ Deck was not desirable from an integration standpoint, the
x ‘ ., .a,’ /' rack structures were shipped, without electronics, to en-
. _ sure that the approximately 360 kilograms of structural
‘- ~’""’"" mass would make the launch schedule. Consequently,
‘ 'l' ' t Blue denmes the CQ structure and electronics were not inte t d d
‘-~ CQ racks grae an
Magenta denotes Brown denotes tested with their intended flight structure at the Johnson
00 pop-ups co bump-outs Space Center (JSC). Electronic assemblies were
completed just prior to installation of the CQ racks into
I I I I I I I the MPLM. Full electrical functional tests were
Figure 1. CQ location wnthin Node 2 Indicating the port performed using the deck and overhead CQ racks at
and starboard ”h'ts that were launched 0” ULFZ- JSC prior to shipping the port and starboard electronics
to KSC, thus reducing the risk of complications at KSC.
bump-out (shown in brown) units that contain ventilation Integrated testihg revealed an unanticipatedI t'IOW
equipment. These two hardware deployments provide both COHCIII’EIOH, which IIS discussed Im the on-orhlt activation
a real and a perceived increase in habitable volume over section that requnred mOd't'Cat'Oh 0t Oh'Orb't procedures
the standard ISS rack volume (shown in blue). but was not critical to hardware shipment. The electronics
were delivered and successfully integrated without
The ISS CQ racks and additional regenerative life sup- significant issues at the KSC Space Station Processing
port racks set the framework for increasing the ISS crew FaC'I'ty-
member complement from three to six. This increase in I
crew member complement will help provide the The hardware development schedule made flight hard-
capability for ISS to reach its full science research ware unavailable for crewtraining in an on-orbitconfigur—
potential. This paper describes how the C0 flight hard- ation. SIeveraI opportunities were providedI to the crew to
ware meets the original design intent, on-orbit View flight hardware components at yarlous manufac-
deployment activities, and initial crew feedback tUIth stages. Add't'Ohally’ the prevnously deyeloped
concerning CQ habitability. The ISS CQ provides an m'djt'del'ty mockup W33 avaIIIabIe for cemparison 9t
improvement in acoustic mitigation, thermal control, and baS'C assembly features. A3 th'S mockup d'd hOt COhta'h
electronics integration over the U.S. Temporary Sleep electronics, Checkouttralnlng could not be performed. The
Station in the laboratory module and the Russian flight hardware was therefore Checked for tool access and
Kayutas in the Service Module [11- sharp edges; it was then extensively coordinated to en-
sure that labeling and accurate crew procedures were in
place during development. Despite this, the inability to pro-
FLIGHT HARDWARE COMPLETION vide a fully functional, flight—Iike trainer contributed to some
on-orbit installation issues.
Schedule Challenges during hardware fabrication and
unanticipated test issues resulted in some modifications FLIGHT HARDWARE DESCRIPTION
to the flight hardware configuration. It is beneficial to
highlight a few of these schedule issues because they con- The flight hardware met the initial design intention.
tributed to some of the ground and installation issues. Figure 2 illustrates the CQ configuration for launch. Note
that this configuration differs from the on-orbit
Since the start of the ISS CQ project, it was known that configuration in that it reverses the bump-out and
an integration test, or a raCk-Ievel fit Check, between the retracts the POP-UP to meet MPLM rack envelope
CQ and Node 2 was not feasible because of the late requirements. The reversed bump-out is evident by
initiation of the C0 project. No CQ hardware existed at comparing Figure 2 and Figure 3- The retracted POP'UP
the time of the Node 2 launch. This risk was mitigated, is evident by comparing Figure 2 (no white material) and
however, by interaction with subsystem managers of Figure 4 (horizontal white material) or illustrated in
Figure 1 but without the magenta area.
SAE Int. J. of Aerosp. | Volume4 | Issuel 99

"
"3","pg_____.r* - T a ‘- .IT. I
III _ _II
_ prin- m, \t. p. 1
III: E III II I I II “ - I . I""
l 31' HI I :- retlar: cl .. _
| I' ""I 1 '- ' t
. '.'_I I I -: i
' i
| '.I§ I . I : II; I
r I I 3] - I .' '
:ll 5 "" - i |
- -—| I I I I 5:! ""
Bum -nut I I; . q- ..II .
""I 5' depﬂyed _. -'"" I-II
I_I 5_ _ 11 I -. I I_.-.t' B t I‘k_ I..- i
. .a um -uu .--1 «-
It reva- rIIIsed ’ h "" -
.t I I
P"" Figure 3. CO on-orbit configuration in a rack handling
r I - adapter (white tubular structure) during acoustic
- _ certification tests.
Figure 2. Launch configuration of 00 showing interior of p“
_ . . . I . FI-IJF
bump out Without acoustic blankets . . ii damaged
h... - ' -
The white squares of hook-and-Ioop fastener that are I .
shown on the structure allow attachment of the acoustic ' - _
blankets. The “raised” areas at the left side and the top
are the intake ventilation duct system. The white mesh at
the bottom is the blockage prevention net over the ex-
haust duct system. The intake and exhaust ducts each
contain one fan with a tachometer and air ﬂow sensor. The . . . f h . h
intake and exhaust fans are in series to provide :IguIre 4cIi SidefIVIetho CQ top 3 owmgt e pop-up
redundancy and optimize thermal performance [1]. ep oye CO” Igura 'On'
Electrical connectors, which are covered in protective
tape, are the power and signaII interfaces for fan status, Electronics within the 00 are centrally located on the
power conversion, and egress tlghtlhg- utility wall, thereby freeing up the back wall and opposite
side wall for crew items. Note that the si|ver-co|ored
Figure 3 shows the exterior on-orbit configuration of the back wall is additional UHMWPE material. The General
CO with the acoustic blankets in place. The on orbit Luminaire Assembly (GLA) on the side wall is mounted
configuration provides 2.1 m3 of interior volume for the on tracks to allow crew adjustment in Figure 5_ The
crew member. The black carbon fiber composite side computer work table (not present in Figure 5) location is
panel, WhiCh iS Shown on the left, is not exposed to the also adjustable along the tracks. The white fabric tab at
aisle on orbit. The intake screen for the ventilation duct the top is the handle for pulling down the pop-up_
is located to the left of the door. The standard ISS rack
power SWitCh (RPS) is located below the intake screen. The interior of the CO, with the white acoustic blankets
installed, is much brighter over an interior in which just
The on-orbit configuration 0f the POP-UP, WhiCh iS ShOWh electronics are installed over bare walls. Figure 6 shows
in Figure 4, provides additional interior volume and head a fully outfitted utility wall (except for the computer table).
room for taller crew members. The white plastic material Note that Figures 5 and 6 illustrate mirror image
is part of the ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene configurations of the 00. These mirror configurations
(UHMWPE) radiation shielding material that is present in maintain the local vertical orientation in Node 2 between
the pop-up and back wall of each CQ. opposing 00s [1] across the aisle way.
100 SAE Int. J. of Aerosp. |V01ume4 | Issuel

"
"4","W733???“ AudioAnnunciationDevices 3' ' . I
*1 5,. f \ ‘ (AAD)—ClasslAlarm Speakers m .33 .i
*3 ., .' ""2"";1“ T ‘ GeneralLuminaireAssembly j"" t w i . ‘ j: A N""; '\
H \h , ' g I, (GLA)andshade b "" _' “6%“ _
.. ,/ gét v I ‘1 v
W ; .515 «m I TestPanel E 7_ t
.-' -"" ‘ ; I J 1! E t Seat trackforGLAand J; ‘
I 'I I 1,! d .t' j bogenarmf-orcomtputer :""t V
I"" It AudIoTennInalUnIt(ATU) ‘ . ‘ gm ,_ - .
_ . . = r _. . I l tit Speaker jt 7t it ~”‘ L
|. --. I i]; ‘ 7‘ I ‘-
.- t. - yeghagsttsratztssgsttgnm; / / [ c i t
“,0- t tn 25* - .t .
i t i It ._ - . ﬂ Electncalpanel f, h; t
I > ’ tﬁ Electn'cal cables to bump-out ' .t it
t S‘Ilgz 'I]\ t it t
‘ t t; W,‘ ElectricalconnectorstoNode2 rut . -t 7, 2 .
| 2 Triple cargo transferbag (CTB) /
* -._ ' ‘ ;_ launch bag restraintstraps
’ ' (removed on-orbit) i
Figure 5. Location of C0 electronics without interior I '-
acoustic blankets. ; ""
t t; ‘5 _ it.' t 7 r V
11% ‘ {‘1 9t ,—- V . Lu. 7 t """"""T ..
vs 5 a .
' . _ -- Figure 7. Interior of C0 bump-out. The acoustic blankets
. i A t ' are covering all of the hook-and-Ioop fastener squares
t , ,‘ '1 that are depicted in Figure 2.
t. ‘t ‘32:» .
t ‘, t! FLIGHT HARDWARE VERIFICATION VS. DESIGN
' .. think Acoustical testing continued after the C0 critical design
- t ', .. review because early testing had indicated that there were
' _ ""’ ’ exceedances in portions of the acoustic requirement
- .. spectrum. Two design Changes were instituted as a result
of this testing. The first design change was the reduction
of exhaust fan speed by about 10 rpm below the intake
fan speed to remove an acoustic coupling with the intake
3+ fan. This coupling had caused a low acoustic “beat.” The
‘ i -. - \ second design change was the removal of the intake fan
/// i .,- ' elastomeric mounts. It was found that limited packaging
J t t ‘ . room for the fan in the available bump-out envelope did
not allow the elastomeric mounts sufficient freedom for
Figure 6. On-orbit configuration of C0 after initial dampening. The design SOIUtiO“ was simply to eapture
installation of blankets and electronics but without crew the Intake fan between the WC pieces 0f aCOUStIC foam
personal items. within the duct interior. One issue that was created by
this design solution was that the duct foam could not sup-
. . port the fan weight during launch. As a result, the intake
Figure 7 capthtes the V'eW that. a crew member WOUId fan was launched soft stowed, packed inside the C0
have when exntmg the (30- The Intake duct exhaust and stowage bag, and installed on-orbit. Although these two
yertlcal Iouyer adjustments are located at the top. The changes reduced the acoustical noise level, some
Intake fan '3 located to the ”th Of the door heh'hd the exceedances were still present at the time of delivery. The
upper panel. The duct to the hght Of the door '3 not fully CQ acoustic requirement is Noise Curve (NC) 40 which
covered With acoustic blanket to prevent Interference has acoustic levels defined for the eight octave bands
with the door when it opens. The small cutout in the between 63 Hz and 8000 Hz ranging from 64 dB to 37
blanket immediately above the door are the egress light- dB respectively. The acoustic exceedance in the 250-Hz
emitting diodes (LEDs).
SAE Int. J. of Aerosp. | Volume4 | Issuel 101

"
"5","octave band corresponded with the fan blade pass ON-ORBIT ACTIVATION
frequency, and the CQ exceeded the NC-4O requirement
in this frequency band by approximately 7 dB at low, and INITIAL INSTALLATION
approximately 3 dB at high, fan speeds. As previously
presented in Reference [1], the) overall ﬂOW rate was Detailed CQ installation and outfitting procedures were
intentionally limited to 2-7 m /min because 0f the developed prior to the arrival of the units on ISS, and are
diminishing returns in reducing the internal temperature outlined subsequently. The CQ racks were transferred in
and the increasing negative impact 0f higher flows on the launch configuration from the shuttle MPLM to the
eCOUStICS- ISS Node 2 and temporarily attached in equipment bay
5. Approximately one month after the two CQ units were
The CQ annunciates ISS alarm signals. To ensure that delivered to |ss on ULF2, the crew began deployment
the crew member hears the alarm, the level of these activities, activating the port CQ in mid-December 2008.
alarms must be more than 20 dB above background The starboard CQ was deployed in mid-January 2009.
noise. However to prevent potential hearing damage, The on-orbit deployed port CQ is depicted in Figure 8.
the alarm levels must be less than 79 dB absolute. The
CQ alarm levels from the Audio Terminal Unit (ATU) v?!”
Speaker exceeded the 79 dB limit, an exceedance that ' 7 ‘ >9- .. .I ,
was discovered after delivery of the first two 00s as part (“I . ""h _V
of additional integration testing on the third CQ at JSC. .9/ “mp” ’ I'
Further details are provided and ongoing mitigation of ‘ I . 5‘ .' J.“ ' -
the ATU Speaker alarm levels are discussed as part of I. i t 1""“ 1 I “3* 9- ' 4 ,/
the on-orbitcheckout. . t 9.“ 1 ‘ - ’ '
a: ‘ '
The interior flow rate uniformity requirement was slightly .9- '4 I ’6 E {R ;,39'
exceeded, as shown in Table 1. The intention of this re- Ilg , t :1 \j i '
quirement was to ensure that carbon dioxide (002) was i, g"": . _ _ 3%
removed in all portions of the ISS. Separate CQ ﬂow '1 ,- 'f‘it. r35? \""'
analysis indicated that there was adequate flow in all t’} I F
locations with all fan speeds, even if one fan failed to t ""j! ‘. 9
remove COZ. Additional analysis demonstrated that the J , ‘ 9.
CQ design met the intent of the requirement and ti ' ‘_ .. ....'
provided the basis for accepting exceedance of the «6. 9 ~ rI v.53).
requirement. ""1' “ {1.942.}: . 5i '“7
The CQ hardware was verified through a combination of _ .I . ~. - ‘ ;
measurements, analysis, and testing. In general, the CQ "" """" '
design met all of its functional requirements with a few I I I I
minor exceptions, including acoustics and labeling. Figure 8' Port CQ rack Installed on orbit 'n Node 2'
. . I I The CQ was converted from launch configuration (bump-
Table 1. Comparison of the actual CQ verification test out reversed and pop-up retracted) to on-orbit configura_
data to major prOJect requnrements. tion. After it was located in Node 2, the CQ was rotated
and the crew removed the pop-up bolts and shims that
W had been holding it during launch. The CQ was then
W ‘ returned to an upright orientation, the bump-out launch
mvmge S57W 55w bolts were removed, and the bump-out was removed from
oPeakpower sssow 156W the front of the rack and temporarily stowed. The cargo
W transfer bag (CTB), together with the outfitting hardware
::::::At::np°’::lrfe :33"": g'gzggL‘i’msspe‘Sedd that was launched on the floor of the CQ, was also
Carbon Dioxide b3?“ : gA'MmmHg 0:52mm:g@plow temporarily stowed. The pop-up was then deployed and
Venﬂlaﬁonﬂowrate ' the crew electrically interfaced the CQ to Node 2. The
oOverallFlowRate: 0.42-5.1m3lmin 1.6-2.7m3lmin Node 2 standoff contained pre-positioned electrical
olnteriorFlow Uniformity: 266%4.6-12mlmin ~66% 3.1-14mlmin Cables that were routed through access holes in the CQ
W ﬂoor. The six connections to Node 2 include two 120-Vdo
""memr’s'eepmg 5N0“ Egggfggﬁgdames power connections, two command and data handling
.lnteriorIsleeping 25.025 2NC.Z5 (C&DH) connections, one audio connection and one
-Exterior SNC-40 Egggﬁiceedances operations local area network (LAN) connection.
The interior acoustic blankets for the back wall, utility wa||,
sleep wa||, pop-up, and floor were installed after these
interfaces were connected, as shown in Figures 6, 7, 8,
and 9.
102 SAE Int. J. of Aerosp. |Volume4 | Issuel

"
"6","Crew Office, Mission Operations, and Human Factors at
. JSC. Despite this level of preparation, in the limited time
.*-’- "" ' f i that actual flight hardware was available not every instal-
; ' 4t lation detail could be fully reviewed. Some of these issues
t .‘ >3. __ . _ t . .. ""'_""j' ,.: became apparent during assembly and checkout.
t.- t“; ‘1’ . ate e; '_. "". “Ht""; One Issue was configuring the bump-out fasteners for
\( tat '\T§:-t -Jg_-_,t-;;3_’__: :ME“. t‘. _ A on-orbit use. All of the original bump-out launch fasten-
TN .._ Li. _..L t. ' \t ers were removed. Four of the bump-out launch bolts
3"" ’ h‘ . ’t "" ' ‘ were replaced with on-orbit bolts that were to be
.' ‘ tﬂl’t’:“ _ _, ‘t'r' t‘it-t,‘ . .
- ,_ Lam. _ . ___ _ _ ﬂit“ , \_ tethered by a small cable to a retaining screw that was
' Hg.- , it. ‘ -.t located on the sides of the 00 rack. The problem with
' _ . ,7 :.~ "" these bolts was the tether. Although it was easily
‘ ' t ‘ accessible for a stand-alone rack, the tether was actually
designed to be screwed to the side of C0 in the narrow
Figure 9- Installation 0f the POP'UP blanket (interior 0f space that lies between the two adjacent racks. Aligning
C9) Blanketaligns With white hook-and-Ioop fastener the tethered screw and using the screwdriver in this
strip on the back W3” Immediately above the snlver narrow space was not easily achieved in microgravity.
UHMWPE panel. The ends of the cable for the tether bolts were taped to
the rack rather than fastened. One of these taped
After the pop-up blanket was reinstalled correctly, the fastener locations can be seen in Figure 8. It is about 20
side and back wall acoustic blankets were installed to cm above the exhaust screen and affixed W'th orange
the hook-and-Ioop fastener pieces that are attached to tape to the vertical alluminum bump-out flange. Th'e
the C0 structure. CQ electronics were then removed Issue may have been discovered Oh the ground had the
from the CTB, including the electrical cables, GLA, Audio feature been. prQVIded on the mId-fndehty mockup durlng
Annunciation Devices (AADs), and 9-V batteries that crew familiarization.
were configured as previously shown in Figure 6.
Another issue occurred during installation of the intake
The crew thereafter installed the bump-out in the de- fan. This fan is designed to be installed between two soft
ployed configuration followed by the intake duct fan. The cushions of sound abatement. On orbit, the crewllnstalls
four bump-out cables that are between the bump-out the fan beh'hd an access panel. Th'e panel, .Wh'eh can
and the electrical panel were connected, and the C0 be seen on the left upper snde 0t F'gttte 2 W'th a Wh'te
was powered UP- After the C0 was powered up, the GLA |abe| In the center of panel, was deSIgned With captive
was turned on and the fans were switched from low to fasteners to accommodate installation and routine inspec-
medium, and from medium to high to verify fan control tions of the intake duct. The issue was the fasteners that
and airflow. The remaining internal and external blankets were used for the access panel.
were installed, and a “receive audio” check was com- ..
pleted on the ATU speaker. The final step that was per— Three of these fasteners are Philips head screws that
formed was to verify test panel functions_ are countersunk to allow clearance behind the door hinge
rib. These fasteners require a relatively high torque to
The Test panel provides a check of backup batteries, withstand launch yibration leads; but once on orbit, the
egress lights, and caution and warning (C&W) tones. fastener torque '3 not critical and can be snmply
Test Panel check out procedures verified a nominal tightened ”ht"" seated. Philips'head screws are also
operation of all functions. prone to damage If the screw driver IS not firmly Inserted
in them. The fasteners have easy access, both on the
ground and in orbit, after the door is removed. On the
Mechanical ISSUES ground, the technician can easily maintain contact and
alignment with the screws. On orbit, however, crew
Mechanical assembly of C0 was completed with few members must stabilize their bodies and actively push
issues; however, these issues that were encountered off a surface to obtain the same tool engagement force.
were less involved in technical matters and more This was not adequately communicated to the on-orbit
involved with conveying required techniques. The C0 crew. Additionally, the mid-fidelity mockup did not have
engineers were well-versed in the details of their design sufficient fidelity in this area to allow training of the tool
in 1-g, but had less opportunity for full evaluation of engagement technique. Consequently, two fasteners
integrated operations in microgravity. were significantly damaged during deployment of the
first CQ. After the damage had occurred, ground support
The development team had foreseen this situation, how- personnel provided additional clarification on tool
ever, and had formed integrated product teams to sup- selection/engagement and the need for crew members
port the various areas. Specialists were drawn from the to react to the engagement force with their feet against
the back wall of the C0. After these clarifications had been
made, the remaining screws were removed without
SAE Int. J. of Aerosp. | Volume4 | Issuel 103

"
"7","incurring further damage. Replacement fasteners for the toggle switch that is on the front of the CQ; it provides
two fasteners that were damaged will be flown on ISS emergency power shutdown (via MDM commanding) and
Assembly Flight 17A. prevents power from inadvertently being applied to a CQ
during scheduled or unplanned maintenance. The RPS
The acoustic blankets are designed to overlap the data signal was therefore monitored in real time on the
seams and cracks of the close-out panels and rack ground during CQ activation to verify the switch position
panel joints to block and adsorb noise and light leaks. for applying power to the rack. In the course of this
During blanket installation, the crew had an issue with monitoring, it was determined that signals to the MDMs
installing the first acoustic blanket on the pop-up. The were programmed in reverse, which meant that the CQ
procedures had not adequately explained the proper RPS “Off” position actually applied power (the “On”
initial alignment point for the blanket. This inadequacy position) to the CQ. Although this RPS operation does
was discovered after ground support personnel saw not impact CQ operation, the crew was instructed to re-
blanket gaps where the side wall blankets did not align label the CQ RPS (i.e., “Off” was labeled “On” and “On”
properly. The blanket misalignments and gaps between was labeled “Off”). This is a temporary fix until the Node
blankets, if unaddressed, would have resulted in an 2 software is updated to reflect the actual switch
acoustically louder interior. The correct alignment point positions.
was communicated to the crew, and the blanket positions
were adjusted. In retrospect, more detailed procedures Once verification of the RPCM was complete and the
and the addition of alignment marks on the CQ rack CQ was powered, the primary power feed to the rack
(rather than only on the approved operations was disabled to verify that the redundant feed would
nomenclature) would have benefited the crew. Figure 9 continue to supply power to the rack. This activity
is an example of a photograph that could have been in- verified that the “One Side Power” LED on the CQ power
cluded in the procedures to show proper alignment. supply would illuminate, and that, with one power feed
Additionally, some of the alignment issues could have down, the GLA and fans would remain functional when
been minimized had the hardware schedule allowed time solely powered from the redundant power line. The
in which the crew could have trained with the flight primary power feed was then reapplied to the rack, and
hardware. the crew verified that the CQ was receiving power and the
fans were operational.
Other lessons learned highlight what worked well. The
crew commented on the efficiency of packing the stowed To verify that the airflow sensors properly interfaced with
equipment in reverse order, so that the items that were the Node 2 MDMs, the airflow to the sensors had to be
to be installed first were at the top of the bag. It was sufficiently blocked. The sensors trig) when the airflow
noted that the preferred method of unpacking the CTB is falls below approximately 0.63 m /min. The sensor
to open the zipper only far enough to get the article out. functionality check is verified when the MDM success-
This eliminates the possibility of unrestrained items float- fully receives the blocked fan signal and sends alarm
ing away. signals back to the ATU speaker in the CQ to annunciate
alarms. A one-fan failure signal to the MDM causes a
System Checkout Class III (caution) alarm to annunciate in the CQ, while a
two-fan failure causes a Class II (warning) alarm to
During CQ activation planning, a nomenclature incon- annunciate.
sistency between the CQ/Node 2 hardware and the soft-
ware of Node 2 was discovered. The Node 2 and 00s For the one-fan failure test, the airflow to the exhaust
were built to specific requirements that were identified in sensor was to be blocked. The blockage prevention net
interface control documents. The Node 2 C&DH soft- from the exhaust duct area was to have been removed
ware similarly used a software-unique specification. The before the fans were set to high. The prevention net is
CQ specification is generic for all 00s [2], except for the purposely oversized to prevent inadvertent exhaust
Node 2 hardware [3], and software are referred to 00s blockage by clothing that may drift free. During checkout,
by sequential numbers rather than by the physical rack however, the prevention net was inadvertently left in
bay locations. Although the connections were physically place, thereby preventing the crew from sufficiently
compatible, this meant that three different blocking the airflow to the sensor. After the crew held a
nomenclatures were used for the CQ power conference with personnel on the ground and clarified
configurations. As indicated earlier, different hardware the procedures, the net was removed and the duct was
schedules did not allow for CQ and Node 2 hardware sufficiently blocked with plastic sheeting and taped to
integration to verify that the software and physical wiring restrict air flow below the 0.63 m3/min alarm trigger
of the Node 2 and CQ were compatible prior to delivery point. This blockage caused a Class III (caution) alarm to
and launch of that hardware to the ISS. successfully annunciate in Node 2 and in the CQ via the
CQ ATU speaker.
The result was uncertainty as to how the CQ RPS and
the Node 2 Remote Power Control Modules (RPCMs) The two-fan failure was created by blocking the airflow at
and Multiplexer—Demultiplexers (MDMs) would power the the intake in addition to the exhaust to annunciate a
00s in Node 2 and display power status. The RPS is a Class II (warning) alarm. During ground testing before
104 SAE Int. J. of Aerosp. |Volume4 | Issuel

"
"8","shipment of the 00s, the project team concluded that Since the direct method of blocking the airflow did not
the CQ duct system has several small air leaks along the work due to air leakage in the 00 system, the project
intake duct panel joints. The intake duct is approximately team developed an alternate, indirect method of check-
twice as long as the exhaust duct so leakage is more ing the transmission of the two-fan failed signal and
pronounced. These leaks make it difficult to create an receipt of the Class II alarm. Approximately 1 month
airflow blockage that will trip the airflow sensors and after initial activation, ground support concluded that
cause a two-fan failure situation. The system leaks are functionality could be tested by temporarily removing
only significant when the duct is blocked and the fan suc- power from the 00 via the RPS. Removing power from
tion pressure increases. The leaky duct system in the 00 the 00 also removed power from both of the fans and
creates a safer condition for the crew, however. This is both of the airflow sensors. This temporary power
because leaks in the system make it almost impossible interruption caused the 00 to send the required error
to completely block the airflow in the 00. If both fans fail signals to the MDM, which registered a two-fan failure and
there is no air movement and the flow sensors will successfully annunciated a Class II (warning) alarm in
trigger an alarm. As long as the exhaust fan is working Node 2 and in the 00 using the ATU Speaker This
air must be exiting the 00 because it is not a sealed workaround could have been minimized had the 00
rack. The air infiltration can come from multiple electronics been integrated to the structure at JSC rather
locations between 00 structural elements. If the intake than at KSC, where only very limited functional tests could
duct is blocked but the intake fan is still operating, leaks be performed.
in the intake duct help to mix the air within the 00. It was
verified, with computational fluid dynamic analysis, that To test the functionality of the AADs inside the 00,
the worst-case leaks (all emanating from inside the 00 several ISS systems were placed in “safe” mode so that
and away from the crew head position) still maintain the crew could simulate an emergency (Class I) situa-
sufficiently low 002 levels at the crew head position. tion. The test sequence had to be coordinated with
several ground support personnel, and the steps to
To cause the two-fan failure, the on-orbit crew needed to perform the test had to be clearly defined to avoid mis-
block the airflow at the inlet on the exterior of the bump- takes. Therefore, owing to the complexity of this test, the
out, at the diffuser that is inside the 00 and at the ex- AADs were not tested during initial system checkout.
haust that is on the interior of the bump-out, as depicted The checkout was instead combined with a similar test
in Figure 10. for the Waste and Hygiene Compartment to minimize
crew time. To verify AAD functionality, the crew
simulated an emergency situation by depressing the
- :55"" toxicity (“Tox”) button on the Caution and Warning
1. . p x System panel that is in the ISS. When this emergency
L } Diffuser -r ""I situation was simulated, the two AAD speakers that are
. L f” __ inside , L inside the 00 annunciated a Class | (emergency) alarm
-""-..---1.- - cu - ,_ ' as expected.
' - 5 ﬂ"": ON-ORBIT PERFORMANCE
__ _ | :1 "" Due to the limited availability of crew time on ISS, the
_ Lu]; . on-orbit checkout and validation measurements were
'-'- A. ?mi- ' conducted over several weeks. Acoustic measurements
"" T a l l of the 00 interior indicated about an 8—dB greater
_ . - LE“; reduction in acoustic noise than was measured during
5/5 '_ ' ' .,.- _ m3; J ‘ certification tests. The 00 verification tests on the
"" E“ "" L ""Li ground only used 00 hardware and a sleeping bag that
_ _ _ _ _ _ was mounted to the wall. On orbit, the 00, of course,
Air exhaustmsude CE} Air Intake on hump-out EItEl‘lDl‘ has additional crew items, Clothing, and stowage
present. The presence of these soft items probably
Figure 10- Areas in CQtO bIOCk airflow t0 the airflow contributed to the further reduction in noise level that
sensors. was observed on orbit.
Ground testing proved that the crew would have to pro- Alarm levels were also measured on orbit to help resolve
duce a very good seal, especially at the diffuser location, difficulties of coordinating external Node ATU settings
to block the airflow and trip the sensors. Blocking the mm the aCOUStIC levels that were produced by the In-
airflow at three locations on orbit with tape and plastic ternal CQ ATU Speaker during ground Integration teSt'“9-
sheets was unsuccessful in reproducing a two-fan fail-
ure. As this activity could not be completed on orbit, the Wpea—km
CQ activation could not be completed and 00 usage was
partially restricted. Desired external alarms and audio need to be recreated
inside the 00 since the purpose of the 00 is to block out
SAE Int. J. of Aerosp. | Volume4 | Issuel 105

"
"9","light and sound. Two Node 2 ATUs are located in the items. Additionally, D-rings, which are attached to this

aisle for communications and annunciation of alarms. A wall, allow large or oddly-shaped personal items to be

patchable extension cable is provided from each ATU. secured with elastic cords. Most of the stowage space is

The original design provided just this extension cable for located on the curved back wall of the CQ. The internal

a Crew Communication Headset Assembly (CCHA) design of the CQ provides an available storage space of

headset that is inside the CQ. Two developments approximately 0.28 m3, which exceeds the 0.09 m3

changed the efficacy of this design: The first was the requirement.

addition of a permanent ATU Speaker to announce

alarms at a fixed volume that is 20 dB above ambient to All of the features that are in the CQ can handle the ex-

meetsafety requirements. The second was the desire of pected crew loads and may be used as maneuvering

the crew to use handheld and portable microphones in- aids.

stead of headsets. The microphones are recognized by

the Node ATU, and the Node ATU output to the C0 However, the CQ design has a standard set of seat

varies depending on the type of headset that is plugged tracks installed on the floor. As this set is compatible

into the CQ ATU Speaker. with the ISS handrails, a handrail can be installed that
would stabilize a crew member.

To provide audible alarms at 20 dB above the background

noise, the gain of the ATU speaker had to be fixed based Seat tracks are also found alongside the door, on the out-

on an interpretation of interface specification because no side, for handrail installation to aid in ingress to, and trans-

flight ATUs were available on the ground. The signal, lation past, the CQ. Although the current crew seems not

Which was approximated from training hardware, ultimately to require this translation aid, the design feature is pres-

proved to be about 10 dB higher than the requirement. ent to allow for future crew preference

The other problem was that the ATU Speaker functional During scheduled crew off-time or crew sleep time, the

requirements to accommodate the baseline headset crew will use another set of restraints. This set is found

were not adequately defined for voice communication. inside the CQ, on the sleep wall, where D-rings are

The ATU Speaker had a conflicting alarm requirement mounted around the perimeter to secure the Russian

that necessitated that it is always on, so the alarms are sleeping bag or the U.S. sleep bag. When the sleeping

always announced for safety considerations. The signal bag/sleep bag is pulled straight against the flat wall, which

that the ATU Speaker receives from Node 2 is a compo- is the preferred sleep position, crew members will use the

site alarm/audio signal that cannot be separated out by extra headroom that is provided by the pop-up design of

the CQ. Consequently, the combination of ATU Speaker the ceiling.

and open microphone on the headset created feedback

from the ATU Speaker. FU” integration testing Of this Finally, initial on-orbit radiation measurements in both of

configuration was not possible before the hardware was the CQ units have been obtained. Early indications are

launched. As this feedback has been observed on orbit, that the CQ design provides a reduction of about 25% in

the crew has developed a workaround for PIU99ih9 ih the daily radiation dose, which is consistent with analytical pre-

headset to the external ATU Uhtil modifications to the dictions. Additional measurements are required to obtain

CQ ATU can be made. The resulting feedback should be a complete characterization.

eliminated through redesign and launched on ISS

Assembly Flight 19A. This issue could have been CREW FEEDBACK

avoided in the design phase; however, if audio opera-

tions requirements had been more specific, and the design First use Of the port CQ began in mid-December 2008.

COUtd have been validated if NOde SimUtatorS had been The f0rma| crew debriefing wi” occur approximately six

available. weeks after the crew returns (i.e., May 2009). However,
initial down linked feedback from on orbit indicates that

W the CQ was very quiet and spacious. Although there
were initial comments that the CQ was too warm, the CQ

One Of the 00 design requirements is to provide stowage design only permits control of the airflow rate to reduce

space for a crew member’s personal items. Some Of these the temperature-delta from the aisle. Investigation of the

items may be hUh9 Oh the W3”, while others can remain Node 2 temperature during the initial week of CQ use

ih the CTBS, WhiCh must be secured. M0Uhtih9 revealed that the Node 2 ambient temperate had not

accommodations, WhiCh include hook-and-loop patches, been decreased sufficiently to enable CQ comfort. Adjust-

bungees, and mounting rings, were developed ih close 00- ments have been made since, and there have been no

operation With the JSC Human Factors Team. When the further comments regarding the CQ being too warm_

crew member faces “fonNard” from the W8” that hOIdS The starboard CQ permanent usage began in February

the sleeping bag, most 0f the free space in front Of that 2009 and crew debriefing will occur about November

crew member is equipped with hook-and-loop patches to 2009

hold procedures and personal items. The wall that is to

the right of the crew member is also equipped with hook-

and-loop patches that are compatible with most crew

106 SAE Int. J. of Aerosp. |Volume4 | Issuel

"
"10","CONCLUSIONS ACRONYMS
The CQs provide private crew space with enhanced AAD audio annunciation device
acoustic noise mitigation, integrated radiation reduction ATU audioterminal unit
material, controllable airflow, communication equipment, C&DH command and data handling
redundant electrical systems, and redundant caution and CCHA crew communication headset assembly
warning systems. The ISS CQ design has been validat- 002 carbon dioxide
ed on orbit, marking the successful end of more than four CQ crew quarters
years of development. The on-orbit issues were the result CTB cargo transfer bag
of lost opportunities for integration tests and training C&W caution and warning
hardware that were caused by schedule constraints. This GLA general luminaire assembly
illustrates the importance of not omitting fulI-system ISS International Space Station
integration tests owing to program constraints. JSC Johnson Space Center
KSC Kennedy Space Center
Although only three crew members are currently on orbit, LAN local area network
by August 2009 the permanent ISS crew size will LED light-emitting diode
increase to six. At that point, an acoustically quiet and MDM multiplexer—demultiplexer
visually isolated CQ environment will be critical for MPLM multi-purpose logistics module
obtaining crew rest and comfort to enable long-term NC noise curve
crew performance and morale. Through replacement of RPCM remote power controller module
occasional acoustic blankets to maintain cleanliness and RPS rack power switch
periodic cleaning of the ventilation ducts and screens, UHMWPE ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene
the C0 will provide uninterrupted living arrangements for ULF2 utility logistics flight 2
the life of the ISS.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
REFERENCES
This paper summarizes the hard work that was performed
1. Broyan, J., Borrego, M., and Bahr, J., ""International by numerous JSC NASA and Engineering Support Con-
Space Station U303 Crew Quarters Development,"" tract project managers, design engineers, and analysts.
SAE Int. J. Aerosp. 1(1):92—106, 2009, Additional acknowledgement to the contributions of the
doi:10.4271/2008—01-2026. JSC functional specialists, engineers, and crew members
2. “Project Technical Requirements Specification for the whose frequent input was invaluable in ensuring that as
|ss Crew Quarters,”SSP 50781 Rev A, Jul 25, 2007_ much anthropometric and habitability functionality as
3_ “Node 2 t0 Crew Quarters |nterface Control possible was incorporated. The C0 project is funded by
Document,” SSP 50357 Rev A, Jul 12, 2007. the NASA JSC '88 Vehicle Office-
CONTACT
James Lee Broyan, Jr. can be contacted at JSC, Crew
and Thermal Space System Division, Mail Code EC3,
2101 NASA Parkway, Houston, 77058, 281-483-9351,
iames.l.br0yan@nasa.gov.
Melissa Ann Borrego can be contacted at
melissa.a.borrego@nasa.gov.
Juergen F. Bahr can be contacted at
iuergen.f.bahr@nasa.gov.
SAE Int. J. ofAerosp. | V01ume4 | Issuel 107

"
