"","x"
"1","46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2008-797
7 - 10 January 2008, Reno, Nevada
Emergence of a US Natlonal Laboratory on the
Internatlonal Space Statlon
Mark L. Uhran*
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Washington, DC 20003

The International Space Station (ISS) is rapidly approaching the long-awaited
completion of assembly. All US core elements have been integrated and tested on-orbit, and
the attention of NASA has turned to deployment of the European, Japanese, and Russian
laboratories. The fully envisioned configuration is on schedule to be completed as planned by
the end of US government ﬁscal year 2010. Section 507 of the NASA Authorization Act of
2005 designated the US segment of the ISS as a “national laboratory”, thus opening up use to
other US government agencies, US private ﬁrms and US academic institutions. In response,
NASA submitted a Report to Congress Regarding a Plan for the ISS National Laboratory in
May 2007. This paper recounts the major elements of the plan and elaborates on the
ultimate intent, strategic focus, and key aspects of tactical implementation. The original 1984
Vision of a robust, multi-mission space station serving as a platform for the advancement of
US science, technology and commerce will soon be achieved.

1. Introduction

The International Space Station (ISS) is a partnership among the nations of Canada, Europe, J apan, Russia and
the United States (US) to cooperate on the design, development, operation and utilization of a permanently occupied
civil space station. Assembly began with the ﬁrst element launched in November 1998, and the ISS has been
permanently crewed since November 2000. All of the principle remaining US elements of the ISS, as well as the
European and J apanese laboratories, have completed development, test and evaluation, and are awaiting launch at
the Space Station Processing Facility, Kennedy Space Center.

In a major space policy address on January 14, 2004, President Bush directed NASA to focus future human
space exploration activities on a return to the Moon as prelude to future human missions to Mars and beyond. The
NASA Authorization Act of 2005 (hereafter called the Act) also called for this renewed emphasis on space
exploration. Included in the new national Vision for Space Exploration are plans to complete assembly of the ISS
and retire the Space Shuttle ﬂeet by the end of ﬁscal year (FY) 2010. In calendar years (CY) 2006 — 2007, NASA
demonstrated its commitment to achieve the FY 2010 objectives by successfully completing six Space Shuttle
missions to the ISS. A $500 million NASA commitment was also made to obtain demonstrations of new US
commercial orbital transportation services (COTS). These commercial services are planned to support US
maintenance and utilization of the ISS in the post—assembly era after the Space Shuttle is retired from service. US
commercial transportation services are targeted to be available in parallel with existing and emerging space
transportation assets of Russia, Europe and J apan.

Along with concentrating NASA space systems development and operation efforts on space exploration, the US
research mission for the ISS was re—evaluated and subsequently re—focused primarily on requirements—driven,
exploration—oriented research. This research includes use of the ISS to develop, demonstrate, and deliver
technologies, biomedical counter—measures, and operational experience that will enable humans to withstand the
rigors of space and permit more ambitious long—duration exploration missions in the future. In addition, the Act
mandated that 15 percent of the NASA funds budgeted for ISS research be dedicated to non—eXploration oriented
ISS research. While this combination of research commits NASA as the “anchor tenant”, it also frees up ISS
resources (e.g., power, cooling, communications...) and accommodations (e.g., laboratory space and external
attachment sites) over and above NASA mission needs.

* Assistant Associate Administrator, International Space Station, Ofﬁce of Space Operations, 300 E St., SW/Mail
Stop 7P39, AIAA Associate Fellow.
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
092407
This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

"
"2","The Act also designates the US segment of the 188 as a national laboratory to be made available for use by US
public and private entities. The term “US segment of the 188” includes both US elements and US rights of access to
international elements as deﬁned in the ISS Memoranda of Understanding with the international partners. Through
this approach, basic and applied research that is not applicable to the NASA mission can be pursued by those
organizations whose own activities will directly benefit. NASA has embraced this legislative directive and launched
a broad 188 applications development initiative as a result. This paper summarizes NASA progress in this regard
and discusses the prospects for productive utilization of the 188 in the post—assembly timeframe. Initial encounters
with US government agencies have been positive relative to their potential use of the 188. To date, a ﬁrm interest
has been demonstrated in the areas of education, human health related research and defense sciences research.

In Section 2, the speciﬁc actions taken by NASA and the responses from these communities are discussed in
detail. In brieﬁ an interagency task force has provided a full report on the potential for using [SS to advance
science, technology, engineering and math (STEM educational Objectives; a Memorandum of Understanding
between NASA and the National Institutes ofHealth on use of the [SS has been signed; and, NASA is continuing to
reach out to the private sector as demonstrated by the August 2007 announcement of opportunities to US non-
government entities to use the ISSfor research & development (R&D) purposes. As these actiVities progress, NASA
remains confident that further applications of ISS capabilities will emerge in parallel with the reduction in perceived
risks resulting from: (1) completion of ISS assembly, and; (2) availability of next generation commercial space
transportation serVices. This reduction in risk will be key to the identification of sources of funding for non—NASA
use of the ISS.

NASA is carefully considering the operations plan during the ISS post—assembly period. Before determining ﬁnal
details of management structures and processes, it will be important to reasonably deﬁne the scope of future 188
applications. The nature of R&D is such that discovery can inﬂuence outcomes at any point in an endeavor. The
low—Earth orbit environment in which the ISS resides is a unique and relatively new human domain of activity;
hence, the opportunity for discovery remains rich and the effect on evolution of the national laboratory must be
compatible in terms of management structures and processes. The ultimate form of the 188 National Laboratory
management structure will depend on the functional breadth of the science and applications program. Several
models of successful national and international management systems are under consideration by NASA and the
NASA Advisory Council. Flexibility remains important at this early stage. In Section 3, several strategic
considerations are discussed, such as the need for NASA to continue as the executive agent for integrating interests
of other US government agencies that might not be inclined to work with a third party entity when seeking access to
a US government asset. NASA will also continue to explore the beneﬁts of an associated non—proﬁt, 0r for—proﬁt,
management entity for non—government access to the 188, in the event it becomes a valuable feature in the evolving
private sector space economy.

11. Progress in CY 2006-2007

Completion of the ISS assembly phase is now appearing clearly on the horizon in FY 2010. During FY 2005,
NASA recognized the need to focus attention on exploration—driven mission requirements for 188, and the
Exploration Systems Mission Directorate (ESMD) subsequently delivered a utilization plan to the Congress. 1
Following closely, the Space Operations Mission Directorate (SOMD) launched an applications development
initiative directed toward public and private sector organizations having potential uses for the 188 as a national
laboratory. In the context of this initiative, NASA is seeking partnerships with other government agencies... as well
as the commercial sector to conduct research 0n-b0ara’ the [SS ”.2

In order to organize and expeditiously address the challenge of transition from the assembly phase to a national
laboratory utilization phase, it was ﬁrst necessary to step back and consider future 188 schedule milestones that will
affect the operation and longevity of the facility and its various components. Within this context, the objective
became clearly defined and constraints were established from national policy and technical perspectives.
Development of an executable strategy followed that included a series of near—term tactical initiatives for achieving
the objective. As a result of the work accomplished, NASA has made a number of preliminary ﬁndings that can
guide the future development and evolution of a framework for 188 National Laboratory operations. The following
sections discuss each of these aspects.

\

2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
092407

"
"3","A. Schedule Milestones

The design life of US 188 elements is defined in system specifications as 15 years from the time of deployment
of the element on orbit. Since elements are deployed sequentially during the assembly period, the launch of the US
Laboratory module Destiny, in February 2001, is most frequently cited as the nominal reference point for beginning
the ISS lifetime. Formal life cycle costing studies to date have thus reﬂected FY 2016 as the corresponding
milestone for completion of program operations. Nonetheless, past operating experience with both human—rated and
robotic spacecraft clearly indicates that systems are capable of performing safely and effectively for well beyond
their original design lifetime. Service life can be extended dependent on actual operating experience and the selected
approach to maintenance and refurbishment. The 188 program is proceeding with the analyses necessary to extend
serVice life if warranted.

Operation of the US Laboratory beyond 2016 implies extension of the certiﬁed design lifetime. This will require
analyses and tests at additional cost, so a decision on whether or not to pursue serVice life extension will be required
in the FY 2014 timeframe, in order to allow sufﬁcient lead—time to conduct the work needed to validate the
extension. Such a decision would be rationally based on a determination of the beneﬁt and cost prospects for
extended ISS operations at that time. Options available for re—supply logistics and maintenance would be important
factors, as would be the desires and capabilities of the international partners.

Considering that Station assembly is scheduled to be complete by the end of FY 2010, a four—year period exists
during which the 188 will be able to demonstrate its value as a national laboratory, or as a platform for further
NASA mission applications. Four years (FY 2011 through FY 2014) represents a relatively short operations period
considering the lead times necessary to deﬁne, ﬁnance, organize and produce high—Value, space—based missions.
Therefore, it becomes important that any entity which intends to use the ISS take judicious steps during the FY 2007
— 2010 preparatory period in order to be operationally ready for 188 utilization at the conclusion of assembly.

Each of the major future milestones discussed above are illustrated below.

M M M m M NJ M w M ﬂ M
V V V V
National Assembly Service Current
Lab Complete Life Design
Plan & Extension Life End
Shuttle Decision
Retirement
C0st:Beneﬁt
Demonstration
(4 years)
Preparatory Window
Figure 1. Major ISS Program Milestones
B. Objectives and Constraints

Over the past decade, several program ofﬁces at NASA headquarters have examined and evaluated the possible
uses of the 188 in the post—assembly timeframe. Explicit in these studies were corresponding utilization management
structures and alternate approaches to recruiting, selecting, ﬁnancing, producing and performing utilization
missions. Numerous external, expert sources were also consulted and their ﬁndings thoroughly documented. As a
result, an extensive body of work is readily available to inform NASA’s current initiative.3

Explicit in all prior efforts were statements of objective. In reviewing this history, a persistent theme emerges
that is consistent with the current policy to operate a portion of the 188 as a national laboratory. This common theme

3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
092407

"
"4","is to develop a diversiﬁedportfolio ofproduetive research and application projects that exploit the unique attributes
of the [SS and contribute to US scientific and technological leadership and economic growth. In the course of
pursuing this objective, a limited set of NASA constraints must also be taken into consideration. Following the
return—to—ﬂight of the Space Shuttle, the completion of the 188 is the next step in the Vision for Space Exploration.
The NASA mission for the 188 is to enable exploration—driven research that supports the Vision. Thus, NASA uses of
the Station to enable the exploration mission must command top priority. Since the 188 was originally designed to
accommodate multiple, concurrent mission applications, its capacity is robust and also capable of supporting non—
NASA utilization mission obj ectives.

Due to the ﬁscal challenges of mounting a human and robotic space exploration program, while also sustaining a
Vigorous aeronautics research program, NASA must rigorously apply all available spending authority to its own
Agency mission. For this reason, funds necessary to carry out the missions of other public or private entities must be
funded by those entities, so as to avoid impacting the primary missions of NASA. As operators of the ISS and
stewards of this new national laboratory, NASA remains committed to covering the annual cost of ISS operations
and maintenance for as long as the beneﬁts to the nation are justiﬁable. NASA is also resolute in its plan to employ
the 188 to advance research on human physiology, in order to enable the long duration human space ﬂight missions
of the future.

C. Strategy and Tactical Initiatives

The principal element necessary to successful operation of the 188 National Laboratory is a body of external
organizations that are knowledgeable and prepared to undertake and fund missions in space, i.e., qualiﬁed end—users.
Therefore, while continuing to define and evaluate potential management structures for the national laboratory, the
NASA strategy is to focus early eﬁ’orts 0n identiﬁ/ing qualiﬁed end—users from the public and private sectors. In
order to ensure Visibility and sustain advocacy at the highest levels of NASA leadership, the ISS management and
applications development initiative is being directed at the Headquarters level by the Associate Administrator for
Space Operations, and is under the direct cognizance of the NASA Administrator. The NASA Advisory Council is
also actively engaged through periodic review and assistance in opening dialog with Viable end—user communities,
as well as in providing independent evaluations of potential management structures and processes.

Due to the complexity and potential hazards of space ﬂight, written agreements must be employed to deﬁne key
aspects of all relationships. In the public sector, agency—to—agency memoranda of understanding (MOUs) are used,
while Space Act agreements (SAAs) accomplish a similar purpose in private sector arrangements. All such
agreements will be formulated in strict accordance with statutory law and national policies. Close review will be
coordinated with the NASA Headquarters Office of General Counsel on legal aspects, and the 188 Program Ofﬁce
in Houston, Texas will review and validate all technical requirements involving the use of government furnished
equipment and facilities, ISS physical accommodations, and 188 utilization resources during the pre—ﬂight, on—orbit
and post—ﬂight phases of the mission.

The tactical initiatives that support this strategy fall into three general categories, each of which are discussed
below:

° Public / Private Sector Initiatives in Education;

° Public Sector Initiatives in Research; and,

° Private Sector Initiatives in Applications.

D. Public / Private Sector Initiatives in Education

NASA shares with the Administration and Congress a belief that education is the gateway to opportunity and the
foundation of a knowledge—based, innovation—driven economy. “Accordingly, we are preparing the pathwayfor the
next generation with great anticipation. T hese ‘explorers and innovators 0f the new millennium ’ mustfully represent
our Nation’s vibrant and rich diversity. Furthermore, we will support our Nation’s universities, colleges and
community colleges by providing exciting research and internship opportunities that ‘light the ﬁre’ and ‘fuel the
passion ’for a new culture oflearning and achievement in STEM”.4

Stimulating youth to pursue STEM education with a View toward careers in scientific and technological
vocations represents a growing national challenge.5 The exploration of space has consistently been an area of
fascination and excitement for young minds, and the 188 represents the most recent US government program to
bring the stimulus of human space ﬂight into classrooms at all levels of the educational system. During the ﬁrst 10
expeditions to the ISS, almost a million students participated in some form of educational project involving
interaction with the station or astronaut crew. Successful educational projects have ranged from classroom versions
of experiments to “Saturday morning science” hosted live by the 188 Science Officer. In the case of televised

4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
092407

"
"5","educational demonstrations, over 30 million students have had the opportunity to receive downlinks from the [SS
that are broadcast via networks across the country.

In recognition of this 188 potential, the NASA Ofﬁce of Education established an interagency task force
consisting of representatives from the educational ofﬁces of siX US government agencies (Department of Education,
National Science Foundation, Department of Energy, Department of Defense, National Institutes of Health, and
National Aeronautics and Space Administration). The task force’s deliberations were further informed by
consultations with a wide variety of private sector educational associations and industry trade groups. Meeting
periodically during CY 2006, the task force evaluated future prospects for use of the 188 as an educational asset in
their ongoing programs. In collaboration, an ISS National Laboratory Education Concept Development Report was
produced, in which the task force concluded from its ﬁrst phase of discussions that there is signiﬁcant interest
among F ea’eral agencies in the opportunity to further develop the [SS as an assetfor education.6 The opportunity for
private sector participation in supporting various features of the ground—based portions of ISS—based educational
projects was apparent.

Over and above the need to develop educational content, the capability to transport student equipment and
produce collateral educational materials was examined at length. It was clear that the availability offuna’ing for
space transportation services is the principal obstacle to expanding a high-value [SS education program. As a
result, representatives on the interagency task force can resume their efforts once such funding becomes available.

E. Public Sector Initiatives in Research

US government agencies are strong contributors to research in areas germane to their respective missions. The
188, in turn, offers a unique and only recently accessible natural environment in which to conduct scientifically
relevant experiments across the biological, chemical and physical research spectrum. Prior space experiments
conducted under NASA sponsorship, and frequently involving other government agency investigators, have
produced positive results that suggest the opportunity for meaningful advances in a variety of ﬁelds.7 However,
these ﬁelds are not all closely associated with NASA’s recently focused mission of space exploration.

In recognition of the potential value of the 188 to support missions of other US government agencies, the NASA
Administrator issued a letter of inVitation to the US Secretaries of Energy and Commerce, and to the Directors of the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the National Science Foundation (NSF).8 A response was received on the
behalf of the NIH Director.9 Based on the positive results of prior space biotechnology research, coupled with
NASA’s ongoing program in human biomedical research, the Chairman and members of the NASA Advisory
Council (NAC) organized a multi—agency meeting in December 2006 on Space Related Health Research.10 The
goals of the NIH—hosted event were to share information across key Federal agencies about space—related health
research interests and activities, and to identify potential opportunities for collaboration to facilitate future research.
Representatives from ﬁve Federal agencies attended to hear about research opportunities on the 188 in the new role
as a national laboratory. During a round robin session, over a dozen briefings were offered on current areas of
applicable research, and future interest areas of the NIH, NSF, Food and Drug Administration (FDA), National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), and the US Department of Agriculture (USDA). As a result of the
December 2006 meeting, NASA and NIH have signed an MOU that will provide a frameworkfor NIH to encourage
use 0fthe [SS as a national laboratory.“

In addition to scientific research pursuits under civilian programs, NASA maintains a close ongoing relationship
with allied interests in the defense sciences research community. Each year a Space Experiments Review Board
meets to evaluate and recommend candidates for future US Department of Defense (DOD) space missions under the
Space Test Program (STP). During the November 2006 meeting of the board, the 188 National Laboratory
opportunity was reviewed by military leaders from all services. NASA re—afﬁrmed its commitment to continue to
accommodate defense sciences research in accordance with existing defense policy guidance.12 To date, the DOD
STP has ﬁelded multiple missions employing the ISS, and further missions remain on the drawing board scheduled
for future ﬂight opportunities.

For both ciVil and defense agencies involved in research and development (R&D), there is a thorough
understanding of the technical challenges associated with design, development, test and operation of space—based
missions. In the case of the ISS, funding for space transportation services remains the single greatest barrier to
ﬁelding a productive public sector program in research. Transportation can represent the greatest cost component in
space R&D; thus, the ability to acquire transportation services will directly affect the success of 188 as a national
laboratory in the years to come.

5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
092407

"
"6","F. Private Sector Initiatives in Applications

There are numerous forums engaged in advocating commercial space development in an effort to stimulate a
new space economy. All involved recognize the pivotal role that affordable space transportation plays in closing the
business case for any private sector venture. To this end, NASA has committed $500 million for the demonstration
of commercial orbital transportation serVices (COTS), and created a government market for such serVices by the
demand inherent in maintenance and utilization of the 188.

In the past, private ﬁrms have demonstrated interest and participated in space research across topics as diverse as
molecular biology, tissue culturing, bone demineralization, antibiotics production, plant genetics, combustion
synthesis, and ultrahigh vacuum and microgravity processing of materials. Increasing the frequency and
predictability of access to space, in order to sustain consistent progress toward a research objective, has proven to be
a necessary requirement for success. NASA looks forward to COTS demonstrations by the end of this decade that
will satisfy this requirement.

In addition, NASA continues to explore the potential for agreements with private sector ﬁrms that involve use of
ISS accommodations and resources as test beds for engineering research. Although numerous discussions have taken
place on topics as broad—ranging as test beds for electric propulsion, laser—optic communications and wireless power
transmission, it is premature to identify commercial end—users that are fully prepared to undertake the risks
associated with future space missions. The perception of risk is related to two factors: (1) remaining challenges in
the ISS assembly process, and; (2) uncertainty in the future price and availability of space transportation services. As
these uncertainties fall away toward the end of the decade, conﬁdence can rise and private sector interest in use of
the 188 National Laboratory can then develop.

During the period leading up to 18$ assembly completion and COTS demonstration, NASA will continue to
participate directly in discussions with private ﬁrms and host sessions under the sponsorship of industry trade
associations. This participation has been demonstrated by NASA’s attendance at a May 2006 Commercial Space
Forum and an October 2007 [SS National Laboratory Workshop both organized by the California—based Alliance for
Commercial Enterprise in Space. In addition, NASA organized a January 2007 Special Session an ISS a New
National Laboratory at the 45th Annual Aerospace Sciences Meeting, which was sponsored by the American
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. In CY 2008 efforts are underway to work with the National Chambers of
Commerce and facilitate linkages between space entrepreneurs and industry sponsored investor forums.

In August 2007, NASA also issued an announcement of opportunities for non—government entities to use the 18$
for R&D and industrial processing purposes. Several qualiﬁed responses were received and NASA intends to pursue
Space Act agreements with those parties early in CY 2008. Due to the proprietary nature of information involved in
these discussions, it is not appropriate for NASA to elaborate at this time. However, it was not surprising to ﬁnd that
interests remain strong in the general area of biotechnologies.

Finally, the model of procuring commercial services, instead of ﬁnancing government—developed systems, is
emerging strongly now that the COTS approach is setting the precedent. Based on this promise of success, NASA
hopes for commercial water production services on the ISS utilizing the Sabatier process for recovery of carbon
dioxide and hydrogen efﬂuents from the environmental control and life support system. Rather than develop this
important future capability under a government—funded program, NASA is pursuing a contract with a commercial
supplier of the serVice. This initiative is designed to expand the market for commercially supplied services to the
188.

III. Preliminary Findings

The past two years were a very active year both from the perspective of advancing ISS assembly, with siX
successful Space Shuttle missions in an 18—month period, and in terms of implementing an applications development
initiative consistent with designation of the 188 as a new national laboratory. In order to sustain progress on this
latter objective, it will be important to recognize and directly address the rate—limiting parameters that are applicable
for each of the tactical initiatives.

° The Public/Private Sector Initiative in Education can build on signiﬁcant interest among Federal agencies in the
opportunity to further develop the 188 as an asset for education. Fortunately, the cost of educational projects is
an order—Of—magnitude less than that of most R&D efforts. Regardless, public funding for space transportation
services will be necessary to achieve the potential.

6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
092407

"
"7","° The Public Sector Initiative in Research will be paced by ongoing evaluations made by US government
agencies. Although much experiment equipment is already available, public funding for space transportation
services will be necessary to enable these research programs.

° For the Private Sector Initiative in Applications, progress is dependent on a reduction in the perception ofrisk
due to remaining assembly challenges and the cost and availability ofspaee transportation services. As these
milestones are achieved and perceptions change, business cases will emerge at acceptable risk levels for
products and services commercially supplied, instead of government developed.

The rate—limiting parameters for success are not related to the ability to form public, or private, partnerships ——
NASA has the necessary instruments of agreement (e.g., MOUs, SAAs, contracts, grants, cooperative agreements)
and has consistently demonstrated the ability to apply these tools effectively in cases where mutual benefits and
responsibilities can be identiﬁed. Once the range of qualiﬁed and committed end—users becomes clear, the
management structure can be tailored to meet specific needs, and leverage to the maximum degree practical existing
management practices of respective end—users. NASA, in coordination with the NASA Advisory Council, will
continue to examine future options for management structures in parallel with end—user identiﬁcation.

The availability of an experienced workforce and ground—based assets is, likewise, not a pacing item. These
resources can be applied on a case—by—case basis in accordance with speciﬁc needs and terms of partnership
agreements.

The rate—limiting parameter for success is affordable and reliable space transportation services to and from the
188. The availability offundingfor transportation services will directly aﬂeet the ability 0fthe [SS to operate as a
national laboratory in the years to come. In the absence of such resources, uses will be limited to the achievement of
NASA space exploration mission objectives. In order to fully evolve in the capacity of a national laboratory, public
funds will be required and private investments will be needed to pursue non—NASA objectives.

As the plan for operating the 188 as a national laboratory evolves, the composition of the end—user communities
will affect the outcome. The future management structure will rationally reﬂect practices of the public and private
sector sponsors of ISS missions. If the range Ofsponsors is broad and diverse, a new management authority may be
required.

With these considerations in mind, the following section provides a broad outline for a preliminary “operations
plan” as was requested by the Congress. The emphasis is focused on ﬂexibility to respond to the environment as
practical considerations, such as other government agency spending authority and cost of commercial space
transportation systems, come to bear on the situation at hand. Lastly, it is worthwhile to recall that the nature of
R&D is such that discovery can inﬂuence outcomes at any point in an endeavor. The low—Earth orbit environment in
which the ISS resides is a unique and relatively new human domain of activity; hence the opportunity for discovery
remains rich. The route ofdiseovery may well direct evolution 0fthe national laboratory structure.

IV. Preliminary Operations Plan

A. Research Plans and Partnerships

NASA remains committed to the 188 as its primary analog for long—duration space missions beyond low—Earth
orbit. As articulated in the NASA Research and Utilization Plan for the ISS, NASA has re—focused its 188 research
to meet agency exploration needs. As humans venture further into space, the next generation of long—duration human
exploration missions will need:

° Crew that can withstand the rigors of space;
° Spacecraft systems with high reliability and maintainability; and
° Operational experience at the crew—systems interface.

The research and utilization plans of potential future public or private sector entities are not known and cannot
be fully predicted at this stage. Due to the national laboratory initiative, NASA is now in the process of pursuing
MOUs with other Agencies, such as the NIH, regarding frameworks for potential future uses of the 188. Once these
MOUs are formalized, potential US government—wide interests in using the 188 will be better understood. Since
each MOU serves as a model for the next, valuable lessons are anticipated as the 188 National Laboratory evolves
from concept to practice. Administrative aspects will be elucidated and “best practices” can be brought to bear on
future management structure and processes.

7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
092407

"
"8","B. Workforce and Ground-Based Assets

US Government workforce and ground—based assets can be made available in accordance with the negotiated
terms of new MOUs and SAAs, and within the boundaries of existing international agreements. The speciﬁc terms
depend on the obj ective and perceived beneﬁts to the parties of each unique agreement.

In addition to ground—based assets, NASA continues to maintain ﬂight equipment that was originally developed
to conduct research on the 188. In some cases, this equipment currently resides on the 188, while in other instances it
may be awaiting ﬂight, or ﬂight plans may have been suspended due to changes in the NASA research program.
Such equipment can also be made available under terms of specific agreements. A master list of available equipment
is maintained by the ISS Payloads Ofﬁce and available for reView.13
C. Management Structures

NASA researched possible government and non—government organizations weighing the positive and negative
attributes of each model to enhance ISS utilization. An independent reView of potential management structures is
also underway by the NASA Advisory Council. Based on NASA’s research, much of which is captured in a recent
report by the Congressional Research Service.14 NASA has determined the best approach for the 188 National
Laboratory, in the event of growing interest from a non—government community, would be through a phased
transition.

In Phase I, which is already underway, NASA will continue to operate the 188 National Laboratory with a focus
toward identifying qualified and committed end—users and putting in place agreements for the post—assembly time
period. NASA will establish a small project ofﬁce within the Space Operations Mission Directorate at NASA
headquarters to work with other US government agencies and the private sector. Much of this work has begun
already. NASA has been in contact with other Federal agencies and private firms, and is continuing to coordinate
informational sessions to discuss opportunities for access to the 188 National Laboratory.

In Phase II, provided non—government demand for access to the 188 National Laboratory evolves to a scale that
warrants, NASA could establish an institute, or other cost—effective entity, to manage opportunities for non—
government organizations that are pursuing applications unrelated to the NASA mission. At the strategic and tactical
levels, NASA would work closely with such an institute or entity to facilitate the integration of its applications
portfolio with NASA’s ongoing research mission, and within the overall availability of US accommodations and
resources on the ISS.

NASA currently considers an institute to be the preferable organizational structure for management of non—
government interests in the 188 National Laboratory because it provides the greatest ﬂexibility to evolve in parallel
with potential future scientific, technological and commercial interests. It is an organizational body created for a
deﬁned purpose, which can operate either as a for—proﬂt or nonproﬁt entity. It could be created by contract,
cooperative agreement, grant or other transaction (SAA). However, other organizational structures are available and
will be examined in further detail prior to implementing Phase II.

NASA will continue to be the executive agent for other government uses of the 188. In this manner, NASA will
also ensure that the 188 is operated as a national laboratory within the boundaries of all precedent international
agreements.

V. Conclusion

The 188 continues to be an important destination and laboratory for exploration—focused NASA research.
Research into the effects of micrograVity on the human body, and reliable counter—measures for these effects, is
ongoing and will continue for the foreseeable future. In addition, 188 affords a unique facility to perform technology
demonstrations for future incorporation into NASA space ﬂight systems.

The prospects for use of the 188 by other Federal entities are also promising. The work conducted to date indicates
interest is already strong in the areas of human health research, defense sciences research and projects designed to
advance national STEM educational objectives. In each of these cases, other US government agency spending
authority may be necessary.

At this early stage, the perception of risk on the part of non—NASA entities remains high due to two factors: (1) the
ISS assembly challenge that remains between 2008 — 2010, and; (2) the need for demonstration of next generation,
lower cost commercial space transportation serVices by the close of CY 2010. As this decade comes to an end, the
perception of risk should decline and additional interest in the use of the 188 will emerge.

Steps taken in the 2007 — 2010 preparatory period will determine the outcome of the 2011 — 2014 utilization
period. This will position the US government for a sound decision on 188 lifetime in consideration of the beneﬂt—to—
cost trade that NASA must finalize in the 2014 time frame.

8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
092407

"
"9","To close, the prospects for productive ISS utilization are extraordinary if one considers the long View of science
and technology in history. For example, in the second half of the 19th century, scientists first began understanding
the true properties of vacuum and in 1855 Heinrich Geissler produced the world’s ﬁrst vacuum tubes. The tools for
establishing, measuring and characterizing vacuums were just developing and applications of vacuum environments
were hypothesized. Many contended that nothing beneﬁcial could ever come of vacuum because it represented the
absence of all matter and thus was of no value. Then, in the 20th century an industrial revolution that was enabled by
ultra-vacuum processing for micro-electronics applications swept across the world. In the 2nd half of the 20th
century, the space program provided the tools to measure and characterize microgravity environments and, once
again, applications are being hypothesized. It is not surprising that many contend nothing beneficial can come of it.
However, the ﬁeld of micro-biologics is growing rapidly and the ability to manipulate biomaterials at the molecular
and cellular level through microgravity-based processes has drawn attention.

Although outcomes in science and technology are rarely predictable with certainty, the educated observer can
draw lessons from history. In the case of the 188, one recent observer suggests, “When we have ﬁnished it, it will be
the most unique laboratory anyone has ever created. If we use it properly, if funds are appropriated to allow us to
use it properly, we will not fail to make ground—breaking discoveries. We don ’t know what those are, but we know
we will notfail to make such discoveries. ”15

.: _'—IIII. IIIIII
5' ‘.=-— -__. - “i \ 1h.
._--L—u-..“ . -"" - L;
m l -'i-""=—' _' ' . ' :-.— ‘ ._ - ._ - 1‘. ‘ﬁ .
' ___.-— _ _ .' ﬁt. - '51:; I """"""--.--
r I- ' ' *H‘WHL-L-""T 3.- ‘5 '
I -_ ""I..- '-""-- —-+—.. +1: '-""'-- _ I
. If aﬂ- fﬁ- ""i2. II ""1. _
III-I Pi. . III 'ufl- _ - ‘5
?: “LE"" 1. l. - I.— I 'ﬂ- ___ _ - ' —_' ‘1""..- - I .
_r..- 1” 13:: ""F. 4 _ _ 3'. ' ' E31? . ___
- V"" -.' 'II'I .-r-*-""‘_ - - _ _,.’. ' fﬁi' "" ._ ""' ... ""-
LF— ___.- - -‘ _ZE-ggﬁthiﬁ'TJEE—ﬁ'! -. ' ""H
_ ___.n—la- :—.I— — l EIII IrI-'_I_ '1‘] .- :I. I.II.'I_- -.|-.;=.—'II.!_.I - -_ ""I I . _ _ -
“ii ---L- 1:: FAILLFE ‘.. -. I ' I'L- .L*L:L - L -
._ 51.5.. _u. jig; 'Ltﬁf'Llu: -_ - 12,15 . hﬂhI .. .J- - ._.- .' .I -.._: .I
152' ii. "" ' -. , _J- ._ .21 -. ”T."" .- _"""".'.'?g. _: .
"" b-EI' 1 "".1 I. .I : ' ' 1 q..- "".. I'.'+
,7 -. _ﬂ. r 'I I _I"""""""" #1; ' '-1*_ ""' E”;
III :III.II. I . I . .- I ail. - J _ - III I.. 'I- . _ .I-. E. 'II
.‘F- -- - -5— , . . --.. :
""'11- ﬂ ""#5; ' '5: .E' - I -. W "" .
Ir!- I II I- I '. _.-':Ii_'_— {III- I I . Iiﬁ _..._ ._ II. . ,IIIII-I. I—

'1. ﬁ 5.- ' 4', "" "" . . - "".--""LL"""".’-"""". '- ' . ~ :

1 LL ' - - . ‘1 -.. _ _~ "" LL ,; . ~_ _. ""E
, a - - LL ”5L --
i; ELI: . .I-Ig-iIkI-fllt- __I . I I I. . II II I -_ -'.. II_ a .—

l L . II__ﬁi'.Iﬁ-__I I - I- l _I .- II .3qu _ -..IIIIIIIIr_ I -
I .- - | . .
11‘? -_ ' I '1; I '- ' - 'u .' kl'iﬁl- i15'- ﬁg .IFII'. ' H'-' ..""
IPII‘ . _ -.-'.g""-""-' 3 III:I_-II.III|.'_I . W ?_I'r .._IE__II.. - _III I.- I.I-III .III.I
L' E 1""“ i .. "":1 ""2h. '-- Eh. ‘
Figure 2. 188 Conﬁguration at Assembly Complete
9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
092407

"
"10","Appendix

Section 507 excerpted from the NASA Authorization Act of 2005 (Public Law 109—155).
“SEC. 507. NATIONAL LABORATORY DESIGNATION.
(a) DESIGNATION. To further the policy described in section 501(a), the United States segment of the 188 is hereby
designated a national laboratory.
(b) MANAGEMENT.

(l) PARTNERSHIPS. The Administrator shall seek to increase the utilization of the 188 by other Federal entities

and the private sector through partnerships, cost—sharing agreements, and other arrangements that would

supplement NASA funding of the 18$.

(2) CONTRACTING. The Administrator may enter into a contract with a nongovernmental entity to operate the 188

national laboratory, subject to all applicable Federal laws and regulations.
(0) PLAN. Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall transmit to the
Committee on Science of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation of the Senate a plan describing how the national laboratory will be operated. At a minimum, the plan
shall describe

(1) any changes in the research plan transmitted under section 506(3) and any other changes in the operation of

the ISS resulting from the designation;

(2) any ground—based NASA operations or buildings that will be considered part of the national laboratory;

(3) the management structure for the laboratory, including the rationale for contracting or not contracting with a

nongovernmental entity to operate the 188 national laboratory;

(4) the workforce that will be considered employees of the national laboratory;

(5) how NASA will seek the participation of other parties described in subsection (b)(l); and

(6) a schedule for implementing any changes in 188 operations, utilization, or management described in the

plan.
(d) UNITED STATES SEGMENT DEFINED. In this section the term “United States segment of the 188” means those
elements of the ISS manufactured

(l) by the United States; or

(2) for the United States by other nations in exchange for funds or launch services.”

Acknowledgments

This work draws largely from NASA’s 2007 report to the US Congress regarding a plan for the 188 National
Laboratory. The report benefited greatly from the thoughtful reView and counsel provided by Mr. William
Gerstenmaier, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Operations, Mr. Scott Pace, NASA Associate
Administrator for Program Analysis and Evaluation, Mr. Richard Sherman, NASA Associate General Counsel for
Commercial Law, and Dr. Carl Walz, NASA Director of Advanced Exploration Technologies. In addition, the
reView and editorial support provided by members of the NASA Advisory Counsel, Committee on Space Operations
was invaluable. In particular, the sound advice and steadfast support of Council Chairman, Dr. Harrison Schmitt,
was essential to capturing the full intent of the enabling legislation.

References
1 NASA, Research and Utilization Plan for the International Space Station, June 2006 (available on-line at:
https://eXploration.nasa.gov/documents/reports.html).
2 Written Statement of Michael D. Griffin, NASA Administrator, before the Subcommittee on Science and Space, Committee on Commerce,
Science and Transportation United States Senate, April 25, 2006.
3 Uhran, M., Bibliography of Prior NASA Studies on 188 Utilization Management, unpublished, May 2007.
4 Written Statement of Shana Dale, NASA Deputy Administrator, before the Committee on Science, House of Representatives, March 30, 2006.
5 National Research Council, Committee on Science, Engineering and Public Policy, Rising Above the Gathering Storm: Energizing and
Employing America for a Brighter Economic Future, 2005.
6 Interagency Task Force on Use of the 188 for Educational Purposes, 188 National Laboratog Education Concept Development Report,
December, 2006, (available on-line at http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/science/nlab/indeX.html).
7 George C. Marshall Space Flight Center, Microgravity Master Publications List Archive, December, 2007 (available on-line at:
https://repository.msfc.nasa.gov/microgravity/component/main).
10
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
092407

"
"11","8
Letter from NASA Administrator to DOE Secretary, DOC Secretary, NIH Director, and NSF Director Inviting Participation in 188 National
Laboratory Applications Development, October 27, 2006.
9
Letter from Director, National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases to NASA Administrator, Regarding Working with

NASA on the 188 National Laboratory Initiative, December 6, 2006.
10

National Institutes of Health, Agenda, Summary Report and Attendees List for Multi-Agency Meeting 011 Space Related Health Research,
December 8, 2006.
1 1

Memorandum of Understanding Between the NIH and NASA for Cooperation in Space-Related Health Research, September 12, 2007
(available on-line at http://WWW.nasa.gOV/mission_pages/station/science/nlab/index.html).
12

Memorandum from DOD Deputy Secretary of Defense to Secretaries of the Military Departments regarding Space Test Program Management
and Funding Policy, July 8, 2002.
13

Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, 188 Payloads Ofﬁce, Master List of ISS Payload Equipment (available on-line at:
http://WWW.nasa.gOV/mission_pages/station/science/eXperiments/Discipline.html
14

Congressional Research Service Report for Congress RL30533, The Quasi Government: Hybrid Organizations with Both Government and
Private Sector Legal Characteristics, by Ronald Moe & Kevin Kosar (2005).
15

Statement of Michael D. Grifﬁn, NASA Administrator, upon signing of the MOU Between NIH and NASA for Cooperation in Space-Related
Health Research, September 12, 2007, Capitol Hill, Washington, DC.

1 1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
092407

"
