"","x"
"1","Acta Astronautica 68 (201 1) 2098—21 13
— '::=*""'"" / 2""
K’ Contents lists available at ScienceDirect ' ’
.,!:""%4-%‘~‘+‘¥ a ' ' -
~ J. H3 Acta Astronaut1ca /
ELSEVIER journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/actaastro {m} (( .313
—
Stepp1ng stones toward global space explorat1on
M. Ansdell a""“, P. Ehrenfreund 3, C. McKay b
a Space Policy Institute, Elliott School oflnternational Affairs, George Washington University, 1957 E Street, Suite 403, Washington, DC, USA
'3 NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA
ARTICLEINFO ABSTRACT
Article history: Several nations are currently engaging in or planning for robotic and human space
RECEiVEd 15 July 2010 exploration programs that target the Moon, Mars and near—Earth asteroids. These ambitious
RECEiVEd in rEViSEd form plans to build new space infrastructures, transport systems and space probes will require
28 OCtOber 2010 international cooperation if they are to be sustainable and affordable. Partnerships must
Accepted 29 October 2010 . . . . .
Available online 19 November 2010 Involve not only establ1shed space powers, but also emerg1ng space nat10ns ancl developIng
— countries; the participation of these new space actors will provide a bottom—up support
Keywords: . structure that will aid program continuity, generate more active members in the space
Space e>€P10rat1°n . community, and increase public awareness of space activities in both developed and
ETterrerrlﬁggil/lissgeeﬁttslon developing countries. The integration of many stakeholders into a global space exploration
International Space Station program represents a crucial element securing political and programmatic stability. How can
CubeSats the evolving space community learn to cooperate on a truly international level while engaging

emerging space nations and developing countries in a meaningful way? We propose a stepping
stone approach toward a global space exploration program, featuring three major elements:
(1) an international Earth—based ﬁeld research program preparing for planetary exploration,
(2) enhanced exploitation of the International Space Station (155) enabling exploration and
(3) a worldwide CubeSat program supporting exploration. An international Earth—based ﬁeld
research program can serve as a truly global exploration testbed that allows both established
and new space actors to gain valuable experience by working together to prepare for future
planetary exploration missions. Securing greater exploitation of the [SS is a logical step during
its prolonged lifetime; [55 experiments, partnerships and legal frameworks are valuable
foundations for exploration beyond low Earth orbit. Cooperation involving small, low—cost
missions could be a major stride toward exciting and meaningful participation from
emerging space nations and developing countries. For each of these three proposed stepping
stones, recommendations for coordination mechanisms are presented.
© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction be successful. Indeed, monetary efﬁciency, program sus—
tainability, political prestige and workforce stability are
Several nations are currently engaging in or planning for some of the mutual beneﬁts that can arise from cooperative
human and robotic space exploration programs that target space exploration [1,2]. However, such partnerships must
the Moon, Mars and near—Earth asteroids. Given current be based on shared objectives, clearly deﬁned responsi—
budgetary constraints and the need for more sustainable bilities, scientiﬁc support and other critical elements that
space exploration programs, these ambitious plans to build make international space cooperation successful [2].
new space infrastructures, transport systems and space
probes will require international cooperation if they are to 1.1. Overview of national and international space exploration
activities
* Corresponding author_ Tel.: + 1 808 753 4691. The United States (US) President Barack Obama took the
E-mail address: megan.ansdell@gmail.com (M. Ansdell). National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) in
0094—5765/$ — see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2010.10.025

"
"2","M. Ansdell et al. / Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 2098—21 13 2099
new directions with his Fiscal Year (FY) 2011 Budget In additionto historicalspace powers such as the United
Request. The latest plan includes new destinations for States and Russia, newcomers including China and India
human space exploration such as near—Earth asteroids and are now pursuing or considering pursuing human space
focuses on technology development and creating oppor— exploration. China launched its ﬁrst human into space on
tunities for the commercial sector. NASA’s Exploration Shenzhou-S in 2003, followed by a two—person mission on
Systems Mission Directorate is planning robotic precursor Shenzhou-6 in 2005 and a three—person extravehicular
missions to the Moon, Mars and near—Earth asteroids activity (EVA) mission on Shenzhou-7 in 2008. In 2011,
to scout targets for future human activities as well as China will launch T iangong-1, its ﬁrst space lab module,
identify the hazards and resources that will determine the followed by an unmanned Shenzhou-S to dock with it.
future course of human expansion beyond Low Earth China recently began work on its inhabited space station
Orbit(LEO). aimed for completion around 2020. India’s budget for

The European Space Agency (ESA) is the main scientiﬁc pursuing human space exploration is currently under
user of the International Space Station (155) and has discussion.
recently contributed a number of major infrastructure
parts such as the Columbus laboratory, the Automatic 1.2. Vision for a future global space exploration program
Transfer Vehicle (ATV) and the Cupola observation module.
The European Space Science Committee (ESSC) released in Despite these exciting advancements, international
2009 its Science-Driven Scenario for Space Exploration,1 cooperation in space exploration (apart from the 155) has
which deﬁned overarching scientiﬁc goals for Europe’s focused on cooperation between the national programs of
space exploration program. The Committee recognized established space powers rather than a truly integrated
Mars as Europe’s main exploration target and clearly stated global effort. Consequently, within the global space
that Europe should position itself as a major actor in exploration community there remains a lack of common
deﬁning and leading a Mars sample return mission [3]. focus and roadmap as well as basic mechanisms for
Indeed, the political dimensions of space exploration and cooperation. Moreover, differences in the political priori—
its economic and strategic applications are now in the ties and budget cycles that shape the governments of
process of being acknowledged in Europe [4]. The EU and established space powers, along with prohibitive technol—
ESA jointly launched a consultation process with various ogy transfer regulations such as the International Trafﬁc in
stakeholder communities (e.g. science, industry, national Arms Regulations (ITAR), still build barriers that must be
agencies) in spring 2010 with three workshops that served overcome in the future.
as input to the second high—level conference on exploration Taking steps in the right direction, fourteen space agen—
held in October 2010 in Bruxelles. Cies2 produced in 2007 the report Global Exploration Strategies
Long—term cooperation between NASA and the Eur— (GES)—The Framework for Cooperation.3 The International
opean Space Agency (ESA) has been initiated through the Space Exploration Coordination Group (ISECG) currently
Mars Exploration Joint Initiative (MEJI). The program implements and coordinates GES, helping to harmonize
provides a framework that will expand the collective national plans and in particular architectures to advance
capabilities of the two agencies as they jointly deﬁne human lunar exploration [7]. Other national and interna—
and implement their scientiﬁc,technological and program— tional working groups — including the International Lunar
matic goals for Mars exploration. MEJI launch opportu— Exploration Working Group (ILEWG), the International Mars
nities during the 2016—2020 timeframe should ultimately Exploration Working Group (IMEWG), the Lunar Exploration
lead toamulti—element Mars sample return mission within Analysis Group (LEAG) and the Mars Exploration Program
the next decade [5]. Analysis Group (MEPAG) — are investigating cooperative
Anumber of orbiter, lander and sample return missions mission scenarios for the Moon and Mars. The Committee
are being prepared by Russia, Japan, China and India. on Space Research(COSPAR) and the International Academy
Russia’s Phobos-Grunt mission will be launched in 2012 of Astronautics (1AA) are among the capacity building
to return samples from the Martian moon Phobos and organizations that promote the engagement of emerging
Japan’s Hayabusa spacecraft recently returned to Earth space nations and developing countries in future space
in June 2010 with a sample from the asteroid Itokawa. exploration plans.
Several Lunar orbiter missions will be carried out in this One of the pillars of the United Nations Program on
decade, such as China’s recently launched Chang’e—Z and Space Applications for developing countries focuses on
India’s planned Chandrayaan-Z (as a part of Russia’s Luna “basic space science, including astronomy and astrophy—
Resource-1). Contact and in—situ robotic missions to the sics, solar—terrestrial interactions, planetary and atmo—
Moon are also envisaged for later in this decade, including spheric studies and exobiology” [8]. All of those research
Japan’s Selene-2 (lander) and Selene-3 (sample—return), topics are crucial to advance space exploration of the
Europe’s Lunar Lander, China’s Chang’e-3 (lander) and Earth—Moon—Mars space. A good understanding of the
Chang’e-4 (sample return), and Russia’s Luna Resource-1 technology gathering basic science data is a precondition
(Russian lander with Indian orbiter) and Luna Resource-Z to achieve a higher level of independency of aspiring space
(Russian lander, rover and retransmitting satellite) [6].
2 Australia, China, Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy,]apan, Russia,
South Korea, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and the United States and the
1 http://sci.esa.int/science—e/www/object/index. European Space Agency.
cfm?fobjectid=45509 3 http://www.globa1spaceexploration.org/

"
"3","2100 M. Ansdell et al. / Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 2098—21 13
nations and transforming them into more active players standardization—all major prerequisites for a sustainable
[8]. A larger contingent of active players and stakeholders global space exploration program in the future.
worldwide increases the potential of international coop— Although the involvement of emerging space nations and
eration for space exploration and thus political and pro— developing countries will not necessarily be the primary
grammatic commitment. driving force for a future global space exploration program
In this paper, we propose a stepping stone approach led by established space powers, they will make important
toward a future global space exploration program. Using this contributions by providing a bottom-up support structure for
approach, the growing space community will learn to ambitious space activities. Indeed, given the long—term nature
cooperate on a truly international level while also engaging of space exploration, new space actors that do not have the
emerging space powers and developing countries in a mean— required capabilities, resources or mandates at present will
ingful way [6]. The approach features three major stepping most likely develop them as the anticipated era of global
stones: (1) an international Earth—based ﬁeld research pro— space exploration unfolds.Actively engaging these new space
gram preparing for planetary exploration, (2) enhanced actors in the early stages will therefore increase future
exploitation of the ISS enabling exploration and (3) a world— interest and capacity in planned large—scale exploration
wide CubeSat program supporting exploration (Fig. 1). endeavors. Their active participation will also help build up
An international Earth—based ﬁeld research program pre— basic space technology capacity within their countries,
paring for planetary exploration will allow stakeholders from thereby accelerating the transformation of these new space
various cultures to advance related science and technology, actors into more active members of the space community, for
while also gaining valuable practical experience from work— example by becoming hardware providers rather than just
ing together in the ﬁeld. Securing enhanced exploitation of users of space data [8]. Finally, involving emerging space
the 155 by involving a wider range of participants in the nations and developing countries will increase public aware—
utilization of recently integrated facilities and alarger crew of ness and engagement in space activities in both developed
six provides opportunities to advance our knowledge of living and developing worlds.
and working beyond LEO. Collaboration on small, low—cost
missions through a worldwide CubeSat program can support 1.3. Established space powers, emerging space nations and
primary exploration activities, while also enabling the parti— developing countries
cipation of new space actors in a meaningful way. This
stepping stone approach will ease cross—cultural barriers The three terms used in this paper to classify members of
and the development of interfaces as well as foster the space community — established space powers, emerging
~ 2* w- -
' i a_-
f :- :1.” 41 _
z - '7 :‘ 6‘. $5 ’
. _ .f,,frt;.._;_ .-
,— 75,- ‘ ' -' .1 ~ ,‘.-‘,.'.I',_-'..<“
4r 1;: 3 ‘1 f - 1v”
1) International Earth—based
field research program
Stepplng stones toward
global space exploratlon
”‘- “’ - MW . - -T-\:T‘ .
3:33;»- ' ' 3. -.,, - e: ‘- r
1:: ., 2:: \ \ 1
—?~ 1‘ .. \\
\_
‘
2) Enhanced exploitation of the 3) Worldwide CubeSat program
188 enabling exploration in support of exploration
Fig. 1. Stepping stones toward global space exploration (images courtesy of NASA).

"
"4","M. Ansdell et al. /Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 2098—21 13 2101
space nations, and developing countries — should not be Table I
thought Of as distinct categories. Rather, these members exist Potential near—term international initiatives for space exploration.
along a continuum of space capabilities that range from low —
, , , , , Initiatives Potential spec1ﬁc Part1c1pants
complex1ty With high dependence on foreign partnerships to missions
high complexity with low dependence on foreign partner— —
ships. Established space powers inhabit the latter end of the PrEParation International Earth- Current and emerging
continuum and tend to drive the most ambitious space for planetary based ﬁeld research space hations, developing
activities. They include the United States, Russia, Japan and EZSPILOJdatEg program counmes’ pnvate seam
Europe. China and India are nearing this end of the spectrum
as they are engaged in ISECG and are beginning to make Joint program Enhanced exploitation Current ISS partners and
important contributions to space exploration. However, they for exPlOtatiO“ Of the 15? enabling POtential “6W Partners
have not yet reached the same level of past experience and researCh exPloratlon
capability as the EStabliShEd space powers. Cooperation on Worldwide CubeSat Current and emerging
Developing countries are at the opposite end of the small,low—cost program in support space nations,developing
continuum from established space powers. The objectives miSSiOHS 0t exploration countriesv Private 5eCt0t
of developing countries include establishing basic indigen— —
ous space capabilities and beneﬁting from satellite ser—
vices. However, they lack the required resources 35 well 35 elaborate on how these key areas can be expanded to serve
the technical and managerial expertise to successfully as near—term international initiatives leading to a sustain—
develop space hardware and operate S&tEllltES without able global space exploration program in the future.
signiﬁcant foreign assistance. Thus, they are particularly
interested in small satellite projects because they provide ,
entry—level, hands—on technical experience and practical 2‘1‘ International Earth-based ﬁeld research p rogram
training [9,10]. Examples of developing countries include . . .
Azerbaijan, Croatia, Latvia, Malaysia, Nigeria, Peru, Roma— , Human and whom operations in space can be BEEF—
nia and Tunisia—to name only a few. t1vely prepared for 0h Earth, as terrestrial extreme €11er-
E m e r gi n g s p a c e n ati o n s are more a dv a n c e cl than devel— ohments often prov1de analogs to landing and operation
oping countries in terms of the autonomy and complexity sites en the Moon mid Mars. Field research at such analog
of their space projects. They have executed a wider range of 51:65 1,5 currently being uhdertaken 1n collaboratibn Wlth
s p a c e p r oj e ct s ( eith e r i n cl e p e n cl e ntly or with the h el p of sc1entists, engineers, medical persohnel and oftenjournal—
foreign partners) and currently beneﬁt from the services IStS andstudents to cover the multidisc1plinary aspects that
provided by satellites they operate. However, they cannot are key in advancmg and promoting planetary exploration.
be considered established space powers because they lack The importance ofthese efforts W111 grow .m the com.“ g
proven launch vehicles and have not yet played signiﬁcant decades, as increasmgly ambitious space m1? 51,0115 require
roles in exploration missions to other planetary bodies. One more preparatorywork 1n the ﬁdd t0 “??X‘mlze missmn
objective of emerging space nations is therefore to gain success and sc1ent1ﬁc return.F1eld expeclitions and labora—
experience in more advanced space projects. Accordingly, tory Simulations not only test technblogies, methodologies
they are often interested in establishing meaningful roles and prbtocols, bUt also serve as training bases for personnel
in international programs led by established space and sc1ence and operations teams [12]'
powers. Examples of emerging space nations range from
South Korea to Brazil. 2.1.1. A multidisciplinary endeavor in extreme environments
Clearly, differences exist in the objectives and interests Existing Earth—based ﬁeld research programs preparing
of emerging space nations and developing countries. for planetary exploration range from narrow to broad in
Mechanisms for engaging these two types of potential focus. They include investigating geological and geochem—
participants in global space exploration must reﬂect these ical contexts; demonstrating technologies, infrastructures
differences. They must also aim to develop the political will and methodologies for current and future missions; eval—
that is critical for ensuring long—term funding for their uating crew operations and psychology through simula—
participation. More detailed mechanisms are addressed in tions; and training crews and support teams for 155
Section 3. missions. Many space instruments augment their ﬂight
readiness level through tests at planetary analog regions on
2. Stepping stones toward global space exploration Earth. Lessons learned from sample collection, handling
and in—situ analysis at these sites help to overcome
A stepping stone approach can pave the path toward a contamination issues as well as improve instrument per—
sustainable global space exploration program capable of formance. Using Mars regolith analogs to test physical and
conducting complex sample return and human exploration Chemical properties such as pH, redox potential, elemental
missions beyond LEO [11]. This paper focuses on three composition, conductivity and organic content are part of
areas in particular that are actively being pursued 0n the interdisciplinary preparation phase to search for
national, bilateral and multinational levels (see Table 1), organic molecules and life on Mars [13]. Artiﬁcial environ—
but do not presently feature worldwide efforts involving ments can also be used to test exploration concepts and
all established space powers as well as emerging space further development of closed—loop systems for long—
nations and developing countries. In this paper, we duration space exploration.

"
"5","2102 M. Ansdell et al. / Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 2098—21 13

These research efforts of the planetary science commu— Haughton—Mars Project (HMP) and Pavilion Lake Research
nity are often compatible with those of the Earth science Project (PLRP) [15].
community. Technologies required for scientiﬁc investiga— CEEF: Japan’s Institute for Environmental Science (IES)
tions at terrestrial extreme environments are often similar established the Closed Ecological Experiment Facilities
to those needed for operations on extraterrestrial bodies (CEEF) to research potential Closed environment concepts.
[14,12]. Thus, ﬁeld research sites in extreme environments CEEF currently consists of three buildings: the Closed Geo—
on Earth such as Antarctica provide a unique opportunity Hydrosphere Experiment, Closed Animal Breeding and
for collaboration between the planetary science and Earth Habitation Experiment and Closed Plantation Experiment.
science communities. By exploiting their synergies, it is Results from CEEF are expected to contribute to the
possible to share ﬁeld sites, equipment and data; jointly development of closed—loop systems for future Moon/Mars
test related technologies, methodologies and protocols; bases [16,17].
cooperatively train science and operations teams; and Concordia Station: Concordia Stationisapermanently
mutually engage the public, media and educators in inhabited research facility in Antarctica for conducting
planetary science awareness [6]. Such cooperation will scientiﬁc research in the ﬁelds of glaciology, atmospheric
promote efﬁciency as well as sustainability for a global sciences, astronomy and astrophysics, Earth sciences,
space exploration program. technology and human biology and medicine. Given the

similarities between Antarctic research stations and future
planetary outposts, ESA uses Concordia Station for experi—
2-1-2- Existing Earth-based ﬁeld research programs ments and simulations relevant for future human space

Programs exist worldwide that use Earth—based sites to exploration [18].
prepare for planetary exploration, 35 Shown in Table 2 and Desert RATS: Desert Research and Technology Studies
summarized in thiS section. Many Of these programs (Desert RATS)7 is an annual ﬁeld test led by NASA in
include bilateral or multinational cooperation. HOWEVER collaboration with n0n_NASA research partners in remote
these common efforts ShOUld be united through a 8101331, parts of Arizona and California. The program assesses
cross—disciplinary program that supports space exploration preliminary exploration concepts for surface operations
11115510115 beyond LEO- including rovers, EVAs and ground support.

AMASE: The Arctic Mars Analog Svalbard Expedition HMP: The Haughton—Mars Project (HMP)8 was estab—
(AMASE)4 COHdUCtS Mars—related ﬁeld research on the lished in 1997 on Devon Island in the Canadian High Arctic
AtCtiC island 0f Svalbard, the only place known on Earth and is now part of CARN. HMP serves as a Mars analog that
Wlth carbonate depOSitS identiCal to those Of the Martian supports the development of new technologies and opera-
meteorite ALH84001- Through AMASE, a multinational tional frameworks in preparation for future human and
team 0f researchers from Europe and the United States robotic exploration of Mars and other planetary bodies.
has tested a variety 0f exploration instruments for Mars ILEWG: The International Lunar Exploration Working
missions such as ESA’s ExoMars and NASA’s Mars Science Group (ILEWG)9 has a task group that organizes and
Laboratory. coordinates ﬁeld campaigns at the Mars Desert Research

ASTEPI NASA'S Astrobiology Science and Technology for Station, Eifel Volcanic Park, Rio Tinto and other sites in
Exploring Planets (ASTEP)5 iS a science—driven exploration collaboration with BSA, NASA, and other partners in
program supporting the development 0f new technologies, academia and industry. The goals of ILEWG ﬁeld campaigns
instrumentation and operational schemes for exploring include testinginstrumentation,rovers,landers,EVA tech—
extreme environments. Research conducted through nologies and habitats; performing ﬁeld research in geology,
ASTEP ﬁeld campaigns aims at further understanding 0f sample analysis and exobiology; studying human factors
the limits and adaptability Of llfe as W611 as lower risks Of and crew aspects; and public outreach and student
exploration activities on other planetary bodies. training.

CAREXI Initiated by the European Commission (EC) MARS: The Mars Analog Research Station (MARS)10
through its “Framework 7”, the Coordination Action for program is a global effort led by the Mars Society. MARS
Research Activities on life in Extreme Environments currently operates two simulated Mars habitats, the Flashline
(CAREX)6 has tWO main objectives: strengthen the 13111“ Mars Arctic Research Station (F—MARS) on Devon Island and
opean network 0f scientists researching life in extreme the Mars Desert Research Stations (MDRS) in Utah.There are
environments and coordinate and set scientiﬁc priorities. intentions to establish two more habitats, Euro—Mars in
CAREX endorses cross—sector interests in microbes, plants, Iceland and Mars—Oz in Australia.At MARS facilities, scientists
and animals in diverse extreme environments including conduct experiments in psychology, geology and biology for
outer space. further understanding of how to live and work on Mars.

CARN: The Canadian Space Agency (CSA) established Simulated deployments last roughly two weeks and partici—
the Canadian Analog Research Network (CARN) t0 COOI‘Ch- pants must wear simulated spacesuits and communicate
nate and facilitate the use Of three 1V100h/1V131‘S 3113108 with time lags equivalent to Earth—Mars radio message
sites in Canada for scientiﬁc exploration research.

CARN includes the McGill Arctic Research Station,
7 http://www.nasa.gov/exploration/analogs/desert_rats.html
8 http: //www.marsonearth.org

4 http://amase.ciw.edu 9 http://sci.esa.int/ilewg

5 http://astrobiology.nasa.gov/astep 1° http://www.marssociety.org/portal/groups/AnalogsTF/

6 http://www.carex—eu.org index_html

"
"6","M. Ansdell et al. / Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 2098—21 13 2103
Table 2
Current and planned Earth—based ﬁeld research programs
Initiatives Lead entities Supporting entities Locations Descriptions
(Founded)
Current Analog Programs
AMASE (2003) Hans Amundsen Various Svalbard (Arctic) Conducting astrobiology research and instrument testing
(Europe) at a Mars analog ﬁeld site
ASTEP (2001) NASA Various Various extreme Scientiﬁc research and technology demonstrations for
(United States) environments understanding of the limits and adaptability of life
CAREX (2008— British Antarctic CAREX Core Various extreme Coordinating scientists and setting scientiﬁc priorities for
2010) Survey, ESF (Europe) Partners environments research of life in extreme environment in Europe
CARN (2005) CSA (Canada) Various Canada Coordinating the use of Canadian Moon and Mars analog
ﬁeld sites for exploration research
CEEF (19905) IES (Japan) N/A Rokkasho (Japan) Closed environment facilities that may help develop
closed—loop systems for Lunar and Martian bases
Concordia (2005) IPEV (France), ESA (Europe) Antarctica Researching glaciology, atmospheric sciences,
PNRA (Italy) astronomy, Earth sciences and human biology
Desert RATS (1998) NASA (United States) N/A California, Arizona Conducting annual ﬁeld campaigns to test preliminary
(United States) concepts for surface operations on extraterrestrial bodies
HMP (1997) Mars Institute SETI Devon Island Using ﬁeld research sites at the Haughton impact
(United States, (United States) (Canada) structure as terrestrial analogs for Mars
Canada)
ILEWG (1995) ESA (Europe), National space Utah (United States), Testing technologies, performing ﬁeld research, studying
NASA (United States) agencies Rio Tinto (Spain) and human factors and conducting education and outreach
others activities
MARS (2000) Mars Society Various Devon Island Long duration psychology, geology and biology ﬁeld tests
(United States) (Canada), Utah for understanding how to live and work on Mars
(United States)
PLRP (2004) CSA (Canada), NASA N/A British Columbia Researching the origins of freshwater microbilites, which
(United States) (Canada) can be applied to the search for life beyond Earth
PISCES (2007) JUSTSAP (Japan, Canada, Europe Hawaii (United Field research campaigns and education and outreach
United States) States) activities promoting living and working in space
TNA—1 (2009) Europlanet (Europe) European Spain, Russia, Tunisia, Facilitating access for Europeans to certain Earth—based
Community Svalbard, Morocco ﬁeld sites to conduct planetary research
Proposed Analog Programs
IAN CSA (Canada) Various Canada International expansion of CARN
PISA United States, Japan Various Hawaii (United International expansion of PISCES
States)
delays. MDRS is also a societal endeavor that engages public Technology and Space Application Program (JUSTSAP)
applicants. and is based at the University of Hawaii at Hilo. When

PLRP: The Pavillion Lake Research Project11 was estab— fully developed, PISCES will consist of ﬁeld sites, including
lished in 2004 and is now part of CARN. PLRP is a science a simulated Lunar outpost, and various laboratories and
and exploration effort focused on furthering knowledge on classrooms [19]. In 2008, a PISCES ﬁeld site was used to
the origins of freshwater microbilites in the Pavillion Lake assemble scientists from the United States, Canada, Ger—
in British Columbia, Canada. This multidisciplinary many and Switzerland to perform the ﬁrst International
research effort is relevant to both Earth science and Lunar Analog Test. Future campaigns involving more
astrobiology communities because it can be applied to international partners and a wider variety of systems
the study of the development of life on Earth as well as the and instrumentation tests are planned for 2010 and
search for life beyond Earth. beyond [20].

PISCES: The Paciﬁc International Space Center for TNA-l: The TransNational Access (TNA) program12 is
Exploration Systems (PISCES) is a research and education part of the Europlanet Research Infrastructure, an initiative
center dedicated to the development of new technologies funded through the EC’s “Framework 7” and aimed at
and concepts needed to sustain life on the Moon and engaging Europe’s planetary science community in colla—
beyond. It was established by the Japan—US Science, borative research. One of the program’s areas,TNA—1,funds

11 http://www.pavilionlal<e.com 12 http://www.isa.au.dk/networks/euroPlanet/indexhtml

"
"7","2104 M. Ansdell et al. / Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 2098—21 13

European scientists to perform planetary research at compete and cooperate with each other. Thus, future
selected sites in Spain, Tunisia, Svalbard, Morocco and planetary outposts may proﬁt from infrastructure, research
Russia that are analogous to environments on Mars, Europa and legal expertise that have been developed at Antarctic
and Titan. stations (ESA is already making use of Concordia Station as

Other: China has identiﬁed the Eastern Xinjiang Gobi a high ﬁdelity analog site). The Scientiﬁc Committee on
Desert as its Lunar analog site and intends to use this Antarctic Research(SCAR)14 coordinates scientiﬁc research
domestic resource to test space exploration technologies in Antarctica and provides international, independent
and methodologies [21]. Russia primarily uses closed labs scientiﬁc advice to other bodies. Thirty—one countries that
or simulators for such tests, though it also makes limited pursue active scientiﬁc research programs in Antarctica
use of ﬁeld sites such as the Vostok Lake and Deception have joined SCAR as full members.Governance frameworks
Island in Antarctica as well as the Kamchatka Peninsula and for future planetary bases could be modeled after SCAR as
Popigai Impact Structure in Russia. well as other current in—situ exploration and operations

The Earth—based ﬁeld research programs described above schemes.
are currently used to prepare for planetary exploration The many existing and planned Earth—based ﬁeld
beyond LEO. Several of these programs have strong synergies research programs illustrate the importance of these
with Earth science programs [14]. The exploitation of these activities as a means of preparing for planetary exploration.
synergies is critical, as it promotes sustainability for future These programs provide foundations upon which a united,
space exploration programs (Section 3.1 elaborates further on multidisciplinary research program may be initiated under
this concept). In addition to Earth—based ﬁeld research the auspices of research foundations, academic institutions
programs in support of space exploration, several programs and national space agencies of both developed and emer—
have been established that focus in particular on human ging space nations. Mechanisms for launching into this
performance aspects [22]. Among them are: next phase of cooperation are discussed in Section 3.1.

NEEMO: NASA’s Extreme Environment Mission Opera—

. ‘13 . .
t1ons .(NEEMQ) IS a prograni “.13? trains astronauts, 2.2. International scientiﬁc exploitation of the ISS enabling
sc1entists, engineers and other 1nd1v1duals for future 155 .
. . . . . . . exploration
missmns. NEEMO tra1nees live in an underwater fac111ty,
Aquarius, for 011.6 to two WEEkS Whlle Simulating EYAS’ In 1984, US President Reagan directed NASA to build a
testing exploration concepts and researching medical . .
. . . . permanently occupied space station and to seek other
issues that may arise during spaceﬂight. . . . . . . . . . .
. . . nations t0101n 1n the program. This pre51dent1al 1nv1tation
MarsSOO: This program involves 51x crewmembers that . . ,
. . . . . led to a series of formal agreements between the station 5
are currently Simulating a round trip missmn to Mars (250 . . .
. original partners (Europe, Canada, Japan, and the United
days to Mars, 30 days on the Martian surface and 240 days . . . .
. . States) With Ru551a being added as a partner later1n 1993.
back to Earth). Since 3 June 2010, the MarsSOO crew has lived . . . .
. . . . . . . After a series of rede51gns and negotiations, the 1998
and worked in a sealed fac111ty in Moscow investigating the .
. . . Intergovernmental Agreement (IGA) was established,
psychological and medical aspects of long—duration space . . .
. . . . laying out the fundamental obligations of the 155 program
missmns. Efforts to reproduce a real trip to Mars include .
. . . . . . . . . . and a framework for long—term cooperation amongst the
limiting supplies and imposmg an art1ﬁc1al 20—m1n delay in .
. . . . partners. Four Memorandums of Understanding (MOUs)
communications each way. MarsSOO is being conducted
. . . . . between NASA and each of the other 155 partners as well as
under the auspices of the Ru551an Institute for Biomedical . . .
Problems (IBMP) with extensive artici ation b ES A [23] variou51mplement1ng arrangements have also been estab—
p p y ' lished under the IGA in subsequent years in order to
implement the design, development, operation and utili—
2.1.3. Planned Earth-based ﬁeld research programs zation of the ISS.

IAN: The International Analog Network (IAN) is the In 1998, Russia’s chya module became the ﬁrst 155
proposed international expansion of CARN to include more node launched into orbit. Major contributions from other
analog sites throughout Canada and to make them avail— ISS partners followed, including Russia’s Zvezda service
able to any researcher in a participating country [24]. module in 2000, NASA’s Destiny laboratory and Canada’s

PISA: Similar to the transformation of CARN into IAN, CanadarmZ in 2001, ESA’s Columbus laboratory and JAXA’s
the Paciﬁc International Space Alliance (PISA) is the Kibo laboratory in 2008, and NASA’s T ranquility module and
proposed international expansion of PISCES. PISA intends ESA’s Cupola observation module in 2010. The 155 has been
to engage governments, universities, industry and non— continuously inhabited since 2000 and has supported a full
governmental organizations in PISCES related activities crew of six since 2009. The completion of ISS assembly is
and will use ISECG policies to guide its program [25]. expected in 2011.

Antarctic Stations: Antarctica and extraterrestrial International cooperation on the 155 has allowed for
bodies such as the Moon or Mars share several similarities, more facilities, larger crews and better—equipped labora—
including the lack of indigenous populations and existence tories available to many space and non—space actors. As the
of extreme conditions where humans require life support 155 transitions from assembly to utilization, its continued
technologies to survive. They also represent international success will depend on how well it is exploited over the
arenas where nations are driven by scientiﬁc interests to coming years. Enhanced utilization will also be an

13 http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/NEEMO/ 14 http://www.scar.org/

"
"8","M. Ansdell et al. /Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 2098—21 13 2105
important enabler of a future global space exploration disciplines relating to life and physical sciences. ELIPS is
program, as 155 facilities serve as unique testbeds for currently in its third phase and is conducting studies on
exploration technologies and operational schemes, and radiation biology and physiology; health care and human
ISS partnerships and legal frameworks could give way to performance under extreme conditions; life support and
those used in missions beyond LEO. thermal control systems; food production in space; ﬂuids

NASA currently plans to prolong ISS lifetime until at handling and processing in space; materials exposure and
least 2020, in concert with the other partners. In February advanced materials; and contamination prevention and
2010, US President Obama included funding in his FY 2011 planetary protection.

Budget Request for this extension as well as for increased Japan’s Kibo Laboratory includes a Pressurized Module,
utilization of the 155 as a National Laboratory. During a Exposed Facility and a Remote Manipulator System, which
meeting in Tokyo in March 2010, heads of ISS partner collectively house experiments onawide range of topics such
agencies also agreed to plan for the 155 until 2028, con— as Earth science, space medicine, material science and com—
cluding that they share “strong mutual interest in con— munications. Kibo is currently in its ﬁrst phase of utilization
tinuing operations and utilization for as long as the beneﬁts (2008—2010), during which it has two scientiﬁc research
of ISS exploitation are demonstrated” [26]. However, there priorities: material science and life science. During this ﬁrst
are speciﬁc constraints regarding the implementation of phase of utilization, Kibo will support future human space
international projects spanning many years or decades. activities by carrying out relevant technology demonstrations
These constraints are due to, for example, the nature of the and medical research. Kibo’s second phase of utilization
US annual appropriations process and the European four— (2010—2012) will expand on these activities [27].
year renewal of Member States’ commitments to ESA’s Russia’s ISS efforts have focused primarily on providing
budget. In the context of the current economic crisis, a transportation to and from the ISS rather than on devel—
robust program must address these programmatic risks by oping and utilizing ISS facilities in preparation for human
building on political support and including a timeline for exploration beyond LEO. Russia has recognized that this
deﬁnition, approval, budget cycle, conﬁrmation, develop— could result in the country falling behind in human space—
ment and consolidation within the agreed budget. ﬂight along with related science and technology disciplines
as other nations continue to invest in this sector [28].
2.2.1. 155 exploration science Nonetheless, Rnssia continnes to conduct exploration

Research on the ISS delivers increasing scientiﬁc return. research usmg its 155 fac111t1es SUCh .35 the LADA, green
Over 400 experiments have been performed in the last ten house and the EXPOSE'R payload, Wthh are described in
years on topics such as biology, human physiology, phy— 59cm,“ 2'2'2' , ,
sical science, material science, Earth science and space ,,Wlth1n the UmtEd States,.the National Research Coun—
science.These experiments and their accomplishments are C115 Space StUdIES. Board 15 currently Fondueting thg
summarized in International Space Station Science Research D ecadal S Lirvey on Blzoéoglcal and Physical Saences ""15,130“?
Accomplishments During the Assembly Years: An Analysis of (the Interim Report was released.1n July 2010 Wlth the
Results from 2000 to 200815 and a summary of current 155 ﬁnal report C196 in early 2011):,”“5 decadal survey WI“
facilities can be found in Research in Space: Facilities on the deﬁne and prioritize ,US ObJeFUVES for hfe and phy51cal
International Space Stationie sc1ence research in microgravity over the next decade in

The 155 serves as a unique laboratory for the interna— order to meetthe mF‘lF‘FIISCIPWaW Chéllengés Of future
tional advancement of human and robotic space explora— space exploration act1v1t1es. It Will also identify potential
tion beyond LEO. Its facilities enable scientiﬁc research on research synergies between NASA and Other US goyern—
the effects of long—duration exposure to the space envir— ment agenc1es, eommerc1al entities and. international
onment as well as development and testing of technologies partners. NASA W111 use these recommendations to develop
and materials for future exploration systems. ESA has an iniplenientation plan for exploration experiments and
recently released a Call for Ideas (CFI)17 open to a wide m1551ons 1n LEO and beyond. , ,
range of applicants (including scientiﬁc institutions, Canaciacontributes E0155 exploration sc1ence through
national agencies, entrepreneurs and industry) to obtain various 1n1t1at1yes.. CSAS OSTEQ experiments study the
an indication of interest in using the 155 from 2011 onwards Pone C611 behav1or1n microgravity for further understand—
(for speciﬁc experiments, technology demonstrations, out— 1ng Of human bone degradation in space. 111.2092 and 2,003 '
reach activities, etc.) to prepare for human exploration 05A conducted Extraveh1cularAct1v1ty Radiation Monitor—
b eyon c1 LEO. 1ng(EVARM)exper1ments that used dosimeters 1n the form

The European Life and Physical Sciences and Applica— of small baciges placed 1n51de spacesuits to measure the
tions in Space (ELIPS)18 program made Europe the largest leyels of radiation astronauts received during spacewalks,
scientiﬁc user of the 155. Since the early 20005, the ELIPS Wlth the aim Of optimizing ?PaFESUIt radiation thlddmg'
program has pursued applied research on the 155 in six Currently, 0SA sponsors Bodies in the Space Env1ronment

(BISE), a series of computer—based tests conducted on 155

15 http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/389388main_ISS%205cience%20
Report_20090030907.pdf

16 http: / /nasa.gov/pdf/393789main_iss_uti1ization_brochure.pdf

17 http://Www.esa.int/SPECIALS/HSF_Research/SEMB4WO1FG_0.html 19 http://sites.nationalacademies.org/SSB/CurrentProjects/

18 http://www.spaceﬂight.esa.int/users/index.cfm?act=defau1t. ssb_050845
page82level=1 6&page=453 2° http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=1 2944#toc

"
"9","2106 M. Ansdell et al. /Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 2098—21 13
Table 3
Sampling of current 155 facilities for exploration research.
Facilities (Launched) Owners Subjects Descriptions
Destiny (2001) NASA Various NASA’s primary pressurized research laboratory

HRF—1/2 NASA Physiology Researching the effects of long duration spaceﬂight on humans and testing

countermeasures for preventing the negative effects of space travel

ALTEA NASA Physiology Helmet—like device measuring the effects of cosmic radiation passing

through the 155 on human brain activity and visual perception
Tranquility (2010) NASA Various The newest pressurized module to the ISS

ARED NASA Physiology Providing new exercise capabilities on the ISS and collecting data regarding

loads, repetitions, strokes, and other parameters regarding crew exercise

COLBERT NASA Physiology Treadmill for crew exercise and studying how to maintain cardiovascular

health and prevent muscle and bone loss during long duration spaceﬂight
Columbus (2008) ESA Various Pressurized laboratory harboring several research facilities
Biolab ESA Biology Researching the effects of the space environment on biological organisms
FSL ESA Physical Material Multiuser facility for conducting ﬂuid physics experiments in microgravity
Science to aid development of ﬂuid delivery systems in future spacecraft
Kibo (2009) JAXA Various Also known as the Japanese Experiment Module (JEM)

AQH JAXA Biology Tanks accommodating small ﬁsh for experiments on the effects of the space

environment on living organisms

JEM Exposed Facility JAXA Various Unpressurized external platform holding up to 10 payloads for research in

communications, material processing, engineering, etc.
Zvezda (2000) ROSCOSMOS Various First multipurpose research laboratory of the ISS

LADA Greenhouse ROSCOSMOS Biology Supporting multigenerational experiments on plant biology and space

farming for a variety of plants such as sweat peas, tomatoes and lettuce

EXPOSE—R ROSCOSMOS Biology An external payload facility holding variety of biology experiments that

require long term exposure to the harsh space environment
EXPRESS Racks (Various) Various Various Modular, multipurpose payload racks storing and supporting ISS
experiments, located on the Destiny, Columbus and Kibo Modules.

SpaceDRUMS (Tranquility) NASA Material Science Hardware for conducting containerless material processing to develop

advanced materials for new spacecraft and future Moon and Mars bases

EMCS (Columbus) ESA Biology Growth Chambers for conducting multigenerational experiments on the

effects of microgravity on early development, small organisms and plants
crewmembers to discern how humans orient themselves in Long Term Effects in Astronaut’s Central Nervous System
near—weightless environments. (ALTEA) is a helmet like device that measures the effects of
cosmic radiation passing through the 155 on human brain
2.2.2. 155 facilities for exploration research activity and visual perception.

ISS facilities are currently being used for exploration Tranquility (NASA): As the newest pressurized module
research, as summarized in this section and sampled in t0 the ISS, NASA’s T ranquility accommodates advanced
Table 3. Many of these facilities are installed on speciﬁc life support and environmental control systems as well
modules, though collaboration exists between space agen— as second generation exercise equipment such as the
cies and research institutions so that they may be exploited Advanced Resistive Exercise Device (ARED) and the Com—
more widely. Some smaller pieces of hardware are por— bined Operational Load Bearing External Resistive Exercise
table, allowing for utilization on various ISS modules. Treadmill (COLBERT). ARED and COLBERT have been

Destiny (NASA): As NASA’s primary pressurized designed to provide more efﬁcient and effective exercise
research laboratory, Destiny harbors a wide range of as well as relay data back to NASA exercise physiologists t0
experiments and hardware to help prepare for future further understanding of how exercise helps maintain
missions beyond LEO. For example, its Human Research cardiovascular health and prevent muscle and bone loss
Facility (HRF) conducts experiments that further our experienced during long duration spaceﬂight.
understanding of the effects of long duration spaceﬂight Columbus (ESA): ESA’s Columbus Module is a pressur—
on the human body and tests countermeasures for pre— ized laboratory that houses several research facilities used
venting the negative effects of space travel. The Anomalous as testbeds for space exploration. Among them is Biolab, a

"
"10","M. Ansdell et al. /Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 2098—21 13 2107
facility designed to support experiments on microorgan— small organisms; and NASA’s Space Dynamically Respond—
isms, cells, tissue cultures and small plants and inverte— ing Ultrasonic Matrix System (SpaceDRUMS), a collection
brates that further understanding of the effects of the space of hardware for containerless material processing to
environment on biological organisms. The Muscle Atrophy develop advanced materials for future spacecraft and
Research Exercise System (MARES) is an exercise instru— planetary bases. EXPRESS Racks are the most ﬂexible
ment for researching the effects of microgravity 0n mus— modular research facility currently on the 155, with 50
Cles. The Fluid Science Laboratory (FSL) investigates the percent of the racks still available for use.
physics of ﬂuids in space for the design of ﬂuid delivery Given its newly integrated facilities and enhanced crew
systems in future spacecraft. The Columbus External of six, it is crucial that the 155 be exploited by a wider
Payload Facilities (CEPF) is a multiuser external attachment variety of space and non—space actors (including emerging
t0 the outside of the Columbus Module with ﬁttings for space p0wers,developing countries,academicinstitutions,
four external payloads or facilities. Two attachments private organizations and others) in cooperation with the
currently hold European payloads: the European Technol— ISS partners. Europe took a step in this direction in October
ogy Exposure Facility (EuTEF) for experiments requiring 2010 with the announcement of a new policy that will
exposure to the space environment and a platform for allow European non—ISS partner countries to place experi—
measuring solar spectral irradiance known as Solar. CEPF ments on the 155 during a three—year trial period through
also houses experiments of other 155 partners, such as 2013.21 The next decade will be vital for leveraging the ISS
NASA’s Materials International Space Station Experiment to advance exploration science research. It will also be
(MISSE) for testing the durability of potential spacecraft important to integrate this research with supporting non—
materials. 155 projects such as Earth—based bed rest and isolation

Kibo (JAXA): Also known as the Japanese Experiment studies as well as microgravity experiments using para—
Module (JEM), Kibo is a pressurized laboratory for experi— bolic ﬂights, drop towers and sounding rockets. Mechan—
ments in space medicine, biology, Earth observation, isms for achieving these goals are discussed in Section 3.2.
material production, biotechnology and communications.

In particular, its Saibo Experiment Rack is a multipurpose

payload rack accommodating various life science experi— 23- Worldwide CubeSat program in SUPPOTt 0f exploration
ments and consisting of a Clean Bench glovebox for

isolating organisms being studied and a Cell Biology CubeSats represent a speciﬁc type 0f nanosatellite
Experiment Facility that includes an incubator, centrifuge measuring 10 X 10 X 10 C1113 and weighing slightly more
and sensors. Its Aquatic Habitat (AQH) houses small ﬁsh for than 1 kg. Their small size and mass make them relatively
investigating the effects of space environmental factors on inexpensive and simple to mum and allow them to be
living organisms. The Remote Manipulator System (RMS) launched 35 secondary payloads at much lower COSt and
connects the pressurized laboratory to the JEM Exposed higher frequency than traditional mOHOlithiC satelliteS.The
Facility (JEM—EF), an unpressurized external platform that standard CubeSat size 0t 1U (10 X 10 X 10 C1113) has been
can hold up to ten experiment payloads for research in scaled to other conﬁgurations SUCh 35 the 2U (20 X 10 X
various ﬁelds, including those related to future space 10 C1113), 3U (30 X 10 X 10 C1113) and 5U (30 X 20 X 10 C1113)
exploration. CubeSat.

Zvezda (ROSCOSMOS): Zvezda was the ﬁrst 155 multi— CubeSats began as an affordable educational tool for
purpose research laboratory and remains a key supporter university students in science and engineering ﬁelds to
of exploration research on the 155. Its Human Life Research gain hands—on experience in aerospace development PFO-
program consists of various systems for studying human grams. In more recent years, the wider utility 0f CubeSats
life in space, such as the Immune System Study Kit and has been increasingly recognized; countries DOW see them
Weightlessness Adoption Study Kit. Zvezda’s LADA green— as cost—effective platforms for performing science research,
house has 3150 been used to study fundamental plant technology demonstrations, and education and outreach
biology and space farming by growing multiple genera— activities (see Table 4). Indeed, fast and inexpensive
tions of sweet peas, wheat, tomatoes and lettuce in development from concept to launch iS important h0t only
microgravity. EXPOSE—R, a payload facility mounted on for educational programs, bUt 3150 for emerging space
the outside of Zvezda, holds a variety of biology experi— powers and developing countries With limited space
ments that require long duration exposure to the space budgets and technical expertise. Moreover, CubeSats have
environment. demonstrated their potential as testbeds for advanced

EXPRESS Racks: Expedite the Processing of Experi— technologies as well as platforms for research in astro—
ments to Space Station (EXPRESS) Racks are modular, 131010831, astronomy, Earth observation, atmospheric
multipurpose payload racks that store and support 155 science and other ﬁelds [9]-
experiments. EXPRESS Racks are currently located on the There are several major organizations currently PFO-
Destiny, Columbus and Kibo Modules and Often house moting CubeSats and other small—class satellites. ESA’s
experiments contributing to exploration activities. Exam— Education Ofﬁce sponsors the Student Space Exploration
ples include NASA’s Advanced Biological Research System and Technology Initiative (SSETIVZ WhiCh 31110118 other
(ABRS) for growing plants, microorganisms and small
arthropods; ESA’s European Modular Cultivation System Thttpzllwww.spacenews.com/civi1/101021—europe—broaden—
(EMCS) for multigenerational studies on the effects of access—iss.html
gravity on the development and growth Of plants and 22 http://www.esa.int/esaMI/sseti_express/SEM1927083E_0.htm1

"
"11","2108 M. Ansdell et al. /Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 2098—21 13
Table 4
Sampling of completed and planned CubeSat science and technology missions‘”l
Subjects Missions Lead entities Launches Descriptions
Astrobiology O/OREOS NASA Ames Research 1 1/2010 Studying the effects of the space environment on
Center organic compounds
Astronomy BRITE, CanX-3, CSA, FFG, University of 2011 Constellation of nanosatellitesforstudying
TUGSAT-l Vienna asteroseismology
Atmospheric science FIREFLY NSF, NASA 06/2010—12/2011 Studying links between lightning and terrestrial
gamma ray ﬂashes
Biology GeneSat—l NASA 2006 Studying microorganisms at the gene and protein level
when exposed to the space environment
Biology PharmaSat (GeneSat—l NASA 2009 Studying how microgravity effects the response of yeast
successor) to antifungal treatment
Education and European CubeSat ESA 2008 Annual student workshop on CubeSat development
outreach Workshop
Earth observation CanX—2 UTIAS SFL 2008 Usingan Argus IR spectrometer to analyze atmospheric
gases over Ontario, Canada
Electronics Robusta CNES/ESA/Montpellier In progress Validating test standards for space radiation effects on
University electronics
Material processing HawkSat—l Hawk Institute for 2009 Researching commercial material processing (could not
Space Sciences establish communication)
Space weather RAX University of Michigan, 1 1/2010 Investigating plasma instabilities that lead to magnetic
SRI International, NSF ﬁeld—aligned irregularities of electron density in the
lower polar thermosphere
Technology LightSail-l Planetary Society 201 1 Demonstrating solar sail propulsion technology in LEO
demonstration
a Adapted from Woellert et a1. [9].
things promotes and conducts student nanosatellite pro— analyzed countries chose to depend on a foreign govern—
jects. ESA also organizes the European CubeSat Workshop, ment or company to execute at least one of the Ladder’s
an annual event where students learn about small satellite milestones. They expressed concern that countries of lower
development and discuss CubeSat related topics with technological sophistication are often at a disadvantage in
experts as well as each other. Within the United States, these partnerships, and that it would therefore be bene—
its National Science Foundation has established a CubeSat ﬁcial for a country to ﬁrst build up some independent
program to support development, construction, launch, capability in order to partner later when more technolo—
operation and data analysis of CubeSats missions for gically equal. This raises the question, however, of how a
research on space weather and atmospheric science. country can independently build up space capabilities
NASA’s Astrobiology Small Payloads Program is currently without the help of foreign entities.
conducting a scientiﬁc CubeSat mission, O/OREOS, CubeSats could be one solution. Compared to traditional
described in more detail in Section 2.3.1. monolithic satellites, CubeSats provide a relatively simple,
low—risk and expeditious method of independently gaining
. . . foundational experience in space technologies. One suc—
2'3'1' .CubeSats for emerging space nations and developing cessful example of this approach is the Libertad-1 CubeSat,
countries , , , , , Columbia’s ﬁrst satellite, launched in 2007. An eight—
WhileZaBnaly21lng the hlstoncal paths Of Elght developing member team from the Universidad Sergio Arboleda with
countnes as. t 16y pursuecll. Tum? space Clapallil 1U? no prior satellite development experience produced Liber-
WOOd anthelige [10] estabhls Ed a rémeW0r<léa Ed t l: tad-1 at a total cost of only $250,000. Indeed, CubeSats are
Space Tec no ogy Ladder. T e Ladder 15 an ldefi 126d pat demonstrating their ability to provide cost—effective,
that acountry. could .follow as it develops natlonai space space—based science and technology platforms for emer—
Capabllities of1ncrea51ngtechnologlcal d1fﬁculty.U51ngthe ging space powers and developing nations [9].
Ladoer,lcommon decisiion areas for congitnes purslilnng The UN has formally recognized the value of small
naftfiona space Clipabll 1t1es hwere 114611“ .6121 1:5 W: as satellites to emerging space nations and developing coun—
,d1 erent approac es ta Sen?” en dea ling W; t, :56 S farﬁd tries. Small satellite projects build expertise in basic space
lssues. WOOd and Weige noted t at a 61g t O t e technologies and contribute to the planning and imple—
mentation of certain UN programs and projects for
23 Algeria, Egypt, Nigeria,1ndia, Malaysia, South Korea,Argentina, and developing countries- In order to promOte itS cause, the
Brazil. UN hosts regular small satellite conferences such as the

"
"12","M. Ansdell et al. / Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 2098—21 13 2109
UN/Austria/ESA Symposia and the UN/IAA Workshops on demonstrate technologies to investigate the viability of
Small Satellites. small, low—cost space missions for conducting astrobiology
experiments. O/OREOS will be NASA’s ﬁrst mission with
2.3.2. CubeSats contributing to exploration science the ability to support two independent science payloads on
CubeSats can play a supportive role in exploration a single free—ﬂying CubeSat. O/OREOS was successfully
activities. Several pioneering CubeSat missions (sampled launched in November 2010.
in Table 4 and summarized in this section) have recently CubeBots: As an extension of the concept of CubeSats in
demonstrated the ability to conduct scientiﬁc experiments orbit, CubeBots are exceptionally small sized (1—100kg)
in the ﬁelds of biology and Earth observation; planned mobile surface systems that could provide more affordable
missions in 2010 will validate their utility in other ﬁelds opportunities and thus broader participation in future
related to space exploration such as planetary science and space exploration missions. Over the past decade, excep—
space weather. CubeSats are also being used to demon— tionally smallrobotics systems have increasingly becomea
strate technologies for future space exploration, in parti— practical means of enabling space exploration including
cular solar sail propulsion. Moreover, it is envisaged that scientiﬁc investigation [6]. CubeBots could take advantage
CubeSats will “piggyback” on primary orbiters traveling to of recent advances in technology miniaturization to facil—
the Moon and Mars to support planetary science missions. itate low—cost secondary payload opportunities accompa—
GeneSat—l and PharmaSat (NASA): GeneSat-1,24 under nying primary surface missions to extraterrestrial bodies.
the auspices of NASA, was a successful biological science These systems have several limitations, in particular those
mission demonstrating the ability of free—ﬂying CubeSats regarding communications, precise transportation and
to conduct fundamental biology experiments at low—cost. landing, and power and thermal management. However,
GeneSat-1 studied the biological changes in E. coli micro— these challenges could be overcome by sending CubeBots
organisms at the gene and protein level when exposed to in groups and then linking the individual CubeBots to
the space environment, which furthered understanding of each other as well as to primary surface systems in
the impact of spaceﬂight on biological organisms as well as order to extend CubeBot lifetime and increase data
how to develop effective countermeasures. Using the same return [6].
3U conﬁguration, PharmaSat25 built upon the ﬂight heri— CubeSats are becoming an affordable means of con—
tage of GeneSat-1 to study how microgravity affects the ducting scientiﬁc research and technology development.
response of yeast to antifungal treatment, which furthered They are also being recognized as valuable tools for
understanding of the efﬁcacy of drugs in space. developing countries, as they serve as entry—level missions
LightSail-l (The Planetary Society): The LightSail26 for gaining basic space technology and operational exper—
program will investigate the viability of using solar sail tise. Current CubeSat activities in developing countries are
propulsion in space exploration missions. LighSail-1 is the focused on providing human beneﬁts through Earth obser—
ﬁrst spacecraft of the program and it will use three vations, disaster management and communication. How—
CubeSats to demonstrate solar sail propulsion in LEO ever, the revolution in the development of valuable science
(LightSail-2 and LightSail-3 will be larger spacecraft with payloads supporting space exploration goals for this cate—
more ambitious missions going beyond Earth orbit). gory of small satellites provides an attractive opportunity
Final designs for LightSail-1 are currently underway for developing countries to embark in science and technol—
and the Planetary Society is working with NASA Ames ogy support for exploration.Aworldwide CubeSat program
Research Center to secure a secondary payload launch that supports exploration and integrates emerging space
for 2011 [29]. nations and developing countries in a meaningful way will
RAX: The Radio Aurora Explorer (RAX)27 is a mission prepare for broader participation in a future global space
that will study space weather. It is a joint effort between exploration program. Mechanisms for achieving this are
the University of Michigan and SRI International, funded by discussed in Section 3.3.
the US National Science Foundation. RAX will investigate
plasma instabilities that lead to magnetic ﬁeld—aligned 3. Coordination mechanisms to prepare for global space
irregularities (FAI) of electron density in the lower polar exploration
thermosphere (80—300 km). Plasma turbulence degrades
communication and navigation signals and the results New coordination mechanisms that embrace a wider
obtained by RAX can improve current communication range of space actors and emphasize long—term coopera—
and navigation technologies. The satellite is a 3 kg CubeSat tion will be required to make the anticipated era of global
and was launched successfully in November 2010 as space exploration sustainable [11]. While new models of
secondary payload on a Minotaur IV rocket from Kodiak. cooperation should be built upon legacy partnerships, they
O/OREOS (NASA): As part of NASA’s Astrobiology Small also should be targeted to include emerging space nations
Payload Program, the Organism/Organic Exposure to and developing countries. By focusing on the three step—
Orbital Stresses (O/OREOS) CubeSat will study the effects ping stones presented in this paper — (1) an international
of the space environment on organic compounds and Earth—based ﬁeld research program preparing for planetary
exploration, (2) enhanced exploitation of the ISS enabling
T exploration and (3) a worldwide CubeSat program sup—
http://genesat.arc.nasa.gov/ . . . . .
25 http:Htiamanasa_gOV/pharmasat/ portmg explorat10n — the evolv1ng space commurnty w1ll
26 http://www.planetary.org/programs/projects/solar_sailing/ be able to take a loglcal approach toward bmldlng a
27 http://rax.engin.umich.edu/ sustainable global space exploration program while

"
"13","2110 M. Ansdell et al. /Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 2098—21 13
also including emerging space nations and developing the program in terms of hardware, but could host ﬁeld
countries in a meaningful way. This section discusses campaigns (if suitable terrain exists within their country)
potentialcoordination mechanisms for successfullyimple— and would beneﬁt from observing these activities and
menting these stepping stones. using them as a means of educating and inspiring students.
The recent proposal to use the Sainte—Rose Moon—Mars
3.1. Establishing an international Earth-based ﬁeld research analog volcanic site at La Reunion for future robotic and
program human exploration provides a good example for such
activities in developing countries [32].

3.1.1. Advantages

Although there are a number of Earth—based ﬁeld sites 3.1.2. Recommendations for implementation
currently being used to prepare for planetary exploration, A common roadmap for utilizing Earth—based ﬁeld
no integrated program exists to bringtogetherthese shared research sites should be established in consensus with
efforts (see Section 2.1.2). Consequently, there is no many international partners with a long—term perspective
common focus, roadmap or database within the commu— to enhance sustainability. Campaigns should evolve from
nity. In order to promote sustainability for global space simple ﬁeld trips characterizing the geological environ—
exploration, there is a need for a coherent program ment to complex endeavors testing large infrastructures.
established in consensus with partners worldwide and Evaluation of data and results should involve all partici—
supported by space agencies,NationalScience Foundations pants in order to embark on important issues such as
and other relevant entities. An international Earth—based standardization, computer methods and archiving. Enga—
ﬁeld research program is therefore an important stepping ging the public and media in such initiatives is already a
stone toward a future global space exploration program common practice and will be required to raise awarenessin
because it brings together space actors with different a future global space exploration program [33].
capabilities, thereby enhancing individual potentials and To further promote sustainability in suchaprogram, the
fostering collaboration. It also provides an international synergies of space exploration and Earth science should be
testbed for operational schemes and managerial frame— exploited on technical, managerial and political levels [14].
works, which can be ﬁne—tuned on Earth and then This can be done through the study of life in extreme
applied in future activities on planetary bodies. Moreover, environments, which is important for understanding the
it increases public awareness and engagement for limits and adaptability of life on Earth as well as on other
planetary exploration at various locations around the planets. A successful model upon which to establish such
globe. an initiative is CAREX, a program recently founded within

Most notably,lessonslearned from working together on the European Commission’s “Framework 7”. CAREX is a
Earth in the near—term will provide important insights into multinational initiative (its network includes 58 European
how to successfully implement speciﬁc exploration mis— and non—European partners)that takes an interdisciplinary
sions to the Moon and Mars in the future. Transnational approach to research on life in extreme environments by
cooperation will stimulate the sharing of expertise and covering subjects from microbes to animals and environ—
possibly resources as well as encourage the establishment ments from oceans to outer space. Using workshops,
of common standards, methodologies and frameworks summer school sessions and Knowledge Transfer grants,
[11]. International teams working together in the ﬁeld will CAREX facilitates networking and knowledge exchange
allowlogistical, cross—cultural, proprietary and legal obsta— amongst European scientists and aims to establish a
cles to be identiﬁed before embarking on ambitious activ— strategic European research agenda. Adopting a CAREX—
ities beyond Earth, where solutions are more difﬁcult to like model and expanding it globally to support an inter—
formulate and implement successfully [30]. In addition, an national Earth—based ﬁeld research program will encou—
international Earth—based ﬁeld research program will help rage cooperation between the Earth science and planetary
to address the current gaps in analog studies that were science communities as well as facilitate information
identiﬁed in a recent report by the International Space exchange, efﬁciency and sustainability. National Science
University [31],in particular the need for “a long—duration Foundations and other research institutions should be
analog mission design that includes robotic assistance as involved in addition to space agencies in order to engage
an integral part of the mission.” The report also proposed to experts from both communities.
establish a metric to enhance cooperation, ease standardi— Given the similarities between Antarctica and extrater—
zation, and sufﬁciently exploit datasets of analog studies restrialbodies (see Section 2.1.3), successful operation and in—
worldwide. An international analog program will help to situ exploration models could be derived from SCAR activities
address the current gaps in analog studies as well as that use regular meetings to exchange information about
facilitate the establishment of such a metric by bringing scientiﬁc research and expeditions; discuss compliance with
together various contributors at an early stage through a environmental provisions; and confer on matters of common
coherent program. interest. A comparable model adopted for an international

Emerging space nations could make meaningful con— Earth—based ﬁeld research programwould allowforaconstant
tributions to this program through, for example, the dialogue between partners worldwide that would facilitate
provision of small hardware elements. This would in turn the exchange of information on scientiﬁc and technological
allow them to gain valuable practical experience to support advancements; discussions on environmental protection reg—
later more complex space activities. Developing countries ulations and compliance; and the potential sharing of
would most likely be unable to offer direct contributions to resources in the pursuit of common interests.

"
"14","M. Ansdell et al. /Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 2098—21 13 211 1
3.2. Enhanced scientiﬁc exploitation of the ISS enabling National Laboratory users (i.e. US public and private
exploration entities) to perform studies that further their own objec—
tives, some racks should be reserved for developing
3.2.1. Advantages countries and emerging space nations to conduct experi—
Expanding international cooperation in the use of ISS ments in exchange for data sharing or other research
facilities through a long—term, science research and tech— related items.
nology demonstration program is essential forthe future of Scientiﬁc utilization of modular payload racks (e.g.
global space exploration. The 155 is a unique laboratory for EXPRESS racks) would be a logical ﬁrst step toward
the international advancement of human and robotic expanding ISS participation, as developing countries and
exploration, as it enables scientiﬁc investigations regarding emerging space nations do not have the expertise or budget
the effects of long—duration exposure to the space envir— to contribute station segments or provide transportation.
onment as well as the development of technologies and Moreover, data sharing as a means of repayment would be
materials for future exploration systems.By building upon consistent with NASA’s “no exchange of funds” policy.
its international governance model and maximizing the Scientiﬁc cooperation could also be used to build up trust
use of its recently integrated facilities, the role of the 155 between existing and potential 155 partners in anticipation
over the coming years will be to “provide important of more frequent and higher risk activities, such as hosting
technical, operational, and management experience in non—partner astronauts on the 155 or jointly developing in—
the conduct of long duration, multinational space mis— situ resource utilization systems for missions beyond LEO.
sions” [34]. In order to coordinate these activities and ensure the
It has been discussed on several occasions that includ— proper commitment of funding from these new partici—
ing materializing space powers like China and India as pants, the United Nations Committee on the PeacefulUses
space station partners is desirable. In addition, UN bodies of Outer Space (UN—COPUOS) could identify one scientiﬁc
have initiated discussions on how scientists from emerging entity from each developing country or emerging space
space nations and developing countries could be integrated nation wishing to participate in the 155 (in an area in which
with 155 agencies to produce meaningful results. By the country has developed expertise) and then match it
restricting such cooperation to research, (e.g. sharing with a scientiﬁc activity of an ISS partner. In the event that
research facilities, data downlink opportunities and data it is difﬁcult to identify the scientiﬁc entity, announce—
dissemination capabilities within the framework of an ments of opportunity or requests for letters of intent could
international program), potential legal and technical issues be used. Support should also be provided by organizations
arising from the involvement of non—ISS partners may be that fund capacity building such as the Committee on Space
limited. Although prohibitive regulations such as ITAR still Research (COSPAR). The involvement of the UN and other
exist, new export control reforms have recently been capacity building organizations will help to ensure the
supported by the White House and are now under con— political and programmatic commitment needed to sustain
sideration by the US Congress. The restructuring of the funding and continuity.
control lists, in addition to the harmonization of licensing
policies and development of a single information technol— 3.3. Worldwide CubeSat program in support of exploration
ogy system, will streamline the process of involving non—
ISS partners in scientiﬁc research onboard the 155. 3.3.1. Advantages
Proper commitments will be required for the successful CubeSats are an ideal platform for a worldwide program
expansion of ISS participation. This need was highlighted that engages a wide range of space actors because their
by the NASA—Brazil partnership, established by an Imple— standard speciﬁcations and use of mostly commercial off—
menting Arrangement signed in October 1997. Under the the—shelf components minimizes the potential transfer of
agreement, Brazil was to provide six pieces of hardware as sensitive technologies. Moreover, the lower costs asso—
part of NASA’s ISS quota, while NASA was to provide Brazil ciated with CubeSat development, deployment and opera—
with certain ISS utilization rights. However, Brazil was tion in comparison to traditional monolithic spacecraft
unable to deliver any of the elements due to a lack of lowerthe barrierofentry for countries with more restricted
funding and political priority within the country [35]. The budgets and limited expertise. Thus, developing countries
shortcomings of this partnership illustrate the need for in particular have a lot to gain from a worldwide CubeSat
new mechanisms that ensure expanded ISS participation program enabling exploration, as it would allow them to
remains a high political priority within participating secure basic capabilities in satellite development and
countries in order to ensure funding and produce mean— operation at low cost and in a relatively short timeframe.
ingful results. The fast development cycle of science payloads addressing
space biology, space weather, atmospheric science, mate—
3.2.2. Recommendations for implementation rial processing, astronomy and others [9], all relevant to
Upon completion of the 155 in 2010, only 48 percent of space exploration goals, provides opportunities for aspiring
NASA’s EXPRESS racks and 33 percent of NASA’s external space nations to advance technology and to participate
research sites will be utilized with the remainder available in the larger framework of a global space exploration
for other use. This availability was intentional so that the program. As mentioned before, basic space science and
155 would not only support NASA research, but also space applications (such as remote sensing) are both
the research of the broader scientiﬁc community [36]. pillars of the UN program to promote the beneﬁts of
Although these available payload racks are intended for space—based solutions for sustainable economic and social

"
"15","2112 M. Ansdell et al. /Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 2098—21 13
development [8]. Although emerging space nations have establish collaborative relationships with various space
already surpassed the level of technical autonomy and faring entities around the globe; gain returns in the form of
complexity required to independently develop a CubeSat, technical and operational experience; and build up science
they can still use the program for training in space project and technology infrastructure within their countries. One
development and management. Moreover, both develop— successful satellite ground station project in development
ing countries and emerging space nations can beneﬁt from since 2006 is the Global Educational Network for Satellite
using CubeSats as low—cost platforms for science research Operations (GENSO).28 Connected by the Internet and
and technology demonstrations. interacting via standard software, GENSO is an interna—
The UN has formally recognized the value of small tional network that aims to provide near—global commu—
satellites to developing countries. In 1999, the UN Ofﬁce for nications coverage for every educational satellite launched,
Outer Space Affairs (OOSA) and the IAA began jointly greatlyincreasing the educationalreturn from these space
holding annual workshops with the theme of Small Satel— missions.
lites at the Service of Developing Countries. Over the years, A model of cooperation that has not yet been demon—
workshop participants have acknowledged that for devel— strated is scientiﬁc data sharing in exchange for rideshar—
oping countries small satellite technologies are an effective ing. CubeSats developed by emerging space nations could
means of developing more complex indigenous space be transported to the Moon or Mars through “piggyback
capabilities; advancing an associated science and technol— rides” on more complex spacecraft developed by experi—
ogy industrial capacity and knowledge base; motivating enced space powers. Once at their deep space destinations,
and training students in related ﬁelds; and promoting CubeSats would detach from their parent satellites to
international cooperation and interoperability [8].Arecent collect data on scientiﬁc research questions, identify
development of these workshops is a new initiative within human exploration risks or investigate planetary protec—
the framework of the UN Program on Space Applications tion concerns. These data would then be shared in
known as the UN Basic Space Technology Initiative (dis— exchange for the piggyback rides.
cussed in more detail in Section 3.3.2).
. . . 4. Conclusion
3.3.2. Recommendations for Implementation
A successfulworldw1de CubeSat program in support Of A sustainable global space exploration program capable
space exploration must ﬁnd a way to max1mize the .
. . of conducting complex sample return and human explora—
1nvolvement of potential stakeholders as well as the . . . .
. . . . . tion missmns beyond LEO can only be made p0551ble
production of meaningful contributions to exploration. . . .
. . . through international agreements and the involvement
The involvement of UNBSTI could fac111tate the process, . . . .
. . . . . of established and emerging space nations along With
as it intends to be an information broker and interface . . .
. . . developing countries. In this paper, we proposed three
between stakeholders in the small satellite community, . . . . . .
. major stepping stones toward ach1ev1ng this goal. (1) an
espec1ally between those that have already demonstrated . .
. . . . . international Earth—based ﬁeld research program prepar—
space capabilities and those seeking to establish them [8]. . . . .
. . mg for planetary exploration, (2) enhanced exp101tation of
The UNBSTI would serve as a promoter of standardization . . .
. . . . . the ISS enabling exploration and (3) a worldw1de CubeSat
and coordination by engaging many international stake— . . .
. . program supportlng exploratlon.lmplement1ng these step—
holders and promoting mutual beneﬁts and meaningful . . . .
. . . . ping stones w111 un1te key stakeholders in the early stages
sc1ent1ﬁc and soc1al return. This approach would engage .
. . . . as well as improve and ease technology transfer and cross—
part1c1pants beyond national space agenc1es, thereby . .
. . . . . cultural management while also ensuring the development
av01d1ng any formal political commitment to large—scale . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . of1nterfaces that form the major prerequ151tes and building
initiatives, and allow for different entities to follow their .
. . . . . . blocks for a future global space exploration program.
own rationales for engaging in such missmnS—all impor— . .
. . . . . An international Earth—based ﬁeld research program
tant characteristics for sustainable international coopera— . .
. . w111 serve as a truly global exploration testbed to help
tion in space [34]. .
. better prepare for future planetary exploration as well as
One area of cooperation that would greatly beneﬁt the . . . . .
. . . prov1de opportunities for emerging space nations to foster
global CubeSat community is the establishment of a . . . . . . . .
. . . . partnerships and expand their 1nd1v1dual capabilities.
worldw1de ground station network. Due to a combination . . . .
. . . . . . . Enhanced exp101tation of the 155 during its prolonged
of low orbits and limited ground station availability, a l' . . . . . .
. . . . 1fet1me Will be critical to advanc1ng exploration beyond
Signiﬁcant challenge when operating CubeSats is the LE . . . . .
. . . . . O and Will also prov1de ample opportunities to involve
narrow Window of opportunity to downlink data w1th1n . .
. . . . . new space actors in meaningful research and technology
a reasonable time period after its collection. A worldw1de . . .
. . . demonstrations. A worldw1de CubeSat program Will be
ground station network would allev1ate this problem by . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . particularly useful for building up ba51c space capabilities
prov1d1ng near continuous periods of communication w1th . . . .
. . . and sc1ence knowledge in developing countries thus
CubeSats. The ease of establishing ground station networks . . . .
. . enabling them to integrate in a global space exploration
has increased over recent years due to the maturation of effort
the Internet, low—cost standard communication hardware '. . .
. . . This stepping stone approach that includes the broad
and open—source software [9]. Prov1d1ng a ground station . . . . . .
. . . part1c1pation of many stakeholders worldw1de w111 prov1de
node as part of a worldw1de network is therefore an ideal
way for smaller space actors to make valuable yet afford—
able contributions to the global CubeSat community; 28 http://www.genso.org/

"
"16","M. Ansdell et al. /Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 2098—21 13 2113
a bottom—up support structure to bridge the transition [16] K. Nitta, The mini—Earth facility and present status of habitation
phase from the present state of space exploration to future exPerlment Program, AFIV35P3CE Res- 35 (2005,) 153171.538- , ,

. [17] Y. Tako, One—week habltatlon of two humans 1n an alrtlght fac111ty
large'scale endeavors and space InfraStFUCtures' Space with two goats and 23 cropS—analysis of carbon, oxygen, and water
agencies, National Science Foundations, UN bodies, circulation, Adv. Space Res. 41 (2008) 714—724.

COSPAR, IAA and other capacity building organizations [18] European Space Agency (ESA) News, Concordia calling, 20 January
- - 2010, <http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEM2D9P]H4G_index_0.html>
should support such a stepplng stone approach 1n order to (accessed 5 June 2010)
reaCh a new lEVEI 0f COOperation in SpaCe EXplOI‘ation [19] Paciﬁc International Space Center for Exploration Systems (PISCES),
necessary to create effective and efﬁcient partnerships [20] gtgatngiC Plan12087-2017. Jlune 2098- . H . 1 f
- - - . . ox et a ., unar ana 0g testlng 1n awal’i: an examp e o
for the fUture as we“ as fOSter SUStalnablhty' internationalcollaboration, in: Proceedings of the 12th International
Conference on Engineering Science, Construction and Operations in
Challenging Environments, American Society of Civil Engineers,
Acknowledgments Honolulu, Hawaii, 14—17 March 2010, p. 1173.
[21] S.M. Xiang, D.H. Huang, Analog research in China’s lunar exploration,
in: Proceedings of the 40th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference,
M- AHSdeu and 13- Ehrenfreund are SUPPOFtEd by Woodlands, Texas, 23—27 March 2009, id. 1458.
NASA Grant NNXOSAG78G and the NASA Astrobiology [22] S. Mohanty et al. 2008. Survey of past, present and planned hnman
Institute (N AI) space mission simulators, in: Proceedings of the 38th Internatlonal
' Conference on Environmental Systems, San Francisco, California, 29
June—3 July 2008.
References [23] European Space Agency (ESA) Participation in MarsSOO, Mars500
quick facts, 1 1 June 2010, <http://www.esa.int/SPECIALS/MarsSOO/
SEMGX9U889G_0.htm1> (accessed 15 June 2010).

[1] DA. Broniatowski, et al., A framework for evaluating international [24] V. Hipkin et al., The Canadian Analog Research Network (CARN):
cooperation in space exploration, Space Policy 24 (2008) 181—189. opportunities for terrestrial analog studies in Canada and abroad, in:

[2] National Research Council and European Science Foundation, US— Proceedings of the 38th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference,
European Collaboration in Space Science, National Academy Press, League City, Texas, 12—16 March 2007, id. 1138.

Washington, DC, 1998. [25] J. Crisafulli, Personal communication with Megan Ansdell, 6]anuary

[3] ].—C. Worm, et al., Science—driven scenario for space exploration: 2010_
report from the European Space Sciences Committee (ESSC), Astro— [26] RB. de Selding, Partners Discuss Flying Space Station Through 2028,
biology 9 (2009) 23—41. Space News, 11 March 2010, <http://www.spacenews.com/civil/

[4] G. Horneck, et al., Toward a European Vision for space exploration: 100311—iss—partners—looking—out—2028.html> (accessed 15 March
recommendations of the Space Advisory Group of the European 2010).

Commission, Space Policy 26 (2010) 109—112. [27] Japanese Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), Current Status of

[5] National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), Mission Research Themes for I(ibo First Phase Utilization, <http://kibo.jaxa.
News, NASA and BSA Establish a Mars Exploration Joint Initiative, 8 jp/en/experiment/theme/ﬁrst/ > (accessed 16 March 2010).

July 2009, <http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/mars/news/mars— [28] Federal Space Program of the Russian Federation, October
20090708.htm1> (accessed 22 March 2010). 2005, <http://Www.federalspace.ru/main.php?id=85> (accessed 16

[6] Committee on Space Research (COSPAR) Panel on Exploration (PEX), March 2010).

Toward a Global Space Exploration Program: A Stepping Stone [29] The Planetary Society, Planetary News: Space Missions (2010),
Approach, June 2010, <http://cosparhq.cnes.fr/PEX_Report2010_]u LightSail: Firming Up the Spacecraft Design, <http://www.plane
ne223.pdf> (accessed 22 June 2010). tary.org/news/2010/0527_LightSai1_Firming_Up_the_Spacecraft.
[7] International Space Exploration Coordination Group (ISECG), The html) (accessed 20 June 2010).
2007 Annual Report of the International Space Exploration Coordi— [30] P. Ehrenfreund, et al., Cross—cultural management supporting global
nation Group, March 2008, <http://www.globalspaceexploration. space exploration, Acta Astronaut. 66 (2010) 245—256.
org/c/document_library/get_ﬁle?uuid=8e69fb55—4f9e—454c—b929—7 [31] T. Nordheim, R. Luong, M. Rosenberg, E. Hammons, Analog studies
d3aa659d6bb82groupld=10812> (accessed 12 February 2010). for preparation of human missions to the Moon and Mars, in:
[8] W.R.Balogh,H.].Haubold,ProposalforaUnited Nations Basic Space Proceedings of the Global Lunar Conference, Beijing, China, 31
Technology Initiative, Adv. Space Res. 43 (2009) 1847—1853. May—3 June 2010.
[9] K. Woellert et al., CubeSats: cost—effective science and technology [32] G. Pignolet, L. Fontaine, ].—P. Chabriat, The Sainte—Rose Moon—Mars
platforms for emerging and developing nations, Adv. Space Res., analogue volcanic site at la reunion for preparing future geological
in press, doi:10.1016/j.asr.2010.10.009. and human exploration, in: Proceedings of the International Astro—
[10] D.Wood,A.Weigel,The evolution of satellite programs in developing nautical Congress, Prague, Czech Republic, 27 September—l October

countries, in: Proceedings of the 60th International Astronautical 2010, id. 6322.

Congress,Daejeon,SouthKorea,12—160ctober 2009,1AC—09—B4.1.3. [33] P. Ehrenfreund, N. Peter, L. Billings, Building long—term constitu—
[1 1] P. Ehrenfreund, N. Peter, Toward a paradigm shift in managing future encies for space exploration: the challenge of raising public aware—

global space exploration endeavors, Space Policy 25 (2009)244—256. ness in the United States and in Europe, Acta Astronaut. 67 (2010)
[12] CR. Osinski, et al., Terrestrial analogs to Mars and the Moon: 502—512.

Canada’s role, Geosci. Canada 33 (2006) 175—188. [34] G. Gibbs, I. Pryke, International cooperation in space: the AIAA—IAC
[13] Z. Peeters, et al., Habitability on planetary surfaces: interdisciplinary workshops, Space Policy 19 (2003) 53—62.

preparation phase for future Mars missions, Int.].Astrobiol. 8 (2009) [35] D. Henriques da Silva, Brazilian participation in the International

301—31 5. Space Station (155) program: commitment or bargain struck?, Space
[14] S.Y. Chung, et al., Synergies of Earth science and space exploration, Policy 21 (2005) 55—63

Adv. Space Res. 45 (2010) 155—168. [36] Government Accountability Ofﬁce (GAO), International Space Sta—
[15] R. Léveillé, Validation of astrobiology technologies and instrument tion: Signiﬁcant Challenges May Limit Onboard Research, Report to

operations in terrestrial analog environments, C. R. Palevol. 8 (2009) Congressional Requesters, November 2009, <http://www.gao.gov/

637—648. products/GAO—10—9> (accessed 8 March 2010).

"
