"","x"
"1","tam”) Available online at www.sciencedirect.com _—‘————__
(f) (1) ® ism

(“e“ﬁg SCIENCECDIRECT

. 5U

“"" ﬁﬁll’ﬁlﬂlRl/llﬂUUHlE/ll
PERGAMON Acta Astronautica 58 (2006) 523—536 m

www.elseVier.com/locate/actaastro
A new countermeasure deV1Ce for long durat10n space ﬂ1ghts
Ryan L. K0briek*, Sarita Dara, J Ohn Burley, Stuart Gill
H—STRAW Project, Aerospace Engineering Sciences Department, University Of Colorado at Boulder, 429 UCB, Boulder,
Colorado 80309-0429, USA
Received 1 December 2004; received in revised form 31 August 2005; accepted 13 December 2005
Available online 24 March 2006
Abstract
This paper discusses a conceptual design of a new countermeasure device named Virtual Gravity Artiﬁcial Reality (ViGAR).
The device was part Of a complete concept called The Human Spaceﬂight Training Recommendations Against Weightlessness
Project (H-STRAW Project). The H-STRAW Project was a submission in the Human Missions Category for the European Space
Agency’s lst Aurora Student Design Contest. ViGAR is a combined countermeasure concept design for a space station, which
includes artiﬁcial gravity, exercise and Virtual reality. The subsystems 0f ViGAR are outlined in this report and the potential
difﬁculties are identiﬁed. ViGAR is a complete system that could potentially be a key design guide for future space missions
beyond low Earth orbit and on to Mars.
© 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Microgravity; Countermeasure; Space; Artiﬁcial gravity; Mars
1. Introduction and work in, for example, the Martian gravity environ—
ment (0.38 g) immediately after their arrival at their des—

For a crew to arrive at a destination such as Mars tination. For the next generation of human exploratory
in a Viable condition, they will have to counter effects missions, the key to mission success lies in overcoming
of bone loss, muscle weakness, vestibular readjust— the physiological limitations of prolonged exposure to
ment, cardiovascular deconditioning, metabolic and microgravity by means of effective countermeasures t0
endocrine alterations, and altered sensory motor per— ensure the long—term health maintenance of the astro—
formanee. They will also have to overcome the psycho— nauts.
logical stresses of sensory deprivation and monotonous Current evidence suggests that several countermea—
lifestyles. These health risks increase with exposure sures should be used simultaneously in order to main—
time to the space environment and therefore pose great tain optimal functioning of the human body and limit
concern for long duration space ﬂight within low Earth adverse physiological Change. The crew needs to follow
orbit as well as interplanetary missions. Moreover, a rigorous time—consuming countermeasures schedule
the crew may have to be in a Viable condition to live while in orbit 011 a day—tO—day basis. However, despite

the use of existing countermeasures, there is evidence
* , of continued muscle and bone deconditioning and post—

COHeSpondmg amhor' Tel; +1 814777 5256; ﬂight problems such as orthostatic intolerance and de—
faX: +1 845 853 1345.

E-mail addresses: k0brick@colorad0.edu, ryanxpc@gmail.c0m creased 6X61” Cise capaCitYa indicating a need for C1” CW 1‘ 6'
(R.L. Kobrick). habilitation upon return to Earth. The 188 crew spends
0094—5765/$ — see front matter © 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.actaastr0.2005.12.013

"
"2","524 R.L. Kobrick et al. /Acta Astronautica 58 (2006) 523—536
up to 3 h per day doing exercises and their post—ﬂight odiC gravity environment as well as exercise, by means
rehabilitation time is approximately equal to the time of a short arm centrifuge coupled with a variable load
spent in space. bicycle. ViGAR could be a test bed for variable grav—
One of the systems most affected by microgravity is ity research and for a variety of conﬁgurations a com—
the musculoskeletal. Due to the sudden absence of me— plete conﬁguration for a TransHab—like module (short
Chanical load on the body, there appears to be a disuse for Transit Habitat) was investigated. It can also be atool
osteoporosis and disuse atrophy of the muscles. Bone to make the quantitative assessment about the “Gravity
mineral density appears to decrease at an average rate Dose” requirements in terms of the amount of gravi—
of about 1% per month and begins within the ﬁrst few tational load and the frequency of such an exposure,
days in space. Current ﬂight studies indicate that the that is required to maintain physiological conditioning
bone loss in weight—bearing bones is not proportional in space.
to the length of ﬂight and that bone loss occurs de—
spite available countermeasures. Recovery of bone mass
upon return to Earth may take up to 2 years. Likewise, 3. Conceptual design of ViGAR
the muscles begin to atrophy and become smaller and
weaker. Calcium and phosphorous metabolism, which The ViGAR device uses artiﬁcial gravity, exercise,
is Closely linked to the musculoskeletal system, is also and Virtual reality to help to counter the physiologi—
affected. Aerobic and to some degree resistive exercises cal deconditioning associated with long duration space—
have been the primary countermeasures against bone ﬂight and will be the focus of this section.
loss and muscle loss throughout the history of space ViGAR will be a combination of a bicycle on a cen—
ﬂight, but have been only partially effective [1]. All trifuge with an integrated Virtual reality (VR) system.
this has cast doubt on the effectiveness of exercise pro— By creating an all—in—one device for the crew, an inte—
grams for musculoskeletal reconditioning. But this has grated package of countermeasures could be performed
also revived the interest in artiﬁcial gravity. at one time.
The basic premise about artiﬁcial gravity is to re— Such an integrated approach could have the multiple
place a “zero—graVity environment” with a “gravity beneﬁts of:
environment” and therefore minimize the microgravity—
induced physiological Changes. There are ground—based 0 Cardiovascular and muscular conditioning;
studies, which support the beneﬁts of centrifugation in 0 reduction 0f bone mass;
both experimental animal models and humans. How— 0 sustained 10W artiﬁcial gravity COhditiOIlS; and
ever, most studies give a qualitative assessment. The O psychological beneﬁts Of re—coupling vestibular and
beneﬁts of artiﬁcial gravity are yet to be quantiﬁed by Visual information.
both ground—based studies and space—based research.
Currently, in scientiﬁc literature, the focus is on an Crew time is extremely important for performing exper—
integrated approach, using both artiﬁcial gravity and iments; station keeping Chores as well as personal time.
exercise to ﬁght microgravity—induced Changes. Less time spent exercising could be of beneﬁt to pre—
vent long strenuous days of work and maximize crew
operation time. ViGAR therefore would be time and re—
2. The H-STRAW Project SOUTCC efﬁcient.
An increase in the ISS crew size would be highly
The objective of the Human Spaceﬂight Training beneﬁcial, as it would provide a larger pool of subjects
Recommendations Against Weightlessness Project (H— in space from WhiCh t0 derive data on physiological
STRAW Project) is to take a holistic approach to mechanisms of adaptations to long duration spaceﬂight
counter the key physiological problems and thereby and thC development Of countermeasures. AS originally
enable the “human” with “technology” so that they planned fOY the 155, a crew 0f SiX ﬂying CVCTY 3 months
can together push the frontiers. This paper discusses WOUId provide the possibility 0f 00116“ng data on 24
a conceptual design of a new countermeasure device P601316 in 1 year.
Virtual Gravity Artiﬁcial Reality (ViGAR). This design
was part of a proposal in the European Space Agency’s 3.]. Physics
(ESA) lst Aurora Student Design Contest.
ViGAR was designed to provide an integrated coun— In order to simulate gravity in a space environment,
termeasure for the space crew. It could provide peri— the spacecraft, module, or human in question must be

"
"3","R.L. Kobrick et al. / Acta Astronautica 58 (2006) 523—536 525
subjected to a centripetal acceleration (a—measured in ‘
meters per second squared). The value of this acceler—
ation can be considered the level of “artiﬁcial gravity” 1,)
experienced by the subject. The centripetal acceleration ”a;
is calculated based on two parameters, the rotational ' ¢ ‘1
rate or angular velocity (co—measured in revolutions f] ,
per minute) and the rotation radius (R), according to :1 , l
the equation: a = cozR. 1.; ' "" f .
For all conﬁgurations of ViGAR the rotation radius is f. I ,
ﬁxed, therefore the angular velocity is the only variable - _
that can be adjusted during usage to Change the “artiﬁ— ""
Cial gravity” level. The gravity gradient is directed from
head to toe to aid in ﬂuid redistribution and simulate z.
mechanical load. The magnitude of gravity gradients _ _ _
needs to be tested further to determine what the crew Flg' 1' CAD Of VIGAR for a Transmb‘hke mOdUIe'
can adjust to. BSA Astronaut Reinhold Ewald recalled . . . . . .
that in the Soyuz a 2 rpm solar spin after launch, during American male (US Adult CIVIhan anthropometric d1""
the route to the 188, do es not go unnoti C e d. mens10ns from Sanders and McCormick [5] and .Wood—
Two major design considerations must be made for S911 [6]). have been eons1dered andanthropometric mar—
a centrifuge to include the an gular momentum create d gins built in for adjustability to different crewmember
by a spinning body within the entire spacecraft and the body SIZCS'
induced Vibrations. Both of these have similar effects
on the overall spacecraft motion to that of a momentum 3,3, Design and technologies involved in main
or reaction wheel of a satellite. Large—scale construc— conﬁguration
tions can be used to overcome the constraint of inter—
nal ballistic motion. By counter—rotating a rotor to pro- One of the H—STRAW Project’s main goals was to
Vide equal and opposite angular momentum, gyroscopiC design a novel countermeasure device for use in space
torques can be compensated [2]. A dampening system for a variety of different conﬁgurations. Fig. l is a
can be used on the device similar to those used on pre— computer—aided design of ViGAR for a TransHab—like
Vious space exercise equipment such as the ergometer module conﬁguration. There are many advantages in
to reduce Vibrations. using an inﬂatable module such as TransHab, but mod—
iﬁcations would have to be made to the original internal
3.2. Anthropometric dimensions conﬁguration of TransHab to accommodate such a de—
Vice. Essentially the two major Changes to current plans
Anthropometric requirements inﬂuenced the design would be to create four ﬂoors instead of three, which
of ViGAR. Individual variations of crewmember body would isolate ViGAR for safety reasons and the second
size as well as physiological Changes in posture and modiﬁcation would be a reinforced structural core.
body dimensions such as circumferences, stature, and The H—STRAW Project team examined a TransHab
mass occur in microgravity. An example is the lengthen— module conﬁguration for the main reasons that the lim—
ing of the body as well as altered mobility and strength ited volume of the current 188 modules does not permit
Characteristics displayed in microgravity or partial graV— the testing of a sufﬁciently large radius centrifuge as a
ity conditions. This inﬂuences the dynamic anthropo— countermeasure tool. The modiﬁed design is based on
metric dimensions as described by the body in motion that developed at NASA Johnson Space Center (J SC).
and also the restraint design [3]. TransHab has had a high level of development already
The ViGAR design caters to the anthropometric cri— and has appeared in many Mars mission architectures.
teria of mixed—gender, multinational crews. For the In— Several NASA and BSA Mars planning documents have
ternational Space Station, the design population ranges identiﬁed inﬂatable habitats as crucial to the human eX—
from a 5th percentile Japanese Female to 95th per— ploration of Mars. Inﬂatable structures are to be a ma—
centiles US Male. This equates to a range of stature jor area of focus under Europe’s Aurora program and
from 149 to 193 cm [4] with a maximum—seated height ESA is already committing funds for the development
is 94 cm [5 ,6]. For purposes of this proposal, the stan— of a ﬂight demonstrator [7]. The ﬁnal factor of selecting
dard 5th percentile Japanese female and 95th percentile TransHab as the basis for this design is the frequent and

"
"4","526 R.L. Kobrick et al. /Acta Astronautica 58 (2006) 523—536
Table l
Gravity gradient experienced by ViGAR rider
2
£9 1 I..-._.I_I_-.I II-.- .. --_-_I.::’¢,-IIIIII I
'3 05 . - , ‘1. ,, ,, . - ,, ,, , ,
P"" . - 4
0 7 - '
0 5 1O 15 20
Angular Veloc ity (rpm)
continued appearance in NASA’s Mars mission archi— main ring. The motor speed is set by the user to the
tectures since 1997 as a test module on the 138, a transit desired gravity level Via the computer system on the bi—
vehicle to Mars and also a surface habitat. All of these cycle. A second seat or a mass would have to be placed
justiﬁcations were made as part of a Team Project at the 1800 from the main armature to balance the forces gen—
International Space University, which incorporated the erated by the motion and to prevent large oscillations in
H—STRAW Project’s ViGAR as a crucial technology for the structure which would lead to bearing damage (see
human missions to Mars. Fig. 2). The Choice of materials used for the reinforced
structure of the device must take into consideration that
3.3.]. B 0 dy orientation the equipment used must not create an electrical poten—
ViGAR has been designed so that the body of the t1al difference that could lead to corros10n.
rider is orientated with the head Closer to center of ro—
tation to create a ﬂuid shift to the lower body with 3.3.3. Counter-rotating ring
the induced gravity ﬁeld. The rider faces the direction A counter—rotating ring is used to balance the angular
of rotation (“wind in face”). This orientation also pre— momentum generated by the main armature. It has a
vents the formation of a gravity gradient across the lower total mass and spins faster than the main ring to
body as is generated in tilted centrifuges. Table 1 shows balance the angular momentum of ViGAR. The counter—
the maximum possible gravity gradient for a user on rotating ring would run on two sets of bearings and has
ViGAR in the TransHab conﬁguration (Mars relative compartments to add additional mass for larger users.
gravity is 0.38 g). The legs are moved forwards and the The total additional mass should be added to the ring in
seatback is slightly tilted to decrease the loads on the two equal portions located 1800 from each other. One
spinal column. Introducing a bend in the rotation arm of possibility is to add water to a contained section of the
the centrifuge reduces the added construction complica— ring to evenly distribute the mass over the entire ring.
tion presented by the tilt in the conﬁguration. The cen— This ring is driven from the same motor by the use of
trifuge would now have two pieces connected together gears as shown in Fig. 3.
adding a new stress point and increasing the mass of
the structure. 3.3.4. Foot pedal position
The pedals are fastened to a main shaft that can be
3.3.2. Main armature and main ring with countermass lengthened or shortened to meet the users dimensions
The main armature to which the bicycle and VR accounting for the longest rider legs possible. The ped—
equipment is attached runs on two sets of bearings. als were originally designed to be located in front of
A motor mounted on the frame of TransHab drives the the torso as with any ground bicycle, but in the end the

"
"5","R.L. Kobrick et al. /Acta Astronautica 58 (2006) 523—536 527
l 1 ¥ . I g ‘
Fig. 2. Main ring of ViGAR With two armatures.
3.3.6. Impact from pedal motion
Designers of exercise equipment usually go to great
lengths to reduce any ‘jerkiness’ so that the exercise is
i more comfortable for the user. However, in a micrograv—
“ _ 3A. ity environment it is desirable to increase the amounts
1§ of impulsive forces on an astronaut’s bones, muscles,
‘ ' ‘ § and joints since this type of impact loading is missing
\ in their day—to—day lives. It is possible to create pedaling
motions that induce more impacts on the body through
the use of non—Circular gearing in the pedal system, such
__ as has been included in the ViGAR design. An elliptical
_. _. - - "" ~* pedaling motion in place of the standard Circular action
, ' ' could make use of a longer, straighter ‘power stroke,’
r :u“ x l , followed by a sudden Change of direction With a short
”‘0“; 1‘; ‘ l l radius. The result is a rapid Change of direction that cre—
f $1630“ ates more impact—type loads. An alternative method of
3 33‘5“ pedal motion is the use of an elliptical pedal path that
-“.“l;‘~"" is itself rotating around the axis of pedaling. The re—
“k‘” sult is a seemingly random pedaling motion that places
'3‘. impacts on the rider’s legs in all directions. Naturally,
‘ there is a trade—off between repetitive impact loading
Fig. 3. Motor and gear assembly. and user comfort. This can be solved through experi—
mentation With ellipses of different dimensions. Each
astronaut could deﬁne preferred pedal—cycle geometry
to match his/her pedaling style [9].
decision was made to extend them away from the rider’s
body and upwards to meet design requirements of using
volume efﬁciently in TransHab. 3'3'7' . Cycle energy ”S? and storage .
Art1ﬁc1al grayity enVironments created With the use of
human power (i.e. the output of the cycling exercise) to
3.3.5. Foot restraints rotate a centrifuge has been proposed by past centrifuge
Supports attached to the feet on traditional space eX— designs, such as Space Cycle TM. The external electri—
ercise equipment are called subject load devices (SLD), cal power used by ViGAR for spinning the centrifuge
and the gravity replacement loads (GRL) are trans— has two main advantages. Firstly, it offers a broader
ferred through straps [8]. SLD devices are not needed scope of options for When and how the centrifuge can
in the case of ViGAR since the feet Will be locked into be used. Some examples of this ﬂexibility of operation
the pedals. include the use of ViGAR by injured crewmembers t0

"
"6","528 R.L. Kobrick et al. /Acta Astronautica 58 (2006) 523—536
beneﬁt from the artiﬁcial gravity portion without the system against Vibration and increase gear—teeth life—
exertion of the difﬁcult exercise bike, or conversely the time. Fig. 3 shows a schematic diagram of the gearbox
use of the exercise bike by a crewmember without spin— and bearings.
ning the centrifuge as a resistance. The second reason
to use external energy to power the centrifuge is that 3.3.9. Power requirements
a more consistent gravity ﬁeld is established. Human A device this large requires a minimum power sup—
power output can ﬂuctuate greatly, especially towards ply of 500W with 20—3OA in comparison to the en—
the end of a hard workout. If humans were the source tire current conﬁguration of the 188 system, which has
used to power the centrifuge, output ﬂuctuations would maximum power usage of 25 kW. The ﬁnal conﬁgu—
Create an inconsistent gravity ﬁeld. These ﬂuctuations in ration of the 188 will have a maXimum power supply
the gravity ﬁeld are major concerns as it is thought that of 125 kW.
reduced forces from gravity have less beneﬁcial effects
than higher forces, and that ﬂuctuating gravity may dis— 3.3.10. Fixed seat and back support
rupt the crewmember’s ability to adapt to the rotating An ergonomic seat has been designed for both male
environment. and female riders with a similar cover material to that of
There is valuable kinetic energy created by the exer— public gyms. This material adds sanitary protection and
Cise equipment that would be completely wasted if sim— allows an easy clean up after activity. The form of the
ply converted to heat energy. If a small permanent mag— cushion is similar to that of a car—racing seat for ﬁtted
net generator (dynamo) is used as a resistance device, comfort. The frame could be made with a webbing or
some of the kinetic energy can be transferred to eleC— light aluminum frame to avoid any off gassing from a
trical energy. This electrical energy can be used to di— foam material. The seat can be replaced for maintenance
rectly power electronic equipment, or can be stored for purposes. Feedback could also be integrated into the
future use in the form of rechargeable batteries. A ﬁt hu— seat with an actuator.
man male pedaling with a moderate force for 1h using The back support is softly padded to account for the
a small generator can produce a constant output power user’s motion while exercising. Orthopedic considera—
of roughly 200W. This is more than enough to power tions need to be used to develop the proper shape of the
for the electrical equipment that runs the VR compo— back support.
nent of the human centrifuge. It is estimated that a
next—generation VR system will not require more power 3.3, I 1, Virtual reality and user interface
than 25 W. The components of the VR device that re— VR is an important countermeasure. It is a technolog—
quire power include the computer system, the VR diS— ical means of altering perceptions, and is gaining pop—
play goggles, feedback sensors, and possible feedback ularity in the ﬁelds of psychiatry and psychology for
actuators. The total power drawn by the VR system iS therapeutic techniques as well as perception experimen—
muCh lower than the power output of the Cycling SyS- tation. For the ViGAR device, it offers psychological
tem, even accounting for conversion inefﬁciency, allow— beneﬁts by allowing the user to select the environment
ing the “left—over” electricity to be stored in a battery through which they will ride and also their preferred
system as backup power [10,11]. music or soundtrack. There is evidence to suggest that
the combination of VR exposure with exercise has a
3.3.8. Motor of choice synergistic effect, increasing perceived well—being be—
An alternating current induction motor (ACIM) is yond that achieved with exercise alone. Trials using an
best because it can be used for applications with high interactive Virtual reality bicycle whilst exercising on a
torque and high rotational speeds [12]. The AQM motor cycle ergometer at moderate intensity (60—70% of maX—
is ideal for constant speed applications, which are nec— imum heart rate) enhanced enjoyment and perceived en—
essary for maintaining a stable gravity gradient within ergy and reduced tiredness [13]. The increased enjoy—
the users body. The motor is used to drive two shafts ment may also make it easier to maintain the exercise
from a gearbox, which in turn drives the two main rings program over long periods of time, and the possibil—
of ViGAR at different rates of speed. ity of variation of the VR experience could reduce the
Differences in speed and mass of the two ring as— monotony of long—duration spaceﬂight.
semblies would create near equal angular momentum. VR may also help in reducing disorientation since
The motor would drive both rings with a series of gears the user receives continuous Visual feedback synchro—
and teeth on the internal structure of the ring. The nized with the proprioceptive feedback from the mus—
teeth should be coated in epoxy to help dampen the Cles of the extremity. Current VR systems are sometimes

"
"7","R.L. Kobrick et al. / Acta Astronautica 58 (2006) 523—536 529
' é mm: m. [an v.“ Go Wmdow mlp u. 0 4e 'c' Wed 1049A» ‘
9” £3.”Z‘"":L‘£;':."""""":.2L D
a
seam Clues Forest ‘; Pomona: mm.
Fig. 4. Possible user interface.

reported to cause Visual—Vestibular conﬂict (VVC), and 3.3.12. User feedback
research is ongoing to determine the extent of this ef— It is desirable to immerse the user in the VR enViron—
feet [14]. It is desirable for VR systems to minimize ment as much as possible, by “feeding back” to the user
VVC when used in l — g conditions, but the research additional stimuli that reinforce what is shown on the
in this area could be ‘spun—in’ to allow the re—coupling Virtual reality display. A creative method of feedback
of stimuli in microgravity. The Virtual world that could is to give the user information through the pedaling de—
be created to match the vestibular input may not cor— Vice. For example, a sudden increase in the resistance
respond strongly to the real world in l — g, but could of the motion of the pedals would reinforce an illusion
provide a novel sensory experience that should be en— of an up—hill trajectory for the cyclist. Also, by creating
joyable. When operated in a pseudo—terrestrial mode, a Vibratory motion in the pedals, a broad array of eXpe—
the bicycle Virtual environments are 3D modeled to al— riences could be portrayed, including riding over rough
low an increase in terrain difﬁculty, which would be terrain. Both of these effects can easily be created using
fed back into the pedal system to vary resistance, as in simple mechanisms in the pedaling device.
a standard exercise bicycle. The environments will in— To create feedback through the pedal system, it is
elude rides through forests, beachfronts and any loca— necessary to have a feedback line between the loading
tion in the world or out of this world depending on the device and the VR computer. The easiest way to create
user’s request before ﬂight. pedaling effects is to have the loading deVice rapidly

The computer interface also allows the user to View regulate the force applied to the user. The VR computer
movies, family Videos that have been e—mailed from controls the resistance ﬂuctuations. If the loading deVice
Earth, or other personal Choices such as the news from used is a small permanent motor generator (dynamo),
their home. The computer unit could also be used dur— it would be possible to place a switch in the resisting
ing personal time as well if no other users want to ride Circuitry to increase the load on the generator, thereby
but of course there are better locations onboard a station increasing the force required by the user to continue
to watch TV. The suggested platform for the computer pedaling at a given speed. The cycle speed also feeds
system is an Apple Macintosh to allow testing of new back into the environment to give the user an accurate
computers in space. A sample of the start—up screen is speed based upon power input.
displayed in Fig. 4. The wiring of the device is coated Another form of feedback in the pedaling system is
to avoid oxidation. The Virtual environment program the inclusion of a vertical linear actuator. This actuator
also includes displays of speed and gravity for use by rapidly Changes the distance between the users seat and
the rider. the aXis of pedaling, to create Vibrations or ‘bumps’ that

"
"8","530 R.L. Kobrick et al. /Acta Astronautica 58 (2006) 523—536
reﬂect what the user sees on the VR Visual screen. For been a number of alternative suggestions for tracking
the purpose of applying impacts to the user, the actua— the head for VR in microgravity, including optical, ul—
tor can augment or even replace the elliptical/eccentric trasonic and inertial methods. Ultrasound is deemed to
pedal rotation. A pneumatic—type actuator with a stroke be a poor option in the space environment due to ambi—
of only a centimeter is sufﬁcient. It uses the spacecraft’s ent noise and proximity of reﬂecting surfaces. Optical
atmosphere as the working ﬂuid in a miniature self— systems tend to be effective but can be interrupted if
contained compression system. The deVice is held in a something falls in the line of sight. Inertial systems work
compact space below the cycle seat. Using a series of well over the short term but drift effects cause errors to
gears, the pneumatic compressor is run by the user’s accumulate. The optimal head—tracking system is likely
pedaling motion. The VR computer controls the pneu— to be a hybrid, such as an opto—inertial system [16].
matic valves in the linear actuator as a form of feedback. Another important feature of the helmet is that it pre—
vents the user from seeing the spinning room, which
3.3.13. VR hand controls could cause disorientation. Ground testing would have
The VR hand controls are important for rider use and to be done to see how the peripheral Vision affects the
safety. The buttons are raised with different shapes so user and if it is not signiﬁcant then a variety of different
the user can easily identify which button they are about helmets could be used. Another possibility is if the hel—
to push. The emergency stop button is extremely impor— met is replaced by a simple head restraint to minimize
tant for safety and would require careful consideration the heat generated.
in order that it would not be accidentally pushed. The
controls include a track pad and buttons like a laptop 3.3.15. Adjustable head restraint
computer, which would function with the software to The head restraints offer minimal contact with the
offer these main features: user’s head, but simultaneously prevent the user from
tilting or turning too much. The greater the head move—
0 Scenery selection for VR (software application on ment, the greater chance of feeling Coriolis effects,
computer). which can facilitate space motion sickness. The restraint
o Dual—button emergency stop (due to sickness or un— can be adjusted on the central rail structure of ViGAR
foreseeable problems). to accommodate for the different heights of users, as
0 Music or background soundtrack selection (software well as from both the side and top of the user’s head
application). factoring in the size of the VR Helmet. If trials demon—
. Movie library and personal footage (personal CD). strate that it is necessary to keep the head still during
0 Centrifuge speed selection (to determine gravity gra— centrifugation, this will drive the need to develop effec—
dient before starting activity). tive eye—tracking VR controls.
0 Pedaling difﬁculty (determined by terrain in Virtual
environment). 3.3.16. Body and arm restraints
0 Turning of the bicycle in the VR environment. The body restraint, like the foot restraints, is made
0 Volume control. of lightweight and comfortable material. The strap is
located at the lower abdominal region and stretches to
3.3.14. VR helmet the shoulders. The forces generated by the rotation will
The VR helmet is designed to ﬁt many users and is keep the user in ViGAR, but the straps are in place for
kept small to reduce the heat generated while exercis— safety considerations to prevent the rider from falling
ing. Thermal ﬁns could be used to remove the heat load. off. Arm restraints may be required to prevent the arms
In essence, the helmet is more of a computer screen from ﬂailing and hitting the sidewalls. An ideal body
with adjustable eye—to—screen distance. The helmet can position for the rider includes having the hands resting
be upgraded to include an eye motion feedback into the forwards in front of the chest holding the controls. The
loop in future work. There are currently many methods rider will be strapped to the seat by a ﬁve—point harness
suggested for eye tracking and some are at the mature system.
level for use in VR systems [15]. The advantage of eye
tracking for VR immersion is that the head can be re— 3.3.17. Ergonomic support
strained but movement within the Virtual environment All the ergonomic features such as restraints and bi—
can still be controlled using the eyes. Eye tracking gen— cycle seat have factored in the following: heat generated
erally uses a pattern recognition algorithm to identify by the body, the use by multiple different body types,
the size, shape and location of the pupil. There have and simplicity of part replacement.

"
"9","R.L. Kobrick et al. /Acta Astronautica 58 (2006) 523—536 531
l 7
l
5; ’1 - f. -1 _ ”.2 'J. -7 .
1 _ . - é - 7 _ 7— 7— ""‘
l: I 5'“! - - i .—- l
' 1.0 .
' i L l. ;' 1. )9
J l l l l T - “J ” ’ "" ' f;
I M, o‘. L , ‘ - '.' _
l ' l ' ’ .1 — .. -. .1 J
t l? , . . ' 1 'i ”'1'.""- ‘.I
1 W 5 _
I . 11 l‘ l . l: r- l! .
M y w .. _ ; 1
“I r-'. Jul"" J 7' vii: :1 Ir '
*l 1'13“. 1 5 . '1!
l . » ~ "" 4:;- ’ '
l - ' 1’10 L3» ; ""4;..- '
1 -. a .1
. ---"" 1 '1
1' .1"" - i ‘ L; . l
I - ' ' 7 ' 1 J -
l [I] . ‘7 l. l. ‘ —J‘ _’ 1“! f,
H :i J l . I ‘1 t J ‘: dlr ' I ' A.
O '1‘ .- ”fill - ‘: ‘- l» J—LLD‘EEJ
':.__ r , 1'; 1
h ‘1 I ﬁx I ' l [1L1 .—=""[’r,
& , I §
o .‘r' [~A n :13“ . .‘l'
o o z o J _ ‘. . (7“? '
Fig. 5. Full View of modiﬁed TransHab With ViGAR in upper ﬂoor.
3.3.18. Vibration dampener 188 technical speciﬁcations is used With this device.
A dampener system must be tailor—made depending Also the activity must coincide With activities such as
on the ﬁnal space segment conﬁguration selected and microgravity and if attached to the 188 With a TransHab—
What other activities are on the space station. Recent like module, the crew might be required to exercise only
studies suggest diat Vibration may help prevent bone during station keeping boosts and activities. Of course,
loss, however Vibrations may disrupt microgravity eX— the same requirements for quality microgravity condi—
periments and maybe harmful to the structure. There— tions would probably not apply for an interplanetary
fore, a Vibration isolation system compatible With the mission.

"
"10","532 R.L. Kobrick et al. /Acta Astronautica 58 (2006) 523—536
3.3.19. Mode of operation ule in space. Additional air ﬁlters, fans or location of
ViGAR can be operated in automatic as well as man— ViGAR would be important for integration.
ual mode. There will be an inbuilt safety system for the
centrifuge. The user will be provided with the option of 3, 3, 2 3, Additional safety features
using only the bicycle for exercise independent of the Two modes of redundancy should be considered just
centrifuge and ViCC versa. in case the primarily driver of ViGAR fails. If it fails on
a long duration mission it would become dead weight
3320. Location Of ViGAR in a TransHab- like module unless there is a backup system to make it operational.
ViGAR’s location, as discussed, will require new This could be accomplished with a mechanical mode of
modiﬁcations to a current TransHab design. The loca— operation.
tion above the exercise and hygiene level with its own Motor shutoff in case Of emergency has been dis—
ﬂoor to protect other crewmembers from accidentally cussed from the user feedback but there should be a
bumping into ViGAR when it is active. The location of failsafe braking system to slow the vehicle down sim—
ViGAR is shown in Fig. 5. ilar to a falling elevator’s internal wheels that are de—
ployed. An automatic breaking system would not be
_ _ hard to add to the design. It should also be possible for
3'3'21' Mamtenance and storage of VIGAR other astronauts to shut down ViGAR in case of emer—
A ma] or concern enpressed by CSA Astronaut Robert gency, so an additional external shutoff switch would be
Thirsk is that while in space it can become time con— needed.
suming and frustrating to repair equipment. ViGAR has
the goal of reducing exercise time but it must be built
to. be robust enough not. to have this saved time. ﬁlled 4. Assembly on ground versus in orbit
w1th maintenance. Repairs on any deV1ce, espec1ally a
new design, may be required. In order to ensure that The rotating ring structure (both the main and
VIGAR can be tuned properly, extra p arts W111 have to counter—rotating rings) need to be built on the ground
be accesmble espec1ally if it is in trans1t for a long du— for several reasons including:
ration space mission, to Mars for example. These extra
parts will take more storage ioom again emphasizing . Creation of a smooth bearing track.
the importance of a well—de31gned structure. If main— 0 In—orbit assembly would require several smaller
tenance must be done, the crew must have easy access pieces to be put to gether in space, which could
to all parts. The deV1ce should beas modular as pos— lead to misalignment on the track.
Sible to replace darnaged sections if necessary. During . Small available volume.
ViGAR’s construction and. testing, the system. should 0 There is less than a l—m diameter to move parts
be analyzed to piedict Whleh parts are most likely to from a launch vehicle into the habitat, so parts
fail, and to spec1ﬁcally bring those replacements on must be small.
a long duration missmn or Mars mission. The. use of . Mechanical testing.
standard parts and ﬁxtures and the de31gn requirement 0 The counter rotating ring system can be further
of reparability would be recommended to aid on—board teste d to optimize the correct internal mass for a
maintenance. range of users, effectively balancing the angular
momentum based on the users mass.
3.3.22. Noise and environment pollution
Noise is a difﬁcult pollution to deal with onboard The ideal solution would be to build the ring structure
space stations and it is especially undesirable in Vi— on the TransHab—like module on the ground regardless
GAR’s TransHab conﬁguration. To reduce the noise of the date that the bicycleN R assembly is sent up.
generated by the motor and bearings on the two rings, The armature assembly can be sent on the same ﬂight
proper space—tested lubrication must be applied. To if there is room to place it in the deﬂated TransHab
avoid noise from the armature, all tolerances must be conﬁguration.
tight to keep ViGAR rigid when in use. Technical facilities to test the equipment are required
Air quality is extremely important aboard a station on the ground. These facilities need to test the struc—
because you cannot simply air out the module or vehi— tural strength of the entire deVice on the rings both on
Cle. Carbon dioxide build—up and proper oxygen ﬂow is its own and inside TransHab. The VR computer equip—
important especially near an exercise section of a mod— ment must minimize space use on the armature, and the

"
"11","R.L. Kobrick et al. /Acta Astronautica 58 (2006) 523—536 533
wiring must be designed to not interfere with user com— environment by keeping the user screen focused and
fort. Ergonomic studies could be conducted in the test— moving with relative eye movements caused by the
ing facility for all parts of the deVice to ﬁnd the ideal rotation. These sensors can also be used as monitoring
assembly, and also to see which materials can handle deVice.
the most wear and tear. These facilities can be used to
verify that the technology is. in .fact beneﬁcial for the 6. 0th e r conﬁgurations
human body and that the deV1ce is safe to use in space.

The .use Of YIGAR must also be adaptedto meet the The conﬁguration described in the preceding sec—
nonimicrograwty schedule Of the International Space tions is one of many possible solutions. The importance
Station or other platforms such as during the reboost of such a device is known, but currently no permanent
p hase. StUdleS have to be done for a TransHab—like 319(1— artiﬁcial gravity deVice eXists in space. The conﬁgu—
UIC to deﬁne SPCh changes and recommend the training ration was designed to save space on a TransHab—like
p rotocol for VIGAR' module in order to maximize the potential use of the

entire habitat.
. . . An alternative conﬁguration was considered includ—
5' Novel addltlons t0 VIGAR ing two large wheels rotating in opposite direction, and
. . . . on opposite sides of the middle column of TransHab.

Poss1ble add—ons t0 the VIGAR deV1ce include: The user’s head would be located in the middle, or axis,
0 Attaching a fan blade to the bottom of the bicycle to of rotation. This structure would be lighter and much

use the deVice as giant fan for self—ventilation. simpler to launch to space as an independent unit, but
0 Adding experiment racks to bicycle assembly to al— the main trade off was that this deVice would have to be

low variable—‘g’ experiments, or possibly just for almost 4m in radius (for each wheel) and would take
storage. This could be an alternative to adding mass up far too much volume in the module. In the design of
to the counter—rotating ring. a centrifuge, the radius of the armature does not have
0 Including eye feedback into Virtual environment such a strong effect on the g—levels created as the speed
using optical sensors to enhance the Virtual reality at which the deVice spins. The armature of the preferred

4:: i 21? ‘ J’ 7‘ ,J ..

{I “ ,l .
Fig. 6. Armature of ViGAR on central rotation point.

"
"12","534 R.L. Kobrick et al. /Acta Astronautica 58 (2006) 523—536
ViGAR conﬁguration takes advantage of the cylindrical speciﬁc objective of deﬁning the efﬁciency of artiﬁcial
shape of the middle column of TransHab to extend the gravity as a countermeasure, exploring the interaction
radius of the centrifuge. The most important factor for between artiﬁcial gravity and exercise in maintaining
the ViGAR design concept is that the bicycle and VR crew health and deﬁning the physiological thresholds
computer can still be attached to any conﬁguration or for effective g—levels as well as the frequency and
motor source (i.e. around a ring or a single point) as duration of g exposure.
seen in Fig. 6. This type of arrangement may be more The recommendation about the g levels, the rotation
suitable for non—TransHab conﬁgurations. rates and the duration of g exposure would have to be
validated on the ViGAR in TransHab. The functional re—
7. Problems With ViGAR and proposed solutions quirements for training will have to be identiﬁed. T here
. . . . . . . would be a lower g—level and g—duration limit below
Art1ﬁc1al grayity comes With its own eVils. There is a . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . Wthh intermittent centrifugation would not give sufﬁ—
high risk of 1nduc1ng Coriolis forces (leading to vestibu— . . .
. . . . . Cient beneﬁts. The maX1mum tolerable operating speed
lar cross—Coupling stimulation) and other spatially d1s— . .
. . . . . . has to be determined based on the neurovestibular re—
orientating effects like illusory tilt sensation and pos— .
. . . . . . sponse of the average human being (data from ground
tural 1nstab111ty. Head movements in a rapidly rotating . . . .
. . . . . based studies) and this Wlll determine the upper bound—
enVironment could cause motion Sickness and disori— . . .
. . ary on grayity levels. Studies have shown that the s1de
entation. Lackner and colleagues studied the effects of . . . . .
. . . . . effects of centrifugation like motion Sickness and spa—
Coriolis forces generated by art1ﬁc1al grayity on the eX— . . . . .
, t1al disorientation can be overcome by adaptation and
ecution of arm, leg and head movements [17]. The au— . .
. . . . by controlling the rate of rotation [18]. Current research
thors conclude that adaptation to art1ﬁc1al grayity (up to . . . . .
. . indicates that majority of the population can tolerate
10 rpm) occurs readily, espec1ally arm and leg control, . .
, rates up to 10 rpm. W1th ViGAR, at lOrpm, the g—level
while control of the head and neck takes longer. . , . . .
. . . . at the rider s feet (radius of 3.8m) 1s approx1mately
The disorientating symptoms could be complicated . . . .
. . . 0.43 g (a little more than Martian grayity). By varying
by the incorporation of the VR deV1ce. However, re— . .
. . . . . the rpm and therefore the g—levels—it would be poss1ble
straining the head to minimize the head movement and . . . “ . . ,,
. . . to identify the appropriate grayitational dose range
therefore reduc1ng the Coriolis would address these . . . . .
. . . . 1.e., upper and lower 11m1ts for phys1olog1cal beneﬁts.
problems. The VR deV1ce Wlll primarily be used as a . . .
. . The relationship between the angular ve10C1ty and the
Visual feedback about the status of the users motion . .
. . . g—levels at the head and the foot are depicted graphi—
wh11e pedaling. The pedal movement Wlll be synchro— call in Table 1
nized to the speed of Visual scene movement in the y ' .
. . . . . . . The ground research proposalw111 seek to address the
VR. This would minimize the conﬂicting inputs from . . . .
. . . unknown variables of art1ﬁc1al grayity and try to answer
the Visual and proprioceptive sense organs and reduce . . . .
. . . . . some of the critical questions like:
disorientation and motion Sickness.
Limiting exposure to brief periods daily could also 0 What is the minimum g—level required to limit the
help in adapting to the side effects (intermittent cen— adverse effects of microgravity?
trifugation). All these issues have to be thoroughly 0 What is the relationship of the physiological response
quantiﬁed and deﬁned based on the results from vari— vs. g—level?
ous ongoing animal and human experimentation. Very o What is the optimal frequency of gravity exposure?
little is known of the interactions of the artiﬁcial grav— o What is the duration of centrifugation to get measur—
ity with exercise. Whether these two countermeasures able beneﬁts?
complement each other is yet to be studied The ground 0 What is the relationship of exercise and artiﬁcial grav—
proposal will address some of these issues and would ity? What types of exercise are best in combination
also look at the interaction between centrifugation to centrifugation?
and exercise. 0 What are the adverse effects of artiﬁcial gravity and
what can be done to counter them?
8. Proposal for developing a training schedule with o What is the length of adaptation period from artiﬁcial
ViGAR gravity to zero gravity and Vice versa?
Feasibility studies and ground based human cen— . . .
. . 9. Spln-offs from spinnlng
trifuge research on human volunteers would help in
deﬁning a training schedule for the astronauts. The sec— 0 Many spin—offs are generated from new technology
ond part of this proposal is a research protocol with the developments. For this device, possible spin—offs

"
"13","R.L. Kobrick et al. /Acta Astronautica 58 (2006) 523—536 535
include new rides and simulators (especially using University; Professor Hugh Hill, International Space
Virtual reality), and new exercise equipment such University; Robert Thirsk, CSA Astronaut; Reinhold
as the cardio muscular conditioner (which is used Ewald, ESA Astronaut; Jaret Matthews, Fellow MSS
at sports centers and medical rehabilitation centers) 2003 Student (CAD drawings of ViGAR and module);
[19]. New studies can be designed to ﬁnd ways to Peter H. Diamandis, X PRIZE Foundation & Zero
keep astronauts safe and also to develop Clinical Gravity Corporation.
applications on Earth. A motion sickness adaptation
schedule and biofeedback for treatment of motion

- - - - - References
Sickness w111 directly result from the subject testing
of the device. . . .
[1] R.L. De Hart, J.R. DaV1s, Fundamentals of Aerospace Med1c1ne,
third ed., Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia, 2002
. . 602
10. 0nclus10n p '
C [2] S. Sherwood, Design organizational principles for Earth orbital
. . . architecture, in: AIAA Space Architecture Symposium, The
Th6 tCChIllCal dCSIgIl pr0posa1 WaS dCVCIOPCd taklng World Space Congress, American Institute of Aeronautics and
into consideration both the human requirements as well Astronautics, Houston, October 10—19, 2002.
as those for integrating ViGAR into a TransHab—like [3] C.- Perner, W. Langdoc, Design of interior areas, in: AB.
module Many possible developments are considered N1c0g0ss1an et al. (Eds), Space Blology and Med1c1ne, V01. 2,

' , , , ’ Nauka Press, Moscow, 1994, pp. 139—165.
as well as some Of the potential hurdles 31.1(1 difﬁculties. [4] NASA, Astronaut selection and training [electronic version],
A Simultaneous ground—based study W111 dCﬁHC thC Information Summaries, NP—1997—07—006JSC, Johnson Space
training schedules for the astronauts on this device. Center, Houston, July 1997, pp. 2—3.

Once Operational, ViGAR Will be an ideal test bed for [5] MS. Sanders, EJ. McCormick, Human Factors in Engineering
variable gravity research and may eventually prove to 32d 4]];814]; seventh ed"" MCGraW'HIH’ Inc"" Slngapore’ 1993
be 3' I'lovel comhined countermeaéures dCVICC that ceuld [6] WE. Woodson, B. Tillman, P. Tillman, Human Factors Design
help in countering the phys1010gical and psychological Handbook, second ed., McGraw—Hill, Inc., New York, 1992 pp.
effects of long duration space ﬂight. 555—576.

The project attempts to remain within the conﬁnes Of [7] P. Mitschdoerfer, Towards the future [electronic version], On
technologies that are near—term or in an early stage of Statlon (BSA. Onhne Pubhcauon)’ VOL 12.’ 2003’ pp' 17—19'

, , , [8] IL. McCr01y, H.A. Baron, S. Balkin, RR. Cavanagh,
devehpment’ 1‘ ather than 1n the domam Of hypOthetlcal Locomotion in simulated microgravity: gravity replacement
pOSSIblhtles. All of the key elements of the Space seg— 10ads,AViati0n Space and Environmental Medicine 73.7 (2002)
ment design and the ground—based program are within 625—631.
the scope of today’s capabilities. Of course, additional [9] A' Panto“, Gears and Gear DriVeS’ Mom)“ SyStem DeSign

. . . . Handbook, Penton, Cleveland, 2001, pp. A145—A160.
advancements m the ﬁelds Of VR,’ engineering, phys101 [10] ED. Butcher, Pedal Powered Generator, Personal website,
Ogy 9r Space'medlcme 0011“ be Incorporated by mOdl' 1994, Accessed Online 29 June 2003, Available at URL:
ﬁcation 0r reﬁnement of the proposal. The fundamental http://www.10s—gat0s.ca.us/daVidbu/pedgenhtml
point is that an interdisciplinary approach to the problem [11] EM. Shaver, Bicycle Powered Generator, Personal website,
of countermeasure design is one that can yield strong re— Accessed Onhne 29 MarCh 2003’ AVallable at URL:

. . . . . http://users.er01s.com/mshaver/bikegenhtm
sults. As an international student team With expertise in . . . .

. . . . . [12] NASA, Selectlon 0f electrlc motors for aerospace apphcatlons
meChamcal and aerospace. engineering, phys1cs, phys1— [electronic version], Preferred Reliability Practices, Practice No.
ology and aerospace medicme, the H—STRAW Preject PD—ED—1229 (n.d.), NASA Marshall Space Center, Huntsville,
team hopes that this Will be a valuable concept, and pp. 1—6. Available at URL: http://msfcsma3.msfc.nasa.g0V/tech/
demonstrate our belief in interdisciplinary thinking and PraCtlce/ basehne/ 1229meC'Pdf
in tercul tural COO eration [13] T.G. Plante, A. Aldridge, R. Bogden, C. Hanelin, Might Virtual

p ' reality promote the mood beneﬁts of exercise, Computers in
Human Behavior 19 (2003) 495—509.
Ackno 1e d ments [14] H. Akiduki, S. Nishiike, H. Watanabe, K. Matsuoka, T. Kubo,
W g N. Takeda, Visual—vestibular conﬂict induced by Virtual reality
in humans, Neuroscience Letters 340 (2003) 197—200.
I would like to especially thank my teammates from [15] CS. Lin, An eye behavior measuring device for VR system,
the Aurora Student Design Project, Dr. Sarita Dara, Optics and Lasers in Engineering 38 (2002) 333-359-
John Burley and Stuart G111. With these wonderful [16] M. Zaoui, D. Wormell, Y. Altshuler, E. Foxlin, J. McIntyre, A
. . . 6 D.O.F. opto—inertial tracker for Virtual reality experiments in
mlnds’ the H'STRAW PIOJCFt became .an award. Wln' microgravity, Acta Astronautica 493—10 (2001) 451—462.
11mg 00110613t and an CXtYaOlenafy learnlng CXPCHCHCCI [17] JR. Lackner, P. DiZio, Adaptation in a rotating artiﬁcial gravity
Professor Nikolai Tolyarenko, International Space environment, Brain Research Reviews 28 (1998) 194—202.

"
"14","536 R.L. Kobrick et al. /Acta Astronautica 58 (2006) 523—536

[18] A. Graybiel, Some physiological effects of alternation between [19] NASA, Cardio—muscular conditioner, NASA Scientiﬁc &
zero gravity and one gravity, in: J. Grey (Ed.), Space Technical Information, 1993, NASA, Accessed Online 2 July
Manufacturing Facilities (Space Colonies): Proceedings of the 2003 (http://WWW.sti.nasa.g0v).
Princeton/AIAA/NASA Conference, May 7—9, 1975, American
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Princeton, 1977,
pp. 137—149.

"
