"","x"
"1","1st Space Exploration Conference: Continuing the Voyage of Discovery AIAA 2005-2550
30 January -1 February 2005, Orlando, Florida
188: A Partner in Enabling Space Exploratlon
Through Reductlon of Risk
Gary H. Kitmacher, Manager, Technical Information and Education, International Space Station Program, NASA
J ohnson Space Center
Ilia Rosenberg, Associate Technical Fellow, The Boeing Company
William Gerstenmaier, International Space Station Program Manager, NASA J ohnson Space Center
“The best way to predict the future is to create it.”
Managing for Results by Peter F. Drucker
Abstract
Many management and engineering solutions contribute to the strength of a program. Management integration in cost,
schedule, and technical risk areas can have a signiﬁcant effect on program success. An assessment of cases from
several spaceﬂight programs and the 188 results in recommendations that can lead to future success. The 188 is
currently the largest space exploration program in the world. It involves several maj 0r aerospace companies and
international space agencies as partners. The 188 Program is of importance and relevance to the Space Exploration
Vision, particularly in the utilization of the 188 as a test bed for new technologies and techniques in support of CEV
and Lunar Mission hardware design and development.
I. INTRODUCTION
The International Space Station (188) has been, and Will continue to be, instrumental to the exploration of space.
During the course of the 188 Program, NASA has amassed critical insight in many areas crucial to space exploration
and Will further increase this knowledge as 188 progresses With assembly, operations and utilization. Knowledge has
been gained in all areas, including management, integration, operations, assembly, maintenance, International Partner
relationships, life sciences and engineering. NASA is at a critical juncture at this time, beginning implementation of
the Exploration Program in parallel With 188 operations. Careful forward planning and strong commitment can
maximize the potential beneﬁts gained from the 188 Program and reduce risk to the Exploration Program, While also
maximizing synergies between the two Programs for optimum resource usage. This requires that both programs work
together now to develop a strategy for implementation.
This paper Will address areas for future use of the International Space Station to raise technology levels and/or validate
concepts, designs, or technologies. The ideas listed can be planned in such a way that they Will be beneﬁcial to both
the Exploration and 188 Programs It does not address previous lessons learned applicable to Exploration.
II. 188 as A Tested for Exploration Systems and Operations
ISS affords a unique opportunity to serve as an engineering test bed for hardware and operations critical to the
exploration tasks. The 188 is a large, complex spacecraft operating continuously in space and maintained by the
onboard crew. Similar to spacecraft that Will support future missions beyond lOW-Earth orbit, 188 does not return to the
ground for servicing, and provisioning of spares is severely constrained by transportation limits, especially upon
Shuttle decommissioning.
The 188 can be Viewed as an ideal platform to use for mitigation of risks that cannot be assessed correctly on the
ground or are better reduced in space. The 188 is a Viable, and in many instances the only, test bed available in the near
term for increasing technology readiness levels and/or validating concepts and technologies for human space ﬂight in
space environments such as microgravity, thermal, radiation and contamination environments.
This presents NASA With a unique opportunity for technical and acquisition collaboration across two large NASA
Programs, Space Exploration and the International Space Station.
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2005 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
The U.S. Government has a royalty-free license to exercise all rights under the copyright claimed herein for Governmental purposes.
All other rights are reserved by the copyright owner.

"
"2","A. Areas of Applicability

Based on experience, even if the Space Exploration Program successfully implements all of the best practices
developed by NASA and industry to date, it cannot eliminate the risk inherent in its program. Utilization of the 188 can
help to mitigate these risks from an engineering and operations standpoint, as well as maximize the United States and
International Partners/Participants’ investment in the human space program. The ideas listed below have the potential
to beneﬁt both Exploration and 188. However, other exploration-speciﬂc concepts could be addressed and planned into
188 operations and should not be ignored if they have a higher priority than items listed.

In some cases , Exploration has approved Intramural Proposals and/or Extramural Proposals that are pre-cursors to
ﬂight demonstrations on 188. As these projects show promise, and as Exploration determines the priorities of the
projects, 188 planning to integrate into ﬂights and operations should begin.

Areas identiﬁed as being particularly relevant for use of 188 as an exploration test-bed include:

' Space Natural Environments and Effects — validation of integrated space environment models such as radiation,
meteoroids, and electrical charging (plasma), with the extrapolation of the orbital environment and mitigation
methods to the exploration environments. Validation of concepts/designs for improved radiation,
micrometeoroid debris, and noise protection. These factors should not be underestimated as there were maj 0r
oversights in the natural environment which resulted in inadequate features of the 188 design and which required
subsequent augmentation.

' Robotics — Flight demonstrations of new robotic designs/concepts or operational scenarios for assembly or
maintenance tasks.

' Sensors and Manipulators - Integrated Suite of imaging sensors and manipulators for in-space system inspection
or operation. The capability to perform a wide variety of local inspection and control operations can be
important to the long-term, robust operation of diverse systems in deep space and planetary venues. Human
Interfaces - Applicability of rich multi-modal human interface systems (Visual, haptic, speech, etc.) to problems
such as: (i) human-robotic on-orbit assembly of structures, (ii) distributed anomaly response systems for
advanced life support or vehicle emergencies, (iii) augmented and synthetic reality Vision, etc.

' Advanced Life Support Systems — increasing technology readiness and/or validating designs for closed loop life
support systems such as oxygen generation and waste (water) recycling.

' Long-duration Crew Health and Performance — provide valuable data on the long-term effects on the human
body and psychology.

' Crew health care and exercise — Validate concepts for advanced crew health care and exercise concepts.

' Human Interfaces - Applicability of rich multi-modal human interface systems (Visual, haptic, speech, etc.) to
problems such as: (i) hunian-robotic on-orbit assembly of structures, (ii) distributed anomaly response systems
for advanced life support or vehicle emergencies, (iii) augmented and synthetic reality Vision, etc.

' Assembly Operations - Efﬁciency, speed and preciseness 0f in-space assembly systems at a large-scale (e.g.
cranes), mid-scale (e.g. anthropomorphic robots), or small-scale (dexterous and/or micro manipulators), reliable
in-space self deploying systems, and self—assembling systems for applications in Earth-orbit, the Moon, and
beyond, including intelligent and robust docking mechanisms, as well as robust, autonomous rendezvous and
docking technologies and test beds.

' Advanced Power Systems; Fuel Cells; Batteries - Flight demonstrations to raise technology readiness or prove
out design concepts.

' CEV rendezvous and docking — ﬂight demonstration of CEV rendezvous and docking capability and design.

' Operational Concepts — 188 could be used to investigate possible scenarios that would exist in Exploration, for
instance a “day without communication between ground and crew”.

2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","' Synergy with Future Spares — To account for the decommissioning of the Shuttle, the 188 Program is in the
process of updating_its sparing and maintenance concepts. This will require more in-ﬂight maintenance and
procurement of additional spares. Some of these spares can incorporate new technologies/designs that will
beneﬁt Exploration and 188 simultaneously.

111. Conclusion
We View the 188 as an ideal platform to approach the mitigation of risks that are either very difﬁcult or cannot be
mitigated 0n the ground. Capturing the potential lessons learned from using the 188 as a testbed for new technology
will make better equipment for long duration Space Exploration ﬂights.
The 188 is a Viable, and in many instances the only, test bed for the concepts, which need to be validated in space
microgravity, thermal, radiation and contamination environments, to advance technology readiness.
It is well known that upmass, downniass, and crew time are severely limited in the 188 Program. This issue is being
addressed with emphasis on the need to support Exploration objectives. Priorities and strategies will need to be
addressed and developed ahead of time to ensure maximum use of these resources to NASA. It is imperative that the
two programs form and alliance and develop a strategy for more effective implementation.
NASA is embarking on a new and exciting chapter in space exploration. The new Vision for space exploration calls for
a sustained, achievable, and affordable human and robotic program to explore the moon, Mars and beyond. The 188
plays a critical role in paving the way for human space exploration beyond low Earth orbit. The President has given
NASA the goal to complete assembly of the 188 by the end of this decade and t0 re-focus U.S. research and use of the
188 on supporting space exploration goals, with emphasis on understanding how the space environment affects
astronaut health and developing countermeasures and spacecraft systems, such as those for life support.
Environment is a critical success factor and even if the Space Exploration Program successfully inherits and
implements all the best practices, developed by NASA and industry to date; it can not eliminate the risk inherent to any
new program. However, extensive utilization of the 188 can help to mitigate this risk from the engineering standpoint.
This presents us with a unique opportunity for technical and acquisition collaboration across the two largest NASA
Programs, Space Exploration built on the foundation and experience of the International Space Station.
The Space Station serves a wide variety of purposes. It is a microgravity and life sciences laboratory, a test bed for new
technologies in areas like life support and robotics, and a platform for astronomical and Earth observations. It is the
cornerstone of the Vision for space exploration. Assembling and operating the International Space Station has been
producing advances in our knowledge about how we can live and work in space for long, continuous periods of time,
and even the loss of Columbia has had effects on logistics support that has resulted in new knowledge and experience
about how to support extended missions at planetary distances. The knowledge we are gaining is critical for our future
journeys.
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","IV. Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Lorraine Anderson, Bradley Cothran, Ford Dillon, and David Lengyel for their support
and assistance with this proj ect and for their appreciation of the beneﬁts for utilization of the International Space
Station to be gained from this paper Rich Clifford, Mike Collins, Brett Anderson, and Leonard Nicholson gave
authors the detailed and sometimes arduous critique that we hope helped us to signiﬁcantly improve the content ﬂow
and clarity of concepts.
V. ADDENDUM A
Addendum A is a subset of already existing requirements documented in reference (3) that can be veriﬁed on the ISS.
* CTSOOSOH: The CTS shall provide the capability to monitor, command, and control the system segments and
elements.
Rationale: Mission success and the safety of the ﬂight crew, ground personnel and the general public will be dependent
on the ability of the CTS to monitor, command and control the system, segments, and mission elements. A critical
capability required for public safety is the ability of the Range Safety System to track launch vehicle trajectory and
performance and issue ﬂight termination commands if required. Another example is the ability to detect and annunciate
mission and safety critical conditions, isolate the conditions, and provide for recovery of mission and safety critical
functions.
* CTSOO75H: The CTS shall provide automated control linked to the mission phase and function.
Rationale: A high degree of automation is desired for the CTS to minimize the number of routine tasks required of the
crew and mission control personnel. The cost of automation must be balanced against development cost, schedule, and
technical risk. This requirement is a broadly deﬁned parent for lower-level requirements that will specify levels of
automation.
* CTSO300H: The CTS shall provide autonomous operations linked to the mission phase and function with an
objective of autonomous operations throughout the mission.
Rationale: A high degree of CTS autonomy is desired for the CTS. Autonomy is required for functions for which there
is not reasonable time for human response. A deﬁned methodology should be applied to each mission phase and
vehicle function to determine how much automation is needed, and to assess where it is cost effective. This requirement
serves as a broadly deﬁned parent for lower level requirements that will specify the level of autonomy.
* CTSO320H: The CTS shall provide manual intervention of automated functions critical to mission success and crew
safety.
Rationale: Manual intervention of automated control can be executed by ground control personnel or the crew. Human
intervention capability is required to ensure that automated functions do not perform actions that are inappropriate in a
particular failure scenario. For example, previous system or sensor failures may make an automated response
undesirable. Crew intervention requirements are covered in NPR 8705.2.
* CTSOlZSH: The CTS shall provide for TBD contingency EVA during operations in Earth orbit (TBD-33).
Rationale: Contingency EVA capability was speciﬁcally identiﬁed by the Operations Advisory Group (OAG) as a high
priority capability. TBD Closure: Speciﬁc contingency tasks cannot be identiﬁed until the CTS elements have been
designed. Therefore, this requirement will remain TBD, pending further study.
* CTSOl90H: The CTS shall detect and annunciate conditions which could result in loss of human life, loss of vehicle,
loss of mission, or signiﬁcantly impact mission capability.
Rationale: This requirement captures functionality, such as Integrated Health Management, for the detection of system
failures. For situational awareness, the crew and ground control must be aware of signiﬁcant changes in vehicle status,
even if automated systems respond to the condition. This requirement intentionally does not specify all failures - which
is not practical. Also, it is left to the program to interpret ""signiﬁcantly impact mission capability"" in the lower level
requirements. This requirement serves as a parent to ﬂight element health status monitoring requirements.
4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","* CTSOZOOH: The CTS shall provide autonomous isolation and recovery, With an objective of automated isolation and
recovery, from conditions Which could result in loss of human life or loss of vehicle.
Rationale: This requirement captures functionality, such as Integrated Health Management and redundancy
management, for the detection and mitigation of system failures. Reliance on communication With mission control to
avoid loss of vehicle or loss of life is not acceptable. Automated recovery should be used When practical, and for all
cases Where the time required for human response Will not prevent the loss.
* CTSOZ4OH: The CTS shall provide communication in accordance With the TED Constellation Systems 1RD (TBD-
66).
Rationale: The complexity of possible architectures and the serial acquisition of Exploration elements dictate a standard
communications interface between all elements of the Exploration System of Systems. ""Communication"" includes
command, data, voice and Video. Constellation Systems must deﬁne the standard communications system in an 1RD to
include bandwidth, rates, security, etc. The CEV and the CEVLS are the ﬁrst CTS elements that Will comply With this
interface document.
* CTSOZSOH: The CTS interface With the Ground Support System shall comply With the requirements of the TED CTS
/ Ground Support System 1RD (TBD-67).
Rationale: The CTS Will interface With Ground Support Systems such as Mission Control and recovery / rescue forces.
The CEV and the CEVLS are the ﬁrst CTS elements that Will comply With this interface document.
* CTSOZ6OH: The CTS interface With the In-Space Support System shall comply With the requirements of the TED
CTS / In-Space Support System 1RD (TBD-68).
Rationale: The CTS Will interface With the In-Space support System such as communications satellite systems and
navigation satellite systems. The CEV is the ﬁrst CTS element that Will comply With this interface document.
* CEV023OH: The CEV shall detect and annunciate conditions that could result in loss of human life, loss of vehicle,
loss of mission, or signiﬁcantly impact mission capability.
Rationale: This requirement captures functionality, such as Integrated Health Management, for the detection of system
failures. For situational awareness, the crew and ground control must be aware of signiﬁcant changes in vehicle status,
even if automated systems respond to the condition.
* CEV0047H: The CEV shall capture and archive mission and safety critical performance data.
Rationale: The ability to capture mission and safety critical performance data, and archive it in a retrievable format is
necessary to support real-time anomaly resolution and post-mission data analysis.
* CEV03OOH: The CEV shall communicate in accordance With the TED CTS 1RD (TBD-66).
Rationale: The complexity of possible architectures and the serial acquisition of Exploration elements dictate a standard
communications interface between all elements of the Exploration System of Systems. Communications includes
command, data, voice and Video. Constellation Systems must deﬁne the standard communications system in an 1RD to
include bandwidth, rates, security, etc. The CEV and CEVLS are the ﬁrst CTS elements that Will comply With this
interface document.
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","VI. ADDENDUM B
Exploration
Advanced Life
Support Systems .
Extrave(hiculjar KN , ‘\
Activity EVA 81K a .. A 5 .
Crew Systems \‘ ‘~';'5*‘:;_§ i Materlals 8‘
\ K . ~ 4.. ~ i“ 1 . ‘ , ____,45gnwronmental
\~\ , “f”; ' V g: _ ‘ ,/ \Ef‘fecgﬂ
:5"" AdVanced-"""""" 'a 5% ’33 a If ~25; ' \
Hgitation ,. 1 , _, ”i“ \ 5‘wa
""“ ; ' 7' ‘ . : . ‘ ’ \ 5%? 3‘s _ ,1; “ , ~
g -‘ stems g $3. $\QIW;\‘§ner9v
_,,. . , tr ,s \m to rage
Automation . K
and ' ‘
Robotics \ . Advanced
k _ Power
8' | - I R ' h \ Generation
IO oglca esearc
and \ 235.232? v. ~
Countermeasures "" < 'i' munication Advanced
Crew . ,-. tems’ﬂgui‘rgpulsmn
Transportation 2‘7 Ne or 1:; ”a ‘ a
and Re-sUpply ‘ ‘ "" ‘.,{’ d“
Figure D-l. Utilities and Candidate technologies for validation on the 188
The 188 as testbed provides many important utilities for future payloads as deﬁned in reference (10):
. Large test area for payloads
0 Electrical power.
I The 188 contains 8 independent power channels With primary power capability of 11 kW each
(capability varies With operating conditions, age, beta angle, etc.)
I Each DDCUs can provide secondary power (120 Vdc) at 6.25 kW and two
DDCUs can be operated in parallel for a total power capability of 12.5 kW
0 Recirculating coolant at ~ 35 0F
0 Cables to collect data from test article and to provide computer control
I Data can be transmitted to ground and/ or stored on orbit, as needed
I 1553 bus can provide interface With computers on 188, if needed
I On-orbit crew can interact Via laptops, if needed
0 TWO-Way communication With ground
0 On-orbit crew extra vehicular activity support,
. Cable junction boxes and ﬂuid quick disconnect couplings exist at truss joints
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","A. Candidate Technologies (Reference 6)
Variable Speciﬁc Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket (VASIMR), that is currently under development at
J SC. VASIMR is an electrodeless, electrothermal, RF-heated plasma propulsion device capable of
continuous thrust/ Isp modulation at constant power. (Reference 5)
- Thrust produced by VASIMR can be used for ISS drag compensation VASMIR can serve as plasma
contactor for the ISS.
° VASIMR can serve as plasma contactor for the ISS.
XIII. POTENTIAL ISS LOCATION
s""',f '
ﬂ
.. V ,4.
‘ \ o f < 7. «52%».
m: "" "" “\iafzcais .,
. “ 113535;»4, ""r- . “13(55'J"": ,V
, _ j “ ‘ \ "" ,. » ., “125355.; ,. , ""‘ '- - .V \{i'izﬁgit V.
‘ ~ __ ,_ «m; 3., .
- . ' I 1 I x ; . «’gtﬁ,
. _ ﬁwm . ____f_,.  » «g2; -
0
Figure A-2. Attachment at external payload site on P3 (or S3) truss segment shown
7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","A. Advanced Solar Array Technology (Reference 6)

° Test articles that utilize solar energy can be mounted on outboard truss to take advantage of ISS alpha
pointing

° Testing on 188 Will help advance technical maturity of concentrating and non-concentrating
photovoltaic arrays

° 188 can store electric power generated by the test article during isolation periods and provide electric
power to sustain the test article during eclipse periods

8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9",".ﬁ'e'e‘
. . I - I - —|-|..'l.-I'""-__‘__-I—-__‘__.—_
:==--:~.r+-n-¢- .~..
- ..""'r'.:'lll . : II i! - . 1 I'lrl'!‘
||I-III I ""III I i' ll II'.I- -. f:
-- H:- J .4? _ -r
u. . r l'.| ~ 'E'I. '
-_.I' I l. .
Deployable Solar Concentrator Lightweight PV Arrays
Figure A-3

B. Thermal Power Conversion Technologies (Reference 6)

- ISS can be utilized to test and validate thermal power conversion technologies in space environments

- The test articles may be mounted outboard 0f the alpha gimbals to take advantage of ISS alpha pointing

- Early External Active Thermal Control System hardware on P6 Long Spacer may be re—activated to provide

recirculating cooling ﬂuid for the test article, if needed

- Batteries on PV modules may be utilized to smooth out the electric power output of the test article

- Data from the test article can be collected Via 1553 bus, stored on orbit and transmitted to ground

- On—orbit computers can provide computer control for test article Via 1553 bus

- Crew on—orbit can provide EVA support, if needed
Li—Ion battery technology
Highly efﬁcient and long life energy storage systems are essential to enable Space Exploration Vision NASA and
Boeing NASA Systems have been actively pursuing the application of Li—Ion batteries for ISS and other space
application for several years
A ﬂight experiment using Li—Ion batteries on ISS would provide the applicable data and technology maturity needed
for manned space applications.

9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"10","Figure A-4 LI—Ion battery cells, credit — NASA GRC
. _ : ‘l J' -_ .' _' ”:55. 32-- - - .
I' -' I I. .|_-:::.:-i.::'- 4-HT '_'.
J Vjﬂf 1TH fill? __ '. ff = C. Advanced ECLS systems (Reference 7)
— ""_'_.'_.-:""""-|- :___.:.-"""":'PI *1, , - 188 can be used to test advanced in
' iii ff"" _ _ space based ECLS systems
-_ : ."" "" Ff ' ""_';-_ __ — Ground based technologies can
.: i. 3 w ""' _ be tested more efﬁciently 0n
1:: _ ' .9"" ""- the round
' -. l'"" . g
-. _,-_- ___. ' - Might be some
. .- -I‘. :1 ”u. _ .-— - "" exceptions for small
?'?h -' ' proof of concept
- . :55} .- .. experiments
.'.E'E:;: _ '
‘51? - Most notable candidates
I — Sabatier — Carbon Dioxide
Reduction
- Further closes the water loop
- Still dumps some COZ/CH4 overboard
— High Pressure Oxygen Generator
- Allows for in—situ creation and maintenance of high pressure oxygen resources
- Water is an efﬁcient way to transport oxygen verses tankage (cryo or high pressure)
— Trace Contaminant Monitoring
- Monitoring of speciﬁc list of trace contaminants for in—situ analysis is required for any long term
closed environment
— Static air/water separators
- Current dynamic separators have limited life
— (High Pressure) Nitrogen Generator
- Allows for in—situ creation and maintenance of (high pressure) nitrogen resources
- Some form of NXOX (Ammonia is also a potential candidate) is an efﬁcient method to transport
nitrogen verses tankage (cryo or high pressure)
— Waste (Trash) Oxidizer
- Allows to even further close all loops Via recovery of H2, 02, and N2 from solid wastes (human
solid wastes, food wastes, etc)
— Biologically based Water Processor
- Less logistical requirements
— Bosch — Carbon Dioxide Reduction
- Produces carbon; n0 hydrogen is lost
- Large in size and power requirements
D. On-orbit repair depot
1. Demonstrate repair processes in unique micro—g environment.
2. Station is Viable and only environment satisfying these requirements, it has direct beneﬁt to 188 by reducing
ISS logistics support requirements and supports 2+ spirals of exploration
1 0
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"11","E. Virtual Control Center
' Demonstrate an affordable and ﬂexible ground support approach for monitoring and control of in-ﬂight
operations:
° On demand utilization of skills
- Effective utilization of critical skills
° Provide reduced operations costs and efﬁcient access to existing data streams and retrieval of 188
data
F. Technical Approach:
' Situational awareness for ground decision makers by making data available anywhere/anytime
' Integration of existing ﬂight data capabilities at existing workstations/devices (pagers, blackbery’s, etc.)
outside of the MCC/MER
' Incrementally implement across all control centers/engineering backrooms, etc.
G. Crew Information Interfaces for the 188, Space and Planetary Environments. Enhanced In-Flight
Operations and Maintenance Data
Designing smart interfaces between the EMU and pertinent information databases on board the vehicle and on the
ground is imperative for improving mission performance and safety. Current EVA communications interfaces are
limited to voice communications, 0ne-wayte1emetry 0f astronaut life support, physiological data, and 0ne-way Video
Via the EMU helmet mounted camera. On-orbit ISS operations suffer from a dearth of communications infrastructure
components, Which have the potential to dramatically improve the ﬂexibility, robustness, and safety of future EVA
operations on the ISS and for the Space Exploration.
With 0ne-way1ine-0f—sight light-travel-time delays of 4.5 to 21 minutes between Earth and Mars, EVA operations on
the Martian surface are 1ike1yt0 be autonomous 0r semiautonomous and based on the skills—based training rather than
scripted tasks. (23)
The improved information interfaces Will increase crew and vehicle safety and reduce costs associated With operations
training. These objectives Will be achieved through:
- Enabling a multi-modal optimization framework across mission architectures by applying advanced human-machine
interface technologies to decision making models for time-critical actions.
- Designing intelligent data communication interfaces between the crew and imagery, operational and other pertinent
information databases on board the vehicle and on the ground.
- Including redundancy, advanced error correction protocols and decentralized design architecture, allowing entire
components and software/hardware strings to fail Without degrading the performance of the entire system.
- Providing the 188 as a test-bed to integrate and evaluate other projects throughout their TRL life cycle to ensure a data
rich environment for the system-of—systems architecture and enabling capability for technology infusion and future
architectural evaluation.
VII. REFERENCES
1. Kitmacher, G.H., et al. The International Space Station, A Gateway to the Future. IAF WSC 2004
2. Hodgson, E., et 211. Requirements and Potential for Enhanced EVA Information Interfaces, Conference
Proceedings, 2003 SAE International
3. Exploration System of Systems Programmatic Requirements and Guidelines Document, NASA Headquarters,
ESMD-RQ-0021, November, 2004
4. Exploration Crew Transportation System Requirements Document (Spiral 1), Exploration Crew Transportation
System Requirements Document (Spiral 1), ESMD-RQ-0011, ESMD-RQ-0011
1 1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"12","5. Chang Diaz, Franklin R., et a1 Rapid Mars Transits With Exhaust-Modulated Plasma Propulsion. NASA Technical
Paper 3539, March 1995 http://st0n.jsc.nasa.gOV/c0116ctions/TRS/_techrep/TP-1995-3539.pdf

6. Gholdston, E. Power and Propulsion Testbed on 188 — Concept and Applications. .Boeing Presentation, November
2004

7. Leonard, D.J. Advance ECLS 188 as a Test Bed, Boeing Presentation, November 2004

8. [M. M0rphew*, Psychological and Human Factors in Long Duration Spaceﬂight, McGill J oumal of Medicine,
2001 6: 74-80, http://www.medicine.mcgill.ca/mjm/V06I101/V06pO74/V069074pdf]

9. Zimmerman, R. Leaving Earth. J oseph Henry Press. 2003.

10. Foley, K. A Test Bed for Exploration Workshop to Enable and Realize the US. Vision for Space Exploration,
Boeing Presentation, November 2004.

12
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"13","1 3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"14","14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
