"","x"
"1","45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2007-544
8 - 11 January 2007, Reno, Nevada
Intravenous Solutlons for Exploratlon MlSSlOIlS
Fletcher J . Miller*
National Centerfor Space Exploration Research, Cleveland, OH, 44135-3191, USA
Charles Niederhausl, Karen Barlowi, and DeVon Grifﬁn§
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH, 44135-3191, USA
This paper describes the intravenous (IV) ﬂuids requirements being developed for
medical care during NASA’s future exploration class missions. Previous research on IV
solution generation and mixing in space is summarized. The current exploration baseline
mission proﬁles are introduced, potential medical conditions described and evaluated for
ﬂuidic needs, and operational issues assessed. We brieﬂy introduce potential methods for
generating IV ﬂuids in microgravity. Conclusions on the recommended ﬂuid volume
requirements are presented.
I. Introduction
The Vision for Space Exploration outlined a new direction for NASA, consisting of missions unlike those
accomplished before. These missions will return astronauts to the Moon and test the technologies required for Mars
missions. The International Space Station (188) will be used as a test bed for some of these new technologies.
NASA’S Exploration Systems Architecture Study presents the Design Reference Missions (DRMS) that are being
used to facilitate the derivation of requirements for the essential technologies. These DRMs include missions to 18$,
Lunar Sorties, Lunar Outposts, and Mars Exploration.1
These longer duration missions increase the likelihood of a medical incident and thus the need for medical ﬂuids.
The Patient Condition DataBase (PCDB) contains a list of over 400 medical conditions that may present and require
treatment during 188 missions.2 These conditions are a subset of the total possible conditions that could be
encountered during long duration, Extra-Vehicular Activity (EVA) intensive, exploration missions. Of the 442
conditions, approximately 115 may require medical ﬂuids during the course of treatment. Terrestrial treatment
would typically include ﬂuids such as Normal Saline (NS) (0.9% NaCl), 5% Dextrose, Lactated Ringer’s, or whole
blood. Operational constraints, such as mass limitations and lack of refrigeration, may limit the type and volume of
such ﬂuids that can be carried onboard the spacecraft. Representative conditions that would require ﬂuid treatment
include maj or bone fracture, burns, and acute anemia. These conditions are described in detail later in this paper.
Choosing a technology to generate sterile water for injection and produce intravenous ﬂuids requires balancing
capabilities with mission and medical requirements. For example, the type, volume, and timeline over which IV
ﬂuids are required are key drivers in selecting an appropriate technology. Additionally, the system must operate in
various gravity environments, such as microgravity, lunar gravity, and Martian gravity, while also functioning in
earth normal gravity for testing and veriﬁcation. Thrusting events also produce an effective gravitational level and
could possibly occur during ﬂuid production. Successful operation requires maintaining sterility. Some
technologies might be sealed until use, requiring only seal integrity, while other systems may require internal
recirculation or periodic maintenance to ensure proper operation. Diagnostics will likely be required to verify
proper operation of the system. Crew time is always an issue, and may be especially important in an emergency.
Any system must be relatively simple to use, safe, and reliable.
* Principal Researcher, MS 110-3
l Aerospace Engineer, System Engineering, MS 86-12, Full AIAA Member
I Student Trainee (Engineering), Bioscience and Technology Branch, MS 77-5,
§ Physical Scientist, Human Research Ofﬁce, MS 77-5
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

"
"2","A. Previous Research

In the late 1980s and early 1990s, NASA conducted a detailed investigation to determine the possibility of
producing IV ﬂuids on orbit as part of the Health Maintenance Facility of the Space Station Freedom Program. The
Johnson Space Center (J SC) led this effort, which included contracts with Krug International, Sterimatics, and
Baxter, culminating in a ﬂight experiment on STS-47 from 9/12/1992 - 9/20/1992. The ﬁnal decision at the time
was not to produce sterile water on Space Station Freedom, but to use prepackaged IV ﬂuids. No ﬂight-ready
hardware was fabricated for sterile water production. This section brieﬂy summarizes the results of those earlier
efforts.
1. I VFluidS Requirements White Paper

Creager of Krug Life Sciences (1991) evaluated siX scenarios requiring ﬂuids for medical treatment.3 Fluid
volumes were calculated for each scenario using seven types of solutions. The volume required to cover a particular
scenario ranged from 11 L to 90 L, averaging 37 L. The total volume required to treat all indiVidual scenarios
enVisioned for a mission and the minimum volume required to any one indiVidual scenario in a mission were also
calculated. The total volume of the 7 types of solutions required to cover one incident of each scenario was 220 L,
while 141 L was the maximum required to cover any single scenario. (The report suggested that the minimum was
123 L but there was an 18 L error in the calculations for the minimum amount of Normal Saline required.)
2. Sterile Waterfor Injection System

Krug International, as lead contractor for the Health Maintenance Facility on Space Station Freedom, contracted
with Sterimatics Corporation to develop a Sterile Water for Injection System (SWIS) as part of a system to produce
IV ﬂuids. The SWIS was a ﬁlter/adsorption based technology to produce Water for Injection (WFI). The design
goal was to convert ISS “hygiene water,” which has a lower quality than potable water, to produce WFI. System
requirements included producing at least 6 L of WFI at 6 L/hr with a sterile shelf life of 90 days, utilizing a ﬁlter
with a minimum shelf life of 1 year. As developed, the SWIS had a dry mass of 2 kg and produced 9 L of WFI from
water containing contamination levels 10 times the ISS potable water speciﬁcation. Testing indicated that at least
20 L of WFI could be produced from potable water. The SWIS was ﬂown on STS—47 in September 1992 as part of
the Fluid Therapy System on the Spacelab—J (Spacelab—Japan).
3. Zero Gravity I VMixing System

Krug International contracted with Baxter Healthcare to produce a system for mixing constituents in custom IV
bags. Baxter worked on developing methods to Ian both powders and concentrates, but was unable to overcome
problems in mixing powders.4 The development was constrained by a passive system requirement, utilizing only
water pressure to produce the mixing. Baxter conducted experiments with a dyed concentrate and observed a low
degree of mixing, with the heaVier, dyed concentrate located on the bottom of the bag in 1g testing. No quantitative
mixing studies were completed in normal or microgravity. Subsequent analysis and tests have demonstrated that
these mixing techniques can easily be gravity-driven and care must be taken not to interpret those results as a
testament to their effectiveness in microgravity.4
4. STS—47 Fluid Therapy System

The Spacelab—Japan Module ﬂew on STS—47 during September 1992. One of the experiments was the Fluid
Therapy System (FTS), testing the equipment and procedures developed thus far for IV generation. The FTS
utilized the adsorption ﬁlters developed by Sterimatics to produce the WFI, and the IV bags and mixing method
developed by Baxter to produce the ﬁnal solutions. An infusion pump administered a saline solution into a
mannequin arm to complete an end-to-end system test. The degree of mixing was not quantiﬁed on orbit, nor was
the solution frozen or ﬁxed in any fashion to preserve the state of mixing on orbit. While later analysis on Earth
showed that the ﬁnal solution met the tolerance criteria for solution concentration (i5% of desired concentration),
that determination was only a validation of the amount of solute in the ﬁnal solution, not a veriﬁcation of achieving
the in-ﬂight mixing requirements because Vibrations from landing and handling as well as molecular diffusion
would have easily homogenized the sample by the time the post—ﬂight analysis was performed. Ground testing of
the produced WFI also concluded that it exceeded the maximum Total Organic Carbon requirement. It has been
speculated that the source of this carbon was from the IV bags themselves, although channeling in the adsorption
system is also possible. In addition, Astronaut Mae J emison observed serious bubble problems during the
experiment.
B. Objectives of this Paper

This paper focuses on describing the requirements for IV ﬂuids for NASA’s missions and presenting key issues
in developing any IV generation system. It introduces potential generation technologies, and presents conclusions on
whether generating IV ﬂuids on orbit is preferable to ﬂying pre-packaged supplies. The proﬁles of expected
missions, as outlined in the Exploration Systems Architecture Study (ESAS) Design Reference Missions (DRM), are

2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","described and analyzed for potential emergency medical care needs. These missions are still very early in the
planning stages, so detailed equipment requirements have not been developed, and mission scenarios may change.
Much of the expected medical care needs are based on current and past mission requirements, as well as past
advanced planning.

Potential medical conditions are analyzed to determine whether IV ﬂuids might be required and the approximate
quantity. The analysis is on a layman’s level to give a rough estimate of ﬂuids requirements. Some of the key
questions and requirements that an IV generation system must meet are elucidated. Questions include quantities
required, production rate requirements, quality requirements, and in-space operation. Some potential technologies
are summarized. Conclusions are drawn about whether produced or stored IV ﬂuids are more appropriate for a
given DRM.

11. Medical Conditions Requiring Fluid Treatment

The 188 PCDB was analyzed to determine which potential conditions require ﬂuid treatment.2 Of the 442 listed
patient conditions that may be encountered while onboard the ISS, approximately 115 may require intravenous ﬂuid
treatment. These conditions may also occur on other exploration missions, possibly with a different probability of
occurrence. These possible conditions have been grouped into major areas where the reason for ﬂuid treatment is
approximately the same. The required treatment is developed only at the top level, following standard medical
practices. IndiVidual patient situations and physician preference may change the preferred ﬂuid treatment.

From the point of View of providing WFI for exploration missions, the most demanding scenario is treating a 100
kg male. While NASA does not have ofﬁcial astronaut weight standards, the maximum height allowed is 76 in, and
the maximum Air Force pilot weight at 76 in height is 102 kg. The main goal in this study is to determine the
overall volume of ﬂuids required, and which solutions are generally preferred. These results will be used to deﬁne
and size an IV ﬂuid generation system. The Space Medicine DiVision will determine actual ﬂuid requirements for
an operational system.

A. Severe Burn

Serious burns increase capillary permeability, causing ﬂuid to shift from the vascular system into the
surrounding interstitial space. This shift occurs in thermal burns of 2nd and 3rd degree, as well as severe chemical
and radiation burns. Fluid treatment is based on the size of the burned surface area, and is the same for all types of
burns. Burn surface area calculations include areas with 2nd and 3rd degree burns, but not 1st degree burns. Burns
covering more than 15% Total Body Surface Area (TBSA) require ﬂuid treatment to replace the lost intravascular
volume. In these cases, prompt ﬂuid treatment is critical to survival. There are many guidelines for ﬂuid treatment,
but the most widely recognized is the Parkland formula6. Most guidelines recommend ﬂuid treatment for 24 hrs, and
then lesser treatment for the next 24-48 hours, with ﬂuid intake levels approaching normal maintenance
requirements.

For this paper, the recommendations contained in The United States Naval Flight Surgeon Handbook7 will be
utilized and were based on recommendations from Brooke Army Medical Center. The Handbook recommends 2-4
mL/(kg %TBSA) of Lactated Ringer’s (LR) in the ﬁrst 24 hrs, with half of that amount given in the ﬁrst 8 hrs.
Recommendations for the second 24 hours are 0.5 mL/(kg %TBSA) of 5 % albumin in Lactated Ringer’s (200 cc
25% albumin in 800 cc of LR) and D5W at 2-4 mL/(kg %TBSA), which is the same ﬂuid hourly infusion rate as the
ﬁrst 24 hours. Albumin is not recommended, however, for inclusion in Exploration missions due to uncertain
efﬁcacy, storage life concerns, and radiation concerns.

A 100 kg male with a 40% burn surface area would require 16 L of LR in the ﬁrst 24 hours according to the
Parkland and Naval formula (8-16 L Naval), with 8 L given in the ﬁrst 8 hours. The second 24 hours would require
8-16 L of D5W and 2 L of 5% albumin according to Naval guidelines. As mentioned above, NASA will not plan to
include the albumin for exploration class missions. The D5W rate is adjusted by monitoring urine output, but these
tests may not be available on exploration missions. Fluid treatment beyond 48 hours would only be required if the
patient is physically unable to eat and drink. The maximum total ﬂuid requirements would be 16 L of LR and 16 L
of D5W, for a total of 32 L.

B. Acute Anemia

Acute anemia due to blood loss requires ﬂuid treatment to maintain the intravascular volume. The blood loss
can occur from a major laceration, puncture wound, or other causes. Crystalloids are the appropriate treatment for
moderate volume loss, but blood transfusions should normally be considered after 2 L of crystalloids. The general
terrestrial rule of thumb is 1 unit of blood for every 3 units of crystalloid. We made the assumption for this study,

3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","however, that blood would not be carried on board. Hemoglobin—based oxygen carriers (HBOCs) are a potential
alternative for whole blood in cases of severe blood loss, assuming a sufﬁcient supply while the body regenerates
the red blood cells. Blood loss of 40% or greater (Class IV shock) requires prompt resuscitative measures to avoid
patient demise.

Acute anemia generally utilizes only 2 L of crystalloids before considering blood or HBOC transfusion, although
for the 100 kg male 3 L of crystalloids would provide the same dilution. Normal Saline is the most commonly used
solution in emergency rooms. If the hemoglobin level is allowed to decrease from 15 g/dL to 7 g/dL without
oxygen-carrier transfusion, 53% of the blood volume could be replaced with ﬂuid. A 100 kg male has 7.1 L of
blood, compared to the typical 70 kg male with 5 L of blood. These volumes do not account for any possible
changes due to chronic hypograVity or hypoxic cabin environments.

A 100 kg male could receive 4 L of ﬂuid while maintaining a hemoglobin concentration above 7 g/dL, and 5 L
of ﬂuid and maintain a hemoglobin concentration of 5 g/dL. Because crystalloids tend to leave the vascular system
and diffuse to the interstitial volume, additional ﬂuid is required to maintain proper intravascular volume while the
patient recovers. Assuming a 30% intravascular volume loss is acceptable, a maximum 66% blood loss to maintain
sufﬁcient hemoglobin, and a 20% intravascular crystalloid retention, a maximum 12 L of Normal Saline would be
required for the worst case. A patient would be physically unable to survive without an oxygen-carrier transfusion if
the blood loss was more severe. Only 3-5 L would be delivered immediately, with the remaining amount delivery as
the crystalloid leaves the intravascular volume and blood pressure drops. Infusing 12 L of crystalloid could
introduce other serious problems, and should be considered an absolute worst case, to be used only if blood or
HBOCs are not available.

C. Drug Delivery

Certain medications specify delivery by IV ﬂuid. This restriction is often due to the need for a prolonged
delivery timeline, and may be avoided in some emergencies by multiple delayed inj ections. The ability to provide
drugs by IV does have procedural advantages in requiring less human involvement, eliminates multiple injection
sites, and provides versatility in varying the drug introduction rate. Currently, 4 drugs that are on the ISS require
some volume of IV ﬂuid for delivery, and 4 more are under consideration. Longer duration missions with no chance
of timely transport will presumably carry more such drugs. There are many conditions in the PCDB that may
require IV drug delivery, from severe conditions such as cardiac arrest to less life-threatening conditions such as
various forms of infections. To provide a quick method for administering medicines if needed, starting an IV line
upon admission is standard procedure in most terrestrial emergency rooms. Normal Saline is often preferred as it
avoids any potential problems with excess glucose. Lactated Ringer’s cannot be injected at the same site with blood
because of interactions with stabilizing chemicalsg’9 Many of the drugs requiring IV delivery would be administered
in one dose, or given over a relatively short duration. They would require only 1-2 L of ﬂuid for injection.
Conditions requiring long-term IV drug delivery typically require 1-2 L per day, with Normal Saline as the generally
preferred diluent.

D. Bone Fracture

Fractures of maj or bones of the body such as the femur, radius, or hip could require ﬂuid treatment. Maj or blood
vessels could be severed, resulting in blood loss and acute anemia. The blood loss is generally internal to the body.
Treating severe fractures requires open reduction and realignment; these procedures are simple enough for
consideration on exploration missions but this minor surgery entails additional blood loss. A fracture of the femur is
more severe since major arteries are subject to severing. A femur fracture can cause internal blood loss can be as
high as 2-3 L, with compartment syndrome a major concern.

Fractures of the long bones in the arms and lower legs can cause internal blood loss and sequestration, but
generally do not require ﬂuid treatment. A worst-case scenario for these fractures also includes open reduction and
requires up to 2 L of NS. Fractures of the femur can be far more severe. If a fasciotomy is not attempted to reduce
intracompartmental pressure and avoid tissue necrosis, the treatment ﬂuid volume required is bounded by the need
to prevent excessive hemodilution while preserving adequate blood pressure. This internal blood loss limit is lower
than that of the external blood loss case discussed in regards to acute anemia. An estimate of the maximum amount
of ﬂuid required to treat a femur fracture without a fasciotomy is 8 L of NS (again, assuming blood is not available
on board).

E. Fluid Maintenance

Humans require water to replace that lost during the day to the environment. Water is released through bodily

waste, through the skin as a heat regulation mechanism, and through the lungs due to evaporative losses during
4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","breathing. Normally water replacement is 2/3 from drink and 1/3 from food. A patient physically unable to eat or
drink must have water, electrolytes, and caloric requirements replaced intravenously. The most common method to
calculate requirements is the Holliday—Segar Method.10 This method is widely accepted, but was developed from
pediatric studies in patients up to 70 kg in weight, and has not been veriﬁed for low-pressure environments.
HypograVity is known to at least temporally affect body ﬂuid levels, and a low-pressure cabin might affect the ﬂuid
loss through changes in the respiration and perspiration rates. For humans >20 kg, the daily requirements are10

' 1500 kcal + 20 kcal/kg over 20 kg,

' 1 cc water/kcal,

' 3 mEq Na/ 100 cc water,

' 2 mEq K/lOO cc water, and

' 2 mEq Cl/ 100 cc water.

A 100 kg male would require 3.1 L of ﬂuid per day according to the Holliday-Segar formula. The solution
would typically be D5 1/2 NS + 20 mEq KCl/L. This should continue for not longer than 10 days before alternative
treatments are implemented due to the lack of calories and other trace chemicals. Assuming the patient would be
treated for no longer than 14 days worst case, 44 L of ﬂuid would be required.

111. Exploration Mission Fluid Requirements

NASA is currently considering and planning a wide variety of missions that vary in duration from several days
to many months in the case of a Martian voyage. The missions also differ from one another by the ease with which
a patient can be returned to earth. These two factors, duration and ease of return, dictate different ﬂuid generation
and mixing requirements for each mission, even for the same set of patient conditions. There will also be
considerable differences in the mass allotted for medical supplies to treat patient conditions. In this section, we
outline treatment timelines and ﬂuid needs for four different missions, one to 188, a lunar Visit, a lunar habitat, and a
trip to Mars.

A. Fluid Requirements for 188

The long duration nature of the mission allows for some ﬂexibility in the treatment timeline. The time, space,
and potentially the supplies required are available to treat the patient in-situ. Patients could be allowed to stabilize
after maj or injury prior to transport to earth. The transport time would be a matter of hours, but loading time may be
extended due to issues of moving the patient. For a worst case condition, the patient could be stabilized for up to
two weeks prior to transport.

The critical ﬂuid patient conditions for an ISS mission are severe burns, acute aneniia, major fractures, and IV
maintenance. It is expected that most medical events would involve only one patient, but a major ﬁre could
encompass multiple crewmenibers. The potentially long stabilization time makes maintenance the largest potential
ﬂuid requirements event. Based on more detailed analysis5, Table 1 illustrates the ISS ﬂuid requirements.

, , , Trauma or

, Major Long Trauma Wlth Illness Wlth Drug ,
Burn (2 patlents) , , Illness Wlth

Bone Fracture Acute Anemla Dellvery .
Malntenance
24LLR 8LNS 12LNS 16LNS 4LNS
77 L DSKS 9 L DSKS 9 L DSKS
Table 1: Fluid requirements to treat two crewmenibers with maj or injuries/illnesses on the 188.
B. Lunar Sortie

The short duration of the mission limits the potential time for patient stabilization prior to Earth return. It also
lessens the chance of multiple events during the mission. A maximum of 7 days can be spent on the surface, and
transport back to Earth can occur from any site at any time in 5 days or less. Medical events that happen during the
initial transit to the moon can utilize the free-return abort mode as in Apollo 13, limiting the maximum total
treatment time to 6 days for an event in the early stages of the mission when a direct—return is not possible. The
limited supplies in these missions will restrict the time allowed for stabilization prior to starting return.
Requirements in this document assume that transport will begin 24 hours after any maj or incident.

5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","The critical ﬂuid patient conditions are burns, acute aneniia, maj 0r fracture, and maintenance. The maintenance
ﬂuid requirements are lower than for the ISS mission due to the fewer days of treatment (6 versus 14). Severe
illness or infections that would require long-term drug delivery are not considered likely on these short duration
missions if astronauts are effectively pre-screened for health conditions.

The detailed analysis given in reference [5] yielded the following estimate of Lunar Sortie requirements.

, Major Long Bone Trauma With Acute Trauma 0r Illness
Burn (1 patlent) , , ,
Fracture Anemla Wlth Malntenance
16LLR 8LNS lZLNS 2LNS
28 L DSKS 9 L DSKS 6 L DSKS
Table 2: Fluid requirements to treat two crewmenibers With maj 0r injuries/illnesses 0n the Lunar Sortie.
C. Lunar Outpost

The lunar habitat missions currently envisioned Will require a crew of 4 occupying an outpost for up to 6 months.
A continuous human presence on the moon Will be accomplished by crew rotation. The supplies available for
medical treatment may well be increased over the short duration missions, but exact parameters have not been
established. The vehicles developed for the lunar sortie Will be used for crew rotation. This implies a maximum 5
days from return decision to touchdown. One of the purposes of this class of missions is validating technologies
required for Martian exploration, including medical capabilities. These missions are the best opportunities for
evaluating medical technologies and procedures for Mars missions When no return Will be possible.

The treatment timeline is similar to that outlined for the 188. The facilities available Will allow time for patient
stabilization prior to transport if that is the best course of action. Due to the relatively long transportation time With
limited facilities, in-situ treatment could produce better outcomes than evacuation. Requirements in this document
envision that a patient could stabilize for up to 14 days before a 5-day evacuation. Not considered are potential
mission scenarios With an extended duration rover away from the habitat for several days. Table 3 gives the
requirements.5

, , , Trauma 0r
, Major Long Trauma Wlth Illness Wlth Drug .
Burn (2 patlents) , , Illness Wlth
Bone Fracture Acute Anemla Dellvery ,
Malntenance
24LLR 8LNS lZLNS 16LNS 4LNS
92 L DSKS 9 L DSKS 9 L DSKS

Table 3: Fluid requirements to treat two crewmenibers With major injuries/illnesses during a Lunar Habitat
mission.

D. Mars Exploration

Mars exploration is planned as a conjunction-class mission, With a 6 month transit to and from Mars, and an 18
month stay. A crew of 6 Will be included on this 2.5 year mission. No early return is possible in the case of an
emergency. All medical conditions must be treated on-site With available resources. This mission Will include
extended time in both microgravity and 0.38 g. A pre-deployed surface habitat, and a pre-deployed Mars Lander
Will precede crew launch. Separate medical equipment could be provided for in both the transfer vehicle and the
habitat.

The inability to transport injured crew to Earth facilities requires that all medical conditions, except those at the
very beginning or end, must be treated to recovery, supply exhaustion, or death of the patient. The total mission
length is similar to the combination of 2 continuous ISS expeditions in microgravity and 3 continuous lunar habitat
expeditions in partial gravity. The medical conditions that may be encountered on the Martian surface are similar to
those for the lunar habitat. The microgravity transit Will presumably not include any construction activities like on
188, but could include repair EVAs. Mars Exploration Requirements are shown in Table 4.

6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7",". , , Trauma or
, Major Long Trauma Wlth Illness Wlth Drug ,
Burn (2 patlents) , , Illness Wlth
Bone Fracture Acute Anemla Dellvery ,
Malntenance
24LLR 8LNS 12LNS 22LNS 4LNS
148 L DSKS 16 L DSKS 16 L DSKS

Table 4: Fluid requirements to treat two crewmembers with maj or injuries/illnesses during a Mars mission.
E. Summary of Fluid Requirements

Within each of the missions, several scenarios were evaluated for the overall medical ﬂuid requirements. These
scenarios included a single event, a single maj or event with one minor event, a single maj or event with a burn event,
and other combinations described in reference [5]. Total mission ﬂuid requirements were then developed based on
treating various combinations of medical events. During this development, it was recommended that Lactated
Ringer’s and Normal Saline be considered nearly interchangeable electrolytes to reduce the overall volume
requirements.

Table 5 gives the ﬁnal recommended volumes for the various missions. The longer duration missions include
ﬂuid to treat multiple medical events. Mass constraints may limit the ﬂuid provided on missions, so a minimum
ﬂuid recommendation is also included. Normal Saline, whether premixed or mixed on-board during an emergency,
is the only electrolyte included in the minimum recommendations. The 188 minimum recommendation would be
sufﬁcient to treat any one medical event excluding maintenance ﬂuids (dextrose is carried to meet the 48 hour ﬂuid
requirement for burns). The lunar sortie minimum recommendation would cover any one event except a burn event,
and excluding maintenance ﬂuids. It would provide the minimum volume recommendations for a 100 kg patient
with 30% burns, although not the caloric intake provided by DSKS and not any ﬂuids beyond the ﬁrst 48 hours. The
lunar habitat minimum recommendation would treat any one event, excluding maintenance requirements. The
minimum recommended for a Mars mission is more generous. It would cover the initial ﬂuid requirements of the
burn event with two patients, and the initial requirements of any other one event. Maintenance ﬂuids for a total of
15 days are also included to treat the 3 potential patients.

M' , Recommended Event Fluid Volume Minimum Fluid
1ss10n
Coverage Recommendation Recommendation
. 20 L LR 24 L NS
Any one minor event
. 20 L NS 24 L DSKS
ISS and any one ma] or
86 L DSKS 48 L total
event
126 L total
8 L LR 12 L NS
, 8 L NS 12 L total
Lunar Sortie Any one event
28 L DSKS
44 L total
. 20 L LR 24 L NS
Any one minor event
L H b't t d . 20 L NS 24 L DSKS
n r 1 n n n m r
u a a a a a yo 6 a“) 101LD5KS 48Ltotal
event
141 L total
34 L LR 36 L NS
M E 1 t' Any two minor events 34 L NS 69 L DSKS
ars Xp ora ion and one burn event 180 L DSKS 105 L total
248 L total
Table 5: Final ﬂuid volume recommendations for exploration missions.
7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","IV. Considerations for Creating Water for Inj ection

When developing a Water For Injection (WFI) production system for NASA’s exploration missions, the unique
operational enVironment raises additional challenges not encountered when developing a ground-based system and
requires special considerations. In addition, the initial water source supplied to the system may have important
differences from the water that ground-based systems typically employ. The gravity level, radiation level, and
sealed enVironment all raise concerns about microbial contamination and how to maintain sterility of the system in
conditions not previously encountered by WFI systems. These concerns are in addition to the normal NASA
concerns on minimizing weight, volume, and power, while maximizing reliability.

A. Water Quality Requirements

The requirements for WFI and sterile WFI are set out in the United States Pharmacopeia (USP).11 That document
contains speciﬁc requirements that must be met, as well as general requirements that can be difﬁcult to quantify.
The general, unquantiﬂed requirements could be problematic with a unique system speciﬁc to NASA’s needs.
NASA’s needs may well be better met by a new type of system, but deﬁning equivalent performance of existing
systems is a challenge. As an example, the USP standard requires that source water meet Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) potable water standards. The EPA does not have standards on all possible contaminates, such as
iodine and silver because these biocides are not normally used in public water systems. Biocides are not allowed in
water for injection and must be removed. Reference [5] discusses in detail the various agencies and regulations
governing water quality and allowed contaminant levels in water to be used for different purposes.

B. Water Sources

While using potable water as the source to generate WFI is obVious, other potential sources exist. Short duration
missions could use fuel cells, such as in the Shuttle, to generate high purity water. Oxygen generation Via
electrolysis for moderate duration missions uses potable water with an additional deionizing bed to remove the
iodine biocide. This product water could also be used to generate WFI. A generic emergency water source to be
used for oxygen generation, medical emergencies, or replenishing potable water stores may be a Viable option for
moderate to long duration missions. Water obtained from in-situ resource utilization would presumably go through
processing to bring quality up to potable water standards.

Potable water on the 188 is used for drinking and hygiene. NASA potable water must meet requirements as set
out in NASA SSP 4100012, which is different than EPA standards. There is some overlap in the two standards, but
NASA’s standards cover contaminants speciﬁc to spacecraft water, and do not have requirements to eliminate
contaminants commonly found in public water systems. Overlapping contaminant standards are generally stricter in
NASA’s requirements, but this is not true for all substances.

Oxygen production requires higher purity water than NASA potable water. The Oxygen Generation System
(OGS) ﬂight hardware generates oxygen Via electrolysis and was ﬂown to 188 on STS-lZl this year. This system is
designed to utilize NASA potable water provided by the Water Recovery System. An internal deionizing bed
removes the iodine biocide, as well as other ions”. This treated water remains internal to the OGS, and is not
normally available for other uses.

C. Production Timeline

The choice of a system to produce WFI is critically tied with the timeline over which water would be available.
Systems that produce water more slowly must have some sort of stored capacity to meet potential requirements for
an initial bolus in the case of an emergency. Such a contingency is at odds with the general NASA philosophy to
eliminate the mass of stored water. Production timelines for various systems are described below.

An on-demand system would require a high production rate in order meet the initial needs, on the order on 4
L/hr. This high production rate may preclude certain technologies from consideration. Stowing limited supplies on
the order of 2-10 L to handle the initial needs, and then producing ﬂuids at a moderate rate to keep the supplies
replenished is an alternative to a large capacity on demand system. Typical IV ﬂuid maintenance rates are 4 L/day,
although certain conditions could require more ﬂuids in the short term. An online system available for production at
any time, or a limited use system that produces a ﬁxed quantity of ﬂuid before requiring consumable replacements is
another option. Cartridge-type systems use consumables to remove and store the contaminants. Cartridge systems
typically treat limited quantities of ﬂuid, on the order of 10 L. Such systems could be developed for one time use,
where a cartridge is rated to purify a prescribed volume of ﬂuid and is also rated for a limited duration of dry, sterile
storage.

8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","D. Solution Production

The ﬁnal product for ultimate use is a medical solution. This requires adding and mixing the constituents, such
as sodium chloride, glucose, or other pharmaceuticals. The physical state of the constituents directly affects the
mixing method and indirectly affects the water production method. The mixing time also inﬂuences the delivery
timeline. Time to treatment can be critical in an emergency. To ﬁt Within a therapeutic Window, longer mixing
times reduce the time available for WFI production. A long mixing time may require a large capacity production
system to decrease the WFI production time. Mixing time is less critical for a system With emergency stores. The
method appropriate for mixing the solution to ﬁnal form is the subject of an ongoing proj ect at GRC.14
E. Hypogravity Production Challenges

MicrograVity poses operational challenges for any ﬂuid system. Potential problems in an IV system arise in all
phases of operation, from production to storage to handling. There are also potentially unique sterility issues arising
from microgravity operation. Addressing challenges induced by hypograVity issues should be tackled early in the
design phase, rather than attempting to add ad hoc solutions later in the development process. Design challenges
due to altered gravity are frequently of such magnitude that they can only be effectively addressed in the design
phase. In general, partial gravity systems are somewhat easier to design and test, but still require careful analysis. A
more detailed discussion of the difﬁculties hypograVity imposes is given in reference [5], While a summary is
provided below.

Many of the microgravity ﬂuids issues arise When a liquid-vapor interface is present. The interface may be
present by design, or as an off—nominal condition. All production methods are potentially affected by the presence
of bubbles in the system. The location of bubbles in microgravity is much more difﬁcult to predict because, unlike
normal gravity, the system has no top. Thus, mitigating bubble problems is harder in microgravity. Bubbles can
cause pump problems such as loss of prime, Which could be mitigated by less susceptible positive displacement
pumps. Adsorbent media such as charcoal ﬁlters or ion-exchange resins are only effective When water is able to
pass through them. Such media are rendered ineffective When the gas bubbles effectively channel the liquid ﬂow
around a dry volume, or could result in a stagnant ﬂow, Which can then become a bacterial breeding ground. Filters
and membranes can be rendered ineffective for similar reasons.

Many ground-based systems, and some proposed microgravity systems have a storage vessel for limited WFI
storage. Storage may not be required for an on-demand system, but a system designed for gradual replacement may
perform better by storing small volumes of WFI prior to ﬁlling IV bags. Filling, venting, and removal from
containers in microgravity is complicated by ensuring the proper location of the liquid and vapor present. Capillary
devices are often used for liquid management.

Using devices at various places in the system to trap and remove the bubbles could alleViate MicrograVity
handling challenges. Bubble traps could remove inlet bubbles from source water prior to entering the WFI
production system, prior to any storage container, the mixing device, and/or prior to actual use. These traps could be
used constantly, such as the inlet trap, be required only during a priming operation, or require monitoring and action
if the closed system is breached and a bubble enters the system. Some production methods, such as distillation, may
require more rigorous bubble control methods. There may also be microgravity-handling issues With particulates in
the system. The ﬁlter-based technologies may have particulates released from the media that may be more readily
transported in microgravity, depending on ﬁlter orientation.15

Maintaining sterility of a medical water generation system is critical to its ultimate performance. This task is
challenging under normal gravity, and presents some unknown issues in microgravity. The enVironmental effects of
microgravity and increased radiation may cause differences in microbial growth, as well as potentially increase
mutation. Cell culture experiments on Shuttle and 188 have shown measurable differences in microgravity, but
operational experience on Mir and 188 has not shown noticeable microbial differences With gravity level. It is not
expected that microgravity operation Will present any additional sterility challenges.

V. Potential Production Technologies

Table 6 gives a summary of the technologies that could be used to generate WFI during an emergency and for
subsequent maintenance needs.5 (Note that the SBIR level technologies are not included in the table and the reader is
referred to reference [5] for those). Only two technologies are currently approved for WFI, distillation and reverse
osmosis. Unfortunately, both suffer from disadvantages that make them difﬁcult to adapt to spacecraft use.
Distillation requires a large amount of energy, a cooling surface, and gravity or other means of separating the gas
from the liquid. R0, meanwhile needs a relatively high-pressure water source, and faces sterilization issues for
repeated use.

9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"10","Currently the technology next closest to meeting USP standards is a combination of ﬁltration (to remove larger
contaminants) and adsorption to remove speciﬁc molecular and living species (i.e., Viruses). While not yet approved
for parenteral use, vendors are making improvements that may allow this use in the future. Forward osmosis (F0)
could likely be approved for parenteral use, given that RO is approved, but is limited to producing concentrated
solutions and not nearly as ﬂexible as technologies that produce pure water from Which the desired solution can be
made. FO may ﬁnd a niche application in WFI. The remaining three technologies, membrane distillation, osmotic
distillation (Which, like PC, can only produce concentrated solutions), and nano-ﬁltration offer some potential
advantages of weight and power, but are still in the development stage and would require more extensive work to
produce WFI in space.

A future trade study is planned to identify, evaluate in more detail, and draw conclusions about these potential
WFI production methods. The trade study Will select the method most appropriate for the various DRMs, and
provide estimates of expected performance. Other technologies may be identiﬁed during the trade study and
included as well. The potential technologies Will be quantitatively evaluated to present a non-biased ranking. The
selection criteria Will include parameters such as production rate, sterility, mass, consumables, hypograVity
conﬁdence, operations, and development ease.

Watel: Contaminants In use now Rate of Energy . . . Other needs or
Generatlon . needed for Sterlllzatlon . . .
removed for WFI generatlon . 11m1tat10ns
Method generatlon
Need a cool
surface for
Essentiall High; many May need to condensation.
Distillation . y Yes gallons per 13 Wh/liter sterilize cold Conventional
everything . .
hr. lines. separation
requires gravity
to work
Bacteria, Yes. Also
endotoxins was tested need to
. Need . .
Viruses by KSC for . sterilize
Reverse several pressurized
. Large molecules space use . membrane and
Osmos1s . gallons/day water (120 ps1
SOlldS and met or more) Whole system
Salts to some most USP periodically
extent standards
Most
contaminants can Depends on Need low cartridge can Current cartridge
be removed, but Size of .
. . pressure be stored can treat 3 liters,
Adsorptlon adsorber(s) must No cartndge. 4.5 .
. water of a sterile, but only then must be
be chosen for l/hour 1s cou le si used once dis osed
speciﬁc available p p p
contaminants
Bacteria Varies With Need Chemical
Filtration Endotoxins No ﬁlter. EX 0.7 pressurized treatment or
Solids l/m for 5 psi water source Disposal
Cannot produce
Forwand Same .as reverse No 0.81/hr none Use once, then pure water, only
Osmos1s osmos1s dispose. concentrated
solutions.
Membrane Eszfglliiliiy but Lower than Need a 0001
. . . . g ’ No Not yet tested traditional Not yet tested surface for
Dlstlllation still under . . . .
distillation condensation
development
No high pressure
. . as in R0
.OSFnOtic Essentially No N/A’ but Low Not yet tested Cannot produce
Dlstlllation everything likely slow
pure water, only
solutions
Still . 1n the N / A, but
experimental . . N/A —
Nano Similar to low pressure No large-scale
. . phase — actually No . . probably need .
Flltratlon . kidney ﬂuid needed . deV1ce ever made
being developed . to dispose
function
to cleanse blood
Table 6: Efﬁcacy of various methods of water puriﬁcation.
10
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"11","VI. Recommendations

NASA’s Vision for Space Exploration has initiated new efforts to determine what technologies will be required
for exploration of the Moon and Mars, and to deﬁne how these technologies will be developed and validated.
Medical requirements and capabilities are being developed as part of this process. In particular, the necessity and
required volumes for medical intravenous ﬂuids are presented in this paper.

Terrestrial hospitals have a wide variety of ﬂuids for medical use, but the mass and storage requirements limit
what NASA may carry. In particular, human blood or blood products cannot be provided on exploration missions
because of limited storage life and refrigeration capabilities. HBOCs are under development as a substitute, but
have not reached sufﬁcient maturity to be included in NASA’s planning at this time. Colloids are also commonly
used for terrestrial medical treatment, but recent research questions the efﬁcacy of colloids over crystalloids. It is
recommended that 3 types of ﬂuids be available for use in NASA’s exploration missions: Lactated Ringer’s (LR),
Normal Saline (0.9 %) (NS), and 5% Dextrose with 1/4 NS and 20 mEq KCl (D5KS). These are the most common
ﬂuids used for burns, trauma and medication, and maintenance requirements respectively. Lactated Ringer’s and
Normal Saline are often considered nearly interchangeable during treatment, and it is recommended that they be
considered fully interchangeable for high-Volume medical ﬂuid treatments during exploration missions to reduce the
overall volume requirements. It is also recommended that the medical community evaluate whether the LR and NS
requirements can be met by one electrolyte to further reduce the logistics requirements.

The requirements for medical ﬂuids were developed by evaluating the patient conditions in the PCDB. Five
generic situations were identiﬁed to quantify ﬂuid requirements, rather than develop ﬂuid requirements for each
speciﬁc condition. These ﬁve conditions were 2nd and 3rd degree skin burns, acute anemia, drug delivery, major
bone fracture, and ﬂuid maintenance. Actual medical events can require ﬂuid treatment for several of these generic
conditions. Typical medical events were postulated and analyzed to determine ﬂuid requirements for the various
exploration missions. The maximum ﬂuid requirement scenario for each mission was always a major ﬁre, possibly
injuring 2 crew members, requiring ﬂuid treatment followed by maintenance ﬂuids as the patient(s) recover(s). This
scenario is often considered as either the driver for ﬂuid volume requirements, or so severe as to preclude any
treatment beyond the most basic. Because space exploration has already had several ﬁre or explosion events
(Apollo 1, Apollo 13, and Mir NASA-3), prudence dictates planning for the possibility. Additionally, the planned
low-pressure, oxygen—rich enVironment in the new spacecraft increases the ﬁre hazard over 188, and surface
exploration is EVA intensive in a pure-oxygen spacesuit enVironment.

The recommended ﬂuid volumes are detailed in Table 5. These recommendations should be considered as an
upper bound of what would be required. Mission constraints may limit the supplies provided onboard, while
accepting the subsequent increase in risk. The requirements are similar for the ISS and lunar habitat missions, with
somewhat increased requirements for a Mars Mission. The lunar sortie requirements are substantially less and may
require a different type of ﬂuid production system if ﬂuids are provided.

It is recommended that a system capable of generating 130 L of ﬂuid for two time-separated events should be
developed for 188 and lunar habitat missions. The water generation system should have the capability of generating
100 L of medical water at any time after one minor event, or have the capability to produce and store sufﬁcient
solutions immediately after the ﬁrst event. Concentrate or powder and associated supplies should be available to
produce 15 L LR, 15 L NS, and 100 D5KS. An 8-hour contingency supply of 6 L LR, 6 L NS, and 2 L D5KS
should be carried as stores. Note that when LR and NS are considered nearly interchangeable as recommended, the
8-hour contingency supply is the same as a 2-hour contingency supply for all of the DRMs. The system would
preferably have the ability to produce new contingency stores with a shelf life of 6 months after a minor medical
event occurs, otherwise new stores will have to be shipped to ensure a sufﬁcient supply. A Mars ﬂuid system would
have the additional requirement of being capable of generating replacement contingency stores with at least a 6-
month shelf life

The lunar sortie has a much reduced volume requirement, and less concern with long-term sterility. It is
probably not realistic to carry an 8-hour contingency supply, so a 1-hour supply of 4 L NS is recommended. The
ability to produce 40 L of solution as 8 L LR, 4 L NS, and 28 L D5KS to handle any one event is recommended.

The solutions produced should meet USP standards to ensure the best possible medical care is being provided.
There is some concern because the USP standards are deﬁned mainly from the process used to produce WFI rather
than quantitative measurements of the ﬁnal product. This is a problem because the standard process equipment will
not meet NASA’s mass requirements and may not function properly in the space enVironment. There is an
additional complication because NASA potable water speciﬁcations do not match the EPA potable water
speciﬁcations that are assumed to be the initial source water. Detailed speciﬁcations will have to be developed to

1 1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"12","ensure the medical water system and the ﬁnal produced solutions meet the spirit of the regulations if not the speciﬁc
process regulations.

Many potential technologies can be utilized to produce the puriﬁed water. Many of these technologies are
commercially used to purify liquids in industry, or are being developed in advanced systems for potable water
production. The USP currently states the “Water for Injection is water puriﬁed by distillation or by a puriﬁcation
process that is equivalent or superior to distillation in the removal of chemicals and microorganisms.” To date,
reverse osmosis is the only acceptable alternative to distillation within the USP WFI standards. The USP WFI
standards were developed for production of continuous quantities of at least tens of liters per hour. NASA, on the
other hand, requires a much smaller production rate and volume capability, so other production technologies may be
preferred.

Maintaining sterility is more of a concern with occasional production, and the production system may be altered
to include components that are utilized only for limited durations to prevent contamination. NASA could use
technologies in a unique fashion to directly produce a solution whi1e bypassing any storage of WFI. A future trade
study will evaluate the potential technologies, incorporating the results of small breadboard studies, and recommend
the type of system that should be developed for NASA’s Exploration missions.

Acknowledgments

The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the NASA Exploration Medical Capabilities Program in the
Exploration Systems Mission Directorate. J ohn McQuillen 0f the Glenn Research Center provided valuable
technical discussions and proofreading of this paper.

References

1NASA’s Exploration Systems Architecture Study, NASA-TM-2005-214062, p. 217, 2005.

2 http://sd.j sc.nasa. g0v/PCDB/10gin.cfrn

3Creager, G., “An Evaluation of IV Fluids Requirements for the Space Station Freedom Health Maintenance Facility
Assuming a 10-Day Therapeutic Stay,” Krug Life Sciences, 1991.

4 J . Ogle, M. Finley, and J . Kipp, “Space Station LVP Mixing System, Interim Report #2,” Baxter Healthcare, June 1989.

5 Niederhaus, C., Barlow, K., Grifﬁn, D. Miller, F., “Medical Grade Water Generation For Intravenous Fluid Production on
Exploration Missions,” NASA-TM-XXXX (number not yet assigned; currently in review), 2006.

6 Yowler, C. J . and Fratianne R. B., “Current status of burn resuscitation,” Clin Plast Surg, Vol. 27, 2000, pp. 1-10.

7 The Society of U.S. Naval Flight Surgeons, The United States Naval F light Surgeon Handbook, 2nd edition, 1998.

8 Lorenzo, M., Davis, J .W., Negin, S., Kaups, K., Parks, 8., Brubaker, D., Tyroch, A. “Can Ringer’s Lactate be used safely
with b100dtransfusions?,” Am J Surg, Vol. 175, 1998, pp. 308-309.

9 Boldt J., Haisch G., Suttner S., Kurnle B. & Schellhase F. “Are Lactated Ringer’s Solution and Normal Saline Solution
Equal with Regard to C0agu1ation?,” Anesth Analg, V01. 94, 2002, pp. 378-3 84.

10 Holliday, M. A. and Segar W. E., “The maintenance need for water in parenteral ﬂuid therapy,” Pediatrics; V01. 19, 1957,
pp. 823-832.

11 United States Pharrnacopeia ,National Forrnulary, currently USP 29—NF 24, 2006.

12System Speciﬁcation for the International Space Station, NASA SSP 41000, 1996.

13 Bagdigian, R., Cloud, Dale, and Bedard, J., “Oxygen Generation Systems Status of the Regenerative ECLSS Water
Recovery,” SAE 2006-01-2057, 2006.

14 Niederhaus, C. E. and Miller, F. J . Intravenous Fluid Mixing in Normal, Partial, and Micro- Gravity: Down-selection of
Mixing Methods, NASA TM-XXXX (report submitted, but number not yet assigned), 2006.

14 Joshi, J , “Human Support Technology Research to Human Support Technology Research to Enable Exploration,”
NASA/TM—2003-212598 Results of the Workshop on Two-Phase Flow, Fluid Stability and Dynamics: Issues in Power,
Propulsion, and Advanced Life Support Systems p. 97-127,2003.

12
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
