"","x"
"1","5‘3”» Available online at www.sciencedirect.com _
«>2 ta 5' D- t inn
PERGAMON Acta Astronautica 59 (2006) 1135—1145 m
WWW.elseVier.com/locate/actaastro
The extraveh1cular mobility unit: A reyiew 0f enVironment,
requirements, and des1gn Changes 1n the US spacesu1t
Nicole C. J 0rdan*’ 1, J oseph H. Salehz, Dava J . Newman3
Department Of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Massachusetts Institute Of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
Received 22 September 2005; accepted 18 April 2006
Available online 28 July 2006
Abstract
Requirements are rarely static, and are ever more likely to evolve as the development time of a system stretches out and its
service life increases. In this paper, we discuss the evolution of requirements for the US spacesuit, the extravehicular mobility
unit (EMU), as a case study to highlight the need for ﬂexibility in system design. We explore one fundamental environmental
Change, using the Space Shuttle EMU aboard the International Space Station, and the resulting EMU requirement and design
Changes. The EMU, like other complex systems, faces considerable uncertainty during its service life. Changes in the technical,
political, or economic environment cause Changes in requirements, Which in turn necessitate design modiﬁcations or upgrades.
We make the case that ﬂexibility is a key attribute that needs to be embedded in the design of long-lived, complex systems to
enable them to efﬁciently meet the inevitability of Changing requirements after they have been ﬁelded.
© 2006 ElseVier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Extravehicular mobility unit; Requirements evolution; Design changes; Flexibility
1, Introduction being that requirement changes or instabilities have a
negative impact on both system life—cycle cost and de—
Traditional systems engineering Wisdom, developed velopment schedule. Furthermore, it is believed that the
and supported by decades of experience in designing later in the development phase a requirement Change is
and operating complex engineering systems, holds that requested, the higher the 0051 penalty is 10 implement
requirements should be frozen as early as possible this change, as shown in Fig. 1 [1]-
during the system’s development phase, one rationale In practice however, freezing requirements, whether
during the development phases or after ﬁelding a com—
pleX engineering system, is unrealistic. The IEEE Stan—
dard 1233 for example recognizes this fact and states
* Corresponding author. Current address: 2101 NASA Parkway, that [2]:
Mailcode ECS, Houstan, TX 77058, USA. Tel.: +1 281483 9127;
faX: +1281483 6324- Although it is desirable to freeze a set of require—
1E-mazladdress:n1c01e.c.301rdan@nasa.g0V(N.C.J01rdan). ments permanently, it iS rarely possible. Require—
Graduate Student, Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics - - -
. ments that are likely to evolve should be identiﬁed
and Technology and Policy Program. ,
2 Executive Director of the Ford—MIT Alliance, Room E40—247. and eommunicated t0 bOth the cusmmers .and the
3 Professor of Aeronautics and Astronautics and Engineering Sys— teChmcal commuth- A C01” 6 SUbset 0f 1‘ eqmrements
tems; Director, Technology and Policy Program, Room 33—307. may be frozen early. The impact Of proposed new
0094—5765/$ — see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.actaastr0.2006.04.014

"
"2","1136 NC. Jordan et al. /Acta Astronautica 59 (2006) 1135—1145
Cost of implementing instead of developing a new, clean—sheet design. In this
a requirementchange — . . . . .
ILLUSTRATIVE context, it is unrealistic to attempt to freeze require—
— ments as early as possible, and the traditional attitude
of the systems engineering community towards change
needs to be reVisited: requirement changes will occur,
especially in long—lived systems, and instead of resist—
ing them or passively accepting them, it is preferable
that system engineers “design for change,” or embed
_ ﬂexibility in the design of complex engineering sys—
T'me terns. We deﬁne ﬂexibility of a design as a property
Conceptual Preliminary Detailed Production ____ Ofa SyStém Fhat allows it .tO respond to changes in its
---- initial ObjeCthCS and requirements that occur after the
system has been ﬁelded, in a timely and cost—effective
Fig. 1. Rationale for an early freeze of system requirements. Adapted way [4]
from Ref‘ [ll Increasingly, system designers recognize that their
systems operate in a dynamic environment, and that the
systems are likely to change. Managers are beginning to
requirements must be evaluated to ensure that the ini— experiment With how to value uncertainty [5]' SCYeral
tial intent of the requirements baseline is maintained. new tOOIS have been developed, and 01d tOOIS modiﬁed,
to attempt to predict how changes in one part of an op—
In short, requirement changes in the traditional SYS' erating system will affect the whole [6—9]. Rather than
terns engineering approach are undesirable, 13111 are passively reacting to change, some system architects are
cautiously 10133th when they are ineVitable. beginning to develop design methodologies that could
make their systems resilient to change [10,11]. This pa—
1.]. Complicating factor per argues that requirements change is an inevitability
in the life of any complex system and that by embed—
The last two decades have witnessed a trend in ding ﬂexibility in the design of such systems will enable
increasing system design lifetime. Communication it to react more efﬁciently to change.
satellites for example have seen their design lifetime
increase from 7 to 15 years over this time period
[3]. This trend—also observed in the design of other 1.2. Paper outline
aerospace and numerous defense systems—is the result
on the one hand of budgetary constraints and ﬁnancial In this paper, we demonstrate how environment
pressure to maximize the return from such high—Value changes, political, economic, physical and technologi—
assets, and on the other hand of increased reliability cal, triggered requirement changes, which in turn ne—
and technical advances that allow complex engineering cessitated design changes in the particular case of the
systems to remain operational for such long periods of US spacesuit, the extravehicular mobility unit (EMU).
time. Why is this observation a complicating factor to We further build on this example to make the case for
the traditional attitude towards requirement changes? a new attitude towards requirement changes in system
Engineering systems often operate in complex and design in general, and the need to embed ﬂexibility in
rapidly evolving environments. As their design lifetime the design of complex engineering systems. Herein we
increases, it becomes increasingly probable that the ini— discuss the evolution of requirements for the EMU, as
tial environment from which the original system re— a case study in the need for ﬂexibility in systems engi—
quirements were derived changes during the system’s neering design. We explore one fundamental enViron—
operational life. This environment change, whether po— mental change, using the Space Shuttle EMU aboard
litical, economic, physical or technological (discussed the international space station (188), and the resulting
in detail later), will in turn cause requirement changes EMU requirement and design changes. The EMU, like
as a result of new customer or user needs, or new iden— most complex engineering systems, faces considerable
tiﬁed opportunities. However, the same budgetary con— uncertainty during its service life. Changes in the tech—
straints mentioned previously often mandate that the nical, political, and economic environments may cause
ﬁelded system be modiﬁed or upgraded to satisfy the changes in requirements, which in turn necessitate
new requirements and provide enhanced capabilities, design changes.

"
"3","N.C. Jordan et al. /Acta Astronautica 59 (2006) 1135—1145 1137
The existing literature on the EMU is thin and fo— sary to sustain life in a human—sized, mobile form. This
cuses 0n the early and middle history of the spacesuit. section examines the history of the EMU, describes its
For a sample of the existing literature on the EMU major components and functions, and discusses the en—
see [12—15]. Balinskas and Tepper, spacesuit engineers, Vironment in which the EMU has operated in the Space
wrote an excellent documentation of the early devel— Shuttle era. This constitutes the baseline environment
opment of the EMU [16]. The most current informa— 0f the spacesuit against which we contrast in Section 3
tion on the speciﬁcations of the EMU is the EMU Data the usage of the EMU aboard the 138, as well as the
Book, published by Hamilton Sundstrand [17]. A more requirement and design Changes that ensued from this
general book, authored by Harris, outlines the history environment Change.
of pressure suits and spacesuits and gives insight of
their operation [18]. This paper builds on this literature
and expands on it by identifying recent changes in the 2.]. Brief history of the EMU: a hesitant commitment
EMU requirements (and design) not yet documented, to an invaluable system and capability
and by introducing a novel framework for understand—
ing change propagation in complex systems in general Extra—Vehicular activity (EVA) has been a reality for
and the EMU in particular. the US since the Gemini Program in 1965. Clean—sheet
Section 2, History and Background of the EMU, spacesuit designs were undertaken for the Gemini,
examines the history of the EMU, describes its major Apollo, and Shuttle programs whereas modiﬁcations
components and functions, and discusses the baseline of existing designs were used for Skylab and 13$ [13].
environment in which the spacesuit was initially de— Throughout the Apollo and Skylab programs, NASA
signed to operate during the early Space Shuttle era. gained extensive experience with EVA and spacesuit
Fundamentally, the EMU was conceived as a limited— design. The capability for humans to work outside the
capability spacesuit to be used in emergency situations. spacecraft proved invaluable time and again: for exam—
However, immediately after it was ﬁelded, NASA ple, Skylab astronauts performed 12 contingency EVAs
began to make changes to the EMU for a variety of rea— to ﬁx unanticipated problems, repeatedly saving the
sons discussed in Section 2. Section 3, EMU environ— space station from abandonment [19]. However, despite
ment Change, explores the implications of the decision the advantages of EVA capability, early Shuttle de—
tO modify the Shuttle EMU for use aboard the ISS, and signs did not include the means to perform EVA. This
the resulting requirements and design Changes. Section function was added later, and then only to provide the
4, Conclusion, summarizes important ﬁndings: ﬁrst, ability to perform limited contingency operations [18].
given the number of requirement and design changes Because of the delayed decision to develop a Shuttle
that occurred in the EMU, the next generation spacesuit, spacesuit, EMU development lagged behind the Shut—
which will likely be ﬁelded for a decade or two, will tle by approximately 4 years. The vast majority of the
have to be designed with the ability to cope with the overall Shuttle program was conducted without a de—
inevitability of changing requirements after it has been velopment phase, a reality especially true for the EMU.
ﬁelded; SCCOIld, more generally, ﬂexibility Will become Initial hardware designs were tested to ﬂight standards
an increasingly critical property that needs to be em- and certiﬁed in parallel with early Shuttle ﬂights. The
bedded in the design of complex engineering systems, merging of the ﬁnal testing and operational phases
and thus allow them to easily cope with uncertainty and resulted in approximately 4000 man—hours 0f EMU
Changes in their environment and requirements. This processing between ﬂights, compared to less than 1000
work is a careful review of the requirement and design today [12], As America’s ability to perform complex
changes of the EMU and aims to beneﬁt the designers operations in space increased, so too did the EVA time
of the next generation spacesuit. It is our hope that a required to achieve those Objectives. Table 1 shows
thorough understanding of the current spacesuit and the total man—hours of EVA time logged by American
the Changes it has undergone will aid in achieving an astronauts for each major manned spaceﬂight program.
even better design for future spacesuits, emulating the The EMU has performed more than 75%, by duration,
EMU in its strengths and learning from its weaknesses. of all American EVAs. That the EMU was initially
designed as a limited capability suit to satisfy minimal
2. History and background of the EMU mobility and operational requirements is astounding in
light of the fact that it has been subsequently used to
The EMU, the US spacesuit, is aminiature spacecraft repair satellites, construct a massive space structure,
in the sense that it provides all of the functions neces— and maintain the ISS.

"
"4","1138 NC. Jordan et al. /Acta Astronautica 59 (2006) 1135—1145

Table 1 variety of functions, including providing a breathable

Summary Of US EVA duratlon by program atmosphere, mobility, temperature control, and protec—

program Total EVA duration [hours] Suit used tion from radiation and particle impacts. The two main

— components of the EMU are the Primary Life Support

Geminia 12:40 G—4C/G—5C S - h

b ystem (PLSS), the spacesult backpack, and t e pres—

Apollo 165:17 A7L/A7LB A d .1 d h . fEMU

Skylabb 82:52 A7LB Isure garment.I etal e 80 ematlco components

Shuttleb’c’d 1022;11 EMU IS shown In Flg- 2-

ISSd 244:56 EMU Proceeding from the top to the bottom of the EMU,
ahttp://hist0ry.nasa.g0V/SP—4002/app1d.htm [Cited 3 July 2005]. the helmet assembly 15 compnsed Of a Clean pIOlycar'
bD.S.F. Portree and RC. Trevino, Walking to Olympus: and EVA bonate 1311131316 and V1801“ S to p1“ 01601 from sun and ImpaCt-

Chronology, Monographs in Aerospace History Series #7, 1997. The helmet connects to the hard upper torso (HUT), a
CNASA space shuttle launch archive, http://science.ksc.nasa.g0v/ ﬁberglass shell that iS the main structural support for

htt1/"" /'td11J12006. .. . .

S 1; (?HFSSIOHS [Cl 6 u y ] . . other elements of the sult 1nclud1ng the PLSS. The dls—

Mlsswn control center status reports, http.//spaceﬂ1ght1.nasa.g0v/ .

SpaceneWS/reports/ [Cited 11 July 2006]. play and control module (DCM) IS mounted to the front
of the HUT and contains external ﬂuids and electrical
connections, thermal, pressure, and communication

2-2- Functionality and conﬁguration controls, and a display of suit parameters. The arm
assembly is attached at both shoulders of the HUT and

1h 01"" der 10 understand hOW changes P1"" opagated contains two mobility bearings, one each at the shoulder
through the EMU de81gn as a result 0f env1r0nmental and wrist. The lower torso assembly is the bottom half
changes, 11 15 1mp0rtant 10 ﬁrst understand hOW the 0f the EMU and consists of the waist, brief, leg, and
system operates. Thls sectlon pr0V1des an overV1eW 0f boot assemblies. The PLSS has primary oxygen tanks
the functionality of the EMU as well as a brief descrip— and an emergency secondary oxygen pack. The con—
t10n Of 115 major components. The EMU performs a taminant control cartridge (CCC) removes C02, odors,
Radio . Extravehicular
L'ghts visor assembly _
Lights Lights
\ Antenna f‘7’__‘
Caution and ‘W Q -, Fanlseparatorl Helmet ﬁghﬁ Communications
warning system I \ , 1 pumplmotor assy. Hard upper [— .: carrier assembly
IVI ' ~ﬁﬁ-ﬁ torso .2. Lgﬁ m In-suit
. .I.—- vi {I I '3 I ':,.....I. '
Sublnmator 1111j'éﬁ‘4 Temperature ’1 ¢@ ;. 1, drunk bag
'%7%§F%E11 control valve . “‘53, 'I T‘} 1i I AAPISAFER
Primaryo2 tanks *1» 1 531 7f; H20 tank /.'. 7% 4. _- 1""?""2’ .1 ‘ c::::;tion
4 \ :1 :2 w (x 7 LE1! V“; for service
\i \ ”W - ;#_—°___, I . D I dale J _-- 1‘:\< and cooling
. 3% . .‘ I . -. -/ isp ay an ,;M , I I umbilical
coict’rrhtlacrg'rngge i “WV ? control module 1“.“ . “I \\ % SAFER mount
‘ ‘19.” .‘LII \ Primarylife ‘L F 613° -:
. . ,. ‘WP‘ﬁ‘Ei‘ supportsubsystem 1; 11 ' AAP/SAFER
(, ‘ 1 1w-.. ; ‘ ., 'i 1 ”‘°""""‘
Battery g , W 88622:? ~ .;\ %\’ Q 02 control
‘ "" __ 1x 2 1;"" \‘h’n , / actuator
i 73.7.7. .. f ,. Gloves . “1.777 /""
2 2 5x; .&\ -€'/' - . ‘
.-’\ ' -/, \i\\ /H_/’ Mini-workstation
- 7 ~ .7 ' \ / mounts
Secondary oxygen 7': -7 V r; ’1 7..
930k 7 r—/ :7“;— -_ ‘ 1: g Y]
:'__I__ I__I__II - Ozregulators “' r I 7.
\‘v \£ ‘ “3‘21. L' 'd r
7 7 '5“? aways:
Ifffi-v/ /Lower torso - 111.11 garment
‘ ” \ _,_‘ assembl
7: 1;” . y
V"" ' v” T: g ‘9‘
4.9;! Q.»
Boots
Fig. 2. Extravehicular mobility unit components [Creditz Hamilton Sundstrand].

"
"5","N.C. Jordan et al. /Acta Astronautica 59 (2006) 1135—1145 1139
particulates, and other contaminants from the oxygen.
The battery supplies power for most EMU functions
and the sublimator, fan/pump/separator, and water tank
work together to remove excess heat from the system.
When the EMU is inside the Shuttle or 188 airlock, it
connects to the vehicle Via an umbilical, which attaches Political PhySical
t0 the front 0 f the DCM. environment environment
Comfort and mobility within the EMU are provided
for through several pieces of hardware. Before doing Object 01.
the spacesuit, astronauts put on the Liquid Cooling and System
Ventilation Garment, a tight—ﬁtting, elastic body suit
with ﬂexible tubing woven into the fabric. Whenever
the crewmember is wearing the EMU, cold water Cir— Technological Economic
culates through the tubing, remov1ng excess body heat. envir 011m em environment
The cooling garment also contains larger tubes, which
transport oxygen back to the PLSS for scrubbing.
As described above, mobility is provided through bear—
ings located at the shoulder, upper arm, wrist, and
waist. Finally, ﬁve different layers of material provide
thermal, radiation, and punCture prOteCtion' The in"" Fig. 3. Different environments of an object or a system.
nermost layer is the pressure garment bladder, which
contains the suit atmosphere. The pressure garment
cover is outside of the bladder and works to keep the 2,4, Baseline environment: space shuttle mode
bladder in place. The ﬁnal three layers are collectively
called the Thermal Micrometeoroid Garment, which As noted above, the EMU was originally conceived
consists of a rip—resistant material, thermal layers, and as a limited—capability spacesuit to be used exclusively
an outermost layer that resists contamination, puncture, in emergency situations. This contingency—only enVi—
and reﬂects radiation. The number of thermal layers ronment quickly gave way to routine use Of the EMU
varies widely and is the thickest in the HUT and PLSS for satellite servicing, an operational mode we term the
and thinnest in the ﬁngers, where the need for mobility Shuttle environment. In this section we outline general
is critical. reasons for EMU design Changes and eXplore one spe—
ciﬁc Change that occurred as a result of shifting the
EMU to the Shuttle mode.
2.3. Deﬁnition of environment Immediately after the EMU was ﬁelded, NASA began
to make Changes to it for one of four reasons:
One goal of this paper is to demonstrate how enViron—
mental Changes trigger requirement Changes, which in 1. Hardware failure—if apart did not function properly
turn necessitate design Changes. We do not restrict the or was found to be out of speciﬁcation, it was ﬂagged
meaning of environment to the narrow sense of physical and Changed.
environment, such as the temperature and pressure sur— 2. Obsolescence—when a manufacturer ceased mak—
rounding a system. Instead, we eXpand it to include po— ing a particular part.
litical, economic, and technological conditions as well 3. Hardware upgrade—when advances in technology
(Fig. 3). As an illustration, the environment of the maple lead to improvement in suit capability.
tree in a yard includes physical factors such as the soil 4. Goal Change—a programmatic decision to use the
conditions, rain patterns, and sunlight, political factors EMU in a way in which it was not originally in—
such as a rule against the tree shadowing the neighbor— tended.
ing yard, and economic factors such as whether or not
the owner received a subsidy to plant the tree. Simi— Broadly speaking, the ﬁrst three reasons for Change
larly with the EMU, Changes in its baseline design were occur because of an altering physical or technological
caused by Changes in its environment: physical, politi— environment, whereas the fourth is a consequence of the
cal, technological and economic environments or con— shifting political and economic environment. A number
ditions as will be discussed in detail shortly. of the Changes to the EMU are a consequence of the

"
"6","1140 NC. Jordan et al. /Acta Astronautica 59 (2006) 1135—1145
ﬁrst and second reasons simply because they are not op— Substantial requirements Changes were again levied
tional; when a part fails or a key material is no longer upon the EMU ﬁrst in anticipation of using it to support
available, it must be ﬁxed or replaced. The third reason Space Station Freedom and later as a result of the need
is infrequent because, although engineers have an inﬁ— to use the EMU for the International Space Station. The
nite supply of ideas for upgrades to the EMU, there are basic capabilities of the EMU, however, to support life
rarely enough resources to implement them. Changes in in space and enable useful work, remained unaffected,
a program’s goals, the fourth reason for Change, are of— and a number of EMU components such as the cooling
ten imposed from outside of the technical community; garment, helmet, external Visors, Display and Control
with the EMU these Changes often come from Congress Module housing, and the Communications Carrier As—
or the Executive Branch. One important goal Change sembly headset have remained unaltered. The next see—
that came soon after the EMU was designed followed tion describes the Changes that occurred as a result of
from the decision to use the Shuttle to release and ser— using the EMU for the construction and operation of
Vice satellites. The primary purpose of the EMU for the 188.
most of the 1980s was to assist in this process.

One design Change that came as a result of the EMU 3. EMU environment change
transitioning from contingency—only to satellite serViC—
ing is an increase in its operating pressure. The EMU In this section, we examine how environmental
was initially designed for a 283 kPa (4.1 psia) operat— changes for the EMU caused requirements Changes,
ing pressure primarily because this pressure was Close which lead to EMU design Changes. This section be—
to NASA’s operational experience with the Apollo suits, gins with the political decision to use the Shuttle EMU
which operated at 26.9 kPa (3.9 psia). Operating at a low aboard the ISS and explores the resulting requirements
pressure is advantageous in that it increases mobility by and design changes. We then look at the Change in
decreasing the effort for an astronaut to move inside the the physical environment surrounding the EMU and
suit because the astronaut does less work to compress a change in the technical environment and trace the
the gas—ﬁlled suit. However, it also puts the astronaut resulting requirements and design iterations. Table 2
at an increased risk of decompression sickness (DCS) summarizes these Changes.
and extends the time an astronaut must pre—breathe pure
oxygen to avoid DCS. Humans living at the Earth’s sur— 3, 1, Scrub ’89
face breathe an atmosphere comprised of about 79%
nitrogen and 21% oxygen at 101.4 kPa (14.7 psia). As In 1989, the spaceﬂight community experienced a
we breathe the nitrogen in and out, it becomes saturated major setback and was forced to eliminate or consid—
in our blood and is at risk of coming out of solution at erably cutback many programs when funding was sig—
reduced pressures, similar to the effect of carbon diox— niﬁcantly reduced; Congress that year proposed to cut
ide bubbles being released when a soda can is opened. NASA’s budget by more than $1 billion, including re—
Nitrogen gas bubbles in our system can cause a host of ducing space station funding by $395 million. Plans for
medical problems including “the bends,” mental impair— an international space station were substantially down—
ment, and death. In order to avoid DCS, astronauts must sized and, more importantly, the plan to build a new, ad—
either experience slow decompression over a period of vaneed space suit to service the space station and serve
days or pre—breathe pure oxygen for a period of hours as a test bed for planetary exploration technologies was
prior to EVA. NASA realized in the early 1980s that the eliminated. This event became known in the space com—
pre—breathe time necessary for a 283 kPa (4.1psia) suit munity as “Scrub ’89” and was the watershed event
was unacceptably long and the Shuttle could not reduce that mandated a Change in the EMU’s goals from Shut—
its cabin pressure low enough for the crew to experience tle spacesuit to space station suit. The decision NOT to
slow decompression. Because EVAs were becoming build a space station—speeiﬁe spacesuit, and instead to
more commonplace, reducing the overhead of perform— modify the EMU marked a shift in the modus Operandi
ing a spacewalk was a priority. Physiological experts of that system. Because on—orbit time was limited dur—
eventually concluded that if the suit pressure were raised ing the Space Shuttle era, the EMU was designed to
to 29.6 kPa (4.3 psia), a combination of reducing the operate Virtually maintenanee—free during the mission.
Shuttle pressure and pure oxygen pre—breathe would be Now that the EMU was to serve aboard the ISS, two re—
acceptable. This Change required Changes in the pres— quirements Changes occurred that are further discussed
sure regulator bands, changes in the crack pressures of in the following: more on—orbit time between hardware
the relief valves, and a recertiﬁcation of the EMU. processing, and extended EMU life [14].

"
"7","N.C. Jordan et al. /Acta Astronautica 59 (2006) 1135—1145 1141
Table 2
Summary of EMU changes
Requirement Change Design or procedure Change
Environment Change—use shuttle EM U aboard 155
Make EMU sizable 0n—0rbit Adjustable cam sizing in softgoods
Sizing rings in arms and legs
Hard Upper Torso replaceable 0n—0rbit
Hard Upper Torso redesigned
Increased EMU life Recertiﬁcation 0f EMU components
Change in static seal material
Noise mufﬂer redesign
Flow ﬁlter redesign
Coolant water bladder material change
Environment Change—physical environment of 155
Minimum metabolic rate lowered Cooling garment bypass designed
Heated gloves redesinged
Lower probability of penetration Track orbital debris
Deﬁne allowable penetrations
Different radiation exposure Carefully plan all EVAs
Risk of propellant exposure 1—h bake—out procedure
Lengthen umbilical
Environment Change—technical environment advances
Advance in suit joint technology Joint patterning and materials Changed
Bearing design and materials Changed
Need for delicate assembly tasks Glove design and materials Changed
Increased EMU life Battery redesign
Carbon dioxide removal technology upgrade
Carbon dioxide sensor upgraded
Secondary system in case of crewmember separation Design cold gas propulsion rescue system
3.1.1. On-orbit Sizing the lower arms, Waist Brief Assembly, knees, and legs
In the Apollo days, spacesuits were manufactured and sizing rings at the thigh and leg. In order to further
for individual crewmembers. This philosophy shifted aid on—orbit sizing and servicing, NASA also Changed
slightly during the Shuttle era due to a rapid increase in the design of the HUT and display and control mod—
the membership of the astronaut corps and in the num— ule (DCM) to make them replaceable on—orbit [15]. In
ber of EVAs. The major components of the suit—HUT, theory, a crewmember can disassemble the EMU and
lower torso assembly, arm assembly, liquid cooling and remove the DCM 0r HUT to make repairs or Change
ventilation garment—came in discrete sizes that were size, although this has not yet been done to date.
uniquely adjusted to ﬁt an individual crewmember us— Both logistics issues and safety concerns motivated
ing Cloth strips sewn into the suit by technicians on the the redesign of the HUT. The original HUT design,
ground. Each Shuttle mission ﬂew three EMUs, two known as the pivoted HUT, was available in ﬁve sizes
primary and one backup, and the two EVA astronauts from small to extra large and had four different sizes of
were often Chosen to be of similar physical size so that Body Seal Closure, the connection between the upper
they could ﬁt in the same backup suit. In the ISS era, and lower torso. The term pivoted HUT comes from the
EMUs are aboard for a period of months and need to be type of shoulder joint in the unit, which was mobile, but
reconﬁgurable to ﬁt a range of body sizes. The Change only single—fault tolerant and the point of lowest safety
in requirement from “one suit—one person” to “one suit— in the entire EMU. The new design, known as the planar
many people” caused several design Changes. Changes HUT, has a smaller number of sizes and a lower risk
to the spacesuit garment included added sizing cams to shoulder joint design.

"
"8","1142 NC. Jordan et al. /Acta Astronautica 59 (2006) 1135—1145
3.1.2. Increased service life duration and the addition of thermal mittens to the suite of EMU
The other requirement Changes that occurred as a re— support equipment. The crewmember is able to con—
sult of the decision to use the Shuttle EMU aboard the trol the water ﬂow rate through their cooling garment
188 were the following: (1) extension of EMU life, (2) Via a temperature control valve, located on the front
increase in the number of EVAs aparticular EMU could of the DCM. In the original EMU design, the lowest
perform, (3) increase in the shelf life of the EMU, and setting of the temperature control valve still allowed a
(4) increase in the number of days between ground ser— minimal amount of water ﬂow through the cooling gar—
Vicing. Given the signiﬁcantly extended stay of astro— ment. The cooling garment bypass modiﬁes the func—
nauts aboard the 188 compared to the duration of ﬂight tion of the temperature control valve such that when a
of the Space Shuttle (several months for the 188 com— crewmember is cold, they are able to block ﬂow com—
pared with a couple of weeks for the Shuttle), the EMU pletely from the cooling garment, while water continues
was required, following the decision to use it aboard to run to the PLSS and to the DCM to cool the elec—
the 188, to be capable of performing 25 EVAs in 180 tronics. In this setting, the astronaut is warmed entirely
days instead of the original requirement of three EVAs through body heat. This new setting is necessary to
in 10 days. In addition, the EMU was required to he keep the crewmembers warm during periods of rest on
capable of undergoing 180 days in space without being 188 EVAs.
serviced. Rather than undertake an extensive redesign EMU glove design also Changed to incorporate both
of the EMU in order to meet these new requirements, active and passive thermal control. The design and im—
NASA engineers decided to upgrade the shortest life plementation of glove heaters was due in part to the
items so that they would last at least 180 days [18]. anticipated needs of space station EVAs, but primarily
For example, some of the Changes included replacing driven by cold temperatures experienced during training
seal materials, a redesign of the PLSS vent loop noise prior to the ﬁrst Hubble Space Telescope servicing and
mufﬂer, changes in the ﬂow ﬁlters, and a Change in the repair mission, STS—61 in 1993. During a thermal vac—
coolant water bladder material. uum test Chamber run, astronaut Story Musgrave devel—
oped a mild case of frostbite in the ﬁngers of his right
3.2. Physical environment hand [21]. In response to this event, NASA developed
the ﬁrst generation glove heater, using 3V resistance
The 188 operates in a different physical environment heaters incorporated into the glove thermal micromete—
than the Space Shuttle. Changes to the thermal pro— oroid garment on the back of each ﬁngernail.
ﬁle, radiation environment, micrometeoroid hazard, and Penetration and subsequent loss of pressure by mi—
contaminant exposure risks all drove physical and op— crometeoroids and orbital debris is a longstanding ve—
erational Changes to the EMU. hicle and spacesuit concern. Although the baseline re—
The EMU is designed to accommodate four speciﬁed quirement of a probability of no penetration of 0.995
levels of metabolic loading: minimum rate, maximum over 10 years has not Changed, the amount of orbital de—
rate, average rate, and a short—duration spike value. Be— bris increased signiﬁcantly between early Shuttle ﬂights
cause of anticipated rest periods during space station and ISS operation. By 1994, the Chance of penetration
construction, the requirement for minimum metabolic for particles larger than 0.1 cm diameter was greater for
rate Changed from 400 to 350 BTU/h [17—20]. Space orbital debris than for micrometeoroids and the overall
Shuttle astronauts have two countermeasures to miti— probability of no penetration continues to decrease. Al—
gate periods of low thermal loading during EVA. First, though no design Changes were adopted to mitigate this
mission planners can schedule rest periods while the problem, two procedural and organizationalchanges oc—
astronauts are in the sunlight. Second, astronauts can curred. First, NASA introduced the concept of allow—
rest within the Shuttle payload bay, thereby increasing able penetrations, under the assumptions that the EMUs
the thermal loading on the EMU due to the high emis— emergency OXygen supply would be able to keep up
siVity of the materials in the payload bay and the in— with small leaks. Second, NASA keeps track of orbital
creased thermal radiation from the Shuttle itself [16]. debris and plans EVAs accordingly [16].
Because neither of these countermeasures is available The 133 inclined orbit and mission duration Changes
to I88 crew, the design of the EMU was modiﬁed to the radiation environment crewmembers experience.
accommodate the requirement change. During a mission, astronauts are exposed to three prin—
Lowering the minimum metabolic rate requirement Cipal types of space radiation: Van Allen Belt radiation,
resulted in three design Changes: the development of Galactic Cosmic Radiation, and radiation from solar
a cooling garment bypass, the design of glove heaters, proton events. Although the orbit of the 188 does have

"
"9","N.C. Jordan et al. /Acta Astronautica 59 (2006) 1135—1145 1143
an effect on the radiation levels experienced by the knee, for example, the patterning allows the fabric to eX—
astronauts, the overriding factor in radiation dosage pand across the kneecap and collapse behind the knee,
is the lengthened duration of the crew outside the reducing the amount of gas that must be compressed.
Earth’s protective atmosphere. Analysis of the new en— Bearings allow isovolumetric rotation of joints, and are
Vironment concluded that, with proper monitoring and manufactured by placing small spheres in a track around
planning, NASA could maintain its current standards the Circumference of a joint. Bearing torque is directly
on radiation exposure without additional EVA—speciﬁc related to the contact area between the spheres and the
shielding [22]. tracks. Engineers decreased joint torque by improving in

The 188 has small jets that provide it with altitude the way that joints are patterned and using stronger ma—
control. The propellants used by the jets pose an eXpo— terials. Using a spacer between each sphere decreased
sure risk to EVA astronauts. Although the Shuttle has bearing torque, cutting in half the number of spheres
similar jets, they are located around the Space Shuttle in the tracks and the surface contact area between the
Main Engines, in an area inaccessible to EVA astro— spheres and races.
nauts, whereas on the space station it is possible for EVA There is a basic tradeoff in glove design between
crewmembers to traverse into hazardous zones around durability and tactility. For most of the shuttle years,
the jets. Because of this physical environment Change, a lower tactility glove was sufﬁcient to perform EVA
engineers modiﬁed EMU supporting hardware. In the tasks, and desirable because of its increased life. How—
event an EVA crewmember becomes contaminated with ever, transitioning from Shuttle operations to delicate
one of the propellants, they must wait outside the air— ISS assembly procedures caused a Change in glove de—
lock for about an hour, in a “bake out” period, to allow sign. The EMU gloves are currently on their sixth iter—
the propellant to evaporate. The umbilical that attaches ation and are distinguished by their series number. Se—
to the airlock and reﬁlls the EMU’s consumables was ries 1000 and 3000 were used throughout the 1980s and
lengthened to allow the astronaut to use 188 consum— were custom manufactured for individual crewmem—
ables during this period. bers. The 3000 series gloves offered individual ﬁnger

adjustment capability, but patterning caused excessive
3.3. Technical environment hand fatigue over an 8—h EVA. Four thousand series
gloves were very robust, had a very long life, and were

Advances in technology enable hardware upgrades used until the mid—1990s. To achieve this durability, en—
not necessarily because the old part ceased to perform gineers traded off tactility and feedback, causing higher
its function, but because newer parts are available to per— hand fatigue. Around 1995, NASA introduced the 6000
form the function better. Because these kinds of Changes series glove, which incorporates a lower—torque wrist
are not mandatory, they are sometimes rejected due to bearing and increases tactility and feedback. Although
lack of resources. As a result, EMU engineers often get this glove helps the crewmember to grasp small objectS,
to upgrade antiquated technology only when it happens its life is shorter compared to the 4000 series.
to be in line with a funded program, such as the 188. The design Changes for PLSS batteries, CCC, and
This section examines hardware upgrades made to the C02 sensor were motivated by the increased design
EMU as a result of the decision to use it aboard the ISS. life of the EMU. By adding more plates into the cells
These upgrades include increased rnobility joints; an of the silver—zinc batteries, the wet life was increased
upgraded glove design; upgrades to the EMU batteries, from 170 to 425 days. The old style of the CCC used
CCC, and a new carbon dioxide (C02) sensor; and the Charcoal and lithium hydroxide to remove trace con—
design of the simpliﬁed aid for EVA rescue (SAFER). taminants and carbon dioxide. One CCC could only be

Advances in materials and joint design increased the used for one EVA before needing ground servicing. The
mobility of the EMU. Working inside of a spacesuit is new design Of CCC uses metal—oxide to absorb C02
akin to working inside a balloon. Each time you move and iS regenerable on-orbit a minimum of 55 times.
an arm or leg, you must do work to compress the gas The EMU C02 sensor was upgraded from an electro—
inside the balloon as it shrinks in volume while bend— chemical sensor to an infrared transducer for safety
ing. The amount of torque necessary to move increases and maintenance reasons. The electrochemical sensor
as the pressure inside the balloon rises. The EMU pres— had a delayed response time to the level of C02 in
sure garment has two mechanisms that ease spacesuit the spacesuit atmosphere and also required recalibration
movement. Joints are needed when you would like to before each Shuttle ﬂight. The infrared transducer has
bend and are formed by special patterning of the space— an almost immediate response time and requires little
suit fabric to minimize the Change in volume. At the maintenance.

"
"10","1144 N.C. Jordan et al. /Acta Astronautica 59 (2006) 1135—1145

Flight rules dictate that EVA crewmembers must be characterizes its physical, technical, and political enVi—
tethered to the host vehicle at all times. In the event of a ronment. We therefore suggest that this next—generation
separation, the Space Shuttle is able to reposition itself EMU be explicitly designed to be capable of accommo—
and rendezvous with the astronaut. The 188 is incapable dating requirement changes easily and cost—effectively
of such a maneuver. In order to add a second layer of after it has been ﬁelded. We will be exploring the issue
safety in the event of crewmember separation, engineers of how to design a spacesuit to accommodate change in
designed the SAFER system [23]. SAFER is a cold—gas a future work.
propulsion system that provides adequate propellant for More generally, we contend that the above
a crewmember to maneuver back to the 188 via a hand suggestion—building ﬂexibility into the EMU—is rel—
controller. The SAFER system ﬁts below the PLSS and evant and applicable to the design of many complex
does not interfere with suit mobility. engineering systems, especially those with long de—

sign lifetimes. Instead of attempting to freeze system
4. Conclusion requirements as early as possible, of resisting re—
quirement changes or tolerating them when they are

In the previous sections, we discussed the baseline en— ineVitable, we inVite systems engineers to a new at—
Vironment in which the spacesuit was initially designed titude, more active and pre—emptive, towards change:
to operate during the early Space Shuttle era, and then to embed ﬂexibility in the design and architecture of
contrasted it with its new environment of use aboard complex engineering systems as a means for managing
the 138. We demonstrated how changes in the physical, uncertainty and change in their environments. Flexi—
technical, and political environment of the spacesuit re— bility has been deﬁned in this work as the property
sulted in requirement changes, which in turn necessi— of a system that allows it to respond to changes in its
tated design changes to the EMU. We traced ten require— initial obj ectives and requirements occurring after the
ment changes that resulted from the decision to use the system has been ﬁelded, in a timely and cost—effective
Shuttle spacesuit aboard the ISS, and discussed the 24 way. It entails design choices (e.g., modular design
design changes that ensued. Building on the EMU eX— instead of an integral architecture) and trade—offs that
ample, we make two suggestions for designers and aca— are context and system—speciﬁc. In a future work, we
demics in engineering disciplines to reﬂect upon: the discuss how to embed ﬂexibility in the design of the
ﬁrst concerns the design of the next generation EMU, new planetary—class EMU.
and the second addresses more generally the design of
any complex engineering system with a long design Acknowledgments
lifetime.

The current US Vision for Space Exploration, an— The authors gratefully acknowledge the help of
nounced in January 2004, calls for a human return to Stephen Anderson 0f ILC Dover and Dennis Daw—
the Moon by 2020, and eventually a manned eXplO— son of Hamilton Sundstrand. The National Science
ration of Mars. In this context, a new, planetary—class Foundation Graduate Research FCHOWShip Program
EMU will be developed, whether this ambitious Vision and Universities Space Research Association, contract
is achieved or not. This new EMU, which is expected to 070605-003-006, provided partial ﬁnancial support for
remain operational for at least a decade or two, will op— this research.
erate in an equally if not more uncertain environment,
physical, technical, and political, as that which charac— References
terized the present Shuttle and Space Station EMU. If , ,

. . . . . [1] BS. Blanchard, System Englneenng Management, second ed.,
the past is a guide to the future, 1t1s a particularly useful Wiley, New York, 1997.
gUide in the deSign 0f the neXt'generaﬁon EMU: 100k"" [2] IEEE Guide for Developing System Requirements
ing back, we take note on the one hand of the many Speciﬁcations, 1998 Edition.
changes that have occurred in the EMU environment, [3] J.H. Saleh, D.E. Hastings, D.J. Newman, Spacecraft design
which in tum resulted in requirement changes, and on lifetime, Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets 39 (2) (2002)
the other hand of the considerable challenges design— 244—257' _ _ _ _ _

. . . . [4] J.H. Saleh, D.E. Hastlngs, D.J. Newman, FleX1b111ty 1n

ers faced m adapting the Spacesmt to these changing system design and implications for aerospace systems, Acta
requirements (Signiﬁcant resources expended and sub— Astronautica 53 (12) (2003) 927444.
Optimal resulting design)- Looking ahead, it is to be CX— [5] W.B. Rouse, K.R. Boff, Value—centered R&D organizations: ten
pected that requirement changes will occur in the future principles for characterizing, assessing, and managing value,
planetary—class EMU as a result of the uncertainty that SYStemS Engineering 7 (2) (2004) 167—185-

"
"11","N.C. Jordan et al. /Acta Astronautica 59 (2006) 1135—1145 1145

[6] A. Gregoriades, J.—E. Shin, A. Sutcliffe, Human—centered [15] RC. Wilde, J.W. McBarron, J.J. Faszcza, Identiﬁcation and
requirements engineering, in: Proceedings of the 12th IEEE status of design improvements to the NASA shuttle EMU for
International Requirements Engineering Conference, 2004. international space station application, Acta Astronautica 40

[7] R]. Clarkson, C. Simons, C. Eckert, Predicting change (11) (1997) 797—805.
propagation in complex design, Journal of Mechanical Design [16] R. Balinskas, E. Tepper, Extravehicular mobility unit
126 (5) (2004) 788—797. requirements evolution, Hamilton Sundstrand, Contract No.

[8] C. Eckert, P.J. Clarkson, W. Zanker, Change and customization NAS 9—17873, 1994.
in complex engineering domains, Research in Engineering [17] NASA Extravehicular Mobility Unit LSS/SSA Data Book,
Design 15 (1) (2004) 1—21. Hamilton Sundstrand, Revision J, February 2003.

[9] TR. Browning, Applying the design structure matrix to system [18] G.L. Harris, The Origins and Technology of the Advanced
decomposition and integration problems: a review and new Extravehicular Space Suit, AAS History Series, V01.
directions, IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 48 24, American Astronautical Society, San Diego, 2001
(3) (2001) 292—306. (Chapters 5—8).

[10] J.K. Gershenson, GJ. Prasad, Y. Zhang, Product modularity: [19] G. Goodman, Information requirements for space station
deﬁnitions and beneﬁts, Journal of Engineering Design 14 (3) freedom EVA, 2lst International Conference on Environmental
(2003) 295—313. Systems, SAE SP—872, 1991, pp. 153—157.

[11] J.K. Gershenson, GJ. Prasad, Y. Zhang, Product modularity: [20] NASA Extravehicular Mobility Unit LSS/SSA Data Book,
measures and design methods, Journal of Engineering Design Hamilton Sundstrand, Revision D, February 1997.

15 (1) (2004) 33—51. [21] B. Schwartz, Astronaut story Musgrave injured during training,

[12] G.C. Lutz, P.R. Peacock, M.A. Melgares, R.C. Wilde, EMU Release 93—038, 1993.
processing—a myth dispelled, 2lst1nternati0nal Conference on [22] W. Atwell, Space radiation exposures for international space
Environmental Systems, SAE SP—872, 1991, pp. 39—47. station extravehicular activities, 34th Aerospace Sciences

[13] BR. Prouty, R.C. Wilde, M. Gan, Evolution of the Meeting and Exhibit, AIAA—1996—742, 1996.
extravehicular mobility unit for future missions, 2lst [23] J. Dutton, Extravehicular activity hardware for international
International Conference on Environmental Systems, SAE SP— space station, Journal of Aerospace Engineering 10 (3) (1997)
872, 1991, pp. 49—60. 91—93.

[14] RC. Wilde, Preparing EMU for space station, Acta Astronautica
36 (1) (1995) 65—72.

"
