"","x"
"1","\J xmmws .o w.- - - - - =
WViA—Vygﬂqg Available onllne at www.SCIencedIrect.com
“aﬂaé ADVANCES IN
Mg°v;'é§’€d H I‘ Q 0
gig? SCIenceDIrect SPACE
‘1; RESEARCH
ELSEVIER Advances 1n Space Research 46 (2010) 761—767 MCOS=IWW
WWW.elseVier.com/locate/asr
Des1gn eons1derat10ns for sustainable spacecraft water
management systems
. b .
Evan A. Thomas a’*, Mark M. Weislogel , DaVid M. Klaus C
aNASA-JOhnSOI’l Space Center, 2101 NASA Parkway, Mailcode EC3, Houston, T X 77058, USA
bPortland State University, Mechanical and Materials Engineering Department, P.0. Box 751, Portland, OR 97207, USA
C University Of Colorado at Boulder, 429 UCB, Boulder, CO 80309-0429, USA
Received 29 September 2009; received in revised form 24 February 2010; accepted 2 April 2010
Abstract

It is well recognized that water handling systems used in a spacecraft are prone to failure caused by biofouling and mineral scaling,
Which can Clog mechanical systems and degrade the performance of capillary—based technologies. Long duration spaceﬂight applications,
such as extended stays at a Lunar Outpost or during a Mars transit mission, Will increasingly beneﬁt from hardware that is generally
more robust and operationally sustainable over time.

This paper presents design strategies and testing considerations for improving the reliability of water handling technologies. Our
application of interest is to deVise a spacecraft wastewater management system wherein fouling can be accommodated by design attri—
butes 0f the management hardware, rather than implementing some means of preventing its occurrence. Two representative boundary
applications are presented. The ﬁrst is a short term application Where reduced gravity ﬂight tests demonstrated a static phase separator
prototype that achieved nearly 100% separation of gas from liquids under Widely varying wetting conditions correlated to anticipated
ranges of wastewater fouling. The second is a design concept for a lunar outpost water recovery system Where wastewater is allowed
to age and form bioﬁlms and precipitates that can be ﬁltered through lunar regolith media as the water is reclaimed. Both applications
are supported by similar underlying principles of facilitating sustainable ﬂuid handling in the presence of fouled surfaces.

Published by Elsevier Ltd. on behalf of COSPAR.

Keywards: Sustainable; Life support; Wastewater; Fouling

1. Introduction can clog mechanical systems. In turn, these failures can
cause increased maintenance cost and overall crew labor

Development of spacecraft life support hardware over burden.
the past few decades has focused primarily on microgravity Long duration space missions, such as expected for a
applications, With sophisticated designs usually constrained Lunar Outpost or a Mars transit, Will drive the need for
by limitations of volume, mass and power. In particular, hardware that is less prone to fouling failure and generally
for 2-phase gas/liquid separation in microgravity, eentripe- more robust and sustainable. One application that would
ta1 acceleration or capillary action is used to remove liquids beneﬁt from innovation is wastewater management,
Without the aid of gravity-driven buoyancy. These systems wherein biologically mediated wastewater degradation
have often been prone to failure due to surface fouling can be accommodated by the design of the ﬂuid manage-
eaused by biological reactions or mineral sealing, Which ment hardware as opposed to its occurrence being detri-

mental to the desired process.
—* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 3035504671. Th1s paper presents challenges assoeiated .Wlth space-

E—mail addresses: evan.a.th0mas@nasa.gov (EA. Thomas), mmw@ craft water System bIOIOglcal and mmeral fouhngand sug-
mme.pdx.edu (MM. Weislogel), Klaus@colorado.edu (D.M. Klaus). gests alternatlve approaches that move toward increased
0273-1177/$36.00 Published by Elsevier Ltd. on behalf of COSPAR.
doi:10.1016/j.asr.2010.04.005

"
"2","762 EA. T homas et a1. /Advances in Space Research 46 {2010) 761—767

sustainability. Design considerations are presented wherein low (Fig. 1), yielding a high degree of capillary pumping.

systems may be capable of accommodating, or potentially This key design parameter, Which is the angle formed

even beneﬁting from, ﬂuid/surface fouling. Suggestions between the advancing liquid interface and the solid sur-

for a shift in the method of testing and evaluating space- face as it moves along, is governed by the various surface

craft management system prototypes are oﬂered to better energies and the geometry of the solid surface (Quere,

bound expected operational conditions, providing more 2008). The lower @adv the greater the degree of aﬂinity

realistic performance data. Two examples of sustainable the liquid has for the surface, leading to an increased spon-

spacecraft ﬂuid management systems that incorporate taneous Wicking potential. Any changes to the surface

these design considerations are presented herein as case properties, including fouling, can aﬂect this process.

studies. One system is conceived for short duration micro-

gravity ﬂight, and the other for long duration planetary 2.2. Fouling

use. They are uniﬁed by accommodating ﬂuid fouling,

rather than preventing it, to achieve more sustainable and Biofouling is a phenomenon through Which microbial

TObUSt performance. growth in a water solution attaches to wetted surfaces
Within the system. Due to the self-contained and continu-

2. Background ous functionality typical of spacecraft water management
systems in particular, the detrimental eﬂects of biofouling

2.1. Spacecraftﬂuid management pose well recognized design and operational challenges.
Testing conducted at NASA-Marshall Space Flight Center

In a microgravity environment, separation Of immiscible indicated that microbiology contributed to corrosion of an

ﬂuids (i.e. gas and liquid) does not occur naturally, as it aluminum alloy used in spacecraft water recovery systems

does on Earth due to buoyancy. In such situations, surface (Obenhuber et a1., 1991)- The study also concluded that

tension and wetting forces become the dominant inﬂuence once bioﬁlms form in a water recovery system they are

on the liquid behavior. The Space Shuttle and the Interna- “extremely diﬂieult to remove” WithOUt methods that are

tional Space Station (188) both use rotary fans for water destructive to the hardware. If iodine is added to the pota-

separation from an airstream, Which are known to be sus- ble water system to prevent microbial growth, it must SUb'

ceptible to failure due to fouling, since the tight tolerances sequently be removed before drinking due to crew health

and small oriﬁces do not readily accommodate the resul- concerns — a unit operation that further increases system

tant blockage that can occur from biological or inorganic complexity (NASA-JSC, 2000)- Designing systems that

mass buildup. This potential for clogging adds another are less susceptible to biofouling oﬂers only one potential

concern in addition to the already generally increased like- solution to these concerns.

lihood of failure due to moving parts needed for rotating Another form 0f wastewater fouling is mineral scaling.

equipment (Johnson, 2002; Puttkamer, 2008). Scaling occurs as inorganic precipitates form When certain

Capillary action is regularly used for the control Of liq- ion concentrations in solutions exceed their solubility limits

uids in various spacecraft systems, such as propellant and and create solid salts. These salts then precipitate onto sur-

eryogen management or in thermal ﬂuid loops for temper- faces. Because water management systems are often

ature control (Weislogel et a1., 2009; Thomas et a1., 2009). exposed to ﬂuids With high salt concentrations (i.e. urine),

Large length-scale capillary systems such as these tend to the prevention 0f sealing must be addressed. Scaling can be

exploit container geometry and ﬂuid properties to passively avoided by pretreatment 01‘ by careful design and operation

transport ﬂuids to desired positions for a variety of pur- 0f the water management system.

poses. Thus, the shape of the container can serve as a

pumping mechanism that does not rely on moving parts. 3. Technology development considerations

Unfortunately, such methods have only been conﬁdently

established for well characterized systems With favorable 3.]. Geometry

wetting conditions, Where there is a high degree of aﬂinity

of the liquid for the solid surface. Generally, these systems In contrast to state-of-the-art mechanical approaches, it

work best When the advancing contact angle @adv is reliably is anticipated that passive capillary driven liquid phase

Hydrophilic spreading ﬂuid: Hydrophilic partial wetting Hydrophobic non-wetting
9m: 180° or 0° system: 0° < 6w, < 90° system: 90° 5 GM.
Fig. 1. Illustration of advancing contact angle (Qadv) (adapted from Dodge (2000)).

"
"3","EA. T homas et al. /Advances in Space Research 46 { 2010 ) 761—767 763
separation is feasible directly in place of active rotary sep- 3.2. Pretreatment
arators for wastewater applications, where the wetting and
fouling Characteristics can vary widely. Thomas and Muir- The use of oxidizing pretreatment Chemicals for space-
head (2009) observed that certain aspects of wastewater craft wastewater is intended to prevent urea hydrolysis
fouling can improve wetting Characteristics. They found and the subsequent bioﬁlm and precipitate formation that
that although vacuum drying and large defects tended to tends to foul and Clog hardware such as rotary fan separa-
inerease @adv, crystal growth and bioﬁlm growth actually tors, vacuum oriﬁce, or water recovery systems. In con-
lowered @adv. They also noted that the use of pretreatments trast, the absence of pretreatment Chemicals likely results
generally increased @adv. These trends indicate that promo- in an increased prevalence of bioﬁlm formation and small
tion of wastewater fouling may be exploited to signiﬁcantly crystalline growth, which has been shown to signiﬁcantly
decrease @adv and thereby improve performance of eapil- lower the contact angle by up to 440 with 95% conﬁdence
lary-based ﬂuid management systems. (Thomas and Muirhead, 2009). This response can be uti-
In a related study, a passive eapillary-driven ‘statie phase lized by design to increase the performance of a capillary-
separator (SPS) was developed and tested in a reduced- based wastewater management system. Consequently, an
gravity environment to demonstrate successful air/liquid alternate design strategy coinciding with the use of a capil-
separation under highly variable wetting conditions, lary-based system might be to eliminate the need for pre-
wherein capillary conditions varied from highly wetting to treatment Chemicals intended to prevent fouling, and
non-wetting (Weislogel et al., 2008). When the system was deliberately allow wastewater fouling to occur in the liquid
operated within design speciﬁcations, it achieved 100% sep- management system. The operational implications of
aration in nearly 100% of the tests performed, and with ﬂu- employing this approach are discussed below. Typical sur-
ids of widely varying contact angles. The sub-seale face features caused by biofouling and crystalline growth
prototype demonstrated several key design features: are shown in Fig. 2.
While incorporating a wastewater management system
c Centrifugal motive gas ﬂow when available from that does not require pretreatment Chemicals would
upstream fans that are not directly exposed to the waste- undoubtedly be beneﬁcial from an operational and logistics
water can be used eﬂeetively to force droplet perspective, the eﬂeet of intentionally allowing bioﬁlrn for-
eoaleseenee. mation on associated systems that are prone to Clogging
o The bulk ﬂuid ﬂow may be controlled by either wieking would still need to be considered. As a case study, the
in the ease of favorable wetting (Gadv << 90°) or air drag Space Shuttle currently uses a 0.87 cm internal diameter
in the ease of poor wetting (Gadv N900) — the same geom- pipeline linking the wastewater storage tank to the vacuum
etry can serve both limits. dump oriﬁce, approximately 0.14 cm in diameter. Between
0 Capillary forces act to ‘eontain’ the liquid in both cases. the wastewater tank and the vacuum oriﬁce is a composite
0 Liquid carryover is minimized by ‘pinning edges’ in the foam ﬁlter, with the smallest layer having a mean pore size
ease of favorable wetting or tortuous paths in the ease of of 300 um, yielding a Clean ﬁlter pressure drop of 0.1 psid.
poor wetting. These pinning edges are sharp features During at least one ﬂight anomaly, decreased ﬂow was
that present an unfavorable geometry for capillary observed through the wastewater durnp line. A subsequent
pumping, and instead encourage ﬂuid to follow an adja- investigation suggested that either bubble formation or
cent, more favorable capillary path. precipitate fouling caused the decreased ﬂow rate (Muir-
head and Verostko, 2007). If this conclusion is correct, it
When contact angles are large, capillary wieking rates
are reduced below the input liquid ﬂow rate and the capil-
lary force actually resists ﬂuid motion. In this case the bulk 197-5 um
liquid will accumulate locally until air drag provided by
upstream fans overwhelms the capillary force and dynamic ‘_ . '9‘? .4
pressure is suﬂieient to direct the liquid to its desired stor- _ z”. j“ r. .: ‘ .
age location. Capillary pinning eﬂeets, wherein the ﬂuid is 775-6 I . 1.431372}! “£7 - “15.11;..."" .. .
retained in a desired location by the unfavorable capillary ‘ . 'i i ‘ 3‘» '
pumping geometry, then serve to contain the liquid for fur- 500'0 , J ‘ 1.21.;
ther processing. In general, geometry-based design eonsid- “ ”ﬁg- *""\ ' \ A:
erations based on this principle can be used to improve the I 10000
operational reliability of eapillary-based microgravity ﬂuid Ll“ 500.0
management systems. Potentially, such a capillary based 0'0 ”m 0 O um
technology can be directly used in place of mechanical, '
rotary fan separators for microgravity ﬂuid management, Fig. 2. Surface proﬁle irnage showing typical features of biological and
. . mineral wastewater fouling. Color gradient indicates height of features
and may be less p rone t0 fallure caused by surface fouling. (Thomas and Muirhead, 2009). (For interpretation of the references to
A deSign Strategy begins to emerge When complemented by colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this
the following additional considerations. article.)

"
"4","764 EA. T homas et a1. /Advances in Space Research 46 {2010) 761—767
is certainly important to consider the likelihood of the not be applicable. As one feasible strategy, a hydrophilie
intentional fouling layer resulting in clogging of other parts treatment could be applied to the capillary system in
in the system. Part of this concern arises from the potential absence of a biocidal treatment to improve initial wetting.
for biomass to break oﬂ and into the liquid stream. As the As the system is used, the surface treatment will wear oﬂ
example of a surface with relatively deep features in ﬁgure while crystalline and bioﬁlm fouling layers form. This
illustrates, however, the thickness of waste water fouling approach would potentially allow for favorable wetting
layers is generally less than 300 um, and these results sug- conditions within both new and used capillary systems.
gest that the fouling layer is unlikely to grow to a depth Another option would be to simulate the ultimate out-
that would slough oﬂ and Clog downstream hardware come of wastewater fouling conditions in the new design.
(Thomas and Muirhead, 2009). Since it has been shown that small crystalline growth

To partially Characterize which elements of a fouling improves wetting conditions, while large crystals as well
layer would indeed pass through a capillary management as dried and cracked surface features worsen wetting, sim-
system, particles greater than 100 um were ﬁltered during ulating favorable fouling conditions oﬂers an attractive
a 21-day test (Thomas and Muirhead, 2009). The largest alternate design strategy for capillary based systems. Spe-
partieles anticipated are Nl mm, although amorphous eiﬁcally, by roughening a surface such that the largest
deposits can be even larger. Thus, while clogging of the defect height d and capillary length l are in ratio satisfying
wastewater dump line and wastewater storage tank is unli- d/l < 0.04, a partially wetted surface will be wetted more
kely, care should be taken to appropriately size the dump favorably(Thon1as and Muirhead, 2009). With such a cap-
line ﬁlter to avoid clogging it or any small downstream illary-based wastewater system, designers could consider
component such as a vacuum oriﬁce. The foam ﬁlter is spe- integrating exposure to wastewater prior to use in ﬂight
ciﬁcally designed to ﬁlter particulates that arise in spite of to promote fouling layer growth to improve initial system
pretreatment chemicals, i.e. clothing ﬁbers or hair. Amor- performance. This might be considered an unusual proce-
phous deposits are likely a consequence the amorphous dure, and care would have to be taken to ensure that any
crystalline or bioﬁlm formations and must be collected by pathogenic constituents are conﬁned to the wastewater sys-
the ﬁlter. It seems feasible to modify the foam ﬁlter to tem. Alternatively, a sterile wastewater ersatz could be
include a lower density stage to trap and remove sticky developed that would deposit fouling layers on the surface
amorphous deposits, without causing a dramatic increase in a similarly beneﬁcial way.
in the pressure loss across the ﬁlter or allowing break-
through of the contaminants. 3. 4. High ﬁdelity environmental technology testing

The Space Shuttle air return line includes both an odor
and a bacterial ﬁlter. The air ﬂow returned from a capil- In addition to the technical design considerations, it is
lary-based liquid—air separator would likely have a higher possible that more sustainable spacecraft ﬂuid management
odor and bacterial burden, but could likewise be ﬁltered technologies might also be developed by reconsidering the
before returning to the cabin. Of greater concern is the methods in which they are typically tested under highly
probable odor and bacteria emitted from a wastewater controlled conditions. The goal is generally to conduct
input funnel caused by biofouling in the absence of pre- deﬁned tests that produce predictable and reproducible
treatment. However, simple operational rules could be results akin to how basic scientiﬁc research is carried out.
put in place to minimize these undesirable eﬂects as well. Once these systems are in space, however, they often fail
For example, simply capping the interface when not in in complex, unforeseen ways leaving the engineers frus-
use would trap odors, similar to how the Apollo crew cap- trated and the systems in disuse.
sule urine dump line was used. When operated, the air fan Designing, testing and evaluating spacecraft ﬂuid man-
assist would draw cabin air through the system and mini- agement systems is an engineering challenge more than it
mize the potential for contaminants to escape. Addition- is a basic science research challenge. Rather than examin-
ally, the urine funnel would be interchangeable and ing fundamental processes, engineers are generally more
Cleaned between uses, as current operational protocols interested in how well a given system meets operational
specify. Within these imposed constraints, the absence of requirements. Testing protocols, therefore, should be
pretreatment Chemicals should not create an added odor adjusted to reﬂect this goal. Systems should not need to
and bacterial burden in the spacecraft. be fully Characterized under precise and controlled enViron-

ments; rather results from complex and compounded con-
3.3. Materials and surface treatments ditions within deﬁned boundaries should be compared to
stated performance requirements. Suggested basic elements

Surface treatments also oﬂer a means of improving of this approach are:
material wetting Characteristics. Based on the results of
the wastewater fouling studies described above, several pre- 1. Set performance requirements and evaluation criteria
Vious assumptions regarding surface treatments can be for desired technology.
reconsidered. Speciﬁcally, the presumed need for a biocidal 2. Deﬁne reasonable envelope of expected operational
surface treatment and long-term mechanical durability may environmental conditions.

"
"5","EA. T homas et al. /Advances in Space Research 46 { 2010 ) 761—767 765
3. Evaluate multiple technologies within this expected of the wastewater to vacuum while minimizing cabin air
operational envelope. loss.
4. Escalate, expand and compound the envelope as teeh- The PBALL device is composed of a crew interface, a
nologies mature. void volume to retain the bulk liquid, and a capillary vane
5. Evaluate the results against performance requirements structure that serves to draw the urine away from the void
and technology capabilities. volume and towards the vacuum drain port. The vane
structure (resembling a tapering stack of ‘aning fans’) uti-
While this approach may seem like standard engineering lizes capillary wedge geometry to collect, contain and dis-
praetiee, it is in fact a departure from the methods in which pose of the wastewater. Fig. 3 shows the vane structure
most spacecraft ﬂuid management systems are tested, per- design for PBALL, wherein a large void volume is pre-
haps a consequence of the rarity and expense of ‘in-spaee’ sented to the incoming wastewater stream to minimize pin-
ﬁeld testing. Speciﬁcally, the typical approach today is to ning events. The vane structure becomes denser
control the testing environment in such a way that any par- downstream and reduces the interior angle of the vanes.
tieular requirement is evaluated in relative isolation. For This provides capillary pumping for wetting conditions
example, ground tests with ﬂuid systems often use ersatz and generally allows for concentration of the bulk liquid
with over-simpliﬁed conditions that do not fully represent with passive displacement of the air. In poor-wetting eon-
the actual environment that produces the appropriate eom- ditions, the momentum of the liquid stream forces the
plex surface conditions in which the fouling occurs. Engi- liquid downstream. Spurious perturbations to the system
neering performance tests consequently should be less promote capillary pumping. Only a single vane continues
concerned with fully Characterizing a single parameter in to the liquid exit port providing capillary communication
favor of gaining conﬁdence in the system’s overall robust- to the bulk liquid without extensive Viscous and pinning
ness and sustainability across a range of expected eondi- forces.
tions. In this manner, the resultant designs will The PBALL design demonstrates application of a num-
neeessarily be capable of accommodating, if not exploiting, ber of fundamental eapillary-driven principles described
ﬂuid fouling, making the next generation of spacecraft life above, namely:
support and ﬂuid handling systems more robust and
sustainable. 0 Collection of bulk ﬂuid Via capillary geometries (for
favorable wetting the capillary uptake rate exceeds the
4. Applications input rate) and liquid momentum (for unfavorable wet-
ting, when the capillary uptake rate is lower than the
The design and testing considerations presented can be input rate the device relies on liquid inertia and capillary
applied to a wide spectrum of spacecraft ﬂuid management containment to capture and separate the ﬂuid phases).
systems. Presented here are two examples, one for intermit- o Containment of bulk ﬂuid by capillary force.
tent, short-terrn microgravity ﬂuid management; and o Minimization of carryover or splash by pinning edges.
another for long duration, continuous lunar outpost use. 0 Promotion of beneﬁcial fouling by avoiding pretreat-
Both of these applications represent departures from the ment Chemicals.
state-of—the-art technologies and current system develop-
ment plans. Using a linear model to describe the relationship
between surface fouling and contact angle (Thomas and
4.1. Contingency wastewater disposal Muirhead, 2009), the impact of surface fouling on capillary
A direct application of the static phase separator (SPS)
design considerations was initiated to develop a eontin- _~-----, _ 1LV0'Ume
geney wastewater disposal system for NASA’s Crew Explo- 7’ ‘ -- ..-':_:""I
ration Vehicle (CEV) called the Personal Body-Attaehed Capillary vane ’ Inlet
Liquid Liquidator, or PBALL. In this contingency see- Strum“ K
nario, the airﬂow system was assumed to have failed, leaV-
ing only passive hardware and vacuum vent to dispose of ‘\
the wastewater. To meet these needs, the PBALL was eon- V Crew interface
eeived to rely on capillary action and urine wetting design / 4""“
considerations. The design Challenges inherent in the SPS \ -
are similar in some ways to the PBALL, with the key diﬂer- / ‘ H s
. . . Outlet to
enee being the lack of air ﬂow pr0V1ded by an external vacuum H—J
source. The PBALL was designed to accommodate a range Decreasmg interior angle
Of wetting conditions’ from 00 < 8610'” N900, be adaptable Fig. 3. PBALL illustration showing human interface, and capillary vane
for bOth male and female use: COlleCt and retain up to a liter structure designed to separate air from wastewater, and direct liquid to
of urine, minimize splash-baek, and allow continuous drain vacuum outlet.

"
"6","766 EA. T homas et a1. /Advances in Space Research 46 {2010) 761—767
pumping can likewise be predicted. For illustrative pur- For these reasons, the appropriate technology develop-
poses in Fig. 4, this semi-empirical approach is applied to ment approach for lunar outpost hardware may likely
expected conditions for the full scale PBALL and shows be adapting terrestrial technologies for use in a hypo-
the correlation of surface fouling on capillary pumping graVity environment, rather than modifying microgravity
along a plane representing an average wastewater input space ﬂight technologies.
ﬂow rate of 20 ml/s (NASA-JSC, 2008). The region below As part of a wastewater management system for a plan-
this plane represents Where the input liquid ﬂow rate etary base, an alternative ﬁltering method is suggested. The
exceeds the capillary pumping rate, resulting in a buildup aforementioned fouling studies indicated that wastewater
of bulk liquid. As indicated, highly fouled surfaces With can be expected to form bioﬁlms, amorphous crystalline
small surface defects produce the highest capillary pumping deposits, and large crystals on solid surfaces. These constit-
rates. This illustrates the likely outcome of intentional uents are similar to those found in terrestrial water treat-
Wastewater fouling and demonstrates its positive impact ment systems, and can easily be ﬁltered out. For
on capillary pumping action. example, wastewater in a lunar outpost could be encour-
aged to form biological and mineral precipitates in a
roughing ﬁlter, and then these fouling constituents could
4.2. Lunar outpost water recovery then be removed by ﬁltering. Potentially, lunar regolith
could be used as a media ﬁlter.

As missions become extended in duration and move The aforementioned wastewater fouling study indicated
toward more self—reliant operations, new demands are that fouled surfaces contain crystals on the order of 10—
placed on the life support system design. Thus far, all indi- 100 um, While the fouling layers are generally less than
cations have suggested that the lunar outpost water reCOV- 200 um. A commonly used lunar regolith simulant has a
ery systems Will be evolved from current spacecraft mean particle size of about 200 um. Based on these approx-
technologies, including urine pretreatment, distillation, imate sizes, it is feasible to design a lunar regolith ﬁlter that
and brine dewatering (NASA, 2005). However, these tech- Will eﬂeetively remove wastewater precipitates and bio-
nologies were developed for microgravity compatibility, ﬁlms, as a granular ﬁlter can have an eﬂective media diam-
and may carry undesirable fouling and failure mode heri- eter up to approximately 25 times the diameter of the
tage from this enVironment. targeted contaminants, and can be designed to be a purely

Unlike orbiting spacecraft, a lunar outpost Will exist physical ﬁltering process.
in a fractional Earth graVity enVironment (~0.166g0) Filtered wastewater is then delivered to the primary
With abundant natural resources including lunar regolith, downstream processors. By precipitating crystalline con-
vast open surfaces, and plentiful sunlight. Sunlight can stituents, it is feasible to expect a higher recovery rate
provide a direct source of energy for solar distillation, and lower energy cost for the primary processors, Which
While graVity can at the very least make complex micro- are limited by the solubility of the ionic concentrations.
graVity compatible technologies ﬂuid separation technol- These ﬁlters could be located outside of the habitable
ogies unnecessary, and at best be advantageously spacecraft volume, and can be prevented from freezing by
utilized in a wastewater recovery process. Meanwhile, using direct solar energy and albedo eﬂects.
the outpost may not have ready access to Earth resup- This concept addresses several important challenges to
ply, making consumables and maintenance of greater implementing a water recovery system for a lunar outpost,
concern When conducting design trade studies. Lunar as well as raises several other concerns that must be
surface conditions are perhaps more analogous to the addressed, as summarized below.
terrestrial enVironment than to microgravity space ﬂight.

0 Sustainability — this concept uses simple unit pro-

cesses that are proven and robust, With minimal elec-

trical energy required, and a likely low maintenance

3 60 ‘ ° o In situ resource utilization — as suggested by many stud-

E. 50 . 5 i ies, a lunar outpost Will likely beneﬁt from use of local

E 40 resources, such as direct solar energy and lunar regolith

5;: . proposed here as the primary resources supporting

E 30 7. . _ ' 1 a ._ . .1. water, recovery, and additionally, takes advantage of

E 20 . the presence oflunar graVity.

5:10 5r -..__""____5___ o Pretreatment — this concept eliminates the need for

9 'io'.;3'd::-:::""fiiléitj.” “0010 toxic pretreatment chemicals used for urine stabiliza-

, 0'6 0-4 02 004 0.03 0‘02 ' tion. Instead of trying to prevent urea hydrolysis, this

Fraction Fouled 0 0'05 Defect Ratio ofCapillaryLength ' ' ' ' _

concept promotes biologically mediated ur1ne degrada

Fig. 4. Capillary pumping to input liquid ﬂowrate based on fraction tion, taking ions out Of SOlutionS and then ﬁltering the
fouled and defect height. subsequent minerals and biology.

"
"7","EA. T homas et a1. /Advances in Space Research 46 (2010) 761—767 767
0 Integration — this concept can be directly integrated With to myriad terrestrial and spacecraft sustainable ﬂuid man-
existing water recovery system technologies, including agement technologies.

brine dewatering systems that could result in improved Collectively, the design considerations and application

performance With the elimination of mineral fouling. examples presented here are uniﬁed by the approach of

accommodating ﬂuid fouling to achieve more sustainable

A primary NASA Exploration Life Support technology and robust systems.
activity is “reducing life support consumables and improv-
ing system performance and robustness” (Barta and Ewert,

, , References
2009). This sustainable water recovery concept addresses
thlS gap through the InﬂoVathe use Of p artlal graV1ty, SOlajr Barta, D., Ewert, M. 2009-01-2483 Development of life support system
energy and lunar regOhth 111 place Of pretreatment Cheml' technologies for human lunar missions, in: International Conference
cals and primary processors (Thomas et a1., 2009). on Environmental Systems. Savannah, SAE, 2009.
Dodge, F. The New Dynamic Behavior of Liquids in Moving Containers.
- Southwest Research Institute San Antonio 2000.
5. C0nclus10n 9 ,
Johnson, J. EECOM/DF82/JSC-19935 Shuttle OPS V08-Waste Collec-
. . tion System. NASA-Johnson Space Center, Houston, 2002.

Rathﬁil‘ than attﬁimptmg t0 pr€V€nt 01‘ reduce foullng, Muirhead, D., Verostko, C., ESCG-4106-09-LSCS-DOC—0002-STS-116
Which can result in wastewater system failures, sustainable Wastewater Dump Line In-Flight Anomaly Investigation: Experimen-
ﬂuid management concepts can be designed to accomm0_ tal Assessment Of the STS-116 Wastewater COHCCtiOU and Effects 011
date, perhaps even beneﬁt from, biofouling and mineral 2:13:11: 1515157 SUbSyStem Housmn’ Engmeermg and 80161106 contra“
scaling. DCSIgn cons1derat10hs mdudmg geometry guide- NASA-JSC. CTSD-ADV-341 Lunar—Mars Life Support Test Project:
111163 for caplllaYY'based ﬂuld separators capable Of han' Phase 111 Final Report. Houston, NASA-Johnson Space Center Crew
dling highly variable wetting conditions, discontinued and Thermal Systems Division, 2000.
need for pretreatment cherllicals9 and wastewater fouling NASA-JSC. CXP 70000 Constellation Architecture RCClUimeCIltS RCVi-
ﬁltration oﬂer feasible a 1,Oaches. sion B. Houston, NASA-Johnson Space Center, 2008.

T 1 1. pp d h . f NASA. NASA-TM-2005-214062 NASA’s Exploration Systems Architec-

WO exainp e 2.11) p lcatlfnls 2.1156 p resente erem’ 0116 01‘ ture Study, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 2005.
short-duration micrograVIty ﬂlght, and the Other for long- Obenhuber, D., Huff, T., Rodgers, E. 911378 Microbial Bioﬁlm Studies of
duration planetary outpost use. Reduced-graVity ﬂight the Environmental Control and Life Support System Water Recovery
tests demonstrated a static phase separator that achieved Test for Space Station Freedom, in: International Conference on

- - Environmental S stems. San Francisco CA SAE 1991.

nearl 1000 se aration of as from ﬂu1ds over a ran e of y ’ ’ ’, ,

id 1y A.) p . gd' . h . h 1. .g 11 Puttkamer, J. “ISS On-Orbit Status 05/21/08”.Internat10nal Space Station
W1 6 y varying wetting COIl 1t1011s t at mlg t 1‘68. istica y Daily Report Retrieved November 24, 2008. Available from: <http://
be expected from waStewater fouling that WOUld occur dur' www.hq.nasa.gOV/osf/iss_reports/reports2008/05-21-2008.htm>.
ing actual use. In another example, a lunar outpost water Quere, D. Wetting and roughness. Ann. ReV. Mater. Res. 38 (23-43), 71—
recovery system could beneﬁt by being encouraged to foul 99, 2008- _ _ _ _
regolith media and form bioﬁlms and precipitates that can Thomas, E., Leidich, J ., Klaus, D. 2009-01-2503 A sustainable regelith-
h b ﬁl d d h 1 . d . d based water recovery concept for the lunar outpost, 1n: International
t 611 e tere an t 6 water rec alme us1ng OWHStream Conference on Environmental Systems. Savannah, SAE, 2009.
treatment processes. Thomas, E., Muirhead, D. Wastewater fouling impact on capillary contact

Additionally, rather than evaluating technologies Within angle. Biofouling 2 (5), 445—454, 2009.
narrowly controlled experimental conditions that might Weislogel, M., Thomas, E., Graf, J. A UOVCI dCViCC addressing design

- - hallen es for assive ﬂuid hase se arations aboard s acecraft.
not accuratel reﬂect actual com 1eX o erational enViron- C g p p p p
111 d1. p b p t. 11 'ﬁ d MicrograVity Sci. Technol., doi:10.1007/s12217-008-9091-7, 2008.
ments’ water an 111g SyStemS can 6 opera 1.0.118"" y V6“ 6 Weislogel, M., Thomas, E., Graf, J. A novel device addressing design
OVCI‘ a reasonable enVelOpe Of expected COIldlthIlS to better challenges for passive ﬂuid phase separations aboard spacecraft.
ensure their reliability. These considerations can be applied Microgravity Sci. Technol. 21 (3), 257—268, 2009.

"
