"","x"
"1","IAC-06-A1.7.9
EXPLORATION HEALTH RISKS: PROBABILISTIC RISK ASSESSMENT
J ennifer L. Rhatigan, PhD, PE
NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston TX, USA
jennifer.1.rhatigan@nasa.gov
John B. Charles, PhD
NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston TX, USA
john.b.eharles@nasa.gov
J . Michelle Edwards, PhD
Futron Corporation, Houston, TX, USA
medwards@wy1ehou.eom
ABSTRACT
Maintenance of human health on long-duration space exploration missions is a signiﬁcant
challenge to mission designers. Notably, human health risks are currently the largest risk
contributors to the risks of evacuation or loss of the crew on long-duration International Space
Station (ISS) missions. We describe a quantitative assessment of the relative probabilities of
occurrence of risks to human health during space ﬂight to augment qualitative assessments used
in this ﬁeld to date. We discuss statistical techniques to provide this risk quantiﬁcation using
relevant sets of astronaut biomedical data from short and long duration space ﬂights as well as
relevant analog population data. Our efforts to date have focused on quantifying the probabilities
of medical risks that are qualitatively perceived as relatively high: risks of premature death from
radiation exposure, cardiac dysrhythmias, medically signiﬁcant renal stone formation associated
with increased calcium mobilization, and bone fracture associated with loss of bone mineral
density. We present these quantitative probabilities in order-of—magnitude comparison format so
that relative risk can be gauged. These results can be used to inform NASA exploration mission
design trade studies with the objective of preventing the higher among the human health risks.
INTRODUCTION and interpretation of these results. Finally,
we explain the types of decisions that can be
Truly quantitative assessments are common, supported through this form of analysis and
even expected, in the engineering and provide examples of how our methodology
actuarial spheres, but that capability is just will enable NASA to focus research and
emerging in some arenas of life sciences development efforts on addressing the most
research, such as identifying and minimizing signiﬁcant risks to human health on long-
the hazards to astronauts during future space duration space missions.
exploration missions.
In this paper, we discuss this emerging area BACKGROUND
of study by ﬁrst providing background on
NASA’s probabilistic risk assessment Deﬁning Risk
approach. We explain our motivations, goals NASA deﬁnes risk as “the combination of
and objectives for pursuing this path. We the probability that a program will
then outline our analytical techniques and experience an undesired event and the
results to date, including the critical consequences, impact, or severity of the
assumptions made in the data usage and undesired event, were it to occur“. As
analyses. We provide a detailed discussion deﬁned here, risk analysis has two primary
1

"
"2","components: the likelihood and severity of systematically during space ﬂight came
harm or adverse consequence. during the three crew Visits (three men each,
We can apply this deﬁnition speciﬁcally to for 28, 59 and 84 days) to the Skylab space
human health in space ﬂight. For example, station in 1973-19742. Subsequent efforts to
space motion sickness is a frequent establish statistically signiﬁcant data sets to
occurrence early in most space ﬂights (high answer operationally important questions
likelihood), but is readily handled With began With NASA’s Extended Duration
current countermeasures and procedures Orbiter Medical Project (EDOMP), Which
(low severity), so it is not a high risk for any was a Space Shuttle based data collection
but the shortest of missions. On the other from 1989-1995 on missions 16 days in
hand, the possibility of adverse cardiac length.3 EDOMP data and protocols then
rhythm changes has a low probability of formed the basis for pre-ﬂight, in-ﬂight and
occurrence (according to historical post-ﬂight measurements during the Phase I
monitoring) but could lead to consequences (Shuttle-Mir and NASA-Mir) missions of 7
so severe as to warrant special treatment NASA astronauts and 17 Russian
provisions Within the limited resources of a cosmonauts aboard the Russian space station
space mission. Its risk level is still subject Mir in 1995-1998. In particular, the detailed
to quantiﬁcation. pre- and post-ﬂight assessments established
Risk in this parlance is then deﬁned by three a reliable baseline for missions of 115-188
questions: days duration, relatively independent of the
o What can go wrong? operational problems that impeded the in-
. How likely is it? ﬂight studies.4 With the advent of the
. What are the consequences? International Space Station ([55), collection
In space ﬂight program and project of true long-duration data sets (deﬁned as 4
development, NASA design engineers to 6 months 0t space ﬂight) has begun. At
utilize several methodologies to address this writing, 12 human expeditions have
these questions: Hazards Analysis (HA), been completed on the 155» comprised et a
Failure Modes and Effects Analysis, Critical total 0t 30 astronauts and cosmonauts. The
Items List (FMEA/CIL), Problem Reporting 13th expedition on 155 is hOW nearing
and Corrective Action (PRACA), and completion. While participation in medical
Probabilistic Risk Assessment (PRA). experiments is voluntary, we now have
While the ﬁrst three methodologies are available data sets on human health to Which
focused on engineering design and mission statistical techniques can be applied and
operations, PRA is a technique that can be meaningfully interpreted. Notably, analog
broadened to include any mission risk Where population data have 3150 emerged recently
a probability can be assigned and a in risk areas of broader medical research
consequence deduced. interest, such as bone loss5 .
Recognizing the need for acquiring the
Availability of Human Health Data in Long- clinical data necessary for protecting
duration Space Flight and Analog astronauts” health, NASA started a database
Populations for such data, the Longitudinal Study of
Until recently, reliable data upon Which to Astronaut Health (LSAH)
base probabilities of human health risks in (http://sd.jso.nasa.gov/sd13/1sah.ast), in
space ﬂight did not eXist. Operationally- 1992- The goal 0f the LSAH is to
relevant data were collected by medical investigate and describe the incidence of
monitoring on most early U.S. astronauts, acute and chronic morbidity and mortality of
but only a few hypothesis-driven biomedical astronauts and to determine Whether the
investigations were accommodated on space unique occupational exposures encountered
ﬂights in the Mercury, Gemini and Apollo by astronauts are associated With increased
programs (1961-1972). The ﬁrst risks of either total or oause-speoiﬁo
opportunity to collect large amounts of data morbidity or mortality.
2

"
"3","The other major source of data on maturation to the resolution of human health
astronauts” physical responses to space risks for NASA’s exploration missions.
ﬂight factors is the widely-distributed body Moreover, we are now able to integrate
of information acquired by NASA-funded human health risks into the overall PRA
investigators doing scientiﬁc investigations. mission risk discussion. Program managers,
NASA collects the resulting data in the Life using PRA, can truly weigh human health
Sciences Data Archive (LSDA) risks against the traditional mission-speoiﬁo
(http://lsda.jso.nasa.gov/lsda_home.ofm). hardware and software risks and assess
The archive includes investigations from where improvements are best applied to
1961 (Mercury Project) through current most effectively reduce overall mission
missions (ISS and Shuttle) involving human, risks.
plant and animal studies. The LSDA is a These motivations are further supported by
part of the Human Health and Performance the recent reView of the space ﬂight human
Program of the Exploration Systems health program8 by the US Institute of
Missions Directorate which is dedicated to Medicine, which strongly recommended risk
“safe, sustained, affordable exploration of quantiﬁcation.9
the Moon, Mars, and beyond...” This site is
intended for all audiences, from scientists Heritage of Human Health PRA
and teachers to the general space enthusiast. US regulatory agencies have historically
With these data sets in development and utilized probabilistic techniques to evaluate
under constant growth, we can apply industrial risks to local populations. To our
probabilistic risk assessment techniques to knowledge, the ISS PRA was the ﬁrst to
the analysis of long-duration space ﬂight integrate human health risks into mission
human health risks. risk using analytical methodologies. Human

health risks were evaluated using expert
Motivations to Utilize PRA for Human opinion and surrogate (analog) data in 1997.
Health Risks in Space Flight NASA ﬂight surgeons were asked to
Now that NASA is engaged in planning estimate probabilities, health effects and
long-duration exploration missions6, we are mission impacts of selected medical events
motivated to determine if any human health occurring during space ﬂight mission of 30-
risks will be signiﬁcant barriers to the 90 days“). These were combined with
success of these missions. NASA speciﬁes analog data to estimate probabilities of
use of PRA in management, planning, and occurrence. Consequences were developed
execution of these types of missions.1’7 based on ISS design and planned medical
PRA is an application of a set of techniques and operational mitigations. Clearly, our
in statistical modeling and data analysis most immediate need is to update this
providing relative order of magnitude analysis with data gathered since 1997 on
differences between risks to improve both ISS and Mir. However, much insight
deoision-making. The concept of being able can be gained as a result of our observations
to weigh risks against each other using about this initialhuman system PRA.
relative orders of magnitude can vastly
improve our insight and thus our decision- The [SS PRA Medical Event Model
making. Particularly in the human life The 188 Program deﬁnes three ‘oritioal end
sciences, it draws us away from debate states’ in its PRA model. Human health
hinged upon expert opinion that reigned risks contribute to two of these three critical
until recently and leads us towards more end states, Loss of Crew (LOC) and
fruitful, deﬁnitive discussions on the merits evacuation of the [SS (EVAC)*. Figure 1
of data sets, the effects of critical illustrates a comparison of probabilities of
assumptions, and interpretations of data.
We believe thls to be an evolutionary * The third critical end state, Loss of System

(LOS) is unrelated to human health.

3

"
"4","Loss of Crew and Evacuation due to medical distributions With associated uncertainties.
events for three mission duration periods. They are frequently presented in What are
Values shown in the chart represent mean termed “band-aid” charts. These types of
values. As time on [SS increases, risk of charts show a bar With color density directly
evacuation or loss of crew correspondingly proportionate to probability density. The
increases. Uncertainty also increases With ends of each bar are bounded by the 5th and
mission duration. 95th percentile. The mean value,
Results of PRA are not point estimates of representing the expected value, is usually
percentages but are expressed as probability marked.
nl .ﬂ-i'il1
mmm l—E-
I-I-II: £123 |
EmE‘u'iﬂLG-MD II:
' |.I.JI| £5531
El-r'rrnE'u'AG-MEI ll
l-|-'|'| 11-313
isznmm j- '
I-I-l: .III13I1- | |
mmm II
I l-l-l .IJEIﬁH!
EmLDCF-ﬂ] ll
IZIJIIIJEHJIZI ?.UIZIE-DI 4 .‘IJIZIE . '1'? ll-JJIZIE III."" 3.0 DEIDE 1.U:|Ea|:|1 1.3'IIEJIZI1 1.Il|:|E4|:|1
Prﬂbahilihr
Figure 1.Hist0rical use of PRA for 188 Program. Medical issues are the leading risk drivers in the 188
model for LDC and EVAC end states. Critical End States: LOC-MD is Loss of Crew due to medical event,
and EVAC-MD is evacuation of 188 by the crew due to medical event. Probability of occurrence is given
for 3-month, 6-month, and 12-month missions. ”2 mean value. 188 conﬁgured for Space Shuttle mission
11A (i.e., early in the assembly sequence) With 3 crew members. EVAC assumes that ill or injured
crewmembers can be evacuated to Earth Via the Shuttle. LOC results if ill or injured crew cannot recover
in-ﬂight or be evacuated“. Semi—log scale; shading in bars indicates probability density; solid line is mean.
GOALS & OBJECTIVES 2. Update the human health aspects of
PRA for International Space Station
With the above motivations and heritage in (188).
mind, we can articulate our goal and 3. Use updated 188 PRA heritage as
objectives: foundation for integrating human health
risks into PRA for exploration missions.
GLal: Our goal is to provide data-based,
order-of-magnitude rationale for highest This paper describes our initial efforts to
human system risks, and to inform decision meet these objectives. We have focused our
processes to improve space ﬂight crew efforts thus far on determining the
health and efﬁciency. probabilities (likelihoods) that human health
risks Will occur in space ﬂight for two
Objectives reasons. First, we believe this to be the
1. Evaluate human health risks of space more difﬁcult task. The effort and insight
ﬂight. required to both obtain and interpret data
4

"
"5","sets that accurately reﬂect space ﬂight example of this is the risk of bone fracture.
mission parameters should not be While there has not been a bone fracture
underestimated. Second, analysis of the observed during space ﬂight, there is ample
consequence parameters of a health risk is evidence that bone mineral density (BMD)
very mission dependent. While the 188 does decrease consistently with time in a
program has well-deﬁned procedures to microgravity environment”, This decrease
handle medical emergencies, exploration in BMD is associated with an increased
missions have yet to deﬁne requirements propensity to fracture in clinical populations
and parameters that determine risk on Earth, and indeed has led NASA to
consequence, such as mission tasks, mission measure BMD loss data on astronauts Via
durations, system parameters that impact dual X-ray absorptiometry (DXA).
health, availability of evacuation support, Similarly, we chose measurable quantities
and the like. We believe that when space relating to other adverse events to analyze
ﬂight human health probabilities are the risk (Table l). The initiating factor for
established and vetted through peer reView, each of these undesired end states (or risks)
we will have the critical data necessary to was used to help determine the measurable
support PRA for any future NASA mission. factor.
Assumptions associated with these
DISCUSSION & RESULTS selections are that changes in state from
earth normal do not represent “space
We ﬁrst discuss the overall analytical normal”. It is possible some of the state
approach we have taken in an initial changes, such as QT interval, may have no
assessment of several of the human health bearing on incidence of circulation failure or
risks thought to be signiﬁcant in space myocardial infarction. Moreover, there are
ﬂight. We then describe speciﬁcally how other indicators for these adverse events.
each of the probabilities for these risks is Those listed are simply the ones we are
analyzed, including signiﬁcant assumptions. examining initially based on availability of
We discuss the interpretation of these data. Others can and will eventually be
probabilities, and ﬁnally compare these incorporated once their signiﬁcance is
probabilities to each other. determined. A primary factor for inclusion
of an indicator is whether or not its inclusion
Approach and Summagg-level Assumptions reduces overall uncertainty of the risk.
The approach for the initial analysis of these In all cases, astronaut age was assumed to be
risks involved probability models as well as a mean of 40 years. No pre-eXisting
Bayesian (or inferential) statistics12 . conditions were taken into consideration.
Probability distributions were obtained using We note that indicators may additionally be
Monte Carlo methodology. The oovariates. It is reasonable to infer renal
distributions were then expressed in charts stone formation and loss of bone mineral
showing the 5th and 95th percentiles and the density are related Via calcium loss. We
mean. The mean value represents the have not included any oovariant
expected value with the 5th and 95th dependencies at this time, however, because
percentiles representing the range of there is not data to support this.
uncertainties. In summary, we have determined observable
Space ﬂight incidence or correlative data and measurable quantities to correlate to
were obtained from LSAH, and are adverse events listed in Table l and made
summarized in Table 1. We note many of assumptions that render the analysis
the risks faced in human space ﬂight are not tractable. These quantities are being used to
measurable mainly due to rarity or absence determine the risk or propensity of the
of their occurrence. Therefore we selected adverse event. We present results in the
observable quantities to use in determining following section for the ﬁrst three items in
the risk of an adverse event. A particular Table l and note that the fourth item,
5

"
"6","malignant dysrhythmia, is under evaluation 0 The presence of a load on the bone
at this time and Will be presented at a later sufﬁcient to cause fracture.
date. 0 Astronauts in microgravity Will fracture
bones at same BMD as study
Initiating Undesired Observable participants.
Factor End-state Quantity 1 f
Bone mineral 0 Bone oss occurs at a rate. 0
B 1 B f tu density (DXA); approximately 1.5% per month until the
one 055 one we re bone architecture end of the mission. This rate is extracted
(QCT) from pre- and post-ﬂight measurements
C 1 , 1 FrmlarthaZJr of astronaut bone loss in the Mir and [SS
a mum oss eve s; s one 14
via renal Renal stone incidence within programs, ' . . . .
system 18 months of 0 Bone loss occurs in a linear fashion unt11
1mm end of mission. Although a plateau in
d' . ITYPEKSW; bone loss has been observed in a study
Radiation Eiphagr): $333: of 28 immobilized patients (including 22
exposure Induced Death experienced; With pOSt'traumiuiC spinal cord leSiOHS)
(REID) probability of after 25 weeks 5, there is insufﬁcient
@ evidence at this time to determine at
13,100? t' 9&5?“ T What level and over What duration this
. g ; Q 2; . . . .
Mallgnant. gig: Ion $2313; of in? might occur in space ﬂight. Therefore it
dysrhythmla myocaidial ﬂightheart is not taken into consideration at this
infarction attacks time. Moreover, an exponential model
Table 1. Quantiﬁcation Methods of Undesired of bone loss (inferring from post-ﬂight
Events: The initiating factor is the event or bone recovery rates) is in preparation
process that leads to an nndesned health Which may mimic true bone loss rate16.
outcome. Observable quantities are those The fracture probability is plotted against
selected for analysis that best represent the risk s eciﬁc mission durations (in da s) in
in the data sets available. Underline indicates p . y .
quantity used in initial assessment. Figure 2' Note that typical space ﬂlght
mission durations are indicated on the
Bone Loss and the Probability of Bone ﬁgure. We observe that a nnss1on Of 6
Fracture months (representative of either an ISS
In order to gain insight into the relative miss1on or a lunar outpost miss10n) has a
probability of bone fracture in space ﬂight very low probability Of fracture occurrence
due to BMD loss, we began With an analysis for an 1nd1V1dual astronaut: The longest
of an analog population. This analog continuous. hnman space ﬂight to date is
population is composed of 348 men (age 22- noted, to indicate that. we have no space
90) and 351 women (age 21_93) Whose ﬂight data beyond this experience level.
BMD and fracture occurrences were tracked. Note .that uncertainty increases .as miss1on
While this analog population is clearly not dPratlon moves past our experience base.
closely aligned With the astronaut Flpaily» known information .for Martian
population, it is one With correlated fracture m1ss10ns is indicated, show1ng planned
propensity information. We further made departuie from kMars afte}: aFout 750 dlays
the following simplifying assumptions: 3%?) :mva bao on Eart a ter more t an
o Fracture risk is related only to BMD ays.
level. .
o The data followed a Weibull uncertainty We acknowledge that our. assumptions have
distribution placed this information in the speculative
0 All individuals lose bone at the same arena; however Figure .2 does .pr0V1de
rate (i noring in diVi dual variation and information that agrees With and reinforces
gendergdifferenoes). What has been supposed by experts .
6

"
"7","Moreover, we believe the primary value of have experienced kidney stone formation
this analysis is the establishment of a post-ﬂight19 while one assumed in-ﬂight
methodology that we can use to proceed kidney stone has occurred”. Since access to
with more relevant data. medical care is limited aboard spacecraft,
occurrence of renal stones in a erewmember
_‘ — . is a signiﬁcant risk. Renal stones can cause
""~‘ :- - - 5% assurance level ' . . . . .
‘— mostlikely value [ acute debilitating pain prior to passage, and
g E — Curve suggests GEE£3£Z§§EZEZSESSVQ A if a blockage occurred that could not be
g: 1 ofastronautfracmres during Space ﬂight é . surgically treated, become life-threatening.
E c. _‘ §§ § 3% 3 ,EB We obtained renal stone event data from the
ﬁg"" égzé E: §g ,’ ’3 LSAH and evaluated the probability of
g g; 7 E3 E 3 737,313 32/ ,i’ g occurrence both in-ﬂight (6-month and one-
§ 3553 3‘3 ,g‘ ’1’ 1 ; year missions) and post-ﬂight (within 18
“ E; -‘ - I,” X’ . § months). We note this population is
‘ ”42"",,"" ' § screened for renal stones prior to selection
C i ;- "" I ””' as astronauts and therefore occurrence is
W 4” 5-"" * 7-” ”-v ‘3"") W expected to be less than the general
Em,gverg'mmogg population”. Further, astronauts are not
Figure 2. Example of probability of fracture assigned to long duration missions (i.e. [SS
Wm} eqlﬁValent time in miCI‘Ogl‘aVity missions) if they have had a renal stone
enVironment. Based 0“ BMD 39d ”known occurrence since selection into the astronaut
fracture rate of ground analog population . co
rps.
, We made the following assumptions:
We are currently developing a model of . .
. 0 No age or gender differences in
bone loss and fracture propens1ty based on
, occurrence of renal stones, although the
the actual bone loss measured from MW and general literature in dioates a slightly
[SS astronaut BMD data from the LSAH. h' .
, , igher risk for males than females.
Additionally, we acknowledge that a .
. . o Cons1dered only those oeeurenees of
fracture Wlll not occur unless a load is . .
stones of sufﬁeient Size to be
placed upon the weakened bone. Therefore .
. . . . symptomatic and reportable.
fractures while in micrograVity are not . . . .
. . o The data followed a Weibull distribution
expected, however, the forces applied during . . .
. Figure 3 displays the analys1s results,
landing, takeoff, or lunar/Mars surface . . .
. . . . show1ng both the post- and 1n-ﬂight renal
aet1V1t1es must be eons1dered. Such forces . .
. . . stone risk. We observe that the highest
Wlll be included in our ﬁnal model of .. . .
. . . probability is during the 18-month post-
fraeture risk. Our expectation is the model . .
. . . . . . ﬂight Window for an astronaut after a one
in developmentw1ll improve our 1ns1ght into . . . .

. . . year long space ﬂight. The probability is

the risk of fracture during exploration . .
. . . slightly lower for post-ﬂight after a 6-month
m1ss1ons by both deereas1ng the . . . . .
. . . . miss10n. We note the probability of an in-
uneertainties noted above and 1nereas1ng our . .
. ﬂight renal stone is one to two orders of
conﬁdence in the outcome. . . . .
magnitude lower, depending on miss1on
Probability of In-ﬂight and Post-ﬂight Renal (imam . .
. The renal stone analys1s has a relatively
Stone. The loss of oaloium from bone . . . .

. . . . . mature heritage Since it is based on LSAH
combined w1th decreased ﬂuid intake 1n- . .
ﬂ‘ . . . data, rather than analog data. Uncertainties

ight increases the probability for renal

. . . are well understood. One area we would

stone formation during and after ﬂight. l'k t t hl d t . t' (1
Both factors increase the likelihood that .1 e 0 use 0 6.1) re uoe unoer ain 1.68 an
. . . . improve evaluation involves comparison of
solid particles Wlll condense in the d d'ff f th' . k A
kidneyslS. Through 2001, 14 astronauts gen er 1 erenoes or is us ' S
7

"
"8","previously noted, there is indication this risk Nonetheless, the radiation environment on
is higher for males than females. ISS, protected Within the Earth’s
geomagnetic ﬁeld, differs signiﬁcantly from
h the more severe radiation environment
[l] astronauts Will experience on the Moon, in
_ _ transit to Mars, or on the surface of Mars.
RenaI I8 IIIID' PDSI'IIIQIII RISI‘I' 3'55 The following analysis is based on the work
[I] 0f Cueinotta et al.23 Where they evaluated
Renal 18 M0. PUSt—flightRisk, 180 probability distributien flinctions (PDFs) for
g fatal cancer risk in interplanetary (1P)
missions of varying durations.
m_ﬂightRenal Rigkl 355 We utilized these PDFs to determine
probabilities for currently envisioned
m exploration missions. REID is the lifetime
In—flight Renal Risk, “180 risk that an individual will die from a cancer
I I I I I I caused by radiation exposure.
I 3'05 I 3—04 I BI]? The following was assumed:
Probabiliw o The worst case is a solar particle event
Figure 3. Relative probability of occurrence of (SPE) similar to that observed in 1972.
Renal Stone for 6-month (180-day) ihission . Only REID considered' other
and 1-year (365-day) mission. Probability for . . . . . ’
in-ﬂight occurrence as well as 18 month post- debilitating . radiation effects are
ﬂight occurrence. Data based on occurrence in neglected. It IS expected that REID W111
the astronaut population. Semi-log scale; be the 111.390? component Of radiation
shading in bars indicates probability density; exposure 11m1ts-
solid line is mean. 0 Previously accumulated radiation
exposure is neglected.
Probability of Radiation Exposure Induced 0 Data presented is for males onlyi.
Death {REID}. Cosmic radiation is a major o A lognormal distribution of the data
risk factor in human space missions. The points.
space radiation ﬁeld includes a mix 0f 0 Spacecraft shielding is typical of current
electrons, protons, energetic heavy ions technology: 5 g/sz
(H213): and secondary radiation such as 0 These durations represent proposed
bremsstrahlungI and secondary neutronszz. estimated mission times (and IP
Primary sources of cosmic radiation are exposures):
galactic cosmic rays (GCRs) and solar 180 days : long-duration Moon stay
particle events (SPEs). Radiation exposure 270 days = 1/2 of transit to Mars
depends upon several variables including 360 days = one year (for comparison)
altitude and inclination of the spacecraft, 540 days 2 Earth to Mars round trip
shielding material and thickness, and solar (ﬂy-by, without landing)
activity patterns. Radiation exposure can 1000 days 2 round trip plus Mars
lead to cancer, degenerative tissue effects surface stay
such as cataracts or heart disease, as well as Figure 4 shows a worst case scenario of the
acute radiation syndrome. Indeed, radiation probability of premature death due to
exposure is considered a relatively high risk radiation exposure for male astronauts. As
ff” ISS anti procedures are in piaee for in- time in microgravity away from earth’s
s1tu sheltering from solar-magnetie storms. protective atmosphere increases, the risk of
I High-energy electromagnetic radiation released —
as the primary radiation particles interact With 1 Female data is available but was not included
the nuclei of spacecraft shielding materials or the because our primary focus in this publication is
human body and decelerate. presentation of a methodology.
8

"
"9","exposure induced death due to radiation be lower. Furthermore, this ﬁgure
increases. However, the uncertainty is exempliﬁes the power of order-of-
large, reﬂecting our limited knowledge of magnitude analysis. We observe that the
radiation exposure with time in deep space. probability of fracture is within an order of
. g magnitude of the probability of REID,
whereas the renal stone probability is an
6000836 gunacelm Days |p order of magnitude lower.
m When the probabilities of a risk are similar,
the uncertainty can be useful in comparing
5400mm) risks. When compared in this way, we can
-:I observe the overlap in uncertainties and the
360DayslP variation of uncertainty, denoted by the
-j width and density of the shaded bars in
Figure 5. We acknowledged the high
QYODWS'P uncertainty in the previous section; however
.1 this ﬁgure serves to reinforce the need for
180Days|P reduced uncertainty in these areas,
19-03 19-02 mm particularly the higher risks. We speculate
Probabi'W that with lower risk probabilities, high
Figure 4. Probability of Radiation exposure uncertainty may not be an issue.
induced death (1313.11)) f0]: various Information such as this is useful in decision
Interplanetary (1P) Inlss10n durat120ns. Males making with regard to risk mitigation or
only. Spacecraft shielding of 5 g/crn . Based on
1972 worst case solar particle event. Semi-log acceptance.
scale; shading in bars indicates probability
density; solid line is mean. i I _ RE'D' “fame
Comparing the Probabilities for Space Flight Rena! Starla
HealthRisks: :E
We have included this comparison (Figure
5) to illustrate the utility of PRA as an order- . Efﬁe Rig“-
of-magnitude comparison tool. This ﬁgure
shows the comparison of probabilities of 1M4 13-03 13-0? 19-01 13m“
REID, renal stone, and fracture risk for a . . .. .
365 day mission in the same forma t as use (1 Figure 5. Comparison .Of probabllltles of space
, , ﬂlght human health rlsks. Example one year
preVIOusly. we chose a one year inter- interplanetary mission. Semi—log scale; shading
planetary mission for illustrative purposes§- in bars indicates probability density; solid line is
Note that uncertainties are higher for a one mean,
year mission primarily because this mission CONCLUSIONS
duration is beyond our space ﬂight
experience level. Nonetheless, we can draw NASA is engaged in planning long-duration
insight. exploration missions, and because of that we
Among the risks we have examined to date, are motivated to determine if human health
the probability of REID appears to be the risks will be signiﬁcant barriers to the
largest. This is followed by the in-ﬂight success of these missions. This is supported
fracture risk, and then the in-ﬂight renal by the knowledge that medical issues are the
stone risk. As detailed previously, fracture leading risk drivers in the ISS PRA model
risk is based on data from a ground for either loss of the crew or evacuation of
population; the actual risk to astronauts may 188 by the crew due to medical event. We
— have developed a methodology enabling us
§Note that REID values are calculated for a 360- to provide data-based, order-of-magnitude
day mission, rather than a one-year mission.
9

"
"10","rationale for the highest human health risk ﬁrst critical step in advancing our
probabilities, and to inform decision understanding of risk.
processes to improve space ﬂight crew Although we have learned a great deal from
health and efﬁciency. these initial risk assessments, we have also
The ability to weigh risks against each other pointed out the many limitations to the
using relative orders or magnitude can vastly analysis. In order to meet our stated
improve our insight into these risks, and thus objectives, we have the following work to
our deeision-making. It allows us to focus do.
our assessments on more deﬁnitive Objective 1: Evaluate human health risks of
discussions on the merits of data sets, the space ﬂight.
effects of critical assumptions, and 0 Complete an initial assessment of each
interpretations of data. We believe this to be of the highest risks. In addition to the
a critical step toward the resolution of risks presented here, we are considering
human health risks for NASA’s exploration acute radiation risks (cataracts, CNS
missions. effects, and gastrointestinal effects),
Moreover, we are now able to integrate behavioral health and performance, and
human health risks into the overall PRA neurovestibular risks.
mission risk discussion. Program managers, 0 Obtain additional data for assessment of
11$ng PRA, can truly weigh human health the risk of cardiovascular dysrhythmia.
risks against the traditional mission-speeiﬁe The data obtained thus far shows there
hardware and software risks and assess may be microgravity induced prolonged
where improvements are best applied to QTe, however, in order to perform a full
reduce overall mission risks. analysis of the probability, additional
Preliminary efforts have produced results data is required. Furthermore, the
that are commensurate With earlier relevance of this prolonged QT needs to
qualitative estimates of risk probabilities in be evaluated.
this and other operational contexts, 0 Evaluate the uncertainty associated with
indicating our approach is useful in support each risk and assess the need for
0f the development 0t human health and Bayesian updating or further research to
performance standards for long-duration reduce uncertainty.
space exploration missions. This approach When space ﬂight human health
3150 enables mission-speeiﬁe PRA for space probabilities are established and vetted
exploration missions. Quantitative PRA through peer review, we will have the
allows program managers to focus resources critical data necessary to support PRA for
on these human health risks most likely to any future NAS A mission.
occur with undesirable consequences. Objective 2; Update the human health
We believe the use Of PRA to evaluate aspects of PRA for International Space
human health risks associated with space Station (155).
ﬂight is an extremely valuable tool and our , This requires association Of the
intention is to further mature this tool with probability of each risk with possible
the most recent and relevant space ﬂight consequences or outcomes particular to
human health data. the [SS mission design.
Objective 3: Use updated 188 PRA heritage
W as a foundation for integrating human health
risks into PRA for exploration missions.
We have focused our efforts thus far on 0 Analysis of the consequence parameters
determining the probabilities (likelihoods) of a health risk is very mission
that human health risks will occur in space dependent. Exploration missions have
ﬂight. We believe effort and insight yet to deﬁne requirements and
required to both obtain and interpret data parameters that determine risk
sets that accurately reﬂect space ﬂight is the
10

"
"11","consequence, such as mission tasks, We also acknowledge the critical guidance
mission durations, system parameters provided to us by the NASA Headquarters
that impact health, availability of PRA experts led by Dr. Michael
evacuation support, and the like. Stamatelatos.
0 We expect that lunar mission
architectures Will begin to emerge over REFERENCES
the next year. We can begin to assess —
risk When we are able to estimate 1National Aeronautics and Space Administration Risk
parameters associated With health risks. g‘g’safegqse’z P105831?“ and Gmdelmes, NPG
. . . . , prl .
For. mStance’ on 2? lunar m1e510n, 2R. S. Johnston, L.F.Diet1ein, eds.,Bi0medical
estlmates Of taSk loadmg on bone m the results from Skylab, NASA SP-377, Government
lunar partial gravity Will be needed to frinting Ofﬁce,Washington,DC, 1977.
COIIIplCt€ thG bone fracture risk C. F. Sawm, G. R. Taylor, W. L. Smith, 6dS.,
a S S e S S m e nt Extended Duration Orbiter Medical Project, NASA
° , SP-1999-534, National Aeronautics and Space
AnOther Challehge we have faced IS the Administration, Houston, Texas, 1999.
small sample Slze of astronaut data. ThIS 4G.C.Nield and PM.Vorobiev,(eds.),Phase1
contributes to the large uncertainties ngmm 10th RepOf’h NASA SP-1999-6108, NASA
observed in the results. As our data base SHeadquarterS’waShlngtongD'C'=January1999'
from 188 lon -durati0n missions rows S. Ott, (2006) Fracture Rlsk Calculator.
. . g . . g ’ http://courses.washington.edu/bonephys/FXRiskCalcul
add1t10na1 data W111 be obtamed and used to ator.htm1
update the current analyses. 6 National Aeronautics and Space Administration, The
Visionfor Space Exploration, NP-2004-01-334-HQ,
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC, February
— 2004.
. . 7 National Aeronautics and Space Administration NPR
For a prejeet that 1ntegrates concepts and 8705.5 Probabilistic RiskAssessmem (PRA) for NASA
techniques from such diverse ﬁelds as ?mgifams and PVOJéctS . . .
engineering, bio-statisties, probabilistic risk Natlonal AeTonauncs and Spa“)? Admlnlstratlom
t t Bzoastronautzcs Roadmap: A stk Reductzon Strategy
assessmen ’ . program managemen ’ for Human Space Exploration, NASA/SP—2004—61 13,
spacecraft de31gn, ﬂlght surgery, and the NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas,
medical disciplines speciﬁc to the human gebruary 2005.
health risks, we have relied upon a merry 13- LongneCker» 1}- Mfﬂins (eds), Committee on
band of exertsp who have each brought ﬁzzfzzfiiﬁigzsizziztrsattsgtizagza“
enthu51asm and an open-Ihmded embrace Of http://darwin.nap.edu/books/030909948X/html/
new concepts along W1th a wealth of 10 R. D. Billica, et a1, Perception OfMedical Risk Of
discipline expertise and critical thinking SpaC€ﬂighh Aviation, Space and EnVironmental
capabilities to our team. We thank each Mgdﬁlee» V‘Iésgkio'TS’g/Iasyt 13961-3 b 2005
. . . . . . . ames, ra e u y, ecem er ,
1nd1V1dua11y for 1118 or her contrlbutlone and p e r S O n a1 communication.
are most grateful to have the. opportunlty to 12 D.S. Sivia, Data Analysis: A Bayesian T utorial,
be a part of such an engagmg team. We Oxford Science Publications, 1996.
gratefully acknowledge the contributions to 13 T- Lang, A- LeBlanc, H. Evans, Y. Lu, H. Gennant,
this work from: David Baumann, Doug 2:. Yu? Corticfaltllahd trabecélularthone minﬁtalhlto? from]
. e spme an 1p 1n ong- ura 10h space 1g , ouma
Butler’. Jon Clark’ MD’ A1 FGIVGSOH, PhD’ OfBone and Mineral Research, 19(6): 1006-12, 2004.
B01) Fltzpatrlek, DaVe Glllls, MD: ROque 14 A. Leblanc, V. Schneider, L. Shackelford, S. West,
Haines, Judith Hayes, Kathy Johnson— V. Oganov, A. Bakulin, LI Voronin, Bone mineral and
Throop, PhD, Lauren Leveton, PhD, Trinese lean tissue loss after long-duration spaceﬂight.
McKenzie, Robert Phillips, Mark Powell, ‘1] 0”” ""a1 ?f Musculmkeleztgé gmd N 6""” anal
Kwesi Robotham, Lisa Stephenson, Hsi- 1? t 6mg"" 10.7” 1' 1574.60’ '
hD (1 K1 W D All P. Mmalre, P. Meunler, C. Edouard, J . Bernard, P.
guang Sung, P ?m 1 ey ren. r' an Courpron and J . Bourret, Quantitative histological data
S. Ben] amln COHtrlbUted a numbe Of h€lpﬁl1 on disuse osteoporosis, Calciﬁed T issue Research.
suggestions to our efforts. 17:57-73, 1974-
1 1

"
"12","16 J . Sibonga, head, Bone Laboratory, Johnson Space
Center, personal communication.
17 L. J..Melton, 111,13. J. Atkinson, M. K. O'Connor,
W.M. O'Fallon, and B. L. Riggs, Journal ofBone and
Mineral Research, 13: 1915-1923, 1998.
18F. A. Whitson, R. A. Pietrzyk, C. F. Sams, Space
ﬂight and the risk of renal stones, Journal of
Gravitational Physiology, 6(1): 87-88, 1999.
19D.L. Harm, R.T. Jennings, J .V. Meek, M.R. Powell,
L. Putcha, C.P. Sams, S. M Schneider, L.C.
Shackelford, S.M. Smith, PA. Whitson, Invited
review: Gender issues related to spaceﬂight: a NASA
perspective, Journal Oprplied Physiology, 91: 2374-
23 83, 2001.
20 V. LebedeV, Diary ofa Cosmonaut: 21] Days in
Space. Originally published as Dnevm'k Kosmonavta
(1983) by Nauka I. Zhizn. Later translated from
Russian by Luba Diangar, edited by Daniel Puckett
and Dr. C.W. Harrison. Bantam Edition, 1990.
Bantam Publications Inc., 1990.
21P. A. Whitson, R. A. Pietrzyk, c. Y. c. Pak, Renal
stone risk assessment during space shuttle ﬂights, The
Journal of Urology, 158(12): 2305-2310, 1997.
22G. Reitz, K. Strauch, R. Beaujean, J . Kopp, M.
Leicher, C. Heilmann, N. Heckeley, G. Obe,
Environmental and personal dosimetry 0n D-2.
Proceedings 0fthe Nordemey Symposium on
Scientiﬁc Results 0fthe German Spacelab Mission D-
2, P. R. Sahm, M.H. Keller, B. Schiewe, eds., DLR,
Koln, Germany, 135-142, 1996.
23 F. A. Cucinotta, M.-H. Y. Kim, and L. Ren,
Managing Lunar and Mars Mission Radiation Risks
Part1: Cancer Risks, Uncertainties, and Shielding
Effectiveness, NASA/TP-2005-213164.

12

"
