"","x"
"1","- 95‘1Mmc'3/
Mem. S.A.It. V01. 82, 437 ”95%
© SAIt 2011 Memorie della ?@ﬁ
@499 degn 808%
H uman Space Exploration architecture study
In TAS- I
M.A. Perino

Thales Alenia Space Italia — Strada A. di Collegno 253, 1-10146 Torino, Italy

email: MariaAntonietta.perin0 @thalesaleniaspace.com

Abstract. The international space exploration plans foresee in the next decades multiple

robotic and human missions to Moon, Mars and asteroids. The US Space Exploration pro-

gram addresses the objective “to explore space and extend a human presence across the

Solar System”. Main steps include the completion of the International Space Station and

its utilization in support of space exploration goals, “as the launching point for missions

beyond the LOW Earth Orbit”. Along a parallel matching path, Europe has developed a

roadmap for exploration Aurora and has supported design activities on combined Moon-

Mars Exploration Architectures. Thales Alenia Space Italia has been involved in the maj or

European activities related to exploration and it is currently analyzing the different explo-

ration scenarios considered by the major Space Agencies With the objective to identify an

international reference scenario for exploration taking into account the need to balance col-

laboration at international level due to the highly demanding nature of planetary exploration

missions, and the development of autonomous key capabilities considered of strategic im-

portance.
1. Introduction opment of the enabling technologies for plan—

. etary exploration. Comparing the current eX—

The complex and ,demanlﬁg nature Of Moon ploration plans at international level for both
311d. Mars explot at10n “113310.113 anti the Cllﬁent Moon and Mars exploration, it appears evident
crltlcaT economlcal and p011t1ca1 1nternat10nal that each country is moving through a phased
scene 1Inpose a careful analy31s Of the p08? approach Where the initial robotic missions are
h1e archltecture optlens to meet spemﬁe mls— typically performed with:
81011 scenarlos ObJCCtIVCS so as to 1dent1fy the
required building blocks and derive the strate— _ orbiter: to acquire information and knowl—
gic European contributions. Given its strong edge about the planet Characteristics and
political and ﬁnancial commitment, the global resources
space exploration picture is driven by the US — lander: to validate the capability to reach
space exploration Vision, With a parallel strong the planet surface
European interest to build—up from existing — rover: to reach and explore sites of particu—
technological capabilities and competitive as— 131‘ interest
sets and to develop a robust role as appealing
partner, and a growing support at international This approach results in a repetition of mis—
level. The current approach is not focus to a sions With similar features, Whose value is jus—
speciﬁc priority destination rather to the devel— tiﬁed by the need to develop and master the key

"
"2","438 Perino: TAS human exploration architecture
capabilities required to perform planetary eX— given to develop and test 0n—0rbit robotic s0—
ploration missions. Once these basic capabili— lutions Which might substantially support both
ties are acquired, it Will be mandatory to plan the post—ISS evolution and the exploration mis—
for complementary missions, each one con— sions:
tributing to an international exploration plan
Where the competences and interests of each — Tele—operated TObOtiC devices directly C011""
partners are valued. trolled by crew to execute external or inter—
nal operations
— Crew collaborative robotic devices to sup—
2_ Human space exploration fina| port crew tasks (external or internal) with
destination a sliding level of autonomy. This could
be preparatory to design robotic assistants
The ultimate mission iS represented by a hu— for astronauts engaged in exploration mis—
man Visit to the Mars surface. To achieve this signs,
ambitious goal a set of preparatory dedicated
missions should be planned to support acqui— The operation and growth 0f the 155 could
sition of seientiﬁc/safety data. The huge cf. take into account possible extended utilization
fort, both technical and economical, associated 0f individual modules as prototype vehicles t0
to such a mission leads to consider not only conduct demonstrations of outer exploration
the crewed mission itself but also the prepara— missions.
tory campaign as an international endeavor.
From this perspective, the various stages of
Agencies space programs should address “co— cg». . M ‘
0rdinated”scar provisions (e.g. coherent allo— ‘ ??mxsx
cation of technological/development efforts), “£1. , w. K ""V mg?“ “r
to support completeness of assets and avoid i"" E’ ‘ .. - i
duplication of efforts/costs, While providing re— ‘4‘“
dundant functional legs. ,z. , * J h""
3 ‘ ‘ W‘- ﬁnal-
ir-p , 3'97? ' A
3. International Space Station /[i~a,f§,.;;;;;ﬁ ‘ J: (j m.
utilization ' ""s: ,, ""
. . . . . r . ; :3
The International Space Station utilization and ‘ “ , [2—353 \
composition should be enhanced to sustain
scientiﬁc Earth—oriented objectives and sup— Fig. 1- From 155 to Moon and Mars (BSA)
port the acquisition of long—term exploration—
oriented capabilities (Fig. I. In particular,
the presently available 188 architecture could
be prbgressixfelybpen t0 accommodate/ietatte 4_ Post-ISS human operations in LEO
additional seientiﬁc payloads and capabilities
(With the support of scientiﬁc community and A post—ISS infrastructure should be designed
Agencies). This can be achieved by perform— to serve as a LEO facility With enhanced hab—
ing a dedicated investigation focused on possi— itability properties and supporting capabilities
ble ISS engagement to support demonstration for exploration missions. In particular, the ar—
of technologies for long duration exploration chitecture Of a new LEO infrastructure could
missions (telemedicine, e—health, psychologi— include new types of elements With enhanced
cal and stress countermeasures, rapid proto— capabilities to support comfortable and safe
typing and 0n—site production capabilities) or human life (radiation, meteoroids protections),
in View of post—ISS evolution (e.g. inﬂatable high degree of resources regeneration, and
modules). Moreover, Wide attention should be self sustainable Operations (energy). Moreover,

"
"3","Perino: TAS human exploration architecture 439
dedicated parts of the infrastructure should be mode”pending an integrated assessment fo—
designed to support exploration missions oper— cused on really attainable and accountable re—
ations like crew training, assembly, integration, turn. So, different types of missions might be
CheCk—out, and maintenance of exploration ve— planned in the next years:
hides, and vehicle ﬂight operations. The archi—
tecture should include: — to get scientiﬁc data about Moon Character—

_ dedicatecl decks With robotic devices to im— — iitlgetailecegbgggtlegonﬁrmations about eX—
plement integration and serV101ng opera— elusive opportunities of science “from the
tions . . . Moon”

_ storage eap ab 11.1 ties for resources and fuel — to develop technologies enabling reliable

— “on—orb1t”rn1ss1on control centers and crew - -

access to lunar surface (e.g. prec1s1on land—
headquarters . ing, obstacle avoidance, throttable propul—

_ quarantine / medical quarters sion, power generation supporting mo—

bile systems, mobility implementations to
5. Advanced human transportation transport cargo and/or crew, ISRU capabil—
system ities)
Intensive utilization of LEO infrastructure and _ ifoiicslesriltéfgoftiiiig (giggles :1): EEESEC solu
poss1ble extens1on of human categories access
ShOUId adclress speciﬁc criteria for the design A global evaluation shall than be conducted to
and operations Of transportation systems: establish the attractiveness and sustainability to

_ Separation of crew and cargo transporta_ a next phase of exploration and exploitation of
tion systems (to limit the cost of cargo the Moon supported by humans. The COhChl'
transfer, compared to the safety implica— sions of this assessment should be supported
tions of crew transportation) by corresponding investigations related to re—

_ Crew vehicles with advanced ﬂight capa— sources utilization on Earth, like the potential
bilities (cross range, maneuverability, lim— use Of Helium—3 in the energy sector. A P031""
ited accelerations) and high level of safety tive feedback in this sense could heaVily steer

_ Minimization of operations costs (adoption and condition the priorities of the so called “eX—
of the reusability criteria both for the re— ploration ﬂexible path”, and might become a
entry and the propulsive Constituents, in— key factor for the selection of the required eX—
Cluding the adoption of advanced “vehicle ploration plans.
health management systems”).

The relevance of the development costs makes 7_ Mars human missions preparatory
even more important the assessment and the steps
Choices related to the launcher. This subject is
a key factor Which should be evaluated at in— Considering the huge effort to be put in place
ternational level, taking into account not only and the extreme complexity associated to a
LEO targets, but also the needs associated to Mars human mission, preparatory steps based
the exploration missions. on incremental acquisition of capabilities are
considered mandatory. The necessity to avoid
6. Near/medium-term Moon duplication of efforts/costs should motivate the
expl orati on creation of an International organizationad—
dress1ng not only the potential opportunities
The near/medium—term exploration missions of cooperation in performing preparatory mis—
might be oriented to acquire key informa— sions but actually the consistency of the efforts.
tion and technological experience related to lu— In this context Exomars and Mars Sample
nar exploration (Fig. '. Choices about long— Return are considered cornerstone programs.
term evolution should be kept in “suspend Technological developments in different ﬁelds

"
"4","440 Perino: TAS human exploration architecture
3' S % Eﬁ
4‘ ‘ J ‘ "" .. I '. 1' .I' ‘.
W E.” ﬁ... wk?“ -‘
gs A A ”5 A‘meedﬁisslons
30-50 kg 15°‘3°° ""9 ‘5°’3°° ""9 Pmsuﬂzed ""’va
Lander Class Lander Class Lander Class -
1st Human Missbon
4*
A .0
30-53%; $15232 ""abmm ""m?“ ALogisﬂéﬂissbotiﬁ‘
Land.“ Class (Medium Rovers) g u
e 5 -
- [“0933 “
’ ""' .
Fig. 2. ISECG International Lunar Exploration Scenario
are mandatory:p1anetarypr0tecti0n,Mars spe— — Launch capabilities and propulsion tech—
Ciﬁc ISRU issues, propulsion capabilities, en— nologies
ergy generation, storage and management. — Assembly and servicing of elements in or—
Moreover, those related to human missions bital mission nodes, including automatic
could receive inputs and support by the incre— rendezvous of modules, fuel storage and
mental steps of the “Flexible Path”appr0ach, management.
With speciﬁc commonalities associated to pos— — Techniques of approach and “landing /
sible missions to NEOs. docking ”for different categories of targets
(orbital bodies With limited or no gravity
like NEOs, planetary surfaces With signif—
8. Flexible path icant gravity, presence of atmosphere, vac—
uum, spinning properties).
A “Flexible Path”appr0ach should be estab— — Development of pressurized elements to be
lished in the short—medium term period, in or— utilized as pr-dCﬁIICd building modules
der to keep Open decisions and steps towards for composed applications (command and
the ﬁnal destination, maximizing the potential control modules for landers 0r rovers, hab—
re—utilization of results derived from interme— itable elements, regenerative life support
diate actions and investments. This approach elements,1ab0rat0ries,r0b0tic devices).
requires a careful anticipated analysis of tech—
nological needs end future integratect applica— 9_ Deep Space mi ssi on S
t10ns to clearly 1dent1fy ba31c essentlal lssues
Whose solutions could be directly adopted for In the frame of Deep Space mission scenar—
utilization in Whatever scenario evolution. In ios, the exploration of Near Earth Objects and
other terms, the ambitious objective would be asteroids presents technological, scientiﬁc and
to identify a number of technologies / prod— planetary health interests. From a technolog—
ucts Which could constitute a basic set of as— ical Viewpoint, in fact, the requirements im—
sets to compose the core solutions for the fu— posed by a mission to NEOs, With a duration
ture missions in a relative restricted number of not shorter than 6 months, could represent an
exploration scenarios. Strategic decisions may incremental test bench of capabilities as ad—
be therefore implemented in the near/medium dressed by the “Flexible Path”appr0ach. An
term concerning: enabling technology to be developed and vali—

"
"5","Perino: TAS human exploration architecture 441
dated could be the ﬁnal approaching and dock— tional human exploration of Moon and Mars
ing with a non—collaborative target. Moreover, (Fig. '. Moreover, new alliances and partner—
a human mission to a Near Earth Object could ships might be developed by Europe for the de—
be regarded as a representative demo—mission velopment of commercial crew transportation
of a future human mission to Mars. From a sci— system, that might have a high strategic value
entiﬁc point of View, a NEO mission can pro— in offering a redundant capability for such a
Vide possible exobiology feedbacks (trace of critical functions w.r.t. what is available or in
life, origin of universe) and potential resources development at international level.
exploitation. A political rationale supporting a
NEO mission might originate from the increas—
ing attention and interest at developing over— 11- COHCIUSiOH
all measures of Earth protection against the . .
threat of a collision with a large celestial body. The global space exploration p mgr‘i‘mme 1s
Techni ues of various t es could be sub'ect of well p os1tioned to p rep are the framing COH—

q YP J - - -

. ditions for the continuous development of a
coordinated study and development, depend— E . d t d 't b'l't'
ing on the Characteristics of the NEOs them— nropean space in us ry an 1 S cap a 1.1 ies.

. . . It is necessary to set up a platform at political
selves, the expected available time for reaction . . . .
from the notiﬁcation the rendezvous o ortu— level enabling potential international partners

. . , PP to
n1ty w1ndows. '
— confront their expectations and needs
10_ Potential European contributions — continue their discussions on multiple eX—
ploration scenarios

In developing its strategy for exploration, — identify collaboration schemes and com—
Europe shall build upon the solid CXpCI‘tlSC plementarities leading to a global interde—
acquired With missions like Mars EXPTCSS, pendence between the partners, rather than
Rosetta and Smart—l, and Carry on with robotic a juxtaposition of initiatives from indepen—
missions to meet the scientiﬁc objectives in— dent actors
dicated by the science community and to val—
idate the key capabilities and technologies From an industrial View point, space eXplo—
required to reach and explore a planet sur— ration will stimulate technological develop—
face landing/ascent, surface mobility, In—Situ ment activities, industrial innovation, and eco—
Resources Utilization, navigation and telecom— nomic growth, and it will eXpose the European
munication, radiation protection. With this re— industry to a signiﬁcant competitiveness at
gard, the development of a logistic Lander is international level. A European space eXplo—
regarded as a high priority element to be de— ration strategy is mandatory to Clearly outline
veloped by Europe because it would enable im— the speciﬁc European space exploration pri—
plementation of European autonomous robotic orities and to develop a coordinated network
missions and participation in international hu— of international collaboration. A key priority
man exploration missions. Building upon the at European level should be given to the eX—
robust heritage acquired by Europe in con— tension of the utilization of the ISS beyond
tributing to the ISS development, a LEO post— 2020 with the threefold goal to increase its
188 infrastructure development would respond beneﬁts, enhance its Visibility and decrease its
to the need to continue fundamental and ap— operational cost. A European technology pro—
plied research in microgravity conditions at the gram should be set up, identifying and devel—
end of the ISS operative life, also permitting oping key technologies for Europe to bring into
the development of new capabilities for sus— the international partnership, including and in
taining human presence in space. Key elements parallel with Europes participation in a robust
like the cargo lunar lander, the surface habitat, robotic exploration program. It is important
and the pressurized rover could be regarded as and necessary to resolve the issue of trans—
European strategic contributions to the interna— port to and from LEO, because of a shortage

"
"6","442 Perino: TAS human exploration architecture
"" * “ *qu
f ' 0"": ' Na
73‘ 1 . - _' __'-j
Lan-er
“ ; 1-,, . N 3“
igl‘g, '77 f i . .. ﬂwml‘! , L"";
~ - - r .c .; =2 _ -_;:.:—._~: La..- p""! v -
L_mggm #1 J: 7 ‘ L 3—2, __ ’ 5. f"" - : 7:13;; 5.74 L31???""- ‘5’?
l l — 3%,.“ : ' ' 3‘ r :7 51%;. 7 7,' ""
V. , u ya: ‘ / 0,9 tr:""-¥.;W’--’EN 7 "" F l
-.‘_:-'.~ ‘3’“ 7:2"" “‘4 = L : 5;; .L
Fig. 3. Moon Surface Infrastructure (Thales Alenia Space - Italia)
of transport systems and the lack of a com— Supporting Robotic Missions. International
mon transportation policy between partners, Space Exploration Coordination Group,
Which could jeopardize the optimal utilization Noordwijk, 2—3 December 2009
of space infrastructures in LEO. The Global Exploration Strategy A Framework
for International Coordination, 2007
http://esamu1timedia.esa.int Exploratiom
References Strategyframework_f0r_C00rdinati0n.pdf
Exploration Reference Architecture Overview of International Exploration Plans.
Document, Issue 1, Revision 0, November Issue 1, RCViSiOH 0- 18 December 2009.
2009, HSF—EA/HSP/DOC/OM/2009—05002 HSF—EA/HSP/DOC/JM/2009—05005
European Space Exploration Themes and The Future of European Space Exploration:
Objectives, Issue 3 Draft, 18th December Towards a Long—Term Strategy,
2009, HME—HS/STU/RQ/WC/2007—03017 HME—HS/REF/MEM/BH/ 2005-50001 ;
Final Report of Phase 1 0f the ESA—NASA 20/12/05. http://esamu1timedia.esa.int
Comparative Architecture Assessment, LongTerm_StrategyExecutive_Summary.pdf
June 2008 http://esamu1timedia.esa.int Lunar Program Industry Brieﬁng: Altair
NASA_ESA_CAA—Rep0rt.pdf Overview http://www.nasa.g0v -092408
Final Report of Phase 1 0f the ESA—JAXA AltairLunarUpdatePresentationR4ﬁnal.pdf
Comparative Architecture Assessment, July Surface Buildup Scenarios and Outpost
2009. HSF—EA/INT/TN/MH/2009—35000 Architectures for Lunar Exploration, Daniel
Guidelines for ISECGS Reference Architecture D. Mazanek and Patrick A. Troutman
for Human Lunar Exploration Including (NASA) Langley Research Center

"
