"","x"
"1","An Atomic Gravitational Wave Interferometric Sensor in LOW Earth Orbit
(AGIS—LEO)
Jason M. Hogan, David M. S. Johnson, Susannah Dickerson, Tim Kovachy,
Alex Sugarbaker, Sheng—wey Chiow, Peter W. Graham, and Mark A. Kasevich*
Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94805, USA
Babak Saif
_ _ _ I Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA
: F4 Surjeet Rajendran
- O - Center for T heoretz'cal Physics, Laboratory for Nuclear Science and Department of Physics,
' N ' Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02189, USA and
: 8: Physics Department, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA
: m Philippe Bouyer
. ﬁ- . Laboratoire Charles Fabry de l’Institut d’Optique,
' v—4 ' Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque, Université Paris Sud 11,
: ' Institut d’Optique Graduate School, RD 128, 91127 Palaiseau Cedex, France
I ﬂI
Ha Bernard D. Seery, Lee Feinberg, and Ritva Keski—Kuha
. I . NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland 20771, USA
- a - (Dated: September 15, 2010)
' 8 ' We propose an atom interferometer gravitational wave detector in low Earth orbit (AGIS—LEO).
: c3 ' Gravitational waves can be observed by comparing a pair of atom interferometers separated over
. (0’ . a N 30 km baseline. In the proposed conﬁguration, one or three of these interferometer pairs
' O - are simultaneously operated through the use of two or three satellites in formation ﬂight. The
: ' a : three satellite conﬁguration allows for the increased suppression of multiple noise sources and for
. >5, the detection of stochastic gravitational wave signals. The mission Will offer a strain sensitivity
: v5:: ' of < % in the 50 mHz — 10 HZ frequency range, providing access to a rich scientiﬁc region
. Q: With substantial discovery potential. This band is not currently addressed With the LIGO 0r LISA
- H- instruments. We analyze systematic backgrounds that are relevant to the mission and discuss
: F4 : how they can be mitigated at the required levels. Some of these effects do not appear to have
. > I been considered previously in the context of atom interferometry, and we therefore expect that our
- N - analysis Will be broadly relevant to atom interferometric precision measurements. Finally, we present
: O ' a brief conceptual overview of shorter—baseline (f, 100 m) atom interferometer conﬁgurations that
. l\ . could be deployed as proof—of—principle instruments on the International Space Station (AGIS—ISS)
. N . or an independent satellite.
. Q .
I O I
I O I
' T: ' Contents
: x I. Introduction and Science Goals 2
' H ' . . .
- C23 - II. MISSIOI’I OverV1ew 3
"" ' ' ' A. Atom Interferometry 4
B. The Gravitational Wave Phase Shift 6
C. Gravitational Wave Sensitivity 7
D. Satellite Conﬁguration 9
1. TWO—Satellite Conﬁgurations 9
2. Three—Satellite Conﬁgurations 10
III. Instrument Overview 11
*Electronic address: kasevich©stanford.edu

"
"2","2

A. Cold Atom Source 12

B. Atom Optics 13

C. Detection 13

IV. Atom Interferometer Laser Beam Considerations 14

A. Telescope Design 14

B. Wavefront Aberrations 15

1. Wavefront Aberration Phase Shift Calculation 15

2. Transverse Vibration Induced Phase Noise 17

3. Dynamic Wavefront Induced Phase Noise 17

4. Atom Distribution Induced Phase Noise 20

5. Wavefront Aberration Noise Mitigation 20

C. Laser Phase Noise 21

V. Environmental Considerations in Low Earth Orbit 22

A. Error Model 23

B. Orbital Altitude 25

C. Vacuum Requirements 25

D. Magnetic Fields 25

E. Gravity Gradients 26

1. Satellite Position J itter 26

2. Non—Spherical Earth Gravity Gradients 26

3. Lunar and Solar Tidal Forces 27

4. Free Earth Oscillations 28

5. Newtonian Gravity Spectral Signatures 29

F. Laser Pointing Angle J itter 29

VI. Short—Baseline Conﬁgurations 31

A. Lattice—Hold Interferometer Gravitational Wave Phase Shift 32

B. Lattice—Hold Interferometer Gravitational Wave Sensitivity 32

C. Environmental Considerations near the International Space Station 33

D. Three—Axis Boom—Based Conﬁguration 34

VII. Secondary Objectives 35

VIII. Summary 35

Acknowledgments 35

References 35

I. INTRODUCTION AND SCIENCE GOALS

Gravitational waves (GWS) provide an unexplored Window into the Universe. All current astrophysical observations
rely on electromagnetic waves. Gravitational waves, by contrast, are sourced by energy, not Charge, and can thus
reveal entirely new types of sources that are difﬁcult or impossible to observe electromagnetically, including black hole,
White dwarf, and neutron star binaries. Further, gravitational waves are not screened even by dense concentrations
of matter and can thus be used to probe environments, including the very early universe, that are inaccessible to
any other telescope. Unlike electromagnetic waves, gravitational waves permit observations beyond the surface of
last scattering. Such observations could Change our understanding of the fundamental laws of physics, shedding light
on the birth of our universe in reheating after inﬂation or revealing evidence that our universe underwent a phase
transition at extremely high temperatures. Historically, the ability to observe new sections of the electromagnetic
spectrum has led to many new discoveries. Similarly, the gravitational spectrum seems likely to be ﬁlled With sources
that Will provide unique information about astrophysics, cosmology, and high energy physics [1—3]. However, it may be
the unpredicted sources of gravitational radiation that have the greatest effect on our understanding of the universe.
We propose a 10W Earth orbit gravitational wave observatory based on atom interferometry, AGIS—LEO, Which Will
be sensitive to signals in the frequency band 50 mHz — 10 Hz, complementary to the reach of the LIGO and LISA
instruments. The frequency band probed by AGIS—LEO is home to a variety of interesting astrophysical phenomena.

"
"3","3
Textbook sources of gravitational radiation are compact object binaries, which give a coherent, oscillatory gravitational
wave signal. These binaries consist of systems where both components are compact objects such as white dwarfs,
neutron stars, or black holes [2]. They strongly radiate gravitational waves because they contain large—mass stars
orbiting in close proximity, and the frequency of the emitted waves traverses through the AGIS—LEO frequency band
as the binaries merge.

The lifetime of such a source is a strong function of the gravitational wave frequency and ranges from several
thousand years for a source at 10 mHZ to about a week for a source at 1 Hz. These observation times are signiﬁcantly
longer than the lifetime of a comparable source in the frequency band of LIGO. This long lifetime enhances the
number of such sources in this frequency band relative to that of LIGO and increases their detectability owing to the
increased observation time. Additionally, due to their large physical size, the mergers of white dwarfs end before they
enter the frequency band accessible to LIGO but lie well within the frequency band of AGIS—LEO. Numerous such
binaries are expected to lie in the Milky Way, and AGIS—LEO may be able to detect the brightest of these sources,
such as a compact solar mass binary within N 100 kiloparsec.

Other major sources of gravitational radiation in the AGIS—LEO band include the inspirals of solar mass black holes
into intermediate mass (102MQ § M § 104M®) black holes out to distances of N 1 megaparsec and into massive
(104MQ § M g 107MQ) black holes out to distances of N 10 megaparsecs. There are signiﬁcant uncertainties in
the expected merger rate of such objects, particularly because their detection is a Challenge through electromagnetic
methods. In fact, the detection of the gravitational waves emitted by these objects is one of the cleanest ways to
observe them, and hence there is great scientiﬁc importance in achieving this goal.

The detection and parameter estimation of these mergers could play an important role in enhancing our under—
standing of the growth of structure in our Universe. For example, they can help uncover the nature of seed black
holes that lead to the formation of massive black holes at the centers of galaxies. These binary mergers will also
test general relativity in the strong ﬁeld regime — a regime which is currently inaccessible to terrestrial and solar
system tests of gravity. Furthermore, the detection of a large number of such binary mergers may permit their use
as standard gravitational wave sirens (analogous to an electromagnetic standard candle), thereby providing a new,
precision cosmological probe [4].

There are also several possible cosmological sources of gravitational radiation, described below, which are more
easily observable in the low frequency band below 10 Hz. Although these sources are by no means certain to exist,
the discovery of any one would be incredibly important for cosmology and high energy physics.

We believe our universe began in a period of inﬂation; the subsequent reheating produced all the matter we see
today. This period of reheating after inﬂation produces gravitational waves which are potentially strong enough to
be detectable [5—7]. The gravitational wave spectrum produced by reheating is expected to be peaked; the frequency
of the peak is model—dependent and varies with the scale of reheating. After redshifting, this peak can lie anywhere
between roughly 10 mHz and 109 HZ, so it may be possible for AGIS—LEO to observe gravitational waves from
reheating.

A ﬁrst—order phase transition in the early universe can produce gravitational waves through bubble nucleation and
turbulence [8, 9]. A phase transition at the well—motivated TeV scale is likely to produce gravitational waves with
a frequency today in a range near 100 mHz. In some models with new physics at the weak scale [10], including
some supersymmetric [11] and warped extra—dimensional [12] models, the electroweak phase transition can produce
gravitational waves well above the threshold for detection by atom interferometers.

A network of cosmic strings produces a stochastic background of gravitational waves from cusps, kinks, and Vibra—
tions of the strings. If such a network exists, calculations [13, 14] indicate that the gravitational waves produced may
well be strong enough to be observable in the low frequency band from N 100 mHz to 10 HZ for cosmic string tensions
as low as GM N 10—8 (or lower for a more advanced detector that could be realized in the future).

There are many other possible sources of gravitational waves from fundamental physics in the early universe,
including Goldstone modes of scalar ﬁelds [15], or radion modes and ﬂuctuations of our brane in an extra dimensional
scenario [16, 17]. Pre—big bang [18] or extended [19] inﬂation could also lead to a strong gravitational wave signal in
the relevant frequency range. Other astrophysical sources may lead to an interesting stochastic gravitational wave
background (for a review see [3]).

II. MISSION OVERVIEW

We propose to search for gravitational waves using light—pulse atom interferometry [20, 21]. (An alternative approach
using conﬁned lattice—hold interferometry will also be explored in Sec. VI A.) In this section, we describe atom
interferometry and how it can be used to make a sensitive space—based gravitational wave detector, AGIS—LEO. We
will also introduce the multiple—satellite conﬁgurations that arise naturally from the application of atom interferometry
to the detection of gravity waves.

"
"4","4

z <—>(——> <——><—>

d~31n lx~15m lx~15m d~31n
y;—>X (——)
L ~ 30 km
FIG. 1: Schematic of one beam line of the proposed setup. Two satellites $1 and SQ house the lasers and atom sources. The
dashed lines represent the path of length la; traveled by the atoms during the interferometer sequence. At their Closest approach,
the atoms are a distance d from the satellites. The red band represents the paths of the lasers along the axis between the
satellites.
A. Atom Interferometry

In a light—pulse atom interferometer (AI), an atom is forced to follow a superposition of two spatially separated
free—fall paths. This is accomplished by coherently splitting the atom wavefunction With a pulse of light that transfers
momentum hkeﬂ: to a part of the atom [20], Where keff is the effective wavevector of the light. As a result of the
momentum recoil from the interaction With the light, the two halves of the atom wavefunction spatially separate
along the light propagation direction, each following its own Classical path due to the velocity difference. Note
that the interferometer paths considered here are all nominally one—olimensional along the direction of keﬂs; unwanted
displacements perpendicular to keff arise only because of Coriolis forces present in low Earth orbit and Will be discussed
below (see Figs. 2 and 3 for examples). When the atom wavefunction is later recombined, the resulting interference
pattern depends on the relative phase accumulated along the two paths. This phase shift results from both the free—fall
evolution of the quantum state along each path and from the local phase of the laser, Which is imprinted on the atom
during each of the light pulses [21]. Since it precisely compares the motion of the atom to the reference frame deﬁned
by the laser phase fronts, the phase shift is sensitive to inertial forces present during the interferometer sequence. To
be concrete, the lasers are ultimately anchored to the frame of the AI sensor, so the AI phase shift is a record of the
motion of the inertial atom With respect to the sensor frame as measured by the laser phase fronts, Which act as a
sub—mioron periodicity ruler. Equivalently, the atom interferometer phase shift can be Viewed as a Clock comparison
between the time kept by the laser’s phase evolution and the atom’s own internal Clock. Sensitivity to gravitational
waves may be understood as arising from this time comparison, since the presence of space—time strain Changes the
light travel time between the atom and the laser [22].

Gravitational waves can be detected by recording the phase shift they induce in the atom interferometer. Since this
phase shift is also directly sensitive to unavoidable phase noise and Vibration noise present on the laser light pulses
that act as the atom beamsplitters and mirrors, a practical gravitational wave detector must be differential. The
concept of the AGIS—LEO instrument is to compare the phase shifts of two separate atom interferometers that are
manipulated by the same laser, and that are therefore subject to the same laser noise. The differential phase shift is
still sensitive to the gravitational wave While the laser noise is suppressed as a common mode.

Figure 1 illustrates the AGIS—LEO differential interferometer concept. Two satellites $1 and $2 separated by baseline
L provide a pair of counter—propagating laser beams required to implement the necessary two—photon transitions
commonly used for atom optics in alkali atoms [23—25]. The atom interferometer regions (dashed lines) are each
near one of the laser sources and have size la; along the laser direction (the x—direction). As mentioned above, the
atom wavepackets are separated along the laser propagation direction so that the paths of the interferometer arms
are nominally one dimensional along :10. Both satellites are in orbit around the Earth, and for simplicity we take the
orbital angular velocity vector to be (2 = nory (for a leader—follower orbit, as seen in Fig. 6).

The speciﬁc sequence of light pulses used to implement the atom interferometer is an important consideration since
it affects both the gravitational wave response and the sensitivity to noise. The standard three—pulse accelerometer
pulse sequence (7T/ 2 — 7T — 7T/ 2) consists of an initial beamsplitter pulse, a mirror pulse a time T later, and a ﬁnal
interfering beamsplitter pulse after an additional time T . Such an interferometer is sensitive to gravitational waves as
well as uniform acceleration; this interferometer geometry is discussed in detail in [26]. However, in a leader—follower
low Earth orbit (see Fig. 6) the three—pulse sequence cannot be used by the AGIS—LEO instrument because the large
rotation bias prevents the overlap of the interferometer arms. In order to observe interference and thereby measure a
phase shift, the arms of the atom interferometer must overlap at the end of the pulse sequence Within the size of the

"
"5","5
X [m]
C D
4 /'&\
’ \
I, ‘
I \
2 ,’ \\ 4
I
A ,” \\ F
’ t[s]
\\ 5 I
\\ ’I 2
_2 \ ’1
\ /
_4 \\\ I” a 0
\ ’ 2‘ ‘——— -‘~
C B E N ”/¢’ F ‘~~~~~~
2 [cm] ”/ V\\
—2 z s
4 (\B D ’3
\x ”f
2 4 K~~~ ”¢”
A F ~N“~~-—__y-——-—”/
~~ ’a t [S]
\\ 5 10 ’z’ 15 —4 —2 O 2 4
\ I
—2 \ B D / x [m]
\ I
_4 \\\\~ ’I”’
FIG. 2: Four—pulse atom interferometer sequence using double—diffraction LMT beamsplitters under the inﬂuence of a leader—
follower low Earth orbit rotation bias. The upper arm of the interferometer is the solid (blue) path and the lower arm the
dashed (red) path. Interactions With the light pulses are shown as points labeled by letters A through F. The interferometer
laser pulses are directed along the x—direction With kz- : miceﬂsfc for 1 S 2' S 4. The normalized wavevectors have values m : 1,
n2 : 2, n3 : 2 and R4 : 1. The pulses occur at times 751 : 0, t2 : T, 753 : ST and t4 : 4T With interrogation time T : 4 s.
See Fig. 1 for the deﬁnition of coordinate axes.
atomic wavepacket (i.e., Within the spatial coherence length of the atom). For 87Rb atoms, the coherence length of
the atom’s external degrees of freedom is Am 2 h/Ap N 10 ,um‘ / w for atom ensemble temperature 7'. The large
Coriolis forces experienced in low Earth orbit can cause deviations to the nominal paths of the atom interferometer’s
arms that exceed this coherence length, causing the interferometer not to Close. To address this problem, AGIS—LEO
uses multiple—pulse sequences With appropriate symmetry to facilitate interferometer Closure.

An example of a pulse sequence that Closes even in the presence of large Coriolis forces is the symmetric four—pulse
sequence (7T/2 —7T —7T —7T/2) shown in Fig. 2, Where the four laser pulses propagate along the ac direction With effective
wavevectors kz- 2 k1)? for 1 g 73 g 4. This interferometer uses two mirror pulses, resulting in a two—loop interferometer
geometry along the ac direction. Although the interferometer is nominally one dimensional along :10, the Coriolis force
causes transverse deﬂections so that at point C the upper arm z—position is 2:0 : % ‘29 X V‘ T2 : Qor(keﬂ:/m)T2 N
2 cm, Where once again Qor is the orbital angular velocity of the AGIS satellites. For increased symmetry between the
arms, the interferometer in Fig. 2 uses double—diffraction beamsplitters [27] in Which the upper and lower arms of the
interferometer are given a positive and negative recoil kick, respectively. In contrast to the typical single—diffraction
beamsplitter Where only one arm Changes velocity, the double—diffraction beamsplitter results in symmetric Coriolis
deﬂections Which are needed to Close the interferometer.

Multiple—pulse sequences such as the one in Fig. 2 also help reduce systematic errors in the instrument. For
example, by adjusting the time spacings between the pulses, the four—pulse sequence can be tuned to be insensitive to
either uniform accelerations or gravity gradients and Coriolis effects [26, 28]. This is useful for suppressing spurious
noise from these sources. The sequence shown in Fig. 2 uses a symmetric pulse spacing With pulses occurring at
times 751 = 0, t2 = T , t3 2 3T, and t4 : 4T. As a result, this interferometer is insensitive to acceleration noise, but it
remains sensitive to gravity gradients.

A ﬁve—pulse sequence (7T/2 — 7T — 7T — 7T — 7T / 2) offers a number of advantages that make it a promising candidate for
the AGIS—LEO mission. Figure 3 shows an example of a symmetric ﬁve—pulse sequence With pulses at times 751 : 0,
t2 = T , t3 2 3T, M 2 ST, and t5 2 GT and With variable pulse wavevectors lo; along the x—direction assuming large
momentum transfer (LMT) atom optics With magnitudes k1 = keﬂs, k2 = gkeﬂ‘, k3 = gkeﬁ‘, k4 = %keﬂ:, and k5 = 2keﬂs,

"
"6","6
X[II1]
A D
I \\
5 C I, \ G 6
l’ \\
I \
’I \\ ’
AA/ \AH"" 4
t s
\\ 5 ’1’ \\ 20 ’,’ ‘ [ ]
\ I \ / F C
\\\ ’I’ \\\ ’I’ 2 \
_5 . B . F \\\
g 0 D ,0
N /
Z [cm] ”/
—2 z’
4 ’_‘ B G
’l’ \\\
I \
I o —4
2 E / \F
I \
A I \ H ’ [ 1
‘ A t s —6
\\ 5 10 ,l 2 -5 0 5
\\ [ID
—2 \ B ’I G X [m]
4 \\\ ”I
_ \.,1
FIG. 3: Five—pulse atom interferometer sequence using double—diffraction LMT beamsplitters under the inﬂuence of a leader—
follower 10W Earth orbit rotation bias. The upper arm of the interferometer is the solid (blue) path and the lower arm is the
dashed (red) path. Interactions With the light pulses are shown as points labeled by letters A through H. The interferometer
laser pulses are directed along the x—direction With kz- : miceﬂsfc for 1 S 2' S 5. The normalized wavevectors have values m : 1,
m2 : %, m3 : 3, m4 : g and R5 : 2. The pulses occur at times 751 : 0, t2 : T, 753 : ST, 754 : ST and t5 : 6T With interrogation
time T : 4 s. See Fig. 1 for the deﬁnition of coordinate axes.
Where hkeﬂ: = ZOOEk (see Sec. 11113). The three mirror pulses in this sequence result in a three—loop interferometer
geometry along the x—direction, and these particular 75%- and 196- values are Chosen to simultaneously meet the constraints
of interferometer Closure in ac and z and symmetry in time (see the detailed discussion in Sec. VA). For four— and
ﬁve—pulse sequences With the same IOW—frequency detection limit, the z—deﬂection 0f the ﬁve—pulse interferometer is
intrinsically smaller than that of the four—pulse interferometer since it goes through zero at the midpoint. Smaller
deﬂection is desirable since the atoms must stay Within the beam waist of the interferometer lasers (see Sec. IV). In
addition, the ﬁve—pulse sequence is insensitive to both acceleration noise and gravity gradient induced background
noise Which reduces the temperature requirements (kinematic constraints) of the atom source (see Sec. III A).
B. The Gravitational Wave Phase Shift
The gravitational wave—induced phase difference between two ﬁve—pulse (7T/2 — 7T — 7T — 7T — 7T / 2) atom interferometers
separated by baseline distance L along the direction of propagation of the laser light is
. 7 —1— 8 cos wT ,
AgbGW : SkeﬂshL s1n4(wT/2) (f) s1n QGW (1)
Where h is the gravitational wave strain for a gravitational wave of frequency w, T is the interrogation time of
the interferometer, and keﬂ: is the effective wavevector 0f the AI beamsplitter. Here QGW 2 cat is the phase of the
gravitational wave at the time t of the measurement. This result follows from a fully relativistic phase shift calculation
discussed in [29, 30] applied to the ﬁve—pulse sequence described in Sec. II A.
To maximize the strain sensitivity of the detector, the baseline L should be made as large as possible. This is
a straightforward scaling to implement since only the laser light needs to travel the distance L between the atom
interferometers; each AI can remain relatively small, situated at the ends of the long baseline (see Fig. 1). From Eq.

"
"7","7
10—14
10—15
10—17 a
10-18 LISA ‘ ‘
N b V A
Q m 10-19 I AGIS—LEO
C
10—21
LIGO
10—22
—23
10 Adv LIGO
10—24
10—5 Hz 10—4 Hz 10—3 Hz 10—2 Hz 10—1Hz 1H2 10 Hz 102 Hz 103 Hz 104 Hz
FIG. 4: The thick (red) curve shows the enveloped strain sensitivity versus gravitational wave frequency of a ﬁve—pulse inter—
ferometer sequence for a single arm of the proposed AGIS—LEO instrument. Analogous plots for LIGO [31], Advanced LIGO
[32], and LISA [33] are included for comparison. Curves a—d show gravitational wave source strengths after integrating over the
lifetime of the source or one year, Whichever is shorter: (a) represents inspirals 0f 103MQ, 1M9 intermediate mass black hole
binaries at 10 kpc, (b) inspirals 0f 105MG, 1M9 massive black hole binaries at 10 Mpc, (C) White dwarf binaries at 10 kpc, and
(d) inspirals 0f 103MG, 1M9 intermediate mass black hole binaries at 10 Mpc.
(1), the interferometer is maximally sensitive to GW frequencies at and above the corner frequency we 2 % (:0s_1 g m
27? ' 0.29 / T at Which point Agbgw : (125/ 16)keﬂshL sin QGW. For lower frequencies w < we, the 3 0113 point occurs at
wgdB = % csc_1[4/\/5] % 27? ' 0.19 / T and sensitivity falls off as of. At higher frequencies w > we, the envelope of
the sensitivity curve is constant and the periodic anti—resonant frequencies that are present in (Eq. 1) can easily be
avoided by varying T [26].

In order to observe a gravitational wave, the phase shift Aqﬁgw must be sampled repeatedly as it oscillates in time due
to the evolution of QGW. To avoid aliasing, the sampling rate fr must be at least twice the frequency of the gravitational
wave. The sampling rate can be increased (Without decreasing T ) by operating multiple concurrent interferometers
using the same hardware [26]. In these multiplexed interferometers, atom Clouds With different velocities would be
addressed Via Doppler shifts of the laser light.

C. Gravitational Wave Sensitivity

The phase sensitivity of an atom interferometer is limited by quantum projection noise 6q5 = 1/SNR = 1/\/Na,
Where Na is the number of detected atoms per second. For shot—noise limited atom detection, the resulting strain
sensitivity to gravitational waves becomes h : 813% (:s(:4 (wT / 2) (W). Figure 4 shows the AGIS—LEO mission
strain sensitivity (enveloped) for a single pair of satellites using the ﬁve—pulse interferometer sequence from Fig. 3
With hkeﬂ: = ZOOEk beamsplitters, an L = 30 km baseline, a T : 4 s interrogation time, and a phase sensitivity of

"
"8","8
10—14
10—15
10—17
10-18 LISA
N
a |E
10—20
10—21
LIGO
10—22 a
b IS—future
—23
10 C Adv LIGO
10—24
10—5 Hz 10—4 Hz 10—3 Hz 10—2 Hz 10—1Hz 1H2 10 Hz 102 Hz 103 Hz 104 Hz
FIG. 5: The thick (red) curve shows the enveloped strain sensitivity versus gravitational wave frequency of a ﬁve—pulse inter—
ferometer sequence for a single arm of a sensor that could be realized in the future. Analogous plots for LIGO [31], Advanced
LIGO [32], and LISA[33] are included for comparison. Curves a—C show gravitational wave source strengths after integrating
over the lifetime of the source or one year, Whichever is shorter: (a) represents inspirals 0f 105MG, 1M9 massive black hole
binaries at 10 Gpc, (b) White dwarf binaries at 10 Mpc, and (c) inspirals 0f 103MQ, 1M9 intermediate mass black hole binaries
at 10 Gpc. It should be noted that the stochastic background of White dwarf binaries Will likely overwhelm all but the strongest
of these sources at frequencies less than N 0.5 HZ (see Fig. 9). Note also that this sensitivity curve assumes atom shot noise
limited detection and does not include limits that could be imposed by systematic effects present in the future apparatus.
6q5 = 10—4 rad/V Hz. Although the sensitivity spectrum contains periodic nulls corresponding to frequencies at Which
AqﬁGw = 0, in practice the entire strain sensitivity envelope shown in Fig. 4 can be accessed by scanning T over a
small range on repeated interferometer sequences.

Many of the parameters that set the instrument sensitivity can eventually be improved as A1 technology continues
to evolve. Figure 5 shows the gravitational wave sensitivity that would be possible With a more advanced version of the
AGIS instrument. This future sensitivity curve assumes the same ﬁve—pulse interferometer sequence and hkeﬂ: = ZOOEk
atom optics, but With an L : 104 km baseline, a T : 40 s interrogation time, and an improved phase sensitivity
of 6q5 = 10—5 rad/x/ HZ. We note that this sensitivity curve does not include limits that might be imposed by the
systematic effects relevant to such a future apparatus, since its purpose is simply to illustrate the potential for atomic
gravitational wave detectors to improve as technology advances. The large baseline of this future instrument would
require a solar orbit and is not addressed here.

"
"9","9
y é a “I
/ /
x ' ‘U’
\
Z
X
Z
FIG. 6: Conceptual orbit diagrams for two possible AGIS—LEO two—satellite conﬁgurations, not to scale. In each ﬁgure, the
locations of the satellites (black dots) are shown at quarter—intervals (left) or sixth—intervals (right) of the orbital period,
connected by a green line corresponding to the interferometer baseline axis of the gravitational wave detector at that instant.
Left: A leader—follower (LF) conﬁguration in which both satellites follow circular orbits with the same altitude and angle of
inclination, but with different angles of true anomaly (i.e. phases). In this formation, the baseline’s length does not change,
but it rotates constantly as the satellites orbit the Earth. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, the leader—follower orbit is assumed in this
paper. Right: An inclined—great—circles (IGC) conﬁguration in which both satellites are in circular orbits of the same radius,
but with different angles of inclination. If the true anomaly difference between the satellites were zero, then the baseline axis
would not rotate, but it would ﬂip twice per period and it’s length would oscillate. Practically, however, it is necessary to add
some anomaly to ensure that the satellites do not collide. In this case, one satellite appears to move in an ellipse centered on the
other. The eccentricity of this ellipse is determined by the ratio between the anomaly and the inclination, allowing continuous
tuning from a conﬁguration that favors nearly constant orientations at the cost of length variations to a conﬁguration with
invariant lengths and constant rotation rates. Note the difference in deﬁnitions of the coordinate axes in the satellite frames
between the LF and ICC conﬁgurations. In the LF conﬁguration (as in Fig 1), the x—direction is ﬁxed to the rotating baseline
and the y—direction is normal to the satellites’ mutual orbital plane. In the ICC conﬁguration, the baseline lies on the y—axis
and the x—axis is chosen to be tangential to the satellite’s orbital curve.
D. Satellite Conﬁguration
1. Two-Satellz'te Conﬁgurations

As shown in the preceding sections, gravitational waves can be detected with a pair of atom interferometers manip—
ulated by two satellites separated by a baseline of length L. Ideally, the satellites would be inertial and the baseline
length would be constant. Instead, many practical issues must be addressed for the non—inertial low Earth orbits we
discuss here. The simplest two—satellite conﬁguration is the Circular leader—follower (LF) conﬁguration (see Fig. 6),
which yields baselines of constant length, but also with constant orbital rotation rate, Qor. While this rotation bias
yields off—aXis Coriolis deﬂections (as discussed in Sec. II A and Figs. 2 and 3), the LF conﬁguration provides a simple
starting point for our analysis. Thus, an equatorial, circular, two—satellite, LF orbit will be assumed throughout this
paper unless stated otherwise.

However, it should be noted that other orbital conﬁgurations exist for two satellites that have some advantages over
the simple LF conﬁguration. For instance, the inclined—great—circles (IGC) conﬁguration shown on the right in Fig.
6 reduces the impact of rotation bias at the cost of a variable baseline length. While any orbit pair at equal altitude
requires the satellites to circle each other once per period, this conﬁguration can concentrate most of this rotation
at the orbit crossing points. During the rest of the orbit, the baseline deviates little from one of two antiparallel
orientations. For instance, at an orbital altitude of 1000 km (105 minute period), an IGC orbit with a maximum
separation of 30 km and a minimum separation of 100 rn exhibits sub—degree angular deviations during two 45—minute
windows centered at the points of maximum separation.

The potential beneﬁts of the ICC conﬁguration are substantial. Most important, the small angular deviations
decrease rotation bias and Coriolis deﬂections (see Fig. 7), relaxing many of the constraints based on (2m in the
LF conﬁguration. Further improvements are then possible with star—tracker—based satellite pointing stabilization and
active servoing of the beam delivery optics to compensate for residual rotation [21]. Finally, if the baseline axis
points toward the Sun, this conﬁguration makes a sunshield more practical, since it would only have to protect the
interferometer region along its transverse extent rather than its full length. (As will be discussed in Sec. VB, the
Earth’s shadow could also be used for sun shielding, yielding about 35 minutes of uptime per period at 1000 km of

"
"10","10
4 0.2
§ 0.0
Q
.3 _0'20 5 10 15 20
.§ 0 x‘ I,’ time(secondS) ‘\
33 \\\ II
3 \ I”
g \\ I”
3‘3 —2 \\ [’1'
_4 “~--""
0 5 10 15 20
time (seconds)
FIG. 7: Coriolis deﬂection from the interferometer axis for inclined—great—Circles and leader—follower orbits. Leader—follower
deﬂection is shown in solid (blue) and dotted (red) lines With a maximum transverse separation of 8 cm between the two
arms of the interferometer, While the inclined—great—Circles deﬂection is shown in solid (green) and dashed (purple) lines With a
maximum separation of 160 pm. The inset shows a Close—up View in order to detail the inclined—great—Circles deﬂection.
altitude. This corresponds well With the 45—minute Window of small angular deviations discussed previously.)

The variable baseline length in an IGC conﬁguration implies that the atoms from the two satellites have a non—
zero relative velocity along the interferometer axis. This requires that the lasers be phase—Chirped to account for the
Doppler shift caused by this Changing relative velocity over the duration of the interferometer. Additionally, the atoms
released from the two satellites Will have different respective Doppler shifts. Thus, two different sets of frequencies
Will be needed to address a pair of interferometers in a differential conﬁguration (With one interferometer released
from each satellite). The two frequency sets can be realized by electro—optically generating multiple sidebands from
a common source laser.

The relative velocity between the two interferometers is advantageous for Doppler—based multiplexing of multiple
interferometers during the same time Window. The relative velocity between the atoms and the satellite depends on
AT, the time since the start of each interferometer. Thus, each Cloud is naturally tagged With a different frequency
Which allows for easy individual addressability.

2. T hree—Satellite Conﬁgurations

While a single pair of atom interferometers along a common baseline is sufﬁcient for detecting gravitational waves, a
multiple—arm conﬁguration With several AI pairs offers many potential advantages, Which we Will discuss shortly. Our
three—arm proposal consists of three satellites maintaining constant separations of N 30 km in formation ﬂight (Fig.
8). Such a formation can be pictured as a chief point on a Circular Earth—orbit, With deputy satellites in Circular orbits
in a Hill frame around the chief point. It has been shown that such orbits exist With low station—keeping costs even
When one accounts for the J2 oblateness of the Earth [34]. Lasers located inside each satellite send light to both of
the other satellites, forming a set of three arms consisting of counter—propagating light beams. Each arm has an atom
interferometer at both ends — near, but outside of, the satellites (Fig. 1). The pair of atom interferometers along a
given arm is manipulated by the counter—propagating light beams of that arm, and the phase difference between these
AIs due to a gravitational wave is given by Eq. (1). As a result, each arm of the instrument acts as an independent
gravitational wave detector.

The desire for multiple, independent GW detectors in the AGIS instrument is motivated by one of our primary
science goals: the detection of stochastic GWs. While a coherent GW signal, such as one from a binary merger, can
be detected by a single arm of AGIS, stochastic GWs can be detected only by studying correlations in the signals

"
"11","11
. .- Aagl Aagl
FIG. 8: AGIS—LEO three—satellite orbit simulations. Left: Equatorial orbit of the entire AGIS—LEO constellation at an altitude
of 1000 km. Right: Closer View of three AGIS satellites in an equilateral triangular formation. The simulations were done
using the STK software package from AGI.

Baseline 30 km Gravitational Wave Sensitivity (Sec. II C)

Atom Flux 108 @ Cold Atom Source (Sec. III A)

Cloud Temperature N 100 pK Cold Atom Source and Wavefront (Sec. IIIA and IVB4)

Cooling Laser Powers N 100 mW Cold Atom Source (Sec. 111A)

Interferometer Sequence Multiple 100p Atom Interferometer Pulse Sequence (Sec. II A)

Momentum Separation of Interferometer Arms N 2007119 Atom Optics (Sec. 111B)

TABLE I: Instrument parameters summary. For interferometer laser requirements, see Table II.

from at least two independent GW detectors. In Fig. 9, the sensitivities of the AGIS—LEO and future instruments are
plotted against expected stochastic backgrounds. Following the analysis in [26], we display the sensitivities as 95%
conﬁdence limits on the gravity wave energy density, QGW. To account for the effect of the satellite conﬁguration
on the instrument’s sensitivity to stochastic sources, the calculation includes the appropriate overlap function value
v 2 7T for an equilateral triangle geometry [35]. As indicated by the sensitivity of the future—technology curve, sensors
using AIs have the potential to detect stochastic GWs from cosmic strings and, depending on the exact frequency
cutoff of the White dwarf background, possibly even inﬂation and TeV scale phase transitions.

There are also technical advantages to the AGIS—LEO three satellite conﬁguration over a single arm design. Addi—
tional suppression of laser phase noise and Vibration noise is possible by combining the signals from multiple arms.
Noise that originates from a particular satellite can have a signiﬁcant common component for the two arms serviced
by that satellite. Comparison of the signals from multiple arms can be used to subtract this common noise, allowing
for additional noise cancellation in the event that the single arm differential suppression is not sufﬁcient. Finally, the
use of three independent arms provides redundancy and improves uptime. A ﬁnal determination of the AGIS—LEO
orbital conﬁguration Will require a more thorough analysis of the costs and beneﬁts outlined here.

III. INSTRUMENT OVERVIEW

A single phase measurement in an atom interferometer consists of three steps: atom Cloud preparation, interferom—
eter pulse sequence, and detection. In order to attain the 10‘4 rad/x/ Hz phase sensitivity, the instrument must be
designed to provide, maintain, and measure a cold atom ﬂux of 108 atoms/s. Instrument parameters resulting from
the discussion below are summarized in Table I.

"
"12","12

10—3Hz 10—2Hz 10—1Hz 1 Hz 10 Hz 102 Hz 103 Hz

1 1
10—2 10—2
10—4 —LIGO S4 10—4

BBN + CMB
G = 10-8

10—8 G = 10—10 - 10—8

5 _10 Advanced LIGO _10

C} 10 10
V A G = 10—16
10—12 V 10—12
_ ‘ _ __________Iﬁﬂa_ti<3n_______________' _

10 14 10 14

10‘16 RSI 10—16

10—18 10—18

10—3Hz 10—2Hz 10—1Hz 1 Hz 10 Hz 102 Hz 103 Hz
FIG. 9: The 95% conﬁdence limits on the sensitivity of the instrument in terms of gravity wave energy density, Slaw, for
present and future parameters are plotted as thick (red) curves. These sensitivities are for a ﬁve—pulse interferometer sequence.
The limit from the LIGO Science Run 4 and the projected limits from initial and advanced LIGO are shown [36]. The limits
from models of big—bang nucleosynthesis (BEN) [37] and the cosmic microwave background (CMB) [38] apply to the integral of
the stochastic gravitational wave background over frequency. The possible region of gravitational waves produced by a period
of inﬂation (not including reheating) is shown. The upper limit on this region is set by the COBE bound [39]. The gray band
shows a prediction for the stochastic gravitational wave background from extragalactic White dwarf binaries; its Width shows
an expected error [40]. The (green) curve labeled R81 corresponds to an example spectrum of gravity waves from a TeV scale
phase transition, in this case from the R81 spacetime geometry [12]. The (orange) lines labeled With GM correspond to one
prediction for a network of cosmic strings With tensions GM : 10—8, GM : 10—10 and 10—16 (With 04 : 0.1 and ”y : 50) [14].
Note that these cosmic string estimates have large uncertainties and may be Optimistic assumptions.
A. Cold Atom Source

The suppression of velocity—dependent backgrounds requires the atoms to be 00101, With RMS velocity Widths as
small as N 100 ,um/s, corresponding to Cloud temperatures of N 100 pK. Cold atom Clouds With 108 to 1010 atoms
are readily produced using modern laser cooling techniques [41]. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that the
hardware necessary for these standard techniques is simple and can be made robust and compact — enough to perform
well in drop towers and on airplanes [21, 42, 43]. It is possible to make cold atom sources With ﬂuxes of 1010 atoms/s
that ﬁt in a volume of less than 20 cm3 and require N 100 mW of laser power [44].

The required N 100 ,um/s Wide Cloud can be extracted from a large (2 1010 atom) ,uK—temperature thermal
Cloud by applying a velocity—selective cut using Doppler sensitive tWO—photon transitions [45]. Alternatively, the
necessary velocity spread can be achieved by adiabatically expanding a cold atom ensemble in a harmonic trap or by
implementing delta kick cooling [46], both of Which are aided by being in microgravity, or by cooling the atoms in an
optical lattice [47]. Adiabatic expansion of a cold atom ensemble in an all—optical trap, Which requires only simple
cavities and low power lasers, can be realized With a setup similar to that described in [48]. In any of these cases, low
densities are desirable to mitigate possible systematic noise sources associated With cold collisions. If necessary, an
array of multiple atom sources can be placed in each satellite in order to meet the atom ﬂux requirement.

"
"13","13

After preparation, the cold atom ensemble must be positioned outside the satellite in the interferometer region (see
Figs. 1 and 10). This can be accomplished using laser light along the primary interferometer beam axis. Counter—
propagating light from two satellites is used to form an optical standing wave, trapping the cold atoms. Such an
optical lattice trap can then shuttle the atom Cloud out to the appropriate initial position [49].

In leader—follower low Earth orbits, positioning the atoms outside the satellites must account for signiﬁcant Coriolis
forces. For example, moving an atom Cloud 10 rn from the satellite in a time of 1 s can lead to transverse accelerations
of iv X (2‘ N 10—39. Using a red—oletuneol optical lattice can provide transverse conﬁnement during Cloud positioning,
but this may require small lattice beam diameters, potentially limiting the baseline due to laser light diffraction effects.
To avoid this baseline constraint, a more tightly focused beam may be sent out from each satellite in addition to the
larger diameter optical lattice, acting as a source of transverse conﬁnement for the atoms near the satellite from which
the small beam originates.

B. Atom Optics

Conventional Raman atom optics transfer momentum hkeﬂ: 2 26k to the atom at each beamsplitter [23]. To
achieve the desired sensitivity, it is necessary to increase keﬂ: using large momentum transfer (LMT) bearnsplitters.
An N th order LMT beamsplitter (corresponding to an hkeﬂ: = 2Nhk momentum separation between the arms of an
interferometer) yields an N —folol enhancement of the phase difference in Eq. (1). LMT bearnsplitters can be achieved
by adiabatically accelerating the atoms with an optical lattice [49—52] or by applying sequential two—photon Bragg
pulses. In addition to the desired stimulated transitions, the atoms can undergo unwanted spontaneous two—photon
transitions when in the presence of the laser ﬁeld, consisting of the stimulated absorption of a photon from the
laser ﬁeld followed by the spontaneous emission of a photon in a random direction. Atoms that undergo spontaneous
emission are lost and do not contribute to the interferometer signal, so this effect must be minimized. The spontaneous
emission rate can be written as RSC = %, where ﬁst = W is the Rabi frequency of the desired stimulated
two—photon transitions, I is the laser intensity, F is the spontaneous decay rate of the excited state, A is the laser
oletuning, and [sat 2 2°57: is the saturation intensity of the atomic transition with resonant cross section 00 N A2 and
frequency w = 27TC/A. The time tN needed for an N th order LMT beamsplitter is given by tN N N 9i In order
for spontaneous emission not to degrade the signal signiﬁcantly for q concurrent interferometers, we thereiore require
that qNQist SJ Bi. For example, for rubidium atoms (Isat % 2.5 2“ng and F m 27? ' 6.066 MHZ) we can meet this
requirement for 671 N 100 LMT beam splitters and q N 10 concurrent interferometers by choosing ﬁst N 27? X 0.4 kHz
and laser powers of N 1 W with a beam waist of 10 cm.

In addition to minimizing spontaneous emission, we must ensure that noise in the differential phase between
interferometers due to AC Stark shifts [41] (including those due to off—resonant two—photon transitions) is below
10—4 rad/\/H—Z. This can be achieved with the parameters given above by stabilizing ﬂuctuations in the laser intensity
at the N 0.01% level. Off—resonant shifts are discussed in detail in [50].

When multiple concurrent Doppler—multiplexeol interferometers are used, for certain parameters it may be optimal
to Choose the launch momentum difference between successive interferometers to be smaller than the momentum
splitting between the arms of a single interferometer. If this is the case, then there will be instances when two arms
of two different interferometers will cross each other in momentum space. The existence of such crossings will require
only minor alterations to the pulse sequence to avoid interactions with the undesired arm.

C. Detection

A normalized phase measurement at the end of a pulse sequence consists of counting the number of atoms at each
output port of the interferometer. Since the interferometry takes place outside the satellite, this counting must be
done remotely. Fluorescence imaging, commonly used in laser cooling and trapping experiments, is an inherently
remote state—sensitive atorn—counting technique. A ﬂuorescence—baseol detection scheme can be implemented with
CCD cameras on the satellites and the same telescopes used to enlarge the primary atom interferometry beams (see
Sec. IV A). For instance, a detection beam tuned to resonance with an optically allowed atomic transition can be
generated and enlarged to a 10 cm waist with the telescope on one satellite. Backscattereol ﬂuorescent light can be
collected using the same telescope.

The details of such a scheme are as follows. Prior to detection, atoms exiting a port of the atom interferometer can
be transferred from the interferometer atomic state (one of the ground state hyperﬁne levels) to the imaging state
(the other ground state hyperﬁne level) using a Doppler sensitive two—photon Raman transition. Here the Doppler
sensitivity of the transition is used to distinguish the output ports of the interferometer, since the atoms in the

"
"14","14

Parameter Speciﬁcation Location in Text

Power N 1 W Atom Optics (Sec. III B)

Waist N 10 cm Atom Optics and Laser Pointing Angle Jitter (Secs. IIIB and VF)

Intensity Stability < 0.01% Atom Optics (Sec. III B)

Wavefront < ﬁ Wavefront Aberrations (Sec. IV B)

Phase Noise < —100 % Laser Phase Noise (Sec. IV C)

Fractional Frequency Stability < 10—11 Laser Phase Noise (Sec. IV C)

TABLE II: Interferometer laser pulse requirements.

different output ports have different longitudinal velocities (see for instance, Fig. 3). A subsequent short detection
pulse (N 1 ms) (tuned to be resonant with the transition between the imaging state and an optical excited state)
scatters ﬂuorescent photons. A fraction of these photons is collected by the imaging optics and focused onto a CCD
detector. With Na N 108 atoms in the Cloud, a phase sensitivity of N 10—4 raol requires the ability to measure Changes
in atom number at the m N 104 level (the atom shot—noise limit). This limit can be achieved by scattering enough
photons from the atomic ensemble so that at least 1 photon per atom is detected. The required number of scattered
photons is determined by the solid angle subtended by the light collecting optics, which for a 30 cm primary telescope
mirror at a distance of 10 rn from the atom Cloud is AS) N 6 X 10—5 sr. For the above parameters, the detection
laser must have I / [sat N 10 to achieve 1 photon per atom in 1 ms. The outputs from multiple Doppler—rnultiplexed
interferometers run concurrently can be detected with a sequence of appropriately tuned velocity—selective Raman
pulses. Finally, the fact that the detection is spatially resolved allows for Characterization of possible optical wavefront
curvature errors in the sensor (see Sec. IVB 5).

Having shown that it is possible to produce, maintain and detect the necessary cold atom ﬂux, we now consider
the noise sources that may compete with gravitational waves at this level of phase sensitivity. These sources fall into
two general categories: noise of the laser beam wavefronts and noise from the environment. The former affects the
atoms’ reference frame while the latter affects the atoms’ motion relative to that reference frame.

IV. ATOM INTERFEROMETER LASER BEAM CONSIDERATIONS

The laser wavefronts form the reference frame against which the motion of the atoms is compared. Thus, it is
important that any non—cornmon noise in the wavefronts that is imprinted on the interferometers falls below the phase
sensitivity limit in the frequency band of interest. In this section, we discuss telescope design, wavefront aberrations,
and laser phase noise as they relate to this requirement. For a summary of the resulting interferometer laser pulse
parameters in particular, see Table II.

A. Telescope Design

To generate interferometry beams with Rayleigh ranges equal to half our satellite separations (see Sect. VF), we
will need telescopes to magnify the beam waists to 5 — 10 cm. These beam waists should also be large compared
to the typical sizes of the atom Clouds, N 1 cm FWHM. The telescopes serve multiple purposes in the instrument:
their beam line can be used to shuttle atoms into the interferometry region before a measurement (Fig. 1), they
magnify the primary atom optics beams (Sec. III B), and they form a part of the detection imaging system (Sec.
III C). As discussed in the remainder of this section, the atom optics beams place the most stringent requirements on
the telescope design. Each beam is used in two atom interferometers, one a few meters outside the laser’s originating
satellite, and the other N 30 km away. Thus, the telescope’s design must account for both small—scale imperfections
and large—scale aberrations. For instance, the secondary rnirror must not obstruct the path of the beam and the
primary mirror must be large enough to avoid aperture diffraction effects. A N 30 cm diameter off—axis Schiefspiegler
or off—axis Gregorian telescope could be capable of meeting these requirements [53, 54]. A Gregorian telescope has the
additional advantage that its real intermediate focus could be used for pinhole spatial ﬁltering, which would eliminate
wavefront errors from all optics and lasers before the primary mirror (see Fig. 10).

"
"15","15
Secondary 4-»
error /=l
""ism Interferometry
\\ Beam Source
_ \ ,‘éféy‘
° .4...‘ \..“gr¢’\ 4
Retro error "" 1%?3‘3‘38‘,‘
Aw; “ anary
ﬂ§\“ error
\\\\‘
a ‘
/
/ Atom Shuttling
' - Lattlce
I Cold Atom
Source
FIG. 10: Conceptual diagram of a single AGIS telescope as a 30 cm off—axis Gregorian system. Note the intermediate focus
of the Gregorian telescope, Which allows for the use of pinhole spatial ﬁltering to remove wavefront aberrations from upstream
optics and lasers. Also shown approximately to scale is the cold atom source and a lattice beam that could be used to shuttle
the atoms into the middle of the primary interferometry beam. The primary beam line can in turn be used to shuttle the atoms
away from the satellite prior to an interferometer sequence.
B. Wavefront Aberrations
Wavefront aberration of the interferometer laser beams is a potential source of noise. Since the phase of the laser
is imprinted on the atom during each light pulse, any transverse phase variation results in a phase shift that depends
on the transverse position of the atom With respect to the laser beam spatial proﬁle. This effect can result in phase
noise (i) due to satellite transverse position noise during the interferometer pulse sequence, (ii) due to ﬂuctuations in
the mode itself induced by temporal variations in the optics path or (iii) due to jitter in initial atom Cloud position
01‘ Width from shot to shot. The effect is in general not common—mode suppressed since wavefront perturbations
With high transverse spatial frequency diffract out of the beam over distances smaller than the satellite separation.
The perturbations become common—mode suppressed at transverse wavelengths At longer than the corner wavelength
AC 2 V LA N 17 cm (30%)1/27 Where AC is deﬁned as the transverse spatial length scale Which has a Rayleigh range
of L. In addition, since the in the simplest case the interferometer phase measurement is determined by the total
number of atoms in a particular state, aberrations With transverse wavelengths smaller than the size of the Cloud can be
suppressed by spatially averaging over the atom Cloud. However, by performing this average, the phase measurement
becomes sensitive to Changes in the atom Cloud size from shot to shot, a noise source Which we also discuss below.
1. Wavefront Aberration Phase Shift Calculation
The phase shift imparted to the atoms as a result of non—uniform transverse spatial phase of the laser wavefronts
can be calculated by summing the local phase ¢(Jj, z, t) imparted to the atom at each of the light pulses:
TL TL
(Pt = Z ¢(5L’ja Zjatj) = 29(1117 kt,tj) Siﬂikt(zj — 53021)) + 9t] (2)
j=1 i=1

"
"16","16
Here the position of the atom is referenced to the coordinate system shown in Fig. 1, where 303- is the longitudinal
position of the atom along the direction of keﬂ: at the time tj 0f the jth pulse and zj is the transverse position at
time tj (for simplicity we suppress the transverse coordinate yj). The sum is taken over the n light pulses of the
interferometer sequence; in the cases considered here n = 5 and the coordinates (:Ej,zj,tj) are taken to be those
shown in Fig. 3. For simplicity, we consider the response to a single Fourier component of amplitude 6(110, kt, t) and
transverse spatial wavevector kt = 27T/At. The general phase 91; allows modeling of both quadratures. The time—
dependent reference position 6z(t) accounts for Vibrational noise that affects the relative transverse position of the
atom and the satellite. In the paraxial limit, the amplitude of each Fourier component evolves as the beam propagates
along the ac direction according to the paraxial propagator given by 6(110, kt, t) = 60%, 75) exp [—73%(30 — 1100)] where :30
is the reference plane at which 6(kt,t) is known. Finally, in order to model time—dependent wavefront aberrations,
we decompose each Fourier coefﬁcient into a static and a dynamic component: 6(kt, t) E 60(kt) + 66(kt, 75). Here the
term 66(kt,t) represents an explicitly time—dependent variation of the amplitude of the aberration with transverse
wavevector kt.

The phase shift (Pt given by Eq. (2) depends on the initial coordinates ($1, 271, 751) of the atom Cloud at the ﬁrst laser
pulse. Since the atom wavefunction is spatially delocalized, the ﬁnal phase shift will vary with position across the
atom. These position dependent phase shifts lead to an atom probability distribution (in one of the output ports) that
may be written as l\I1(X)l2 = A(X) + B (X) cos (Q50 + ¢(X)), where ¢(X) is the spatially varying phase shift. Assuming
lgb(x)l << 1, the total probability of detecting an atom in this port then depends on the spatial average of the phase
over the atom wavefunction:

00
P: / W<x>l2dw ~ A+BCOS(¢0 + <¢<x>>> l¢<x>l << 1 (3)
—00
where A E [3:0 A(X)dac, B E [3:0 B(X)dac, and (¢(X)> E % [3:0 B(X)q5(x)dac.

For this noise analysis, we want to calculate the differential response between two atom interferometers separated
by a distance L along the laser propagation direction (see Fig. 1). This gradiometer phase is denoted ACID): E
((1)1;(301 : L)> — ((1)1;(301 = 0)), where the expression given in Eq. (2) has been evaluated at initial positions 0 and L
along the ac axis and the angle brackets indicate a spatial average over the atom distribution. Note that in practice
the spatially resolved atom detection scheme discussed above (see Sec. III C) allows direct resolution of the transverse
spatial dependence of the phase shift. In this section, we assume that we simply average over this information in
order to set upper limits on the allowed aberrations 0f the optical system.

Since we are only concerned with calculating time—dependent phase shifts originating from the jitter amplitudes 6z(t)
and 66(kt, t), we may ignore any constant phase shift piece in Eq. (2) that does not depend on either jitter amplitude.
T0 enforce this condition, we consider only the ﬁrst—order jitter susceptibilities 8(ACIDt)/8(6z) and 8(ACIDt)/8(66’). We
then consider the response at frequency w of Eq. (2) for the position and phase jitter amplitudes, 6z(t) = 62(w)e_m
and 66(kt,t) = 66(kt,w)e_m. Assuming that the system can be linearized for small jitter, the transfer function
Hn(w) that relates each noise source 6n(t) t0 the phase error is simply the ﬁrst—order susceptibility evaluated at zero
jitter amplitude.

With these transfer functions, we can relate the amplitude spectral density of the measured phase g to the
amplitude spectral density of noise sources 6—”. In general, the spectral densities are matrices, but because the
measured phase is a scalar quantity and the noise sources are assumed to be uncorrelated, the relationship reduces to

6qu = 2 law)? 6n 2 (4)
TL
where lHn(w)l is the magnitude of the transfer function. As noted above, the transfer function H n (w) of the particular
noise source 67105) takes the form 8(ACIDt)/8(6n)l{5n}:0 in this analysis.

By taking the square root of Eq. (4), we ﬁnd the amplitude spectral density of the phase noise imprinted on the
atom (in [rad/ﬁb in terms of the amplitude spectral density of the transverse position jitter 5(a)) (in [m/VED
and 0f the wavefront variation @(kt, w) (in [rad/ﬁbz

6— k _ 8(A<I>t) 6— 2 8(A<I>t) E k 2 5
M W— (|W| 4“”) +(lml (W) U
2 2 2
: 2 NH (i—jﬂkﬂg) .1. E2 (5 — 9 cos [¥] cos[2wT] + 4cos[3wT]) sin [%] exp [—41:3%] (6)
where the noise contributions from transverse motion and dynamic wavefront variation have been summed in quadra—
ture since they are assumed to be uncorrelated. The atom position distribution is taken to be a Gaussian with width

"
"17","17

Transverse Position < 10 % Wavefront Aberration (Sec. IV B)

Angle Jitter < 1 Lﬂi—j Laser Pointing Angle Jitter (Sec. VF)

Angular Rate < 1 nrad/s Rotational Effects (Sec. VA)
TABLE 111: Satellite position and angle control requirements. These requirements form constraints on one satellite’s laser
position and angle relative to the counter—propagating beam from the Opposing satellite. We therefore can split the requirements
into a coarse constraint on the satellite and a ﬁne constraint on the laser’s mounting platform. The constraints apply to both
leader—follower and inclined—great—Circle orbits.
0 (FWHM), N = keﬂF/Zk is the order of the LMT beamsplitter, and T is the interrogation time. The Coriolis—induced
transverse position separation of the upper and lower interferometer paths is given by Az. A ﬁve—pulse sequence is
assumed in obtaining Eq. (6). Finally, Eq. (6) represents the magnitude of the response With respect to the aberration
phase 9t (i.e., the quadrature sum of both sine and cosine aberrations).

We note that as A2: —> 0, the frequency dependence of the wavefront noise given in Eq. (6) is identical to the GW
phase response for a ﬁve—pulse sequence (see Eq. (1)). This is expected since both effects arise from What amounts
to a time variation in the local phase of the laser. However, as opposed to the GW signal, the response to wavefront
aberration is suppressed to the extent that the aberrations are common between the two interferometers.

2. T ransve’rse Vibratian Induced Phase Noise

Here we focus on the wavefront—induced noise due to stochastic variation of the relative transverse position 62: 0f the
atom With respect to the aberrated beam during the interferometer pulse sequence. This type of transverse position
jitter may result from lariations in the satellite position. Sensitivity to transverse position jitterif the satellite is
given by Eq. (6) With 66(w) = 0. In order for this noise source to be less than the atom shot noise 6gb, the maximum
allowable wavefront aberration (in fractions of an optical wave) is given by

6A 90(kt) 1 E)“: 7TLA 7T20'2 27TAz _1

—E—:——_CSC— ex — 62+6300s — 7

A 27v «2 N52: 2A3 p 4A31n2 At ( )
assuming keﬂ: : ZNk = 200k LMT atom optics, E = 10—4 rad/x/ Hz, and motion 62: at the GW peak sensitivity
frequency we 2 % cos_1\/§. Figure 11(a) shows the general wavefront constraint for all spatial wavelengths due to
627 Vibration With amplitude 5 = 10 nm/@ for both the leader—follower and inclined—great—Circle orbits. Note the
expected exponential relaxation of the wavefront constraint due to spatial averaging for At < 0 as well as the expected
corner wavelength at At N \/L—)\ above Which the perturbations start to be common for the two interferometers. For
wavelengths in the intermediate region 0 < At < AC, Which are not suppressed by spatial averaging and are not common
between the interferometers, the maximum allowable wavefront aberration in waves is 6A N ﬂ (3—51) (w).
For the leader—follower orbit, however, the larger transverse position separation (Az N 4 cm versus 80 ,um) results in
resonant cancellation of certain transverse wavelengths. In the vicinity of these particular wavelengths, the wavefront
requirements are signiﬁcantly relaxed.

3. Dynamic Wavefront Induced Phase Noise

Temporal ﬂuctuations of the spatial mode can also be a problem if the mode varies at frequencies Withiﬂ the GW
detection band. The phase noise induced by such dynamical wavefront va_riati0ns is given by Eq. (6) With 6z(w) = 0.
Figure 11(b) shows the required constraint on the ﬂuctuation amplitude 66(kt, we) in order for this noise source to be
less than the atom shot noise. To be maximally conservative, the wavefront ﬂuctuation is assumed to be at the GW
peak sensitivity frequency we.

To put the dynamical wavefront constraints given in Fig. 11(b) into perspective, we consider several well—known
sources of wavefront ﬂuctuation associated With aberrations caused by the mirrors in the optics system [55]. To be
concrete, we model the wavefront aberrations caused by Vibrations and thermal ﬂuctuations of the 30 cm primary
telescope mirror. The primary mirror is signiﬁcant since it is the last element that the beam encounters before
propagating t0 the atoms, and n0 wavefront spatial ﬁltering can be done after this element. We emphasize that the
same analysis can easily be extended to other elements in the optics system as necessary.

"
"18","18
10 1
I H
15 . I E!
':-'- r. H : x E
1.1:: 52 : x %
ll "" ll ' ‘ ’ E
II H n ,' \V/ FD
'1“ H ,’ A °°
0.01 I i‘ 1"" \\ ’,I m 10-6
0001 0.5 1.0 5.0 10.0 50.0 100.0 10—8 0.5 1.0 5.0 10.0 50.0 1000
At [cm] L [cm]
(a) (b)
FIG. 11: Transverse spatial phase proﬁle requirement as a function of transverse wavelength. Both ﬁgures assume the ﬁve—pulse
interferometer of Fig. 3 with 2007110 atom optics, L : 30 km baseline, and a w : 10—4 rad/x/E phase noise requirement. (a)
Static wavefront requirements due to satellite transverse motion with amplitude 5 : 10 nm/x/E at frequencies within the
GW detection band versus spatial wavelength of the perturbation. The atom Cloud size is taken to be a : 1 cm (FWHM).
The blue (dashed) curve assumes a leader—follower orbit, while the solid (green) curve assumes an inclined—great—Circles orbit.
The large notches in the dashed (blue) envelope arise from resonant cancellations 0f the wavefront aberration with the large
transverse separation of the leader—follower interferometer paths. Both curves have been partially enveloped. (b) Temporal
stability requirements for wavefront perturbation amplitude versus spatial wavelength of the perturbation. This constraint
applies only to perturbation amplitude variations that occur at temporal frequencies within the GW detection band. The pair
of curves show the effect of averaging over the atom Cloud size. As labeled, the curves assume atom Cloud widths of a : 1 cm
(FWHM) and a : 10 cm (FWHM). Both curves have been enveloped.

Fluctuations 0f wavefront aberrations are a source of stochastic noise in the interferometer. As a result, they
contribute to the strain noise ﬂoor of the gravitational wave detector. Figure 12 shows the effective strain noise
contributed by the various sources of dynamical wavefront aberrations that we model. For comparison, the atom
shot—noise limited strain sensitivity from Fig. 4 is reproduced in blue (labeled “‘Shot”).

The ﬁrst effect we consider is dynamic wavefront aberrations caused by vibrations of the primary telescope mirror.
We consider a mirror modeled as a solid cylindrical disk with diameter D = 30 cm. The mirror surface is nominally
polished so as to produce a collimated Gaussian beam upon reﬂection (see Fig. 10 for example). However, the surface
of the mirror can become deformed as a result of vibrations of the mirror substrate, and these aberrations will be
imprinted onto the laser beam as a spatially dependent phase. It is convenient to decompose the mirror Vibrations
into a set of normal modes and consider the effect of each mode separately. For example, the lowest frequency
mode corresponds to the bowl—shaped deformation given by 6:100“) = 6:100J0(2j0,17°/ D), where J0 is the zeroth order
Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind, and j0,1 is the ﬁrst zero of Jo. (For simplicity, we assume Dirichlet boundary
conditions on the mirror edge.) In order to leverage the results of Fig. 11(b), this deformation can be rewritten as a
discrete Fourier series. Since the ﬁrst term in the series has a 97% overlap with the deformation, the mirror surface
proﬁle is well—approximated by the truncated series 6:100“) % 6:100 cos (wr/D). Therefore, excitations of the the lowest
order normal mode of the mirror correspond to dynamic wavefront perturbations with transverse spatial wavelength
At : 2D x 0.6 In in Fig. 11(b).

The normal modes of the mirror can be excited by vibration of the satellite. We conservatively assume a white
noise acceleration spectrum of g : 10—7g/\/E which acts as a driving force for this motion [56]. The Vibration
response to acceleration of one of the normal modes is a narrow Lorentzian centered at the resonant frequency of the
mode:

V7102) 2 (SE = + (8)

5a \/ (W73 — 602V + (27716002

Here y” is the (structural) damping of the mode with resonance frequency can. Even the lowest of the mirror resonances
(corresponding to the At 2 2D mode discussed above) tends to be relatively high frequency (can > 100 Hz) and sharply
peaked (Qn E W > 102), so the response of the mirror surface in the GW detection bandwidth is relatively ﬂat,
corresponding to the tail of the Lorentzian. The phase noise induced by these off—resonant mechanical Vibrations is
given by Eq. (6) with 5(0)) : 0 and E = k Vn(w)E. The resulting effective strain noise from mechanical vibrations
of the lowest mirror mode (with At 2 2D) is shown in red (labeled “‘Mechanical”) in Fig. 12.

"
"19","19
10—17
Shot
10—18 SB
N —19 :
T [E 10 Mechanical
10—20 TE
10—21 _
0.001 0.01 0.1 1 10
Frequency [Hz]
FIG. 12: Effective strain induced by several sources of wavefront noise. Each of the effects are caused by a phase aberration
that is imparted to the laser beam as it reﬂects off the ﬁnal telescope mirror. “Mechanical” (red) is the off—resonant mechanical
acceleration noise of the mirror assuming a normal mode With can : 27r X 2 kHz and Qn : 102 and a White noise acceleration
amplitude spectral density of 10—7g/x/E. “SB” (yellow) is substrate Brownian noise at temperature 7' : 300 K for a m : 1 kg
mirror assuming a normal mode With can : 27r X 2 kHz, Qn : 102, and With effective mass fraction om : 10—3. “TE” (green) is
thermoelastic noise for a beryllium mirror substrate at temperature 7' : 300 K assuming a Gaussian deformation scale factor
of we : 1 cm.

The effect of higher order normal mode oscillations is generally suppressed since these modes have correspondingly
higher resonance frequencies, and the size of the mechanical response in the GW band scales as N wg2. However,
since they are also associated With smaller At, these modes can induce a larger intrinsic response (see Fig. 11(b)).
Speciﬁcally, for long spatial wavelengths At > AC, the phase response scales as At—2. Assuming a linear dispersion
relation for the mirror modes, the transverse wavelength of the mode goes as At N w; 1. As a result, the ﬁrst several
normal modes make roughly equal contributions to the noise ﬂoor. Beyond this, higher frequency normal modes With
transverse wavelengths At < AC are suppressed by the decreased mechanical response and (eventually, for At < 0) by
spatial averaging over the atom Cloud.

In addition to external mechanical excitation, the normal modes of the mirror also Vibrate as a result of the ﬁnite
temperature of the substrate[55, 57]. These thermally excited mirror Vibrations are known as substrate Brownian
(SB) noise. The phase noise caused by substrate Brownian noise is given by Eq. (6) With 5 = 0 and W = 69313 Where

69313:;zﬁnma/L372ﬂ (9)

moaned,” w

and where %n is the amplitude spectral density of the Vibration amplitude of the mirror mode With resonance
frequency can, structural damping v”, and effective mass man [57]. This result follows from the ﬂuctuation dissipation
theorem for a mirror substrate of temperature 7' [58]. Here m is the mass of the mirror itself and ozn quantiﬁes the
effective fraction of the mirror mass that oscillates for a particular mode. Values for the effective mass man of the
mode depend on the details of the mode shape as well as material properties of the substrate and the geometry of the
mirror. As an example, the values of ozn reported by [57] range from 10—3 to 10 for a 10 cm diameter, 8.8 cm thick
fused silica mirror With mass m = 1.6 kg. For a conservative estimate, we take m = 1 kg and oz 2 10—3. The resulting
effective strain noise caused by substrate Brownian noise of the the lowest mirror mode (With At 2 2D) is shown
in yellow (labeled ‘SB’) in Fig. 12. As With mechanical noise above, the ﬁrst few higher mirror modes (Which have
smaller At) are potentially of comparable size since the phase response scales as At—2. However, the overall response
for the different modes Will depend on the detailed scaling of ozn for the speciﬁc mirror geometry, and this is beyond
the scope of our analysis.

Thermal ﬂuctuations in the mirror substrate can also cause wavefront aberrations by inducing non—uniform thermal
expansion, an effect known as thermoelastio noise [55, 58, 59]. This effect depends strongly on the material properties
of the mirror substrate, such as the coefﬁcient of thermal expansion, thermal conductivity, density, and speciﬁc
heat. As an example, we consider the thermoelastio noise for a beryllium mirror at 300 K. Note that this is a
conservative estimate, since the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) Will use a beryllium mirror at 30 K, and

"
"20","20
the lower temperature signiﬁcantly reduces thermoelastic noise [60]. The power spectral density of thermoelastic
Vibrations has previously been calculated for a Gaussian deformation with scale factor wo [55, 59]. To be maximally
conservative, we Choose the scale factor to be wo = 1 cm since this maximizes the thermoelastic amplitude spectral
density in the GW frequency band for the beryllium mirror. Represented in the Fourier domain, a Gaussian surface
deformation contains a distribution of transverse wavelength components At 2 wo. The total phase noise response to
the Gaussian deformation is then the sum of each spectral component weighted by the amplitude of the phase noise
spectral response @0315, w) given by Eq. (6). As a conservative simpliﬁcation, we take the value of the peak response
of $(khw) which occurs at At % 10 cm as the response for the entire Gaussian spectrum. The resulting effective
strain due to thermoelastic noise is shown shown in green (labeled “‘TE”) in Fig. 12.

The dynamic wavefront noise effects considered so far are all caused by a phase aberration that is imparted to the
laser beam as it reﬂects off the ﬁnal telescope mirror. Alternatively, wavefront noise may be present on the beam as
a result of the intrinsic limitation of the spatial mode purity of the laser source. To eliminate this type of aberration,
the laser beam can be sent through a high ﬁnesse mode—scrubbing optical cavity prior to delivery to the ﬁnal telescope
optics. In this case, the wavefront noise upon exiting the optical cavity will be limited by the same sources of dynamic
wavefront noise shown in Fig. 12 as applied to the mirrors in the optical cavity, rather than by anything intrinsic to
the laser.

,4. Atom Distribution Induced Phase Noise

Quantum projection noise and variation in the preparation of the atom sample result in shot—to—shot ﬂuctuations
of the atom Cloud size and its position in the interferometer beam. At zero temperature, if the two paths of the
interferometer do not separate transversely, the Cloud size variation induces no net phase error as both paths average
over the same wavefront error at each pulse. Such a constant phase is perfectly cancelled by the pulse sequence. Due
to ﬁnite temperature, however, the expansion of the Cloud will result in a phase error since the cancellation will no
longer be perfect between pulses. Moreover, the interferometer paths do separate in general, and each path explores
a slightly different region of the wavefront aberration, resulting in non—zero phase shift. If the Cloud size or transverse
position Changes from shot to shot, this phase—shift varies in time, mimicking a gravitational wave.

We compute the phase noise due to stochastic variations in the atom Clouds’ initial size and position. The size during
the interferometer is determined by the linear expansion associated with the Clouds’ ﬁnite temperature. Assuming
the typical FWHM Cloud size and the corresponding amplitude spectral density for the two distant atom Clouds
are identical, but uncorrelated, and assuming that the amplitude spectral density of the transverse position is also
identical and uncorrelated, we ﬁnd that the maximum allowable wavefront aberration is proportional to csc[7rAz/)\t]2.
This scaling factor indicates that transverse wavelengths longer than the transverse separation will be quadratically
suppressed, as expected. As previously mentioned, the Cloud expands linearly once released from the trap due to its
non—zero temperature. At temperatures of 100 pK and corresponding velocities of 100 ,um/s, this effect is negligible.

The transverse trajectory deﬂection of the inclined—great—Circles orbit is suppressed by N L / R N 103 compared to
that of the leader—follower orbit (see Fig. 7). Consequently, for the same wavefront aberration, the inclined—great—Cirole
orbit has a signiﬁcantly relaxed Cloud size and position constraint, as shown in Fig. 13. The size of the transverse
wavepacket separation (A2: = 4 cm for the LF orbit, and A2: = 80 am for the ICC orbit) is the only difference between
the two curves. In both cases, the shot—to—shot atom Cloud size and centroid position variation are assumed to be at the
shot—noise limit. For an atom Cloud of Na N 108 atoms with size 0 = 1 cm, the centroid transverse position uncertainty
due to shot—noise is 627 N mg N 1 am. Likewise, the Cloud size uncertainty is given by 60 N Ma N 1 am . These
values represent a lower bound on the centroid position and Cloud size variation from shot—to—shot. Since the results
of Fig. 13 assume spatially averaged detection, the curves represent maximally conservative wavefront requirements
that can be relaxed through the use of more sophisticated detection schemes (see Sec. IVB 5).

5. Wavefront Aberration Noise Mitigation

In an alternative interferometer beam geometry, the atom optics laser beams can be made to ﬁrst propagate between
two satellite stations along a path that is displaced from the atoms before being redirected to interact with the atoms.
As a consequence, the ﬁrst propagation segment would serve as a spatial ﬁlter, allowing high frequency wavefront noise
to diﬁract out of the beam. This arrangement is still sensitive to wavefront aberrations caused by the beam steering
optics, but these are potentially more well deﬁned than the mode of the laser source. If needed, this alternative beam
geometry could be used in conjunction with a mode—scrubbing cavity.

Commercially available interferometers can measure wavefront aberration with RMS repeatability 6A < A/ 1000
[61]. In principle, the aberration can be monitored in real time using such a wavefront sensor. Furthermore, we

"
"21","21
10 ’
v”
1 ’z’ A
-..¢ ,1 IGC
0.1 x %
""E I” A
g 0.01 /’ m
[I
0.001 ,I’ LF %
II”
10‘4 \ ,./’ 1%
10—5
0.1 0.5 1.0 5.0 10.0 50.0 100.0
At [CID]
FIG. 13: Transverse spatial phase proﬁle requirement as a function of transverse wavelength for shot—tO—shot noise sources. All
curves have been enveloped and assume the ﬁve—pulse interferometer of Fig. 3 with 2007110 atom optics, an L : 30 km baseline,
and a w : 10_4 rad/x/E phase noise requirement. The Clouds are assumed to be 1 cm FWHM, and the amplitude spectral
densities of the Cloud size and Cloud centroid position noise are both 1 ,um/x/E (This assumes a fr : 1 HZ repetition rate
with 108 atoms per shot). The curves associated with the leader—follower and inclined—great—Circles orbits have been labeled
“LF” (blue) and “IGC” (green) respectively. The solid curves are associated with ﬂuctuations in initial atom Cloud size, while
the dashed curves are associated with ﬂuctuations in initial Cloud position in the beam. Note that the wavefront requirements
shown here are maximally conservative; those from the LF curves in particular can be signiﬁcantly mitigated by Characterizing
the wavefront and by reducing the transverse separation through multiple—pulse interferometer sequences (see Sec. IVB 5).
can leverage the fact that the detection is spatially resolved (see Sec. III C) to perform in situ measurements of the
wavefront. If necessary, in addition to measuring the spatial phase distribution for each of the ﬁve—pulse sequences, we
can interleave alternate pulse sequences tailored to be maximally wavefront—sensitive. The initial transverse velocity
and the time between pulses can be varied to gain maximal information about the wavefront.

Spatially resolved detection of the atom Cloud can help mitigate the wavefront requirements that result from spatial
averaging (Fig. 13). In particular, the requirements shown in Fig. 13 for the 1eader—f0110wer orbit exceed the range of
current technologies [61]. However, these bounds are maximally conservative since with spatially resolved detection
we can directly measure the shot—to—shot variations of the Cloud size and centroid position in real time. The additional
information provided by spatially resolved detection should allow the wavefront requirements shown in Fig. 13 to be
relaxed by an amount that depends on how well the shot—to—shot wavefront Characterization can be performed.

Finally, to lessen the impact of shot—to—shot noise sources, it is possible to use interferometer sequences with more
pulses than considered here to reduce the transverse wavepacket separation. The quadratic scaling of the phase noise
with respect to this separation makes it a useful tool for shot—to—shot phase noise management.

C. Laser Phase Noise

As the laser phase is the reference used to measure the atom motion, noise of the laser phase is imprinted as noise
on the atom phase. We consider two sources of laser phase noise: noise of the laser phase 605 and noise 610 of the
center frequency of the laser. For both, the noise is signiﬁcantly suppressed by using common lasers.

Despite the use of common lasers, the laser phase 605 is asymmetrically imprinted due to the ﬁnite light travel time
% N 100 as between the two interferometers [26]. If the laser pulses are longer than the the light travel time, however,
the phase noise at only the beginning and end of the pulses will be n0n—comm0n; the rest of the pulse overlaps in time
and is common. Modeling the LMT pulse as a sequence of a large number of pulses, we note that if each component
pulse is longer than the ﬁnite light travel time, laser phase noise at frequencies lower than N ”TC 2 30 kHz will be
suppressed.

In addition, each interferometer is insensitive to static phase offsets and will suppress phase noise at frequencies
below N %. Moreover, the atoms average the laser phase at frequencies higher than the effective Rabi frequency
of the LMT pulse, Qst/N, where N is the number of pulses. By calculating the quantum evolution of the phase
of the atom states through the interferometer sequence, we can analytically ﬁnd the transfer function T ¢( f) that

"
"22","22
10

A ""\

Pd 1 -‘I‘vuw

'3 0.1 ""W“ \\

H “..‘IOQg.........---------- \

‘3: 0.01 ‘g \\

R4 N‘

0.001
10‘4
0.1 10 1000 105
Frequency (Hz)

FIG. 14: The transfer function relating laser phase noise to atom phase noise as a function of frequency. Sharp oscillations have
been enveloped. All three curves have ﬁxed interferometer time T : 4 s and baseline L : 30 km. The solid (black), dashed
(red), and dotted (green) curves have effective LMT Rabi frequencies of 100, 10, and 1 HZ respectively. Below % : 0.25 HZ,
phase noise is suppressed due to the interferometer’s insensitivity to static phase Offsets and overlapping pulse suppression.
The sensitivity to phase noise rises until the atom begins to average the phase above the effective LMT Rabi frequency. This
effective low pass ﬁlter balances the high pass ﬁlter of the overlapping pulse suppression, producing the ﬂat region. Above the
corner frequency of the overlapping pulse suppression, ”TC N 30 kHz, the atom’s averaging suppresses phase noise.
relates laser phase noise to atom phase noise for a ﬁve—pulse sequence (see [62] for a similar calculation). In Fig. 14
we show this transfer function for three sample Rabi frequencies ﬁst : 10,1,0.1 kHz for ﬁxed baseline L = 30 km
and interferometer time T N 4 s. Note the corner frequencies at 0.25 Hz, Qst/N, and 30 kHz corresponding to the
interferometer lOW—frequency suppression, the atom’s LMT Rabi frequency suppression, and the overlapping pulse
suppression respectively.

Drift 6k in the central frequency of the laser between pulses differentially Changes the position of the laser phase
reference relative to the near and far interferometers. While the near interferometer sees negligible motion of the
phase front, the far interferometer sees a wavefront shifted by 610 L. Equivalently, this effect can be understood in
the time domain as an extra phase accumulated at a rate 610 during the time L / c during Which the light pulse is not
common for the two interferometers.

To place an upper bound on laser phase noise control constraints, consider the maximally conservative Rabi fre—
quency N 10 kHz . As the 605 and 610 L phase noise sources are uncorrelated, they must be added in quadrature as
N ﬂ/(6qﬁ)2 + (6k L)2. For this contribution to be < 10‘4 rad/x/ Hz, the phase noise of the laser must be < —100 %
at an offset of N 20 kHz , and the fractional stability in the laser frequency must be N 10‘15(1O7+_1) over time scales
N T . Both requirements are experimentally achievable [63, 64].

Alternatively, in a three or more satellite conﬁguration, two non—parallel beam lines designed to share a common
laser can be used to greatly suppress the laser phase noise due to frequency instabilities. Noise from each beam’s
counter—propagating laser is common to both interferometers on that line, While noise on the shared laser is common
to both pairs of interferometers. The gravitational wave signal remains present because it has different components
along the two beam lines. The residual phase shift is N 6k6L, Where 6L is the difference in length of the two beam
lines. If the arm lengths are known to N 1 m, then the laser frequency drift may be relaxed to a fractional stability

fN 10—11(1O7 m—l)
o —k .
V. ENVIRONMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS IN LOW EARTH ORBIT

The sensitivity curve in Fig. 4 assumes atom shot noise limited phase noise. Many environmental effects, however,
can contribute noise and spurious signals. We analyze these potential backgrounds for both leader—follower and
inclined—great—circle orbits. The error model we consider includes the effects of rotation (Coriolis and centrifugal
forces), non—uniform gravity, and magnetic ﬁelds. In addition, the analysis accounts for laser pointing errors and the

"
"23","23
effect of the ﬁnite curvature of the laser wavefronts.
A. Error Model

To calculate the phase shifts caused by these effects on the atom interferometer, we follow the standard procedure of
calculating the contributions from propagation phase, separation phase, and laser phase [21, 65] for both orbital con—
ﬁgurations shown in Fig. 6. In both cases, we compute the phase shift between two atom interferometers separated by
baseline L. The light pulse sequence used for the calculations is the ﬁve—pulse, double—diffraction interferometer shown
in Fig. 3. The two interferometers are assumed to have an uncontrolled initial velocity difference of (6113;, 6%, 60,2)
and position offset of (6:10, 6y, 62:), both of which may vary stochastically shot to shot. Since we are concerned only
with terms that vary in time in the detection band, all constant offset phase shift terms have been subtracted. Here
Tij E —8jgz- is the gravity gradient tensor and gr; is the gravitational ﬁeld vector. Values for T ij assume a spherical
Earth. The results for the leader—follower orbit are presented in Table IV using the coordinate system shown in Fig. 1,
where the x—axis is the chord connecting the two satellites. The inclined—great—circles conﬁguration results are shown
in Table V, where the connecting chord is along the y—axis as shown in Fig. 6.

Both of these calculations share many commonalities, and we can make the following general statements. Since
the atoms are in free fall, many of the largest phase shift terms cancel in pairs. This occurs because in circular orbit
around a spherical Earth, {231. : g / R : T XX : %T227 where R is the radius of the orbit and g is the local gravitational
acceleration at altitude. As an example, see terms 1 and 2 in both Table IV and Table V. There are also more
elaborate cancellations, such as terms 5, 8 and 9 in Table IV, which together all cancel as a result of V ' g : —TZ-Z- = 0.
Additionally, the orbital rotation of the laser axis, Qor can couple with variations in the atoms’ launch velocity and
position as well as variations in the laser axis orientation itself to produce many of the dominant backgrounds.

Finally, the T 4 scaling of the leading order phase shifts in Table IV is expected given the symmetric triple—loop
geometry of the ﬁve—pulse sequence (see Fig. 3). The conventional three—pulse, single—loop (g—W—g) gravimeter
sequence is sensitive to the quadratic N §gt2 motion of the atom, resulting in a T 2 leading—order scaling of the
phase shift. Additional symmetric loops have the effect of making the interferometer sensitive instead to higher—
order components of the motion N t(AH), yielding a T (AH) leading phase shift, where A is the number of loops.
As a consequence, symmetric multiple—loop interferometers respond to higher—order derivatives of the gravitational
potential, since the ﬁrst non—triVial correction due to the derivative 809$ appears as motion proportional to ISM“).
A corollary of this is that the response to lower—order derivatives 8(0qﬁ with 73 < A is highly suppressed. Therefore,
the use of multiple—loop interferometers can substantially reduce the interferometer’s sensitivity to background effects
due to inhomogeneous ﬁelds, since the perturbations caused by higher—order derivatives are signiﬁcantly smaller for
typical ﬁelds.

From the phase shift list for the LF orbit, we note that the largest term that does not cancel (term 12 in Table IV)
results from a coupling between gravity gradients and rotation. This term sets the limit of the size of the transverse
velocity jitter 6025 for the LF conﬁguration: for ZOOEk beamsplitters, 4 s interferometer time, and Qor N 10—3 rad/s,
6025 g 10—8 m/s. This shot—to—shot velocity variation is equivalent to g 100 pK in atom cloud temperature for 108
atoms. Term 13 constrains the laser pointing error rotation rate to 69 N 1 nrad/s. Term 14 limits the longitudinal
position variation of the atoms to 6:10 N 10 ,um. Term 15 is reduced below the shot noise limit by this latter constraint.
These requirements are not strict, but imply a trade—off with several other parameters. If necessary, a small reduction
in interferometer time at the expense of bandwidth, for example, could signiﬁcantly relax these constraints, as both
terms scale with multiple orders of the time.

The ICC orbit offers many systematic beneﬁts over the LF orbit. Note that the largest non—cancelling term in the
ICC list (term 3 in Table V) is the leading term from Table IV but suppressed by an additional power of QorT. This
suppression arises because the ICC interferometer axis is nearly parallel with the orbital rotation axis. Therefore the
transverse trajectory deviations due to the Coriolis force are suppressed by % as compared to the LF orbit, which leads
to a phase shift suppression cc QorT. For the same stochastic atom position jitter, the contributions to the ICC phase
shifts are smaller than those of the LF. The largest phase shift due to atom jitter for the ICC is term 5 in Table V,
which remains below atom shot noise for position ﬂuctuations of 6y N 20 um instead of N 10 ,um. Similarly, velocity
variations of N 1 um/ s instead of N 10 nm/ s could be tolerated. However, if the tight atom kinematic constraints can
be achieved and 69 effects can be controlled, then the interrogation time could be doubled to bring these systematics
t0 the same size as atom shot noise. This would lower the instrument corner frequency by a factor of two, potentially
allowing for the detection of lower frequency GWs.

The current IGC analysis does not account for the relative velocity between the two atom clouds, or the required
orbital phase offset between the satellites to avoid collision. Both of these effects can be removed by rotating and
chirping the interferometer laser to make it remain inertial during the interferometer sequence [21, 66]. As mentioned
in Section II D, the relative velocity between the clouds is useful for Doppler shift frequency tagging of the individual

"
"24","24
Differential phase shift Size (rad)
1 —60keﬂ:LQ§r6§2 T4 — 1.15
2 60keﬁ‘L Txxnorén T4 +1 . 15
3 888keﬁLniran T6 +3.67 x 10—4
4 444keﬁL Tzzngran T6 —3.67 x 10—4
5 44415...ch TXXTZZnoran T6 +3.67 X 10—4
6 sokeﬁnirava‘l +1.92 X 10—4
7 15keﬁTZanava4 —1.92 x 10—4
8 —444keﬁL Txxniran T6 —1.84 X 10—4
9 —444keﬁL foﬂoréﬂ T6 —1.84 X 10—4
10 425/56.ch szngrén T5 —1.24 X 10—4
11 —%keﬁL TXZTZZm T5 +1.24 X 10—4
12 15keﬁsTXX§20r6va4 +9.62 X 10—5
13 —%keﬁL TXZTXXm T5 —6.19 X 10—5
14 —4—;keﬁn§raxT4 —1.67 x 10—5
15 15keﬂsTXXQgr6xT4 +1.11 X 10—5
TABLE IV: Differential phase shift error budget for AGIS—LEO in a leader—follower orbit. The results are based on the triple—
loop interferometer in Fig. 3, and the phase difference assumes the gradiometer conﬁguration shown in Fig. 1 between two
atom interferometers separated by L : 30 km in a leader—follower orbit (see Fig. 6). An unimportant constant phase shift has
been subtracted. The jitter in the atom initial position and velocity are taken to be 6m : 1 pm and 60g : 10 nm/s, respectively.
The laser pointing error rotation rate is 69 : 1 nrad/s. The orbital radius R and rotational rate Qor are for a 1000 km orbital
altitude. Interrogation time is T : 4 s and the LMT beamsplitters have hkeﬁ: : 2007119.
Differential phase shift Size (rad)
1 —%keﬁ%Tmngran T5 +8.25 x 10—5
2 —%keﬁL—;Tﬁzan T5 —8.25 x 10—5
3 ¥keﬁL—gnﬁrm T5 +6.19 x 10—5
4 %keﬁ%T§yan T5 +2.06 x 10—5
5 LgkeﬁTfyay T4 +5.57 X 10—6
6 45 IgefJELTWan2 T4 +7.47 X 10—7
7 ijkeﬁTfyavy T5 +6.69 x 10—7
8 15keﬂr%6vmﬂng4 +3.95 x 10—7
9 %keﬁ%TzzavanrT4 —3.95 x 10—7
10 1—25keff%TXX6vaOFT4 +1.98 X 10—7
TABLE V: Differential phase shift error budget for AGIS—LEO in an inclined—great—Circle orbit. The results are based on the
triple—loop interferometer in Fig. 3, and the phase difference assumes the gradiometer conﬁguration shown in Fig. 1 between two
atom interferometers separated by maximum distance L : 30 km in an inclined—great—Circles orbit (see Fig. 6). The required
N 100 m offset to avoid collision is not included. An unimportant constant phase shift has been subtracted. The jitter in the
atom initial position and velocity are taken to be 6y : 1 pm and 6’03; : 60y : 10 nm/s, respectively. The separation distance L
is taken to be 30 km, Which is the maximum separation over the course of the orbit, and the point of largest systematic error.
The laser pointing error rotation rate is 69 : 1 nrad/s. The orbital radius R and rotational rate Qor are for a 1000 km orbital
altitude. Interrogation time is T : 4 s and the LMT beamsplitters have hkeﬂr : 2007119.
Clouds.

It is important to note that the above calculation assumes that the laser beams are plane waves, ignoring the ﬁnite
curvature of the laser wavefronts. This is a rough approximation, since the interferometer beams we consider have
a Rayleigh range comparable to the satellite separation L, and so they are maximally curved for their size at the
position of the interferometers. These effects of wavefront curvature are a correction to the results of Table IV. The
effect of Gaussian curvature is analyzed for high frequency laser pointing jitter in Section VF, and in this case, the
physical beam results in less—stringent pointing requirements than for the plane wave case. The full Gaussian analysis
for the above error model would conceivably result in a similar reduction in rotation rate error 69 sensitivity.

"
"25","25
B. Orbital Altitude

The error model in the previous section indicates that many systernatic effects are mitigated at larger orbital radii,
where the rotation rate, {20“ is smaller. In general, the selection of the satellites’ orbital altitude needs to account for
several factors, including vacuum requirements, magnetic ﬁelds, gravity gradients, rotational effects, and the fraction
of an orbital period spent in the Earth’s shadow. Of these, only the last favors lower orbits, since without a satellite
sunshield we rely on the Earth’s urnbra to protect the interferometers’ atom Clouds from a large N 10 s‘1 scattering
rate with solar photons [26]. For an equatorial orbit at 1000 km, a satellite spends approximately one third of its
time in the Earth’s shadow. All of the other altitude—inﬁuencing factors mentioned improve with increasing height,
and in the following subsections we argue that their effects are acceptable at or even below 1000 km.

C. Vacuum Requirements

Collisions with particles in the background gas cause the decoherence of atoms in the interferometer region. While
this is not a source of noise and does not introduce a spurious phase shift, the removal of atoms from the Cloud
reduces the sensitivity of the instrument. Around 700 km above the Earth’s surface, the atmosphere is dominated by
H, He, and atomic O with densities of 106 $ at temperatures near 1000 K [67]. This corresponds to pressures of
10‘10 Torr, typical for low—baokground—oollision—loss atom interferometry experiments. At this pressure, the average
time between collisions of an atom with the background gas is N 100 s [26], several times longer than the proposed
interferometer time of N 10 s. Thus, satellites constructed with low—outgassing materials at altitudes above 700 km
are sufﬁcient to meet the vacuum requirements of AGIS—LEO.

D. Magnetic Fields

Since the atom interferometers take place outside of the AGIS—LEO satellites, the atoms are in a region of space
with uncontrolled magnetic ﬁelds. The local magnetic ﬁeld deﬁnes the quantization axis used for the atom—laser
interaction and shifts the atomic energy levels, which can cause an unwanted phase shift in the atom interferometer.
Variations in the direction of the magnetic ﬁeld have been addressed in the original AGIS proposal [26], and similar
strategies to deﬁne the quantization axis, such as a large permanent magnet, can be employed in AGIS—LEO.

Phase shifts due to time—dependent variation in the atomic energy levels are more concerning. In order to mitigate
these effects, we perform interferometry on atoms in the [m = 0) Clock state which is ﬁrst—order insensitive to energy
shifts from magnetic ﬁelds. However, alkali atoms have a second order energy shift AE = éozéa and since é varies
between the two AGIS—LEO interferometers, there is a differential phase shift between them. We analyzed the in—situ
magnetic ﬁeld for various AGIS—LEO orbits using the World Magnetic Model 2010 (WMM2010) [68]. The WMM2010
models the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld using a 12th order spherical harmonic expansion with the minimum wavelength of
28.80. This spatial resolution is much larger than the orbital arc traversed during a 24 second interferometer sequence,
so we can model the ﬁeld as B7) + ?%th — to) where A is the orbital longitude. The leading order response of a single
three—pulse atom interferometer to these spatial gradients is:

N hkeﬂ: 2 8B 8A N hkeﬂ: 2 8B 1
A¢B _ m QT BO 8A 8:10 _ m QT BO 8A RE (10)

For this long—wavelength rnodel, variations are suppressed by the ratio of the interferometer size to the radius of
the Earth, R E. The differential phase shift between two interferometers spaced by a baseline L away from each other
is

2
ACbl3agradiorneter 2 $05T2% (11)

This is further suppressed by the ratio of the baseline L to the radius of the Earth. For an example 850 km equatorial
orbit, using WMM2010, we expect N 200 mG magnetic ﬁelds with [39—]: N 1 mG/deg. longitude. This results in a
differential phase shift of ACngradiometer N 10‘8 rad which is well below threshold. Magnetic ﬁeld dependent phase
shifts are expected to be further suppressed by the proposed ﬁve—pulse sequence.

Additionally, there may exist ﬁner local variation in the magnetic ﬁeld due to the presence of the spacecraft.
However, the interferometer sequence takes place a distance d 2 3 rn from the spacecraft, and local spurious magnetic

"
"26","26
ﬁelds fall off as N d3. Therefore the magnetic ﬁeld gradient differences between the two spacecraft can be controlled
below our required threshold of 10—8G/m. Furthermore, pulse sequences that use larger numbers of pulses, such as
the four— and ﬁve—pulse sequences discussed above, will have additional suppressions of this effect.

E. Gravity Gradients

Fluctuations in the Newtonian gravitational ﬁeld can masquerade as a gravitational wave. Therefore we have
engineered a pulse sequence and use a differential measurement satellite conﬁguration to minimize the phase shift
caused by the Newtonian gravitation potential g9. As discussed in Sec. IV A, AGIS—LEO beneﬁts from many exact
cancellations due to its pulse sequence symmetry and the orbital symmetry which demands $231. 2 g / R = T XX : éTZZ.
The above analysis assumes a spherical earth and does not take into account the local presence of the satellites. We
now analyze the impact of a large local mass with position jitter and the effect of the AGIS—LEO constellation orbiting
in the Earth’s inhomogeneous gravitational ﬁeld.

1. Satellite Positian Jitter

The motion of the satellite is typically a major source of concern for a space—based precision test mass experiment,
as it causes large time—dependent gravity gradients that can be a signiﬁcant source of error. We take advantage of the
disposability 0f the atomic test masses and perform our precision measurement outside of the satellite to decrease our
sensitivity to these spurious gravity gradients. Since we are searching for time—dependent gravitational wave signals,
we are concerned only with background noise in our detection band; overall static phase offsets between the two atom
interferometers are not important. Therefore we require the satellite jitter position 611953492) to be small enough in
our measurement frequency band so that spurious phase shifts are below 10—4 rad/x/ Hz.

We calculate the response of a single atom interferometer to satellite position jitter using perturbation theory [66].
T0 ﬁrst order in the jitter amplitude dacsatﬁu) the perturbing Lagrangian ALsat is

GM tm

ALsat(w) 2 %6xsat(w) (12)
where Msat is the mass of the satellite, m is the atom mass, and d is the distance between the atom and the
satellite. The resulting propagation phase shift [21] from this perturbation as a function of frequency determines the
interferometer’s sensitivity to satellite position jitter. The required satellite control to reduce the position jitter phase
shift below atom shot noise is shown in Fig. 15. The peak control requirement is N 1 um/V Hz at w N 1 / T where T
is the interrogation time. This requirement is signiﬁcantly less stringent than that imposed by wavefront aberrations
and thus is not a driving factor in the mission design.

2. NOn—Sphe’rz'cal Earth Gravity Gradients

The proximity of the Earth’s non—uniform gravitational ﬁeld to the observatory is also a source of non—trivial
Newtonian gravitational backgrounds. The near—Earth gravity ﬁeld is well known and is Characterized in the Earth
Gravity Model 2008 (EGM2008) by a spherical harmonic expansion [69]. EGM2008 resolves spatial wavelengths as
small as 5 arcminutes, which is on the same order as the orbital arc subtended by AGIS—LEO. If the two interferometers
are in different gravitational ﬁelds, they will record different phase shifts. These phase shifts will Change over the
course of the orbit, producing a time—dependent background signal.

As the non—spherical Earth produces a time—varying gravitational potential 95 which can be Characterized by spher—
ical harmonics, these spherical harmonics form a natural basis to use for computing the AGIS—LEO response to
gravitational deviations from the static, spherical earth. Expanded in this basis, the gravitational potential (I) is

GM
cm, 9, A, t) = —E + 9(9, 9, A, t) (13)
7“(75)
GM ”max R n n . —
9(9, 9, m) = —E 2 —E 2 (an, m] costh) + 399,99] s1n mA(t)) P,7;[cos9(t)] (14)
7“(75) ”:2 7“(75) m:0

"
"27","27
1
0.1
A 0.01
N
§|E
g 0.001
10—4
10—5
0.001 0.01 0.1 1 10
Frequency (Hz)
FIG. 15: Satellite position jitter requirements as a. function of frequency. This plot is for a. single interferometer and assumes
the ﬁve—pulse sequence of Fig. 3 With 2007110 atom optics, a. satellite mass M : 1000 kg, an initial atom Cloud distance d : 10 m
from the satellite, and a. 6gb : 10_4 rad/x/ HZ phase noise requirement.
Where M E is the mass of the Earth, 05 is the aspherical potential, T(t), 6(75), and A(t) are the radial distance, northern
spherical polar distance (00:1atitude), and longitude of the atom Cloud, E[n,m] and §[n,m] are the coefﬁcients of
the EGM2008 model, and P71”; [cos 605)] are the fully normalized associated Legendre functions of the ﬁrst kind [69].
The effects of gravity gradients from a spherical Earth are accounted for in the phase shift calculation presented in
Sec. VA. Therefore we compute the atom interferometer response to an arbitrary spherical harmonic component 0f
05 using perturbation theory. We compute the response to the following perturbing Lagrangian for the AGIS—LEO
leader—follower equatorial orbit
Rn
AL[n,m,t] = —E (E[n,m] cos th) + §[n,m] sin mA(t)) (15)
7a(t)n—|—1
We then sum the response of each individual spherical harmonic to produce the total phase shift A05.
m ”max 77»
A05 2 —EGME Z 2 (/ AL[n,m,t]dt —/ AL[n,m,t]dt) P?Q[O] (16)
”:2 777.20 upper lower
The 105 minute orbital period of the AGIS—LEO constellation causes spherical harmonics of order m to induce
time—dependent phase shifts With frequency cum 2 771((20r — 9E), Where GE is the Earth’s rotation rate. In order to
ﬁnd the full frequency response due to Earth gravity for a 1 year AGIS—LEO science run, we sum the phase shift
response for all spherical harmonic components With effective frequency 02m, and divide by the AGIS—LEO frequency
response for a 1 year—1 bandwidth. This procedure is identical to that used for plotting gravity wave sources in Figs.
4 and 5. The effective strain response is plotted With Circles (blue) on Fig. 16. At 10W frequencies (f < 30 mHz), this
Newtonian gravity background is the dominant systematic.
3. Lunar and Salon“ Tidal Forces
The tidal forces from the Moon and the Sun form a non—negligible contribution to the AGIS—LEO Newtonian gravity
background. We treat both sources as perfect spheres and thus their tidal forces arise from gravity gradients, since
AGIS—LEO is in free—fall With respect to both the Sun and the Moon and does not see a direct gravitational force
from either. While the ﬁve—pulse interferometer sequence is insensitive to gravity gradient phase shifts for uniform

"
"28","28
0.01 . . ,
_6 I . . '.'.':&.0
10 4:,
.0 ‘ok
10—10 .3
T iﬁ ' . . 3;.
10—14 .9. :3
10—18 2, a
10-22 1 a'.
0.5 1. 5. 10. 50. 100. 500.
Frequency [mHz]
FIG. 16: Newtonian Gravity Backgrounds. Each point on this plot is the effective h/x/ HZ for a Newtonian gravity background
frequency component With a measurement bandwidth of 1 year_1. The Circles (blue) are EGM2008 components, the squares
(red) are phase shifts due to lunar tidal forces, and the diamonds (green) are for free earth oscillations normalized to a 80,2,0
peak amplitude of 1 cm. This plot is for two interferometers separated by 30 km and assumes the ﬁve—pulse sequence of Fig. 3
With 2007110 atom optics, a T : 4 s interrogation time, and a 6gb : 10—4 rad/x/ HZ phase sensitivity for the AGIS—LEO sensitivity
CUI'VG.
gradients (i.e. those of the Earth, Which it is orbiting), it is sensitive to gradient differences between the satellites. As
the satellite constellation orbits the Earth, the orientation of the sensors Changes With respect to the vector pointing
toward the Moon (0r Sun). Therefore the orientation of the Moon gravity gradients Mij Changes With respect to the
interferometer axes, and the two satellite orientations are slightly different. Similarly, one satellite is often farther
from the moon than the other, and this creates a difference in size between the gradients experienced by the two
sensors, even though their orientations may be the same. Thus Mg; is not the same as M113, Which induces a phase
shift that is modulated by both the AGIS—LEO and Moon orbital velocities. We compute the phase shift response
for a 6Mij : Mij,1 — Mij,2 using perturbation theory, and the 1 year science run results are shown as squares (red)
on Fig. 16. The frequency of the response is determined to ﬁrst order by Qor arid the spatial frequency of the phase
3
response. The Sun produces a similar response, but smaller by %A% N 45%.
OOD Sun
,4. Free Earth Oscillatwns

The gravitational potential of the Earth is not constant in time and undergoes free earth oscillations at frequencies
Which are potentially interesting When searching for gravitational waves [70]. Free earth oscillations are spherical
harmonic eigenmodes 0f the Earth Which ring at frequencies < 10 mHZ and can be excited by major earthquakes,
Which can produce > 1 cm height deviations at all points on the Earth’s surface [70]. Not only are these signals
naturally time—dependent, the orbital motion of the satellite also splits their frequency spectrum, making spectral
data analysis techniques more difﬁcult. It is important to note that free earth oscillations are Characterized by the
geophysics community and Will be well—known during AGIS—LEO science runs.

The standard formalism for computing the shape and oscillation frequency for the normal modes of the Earth is
well documented in the geophysics community, and we Will lean heavily on their analysis [71]. The Earth can oscillate
in three fundamental Classes of modes: radial, toroidal, arid spheroidal. Radial modes are Characterized by expansion
and contraction of the Earth in a purely radial direction With s = f (M72, Where s is the displacement of the Earth’s
surface. Toroidal modes produce shearing motion between sections of the Earth’s surface and have angular variation,
but do not contain radial displacement. For a spherical Earth, radial and toroidal modes do not produce a Newtonian
gravitational signal for AGIS—LEO. On the other hand, spheroidal modes have angle—dependent radial deviation Which
create ripples in the Newtonian gravitational ﬁeld that AGIS—LEO measures during its orbit.

"
"29","29

In order to determine the AGIS—LEO response to free earth oscillations, we compute the perturbing potential Q5
resulting from an arbitrary surface displacement, which gives

X’ s X’ . X — X’
¢=_G/p<)()(3 km (17)
V HX — X’ ll
where p is the density proﬁle of the Earth and S(X’) = sn,l,m(r, 6’, A, t) is the displacement associated with the (n, l, m)th
Earth eigenrnode [71]. Therefore the gravitational potential Q5 only depends on (7°, 6’, A,t) and the initial amplitude
and phase of the displacement.
Rl-l—l
E ' n
¢n,l,m(7°797)\775) : W6”) ’l(t+tO)Yl,m(67)\)f(RE) (18)
where f (RE) is the integrated scale factor, to is an arbitrary time offset, can); is the eigenfrequency, and Y1,m(6’, A)
is shorthand notation for the fully normalized spherical harmonics that were previously deﬁned, with E[m,n] and
§[m, n] set to unity. The normal mode eigenfrequencies strongly depend on the Earth composition and are not well
approximated by a simple analytic model. Therefore we use the MINEOS geophysics software package to calculate
eigenfrequencies using the Preliminary Reference Earth Model (PREM) for p(x) [72].

We compute the phase shift for this time—dependent Q5 using perturbation theory, as described in the previous
sections. We plot the response with diamond markers (green) on Fig. 16 where we have taken f (RE) such that the
peak displacement for 30,2,0 is 1 cm, which was the minimum displacement of any location on Earth immediately after
the 2004 Sumatra—Andarnan earthquake [70]. This provides an upper bound to the 1 year integrated coherent signal
response.

5. Newtanian Gravity Spectral Signatures

It is important to note that AGIS—LEO GW sources will persist over many satellite orbital periods, and can be
discriminated from possible signals of terrestrial origin by their spectral signature (Fig. 17). Signal sources which are
ﬁxed to the Earth (such as those arising from the non—uniform geoid characterized by EGM2008) will be shifted in
frequency by the Earth rotation rate if the satellite is in an equatorial orbit. However, signal sources which are in
the inertial frame and not ﬁxed to the rotating Earth, such as gravitational waves, will have their signal split into
a doublet spaced by twice the orbital frequency. Free Earth oscillations are decoupled from the Earth rotation rate
and also form doublets which are spectrally indistinguishable from gravity waves. However, free Earth oscillations are
independently monitored by ground—based seismic networks and can be subtracted during signal post—processing.

F. Laser Pointing Angle Jitter

In addition to the shot to shot laser pointing rotation rate error quantiﬁed by 69, the pointing angle may vary
from pulse to pulse. To determine the spectral response of the atoms to this jitter, we turn to an analysis procedure
similar to that_in Sec: IVB 1. In the particular case of laser pointing, the jitter is modeled as an oscillatory rotation
angle 66(75) 2 66(w)e_“""t that changes the direction of the wavevector keff at each pulse time. Here, 66(w) is the angle
amplitude spectral density and w is the frequency of the rotation jitter.

A realistic model of laser pointing jitter must account for the ﬁnite curvature of the laser wavefronts at the position
of the atoms. To reduce sensitivity to pointing jitter, the curvature of the wavefronts may be chosen so that the phase
of the beam at the position of the atom is minimally sensitive to beam rotation. For a Gaussian beam propagating
along the x—direction, the phase imprinted during one of the light pulses on an atom at position (:10, y, z) is given by

<I>(ac, y, z) : kw —1— ﬁﬁf + 272) — arctan (30/303) (19)
where R(ac) E :E —1— $%/$ is the radius of curvature of the wavefronts and :ER is the Rayleigh range of the beam. Notice
that for an atom at position :10 = am, the radius of curvature is R(wR) = 2303. Therefore, a beam with :ER : L/2
and a beam waist placed at the midpoint between the two atom interferometers separated by baseline L will have
a radius of curvature equal to the baseline distance at the position of the atoms (this is the same conﬁguration
as a confocal cavity). This conﬁguration results in a dramatic suppression of laser pointing sensitivity because the
wavefront curvature at the position of the atom is locally the same as the curvature of a spherical wave originating
from the point of rotation of the beam (see Fig. 18).

"
"30","30
gym gym - Inertial Source (21)
— Earth—Fixed Source (b)
’ ‘ WE Source Frequency
0)
60 Vaz‘ a
’1’ l ._ \\‘ ’ S T Fa
W ‘H ., H’ ‘ "" I 5
,_ 'y x <
‘ 3 ’ ""
QFE \. I
'Qor 'mQE 0 +Qor
D t t dF Sh'ft
(a) (b) (C) 6 CC C requency 1
FIG. 17: Discrimination of Newtonian gravity gradient signals by their spectral signatures for equatorial satellite orbits. (a)
Inertial signal sources include gravity waves (at frequency w) and free—earth oscillations (QFE, “football mode” shown). (b)
Non—inertial Earth—ﬁxed sources include the non—uniform geoid and terrain features, which rotate with the planet at a frequency
of 93 (the spherical harmonic component pictured has m : 10). (c) Amplitude spectral signatures of the effects pictured in
(a) and (b). For an equatorial orbit, inertial sources (blue, thicker bars) are amplitude modulated by the satellite’s orbital
frequency, Qor, and appear as doublets at :|:Q0r relative to the source frequency (gravity wave or free—earth oscillation). For
satellites in equatorial orbits, Earth—ﬁxed sources would appear as signals at mﬂor were it not for the rotation of the Earth.
With the Earth rotating at 93, these sources are downshifted by 7719;; (red, thinner bar). This picture is strictly correct only
for an equatorial orbit, since a ﬁnite inclination angle would lead to doublet signatures even for Earth—ﬁxed sources.
\
\
\
Yé"" ‘\
\
\
z / l x |.
H/ “ l l ‘ \ MW
n l ‘ l l l l l ll 1""
i x i x l l a l s. »
‘\‘~.‘\ l‘l/I“
l \ \ l.‘ l l l l ’l l / :l I/
I
I
I
2% 1'
I,
X I
FIG. 18: Pointing jitter insensitivity due to wavefront curvature of the Gaussian interferometer beams. The two satellites are
depicted as points labeled “n” and “f” for near and far, respectively. The satellites are separated by a baseline L, and the atom
interferometers are assumed to operate in Close proximity to each of the satellites. The interferometer beam waist is located
at the midpoint between the two satellites and the beam has a Rayleigh range $3 : L / 2 so that the radius of curvature of the
wavefront at the far satellite is R : L. As a result, the laser phase at the location of the far satellite is insensitive to pointing
jitter caused by uncontrolled rotation of the beam about the near satellite.

To calculate the residual sensitivity to pointing jitter, we assume the laser conﬁguration shown in Fig. 18 in which
the beam waist is placed at the midpoint between the satellites and the Rayleigh range is 903 : L / 2. We consider
the phase shift resulting from a two—photon transition (Raman or Bragg), and we assume that each of the two
satellites serves as the point of origin for one of the two (counter—propagating) frequencies involved in the transition.
For simplicity, we further assume that only one of the satellites experiences pointing jitter, so that only one of the
counter—propagating Gaussian beams will have a variable propagation direction. For the case that the near satellite
is jittering (point “n” in Fig. 18), the phase of the two—photon phase shift at the location of the far satellite (point
“f” in Fig. 18) is approximately given by

x
mm, zf) : 2m + m (f) 590:) + kL . 0 [(xf/L)2 , (Zf/L)2 , (kL)_1] (20)
where 90f is the longitudinal position offset of the far atom away from the ideal Rayleigh range position, Zf is the
transverse offset, and we take 3/ = 0. Notice that at the exact position of the Rayleigh range (am 2 0) the phase
is (to ﬁrst—order) independent of 69(75). Likewise, the two—photon phase shift at the location of the near satellite is

"
"31","31
Differential Phase Noise Maximum Term Size [prad/x/E]
1 ¥keﬂséxn%ﬂng2x(wT)m 108
2 9k§ff%ﬂorT3 sin(2 wT) E 50
3 4 keﬁaznw + 8 cos(wT)) sin4 (§) @ 13
4 4 keff(6xf/L)6zf (7 + 8 cos(wT)) sin4(%) E 4.2
TABLE VI: Differential phase noise due to laser pointing jitter for AGIS—LEO. The results are based on the triple—loop
interferometer in Fig. 3, and the phase difference assumes the gradiometer conﬁguration shown in Fig. 1 between two atom
interferometers separated by L : 30 km. The orbital radius R and rotational rate Qor are for a 1000 km orbital altitude. The
results are for the leader—follower orbit conﬁguration. Interrogation time is T : 4 s and the LMT beamsplitters have hkeff :
2007119. The frequency response of term 1 is given by x(wT) E V155 + 100 cos(wT) — 39 cos(2wT) — 16 cos(3 wT) sin2 (%).
The maximum term size is taken as the high—frequency limit of the enveloped response curves With the following parameters:
E : 1 nrad/x/E, (Szn : 1 pm, 62f : 1 mm, 6% : 10 m, and 6x” : 10 m.
approximately
mum, Zn) : 2m + kzn (1 + 3%) 59(1) + kL . 0 [(wn/L)2 , (zn/L)2 , (kL)_1] (21)
Where in this case 1% is the longitudinal position of the near atom With respect to the point of rotation of the beam
and zn is the transverse offset. Note that the phase ACIDD at the position of the near atom is still sensitive to 66(15)
since the wavefront curvature cannot be matched at that distance from the rotation point.

We perform the phase shift calculation outlined in Sec. VA using the rotated Gaussian beam phase shifts of Eqs.
(20) and (21). This analysis assumes the leader—follower orbit conﬁguration and the coordinate system shown in
Fig. 1. The four largest terms of the RMS differential angle jitter response appear in Table VI. The results have
been simpliﬁed by enforcing the orbital conditions 9 = QgrR and T XX : Tyy : —%TZZ : Qgr. Terms 3 and 4 are a
consequence of the position dependence of ACIDD and ACIDf. Term 1 appears as the dominant response for the same
analysis performed With plane waves instead of Gaussian beams; here the term is suppressed by 6:10” / L N 3 X 10—4
compared to the plane wave case as a result of the curved wavefront at the far satellite. Finally, term 2 consists of
equal contributions from both the near and the far satellite and is a result of the ﬁnite longitudinal extent of each
atom interferometer coupled With transverse Coriolis deﬂections.

The angle jitter requirements implied by each of these terms is shown in Fig. 19 as a function of jitter frequency.
In the relevant gravitational wave bandwidth, the pointing error must be < 1 nrad/VE in order for the phase noise
contribution to be less than atom shot noise of 10‘4 rad/\/H—z. Table III summarizes the satellite control constraints.

In this analysis we have assumed that the photon recoil effects due to Gaussian curvature are negligible. The
wavevector E is the gradient of the local phase during the atom—light interaction. The ﬁnite beam curvature causes
the effective wavevector E to point slightly away from the interferometer axis, at off—axis interaction points. This
Changes the direction of the momentum kick imparted to the atom, Which leads to additional transverse motion.
These trajectory modiﬁcations are small compared to other deﬂections present in the problem, such as those caused
by Coriolis forces. However, the effect of these wavevector perturbations can be computed and this analysis is currently
ongoing.

The results of the pointing jitter analysis are mostly unchanged for the inclined—great—Circles orbit conﬁguration.
The main difference is that the transverse Coriolis deﬂections are greatly suppressed for the inclined—great—Circles. As
a result, term 2 in Table VI no longer appears in the results. However, the jitter requirement is still < 1 nrad/VE
in the GW band for this orbit conﬁguration.

VI. SHORT—BASELINE CONFIGURATIONS

A proof—of—principle AGIS instrument could be space tested on the International Space Station (AGIS—ISS) or on
an independent satellite employing booms to house the interferometer regions. While such an instrument would be
limited to signiﬁcantly shorter baselines, thereby decreasing sensitivity to the scientiﬁcally interesting gravitational
waves mentioned previously, it would provide useful technology development for a full AGIS—LEO mission.

In addition to serving as a testbed for the light—pulse atom interferometry sequences that Will be used for AGIS—
LEO, a short—baseline instrument could be used to implement lattice—hold atom interferometry, a recently—proposed
alternative to light—pulse atom interferometry [50]. Lattice—hold atom interferometry involves the use of optical lattices
to continuously control the trajectories of the two arms of an atom interferometer. To perform optimally, optical—
lattice manipulations of the atoms require a larger tWO—photon Rabi frequency (Which is proportional to laser intensity)

"
"32","32
100
50
6Xf 62f
@ 20 6X”
,3 10 6211
g
£4 5 Curvature
CD
|<o
2
1
1 5 10 50 100 500 1000
Frequency [mHz]
FIG. 19: Interferometer laser pointing stability requirements. Each curve corresponds to a different term from Table VI, labeled
by their corresponding position offsets. “Curvature” refers to Term 2. A11 parameters are the same as in Table VI.
than may be available in the AGIS—LEO conﬁguration. This is because available laser power is ﬁnite, and so long
baselines, which require larger beams to mitigate diffraction, have limited intensity. With the smaller beam waist
allowed by a shorter baseline, the desired intensities for lattice—hold interferometry are more easily attainable. The
potential improvements in sensitivity of this promising new approach to atom interferometry suggest that it might
even be capable of observing gravitational waves with ISS—scale baselines. Regardless, it requires the same hardware
as light—pulse atom interferometry, with only software modiﬁcations needed to Change the durations and frequencies
of the applied laser light. Thus, a short—baseline mission could provide a space demonstration of both light—pulse atom
interferometry and lattice—hold atom interferometry, with the possibility of direct gravitational wave detection.

In what follows, we provide a brief conceptual overview of lattice—hold interferometry as it could be applied to an
ISS or other short—baseline satellite mission. Much of the analysis we have performed for a light—pulse interferometer
geometry applies also to the case of a conﬁned lattice—hold interferometer. In this section, we focus on the aspects of
the analysis that must be modiﬁed for conﬁned interferometer geometries and short baselines.

A. Lattice—Hold Interferometer Gravitational Wave Phase Shift

In comparison to light—pulse atom interferometry, lattice—hold atom interferometry offers potentially larger gravi—
tational wave sensitivities for short baseline conﬁgurations. The graVitational—wave—induced phase difference between
two lattice—hold interferometers is:

m

Aqﬁgw N EwLDh sin (wT/2) sin QGW (22)
where m is the mass of the atom, h is the gravitational wave strain, w is the gravitational wave frequency, T is the
interrogation time, L is the baseline distance between the two interferometers, and D is the wavepacket separation
in each interferometer. The phase 9Gw of the gravitational wave is deﬁned as in Sec. IIB. The interferometer
conﬁguration is illustrated in Fig. 20. Equation (22) follows from a fully relativistic calculation in which the space—
time trajectories along which the lattices guide the atoms are determined by solving for the intersection points of the
null geodesics traveled by the photons forming the lattices. These intersection points are calculated using the general
method presented in [30]. An interesting feature of the phase difference in Eq. (22) is that if we set D N L, it scales
quadratically with L, suggesting the possibility of scientiﬁcally interesting sensitivities with only modest baselines.

B. Lattice—Hold Interferometer Gravitational Wave Sensitivity

To illustrate the promising sensitivity of lattice—hold interferometer gravitational wave detectors over short baselines,

we consider an example set of feasible parameters. For a baseline of L N 10 In, a wavepacket separation of D N 10 In, a

"
"33","33
""s‘ D ’)'-:::::”-
\ I “-
\\\\\ ”l,
L
N
""s‘ D ”""l:::::""-
‘\\\ I”, ..-
\“ ”i
0 T
1:
FIG. 20: Lattice—hold interferometers in a differential conﬁguration that could be realized on the 188. The baseline distance
between the two interferometers is L, the wavepacket separation in each interferometer is D, and the interrogation time is T.
The graVitational—wave—induced phase difference between the interferometers is given by Eq. (22).
gravitational wave frequency of w N 27? X 1 Hz, and a phase sensitivity of N 10—4 rad/x/ Hz, a lattice—holol interferometer
conﬁguration using Rb atoms has a strain sensitivity of h N 10—16/\/ Hz. For laser intensities of N 100 W/Cm2, a
sufﬁciently large two—photon Rabi frequency (N 27? X 60 kHz) can be achieved to efﬁciently pull apart and recombine
the atomic wavepackets over the N 10 In baseline in N 1 s, While the spontaneous emission rate can be kept sufﬁciently
low (N 0.1 s_l) to avoid signiﬁcant losses.

The parameters described allow for a scientiﬁcally interesting gravitational wave strain sensitivity for an apparatus
that could be ﬁt on the ISS. Lattice—holol schemes are also promising for ground—baseol detectors. For instance, such
a detector could be realized in the 10 In atomic fountain currently being constructed at Stanford [30].

C. Environmental Considerations near the International Space Station

As discussed previously, most of the environmental factors of Sec. V become more problematic at lower altitudes.
At 350 km above the surface of the Earth (the approximate orbital altitude of the 188), the number density of
atomic oxygen is around 108 %, at least two orders of magnitude worse than required [67]. Thus, the AGIS—ISS
instrument would need to have an enclosed vacuum tube to protect the interferometry region, though the exterior
vacuum environment allows the tube walls to be thin and non—structural. This tube would also act as a sunshielol,
increasing uptime by eliminating the need to operate only in the Earth’s shadow. It could even provide the base for
a magnetic shield if one were necessitated by the lower orbit or the proximity of the 188. Further study is required to
determine the impact of gravity gradients and Coriolis effects in the lower ISS orbit and to develop a full systematic
error budget for AGIS—ISS, although preliminary calculations indicate that the transverse conﬁnement provided by
red—oletuneol laser beams for a lattice—holol conﬁguration can signiﬁcantly suppress the sensitivity of the instrument to
Coriolis effects. AC Stark shifts Will be an important factor in Choosing the optimal beam waist and in specifying the
necessary level of intensity stabilization. These shifts can cause non—common noise in the interferometer phase that
depends both on the degree of divergence of the laser beams over the interferometer region and on the size of laser
intensity ﬂuctuations. Finally, to mitigate Vibrational noise from the ISS itself, one option is to tether the instrument
to the space station, rather than to attach it directly.

"
"34","34
.
2m
El
‘v\\ V n l
I) *‘4x\ 4 V ‘41“ ""4""""
\Vg W
{WEAVV a ; V») 2K
E ’1 ”V
FIG. 21: Boom conﬁguration for a three—aXis gravitational wave detector, With retroreﬁectors mounted at the end of each
boom. The shaded red lines indicate the optical path, and the arrows on the upper boom indicate an atom interferometer fully
ﬁlling its boom (speciﬁcally the trajectories of the atoms during the ﬁrst half of the ﬁrst loop of a sequence, as in Fig. 3 or Fig.
20). The advantages of a boom conﬁguration are discussed in Sec. VID. Note that the ﬁgure is not to scale, that the vacuum
bellows in each boom are hidden for Clarity, and that only one of the six interferometer regions is indicated With arrows.
D. Three—Axis Boom-Based Conﬁguration

A promising conﬁguration for short—baseline detectors involves the use of six booms originating from a central
module to form interferometer pairs along three orthogonal axes, With each boom housing a single interferometer (see
Fig. 21). The laser beams can be aligned in a racetrack conﬁguration through the use of retroreﬁeoting elements
(e.g., corner cubes) at the end of each boom and pentaprisms inside the central module to allow for 90 degree turns,
enabling us to simultaneously address all six interferometers With a common set of frequency ramps. The central
module would house the atom source and optics, With bellows extending inside each boom to establish vacuum. As
mentioned in the previous section, a magnetic shield can enclose each of the interferometer regions or be incorporated
directly into the vacuum bellows. Compact, self—deploying booms are available from commercial manufacturers [73].

A key advantage of a boom conﬁguration is that the three—axis measurement allows for the mitigation of background
signals due to ﬂuctuations in centrifugal force gradients, Which arise from rotational noise. For a single—axis sensor,
such ﬂuctuations have the same signature as a gravitational wave. However, correlation measurements between three
orthogonal sensors would allow for these ﬂuctuations to be distinguished from a gravitational wave.

A boom conﬁguration can either operate as a free ﬁyer or be attached to the 188, With the capability to implement
both light—pulse and lattice—hold interferometry due to their identical hardware requirements. In either case, it is
desirable for each interferometer to ﬁll its respective boom (i.e., the wavepaoket separation should be nearly the
length of a boom), so that the maximal gravitational wave sensitivity allowed by the instrument is achieved. For a
free ﬁyer conﬁguration, it may be possible to use boom lengths of up to N 100 m. With such a boom length and With
hkeﬂ: = ZOOEk beam splitters, the interferometers can ﬁll the booms With interrogation times of N 100 s.

For a free ﬁyer, one axis could be made effectively inertial by orienting it perpendicular to the orbital plane,
suppressing effects arising from rotation bias and Coriolis deﬂections as is done for the ICC conﬁguration (see Sec.
II D). With the use of thrusters, it may be possible to make all three axes effectively inertial.

An additional scientiﬁc motivation for the boom conﬁguration is that the three—axis measurement can aid in the
performance of certain tests of general relativity. For example, the boom conﬁguration appears to be an ideal platform
for measuring the nonzero divergence of the gravitational ﬁeld in free space predicted by general relativity [30].

"
"35","35
VII. SECONDARY OBJECTIVES

Although variations in Earth’s gravity gradients are a noise source for the GW detector, pulse sequences designed
to measure these variations can provide important geophysical information including data regarding the ﬂow of water
on the Earth that is important for understanding weather, the Climate, and oceans. Similar arguments have provided
motivation for satellite missions such as the CHAllenging Mini—satellite Payload (CHAMP), the Gravity Recovery and
Climate Experiment (GRACE), and the Constellation Observing System for Meteorology, Ionosphere and Climate
(COSMIC). The method works: GRACE’s monthly gravitational maps have improved our understanding of ocean
Circulation [74], polar ice loss [75], and water ﬂow of large basins like the Amazon [76].

Furthermore, if the atom Clouds are prepared in a magnetically—sensitive state, [m 7E 0), the gravity wave detector
becomes a detector of the local magnetic ﬁeld gradient at each of the interferometers. Similar to the gravity gra—
diometer, the transformed detector would produce a map of the temporal variation in the Earth’s magnetic gradients.
Data collected by previous satellite missions—Qrsted, CHAMP, and Satellite Argentina Cientiﬁcas — C (SAC—C)—have
been used to model the static and time—varying geomagnetic ﬁeld [77] and mantle conductivity [78].

The modiﬁcations necessary to make these measurements do not require different hardware, merely different soft—
ware. With this unique ﬂexibility of atom interferometric measurements, AGIS—LEO can provide complementary
maps of temporal variations in the Earth’s gravity gradients and magnetic ﬁeld gradients.

VIII. SUMMARY

Atom interferometry offers a means to sensitively measure gravitational waves With short baselines and in low Earth
orbit. With a strain sensitivity of < 10—18/\/E in the 50 mHz — 10 Hz frequency band, the AGIS—LEO instrument
can detect gravitational wave signals inaccessible to ground—based alternatives. Such information could impact our
understanding of the universe from the mergers of nearby White dwarf binaries to phase transitions and reheating at
the earliest of times. Extensive theoretical analysis of noise sources performed for solar orbits, [26], has been adapted
to the new conditions of low Earth orbit. We have analyzed possible environmental noise sources from near—Earth
magnetic ﬁelds and gravity gradients and have found them to fall below the necessary threshold. Laser requirements—
phase noise, frequency stability, and wavefront—are all achievable With current technology. Rotation effects, Which are
stronger in low Earth orbits due to the short orbital period, can be mitigated through the invaluable ﬂexibility of
atom interferometry: the Choice of interferometer pulse sequence.

An apparent strength of the AI approach is that many of the instrument and system level requirements can be
validated 0n the ground, in suitably conﬁgured terrestrial laboratories. For example, the Stanford 10 In free fall
tower Will enable Characterization of LMT optical sequences, wavefront and laser jitter requirements, magnetic ﬁeld
sensitivity, vacuum sensitivity, laser cooling protocols, kinematic requirements for the atom sources, Coriolis and
gravity gradient sensitivities, etc.

Finally, atom interferometry has the potential for even higher precision. With longer baselines and larger beam—
splitters, the sensitivity of pulsed atom interferometers to gravitational waves can be increased by multiple orders
of magnitude. With shorter baselines, lattice—hold atom interferometers, now in development, have the capability to
provide high sensitivity. In fact, an ISS—scale test mission for AGIS using lattice—hold atom interferometry might be ca—
pable of directly detecting gravitational waves, While simultaneously ﬂight testing the technology for a full AGIS—LEO
science mission.

In short, AGIS is a sensitive and scalable instrument that can open the door to information about our universe
that is currently encoded in gravitational waves.

Acknowledgments

We thank Peter Bender for valuable discussions. TK acknowledges support from the Fannie and John Hertz
Foundation. TK, SD and AS acknowledge support from the NSF GRFP. AS acknowledges support from an Anne
T. and Robert M. Bass Stanford Graduate Fellowship and a DOD NDSEG Fellowship. SR is supported by the DOE
Ofﬁce of Nuclear Physics under grant DE—FG02—94ER40818. SR is also supported by NSF grant PHY—0600465. PB
acknowledges support from a Fulbright Fellowship and the iXCore Foundation.

[1] B. F. Schutz, Classical and Quantum Gravity 16, A131 (1999), arXiv:gr—qC/9911034.

"
"36","36
[2] C. Cutler and K. S. Thorne (2002), arXiv:gr—qC/0204090.
[3] M. Maggiore, Phys. Rept. 331, 283 (2000), arXiv:gr—qC/9909001.
[4] B. F. Schutz, Nature (London) 323, 310 (1986).
[5] J . Garcia—Bellido, D. G. Figueroa, and A. Sastre (2007), arXiv:0707.0839 [hep—ph].
[6] R. Easther, J. T. Giblin, and E. A. Lim (2006), arXiv:astro—ph/0612294.
[7] J. Dufaux, A. Bergman, G. Felder, L. Kofman, and J. Uzan, Phys. Rev. D 76, 123517 (2007), arXiv:0707.0875 [astro—ph].
[8] M. Kamionkowski, A. Kosowsky, and M. S. Turner, Phys. Rev. D 49, 2837 (1994), arXiv:astro—ph/9310044.
[9] C. Caprini, R. Durrer, and G. Servant, Phys. Rev. D 77, 124015 (2008), arXiv:0711.2593 [astro—ph].

[10] C. Grojean and G. Servant, Phys. Rev. D 75, 043507 (2007), arXiv:hep—ph/0607107.

[11] R. Apreda, M. Maggiore, A. Nicolis, and A. Riotto, Nuclear Physics B 631, 342 (2002), arXiv:gr—qC/0107033.

[12] L. Randall and G. Servant, Journal of High Energy Physics 5, 54 (2007), arXiv:hep—ph/ 0607158.

[13] J . Polchinski (2007), arXiv:0707.0888 [astro—ph].

[14] M. R. DePies and C. J. Hogan, Phys. Rev. D 75, 125006 (2007), arXiv:astro—ph/0702335.

[15] C. J. Hogan (1998), arXiv:astro—ph/9809364.

[16] C. J. Hogan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2044 (2000), arXiv:astro—ph/0005044.

[17] C. J. Hogan, Phys. Rev. D 62, 121302 (2000), arXiv:astro—ph/0009136.

[18] M. Gasperini and G. Veneziano, Phys. Rept. 373, 1 (2003), arXiv:hep—th/0207130.

[19] M. S. Turner and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 3080 (1990).

[20] P. R. Berman, ed., AtOm Interfemmetry (Academic Press, San Diego, 1997).

[21] J . M. Hogan, D. M. S. Johnson, and M. A. Kasevich, in Praceedz'ngs 0f the International Schaol 0f Physics ”Enrico Fermi”
0n AtOm Optics and Space Physics, edited by E. Arimondo, W. Ertmer, and W. P. Schleich (IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2009),
pp. 411—447, arXiv:0806.3261 [physics.at0m—ph].

[22] S. Dimopoulos, P. W. Graham, J. M. Hogan, M. A. Kasevich, and S. Rajendran, Physics Letters B 678, 37 (2009).

[23] M. Kasevich and S. Chu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 181 (1991).

[24] D. M. Giltner, R. W. McGowan, and S. A. Lee, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2638 (1995).

[25] E. M. Basel, M. K. Oberthaler, H. Batelaan, J. Schmiedmayer, and A. Zeilinger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2633 (1995).

[26] S. Dimopoulos, P. W. Graham, J. M. Hogan, M. A. Kasevich, and S. Rajendran, Phys. Rev. D 78, 122002 (2008),
arXiv:0806.2125 [gr—qc].

[27] T. Léveque, A. Gauguet, F. Michaud, F. Pereira Dos Santos, and A. Landragin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 080405 (2009).

[28] B. Dubetsky and M. A. Kasevich, Phys. Rev. A 74, 023615 (2006).

[29] S. Dimopoulos, P. W. Graham, J. M. Hogan, and M. A. Kasevich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 111102 (2007), arXiv:gr—qC/0610047.

[30] S. Dimopoulos, P. W. Graham, J. M. Hogan, and M. A. Kasevich, Phys. Rev. D 78, 042003 (2008), arXiv:0802.4098
[hep-ph]-

[31] K. Kawabe and the LIGO Collaboration, Journal of Physics: Conference Series 120, 032003 (2008).

[32] J. R. Smith and the LIGO Collaboration, Classical and Quantum Gravity 26, 114013 (2009).

[33] S. L. Larson, W. A. Hiscock, and R. W. Hellings, Phys. Rev. D 62, 062001 (2000), arXiv:gr—qC/9909080.

[34] N. SneeuW and H. Schaub, Gravity, Geoid and Space Missions pp. 12—17 (2005).

[35] N. Christensen, Phys. Rev. D 46, 5250 (1992).

[36] B. Abbott, R. Abbott, R. Adhikari, J. Agresti, P. Ajith, B. Allen, R. Amin, S. B. Anderson, W. G. Anderson, M. Araya,
et 31., The Astrophysical Journal 659, 918 (2007), arXiv:astro—ph/ 0608606.

[37] B. Allen (1996), arXiv:gr—qC/9604033.

[38] T. L. Smith, E. Pierpaoli, and M. Kamionkowski, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 021301 (2006), arXiv:astro—ph/0304393.

[39] B. Allen and S. Koranda, Phys. Rev. D 50, 3713 (1994), arXiv:astro—ph/9404068.

[40] A. J. Farmer and E. S. Phinney, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. SOC. 346, 1197 (2003), arXiv:astro—ph/0304393.

[41] H. Metcalf and P. Straten, Laser Cooling and T rapping (Springer, New York, 1999).

[42] T. van Zoest, N. Gaaloul, Y. Singh, H. Ahlers, W. Herr, S. T. Seidel, W. Ertmer, E. Basel, M. Eckart, E. Kajari, et 31.,
Science 328, 1540 (2010).

[43] Stem, G., Battelier, B., Geiger, R., Varoquaux, G., Villing, A., Moron, F., Carraz, 0., Zahzam, N., Bidel, Y., Chaibi, W.,
et 31., Eur. Phys. J. D 53, 353 (2009).

[44] R. S. Conroy, Y. Xiao, M. Vengalattore, W. Rooijakkers, and M. Prentiss, Optics Communications 226, 259 (2003).

[45] M. Kasevich, D. S. Weiss, E. Riis, K. Moler, S. Kasapi, and S. Chu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 2297 (1991).

[46] H. Ammann and N. Christensen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 2088 (1997).

[47] J.—S. Bernier, C. Kollath, A. Georges, L. De Leo, F. Gerbier, C. Salomon, and M. Kéhl, Phys. Rev. A 79, 061601 (2009).

[48] J .—F. Clement, J .—P. Brantut, M. Robert—de Saint—Vincent, R. A. Nyman, A. Aspect, T. Bourdel, and P. Bouyer, Phys.
Rev. A 79, 061406 (2009).

[49] J . H. Denschlag, J . E. Simsarian, H. Hffner, C. McKenzie, A. Browaeys, D. Cho, K. Helmerson, S. L. Rolston, and W. D.
Phillips, Journal of Physics B: Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics 35, 3095 (2002).

[50] T. Kovachy, J. M. Hogan, D. M. S. Johnson, and M. A. Kasevich, Phys. Rev. A 82, 013638 (2010), arXiv:0910.3435
[physics.at0m—ph].

[51] P. Cladé, S. Guellati—Khélifa, F. m. C. NeZ, and F. m. C. Biraben, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 240402 (2009).

[52] H. Miiller, S.—W. ChiOW, S. Herrmann, and S. Chu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 240403 (2009).

[53] Laser interfemmeter space antenna (lisa) missian concept, LISA Project internal report number LISA—PRJ—RP—0001 (2009).

[54] M. G. Hauser, T. Kelsall, D. Leisawitz, and J . Weiland, eds., COBE Diﬁuse Infrared Backgmund Experiment (DIRBE)
Explanatery Supplement (NASA/GSFC, Greenbelt, MD, 1998), cobe ref. pub. no. 98 3. ed., available in electronic form

"
"37","37

from the NSSDC.

[55] K. Numata, M. Ando, K. Yamamoto, S. Otsuka, and K. Tsubono, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 260602 (2003).

[56] D. A. Vallado and D. Finkelman, in Astrodynamics Specialist Conference and Exhibit (Honolulu, Hawaii, 2008).

[57] A. Gillespie and F. Raab, Phys. Rev. D 52, 577 (1995).

[58] Y. Levin, Phys. Rev. D 57, 659 (1998).

[59] M. Cerdonio, L. Conti, A. Heidmann, and M. Pinard, Phys. Rev. D 63, 082003 (2001).

[60] D. J. Edinger and A. A. Nordt (SPIE, 2005), V01. 5868, p. 58680X.

[61] For example, see the 4D Technology FizCam 2000 Fizeau interferometer.

[62] P. Cheinet, B. Canuel, F. Pereira Dos Santos, A. Gauguet, F. Leduc, and A. Landragin (2005), arXiv:physics/0510197.

[63] J . L. Genet, J . Kim, C. Bourassin—Bouchet, M. Lours, A. Landragin, and F. P. D. Santos, Optics Communications 282,
977 (2009).

[64] A. D. Ludlow, X. Huang, M. Notcutt, T. Zanon—Willette, S. M. Foreman, M. M. Boyd, 8. Blatt, and J. Ye, Opt. Lett. 32,
641 (2007).

[65] K. Bongs, R. Launay, and M. Kasevich, Applied Physics B: Lasers and Optics 84, 599 (2006).

[66] A. Peters, K. Y. Chung, and S. Chu, Metrologia 38, 25 (2001).

[67] A. E. Hedin, J. Geophys. Res. 96, 1159 (1991).

[68] S. Mans, S. Macmillan, S. McLean, B. Hamilton, A. Thomson, M. Nair, and C. Rollins (2010), the US/UK World Magnetic
Model for 2010—2015, NOAA Technical Report NESDIS/NGDC.

[69] N. K. Pavlis, S. A. Holmes, 8. C. Kenyon, and J. K. Factor, an Earth Gravitational Model to Degree 2160: EGM2008,
presented at the 2008 General Assembly of the European Geosciences Union, Vienna, Austria, April 13—18, 2008.

[70] J. Park, T.—R. A. Song, J. Tromp, E. Okal, S. Stein, G. Roult, E. Clevede, G. Laske, H. Kanamori, P. Davis, et 81., Science
308, 1139 (2005).

[71] F. A. Dahlen and J . Tromp, T hearetz'cal Glabal Seismalagy (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1998).

[72] G. Masters, M. Barmine, S. Kientz, J . F. Gilbert, and J . Woodhouse, the MINEOS Computational Infrastructure for
Geodynamics, URL http : //geodynamics . org/Cig/software/mineos.

[73] For example, see ABLE Engineering, 1106., http://WWW.aeC—able.com/Booms/coilboom.html.

[74] B. D. Tapley, D. P. Chambers, 8. Bettadpur, and J. C. Ries, Geophys. Res. Lett. 30, 220000 (2003).

[75] J. L. Chen, C. R. Wilson, D. Blankenship, and B. D. Tapley, Nature Geoscience 2, 859 (2009).

[76] B. D. Tapley, S. Bettadpur, J. C. Ries, P. F. Thompson, and M. M. Watkins, Science 305, 503 (2004).

[77] N. Olsen, H. Liihr, T. J . Sabaka, M. Mandea, M. Rother, L. Tfoner—Clausen, and S. Choi, Geophysical Journal International
166, 67 (2006).

[78] A. Kuvshinov and N. Olsen, Geophys. Res. Lett. 33, 18301 (2006).

"
