"","x"
"1","m,» Available online at www.sciencedirect.com m

Mb ""’ ScienceDirect [11113111

5‘“ isntimmntai
PERGAMON Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 324—333 m

www.elseVier.com/locate/actaastro

New technology innovations w1th p0tent1a1 for space appheations

Kumar Krishen
NASA Johnson Space Centen 2102 Nasa Parkway, Houston, TX 77058, USA
Available online 21 February 2008
Abstract

Human exploration and development of space is being pursued by spacefaring nations to explore, use, and enable the
development of space and expand the human experience there. The goals include: increasing human knowledge of nature’s
processes using the space environment; exploring and settling the solar system; achieving routine space travel; and enriching life
on Earth through living and working in space. A crucial aspect of future space missions is the development of infrastructure to
Optimize safety, productivity, and costs. A maj or component of mission execution is Operations management. NASA’s International
Space Station is providing extensive experience in both infrastructure and Operations. In View Of this, a vigorously organized
approach is needed to implement successful space-, planet-, and ground-based research and Operations that entails wise and
efﬁcient use Of technical and human resources.

Many revolutionary technologies being pursued by researchers and technologists may be Vital in making space missions safe,
reliable, cost—effective, and productive. These include: ionic polymer—metal composite technology; s01id-state1asers; time-domain
sensors and communication systems; high-temperature superconductivity; nanotechnology; variable speciﬁc impulse magneto
plasma rocket; fuzzy logic; wavelet technology; and neural networks. An overview of some of these will be presented, along
with their application to space missions.
© 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction exploration and discovery is not an option we choose, ”
said President Bush, “it is a desire written in the human

On January 14, 2004, President George W. Bush heart.”
announced a new Vision for NASA to implement a
sustained and affordable human and robotic program 2. The exploration scenario and operations
to explore the solar system and beyond; extend hu— environment
man presence across the solar system—starting with
a human return to the moon by the year 2020 in NASA’s Vision is to improve life on Earth, extend
preparation for human exploration of Mars and other life into space, and ﬁnd life in the universe. The Inter—
destinations—develop the innovative technologies, national Space Station (188), missions to the moon for
knowledge, and infrastructures needed to explore and long—duration stays, and a human mission to Mars are
to support decisions about the destinations for human elements of this [1,2]. Three prominent goals of NASA
exploration; and promote international and eommer— are to (1) conduct scientiﬁc research to understand the
Cial participation in exploration to further US seien— processes and phenomena that underlie the formation
tiﬁc, security, and economic interests. “This cause of of the universe and the life it SUPPOYtS; (2) explore the
— universe to expand human knowledge and presence;

E-mail address: kumar.krishen—1@nasa.g0v. and (3) Pursue along With Other gOVernment, industry,
0094—5765/55 — see front matter © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.actaastr0.2007.12.047

"
"2","K. Krishen / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 324—333 325
C5 06 07 03 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 1‘3 20 21 22 23 24 25
~ _;::"";.::: A .__._.
. -:-‘*4 mm m; m ?;y» __
~ __.I.2’-"" n - ""
k5"". . CommerciaICrow.Carotorlss 'rv'!’ Q“ r, ,
CEV Production and Ocrations .
mwwgmmy LunarLanderDcvclocment 3;:- 5' i _ 7 Fig. 2. Fig. 2. 188 developing future capability.
post location is to be Chosen to optimize the enV1s1oned
_ _ objectives, Which include: using the moon and Mars
Fig. 1. NASA exploratlon roadmap. 1 . . . . . _
ocations and enVironments to conduct seientiﬁc inves
tigations, learning to survive on another planet, and
dealing With the health and logistics issues of extended
and academic communities applications of aeronautics, stays. In Choosing the Lunar Outpost location, consid—
space science, and technology for the preservation and eration should be given to having an area With the least
improvement of life on Earth [1,2]. possibility of falling space meteorites and cosmiC/solar
NASA has formed the Constellation Program to burst particle radiation. In addition, the area should be
maintain US presence in low Earth orbit, return to the of scientiﬁc interest and have a suitable landing site,
moon to establish an outpost, and explore Mars and an area useful for oxygen production and other in situ
beyond. Fig. 1 details the missions that make up the resources utilization(ISRU)Capabi1ities, sunlight avail—
NASA exploration roadmap. ability, line—of—sight communication With the Earth, and
These include space shuttle and 188 operations, Crew nearby permanently shadowed areas for potential in situ
Exploration Vehicle production and operation, lunar water production.
and Mars robotic missions, Lunar Outpost buildup, The environments for the Earth, moon, and Mars vary
and Mars expedition design. NASA’s space platforms signiﬁcantly and call for speciﬁc technology solutions.
include Earth— and moon—orbiting platforms, space sta— Lunar surface temperatures can range from —299 to
tions, and deep space platforms. To these platforms 250 OF [3]. The temperature cycle on Mars can range
intended for operations, logistics, and communications from —225 to 64 OF, based on Mars Pathﬁnder data and
are to be added satellites for scientiﬁc or observa— NASA calculations. These values are typical and more
tional systems. Technology drivers for these platforms recent and accurate data are available from NASA.
include: advanced structures and materials, avionics One of the environmental factors on the moon is lunar
systems, human support, communications, sensors, en— dust. The risks for prolonged explore to lunar dust Will
Vironmental interactions, propulsion and control, and include mechanical failures in spacesuits and airloeks,
power and thermal management. The NASA science lung disease, and decreased efﬁciency of the solar en—
programs are in support of Earth science, planetary ergy panels. Mars dust Will have similar consequences.
science, heliophysics, and astrophysics. These pro— The ionizing radiation is one of the most signiﬁcant
grams also need unique sensor, data acquisition and hazards for both hardware and humans in space. This
processing, and mission support technologies. hazard Will demand attention for both lunar and Mars
The 188 provides a permanently manned, multipur— missions [4].
pose facility in low Earth orbit, With a life expectancy Solar light environment Will continue to have a pro—
of more than 20 years (Fig. 2). It Will provide great nouneed inﬂuence on many aspects of the Lunar Outpost
opportunity for basic and applied science in micrograv— and a human mission to Mars. The lack of atmosphere
ity With continued addition of capabilities resulting in on the moon and presence of Mars atmosphere Will
a siX—person crew planned for 2009. The 188 Will also present different scenarios for solar energy use and Will
provide valuable design and veriﬁcation for future space demand differing approaches. Another environmental
systems and technology. factor to be faced on Mars is the occasional presence of
The Constellation architecture is being formulated to regional dust storms resulting in altering both temper—
meet the stated exploration objectives. The Lunar Out— ature and lighting conditions. In addition, as With the

"
"3","326 K. Krishen / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008 ) 324 —333
moon, water harvesting Will need unique technology to exploration life support, advanced environmental mon—
make it a cost—effective proposition. itoring and control, ﬁre protection, detection, and sup—

The gravity environment Will modulate human sur— pression, extravehicular activity (EVA), automation for
Vival 0n the moon and Mars. For the moon, this adap— operations, intelligent software design, and integrated
tation Will be to about one—sixth and for Mars to about systems health management project.
tWO—ﬁfths. The effects of gravity on humans and 1iV— The technology investment areas given in NASA’s
ing organisms continue to be studied. Results to date Exploration Systems Architecture Study are structures
show profound effects on several functions of the human and materials, protection, propulsion, power, thermal
body [5—7]. controls, avionics and software, environmental con—

The distance to the moon and Mars results in round— trol and life support, crew support and accommoda—
trip communication delays of a few seconds to more tions, mechanisms, ISRU, analysis and integration, and
than 40min and provides technology Challenges to al— operations [4].
leviate the consequences of these delays. For this rea— Crew health care needs for long—duration missions
son, reliability and autonomy must be incorporated in should include highly accurate and reliable monitoring
mission—critical system designs. and diagnosis systems, and countermeasure technolo—

gies resulting in maintaining healthy crews for long
3. Projected space technology needs periods on the planetary surface. Imaging and diag—
nostic systems, preferably in Vitro, need to be devel—

The President’s Commission on Implementation of oped With attractive mass, size, power, and ease of
United States Space Exploration Policy formed after Operation. Technology developments are needed in the
President Bush’s January 2004 announcement issued areas of space radiation protection including: biolog—
a report in June 2004 [1]. Finding 4 from this report ical countermeasures, medical care devices, clinical
states: “the Commission ﬁnds that successful develop— capabilities, reduced-gravity countermeasures, behav—
ment of identiﬁed enabling technologies Will be critical ioral health management, crew cohesion training and
to attainment of exploration objectives Within reason— performance, human performance measurement, enVi—
able schedules and affordable costs.” The report lists ronmental control, and food storage and processing.
17 enabling technologies, and the Commission recom— Intelligent and autonomous medical informatics sys—
mends that NASA conduct initial assessments of these terms are needed to track and document the medical
technologies and develop and integrate them in its eX— history of crew members. Countermeasure technolo—
ploration architecture. gies include: exercise, timed drug release, targeted

Following this report, NASA conducted an extensive drug therapy, triggered drug release, and operating
study titled “NASA’s Exploration Systems Architecture hardware. Medical Operations Will develop contrast
Study” to identify the systems and architecture needed agents to target speciﬁc sites for surgery, biO—mimetic
to realize the exploration goals [4]. Section 9 of this or engineered compounds to help wound healing, and
report, entitled “Technology Assessment,” provides a miniatured electron microscopes for biopsies.
summary of the technologies needed and recommends Key concerns that distinguish NASA technology re—
that NASA undertake a Vigorous approach to develop— quirements include: size per unit of mass, strength and
ing a process to prioritize the funding of new technology performance per unit of mass, power generation and
development. The NASA Exploration Systems Mission energy storage per unit of mass, and information pro—
Directorate (ESMD) uses two technology focused cessing and intelligence per unit of mass. Indeed, mass
programs—the Exploration Technology Development and size are the major determinants of mission costs.
Program (ETDP) and the Human Research Program—to Coupled With this, space missions demand a very high
carry this out. degree of reliability and autonomy.

Currently under the NASA ETDP, high—priority The main drivers for space technology development
technologies being pursued are: ablative thermal pro— are increased productivity, higher safety, and reduced
tection system, automated rendezvous and docking, cost. The productivity needs include human—machine
autonomous landing and hazard avoidance technol— symbiosis, sensors, nanocomputing, nanoelectroniCS,
ogy, propulsion and cryogenics advanced develop— data mining, fuel cells, and energy storage. Safety
ment, human robotic systems, ISRU, supportability, includes radiation protection, life support, countermea—
high—performance and radiation—hardened electronics, sures, and managing the health systems. As was stated
advanced ﬁssion—based power systems, energy stor— earlier, costs are highly correlated With mass and size.
age, dust project, thermal control system development, Technologies are needed to provide multifunctional

"
"4","K. Krishen / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008 ) 324 —333 327
performance with minimum mass and size. In addition, been proposed. Conventional MRI systems require
power and thermal management technologies can also liquid helium refrigerant, bulky cryostats, and exces—
reduce mission costs. sive power, and are heavy. These systems therefore

The recent stated technology Challenges and priori— become prohibitive in terms of cost. High—temperature
ties for the science missions according to Headquarters superconductors (HTSs) can make a space—borne MRI
are as follows: new remote—sensing technologies to bet— system feasible because this system can work at higher
ter see, detect, and measure the Earth, the sun, the solar temperatures. With proper design and thermal control,
system, and the universe; large, 10wer—cost, lightweight these systems can be made cryogen free. HTS mag—
mirrors and space—deployable structures for the next nets can operate at 150K with some compounds and
generation of large telescopes and antennas; novel plat— can be cooled by relatively inexpensive, reliable, and
forms, including power and propulsion technologies, compact coolers. Other technologies showing promise
that can take instruments to new vantage points; intel— include ionic polymer—metal composite (IPMC) tech—
1igent distributed systems that enable advanced corn— nology; solid—state lasers; time—dornain sensors and
munications, efﬁcient data processing and transfer, and communication systems; nanotechnology; variable spe—
autonomous operations of land— and space—based assets; Ciﬁc impulse magnetoplasma rocket (VASMIR); fuzzy
and information synthesis to derive useful knowledge logic; wavelet technology; and neural networks.
from extremely large data sets through Visualization,
advanced simulations, analysis, and seamlessly linked 4.1. High-temperamre superconductivity
models.

Operations, as the term applies to the nation’s civil Superconductivity, the loss of electrical resistance,
space program, constitute a broad spectrum of actiV— was discovered by Heike Kamerlingh Onnes in 1911
ities and associated facilities that enable the conduct by showing that mercury becomes superconducting at
of a program or mission to achieve desired goals or 4.2 K, In 1986, Karl Alex Muller and Georg Bednorz
objectives. Operations areas typically include automa— developed a new compound consisting of barium, lan—
tion and robotics, training systems, in—space operations, thanum, and copper. This compound was relatively easy
ground operations, and associated information acqui— to prepare and has a superconducting temperature of ap—
sition and processing infrastructure. Often space— and proximately 30K [8]. In February 1987, Paul C.W. Chu
ground—based operations have to accommodate new re— and Mao—Ken Wu and their team members developed an
quirements or modiﬁcations to the previous mission re— yttrium, barium, and copper compound that super eon—
quirements. In this context, technology needs can also ducted at about 90 K, which is above the temperature
be identiﬁed to serve Changing requirements of long— of liquid nitrogen [8]. Subsequently, higher—temperature
duration missions, space assembly and servicing, inter— superconductors with critical temperature above 125 K
national space activities, and the interaction of ﬂight were discovered and under pressure higher supercon—
systems. ducting temperatures were achieved. By 1996, temper—

atures above 164 K were recorded [8].
4. New technologies with potential space The application of superconductors to space mis—
applications sions draws impetus from technology needs as well
as the low temperatures that space offers. Space ap—

Research and development efforts throughout the plications for HTS were studied by Krishen and Ig—
commercial, academic, and government sectors have natieV with a comprehensive reView provided in 1988
resulted in revolutionary technologies that have poten— [9]. Speciﬁcally, technology development areas stud—
tial for space applications. One example is the magnetic ied included: (1) high current power transmission, (2)
resonance imaging (MRI) system. Studies have shown microwave components, devices, and antennas, (3) mi—
that the structurelvolurne and functions of muscle, crowave, optical, and infrared sensors, (4) signalproces—
bone, and connective tissues for astronauts exposed sors, (5) sub—millimeter wave components and systems,
to microgravity are affected [5—7]. The cardiovascular (6) ultra—stable space Clocks, (7) electromagnetic launch
system, neuromuscular functions, and metabolic aC— systems, and (8) accelerometers and position sensors
tiVity are also affected [7]. NASA has used MRI data for ﬂight operations. Considerable progress has been
to study the anatomical Changes of selected astronauts made in developing some of the HTS—based technology
both before and after their ﬂights. for these applications. In particular, HTS has been used

No in—ﬂight MRI data are available, although the in sensing systems for the transmission of signals from
need for such data and the use of MRI in space has collectors to detectors.

"
"5","328 K. Krishen / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 324 —333
The use of HTS in space communications has been 7 , . 7
studied, and communication systems have been de— * - ' 777% ,5. “.__. ‘ .
signed [10]. Experiments establishing the performance “ “ —’ , ‘ _j;i‘}i_?4%ﬁ ,-
of these systems have been proposed. Other proposed *7 T‘xm‘wi;
applications include momentum Wheels for satellite at— I 7 "" ""W 7.; ’ "" 7
titude control, magnetocardiography (MCG) system for
noninvasive monitoring of cardiac activity, and magnets
for energy storage. The momentum Wheel is based on
superconductor magnet bearing With substantial energy . ,
saving [11]. The MCG system is designed to moni— ’-.,.-;w___w_ “-4”
tor biomagnetic ﬁelds emitted by the heart during the 9,. . 7 7
cardiac cycle [12]. It is based on HTS superconduct—
ing quantum injection diodes. The MCG can measure
cardiac signals a few inches away from the chest. The _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
application Of magnets to MRI was mentioned earlier. FEED} A quarter 1s 11fted Wlth IPMC (w1th perm1ss10n from K1rn
Other applications Will include energy storage on the '
lunar surface and VASMIR. The VASMIR system Will
be discussed later in thls p ap er. IPMC technology can be envisioned for use in space
robotic, human support, and Vibration monitoring and
4.2. Ionic polymer—metal composites control. These applications Will be brieﬂy discussed.
IPMCs are evolving With desirable mechanical and 421' Robotic applications
sensing properties [13—16]. Shahinpoor and Kim [14] A variety of end effectors are possible With IPMC
have developed simpler compositing and electroding technology in space environments. The agility and quick
processes resulting in cost savings in the manufacture of response Of these end effectors Will promote their use
IPMCs. Many IPMCs are composed of perﬂuorinated in micro— and partiaI—gravity environments. The tech—
ion exchange membrane (IBM). The IBM is compos— nology can also be used to provide mobility using legs
ited With gold or platinum or carbon conductor, or a and Wheels. On the moon surface, vehicle—borne mech—
conductive polymer. anisms can be used due to lack of atmosphere. In the
When subjected to a 10W applied ﬁeld on the order Mars environment, the use of insects and ﬂies such as
of 10 kV/m across a metalized 0r conductive surface, a Mars worm, Mars ﬂy to navigate over, on, and below
IPMCs show large bending motion. Furthermore, these the planetary surface can be envisioned.
materials can retain a modiﬁed shape With particular
levels of input voltage. Research to date has shown a 4.2.2. Human support
force greater than 40 times the weight of an IPMC and The development of a tight suit incorporating IPMC
large bending displacements can be realized With very actuators/museles that allow contact With human mus—
low input voltages [13]. For example, a 14—mm displace— Cles is needed to realize the beneﬁts for crew members.
ment in a cantilever beam of 20mm x 5 mm x 0.2 mm In one of the applications, the actuation is provided
With 1.5V and 146 mA current is observed [13]. to move human extremities against the IPMC mus—
Fig. 3 shows a quarter lifted by an IPMC [16] by the cle movement. The resistance against motion provides
application of a step voltage of 2.8 V (E = 1.4 V /mm). a countermeasure for muscle atrophy in a space en—
The time interval between the frames is approximately Vironment. The suit muscles Will be actuated through
1 s. This displacement of IPMCs can be made bi— selective electric pulse sequences both spatially and
directional by reversing the polarity of the electric temporally. In this way, a combination of human mus—
ﬁeld. When subjected to an imposed bending stress, Cles Will get exercised for a speciﬁed time. This type
IPMCs develop a measurable voltage across chemi— of body conditioning is effective and efﬁcient in that an
cally/physically placed electrodes. For example, the astronaut can be working using hands and arms While
bending of a cantilever IPMC strip produces 10’s of getting exercise in other parts of the body as well.
millivolts [17]. This attribute makes it a sensor With The second application can augment the strength of
attractive properties compared to shape memory alloys astronauts to enhance their performance and response
and electrostatic ceramic actuator sensors. time in space environments. A similar suit to that used

"
"6","K. Krishen / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008 ) 324 —333 329
as a countermeasure 0r exercising system can be used inﬂatables. The use of single—walled carbon nanotubes
in this mode to regulate and provide strength to astro— (SWCNTs) in polymer and ceramic matrices results in
nauts, especially during EVAs. The strength and pre— improved strength and thermal performance.

Cise motion provided through these systems can give A brief synopsis of some of the work being carried
better precision for task execution. The same tight suit out by the NASA Johnson Space Center (J SC) Nan—
can be used as a passive sensing system to monitor the otube Team is given here. Long—duration space ﬂight
posture and motion of astronauts during designated pe— requires a regenerable system for air revitalization. In
riods to categorize human factors effectiveness of each this application, SWCNT can be used to replace ze—
astronaut/suit. elites and amine—coated polymer beads. Carbon nan—
otubes offer advantages in terms of reduced mass and
4,2, 3, Vibration monitoring and control volume, larger surface area, and better thermal conduc—
Monitoring of structural vibration of satellites tivity. In one of the applications, SWCNTS are chemi-
such as the 188 can be accomplished by mounting cally bonded (functionalized) With amines t0 make C02
IPMC devices at strategic places on the structure and scrubber material [19} Amines require IOWCY energy
gathering Vibration data continuously, either through for regeneration than the molecular sieves presently in
a hardwired scheme or a Wireless opticaI/infrared 1186 [19]- The SWCNTS PfOVidC a higher surface area,
communications system. These data can be used to resulting in both volume and weight savings. Carbon
develop three—dimensional Vibration models and t0 cal— nanotubes with greater surface area and nanOporosity
culate effects on the trajectory, instrument pointing, provide superior materials for electrolyte ion support
and gravity environment. Corrections to the data and for supercapacitor power and energy storage. In addi—
pointing instruments can then be made based on these tion to increased capacity for storage, these devices of—
data. IPMC devices can be placed at Vibration 15013- fer better electrical and thermal conductivity. The use of
tion points to generate opposite actuation to that of carbon nanotubes fuel cells provides increased reliabil—
the raCk/instrument Vibration. In this way, Vibrations ity through reduced activation p01arizati0n,high capac—
can be alleviated or reduced to provide Vibration—free ity through high surface area, and higher power density
environments. from more efﬁcient use of platinum catalysts.
Current research efforts at NASA J SC involve the
4.3. Carbon nanotechnology use of microwave energy to heat nanotubes in polymer
and ceramic matrices for localized heating, curing, and
The unique Chemistry of carbon nanotubes (Fig. 4) bonding. This technique is being explored for the re—
provides material With strongest ﬁber possible, electri— pair of the shuttle thermal protection system. The use of
cal conductivity of copper, thermal conductivity of di— SWCNTs in phenolic—impregnated carbon ablator ther—
amond, large—aspect ratios, large surface areas, and the mal protection material is also being explored. The use
scale and precision of DNA [18]. Reduced mass and 0f nanotubes in thermal protection materials can result
volume and multi—functionality makes materials and de— in increased strength and enhanced thermal and radia—
Vices based on this technology most desirable for space ti0n protection. The use of SWCNTs in polymer ma—
applications. trices and its application to thin transparent coating is
The numerous applications of single— and multiple— showing promise for 10W material density and high elec—
Wall nanotubes to space systems are currently being trical conductivity for electromagnetic shielding. The
explored across NASA and many research institutions. use of solar—radiation—sensitive functionalized SWCNTs
Applications include power/energy storage, advanced to measure radiation dose rates and total radiation dose
life support, crew health maintenance, electromag— is advantageous as the higher nanotube surface area in—
netiC/radiation shielding, sensors and instrumentation, creases the sensitivity of the measurements.
thermal management, and structural integrity. Appli—
cations for materials include primary structures and
4.4. VASIMR
Ir?“V‘VA'AA'xMMAN M VASIMR is a high—power plasma rocket that is capa—
1‘W ble of continuous exhaust modulation at constant power
“W, hw, ”WM: [20]. This electrode—less heated thruster operates over a
“mum“...mw-...._..-................_........................ Wide range of thrust and speciﬁc impulse combinations
Fig. 4. Carbon nanotube. to obtain maximum propulsive ﬂight efﬁciency [20].

"
"7","330 K. Krishen /Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 324—333
Plasma RF Booster Magnetic
Source Ion Nozzle
Ionization Acceleration
Superconducting -
Propellant 7’ -. 1 - -
Feed - ’
vy‘gu;\ —--1__=;~.1,.¢‘
1;.‘<#—%= = alum
- ' .———- ———-— —- -- s w ‘1
‘ r' r ' -‘ ‘ ' T \
L‘ a I \
I 1
Electrical n n
POW Vellglclity
Fig. 5. VASMIR diagram.
As shown in Fig. 5, the VASIMR system encom—
passes three linked magnetic cells. The “plasma source”
cell involves the main injection of neutral gas (argon or
lighter gases) to be turned into plasma and the ioniza—
tion subsystem. The “RF booster” cell acts as an ampli—
ﬁer to further accelerate the. plasma ions to the des1red |_
energy us1ng electromagnetic waves and 1011 cyclotron
resonance. The “magnetic nozzle” cell converts the en— Fig. 6. Spectroscopy technique [24].
ergy of plasma into directed motion and ultimately use—
hll thrust [21]- The continuous optimal tuning 0f thhlSt eration include high speed, high precision, operation at
and speciﬁc impulse produces a linear rocket equation room temperatures, and access to wavelengths suitable
[22]. This feature can result in constant acceleration and for remote sensing modality with high sensitivity.
a substantial saving of time for an exploration mission The technique uses the Beer—Lambert Law Of linear
to Mars. VASIMR systems Will also enable efﬁcient absorption (Fig. 6). The absorption at a wavelength is a
boosting 0f the satellites in Earth, moon, and Mars 01— funetion 0f the product of molecular line intensity and
hitS- the normalized spectral line shape function. Long opti—
The generation 0f strong magnetic ﬁelds in space for cal absorption path lengths are needed for high sensi—
VASIMR can be enabled by the use Of high—temperature tiVity. These path lengths can be achieved using cavity
superconductors. Tai—Yang Research Corp, through the enhanced multipass absorption cell or open—path mon—
NASA JSC Small Business Innovation Research Pro— itoring with retro—reﬂectors, or With evanescent ﬁeld
gram, has developed 24—cm HTS coils for installation monitoring with ﬁbers and waveguides. High—resolution
into the ground—based VASIMR experiment. In addi— spectroscopy with line widths of less than 30 MHZ has
tion, the contract provided two additional 16—Cm coils been realized with this technique [24].
to support thermal tests. Thermal tests 011 these coils Atmospheric trace gases such as carbon monoxide,
have been successful. nitric oxide, nitrous oxide, formaldehyde, methane,
and sulfur oxide can be measured With concentrations
4.5. Solid-state laser—based chemical sensors of 100—9000 parts per billion [23,25,26]. The exter—
nal cavity Widely tunable thermoelectrically cooled
Laser absorption spectroscopy is showing great design developed by Wysocki et a1. [26] employs
promise for space applications as a result of the de— a cavity mode tracking system. This system is ca—
velopment of innovative solid—state laser and sensing pable of mode hop—free spectroscopic operation for
technologies [23]. The advantages of mid—infrared high—resolution multiple species of trace—gas detection
spectroscopy based on laser difference frequency gen— applications.

"
"8","K. Krishen / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008 ) 324 —333 331
This technology offers potential beneﬁts in terms of the pulse transmission or by signal polarity. Time cod—
reduced cost, reduced power consumption, reduced size, ing of the pulses allows Channelization while the time
and increased reliability With improved tuning range. dithering and signal polarity provide the modulation
' ' ' ' ' [28]. A high—duty—cycle phase—coded sequence of short
4.6. Ullra-wzde band commumcalzon and navzgalzon pulses is transmitted at gigahertz rates in DSC—UWB
. . . s stems. A se do—noise se ence to ides modu—
Ultra—Wlde band (UWB) communlcatlons and naV— y. p u . qu p V .
. . . . . latlon, spectrum spreadlng, and Channehzatlon [29].
1gat10n systems are reahzed by transmlttlng and re— . . .
. . . . Multlple pulses are coded to represent a s1ngle b1t 0f
ce1V1ng ultra—short electromagnetlc pulses. As shown 1n in formation
Fig. 7, a UWB system has a bandwidth greater than 0.20 ' . .
. In communlcatlon systems, the advantages of UWB
0f the center frequency or occuples 500MHz or more . . .
systems Include robustness to multlpath fadlng, low
of the spectrum [27]. For narrow band (NB) systems, . . .
. . . transmltted power and power dens1ty, 10W probabll—
the bandw1dth 1s typlcally 1% 0f the center frequency. . . . . . .
. . . 1ty 0f 1ntercept10n, multlchannel operatlon, and hlgh—
Short—pulse—Wldth s1gna1s have very large s1gna1 .
. . . spectrum efﬁc1ency. The TM—U WB systems can operate
bandw1dth. For example, as shown 1n Flg. 8, a pulse of . . . .
. . . 1n a radar mode for detectlon, ranglng, and motlon
appr0X1mately 0.5 ns pr0V1des a bandw1dth of 1—2 GHZ . . . .
. . sens1ng of robots or personnel. Th1s apphcatlon would
[27]. The short pulses can be transmltted as a s1ngle . . .
. . . . pr0V1de 1mp0rtant0perat10nal data on the lunar surface.
pulse or 1n groups. The Informatlon can be encoded 1n . . . .
. . . . The technlque can also be used for prec1s10n mapplng
pulse p0s1t10n, amphtude, and phase. The technlques . . . .

. 0f terraln and C0111s10n aV01dance. Another suggested
that have been explored most are the tlme—modulated a lication includes radio fre uenc identiﬁcation a1
UWB (TM—UWB) and the direct sequence phase coded p p . . . q y .

10W1ng the prec1se locatlon and tracklng of assets on
UWB (DSC_UWB)' the Lunar Out 0st [29 30]
Short pulses are transmitted at high rates in the p ’ '
TM—UWB system. These pulses are spaced in time at .
. . 5. C0nclus10ns
random or pseudO—random tlme 1ntervals [28]. Data
modulation is im lemented b ditherin the timin 0f . . .
p y g g The compleXIty of future long—duratlon human m1s—
sions t0 the moon and Mars and the critical need for
_ NB: (FH -Ft) < 0.01’fc safety, reliability, and cost—effectiveness dictate the use
gg «— of innovative technologies and techniques. As discussed
Q; o o o _
9% was UWB: (FH-FLPO-Zo'fc 1n th1s paper, the lunar and Mars enV1r0nments pro
§§ ' Vlde very hard Challenges for systems and humans to
a be functional and productive. In View of this, Vigorous
f f f” efforts to incorporate new technologies in future space
L . .
quufncymz, m1ss10ns must be undertaken.
Much of the research and development in the US is
Fig- 7- UWB VS- NB SystemS- being conducted at academic institutions and research
'11— 1/2 ns —p '
0 r ‘w
. f 1 [l-Ills
"":5 E —20
:2 L B ' fa .‘é’
% 1 q; —30 E O:
0 cu
-40 3: L:
_50 —_—_—
0 l 0.2 0.4 0.6 I 0.8 0 1 2 3 4 5
Time (ns) Frequency (GHz)
Fig. 8. Pulse in time and frequency domain.

"
"9","332 K. Krishen /Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 324—333

laboratories, and in the private sector for their own [6] A. Hawkey, Physiological and biomechanical considerations
goals and ObjCCtiVCS. The ensuing developments may fOf a human Mars mission, Journal Of BfitiSh Interplanetant
or may not be adoptable to space missions for seV— 8°“th 58 (3‘4) (2005) 1.17—130'

. [7] MR. Deschenes, M.H. Wllson, WJ. Kraemer, Neuromuscular
eral reasons' Some Of these COUld be the conStramtS adaptations to spaceﬂight are speciﬁc to postural muscles,
of mass, size, power consumption, and reliability for Muscle Nerve 31 (4) (2005) 468—474.
space systems. In some instances, the space environ— [8] G. Holton, H. Chang, E. Jurkowitz, How a discovery is made:
ment could make their use cost—prohibitive. However, a case. hiStory’ AmeriFan SCienﬁSt 84 (1996) 394—375; _
some of these technologies could be modiﬁed to make [9] .K KnShen’ A' .Ignage.“ Future.superconducuwty apphcanons

. . . . . 1n space—a reV1eW, 1n. Proceedlngs 0f the World Congress on
thelr use a pﬂonty In space SyStemS' In thlS paper, Superconductivity, Houston, TX, February 1988, pp. 141—154.
the promise and feasibility of using high—temperature [10] P. Ngo, K. Krishen, D. Arndt, G. Raffoul, V. Karasack, K.
superconductivity technology, ionic polymer_metal Bhasian, R. Leonard, A high temperature superconductivity
composites, carbon nanotechnology, VASMIR, and communlcatlons ﬂlght expernnent, 1n: Proceedlngs 0f .the

1. d—S ta te laser—based Chemical sensors and UWB 43rd .Congress of the Internatlonal Astronautlcal Federatlon,
SO 1 . . . . . . ’ Washlngton, DC, August 28—September 5, 1992.
commumcatmn and naV1gat10n ls dlscussed- Other [11] Z. Xia, et. 211., Superconducting magnetic bearing and its
technologies showing considerable promise are wavelet application in ﬂywheel kinetic energy storage, in: Proceedings
technologY, fuzzy logiC, and neural networkS. Promis- Of the 10th Anniversary WOkahOp 0n PhYS1CS, Materials and
ing research and technology development is ongoing Apphcanons’ HOUSton’ TX’, 1996' ,
, [12] n. Tralshawala, Q.y. Y1ng, J.H. Mlller 11., Z. Zou,
1n these technology areas. For example, wavelet—based J.H. Xu, D.R. Jackson, High—TC superconducting image
data compreSSion and prOCCSSing is ShOWing I‘CVOIU— surface magnetometers, IEEE Transactions on Applied
tionary promise for Video and certain types of signals. Superconductivity 5 (1995) 2354—2357.
New methods and hardware using compression sensing [13] M. Shahinpoor, K]. Kim, The effect of surface—electrode
- - - - - - resistance on the performance of ionic—polymer—metal
w1th dlgltal lmage and V1de0 cameras can substantlally . . . .
, , , , c0mp031tes (IPMC) art1ﬁc1al muscles, Smart Matenal and
reduce samphng rates Wlth very httle effeCt 0n lmage Structures. International Journal 9 (4) (2000) 543—55 1.
quality [31]. In another application, three—dimensional [14] M. Shahinpoor, K]. Kim, A novel physically—loaded and
wavelet image processing has shown improvements in interlocked electrode developed for ionic polymer—metal
the resolution of volume data With most effective image COHlPOSlteS (IPMCS)’ Sensors and ACtuator’ A: Physmal 96
compression [32]. (2/3) (2.002) 125—132' .
[15] K]. K1n1, S. Tadokora (Eds), Electroactlve Polymers for
Robotic Applications, Artiﬁcial Muscles and Sensors, Springer,
Acknowledgments Berlin, 2007.
[16] K]. Kim, M. Shahinpoor, Development of three dimensional
The author Wishes tO acknowledge discussions With ionic polymer—metal composites as artiﬁcial muscles, Polymer
- - - - 43 3) 2002) 797—802.
and the presentatlon mateﬂal prov1ded by Dr’ M11100 [17] K.J.( Ki(n1, M. Shahinpoor, Application of polyelectrolytes in
Dastoor 0f the IPPO Headquarters, Dr- Jared Sqmre 0f ionic polymeric sensors and artiﬁcial muscles, in: S. Tripathy,
Ad Astra, and Dr. Frank Tittel Of Rice University. He J. Kumar, H.S. Nalwa (Eds), Handbook of Polyelectrolytes
also thanks MS. Michele Brekke 0f JSC for her support and their Applications, vol. 3, American Scientiﬁc Publishers
and encouragement. (ASP), 2002, pp. 1—22, (chapter 1).
[18] B.1. Yakobson, R.E. Smalley, Fullerene nanotubes: C1000,000
and beyond, American Scientist 85 (1997) 324—337.
References [19] R.K. Allada, et 211., Nanoscale materials for human spaceﬂight
applications: regenerable carbon dioxide removal using single—

[1] A journey to inspire, innovate, and discover, Report of the walled carbon nanotubes, in: Proceedings of 36th International
President’s Commission on Implementation of United States Conference on EnvironmentalSystems,N01f01k,VA,USA,July
Space Exploration Policy, Washington, DC, June 2004. 17—20, 2006.

[2] Report of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the US [20] ER. Chang Diaz, T.F. Yang, Design Characteristics
Space Program, US Government Printing Ofﬁce, Washington, of the variable isp plasma rocket, in: Proceedings
DC, December 1990. of AIDAA/AIAA/DGLR/JSASS 22nd International Electric

[3] S. Rickman, Lunar Architecture Focused Trade Study Propulsion Conference,Viareggio,1taly, October 1991.

Final Report, NASA/JSC, ESMD—RQ—005, October 22 2004, [21] VASMIR description, Private Communication from Dr. J.

pp. 562—563. Squire, AD ASTRA, Rocket Company, USA, June 24, 2007.

[4] NASA’S exploration systems architecture study, Final Report, [22] ER. Chang Diaz, Research status of the variable speciﬁc
NASA—TM—2005—214060, NASA Washington, DC, November impulse magnetoplasma rocket, Transactions of Fusion
2005. Technology 35 (1999) 87—93.

[5] D. LeBlanc, E.R. Spector, H.J. Evans, J.D. Sibonga, Skeletal [23] T. Topfer, et 211., Room—temperature mid—infrared laser sensor
responses to space ﬂight and the bed rest analog: a review, for trace gas detection, Applied Optics 36 (30) (1997) 1—8.
Journal of Musculoskeletal Neuronal Interactions 7 (1) (2007) [24] F.K. Tittel, Laser based chemical sensor technology, Private
33—47. Communication, Rice University, July 2007.

"
"10","K. Krishen / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008 ) 324 —333 333

[25] MR. McCurdy, Y. Bakhirkin, G. Wysocki, F.K. Tittel, [29] K. Siwi21k, Ultra—wide band radio: introducing 21 new

Performance of an exhaled nitric oxide and carbon dioxide technology, Proceedings of IEEE VTC—2001, Rhodes, Greece,

sensor using quantum cascade laser—based integrated cavity May 2001, pp. 1088—1093.

output spectroscopy, Journal of Biomedical Optics 12 (3) (2007) [30] J. Ni, et. 211., UWB tracking system design for free—ﬂyers, in:

034034—3—034034—9. AIAA Space 2004 Conference and Exposition, Paper 090304,
[26] G. Wysocki, et 211., Widely tunable mode—hop free external September 28—30, 2004.

cavity quantum cascade laser for high resolution spectroscopic [31] D. Takhar, et. 211., A compressed signal camera: new theory and

applications, Applied Physics B 81 (2005) 769—777. an implementation using digital micromirrors, in: Proceedings
[27] D. Arndt, et 211., UWB technology and applications on of Computational Imaging IV at SPIE Electronic Imaging, S21n

space exploration presentation, NASA Johnson Space, Private Jose, January 2006.

Communication, May 2006. [32] K]. Jones, 3D wavelet image processing for spectral resolution
[28] K. Siwi21k, P. Withington, S. Phel21n, Ultra—wide band radio the 0f landsat images, in: H.H. Szu (Ed.), Proceedings of SPIE,

emergence of an important new technology, in: Proceedings of V01. 3391, Wavelet Application, V, March 1998, pp. 218—225.

IEEE VTC—2001, Rhodes, Greece, May 2001, pp. 1169—1172.

"
