"","x"
"1","O O O O O
Exploratlon Space Sult Archltecture and Destlnatlon
O
EnVIronmental-Based Technology Development
Terry R. Hill
NASA — Lyndon B. J 0hns0n Space Center
2101 NASA Parkway
Houston, Texas 77058
281-483-8135
terry.hi11—1@nasa.g0v
Abstract—This paper continues forward where EVA Space particular program, and provide architecture and design
Suit Architecture: Low Earth Orbit Vs. Moon Vs. Mars [1] solutions for space suit systems in time or ahead of need
left off in the development of a space suit architecture that is dates for any particular erewed ﬂight program in the future.
modular in design and could be reconﬁgured prior to launch The approach to space suit design and interface deﬁnition
or during any given mission depending on the tasks or discussion wi11sh0w how the architecture is very adaptable
destination. This paper will address the space suit system to programmatic and funding changes with minimal re-
arehiteeture and technologies required based upon human design effort such that the modular architecture can be
exploration extravehieular activity (EVA) destinations, and quickly and efﬁciently honed into a speciﬁc mission point
describe how they should evolve to meet the future solution if required. Additionally, the modular system will
exploration EVA needs of the US human space ﬂight allow for speciﬁc technology incorporation and upgrade as
program.1’2’ 3 required with minimal redesign of the system.
In looking forward to future US space exploration to a space TABLE OF CONTENTS
suit architecture with maximum reuse of technology and
. . . . 1. INTRODUCTION................................................................1
functionality across a range of m1ss10n proﬁles and
. . . . 2. OVERVIEW OF THE CxP SPACE SUIT ARCHITECTURE .. 2
destinations, a series of exereises and analyses have
. . . . . 3. METHODOLOGY OF DESTINATION ENVIRONMENT
pr0V1ded a strong indication that the Constellation Program
. . . . . DESIGN GROUPINGS 4
(CXP) space su1t architecture is postured t0 pr0V1de a Viable
. . . . 2 . . 4. MAPPING DESTINATION ENVIRONMENTS TO MUTUALLY
solution for future exploration m1ss1ons . The destination
. . . . INCLUSIVE DESIGN DRIVERS 7
enV1r0nInenta1 ana1ys1s presented in this paper demonstrates
- - 5. IMPLICATIONS TO TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
that the modular architecture approach could pr0V1de the
. . . STRATEGIES 12
lowest mass and m1ss10n cost for the protection of the crew
. . . . . 6. CONCLUSION 12
glven any human m1ss10n 0uts1de 0f 10w-Earth orbit (LEO).
. . . REFERENCES 13
Add1t10na11y, some of the high-level trades presented here
. . . BIOGRAPHY 14
pr0V1de a reV1ew 0f the enV1r0nInenta1 and non-
environmental design drivers that will become increasingly
important the farther away from Earth humans venture. 1' INTRODUCTION
. . . . . Destinationsfor Human Exploration
This paper demonstrates a logical clustering of destination . .
design environments that allows a focused approach to Tntlotoking forward to the fnture 0f human space exploration,
technology prioritization, development, and design that will it is important to ﬁrst eons1der the p0ss1b1e destinations that
maximize the return on investment, independent of any humans can realistically travel to, survive in, and possibly
live in for extended periods of time with reasonable
resources and budget. For example, it can be assumed with
:U.S. Government work not protected by US. copyright some level Of conﬁdence that there Will be no crewed
3IEEEACpaper#1330,Yers10n2,submittedJanuary10,2011' _ _ missions to Mercury due t0 the required infrastructure,
Th1s paper was peer reV1ewed for technlcal content by: Lindsay Aitchison . . . .
(P . . . logistics train and rocket des1gn that would be needed to
ressure Garment Englneer), Kimberley Baird (Dep. Branch Manager), . . . .
Cinda Chullen (EVA Technology Development), B. Michael Lawson (CXP 011mb mm and OUt Of the mher graV1ty well Of the sun-
Suit Element Life Support Subsystem Manager), Joseph J . Kosmo (Space However, it is reasonable to consider Visitation 0f the Earth-
Suit Advanced Development Lead Engineer), Amy Ross (Pressure sun libration points. In following this line Of thought, and
Garment Development Lead), William Spenny (ISS EMU Engineering . t k 1 d f th h . 1 . t f
Subsystem Manager), Robert Trevino (Space Suit Life Support Technology usmg cnrren. now 6 g6 0 e p ySICa. enVironmen S 0
Development) and Sandra Wagner (EVA Systems Lunar & Mars dust deStmatlonS 1n the SOlar SyStem from Wthh one can return
mitigation) - NASA/JSC Crew & Thermal Systems Division, Space Suit in a decade or less, one can very quickly identify the
3nd Crew suerVal SYStem Braneh- _ _ destination design drivers required for exploration-Class
One of the remaining challenges of the CXP su1t archltecture was . t
incorporation of the launch, entry and abort functionality into the system space sul 5'
without signiﬁcantly compromising the survival or EVA functional
performance. While this aspect of the architecture is still under debate, the Historically9 technology development for human space
modularity and cominonahty 0f the archltecture for EVA m1ss1ons 1s st111 exploration primarily did not happen until the mission was
vahd and worth cons1derat10n.
1

"
"2","deﬁned and funded or was done at the component level in common hardware across multiple mission phases (to
efforts to improve existing systems. Low technology reduce developmental and logistics costs). And also features
readiness level technology development for pursuing an open architecture that can be reconﬁgured and can
advanced concepts has been also very limited. While the leverage off components used during other mission phases
logic in this is understood, given that humans only started where possible. [1]
venturing beyond the relatively benign environment of Earth
in the last 50 years and had little idea of what might be The following were the key design ﬁgures of merit that
encountered at each destination, today the approach should were used in evaluating all of the following different
be questioned, given that humans have either physically architectures, some of which later became architecture
stepped on, landed robotic probes, placed orbital vehicles design drivers: operational performance; work efﬁciency;
around, or had close ﬂy-bys of every single signiﬁcant body launch, entry, and abort overhead; suit attributed mass and
in the solar system — with the exception of Pluto. Now with volume; ﬁeld rnaintenance; commonality (design and
the volumes of data growing at a near-geornetric rate, the hardware); extensibility; technical risk/feasibility; life cycle
knowledge of the environments in which humans can costs; and development schedule risk. The following were
venture is understood to the point where common design the suit performance criteria that deﬁned the high-level
drivers and required design elements can be identiﬁed with functional requirements for the suit architecture: intra-
reasonable conﬁdence. Given this knowledge of the vehicular rnobility; microgravity rnobility; microgravity
environments and lessons learned from human space ﬂight environmental protection (thermal, radiation, micro-
operations to date, an internal assessment (performed within meteoroid protection); comfort (un-/pressurized); ease of
the Space Suit and Crew Survival Systems Branch at the donning and dofﬁng; crew ability to escape the vehicles
J ohnson Space Center) of the progress that has been made in while wearing the suit; suit sizing methodology; ability of
human exploration space suit technology with respect to the the suit to have sizing adjustments; high operational reliabil-
“design space” is proposed in this paper. ity; high evolvability and adaptability; extraterrestrial
surface mobility; and extraterrestrial surface environmental
In the following pages, a reView will be performed of the protection
exploration space suit architecture developed in NASA’s
Constellation Program (CXP) and how it can be used for After ﬁve years and multiple design iterations, the CSSE
future human missions. Additionally, a methodical approach suit architecture consisted of the following modular, or
to common and probable destination environments will be swap-able (from one conﬁguration to another), hardware
addressed and how this should affect the prioritization of elements: helmet bubble and communications cap, gloves
space suit technology development in the future. optimized for pressurized usage, boots optimized for lg
vehicle escape, lower arms and legs with mobility joints and
2. OVERVIEW ()1: THE CXP SPACE SUIT umbilical connectors; and restraint mechanisms that are
ARCHITECTURE common in design. The ﬁre protection outer cover layer and
EVA thermal multilayer insulation (MLI)/therrnal micro-
The space suit architecture developed by NASA’s rneteoroid protection garment (TMG)4 were unique enough
Constellation Space Suit Element (CSSE) only addressed to very discrete mission phases that it was felt they would
crew survival, low earth orbital operations and lunar surface not be included functionally in the modular hardware so as
EVAS, but at the very core had many, if not all, of the key to reduce the overhead of carrying around hardware for
design-driVing elements that will be required for human infrequent use or as bad-day risk mitigation. The outer layer
exploration in the solar system. The CSSE tearn3 addressed of the TMG is not only ﬁre resistant, but it provides low
this challenge by fully embracing “clean-sheet” or emissivity for reﬂecting solar radiation — thus the white
“textbook” systems engineering methodology by ﬁrst coloration — and also provides cut, puncture, and abrasion
deﬁning the operational concepts, which focused on the resistance. The outer layer of the MLI/TMG may require a
development Of an architecture with all CxP design different coloration on Mars to meet the emissivity require-
reference missions (DRMs), and keeping an eye on life- ments for that environment.
cycle program costs. A comprehensive reView of the
functional designs, strengths, and limitations of previous US With the maturity of human exploration into space is still in
space suits, in addition to what is known of Russian space its infancy and with limited resources to apply to develop-
suits, took place to deduce historical lessons learned based rnent, a ﬂexible system that will minimize the cost by
1101 only 011 what did 1101 work but, more importantly, 011 decreasing the development cost per mission is desirable.
what worked right. The current strategy to accomplish the However, with a system that operates in varying enViron-
rather daunting task 0f meeting all space SUit design TCQUiTC' rnents there is the risk that performance in speciﬁc environ-
ments in the extreme environments previously detailed with rnents will be compromised. As experience in speciﬁc
a single system hinges on an arrangement that not only uses
4 Consists of Ortho 116 fabric, 5 layers of aluminized Mylar, and one layer
3 This team was comprised of NASA ciVil servants and support contractor of neoprene-coated nylon. While the neoprene and nylon will burn in air at
workforce with the responsibility of deﬁning CXP space suit architecture ambient pressure, the NASA White Sands Test Facility rating of A for the
and associated functional requirements and to later become the NASA outer layer of Ortho 116 means that the material has a burn length less than
oversight and subsystem managers. 6 inch for ambient pressure to 10.2 psi with oxygen concentrations of 30%.
2

"
"3","environments grows or human habitation is more perma- duration habitation, and to progress eventually to Mars
nent, then specialized suits and hardware Wi11be warranted. exploration. [3]
Additionally, the portable life support system will be used The common themes on how the CSSE suit architecture
only on the lunar surface as life support functions are would be used for the CXP resonate With the possible design
provided by the vehicle When the crew is inside or While reference missions being discussed today for future human
performing microgravity EVAs. And, the core torso exploration. At the most fundamental level, every human
segment, Which is optimized for eight hour surface EVAs, is launch Will need to provide protection for the crew against a
swapped out With the a11—soft segment used for launch and bad day on the launch pad as well as a launch abort scenario
landing. Prior to the CXP space suit design effort, a very and protection While reentering the atmosphere on mission
similar design philosophy was recommended by J oseph completion. Each mission Will either require a planned
Kosmo, NASA, in 1990. [2] microgravity EVA or the capability to perform contingency
EVAs in the event the vehicle leaks or other hardware
How This Works Wellfor the Different Destinationsfor malfunctions require mitigation — particularly during
Human Exploration. missions With long transit durations. And, as With the
The fundamental plan was for the CXP to evolve from Constellation suit, it is highly des1rab1e for these. future
. . . . . m1ss1ons to be able to reconﬁgure a suit to meet the different
micrograV1ty to lunar exploration With sortie and long-
Table 1. Destination Environment Design Values Used to Develop Design Driver Groupings for Space Suits.
—
Destination LEO/GEO Lagrange In-transit NEO/NEAS Earth’s Moon Moons of Mars, Mars
EVA/ [4][5][6][7] Points [8] (Deep [9][10][11] Jupiter, and Surface
Parameter Space) Saturn With No [14][15]
Mission Atmosphere
[12][13]
Mission 1-2 weeks 3-6 months 6 months to 6 months to Sortie: 1-2 Martian moons: 6 months to
Duration Transit + 3.5 years 3 years weeks 3 to 5 years 1.5 years +
Mission Outpost: J ovian/ Saturnian transit time
Dwell time 6 months to 1 moons: 5 to 10
year years
Gravity Field Hg “g “g Effectively 1.63 Phobos — 3.71
(m/sz) ttg Effectively ttg
Demos —
Effectively ug
Europa —
1.3 14
Ganymede — 1.43
Radiation LEO Solar and Solar and Solar and Solar and Solar, Cosmic & Atmospheric
(Solar Wind, (shielded) CosmimL Cosmic Cosmic Cosmic Trapped Shielded
Trapped) (trapped)
Thermal -78 to 125 Shadows at Europa — Min. -87
Environment poles to center Min. -223 Mean -63
Touch of crater at Mean -171 Max. 20
Temperatures equator at lunar Max. -148
(°C) noon Ganymede— Min.
(—244 to 120) -279
Max. -189
Environment Abrasion Abrasion
Atmospheric High High Vacuum High High High Vacuum High Vacuum 0.61 (4.57)
Pressure Vacuum <1 Pa Vacuum Vacuum <1 Pa <1 Pa kPa
<1 Pa <1 Pa <1 Pa
—
T Includes the primary radiation from the source and secondary radiation as a result of the interaction of the source radiation and local
materials of the space craft and/or space suit.
3; Moons that have ice processes in place (Europa, Enceladus) may provide sufﬁcient mechanism to provide dust that would fall into the
Low Abrasion category.
3

"
"4","needs of the crew (to save mass and volume) and not carry of experience in performing human EVA operations has
multiple suits per crew member. taken place in the last 50 years. The environment is thus
well understood. The local gravitational acceleration, while
Additionally, multi-program life cycle costs and return on in the gravity well Of Earth, places an Object in a state of
investment in technology development can be realized in orbital free fall and, therefore, will be quantiﬁed on the
this approach by designing to the architecture interfaces and order of miero-g’s. Additionally, the atmospheric drag at the
only performing multiple designs for the hardware speeiﬁe- altitude most Shuttle missions and 188 Operations take place
ally required for the unique environments. will be considered negligible with regard to space suit
design. The radiation environment, which is greater than the
3. METHODOLOGY OF DESTINATION environment high-altitudepilots are exposed to due to lack
ENVIRONMENT DESIGN GROUPINGS Of an atmosphere, st111 res1des w1th1n the Earth’s Van Allen
belts. The exception is for a region above the Earth known
Determination 0fthe Design Drivers as the South Atlantic Anomaly5 where potential EVAs
. . . . . . f h'l h ' h h h' ' 1' '
The f011nulat10n 1n a new way of prioritizing technology per ormed W 1et e pass1ngt roug t 1s region are 11n1ted
. . to 3-5 passes for any particular crew member before they
development efforts for space su1ts began With the . . . . .
President’s new Vision for N AS A in February 2010 It are rescheduled, however, the actua1111n1tat10n 1s deﬁned by
. , ' the personal accumulated radiation dosage which is tracked
seemed that the proposed emphas1s of NASA s resources . . .
. . . for the m1ss10n and for life of the crew member. The current
would be less focused on eont1nu1ng w1th the CXP and . . .
. . . . . ﬂ1ght rules [16] for EVA radiation exposure state
bu1ld1ng ﬂ1ght hardware but more 1n geing back to the s eeiﬁeall .
drawing board and developing the technology that would be p y.
' d t k l -d t' l t' . .
requ1re 0 ma e ong ura10n space exp 01a10n more A. For predicted exposure less than the action level
successful when we as a nation were ready to step out into . .
space for good. (non-restrietive)
For this study, a different approach was taken with an 1' dCCinSIiier drelayinlg rthienEVA; up $022“) dailgihgr
inventory of possible destinations in the solar system that eillyr f O aﬁee e a 5: eg :15 eiiisli hinS
humans could reasonably explore given the likely W. . e ucge te exposuet Wt ettaeeo p15 g
technology developments in the next 30 years regarding m1ss1(:1n OIJCC 1:168 001351? :11 W1 norma crew
launch vehicle, engine, Closed-loop life support systems, groun ru es an eons rain 8' . .

. . . . 2. An EVA 1n progress w111 continue. C0ns1der
and subsequent durations of m1ss10ns and space suit 11 t d din n h d 1 d it In t i tin
technology. When the destination list was complete, the .0 a . g .u SC e ue e. S 0 6X S g

. . . t11nel1ne 1f th1s results 1n add1t10nal EVA crew
subsequent enVironInents and Characteristics were assessed 1
and grouped for commonality. exposu e.
B. Predicted crew exposure greater than the action
Destination Design Environments level at the end of the EVA (restricted)
The en ironInents 0f the destination locations ill be brieﬂ . . .
. V . . . W . y 1. Delay EVA up to 14 days if st111 p0ss1b1e t0
discussed 1n the sections to follow, however, they w1ll not 1. h . . b' t' d 1
be discussed in great detail as the individual environments accolm p t1s m1ss10121 0 J60 IVCS’ or e ay or
have been documented in the source materials referenced. It aeee era e e gress _ ICVS' . .
. . . . . 2. An EVA 1n progress w111 continue. C0ns1der
1s worth mentioning that for th1s exereise, and to a large d't' t k t . d f .
extent in space suit design, the exact numbers for environ- CXPC. 1 mi. 3: S n0 requ1re or prnnary
mental design drivers are not critical discriminators in the m1ss10n 0 J60 IVCS'
ﬁrst—order design of the system. For example, whether the C, Predicted crew exposure greater than the high dose
local vacuum of space is 1><10'5 torr or 1><10'13 torr, for a rate limit (high dose rate limits)
suit pressurized t0 4 lbs/in2, is of marginal consequence. The
same can be said for designing a suit to tolerate a touch 1. A planned EVA shall be rescheduled as
temperature of -125 or -148°C (-193 or -234.4°F) in which required to reduce the exposure to below the
the design Challenge is largely the same and may only high dose rate limit.
impact ﬁnal material selection or seeond-order suit heater 2. An EVA in progress shall be eXpedited by
impacts to the power budget. The speciﬁc environmental deleting tasks not required for primary mission
values that are used for this study are summarized in Table objectives.
1, and the major suit design drivers for suit development
will be summarized in each section.
Low-Earth Orbit (LEO) OperatiOVZS (ISS, LEO satelliteS) 5 The South Atlantic Anomaly is a result of the Earth's magnetic ﬁeld and is
, , , , , not completely symmetric and aligned with the Earth’s surface and thus
Th LEO h h h
e. . . micrograwty CQVIIOPmenta W 10 IS t e mOSt allows a portion of the solar (particle) ﬂux to extend down through LEO
familiar 1n human exploration, IS where the largest amount and affects communication with satellites, the Hubble space telescope,
high-altitude aircraft and the Space Shuttle.
4

"
"5","D. Predicted crew exposure greater than the joint Lagrangian Points: Sun-Earth-Moon
exposure limits Interest in human missions to the Lagrangian7, or libration,
oints in the sun-Earth and Earth-moon s stems has
1. A planned EVA shall be rescheduled as p . . .y
. , . . increased 1n recent years. In a two-body graV1tational system
required to reduce the crewmember s m1ss1on . . . . .
. . . . 1n Circular orbit about one another (as 1s the case With the
exposure to below the JOlnt exposure limit. .
2 A EV A . h 11 b t . t d sun-Earth and Earth—moon systems), there are ﬁve regions
' n 1n progress S a e erm1na e ' in which the gravitational balance between the two bodies
The solar wind is still a non-triVial inﬂuence in this environ- are in equilibrium and lend themselves well for placement
ment and, with most of the EVAs performed to date — and of satellites, observatories, or rendezvous depots for space
likely in the future — being around human-made structures, missions with minimal fuel consumables for positional
the effects of the interaction between the solar wind and station-keeping.
large metallic structures (or solar panel elements), plasma
generation, and conductance has been an increasing safety The duration of such missions is likely to exceed 3 months —
concern in the community. with the potential for more than one year depending on the
libration point; therefore, the time element of the design
Therefore, the design drivers for this environment will be: would be considered a driver. The environmental design
pressurized suit mobility in microgravity, life support drivers for this region are encompassed by the GEO
consumables in a vacuum, thermal exposure and manage- environment.
ment in a vacuum around human-Inade structures, and
plasma Charging ﬁelds. In-transit Contingency (Deep Space) Microgravily E VAS
This classiﬁcation, while more mission s eeiﬁe, does deﬁne
Geosynchronous Earth Orbit (GEO) Operations (within and - . . . p . .
, a des1gn enV1ron1nent. Th1s enV1ron1nental scenar1o 1s a
outszde the Van Allen Belts) . . . . . .
eatehall for the instances during a m1ss1on 1n wh1eh crew
Probable future human activity in this region will consist of members are required to go outside the vehicle to either
retrieving, repairing, refueling, or deploying geosynehron- investigate, repair, or replace hardware associated with their
ous satellites (35,786 km [22,236 mi] above the Earth’s vehicle. NASA’s experience during the last 50 years of
surface) or multi-day experimental missions. This environ- operations is that Murphy8 is never far away and having the
ment is very similar to that of the LEO missions but with the capability to perform unscheduled, or contingency, EVA is
signiﬁcant difference of being within or outside the Earth’s a critical capability for all missions. This environment is
Van Allen belts for some or most of the time6, largely encompassed by the GEO environment in terms of
Consequently, the effects of the solar wind, and to a lesser vacuum, radiation, and plasma Charging. However, the
extent cosmic radiation, are elevated due to direct exposure thermal environment will probably differ due to varying
from the sun or the concentration of geomagnetieally trap- distances from the sun. Additionally, due to the fact that the
ped radiation (electron and proton) in Earth’s magnetic probable mission duration (time away from Earth) will be
ﬁelds. The inner Van Allen belt extends from an altitude of anywhere from three months to ten years, it is imperative
1000 to 10,000 km (621.4 to 6,213.7 mi) above the Earth’s that this time away be factored into the suit design,
surface (the South Atlantic Anomaly is a result of the inner fabrication, and reliability engineering.
proton belts dipping down as low as 220 km), and the large
outer radiation belt extends from an altitude of about 19,113 Low-mass Near—Earth Object (NEO)/Near—Earth Asteroid
to 44,597 km (11,876.3 to 27,711.3 mi) above the Earth’s (NEA) (halfmass 0fthe moon) EVAS
surface. [17][18] The suit design environment of low-Inass NEO/NEA EVAs
. . . is an interesting combination of the microgravity environ-
The duration of such m1ss1ons would not be expected to ment of LEO EVAs and that of the thermal and dust
exceed a 1- to 2-week duration; therefore, the time element . . .
. . . . enVironInent of the lunar EVAs (discussed later). Th1s
of the des1gn would not be eons1dered a driver. The enViron- . . . . . . .
. . . . . dest1nation 1s ass001ated w1th m1ss1ons to NEO/NEA that
mental des1gn drivers for this region would be: pressurized
. . . . . . . . are half the mass of the moon or smaller and would have a
su1t mob1l1ty 1n micrograV1ty, life support consumables 1n a . . . . .
. local graV1tational acceleration between micrograV1ty and
vacuum, thermal exposure and management 1n a vacuum 2 - -
. 0.817 m/s , thus rendering normal human ambulation not
around human—made structures, plasma Charging ﬁelds, and . . . . .
. . . poss1ble. The extremely low graV1tational aeoelerat1on w1ll
solar/eosmie/eoncentrated radiation effects. . . .
require the use of attachment mechanisms (to the object
being studied) and mobility aids to transverse the object. In
some ways the lack of meaningful gravity will affect the
6 While the geostationary orbit is above the inner Van Allen belt, it can 7 The concept was ﬁrst conceived by J oseph L. Euler around 1750 when he
reside in or outside of the outer belt due to the compression of the outer belt predicted the collinear points commonly known as L1, L2, and L3. Later,
on the side of the Earth facing the sun and the pressure of the solar wind. Luis Lagrange, in his work with two-body orbital mechanics, further
Therefore, at times the satellite might be on the outer edges or outside the predicted the existence of points L4 and L5; these points were all later
belt, depending on the relative position with respect to the sun and current named after Lagrange in his honor.
solar activity levels. 8 Societal reference for when something or a situation can go wrong, it will.
5

"
"6","EVAs and how the crew performs tasks due to the fact that EVA environment, mission duration is expected to play a
any dust generated/stirred up will likely hover in a Cloud major component of the design driver challenges.
around the work site for indeterminable amounts of time and
could potentially impact work site Visibility, dust coverage Earth is Moon
f the s it and d st miti ation strate ies. If d st is resent . . . . .
O u ’ . u g . . g u .p The recent lunar enV1ronInent deﬁnition for su1t des1gn for
on these bodies, the Characteristics of the dust (phys1eal and .
. . . the CXP encompassed the entire range of lunar extremes as
chemical) are expected to fall Within the range analyzed
. 9 deﬁned by the CXP goal of global access to the lunar surface
both from the moon and from recent stud1es of comets . . . . . .
With a Single su1t system. [1], [3] The dust enVironInent 1s a
Jovian/Satumian Moons known variable given the experience gained and information
gathered as part of the surface EVAs and the dust and rock
This destination environment is one of the more difﬁcult to samples and space suit hardware returned from the Apollo
deﬁne given the widely varying conditions that can be Program.
encountered in and around Jupiter and Saturn. In this paper,
only the moons of both planets were considered as a Viable As part of the “go anywhere, anytime” philosophy of the
destination because they are relatively stable (Io being an CXP, suit engineers now had to consider the design impacts
example of a moon that would not make the ﬁrst cut for ﬁrst of suit(s) designs that would allow crew members to
J ovian mission) and would hold a great deal of either function in the permanently shadowed crater interiors at the
geological or biological interest. With those parameters, the lunar poles with cryogenic touch temperatures as well as the
ﬁeld is narrowed signiﬁcantly to Jupiter’s Europa but is solar furnaee-like environments of craters at the equator
kept generalized to all of the rocky bodies with no during lunar noon.
atmosphere. Europa — and most Jovian moons of interest —
lie within the dense bands of trapped radiation and at some The gravity, while one-sixth that of Earth’s gravity, did
estimates are two to three times what would be experienced provide mobility challenges to the Apollo crews since the
within Earth’s Van Allen Belts. pressurized suit design hindered natural human ambulation.
Advances in space suit mobility elements since that time
It also should be noted that missions to Saturn would have have signiﬁcantly minimized the impact of low gravitational
to be of incredible interest or necessity for the investment of acceleration combined with suit pressurization to the design
the additional mission transit time to reach the planet and of a space suit. Therefore design drivers for this environ-
destinations of interest, such as the moon Eneeladus. Saturn ment, in addition to the mission durations of two weeks to
does have a region of trapped radiation that is present but it one year and associated reliability design Challenges, will be
is not as extreme as what is found around Jupiter. Titan as follows: pressurized suit mobility in reduced-gravity; life
offers reduced gravity acceleration and an atmospheric support consumables in a vacuum; thermal exposure and
pressure of 147 kPa, but satellite data suggest lakes of liquid management in a vacuum at extreme temperatures; high-
methane and with signiﬁcant methane in the atmosphere abrasion, very ﬁne, and statically Charged dust; and
with very little oxygen and indications of atmospheric potential plasma charging ﬁelds.
lightning. The implications are that a human presence would
provide a source of oxygen and facilitate a very dangerous Martian Surface Missions
environment for the crew members. Thus, Titan has been . . . .
remove d from the analysis performe d for this study The martian surface enVironInent, in many aspects, is the
' Inost benign of all those to be considered for human EVAs.
Design drivers for this environment will be nearly identical The presence Of the Inartian atmosphere, albeit much less
, . . prominent than Earth s, does prov1de the mechanisms for
to those of the Earth s Inoon With regard to the abras1ve . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . w1nd eros1on in addition to minimizing thermal extremes,
dust, cryogenic temperatures. Trapped radiation conditions . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . solar w1nd protection, and some cosmic radiation shielding.
(most extreme of EVA destinations), in addition to m1ss1on . . . .
. . . Recent discoveries from NASA martian rovers and orbiters
duration and robustness of des1gn due to relatively unknown . . . . .
. . . . . indicate an ever-1ncreas1ng eV1denee base for the past
surface conditions and required tasks w111 dramatically . . . .
. . . . eX1stenee of liquid ﬂow1ng on the surface. Between the
impact the required des1gn and technologies. . . . . .
ﬂow1ng of liquid on the surface and the atmospheric eros1on
. . . . mechanisms, the martian dust physical Characteristics will
Martzan Moons: PhobOS/Dezmos Mzsszons . . . .
be eons1dered low abras1on albeit more abras1ve than what
The environment of the martian moons is expected to might be found on Earth. However, while knowledge of the
combine lunar dust Characteristics with thermal extremes at Chemical makeup of the martian dust is limited, with the
vacuum that are no greater than those seen on Earth’s moon, spectral information from the orbiting satellites and the spot
with the low gravitational acceleration Challenges seen with analyses from the rovers, the generalized list of Chemical
the NEO/NEA EVA environment. As with the in-transit makeup is growing.
9 _ The current NASA design reference missions [19], [20],
Samples of comet Wlld 2 returned by NASA s Stardust and data returned [21] indicate a probable mission duration Of upwards Of 3.3
from the EPOXI (Extra-solar Planet Observation and Deep Impact Th. . h 11 f . .
Extendedlnvestigation) spacecraft. years. is poses quite a c a enge or space su1t engineers
6

"
"7","to design a suit that is highly operable, does not require low torque and no programming“). While it is largely
frequent maintenance, is very durable for signiﬁcant usage independent of the gravity ﬁeld, it is one of the leading
at Mars, and is highly reliable — not requiring repair or causes of astronaut fatigue during miero-gravity EVAs.
replacement — during the mission. Additionally some
surface data from the Spirit Mars Exploration Rover Reduced—gmvily DestinationS—The reduced-gravity destin-
indieates that the surface temperatures can vary from -23 to ation environment group is comprised of potential EVA
-90 degrees Celsius diurnally from late summer to fall environments in which the local gravity ﬁeld is deﬁned as
respectively. [22] Therefore some consideration may be 1.6 m/s2 < local acceleration > 6.5 m/sz. Of the possible
required for long mission stays that may span seasons at destinations where humans can survive and potentially live
some of the martian latitudes. long term with a return to Earth within ﬁve years, the
following present themselves as Viable destination
Therefore, the design drivers for this environment, in candidates: Earth’s moon and Mars. In a reduced-gravity
addition to the mission durations of as many as 3.3 years environment, as deﬁned previously, the two major design
and associated reliability design Challenges, will be: drivers are the mobility and mass of the space suit.
pressurized suit mobility in reduced gravity; life support Similarly, as discussed with the microgravity environment,
consumables in a rariﬁed atmosphere; thermal exposure and pressurized mobility of the suit and minimizing suit-indueed
management in a rariﬁed atmosphere at cold to moderate fatigue on the astronaut are highly desirable given the
temperatures; and low-abrasion, very ﬁne, and potentially relatively short EVA time available and the voluminous lists
Chemically reactive dust. of desired tasks during EVAs — if crew members are
eXhausted early in the EVA, not all objectives will be met.
4. M APPING DESTIN ATION ENVIRONMENTS TO As has been seen in the past, crew fatigue is primarily a
MUTUALLY INCLUSIVE DESIGN DRIVERS combination of suit pressurization and tasks required of the
crew of which the gravity environment will obviously frame
Destination Mapping Phased Approach what tasks are required of the crew.
The study was approached in three phases to prov1de a Secondly, the mass of the suit is very important in a few
systematic reV1ew of what is needed in space su1t des1gn as a . . . . . .
function of the potential destinations for human EVA. The different ways. The graV1ty environment 1n Wthh the suit
ﬁrst phase of this study, after deﬁning the list of potential W111 be used and the length Of tune the crew member has
human exploration destinations, was to deﬁne a list of space been. out Of the Ealth S lg enV1ronInent should be
suit design drivers per destination. The second phase took eons1dered when deﬁn1ng the mass Of the space su1t. For
the destination-based design drivers for space suit hardware example, If the crew has only been away from Earth for one
and focused on the physical Characteristics of the local week and W111 be operating 3.1 68.kg (150 lbm) su1t .on the
environments, grouping them into common design drivers. “10.0“? th1s 1s a manageable s1tuation (other than the 1nert1al
These subsequent groupings were: microgravity, re duee d res1stanee of the suit) as this suit would appear to weigh on
gravity, thermal extremes at vacuum, solar, and cosmic the moon the equivalent of 11.3 kg (25 lbs). However, if the
radiation; high-abrasion dust; low-abrasion dust; and crew member has been on the moon for one year and h1s/her
thermal management in the presence of an atmosphere. And muscular strength has “3.9.th t0 the moon (6%"" no muscle
lastly, the third phase of deﬁning the design drivers focused res1stanee tra1n1ng t.0 m1t1gate muscle atrophy), the su1t
on unique aspects of missions that would affect the design WOUld appear to weigh 68 kg (1.50 lbs) on the moon and
of space suits; this resulted in: mission length and distance would adve $.61}, affect the fatigue EVCIS Of the crew'
from Earth (hardware reliability, maintainability, and Gianted this is a scenario.that is unlikely under normal
complexity) and long durations of exposure to radiation. m1ss1on operatlons, hut 1t 1s used here to exaggerate the
p01nt. There is grow1ng thought that the EVAs themselves,
. . . . when done regularly, could prevent atrophy due to the
Phase 1' Deﬁmng EVA Deszgn Drzvers loading of the skeletal system from the suit; however, the
Microgravily DestinationS—Mobility in microgravity ISS paradigm would imply the necessity of exercise
becomes an issue as Newton’s third law of motion comes protocol throughout a mission to prevent the known long-
into play: Bodies remain in a state of rest or uniform motion term effects of weightlessness.
(constant velocity) unless they are acted upon by an external
unbalanced force. How this transfers to suit design is in the There is also growing thought in the space suit community
ability to move and translate from 0116 location to another that a different look should be taken at how the mass of the
with minimal resistance from the suit itself, and in smooth suit is Viewed and managed. The thought is that in reduced
motions that will not eXCite unwanted suit dynamic motion gravity environments, such as Earth’s moon and that of the
or cause undesired impact forces to interactions with the smaller moons, natural human ambulation as performed on
local environment that would set the crew member in Earth is not really practical or easy given the presence of
unwanted directions. What is desired is a suit that provides
the required pressure and has mobility joints that provide 10 Some space suitmobility joints are made of sets of circular bearings that
are offset at different angles to obtain the desired range of motion for that
joint. However, this often results in a mobility joints that require proper
alignment of the hearings to obtain certain reach zones.
7

"
"8","reduced gravity. This was seen in the Apollo EVA Video eroded or smoothed the edges of the particles once formed.
footage in which the crew would frequently fall over or While the extraterrestrial dust world has further segregated
would lope across the surface. Loping was easier to do than philosophically — arguments based on particle size and
traditional earth ambulation and was not as physically whether particles are considered “dust” or “regolith” — for
taxing. However, as some recent simulated reduced gravity the purpose of this discussion it is not necessary to further
testing performed at J SC has indicated that even the suit-less stratify the deﬁnition.
human ambulation changes in the reduced gravity
environment and that new approaches to suit mobility in Low-abrasion Dust—Low-abrasion dust is characterized
these environments should be investigated further. generically as in-Situ regolith material the size of granules of
sand or smaller in which natural erosion processes are
As with all things relating to space exploration, there is a present; i.e., water or atmospheric mechanisms that have
trade-off between the amount of mass that can be launched eroded or smoothed the edges of the particles once formed.
from Earth and that required to perform the task optimally
in the destination environments. Mass is always king on Extreme T hermal Management at Vacuum:
la nch da so careful Inass mar in mana ement and
. u y, . . . . g g . . Lunar Pole in Permanent Shadows of Craters — Cold
impacts on m1ss1on objectives at the ﬁnal dest1nation, . .
shoul d be consi dere d Extreme—There has been eV1dence in recent years of lunar
' ice at or below the surface of permanently shadowed areas
Radiation—The non-thermal radiation environment for within the craters at the lunar poles. These areas have been
human exploration missions within and outside of Earth’s p221?th:Oi:t1:t3:$gliere:ie::§cefo?l8:113:11;Sgiiayiter‘: a
Van Allen belts will increase the risk to human survival in p ry q . . ’ ry
two general situations: high-energy solar events and long- expens1ve to launch from Earth to support m1ss1ons, and the
duration exposure to cosmic and solar radiation. Given the products generated through electrolys1s can be used for
. rocket fuel, any destination that has a form of water
propuls1on technology of today and the cost of space travel, available for u tiliza tion will be hi hl desirable
any destination in our solar system will either require g y '
substantial time for the mission or the time spent at the . . .
mission destination will be ideally maximized so as to get However, for 196 t0.eXISt It must be protected from the solar
the return on the ﬁnancial investment. However, in the early W1?(.1dangl sulblnnatfion Eiocgstsh that wojuldb r6913“: 1t “:th
exploration missions the destination stay duration may be 011:1 :. 61 me Of glgt O b e sun, e ll“: ene: a
minimized initially to limit the risk with longer durations for Pm. CC ?V6 ayer 0 us? or e a .Cry9genlc 6.11196“ “res”
subsequent missions Th1s Wlll place the astronauts worklng 1n an enV1ronInent of
' cryogenic touch temperatures and, in turn, will drive the
Design Impacts due to Usage Duration—For the same need for development of advanced materials that are highly
reasons that will be discussed later, most human exploration Eleaﬁflslafgrtht::ehnt:112pcraigrefncigagef :(i‘eljvnceiioiiztiii or
missions outside of Earth’s orbit will necessitate long p . gy . p .ty.
. . Advancements w111 also have to be made in order to prov1de
periods of time away from the safety and resources of Earth. .
Therefore it becomes critical that space suit design be the thermal management of the crew for long durations at
robust enough to endure expected usage or be maintainable these temperatures.
b a crew with minimal recurrin maintenance and re uired
reyplacement parts during the mission q Lunar Equator, Center of Crater at Noon — Hot Extreme—
' Earth’s Inoon also offers the other end of the thermal
This discussion on space suit reliability to a large extent is ::?:§:?:n:r:f§er;lte tic: Scifjtlgrleathlllgaa? EEELOIEEZH 1:113:11:
an uncharted area of study. Historically, space suit hardware . . ’ . q ' p
is non-comInercial custom hardware that is manufactured Program Inltigated the nnpacts Of bOth the 001d polar and
. ’ . . . . . . the hot equatorial thermal extremes by Visiting the mid-
and operated in non-stat1st1cally Signiﬁcant quantities for latitude areas at lunar twili ht“ While this a roach was
standard statistical reliability calculation methods. For erfectl acce table for hugmankind’s ﬁrst Vielnture from
exploration missions, space suits will be Inission-critical p y p . . . .
items that must fail safe but the trades must be done to home, the approach W111 s1gn1ﬁcantly hand1cap future
optimize the acceptable iiisk posture Inass impacts due to extensive exploration and permanent habitation away from
’ . E th.
robustness and redundancy (extra mass on suits or spare ar
parts and required tools launched on the vehicle), and cost
associated with developing design and testing methods to be
able to characterize and predict the mean time between
failure and modes Of failure. 11 This is not part ofthe discussion of this study, but it should be noted that
the tw111ght conditions of the Apollo m1ss1on EVAs, 1n addltlon to
. . . . . . providing thermal mitigation, also provided an optimum balance of lighting
H lgh-abr aSlOn DUSt—ngh-abfaSIOn dllSt IS ChaTaCtCTIZCd conditions. In the absence of an atmosphere to diffract light, the contrast
generically as in_Sil‘u regolith material the size of granules of between the directly illuminated surface and that Of the shadows is difﬁcult
sand or smaller in which no natural erosion processes are for the 1.111111%“? eye to raédﬂy adapt“ The $5111.“? alaCk Of depth pérceptlon
. . h . h . h h and an inability to see into shadows untll w1th1n the shadow. Th1s would
present, 1'6"" water 01‘ atmosp er1c mec anlsms t at ave remain an issue for design and operations of future missions.
8

"
"9","Table 2. Space Suit System Mass Values for NASA Historical and Currently Operational EVA-capable EMUs.
—
Parameter/Weight 0n Apollo EMU [23] Space Shuttle EMU ISS EMU [25] CXP Suit Element (goal
Earth: kg (lbs) [23] [24] requirements) [26]
Space Suit/Pressure 35.4 (78) 43 (94) 65.2 (143.7) 188: 42 (92)
Garment Lunar: 42 (92)
Portable Life 60.8 (134) 65.8 (145) 89.2 (196.7) Lunar: 48.9 (108)
Support backpack
96.2 (212) 108 (239) 154.4 (340.4) 90.7 (200)
Operational Pressure 25.9 (3.75) Nominal: 29.7 (4.3) Nominal: 29.7 (4.3) 29.7 (4.3)
kN/m2 (psia) DCS Treatment: 55.2 DCS Treatment: 55.2
(8 above ambient) (8 above ambient)

—
While it is possible that L1 0f the sun—Earth Lagrangian/ Phase II: First-order Environmental Impacts to Design
libration points has higher solar ﬂux from the sun, the solar The two mos t common rou in s 0 f destination environ-
albedo12 resulting from a combination of normal reﬂection ments were micrograviti (5E5 GEO sun-Earth-moon
from the lunar surface (the. angle Of reﬂection and re- Lagrangian points, in-transit mission contingency EVAs,
absollgption by astronauts is higher) coupled With the solar lOW-Inass NEO /NE A moons 0 f Mars moons 0 f Jupi ter and
3322:3333 < Sam» am

g . . . . tational ﬁelds of 0ne-third Earth or less: Mars and Earth’s
crater creates an enVironInent that Wlll be the most radiative . . . .

. . . moon). The de01s10n to group the enVironments in terms of
thermally Challenging Of any destination humans may the gravity ﬁeld hinged on the mobility of the human
attempt to V1s1t1nthe foreseeable future. performing the mission tasks and the technology required

. er the eX erience of NASA that the technolo , tools and
Moderate T hermal ExtremeS—The two enVironInents that ihobility pmethods are dramatically di ffeifzn t for a
fall .1nt0 this category are LEO (near a structure .Wlth microgravity environment, a reduced gravity environment
s1gn1ﬁcant thermal mass) and the martian surface. Th1s1s an and that 0 f Earth’s surface raVit EX eriences from
interesting grouping as these two environments represent the Apollo EVAs and the suit Ifobilit}; desians 0 f the day
milder thermal management des1gn Challenges for space resulted in the astronauts loping across the lunar surface for
suits. Tﬂey art: boéh nnique 11: til at tﬁey arc: ltess eligitremetﬁs long traverse as they found this to be an easier and more
ar .as OWt e es1gn mus e C ange O a ress e expedient means of traversing than ﬁghting the internal
enVironmen ' pressurized forces of the suit Via a more earth-like
. . . . ambulation. Likewise the current knowledge of the near
The radiative thermal enVironInent 1n LEO takesadvantage earth asteroids suggests _ and quite frankly our hope _ that
Of local albedo .ﬁromthe structure the astronaut 1s Working there are none that approach the size of the moon or larger
aroundand that is heing reflected ﬁonhthe Earth. le?n the necessitating earth—like ambulation; despite What Hollywood
approxnnate 90-minute orbit duration (45 minutes in the would have you believe
sun and 45 in the Earth’s shadow), the conductive '
[lempegatures 3:16 tilOdCIEﬁPd [and f0 $1 bte farther smoothed The need for human life support (Which in this case Will be
epen mg on e erma 1ner 1a 0 e S rue ure. deﬁned as requiring, pressure management, thermal control,
, , inspired oxygen and hydration) Within the biological
Thed marltian tlhderIInaElOentvnonment can rantgethﬁOIﬁi [:th requirements for normal bodily function is necessary for all
m0 era. e y CO . empera ures 0’ a .e 0. es human excursions outside the bounds of the Earth’s surface.
depending upon the latitude, What WOUld be a typical Winter Therefore this is common to all destination environments
. . . 0 0
day in Scand1nav1a {-1 12 t0 8 C [470 i0 17'6 F])' The and not called out speciﬁcally as a design driver — With the
presence Of an atinosphere, albeit 0.116 that is “168$ that Of exception of When there is an atmosphere or not, as this Will
Earthf, does ptIEthde same :ﬁnvective [anti conclluetivel :16 at inﬂuence the technologies and strategies for providing these
rans erinc e a ren 6.1:] e curren erma 1nsu a 1011 life support functions. It should be noted that life support
approac in vacuum 1nV1a e. systems are one of the more complicated and expensive
systems required in space ﬂight and should therefore not be
12 The albedo of an object is a measure of how strongly it reﬂects light from terlahzed 01‘ forgOtten When pl‘lorltlZlng development.
light sources such as the sun. It is therefore a more speciﬁc form of the
term reﬂectivity. Albedo is deﬁned as the ratio of total-reﬂected to incident
electromagnetic radiation.
13 Solar ﬂux, 0r radiative ﬂux, is the amount of energy moving in the form
of photons at a certain distance from the source per angle of incidence per
second.
14 This orbital period is representative of the typical operational orbit for
the space shuttle.
9

"
"10","It should also be noted that the impacts due to the internal
operational pressure of the suit can signiﬁcantly affect suit 3
design and system mass. In Table 2, the impact to system '8"" ""‘ 3
mass of the ISS EMU due to an operational pressure of 8- 3 E 3
psi, as opposed to the typical 4.3-psi, is signiﬁcant. While a :3 3 3
designed operational pressure of 8-psi is not required for ‘3 .,.-._..i_.— 3
EVAs, it does profoundly decrease the amount of pre- ,~’ 3 3
breathe time on pure oxygen to denitrogenate the blood to 1383 ,-"" g
prevent decompression sickness. [27] As a 4.3-psi suit V V ,~"" 3»
impacts the timeline of a mission due to required pre- 3% ,~"" H
breathe and uses known technology for design, the 4.3-psi g: ,~’.
suit is considered operationally desirable for this study; it is “3i ,~"" 33, g m
not singled out as an environmental design driver. :4 ,-"" 3% 3 3
And lastly the suit operating pressure inside the vehicle has l .,.:'.,""j;‘.':;2':;‘—--”g'g’” 3 3'
to be coordinated with the cabin atmosphere and pressure, g ;=:’ .' '3 E; 3?;
oxygen concentrations, which affect ﬂammability consider- 2"" ‘§\ .,~,’."" I 3%
ations, EVA pre-breathe protocols, and vehicle operational 3 \ )4’\ '1'. 3
constraints. 3 X \1'\'°... ' g
~' \ u:'<'<-.. E
. . E? i...’ \x.“ ......‘.,‘“‘-‘-'-°\£;<-.m 3°
Phase III: Second—order Envzmnmental Impacts t0 Deszgn g; - ,x \ :1 _______;; 3‘ up
3‘9 Oz r’ .' -‘ H '3'
Once the destination environments were grouped, a map— 33 3.3 '3”\\ {\Ni'l' 3 g
ping t0 the environmental suit design drivers was performed < 3 2—. \J :'\f 1::
as can be seen in Figure 1. In environment groups in which 3: ..-"",l‘._i‘,\ 3
all of the included environments contribute to a suit design ff}. I‘~\.::_:.~.=. 3 E 3%
driver, the line for the group begins at the group boundary I I "",--— 3“” 3 g 3 3
and proceeds to the design driver. For design drivers in 3 i 1'!” 3 33 3'
which all of the environments within a group do not map to E . _I"" I' 2;, g 3 g 2
the design driver, lines speciﬁc to that environment map to 3 :‘Il’ ll 3% E >
the driver. For example, all of the microgravity environ- ‘ j"": I l__-—..-_-iyu\ 3
ments map to the microgravity and t0 the extreme-thermal- :WI II..,.-‘III 33 3
at-vacuum drivers and, thus, the black dotted line maps from 3 '1' .f I I,’ g
the microgravity destinations group border. However, all of 3 ‘ Ill 3;! I 3
the microgravity destinations map to the radiation design ‘3 j I II ,I' 3
driver except for the LEO environment; therefore, all of the 3 .-,' 1' II ,I' 3
microgravity environments — except for LEO — map Via A II I ll 3
lines to the radiation design driver. fj'ﬂ ' I ,’ ___: é
"":5: :: . , x
, , , , 3 23:23:15 ,' 1 ,’ I ,’ f 3-
As seen 1n Flgure 1, and perhaps more clearly 1n Flgure 2, 3 I l I ,I , a
extreme thermal management in vacuum and radiation 3 I 1' I’ ,I' ’I’ 3
protection from a high—level assessment are design drivers 9 :I II II [I 3
for 89% of all possible destinations on which humans are I III II 1’ ;‘
likely to perform EVAs. Coming in a close second at 78% {'1' ’ ’l l, 5 ii
. . . . . - I B m
of all dest1nat10n enV1r0nInents are the des1gn drivers due to W 3—417"" 1’ §\ 5.3
mission duration (time) and microgravity. Following these 3 {I 1’ 3 33‘
we see at surprisingly low percentages: high—abrasion dust 3' i’,’ 1% 33
at 44%, reduced gravity at 22%, and moderate thermal and EE 3 :-
low-abrasion dust tied last at 11%. 3'3 I E 3 3
z 3; \ 3
Extreme T hermal at Vacuum—Not surprisingly, all 3 é;
destination environments listed, with the exception of Mars, i 3 5
have to contend with thermal management in the vacuum of 3
space. And, in reviewing the data, it is seen that of the
destinations available for human EVA, the thermal extremes , ,
seen on Earth’s moon encompass all other environments. “g?“ ,1 _ Mapplng 0f the probable human EVA,
dest1nat10n enVIronments t0 the prlmary space sult
Radiation—Historically, due to mass constraints for launch dBSlgn drlvers.
capability and cost, protection against solar and cosmic
10

"
"11","Destmahon EnVIronments
5‘ O
a E
*3 E"" 2 3 cu
E g S S 3 E
g 3 3 S 3 ° 3
3 g E"" E E 2 3 E .5
8 o S}, {.3 0 -‘;° '8 ‘E g Percentage of Destination
5 8 3 § § 2 E 3 E Environments Driving Design
—IIIIIIIIn
e I—IIIIIIIu *
“2’ —IIIIIIIDD
I—
-IIIInuqu
ED ‘
_Iqununuu
: —IDDDDDDDD *
:5
—::::::::::::::::I *
_naauunnII *
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
Figure 2 — Mapping of the EVA destination environments to the design drivers so as to identify commonality
percentages; this will aid in identifying the most common design drivers for all the possible human EVA destinations.
radiation has been “best-effort” strategy in which outer reliable space suit system. By focusing on the individual
garments provide protection against alpha particle radiation design element with regard to the most extreme operational
but limited effectiveness against anything else. To date, environment and the maximum mission duration, the goal
NASA has mitigated exposure for LEO operations by would be to drive the mean time to failure well beyond any
monitoring solar activity and limiting EVA time and mission hardware needs. Such a systematic approach will
providing vehicle shielding during high-activity or solar over time drive out the failure modes, increase the design
events to limit exposure to the crew. A similar approach was reliability and build a statistical operational experience base
used for the Apollo missions, but the information regarding such that failures are well understood and at times
solar activity was limited due to ground-based telescopes predictable.
and radiation monitors on the lunar lander.
Microgravity Design DriverS—Similar to the discussion of
It should be noted that there is no delineation in Figure 2 in thermal management at extreme temperatures in a vacuum,
the percentages as to what form of radiation each of the the number of destinations with very low to negligible
environments includes; instead the percentages are rolled gravitational acceleration by far outweigh the destinations in
up. Environmental groupings in Figure 1 show that radiation which a reduced, yet signiﬁcant, gravity ﬁeld is present that
protection is a signiﬁcant environmental design driver that is relatively hospitable to humans.
is common to all destinations outside of LEO and can have a
profound impact on human life due to the long mission High-abrasion Dust—High-abrasion dust, as a design
durations and for long-term exposure. Given the leaps of driver, comes into play in less than half of the environments
understanding on the mechanics of radiation and decay, and discussed in this paper given the number of destinations that
their effects on humans, it is critical that a concerted effort pertain to deep-space EVAs or Mars, where the dust has
be applied to suit development for human exploration in this been eroded over time. It should also be noted that our
area. experience with the dust on Earth’s moon is indicative of
what is expected for destinations with high-abrasion dust.
Design Impacts due to T ime—With the exception of LEO
and GEO, using the assumption that manned vehicles will Reduced Gravity, T hermal Management in cm Atmosphere,
be limited to current chemical combustion technology, all and Low-abrasion Dust—The last three are grouped
potential destinations for human EVA will require long because the percentages, while not initially expected, make
mission durations at quite a distance from the resources and sense when considering all other destinations. All three have
supplies of Earth. Therefore, it should be recognized that a to do with Mars and Earth’s Inoon, which are the only
methodical approach must be taken for developing a highly signiﬁcant bodies within current human exploration.
1 1

"
"12","Moreover, Mars is the only other body with an atmosphere savings in terms of schedule can be realized since the
that facilitates two of these three design drivers. Further technology can be developed prior to the mission that is
implications of these ﬁndings will be discussed later. being deﬁned; i.e., the sooner you launch, the cheaper it is
given you have saved the money in the out-years due to
5. IMPLICATIONS TO TECHNOLOGY inﬂated dollarS-
DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES , , ,
It is not the intent of this paper to assess the current state-of—
Given the past success rate of proj ects to be funded through the-art of space suit design with respect to any of the design
completion within NASA, it iS advised to obtain funding Via drivers discussed here. It is the intent to bring to the stage
DOD-ﬂigl’lt program monies, dCVClOp the technologies that the notion that by addressing the design drivers9 in a
will give the highest probable return on investment with the systematic and well-Inanaged effort, that will be most
greatest likelihood Of being needed, and coordinate the frequently encountered in human EVAs in the foreseeable
effort at the agency level to reduce the likelihood Of future will yield the largest return on investment outside of a
redundant effort or miss-veetoring. speciﬁc mission and destination.
This study addresses the likelihood of design drivers as a 6. CONCLUSION
function of the possible destinations that human EVA will
potentially encounter given the likelihood of technological This study addresses hOW a generic, modular space Shit
advancements within the next feW decades as have been architecture would be beneﬁcial when combined with the
seen in the past 30 years. With this in mind, results could study Of all potential destinations in the solar system for
differ from those one would expect given past efforts in suit human EVAs Withiii the next 30 years (based on current
design and technology developed to any signiﬁcant level. In technological capability and, using linear extrapolation, that
the past, these efforts were deﬁned by a particular mission which can be achieved based on experiences during the last
with a particular destination in mind — usually the ﬁrst time 50 years Of human space ﬂight — no warp drives and force
Visiting that destination. In that framework, that paradigm of ﬁelds available) combined With a systematic prioritization
design and technology development prioritization made 0f technology development as deﬁned by likelihood 0f need
sense. However, in a future in which resources to be applied for human EVAs. These tWO when combined provide a
to space suit design and technology development will be space suit architecture that is easily modiﬁed depending on
scarce and prioritization will be expected, the need for the mission destination and can be upgraded when new
exploration as well as the destinations to be explored will technology is available With minimal cost and redesign. One
vary with policy makers in power; therefore, a prioritization example to illustrate the modular architecture and ability to
based on the likelihood of occurrence should be seriously upgrade as required is the TMG- The TMG can be
considered. minimized for use in LEO, and when a mission is required
to go to the moon, it can be replaced with a version that is
If it is clear that Mars is a high-priority destination due to specialized feh the lunar environment. .The TMG can later
national security, discovery of unobtainiuIn, or survival of be replaced With vers1ons that are optnnlzed for the other
the species, the prioritization presented here will be thermal and micrometeoroid enVironInents deﬁned in this
overcome by events. But, lacking such direction, we see paper. As long asthe suit and TMG interfaces are well
here that half of the signiﬁcant design drivers for space suits deﬁned, it Wiii mlnnnize the .eost 0f upgrading the suit
encompass 78% to 89% of all destinations for human EVA. capability by not requiring a ma] 0i redes1gn effort.
What we do see is that only one-quarter of the suit design
drivers are speciﬁc to Mars. The destination list, which is based on these selection
criteria, is greatly narrowed and the possible destinations for
So, from a perspective of return on investment to reach the our human (in-person) exploration .reduees into a well-
InaXiInuIn yield of dollars invested in space suit design and deﬁned subset ef space shit des1gn drivers that are not likely
technology development, a new focus should be brought to Change Signiﬁcantly iii the near future and can be used
into the forefront for discussion. A modular suit architecture now to solve .most — if not all f 0f the major design
as discussed in [l] and [2], has the potential for a generic set challenges faelng space Shit eng1neers and exploratlon
of suit hardware components or elements that would address programs today.
the majority of destination environments while minimizing
the impact to performance. It would provide hardware and The ﬁndings and rankings presented in this paper provide a
design interfaces such that suit components that needed to mission-independent, EVA system development approach
be Changed due to speciﬁc and/or unique environmental based on destination environmental space suit design driver
constraints would be Changed. Additionally, the modular likelihood. This approach Wiii help ensure the highest
nature of the architecture would allow integration of new likelihood, and highest return on investment while there is
technologies as needed without a massive redesign effort. no programmatic destination 0f record and Wiii also ensure
Furthermore, by minimizing the costs due to suit redesign, the opportunity to provide the largest return 011 taxpayer
cost savings in terms oflauneh mass, and only launching the dollars that will meet multiple future mission destinations.
suit components necessary for destinations of that mission, This allows a greater chance 0f providing better technical
12

"
"13","solutions to future missions When they are needed, as [8] E. Canalias, G. Gomez, M. Mareote, and J. J .
Opposed to waiting for a mission to be identiﬁed and then Masdemont, Assessment of Mission Design Including
starting to solve the technical suit design problems once the Utilization of Libration Points and Weak Stability
programmatic and budgetary clocks have begun to tick. Boundaries, European Space Agency, the Advanced
Concepts Team, Ariadna Final Report (03-4103a),
It is highly recommended that this development approach be 2004.
considered and managed as a “Flight Program,” meaning
that development technical requirements, budgets, and [9] J . Pantermuehl and B. Miranda, Thermal Study Of the
developmental milestones are well deﬁned and managed to Constellation Space Suit Element in Lunar Craters and
agreed-upon completion dates. This Will help ensure that Plains, NASA’s Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, JSC-
these efforts will reach the desired engineering solution in a 65567, July 2007
reasonable amount of time and aid in maturing the
technology incrementally as the funding is available. And [10] David A. Paige, et a1, Diviner Lunar Radiometer
1ast1y, it should be noted that While the environment is the Observations of Cold Traps in the Moon’s South Polar
primary design driver in space suit design, the largest Region, Science, Vol 330, pg 479, October 22, 2010
secondary driver is the activity of Which Will be performed
in the suit and should not be forgotten When formulating the [11] Grant H, Heiken, David T. Vaniman and Bevan M.
space suit architecture and considering how to incorporate French, Lunar Source Book: A User’s Guide to the
the needed technologies for the destination environment. Moon, Lunar and Planetary Institute, Cambridge
University Press, 1991, ISBN: 0-521-33444—6
[12] Luey-Ann McFadden, Paul Weissman, and Terrence
REFERENCES Johnson, The Encyclopedia Of the Solar System,
. . . Elsevier Inc., 2007, pp. 432, ISBN-13: 978-0-12-
[1] Terry R. H111 and Bnan J. Johnson, EVA Space Suit 088589-3
Architecture: LOW Earth Orbit Vs. Moon Vs. Mars,
IEEEAC paper #1209? 2010 [13] Mona L. Delitsky and Arthur L. Lane, Ice Chemistry 011
. . . the Galilean Satellites, NASA Jet Propulsion
[2] Joseph J. Kosmo, Des1gn C0ns1derat10ns for Future Laboratory, Journal Of Geophysical Research, Vol.
Planetary Space SUitS, NASA,S Lyndon B. JOhIlSOIl 1039 NO. 13139 PP 319 :),91_:),19 4039 1998
Space Center, SAE Technical Paper Series 110. 901428,
Ju1y1990 [14] Katharina Lodders and Bruce Fegley, The Planetary
. . . . Scientist's Companion, Oxford University Press US.
[3] Constellation Des1gn Reference M1ss10n and 1998, p. 190. ISBN 0195116941
Operational Concepts, NASA Constellation Program,
CXP 70007 reV1s10n B Change 002, release date June 19, [15] David R. Williams, Mars Fact Sheet, National Space
2008 Science Data Center, NASA, (September 1, 2004),
. . . http://nssde.gsfe.nasa.gOV/planetary/factsheet/marsfact.h
[4] James R. Wertz and Wiley J . Larson, Space M1ss10n tml, Retrieved November 22’ 2010
Analysis And Design, Mieroeosm, Ine., Third Edition,
1999’ ISBN: 978—1881883404 [16] Flight Rules: 188 Generic Operational, NASA Lyndon
, , . B. Johnson Space Center, Volume B, Section B14,
[5] J . L. Roder, Speeiﬁeation 0f the Plasma Env1r0nment at NSTS—12820, October 05’ 2010
Geosynehronous Orbit in the Energy Range 87 eV to
288 keV, The Aerospace Corporation for Space and [17] ECSS—E-ST-10-04C Space Engineering _ Space
Missile System Center Air Force Materiel Command, Environment, Eurepean Cooperation for Space
August 15’ 1994 Standardization, cooperative effort With European
. . . . . Space Agency, November 15, 2008
[6] Des1gn Env1r0nments for Crew Systems D1V1s10n
Provided Space Shuttle GFE Hardware, NASA, [18] N. E. Brown, T. R. Dashner and B. C. Hayes,
Johnson Space Center, Crew Systems DIVISIOH’ JSC' Extravehieular Activities Guidelines and Design
08708: September 11» 1975 Criteria, NASA CR—2160, 1973
[7] E' 1"" Yagoda, Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS—02) [19] Ste hen J . Hoffman and David J . Ka 1an Human
EVA Touch Temperature Evaluation J Ohnson Space E p - . p - 9
, , , ’ Xploration of Mars. The Reference M1ss10n 0f the
Center Engineering and Selenee Contract Group for N AS A Mars Exploration Study Team N AS A Special
NASA, ESCG-4470-07-TEAM-DOC—0033-B, July 28, Publication 6107 July 1997 9
2008 9
13

"
"14","[20] Bret G. Drake and Mars Architecture Steering Group, BIOGRAPHY
Human Exploration of Mars: Design Reference _ .
Architecture 5.0, NASA Special Publication SP—2009— 7 Terry R' HI” ZS a member of the
566, July 2009 47.,- -- ‘ NASA Lyndon B. Johnson Space
' ; Jr, . Center (JSC) Internatzonal Space
[21] Bret G. Drake and Mars Architecture Steering Group, 5 ,2!‘ 1 , Statzan/Shuttle. Extravehzeular
Human Exploration of Mars: Design Reference g"" 29' 1 M01911“? U7?“ (EMU). Team
Architecture 5.0 Addendum, NASA Special Publication ""Va. \f wher e . he ZS .respbnszbte for
SP-2009-566-ADD, July 2009 ’0 555‘ . provza’zng engzneerzng znszght
' :1 into the 2010 life extension
[22] Zbigniew Sorbjan, Michael Wolff and Michael D. x 4‘ hardwére, MOdlﬁcathm
Smith, Thermal Structure of the Atmospheric Boundary : ~ determznzng .what the system
Layer on Mars Based on Mini-TES Observations, ~ 2. 4 har dwar e zmpaets ar e to
Quarterly Journal Of The Royal Meteorological . . ?“deg the [SS EM U support
S ociety, 135:1776—1787, 2009 out untzl 2028, and znvestzgatzng how the EM U can be used
as a demonstration platformfor technology development.
[23] Kenneth S. Thomas and Harold J . McMann, US . . , ,
Spacesuits, Springer—Praxis Ltd., 2006, ISBN: 0—387- Terry has a BS zn Aerospace Engzneerzng and an MS zn
27919_9 Guza’anee, Navzgatzon, and Control T heory wzth a mznor zn
Orbital Mechanics from the University of T exas at Austin.
[24] N AS A Extravehicular Mobility Unit (EMU) SS A Data He began his career at NASA while working on. his graduate
Book Hamilton Sundstrand initialrelease ca 1983 theszs pmjeet zn developzng banks of szmphﬁea’ Kalman
’ ’ ’ ﬁlters integrated into an artiﬁcial neural network to obtain
[25] N AS A Extravehicular Mobility Unit (EMU) LSS /SS A an optimal state solutionforpreeision landing on Mars.
gjgiemgéoiéloHamﬂton Sundstrand, ICVISIOD P’ While at NASA, T erry has worked on projects and programs
spanning from [SS navigation software veriﬁcation to
[26] Space Suit Element Requirements Document, Shuttle navigation design test objectives and baeh-robm
Constellation Program Extravehicular Activity (EVA) mzsszan support, X38 Crew Return Vehzele navzgatzon
Systems Project Ofﬁce (ESPO), CXP 72208 revision D, algorzthm development, Space Launch tnztzatzve technolagy
September 3 2010 a'eveloprnent, Orbztal Space Plane PFOJeet ofﬁce ISS—prznae
’ zntegratzon, Space Shuttle “Return to thht” STS-107 tzle
[27] Ryan Lee, Operational Pressure Implications 0n :5]? azr t6?!) 31911122. development, and t0 CxP Space Salt
Pressure Garment Subsystem Design, NASA Lyndon emen ea ers zp.
geggggsggogpace Center, JSC_65569/CTSD_CX_5123’ T erry and the Suit Element have been interviewed by the
Associated Press and covered by media outlets including
CNN.com, Forbes.com, and National Geographic video
“Living on the Moon” air date 2009. T erry has also been
identiﬁed as one of NASA’s Constellation Stars, and was
identiﬁed as NASA T eeh Brief’s “Who ’s Who at NASA ”for
November 2010.
In leading the CxP Suit Element engineering team, T erry
had the responsibilities of JSC’s Engineering Project
Manager, the CxP E VA Systems Suit Element Deputy Lead,
and Element Lead during his tenure 0n the project. He
facilitated the development of system functional require-
ments for space suit development and a “elean-sheet”
design approach that has been widely recognized within and
outside NASA.
14

"
