"","x"
"1","Kw»? Available online at www.sciencedirect.com _____________
”5‘;
55‘- ‘.r.‘ S ' D' WM
tat“ C'ence ""e“ msmmmnttm
PERGAMON Acta Astronautica 65 (2009) 912—920 ——-——————________
WWW.elseVier.com/locate/actaastro
Robotic assembly and maintenance of future space stations based on
the ISS n11ss10n operations experience
Richard Remba1a*, Cameron Ower
MDA—Space Missions, Canada
Received 5 December 2007; accepted 10 March 2009
Available online 3 June 2009
Abstract

MDA has provided 25 years of real-time engineering support to Shuttle (Canadarm) and ISS (CanadarniZ) robotic Operations
beginning With the second shuttle ﬂight STS-2 in 1981. In this capacity, our engineering support teams have become familiar
With the evolution of mission planning and ﬂight support practices for robotic assembly and support Operations at mission
control. This paper presents Observations on eXisting practices and ideas to achieve reduced Operational overhead to present
programs. It also identiﬁes areas Where robotic assembly and maintenance of future space stations and space-based facilities
could be accomplished more effectively and efﬁciently.

Speciﬁcally, our experience shows that past and current space Shuttle and ISS assembly and maintenance Operations have used
the approach of extensive preﬂight mission planning and training to prepare the ﬂight crews for the entire mission. This has been
driven by the overall communication latency between the earth and remote location Of the space statiorﬂvehicle as well as the
lack of consistent robotic and interface standards. While the early Shuttle and ISS architectures included robotics, their eventual
beneﬁts on the overall assembly and maintenance Operations could have been greater through incorporating them as a major
design driver from the beginning of the system design. Lessons learned from the ISS highlight the potential beneﬁts of real-
time health monitoring systems, consistent standards for robotic interfaces and procedures and automated script-driven ground
control in future space station assembly and logistics architectures. In addition, advances in computer Vision systems and remote
Operation, supervised autonomous command and control systems Offer the potential to adjust the balance between assembly and
maintenance tasks performed using extra vehicular activity (EVA), extra vehicular robotics (EVR) and EVR controlled from the
ground, ofﬂoading the EVA astronaut and even the robotic Operator 0n-0rbit of some of the more routine tasks. Overall these
proposed approaches When used effectively Offer the potential to drive down Operations overhead and allow more efﬁcient and
productive robotic Operations.
© 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction mission operations costs. Further exploration missions
should plan for the utilization of such systems so as to
MDA’S experience has shown that the appropriate use increase cost effectiveness by simplifying pre—mission
of robotic and automated systems, implementing sys— planning and training.
tern designs with simple, automated, high level control
functions, and utilizing automated trouble—shooting, re— 2. Minimizing mission-speciﬁc planning through
covery, and data retrieval systems, can reduce overall standards

* Corresponding author. The Space Statien Remote Manipulator System

E-mail addresses: richard.rembala@mdacorporation.com (SSRMS) and SPCC131 PUYPOSC DeXterous Manlptﬂa'
(R. Rembala), cameronower@mdacorporation.com. tor (SPDM) robotic systems incorporate very ﬂexible
0094—5765/$—see front matter © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi: 1 0. 1 016/j .actaastr0.2009.03 .064

"
"2","R. Rembala, C. Ower / Acta Astronautica 65 (2009) 912—920 913
Table l
188 berthing mechanisms and functions [1].
Mechanism Function
Payload retention system Connects payloads t0 the orbiter cargo bay
“Common” berthing mechanism (CBM) Connects US modules together on the forward half of ISS
Lab cradle assembly (LCA) Connects integrated truss to lab module
Segment—tO—segment attach system (SSAS) Connects integrated truss segments together
“Common” attach system (CAS) Connects exposed payloads and logistics carriers to the truss
Androgynous peripheral attach system (APAS) Connects the Russian FGB and PMAl together and docks orbiter to 188
JEM exposed facility berthing mechanism (JEM—BM) Connects JEM exposed facility to the JEM module
Payload interface unit (HPIU) Connects external payloads t0 the JEM exposed facility
Rocketdyne truss attach system (RTAS) Connects integrated truss segments together
Modiﬁed Rocketdyne truss attach system (MRTAS) Connects integrated truss segments together
control systems that allow a range of system parameters 2. During the engineering cycle mission support ﬁles
to be ﬁne for any given payload or operation by optimiz— are based on detailed analysis and are used to gather
ing performance and simplifying operations. The irony human—in—the—loop feedback.
of designing a very ﬂexible and capable robotic system 3. The ﬂight cycle is intended as the development of
is that it tends to complicate mission planning processes the ﬂight version of mission support ﬁles. During
because the available ﬂexibility does not necessitate the this cycle, products are updated with reﬁned analysis
implementation of standards. Without standards, indi— and HIL feedback.
Vidual payload developers are free to re—invent payload 4. The update to ﬂight cycle is a placeholder to up—
interfaces with each new design, and mission design— date ﬂight cycle products as necessary based on last
ers and arm operators are free to Change operational minute Changes to the mission.
techniques based on personal preferences and practices.
Alon with new robotic and berthin interface desi ns, . . . .
. .g . g g Developing robotic standards that obtain community
m1ss10n operations Changes, and operator personal pref— . . .
. . and program buy—1n from the beginning can help reduce
erences comes the increased overhead (and ass0C1ated . . . . . .
. . . . . . . the upfront m1ss10n planning required by permitting
costs) of m1ss10n—spec1ﬁc robotic analys1s, training, and . . . . . . . .
. . . . training and operations veriﬁcation through Similarity.
planning as well as the increased costs ass0C1ated w1th . . . .
. Robotic standards can also help in deﬁning generic
development of new hardware and software s1mula—
. . . control parameters that can be safely used for the vast
tors for the interfaces. For 188 assembly operations 1n— . . . .
volVin the Mobile SerViCin S stern (MSS) mission majority of expected payloads and robotic operations.
.g . g y ’ In the case of the SSRMS (and the original SRMS) a
planning begins two years before the planned opera— . . “ ,,
. . . . standard robotic interface—the grapple ﬁxture —was
tion and involves multiple teams at the Canadian Space . . .
. . . developed for the robot to mechanically interface w1th.
Agency (CSA) and NASA. During this planning phase, . . .
0 erations are simulated and a load s eciﬁc arame With the grapple ﬁxture interface came a standardized
p . p y . . p p method for the SSRMS to capture and handle payloads
ters are tuned in order to meet m1ss10n goals and per— . . .
. . and allowed for generic training methods to be devel—
formance requirements as well as to obtain operator . .
. oped, baseline robotic approach rates to be adopted,
feedback for hurnan—in—the—loop (HIL) performance ad— . .
. . and ﬁxed control system parameters to be utilized.
Justments. Furthermore, the need to address off—nominal . . . .
. . . Unlike the case With other berthing interfaces on the
scenarios for safety reasons results in unique robot and . .
. . . . . . . International Space Station, the standard end—effector—
berthing mechanism interaction for each m1ss10n requir— . . .
. . . . . to—grapple ﬁxture interface eliminates the need to reana—
1ng a multitude of Simulations to ensure safe operational . . .
. . . . . . lyze, retrain, Simulate, and tune each capture operation.
techniques. In total, this iterative and incremental mis— . . . . .
. . On space station, each unique r0b0t1C/berth1ng inter—
s10n planning process undergoes a total of four phases . . . . . . .
. . . . face requires m1ss10n planning, m1ss10n analys1s, and
each lasting appr0x1rnately 6 months in duration: . . . .
operator training to be re—1nvented and re—performed 1n
1. The draft cycle is intended as the development of order to ensure the operational feasibility of the task
the initial delivery of mission support ﬁles and is both from a safety (loads) perspective and from a user
provided for exploring the system functionality in perspective. Table l and Fig. 1 provide examples of the
the context of a mission. variety of different mechanical interfaces with which the

"
"3","914 R. Rembala, C. Ower / Acta Astronautica 65 (2009) 912 —920
CBM CBM
Passive Halt Active Halt
Capture latch fitting . ‘-_‘
__""’”;‘Q\}Q‘ Capture mm (/‘fj>—“ "",2“ {i
n .5 \ 'QW/ cull"" »' |
MS | “KN Bola -/ Z’// ’9‘! x""? Controllet
I"" .3 '/,{l/ ﬂy/I/ panel assembly
\4 ox g/tgu-v‘ ' §//l/ Alignmentguide
\ ‘ ""5| (Tu, mt’W
15-75”
\ i 48—» ~,\%/
_. trpctuml -\I""""-=';'...”//""
AI‘ nt ‘de ' I """"98 .__---/
Ignme gm _V \ l. ,4-
' eady to Latch Indcators mu.
JK .
Flne alignment cone 5,],
’9
_ @ Coarse allgnment cup
Coons alignment cone >
Capture latch % .. (“5-31.99 Eﬂ Flne allgnmentcup
M “-{1/w' ""V
9 1'”. -' '1’,
\ﬁii'K-ﬂl“ #11,}, go.i‘~\\\y
“f., , ht; /,,:l[,—
Ready-tn—Iatch sensor ‘ﬂ-ﬁ, /§}\/f ”W45“ Ready-to-latch strike:
\Xlge 435‘“ {1-5. ’ A‘,
f~ "" ' ~--.“\ ‘ WW r’.
Active SSAS \ //Fi~§+§ ’ [£233
3353,29 argixl I Captum bar
""K‘k: hum sus --
Alignment Guides
‘Eiiad/ 5:23: ,ﬂ'ﬁi .
‘ '77""; ~ ' \ “-
~!u€r' ~q 1.4.75 ~ .. Q‘Il
.4 .,, ”~Hﬁlﬁ _ \H“ .1 L”,
/ ‘5»! . 1‘.‘ L‘A-‘WL'JIH/‘IQ
K"" wt.‘ .-"" 1' Ir . w"" V ""f""- H
a ‘1 ~., ~ . J _ ;‘.-‘-. _
Umbilical 4'“, F .71»)..- :‘4?’ ;
mating |T\ , ‘ ‘W/ér‘"" ‘. _,
assembly t Ill, ‘45??? //
,- .4; -.- 2LT)
IN"" 121-“ /
‘1 l’/ Capture latch
. 1‘ {I '
K” .....
_ J '7’
Ready-tolatch
. “2 RTL t9 4' r.»
’5‘ )ga ?*f Allgnmem guldes
'5‘ (4 111-123” -:E:""~3*""--::ff':4?::~-
- I \ ' ,-""' J _. .\ 1 “R397 “,—
1; sﬁpﬁ.‘ ‘wgﬁf'fisf‘tg .463 , 31'
6:“ It $31“ L231; ‘ «. ngiﬁl’; J ﬁg“.
'- ‘3 4 Capture latch  ‘-“ : EEVN-t‘9w"". ,r ""#me, _ mg A.
*3 '""iir-ﬁix‘éﬁ- , Ex. ' ""
'1‘ "" “ “11- £35 ’r ‘j;._ Suppért brace
Rlngtrame "" ' 7— u \k‘
H a .r x_J; : —:\»:"".\
.-.- .4: r: 5:: °‘ '“ I ‘1\ ongeron
E n L: z 4&3
Fig. 1. Examples of different ISS payload attachment mechanisms.

"
"4","R. Rembala, C. Ower / Acta Astronautica 65 (2009) 912—920 915
33%..
4, /‘ roam (’2‘,
mamm/ ’ ”TM {a‘@‘
1mm ‘ // .'
P“ . EVA 1... mm
I wmo- /¢ @F u""
@“zuw \/ Mg
\ moan
WM-
umooncu M socmtrggsmu
, SPDM onu TOOL
\ ( v5, CHANGEOUT MECHANISM (OTCM)
mm
Ii. '3.
.‘ mm... acmooucauom .n.,‘¢‘
.h l. wn— c 405“,
Image“ i ' \ "" (\‘J
“W"" A Uw- ' \\ ‘ \
l xf-r; \ ‘\ ‘
t ""g;- Nﬁ-t \ ll ,
I “' /[,_‘:‘,:§',\J’) \ ,‘li ,
\ (' v crxc', . .
onset too. {{;&.§}>o'/}¥tt ‘ {3.0
44.6 °_~ ,, i,’
""(o’szl((O ""’ \
6W b.9151"" “3
”WWW gagfg.
“CMFMUK m
SPDM Tooling °°""""""""
Fig. 2. Varying SPDM robotic mechanical interfaces on 188.
. — . ‘2” , Typically when the SSRMS berths payloads to an ac—
tive capture mechanism, the SSRMS joints are “limped”
I Jl \ so as to make the SSRMS compliant to the active cap—
. _f_, . ture mechanism on the 188 as it pulls in and secures
the payload. In off—nominal (failure) situations, the SS—
, V . RMS mechanical parking brakes can inadvertently en—
1. gage thereby res1st1ng the active capture mechanism on
A d .1; the 188. The resultant loads that can be induced in these
”a l . off—nominal scenarios require extensive analysis and 0p—
' - ‘ erational techniques to satisfy ISS safety requirements.
If system level integration of the active berthing mech—
Fig. 3. Varying SPDM alignment targets. anism and the robotics were performed early in the 188
program, a control architecture could have been imple—
mented which allows an automated safety monitoring
pre—mission planning process must contend today on the system to halt the 188 active berthing mechanisms if
188. While all of these devices accomplish the same ba— the SSRMS mechanical brakes were to engage. While
sic function—to structurally attach two pieces of hard— this capability was eventually implemented into the ISS
ware together—their differences in contact geometry, command and control computer systems, this software
alignment features, operator Visual cues, and fundamen— upgrade was tOO late to effectively address all 188 cap—
tal operation all result in mission—speeiﬁe training and ture mechanisms. In addition, since this upgrade had to
analysis requirements. be built around an already existing command and con—
The lack of end—tO—end integration between the on— trol architecture, the result is a band—aid solution that
orbit robotic systems and the active capture mecha— cannot react fast enough to completely eliminate the
nisms throughout the 188 causes additional analysis and need for the analysis and operational WOIk—arounds.
training overhead when dealing with off—nominal events In the case Of the SPDM, the lack Of mandated
that manned space—ﬂight safety requirements mandate. robotic interface standards for payloads 0r orbital

"
"5","916 R. Rembala, C. Ower / Acta Astronautica 65 (2009) 912 —920
replacement units (ORUs) at the beginning of the ‘ “w , ‘ \ ' , ""
188 program resulted in developers designing unique ‘ ' ' 1‘ '. .
Visual alignment targets, unique grasp points which M 1 39%. 7
require special adapter tools for the SPDM to inter— V“) i _ ’ ""f- , 5%
face with (see Figs. 2 and 3 for examples), and unique “‘1‘ ' _ ~ \ RPCM
berthing/alignrnent hardware to secure each payload to t“ $ ‘ . ,4""
the space station (see Fig. 4 for examples). From an ' l»..-_ Vim ‘ a
operational standpoint, each of these unique aspects \/\ -“ y.
to each payload compound to produce an operational u ‘ , - "" ﬂ
planning overhead even more daunting than that of M f ' ‘ ~
the SSRMS. This translates into the need for unique
strategies and techniques for operator training, as well 1,; "" gig???""
as unique mission planning analysis for each ORU , f ‘
maintenance operation. On some operations, where the , .
SPDM is required to use adapter tools before being \ . A
able to even interface with “robotic” handling points, \4 ‘ , ACU
these differences have introduced not only operational A ' I --- _'
complexity to the task, but also large mission time— V “A
line impacts—adding hours of operational overhead to , 4
the 0n—0rbit maintenance task such as for swapping 7
between tools signiﬁcant mission planning efﬁciency ‘
and cost savings could have been obtained through the @
institution of robotic standards and practices. - x -‘7 ‘
Future space exploration missions can beneﬁt from i. _ . .. "" ’4
the extensive work already performed on the Interna— : g; :_ ' ‘ ‘ L""
tional Space Station in the area of hardware assembly ""0. {1"" W ” , 1’ ' Battery
by utilizing a single existing pressurized interface for '
habitable module attachment (such as the CBM) and Y /
a single existing unpressurized berthing interface (such I ' /’
as the CAS) for external structural attachment. Reusing , ?M ~ 1'
. . . . . W 5"" ‘ ""~
eX1st1ng, proven berthing interfaces for Wthh opera— ""1 '
tional techniques have already been developed, trained . ft
for, and perfected is far more cost—effective than re— ' e}? ’-
designing yet more unique interfaces. ‘ b , ' h , . -
A number of these standardized ORU design lessons . fﬁl ‘
learned have been applied in the Defense Advanced ‘ a ""A ‘ -
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Orbital Express ' ""' 7' _ 1;-
(OE) Demonstration Mission which executed in 2007. : i-
The OE technology demonstration involved the design, . ~ “ MDM
development and 0n—0rbit test of a prototype serVic— . i -""' _ ‘ .
ing satellite (ASTRO) and a surrogate next generation Y . :34. ‘1‘}
serviceable satellite (NextSat) led by Boeing. The goal a - '
0f the Orbital Express Space Operations Architec— . - _
ture program was to validate the technical feasibility '11 211$ - 1K
of robotic, autonomous 0n—0rbit refueling and recon— ,’ . 1: a 7
ﬁguration of satellites to support a broad range of
future US national security and commercial space pro— Fig. 4. Sample of different ORU Interfaces on 188.
grams [2]. Two critical components of the ASTRO
and NextSat spacecrafts were battery and computer shows the robotic handle, or Probe Fixture Assembly
sub—systerns which were designed as ORUs with stan— (PFA) with which the Orbital Express Manipulator
dardized non—proprietary satellite servicing interfaces System handled both ORUs and the NextSat. It also
(mechanical, electrical, etc.)deve10ped by MDA. Fig. 5 shows the standard ORU Container Assembly (OCA)

"
"6","R. Rembala, C. Ower / Acta Astronautica 65 (2009) 912—920 917
simply to secure the tool to its interface on a pay—
. ,‘ _;;‘ _ . r A 7 load. Such a basic function would beneﬁt tremendously
.. ""‘ﬁ; = ' , . . ‘- m _; a from automated command scripts. Adaptive, smarter,
7“ [‘3 34A C3 5"". 5 and more automated s t d d t h l —
. a i _, + . . Y? em? ? 9. e P. Par
.4? ‘_ m’ 5 -,. .. ‘ ‘- tition such system functions into more intuitive higher
.17-? iimﬁ '; '3 . level sequences. From the operator/user point of View,
7 Q ~74 ”tﬂ; W I- S} ’. > this will minimize the monotony and error—prone nature
‘ '~ 3; ’l ‘ _ of executing long routine operations and command se—
vii“ f , .. L9 ; quences. Such higher level system functions allow the
' ~ =9» ‘7 a 3 ° user to focus more on what is required to be performed
‘;\— and less on how to actually perform it. Furthermore, au—
1 , : _ , _- ‘ tomation of routine and repetitive system tasks allows
I I 1' ‘ ‘ l _ .- the crew to focus training and proﬁciency in areas of
. . . h “—r ' J "" f system usage where crew involvement is critical to mis—
/' ' , - ' g ‘1"" sion safety and/or success. Requiring crew to maintain
1‘ , -' J t .. i ._ ‘ ‘ proﬁciency in the most basic system functions distracts
.l , a i. "" / them from training for and maintaining a high level of
' ’3‘..- 35:3? E '7 r A 1 . ’ competency in the critical aspects of the operation.

‘ ,\ j _. ' 15.11 ‘ ' _- . In the M88, some level of command automation
. “ _““""~< A: 7 «M; - was achieved through the Operations Control Software
7' a ' (OCS) for high level control of the SSRMS and SPDM.
Fig. 5. Standardized OE ORU interfaces: (clockwise from bottom WhilC Simplifying thC 11861” intCIaCtiOn With the 133
left) ORU container assembly (OCA) with probe ﬁxture assembly robotic systems, the OCS unfortunately had hard_c0ded
(PFA), ORU interface assembly (01A), 01A to OCA mating inter— logic in the software’s command sequences which
face' impacted the ability for the system to work—around
off—nominal or unforeseen events. An automated script
in which the battery and computer ORUs were housed execution capability would have provided ﬂexibility
as well as the standardized ORU interface assembly and expandability to cope with issues like these. Not
(01A) to attach the ORU container to the spacecraft. only can reconﬁgurable high level scripting command
One of the goals of the mission was to demonstrate interfaces automate tedious routine functions, they
the effectiveness and efﬁciency gained by using such can also provide cost savings by allowing new com—
interfaces, thereby facilitating the establishment of an mand sequences to be developed (or ﬁxed when bugs
industry wide on—orbit servicing standard. Apart from are found) without the need for CSCI redevelopment,

successfully demonstrating autonomous ORU transfers retest, and recertiﬁcation.
during the mission, another important beneﬁt of these On the M88 program, an automated script driven
standardized interfaces is that the effort to plan and commanding tool (SAIF) was developed for SSRMS
verify ORU transfers for this mission was achieved with and SPDM integration testing that provides such a ca—
an order of magnitude reduction in the effort compared pability. SAIF permits command scripts to be generated
with past 188 planning and veriﬁcation efforts. with telemetry driven conditional logic to control the
lower level robotic systems. This capability allows for
3. Simplifying command interface and automating simple automated testing of the robotic systems on the
routine functions ground and in the future this concept could be extended
to provide automated control of the robotic systems on—

In general, the more basic a command level that a orbit.

system adopts, the more tedious routine system opera— While automated sequences and high level system
tions become from a user perspective. In turn, this often commanding is recommended to simplify system op—
results in a more error—prone task outcome. A case in erability thereby minimizing system pfOﬁCiCIle iSSUCS,
point is the Robotic Micro Conical Tool (RMCT) devel— it is recognized that manual override control functions
oped to allow the SPDM to capture non—standard robotic are still required by on—orbit crew or ground support
ﬁxtures. Complexities in both the tool and the software teams under off—nominal situations since software or
design require the user to issue a total of 18 commands rule—based script logic can sometimes get confused by
through a point and Click graphical user interface, all feedback from sensor hardware that has experienced

"
"7","918 R. Rembala, C. Ower / Acta Astronautica 65 (2009) 912—920
a failure. When manual override functions are imple— to support variable autonomy and allow for introduc—
mented, they must be implemented such that they (10 tion of autonomy enhancements over the life of the sys—
not impose any software restrictions (apart from safety tern. ROSA can provide astronauts and operators on the
functions which require safety overrides) which may ground with the ability to choose the level of autonomy
preclude the ability to perform potential off—nominal with which to instruct the system to perform an oper—
operations in the future. ation, and to permit the operator to generate operation
scripts that seamlessly incorporate mixtures of high and
4. Reducing mission execution overhead—remote low level commands within a single operation. In gen—
command and control (ground control) eral, it contains a mixture of goals or tasks and low level
commands that control the operation. The use of goals to
One Of the ""way—of—doing—business” adjustments that the greatest extent possible simpliﬁes operations plan—
was needed for SSRMS over the original SRMS prac— ning. In preparation for an operation, the script and ap—
tices was in the sustaining engineering support func— propriate models are loaded. During execution the crew
tion. With the SRMS, minor 0n—0rbit anomalies could may View the operation. However, the crew need not
be investigated in detail after the mission was com— directly control the execution, but maintains the ability
pleted and the arm returned to earth. For the SSRMS to interfere as required. In its most general form, ROSA
which remains on—orbit, engineering investigations are consists of (1) sensors to determine the external enVi—
more challenging. However, contrary to initial eXpecta— ronment and system state, (2) a behavioral executor t0
tions, the challenge in trouble—shooting SSRMS anoma— guide operations, (3) an inference engine that invokes
lies was not due to lack of ﬂight data or insight into and terminates behaviors, (4) an intelligent operations
the arm behaviour, but rather lack of trouble—shooting supervisor that controls operations based on high level
opportunities. Scarce availability of on—orbit crew time goals, and (5) a planning and cognitive modeling en—
has resulted in engineering support teams having to wait gine.
months before even simple trouble—shooting investiga— Early in the mission, the MDA—developed manipula—
tions could be scheduled and executed. Relying on the tor arm on the ASTRO was used to perform the ﬁrst
availability of on—orbit crew has been an impractical way autonomous battery ORU transfer from the ASTRO,
of characterizing and maintaining the health of the 88— where it had been located since launch to the NextSat.
RMS [3]. The recent implementation of ground—based This transfer marked the ﬁrst time one satellite has au—
command and control of the SSRMS has provided an in— tonomously transferred a battery to another spacecraft
valuable tool in supporting more efﬁcient and timely en— using a robotic manipulator arm. All operations went
gineering trouble—shooting. Future long duration space as planned with no anomalies, with the Operations per—
missions can eXpect similar engineering support bene— formed at the lowest autonomy level, requiring several
ﬁts if ground control is implemented. ATPs (“approvals to proceed”) from the ground opera—
Apart from supporting engineering investigations, tor at speciﬁed decision points in the transfer operation.
signiﬁcant beneﬁts are also attained by allowing robotic A later mission scenario culminated in a comprehen—
control from the ground for the execution of routine sive, fully autonomous servicing demonstration which
operations. Ground control allows for the optimal sepa— included autonomous rendezvous and docking from 7
ration of on—orbit crew and ground functions and saves km separation, followed by propellant transfer. Later in
signiﬁcant on—orbit crew time [3]. that mission scenario, the manipulator system on AS—
Currently, the new ground command capability is rou— TRO transferred its battery to NextSat in the industry’s
tinely used to relocate the SSRMS in preparation for ﬁrst fully autonomous battery transfer operation, with
upcoming operations and to perform ISS surveys. With no ATPs required. Incorporating this type of capabil—
the future launch of the SPDM in 2008, the utilization ity into the present 133 operations or the assembly and
of ground control is expected to increase dramatically. maintenance of future space stations offers signiﬁcant
The OE demonstration mission provided an initial beneﬁts.
glimpse of the extent to which assembly and/or main—
tenance tasks can be taken using ground control and a 5. Maintaining crew proﬁciency during long
supervised autonomous command and control strategy. duration space ﬂight
In order to command and control the OE manipulator
from the ground during critical ORU transfers, MDA One of the potential issues that can arise during long
applied the Remote Operation Supervised Autonomy duration human space ﬂight is ensuring that the skills
(ROSA) [4], a command and control system framework acquired by the crew on the ground before the mission

"
"8","R. Rembala, C. Ower / Acta Astronautica 65 (2009) 912—920 919
are retained until they are required to be put to use on— SSRMS with the payload is not reviewed—only the
orbit. Drawing on points touched—upon elsewhere in this sequence of steps. This form of proﬁciency training
paper, the following steps can be taken to simplify the can only target speciﬁc knowledge and skill elements
task of maintaining crew proﬁciency. rather than the full range required for complex MSS

operations [5].
5.1. Standardize robotic operations and utilizing Future manned robotic missions can take advantage
common interfaces of high ﬁdelity dynamic simulations to assist the crew
in maintaining proﬁciency by providing validated dy—
As mentioned earlier in this paper, one of the Chal— namic simulations with 3D world graphics models and
lenges in the ISS mission planning process has been contact models and by integrating them with the same
caused by the lack of robotic standards and commonin— user interface that will be used to control the actual
terfaces. Non—standard interfaces have resulted in crew robot. Such a system would permit on—orbit crew to uti—
members needing to perform not only generic training lize a fully representative training platform to simulate
but also a signiﬁcant amount of mission—speciﬁc train— and practice the full spectrum of robotic operations.
ing. That is, while all SRMS and SSRMS operators are
proﬁcient and capable of capturing a standard grapple 6. Automated health monitoring
ﬁxture, the same cannot be said for berthing payloads
to the various different types of berthing interfaces. By During non—time—critical mission phases an auto—
minimizing the number of interfaces to be dealt with, mated health monitoring system on the ground can pro—
the burden of operator skills retention to interact with Vide efﬁciency beneﬁts to the program by eliminating
these interfaces is reduced and more generic training the need to staff support personnel for all disciplines
approach can be adopted. around the clock. MDA has used such an automated
data archival, retrieval, and analysis tool on both the
5.2. Implement ground control and higher level Shuttle and the ISS robotic systems for years. This in—
command and control functions house developed utility, termed “Mass Data”, performs
automated data retrievals from NASA’s real—time data
The implementation of both ground control and archive at the J ohnson Space Center and stores the data
higher level command and control functions through in a locally maintained searchable database. All incom—
automation can help simplify the task of maintaining ing data from NASA is automatically processed by the
crew proﬁciency by allowing the crew to focus on system based on pre—programmed (and reconﬁgurable)
the critical operations. Optimizing the roles and re— rules to automate routine sustaining engineering func—
sponsibilities of the on—orbit crew, the ground, and the tions. Functions currently automated by MDA’s ﬂight
automated systems ensures that areas of proﬁciency data processing system include automatic tracking of
required of the crew are well deﬁned and maintainable. limited life item usage to support logistics and plan—
ning, post—processing of data, as well as automated de—
5.2.1. Develop integrated crew training capability into tection and ﬂagging of off—nominal system events. Use
robotic systems of the system has allowed for very effective near real—
One of the lessons learned in the 188 program is the time retrieval, analysis, understanding, and resolution
identiﬁed need for on—orbit training re—familiarization of system anomalies. Implementing similar automated
for the SSRMS operations and associated assembly data monitoring tools on future systems can provide
tasks. On several occasions, delays in a shuttle launch a cost effective method of system monitoring. Com—
and associated assembly mission resulted in signiﬁcant bining this tool with automated personnel notiﬁcation
durations of time from when the increment (long dura— through e—mail or pagers and providing a remote access
tion stay) crew members on the 188 were trained, and capability can allow an engineering support team to
when the task actually took place. To re—familiarize be gathered (or executed decentralized) on an as—need
themselves with the task, the increment crew performed basis rather than through around—the—Clock monitoring.
“dry—runs” of the operations several days prior to the Adopting such an automated health monitoring system
mission using the actual SSRMS. One shortfall of such would reap the cost beneﬁts of reduced support staff
procedure dry—runs is the obVious inability to practice over the life of the mission. Such efﬁcient mission
the complex assembly sequence with the payload that support infrastructures have already been successfully
is to be installed on the upcoming mission. Because employed and demonstrated by today’s satellite indus—
of this limitation, the performance and response of the try. An example of where this has been done effectively

"
"9","920 R. Rembala, C. Ower / Acta Astronautica 65 (2009) 912—920
includes Landsat—7, which has a “lights out” opera— and in long duration space ﬂight. This paper presented
tions concept. At night, the ground support function observations on existing mission planning and support
is unmanned but automated health monitoring systems practices and provided the following recommendations
downlink and review satellite telemetry and automat— on ways in which these practices could be optimized:
ically notiﬁes the on—call engineers Via text—paging if
problems are detected. 1. Deﬁning and adopting robotic standards early on in
As noted the capability above will greatly aid in im— the program is critical to ensure efﬁcient, cost ef—
proving efﬁciency in non—time—critical mission phases. fective crew training, mission analysis, and mission
Automated health monitoring of a different nature can planning in the future.
aid in the more mission—critical phases. More recently 2. Adopting simple high level command interfaces and
as part of NASA’s Exploration Enterprise [6], an ob— automated script based commanding can simplify
jective of moving towards more crew—centred opera— system usability and operator proﬁciency retention.
tions has been identiﬁed, with the goal of having fewer 3. Providing ground control command capability allows
direct/in—direct operators control more robotic systems. optimal separation of 0n—0rbit and ground crew re—
As robotic systems are imparted with greater degrees sponsibilities and functions.
of autonomy as highlighted above, there is by deﬁni— 4. Automated health monitoring systems during non—
tion less operator interaction and operator control over time critical mission phases can provide an efﬁcient,
the robot’s actions in real time. This may require in— cost saving alternative to around the clock system
creased safety awareness as the increased possibility of monitoring by support staff. Automated safety moni—
failures or program errors can place human safety or toring systems offer the potential to reduce the num—
equipment at risk. Systems such as the On—orbit Safety ber of staff controlling and monitoring a time critical
Monitor (OSM) [7] have been developed with this in mission task.
mind. The objective of systems such as OSM project
is to provide safety monitoring functions/technologies References
which will improve the safety of the remote teleopera—
tion of robots where continuous human monitoring is Ci- [1] International Space Station Familiarization, ISS FAM C 21109,
ther cost—prohibitive, or not possible. The OSM system Reﬁsmn B’ OCtOber 18’ 2001' _ _
. . . [2] Orbltal Express Space Operatlons Architecture, DARPA
18 a bundle Of funCtlonS/teChnOIOgles to help compen— Tactical Technology Ofﬁce (http://www.darpa.mil/tt0/
sate for the operator’s poor situational awareness and programs/oehtml).
mitigate the risks that come with remote teleoperation 0f [3] R. Rembala, S. Aziz, Increasing the utilization of the ISS
robots (e.g. ground—based control of space robotic sys— Mobile Sericing Systém through groynd control, in: IAC-05-
tems) and/or autonomous operation. OSM’S approach 1J3a4.:r.1042,0(5)gth Internatlonal Astronautlcal Congress, Fukuoka,
is based on using real_time data from a computer Vi_ [4] R.p Gillett, .M. Greenspan, et al., Remote operation with
sion system for authenticating the synthetic models used supervised autonomy (ROSA), in: Proceedings Of the 6th
for collision detection, and its ability to issue warnings International Symposium on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics
when it detects that safety is being compromised by & Automation in Space, St-Hubert, Quebec, 2001-
potential collisions. This could provide systems such [5] L. Evans, E. Greenberg, Innovative solutions for maintaining
. . . on—orblt crew skllls proﬁc1ency: a key to successful long
as the MOblle SCI‘VIClng SyStem on 188 01‘ Other fmure duration space missions, in: IAC—OS—B4.4.06, 56th International
space station assembly robotic systems with much of Astronautical Congress, Fukuoka, Japan, 2005.
the needed situational awareness capabilities that they [6] NASA Document, The Vision for Space Exploration, February
currently lack for mission critical operations. 2004-
[7] G. Yang, M. Bondy, P. Jasiobedzki, M. Greenspan, M. Doyon,
7. Caucasians 3:123 ?fszszgssnsizzfg 2351,61aﬁsaisaa
Symposium on Robot Design, Dynamics and Control, Montreal,
Mission planning and operations will need to evolve Canada, 2004.
to become more time efﬁcient, and therefore cost—
effective, for supporting crews on future space stations

"
