"","x"
"1","International Journal OfAstrobiology 14 (1): 115—122 (2015)
doi:10.1017/Sl473550414000123 © Cambridge University Press 2014
O 0
Impact shocked rocks as protectlve habltats
O
on an anOXIc early Earth
Casey C. Bryce', Gerda Horneckz, Elke Rabbowz, Howell G. M. Edwards?”4 and
Charles S. Cockell'
1UK Centrefor Astrobiology, School OfPhySics and Astronomy, University ofEdinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK
e-mail: Casey. Bryce@ed. ac. uk
2German Aerospace Center DLR, Institute ofAerospace Medicine, Koeln, Germany
3 Centrefor Astrobiology and Extremophiles Research, School ofLife Sciences, University OfBradford, Bradford, UK
4Department ofPhySics and Astronomy, Space Science Research Centre, University OfLeicester, Leicester, UK
Abstract: On Earth, microorganisms living under intense ultraviolet (UV) radiation stress can adopt
endolithic lifestyles, growing within cracks and pore spaces in rocks. Intense UV irradiation encountered by
microbes leads to death and signiﬁcant damage to bioniolecules, which also severely diminishes the
likelihood of detecting signatures of life. Here we show that porous rocks shocked by asteroid or comet
impacts provide protection for phototrophs and their bioniolecules during 22 months of UV radiation
exposure outside the International Space Station. The UV spectrum used approximated the high-UV ﬂux on
the surface of planets lacking ozone shields such as the early Earth. These data provide a demonstration that
endolithic habitats can provide a refugium from the worst-case UV radiation environments on young planets
and an empirical refutation of the idea that early intense UV radiation ﬂuxes would have prevented
phototrophs without the ability to form microbial mats or produce UV protective pigments from colonizing
the surface of early landmasses.
Received 12 February 2014, accepted 27 March 2014, first published online 14 May 2014
Key words: chroococcidiopsis, early life, EXPOSE-R, impacts, ISS, low Earth orbit, UV.
Introduction colonization is crystalline rocks shocked by asteroid and comet
impacts, including gneisses, which become more porous as a
For the last2.5 billion years, the Earth has been protected from result of the intense pressures and temperatures of impact
harmful ultraviolet (UV) radiation by the ozone shield shock (Cockell et al. 2002). Cockell et al. (2002) calculated that
(Kastings & Siefert 2002). However, the ﬁrst 1 billion years organisms at 2mm depth in porous impact-shocked gneiss
of life’s evolution occurred under a nitrogen and carbon under these early Earth radiation conditions would only
dioxide atmosphere which does not have the same ability to encounter a maximum of one tenth of the DNA damage
absorb UV radiation (Cockell & Horneck 2001). Organisms encountered on the surface of the Earth today, whilst still
attempting to survive on the Earth’s surface prior to the rise in receiving sufﬁcient photosynthetically active radiation for
oxygen would receive a radiation dose up to 1000 times more (anoxygenic or oxygenic) photosynthesis.
damaging to DNA than today (Cockell & Horneck 2001). Previous work has only tested the protection afforded by
Indeed, it was originally proposed that the intense UV rocks to UV radiation for a short period (Cockell et al. 2003)
radiation ﬂux experienced on the early Earth might have and only using the present-day terrestrial ﬂux. One location in
prevented the colonization of the land masses (Berkner & which the putative early earth UV radiation ﬂux can be
Marshall 1965). simulated is low Earth orbit (LEO) (Rettberg et al. 1998),
In high-UV environments on Earth today a number of where cut-off ﬁlters can be used to attenuate the extraterrestrial
survival strategies are observed. One such strategy is the UV ﬂux to simulate early Earth UV ﬂuxes.
matting habitat, whereby organisms achieve protection within In the study presented here, we used the long-term exposure
thick laminated structures such as stromatolites. This has long facility, EXPOSE-R, aboard the International Space Station to
been recognized as apotentialmeans for early surface-dwelling test the ability of an impact shocked endolithic substrate to
organisms to have been protected from early intense UV provide adequate protection for phototrophs under a simu-
radiation (Margulis et al. 1976; Westall et al. 2006). lated worst-case prediction for early Earth’s UV radiation
Alternatively, organisms commonly grow in the interior of regime. Here oxygenic phototrophs are studied. There are
rocky substrates or under them (Friedmann 1980). These numerous lines of evidence which suggests oxygenic photo-
organisms are known as endoliths and hypoliths, respectively. synthesis had evolved well before the atmosphere became
The depth of penetration of UV radiation into a rock will oxygenated on a large scale (Buick 2008). Therefore oxygenic
depend on the substrate. One rock substrate suitable for photosynthesis would almost certainly have existed before

"
"2","116 Casey C. Bryce et aI.
UV-protection from the ozone shield was achieved. However, been described from a wide range of extreme habitats such as
the principle we demonstrate is equally applicable to anoxy- hot springs (Geitler 1933), hypersaline (Dor et al. 1991) and
genic photosynthesizers. freshwater (Komarek & Hindak 1975) environments, hot and
cold deserts (Friedmann 1980; Friedmann & Ocampo-
Friedmann 1985; Budel & Wessels 1991) and within lichens
Materials and methods as cyanobionts (Budel & Henssen 1983). In the most extreme
hot, cold, arid and saline habitats on Earth, it is generally
Organism and substrate 56186110” found to be the dominant cyanobacterium (Friedmann &
In this exposure experiment impact-shocked gneiss from the Ocampo-Friedman 1995). Chroococcidiopsis commonly
Haughton Impact Crater in the Canadian High Arctic was adopts an endolithic lifestyle. The rocks it inhabits act as a
selected as a test substrate. A detailed outline of the geology of shield from harmful environmental conditions (Friedmann
the Haughton Impact Structure from which the rocks were 1980).
obtained can be found in Osinski et al. (2005). For a rock to be The long-term survival of Chroococcidiopsis aboard the ISS
colonized it has to be suitably porous. Sandstones or vesicular was demonstrated as part of the ESA EXPOSE-E mission
volcanic rocks are porous under normal geological conditions (Cockell et al. 2011). Cells of Chroococcidiopsis sp. 029 were
making them good candidates for colonization (Cockell & used to artiﬁcially augmentanaturalphototroph bioﬁlm which
Osinski 2007). Crystalline rocks are generally low porosity and was exposed to space conditions. These cells were shown to be
a poor prospect for colonization. However, asteroid and comet Viable after 534 days in LEO exposed to the full extraterrestrial
impacts, widely considered to be a purely destructive force, UV radiation spectrum. This survival was attributed to the
have the ability to alter crystalline rocks in a way which high numbers of Chroococcidiopsis cells relative to the
increases the porosity, and therefore the availability of abundance of other species in the natural phototroph
microhabitats within the rock structure (Cockell et al. 2002, community and protection of live cells by dead cells under a
2003; Fike et al. 2002; Pontefract et al. 2012). Cockell et al. bioﬁlm of cells, which was not a monolayer. In the experiment
(2002) describe a 25 times increase in the porosity of gneiss reported here, the exposure time was extended (22 months
(a crystalline, low-porosity metamorphic rock) which had been compared to 18 for EXPOSE-E) and pure cultures of
highly shocked by impact compared to nearby lightly shocked Chroococcidiopsis used in sample preparation. The samples
or non-shocked gneiss of the same parent material. They on glass discs have both high numbers of Chroococcidiopsis
observe that this increased porosity allows bands of photo- cells and a thin layer of cells so we will be able to test if these are
trophic cyanobacteria to colonize below the surface of the rock the only attributes contributing to survival in the previous
in a high-radiation natural environment. EXPOSE-E experiment.

The exposed land on the early Earth, whilst containing some
sedimentary lithologies, would most likely have been pre- Sample preparation
dominantly comprised of crystalline rocks (Moorbath 2005). Chroococcidiopsis sp. CCMEE 029 was obtained from the
In the period between 4.1 and 3.8 billion years ago, asteroid Culture Collection of Microorganisms from Extreme
impacts were many orders of magnitude more common than EnVironrnents (CCMEE) established by E. Imre Friedmann
today (Chyba & Owen 1994). Thus, when life appeared, and now maintained at the University of Rome ‘Tor Vergata’.
impacts would have been widespread and could have altered Cells were cultured in BG-ll media as described previously
the crystalline surface to provide suitable habitats in which the (Cockell et al. 2005). An aliquot of cells (~ 1.5 X 106 cells) were
ﬁrst microbes could survive under the harsh UV conditions transferred evenly onto the surface of 0.5 cm-diameter sterile
encountered on the Earth’s land masses. glass discs or 1cm-diameter discs of impact-shocked gneiss

Since asteroid and comet impacts are ubiquitous throughout (Fig. 1). The impact-shocked gneiss was 5 mm thick, a
the universe, we can extend our hypothesis that impact- thickness within which Visible light transmission in the
shocked rocks provide important habitats to any rocky planet majority of the substrate is sufﬁcient to support photosynthetic
which lacks atmospheric oxygen and is therefore subject to growth in natural communities that inhabit these rocks
intense UV radiation exposure. This could be particularly (Cockell et al. 2002).
important on planets where the geology is dominated by low-
porosity crystalline rocks rather than sedimentary lithologies Exposure conditions
and thus where potential endolithic habitats would be in short The International Space Station (ISS) orbits the Earth at an
supply. altitude of around 450 km, in a region termed ‘low Earth orbit’

Further details on the shocked gneiss can be found in Fike (LEO). In this region, our organisms are exposed to a variety of
et al. (2002) and Cockell et al. (2002). Cockell et al. (2002) extremes: space vacuum, intense radiation bombardment from
discuss the improvements for life which resulted from the both solar and galactic sources as well as extreme and variable
impact which altered the gneiss used here to its current state. temperatures (Horneck et al. 2010).

The polyextrernotolerant cyanobacterium Chroococcidiopsis The samples were ﬁxed into the European Space Agency
sp.029 was selected as a model organism. Chroococcidiopsis is Expose-R facility in March 2009. The technical speciﬁcations
one of the most tolerant to extremes of all of the known of this facility have been described previously by Rabbow et al.
cyanobacteria. It is remarkably versatile with strains having (2009). The EXPOSE facility, run by the European Space

"
"3","Impact shocked habitats on early Earth 117
All of the samples on rock discs were housed in vented
containers. Six rock discs were exposed to 100% of the UV
radiation >110nm and the remaining siX kept dark. These
rocks were exposed to 80 nm (110—190 nm) of UVC radiation
not expected to have been encountered on the early Earth and
therefore experienced a UV spectrum on their surface more
severe than the worst-case early Earth spectrum. Identically
prepared control samples were kept dark in the laboratory for
the duration of the experiment. The experiment was conducted
for 22 months (10 March 2009—21 February 2011).
Raman spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy was used to investigate the destruction of
biomolecules on exposure to the extreme conditions in LEO.
Fig' 1f ,Image diSplaymg the impaCt'ShOCked gneiss (right) and We used the presence or absence of carotenoids as a proxy for
borosﬂlcate glass (left) used as substrates for the experiment. . . . . .
blomolecule destructlon 1n our experlments. Caroten01ds are a
group of coloured pigments which are ubiquitous in nature,
Agency (ESA), is a multi-user facility which was designed to particularly in photosynthetic organisms like cyanobacteria
host medium- to long-term experiments (around 1.5 years) and plants. Excitation of a carotenoid containing sample at
aboard the ISS. It is comprised of three trays containing 514nm will reveal acharacteristic spectrum (Fig. 2), where the
hundreds of individual compartments in which samples are Raman shifts relate to the stretching of the C=C and C—C
housed. The trays can be vented to the space environment or bonds and to the bending of the C—CH groups within the
sealed and pressurized with deﬁned gases to simulate an conjugated molecule (Jorge Villar & Edwards 2006).
atmosphere. A variety of ﬁlters are used to control the The observed Raman peaks arise from a resonance effect
wavelength and intensity of radiation the samples are exposed which causes an ampliﬁcation of the band intensities above the
to. A range of bacteria, cyanobacteria, fungi, plants and some background. This has proved to be extremely effective in the
invertebrates have previously been shown to survive exposure analysis of biological samples which are complex, of low
to the full range of space conditions or selected parameters of it concentration or which, as is common in cyanobacteria, are
(summarized in Horneck er al. 2010). prone to being obscured by the signiﬁcantly stronger ﬂuores-
A total of 36 glass discs and 12 rock discs were tested. Half of cence emission excited by Visible laser wavelengths. The
the glass discs were housed in containers which were vented to technique is particularly suited to the analysis of organic
allow exposure to the vacuum of space whilst half were in materials in mineral matrices, is also non-destructive and is
sealed containers ﬁlled with argon gas. These experiments therefore excellent for studies such as these where samples are
therefore investigate the effects of UV radiation alone, but do extremely precious. It has been used on numerous occasions to
not take into account any potential confounding effects of detect cyanobacterial biomarkers from extreme environments
interactions between UV radiation and atmospheric compo- (e.g. Jorge Villar & Edwards 2006; Wang et al. 2010; Vitek
nents that might have been present in the early Earth 61 al. 2010; Cockell er al. 2011).
atmosphere such as carbon dioxide. Twelve glass discs in A Renishaw inVia laser Raman microscope (Renishaw,
each condition were exposed to UV radiation whilst the rest UK) was used and samples were excited at a wavelength of
were kept dark. MgF2 or Suprasil windows were used which let 514 nm. The laser was typically operated at 5% power with
through UV > 110 nm or > 170 nm, respectively. In the Suprasil each spectrum being an average of ten acquisitions. Data were
windows further cut-off ﬁlters were used to reduce the ﬁnal UV analysed using the commercial WiRE 3.2 software package
cut-off to >200 nm. Neutral density ﬁlters were used to control (Renishaw, UK)
radiation dose to 0.01, 1 or 100% of the total radiation (no Before analysis of the rock discs, a cross-section was
neutral density ﬁlter). Three glass discs in each container obtained with a sterile chisel. A positive or negative result for
(sealed or vented) were exposed to 100% UV> 200 nm, two the carotenoid spectra both on the UV-exposed surface of the
exposed to 1% UV>200 nm and three exposed to 0.01% disc and the interior was recorded. Selection of the spot on
UV > 200 nm. These conditions were repeated for which to sample within the rock was guided by the location of
UV> 110 nm to investigate the effects of very short wave- patches of cells as, owing to irregularities in pore spaces, they
lengths of UV radiation. are not homogeneously distributed throughout the rock. For
The UV conditions encountered by each sample type are samples which were highly ﬂuorescent at this level, the laser
summarized in Table 1. For the glass discs we report the power was reduced to 1% to ensure that the signal was not
averages across the two compartments (vented or sealed) as hidden by the attendant ﬂuorescence generated. Control
this should not inﬂuence the UV ﬂux. The method of spectra were also obtained from a segment of rock on which
calculating UV ﬁuences throughout the experiment are there were no cells and from dried cells of Chroococcidiopsis
discussed in detail in Rabbow er a1. (2014, this issue). sp.029 on BG-ll agar.

"
"4","118 Casey C. Bryce et aI.
‘5 NH 62:? 62: 62:
g E x S X g x
-~ H m x m. m KO.
'3‘: .8 3 ﬂ 8 3 ﬂ 5?» ﬂ
sﬁééiééié
Te a x x <I- X x \o x
E g N. M. R M. H. S IH.
m 00 w—4 w—4 [\ w—4 w—4 OO
8 p Q m
'g S § § 8‘? S
H‘ X o “1 <I- X
9"" m
a BEHEaHE/
(I) \0 <1“ 0 \0 <1“ 00 \D
*5 NH 2 S E S S E 2
E S l: i a (>52 3’: E 0):? m1 Hm 13m um um 1mm
V m ln to m Hl- HI- «3
Harman shift {cm}
a E 3 VS vi’ Fig. 2. Raman spectra taken from Chroococcidiopsis cells displaying
g f“ m. A Z : the typical carotenoid signature where peaks correspond to the
Sr E :L § 3 2? fl stretching of the C = C and C—C bonds and the bending of the C—CH
E? EELﬁVéEOLQVE group.
3 +| +|
>§é§:é§:é H _ H
D m ‘9 ‘0 ‘0 ‘r ‘9 ‘9 ‘r One glass disc from each condltlon was probed 1n trlphcate
A with a positive or negative result for the typical carotenoid
0 MC:
3 A A H spectra recorded.
H; g g 3: Both the glass and the rock used for this experiment were
g ﬂHA ﬂHA ﬂ investi ated in an identical manner to the experimental
m <I- N KO. <[- l\ ‘1'. <1- g _
'5 N“ S m 0 S m 0 S sam les to ensure that the substrate drd not have an
O E i', +| x i', +| x p
> m i l“ : w 0 [5 tr; independent signal which could confuse the results.
D £ «a 8 N° N° “HO H H
A A Ampliﬁcation 0f16S rRNA genes from Chroococcidopsis on
N .g #9 VS A glass discs
S ”3 X x \0
§ § §- 2 § To assess the effect of direct UV radiation exposure on DNA
5 g 3 g 3 $3 a 3 preservation, 16S rRNA was ampliﬁed from the glass discs in
§ EN? 3 E 3: 3 E E 3 UV radiation exposed and dark conditions. Cells were
Q E 3 0‘2 g g 3 § ‘3 S; recovered from glass discs by vortexing the discs in 200 pl of
go sterile MilliQ water. Cells were lysed by cryogenic grinding to a
g g p g g ﬁne powder following sequential freeze—thawing cycles in
E g 3 g g A 3 liquid N2. . . .
b g g {I 301; 3 Polymerase cha1n reactlon (PCR) was performed us1ng
m +| 2 ln A tn . . . .
% EENA meg o\° 2 i3 2 cyanobacterla spe01ﬁc prlmers, forward prrmer CYA106F
E <>t E 35; 3 ﬂ :3: 19 ﬂ [3 and reverse rimer CYC781R (Nubel et al. 1997). CYA718
G D ,M - X .—4 . (\l <I- . p
h V V V m m V V m was an e uimolar mixture of CYA781R(a) and CYA781R
Q q
§ g ppp (b). The primers were synthesized commercially (Sigma-
>—x ‘3 § a G 3 3 3 Aldrich UK)
Q -~ H a : x x x ’ ' . -
""SS 3“ £33 £33 PCR ampliﬁcatrons were performed w1th an Eppendorf
g Hg A ""O ""O ""O ""O ""O ""O ""O epgradient S mastercycler. Touchdown PCR was performed
5 E E E E E E E E E (Korbie & Mattick 2008), to maximize sensitivity and
§ m 3 H H H H H H H specrﬁcny. 100 pl PCR reactlons contalned 50 pmoles of each
§ 3 primer, 25 nmol each of dNTP (Roche, Penzberg, Germany),
~§ «.5 a O H O H O 200 pg of BSA (New England Biolabs, Herts, UK), 10 p1 of
E o\° z; e H 3 e H 3 e lOXPCR buffer and 20111 of DNA sample. The MgCl2
E a concentration present in the reaction mixture was supplemen-
E a E“ a a a ted to give a ﬁnal concentration of 2.5 mM. Reactions were
Q) a a
g?) E. E g g g started by the addltlon 0f 4 U of SuperTaq DNA polymerase
5 <6 H H . . . . . .
g 0 3 H 8 H (Camblo, Ltd, Cambrrdge, UK) after an 1n1t1a1 denaturatlon
‘9 “d step (5 min at 94 °C), at 80 °C. The ﬁrst incubation cycle was
H' 4:9 g g g 1 min at 94 °C, 1 min at 65 °C and 1 min at 72 °C. In the second
% 783* g g g cycle, the annealing temperature was decreased by 1—64 °C, in
S c}? '5 '5 o? the third cycle by 1—63 °C, and so on in the same stepwise

"
"5","Impact shocked habitats on early Earth 119
manner until the annealing temperature was 54 °C (after 12
cycles). Twenty-ﬁve further cycles were performed at this
annealing temperature followed by a ﬁnal elongation step of
10 min at 72 °C. The results shown are of a minimum of two
independent ampliﬁcations. The ampliﬁcation products were it ,i .1"" __
resolved on a 1% TAE agarose gel (40 mM Tris-acetate, 1 mM -- -""'.' 'u *u _ -1__.=._
EDTA, pH 8.0) stained with SYBR Safe DNA gel stain
(Invitrogen).
The PCR aims only to provide a qualitative assessment of
DNA destruction. Since each sample was prepared identically,
a negative result indicates DNA destruction compared to the T
control samples which consistently display a band.
Fig. 3. Image showing colour change in UV-exposed rocks (left)
POSI-ﬂight culturing compared to rock kept dark in LEO (right).
On return, one-third of each rock disc was placed in 100 ml of
BG-ll media with triplicate cultures for each. exposure Raman Spectroscopy
condition. Subsequent growth was identiﬁed using bright In our samples, we found that glass discs which had been
ﬁeld microscopy. Since the rock could not be broken into inoculated with cells of Chroococcidiopsis and either stored
segnients Wlth adequate accuracy and cells were unevenly under laboratory conditions or kept dark whilst in the
distributed throughout the pore space, calculation of the exact EXPOSE-R facility clearly exhibited the characteristic car-
numbertof cells on each fragment Of rock used tor the otenoid bands described above. This indicates that despite the
inoculation was not poss1ble. Therefore, .only a pos1t1ve or death of the cells during the period of desiccation the
negative result for growth could be obtained. For the glass biomolecular carotenoids had not under one de radation.
discs, one disc for each exposure condition was added to fresh I h UV (1 1 1 g d' f 'd
BG-ll media. 11 t e -eXpose samp es on g ass 1scs t. e caroten01
peaks were only detectable at a very low level in one sample
. . which had been exposed to 0.01% of the incoming radiation
S can n m g electron m ZCVOSCOP y >110 nm in a vented container. All other UV-eXposed samples
Both rock (11303 and glass (11303 were imaged using scanning tested exhibited no spectral peaks. Variations in the back-
electron microscopy. The rock discs were coated in gold before ground ﬂuorescence emission intensity were observed in
imaging using a Philips XL30CP scanning electron microscope several of these U V-eXposed samples.
(SEM) (Philips, UK) operated at 1 mbar pressure. Images were Rock discs which had been exposed to UV in LEO exhibited
obtained using the absorbed current detector (AE1) at a voltage a browning of the surface which was not observed in rock discs
0t 20 kV- which had been kept dark (Fig. 3). The spectra obtained from
Observations on the glass (11303 were carried out “Sing a cells in the rock discs are displayed in Fig. 4. For cells on rock
CamScan MX2500 SEM (CarnScan, UK) operated in discs stored in the lab or kept dark in LEO the carotenoid
controlled pressure mode (Envac, 30 Pa) and coupled to signal was detected both on the surface and in the subsurface
energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) With Noran Vantage (Fig. 4(a) and (b)). In the rock discs it was found that cells on
system and Vista software. Images were recorded at a working the UV-eXposed surfaces of the rocks had experienced similar
distance 0t 20 mm using the AEI at a voltage 0t 20 kV- destruction to carotenoids as that exhibited by cells on glass
UV-eXposed discs (Fig. 4(c)). Cells on the surface of the rocks
Results imaged through the Raman microscope had turned brown
during exposure and they did not eXhibit any characteristic
Post-ﬂight culturing Raman peaks when probed (Fig. 4(c)). However, below the
Within 4 weeks of inoculation of the fragments of rock discs, surface in the cleaved samples, green ﬂecks were observed
numerous 0.5_1 mm green specks were observed on the rock which when probed at 514 nm exhibited the typical carotenoid
fragments. After 2 months, growth was clearly observed in the Raman spectral signals (Fig. 4(c)). This demonstrates that the
media of all experimental samples whether stored in the rocks were effective in shielding the cells housed internally
laboratory, kept dark in LEO or UV exposed in LEO. from 100% exposure to the full extraterrestrial radiation dose
Chroococcidiopsis cells were conﬁrmed under bright ﬁeld >110 nm. We have determined that WhhSt some ﬂuorescence
microscopy. Some variability in the growth rates and contribution from glassy minerals in the rocks is present there
concentrations of cells between conditions was observed but is no interference that would confuse the interpretation of these
this was not quantiﬁable due to the necessary inaccuracies in characteristic carotenoid spectral signals.
the number of cells used for inoculation.
It was found that no samples on glass discs, whether in LEO P 01y mer “56 chain reaction
or stored in the lab, had remained Viable for the duration of the The results of the PCR reactions are displayed in Fig. 5. 168
experiment. rRNA was successfully ampliﬁed from all of the cells on glass

"
"6","120 Casey C. Bryce et aI.
L n r | A ..
ab cc: t 0 3 b L Cl 6
.-
E'DEI 'IIIIIUCI 1200 14130- 1EDE| 1360 1—
Haman 5hifl:[r:n1'] - — —
Dark in LEO B
f Fig. 5. Ampliﬁcation of 16S rRNA genes from Chroococcidiopsis on
Sur ace glass discs exposed to various space conditions. (a) Ampliﬁcation of
genes from cells on three glass discs kept dark in sealed containers, (b)
ampliﬁcation of genes from cells on three glass discs kept dark in
vented containers, (c, d) no gene bands observed from cells on UV-
exposed glass discs in sealed (c) or vented, (d) containers, (e) positive
3‘3” WW ”'3‘? ”W 1W“ 130” control (left), negative control (middle) and marker lane (right).
Haman shift [cm ']
UV EKPDEEd “1 LED C originally inoculated with the same numbers of cells. For this
reason normalization of the DNA was not required.
EUFfaCE‘ Scanning electron microscopy
Figure 6 displays SEM images of cells in the pore space of the
rocks in the control (a), dark (b) and UV exposed (c) samples. It
was observed in the UV-eXposed rocks that morphologically
intact cells were present even in pores directly exposed to the
surface. This could suggest that UV bleaching of the cells had
occurred and the biomolecules destroyed whilst the cells still
am} 1mm 12m} mm mm 1300 - - -
Rama” mm [m .} maintained their shape.
SEM images of the glass discs reveal that samples which had
Fig. 4. Raman shift at 514 nm of the patches of cells in the surface and been kept dark, despite being dead on their return t0 Earth,
subsurface of rock discs from each condition. The spectral bands had also retained their morphology (not pictured). This was
indicative of carotenoids is present in the surface and subsurface of the also the case for the glass discs exposed to UV radiation within
laboratory controls and the dark samples from low Earth orbit as well vented containers but intact cells were not observed on glass
as the subsurface of the UV-exposed rocks. The brown cells on the discs which had been kept sealed.
surface of the UV-exposed rocks do not show any distinct peaks but
exhibit an increased ﬂuorescence.
Discussion
discs which had been kept in dark conditions, but not on any In this study, we used the UV radiation conditions found in low
exposed to UV radiation. There was some variation between Earth orbit (LEO) to determine if an endolithic lifestyle could
the intensity of the bands that were detected. The use of the provide suitable shelter for phototrophs on the anoxic early
PCR aimed to provide a proxy for DNA damage to the Earth, or on other anoxic planets, which receive a higher UV
samples. The successful imaging of bands gives a qualitative radiation dose than the Earth’s surface today. Impact shocked
assessment of the destruction of DNA since all discs were gneiss was chosen as the rock substrate to determine whether

"
"7","Impact shocked habitats on early Earth 121
22 months were Viable on their return to Earth. This reveals
A that it would be possible for cyanobacteria to persist in a
desiccated state for almost 2 years in these rocks under the
worst-case UV radiation conditions.

The complete loss of Viability in cells on all of the glass discs
regardless of exposure conditions (and in controls) could be a
result of extreme desiccation of the thin layer of cells on the
glass disc. Cells within clumps inside the rocks might have been
protected by the extracellular polysaccharide of other cells as
observed with other cyanobacteria (Tamaru et al. 2005) or
have had reduced rates of desiccation when they were prepared.

m:nv 5p."" 11,-. |____4 m...-.- The thin layer of cells desiccated onto the ﬂat glass surface will

m"" w m Hf have dried out quickly. Inside the rocks, cells contained within

the liquid would have pooled in pore spaces allowing cells to

B desiccate more slowly, where it would form thick clumps as

~ seen in Fig. 6(a).

‘ Our results on the UV-eXposed glass discs show that direct

exposure to the worst-case early Earth UV radiation condi-

- tions over a long period will have a destructive effect on

biomolecules, destroying both essential pigments and breaking

up DNA even when this was attenuated to only 0.01% of the

incoming UV. Our PCR and Raman spectroscopy results

demonstrate that this damage was not as extensive in discs

which had been kept dark compared to those exposed to UV

m, W [3.31 mm: --_,. radiation. This supports the general consensus that UV

WWWW W radiation exposure is the most destructive aspect of exposure

to space conditions (Horneck et al. 2010). This also emphasizes

C the low survivability of photosynthetic life on the surface of the
early Earth in the absence of active repair.

The positive detection of carotenoid signatures observed by
Raman spectroscopy in cells exposed to 0.01% UV radiation of
>110 nm in vented containers suggests that the radiation dose
received at this level may have been close to a threshold level at
which biological molecules can surVive.

We also observed that UV radiation exposure, death and
biomolecule destruction does not necessarily destroy the
morphology of cells. SEM images of the rock discs showed

mu EPMH 5”” that the morphology of some cells within the rocks remained
-.-r..uw4.u :~:I~ intact regardless of exposure condition or proximity to the
surface. The morphology could also be discerned from cells on
Fig. 6. SEM images of the rock discs show that cell morphology glass discs from all conditions in vacuum but not on discs
observed in the control was preserved during exposure to space housed in argon gas. This could suggest that space vacuum
conditions, both dark and UV radiation exposed (a) rock control disc might be advantageous to the preservation of morphology
kept dark in the lab for the duration of the experiment, (b) rock disc under extreme UV radiation stress. With only one sample
kept dark in LEO and(c) rock disc exPOSCd to 100% UV>110 “m in available for this imaging analysis this result would require
LEO' further conﬁrmation; however, this could suggest that the
presence of a thick atmosphere may be detrimental to
biomarker preservation and detection on a planetary surface
new habitats created by impact events could provide adequate with a high-UV ﬂux.
protection from the higher UV radiation. The extent of carotenoid destruction on directly exposed
Phototrophs have the requirement for photosynthetically cells (either on the glass discs or the surface of the rocks)
active radiation (PAR) for growth, meaning that they must be compared to those within the impact-shocked rocks highlights
exposed to sunlight with the concomitant exposure to UV the importance of a shielding mechanism in high-UV radiation
radiation. Therefore, simply growing at a depth where UV conditions whether on the early Earth or other rocky planetary
radiation is completely extinguished is not an option. surfaces. These data show that impact-shocked rocks provide
We report that organisms within impact-shocked gneiss protection against biomolecule destruction and ultimately loss
exposed to the intense UV radiation environment in LEO for of cell Viability.

"
"8","122 Casey C. Bryce et aI.
We conclude that the protection afforded to organisms Fike, D.A., Cockell, C.S., Pearce, D. & Lee, P. (2002). Heterotrophic

Within impact-shocked rocks is adequate tO preserve Viable microbial colonization of the interior of impact-shocked rocks from

- . . Haughton impact structure, Devon Island, Nunavut, Canadian High

cyanobacterial cells in a desmcated state for at least 22 months . .

_ Arctlc. Int. J. Astrobzol 1, 311—323.

under a UV ﬂux at leaSt equal to the worSt'Case scenarlo 011 the Friedmann, EL (1980). Endolithic microbial life in hot and cold deserts.

early Earth. This result could extend to other terrestrial-type 0mg, Life 10, 223435,

rocky planets lacking a sufﬁcient atmospheric UV radiation Friedmann, El. & 00amp0-Friedmann, R. (1995). A primitiVe

shield. Cells actively growing, unlike the desiccated cells we gyanolﬁcteiigg) 21284131023666 microorganism for terraforming MarS- AdV-

. . . . pace es. , — .

S’tUtileti he_re’ would have the potehtial t0 aCtlveiy repair UV Geitler, L. (1933). Diagnosen neuer Blaualgen von den Dunda Inseln. Arch.

radiation-induced damage (assuming the dose 1S sublethal), Hydrobiol. —Supp112,622—634.

suggesting that our results are conservative. This work Horneek,G.,K1aus,D.M.& Mancinelli, R.L. (2010). Space microbiology.

highlights the potential of impact craters and endolithic Microbial. M01. Biol. Rev. 74, 121—156.

habitats as protective habitats 011 rocky planets With a high- Jorge-Vil1ar, S.E. & Edwards, H.G.M. (2006). Raman spectroscopy in

UV radiation ﬂux and it empirically demonstrates that AStrOblOlOgy' Anal Bioanal’ Chem 384’ 100—113'

_ _ _ _ Kasting, J.F. & Siefert, J.L. (2002). Life and the evolution of Earth’s

phototrophic microorganisms could have colonized early atmosphere. 561-6"" 66 296, 1066—1068.

land masses under a worst-Case UV radiation ﬂux even Without Komarek, J. & Hindak, J. (1975). Taxonomy of the new isolated strains of

a matting ability. Chroococcidiopsis (Cyanophyceae). Arch. Hydrobiol. 13, 311—329.

Korbie, D.J. & Mattick, J .S. (2008). Touchdown PCR for increased
speciﬁcity and sensitivity in PCR ampliﬁcation. Nat. Protoc. 3(9),

Acknowledgements 1452—1454.

Margulis, L., Walker, J .C.G. & Rambler, M. (1976). Reassessment of roles

The aUthorS thank Angela Dawson for her contribUtion t0 the of oxygen and ultraviolet light in Precambrian evolution. Nature 264,

PCR, Peter Chung for assistance With the Raman spectroscopy 620—624.

and Lore Troalen for assistance With the SEM 0n the glass Moorbath, S. (2005). Oldest rocks, earliest life, heaviest impacts and the

discs. The PhD studentship for C. Bryce is funded by EPSRC. HadeamArChéear}tran51t10n° Appl‘ GQOC/wm 5’ 819—824] ,

Nubel, U., Garma-Plchel, F. & Muyzer, G. (1997). PCR prlmers to amphfy
16S rRNA genes from Cyanobacteria. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 63(8),

References 3327—3332-

Osinski, G.R., Lee, R, Spray, J .G., Parnell, J ., Lim, D.S.S., Bunch, T.E.,

Berkner, L.V. & Marshall, LC. (1965). History of major atmospheric Cockell,C.S.&Glass,B. (2005). Geologicaloverview and cratering model
components. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 53, 1215—1225. for the Haughton impact structure, Devon Island, Canadian High Arctic.

Budel, B. & Henssen, A. (1983). Chroococcidiopsis (Cyanophyceae), Met. Planet. Sci. 40, 1759—1776.

a phyeobiont in the lichen family Lichinaceae. Phycologia 22, 367— Pontefract, A., Osinski, G.R., Lindgren, P., Parnell, J., Cockell, C.S. &
375. Southam, G. (2012). The effects of meteorite impacts on the availability

Budel, B. & Wessels, D. (1991). Rock inhabiting blue-green algae of bioessential elements for endolithic organisms. Met. Planet. Sci. 47,
Cyanobacteria from hot arid regions. Algolog. Stud. 64, 85—398. 1681—1691.

Buick, R. (2008). When did oxygenic photosynthesis evolve? Philos. Rabbow, E. et al. (2009). EXPOSE, an astrobiological exposure facility on
T rams. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 363, 2731—2743. the International Space Station — from proposal to ﬂight. Orig. Life. Evol.

Chyba, C.F. & Owen, TC. (1994). Impact delivery of volatiles and Biosph. 39, 581—98.
organic molecules to Earth. In Hazards Due T 0 Comets and Asteroids, Rabbow, E., Rettberg, P., Barczyk, S., Bohmeier, M., Parpart,A., Panitz, C.,
ed. Gehrels, T., pp. 9—58. University of Arizona Press, Arizona. Horneck, G., Burfeindt, J ., Molter, M., J aramillo, E., Pereira, C., WeiB, P.,

Cocke11,C.S. &Horneck, G. (2001). The history ofthe UV radiation climate Willnecker, R., Demets, R., Dettmann, J. &, Reitz, G. (2014). The
of the Earth — theoretical and space-based observations. Photochem. Astrobiological Mission EXPOSE—R on board of the International Space
Photobiol. 73(4), 447—451. Station.

Cockell, C.S. & Osinski, GR. (2007). Impact-induced impoverishment and Rettberg, P., Horneck, G., Strauch, W., Facius, R. & Seckmeyer, G. (1998).
transformation of a sandstone habitat for lithophytic microorganisms. Simulation of planetary UV radiation climate on the example of the early
Meteorit. Planet. Sci. 42, 1985—1993. Earth. Adv. Space Res. 22, 335—339.

Cockell, C.S., Lee, R, Osinski, G., Horneck, G. & Broady, P. (2002). Tamaru,Y.,Takani,Y.,Yoshida,T. &Sakom0to,T. (2005). Crucialrole of
Impaet-induced microbial endolithic habitats. Meteor. Planet. Sci. 37, extracellular polysaccharides in desiccation and freezing tolerance in the
1287—1298. terrestrial cyanobacterium Nostoc commune. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71,

Cockell, C.S., Rettberg, P., Horneck, G., Scherer, K. & Stokes, D.M. (2003). 7327—7333.

Measurements of microbialprotection from ultraviolet radiation in polar Vitek, R, Edwards, H.G.M., Jehlicka, J., Ascaso, C., De los Rios, A.,
terrestrial microhabitats. Polar Biol. 26, 62—69. Valea, S., Jorge-Villar, S.E., Davila, A.F. & Wierzchos, J . (2010).

Cocke11,C.S., Schuerger,A.C.,Billi,D., Friedmann,E.I.&Panitz,C. (2005). Microbial colonization of halite from the hyper-arid Atacama Desert
Effects of a simulated Martian UV ﬂux on the cyanobacterium, studied by Raman spectroscopy. Philos. T rans. R. Soc. A 368(1922),
Chroococcidiopsis Sp 029. Astrobiol. 5, 127—140. 3205—3221.

Cockell, C.S., Rettberg, P., Rabbow, E. & Olsson-Francis, K. Wang, G., Hao, 2., Huang, 2., Chen, L., Li, X., Hu, C. & Liu, Y. (2010).
(2011). Exposure of phototrophs to 548 days in low Earth orbit: Raman spectroscopic analysis of a desert cyanobacterium Nostoc sp. in
microbial selection pressures in outer space and on early Earth. ISME J. response to UVB radiation. Astrobiology 10(8), 783—787.

5, 1671—1682. Westall, F., de Ronde, C. E. J., Southam, G., Grassineau, N., Colas, M.,

Dor, L., Carl, N. & Baldinger, I. (1991). Polymorphisms and salinity Cocke11,C. S. & Lammer, H. (2006). Implications of a 3.472—3.333-Gyr-
tolerance as criterion for differentiation of three new species of old subaerial microbial mat from the Barbeton greenstone belt, South
Chroococcidiopsis (Chrococcidiopsis Chrococcales). Algolog. Stud. 64, Africa for the UV environmental conditions on the early Earth. Philos.
411—421. Trans. R. Soc. B 361, 1857—1875.

"
