"","x"
"1","Bioanal ReV (2012) 4:55—74

DOI 10.1007/s12566-012-0029-6

Measurement of oxidatively generated base damage

to nucleic acids in cells: facts and artifacts

Jean Cadet - Thierry Douki - J ean-Luc Ravanat -

J . Richard Wagner

Received: 5 January 2012 /Accepted: 6 March 2012 /Pub1ished online: 27 March 2012

© Springer—Verlag 2012

Abstract The search for DNA biomarkers of oxidative immunoassays suffer from a lack of speciﬁcity due to the

stress has been hampered for several decades by the lack occurrence of cross-reactiVity With overwhelming normal

of relevant information on base oxidation products and the bases. One major exception concerns the immunodetec-

challenging issue of measuring low amounts of lesions, tion of 5-hydr0xymethylcyt0sine, produced in a relative-

typically a few modiﬁcations Within the range 106—108 1y high yield as an epigenetic DNA modiﬁcation. HPLC—

normal bases. In addition and this was ignored for a long MS/MS is now recognized as the gold standard for measuring

time, there is a risk of artifactual oxidation of overwhelming oxidized bases and nucleosides in human ﬂuids such as urine,

nucleobases during DNA extraction and subsequent workup saliva, and plasma.

that has led to overestimation of some base damage up to 2—

3 orders of magnitude. The main aim of the survey is to Keywords Oxidized nucleosides - Chromatographic

critically reVieW the available methods that have been de- assays ~1mmun0detecti0n-Enzymatic assays

veloped for measuring oxidatively generated base damage

in nuclear and mitochondrial DNA. Among the chromato-

graphic methods, high-performance liquid chromatography Introduction

associated With tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC—MS/MS)

is the most accurate and versatile approach Whereas HPLC— Cellular biomolecules such as DNA, lipids, and proteins are

electrochemical detection (ECD) is restricted to electro- subject to constant oxidation reactions due to the initial

chemically active modiﬁcations. These methods allow mea— generation of superoxide radical (OZ°_) during mitochondri-

suring several single oxidized pyrimidine and purine bases, a1 respiration and other pathways involving nicotinamide

tandem base lesions and interstrand DNA cross-links in nu- adenine dinucleotide phosphate, xanthine oxidase, and

clear DNA. As complementary analytical tools, enzymatic uncoupled nitric oxide synthase [1—3]. The release of 02°—

methods that associate DNA repair enzymes With either the is exacerbated under oxidative stress as the result of mito-

alkaline comet assay or the alkaline elution technique are chondrial dysfunction, inﬂammatory response, iron over-

suitable for assessing 10W variations in the level of different load, or activation of xanthine oxidase—reductase. This

classes of oxidatively generated DNA lesions. Most of the may be initiated by physical exercise [4, 5] or associated
With aging [6], ischemia—reperfusion [7], and pathological

— disorders including diabetes mellitus [8, 9], obesity [10],

J- CadeHETT- DOUKi'J--L- RaVanat infertility [11], neurodegenerative diseases [12, 13], and

Laboramire “Lééions des A.Cides Nudéique,s”.’ SCIB'UMR'E n03 malignant tumors [14 15]. There are also numerous exog-

(CEA/UJF) Instltut Nanosmences et Cryogenle, CEA/Grenoble, . ’ ,_ .

38054, Grenoble Cedex 9,1:rance enous chemical sources of 02 that include ultraﬁne par-

e-mail: jean.cadet@cea.fr ticles [16], cigarette smoke [17], and xenobiotics [18].
Spontaneous 0r enzymatically driven dismutation 0f 02'—

J . Cadet - J . R. Wagner . . . .

Département de Médecine Nucléaire et Radiobiologie, Faculté de gives [186 t0 poorlyreactive H202 that IS converted upon

médecine et des sciences de la santé, Université de Sherbrooke, reduction by transmon metals according to the so-called

Sherbrooke, Quebec J 1H 5 N4, Canada Fenton reaction to highly reactive hydroxyl radical [19,

@ Springer

"
"2","56 J. Cadet, et a1.
20]. It may be pointed out that ionizing radiation is able to measurement of specific oxidation products of 2-
directly generate °OH through the radiolysis of water Inole- deoxyribose Inoieties such as 2-deoxyribonolactone,
cules whereas interaction of highly energetic photons leads phosphoglycolate, and C5'-a1dehyde of cellular DNA
to the ionization of DNA bases and 2-deoxyribose [21]. are not included in this survey [39, 40]. This also
Interestingly, one-electron oxidation of the nucleobases applies to the nucleobase adducts that arise from the
may be achieved under mild conditions by type I photo- reaction of lipid peroxide breakdown products for which
sensitizers upon UVA radiation excitation [22]. Another several recent comprehensive surveys are available
important reactive oxygen species is singlet oxygen (102) [41—45]. In the ﬁrst part of this article, a brief descrip-
that has been shown to be the main oxidant generated by tion of the main single oxidation products of pyrimidine
type II photosensitization upon UVA irradiation of cells [23] and purine bases that have been so far detected in
and human skin [24]. The ubiquitous occurrence of oxida— cellular DNA is reported [46]. One may add to this list,
tion processes in cells and their strong implication in dele- tandem base 1esions together with purine 5',8-cyclonu—
terious genotoxic effects explain why early attempts were cleosides and cytosine-derived clustered damage that
made during the period 1972—1981 to search for DNA arise from °OH-1nediated hydrogen abstraction at C5
oxidation products in living microorganisms and cells. and C4 of the 2-deoxyribose, respectively [46, 47].
Unfortunately, the two indirect assays [25—27] that were

initially designed to look for 5,6-dihydroxy-5,6-dihydrothy-

rnine (thymine glycol, ThyGly), one of the ﬁrst identiﬁed Oxidatively generated base damage detected in cellular
°OH-niediated degradation products of thyrnine in isolated DNA

DNA [28], were prone to artifacts. Thus, the search for

acetol, an alkaline degradation product of ThyGly, has led A large body of information is now available on the mech-
to an overestimation of the lesion by at least three orders of anisrn of formation of modiﬁed nucleobases upon exposure
magnitude [27, 29, 30]. This has been explained by the use to several oxidants including OH, 102, and one-electron
of [3H]- or [14C]-1abe1ed thymine that upon incorporation oxidants [46, 48, 49]. While °OH efﬁciently reacts with the
into cellular DNA gives rise to ThyGly by auto-radiolysis nucleobases and the 2-deoxyribose moiety of DNA [21, 46],
which is in large excess with respect to the much lower 102 is a mild ROS that speciﬁcally oxidizes guanine [46,
amount generated by external exposure to OH [31]. A few 48]. Among one-electron oxidants, type I photosensitizers
years later, there was a strong impetus to the measurement [22] and biologically relevant CO3°_ that arises from the
of oxidatively generated damage to cellular DNA due to the decomposition of nitrosoperoxycarbonate [50], the reaction
development of the gas chromatography—mass spectrometry product of peroxynitrite with C02 is able to abstract one
(GC—MS) method [32] and the advent of a new analytical electron from purine components and to a lesser from py-
tool involving high-performance liquid chromatography rirnidine bases [51, 52]. It may be added that gamma and X-
coupled to electrochemical detection (HPLC—ECD) [33]. rays are also capable of inducing damage to the sugar
However, the measurement of 8-oxo-7,8-dihydroguanine moiety of DNA by direct ionization [21]. Altogether, Inore
(8-oxoGua), one of the main available biomarkers of oxida— than 80 modiﬁed bases including isorners and unstable
tive stress to DNA, that was found at the same period to be a hydroperoxide precursors have been identiﬁed so far in
predominant °OH-niediated oxidation product of guanine model studies [46—49]. However, only about 25 % of these
[34] has led to large discrepancies in the reported levels oxidatively generated lesions can be accurately detected at
[35]. Thus, it was found that the values obtained by GC— the cellular level [46, 53].

MS analyses were between 2 to 3 orders of magnitude

higher than those inferred from HPLC—ECD measurements. Single oxidation base products

The drawbacks and ﬂaws at the origin of these differences

have been identiﬁed [3 6] and will be further discussed in the The four diastereomers of 5,6-dihydroxy-5,6-dihydrothymi-
section devoted to chromatographic measurements. An aim dine (Tthly), 5-(hydroxy1nethy1)-2'-deoxyuridine
of this survey is to critically reView speciﬁc-based chro- (HindUrd), and 5-for1ny1—2'-deoxyuridine (S-FordUrd) have
Inatographic approaches and more global methods such been measured in cellular DNA upon exposure to ionizing
as immunological and enzymatic assays that are current- radiation or high-intensity UVC laser pulses as the result of
1y available for monitoring oxidatively generated base either °OH addition across the 5,6-doub1e bond of thyrnine
modiﬁcations in cellular DNA. In addition, information or initial generation of the related radical cation, respective-
is provided on the methods that have been designed to 1y [54, 55]. In addition, 5-hydroxy-2'-deoxycytidine (5-
measure oxidized nucleobases and nucleosides in urine OHdCyd) whose formation is likely to arise from initial
as likely released by-products of DNA repair pathways °OH addition at C6 of the cytosine base [49] has been also
[37, 38]. One should note that Inethods devoted to the shown to be generated in cellularDNA [56].Recent1y,there
@ Springer

"
"3","Measurement of oxidatively generated base damage to nucleic acids in cells 57
has been much interest devoted to 5-(hydr0xymethyl)—2'- Chromatographic methods
deoxycytidine (5-H1ndCyd) considered as the sixth most
abundant DNA nucleoside, which is post-replicatively gener- DNA extraction
ated as an epigenetic modiﬁcation [57, 58] upon enzymatic
oxidation of 5-1nethy1-2'-de0xycytidine by ten-eleven translo- There were major ﬂaws in the analysis of oxidatively
cation (TET) oxygenases [59, 60]. 5-H1ndCyd may be also induced DNA damage in the 1990s because of artifactual
chemically produced by °OH-1nediated degradation and one- oxidation of DNA nucleosides during the extraction from
electron oxidation of 5-1nethy1-2'-de0xycytidine [49]. cells and subsequent digestion t0 2'-de0xyrib0nucle0sides.
Both '0H and one-electron oxidants have been found to In some cases, the level of artifactual oxidation far
give rise in cells to 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0-2'-de0xyguan0sine exceeded the actual levels of damage in cellular DNA.
(8-0X0dGu0) and 2,6-dia1nin0-4-hydr0xy-5-f0rmamid0pyr— This problem has been minimized today by using the NaI
irnidine (FapyGua) upon one-electron oxidation and one- chaotropic method for DNA extraction [68]. Upon com-
electron reduction, respectively, of transiently generated 8- parison of several conditions, the optimal methods include
hydroxy-7,8-dihydr0guanyl radical. Similarly, adenine- the chaotropic NaI method for DNA extraction together
related degradation products, namely 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0-2'- with the use of deferoxamine, an iron ion chelator, t0
deoxyadenosine (8-0X0dAd0) and 4,6-dia1nin0-5-f0rmarni- prevent Fenton reactions [69]. Even under these optimized
d0pyri1nidine(FapyAde), have been shown to be generated conditions, however, there is still a certain amount of
in cellular DNA upon exposure to gamma irradiation and artifactually induced oxidation in View of the fact that the
high-intensity UVC nanosecond laser pulses [54, 55]. 2,2- extent of oxidation is inversely dependent on the amount of
Diarnino—4-[(2-de0xy-ﬂ-D-erythr0-pent0furan0sy1)arnin0]-5 DNA extracted from human sperm within the range 20—
(2H)-oxazolone (dZ) is another radical oxidation product of 100 pg [70].
guanine that is also formed in cellular DNA through the
likely intermediary 0f 2-a1nin0-5-[(2-de0xy-6—erythr0-pen- Gas chromatographic analysis
t0furan0sy1)a1nin0]-4H-imidazol-4-0ne (dIz) [61]. Another
guanine oxidation pathway leading to the selective forma- GC coupled to MS with selected ion monitoring (SIM)
tion 8-0X0dGu0 at the exclusion of FapyGua is provided by involves initial hydrolysis of DNA to its component nucleo-
the [2+4] cycloaddition reaction of 102 across the imidazole bases using strong acid (88 % formic acid, 140 0C for 30—
ring [48]. 40 min) followed by derivatization of modiﬁed and nonme-
diﬁed bases in anhydrous acetonitrile and bis(trimethy1si1y1)
Tandem lesions triﬂuoroacetamide containing 1 % trimethylchlorosilane in
order to render nucleobases volatile for GC analyses. The
Evidence has been provided for the °OH-niediated for- samples are usually injected on a 5 % cross-linked phenyl-
mation of two Vicinal lesions on the same strand of Inethylsilicone column and eluted withatemperature program
cellular DNA as the result of the reaction of either 5- between 120 and 280 OC. Initially, a non-labeled internal
(uracily1)methy1 radical [62] or the likely 6-hydr0xy-5,6- standard was used to quantify oxidized bases, but later, isoto-
dihydrocytosyl radical with the 5'-guanine base at C8, pically labeled standards were incorporated into the analyses.
thereby generating the G[8-5m]T and G[8-5]C lesions This method was attractive becauseitperrnitted the analysis of
[63, 64]. Hydroxyl radical-Inediated hydrogen abstrac- more than 25 oxidized and reduced nucleobases in isolated
tion at the C5 of the 2-de0xyrib0se moiety of DNA, and cellular DNA with a small sample of DNA (0.2 pg) [32,
followed by intramolecular cyclization of the resulting 71, 72]. The utility of this method was extended to the deter-
5'-y1 radical to the C8 position of adenine and guanine, mination of substrate speciﬁcity constants for DNA repair
are the likely steps leading to 5 ',8-cyclo-2'-de0xyaden0- glycosylases, including, at the initial stages, bacterial forma-
sine and 5',8-cyclo-2'-de0xyguan0sine, respectively [65], midopyrimidine g1ycosy1ase(Fpg)and endonuclease III (endo
lesions that eXhibit modiﬁcations in both the base and III) [73, 74]. Despite the widespread application of GC—MS,
sugar moiety of the nucleosides [47]. serious discrepancies appeared in the 1980s and 1990s for the
values of 8-0X0Gua obtained by GC—MS compared to those
Clustered damage obtained by an alternative emerging chromatographic assay:
HPLC—ECD [33]. The values of 8-0X0dGu0 obtained by GC—
The oxidized abasic site generated upon °OH-induced hy- MS analysis, i.e., in the range of a few lesions per 103—104
drogen abstraction at C4 of the 2-de0xyrib0se moiety is the normal bases in cellular DNA [35], were generally 2 orders of
likely precursor of a highly reactive unsaturated aldehyde magnitude higher than those obtained by HPLC—ECD. SeV-
able to produce DNA interstrand cross-links through elec- eral years later, an explanation was provided for the gross
trophilic cycloaddition to an opposite cytosine [66, 67]. overestimation of 8-0X0Gua in cellular DNA [75]. The
@ Springer

"
"4","58 J. Cadet, et al.
derivatization step of GC—MS analysis was largely responsi— HPLC—ECD

ble for the overestimated values of 8-oxoGua [76, 77] involv-

ing the acid hydrolysis-rnediated release of an overwhelming HPLC—ECD involves separation of either nucleobases or
quantity of nonrnodiﬁed guanine. This is similar to previous nucleosides by reversed phase HPLC coupled to electro-
observations showing that heating of 5,6-dihydropyri1nidine chernical oxidation of the nucleic acid modiﬁcation. This
derivatives during silylation led to their oxidation, i.e., to the method is applicable only to a small number of modiﬁed
generation of related unsaturated pyrimidines [78]. It may be nucleobases and nucleosides, i.e., those that exhibit a low
added that the derivatization step induces the oxidation of not oxidation potential. The ﬁrst application of this method for
only guanine to 8-oxoGua with a frequency of 10—4 but it also the detection of DNA damage was for 8-oxodGuo in the
applies to other purine and pyrimidine bases giving the mid-1980s by Floyd et al. [33]. This oxidized nucleoside
corresponding oxidized bases [79]. This explains why the was discovered in 1984 by Kasai and Nishimura [34].
yields of oxidized bases measured by GC—MS were over— Thereafter, a HPLC—ECD assay was extended to the mea-
estimated by factors varying between 2 and 3 orders of mag- surement of 5 -OHdCyd and 5'-hydroxy-2'-deoxyuridine
nitude. Furthermore, the pre-puriﬁcation of the modiﬁed bases [87], two oxidation products of 2'-deoxycytidine, which also
by HPLC [79] in order to remove the overwhelming normal exhibit a low oxidation potential similar to that of 8-
bases prevents the occurrence artifactual oxidation. Another oxodGuo. The HPLC—ECD detection of 8-oxodAdo and
matter of concern in the GC—MS assay was the use of inap- its free base is less speciﬁc [88] because of its higher
propriate conditions of acidic hydrolysis that have been shown oxidation potential. In addition, FapyGua and FapyAde are
to lead to the degradation of unstable compounds under hot electrochemically active and may be detected by HPLC—
acidic treatment. This is the case for FapyGua and FapyAde ECD [89]. The modiﬁed nucleobases are less suitable than
[80]. A mild alternative involves both enzymatic digestion and 2'-deoxyribonucleosides for HPLC separation on octadecyl-
spontaneous hydrolysis of modiﬁed nucleosides such that the silyl silica gel columns because of their rapid elution close
chemical integrity of the guanine and adenine formamidopyr— to the void volume where there is usually an abundance of
imidine derivatives is preserved [80]. The use of GC—MS for impurities for ECD of biological samples. Although the
measuring oxidatively generated base damage is considered as HPLC—ECD method is restricted to a few highly oxidizable
an inaccurate method in the recommendations made by the lesions, it is a robust and accurate method as long as arti-
European Standards Committee on Oxidative DNA Damage factual oxidation is minimized during DNA extraction [68,
(ESCODD) [81]. As a result, the application of the GC—MS 69]. On the other hand, one may underestimate the yield of
method has signiﬁcantly decreased during the last 10 years. 5-hydroxycytosine and the corresponding nucleoside, which
There are still a few exceptions including the questionable has a relatively low oxidation potential because of its oxi-
measurements of FapyGua, FapyAde [82], and 5',8-cyclo-2'- dation during sample preparation. One of the relative weak-
deoxyguanosine [83]. As one example of discrepancy, one nesses of this method is the lack of internal calibration
may quote the high values of (5 'S)-cyclo-2'-deoxyguanosine despite a few attempts including the use of 2,6-diamino-8-
whose steady-state level varies between 0.2 and 0.8 lesions oxopurine as an internal standard [90].

per 106 2'-deoxyribonucleosides in the gill DNA of En-

glish sole ﬁsh [49]. These yields are two to eight-fold HPLC—MS

higher than those of 8-oxodGuo measured by chromato-

graphic methods in cellular DNA [84]. In comparison, the HPLC coupled to electrospray mass spectrometry (ESI-MS)
relative yield of formation of (5 'S-cyclo-Zﬁdeoxyguano- appeared about 15 years ago, a few years before the much
sine and 8-oxodGuo in isolated DNA was estimated to be more sensitive and accurate technique of HPLC—ESI-MS/
1:40 as inferred from HPLC—MS/MS measurements [65]. MS. An early application of ESI-MS showed that the limit
Although it may be possible to prevent artifactual oxida— of detection of 8-oxodGuo by HPLC—MS in the SIM Inode
tion in the GC—MS method by enzymatically removing and HPLC—MS/MS in the multiple reaction monitoring
lesions with puriﬁed DNA repair enzymes, for example, (MRM) mode was 5 pmol and 20 frnol, respectively [91].
by using 8-oxoGua, FapyGua, and FapyAde with Fpg- From this comparison, one may conclude that HPLC—MS in
enzyme, this modiﬁed method that may lack of quanti- the SIM mode is not suitable for measuring oxidized nucleo-
tative release of the modiﬁed bases has not received sides in cellular DNA in which the levels even under expo-
Inuch application so far [85]. In conclusion, the amount sure to strong oxidative stresses are no higher than a few
of oxidized bases reported in cellular DNA using the modiﬁcations per105 nucleosides (Table 1). With the use of
GC—MS assay is overwhelmingly induced during sample only a single quadrupole for mass separation, there is a risk
preparation, and thus, these data have little relevance for of collecting erroneous peaks that may have the same Ino-
assessing the biological role of DNA oxidation products lecular weight than the selected ions of the lesions due to the
[86]. presence of impurities when high sensitiVity is applied.
@ Springer

"
"5","Measurement of oxidatively generated base damage to nucleic acids in cells 59
Table 1 Summary of analytical methods used for quantitation of oxidatively generated base damage in cellular DNA
Method Sensitivity Amount Advantages Limitations
DNA (lug)
Accelerator mass spectrometry Highest (attomole range) 1—10 High sensitivity 14C/3H-labeled compounds required
32P—Postlabeling High (attomole range) 1—10 Low amount DNA required; sensitive Low speciﬁcity; semi-quantitative data
HPLC—MS/MS Good (sub-femtomole range) 10—100 High accuracy (MRM mode) Specialist and costly equipment
GC—MS Good (sub-femtomole range) 10—100 Structural information Requires derivatization and analyte
pre—puriﬁcation, specialist equipment
HPLC—ECD Good (sub-femtomole) 20—100 Simple; robust; inexpensive Only applicable to electrochemically active
lesions; risk of interfering impurities
Immunoassay Fair 1—200 Robust and easy Semi—quantitative; risk of cross-reactivity
Histochemistry Variable (pico/femtomole range) — Robust and easy Identiﬁcation poor; semi-quantitative
LM—PCR Low <1 Detection at sequence level Low sensitivity (1 1esi0ns/104 bases)
Unfortunately, this has been the case for the measurement of analysis involve With the exception of polar FapyAde and
radiation-induced damage including oxidized purine nucleo- FapyGua, the use of narrOW-bore ODS columns and suitable
sides in human cells [92, 93]. Furthermore, the problem is solvent gradient programs that allow a complete separation
underlined by an overestimation of the yields of radiation- of complex mixtures in a reasonable time (<40 min) [102].
induced 8-0X0dGu0 and 8-0X0dAd0 by ESI-MS, Which are Optimized conditions of ionization of the modiﬁed nucleo-
50- and 100-f01d Inore elevated compared to those Inea- bases and nucleosides have been deﬁned. Thus, thymidine
sured by HPLC—ESI-MS/MS [54, 55]. It may be added oxidation products including Tthly, FordUrd, and
that the latter HPLC—MS/MS data are consistent With HindUrd are more efﬁciently ionized in the negative ESI
the measurement of Fpg-sensitive sites in cellular DNA mode, Whereas ESI+ has been used for the ionization of 8-
[94] and predications based on both experimental and oxodGuo, 8-0X0dAd0, FapyGua, and FapyAde. Accurate
theoretical data [95]. Another example of questionable quantitative measurement is achieved using the isotope di-
data provided by HPLC—ESI-MS deals With an overes- lution technique that requires the synthesis of [15N]- and
timation of the radiation-yield 0f (5'R)-5',8-cyclo-2'- [13C]-1abeled internal standards. Another critical issue is
deoxyadenosine [96] by at least 2 orders of magnitude Whether the enzymatic digestion of oxidized nucleosides is
When compared With the much lower levels that have quantitative. The use of site-speciﬁcally modiﬁed oligonu-
been recently determined by HPLC—ESI-MS/MS [65]. cleotides is very useful to optimize the full release of tar-
The situation is different for the measurement of 5- geted lesions that may necessitate the use of a cocktail of
(hydroxymethy1)-2'-de0xycytidine since the yield of the endonucleases, exonucleases, and phosphatases. As already
enzymatically oxidized 2'-de0xyrib0nucle0side is in the discussed, the prevention of spurious oxidation reactions to
range of 0.4 to two modiﬁcations per 103 nucleosides in overwhelming normal 2'-de0xyrib0nucle0sides during
the DNA of mouse brain [97, 98]. DNA extraction and subsequent workup is a difﬁcult task.
From a comparison of several conditions, it appears that the
HPLC—MS/MS and M83 optimal methods involve the chaotropic NaI technique for
DNA extraction and the use of deferoxamine, an iron ion
HPLC—ESI-MS/MS (Fig. 3) is now considered as the gold chelator, to prevent or at least to minimize Fenton reactions
standard method for the measurement of oxidized nucleo- [69]. However, even under these optimized conditions, it
sides and nucleobases under conditions of strong oxidative was shown that the extent of artifactual oxidation is inverse-
stress that lead to a signiﬁcant increase in the levels of 1y dependent on the amount of DNA extracted from human
oxidatively generated base damage over cellular back- sperm Within the range 20—100 pg [70]. Other improved
ground [99]. The ﬁrst reported contributions involving the HPLC—ESI-MS/MS assays have been recently proposed.
measurement of 8-0X0dGu0 in rat tissues [100], cellular These include a switching device that allows pre-
DNA [101], and human urine [101] established the suitabil- concentration of oxidized nucleosides produced in tiny
ity of HPLC-ESI—MS/MS. Rapidly, neW applications With amounts before their accurate measurement [106] and a
extension to other oxidized nucleosides and modiﬁed bases solid-phase extraction step that is expected to prevent ad-
have appeared [102—105]. These include the four cis and ventitious oxidation reactions [107]. It was also recently
trans diastereomers 0f Tthly, HindUrd, S-FordUrd, 8- reported that the artifactual oxidation of guanine is totally
oxodAdo, FapyAde, and FapyGua (Figs. 1 and 2) [102]. suppressed during DNA extraction by applying the com-
For most of the latter lesions, optimized conditions of HPLC mercially available DNA-zol methodology that involves the
@ Springer

"
"6","60 J . Cadet, et al.
Fig. 1 Structure of single 0 CH O O NH2 0 H o
oxidatively generated base HN E0: HN )ﬁ/CHO HN )ﬁ/CHgoH N JTOH HN JEN HN )tﬂto
1es1ons 1n cellular DNA 0%”! HOH 0%”! I CAN I CAN I HZN/RN I [3:0 HZNJQN I NH
R R R R R R
Tthly FordUra HMdUrd 5-OHdCyd 8-oxodGuo Fapdeuo
NH2 H NH2 H Oi“ OiOXNH2 HNJZELNH
N / N / _ NH \
@N/EO :Nj:N;—O H'?‘ \N>: HIT] N NH2 HN%\H lN/go
‘R ‘R R R R
8-oxodAdo FapydAdo dIz dZ dSp
use of high concentrations of thiocyanate [108]. In addition, act as both one-electron oxidant and 102 generator [112].
aqueous solutions may be treated with CheleX resin in It is surprising to note that 8-oxodGuo, the likely precursor
addition to deferoxarnine to avoid contamination with metal of dSp, is present in cellular DNA with a10-fold lower yield
ions [108]. in comparison to the secondary oxidation product, dSp. It is
The neutral-loss scan mode is an interesting possibility well documented that 8-oxodGuo is about 2 orders of mag-
available with tandem mass spectrometry that can be used to nitude more susceptible than dGuo to both 102 [113] and
search for unknown compounds in complex mixtures such one-electron oxidation [114]. However, if one considers that
as enzymatic hydrolysates of gamma-irradiated DNA. This the highest possible level of 8-oxodGuo would be of a few
has been exploited to look for new oxidized nucleosides modiﬁcations per 105 guanines, it is rather unlikely that
which in the positive ionization Inode show characteristic signiﬁcant oxidation of the latter nucleoside will occur in
fragmentation arising from cleavage of the N—glycosidic cellular DNA. Another intriguing result deals with the de-
bond. This is accompanied by the release of 2-deoxyribose tection by HPLC—ESI-MS/MS of spiroiminodihydantoin 2'-
corresponding to the loss of 116 mass units. Thus, the search deoxribonucleosides (dSp) that have been shown in model
of compounds exhibiting the loss of 116 mass units has led studies to be one-electron oxidation products of 8-oxodGuo
to the identiﬁcation of four new modiﬁed 2'-deoxyribonu— [115], in bacterial DNA upon incubation with chromate
cleosides in cellular DNA exposed to either gamma rays or [116]. Even if the one-electron oxidation of 8-oxodGuo
b1eomycin [66, 67]. occurs at a rate that is 2 orders of magnitude higher than
Base modiﬁcations have been measured by HPLC—MS/ that of 2'-deoxyguanosine [114], it is doubtful, on the basis
MS within dinucleoside Inonophosphates resulting from the of competition kinetics, that secondary oxidation products
incomplete enzymatic digestion of DNA and allowing for such as dSp wi11 predominate at the expense of initially
more sensitive detection by negative Inode ionization. Thus, generated 8-oxodGuo in bacterial DNA. Another problem
ThyGly and formamide, a remnant of °OH-niediated oxida— is the multiplicity of the peaks corresponding to the molec-
tion of the thyInine Inoiety, have been detected in human ular weight of the dSp and 8-oxodGuo containing dinucleo-
cells upon gamma and UVC radiations [109—111]. HoweV- side Inonophosphates in the HPLC elution proﬁle [112].
er, most of the reported data are inconsistent. For example, it This cannot be only explained by the presence of two
was proposed that 102 which reacts exclusively with gua- diastereomers of dSp, raising a question concerning speci-
nine was responsible for the formation of thyInine degrada- ﬁcity, and thus, the accuracy of the HPLC—ESI-MS/MS
tion products upon UVC irradiation [110]. Other measurements, when the level of modiﬁcations is very low
questionable data involved the HPLC—ESI-MS/MS detec— as expected to be the case for dSp lesions. Evidence has
tion of spiroiminodihydantoin 2'-deoxyribonucleosides in been provided that MS3 detection is required for the accu-
the DNA of human fibroblasts following exposure to rate measurement of radiation-induced tandem base modiﬁ-
UVA-excited methylene blue, a photosensitizer that may cations between guanine and either thyInine [63] or cytosine
Fig. 2 Strncture of oxidatively H o H N H O
generateo 1ntra- and 1nterstrand H2N 0 OH H2N m; 2 ﬁg
adducts 1n cellular DNA N \N NH 0 N / N Ho N /N NHZ
/{/) H Ijﬁ\/)\NH NM HO 0 N I O 0 NY
HO N N . N N 2 N \ N
“W \s o f TLNH I k
Na Na m w? . . E—i . o
| ‘O-P-O o N O .. o
OH OH dR b' Tp/ 0 H
OH OH
CyclodAdo CyclodGuo dCyd-aldehyde G[8-5m]T G[8-5]C
@ Springer

"
"7","Measurement of oxidatively generated base damage to nucleic acids in cells 61
[64] which are produced with a frequency lower than one irnrnunohistochernical location of 5-H1nCyt has been
modiﬁcation per 109 2'-deoxyribonucleosides. achieved in early pronuclear mouse zygotes [58], mouse
cells [125], and several mouse tissues including hippocam-
pus, kidney, liver, and testes [97, 126]. Excellent correla-
Immunoassays tions were observed between the intensities of the stained
ﬂuorescent signals and the levels of 5-(hydroxymethyl)—2'-
Maj or efforts have been devoted in the past three decades to deoxycytidine measured by HPLC—MS, further establishing
raise polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies against several the validity and the speciﬁcity of irnrnunohistochernical
oxidized purine and pyrimidine bases, including 8-oxo-7,8- detection [126]. One may add that ﬂuorescence-based irn-
dihydroadenine (8-oonde) [117], ThyGly [118], adenine Inunohistochernical methods have been applied for the de-
Nl-oxide [119], and 8-oxoGua [120—122]. The antibodies tection of 8-oxoGua in human chromosomes [127] and
thus obtained showed cross-reactiVity with their normal tissues [128—132]. However, the accuracy of immunodetec-
precursors within a relative frequency that was found to tion of 8-oxoGua in mitochondrial DNA [133—135] appears
vary between 10—3 and 10—5. They have been used in radio- to suffer from a lack of speciﬁcity of antibodies [136].
irnrnunoassays, competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent A more recent development of immunological techniques
assays (ELISA), or irnrnunoblot assays for measuring oxi- using antibodies against 8-oxoGua and 5-HmCyt involves
dized bases in genomic DNA or after its hydrolysis. The the irnrnune-precipitation of genomic DNA fragments
poor speciﬁcity of most of the antibodies against oxidized (Dnalp) that are obtained by restriction enzyme digestion
bases is likely to be accounted for by the fact that only slight with a length up to 1 k base pairs [137]. Either 8-oxoGua or
changes are introduced in the molecules by inserting either 5-HmCyt containing DNA fragments may be separated
one oxygen atom as is the case for 8-oonde and 8-oxoGua from nonmodiﬁed ones using magnetic Dynabeads M-280
or two hydroxyl groups as for ThyGly. It may also be sheep antibody against IgG, and subsequently, the two sets
pointed out that the steady-state level of a major base lesion, of oligonucleotides may be ampliﬁed by RT-polymerase
i.e., 8-oxoGua, in human cellular DNA assessed by HPLC chain reaction (PCR). The use of genome chips associated
methods is no more than a few residues per 106 guanines with microarray technology would allow the location of the
[81]. Cross-reactiVity likely explains the overestirnation in oxidatively generated base damage within DNA [137, 138].
the level of 8-oxoGua by at least three orders of magnitude Using this high-throughput screening method, it was shown
as estimated by ELISA measurements in cellular DNA that the distribution of 8-oxoGua was not uniform in the
[123]. One may also point out the limitations of irnrnuno- chromosomes of renal cortical DNA from male C57BL mice
detection approaches even when using an improved method that were exposed to ferric nitrilotriacetate, a kidney carcin-
that involves immunoafﬁnity isolation of 8-oxodGuo from ogen [138]. A similar immunoprecipitation—based approach
DNA enzymic hydrolysates prior to ELISA quantiﬁcation was recently designed for the serni-quantitative detection of
using two different monoclonal antibodies toward 8- 5-HmCyt in human brain [139] and mammalian mitochon-
oxodGuo. The limit of detection of 8-oxodGuo was 1 lesion drial DNA [140].
per 105 2'-deoxyguanosine in a sample size of DNA of at Another application of the immunoprecipitation tech-
least 100 ug. Furthermore, it was shown that the level of 8- nique dealt with the detection of 8-oxoGua in cytoplasmic
oxodGuo in the DNA of human placenta measured by the messenger ribonucleic acids (mRNAs) following their iso-
irnrnunoassay was 6-fold higher that that obtained by lation by Northwestern blotting. The whole procedure
HPLC—ECD analyses [120, 124] (Fig. 3). involves subsequent steps which include reverse transcrip-
One may conclude that most irnrnunoassays so far avail- tion of the RNAs, cDNA ampliﬁcation, Southern blotting,
able are suitable for monitoring the formation of oxidized and cloning [141]. Using this technique, poly(A)+ mRNAs
bases in isolated DNA when the levels of modiﬁcations are were observed to be oxidized in Alzheimer disease patients.
higher than a few lesions per 104 normal bases [125] but A more quantitative estimation of the extent of 8-oxoGua
inappropriate for detecting physiologically relevant oxida— content was achieved after the separation of oxidized
tively generated base damage in cells. One major exception mRNAs from non-oxidized ones [142]. Further evidence
is the recent dot-blot detection in 293 T cells of 5- for the oxidation of messenger RNAs in motor neuron
hydroxyrnethylcytosine (5-H1nCyt) [58] that is produced degeneration, an early step leading to amyotrophic lateral
post—replicatively during cell development through the oxi- sclerosis disease, was provided upon application of this
dation of 5-methylcytosine by TET enzymes [59]. This was technique to spinal cord mRNAs from wild-type and mutant
achieved using a polyclonal antibody against 5-H1nCyt, (SOD1)mice [143].
which occurs at particularly high levels in brain tissues In addition to these various immunological methods
[57] and which may represent as high as 0.7 % of normal designed for detecting oxidized bases, a related assay is
cytosine bases [59]. It is worth mentioning that the based on the specific binding of aVidin, a tetrarneric
@ Springer

"
"8","62 J . Cadet, et al.
Fig‘ 3 Main dire“ 3nd indireCt I ndirect aggroaches Direct aggroaches
methods for measurlng
oxidatively generated base @ Cells
damage in cellular DNA . .
DNA extraction
\
Anlborestimation ?
Alkaline cell lysis m DN A
Fluorescence detection (ELISA) i DNA N—glycosylases
Radioactive detection (RIA) DN A digestion
Strand breaks \o‘r hydrolysis
Fpg-Sensitive Sites
0881'seml'tive Sites Nucleotides or nucleosides or bases
Endo III—Sensitive Sites ‘ ‘
Al(lizlrlrillftte :fiién 32 P- A TP [ derivatization
32P-post labeling HPLC-EC GC-MS
HPLC-MS/MS
biornolecule having four biotin binding sites, to 8-oxodGuo technique [149, 150] are suitable and sensitive methods for
[144]. The origin of the binding is likely due to the fact that detecting direct DNA strand breaks and a1ka1i-1abi1e sites
the oxidized base of 8-oxodGuo exhibits an imidazolidone consisting of abasic and oxidized abasic sites [151] together
group that is similar in structure to that of biotin, the usual with several oxidized bases such as ThyGly and ForUra [152,
ligand. Thus, it was shown that several conjugates including 153]. However, both of the methods as well as the unwinding
aVidin—ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) and, to a lesser assay [154] may be rendered more speciﬁc by pre-incubating
extent, the monoclonal antibody to biotin were able to bind released nuclear DNA from cells with DNA repair N-glyco-
to cellular DNA. Thus, application of the aVidin—FITC assay sylases including bacterial endo III and formamidopyrimidine
that has involved the use of a 96-well ﬂuorescence plate DNA N—glycosylase (Fpg) [154—158]. The main substrates of
reader allows for the detection of 8-oxodGuo in cells eX- endo 111 include 5,6-saturated thyrnine and cytosine deriva-
posed to two oxidizing agents including photoexcited Ineth- tives such as ThyGly and pyrimidine rearrangement products
y1ene blue and hydrogen peroxide [144]. However, such as 5-hydroxyhydantoin and 5-hydroxy-5-rnethy1hydan-
application of the aVidin—FITC assay to the formation and toin [73, 159, 160]. Fpg protein also eXhibits a broad speci-
repair of 8-oxodGuo in gamma—irradiated MOLT-4 human ﬁcity, being able to excise in addition to a few oxidized
leukemia cells and CHO-Kl Chinese hamster cells show pyrimidine lesions (5,6-dihydroxy-5,6-dihydrothymine, 5-
considerable variability in the ﬂuorescence intensity of the hydroycytosine, forInylaInine), 8-oxoGua, and the two main
nuclear DNA [145]. Furthermore, the speciﬁcity of aVidin forrnarnidopyrirnidine derivatives derived from guanine and
binding to 8-oxodGuo has been questioned on the basis of adenine including FapyGua and FapyAde [74, 160, 161].
X-ray crystallographic and binding studies in solutions More recently, 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase 1 (OGGl),
[146]. Even if the biotin binding pocket of aVidin is able the mammalian homolog of Fpg that shows higher substrate
to accommodate 8-oxodGuo in a speciﬁc way, there are speciﬁcity, has been used in association with the comet assay
likely several non-speciﬁc interactions in particular with to monitor the formation of 8-oxoGua and FapyGua [162,
purine bases in double-stranded DNA that interfere with 163]. Among the numerous applications of the modiﬁed al-
the quantitative detection of 8-oxodGuo. One should also kaline e1ution technique, it is important to underline the as-
note that aVidin—FITC binding data have not been conﬁrmed sessment of steady-state levels of Fpg- and endo III-sensitive
with either HPLC—ECD or HPLC—MS/MS measurements of sites in the DNA of various human ce11types. Thus, the levels
8-oxodGuo in cellular DNA. of base damage recognized by Fpg repair enzyme were found
to vary between 0.07 and 3 lesions per 106 base pairs in HeLa
and L1210 cells, respectively [164]. In addition, the frequency
Enzymatic-based assays of endo III-sensitive sites was found to be about 6-fold lower
than that of modiﬁed bases recognized by Fpg protein in
Single base lesions L1210 cells [164]. Attempts have been made to calibrate the
enzymatic version of alkaline cornet assays. This was
The single-cell gel electrophoresis technique, the so-called achieved by measuring three modiﬁed purine bases including
alkaline comet assay [147, 148], and the alkaline e1ution 8-oxoGua, FapyGua, and FapyAde by HPLC—ECD and
@ Springer

"
"9","Measurement of oxidatively generated base damage to nucleic acids in cells 63
HPLC—GC/MS. It was found that the frequency of Fpg- sites” [173] constitute a major class of radiation-induced
sensitive sites was comprised between 0.11 and 0.16 lesions damage to DNA. In terms of biological relevance and as
per 106 normal bases [94]. This compares to a similar value of mostly inferred from Monte Carlo calculations [174, 175],
0.085 sites recognized by Fpg protein as inferred from an OCDLs may consist of a large repertoire of lesions includ-
interlaboratory study carried out by the ESCODD network ing modiﬁed bases, abasic sites, and single-strand breaks on
[81, 165]. the same or opposite DNA strands within one or two heliX
It may be stressed that under conditions of optimized turns [176, 177]. It is also assumed that the complexity of
DNA isolation, the steady-state level of 8-oxodGuo Inea- the clustered DNA damage and their biological impact
sured by HPLC-based methods in the DNA of lymphocyte increase with the linear energy transfer of radiation and/or
cells was on average 12-fold more elevated than the number heavy particles. However, there is still a paucity of informa-
of Fpg-sensitive sites [81, 165]. It is likely that 8-oxoGua tion concerning the nature of OCDLs in cellular DNA due to
represents only a fraction of about 50 % of the lesions difﬁculties in the identiﬁcation of speciﬁc lesions in View of
recognized by Fpg. On the other hand, artifactual oxidation the large number of possible base lesions and their sequence
of the guanine Inoiety during the comet assay is probably distribution. In order to overcome this challenging analytical
low while being more important for either HPLC—ECD or issue, enzymatic assays have been proposed to monitor the
HPLC—MS/MS methods [70]. It may be added that the formation of sub-classes of OCDLs that may have a Inodi-
better ability for DNA repair—based assays with respect to ﬁed purine base on each of the two opposite strands. There-
chromatographic methods to deal with the measurement of fore, excision of the two closely spaced lesions by either
small increases in the frequency of 8-oxoGua from the Fpg or OGG1 DNA repair enzyme will give rise to a DSB if
steady level has been established in a comparative study the two modiﬁed bases are separated by less than 30 bp.
aimed at measuring damaging effects of low doses of ion- Other examples of bistranded clustered lesions may involve
izing radiation to nuclear DNA in human monocytes. Thus, two oxidized pyrimidine bases that are expected to be
a dose of 40 Gy was necessary to note a signiﬁcant increase converted into DSB upon incubation with bacterial endo
in the level of 8-oxodGuo with respect to control using III or human NTH1. Similarly, the processing of opposite
chromatographic methods. In contrast, an elevation of the abasic sites by either endonuclease IV (endo IV) or hu-
level of Fpg-sensitive sites was observed after exposure of man AP endonuclease (Apel) may also lead to the for-
the cells to 2 Gy [94] and even at a 10-fold lower dose, i.e., mation of DSBs. It should be pointed out that the
0.2 Gy using an optimized version of the comet assay[166].A presence of a SSB in the opposite strand of clustered
still pending issue of enzymatic assays is the lack of internal damage containing either a base modiﬁcation or an abasic
calibration of the methods; however, one main exception site would give rise to a DSB upon appropriate enzymatic
involves the use of cellular DNA in which a few thousands digestion. The measurement of generated DSBs is
guanine sites were specifically converted into [180]-8- achieved either by conventional pulsed ﬁeld gel electro-
oxodGuo by labeled singlet oxygen oxidation [167]. Another phoresis or constant electrophoresis, once DNA is ernbed-
matter of quantitative uncertainty deals with the recent obser- ded in agarose plugs [178—182]. Quantiﬁcation of the
vation that Fpg protein does not excise 8-oxoGuo in some of clustered damage was made by applying number average
the oxidatively generated tandern base lesions generated by a length analysis that requires consideration of the size of
single radicalhit [168]. Even with these limitations, enzymatic extracted DNA from cells. Alternatively a modiﬁed neu-
Versions of the comet assay and alkaline elution technique tral comet assay has been used to measure generated
remain the methods of choice for assessing low variations in DSBs in a serni-quantitative Inanner [183, 184].
the steady-state levels of oxidized bases in DNA that are Evidence has been provided for the formation of three
expected to occur from the action of antioxidants [169—171]. classes of bistranded clustered DNA lesions in cells exposed
As already mentioned, the measurement of base oxida— to ionizing radiation. In this respect, it is important to
tion products in mitochondrial DNA is not reliable using underline that the frequency of bistranded oxidized purine
HPLC-based techniques and immunoassays. A more suit- base clustered damage induced by gamma rays in human
able alternative involves using a relaxation assay in cornbi- Inonocytes is 5.9 lesions per 109 bases, per gray [185]. This
nation with DNA repair enzymes including Fpg and endo III would represent about 10 % of the Fpg-sensitive sites that
proteins [172]. are detected in the DNA of gamma—irradiated human Inono-
cytes [62]. Similar observations were made for the radiation-
Clustered damage induced formation of Fpg type OCDLs in human breast
cancer cells MCF-7 and non-rnalignant MCF-10A cells
Complex modiﬁcations that include double-strand breaks [186]. These data are, however, higher than expected from
and closely spaced oxidatively generated clustered DNA the measurement of single lesions by either HPLC or
lesions (OCDLs) initially called “locally multiply damaged enzymatic-based assays. More intriguing results concern
@ Springer

"
"10","64 J . Cadet, et al.
the measurement of bistranded OCDLs in non-irradiated Accelerator mass spectrometry
cells [187—190] as discussed in detail in a recent reView
article [53]. It is not clear how substantial levels of detected Accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) is a highly technical-
bistranded OCDLs may be generated endogenously when 1y sophisticated method used for the detection of low abun-
Fenton reactions are mainly involved in oxidation reactions dant and long-lived isotopes [200]. Indeed, this is the most
that give rise to single and tandem base lesions. One possi- sensitive technique available for the quantiﬁcation of DNA
bility could be associated with adventitious oxidation reac— modiﬁcations with a limit of detection of 1—10 adducts/1012
tions that are expected to be signiﬁcant with tiny amounts of DNA bases using small amounts of DNA samples (> 1 ug).
extracted DNA typically in the range of a few nanograms AMS has mainly been applied to estimate the formation and
[70]. This raises the question about the accuracy of enzy- repair of DNA adducts produced by DNA alkylating agents,
Inatic assays aimed at detecting bistranded OCDLs. including tamoxifen, adriarnycin, cis-platin derivatives, af-
latoxin, ochratoxin, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorobenzo-p-dioxin, 2-
arnino-1-1nethy1-6-pheny1imidazo[4,5-b]pyridine, and 2-
Other methods arnino-3,8-dimethy1i1nidazo[4,5-ﬂquinoxaline [201—205].
These studies may be extended to in Vivo studies with
Postlabeling Inethods anirnals because of the low and diagnostic amounts of
radioactivity required to achieve the limit of detection.
A major ﬂaw of the 32P-postlabeling assay is the occurrence AMS has also been applied to examine the metabolic pro-
of radiolytic processes arising from [3 photon emission of cessing of various drugs, Vitamins, and xenobiotics
32P-labeled nucleotides [191, 192] and thereby leading to an [206—208]. In particular, Henderson and co-workers [207,
overestimation of the level of 8-oxoGuo [193, 194]. In 208] have largely elucidated the metabolism of 8-oxodGuo
particular, the levels of 8-oxodGuo were estimated to vary in cells by the analysis of its different phosphorylated forms
between 87 and 133 lesions for 106 normal 2'-deoxyribonu- together with its incorporation into cellular DNA. The pu-
cleosides [193]. Pre-puriﬁcation of 8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-2'- rine base appears to be salvaged from 8-oxodGuo and
deoxyguanosine 3'-1nonophosphate (8-oxodGMP) by subsequently incorporated into both DNA and RNA, with
HPLC prior to the T4-polynucleotide kinase-Inediated phos- a 5—6-fold higher extent of incorporation into RNA. The
phorylation was shown to prevent artifactual oxidation of 2'- levels obtained by incorporation were about one lesion per
deoxyguanosine 3'-1nonophophosphate present in great eX- 106 nucleotides, which are comparable to the estimated
cess [195]. In addition, the peak containing overwhelming steady-state levels in human lymphocytes. Interestingly,
normal nucleotide tai1s with the peak containing 8- the removal of 8-oxoGua was fairly slow, with a half-life
oxodGMP in HPLC analysis. This is likely to lead to a 2—3 days, in comparison to the rapid removal of single
lower efﬁciency in the phosphorylation of modiﬁed nucle- lesions expected to occur by base excision repair. The tech-
otide and, therefore, to an underestimation of the level of 8- nique of AMS cannot be used to directly detect oxidatively
oxodGMP. It was also found that a decrease in the amount induced DNA damage because the compounds must carry a
of DNA used for postlabeling led to an increase in the radioisotope (14C or 3H in most studies) that is known to
artifactual oxidation of dGMP, making it difﬁcult to abso- induce self-radiolysis processes and artifactual generation of
1ute1y quantify 8-oxodGMP. An alternative so-called im- oxidatively generated DNA lesions [31]. Alternatively,
proved 32P-postlabeling assay was proposed. The the technique may be combined with postlabeling deriV-
enrichment step involves 1-directiona1 separation of 8- atization. For example, oxidized DNA was treated with
oxodGMP onapo1yethyleneirnine-cellulose thin-1ayer chro- [14C]-1nethoxyarnine, which forms a stable oxirne deriV-
Inatography plate in order to remove overwhelming normal ative with aldehyde and ketone products of the 2-
nucleotides [196]. However, intriguing results were deoxyribose Inoiety, useful for the quantification of
obtained using this assay since the average steady-state level DNA strand breaks and abasic sites [209]. This study
of 8-oxodGMP in uterine cervix DNA of healthy subjects showed a direct and strong correlation of methoxyamine
was found to be about 1.9 lesions per 109 nucleotides [197]. incorporation and strand breaks/AP sites down to ﬁve
This is clearly indicative of an underestirnation in the level modifications in 106 nucleotides for the analysis of
of 8-oxodGuo likely due to the presence of contaminating 1 ug of DNA. A major disadvantage of AMS is the
nucleotides that may compete with phosphorylation of the lack of structural information concerning the origin of
latter oxidized nucleotide. Another major drawback of the [14C]-atom in the sample. Thus, it is often necessary to
32P-postlabeling assays deals with the inability to unambig- collect [14C]-containing fractions before analysis and
uous1y identify the lesions as illustrated by the tentative compare the chromatography properties with authentic
identiﬁcation of type II I-cornpounds [198] as 5',8-cyclo- standards. However, the unsurpassed sensitiVity of
2'-deoxyadenosine [199]. AMS, the greater availability of instruments and the
@ Springer

"
"11","Measurement of oxidatively generated base damage to nucleic acids in cells 65
development of on-line methods of separation will likely cancer drugs. PCR-stop assays are based on the ability of
make this technique of greater interest in the analysis of DNA damage to block ampliﬁcation of the DNA template
DNA damage. by polymerase. These assays without competitive internal
standards rernain serni-quantitative because of differences in
Polymerase chain reaction-based Inethods amplification efficiency between sequences and inter-
sarnple variations [217]. On the other hand, real-time PCR
Ligation-rnediated PCR is a powerful assay to determine the allows one to monitor PCR ampliﬁcation efﬁciencies. Using
relative yields and distribution of DNA damage in speciﬁc short-target DNA (150—300 bp), one observed marked
genes and sequences [210—214]. Combined with Maxarn— changes in the threshold cycle as a measure in ampliﬁcation
Gilbert sequencing, the assay gives a footprint of the darn- efﬁciency only after exposure of puriﬁed DNA to 1 kGy;
age in genes at nucleotide resolution. The assay involving thus, this assay lacks the sensitivity required for the analysis
exponential ampliﬁcation of target DNA is arnendable to the of cellular DNA damage [218]. Alternatively, this approach
analysis of damage in small amounts of DNA (> 1 ug). The has been extended to longer sequences (up to 1,000 bp) with
lesions are identiﬁed by their conversion to strand breaks areport of increases HZOZ-induced damage in mitochondrial
using either chemical reactions or puriﬁed enzymes. For DNA of SH-SY5Y cells with observable changes in damage
example, oxidatively induced base damage can be converted frequency of about one lesion per 10 kb observed in the
to breaks by the action of formamidopyrimidine DNA gly- vulnerable D-loop region [219] that, however, are question-
cosylase (Fpg) or endonuclease III (Nth), which recognizes able in term of levels.
oxidized purines and pyrimidines, respectively. In addition,
cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers are converted to strand Tirne-resolved detection of 8-oxoGua in cells
breaks by reaction with T4 endonuclease V, and DNA con-
taining bulky adducts is cleaved using Escherichia coli A suitable strategy based on the use activated carbon ﬁber
UvrABC. Although the choice of enzyme offers some spec- Inicroelectrodes has been designed for monitoring in real-
iﬁcity to the type of lesion, it does not distinguish between time the extracellular release of 8-oxoGua or 8-oxodGuo
isorners or lesions with similar structures. A critical step in [220]. Thus, detection of electrochernically active corn-
LM-PCR is the ligation of the DNA fragments to a double- pounds, likely 8-oxoGua compounds, was achieved using
stranded linker for subsequent exponential ampliﬁcation. the latter sensing platform at the surface of isolated lung
An improvement in signal has been reported for terminal epithelial cells that were pre-incubated with 4 mM nicotine
transferase-dependent PCR compared to T4 DNA ligase in as the oxidative stress agent [220]. A bacterial biosensor
conventional LM-PCR [215]. The major disadvantage of bearing an enhanced green ﬂuorescence protein (EGFP)
LM-PCR for ROS-induced damage is the relatively low reporter gene has been constructed for detecting oxidative
sensitiVity compared to other methods (HPLC-MS/MS). agents capable of damaging DNA [221]. The SOS response
The limit of detection is about 0.8 direct strand breaks or that is triggered in prokaryote cells by oxidative stress
oxidized purine and pyrimidine bases per 104 bp. This and agents leads to a ﬂuorescence emission signal through the
higher levels of damage were obtained from the treatment of activation of EGFP. The sensitiVity of the biosensor was
nuclei with 50 mM H202 with or without Inetal catalysts and enhanced 10—20 times by knocking out one alkyl hydroper-
ascorbate [211]. On the basis of preliminary results, howeV- oxide reductase gene and two catalase genes that would
er, the authors proposed an enhancement in the sensitivity promote the occurrence of °OH-1nediated-DNA damage
by an average 24-fold for HZOZ-induced damage by pre- through Fenton type reactions.
puriﬁcation of the target gene before analysis using contin-
uous elution electrophoresis. With the latter improvement, it Nanopore detection of guanine oxidation products
would be possible for LM-PCR to measure oxidized bases
in DNA at physiologically relevant levels of ﬁve lesions per Mapping of oxidatively generated base damage at the nu-
106 nucleotides. A variation of LM-PCR was developed to cleotide level in DNA fragments remains a challenging
estirnate 8-oxodGuo damage in individual genes. This Ineth- analytical issue as illustrated by identiﬁable limitations as-
od compared the yields of PCR products from DNA samples sociated with the use of PCR assays (Vide supra). As a
before and after treatment with 8-oxoguanine N—glycosylase potential alternative, an ion channel detection method was
(OGGl) enzyme and reported signiﬁcant differences in recently reported [222]. This method was based on the
damage for Helicobacter pylori—infected compared to non- ability of 40-mer single-stranded DNA fragments, i.e.,
infected tissue; however, the level of damage was estimated poly-dC hornopolyrner or K-ras heterosequence tethered to
between 25 and 100 lesions per 106 nucleotides [216]. A a biotin—streptaVidin complex at the 3'-extre1nity, to trans-
number of other methods based on PCR have been exarn- locate through an alpha-hernolysin ion channel. Fragments
ined mainly for DNA damage induced by UV light and anti- containing single guanine modiﬁcation caused a change in
@ Springer

"
"12","66 J . Cadet, et al.
the mobility of the fragment through the channel under a and animal ﬂuids including urine and plasma as potential
given voltage. The immobilization of DNA fragments was biomarkers of oxidative stress. GC—MS in the SIM mode
higher for the spirocyclic adduct (Sp-NR) that is formed by was used to monitor the release of 8-0X0Gua and 8-0X0Ade
the nucleophilic addition of spermine t0 the purine radical in urine [229]. Other assays have included quantitation of
cation formed by one-electron oxidation of 8-0X0-7,8-dihy- 8-0X0Gua and 8-0X0dGu0 by either HPLC—ECD [230, 231]
droguanine than for smaller guanine lesions including 8- 0r immunodetection [232] after solid-phase extraction and
oxodGuO, guanidinohydantoin, and Sp. Interestingly, the immunoafﬁnity pre-puriﬁcation. Discrepancies in the levels
blockage current levels provided by Sp and Sp-NR modiﬁ- of urinary excreted 8-0X0Gua and 8-0X0dGu0 have gradu-
cations within the 40-rner single-stranded DNA fragments ally appeared with the widespread application of immuno-
differed by 10 % from those of normal bases [222]. assays and chromatographic based methods which have
greatly beneﬁted from the advent of accurate HPLC—MS/MS
Immunospin trapping of oxidatively generated DNA analysis. A long-standing issue concerns the origin of the
radicals released oxidized bases and nucleosides in urine that, however,
does not implicate any signiﬁcant contribution of diet [37]. It is
Efforts have been made to gain structural information on believed that the excretion of oxidized bases is mostly
transient radicals that may be generated in cellular DNA by accounted for, as proposed earlier [233, 234], by the removal
the reaction of oxidants with nucleobases and 2-de0xyrib0se 0f the modiﬁed bases from nuclear DNA by repair N—glyco—
moieties. These studies have been hampered by the short-life sylases. Thus, hOGGl is the likely repair protein together with
time 0f1n0st base and sugar radicals that efﬁciently react with back-up enzymes that are involved in the release of predomi-
02 at rates controlled by diffusion with the exception of the nant 8-0X0Gu0. The situation is not as clear for the urinary
oxidizing G(—H)° and aminyl radicals. In order to comply with excretion of 8-0X0dGu0 [234] although recent evidence pro-
this difﬁcult issue, a sensitive but poorly structurally informa— Vided support for the implication of hMTH1, a Nudix hydro-
tive immunospin trapping assay that consists of three main lysate that as a sanitization enzyme is able to dephosphorylate
steps has been developed [223, 224] and applied to the detec- 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0-2'-de0xyguan0sine triphosphate in the nu-
tion of DNA radicals produced by various oxidants including cleotide pools therefore preventing its incorporation into DNA
ethanol radicals [225], OH [226], and also HOCl [227] [235].
through the formation of chloramines intermediates. The
nitrone spin-trap 5 ,5-dimethy1-1-pyrr01ine-N—0Xide (DMPO) Immunoassays
that diffuses within the cells and eXhibits low toxicity is able to
convert short-lived radicals into stab1e nitrone adducts after In the last 15 years, numerous competitive ELISA measure-
the spontaneous oxidation of initially formed radical DMPO ments of excreted 8-0X0dGu0 in human ﬂuids including
adducts. Subsequently, DNA containing the nitrone adduct saliva, plasma, and urine [23 6—241] have been performed
was puriﬁed before assessment of the DMPO trapped radicals using commercial kits that involve in most cases the N451
by either ELISA 0r dot-blot measurements using antibodies monoclonal antibody against 8-0X0dGu0 available through
raised against DMPO. However, this approach does not pro— the J apanese Institute for the Control of Aging [236]. These
Vide any relevant information on the nature of DNA radicals assays that do not require expensive equipment and highly
that are spin-trapped by DMPO. This was circumvented by specialized expertise and may be conducted on a large-scale
substituting unspeciﬁc immunodetection with a more Inole- basis that ﬁts well with human cohort studies. However, the
cule speciﬁc approach using ESI—MS in either single or tan- speciﬁcity of anti 8-0X0dGu0 antibodies for measuring the
dem modes of detection after enzymatic digestion of DNA latter oxidized 2'-de0xyguan0sine in urine [233, 242, 243]
into 2'-de0xyrib0nucle0sides and immunoprecipitation of and plasma [244] has been questioned because the values
nitrone adducts [228]. One Inain nitrone adduct was identiﬁed obtained by ELISA are larger than those provided by
as the addition product of DMPO t0 6-a1niny1 radical which HPLC—ECD 0r HPLC—MS/MS analyses. This may be
arises from dehydration of the '0H adduct at C5 of adenine in explained at least partly by the presence of urea in urine, a
the DNA of mouse macrophage Raw 264.7 cells upon eXpO- compound that interferes with the immunodetection 0f 8-
sure to the Cu(II)—H202 oxidizing system [228]. oxodGuO [245, 246]. Further, conﬁrmation of the lack of
accuracy of ELISA measurements of 8-0X0dGu0 in urine
has been provided by an extensive comparative study with
Measurement of oxidized nucleobases and nucleosides chromatographic methods as part of an interlaboratory val-
in human ﬂuids idation exercise involving 17 research groups of the Euro-
pean Standards on Urinary (DNA) Lesions Analysis
Early attempts have been made to develop assays aimed at network [247]. As previously observed, the average values
measuring oxidized nucleobases and nucleosides in human of urinary 8-0X0dGu0 determined by ELISA methods were
@ Springer

"
"13","Measurement of oxidatively generated base damage to nucleic acids in cells 67

greater than those obtained by chromatographic methods of oxidatively generated base damage is a suitable alterna-

including HPLC—ECD, HPLC—GC/MS, and HPLC—MS/ tive for assessing low variations in the levels of the lesions.

MS that all show a good agreement. Several parameters in Efforts are currently made to extend the measurement of

addition to the presence of interfering impurities may eX- base damage in cellular DNA to oxidation products of

plain the lower accuracy of the ELISA Inethods [248]. cytosine, tandem base lesions, DNA—protein cross-links,

These include the absence of internal standardization, the and interstrand DNA cross-links. There is also a need of

higher variability of measurements, and the lack of linear developing accurate assays for monitoring oxidatively gen-

response in ELISA calibration at high 8-oxodGuo concen- erated base damage in mitochondrial DNA.

trations [247].

Chromatographic Inethods References

It was recently conﬁrmed that the three most recently used 1. Elahi MM, Kong YX, Matata BM (2009) Oxidative stress as a

chromatographic Inethods consisting Of GC—MS With pre- mediator of cardiovascular disease. OXid Med Cell LongeV
. . 2:259—269

punﬁcatmn’ HPLC_ECD’ and HPLC_MSMS have reached 2. Di Lisa F, Kaludercic N, Carpi A, Menabo R, Giorgio M (2009)

a consensus for the measurement of 8-oxodGuo 1n unne Mitochondria and vascular pathology. phamacol Rep 61:123—

[247]. However, HPLC—ECD methods, even improved ver- 130

sions that beneﬁt from column switching column [249, 250] 3- Murphy PM (2009) HOW mitOChondria Pmduce reaCtiVe oxygen

and higher sensitivity associated With the use of a nano- SpeCieS? BiOChemJ417ﬂ—13 .

. . 4. Powers SK, Jackson MJ (2008) Exercise-induced oxidatwe
carbon ﬁlm eleetrede [251]» remalh SUhJeet t0 the presence stress: cellular mechanisms and impact on muscle force produc-
of electrochemically active interfering compounds and re- tion. Physiol Rev 88:1243—1276
stricted to only a few electroactive modiﬁed bases including 5- 5- 3:33;”: 0: heiehgdddsagﬁiezyan A: K611i? D: Wagner Kh'H

_ _ xer01se-1n UCC amage: IS t CI‘C a 1'6 at10ns 1p
OHCyt’ 8 OXOAde’ FapyGha’ ahd FapyAde. HhLC GC/MS With inﬂammatory response? Exerc Immunol ReV 14:51—72
has been shown to be a SUltable approach allerng the aeeu- 6. Romano AD, Serviddio G, de Matthaeis A, Bellanti F, Vende-
rate measurement of several oxidized nucleobases and nucleo- miale G (2010) Oxidative stress and aging. J Nephrol 23(Supp1
sides including 8-oxoGua, 8-oonde, 8-oxodGuo, 5- 7 2533522153; k U (2009) 0 'd . d . 1 .
~ _ ~ _ . en , ayra tutan X1 at1ve stress an 1ts ro e 1n
hydroxyuracﬂ, ahd 5 hydroxymethyluraell [252’ 2531 HO.W the pathogenesis of ischaemic stroke. Int J Stroke 4:461—470
ever: the pre-purlﬁcatlon Step IS very tedlous, thus prevehtlhg 8. Monteiro R, Azevedo I (2010) Chronic inﬂammation in obesity
the analysis of numerous samples. These limitations are not and the metabolic syndrome. Mediators Inﬂamm 2010:1—10
present for the versatile and accurate HPLC—MS/MS Inethods 9- TakayalnagidR, Iniguehig, thaka K (2011) Clinbical an? exper;
_ . 1menta eV1 ence or 0X1 at1ve stress as an exacer at1ng actor o
[101’ 104’ 254 265] that may behhhSIdered as the gOId diabetes mellitus. J Clin Biochem Nutr 48:72—77
standard for the measurement of ox1dlzed bases and nucleo- 10. Zhang H, Xie C, Spencer HJ, Zuo C, Higuchi M, Ranganathan G,
Sides in urine [99, 266]. Kern PA, Chou MW, Huang Q, Szczesny B, Mitra S, Watson AJ,
Margison GP, Fan CY (2011) Obesity and hepatosteatosis in mice
With enhanced oxidative DNA damage processing in mitochon-
. dria. Am J Pathol 178:1715—1727
Conclusmns 11. Aitken RJ, Curry BJ (2011) Redox regulation of human function:
from the physiological control of sperm capacitation to the etiol-
Major achievements have been accomplished in the mea- Ogy 0f infertility and DNA damage in the gem line- AntiOXid
surement of oxidativel darna ed bases and nucleosides in Redox Signal 14367—381
. y . g. . . 12. Martin LJ (2010) Mitochondrial and cell death mechanisms in
heth gehemle DNA and blologlcal ﬂu1ds such as urlhe ahd neurodegenerative diseases. Pharmaceuticals (Basel) 3:839—915
plasma during the last 15 years after a long period of 13. Gille G, ReichmannH (2011) Iron-dependent functions of mito-
confusion during Which lesion yields varied over three chondria—relation to neurodegeneration. J Neural Transm
orders of magnitude Several drawbacks and requirements 118349—359 . . .
. ' . . . . . 14. Lawless MW, O’Byrne KJ, Gray SG (2010) Target1ng ox1dat1ve
have been clearly 1dent1ﬁed 1nclud1ng the nsk of adventl- stress in cancer. Expert Opin Ther Targets 14312254245
tious oxidation of nucleobases or nucleosides during DNA 15. Reuter S, Gupta SC, Chaturvedi MM, Aggarwal BB (2010)
extraction, the lack Of speciﬁcity Of antibodies, the need Of Oxidative stress, inﬂammation, and cancer: how are they linked.
3 . Free Radic Biol Med 49:1603—1616
tandem MS’ and eventually MS deteChOh at the Ohtpht Of 16. M611er P, Loft S (2010) Oxidative damage to DNA and lipids as
HPLC eelumhs- HPLC_MS/MS appears to be the methed Of biomarkers of exposure to air pollution. Environ Health Perspect
choice for measuring oxidized bases and nucleosides in 118:1126—1136
urine. This is also the case for nuclear DNA When the 17- Faux SP: TaiT, Thome D,XuY, Breheny D: GacaM (2009)“16
~ ~ ~ ~ role of oxidative stress in the biological responses of lung epithe-
1nduced frequency of Inodlﬁed bases 1s notable W1th respect lial cells to cigarette smoke. Biomarkers 14:90—96
to steady-state level of these les1ons. Enzymatlc assays that 18. Mena S, Ortega A, Estrela JM (2009) Oxidative stress in
involve the use of DNA repair enzymes for revealing classes environmental-induced carcinogenesis. Mutat Res 674:3644
@ Springer

"
"14","68 J. Cadet, et al.
19. Jomova K, Valko M (2011) Advances in metal-induced oxidative and 3’-ph0sph0g1ycolate pathways of 4’ oxidation of 2-
stress and human disease. Toxicology 283:65—87 deoxyribose in DNA: application to DNA damage produced by
20. Brillas E, Sires I, Oturan MA (2009) Electro-Fenton process and gamma radiation and b1e0mycin. Chem Res Toxicol 20:1701—
related electrochemical technologies based on Fenton’s reaction 1708
chemistry. Chem Rev 109:6570—6631 40. Chan W, Chen B, Wang L, Taghizadeh K, Demott MS, Dedon PC
21. von Sonntag CV (2006) Free-radical induced DNA damage and (2010) Quantiﬁcation of the 2-de0xyrib0n01act0ne and nucleo-
its repair. A chemical perspective. Springer, Heidelberg side 5’-a1dehyde products of 2-de0xyribose oxidation in DNA
22. Douki T, Ravanat J-L, Angelov D, Wagner JR, Cadet J (2004) and cells by isotope-dilution gas chromatography mass spectrom-
Effects of duplex stability on charge-transfer efﬁciency Within etry: differential effects of gamma-radiation and Fe2+-EDTA. J
DNA. In: Schuster GB (ed) Long-range transfer in DNA1. Topics Am Chem Soc 132:6145—6153
in current chemistry, V01236. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, pp 1— 41. Taghizadeh K, McFaline JL, Pang B, Sullivan M, Dong M,
25 Plummer E, Dedon PC (2008) Quantiﬁcation of DNA damage
23. Cadet J , Douki T, Ravanat J-L, Di Mascio P (2009) Sensitized products resulting from deamination, oxidation and reaction with
formation of oxidatively generated damage to cellular DNA by products of lipid peroxidation by liquid chromatography isotope
UVA radiation. Photochem Photobiol Sci 8:903—911 dilution tandem mass spectrometry. Nat Protoc 3:1287—1298
24. Mouret S, Baudouin C, Charveron M, FaVier A, Cadet J , Douki T 42. Blair IA (2008) DNA adducts With lipid peroxidation products. J
(2006) Cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers are predominant DNA Biol Chem 283:15545—15549
lesions in Whole human skin exposed to UVA radiation. Proc 43. Medeiros MH (2009) Exocyclic DNA adducts as biomarkers of
Natl Acad Sci USA 103:13765—13770 lipid oxidation and predictors disease. Challenges in developing
25. Hariharan PV, Cerutti PA (1972) Formation and repair ofgamma- sensitive and speciﬁc methods for clinical studies. Chem Res
ray induced thymine damage in Micrococcus radiodurans. J M01 Toxicol 22:419—425
Bi0166:65—81 44. Nair J, Nair UJ, Sun X, Wang Y, Arab K, Bartsch H (2011)
26. Schellenberg KA, Shaeffer J , Nichols RK, Gates D (1981) Char— Quantifying etheno-DNA adducts in human tissues, White blood
acterization of radiation damage to DNA by reaction With boro- cells, and urine by ultrasensitive (32)P-p0st1abe1ing and immu-
hydride. Nucleic Acids Res 9:3 863—3 872 nohistochemistry. Methods M01 Biol 682:189—205
27. Cerutti PA (1974) Effects of ionizing radiation on mammalian 45. Voulgaridou GP, Anestopoulos I, Franco R, Panayiotidis MI,
cells. Naturwissenschaften 61:51—59 Pappa A (2011) DNA damage induced by endogenous aldehydes:
28. Teoule R, Bonicel A, Bert C, Cadet J, Polverelli M (1974) current state 0fkn0w1edge.MutatRes 711:13—27
Identiﬁcation of radioproducts resulting from the breakage of 46. Cadet J , Douki T, Ravanat J -L (2010)OXidative1y generated base
thymine moiety by gamma irradiation of E coli DNA in an damage to cellular DNA. Free Radic Biol Med 49:9—21
aerated aqueous solution. Radiat Res 57:46—58 47. Chatgilialoglu C, Ferreri C, Terzidis MA (2011) Purine 5’,8-cyclo-
29. Hariharan PV, Cerutti PA (1977) Formation of products of the nucleosides: chemistry and biology. Chem Soc ReV 40:1368—21382
5,6-dihydr0xydihydrothymine type by ultraviolet light in HeLa 48. Cadet J , Douki T, Ravanat J-L (2008) Oxidatively generated
cells. Biochemistry 16:2791—2795 damage to the guanine moiety of DNA: mechanistic aspects and
30. Hariharan PV, Courtney J , Eleczko S (1980) Production of hy- formation in cells. Acc Chem Res 41:1075—1083
droxyl radicals in cell systems exposed to haematoporphyrin and 49. Wagner JR, Cadet J (2010) Oxidation reactions of cytosine com-
red light. Int J Radiat Biol 37:691—694 ponents by hydroxyl radical and one-electron oxidants in aerated
31. Cadet J, Berger M (1985) Radiation-induced decomposition of aqueous solutions. Acc Chem Res 43:563—571
the purine bases Within DNA and related modelcompounds.1ntJ 50. Medinas DB, Cerchiaro G, Trindale D, Augusto O (2007) The
Radiat Biol 47:127—143 carbonate radical and related oxidants derived from bicarbonate
32. Dizdaroglu M (1984) The use of capillary gas chromatography— buffer. IUBMB Life 59:255—262
mass spectrometry for identiﬁcation of radiation-induced DNA 51. Joffe A, Geacintov NE, Shaﬁrovich V (2003) DNA lesions de-
base damage and DNA base-amino acid cross—links. J Chroma- rived from the site selective oxidation of guanine by carbonate
togr 295:103—121 radical anions. Chem Res Toxicol 16:1528—1538
33. Floyd RA, Watson JJ, Wong PK, Altmiller DH, Rickard RC 52. Cadet J, Douki T, Ravanat J-L (2006) One-electron oxidation of
(1986) Hydroxyl free radical adduct 0f deoxyguanosine: sensitive DNA and inﬂammation processes. Nat Chem Biol 2:348—349
detection and mechanisms offormation. Free Radic Res Commun 53. Cadet J, Douki T, Ravanat J-L (2011) Measurement of oxi-
1:163—172 datively generated base damage in cellular DNA. Mutat Res
34. Kasai H, Nishimura S (1984) Hydroxylation 0f deoxyguanosine 711:3—12
at the C-8 position by ascorbic acid and other reducing agents. 54. Pouget J-P, Douki T, Ravanat J-L, Testard I, Odin F, Cadet J
Nucleic Acids Res 12:2137—2145 (2002) Formation of modiﬁed bases in cells exposed either to
35. Halliwell B, Dizdaroglu M (1992) The measurement of oxidative gamma radiation or high-LET particles. Radiat Res 157:589—595
damage to DNA by HPLC and GC/MS techniques. Free Radio 55. Douki T, Ravanat J-L, Pouget J-P, Testard I, Cadet J (2006) Minor
Res Commun 16:75—87 contribution of direct ionization to DNA base damage induced by
36. Cadet J , D’Ham C, Douki T, Pouget JP, Ravanat JL, Sauvaigo S heavy ions. Int J Radiat Biol 82:119—127
(1998) Facts and artifacts in the measurement of oxidative dam- 56. Lenton KJ, Therriault H, Fiilép T, Payette H, Wagner JR (1999)
age to DNA. Free Radic Res 29:541—550 Glutathione and ascorbate are negatively correlated With oxida-
37. Cooke MS, Olinski R, Loft S, European Standards Committee on tive DNA damage in human lymphocytes. Carcinogenesis
Urinary (DNA) Lesions Analysis (2008) Measurement and mean- 20:607—613
ing of oxidatively modiﬁed DNA lesions in urine. Cancer Epi- 57. Kriaucianis S, Heintz N (2009) The nuclear base 5-
demiol Biomarkers Prev 17:3—14 hydroxymethylcytosine is present in Purkinje neurons and
38. Evans MD, SaparbaeV M, Cooke MS (2010) DNA repair and the the brain. Science 324:929—930
origins of urinary oxidized 2'-de0xyrib0nucle0sides. Mutagenesis 58. Iqbal K, J in S-G, Pfeifer GP, Szabo PE (2011) Reprogramming 0f
25:433442 the paternal genome upon fertilisation involves genome-Wide
39. Chen B, Zhou X, Taghizadeh K, Chen J, Stubbe J, Dedon PC oxidation of 5-methylcytosine. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
(2007) GC/MS methods to quantify the 2-de0xypent0s—4-u10se 108:3642—3647
@ Springer

"
"15","Measurement of oxidatively generated base damage to nucleic acids in cells 69
59. Tahiliani M, Koh KP, Shen Y, Pastor WA, Bandukwala 76. Ravanat J-L, Turesky RJ, Gremaud E, Trudel LJ, Stadler RH
H, Brudno Y, Agarwal S, Iyer LM, Liu DR, Aravind L, (1995) Determination of 8-0X0guanine in DNA by gas chroma-
Rao A (2009) Conversion of 5-methylcyt0sine t0 5- tography—mass spectrometry and HPLC—electrochemical detec-
hydroxymethylcytsone in mammalian DNA by MLL partner tion: overestimation of the background level of the oxidized base
TET1. Science 324:930—935 by the gas chromatography—mass spectrometry assay. Chem Res
60. Yier LM, Tahiliani M, R210 A, Aravind L (2009) Prediction ofnovel Toxicol 8: 1039—1045
families of enzymes involved in oxidative and other complex mod- 77. Hamberg M, Zhang L-Y (1995) Quantitative determination of 8-
iﬁcations of bases in nucleic acids. Cell Cycle 8:1698—1710 hydroxyguanine and guanine by isotope dilution mass spectrom-
61. Matter B, Malejka—Giganti D, Csallany AS, Tretyakova N (2006) etry. Anal Biochem 229:336—344
Quantitative analysis of the oxidative DNA lesion, 2,2-diamino- 78. Kelley JA, Abbasi MA, Beisler JA (1980) Silylation mediated
4-[(—2-de0xy-ﬂ-D-erythr0-pentofuranosy1)amin0]-5(2H)-oxazo- oxidation of dihydropyrimidine bases and nucleosides. Anal Bio-
lone (oxazolone) in Vitro and in Vivo by isotope dilution-capillary chem 103:203—213
HPLC—ESI-MS/MS. Nucleic Acids Res 34:5449—5460 79. Douki T, Delatour T, Bianchini F, Cadet J (1996) Observation and
62. Bellon S, Ravanat J -L, Gasparutto D, Cadet J (2002) Cross—linked prevention of an artefactual formation of oxidized DNA bases
thymine-purine base tandem lesions: synthesis, characterization, and nucleosides in the GC—EIMS method. Carcinogenesis
and measurement in gamma—irradiated isolated DNA. Chem Res 17:347—353
Toxicol 15:598—606 80. Douki T, Martini R, Ravanat J-L, Tureski RJ, Cadet J (1997)
63. J iang Y, Hong H, Cao H, Wang Y (2007) In Vivo formation and in Measurement of 2,6-diamin0-4-hydroxy-5 -f0rmamidopyrimidine
Vitro replication of a guanine—thymine intrastrand cross—link 1e- and 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0guanine in isolated DNA exposed to gam-
sion. Biochemistry 46:12757—12763 ma radiation in aqueous solution. Carcinogenesis 18:2385—2391
64. Hong H, Cao H, Wang Y (2007) Formation and genotoxicity of a 81. Collins AR, Cadet J , M611er L, Poulsen H, Viﬁa J (2004) Are we
guanine—cytosine interstrand cross—link lesion in Vivo. Nucleic sure we know how to measure 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0guanine in DNA
Acids Res 35:7118—7127 from human cells? Arch Biochem Biophys 423:57—65
65. Belmadoui N, Boussicault F, Guerra M, Ravanat J -L, Chatgilia- 82. Jaruga P, Kirkali G, Dizdaroglu M (2008) Measurement of for-
loglu C, Cadet J (2010) Radiation-induced formation of purine mamidopyrimidines in DNA. Free Radic Biol Med 45:1601—
5’,8-cyclonucleosides in isolated and cellular DNA: high stereo- 1609
speciﬁcity and modulating effect of oxygen. Org Biomol Chem 83. Jaruga P, Dizdaroglu M (2008) 8,5’-Cyclopurine-2’-de0xynucle0-
8:3211—3219 sides in DNA: mechanisms of formation, measurement, repair
66. Regulus P, Spessotto S, Gateau M, Cadet J , FaVier A, Ravanat J -L and biological effects. DNA Repair (Amst) 7: 1413—1425
(2004) Detection of new radiation-induced DNA lesions by liquid 84. Malins DC, Anderson MK, Stegeman JJ, Jaruga P, Green VM,
chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry. Rapid Gilman NK, Dizdaroglu M (2006) Biomarkers signal contami-
Commun Mass Spectrom 18:2223—2228 nant effects on the organs of English sole (Parophrys vetulus)
67. Regulus P, DurouX B, Bayle P-A, FaVier A, Cadet J , Ravanat J -L from Puget sound. Environ Health Perspect 114:823—829
(2006) Oxidation of the sugar moiety of DNA by ionizing radi- 85. Jaruga P, Speina E, Gackowski D, Tudek B, Olinski R (2000)
ation 0r bleomycin could induce the formation of a cluster DNA Endogenous oxidative DNA base modiﬁcations analysed With
lesion. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104: 14032—14037 repair enzymes and GC/MS technique. Nucleic Acids Res 28:E16
68. Helbock HJ, Cundy KC, Ames EN (1998) DNA oxidation mat- 86. Cooke MS, Evans MD, Dizdaroglu M, Lunec J (2003) Oxidative
ters: the HPLC—electrochemical detection assay of 8-0X0- DNA damage: mechanisms, mutation and disease. FASEB J
deoxyguanosine and 8-0X0-guanine. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 17:1195—1214
95:288—293 87. Wagner JR, Hu CC, Ames EN (1992) Endogenous oxidative
69. Ravanat J-L, Douki T, Duez P, Gremaud E, Herbert K, Hofer T, damage of deoxycytidine in DNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
Lassere L, Saint-Pierre C, FaVier A, Cadet J (2002) Cellular back— 89:3380—3384
ground of 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0-2’-de0xyguan0sine: an isotope based 88. Berger M, Anselmino C, Mouret J-F, Cadet J (1990) High per-
method to evaluate artefactual oxidation of DNA during its extrac- formance liquid chromatography—electrochemica1 assay for mon-
tion and subsequent work-up. Carcinogenesis 23: 1911—1918 itoring the formation of 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0adenine and its related
70. Badouard C, Menezo Y, PanteiX G, Ravanat J -L, Douki T, Cadet 2’-de0xynucle0side. J Liq Chromatogr 13:929—932
J, FaVierA (2008) Determination of new types ofDNAlesions in 89. Park J-W, Cundy KC, Ames EN (1989) Detection of DNA
human sperm. Zygote 16:9—13 adducts by high-performance liquid chromatography with elec-
71. Dizdaroglu M (1990) Gas chromatography of free radical- trochemical detection. Carcinogenesis 10:827—832
induced products of pyrimidines and purines in DNA. Methods 90. Ravanat J -L, Gremaud E, Markovic J , Turesky RJ (1998) Detec-
Enzymol 193:842—857 tion of 8-0X0guanine in cellular DNA using 2,6-diamin0-8-0X0-
72. Dizdaroglu M (1993) Quantitative determination of oxidative purine as an internal standard for high-performance liquid
base damage in DNA by stable isotope-dilution mass spectrom- chromatography with electrochemical detection. Anal Biochem
etry. FEBS Lett 315:1—6 260:30—37
73. BoiteuX S, Gajewski E, Laval J , Dizdaroglu M (1992) Substrate 91. Cadet J , Douki T, Frelon S, Sauvaigo S, Pouget J -P, Ravanat J -L
speciﬁcity of the Escherichia coli protein (formamidopyrimidine- (2002) Assessment of oxidative base damage to isolated and
DANN glycosylase): excision ofpurine lesions in DNA produced cellular DNA by HPLC—MS/MS measurement. Free Radic Biol
by ionizing radiation or photosensitization. Biochemistry Med 33:441442
31:106—110 92. Tue J, Jaruga P, Rodriguez H, Dizdaroglu M, Bohr VA (2002)
74. Dizdaroglu M, Laval J , BoiteuX S (1993) Substrate speciﬁcity of The Cockayne syndrome group B gene product is involved in
the Escherichia coli endonuclease III: excision of thymine- and cellular repair of 8-hydr0xyadenine in DNA. J Biol Chem
cytosine-derived lesions in DNA produced by radiation- 277:30832—30837
generated free radicals. Biochemistry 32:12105—12106 93. Tue J, Jaruga P, Rodriguez H, Bohr VA, Dizdaroglu M (2003)
75. Cadet J , Douki T, Ravanat J -L (1997) Artifacts associated With Primary ﬁbroblasts 0f Cockayne syndrome patients are defective
the measurement of oxidized DNA bases. Environ Health Per— in cellular repair of 8-hydr0xyguanine and 8-hydr0xyadenine
spect 105:1034—1039 resulting from oxidative stress. FASEB J 17:668—674
@ Springer

"
"16","70 J. Cadet, et al.
94. Pouget J -P, Douki T, Richard M-J, Cadet J (2000) DNA damage (2007) Assessment of DNA damage at the dimer level: measure-
induced in cells by gamma and UVA radiation as measured by ment of the formamide lesion. Radiat Res 167:146—151
HPLC—MS and HPLC—EC and comet assay. Chem Res Toxicol 111. Iijima H, Patrzyc HB, Budzinski EE, Freund HG, Dawidzik JB,
13:541—549 Rodabaugh KJ, BOX HC (2009) A study of pyrimidine base
95. Goodhead DT (1989) The initial physical damage produced by damage in relation to oxidative stress and cancer. Br J Cancer
ionizing radiations. Int J Radiat Biol 56:623—634 101:452456
96. D’Errico M, Parlanti E, Teson M, Bernades de J esus BM, Degan 112. DeFedericis H-C, Patrzyc HB, Rajecki MJ, Budzinski EE, Iijima
P, Calcagnile A, Jaruga P, Bjeréis M, Crescenzi M, Pedrini AM, H, Dawidzik JB, Evans MS, Greene KF, Box HC (2006) Singlet
Egly JM, Zambruno G, Stefanini M, Dizdaroglu D, Dogliotti E oxygen-induced DNA damage. Radiat Res 165:445451
(2006) New functions of XPC in the protection of human skin 113. Prat F, Houk KN, Foote CS (1998) Effects of guanine stacking on
cells from oxidative damage. EMBO J 25:4305—4315 the oxidation of 8-0X0guanine in ﬂ-DNA. J Am Chem Soc
97. Miinzel M, Globisch D, Briickl T, Wagner M, Welzmiller V, 120:845—846
Michalakis S, Miiller M, Biel M, Carell T (2010) Quantiﬁcation 114. Ravanat J -L, Saint—Pierre C, Cadet J (2003) One-electron oxidation
of the sixth DNA base hydroxymethylcytosine in the brain. of the guanine moiety of 2’-de0xyguan0sine: inﬂuence of 8-0X0-
Angew Chem Int Ed 49:5375—5377 7,8-dihydr0-2’-de0xyguan0sine. J Am Chem Soc 125:2030—2031
98. Miinzel M, Globisch D, Carell T (2011) 5-Hydr0xymethylcytosine, 115. Luo W, Muller JG, Rachlin EM, Burrows CJ (2001) Character-
the sixth base of the genome. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 50:6460— ization of hydantoin products from one-electron oxidation of 8-
6468 0X0-7,8-dihydr0guanosine in a nucleoside model. Chem Res
99. Cadet J , Poulsen H (2010) Measurement of oxidatively generated Toxicol 14:927—938
base damage in cellular DNA and urine. Free Radic Biol Med 116. Hailer MK, Slade PG, Martin BD, Sugden KD (2005) Nei deﬁ-
48:1457—1459 cient Escherichia 6011' are sensitive to chromate and accumulate
100. Serrano J , Palmeira CM, Wallace KB, Kuehl DW (1996) Deter— the oxidized guanine lesion spiroiminodihydantoin. Chem Res
mination of 8-hydr0xyguanosine in biological tissues by liquid Toxicol 18:1378—1383
chromatography/electrospray ionization—mass spectrometry. Rap- 117. West GJ, West IW—L, Ward JF (1982) Radioimmunoassay of 7,8-
id Commun Mass Spectrom 10:1789—1791 dihydr0-8-0X0adenine (8-hydr0xyadenine). Int J Radiat Biol
101. Ravanat J-L, Duretz B, Guiller A, Douki T, Cadet J (1998) 42:481490
Isotope dilution high-performance liquid chromatography—elec- 118. Hubbard K, Huang H, Laspia MF, Die H, Erlanger BF, Wallace
trospray tandem mass spectrometry assay for the measurement of SS (1998) Immunochemical quantitation of thymine glycol in
8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0-2’-de0xyguan0sine in biological samples. J oxidized and X-irradiated DNA. Radiat Res 118:257—268
Chromatogr B 715:349—356 119. Signorini N, Molko D, Cadet J (1998) Polyclonal antibodies to
102. Frelon S, Douki T, Ravanat J -L, Pouget J -P, Tornabene C, Cadet J adenine N1-0Xide: characterization and use for the measurement
(2000) High-performance liquid chromatography—tandem mass of DNA damage. Chem Res Toxicol 11:1169—1175
spectrometry measurement of radiation-induced base damage to 120. Yin B, Whyatt RM, Perera FP, Randall MC, Cooper TB, Santella
isolated and cellular DNA. Chem Res Toxicol 13:1002—1010 RM (1995) Determination of 8-hydr0xyde0xyguan0sine by an
103. Podmore ID, Cooper D, Evans MD, Wood M, Lunec J (2000) immunoafﬁnity chromatography—monoclonal antibody-based
Simultaneous measurement of 8-0X0-2’-deoxyguanosine and 8- ELISA. Free Radic Biol Med 18:1023—1032
0X0-2’-deoxyaden0sine by HPLC—MS/MS. Biochem Biophys 121. Mitchell DL, Meador J, Paniker L, Gasparutto D, Jeffrey WH,
Res Commun 277:764—770 Cadet J (2002) Development and application of a novel immu-
104. Weimann A, Belling D, Poulsen HE (2001) Measurement of 8- noassay for measuring oxidative DNA damage in the environ-
0X0-2’-deoxyguan0sine and 8-0X0-2’-deoxyaden0sine in DNA ment. Photochem Photobi0175z257—265
and human urine by high-performance liquid chromatography— 122. Cooke MS, Evans MD, Podmore ID, Herbert KE, Mistry N,
electrospray tandem mass spectrometry. Free Radic Biol Med Mistry P, Hickenbotham PT, Hussieni A, Grifﬁths HR, Lunec J
30:57—764 (1998) Novel repair action of Vitamin C upon in Vivo oxidative
105. Glintborg B, Weimann A, Kensler TW, Poulsen HE (2006) Oltipraz DNA damage. FEBS Lett 439:363—3 67
chemoprevention trial in Qidong, People’s Republic of China: unal— 123. Musarrat J , Arezina-Wilson J , Wani AA (1996) Prognostic and
tered oxidative biomarkers. Free Radic Biol Med 41:1010—1014 aetiological relevance of 8-hydr0xyguanosine in human breast
106. Singh R, Teichert F, Verschoyle RD, Kaur B, Vives M, Shanna carcinogenesis. Eur J Cancer 32A:1209—1214
RA, Steward WP, Gescher AJ, Farmer PB (2009) Simultaneous 124. Santella RM (1999) Immunological methods for detection of
determination of 8-0X0-2’-deoxyguanosine and 8-0X0-2’-deoxya- carcinogen-DNA damage in humans. Cancer Epidemiol Bio-
denosine in DNA using online column-switching liquid chroma- markers Prevent 8:73 3—739
tography/tandem mass spectrometry. Rapid Commun Mass 125. Ito S, D’Alessio AC, Taranova 0V, Hong K, Sewers LC, Zhang
Spectrom 23:151—160 Y (2010) Role of TeT proteins in 5mC t0 5th conversion, ES-
107. Chao MR, Yen CC, Hu CW (2008) Prevention of artifactual ce11 self—renewal and inner cell mass specification. Nature
oxidation in determination of cellular 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0-2’-de0X- 466: 1 129—1 133
yguanosine by isotope-dilution LC-MS/MS With automated 126. Globisch D, Miinzel M, Miiller M, Michakalis S, Wagner M,
solid-phase extraction. Free Radic Biol Med 44:464473 Koch S, Briickl T, Biel M, Carell T (2010) Tissue distribution of
108. Mangal D, Vudathala D, Park JH, Lee SH, Penning TM, Blair IA 5-hydr0xymethylcytosine and search for active demethylation
(2009) Analysis of 7,8-dihydr0-8-0X0-2’-de0xyguan0sine in ce1- intermediates. PLOS One 5:e15367
lular DNA during oxidative stress. Chem Res Toxicol 22:788— 127. Ohno M, Miura T, Furuichi M, Tominaga Y, Tsuchimoto D,
797 Sakumi K, Nakabeppu Y (2006) A genome-Wide distribution of
109. Bailey DT, DeFedericis H-C, Greene KF, Iijima H, Budzinski EE, 8-0X0guanine correlates with the preferred regions for recombi-
Patrzyc HB, Dawidzik JB, BOX HC (2006) A novel approach to nation and single nucleotide polymorphism in the human ge-
DNA damage assessments: measurement of the thymine glycol nome. Genome Res 16:567—575
lesion. Radiat Res 165:43 8—444 128. Toyokuni S, Iwasa Y, Kondo S, Tanaka T, Ochi H, Hiai H (1999)
110. Greene KF, Budzinski EE, Iijima H, Dawidzik JB, DeFedericis Intranuclear distribution of 8-hydr0xy-2’-de0xyguan0sine: an im-
H-C, Patrzyc HB, Evans MS, Bailey DT, Freund HG, Box HC munocytochemical study. J Histochem Cytochem 47:833—835
@ Springer

"
"17","Measurement of oxidatively generated base damage to nucleic acids in cells 71
129. Machella N, Regoli F, Cambria A, Santella RM (2004) Oxidative 147. Tice RR, Agurell E, Anderson D, Burlinson B, Hartmann A,
damage to DNA: an immunohistochemical approach for detection Kobayashi H, Miyamae Y, Rojas E, Ryu JC, Sasaki YF (2000)
of 7,8-dihydr0-8-0X0deoxyguanosine in marine organisms. Ma- Single cell gel/comet assay: guidelines 725 for in Vitro and in Vivo
rine Environ Res 58:725—729 genetic toxicology testing. Environ M01 Mutagen 35:206—221
130. Nakae Y, Stoward PJ, Bespalov IA, Melamede RJ, Wallace SS 148. Azqueta A, Gutzkow KB, Brunborg G, Collins AR (2011) Towards a
(2005) A new technique for the quantitative assessment of 8- more reliable comet assay: optimising agarose concentration, un-
oxoguanine in nuclear DNA as a marker of oxidative stress. Winding time and electrophoresis conditions. Mutat Res 724:41—45
Application to dystrophin-deﬁcient DMD skeletal muscles. His— 149. Kohn KW (1991) Principles and practice of DNA ﬁlter elution.
tochem Cell Biol 124:335—345 Pharmacol Ther 49:55—77
131. Kemeleva EA, Sinitsyna OI, Kolosov NG, Vasyunina EA, Zharkov 150. Guetens G, De Boeck G, Highley M, van Oosterom AT, de Bruijn
DO, Conlon KA, Berrios M, NeVinsky GA (2006) Immunoﬂuores— EA (2002) Oxidative DNA damage: biological signiﬁcance and
cent detection of 8-0X0guanine DNA lesions in liver cells from methods of analysis. Crit Rev Clin Sci 39:331—157
aging OXYS rats, a strain prone to overproduction of free radicals. 151. Lhomme J , Constant J -F, Demeunynck M (1999) Abasic DNA
Mutat Res 599:88—97 structure, reactivity, and recognition. Biopolymers 52:65—83
132. Ohtsubo T, Ohya Y, Nakamura Y, Kansui Y, Furuichi M, Matsumura 152. Lustig MJ, Cadet J , Boorstein RJ, Teebor GW (1992) Synthesis
K, Fujii K, Iida M, Nakabeppu Y (2007) Accumulation of 8-0X0- 0f the diastereomers of thymidine glycol, determination of con-
deoxyguanosine in cardiovascular tissues With the development of centrations and rates of interconversion of their cis—trans epimers
hypertension. DNA Repair (Amst) 6:760—769 at equilibrium and demonstration of differential alkali lability
133. Oka S, Ohno M, Tsuchimoto D, Sakumi K, Furuichi M, Within DNA. Nucleic Acids Res 20:48394845
Nakabeppu Y (2008) Two distinct pathways of cell death trig- 153. Berthod T, Petillot Y, Guy A, Cadet J , Forest E, Molko D (1996)
gered by oxidative damage to nuclear and mitochondrial DNAS. Synthesis and mass spectrometry analysis of oligonucleotides
EMBO J 27:421—432 bearing 5-f0rmy1—2’-de0xyuridine in their structure. Nucleosides,
134. Sheridan J , Wang LM, Tosetto M, Sheahan K, Hyland J , Fenne11y Nucleotides 15:1287—1300
D, O’Donoghue D, Mulcahy H, O’Sullivan J (2009) Nuclear 154. Hartwig A, Dally H, Schlepegre11R(1996) Sensitive analysis of
oxidative damage correlates With poor survival in colorectal oxidative DNA damage in mammalian cells: use of bacterial Fpg
cancer. Br J Cancer 100:381—388 protein in combination with alkaline unwinding. Toxicol Lett
135. Ohno M, Oka S, Nakabeppu Y (2009) Quantitative analysis of 88:85—90
oxidized guanine, 8-0X0guanine, in mitochondrial DNA by im- 155. Collins AR, Duthie SJ, Dobson VL (1993) Direct enzymic de-
munoﬂuorescence method. Methods M01 Biol 554:199—212 tection of endogenous oxidative base damage in human lympho-
136. Maynard S, de Souza-Pinto NC, Scheibye-Knudsen M, Bohr VA cyte DNA. Carcinogenesis 14:1733—1735
(2010) Mitochondrial base excision repair assays. Methods 156. Johansson C, M611er P, Forchhammer L, Loft S, Godschalk RW,
51:416—425 Langie SA, Lumeij S, Jones GD, Kwok RW, Azqueta A, Philips
137. Akatsuka S, Toyokuni S (2010) Genome—scale approaches to inves— DH, Sozeri O, Routledge MN, Charlton AJ, Riso P, Porrini M,
tigate oxidative DNA damage. J Clin Biochem Nutr 47:91—97 Allione A, Matullo G, Palus J , Stepnik M, Collins AR, M611er L
138. Akatsuka S, Aung TT, Dutta KK, Jiang L, Lee WH, Liu YT, (2010) An ECVAG trial on assessment of oxidative damage to
Onuki J , Shirase T, Yamasaki K, Ochi H, Naito Y, Yoshikawa T, DNA measured by the comet assay. Mutagenesis 25: 125—132
Kasai H, Tominaga Y, Sakumi K, Nakabeppu Y, Kawai Y, Uchida 157. Epe B, Hegler J (1994) Oxidative DNA damage: endonuclease
K, Yamasaki A, Tsuruyama T, Yamada Y, Toyokuni S (2006) ﬁngerprinting. Methods Enzym01234:122—131
Contrasting genome-Wide distribution of 8-hydr0xyguanine and 158. Pﬂaum M, Will 0, Malher HC, Epe B (1998) DNA oxidation
acrolein-modiﬁed adenine during oxidative stress—induced renal products determined With repair endonucleases in mammalian
carcinogenesis. Am J Pathol 169:1328—1342 cells: types, basal levels and inﬂuence of cell proliferation. Free
139. Jin SG, Wu X, Li AX, Pfeifer GP (2011) Genomic mapping of 5- Radic Res 29:585—594
hydroxymethylcytosine in the human brain. Nucleic Acids Res 159. Gasparutto D, Muller E, Boiteux S, Cadet J (2009) Excision of
39:5015—5024 the oxidatively formed 5-hydroxyhydant0in and 5-hydr0xy-5-
140. Shock LS, Thakkar PV, Peterson EJ, Moran RG, Taylor SM methylhydantoin pyrimidine lesions by Escherichia coli and Sac-
(2011) DNA methyltransferase 1, cytosine methylation, and cy- charomyces cerevisiae DNA N—glycosylases. Biochim Biophys
tosine hydroxymethylation in mammalian mitochondria. Proc Acta 1790:16—24
Natl Acad Sci USA 108:3630—3635 160. Ide H (2001) DNA substrates containing deﬁned oxidative base
141. Shan X, Tashiro H, Lin C-L (2003) The identiﬁcation and char- lesions and their application to study substrate speciﬁcities of
acterization of oxidized RNAs in Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci base excision repair enzymes. Prog Nucleic Acid Res M01 Biol
23:49134921 68:207—221
142. Shan X, Lin C-L (2006) Quantiﬁcation of oxidized RNAs in 161. Tchou J, Kasai H, Shibutani S, Chung MH, Laval J, Grollman
Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 27:657—662 AP, Nishimura S (1991) 8-OX0guanine (8-hydr0xyguanine) DNA
143. Chang Y, Kong Q, Shan X, Tan G, Ilieva H, Cleveland DW, glycosylase and its substrate speciﬁcity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
Rothstein JD, Borchelt DR, Wong PC, Lin CG (2008) Messenger 88:4690—1694
RNA oxidation occurs early in disease pathogenesis and pro- 162. Dherin C, Radicella JP, Dizdaroglu M, BoiteuX S (1999) Excision
motes motor neuron degeneration in ALS. PLoS One 3:e2849 0f oxidatively generated DNA bases by the human apha-hOggl
144. Struthers L, Patel R, Clark J , Thomas S (1998) Direct detection of protein and the polymorphism apha-hOgg1(Ser326Cys) protein
8-0X0deoxyguan0sine and 8-0X0guanine by avidin and its ana- Which is frequently found in human populations. Nucleic Acids
logues. Anal Biochem 255:20—31 Res 27:4001—1007
145. Chen S-K, Tsai M-H, Lin C-H, Hwang JJ, Chan WP (2001) 163. Smith CC, O’Donovan MR, Martin EA (2006) hOGGl recog-
Determination of 8-0X0guanine in individual cell nucleus of nizes oxidative damage using the comet assay With greater spec-
gamma-irradiated mammalian cells. Radiat Res 155:832—836 iﬁcity than FPG 0r ENDOIII. Mutagenesis 21:185—190
146. Conners R, Hooley E, Clarke AR, Thomas S, Brady RL (2006) 164. Pﬂaum M, Will 0, Epe B (1997) Determination of steady-state
Recognition of oxidatively modiﬁed bases within the biotin- levels of oxidative DNA base modiﬁcations in mammalian cells
binding site of avidin. J M01 Biol 357:263—274 by means of repair endonucleases. Carcinogenesis 18:2225—2231
@ Springer

"
"18","72 J . Cadet, et al.
165. ESCODD, Gedik CM, Collins AR (2005) Establishing the back— acute lymphoblastic MSH2-deﬁcient NALM-6 cells. Mutat Res
ground level of base oxidation in human lymphocyte DNA: 674:123—130
results of an inter—laboratory validation study. FASEB J 19:82—84 185. Tsao D, Kalogerinis P, Tabrizi I, Dingfelder M, Stewart RD,
166. Sauvaigo S, Petec—Calin C, Caillat S, Odin F, Cadet J (2002) Georgakilas AG (2007) Induction and processing of oxidative
Comet assay coupled to repair enzymes for the detection of clustered DNA lesions in 56Fe-ion-irradiated human monocytes.
oxidative damage to DNA induced by low doses of gamma- Radiat Res 168:87—97
radiation: use of YOYO-l, low background slides, and optimal 186. Francisco DC, Peddi P, Hair JM, Flood BA, Cecil AM, Kaloger—
electrophoresis conditions. Anal Biochem 303:107—109 inis PT, Sigounas G, Georgakilas AG (2008) Induction and pro-
167. Ravanat J -L, Sauvaigo S, Caillat S, Martinez GR, Medeiros MH, cessing of complex DNA damage in human breast cancer cells
Di Mascio P, FaVier A, Cadet J (2004) Singlet oxygen-mediated MCF-7 and non-malignant MCF-10A cells. Free Radic Biol Med
damage to cellular DNA determined by the comet assay associ- 44:558—569
ated with DNA repair enzymes. Biol Chem 385:17—20 187. Bennett PV, Cintron NS, Gros L, Laval J , Sutherland BM (2004)
168. Bergeron F, Auvre F, Radicella JP, Ravanat J-L (2010) H0* Are endogenous clustered DNA damages induced in human
radicals induced an unexpected high proportion of tandem lesions cells? Free Radic Biol Med 37:488—499
refractory to repair by DNA glycosylases. Proc Natl Acad Sci 188. Bennett PV, Cuomo NL, Paul S, Tafrov ST, Sutherland BM
USA 107:5528—5533 (2005) Endogenous DNA damage clusters in human skin, 3-D
169. Collins AR, HarringtonV DJ, Melvin R (2003) Nutritional mod- model, and cultured skin cells. Free Radic Biol Med 39:832—839
ulation of DNA repair in a human intervention study. Carcino- 189. Bennett P, Ishchenko AA, Laval J , Paap B, Sutherland BM (2008)
genesis 24:511—515 Endogenous DNA damage clusters in human hematopoietic stem
170. Loft S, Hegh Danielsen P, Mikkelsen L, Risom L, Forchhammer and progenitor cells. Free Radic Biol Med 45: 1352—1359
L, Meller P (2008) Biomarkers of oxidative damage to DNA and 190. Kryston TB, GeorgieV AB, Pissis P, Georgakilas AG (2011) Role
repair. Biochem Soc Trans 36:1071—1076 of oxidative stress and DNA damage in human carcinogenesis.
171. Azqueta A, Shaposhnikov S, Collins AR (2009) DNA oxidation: Mutat Res 711:193—201
investigating its key role in environmental mutagenesis With the 191. M611er L, Hofer T (1997) [32P]ATP mediates formation of 8-
comet assay. Mutat Res 674:101—108 hydroxy-2’-de0xyguan0sine from 2’-de0xyguanosine, a possible
172. Trap C, McCullough AK, Epe B (2007) The basal levels of 8- problem in the 32P-postlabeling assay. Carcinogenesis 18:2415—
OXOG and other oxidative modiﬁcations in intact mitochondrial 2419
DNA are low even in repair deﬁcient (Ogg1_/_/Csb_/_) mice. 192. Schuler D, Otteneder M, Sagelsdorff P, Eder E, Gupta RC, Lutz
Mutat Res 625:155—163 WK (1997) Comparative analysis of 8-0X0-2’-deoxyguan0sine in
173. Ward JF (1985) Biochemistry of DNA lesions. Radiat Res Suppl DNA by 32P- and 33P-p0st1abe1ing and electrochemical detection.
8:8103—8111 Carcinogenesis 18:2367—2371
174. Nikjoo H, O’Neill P, Wilson WE, Goodhead DT (2001) Compu- 193. U-s D, Gupta RC (1996) Sensitive detection of 8-hydr0xy-2’-
tational approach for determining the spectrum of DNA damage deoxyguanosine in DNA by 32P-p0st1abe1ing assay and the basal
induced by ionizing radiation. Radiat Res 156:577—5 83 levels in rat tissues. Carcinogenesis 17:917—924
175. Semenenko VA, Stewart RD (2004) A fast Monte Carlo algo- 194. Randerath K, Zhou GD, Monk SA, RanderathE (1997) Enhanced
rithm to simulate the spectrum of DNA damages formed by levels in neonatal rat liver of 7,8-dihydr0-8-0X0-2’-de0xyguan0-
ionizing radiation. Radiat Res 161:451457 sine (8-hydr0xyde0xyguan0sine), a major mutagenic oxidative
176. Sutherland BM, Bennett PV, Sidorkina 0, Laval J (2000) Clus- DNA lesion. Carcinogenesis 18:1419—1421
tered DNA damages induced in isolated DNA and in human cells 195. Zeisig M, Hofer T, Cadet J, M611er L (1999) 32P-postlabeling
by low doses of ionizing radiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA high performance liquid chromatography (32P-HPLC) adapted for
97:103—108 analysis of 8-hydr0xy-2’-de0xyguan0sine. Carcinogenesis
177. Georgakilas A (2011) Detection of clustered DNA lesions: bio- 20:1241—1245
logical and clinical applications. World J Biol Chem 2:173—176 196. Gupta RC, Arif JM (2001) An improved 32P-p0st1abe1ing assay
178. Sutherland BM, Georgakilas AG, Bennett PV, LavalJ, Sutherland for the sensitive detection of 8-0X0deoxyguan0sine in tissue
JC (2003) Quantifying clustered DNA damage induction and DNA. Chem Res Toxicol 14:951—957
repair by gel electrophoresis, electronic imaging and number 197. Ravoori S, Vadhanam MV, Davey DD, Srinivasan C, Nagarajan
average length analysis. Mutat Res 531:93—107 B, Gupta RC (2006) Modulation of novel DNA adducts during
179. Georgakilas AG, Bennett PV, Wilson DM III, Sutherland BM (2004) human uterine cervix cancer progression. Int J Oncol 29: 143 7—
Processing of bistranded abasic DNA clusters in y-irradiated human 1443
hematopoietic cells. Nucleic Acids Res 32:5609—5620 198. Randerath K, Yang P-F, Danna TF, Reddy R, Watson WP, Ran-
180. Hada M, Georgakilas AG (2008) Formation of clustered DNA dam— derath E (1991) Bulky adducts detected by 32P-p0st1abe1ing in
age after high—LET irradiation: 21 review. J Radiat Res 49:203—210 DNA modiﬁed by oxidative damage in Vitro. Comparison with
181. Nowsheen S, Wukovich RL, Aziz K, Kalogerinis PT, Richardson rat lung I-compounds. Mutat Res 250: 135—144
CC, Panayiotidis MI, Bonner WM, Sedelnikova OA, Georgakilas 199. Randerath K, Zhou G-D, Somers RL, Robbins JH, Brooks PJ
AG (2009)Accumu1ati0n 0f oxidatively induced clustered DNA (2001) A 32P-postlabeling assay for the oxidative DNA lesion
lesions in human tumor tissues. Mutat Res 674:131—136 8,5’-cyclo-2’-de0xyaden0sine in mammalian tissues. Evidence
182. Peddi P, Loftin CW, Dickey JS, Hair JM, Burns KJ, Aziz K, that four type II I-compounds are dinucleotides containing the
Francisco DC, Panayiotidis MI, Sedelnikova OA, Bonner WM, lesion in the 3’ nucleotide. J Biol Chem 276:36051—36057
Winters TA, Georgakilas AG (2010) DNA-PKC deﬁciency leads 200. Hellborg R, Skog G (2008) Accelerator mass spectrometry. Mass
to persistence of oxidatively induced clustered DNA lesions in Spectrom Rev 27:398427
human tumor cells. Free Radic Biol Med 48:1435—1443 201. Brown K, Tompkins EM, White IN (2006) Applications of ac-
183. Holt SM, Georgakilas AQ (2007) Detection of complex DNA celerator mass spectrometry for pharmacological and toxicologi-
damage in y-irradiated acute lymphoblastic leukemia pre-B cal research. Mass Spectrom Rev 25:127—145
NALM-6 cells. Radiat Res 168:527—534 202. Martin EA, Brown K, Gaskell M, A1-Azzawi F, Garner RC,
184. Holt SM, Scemama J -L, Panayiotidis MI, Georgakilas AG (2009) Boocock DJ, Mattock E, Pring DW, Dingley K, Turteltaub KW,
Compromised repair of clustered DNA damage in the human Smith LL, White I (2003) Tamoxifen DNA damage detected in
@ Springer

"
"19","Measurement of oxidatively generated base damage to nucleic acids in cells 73
human endometrium using accelerator mass spectrometry. Cancer 220. Prabhulkar S, Li C-Z (2010) Assessment of oxidative DNA
Res 63 :8461—8465 damage and repair at single cellular level Via real-time monitoring

203. Hah SS, Henderson PT, Turteltaub KW (2009) Recent advances of 8-OHdG biomarker. Biosens Bioelectron 26:1743—1749
in biomedical applications of accelerator mass spectrometry. J 221. Chen Z, Lu M, Zhuang G, Wang H (2011) Enhanced bacterial
Biomed Sci 16:54 biosensor for fast and sensitive detection of oxidatively DNA

204. Himmelstein MW, Boogaard PJ, Cadet J , Farmer PB, Kim JH, damaging agents. Anal Chem 83:3248—3251
Martin EA, Persaud R, Shuker DE (2009) Creating context for 222. Schibel AEP, An N, Jin Q, Fleming AM, Burrows CJ, White HS
the use of DNA adduct data in cancer risk assessment: 11. Over- (2010) Nanopore detection of 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0-2’-de0xyguan0-
View of methods of identiﬁcation and quantitation of DNA dam- sine in immobilized single-stranded DNA Via adduct formation to
age. Crit Rev Toxicol 39:679—694 the DNA damage site. J Am Chem Soc 132:17992—17995

205. Hah SS, Henderson PT, Turteltaub KW (2010) Towards biomarker— 223. Ramirez DC, Gomez-Mejiba SE, Mason RP (2006) Immuno-spin
dependent individualized chemotherapy: exploring cell—speciﬁc dif— trapping of DNA radicals. Nat Methods 3:123—127
ferences in oxaliplatin-DNA adduct distribution using accelerator 224. Ramirez DC, Gomez-Mejiba SE, Mason RP (2007) Immuno-spin
mass spectrometry. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 20:2448—2451 trapping analyses. Nat Protoc 2:512—522

206. Knutson CG, Skipper PL, Liberman RG, Tannenbaum SR, 225. Ogusucu R, Rettori D, Netto LES, Augusto O (2009) Superoxide
Mamett LJ (2008) Monitoring in Vivo metabolism and elimina- 1-mediated production of ethanol- and DNA-derived radicals in
tion of the endogenous DNA adduct, M(1)dG {3-(2-de0xy-[3-D- yeasts challenged With hydrogen peroxide: molecular insights
erythro-pent0furan0sy1)pyrimid01,2-oc-purin-10(3H)-0ne}, by into the genome instability of peroxiredoxin-null strains. J Biol
accelerator mass spectrometry. Chem Res Toxicol 21:1290—1294 Chem 284:5546—5556

207. Mundt JM, Hah SS, Sumbad RA, Schramm V, Henderson PT 226. Kojima C, Ramirez DC, Tokar EJ, Himeno S, Drobna Z, Styblo
(2008) Incorporation of extracellular 8-0X0dG into DNA and M, Mason RP (2009) Requirement of arsenic biomethylation for
RNA requires purine nucleoside phosphorylase in MCF-7 cells. oxidative DNA damage. J Natl Cancer Inst 101:1670—1681
Nucleic Acids Res 36:228—236 227. Gomez-Mejiba SE, Zhai Z, Gimenez MS, Ashby MT, Chilakapati

208. Hah SS, Mundt JM, Kim HM, Sumbad RA, Turteltaub KW, J, Kitchin K, Mason RP, Ramirez DC (2010) Myeloperoxidase-
Henderson PT (2007) Measurement of 7,8-dihydr0-8-0X0-2’- induced genomic DNA-centered radicals. J Biol Chem
deoxyguanosine metabolism in MCF-7 cells at low concentra- 285:20062—20071
tions using accelerator mass spectrometry. Proc Natl Acad Sci 228. Bhattacharjee S, Deterding LJ, Chatterjee S, Jiang J , Ehrenshaft
USA 104:11203—11208 M, Lardinois 0, Ramirez DC, Tomer KB, Mason RP (2011) Site-

209. Zhou X, Liberman RG, Skipper PL, Margolin Y, Tannenbaum speciﬁc radical formation in DNA induced by Cu(II)—H202 oxi-
SR, Dedon PC (2005) Quantiﬁcation of DNA strand breaks and dizing system, using ESR, immuno-spin trapping, LC-MS and
abasic sites by oxime derivatization and accelerator mass spec- MS/MS. Free Radic Biol Med 50:1536—1545
trometry: application to gamma-radiation and peroxynitrite. Anal 229. Stillwell WG, Xu HX, Adkins J A, Tannenbaum S (1989)
Biochem 343:84—92 Analysis of methylated and oxidized purines in urine by cap-

210. Driggers WJ, Holmquist GP, LeDouX SP, Wilson GL (1997) illary gas chromatography—mass spectrometry. Chem Res TOX-
Mapping frequencies of endogenous oxidative damage and the icol 2:94—99
kinetic response to oxidative stress in a region of mtDNA. 230. Fraga CG, Shigenaga MK, Park JW, Degan P, Ames EN (1990)
Nucleic Acids Res 25:43624369 Oxidative damage to DNA during aging: 8-hydr0xy-2’-de0xy-

211. Rodriguez H, Akman SA (1998) Mapping oxidative DNA dam- guanosine in rat organ and urine. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
age at the nucleotide level. Free Radic Res 29:499—510 87:45334537

212. Rodriguez H, Akman SA, Holmquist GP, Wilson GL, Driggers 231. Park EM, Shigenaga MK, Degan P, Kom TS, Kitzler JW, Wehr
WJ, LeDouX SP (2000) Mapping oxidative DNA damage using CM, Kolachana P, Ames EN (1992) Assay of excised oxidative
ligation-mediated polymerase chain reaction technology. Meth- DNA lesions: isolation of 8-0X0guanine and its nucleoside deriv-
ods 22: 148—156 atives from biological ﬂuids With a monoclonal antibody column.

213. Angers M, Cloutier JF, Castonguay A, Drouin R (2001) Optimal Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89:3375—3379
conditions to use Pfu eXO (—) DNA polymerase for highly efﬁ- 232. Degan P, Shigenaga MK, Park EM, Ames EN (1991) Immunoaf—
cient ligation-mediated polymerase chain reaction protocols. ﬁnity isolation of urinary 8-hydr0xy-2’-de0xyguan0sine and 8-
Nucleic Acids Res 29:E83 hydroxyguanine and quantitation of 8-hydr0xy-2’-de0xyguano-

214. Besaratinia A, Pfeifer GP (2009) DNA-lesion mapping in mam— sine in DNA by polyclonal antibodies. Carcinogenesis 12:865—
malian cells. Methods 48:3545 871

215. Komura J, Riggs AD (1998) Terminal transferase-dependent 233. Shigenaga MK, Aboujaoude EN, Chen Q, Ames EN (1994)
PCR: a versatile and sensitive method for in ViVO footprinting Assays of oxidative DNA damage biomarkers 8-0X0-2’-deoxy-
and detection of DNA adducts. Nucleic Acids Res 26:1807— guanosine and 8-0X0guanine in nuclear DNA and biological
1811 ﬂuids by high-performance liquid chromatography With electro-

216. Choi J , Kim DY, Hyun JW, Yoon SH, Choi EM, Hahm KB, Rhee chemical detection. Methods Enzymol 234:16—33
KH, Chung MH (2003) Measurement of oxidative damage at indi— 234. Loft S, Poulsen HE (1998) Estimation of oxidative DNA damage
Vidual gene levels by quantitative PCR using 8-hydr0xyguanine in man from urinary excretion of repair products. Acta Biochim
glycosylase (OGGl). Mutat Res 523:225—235 P01 45:133—144

217. Fernando LP, Kurian PJ, Fidan M, Fernandes DJ (2002) Quanti- 235. Haghdoost S, Sjélander L, Czene S, Harms-Ringdahl M (2006)
tation of gene-speciﬁc DNA damage by competitive PCR. Anal The nucleotide pool is a signiﬁcant target for oxidative stress.
Biochem 306:212—221 Free Radic Biol Med 41:620—626

218. Lim S,Y00n H,Ryu S,Jung J,Lee M,KimD(2006)Acomparative 236. Toyokuni S, Tanaka T, Hattori Y, Nishiyama Y, Yoshida A,
evaluation ofradiation-induced DNA damage using real-time PCR: Uchida K, Hiai H, Ochi H, Osawa T (1997) Quantitative immu-
inﬂuence of base composition. Radiat Res 165:430—437 nohistochemical determination of 8-hydr0xy-2’-de0xyguan0sine

219. Rothfuss O, Gasser T, Patenge N (2010) Analysis of differential by a monoclonal antibody N45.1: its application to ferric
DNA damage in the mitochondrial genome employing a semi- nitrilotriacetate-induced renal carcinogenesis model. Lab Invest
long run real-time PCR approach. Nucleic Acids Res 38:E24 76:365—374

@ Springer

"
"20","74 J . Cadet, et al.

237. Yoshida R, Ogawa Y, Shioji 1, Yu X, Shibata E, Mori I, Kubota H, 253. Gackowski D, Rozalski R, Roszkowski K, J awien A, Foksinski
Kishida A, Hisanaga H (2001) Urinary 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0-2’- M, Olinski R (2001) 8-OX0-7,8-dihydr0guanine and 8-0X0-7,8-
deoxyguanosine and biopyrrins levels among construction work- dihydr0-2’-de0xyguan0sine levels in human urine do not depend
ers With asbestos exposure history. Ind Health 39:186—188 on diet. Free Radic Res 35:825—832

238. Yoshida R, Ogawa Y, Kasai H (2002) Urinary 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0- 254. Weimann A, Belling D, Poulsen HE (2002) Quantiﬁcation of 8-
2’-de0xyguan0sine values measured by an ELISA correlated well oxo-guanine and guanine at the nucleobase, nucleoside and deox-
With measurements by high-performance liquid chromatography ynucleoside forms in human urine by high-performance liquid
with electrochemical detection. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers chromatography—electrospray tandem mass spectrometry.
Prev 11:1076—1081 Nucleic Acids Res 30:E7

239. Chiou CC, Chang P-Y, Chan EC, Wu T—L, Tsao K—C, Wu JT (2003) 255. Sabatini L, Barbieri A, Tosi M, Roda A, Violante FS (2005) A
Urinary 8-hydr0xyde0xyguan0sine and its analogs as DNA markers method for routine quantitation of urinary 8-hydr0xy-2’-deoxy-
of oxidative stress: development of an ELISA and measurement in guanosine based on solid-phase extraction and micro-high-
both bladder and prostate cancers. Clin Chim Acta 334:87—94 performance liquid chromatography/electrospray ionization tan-

240. Ihara Y, Takata H, Tanabe Y, Nobukuni K, Hayabara T (2005) dem mass spectrometry. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 19:147—
Inﬂuence of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation on disease 152
severity and oxidative stress markers in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid of 256. Hu CW, Wang CJ, Chang LW, Chao MR (2006) Clinical-scale
patients With spinocerebellar degeneration. Neurol Res 27:310—3 13 high throughput analysis of urinary 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0-2’-de0xy-

241. Haghdoost S, Czene S, Naslund I, Skog S, Harms-Ringdahl M guanosine by isotope-dilution liquid chromatography—tandem
(2005) Extracellular 8-0X0-dG as a sensitive parameter for oxi- mass spectrometry with on-line solid-phase extraction. Clin
dative stress in Vivo and in Vitro. Free Radic Res 39:153—162 Chem 52:1381—1388

242. Cooke MS, Singh R, Hall GK, Duarte TL, Farmer PF, Evans MD 257. Malayappan B, Garrett TJ, Segal M, Leeuwenburgh C (2007)
(2006) Evaluation of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and Urinary analysis of 8-0X0guanine, 8-0X0guan0sine, fapyguanine
liquid chromatography—tandem mass spectrometry methodology and 8-0X0-2’-deoxyguan0sine by high-performance liquid chr0-
for the analysis of 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0-2’-de0xyguan0sine in saliva matography—electrospray tandem mass spectrometry as a mea-
and urine. Free Radic Biol Med 41:1829—1836 sure of oxidative stress. J Chromatogr A 1167:54—62

243. Cooke MS, Barregard L,MistryV,P0tdar N, RozalskiR, Gackowski 258. Harri M, Kasai H, Mori T, Tornaeus J, Savela K, Peltonen K
D, Siomek A, Foksinski M, Svoboda P, Kasai H, Konje JC, Sallsten (2007) Analysis of 8-hydr0xy-2’-de0xyguan0sine in urine using
G, Evans MD, Olinski R (2009) Interlaboratory comparison ofmeth- high performance liquid chromatography—electrospray tandem
odologies for the measurement ofurinary 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0-2’-de0X- mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr B 853:242—246
yguanosine. Biomarkers 14: 103—1 10 259. Evans MD, Singh R, Mistry V, Sandhu K, Farmer PB, Cooke MS

244. Breton J , Sichel F, Bianchini F, Prevost V (2003) Measurement of 8- (2008) Analysis of urinary 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0-purine-2’-de0xyri-
hydroxy-2’-de0xyguan0sine by a commercially available ELISA bonucleosides by LC-MS/MS and improved ELISA. Free Radic
test: comparison with HPLC/elctrochemical detection in calfthymus Res 42:83 1—840
DNA and determination in human serum. Anal Lett 36: 123—134 260. Crow B, Bishop M, Kovalcik K, Norton D, George J , Bralley JA

245. Song M-F, Li Y—S, Ootsuyama Y, Kasai H, Kawai K, Ohta M, (2008) A simple and cost effective method for the quantiﬁcation
Eguchi Y, Yamato M, Matsumoto Y, Yoshida R, Ogawa Y (2009) of 8-hydr0xy-2’-de0xyguan0sine from urine using liquid chroma-
Urea, the most abundant component in urine, cross-reacts With a tography tandem mass spectrometry. Biomed Chromatogr
commercial 8-OHdG ELISA kit and contributes to over- 22:394—401
estimation of urinary 8-OHdG. Free Radic Biol Med 47:4146 261. Henriksen T, Hi11estmm PR, Poulsen HE, Weimann A (2009)

246. Cooke M (2009) A commentary on “Urea, the most abundant Automated method for the direct analysis of 8-0X0-guan0sine,
component in urine, cross-reacts With a commercial 8-OHdG and 8-0X0-2’-deoxyguanosine in human urine using ultraperform-
ELISA kit and contributes to overestimation of urinary 8-OHdG”. ance liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry. Free
What is ELISA detecting? Free Radic Biol Med 47:30—31 Radic Biol Med 47:629—635

247. ESCULA, Evans MD, Olinski R, Loft S, Cooke MS (2010) 262. Andreoli R, Manini P, De Palma G, Alinovi R, Goldoni G,
Toward consensus of urinary 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0-2’-de0xyguan0- Niessen WMA, Mutti A (2010) Quantitative determination of
sine as a noninvasive biomarker of oxidative stress. FASEB J urinary 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0-2’-de0xyguan0sine, 8-0X0-7,8-dihy-
24:1249—1260 droguanine, 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0guan0sine, and their non-

248. Garratt LW, Mistry V, Singh R, Sandhu J , Sheil B, Cooke MS, Sly oxidized forms: daily concentration proﬁle in healthy volunteers.
PD (2010) Interpretation ofurinary 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0-2’-de0xygua— Biomarkers 15:221—231
nosine is adversely affected by methodological inaccuracies When 263. Lee KF, Chung WY, Benzie IE (2010) Urine 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0-
using a commercial ELISA. Free Radic Biol Med 48:1460—1464 2’-de0xyguan0sine (8-0X0dG), a speciﬁc marker of oxidative

249. Kasai H, Svoboda P, Yamasaki S, Kawai K (2005) Simultaneous stress, using direct isocratic LC-MS/MS: method evaluation and
determination of 8-hydr0xyde0xyguan0sine, a marker of oxida- application in study of biological variation in healthy adults. Clin
tive stress and creatinine, a standardization compound in urine. Chim Acta 411:416—422
Ind Health 43:333—336 264. Andreoli R, Mutti A, Goldoni M, Manini P, Apostoli P, De Palma

250. Tamae K, KawaiK, Yamasaki S, KawanamiK, Ikeda M, Takahashi G (2011) Reference ranges of urinary biomarkers of oxidized
K, Miyamoto T, Kato N, Kasai H (2009) Effect ofage, smoking and guanine in (2’-de0xy)rib0nucle0sides and nucleic acids. Free
other lifestyle factors on urinary 7-methyguanine and 8- Radic Biol Med 50:254—261
hydroxydeoxyguanosine. Cancer Sci 100:715—721 265. Broedbaek K, Weimann A, Stovgaard ES, Poulsen HE (2011)

251. Kato D, Komoriya M, Nakamoto K, Kurita R, Hirono S, Niwa D Urinary 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0-2’-de0xyguan0sine as a biomarker of
(2011) Electrochemical determination of oxidative damaged type 2 diabetes. Free Radic Biol Med 51:1473—1479
DNA With high sensitivity and stability using a nanocarbon ﬁlm. 266. Mistry V, Teichert F, Sandhu JK, Singh R, Evans MD, Farmer PB,
Anal Sci 27:703—7 07 Cooke MS (2011)N0n-invasive assessment ofoxidatively damaged

252. Ravanat J -L, Guicherd P, Tuce Z, Cadet J (1999) Simultaneous DNA: liquid chromatography—tandem mass spectrometry analysis
determination of ﬁve oxidative DNA lesions in human urine. of urinary 8-0X0-7,8-dihydr0-2’-de0xyguan0sine. Methods Mol
Chem Res Toxicol 12:802—808 Biol 682:279—289

@ Springer

"
