"","x"
"1","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)’ Sponsoring Organization.
Confetence and Exhibit on international
Space Station Utilization « 2001 .
Cape Canaveral, FL 15-18 Oct. 2001 A 0 1 42818
AIAA——-2001—4959
PHYSICS OF COLLOIDS IN SPACE-2 (PCS-2)
Subramanian Sankarana, Urs Gasserb, Suliana Manleyb, Megan Valentineb, Vikram Prasadb, Daniel Rudhardtb,
Arthur Baileyb, Anthony Dinsmoreb, Phil Segrec, Michael Dohertyd, Eric R.Weeksc,
Peter N. Puseyf, and David A. Weitzb.
3National Center for Microgravity Research, NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH,
bDiv. of Engg. and Applied Sciences/Dept. of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA,
cNASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, AL, dNASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH,
cDept.of Physics, Emory Univ., Atlanta GA,
fDept. of Physics, Univ. of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
Abstract considered as playing the role of atoms; hence, they are
of interest in the study of the nature of, and transitions

The Physics of Colloids—2 (PCS—2) among gaseous, liquid, solid/crystal, and glass states of
experiment is aimed at investigating the basic physical matter. The sizes, shapes (spherical, rods, etc.), and the
properties of several types of colloidal suspensions. volume fractions of the particles involved, the surface
The three broad classes of colloidal systems of interest charge types and distributions, the properties of the
are binary colloids, colloid-polymer mixtures, and ﬂuid medium, and hence the resulting interactions
fractal gels. The objective is to understand their phase among the particles that can be ﬁne-tuned to vary from
behavior as well as the kinetics of the phase transitions highly repulsive, to weakly attractive, to strongly
in the absence of gravity. The nucleation, growth, and attractive interactions, offer a very wide ﬁeld of colloids
morphology characteristics of the crystals and gels that research.
form would be studied using confocal microscopy. . . . _ .
These will be observed directly with excellent time The ObjeCthC Of this PCS'2. expenment Is to
resolution, and therefore extensive information about study colloidal systems 'w1th particles that are 0f
the different phases and their growth mechanisms will dlfferent Slze ancl matenals t0 ptoduce new .useful
be gained. With the laser tweezers, it will be possible materials. In m10rograv1ty, partlcles of different
to measure the strength of these structures and to densmes do not separate away by sedimentation.
modify them in a controlled way, and the Hence, in. space, crystals can. be grown Wlth two
spectrophotometer will provide the possibility to probe different kinds Of partlcles, Wthh cannot be done 1n
their optical properties. We believe that this earth . graVItY- Thus, for exatnple, large crystals
experiment will provide the basis for future ""colloid contalnmg. both metals and plasticscan be grown. 1n
engineering"" in which complicated structures with microgtaVIty. Such crystals have Interestlng optlcal
novel properties (e.g. photonic crystals) will be grown propertles such as photomc .band gap. By such an
by controlled self-assembly. approach of ’collmd eng1neer1ng’,we can manufacture a

large variety of crystals that are valuable in diverse
Introduction technical applications. '

Colloidal systems are ﬂuids with other . This experiment is one Of the ant four
particles dispersed in them, especially particles of size expenments that would be conducted 1n the LMM
one nanometer to one micrometer. Colloidal systems (Light Microscopy Module)1,2,3 in the FIR (Fluids
are found everywhere in nature and in industrial Integrated Rack)4 in the 188 (International Space
processes. Aerosols, foam, paints, pigments, cosmetics, Station). The 188 provides long durations of low-
milk, salad dressings, and biological cells areexamples gravity environment, and the LMM is a reusable
of colloidal dispersions OI‘ suspensions. In addition, the experiment platform that provides confocal- and video-
colloidal particles can serve as model systems for the microscopy, laser tweezers, and spectrophotometry, as
study of fluid and solid properties since they can be well as the possibility to study hundreds of samples.

_______________ Thus, for the ﬁrst time, a low—gravity environment is

Copyright © 2001 by the American Institute available that suits the needs of long-term experiments

, , , , that rely on advanced direct microscopic imaging
of Aeronautics and Astronautlcs, Inc. No copyright 1s techniques.
asserted in the United States under Title 17, U. S.
Code. The U. S. Government has a royalty-free license The colloidal systems that would be studied
to exercise all rights under the copyright claimed herein in the PCS—Z experiment, the need for microgravity,
for Government Purposes. All other rights are reserved some related ground and ﬂight experiment work, the
by the copyright owner.

1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"2","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)’ Sponsoring Organization.
hardware and ﬂight project development work at NASA ultimate structure becomes obscured by the kinetics of
GRC, and the proposed experimental procedure we the phase behavior. .
described below. _ '

The focus Wlll be on the behav10r near

Science Objectives coexistence regions, where two or three phases exist

simultaneously in the sample. We will study the

The PCS—2 experiment will focus on three structure and behavior of these phases, addressing

classes of colloidal samples, namely, Binary Colloidal critical questions that have been obscured in previous
Crystals, Colloid-Polymer Mixtures (Gels/Crystals), studies because of limitations imposed by
and Fractal Aggregates and Gels. Quantitative data on sedimentation. For example, we will study the nature
nucleation, growth, coarsening, morphology/ structures, of the ﬂuid droplets that form and will attempt to
and mapping of phase diagrams will be obtained by measure their interfacial tension by measuring their
studying the local structures that form via self- shape ﬂuctuations. We will study the crystallization of
assembly, in the absence of gravity. These three classes the solid phase, measuring both the structure and the
are discussed further below. The actual colloid samples morphology of the crystallites. We will investigate
that would be investigated are discussed in the samples whether the crystals are fonned initially in the ﬂuid
selection section. droplets or whether they can sublime from the gas
. , phase. We will also investigate the potential of using
W91 this weak attractive interaction as an alternate means for

V controlling the growth of colloidal crystals for use as

It is known that under appropriate new materials. Finally, we will use the depletion
conditions, monodisperse colloidal particles can self- interaction to induce gelation and will study the
assemble into crystalline structures with long range properties and aging of the resultant gels.
periodic order5, driven 50161 b entrop . If particles , .
of different diameters are 112de together, the same The $r9WFh propemes Of collmdal gels, the
entropic effects can lead to the self-assembly of binary nature 0f equillbrlum structure .(crystal or gel), the

“0 c stalsev7. structure and merphology of collmdal crystals, and the
a y ry elastic (Rheologlcal) propertles of gels are of interest.
Under certain conditions, it has been found
that hard-sphere particles (colloidal PMMA) at size M
ratio 0.58 formed both the AB2 and the A813 ,
superlattice structures. Several different crystalline In the above COI'POI mlxtures, as the polynier
structures have been observed, and more are predicted to eoncenttatlon 1s increased, the strength Of the attraetive
8 . . . 1nteractlon becomes so large that the collmda] paI‘tICleS
occur . In PCS—2, we Wlll use collmdal panicles of , 12 , , ,
different materials to make binary alloy crystals. We form a €61“th Structure ° T1115 ‘5 Characteezec.‘ by, a
will study the phase behavior and crystallization fractal structure at short length scales and e hquid'hke
properties ofthese binary alloys. ordenngat larger length scales, resulting. 1n 3 rlng of
1ntense llght scattenng at low angles. Th1s structure IS
The phase diagram of binary colloidal crystal similar to that observed in irreversible aggregation and
alloys, their growth kinetics, the morphology of the gelation. Ultimately, this gel-like structure should
crystals formed, and the elastic (rheological) properties anneal into a crystalline order; however, under normal
of these crystals are of interest. gravity the gel can not support its own weight and
ultimately collapses, leading to macroscopic phase
WM separation, obscuring the true ultimate behavior.

The second set of samples will be a mixture . Using the confocal microscope, it is possible
of colloidal particles with polymers. The addition of ?0 Image the complete structure dlreSﬂY- Moreover: It
the polymer induces weak attractive interactions is pOSSible to follow the thermal motion of the partlcles
between the colloidal particles by the depletion m the 'gel, allowmg the exc1tat10n spectrum to be
mechanism, leading to a rich phase behavior for the determlned. This can be directly related to. the elastlc
colloidal particles. modulus of the network; 1t can also prov1de a direct

probe of the Vibration modes of the networks. In
Several such systems, including emulsion addition, we will investigate the slow aging of the
droplets9, charge-stabilized polystyrene spheres“), and structure, and compare these to current theories on
polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) particles11 have been aglng.
studied. As the strength of the attractive interaction is Thus, the nature of the polymer gels at
moreaseil by mereasmg the polymer concentrattlon, the short length scales, the growth properties of colloidal
ﬂu1d—sol1dcoex1stenee extends over an Increasmg range gels, the largest fractal scales of materials as to how
of collmd concentrations. However, the approach to the
2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/orAuthor(s)' Sponsoring Organization.
large the scaling properties extend, and the elastic Need for microgravity: '
(rheological) properties of colloidal gels are of interest.
. . 0 . . The formation of colloidal crystals is strongly
______g___g___pp_____C01101d En meenn andA llcations: affected by sedimentation; this is most graphically
Th f . tu f tw d’ff t t . 1 demonstrated by the results of the experiments of
, e use 0 mm res 0 0 1 eren ma er1a S Chaikin and Russel, who showed that the morphology
greatly Increases the ﬂex1b111ty 0f: .the resultant of colloidal crystals grown in space is completely
structures. For example, the charactenstic length scale different from that grown on earth.
of the structure can be set by one material, which could
be an inert plastic, while the second material could have As the crystals sediment, the shear of the ﬂuid
some completely different property, and could, for ﬂowing past their edges is sufﬁcient to destroy them.
example, be an Optically active semiconductor particle. In addition, the sedimentation time of the crystals
This provides an opportunity to synthesize structures rapidly begins to compete with the diffusion time of
that are ordered on the length scale of light in all three the accreting particles, signiﬁcantly changing the
dimensions, and such materials should have fascinating growth mechanism. While some of this effect can be
new properties. mitigated by buoyancy matching, this is not
. . , , . completely effective, even at the best level of buoyancy
Abundant biomedlcal appllcatlons for COlIOIdfﬂ match that can be achieved. By calculating the effective
crystals fire bemg developedI drug dellVérya blomlmetlc Peclet number, (the ratio of the diffusion time scale of
assemblies, encapsulating cells, USS“? culture, the particles, to the settling time scale of the crystal,) it
controlled release 0f drugs, ﬂavors, nutrlents, and can be shown that the size of the crystals, Ram“ that
fragrances, and 30 on. In addltlon, the expenmental can be formed varies inversely as the square root of
methods and approaches of these studies, such as the both the raVity and AP the residual density
confocal microscopy, laser tweezer, spectrophotometry, . g, g _’ . ’ . _ .
and the various video microscopy methods are highly dlf‘ference after dens1ty-match1ng. 1.e., if we. improve
applicable to the development of biomedical sciences. the bueyalllicy mail; by 3V0 orders (if magmtudie, the;
Slze o te crys 3 W1 increase y one or er 0
For the nano/info technology, the material magnitude; by comparison using the standard non—
properties of interest are the various optical properties buoyancy matched ﬂuids, but doing the experiment in
that lead to optical switches, optical ﬁltering, wave— microgravity gains an additional 3 decades; this is
guides, and simultaneous three-dimensional diffraction. consistent with what is seen in the CDOT experiments.
The photonic band gap crystals are patterned with a Combining the buoyancy match and microgravity will
periodicity in dielectric constant, which can create a produce crystals of remarkable sizes.
range of ’forbidden’ frequencies, called the photonic _ . . .
bandgap. This provides an opportunity to shape and . In addltlon, when collmdal particles 0f
mold the ﬂow of light for photonic information different materials are used (e.g., Gold, ZnS, PMMA:
technolo 13,14 Silica, and various core—shell particles, and hollow
gy ' particles that can provide the desired variation of
One of the most interesting features of diClCCFTiC constants to th€ CIYStal), It is .CVCU more
photonic band gap structures is their inﬂuence on essential to perform the experiments in m1crograv1ty;
emitters embedded within the crystal_ Because the otherwise the differential sedimentation Of the different
phase space is restricted, the emission properties will be 1331110165 W1“ prevent growth 0f any crystals.
dramatically modiﬁed; both the lifetime and the P CS 2 related ound based work
frequency of the emlsS1on should be changed”. Such
effects of modiﬁcation in the optical properties would Several aspects of the colloids research
bgdpronounleedblnl co1101dt-‘baisedl'malter‘1jalfs 3159’ I11“ applications, and use of diagnostic tools such as the
a 1tlon, t, e e av1or 0 0C3 126 eects 1,“. t e confocal microscopy, related to this experiment are
structure Will be analogous to dopants 1n tradltlonal . . , 17 , 18 '
crystals and will introduce new optical properties16 described 1-1] the PI S ’ and t1}? CO-I S web pages. Of
’ , . ‘ partlcular Interest to PCS-2 ight experiment are the
In ordelra: tifaitﬁdih?allocagzegssgiméeiewe W31“ developments in the colloidal particles manufacture, the
mam u v1 u a 1c u e - -
bin p allo usin las rtwegz rs For exam le onp th studies on bmary alloys, col-pols, fractal gels, and the
b' ary y 1 g f e d e] ' f 'p ’ 1:36 e experience 1n usmg the confocal mlcroscope and the
mary crysta S are .orme ’ a c ass 0 experrmentt at we associated control and data analysis software. These are
plan to perform IS the local modlﬁcatlon of then brieﬂ d'
, , , , . y iscussed below.
structure through the manipulation of 1nd1v1dual
particles usmglaser tweezers. Among PHaSE-Z, PCS-2, and L<I>CA19
experiments, there is a strong collaboration with
Pusey’s18 and van Blaaderen’s20 labs for related
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/orAuthor(s)' Sponsoring Organization.
scientiﬁc work, and preparation of several types of transition, gelation results from kinetic arrest due to
colloid samples for these research. Several PhaSE-l, crowding of clusters, and that both gelation and the
PCS-l experiments’ PMMA particles, and those for the glass transition are manifestations of a more general
ground based work in these labs, and NASA GRC for jamming transition”.
the work with LMM came from Prof. Pusey, and . . . .
Schoﬁeld’sm labs; currently, van Blaaderen is working _ In the studles on Vlsceelast1c1ty Of weakly
on certain types of core-shell particles; for example, attractive 19311191359 the rheological data 0f weakly
they have produced 1 micron dia silica particles that attractive collmdal pattlcles were measured. There IS a
have 400 nm ﬂuorescent cores. Such ﬂuorescent core- critlcal onset of a SOlld network as the particle volume
silica shell particles increase the spatial resolution with fraction, <1), 0f the strength 0f the attractive inter-particle
which these systems can be studied using confocal interaction, U, increase above critical values. For all
microscopy. Similarly, silica particles with a gold core solid like samples, both the frequency—dependent linear
(gold radius 15 nm, total 150 nm) have also been Viscoelastic moduli, and the strain—rate dependent stress
producedzo, These types of particles can be mixed with can be scaled onto universal master curves. A model of
simpler silica particles to produce crystals with novel a solid network interspersed in a background ﬂuid was
properties. shown to qualitatively account for this behavior.24

Also of interest are polystyrene Spheres coated In addition, extensive work in being cam'ed
with ZnS; polystyrene-ZnS core-shell spheres with 3 out to develop the use of confocal microscopy to
200 nm radius of the polystyrene core and measure structure and dynamics of colloidal systems in
approximately 60 nm of ZnS shell thickness have been 3D. Three—dimensional colloidal crystallization was
manufactured. 22 observed as follows. The PMMA spheres were

sterically stabilized with p01y-12-hydroxy-stea1ic acid;

In addition, at Edinburgh there is an active The total volume of the samples was 50 microliters; a
research effort investigating the phase behavior 0f 58 x 55 x 20 microns volumecontaining around 4000
mixtures 0f colloids and polymers. Light scattering particles was observed. Laser seaming confocal
studies, that give averaged properties 0f the various microscope from Noran Instruments was used to image
phases that develop, are cam'ed OUt- A130, direct 3D regions in PMMA beads that contain a ﬂuorescent
visualization Of the colloidal particles using DIC dye By taking images two 01- three times every minute
microscopy is developed; these give detailed 10031 crystallites formation and evolution with time was
information on the various phases involved as they recorded. After the measurement the positions of the
develop. particles were determined and tracked.

At Harvard, an important development that _ .-: .-,u '-'.f'-""-'-"" , . .. t“ .... . ---.'.t :
Segre had undertaken is to ﬁnd a ﬂuid, cycloheptyl :Ih‘ """"1” :H. _.'-‘.:. Lap.“ ,""""""‘r '1‘ r. {5.2
bromide that when mixed with decalin allows the i:- J:\‘gﬂt‘ttﬁ rt '. 1i? '- 2‘43?! 1' ‘53:“? .1

a ,’ , 9 .}.;ﬁ.‘: f‘Z-i34;_.:.at ”5"" Rent}. .. [11’
PMMA particles to be both 1ndex matched and nearly _-._ hike??? wig?“ ’r, 5:413}. _ uﬁ-

' buoyancy matched. With this ﬂuid, it is possible to .'~1§,‘fﬂltéﬁ§g§?r 1' 1 niﬁmttfg .'
improve the buoyancy match of the particles by close to :ﬁgﬁiﬁiﬁﬁt 't't téttfhﬂ_ '_‘ {3.31- 1} _-
two decades in density difference, Ap, (from 0.25 to %;“£} ﬁg??? 3"": .rgéttsﬁtﬁfhtﬁﬁn
0.002). This work on dynamics of the crystallization of ?.f- "".' -m‘""t';hﬁf'1*trhfhtt ﬁttr: “ht“
binary alloys using buoyancy-matched mixtures is to A-*t'-':'-'.'.- ‘Tatttlt ltt"" :.ff.t_1.‘.'__3.‘:‘%‘§“,.-T:' B
complement the work of Schoﬁeld in Edinburgh. Figural: Real-space imaging of nucleation

. . . . and rowth in colloidal c stallization usin confocal
. In addlthn’ expenments to probe growth and micrgscopy: In this experirrnyental data, partiﬁes with a
dynamlcs 0f collmdal gels formed by collmd—polymer t l—like surroundin are re resented for clari b
mixtures are conducted. This is being done to compare :38 a g . p ’ ty, y
. . . . e large red spheres while the smaller blue spheres
W1th the behav10r of gels formed by 11TeverS1ble , , , _ 25
aggregation of colloidal particles. We have found that represent parttcles m the metastable hﬁmd- The V91'

, gels can form at much lower volume fractions using the fractlon IS 044,5‘ (A) Ttme :15 mm, (B) 58 mm.
near buoyancy match solvent, but these gels have a very after shear melting.
unusual behavior. We show that elation of weak] . . . .
attractive colloids is remarkably simiglar to the colloidgl . The algorlthm for ﬁnding crystallme regibns
glass transition. Like the glass transition, dynamic telles on the assumptlon that the nelghbors Of a partie 16
light scattering functions near gelation scale with 1n acrystal lattice are arranged mapartltcular onentatlon

. . . . about the partlcle, and that thls orlentatlon of nelghbors

scatterlng vector, and exhibits a two-step decay w1th a . . . .
. . . IS the same for nearby partlcles. Particles w1th many
power-law divergence of the ﬁnal decay tlme. lee the . , , . , . ,
glass transition, static light scattering does not change crystal—hke bends (e.g. 8)are.said to be crystat-llke '
upon gelation. These results suggest that, like the glass Such an algorithm and analy31s 0f the confocal lmage

- 4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/orAuthor(s)' Sponsoring Organization.
data give us insight into the crystals as they are just formed from monodisperse emulsion particles. On
nucleating, and growing with timezs earth, these emUISiOHS cream and, even though crystals

do form, they do not persist when the emulsion creams.
In another work, the nature Of glass transition These results suggest that this may be due to the
iS studied. We used small colloidal particles to model creaming; as the crystallites increase in volume fraction,
atoms in a glass, and studied them 118ng confocal they become unstable to rearrangements. This may be
microscopy. As the particles are packed together, if one due to the intrinsic instability expected for an FCC (or
of them wants to move, its neighbors have to RHCP) lattice of particles with liquid ﬁlms at their
cooperate. AS they are packed even tighter, more Of the interfaces; these ﬁlms must then meet the Plateau
particles have to cooperate for any to move. When all Of criteria for stability which can not be done for an FCC
the particles in' the sample have to C?9Peratea the structure29 Finally, the Video component of BCAT-I
sample 15 essentially a 501151 “ thus explaining what ‘3 also proved conclusively that the instability of the
happening With glass 33 it’s cooled. This is a classic kinetically arrested gel—like structure formed upon the
theory, and for.the ﬁrst time we can 100k at a real addition of high concentrations of polymer to induce a
phy51cal experlment and directly see cooperative very strong depletion attraction among the pMM A
motion.26 spheres is gravity-induced. A11 earth experiments have
_ . shown that this gel structure collapses after some delay
time, which depends on the strength of the attraction.
Such a collapse precludes investigation of the long-term
stable state of the sample, which is completely
unknown. The collapse was not observed in
microgravity, but there was insufﬁcient time to monitor
the evolution of the long-term structure.
*_ ﬁviﬂ BCAT-Il tested a different series of binary .
1"""" TEE“ Laws. '
riﬂe 5;; alloy mixtures. A goal here was to further explore the
"" ﬁfe; 3, phase boundaries of the region where good colloidal
'4 1:: crystals form as r is varied. The samples chosen for
- BCAT-II had r==0.61, which is slightly to the high side
Figure.2 Studies on ’glass transition’, using of the optimum value determined on earth. The goal
colloidal particles and confocal microscopy: this was to investigate whether the optimum value 0f r
experimental data shows the cooperative clusters of changes as does that of (j). The results suggested that
particles. A“ Of the particles are actually the same size; this size ratio is very inefﬁcient in forming colloidal
the slower particles are shown smaller SO that the fast crystals; i.e., the optimum Value of r is the same in
ones stand out. 26 microgravity as on earth, unlike the value for q).
CGEL tests were designed to perform light
PCS-Z and the Related Flight Experiments scattering studies of all three classes of samples to be
ﬂown on PCS-l, including the binary alloys, the
Several precursor experiments supporting the colloid-polymer mixtures and the fractal colloidal
goals of PCS-127a28, and pcs_2 have been ﬂown as aggregate gels. The pictures from these tests suggest
glovebox experiments aboard the Russian space station that the crystal phase forms within the ﬂuid phase, and
MIR. These helped provide critical tests to determine does not form from the gas phase. However, the
the effects of microgravity on colloidal dispersions. magniﬁcation of the camera lens used for these
Four glovebox experiments (BCAT-l, BCAT_2, photographs was not sufﬁcient to conﬁrm this
CGEL-l, and CGEL-Z) have been performed to date. unambiguously, and further experiments to determine
this will have to await PCS—Z.
. BCAT-I successfully produced binary alloy
crystals of the AB13 structure. Samples were chosen In the CGEL-2 tests, on the John Glenn
near the optimal size ratio of 0.58, and at several shuttle mission, a ABe colloidal crystal could be
different total volume fractions. Interestingly, the formed, a Structure that was discovered in Edinburgh
optimum volume fraction for the crystal growth turned only a few months before the mission. This sample
out to be 0.54; this was higher than the optimum value grows quite rapidly as compared to most other binary
on earth. This highlights the difference between results alloys, allowing us to Study the crystals grown in
obtained on earth and those obtained in microgravity; space. Interestingly, no dendritic growth of the large
this result was also extremely useful in planning for crystallites was seen (Fig.3), suggesting that the growth
PCS—l. The results of BCAT—I also included the ﬁrst mechanism differs signiﬁcantly from that of
observation of the persistence of colloidal crystals monodiSperse particles.
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)‘ Sponsoring Organization.
d _ . . . --. "".+;.-..; Flight Hardware and Development work at NASA GRC
ﬁfe 'IM‘"" _ 1*;: 'I To accommodate a larger set of ﬂight
' ' m” "" ' experiments, a Leica RXA microscope is modiﬁed to
. .. ' accommodate various diagnostic techniques. The

imaging techniques of high resolution color video

CGEL-Z Sample 5 CGEL-Z Sample 6 microscopy, bright ﬁeld, dark ﬁeld, phase contrast,

. , , differential interference contrast (DIC), ﬂuorescence,

F1gure.3: Blnary Collmdal Crystals (AB6): spectrophotometry, confocal microscopy, and

Sample 5 15 more concentrated than sample 6' For interferometry are combined in a single conﬁguration.

hlgher concentratlon, larger number of crystalhtes form, This suite of measurements allows a very broad

and then Size 18 smaller; alsoﬂthe large crystalhtes 1n characterization of ﬂuids, colloids, and two-phase
sample 6 do not show dendrltlc structures unllke seen m d' 'ncl d' b' 1 . ls les 2
in CDOT-l experiments with monodisperse samples. e 1a, 1 u mg 10 oglca amp '

, , , To translate the l-g experiments into
In addition, 0011014211 fractal aggregate gels could be microgravity, there are several required repackaging, and
formed, bOth from 1rrevers1ble aggregatlon and through design exercises; these are taken care of at NASA GRC.
the use Of the depletlon attraction. Tele-metry and tele-commanding aspects require

The PCS-l experiment is currently being deyeiopment efforts for automatlon, softxfzvfare, and
conducted in the ISS, in the EXPRESS rack. In traming. Also, v1bratlon (g-Jltter e ects on

27 . . . experlments, and launch loads on the hardware),
PCS-l , three classes of collmdal materlals are belng . . .

. . . thermal cychng, EMI, vacuum/fluld-leak, acoustlc
studled. These mclude ordered crystalllne samples; . - - . d f
. tures of colloidal particles with other species nOISe emlsswn testsacontamment en sa ety are some
mix . . . . ’ of the other standard Issues that are 1mportant.
prlmanly polymers, Wthh Induce a weak attractlve
interaetion allowing US to precisely tune the phase Additionally, several experiment speciﬁc
behav10r 0f the mlxtures; and highly d1sordered, hilt issues arise. There has been excellent communication
very tenuous fraCtal StI'llCtllI'eS Wthh pOSSCSS thell' 0WD between the engineering and the research teams
unlque symrnetrles and their own umque properties. regarding such issues that can affect the science and
There are elght test cells; the samples used are: tWO engineering; as a result, various new ideas, and/or
blnary alloy crystals (one A36, one A1313), one c01101dal compromises are continually developed, either at
glass system that may form cryetals 0h earth, and three NASA GRC or at the PI labs. Some of the issues are
Col-Pol systems (one near cntlcal pomt in two—phase listed below as examples:
region, one gel-like sample and one crystal sample), . . . . -
and two fractal gel systems (one polystyrene, and one The ab111ty t0 contaln the ﬂu1d samples for
silica). The PCS-l experiment will yield cOnsiderable long duration, without leaking iS tested, and various
information about the bulk properties of the colloidal types of sample-cell developments were carried-out and
dispersions. evaluated. Various methods of sample homogenization
. . . techniques were tested and evaluated; shelf-life and

.111 PCS.—2, we W1“ emphasrze ornatenals compatibility of the sample themselves are important;
syntheer, and W111 extend the range 0f materials used. the type of lasers used need to be compatible with the
In addlhOh, we W111 StUdY the structure and dynamlcs dyes used; the laser light has a bleaching effect on the
Of these systerns 1“ real space, allowmg US to probe ﬂuorescent samples, and hence on the life of ﬂuorescent
local structure 1n unprecedented detall. In the confocal dyed particles; various chunks of experimental work

. microscope that‘ls belngodevelopoect at NASA GRC, the need to be time-lined within the microgravity, and
z-ax1s step Slze 15 0.1m1crons; 1t1s expected that, say, crew- time constraints -- all such issues demand a
in dCteCting isolated particles, Size 2 microns diameter, healthy interaction among the team members, and I
the centr01d TeSOhlthh in X, y, and Z dlrectlons 0f +/' suitable solutions were found; such matters weIe/are
20, 20, end 89 nm .WOUId be posmble respectively, and reviewed in detail in the various NASA reviews such as
. that 3 dlmenSIOHal Image CUbeS COUId be acqulred at 30 the (RDR) Requirement Deﬁnition Review) and PDR
frames/sec. - (Preliminary Design Review) and so on.

. The microscope can accommodate platens With Also, to avoid overdesign, several questions
approxrmately 125 mm 'X 100 mm 0f useable area. come up and appropriate compromises or solutions
Wlthlh .thls area there W111 be around 20 511195 each were found. Some issues of this nature are: we do not
contamlng around 6 cells, for a total of 120 cells. It IS really need the ability to visualize the tweezer beam
planned to use around 300 sample Cells, eaCh around since it can be worked out by appropriate
2.51mm d1a. and 150 mICI'OIlS thICk (""""075 mlcrollter correlations”; for the spectrophotometer, we can relax
V0 ume). the ’polarized’light input requirement, for cells that

6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)’ Sponsoring Organization.
could use application of electric ﬁeld, the ﬁeld can be Micro rheology will be used to ﬁnd the elastic
applied on all cells in the slide rather than requiring properties in the linear regime. In order to do this the
individual electrical connections. All such solutions motion of a particular bead will be tracked. This can be
and/or compromises save development time and cost. done by either confocal or video microscopy. The laser

. . . tweezers will also be used to modify the crystal lattice
In the interest of cost-savmg and yet keeping by creating defects.
the value for broad science, including biological
sciences, one of the most important compromise that Colloid-Polymer Mixtures: The colloidal
was undertaken was the inclusion 0f confocal particles for this experiment will again be dyed PMMA
microscopy, while relaxing the requirement for laser spheres suspended in an index matched ﬂuid. The
light scattering techniques that are used in the precursor volume fractions of these samples will range from
colloids experiments. Such a decision was made at an about 1% to 30%, The polymer will be polystyrene,
early stage of the project and it continues to prove to be with a molecular weight ranging from about 105 to 106.
an excellent decision. Moreover, the design of the
microscope retains the ability to add on new The colloid—polymer mixtures Will be
capabilities that can become desirable in future. homogenized using the same procedure used for the
binary colloid mixtures. After they are homogenized,
The details and the capabilities 0f the LMM the formation of the gel will be monitored by taking
itself are described in the several documentsza31’32. 3D stacks of images in the same way as for the binary
Also, it is worth noting that several key resources, 00110id31 crystals.
such as ower, data stora e, and so on), includin a . , , , ,
gontiguofs volume that cgan physically accommodgate During the equ1libration 0f the samples, DIC
the LMM, are provided to the LMM by the FIR which or phase contrast mICYQSCOPY (and occas10nally also
is a part of the FCF (Fluids and Combustion Facility); confocal rnlcroscopy) Will be used to ﬁnd out ,Whleh
several interesting details of this facility can be found samples will eventually contain gas, hquld or 'solld or a
. h b 3 e533 comblnation of these. An automatic recognitlon of the
mt ese we p g ’ dlfferent phases could save a lot of time. ThIS
Experimental procedure information will be used to establish the phase diagram
of this system under micro-gravity, and it will be the
Binag: Alloys: Once the sample is input for selecting a set of representative. samples that
homogenized, the nucleation and growth of individual Will be studled.1n.more detail. In addltlon, the WI”
crystallites of the binary colloidal alloy will be complete the 1ns1ght gamed from PCS'_1, 1nto the
monitored with the confocal microscope, by taking mechanlsms that lead to the ultimate equlltbration of
three—dimensional stacks of images. Confocal the gel. The selected samples W111 be observed in
microscopy will allow to make observations about the longer confocal or Video-microscopy runs 1n order to
shape and the structure of the nuclei that are not charactenze the present structures and. the dlﬁ'erent
possible with the light scattering techniques used in phases. Collmdal crystals may form 1n one 0f,the
PCS-l, since not only the average structure of the phases. Since they can fotm at low yolume fractlons
nuclei but also its variations within a nucleus can be andresult frorn an attractive interaction between the
studied. The comparison with analogous ground-based partiocles, then growth and evolutlon may be
experiments will reveal differences in the growth s1gn1ﬁcantly dlfferent from the formation Of, those
behavior under micro-gravity. formed by 'hard spheres. Therefore, we will use
confocal microscopy to study their nucleatlon and
Series of two—dimensional pictures taken in growth in a way that is analogous to the one described
fast succession will allow to track all visible particles. in the section above about binary colloidal crystals.
This will be done either by video microscopy or with l . , . ,
the confocal. It allows to characterize how particles In addltion, some samples WI,” contain test
move and diffuse in the sample. beads that W111 be used for . micro rheology
measurements, and the elastlc properties of the gels and
Once large crystallites have formed, we will Solid structures will be measured with laser tweezers.
investigate the properties of the crystal lattice. Again, . ,
the structure of the stable structure can be determined . . WWQQL;
by taking 3D stacks of images with the confocal. In W The phase dlagrams 0f
order to measure the elastic properties, a test bead samples made of colloid-metal, colloid-semiconductor,
within a crystallite can be grabbed with laser tweezeis and colloid-liquid-crystal mixtures are expected to be
and be used to distort the lattice. The bead is vibrated similar to the case Of binary PMMA mixtures.
back and forth with the laser tweezers in order to create However, this is difﬁcult to test in ground based
collective excitations (the equivalent of phonons) that experiments, since these samples cannot be density
are then observed by Video— 01- confocal microscopy. matched by choosing a suitable solvent. Therefore, it
will be part of the experiments planned for PCS-2 to
7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/orAuthor(s)' Sponsoring Organization.
map out the details of the phase diagrams of the the most promising for applications. The data from the
different sample types. PCS-l ﬂight experiment that is currently underway,

. will also be considered. .
The experiments needed to study the formation
and the evolution of the structures in these samples will A selection list of colloidal samples for these
be analogous to the ones described in the sections on experiments are available if the ﬂight samples were
binary alloy colloidal crystals and colloid—polymer needed now; however, the exact particle sizes,
mixtures above. In addition, the effect of dc- and ac- materials, volume fractions ranges of interest, and their
electric ﬁelds on the optical properties of these samples characterization will be continually ﬁne—tuned further,
will be determined. In order to do this a sample will in a way that would improve the eventual science
be illuminated with monochromatic light under various return, without affecting the hardware development.
angles during a video microscopy run. _ _
Beyond the PMMA, polystyrene, s1lica
Test Sequences samples of binary and Col-Pol (2- & 3- phase) systems, '
other types of particles and systems of interest include
Detailed test matrices were developed for the PMMA- silica, PMMA- metals, PMMA— liquid
various sample types of interest; such information is crystals, PMMA- semi-conductor, Silica- liquid-crystal,
used for further detailed planning of the ﬂight and silica- semi—conductor systems. Binary alloys of
experiments in terms of the diagnostic techniques that PMMA- PMMA, or Silica- Silica, and Col- Pol
need to be arranged, time—lining the various sequences, systems of PMMA— polystyrene, and various metal and
and for developing the various software subroutines that liquid crystal particles are available now; currently, the
would be needed for the experiments. An example test next stage of core-shell particles, and binary systems are
sequence is shown below: being developed and evaluated as described earlier.
Sample type 1 to 30: Day 1: Stir each sample Summm
one by one (one minute each). Take pictures (10x and
20x) to evaluate homogeneous mixing (one minute for The PCS-Z experiment will investigate the
each picture). Using software, characterize the sample nucleation, growth, and morphology of binary alloys,
homogeneity after mixing (one minute for each picture). colloid-polymer and fractal gels using video and
. . . confocal microscopy. These structures are formed via
. Day 2‘90 or “T1""! crystals appeari Usmg elther self-assembly of nano-scale colloidal precursor particles.
bright ﬁeld or DIC mieroscopy, '(dependlng upon the Laser tweezers will be used to study the rheological
particle—solvent Index mlsmatch), identlfy nucleatlon. of properties of the structures and to introduce defects.
crystals (Automate these procedures to do m ~ 5 The optical characteristics will be studied using
minutes per sample; 2'5 hrs.) spectrophotometry. The multi—user light microscopy
Day 9099: Image selected samples (aroun d module (LMM) hardware developed is an important and
18) that show crystals using bright ﬁeld and DIC “Ty fmltﬁﬂ hardware that WI“ beneﬁt not 0.1113] the
microscopy. Record (video) selected samples with x5, selence 0f COHOIdS’ and condensedmatter phySlCS’ but
. . . also several other Important dismpllnes such as
x20, and x100 objectives for 2 minutes each (An b' l . l . d f tu d 1. t’ f
average of 10 minutes per sample for brightﬁeld, DIC, 10 ogica 801.6 noes, an manu ac re an app 1.0 a 1011 0
and video. 3 hrs.) Study selected samples/crystals hovel mammals that are relevant to optical and
(around 12) using confocal microscopy to detennine Inforrnatlon/computer technologles.
the crystal structure, (defects, orientations, etc.) (2 hrs.) Acknowledgements
' ' Day > 99. . High magniﬁcatlon confocal This work is supported by the N AS A
imagmg for several mmutes. Select and study around Micro avi Science and A lication Div under Grant
18 crystals at around 10 minutes each (3 hrs.) Locate N N 1583 23284 pp ‘
grain boundaries of selected crystals of interest (around 0' ' ’
6), (1 hr.) and, use laser tweezers to rnanipulate crystal It is a pleasure to acknowledge the support .
lattlce defects,.and record the act1v1ty usmg hlgh from several LMM team members from NASA, Ms.
Enagnlﬁczlitlcin3xg<1f%,7oli confocal data (1 hr.) Total t1me Susan Motil, Mr. John Snead, and Dr. DeVon Grifﬁnl,
or samp es - _ rs. and from Logicon/Northrop Grumman Co., who all
Samples Selection for PCS-2: share the sense of responsibility and excitement in this
project; to mention a few -- Mr. Ed Hovenac, Dr. Andy
Several ground-based experiments, phase— Resnick, Mr. John Eustace, 111 the optics area, and
diagram studies, and results from other experiments in TOW B’ruzas, Greg Pruett, LOUIS Chestney, and DICk
micro-gravity will be used to guide the selection of the Dewrtt 1n .the test—cell development, electrical, software,
samples that are the most scientiﬁcally interesting and and tlmeline development work, and several others 1n
safety, mechanical design, drawing, and so on. .
8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)‘ Sponsoring Organization.
References 18 Pusey, P.N., Soft Condensed Matter, mm
W

1 Motil, S., Snead, J., and Grifﬁn, D., Light Micros00py show.cgi?dbxpe0ple&id=pusey.

Module (LMM), W 19 Lin, K.-h.,Crocker, J.C., Prasad, V., Schoﬁeld, A., Weitz,

6712/ lmm.htm1. D.A., Lubensky, TC, and Yodh, A.G., Entropically
9 2 Motil, S.M., and Snead, J.H., The Light Microscopy Driven Colloidal Crystallization on Patterned Surfaces,

Module: An On—Orbit Multi-User Microscope Facility Physical Rev. Letters 85 (8) (2000).

Planned For The FCF On The ISS, Conference & Exhibit 20 Blaaderen, A.v., Colloidal Matter, http://

on ISS Utilization, Cape Canaveral, FL. AIAA—4956 www.amolf.nl/research/colloidal matter/.

(2001). 21 Schoﬁeld, A., Andrew’s PMMA Latices, http://

3 Logicon/Northrop Grumman C0"" Light Microscopy www.phed.ac.uk/~abs/Latexlist.htm1. ,
Module (LMM), http://cleve1and.feddata.com/LMM/. 22 Dinsmore, A.D., Breen, M.L., Qadri, 8.8., and Ratna, B.R.,

4 Gati’ F» and Hi11> Ma The FCF Fluids Integrated Racki Photonic Crystals from Core-Shell Colloidal Spheres,

. Microgravity Fluid Physics Experimentation on Board (submitted) _
the ISS, AIAA‘2001‘4926 (2001). 23 Segre, P.N., Prasad, V., Schoﬁeld, A.B., and D. A. Weitz,

5 Pusey, RN, and van Megen, W., Phase Behaviour 0f Glass-like kinetic arrest at the colloidal gelation
Concentrated Suspensions of Nearly Hard C0110ida1 transition, Physical Rev. Letters 86, 6042—6045 (2001).
Spheres, Natur e 320’ (6060): 340'342 (1986) 24 Trappe, V., and Weitz, D.A., Scaling 0f the

6 Eldridge, 'M-D-a Madden, RA, and Frenkel, D"" EntrOpy- viscoelasticity of weakly attractive particles, Phys.
Driven Formation of a Superlattice in a Hard-Sphere Rev. Lett. 85, (2), 449-452 (2000).

Binary Mixture, Nature 365 (6441), 35-37 (1993). 25 Gasser, U., Weeks, E.R., Schoﬁeld, A., Pusey, RN, and

7 Eldridge, M.D., Madden, P.A., and Frenkel, D"" A Weitz, D.A., Real-Space Imaging of Nucleation and
Computer-Simulation Investigation into the Stability of Growth in Colloidal Crystallization, Science 292, 258-
the AB2 Superlattice in a Binary Hard-Sphere System, 262 (2001).

M01. PhYS- 80(4)a987-995(1993)- 26 Weeks, E.R., Crocker, J.C., Levitt, A.C., Schoﬁeld, A.,

8 Eldridge, MD"" Madden, RA» Pusey, RN"" and Bartlett, P"" and Weitz, D.A., Three-dimensional Direct Imaging of
Binary Hard-sphere mixtures: A Comparison between Structural Relaxation Near the Colloidal Glass
Computer Simulation and Experiment, M01. Phys. 84, Transition, Science 287 (627) (2000).

395-420 (19951 27 Weitz, D.A., Doherty, M., Jankovsky, A., Koudelka, J.M.,

9 Bibette, J., Roux, D., and Nallet, F., Depletion Ansari, R., Lorik, T., Shiley, W., Bowen, J., Kurta, C.,
interactions and ﬂuid-solid equilibrium in emulsions, Eggers, J"" Bambakidis, K., Hovenac, E., Segre, p” Bailey,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 65’ 2470'2473 (1990)° A., Gasser, U., Manley, S., Prasad, V., A, S., and Pusey, P.,

10 Calderon, F.L., Bibette, J., and Biais, J., Experimental The Physics of Colloids in Space, Conference &
PhaseDiagramS of Polymer and C0110“ Mixtures» Exhibit on ISS Utilization 2001, Cape Canaveral,
EWOP/W- Le“. 23 ( 9)» 653-659 (1993). Florida. AIAA 2001-4900 (2001).

11 Ilett, S.M., 0170019 A., P00“, W.C.K., and Pusey, P.N., 28 Ansari, R.R., Hovenac, E.A., Sankaran, S., Koudelka,
Phase-Behavior of a Model Colloid-Polymer Mixture, J.M., Weitz, D.A., Cipelletti, L., and Segre, P.N., Physics
Phys. Rev. E 51 (2), 1344‘1352 “995) of Colloids in Space Experiment, Space Technology

12 Poon, W.C.K., Selfe, J.S., Robertson, M.B., Ilett, S.M., and Applications International Forum —STAIFF-99,
Pirie,A.D.,and Pusey, P.N., An experimental study of a Alburquerque, NM. (1999).
model colloid-polymer mixture, '1' Phys. de Physique H 29 Weaire, D., and Phelan, R., A Counterexample to Kelvin
3 (7), 1075-1086 (1993). Conjecture on Minimal-Surfaces, Philosophical

13 Joannopoulos, J.D., Villeneuve, P.R., and Fan, 5., Magazine Letters 69(2),107-]10(1994).

Photonic ' crystals: putting a new twist on light, 30 Chaikin, P.M., Russel, W.B., Sullivan, M.T.,
Nature 386,, 143-149 (1997). Hollingsworth, A.D., van Blaaderen, A., Meyer, W.V.,

14 JoannOpoulos, 1 D2 Photonic Crystal Research, Doherty.MP, and Resnick.A.H, Physics of hard spheres
--P~——-p—-——~—htt ://ab-initio.mit.edu/ hotons/. experiment-2 (PHaSE-Z), Conference & Exhibit on ISS

15 Martorell, l, and Lawandy, NM, Spontaneous Utilization 2001, Cape Canaveral, Florida. AIAA-
Emission in a Disordered Dielectric Medium, Phys. 2001-4958 (200]).

Rev. Lett. 66 (7), 887-890 (1991} 31 Resnick, A., Design and construction of a space-borne

16 John, S., Strong localization of photons in certain optical tweezer apparatus, To appear in Rev. Sci.
disordered dielectric superlattices, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58 Instrum. 72, (11) (2002).

(23), 2486-2489 (1987). 32 Doherty, MP.,Moti1, S.M., Snead, 1.11., and Malarik,

17 Weitz, D.A., Experimental 50ft Condensed Matter D.C., Microscope-Based Fluid Physics Experiments in
Group, Div. of Engineering and applied sciences/ Dept. the Fluids and Combustion Facility on ISS,
of Physics, Harvard University, hum Spacebound 2000, Vancouver, B. C. May (2000).
deas.harvard.edu/ projects/ W6itZlﬂ_b_/. 33 MSD, Welcome to the Fluids and Combustion Facility

(FCF), http://fcf.grc.nasa.gov/.
9
Amen’can Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
