"","x"
"1","PhySlCS 0f Collmds 1n Space:
MlcrograVIty Experlment Launched,
Installed, and Actlvated 0n the
Internatlonal Space Statlon
The Physics of Colloids in Space (PCS) experiment is a Microgravity Fluids Physics
investigation that is presently located in an Expedite the Process of Experiments to Space
Station (EXPRESS) Rack 0n the International Space Station. PCS was launched to the
International Space Station 011 April 19, 2001, activated on May 31, 2001, and will
continue to operate about 90 hr per week through May 2002.
. h :— ' — IE!
HIgh-angla 1"""" -- , Hr?“ ang
camera —- , M I'I'Ilrrnr'
: .____ _ -':: :__l,. -' {f— Bragg
Lﬂw-angle ' T ,"" 55mg""
camem—-“*- . 5-. I- '
?W- i J"" -
‘1 ' 5' .ﬁ
' ;__ . __ ‘ H. Mix
4- 3;! -'-- _J'. J. ' _ mater
i n%- as-
hi.""-E'.'..~ - -
.' ritlr-FI"" 'T'H'TFI"" 55-"":-
-. m I I'“ .1... 'I--... ' _ .
'- Ruff: *'
Eamusel with: ,2- ' .. _-__ ._.--_- '
sample cells I i=1; .-.~""' ""
Physics ofColloids in Space (PCS) test sectionfeatures.
Long description Illustration showing carousel With sample cells, low-angle camera, high-
angle camera, high-angle mirror, Bragg screen, and mix motor.
PCS is concurrently gathering data 011 the basic physical properties of three different types
of colloids to study how colloidal structures grow, the rates at Which they grow, and the
structures that they form. A colloidal suspension consists of ﬁne particles (micrometer t0
submicrometer) suspended in a ﬂuid, for example, paints, milk, salad dressings, and
aerosols. The long-term goal of this investigation is to better understand how colloidal
constituent properties affect the properties of a bulk colloidal suspension and to begin to
probe the unique light-scattering properties of nanoengineered binary colloidal alloys. The
potential payoffs 0f PCS are improvements in the properties of paints, coatings, ceramics,
and food- and drug-delivery products; improved manufacturing of products requiring

"
"2","either colloidal suspensions for processing or as precursors; and important ﬁrst steps in the
research and development of an entirely new class of materials that can passively affect the
properties of light passing through them. These materials may ﬁnd uses as optical switches
and lasers for advanced communications and displays. This experiment is the ﬁrst part of a
two-stage investigation conceived by Professor David Weitz of Harvard University along
with Professor Peter Pusey 0f the University of Edinburgh.
1
.1 - . i
V - ""
Colloidpolymer criticalpoint sampZe--13 hr, 24 min after being mixed. Sample Shows a
phase separation never seen on Earth.

Long description The Colloid-Polymer Critical Point sample is a combination of
monodisperse PMMA particles and polystyrene polymer, suspended in eis-decalin and
tetralin. This sample was homogenized on July 17, 2001. Immediately after mixing, it

began to phase separate, or demiX, into two phases--0ne that resembles a gas and one that
resembles a 1iquid--exeept that the particles are colloids, not atoms. In this image, the
black regions (colloidal gas) are bigger and the white regions (colloidal liquid) have
become whiter as the domains have coarsened.

AB6 binary colloidal alloy sample--20 days, I 1 hr after being mixed. Bands Ofcolor can
be seen that were created by the diffraction ofwhtte light by the crystallized sample.
Long description The AB6 binary colloidal alloy sample is composed of two different sizes
of monodisperse PMMA particles, suspended in eis-deealin and tetralin. The sample is
referred to as AB6 because, upon crystallization, the fundamental crystal lattice structure
that is observed is 6 B (smaller) particles surrounding 1 A (bigger) particles. The AB6
sample was homogenized on June 29, 2001. From the onset of mixing, the sample began

"
"3","crystallizing.
PCS contains eight approximately 3-milliliter colloid samples, each contained by a glass
cell stationed Within a remotely controllable carousel inside the PCS test section.
Experiment operations consist of mixing (0r homogenizing) the colloid samples to
eliminate any sedimentation and to produce a uniform distribution of particles in the
solution. Once mixed, particles start to self—assemble, and the diagnostic measurements are
initiated. Measurements are regularly made 011 each sample over 1 t0 2 months as its
substructures (either crystallines 0r gels) grow and evolve. Measurements include still
color digital images, high-angle static laser light scattering (0r Bragg scattering), low-
angle static and low-angle dynamic light scattering, ﬁber static and ﬁber dynamic light
scattering, and rheology. The diagnostic data provide growth information, the shape of the
structures formed, and other physical properties of the structures.
PCS is being remotely operated from the NASA Glenn Research Center's Telescienee
Support Center in Cleveland, Ohio, and at an established remote site at Harvard University
in Cambridge, Massachusetts. The two locations permit daily remote operation of the
experiment. In real time Via commands uplinked from Earth to the International Space
Station, the PCS commanders control such activities as Which sample to interrogate, When
to homogenize the sample, Which diagnostic technique to employ to perform the
interrogation, as well as the sequencing of sample diagnostic runs.
PCS completed its checkout operations on June 22, 2001. During the subsequent 13
weeks, it did an initial survey of crystal nucleation and growth on six of the eight samples
and then reinitiated more detailed investigations on the two binary colloidal alloy samples.
The crystalline samples (AB6, AB13, colloid polymer crystal, and colloidal glass) are all
behaving as hoped for, With the growth of the crystallites having been interrogated by a
host of different state-of—the-art light-seattering techniques. The colloid polymer critical
point sample, as hoped, exhibits, upon homogenization, a phase separation, or demixing
process, that would never be seen in 1 g. The colloid polymer gel sample, the last of the siX
samples to be homogenized, was veriﬁed to gel in microgravity, and aging of the gel was
observed. Each of these siX samples is to be rehomogenized to enable more detailed
investigations to occur over the upcoming months 011 orbit.

"
"4","1D ._

=: 3 ' .r
g: E I III
N .
E ‘4 "" '
C
— 2 ._

n u—-——H""“'LI

{m {15 1.0 2.0 31:me

Er. cm‘1
2:: —

=: I""
m | '
§1n~ .-' 'l
+4 I, 3'"".
E F”; H...

[1 . .'. Eﬁ—r—e-m—hﬁﬂ-am..._._. .'

4113 {1.5 1.:1 1n 3.:1xm5

:1. cm'1
Diffraction patterns from the A313 binary colloidal alloy sample (high-angle scattering).
Intensity shown in arbitrary units; q is directly proportional to the scattering angle.
Growth ofBragg peaks over time indicates the presence Oferystals. T 0p: 0.48 hr after
melting. Bottom: 255 hr after melting.

Long description High-angle scattering diffraction patterns of the second binary colloidal
alloy sample, AB13. After the sample was melted, the scattering was ﬂuidlike. Then Bragg
peaks appeared about 7 days later. By following the growth of the Bragg peaks over time,
researchers monitor the crystallization process. High-angle scattering is performed with a

laser, a Bragg screen, and a high-angle camera.
Overall, the initial survey was successful in determining the crystallization time and other
characteristics of the samples, revealing exciting areas of interest for each and conﬁrming
the diagnostic techniques to be used for the much more detailed measurements to be
conducted on each sample through May 2002. Two samples yet to be interrogated,
composed of colloids that gel in an irreversible manner when a salt is added, will be
initiated during future PCS experiment runs. To date, experiments performed by PCS have
proceeded very well with the instrumentation exceeding Professor Weitz' expectations.
The PCS experiment was developed and launched and is being operated by Zin
Technologies under NASA contract NAS3-99154.
Find out more about this research:
Glenn's PCS research (includes data on a sample-by-sample basis--being updated)
http://miorogravity.gro.nasa.goV/6712/pos.htm
David Weitz at Harvard (introduces the principal investigator)
Principal investigator group at Harvard (scientiﬁc focus areas of interest)
http://www.deas.harvard.edu/proj eots/weitzlab/

"
"5","Glenn's microgravity research http://micr0gravity.grc.nasa.gov/

Glenn's ﬂuid physics research http://exp10rati0n.grc.nasa.g0V/life/

Glenn contacts: Michael P. Doherty, 216-433-6641, Michael.P.Doherty@grc.nasa.g0v;
and Dr. Subramanian Sankaran, Subramanian.Sankaran@grc.nasa.g0v

Author: Michael P. Doherty

Headquarters program ofﬁce: OBPR

Programs/Projects: Microgravity Science

"
