"","x"
"1","NASA / TM—2002-212011 IAC—02—].6.04
P, ,w

Results From the Physms 0f
C01101ds Experlment 0n ISS

David Weitz

Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts

Arthur Bailey

Scitech Instruments, Inc, North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada

Suliana Manley, Vikram Prasad, and Rebecca Christianson

Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts

Subramanian Sankaran

National Center for Microgravity Research, Cleveland, Ohio

Michael Doherty and Amy Jankovsky

Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio

Tibor Lorik, William Shiley, John Bowen, Carol Kurta, and Jeff Eggers

ZIN Technologies, Inc, Cleveland, Ohio

Urs Gasser

University of Konstanz, Germany

Phil Segre

Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama

Luca Cipelletti

University of Montpellier, France

Andrew Schofield and Peter Pusey

University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom

December 2002

"
"2","The NASA STI Program Office . . . in Profile
Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to 0 CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected
the advancement of aeronautics and space papers from scientific and technical
science. The NASA Scientific and Technical conferences, symposia, seminars, or other
Information (STI) Program Office plays a key part meetings sponsored or cosponsored by
in helping NASA maintain this important role. NASA.
The NASA STI Program Office is operated by 0 SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientific,
Langley Research Center, the Lead Center for technical, or historical information from
NASA’S scientific and technical information. The NASA programs, projects, and missions,
NASA STI Program Office provides access to the often concerned with subjects having
NASA STI Database, the largest collection of substantial public interest.
aeronautical and space science STI in the world.
The Program Office is also NASA’S institutional 0 TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. English-
mechanism for disseminating the results of its language translations of foreign scientific
research and development activities. These results and technical material pertinent to NASA’S
are published by NASA in the NASA STI Report mission.
Series, which includes the following report types:
Specialized services that complement the STI
0 TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of Program Office’s diverse offerings include
completed research or a major significant creating custom thesauri, building customized
phase of research that present the results of databases, organizing and publishing research
NASA programs and include extensive data results . . . even providing Videos.
or theoretical analysis. Includes compilations
of significant scientific and technical data and For more information about the NASA STI
information deemed to be of continuing Program Office, see the following:
reference value. NASA’S counterpart of peer-
reViewed formal professional papers but 0 Access the NASA STI Program Home Page
has less stringent limitations on manuscript at http://www.sti.nasa.gov
length and extent of graphic presentations.
0 E-mail your question Via the Internet to
0 TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientific help@sti.nasa.gov
and technical findings that are preliminary or
of specialized interest, e.g., quick release 0 Fax your question to the NASA Access
reports, working papers, and bibliographies Help Desk at 301—621—0134
that contain minimal annotation. Does not
contain extensive analysis. 0 Telephone the NASA Access Help Desk at
301—621—0390
0 CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientific and
technical findings by NASA-sponsored 0 Write to:
contractors and grantees. NASA Access Help Desk
NASA Center for AeroSpace Information
7121 Standard Drive
Hanover, MD 21076

"
"3","NASA / TM—2002-212011 IAC—02—].6.04
‘ll “ii“: (i i ,

Results From the Physms 0f
C01101ds Experlment 0n ISS

David Weitz

Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts

Arthur Bailey

Scitech Instruments, Inc, North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada

Suliana Manley, Vikram Prasad, and Rebecca Christianson

Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts

Subramanian Sankaran

National Center for Microgravity Research, Cleveland, Ohio

Michael Doherty and Amy Jankovsky

Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio

Tiber Lorik, William Shiley, John Bowen, Carol Kurta, and Jeff Eggers

ZIN Technologies, Inc, Cleveland, Ohio

Urs Gasser

University of Konstanz, Germany

Phil Segre

Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama

Luca Cipelletti

University of Montpellier, France

Andrew Schofield and Peter Pusey

University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom

Prepared for the

53rd International Astronautical Congress

cosponsored by the International Astronautical Federation (IAF), the International
Academy of Astronautics (IAA), and the International Institute Of Space Law (IISL)
Houston, Texas, October 10—19, 2002

National Aeronautics and

Space Administration

Glenn Research Center

December 2002

"
"4","Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the NASA Microgravity Science and Application Division under Grant number
NAG3—2284. It is a pleasure to acknowledge the support from PCS team members, the long list of people who had
contributed in the various stages of the project include John Koudelka, Rafat Ansari, Edward Hovenac, Paul
Slobodian, Kim Bambakidis, Jim Kolibas, and Robert Skupinski, to mention a few people. The support from the
various folks involved in carrying out the experiment, in TSC, MSFC, JSC, and the various ISS crewmembers
including Carl Walz, who carried out a number of complicated recovery procedures, is acknowledged.
This report is a formal draft or working
paper, intended to solicit comments and
ideas from a technical peer group.
This report contains preliminary
findings, subject to revision as
analysis proceeds.
Available from
NASA Center for Aerospace Information National Technical Information Service
7121 Standard Drive 5285 Port Royal Road
Hanover, MD 21076 Springfield, VA 22100
Available electronically at http:[ [gltrsgrcnasagov

"
"5","RESULTS FROM THE PHYSICS OF COLLOIDS EXPERIMENT ON ISS
David Weitz
Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts
Arthur Bailey
Scitech Instruments, Inc.
North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
Suliana Manley, Vikram Prasad, and Rebecca Christianson
Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts
Subramanian Sankaran
National Center for Microgravity Research
Cleveland, Ohio
Michael Doherty and Amy J ankovsky
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio
Tibor Lorik, William Shiley, J ohn Bowen, Carol Kurta, and J eff Eggers
ZIN Technologies, Inc.
Cleveland, Ohio
Urs Gasser
University of Konstanz
Germany
Phil Segre
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Marshall Space Flight Center
Huntsville, Alabama
Luca Cipelletti
University of Montpellier
France
Andrew Schoﬁeld and Peter Pusey
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Abstract and from the remote site at Harvard University in
. . . Cambridge, Massachusetts. PCS was launched on
The Phys1cs 0f C01101ds . 1h Space (PCS) 4/19/2001 on Space Shuttle STS-100. The experiment
experlment W35 accommodated Wlthlh Internatlonal was activated on 5/31/2001. The entire experimental
Space Statlon (ISS) EXpedlte the PRocessmg 0f setup performed remarkably well, and accomplished
Experlments to Space Statlon (EXPRESS) Rack 2 and 2400 hours of science operations on-orbit.
was remotely operated from early June 2001 until . . . . . .
February 2002 from NASA Glenn Research Center's The sophlstlcated .mstrumentatlen 1h PCS 15
Telescience Support Center (TSC) in Cleveland, Ohio, capable of dynamlc and statlc llght scatterlng from 11 t0
NASA/TM—2002—21201 1 1

"
"6","169 degrees, Bragg scattering over the range from 10 to biomimetic assemblies, cell encapsulation, tissue
60 degrees, dynamic and static light scattering at low culture, and controlled release of drugs, ﬂavors,
angles from 0.3 to 6.0 degrees, and color imaging. nutrients, and fragrances. Optical, and information and
. . . . computer technologies can beneﬁt from “colloid
The long duration nncrogravrty enVironment engineering” of novel materials such as photonic
on the ISS tacrlitated extended stadies on the growth crystals, Via self—assembly in microgravity.
and coarsening characteristics of binary crystals. The
de—mixing of the colloid—polymer critical—point sample Starting with well—characterized particles, we
was also studied as it phase—separated into two phases. can ﬂne—tune the interactions among them to vary from
Further, aging studies on a col—pol gel, gelation rate highly repulsive, to weakly attractive, to strongly
studies in extremely low concentration fractal gels over attractive interactions. Understanding the various
several days, and studies on a glass sample, all provided mechanisms involved in these interactions is an
valuable information. Several exciting and unique important science objective in the very wide ﬁeld of
aspects of these results are discussed here. colloids research. In addition, the colloidal particles
. can serve as model systems for the study of ﬂuid and
Introduction - - - -
solid properties Since they can be cons1dered to be
. . . analo ous to atoms; hence, the are of interest in the
Collords can be deﬁned as ﬂuids With other g y. .
. . . . . . study of the nature of and trans1tions among gaseous,
particles dispersed in them, particularly particles of Size . . .
. liquid, solid/crystal, and amorphous states of matter.
between one nanometer and one micrometer. At the
lower bound, the particle sizes are on the order of In this PCS experiment, four classes Of
molecular dlmehSIODS, and at the upper bound external colloidal samples, namely, binary colloidal crystals, col—
forces such as graVity are more important than pol mixtures, fractal gels, and a glass sample were
BfOWhlah motion. The variations 1h SlzeS, shapes investigated. Quantitative data on nucleation and
(spheres, rods, etc.), the volume fractions 0f the growth in the absence of gravity were obtained.
particles involved, the surface charge types and
distributions, and the properties of the ﬂuid medium, Hardware and D13 hOStleS
lead to diverse colloidal systems with several technical . . .
applications. It is fascinating to see the resulting . ""l‘he PCS experiment hardware 1% COH‘PTlsed Of
widespread colloids phenomenon in nature and in an AVionics Section unit and a Test section unit. They
industrial processes. Aerosols, foam, paints, pigments, are acconiniodated side by Side m 188 EXPRESS Rack
cosmetics, milk, salad dressings, and several electro— 2’ Decepymg four Middeck Locker Equivalents Of rack
and magneto—rheological ﬂuids are examples of volume (Figure 1) .The PCS hardware. uses the
colloidal dispersions or suspensions. Abundant EXPRESS Rack utilities .Of power, air—cooling, water—
biomedical applications for colloidal crystals are being cooling, and communication for commandlhg and data
developed' some examples are drug delivery telemetry. The PCS AVionics Section provrdes power
‘ f"" I ' '
2y ' .
.‘ ﬂ Wt: ."" _ . ., ‘ .. i-i . '
P. \ ’ \ ----—___- _ “'A . ’m 2
«r 2 <1 2 . . * ""L 2-2;... ,
.h' . t.“ ’1‘” g"" ,r - .—4.:‘j ‘ ‘ 11
I ...,a‘ . , .1! i! ‘, V, ;_ . 1.; f 0‘
' I .' ' é 2‘ ‘ 252,-».- . ?'t‘guﬁ‘ 9 t“. ‘  '#
. "" f 9‘ ‘ ”r, ‘ x 2 ""ET"" “2..-"". 2 "" 2
, ~I \‘ ‘.—- ‘ ..--2, i 5.51-’2 n
. . . ' . . __ ,gﬁ .- _, _ . 72., .2
- N '_ . '* ‘ ‘ ¢ . ‘ W,
‘ _ 2-. u .c 2‘ . ~ {I ‘ ‘ ~ 1. i D
I 2 _ 2 2- . 2 —
' \ ' ”‘i \j / 9 t .-
‘0'. he e“. —‘ ‘,') 3.?! J v .
. “ I '- 7‘72 2’ ’0’ e “i
. . . \ , 3-.— .ﬂ ' ' \3
’*9f - 2‘ ._.. 2 2.= a. '5""? ..2 a ,-
«e; .’_ ., _/. ‘ -*“ ?-gﬁ ,
:. - 92.‘\ . PCS Test Section -_- PCS AVionics Section _
O A_ ' . '- .2 . g ' ISSOO2EG‘87 2001M5I30155407
‘ .0
Figure 1 PCS on 188
NASNTM—2002—21201 l 2

"
"7","distribution, command and data communication, data the sizes or positions of the colloids or structures
acquisition and processing, and data storage on 18 GB formed and how they are arranged on length scales up
removable hard drives. to approximately 5 microns. Dynamic light scattering is
. . . . a technique that measures the spectral width or time
The PCS Test Sectioneohtains eight .COHOld dependence of the scattered light, resulting from the
samples. and all the diagnostic .instruihentation. A motions of particles or structures. Two color cameras
schematic Of the PCS seience diagnostics 1s shoyvn (1x and 10x magniﬁcation) provide real-space images
.(Figure 2). These diagnostics are mostlyhght scattering on macroscopic length scales (to complement the
instrumentation, Wthh were developed sabstantially Fourier-space light scattering on microscopic length
under a preVIOhS ﬂlght experimleht, the Phys1cs Of Hatd scales). A further detailed description of the PCS
SPhereS Experiment (PHaSE). 9 .Dynamic and Sthtlc hardware has been given by Ansari et a1.,3; the detailed
nght Scattering (aka ﬁber scattering) is pr0V1ded YIa a description of the PCS experiment objectives has been
532 nanometer. Nd'YAG laser and ﬁber-coapled Single discussed by Doherty et al.,4 and a detailed description
photon counting detectors. TWO . detection ﬁbers of the ﬂight hardware operations on 188 is discussed by
Simultaneously collect light at scattering angles from 11 D 0h erty et a1 5
to 169 degrees and the complementary angle. Bragg ’
scattering is measured over the range from 10 to 60 Thus, the apparatus is equipped to perform
degrees by imaging the scattering from a second Nd- seven different measurements6 — Static Light Scattering
YAG laser on an optical screen With a digital camera. (SLS), Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS), High Angle
Additional optics and a second digital camera capture Scattering 0r Bragg Scattering (HAS), LOW Angle Static
the laser light scattered at low angles of 0.3 to 6.0 Scattering (LAS), Low Angle Dynamic Scattering
degrees. Via the electronics and data processing (LAD), Rheology, and Imaging.
provided by the Avionics Section, both static and .
dynamic light scattering data are obtained from the low Sam 16 Fluids
scattering angle optics and camera. Static light Table 1 shows the details Of the samples used
scattering refers to the measurement of the average in PCS. A total of eight colloid samples, each
angular dtSttthUttOh 0f the scattered light. This approximately 3 milliliter in volume, were used. Each
distribution is a measure of the Fourier transform of the sample was contained in a glass cell that was stationed
mass-to—mass correlations in the sample, meaning that Within a remotely controlled carousel inside the PCS
this type of measurement provides information about Test Section.
PCS Science Diagnostics
Cplor Camefas
(Visual Imaging) I I Sample Cell (8 total in Carousel)
—_ Bragg Screen
D&S Sample Flui
W W '
CCD
Camera
* 1 t— J 77 _—
l B v _
I CCD Camera Low
Detector ' Lasers Megggtgments
E 1) Dynamic and Static
JUL— Light Scattering (D&S)
°°Efr'§t°' EEEE ==== 2) Bragg and Low Angle
Scattering (B&LA)
Figure 2 Schematic of the PCS Diagnostics
NASNTM—2002—21201 1 3

"
"8","sample image Name, sample image
1, Col—Pol Critical Point r=170 nanometer Colloid 5, Col—Pol Crystal 1 r=270 nanometer PMMA
sample: 11hrs:45mins and Polystyrene Polymer hr and 32 minutes Colloid and Polystyrene
after miXin. (MW=13.2e6); Volume after mixing Polymer; (MW =3.9e6);
U fraction is Colloid: 0.22 Volume fraction Colloid:
‘ . Polymer concentration is Cp 0.325
. =1.285 mg/cm3 Polymer concentration is Cp
. '- L g a ‘ Solvent is Cis—decalin and ‘ =1.055 mg/cm3
\ ‘ ft ﬁr tetralin — index match - "" ’ ' Solvent is Cis—decalin and
1. ff ' particles; Sample displays tetralin — index match
strong low angle scattering particles
2, Silica Fractal Silica LudOX TM50 Dupont 6, Col—Pol Gel ASM8 (r=324.7 nanometer)
in water, D=22 nanometers, l; ., Colloid and Polystyrene
volume fraction = 1.56—4, K"" Polymer (MW =1.9866,
Salt is NaCl (4M) - Radius = 38 nanometer,
Size ratio is 0.12 (polymer
~ to colloid); Volume fraction
. is Colloid: 0.25; Polymer
Soon after constituent g; 1120;111:3164 (31 day concentration iS CP :50
combination. . . mg/cm3. Solvent is cis—
minutes after le decalin and tetralin — index
match particles. Sample
displays a near static
scattering ring at low
angles.
3, P01 st rene Fractal Polystyrene (IDC White 7, AB13 Binary V01. Fraction of A
sulfate 21 nanometer Cr stal (r=415nm) is 0.115, and
diameter) in water (63% V01. Fraction of B
D20, balance H20). (r=237.6nm) is 0.41.
Volume fraction 8.26-6; Salt Radius ratio is 0.5725.
Solution: MgCl2 (0.1 M) in Solvent is Cis—decalin and
Water (63% D20, balance tetralin — index match
Polystyrene Fractal gel: H20) AB”: High—mag particles. Crystallization
high—mag image 10 days image. time 5 days
after constituent
combination.
4, AB Binar Cr stal V01. Fraction of A 8, Colloidal Glass 0.508 micron poly—methyl
(r=324.7nm) is 0.4167, and methacrylate (PMMA)
V01. Fraction of B colloid
(r=130nm) is 0.1254. ,V ‘\' Total volume fraction is :
Radius ratio is 0.4004. “1,, C 0.612
Solvent is Cis—decalin and \ ' Solvent is Cis—decalin and
tetralin —indeX match ‘ ‘ ' tetralin — index match
particles Crystallization Colloidal Glass particles
C01“ image 0f the A136 time 2 days. sample, 2 hrs 33 min Crystallization time: a few
test CCH- after miX. days
Table 1. PCS Flight Samples Details, and some sample pictures.
NASNTM—2002—21201 1 4

"
"9","Four classes of colloidal materials were samples during this crystallization or gelation process.
studied. These include I) ordered binary crystalline All samples, except the two fractal gels, can be
samples; binary colloidal crystal alloy samples are rehomogenized (reinitiated) to repeat a measurement at
dispersions of two different size particles in an indeX- another sampling rate or to utilize a different
matching ﬂuid; 2) mixtures of colloidal particles with measurement technique to examine their behaVior in a
other species, primarily polymers, which induce a weak complementary way. The fractal gels can only be run
attractive interaction allowing us to precisely tune the once. For all samples, measurements were taken every
phase behaVior of the mixtures; Colloid-polymer few seconds immediately after homogenization and then
mixture samples are solutions of mono-disperse with less frequency (typically for a few hours each
particles mixed with a mono-disperse polymer in an week) over a several-nionth period, with on-going
indeX-matching ﬂuid, where the phase behaVior—solid, experimentation taking place for over several months.
liquid, and gas—is controlled by the concentration of The measurements readily provided the information on
the colloid, the concentration of the polymer, and the the growth, the size, and the type of structures formed.
relative size of the colloid and the polymer; 3) highly
disordered, but very tenuous fractal structures which Results
possess their own unique symmetries and their own
unique properties. Fractal gels may form when charged Quantitative data from the dynamic and static
colloids have their electrostatic repulsions screened out light scattering, Bragg scattering, low angle dynamic
by the addition of a salt solution, allowing aggregation. and static light scattering, and color imaging were
These can be formed at very low volume fractions, and obtained; detailed data analysis in each of the research
the highly tenuous aggregates formed exhibit a areas (binary colloidal alloys, colloid-polyniers, fractal
remarkable scaling property: their structure appears the gels, and colloidal glass) is Shh underway. The latest
same on 311 length scales up to a cluster size, and so can research updates can be found in the PI website6 related
be described as a fractal. A polystyrene, and a silica t0 this PCS project. The following descriptions
fractal sample were studied; and 4) colloidal glass illustrate the kind of data obtained from the various
samples; consider a hard sphere colloid system: as the samples. Table 1 3150 shows some color images Of these
particles are packed together, if one of them wants to various samples.
move, its neighbors have to cooperate. As the are . .
packed even tighter, more of the particles haze to Mm C01101dalC stal A110
cooperate for any to move. When all of the particles in I . kn h d . d' .
the sample have to cooperate, the sample is essentially a . t is 0W.“ t at 111.1 er appropriate con itions,
solid—this explains what happens with glass, as it is nionodisperse collmdal particles can self-assenible int(g
cooled.7 In the earlier PHaSE ﬂight, it was found that crystalline structures Wlth long range periodic order,
samples which were glasses in l g crystallized driven solely by entropy. If particles of.d1fferent
immediately in Hg; this sample is to help examine the diameters are mixed together, the same entropic effeclgs
existence of colloidal glasses in Hg- can lead to the self-assembly of binary alloy crystals. ’

Thus, there are eight test cells: two binary “ Under certainconditions,‘ it has been found
alloy crystals (one AB6, one AB13), three Col-Pol that hard-sphere particles (collmdal PMMA) at Size
systems (one near critical point in two-phase region, ratio 0158 formed bOth the AB? and the A513
one gel-like sample and one crystal sample), two fractal superlattice structures. Several different crystalline
gel systems (one polystyrene, and one silica), and one structurels1 have been observed, and more are predicted

. to occur
collmdal glass system. '

Initiation of an investigation on each colloid In PCS’ we StUdled two samples, one an AB13
sample occurs when it is homogenized (that is, stirred structure, the second an AB6 structure. In both cases, by
up Via the oscillation of the sample cell within its monitoring the evolution of the crystallization of each
bearings or mixed with a special ﬂuid combination samp 16?’ we learned new information that is not
device) to evenly distribute its suspended particles and access1ble 1n StUdleS performed in lg.
then allowed to sit for days,. weeks, or months on orbit. In the case of the AB13 sample, we observed
Duhnfo’ thls interval, particles in the samples W111 unexpected power-law behaVior in the growth of the
organize themselves—that 15’ self-assemble—into crystals. The origin of these power-law growths is still
crystal-like or gel-like arrangements. Meanwhile, the been investigated as we perform more detailed analysis
laser light scattering and Visual imaging .diagnostics are of the data. The AB6 sample exhibits quite different
utilized to gather structural information about the growth behavior, and its origin is also still being
NASA/TM—2002—21201 l 5

"
"10","investigated. The AB13 sample was allowed to anneal Fractal Gels
for an extended period, and we obtained remarkable
static scattering, showing more peaks in the powder The irreversible aggregation of colloidal
pattern than have ever been observed before. This particles leads to the formation of highly tenuous, but
suggests that gravity plays an important role in the mechanically rigid structures with scale invariant or
ultimate size and morphology of the crystals. fractal symmetry.15 The physical properties of such
. . objects should directly reﬂect this scale invariance and
W these experiments will probe these properties. They
. . . will focus on the mechanical properties, and thus will

The addltleh Of the polymer induces weak measure the dynamics of the fractal objects. If the
attractive interactions between the colloidal particles by aggregation is allowed to proceed, unimpeded by the
the depletion mechanisni, leading to a rich phase effects of sedimentation, the fractal aggregates will
behaV1or for the collmdal. particles. Selxzzeral such ultimately form a continuous network, or a colloidal
systenis, including 61111118101113 droplets, charge- gel.16 This gel will have unique properties, reﬂecting the
stabilized polystyrene sphefes, and polymethylmeth- fractal scaling of the indiVidual aggregates at shorter
acrylate (PMMA) partieles . have been studied. AS the length scales, and the mechanical properties of a
strength Of the attractive interaction is increased hy collection of fractal aggregates at larger length scales.
1ncreas1ng the polymer concentration, the ﬂuid-solid The colloidal polystyrene, and silica gel samples are to
coeX1stence extends over an 1ncreas1ng range Of collmd study these aggregation characteristics, and test whether
concentrations. or not the aging behavior is unique to polystyrene gels.

W The polystyrene fractal sample, which had a

. . . very low volume fraction, never gelled in the time it

. Ihltlal analys1s of the data shows .that the was observed. However, it did produce very interesting
coll01ds phase separate lhte .glassy or disordered results, allowing us to measure the internal Vibrational
regions, followed by crystallization of the glassy modes of the fractal structure, even though it did not
regions. We expect to be able to extract useful data fully gel. This was because the fractal clusters grew so
about the growth mechanism of the crystals, and to be large, which would not be feasible in ground-based
able to contrast this With the behavior of purely experiments. These results show that the theoretical
repulswe systems. models that describe a gel also work for fractal

C 011 oi d-P 01 mer Gel: aggregates, provided they are sufﬁciently large, and

: prov1ded the range of scattering angles required can be

This sam 1 b h d . , . accessed. In addition, the inhomogeneities Visible in the

p e e ave in an unexpected way, it , , ,

formed a solid gel, even though we had planned to have polystyrene sample, quite early in Its gtOWth were very

. . puzzling; further ground based experiments based on
a sample that would be in the state that we call the ﬂuid- , . . .
cluster phase. However, there are also very interesting these results, uncovered the eX1stence of certain limits
features of elle d sam les that we were able to stud to the lowest volume fraction at which such gels can be

g P Y . . . .
with this sample. We studied the solid-like behavior of formed 1“ mlcregmwty and 1“ 1g; these 8““
the el and we were able to use the rheolo ca abilit experiments are in progress toward corroborating the
g , gy P Y . .

of the PCS apparatus to estimate the elastic modulus of ﬂlght experimental results.
the sample. This will be compared to similar samples The silica sample probably did gel, as
prepared on the ground, where we can measure the expected. This sample was at a higher volume fraction,
elastic modulus directly. In addition, this gel was found and so gelled in a shorter time than the polystyrene.
to age, and become slower dynamically, Withih a short This is ﬁrst time a silica gel has been formed under
period Of time after gelation similar to the aging these low volume fractions, because it is impossible to
behaV1or observed 1h fractal gels on earth. do this on earth where gravity would crush the gel.

MW Colloidal Glass:

This sample produced a beautiful eXhibit of In an earlier PHaSE ﬂight, it was found that
spinodal decomposition over four decades in length samples which were glasses in 1g crystallized
scale, from 1 micron to 1 cm. We were able to follow immediately in Hg; this sample is to help examine the
the growth 0f the length scale With time over the full existence of colloidal glasses in pg. The sample that
range of length scales, and the results will be compared was ﬂown was a mixture of two glassy samples that had
to theoretical predictions. been ﬂown in previous PHaSE ﬂights. This PCS sample
NASA/TM—2002—21201 l 6

"
"11","was observed to crystallize rapidly in space; however, sedimentation would cause the colloids to fall to the
preliminary observations suggest that it will crystallize bottom of the cell faster than the de-miXing process
at lg as well. The origin of this behavior is not clear; it could occur. That is, phenomena such as this col-pol
is possible that the sample was poorly mixed, and this spinodal decomposition, and crystallization of samples
left some regions where crystals nucleated more easily, that remain as glass in lg, can be studied only in
resulting in the crystallization. The colloidal glass ﬂight ‘niicrograVity’.
sample results, and the tests with the colloidal glass . . . .
sample in lg (in the engineering unit at Harvard) . . In addition, the ‘long. durations’ over Wthh
indicate that the mixing procedures must be carefully thls nncrograv1tyenVironnient1s available in the 1889
examined for the glass samples. Further experiments allows 1.15 to zero .111 on the Inmal’ and ﬁnal, ngth and
were needed on earth after the ﬂight sample was coarsening behaV1ors of all the samples; and,.e.g., 1n the
returned. These tests are in progress. These are very case of fractals, the long duration micrograVIty enabled
critical for upcoming PCS+ experiments. us to study them at extremely low concentration limits,
at which the physical processes of interest are extremely
Need for microgravity2 and long duration microgravity: slowed down.

The formation of colloidal crystals is strongly Thus, both, the microgravity and the long
affected by sedimentation; this is most graphically duration over which it is available facilitated these
demonstrated by the results of the experiments of studies on the growth and coarsening characteristics of
Chaikin and Russel, who showed that the morphology binary crystals, col-pol crystals, gels, fractals, colloidal
of colloidal crystals grown in space is completely glasses.
different from that grown on earth.17 . . . . .

In this context, it is worth p01nt1ng out the

As the crystals sediment, the shear of the ﬂuid capabilities 0f another facility, the LMM (Light
ﬂowing past their edges is sufﬁcient to destroy them. In Microscopy Module), that is being developed and built
addition, the sedimentation time of the crystals rapidly by NASA GRC; the LMM Will provide the following
begins to compete with the diffusion time Of the exciting capabilities: It is a reusable experiment
accreting particles, signiﬁcantly changing the growth platform that provides confocal- and Video-microscopy,
mechanism. While some of this effect can be mitigated laser tweezers, and spectrophotometry, as well as the
by buoyancy matching, this is not completely effective, possibility to study hundreds 0f samples. For example,
even at the best level of buoyancy match that can be we can study 120 or more sample cells, each around
achieved. By calculating the effective Peclet number, 2.5mm dia. and 150 microns thick (~0-75 microliter
(the ratio of the diffusion time scale of the particles, to volume). We can study the structure and dynamics 0f
the settling time scale of the crystal,) it can be shown various systems ih real space, allowing us to probe local
that the size of the crystals, RC,maX that can be formed structure in unprecedented detail. The details and the
varies inversely as the square root of both g, the gravity, capabilities 0f the LMM918_21 and upcoming
and Ap, the residual density difference after density- experiments such as PC5922 experiments are described
matching. That is, if we improve the buoyancy match by in the references.
two orders of magnitude, the size of the crystals .will PCS Hardware failure and recove :
increase by one order of magnitude; by comparison —W‘
using the standard non-buoyancy matched ﬂuids, but On Sunday, February 24, 2002, at the onset of
doing the experiment ih microgravity gains an a scheduled operational run, the PCS ﬂight system
additional 3 decades; this is consistent with what is seen computer failed to boot up. After various intense
in the CDOT and PHaSE experiments.” Combining the recovery attempts, including one on Wednesday, March
buoyancy match and microgravity will produce crystals 20, 2002, in which an Iss crew member, Carl Walz,
ofremarkable sizes. executed a set of uniquely planned, designed, and

veriﬁed procedures in which he electrically jumper-

These Steady streanis Of PCS data from every connected a monitor and keyboard borrowed from the
sample from the micrograVIty enVironnient are of great Human Research Facility (HRF) presently on-board
scientiﬁc value; incidentally, a Visually interesting .

. . . . . ISS, to the PCS ﬂight system computer to access and
example is the time-lapse mov1e of the de-nnX1ng of the . . .

. . . . . modify poss1ble corrupted PCS Bas1c Input/Output
collmd-polymer critical p01nt sample. The spinodal . . .

. . . . . . System (BIOS) settings, but this recovery operation was

decompos1tion in this sample, in the absence of graV1ty, . .
over four decades of length scale, (from 1 micron to 1 Without success. In the week follow1ng theMarch 29th

. . . . . . recovery attempt, based on several logistics and risk
centimeter,) is being analyzed in detail. Such behaV1ors f GRC d th ISS d t t . t
cannot be observed in these samples on earth because actors, an e program agree 0 ernnna e
NASA/TM—2002—21201 l 7

"
"12","any further on-orbit recovery actions for the PCS ﬂight colloidal dispersions. This is truly an advanced
hardware. diagnostic ‘facility’ that is conducive for a very large
class of ﬂuids, condensed matter physics, and biological
The hardware has been brought down for research work.
failure analysis, and it is being ﬁxed and is ready for the
next planned activity with the PCS+ experiments by Summag
Profs. Paul Chaikin, and William Russel of Princeton
University. Despite the various successes described Physics 0f Colloids in Space (PCS): the ﬁrst
earlier, with each and every sample type investigated, ﬂuids physics experiment that was carried out onboard
early termination of PCS resulted in some signiﬁcant the ISS has given us tremendous amount 0f fresh
missed opportunities: scientiﬁc data and knowledge. Four classes of colloids
were examined in these experiments, forming binary
The measurements 0f the growth 0f the AB6 crystals, col-pol gels and crystals, fractal gels, and
sample at early times are obscured by scattering from glasses. Settling of the particles and aggregates in l g
the liquid, and the data we have were not obtained at the affects these experiments in various ways; the long
optimum time intervals during the growth process; durations of microgravity available in the ISS helped
further experiments are needed to investigate this more unmask these unique data by avoiding such settling, and
closely. This would provide critical insight into the by extending the experimentation time, thereby
nature 0f the nucleation and growth process 0f the allowing us to choose the various samples and study the
crystals, one of the key aspects of the formation of these various growth and coarsening characteristics
structures. Similarly, it is essential to repeat the associated with them.
measurements of the early stages of the AB13 crystals to
conﬁrm the unexpected power laws observed. W
With the col-pol gel samples, further 1. Lant, C. T., Smart, A.E., Cannell, D.S., Meyer,
experiments to extend the range of frequencies over W.V. and Doherty, M. P., “Physics of hard spheres
which the elastic modulus was measured are desirable. experiment—a general purpose light scattering
Rheology measurements as a function of time after the instrument,” Appl. Opt. 36, 7 501—7 507 (1997).
gelation and during the period of aging will provide 2. Doherty, M.P., Lant, cm, Ling, J.S., “The Physics
valuable insights into the mechanisms leading to of Hard Spheres Experiment on MSL-l: Required
structural changes. These would provide important Measurements and Instrument Performance,”
additional insight into the nature of the gel. With the A1 A A—98—0 462 (1998).
col-pol crystal sample, further experiments are des1rable 3. Ansari, R.R., Hovenac, E.A., Sankaran, S.,
to conﬁrm the important observation of the order of the K d lk J M W . t D A C' 11 tt' L d
. .. . ouea,.., eiz, ..,1pee1,.,an
phase separation and crystallization. With the col-pol “ . . .
critical sample, we would like to repeat the test for Segrei P'N"" Phys1cs Of COHOldS 1n. Shace
. . Experiment,” Space Technology and Applications
conﬁrming certain aspects of the set of data we .
obtained, and also obtain a second “movie” of the International Forum—STAIFF-99, Albuquerque,
spectacular spinodal decomposition behavior in these NM' (1999) .
samples in microgravity. 4. Doherty, M.P., Koudelka, J .M., Motil, S.M.,
Saavedra, S.M., “Light Scattering for Complex
With the fractal samples, we WOUId like t0 Fluids Research on ISS: Investigator Dreams and
probe the aging of the silica gel, and compare the results Anticipated Hardware Development,” A1 A A—99—
to that of polystyrene gels; this was one of the main 0964 (1999).
motivations of the eaperinient. The aging of a gel rnade 5. Doherty, M., Bailey, A., Jankovsky, A., and Lorik,
from a hard material, Silica, could be dramatically T., “Physics of Colloids in Space: Flight Hardware
different from that of a soft sample, polystyrene. This Operations on ISS,” A1 A A 40th Aerospace
con] ecture COUld not be tested. Sciences Meeting, J anuary 14—17, 2002, Reno, NV.
Thus, the PCS hardware remains very valuable NASA/TM—ZOOZ'Zl 1371-
for these and other such samples in future. While the 6- Weitz, D.A., website: “The Physics 0f
ISS provides ‘long durations’ of ‘low—graVity’ Colloids in Space (PCS) project,”
environment, the PCS hardware/facility provides http_://www.deas.harvard.edu/p_rojects/weitzlab/
enormous capabilities to study the bulk properties of the research/nasap_roj.html
NASA/TM—2002—21201 l 8

"
"13","7. Weeks, E.R., Crocker, J .C., Levitt, A.C., Schoﬁeld, 15. Weitz D.A., and Oliveria, M., Phys. Rev. Lett. 52,
A., and Weitz, D.A., “Three-dimensional Direct 1433 (1984).

Imaging of Structural Relaxation Near the 16. Bibette, J ., Mason, T.G., Gang H., and Weitz, D.A.,
Colloidal Glass Transition,” Science 287 (627) Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 981 (1992).
(2000). 17. Cheng, Z., Chaikin, P.M., Zhu, J., Russel, W.B.,

8. Pusey, RN, and van Megen, W., “Phase Behaviour and Meyer, W.V., “Crystallization Kinetics of Hard
of Concentrated Suspensions of Nearly Hard Spheres in Microgravity in the Coexistence
Colloidal Spheres,” Nature 320, (6060), 340—342 Regime: Interactions between Growing
(1986). Crystallites,” Phys. Rev. Lett. Vol. 88, N0. 1, Jan.

9. Eldridge, M.D., Madden, P.A., and Frenkel, D., 7,2002.

“Entropy-Driven Formation of a Superlattice in a 18. Motil, S., Snead, J ., and Grifﬁn, D.,
Hard-Sphere Binary Mixture,” Nature 365 (6441), “Light Microscopy Module (LMM),”
35—37 (1993). http_://micr0gravity. grc.nasa.gov/ 6712/1mm.htm1.

10. Eldridge, M.D., Madden, P.A., and Frenkel, D., “A 19. Motil, S.M., and Snead, J.H., “The Light
Computer-Simulation Investigation into the Microscopy Module: An On-Orbit Multi-User
Stability of the ABZ Superlattice in a Binary Hard- Microscope Facility Planned For The FCF On The
Sphere System,” M01. Phys. 80 ( 4), 987—995 188,” Conference & Exhibit on 188 Utilization,
(1993). Cape Canaveral, FL. AIAA—4956 (2001).

11. Eldridge, M.D., Madden, P.A., Pusey, RN, and 20. Logicon/Northrop Grumman C0. website:
Bartlett, P., “Binary Hard-sphere mixtures: A “Light Microscopy Module (LMM),”
Comparison between Computer Simulation and http_://cleve1and.feddata.com/LMM/.

Experiment,” M01. Phys. 84, 395—420 (1995). 21. Resnick, A., “Design and construction of a space-

12. Bibette, J., Roux, D., and Nallet, F., “Depletion borne opticaltweezer apparatus,” To appear in Rev.
interactions and ﬂuid-solid equilibrium in Sci. Instrum. 72, (11) (2002).
emulsions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 2470—2473 22. Sankaran, S., Gasser, U., Manley, S., Valentine, M.,
(1990). Prasad, V., Rudhardt, D., Bailey, A., Dinsmore, A.,

13. Calderon, F.L., Bibette, J., and Biais, J., Segre, P., Doherty, M., Weeks, E., Pusey, P., and
“Experimental Phase-Diagrams of Polymer and Weitz, D.A., “Physics of Colloids in Space-2 (PCS-
Colloid Mixtures,” Europhys. Lett. 23 ( 9), 653— 2).” D., AIAA Conf. & Exhibit on 188 Utilization,
659 (1993). Cape Canaveral, FL Oct. 2001, AIAA—2001—4959.

14. Ilett, S.M., Orrock, A., P0011, W.C.K., and Pusey,

P.N., “Phase-Behavior of a Model Colloid-Polymer
Mixture,” Phys. Rev. E 51 (2), 1344—1352 (1995).
NASA/TM—2002—21201 1 9

"
"14","Form Approved
REP RT D MENTATI N PA E
O OCU O G OMB No. 0704-0188
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this
collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson
Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503.
1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 2. REPORT DATE 3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED
December 2002 Technical Memorandum
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 5. FUNDING NUMBERS
Results From the Physics of Colloids Experiment on 188
WU—22—400—3 2—3 0—02
6. AUTHOR(S)
David Weitz, Arthur Bailey, Suliana Manley, Vikram Prasad, Rebecca Christianson, Subramanian
Sankaran, Michael Doherty, Amy J ankovsky, Tiber Lorik, William Shiley, J Ohn Bowen, Carol Kurta,
J eff Eggers, Urs Gasser, Phil Segre, Luca Cipelletti, Andrew Schoﬁeld, and Peter Pusey
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
REPORT NUMBER
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
J OhIl H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field E—13700
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 — 3191
9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSORING/MONITORING
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER
National Aeronautics and Space Administration NASA TM 2002 212011
Washington, DC 20546—0001 — _
IAC—OZ—J . 6.04
1 1 . SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES
Prepared for the 53rd International Astronautical Congress cosponsored by the International Astronautical Federation (IAF), the International Academy of
Astronautics (IAA), and the International Institute of Space Law (IISL), Houston, Texas, October 10—19, 2002. David Weitz, Suliana Manley, Vikram
Prasad, and Rebecca Christianson, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts; Arthur Bailey, Scitech Instruments, Inc., North Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada; Subramanian Sankaran, National Center for Microgravity Research, Cleveland, Ohio; Michael Doherty and Amy J ankovsky, NASA
Glenn Research Center; Tibor Lorik, William Shiley, J ohn Bowen, Carol Kurta, and J eff Eggers, ZIN Technologies, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio; Urs Gasser,
University of Konstanz, Germany; Phil Segre, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center; Luca Cipelletti, University of Montpellier, France; and Andrew
Schofield and Peter Pusey, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Responsible person, Michael Doherty, organization code 6728,
216—433—6641.
12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE
Unclassified — Unlimited
Subject Categories: 34 and 74 Distribution: Nonstandard
Available electronically at http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov
This publication is available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information, 301—621—0390.
1 3. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words)
The Physics of Colloids in Space (PCS) experiment was accommodated within International Space Station (188) EXpedite the
PRocessing of Experiments to Space Station (EXPRESS) Rack 2 and was remotely Operated from early June 2001 until February 2002
from NASA Glenn Research Center's Telescience Support Center (TSC) in Cleveland, Ohio, and from the remote site at Harvard
University in Cambridge, Massachusetts. PCS was launched on 4/19/2001 on Space Shuttle STS—100. The experiment was activated on
5/31/2001. The entire experimental setup performed remarkably well, and accomplished 2400 hours of science Operations on—Orbit. The
sophisticated instrumentation in PCS is capable of dynamic and static light scattering from 11 to 169 degrees, Bragg scattering over the
range from 10 to 60 degrees, dynamic and static light scattering at low angles from 0.3 to 6.0 degrees, and color imaging. The long
duration microgravity environment on the ISS facilitated extended studies on the growth and coarsening characteristics of binary
crystals. The de—miXing 0f the colloid—polymer critical—point sample was also studied as it phase—separated into two phases. Further,
aging studies on a col—pol gel, gelation rate studies in extremely low concentration fractal gels over several days, and studies on a glass
sample, all provided valuable information. Several exciting and unique aspects of these results are discussed here.
14. SUBJECT TERMS 15. NUMBER OF PAGES
. . . 15
C01101ds; Mlcrograwty 16. PRICE CODE
17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT
OF REPORT OF THIS PAGE OF ABSTRACT
Unclassified Unclassified Unclassified
NSN 7540-01-280-5500 Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89)
Prescribed by ANSI Std. 239-18
298-102

"
