"","x"
"1","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/orAuthor(s)' Sponsoring Organization.
n erence and Exhibit on InternationaI
1:222:32: ‘é‘iléaéif’?sfé‘f°§dm Ao1-42932
AIAA-2001-5058

Physics Of Colloids in Space Plus This transition underlies all other fluid—solid transitions

(PCS+) and provides a reference upon which much theory and

computation in condensed matter physics builds.l

P.M. Chaikin, W.B. Russel, W. Kopacka, Furthermore hard spheres form a well-accepted baseline

Princeton Univ.,Princeton,NJ 08544 for understanding and manipulating the behavior of

A. van Blaaderen colloidal dispersions, which form the backbone for a

Utrecht Univ., Utrecht, The Netherlands significant portion of Chemical technology.2 Though

W.V. Meyer and MP. Doherty, NASA Glenn, extensive, neither the theory nor the database are yet

Cleveland, OH complete. To do so requires the removal or reduction of

the experimental constraints imposed by gravity induced

sedimentation and convection and extension of

experiments to sufficiently long times to accommodate

ABS TRACT the rather slow dynamics of highly crowded dispersions.

The ultimate payoff will be a definitive set of data on

The Physics of Colloids in Space Plus (PCS+) this most fundamental of non—ideal systems, plus the
experiment consists of 1i ght scattering and rheological understanding required to control or modify the structure
measurements probing the essential features of the hard of densely packed media.
sphere disorder-order transition and the properties of the PCS+ is afollow-on t0 the Physics of Colloids in
ordered solid phase that results. Several samples, in Space (PCS) experiment, an EXPRESS Rack payload
custom-designed cells at fixed volume fractions, will launched in April 2001 and operating on [SS during
permit measurements from the disordered fluid phase, Increments 2-4. PCS+ introduces eight more samples to
through the coexistence region, into the fully crystalline effectively double the amount of science gained with the
solid, and beyond toward random close packing. The current hardware. The PCS Test Section hardware will
dispersions will consist of monodisperse colloidal hard be de-orbited, outfitted with eight new sample cells,
spheres 0.65-0.70 micron diameter with cores of relaunched to 188, and activated for extended operations.
poly(methylmethacrylate) and a comb-graft co-polymer This plan typifies the hardware reutilization
stabilizer in a mixture of decalin and tetralin with an opportunities and launch mass savings now possible in
almost matching refractive index. this era of the International Space Station.

The information obtained will answer fundamental Beginning with two proposals in 1991 in response '
questions in condensed matter physics regarding this to NASA Research Announcement NRA-91-OSSA-17,
most fundamental of transitions between liquid and solid the definition, conceptualization, and development of
phases. An extensive theoretical basis, from computer flight-worthy light scattering instrumentation at the
simulations and statistical mechanical theories, Lewis Research Center (LeRC) has been under way.
complements numerous experimental studies with The development originated from an Advanced
similar model systems addressing one or more aspects Technology Development (ATD) for a Laser Light
Of the phenomena. However, gravitational settling Scatteringlnstrument.3*4 Figurel depicts the evolution
inevitably complicates the measurements and introduces of light scattering flight instrumentation and its
ambiguities. With PCS+ we seek to sweep these aside application to multiple flight experiments. The first
in completing a comprehensive study capitalizing on science returns from this type of instrumentation,
the techniques and knowledge developed in the realized in the 1990’s, include data gathered via our
preceeding ground-based and flight experiments. With Colloidal Disorder Order Transition (CDOT) and
this space experiment we aim to CDOT-2 glovebox investigations, and the Physics of
0 understand why glasses do not persist in microgravity, Hard Spheres Experiment (PHaSE) Spacelab experiment
0 correlate the visual ""appearance of dendrites with data and the Binary Colloid Alloy Test (BCAT), BCAT—Z,
on nucleation and growth from Bragg scattering, and Colloidal GELation (CGEL), and CGEL-2 glovebox
0correlate depletion observed by low angle scattering investigations of Weitz and Pusey. The studies have
with the Visual appearance of dendrites. involved colloidal suspensions comprised of hard

polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)! spheres whose
INTRODUCTION interaction potential is dominated by short range
repulsions. The purpose of these experiments was to

The hard sphere phase transition is driven purely by investigate the physics of nucleation and growth and the
configurational entropy due to constraints on the structure and properties of the crystals for colloidal
packing of impenetrable particles at high densities. (both single-diameter particle and binary) systems. In
Copyright © 2001 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, Inc. All rights reserved. 2

American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"2","(c)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/orAuthor(s)' Sponsoring Organization.
W _ EIEnEeE ‘5— EET"" — _ _ _ _ _ _ '- _ _) only a sediment of small crystallites. In addition, a
sample that remained glassy on Earth crystallized fully
.. k in microgravity, a completely unexpected result.
., Mul%serq% PHaSEll yielded high fidelity measurements of the
.. LaserLight 5‘ kinetics of nucleation and growth and the elastic
‘.. Sgagiiecrgl‘gl E: modulus of the solid phase on samples having volume
. . .. . Capab't'ties ‘95 fractions (i.e., the fraction of the total sample volume
g. I """" occupied by the spheres) of $20528, 0.552, 0.575, all
WI either within the coexistence or crystalline regions of
t i g-I'Eéuoiaat the hard sphere phase diagram.12 Because of gas bubbles
‘ ﬁ in four of eight sample cells and ﬂare that obscured the
t--------~--yEFEt'EtEtﬁii'stE:'é‘i‘ﬁb'ﬁiﬁtffcm$3) low angle scattering, only a portion of the PHaSE
Figure 1: Evolution of Laser Light Scattering Instruments SCience was accompliShad13
The PCS+ experiment on [$8 seeks to investigate
bOth cases, due to demands on overall experiment further the fundamental questions associated With the
complexity and the requirement to gain early science on nucleation, growth, structure, dynamics, and rheology
existing carriers, the light scattering investigations of colloidal crystals with an improved version of the
ﬂown to date have addressed only a subset of the total PHaSE instrument. In particular, we aim to
proposed science. on board the International Space - understand why glasses do not persist in microgravity.
Station (133), this and subsequent experiments intend to ° correlate the visual appearance of dendrites with data
conduct the balance of the science. Extended periods of on nucleation and growth from Bragg scattering, and
microgravity are needed, since hard sphere colloids have ocorrelate depletion observed by the low angle
significant density differences between the particle and scattering peak with the visual appearance of dendrites.
ﬂuid. Eliminating the driver for sedimentation unmasks
the fundamental processes over their natural time scales. THE LIGHT SCATTERING INSTRUMENT
Light scattering impinges an incident beam of
electromagnetic radiation on a sample that transmits An instrument similar to that ﬂown for PHaSE
most of the radiation but scatters a small portion in was developed as the Physics Of Colloids in Space
other directions.5 This scattered light, collected by apparatus (PCS) for the EXPRESS Rack. Hardware
cameras or photodetectors, reveals information about the improvements and enhancements have resolved technical
scattering medium itself, such as particle size, difficulties that plagued PHaSE and serve to
polydispersity, and diffusivity and the interparticle accommodate the science and diagnostic requirements of
spacing in ﬂuid and crystalline phases at normal or wide Weitz and Pusey.” This hardware provides visual
angles and the size and structure of crystallites at small imaging and light scattering to examine colloid samples
angles. To accomplish this requires either two sources Of 3 milliliter volume contained in an optical cell
0f electromagnetic radiation or tWO cameras. designed to provide two orthogonal beams, for dynamic
Complex ﬂuids include colloidal suspensions, gels, and static scattering and Bragg and low angle scattering,
magnetorheological fluids, foams, and granular systems. respectively. The cell has a cylindrical cavity for the
Studies 0f colloidal suspensions, commonly referred to sample and glass that matches the refractive index of the
simply as colloids,6 promise a more complete dispersions.“
understanding of phase transitions, as well as offering a The Bragg and low angle scattering is detected by
basis for the design and synthesis Of a new and better launching the laser along the axis of the cylindrical
materials. Such materials might be those ordered on the volume. The spherical cap of the cell acts as a lens to
length scale 0f light in 311 three dimensions and focus the scatteredlight onto a hemispherical screen for
potentially suitable for Optical switches or filters or as observation via a digital camera. The lens and screen
photonic band gap structures. Monodisperse colloidal capture the scattered light over the range of 100 to 60°.”
hard spheres undergo a transition from a disordered liquid The scattered 1i ght at low angles is detected Via another
to an ordered solid at volume fractions for the particles digital camera and another set of Optics mounted in the
greater than 0-5» which three PFthOUS flights have center of the spherical Bragg screen.“4 The low angle
studied via light scattering at a macrOSCOpic level: the optics consist of a dump spot (05 mm wide drill bit) to
CDOT glovebox experiment in October 1995, PHaSE both block the transmitted beam and reflect a portion of
th July 1997, and CDOT‘Z in October 1998- Each it to a detector for measurement, a lens, and a mirror.
yielded significant results. In CDOTMO large dendritic These optics capture light scattered from 0.40 to 7.0"".
crystallites grew in samples that, on Earth, produced The Bragg and low angle diagnostics provide
3 ,
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)‘ Sponsoring Organization.

information on the static crystal structure, with the low RESULTS FROM PHaSE
angle also offering dynamic information from
ﬂuctuations of the intensity of each speckle. The previous flight experiments and ground-based

The second laser beam is launched into the outer research have added substantively to the fundamental
edge of the sample cell, striking a parabolic skirt and understanding of dispersions of hard spheres in particular
being reflected orthogonally through the cylindrical and the freezing and glass transitions in general. This
sample volume along its radius.‘1 Similarly, the has stimulated computer simulations and experiments
scattered light is reflected off the parabolic surface and by groups elsewhere. Here we first list the new
out the bottom of the sample cell. Two optical fibers information gained from the PhaSE experiment and then
positioned 1800 apart capture the scattered light, and detail other accomplishments we feel to be significant
carry it to avalanche photo diodes for photon counting. that emerged from the ground based work.
These pick—up fibers are mounted on a rotary stage that 0 face-centered-cubic (FCC) crystal structure
permits detection of the scattered light over 11° to 1690 In normal gravity the FCC structure, established
(1910 to 349°). The transmitted light is directed to a theoretically as the equilibrium symmetry, often
photodetector that monitors the power. emerges as crystallites settle, stimulating speculation

The experiment hardware accommodates eight about ways that gravity might cause the transition. The
sample cells mounted in a carousel. The carousel and time-resolved Bragg scattering for all three samples in
associated rotary stage can position each sample in the microgravity‘s’l6 demonstrates conclusively that FCC
diagnostic stations (two imaging and one scattering appears late in the coarsening process as small
station). At the scattering station, the sample cell crystallites lose particles to the slow “ripening” of large
interfaces with a belt system that controls sample crystallites. This suggests that gravity is merely a
rotation to support dynamic 1'1 ght scattering and complicating factor, not a driving force, in the
rheology measurements.ll One sample cell design has experiments under normal gravity, and that rapid non-
two diaphragm cavities off the main cylindrical volume, equilibrium growth is responsible for the random
which interface with two rods off a cam and motor and stacking of hexagonal planes that appears first.
permit the introduction of solvent to adjust the °simultane0us growth and coarsening16
composition.l4 Calculations exist describing complex interactions

All the aforementioned diagnostics and systems are among crystallites during the growth process as
housed in a sealed enclosure referred to as the Test concentration fields overlap in the surrounding
Section. An accompanying box, the Avionics Section, disordered phase. Time-resolved Bragg scattering under
houses components for power distribution, control microgravity captures one effect of these interactions
circuitry, data acquisition and data storage in two quite conclusively for the sample at $20528. From the
drawers. The upper drawer holds the power control earliest time until the sampleis almost fully crystalline
module, current sensors, circuit breakers and three the size and overall crystallinity grow monotonically,
removable hard drives. Two Of the hard drives are but the number density falls. Apparently nucleation is
capable 0f recording 18 gigabytes 0t digital data. The slower than the loss of crystallites due to transfer of
third drive houses the system control software. All particles from small to largg crystallites. Thus
three can be removed and replaced on—orbit. The lower coarsening occurs simultaneously with growth, rather
drawer contains the data acquisition boards in a PCI/ISA than following the completion of the nucleation and
BUS. The acquisition system interfaces three frame growth as generally assumed. In normal gravity,
grabbers With the four cameras in the Test Section ahd settling of crystallites onto the face plate of the cell or
includes correlators (Flexible Instruments) to process out Of the beam prevents such a conclusion.
the data from the APDs. The Test Section and 0dendriticgrowth16
Avionics Section reside in an EXPRESS Rack, which In the same sample an interesting signature appears
provides power, water and air cooling, and telemetry. in the apparent number density of crystallites and the
The experiment operations Will be performed from the volume fraction within the crystallites shortly before
ground through the GRC Telescience SUPport Center full crystallinity is reached. A brief upturn in both
and a Remote Operations Site at Princeton University. indicates the creation of more domains of the size of the
The Remote Site permits the science team to conduct average crystallite simultaneous with compression of
the experiment over the several months Ch 155 at their the crystallites. Only the emergence of dendritic arms
worksite. offers a reasonable explanation. The arms are seen by

the scattering as separate domains whose smaller radii of
curvature would compress the interior crystalline phase.
4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","(c)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/orAuthor(s)' Sponsoring Organization.

° elasticity of crystal17 SUMMARY

Measurements of the resonance due to oscillations
of the cell produced the first elastic moduli for hard This paper has broadly described the science gained
sphere crystals. Results from normal and microgravity from PhaSE and related ground based studies and the
were consistent and coincided almost exactly with the experimental objectives for PCS+.
static modulus extracted from computer simulations.

These interpretations of the flight experiments are ACKNOWLEDGMENT
supported and augmented by years of laboratory
experiments on the ground: This research is funded by NASA’s Microgravity
0 characterization of swelling and equation of Fluid Physics Program and skillfully supported by the
state'8 The role of the PMMA/PHSA spheres as NASA Glenn Research Center.
model hard spheres has been buttressed by detailed
characterization that deﬁnes the hard sphere volume REFERENCES
fraction and confirms the fundamental thermodynamics.
0 effect of polydispersity 0n crystalline phase 1. P. M. Chaikin, and T. C. Lubensky, Principles of

A significant difference was found between the CondensedMatter Physics (Cambridge U. Press,
equation of state measured for the PMMA/PHSA and Cambridge, 1995).
that from simulations for a single FCC crystal of
monodisperse hard spheres.18 Simulations19 traced the 2. W. B. Russel, D. A. Saville, and W. R. Schowalter,
effect to the 5% polydispersity 0f the sample, Colloidal DiSpersions (Cambridge U. Press,
stimulating efforts, not yet successful, to reduce the Cambridge, 1989).
polydispersity substantially for future flights.
0 growth of large crystals in temperature 3. NASA Laser Light Scattering Advanced Technology
gradient20 Heating one end of a flat capillary Development W0rks/z0p—1988, Proceedings of a
containing a dispersion just below freezing volume workshop sponsored by the NASA Lewis Research
fraction increases the osmotic pressure locally and drives Center, NASA CP—10033 (1989).
particles toward the cool end. There the volume fraction
rises just above freezing, stimulating nucleation and 4. W. V. Meyer and R. R. Ansari, “A preview ofa
growth that has produced 1-3 mm single crystals and microgravity laser light scattering instrument,” AIAA
enabled a Characterization of the phonon spectrum of the 91—0779 (1991).
crystal.21 The technique will be exploited further in
experiments under the microscope. 5. B. Chu, Laser Light Scattering, (Academic Press,
0 dynamics of the metastable fluidlg’22 New York, 1991).

Careful measurements of the low shear viscosity
from a Zimm viscometer and the long-time dynamics 6. A. P. Gast and W. B. Russel, “Simple Ordering in
from ensemble-averaged dynamic light scattering at Complex F1uids,”Physics Today (College Park, MD),
volume fractions up to 0.56 detected signatures of the 24 (1998).
glass transition. This has led to a new master curve for
the low shear viscosity of hard spheres based on data for 7. R. B. Rogers, W. V. Meyer, J . Zhu, P. M.
PMMA/PHSA from three different laboratories and Chaikin, W. B. Russel, M. Li, and W. B. Turner,
silica spheres from Princeton. The result differs by a “Compact laser light scattering instrument for
factor of two at the freezing transition from the “01d” microgravity research,” Appl. Opt. 36, 7493 (1997).
master curve and suggests a different functionality for
the divergence. Rather than a power law divergence at 8. J . Zhu, M. Li, R. B. Rogers, W. V. Meyer, R. H.
0.58, indicated by theories for glasses and dynamic light Ottewil], STS-73 Space Shuttle Crew, W. B. Russel,
scattering measurements, or 0.64, predicted by colloidal and P. M. Chaikin, “Crystallization of hard sphere
theories, the data indicates an exponential divergence at colloids in microgravity,” Nmure (London) 387 , 883
0.64 as expected from phenomenological models based (1997).
on free volume (Cohen-Turnbull) or configurational
entropy (Adam-Gubbs) arguments. 9. W. B. Russel, P. M. Chaikin, J . Zhu, W. V.

Meyer, and R. B. Rogers, “Dendritic growth of hard
sphere crystals,” Langmuir 13, 3871 (1997).
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)‘ Sponsoring Organization.
10. Z. Cheng, P.M. Chaikin, W.B. Russel, W.V., 16. Z. Cheng, P.M. Chaikin, J. Zhu, W.B. Russel, and
Meyer, J . Zhu, R. Rogers, and RH. Ottewill, ""Phase W.V. Meyer, “Crystallaization kinetics in microgravity
Diagram of Hard Spheres"", Journal ofMaterials and in the coexistence regime: Interactions between growing
Design 2 2 529 (2001). ‘ crystallites”, Phys. Rev. Lett. (submitted).

11. C. T. Lant, A. E. Smart, D. S. Cannell, W. V. 17. S.—E. Phan, M. Li, J. Zhu, P.M. Chaikin, C.L.
Meyer, and M. P. Doherty, “Physics of hard spheres Lant, and W.B. Russel, ""Linear viscoelasticity of hard
experiment — a general purpose light scattering sphere colloidal crystals from resonance detected with
instrument,” Appl. Opt. 36, 7501 (1997). dynamic light scattering”, Physical Review E 6 0 1988
(1999).
12. P. M. Chaikin, J. Zhu, Z. Cheng, S. Phan, W.B.
Russel, C. T. Lant, M. P. Doherty, W. V. Meyer, R. 18. S.—E. Phan, W.B. Russel, 2. Cheng, J. Zhu, P.M.
Rogers, D. S. Cannell, R. H. Ottewill, PHaSE Team, Chaikin, J.H. Dunsmuir, and RH. Ottewill, “Phase
“The Dynamics of Disorder-Order Transitions in Hard transition, equation of state, and limiting shear
Sphere Colloidal Dispersions,” NA SA CP-1998- viscosities of hard sphere dispersions”, Phys. Rev. E.
208868, 185 (1998). 5 4 6633 (1996).
13. M. P. Doherty, C. T. Lant, J. S. Ling, “The 19. S.—E. Phan, J. Zhu, P.M. Chaikin, and W.B.
Physics of Hard Spheres Experiment on MSL-l: Russel, ""Effects of polydispersity on hard sphere
Required Measurements and Instrument Performance,” crystals"", Journal of C hemical Physics, 1 0 8 9789
AIAA—98—0462 (”1998) (1998) [with].
14. R. R. Ansari, E. A. Hovenac, S. Sankaran, J. M. 20. Z. Cheng, W.B. Russel, and RM. Chaikin,
Koudelka, D. A. Weitz, L. Cipelletti, and P. N. Segre, ""Controlled growth of hard-sphere crystals"", Nature
“Physics of Colloids in Space Experiment,” Space 40 1 893 (1999).
Technology and A pplicarions International Forum -
STAIF—99 (1999). 21. Z. Cheng, J. Zhu, W.B. Russel, and RM. Chaikin,
""Phonons in an entropic crystal"", Physical Review
15. 2. Cheng, J. Zhu, W.V. Meyer W.B. Russel, and Letters 8 S 1460 (2000).
RM. Chaikin, ""Colloidal hard sphere crystallization
kinetics in microgravity and normal gravity"", Applied 22. Z. Cheng, J. Zhu, RM. Chaikin, S.—E. Phan, and
Optics 4 0 4146 (2001). W.B. Russel, ”Divergence in the low shear viscosity of
colloidal hard sphere dispersions"", Phys Rev. E (to be
submitted).
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
