"","x"
"1","46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2008-819
7 - 10 January 2008, Reno, Nevada
An EXPRESS Rack OverVIew and support for MicrograVIty
Research on the International Space Statlon (188)
J oseph J . Pelfrey1 and Lee P. J ordan2
NASA Marshall Space F light Center, Huntsville, Alabama, 35812
The ﬂpedite the ﬂocessing of Experiments to §pace §tation or EXPRESS Rack System
has provided accommodations and facilitated operations for microgravity-based research
payloads for over 6 years on the International Space Station (188). The EXPRESS Rack
accepts Space Shuttle middeck type lockers and International Subrack Interface Standard
(ISIS) drawers, providing a modular—type interface on the 188. The EXPRESS Rack
provides 28Vdc power, Ethernet and RS-422 data interfaces, thermal conditioning, vacuum
exhaust, and Nitrogen supply for payload use. The EXPRESS Rack system also includes
payload checkout capability With a ﬂight rack or ﬂight rack emulator prior to launch,
providing a high degree of conﬁdence in successful operations once on-orbit. In addition,
EXPRESS trainer racks are provided to support crew training of both rack systems and
subrack operations. Standard hardware and software interfaces provided by the EXPRESS
Rack simplify the integration processes for [SS payload development. The EXPRESS Rack
is designed to accommodate multi-discipline research, allowing for the independent
operation of each subrack payload Within a single rack. On-orbit operations began for the
EXPRESS Rack Project on April 24, 2001, With one rack operating continuously to support
high-priority payloads. The other on-orbit EXPRESS Racks operate based on payload need
and resource availability. Over 50 multi—discipline payloads have now been supported on-
orbit by the EXPRESS Rack Program. Sustaining engineering, logistics, and maintenance
functions are in place to maintain hardware, operations and provide software upgrades.
Additional EXPRESS Racks are planned for launch prior to [SS completion in support of
long-term operations and the planned transition of the U.S. Segment to a National
Laboratory.
1. Introduction

The EXPRESS Rack serves as a platform for scientists to perform experiments on the 188 by extending
resources to subrack Payload Developers (PD). The EXPRESS Rack concept was derived from the desire to have a
simple hardware interface, coupled With a streamlined integration process, to get experiments to orbit quickly. The
EXPRESS Rack provides standardized interfaces including Middeck Locker type interfaces and International
Subrack Interface Standard (ISIS) drawer interfaces. Each EXPRESS Rack can accommodate eight single middeck
lockers and two ISIS drawers. The EXPRESS Rack can also accommodate double middeck lockers and “quad”
payloads that utilize the equivalent of four middeck locker spaces.

Eight EXPRESS Racks have been built, ﬁve of Which have been delivered to the 188. Four racks are conﬁgured
With the Active Rack Isolation System (ARIS), two of Which are currently on-orbit. The ARIS system reduces the
microgravity disturbances transmitted to the rack payloads during sensitive operations. On-orbit, EXPRESS Racks
are currently located in the United States Destiny Laboratory Module. Within the next year, one rack Will be moved
to the European Space Agency Columbus Module, and two racks Will be transferred to the J apanese Experiment
Module.

In addition to the EXPRESS Racks, four EXPRESS Transportation Racks (ETRS) have been built to transport
EXPRESS Rack payloads to 188. The ETR only provides a structural/mechanical interface for launch support.
Payloads requiring power during ascent or descent Will be transported in the Shuttle middeck. Currently, no future
ﬂights are planned for the ETR; however ﬂight units are available if required.

1 EXPRESS Rack Stage Integration Manager, NASA MSFC, VP35
2 EXPRESS Rack Engineering Integration Manager, NASA MSFC, VP35
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

"
"2","The EXPRESS Rack was designed and built at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). MSFC manages
engineering integration for subrack payloads and sustaining engineering for all of the EXPRESS Racks. Through
this integration support, compatibility of payloads Within the rack and compatibility With the 188 is ensured.

11. Hardware Provisions

In order to support simultaneous operations of multi-discipline research, the EXPRESS Rack was designed to
accommodate various combinations of physical hardware interfaces. The International Standard Payload Rack
(ISPR), provided by the 188 program, serves as the primary structure for the EXPRESS Rack. Secondary structure
is added to support the payloads and to provide mounting for the EXPRESS Rack subsystems. Subsystem hardware
is located primarily in the back of the rack to maximize front access locations for the payloads, as shown in Fig. l.
Payload interfaces utilize the Shuttle Middeck Locker type interface and the ISIS drawer interface. This allows the
payload positions to be utilized by multiple science disciplines and operated independently in the rack.

Middeck Locker interfaces are offered to
allow payloads (a middeck locker or EXPRESS 8/2 Configuration
equivalent replacement container) that had International Standard ,~: \
previously ﬂown in the shuttle middeck, Payload Rack \‘
Spacelab, SpaceHab, or Mir totransition to Secondary Structure & 1§$ﬂ%\;/\
ISS us1ng the same interface. This also allows Subsystems sﬁﬁh/ ’/ ‘
payloads requiring power during transport or 0 49%|?“ //
late/early access to be transferred efﬁciently ~O§§%§H§ i
EigeaesnsthEShﬁttleCmidgleck and thef on-orllait 8/2 Pay|oad Configuration (8 ‘~/%|ij§ ‘

ac . om inations o sing e, Middeck Lockers, ""r~\’/\W :
double or quad-locker payloads can be used 2 P0W9r9d ISIS Drawers) §Yﬁ\%§%‘\ §
for increased experiment volume. N‘a \\q/ﬁEE/¢

Two 4 Panel Unit (7 inch height) ISIS EN/
drawers can be accommodated in the E
EXPRESS Rack. The ISIS drawer is based on Figure 1- EXPRESS Rack Exploded View
the Standard Interface Rack (SIR) drawers
previously ﬂown for life science payloads on Spacelab and Mir. The ISIS drawer locations can accommodate
passive or powered drawer experiments. The ISIS interface uses blind-mate connectors for power and data resources
provided by the rack.

The EXPRESS Rack is conﬁgured With connector panels at the top of the rack and approximately in the middle
of the rack. These connector panels provide data and power interfaces for the locker positions and quick disconnects
for the ﬂuid interfaces payloads use. The EXPRESS Rack Ofﬁce provides standard cables and hoses to connect
payloads to the rack interface.

An EXPRESS Rack Solid State Power Controller Module (SSPCM) interfaces With the 188 provided lZOVdc
power, distributes it to the other EXPRESS Rack subsystems, and converts it for distribution to the payloads. For
each locker or ISIS drawer position, the EXPRESS Rack offers 28Vdc, 20 amp maximum, conﬁgured in 5 amp
increments.

Experiment control and data interfaces are provided through RS 422, Ethernet, 5Vdc discrete, and +/-5Vdc
analog interfaces. NSTC RSl70A Video capability is provided for each payload position. The EXPRESS Rack
Interface Controller (RIC) and Payload Ethernet Hub/Bridge (PEHB) interface With the 188 data and Video services
to provide these interfaces to the payloads. These avionics, in conjunction With the EXPRESS Memory Unit
(EMU), control the EXPRESS Rack subsystem operations, and support the communication With payloads from the
ground or on-orbit. A laptop is also provided With each EXPRESS rack for crewmembers to operate and monitor
EXPRESS Rack systems and payloads and can be used for speciﬁc payload experiment operations.

Thermal conditioning for payloads is provided by either air cooling or the internal water loop. Water-cooling is
available to payloads utilizing two available connections on each rack and is provided by the ISS moderate
temperature cooling loop. The EXPRESS Avionics Air Assembly (AAA) interfaces to the moderate temperature
loop and includes a water-to-air heat exchanger and fan that provides cooling air to the payload locations With 15
cfm ﬂow. The EXPRESS Rack distributes cooling air to the interface at the rear of the lockers and drawers. It also
circulates the air Within the rack past the smoke detector, Which is connected to the ISS Caution and Warning
system. The EXPRESS Rack subsystems are primarily water-cooled through the use of ISS-developed coldplates,
leaving almost all of the AAA-generated cooling air available to payloads.

2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","The EXPRESS Rack also provides nitrogen and vacuum services. The ISS Nitrogen distribution is extended by
the EXPRESS Rack to one payload quick disconnect located on the front connector panel. Likewise, the ISS
Vacuum Exhaust System is extended to one location on the front of the rack that a payload can interface to Via an
EXPRESS-provided ﬂuid line and quick disconnect.

For the EXPRESS Racks With ARIS, additional subsystem hardware is included to control and monitor the ARIS
portion of the rack. The ARIS components are provided by the ISS program. In addition, a Glenn Research Center
provided Space Acceleration and Measurement System 11 (SAMS 11) Remote TriaXial Sensor Electronics Enclosure
(RTS-EE) is included in the EXPRESS Racks With ARIS. The RTS-EE provides a subsystem to interface to a sensor
in payloads to monitor the speciﬁc microgravity environment in the payload.

III. Payload Integration

The EXPRESS Project provides direct support to the ISS Payloads Ofﬁce in managing EXPRESS Rack and
payload integration activities. EXPRESS payloads follow the overall ISS payload integration process Which can
begin as early as three years from launch. The integration cycle, as shown in Fig. 2, is supported by the EXPRESS
Project at varying levels depending on payload complexity and maturity.

Strategic Tactical ﬂperatiuns

l-Eﬁl'u'l l-1El'u'l ~L-1l'u'l ~1— ~EMs —|r Crewﬂeturn
Requirements Definitinn Missinn Integratinn Real Time ﬂperatinns Past Flight ﬂps
(Design, Eluild, Teatj [Increment Planning] [Heaearchj (HJW, Data Return)

PD“ ED“ Cr?” _. Increment 4—C'E‘""_
Rﬂtﬂtlﬂﬂ Stage Stage Stage Rﬂtﬂtlﬂn
.L
Lautch LaLiT1ch Lautch Lau'nch
Figure 2. Payload Integration Flow Diagram

The strategic phase of integration for the payload involves the initial design and requirements deﬁnition to
ensure ISS compatibility. The tactical phase begins With baseline of the research plan for a speciﬁc increment and
involves activity centered on ﬂight integration, veriﬁcation and Certiﬁcate of Flight Readiness (COFR). During the
operations phase, the payload is on-orbit performing science operations With support from the real-time team. And
ﬁnally, the post-ﬂight phase involves return-to-earth, science retrieval and post-ﬂight reports and publications.

During these phases of integration, the payload developers Will coordinate With various disciplines in the ISS
Payloads Ofﬁce. These areas include Research Planning, Mission Integration, Engineering Integration, Safety, Test
and Operations. The EXPRESS Project supports each of these discipline areas during the integration process for the
rack and the subrack payloads.

A. Research Planning

EXPRESS payload users are identiﬁed through the Research Planning Working Group (RPWG) in the ISS
Payloads Ofﬁce. The RPWG is responsible for developing research plans for each ISS Expedition. During the
research planning process, the RPWG works closely With the ISS Program Science Ofﬁce and NASA Headquarters
in establishing the science priorities for ISS utilization. During the utilization planning process, the EXPRESS
Project provides input for payload readiness and compatibility With the research plan. Once the plan is ﬁnalized, the
Payloads Ofﬁce Will provide direction to the project to begin implementation and tactical integration activities.

B. Mission Integration
The Mission Integration team is responsible for the overall Increment Payload Management, manifest
development, integration coordination and COFR 0f the payloads planned for a speciﬁc ﬂight, stage and increment.
As a service to the payload developers, a Payload Integration Manager (PIM) is assigned as a point of contact from
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","the 188 Program to assist With the integration process. The PIM coordinates the provision of documentation and
ground hardware used to checkout the payload interfaces, as well as supporting the payload developers in providing
the interface information required for the 188 program.

A Payload Integration Agreement is written to document the agreements made between the payload developer
and the 188 Program, With the assistance of a Payload Integration Manager. The PIM coordinates manifest changes,
tactical plan development and Certiﬁcate of Flight Readiness (CoFR) for the EXPRESS Payloads. The PIM also
coordinates With the Increment Payload Managers in working issues during the tactical integration and operations
phases of the payload activity.

C. Engineering Integration

The EXPRESS Project manages the engineering integration activity for the EXPRESS Racks and subrack
payloads. Engineering integration ensures payload compatibility With the rack, the ISS modules, and transport
vehicles that the payload may use. Detailed interface and requirements information is documented in the EXPRESS
Rack Interface Deﬁnition Document (IDD). Based on this information and the interfaces a payload uses, an
Interface Control Document (1CD) is developed for use by the integration teams. The ICD documents any
deviations from the requirements and these must be agreed to by the EXPRESS Project and the 188 Program. The
ICD also identiﬁes the veriﬁcation requirements by reference to the Generic Payload Veriﬁcation Plan (GPVP). The
GPVP outlines how each requirement is to be veriﬁed and the submittal dates for the required data.

The speciﬁc payload veriﬁcation data are provided to the EXPRESS integration team and combined With the
EXPRESS Rack data verify the integrated rack analytically. Each time a payload is exchanged, the new
conﬁgurations are analyzed. This integrated rack information is provided to the 188 program for further element
level analysis. The engineering integration process is essential to ensuring safe, successful operation of the payloads
in the EXPRESS Rack.

D. Safety

Payloads planned for launch and operation must complete the ISS Payload Safety process to obtain approval for
all aspects of payload integration and operations. Each payload is assigned a Payload Safety Engineer Who assists
the PD and PIM through the process. Payloads are required to complete Phase 0/1, II, 111 reviews depending on
payload complexity. The individual payloads submit safety data packages to the Payload Safety Review Panel
(PSRP) for approval. An integrated EXPRESS Rack conﬁguration, composed of the standalone rack, payload
hardware, and sample material, is submitted to the PSRP for Phase III approval. This approval is required prior to
ﬂight and/or on-orbit operations of the rack. The safety process is streamlined for payloads that have ﬂown
previously.

E. Testing Support

As part of the payload veriﬁcation process, payload developers are required to perform various tests With their
hardware in order to complete its certiﬁcation. Suitcase Simulators are provided by EXPRESS Rack Ofﬁce as
portable units to be used at a payload developer’s site to support their software development and to verify data
interfaces between the payload and the EXPRESS Rack. The suitcase simulator is composed of a computer With
cards and software to simulate the EXPRESS Rack.

After the payload hardware is turned over to NASA, it Will be integrated into a rack for integrated testing. To
improve efﬁciency, a software simulation of the EXPRESS Rack is being developed to operate on a standard
Personal Computer (PC). This Will allow payload developers to receive this software and utilize it in the
development of their payload software and enable a more complete software interface development and checkout at
the Payload Development site.

In order to assist payloads in their development, the EXPRESS Rack Ofﬁce has established end-to-end testing
capability utilizing a ﬂight EXPRESS Rack. In the Space Systems Integration and Test Facility (SSITF) at MSFC,
subrack payloads can perform commanding, telemetry downlink, ﬁt checks, power tests and troubleshoot anomalies
While connected to a ﬂight EXPRESS Rack and simulated ISS interfaces provided by the Payload Rack Checkout
Unit (PRCU). This capability also allows for personnel that Will be operating the payloads on-orbit to become
familiar With the payload and to validate on-orbit crew procedures. Use of this facility can be requested from the
EXPRESS Rack Ofﬁce and may be provided Within the resources available.

F. Certiﬁcate of Flight Readiness

All payloads planning to launch, return and/or operate on 188 are required to participate in the Certiﬁcate of

Flight Readiness (CoFR) process. The CoFR process is applicable to all mission phases and allows for the 18$
4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","Payloads Ofﬁce to certify payload safety, integration and operational readiness. The PIM provides guidance to the
payload developers throughout the CoFR process. The EXPRESS Project utilizes payload-submitted data to perform
the integrated rack CoFR activities. Before a payload is launched, integrated or operated, all CoFR activities must be
complete.

IV. EXPRESS Rack Operations

Currently, ﬁve EXPRESS racks are onboard ISS and have all operated at some point since arriving. Since the
ﬁrst EXPRESS Rack was launched, at least one rack has operated continuously supporting high priority and “keep-
alive” science payloads. The remaining racks are scheduled to operate as resources are available to support payload
requirements. With all ﬁve racks combined, EXPRESS operations have contributed to over 115,000 hours of on-
orbit operational time.

A Payload Rack Ofﬁcer (PRO) is responsible for ground commanding during on-orbit operations of the basic
EXPRESS Rack. The PRO is located at the MSFC Payload Operations Integration Center (FDIC) and is responsible
for conﬁguring EXPRESS Racks for the complement of payloads on each increment. EXPRESS subsystem data is
monitored by the PRO to ensure that the racks are operating nominally. The crew has the capability to control and
monitor the EXPRESS Rack and its payloads on-orbit through the use of the rack laptop. Payloads are also
controlled and monitored by their personnel at the FDIC or at their own telescience center.

Trainer racks are provided by the EXPRESS Rack Project to support training of the crew. The trainers have the
physical interfaces of the rack and simulate the operation of the EXPRESS Rack subsystems to support training for
the basic operation of the rack.

Payload operations should be considered throughout the design and integration process. One of the most limiting
resources on 188 is available crew time. Payloads should incorporate means to reduce crew involvement by
providing for ground control, automation, and simpliﬁed interfaces required for operation.

V. Sustaining Engineering

The Sustaining Engineering function supports EXPRESS and derivative racks during payload integration,
integrated testing, and on-orbit operations. This function includes development of software upgrades to resolve
issues found in testing and to provide enhancements to allow more control from the ground. Sustaining Engineering
personnel work closely with Operations personnel to troubleshoot on orbit anomalies, develop operational
workarounds where possible, and to resolve any issues.

VI. Payload Users

Through the life of the EXPRESS Rack Program, over 50 payloads have utilized EXPRESS resources while
conducting 188 research. The EXPRESS Rack system allows for many areas of science and technology to utilize the
ISS environment efﬁciently. Currently, EXPRESS Racks are supporting NASA and International Partner payloads,
some of which are described below. These descriptions along with other 188 utilization information can be found at
the following NASA website: http://www.nasa.gov/niission_pages/station/science/eXperinients/List.html
A. NASA Payloads

Advanced Astroculture TM (ADVASC) explored the beneﬁts of using microgravity to create customized crops
that withstand disease and inhospitable conditions, resist pestilence, and need less space to grow. These are qualities
that will beneﬁt space explorers and earth inhabitants. Plant growth and development in microgravity will provide a
natural air and water ﬁltration system and large-scale plant growth systems. Furthermore, ADVASC is a precursor
for growing plants during extended space expeditions to the Moon and Mars.

The purpose of the Cellular Biotechnology Operations Support System (CBOSS) study was to support
biotechnological research on board 188 by providing a stable environment in which to grow cells. The system was a
multi-component cell incubator intended to grow three-dimensional clusters of cells in microgravity. A self-
contained apparatus, CBOSS was designed to allow multiple experiments to be performed, thereby enabling
scientists to study various types of cells operating simultaneously.

Elastic Memory Composite Hinge (EMCH) studied the performance of a new type of composite hinge to
determine its suitability for use in space. The experiment used elastic memory hinges to move an attached mass at
one end. EMC materials tested in this experiment are stronger and lighter than current material used in space hinges

5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","and could be used in the design of future spacecraft. EMCH was performed by the crew while powered from an
EXPRESS Rack and mounted to the front face to allow Video to be taken during the experiment.

EXPRESS Physics of Colloids in Space (EXPPCS) studied the kinetics of colloidal (ﬁne particles suspended in a
ﬂuid) crystal formation and growth. These experiments provided the critical information necessary to use colloidal
precursors to fabricate novel materials in the new ﬁeld of colloidal engineering. Physics of Colloids in Space (PCS)
focused on the growth, dynamics, and basic physical properties of four classes of colloids: binary colloidal crystals,
colloid—polymer mixtures, fractal gels, and glass. These were studied using static light scattering (for size or
positions of the colloids or structures formed), dynamic light scattering (to measure motions of particles or
structures), ﬂow measurement, and still imaging.

MicrograVity Acceleration Measurement System (MAMS) is an ongoing study of the small forces (Vibrations
and accelerations) on the ISS that result from the operation of hardware, crew actiVities, as well as dockings and
maneuvering. Results are used to generalize the types of Vibrations affecting Vibration—sensitive experiments.
Investigators seek to better understand the Vibration environment on the space station to enable future research. Most
microgravity experiments require a quiescent environment in which the effects of gravity and other accelerations are
reduced below a threshold level (determined by experiment parameters and design). Knowledge of the acceleration
environment in which an experiment was operated is provided by MAMS data.

- ‘ - f/jj’ ,, ,7 The Protein Crystal Growth—Single Locker Thermal Enclosure

’? a - ‘ #31:?{1' Systern—Improved Diffraction Quality of Crystals (PCG—STES—IDQC)

.7 . g; _ ‘ :71? §.¢..L:-—“'—l£u—— 7 '- ‘ investigation was performed to obtain high quality crystals for ground—

— E} \ . . —"" _, ll 11 based research. Study of protein crystals is essential for Visualizing

NE 33 i proteins and developing new drugs and agricultural products. The

E m w :5"" i, "" crystals grown in microgravity are able to grow larger and more

i422 :3 V mil f 1 , I ,3; ‘1'; organized than those grown on Earth. Fortunately, the microgravity

Ei i. ~z-%”;.ﬁﬁ;§i%i / environment aboard the ISS is relatively free from the effects of

ii i\‘9 3;“ E; _""i; sedimentation and convection and provides an exceptional
iii“ lilli ggmsii enVironrnent for crystal growth. Crystals grown in rnrcrogravrty can
illii‘:i-_n£; ﬁr“; u} E help sc1ent1sts gain detailed knowledge of the atomic, three—
i :3“ [FE dirnensional structure of many important protein molecules used in
Q? i {ﬂu}! g .1 f, ft, 6 pharmaceutical research for cancer treatments, stroke prevention and
:_g _.\ , 1: m ; 7 ,h other diseases. An EXPRESS Rack, as seen in Fig. 3, supported this
‘i Ekﬁ§4$ ‘ experiment . by providing the necessary interfaces while
_,-i 1-: . :l f—""Z if i,— E accornrnodating other payloads snnultaneously.
E 3:, l ' "" M}: «L: Plant Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus (PGBA) monitored and
, m _, “‘FF maintained light, temperature, humidity and oxygen levels to study
7 . / {'75 A lignin production changes in Arabidopsis thaliana (a fast growing
' (f h M ' ' plant) grown in microgravity. Several different types of plants have
"" WW ‘ been grown inside PGBA, including wheat, tornatoes, loblolly pine,
. ‘ . spinach, periwinkle, white clover, pepper, sage, and purple cone
Flgure 3' EXPRESS rack Wlth ﬂower. The ability to grow plants in space will have an enormous
payloads on ISS impact on the success of future interplanetary space exploration. Any
long—term human presence on the Moon or Mars will require
sustainable plant growth, which can provide a renewable food supply for explorers and assist with the maintenance
of breathable air.

Space Acceleration Measurement System (SAMS—II) is an ongoing study of the small forces (Vibrations and
accelerations) on the ISS that result from the operation of hardware, crew actiVities, as well as dockings and
maneuvering. Results will be used to generalize the types of Vibrations affecting Vibration—sensitive experiments.
The residual acceleration environment of an orbiting spacecraft in low earth orbit is a complex phenomenon. Many
factors, such as experiment operation, life—support systerns, crew actiVities, aerodynamic drag, gravity gradient,
rotational effects and the vehicle structural resonance frequencies (structural modes) contribute to form the overall
reduced gravity environment. Weightlessness is an ideal state, which cannot be achieved in practice because of the
various sources of acceleration present in an orbiting spacecraft. A complete understanding of the Vibration
environment will help researchers develop methods to minimize disturbances. It also allows other principal
investigators to design their payloads with the Vibration environment in mind.

6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","B. International Partner Payloads

Anomalous Long Term Effects in Astronauts' Central Nervous System (ALTEA) integrates several diagnostic
technologies to measure the effect of the exposure of crewmembers to cosmic radiation. It will improve the
understanding of the impacts that radiation has on the human central nervous system functions, and will study the
ﬂashes from cosmic radiation that astronauts have reported since the Apollo ﬂights. ALTEA will also provide an
assessment of the radiation environment in the 188. The tests conducted using the ALTEA hardware will help
scientists characterize how the heavy ion radiation of space impacts the brain and whether or not that radiation
causes any temporary or permanent abnormalities in the brain function and the Visual system in particular.

Analyzing Interferometer for Ambient Air (ANITA) monitors 32 gaseous contaminants, including formaldehyde,
ammonia and carbon monoxide, in the atmosphere on board the station. The experiment is testing the accuracy and
reliability of this technology as a potential next-generation atmosphere trace-gas monitoring system for the station.
This will lead to new atmospheric monitoring systems for future spaceﬂight.

ELaboratore Immagini TEleVisive - Space 2 (ELITE-SZ) will study the connection between brain, Visualization
and motion in the absence of gravity. ELITE-SZ will provide a system for observations on body motor control
during long term exposure to microgravity and perform quantitative data collection and analysis on board the
International Space Station (188). By recording and analyzing the three-dimensional motion of astronauts, this study
will help engineers apply ergonomics into future spacecraft designs and determine the effects of weightlessness on
breathing mechanisms for long-duration missions. This experiment is a cooperative effort with the Italian Space
Agency, ASI. ELITE consists of an ISIS drawer, installed in an EXPRESS Rack, and 4 cameras positioned in the
US Laboratory.

Molecular and Plant Physiological Analyses of the MicrograVity Effects on Multigeneration Studies of
Arabidopsis thaliana (Multigen) will grow Arabidopsis thaliana, a small ﬂowering plant related to cabbage and
mustard, in orbit for three generations. The results of this investigation will support future plans to grow plants on
the long-duration transit to Mars. This is a cooperative investigation with the European Space Agency, ESA.

Multigen utilized the European Modular Cultivation System (EMCS) facility onboard the International Space
Station (188). EMCS is an experiment facility for biological investigations in microgravity. For Multigen-l, seeds
will mature to thale cress plants. The plant growth, including circumnutation of the stems, will be recorded using
time-lapsed Video in the EMCS. Once these plants reach maturity, they will be dried, stowed and returned to Earth
for morphological and physiological analysis. A portion of the seeds that are produced by these plants will be used
in ground-based scientiﬁc studies of morphology and physiology. The remaining seeds have been harvested and
watered to observe multigenerational growth. During long-term space exploration it will be necessary to provide
astronauts with regenerative sources of food as well as supplemental methods to recycle carbon dioxide into
breathable oxygen. As new information about how plants grow in microgravity emerges, sustainable plant-based life
support systems may be developed.

C. 188 National Laboratory

The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) plans to operate a share of US. accommodations
on the International Space Station (188) as a national laboratory in accordance with the NASA Authorization Act of
2005. As a national laboratory, access to the 188 can be made available to other US government agencies, US
private ﬁrms and academic institutions for research and development (R&D), and industrial processing purposes.
This program is intended to commence following completion of ISS assembly in late FY 2010.

As NASA plans the implementation of the 188 as a National Laboratory, the EXPRESS Rack provides simple
interfaces and accommodations for payloads to utilize. Its versatility combined with proven on-orbit operations will
support multiple types of payloads. The documentation and integration process is established for payloads to
follow. In addition, integration efﬁciencies are being considered to streamline the process in support of payloads.

VII. Conclusion

The EXPRESS Rack provides a versatile facility for use by all payload disciplines. It has also served as a basis
of design for the Human Research Facility and Window Observational Research Facility racks. Designing and
building the derivative racks in conjunction with the EXPRESS Racks has been a beneﬁt to all. Some requirements
have been incorporated in all the rack designs, while others have been developed uniquely for a speciﬁc
conﬁguration. Utilization of common aVionics hardware in these racks has made the sustaining engineering
function and the sparing of hardware more efﬁcient. The successful on-orbit operations and versatility of the
EXPRESS Rack has facilitated the operations of many scientiﬁc areas, with the promise of continued payload
support for years to come. Process improvements and enhancements continue to improve the accommodations and

7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","make the integration and operations process more efﬁcient. The shortened integration process along With the simple
hardware and software interfaces Will beneﬁt Space Station researchers for many years to come.
8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
