"","x"
"1","(c)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/orAuthor(s)' Sponsoring Organization.
Conference and Exhibit on International
Space Station Utilization — 2001,
Cape Canaveral, FL, Oct. 15~1 8, 2001
A01 .42931 AIAA-2001-5056
EXPRESS RACK
CAPABILITIES AND
LESSONS LEARNED and a streamlined process to get their experiments to
orbit quickly. The EXPRESS Rack provides simple,
standard interfaces. Two types of payload .
accommodations are offered: Middeck Locker type
Stacy M' Counts and Annette Sledd interfaces and International Subrack Interface Standard
drawer interfaces. Middeck Locker interfaces are
Project Lead, EXPRESS Rack Development, FD3I, offered to allow payloads (a middeck locker or
Marshall Space Flight Center, AL 35812 equivalent replacement container) that had previously
5 (256)544-6004; stacy.counts@msfc.nasa.g0v flown in the shuttle middeck, Spacelab, SpaceHab, or
Q Mir to transition to 188 using the same interface. The
i EXPRESS Rack offers eight single middeck locker
E Abstract. The Expedite the Processing of positions. The EXPRESS Rack in the locker positions
E Experiments to Space Station or EXPRESS Rack may accommodate single, double, or quad equivalent
g System was developed to provide Space Station containers. The ISIS drawer is based on the Standard
3 accommodations for small, subrack payloads. The Interface Rack (SIR) drawers previously ﬂown on
g? EXPRESS Rack accepts Space Shuttle middeck Spacelab and Mir by Life Science payload developers.
§ locker type payloads and International Subrack Two 4 Panel Unit (7 inch height) ISIS type drawers can
5? Interface Standard (ISIS) Drawer payloads, be accommodated in the EXPRESS Rack. Two drawer
E; allowing previously ﬂown payloads an conﬁgurations have been developed: powered and
g opportunity to transition to the International Space stowage. The powered drawers have rear power and
g Station. The EXPRESS Rack provides power, data connectors that mate once the drawer is installed
3"" data command and control, video, water cooling, and locked into position in the rack. The stowage
E air cooling, vacuum exhaust, and Nitrogen supply drawers do not have rear connectors as they are used for
E to payloads. The EXPRESS Rack system also stowage of items only, but do utilize a sliding lid for
55 includes transportation racks to transport payloads access to the drawer content. The EXPRESS Rack is
E to and from the Space Station, Suitcase Simulators shown in Figure 1.
C; to allow a payload developer to verify data
E Interfaces at. the development site, Functional International Standard
(g Checkonit Um: to (allow paylolad fchecilkout at KSC payload Rack
3 prior to aunc ,an trainer rac s ort e astronauts
E to learn how to operate the EXPRESS Racks prior i\\ /1\
j: to ﬂight. Standard hardware and software EXPRESS {<$, /\.~)
T: interfaces provided by the EXPRESS Rack Rack \ ‘\§\€<D\I;> l
E simplify the analytical and physical integration Secondary ”?abiﬂb/ I
ﬁ (1 facil't te i l r 188 1 ad Structure & 479’” Ilvl‘l 2""
g processes, an 1 a 3 mp 6 pay 0 0/ “=?l\,‘?’1.*?y’/“hitl>"" K
g development. To date, four EXPRESS Racks SUbSyStemS ~%ﬁwy;$§
5 have been launched and three of these Racks Payloads “’9\§\\%‘/&H§M§;§
m activated on-orbit. Various lessons learned have (8 Middeck “¢é>£}ﬁl\
been captured and documented by the EXPRESS LOCkefS & 2 ~VY/Q‘Q” : f
team during the early operational activities for 1513 Drawers) ~~l‘g§/r//€y ~.
these racks. §‘a r/é’ﬁ‘if
\/
W Figure 1. EXPRESS Rack, Exploded View.
The EXPRESS Rack concept was derived from the
researchers’ desire to have a simple hardware interface
Copyright © 2001 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and The payloacls that OCCUPV these 10 p951“? 11,8 1n the rack
Astronautics, Inc. No copyright is asserted in the United States can be prov1ded by multiple selence dISCIPImeS and can
under Title 17, US. Government has aroyalty—free license to be operated independently of each other in the rack.
exercise all rights under the copyright claimed herein for
Government Purposes. All other rights are reserved by the copyright
owner. 2
Amerlcan Institute or Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"2","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)’ Sponsoring Organization.
The EXPRESS Rack Integration Process supports a
payload developer in preparation for ﬂight. An
EXPRESS Payload Integration Manager (EPIM) is
assigned as a point of contact for the developer with the ,2-.\
. . . ”(.2” ‘ ‘..‘
ISS Progratn. The EPIM coordlnates the prov1510n of ,fﬂ/“xu
documentatlon and ground hardware used to checkout SAMS ! {g ,ﬁ?’ \
. - RTS-EE - \*¥:&\§/\ N. EMU
the payload interfaces, as well as supporting the . Vx‘gS/fa --\\
payload developers in providing the interface i i,» 4a§$ffﬂlﬁ ""'\
information required for the ISS program. E ‘wéﬂgﬁlﬂ PEHB
: xﬁ‘m/v/W
HARDWARE PROVISIONS 1 ! /\\¢/ Fig:
i W//\ 113% 1i! 1'
- . . . .19 M mm ‘M [.51
Eight EXPRESS ﬂight racks are prowded, extending 1-‘\%/\/ﬁ{,‘\\3\""3¢""r
the accommodations of ISS t0 subrack payloads. All of ! ,gN .63)., :
these racks provide 8 single middeck locker type ""V \\%Eé/g
é mounting locations and 2 ISIS Drawer interfaces. Four ‘1'ng
5' of these racks include the Active Rack Isolation 1/
§ System (ARIS) to isolate payloads in the rack from
g disturbances outside the rack. Four of the racks are
N. _ . . _
2 non ARTS. The EXPRESS Rack utlhzes some ISS Figure 2.2 EXPRESS Rack FrontView. ,
5 prowded components and prov1des unlque structure and
E subsystem hardware to provide a simple interface for
g? the subrack payloads. The International Standard
g Payload Rack_(ISPR) is provided by the ISS program
:5 and serves as the primary structure for the EXPRESS
E; Rack. Secondary structure is added to support the An EXPRESS Rack Solid State Power Controller
g payloads and to provide mounting for the EXPRESS Module (SSPCM) interfaces with the ISS provided 120
§ Rack subsystems. Subsystem hardware is located v dc power, distributes it to the other EXPRESS Rack
3“ primarily in the back of the rack to maximize front subsystems, and converts it to 28 v dc for distribution to
E access locations for the payloads, as shown in the payloads. The EXPRESS Rack Interface Controller
g Figures 2.1 and 2.2. The racks have two connector (RIC) and Payload Ethernet Hub/Bridge (PEHB)
BE panels, one located at the top of the rack and a second interface with the ISS data and Video services and
% located approximately in the middle of the rack. These provide simple data and Video interfaces to the
C; connector panels provide data and power interfaces for payloads. These units, in conjunction with the
E the middeck payloads and quick disconnects for the EXPRESS Memory Unit (EMU), control the EXPRESS
(2 ﬂuid interfaces for locker 0r drawer payloads to access. Rack subsystems operation, support the conﬁguration
8 The EXPRESS Rack Project provides standard cables of the rack for the integrated payloads, and support the
g and lines to connect the payloads to the connector communication with payloads from the ground or on-
; panels. orbit. Provided with the rack is a laptop for the
2;: crewmembers to operate and monitor EXPRESS Rack
3» systems and payloads within the rack.
""U r-‘\
% xm""‘--\ . . . . .. .
g Smoke Detector ,/ ,1 5 Coohng IS pr0v1ded 1n the rack by utillzmg the ISS
E ,7 g¢>dﬁ1 moderate temperature cooling loop. This cooling loop
5"" I‘w%§&§/ 1 RIC is extended into the EXPRESS Rack and controlled by
AAA i'i‘l‘E-‘iﬁillé ‘ T automated valves. The EXPRESS Avionics Air
,- £%*—---?' 53%. ’n a . ~
.gkgﬁ_ ﬂea! 333;»? 5 Assembly (AAA) interfaces to the moderate
1 ziimt./~=:""51%ﬁ 1 ' ‘
1|};iiﬂulgg1‘ggzifgg‘gﬁ/ :I SSPCM temperature 100p and includes a water-to—alr heat
.: ‘ 5: u; gar . . .
ARIS Remote EM mama}? : exchanger and fan that prov1des coollng air to the
Electronics Unit \IQ E‘Emgﬁ- payload locations. It also circulates the air within the
wRQI‘L' {'19: rack past the smoke detector, which is connected to the
k§§i§zx ;;\ :/: ISS Caution and Warning system. The EXPRESS Rack
iwviﬁii , l '1 distributes cooling air to interface to the rear of the
\i-Icl/f’ middeck lockers, compatible with the redesigned
M Orbiter middeck. ISIS drawer payloads are cooled by
Figure 2.1 EXPRESS Rack Rear View.
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","(c)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/orAuthor(s)' Sponsoring Organization.
circulating air through the drawer. The EXPRESS the EXPRESS Racks with ARIS. The RTS—EE provides
Rack subsystems are water-cooled through the use of a subsystem to interface to a sensor in payloads to
ISS-developed coldplates, leaving almost all of the monitor the specific microgravity environment in the
AAA-generated cooling air available to the payloads. payload.
Payloads can also interface to the moderate temperature
cooling loop by interfacing to one of two sets of quick The EXPRESS Racks are integrated with payloads at
disconnects located on the rack connector panels, Kennedy Space Center and launched, unpowered, to the
through the use of EXPRESS-provided interconnect 188 in the Multi—Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM).
lines. Once on-orbit the racks will be transferred to the US.
Lab module. Later, once the international modules are
The 188 Nitrogen distribution is extended by the on-orbit, the EXPRESS Racks may be integrated into
EXPRESS Rack to one payload quick disconnect the US. payload locations of those modules. Once all
located on the front of the EXPRESS Rack. Likewise, the EXPRESS Racks are on~orbit or payloads need to
the 185 Vacuum Exhaust System is extended to one be exchanged, EXPRESS Transportation Racks will be
location on the front of the rack that a payload can used to carry additional payloads to and from space.
interface to via an EXPRESS-provided ﬂuid line and The transportation racks accommodate 6 ISIS 4 PU
é quick disconnect. drawers and 6 middeck locker type payloads. The
5' transportation rack provides only a structural and
i Figure 3 shows the laboratory services the EXPRESS mechanical interface for the payloads. The
E Rack will interface with and the accommodations transportation racks will remain in the MPLM and the
2 provided to payloads within the rack. payloads exchanged with the EXPRESS Racks. The
C; exchanged payloads will be loaded into the
E transportation racks for return to earth. Any payloads
%{° requiring power, cooling, or late access will be
§ transported to 188 in the Shuttle middeck, and then
3% relocated to the EXPRESS Rack on—orbit. Four
EL transportation racks have been provided and are
£1
E W
8“ Lab Interface mmmmmm Payload Interfaces
§ Power 120 +6/'4 VdC J : POWCI (28 Wk)
3 ’3’ M a Analog (+/_ 5V)
8 MIL-STD- 1553 EH 5*
5 IVS ﬁg 9—-
9 f»; Ethernet (10baseT)
:3”: Vacuum Exhaust Svstem +—- ?” «— Vacuum Exhaust System
Gm em
8 ‘
Figure 3. EXPRESS Rack Functional Interfaces.
For the EXPRESS Racks with ARIS, additional
subsystem hardware is included to control and monitor currently located at KSC for launch. The EXPRESS
the ARIS portion of the rack. The ARIS components Rack Project provides ISIS drawers for use by
are provided by the 188 program. In addition, a Glenn payloads. Powered and stowage drawers are provided.
Research Center provided Space Acceleration and
Measurement System 11 (SAMS 11) Remote Triaxial Ten Suitcase Simulators are provided by EXPRESS
Sensor Electronics Enclosure (RTS—EE) is included in Rack as portable units to be used at a payload
4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)’ Sponsoring Organization.
develo er’s site to su ort their software develo ment .
p . . pp p Table 1. Total Rack Level Payload Accommodations
and to verify data 1nterfaces between the payload and
composed of a computer with cards and software to
Slmulate the EXPRESS Rack. Cables and a laptop are Structural Attachment 8 MDLS and 2 H,” ISIS Drawers
prov1ded for a payload to do an end-to-end
communication check prior to delivering the payload t0
the integration site. Suitcase simulators are provided “ zooowza VDC power supplied to payloa.s
and distributed to payload developers based on their
ﬂight dates and developmental stage. - 2000 W Payload heat rejection - air and
Thermal Control water
Two Functional Checkout Units (FCUs). provide 10_ RS-422 18_ Analog
Slmnlated EXPRESS Rack 1nterfaces for use in ground 10 _ Ethernet 28 _ Discrete (m_direcﬁon 1)
testing and are prowded to check out payloads not
being launched in an EXPRESS Rack. A FCU is one NTSC'eedfmm eac"" paybad s°""""°
planned for use at the integration site prior to the
\D . . . '
é Hammad“ RaCk Or the Shuttle MiddeCk' The
i Functional Checkout Unit will interface with KSC ""e pay 0a connec lo""
a Ground Support Equipment that simulates the Lab
g interfaces.
5 The accommodations for individual middeck locker and
E A total of seven trainer racks are provided by the ISIS payload locations are provided in Table 2.
OD . . .-
3 EXPRESS Rack PFOJCCL .An eXIStmg Stapqalone Table 2. Payload Level Accommodations.
g Tralner 1s currently bemg utlllzed for crew trammg at
§ JSC while six more Standalone Trainers will be
g delivered Withm thls year to meet future crew training we Accommodati
g demands. The existing Standalone Trainer has been n“
§ delivered to support training of the crew for the early tructural Attachme t 72 lb @ +10inc . . .
n . . . . - 9 64Ib wlthmc constraints
3 EXPRESS Rack ﬂlghts. ThIS tramer has the physxcal g
E interfaces of the rack and simulates the operation of the u
g EXPRESS Rack subsystems, and primarily supports (@28 Vdc) (@28 Vdc)
m . . . . . .
E training fot the basm operatlon 0f the rack. In addltlon Therm-ay Control Nominal: 150 w Nominak 150 w
% t0 Simulating the EXPRESS Rack subsystems, the A""
U . . . .
5 trainers includeusoftware to Simulate malfunctions. The 500 w (two positions 500 w (two positions
E Standalone Tralners prov1de power and data to payload maximum in rack) maximum in rack)
(2 simulators and will be used in the training labs at the
o P l d T . . C l tJSC Data ~1- RS422 02-Analog 1-RS-422 o1-Analog
m ay 03 rammg omp ex a - .1. Ethernet 0 3 - Discrete 1- Ethernet 02 - Discrete (bi airect.
g bi-direct.
2 ACCOMMODATIONS Video 1 - NTSC/RS 170A feed from 1 - NTSCIRS 170A feed fro
T: ___._...._............._..__ payload source (Shared) Davload source (Shared)
z . .
The accommodatlons r0v1ded b the EXPRES Rack
‘3 p y . . S Vacuum Exhaust 1 (Shared) 1 (Shared)
é for the complement of payloads are listed 1n Table 1. system
L;
g 1 (Shared) 1 (Shared)
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)‘ Sponsoring Organization.
PAYLOAD INTEGRATION data is monitored by the PRO to ensure that the racks
are operating nominally. The crew also has the
An EXRESS Integration Agreement is written to capability to control and monitor the EXPRESS Rack
document the agreements made between the payload on-orbit through the use of the rack laptop. Payloads
developer and the 188 Program, with the assistance of are controlled and monitored by their personnel at the
the EPIM. Detailed interface and requirements POC or at their own telescience center.
information is documented in the EXPRESS Rack
Interface Deﬁnition Document (IDD). Based on this SUSTAINING ENGINEERING
information and the interfaces a payload uses, an
Interface Control Document (ICD) is written by the The Sustaining Engineering function supports
EPIM. The ICD documents any payload deviations EXPRESS and derivative racks during payload
from the requirements and must be agreed to by the ISS integration, integrated testing, and during on—orbit
Program prior to the ICD being signed. Based on the operations. This function has included development of
interfaces utilized, a Veriﬁcation Plan is written for software upgrades to resolve issues found in testing
each payload to deﬁne how each of the requirements prior to launch and on orbit. Sustaining Engineering
will be veriﬁed and the submittal dates for data. personnel work closely with Operations personnel to
g troubleshoot on orbit anomalies, develop operational
5' The individual payload data is provided to the workarounds where possible, and to resolve the issues.
é EXPRESS Rack Ofﬁce and combined with the In addition, drawing updates are made to include any
a EXPRESS Rack data to verify the integrated rack required post-delivery hardware modiﬁcations.
2 analytically. This is done for each conﬁguration of the Through sustaining engineering activities the processes
g rackﬂon-orbit in one of the lab modules and for will be evaluated for improvements. This function will
3 transport in the EXPRESS ﬂight or transportation racks cover sustaining engineering for all EXPRESS racks
95? in the MPLM. Each time a payload is exchanged the and derivative hardware after delivery from the
g various conﬁgurations are analyzed. This integrated contractor.
g rack information is provided to the 188 program for
E‘ further element level analysis. The EXPRESS Rack,
g without payloads, and the individual . payloads, take ON-ORBIT LESSONS LEARNED
é packages to the Payload Safety Review Panel for
g” approval. An integrated EXPRESS Rack conﬁguration Four EXPRESS Racks have been launched and moved
E is taken to the PSRP for Phase III approval. to the US Lab. EXPRESS Racks 1 and 2 were
E launched on STS-IOO while EXPRESS Racks 4 and 5
EE After the Standalone EXPRESS Rack is completed with were launched on STS-105. Three of the four racks
% veriﬁcation testing, it will be shipped to KSC. have been powered on. A number of lessons learned
:3 Turnover t0 KSC occurs following a post—ship have developed during operation of the racks. These
E checkout. Likewise, the payloads will complete items involve hardware anomalies, software problems,
(2 Verification testing at their development site and then be and some sporadic issues whose root causes have not
8 shipped to KSC. After they are turned over to KSC, yet been determined. The lessons learned will be
E they will be integrated into the rack (or FCU for later topically grouped and discussed in the following
j: ﬂights). Then the integrated rack (or FCU) will be paragraphs.
2;: checked out in the Payload Test and Checkout Stand
3 (PTCS), which simulates the lab interfaces. The RACK CONFIGURATION LESSONS LEARNED
g integrated rack is then turned over for installation into
Li the MPLM. Payloads that require power during ascent One of the challenges facing ISS payload operations on
E or late access loading will be launched in the Shuttle a continuing basis is the length and quality of Ku—Band
middeck. coverage. During power on of Rack 1, there was
limited Acquisition of Signal (ADS). This limitation
hindered commanding rack configuration from the POC
EXPRESS RACK OPERATIONS by the planned method __ conﬁguration ﬁle uplink t0 the
Payload MDM, followed by transfer of the files from
A Payload Rack Officer (PRO) is responsible for the PL MDM t0 the EMU. However, when the ﬁle was
ground commanding during on—orbit operations of the uplinked and transferred to the rack, the downlinked
basic EXPRESS Rack. The PRO is located at the response was an error condition. Since Rack 1 hosts
Payload Operations Center (POC) and is responsible for payloads that require continuous power, it was
conﬁguring EXPRESS Racks for the complement of necessary to be able to conﬁgure the rack to begin
payloads on each increment. EXPRESS subsystem payload operations. To further complicate the situation,
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)‘ Sponsoring Organization.
a limited window of opportunity existed to perform the telemetry to the ground via medium or high rate
rack conﬁguration during Shuttle docked operations telemetry paths.
since Payload crew time is very limited during joint
shuttle-station operations. Several anomalies related to these functions have been
experienced during the initial months of operation. A
These problems necessitated the use of a backup plan. brief summary of these anomalies follows.
The conﬁguration ﬁles had been loaded on the EMU at
KSC at the completion of integrated rack testing. The All of the cards in the RIC provide “health” readings of
KSC—loaded ﬁles were used by the PRO to conﬁgure the rack health and status data. One of the status
the rack for payload operations, thus allowing the rack indicators is called the “heartbeat” counter. Three of
to support payload transfer and operation. the four RIC cards have experienced a stoppage of the
heartbeat during mission operations. This problem has
Subsequent evaluation of the ﬁle uplink and transfer not resulted in loss of function of the cards, but merely
revealed that the conﬁguration ﬁles were byte-swapped a suspension of the status counter task.
in the uplink process. Because uplinking these ﬁles
results in a byte-swapped conﬁguration file, it has Another issue with the RIC has been the intermittent
5 become necessary to deliver two sets of ﬁles — one that drop out of Payload Health and Status data. These drop
2 is byte swapped to support uplink operations and one outs occur at various times, sometimes when a
i that is not byte swapped to load for ground testing at command is sent to a rack that is intended for another
g KSC. Payload, sometimes when high downlink rates are
2 being utilized for Ethernet payloads in the rack, and
g The lesson learned from this experience is to have sometimes it cannot be tied speciﬁcally to any single
3 viable backup plans for critical real-time operations. event. The “signature” of this problem is that the
95? EXPRESS has developed a couple of methods for payload portion of the health and status data completely
g handling this issue. One method has resulted in the pre— drops out for up to two minutes, but always resumes.
3;? loading of backup ﬁles on the EMU and a second Since the data always resumes transmission, this
EL insurance involves the uplinking 0f byte swapped files problem can be worked around. The root cause of the
g to the PL MDM in advance of the need to transfer them problem is being investigated as a sustaining
g to the EMU. These scenarios allow for operational engineering task.
3“ ﬂexibility.
E A third issue is the capability of the RIC to handle large
E Initial operational scenarios had planned for entire rack ﬁle transfers, or multiple ﬁle transfers that occur
OLE conﬁguration ﬁles to be updated and reloaded when simultaneously and result in heavy data loading of the
% payloads within that rack were changed out. After system. The EXPRESS integration and operational
‘53 operating on the 188, it has been recommended and philosophy dictates that payload testing occurs very
E agreed upon that the partial ﬁles related to payloads close to MPLM integration. Additionally, since a
2 being installed in an EXPRESS rack will be released payload can be manifested to operate in a rack that is
8 separately and loaded on the rack. already on orbit, it may never be tested on the ground
E with the actual payloads it will operate with on orbit.
f: In addition, Conﬁguration Files will not be required as This situation makes the characterization of the rack’s
2;: early as originally planned and their releases will now data system critical to successful science operations.
5» occur at Launch minus 7 months and Launch minus 4
g months. This schedule will allow later payload data to One of the shortcomings of early EXPRESS rack
Li be used to compile these conﬁguration ﬁles while still operations has been incomplete identification of all data
E meeting the need dates for the integrated rack testing transfer/telemetry constraints. Part of this is
and on—orbit operations. attributable to schedule/testing limitations on the rack
system, and part of it is due to inadequate definition of
the payload’s detailed data requirements. EXPRESS
RIC LESSONS LEARNED used the extensive integrated testing during the 6A
integration flow, coupled with on-orbit troubleshooting,
The RIC performs a number of functions in the to develop a set of operational constraints. The
EXPRESS Rack. The RIC’s three primary functions EXPRESS program is continuing to work
are to: 1) command and control the rack and payloads, characterization of the rack data system to mitigate on-
2) transmit rack and payload health and status data to orbit payload conﬂicts and identify areas that
the ground via low rate telemetry paths, and 3) transmit software/hardware upgrades can resolve.
7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)‘ Sponsoring Organization.
LAN LESSONS LEARNED procedure for EXPRESS Rack software
loading. This procedure addressed nominal
A problem related to the third RIC issue occurred when AND off-nominal situations that could arise
Rack 2 experienced an anomaly with the Payload during the software load process.
Ethernet interface. This interface became unusable 0 Multiple media should be considered to store
although no error message was given to indicate the the software. EXPRESS Rack software is
origination of the problem. The problem was later loaded on CDs, but backups have been made
attributed to the Lance Ethernet Driver, a chip resident available on orbit through uplink and direct
on the Master Controller Card (MCC) and 81553 cards. ﬁle transfers, as well as uplinking followed by
The Lance hardware asserts an internal “restart” when transferring the ﬁle to a ﬂoppy disk.
one of two conditions is present: there is heavy local
bus utilization between Payload activity, SSPCM SPARES AVAILABILITY ISSUES
communication, downlink telemetry, and PEP
communication or there are excessive collisions due to There are four primary payload ORUs for the
heavy LAN loading external to these cards. T0 EXPRESS Rack: RIC, SSPCM, PEHB, and EMU.
troubleshoot the problem, a plan was developed that Every ORU is critical for rack operation and payload
é reduced LAN 0 traffic, reduced the rack-to-rack success. Therefore, each project team should consider
5' bridging interference by moving this trafﬁc to LAN 1 early on during the design review phase how each ORU
i and telemetry to LAN 2, and redistributed the RIC will be spared. The sparing philosophy is a critical one
a MCC loading to the HRLC. Troubleshooting efforts for many reasons. First, these items require long lead
g revealed that a high rate of bridging between Rack 1 times prior to delivery. The EXPRESS Rack project
5- and Rack 2, heavy payload usage in Rack 2, and high has coordinated across the EXPRESS logistics and
E RIC LAN 0 Ethernet loading contributed to this EXPRESS Development teams to define an efficient
g problem. This anomaly was initially addressed Via on- schedule for meeting ﬂight hardware deliveries as well
g orbit operational constraints to ensure racks with as spares support for ﬂight. To compensate for the late
3;? bridged data are conﬁgured to limit telemetry loading delivery of spares, ﬂight hardware designated for later
E} on the RIC and the use of alternative methods to ﬂights have been used as spares to support racks
g downlink data (HRLC). The permanent solution to this Operating on—orbit. Obviously, the use of ﬂight assets
§ problem was a software update for the RIC. as spares results in potential impacts to ﬂight schedules
3” and the institution of some risk if the original spares
3 SOFTWARE LESSONS LEARNED delivery is impacted for any reason. However, to date
8 the EXPRESS team has managed to meet all spares
OLE Some of the early lessons that can be learned from a deliveries without impact to ﬂight schedules.
% software perspective will be summarized in this section
{64) in list format as follows: SUMMARY
E 0 Develop software that can be loaded in a
(g modular fashion. The RIC software load All of the early payload racks currently located on the
8 process requires that all cards be loaded during 188 are EXPRESS Racks or derivatives of the
E a software load. EXPRESS Rack. The ﬁrst HRF rack was launched on
:3 0 Automation of the software load process ﬂight 5A.1 with 2 EXPRESS Racks~——one with ARIS
2;: should be maximized to enhance on-orbit and one without ARIS — launched on 6A. Two
3 opportunities to load. Crew time restrictions additional (non-ARIS) racks were launched on ﬂight
§ limit the time availability and resulting 7A.1. The early EXPRESS Rack payloads continue to
Li opportunities to load software. EXPRESS operate with close coordination between the EPIMs,
E Rack software updates on orbit were much EXPRESS Operations personnel, and the EXPRESS
improved by semi-automation of the load Engineering Integration personnel. All payloads will be
process, requiring less crew interaction during physically integrated into the rack at the Kennedy
the software load. Hardware is being qualified Space Center approximately four and a half months
to enhance the automated load process that prior to launch.
will further reduce the time to load software to
about 1/3 of the time required for the semi- Several lessons learned have been documented during
automated load. initiation of rack operations on-orbit. Some of the
o Back—up/contingency plans need to be in place issues encountered were easily ﬁxed while others
to support the on-orbit load procedure. Close required more coordination and investigation of the
interaction between the procedure developers anomalies. It iS intended that the documentation and
and software personnel resulted in a solid crew availability Of these lessons learned, including a
8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)’ Sponsoring Organization.
synopsis of the work-arounds developed for each issue, of design for the HRF, BRP, and WORF racks.
will serve to prevent inefﬁciencies in troubleshooting Designing and building the derivative racks in
for other rack project personnel. conjunction with the EXPRESS Racks has been a

beneﬁt to all. Some requirements have been
Despite a number of on—orbit issues, the EXPRESS incorporated in all the rack designs, while others have
Racks have supported payload operations and the been developed uniquely for a speciﬁc conﬁguration.
accomplishment of science. Close interaction between In addition to the synergy provided by building these
operations, sustaining engineering, and software racks together, it has allowed lessons learned from one
personnel is required to clearly understand problems, rack to be implemented in the others. Efﬁciencies in
develop workarounds where needed, and upgrade building all these racks have beneﬁted all projects
software to resolve problems. involved. The shortened integration process along with
the simple hardware and software interfaces will benefit

The EXPRESS Rack provides a versatile facility for use Space Station researchers for many years to come.
by all payload disciplines. It has also served as a basis

\0

§

§

N.

9

E

a

S

S

o

E

o.

E

i

E

i

2

3

8

m

LTJ

H

%

0

HA

O

<

FA

2

o

(g .

Q

<

m

<

z

E

""O

%

L3

Q

a

O

o

9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
