"","x"
"1","RESEARCH ARTICLE
Abdomen-High Elastic Gradient Compression
Garments During Post-Spacefl ight Stand Tests
MICHAEL B. STENGER, STUART M. C. LEE,
CHRISTIAN M. WESTBY, L. CHRISTINE RIBEIRO,
TIFFANY R. PHILLIPS, DAVID S. MARTIN,
AND STEVEN H. PLATTs
STENGER MB, LEE SMC, WESTBY 'CM, RIEEIRO LC, PHILLIPS TR, reductions in splanchnic and leg blood ﬂow than non-
MARTIN DS, P'LATTS SH. Abdo'men-htgh elastic gra'dtent compression presyncopal subjects during a 10-min head-up tilt test,
garments during post-spaceﬂtght stand tests. AV1at Space Env1ron . . . .
Med 2013; 84:459_66. suggestmg that nonpresyncopal subjects mamtamed
Space Shuttle astronauts wore an inflatable antigravity suit during re- thEil‘ ability to VaSOCODStI‘iCt. If b100d dOES in faCt pool in
entry and landing, and astronauts and cosmonauts wear an elastic-com- the lower body, particularly in the splanchnic Circulation,
pression garment (with lacing) during Soyuz re—entry and landings and in after spaceﬂi ht a mechanical pressure arment COV-
the first few days of recovery. However, neither garment is an ideal coun- . h g . ' f h b d b g 'd 1
termeasure to spaceflight—induced orthostatic intolerance. Our labora- ermg t ese reglohs .0 t e O y may e an 1 ea treat""
tory has been investigating an elastic graded compression garment ment for Ol‘thOStatIC ln’EOleranCE.
(GCG) that applies graduated pressures from'the feet to the abdomen for To provide protection against spaceﬂight-induced 01‘-
use followmg 1nternatlonal Space Station missions and possnibly during thostatic intolerance during re-entry and landing, both
exploration mlsslons. Methods: Before and after Shuttle missions, 14 NASA d th R . F d 1 S A .
astronauts participated in a 35-min stand test. The stand test was con- an e u551an e era pace gencyOrequlre
ducted without garments preflight. On landing day, 7 astronauts wore that aStI‘OHaUtS aDd CosmODaUtS weal“ CompTESSIOD gal“-
the GCG while 7 astronauts did not (controls). Heart rate and bleod ments, During Space Shuttle landings, NASA astronauts
pressure were measurect In all astronauts during prone rest and standing. used an inﬂatable antigravity suit (AG5) that consisted
Stroke volume and cardiac output were measured only In GCG subjects. f f' . t t d b1 dd th t th bd
Results: No astronauts in either group became presyncopal during the O . 1V8 1n erconnec e a ers a cover e a omen’
stand test preflight or postflight. The Change in heart rate from prone to thlgh/ aDd calf- The bladders COUId be 1Dﬂated t0 Pres'
standing was lower in the GCG subjects on landing day than in the con- sures ranging from 0.5 psi (25.9 mmHg) tO 2.5 psi (129.3
trol subjects. Within the GCG subjects only, the increase in total periph- mmHg) in increments Of 0.5 psi (2’13). While effective as
eral resrstance from prone to standing was higher after spaceflight. t t th t t. . t 1 th AGS _
Conclusions: The GCG prevented tachycardia and increased total pe- a Cbun ermeasure O 01‘ OS a 1C 1n 0 erance’ e re
ripheral resistance with standing after spaceflight. The ccc shows qu1res a compressed gas source for use and loses pres-
promise as a countermeasure against post-spaceflight orthostatic intoler— sure when disconnected from the gas source, particularly
ance, can be easily donned, and is relatively cornfortable to wear, but during ambulation (10,16). Furthermore, the AGS in-
has not been validated afterlong-duratlon spaceflight. 1‘ a th m tab li t fambulati n anb un m_
Keywords: anti-gravity suit, orthostatic intolerance, Space Shuttle. C e ses e e O C COS 0. .0 ’ C e CO
fortable at hlgh compressmn, and IS not desagned to
be worn during postﬂight recovery (2,10). The Russian
FOLLOWING SPACEFLIGHT, the ability to remain Kentavr is a noninﬂatable compression garment made
upright 01. egress from the space vehicle after land- of a resﬂlent e1ast1c fabrlc. It c0n51sts 0t blcycle-type
ing may be compromised by an inability to maintain ad- shorts that extehd from Just above the walst t0 the knee
equate arterial pressure and cerebral perfusion. Many and a Pelt 0t galters that cever the cah/es. Each compo-
astronauts experience postﬂight orthostatic intolerance, heht Of the Kentavr has lacmg UP the Sldes 0f the legs to
and its severity and incidence appear to increase as the allow for adJustments, and the 1ntended pressure pro-
length of microgravity exposure is extended. Approx- duced by the Kentavr 15 30 i 5 mmHg across the Olength
imately 20—60% of astronauts (3,5,9) returning from Of the garment (19); Thus, the Kentavr 15 not spectflcalty
short-duration (4—18 01) spaceﬂights and up to 83% 0f de51gned to Promote graded levels 0t protectlon 1h
astronauts returning from long-duration (> 1 m0) space- those areas Of the lower body wh1ch WOUId be more
ﬂights become presyncopal during postﬂight orthostatic
challenges (12). Reduced postﬂight plasma volume and From the NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX.
altered distribution of blood while upright, particularly Th1: anfahuSCEFt Vt‘fas tecﬁve‘t ff)” tggllgw 1“ AuguSt 2012- It was
. . accep e or pu 1ca 10n 1n ovem er .
t0 the abdomen and lower. bOdy’ IS thought to contrlbute Address correspondence and reprint requests to: Michael B. Stenger,
t0 postﬂlght Ol‘thOStath IDtOIEI‘aDCE- Buckey 9t 31- (3) Ph.D., Wyle Science, Technology, and Engineering Group, 1290 Hercu-
Suggested that orthostatic intolerance may be caused by les Blvd, Suite 120, Houston, TX 77058, Email: michael.b.stenger@
- - - - - - _ nasagov.
an 1mpa1red ablhty t0 CODStrlCt the SplanChnlc vascuta Reprint & Copyright © by the Aerospace Medical Association,
ture. Indeed, Arbellle et a1. (1) recently demonstrated 1n Alexandria, VA.
a bed rest model that presyncopal subjects had smaller DOI: 10.3357/ASEM.3528.2013
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 84, N0. 5 - May 2013 459

"
"2","GRADIENT COMPRESSION GARMENTS—STENGER ET AL.
susceptible to ﬂuid accumulation due to hydrostatic 44 i 2 yr, 178 i 1 cm, 76 i 3 kg, mean i SE; ﬂight dura-
gradients so as to provide the greatest benefit to promot- tion 10—15 01) who completed an identical stand test in a
ing venous return. A further disadvantage of the Ken- separate study served as control subjects. Astronauts
tavr is that uncovered areas of the body (e.g., knees, serVing as control subjects did not wear the compression
ankles, and feet) tend to swell if the garment is worn for garments before or after ﬂight.
an extended period of time, such as when cosmonauts On the last day of the Shuttle ﬂight, all astronauts
continue to wear the Kentavr as they readapt to Earth donned the Advanced Crew Escape Suit with the stan-
graVity in the first few days after ﬂight. Additionally, dard NASA AGS and were prescribed to participate in
while the lacings can be used to increase or decrease the standard ﬂuid-loading protocol according to NASA
compression, it is not possible to know or measure the Flight Rules (Space Shuttle Operations Flight Rules,
level of compression provided so that the garment can NSTS—12.820, Volume A, Section 13-Aeromedical, 2002).
be adjusted to meet the expected levels of protection. Following re-entry, landing, and wheelstop, the astro-
Due to the limitations of the AGS and Kentavr, we ini- nauts egressed the Shuttle and boarded NASA’s Crew
tiated a series of studies in our laboratory to evaluate the Transport Vehicle. Astronauts removed the Advanced
efficacy of various configurations of elastic compression Crew Escape Suit and AGS in the Crew Transport Vehicle.
garments (10,13,16) with the intent of identifying a new Three of the treatment subjects donned the compression
garment that could be integrated into advanced explo- garments at this time, wearing the garment under their
ration suits with little to no complication. Working with ﬂight suits during the Shuttle ’wall< around’ and media
materials experts, we recently developed individually- events before transport to the Baseline Data Collection
fitted, abdomen—high compression garments that were Facility. The remaining four treatment subjects chose to
custom designed to combine the positive features of the don the garments after arriVing at the data collection fa-
AGS and Kentavr while eliminating most of the nega- cility. Control subjects did not wear the compression
tive features. These garments provide a gradient com- garments at any time on landing day. The testing proto-
pression along the length of the leg rather than static col and procedures, as well as the request for data shar-
pressures, do not require a pressurized air source from ing, were reviewed and approved by the NASA Johnson
the vehicle or other external source, and provide complete Space Center’s Committee for the Protection of Human
coverage from the toes to the abdomen so as to prevent Subjects. Subjects received written and oral explanations
uncomfortable tissue swelling in the uncompressed ar- of the test protocols before providing written informed
eas as in other garments. Furthermore, these lightweight, consent.
three-piece garments are relatively easy to don, inex-
pensive to produce, and require minimal stowage and ,
maintenance in ﬂight (10). We previously showed that Equzpment
elastic thigh-high only garments were effective in pre- The GCG tested on landing day in the countermeasure
venting post-spaceﬂight symptoms of orthostatic intol- subjects consisted of custom-fitted thigh-high stock-
erance after a Space Shuttle mission (16), but evidence ings with overlapping, custom-fitted ’biker-style’ shorts
from other studies suggests that abdominal compression (Fig. 1), the combination of which provide continuous
improves the efficacy of compression garments (4,15,18). compression from the foot to the abdomen. The gar-
The purpose of this study was to evaluate a three-piece ments were made from a blend of nylon and spandex to
abdomen-high, elastic gradient compression garment provide mechanical compression and were designed
(GCG) as a countermeasure to post-spaceﬂight ortho- through consultation with and constructed by BSN-
static intolerance. We hypothesized that these garments medical, Inc. (Rutherford College, NC). The design was
would prevent or attenuate the tachycardia, the larger based upon ground-based pilot studies conducted in
postﬂight drop in stroke volume, and the inability to in- our laboratory and other published reports that sug-
Crease total peripheral resistance normally seen during gested that both leg and abdominal compression were
orthostatic stress after spaceﬂight (3,5,20). Furthermore, required for the best outcome (4,15,18). Commercial
we anticipated that this novel design would be easy to off-the-shelf versions of these compression garments
don and comfortable to wear. are used clinically to treat vascular disorders and or-
thostatic hypotension. This GCG was constructed as a
METHODS three-piece garment to improve ease of donning com-
, pared to the commercial, one-piece abdomen—high com-
Subjects pression garment.
There were 14 Space Shuttle astronauts (7 treatment, Approximately 60 d before the scheduled launch,
7 controls) who volunteered to participate in this study. each astronaut was measured for individualized con-
Astronauts participated in a short 35-min stand test struction of the garment. A trained fitter measured the
before ﬂight without compression garments as a mea- circumference of each astronaut’s legs every 1.5 inches
sure of preﬂight baseline condition. Seven treatment as- from the feet to the top of the thigh. Additional mea-
tronauts (seven men, 47 i 1 yr, 174 i 2 cm, 83 i 3 kg, surements were taken along the torso ending just below
mean i SE; ﬂight duration 12—16 01) completed the same the breast-line. The manufacturer used these measure-
stand test on landing day while wearing the compres- ments to construct the customized gradient compres-
sion garments. Seven astronauts (five men, two women, sion garments that were designed to produce a pressure
460 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 84, N0. 5 - May 2013

"
"3","GRADIENT COMPRESSION GARMENTS—STENGER ET AL.

N0 astronauts wore the GCG during preﬂight testing
and only the countermeasure subjects were the GCG 0n
landing day. Preﬂight testing was conducted in the
Cardiovascular Laboratory at the Johnson Space Center,
Houston, TX. Postﬂight testing was conducted in the
Baseline Data Collection Facility at the Kennedy Space
Center, FL, or at the Dryden Flight Research Center,
Edwards, CA. Testing 0n landing day was conducted
approximately 2 h after wheel stop.

Astronauts were instrumented to measure continu-
ous ECG (Mortara H12+ Holter, Mortara Instrument,
Inc, Milwaukee, WI) and beat-to-beat blood pressure
(sampling rate of 100 Hz) in the finger (Portapres, Fi-
napres Medical Systems, Amsterdam-Zuidoost, The
Netherlands) during the stand test. The stand test be-
gan with the astronaut lying prone on a foam mat for 3
t0 5 min. After baseline measurements were obtained,
astronauts stood up as quickly as possible in response
to a verbal cue, and stood quietly for 3.5 min (210 s).
During standing, the astronauts were discouraged from
movement, muscle contractions, and talking (except to
report symptoms), and were encouraged to breathe

‘_' normally.

The Holter monitor was used to acquire high fidelity,
12-1ead EKG at 1 kHz for later ofﬂine calculation of heart
rate. The Portapres uses photoplethysmography to esti-
mate finger arterial blood pressure and a hydrostatic ad-
justment routine that allows for accurate estimation of
blood pressure regardless of where the sensor is in rela-
tion to the heart. In the GCG subjects only, aortic blood
velocity time integral was acquired by sonography
throughout each beat during the last 2 min of prone rest
and during standing from continuous wave Doppler

_ ‘ measurements made at the apical window using a 2 t0
4 MHz phase array probe with a standard ultrasound
machine (CX-50, Philips Healthcare, Andover, MA). Im-
ages were stored digitally for ofﬂine analysis (PrOSOIV®
3.0, Problem Solving Concepts, Inc, Indianapolis, IN).
Doppler images from at least three cardiac cycles for
each minute were independently analyzed by two expe-
rienced, registered sonographers. Stroke volume (annu-
lus cross sectional area >< velocity time integral), cardiac
output (stroke volume >< heart rate), and total periph-
eral resistance (mean arterial pressure/cardiac output)
were calculated.

Astronauts were asked to abstain from caffeine, nico-
tine, and alcohol for 12 h prior to testing, refrain from
exercise within 4 h of testing, and avoid maximal exer-
cise for 24 h prior to testing. Astronauts also were asked

Fig. 1. ’Biker—style’ shorts and thigh-high garments that comprise the to avoid heavy meals in the 4 h prior to testing. Abdo-
GCG. The garments are shown separately here for illtistration purposes men, thigh, calf, and ankle circumferences were mea-
only. When worn, the bottom of the shorts overlap the thIgh-hlgh garments. . . .

sured during each test sess10n to measure changes in
Of 55 mmHg at the ankle, decreasing to approximately body segments that might inﬂuence the fit of the gar-
35 mmHg at the knee and 18 mmHg at the thigh. The ments after spaceﬂight. Test Operators also queried the
shorts were designed to produce a pressure of 16 mmHg astronauts regarding garment comfort and fit while the
in the abdominal region. astronauts were wearing the garments 0n landing day.

Astronauts scored the garment fit of the shorts and thigh
Procedures stockings separately on a scale of 1 t0 5, with 1 being

Approximately 30 d before launch (L-30) and on land- ”very comfortable” and 5 being ”very uncomfortable.”
ing day, astronauts participated in a 35-min stand test. A score of 3 was considered to be ”neutral.”

Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 0 Vol. 84, N0. 5 0 May 2013 461

"
"4","GRADIENT COMPRESSION GARMENTS—STENGER ET AL.
Data Reduction pressure values during prone rest and while standing

As d es crib e d above, heart rate and blo o d pressure for the GCG and control subjects are displayed in Table I.
were collected continuously while subjects were prone Mean (: SE) stroke volume, cardrac OUtPUt’ and total
and standing. Heart rate and blood pressure data were per1phera1 res1stance values for the GCG SUbteCtS are
averaged over the last 2 min of the prone position. Heart shown 1n TableOII.. , , , ,
rate and blood pressure data were averaged over the There was a Slgnlﬁcent GFOUP X T1me mteractlon (Z 2
last 3 min of standing (from approximately 30 s to 210 s). P3771 P < 0'01) 1t} subJects heart rate response to stand-
Data collected during the time that the astronauts moved mg (Flg' 2)' Conslstent Wlth our hypothes1s, s1mp1e ef-
from the prone to standing position (~10 s) and the fol- fects contrasts revealed that the postﬂ1ght heart rate
lowing 20 s were not included in the averaging. Stroke response to Standlilg was not dlfferent fromOpreﬂlght 1n
volume, cardiac output, and total peripheral resistance the GCG group [X (1) = 0-37, P = .055], Whlle the post-
measured in the GCG subjects were similarly averaged. ﬂlght heart rate response to stanzdmg was greater than
Thus, the response to standing for each of the depen- preﬂlght 1n. the control group [X (1) = 7'08' P <.Q'011'
dent variables was calculated as the difference between Our analys1s Of b10001 pressure revealed no s1gn1f1cant
the average of the last 2 min of prone and the average of effects; hOWE’Yel‘r the data revealed somewhat lower
the last 3 min of standing. overall systolrc blood pressure among the controls rela-

t1ve to our GCG group (Z = 1.87, P = 0.06).
Statistical Analysis GCG subjects’ total peripheral resistance response to
. . . . . . standmg was s1gn1f1cant1y greater (Z = 2.32, P = 0.02)

Th1s study 1s a m1xed-factor1a1 experimental des1gn on landing day; however, stroke volume response was
comparmg contmuously scaled cardlovasctllar out- not significantly different on landing day (Z = —0.69,
comes (stand-prone) collected pre-Oahd postﬂrght from P = 0.49). Calf, thigh, and abdominal circumference in
two groups (GCG and control). Stat1st1ca1ana1yses were GCG subjects were 1.7 i 0.8% (Z = _ 2.14, P = 0.033),
performed using Stata IC software (vers. 11.2, StataCorp 2.4 i 10% (Z = —2.46, P = 0.014), and 2.6 i 09% (Z 2
LP, College Station, TX) and setting 2-tailed alpha to re- _ 2.85, P = 0.004) lower, respectively, on landing day
ject the null hypothesis at 0'05 With no adjustments for than preﬂight (Table III). The Circumference of the ankle
multlple comparlsons. A11 assumptlons requlred of our on landing day (—1.6 i 1.1%) was not significantly dif-
stat1st1ca1techn1ques were tested before hypothes1s test- ferent (Z = _1.30’ P = 0.193) than preﬂight.
ing, necessitating a log transformation and the elimina-
tion of a single overly inﬂuential observation in our Postﬂight C omfort R atin gs
heart rate response to standing data. . . .

Separate mixed-effects linear regression models were TheOmaJorlty Of the astronauts descrlbed the shorts
used to evaluate the effects of short-duration spaceﬂight and thlghfhlgh garments as bemg comfortable on lanohng
and the GCG on heart rate, blood pressure, and anthro- day. Spec1f1ca11y,.flve of the seven astronauts descrlbed
pometric measures. For each of these variables, our sta- the. shorts as bemg comfortable or very comfortable,
tistical model included a dummy-coded beta coefficient wh11e tWO 0f the seVeh descrlbed them as bemg uncom-
comparing pre- to postﬂight outcomes, a coefficient fortable. Of the seven astronauts, s1x reported the thlgh-
comparing control subjects to the GCG group, and the hlgh garments as comfortable or very comfortable. The
important Time >< Group interaction term evaluating lowest comfort ratmg for the thlgh-hlghs was 3, wh1ch
the relative effects Of spaceﬂight by group to test our hy- would be ne1ther comfortable nor urlcomfortable (”neu-
pothesis that the typical spaceﬂight effects on these out- tral”). None Of the astronauts descrlbed the garments as
comes would be attenuated in the GCG group. A priori bemg very uncomfortable.
simple effects contrasts comparing preﬂight versus post-
ﬂight outcomes within group were performed following DISCUSSION
detection of any significant Time >< Group interactions. There are three important findings of this study: the
AS typical With mixed-effects modeling, we. inc1uded a three-piece, abdomen-high compression garments effec-
random 1ntercept t0 accomrhodate the lohgltUdmal de- tively prevent post-spaceﬂight tachycardia, increase to-
s1gr1 Of the experrment, allowmg each part1c1pant t0 have tal peripheral response to standing, and are comfortable
the1r 9WD offset. None Of our analyses benefrted by to wear. Tachycardia is a common finding after space-
mcludmg random slope terms. We report s1gr11f1cance ﬂight (3520) and we observed an elevated heart rate
(P-Values) and the WaldOZ-score fOI‘ tGStS 0f mam effects response to standing in the control subjects on landing
anol mterachonsmour gmxed-effects analyses, or the Wald day. However, the change in heart rate from prone to
Chr-Osquare statrstle (X ) for srmple effects contrasts £01"" standing was similar from pre- to postﬂight in the GCG
lowmg s1gn1f1cant1nteract1ons. subjects. Also, stroke volume and cardiac output are

normally reduced after spaceﬂight, likely due to de-
creased circulating blood volume, pooling in the lower
RESULTS extremities, or reduced cardiac effectiveness (3,5,20).

No subjects in either the GCG or control group be- In contrast, the decreases in stroke volume and cardiac
came presyncopal during the 35-min stand test before output with standing after spaceﬂight were not different
or on landing day. Mean (i SE) heart rate and blood from preﬂight in astronauts who wore the three-piece
462 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 84, N0. 5 - May 2013

"
"5","GRADIENT COMPRESSION GARMENTS—STENGER ET AL.
TABLE I. MEAN (: SE) HEART RATE (HR), SYSTOLIC BLOOD PRESSURE (SBP), AND DIASTOLIC BLOOD PRESSURE (DBP) EXPRESSED AS AN
AVERAGE OF THE LAST 2 MIN OF PRONE REST ANDTHE AVERAGE OF 3 MIN OF STANDING.
HR (bpm) SBP (mmHg) DBP (mmHg)
Prone N Stand N Prone N Stand N Prone N Stand N
GCG
Preflight 66:2 7 79:3 7 130:5 7 132 :6 7 76:4 7 69:5 7
LandingDay 71 :4 7 82:5 7 137:4 7 141 :6 7 83:2 7 80:3 7
Control
Preflight 62 :3 7 77:4 7 138:8 7 130:8 7 70:5 7 63 :5 7
LandingDay 75:4 7 96:7 7 145:8 6 136:11 6 75:4 6 69:5 6
Neither group of astronauts wore the compression garments before flight. GCG subjects wore the compression garments on landing day. Control
subjects did not wear the compression garments at any time.
GCG. Perhaps more importantly, previous studies have differences between these thigh-high garments and
identified an inability to increase total peripheral resis- the current abdomen-high GCG are twofold. First, the
tance as a factor distinguishing between astronauts who compression was slightly lower in the thigh—high only
develop and astronauts who do not develop orthostatic garment, ranging from 55 mmHg at the ankle to 6 mmHg
intolerance after spaceﬂight. However, the efficacy of at the top of the leg, resulting in an average compression
any countermeasures to spaceﬂight-induced orthostatic over the leg of 25 mmHg. In contrast, the compression
intolerance is limited if the astronaut chooses not to im- in the three-piece compression garment in the current
plement them, including for reasons of comfort. Overall, study ranged from 55 mmHg at the ankle to 18 mmHg
the astronauts in the GCG group judged the three-piece at the top of the leg, resulting in an average compression
compression garments to be comfortable to wear, even over the leg of 35 mmHg. Secondly, and perhaps most
after completing the NASA standard ﬂuid loading importantly, the three-piece compression garment pro-
protocol. Vides ~16 mmHg of abdominal compression. Due to the
This was not the first attempt to use gradient corn- large capacitance beds of the splanchnic circulation,
pression garments to prevent post-spaceﬂight ortho- compression of the abdomen may be critical for an effec-
static intolerance. Before and after the Apollo 16 mission, tive countermeasure to postﬂight orthostatic intolerance
NASA ﬂight surgeons evaluated a ”waist-high” Ieotard (4,15,18).
that was designed to produce 40 to 45 mmHg compres- Denq et a1. (4) studied 14 patients with clinical ortho-
sion at the ankle, decreasing linearly to approximately static hypotension who underwent a series of 5-min
10 mmHg at the waist. They studied the Command head-up tilt tests separated by at least 20 min of recov-
Module Pilot and his backup, along with two control ery. The hemodynamic responses and presentation of
subjects during a 5-min stand test before and after space- symptoms during a control condition, without a coun-
ﬂight. While the elastic Ieotard appeared to provide termeasure, were compared to various combinations of
moderate protection for the Command Module Pilot pressure applied to the calves, thighs, and abdomen us-
after spaceﬂight, the ﬂight surgeons deemed this type of ing a modified antigravity suit. In each case, the blad-
garrnent unsuitable for routine use due to donning dif- ders that make up the suit were inﬂated to 40 mmHg. In
ficulty and sizing uncertainty after anticipated limb general, hemodynamic responses and symptoms were
girth reduction during spaceﬂight (6). most improved over the control condition when all the
Recently we evaluated the effectiveness of thigh—high bladders were inﬂated compared to only inﬂated over
gradient compression garments after a Space Shuttle the calves, thighs, or abdomen separately. Despite this
mission (16). While the thigh—high garments prevented evidence, researchers and clinicians continue to pursue
the drop in stroke volume and cardiac output seen in a knee-high compression garments due to the discomfort
cohort of Space Shuttle astronauts, the thigh—high gar- and poor patient compliance associated with waist-high
ments did not prevent post-spaceﬂight tachycardia. The garments, even though knee-high compression garments
TABLE II. MEAN (: SE) STROKE VOLUME (SV), CARDIAC OUTPUT (CO), ANDTOTAL PERIPHERAL RESISTANCE (TPR) EXPRESSED AS AN AV-
ERAGE OF THE LAST 2 MIN OF PRONE REST ANDTHE AVERAGE OF 3 MIN OF STANDING IN THE GCG SUBJECTS ONLY (N = 7).
Total Peripheral Resistance
Stroke Volume (ml) Cardiac Output (L) (mmHg- L‘1 ' min“)
Prone Stand A Prone Stand A Prone Stand A
Preflight 70 : 4 53 : 4 —17 : 3 4.7 : 0.4 4.1 : 0.4 —0.6 : 0.3 21 : 2 23 : 3 +2 :1
Landing Day 67 : 5 47 : 5 —19 : 2 4.7 : 0.4 3.9 : 0.4 —0.8 : 0.2 23 : 2 27 : 2 +5 : 1*
No similar data were collected in the control subjects. Preflight testing was performed without the compression garments, but the garments were worn
on landing day.
* Significantly greater than preflight.
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 84, N0. 5 - May 2013 463

"
"6","GRADIENT COMPRESSION GARMENTS—STENGER ET AL.

30 10 First, the last 2 min of supine rest from the other two
- Pre A 5 conditions were used to represent the baseline condi-
|:| Post * E” 0 tion, similar to the prone condition in the current study.

25 E Second, standing heart rate data were expressed as the

E '5 average of the first 3 min to be similar to the GCG condi-
A 5} -I0 tion. Further, standing stroke volume was the average of
E 20 <1 45 the first 3 min (thigh-high) or minute 1 and 4 of tilt (no
5 compression garments), when stroke volume data were
g '20 not collected during minutes 2 and 3. Although not a per-
“ 15 GCG CON fect comparison between conditions because of the differ-
E 5 ences in test protocols, these data appear to demonstrate
E 10 a that the effect of the thigh-high garments was limited,
<1 :1: 0 whereas the effects of the GCG were more pronounced
E _5 (Fig. 3). Specifically, while the increase in heart rate from
5 2 rest to standing was not greatly inﬂuenced by the
2 40
35
0 -l5
GCG CON GCG CON
Fig. 2. Mean (: SE) heart rate and blood pressure responses to stand- 30
ing before and after spaceflight for both control (CON) and treatment A
(GCG) groups. Before flight, neither group of astronauts wore the GCC. E 25
On landing day, only the treatment group wore the GCC. Significantly Q
different than GCG and significantly different than preflight. a
3 20
have been shown to be ineffective (11,14). In the Denq <3
study (4), although the only single region in which corn- % 1 5
pression improved the subject’s condition was when the co
bladder was inﬂated over the abdomen, others have E
shown that abdomen-only compression may actually <1 10
sequester blood in the legs, highlighting the impor-
tance of the current ankle to abdomen gradient com- 5
pression of the GCG (15).
To compare the effectiveness of the three-piece, abdo-
men-high GCG relative to the thigh-high compression 0
garments that we previously studied (16), we reviewed N0 Garment Thigh-High Abdomen-High
data from one astronaut who participated in both this 0
study and in two other studies designed to investigate
orthostatic responses after a Space Shuttle mission.
After one previous mission, the astronaut wore no A '10
compression garments, and after another mission the a
astronaut wore only thigh-high compression garments v _20
(16). In these tests, the astronaut was supine for 6 min “é
before being tilted to 800 head-up using an automatic tilt :3
table. The astronaut remained in the upright tilted posi- 3 _30
tion for 10 min. To facilitate comparisons between these >
tests and the GCG conditions in the current study, we 3
reduced previously collected data in the following ways. 8 -40
5
<1
TABLE III. PRE- AND POSTFLIGHT LIMB CIRCUMFERENCE '50
MEASUREMENTS IN 7 ASTRONAUTS (GCG SUBJECTS ONLY).
Circumference (cm) -60
Ankle Calf Thigh Waist Fig. 3. Change in heart rate and stroke volume from the supine or
— prone position to standing in one astronaut who participated in ortho-
Preflight 22.4 i 0.6 36.9 i 0.9 51-1 i 1-6 88-5 i 3-0 static tests after three different Space Shuttle missions. The astronaut
Landing Day 22.1 i 0.8 36.3 i (19* 49.9 i 115* 86.2 i 31* wore no compression garments during a tilt test after one mission, wore
Difference —0.3 i 0.3 —0.6 i 0.3 —1.2 i 0.5 —2.3 i 0.8 thigh-high compression garments during a tilt test after another flight
= (16), and wore the three-piece GCG during the stand test in the current
* Significantly different than preflight. study.
464 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 84, N0. 5 - May 2013

"
"7","GRADIENT COMPRESSION GARMENTS—STENGER ET AL.
thigh-high garments on landing day, the increase was wear the shorts suggests that additional modifications
substantially less when wearing the GCG. Similarly, the to this part of the garment should be considered. Astro-
decrease in stroke volume upon standing was much less nauts also have reported anecdotally that the previous
while wearing the GCG. compression garments, such as the AGS, over the abdo-
Not only are the three-piece, abdomen-high garments men can be particularly uncomfortable after completing
effective in preventing postﬂight tachycardia, the novel a ﬂuid loading protocol.
design includes important features to improve fit, com- Although these garments effectively prevented rises
fort, and ease of use. First, the garment design with three in heart rate, decrements in stol<e volume, and increased
separate pieces is far easier to don than a single-piece total peripheral resistance in the GCG subjects during a
abdomen high garment. In a previous study of a one- short stand test after a short-duration spaceﬂight, fur-
piece, abdomen-high compression garment conducted ther testing is recommended to fully demonstrate their
in our laboratory (Platts SH; unpublished observations; efficacy. First, while promising, these results do not
2009), donning the garment was always complicated guarantee that they will be effective after long-duration
and strenuous as the subjects often required the assis- exposures to weightlessness when orthostatic intoler-
tance of a test operator to pull the tight garment up the ance is more prevalent (12) and the change in body di-
legs, across the hips, and up the abdomen. The single mensions may be greater (7,8). The decreased body
piece garment had to be gathered up first, and then segment circumferences measured in these astronauts
worked slowly up the body while smoothing to avoid following short-duration spaceﬂight were within the ac-
twisting of the material. In contrast, the GCG can be ceptable range for these garments. The garments were
donned with relative ease by the wearer alone. Each leg constructed such that they take advantage of a relatively
garment, or stocking, of the GCG is pulled on one at a ﬂat portion of the material’s length-tension curve and
time, and then the shorts are pulled up last. Second, in changes in body circumference of less than 3.8 cm (1.5 in)
this design we were able to include zippers in the shorts do not result in an appreciable change in compression
that could be opened, if desired, to further improve the (Tucker K, BSN-medical, Inc.; personal communication;
ease of donning. This design modification could be par- 2012). However, following long-duration spaceﬂight,
ticularly helpful if these garments were used during re- greater changes in anthropometrics are possible. Sec-
Covery after spaceﬂight or in a clinical population. The ond, while these garments have been shown to be effec-
shorts are easily lowered and raised when subjects need tive during a short stand test after a Space Shuttle
to urinate or defecate. Third, we included zippers at the mission and preliminary data from our laboratory sug-
calf-ankle region of the garment that could be opened gest that they are effective in longer (15 min) tilt tests
while pulling the garments over the ankle. Without the after bed rest (17), the effectiveness of the three-piece
zippers, this part of the garment would be difficult to garment has not been evaluated during acceleration
don when pulling up thigh-high stockings because the profiles similar to those currently experienced by astro-
narrowest (and highest compression) part of the gar- nauts returning from the International Space Station or
ment (material around the lower calf) must be pulled in the planned profiles for commercial spaceﬂight. If
across the widest part of the foot (calcaneus-talus cir- they are to be validated for use during re-entry and
cumference). Once the thigh—high portion of the gar- landing, controlled centrifuge studies should be con-
ment is pulled into place, then the zipper is Closed. The ducted. These results may direct us to an implementa-
combination of these design features would make don- tion plan for protection against orthostatic intolerance
ning possible in the small confines of a space vehicle, a that provides different garments, for example, re-entry
specific concern noted from the experiences of Apollo 16 and landing versus postﬂight readaptation; a high-com-
(6) that probably prohibited further use of the garments pression garment might be required during re-entry and
in later missions, but this has not been specifically tested. on the first day postﬂight, and a lower compression gar-
Overall, the new compression garments were rated to ment can be used in subsequent days of recovery to help
be comfortable. Of the seven astronauts, six rated the astronauts re-acclimate to Earth gravity. A similar, but
thigh-highs as either comfortable or very comfortable, perhaps less controlled, plan already is in use by Rus-
and only one of the seven astronauts rated the thigh- sian medical experts using the Kentavr.
high portion of the garment as neither comfortable nor There are several limitations of this study that should
uncomfortable. However, the design of the shorts should be considered in the interpretation of these results. First,
receive additional attention for improvement because as in all spaceﬂight studies, it is impossible to control the
two astronauts reported that the shorts were uncomfort- pre- and in-ﬂight habits of the astronauts. Further limita-
able to wear. Discomfort appears to increase while tions were imposed primarily to the timing of the study
seated, during which time the garment bunches in the relative to the end of the Space Shuttle Program. This
front and wrinkles in the zippered section can press study was implemented near the end of the Shuttle pro-
into the abdomen. One of the two astronauts specifically gram and availability of astronaut test subjects was lim-
reported that he unzipped the shorts while seated to ited. To recruit enough astronauts to obtain the statistical
provide some relief. The importance of abdominal com- power required to detect differences between the control
pression provided by the shorts to prevent orthostatic and GCG groups, we needed to develop a study design
intolerance and any potential that astronauts may not that allowed us to leverage data from an existing study
use the shorts or may alter the manner in which they collecting orthostatic test data in astronauts without a
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 84, N0. 5 - May 2013 465

"
"8","GRADIENT COMPRESSION GARMENTS—STENGER ET AL.
compression garment. We therefore chose the orthostatic 2- Bishop PA, Lee SM, anza NE, Clapp LL, Moore AD, eta1.Carbor1
test for this study that was identical to a short-duration dloxlde accumulatmn' walkmg perfoimanqe’ and mEtabOhC
. . cost 1n the NASA launch and entry su1t. AV1at Space Env1ron
stand test in another spaceﬂight study; the astronaut test Med 1999,. 70:656—65.
subjects from the other study were used as controls in the 3. Buckey 1C, Lane LD, Levine BD, Watenpaugh DE, Wright S], et al.
current study. As a result, astronauts were not randomly grgh‘isgatic intOIEIance after SPaCEﬂight- 1 AP]?1 PhySiOI 1996;
aSSIgned t0 treatmefnﬁ groups. AlSO, thlS Stand teSt was 4. Denq JC,Opfer-Gehrking TL,Giuliani M,Felten ],Convertino VA,
Perhaps nOt as SGDSltlve as a longer orthOStatlc Challenge Low PA. Efficacy of compression of different capacitance beds
might have been (3), as the stand test in the companion in the amelioration of orthostatic hypotension. Clin Auton Res
study (from which the control subjects were drawn) was .1997? 7‘321—6- ,

'f' 11 h t 1. .t th b f 1 5. Fr1tsch-Yelle JM, Wh1tson PA, Bondar RL, Brown TE. Subnormal
spec1 1ca y C osen O 1m1 e num er 0 presyncopa .35"" norepinephrine release relates to presyncope in astronauts
tronauts on landing day. Further, stroke volume, cardlac after spaceﬂight.]ApplPhysiol1996;81:2134—41.
output, and total peripheral resistance were not collected 6- Hofﬂer (3W, Johnson RL: Apollo ﬂight crew cardiovascular
in the control subjects in that study, which would have evglueltlpns‘ II“ BlomEdlcal results. Of APOHO‘ Hapover’ MD:

h d h . . f h . h Sc1ent1f1c and Techmcal Informatlon Office, Natlonal Aero-
Strengt ene t e interpretation 0 t e responses m t e nautics and Space Administration; 1975.
countermeasure subjects. However, we still were able to 7. LeBlanc A, Lin C, Shackelford L, SinitsynV, Evans H, et al. Muscle
detect differences between the GCG and control subjects VOIUIIflléz $141“ 29131???“ Fiflnzeg égzg’gaﬁcégogly comPOSition after
during the postﬂight stand test. Furthermore, due to the Space 1g t‘] Pp ysm ’ ' . _ ‘

. . . . 8. LeBlanc AD, Schnelder VS, Evans H], Plentok C, Rowe R, Spector
11m1ted number Of women 3551gned t0 ShUttle ﬂlghtS 3f"" E. Regional changes in muscle mass following 17 weeks of bed
ter the study started, only two female astronauts partici- rest.]ApplPhysiol1992;73:2172—8.
pated in the control group, and no women were studied 9. Lee SMC, Moore AD’. Fr1tsch—Yelle JM, Greenlsen MC, Schnelder
. the treatment rou Historicall the incidence Of 01‘- SM. Inﬂlght exerc1se affects stand test responses after space
In . . g P- . y, . ﬂight. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1999,- 31:1755—62.
thostatlc Intolerance has been hlgher In women (20). 10. Lee SMC, Guined JR, Brown AK, Stenger MB, Platts SH. Metabolic

In conclusion, the three-piece, abdomen-high, gradi- consequences of garments worn tooprotect against post-
ent compression garments examined in this study effec- agilcoegéggégghosmm mtDlerance' AVlat Space Envuon MEd
’tlvely prevented Slgns Of post-spaceﬂrght orthOStatlc 11. Lord RSA, Hamilton D. Graduated compression stockings (20-30
intolerance during a short stand test. Thls garment was mmHg) do not compress leg veins in the standing position.
easy to don and was reported by the astronauts to be 12 M A156 JRSurg 280%); 745314—563 ldb AL Z‘ 1 MG M k d
relatively comfortable to wear during testing after space- ‘ EC 1 ' EYES 1’ erez '. 0. erger ' leg er ‘ ar e

, , , , exacerbatlon of orthostatlc mtolerance after long- vs. short-
ﬂlght- Thls garment mlght be a SUltable replacement to duration spaceﬂight in veteran astronauts. Psychosom Med
the Space Shuttle era inﬂatable AGS and should be fur- 2001; 63:865—73.
ther evaluated for use after long-duration spaceﬂight and 13- Platts 5H1 TUXh9m JA/ Rlbeuo LC/ Stenger MB/ Lee SMC/ Mesk
. 1 tion Class N AS A missions as well as durin JV. Compressmn garments as countermeasures to orthostatlc
1n exp 0r? . g intolerance. Aviat Space Environ Med 2009; 80:437—42.
commerc1alﬂ1ghtventures. 14. Protheroe CL, Dikareva A, Menon C, Claydon VE. Are com-

pression stockings an effective treatment for orthostatic presyn-
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS cope? PLoS ONE 2011; 62e28193.

The authors would like to thank the astronauts for their enthusiastic 15. Smit AA], Wieling W, Fujimura J, Denq JC, Opfer-Gehrking TL,
participation; Kevin Tucker, Mary Ann Hettich, and the staff at BSN- et al. Use oflower abdominal compression to combat orthostatic
medical, Inc., for their collaboration in garment design, individual hypotension in patients with autonomic dysfunction. Clin
measurements, and customized garment construction for the astro- Auton Res 2004;14:167—75.
nauts; Laura Sarmiento of the International Space Station Medical 16_ Stenger MB, Brown AK, Lee SMC, Locke JP, Platts SH. Gradient
PI'OjECt fOI' her h€lp in coordinating data COllECtiOD} DI'. RObEI‘t PlOUtZ- compression garments as a countermeasure t0 post_spaceﬂight
Snyder for consultation on statistical analyses and reporting; and the orthostatic intolerance. Aviat Space Environ Med 2010,- 81:
personnel of the Johnson Space Center Cardiovascular Laboratory for 883—7.
collecting and r649cing the Flata. 17. Stenger MB, Lee SMC, Ribeiro LC, Brown AK, Westby CM,

Authors and aﬁlzatzqn§:M19haelB. Stenger, PhD, B.S., Stuart M. C. Platts SH. Alternative compression garments. NASA Human
Lee, M.S., B.S.f L. Chrlstrne R1be1ro, ].D., M.S., Tiffany R. Phllllps, M.S., Research Program Investigators’WorkshOp, February 14-16,
B.S.,. and.DaVld 8- Martlr}, MS BBA, Wyle Selence, TechnOlOgy and 2012,- Houston, TX. Proceedings available through http:/ /
Englneerlng Group, Christlne M. Westby, PhHD, MUS, UnlverSItieS WWW.dsls.usra.edu/meetings/hrp2012/abstracts/.

Space Research Assoc1atlon, and Steven H. Platts, Ph.D., B.S., B10- 18. Tanaka H, Yamaguchi H, Tamai H. Treatment Of orthostatic into-
medical Research and Environmental Sciences Division, NASA Johnson lerance with inﬂatable abdominal band. Lancet 1997,- 3493175
Space Center, Houston, TX- 19. Vil-Viliams IF, Kotovskaya AR, Gavrilova LN, Lukjanuk VYu,
Yarov AS. Human +GX tolerance with the use of anti-G suits
REFERENCES during descent from orbit of the Soyuz space vehicles. I Gravit

1. Arbeille P, Kerbeci P, Mattar L, Shoemaker JK, Hughson R. Physiol 1998; 52129—30.

Insufficient ﬂow reduction during LBNP in both splanchnic and 20. Waters WW, Ziegler MG, Meck JV. Postspaceﬂight orthostatic
lower limb areas is associated with orthostatic intolerance after hypotension occurs mostly in women and is predicted by low
bedrest. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2008; 2952H1846—54. vascular resistance. JAppl Physiol 2002; 92:586—94.

466 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 84, N0. 5 - May 2013

"
