"","x"
"1","42nd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2004-785
5 - 8 January 2004, Reno, Nevada

Microgravity Environment Predictions and Control

for the Fluids Integrated Rack

L. Moss, M. Just, C. Grodsinsky, J. Heese, B. Humphreys

ZIN Technologies, Inc.

42""ml AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit
Microgravity Science and Space Processing Symposium
5-8 January 2004/Reno, Nevada

This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

"
"2","American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
1801 Alexander Bell Drive, Suite 500
Reston, VA 20191
MICROGRAVITY ENVIRONMENT PREDICTIONS AND CONTROL FOR THE
FLUIDS INTEGRATED RACK
Presented at the 42nd AIAA Aerospace Science Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV
J anuary 7, 2004
Larry A. Moss ZIN Technologies Brook Park, Ohio, USA 1arry.moss@zin-tech.com
Marcus L. Just ZIN Technologies Brook Park, Ohio, USA marcus.just@zin-tech.com
Carlos M. Grodsinsky ZIN Technologies Brook Park, Ohio, USA carlos.grodsinsky@zin-tech.com
J ohn A. Heese ZIN Technologies Brook Park, Ohio, USA john.heese@zin-tech.com
Bradley T. Humphreys ZIN Technologies Brook Park, Ohio, USA brad.humphreys@zin-tech.com
ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION
A11 microgravity experiment racks onboard the This paper Will focus on the approach used to
International Space Station (188) are subjected to characterize microgravity disturbances in the Fluids
quasi—steady, transient, and Vibratory disturbances, Integrated Rack (FIR)[2], currently scheduled for
Which can adversely affect the scientiﬁc investigation launch to the International Space Station (188) in
being conducted. Disturbance forces may be 2005 (Fig. 1). Fluids microgravity experiments
transmitted to the experiment from sources onboard contained Within the FIR are extremely sensitive to
the rack or from off bolard sources such as other racks Vibratory and transient disturbances originating 0n-
and 188 equipmentt ] It is necessary for rack board and off-board the rack. Therefore, several
developers to predict and control the microgravity techniques are implemented to isolate the critical
environment at their critical science locations in order science locations from external Vibration. A
to ensure that speciﬁc science and engiheering combined testing and analysis approach is utilized to
requirements can be achieved. In addltleh to predict the resulting microgravity levels at the critical
satisfying microgravity science requirements, rack science location. The major topics to be addressed
developers and science payloads must also meet 188 are: 1) Vibration Isolation Approaches, 2)
vehicle requirements Which specify maximum loads Microgravity Disturbances, 3) Microgravity
that may be transmitted to the ISS structure and Predictive Modeling, 4) Microgravity Control, 5) FIR
neighboring racks. The authors are working in Science Requirements, 6) On-Orbit Disturbance
conjunction With NASA Glenn Research Center Measurement, 7) 188 Microgravity Requirements,
(GRC) to develop a fully integrated microgravity and 8) ARIS Requirements.
control and veriﬁcation process for the Fluids and
Combustion Facility (FCF). The Fluid Integrated
Rack (FIR) is one of the ﬁrst rack facilities to fully
incorporate this process, addressing microgravity _ a _ . 312:2?“ °°""""°' ”n""
disturbances onboard and off board the rack, While _ “e'r -_. ”iffjj . {zsgjrdmwe5)
utilizing the Active Rack Isolation System (ARIS) in m; Ewan; ‘ lain.
order to meet the microgravity science requirements. Hiﬁv'vg‘iiifgﬁ 41 Ht r1}. l‘ Tm ""5 (gmmogﬁlsfswz)
Starting early in the development cycle, dynamic Diagn‘fsi'ic': T rﬂ-‘E' I ,_ 7""qu m"")
modeling techniques are used to characterize the IL:- ;:::::__. +53%
rack’s internal microgravity environment and its 45,..- : . . 11, R ' e: p.-FSAp
contribution to neighboring racks. Optimized designs t '10:“ t Eﬁjgams) 3:521?
can then be implemented to minimize these EPCU ”MW“ Assemb'y \
disturbance levels and the model can be further used
to develop operational scenarios With least impact to
microgravity experiments. These techniques and . .
methods can be applied to any payload trying to meet Flgure 1' Flulds Integrated Rack
microgravity requirements.
1

"
"3","VIBRATION ISOLATION APPROACHES MICROGRAVITY DISTURBANCES
The FIR is using the Active Rack Isolation System US Lab Environment Offboard Rack
(ARTS) to isolate the rack frorn offboard rack The principal microgravity disturber for any of the
disturbancesm. By utilizing this system, FIR is scientiﬁc experiments in the US Lab is the ambient
connected to the U.S. Lab module structure by 13 space station environment. This Vibratory
umbilical lines, a laptop cable, two ﬁber optic rack— environment is composed from the net effects of
t0-rack cables, and eight actuators utilizing pushrods pumps, fans, valves, compressors, disk drives, cold
(Fig. 2). The umbilical lines provide the rack With plates, exercise equipment, and other mechanical
various utilities such as power, vacuum resource, Vibrations coupled With the ISS dynamics. Included
vacuum exhaust waste, cooling water, gaseous Within this Vibratory environment are quasi-steady
nitrogen, command and data interface, and others. and transient disturbances. However this paper Will
The laptop cable connects the rack to a laptop concern itself With the steady-state Vibratory
computer for crew interface and the ﬁber optic cable environment to illustrate the process and response
connects the FIR to its FCF counterpart, the predictions of the major disturbance contributors
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR). The ARIS is such as rotating mechanical components. An ISS
designed to actively control and attenuate the ambient FEM and SEA model has been simulated by
188 Vibrations below 2 Hz. The umbilical lines Boeing[4’5]t0 predict the disturbance spectrum in the
provide the rack with passive isolation above 2 Hz. US Lab and is represented by the Non-Isolated Rack
Assessment data (NIRA). The NIRA99 spectrum is
Other rack interface schemes besides the ARIS shown in Fig. 6. Updates to NIRA are currently being
approach should also be considered. During non— worked by NASA/GRC.
science operations, ARIS can be commanded either
“Off” or to “Position Hold” placing the rack in a On-board FIR Disturbers
“hard mounted” conﬁguration. In these two FIR’s on-board environment and science support
instances the ARIS actuators are short circuited by equipment such as air circulation fans, water ﬂow,
locking down the front four—snubber locations with airﬂow, and computer hard drives cause disturbances
hard connections between the rack and space station. Within the experiment rack. These disturbers along
Besides the “hard mounted” case, the rack can be With the rack dynamics were characterized to predict
passively isolated with foam inserts placed Within the Whether the on-orbit Vibration levels during
front four snubber cup locations. experimentation exceed the speciﬁed science
microgravity Vibration level requirements. Many FIR
Since the FIR utilizes ARIS, this paper Will focus on disturbers were tested in the Microgravity Emissions
the active isolation simulation. Laboratory (MEL) at NASA-GRC [6] Fig. 3
-- .- summarizes the disturber forces collected at the
5.3m? __ -- MEL. A description of the rack speciﬁc disturbers
ﬂ ARISController(C0ntr01.& Ea§% that are. continuously .or potentially operational
Eggfge‘gégliiﬁggﬁﬁ 215%“ ' 3-139? '- during selence investigations follows.
igﬁgihieﬂgagiqlhi‘s’ﬁion, 1%? D FIR Package Level Disturber Comparison [v6.0]
‘ 3 T‘i‘iiﬁati‘Xi‘é:i‘é§$§§é%‘f3é§§£vﬁﬂﬁiS 3 - - .
ﬂ t
“H.?.J: . i EL- ..w -_ .: V ﬁzz»; ' g 'E __ ...EPCU
a - -... :1... .1 . 1 ._~ -' - 10'3 g.--;""-;__='
STATION UMBILICAL 1U . ,-.--""'-:-:-.--""'""""I
Figure 2. ARIS Isolation System 10 m 10 Hz 10 m m
Figure 3. On-Board FIR Disturbers.
2

"
"4","Air Thermal Control Unit gATCU} Fluid Science Avionics Package gFSAP}
The ATCU is part of the Environmental Control The FSAP is a multi-purpose data acquisition and
System (ECS) located in the top of the rack shown in control system used to effectively interact with all
Fig. l. The ATCU has two EBM impeller driven ﬂuids experiments. The FSAP provides a standard
cooling fans that cycle air within the conﬁnes of the set of analog and digital I/O, motion controllers,
rack. The FIR has a set of airtight doors, which seal analog Video acquisition, data storage, and
off the rack volume from the US LAB volume. A communication connectivity. It is launched within
ﬂexible Viton seal connects the fan assemblies to the the rack and stays on-orbit for use by P1 experiments.
optics bench assembly, which serves to draw warm The FSAP was MEL tested as a package. The
pressurized airﬂow through the optics bench from disturbance forces are shown in Fig. 3. When
speciﬁc experiment support packages to be water compared to the ATCU, its disturbance forces are
cooled within the ATCU at the heat exchanger. As relatively low similar to the EPCU.
shown in Fig. 3 the ATCU is the main onboard
source of Vibration. The peak at 30 Hz is the Mass Data Storage Device (MDSD)
operational frequency 0f the fans (1800 11ml)- The The MDSD contains siX hard drives. This package is
ATCU will operate continuously at selected speeds currently being designed and has not been MEL
between 1600 RPM and 2000 RPM dependent upon tested. Disturbance forces were reasonably estimated
the speciﬁc thermal and heat rejection requirements using the IOP MEL hard drive data. During
0f the PI Speciﬁc Hardware. operation, only 1 hard drive will be active.
Electrical Power Control Unit gEPCU) FIR Science Center
The EPCU performs power distribution, conversion, The science center is simulated with the mass and
control, management, and fault protection functions inertial properties Of a representative experiment,
associated with the operation of the FIR rack. It is Light Microscopy Module (LMM). Each basis
located on the bottom left shelf of the rack directly experiment attached to FIR’s Optics Bench will
above the umbilicals. The only source 0f disturbance introduce additional disturbances speciﬁc to their
011 the EPCU is water ﬂOW through its cold plate. science operations and needs. In addition, each basis
Compared to other disturbers in Fig. 3, its experiment will also introduce structural dynamic
disturbance is an order of magnitude lower than the modes and interface attachment modes to the FIR
ATCU- optics bench, which will couple with the
disturbances. The dynamics and additional
W disturbances associated with the basis experiments
The IOP serves as the command, control, data were not included in this analysis.
acquisition, and data transfer system within the rack
and for ground operations. The IOP is comprised Of Note: The on-board microgravity disturber test data
VME electronic boards. The IOP has two internal was available only down to 1 Hz, however
hard drives used for storing images recorded during microgravity requirements are imposed down to 0.01
science experiments. One hard drive was tested at the Hz. Therefore disturber Vibration levels were
MEL during random read/write operations and estimated for low frequencies using scaled AAA fan
multiplied by a factor of two to account for both hard data. The estimate equation was obtained from
drive disturbances. Boeing disturber testing.[7] In Fig. 3, the estimated
data is Visible below 1 Hz as decreasing slope.
The IOP also has an internal cooling fan. The fan
dominates disturbances at its operational frequency
of 61 Hz, as shown in Fig- 3- MICROGRAVITY PREDICTIVE MODELING
WW Predicting the microgravity environment can be
The IPSU is essentially an on-board image storage achieved by following severalbasie steps:
device used for storing digital images during critical
science operations. Two common IPSU’s will be 1) Development Of on-orbit rack and payload
located side-by-side on the back of the Optics Bench. ﬁnite element model (FEM);
The IPSU package was not tested at the time of this 2) Perform normal modes analysis Of the FEM
analysis, however since the only moving parts are and store the mass-normalized eigenvector
two hard drives, the IOP hard drive data was used as information f0r analytical points ofinterest;
a reasonable estimate multiplied by a factor of two. 3) Incorporate the eigenvector information into
a MATLAB/Simulink dynamic model and
3

"
"5","calculate transfer functions from disturber
locations to critical science location; “Phi_in” represents the mass normalized
4) Multiply the transfer functions by the eigenvectors (units in l/\/m) 0f the input point, while
disturber data to obtain the response at the “phi_0ut” represents the mass normalized
science location. eigenvectors (units in l/\/m) 0f the output point. This
is the standard representation to simulate structural
Development of FEM dynamics in Simulink.
The payload rack model is an International Standard
Payload Rack (ISPR) supplied by Boeing. The FIR The system level View of ARIS modeled within
payload FEM is developed and inserted into the ISPR Simulink is shown in Figure 5. The ARIS is
model by Northrop Grumman Information modeled in Simulink by Boeing[8’9] and serves to
Technologies (NGIT). The ZIN microgravity analysis attenuate off board loads going into the rack through
team then ﬁnalizes the integrated model. the umbilicals and pushrods.
Normal Modes Eigenvector Analysis The ARIS Simulink Model is very complex since it
A normal modes analysis is conducted on the FIR involves accelerometer and position feedback and
FEM. The eigenvectors were mass-normalized and active control of the rigid body rack modes. The
output to a “punch” (*.pch) ﬁle. For the ARIS structural dynamics of the rack and umbilicals using
analysis, the FIR on-orbit FEM, was analyzed in a the format shown in Fig. 4 are represented in the
free-free state. For the hardmount case, the rack is “plant” block (the largest block) of the ARIS model.
simply connected directly to the 188 mass at its front The Simulink Model has separate dynamic loops for
four snubber locations and a free-free boundary the rack, each umbilical, and the rigid body motion of
condition is analyzed. the rack due to the integrated umbilical set. This
separate dynamic 100p approach in the model allows
MATLAB/Simulink Model the analysts greater ﬂexibility to study a variety of
The ARIS team at Boeing developed the original rack conﬁgurations and potential umbilical
concept and method for calculating payload rack modiﬁcations. The ARIS controller is modeled
microgravity levels aboard the 188 with a around the plant. The model is linearized and
MATLAB/Simulink Model. For passive structural converted into state-space representation using the
dynamics, the model can be represented by the “linmod” command in MATLAB. Then transfer
following governing equation: functions are generated using the “frsp” command in
MATLAB.
. 1 A _ 2 .. _ 2 .. 2 ..
[eq ] (t) Ceonly C0I1 ”y y - I‘ _ .
Where A is the input acceleration, 28; is the structural
damping term, con is the natural frequency, and y is ’ ‘4} ’I : 'l a
the acceleration out. In Simulink, this relationship 4 .i . .-. _ _ .IL.
(using force “Fin” instead of input acceleration) y'- ' .53 7 'I I ’ ’9
would be modeled as shown in Fig. 4. :43: V .
_ Dynamic Lnup Mandel :
phi_in WWW.” “W
phi_-:Iut AD“): “""""""“‘-*""'-
tmzeta Figure 5. FIR ARIS Simulink Model
mm: Mal ﬁequmies Calculate the Response
“DIE“mﬂda'damPiWF-ﬁ'UES The transfer functions are converted into one-third
Figure 4. Dynamic Loop Simulink Representation. octave band fermat. The frequency bins must niatch
between the disturber data and the transfer functions.
For steady-state Vibratory analysis, each disturber
force spectrum may be multiplied by its respective
4

"
"6","transfer function to obtain its contributing response at
the critical science location. The net response is Vibratogy
obtained by simply adding all the contributing Other Vibratory disturbers such as various crew
responses together. The response levels are then activities and maintenance are intermittent. Some of
ready for comparison With requirements. While this these activities are not mission critical and can be
analysis is conducted in the frequency domain, the scheduled so as not to interfere With science. For
same model may be used to calculate responses in the example, the crew exercise ergometer causes a
time domain as well. Instead of calculating transfer Violation of the SRED curves as previously
functions based on a unit load input, the disturbance demonstrated. However, the ergometer is only
force time-history ﬁle can be used as input. The functional for several hours a day. If a sensitive
output response may then be saved as a time history experiment might be affected by the crew exercise,
and further processed (e.g. conversion to frequency the PI may Wish to request that the science
spectrum). experiment and exercise be scheduled so as not to
conﬂict With one another. Other experiments may not
MICROGRAVITY CONTROL be impacted by the ergometer at all.
The term “microgravity control” When used in a Disturber screening can be a valuable method for
NASA 188 program context refers to a broad range of assuring the minimal microgravity levels. Once an
activities and requirements. These requirements are initial set of disturbers is tested and the forces are
related to component Vibratory testing, ARIS used as input into the model, the margins between the
performance analysis, rack to station interface force disturbers and the requirement can be determined.
limits, and sway space margins. The analysis Once the margin is determined a sub allocation can
techniques presented herein are directly applicable to be deﬁned for each disturber. Then, as each Orbital
the NASA microgravity control plan. It is the Replacement Unit (ORU) is tested, its spectrum can
responsibility of the payload rack developer (FCF) to be veriﬁed against the sub allocation. As long as the
show NASA that it can comply With the established sub allocations are satisﬁed, the conservatism of the
program requirements. However, for the project model can be assured. This method would screen for
scientist, the same elements of the program defective or unusually high dynamic disturbers.
microgravity control plan can be applied on a
payload level to control and predict the science Local passive isolation may also be applied at the
microgravity environment at the location of interest. source of the disturbers. Passive isolation must be
This can be accomplished by applying the analysis approached With a well thought out design plan.
techniques previously described to accommodate Every passive isolation system actually provides
speciﬁc project science requirements. ampliﬁcation at the resonant frequency before
attenuation occurs. If many components are
Controlling the Environment individually isolated, the resonant frequencies should
The microgravity environment at the science location be distributed to avoid the overlap of the resonant
can be minimized by several methods: location peaks and the operational speeds of the components.
optimization, event scheduling, disturber screening, In some instances With stringent low frequency
passive isolation and active isolation. The Vibrations acceleration requirements and more lenient high
that affect science experiments occur in the quasi- frequency allowable levels, it may be advantageous
steady (<0.0l Hz), Vibratory (0.01-300 Hz), and to avoid passive isolator elements and simply hard-
transient (non-oseillatory, forced impulse) regime. mount the device. A rigid interface allows more
Vibratory energy to stay in the higher frequencies as
Quasi-Steady opposed to shifting it to the lower end Where science
Some of the quasi-steady contributors such as requirements are more difﬁcult to meet.
atmospheric drag are a given and cannot be
eliminated on the 188. Other affects such as gravity Passive isolation can also be applied on a rack level
gradient are location dependant and can be to isolate the rack from the Lab ambient Vibratory
minimized by conducting science close to the ISS environment. The Boeing version of this is the
CG. The US Lab was positioned close to the CG. by Passive Rack Isolation System (PaRIS).
design to minimize gravity gradient quasi-steady
body force levels. Other sources of induced quasi- Transient Events
steady loads are venting, gyroscope start-up, Non-periodie transient events such as solenoid
centrifuge start-up, solar array positioning, and switching, crew activity, and console operations
thermal base loads. should be considered. These events may be scheduled
5

"
"7","so as not to interfere With science investigations. to produce the total on board microgravity
Transient requirements are deﬁned in PIRNl 10H.[10] environment contribution.
FIR SCIENCE REQUIREMENTS Total Mierogravity Environment
The red curve in Fig. 8 shows the total resulting
Science Re uirements accelerations 0f the eombined effects of both
—q—The Science Requirement Envelope Document [11] NTRA99 (dashed blue 11ne) andall ef the onboard
de ﬁnes the required microgravity levels for the FCF d1sturbers (dashed black 11ne). V101at10ns 0f the FIR
project. The FIR SRED was based on the in divi dual SRED occur at 3.5 Hz due to the Off board ergometer
requirements of 16 representative Fluid Basis Toadsz between 10 HZ and 30 HZ due to local pass1ve
Experiments. The envelope, green curve(shown in 1s01at10n Of the ATCU fags” and above 30 HZ due to
Figs. 6-8 )9 is intended to satisfy the vast majority of the d1sturber forces eouphng W1th the racks structural
those experiments. modes. As preV10usly noted, the new ergometer
isolation design Will lower the 3.5 Hz Violation and
Offboard Disturbance Contributions hard .mounting the ATCU fans Will eliminate
Fig. 6 illustrates the resulting microgravity levels at V101at10ns between 10 HZ and 30 HZ'
FIR’s science center With respect to Offboard loads
only. The Offboard disturbance levels were deﬁned W
by the NIRA99 curve, Which provides a worst-Case , , ,
spectrum of expected Vibrations at rack interface The predleted m1erograv1ty levels. are comparable
locations in the ISS assembly complete conﬁguration. W1th actual OH'Orblt Space Acceleratlon Mwsuremept
Results are plotted in comparison With the 188 System (SAMS) measurements 315500.13th W1th
microgravity requirement (188 Reg.) [12] and the FIR EXPRESS rack N0. 2 (the ﬁrst ARTS equlpped rack).
speciﬁc Science Requirement Envelope Document Flgures 9 through 11. show.the.1nler0.graV1ty levels
curve (FIR SRED).[“] The CIR SRED eurv e is also measured by SAMS 1n conqunetlon W1th the ARIS-
included for reference. FIR’s need for ARIS is 188 Characterlzatlon Expernnent (ICE) aboard the
obvious between 0.01 Hz and 30 Hz. In this region, 138. Fig. 9 shows Offboard acceleration levels. These
the lower frequency rigid body motion of the rack is d1sturbances are much lower than NIRA99 levels, as
isolated from the Offboard loads, reducing the NIRA99 1epresents the ISS assembly complete
offboard disturbances below the FIR SRED. conﬁguratlon W1th a crew of seven astronauts durlng
However, ARIS will signiﬁcantly reduce the crew shift operations. In adtlition the Offboard leveTs
exercise ergometer loads but not enough to satisfy the shown are durlng the tune When the 18.8 crew 1s
FIR SRED at 3.5 Hz. Improvements 0n the gett1ng1eady for sleep and the crew d1sturbanee
ergometer passive isolation design are currently levels s1gn1ﬁeantly drop. Flg' 10 Show the response
being developed to reduce this peak. levels onboard the ARIS—ICE rack W1th ARTS 1n.an
“1d1e” mode. Th1s represents a pass1ve 1s01at10n
Onboard Disturber Contribution system With respect to the 13 EXPRESS Rack
Welerations at the FIR umbilicals acting as pass1ve iselators. Note how the
science center due to the 0n—b0ard disturber forces. levelsroll Off after the 1n1t1a1 r1g1d body rack 11.10465'
The disturbers represented in this plot include: The h1gh frequency peak 1s a result Of the exeltatlon
ATCU EPCU IOP IPSUs FSAP and MDSD. In of local structural modes from the EXPernnent
generai the AT’CU leads dorninate the low frequency Physics Of COHOidS in Space (EXPPCS) front 93.1161
0n-b0ard disturbances While the hard drives and Where the SAMS sensor head 1s mounted. The h1gh
smaller cooling fans combine to dominate the high frequency data 1s thus. amphtied much “Fm than the
frequency range. The ATCU peak betw e en 10 Hz and response at the expernnent 1nterface. Flg. T1 shows
30 Hz is the resonant mode of its passive isolation the ICSEOHSC laevels aboard the ARIS rack.W1t.h ARIS
system. The ATCU fans are currently being 1n an aet1ve .mode. The levels drop s1gn.1ﬁeant1.y
evaluated for a hard mounted design such the below the requlrement even at low frequeneles. Th.1s
disturbance peaks between 10 Hz and 30 Hz Will b e CTosely resembles the precheted ARIS performance 1n
eliminated. The sharp peaks at 30 Hz and 50 Hz Flg', 6 except for the h1gh frequglcy Where once
represent the ATCU fans operating speed and IOP agaln local panel modes have amphﬁed the response.
fans Operating respectively coupling With the racks These carves are not expected to exactly match the
structural dynamics. The higher frequency peak at FIR prechetlons, 3.5 they reﬂect a totally dlfferent rack
100 Hz represents the hard drive Operating speeds. W1th, .d1fferent 1nert1a1 mass propertles, fewer
Each of these individual on board responses is added umblheals (EXPRESS (1qu not use the Vacuum
Resource Umblheal as 1n the FIR assessment),
6

"
"8","different rack dynamics, and with different on board mﬁﬁgﬁmggf-WWI”‘M“‘””‘ A “mﬁﬁﬁ
. . . mm Nm-l Ms cavity WWW.
dlsturbance loads. However, thls comparlson can be mew 03-Aur2001a13=25=°°-°°'
used to build conﬁdence in the analytical approach. .
5 FlR-ARIS Science Response to Offboard Loads {NIRA99} [v6.0] 1°
10
NIRAQQ
104 10""
72‘
103 f;
E .5
a 102 g“)
E a
g 1|] 10*
10°
10'7
-1
1D 10""2 10"" 10° 10‘ 102
0119‘“de Octave Frequency Bands (I'IZ) hi‘“”“‘”“*'}m“mmmmm
m‘2 Figure 9. US Lab Increment 3 Microgravity Levels
10'2 10"" 1o” 10‘ 102 103
Hz
. . munuu-mummI—mmuum h—:.I*u
Flgure 6. FIR Selence Response to Off Board Loads Eﬁ“:$n mm hm?
anamu—nu-mmmamm
la""
5 FlR-ARIS Science Response to Onboard Loads [v6.0]
10
4 m""
10
3 iOP .
1IJ -- gm""
g 102 ; § 3 s E
E : ' ,-
‘g "" int"" I
E 10' 5 l
E P_-
' -
1o” ”:4 mi
10"" “
m"" H"" 10' m' mt
'3 mmmmm -n-u-u---W
1o
-2 -1 D 1 2 3 . o
1” 1° 1” Hz 1” 1° 1” Flgure 10. EXPRESS On-Orblt ARIS Idle
Flgure 7. FIR SCICI’ICC Response to Onboard Loads ﬁﬂﬂﬂ-nm"" “HM ‘mﬁ
r-t-HI-rmm- ma mumm, mmmmmnmum ""m. ""'
5 FIR-ARIS Science Response to Onboard and Offboard Loads [v6.0] H ""- mmﬁé—m—mmmm H ""L
10
4 NIRAQQ mi
10
103 m""
3
.5 10‘
E “'1:
10” g
m""
10""
10"" m“
10'2 10"" 10° 10‘ 1D2 103
H7
. . -I 0' la?
Flgure 8. FIR SCICI’ICC Response to All Loads ""’4 "" wmgcmmﬂ-lh} -*---~*r--~*--
Figure 11. EXPRESS On-Orbit ARIS Active
7

"
"9","W point were then Root Mean Squared (RMS)
averaged. The ISS Program Utilization Change
My Engineer has deemed this approach acceptable.
FIR does not have any quasi-steady loads, and [3 Lab Mndule
therefore a quasi-steady loads analysis was not .
mm. WWII III
Vibratory — Hard Mounted Condition "" "" I I I I I ._.—.
When FIR is in a hard mounted conﬁguration it must
satisfy the “good neighbor” requirements for a non- I I I I I I
ARIS rack. Two options are available to demonstrate
compliance: the interface force method, or the I I I I I I
acceleration method. FIR will use the acceleration
method, demonstrating that accelerations at the I ”.__ ......... I ,_,._,._,,,_.___,
nearest ARIS rack are below speciﬁed limits. To
implement the acceleration method, it was necessary
to obtain an updated FEM of the US Lab at Assembly . . .
Complete (AC). The FIR FEM is integrated into its Figure 12. Rack Locations in US LAB Module at AC
appropriate rack location within the US Lab at
LABlS3 SO that transfer functions can be obtained Fug-Harmountto MSRRand ClRAcceleration LimitCheckforPlRN110H[v6.1]
from each of the FIR’s disturbers to its adjacent 1”
neighboring ARIS rack, MSRR at LABlO3. The 105
response at CIR was also calculated for reference.
The layout shown in Fig. 12 illustrates the locations 104
of these neighboring racks relative to FIR. A 103
previous investigation by the Human Research a _
Facility (HRF)[13] demonstrated that the US Lab FEM g 102 III] I
constrained at the CBM bolts at Node 1 and 2 will 3 1 '4.
yield the same transfer functions above 2 Hz as the m Accelummmm ' I
fully integrated ISS model. Thus, FIR will adopt this 100 I '
approach as well, taking note that disturbances all Rssmofcmandzp
dissipate to zero at lower frequencies. Response 1“"" RSSWWSRRLTWZP
forces were added up at the Light Tray and Z-Panel 10.2 .
and then Root Sum Squared (RSS). This was done 10'? 1”“ 100 HZ 10‘ 102 103
for both MSRR and CIR. The RSS accelerations for
these adjacent racks are shown in Fig. 13 and were
found to meet the acceleration limit for PIRN 110H Figure 13. FIR “Good Neighbor” Acceleration Check
with FIR locked down.
1 FlR-ARIS Onboard Force Limit Check for PIRN110H [v6.0]
Vibratory — ARIS Condition 1”
When FIR is in an active ARIS conﬁguration,
PIRN110H states that it must demonstrate W'deaanwm""
compliance to a speciﬁc set of on-board interface ‘00 ""armwaanwmﬂ I
force limits. The blue line in Figure 14 shows the
onboard free-free interface forces in comparison with a
the limits. The only Violation is due to the ATCU. If i 10""
the ATCU speed is increased from 1800 to 2200 rpm, 5
the peak shifts one one-third octave band to the right
and comes under the narrow band requirement. 10-2
The interface forces were calculated by determining Tata'mrfaceForce
accelerations at the actuator location on a free-free
rack as per PIRN110H. By multiplying the 10.3
acceleration at each actuator location by the total 104 1U“ :10: 10‘ ‘02
mass of the rack, estimated interface reaction forces
were calculated. The reaction forces for each attach
Figure 14. FIR On Board to Off Board Force Check
8

"
"10","ARIS REQUIREMENTS and prediction as an integral part of the design
process. Isolator resonant frequencies, disturber
Accelerometer Saturation forces, operational speeds, and rack and umbilical
To prevent saturation at the ﬁrst stage gain, the 300 structural modes all dynamically interact with each
Hz low pass ﬁltered peak accelerations must remain other to affect the response at the critical science
below 160 rnilli-g’s. To prevent saturation at the location.
second stage, the ﬁltered peak acceleration at this
stage should be less than 3.4 rnilli-g’s at each FIR Mierogravity Science Reguirernents
accelerometer head location and along the The Fluid Facility Scientist has indicated the Fluid
accelerometer axes. This will be performed for the Science Experiment Mierogravity Requirements are
ﬁnal veriﬁed microgravity control assessment. most critical between 0.01 Hz and 10 Hz. ARIS will
more than adequately isolate FIR from the 188 off
Sway Space board loads within this low frequency range meeting
A sway space analysis was conducted to ensure that these requirements. The only Violation within this
the raek’s snubber pins do not approach the 0.25” region is from the ergorneter currently being
spherical threshold when the ARIS anti-burnp evaluated to reduce its microgravity disturbance
routines are activated. The relative displacement of contribution to the off board loads. In addition,
the pins was predicted due to the offboard NIRA99 experiment operational scenarios can be coordinated
loads. As shown in Figure 15, the sway space stayed to schedule critical science at times when the
well below the 0.25” anti-burnp threshold limit. Each astronauts are not using the ergorneter.
curve represents the relative displacement of each of
the siX-snubber pins. If the snubber pins move more FIR science requirement Violations between 10 Hz
than 0.25” relative to the snubber cups, ARIS anti- and 30 Hz are due to passively isolating the ATCU
bump routines attempt to increase the actuator forces fans. Analyses are currently being conducted to
so that the rack does not bottom out at the snubber eliminate this Violation by hard mounting the ATCU
assemblies. ARIS microgravity performance is Fans.
signiﬁcantly degraded when anti-burnp activates. If
the 0.25” threshold is exceeded, the anti-burnp Science requirements above 30 Hz will be very
routines would be included in the Sirnulink model difﬁcult to meet. Violations above 30 Hz are due to
and the effect on overall performance would be the off board and on board disturbances coupling
measured. with FIR’s structural dynamic modes. Like the
ergorneter, science operational scenarios can be
100 F'R'AR'S 3""”bberpi"" Re'aﬁ“ swayRespmseMo] implemented to limit disturbances during times of
critical science.
10‘
188 Mierogravity Reguirernents
10.2 FIR demonstrates PIRN110H compliance when in a
hardrnounted condition. This compliance is
£106 demonstrated through the acceleration method
.3 * explained in PIRNllOH. Aeoelerations generated at
_4 the nearest ARIS rack (MSRR) are below the
m speciﬁed limits.
‘05 FIR has one Violation of the on-board ARIS rack
force limits. This occurs at the operating frequency of
10:02 10.. mg 101 m. m. the ATCU at 1800 RPM (30 Hz). One solution is to
”2 increase the speed of the ATCU fans in order to
Figure 15. FIR Snubber Pin Displacement move the peak into the next highest one-third-oetave
band. Since the Violation only exceeds the narrow
band requirement and only occurs in one third octave
band, a anier might be sought.
CONCLUSION
When developing a microgravity researeh facility or ARIS Re uirements
experiment for use on. the 18,89 It .15 extremely With all steady state Vibrational disturbers running,
important to eons1der rn10rograv1tytest1ng, analys1s, the rack will stay within its 0.4 inch spherical
9

"
"11","diameter sway space requirement based on the
relative deﬂection between each snubber pin 10. SSP 57000, PIRN 110H, “Mierogravity
mounted on the rack and each snubber cup assembly Requirements Revision”, December 9, 1999.
mounted to the 188. In addition, it appears that the
FIR rack Will stay Within its 0.25 inch spherical 11. FCF-DOC-002, “Scientiﬁc Requirements
diameter such that ARIS’S anti-bump algorithm Will Envelope Document”, March 1999.
not be activated, Optimizing ARIS’S microgravity
performance. (Note: ARIS’S microgravity 12. SSP 50036 Rev. A, “Mierogravity Control Plan”,
performance is signiﬁcantly degraded When the anti- February 29, 1996.
bump algorithm is activated.)
13. SSP-MG00-010, “Evaluation of HRF Rack PIRN
REFERENCES 110H Compliance”, April Steelman, February 9,
2000.
1. International Space Station User’s Guide, Rev 2.
2. FTS—TR-002, “Preliminary Fluids Integrated Rack
(FIR) Mierogravity Control Report”, Marcus Just
and Larry Moss, ZIN Technologies, June 2003.
3. SSP 57006, “ARIS User’s Guide”, International
Space Station Program.
4. SSP-MG00-024, “Non-Isolated Rack Assessment
(NIRA-99) Vibroaeoustie Mierogravity
Assessment Update for Internal Payloads”, Wei-
Joe Sun, August 8, 2000.
5. S. Thampi, “Non-Isolated Rack Rack Assessment
(NIRA99) Mierogravity Mode”, Presentation to
the Microgravily A] T , August, 1999. (Available
at: http://iss—
WWW.jsenasa.gOV/ss/issapt/payofC/OZ4/mgait_p
ages/mgaithtml).
6. A. MeNelis, T. Goodnight, P. Steve, V. Suarez
“Mierogravity Emissions Lab”, 4th Annual
M icmgmvily Environment Interpretation
T utorial, (Available at:
http://www.1ere.nasa.g0V/WWW/MEL/).
7. D683-28702—1 Issue B, “MICROGRAVITY
DISTURBANCE FORCING FUNCTIONS”,
March 1999.
8. G. S. Bushnell, T. M. Anderson, M.D. Beaeraft,
and AD. J aeot, “Active Rack Isolation System
Development For The International Space
Station”, AIAA Paper 97-1203, 1997.
9. I. J . Fialho, S. Thampi, “The Interplay Between
Hardware and Control System Design In The
Development Of the Active Rack Isolation
System”, 41‘“ AIAA Structures, Structural
Dynamics and Materials Conference, Atlanta,
2000.
10

"
