"","x"
"1","A STUDY OF THE EFFECTS OF SPACE FLIGHT ON THE IMMUNE RESPONSE IN DROSOPHILA
MELANOGAS T ER
Thomas F. Fahlenw, Max Sanchez“: Matthew Leraz, Edina Blazeviez, Jennifer Changl, and Sharmila
Bhattacharya3
[Lackheed Martin Space Operatians, NASA Ames Research Center, Maﬂett F ield, CA 94035
ZNASA/Ames Internship Pragram, NASA Ames Research Center, Maﬂett F ield, CA 94035
3NASA Ames Research Center, Life Sciences Divisian, Maﬂett F ield, CA 94035. *Bath authars cantributed
equally t0 this wark and shauld be cansidered as jaintﬁrst authars.
Drosophila melanogaster (fruit ﬂy) is a small, highly this drawer is made out of polyurethane foam Pyrell®.
tractable and well—Characterized organism that is ideal for This material is frequently used in the packaging of ﬂight
the study of molecular, cellular, developmental, and payloads because it is a low ﬂammability foam. In order
physiological processes. In Drosophila, many of these to Check if the foam used in the mid—deck drawer had any
processes, including certain aspects of innate immunity, adverse effect on the Viability of the ﬂies, lcm cubes of
are very similar to those in humans (1). There is evidence ﬂight foam were placed in Vials containing ﬂy media. 10
that space ﬂight affects the immune system of Astronauts Virgin females and 10 male ﬂies were added to each of
such that the Astronauts may become these Vials. The ﬂies were allowed to mate and lay eggs
immunocompromised during and after ﬂight (2, 3). In for two days at 250C. At the end of this period, the
order to study those possible effects, our laboratory will parental population was removed from the Vials. The Vials
be supporting a study to be carried in the mid—deck 0f the containing eggs were allowed to develop for 12 days at
Space Shuttle to examine the effects of space ﬂight on the 250C. The progeny were counted and the male/female
immune system using D. melanogaster as a model. ratios were scored (Figure 2).
Our experiment configuration consists of 10 sample 3'3 ' Mali?
containers (divided into 5 primary and 5 secondary ?I] I Female
containers) that support adult Drosophzla and allow egg
laying and larval development during ﬂight. During the E El]
scheduled ﬂight, Virgin female and male adult ﬂies will be E 5|]
loaded into the primary containers. The ﬂies will then be :- 4|]
allowed to lay eggs on the food for three days. At the end E
of the third day, the food tray in the primary containers E 3'3
will be switched to the secondary containers. This will E El]
move eggs and larvae produced during pre—ﬂight and
launch to the secondary cassettes. A new food tray will be 1D
placed in the primary container. The sample containers l]
consist of ventilated aluminum cassettes enclosed by Fuam Nu Fuam
ventilated type I containers (Fig. l A—B). In order to
execute this experiment in space, these aluminum GI‘ﬂWﬂl Cﬂﬂiﬁtiﬂﬂ
containers were built specifically to allow Drosophila
growth under the ambient conditions 0f the Shhttle Figure 2. Total progeny produced from eggs laid in the
nnddeck, w1th0ut requiring power. This paper describes presence or absence ofpolyurethanefoam Pyrell®. N25
biocompatibility tests to show the suitability of the
materials to specimen welfare,. and should facilitate the The results on Figure 2 suggest no significant difference
use of these containers by other investigators in the future. in the number of progeny produced in the presence or
m absence of the ﬂight foam material. Additionally, n0
— »‘ ' ' ' "" significant death of parental ﬂies was observed (data not
2 ’ ' “fa _ shown). It was concluded, therefore, that Pyrell® foam
Fl,” 55% l "" '° was biocompatible with the specimen in this experiment
- t m 5 configuration.
A B The next study was used to evaluate the effects of
different starting population densities 0n progeny
Figure 1' Figure I '14 depicts one fully loaded Drosophila production. In order to find the optimal number of starting
container. Figure [-8 depicts the Type I container in parental population, we tested two different
WhiCh the cassette Will be enclosed. configurations: A. 5 Virgin females and 5 males (5F+ 5M)
and B. 10 Virgin females and 5 males (10F + 5M). It is
The individual containers will be housed in one of the important to optimize the size of the starting population in
middeck drawers 0f the Space Shuttle. This consists of a order to maximize the number Of progeny developed in
foam tray holding Change—out platform. The foam used in space for each experiment. As shown on Figure 3, a
Gravitational and Space Biology 19(2) August 2006 133

"
"2","T. Fahlen et a1. — A Study of the Effects of Space Flight on the Immune Response in Drosophila
melanagaster
starting population of 10 Virgin females and 5 Virgin assessing the ability of the ﬂies to Clear the infection.
males is optimal for our 12 day experiment in space. The Ground testing in our laboratory shows that we are able to
total progeny size from 10 females and 5 males was infect ﬂies with 10,000 E. coliHB101bacterialcells with
bigger than that produced by 5 Virgin females and 5 greater than 95% survival of the ﬂies (data not shown).
males, and yet these containers did not show signs of Following 3 days of infection we find that the ﬂies reduce
overcrowding. their bacterial load by two orders of magnitude (Figure 5).
Our ﬂight experiment will utilize this assay to assess the
1000 function of the immune system of ﬂies that have
8 900 SF + M developed in space.
E 800
i 700 l10F+5M
2 600 100000
“a 500
g 400
E
:23 I I I I
g 100 10000
E 0
Males Females Males Females
Primary Containers Secondary Containers
Figure 3. Comparison of starting parental density on
progeny production in ﬂight cassettes.
When the samples return from space, a considerable Condition y
amount of work will be conducted with blood obtained
from third instar larval samples. An experiment was Figure 5. Bacterial Challenge assay. F lies were injected
performed with the ﬂight containers for the full ﬂight with 50 ml of a 2 x [08 cells/ml suspension of E. coli
duration and the number of resulting embryos and larvae HB101 in PBS (10, 000 cells/ﬂy). A subset of the ﬂies
were counted as shown in Figure 4. Large numbers of (Day 0) were immediately assayed for bacterial load by
third instar larvae were obtained which should be more dilution plating of homogenates prepared in Luria Broth
than adequate for the hemocyte analyses to be conducted + 1% triton X—IOO with 3 ﬂies per homogenate. A second
from the space—ﬂown samples. The embryos and earlier subset of ﬂies were incubated at 29 0C for 3 days and then
instar larvae are also present in sufficient numbers for assessed for bacterial load in the same manner. Only live
adequate morphology and gene expression studies ﬂies were assayed. Error bars show the standard
deviation from the mean. N = 3.
900 We have developed and tested containers that will sustain
800 ISF + 5M our specimen for an experiment designed to address the
700 l10F + 5M effects of spaceﬂight on the innate immune system of
Drosophila. These containers should also be appropriate
600 . . . .
500 for use by other investigators. needing to use Drosophila
400 melanogaster as a model spec1men in space.
300 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
200 We gratefully acknowledge helpful discussions with Dr.
100 David Schneider concerning the bacterial infection assay.
0
Embryos lst Instar 2nd Instar 3rd Instar REFERENCES
Developmental Phase 1. Hoffman, J .A., PC. Kafatos, CA. Janeway Jr.,
planned for our ﬂight experiment. R.A.B. Ezekowitz. 1999. Phlogenetic Perspectives in
Innate Immunity. Science. 284:1313—1318
Figure 4. Number of animals at each developmental 2. Borchers, A.T., C.L. Keen, M.E. Gershwin. 2002.
phase. MicrograVity and immune responsiveness:
implications for space travel. Nutrition. 18:889—898.
Our experiment is designed to assess the immune function 3. Sonnenfeld, G. and W.T. Shearer. 2002. Immune
of ﬂies following a shuttle mission. As an assay for function during space ﬂight. Nutrition. 18:899—903.
immune function, we have adapted a bacterial Clearance 4. Brandt, S.M., M.S. Dionne, R.S. Khush, L.N. Pham,
assay, previously described by Brandt Ct 31- (4), 19 our T.J. Vigdal, D. S. Schneider. 2004. Secreted Bacterial
post—ﬂight processing. Brieﬂy, this assay involves Effectors and Host—Produced Eiger/TNF Drive Death
infecting the ﬂies with a known quantity of bacteria and in a Salmonella—Infected Fruit Fly. PLOS. 2:e418.
134 Gravitational and Space Biology 19(2) August 2006

"
