"","x"
"1","XXXVI Meeting of the Italian Section Of the Combustion Institute
COOL FLAMES IN DROPLET COMBUSTION
A. Cuoci, A. Frassoldati, T. Faravelli, E. Ranzi
albert0.cuoci@polimi.it
Department Of Chemistry, Materials, and Chemical Engineering “G. Natta”
Politecnico di Milano (Italy)
Abstract
Anomalous combustion of n-heptane droplets burning in microgravity conditions
was recently experimentally observed by Nayagam et al. [Combustion and Flame,
159 p. 3583—3588 (2012)]. In particular, after a ﬁrst radiative extinction (i.e. the
Visible ﬂame ceases to exist), relatively large, spark-ignited n-heptane droplets
continue to strongly vaporize (according to the well-known squared-laW) for an
extended period, ending in a secondary extinction at a ﬁnite droplet diameter. The
hypothesis proposed by Nayagam et al. was that this seeond-stage vaporization is
sustained by a lOW-temperature, soot-free, “eool-ﬂame’ ’ heat release.
In this paper we applied a numerical model describing the combustion of isolated
fuel droplets in microgravity conditions to explore the feasibility of such
hypothesis. The numerical model solves the unsteady transport equations of mass,
momentum species and energy, both for the droplet and the gas phase, assuming a
spherically symmetric domain. Detailed transport properties are accounted for both
the phases (liquid and gas) and the droplet/gas interface is described assuming
thermodynamic equilibrium. Radiative heat transfer is accurately modeled in order
to correctly capture the ﬁrst-stage (radiative extinction), under the hypothesis of
gray gases. A detailed kinetic scheme With ~150 species, accounting for the low-
temperature mechanism, is adopted. The resulting model consists of a large,
structured system of differential algebraic equations, With numerical complexity
due both to the stiff nature of the kinetic mechanism and to the ﬂame structure
around the droplet.
The numerical results conﬁrmed the hypothesis proposed by Nayagam et al.: after
the ﬁrst-stage ignition, a cool ﬂame at ~7OO K persists around the droplet for a long
period of time (depending on the initial diameter of the droplet), resulting in a
Vigorous vaporization. The comparison With the experimental measurements is
very satisfactory: both the extinction diameters are captured With reasonable
agreement and the vaporization rate is correctly predicted.
A couple of possible long-term implications of these results can be mentioned: i)
the possibility to use the eool-mode combustion of individual droplets may lead to
entirely different design concepts of spray burners; ii) since the eool-mode persists
after the hot-ﬂame extinction, safety procedures based only on considerations of
hot ﬂames may become inadequate for assuring safety under all conditions.

"
"2","XXXVI Meeting of the Italian Section Of the Combustion Institute
Introduction
The combustion of liquid fuels is of great interest in many practical applications,
from industrial burners to diesel engines, especially because of their high-energy
density per unit volume [1]. However, the strong interactions between the many
physieo-ehemieal processes dominating the ignition of fuel droplets, makes the
study of combustion of liquid fuels a very tough subject, both experimentally and
numerically. It is thus useful to take apart the overall system and to study simpler
and possibly ideal conditions, like combustion and evaporation of isolated fuel
droplets in microgravity conditions.
Mierogravity experiments of combustion of isolated droplets are quite common in
the scientiﬁc literature, for a wide range of fuels. Experimental investigations
clearly conﬁrmed the theory, according to which, after a short transition period, a
steady-state regime of vaporization is reached and the square of the droplet
diameter decreases linearly with time (d-squared law). More recently, with the
availability of long-duration spaee-based miero-graVity platforms, larger droplets
have been studied, characterized by longer burning histories [1, 2]. In particular, in
these and other experiments, combustion of n-heptane droplets received a lot of
attention, especially because of its consideration as a component of surrogate fuels
for diesel and gasoline engines. In this context, for the ﬁrst time Nayagam et al. [3]
reported experimental observations in which large n-heptane droplets eXhibit dual
modes of combustion and extinction. First the droplet undergoes normal burning
with a Visible ﬂame which surrounds the droplet and extinguishes due to the
radiative effects at a relatively large droplet size. However, this extinction is
followed by a quasi-steady vaporization of the droplet without any Visible ﬂame
detected, which ends abruptly, at a point called “seeond-stage extinction”. This
two-stage combustion has been observed in the past for bi-eomponent fuel droplets
[4], and easily explained: the lighter component supports the initial ﬂame, while
the second period is supported by the heaVier component. The substantial
difference with the n-heptane case is that for the bi-eomponent droplets both stages
involve traditional hot ﬂames. On the contrary, dual-mode combustion was not
observed for pure-fuel droplets before the work of Nayagam et al. [3]. The possible
explanation proposed by Nayagam et al. [3] was that this seeond-stage vaporization
is sustained by a low-temperature, soot-free, “eool-ﬂame” heat release. However,
they were unable to provide deﬁnitive proof of this interpretation, which, if correct,
may necessitate deeper investigations of currently known eool-ﬂame chemistry in
these systems.
In this paper we applied a numerical model describing the combustion of isolated
fuel droplets in microgravity conditions to explore the correctness of such
hypothesis. The work is organized as reported in the following. We ﬁrst describe
the experiments performed by Nayagam et al. [3] in which the dual-mode
combustion was observed. Then, the numerical model is presented, together with
details about the numerical algorithm adopted. In the ﬁnal part we present the
numerical results and the comparison with the experimental measurements.

"
"3","XXXVI Meeting of the Italian Section Of the Combustion Institute
Microgravity experiments
In this section we summarize only the main features (relevant for the numerical
simulations) of the experiments conducted by Nayagam et al. [3], in which the
dual-mode combustion was observed. Further details of experiments and
operational procedures can be found in Dietrich et al. [5]. The experimental
measurements were conducted on board the International Space Station (188) using
the Multi-User Droplet Combustion Apparatus (MDCA). The cylindrical
combustion chamber had a free-volume of approximately 95 1. An opposed-needle
deployment technique was adopted to freely deploy droplets of chosen initial size
in microgravity. The experimental diagnostic system consisted of a blaek-and-
white, baek-lit droplet image-eapture camera, a UV-sensitive ﬂame-imaging
camera ﬁltered to observe OH*-ehemilumineseenee at a 310 nm wavelength, and a
CCD color camera.
The combustion chamber was ﬁlled with the desired ambient gas mixture,
consisting of oxygen, nitrogen, and sometimes carbon dioxide, at a selected
pressure. Over one hundred droplet burns were carried out using n-heptane fuel in
varying ambient gas mixtures, with initial droplet diameters in the range of d0=2-4
mm, primarily at 0.7 and 1 atmosphere pressures. From the digital images, the
droplet diameter and the ﬂame diameter were obtained as functions of time using
an image-analysis software.
Mathematical model
The general mathematical model used to describe the transient evaporation,
ignition, and combustion of isolated pure fuel droplets in a large environment at
constant pressure is brieﬂy reported below. Mierogravity simpliﬁes the problem,
because of the absence of buoyancy and the resulting 1-D nature of the evaporation
and combustion of a droplet. Time-dependent, spherically symmetrical numerical
computations are well suited to such a problem. The creation and location of a
droplet can be a source of asymmetry in experimental measurements. Nevertheless,
the predictions indicate that these uncertainties do not greatly affect the model’s
assumptions. Detailed chemical kinetics in the gas phase with multicomponent
molecular transport are considered. Only the ordinary diffusion term of the mass
ﬂux of species is taken into account in the gaseous phase. Estimations including the
Soret effect did not show any signiﬁcant modiﬁcation of the results and for this
reason are neither reported nor discussed. Given these assumptions, the liquid
phase is described by the following equations of mass and energy:
plainﬂmzﬁ Mi) (1)
dt 3 dt dt
101C171ﬂ : i220/219 ﬂ) (2)
(9t r 6r dr

"
"4","XXXVI Meeting of the Italian Section Of the Combustion Institute
where ,0] , Cpl and kl are the density, the speciﬁc heat and the thermal
conductivity of the liquid phase, respectively. R d is the droplet diameter, while T1
the droplet temperature. The term de/dt describes the movement of the droplet’s
surface and vg is the gas velocity in the radial direction. This term can be positive
(i.e., the droplet enlarges) if the expansion, due to heating, is greater than the mass
loss due to evaporation. The properties of the liquid are assumed from Daubert and
Danner’s data base [6], from Reid et a1. [7], and Perry and Green [8]. Speciﬁc
attention is devoted to the presence of internal liquid motion due to heterogeneity
in the surface temperature [9]. Such internal recirculation inside a pure fuel droplet
enhances heat transfer. The heating up transient becomes slower, while the burning
rate or extinction phenomena are not affected. To estimate the effect of this
convective two-dimensional contribution is quite complex and would require
further computational efforts, making the whole problem quite difﬁcult for current
computers to handle. On the basis of the proposals of Marehese and Dryer [9], it is
possible to use an “effective” liquid-phase conductivity, but this would introduce a
new parameter. Generally good agreement with experimental measurements is
observed, even when the presence of internal recirculation in the liquid phase is
ignored. All the reported results assume unmodiﬁed transport properties.
The following equations of mass, species and energy are taken into account for the
gas phase:
dog 1 a 2
— + —— r v = 0 3
(9t r2 8r< gpg) ()
6a) . 5a) . 1 a 2 .
pg (—5? + vg 7:1] 2 3—250» pgwgyjI/gymgj J =1...NC (4)
”g 5Tg_15235i_” 5i _
ngpg [3+ Vg E] —r—25[r 8r [kg 8r ]] pg;(Vg,ijg,ng,j) a], +QR VqR (5)
where pg , Cpg and kg are the density, the speciﬁc heat and the thermal
conductivity of the gas phase, respectively. The symbols wgyj, ngj, Q]. , Cpg’j
indicate the mass fraction, the mass diffusion velocity, the formation rate and the
speciﬁc heat of species j. QR is the heat release due to the Chemical reactions, while
qR is the radiative heat ﬂuX. The transport properties were either taken from the
CHEMKIN transport database [10] or estimated following the procedure proposed
by Wang and Frenklaeh [11]. The thermochemical information on the gas phase
was obtained primarily from the CHEMKIN thermodynamic database. Unavailable
thermodynamic data were estimated by group additivity methods [12]. Closure of
the system and equilibrium between gas and liquid demand an equation of state,

"
"5","XXXVI Meeting of the Italian Section Of the Combustion Institute
generally expressed as f (V,T, P, 01, mg) 2 O , for the gas phase. The results reported
below refer to the ideal gas equation. However, modiﬁed Redlieh—Kwong—Soave
and Peng—Robinson equations were also tested, without any signiﬁcant
modiﬁcations in the simulations. Radiative heat ﬂuxes were estimated by adopting
the approach proposed by Kazakov et a1. [13]. The Planck mean absorption
coefﬁcients were derived from polynomial expressions for C0, C02, and H20,
which are assumed to be the only molecules inﬂuencing radiative transfer [14].
The boundary conditions are deeply discussed in [15] and are not here reported for
lack of space. The initial temperature in the gas phase differs according to the kind
of experiment to be modeled. Ignition experiments require a more complex
description. In fact, the deployment of the droplet into a cold environment is
usually followed by the local application of a transient external ignition source
(sparks or hot wires). These procedures can modify the spherical symmetric
structure of the problem. In line with the approach pro-posed by Marehese and
Dryer [9], ignition was simulated by assuming a short period (~1 s) of pure
evaporation at ambient temperature, followed by a non-uniform temperature radial
proﬁle peaking at~2000 K.
The overall model consists of a differential system of the conservation equations
with boundary and initial conditions. As previously noted, the attention to low-
temperature phenomena leads to the use of a detailed kinetic mechanism, which
includes a large number of components. The resulting system of algebraic and
partial differential equations requires particular attention to the numerical aspects
of the problem. The partial differential equations are diseretized by means of a
moving spatial grid. The numerical problem is then Characterized by a large sys-
tem of differential-algebraie equations (DAE), with the velocity in the gas phase
evaluated using the mass conservation equation. Furthermore, nonlinear algebraic
equations are used to describe the gas—liquid interphase conditions.
Table 1. Operating conditions of the experiments
of Nayagam et al. [3] simulated in this work.

02 K
“mm
n----
n----

"
"6","XXXVI Meeting of the Italian Section of the Combustion Institute
The complexity of this problem, coupled to the intrinsic stiffness of the DAB
system, means that speciﬁc attention must be paid to the numerical methods and
solver routines. In fact, this problem is quite Challenging, not only with regard to
the precision required, but also in terms of: i) robustness (sudden ignition, steep
proﬁles, high gradients); ii) efﬁciency (simulations can take more than 2 days of
CPU time).
We adopted the BzzMath library [16] comprising the BzzDae C++ Classes
(BzzMath is freeware for noncommercial use and can be directly down-loaded at
http_ ://www.chem.p_olimi . it/home s/gbuzzi).
The droplet ﬁrst enlarges when heated and then shrinks during vaporization.
Therefore, a moving spatial grid was introduced to describe the moving boundaries
between the droplet and the surrounding gas. Non-equispaoed control volumes are
used to discretize the liquid and gas phases. In particular, by applying the simple
rule Am] = aAri, with 0L~=l.05, the ﬁnal step size becomes ~500 times the initial
one, depending, on the total number of grid points. Hence, a large gas volume
around the droplet is described by maintaining a very ﬁne grid size at the gas—
liquid interface, where the critical gradients are located.
The structure of the DAB system is mainly a tridiagonal block, due to spatial
disoretization, with the exception of the column corresponding to the droplet’s
radius, where the nonzero elements refer to the moving grid. Radiation terms in the
energy balance too are spread over the whole matrix, even though diagonal terms
dominate. Most of the equations are devoted to the Chemical species involved in
the detailed kinetic scheme, with ~l60 equations for each disoretization point.
Consequently, the over-all number of DAEs ranges between ~25,000 and ~65,000,
depending on the number of points of the adopted grid. The possibility of
exploiting the quasi-tridiagonal block structure is of crucial importance in
drastically reducing CPU time. For this purpose, a speciﬁcally developed C++
DAE class of the BzzMath library was adopted.
Results and discussion
The numerical simulations were conducted for several droplets, with different
initial diameters, burning in Oz/Nz atmospheres with different compositions. The
complete list is reported in Table 1. Several computational grids, with different
number of points, were investigated, However, all the results reported in the
following refer to the simulations conducted using a computational grid with 30
points for the droplet (liquid phase) and 120 points for the gas phase. The
convective terms were disoretized using the upwind scheme, while the diffusion
terms were disoretized using centered, 2nd order differences. The simulations were
carried out on Intel® Xeon® CPU X5675 @ 3.07 GHz processors and each
simulation took ~6 h of computational time.
In the following we focus the attention on the results corresponding to the Run 2,
which are presented in detail and discussed. Similar observations can be repeated
also for the other droplets reported in Table l.

"
"7","XXXVI Meeting of the Italian Section of the Combustion Institute
In Figure 1 we show the square of the droplet diameter as functions of time, as
numerically predicted by our model (continuous line) and compared With the
experimental measurements of Nayagam et al. [3] (points), together With the ﬂame
diameter. Immediately following ignition at time i=0, the square of the droplet
diameter decreases almost linearly With time. At around t=9 S, the ﬂame-diameter
abruptly ends, indicating cessation of the detectable Visible-ﬂame and OH
emissions. This point corresponds to the so called ﬁrst-stage (or hot temperature)
extinction. However, the square of the droplet diameter continues to decrease
linearly until around t=35 S, When the slope abruptly Changes to a lower value
indicating a reduced rate of vaporization. This point corresponds to the second-
18 — 40
16 Flame diameter Run 2 3
a (maXimum 0f 21% 02 5
E 14 Tob'I-XHX temperature) d0=3.91 mm 30 E
E 12 .-°° ‘f E
4-! _’ ’7'. 25 t
E 10 ; '0... g
“C : .'o._ 20 E
E 8 : ‘6‘? '9
8 , : ""5’.\ 15 3
""5 b : '0... E
.5 Squared droplet n... 10 g
g 4 I diameter \
§- 2 ..(..\iﬁ«“.., 1. S
0 0
0 10 20 30 40 50
time [s]

Figure 1. Squared droplet diameter and ﬂame diameter (i.e. the location Where the
peak of temperature occurs) as a function of time: comparison between
experimental data [3] (points) and numerical predictions for Run 2.

18 — 3000

16 Run 2
g Squared droplet 21% 02 2500 _
E 14 diameter do=3.91mm %
E 12 \“T/ \ 2000 g
'c """" 1500 E
'53 8 Peak 3
§- . temperature E
*- 6 ‘ 1000 3
“U ‘ .g
E 4 a a
g ‘~.~_ 500 E
g 2 ""-------------- ------
0 0
0 10 20 30 40 50
time [s]
Figure 2. Squared droplet diameter and peak temperature in the gas phase as a
function of time for Run 2 (see Table 1). The continuous lines were obtained by
accounting for the low-T mechanism, While the dotted lines by suppressing it.

"
"8","XXXVI Meeting of the Italian Section of the Combustion Institute
stage extinction. At that point, from the experimental point of View, a vapor Cloud
invariably is seen by the Visible camera to begin to form and grow. The numerical
predictions are in satisfactory agreement With the experiments, both in terms of
droplet diameter and ﬂame diameter histories.
The burning-rate constant K (i.e. the rate of decrease of the square of the droplet
diameter With time) was calculated for the period during Which a Visible ﬂame
eXists (0—9 s), and for the period between radiative and second-stage extinction (9-
35 s). Both experiments and numerical predictions show that the value of K during
the second stage remains quite constant, at a value smaller than that at the end of
the ﬁrst stage, indicating that the quasi-steady burning rate is less Vigorous for the
second stage.
Figure 2 reports the calculated maximum temperature in the gas phase and the
squared droplet diameter as function of time in two different cases: by accounting
for the low-temperature mechanism (continuous lines) and neglecting the low-
O.9O 1400
n-C7H 16 El
0.80
t 1200
0.70 ‘
x 1000
c 0.60 ‘ OH X 5000 temperature —.
.2 | E
g 0.50 | ‘ 800 g
g 0.10 \‘ COZXZ H20x5 600 g
E 0.30 \ I I d - - - E
.. \’ 400 3
0.20 \ 02
\ co x10 l» 200
0.10 _/‘.\----\ ~
/' \\
0.00 - - - ... 0
0.0E+00 1.0E702 2.0E702 3.0802 4.0302
radial coordinate [m]
0.80 — 800
n-C7H 16
0.70 1 El 700
0.60 ‘\ 600
c ‘ temperature _
.9 0.50 ‘ 500 E,
E \ OQOOHX 100 g
; 0.40 400 a
g ‘\ co x10 8
E 030 x / H20x5 300 E
\ O.)
0.20 /. F . C02x 2 02 200 4-!
0.10 2"" I 100
I/- ~“~--_.._"""".._.
0.00 --'--““""0
0.0E+00 5.0803 1.0E~02 1.5E~02 2.0E~O2 2.5E-02
radial coordinate [m]
Figure 3. Calculated gas-phase species and temperature proﬁle surrounding the n-
heptane droplet at t=2 S (panel a) and t=15 S (panel b). The results refer to Run 2.

"
"9","XXXVI Meeting of the Italian Section of the Combustion Institute
temperature reactions (dotted lines). It is evident that the ﬂrst-stage extinction is
followed by a cool ﬂame at ~7OO K, Which persists around the droplet for a long
period of time, up to the second stage extinction and Which is observed only if the
low-temperature mechanism is accounted for. On the contrary, When only the high-
temperature reactions are considered, after the ﬂrst-stage extinction the maximum
temperature in the gas phase rapidly moves to the ambient temperature, the
vaporization rate strongly decreases and the agreement With the experimental data
is completely lost. These results are a Clear conﬁrmation of the hypothesis
proposed by Nayagam et al. [3], about the possible formation of a cool ﬂame after
the ﬁrst extinction.

In order to better support this point, we reported in Figure 3, the radial proﬁles of
temperature and main species calculated at t=2 S and t=15 S. The selected time
correspond to two very different ﬂame structures: a hot-ﬂame in the ﬁrst case and a
cool ﬂame in the second case. The temperature proﬁle in the spark-ignited
experiments shows that Oz becomes zero Where the maXimum temperature is
reached. A typical diffusive burning regime is then observed. The concentration of
n-heptane at the interface is dictated by vapor—liquid equilibrium and rapidly
decreases to zero in the pyrolysis region, well before the maXimum temperature.
The main products are H20, CO, and C02 under these conditions. Ethylene and
acetylene (not here reported) are important intermediates, together With methane,
benzene, and naphthalene. Moreover, the maXimum temperature, initially located
very Close to the droplet, moves toward larger standoff ratios. C02 and H20 are the
end products in the complete combustion of the fuel droplet. A very different
picture is observed at t=15 S, Where the presence of a cool ﬂame With a maximum
temperature of ~700 K seems evident. Normal-heptane does not fully react under
these conditions and ketohydroperoxide (OQOOH) is the main component With
Table 2. Comparison between the measured and predicted ﬁrst and
seoond-stage extinction diameters.
——
“II“-
[%V01] [mm] [mm] [mm] [mm]
n------
n——————

"
"10","XXXVI Meeting of the Italian Section of the Combustion Institute
H20, H202, and CO. Normal-heptane and oxygen concentration proﬁles are
smoother than in the previous case, as a consequence of the lower reactivity of the
system. This lower reactivity means that complete combustion of the high-
temperature oxidation mechanism cannot be activated, with the result that partially
premixed combustion occurs.
Similar results were also observed for the remaining droplets investigated in the
present work (see Table 1). For all these cases, cool ﬂames were always observed,
both numerically and experimentally. Table 2 reports a comparison between the
measured and calculated ﬂrst-stage and seoond-stage extinction diameters. The
agreement can be considered satisfactory for most cases, even if some
discrepancies can be observed, especially for Run 3, Run 4 and Run 6. Nayagam et
al. [3] reported that their experiments were partially performed using free droplets
and partially using ﬂber-sustained droplets, without specifying more details.
Therefore a possible explanation of the maj or discrepancies between the model and
the experiments could be attributed to the presence of the ﬁber, which is not
accounted for in the current numerical model. In particular, this could explain the
results referring to runs in standard air (Runs 2, 3, 4 and 19). Indeed, even if the
initial diameters are very similar (ranging from d0=3.58 mm to d0=3.92 mm), the
behaViors experimentally observed looks quite different and uncorrelated with do,
probably because some of the experiments were performed using ﬂber-sustained
droplets. Of course, further investigations are needed to better Clarify this point.
Conclusions
In this paper we applied a numerical model describing the combustion of isolated
n-heptane fuel droplets in microgravity, described using a detailed kinetic
mechanism. The main objective was to investigate and eXplain the experimental
observations of Nayagam et al. [3], showing the presence of a seoond-stage
extinction, which follows the usual ﬂrst-stage (hot temperature) radiative extinction
of the ﬂame around the n-heptane droplet.
The numerical predictions, in satisfactory agreement with the experimental
measurements, showed that, after the ﬂrst-stage extinction, the vaporization is
sustained by a low-temperature, soot-free, “oool-ﬂame’ ’ heat release.
A couple of possible long-term implications of these results can be mentioned: i)
the possibility to use the oool-mode combustion of individual droplets may lead to
entirely different design concepts of spray burners; ii) since the oool-mode persists
after the hot-ﬂame extinction, safety procedures based only on considerations of
hot ﬂames may become inadequate for assuring safety under all conditions.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge Prof. F. A. Williams (University of
California, San Diego, USA) for the useful discussions and suggestions and Dr. D.
L. Dietrich (NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, USA) for providing us
more details about the microgravity experiments.

"
"11","XXXVI Meeting of the Italian Section of the Combustion Institute

References

1. Nayagam, V., et a1., Mierogravily n-heptane droplet combustion in oxygen-
helium mixtures at atmospheric pressure. AIAA Journal, 1998. 36(8): p.
1369-1378.

2. Dietrich, D.L., et a1., Droplet combustion experiments in Spaeelab.
Symposium (International) on Combustion, 1996. 26(1): p. 1201-1207.

3. Nayagam, V., et 211., Can cool ﬂames support quasi-steady alkane droplet
burning? Combustion and Flame, 2012. 159(12): p. 3583-3588.

4. Shaw, B.D., B.D. Clark, and D. Wang, Spaeelab experiments on
combustion 0fheptane/hexadeeane droplets. AIAA Journal, 2001. 39(12):
p. 2327-2335.

5. Dietrich, D.L.

6. Daubert, TE. and RF. Danner, Data compilation tables ofproperties of
pure compounds. 1985: Design Institute for Physical Property Data,
American Institute of Chemical Engineers.

7. Reid, R.C., J .M. Prausnitz, and BE. Poling, The properties of Gases and
Liquids. 1988, New York: McGraw Hill.

8. Perry, RH. and D.W. Green, Perry's Chemical Engineers' Handbook (7th
Edition). 1997: McGraW-Hill.

9. Marehese, A.J. and FL. Dryer, The eﬂeet of liquid mass transport on the
combustion and extinction ofbieomponent droplets ofmethanol and water.
Combustion and Flame, 1996. 105(1-2): p. 104-122.

10. Kee, R.J., F. Rupley, and J.A. Miller, Chemkin II: A Fortran chemical
kinetics package for the analysis of gaS-phase Chemical kinetics. Sandia
Report SAND89—8009 - Sandia National Laboratories, 1989.

11. Wang, H. and M. Frenklach, T ransport propertis ofpolyeyelie aromatic
hydrocarbons for ﬂame modeling. Combustion and Flame, 1994. 96: p.
163-170.

12. Benson, S.W., T hermoehemieal Kinetics (2nd Edition). 1976, New York:
Wiley.

13. Kazakov, A., J . Conley, and FL. Dryer, Detailed modeling of an isolated,
ethanol droplet combustion under microgravity conditions. Combustion
and Flame, 2003. 134(4): p. 301-314.

14. Hall, R.J., The radiative source term for plane-parallel layers of reacting
combustion gases. Journal of Quantitative Spectroscopy and Radiative
Transfer, 1993. 49: p. 517-523.

15. Cuoei, A., et a1., Autoignition and burning rates offuel droplets under
microgravity. Combustion and Flame, 2005. 143(3): p. 211-226.

16. Buzzi-Ferraris, G. BzzMath 6.0 Numerical Libraries. 2010; Available
from: http_://h0mes.chem.p_01imi.it/gbuzzi/indexhtm.

"
