"","x"
"1","Paper # 070HE-0303 Topic: Spray and Droplet
8th US National Combustion Meeting
Organized by the Western States Section of the Combustion Institute
and hosted by the University of Utah
May 19—22, 2013.
Methanol Droplet Combustion 1n Oxygen-Inert EnV1ronments 1n
Micrograwty
Vedha Nayagaml, Daniel L. DietrichZ, M ichael C. H icks2
Farman A. Williams3
1National Center for Space Exploration Research,
NASA Glenn Research Cemeig Cleveland, Ohio 44135
2NASA Glenn Research Cemeig
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
3Department OfMeChanical and Aerospace Engineering,
University Of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093

The Flame Extinguishment (FLEX) experiment that is currently underway in the Combustion Integrated

Rack facility onboard the International Space Station is aimed at understanding the effects of inert

diluents on the ﬂammability of condensed phase fuels. To this end, droplets of various fuels, including

alkanes and alcohols, are burned in a quiescent microgravity environment with varying amounts of

oxygen and inert diluents to determine the limiting oxygen index (LCD for these fuels. In this study

we report experimental observations of methanol droplets burning in oxygen—nitrogen—carbon dioxide

and oxygen—nitrogen—helium gas mixtures at 0.7 and 1 atmospheric pressures. The initial droplet size

varied between approximately 1.5 mm and 4 mm to capture both diffusive extinction brought about by

insufﬁcient residence time at the ﬂame and radiative extinction caused by excessive heat loss from the

ﬂame zone. The ambient oxygen concentration varied from a high value of 30% by volume to as low

as 12%, approaching the limiting oxygen index for the fuel. The inert dilution by carbon dioxide and

helium varied over a range of 0% to 70% by volume. In these experiments, both freely ﬂoated and

tethered droplets were ignited using symmetrically opposed hot—wire igniters and the burning histories

were recorded onboard using digital cameras, downlinked later to the ground for analysis. The digital

images yielded droplet and ﬂame diameters as functions of time and subsequently droplet burning rate,

ﬂame standoff ratio, and initial and extinction droplet diameters. Simpliﬁed theoretical models correlate

the measured burning rate constant and the ﬂame standoff ratio reasonably well. An activation energy

asymptotic theory accounting for time—dependent water dissolution or evaporation from the droplet is

shown to predict the measured diffusive extinction conditions well. The experiments also show that the

limiting oxygen index for methanol in these diluent gases is around 12% to 13% oxygen by volume.
1 Introduction
Studies of droplet combustion are of interest from both fundamental and applied Viewpoints, the
latter in connection with both combustor performance and safety issues. Inﬂuences of carbon diox-
ide and helium, as well as increased nitrogen, in the atmosphere on the combustion characteristics
and on extinction bear on questions of ﬁre extinguishment. Liquid fuel droplets also are conve-
nient vehicles for investigating relevant combustion processes from fundamental Viewpoints, and

1

"
"2","5th US Combustion Meeting - Paper # 070HE-0303 Topic: Spray and Droplet
methanol, as a non-sooting fuel, offers an opportunity to examine an important simpliﬁed case. Al-
though there have been a number of studies of methanol droplet combustion and extinction in the
past, inﬂuences of different atmospheres are poorly understood. For these reasons, the present re-
search is designed to advance our knowledge of methanol droplet combustion in such atmospheres.
Extensive data of this kind on the combustion of methanol droplets have now been obtained in the
FLEX program onboard the International Space Station (188). More than 100 droplets have been
burned. Here we repost much of these new data and offer simpliﬁed analyses of the results.
Methanol droplet vaporization in a humid environment apparently was ﬁrst studied by Law and
co-workers in 1987 [1]. They showed that, when a methanol droplet vaporizes in a humid en-
vironment, water condenses on the cold droplet surface and is transported into the interior. The
latent heat of water released during condensation was stated to increase the methanol vaporization
rate. Subsequently, the combustion of methanol droplets in a quiescent microgravity environment
[2, 3] and in free falling conditions [4] was investigated. Cho et al. [2] conducted methanol droplet-
combustion experiments in helium-oxygen mixtures, chosen because extinction diameters could be
accurately measured in a short-duration microgravity facility as a result of the increased burning
rates produced by highly conductive helium mixtures. Yang et al. [3] also showed experimentally
that pure methanol droplets burning in air eXhibit extinction at a non-zero droplet diameter. Lee
and Law [4] studied the combustion of freely-falling methanol and ethanol droplets and demon-
strated that they absorb water produced during the combustion process. They also measured the
water content of the droplet as a function of burning time and the extinction diameters for both
methanol and ethanol droplets.
Droplets of initially pure methanol and methanol-water mixtures, diameters 2-5 mm, were burned
in a space-shuttle experiment aboard Columbia during the USML-2 mission [5]. The results
showed that for pure methanol, unlike the alkane droplets that were also studied on that mission,
the extinction diameter varies linearly with the initial droplet diameter. Okai and co-workers [6],
as a part of their methanol-dodecanol droplet-array experiments, measured the extinction diameter
for a single methanol droplet at atmospheric pressure, and additional data from the USML-2 eX-
periments has been reported and analyzed [7]. Marchese et al. [7] show that for small methanol
droplet burning in air, radiation is unimportant, and the ﬂames extinguish by diffusion-controlled
mechanisms, similar to the diffusive-extinction results of the present study. They also show that
when the initial droplet diameter is greater than roughly 4 mm, the droplet ﬂame extinguishes
through excessive radiative heat loss, as predicted in the analysis of Chao et al. [8]. More recently
Hicks et al. [9] studied the inﬂuence of carbon dioxide dilution on methanol droplet extinction for
a ﬁxed oxygen concentration of 21% at one atmospheric pressure. They showed that the measured
extinction diameter can be correlated well by a simpliﬁed theory that employs a critical Damkb’hler
number.
Results of several theoretical and numerical studies of methanol droplet combustion which include
water absorption, have been presented in the past [9—15]. One-dimensional numerical simulations
[10] with detailed chemical kinetics for methanol showed that liquid-phase molecular diffusion of
condensed water in the droplet interior is too slow to be consistent with the observed large amount
of water present in the droplets during the experiments. It was concluded that convective trans-
port within the liquid droplet must occur[lO]. A reduced chemical-kinetic scheme for methanol
gas-phase combustion chemistry was used to examine burning under two limiting conditions for
2

"
"3","5th US Combustion Meeting - Paper # 070HE-0303 Topic: Spray and Droplet
droplet internal mixing, namely a purely diffusive mode, and a fully mixed mode [11]. The results
showed that the perfect liquid-phase mixing model predicts extinction diameters close to the eX-
perimentally observed values, and it was speculated that diffusocapillary (or solutal-Marangoni)
instability, caused by the difference between the surface tension of water and that of methanol,
could lead to strong internal circulation. AXisymmetric numerical simulations with surface-tension
effects included have shown that this type of Marangoni effect in fact has a strong inﬂuence during
methanol droplet evaporation and combustion [16—18]. Water absorption with a well-mixed liquid-
phase thus is a reasonable approximation for describing methanol droplet combustion.
In a paper reporting somewhat more detailed theoretical model calculations [9], it was indicated in
introductory considerations that simpliﬁed physical reasoning can be used to estimate the droplet
diameter at extinction of combustion of an initially pure methanol droplet. During most of the
combustion history, a fraction of the water produced in the ﬂame diffuses back to the surface of
the droplet, where it is readily absorbed, at an approximately constant rate controlled by gas-phase
diffusion. This leads to a gradual increase of the water concentration in the liquid, and eventually
that concentration becomes high enough that the equilibrium gas-phase water concentration at the
droplet surface exceeds the water concentration at the ﬂame, so that the direction of gas-phase
water diffusion is reversed, and water begins to be transported out of the droplet rather than into it.
This occurs when about 30% of the mass of the droplet is water, and the droplet then begins to burn
as a binary mixture of methanol and water. The adiabatic ﬂame temperature of this diluted mixture
is, however, signiﬁcantly less than that of pure methanol, actually below the temperature range,
1200 - 1700 K, that results in chemical-kinetic gas-phase ﬂame extinguishment. Once outward
water transport begins, therefore, the outward water ﬂuX rapidly increases and extinguishes the
combustion, according to this simpliﬁed physical picture.
In this model, the extinction diameter then is approximately the droplet diameter at the end of
the stage of water accumulation. This, however, is only a ﬁrst approximation. Extinction condi-
tions have been calculated more accurately by Rate-Ratio Asymptotic [11] and also numerically
with detailed chemistry [14]. Recently, a simpler Activation-Energy Asymptotic (AEA) approach
has been developed for the problem [15]. Here we eXploit this simpliﬁed AEA approach further
and apply it to the more extensive data that now eXist. We also address droplet burning rates
and ﬂame standoff distances. The last two topics are addressed ﬁrst, below, after the description
of the experiment. Then the extinction conditions are considered in more detail. It will be seen
that these simpliﬁed approaches can provide reasonable agreements with the experimental results,
while improving understanding of the combustion processes. The success of the ABA approach,
in this context, indicates that early [19] one-step empirical overall reaction-rate parameters, de-
veloped from counterﬂow combustion experiments, can been applied remarkably well in droplet
combustion.
2 Experiments
The experiments were conducted using the Multi-User Droplet Combustion Apparatus (MDCA)
installed in the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) facility in the US Module of the 188. The
cylindrical combustion chamber in the CIR has a free-volume of approximately 95 liters with
the MDCA insert installed. The MDCA used an opposed-needle deployment technique to freely
3

"
"4","5th US Combustion Meeting — Paper # 070HE-0303 Topic: Spray and Droplet
I 30mm I I 50mm I I 93mm I
(a) (b) (c)

Figure 1: Typical images from FLEX experiments for methanol burning in air at 1 atm pressure: (a)
back-lit droplet image, (b) UV-image of the flame, and (0) Color camera image of the flame. Image
scale and time after ignition are also shown. Droplet initial diameter was 2.75 mm.

deploy droplets of chosen size in microgravity. Sometimes the droplet was tethered using a small
silicon carbide (SiC) ﬁber to keep it in the ﬁeld of View Of the cameras. Ignition 0f the deployed
droplet was accomplished using two symmetrically positioned hot-wire igniters. The experimental
diagnostic system consisted of a black—and-white, back—lit droplet image capture camera, a UV-
sensitive ﬂame imaging camera ﬁltered to Observe OH*-Chemiluminescence at 310 nanometer
wave length, and a CCD color camera with a wider View angle. All the camera images were
Obtained at 30 frames per second and digitally stored on-board the CIR and down-linked at a later
time for analysis. The color camera with its real-time down-link capability is also used to conduct
experiment Operations from the ground at the Telescience Support Center located in NASA Glenn
Research Center. Prior to an experimental run, the Fuel and Oxidizer Management Assembly
(FOMA) system of the CIR is used to ﬁll the combustion chamber with the desired ambient gas
mixture consisting of oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon dioxide at a selected pressure. Typically several
droplet burns were performed in each environment before venting the combustion chamber to space
vacuum and reﬁlling. Further details of experiments and Operational procedures can be found in
Dietrich et al [20].

4

"
"5","5th US Combustion Meeting - Paper # 070HE-0303 Topic: Spray and Droplet
3 Results
Over one hundred methanol droplet tests in varying diluent concentrations and at primarily two
different ambient pressures (0.7 and 1 atm) have been performed to date. In these tests the oxygen
concentration varied from 30% to 12% by volume while the carbon dioxide and helium diluent
concentrations varied in the range of 0% to 70% by volume and the rest of the inert was nitrogen.
The initial droplet diameter varied between 1.5 mm and 4.5 mm. A representative set of observa-
tions from the three different cameras are shown in Fig. 1. From the digital images the droplet
diameter D and the ﬂame diameter D f were measured as a function of time using a commercially
available image analysis software package. The ﬂame diameters obtained from the color camera
typically fell slightly below the UV—camera measurements. Since the resolution of the UV—camera
was better than the color camera we report here only the UV—camera measurements for ﬂame size.
3.1 Burning Rates
Figure 2 shows droplet diameter-squared and the ﬂame diameter plotted as functions of time for
three different cases. Run #204 corresponds to a methanol droplet of initial diameter 2.75 mm
burning in air (20% 02 and 79% N2) at one atmospheric pressure. The slope of the D2 versus time
curve is fairly linear through most of the burning period except toward the end where the slope
decreases slightly prior to ﬂame extinction, which occurs at a droplet diameter of 1.10 mm, called
the extinction diameter De. Run #110 corresponds to a droplet with an initial diameter of 2.83 mm
burning in 21%02 and 30% C02 environment whereas run #263 had an initial diameter of 2.67 mm
and an atmosphere consisting of 21% 02 and 30% He with the remaining diluent being nitrogen
in both cases. The ambient pressure for both of these cases was 0.7 atm. It can be seen from
the slopes of the D2 versus time curves in ﬁgure 2 that substituting carbon dioxide with helium
leads to a higher burning rate due to the increased thermal conductivity of H 6 compared to 002
and consequently a smaller burning time for droplets of similar size. The extinction diameters De
for run #110 and #263 were 1.57 mm and 1.42 mm, respectively. For these two cases the droplet
remains in the ﬁeld of View after ﬂame extinction and the continued evaporation at a much slower
rate in the hot atmosphere can be seen in the D2-Versus-time curves. It is also interesting to note
that for all three cases the ﬂame diameter initially increases and then decreases to a smaller value at
extinction, showing that the extinction is caused by insufﬁcient residence time rather than radiative
heat loss from the ﬂame.
Figure 3 shows a compilation of all measured burning-rate constants K61. : —d(D2) /dt, plotted
against corresponding calculated burning-rate constant Kw; based on classical quasi-steady theory,
namely

Kw; : 8i ln(1 + B), (1)

plCPg
where Ag and Cpg are the thermal conductivity and speciﬁc heat of the gas mixture, respectively, pl
is the density of the liquid, and B is the transfer number. The transfer number B is expressed as
B _ QfYOpOf + CPg(Too _ Tb)
— —. (2)
L
In the above equation Yam is the ambient oxygen mass fraction, qf is the heat of combustion per
unit mass of the fuel, L is the heat of vaporization of the liquid fuel, and f is the stoichiometric
5

"
"6","5th US Combustion Meeting — Paper # 070HE-0303 Topic: Spray and Droplet
fuel-to—oxygen mass ratio. The fuel boiling point is Tb, and the ambient temperature is TOO. The
property values needed in equation (1) and (2) are evaluated according to the semi-empirical recipe
proposed by Law and Williams [21].
The experimental Kw values were Obtained by linear least-square ﬁtting of the DQ-Versus-time
curves. Only the middle 80% 0f the droplet lifetime was used in these curve-ﬁts, to avoid the
initial heat-up period and the later non-linear behavior close to extinction. The size of each data
point in Fig.3 is proportional to the initial droplet size Do. It is interesting to note that the smaller
droplets have a higher burning-rate constant than the classical quasi-steady prediction. This is
understandable because extinction occurs early for smaller droplets when water condensation is
predominant, and the resulting condensation heat release enhances the burning rate. For larger
droplets, extinction takes place at a later stage when water evaporation becomes inﬂuential and
negates any gains in burning rate experienced during the earlier condensation period. Clearly,
the quasi-steady theory used to calculate Kw; does not include these unsteady water-absorption
effects. Although it is possible to improve the correlation shown in Fig. 3 by including such
effects in estimating Koala for example using the unsteady AEA model discussed later, this is not
attempted here because of the fairly substantial scatter in the experimental data from run to run.
12 16
v f, {G 14
10 r ( ‘ V"" ,V‘ ¥
2 ‘ r ""
ﬂ; , bk 9"" A 12
8 3 5‘
~ , 10
. i . A
a"" E
E 6 ‘ ' 8 E
E 0”""
ND » 6
4 '\
run#263 4
2 ‘
run#204 . 2
O O
O 5 10 15
Time (s)
Figure 2: Droplet diameter square D2 and flame diameter Df as a function of time for three free-
floated droplet tests: Run#110 21% 02 and 30% C02 at 0.7 atm; Run# 204 21 % 02 and 79% N2 at 1
atm; Run# 263 21% 02 30% He and 49% N2 at 0.7 atm.
6

"
"7","5th US Combustion Meeting - Paper # 070HE-0303 Topic: Spray and Droplet
o 02-N2
0-8 o 02-N2-C02
o 02-N2-He @
Tn‘ 0.6 o . ®
E 3 00
E O
"":< O
:2” 0.4 y
0.2
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Kcal (mmZ/s)
Figure 3: Measured burning-rate constant Keg. versus calculated burning-rate constant Km; in dif-
ferent diluent-substituted environments: the size of the bubble is proportional to the droplet initial
diameter.
3.2 Flame-Standoff Ratios
The classical quasi-steady theory of droplet combustion predicts that the ratio of the ﬂame diam-
eter t0 the droplet diameter, D f / D, is a constant, independent of the droplet initial size, for a
given environmental condition, and it typically yields a value several times that Of experimental
measurements. Here we compare the measured ﬂame-standoff ratios against the predictions of a
recently developed simpliﬁed theory [22] that takes into account the effects of water absorption
and employs an effective diffusion coefﬁcient for oxygen. According to [22] the ﬂame-standoff
ratio is given by the expression
D 1
im—[a+\/aZ—Za+4b+1+1], (3)
D 2
where,
W V K 1 W V 04 a:
a : <— Opf > —, and b : _’wpf —0 w W. (4)
8vafpgozo 330,00 Wfpw Vfaoai’opo
Here pg is the gas density, p fis the liquid fuel density, pm is the water density and WOW is the
average molecular weight of the gas-phase species, Wf and Wu, are the molecular weights of
fuel and water, respectively, 030700 is the ambient oxygen mole fraction and 37212,]? is the water mole
fraction at the ﬂame, Vf and V0 are the molar stoichiometric coefﬁcients for fuel and oxygen for a
0ne-step reaction. The effective diffusion coefﬁcients of water vapor and oxygen are denoted by
04w and 040, respectively, and K is the burning-rate constant Obtained from experiments.
7

"
"8","5th US Combustion Meeting - Paper # 070HE-0303 Topic: Spray and Droplet
10 ,
AOZ-NZ-He ,I’
9 /
OOZ-NZ-COZ ,z’
8 l02-N2 x”
8 7 'A III”.
3 I ’ I
§ 6 Air? 1%: g
E ‘A o O o
o 5 I
E I. , '5?
I ,
4 ,I’ I
3 I,”
2 ”
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Df/D - calculated
Figure 4: Calculated and measured flame—standoff ratios in different diluent-substituted environ-
ments.
Figure 4 shows measured ﬂame-standoff ratios (FSR) plotted against the calculated values Obtained
from Eqn. (3). The measured FSRs are Obtained by plotting instantaneous ﬂame standoff ratios
as a function of time and identifying an average value during the quasi-steady burning period
where it remains relatively constant. Environments under which the ﬂame does not reach a quasi-
steady condition, such as those at low ambient oxygen concentrations, are excluded from Fig.
4. Considering the number of independent parameters involved, namely different initial droplet
diameters, various oxygen and diluent concentrations, the simpliﬁed theoretical model predicts
the ﬂame-standoff ratio reasonably well. However, Fig. 4 suggests a systematic disagreement for
different diluent mixtures. The measured FSRs for 02 — N2 — H 6 mixtures are consistently higher
than the predicted values compared to the 02 — N2 — 002 mixture data points. While the exact
reason for this discrepancy is not clear at this point, and further work is needed to understand this
behavior, it is worthwhile to point out here that the simpliﬁed model described in [22] is a quasi-
steady model with water mass ﬂuX estimated employing a ﬁxed value of the water mole fraction
at the ﬂame ij and zero at the droplet surface, which may not be an accurate assumption under
varying oxygen and diluent concentrations.
3.3 Flame Extinction
As described earlier, during methanol droplet combustion the ﬂame can extinguish itself by two
different mechanisms. First, the ﬂame can extinguish as it moves closer to the droplet surface due
to insufﬁcient residence time (“diffusive extinction”); this generally occurs toward the end of the
combustion period as the ﬂame shrinks in size. The second mechanism is the excessive radiative
heat loss from the ﬂame as it grows in size, and this mechanism reduces the ﬂame temperature
8

"
"9","5th US Combustion Meeting - Paper # 070HE-0303 Topic: Spray and Droplet
5
o 02-N2-He
o 02-N2-C02
4 ,0 (63
o 02-N2
Q@ o
3 ’,,/O
E o @D (S)
E (0% ,
‘5 2 /”0 ‘ff 9 ’ ’
D O 0 g '1. A , , ’ ’
Qiﬁi'ﬁﬁh""
5‘91""?)
1 (rinse? 54%).(g3) O
’ , ,6 6
O ” “Q
0 1 2 3 4 5
DO (mm)
Figure 5: Methanol droplet extinction diameter versus initial droplet diameter in diluent-substituted
environments: the size of the bubble is proportional to ambient oxygen mole fraction.
to sufﬁciently low values for the ﬂame to go out (“radiative extinction”); this process is generally
observed for larger droplets at lower oxygen concentrations when the ﬂame is large in size and
lies farther away from the droplet surface. Flame extinctions in both modes were observed dur-
ing the FLEX tests, and the results are summarized in Fig. 5, where the extinction diameter D6
is plotted against the initial diameter Do. This ﬁgure contains over 100 data points, covering a
range of oxygen concentration, 002 and H e diluent concentrations, and initial droplet sizes, at
two different pressure. In the legend the points are grouped into only three different categories,
according to the diluent present, for simplicity. The size of the data point is proportional to the
oxygen mole fraction of the test in this ﬁgure. Despite the lumping together of some of the inde-
pendent variables, the ﬁgure clearly shows two different trends. As expected, the larger droplets
at lower oxygen concentrations (smaller circles in ﬁgure) fall closer to the 450 line, showing that
the droplet extinguishes rather quickly after ignition through radiative heat loss. At smaller droplet
sizes, the data fall approximately along a straight line, irrespective of the diluent concentrations.
The dashed line provides an approximate correlation of these diffusive-extinction results in Fig. 5.
It is worthwhile to compare the experimentally determined extinction diameters with simpliﬁed
theoretical predictions. Figure 6 shows such a comparison for air at one atmosphere. The predic-
tions of rate-ratio asymptotics (RRA) [11], of the recently developed activation-energy asymptotics
(ABA) [15], and of numerical simulation using detailed chemical kinetics [14] are also shown in
the ﬁgure (see the lower curves). In contrast to selecting the product of density and diffusion coefﬁ-
cient, pD, to match the experimental burning rate and ﬁtting one particular experimental extinction
9

"
"10","5th US Combustion Meeting - Paper # 070HE-0303 Topic: Spray and Droplet
point to determine an appropriate heat capacity [15] for the ABA computation, here an entirely a
priori approach is adopted instead. The prescription of Law and Williams is used to determine pD,
as was done in the earlier burning-rate calculations, and the value of a cp was selected such that the
quasi-steady ﬂame temperature matches the adiabatic ﬂame temperature for the pure fuel in the air
environment. This procedure renders the ABA model fully closed and consistent in the sense that
there is no calibration involved. The resulting line, marked AEA in Fig. 6, is seen to be close to
the RRA and numerical predictions, all Of which lie below the data. Since the extinction, however,
occurs after absorbed water begins to evaporate from the droplet, the appropriate adiabatic ﬂame
temperature is below that for pure fuel. To Obtain an idea of the magnitude of this effect, the Cp
values were increased by 60% so that the adiabatic ﬂame temperature was around 1700 K, and the
resulting prediction of the ABA theory then lies much closer to the experimental data as shown by
the line marked AEA-Z. Because Of the expected increase in droplet water content at extinction
with increasing initial droplet diameter the relevant adiabatic ﬂame temperature likely decreases
with increasing D0 thereby causing the slope of the experimental points in Fig. 6 to exceed that Of
AEA-2 line. These Observations suggest general approximate agreement between experiment and
computation for extinction diameters.
3
O FLEX [20] I Dietrich, et al. [5]
Q Yang, et al . [3] A Okai et al. [6]
------ Numerical [14] — - — RRA [11]
2 O
A
g n- o
D I My. xi” ./
1 I,” ./
....._.‘ ”<’/.././.o/
0,37”- 1/
IV ' .
A ”4"". - /
xv“. - ’
‘v
‘w, /
0
0 1 2 3 4 5
DO (m m )
Figure 6: Methanol droplet extinction diameter versus initial diameter for air: Comparison between
experiments and different theories.
4 Conclusion
Extensive experimental results for burning-rate constants, ﬂame-standoff ratios, and extinction di-
ameters during methanol droplet combustion in oxygen-nitrogen, oxygen-nitrogen-carbon dioxide,
10

"
"11","5th US Combustion Meeting - Paper # 070HE-0303 Topic: Spray and Droplet
and oxygen-nitrogen-helium mixtures in microgravity have been Obtained. It was shown that sim-
pliﬁed theoretical models can correlate the burning rate and the ﬂame-standoff ratios reasonably
well, although further investigations notably concerning the latter, seem warranted. The extinction-
diameter prediction by activation-energy asymptotics, while showing correct trends, need more
considerable further improvement. The results reported here can provide a basis for future im-
provements in descriptions of methanol droplet combustion.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the NASA Space Life and Physical Sciences Research and Appli-
cations Program and the International Space Station Program. We would like to thank our other
FLEX team members, C.T. Avedisian, M.Y. Choi, F.L. Dryer, and ED. Shaw for their support.
References
[1] CK. Law, T.Y. Xiong, and CH. Wang. Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 30 (1987) 1435—1443.
[2] S.Y. Cho, M.Y. Choi, and EL. Dryer. Proceedings offhe Combustion Institute, 23 (1990) 1611—1617.
[3] J .C. Yang, G.S. Jackson, and CT. Avedisian. Proceedings offhe Combustion Institute, 23 (1990) 1619—1625.
[4] A. Lee and CK. Law. Combustion Science and Technology, 86 (1992) 253—265.
[5] D.L. Dietrich, J .B. Haggard Jr., F.L. Dryer, V. Nayagam, B.D. Shaw, and EA. Williams. Proceedings of the
Combustion Institute, 23 (1996) 1201—1207.
[6] K. Okai, O. Moriue, M. Araki, M. Tsue, M. Keno, J . Sate, D.L. Dietrich, and EA. Williams. Combustion and
Flame, 121 (2000) 501—512.
[7] AJ. Marchese, F.L. Dryer, and RD. Colantonio. Proceedings OfIhe Combustion Institute, 27 (1998) 2627—2634.
[8] EH. Chao, C.K. Law, and J .S. T’ien. Proceedings offhe Combustion Institute, 23 (1990) 523—531.
[9] M. C. Hicks, V. Nayagam, and F. A. Williams. Combustion and Flame, 157 (2010) 1439—1445.
[10] AJ. Marchese and EL. Dryer. Combustion and F lame, 105 (1996) 104—122.
[11] BL. Zhang, J .M. Card, and EA. Williams. Combustion and Flame, 105 (1996) 267—290.
[12] BL. Zhang and EA. Williams. Combustion and Flame, 112 (1998) 113—120.
[13] T. Farouk and EL. Dryer. Combustion and F lame, 159 (2012) 200—209.
[14] TI. Farouk and EL. Dryer. Combustion and F lame, 159 (2012) 3208—3223.
[15] V. Nayagam. Combustion and F lame, (submitted, 2013) .
[16] HA. Dwyer, A. Aharon, B.D. Shaw, and H. Naizmand. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, 26 (1996)
1613—1619.
[17] HA. Dwyer, B.D. Shaw, and H. Naizmand. Proceedings offhe Combustion Institute, 27 (1998) 1951—1957.
[18] V. Raghavan, D.N. Pope, and G. Gogos. Combustion and F lame, 145 (2006) 791—807.
[19] K. Seshadri and EA. Williams. Effect of CF3Br 0n counterﬂow combustion of liquid fuel with diluted oxygen.
In Gann R. G., editor, Halogenated Fire Suppressants. American Chemical Society, Washington, D. C., 1975.
[20] D. L. Dietrich, RV. Ferkul, V.M. Bryg, V. Nayagam, M.C. Hicks, EA. Williams, F.L. Dryer, B.D. Shaw, M.Y.
Choi, and CT. Avedisian. Detailed results from the ﬂame extinguishment experiment (FLEX). Technical Publi—
cation NASNTP—2013—216046, NASA, Glenn Research Center, Cleveland OH 44135, USA, 2013.
[21] C.K. Law and EA. Williams. Combustion and F lame, 19 (1972) 393—405.
[22] V. Nayagam. Combustion and F lame, 157 (2010) 204—205.
1 1

"
