"","x"
"1","Sub Topic: Droplets and Sprays
9th U. S. National Combustion Meeting
Organized by the Central States Section of the Combustion Institute
May 17-20, 2015
Cincinnati, Ohio
Experimental Observatlons 0f Cool-Flame Supported Blnary-
Droplet Arrays Combustion 1n M10r0grav1ty
Daniel L. Dietrich1’*, Vedha Nayagaml, F orman A. Williams2
[NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 44135, USA
2Department ofMechanical and Aerospace Engineering
University ofCallfornia, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 44444, USA
*Corresponding Author Email: Daniel.L. dietrich@nasa.g0v

Abstract: Recent droplet combustion experiments conducted on board the International Space

Station (188) showed that large, isolated n-alkane droplets can burn quasi-steadily following

radiative extinction, supported by eool-ﬂame Chemistry in the Negative Temperature Coefﬁcient

(NTC) region. In this study we report preliminary experimental results from the ongoing binary-

droplet arrays experiments. For the ﬁrst time, it is shown that quasi-steady combustion of 0001

ﬂames can be supported by binary-droplet arrays. Under some conditions binary droplets support

0001 ﬂames When a single droplet of similar size bums to completion With hot ﬂame. The large,

merged hot ﬂame of the binary-array leads to the necessary thermal and species ﬁelds that can

transition to 0001 ﬂame combustion following radiative extinction, unlike the single droplet in that

ambient environment. These observations may have important implications With regard to spray

combustion.

Keywords: Droplet Combustion, Cool F lame, DropletArmys, Microgravity
1. Introduction

Studies of droplet arrays combustion are motivated by the need to better understand spray
combustion processes Where individual burning droplets interact With each other. The simplest
array conﬁguration is a binary-droplet array Where two droplets are placed on a ﬁber With a
certain separation distance L. Despite it is importance in practical applications there have been
only a few studies of binary arrays Where the complicating effects of buoyancy induced ﬂows
arre removed [1-3], and the results can be compared against simpliﬁed theoretical models [4].
Furthermore, these studies are limited to smaller droplet sizes and the occurrence of cool ﬂame
supported burning of arrays has never been reported before. Struk and eo-workers [3] did study
interacting droplet arrays With larger initial droplet sizes. They showed that droplet interactions
result in smaller extinction droplet sizes in the diffusive extinction regime. In the radiative
extinction regime, however, droplet interactions promoted ﬂame extinction; the larger envelope
ﬂame surrounding the array losing a larger fraction of the total heat release resulting in ﬂame
extinction at smaller initial droplet sizes. The study occurred in drop towers Where the limited
microgravity time duration did not permit observation of the cool ﬂame burning. Further details
of arrays combustion can be found in the review article [5].
1

"
"2","Sub Topic: Droplets and Sprays
2. Experiments

Experiments were conducted on board the International Space Station using the Multi-user
Droplet Combustion Apparatus (MDCA) in the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) facility.
Prior to each experimental run, the combustion chamber is evacuated and filled with desired gas
mixture from gas bottles using partial pressure mixing technique. During an experiment the
ﬁber-support arm is rotated down so that it is in the ﬁeld of View of diagnostic cameras. The
ﬁber-support arm consisted of a long 80 um diameter Silicon Carbide (SiC) fiber and two
anchoring 15 um SiC cross-ﬁbers located at 12 mm apart as shown in Fig. 1. Droplets of desired
size are deposited at the cross-hair locations using a stepper-motor controlled fuel syringe and by
translating the fiber-support arm to the inj eetion point. Ignition is achieved using two hot-wire
igniters (see, Fig.1) which are removed from the field of View after a predetermined ignition
time. The burning process is recorded on board using a high resolution black and white camera,
a color camera, and a intensiﬁed-array UV-eamera for future downlink and analysis. The radiant
emission from the burning droplets is also measured using a broad-band and a narrow-band
radiometer as function of time at 100 Hz. The cameras were operated at 30 frames per second.
Further details of the experimental hardware can be found in [6].
3. Results and Discussion

Experiments were conducted in oxygen-nitrogen and oxygen-helium-nitrogen environments at
half atmospheric and one atmospheric pressures using n-decane fuel. The separation distance
between the droplets was held constant at 12 mm, and the initial droplet sizes varied in the range
2 to 2.5 mm. For arrays experiments, the initial sizes of the droplets were maintained
approximately the same, though some differences occur due to vaporization during sequential
droplet deposition process. A schematic illustration of the droplet-array setup is shown in Fig.
1a. Immediately following ignition an envelope ﬂame develops that surrounds both the droplets
as seen in Fig. 1b, for the separation distance and droplet diameters studied here. The merged
ﬂame then grows to a sufficiently large size to cause radiative extinction of Visible, hot ﬂame.
Subsequent to radiative extinction, both the droplets continue vaporize vigorously without any
Visible ﬂame, supported by cool ﬂame combustion. The cool ﬂame combustion terminates at
ﬁnite droplet diameters, followed by a vapor condensation cloud as seen previously in single
droplet experiments [7].

Igniter i D1 i ,
2 9g 56 1 i
g g V‘ ‘ ‘
D —>: r— 4-
Igniter
Figure 1. (a) A schematic illustration of a binary-droplet array. (b) An envelope ﬂame
surrounding the droplets.
2

"
"3","Sub Topic: Droplets and Sprays
Figure 2 shows the results for a single n-deoane droplet burning in 17% oxygen and 83%

nitrogen environment at one atmospheric pressure. The initial droplet size was 2.12 mm.

Following initial heat-up the square of the droplet diameter decreases almost linearly. The jumps

in the d-square versus time data are due to excessive soot interference during image analysis and

the fact that the ﬁbers somewhat distort the droplet as its size decreases. In some experiments
small gas bubbles formed during droplet deployment burst as the droplet size decreases leading
to a jump in d-square versus time curve. An approximate burning rate constant K, the rate at
which the square of het droplet diameter decrease with time, is estimated to be 0.73 mm2/s. Also
shown in Fig.2 is the ﬂame diameter Df, which grows initially and then decreases before
extinction occurs. The droplet extinction diameter was approximately 2 mm. Subsequent to
ﬂame extinction no vapor cloud was found to form surrounding the droplet. The total radiant
power output Qr from the droplet measured using a broad-band radiometer (BB) and a narrow-
band (NB) radiometer are also shown in Fig. 2. Understandably, the broad-band radiometer
shows a sudden drop in radiant power once the Visible ﬂame extinguishes, and then it slowly
decays to zero value. The narrow-band radiometer saturates above 3 W, and shows only the
slowly decay of radiant power. There were no sudden decrease in the radiometer outputs once
the ﬂame is extinguished leading us to conclude that cool ﬂame phenomenon was not present for
this case.
2.5 25
Df
N .'.jII-:"""" “it""""n. ‘1 5' ‘--...--'
E 1.5 I Cl
D E
‘l \ N B C3?
3.; 5
o
0.5 U
U ”l 2 3 4 5 E 7
Ti m e (s )

Figure 2: A single n-deoane droplet burning in 17% oxygen and 83% nitrogen atmosphere at one
atmospheric pressure: Df — ﬂame diameter, BB — broad-band radiant power, and NB-
narrow-band radiometer power.

Figure 3 shows the results for a binary array of n-deoane droplets burning 17% oxygen and 83%
nitrogen atmosphere at one atmospheric pressure. The initial sizes of the right (D1) and left (D2)
3

"
"4","Sub Topic: Droplets and Sprays
droplets were the same at 2.08 mm. Immediately after ignition a merged ﬂame surrounding both
droplets was formed. The size of the ﬂame then grew with time, as seen in the ﬂame width, Df
versus time curve. The ﬂame width was measured at the center point between the droplets.
Radiative extinction of the hot ﬂame occurs around 3.6 s which is also captured by the broad-
band radiometer output. Unlike the single droplet ease discussed above, the droplets continue to
vaporize at a fast rate following radiative hot ﬂame extinction supported by cool ﬂame. The cool
ﬂame combustion also comes to an end around 6 second as seen by the drop in broad-band
radiometer output. The burning rate constant during hot-ﬂame combustion for both the right and
the left droplet was approximately 0.66 mmZ/s. An average burning rate constant during the cool
ﬂame combustion was estimated to be 0.55 mm2/s for both the droplets. The distortion of the
droplets due to the ﬁbers and the soot again made droplet diameter measurement difﬁcult.
However, it is clear from the radiometer output that cool ﬂame heat release occurs after the hot
ﬂame extinction, and then it stops at a ﬁnite droplet diameter (~0.7 mm). It is also interesting to
note that the overall radiant power output for the droplet-array is considerably greater than the
single droplet case (25 W versus 15 W) due to larger amounts of fuel being burned.
2.5 _ 35
D cool flame
_ T - H 30
.. . : D 2
\ _ - 1 2 5 r...
\ i E
N :1; E D22 20 T
E 1 a .::__ : 15 ..—::.
rT hot flame BB g
D F- i : ‘1 U .,______..
0.5 ' i i O
i . N B 5
o ' ‘ ——— U
U 1 2 3 4 5 E 7 8 9
Ti me (5)
Figure 3: A binary n-deeane droplet burning in 17% 02 and 83% N2 at one atmospheric pressure.
A similar scenario was also observed for n-deeane droplets burning in oxygen-helium
environment. A single n-deeane droplet with an initial droplet diameter of 4.3 mm burning in
35% oxygen and 65% helium at one atmospheric pressure was found to show no cool ﬂame
combustion following hot ﬂame extinction. The measured burning rate constant was 1.04
mmZ/s, and a maximum ﬂame diameter of approximately 28 mm. The droplet diameter at ﬂame
extinction was 1.16 mm. The maximum broad-band radiant power measured was 18 W. On the
other hand, a binary-array burning in the same environment with similar initial droplet diameters
4

"
"5","Sub Topic: Droplets and Sprays

showed a long cool ﬂame burning period following radiative extinction of the merged ﬂame.
Average hot-ﬂame and cool-ﬂame burning rate constants were 0.82 and 0.77 mm2/s
respectively. The cool-ﬂame extinction diameter was too small to measure due to ﬁber
interference. The maximum broad-band radiant power during the hot ﬂame was 30 W and
during the cool-ﬂame period varied between 2 and 6 W.

The phenomenon of cool-ﬂame supported droplet combustion is still not well understood.
While it is difﬁcult to predict when cool-ﬂame burning will occur at this time, it is possible to
gain some understanding based on the data presented here. Earlier studies [8-9] show that the
cool ﬂame is stable only in NTC region which has temperature range between 700 and 800 for n-
alkanes at one atmospheric pressure. Furthermore, the cool ﬂames lie closer to the droplet
surface compared to the hot ﬂames, and require enough oxygen concentration to proceed with
the low-temperature chemistry. So, the merged hot-ﬂame surrounding the droplet array
following extinction should deposit sufﬁcient energy close to the droplet surface to activate the
NTC chemistry and provide enough time for oxygen to diffuse to that location. A single droplet
on the other hand does not enough energy to activate the NTC chemistry at extinction. Clearly,
further studies are needed to identify and understand the situations under which cool ﬂame
supported combustion is possible. This understanding should help in better models for spray
combustion used in practical applications.

4. Conclusions

Experimental results for single and binary-array combustion of n-deoane droplets in
microgravity in oxygen-nitrogen and oxygen-helium environments at one atmospheric pressure
are presented. The results show that under certain conditions a single droplet of similar size to
the array droplet burns without the oool-ﬂame, seoond-stage combustion while the binary array
exhibits cool-ﬂame supported combustion subsequent to hot-ﬂame extinction and the vapor
cloud formation.

5. Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the NASA Space Life and Physical Sciences Research and
Applications Program, and the International Space Station Program. Mr. J . Mark Hickman
served as the proj eot manager.
6. References
[1] T. Y. Xiong, C.K. Law, C. K., and K, Miyasaka. Proo. Combust. Inst. 2021781 (1984).
[2] M. Mikami, H. Kato, M. Kono., and J . Sato. Proo.Combust. Inst. 252431 (1994).
[3] P. M. Struk, D. L. Dietrich, M. Ikegami, G. Xu. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute
292609 (2002).
[4] A. Umemura. Progress in energy and combustion science, 202325 (1994).
[5] K, Annamalai and W. Ryan. Prog. Energy Combust.Sci. 182221 (1992).
[6] D. L. Dietrich, et a1. Miorogravity Science and Technology 26: 65 (2014).
[7] V. Nayagam, D.L. Dietrich, P.V. Ferkul, M.C. Hicks, and FA. Williams, F. A. Combustion
and Flame, 15923583 (2012).
[8] G. Paozko, N. Peters, K. Seshadri, and FA. Williams. (2014). Combustion Theory and
Modelling, 182515 (2014).
[9] TI. Farouk and FL. Dryer. Combustion and Flame 1612565 (2014).
5

"
