"","x"
"1","45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2007-1 151
8 - 11 January 2007, Reno, Nevada
Fluld Merglng V1sc0s1ty Measurement (FMVM) Experlment
0n the Internatlonal Space Statlon
Basil N. Antar1
T he University of T ennessee Space Institute, T ullahoma, T N 37388
Edwin Ethridge2
NASA/Marshall Space F light Center, Huntsville, AL 35812
and
Daniel Lehman3
T he University of T ennessee Space Institute, T ullahoma, T N 3 7388
The concept of using low gravity experimental data together with ﬂuid dynamical
numerical simulations for measuring the Viscosity of highly Viscous liquids was recently
validated 0n the International Space Station (ISS). After testing the proof of concept for this
method with parabolic ﬂight experiments, an ISS experiment was proposed and later
conducted onboard the [SS in July, 2004 and subsequently in May of 2005. In that
experiment a series of two liquid drops were brought manually together until they touched
and then were allowed to merge under the action of capillary forces alone. The merging
process was recorded Visually in order to measure the contact radius speed as the merging
proceeded. Several liquids were tested and for each liquid several drop diameters were
used. It has been shown that when the coefﬁcient of surface tension for the liquid is known,
the contact radius speed can then determine the coefﬁcient of Viscosity for that liquid. The
Viscosity is determined by ﬁtting the experimental speed to theoretically calculated contact
radius speed for the same experimental parameters. Experimental and numerical results
will be presented in which the Viscosity of different highly Viscous liquids were determined,
to a high degree of accuracy, using this technique.
I. Introduction
Aserious problem with calculating the crystallization kinetics of many highly undercooled liquids is related to
the nonexistence of Viscosity data between temperatures slightly above the glass transition to just below the
melting values. The Viscosity values over this temperature range can vary by as much as 10 orders of
magnitude or more. Miani et al.1 have noted that the problem of having reliable data for determining the Viscosity
(0r diffusivity) of highly undercooled liquids has been a serious limitation to the kinetic approach in evaluating the
glass forming ability in metallic liquids.

The interpretation of the Viscosity of highly undercooled substances is currently limited to ﬁtting the data with
various models. It is almost universally accepted that existing Viscosity models are limited and cannot model the
entire Viscosity range. Some preliminary studies has conducted by which it was shown that a number of free volume
models of Viscosity do provide good ﬁt to the measured data for a wide range of substances over the entire Viscosity
range. However, the different models can differ by as much as one order of magnitude over the interpolated
undercooled region where data is not available. If a single Viscosity measurement can be made in the Viscosity
transition region, which is currently inaccessible to direct measurement, then the different Viscosity models can be
critically tested.

1 Professor, Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering, 411 B.H. Goethert Parkway/MSZé, AIAA Associate Fellow.
2Ceramic Engineer, Materials and Processes Laboratory, Huntsville, AL/EM 40.
3 Graduate Research Assistant, Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering, 411 B.H. Goethert Parkway/MSZ6.
1
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2007 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. All rights reserved.

"
"2","In order to make the required measurements, a method is needed that is capable of measuring the Viscosity of
highly Viscous liquid that are susceptible to crystallization over the required Viscosity range. There eXist numerous
methods for measuring the Viscosity of liquids regardless of their magnitude. Almost all of those techniques involve
containing the liquid in a container or subject the liquid to contact with a solid surface. Such methods are not
suitable for measuring the Viscosity of highly undereooled liquids. A container less method suitable for processing
which avoids contact with container walls is needed to make the necessary Viscosity measurement which avoids the
ineipienee of heterogeneous nucleation during the process.

The authors have been developing a novel eontainerless method for measuring the Viscosity of highly Viscous
liquids using the shape relaxation properties of the liquid in response to capillary forces alone. The method relies on
measuring the shape relaxation time for two liquid drops as they coalesce and merge into a single drop under the
action of the surface tension. The advantage of this method is that it uses relatively small samples of the liquid
which allows for the fast achievement of the desired temperature for the material being tested and then quickly
measuring its Viscosity. The coalescence process in this method is driven by the reduction of the surface energy
while at the same time it is constrained by the resistance of the ﬂuid ﬂow due to the liquid Viscosity.

Another important advantage of this technique is that the coalescence process can be accurately simulated
through the solution of the equations of motion of ﬂuid mechanics. This makes the physical process in this method
amenable to comparison with accurate analytical solutions of the shape relaxation properties. The technique relies
on comparing the measured coalescence rate of two liquid drops with one obtained from solutions to the equations
of ﬂuid motion with arbitrary ﬂuid Viscosity. The actual Viscosity of the liquid is the one that ﬁts best the measured
coalescence rate with the one calculated from the solution to the equations of motion. To this end a very accurate
method for calculating the coalescence process of two liquid drops is necessary.

Frankel2 was the ﬁrst to propose an analytical model for the coalescence of liquid drops. Due to the limitations
of the obtained analytical solution, Frankel was able to model only the initial phases of the coalescence process of
two spherical drops. Later work by Hopper3’4 produced analytical solutions for the coalescence rate of two inﬁnitely
long cylindrical drops accurate throughout the whole coalescence process.

Using the Boundary Element Method (BEM), Antar et a15’6 were able develop an accurate numerical solution for
the coalescence of both two inﬂnitely long cylindrical drops as well as two spherical drops. In fact the BEM is
capable of accurately modeling the coalescence process for any two liquid masses of arbitrary initial shapes. The
only limitation of the numerical solution developed by Antar et al is that the simulated coalescence process must
proceed subject to only the capillary forces. In other words the model does not account for any external forces or
body forces such as the force gravity. To this end the validation experiments for this method had to be conducted in
gravity free environment.

This method was validated for a proof of concept in low gravity enVironrnent onboard the NASA/KC-l35 ﬂying
parabolic trajectories5'7. The low gravity portion of the parabolas normally achieved with this aircraft is of the order
10'2 go which lasts for a maximum of 20 seconds. Drop coalescence tests were conducted using several liquids with
a wide range of viscosities, all at ambient temperatures. It was found that of all the liquids tested, glycerin yielded
the best coalescence data. However, by using glycerin as the working liquid it was also possible to test efﬁcacy of
the method for a wide range of Viscosity values. This was possible due to the fact that the Viscosity of glycerin is a
strong function of its temperature and thus the method was tested with glycerin at different temperatures.

In spite of the limitations of the testing environment onboard the KC-l35 it was possible to validate that the
concept developed is a Viable one for measuring the Viscosity of highly Viscous liquids. Some of these limitations
include the short duration of the low gravity window available on board the aircraft, the high Vibration environment
on board the aircraft and most signiﬁcantly the procedure that had to be adopted in performing these tests.

In these tests the two liquid drops were deployed at the tip of two oppositely facing hypodermic needles as soon
as the low gravity portion of the parabola was achieved. After the desired drop volumes are reached, the two drops
were then brought manually until they touched. As soon as the drops touched they were then left to coalesce under
the capillary force alone. In this manner the effects of all external forces on the coalescence process were
diminished as required by the theoretical analysis. However, due to the physical separation constraint imposed by
the distance between the tips of the two opposing needles the end result of the coalescence process yielded a liquid
bridge rather than a ﬁnal drop. This in turn constrained the usefulness of the shape relaxation data for validating the
technique to only the initial phase of the coalescence process. Nevertheless, good agreement between the measured
Viscosity values and the known Viscosity values were achieved with this technique.

In here we present results from validation tests for the Viscosity measurement technique which were conducted
onboard the International Space Station (188) recently.

2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","II. FMVM

In August 2003 the Fluid Merging Viscosity Measurement (FMVM) experiment was approved to be performed
onboard the International Space Station as one of several experiments to be manifested. These experiments were
chosen to be performed during the Space Shuttle “stand down” time period which occurred after the Columbia
accident. All of the approved experiments were designated as fast track experiments since all necessary payload
had to be launched within about siX rnonth’s time. The fast track schedule for operations required a streamlined
approach to expedite the payload development process with imposed constraints of a limited up-rnass of less than
one kilogram, limited volume and a maximum utilization of on-orbit resources.

The purpose of the FMVM was to validate on the 188 the droop coalescence measurement technique which was
developed earlier and validated onboard the NASA/KC-l35. The advantage of performing the validation tests
onboard the 188 is the availability of long periods of good quality low graVity environment. This environment will
facilitate the careful control and manipulation of the coalescence process without the undesirable Vibration
environrnent eXisting onboard the aircraft. Also, the facilities available on 188 were deemed to be sufﬁcient to
perform these tests. Detailed description of the facilities and the test environment onboard the 188 are given in
Ethridge et alg.

The least equipment deemed necessary for performing the FMVM included the test liquid, strings, length scale, a
Video camera and lighting. The test liquids were stored in labeled syringes which were up-rnassed to the 188. The
strings necessary for positioning and manipulating the drops provided the mechanism for implementing the
coalescence process. The scale for establishing the length of the contact radius was in the form a clearly marked
grided paper serVing a background to the test. The Video camera is necessary for recording the coalescence process
and the lighting was necessary for providing sufﬁcient illumination for the Video camera. Of all of that equipment,
only the different liquids in the syringes and the grided paper were delivered to the ISS onboard the Progress 13P.
The digital Video camera used in the tests was the one available to the ISS crew. The strings were obtained from the
sewing kits available on the ISS and a ﬂashlight available to the crew was used for providing the illumination to the
test background.

All of the tests conducted onboard the 188 were performed in
the Multipurpose Work Area (MWA). Brieﬂy, the procedure
followed in conducting all of the tests in the MWA was as follows.

First two drops were deployed each on a separate string and then
manually brought closer together till the two drops touched. Once *
the drops touched each other they were then left to coalesce under ’3
the action of the capillary force without any additional external _,
forcing. To achieve this, the experiment operator had to be
extremely careful in manipulating the two drops to touch each
other and to ensure that the string is left once the drops touched. A
sketch of the experiment set up is shown in ﬁgure 1.
The experiment set up required the use of a number of strings
which were attached at the top and bottom of a vertical plate. The
strings were all helcl together at the top and separately at .the Figure 1. Sketch of the coalescence
bottom of the plate in such a way as to allow for a‘sufﬁc1ent process as performed on the ISS.
distance between each string at the bottom. All str1ngs were
attached to the test platform using double sided adhesive tape. The tests were initiated by ﬁrst deploying two pre-
rneasured drops on two adjacent strings. The experiment operator then detached one of the two adjacent strings
from the bottom side and manually moved that string closer towards the other string until the two drops just touched.
At that point the string was released and the coalescence processes was allowed to proceed until the two drops
completely merged into a single drop. Next, another pre-rneasured drop was deployed on the next string adjacent to
the one haVing the coalesced drops and the process is repeated. This process was repeated for different liquids and
for different drop sizes. A photograph of the experiment setup as was performed in the MWA is shown in ﬁgure 2.
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","FF!“ "" L
6.66
\g’\ BatClamp'
, X ‘ MMQIMWA
Mw-Magm \
» ._-\ sm
_ . ‘ ‘i_ '

\ _ H < r: Trgok Lock
2666. 2. a 6
X. | i ‘- 7 “WA

\‘ ‘ t 4 l ,
,6- ‘_.______._.1_;.
“WM _ '_
RemovabbTMWA
Figure 2. Actual FMVM setup in the ISS MWA.
III. Results and Discussion

As explained earlier the coalescence method for Viscosity measurement was developed as means for measuring
the Viscosity of highly Viscous liquids. To this end it was desirable to validate the method using high Viscosity
liquids. The Viscosity of the liquids used in these tests ranged from 1500 Pa sec to 100,000 Pa sec with surface
tension coefﬁcients ranging from 22 to 90 erg/cmz. The physical properties of all the liquids used in the FMVM
experiments are shown in table 1.

All Of the liquids used 11.1 the Table 1. List of the liquids used in the FMVM tests With their
FMVM tests were stored 1ns1de physical properties.
clearly labeled 10 ml syringes ﬁlled
Wlth sufﬁment hquld to perform all Of Liquid Designated Density Surface Viscosity
the planned tests. Identical procedure Code g/cc Tension Pa see
was followed in the tests for all of the Erg/cm2
1666666 6666- . T66 66616666666 1,490
process for each liquid was 1n1t1ated Sili 0 one Oil 12 500
ﬂy ﬁrStlﬁoatletfmg ti? 1 2”” llldqmd Silicone Oil 100,000

mps' ex 6 res” m-g m mp m 12,500
was made to coalesce With another 2 .

- Honey (thlck) 42,000

““1 dmp depl‘md ““0 3“ adjacent 2 zoo
string. After the two 2 ml drops Corn yrglp ' ’
coalesced the resulting 4 ml drop was -n
made to coalesce with a newly (thICk) E2 1'41 15’000
deployed 4 ml drop. The remaining
liquid in each syringe was used to perform the coalescence between two unequal drops by using the ﬁnal resulting 8
ml drop and whatever amount of the remaining liquid that was possible to deploy from the syringe.

Initially, a one hour period was allocated for performing all of the tests scheduled for the FMVM. However, the
performance of tests took much longer time such that the remaining tests for a number of liquids had to be
postponed to another time period. FMVM was initially conducted during the assigned window of 90 minutes on
July 12, 2004, which was then completed through another 60 minutes on July 13, 2006, while the next segment of
FMVM was performed on May 24, 2005. The tests on the honey were left to the latter time segment due to the fact
some of the honey had crystallized. Thus re-Inelting 0f the honey was necessary before conducting the FMVM tests
using this liquid.

The operator assigned for performing the FMVM during the July 12-13, 2004 time period was the payload
operator for increment 9, Dr. Mike Fincke. The sequence of the liquids tested for FMVM proceeded according to
the alphabetical designation order shown in table 1. In other words glycerin was the ﬁrst liquid to be tested.
However, it was not possible to deploy any usable glycerin drops from the syringe successfully. The reason for this

4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","problem was due to the surface tension characteristics of glycerin. The coalescence tests using glycerin were
abandoned after the deployment of any glycerin drop failed.

The next liquid tested was the Silicone Oil-Bl. The tests with this liquid proceeded as planned since no
problems were encountered in deploying the required drops. Next Silicone Oil-B2 was also tested and whose tests
were also completed as planned. There was a problem with all of the honey since some of it had crystallized. It was
decided to leave the tests for the honey till later time period. The last of the liquids tested were all of the 3 types of
Corn Syrup. For all the tests attempted with corn syrup the deployed drops developed a thick skin on their outer
surfaces. This development made it impossible to continue the coalescence process under such conditions.

The tests for the honey were eventually performed on May 24, 2005 by Dr. J ohn Phillips, the designated payload
operator for Increment 11. This liquid was ﬁrst heated in order to dissolve any of the honey that had crystallized
during the waiting period on board the 188. These tests were also completed as planned.

Of all the liquids tested only the honey and the two silicone oils yielded useful data for the purpose of validating
of the coalescence process. The collected data from all of the coalescence process were in the form of Video
recordings of the coalescence process for each liquid and each test. These Videos had to be ﬁrst downloaded to
NASA/JSC which was then disseminated to the Investigators. There was not any agreed schedule on the time when
these were downloaded to J SC and subsequently delivered to the investigators. Consequently, there was a
considerable time lapse from the time the tests were performed before any of the data from the FMVM could be
analyzed.

The data analysis of all of the FMVM tests involved measuring the length of the contact radius as a function of
time during each coalescence test using single frames from the Video images. One of the ﬁrst tests analyzed was the
one shown in ﬁgure 3 involving the coalescence of 0.5 ml drop with another 8 ml drop both for Silicone Oil with
Viscosity of 12,500 cp (Liquid Blin table I).

#1“ II"" ..:::. 31'“-
; _ g . _ - _ I a I
a E. 5.. ﬁlm
'_I—I-'_E I 'II 4—P- "" ﬂil jIJTI—‘II I
Eama'iiﬁ'rﬁéﬁiir-r n
-:..-a_..=-.=..=-Ea=-?:—=_E-:a-%
mgmﬁasnauuﬂ—
P"" ”ﬂﬁﬁaﬂaﬁ-ﬁ—g
I - -- ﬁg: I- .I..__-—
ﬂﬁgsﬁiﬂﬂﬂﬁﬁﬂ
Figure 3. The setup for the coalescence of
0.5 ml drop with 8 ml drop.
. . . . . l . . , I I II - 4 .
III"" f” 11;.
""""_-'-"": .:|.::_-r--_~_3-_'l:l'..'_"" 3 ii“:
L: :. .t:-_- +- -l-- .- .'?""- |-l'. u .. .. . r . .11-
- ‘ .L Eta? - ' l'- ===l=ﬂg 1W -- “=- *
I . I .- _ - . _ II. 1 x... I
35-h... h -: ...E 1 ﬁg 3 ﬁg
I--E=--I""i --I -_ . '.' _--..ll—.-- I =---m..r . ,' 'HII' l"": I I
""I. IEEH’ ”5 4-! EF' I==- ' ”' :3 .'-’r"" E:
E:=:=-i - .~ $11.“: ---'."".=:'.=L ** -
—lhl-.n=_ "" Il-II lI-I-rl-I -‘==-==
—='==='"""" I-l=-""n=' ====E."" l-II
EE:===EE==:... =:-55== :==:::EEEEF;--==§E====
""IlhlIlIl-Ilu'll- — -- I-IIII “I I... """"
iEEEEEEﬁﬁggggggﬁgff-j :gzzrziiiﬂiﬂﬂﬂﬂl
Figure 4a. Coalescence of two Flgure 4b. Same as 421 at a later tlme.
unequal drops at early time.
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","J + . ' 'r ‘ ' ""
n' I 1 1 l "" I .|'
Fr 11 \ . 11 ’r I ill
::=E:=%;""ﬂ- 55 - u .. .. . +3.3: .
III hr -' "" .1 l'ﬁ“ E I I...- «I .
i:::::.. i' 'H *4"" Eli” “n- == ==' ‘5"" I?” II
II- II"".I F I' ' f _ I - I_—.. 'II-
II-Ilil'llll 1-! - .. EEII IIII-L I. f"" '5] .
II... . * I II I - ,' . r.
:===:f.-E= :==.=5: =====ﬁw -- -- I:
I I...“-
f---- l--- . I III I I. I l I..-
IIIII-ll- III. I-II' u '— -- llli
I-llim-I-ri- "" --=-' II. --- I '-
II-III-I-I II===------l ---- II-Ifj- .-
I . II-
IEEEEEEHI .Iz:n----=====' IEEEE!!! glui-IIEE
Figure 40. Same as 4b at a later time. Figure 4d. Same as 4c at a later time.

Figure 4 shows a sequence of photographs of the actual coalescence process as it proceeded for this test. Figure 5
shows a plot of the measured contact radius values as a function of time for the coalescence of the two unequal
drops.

The analytical shape relaxation during the coalescence process of two liquid masses is determined through the
solution of the conservation of mass and momentum equations for incompressible ﬂow. Upon applying the
capillarity constraints at the surface of the free liquid volumes, the shape relaxation With time of the coalescence
process can be obtained as a result of the minimum energy principle. For two coalescing liquid drops the ﬁnal
shape after the completion of the coalescence process results in a single liquid drop Whose volume is equal to the
sum of the volume of the two drops, in the absence of any external forcing. Due to this result, the time variation of
the contact radius between the two drops as they coalesce represents an accurate measure for the shape relaxation of
the coalescence process of the two drops as the process proceeds. Thus, for the correct interpretation of the shape
relaxation of the coalescence process of the two drops, it is sufﬁcient to determine only the time evolution of the
contact radius as the coalescence process proceeds With time.

0.6 a
A 0-5 . o 90:.“ 0o .
2
~34 ..§ 0
E 0-4 .2. °
3 o . ” .90 900. 0000
a
E
g : ‘ °’ Initial Drop Dlameters:
' D2 = 0‘ 89 cm
0
0 1 2 3 4 5
Time (see)
Figure 5. Measured contact radius variation With time for two
unequal drops.

For the purposes of validating the present Viscosity measurement technique, the time variation of the contact
radius was produced through an accurate numerical solution to the equations of motion. For axisymmetric drops,
Antar et a15’6 obtained the solution numerically using the Boundary Element Method (BEM). The BEM is ideally
suited for the coalescence problem discussed in here due to the fact that this method solves directly for the shape

6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","evolution of the free surfaces during the coalescence process. Figure 6 shows the dimensionless time evolution of
the contact radius as two unequal drops With diameters ratio of 3:1 as they coalesce.
0.7
0.6
“ '
g 0.4
.92: ' Initial Drop Diameters:
E 0-3 D1 = 1 1*
I
0.2 '
0.1 ,
0
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4
Time (t*)
Figure 6. Dimensionless variation of the contact radius With time for the
coalescence of two unequal drops.

Figure 6 shows the normalized calculated contact radius variation With time as two drops With similar volume
ratio as those used in ﬁgures 3 and 4 are made to coalesce. It should noted in here that due to the speciﬁc
normalization process used in obtaining the solution shown in ﬁgure 6, in Which the ﬂuid Viscosity was used in
determining the time scale, that solution is independent of the Viscosity of the exact ﬂuid Viscosity value. However,
the ﬂuid Viscosity can be determined When the actual dimensional contact radius speed is calculated.

Figure 7 shows a plot of the dimensional variation of the contact radius With time as calculated for three different
Viscosity values using the BEM method of solution. The dimensional measured contact radius speed of ﬁgure 3 is
also plotted in ﬁgure 7. It can be clearly seen that the curve computed for a Viscosity value of 11900 cp ﬁts the data
best. A comparison between that value of the Viscosity and the value of the Viscosity of that liquid as noted by the
supplier of 12,500 cp, as shown in Table I, gives an error of 5% in the value of the Viscosity by using the present
technique for measuring the Viscosity of Silicone Oi1B1.

0.9
W”; + 5 _
0.7 'I,
III- _...
:5” 0.5 .5“ — visoos = b
E IF] — “SOUS = C
E 0.4 K)
E E2, Initial Drop Diameters:
8 0.3 r."" D1 =2.89 cm —
ji/ D2 = 0.89 cm
0.2 '1’ Fluid: silicon oil —
1
0.1
0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Time (sec)
Figure 7. Comparison between measured contact radius and one calculated
for three values of the Viscosity.
7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","Figure 8 shows the contact radius variation With time due to the coalescence of two drops of Silicone Oil (B1).
The two drops in this case have equal volume of approximately 4 ml each. Figure 9 shows a plot of the measured
contact radius With a calculated contact radius using the BEM routine for three different values of the Viscosity.
Figure 9 shows that the curve for a liquid Viscosity of 13900 ep appears to approximate the measured values best.
When this value is compared With the standard Viscosity value of 12500 ep given by the supplier of this silicone oil
shows an error of approximately 11% between the two Viscosity values.

Silicon on 31
Time US CD
1.5
V... _ _ _:__.-""_:’--_-_I-T:-
o\~”o“..~.’~ o ,n I
E '0‘”. . _ I
g 6.W.%..M..f:°mv '
.6 .0... E .
l0 «,0 u- _ 4 D11:
5 .w E
.3» 3:23;
0 {""0“}. I
O “’0 3,
v0. 0 f
o y
0 5 Timetsec‘j
Time, see
Figure 8. Contact radius variations With time for the Figure 9- Comparison Of the measured contact
coalescence of two equal drops. radius With the computed contact radius for three
values of the Viscosity.
IV. Conclusions
The Fluid Merging Viscosity Measurement (FMVM) experiment has demonstrated that the coalescence
process of two liquid drops can lead to an accurate measurement to the value of the liquid Viscosity When the
surface tension value for this liquid is known. Also, the FMVM experiment has demonstrated that meaningful
experiments on ﬂuid physics can be conducted onboard the International Space Station With simple Off-the-shelf
equipment and limited effort by the astronauts.
Acknowledgments

The authors gratefully acknowledge the efforts expended by Astronauts Mike Fineke and J ohn Phillips in

conducting the FMVM experiment onboard the 188.
References

1Miani, F. and Matteazzi, P., “Estimation of Viscosity in Undercooled Liquid Metal Alloys,” J. Non-erys. Solids, Vol. 143,
1992, p. 140.

2Frankel, J ., “Viscous Flow of Crystalline Bodies under the Action of Surface Tension,” J. Physics (Moscow), V01. 9, No. 5,
1945, pp. 385-391.

3Hopper, R. W., “Coalescence of Two Viscous Cylinders by Capillarity: Part 1, Theory,” J. Am. Ceram $00., V01. 76, 1993,
p. 1947.

4Hopper, R. W., “Coalescence of Two Viscous Cylinders by Capillarity: Part II, Shape Evolution,” J. Am. Ceram $00., V01.
76, 1993, p. 2953.

8
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","5Antar, B. N., Ethridge, E. C. and Maxwell, D., “Viscosity Measurement using Drop Coalescence in Microgravity,”
Micmgravity Sc. Techn0., V01. 14, N0. 1, 2003, pp. 9-19.

6Antar, B. N., Ethridge, E. C. and Maxwell, D., “Viscosity Measurement of Highly Viscous Liquids Using Drop
Coalescence in Low gravity,”Adv. Space Res., Vol. 24, N0. 10, 1999, pp. 1289-92.

7Ethridge, E. C., Antar, B. N. and Maxwell, D.,“Uti1ization of Low Gravity Environment for Measuring the Viscosity of
Highly Viscous Liquids,” AIAA 99-0708, AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, J an. 11-14, 1999.

8Ethridge, E. C., Kaukler, W. Antar, B. N., “Preliminary Results of the Fluid Merging Viscosity Measurement Space Station
Experiment,” AIAA 2006-1142, AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, Jan.9-12, 2006.

9
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
