"","x"
"1","U1
3)
3
o
3 [PHYSICS IN SPACE]
FOAMS AN D EMU LS I 0 NS I N SPACE >>>DOI10.1051/epn:2008402
John Banhartl, Francisco Garcfa-Moreno‘, Stefan Hutzler 2, Dominique Langevin3, Libero Liggieri“, Reinhard Miller5,
Arnaud SaintJalmes6 and Denis Weaire 2,
1TU Berlin, 2TCD Dublin, 3 UPS Orsay, 4IENI—CNR Cenova, 5MPI Golm, 6 U. Rennes
In the physics of ﬂuids, gravity is often an unwelcome in— were investigated onboard the Space Shuttle, which allowed
truder because it gives rise to instabilities and inhomo— models adopted for surfactant adsorption to be validated [7],
geneities. Microgravity enVironments such as that of the [8]. The younger generation has also been exposed to the de—
International Space Station (188) offer the opportunity to turn lights of foam physics, when undergraduate students earned
off its unwelcome effects. This strategy is being pursued for high commendation for their successful achievement of the
the study of three closely related complex ﬂuids: aqueous extension of one of Plateau’s classic wire—frame experiments to
foams, emulsions, and liquid metallic foams, the latter owing the microgravity environment of a parabolic ﬂight [9].
their importance to being the precursor of solid products.
Studies of soap or metallic froths and complex emulsions are The structure and properties Of foams
inherently interdisciplinary as is often the case with condensed Foams are made of closely packed gas bubbles in a liquid, typically
and soft matter; interdependent effects take place on three water with a surfactant. The liquid volume fraction (p may vary
length scales as well as several time scales, each of which fromless than one percent (dry foam) to around 35% (wet foam).
requires treatment with appropriate tools: When (p > (pC H 35%, the bubbles are spherical and move freely in
a “bubbly liquid”. A “jamming"" transition takes place at the criti—
- Molecular level surfactant properties: foam and emulsion cal liquid fraction that brings bubbles into contact. Such wet foams
chemistry are rather inaccessible under gravity, at least in equilibrium (except
- Mesoscopic [6226! ﬁlm structure and local behaviour: numerical for very small bubbles). The froth on your beer, if you wait for it
simulation to settle, is “dry”. The addition of liquid at the top can create
- Macroscopic level rheology, drainage: hydrodynamic theories steady—state drainage, with a constant volume fraction. This can be
used to study wet foams in a steady state but only up to a liquid
Foams and emulsions are ubiquitous in nature and in indus— fraction of about 20%, beyond which various dynamic instabilities
trial products and technologies. Their stability against phase sepa— (primarily convection) occur — hence the need for microgravity
ration is achieved with blends of molecules (surfactants, which allows the production of such wet foams (see Fig. 1).
electrolytes, polymer, protein) which segregate to the interface be—
tween the two ﬂuids and hinder droplet or bubble aggregation and Metallic foams
coalescence. Seeding with particles also becomes very attractive be— Metallic foams [10] are of considerable interest for light struc—
cause of the outstanding stability it provides to the structure of the tures or shock absorption applications. But they can suffer from
ﬂuid. Foams and emulsions share common structures and show pronounced drainage in the liquid state under the inﬂuence of
many physicochemical analogies. They feature liquid ﬁlms between gravity, unless appropriate measures are taken to prevent ﬂuid
bubbles or drops and transition zones called the Plateau borders. ﬂow. The reasons for this drainage lies in the high density of
European groups have a strong record in this area of research most metals — 2.5 g/cm3 for liquid aluminium — and a Viscos—
on the ground as well as in microgravity, including both para— ity—to—surface tension ratio which is less than 1/10 of water,
bolic ﬂights and sounding rocket missions [1—6]. Adsorption dy— combined with the usually high liquid fraction (>10% ) in most
namics and dilational rheology ofsurfactants at liquid interfaces liquid metal foams. As the ﬁlms become thinner, they rupture
at critical thicknesses around 50 um, something that must be
0,12 eliminated to obtain a useful engineering material. This can be
r ‘ FIG 1: Position Of d b in r r tin solid oxide articles within the ﬁlms and
the liquid front in one Y CO P O a g P
forced drainage exper_ Plateau borders in order to keep the two interfaces apart and ef—
g 008 ’ iments: red circles, on ﬁciently block ﬂow [11]. This stabilisation technique is largely
:- ' ground,the l'qu'd inspired from the similar effect of powders on emulsions first
24% velocity '5 constant; observed by Pickering.
3 blue Circles, In 0g: the
3' propagation is diffu-
E 094 ‘ sive and slower, Foams in microgravity
' all°Wing °“e t° reaCh Microgravity experiments can probe the details of foam struc—
muchlarger volume . .
’1' fractions—instabilities ture (the shapes and arrangements of bubbles), conductzvzty
0 seen on ground are (which can be related to liquid fraction), coarsening (due to
0 4 8 12 15 prevented [2]. diffusion of gas: growth of large bubbles, shrinkage of small
time (s)
europhusicsnews
26 ° volume 59 ° numberAilticle available at http://www.europhysicsnewsorg or http://dx.doi.org/10.1051/epn:2008402

"
"2","I 'li I i' I I. '. ..
, - \ ‘ a
I am '
t = 05 I > t: 08
ones), drainage and capillarity (both due to gravity), rheology - 7
(a foam being a good example ofa complexﬂm'd, combining I ‘ :
liquid—like and solid—like properties) and bubble coalescence. . ' “Q: .

The bubble growth laws (coarsening) must be different in , ” ""° 0, 5 a
the wet and dry foam limit, but this evolution has never been . ' ‘ I “ f y. .5 “
fully checked. The same difficulty occurs with rheology: how a a ' 5. ~ ' ‘3 i
do wet foams ﬂow? 80 wet foams as well as dynamic effects are ‘ ' ' ’ A L I ‘2,
still a terra incognita of many fascinating problems. Their 9 «a . A
eventual solution will provide a scientiﬁcally valid alternative t = 1805 \ t =
to the necessarily conservative empiricism currently used to
evaluate the operational Window and design £01” foam han— A FIG. 2: X-ray radiograph of ground tests of the aluminium foam furnace
dling in many industrial P rocesses. successfully used in the sounding rocket experiment of April 2008. Vari-

Objectives within present ISS research programmes in— ous configtlirations were tested, inclnding foaming against gravity (left

, panel, 1 g ) and supported by grav1ty(rlght panel, -1 g ) and tests were
Clude the measurement Of all these P 1‘ 0p er ties to be measured also performed on parabolic ﬂights. A"" ﬂight data are being analysed.
for aqueous foams in a single instrument. A full set of data on
capillary drainage has already been obtained during parabolic
ﬂight experiments [2] giving better understanding of the liq— Emulsions in microgravity
uid repartition inside the foam at high liquid ﬁactions. First Applications call for efﬁcient and low cost methods for stabilisa—
tests are performed in gravity with foams made of solutions tion or destabilisation ofemulsions. In order to ﬁll the knowledge
containing surfactant and solid particles (such as fumed sil— gap between the present semi—empirical practice and a more de—
ica): this is a direction towards which intense terrestrial re— liberate design of emulsiﬁers, ESA supports a programme in—
search is turning, with strong commercial motivation 6g. in volVing different European teams from academia and industry,
the food industry. working on terrestrial investigations as well as on microgravity eX—

The interplay between drainage and coalescence in metal— periments scheduled to take place within the next two years on
he foams is obscured by the presence of gravity and it is highly board Columbus. Research topics range from the adsorption of
desirable to study rupture without disturbing liquid ﬂows and surface—active components of emulsiﬁers to the collective behav—
while holding the liquid ﬁaction at a constant level. However iour of emulsion droplets as well as the dynamics of the liquid
insight into the internal conﬁguration of the foam is necessary ﬁlm between droplets. Droplet aggregation and coalescence are
in order to quantify both drainage and rupture, which is re— mostly conditioned by the physicochemical properties of ﬁlms
alizable by X—ray radioscopy, as already used in the laboratory where dilational surfactant transport and interfacial rheology —
[12]. Integration of such facilities into a microgravity enVi— the dynamic interfacial tension response to extensions of the in—
ronment is an engineering challenge because of safety aspects terfacial area — play a key role. Weightlessness entails various sim—
and miniaturisation. pliﬁcations allowing for an accurate measurement of kinetic

Aluminium alloy foam is created inside a small ceramic parameters concerned with surfactant transport, adsorption and
furnace: with a microfocus X—ray tube and a ﬂat panel de— interfacial rheology. It also provides for simpliﬁed and controlled
tector, one can observe in situ the mass density projection of conditions under which the process of destabilisation of emul—
the growing foam. In the left panel of ﬁg. 2, foam is shown sions and speciﬁc interactions between droplets can be investi—
to expand from bottom to top and gravity hinders vertical gated. The elimination of buoyancy allows an effective study to
expansion and causes drainage. In the right panel, gravity be made of the processes of droplet coalescence or aggregation,
helps the foam to expand, but liquid still drains to the bot— which under terrestrial conditions are strongly coupled with grav—
tom. Zero gravity experiments on parabolic ﬂights or on ity segregation. Experiments are planned that will focus on the
sounding rockets will show how foams evolve without dilational rheology of mixed surfactant layers subject to adsorp—
drainage for up to minutes. tion and to partitioning between the liquid phases.

In the long run, one should be able to reliably produce ho— Further experiments on ISS employing speciﬁcally designed
mogeneous solid foams on Earth: new scientiﬁc ﬁndings will diagnostics will address the stability of emulsions formed with
enable better materials to be produced for a market which of— surfactants and/ or particles [13,14]. The objective of these
fers many opportunities for cellular metals [12]. experiments is the investigation of droplet-size distribution >
eurorahvsicsnews number 4 . volume 39 . 27

"
"3","VI
9
3
E
Acknowledgements
The studies summarised here are the result of the active and
fruitful collaboration of the different research groups involved in
’ a the ESA MAP programmes ‘FASES’ (Fundamental and Applied
Studies in Emulsion Stability, ‘Hydrodynamics ofWet Foams’,
\ ‘ngOAM’ (Advanced Foams in Microgravity), and ‘XRMon’
' (X—Ray Monitoring). We Wish to thank all the colleagues par—
1 - .1 ticipating in these programmes, including in particular Michele
. , \\ Adler, Mickael Antoni, Anne—Laure Biance, Herve Caps,
‘ _ ‘ ' . \‘~.. Danielle Clausse, Sylvie Cohen—Addad, Reinhard Hoehler,
-\ _ / ; l. s Giuseppe Loglio, Olivier Pitois, Annie Steinchen, Nicolas Van—
' \‘\&/) _ -\_ L dewalle, as well as Douglas Durian of the NASA foam project.
325-1 \ﬁ J , fr .3 — _ - _-
\ .. , :rx-mr???‘ :-
m -« References
. -, ‘ ‘3"" 1 A: ' ' ,; :8? [1] M. Andersson at Ll], “Foam Research in Microgravity”, journal 0ft/76
: ' ,:_"" 91.3?” .-_ _ , .-.7 _ ' japan Society osz'crogmz/z'ty Application (2008, in press)
""AK I ‘ ' ' i': . ‘ 8 ”d ‘ ' [2] A. Saint—Jalmes et 4]., Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 058303 (2007)
A FIG. 3: The future of foam research on the ISS? (courtesy of Wiebke [3] A. Saint—Jalmes et 41., Microgmw'ty Sci. Rc/ynol, 18-1 (2006) 22
Drenckhan). [4] A. Saint—Jalmes et 41., Microgravity Sci. 72657101., 18-3/4 (2006) 108
. . . . . . . . [5] H. Caps et 41., C011. SmfA 261 (2005) 131
> evolutlon durlng destablhsatlon, of droplet palr—W1se 1nterac— ..
tions and coalescence, and of the droplet dynamics in order to [6] T' Wubben 6t dl’j' P17}, 5"". COMI' Matt"" 15’ (2003) 8427
study regimes driven by capillary ﬂows. [7] L. Liggieri et 41., Microgmu Sci. 726/1, 18 (2006) 112
So far, important industrial processes and products have [8]V.1.Kovalchuketa[.,]. Coll. Interﬁzce Sal, 280 (2004) 498
been developed Without the benefit ofwell established science— [9] D.G.T.Barrett 6111]., Microgmv. Sci. 72m, 20, (2008) 17
based models. With the gravity level becoming a variable pa— [10] J. Banhart, 13mg. Mam 5a..) 46 (2001) 559
rameter, scientists in academia and industry are enabled to 11 B h A d E M 8 2006 781
formulate more tractable models. Today ESA has brought to— [ ] I an am a 7% am, ( )
gether three scientific communities and related industry Whose [12] F‘ Garda Moreno 6’"" “1"" C011 Smf A’ 263 (2005) 290
cooperation makes the future of foam and emulsion research [13] M- Antoni 61‘ 41., C011- SWf/L 309 (2007) 280
very promising (see Fig. 3). l [14] D. Clausse et 4]., Adv. Coll. Inmﬁzce 5611, 117 (2005) 5

"
