"","x"
"1","Paper presented at the International Conference on Space Optics, Toulouse, March-April 2004
DIGITAL HOLOGRAPHIC MICROSCOPY FOR EMULSIONS ON THE FLUID
SCIENCE LABORATORY
T. Dewandrea), F. Duboism, N. Callensm, O. Dupont(3), E. Bascoua)

(1) ESA/ESTEC, Keplerlacm 1, 2200AG Noordwijk, NL. E-mail: thierry.Dewandre@esa.int
(2) Université Libre de Bruxelles, Microgravily Research Center, CP 165/62, av. F . Roosevelt 50, B-1050 Brussels,
Belgium. E-mail: fdubois@ulb.ac.be
(3) Lambda-Xs.a., CP 165/62, av. F . Roosevelt 50, B-1050 Brussels, Belgium. E-mail: 0dup0nt@lambda-x.com
ABSTRACT between 4 and 35 um, their density can be up to 100

drops per FOV, Within the DOFCOIlV of conventional
AS part ofthe development Of an Experiment Container microscopy (some Mm) The emulsion volume to be
(EC) for the thd Science Laboratory (F514): t0 be investigated starts at 2 mm from the cell wall, in order
launched to the International Space Station, a digital to avoid surface and bond effects.
holographic microscopy (DHM) system has been
breadboarded. Th6 SCiCl’ltiﬁC tOpiC Of this EC iS The large DOF requirement exceeds by far the
emulsions, and a large depth of ﬁeld (DOF) is required. DOFCOHV, and this led us to use digital holography1’2.
The DHM enables to Visualise the drops of emulsions, Digital holography is an optical technique whereby a 3-
down to a size of 4 um, on a DOF Which is about 90 D (opaque or semi-transparent) object can be focussed
times its classical value. All this information is numerically3 in sample planes outside the original
contained in one single image, Which is a major setup focus plane, well beyond the conventional
advantage in space applications, Where the downlink DOFCOHV. The 3-D velocimetry requirement led to use
datarate and recording capacity are very limited the Fourier approach to digital holographic microscopy
compared to laboratory conditions. This paper (DHM), Which is patented by the University of
describes the technique being used, presents the Brussels, because it enables to re-construct the object
application to emulsions, shows tests results including from one single CCD image. It has been applied
image re-construction, and quantiﬁes the performances successfully to other objects (solid particles in a ﬂow,
as well as the limitations of the system. dust particles).
1. INTRODUCTION A speciﬁcity of the approach presented here is the use

of partial coherent illumination that reduces the level of
The European Space Agency (ESA) has built a Fluid coherent scattered light. We Will see in the following
Science Facility (FSL) to enable scientiﬁc that this type of source is mandatory With respect to the
investigations of ﬂuid behaviour in the micro-graVity present application.
environment of the International Space Station (188).
This facility is to host so-called Experiment Containers The samples are constituted by a relatively dense
(EC) sequentially during its lifetime, each EC being dispersion of um-sized droplets and can therefore be
devoted to a speciﬁc topic 0f applied or basic research. considered as a highly scattering media. Therefore, it
More information 011 FSL and itS ﬁrst 8 EC’S can be was mandatory to assess the DHM refocusing
found on the ESA web site, at the following address: capability With this type of sample and the image
http://WWW.spaceﬂight.esa.int/users/. quality. In particular, tests were important to ﬁnd the

limits of drop size and of volume ratio (drop
ESA, assisted by an external peer group, has selected liquid/rnatrix liquid) beyond which the method fails.
for one of these EC’s a scientiﬁc topic entitled
“Fundamental and Applied Studies 0f Emulsion The digital holography has one more advantage in this
Stability” (FASES), Which requires microscopy With a space application, namely its image data reduction
large DOF, t0 investigate emulsions (dTOP size feature. Indeed, it enables to re-construct on ground
distribution, shape, volume ratio) and in particular the many sample planes from one single image taken in
dynamic behaviour 0f the drops (their velocity, orbit, reducing therefore signiﬁcantly the amount of
collisions, coalescence, aggregation) ih the absence 0f data to be downlinked from the FSL/ISS to the ground
gravity-generated sedimentation and convection for telescience, or to be recorded for later quantitative
phenomena. The requirements are: resolution of 3 um, evaluation on ground. The downlink datarate is indeed
Field of View (FOV) of 1X1 mmz, DOF of 0.1 mm, 3- very limited (a few Mbps) compared to the CCD
D drop velocity up to 0.1 mm/sec. The drops sizes are output (240 Mbps).

1

"
"2","Paper presented at the International Conference on Space Optics, Toulouse, March-April 2004
2. DIGITAL HOLOGRAPHY INSTRUMENT because it is less sensitive to the important light
AND TECHNIQUE scattering created by the deep heterogeneous structure
of the experimental samples. However, and although

2.1 Optical setup tests with (opaque) latex tracers were successful in
A Mach—Zehnder interferometer is built around a reﬂection, it was not possible to detect a correct
sample cell (6 X 6 mm2 cross section) containing an holographic signal with emulsions (transparent
emulsion (up to 7 % of oil in water or, if mentioned, of obj ects). The reason for that is the weak light reﬂection
water in oil, with 1 % of surfactant). The index n is coefﬁcient at the interface between the two types of
1.3974 for N—octane and 1.3751 for N—hexane, and 1.33 liquid used in the emulsion samples. The transmission
for water. The FOV is 0.33 mm, the magniﬁcation M mode was therefore selected (Fig. 1) because it
is 20, the numerical aperture NAobJ-ect is 0.30. appeared not to have this drawback. The transmission
The coherent bearn emitted by a mono—mode laser mode has other advantages since it provides:
diode (AV=635nm, 10 mW) is focused by a microscope ° a better image quality since the recorded
lens L1 close to the scattering surface of a (rotating) holographic information is mainly due to pure
ground glass (RGG). This RGG is continuously diffraction effect of the droplets, and are less
rotating, in order to reduce the spatial coherence, by inﬂuenced by speckle detrimental effects than in
creating secondary sources, whose phases vary rapidly reﬂection, where the differences in optical path are
and randomly. This system reduces the spatial larger, limiting therefore the capability of reducing
coherence of the beam sufﬁciently to eliminate the the light coherence.
speckle effects from the interferometric image, by 0 A drop image which is less dependent on the drop
time—averaging during the CCD exposure period — the surface quality and is closer to the real size of the
traces of the particles located in and around the focused drop (in reﬂection, only the part of the drop which
plane are then clearly Visible, as can be seen in Fig. 3. reﬂects light towards the CCD represents the
Some noisy straight bands/stripes due to the RGG can drop).
appear, bUt they can easily be removed by increasing ° The illumination is uniform and we avoid large
the RGG rotation SPGCd- intensity differences. Indeed, the amount of light

C CD reﬂected towards the CCD varies with the size

(squared diameter) of the different droplets.
B S 2
L3
S am p 1e L 4
B S 1
L2 PM
M 1
L 1
R G G L a s e r
Fig. 1. Optical setup for digital holographic
microscopy. RGG is the rotating ground glass.
The CCD has 1280 x 1024 pixels and 8 bits resolution, Fig. 2: Example of digital hologram of an emulsion of
with a pixel size Of 7 X 7 Mm? For a magniﬁcation Of N—hexane diluted in Water, initial volume ratio 5%
M=20, this leads to a sampling distance Of 035 (reduced at the recording time due to sedimentation), at
Mm/pixel. The exposure time is 0.5 msec and the frame 5 mm frorh the front window. There are no diffractien
rate is 30 fps. To perform the digital holographic patterns V1s1b1e around the drops because they are in
reconstruction Via Fast Fourier Transform, the images the imaged plane. Unfocused drops are VISIble but their
are windowed to 1024 X 1024 pixels. contrast is lower.
In order to achieve the measurement objectives, there _g—]—2.2. Ima e treatment and ob'ect reconstruction
were a priori two possible modes, namely in reﬂection
or in transmission. The reﬂection mode was tested ﬁrst 2-2-1 The Fourier DHM method
2

"
"3","Paper presented at the International Conference on Space Optics, Toulouse, March-April 2004
TWO maj or methods are being used to obtain the image (Fig. 2 & 3) have high density vertical fringes. This
amplitude (modulus & phase) from the intensity method is described in ref. 4.
acquired by the CCD digital detector, Which requires to
resolve the fringe ambiguity. The phase—shift meth0d3, 2.2.2 Object reconstruction
Which is more accurate, typically uses a set of 4 t0 5 Starting With the Fourier transform of the object wave
sequential images Which differ by an incremental small amplitude
change in the reference optical path, but is not
appropriate iii the case of the FASES emulsioh 0(1/ ,V )= [3+1 “(x9 ”I"" ,V ) (1)
experiment, s1nce droplets could move too rapidly at x y x’y l x y
this timescale. Another method has therefore been . . . .
selected here: the Fourier DHM method. This method obtained by the Fourier method, the emuls10h 1s
enables to extract the full optical amplitude and then to reconstructed humseheahy planeby plane us1ng the
reconstruct the full ﬁeld With extended DOF from % Kirchheff—Fresnel equation, In Its near—ﬁeld
Single interferometry image. It requires that the object express1on (near—ﬁeld because we reeonstruet near the
and reference beams reach the CCD sensor at an angle. best .focus object .plane) 9 Whleh is given In Its
This angle is the reason Why the digital holograms continuous and discrete forms In Eq. (2) and (3)

| respectively:
_ ikdxz
uo em = exp<ikd)[fsvi ﬂy expL— T (w? + vi )] [332324;- (x, nlmy )chhy') <2)
- N—l - - 2
u0(s' ,t' )= M Z exp{ﬂ[(s —S')U+ (t — t')V]} xexp{#/tzd(U2 + V2)}ul(s ,t ) (3)
N N 2N
Here, ui(x,y) is complex optical ﬁeld in a point of the
hologram P (corresponding to a focused point of the , _ - ' 1
object), u0(x’,y’) is the complex optical ﬁeld in another ’ -' I:
object point P’ located in a plane at a distance d, xl is ﬁt! :.- _
the wavelength, k=27ﬂxl, (x, y), (x’, y’) are the spatial H 1 I
variables, (vx, vy) are the spatial frequencies. N is the . g: 1* t ‘
number of pixels in both directions and S, t, S ’, t’, U .r _' 1, i . ' i
and V are integer numbers varying from 0 t0 N—l. . ; r I f f'
[Siggwg [5)177,§) denotes the direct or inverse 2D I i_: "" a if I .:
continuous Fourier transformations. t . r
The sampling distance provided by the CCD sensor but - _ 3'
measured in the object space is C in both X and y _ 1, . _ , :
directions. Since image (at the CCD) and obj ect spaces 1 + I 'I i . .' . 1- - .
are conjugated, the reconstruction is the refocusing in - _ - - - -' _ __ :—
the image as well as obj ect planes, except for the scale '1 '1 J
or magniﬁcation factor M between obj ect and image -.
size. If one chooses the obj ect plane, corresponds to ‘ kt
the obj ect sampling size 0 and d corresponds to a i ' "".
refocus distance in the obj ect side. We have adopted ; _' ; H 1- '_
this choice since it gives direct access to the actual size r I I l. ' 1.: . '
0f the object. We an write P, ‘ 1 I 1. .I: -
ON: cN/M=F0V (4) l t?-
. t
An example of numerical refocusing on a particle is 1' .l 1. '
shown in Fig.3. Both images are reconstructed from the _ ' t "" .- . _ ..
same hologram, the top image Without numerical ""' I t ""I it t '- - ' '1'
refocusing (best focus plane of the optical system), the
bottom image where same particle is now focused9 Fig 32 Example Of numerical I‘CfOCUSlIlg 011 a particle.
With refocusing at a distance of 160 um X n= 208 pm.
3

"
"4","Paper presented at the International Conference on Space Optics, Toulouse, March-April 2004
2.3 DOF Performances is easily derived from the identiﬁcation of the drops
The objective of the work reported in this paper is to mentioned above (para 2.4.1.).
extend the DOF 0f the conventional microscopy, 2.4.4 A 3-D velocimetry algorithm
Whose value for this diffraction-limited setup is: A feature of this Fourier DHM method is that it
captures the positions of the full volume Within the
DOFconV= i .61 n Av /NAobject2 I i 5.6 Mm (5) same .frame, Which enables 3-D velocimetry by
f0110w1ng the motion of any particle as observed in the
The effective DOF provided by DHM is the maximum re'CODStTUCtéd planes, from any pair ef subsequent
refocus distance dmax, deﬁned as the distance at Which frames (the thhe elapsed between frames is 33-msec).
the phase change between two successive CCD pixels A 3-D velocnnetry algorithm has been established and
is too fast to be resolved, Which, in the case of the successfully run from holograms from the same setup
Fourier method, can be shown to be (as well as in reﬂection), using mn-sized transparent
tracer particles.
_ + 2 _ + 2 2 2.4.5 Particle shape and size.
dmax _ ZHN 0 / XV _ _ ZHN C ”W M’ (6) The shape and size of any drop can be measured,
For this setup (Fig. 1), dmax = i 510 Mm and the taking into account that the pixel size is 7 Mm/M = .35
effective DOF is therefore 1 mm. This value Mm 1n , the ObJeCt plane. Its .s1ze ,m the plane
corresponds to the observations (Fig. 9). perpendicular to the optical aX1s 1s eas11y determined
from the reconstructed image focussed on the drop’s
The gain in effective DOF provided by this method is plane, by zooming electronically 0n1t.
therefore
2 2.5 Role of partially coherent illumination
dmax / DOFCOHV I 2/'61 N [ .0 NAObjeCt/ XV M] Using partially coherent light has several advantages3,
“ 90 for thls setup (7) in particular it suppresses the speckle noise, reduces
perturbations from elements located at a greater
W distance of the reconstructed plane, and eliminate
effects of multiple reﬂections interference.
The re-constructed iInages enable different types Of The coherence of the laser source is randomised by a
measurements, astdetailed below. ground glass. When the ground glass is rapidly
24-1 Drops1dent1ﬁcat10n rotating, the CCD acquires an average of the speckle
The ﬁrst measurement is the identiﬁcation of the drops ﬁeld during its exposure time: the speckle effects are
iocated ih the extended DOF _ in practice, this e1iminated6, and two effects only remain apparent,
identiﬁcation 15 performed In each re-censtructed Which do not require a long coherence length, that is 1.
plane. Thts task 15 eas11y done automatically for the diffraction from the drops borders and 2. the effects
n01se1ess images, Where the partieles appeal"" Wlth a of beam deformation and diffraction When traversing
large contrast. When n01se appears m the images, as ts the spherical drops if transparent (as is the case here).
the case for small transparent drops, automatic It can be shown that this type of source is completely
identiﬁcation of the drops is more difﬁcult and can be equivalent to a partially spatial coherent s0urce6’7.
improved by prior noise reduction from the hologram When the spatial extent of the coherent beam reaching
(this is illustrated. in para. 4.2) and, in the case of the the ground glass is reduced, it can also be shown7 and
small tlrops Of interest here, by using a software is observed that the size of the speckle grains increases
extracting eh‘ethf‘u‘ shapes. in average. Therefore, by adjusting the focusing of the
2-4-2 Drop FOSItIOh accuracy. laser beam on the ground glass, we tune the size of the
In the direction along the optical aXis, reconstructing speckle grain emerging out of the optical system.
object planes successively from one end 0f the DOF Using partial coherence also progressively reduces the
(Eq. 6) t0 the other end enables to visualise them as a resolution for refocus distance beyond some value
sequence, Where each Visible drop is seen from out-Of- (Which has been derived for another DHM setup3).
focus (Where the drop is surrounded by diffraction
rings) to focussed (Where it changes colour from black 2.6 Processing time.
to White) and then back to out-Of focus again. This In this experiment, the processing time is about 3
method ObViOUSIY enables to determine the POSitiOh Of seconds to Fourier-analyse and reconstruct each object
the drop, With an accuracy determined by the inter- plane from the 1024 X 1024 X 8 bits CCD hologram,
plane distance chosen for the reconstruction, Which is When using a 1 GHz laptop.
typically the DOFCme Of the microscope being used. The reconstruction is typically performed for 20-30
2'4'3 Particle dens1ty. planes on each side of the setup focus plane, With a
The particle density & volume ratio is another .
. . . . . . distance of 10xn Mm (z DOFCOHV) between them ,
measurement, Wthh is required by this application. It ,
leading to a total DOF of 260-400 Mm. Beyond +/- 510
4

"
"5","Paper presented at the International Conference on Space Optics, Toulouse, March-April 2004
Mm (Eq. 6), the accuracy of the reconstructed image The sizes of the particles were measured on the
degrades due to the limited CCD spatial resolution. refocused images. The maximum error was 0.8 pm,
which is acceptable as a pixel corresponds to 0.6 uni in
3. CALIBRATION OF THE INSTRUMENT the object plane for the 512 X 512 images used in this
The chapter provides the infOfmation about the analysis (and a pixel size is 0.33 uni if retaining the full
calibration of the digital holographic microscope using 1024 .X 1024 re—constructed images instead 0f
the same setup (Fig. 1). Several aspects are addressed: averaging them down to 512X512)°
° The sampling distance; _ __ _ _ _ . _ _ __ __ _ ___
° The accuracy of particle sizes measurements; _. _i :._.|- . I - '1'
° The accuracy of the DHM reconstruction; £5"" 1- ”Ir '
° The veriﬁcation that the DHM reconstruction is l. ___-J ::____
performed without parallax effect. ' I 1|}. r’iif' I
I I . 'II. '
3.1 Field of View measurement @ﬁ"" 11* 7112-"" ' II.
A calibrated ruler was inserted in the ﬁeld of View of I""-"" ' ' . __ﬂl‘i‘ ' . r
the DHM. This is shown by ﬁgure 4, where the ' .il'! _ "" I
numerical indications are in mm. The camera CCD _' 1': '- .-
array is 1280 X 1024 pixels. The ruler has a distance of "" .'I . -I 1
10pm between consecutive lines. The analysis of the ' '- .
picture of Fig. 4 indicates that there is 905 pixels for I' . PF _
0.3mm in the object plane, leading to 0.33pm / pixel. I _ .333 l. E"" .
""'-I'"". '_-' II
I g . I
1,:1.-=_""_ - ,.
L - _;._ - . E
Figure 5: Reconstructed object (size-calibrated 4 am
particles) from a hologram focussed at 50 um from it,
for accuracy assessment of the object size
measurement.
3.3 Parallax effect in the digital holograghic
reconstruction
On the basis of the refocused images of a ruler which
has been manually defocused by a precisely known
Figure 4: Ruler in the ﬁeld 0 f View 0 f the DHM distance, a measurement of the pixel size yields 0.332
' ttm / pixel, which corresponds to the size measured at
, , , , smaller distances as well as with classical microscopy
W (in the best—focus plane) by stopping the reference arm.
—' We have demonstrated that, within the accuracy of our
T0 perform this test, we used three sizes 0f size- measurement, we have no parallax effect in the digital
calibrated latex particles: 411m» 7pm and 10pm. Those holographic reconstruction, for a re—construction
particles were located between microscope glass plates distance up to 80 times the classical DOFconv-
in distilled water and these plates were moved at
different distances along the optical aXis with respect to 4. B RE A D BO A RD RESUL TS
the best focus plane of the microscope. The digital
helegraphic reconstruction was performed on each 4.1 Goals of the exlgerimental tests
digital hologram (Fig. 5) to determine the best focus . . . .
distance and the size of the refocused particles. The 0b.] c.0t1V6 Of the experimental KFStS was to yahdate
It has been checked that the differences between the the qlgltai hOIOgmphlc refO‘FUSlng f?” dlfferent
reconstruction distance and the one that is applied with emu1s10n dilutions and to establish experirnentally the
the translation stage are always less than 10pm. As the maxrnium dilution that can be achieved. The
translation stage has a typical accuracy of 10pm, we experiments. have .been performed Iii Hellma
could not fully demonstrate that the digital holographic spectroscopic eells 1n Quartz (qumd thickness 10
reconstruction distance is correct within the accuracy mm). The liquids ”.6 011. (n—ectane 0r n—hexane) and
0 f the measurements ( the D OFconV = i 5.6 Hm» see Eq. distilled water emulsrﬁed in different volume ratios, by
5) adding polyoxyethylenated alcohols surfactants
' (C10E5, BRIJ30 and BRIJ 52).
5

"
"6","Paper presented at the International Conference on Space Optics, Toulouse, March—April 2004

The dispersions of the emulsions were achieved by * The image of ﬁgure 6 is very noisy. This could be

hand—shaking or by ultrasonic means. The duration and due to the drop distribution, which would have a tail of

power of the ultrasonic excitation was adjusted by the small—size drops unresolved by the DHM but capable

scientist to achieve several droplet sizes. However, it of generating optical noise. The characteristics of the

was observed that the graVity makes impossible the drop distribution are related to the emulsions creation

assessment for the large size droplets (fast method (ultrasonic), which is different from the

sedimentation). method used for the less noisy images like Fig. 2 and 7
(hand-mixing). This aspect of the experiments will be

4.2 Exgerimental images further investigated.

Fig. 6 is an example of a recorded hologram. The * In the case of ﬁgure 6, thecoherence reduction was

emulsion was created by ultrasonic mixing (hand— insufﬁcrent to achieve a satisfactory norse reduction

mixing was not effective because the surface tension but It can be adapted to thls s1tuation, to some extent,

was too high). as explained in para. 2.5. An example of hologram
recorded with a higher coherence reduction is shown
by ﬁgure 7. Another important way to reduce the
scattering is to decrease the thickness of the cell.
* It has been observed on images like ﬁgure 6 that the
number of Visible droplets does not increase with the
volume ratio. The interpretation of that a priori
unexpected phenomenon is due to the increase of light
scattering inside of the sample that reduces the contrast
of the resulting image. It results that the number of
detected droplets can be underestimated. This
behaViour is not speciﬁc of the digital holographic
system. It occurs also with classical microscopic
conﬁguration and is an important aspect to be taken
into account for any optical system. Basically, the
picture of Fig. 7 is very similar to what could be
obtained with a classical imaging system. The only

Fig. 6. Digital hologram of an emulsion. N—hexane actual difference is the presence of interference fringes.

diluted in water, initial volume ratio 2.5%, at 5 mm A classical microscope conﬁguration is achieved by

from the front window. The (vertical) interference blocking the reference beam, as shown in ﬁgure 8 (but

fringes are Visible with a contrast indicating that we are w1thout reference beam, no hologram and therefore no

close the volume ratio limit. However, the exact value reconstruction).

of the volume ratio limit is difﬁcult to establish:

sometimes it is possible to reconstruct from the digital

hologram, and sometimes it is not, with this type of

volume ratio

With respect to the digital hologram of ﬁgure 6, we

make the following remarks

* Digital holograms like ﬁgure 6 gave us some

indication about the behaViour of the light in the

emulsion. As a droplet has a different refractive index

than the surrounding liquid, it behaves as a convergent

or a divergent lens. Let us ﬁrst consider the convergent

lens case: the light emerging out of the droplet is

convergent, and when the positions of the focusing

zones are corresponding to the focus plane of the

imaging system, we obtain bright spots. The same type . , , , ,

of result is obtained with diverging lens effect except ﬁg?“ 7: Dlgltal 110103331 rec9rded Wlth a h1g1?”

that the droplets are providing Virtual focusing zones. sEatial coherence reduction — Estimated volume ratio

Here also, scanning through successive planes leads to 2/0'

colour change (black to white or Vice—Versa), but its

interpretation in terms of in front/behind best focus

plane is in the opposite direction.

6

"
"7","Paper presented at the International Conference on Space Optics, Toulouse, March-April 2004
_, -..- - - n. . -I-I-II- hi"" .—..""_..I'Ih-.H""1*.- =I- +
a 3
l; I. ' .-
l' . . I
1‘- .ul ri.
Figure 8: Image recorded with blocked reference beam _
— Estimated volume ratio 2% - .. . ""
-.. .-......_..L- Q. .. ..' ... 1..
The digital holographic reconstruction was tested on Frame 1: Digital holographic reconstruction at _ 300 X
different digital holograms. The 5% volume ratio was _
. . . . n — 400 um.
too high to achieve s1gn1ﬁcant results. For a 2.5%
volume ratio, the hologram of ﬁgure 6 provides 1
refocusing but with extremely high noise indicating "" ' . ""' ' "" “g ""'1'” : .1"". T"" “i"" 1""}.
that it is crucial to reduce the coherence as far as I ' ' '-' —. ._i - _i. l
possible when the emulsion drops volume ratio is high. _ - ‘ '-
Examples of reconstructions from hologram of ﬁgure 7 -
are provided in ﬁgure 9. The reconstructions were _ '-
performed in the range i 500 X n um = i 650 um ' '-
around classical focus plane, by steps of 10 X 11 um. - '
We show here only some examples. _ i _|
From the images of ﬁgure 9, we observe that it is ""‘1."" '
possible to detect focussed droplets in any frame. The , ‘ _ '
DHM depth of investigation has been observed to be I ' ' . I
satisfactorily increased by a factor of 90 to i 500 um, I . _
compared to DOFconv 0f the microscope used here is ‘ r ‘ ' f
around i 5.6 um (Eq. 5). However we have observed .- ' . _
that such a large reconstruction depth is only possible ' -"" u.
when the emulsion is not too dense (up to 2%) and '
when the spatial coherence of the beam is drastically ' ' - "" '
reduced. . u... -r-- -I.‘ . 51-.- .in .-
It W35 not possible to test large droplets because 0f Frame 21: Digitalholographic reconstruction at 0 um
sedimentation — this size of particle most obviously
requires microgravity. The optical limitations Figure 9; Example of digital holographic
mentioned above for the smaller droplets ShOUId be reconstruction. The diffraction effects at the borders of
reduced for larger drops, leading to better image the re-constructed images can be eliminated7.
quality, because larger drops scatter less.
It was observed that the emulsiﬁcation process is 4.4 Enhancement bl: hologram cleaning
essential since it controls the drops size distribution. In For high drops volume ratios and/or small drop sizes
particular, for a given drops volume ratio, increasing holograms become more noisy, as shown in Fig. 10?
the mixer power produces smaller drops. Having the This noise reduces the method capability and
miXing longer also produces smaller drops, but in a less resolution. This can be remedied to some extent by
efﬁ01ent way than a power increase “cleaning” the hologram Via a software treatment. This
is illustrated by the comparison of two images below,
which were re-constructed from the same hologram, at
a focus distance of 39 X 10 X 11 um from the best focus
7

"
"8","Paper presented at the International Conference on Space Optics, Toulouse, March-April 2004
plane, except that the second image has been obtained
after “cleaning” the hologram. 5.3 Best focus distance
N0 obj ective criterion for a best focus plane was found.
The difﬁculty stems from the fact that, compared With
'. -. classical microscopy, there is no clear loss of
_' _ .T '__""f'_""r‘ information (blur) When going out of best-focus. One
_ - """"f*'.-.I _'_ . method is to select the plane With minimum drop size,
I §??‘HE -. 3.1- that is minimum diffraction effects around the drop.
J 'rf' _ H."" ’i'li'i- ""r"". - Another method is to determine When the drop centre
Jr. . m... { ._ . . .
: ii _ 4.2.111 I"": ="" _ _ turns from black9 to White or Vice-Versa — this method
. ﬁat} '- ”.31; has been reﬁned . Whatever the method, the Size of the
.; "" '3 :ff"" :1"" -' drop is determined by the size of the black disk. The
- ' iii: . ; F; determination of the best focus plane is easier When the
I 1 - _ _..- _, . ._ -' object shape is known.
. 5.4 Partial coherence
Using partially coherent light has several
advantages3,which have permitted digital holography
to adapt to the emulsions 0f the FASES experiment.
Partial coherence suppresses the speckle noise, reduces
perturbations from elements located at a greater
distance of the reconstructed planes volume, and
eliminates effects of multiple reﬂections interference.
The level of the partial coherence could be adjusted to
optimise the hologram quality for a given emulsion.
5.5 Advantages for space applications
Besides the image data reduction feature mentioned
above, the use of a CCD has the advantage that the
image is available in digital format immediately and
can be transmitted timely-stretched to ground. This
allows Via “telescience” quantitative pre-evaluation
Figure 10: Digital holographic reconstruction at 520 from the scientist on ground and feedback in near-real-
Mm from best focus plane, before (top image) and after time. Further, as 0116 single image pl‘OVidCS the
(below) noise-reduction of the hologram. information about a sample volume, much less image
raw data must be recorded on board, for later use by
5, DISCUSSION the scientist, and therefore much less crew involvement
is needed for tape replacement.
Some aspects of the technique and 0f the tests The Fourier DHM technique used here requires more
performed are discussed below. pixels in the FOV than classical microscopy to achieve
a comparable spatial resolution in the re-constructed
5,1 The DOF planes, by a factor of 2 t0 3, the real gain in bit-size in
The gain in effective DOF provided by this method is this case is therefore about 90/25” 36. Comparatively,
given by Eq. 7. Its value for this setup is the phase-shift technique requires 4 t0 5 images,
dmax / DOFC0er = 510 / 5.6 = 90. reduced to 2 by on-board processing, reducing the gain
This value corresponds to the observations (Fig.9). to 90/2: 45.
5.2 Measurements from the hologram 5.6 CCD and spatial resolution
The hologram enables several types of measurements, The spatial resolution of the CCD is limited compared
Which have been performed in this investigation: to a ﬁlm, but is large enough3 to acquire all the
particles density, particle shape, particles radius and holographic information required to reconstruct the
radius diameter, 3-D velocimetry. These measurements object and obtain the demanding information required
are all based on a ﬁrst step, that is an (automatic) by this application.
identiﬁcation of the drops, in the planes re-constructed
from the hologram. This identiﬁcation can become 5.7 Applicability t0 sgace.
difﬁcult, however, When the drops become denser or The Fourier implementation of Digital Holography for
smaller, since the hologram then becomes noisy. the present application here may require two
8

"
"9","Paper presented at the International Conference on Space Optics, Toulouse, March-April 2004
adjustments during the operations in space, whenever calibration work reported here (Fourier approach) and
one of the emulsion samples to be sequentially by the Promiss experiment successfully ﬂown in 2002
observed enters the optical setup. The reason is that the and 2003 (phase shift approach), emulsions with
emulsions will be at the limit Of the technique, concentrated mn-size transparent drops are more
requiring a minimisation Of the noise level in the difﬁcult to observe than samples with diluted, larger
hologram. The two controls are the size of the spot on and more contrasted drops.
the RGG, and the relative adjustment of object and
reference beams at the CCD. Moreover, the tests led in the following results:

The angular sensitivity related to the aliasing requires 1. Showing the importance of the emulsiﬁcation
no control, because we use 6 pixels/fringe pairs. method and parameters (power, duration): they have to
The system would also enable to stop the reference be optimised to reach a drop distribution the DHM
beam from ground, which combined with a maximum technique can handle most effectively. For instance, a
spot on the RGG, leads to conventional microscopy, drop distribution with a signiﬁcant tail of drops too
which is needed by samples with excessive scattering small to be resolved could be a source of detrimental
and provides a backup. optical noise.
2. A more quantitative comparison between the DHM
6. CONCLUSION technique and the classical microscopy: the DHM
provides a much larger DOF and provides it in a
The objective of the tests was to demonstrate the “single shot”, which enables 3-D velocimetry, as
feasibility of the digital holographic microscope to required. Classical microscopy, with its much smaller
provide the very high DOF required for the emulsions DOF, provides a better resolution than the Fourier
of the FASES experiment. The range of emulsions of method used here for a given CCD (by a factor of
interest in the FASES experiment include difﬁcult ones roughly 2 to 3) and enables to image somewhat higher
because of: volume ratios (by a factor TBD) because it uses fully-
1. Very small index difference between the incoherent light.
transparent drops and the matrix liquid, which 3. An accurate calibration assessment of the technique.
leads to little contrast of the drops; 4. The experimental demonstration that the selected
2. Drops of very small size, leading to substantial DHM method is sensitive to the light scattering created
scattering of the laser light required by digital by the heterogeneous structure of the emulsions, and
holography; that these effects can be sufﬁciently reduced to allow
3. High density of drops. measurements, by reducing the spatial coherence of the
4. Drops to be observed at more than 2 mm from the source (smaller speckle grains) in an optimum manner.
cell window. Reducing the sample depth helps also. Note that this
Furthermore, the FASES experiment requires 3-D problem occurs also with classical transmission
velocimetry for relatively fast motions (0.1 Inm/sec), microscopy.
leaving us with no freedom but using the Fourier 5, When the drops volume ratio becomes too high (> 2
implementation Of the digital holography. % in the case of 4 Mm drops), the same optical system
BGSidGS rejecting the reﬂection mode due tO P001"" is able to provide images much closer to those of a
performance, we have investigated the most difﬁcult (fully-incoherent) classical microscope, by merely
6111111510“ cases only, whereby the selected digital stopping the reference beam and increasing the spot
holographic technique was brought to its limit and size on the RGG.
sometimes beyond. The results are summarised in the
table below. This work has been performed in the frame of an ESA
contract with the prime contractor EADS Space
FOV 1 mm _33 mm (about 1000 X Transportation.(Friedriohshafen, Germany), for a phase
_-_ A/B for Experiment Containers for ESL, one of them
DOF 0.1mm >11n1n(>: 500 Mm being the EASES .EC. The seientiﬁc team of the
_-_ FASES EC is coordinated by Prof. A. Passerone & Dr.
Resolution 3 Mm < 4 M11102 pixels) L. Liggieri (Genoa, Italy) — Dr. J .-D. Sylvain
(Marseille UniV., France) is the team member deﬁning
ratio on the drop Slze.
. , References
We see that the DOF is much better than required,
which is.a signiﬁoant advantage for the scientists, but 1. B. Skarman, HOLEX TS Videographische
that the limitation is on the volume ratio s1de. Although experimentiereinrichtung fuer telescience-
the DHM technique has been used successfully for anwendungen _ A prototype Video holography based
other objects, as demonstrated for instance by the
9

"
"10","Paper presented at the International Conference on Space Optics, Toulouse, March-April 2004
experimentation facility, WIB/DARA contract (1990-
1994)

2. B. Skarman, K. Wozniak, J . Becker, Application of
digital holographic interferometry to visualise
buoyancy convection, 9th International Symposium on
applications of laser techniques to ﬂuid mechanics,
Lisbon, 13-16 June (1998), and references therein.
3. F. Dubois, L. Joannes, J .-C. Legros, “Improved
three-dimensional imaging With a digital holography
microscope With a source of partial spatial coherence”,
Applied Optics 38 N0 34, 7085-7094 (1999).
4. Kujawinska M., “Spatial Phase Measurement
Methods”, in Interfemgmm Analysis: Digital Fringe
Pattern Analysis edited by D.W. Robinson and G.T.
Reid, Institute of Physics Publishing Ltd (1993), pp
141-193.
5. Born & Wolf, Principles of Optics, Pergamon, sixth
edition (1983), pp. 382-383.
6. Reynolds et 211., The new physical Optics notebook:
tutorials in F ourier optics, SPIE, 1989, pp 212 to 215.
7. Frank Dubois et a1, “Partial spatial coherence effects
in digital holographic microscopy With a laser source”,
to be published in Applied Optics IP, February 2004.
8. F. Dubois, O. Monnom, C. Yourassowsky, and J .-C.
Legros, “Border processing in digital holography by
extension of the digital hologram and reduction of the
higher spatial frequencies”, Applied Optics 41 N0 14,
2621-2626 (2002).
9. B. K. Jones et a1, “Single-eamera method to
determine the optical axis position of ellipsoidal
drops”, Applied Optics 42 N0 6, 972-978 (2003).

10

"
