"","x"
"1","Paper presented at the 54th International Astronautical Congress, Sept.-Oct. 2003, Bremen, Germany
THE FLUID SCIENCE LABORATORY AND ITS EXPERIMENT CONTAINER PROGRAM ON
COLUMBUS

Thierry Dewandre1, Horst Mundorf1, MatteoTacconi1, Alfio Allegraz, Emanuele Pensavallez, JosefWinter3

1ESA-ESTEC, Keplerlaan, 1, 2200 AG Noordwijk, The Netherlands. thierry.dewandre@esa.int

2Space Division, Alenia, Corso Marche, 41, 10146 Torino, Italy

3EADS-ST, 88039 Friedrichshafen, Germany

ABSTRACT FLUID SCIENCE LABORATORY (FSL)
The Fluid Science Laboratory (FSL), a multi-user
facility developed and built by the European Space FSL Descrigtion
Agency (ESA), is a payload element for the ESA’S The FSL is built to host one EC (40 x 28 x 27 cm3),
Columbus module 0f the Int’l Space Station (ISS)- A located within the Central Experiment Module
first batch 0f four Experiment Containers (EC’S) i3 (CEMi). At this location, the EC is surrounded by a
currently under development for FSL. Their SCientiﬁC variety of opticaI diagnostics provided by the FaciIity
topics are: emulsions, geophysical flows, mass Core Element (FCE):
transfer across interfaces and foams. This paper _ Electronic Speckle Pattern Interferometry
shortly describes FSL and these EC’s, with an (ESPI),
emphasis on the stimuli and diagnostics specifically _ Wollaston interferometry in 2 perpendicular
developed for each EC. A second EC batch of four directions
EC’3 is shortly described 33 W9”- - Schlieren in two perpendicular directions,
The FSL and the EC’s development/integration _ telecentric visualisation,
schedules are provided. - velocimetry (light sheet technique,

perpendicular planes with different colours),
—'NTRODUCTION - laser scattering.

The FSL is a multi-user facility (see Fig.1). It is one of
four facilities developed within the Microgravity
Facilities for Columbus (MFC) programme of ESA. Its Video Management Unit (VMU)
Flight Model is currently being tested at the Rack MVIS Electronics Unit _
Level Test Facility (RLTF) in Bremen, before \ MaStercontm' UWHMCU)
integration into the Columbus Laboratory, to be '
launched to the International Space Station (ISS) in ant'V'Oumed Camera
June 2005 according to the present planning. The RA § '
FSL will host sequentially Experiment Containers, OpticalDiagnostics - ""ﬂ ~ -17:
each one being built specifically for a field of the fluid Module (ODM) ."" "" filly: 4:“ i 5
science. » 0 C T“ , s .
The FSL will allow, among others, the investigation of Facility Central Experiment i t "" ' ' ' _,
areas such as geophysical flows, interfacial heat and CO“? MOdU'e(CEM2) — ~ j"" 1 *R 1:31;""
mass transfer, diffusive instabilities,Hinterfaei-al tensien 5J2?"" Central Experiment v i + W H?
and adsorption mechanisms, boning, critical pomt Module (CEm1)_ “ g i .. ’ is J
phenomena, crystal growth, emulsions, foams and (EClocatedinside) % if M ' 2?
directional solidification within transparent media. EC Ut.. . 77/ -_ 143v“

. . . . . ility Lines 7 s. 7 w; ., ﬂ
meg to its adaptable diagnostic tools and its -2 . e3»: \
modularity on several levels, complementary science i ‘ 9 i a}
areas such as colloid and aerosol physics, particle St0wage COHtaiHGFZ \
agglomeration and plasma crystals are envisaged. 0r Upgrade VO'ume « X

Secondary WaterLoop 7 2 7 ‘3»
Assembly (SWLA) ' ”
Avionics Air Assembly Laptop Unit (LTU)
Power Control Unit (PCU)
Fig. 1: FSL Engineering Model
1

"
"2","Paper presented at the 54th International Astronautical Congress, Sept.-Oct. 2003, Bremen, Germany
The FCE provides high speed & colour camera, IR
camera, high resolution camera, three 1Kx1 K digital V ..
CCD cameras — most of these are available along the e‘siwb
and transmission modes. Furthermore, these optical . Wﬁfﬁﬁtﬁﬁﬁgffjme1:12;}
in more than 100 diffe rent ways, making use of the ' ‘ ~%§§§§§gﬁﬁﬁwgi%ﬂ
EC’s four windows (maximum field of view: 80 x 80 WsﬁﬁﬁwWmﬁggggﬁymy
mm2>. f? ﬁgﬂttgww w
Apart from these FCE diagnostics, FSL provides to , *2»? es?
A Laptop Unit (LTU) enables the crew to initialise and .. w.
end EC runs, and possibly to modify them or to
perform trouble shooting. The Canadian Space
Agency (CSA) contributes to FSL via a Microgravity Fig. 3: Combination of four ESPI images, generated
Vibration Isolation Subsystem (MVIS), which is to from fourimagestaken atdifferentdeformations of
isolate the FSL-FCE from externally—generated the flexible optical target.
vibrations.
A more detailed FSL description can be found on the g ~ ""
following ESA web site: _ E
FSL Ogtical Diagnostics .
The optical diagnostics function, which occupies the
largest volume of FSL, is illustrated by some images
below (Fig. 2, 3,4). . j '
*5;
_ r —‘E
Fig. 4: Combination of 6 lightsheets images, showing
different white-Iight sheet thicknesses provided by
FSL (1 ,3,5,10,20,3O mm).
Fig. 2: White light visualisation of an optical target
located at the EC location. The spatial resolution is
limited by the CCD pixels.
2

"
"3","Paper presented at the 54th International Astronautical Congress, Sept.-Oct. 2003, Bremen, Germany
EXPERIMENT CONTAINERS (EC’s) 2. FASES EC
This experiment is for the team coordinated by Prof.
EC’s: General Passerone (Genoa, Italy). Its goal is to study
An EC is a parallelepiped of 40 x 28 x 27 cm3. Fig. 5 emulsions: drop/drop interactions, droplet—size
shows the Reference Test Container used for EC evolution, droplet motion as well as droplet
interface tests with the FSL. In this EC embodiment, aggregation and coalescence.
the EC windows are not square but circular (80 mm
diam.). The content of the EC and the number as well 3. GeoFIow EC
as the shape/size of the EC windows is experiment- This experiment is for the team coordinated by Prof.
specific, and this is what is to be outlined below, for Egbers (Cottbus, Germany).
the first batch of four EC’s. Obviously a major A liquid located between two concentric spheres is
challenge of designing an EC is the EC’s limited stimulated by sphere rotation, a thermal gradient and
volume. a high voltage AC electric field; it is diagnosed by
_ optical means.
. q: , g a q? ?E\ 2’;_.,. 4. FOAM EC
‘ r _. "" ~ ‘ This experiment is for the team coordinated by Prof.
"" ' 1e - m, 3 ~- Langevin (Orsay, France) and Prof. Durian (University
“ . *' . of California, Los Angeles, USA). The generated
.. m“ . aqueous foams will have higher liquid fractions than
R53} 410' “W m - -
~22. _, what IS pOSSIbIe on ground.
,. i iii ”=3-
m,,,’;9 The phase A/B for this first batch of four EC’s has
*i.‘ 3- .12. \T“ ’1 ‘ ' been initiated in 2002, is finished for all except the
' ' ; , W 1“! 1 ,. . FOAM EC, for which technology demonstration steps
_ ~21 c4 \ﬂﬁ are to take place first, onboard parabolic flights and
' L‘E 5;, ' on the Maxus-6 sounding rocket flight in 2004. Hence,
' . [Kr ; -‘ ‘ ESA intends to initiate this year the phase C/D for the
' ., """" three first EC flight models (FASES, CIMEX-i,
GeoFIow), to have their flight models delivered in
2005, whereas the Foam EC flight model delivery to
Fig. 5 : Reference EC. ESA is foreseen early 2006.
In order to minimise costs for this and for future EC The Cimex-1 EC
batches, ESA has required to consider the The objective of this experiment is to study mass-
commonality aspects as far as possible. Thus the EC transfer processes across interfaces, and their
housing as well as parts of the EC avionics are coupling with surface-tension-driven flows and
developed as common equipment with a built-in high instabilities. The interface processes between a liquid
degree of design flexibility, so that they can also be surface and a flowing gas are varied via gas flow rate,
used for future EC’s. liquid injection, fluids temperature, liquid depth in a 2-
Whenever unavoidable, due to safety constraints in D cell and a 3-D cell (Fig. 6).
the ISS for instance, EC’s are designed to be re-
configured on ground to allow the scientists’ team to Schlieren + fh' f 'I
extend its investigations to other experiment direcfvisuolizofion m 0'
configurations during EC re-flights. gas , A gas
EC First Batch 3 % empo‘m'o"" %
E:\l/ngfpi: (:34h0asxe ?)?Dxtozztacrtr)‘:) are presently belng lighfsheef
liquid I I or tomography
1. CIMEX-1 EC injection
This experiment is for the team coordinated by Prof. I I
Legros (Brussels, Belgium).
Its goal is to study mass-transfer processes across Fig. 6 : Principle of the 3—D Experiment Cell of
interfaces, and their coupling With surfaCG-tenSion- CIMEX-1 in FSL. (Length: 130mm, overallheight:<40mm)
driven flows and instabilities.
3

"
"4","Paper presented at the 54th International Astronautical Congress, Sept.-Oct. 2003, Bremen, Germany
The fluids are diagnosed by temperature, mass flow & Further, in order to make many different experiments
pressure sensors, Schlieren, PIV, phase-shift with the limited fluid available inside an EC, a
interferometric tomography (6 views, Fig. 7) and an Cleaning and a re-condensation system will enable to
infrared camera. re-gain fluid and re-cycle it.

Schlieren/visuolizotion The FASES EC
i0 reflection, 000' The objective of this experiment is to study emulsions:
V'SUOI'ZGT'OH oftrocers drop/drop interactions, droplet-size evolution, droplet
CirCU|Or opening in thin motion as well as droplet aggregation and
L 4 stainless steelfoil coalescence.
/, Two sub-topics will be investigated by processing
.. “a..,:..‘i_,«.w.3,,¢m ,. sequentially two kinds of cells within the same EC:
“ §WV%{% ""_'____ ""Investigations on Drop/Drop Interactions in
:2 ﬁg 1§££§ £1: Transparent Emulsions"" (ITEM) and ""Investigations
light T ﬁlgﬁfgéﬁ'ﬁ on Concentrated or Opaque Emulsions and on Phase
sheet for A: Wﬁﬁﬁy __ Inversion"" (EMPI). ITEM focuses on studying,
velocimetry transparent emulsions using video microscopy,
/// f making use of two kinds of cells:
. 1) standard emulsion cells;
Interferometry (tomography, 6 Views) 2) droplets freezing cells.
. _ . . Thermostatic

Fig. 7. 6 Views tomography and other optical

diagnostics for CIMEX-1. m
The surface flatness of the liquid gas interface is ' 4/7
controlled by means of an optical system. Over— or
under—filling is detected and additional liquid is either
injected or retracted to stabilize the interface.

A simplified version of this experiment was already -
demonstrated during a sounding rocket flight (ITEL,
on board the Maser 9 sounding rocket flown in 2002). u \ \
Liq id bottle Avionics \‘ ‘ m
‘ 7 ¢
. Is :9 _fav Fig. 9. FASES EC (Withoutexternal walls)
I :E .. ' 2W '1; V“ The EC IS to process sequentially about 60 emuISIon
. _ f :2 samples (16 mm diam. X 20 mm). The stimuli are:
$1 .. . , ~ \- '« emulsion generation by ultrasound, temperature
. ' I , i ‘ )| control including heating or cooling down below the
3 1w»4 crystallisation point (— 60°C). Thermoelectric coolers,
. . ! ‘3‘ used to cool down and freeze the sample, are to be
5?? Q ~ \ 'i‘ optimised in terms of efficiency to allow sample
in: ' ' "" Wﬂw‘k‘kxfzg cooling with the limited electrical power available for
\ﬁlw/f- The main diagnostics for the ITEM samples are
' tomographic microscopy (2 gm resolution), 3-D
Gas bottle Condenserlseparator Optical System velocirhetry by digital holographic microscopy (4 am
+ experiment cell resolution, < 0.1 mm/sec), poiarlsatlon-mlcroscepy for
the (frozen) crystals. Differential Scanning Calorimetry
(DSC) will enable to study the droplet size distribution
Flg. 8: CIMEX-1 EC. 3-D Ce” EmbOdiment evo|uti0n in the opaque EMPI samp|es_
4

"
"5","Paper presented at the 54th International Astronautical Congress, Sept.-Oct. 2003, Bremen, Germany
Index: 1 experiment container; 2 camera; 3 fluid;
4 atmosphere; 5 solid nucleus; 6 liquidus part of
cutaway of the Earth; 7 Lased Doppler Anemometer
’y / 1 (LDA).
Q 7
/ \ 2
7 / \ ‘
R \ 4
,l“ ‘ , \‘~‘ 12%”. ,.' 2:: \‘H‘, >
"" ' 3*? 3‘)
ﬁg 5
Fig. 11: A diagram of the GeoFIow experiment to be carried out inside an FSL EC, in order to study the evolution
of the atmosphere and of the mantle & liquidus of planets, in a truly central gravity field.
The GeoFIow EC
This experiment is to stimulate and diagnose a liquid,
to simulate geophysical fluids (Fig. 11) as well as 1
engineering situations like spherical bearings. Inside ‘ iii
the EC, a liquid located between two concentric F“ ' --'-.';-_ ;.
spheres (diam. around 5 cm) is stimulated by sphere r’ -- EM- ' '
rotation (O to 120 rpm), a thermal gradient (up to 10 ° . ff _ﬁ ‘ v""-:;—:?_.ﬁ_
C) and a high voltage AC electric field (10 kV, > 300 ECCU l .'
Hz). A miniaturized High Voltage Power Supply is - L \ . - ;
developed for this EC which fits in the EC and .1 *,._
satisfies the needs of the scientist. - * — '
It is diagnosed by optical means (Wollaston _ H ' Hm
interferometry, Schlieren, Laser Doppler Anemometry . J1 f a? - Turret
[LDA]). The embodiment of this system in the h __ -. ___j '
GeoFIow EC is shown in Fig. 10. ' -___ ' ' _
One of the investigation parameters is the gap, that is “'5.
the distance (& thickness of the liquid located) J
between the outer glass sphere and the inner glass '
sphere. Three such gaps are requested. This means
that 3 different fluid cells should be built, each with a Fig. 10: GeoFIow EC without lid.
different diameter for the inner sphere.
5

"
"6","Paper presented at the 54th International Astronautical Congress, Sept.-Oct. 2003, Bremen, Germany

It is diagnosed by optical means (Wollaston

interferometry, Schlieren, Laser Doppler Anemometry Side view :

[LDA]). The embodiment of this system in the

GeoFlow EC is shown in Fig. 10. ' Microscopy

One of the investigation parameters is the gap, that is \I

the distance (& thickness of the liquid located)

between the outer glass sphere and the inner glass l I

sphere. Three such gaps are requested. This means

that 3 different fluid cells should be built, each with a \

different diameter for the inner sphere. Foam loading port

The GeoFlow scientist requests a Laser Doppler

Anemometer (LDA) diagnostic, which is to replace the

EC volume occupied by interferometry in a Top view:

subsequent EC flight. This LDA is currently the topic

of a separate ESA contract (planned to finish April

2004), whose goal is to design, manufacture,

integrate and test a fully functional, state of the art,

Lab-Level Mini-LDA-Breadboard System. This

miniature LDA system will be modular and will

correspond to the GeoFlow EC needs in form, fit and

function, with the potential to be converted into flight

hardware. In particular, the velocity range is: 0.1 to

1000 mm/sec, the head length is < 5 cm. The

hardware of the measurement head itself shall have

its final configuration, size and shape. The EC

constraints include the need to move the LDA within 5

the EC volume to monitor different fluid areas, and to Fig. 12: “Rheometry” use of the rotating cell inside

include the LDA data processing. the EC.

The Foam EC The Fig. 13 shows the same cell, in the way it is to be

The absence of gravity will enable to investigate not used by the European team for drainage

only “dry” aqueous foams, but also wet foams, which investigations: its upper part (conic lid) and lower part

are unstable on ground. After foam samples are (cuvette) will rotate as a single body, and liquid will be

generated, they can be stimulated (via liquid injection injected to investigate its propagation in the foam,

and cell rotation for shear strain rheometry partly in response to the centrifuge force.

measurements); they will also be diagnosed by optical

(visualisation, microscopy, Diffuse-Transmission ROtatiO“ aXiS

Spectroscopy [DTS], Diffusing Wave Spectroscopy Foam camera

[DWS]) and electrical conductivity means. Critical \I _

technologies, like the generation of quality wet foam Liquid propagation Lens

in microgravity, will be tested during an ESA sounding front I C:

rocket flight (Maxus 6, 2004). Foam generation was ‘

already demonstrated on the Maxus 4 flight (2001 ). ‘lr

—

Two types of foam cells are to be built and _

investigated inside the Foam EC. The rotating cell,

which is to be used by the US and the European /VM

scientists in different ways, and the stability cell. Pipe System for foam The onetip is cone_”ke and

The Fig. 12 shows the rotating cell, where the andliquidinjection_ notﬂatasrepresented ’

generated foam IS Introduced from the bottom and

subsequently stimulated by rotating the conic lid as Fig. 13: “Drainage” use of the rotating cell inside

needed for the US scientist’s rheometry experiment. the EC.
The other cell type (“stability” cell) will investigate
optically the foam quality and its spontaneous
evolution (like coarsening). This cell is smaller than

6

"
"7","Paper presented at the 54th International Astronautical Congress, Sept.-Oct. 2003, Bremen, Germany
the other one, so that it will use much less foam per and range of liquid content have been achieved with a
load, which is an advantage since the gas and liquid device called turbulent mixer. In this device, which
to be used during the full EC run inside FSL is limited contains no moving part, the surfactant solution is
to what the EC can contain. In this context, liquid injected into a gas stream through a small pinhole. A
recovery from a foam sample which has been used, mesh which has been added to the assembly subjects
for re-use in generating another foam, is a very the foam to shear which further improves foam quality
valuable technique and is being investigated. by decreasing the bubble size.

A full EC run in FSL will be a sequence of generation t=0.875 sec t=1.75 sec t=2.625 sec [[235 sec
and processing of foams (initial bubble diam. z 100
nm) with different liquid fractions (5 to 30 %) and with r r
additives of different nature or concentration.
The schedule leading to the construction and flight of -
the Foam EC contains several preparatory flights of I I I I
short durations, used mostly to demonstrate the ' .
technology.
Flights performed before and independently of the
Foam EC contract are: Maxus-4 sounding rocket in .
2001, several ESA parabolic flight experiments in ”(24,375 sec ”(25,25 sec ”(26,125 sec t=7 sec
2001-2002, and NASA parabolic flights before 2002.
I Fig. 15: 8 steps of foam filling during the 34th ESA
""’ , . ‘ 15 parabolic flight (liquid content: 15 %). The foam
"" stream can be seen coming from the bottom of the
.. I 7 ’/ I ’_ I = I .. I ce||.
.... I.,. . A In addition a centrifuge mechanism for cell cleaning
‘7: I :1; has been tested. Gas and liquid can be separated by
‘ ' . ‘3 centrifugal forces at the outer wall of the fluid ce|| (see
I ’11 . Fig. 16).
2""1- ‘1
J 255; 2 ' ._.L I‘ 3,!"" / f! A ' 43"":
l.‘ A , ""“—‘""‘ 1% ' ‘ i i / E?
‘ ‘3' "" ' \ 3 I s: I. m i“ 1""."" 3
.3‘ ‘1’ "" 1 -' Li ""‘9' ii =- ‘
. I ‘7 i a ‘ . ' r f; ’ I‘, .
é»: .. : _ E ‘ .- ’ : “ﬁn. "" P,
mm“ .u.-§n"""" ' 1"" ._.. ., ,1- I g k .I_Z—
T'hll-‘J’ I :lu_,gr~’::'j r "" ‘ ""T ’/' i I u»
_ _§‘m'..ir""
' ""’: 7 :3 3:""
$1351
Fig. 14: Test set-up for the 34th ESA parabolic flight. ‘ ' § iy 51
During the 34th ESA parabolic flight campaign (April Rota ng cell Foami jection Motor Re ervoir
2003) six different methods of foam generation and 3 Liquid absoring wipes
ce|| cleaning mechanism have been tested under
reduced gravity. Fig. 14 shows the parabolic flight test Fig. 16: Fluid cell used for foam removal tests (by
set-up. The best test results in terms of foam quality rotation) during 34th ESA parabolic flight.
7

"
"8","Paper presented at the 54th International Astronautical Congress, Sept.-Oct. 2003, Bremen, Germany
Some of the equipment used for parabolic flight
testing are improved versions of techniques tested by
NASA during earlier parabolic flights. But also new
developments have been tested, like a scattering
diagnostic of the foam & liquid injection for drainage
tests.
The future planning comprises the following
preparatory flights:
1. Another parabolic flight session (35th ESA
campaign, October 2003). This will test the following:
foam generation, foam removal and replacement,
foam conduqtivity, rheometry and drainage- _ Fig. 17: Digital holographic microscopy. A 4
2-_ A sounding rocket ﬂight (Maxus-B, 12 minutes microns emulsion drop ofa FASES testsample, as
mlCFO-Q, Fall 2004), to take advantage 0f the parabolic it appears 1. when out of focus 2. in its own plane,
flights results and test the same technologies during which is reconstructed numerically.
more representative time periods: foam generation,
foam replacement, foam conductivity, rheometry and Human Comguter [nterface (HCI)
drainage 33 described above. The Contractor develops user—friendly graphic
_ __ interfaces for the engineers and for the scientists on
—EC Breadboard ACt'V't'eS ground, for each EC. As an example, a display
The first batch of EC’s has required new technology prepared for the FOAM EC is shown in Fig. 18.
developments (including miniaturisation), which have 3""
been subject of several breadboards, as indicated in .W '33:” .‘H '-::::::::,:g |:}colﬂ
the table below. These activities ended in July, 2003. WW. ’ ‘ WJTl—IW W ”
W W - *' iiu'i‘iiii 4%
n iochW W ~"" mm W i lc— N
Breadboard topic i .2 #55} % CWXLXHI W TL. M‘EWB‘""
. I W anunauon Control 'An ‘ M pa toss LIQUID '1V75353 7””
EC housmg LWJ Wnumsﬁtsﬁ‘ﬁ rtmej l- M ,—
CIMEX Liquid condenser & separator ’i‘ ’1‘ Elm: FM—ﬂ M F
. . VA ’2 Freqience Oj H1 [W] ‘
- quUId Surface Flatness Control |_IF—Igugm WK im
FASES Emulsion generator no W]; 14$”; um
- Differential Calorimeter $$$ng 9.. |I— W_,
- Fluid cell thermal control E-\ W 1:: “WW
sample CGIIS conveyor system m {v :évjﬁgm my PIEVLTIERAl\Aonit<:rving v A AVIVcVDNIcs Control V A w MitorMoxitorinsN
(includes rails, wagon, lift) W—W 2223:; 3||7£Z$°£”__E2221T--% |Sﬁi; .|
. . . . v A w' 30mm ---BoardND v A w
- VeIOCImetry by digital holographic ;:::g__-§ “W _.c _.c _.c _v m:
mlcrOSCOpy' Tm Message Wind°w W Mos '1Activationreceived ‘ T:o12::r::nd Log W0 grrmwa‘im'eques‘ ‘
Spherical fluid cell 33:3:2255413 [m 2:2::::::::;gec j I iﬂ j
- Thermostatic unit Fig. 18: Housekeeping display of the FOAM EC
— supring
- W
- H'gh Voltage Pewer Supply ESA is preparing an Invitation to tender (ITT) for a
See parabolic flights above feasibility study for a second batch of four EC’s. Their
topics and scientific teams are given below.
An example of breadboard result is the Fig. 17, _ .. _
obtained via digital holography (FASES EC). This 1. Solldlflcatlon of Made! Substances. _
technique is used because it enables to extend by a The topic of thIs EC IS the solidification of model
factor of approx. 80 the narrow Depth of Field Of transparent substances, with the advantage that the
microscopy_ Emu|3i0ns drops can be seen in a p|ane SOIIdIfICatIOH front-and ItS structure can be visualised
which is out of focus because this technique enables Wlth much detail ”3'09 optical techniques. The
to use one single “focussed” CCD image to re- scientistteam coordinators are Prof. S. Rex(Aachen,
construct out-of—focus planes numerically. The drop D), PFOf- 3- Billia (Marseille, F), PFOf- D. Herlach
size is about 4 microns. (Bochum, D). These experiments are foreseen to be
8

"
"9","Paper presented at the 54th International Astronautical Congress, Sept.-Oct. 2003, Bremen, Germany
performed on two complementary instruments: FSL & INDUSTRIAL CONTRACTORS INVOLVED
DECL|C(CNES). The companies involved in the FSL program are:

Alenia Spazio (Prime), Laben (MCU), Verhaert (FCE),
2. Boiling Heat Transfer under E-Field. OHB (VMU), Carlo Gavazzi (PCU), Sener (Structure),
This EC is to study the boiling heat transfer under Mars (HCI software), Lambda—X (FCE optics). The
large DC electric fields & the transfer enhancement it CSA provides the Microgravity Vibration Isolation
produces. The scientific coordinators are Prof. W. Subsystem.
Grassi (Genoa, I), Prof. C. Herman (Baltimore, USA), The companies involved in the FSL EC phase A/B
with the participation of Prof. Kim (Maryland, USA). project are: EADS-ST (prime & GeoFIow EC), Carlo
For the experiment of Prof. Grassi, a precursor flight Gavazzi (FASES EC & common avionics), Verhaert
on FOTON M-2 is foreseen. (CIMEX EC), Lambda-X (Optics), Higthech (EC

structure), the Swedish Space Corporation (sounding
3. Vibrational Phenomena in Inhomogeneous Media, rocket foam module), EADS-LV (Foam EC), Mars
& in Near Critical and Supercriticalfluids. (HCI software). The LDA development is performed
This EC is to study the behaviour of two-phase fluids under the prime contractor Zarm-Technik GmbH,
and granular matter, when submitted to vibrations. |t together with the Laser—Zentrum Hannover (LZH), the
can also support investigations of the effects of Physikalisch-Technische-Bundesanstalt (PTB) and
vibrations on diffusive processes. The scientific the Brandenburgische-Technische-Universitét (BTU).
coordinators are Prof. P. Evesque (Paris, F), Dr. D.
Beysens (Bordeaux, F) and Prof. J-C. Legros
(Brussels, B).
4. ClMEX-2
The topic of this EC is the investigation of the micro-
convective patterns at evaporating menisci and their
relation with heat pipe structures. Prof. Stefan
(Darmstadt, D) is the scientific coordinator of this
project, which is a subset of the CIMEX program
coordinated by Prof. Legros (Brussels, B). A
precursor flight on FOTON M-2 is also foreseen for
this experiment.

CONCLUSION
As part of the ESA MFC programme for microgravity
research within the ISS Columbus, a facility for fluid
research (FSL) has been built and its flight model is
presently being tested for integration into Columbus.
Besides its powerful image management &
telescience capabilities, this facility provides a large
range of up-to—date stimuli and diagnostics to support
EC’s to be specifically developed for scientists during
its lifetime.
A first batch of four Experiment Containers is
presently being developed, and a second batch of
four will soon be the topic of a phase A/B. These EC
activities include a range of breadboards as required
by the necessary technological developments, and
they take advantage of many ESA precursor flights,
namely parabolic, sounding rockets and FOTON
flights.
9

"
