"","x"
"1","A COMPARISON OF TANDEM WALK PERFORMANCE BETWEEN
BED REST SUBJECTS AND ASTRONAUTS
1Chris Miller, 1Brian Peters, 1Igor Kofman, 1Tiffany Phillips, 2Crystal Batson, 1Jody Cerisano,
1Elizabeth Fisher, 3Ajitkumar Mulavara, 4Alan Feiveson, 4Millard Resohke and 4Jacob Bloomberg
1Wyle Science Technology and Engineering Group, Houston, TX, USA
2MEI Technologies Inc., Houston, TX, USA
3Universities Space Research Association, Houston, TX, USA
4NASA Lyndon B. J ohnson Space Center, Houston, TX, USA
Email: ohris.miller-1@nasa.gov

INTRODUCTION All subjects provided written informed consent

before participating in this study, which was
Astronauts experience a microgravity environment approved in advance by the NASA Lyndon B.
during spaceﬂight, which results in a central Johnson Space Center Institutional Review Board.
reinterpretation of both vestibular and body aXial-
loading information by the sensorimotor system. This study is part of a larger protocol that uses a
Subjects in bed rest studies lie at 60 head-down in suite of physiologic tests and functional tasks to
strict bed rest to simulate the ﬂuid shift and gravity- relate physiologic changes to changes in functional
unloading of the microgravity environment. performance of mission-oritioal tasks immediately
However, bed rest subjects still sense gravity in the postﬂight or after bed rest. Subjects groups
vestibular organs. Therefore, bed rest isolates the included: (a) 10 bed rest controls, all of whom
aXial-unloading component, thus allowing for the completed 70 days of 6-degrees head-down strict
direct study of its effects. bed rest with no exercise countermeasure; (b) 17

bed rest exercisers, all of whom completed the same
The Tandem Walk is a standard sensorimotor test of bed rest but with exercise countermeasures; (o) 6
dynamic postural stability [1]. In a previous short-duration orewmembers who completed Space
abstract [2], we compared performance on a Shuttle missions (12.9 i 1.5 d) with in-ﬂight
Tandem Walk test between bed rest control exercise countermeasures, and (d) 13 long-duration
subjects, and short- and long-duration astronauts orewmembers who completed missions aboard the
both before and after ﬂight/bed rest using a 188 (151.6 d: 17.1 d) with in—ﬂight exercise
composite index of performance, called the Tandem countermeasures. Data collection sessions occurred
Walk Parameter (TWP), that takes into account twice within a 2-month or 2-week time period
speed, accuracy, and balance control. This new before ﬂight or bed rest, respectively (Pre), and four
study extends the previous data set to include bed times after ﬂight/bed rest: on the day of landing or
rest subjects who performed exercise end of bed rest (Post+0d), one day post (Post+1d),
countermeasures. The purpose of this study was to siX days post (Post+6d) and a ﬁnal session 10 days
compare performance during the Tandem Walk test (bed rest) or 30 days (ﬂight) post (Post+10/30). Due
between bed rest subjects (with and without to logistical limitations, data could not be collected
exercise), short-duration (Space Shuttle) from long-duration orewmembers on landing day.
orewmembers, and long-duration International
Space Station (188) orewmembers at various time In the Tandem Walk test, the subjects walked in a
points during their recovery from bed rest or heel-to-toe fashion at a self—seleoted speed for 10-12
spaceﬂight. steps with their arms crossed on their chests and

their eyes closed. A spotter walked next to the
METHODS subject to ensure safety and to monitor the step

"
"2","count. Three Tandem Walk trials were performed the change in TWP for the bed-rest exercise
per session. subj eets was: (a) signiﬁcantly less than that of the
bed rest controls for P0st+0d and Post+1d, (b)
Torso and head linear accelerations (relative to their signiﬁcantly less than the long-duration ﬂight group
respective local coordinate systems) were recorded for Post+1d, and (c) significantly more than the
at 50 Hz using triaxial inertial measurement units short-duration ﬂight group for Post+6d. Thus
(Xsens, North America Inc., Culver City, CA). changes in TWP in the bed rest exercise group were
During the analysis, the start and end of the trials similar to short-duration astronauts for P0st+0d and
were manually selected by inspection of a plot of Post+1d, but similar to the long-duration astronauts
the vertical head acceleration to get the total trial at Post+6d. Therefore, exercise countermeasures
time. The gravitational acceleration was removed helped mitigate some of the decrement in TWP after
from the Z-eomponent 0f the torso acceleration. bed rest (exercise vs.eontr01). However, additional
The root-mean-square (RMS) of the resultant linear balance and/or coordination training during
torso accelerations (TorsoAccR) over the trial was ﬂight/bed rest may be required to maintain TWP at
then computed. Video of the trials were reviewed Pre levels on P0st+0d.
to determine the percentage of heel-to-toe
(“correct”) steps during the task. The TWP was Tandem WalkTest:Tandem WalkParameter
then computed for each session as follows: 3
TWP l 1 PctCorrectSteps 2'5
_ n( + TotalTime * RMS(T0r50AccR)) 2
The log transformation was used to prevent extreme E15
values from dominating the data analysis. Larger 1
values of TWP reﬂect better overall performance. 0.5
A separate analysis revealed no signiﬁcant 0
. . . Pre Post+0d Post+1d Post+6d Post+10-30d
dlfference between the tWO Pre 565510115: 50 the“ +BR_Con -I-BR_Ex +Long-duration(|SS) +Short—duration(Shuttle)
data were pooled in the subsequent analysis. A Figure 1: Tandem Walk Parameter (j: 28E)
11near mlxed model w1th TWP as outcome and
random subject effects was used to estimate group- CONCLUSIONS
by-session means and test for pre-post differences
between groups for 63,011 OPOSt sess10n. P-Value Exercise countermeasures during space ﬂight or bed
thresholds for reportlng signlﬂeanee were calculated rest helped mitigate some of the decrements in
us1ng the Hochberg maltlple-comparlson procedure tandem walk performance immediately after
[3] to control the fam11y-w1se Type I error rate to ﬂight/bed rest. But performance deﬁcits remained,
0'05' thus suggesting an additional sensorimotor
countermeasure may be necessary to maintain
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION tandem walk performance on P0st+0d at
. . . preﬂight/bed rest levels.
All groups eXh1b1ted lower TWP values (1.e.,
increased instability) during Tandem Walk REFERENCES
immediately after ﬂight/bed rest (Figure 1). Thus,
aXial-unleading alone — as is the case in bed rest — 1.Fregly, AR, et al. A erosp a (:6 Medicine 43’ 395_
resulted 1n decreased Tandem Walk performance 399’ 1972
immediately after ﬂ1ght/bed rest. 2.Miller, C, et a1. Proceedings of the 37m Annual
. . . Meeting offhe ASB, Omaha, NE, USA, 2013.
The multlple-eomparlson analys1s 0f the pre- to 3. Hochberg, Y. Biometrika 75’ 800-802, 1988.
postﬂight/bed rest difference estimates showed that

"
"3","ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This study is funded by the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration.

"
