"","x"
"1","— ISS EXERCISE COUNTERMEASURES
O O O 0
Functional Fitness Testing Results Followmg
O O O
Long-Duratlon ISS MISSIons
Mitzi S. Laughlin; Mark E. Guilliams; Bruce A. Nieschwitz; David Hoe||en
INTRODUCTION: Long-duration spaceﬂight missions lead to the loss of muscle strength and endurance. Signiﬁcant reduction in muscle

function can be hazardous when returning from spaceﬂight. To document these losses, NASA developed medical
requirements that include measures of functional strength and endurance. Results from this Functional Fitness Test
(FFT) battery are also used to evaluate the effectiveness of in-ﬂight exercise countermeasures. The purpose of this paper
is to document results from the FFT and correlate this information with performance of in-ﬂight exercise on board the
International Space Station.

METHODS: The FFT evaluates muscular strength and endurance, ﬂexibility, and agility and includes the following eight measures: sit
and reach, cone agility, push-ups, puII-ups, sliding crunches, bench press, leg press, and hand grip dynamometry. Pre- to
postﬂight functional ﬁtness measurements were analyzed using dependent t—tests and correlation analyses were used
to evaluate the relationship between functional ﬁtness measurements and in-ﬂight exercise workouts.

RESULTS: Signiﬁcant differences were noted postspaceﬂight with the sit and reach, cone agility, leg press, and hand grip measure-
ments while other test scores were not signiﬁcantly altered. The relationships between functional ﬁtness and in—ﬂight
exercise measurements showed minimal to moderate correlations for most in-ﬂight exercise training variables.

DISCUSSION: The change in FFT results can be partially explained by in-ﬂight exercise performance. Although there are |osses
documented in the FFT results, it is important to realize that the crewmembers are successfully performing activities of
daily living and are considered functional for normal activities upon return to Earth.

KEYWORDS: spaceﬂight, functional ﬁtness test, rehabilitation.
Laughlin MS, Guilliams ME, Nieschwitz BA, Hoellen D. Functional ﬁtness testing results following long—duration ISS missions. Aerosp Med Hum Perform. 2015;
86 (i 2, Suppl.):A87—A91.

he microgravity environment leads to losses of muscle effectiveness of in-ﬂight countermeasures and document the

strength and endurance during spaceﬂightl’z’S’6 and progress of rehabilitation upon return from these missions. The

long-duration stays from 4 to 6 mo that occur regularly purpose of this paper is to document FFT results from the ﬁrst
on the International Space Station (ISS). Long-duration mis- 25 expeditions and correlate this information with performance
sions on board the ISS induce greater reductions in muscular of in-ﬂight exercise on board the ISS.
function than shorter Space Shuttle missions with durations
from 6 to 16 (1.35’4’6 Signiﬁcant reduction in muscle function can
be problematic when returning to Earth or during future explo- METHODS
ration Class missions beyond low-Earth orbit.

Before the ﬁrst ISS mission, NASA developed a series of A total of 32 (26 men, 6 women) crewmembers were evaluated
medical requirements to evaluate physiological changes due to with respect to functional ﬁtness requirements in conjunction
prolonged stays in microgravity. Several medical requirements with their ISS missions. There were 3 crewmembers who ﬂew 2
include measures of muscular strength and endurance. These missions during the ﬁrst 25 expeditions and their data for both
measures were grouped together into a Functional Fitness Test
(FFT) that 18 performed bOth pI'C- and pOStﬂight. ThiS eight- From Wyle Science,Technology and Engineering Group, Houston,TX.
measure FFT iS used to measure functional strength and endur_ Address correspondence to: Jacqueline M. Reeves, NASA Johnson Space Center, Division

Resource Support, Biomedical Research & Environmental Sciences Division, 2101 NASA
ance Of muSde groups fOI‘ an ISS crewmembers. RCSUltS from Parkway, MC Wyle/SK/37, Houston, TX 77058; Jacquelinem.reeves@nasa.gov
this test are also used by ﬂight surgeons and the Astronaut Reprint & Copyright © by the Aerospace Medical Association, Alexandria, VA.
Strength, Conditioning, and Rehabilitation team to evaluate the DOI: 10.3357/AMHREC112015
AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 12, Section II DecemberZOiS A87

"
"2","ISS FUNCTIONAL FITNESS RESULTS—Laughlin etal.
ﬂights were included in this analysis. All crewmembers were hip with knees in a fully extended position and both hands one
considered healthy; however, some individuals declined to per- over the other. Ihe astronaut reached forward as far as possible
form a particular measure but completed the remainder of the while holding the most distant point momentarily Ihe score was
test. For crewmembers who opted out of a test, the most com- recorded as the furthest reach of three trials.
mon reason was either a current injury or history of an ortho-
pedic injury to a speciﬁc joint or muscle. One crewmember was Cone Agility. Cone agility measured the ability to move and
unable to complete the strength tests due to postural instability Change direction quickly Cones were placed at corners of a
related to an inner ear condition. 4.572-m (15-ft) square and the astronaut was instructed to fol-
low the pattern shown in Fig. 1. ""ihe total time was measured
Pre- and Postﬂight FFT using a hand-held stopwatch and the score was recorded as the
""ihe FFT was performed both pre- and postﬂight to evaluate best of three time trials. ""ihe cone agility test was not a part of
function and recovery to preﬂight norms. Initially the tests were the original FFT and testing began with Expedition 9.
scheduled approximately 60 d before ﬂight, but as missions
transitioned to Soyuz launches the tests were scheduled 60 to Push-ups. Push-ups measured the muscular endurance of the
90 d before ﬂight. Postﬂight testing occurred between days 5 and upper extremities. ""ihey were administered by starting in the
7 after landing. ""ihis postﬂight schedule remained consistent standard up position with hands pointing forward and under
throughout the ﬁrst 10 yr of ISS operations. the shoulders, head up, and back straight. ""ihe astronaut then
An astronaut initiated the testing sequence by performing a lowered the body by ﬂeXing until the elbows were at 90°. ""ihe
10-min warm-up on a cycle ergometer, treadmill, or elliptical astronaut then returned to the starting position by extending
machine, followed by stretching as normally performed before his/her elbows. Resting was allowed in the up position. ""ihe
a workout. ""ihe FFT consisted of the following eight measures: score was recorded as the total number of push-ups per-
formed in 2 min.
Sit and Reach. Lower back and hamstring ﬂexibility was evaluated
using an AcuﬂeXI sit and reach box (Novel Products, Rockton, IL). Pull-ups. Pull-ups measured either a muscular endurance
Ihe astronaut was instructed to remove his/her shoes and place the or muscular strength, depending on the astronaut’s baseline
feet against the footplate, then slowly reach forward bending at the strength. ThiS measure was conducted with either a pronated or
supinated grip, but the grip was
Movement 2 sions. Astronauts were required
c to move through a full range of
motion starting with the elbows
fully extended and ending with
the chin above the bar. Ihe score
was recorded as the total number
Movement 5
of completed pull-ups.
:5: i; 811' di 11 g Crunches. Muscular
:33: n“...'.':.«::::""# g endurance of the abdominal core
2 15 foot by 15 foot s quare.,..--""""""xﬂ 23 was assessed using this timed test.
""ihis measure began with the
astronaut lying on his/her back,
legs ﬂexed to 90°, Chin at Chest,
Movement 3 and arms at the side of the body,
While pressing the lumbar spine
into the ﬂoor and contracting the
abdominal muscles, the hands
slide toward the heels of the feet,
‘— and the arms and forearms
Movement4 A remained on the ﬂoor with the
chin on the Chest for the entire
Movement 1 - Crewmember is to move forward movement. If necessary, astro-
Movement 2 - Crewmember is to shufﬂe to the right nauts were permitted to support
Movement 3 - Crewmember is to move backwards their head with one arm. Ihe
Movement 4 - Crewmember is to shufﬂe to the left score was recorded as the maXi-
Movement 5 - Crewmember is to complete half a ﬁgure 8 moving forward only mum number of sliding crunches
Fig. 1. Cone agility test. completed in 2 min.
A88 AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 12, Section II December2015

"
"3","ISS FUNCTIONAL FITNESS RESULTS—Laughlin etal.
Bench Press (1RM). A CybeX Smith Press Machine (CybeX (designated as the advanced resistive exercise device [ARED])
International, Medway, MA) was used in the performance of was delivered to 188 during Expedition 18.
this upper body strength measure. One repetition maximum ""lhe CEVIS operated on 188 in a manner similar to a stan-
(1RM) began with 2 to 3 warm-up sets at a subjective 30% load dard recumbent cycle found in a gym. ""lhe crewmember
for 10 repetitions. A 3- to 5-min rest period was allowed strapped themselves to a seat with a belt or held onto the frame
between trials during which the astronaut was encouraged to to remain positioned on the cycle, wore cycling shoes and was
stretch. ""lhe weight was increased conservatively, 10—20%, each able to quickly clip onto the cycle pedals, and began working
set as the number of repetitions decreased until reaching one out.111e CEVIS was mounted on aVibration isolation system to
repetition. ""lhe load was increased until the astronaut failed minimize transfer of Vibrations to the structure of the 188.
to complete a lift. ""lhe bench press score was recorded as the ""lhe TVIS and T2 were the treadmill exercise countermea-
maXimum weight lifted for the last successful trial. (Modiﬁca- sures used on the 18$ for exercise. On orbit, the crewmember
tion: during some early missions 1RM tests were not com- wore a shoulder and waist harness and was pulled to the tread-
pleted; 4 to 6 RM tests were used with equations to estimate mill surface using either metal cables attached to preloaded
the 1RM weight.) springs or bungee cords. ""lhe T2 was modiﬁed from a commer-
cial Woodway Path treadmill (Woodway, Waukesha, WI) that
Leg Press (1 RM). A plate-loaded CybeX squat-press machine was designed to support walking and running exercise between
(CybeX International, Medway, MA) was used in the perfor- 2.4 km/h (1.5 mph) and 20 km/h (12.4 mph). Both the TVIS
mance of this lower body strength measure. ""lhe 1RM test and T2 were designed to minimize the transfer of dynamic
began with a 2- to 3-min warm-up at a subjective 50% load for forces caused by treadmill operations to preserve the micro-
10 repetitions. Between successful trials there was a 3- to 5-min gravity environment of the 188 as well as minimize loads
rest period during which the astronaut was encouraged to imparted to station structure.
stretch.111e weight was increased conservatively, 15—20%, each Two different resistance exercise devices have been used
set as the number of repetitions decreased until reaching one during the past 10 yr of ISS operations. ""lhe original iRED was
repetition. ""lhe load was increased 5—10% until the astronaut designed to prevent atrophy of the major muscle groups and to
failed to complete a lift. ""lhe leg press score was recorded as the minimize bone loss in the microgravity environment. ""lhe iRED
maximum weight lifted for the last successful trial. (Modiﬁca- provided loading to the subject through cable connections to a
tion: similar to bench press, 4 to 6 RM tests were completed in pair of canisters, each of which contained stacks of elastomer
some early missions and equations were used to estimate the discs (ﬂex packs). ﬂiese ﬂeX packs were attached to a pulley
1RM weight.) system and subject harness to mimic weightlifting on Earth.
Each disc added an incremental resistance to the total force.
Hand Grip. ""lhis measured the isometric strength of the hands The crewmember set the desired force and exercised by pulling
and forearms using a “Grip A” instrument (Takei and Co, against the resistance that resulted from twisting the elastomer
Tokyo, Japan). Holding the instrument in one hand, the grip discs within the canisters. With different bar, handle, and shoul-
range was adjusted until the second joint of the foreﬁnger was der harness attachments, a crewmember could perform squats,
ﬂexed to 90°. Rotating the dial counter-clockwise zeroed the dead lifts, heel raises, bent over rows, upright rows, military
indicated force. Standing upright, an astronaut griped the press, bench press, bicep curls, and triceps extension exercises.
instrument and exerted full force while keeping the instrument ""lhe major limitations of iRED were its maximum 136 kg (300
at his/her side. At the completion of a trial, the astronaut lb) totalforce and the elastic properties of the ﬂeX packs, which
switched hands and repeated for a total of three trials with each limited useful eccentric training. ""lhe iRED also lacked a Vibra-
hand. ""lhe maximum score for each hand was combined for the tion isolation system.
total score. ""lhe handgrip test was not a part of the original test ""lhe iRED was replaced during Expedition 18 with the
battery and was initiated on Expedition 9. ARED, which simulates free weights by providing both a con-
stant and inertial load. ""lhe ARED employs vacuum cylinders to
ln-Flight Exercise create the resistive force. Onboard ISS, load ranges between 0
Exercise countermeasures were performed on board 188 during and 272 kg (600 lb) were available for bar exercises, while cable/
all missions. Exercise hardware included typical gym equipment rope exercises provided loads up to 68 kg (150 lb). Crewmem-
that has been specially modiﬁed to perform in microgravity bers performed both bar and cable/rope exercises to strengthen
Crewmembers were scheduled for 2.5 h of exercise, 6 (1 per all major muscle groups. ""lhe ARED also incorporates a Vibra-
week.111e 2.5 h was typically divided into 1 h of aerobic training tion isolation system to minimize forces transmitted to the ISS
and 1.5 h of resistance training. ""lhese session times included structure.
hardware set-up, takedown, and post-exercise hygiene. Cardio- In-ﬂight exercise data for each crewmember were collected
vascular hardware included a cycle ergometer with Vibration for each exercise device and downlinked to the ground weekly
isolation system (CEVIS), two treadmills with Vibration isola- Initial processing of the data included formatting for a database
tion systems (TVIS and T2), and a Russian ergometer (Velo). and extracting the parameters included in Table 1. Although
Resistance exercise was performed initially on the interim the exercise data collection system was designed to minimize
resistive exercise device (iRED) until a more advanced unit crew time requirements, multiple hardware failures have
AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 12, Section II December2015 A89

"
"4","ISS FUNCTIONAL FITNESS RESULTS—Laughlin etal.
Table l- ln-Flight ExerCise Data Paramﬂers. was signiﬁcantly reduced postﬂight. ""lhis result is not surprising
m as it is difﬁcult to stretch the lower extremity during spaceﬂight.
m Additionally, Simons demonstrated that during parabolic ﬂight,
Workrate (W) relaxed body posture tends to approach a fetal position as
PEdaling Sp€€d (rpm) the limbs move toward equilibrium.7 Such postural changes
Heart rate (bpth) have been veriﬁed in spaceﬂight8 and a relaxed position would
TVIS and T2 Exemse duratpn . actually result in shortening the length of the hamstrings and
Speed ofvvalkmg/runmng (km/h) _ _ _
Subject load (kg) lower back musculature. Both the 1nab111ty to stretch and the
Heartrate(bpm) altered body position during spaceﬂight may explain the
iRED arid ARED ExerCiSES performed decreased ﬂexibility in the hamstrings and lower back muscu-
Numbet Otsets . . lature observed postﬂight.
NumberOtrEpemons A second measure that showed signiﬁcant differences pre-
Load (kg) _ . . . .
— t0 postﬂlght was the cone aglllty test. ""lhe mean t1me 1ncreased
1.36 s postﬂight, which was approximately 11% slower than
resulted in missing data for several crewmembers. Table 1 lists preﬂight. ""lhis was hOt explained by differences th treadmill
the parameters that should have been collected for each exer- time, speed, or loading during ﬂight. “Cone agility” is a com-
Cise session. ""lhe mean resistive exercise loads for both iRED PleX movement requiring crewmembers to Change direction,
and ARED are noted in Table 11. run forward and backward, and shufﬂe left and right. Although
the ability to execute this type of complex movement is impor-
Statistical Analyses tant to prevent injuries on the ground, it cannot be replicated
Pre- t0 postﬂight functional ﬁtness measurements were ana- With current 155 exercise hardware. ""lhus decreased perfor-
lyzed using dependent t-tests. ""lhe criterion for statistical sig- mance was expected postﬂight and the difference 0t 1-43 s is
niﬁcance was set a priori at P < 0.05. All data are presented as the approximately 1-5 t0 2 steps.
mean i SD, unless otherwise noted. Relationships between Both the “leg press” and “handgrip strength” measurements
functional ﬁtness Change scores and in-ﬂight exercise measure- were signiﬁcantly lower after ﬂight. ThiS decrease was rather
ments were evaluated using correlation analyses. small for the leg press (""23% or approximately 9-07 kg [20 lhl)
and handgrip (-4.9% or 5.6 kg [12.35 1b]). Previous testing in
our gym has shown day-to-day variability in leg press lRM
RESULTS scores ranging from 5 to 10%. Both these strength measures are
statistically different compared to preﬂight but are not physio-
Pre- and postﬂight functional ﬁtness results are summarized logically 0r functionally relevant and did not alter the postﬂight
in Table III. Signiﬁcant differences were noted with the sit reconditioning protocols.
and reach, cone agility, leg press, and hand grip measure- “Push-ups,” “sliding crunches,” and “bench press” measures
ments. ""lhere were no signiﬁcant differences me- to postﬂight were successfully maintained during the ISS missions. ""lhis was
for push-ups, pull-ups, sliding crunches, and bench press. accomplished by integrating abdominal and bench press exer-
""lhe relationships between functional ﬁtness Change scores cises th the exercise prescriptions performed Oh the iRED and
and in-ﬂight exercise measurements were evaluated and mini- ARED- Push-ups are hOt able to be performed 0h either resis-
mal to moderate correlations were observed for most vari- tance device bUt use the same musculature required for the
ables. ""lhe sliding crunch test demonstrated the strongest bench press. ""lherefore by maintaining bench press capability,
correlation with the number of CEVIS sessions per week and the ability to perform push-ups is also maintained. Exercise
this was only moderate at p = 0.395. prescriptions are continually being altered and enhanced based
on testing results to incorporate more complex exercises that
will maintain multiple functional movement patterns.
DISCUSSION Missing in-ﬂight exercise data plagued our evaluation of the
relationship between in-ﬂight exercise and the resulting func-
Differences in the FFT scores subsequent to 133 missions can tional ﬁtness measures. ""lherefore these correlation analyses are
be partially explained by in-ﬂight exercise performance. “Sit preliminary and further data are being collected to enable a
and reach” measured lower back and hamstring ﬂexibility and more robust examination Of this relationship. Operational
status of the ISS exercise hardware further confounded these
analyses. This exercise countermeasures hardware suite has
Tablell. Mean LoadeOHSS ReSiStive ExerCise- experienced multiple failures during the 10 yr onboard ISS.
MEAN LOAD MEAN LOAD Essentially n0 crewmember experienced a fully operational set
MEASURE N (kg) p : SD (lb) p : SD of exercise hardware. Most crewmembers encountered limited
Squats 34 103.5 : 21.1 228.2 : 46.6 performance of one or more of the exercise devices, making it
Hee' Raises 34 l l 16 i 24-3 246-1 i 53-6 difﬁcult to determine the effectiveness of exercise prescriptions.
W In many cases, the status of the exercise hardware limited the
A90 AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 12, Section II December2015

"
"5","ISS FUNCTIONAL FITNESS RESULTS—Laughlin etal
Table III. Functional Fitness Results.
MEASURE N PREFLIGHT p:SD. POSTFLIGHT p: SD. % CHANGE “iSD. P
Sit and Reach 31 17.29 i 3.53 15.88 i 3.49 -8.0% i 9.5 < 0.001
Cone Agility 24 12.87 i 1.02 14.23 i 1.37 11.0% i 11.8 < 0.001
PUSh-Ups 34 48.35 i 17.19 46.21 i 16.7 3.1% i 47.0 0.320
PUII-Ups 30 9.13 i 5.35 8.27 i 4.35 -0.6% i 41.2 0.146
Sliding Crunches 33 102.8 : 30.8 100.0 : 26.9 -0.9% i 16.1 0.396
Bench Press (kg) 32 76.9 i 22.3 76.8 i 21.6 0.68% i 9.9 0.971
Bench Press (lb) 32 169.6 : 49.1 169.5 : 47.6
Leg Press (kg) 31 278.5 : 60.6 269.8 : 57.2 -2.8% i 7.2 0.040
Leg Press (lb) 31 614.0 : 133.6 594.8 : 126.1
Hand Grip 24 102.3 : 19.7 96.7 i 18.0 -4.9% i 8.6 0.006
crewmembers’ workouts more than their physical stamina 01' Authors and aﬁliations: Mitzi S. Laughlin, Ph.D., Mark A. Guilliams, M.A.,
strength. Bruce A. Nieschwitz, B.S., and David Hoellen, M.S., Wyle Science, Technology
Although there are some performance decrements docu- and Engmeemg Group’ HouSton’ TX'
mented in the FFT results postﬂight, it is important to note that
the crewmembers are successfully performing activities of daily
living and are fully functional for normal activities upon return REFERENCES
from the ISS. ""lhe main impairment during the ﬁrst few days
after landing was vestibular function, which can impact func- 1' Baldwm KM’ Whlte TP’ Armand SB’_Edgert0n VR’ Kraemer WJ’ et a1‘
_ _ _ , _ , _ Musculoskeletal adaptations to welghtlessness and development of
tlonal ﬁtness teStlng' The veStlbular 1mpa1rment typlcally effective countermeasures. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1996; 28(10):1247—
resolves quickly and the crewmembers begin to perform 1253.
normal reconditioning workouts Within 3 t0 4 d Of return. 2. Convertino VA.Physiologicaladaptations to weightlessness:effects on
Reconditioning sessions are scheduled for 2 h a day) for 45 d exercise and work performance. Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 1990; 18:119—
following long-duration missions. Although outside the scope 166' _ _ _ _
_ _ _ 3. Greenisen MC, Hayes JC, Siconolfi SF. Functional performance
Of thlS paper, the FFT IS repeated at 30 d after land1ng and’ evaluation. In: Sawin CF, Taylor GR, Smith WL, editors. Extended
at this time) all crewmembers have returned to or exceeded Duration Orbiter MedicalProject(NASA SP-534),Chapter3.Washington
preﬂight ﬁtness measurements. (DC): U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce; 1999:1—24.
4. LeBlanc A, Lin C, Shackelford L, Sinitsyn V, Evans H, et al. Muscle volume,
MRI relaxation times (T2), and body composition after spaceﬂight. IAppl
Physiol. 2000; 89(6):2158—2164.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 5. Lee SM, Shackelford LC, Smith SM, Guilliams ME, Loehr JA, et al.
Lean tissue mass and muscle strength: Does resistive exercise pre-
This report was sponsored by the NASA 188 Program Oﬂice with reference to vent space ﬂight deconditioning? Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2004; 36(5):
SSP 50260 — 188 medical Operations Requirements Document (MORD) and 8272.
SSP 50667 — Medical Evaluations Documentation (MED) Volume B. This arti- 6. Lee SMC, Loehr IA, Guilliams ME, Laughlin MS, Shackelford LC, et al.
cle would not have been possible without a great deal of help from many people. Isokinetic strength and endurance after International Space Station (188)
We would like to thank all former Astronaut Strength, Conditioning, and Reha- missions. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2003; 35(5)28262.
bilitation specialists (ASCRS), as this article includes 10 years of 188 data, and 7. Simons IC. An introduction to surface-free behavior. Ergonomics. 1964;
without their dedication and professionalism this would never had been pos- 7(1):23—36.
sible. We are greatly indebted to Beth Shephard, Jamie ChauVin, Corey Twine, 8. Thornton WE, Hofﬂer GVV, Rummel IA. Anthropometric changes and
Yamil Garcia, Bill Amonette, Christi Baker, and Stephanie Fox. Additionally, ﬂuid shifts. In: Johnston RS, Dietlein LF, editors. Biomedical Results from
Roxanne Buxton and Peggy Lynn have processed the in-ﬂight exercise data for Skylab (NASA SP-377). Washington (DC): U.S. Government Printing
the last few years and we wish to thank you. Ofﬁce; 1977:300—308.
AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, NO. 12, Section 11 December 2015 A91

"
