"","x"
"1","A COMPARISON OF TORSO STABILITY BETWEEN BED REST SUBJECTS AND
ASTRONAUTS DURING TANDEM WALK: PRELIMINARY FINDINGS
1Chris Miller, 1Brian Peters, 1Igor Kofman, 1Rachel Brady, 1Tiffany Phillips, 2Crystal Batson,
3Ajitkumar Mulavara, 4Alan Feiveson, 4Millard Resehke and 4Jacob Bloomberg
1Wyle Science Technology & Engineering Group, Houston, TX, USA
2MEI Technologies 1110., Houston, TX, USA
3Universities Space Research Association, Houston, TX, USA
4NASA Lyndon B. J ohnson Space Center, Houston, TX, USA
Email: ehris.miller-1@nasa.g0v

INTRODUCTION

This study is part of a larger protocol that uses a
During spaceﬂight, erewmembers experience a suite of physiologic tests and functional tasks to
microgravity environment that results in a central relate physiologic changes to changes in functional
reinterpretation of both vestibular and body aXial- performance of mission-critical tasks immediately
loading information by the sensorimotor system. postﬂight or after bed rest. Subjects who have
Bed rest studies have been developed as a ground- completed the study to date include: (a) 5 bed rest
based analog to spaceﬂight. Subjects lie at 60 head- controls (4M/ 1F; 36.8 i 7.9 yr; 66 i 2.2 in.; 163.2 d:
down in strict bed rest to simulate the ﬂuid shift and 17.9 lb), all of whom completed 70 days of 6-
graVity-unloading 0f the microgravity environment. degrees head-down strict bed rest with 110 exercise
However, bed rest subjects still sense gravity in the countermeasure; (b) 6 short-duration erewmembers
vestibular organs. Therefore, bed rest isolates the (4M/2F; 43.0 i 5.6 yr; 70 i 1.5 in.; 168.2 d: 17.6 lb)
aXial-unloading component, thus allowing for the who completed Space Shuttle missions (13.2 i 1.5
direct study of its effects. (1), and (e) 7 long-duration erewmembers (6M/ 1F;

47.8 i 2.3 yr; 70 i 2.8 in.; 188.1 i 32.8 lb) who
The Tandem Walk (that is, walk on ﬂoor eyes completed missions aboard the 188 (152.6 d: 18.2 (1).
closed) is a standard sensorimotor test of dynamic Data collection sessions occurred twice within a 2-
postural stability [1]. Normally, the performance month or 2-week time period before ﬂight or bed
metric is the number of steps the subject can rest, respectively (PRE), and four times after
complete without sidestepping. In this analysis, we ﬂight/bed rest: on the day of landing or end of bed
used linear acceleration of the torso as the rest (P0st+0d), 1 day post (P0st+1d), 6 days post
performance metric as it provides additional (P0st+6d) and a ﬁnal session 10 days (bed rest) or
information about the subject’s stability during the 30 days (ﬂight) post (P0st+10/30). Due to logistical
test. The purpose of this study was to compare torso limitations, data could not be collected from long-
stability during the Tandem Walk test between bed duration erewmembers 011 landing day.
rest control subjects, short-duration (Space Shuttle)
crewmembers, and long-duration International In the Tandem Walk test, the subject walked in a
Space Station (188) erewmembers during their heel-to-toe fashion at a self—selected speed for 10 to
recovery from bed rest or spaceﬂight. 12 steps with their arms crossed on their chest and

their eyes closed. A spotter walked next to the
METHODS subject to ensure safety and to monitor the step

count. Three Tandem Walk trials were performed
All subjects provided written informed consent per session.
before participating in this study that was approved
in advance by the NASA Lyndon B. J ohnson Space Torso and head linear accelerations (relative to their
Center Institutional Review Board. respective local coordinate systems) were recorded

"
"2","using triaXial inertial measurement units (Xsens, encompassed preponderantly positive values when
North America 1110., Culver City, CA, USA) comparing the long-duration crewmembers and the
sampled at 50 Hz. During the analysis, the start and bed rest controls for the P0st+1d and P0st+6d
end of the trial were manually selected by sessions (Figure 2), and the short- and long-duration
inspection of the plot of the vertical acceleration of crewmembers for the P0st+6d session. This seemed
the head. Data were then rotated into the global to indicate that, in long-duration crewmembers, the
coordinate system, and the gravitational vestibular component further impaired torso
acceleration was removed from the Z-component. stability postﬂight (that is, increased RMS), beyond
The resultant linear acceleration of the torso was that attributable to the aXial-unloading component
calculated at each time point of the trial. The root- alone.
mean-square (RMS) of the torso accelerations
within a set window centered on the mid-point of Bed Rest Control vs. Long-Duration Flight
the trial was then computed. A separate analysis 0.4
revealed no signiﬁcant difference between the two 5'
PRE sessions, so all PRE data were pooled. Finally, 1; 0'2
a preliminary mixed-model analysis of the E 0
differences in RMS values for each postﬂight/bed g +
rest session relative to PRE (with three outliers 30.2
removed) was used to compare group X session 25
interactions; that is, changes from preﬂight/bed rest -0.4
to postﬂight/bed rest values between groups. 1’08”"" 1’0““ P05t+6 P08t+10/30
Figure 2: Mean estimate with 95% confidence
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION intervals of the difference of the (post-PRE) session
differences for the RMS of the torso acceleration
All groups exhibited increased torso instability (that between bed rest controls and long-duration ﬂiers.
is, higher RMS values) during Tandem Walk
immediately postﬂight/bed rest (Figure 1). This CONCLUSIONS
suggests that aXial-unloading alone — as is the case
in bed rest _ COUld result in decrements in Tandem Body unloading alone, as in strict bed rest, resulted
Walk performance. in decreased Tandem Walk performance (as
measured by the RMS of torso acceleration)
RMS “Torso ACCEIEI’ationduring Tandemwalk immediately post-bed rest. Central reinterpretation
1'2 of vestibular information by the sensorimotor
1 i system during extended exposure to microgravity
E i' $ may further compromise torso stability during
E03 i Tandem Walking postﬂight.
::05 + 4 +i + + i
5 § {. i REFERENCES
:2 0.4
50.2 1.Fregly, AR, et a1. Aerospace Medicine 43, 395-
399, 1972.
0
PRE Post+0 Post+1 Post+6 Post+10/30
I Bed Rest Control 0 Short-Duration Flight A Long-Duration Flight ACKNOWLED GE MENTS
Flgure 1' RMS esotlmated means.(i SE) Of the torso This study is funded by the National Aeronautics
resultant acceleratlon across sess10ns and groups. . . .
and Space Admmlstratlon.
The preliminary mixed-model analysis showed
conﬁdence intervals for interaction effects that

"
