"","x"
"1","130 CRYSTALS [8]
[8] Counterdiffusion Methods for
Macromolecular Crystallization
By J UAN MA. GARCIA-RUIZ
T0 the memory of Dr. Francisco José Higes Rolando

Introduction

The use of nonequilibrium crystallization techniques is the most effect—
ive way to search automatically for the set of crystallization conditions that
ensures the highest crystal quality. Among these techniques, the counterdif-
fusion method has been proven to be simple and useful for growing macro-
molecular crystals. This Chapter gives a basic introduction to the use of the
counterdiffusion method for macromolecular crystallization. In short, the
method works by triggering a single wave of supersaturation With decreasing
amplitude and increasing Width that propagates across a one—dimensional
reactor Chamber. The uniform propagation requires a convection-free en—
vironment, Which can be achieved in practice using either gels (0r Viscous
materials), capillaries, and/or microgravity. After comparing these three
implementations the use of the technique for screening crystallization
conditions and for high-throughput projects is also discussed.

Macromolecular crystallization is a problem of two sides. From the bio-
chemical perspective, protein—protein interactions leading to speciﬁc ag-
gregation are required to get ordered Clusters as the ﬁrst stage toward
crystallization. These interactions depend on the Chemical cocktail used
in the crystallization trial, such as the type of solvent, the pH, the solubility
reductor, and detergent additives.1 The quality of the crystal depends on
physical variables, such as supersaturation, the rate at Which supersatur-
ation is created, and the ﬂuid dynamics at the reactor and crystal scales,
Which are inﬂuenced primarily by the crystallization technique.

This work focuses on the second aspect of the problem. In particular, I
Will discuss the counterdiffusion technique, Which has not been much used
compared With the Classic vapor diffusion and batch techniques. In the
opinion of the author, it is, however, a very promising technique for macro-
molecular crystallization, particularly When looking for high-quality
crystals and a rapid way to obtain them.

By its very nature, the counterdiffusion (CD) technique requires a mass
transport scenario governed by diffusion. Its success lies in producing a

1 J .-P. Wery and R. W. Schevitz, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 1, 365 (1997).
Copyright 2003, Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
METHODS IN ENZYMOLOGY, VOL. 368 0076—6879/03 $35.00

"
"2","[8] COUNTERDIFFUSION CRYSTALLIZATION METHODS 131
coupling between (1) the diffusion proﬁles of protein and precipitating
agent molecules and (2) the precipitation of the protein. Theoretical
aspects of that coupling are presented ﬁrst. Then I Will describe several
devices to implement the counterdiffusion technique, Which are ultimately
based on the three different ways to remove convective transport, namely,
gels, capillary volumes, and microgravity. Finally, I Will offer some insights
into the use of the technique for screening of crystallization conditions and
for high-throughput crystallization.

From now on, as I Will discuss only the physical aspects of the crystalliza-
tion problem, the terms protein and macromolecule Will be used Without
distinction. I Will use both terms for any protein, nucleic acid, carbohydrate,
or other macromolecule that is crystallized With negligible consumption of
a precipitating agent. Finally, this Chapter focuses exclusively on obtaining
crystals for structural resolution purposes and therefore other uses of the
CD technique for materials science and biotechnology have deliberately
been omitted.

Comparative Overview of Classic Crystallization Techniques

Let us start With a batch experiment, the simplest technique used
in macromolecular crystallization. A macromolecular solution M and a
solution of a precipitating agent P are thoroughly mixed leading even—
tually to either an ordered or disordered phase separation of the macro-
molecule. T0 properly represent the output of the experiment, we use the
Classic Ostwald—Myers solubility diagram (Fig. 1A). Depending on the con-
centration CM and CP 0f the mixing solutions, the system Will move either
into the labile, metastable, 0r undersaturated region following the trajec—
tory O—E. Considering (for practical purposes) a mixing time equal to zero,
it Will do so at an inﬁnite rate, i.e., supersaturation (0r undersaturation)
is instantaneously and homogeneously reached in the Whole reservoir.

When dealing With new macromolecules, the locus of the metastable
region is unknown. Therefore, the location of the system after a single trial
is just a matter of luck. If the system moves to the undersaturated region
nothing Will happen. If it goes to the labile region, as the rate of nucleus
formation In depends on the second power of the logarithm of supersatur-
ation, non—steady-state nucleation occurs, the clustering of growth units
Will take place far from equilibrium, and the output Will be a precipitate
formed by a large number of particles With very small size and a high
number of structural defects. If the system moves to the metastable region,
it is a matter of time to have a reduced number of crystals of reasonable
size and quality.

"
"3","H
t»
N
A 20 B 20
8 18 \ Batch experiment 8 18 \ Vapour dlffuswn experlment
H \ ”.1
1;; 16 \ 1;; 16 \
3: 14 K ‘5 14 ‘
$3 \
8 \ Labile zone 8 E \ \ .
g 12 k ' g 12 \ Lablle zone
0 “ I O \ E
3 10 / ‘ 2 10 \ \
5 / ‘ \ x 5 3,1;
8 8 / \‘-._ #48 8 N“
‘6‘ / ‘ - ‘ ‘ _ O 0’ , "" ‘— “‘ \ -.
a 6 /’ Metast ‘ ‘ ‘ E 6 Met ’“ ~ - \ _ _ g
a O ' 88
g 4 // bIe Zone 5 4 0. table Zone g
“3 / Undersaturated 20116 ‘6 Undersaturated zone >
2 2 .// 2 2 5
0 o
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Precipitating agent concentration Precipitating agent concentration
FIG. 1. Solubility diagram showing how batch (A) and vapor diffusion (B) techniques work (concentration units are arbitrary). In the batch
technique, the mixing of protein and precipitating solutions is almost instantaneous. Therefore, supersaturation is achieved almost immediately.
In vapor diffusion techniques, the rate at which supersaturation is achieved depends on the geometry of the reactor and on the difference in
partial vapor pressure and relative free surface of the drop and well solution. In both cases, the trial is blind and the success in finding single
crystals depends on the number of experiments with different starting conditions.
E

"
"4","[8] COUNTERDIFFUSION CRYSTALLIZATION METHODS 133

The situation is different for crystallization techniques making use of
controlled evaporation; such as hanging/sitting/sandWiChed drop tech—
niques, also termed vapor diffusion techniquesz’3 The drop is made of an
undersaturated protein solution that is forced to evaporate until it becomes
isotonic With the salt solution contained in an independent reservoir,
following Raoult’s law. The concentration of salt in the reservoir solution
is typically twice the concentration of salt in the drop. Therefore, assuming
the volume of the drop is much smaller than the volume of the solution in
the reservoir, the concentration of protein in the drop increases to twice the
initial concentration and the system Will move across the trajectory 0—E
(Fig. 1B). If, eventually, phase separation occurs, it means that the solubil-
ity curve passes across the trajectory 0—E. If the waiting time for crystals to
appear in the drop is long, then the solubility curve would pass Close to the
endpoint E, Whereas if the waiting time is short it Will pass Close to
the starting point 0. Unlike the batch technique, the rate of Change of
supersaturation in the drop technique is not inﬁnite but supersaturation
Changes at a ﬁnite rate 60/6t 7E 0. In other words the time for the concentra—
tion in the drop to move along the trajectory 0—E is different from zero. It
has been demonstrated that this rate of Change of supersaturation depends
on the geometry of the system, in particular on the reservoir and drop
aspect ratio and the separation between them.4’5 Indeed, the crucial point
is not only how far the solution to be crystallized is from equilibrium, but at
What rate equilibrium is approached.

In the free interface diffusion (FID) crystallization technique, solutions
of protein and precipitating agent are placed in contact in a one—dimen—
sional arrangement. The precipitating agent is allowed to diffuse into the
protein solution to move the precipitation system into the metastable zone.
Several devices have been implemented in the past making use of dialysis
membranes in microdiffusion cells6 and capillaries7 With8 or Without9 a
polyacrylamide plug that works as an interface between the protein and

2 A. DucruiX and R. Giegé, in “Crystallisation of Nucleic Acids and Proteins: A Practical
Approach” (A. DucruiX and R. Giegé, eds), p. 121. IRL Press at Oxford University,
Oxford, 1999.

3 A. McPherson, “Crystallisation of Biological Macromolecules.” Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 1999.

4 W. W. Fowlis, L. J . DeLucas, P. J . Twigg, S. B. Howard, E. J. Meehan, and J . K. Baird,
J. Cryst. Growth 90, 117 (1988).

5 A. M. Schwartz and K. A. Berglund, J. Cryst. Growth 210, 753 (2000).

6 M. Zeppezauer, H. Eklund, and E. S. Zeppezauer, Arch. Biochem. Anal. 126, 564 (1968).

7 G. N. Phillips, Methods Enzymol. 14, 128 (1985).

8 F. R. Salemme, Methods Enzymol. 114, 140 (1985).

9 D. L. D. Caspar, C. Cohen, and W. Longley, J. M01. Biol. 41, 87 (1969).

"
"5","134 CRYSTALS [8]
precipitant agent solution.10 The technique has also been used for micro—
gravity experimentsn’12 The main feature of the FID techniques as imple—
mented in protein crystallization studies is that they were designed to reach
the critical supersaturation for nucleation very slowly, seeking a single
nucleation event.13_16 At best, attempts to make use of Ostwald ripening
processes were also considered.17 Hence typical FID experiments can be
considered as batch experiments conducted at a very slow rate of mixing
of solutions.18 Unlike this, the counterdiffusion technique as used in the
author’s laboratory deals With an FID geometry but starting With condi-
tions that are far enough from equilibrium to provoke multiple nucleation
events progressively approaching equilibrium. The next section deals With
the basis of the counterdiffusion technique.
Counterdiffusion Technique: Fundamentals

In counterdiffusion techniques, the interacting precipitating agent and
protein solutions either contact one another directly or (optionally) are
separated by an intermediate Chamber working as a physical buffer. The
geometry of the technique and the concentration proﬁle at time zero are
shown in Fig. 2. As soon as the two solutions come in contact, they Will
interact according to the solubility dependence of the protein on the pre—
cipitating agent concentration. However, the values of the concentration
of both interacting solutions Will Change With time for every point of the re—
actor, i.e., the concentration values Will depend on the mass transport kin-
etics. NOW, note that the two processes working in the experiment, mass
transport and precipitation, are consecutive. For these cases, the kinetics
of the Whole phenomenon is controlled by the step With the slowest kinet—
ics. To reduce the rate of development of supersaturation the best strategy
is to minimize the kinetics of the mass transport step. The best method to
do this is to remove convection allowing the mass transport to be governed
by well-known diffusive laws. When doing this, another advantage crucial
to the method is obtained, namely that it is possible to exploit the coupling
10 G. N. Phillips, J12, Methods Enzymol. 14, 128 (1985).
11 R. Bosch, P. Lautenschlager, L. Potthast, and J. Stapelmann, J. Cryst. Growth 122, 310

1992 .

121(3. C.)Carter et al., J. Cryst. Growth 196, 602 (1999).
13 B. H. Weber and P. E. Goodkin, Arch. Biochem. Anal. 141, 489 (1970).
14 F. R. Salemme, Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 151, 533 (1972).
15 F. R. Salemme, Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 163, 423 (1974).
16 P. C. Weber and F. R. Salemme, J. Mol. Biol. 117, 815 (1977).
17 P. Weber, Adv. Protein Chem. 41, 16 (1991).
18 F. Otalora and J. M. Garcia-Ruiz, J. Cryst. Growth 182, 141 (1997).

"
"6","[8] COUNTERDIFFUSION CRYSTALLIZATION METHODS 135

Fast ﬂow of

RA. molecules »

‘ : 7': Slow ﬂow of protein molecules
— X
A 0 L
Time = 0
Buffer
chamber
_.A. Chamber I Protein chamber
—'X
0 L
B
Time = 0
FIG. 2. Geometry of a counterdiffusion experiment showing the phenomenology of the

technique. (A) Without and (B) With a buffer chamber.
between diffusion and reaction, Which is known to trigger remarkable pre—
cipitation patterns, such as Liesegang’s structures. The basis of the tech—
nique for the crystallization of small molecules forming upon reaction of
two soluble compounds has been discussed in depth by Henisch and
Garcia—Ruiz.19’20 For the case of macromolecules Where the crystallization
is triggered by a reduction of solubility rather than by a Chemical reaction,
the technique works in a slightly different way as the molecules of the pre—
cipitating agent are not (appreciably) consumed during crystallization.21’22
Basically, it works as follows.

Upon starting the experiment, the molecules of the protein diffuse
toward the left (in the geometry of Fig. 2) according to the second law
of Fick:

dC _ D dZC

dt _ de
19 H. K. Henisch and J . M. Garcia-Ruiz, J. Cryst. Growth 75, 195 (1986).
20 H. K. Henisch and J . M. Garcia-Ruiz, J. Cryst. Growth 75, 203 (1986).
21 F. Otalora and J . M. Garcia-Ruiz, J. Cryst. Growth 169, 361 (1996).
22 F. Otalora and J. M. Garcia-Ruiz, J. Cryst. Growth 182,141 (1997).

"
"7","136 CRYSTALS [8]
Assuming for the sake of simplicity a semiinﬁnite length of a one—
dimensional reactor, the proﬁle of macromolecular concentration Will vary
With time as23
CMW) : 6M706rfcfﬁ (1)
Where cm“) is the concentration of macromolecules at time t at the pos—
ition x in the reactor, CMD is the starting concentration of protein in the
protein Chamber, DM is the diffusion coefﬁcient of the protein, and efrc
is the inverse of the Gauss error function. Similarly, the molecules of the
precipitating agent diffuse toward the right leading to a concentration
proﬁle according to the following expression:
_ X 2
CPW) — 6137061”ch ( )
Where the sufﬁx P denotes the salt commonly used as precipitating agent.
The diffusion coefﬁcient of typical precipitating agents (including most
PEGs) is one to two orders of magnitude larger than those of the macro-
molecules. It follows that the salt Will diffuse toward the right 10 to
100 times faster than the protein molecules toward the left. In other words,
the salt Will invade the protein Chamber. This fact imposes a directionality
that is critical for the technique to work properly. In addition it forces the
use of long protein chambers to display such directionality. NOW, as the
precipitant diffuses into the protein following relation (1), it Will provoke
the precipitation of the protein according to the solubility of protein S,
Which can be described, for computing purposes, by Green’s
phenomenological law.24
logS = logSO + ki\/C—p — kOC (3)
Where S and SO are the solubility of the protein at concentration C and in
water, respectively.

Let us select a high initial concentration of precipitating agent so that
once the salt molecules run into the protein Chamber, the system moves
deep into the labile region provoking the immediate precipitation of an
amorphous phase at the location x = x0 (see Fig. 3). The concentration of
protein in and around this area falls, but the molecules of salt diffuse fur—
ther t0 the right. At the location x1, the rate of increases of concentration
of salt is slower and therefore the protein Will precipitate at lower supersat—
uration eventually as crystalline microaggregates. Again the concentration
23 J . Crank, “Mathematics of Diffusion.” Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1956.

24 A. A. Green, J. Biol. Chem. 95, 47 (1932).

"
"8","[8] COUNTERDIFFUSION CRYSTALLIZATION METHODS 137
20 Time
Counterdiffusion +— ——_' 1
18 techniQue \ m:n'“ '0"" ""' ' .' ' ' 1
c: \ X0 x1 x2 X3 x4 x5
.3 16 \
g \
E: 14 \
8 \ Labile zone
8 12 \
O OM \
2 10 _____“""""""""' ____""““““""'"" El
3 \
£5, 8 ‘4 X;\x x1“ x _ \
E ‘ \ x e
o 6 — - — V
g . Metastable 2
4 ' One
2 Undersaturated zone '
2 :0
0 VI
0 5 10 15 20 25 3O 35 40 45 50
Precipitating agent concentration
FIG. 3. The solubility diagram shows how CD crystallization works. The precipitation of
the protein occurs because its solubility varies With, for instance, the concentration of salt. Let
the starting protein concentration be 0M and the concentration of the salt Up. When these
solutions come into contact, the system moves toward point E1 in the phase diagram. Note
that the supersaturation is very high. Therefore, the first precipitate could be an amorphous or
ill-crystalline phase forming at location x0. Its formation depletes the concentration of protein
in the neighboring zones. As the salt continues to diffuse into the protein chamber, a new
precipitation event takes place, this time at lower supersaturation eventually producing
microcrystals (location x1 in the phase diagram). Iteration of this process provokes the
precipitation at lower supersaturation as the precipitation front moves far from the precipitant
Chamber toward the protein Chamber (x2, x3, . . . x6). This yields precipitation zones of fewer
crystals of larger size and higher quality. Contrasting the classic drop and batch methods, the
counterdiffusion technique explores a large number of crystallization conditions in a single
experiment.
of protein in and around location x1 Will drop and the salt molecules Will
continue to move further to the right, to x2 Where the concentration Will in—
crease at an even slower rate. This eventually Will provoke formation of
small single crystals as a result of a comparatively lower supersaturation.
Iteration of this coupling phenomenon that moves the precipitation system
continuously toward equilibrium Will ﬁnally result in the formation of a few
crystals of the highest quality at location xl- far to the right of x0.

From this phenomenological description, it is Clear that the mechanism
initiating pattern formation differs in counterdiffusion from that in other
crystallization techniques. The counterdiffusion technique is an out of
equilibrium precipitation system moving spontaneously toward equilib-
rium. N0 location in the protein Chamber shares the same history as any
other, because the system is completely heterogeneous in space and time.
Looking at Fig. 3 it is apparent that: (1) one counterdiffusion experiment

"
"9","138 CRYSTALS [8]
screens a long path across the phase diagram; hence its power in compari-
son to batch and vapor diffusion techniques; (2) interestingly for practical
purposes, the precipitation phenomena taking place at each point of that
path are independently recorded at different locations of the protein Cham-
ber; and (3) the system travels toward equilibrium, so that precipitation
phenomena consecutive in time and space take place at decreasing super-
saturation. In other words, the technique self searches for the best crystal—
lization conditions. One CD experiment is therefore equivalent to a large
number of hanging drop or batch experiments across the phase diagram.

To illustrate nonequilibrium systems With single pictures is fruitless,
since it is a dynamic process Where supersaturation is both location and
time dependent. To have a dynamic View of the process, Which facilitates
understanding how it works, and to predict the results (as a test tool for
“What if . . .” experiments), it is helpful to perform computer simulations.
The above analytical solution of Fick’s law is an elegant but unrealistic
approach to actual laboratory experiments. It is much more interesting to
use numerical solutions by iterative methods.19 Using these computations
it is easy to show that the CD technique works due to a wave of supersatur-
ation moving from left to right triggering the precipitation of protein, a
ﬁnding that has been experimentally demonstrated2525812513 (Fig. 4). This
wave of supersaturation propagates With progressively decreasing ampli—
tude (Which yields fewer nucleation events) and increasing Width (Which in-
creases the growing time of the crystals and therefore their ﬁnal size). The
reader is inVited to use a freeware computer simulation programmed ad
hoc by Dr. Otalora and the author and to Visualize some microscopy Video,
both available at the website http://1ec.ugr.es.

In principle, using a protein Chamber semiinﬁnite in length, a large
precipitating agent reservoir, and starting at the highest precipitant concen—
tration, one single experiment would be enough to ﬁnd the optimal crystal—
lization conditions, i.e., to scan across the Whole phase diagram. However,
as the diffusion path scales With the square root of time multiplies by a
factor of ~105 cmz/sec (the diffusivity value of the precipitant) no crystal
grower Will be patient enough to wait for the reward (and probably few
macromolecules Will remain stable). It is adVisable to try two or three dif-
ferent starting concentration values of the precipitant solution and to use
protein Chambers a few centimeters in length (see later).

25 J . M. Garcia-Ruiz, F. Otalora, M. L. Novella, J . A. Gavira, C. Sauter, and O. Vidal, J. Cryst.
Growth 232, 596 (2001).

25a L. Carotenuto, C. Piccolo, D. Castagnolo, M. Lappa, A. Tartora, and J . M. Garcia-Ruiz,
Acta Crystallogr. D 58, 1628 (2002).

25b M. Lappa, C. Piccolo, and L. Carotenuto, J. Crystal Growth 254, 469 (2003).

"
"10","[8] COUNTERDIFFUSION CRYSTALLIZATION METHODS 139
25 ,_”-""""--—\,_“Time
Ir ““.
20 / \\\
8 ."" ' K \
‘3 15 :
H
:3
§
8
Q 10 \‘ .
S
5 “\ WK
0 _ _ 4... . _ _
0,5 1,0 1,5 2,0 2,5 3,0 3,5 4,0 4,5 5,0 5,5 6,0 6,5
x(cm)

FIG. 4. Development of supersaturation across a 70-mm-long protein chamber in a
nonequilibrium counterdiffusion experiment performed in space (mission STS—95). The data
correspond to the actual development in time and space of the supersaturation values
obtained by interferometric analysis. The precipitating agent diffuses from left to right
creating a wave of supersaturation that moves across the protein chamber. It provokes
successive protein crystallization events at conditions increasingly favorable for optimal
crystal quality. In spite of three perturbations of the trend provoked by g-jitters, the best
crystals (0.94 A resolution) ever grown 0f the model protein tetragonal HEW lysozyme were
obtained in this experiment. Similar X-ray quality have been obtained recently from gelled
experiment on-ground.

Supersaturation versus Rate of Development of Supersaturation Plots

The rate of development of supersaturation plays a central role in a CD
experiment. It is important to realize that the Width of the metastable zone
in the solubility diagram does not have a ﬁxed value, because its boundaries
are of a different nature. The lower boundary (the solubility curve) is
thermodynamic in nature and its location is independent of the experiment.
However, the upper boundary (the supersolubility 0r metastability curve)
is kinetic in nature and therefore its location in the phase diagram depends
on how the experiment is actually performed. Remember that this second
boundary arises from the probabilistic nature of the nucleation phenom-
ena, the frequency of nucleation J , deﬁned as the number of nuclei created
per unit volume and unit time being

B
1 Z ,0 (_ T)
ln 0

"
"11","140 CRYSTALS [8]
i.e., exponentially proportional to the value of supersaturation. For ideal
experiments performed at constant supersaturation, the waiting time for
nucleation is tw = 1/J. Then, measuring the waiting time for nucleation
for different supersaturation values is the way to create the plots commonly
used for solubility diagrams.

Suppose now that the experiment is performed in such a way that the
value of supersaturation Changes at a positive rate 60/6t, the residence time
in the supersaturation interval 01—02 being 7'. If the value of the residence
time 7' is smaller than the waiting time tw for nucleation in that super-
saturation interval, the system Will propagate across that supersaturation
interval Without the formation of crystalline nuclei. And it Will continue
to do so until the waiting time for nucleation in a certain interval equals
’7'. This is well-known for thermal crystallizati0n26: the faster the rate of
cooling (the rate of Change of supersaturation) the larger the Width of the
metastable zone. If the system moves very fast, phase transition Will occur
into the labile region Where amorphous or polycrystalline microaggregates
Will form. In fact, this is the concept behind the freezing of foods and the
way to avoid ice formation When freezing protein crystals.

In counterdiffusion methods, the rate of increment of supersaturation
decreases as the precipitation moves forward into the protein Chamber.
Rather than the actual value of supersaturation (the amplitude of the
supersaturation wave propagating across the protein Chamber) the reason
for the resulting pattern of crystal quality lies in the slower rate at Which
supersaturation increases. Therefore, to evaluate the power of a given
precipitation technique to cover a Wide set of crystallization conditions, 0
versus 60/6t plots are highly recommendedm’mI When comparing 0 versus
60/6t plots from batch and evaporation techniques With those from
counterdiffusion techniques, the large difference between them becomes
obvious.

Practical Implementation of Counterdiffusion Techniques

By deﬁnition, it is mandatory for any laboratory implementation of
the counterdiffusion technique to reduce convection as much as possible,
thus allowing diffusion to govern the mass transport process in the reactor.
A simple way to estimate the quality of a diffusive scenario is to use the
nondimensional Grashof number NC}, Which measures the ratio between
buoyancy and Viscous forces:

NG = g x p(6p/6c) >< Ac x d3 x “—2
26 J . Nyvlt, “Industrial Crystallization from Solutions.” Butterworths, London, 1971.
26a J. M. Garia-Ruiz, J. Structural Biol. 142, 22 (2003).

"
"12","[8] COUNTERDIFFUSION CRYSTALLIZATION METHODS 141
Where g is the gravity value, p is the density of the ﬂuid, 6p/6c is the density
gradient, d is the Characteristic dimension of the system, and u is the Viscos-
ity of the medium. Therefore, to reduce the ratio between buoyancy driven
convection and diffusion we must tune either g, (6p/6c), u, or d. Variation
of the orientation and value of the density gradient does not drastically
alter the scenario and, in addition, is difﬁcult in practice. Increasing the
Viscosity of the ﬂuid, Which enters in the equation to the second power,
reduces convective forces, but it needs the addition of foreign compounds
(for instance carbohydrates), Which might alter the purity of the crystalliza-
tion scenario. To pay the price of purity, it is very effective to gel the
solution, i.e., to reduce d (Which is to the third power) by a factor of
10—5. If looking for clean experiments, then d can be reduced by using
capillary volumes, or alternatively using the facilities for protein crystalliza-
tion provided by space agencies, Which reduce NG by a factor of 10—4—10_6.
Capillaries and Gels

Gels have been used, at least since the nineteenth century, as crystal
growth media. A large number of crystals of small molecules (inorganic,
organic, organometallic, coordination compounds, drugs, etc.) and macro-
m01ecu1es27’28 have been crystallized inside gels. In most cases, hydro-
philic gels such as agar and its derivatives, silica, polyacrylamide, and even

j am and marmalades have been used.29 Recently, crystal growth in nonhy-

drophilic gels has been also reported.30 The main reason to use gels as crys—

tal growth media is to remove convective ﬂow from the system. For the
case of agarose, it has been recently demonstrated that a concentration of

0.12% W/V is enough to remove convection triggered by large density dif-

ferences in protein crystallization media and even by thermal gradients31

(Fig. 5). The reason is that beyond this concentration threshold, a per—

colation structure is formed by the polymeric cross-linked ﬁbers leading

to a pore size distribution in the range of tens to hundreds of nanometers.

That pore size is the Characteristic length d to be introduced in the calcula—

tion of the Grashof number. In relation to typical millimeter-sized reactors,

27 M. C. Robert and J. Berthou, C. R. Acad. Sci. 11 305, 847 (1987).

28 M. C. Robert, O. Vidal, J . M. Garcia-Ruiz, and F. Otalora, in “Crystallisation 0f Nucleic
Acids and Proteins: A Practical Approach” (A. DucruiX and R. Giegé, eds), p. 149. IRL
Press at Oxford University, Oxford, 1999.

29 H. K. Henisch, “Crystal Growth in Gels and Liesegang Rings.” Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1988.

30 R. Chandrasekhar, J. Mater. Sci. Lett. 19, 1801 (2000).

31 J . M. Garcia-Ruiz, M. L. Novella, R. Moreno, and J . A. Gavira, J. Cryst. Growth 232, 165
(2001).

"
"13","142 CRYSTALS [8]

' ' mu ,_--‘ ‘ w"" '2’?
.w ., . ‘s .
TMJ \ \ 1' 1"" K ‘T/ ""
“u , ""3‘ ‘; . . \ s. ‘ \3/ ' .

' ~- ”4“» I U29) W' K i"" “.1411 ‘3 «g

. _, “Q6? K m 153-3“ ‘ .""
dk&1;..m““~:h V- ‘7"" ' 1 1;""

F IG. 5. Experimental demonstration by Mach—Zehnder interferometry that agarose gels are
able to remove convective mass transport at concentration as low as 0.1% (W/V) of agarose
(A). Compare to picture (B) at agarose concentration of 0.01 % (W/V). From Garcia-Ruiz er al.31
gels reduce NG by a factor of 104—105. Hence, it becomes clear Why gels are
as effective as microgravity in avoiding convective ﬂow. The second advan-
tage of the use of gels is that they avoid sedimentation. The gel strength,
i.e., the maximum load per unit area that a gel may tolerate Without
cracking, depends on the type of gel and on the concentration. For agarose
gels at concentrations between 1% and 2%, gel strength values range be-
tween 400 and 5000 g/cmz. Considering that protein crystal size is at a scale
of millimeter and that their density varies between 1 and 2 g/em3, it is eVi-
dent that When protein crystals grow into a gel, they remain suspended,
there is no sedimentation, and therefore they can grow euhedrally.

At ﬁrst sight, a drawback of protein crystallization in gels is that, unlike
inorganic crystals, macromolecular crystals do not push the gel out during
growth but embed the gel into the crystal.32 The crystallization pressure
that protein crystals exert 0n the gel is larger than the gel strength. HOW-
ever, there is experimental evidence that they do not crack the gel but
include it into the crystalline building. Amazingly, in spite of the incorpor-
ation of a large amount of gel (even up to 20% of silica), there are eXperi-
mental proofs that some protein crystals maintain the single crystal
character, With very low mosaicity, and even they diffract With exceptional
high quality.32 The exact location of the gel ﬁbers in the crystal structure is
unknown, although it seems they are not conﬁned to the large channels of
the protein crystal structure.33 While the inclusion of gel does not seem to
provoke crystal deterioration,34 a more serious drawback of using gels
as growth media is their potential capability of interaction With other
32 J . M. Garcia-Ruiz, J . A. GaVira, F. Otalora, A. Guasch, and M. C011, Mater. Res. Bull. 33,

1593 (1998).
33 J. A. GaVira and J. M. Garia-Ruiz, Acta Crystallogr. D 58, 1653(2002).
34 o. Vidal, M. C. Robert, B. Arnoux, and B. Capelle, J. Cryst. Growth 196, 559 (1999).

"
"14","[8] COUNTERDIFFUSION CRYSTALLIZATION METHODS 143
compounds used in crystallization cocktails. For example, certain precipi—
tating agents (including the most used one, ammonium sulfate) cause agar—
ose precipitation. As for silica gels, they are inadvisable at basic pH as they
may react With divalent cations.

Capillary volumes are also effective to reduce convection. In fact, most of
the early experimental work on diffusion controlled mass transport was
performed by sandwiching the solution between two coverslides.35’36 Batch
crystallization into capillary volumes was also used by Feher and Kam37 to
illustrate diffusion transport in protein crystallization as well as for thermal38
and vapor diffusion techniques.39’40 However, to achieve an effective re—
moval of convective ﬂow, very thin capillaries must be used (see Fig. 6 for a
comparison). The use of capillaries as protein Chambers in counterdiffusion
experiments is the most immediate and simplest idea When applying the
technique to protein crystallization. In particular, When X-ray capillaries
are used as protein Chambers, the crystals can be directly diffracted Without

105 1......

10. g M.) _//./

103 / '/ f'/

/'d//
3'3 102 '/v/'
a 101 /- ‘
a ,I 7"", / —l— Earth grav1ty (V1scos1ty 1.02 cp) ‘
95 100 'vv‘ Q.-.. -- -- --V— Earthgrav1ty(v1s0031ty5cp) I
g - 7/ -
g 10 1 A—M10rograv1ty _ i
U 10—2 ' """"""""""""""""'""::'/'Iy
_3 A/ Typical size of 5

10 i /

10—4 A; /

10-5 A

0,0 0,1 0,2 0,3 0,4 0,5 0,6 0,7
L(cm)

FIG. 6. Plot comparing the power of capillaries, microgravity, and Viscosity to reduce
convective ﬂow in protein crystallization experiments. The minimum practical crystal size
refers to X-ray home sources.

35 S. Goldsztaub, R. Itti, and F. Mussard, J. Cryst. Growth 6, 130 (1970).

36 W. F. Berg, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A164, 79 (1938).

37 G. Feher and Z. Kam, Methods Enzymol. 114, 77 (1985).

38 F. Rosenberger, S. B. Howard, J . W. Sowers, and T. A. Nyce, J. Cryst. Growth 129, 1 (1993).

39 L. Sibille, J. C. Clunie, and J. K. Baird, J. Cryst. Growth 110, 80 (1991).

40 U. R. Alvarado, C. R. DeWitt, B. B. Shultz, P. A. Ramsland, and A. B. Edmundson, J. Cryst.
Growth 223, 407 (2001).

"
"15","144 CRYSTALS [8]
further manipulation. Their use is even more advantageous as it has been
proven that crystals can be frozen into capillaries for cryocrystallography
studies after diffusion of an appropriate cryoprotectant.41’41a Additionally,
the use of very thin capillaries of 0.1 mm in diameter reduces the consump—
tion of protein solution for screening purposes. A device that helps to per—
form these experiments is the Granada Crystallization BOX (GCB).41b The
GCB consists of three elements made of polystyrene: (1) a reservoir to place
the gel, (2) a guide to hold the capillaries, and (3) a cap. There are several
ways to perform CD experiments With the GCB, and the reader is referred
to the website (http://1ec.ugr.es) for further information.

Using capillaries as protein Chamber in counterdiffusion experiments
implies having the precipitating agent diffuse into them While avoiding con-
vective mixing With the protein solution. A simple way to do this is With the
gel acupuncture method (GAME). The protocol is as follows:

Protocol I

1. Prepare a buffered agarose solution at 0.5% (W/V) of agarose
concentration. To do so, mix the appropriate amount of agarose and
buffer solution and heat until boiling for 5 min under continuous
stirring. The agarose solution becomes Clear. Then, keep the melted
agarose s01 at 500.

2. Place the capillary guide into the GCB. Pour the agarose s01 into the
GCB to fill one—third of the bOX. Use a Pasteur pipette but warm it
by filling in and out the hot melted agarose s01. This Will avoid the
formation of gel in the pipette.

3. Wait until the agarose solution cools down and the gel is set.

4. Fill the X-ray capillaries With the protein solution. This can be easily
performed by capillary forces, i.e., introduce the lower end of
the capillary into the protein solution and the solution Will rise
into the capillary up to the desired height. Then, Close the upper part
of the capillary With vacuum grease.

5. Introduce the capillary through the guide to immerse its lower open
end into the buffered agarose gel. Punch it just a few millimeters to
keep the capillary straight.

6. Pour the buffered precipitating agent onto the agarose gel.

7. Close the GCB using its cap.

41 F. J . Lopez-Jaramillo, J . M. Garcia-Ruiz, J . A. Gavira, and F. Otalora, J. Appl. Crystallogr.
34, 365 (2001).
41a C. Bierttimptel, J . Basquin, D. Suck, and C. Sauter, Acta Crystallogr. D 58, 1657 (2002).
41b J . M. Garcia-Ruiz, L. A. Gonale-Ramirez, J . A. Gavira, and F. Otalora. Acta Crystallogr.
D 58, 1657 (2002).

"
"16","[8] COUNTERDIFFUSION CRYSTALLIZATION METHODS 145

The technique has been successfully used for some proteins, particu—
larly When the crystals attach to the capillary wall. However, as discussed
above, neither convection nor sedimentation is completely avoided for ca-
pillary diameters larger than 10—20 pm, a size too small for X—ray diffrac—
tion purposes, particularly for home X-ray sources. A way to overcome
this obstacle is to gel the protein solution or to increase its Viscosity With
agarose. The percentage of agarose to be used for that purpose depends
on the type of gel. The values here suggested correspond to an agarose With
a gelling temperature of 360. A ﬁnal concentration of 0.1% of this agarose
does not form a true gel, but increases the Viscosity to a value high enough
to avoid convective ﬂow and sedimentation.

For screening experiments, reverse the system (i.e., to gel the
protein While using the precipitating agent ungelled). Simply gel the pro—
tein solution using low melting agarose at a concentration above the critical
concentration to form a gel (i.e., 0.15%). The protocol is as follows:

Protocol II

1. Place the capillary guide into the GCB.

2. Pour the buffered solution of your precipitating agent into the GCB
to fill one—third of the bOX. Use a Pasteur pipette.

3. Prepare a buffered agarose solution at 0.5% (W/V) agarose concen—
tration by mixing the appropriate amount of agarose and buffer
solution and heat until boiling for 5 min under continuous stirring.
The agarose solution becomes Clear. Keep the melted agarose s01
at 400.

4. At that temperature, mix the appropriate amounts of agarose
solution and your protein solution to have a final agarose concen—
tration of 0.15% (W/V). Fill the X-ray capillaries With this protein/
agarose solution. Do it by capillary forces, as in protocol 1. Then
Close the upper part of the capillary With vacuum grease.

5. Wait until the protein/agarose solution cools down in the capillary
and the gel is set.

6. Introduce the capillary through the guide to soak its lower open end
in the buffered precipitating agent solution.

7. Close the GCB With its cap.

Note that using agarose With such a 10W gelling temperature, the protein
solution is always handled at temperature below 400. Working With agar—
ose, it must also be considered that this carbohydrate is a nucleation en—
hancer. Small—angle X-ray and neutron scattering shows that lysozyme
interactions in solution and gelled With agarose are identica1.42’43 However,
agarose promotes nucleation because it traps water from the solution, thus

"
"17","146 CRYSTALS [8]
increasing the effective supersaturation When compared With free solu-
tions. A further problem With this technique is that ammonium sulfate,
the most frequently used precipitating agent, precipitates agarose preclud—
ing the formation of gels.44 In addition to agarose, silica gels are the gels
most employed in crystal growth experiments of small molecules. The most
common starting s01 consists of an aqueous solution of sodium silicate With
a speciﬁc gravity of 1.06 g/Cm3, and pH 11.4 0.2, Which is produced by
mixing under continuous stirring one part of commercial sodium silicate so-
lution (speciﬁc gravity 1.37 g/Cm3) and four parts twice-distilled water. This
solution is then mixed With an acid (for instance With hydrochloric 0r acetic
acid or an acid buffer) in the appropriate volume ratio in order to obtain
the required pH value. TWO important points must be noted. First, it is
known that at pH Q72 the gelling time is almost zero and coagulation
takes place instantaneously, yielding a useless product. Thus, try to avoid
this pH value in the last mixing process by pouring the sodium silicate so-
lution 0n the acid solution. Second, try to use strong and continuous mech-
anical stirring during the mixing process in order to avoid local
microvolumes at pH 7. Silica gel is not recommended for experiments re—
quiring alkaline pHs because of the formation of metal silicate hydrates.45
The advantages of this type of gel are in its easy and low-Cost production.
Its 10W optical transparency, Which is sometimes a problem, can be
enhanced by using, instead of a typical acid, an acidic cation exchanger.46

Silica gels made from tetramethOXisylane (TMOS) and teatraetOXisy—
lane (TEOS) are also used in gel growth experiments.“48 To obtain them,
just make aqueous solutions of TMOS 0r TEOS between 1% and 20% in
volume. The silica gel is produced after a variable gelling time by the
following reaction:

SiOCH3 —HOH—CH3Si <—> Si—O—Si + 2CH3OH
Which produces ethanol, hence decreasing the polarity of the solvent. Note
this polarity Change to estimate the Change of solubility of your protein.
This kind of silica gel has a very good optical transparency, can be used
at acid pH, and at basic range below pH 10 in the presence of salts. The
42 S. Finet, F. Bonneté, J . Frouin, K. Provost, and A. Tardieu, Eur. Biophys. J. 27, 263 (1998).
43 o. Vidal, M. C. Robert, and F. Boué, J. Cryst. Growth 192, 257 (1998).
44 M. R. Letherby and D. A. Young, J. Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans. 77, 1953 (1981).
45 R. K. Her, “The Colloidal Chemistry of Silica and Silicates.” Cornell University Press,
Ithaca, NY, 1955.

46 P. G. Barber and N. R. Simpson, J. Cryst. Growth 73, 400 (1985).
47 H. Arend and J . J . Connelly, J. Cryst. Growth 56, 642 (1982).
48 B. Cudney, S. Patel, and A. McPherson, Acta Crystallogr. D 50, 479 (1994).

"
"18","[8] COUNTERDIFFUSION CRYSTALLIZATION METHODS 147
silica gels made out of TMS 0r TMOS do not contain ionic byproducts, but
they adsorb protein molecules through hydrogen bonding and electrostatic
interactions.49 Again, mixing is an important step in ensuring the produc—
tion of a homogeneous gel. The larger the concentration of TMOS 0r
TEOS the smaller the pore size and diffusion coefﬁcient.

Space

Microgravity provides the right scenario to perform “Chemically Clean”
counterdiffusion experiments, i.e., experiments in Which additives to
remove convection are unnecessary. Space experiments share With gelled
experiments the ability to reduce buoyancy-driven convection, t0 hom-
ogenize and (under some circumstances”) reduce impurity concentration
at the crystal face, and to avoid sedimentation of crystals as well as the sec—
ondary nucleation of 3—D protein Clusters.51 In addition, the microgravity
scenario removes the plausible Chemical interaction of the gel With the
reactants used in the Chemical protocol, including the protein itself.

A diverse range of facilities to perform Classic free interface diffusion
experiments is currently offered by several space agencies,52 Which work
rather as an FID technique, i.e., a slow-miXing batch technique.18 Astrium
and the author’s team designed an “extended length” modiﬁcation of the
well-tested ESA Advanced Protein Crystallization Facility.53 This reactor
provides a 70—mm-10ng protein Chamber allowing counterdiffusion experi-
ments to work properly. The extended length reactor was used to monitor
the pattern formation by MaCh—Zhender interferometry Video microscopy.
The experiment conﬁrmed the fundamentals of the technique (see Fig. 4)
and yielded the best crystals obtained of tetragonal HEW lysozyme.54 An-
other CD microgravity experiment was performed by McPherson and
CO—WOIkers.55 They used ﬂash-frozen protein and precipitant solutions
inside plastic tubes. Once in the Russian MIR station the tubes were defro-
zen to start the CD experiment under microgravity. When compared With
49 o. Vida1,M. C. Robert, and F. Boué, J. Cryst. Growth 192, 271 (1998).

50 D. C. Carter, K. Lim, J. X. H0, B. S. Wright, P. D. Twigg, T. Y. Miller, J. Chapman,
K. Keeling, J . Ruble, P. G. Vekilov, B. R. Thomas, F. Rosenberger, and A. A. Chernov,
J. Cryst. Growth 196, 623 (1999).

51 A. McPherson, A. Malkin, Y. G. Kutnesov, and S. Koszelak, J. Cryst. Growth 168, 74

1996 .

521R. Gi)egé, J . Drenth, A. DucruiX, A. McPherson, and W. Saenger, Prog. Cryst. Growth
Charact. 30, 237 (1995).

53 J . S. Stapelmann, G. Smolik, W. Lork, and V. Pletser, J. Cryst. Growth 232, 468 (2001).

54 C. Sauter, F. Otalora, J. A. Gavira, O. Vidal, R. Giege, and J. M. Garcia—Ruiz, Acta
Crystallogr. D 57, 1119 (2001).

55 s. Koszelak, C. Leja, and A. McPherson, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 52, 449 (1996).

"
"19","148 CRYSTALS [8]
ﬂash-frozen batch experiments performed in the same mission, CD experi-
ments yielded better crystals that were arranged along the long protein
Chamber as predicted by theory.

Space experiments are highly demanding from safety and operation re—
quirement points of View. Automation and/or crew time requirements
hugely increase the cost, and in addition to complex logistics, make the
use of space experiments economically doubtfully When just high quality
crystals are sought. To overcome these difﬁculties, GCBs can be used for
microgravity experiments as passive reactors, Without any active mechan—
ism 0r crew manipulation, dramatically decreasing the cost of the experi-
ment. Bear in mind that to perform microgravity experiments one always
has to supply the reactors a few hours before the launch time. Let us call
this time the waiting time for launching. After take-Off, time is required
to reach an orbit around the Earth and (for the case of the International
Space Station) to be locked to the ISS and to allocate the reactor in the
proper place. We call this time the waiting time for orbiting. Taking into
account the above consideration, you prepare the GCB and punch the
capillaries into the gel With a depth x such that

x > (Dt)1/2

Where D is the diffusion coefﬁcient of the precipitating agent and t is the
waiting time for launching plus the waiting time for orbiting. During
the waiting times for launching and orbiting, the precipitating agent is dif-
fusing across the gel and convection is precluded. Once the GCB is orbiting
the Earth, the precipitating agent Will reach the protein solution ﬁlling the
capillaries and the crystallization Will take place in gel-free solution under
diffusion-controlled mass transport. Considering that it is possible to a110-
Cate 23 GCBs (138 capillaries) in a container of about 1 kg (solutions and
gels included), the GCB can be a simple and inexpensive device to perform
screening in space. Recently, an experiment has been successfully per—
formed in the 188 in the framework of the FrenCh—Russian Andromede
mission demonstrating that GCBs are able to perform CD experiments
under microgravity. A second ﬂight, With the objective of analyzing the
main features of the experiment in space versus grown gelled capillaries
in the framework of a numerical simulation including precipitation and
ﬂuid dynamics, is under design.

Some Insights into the Practical Use of Counterdiffusion Techniques

The coupling between diffusive mass transport and protein precipita—
tion is a complex matter that is beyond the scope of this reVieW. Neverthe—
less, With the information provided above it is possible to have a reasonable

"
"20","[8] COUNTERDIFFUSION CRYSTALLIZATION METHODS 149
understanding of the technique for practical purposes. Note that in any
counterdiffusion experiment there are four main parameters (see Fig. 2):

1. The length L of the capillary containing the protein solution. It also
sets the duration of the experiment. For most precipitants and for a
6—Cm-10ng capillary, the total duration of the experiment is between
2 and 3 weeks.

2. The length of the physical buffer. This is a gel layer that does not
interact chemically in the crystallization process. Its purpose is to
slow down the mixing of the solutions. For instance, in the gel
acupuncture method (protocol 1), the length of the buffer is twice the
length of immersion of the capillary in the gel (note that before
reaching the protein, the precipitating agent must travel the
immersion length down—outside the capillary—and up—inside the
capillary. Note also that this buffer layer does not eXist in protocol
11, When the protein is gelled, as the precipitant is in contact With
the protein.

3. The relative value of the volume occupied by the precipitating agent
With respect to those of the protein and buffer Chambers. This
parameter gives the trajectory in the solubility diagram Visiting
crystallization conditions scanned by the experiment (the Window of
scan CP,0—CP,f). The final concentration CH of precipitant at
equilibrium, is calculated by the ratio

CP,0
QVXw+m+mVW
Where VP is the volume of the precipitating agent, Vg is the volume
of the gel layer, and VC is the volume of the capillary (note that in
protocol 11, Vg is zero).

4. The concentration values of the precipitating agent and protein
solutions. The concentration of protein is not critical because, for
most cases, the solubility depends mostly on the precipitant concen—
tration. The precipitant concentration sets the rate at Which
the supersaturation wave moves and the total duration of the
experiment.

To Choose the starting conditions use the solubility diagram of your
protein as a function of the precipitant concentration. If it is unknown
(Which is usually the case), use just an ideal one, as shown in Fig. 7. Just
select a typical concentration for the protein solution to be crystallized,
for instance 5—20 mg/ml. This parameter is not critical. Then select a very
high concentration of precipitating agent CR0 to trigger the precipitation of
protein at high supersaturation as soon as the precipitating agent meets the

"
"21","150 CRYSTALS [8]
20 5 a 3 1, 5 5 3
a Labile 220116
g 16
g 14 Startmgcondltlon2Startmg condltlonl
O é i i i
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Precipitating agent concentration

FIG. 7. Ideal solubility diagram (in arbitrary units) showing the area screened by the
experiment (window of scan) as a function of the starting conditions.
protein solution. As discussed previously, the system will evolve toward
better crystallization conditions. Because of the ﬁnite size of the capillary
(5 0r 6 cm) the window of scan is ﬁnite too. It might happen that your
Choice of precipitant concentration was too high and the whole window
of scan falls inside the labile zone. If that happens, the protein will precipi—
tate across the whole capillary as an amorphous phase or as polycrystalline
spherulites. For instance, if we used a volume of precipitating agent equal
to the volume of the gel layer, the ﬁnal concentration of precipitating agent
in the capillary will be half of the initial concentration. For the second eX-
periment, select a concentration of precipitant lower than the above one,
and by itself the system will reach the right crystallization conditions. Note
also that by selecting the values of these volumes we can tune how wide the
screening of the phase diagram will be.

Some examples of protein crystals grown by counterdiffusion tech—
niques are shown in Fig. 8. For the case of new proteins, when no Clues
0n crystallization conditions are available, screening is mandatory.
There are several screening strategies56_58 and all them can be used for
CD experiments. The advantage of CD methods is that the number of
experiments to run is much smaller because screening of precipitant is
56 C. J. Carter and C. Carter, J. Biol. Chem. 254, 12219 (1979).

57 C. W. Carter, J12, Methods Enzymol. 1, 12 (1990).
58 B. Cudney, S. Patel, K. Weisgraber, Y. Newhouse, and A. McPherson, Acta Crystallogr. D
50, 414 (1994).

"
"22","[8] COUNTERDIFFUSION CRYSTALLIZATION METHODS 151
A ' 1"""": ' ’13?"" u »
"" 1 ‘1’?) *ﬁifh‘z 7: ‘ '
’ r — jQH-‘jF‘Ag-u . iLiﬁ'L-‘LgT 1"" _ ‘
’0 J. -- -~_» . a,
‘ — 3 :2. ‘ -Vlawt-VVL? .. ;‘ '.
' "" 7 , ' «if. 9:15?! 2 1
g;
f' ,3“; ‘  ‘ . ‘.
.W ’3 if- 0 ' , -' .\..‘_
"" ' W“
""-1, Ah 1
..- r r
‘ . I ”ﬁ'
f ""‘""7.§'7"". 5‘54:
s’igﬁr .‘w
' ,-‘_""¥: "" ..
D
E
A _ 7 \\, -
/ DA 1 | \
I x177"" , ' ) )
4a \.

FIG. 8. Some examples of protein crystals grown by CD methods. (A) Dehydroxiquinase
and (B) tetragonal lysozyme crystals, showing the gradient in crystal size arising from the
coupling between diffusion and precipitation. Compare With inset in Fig. 3. (C) Glucose
isomerase and (D) lysozyme crystal rods. (E) Thaumatin crystals grown in space.

"
"23","152 CRYSTALS [8]
13
12 I---l
a 8 lmTﬂiﬁm / //
5 ' ‘ ' ,' ”"" ‘ ‘ f ”
S 7 “f“?‘ifii'i ‘69 “5‘”? 1°“? /
E 6 . .
45 .- -,-__-,_‘_§_/§_1_._;__ .
E 5
4 /¢
_, _ w ffmmfl 5W“ w
1 V ' ” l f '
0 In"".
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Capillary diameter (mm)
FIG. 9. Volume of protein solution required for CD experiments as a function of the
capillary diameter, assuming the capillary to be cylindrical.
unnecessary. For screening, protocol 11 is recommended. No particular
screening strategy is suggested here but just consider that a couple of capil—
lary experiments per pH value and precipitant type is enough to ﬁnd the
best crystallization conditions. In addition to the number of trials, one im-
portant point to assess macromolecular crystallization techniques is the
waste of protein per experiment. For CD techniques, it depends obviously
0n the diameter of the Chosen capillary. We recommend ﬁlling the capillar—
ies up to a length of 50 or 60 mm in order to have a reasonably Wide
Window of scan. The plot in Fig. 9 shows the amount of protein solution re—
quired for the experiment as a function of the inner diameter of the capil—
lary assuming the capillary to be cylindrical. Note that for capillaries of
0.2 mm, the amount of protein required is less than 2 M1. Screening experi-
ments can performed With a 0.1—mm capillary using a protein solution
volume of less than 500 nl per experiment. The fabrication of capillaries
of smaller diameter is under way.
Screening experiments can also be performed directly in electro-
phoretic gels. After running this technique, the purest protein available is

"
"24","[8] COUNTERDIFFUSION CRYSTALLIZATION METHODS 153
inside a strip (or spot for 2—D electrophoresis) of the gel layer, either poly-
acrylamide, SephadeX, silica, 0r agarose. Using native electrophoresis, that
strip of gel containing the fresh puriﬁed protein can be used directly
to screen crystallization conditions by the counterdiffusion method (but
also by other crystallization techniques). Basically, this strip of gel is a
one—dimensional protein Chamber, just as gelled capillary volumes are in
the technique described above. Then, soaking one of the ends of the gel
strip in a solution of precipitating agent can provide useful information to
be used in further screening or even directly in crystallization experiment
using capillaries. The technique has been demonstrated to work for differ-
ent model proteins using different gels as electrophoretic substrates,59 but
remains to be demonstrated for actual cases With new macromolecules.
High-Throughput Protein Crystallization
Triggered by the recent results of genomic projects, high throughput

(HT) macromolecular crystallization is the response to the future massive
availability of biological macromolecules to be crystallized.60’61 High-
throughput crystallization efforts until now have involved vapor diffusion62
or microbatch methods.63 This means that for successfully crystallized pro—
teins, HT techniques need to scale up the conditions to have larger crystals
for diffraction, to catch the crystals With a loop, to freeze them before
obtaining X-ray diffraction data, and to screen them later for the best crys—
tals among the total number of crystals grown in successful drops. Counter-
diffusion techniques offer an alternative, removing from the projects these
critical (and not yet properly evaluated in the HT framework) postcrystal-
lization difﬁculties. In fact, using the counterdiffusion crystallization tech—
nique it is possible to screen simultaneously for optimal concentrations
for (1) crystal growth, (2) the incorporation of a strong anomalous scatter—
ing halide, and (3) cryogenic solution, in a single capillary tube. This can be
achieved by allowing to diffuse into the capillary containing the protein
solution, a solution containing the precipitant, the metal halides, and the
cryoprotectant. Because of their relative molecular radii, the precipitant
is the ﬁrst to diffuse into the capillary containing the protein solution,
59 J . M. Garcia-Ruiz, A. Hernéndez-Hernéndez, J . Lépez-jaramillo, and B. Thomas, J. Cryst.

Growth 232, 149 (2001).
60 L. Stewart, R. Clark, and C. Behnke, Drug Discov. Today 7, 187 (2002).
61 R. C. Stevens, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 10, 558 (2000).
62 U. Mueller, L. Nyarsik, M. Horn, H. Rauth, T. Przewieslik, W. Saenger, H. Lehrach, and

H. Eickhoff, J. Biotechnol. 85, 7 (2001).
63 J . Luft, J . Wolfley, I. Jurisica, J . Glasgow, S. Fortier, and G. T. DeTitta, J. Cryst. Growth

232, 591 (2001).

"
"25","154 CRYSTALS [9]
crystallizing the protein, followed by the metal halides and later the cryo—
protectant (i.e., the right sequence of events). In addition, the gradual incre-
ment of the concentration of salt and cryoprotectant helps avoid cracking of
crystals due to fast soaking. The technique has already been demonstrated
by GaVira et al.64 for the case of insulin crystals. The crystals in the capillaries
can be placed directly in the cryostream for data collection using a conven-
tional laboratory or synchrotron X-ray source. High redundancy data were
used to obtain a Patterson solution from the anomalous signal of iodine and
structure determination by single anomalous scattering (SAS) was obtained
by a self—optimization screening process in a single capillary tube. The
electron density map was obtained in 3 weeks without touching the crystal
at any time. This procedure may be applied for high-throughput screening
and structure determination of proteins in general.65
Acknowledgments
The development of this technique and the details related to its practical implementation
have been the result of a number of PhD. theses by F. Otalora, A. Moreno, J . A. Gavira, and
M. L. Novella. Graduate student L. A. Gonzalez implemented most of the GCB experiments
and helped to set the protocols. Dr. F. Lépez-Jaramillo, Dr. J . Ng (University of Alabama at
Huntsville), Dr. C. Viedma (University Complutense, Madrid), Dr. D. Rondén (Puleva
Biotech, Granada), M. A. Hernandez, and Dr. Eva Maﬁas also contributed to the
improvement of counterdiffusion as universal technique for macromolecular crystallization.
The manuscript was reviewed by Dr. J . Cartwright and Dr. J . Lépez Jaramillo. Financial
support from the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnologia, CSIC, and European Space
Agency is also acknowledged.
64 J . A. Gavira, D. Toh, J . Lopéz-Jaramillo, J . M. Garcia-Ruiz, and J . D. Ng, Acta Crystallogr.
D 58, 1147 (2002).
65 J . D. Ng, J . A. Gavira, and J . M. Garcia-Ruiz, J. Structural Biol. 142, 218 (2003).
[9] Growth Sectors and Crystal Quality
By MARIE—CLAIRE ROBERT, BERNARD CAPELLE, and BERNARD LORBER
Introduction
As is true for most of crystals grown from solutions, crystals of bio-
logical macromolecules are faceted, except for the surfaces in contact with
the growth vessels. This feature introduces differences between zones
arising from the different growth horizons within the same crystal; these
zones are called growth sectors. In the ﬁrst part of this Chapter, we will
Copyright 2003, Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
METHODS IN ENZYMOLOGY, VOL. 368 0076—6879/03 $35.00

"
