"","x"
"1","Original title: GENE EXPRESSION VARIATIONS DURING DROSOPHILA METAMORPHOSIS IN 188 VS. RPM MICROGRAVITY AND BEYOND
Drosophlla GENE Experiment In the Spanish Soyuz MlSSIOh
to the ISS: ||. Effects of the containment constraints
Raul Herranz (1 >“), D. A. LaVan (1), F. J aVier Medina (2), J ack J .W.A. van Leon (3) and Roberto Marco (1)
(1) Departamento de Bioquz’mica-LI. Biomédicas “Alberto Sols ” (UAM-CSIC), Madrid, Spain
(2) Centro de Investigaciones Biolo’gicas (CSIC), Ramiro de Maeztu 9, E-28040, Madrid, Spain
(3) Dutch Experiment Support Center, DESC @ OCB-A CTA-Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
* Corresponding address: Arzobispo Mercillo, sn CP28029 Madrid (SPAIN) E-mail: raul.herranz@uam.es. Phone: 0034 91 497 54 09
Abstract levitation. Sounding rockets and satellites are
19th? GENE experimeflt PerfOTmed during an 11 days SOYUZ available options but at the present moment the
M1ss10n t0 the International Space. Station (188), we intended International Space Station (183) is the best
to determine if nnerograwty affects Drosophzla . . . .
metamorphosis processes. Control experiments were alternatlve for long duratlon m10r0grav1ty researeh.
performed including a 1 g ground control parallel to the ISS NeVertheleSSa the assembly 0f the WhOIC Stathh
ﬂight samples and a Random Position Machine microgravity remains to be completed and has been exposed to
simulated control- A Preliminary analYSiS 0f the resuhs successive delays, which also affected the European
indicates that ﬁve hundred to one thousand genes change their C olumbus module. After years Of delays the
express10n proﬁles depending on the cut-off levels selected. .
Especially affected among them are the mitochondrial ones mOdUIe was launched 111 February 2008' .
(an example with the respiratory chain is presented). We show Apart from pOhthal, hhahmal ahd teCthIOglcal
here that there is a synergic effect of the constraints introduced limitations and delays, the design Of a biological
to meet the requirements of the space experiment (mainly, a experiments to be conducted in the 133 have to
COM .Step and the use Of hermetlcauy Closed .Type'l comply with rigorous safety controls and must be
containers). The cold transport step to the launch s1te was . . . . .
introduced to SI OW down the pupal development. The almost automatlc, requlrlng as httle of crew tlme as
hermetically closed Type I containers were required to ensure P05511313 1h OCtOber 20039 ah 11 days Soyuz
the containment of the ﬁxative (acetone) in the experiment. As Mission (ISS expedition 8) t0 the station to replace
shown here, the oxygen concentration inside the container was the two-member ISS crew tOOk place. AS part Of
n?” Optimal hm fully compatible With puma deVClOpmem' It .is this Spanish Cervantes Scientific Mission (see ref. 2
highly likely that such combined enVironmental effects w111 . . . .
become a common ﬁnding in these types of studies as they for OVCWICW)’ seYeral bIOIOglcal experlnients were
become more complicated and extensive. They could open the Performed IhCIUdlhg the GENE experlment. The
way to understand how the gene expression patterns and the experiment samples returned With the Soyuz 7
actual PhCHOtYPCS can adjust to the . enVimnment- These capsule in dedicated transport boxes after 11 days
ﬁndings indicate the importance of a Vigorous ground based in real microgravity. In the GENE experiment, we
program in support of real nnerograwty experiments. Only . . . .
than we can utilize the 188 in order to understand the Intended to determme 110W m10r0grav1ty affeCFS
consequences of the modiﬁed environment in outer space on Drosophila metamorph0s1s processes. For thls
living organisms. purpose, we have been studying whole genome
expression with mieroarray technologies for
Performing biological experiments in real Drosophila (3). Further details about the GENE
microgravity conditions is not an easy task. Gravity experiment design have been published previously
is a prevalent vector on the Earth surface that can (4).
not be eliminated, so the use of extraterrestrial The main objective of the present study is to
devices to study its effects on any system is focus on the constraints we encountered for the
unavoidable. On ground we can just compensate the GENE experiment. Two questions are addressed in
gravity force using simulation devices as the this paper:
Random Position Paehines (RPM) (1), or magnetic
1

"
"2","Original title: GENE EXPRESSION VARIATIONS DURING DROSOPHILA METAMORPHOSIS IN 188 vs. RPM MICROGRAVITY AND BEYOND

1) Could we study the 5 days long pupal develop- effect of excessive developmental asynchronies in
ment period in an 8 days long mission to the 188? the RNA experiments.

2) Can the sensibilization of biological systems, In addition to the 188 samples, several control
using suboptimal conditions of temperature or experiments were analysed including a 1g ground
oxygen for instance, facilitate the identiﬁcation of control parallel to the ISS ﬂight samples, and one
the gravity responding group of genes? Random Position Machine microgravity simulated

control. The RPM experiment reproduced the same
This apparently simple GENE experiment, just constraints as the ISS experiment, although it
exposure of pupae to microgravity during a short should be noted that random positioning is only a
ﬂight to the 188, had to meet different constraints in simulation of real microgravity and has its inherent
order to be carried out successfully. First of all, it constraints (1). For the RPM we set a maximum
was necessary to deal with the containment speed between -60 and +60°/s with random interval
requirements associated to the use of ﬁxatives in and a maximum distance of the samples to the
space. In fact, the preservation of the samples until center of 4 cm. This generated a maximum residual
recovery is performed in conditions already acceleration of 10'4g (see also 1). A second RPM
predeﬁned in previous studies (5). A mild ﬁxative, experiment without temperature or oxygen
acetone, in minimal quantities was used. In spite of constraints was also run.
this, three levels of containment were still required,
namely, two plastic bags and the hermetically 1 Pupal development is delayed under
closed Type-I container (6) that could not be suboptimal temperature and oxygen
opened at any time during the ﬂight. The container concentration
holds an electrically powered motor that can be Drosophila, as all insects and invertebrates, is a
activated to break tiny glass ampoules containing eototherm animal (cold blooded) that has no
the acetone included inside the bags, releasing the temperature control system like those found in
ﬁxative at the appropriated time. As will be shown many vertebrates. Life and development occurs
in this paper, the modiﬁed Type-1 container holds optimally at room temperature, but in the case of
enough oxygen to allow the complete development Drosophila can proceed at a wide range of
of the 40 Drosophila Oregon R strain pupae temperatures ranging from +14°C to +29°C. At
enclosed in it. Secondly, since the samples could temperatures below 20°C, the development of the
not be prepared at the launch site, they had to be ﬂies is delayed more and more as lower
transported there. Thus it was necessary to slow temperatures are selected, and is almost arrested
down the pupal development during transport by near 14°C. Lower temperatures may decrease the
exposing them to a lower temperature during ﬁve rate of pupae survival (7,8,9). Following the
days, the time of the transport from Madrid to scheduled temperature proﬁle of the experiments,
Baikonour in the case of the Spanish Soyuz the actual temperature during the ISS mission were
Mission. It turned out that controlling the amount of recorded during transport and in ﬂight. The
oxygen available in the hermetically sealed preparation of the samples in Western Europe
container also extended the period of pupal (Madrid and Toulouse) and the transportation at
development. This allowed the recovery of fully 14°C which allowed for arresting nearly all
developed, black pupae at the end of the development until launch from Baikonur
experiment, that could eolose into living imagoes if Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. This included a cold
oxygen was again supplied to them. Non black step of approximately 100 hours from preparations
pupae, that could have prematurely died during the in the laboratory until delivery of the samples to the
ﬂight or have been damaged during the recovery on Soyuz integration team, followed by 15 hours at
ground, were discarded avoiding the undesirable 18°C (room temperature conditions) preceding the
launch of the Soyuz. In the Soyuz, the samples were
2

"
"3","Original title: GENE EXPRESSION VARIATIONS DURING DROSOPHILA METAMORPHOSIS IN 188 vs. RPM MICROGRAVITY AND BEYOND
installed and remained passively at the same The fact that the hermetioity of the Type-I container
temperature in the cosmonauts” module. limited the amount of air inside the container gave
Temperature reached 21°C and then ﬂuctuated the solution to prevent that some pupae eolosed out
slowly between 20 and 21°C until the containers before ﬁxation. Thus, somewhat serendipitously,
were transferred to the ISS Aquarius-2 incubator (2) the constraints one has to face in a space ﬂight
in the Russian segment adjusted at 22°C. Pupae study may also provide some optimization. If we
were allowed to develop for 3.5 days. Then, the two use a range of 2.0 to 3.5 microliters of air for each
GENE containers were removed by the Spanish pupae an hour we gain 2-3 extra days until the
astronaut Pedro Duque and inserted in the power eolosing of the imagoes occurs, without
supply that activated the acetone release from the compromising the overall survival of the imagoes.
ampoules. Containers were introduced immediately Our experiments were performed using two bags
in the Kryogen freezer at -22°C in the Russian with 20-22 pupae each in a Type-1 container with
segment of the 188. The complete timeline of the around 30 m1 of free space for air so the amount of
experiment was 192 hours. air was near 3 mioroliter/pupae°hour, bringing just
In figure 1, we present experiments that show the time for the required delay. Thus, both
that pupal development was sufﬁciently delayed to suboptimal temperature and hypoxia conditions
cope with this 192 hours experiment duration. were included in our 188 experiment, conditions
Pupation in Drosophila usually lasts 4 to 5 days in optimizing the experiment. Since development is
optimal conditions, and up to 6 days (135-145 normal under these conditions, we did not expect to
hours) at 22°C. The first constraint introduced was a detect effects on gene expression associated with
cold transportation step (lasting 4 days). Keeping these constraints. Just in case, proper controls under
the temperature at 14°C can delay and almost arrest, the same development conditions but the
Drosophila development until delivery to the Soyuz microgravity exposure were performed, by a
crew. But in this situation about one in every three parallel 1g on ground control during the mission or
imagoes already eoloses on the eighth day, during the simulation experiments.
therefore
En_cl of the scheduled experiment
I
I
8 785 85114-118 h at 14°c ‘
3 60 35 85 (COLD STEP-Open) /' (COLD STEP_-Closed)
E 5'5: 5’5: ll> I 1,5 - 3,5 pl aIr/ pupa h
3 8,5 8:5 . / I B
°\ 40 25 25 |
25 £5 (COLD STEP-Closed)
85 55 l/ I <1,5 |.Ilair/ pupah
20 ”5 U ' I
4 days 6 days 8 days 10 days 12 days
Time since pupation
Figure 1. Modiﬁcation of pupal developmental time by the Mission Constraints, temperature (114-118h cold step) and oxygen
limitation (hermetically sealed containers during 192h).
3

"
"4","Original title: GENE EXPRESSION VARIATIONS DURING DROSOPHILA METAMORPHOSIS IN 188 vs. RPM MICROGRAVITY AND BEYOND
Table 1. Summary of the experiments conditions and results (number of genes that show signiﬁcantly altered expression levels
using a 1.7 fold cut-off value with Bioconductor software (Benj amini-Hochberg false discovery rate p<0,05 algorithm).

2 A ground simulation methodology, effects of different environmental conditions will
RPM provides results close to those become a common ﬁnding in this type of studies as
obtained in real space microgravity they become more complicated and extensive.
sensitized experiments

RNA was extracted from all samples to test the 3 Could we identify a group of gravity
difference in expression proﬁles during Drosophila responding genes in these sensitized
development with one of the current more powerful experiments?
technologies, a Drosophila complete genome An important ﬁnding of our experiments, of a
microarray (AffymetrixTM version 1.0) (10). A more general nature than those just related to space,
validation of the experiment has been carried out is the realization that the effects of the external,
using quantitative RT-PCR with twenty genes environmental parameters can be better detected
including the different groups of expression proﬁles and studied when the system is sensitized by being
(Figure included as supplementary material). A far from optimal. This means that the effect of
summary of the experiments performed is included temperature, pressure, anOXia or even the presence
in table 1, including real microgravity (ISS) and of weak hypomorphie mutations, etc can be
simulated microgravity (RPM) conditions. It is synergic and useful to characterize the system.
worthwhile noticing that we have performed Unfortunately, until a new Drosophila experiment
experiments in the RPM with and without the is selected for being run in the 188, this concept
temperature/oxygen constraints. A preliminary cannot be explored in real microgravity. We are left
analysis of the results indicates that five hundred with continuing experiments on the ground using
genes change their expression proﬁles in both real low and high gravity simulation approaches. But,
and simulated microgravity. A group especially how can we deal with the complexity linked to the
affected consists of energy related components of analysis of overlapping environmental factors?
the mitochondria (11). Mieroarray analyses of the A systems biology point of View could help us to
RNAs extracted from ﬂies ﬁxed in the ISS revealed deal at least partially with this complexity. It is
that a relatively large set of genes (15% 0f the total known that in complex systems different input
number assayed) experienced a significant signals can generate similar responses and similar
expression change in these conditions. The pre- input signals can activate different pathways,
exposure had an effect by itself on the overall gene always depending on the background steady state of
expression observed after pupae development at the system. The use of suboptimal conditions could
normal temperature, but the two environmental help us to overcome biological system robustness
factors act synergistically (12). Similar results have and change the system equilibrium to additional
been obtained with RPM simulation. The Mission alternative steady state(s) in which changes could
constraints, including the cold transport step, were be much easier to identify. Just as an example using
found to affect synergistically the response of the the data about the gene expression proﬁle in a
microgravity exposure; both real and simulated particular functional system, is shown here the
(table 1). It is highly likely that such combined oxidative electron transport phosphorylation chain.

4

"
"5","Original title: GENE EXPRESSION VARIATIONS DURING DROSOPHILA METAMORPHOSIS IN ISS vs. RPM MICROGRAVITY AND BEYOND
A) RPM non sensitized B) RPM sensitized
’azzur'ﬂ”} 9’! ‘55-5. 4 'I ‘ qﬂﬂiT Egg _:_:LZL§LE‘:3._I_L : ::;::=.-:=r.. 9t! .. t g‘ '(l ""I W
_.,,:;x s ‘ "" ““M {f 9 T > f;
C) RPM and ISS sensitized D) 1 '33 sensitized .,
mum V'f‘f‘Fﬁﬁ‘f'” . . g- “ ’m .. ""“ 5';Z‘S’f‘fg'E‘E;g5yLtEi-‘ii-fi'inféi-i:A;.-_.»,~'.~..-;.-.-4.1:??-.-.-.-;:.;;;.;.;;;,;;:7 . A °"" ?:?:Kc”
Lair... V. 9"" .. I ""‘1“in 4“ m . 1| w ... ‘_ ‘Il
g w» ~ . w x W. a £2? M"" V
Figure 2. Phosphorylation components in the oxidative electron transport chain affected in our real and simulated microgravity
experiments. Affected genes are shown in black boxes with arrows (in red in online version). A) RPM in non sensitized conditions, B)
Genes exclusively affected in the RPM under sensitized conditions, C) Genes affected both in the RPM and ISS in sensitized conditions and D)
Genes exclusively affected in the ISS in sensitized conditions. Figure obtained from Gene Spring software (13).

In ﬁgure 2A we illustrate affected subunits in the We should add that the effect triggered by the
RPM under optimal conditions, i. e. in an constraints is not due to the anoxia itself but to the
experiment in non-sensitized conditions. Only one synergism of the different constraints with
component is unregulated in simulated microgravity microgravity, simulated or real. Two reasons justify
without constraints so we could hardly claim that this assertion. First, 1g controls developed under the
this cellular process is affected. However, it may same constraints have been carried out and used in
well be that just only one of their elements is. In the comparisons. Secondly, from a previously study
sensitized experiments we observe that several (13) we have conﬁrmed that the genes detected in
subunits are affected. Although it may well be that this experiment are not related to the genes that
not exactly the same in the two conditions (only in change their expression proﬁles in anoXia
the RPM, ﬁgure 2B, RPM and ISS common conditions, for example, respiratory chain
affected subunits, 2C, and only in the ISS, 2D). It components are barely affected in those
seems that the microgravity condition, real or experiments.
simulated, can modify the system expression levels
but it does it by acting on different components of 4 Concluding remarks
the electron transport chain and the ATP synthetase. Performing experiments in space is still not
In our View, the system robustness has been trivial. Technical constraints that are supposed to
overcome in the two similar but not identical have little inﬂuence on the system could have deep
conditions and similar components change but not effects on the results, so comprehensive rounds of
exactly in the same way. This conclusion is based ground simulation experiments are mandatory
on a particular cut-off to select the genes that can be before any space mission is actually performed.
considered to be modiﬁed. Deciding which cut-off Moreover, our analyses could open the way to
to apply is somewhat arbitrary in the system understand how the gene expression patterns and
biology approach. We have started using a different actual phenotypes can adjust to the different
statistical approach based on correlations to environmental conditions. In doing so we have
overcome this problem. begun to identify the particular set of genes affected

5

"
"6","Original title: GENE EXPRESSION VARIATIONS DURING DROSOPHILA METAMORPHOSIS IN 188 vs. RPM MICROGRAVITY AND BEYOND

by the absence of gravity (14). Magnetic levitation Mission to the International Space Station. Effects of

provides a different approach to simulate cold transportation. Micrograwty Selence and

microgravity 0n the ground. Experiments TeChHOIOgY- 19 (2)3 454912007)- .

equivalent to the GENE protocol using this 5' Herranz EL Hu§son ,D’ Villa A9, Pastor M9 Medm?‘ FL

levitation instrument are in progress. In particular Marco R MOdlﬁcatlonS m baSIC handlmg teChmqueS
. . . . . ’ to study the consequences of the Drosophila

we are 1ntr1gued by the amplificatlon 0f the . ,,
. melanogaster exposure to the Space enVironment J .

expiess10n changes .by these treatments When gravit.Physi01. 12(2) 51-60 (2005).

additional constraints 1n the growmg conditlons are 6. Biorack 0n D1. ES A SP-1091, Eds. N. Longdon, V.

introduced, such as extreme temperatures, weak David, February 1988, ESA/ESTEC, Noordwijk, the

hypomorphic mutants that by themselves may not Netherlands.

result in strong enough phenotypes. At this point, 7. Lee, RE and Denlinger DL Insects at low temperature.

the effects of containment (limited oxygen, 10w Chapman and Ha11,NY 1991.

temperatures, and possible desiccation), in order to 8- J€HS€H, D» 0V6fgaafd, J & SF€HS€H J G Th? inﬂu€nC€

overcome the system robustness, may be necessary Oftaevelopmental stage. on cold shock res1stance and

in order to detect effects due to microgravity. ab111ty t0 cold-harden 1n Drosophzla melanogaster J .

Insect Phys.(2007), 53, 179-186.
9. Qin W Neal SJ Robertson RM Westwood JT

Acknowled ements ’ ’ . ’ . . ’

The skilful Wark 0f the c r ew 0f the 8th Soyuz t0 the 188 Walker VK. Cold hardening and transcriptional change

mission, including Pedro Duque, in the operation of the g1 935139-28]? 1n3ie1an0gaster. Insect M01 BIOL 2005

procedures in the 188 is gratefully acknowledged. Also ec, ( )' ._ ' . .

. . , 10. Dalma-Welszhausz DD, Wamngton J, Tammoto

the support of the ESA team, 1n particular Mr Jesus EY M' (:1 CG Th ff t' G Ch' 1 tf .

Jimenez, Ms Nathalie Pottier and Mr. F abrizio F esta was ’ 1ya a M th d6]: yme {1200212101133 2 5:1 orm.

crucial. Dutch Space provided the MAMBAs for the an overwew. e O S hzymo. ,’ ' ._ '

. . . 11. Herranz, R., Benguria, A., Fernandez-Plneda, E.,
experiment. We also thank Mrs. Aida V111a (UAM, .

. . . Medlna, F .J ., Gasset, G., van Loon, J .J ., Zaballos, A.,
Madrid) and Mrs. Brigitte Eche (GSBMS-CNES, M R G E . V . t' D .
Toulouse, France) for excellent technical assistance arco, , ' ene XPESSPH aria lOHS urmg

. . . . Drosophzla Metamorph0s1s 1n Space. The GENE

during the preparation of the experlments. ThIS work . . . . .

was supported by Grants from the Spanish “Plan Experiment. 1n the Spanish Cervantes M1ss10n t0 the

Nacional de Investigacién Cientiﬁca y Desarrollo 188' J GraV1t Phys101. 12 (1): 253-4 QODS)‘ ,

, . ,, 12. Marco R., R. Herranz, D.A.Lavan, A. Benguria, I.
Tecnologico Ref. Nos. ESP2001-4522-PE, and L' V'd' L J L (:1 G G t F J M d'
ESP2003—09475—C02—01, and from the Netherlands Opez' 1 “6“” ° ° ea“ r°= ° .asse’ °. ° .6 ma
Institute for Space Research NWO-SRON, MG-057. and J' V an Loon. Exposure to Micrograwty 1n the
A ﬁgure With quantitative RT-PCR validation data has International Space .Statlon (188} or in the groand
been provided as supplementary material. produces an extenswe change 1n gene express1on

during Drosophila pupal development. Science

References (Submitted for publication).

1. van Loon JJWA. Some history and use of the random 13 ' Girardot F’ Monmer V9 Tr1e01re H' Genome W146
positioning machine, RPM, in gravity related research. analys1s Of common and spemﬁc stress responses 1n
Adv Space Res 39 1161-65 (2007) adult drosophila melanogaster. BMC Genomics.

2. van Loon J .J .W.A., F .J . Medina, H. Stenuit, E. Istasse, 5(1):74 QOM)‘ ,

M. Heppener, R. Marco. The National _ ESA Soyuz 14. Leandro L.J.,, N.J. Szewczyk, A. Benguria, R.
missionsAndromede, Marco Polo, Odissea, Cervantes, Herranz, D' Lavan, F' J' Medina ’ G' Gasset, J' yan
DELTA and Eneide. Microgravity sci. technol. XIX- Loon, , C' A' Conley, anti R' Marco Comparatlve
5/6 (2007). analys1s 0f Drosophzla melanogaster and

3. Adams et al. The genome sequence of Drosophila Caenorhabditis elegans gene expression experiments in
melanogaster. Science. 287(5461):2185-95(2000). the European Soyuz Flights to the International Space

4. Herranz R. D.A. LaVan A. Benguria P. Duque L Station. Advances in Space Research. 40(4):506-12
.J. Leandro, G. Gasset , F . J . Medina, J. van Loon, R. (2007)' , , ,
Marco. The “GENE” Experiment in the Spanish Soyuz 15' Gene Spimg GX 7'3 Expressmn Analys1s.

http ://WWW. agilent. com/chem/genesprmg
6

"
