"","x"
"1","Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2015) 27:61—74
DOI 10.1007/s12217—015—9413—5
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Results and Experiences from the Execution of the GeoFlow
Experlments 0n the ISS
J. M. Ezquerro Navarro - J. J. Fernéndez -
J. Rodriguez - A. Laverén-Simavilla - V. Lapuerta
Received: 25 April 2014 / Accepted: 4 September 2014 / Published online: 23 J anuary 2015
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2015
Abstract This paper introduces the GeOFlow missions that Abbreviations
were performed under microgravity conditions on board
the Columbus Laboratory in the International Space Sta— B.USOC Belgium USOC
tion (ISS) from the scientific Operations standpoint. A brief BIOLAB Biology Laboratory
introduction to the three GeOFlow experiments: GeoFlow, Col—CC Columbus Control Centre
GeOFlow—2 and GeOFlow—2b is given, being their main E—USOC Spanish USOC
purpose to capture some essential features of the Earth EC Experiment Container
mantle convection. The major scientific requirements of EDR European Drawer Rack
each of the experiments are presented as an introduc— EPM European Physiology Module
tion for the scientific Operations preparation and concept ESA European Space Agency
development description. Then, the activities performed in FSL Fluid Science Laboratory
order to execute each of the experiments are presented IPV ISS Procedure Viewer
in detail, focusing on the resolution of the several issues ISPR International Standard Payload Rack
encountered during the mission. The outcomes and lessons ISS International Space Station
learned from such long and complex missions Close this MARS Italian USOC
paper. MMA Microgravity Measurement Assembly
MSL Material Science Laboratory
Keywords International Space Station - Columbus - MVIS Microgravity Vibration Isolation System
Geophysical ﬂows - Thermal gradient PD Payload Developer
PI Principal Investigator
SAMS Space Acceleration Measurement System
SHA Secure Hash Algorithm
TM Telemetry
J . M. Ezquerro Navarro - J . J . Fernandez - J . Rodriguez - UHB User Home Base
A. Laverén—Simavilla USOC User Support and Operations Centre
Universidad Politecnica de Madrid, Spanish User Support and WSI Wollaston Shearing Interferometry
Operations Centre (E—USOC), Centro de Investigacién y
Desarrollo Aeroespacial, Campus de Montegancedo UPM,
28223, Pozuelo de Alarcén, Madrid, Spain
V- Lapuerta (E) Introduction
Universidad Politecnica de Madrid, Escuela Técnica Superior de
galgeﬁfdﬁgosngggws’ Plaza de Gardenal Clsnems’ 3’ The purpose of the three GeoFlow experiments: GeoFlow,
6-111311; mariavictoria.lapuerta@upm.es GeOFlow—2 and GeOFlow—2b (Pacros 2007; Mazzoni 2012)
@ Springer

"
"2","62 Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2015) 27:61—74
is to capture some essential features of the Earth mantle Operations Execution” are addressed to the preparation
convection; they study the motion and behaViour of a ﬂuid and execution of such complex missions and provide an
contained between two concentric spheres, representing the overView of the activities and responsibilities of E—USOC.
geophysical ﬂuid inside the Earth. The results from the In section “Mission Science Data Outcomes” the outcomes
experiments execution have provided relevant data to under— of the missions are described. Section “Operational Mission
stand the behaVior of the Earth’s core and mantle (Feudel Outcomes and Lessons Learned” eXplains the lesson
et a1. 2011, 2013; Futterer et a1. 2012, 2013). learned and in section “Conclusions” the conclusions are
The three GeoFlow experiments were performed on presented.
board the Columbus Laboratory (Frutos and Rodriguez
2008; Ezquerro et a1. 2012), in the International Space
Station (188). The Columbus Laboratory was successfully The Geoﬂow Experiments
launched on the 7th of February 2008 in the Space Shut—
tle Atlantis. Once this module was attached to the 188, The GeoFlow experiments are funded by BSA and their
the first European laboratory for long term experiments on aim is to study the convective motion of geophysical ﬂows,
microgravity became a reality, being the main contribu— such as the thermal convective motion in the Earth’s core.
tion from the European Space Agency (ESA) to the ISS. The Principal Investigator (PI) of the GeoFlow eXperi—
The Columbus module hosts several International Stan— ments is Professor Christoph Egbers, from the Brandenburg
dard Payload Racks (ISPRs) dedicated to the research Technical University of Cottbus, Germany, whose research
on different scientific fields,the Fluid Science Laboratory group coordinates an international team of scientists and
(FSL) (Dupont et a1. 2004; Albanese et a1. 2007), the researchers.
Material Science Laboratory (MSL) (Enz et a1. 2011), The experiments’ setup consists of two concentric spher—
the Biology Laboratory (BIOLAB), the European Phys— ical shells containing the sample ﬂuid between them. By
iology Module (EPM) and the European Drawer Rack applying a High Voltage to the inner sphere, making use
(EDR). In particular, the FSL accommodates and provides of the dielectrophoretic effect, a central force field is cre—
the necessary resources to the experiments focused on ated. MicrograVity conditions are necessary to eliminate
physics of ﬂuids and, more specifically, to the GeoFlow the effect of the one—directional force field that is other—
experiments. wise present, modifying the central force field. A thermal
For the preparation and execution of the operations of gradient is also created between the two shells by apply—
the different experiments carried out on board Columbus, ing different temperatures to the inner and outer spheres.
ESA adopted a decentralized approach based on several Finally, it is possible to establish a spinning movement to
centres named as USOCs: User Support and Operations the spheres by rotating the tray where they are mounted. A
Centres. These centres are distributed over different ESA sketch of the physical configuration can be seen in Fig. 1
countries in Europe. The diverse ISPRs/payloads and the (Mazzoni 2012).
manifold experiments taking place on them are assigned to Therefore, the scientific parameters imposed are:
the USOCs, based on their areas of expertise. In .particu— 1) High Voltage
lar, the three GeoFlow experiments have been ass1gned to 2) Temperature Difference
and operated by the E—USOC, the USOC located in Madrid, 3) Rotation Spee d
Spain. The E—USOC. acts on behalf of BSA as respons1b1e 4) GeoFlow—2 & GeoFlow—2b Col d Side Temperature
centre for the operations of the GeoFlow experiments, and
as support centre of FSL. MARS, the Italian USOC, sup— The ranges of the values used for the scientific parameters
ported E—USOC during the GeoFlow experiments acting as in the three experiments are shown in Table 1.
responsible centre for the FSL rack. The E—USOC provides A setpoint is defined by a combination of High Volt—
an interface between the scientific community—the users age, Rotation Speed, Temperature Difference and Cold Side
of the facilities on board the Columbus laboratory—and the Temperature (this last one was a control introduced for
ISS. GeoFlow—2 and —2b). A time lapse of up to 1 h has to be
This paper describes the activities performed in order allowed to reach steady state after setting or modifying any
to prepare and execute the operations of the three eXperi— setpoint: 40 min for temperature Changes and 20 min for
ments: GeoFlow, GeoFlow—2 and GeoFlow—2b in the ISS, Rotation Speed Changes. No specific time lapse is defined
and presents the lessons learned from these missions. In for modifications in the High Voltage value, but this one is
section “The Geoﬂow Experiments” a brief description of always performed along with a modification in the temper—
the three experiments is presented. Section “Science Opera— ature settings and therefore a 40 min lapse is applied. After
tions Concept” is dedicated to the operations concept. reaching steady state the diagnosis takes p1ace,then an accu—
Sections “Science Operations Preparation” and “Science racy and stability of the temperature settings in the order
@ Springer

"
"3","Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2015) 27:61—74 63
Fig. 1 SKCtCh 0f the physical Outor shell Dielectrical ﬂuid
configuration (radius R).
temperature To) | ﬁkotation rate £2
5:32:13 ""‘9“ 0‘ 3 (:entml force ﬁeld m (High
diagnostics \ oltagc)
\ Innershell
(radius R1.
temperature T,)
of 0.1 K is required to produce valuable results whereas Since the refractive indeX is sensitive to density gradients
no specific requirement is placed on the other scientific caused by temperature Changes, these interference phenom—
parameters as long as their values are known. The scientific ena become Visible as fringes and can be utilized to detect
protocol aims to scan a certain amount of setpoints follow— the temperature gradients. One on the scientific images
ing a predefined sequence. Further details for each of the acquired during the GeoFlow—2 experiment can be seen in
experiments are given in sections “GeoFlow Experiment”, Fig. 2).
“GeoFlow—2 Experiment” and “GeoFlow—2b Experiment”. Next we describe more in detail the particularities of the
Scientific results of experiments in the 188 can be performance of each of the three experiments:
affected by quasi—steady and time dependent accelera—
tion: residual gravity and g—jitter (Monti and Savino 1998; GeoFlow Experiment
Fortezza et a1. 1999). The microgravity requirement defined
for GeoFlow experiments was in line with the Vibratory The first GeoFlow BC was launched on Space Shuttle
acceleration limits defined in the 18$ for the MicrograV— Atlantis with the Columbus Module and was installedinside
ity Mode, the microgravity disturbances should be below the FSL by a member of the ISS crew. Once placed in
10‘3 g at frequencies between 0.01 Hz and 300 Hz. the facility, E—USOC Operators used telescience t0 Oper—
The GeoFlow hardware consists of several complex ele— ate the experiment from their control room: telecommands
ments and equipment, including the experiment ﬂuid cell were sent to control the different GeoFlow subsystems
and the systems necessary to apply and control the val— and telemetry and scientific images from the experiment
ues of the scientific parameters, which are placed inside were received and processed on ground. Achieving sue—
a so called Experiment Container (EC): a black anodized cessful results from the experiment was a Challenging mis—
metal bOX which the astronaut inserts in a dedicated drawer sion, starting in August 2008 and continuing until J anuary
inside the FSL. The FSL provides the necessary power, 2009.
data and cooling resources to the EC. The Optics inside The experiment consisted of scanning up to 1030 set—
the FSL allows the use Of different Optical diagnosis teCh— points arranged in 54 separate runs. Two types of runs are
niques. For the GeoFlow experiments, the Wollaston Shear— defined:
ing Interferometry (WSI) is used. This measurement tech—
nique is sensitive to the variation of the refractive indeX 0 N0 rotation runs. In these runs the voltage and Rota—
whiCh describes how light propagates through a medium. tion Speed are kept constant while the Temperature
Table 1 Ranges of the values —
used for the scientific High voltage Temperature Rotation Cold side
parameters during each Mission (kV) difference (K) speed (Hz) temperature (DC)
of the GeoFlow experiments —
GeoFlow 10 0 to 10 0.008 to 2 —
GeoFlow—2 6.5 0 to 10.1 0.008 to 2 20 or 30.5
GeoFlow—2b 0 to 6.5 0 to 10.1 0.008 to 2 20 or 30.5
@ Springer

"
"4","64 Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2015) 27:61—74
m : scientific images were downlinked to ground after eaCh
. _ ” WW??? . run, at a downlink rate of up to 8 Mbps. As backup,
- 22%-;‘3 ‘"" 5; ‘35; these images were also recorded on tapes, which had to be
' . «’7,» ,,i L. .; ‘3, ‘19s '
9- “a :2 {§§st W 2 a... gag: exchanged by an astronaut once they were full. However, in
ﬂ .:\‘\\?~i «:4 am the first GeoFlow experiment the FSL tape recorder failed
3 i» §» ”:2. % ”1\¥t%\"" $39? and its functionality was never recovered. The interferome—
55 2%? w ‘2»... n3} - -
5‘3: . V» 3&5? ._ ., "" .ngmé: ,5}. try images and the telemetry coming from the FSL and the
“-51.7: ‘ {445;}; ‘ 5"" 4:9"" j» 5“; 2 4"" “222‘“ ”3232:” - ' '
«fiﬁ j $1§;§\,§3¢§§§5§W«Z EC were received at E—USOC, where a preprocess act1V1ty
’2 Z “23.3% tgsxgggvgg L was carried out in order to time correlate them. In this way,
g"" 3:22;)“ :4 27 “ w-V’kliiifﬂm; . Sffﬁgﬁ‘ﬁ 5/ f3. . . ﬁg: . . . .
4.: 246:3; 9,, .f- ..~ 2;; g; the P1 was prov1ded With all GeoFlow images acquired by
W’j‘v‘ : ‘3‘ 795. st .‘3- g 1?? FSL, eaCh one accompanied by a set of data received from
:1 533“ f 2.. M‘""_}ﬂf~‘““\ . 1f_.‘$,’$§§ _: 7.1%: 0.94%“; . .
‘ s§ Pf... . ~. j 5% 1%,): the EC: timestamp, value of High Voltage, temperature gra—
* 7; 'i-‘r. X” * mﬁ‘ -,‘ ayizﬁiﬁimﬂ . . . . .
‘ 32:3 “+19%? 1; '1?"" ,{ygx ~35: dient, Rotation Speed, pos1tion of the rotating sphere, etC.
7""}; 2‘21? Egg. [1%ﬁjrﬁiii This data allowed the science team to obtain both quan—
'. ‘ ,7 - N1?"" ? ',7, , f!"" 1973‘? 5"" ’ . . . . . . .
~. 3$5~§i¥ 3:3"": ,~ t1tat1ve and qualitative data on the ﬂuid ﬂow 1ns1de the
, , , , , , , , experiment cell (Futterer et al. 2012, 2013).
Flg. 2 Sc1ent1f1c image acquired during the GeoFlow—2 experiment
GeoFlow—2 Experiment
, , , , , , The GeoFlow—2 experiment, a follow—up of the first
Difference is varied, 1ncreas1ng from lower to higher . . .
, , , , GeoFlow experiment, aimed to study some essential fea—
Values. Even though the des1red rotation is zero, a min— , . .
, , , , tures of the Earth s mantle convection which are deeply
1mum speed is set to allow imaging of the complete . . . . . .
, , , , , inﬂuenced by the Viscos1ty variations determlned by the
sphere, as the optical path is fixed and the field of View . . . .
, , extremely high variations in the temperature. The GeoFlow—
1s not enough to cover the full sphere (see Fig. 1). . . . .
, , , , 2 EC configuration and performances were identical to
0 Rotation runs. The Rotation Speed is varied from lower
, , , those of GeoFlow EC, except for the use of the alkanole
to higher values while keeping the voltage and the . . . . . .
Tern erature Difference constant 1—Nonanol as working ﬂuid instead of the Silicon 011 M5.
p ' With the maximum Temperature Difference set during the
The definition of each run includes the starting conditions GeoFlow experiment the outer Viscosity to inner Viscosity
(voltage, Temperature Difference and Rotation Speed), the ratio is about 1.17 (setting 25 0C for the Cold Side Temper—
step size of the main parameter variations (Temperature Dif— ature and 10 K for the Temperature Difference), while for
ference or Rotation Speed, depending on the type of run) GeoFlow—2 this ratio is increased to 1.45 (setting 20 0C for
and the range to be scanned. The runs could not be split in the Cold Side Temperature and 10.1 K for the Temperature
smaller pieces. Difference). In addition, for l—Nonanol the dielectrophoretic
However, only 10 out of the 54 runs initially foreseen effect increases the Viscosity ratio by a factor of about
were completed due to a malfunction in the GeoFlow EC 21. Considering both effects the maximum Viscosity ratio
(refer to Chapter 5.1). obtained for GeoFlow—2 was about 32. Although the Earth’s
The scientific ﬂuid used was Silicone oil (Baysilone M5), mantle Viscosity ratio is significantly higher than the one
The ﬂuid motion was observed by means of WSI images of obtained during the GeoFlow—2 experiment, the values were
the ﬂuid (with a resolution of 1024 X 1024 pixels in grey big enough to capture the initial basis of Earth’s mantle
scale —8 bits—, whiCh with a low compression rendered a typ— convection and the main properties of hydrodynamic heat
ical image size of 800 kB) whiCh were taken not only once transfer with the medium Viscosity ratio (Futterer et al.
the scientific setpoints when reached but also during the pro— 2013).
cess of reaching them (during the waiting times). Manifold The GeoFlow—2 BC was launched on ATV—2 Johannes
parameters were monitored in the process: High Voltage Kepler and was installed inside the FSL 011 March 19th,
and Temperature Difference between the spheres, Rotation 2011. Starting in March 2011 and ending in May 7th,
Speed, position of the rotating sphere, temperature of the 2012, GeoFlow—2 experiment was a very long and demand—
ﬂuid at different points. The execution of the GeoFlow ing mission, where an important coordination with all the
experiment was carried out from ground in a semiautomatic entities involved was achieved. Aspects as different as plan—
way. ning tasks, engineering support, data quality assessment and
The ground operators commanded the start of eaCh run systems operation and monitoring (GeoFlow—2, FSL and
and monitored its execution by means of displays. Due Columbus), among several other key points, were managed
to the limited storage capacity of the FSL hard disks, using different strategies.
@ Springer

"
"5","Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2015) 27:61—74 65
The GeoFlow—2 experiment consisted of 31 runs, aiming performed in the FSL, the runs were performed on a best—
to scan up to 544 setpoints. The definition of these runs was effort basis, where as many runs as possible were executed
very similar to GeoFlow—1: on—orbit as long as time and resources were available.
. . Startin on December 3rd 2012, 12 runs com risin
0 No rotation runs. In these runs the Cold Side Tem— g . p . g
. 531 h of selence were successfully completed unt11 the
perature, Voltage and Rotation Speed are kept con— . .
. . . . . GeoFlow—2 Experiment Container was removed from the
stant wh11e the Temperature Difference is varied, first . .
. . . FSL rack and stowed on—orb1t1n May 13th 2013.
1ncreas1ng from lower to higher values, and then
decreasing again to lower values in order to investigate
ossible h steresis effects. A minimum s eed is set to . .
p . y. p Sc1ence Operatlons Concept
allow imaging of the complete sphere.
0 Rotation runs. The Rotation Speed is varied from lower . . . . . .
. . . . The main objective of the operations concept is to fit the
to higher values wh11e keeping the voltage, Cold Side . . . . . . .
. solentific requirements into the operational constraints of
Temperature and Temperature Difference constant. . . .
the ISS enV1ronment, and spe01fically of the FSL, tak—
These same 31 runs were to be repeated by means of ing into account the resources allocated to the mission.
the same optical technique (WSI) but with an interferome— To that extent, E—USOC developed an operations concept
try pattern perpendicular to the previous one, if time could for GeoFlow experiments (Ezquerro and Rodriguez 2011),
allow it; they were defined as optional runs. In total, 62 sci— whose main Characteristics are depicted in the following
entific runs were successfully performed, which represent subsections.
100 % of mandatory plus 100 % of optional scientific runs.
A total of 1295 h of science were performed. Crew Intervention Minimized
An important improvement with respect to the first
GeoFlow mission, in terms of scientific return and mis— Being the crew time one of the most valuable resources
sion complexity, was the acquisition of microgravity levels on the ISS, crew intervention for GeoFlow experiments
during the scientific runs. Based on these measurements, was minimized and only required for the purely mechanical
on ground verifications performed by the science team led actiVities. Once crew installed the EC in FSL, science oper—
to the performance of 9 extra partial runs to improve the ations were conducted by the E—USOC ground operators.
quality of the microgravity environment for some specific
setpoints affected by 188 environmental disturbances. Experiment Control and Monitoring from E—USOC
GeoFlow—2b Experiment GeoFlow experiments are long experiments of a highly
repetitive nature, therefore very suitable for script based
GeoFlow—2b is the extension of the GeoFlow—2 experiment. execution. The scripts were designed to allow a high degree
The ﬂuid used was the same as the one used for Geoﬂow—2. of interaction from ground, in two ways:
The results from GeoFlow—2 led the science team to define a
new set of scientific runs with the goal of analyzing in more 0 Allowing the ground operator to define in a data file
depth particular areas of interest, e.g.: the sequence of setpoints to be scanned in each run
. . . . of the eX eriment scri ts. This data file is re ared on
0 Long term evolution of the ﬂuid configuration, by p . p . p p .
. . . . . ground and uphnked to FSL before starting the script
means of no rotation runs With an increased d1agnos1s .
. . . . run. Although the sequence of setp01nts for each run
duration in the steady state configuration. . . . . . .
. . . 1s predefined by the solentific requ1rements, the results
0 Measurement of ﬂuid convective patterns evolution at . . . .
. . . from the execution of preV1ous runs could in this way be
high temporal resolution, by means of no rotation runs . . . . .
. . . . . . . used to introduce modifications in the subsequent runs
us1ng the h1ghestposs1b1e image acqu1s1tion rate,. .
. . . when requ1red.
0 The nonhnear1ty observed by the selence team at low . . . .
. . . 0 Inserting break p01nts for ground interaction at prede—
Rayleigh numbers, by means of no rotation runs us1ng . . . .
fined de01s1on p01nts. These were used for two pur—
lower voltage values. . . . .
poses: in the first stages of the experiment, unt11 enough
And obtaining data for a wider range of parameters (e.g. confidence was gained, they allowed to verify the
rotation runs with higher Temperature Differences). The proper configuration and performance of the different
proposed extension consisted of a total of 48 scientific runs systems before starting the diagnosis; they also allowed
and approximately 1600 h of experiment time, aiming to to make limited Changes to the predefined configuration
scan up to 1410 new setpoints following a new schema. if required, without needing to uplink a new data file
Due to the incoming arrival of the FASES experiment to be and to restart the script run.
@ Springer

"
"6","66 Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2015) 27:61—74
The experiment runs were carried out from ground in a by the science team, namely the scientific parameters
semiautomatic way: for each experiment run, a data file with (i.e. High Voltage amplitude, High Voltage frequency,
the set of setpoints to be scanned was uplinked to FSL, the temperature gradient, Rotation Speed, Cold Side Tem—
ground operators commanded the start of the script run and perature and position of the rotating sphere) and other
monitored its execution by means of telemetry displays haV— temperatures (i.e. temperatures of the thermal con—
ing the possibility to command parameters modifications at trol ﬂuids of the inner and outer spheres, both at
the predefined break points. A limited set of images were the inlet and outlet and temperature of the supporting
downlinked in real time (at a rate up to 2 Mbps) during the tray) . The telemetry timestamps were used to match
initial phase of each run to help the ground operators in each scientific image with its corresponding parameter
assessing the systems status and performance, but in nom— values.
inal conditions this real time downlink was not mandatory 0 Scientific images (see Fig. 2), timestamped and grouped
and could be disabled after around 1 h of execution to save by runs with their correspondent SHA—256 checksum,
on Columbus high rate data resources. being SHA—256 a cryptographic hash function com—
puted with 32—bit words.
Data Management 0 MicrograVity level measurement data from the Micro—
gravity Measurement Assembly (MMA) sensors (only
After the execution of a number of runs and due to the in GeoFlow—2 and GeoFlow—2b). The data was ini—
limited storage capacity of the FSL hard disks, the eXper— tially downlinked and transferred to the MMA Payload
iment is put on hold and scientific images and micro— Developer (PD) for post—processing, this took a large
gravity levels data (in GeoFlow—2 and GeoFlow—2b) is amount of time so it was later decided to post—process
downlinked to ground. Before the deletion of the on orbit the data at E—USOC. This data provided the science
stored data, which is necessary to continue with the next team with information on the microgravity levels and
set of runs, a systematic process for data integrity check possible on—orbit disturbances during the execution of
on ground was adopted in order to verify that no errors the runs, and allowed them to decide whether the runs
were present. This process is described in detail in section were useful or needed to be repeated. For the second
“GeoFlow Execution”. half of the GeoFlow—2 experiment, MMA was aban—
The FSL hard disks capacity was initially (for GeoFlow cloned in favor of a different acceleration measurement
and the first half of GeoFlow—2) of 30 GB, which were deVice, the MicrograVity Vibration Isolation System
filled in a relatively short time (days or weeks, depend— (MVIS), due to issues detected within the MMA data.
ing on the type of runs being performed) and thus required Although MVIS is a complex FSL subsystem (Labib
a careful planning of the runs and data downlink sessions et al. 2010) which includes active elements (magnetic
to avoid delays which would require a thorough replan— actuators), it could be used in passive mode to provide
ning of all subsequent actiVities. From the second half 3—aXis microgravity acceleration measurements in the
of GeoFlow—2, the FSL disks capacity was upgraded to Vicinity of the BC with specifications similar to those of
300 GB, giving a much higher ﬂexibility in both planning MMA, its main inconvenient being the additional layer
and data management. At this point downlink sessions could of data management it required: MMA data is recorded
be planned taking into account scientific needs to assess in real—time in the same FSL hard disks as the rest of
the experiment progress with a given regularity (at least on scientific data (images and MMA are stored in differ—
a weekly basis) and operational convenience (e.g. onboard ent channels of the same record), allowing to manage
and ground resources management), but were not so much all data in parallel (both during recording and down—
constrained by technical aspects. linking). MVIS data is recorded in real—time in separate
As part of the operations concept, the FSL tape recorder MVIS hard disks, and needs to be transferred to the
would be used to backup the data, but as mentioned before FSL hard disks in order to downlink it. This transfer
it did not work and was therefore not used. needs to happen when no other data is being recorded
(i.e. no science runs ongoing), thus the transfer time is
Data Provision to the PI added to all other data management actiVities, extend—
ing significantly the operational time required to get
One of the main E—USOC tasks was to provide the science the data on ground and to resume subsequent science
team with reliable and consistent data. These data products runs.
consisted of: 0 GeoFlow experiments planning/schedules. Additional
information on start/end times of the actiVities, esti—
0 Telemetry reports, containing complete records with mated duration time, name, etc. in order to increase the
the timestamped values of all the parameters needed scientists’ awareness on the on—going operations.
@ Springer

"
"7","Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2015) 27:61—74 67

Science Operations Preparation Columbus Control Center (Col—CC), MARS Center
and UHBs.

The operations concept described in the preVious section k) Development of procedures for the operational inter—

was used as the baseline upon which all operations products, faces between the different teams.

on—orbit actiVities planning and overall operations setup 1) Ground operators training and simulations. For which

were developed at E—USOC. The actiVities performed are the most important part is the familiarization with the

summarized hereafter: HW & SW to understand their performances and limi—
tations, so that the operator is ready to react in real time

a) Coordination and iteration with the scientific team, to any anomaly.
making sure that all the requirements and experimental m) Execution of the Experiment Sequence Tests: a real
constraints are properly understood and implemented. operational scenario is set up with the Engineering
The main outcome of these iterations is an experiment Models and all the technical and operational interfaces.
execution plan which integrates the sequence of runs A representative part of the experiment is executed
to be performed into an operations calendar, detail— in terms of duration time, amount and type of data,
ing which runs are performed each day, which sets requirements, etc. The objective of these tests is to ver—
of scientific parameters are used and the downlink ify that the integrated system, the operators and the
strategy. operations products are ready and adequate to support

b) Plan the necessary on—orbit actiVities to be carried out the operations.
for the execution of the experiment and the resources
needed for them, in coordination with the Colum—
bus planners, who consolidate these inputs for all the Science Operations Execution
different Columbus actiVities in the Flight Program
Overview Next we describe in detail the steps and difficulties found

c) Development of procedures, both for crew and for during the execution of each experiment.
ground command operations.

(1) Validation of these procedures with the Engineer— GeoFlow Execution
ing Models: check their feasibility, execution time,
use and suitability of available tools on—board, ver— The GeoFlow BC was inserted into the FSL on August 6th,
ify the payload telemetry and telecommand database, 2008 by the ISS crew. Following the experiment activation,
and ensure that they provide the scientific protocol a checkout actiVity was successfully completed, verifying
and requirements defined in the Experiment Scientific that all GeoFlow systems were working as expected. A test
Requirements. run was also successfully performed, providing good qual—

e) Support the astronaut training for the on—board opera— ity pictures downlinked in real—time, which confirmed that
tions in collaboration with the trainers at the European the integrated FSL—GeoFlow optical configuration was also
Astronaut Centre in Cologne, Germany. correct.

f) Support ESA Safety in the reView and implementa— However, the FSL tape recorder was not working.
tion of safety aspects related to the GeoFlow EC and Although this incident did not prevent the start of the eXper—
its operations, i.e. identification and control of all pos— iment runs, it required a reVision of the operations concept,
sible hazards both for the on board crew and for the for the following reasons:
hardware. . 0 The downlink was the only means to deliver the scien—

g) Development of the displays used by E—USOC oper— . . . .
ators to command and monitor the execution of the t1f1c data(1mages) to ground, without any backup. . .

. 0 Before deleting the FSL hard disks content, a pos1t1ve
experiment. . . . .
h) Provide the scientific team with a User Home Base confirmation from the sc1ence team was required on the
. . completeness and correctness of the data on ground, in
(UHB). This includes the setup of the needed com— . .
. . . . . order to aV01d sc1ence loss.
munication links and tools (e.g. displays) which allow
them to follow the on—board operations from their Additionally, once the science runs were started, “gaps”
premises. in the downlink data were found which resulted in either

i) Provide the PD with a UHB to receive all the relevant missing or corrupted images on ground. Although these
telemetry so that they can provide remote engineering problems were mostly solved as they were encountered,
support during the operations if needed. they caused delays for the subsequent GeoFlow eXperi—

j) Ground Segment verification tests, validating E— ment runs, and forced the introduction of systematic data
USOC’s ground segment tools and interfaces with the integrity checks on ground in order to verify that no

@ Springer

"
"8","68 Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2015) 27:61—74
errors were present. Taking these new constraints into 3) Corrupted images should be fixed or are identified
account, the following process was adopted (see scheme in as low priority (e.g. control pictures taken during
Fig. 3): heating phases).
4) Acceptable error rate is reached.
0 Once the FSL hard disks were full, the experiment . . . .
. . . 0 Any m1ss1ng or corrupted data would be retrieved again,
runs execution would be put on hold until the SCl- .
. . . . . unt11 an acceptable error rate was met.
ence team could prov1de a pos1t1ve confirmation of data . . .
. . 0 Once the selence team had verified that the data on
completeness on their s1de. . . .
. . . . the1r s1de was complete (up to the defined acceptable
0 After downlink from FSL, a first data integrity Check error rate) the FSL har d disks 00111 d be delete d and
would be performed by MARS before data distribu— . ’ .
. . . operations could continue.
tion to E—USOC: all the interferometry images taken
onboard by FSL are sent to ground as packets on the Delays on this process would have major impacts on oper—
High Rate Data Link. Once on ground, these packets ations plans and schedules; therefore it was implemented
are reconstructed and JPEG images are extracted. This in a procedural way by the ground teams, producing good
process by itself constitutes an error Checking of the results. Nevertheless, it also introduced a dependency on
images. Information such as sync errors, incomplete ground segment performances, resulting in lead times for
packets, CRC errors, and timestamps are used by the data transfer and integrity Checks on ground that had to be
ground systems to evaluate the quality of the packets added to the downlink of the data on—orbit. As a result, the
and identify whether errors have occurred. In case errors time—span of the complete experiment had to be increased
are detected, a new downlink of data would need to take accordingly.
place. After August 27th, 2008, with four runs successfully
0 E—USOC would arrange all the data by runs and ver— completed, the GeoFlow experiment had to be temporar—
ify its completeness crosschecking with the telemetry ily suspended due to on—orbit resources constraints. It was
reports and operations logs. Re—downlink requests were resumed again on December 11th, 2008, with the new oper—
Created in case of missing images. ational strategy running stable and mostly according to the
0 Once E—USOC delivered the data to the PPS UHB, a plans. As the FSL and GeoFlow systems showed a high
final integrity Check would be performed by the science reliability when operated by the experiment scripts, further
team, according to the following criteria: automation was introduced by reducing the number of break
points. This prevented delays in operations related to com—
1) Expected data size matches. manding activities due to signal outages and coordination
2) Expected number of images matches. with Col—CC.
Data downlink __
from FSL \\ “““""-------____
I x
/‘ x"": i \\
__ _-,------/ / l \\
--_— /
HRD packets Data --__-,/
integrity chec k corruption? -ch““""' ! i"".
@MARS ; a.
1,1"" 1/,"" I
7/""""- “N o N _#_f_// No
/ ’/"" 0
Data distribution > Data Yes Data provision F'nal integrity > w eptable
to E-USOC complete? to Pl check error rate?
Iii
Yes
//
Fig. 3 Introduction of systematic data integrity Checks on ground to avoid data loss
Q Springer

"
"9","Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2015) 27:61—74 69
The GeoFlow experiment operations came to a stop on tuning for their use on—orbit. To avoid major delays in
January 9th, 2009, having completed 10 out of the 54 runs the experiment execution, it was decided to proceed
initially foreseen, due to a failure in the EC: an oil leak with lower priority runs, which performed well with
appeared in one of the cooling ﬂuid pumps used to con— the available script, while investigating and solVing the
trol the outer shell temperature. Thus, the BC was removed thermal control routines issue on ground.
from FSL by the ISS crew and returned to ground in the 0 Another issue in the spheres rotating system was also
Space Shuttle Discovery ﬂight STS—l 19 (188 Mission 15A) detected during the first weeks of operations, which pre—
to identify the root cause of the malfunction. vented the execution of the scientific setpoints with very
The BC was refurbished on ground, after an investigation high Rotation Speed (1.8 and 2.0 Hz), introducing a
showed that the failure had been due to a misalignment of new execution constraint. These high rotation setpoints
the pump, which was replaced for GeoFlow—2. could not be recovered by any means: the GeoFlow—2
hardware was not physically able to reach them when
GeoFlow—2 Execution it was commanded to do so, although it could both on
ground tests and during GeoFlow.
The GeoFlow—2 EC is, in terms of hardware, identical to
the GeoFlow EC, except for the ﬂuid within the eXperi— At this point in time, the experiment planning was highly
ment cell and the new pump. The software was updated by affected by the necessary changes to circumvent the encoun—
industry to introduce an automatic PID control of the scien— tered anomalies. Even though the operations concept devel—
tific temperatures (Cold Side Temperature and temperature oped by the E—USOC, thanks to the experience gained in
gradient), which in GeoFlow had to be achieved through the first GeoFlow mission, allowed a fast replanning which
manual settings. minimized the impact on the overall duration of the opera—
Even having considered the lessons learned from the tions, the workload on all the operations planning members
first GeoFlow mission, the GeoFlow—2 experiment was very was very intense. So it was deemed necessary to simplify
challenging. Almost from the beginning several technical even more the planning and replanning processes. Being all
issues were faced, some of which could be solved with rela— the actiVities conducted by the ground operators (no crew
tively minor operational impact. However, issues regarding intervention), it was decided to implement a much more
the quality of the microgravity data acquired up to the mid ﬂeXible approach, consisting on booking just the resources
of the experiment execution had big operational impact. In throughout a complete week, and leaving the detailed sched—
the end, after about 14 months of operations in FSL, all the ule of each actiVity adaptable to the execution evolution.
objectives were met. This decision was a major milestone for the operations
The GeoFlow—2 BC was inserted into the FSL on March teams in what respects planning and replanning workload,
19th, 2011, by the ISS crew. Following the experiment which was significantly reduced thereafter.
activation, a checkout actiVity was completed with suc— The thermal control issue resolution required an impor—
cess, verifying that all GeoFlow—2 systems were working as tant analysis, development and testing effort on—ground and
expected. A test run was performed, also with success, test— on—orbit. The data from the tests on ground was very dif—
ing different camera parameters that allowed the selection ferent from the one obtained on orbit, possibly due to the
of the optimum configuration by the science team. Good microgravity environment. A bug in the thermal parame—
quality pictures were obtained, downlinked in real—time and ters settings at the beginning of the PID control routines,
made available to the science team so that they could pro— which caused the poor thermal convergence, was discov—
Vide their assessment. After the completion of the above ered and fixed. Dedicated scripts for each of the Cold Side
actiVities, the facility was ready to start with the scientific Temperature settings were developed, in order to apply
runs execution. specific solutions and improve the convergence. Another
During the first 4 runs execution, two important prob— approach to improve the thermal convergence was proposed
lems arose, which were not experienced in the first GeoFlow and developed by E—USOC, that made use of the tempera—
mission: tures’ moving mean instead of instantaneous measurements,
but its validation could not be supported by the PD and
0 Scientific setpoints with high Temperature Difference thus it could not be used on—orbit. The resolution of this
could not be reached correctly: temperatures did not issue allowed the execution of the experiment up to the end
converge to the desired settings, and after a pre—set time— of the nominal (mandatory) science runs. Some other tech—
out the script skipped those setpoints, which thus were nical issues were faced, but could be solved or bypassed
not performed. After investigation by the PD and E— with a minor impact by the different teams: USOCs
USOC it was demonstrated that the automatic thermal (MARS and E—USOC), PDs (GeoFlow—2 and FSL) and
control routines implemented by the PD needed fine Col—CC.
@ Springer

"
"10","70 Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2015) 27:61—74
The first MMA microgravity data results from the After the necessary operational products updates to
mandatory runs were available only at this moment in time implement MVIS utilization and the completion of the on
because the post—processing performed by the MMA PD orbit FSL hard disks upgrade, the experiment was resumed
was very time consuming. When the post—processed data with the optional scientific runs. The new hard disks allowed
was delivered to E—USOC inconsistencies in the data were a more efficient management of the experiment images, but
found, about 56 % of the data were duplicate entries of the very low data transfer rate between MVIS and the FSL
different kinds: consecutive measurements had the same hard disks imposed very long microgravity data downlink
rotational and linear acceleration values in all the aXis, sessions. On the other hand, the quality of the MVIS results
consecutive measurements had the same rotational and lin— was excellent and their availability for a quick PI evalu—
ear acceleration values in some of the aXis, consecutive ation after downlink was almost instantaneous. After the
measurements had the same counter tag (the parameter iden— completion of all the optional scientific runs, 9 extra partial
tifying the acquisition sequence) but different acceleration runs were performed. They were requested by the PI after
values in some or all the fields. The elimination of the the evaluation of the MVIS microgravity levels, in order
duplicates from the data implied loss of information at fre— to obtain rerun some setpoints with a better microgravity
quencies above 50 Hz. After a deep analysis it was found environment.
that FSL SW was not managing the MMA sensors’ data The GeoFlow—2 operations were considered completed
correctly, and its solution required important FSL software on May 7th, 2012 and the GeoFlow—2 BC was removed from
upgrades. Before continuing with the optional experiment FSL on May 23rd, 2012.
runs, a trade off was conducted to select an alternative sys—
tem to acquire microgravity measurements. Two different GeoFlow—2b Execution
systems were available on orbit, the MVIS which is part
of the FSL rack and the Space Acceleration Measurement The GeoFlow—2b experiment benefits from GeoFlow and
System (SAMS) which is an 188 service for which seV— GeoFlow—2 lessons learned, although it faced its own new
eral movable sensors are available on—board, attaching one challenges as well. A number of technical problems had to
of them to the FSL rack front. There were many consid— be dealt with, the most important being the failure of the
erations taken into account to decide which one should be FSL hard disks.
used, such as the proximity of the sensors’ location to the Well before the start of operations on December 17th
BC, the systems compatibility with the GeoFlow—2 scripts, 2012, an FSL software upgrade was prepared to recover the
the SAMS sensors availability, MVIS measurements qual— MMA functionalities and was validated on orbit with the
ity validation, implementation effort and time. Thorough help of the GeoFlow EC, used to produce microgravity per—
on—orbit test were prepared and conducted to assess the turbations. The MMA microgravity levels recorded during
MVIS measurements quality, comparing it with the data the validation test were analysed on ground and deemed
from the SAMS sensor, under different conditions (e.g. correct. The implementation of the new scientific goals
different MVIS data acquisition frequencies, measurements required the development of a large set of new experiment
during 188 manoeuvres, during different crew—induced per— scripts, so we took advantage of these developments to roll
turbations). Finally, the use of the MVIS was agreed back to the utilization of MMA instead of MVIS, given the
which required the update of almost all the operations inconveniences of the latter due to its long data transfer times.
products: the experiment scripts, the experiment actiVi— After the first week of operations, as soon as the first sci—
ties planning, the required 188 resources, etc. By that entific data was available on ground, it was observed that
time an improvement of the FSL capabilities was ready: the image quality was lower than the quality obtained in
the FSL Hard Disks were replaced by higher capacity the GeoFlow—2 experiment, showing a lower brightness and
ones, increasing the data storage capability by a fac— contrast. Also, it was observed that the images were not
tor of 10, from 30 GB to 300 GB. The constraints fully centred in the camera’s field of View, as a gap could be
imposed by the limited data storage capability depicted in seen in the lower part of the images.
section “Data Management” disappeared with this hard— In order to improve the quality of the images to maximize
ware upgrade, eliminating the necessity of erasing the the scientific return, an optical checkout was performed,
hard disks between each set of runs and the dependencies aiming to find better camera parameters and to improve
between on—orbit planning and on—ground data distribution the optical alignment. Although a better configuration was
and integrity checks. The risk of erasing valuable scientific achieved in both areas, only the camera parameters changes
data was thus eliminated, and the data downlink planning were kept for use as their implementation was almost imme—
could be driven by scientific needs (e.g. assessing science diate and the science team reported that the science loss due
progress) and operational optimization instead of technical to the misalignment was very low, while the risk and time
limitations. cost of implementing the optics realignment was high.
@ Springer

"
"11","Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2015) 27:61—74 71
Shortly after, a failure of the FSL hard disks prevented From a scientific standpoint, although the operations
the recording of any GeoFlow scientific data (images and interruption meant that most of the experiment plan (a
MMA data) on—orbit. The experiment operations were inter— total of 54 runs) could not be completed, the science team
rupted and on ground investigations led to the replace— reported that the data gathered was considered useful, and
ment of the FSL hard disks with spare units available on partially fulfilled the scientific goals of the experiment. In
orbit, but the problem persisted preventing data record— particular, it was a valuable input in the definition of the
ing. E—USOC proposed a work—around adapting the oper— GeoFlow—2 experimental program.
ations concept: instead of recording the images for a
later downlink, they would be downlinked in real time, GeoFlow—2 Outcomes
relying on the ISS High—Rate Communications Outage
Recorder data dumps to fill the gaps related to 188 com— From the GeoFlow—2 EC installation in FSL to the end of
munications outages. This affected the on—orbit activities operations in May 2012, a total of 71 runs were success—
planning, as a requirement for continuous high rate data fully performed, generating 191 GB of good quality scientific
resources availability and utilisation had to be added. This images and 9.85 GB of microgravity measurements (see
approach also limited the scientific output in the following Table 2).
ways: From a scientific point of View, the GeoFlow—2 eXper—
0 Only runs with low data rate generation could be per— iment was a very successful rnission, where all p lanned
formed; the impact of this limitation was minor, as the mandatory and optional setp01nts were conducted except
highest priority runs in the scientific program had a very for the higher rotational values, and the data gathered was
. . . . cons1dered very valuable.
low image acqu1s1tion rate (less than 2 Mbps).
0 Micro raVity data could not be downlinked in real—
time frgom the MMA; this prevented detecting possible GeoFlow—2b Outcomes
Egiirizgy disturbances Wthh COUld affect the ongo— From the GeoFlow—2 EC installation in FSL on December
3rd 2012, and during the 20 weeks it remained installed,
This new approach was agreed with the science team and 12 runs were performed for an overall of 530 h of science
BSA and successful science could be achieved even in those and 44 GB of scientific images and 8 GB of microgravity
off—nominal conditions. data were downlinked from FSL (see Table 2). This means
The GeoFlow—2b scientific operations were stopped on that 57 % of the minimum science required and 20 % of the
April 23rd 2013, and the BC was removed from FSL and total science requirement was completed. The GeoFlow—2
stowed on—orbit on May 13th 2013 in preparation for the EC remains in the ISS and the rest of the scientific require—
upcoming FSL experiment FASES, even though not all the ments can be performed as soon as FASES experiment is
runs proposed by the science team could be completed. finished and there are resources available.
Mission Science Data Outcomes Operational Mission Outcomes and Lessons Learned
Next we describe in detail the main mission science data From an operational standpoint, the three missions are
outcomes of each experiment. Table 2 summarizes the runs, considered a great achievement as GeoFlow is a very com—
images and data obtained for each experiment. pleX experiment: the missions preparation required hard
The scientific data along with its related telemetry gen— work and dedication from all teams involved (science
erated in these and other ESA experiments on the 188 is for team, ESA, PD, Col—CC, MARS and E—USOC), with the
the sole use of the science team during the first three years, proper coordination between them. Throughout the mis—
and is afterwards freely available to whoever is interested in sions improvement of operational products, ground segment
it. The data can be requested to the responsible USOC, E— setup and operations processes were required for the suc—
USOC in this case, who has the responsibility to keep the cess of the on—going experiment. Moreover, resolution of
data for 10 years. failures, assessment and test on the suitability of alternative
systems (e.g. microgravity acquisition systems trade—offs)
GeoFlow Outcomes were also required as described above. In the end the results
were:
From the GeoFlow EC installation in FSL to the end of
operations, a total of 10 runs were performed with success, 0 The GeoFlow BC was uploaded to 18$ together with
generating 97 GB of good quality scientific images. the Columbus module, thus being one of its first
@ Springer

"
"12","72 Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2015) 27:61—74
Table 2 Summary of the three —
GeoFlow experiments Recorded images Microgravity data Science time Req.
OlltCOIIICS Mission N0 of runs (GB) (GB) (hours) (hours)
GeoFlow 10 97 O 106 1059
GeoFlow—2 71 191 9.85 1295 800
GeOFlow—2b 12 44 8 53 1 —
scientific missions. The achievement of successful sci— being used and with external constraints which are not
entific results in such a complex mission in Columbus under the control of the experiment teams. The follow—
demcnstrates the scientific capabilities of the ESA lab— ing examples gave E—USOC a valuable experience in
oratory on 188 to the user community. this regard:
0 The eX eriment made extensive use Of the downlink . .
resourcIe)s in Columbus and 188, delivering almost 280 . During GCOFIOWQ.’ when making the trade—offto
Gigabytes of data from the on—orbit experiment facility choose an. alternative to MMA for micrograt/ity
t0 the end user. data acqu1s1t10n, MVIS looked the best choice:
0 The broad use Of resources both on—Orbit and on ground ?fecelllzimefcrsui‘lseigmc1:1: t: :ileemEEtevergt/eglgiﬂ
served as test platform for the ground segment archi— FSE notydepgnding 0n the gailability g0 f exter—
tecture and tools, on—Orbit facilities and Operations .
concepts. nal sensors. However, data transfer times were
overwhelming.
The ground teams gathered a very valuable experience, and 0 For the first GeoFlow the lack of actual knowl—
specifically at E—USOC the following lessons learned can edge on the microgravity levels to be expected
be highlighted: inside FSL led to the definition of a requirement
A. Operations Preparation to not perform science activities during 188 events
The first stage of the Operations preparation requires $25ki262305§0$1§ 1332):;:EtiIJiZZZIihCTESVSVIliiCc:
a good understanding of the scientific requirements, could fause microgravity disturbances For any
the payload design and Operation (both hardware and IS S . t th' t f . t d t
software) and 0f the Operations in 188. Translating experimen .1s yp e O requiremen 116.6 S O
. . . . . . . . . be carefully c0ns1dered and its impact estimated
the sc1ent1f1c requirements into 188 act1V1t1es is not during the operations preparation From our eXpe—
straight forward, and requires a careful assessment and . . .°
experience to evaluate (or estimate at least) the possi— rience in average one 188 event 18.“) be expected
ble implications of the different requirements, payload every week. and the exact date and time Of the event
design constraints and Operations concept decisions. is usually fixed only weeks or even days before its
As an example, the on—orbit planning prepared for p erformance, and 8011.16 are not khcwn in advance.
the first GeoFlow mission was based mostly on the Therefcre, any experiment requiring several days
scientific net times required by the science proto— Of continucus operations and Wlth a strong require—
col, the systems performances from the payload doc— ment 01.1 .micrograV1ty.disturbances W111 have a high
umentation and tests with the ground models, and p robability Of not being able i0 meet the require—
some added margins estimated applying standard coef— ment. A careful a ssessmeht Wlth the sc1ence team
ficients, since no real experience was available at and BSA 1s requ1red,as thls usually translates into
that time. This planning proved to be overly Opti— extended operations times to wait for quite p eﬂOdS
mistic from the beginning, generating a heavy work— in 188, which in turn translates into w1der use Of
load on the Operations teams. After the first eXperi— resources (6'2; on—board resources, manpower).
ment runs, some experience was already gained (lead It’s important to coordinate beforehand with the sci—
times to get all systems running, time needed for data ence team on the way ahead in case Of anomalies 0r
downlink and verification considering actual end—tc— scientific issues (e.g. developing what—if scenarios) and
end performances and issues) which allowed eVOlV— to prepare the planning having this in mind, thinking
ing into a much more realistic and feasible planning beforehand how the planning would evolve if they hap—
approach. pen. The longer the experiment is, the more likely it is
It is easy to underestimate or even overlook, and to encounter some Off—nominal issues.
this could lead to wrong decisions, the possible depen— Highly related to the above mentioned points,
dencies 0f the experiment planning with the systems the implementation of a ﬂeXible planning strategy
@ Springer

"
"13","Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2015) 27:61—74 73
during GeoFlow—2, defining resource envelopes dur— Anotherimportantlesson learned was that the scrip—
ing the preparation phase and leaving the lowest level ting concept should leave configuration capabilities to
details to be defined on a weekly and daily basis during the ground team to fine tune the experiment perfor—
real—time operations, helped greatly in improving the mance based on on—orbit experience, and to be able to
overall performance, adding more stability to the plan, adapt the experiment ﬂow to the science needs.
decreasing significantly the workload and reducing the D. Ground Segment
impact of anomalies or unexpected events in the over— The problems encountered during the downlink of sci—
all plan, as activities could be re—ordered as needed to ence data from FSL and its further distribution to the
optimize it. PI highlighted several facts:

It has also been found that the time and resources . .
. . . . . 0 Ground systems configurations should be thor—
dedicated by the operations team in building the proper . .
. oughly known and optimized for the end—to—end
tools (procedures, scripts, support tools) and knowl— .
. operational needs, from the 188 to the PI.
edge on the payload and the experiment (e.g. through . .
. . . . . 0 Bottlenecks 1n the ground segment interfaces shall
study, tests With the engineering models, training and . . . . . .
. . . . . be aV01ded, as they introduce the highestinefﬁ01en01es.
familiarization With the payload hardware and soft— . .
. . . 0 The tools for data archive retrieval shall take
ware, communication With the PI and PD) has a very . . . .
. . . . . . . into account that experiments generating extens1ve
pos1t1ve effect in real—time operations, as it gives them . . . . .
. . . . amounts of data impose additional requirements in
the ab111ty to adapt to 1ssues or anomalies found dur— .
. . . . terms of user interface.
1ng operations and to properly assess their 1mpact. In
particular: E. Teams Coordination
. Several teams were involved in the GeoFlow eXper—
0 Allows a fast update of the operations products . . .
( rocedures eX eriment scri ts) when needed 1ments preparation: Selence Team, E—USOC, PI,
p. ’ p . . p . ' MARS, PDs of FSL and GeoFlow, the ESA Mis—
0 Gives the expertise required to prov1de valuable . . . .
. . . s10n Selence Office and the ESA Payload Operation
1nputs and information to the PI and PD to analyze . . .
. . . . . Management. Some teams participated in the whole
the anomalies, eas1ng the coordination for their . . . .
. process and others got involved at some p01nt in time
resolution. . . . . . .
. . during operations, making it difficult to have every—
. Allows the operators to define and implement . . . . . .
body working in line With the same information and
workarounds. . . . . . . .
resources. In this s1tuat10n, it is of high importance to
This, in turn, has a positive impact in the mission Clearly define all the interfaces and responsibilities of
outcome and the scientific results. the multiple teams, and to prepare an effective actiVity

B. Crew Activities plan, merging the availability of the different resources
Crew activities were monitored using real time Video with the required development, operations preparation
from 188 which proved to be a very valuable resource. and training activities, especially for the use of the
By means of this real time Video, the ground opera— engineering models.
tors highly increased their awareness on the on—board In order to keep the PI aware about the situation
operations and were able to provide proper inputs of the on—board operations and to discuss forecoming
when required. This was observed during both the activities, it is very useful to set up weekly meetings
nominal and the troubleshooting activities, with an that can be held Via teleconference. Proper and regu—
added value when complex and/or sensitive equipment lar reporting (on a daily and weekly basis) proves to
were involved. This Video was also a valuable feed— be invaluable for the awareness and involvement of the
back for the improvement of crew procedures, taking teams during on board operations, and a ﬂuent com—
into account the actual performance of the crew when munication with the science team is essential to be
working in the ISS microgravity environment. able to reach quickly an understanding and agreement

C. Automated Operations on possible deviations from the pre—defined plan (e.g.
Once the FSL and GeoFlow facilities proved reli— setpoints validity and repetitions, way ahead for runs
able performance, further automation in the science affected by anomalies).
operations minimizing the ground interaction could be
introduced. This automation highly improved the sta—
bility of the operations plan by reducing the Chances Conclusions
of delays usually associated with ground commanding
operations, and what is more important increased the Preparing and executing the GeoFlow experiments on
amount of scientific data generated in the time available. board Columbus was a Challenging mission, only possible

@ Springer

"
"14","74 Microgravity Sci. Technol. (2015) 27:61—74
with a good cooperation and coordination between all the References
multiples entities involved in the process, with different
responsibilities and aims. The first ten scientific GeoFlow Albanese, C., Carotenuto, L., Ceriello, A., Dechiara, G., Dell ’Aver—
runs were successfully executed, providing the P1 with 53113, P» Fortezza, R., LaPPF‘a M., P611150, F» PCZZUtia F» Pic""
approximately 114000 high quality scientific interferome— 0010, C"" Tempesm’ S"" Verz1no, G"" Bonnat, G"" Pensavalle, E""
. . . . . . Marangoni, R.,Rina, L.,Trinchero, G.: Fluid Science Laboratory:
try Images. Although not ﬁllfllhng the complete SClenUflC Ready to ﬂy! Lessons learned on preparatory activities, opera—
plan due to a hardware malfunction, the experiment results tions and performances. In: 58th Congress of the International
were very valuable for the science team, and the mission is AStronautical FCderation 2007, LAC, VOL 1, PP- 564—570 (2007)
considered a great achievement for scientific tele—operations Dupent’ 0"" D ewendre’ TI’ Dewandel’ JZL"" Jeannes’ L"" Claessens’ D‘:
. The optical diagnostics of the F1u1d Selence Laboratory. In: 5th
on board Columbus and a very good experience for the International Conference on Space Optics 2004, ICSO, pp. 463—
different teams, and in particular for the E—USOC. 470 (2004)

GCCFIOW-Z experiment was a very demanding mission in EIlZ, T., StClIlelCh, S., SlIIllClC, D., KaSpCrOVlCh, G., Ratke, Lu First

terms of preparation and execution on—board the ISS, lasting eXpeememS uSing the Material? Science Laberatery on Board the
. . . , . Internatlonal Space Station. Micrograwty SCI. Technol. 23, 345—

more than a year. The solentific objectives were fully met, 353 (2011)

except for the very high rotation setpoints which could not Ezquerro, J M Rodriguez, J .: GEOFLOW—2 Mission Operations

be performed due to hardware limitations. The experience Implementation Concept, EUSOC-MOIC-GEOIL Issue 3, RCV- 1,

gained by the teams in the first GeoFlow and the imple— 23/03/11 (2011) , , , , ,

. . . Ezquerro, J .M., Fernandez, J .J ., Rodriguez, J ., Laveron—Simavﬂla, A.:
mentatlon Of a more ﬂeXIble planning approach allowed GEOFLOW—2: results and experiences from a long term mission
more efficient OperatiOIIS, able t0 adapt and eVOlVe With the on the 188. In: 63th International Astronautical Congress 2012,
encountered issues and hardware Changes, like the use of IAC, pp- 1-7 (2012)

MVIS instead of MM A and the increase in the FSL hard Feudel, F., Bergemann, K., Tuckerman, L., Egbers, Ch., Futterer, B.,
. . Gellert, M., Hollerbach, R.: Convection pattern in a spherical ﬂuid
dISkS caPaCItY- shell. Phys. Rev. E 83, 046304—1—046304—8 (2011)

GeoﬂOW—Zb eXperiment, although not completed and per— Feudel, F., Seehafer, N., Tuckerman, L.S., Gellert, M.: Multistability
formed on a best—effort basis due to its lower priority with in rotating Spherical Shell COHVCCUOH- Phys- RCV- E 87, 023021
respect to other 188 experiments at the time, provided eXper— (2013) , , , , , ,

. . . . Fortezza, R., MOIltl, R., SaV1no, R.: Res1dual— g orientation. Micrograv—
imental results essential to validate numerical models on ity SCi.TeChnol.XI,119—128(1999)

the ﬂOW and composition 0f the Earth’s core. EVeh facing Frutos, A., Rodriguez, J .: E—USOC and the GeoFlow experiment oper—
major technical problems, an operational workaround could ations. In: 59th International Astronautical Congress 2008, IAC,
be adopted to be able to get the most science possible in the pp‘ 677—682 (2008)

. . Futterer, B., Dahley, N., Koch, S., Scurtu, N., Egbers, C.: From
tlme available. isoviscous convective experiment ‘GeoFlow I’ to temperature—

The E—USOC team received recognition of excellence dependent Viscosity in ‘GeoFlow II’—ﬂuid physics experiments
from BSA for the eXpertise, professionalism and dedication OH-board 15$ for the capture of COHVCCUOH Phenomena in Earth’s
shown during the GeoFlow—2 mission, and were awarded F outerlgorg‘ng m:ntl; ACtaAAsgonzaut‘ 7,1’ 11—11391301112)b h R

. . . utterer, ., e s, ., esa, .— ., aussm er, ., 0 er ac , .,
Wlth one Of the ESA 188 Awards 2013 1n the thud ISS Breuer, D., Egbers, C.: Sheet—like and plurgne—like thermal ﬂow in
Award ceremony fOI"" their W01"" k in this experiment. a spherical convection experiment performed under microgravity.

J. Fluid MeCh. (2013). doi:10.1017/jfm.2013.507

Labib, M., Piontek, D., Valsecchi, N., Griffith, B., Dejmek, M.,

Jean, 1., Mailloux, M., Palardy, R., Michels, J ., Michalyna, C.,

de Carufel, J .: The ﬂuid science laboratory’s microgravity Vibra—
Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank the Centro tion isolation subsystem overview and commissioning update.
para el Desarrollo Tecnologico Industrial (CDTI) (The Centre for the SpaceOps 1-10 (2010)
Development of Industrial Technology) for the opportunity to work in MaZZOHi, SJ GCOFlOW II Experiment Scientific Requirements, SCI-
projects such as the one described in this paper. We would also like ESA-HSF-ESR-GEOFLOW 11, Issue 4, Rev 0, 23/04/2012 (2012)
to thank ESA, the Italian USOC (M ARS), the Columbus Control Cen— Monti, R., Savino, R.: G—sensitiVity of microgravity experimentation:
ter (Col—CC), the European Planning Team, the European Astronauts fundamentals of disturbance response. Microgravity Sci. Technol.
Center, the Payload Developer (Astrium GmbH) and the GeoFlow SCi— XI, 1-6 (1998)
ence Team for their active work during the experiment preparation and Pacros, Ad GeoFlow Experiment Scientific Requirements, ESA—
execution. HME—ESR—GEOFLOW, Issue 1, ReV 0, 16/08/2007 (2007)
@ Springer

"
