"","x"
"1","Acta Astronautica I (IIII) IlI—III
.1‘€1.2233:13:;1152.’ r Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect / ’
z/ /
1~j13_:§‘c{‘ ‘ ,
., ,._;;.-- )4
v; {1 Acta Astronautlca /
ELSEVIER journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/actaastro :: l::-.II(': .ny
—
. . . . ‘ ,
From 150v1scous convective experiment GeoFlow I to
. . . ‘ , . .
temperature—dependent v15c051ty 1n GeoFlow II —Flu1d phy51cs
experiments on—board 155 for the capture of convection phenomena
. , i?
1n Earth 5 outer core and mantle
B. Futterer *, N. Dahley, S. Koch, N. Scurtu, C. Egbers
Brandenburg University of Technology Cottbus, Department ofAerodynamics and Fluid Mechanics, Siemens—Halske-Ring 14, 03046 Cottbus, Germany
ARTICLEINFO ABSTRACT
Article history: With the hydrodynamic experiment ‘GeoFlow’ (Geophysical Flow Simulation) instability
RecelVEd 19]anuary 201 1 and transition of convection between two spherical shells are traced. The ﬂow is driven by a
RECEIVEd 1“ rEVISEd form central—symmetry buoyancy force ﬁeld in microgravity conditions. We performed experi—
7 AugUSt 20“ ments for a wide range of rotation regimes, within the limits between non— and rapid—
Accepted 12 August 2011 . . . . . . . .
rotatlon. Here we focus on the non—rotatlonal convectlon 1n an 1sov1scous expenmental ﬂu1d
— as in ‘GeoFlow l’ and the preparation of ‘GeoFlow 11’, that uses a temperature—dependent
KeJ/WOTdS! . viscous ﬂuid. Theoretical predictions on thermal, dielectric and optical performance of the
Thermal convecuon ﬂuid suggest the use of an all<anole, i.e. 1—Nonanol as working ﬂuid for ‘GeoFlow 11’. Initial
Egrtelllgiltesrhgrse ground based experiments demonstrate the inﬂuence of the viscosity contrast on ﬂuid ﬂow
Constant viscosity patterns. Speciﬁc results from the ‘GeoFlow 1’ experiment, i.e. steady—state convection above
Mantle a threshold and transition to chaos, are used as a reference.
Temperature_dependent viscosity © 2011 ElSEVlEI‘ Ltd. All rights FESEFVEd.
Geophysical ﬂuid dynamics
Experiment
International Space Station 155
European module COLUMBUS
Fluid Science Laboratory FSL
1. Introduction Earth core, and on the other hand for the Earth mantle in
[4]. Both books highlight the complementary aspects of
The overall driving mechanism of ﬂuid ﬂow in the theoretical, numerical and experimental research for a
inner Earth is convection in the gravitational buoyancy rich variety of physical conditions. While the theory
ﬁeld of our planet (Fig. 1). In particular there has been determines the basic concepts, the numerical simulation
involved a lot of effort in theoretical prediction and is able to Check approximations and modeling concepts
numerical simulation of both the geodynamo [1], which for a rich variety of parameters. Finally there are the
is maintained by convection, and mantle convection, experiments, that allow to capture all non—linear effects
which is the main cause for plate tectonics [2]. These and associated instabilities without analytical and numer—
two different manifestations of convection inside Earth ical simpliﬁcations. Up to now, the comparison between
are extensively described on the one hand in [3] for the all the three approaches is done only at selected points
and is destined to benchmark each other.
To sharpen this discussion, especially laboratory experi—
mper was presented during the 615tIACin Prague mentson mantle dynamics are eon51dered as cruc1al for
*Corresponding author. Fax: +49 355 69 4891. exlﬂorlng new phy51cs and testing theorles [4, Chap- 3,
E—mail address: futterer@tu—C0ttbus.de (B. Futterer). p. 90]. For core dynamics, the experiments are ‘designed to
0094—5765/$ — see front matter © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi: 1 0.1 01 6/j.actaastro.201 1 08005
Please cite this article as: B. Futterer, et al., From isoviscous convective experiment ‘GeoFlow I’ to
temperature-dependent viscosity in ‘GeoFlow II’—Fluid physics experiments on-board 155 for the capture of
convection phenomena in Earth’s outer core and mantle, Acta Astronautica (201 1), doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.201 1.08.005

"
"2","2 B. Futterer et al. / Acta Astronautica I (IIII) III—III
, T‘“ This topic is of high interest in mantle convection
studies. Here temperature—dependent viscosity is believed
. to play a fundamental role [9]. The extremely high tem—
perature difference across the mantle generates a variation
of viscosity up to a factor 105 that deeply inﬂuences the
< 1 properties of the ﬂow in the entire domain. In particular, it
.‘ KM: , affects the properties of the upper boundary layer that,
liquid outercore being very viscous, takes the form of a so—called stagnant
7 0‘? k lid, where convection is heavily depressed and conduction
’ r ' ""ELL; 1 \ becomes an important heat transport mechanism. Viscosity
.« 80'“ inner 00""? ' contrast generated stagnant lids are an essential feature of
' "" I ' l; M mantle convection and are at the basis of the still not fully
' explained formation of plate tectonics [10].
convective Focusing now on this temperature—dependency of a
motion basic ﬂuid ﬂow in spherical geometries, we ﬁnd that, again,
7 "" different approaches are in use, which still need more
, interference for complementary benchmarks. Hence, so
crust far temperature—dependent viscosity convection has been
subjected to numerous numerical studies [2]. But these
J were mainly carried out in Cartesian box geometries, which
elucidate the transition to different convective regimes as
Fig. 1. Convection inside the Earth’s outer core and the mantle. ViSCOSity contrast iS increased. Furthermore there are only
few results obtained in the spherical geometry. A current
limitation of these studies is the lack of experimental
understand the basic ﬂuid (---) mechanical processes’ evidence, as the computational codes often also assume
[3, chap. 1], p. 319]. In summary, one can state that an inﬁnite Prandtl number and therewith a Stokes ﬂow
different approaches have been followed in order to study with dropping the inertial part of the equations. Thus the
speciﬁc phenomena experimentally, against the back— purpose of ‘GeoFlow II’ is to observe the basic properties of
ground of magneto—hydrodynamic (if especially the outer the ﬂow in the small viscosity contrast regime, by achieving
core is regarded) but also on the pure hydrodynamic the maximalviscosity variation allowed with the hardware
physics of ﬂuids. Depending on the research focus, rectan— limitation of the ‘GeoFlow’ inside the Fluid Science Labora—
gular, cylindrical, as well as spherical geometries are in use, tory. Even if the ﬂow parameters are far from representing
even if the geometry of the Earth suggests the use of the the realistic ones found inside the mantle (a condition that
spherical coordinate system. With the experiment ‘GeoFlow’ poses an insurmountable experimental challenge), they are
(Geophysical Flow Simulation) instability and transition of to be considered still useful for a ﬁrst veriﬁcation of present
hydrodynamic convection in spherical shells are traced. In spherical numerical models. This will extend the state of
the speciﬁc focus here is the realization of a so—called self— the art simulations to more realistic three—dimensional
gravitating spherical shell setup [1]. More precisely, the ﬂuid spherical geometry, a clear trend of present research
motion in a gap between two concentric spheres is observed, activities in the study of Earth mantle evolution [2]. To
with the inner spherical shell heated and the outer spherical summarize, the main objective will be the experimental
shell cooled. A high voltage potential between the inner and modeling of mantle convection within temperature—depen—
outer spheres together with the use of a dielectric working dent viscous ﬂuid ﬂow in a spherical shell setup.
ﬂuid induces an electro—hydrodynamic force, which is in In order to introduce the ‘GeoFlow II’ experiment we
analogy to the gravitational buoyancy force inside the Earth. will discuss the basic equations and motivate the use of the
To reduce unwished directed gravity this experiment alkanole as working ﬂuid. To give an initial impression of
requires microgravity conditions. We refer to [5—8] for viscosity inﬂuences with the chosen l—Nonanol, results
scientiﬁc background and application of this technique in from laboratory tests will be shown in the third section.
spherical shell experiments. There we will also discuss the experimental procedure as
The ‘GeoFlow 1’ experiment was accomplished on the well as overall principles of the measurement technique, to
International Space Station’s module COLUMBUS inside the be speciﬁc the Wollaston shearing interferometry. Further—
Fluid Science Laboratory FSL. Special goal of that experi— more we will also present the possibilities to compare
ment was to capture the large—scale convection without as experimental and numerical approaches. Then in the ﬁnal
well as with rotation. For the rotational situation, the section speciﬁc results from the ‘GeoFlowI’experiment, i.e.
stabilizing effects due to centrifugally driven convection the non—rotatingisoviscous thermal convection in spherical
are discussed against the gravitational—buoyancy driven shells, will be presented as a reference for ‘GeoFlow II’.
convection. For this spherical Rayleigh—Bénard convection
in different rotating regimes the working ﬂuid was a 2. Physical basics
silicone oil, for which kinematic viscosity v is approxi—
mately constant. In contrast, for the second experiment, The equations of continuity, motion and heat conduc—
named ‘GeoFlow II’, we propose to use a working ﬂuid with tion describe the hydrodynamic convection in ﬂuids, which
temperature—dependent viscosity. is generated by density, temperature and concentration
Please cite this article as: B. Futterer, et al., From isoviscous convective experiment ‘GeoFlow I’ to
temperature-dependent viscosity in ‘GeoFlow II’—Fluid physics experiments on-board 155 for the capture of

"
"3","B. Futterer et al. / Acta Astronautica I (IIII) III—III 3
gradients in the gravity ﬁeld [11]. Focusing on temperature to the real set value for the viscosity at a speciﬁc AT with
gradients in an incompressible and isoviscous Newtonian v

- - - Av = —tef (5)
ﬂu1d With low values for the coefﬁc1ent of volume expan— A
. . . . , V(Ttef-I- T)
Sion oc, it IS p0551ble to assume a 11near dependency for . . . . .
density changes with the functional relation for density p and w111.de11ver the Size of order for the vanation of the
and temperature Tby [)2 p0[1—oc(T—T0)]. Hereby the index used ﬂuid below. The phy51cal propert1es are gathered
0 marks reference values for the used variables. With this Wlth the Prandtl number Pr = Vref/Kv tOO- .
assumption and additionally with regarding p as constant The geometrical Property 0f the hardwatets chicussed
in all terms of the conservation laws, besides the external by the radius. rat1o ’7 = ti/tOv 15 ﬁxed Wlth ’7 = m f 05
one, we use the Boussinesq approximation for our equa— Refer to details on the hardware in [8,14], who descr1be1t
tions in analogy to [11]. for the ‘GeoFlow 1’ experiment. The non—dimensional
The external force is the buoyancy force resulting from boundary cond1t1ons are hO'Shp for veloc1ty U, and for
the acceleration due to gravity. For the experimental temperature T, values are set t0.T(77)=1 311d T(1)=0,
spherical shell setup it is acting along a vertical axis éz. correspond1ng t0 cool1ng and heat1ng 0f the system. .
Here we set up the acceleration due to an electro—hydro— To proceed, the dynamics 0t GeoFlow 15 descr1bed Wlth
dynamic force, by means of a high voltage potential AT r3
. . . . l - h Vpref ge 0
between the 1nner and outer sphencal boundanes. Th1s Ray 918 number Racentr = W (6)
leads to a radial direction of acceleration due to electro— ref
hydrodynamic gravity with er. Refer to [5,6], who intro— 2 Qrz 2
duced that technique ﬁrst, and to [13], who developed it Taylor number Ta = (M) (7)
also for the application in ‘GeoFlow’, initially for an “ref
ISOVISCOUS ﬂmd' , , with the acceleration due to a high voltage potential Vtms
To develop the equat10ns for the use in a temperature—
, , , , deﬁned by [5]
dependent Viscous ﬂuid, we scale our equat10ns w1th the 2
outer spherical radius r0 for length, the thermal diffusive Zeogt riro 2 1
time rg/K for time, the term pOKv/rg for pressure and the ge = pref To—Ti Vmsﬁ'
temperature difference AT 2 T i—T o for temperature, where . . . . .
K is the thermal diffusivity and p0 is the reference density. where 8.0.1S the d1electnc constant and er 15 the .relat1ye
The indexes i and 0 mark the references at the inner and permlttIVIty. Furthermore V 15 the COEfﬁClent Of dIEIECtrlc
outer base, respectively. To summarize then, the non— expansion and comparable to the effects,which are induced
dimensional Boussinesq equations for velocity ﬁeld U and by the coefﬁcient 0f volume expansion 06 [61- With the
temperature ﬁeld T for thermal convection in rotating parameter 0f
reference frame under inﬂuence of a dielectrophoretic oc p ATgr3
acting central—symmetry buoyancy ﬁeld are given by Rayleigh number Ra = % (8)
ref
V'UZO’ (1) the natural buoyancy force is considered, but is only of
relevance in a laboratory, where the acceleration due to
_1 6U M T gravity g is present. In microgravity conditions with ,ug this
Pt ' [E +(U' WU = —Vp +V' @(VUJFV U) Rayleigh number tends to zero and is therefore dropped.
With this it is the Rayleigh number Ram”, which
1 A A considers thermal effects with Ra ~ AT in radial direc—
Ra -—Te Ra . Te . . . . . “9""”
+ 66""” r5 r+ 2 tion er. Conohs force 15 measured by the Taylor number
~. ~ . A T a, with T a~ n, and n as the rotation rate of the sphere.
_ Taez X U+RaTr s1n Heeq, (2) The rotational axis is in direction of éz. Orthogonal to the
rotational axis in equatorial plane éeq, there are the
5T 2 centrifugal effects which are counted with the additional
— U - V T = V T . 3 ~ ’
at +( ) ( ) factor Ra = ocAT /4 - Pr - T a. In ‘GeoFlow I’ this factor
6 . . .
Before we introduce the parameters, which are in use reaches the order Of 10 ’ 1f the h1ghest p0551ble tempera—
. . . . ture d1fference AT 2 10K and the h1ghest rotat10n rate
in the equat1ons, we want to estabhsh the dynam1c ‘ ,
. . . . nmax :2 Hz are used. For GeoFlow II the whole sphere
v15c051ty MM 2 vtef - pref, which 15 temperature—dependent .
. . . . rotates at the slowest pOSSlble value of nmin 20.008 H2
here. This 15 descr1bed by the Arrhen1us—Andrade law . . . .
w1th T a=4. Herew1th the camera of the optical system 15
MD 2 “refd—EU—Trem, (4) triggered, in order to gather ﬂuid ﬂow images at different
positions on the sphere. Therewith these rapid rotational
where E marks the activation energy [12]. It has to be inﬂuences are neglected within ‘GeoFlow II’ and the
discussed now, whether the Boussinesq approximation is mantle convection is highlighted.
still valid, if we now take into account a variation of the It remains to mention our own numerical simulation
viscosity as in the viscous term of our momentum for the speciﬁc parameter sets (11, Pr, Ram”, T a) of
equation (2). This should be the case for low changes in Eqs. (1)—(3). For this, we use the pseudo—spectral code
the viscosity contrast. The viscosity contrast Av itself is from [15], which expands the velocity and temperature
described with the relation of the reference viscosity vtef ﬁeld into series of spherical harmonics in all coordinate
Please cite this article as: B. Futterer, et al., From isoviscous convective experiment ‘GeoFlow I’ to
temperature-dependent viscosity in ‘GeoFlow II’—Fluid physics experiments on-board 155 for the capture of
convection phenomena in Earth’s outer core and mantle, Acta Astronautica (201 1), doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.201 1.08.005

"
"4","4 B. Futterer et al. / Acta Astronautica I (IIII) Ill—III
directions, i.e. radial, azimuthal and meridional. Maximal from alkanoles, in particular 1—Octanol C8H180 as well as
truncations of this serial expansion were (radial, meridio— the 1—Nonanol CgHzoo, are estimated, assuming technical
nal, azimuthal)=(30,60,60), time—stepping was down to setup of ‘GeoFlow I’. As a result, the alkanes offer the
1 x 10—6. The iteration of the calculation is observed by better dielectric performance than the alkanoles. They
logging the spectral coefﬁcients as well as the kinetic itself show a stronger variation viscosity in the relevant
energy and the Nusselt number. More details on this thermal working regime. Dielectric performance is corre—
logging and assessment of the temporal behavior are lated with an optical assessment of the ﬂuid. For this the
described in [16]. While our direct numerical simulation refractive index N correlates with dielectric properties by
for the real ‘GeoFlow 1’ experiment has been accom— equation N2 =808r - M, where the factorM 2 Mom with the
plished, the simulation of the ‘GeoFlow II’ experiment is permeability constant MO and the relative permeability ,u,
a recently open issue, as the implementation of Eq. (4) is can be dropped due to the use of a non—magnetic ﬂuid and
under development. So besides the possibility to use other experiment itself. The symbol 80 marks the dielectric
codes (also for benchmarks), there is the requirement to constant.
have direct numerical simulated temperature ﬁelds for ‘GeoFlow II’ will focus on temperature—dependency of
the real experiment. Those temperature ﬁelds are the base viscosity, therefore the following discussions are only for
for the forward modeling, i.e. the calculation of measure— the alkanole 1—Nonanol, which is preferred for this scien—
ment images, and will be pointed out below. tiﬁc reasons. The alkanole 1—Octanol failed safety issues
At variance with ‘GeoFlow I’, where the convective for the microgravity conditions.
pattern in spherical geometry was observed for the ﬁrst 3. Are the presented and chosen alkanole ﬂuids able to
time on a standard model ﬂuid, purpose of ‘GeoFlow II’ is be used in experimental environment of ‘GeoFlow I’,
to capture some essential features of mantle convection, regarding optical performance?
where the properties of the convecting ﬂuid are deter— The index of refraction of 1—Nonanol has been mea—
mined, among other factors, by the extremely high sured as a function of temperature. The test shows that 1—
temperature and viscosity variations. Keeping the current Nonanol generates appreciable temperature driven opti—
hardware limitations, it is proposed to utilize a sample cal path differences inside ‘GeoFlow’ experimental appa—
with a more pronounced temperature—dependence of ratus, similar to the ones now observed with the silicone
viscosity, to capture the essential spatiotemporal features oil ﬂuid.
that are believed to be present in the mantle, even though Finally, the most relevant physical property, i.e. the
without reaching its extreme temperature, pressure and viscosity of the used alkanole 1—Nonanol, varies with
viscosity conditions. Pr: ,uref/pref - K. In Fig. 2 we have plotted the measured
The choice of a suitable sample has been based on the kinematic viscosity v at different temperatures T real. In
following questions: anticipation of the experiment procedure, i.e. to vary the
1. Which ﬂuid is able to simulate mantle convection viscosity contrast Av, three working environments WEI, II
behavior? and III are marked, too, with TrefJ=25 0C, Trefﬂ=20 0C
Mantle convection itself can be seen as a relatively and T ref,III=3O-5 0C. The middle WEI just corresponds to
simple convective ﬂuid ﬂow regarding the typical low
velocities. Therefore rotational effects coming from Cor—
iolis and centrifugal forces can be neglected. The chal— 15 _ _ _ :_ _ _ m
lenge is the material that ﬂows, i.e. the ﬂuid itself. - ' ' M5 7.
‘Rheology of mantle material is not simple Newtonian, 12
and mantle materials are a multi—component system NE
[2]. Coming from geophysical/geological theory those E ..____.__,,§_,_.__
aspects of viscous materials of the mantle are numerical E 9
modeled by the viscosity which depends on depth, pres— §
sure and temperature. By realizing a ﬁrst comparable '3
experiment in spherical shells one has to ﬁnd an experi— g. 6 __
mental ﬂuid, whose viscosity varies with temperature S .- lAv.
very strongly, herewith dropping aspects of stress and “.5 3 — - ‘
depth dependency in this approach. From ﬂuid dynamics
research, alkane ﬂuids CnH2n+2 (formerly known as par— ""I
afﬁns) as well as alkanole ﬂuids CnH2n+20 show the 0
relevant behavior. Being highly viscous and changing 15 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 52
their viscosity with temperature, it seems that they can temperature [°C]
be USEd for mOdEImg ma.ntle dynamics. . . Fig. 2. Temperature—dependence of viscosity for the experiment ﬂuid,
2' Are the presented ﬂu1ds able to be USEd 1n EXperlmental the alkanole 1—Nonanol, which is ﬁlling the spherical shell system of the
enVirOHment 0f ‘GEOFIOW 1’, regarding diEIECtriC propertiES? ‘GeoFlow II’ experiment, and for the ‘GeoFlow 1’ experiment ﬂuid, i.e.
Further relevant properties for the ‘GeoFlow’ environ— silicone oil M5. Additionally the so—called working environment WE and
ment have to be considered, such as the dielectric proper— the induced viscosity contrast Av ofthe enperiment is marked, with the
ties for setting up the high voltage potential in order to mference teinperature .Of the COOllng Clrcu‘t’ Wlth Tm” :20 0C and
, , , , Tref,,,1=30.5 C. Therew1th the max1mum of Av 15 Avuw 1.45 and the
SEtuP the central SymmEtry force ﬁdd- The p0551b111t1es Of minimum of Av,” ~ 1.25. For ‘GeoFlow 1’ reference temperature was set
experimental ﬂuids from alkanes C12H26 up to C15H32, and to Tr,” = 250 c, inducing Av] ~ 1.17.
Please cite this article as: B. Futterer, et al., From isoviscous convective experiment ‘GeoFlow I’ to
temperature-dependent viscosity in ‘GeoFlow II’—Fluid physics experiments on-board 15$ for the capture of

"
"5","B. Futterer et al. / Acta Astronautica I (IIII) III—III 5
the performing process of ‘GeoFlow I’, where the former 3. Temperature-dependent viscous natural
experimental ﬂuid, i.e. the silicone oil, has approximately convection—laboratory studies for ‘GeoFlow II’
constant viscosity. The two other WEII and III are the
lowermost and uppermost possible boundary of the Fluid With initial laboratory tests for the overall behavior of
Science Laboratory cooling system. In the technical setup, the ‘GeoFlow 11’ experimental ﬂuid 1—Nonanol, it shall be
the experiment is performed in such a way, that the possible to evaluate the theoretical predictions on ther—
cooling circuit is set to these values by setting a T 0. Then mal, dielectric and optical performance of the ﬂuid, which
the heating circuit T ,- is varied, to set AT in reference to the are discussed very detailed in Section 2. In addition, for
outer cooling loop. Then, for the viscosity contrast Av, we numerical simulations it is crucial to regard two aspects,
can calculate the maximum Am a: 1.45 and the minimum i.e. increasing the viscosity contrast accompanied by
Avm a: 1.25. With this low value for the maximal possible decreasing a Rayleigh number and vice versa. Up to now
variation it is expected that the Boussinesq approxima— in experiments one challenging goal is to set up the
tion is still valid. Furthermore the minimal possible highest possible Av and reference the results with iso—
variation is not far from the situation for the ‘GeoFlow I’ viscous ﬂuids. For ‘GeoFlow II’ a scenario has been devel—
working ﬂuid silicone oil with Av a: 1.17. That is why we oped to approach the numerical procedures with one
expect to have a comparable ‘isoviscous’ behavior in experimental ﬂuid. The assessment here is to vary the
WEIII, and we can use results from ‘GeoFlow I’ as a working environment of the experiment.
reference in the following section. Furthermore a labora— The dynamics of this terrestrial test case considers a
tory study shall deliver, whether this low contrast can spherical shell system, set up by an inner heated sphere
already be suitable for demonstrating inﬂuence on basic and an outer cooled sphere, exposed to the gravity acting
ﬂow concepts. This will be presented afterwards. vertically along the axis of the spherical system. The ﬂuid
Moreover, that procedure of changing the working inside the spherical shell can be considered to be strati—
environment implies the reference viscosity, which has ﬁed stably in the ‘southern’ part, with warm ﬂuid lying
to be used in the calculation of the Prandtl number. Hence above cold. In the ‘northern’ hemisphere though it is the
in the experiment two Pr are set. If the experiment is other way around, with cold ﬂuid above warm. The
performed in WEII, where the outer cooling loop is at the induced ﬂow consists of an axisymmetric plume stream—
lowest possible temperature, the viscosity increases, and ing from the north pole of the inner sphere, and returning
therewith Pr=179. If the experiment is performed in to the equatorial regions (Fig. 3c). This is also described as
WEIII, where the outer cooling loop is at the maximum a thermal upwelling.
possible temperature, the viscosity decreases resulting in The measurement technique for our ﬂuid ﬂow is the
an approximately isoviscous behavior of the working Wollaston shearing interferometry. This interferometry
ﬂuid. Then Prandtl number corresponds to Pr=125. Refer considers the variation of refractive index, which is
also to Table 1 for the listing of further relevant properties induced by thermal changes and therewith by density
of the used 1—Nonanol analog to [12]. Additionally, the gradients. A measurement image shows fringes, which
parameter domain of the experiment is listed in Table 2. correspond to temperature gradients like isolines of
Table 1
Physical properties of the alkanole 1—Nonanol, which is the experimental ﬂuid of ‘GeoFlow II’. The values of the parameters are listed for two possible
thermal working environments of the experiment [12].
Parameter Unit Value (20 0C) Value (30.5 0C)
Viscosity vref mZ/s 1.42 x 10—5 9.73 x 10—6
Thermal conductivity xi W/(K m) 1.63 x 10—1 1.58 x 10—1
Speciﬁc heat c J/(kg K) 2.47 x 103 2.47 x 103
Therm. diffusivity K with K = xl/(pref x c) mZ/s 7.94 x 10—8 7.76 x 10—8
Therm. coeff. of expansion oc 1/1( 9.45 x 10—4 9.45 x 10—4
Relative permittivity 8r 8.83 8.83
Therm. coeff. of expansion for V(Treaz) with y = 06(8r—1)(8r+2)/(38r) 1/1( 3.03 x 10—3 3.03 x 10—3
Density pref kg/m3 8.29 x 102 8.22 x 102

Table 2

Parameter domain of the ‘GeoFlow II’ experiment, and the situation inside the Earth [4].
Parameter [Unit] Value Non—dimensional parameter GeoFlow II Mantle
Gap width ri—ro [mm] 13.5 Radius ratio 17 0.5 0.55
Viscosity v [mZ/s] 7 x 10—6 . . . 1.5 x 10—5 Prandtl PT 125 ---Zoo 00
Temp. difference AT [K] s 10 Rayleigh Racem S 106 106_108
Rotation 11 [Hz] 3 2 Taylor Ta 3 4 0
Please cite this article as: B. Futterer, et al., From isoviscous convective experiment ‘GeoFlow I’ to
temperature-dependent viscosity in ‘GeoFlow II’—Fluid physics experiments on-board ISS for the capture of

"
"6","6 B. Futterer et al. / Acta Astronautica I (IIII) III—III
a b
(a ‘
‘ ‘35."" :23 m...
. +2 29?""ng: ‘~
1:? *‘- -' 4%
gm; Wr/v .
-- ..'*'$~~ow,:.z,t. ""a _ ""' ‘ ‘
. fay, {zviw-LHJW. J"" ‘
c d
camera
4
4 o i 1 ‘
(v
equator
ﬂuid cell
Fig. 3. Fringe patterns of convection: Example for (a) numerically calculated and (b) experimentally observed interferogram for isoviscous natural
convection in spherical shells. This is visualized for the three—dimensional temperature ﬁeld on the sphere (c). The dark coloring marks, qualitatively,
a hot, plumelike upwelling ﬂuid. In one single interferogram image, the polar regions are at the top, while equatorial regions are at its bottom (d).
The thermal ﬂow gets visible as pairs of elliptically formed rings.
height in a topological map. Therewith high gradients get For a monitoring angle with 300, as it is delivered by the
visible as dense lines of those fringes. Refer to [14] for measurement setup in the FSL, the symmetric ellipses get
details on that setup for the use in dielectric convection asymmetric as visible in the experimental image.
experiments in spherical geometry and implementation In addition, for the experimentally observed measure—
in the Fluid Science Laboratory of the European COLUM— ment image, the adjustment of the speciﬁc optical compo—
BUS module on 155. In addition, the interpretation of these nent, i.e. the Wollaston prism, induces nearly parallel fringes
interferograms is traced by a forward modeling techni— for AT 2 O K (refer to Fig. 3, top). In the numerical construc—
que. For this, we calculate fringe patterns from the tion of interferograms a highly accurate adjustment of the
numerically simulated temperature ﬁelds by a numeri— Wollaston prism in the focal point is assumed. Then fringe
cally integration of the temperature ﬁeld in radial direc— patterns occur only for present temperature gradients
tion, followed by the calculation of phase shifts depending AT750 K. To conclude, the relevant numerical and experi—
on that integrated temperature amplitude ﬁeld, and, mental fringe patterns of convection are in alignment.
ﬁnally, correlating those phase shifts with bright and dark With the complementary analysis of calculating fringe
regions as multiples of the light source wavelength. patterns from numerically simulated temperature ﬁelds a
In Fig. 3 these fringe patterns of convection are collected tool has been developed in order to identify patterns in
for the experimental setup (Fig. 3b) and for a numerically the experiment, which are challenging to interpret just by
calculated interferogram (Fig. 3a). In every single image the itself. This forward modeling supports the data analysis of
polar regions are at the top, while equatorial regions are at the experiment. With this the most feature of the ‘Geo—
its bottom (Fig. 3d). Regarding the fact of rotational sym— Flow’ benchmark possibilities is the comparison of pat—
metry in convective ﬂow state, seen in the three—dimen— tern selection in the ﬂuid ﬂow. Quantitative variables as
sional temperature ﬁeld image (Fig. 3c), this is destroyed due the Nusselt number and kinetic energy are not delivered
to insensitivity of diagnostics in the azimuthal direction. by the experiment. Nevertheless it is stated, that for the
Only mirror symmetry to the pole survives. Speciﬁc fringe objective to study the inﬂuence of viscosity contrast the
pattern corresponds to pairs of elliptic rings. Moreover, the pattern selection shall be sufﬁcient.
captured measurement section is a spherical surface in the In the next step, the procedure of studying the viscos—
spherical gap (Fig. 3d), which is integrating the temperature ity contrast is tested in the laboratory situation. First a
effects along the radial distance. The image of an interfero— parameter table is operated comparable to the conditions
gram corresponds to a ﬂattened copy on the camera chip. of the ‘GeoFlow 1’ mission. That implies, the reference
Then this image is an area accurate projection to the plane temperature to be set to 25 0C, in order to drive the ﬂuid
(instead of conformal) producing those elliptic rings. For a cell assembly’s cooling circuit with 25 0C and increase the
conformal projection those would have been circles. The temperature of the heating circuit for establishing the AT.
numerically constructed interferogram regards a monitoring In these terrestrial conditions a variation of Vrms enhances
angle of 00, corresponding to a projection with normal axes. the heat transfer, so as besides Ram”, the ‘classical’
Please cite this article as: B. Futterer, et al., From isoviscous convective experiment ‘GeoFlow I’ to
temperature-dependent viscosity in ‘GeoFlow II’—Fluid physics experiments on-board 155 for the capture of

"
"7","B. Futterer et al. / Acta Astronautica I (IIII) III—III 7
2.5E+05
0 WE m (305°C)
OWE|(25°C) WEII Q WEIII
22:31» """"3 :25? .
WE || WE III
a 1.5E+05 © Q)
’2 r""..::~-4 . exa- ‘ . .
«:8 av“; ~53. .{JEEX , 741‘
1_0E+05 ...-.;;,...,,A’ e-” © .' ‘ .7
0 <2
5-0E+04 a Q §%% © 222:2.“ 3%
0.05+00<, o 0 o
0.0E+00 5.0 E+05 1.0E+06 1.5E+06 2.0E+06 2.5E+06
Ra
Fig. 4. Initial convection experiments with the ‘GeoFlow 11’ working ﬂuid 1—Nonanol in terrestrial conditions, where two Rayleigh numbers, Rd and Racentr
resp., exist. On the x—axis it is Ra, which measures the imposed thermal forcing at AT as ‘natural’ buoyancy, on the y—axis it is Racemr, which measures the
impact of electro—hydrodynamic controlled thermal forcing by variation of VTms at a speciﬁc AT. Sets of these Rayleigh numbers, which are kept ﬁxed, are
observed in different working environments WE, i.e. in different viscosity contrasts. This is marked with the rhomboid symbol <>, whereupon the most
sized correspond to the working environment with the highest reference temperature WEIII, and the lowest sized correspond to the lowest one with
WEII. Measurement technique is the Wollaston shearing interferometry. The observed images follow the interpretation rules as described in Fig. 3. The
comparison between different WE demonstrate very clearly, that there are different ﬂow ﬁelds for the high and low viscosity contrast of WEII and WEIII.
Rayleigh number due to natural buoyancy force has to be Finally it is stated that, with the ‘GeoFlow’ hardware,
considered just superimposing the system [7]. Therewith 1—Nonanol seems to be able to model physics of ﬂuids in
in Fig. 4 the parameter domain is spanned by Ra ~ AT as mantle convection phenomena, where amongst others a
natural buoyancy and, for a ﬁxed AT, by Racentr ~ Vrms as very high viscosity contrast is assumed. While this ter—
superimposed heat transfer enhancement. As second restrial case of natural convection demonstrates already
working environment WEII the lowest and as third envir— the inﬂuence of the viscosity contrast, it cannot be used
onment WEIII the highest possible T ref have been tested. for the model of spherical thermal convection in a self—
Lowest limit was ﬁnally achieved with 20 0C, the max— gravitating force ﬁeld.
imum for the reference working environment is 30.5 0C
(refer to Fig. 2, too). Finally ﬁxed sets of (Ra,Racentr) are
observed in different WE, so as to compare the inﬂuence 4. Isoviscous thermal convection in spherical shells—on
of the viscosity contrast Av. orbit experiment ‘GeoFlow I’
In Fig. 4 that basic type of fringe pattern for natural
convection, i.e. plumelike upwelling in terms of elliptic With the accomplished experiment ‘GeoFlow I’ we are
rings, gets visible on the x—axis, if just AT and Ra resp. is able to present the dynamics for the isoviscous thermal
increased in a single WE. The higher the temperature convection in spherical shells in microgravity conditions.
gradient, the more dense are the fringes at the north pole. Those results will also serve as reference results for the
The upwelling plume is just strengthened. If, for a ﬁxed AT temperature—dependent situation of the viscosity during
and Ra resp., the VrmS and the Racemr resp. is increased in a the present performed experiment ‘GeoFlow II’. There—
single WE, different transitions occur. In low Rayleigh with, we regard now the classical problem of Rayleigh—
number regimes with Ra < 1 x 106 the increase of Racer,” Bénard convection in a spherical shell geometry.
leads to the situation, that plume—like upwelling vanishes First we want to regard the numerical simulated ﬂuid
with dissolving the distinct pairs of elliptic rings. For ﬂow, if we track an increase of the Rayleigh number
Ra>1 x 106 symmetry—breaking bifurcations are observed Racemr as on the y—axis in Fig. 5. As a result we have
with three—dimensional character of the ﬂow, which is described so far, thata steady—state convection is reached
involving also the equatorial regions of the sphere. above a critical threshold of Racentr = 2491 [13]. The
If we now compare the fringe patterns for a speciﬁc set patterns of convection produce different symmetries in
of (Ra,Racemr) in different WE, images demonstrate very form of axisymmetry, octahedral and ﬁve—fold ones [17].
clearly that there are different ﬂow ﬁelds for the high and Transition to time—periodic states capture a remnant
low viscosity contrast of WEII and WEIII, respectively. In the tetrahedral pattern symmetry before irregular ﬂow
experiments it is possible to track the images in space and appears. Refer to details on the direct numerical simula—
time. By this an animation delivers, that the ﬂuid ﬂow tion and the path—following techniques in [14,17]. This
shows a turnaround, which is interpreted as a downwelling numerically assessed temporal behavior is marked on the
from the outer to the inner spherical boundary. y—axis in Fig. 5 on the left side of the illustration.
Please cite this article as: B. Futterer, et al., From isoviscous convective experiment ‘GeoFlow I’ to
temperature-dependent viscosity in ‘GeoFlow II’—Fluid physics experiments on-board 155 for the capture of

"
"8","8 B. Futterer et al. / Acta Astronautica I (IIII) III—III
numerical microgravity pseudo—spectral code is under development, in order to
SimUIatiO” eXpe'imem include the temperature—dependent viscosity. So that, on
. the one hand numerical simulation will accompany the
I . ""1.. ”’55:”??? experiment again. Moreover tools will be developed in order
5 J . _ jaggw .. j to interpret such fringe patterns of convection without the
g 10 ; “ii 10 :1» ‘ i353? basis of a forward modeling technique. This is of interest
w” .. I 333'} "" I'- especially for very supercritical regimes, for which numerical
E ‘ “$7 t ex}? simulations are not applicable.
.8 'k \\
g s‘ .. “Jr 5. Conclusion
5 10“ .. 1o4 .3 §- Pee???
E 4? ' 5.1% @533 The overall objective in the microgravity ‘GeoFlow’
$ 4 ""5 I 3 experiment series is the experimental realization of a
[I , ‘ “1:? .; LW' central—symmetry buoyancy force ﬁeld in spherical shells,
,, “V in order to capture the non—linear dynamics of geophysi—
3 3 cally motivated convection phenomena as they are present
10 W 10 W inside the Earth’s outer core or mantle. In this work, the
0 0 102 steps from the ‘GeoFlow 1’ experiment, which uses a ﬂuid
Taylor number Ta ' Steady °Peri0di0 * irregU'ar with isoviscous behavior (i.e. a silicone oil), to the ‘GeoFlow
II’ experiment, which holds a liquid, having a temperature—
Fig.5. Parametet domain of‘GeoFlowI’experiment with Taylor number dependent viscosity, iS traced. For this, we ﬁrst balance
Ta ~ 11 and Raylelgh number Racentr ~ AT and thermal convectlon 1n the , , , , , , , ,
non—rotating case Ta=O. Spatio—temporal behavior is marked for the SpEClﬁC SClentlﬁC questions,1.e. the VISCOSIty contraSt vana—
numerically calculated (left half) as well as for the experimentally tion in COHVECtiOH phenomena and that implementation in
observed data sets (right half). Fringe patterns of convection are the Boussinesq equations, and some technical require-
incmdec‘ for SPECiﬁC Raylagh “umbets Racentﬁnum = 5 ,X 104 (16ft comm“ ments, i.e. the optical and dielectric performance of possible
of images) and Racenmexp = 6 x 104 (rlght column of lmages) at spec1ﬁc . . . . .
temporal snapshots. The fringe topology corresponds to chaotic thermal quklng ﬂu1ds, as denveréd by alkane and alkanOle lquIdS.
ﬂow with remnanttetrahedral symmetry This leads to the theoretical proposal for the use of the
alkanole I—Nonanol as working ﬂuid for ‘GeoFlow II’.
In addition, our laboratory tests deliver the qualitative
Experimentally observed parameters 0f Racentr in Fig. 5 assessment, that, with the spherical ‘GeoFlow’ hardware
are collected Oh the right half Of the illustration. on the and with the developed thermal procedure of variation
one hand, they demonstrate a more 01‘ less narrow range the reference working environments, I—Nonanol can
0f available data, With a focus on the highly supercritical model the inﬂuence of the viscosity contrast on the ﬂuid
regime. Oh the other hand, they ShOW the same overall ﬂow instabilities. For mantle convection phenomena a
temporal chaotic behavior, as We have it for the numeri— very high viscosity contrast is assumed, but even for the
cally calculated data sets in that regime. The exact super— experimentally achieved viscosity contrast with a factor
position Of the numerical and experimental data sets has of approximately 145 the change from isoviscous to
net been ﬁnalized, 50 remaining ChSCUSSiOh is 011 a temperature—dependent viscous behavior can be visua—
qualitative comparison of the convective patterns itself. lized here in the ﬂuid ﬂow of the laboratory test case.
For this we have calculated fringe patterns of convection Finally, for the presently on orbit running ‘GeoFlow 11'
from the numerically simulated temperature ﬁeld, tOO. experiment, the ‘GeoFlow I’ data serves as a reference
Thus in Fig. 5 we have implemented experimentally case, in which a constant viscosity is assumed. Here we
observed interferograms f01‘ Racentr,exp = 5 X 104 Oh the right summarize this reference case with experimentally
half and numerically calculated interferograms for observed and numerically calculated ﬂuid ﬂow behavior.
Racentr,num = 5 X 104 Oh the left half, respectively. This The overall characteristics of the patterns of convection
numerical Rayleigh number iS also marking the highest show large scale convective cells. For ‘GeoFlow II’, it is
numerically resolved parameter. If we remind, that we have expected that this changes due to the use Of temperature—
polar regions at the tOP, while equatorial regions are at the dependent viscous ﬂuid. The ‘GeoFlow II’ experiment has
bottom Of a single image, one can see, that there is 110 clear been integrated in the ﬁrst half of the year 2011, after the
thermal ﬂuid ﬂOW direct at the pole. The dense lines Of the Automatic Transfer Vehicle ATV II ‘Johannes Keppler’ had
interferograms are interpreted in SUCh a way, that thermal delivered it to the 155. In the present status the procedures
upwellings OCCUF in ﬁne fringe topology, WhiCh iS visible are performed on orbit. First images are expected to be
here outreaching down to equatorial regions of the sphere. available for analysis within the next months.
In between the images is a real time of 20 5. Variation in
space and time emphasize the chaotic behavior.
For the ‘GeoFlow II’ experiment it is expected that Acknowledgments
this ﬂuid ﬂow dynamics change due to the use of tempera—
ture—dependent viscous ﬂuid. As an additional preparation The ‘GeoFlow’ project is funded by ESA(Grant no. AO—99—
further numerical simulations shall capture variations of 049) and by the German Aerospace Center DLR (Grant nos.
thermal forcing (variation of Rayleigh number) with the 50 WM 0122 and 50 WM 0822). The authors would also
speciﬁc viscosity contrast of I—Nonanol. For this, the applied like to thank BSA for funding the ‘GeoFlow’ Topical Team
Please cite this article as: B. Futterer, et a1., From isoviscous convective experiment ‘GeoFlow I’ to
temperature-dependent viscosity in ‘GeoFlow II’—F1uid physics experiments on-board 155 for the capture of

"
"9","B. Futterer et al. / Acta Astronautica I (IIII) III—III 9
(Grant n0. 18950/05/NL/VJ). The scientists also thank the approach within GeoFlow, Acta Astronaut. 62 (4—5) (2008)
industry involved for support, namely Astrium GmbH, Frie— 300-307-
drichshafen German and the User Su OI‘t and O erations [8] T. von Larcher, B. Futterer, C. Egbers, R. Hollerbach, P. Chossat,
’ y . pp p . P. Beltrame, L. Tuckerman, F. Feudel, Geoﬂow: European micro—
Center MARS TEIESPaZIO, NQPIES, Italy and E'USOC, Madrld, gravity experiments on thermal convection in rotating spherical
Spain. Furthermore fruitful discussions with Prof. Dr. habil. shells under inﬂuence of central force ﬁeldJ-Jpn- SOC- Microgravity
Doris Breuer and Ana—Catalina Plesa, German Aerospace Appl' 2.5 (3) (2008) 121—126 . . . .
. f l h l h . [9] J. Ratcliff, P. Tackley, G. Schubert, A. Zebib, Tran51tions in thermal
Center, InStltUte O Panetary Researc ' Panetary P ySICS' convection with strongly variable viscosity, Phys. Earth Planet.
Berhn, Germany are gratefully acknowledged. Inter. 102 (1997) 201—212.
[10] R. Trompert, U. Hansen, Mantle convection simulations with rheol—
f ogies that generate plate—like behaviour, Nature 395 (1998) 686—689.
Re erences [11] S. Chandrasekhar, Hydrodynamic and Hydromagnetic Stability,
Dover Publications, 1981.
[1] F. Busse, Convective ﬂows in rapidly rotating spheres and their [12] D.L1de,Handbool< Of Chemistry and Phy51cs, CRC Press “192008“
dynamo action, Phys. Fluids 14 (2002) 1301_1313_ [13] V. Travnikov, C. Egbers, R. Hollerbach, The GeoFlow—experiment on
[2] M. Ogawa, Mantle convection: a review, Fluid Dyn. Res. 40 (2008) ISS—numerical Simulation, AdV- Space Res. 32 [2003.) 18.1—18.9-
379 ff [14] B. Futterer, C. Egbers, N. Dahley, S. Koch, L._Iehr1ng, First identiﬁca—
[3] G. Schubert, p_ Olson, Treatise on GeophysiCS—Core Dynamics, tion of sub— and supercritical convection patterns from ‘GeoFlow’,
Elsevier, 2009 the geophysical ﬂow simulation experiment integrated in Fluid
[4] G. Schubert, D. Bercovici, Treatise on GeophysiCS—Mantle Dynamics, Science Laboratory, Acta Astronaut. 55 (2010) 100-193-
Elsevier, 2009 [15] R. Hollerbach, A spectral solution of the magneto—convection
[5] I. Yavorskaya, N. Fomina, Y. Belyaev, A simulation of central equations in spherical geometry. Int.]. Numer. MEthOdS FIUidS 32
symmetry convection in microgravity conditions, Acta Astronaut. (2000) 773-797-
11 (1984) 179—183. [16] B. Futterer, C. Egbers, Quasi—stationary and Chaotic convection in
[6] J. Hart, G. Glatzmaier, J. Toomre, Space—Laboratory and numerical 10W rotating spherical ShEHS. in: 13- Eckhardt (ECL). Advances in
simulations of thermal convection in a rotating hemispherical shell Turbulence XII, Springer, 2009, pp. 97—101.
with radial gravity,]. Fluid Mech. 173 (1986) 519—544, [17] F. Feudel, K. Bergemann, L. Tuckerman, C. Egbers, B. Futterer,
[7] B. Futterer, M. Gellert, T. von Larcher, C. Egbers,Thermal convection M. Gellert, R. Hollerbach, Convection patterns in a spherical ﬂuid
in rotating spherical shells: an experimental and numerical shell, Phys. Rev. E 83 (2011) 046304 ff.
Please cite this article as: B. Futterer, et al., From isoviscous convective experiment ‘GeoFlow I’ to
temperature-dependent viscosity in ‘GeoFlow II’—Fluid physics experiments on-board ISS for the capture of
convection phenomena in Earth’s outer core and mantle, Acta Astronautica (201 1), doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.201 1.08.005

"
