"","x"
"1",". (0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)’ Sponsoring Organization.
Conference and Exhibit on lntemational
Caizasznisst 233's:?;‘5:1:?‘;2m A01~42866
' 2001-4939
EFFECTS OF ALTERED GRAVITY ON SPINAL Science Background
CORD EXCITABILITY
Prolonged weightlessness results in a weakening of the
Douglas Watt, M.D., Ph.D. and heart, a loss of skeletal muscle strength and volume and
Luc Lefebvre, B.Eng., M.B.A. decreased bone density.1 At this time, the only effective
Aerospace Medical Research Unit, treatment for these problems is in-ﬂight exercise.
McGill University, Montreal, Canada '
The basic unit of exercise is a single twitch contraction
of one ""motor unit"". By definition, a motor unit
Abstract consists of a group of muscle fibres and the single nerve
cell (motoneurone) that innervates them. If spinal cord
The goal of this experiment is to determine if spinal excitability is reduced during space ﬂight, and there are
cord excitability decreases during prolonged exposure to reasons to believe it may be, 3 this would hinder normal
weightlessness. Electrical shocks are delivered to the recruitment of that and other motoneurones. As a result,
posterior tibial nerve, causing a reﬂex contraction of the more effort would be required to produce the same level
soleus muscle in the same leg. The size of the response of exercise, or if the same apparent effort were
is a measure of how many motoneurones are excited by maintained, the actual level of exercise would decrease.
the standard volley of sensory impulses. The experiment If decreased excitability was still present on landing, it
is carried out three times before launch to obtain control would make it more difficult to stand and walk.
data for each subject. In—flight, testing occurs within 24 However, it may be possible to reverse the process
hours of launch, approximately 6 days into each while still in—flight.
mission and two weeks prior to returning to the ground.
Some subjects will also be tested 3 to 5 weeks after How does one measure spinal cord excitability in a
launch. Post-flight responses are measured on landing human being? If the tendon attached to a muscle is
day and l, 3 and 5 days later. With the experiment suddenly tapped, the result is a volley of sensory
partly completed, it appears that spinal cord excitability impulses that travel to the spinal cord, where they
decreases rapidly upon entering weightlessness, may excite the group of motoneurones that innervate that
recover somewhat over a period of months and is still muscle. All of the muscle fibres innervated by those
abnormal 5 days after returning to the ground. This motoneurones then contract. If spinal cord excitability
change may make .in-flight exercise less effective and/or is reduced, the sensory impulses recruit fewer
efficient and may contribute to locomotor difficulties motoneurones and the muscle contraction is smaller.
encountered after landing. Hence, the size of the contraction is a measure of spinal
cord excitability.
Introduction While tendon taps could be used in this experiment,
more precise results can be obtained with the Hoffmann
Usually referred to as the H—Reﬂex experiment, this Reﬂex (H—Reﬂex) technique.2 While closely related to
study was developed in Canada and is being performed tapping, the stimulus is an electrical shock to sensory
by American and Russian colleagues on both Shuttle fibres coming from stretch receptors in the muscle,
and the ISS. Scheduled to be carried out on the rather than a mechanical stretching of those receptors
Increment 2, 3 and 4 long—duration missions, it is the (see diagram, top of next page). Also, the response is
first multi—national human physiology experiment on the electrical activity recorded from the muscle, not the
the Space Station. All hardware and software for the mechanical contraction that follows that activity.
project were designed, created, and ﬂight—certified by a Nevertheless, each time a subject is tested, we are
group of four people within the AMRU, with extensive measuring how many motoneurones have been excited
cooperation and support provided by personnel at by a standard volley of sensory impulses. When the
Johnson Space Center (Houston), Marshall Space experiment was proposed, we expected to see that
Flight Center (Huntsville) and the David Florida number fall during the mission, quite quickly at first
Laboratory (Ottawa). and then more gradually over many days. We also
i expected a return to normal within days after landing.
Copyright © 2001 by the American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. All rights reserved.
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"2","(c)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)‘ Sponsoring Organization.
Hardware
‘ 3“ng Major pieces of equipment used in this experiment
bPlNAL CORD
$$$$$ng include a lap-top computer, an H-Reﬂex Test Unit
. M (HRTU), a foot brace and a knee brace. Other items
9 ; include a PCMCIA A/D converter card, a PCMCIA
% ﬂash memory card, assorted cables, subject restraint
’ FIBRES belts, electrodes and miscellaneous, small accessories.
MOTONEURONES MUSCLE A Payload and General Support Computer (PGSC) is
used if the experiment is being performed on Shuttle
and the Human Research F acility (HRF) portable
computer is used if it is being performed on the ISS.
Methods Both are IBM ThinkPad model 76OXT laptops (see
photograph, below). In either case, the computer
Testing Procedure controls the timing of the shocks delivered to the
subject, displays each response as it occurs, calculates
Each time a subject is tested, he or she is secured at the and displays the results of the experiment and stores the
waist and feet, with the hips, knees and ankles bent. A raw data for later, detailed analysis.
stimulating electrode is located behind the left knee and .. e . ..
recording e1 ectrodes are placed over the lower calf
muscles. The test operator (who can also be the subject) 5 ’
varies shock strength by turnin g a knob on a near-by 7 l, ”
experiment usin g a lap-top computer stacked on top of . M ,j' 3;
the electronics box. The actual test requires five W -.
minutes, but additional time is required for set-up. At ”,f‘» ‘i
the end of each session, the data are an alyzed and .5: Q”
displayed on the computer so that the crew member can Nm/
decide if the test was completed successfully. The
following drawing shows how a subject is tested in the
The HRTU contains the H—reflex stimulator, an EMG
amplifier, a stimulus measuring circuit, the interface to
the A/D converter and a power supply (see photograph,
below). The only controls are a single knob on the front
used to adjust stimulus strength and a manual trigger
iﬂ : pushbutton used for troubleshooting only. Separate
\Mi \‘ ‘\ LEDs indicate power on and a low battery condition.
\%L‘Q'I\Q
/¢b/\ [77 ' 93$}\ \

M. W). .\\""
obtain centre1 date for each Subject In-ﬂight, it is
carried out within the first 24 hours, approximately 68 .; 4:5
days into the mission and approximately 12 day S b6f0re >A
after launchPost-ﬂighh it iS peI‘f 01‘de 0n landing day e f'

2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)’ Sponsoring Organization.
During testing, the subject's feet are secured to a foot ”i”
brace usmg Nomex and Velcro straps (see photograph, aw”

. . . . . «WWW
beIOW). COmblned With the SUbJeet restraint belts, 1t “9‘8QNK
setVeS t0 maintaln the angles 0f the knees and ankles at @i ’.-"""""""">‘:. ~~\%
for stowage. Mf’xmx‘

4 4 ' 4,2%,4,:::':4;j:2:v,,:v,4,:1:2,=,:;2224=:-;:"",» v""""7'?»i:3""77421:;“12,.‘57',§Ii:-:-,:,:;i;:;'1,2»!':;::- .- 3:151. .- ' '- .- - .552'::-1:'5:'555':.=5:1::‘2525221-5153355?iT2:'='-2':.-'::'5:'=i.-i':"":'2:‘5i';':'§.'-"":';:';i'é.'-"":':'::::_E:.==.=;:-_:-_."".‘\’/’/:-i’:3:='-'.'.:'5.'=-"";'::%’-:‘.'=,-'-¥:=.=:'s:13:53:93.2???....iiiiiiiiﬂéiia‘iiiliife . ‘-.A./."""",'.';.-3?33§3é;3§§3§3§3§:3:5:3£:1§’t3353:55555352'-:
'12 -- "" ' = ' "" .. _ '({»”‘~/¢/ 1&1
""i'1‘3""'""it1'3""'i3%Ii‘3'iii5i?i‘31333?i3i‘f‘3iiziii‘f55%Iiii55?i5i?i5?35%5i3i?itiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiit“ls-"" --"" -. - ,""i‘3'1i‘ti‘35%3%?iiiiiiiii3%iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiEzééii‘iiii2iiiiiiiii::2:35i?:.£1,:z'r'2I,I,i:vi§5,i;:iiiiii:Z2v:533:,i,i525=5-J"".-:s--'"" iEiEgEféiiii§éié?,iiii:é;é33,5i§§iiii5-5§Eiégiiiii;EiE§i5i55,15ii5'5§Ei5.5ESESigi55.33SE5'53}giLii§i§€iiizii§iiéi§isés§s1.i'i=33§§§=3555§5§§§3§sgf§§§t7'«g;\,//*>5\x//{/
' - ' "" .. {/th 901x
3i
""
' -‘
i ' ' The H—reflex experiment SOftW are sets the timing 0f
~ each shock, acquires and displays each EMG response,
_ automatically files the complete data set on the hard
The knee brace provides a stable support for the disk and data storage card, and shows the results of the
stimulating electrode that is located behind the subject's experiment in the form of recruitment curves. It also
knee (see photograph, below). It is held in place using performs a series of self—tests on start—up and constantly
Nomex and Velcro straps and then looked at a ﬁxed monitors the HRTU batteries.
angle to make it more rigid. The stimulating electrode
is Spring-loaded, with a shaft that slides through a ball While several, self-explanatory dialogue boxes are used
joint that is also looked during use. The knee brace is during the experiment, one standard window is used to
folded ﬂat for stowage, with the two subject restraint display both individual EMG responses and recruitment
belts wrapped around it. curves. The latter may be the result of a complete (60
shocks), partial (if the experiment has been paused) or
, , , , , , previously recorded experimental session. The results of
1;, s'ig.i1§;§:::'f § i f. ., 2'}: ' ., "" "" a complete experiment are seen below.
wiwwioég
""L “ L ' 3:1: I iiiweaa '1'? 3-1. x '. 4» “(Ft'itt’ﬂ
W , i . It"" .. ' .~ . réﬁwt’
5:=:.....:5:5:...:;:5:5- .:5:5-::::5:=f:: -::::::::.::-:;:-..::;:.'-...:;:;:;...;:;:;:;;-;:;:;:;-:.:...--:;...;:;:-:;:.-:::::. 4 «K ;:I. 1: I a _- lvgj;¢;;§(§zf<@7y;.ggﬁ
ﬁ\ W-ss::;;;;;e;;;:e: :55,- t. "" ggwhgsf
w ‘ ~ ' e . * aet‘rf
may:;,:55,324,«é::3,,issggzzs:gg3Egaziegger'kg;ggé:{EgégzgzgégégéggigEgg;ggggéézgagg,;,;i3:ffi:fi;:,,,§;,.,;:;---.--- -- -- -- - -- - :2 ' o ?‘ti3.f:<5LttLttﬁttié’rftiiﬁ‘tté
, - g : *‘$*i§‘§;§«§:§
' i ' it? 'o {MW
With the exception of the laptop computer, all items ' .. _ . 3AM,
. I - . C: «ummawﬁe... . .. .... 2 ... i :0;
are stowed 1n a custom-built experiment klt (see i’m’gx2?xgwe&fv§%@f¥§i“v%vx; WMMEE
trays that are used to organize and hold all experiment
hardware other than the lap-top computer. When stowed, The softw are was designed with two major
they are stacked and held together by rotary action considerations in mind. One was ease of debuggin g and
latches. When deployed, they are separated and attached the second was that it had to be easily ported to different
to Velcro patches. The top tray is dedicated to putting platforms. Durin g the project we had to support
electrodes on the subjects and contains many small Windows 95, 98 and NT on the NASA computers as
packages held in place by metal fingers. well as the Macintosh OS for the McGill computers.
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","(c)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/orAuthor(s)' Sponsoring Organization.
Tcl/Tk was used for the user interface (UI) and most of normal. For the present, it would be useful if in—ﬂight
the computations. The Nationallnstrumentslibrary NI~ exercise devices provided the crew member with
DAQ was used to create a shared library (a ""dll"" in objective feedback as to the actual amount of work
Microsoft terminology) to interface with the DAQ-700 being performed.

A/D card. The DAQ card shared library was then loaded
into the user interface scripts at start-up. This achieved
a clean separation of the hardware specific and generic, Lessons Learned
cross-platform items (the interface and analysis). Most
of the UI and data analysis development was done under The International Space Station and the entire groundw
Linux and then ported to both Windows and the based organization that supports it are both new and
MacOS. evolving. Of necessity, ISS crew members spend much
of their time installing new facilities or dealing with
equipment teething problems. Furthermore, at a time
Preliminary Results when so much additional work is called for, crew size is
limited. Nevertheless, it is possible to perform
At the time of this Conference, roughly half of the in— meaningful scientific studies on the Station, if everyone
ﬂight data collection has been completed. So far, it involved pulls in the same direction. The H-Reﬂex
appears that spinal cord excitability decreases rapidly experiment has been a uniquely successful, path-finding
upon entering weightlessness, may recover somewhat effort and while it has encountered many obstacles, it
over a period of months and is still abnormal 5 days also provides many hints as to how things might be
after returning to the ground. The decreased H-reﬂexes done better in the future.
seen during the first week of ﬂight confirm an earlier,
incidental observation made during a different Preparation of Experiment
experiment performed on Spacelab IML-l.3 That ﬂight
lasted only 17 days, however, so long-term effects could Select proposals for ﬂight experiments that can actually
not have been detected. Furthermore, the shorter be accomplished, not necessarily those that would be
exposure to weightlessness experienced during IML-l state—of—the-art in a ground-based laboratory. There are
appeared to have less effect on Spinal cord excitability, still many straightforward questions that can and
as H-reﬂexes were normal within a day of landing. probably should be answered before addressing more
sophisticated issues.
This experiment has demonstrated that spinal cord
excitability decreases during spaceﬂight but it does not All equipment should be user-friendly and carefully
explain why this might have happened. Two possible designed to minimize crew workload. It should look
mechanisms are the different way in which the legs are more like the commercial product used by a technician
used in weightlessness and altered otolith-spinal activity in a clinical laboratory and less like that operated by an
resulting from the loss of the gravity vector. The former advanced post—doctoral fellow in a University.
appears unlikely, since tendon tap responses are not
reduced by a day or two of bed rest. The latter seems Be ﬂexible when it comes to experiment procedures. In
more plausible and may be related to the long- most life science experiments, long, elaborate and
established decrease in spinal cord excitability seen cryptic computer—based versions do not work and are not
immediately after damage to the labyrinth.4 necessary. Paper checklists with illustrations in the
form of line drawings are shorter, more effective and
Whatever the underlying mechanism, a relative more easily understood by a crew member whose native
difficulty in bringing motoneurones to threshold would language is not english. The real experts in procedures
almost certainly effect the control of posture and work for Boeing and Ikea.
locomotion. In an extreme case, the highest threshold -
motor units might be unusable. Post~ﬂight, normal Training of Crew
muscle contractions such as those required to stand up
might need more conscious effort. Conversely, exercise Provide more time for the crew members to train on
at a certain level of perceived effort while in experiments. At the moment, the amount available is
weightlessness might produce weaker muscle grossly inadequate, with no integrated simulations in
contractions, reducing the effectiveness and efﬁciency of many cases.
that exercise. Eventually, a way might be found to
quickly and safely restore spinal cord excitability to
4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)’ Sponsoring Organization.
Since it will be rare to have crew members who are Give more responsibility to payload developers. For
experts in your area, think of them as the best graduate example, if there is an issue that doesn't affect others,
students you could ever hope to have. Treat them as such as how an experiment is presented on a computer,

a professional colleagues, not cabbages. Teach as well as defer to the developer.
train, at all stages of the process. If you aren't excited
about an experiment, why should they be? There has been enough time to develop various
standards. Freeze them, but also distinguish between
Payload Operations what really matters and what doesn't and don't try to
enforce a single, draconian set of rules in all cases. Be
Did we learn anything from the Spacelab and NASA- more ﬂexible. Use common sense.
Mir programs? Excessive crew workload and ineffective
ground support do not benefit anyone. Be ﬂexible and Scheduling, especially if the crew is involved, must
change ”The System” in any way that will increase the become more stable and reliable, with reasonable lead
efﬁciency of experiment operations. times. At the moment, schedules change constantly,
making trip planning next to impossible and very
As a routine measure, establish direct, two-way expensive for investigators living at a distance from
communication between crew and investigators during NASA Centers.
experiment operations. Those who need answers are the
astronauts and those who can provide answers are the Above all, don't use ""The System"" as an excuse for
scientists. stupidity. The comment ""I know its dumb, but that's
what The System wants"" is not acceptable.
Make ""The System” more interactive by down-linking
data files within hours, not weeks. The early detection Other Issues
of a problem can save an experiment. Responding to
unexpected findings can increase the value of an The number of ISS crew members MUST be increased
experiment with minimal additional effort. to at least six or seven. This is far and away the most
fundamental problem at this time. Very little science
Ground—based planning can be difficult in the absence of will ever be possible if there are only three astronauts to
information from space. While negative reporting has do everything on the Station.
its good points, an occasional progress report from the
crew, especially an indication that an experiment has The time from submitting an ISS proposal to
been completed, is a great help. completing the experiment must be reduced. There are
not enough opportunities at present and the resulting
Interactions between ""The System"" and Investigators delays will be unacceptable to most active investigators.
This problem and many others raised earlier would be
The process of preparing an ISS ﬂight experiment has reduced by having a larger ISS crew.
been described as ""a painful experience"". It certainly is,
and there is no valid reason why it should continue to There should be a single mechanism for selecting
be so. Outsiders and insiders alike are faced with a mind- experiments and more international cooperation between
numbing arrogance and intransigence from certain investigators to avoid redundant studies and to achieve
groups. More and more rules and standards are created adequate numbers of subjects. In part, the H-Reﬂex
without consultation and applied retroactively. The ISS experiment was a success because Russian and
side doesn't talk to the Shuttle side, one Center doesn't American crew members were equally involved.
talk to another Center, different groups within Centers
refuse to communicate and everyone lacking in Finally, long-term picture badges should be issued to all
experience avoids those who possess real knowledge. investigators, from all countries, who are working on
ISS is supposed to be for science. If that is the case, ﬂight experiments. While everyone understands that a
then the investigators and payload developers are the certain level of security must be maintained, excessive
customers, but it certainly doesn't feel that way. The and impractical requirements should not be imposed
ISS ""System"" must learn to work with (not against) the selectively on non—American investigators. If this is
users, be less territorial, and show respect for the truly an International Space Station, then citizens of
knowledge and experience of others, both inside and partner nations should be treated as equals, not aliens.
outside of NASA.
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","(0)2001 American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics or Published with Permission of Author(s) and/or Author(s)‘ Sponsoring Organization.
Acknowledgements

This project has been supported by the Canadian Space

Agency and by the National Aeronautics and Space

Administration.

References

1. Churchill, S.E. (Ed.). Fundamentals of Space Life
Sciences. Krieger Publishing Company, Malabar,
Florida, 1997.

2. Hugon, M. Methodology of the Hoffmann reﬂex
in man. In: J.E. Desmedt (Ed.), New developments
in electromyography and Clinical neurophysiology,
v01. 3: 277—293. Karger, Basel, 1973.

3. Watt, D.G.D. Canadian vestibular experiments on
IML~1. Proceedings of First International
Microgravity Laboratory, Review of Science
Results, New Orleans, April 1993.

4. Watt, D.G.D. and Peterson, B.W. Recovery from
peripheral vestibular defects: VCR and VSR.

In: Vestibular Disorders, eds. H.O. Barber and
J .A. Sharpe, Year Book Medical Publishers,
Chicago, 1988.
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
