"","x"
"1","EFFECTS OF ALTERED GRAVITY ON SPINAL CORD EXCITABILITY (FINAL RESULTS)
D.G.D. Watt
Aerospace Medical Research Unit, McGill University, 3655 Prom. Sir William Osler,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G 1Y6 (e-rnail doug.watt@rncgill.ca)
INTRODUCTION
Prolonged weightlessness results in a weakening of the heart, a loss of skeletal muscle strength and volume, and
decreased bone density. At this time, the only effective treatment for these problems is in-ﬂight exercise. The basic
unit of exercise is a single twitch contraction of one motor unit. If spinal cord excitability (SCE) is reduced
during space ﬂight, this would hinder motor unit recruitment. As a result, more effort would be required to produce
the same level of exercise, or if the same apparent effort were maintained, the actual level of exercise would decrease.
If present after landing, it would be more difﬁcult to stand and walk.
METHODS
This experiment was performed by eight crew members from the Expedition 2, 3 and 4 missions to the International
Space Station. SCE was measured using the H-ReﬂeX method. In contrast to tendon taps, the electrical stimulus is
more controllable and muscle spindle excitability is not an issue. Sixty shocks of varying strength were applied to
the posterior tibial nerve during each test and the EMG responses were recorded from soleus. H-wave and M-wave
areas were plotted as a function of stimulus strength and the recruitment ratio was calculated as Hmax /MmaX.
Testing was performed repeatedly before, during and after ﬂight.
RESULTS
As expected, pre-ﬂight recruitment ratios were quite consistent for each subj ect but varied widely between subj ects.
Thus, the data for each indiVidual were normalized relative to his or her average pre-ﬂight response. These values
were then further averaged across the subj ects and plotted as a function of time before, during and after ﬂight.
Because different crews were tested at different times during their ﬂights, the l, 3 and 5 month averages include
only 5 of the 8 subjects.
5 I: 100 g
3 l_
,. I--.II;;I
- - _ TEST SESSION
Recruitment ratios decreased within 24 hours of achieving weightlessness and remained at the same level throughout
ﬂight. The post-ﬂight pattern was more complex. Although there appeared to be signiﬁcant improvement on R+l,
there was a subsequent decline and complete recovery did not occur until R+9 or later. Subj ects showed clear
evidence of high stretch reﬂeX loop gain on R+l, including hyper-reﬂeXia and a marked tendency to develop clonus.
DISCUSSION
The decrease in SCE during space ﬂight could be due to disuse of the legs, although H-reﬂexes do not decline
during a few days of bed rest. Alternatively, the cause may be altered otolith-spinal activity resulting from the loss
of the graVity vector, as SCE is known to be decreased immediately after damage to the labyrinths. The prolonged
recovery after landing may reﬂect the time required for vestibular function to return to normal. In the meantime, the
transient improvement on R+l could reﬂect an attempt to compensate by increasing muscle spindle sensitiVity.
(This study was supported by the Canadian Space Agency and by NASA)

"
