"","x"
"1","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem, Israel. Copyright ©2015 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
IAC—15—E1.2.2
EXPERIENCING SPACE BY EXPLORING THE EARTH — EASY-TO—USE IMAGE PROCESSING TOOLS
IN SCHOOL LESSONS
Andreas Rienow
Department Of Geography, University Of Bonn, Germany, a.rien0w@ geographieuni—bonnde
Valerie Graw*, Sascha HeinemannT, Gunter Menzi, J ohannes Schultz§, Fabian Selg**, J ohannes WepplerTJr
* Department of Geography, University of Bonn, Germany, valerie.graw@uni—b0nn.de
I Department of Geography, University of Bonn, Germany, sascha1@uni—b0nn.de
* Department of Geography, University of Bonn, Germany, g.menz@uni—b0nn.de
§ Department of Geography, University of Bonn, Germany, schultz@ geographieuni—bonnde
Department of Geography, University of Bonn, Germany, selg@uni—b0nn.de
H Raumfahrtmanagement, Deutsches Zentrum fur Luft— und Raumfahrt e.V. (DLR), Bonn, Germany, johannes.weppler@d1r.de
In the 1990s, a photo taken by the probe Voyager showed the Earth as a small island right in the middle of an
infinite black ocean 6 billion kilometres away. A ‘Blue Marble’ turned into a ‘Pale Blue Dot’ and initiated a public
discourse about a sustainable handling of our resources. Therefore, ‘Blue Dot — Shaping the Future’ became the title
of the mission of Alexander Gerst’s space ﬂight. From 28 May to 10 November 10, 2014 the ESA Astronaut
fascinated the German public with his liye—impressions from the International Space Station (188). Simultaneously,
the project ‘Columbus Eye — Liye—Imagery from the 188 in Schools’ established a learning portal on earth
Observation from the ISS (www.Columbuseye.uni—b0nn.de). The portal makes use Of NASA’s High Definition Earth
Viewing (HDEV) experiment which features four cameras Observing the earth 24/7. Columbus Eye is carried out at
the University Of Bonn and sponsored by the German Aerospace Center (DLR) Space Administration. The main goal
of Columbus Eye is to enable Children to Observe our planet from the astronaut’s perspective while applying
professional remote sensing analysis tools. During the IAC 2014, we published a concept on how the fascination of
technology and environment should be bundled in order to ignite the pupil’s interest on spaceﬂight and earth
Observation. Following up on this, in 2015 we are proud to present the implementations of this concept: the HDEV
archive and, even more important, the Observatory. While the archive provides spectacular footage of e.g. the
Mediterranean Sea, the Himalaya, and sunrises available for everybody, the Observatory was specifically constructed
for pupils and teachers. Here, it is possible to learn about processes and phenomena of the coupled human—
environment system in an interactive manner. The pupils can conduct easy—tO—use image processing analyses on their
own. In doing so, they get the Opportunity to derive a map out Of an HDEV image and hence turn a continuous
spatial texture into a discrete spatial pattern of land uses. The presentation explains how teachers can be taught to
apply the Columbus Eye learning tools in their everyday school lessons. Additionally, we present the next mission of
the project: HDEV Videos will be edited in order to perceive them in Virtual reality. Witnessing geospatial analysis
turns into experience and enters our understanding.
I. EARTH OBSERVATION FROM THE 188 Simultaneously, a Dragon spacecraft 0f the American
1.1 HDEV — High Definition Earth Viewing from the company SpaceX delivered a platform containing four
ﬂ commercial Off—the—shelf (COTS) cameras to the
The famous Voyager photo taken from 6 billion International Space Station (188) in April 2014. The
kilometres away showed the Earth as small oases which platform was mounted onto the Columbus External
is easy to overlook. A ‘Blue Marble’ turned into a ‘Pale Payload Adapter (CEPA) 0f the ESA Columbus
Blue Dot’ and initiated a public discourse about a Laboratory by the Canadian robotic arm. This
sustainable handling of our resources. During his automated process was carried out for the first time in
mission ‘Blue Dot — Shaping the Future’, the German the 188 program [2]. Once installed, the main purposes
ESA Astronaut Alexander Gerst used Twitter and social 0f the HDEV experiment conducted by NASA are to
media to share his View from the International Space test the robotic installation of external payloads and to
Station (188) on our planet with the fascinated public examine the suitability of COTS HD cameras for
[1]. Earth Observation suddenly became a recurrent upcoming space missions to the Moon and Mars. In
topic in the news when Gerst presented Cities at night, order to valorise the fascinating footage educationally,
the aurora borealis, 0r thunderstorm nuclei. the German proj ect ‘Columbus Eye — Liye—Imagery 0f
IAC—15—E1.2.2 Page 1 0f7

"
"2","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem, Israel. Copyright ©2015 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
’3 , f; P General conditions Nadir View
. . . 1.5%,; ~400 km altitude ~ 530 km swath
ﬁx W 7' , H ﬂexible attitude and ~ 500 m spatial
1:: “~ ‘0': 73 ::..""~-¥-—“““* _ , Wish” ‘ yaw resolution
' W :3 . . 90 days similar ﬂexible temporal
\ 1"" ' ‘Q exposure repetition resolution between 180
~ 1 §??- .' *3“ minutes and 3 days
. ﬁe ?:""y‘aﬂﬂ ) h_\,\‘:m ihcluding LOS and
n1 ght times
tomatic sh tterin s ectral resol tion: 1
Figure 1: HDEV cameras and Views (Source: NASA) au 11 g CpMOS sensoil Visible
. . spectrum (390—750nm)
the 188 in Schools’ is funded by the German Aerospace
Center (DLR). It acts as the exclusive European partner m
of the HDEV experiment. Accomplished by the the an externalpayload 0n the 188
Remote Sensing Research Group (RSRG) at the
Department Of Geography at the University Of Bonn, the 1.11 Recorded in Space, Filed on Earth, Published to the
project is in charge of filing and publishing the HDEV Internet
data ih a web portal and, thus, making the data The HDEV Video stream is not filed during
access1ble te the public. Coluinbus Eye has its ’root In recording. Instead, the data is transmitted directly Via
the PI‘OJCCt ReIhote Sensmg 1h ScheoluLessohs (F18) the TDRS (Tracking and Data Relay Satellite) System
relying en cons1derable experience 1n.1mpart1ng earth to its ground segment in White Sands (New Mexico,
Observation techniques to an. inexperienced audiehce USA) and redirected to the FDIC (Payload Operations
ﬂ Nevertheless, the ISS ls an earth uobuservation Integration Center) at the Marshall Space Flight Center
platform exhibiting several unique Characteristics Wthh in Huntsville (Alabama USA). The KU band used for
distihguishes h from satellites— or air borne reihote the transmission is also utilized for the downlink 0f
sensmg: h is inanned, Circles sun—asynchroneusly, m a other high rate data so that the HDEV stream can be
low Earth. orbit, and faces varying tlyhamics In terms 0f blocked. The same case occurs as soon as TDRS has 110
the roll, pitch and yaw axes [41' This inﬂuences not only line of sight with White Sands leading to a loss of signal
the lighting and recording but also the storage and (LOS) period for the ISS.
transmiss10n conditions. _ While the data stream itself is archived at the FDIC
In total, HDEV cons1sts. 0©f four (gameras 2; the and published Via the Johnson Space Center (JSC) in
J ap 3,1168% companies Panasonic ’ Sony ’ Hltaehl hhd Houston (Texas, USA) as an online live stream, an
Toshiba . The first two cameras are installed parallel. immediate usable archive of the HDEV experiment is
According to that, earth Observation of the 188 is exclusively hosted at the RSRG. A permanent data
conducted in three perspectives: aft, forward, and nadir exchange link between the FDIC and the RSRG was
Vlew (Flg' D' Usually, the HDEV cameras areupart Of a established using the NASA Telescience Resource Kit
cycle where every camera is subsequentlysw1tched 0n (TReK). The scientific payload data stream of HDEV is
m _ Hence, the cycle has to be adjusted to a received Via the TReK bridge and converted into usable
configuration where the front and aft camera lenses are mp4—f0rmat by the use Of the HDEV Raw Video
not directly facing the suh. That case occurs as soon as Redirector. In order to manage the large amount of data,
the beta ahgle 0f the 188 is below _32 degrees [6} .Table the original Videos are divided into hourly segments and
1 summarizes the earth Observation Characteristics of subsequently stored. The downlink is already
the _ISS 1h general and the HDEV nadir camera In established, the uplink ensuring the commanding 0f the
p articular ' cameras from Germany is currently under development
[7]. The HDEV archive in Bonn covers all downloaded
Videos since the end of 2014. Beside a continuous
storage, the project selects some ‘highlights’ from the
HDEV experiment which are published online. Like the
HDEV live stream they are freely available at the
Columbus Eye portal WWW.Columbuseye.uni—bonn.de.
The detection of meaningful highlights is conducted by
geography students. Due to the fact that stamps 0f LOS
IAC—15—E1.2.2 Page 2 0f 7

"
"3","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem, Israel. Copyright ©2015 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
if 5 time, region, and event). Hence, “Columbus Eye show
. me all Video highlights covering typhoons over the
' """"Ve‘ Pacific region filmed by the nadir—facing camera
.; ;""_ii.‘ _ .3, l’“ throughout the year 2015” could become a typical
1- 3 ,3. J; . ' ,, client—filter request. In the background, this feature
'.‘_ 2.; ﬁ‘nv‘f‘n-z makes extensive use of the flexible GeoJSON format
Qigx i' ' . - .7. :3 $333.1:- (JavaScript Object Notation) and its capabilities to store
’ ‘ _ .. ‘3 ' 2 "" . and represent geographical features as well as non—
f“; 3 ""3 : 6 spatial attributes [9]. As an integrated approach, the web
' ,‘_ “3:3. _' _ {,3 GIS Will improve usability and oversight, removing
3:33. ’d‘a » ~ ""\_ unwanted Video tracks and combining features in one
' j place.
. 3 3 However, the main goal of Columbus Eye is the
7’ "" ~ ‘ '3 3. 3 ’ didactical valorisation of the HDEV data for a
‘ — (:49 i. . » » sustainable use in secondary school lessons. Thus, earth
y .' @431: . . g ' ,. observation from the 188 is carried on even after Gerst
3..... :3 3 33;- ’ "".551? ‘ returned to Earth. The fascinating Views from above
‘“ ~1- _. _~ ‘ ‘ provide the basis for mediating knowledge about space
""k- ” "" _ ' ' "" travels and remote sensing linked to the geographical
‘3: i '3' 3 curriculum.
v.3 .. - .3“ 4.
_ . a: _ ggx , - \ II. PUPILS EXPERIENCE THE ASTRONAUT’S
. M5215 ¥ '4“? . 2‘ ' , . ' VIEW
Figure 2: Original and enhanced image (HDEV nadir II.I Didactical Background
View, Algiers, Algeria) It is a paradox, that the knowledge about earth
observation as a key technology in our modern
times are not stored in the Video file, it is complicated to information society is not Widespread [10]. A study
allocate the recorded content. revealed that a majority of German pupils does not even
The coarse spatial resolution and atmospheric know that Google Earth is based on satellite images
scattering makes it difficult to detect land surfaces such [1 1]. Although teachers are interested in implementing
as urban structures or agricultural land use. By the topic of earth observation in their Classes, the
removing Rayleigh and Mie scattering effects the encouragement fails because of confusing, difficult, or
quality of the HDEV footage is improved [8]. Further ineffective didactical preparation of respective
image enhancements can be achieved by adjusting information [12]. In contrast, surveys With over 300
contrast and intensity values of the image (Fig. 2). In pupils of grammar schools in North—Rhine have shown
order to ensure user—optimized access, the Videos can be that the interaction With satellite images supports the
downloaded in HD (1280 X 720 pixels) and reduced comprehension of complex curricular topics like wave
frame sized (720 X 480 pixels). In addition to a stylized lengths, reﬂeXion, or atmospheric Circulation [13].
map, a brief report is provided for every highlight Here, the HDEV mission provides an opportunity to
describing the phenomena as well as the trajectory of combine both: the fascination of space travels With the
the 188. So far, impressive Videos showing the Sun and fascination of observing our Earth from above. In order
the Moon rising but also areas that are difficult to to avoid an ‘art for art’s sake’, the Columbus Eye portal
access, weather events, or spacecraft approaching the provides teaching materials utilizing the HDEV footage
space station are part of the Columbus Eye highlights in order to mediate school curricular topics. Cross—
archive. linked thinking is promoted since the subj ect matter Will
In order to get the most out of the data, a web be discussed in different Classes. The basic principles of
geoinformation system (GIS) Will be implemented to earth observation are covered in the natural sciences,
provide a common platform for convenient and such as math, physics or computer science, While in the
interactive access. The web GIS Will Visualize the orbit more applied sciences, like geography or biology,
of each respective highlight and, upon selection, present HDEV data is analyzed to answer a specific research
the attributed information. As a major function, the web question. Figure 3 presents the three kinds of Columbus
GIS will introduce client—side filtering of highlight Eye teaching materials. They are guided by regular
Videos. This way the entire archive (i.e. database) can be school curricula and vary in their degree of interactivity
searched for specific attributes of interest (e.g. camera, and intensity of media application.
IAC—lS—El.2.2 Page 3 of 7

"
"4","66th International Astronautical Congress, Jerusalem, Israel. Copyright ©20 15 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
11.111 The Observatory: Regions and Phenomena
Animation/imemion Inspected from the ISS
Worksheets TaSksi:?:rr:aa:i(c?I:ound S°'”ﬁ°"" The observatory contains the second type of the
Columbus Eye teaching materials. According to the
principles of moderate constructivism [17], the learning
Teaching Tasksandbackgmund Interactivetool Solution process requires a high degree of self—organisation and
tools inf°rmati°n responsibility. Thus, the observatory provides the
opportunity for pupils to freely construct their own
hypotheses based on a spatial analysis. For that purpose,
Teaching Initialpmblem Background Interactive Solution nadir Videos of 188 ﬂights have been transformed into
sequences ‘”f°""“a“°"" ‘°°' large panorama shots. They build the bases for the
Quiz Quiz spatial analyses in terms of regional geography and a
self—conducted image processing.
Figure 3: Interactivity concepts of Columbus Eye Currently, the observatory includes panorama shots
teaching materials of three regions: ‘West Africa — Crossing the Biggest
Desert on earth’, ‘South America — Coast to Coast’, and
Confucius says “I hear and I forget. I see and I ‘Canada — Snow, Ice and Sea’. ‘West Africa’ e.g.
remember. I do and I understand”. It mirrors the provides multiple surfaces ranging from sea and desert
didactical background of moderate constructivism. areas in the northwest to Savannah regions and the
Moderate constructivism regards learning as an active tropical rainforest with dense Cloud cover when moving
process. Through learning, present perceptive, thinking, southeast. The variety of surfaces leads to possible in—
and behavioural patterns are adjusted to new depth discussion on different Climatic zones. Moreover
information, so that new insights emerge [14]. The there are information points to be found in the image
constructivist learning theory is based on the which are divided into two categories: regions and
assumption that the learners construct their own phenomena. With their help more knowledge can be
hypotheses considering their previous knowledge acquired on e.g. Savannah ecosystems in West Africa,
independently from a teacher [15]. Therefore, learning insights in tectonics and topography in South America,
is an autonomous and social process. Individual or the geography and life in cold regions in Canada.
experiences, dialogue and the effort to understand are The integrated spatial analysis is a do—it—yourself
most relevant in the learning process. Following these Classification. In order to handle the manifold
principles, the provided material can be used in lessons information of earth observation data, a land—coyer
that are mainly based on self—reliant learning and require Classification can transform the complexity of spatial
only minimal lead and instruction by the teacher [16]. imagery into a simple land—coyer map showing the most
important patterns at a glance. The pupils are able to
11.11 The Worksheets: Keep it Simple, Keep it Manual Classify the 188 image by creating own training
The simplest teaching materials of Columbus Eye samples. The Classification is based on the minimum
are worksheets. While the degree of interactivity is low, distance Classification [18]. The tools are developed as
no technical issues can occur and HDEV can be online tools where pupils can directly create training
implemented in everyday school lessons ad hoc. One areas sharing spectral similarities, label them and apply
example deals with atmospheric scattering. A news an own colour scheme. Hence, colour information is
article introduces the inﬂuences of Mie and Rayleigh related to semantic information in order to construct
scattering on our Visual impression of the atmosphere. ‘subjectiVe’ spatial conception based on ‘objectiVe’ data
Optionally, the teacher can also download a zip—file (Fig. 4). Working with those images from the ISS orbit
containing a learning Video and a swipe implemented in demonstrates the ability of earth observation techniques
a Power Point file. It enables the pupils to compare an and the massive human interference affecting our
original HDEV image with an atmospheric corrected environment [19]. The online tools also come along
one. Accordingly, HDEV footage is used as with downloadable work sheets dealing with curricular
Visualization possibility where the given tasks — among topics of the subject geography. They contain tasks and
others a fill—in—the—blank text — consider the pupils’ level background information for pupils as well as sample
of knowledge. Again, teachers are provided with a short solutions and an accompanying didactic commentary for
didactical commentary. It comprises an overview of the teachers. In contrast to work sheets, the didactic
learning goals, covered topics, and applied media. commentary is extended by a table depicting how the
Additionally, they provide exemplary plans of how to specific teaching unit meets certain curricular topics of
structure the lesson and sample solutions. the sixteen federal states of Germany. Additionally, it
holds background information on remote sensing and
earth observation from the 188 as well as a step—by—step
IAC—lS—El.2.2 Page 4 of 7

"
"5","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem, Israel. Copyright ©2015 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
South America - Coast to Coast be published soon. It teaches a basic mathematical topic
-. 5- .- .. _ + _ in a Vivid manner. The initial problem is that noisy
; ‘2‘ i: :5; ‘ HDEV images need to be ehhanced by using image
“:1; , g ‘53:: 745:}: ‘5 ‘. . filtering methods. A swipe is introduced showmg a
‘ ‘ ‘ E‘ﬁ ‘ ’ ‘- d noisy and a corrected HDEV image in nadir View above
_ 32%?“- the Atlantic Ocean. It also shows a spacecraft docked to
‘ "" -‘. ' g‘ﬁt ' the 183 Which should evoke a first interest of the pupils
«$3 ' in terms of “What is that?”. Afterwards, pupils learn
‘- . 5.3,; _V “Ll“ ‘ ' about the role of the arithmetic mean in statistics as well
if a .933 . xii as the functionality of a moving window for image
. ’ 3m. w processing purposes. The Chapter finishes With a quiz
-5 *5 forcing the pupils to reﬂect on of the mediated
""° ﬂ knowledge. The second half of the module deals With
v: C‘ the self—reliant application of kernel—based filtering
a ;. m m — methods. The pupils get the task to analyse an
atmospheric corrected image of Canada and additionally
' ‘repair’ two noisy images of Saudi—Arabia. The image
of Saudi Arabia was taken in nadir View With the aft
1“; a ' a . ---‘I + _ . View cam Which means that the 183 had preceded a
, a . g , V ' . 7 special manoeuvre in order to get ready for a spacecraft
' ' , ‘ ’ 7 ' ‘ ﬂ v docking. Pupils learn how different Climatic regions are
"" f "" ~ seen from an astronaut’s View; they get in touch With
' a , 7 , 7 "" * . the ﬂight Characteristics of the 183; they are trained in
7 — 7. two different image processing methods; and finally
‘ _ 7 r 7‘ ‘ 9 they apply an arithmetic mean filter to different levels
. ' . a , » . ' 7 of noisiness. From the evidence of their own eyes and
‘ 7 - ‘v 7 , ‘ by Virtue of their own analyses, the pupils can see how
' ' lg , 3 ; deceptive images from space can appear, and how they
"" ” g ,, are able to transform their appearance. Again, a quiz
* cements the information learnt.
Figure 4: Screenshot showing the Classification process II.V Face to Face: Road Show in German Schools
for ‘South America— Coast to Coast’ Whereas the Columbus Eye portal forms the
backbone of the project, another important pillar is
operator's guide of the ﬂash—based Classification tool. In represented by ongoing Visits to German Schools. They
doing so, the worries of teachers related to technical link the Columbus Eye developments and the mission of
issues can be reduced and teachers are encouraged to Alexander Gerst. In addition to teacher trainings, the
integrate the tool in their everyday school lesson [20]. major part of the so—called ‘Columbus Eye Road Show’
focuses on pupils of all kinds of secondary schools With
II.IV The Modules: Comprehensive Interactive two kinds of Visits: lecture hall presentations and Class
Teaching Units room Visits. The lecture hall presentations should ignite
The third and most complex type in terms of the fascination of the pupils for space travels and earth
interactivity and media application are whole teaching observation as well as inform about Alexander Gerst’s
modules. The basic structure of the learning module experience on the 133. Here, the audience consists of a
consists of three Chapters. Each Chapter has a Clear aim minimum of 100 pupils. The Class room Visits brings the
and guideline for the learner including background project in touch With a smaller audience and have the
information and tasks. Moreover, each Chapter possibility of in—depth discussions.
concludes With a quiz. A very short first Chapter Both types of Visits start With a presentation. The
introduces the main problem to be solved in the course first part deals With the Characteristics of the ISS and the
of the subsequent Chapters. The second one deals With experiments of Alexander Gerst. Here, pupils can
the specific curricular topic and provides necessary Choose between four experiments which have been
background information. The centre of the third Chapter carried out by the German astronaut especially for
is an ‘analysis tool’, similar to common software used Children, e.g. the specific ﬂight behaviour of paper
for spatial analysis [21]. planes in a microgravity environment. His View from
The first example ‘Mean Calculations from the 183’ the cupola leads to the second part dealing With earth
deals With statistically—based image processing and Will observation from the ISS and, thus, the Columbus Eye
IAC—15—E1.2.2 Page 5 of 7

"
"6","66th International Astronautical Congress, Jerusalem, Israel. Copyright ©2015 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
project. The presentation follows an interactive concept As a next step, the advanced education of teachers
and comprises of space imagery, Videos with Alexander will be a way to sensitize them for multimedia earth
Gerst as a moderator, audio files of communication observation to mediate regular curricular topics. Thus,
between astronauts and mission control, ﬂash the implementation of earth observation in STEM
animations and interactions, as well as a live application subjects is facilitated and pushed beyond their
of the Columbus Eye teaching material. During the Class application as a mere illustrative teaching element
room Visits, the pupils are asked to apply the Columbus exclusively in geography lessons. Again, those teacher
Eye learning tools and answer some questions related to workshops may also multiply the recipients and spread
the Earth’s surface, e.g. to calculate the snow mass of the knowledge of earth observation from space in a
the Andes. In addressing the pupils’ reality of life with sustainable fashion.
convenient comparisons and current news topics, a In the near future, the topics of the Columbus Eye
dialog between presenters and pupils emerges. In doing teaching materials will be further extended and
so, one main goal of both, Gerst’s Blue Dot mission and additional information such as the size of a hurricane or
the Columbus Eye project, can be achieved: to raise the the name of a geographical location will be directly
awareness of the pupils for a sustainable treatment of integrated into the 188 Videos. Later on, the route of
the Earth. implementing e—learning will lead the project to mobile
One special event of the road show included an learning and the exploration of applicable 3D Videos. In
exclusive live radio call to Alexander Gerst on the ISS. doing so, the pupils experience a new and unfamiliar
While the pupils were asking their questions dealing dynamical astronaut’s—eye View, but also the value of
with living and working in space, Columbus Eye earth observation and space technologies to monitor
streamed HDEV live Videos, so that the call from the ongoing processes of coupled human—enVironment
ground was instantly accompanied by imagery from systems directing the future of the Earth.
above.
So far, more than 1,000 pupils and 70 teachers were LITERATURE
approached directly. The lessons based on HDEV have [1] Deutsches Zentrum ﬁ'lr Luft—und Raumfahrt (Eds),
also been aired on TV and radio, so that a wide, 2014, Blue Dot — Alexander Gerst shapes our
interested public was addressed [22, 23]. The Visits of future on the International Space Station. Bonn.
the Columbus Eye portal and its observatory are [2] Runco, S., 2015 , International Space Station — High
reaching a number of 11,000. Definition Earth Viewing (HDEV), Retrieved from
http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/statiorﬂresearC
III. CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK h/eXperiments/917.html (last access: 2015—09—21).
Since the last presentation of Columbus Eye at the [3] Goetzke, R., Hodam, H.,Rienow, A. & VoB, K.,
IAC 2014, the project experienced a lot of development. 2014, Floods — Dealing with a Constant Thread. In:
The archive with HDEV highlights and the observatory Sanchez et al. (Eds): Learning and Teaching with
has been implemented and continuously extended. A Geomedia. Cambridge, 90—102.
concept for work sheets, comprehensive teaching [4] Stefanov, W. & Evans, C. A., 2014, The
modules, and didactic commentaries were added to the International Space Station: A Unique Platform for
teaching materials. Additionally, a road show with Visits Remote Sensing of Natural Disasters. JSC Biennal
at several German schools and educational institutions Research Report, 108—110.
was initiated and continued. Accordingly, if the actions [5] Rienow, A., Hodam, H., Menz, G., Weppler, J. &
and goals of Columbus Eye are condensed, two Runco, S., 2014, Columbus Eye — High Definition
catchwords emerge: extensive dissemination and Earth Viewing from the 188 in Secondary Schools.
selective intensification. 65th International Astronautical Congress 2014 29
The first feedbacks of professionals in the field of September—03 October 2014 in Toronto, Canada,
secondary education are promising and have already IAC—14—E, 1—5.
initiated ideas for future developments of the project. [6] Runco, S., 2014, High Definition Earth Viewing
But there is still room for improvement. The experience (HDEV) Payload Ground Software User’s Guide,
with the application of the Columbus Eye observatory Houston.
tools in Classes showed e.g., that, at first sight, pupils [7] Schneider, M. & Lapenta,C. C., 2001, Payload
took the result for granted. Instead of questioning the Operations Integration Center Remote Operations
fact that misclassifications might occur, they needed Capabilities. Conference and Exhibit on
extra hints before they start to critically assess their International Space Station Utilization — 2001,
results. The critical reﬂection is meaningful to foster Cape Canaveral, FL, Oct. 15—18,2001,1—10.
competences in the field of spatial orientation and the [8] Mahiny, A. S. & Turner, B. J., 2007, A Comparison
pupils’ usage maps as implicated in the national of Four Common Atmospheric Correction
education standards [21].
IAC—15—E1.2.2 Page 6 of 7

"
"7","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem, Israel. Copyright ©2015 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
Methods. Photogrammetric engineering and remote Use Image Processing — The FIS Learning Portal
sensing 73(4), 361—368. 011 Remote Sensing. In: EARSeL eProceedings
[9] Westra, E., 2015, Pyhton Geospatial Analysis 12,2, 164—173.
Essentials, Birmingham. [17] Karagiorgi, Y. & Symeou, L., 2005, Translating
[10] Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy Constructivism into Instructional Design: Potential
(Eds.), 2012, Making Germany's space sector fit and Limitations. Educational Technology &
for the future. The space strategy of the German Society, 8(1), 17—27.
Federal Government. Retrieved from: [18] Richards, A., 1999, Remote Sensing Digital Image
http://www.bmwi.de/EN/SerVice/Publications/publ Analysis, Berlin.
ications—archive,did=386426.html (last access: [19] Rienow, A., Hodam, H., Selg, F. & Menz, G.,
2015—09—21). 2015, Columbus Eye: Interactive Earth
[11] Kollar, 1., 2012, Die Satellitenbild—Lesekompetenz. Observation from the 188 in Class Rooms. In:
Empirische Uberpriifung eines theoriegeleiteten J oumal for Geographic Information Science 1—
Kompetenzstrukturmodells fur das ,Lesen’ V011 2015, 349—354.
Satellitenbildern. Dissertation PH Heidelberg. [20] V013, K. Goetzke, R. & Hodam, H., 2008, Wie wird
Retrieved from 0pus.ph— das Thema ,Fernerkundung’ im Unterricht
heidelberg.de/files/36/Dissertation_Isabelle_K011ar angenommen? — Erste Ergebnisse einer Fallstudie.
.pdf (last access: 2015—09—21). J ekel, Keller & Strobl (Eds.): Lernen mit
[12] V013, K., Goetzke, R., Hodam, H. & Rienow, A., Geoinformationen 111, 8—14.
2011, Remote Sensing, New Media and Scientific [21] Ubelst'adt, S., 2014, Den Planeten im Blick.
Literacy — A New Integrated Learning Portal for Schiiler schliipfen in die Rolle V011
Schools Using Satellite Images. Learning with G1 Wissenschaftlern. 3 Sat Nano, TV—Sendung mm
2011 - Implementing Digital Earth in Education. 10.11.2014.
Berlin, 172—1. [22] Zeitler, A., 2014, Service Bildung — Erdkunde mal
[13] Goetzke, R., Hodam, H., Rienow, A. & V013, K., anders. Bilder aus dem A11 furs Klassenzimmer.
2013, Tools and Learning Management Functions WDR 5, Hbrfunksendung vom 15.05.2014.
for a Competence—Oriented Integration Of Remote Retrieved from
Sensing in Classrooms. Car et al. (Eds.): http://www.wdr5.de/sendungen/leonardo/service/serVice
GI_F0rum 2013, 45 8—463. bildung/proj ektcolumbuseye100.html (last access:
[14] Mandl, H. & Kopp, B., 2007, Blended Learning: 2015—09—21).
Forschungsfragen und Perspektiven, Munich. [23] DGfG (Deutsche Gesellschaft fiir Geographie
[15] Rinschede, G., 2007, Geographiedidaktik: (Eds.), 2014, Bildungsstandards im Fach
GrundriB Allgemeine Geographie, Stuttgart. Geographie fiir den Mittleren Schulabschluss mit
[16] Goetzke, R., Hodam, H., Rienow, A. & V013, K., Aufgabenbeispielen. Bonn.
2013, Teaching Materials, Encyclopedeia, Easy—to—
IAC—15—E1.2.2 Page 7 0f 7

"
