"","x"
"1","EARTH OBSERVATION FROM THE ISS COLUMBUS LABORATORY — AN OPEN ED-
UCATION APPROACH TO FOSTER GEOGRAPHICAL COMPETENCES OF PUPILS IN
SECONDARY SCHOOLS
Andreas Rienow (1), Valerie Graw (1), Sascha Heinemann (1), J ohannes Schultz (1), Fabian Selg (1), Gunter Menz (1)
(1) Remote Sensing Research Group (RSRG), Department ofGeography, University ofBonn, MeckenheimerAllee 166,
53115 Bonn, Germany, a.rien0w@geogmphie.uni-bonn.de
ABSTRACT the HDEV experiment conducted by NASA are to test

. . . the robotic installation of external a loads and to ex-
Since spring 2014, four commermal off-the-shelf cam- amine the suitability 0 f COTS HD Eaiiieras for upcom-
eras (COTS) are attached to ESAQS Columbus laborato- ing space missions to the Moon and Mars. In order to
ry taking Videos Of the Earth 24/731116 0n1y13ur0pean valorise the fascinating footage educationally, the Ger-
partner Of the NASA experiment ngh Deﬁnition Earth man project ‘Columbus Eye — Live-Imagery 0f the ISS
V1ew1ng’ (HDEV) is the educational prOJect ‘Columbus in Schools’ is funded by the German Aerospace Center
Eye _ Live-Imagery. from the ISS 1n. SChOOlS (DLR). It acts as the exclusive European partner of the
(WWW.columbuseye.uni-b0nn.de). In 0rdert01mp1ement HDEV experiment Accomplished by the the Remote
earth observation techniques for a sustainable use in Sensing Research Group (RSRG) at the Department of
secondaryschool ICWSOHS’ the project deve10ps interac- Geography at the University of Bonn the project is in
tive teetching materials. They enable pupils to apply charge of ﬁling and publishing the HDEV data in a web
profess10na1 remote sens1ng analyses. The paper eX_ ortal and thus makin the data accessible to the ub-

1'thd1 t d‘ fth 't td p ” g p
pains e eve opmen. para 1gm 0 e pl‘OJCC Wm.) e lie. Columbus Eye has its root in the project ‘Remote
1n preblem-hased learning and moderate COpSthtiW/ISHW' Sensing in School Lessons” (FIS) relying on considera-
It Will be dISCLlSSCd. how teachers Wire pr0V1ded Wlth (h- ble experience in imparting earth observation techniques
dactical commentaries and trained in face-to—face work- to an inex erienced audience [2] Nevertheless the ISS
shops for an efﬁcient and sustainable implementation of is an earlt)h observation platfoini exhibiting, several
the niaterialthn (101mg S? It i; enbsured tthat pugils can unique characteristics Which distinguishes it from satel-
experience e va ue O ear . O serva ion an space 1ites- or air borne remote sensing: it is manned, circles
technologies to monitor 0ng01ng processes Of coupled sun-asynchronously in a 10W Earth orbit and faces var-
human-environment systems driving the future of the in d namics in terms of the roll itch and aw axes
Earth. y g y. . 9p. y .

[4]. This inﬂuences not only the lighting and recording
1 h . . . . .
1. E ARTH OBSERVATION FROM THE IS S but a s0 t e storage and transnnss10n conditions
1.1. HDEV — High Deﬁnition Earth Viewing from g 2 ,5; P
the Iss ‘%3‘
The famous Voyager photo taken from 6 billion kilome- TW§_ "" I ‘ Hitacm-ﬂ
tres away showed the Earth as small oases Which is easy $2.7M ' W ““
to overlook. A ‘Blue Marble” turned into a ‘Pale Blue 1
Dot’ and initiated a public discourse about a sustainable ' W v \\ 2. 2
handling of our resources. During his mission ‘Blue Dot ' x“
— Shaping the Future”, the German ESA Astronaut Al- ‘ - ""i a 335*
exander Gerst used Twitter and social media to share his . __ a We“ 3 Tohiba—Qgiir
View from the International Space Station (ISS) on our ' ' ’ i"" "" “x
planet With the fascinated public [1]. Earth observation Figure 1, HDEV cameras and Views (Source N AS A)
suddenly became a recurrent topic in the news When ' '
Gerst presented cities at night, the aurora borealis, or In total, HDEV consists of four cameras of the Japanese
thunderstorm nuclei. Simultaneously, a Dragon space- companies Panasonic© Sony© Hitachi© und T0shiba©.
craft Of the .A.m erican company .SpaceX delivered a plat- The ﬁrst two cameras are installed parallel. According
form containing four eomniermal off-the-shelf (COTS) to that, earth observation of the ISS is conducted in
cameras to the International Space Station (ISS) in April three perspectives: aft, forward, and nadir View (Fig. 1).
2014. The platform was mounted onto the Columbus Usually the HDEV cameras are part of a cycle Where
External Payload Adapter (CEPA) 0f the ESA Colum- ’ . .
b L b b h C d' b . Th' every camera is subsequently sw1tched on [2]. Hence,
us a oratory y t e ena 1an r0 one arm: is au- the cycle has to be adjusted to a conﬁguration Where the
tomated process was carried out for the ﬁrst time in the front and aft camera lenses are not directly facing the
ISS program [2]. Once installed, the main purposes of
Proc. ‘Living Planet Symposium 2016 ’, Prague, Czech Republic,
9—13 May 2016 (ESA SP—740, August 2016)

"
"2","sun. That case occurs as soon as the beta angle of the in the Video ﬁle, it is complicated to allocate the record—
ISS is below 32 degrees [6]. Tab. 1 summarizes the ed content.
earth observation characteristics of the 188 in general ;' l.
and the HDEV nadir camera in particular: .
Table 1: Earth observation characteristics of HDEV as ,1 . g ', ' ’ '
an external payload 0n the ISS :— . V,‘ ‘ "" “j -~ . ~~r—. . ' r
— ~ __ ~4_ 33»? t; 4“ 2-.“ #3“... ago '
General conditions Nadir View :1. . ""gt. -. ‘f . 3'73
— .zz— -, err- I , ~
~400 kin altitude ~ 530 km swath .3"" ‘ ﬂ “- = +‘- :
ﬂexible attitude and yaw ~ 500 in spatial resolution fit- I : i E
_ ‘91.. M I"" f — ‘x
90 days similar exposure ﬂexible temporal resolution "" z """"mﬂt-‘V '- ‘J - i ’
repetition between 180 minutes and 3 j“
days including LOS and ,- _ A 3
night times ~ "" 7 r 1
automatic shuttering spectral resolution: 1 CMOS ' ' (3145} t» 7 ' ""
sensor, Visible spectrum . .' m3; » . A 1: ' ,.
390-750nm ‘- v ., .1“
1.2. Recorded in Space, Filed on Earth, Published to ' ‘ m I ‘
the Internet 7"":- ; . '
The HDEV Video stream is not ﬁled during recording. ‘ .F; ‘_
Instead, the data is transmitted directly Via the TDRS wgdha 1 ' ‘-
(Tracking and Data Relay Satellite) System to its Figure 2: Original and enhanced image (HDEV nadir
ground segment in White Sands (New Mexico, USA) View, Algiers, Algeria)
and redirected to the FDIC (Payload Operations Integra—
tleh Center) at the Marshall Space Flight Center in The coarse spatial resolution and atmospheric scattering
HUhtSVhle (Alabama, USA) The KU band hsed for the makes it difﬁcult to detect land surfaces such as urban
transnnss10n is also utilized for the downlink of other structures or agricultural land use. By removing Ray—
high rate data so that the HDEV stream can be blocked. leigh and Mie scattering effeetS the quality Of the
The same case occurs as soon as TDRS has no line of HDEV footage is improved E] Further image en—
sight With White Sands leading to a 1055 Of signal (L05) hancements can be achieved by adjusting contrast and
period for the ISS- . . . intensity values of the image (Fig. 2). In order to ensure
While the data stream itself is archived at the FDIC and user—optimized access, the Videos can be downloaded in
published Via the Johnson Space Center (JSC) .ih Heh' HD (1280 X 720 pixels) and reduced frame sized (720 X
ston (Texas, USA) as an online llVe stream, an hhmedl' 480 pixels). In addition to a stylized map, a brief report
ate usable archive 0f the HDEV experiment 15 exclu— is provided for every highlight describing the phenome—
s‘ively hosted at the RSRG- A permanent data exchange na as well as the trajectory of the 188. So far, impressive
link between the FDIC and the RSRG was established Videos showing the Sun and the Moon rising but also
using the NASA Teles01ence Resource Klt (TReK). The areas that are difﬁcult to access, weather events, or
seientiﬁc payload data stream Of. HDEV 15 received Vla spacecraft approaching the space station are part of the
the TReK bridge and converted into usable mp4—f0rrnat Columbus Eye highlights archive.
by the use Of the HDEV Raw Video Redireeter. 1h erder In order to get the most out of the data, a web geoinfor—
to manage the large amount of data, the original Videos mation system (GIS) Will be implemented to provide a
are lelded 1ht0 .houily segments and subsequently common platform for convenient and interactive access.
store(l. The dOWhhhk ts already established, the uplink The web GIS Will Visualize the orbit of each respective
ensuring the commanding 0f the cameras from Germany highlight and, upon selection, present the attributed in—
ts currently under development [7.1 The .HDEV archive formation. As a major function, the web GIS Will intro—
in Bonn cevers all dewnloaded Videos s1ncethe end 0f duce client—side ﬁltering of highlight Videos. This way
2014- Bes1de a continuous storage, the pI‘OJCCt selects the entire archive (i.e. database) can be searched for
some highlights frern the HDEV experiment Whleh are speciﬁc attributes of interest (e.g. camera, tiIne, region,
published online. Like the HDEV live stream they are and event). Hence, “Columbus Eye show me all Video
freely available at. the Columbus .Eye portal highlights covering typhoons over the Paciﬁc region
www.columbuse e.uni—bonn.de. The detection of mean— ﬁlmed by the nadir—facing camera throughout the year
ingful highlights 15 conducted by geography StUdehtS- 2015” could become a typical client—ﬁlter request. In the
Due to the fact that stamps of LOS times are not stored background, this feature makes extensive use Of the

"
"3","ﬂexible GeoJSON format (JavaScript Object Notation) more applied sciences, like geography or biology,
and its capabilities to store and represent geographical HDEV data is analyzed to answer a speciﬁc research
features as well as non-spatial attributes [9]. As an inte- question. Fig. 3 presents the three kinds of Columbus
grated approach, the web GIS Will improve usability Eye teaching materials. They are guided by regular
and oversight, removing unwanted Video tracks and school curricula and vary in their degree of interactivity
combining features in one place. and intensity of media application.
However, the main goal of Columbus Eye is the didacti- Confucius says “I hear and I forget. I see and I remem-
cal valorisation of the HDEV data for a sustainable use ber. I do and I understand”. It mirrors the didactical
in secondary school lessons. Thus, earth observation background of moderate constructivism. Moderate con-
from the ISS is carried on even after Gerst returned to structiVism regards learning as an active process.
Earth. The fascinating Views from above provide the Through learning, present perceptive, thinking, and be-
basis for mediating knowledge about space travels and haVioural patterns are adjusted to new information, so
remote sensing linked to the geographical curriculum. that new insights emerge [E]. The constructivist learn-
ing theory is based on the assumption that the learners
2. PUPILS EXPERIENCE THE ASTRONAUT’S construct their own hypotheses considering their previ-
VIEW ous knowledge independently from a teacher [15].
, , Therefore, learnin is an autonomous and social ro-
2'1' Dldactlcal Background cess. Individual exieriences, dialogue and the efforpt to
It is a paradox, that the knowledge about earth observa- understand are most relevant in the learning process.
tion as a key technology in our modern information so- Following these principles, the provided material can be
ciety is not Widespread [10]. A study revealed that a used in lessons that are mainly based on self-reliant
majority of German pupils does not even know that learning and require only minimal lead and instruction
Google Earth is based on satellite images [11]. Alt- by the teacherw.
hough teachers are interested in implementing the topic
of earth observation in their classes, the encouragement 2.2. The Worksheets: Keep it Simple, Keep it
fails because of confusing, difﬁcult, or ineffective di- manual
dactical preparation of respective information [12]. In
contrast9 surveys with over 300 pupils of grammar The SlIIlplCSt teaching materials Of Columbus EYC are
schools in North-Rhine have shown that the interaction worksheets. While the degree 0f interactivity is 10W: no
With satellite images supports the comprehension of technical issues can occur and HDEV can be imple-
complex curricular topics like wave lengths, reﬂeXion, mented in everyday school lessons ad hoc. One example
or atmospheric circulation [El deals With atmospheric scattering. A news article intro-
duces the inﬂuences of Mie and Rayleigh scattering on
Animation/imeracﬁon our Visual impression of the atmosphere. Optionally, the
Worksheets Tasksigpjrggjfgfund 5°'”""'°"" teacher can also download a zip-ﬁle containing a learn-
ing Video and a swipe implemented in a Power Point
ﬁle. It enables the pupils to compare an original HDEV
_ image With an atmospheric corrected one. Accordingly,
Teaching Tasksand background Interactlvetool Solution . . . . . . .
tools information HDEV footage is used as Visualization poss1bility Where
the given tasks — among others a ﬁll-in-the-blank text —
consider the pupils’ level of knowledge. Again, teachers
Teaching Initialpmblem Background Interactive Solution are provided With a short didactical commentary. It
sequences information tool comprises an overV1eW of the learning goals, covered
Quiz Quiz topics, and applied media. Additionally, they provide
exemplary plans of how to structure the lesson and
Figure 3: Interactivity concepts of Columbus Eye teach- sample solutions.
ing materials
2.3. The Observatory: Regions and Phenomena
Here, the HDEV mission provides an opportunity to Inspected from the ISS
combine both: the fascination of space travels With the
fascination of observing our Earth from above. In order The observatory contains the second type 0f the Colum-
to avoid an ‘art for art’s sake’, the Columbus Eye portal bus Eye teaching materials. According to the principles
provides teaching materials utilizing the HDEV footage 0f moderate constructivism [H]: the learning process
in order to mediate school curricular topics. Cross- requires a high degree 0f self—organisation and respon-
linked thinking is promoted since the subject matter Will SihihtY- Thus, the observatory provides the OPPOTtUhitY
be discussed in different classes. The basic principles of for pupils to freely construct their own hypotheses based
earth observation are covered in the natural sciences, on a spatial analysis. For that purpose, nadir Videos 0f
such as math, physics or computer science, While in the ISS ﬂights have been transformed into large panorama
shots. They build the bases for the spatial analyses in

"
"4","terms of regional geography and a self—conducted image by creating own training samples. The classiﬁcation is
processing. based on the minimum distance classiﬁcation [E]. The
South America ﬂ Coastto Coast teols are developed. as online toels Where pupils can
directly create training areas sharing spectral Similari—
Q' t. '7: T: “ .. - + ‘ ties, label them and apply an own colour scheme.
‘ "" 7}}: ‘ ‘ Hence, colour information is related to semantic infor—
T'A,‘ ‘ _ ‘a—R‘; ‘ . ; o mation in order to construct ‘subjective’ spatial concep—
.7 .‘ 425%5 . s ‘ tion based on ‘objective’ data (Fig. 4). Working With
‘ ,jw ‘ ,. 3:: those images from the ISS orbit demonstrates the ability
. 4 I“ gﬁ~ _' of earth observation techniques and the massive human
‘ kg interference affecting our environment Q]. The online
7.. *ﬁrﬁfi, ‘ A tools also come along With downloadable work sheets
1 ”‘5 1-: , 533;. dealing With curricular topics of the subject geography.
1;“ "" They contain tasks and background information for pu—
” \k‘ﬁ pils as well as sample solutions and an accompanying
_: T didactic commentary for teachers. In contrast to work
, sheets, the didactic commentary is extended by a table
'°- *' W- W — depicting how the speciﬁc teaching unit meets certain
curricular topics of the sixteen federal states of Germa—
ny. Additionally, it holds background information on
. remote sensing and earth observation from the 188 as
A I 7 ' _ -~~‘| + - well as astep—by—step
' 7. A r A _ 7 ' 1‘ V 2.4. The Modules: Comprehensive Interactive
. ‘ _ ' , Teaching Units
V ' ‘7 .' ’ ‘ -, "" ,. i ‘ The third and most complex type in terms of interactivi—
, , _ .7 r v’ ‘f_ ‘7' ty and media application are Whole teaching modules.
, * , 7. ﬂ , . a 7 The basic structure of the learning module consists of
~ . s 1 ‘v 7 i ' , three chapters. Each chapter has a clear aim and guide—
' 7 A x 7 A line for the learner including background information
' ,7 7, 7 and tasks. Moreover, each chapter concludes With a
ﬂ quiz. A very short ﬁrst chapter introduces the main
~— ——— problem to be solved in the course of the subsequent
Figure 4: Screenshot showing the classiﬁcation process chapters. The second .one deals Wlth the spe01ﬁe our—
for ‘South America— Coas t to Coas t ricuiar topic and pr0V1des necessary bachground InfOT-
mation. The centre of the third chapter is an ‘analys1s
Currently, the observatory includes panorama shots of “’91 ’ Slmllar to common software used for spatial anal—
three regions: ‘West Africa — Crossing the Biggest De— ys1s [21]' c . ,
sert on earth’ ‘South America — Coast to Coast’ and The ﬁrst exthpTe Mean Calculations from the 18.8
‘Canada _ Snbw Ice and Sea’. ‘Wes t Africa’ e.gj pro— deals With statistically—based image processmg. and Will
. . ’ . be published soon. It teaches a bas1c mathematical topic
Vides multiple surfaces ranging from sea and desert are— in a Vivid manner The initial roblem is that nois
as in the northwest to Savannah regions and the tropical HDEV ima es neeci to be enhancgd b usin ima e ﬁl}:
rainforest With dense cloud cover When moving south— t . thgd A . . . t d (i, h g. g .
east. The variety of surfaces leads to possible in—depth ering me O 8' sw1pe1s in re uce. S ewmg a n01sy
discussion on different climatic zones. Moreover there and a .corrected HDEV image in nadir Vlew above the
are information points to be found in the image Which Atlantie Ocean. It also shows a spacecraft docked t.0 the
are divided into two categories: regions and phenomena. 188 WthB shouid evo‘ie a ﬁrst interest O.f the pupils in
With their help more knowledge can be acquired on e.g. terms Of What 1.8 that.. ' Afterwardsapapils learn about
Savannah ecosystems in West Africa, insights in tecton— the rele Of. the arithmetic me?“ in statistics as well as the
ics and topography in South America, or the geography functionality Of a movmg Window for image proeessmg
and life in cold regions in Canada. purposes. The chapter ﬁnishes With a quiz foreing the
The integrated spatial analysis is a do—it—yourself classi— pupils to reﬂect on Of the mediateci knowledge. The
ﬁcation. In order to handle the manifold information of SCCOT‘d half Of the module deals Wlth the self—reliant
earth observation data, a land—cover classiﬁcation can application Of kernel—based ﬁltering methods. The pu—
transform the complexity of spatial imagery into a sim— P118 get the task to analyse. an atmbspheric corrected
ple land—cover map showing the most important patterns image Of Canada anti additionally repair. two .n01sy
at a glance. The pupils are able to classify the 188 image images of Saudi—Arabia. The image of Saudi Arabia was

"
"5","taken in nadir View with the aft View cam which means ing and working in space, Columbus Eye streamed
that the ISS had preceded a special manoeuvre in order HDEV live Videos, so that the call from the ground was
to get ready for a spacecraft docking. Pupils learn how instantly accompanied by imagery from above.
different climatic regions are seen from an astronaut’s So far, more than 1,000 pupils and 70 teachers were
View; they get in touch with the ﬂight characteristics of approached directly. The lessons based on HDEV have
the ISS; they are trained in two different image pro- also been aired on TV and radio, so that a wide, inter-
cessing methods; and ﬁnally they apply an arithmetic ested public was addressed [22, 23]. The Visits of the
mean ﬁlter to different levels of noisiness. From the Columbus Eye portal and its observatory are reaching a
evidence of their own eyes and by Virtue of their own number of 11,000.
analyses, the pupils can see how deceptive images from
space can appear, and how they are able to transform 3. CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
their appearance. Again, a quiz cements the information Since the initiation of Columbus Eye in 2013’ the pro-
earnt. . . . .
JCCt experienced a lot of development. The archive With
2.5. Face to Face: Road Show in German Schools HDEV highlights and the observatory has been imple-
mented and continuously extended. A concept for work
Whereas the Columbus Eye portal forms the backbone sheets, comprehensive teaching modules, and didactic
of the project, another important pillar is represented by commentaries were added to the teaching materials.
ongoing Visits to German Schools. They link the Co- Additionally, a road show with Visits at several German
lumbus Eye developments and the mission of Alexander schools and educational institutions was initiated and
Gerst. In addition to teacher trainings, the major part of continued. Accordingly, if the actions and goals of Co-
the so-called ‘Columbus Eye Road Show’ focuses on lumbus Eye are condensed, two catchwords emerge:
pupils of all kinds of secondary schools with two kinds extensive dissemination and selective intensiﬁcation.
of Visits: lecture hall presentations and class room Visits. The ﬁrst feedbacks of professionals in the ﬁeld of sec-
The lecture hall presentations should ignite the fascina- ondary education are promising and have already initi-
tion of the pupils for space travels and earth observation ated ideas for future developments of the project. But
as well as inform about Alexander Gerst’s experience there is still room for improvement. The experience
on the ISS. Here, the audience consists of a minimum of with the application of the Columbus Eye observatory
100 pupils. The class room Visits brings the project in tools in classes showed e.g., that, at ﬁrst sight, pupils
touch with a smaller audience and have the possibility took the result for granted. Instead of questioning the
of in-depth discussions. fact that misclassiﬁcations might occur, they needed
Both types of Visits start with a presentation. The ﬁrst extra hints before they start to critically assess their re-
part deals with the characteristics of the ISS and the sults. The critical reﬂection is meaningful to foster
experiments of Alexander Gerst. Here, pupils can competences in the ﬁeld of spatial orientation and the
choose between four experiments which have been car- pupils’ usage maps as implicated in the national educa-
ried out by the German astronaut especially for children, tion standards [21].
e.g. the speciﬁc ﬂight behaviour of paper planes in a As a next step, the advanced education of teachers will
microgravity environment. His View from the cupola be a way to sensitize them for multimedia earth obser-
leads to the second part dealing with earth observation vation to mediate regular curricular topics. Thus, the
from the ISS and, thus, the Columbus Eye project. The implementation of earth observation in STEM subjects
presentation follows an interactive concept and com- is facilitated and pushed beyond their application as a
prises of space imagery, Videos with Alexander Gerst as mere illustrative teaching element exclusively in geog-
a moderator, audio ﬁles of communication between raphy lessons. Again, those teacher workshops may also
astronauts and mission control, ﬂash animations and multiply the recipients and spread the knowledge of
interactions, as well as a live application of the Colum- earth observation from space in a sustainable fashion.
bus Eye teaching material. During the class room Visits, In the near future, the topics of the Columbus Eye
the pupils are asked to apply the Columbus Eye learning teaching materials will be further extended and addi-
tools and answer some questions related to the Earth’s tional information such as the size of a hurricane or the
surface, e.g. to calculate the snow mass of the Andes. In name of a geographical location will be directly inte-
addressing the pupils’ reality of life with convenient grated into the ISS Videos. Later on, the route of imple-
comparisons and current news topics, a dialog between menting e-learning will lead the project to mobile learn-
presenters and pupils emerges. In doing so, one main ing and the exploration of applicable 3D Videos. In do-
goal of both, Gerst’s Blue Dot mission and the Colum- ing so, the pupils experience a new and unfamiliar dy-
bus Eye proj ect, can be achieved: to raise the awareness namical astronaut’s-eye View, but also the value of earth
of the pupils for a sustainable treatment of the Earth. observation and space technologies to monitor ongoing
One special event of the road show included an exclu- processes of coupled human-enVironment systems di-
sive live radio call to Alexander Gerst on the ISS. While recting the future of the Earth.
the pupils were asking their questions dealing with liV-

"
"6","4. REFERENCES trieved from 0pus.ph-
.. heidel-

1' Deutsches Zentrum fur Luft-und Raumfahrt (Eds) ber .de/ﬁles/36/Dissertati0n Isabelle Kollar. (if
(2014) Blue Dot — Alexander Gerst Shapes ourfu- g — — p
ture 0n the International Space Station. Bonn. (last access: 2016-05-02)

2. RunCO, S., (2015). International Space Station — High 12' ‘83} 11; ""Riclfggeéei's’mI—Ioﬁgé ﬁegaifgog: 1e:
Deﬁnition Earth Viewing (HDEV), Retrieved from . .' g, .

. . . tlﬁc L1teracy - A New Integrated Learmng Portal
http://WWW.nasa.gOV/mlss10n_pages/stat10n/researc f h 1 . 11. . . h
h/experiments/917 html (last acceSS' 2016-05-02) or so 00 S Usmg Sate 1te Images. Leammg WU

' ' ' G] 2011 - Implementing Digital Earth in Educa-
' .B 1' 1 2—1.

3. Goetzke, R., Hodam, H.,Rien0w, A. & V013, K. tzon er 1n, 7
(2014). Floods - Deahng W1th a.C0nstant Threed. 13. Goetzke, R., Hodam, H., Rienow, A. & V013, K.,
In: Sanchez et al. (Eds): Leammg and T eachmg —.

'th Geomedia Cambrid e 90_102 2013 . Tools and Learmn Mana ement Func-
W—bl ' ’ ' tions for a Comgetence-Oriented Integration of
. R tS 'g'Cl .C t1.gEd.):

4. Stefanov, W. & Evans, C. A. (2014). The Internatlon- Gingiumegsolg :lrg8_4a6s3sr00ms ar e a S
a1 Space Station: A Unique Platform for Remote é
Sensing? Of Ijaltlagall lglsasters. JSC Blennal Re- 14. Mandl, H. & K0 , B. 2007 . Blended Leamin .'
seam epor ’ _ ' F orschungsfmgen und Persgektiven, Munich.

5' RISE?) ‘Ag’ H2 8312111: ’ CI—(I)1’unl\:[bel:lsZ’EGej WI; ﬁCECJﬁnfL 15. Rinsehede, G. (2007). Geographiedidaktik: Grund-

, o o — _ a a 0
tion Earth Viewing from the ISS in Secondary rzﬁ Allgememe Geographze, Stuttgart.
o . . a
Schools 65th Internatlonal Astronautlcel Congress 16. Goetzke, R., Hodam, H., Rlenow, A. & V013, K.,
2014 29 Segtember-03 October 2014 1n Toronto, —.
Canada IAC—14-E 1_5 2013 . Teachln Materlals, Enc Clo edela, Eas -
—’ ’ ' tO-Use Image Processing — The FIS Learning Por-
. .. . . ' g. : ' g

6. Runco, S. (2014). Hzgh Deﬁmtzon Earth Vzewmg t1a21(2)n11{6e4111_1i);e3$ensm In EARSeL eProceedm S
(HDEV) Payload Ground Software User’s Guide, 49’ '

Houston. . . .
17. Karaglorgl, Y. & Symeou, L. (2005). Translatlng
7 Schneider M & Lapenta C C (2001) Payload Op- Constructivisminto InstructionalDesign:Potential
. . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . _
eratlons Integratlon Center Remote Operatlons —Lancélemzltc71tzzo7I/zs Educatzonal Technolo & S0616

Capabilities. Conference and Exhibit 0n Interna- ML ’ '
ggggrlaf pFaIfegéftZIOSI/ilgtlélggtlloii 02001’ Cape Ca- 18. Richards, A. (1999) Remote Sensing Digital Image
’ ’ ' ’ ’ ' Analysis, Berlin.

8' M_%_W ’ A' S' & Turner, 13' J' 2.007 ' A C9111 arlson 19. Rienow, A., Hodam, H., Selg, F. & Menz, G. (2015)
of Four Common Atmospherlc Correctlon Meth- . . .
ods Photo rammetric en ineerin and remote Columbus E e.Interact1ve Earth Observatlon from
S—g—g—g—enhin 73 4 3 61-3 68 the ISS in Class Rooms. In: Journal or Geo m h-
#3 ' ic Information Science 1-2015, 349-354.

9' W:::;ai;zl]:.’B(iiﬁqlii).h:1)1/qth0n Geospatzal Analyszs ES- 20. V013, K. Goetzke, R. & Hodam, H. (2008 2. Wie Wird

’ g ' das Thema ZFernerkundung’ im Unterricht ange-
. . . . ? — g ' ' ' .
10. Federal Mlmstry for Economlc Affalrs and Energy hommen Erste Er ebmsee emer Fellstudte
. , . Jekel, Keller & Strobl gEds.). Lernen mzt Geom-
(Eds.) (2012). Makmg Germanys space sector f1t ormationen 111 8-14
for the future. The Space strategy of the German ;’ '
Federal Government. .Retrleved . from: 21. Ubelstéidt, S. (2014). Den Planeten im Blick. Schﬁ-
http://WWW.bmW1.de/EN/SerV1ce/Pubhcat10ns/pub1 .. . . .
ications—archive di (1:3 8 6 42 6 html (las t acceSS' 1er schlupfen 1n d1e Rolle V0n Wlssenschaftlern. 3
2016-05-02) ’ ' ' Sat Nana, TV-Sendung vom 10.11.2014.

11. Kollar, I. (2012). Die Satellitenbild—Lesekompetenz. 22' Ze1t(11er, A].3(12(;)14). 863/106 Elllldgjng RF rdkurtd e mal
Empirische Uberpmfung eines theoriegeleiteten 3/1133: HI""? :18 dem 1r: 05 38516221121131.6r'
Kompetenzstmkturmodellsﬂir daS ,Lesen’ van Sa- (1 fr m or an sen 1mg vom ' ' ' e r1e-
tellitenbildem. Dissertation PH Heidelberg. Re- V6 0

"
"7","http ://WWW.Wdr5 .de/sendungen/leonardo/service/service
bildung/projektcolumbuseye100.htm1 (last access:
2016-05-02).

23. DGfG (Deutsche Gesellschaft ﬁir Geographic (Eds.)
(2014). Bildungsstandards im F ach Geographie
ﬂir den Mittleren Schulabschluss mit Aufgabenbei-
Spielen. Bonn.

All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate, letting you access and read them immediately.

"
