"","x"
"1","Y.
9' 24-hr BLOOD PRESSURE IN HDT-BED REST AND SHORT-LASTING SPACE FLIGHT.
J ohn M. Karemaker’, J anneke Gisolf‘, Wim J . Stokl and Gert A. van Montfrans2
Academic Medical C enter at the University ofAmsterdam, Departments 0f(1) Systems Physiology
and (2) Internal Medicine; PO. Box 22660, 1100 DD Amsterdam, The Netherlands
ABSTRAC T on short-lasting missions to the International
Space Station (188). The main object of both
In 2 ESA-cosmonauts we compared the 24-hr studies was to observe the circadian proﬁle of
proﬁles in blood pressure (BP) and heartrate BP and Heart Rate (HR) by continuous BP—
(HR) to those that we had observed in an earlier measurement using the F inapresTM-principle.
Head-Down Tilted (HDT) bed rest study. In The added advantage over conventional 24-hr
view of the lack of gravitational stress, an upper-arm recording being, that the FinapresTM
attenuated proﬁle was expected, as in HDT. To signal allows pulse-wave analysis to unravel the
obtain a full proﬁle we measured automatic cardiovascular changes underlying BP—changes
upper—arm cuff measurements in 2 cosmonauts, by estimating changes in stroke volume (SV),
. combined with PortapresTM recordings in one. cardiac output (CO) and systemic vascular
Unlike HDT, actual microgravity did not result resistance (SVR).
, in attenuated circadian proﬁles. The levels of
. systolic and diastolic pressures tended to be 2. METHODS
i slightly lower in ﬂight. Only nighttime heart
3 rate was signiﬁcantly lower in Space. The methods in HDT-94 have been described
1 earlier in full [1]. In short, 7 test subjects
1 1. INTRODUCTION underwent once a week a 24—hr PortapresTM
1 (portable F inapresTM) recording, 2 weeks
i In healthy subjects blood pressure (BP) and before, 6 weeks of HDT and 2 weeks after.
5 heart rate (HR) exhibit a distinct circadian Two ESA-cosmonauts scheduled for Taxi-
] rhythm, being higher during the day and lower ﬂights (Cervantes and Delta missions
i during the night. The daytime increase is, to a respectively) participated in this study. Due to
; large extent, a consequence of the upright the logistics of Spaceﬂight it was not possible
‘ posture. Due to the position of the head above to obtain full 24-hr PortapresTM recordings in
! the heart, BP will be up-regulated. For another Space. Therefore we settled for automatic
5 part the daytime increase is due to the action of upper-arm cuff recordings (Boso—equipment,
I the neurohormonal system in support of daily provided by ESA) with additional free-ﬂoating
; activities. The decrease during sleep is PortapresTM recordings. These were restricted to
3 considered a sign of good health: sympathetic a number of more or less quiet moments during
, activity is almost abolished, and the hydrostatic the day and the pre-sleep to sleep transition.
effects of the upright posture have disappeared. The main problem for Portapres turned out to
1 Both in head-down tilted bed rest (HDT) and in be the batteries: almost no rechargeable battery-
! actual microgravity the gravitational stress is no pack passes the stringent safety tests for the
l longer active to increase daytime BP. Therefore 188. By chance it was discovered that the US-
! these circumstances provide excellent test beds crew had Makita power tools onboard that came
; to study the effect of gravitational stress on our with rechargeable packs fulﬁlling the
. Eaith-bound life. The present paper combines requirements of Portapres. Therefore the 2”Cl
I observations in both these experimental cosmonaut carried 2 Makita power tool handles
l circumstances: 7 test subjects in 42-days of in his luggage to the ISS, adapted to serve as
' HDT and 2 cosmonauts in Soyuz Taxi-ﬂights Portapres power supply units.
i Journal of Gravitational Physiology 0 Vol 14(1) 0 2007 p-49

"
"2","3. RESULTS lack of gravitational loading should be
considered, but also the general lack of activity,
The results of the HDT—study have been both psychological and physical, in the HDT-
reported in full in [1]. In shoﬁ, we observed in study is probably decisive here. Astronauts in
HDT a rapid attenuation of the circadian BP- Space, in particular those on short-lasting
proﬁle compared to the initial (upright) control missions, are very active during their waking
period. This attenuation was due to decreases in hours, and the psychological stress of being at
daytime systolic and diastolic pressures, night- the ISS and having both experimental and
time values remaining more or less unchanged. public relations duties (tv-appearances etc.) are
The depth of the HR—proﬁle did not change reﬂected in their BP and HR. It is unknown if
very much under HDT, although both day- and the same proﬁles do occur in astronauts/-
night-time HR were slightly higher than in the cosmonauts who stay onboard for prolonged
control period. Circadian proﬁles of SV and CO periods. As in HDT one might expect a slow
were essentially unchanged. decrease of SV over time, reﬂecting the usual
The Space-observations were haunted by cardiovascular deconditioning that takes place.
technical problems: the Boso-blood pressure
device was malfunctioning very often. The 5. CONCLUSIONS
status of the onboard Makita—battery packs was
not known beforehand, it turned out that some Contrary to expectation from earlier HDT-
packs had only little capacity left. This ruined studies we did not observe drastic changes in
the ﬁrst of the 2 planned sleep~recordings. cardiovascular 24-hr proﬁles during short-
However, the cosmonaut voluntarily performed lasting Spaceﬂight in 2 ESA-cosmonauts. In
one extra -unscheduled- sleep recording later in view of the heavy schedule and the mental load
the mission. that this imposes on the subjects, it still open to
The depth of in-ﬂight circadian proﬁles of BP debate whether this also holds true for
was not very much changed in either astronauts who stay several months in Space.
cosmonaut. Systolic and diastolic values tented
to be slightly lower in Space, both day- and
nighttime values. HR-proﬁle was not attenuated 6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
either, however, nighttime HR was signiﬁcantly
lower than preﬂight. Pulse wave analysis of the This study was supported by the Dutch Space
Portapres signal revealed no striking changes in Research Organization Netherlands (SRON) by
SV, CO or SVR. The reversal of awake— several grants. We are very grateful to the ESA-
sleeping SVR as we had observed earlier under test subjects, the -cosmonauts and their back-
HDT (nighttime values exceeding the pre-sleep ups who cordially took part in these studies.
values, the opposite of the control period) was The help on many occasions by ESA, NASA,
not conﬁrmed here. CNES, Medes and IBMP is gratefully
acknowledged.
4. DISCUSSION
. 7. REFERENCES
This study, where the observations in Earth-

» bound simulation -HDT— were compared to 1. Voogel, A.J. et al. Circadian blood pressure
actual Space ﬂight, conﬁrms the strengths and and systemic haemodynamics during 42 days of
weaknesses of such simulations. In general, the 60 head-down tilt. Acta Physiol. Scand, Vol.
outcome of the simulation was not contradicted 161, 71-80, 1997.
by our -restricted- Space observations. The BP-
proﬁle was essentially unchanged, different
from the HDT—situation. However, not only the
P60 Journal of Gravitational Physiology 0 Vol 14(1) 0 2007

"
