"","x"
"1","OSA / ORS 2010
OMA4.pdf
The Hyperspeetral Imager for the Coastal Ocean (HICO)
and Environmental Characterlzatlon 0f the Coastal Zone
from the Internatlonal Space Statlon
Michael R. Corson
US. Naval Research Laboratory, remote Sensing Division, 4555 OverlookAve S W, Washington, DC 203 75
mike.corson@nrl.navy.mil
Robert L. Lucke
US. Naval Research Laboratory, remote Sensing Division, 4555 OverlookAve S W, Washington, DC 203 75
roberl.lucke@nrl.navy.mil
Curtiss 0. Davis
College ofOceam'c and Atmospheric Sciences, 104 COAS Admin. Bldg, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331
cdavingcoas.oregonslale.edu
Abstract: The Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Ocean (HICO), now operating on the International
Space Station, is the ﬁrst spaceborne hyperspectral imager optimized for environmental characterization of
the coastal ocean. HICO image data is being exploited to produce maps of coastal ocean properties including
bathymetry, in-water suspended and dissolved matter, and bottom characteristics, offering a new remote
sensing capability for coastal types worldwide.
OCIS codes: (280.0280) Remote sensing and sensors; 010.4450 (Oceanic optics)
1. Introduction
Environmental Characterization of the coastal ocean, including maps of bathymetry, in-water organic and inorganic
matter, water optical properties, and bottom characteristics, is a Vital component of planning and executing naval
Operations in these areas. Space platforms offer the possibility of repeat and efﬁcient access to coastal sites
worldwide, and spaceborne multispectral optical imagers such as SeaWiFS, MODIS and MERIS have demonstrated
this advantage for Characterization of the Open ocean. The open ocean is relatively simple, with few in-water
components that tend to CO-Vary on scales of kilometers, so that multispectral image data sampled at 1 t0 4 km is
sufﬁcient. By comparison the coastal ocean is much more complicated, containing suspended and dissolved organic
matter, suspended and dissolved inorganic matter, with various bottom types and depths, all Of which can vary
signiﬁcantly on scales of tens to hundreds of meters. Multispectral data generally does not contain sufﬁcient
information to quantify and Characterize the coastal environment. Over the past two decades, hyperspectral imaging
from aircraft platforms has developed as a powerful method of Characterizing the coastal environment. A
hyperspectral imager records a contiguous spectrum of the light received from each pixel in the scene, and this
additional spectral information is exploited to produce the desired maps of bathymetry, water constituents, and other
coastal properties [1,2].

The Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Ocean (HICO), built and Operated by the US. Naval Research
Laboratory (NRL), is the ﬁrst spaceborne hyperspectral designed for coastal ocean environmental Characterization.
HICO is a natural next step following airborne imaging, providing repeat global access to a variety of coastal types
worldwide to develop and validate environmental product algorithms. The HICO imager optical system is based on
the heritage of airborne sensors previously built at NRL. The environmental product algorithms developed at NRL
and other laboratories to analyze airborne hyperspectral data form the starting point for analyzing HICO spaceborne
imagery.

HICO was launched from the Tanegashima Space Center on Tanegashima Island, Japan, to the International
Space Station (188) on September 10, 2009. The HICO RAIDS Experiment Payload (HREP), the payload module
containing HICO and a second NRL experiment, the Remote Atmospheric and Ionospheric Detection System
(RAIDS), docked t0 the Exposed Facility 0f the Japanese Kibo Module 0n the Space Station on September 24 and
was activated shortly thereafter. The module containing HICO 0n the Space Station is shown in Figure 1.

This paper will discuss the HICO imager and its performance, and then show examples of coastal
environmental products retrieved from HICO imagery and the specialized algorithms used to retrieve those products.
A companion paper in this volume by Davis et al. discusses HICO data processing and shows example results for
coastal ocean and river mouth areas.

"
"2","OSA / ORS 2010
OMA4.pdf
' ﬂ; .. Jyoti - . __ﬁ:
.,f If “Ilwfﬂl h E“ r... 11- gm""-
- - a‘ .. .1 M -' . "" ':-'2'f"""""":r 3--

._ - .__ «r» -- ,

-____“I- :5}... _ '5 - ““ *1 ‘13.; T__.___ M11. 6 Eff;

""ti"": -‘—_"".-* _ - - ., h "" I ' I , ,..-_'"" I f""

F . 3* . . - ' ""- ' _ / .

._ Payload module contalnlng HICO a / .' . _

..- 't._+_ a.?.j' - - .' -'.a'.
Fig 1. Left: Payload module containing HICO attached to the J apanese Kibo Module - Exposed Facility on the International Space Station. HICO
Views the Earth through a slot in the module’s nadir panel. (Photograph courtesy NASA) Right: Flight model HICO imager. (NRL photograph)
2. HICO design and performance
The Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Ocean was built by the Remote Sensing Division of the U.S. Naval
Research Laboratory as a proof—of—concept demonstration that coastal ocean environmental products could be
retrieved from spaceborne hyperspectral imagery. HICO is sponsored by the U.S. Ofﬁce of Naval Research (ONR)
under ONR’s Innovative Naval Prototype program. The HICO ﬂight imager is shown in Figure 1. HICO is
optimized for coastal ocean environmental imaging With design and performance requirements based on the heritage
of two decades of airborne experience at NRL and other laboratories [3]. A primary performance requirement for
coastal ocean imaging is the requirement of a high signal-to-noise ratio for water scenes. The ocean surface is dark,
With low albedo, and from an aircraft or from space is Viewed through the atmosphere Which is substantially brighter
than the underlying scene because of atmospherically-scattered sunlight. This atmospheric signal must be removed
because it contains no information about the water scene, and this process invariably degrades the signal-to-noise
ratio in the resulting ocean image. HICO is designed and tested to have a signal-to-noise ratio greater than 200 to 1
when Viewing a scene With a 5% surface albedo from space. HICO scenes are approximately 42 X 190 km, large
enough to capture the scale of coastal dynamics. HICO’s ground sample distance, the footprint of a single image
pixel on the ocean surface, is approximately 83 In cross track and 96 In along track, providing adequate spatial
resolution for this demonstration. The primary performance characteristics of HICO are summarized in Table 1

Table 1. HICO Performance Parameters

3. Coastal environmental products and product algorithms
Because of the complicated nature and Wide variety of coastal ocean environments, product retrieval algorithms for
the coastal ocean often make use of physical information about water optical transmission, or biological and
physical information about the expected in-water constituents and bottom types, to increase their effectiveness. An
example of such an algorithm applied to HICO image data is the relative bathymetry map of an area in the Yellow
Sea off South Korea, shown in Figure 2. The left picture in Figure 2 is a color image of the scene produced using
three color bands (red, green, and blue) from a HICO hyperspectral image. This color image shows extensive
shallowly-submerged mud ﬂats and channels cut into them by the tide. The false color relative bathymetry map on
the right was retrieved from HICO image data using a newly-developed algorithm [4] that makes use of the variation
in optical absorption of water With wavelength.

"
"3","OSA / ORS 2010
OMA4.pdf
Shallew Water
. T Approx. 1 meter Depth
1""};1‘"" I w ._'. I
f.I-I. IF- :5. - .1 . _‘ . I DEEP Water
_: jar"" . . :- _ I .-
315 .'.'--I ﬁ-Ijrﬁ
Submerged n"" 42:. ‘T- "" .. _
Mud Flat .. .- _ . . ﬁg};
Water Channel 14:""! 3 t I .i I : _
--:-I-_F ..
.h ”4. it a i
""iii"" ' 1.31:"":
1.1:: . 31:. A __-
e22,
Fig 2. Left: Color image of the Yellow Sea off the coast of South Korea, showing extensive mud ﬂats and tide-cut channels. Right: False-color
relative bathymetry map produced using HICO image data. The imaged scene is approximately 42 X 190 km.

Bottom reﬂectance is a confounding factor in retrieving bathymetry from optical remote sensing imagery,
because When analyzing an image of a coastal ocean scene a dark (10W reﬂectance) bottom at shallow depth tends to
mimic a bright (high reﬂectance) bottom at greater depth. The algorithm employed to retrieve the bathymetry map
in Figure 2 uses the remote sensing reﬂectance at the surface, Which is the upwelling radiance leaving the surface
divided by the solar irradiance, at two wavelengths. The ﬁrst wavelength is 810 nm, at Which there is a local
minimum in water absorptance, allowing relatively more light scattered from the bottom to well up through the
surface, thereby increasing the remote sensing reﬂectance at this wavelength. The second wavelength is 720 nm,
Which is away from the local minimum in water absorptance, so that relatively less light scattered from the bottom
wells up through the surface, decreasing the remote sensing reﬂectance at this second wavelength. Combining the
measurements at these two wavelengths for Which the effect of the bottom reﬂectance is different aids signiﬁcantly
in reducing the potential confusion between bottom reﬂectivity and depth. While this relative bathymetry map is
preliminary and has not been validated, it does indicate the potential of environmental characterization of the coastal
ocean using hyperspectral imagery from space.

4. Conclusion

Hyperspectral imaging from space offers the possibility of retrieving detailed environmental information for coastal
oceans worldwide. The Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Ocean, built and operated by the Naval Research
Laboratory and now on the International Space Station, is the ﬁrst demonstration of this capability.

5. Acknowledgements

HICO is launched and ﬂown under the direction of the DOD Space Test Program.

6. References

[1] Goetz A. F. H., Vane G., Solomon J ., and Rock B. N., “Imaging spectrometry for Earth remote sensing”, Science, 228, 1147—1153, (1985).

[2] C. 0. Davis, K. L. Carder, B.-C. Gao, Z. P. Lee, and W. P. Bissett, “The development of imaging spectrometry of the coastal ocean”, IEEE
Proceedings of the International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, 4, 1982-1985, (2006).

[3] C. 0. Davis, M. Kavanaugh, R. Letelier, W. P. Bissett, and D. Kohler, “Spatial and spectral resolution considerations for imaging coastal
waters,” Coastal Ocean Remote Sensing, edited by R. J . Frouin and Z. P. Lee, Proc. of. SPIE V01. 6680, 66800le-12, (2007).

[4] C. M. Bachmann, et 211., “Very shallow water bathymetry retrieval from hyperspectral imagery at the Virginia Coast Reserve (VCR’07) multi-
sensor campaign”, Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE International Geoscience & Remote Sensing Symposium, Boston, MA, USA, (2008)

"
