"","x"
"1","OSA / ORS 2010
OMB1.pdf
Coastal features and rlver plumes as seen w1th the
Hyperspeetral Imager for the Coastal Ocean (HICO)
Curtiss 0. Davis
College ofOceam'c and Atmospheric Sciences, 104 COAS Admin. Bldg, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331
cdavingcoas.oregonslale.edu
Robert Arnone
US. Naval Research Laboratory, Oceanography Division, Stennis Space Center, MS 39529
amoneanrlsscnavymil
Richard Gould
US. Naval Research Laboratory, Oceanography Division, Stennis Space Center, MS 39529
g0uld@nrlssc.navy.mil
Michael R. Corson
US. Naval Research Laboratory, Remote Sensing Division, 4555 OverlookAve S W, Washington, DC 20375
mike.corson@nrl.navy.mil
Marcos Montes
US. Naval Research Laboratory, Remote Sensing Division, 4555 OverlookAve S W, Washington, DC 203 75
marcos.m0nles@nrl.navy.mil
Abstract: The Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Ocean (HICO) is now operating on the International
Space Station. Here we review the processing of HICO data and its application to study coastal features and
river plumes.
OCIS codes: 280.4788 (Optical sensing and sensors); 010.4450 (Oceanic optics)
1. Introduction
Spaceborne multispectral ocean color imagers such as SeaWiFS, MODIS and MERIS have proven to be highly
successful for Characterization of the Open ocean. These imagers have 1-4 km spatial resolution and 6-15 Channels.
By comparison the coastal ocean is much more complicated, containing high levels of phytoplankton, suspended
sediments, suspended and dissolved organic matter, with various bottom types and depths, all Of which can vary
signiﬁcantly on scales of tens to hundreds of meters. The coastal ocean requires higher spatial sampling and
multispectral data generally does not contain sufﬁcient information to quantify and Characterize the coastal
environment [1]. Over the past two decades, hyperspectral imaging from aircraft platforms has developed as a
powerful method of Characterizing the coastal environment. A hyperspectral imager records a contiguous spectrum
of the light received from each pixel in the scene, and this extra spectral information is exploited to produce the
desired maps of bathymetry, water constituents, and other coastal properties [2,3].

The Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Ocean (HICO) [4], is an imaging spectrometer based on the PHILLS
airborne imaging spectrometers [5]. HICO is the ﬁrst spaceborne imaging spectrometer designed speciﬁcally to
sample the coastal ocean. HICO will sample selected coastal regions at approximately 90 m with full spectral
coverage (400 to 900 nm sampled at 5.7 nm) and a high signal-tO-noise ratio to resolve the complexity of the coastal
ocean. HICO is sponsored by the Ofﬁce Of Naval Research as an Innovative Naval Prototype (INP), and will
demonstrate coastal products including water Clarity, bottom types, and bathymetry and on-shore vegetation maps.
As an INP, HICO also demonstrates innovative ways to reduce the cost and schedule of this space mission by
adapting proven PHILLS aircraft imager architecture and using Commercial-Off-The-Shelf (COTS) components
where possible. HICO was built in 16 months and was completed in July 2008 and integrated into the HICO RAIDS
Experiment Payload (HREP) in August 2008. HREP was launched on the Japanese H-2 Transfer Vehicle (HTV)
September 10, 2009. The HTV rendezvoused with the International Space Station (188) on September 17, 2009.
HREP was installed on the 188 on September, 24, 2009 and the ﬁrst HICO imagery was collected on September 25,
2009. HICO is Operating normally and image quality is excellent. A companion paper in this volume by Corson et
a1. discusses the HICO imager and its performance. Here we give an overview of the data handling and processing
and we present example results for coastal regions and river mouth areas.

2. HICO data handling and processing

"
"2","OSA / ORS 2010
OMB1.pdf
HICO is a demonstration sensor and data is collected for particular study areas. The standard HICO scene is 42 X192
km and a maximum of one scene is collected on each 90 minute orbit. Data requests are compiled by personnel at
the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington DC (NRL DC) and sent to the 188 by NASA for execution. Data is
transmitted from the 188 to NASA Marshall Space Flight Center and then transferred to NRL DC for processing.
The initial processing from level 0 (raw data) to level lb (calibrated radiances with geolocation information)
includes dark current subtraction, CCD smear correction, 2nd order correction, spectral calibration and radiance
calibration. The calibrated data are then sent to NRL Stennis Space Center for further processing using the NRL
SSC’s Automated Processing System (APS; Fig. 1). APS was developed for processing SeaWiFS, MODIS and
other multispectral ocean color data. It ingests level lb data and produces a wide range of standard products. APS
was modiﬁed in two fundamental ways to process HICO data: the capability to ingest fully hyperspectral data cubes
was added, along with the capability to apply hyperspectral algorithms to make a variety of products from that data.
Thus, APS HICO has two processing lines: one for making standard APS products from HICO data convolved to
multispectral bands and one for exploiting the full hyperspectral data. Using the multispectral line HICO data is
binned spectrally to simulate MODIS data and then processed to produce all the standard MODIS products but at 90
m Ground Sample Distance (GSD) instead of the MODIS 1 km GSD. This is important in coastal areas were the
tides, diurnal winds, river outﬂow and other forces create complex patterns in the coastal ocean (Fig. 2).
|:>- E>
Vlcarious
Callbraﬂon
Lovch—Moddod
Smmbandc
WDIS
KFIS
I‘x
m— :35: mars“ tm
Level 21:"" Atmospheric Shadow Ligan- Méthﬂdﬁ
Standard AIPS Canadian Cnnmﬂnn - Canadian
""""'*“""*°*"""" —_
Algmillnm; -
Products
pm, rxsrdﬁ 333%? AL
At. any. 0:3. 01:4, ﬁg?“
ummcm. Etc Em
—
“ _-

Fig. 1. Flow diagram for the HICO data processing system. The initial processing from Level 0 to 1b (blue boxes) is done at NRL DC. The
remaining processing is done in APS at NRL SSC. The multispectral processing (pink boxes) is used to produce MODIS like products at 90 m
GSD. The Hyperspectral processing line (purple and green boxes) uses multiple approaches for atmospheric correction and product production to
test and evaluate new approaches to take advantage of the full spectral data. Level three and higher processing (binning, remapping, etc.) is then
done to both data types.

The Hyperspectral processing is more experimental. As HICO is the ﬁrst ocean color hyperspectral sensor in
space we have not previously developed automated processing for hyperspectral ocean color data. The
hyperspectral branch includes several options for atmospheric correction and product production. Additionally, the
calibrated hyperspectral image cube is available and that data is being used at NRL, OSU and other universities and
laboratories for developing new hyperspectral algorithms.

3. Example coastal and river products
Figure 2 is a HICO image of the Yangtze River Plume, China that shows the complexity of coastal water properties
resolved in HICO imagery. Figure 3 is an image of the Florida Keys near Key Largo showing some of the products

"
"3","OSA / ORS 2010
OMB1.pdf
J_-
. ..._ .I r __ __.__
H. j.- . -.I i I _ . .L—I . _ .i .
'I g; . r"" ' . 19h..."" ,
Fig. 2. RGB image of the Yangtze River plume, China made from three channels of HICO data. Orientation is from NW 011 the left to SE 011 the
right. Strong coastal currents and tides are pushing sediments and phytoplankton in to a complex pattern of swirls and eddies which are clearly
resolved in the HICO data.
produced With the multispectral HICO processing in APS. We continue to test and validate new products from
HICO particularly for the full hyperspectral data.
f ‘—- J .. 0 :>
.‘3 “0.: ‘£>.Jh
:13 n
.131.
"" 1"" \“
Fig. 3. Example APS products from a HICO image of the Florida Keys near Key Largo. Orientation is from southwest at the top to northeast at
the bottom.

4. Acknowledgements
HICO is integrated and ﬂown under the direction of the DOD Space Test Program. HREP has also received support
from NASA and JAM as the ﬁrst US experiment payload 0n the J EM-EF.
5. References
[1] C. 0. Davis, M. Kavanaugh, R. Letelier, W. P. Bissett, and D. Kohler, “Spatial and spectral resolution considerations for imaging coastal
waters,” Coastal Ocean Remote Sensing, edited by R. J. Frouin and Z. P. Lee, Proc. of. SPIE V01. 6680, 66800P:1-12, (2007).
[2] A. F. H. Goetz Vane G., Solomon J., and Rock B. N., “Imaging spectrometry for Earth remote sensing”, Science, 228, 1147—1153, (1985).
[3] C. 0. Davis, K. L. Carder, B.-C. Gao, Z. P. Lee, and W. P. Bissett, “The development of imaging spectrometry of the coastal ocean”, IEEE
Proceedings of the International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, 4, 1982-1985, (2006).
[4] M. R. Corson, D. R. Korwan, R. L. Lucke, W. A. Snyder and C. 0. Davis, The Hyperspectral Imager For The Coastal Ocean (HICO) On The
International Space Station, IEEE Proceedings of the International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium. 978-1-4244-2808—3/08, (2008).
[5] C. 0. Davis, J. Bowles, R. A. leathers, D. Korwan, T. V. Downes, W. A. Snyder, W. J. Rhea, W. Chen, J. Fisher, W. P. Bissett and R. A.
Reisse, Ocean PHILLS hyperspectral imager: design, characterization, and calibration, Optics Express, 10(4): 210-221, (2002).

"
