"","x"
"1","The HICO Program — Hyperspeetral Imaglng 0f the
Coastal Ocean from the Internatlonal Space Station
M. R. Corsona, J . H. Bowlesa, W. Chena, C. O. Davisa, K. H. Gallellib, D. R. Korwana, P. G. Lucey"", T. J . Mosherd,
R. Holaseke
Abstract - The HICO (Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal models for the coastal ocean, and Characterize and monitor the

Ocean) program is a collaboration between the Naval Research health Ofreef environments.
Laboratory (NRL), the University of Hawai’i at Manoa, Utah
State UniverSity’ and NovaSol Inc,” to image the ,coaStal ocean The pressurized and temperature-controlled environment in
and reef systems from the International Space Station. The ﬁrst . . . .
phase of the program will install the NRL Portable the 188’ the ablhty t0 launCh t9 the Statlon 1n a padded locker
Hyp ersp e ctr a1 Imager for L 0W Light Spectroscopy (PHILLS) in 1n the Space. Shuttle with relatively low launch Vibretion, and
the Station Window Observational Research Facility (WORF), the avallablhty 0f Statlon crew for system setup, malntenance,
which has a nadir-facing optical window. The PHILLS will and troubleshooting allow HICO to make use ofhyperspectral
image in 10 nm bands over the wavelength range 400 to 1000 nm,
and is designed to provide a signal-to-noise greater than 200 to 1 r""?
when Viewin the relative] dark coastal ocean, coral, 0r 0n-sh0re "" * IF I i: . _ .1: '
vegetation. gThese imagei and ground truth will be used to 1"" 1i 41"" _ ' {#ﬁ """"
develop and verify algorithms for water optical properties, 'i' . 1H '1' _
chlorophyll, CDOM, bathymetry, bottom type, coral reef status,
and to classify on-shore vegetation. The second phase of the I __._
program will install the University of Hawai’i MAHI short wave _ J -. I- ""
infrared hyperspectral imager in the WORF. This paper ' f9.$ E
introduces the HICO program, and discusses the PHILLS and its . , * ""'-' "" -
implementation for HICO. '3‘ r II .- ' I .-
. I'r- "" '
I. INTRODUCTION TO THE HICO PROGRAM *9 ""‘ . ""E if t""
The nadir-facing optical quality window in the Destiny , _ Ilffiﬁ
module of the International Space Station (188) [1], shown - H.-
from inside the Station in Figure 1, offers the opportunity to \
image the Earth from space from a shirtsleeve environment. 5..
The Window Observational Research Facility (WORF), which 1'"" H“!
is yet to be launched, will provide payloads using the window
With power, thermal management, and command and data Figure 1. The optical quality window in the Destiny module of the
links. The HICO (Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal International Space Station.
Ocean) [2] program is a collaboration between the Naval
Research Laboratory (NRL), the University of Hawai’i at imagers developed for airborne imaging. This avoids the
Manoa, Utah State University, and NovaSOI, Inc., to use the substantial cost and development time of imagers designed for
188 window facility to image the coastal ocean and reefs on a autonomous operation in a space environment. The 188
global scale. The HICO program has been briefed t0 the DOD WORF power, thermal management, and command and data
Space Experiments Review Board, and it is anticipated that systems further simplify the system requirements compared to
the Space Test Program (STP) will integrate the payload with a dedicated space instrument. This opportunity will allow
the Space Shuttle and 188. HICO will image selected coastal HICO to begin the substantial task of developing methods,
and reef areas with sufﬁcient frequency to capture seasonal algorithms, and data systems for space-based hyperspectral
variations, and will use the data to characterize and develop imaging of the coastal and ocean environments.
aRemote Slensing DliVision, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC, HICO Will collect data from the 188 using tWO hyperspectral
gé . I:- . . . . .
5131:8323 Igetiltae: 1;; Space Technology, Naval Research Laboratory, imagers, Wthh W111 be operated sequentially for
Washington, DC, kga11e111@spacenﬂnavymﬂ approx1mately one year each. The ﬁrst on board W111 be the
CHawai’i Institute for Geophysics and Planetology, University of Hawai’i at NRL Portable Hyperspectral Imager for LOW Light
348111081» Honolulu» HI» MW . . Spectroscopy (PHILLS) [3], which images in the Visible and
Mechamcal and Aerospace Englneerlng, Utah State Un1vers1ty, Logan, UT, N ear Infrared (VNIR) wavelengths from 400 to 1000 nm. The
t]mosher@eng1neer1ng.usu.edu . . . . .
eNovaSol, Inc., Honolulu, HI, rick.holasek@nova-sol.com PHILLS IS shown 1n Figure 2. The second imager W111 be the
0-7803-8742-2/04/$20.00 (0) 2004 IEEE 4184

"
"2","MAHI, which is being developed by the University of Hawai’i II. THE PHILLS IMAGING SYSTEM
and NovaScl, Inc. MAHI will image in the Short Wave
InfraRed (SWIR) from 1000 to 2500 nm. Figure 3 shows the The NRL PHILLS is a pushbroom-scanning hyper8pectral
NovaScl Diamond-One, from which MAHI is being derived. imager designed to produce high signal-to-noise images 0f the
The planned Ground Sample Distance (GSD) for PHILLS is relatively low albedo coastal ocean and on-shore vegetation.
25 m, and for MAHI is 40 m. During operation, each imager The PHILLS imager, ShOWh in Figure 2: is built using
will be mounted on a motorized gimbal system to be Commercial Off The Shelf (COTS) components wherever
developed and fabricated by Utah State University. The possible to minimize cost and development time. Light enters
gimbal system will provide ground motion compensation to PHILLS through the foreoptic lens, which images the scene at
reduce the apparent speed Of the ground past the line Of sight, the location of the spectrometer slit. The slit is the system
and will also provide cross-track pointing to improve scene ﬁeld stop, and it allows only light originating from a line in
access. Following the completion Of the HICO program, the the scene, parallel to the slit, to enter the spectrometer.
gimbal system will be delivered to the Space Test Program, Spectral dispersion in the direction perpendicular to the slit is
which intends to make it available for subsequent WORF produced by a HyperSpecTM VS'15 spectrometer, Shown in
payloads. The discussion below describes in more detail the cross section in Figure 4- This spectrometer was developed ih
NRL hyperspectral imager and its implementation for HICO. collaboration between NRL and American Holographic, IhC-a
and an improved version is now available from Headwall
.. Photonics. The spectrometer is an all-reﬂective Offner design
' J‘ ”3.:- incorporating a convex reﬂective grating corrected for
w EH: astigmatism, and is further optimized by selecting the grating
i' holographic construction points and mirror tilts to balance
' third- and ﬁfth-order astigmatism. This spectrometer has
1, 1.. , '- 3'"" inherently low smile (the change in dispersion with ﬁeld
- ' ' - t - ""r position) and keystone distortion (the change in magniﬁcation
' . _ I with spectral position), both modeled to be less than 0.1%.
. u- _ - x 4-5—
l3.“ . .. ‘ .
' ' IMMﬁﬁa
ﬂ? .1: x"" 'wge- 43‘ 3
I' I “EEIi 'in"" NI! i I §
:1- 5! i‘. - \vx 14?. r4.
E; 'l. ‘5”! Vi“ #237 g
. . E \II L"" IN?"" : u' 9“;
Figure 2. The NRL PHILLS VNTR hyperspectral imager. The overall length “‘Qi-EEIZE-Fr'ﬁﬁ'. *-“-""’='='="" ."" r...
of PHILLS 1s approx1mately 35 cm. ﬁr“ f1""; 'I .I‘
1 reg. . . t
,E‘Iﬁie-‘l‘r’g 5, ""1"",“ 'a
5-H ""mum: . .' x a.
- .al..- ___ :—_n-.- 'l 55 '
. _ ‘5 ea 2 4 . 5
"" ' h I ,I ..
t H 1 1: l ' Figure 4. The HypeiSpecTM V815. The numbered components are: 1) lens
"" :- |. I mount and entrance slit, 2) fold mirror, 3) concave mirrors, 4) convex grating,
. 1, 5) location of the CCD.
-. - a- 'I
"" .i _' .. i 1?] The spectrally dispersed image falls on a thinned, backside
‘ . 1"" ""h” . IE % illuminated 1024 X 1024 silicon CCD in a camera from
"" "" 4. _ “ ' t "" {55 PixelVision, Inc. The wavelength range from 400 to 1000 nm
_. J r .- is dispersed over approximately 500 pixels, yielding spectral
"" . ’ ' ""7- resolution as ﬁne as 1.2 nm. The focal plane assembly
I ‘ incorporates a custom zero order beam dump and an order-
II'H. _,J = - _ sorting ﬁlter. The backside illumination provides high
i , quantum efﬁciency in the blue wavelengths, and the camera
electronics provide 14-bit digitization and approximately 30
electrons read noise. These performance characteristics, along
, , , with ground motion compensation to increase the frame time,
Figure 3. The NovaSol Inc. Diamond-One SWIR hyperspectral imager, . . . . . . . .
predecessor to the University ofHawai’i and NovaS 01 MAHI. yield the high Signal to n01se ratio required to retrieve quality
0—7803—8742-2/04/$20.00 (0) 2004 IEEE 4185

"
"3","data products from the low albedo coastal ocean scenes. develop other data products of interest to the University’s
The PHILLS foreoptic used for data collection from an aircraft research program. At NRL, emphasis will be placed on
is a COTS C—mount Video lens from Schneider Inc., which is atmospheric correction, water optical properties, bottom type
corrected over the wavelength range 400 to 1000 nm. The and reﬂectance, bathymetry, and the classiﬁcation of near—
much higher altitude of the ISS and the 25 m GSD will require shore vegetation and terrain. NRL will also use the variety of
a longer focal length lens. A suitable lens designed to operate Viewing geometries provided by the Station orbit to
over the full PHILLS wavelength range is not commercially investigate the sensitivity of the product algorithms to the
available, and therefore the PHILLS foreoptic for HICO will observing geometry, Sun angle, aerosol type, and the optical
be custom designed and fabricated. depth of the atmosphere.
III. PHILLS IMPLEMENTATION ON THE INTERNATIONAL ACKNOWLEDGMENT
SPACE STATION

This work is supported by the Ofﬁce of Naval Research, the
The PHILLS pushbroom mode of imaging is compatible with Space Test Program, and Navy TENCAP.
use on the 188, where the forward motion of the aircraft
environment for which the PHILLS was designed is replaced REFERENCES
by the OI‘bltal mOtlon Of the Siatlon' The PHILLS. HICO data [1] M. Runco, “Earth Science and Remote Sensing from the International
W111 be COlleCted and Stored m 10 nm SpeCtral blnS over the Space Station Using the Destiny Laboratory’s Science Window and the
wavelength range 400 to 1000 nm, with 200 to 1 or greater Window Observational Research Facility”, Thirtieth International
signal—to—noise for coastal ocean scenes over the range of Symposium 011 Remote Sensing of EnVironment, Honolulu, HI,
wavelengths that penetrate the? water' InStruinent mOdeling [2] ITIO i.etii141;:i1:2013: G. Lucey, C. 0. Davis, “Hyperspectral Imager for the
ShOWS that a ground mOtlon compensation faCtor Of Coastal Ocean (HICO)”, Thirtieth International Symposium on Remote
approximately ten will be required to achieve the planned Sensing ofEnVironment, Honolulu, HI, November 2003.
signal—to—noise ratio, and orbit simulations have shown that [3] C- 0- DaVisa J- Bowles, R- A- Leathers)? Korwan, TZV- Downes, W-
m 30 to W 13-31:: WW
achieve an acceptable scene reV1s1t time of approx1mately ten and calibration,” Optics Express,10:4,210-221 (2002)_
days for any location accessible from the ISS orbit. The [4] K. Scott, S. Biggar,D. Eppler,E. Zalewski, L. Brownlow, and K. Lulla,
transmission of the Station optical—quality window varies over “International Space Station Destiny Module Window Optical
a range Of tens Of p ere em as a function Of wavelength and Characterization”, . Thirtieth International Symposium on Remote

. . . . . Sensmg of the Env1ronment, Honolulu, HI, November 2003.
angle Of ineldence [4]” and thls W111 have to be taken into [5] J. Bowles, D. Clamons, D Gillis, P Palmadesso, J. Antoniades,
account in the data processing. M Baumback, M Daniel, J Grossmann, D Haas and J Skibo,
“New results from the NEMO/ORASIS compression

The PHILLS HICO ﬂight system will consist Of: the PHILLS algorithm”, Proceedings of the SPIE, vol. 3753 (1999) p. 226.
imager described above; a two aXis gimbaled mount providing
ground motion compensation and cross—track pointing; a
Windows—based computer that controls the imaging process
including receiving imaging scripts generated on the ground,
receiving time and attitude data from the Station, receiving
health and status data from the sensor system, controlling the
imager, controlling the gimbal pointing and motion, operating
a mechanical shutter to collect dark background frames, and
processing and storing the data; and a power supply for the
PHILLS, gimbal system, and computer. The computer will
also implement the NRL Optical Real time Adaptive Spectral
Identiﬁcation System (ORASIS) algorithm [5], to provide
approximately 10 to 1 compression of the hyperspectral data
with negligible loss of ﬁdelity. There is provision for some
image and status data to be sent to the ground Via Station
telemetry for system checkout, system monitoring, and scenes
requiring low data latency. However, current plans call for the
bulk of the image, pointing, and ancillary data to be stored on
ruggedized media and transported to the ground for analysis.
The Naval Research Laboratory will use the HICO data to
investigate the use of existing and new algorithms to produce
products of Naval utility using spaceborne hyperspectral
imagery. The University of Hawai’i will analyze the data to
characterize and monitor the health of reef environments, and
0-7803-8742-2/04/$20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE 4186

"
