"","x"
"1","The Remote Atmospheric and Ionospheric Detection System
experiment on the ISS: Mission Overview
Scott A. Budzien’“, Rebecca L. Bishopb, Andrew W. Stephana,
Paul R. Strausb, Andrew B. Christensenb, and J ames H. Hechtb
31Naval Research Laboratory, 4555 Overlook Ave. SW, Washington, DC 20375, USA;
bThe Aerospace Corporation, Mail Stop M2-260 PO BOX 92957, Los Angeles, CA 90009, USA
ABSTRACT
The Remote Atmospheric and Ionospheric Detection System (RAIDS) is a suite of three photometers, three
spectrometers, and two spectrographs Which span the wavelength range 50-874 mm and remotely sense the thermosphere
and ionosphere by scanning and imaging the limb. RAIDS was originally designed, built, delivered, and integrated onto
a NOAA TIROS satellite in 1992. After a series of unfruitful ﬂight opportunities, RAIDS is now certiﬁed for ﬂight on
the Kibo Japanese Experiment Module—Exposed Facility (JEM-EF) aboard the International Space Station (1S5) in
September 2009. The RAIDS mission objectives have been refocused since its original ﬂight opportunity to
accommodate the lower [SS orbit and to account for recent scientiﬁc progress. RAIDS underwent a fast-paced hardware
modiﬁcation program to prepare for the [SS mission. The scientiﬁc objectives of the new RAIDS experiment are to
study the temperature of the lower thermosphere (100—200 km), to measure composition and chemistry of the lower
thermosphere and ionosphere, and to measure the initial source of OH 83.4 nm emission. RAIDS Will provide valuable
data useful for exploring tidal effects in the thermosphere and ionosphere system, validating dayside ionospheric remote
sensing methods, and studying local time variations in important chemical and thermal processes.
Keywords: airglow, ultraviolet, remote sensing, thermosphere, ionosphere
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Airglow remote sensing
The ionosphere and thermosphere constitute the protective interface between ionizing solar electromagnetic radiation
and the Earth's atmosphere, While the polar upper atmosphere serves as a buffer from energetic particle radiation. The
Sun-Earth connection is strong in this atmospheric region, as its composition, structure, and temperature depend upon
the incident solar photon and particle ﬂuxes. As our technological society increasingly relies upon operational systems
in low Earth orbit, research of the coupled ionosphere-thermosphere system gains societal relevance. Understanding,
characterizing, and forecasting the temperatures and temporal/spatial variability of ion, electron, and neutral densities of
the upper atmosphere illuminate diverse topics such as GPS signal quality on Earth and in space, orbital drag of satellites
and the International Space Station, correct interpretation of GPS measurements, and even anthropogenic global climate
change.1’2’3’4 Recent observations of ionospheric airglow modulations illustrate the importance of tidal interactions from
the lower atmosphere to the thermosphere-ionosphere 1‘egi0n5’6 as an additional source of upper atmosphere variability.
The ionosphere is the most variable part of the atmosphere: peak ion density varies by orders of magnitude depending
upon local time, latitude, solar activity level, and geomagnetic conditions. The neutral thermosphere is less variable, yet
variations in the photoelectron ﬂux, temperature, and abundances of chemically reactive species both affect and reﬂect
the state of the coupled thermosphere-ionosphere system. Spectra of naturally-occurring ultraviolet, Visible, and infrared
airglow emissions from the upper atmosphere provide information about the global and vertical distribution of neutral
gases, ions, and electrons in the upper atmosphere. When such observations are analyzed using applicable radiative
transfer, atmospheric composition, and photoelectron models, a comprehensive understanding of the composition and
distribution of all major ion and neutral species of the ionosphere and thermosphere may be obtained. These retrieved
environmental data products can be ingested into assimilative operational space weather models to improve the ﬁdelity
of current ionospheric speciﬁcation and to improve forecasting When full-physics assimilative models are implemented.
Solar Physics and Space Weather Instrumentation I”, edited by Silvano Fineschi, Judy A. Fennelly, Proc. of SPIE
Vol. 7438, 74380X - © 2009 SPIE - CCC code: 0277-786X/09/$18 - dOi: 10.1117/12.826513
Proc. Of SPIE Vol. 7438 74380X-1

"
"2",", ' "" 3*» - , 1
, ’ I \‘\‘~‘
, ii, - ,1' '
- ,,/""/
“‘ ‘1: __-, .,,,.___._,,_ ""1‘“: _ _. 7 ‘
w ,, - ‘ ‘ ;_;nimj ,-. .5, - . - ; ‘41.; j _.--- 4
- ‘ J . ‘4...- A
\ ‘ ‘ ‘ _ #‘g "" .-~.-..,-._' “'I ’ ‘ - ‘3 ,. .
‘ “' -‘~- ' i .A
Fig. 1: The RAIDS experiment hardware for the [SS mission integrated into HREP. The scan head containing eight optical
sensors Views out the open end of HREP and scans downward from the top deck.
1.2 Experiment history
The Remote Atmospheric and Ionospheric Detection System (RAIDS) was conceived in 1983 at a time when rather
limited datasets were available to study the therrnosphere-ionosphere system globally. In particular, ultraviolet remote
sensing of this region of the atmosphere had been performed using a number of advanced sounding rockets, various
satellite observations limited in global, temporal, or spectral coverage, and several lunar camera images. The RAIDS
experiment was developed to perform the ﬁrst state—of—the-art, comprehensive, global satellite survey of the upper
atmosphere using hyperspectral remote sensing of airglow. RAIDS was also to have demonstrated advanced operational
global remote sensing methods.
RAIDS (Fig. 1) was built jointly by the Naval Research Laboratory and The Aerospace Corporation, extensively tested
and calibrated, and then integrated onto the NOAA-J Advanced TIROS-N satellite in 1992. When NOAA-I was launched
in August 1993 and experienced a power system anomaly two weeks into its mission, the NOAA-J satellite was
reconﬁgured, and RAIDS was removed in 1994. The RAIDS hardware was placed in clean storage at NRL. Eleven
domestic and foreign launch opportunities were pursued over the course of thirteen years, each ultimately frustrated by
spacecraft accommodation of the large RAIDS sensor suite, programmatic issues, or simple bad luck.
1.3 ISS opportunity
In October 2006 a new ﬂight opportunity aboard the International Space Station (ISS) was identiﬁed, and in March 2007
RAIDS was manifested to ﬂy with an NRL companion experiment named the Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal
Ocean (HICO). Both experiments will operate inside the HICO-RAIDS Experiment Payload (HREP), which is a
structure about the size of a refrigerator that provides power and communications between the experiments and the space
station. HREP will ﬁll a NASA slot on the Kibo J apanese Experiment Module—Exposed Facility (JEM-EF) which was
just recently installed and commissioned on the 155. The payload will launch aboard the demonstration ﬂight of the new
H-II Transfer Vehicle (HTV) unmanned resupply system developed by the J apanese. As the ﬁrst US payload aboard the
JEM-EF, the HREP program serves as a pathﬁnder for future US experiments slated for other NASA slots on the
exposed facility. Integration services and one year of mission operations are provided to HREP by the Department of
Defense Space Test Program, and the nominal one-year mission may be optionally extended for up to two additional
years before removal from Kibo and disposal by reentry.
1.4 RAIDS experiment descriptions
The original 1990 design of the RAIDS experiment has been described previously.7’8 This paper provides an overview of
the new RAIDS mission aboard the 188 from motivation to implementation, while two companion papers9’10 discuss the
refurbished sensor performance with respect to the new science obj ectives in more detail.
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7438 74380X-2

"
"3","2. MISSION

2.1 Approach
The new RAIDS mission aboard the ISS follows the ""faster-better-cheaper” (pick two!) paradigm for mission design.
The HREP program was optimized for a short schedule and for minimum acquisition cost, while necessarily accepting
higher performance risk. The HREP, HICO, and RAIDS development, test, and integration schedule was extremely
compressed: at program initiation only 23 months were allotted from program kickoff to delivery in February 2009 to
meet the original target launch date. (The launch date slipped by only 3 months during the program.) Neither the HREP
payload infrastructure nor the HICO experiment were designed at the beginning of the program; RAIDS was in a better
position as pre-eXisting hardware. Even so, due to RAIDS' extended storage period, evaluating, refurbishing, testing,
and integrating RAIDS within the allotted time frame remained quite challenging. Very tight budget constraints
permeated the program and affected decision-rnaking at both the experiment- and payload-levels.
The extant RAIDS experiment package had been built to approximately Class-B (Medium Risk with Cost-SaVing
C0rnpr0rnises) speciﬁcations, but the RAIDS refurbishment and the overall HREP program was deﬁned as Class-D
(Minimum Acquisition Cost).11 Class-D space missions typically include characteristics such as small size, low cost,
short life, low complexity, medium to high risk, single-string designs, n0 ﬂight spares, and relaxed testing requirements
with respect to payload performance. Of course, as an ISS payload, all HREP hardware had to satisfy both the NASA
and J AXA manned spaceﬂight safety requirements without exception.
Finally, the scientiﬁc goals of the RAIDS experiment were reconceived in light of both the observational constraints of
the [SS and many years of progress in ionosphere-therrnosphere remote sensing research. Due to the tight schedule and
budgetary constraints, we adopted a very conservative approach: deﬁne cutting edge science that could be performed
with the fewest modiﬁcations to the RAIDS hardware. The RAIDS team was forced to ruthlessly focus upon the new
primary science objective for RAIDS, to identify and retire risk early, and to sacriﬁce secondary science goals and
secondary sensors to meet schedule and budget requirements, when necessary. Thus the approach we adopted was to do
the least possible amount of hardware refurbishment necessary to meet the requirements of NASA manned mission
safety, ISS/JEM-EF/HTV accommodation, RAIDS primary science objectives, and RAIDS secondary science objectives
(in order of importance).
2.2 Scientiﬁc objectives
RAIDS was conceived and built as a survey experiment with broad capabilities to completely characterize the
aeronornically important species in the thermosphere and ionosphere. Nowadays, space science missions are generally
expected to have more tightly-focused objectives than those of the original RAIDS mission. Though a global
comprehensive therrnospheric and ionospheric survey has never been performed, various space experiments over the last
15 years have advanced our understanding of the therrnosphere. Yet compelling, fundamental science questions remain
concerning (1) the structure of the thermosphere and ionosphere, (2) their responses to solar and geomagnetic forcing,
and (3) the effect of tides and gravity waves upon the upper atmosphere. The RAIDS experiment will measure the
composition, density, and temperature from which chemical and dynamical effects can be modeled 0r inferred to address
aspects of these questions.
The International Space Station platform is not well-suited to high latitude (auroral) 0r ionospheric observations due to
its 51.60 orbital inclination and low 330-425 krn orbital altitude. Consequently, the ability of RAIDS to address the
science questions above will be limited to what can be accomplished in low- to rnid-latitudes and in the lower portion of
the thermosphere and ionosphere. The new RAIDS obj ectives tailored for this 188 mission are:

Primary Objective: Measure the lower therrnosphere temperature over altitudes 100-200 km to study

the vertical temperature and compositional structure, the therrnospheric response to solar UV

variability, and the effect of tides and waves on the lower therrnosphere.

Secondary Objective: Measure the 0+ initial 83.4 nm emission source in the lower F region

ionosphere separately from the multiple scattering 83.4 nm source near the F-region peak to validate

remote sensing of the dayside ionosphere.

Secondary Objective: Measure the global distribution of minor species in the therrnosphere to

understand their role in chemical and ionic reactions in the lower thermosphere and ionosphere.

Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7438 7438OX-3

"
"4","777 630
Phot Phot
. A, FUV MW EUV
'; . .1. ~ 1 I V ””7?” ~i ('13:?I 'n. ‘2 1’
IR Det i i ""‘1 "" i ‘ 0‘ 2* «*7 £4!
BOX 45.“ 1 ""1; r4”. .. .1; ""1“‘4 : k"" 34"", 4 ' ”7,4 ””7 4’
miﬁxﬂ. :1 ‘24; 4 f i i i‘ Isi-Wi
. V 3., 1:""! S, "" éa‘“:'i '_ {a . ';‘ -.""‘r-:;""'""""75“
”TL” km: 51- w ' -.~. E}- ‘1'354‘ 27’
, ""“7'” .1 4 33.3 i: g 3‘ '{m-‘we‘mgg‘ ii: , *5? /
- _ V, -- .33 . ' ' Gait” 1:... ‘7 ‘ -‘ . f1.“ ‘31-”
; “*2 rahr“—-fm.;. , '. ;
‘ ‘ i f? ,. a _ -_ .‘—, ‘ v
.' s , 3? 3 V ‘ , ””” a . y
4% :7; 5—1;.E5; .
""NIR NUV 5:4 k 76.5 1:
Phot
Fig. 2: The RAIDS experiment hardware after refurbishment, including the IR detector box (left) and the scan head (right)
containing seven scanned sensors and the ﬁxed FUV limb imaging spectrograph.
The primary objective of temperature measurements in the lower thermosphere is highly relevant to current community
interest in the effects of tides upon the global structure of thermosphere and ionosphere}6 the development and
validation of improved empirical models of the thermosphere,12 and understanding the heat balance in the thermosphere
With respect to global climate change and satellite dragl. RAIDS measurements Will focus particularly on temperature in
the 100-200 km altitude range Where a large temperature gradient occurs and Which coincides With a temperature data
gap between 130-200 km.
2.3 Sensors and observables
The RAIDS sensor suite (Fig. 2) includes eight instruments in three classes—photometers, spectrometers, and
spectrographs—Which together span the EUV t0 NIR t0 passband 55—874 mm. The photometers, spectrometers, and the
FUV spectrograph include off-axis telescopes feeding an entrance slit, While the EUV spectrograph uses a mechanical-
grid collimator to deﬁned its ﬁeld-of-View. The photometers have ﬁxed 1.5 nm passbands at 630, 777.4, and 765 nm.
The NIR (722-874 nm), NUV (295-399 nm), and MUV (190-317 nm) Ebert-Fastie spectrometers can operate at ﬁxed
selectable wavelengths or as scanning monochromators. The FUV (130-170 nm) and EUV (55-115 mm) spectrographs
include array detectors and return multi-wavelength spectra continuously. Seven of the instruments are co-aligned 0n the
stepper—motor—driven scan head Which points to or scans up to 16.50 across the limb, but the FUV spectrograph is
mounted separately and performs ﬁxed-angle vertical imaging of the limb. Thus the RAIDS sensor suite provides a
highly ﬂexible combination of spectral scanning, vertical scanning, ﬁxed pointing, and selectable monochromatic
photometry capable of addressing a Wide variety of aeronomy problems. The optical characteristics of these sensors Will
be brieﬂy reviewed in section 3.1, and the built-in observing modes are discussed in section 4.4.
A brief traceability matrix (Table 1) connects scientiﬁc objectives and measureables t0 dayside and nightside capabilities
for each of the sensors. The NIR Spectrometer and 765 Photometer are key instruments for the temperature objectives.
Temperature measurement relies upon 02 Atmospheric band (0,0) emission, Which may be studied using spectral scans
of the NIR spectrograph at discrete altitudes or by continuous limb scan proﬁles using a combination of monochromatic
emissions Within the (0,0) band. The EUV spectrograph is the only sensor capable of measuring the dayside ionosphere.
Composition of the major gas species may be measured using a variety of instruments and algorithms, s0 retrieved
atmospheric densities may be intemally-validated using independent sensors. The minor species science objectives
focus upon the chemically active, thermodynamically important gas NO, measured using the MUV spectrometer.
2.4 Mission success
Based upon the scientiﬁc objectives and the instrument complement, we have developed mission success criteria (Table
2). These criteria deﬁne the altitude range covered, the type of limb scan used, and the period of operation necessary to
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7438 7438OX-4

"
"5","Table 1. Mission Objectives, Measurements, and Sensors
* D , Temperature Temperature N2 02 0 Minor 0+ or
p ays1de (Discrete Proﬁle Density Density Density Species Electron
Nightside altitudes) Density
NIR Spectrometer
(740-874 nm) g *
*0
Photometer
765 nm
MUV Spectrometer é)? * é)? *
(190-320 nm) * *
NUV Spectrometer f * f * V *
FUV Spectrograph
(130-170 nm)
Photometer
777 nm
Photometer
630 nm
EUV Spectrograph
(55-1 10 nm)
Response to Response to
Objective solarﬂux and tides and Composition Chemistry Ianosphere
solar wind waves
Table 2. Mission Success Criteria
Primary Objective Thermosphere Temperature & Composition with Thermosphere Temperature & Composition with
Variability Variability
0 100-200 km alt. 0 100-350 km alt.
o discrete altitudes 0 full altitude scan
0 30 days continuous o 1 year continuous
Secondary Objective Dayside Ionosphere Initial 0+ 834 Source Dayside & Nightside Ionosphere Variability
0 200-350 km alt. 0 200-350 km alt.
0 full altitude scan 0 full altitude scan
0 1 day 0 1 year
Secondary Objective MLTI Chemistry and Microphysics MLTI Chemistry and Microphysics
0 100-200 km alt. 0 100-350 km alt.
o discrete altitudes o discrete altitudes
o 2 weeks 0 1 year
0 30-day minimum time for Primary Science Objective was deﬁned by 188 precession rate to achieve 24-hour local time coverage,
excluding sun-safe periods. (Not merely 30 random days over a one-year period.)
0 At least 80% data coverage expected.
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7438 7438OX-5

"
"6","address the scientiﬁc objective. The success criteria also ﬂow down to deﬁne other RAIDS mission requirements and
provided guidance in prioritizing refurbishment tasks, mitigating technical risk, and planning mission operations.
As a Class-D higher risk experiment the HREP/RAIDS mission has not being designed to ensure comprehensive
success. However, RAIDS was originally built to approximately Class-B standards using rad-hard parts and built-in
redundancies. Therefore, we fully expect RAIDS to far exceed its minimum success criteria. Minimum Success was
achievable by RAIDS even before the RAIDS hardware refurbishment actiVities.
2.5 Mission proﬁle
Currently HREP is scheduled to launch on September 11, 2009 aboard HTV—l from Tanegashima Space Center in J apan.
The unmanned HTV capsule includes a pressurized cargo area and an unpressurized bay in which payloads destined for
the J EM-EF are stored. After launch the HTV will rendezvous with the ISS, and the Space Station Remote Manipulator
System will grab the HTV and deck the pressurized portion to the Kibo module. After a time, astronauts will use the
manipulator arm on the J EM to extract the Experiment Pallet (EP) from the HTV, and attach the EP with the payloads t0
the External Facility. Later, the manipulator arm will be used to remove payloads from the EP and plug them into their
ﬁnal positions.
One year of mission operations will be provided by the Space Test Program, though the experiments could potentially
operate aboard the [SS for a much longer period of time, if funding is secured. During the period of RAIDS operations
the Atmospheric Neutral Density Experiment (ANDE) microsatellite experiment from NRL will measure in situ
thermospheric composition, total density, and winds in the [SS orbital plane over the course of approximately 12 months.
Operating opposite RAIDS 0n the J EM-EF will be the J apanese experiment Superconducting Submillimeter—wave Limb
Emission Sounder (SMILES) to measure trace gases in the stratosphere. Also present on the JEM-EF facility will be the
Space Environment Data Acquisition equipment-Attached Payload (SEDA-AP), a J apanese experiment to measure the
local space environment (plasma, atomic 0, etc.) in the [SS orbit. In the third year after RAIDS begins data collection
the Japanese Ionosphere, Mesosphere, and upper Atmosphere and Plasmasphere mapping experiment (IMAP) will
measure airglow emissions beneath the ISS. These experiments are expected to provide measurements that can
complement RAIDS remote sensing observations and provide validation, context, or missing information relevant to
RAIDS science.
After RAIDS science mission operations cease, the HREP payload will be decommissioned, and the manipulator arm
will load it into an empty HTV for de-orbiting and disposal by atmospheric re-entry.
3. HARDWARE

3.1 Hardware Overview
In Table 3 we provide a brief summary of sensor capabilities. A few key features of the sensors are:
EUV Spectrograph. The EUV spectrographs is a f/5 imaging Wadsworth design using a wedge-and-strip two
dimensional detector, although the spectrograph is not operated in imaging mode—the spatial dimension of the spectrum
is collapsed to save bandwidth. The spectrograph uses a mechanical grid collimator to minimize reﬂective losses. The
grating may be positioned to measure the 50-85 nIn passband or the 77-110 nIn passbands at 1.2 nm spectral resolution.
The 128-bin spectra are read-out every 0.5 seconds. The peak sensitiVity is 0.5 counts/sec/Rayleigh at 011 83.4 nm, the
emission feature of primary interest.
FUV Spectrograph. The FUV spectrograph is an f/5 imaging Wadsworth design which uses a 0.125-In Off-aXis
telescope to image the atmospheric limb in the 130-170 nm passband onto a sealed wedge-and-strip detector. This
spectrograph is used in imaging mode and generates 64 spatial pixels by 256 spectral pixel images. Each image is
integrated for at least 64 seconds and read-out piecewise into telemetry as 128 bins every 0.5 seconds. This was
originally the “premier” NRL sensor; however, for this [SS mission its limited 4.1O vertical ﬁeld-of-View is not well
suited to the low 375 km orbit altitude. Moreover, the sensor has suffered a signiﬁcant degradation of its short
wavelength sensitiVity below 145 nm which could not be corrected for this mission. Peak sensitiVity near 150 nm is
approximately 1.7 counts/sec/Rayleigh, and spectral resolution is 0.7 nm.
MUV Spectrometer. The MUV spectrometer is an f/5 0.125-In Ebert—Fastie monochromator fed by a 0.25-In off aXis
telescope and uses an EMR “F” CsTe photomultiplier tube detector. The spectrograph covers 195-317 nm at 1.0 nm
resolution in a 25-sec scan. Sensitivity near 240 nm is ~7 counts/sec/Rayleigh.

Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7438 7438OX-6

"
"7","Table 3. Summary of Sensor Characteristics
Sensor Passband Field-of—View Integration Aperture Area Telemetry Rate Sensitivity
Time (bits/sec) (counts/sec/Rayleigh)

55—111 mm @ 1.25nrr1res. 0.10 x 2.40 70mm x 70mm 2560 0.2—0.5
130—170 nm @ 0.7mm res. 4.10 x 0.10 64-90 sec 21mm x 25mm 4096 0.1—1.7
190—317 nm @ 0.95nm res. 0.10 x 2.10 0.025 sec 42mm x 50mm 1—7
295—399 nm @ 0.7mm res. 0.10 x 2.10 0.025 sec 21mm x 25mm 4—7
722-874 nm @ 0.84nm res. 0.10 x 2.10 0.025 sec 21mm x 25mm 0050.13

630 Phot 1.5 nm @ 630 nm 0.20 x 2.10 42mm x 50mm 4.03

765 Phot 1.5 nm @ 765 nm 0.10 x 2.10 21mm x 25mm 2.57

777 Phot 1.5 nm @ 777 nm 0.20 x 2.10 42mm x 50mm 0.86
NUV Spectrometer. The NUV spectrometer is an f/5 0.125-rn Ebert-Fastie rnonochrornator fed by a 0.125-rn off-axis
telescope and uses an EMR photomultiplier tube detector. The spectrograph covers 295-399 nm at 0.7 nm resolution in a
25-sec scan. Peak sensitivity near 330 nm is ~7 counts/sec/Rayleigh.
NIR Spectrometer. The NIR spectrometer is an f/5 0.125 Ebert-Fastie rnonochornator fed by a 0.125 off-aXis telescope.
Its detector is not directly attached to the spectrometer, but fed by a ﬁber optic cable to the radiative cooled IR detector
box which houses the Hamamatsu R943-O7 series photomultiplier tube. The NIR spectrometer covers the passband 725 -
870 nm ar 0.84-nrn spectral resolution during its 25-sec scan. This system uses a glass ﬁlter to restrict out-of-band light.
777 Photometer. The 777.4 nm photometer is tuned for an nighttime O++e recombination line of atomic oxygen. It
uses a 0.25-rn off-aXis telescope and a Barr Associates 1.5-nrn passband interference ﬁlter coupled to a Hamamatsu
R943 photomultiplier tube Via a ﬁber optic cable.
630 Photometer. The 630 nm photometer is tuned for an 0 emission feature present in the nightglow. A 0.25-m off axis
telescope feeds an interference ﬁlter coupled to a Hamamatsu R943 PMT through a ﬁber optic cable.
765 Photometer. This sensor is an updated version of the original 589 nm sodium line photometer. A new 1.5-nrn
passband interference ﬁlter was installed, optimized for a portion of the 02 Atmospheric (O-O) band suitable for
temperature sensing. This ﬁlter stage is fed by a 0.125-rn Off-aXis telescope and connected to a Hamamatsu R943 PMT
detector Via ﬁber optic cable. This sensor was checked to assess its off-aXis light rejection, which was found to be
unchanged after extended storage.
3.2 JEM-EF/ISS platform
The JEM-EF and [SS platforms offer both advantages and disadvantages compared to free ﬂying satellites. Orbital
access to the space station is relatively easy and IBM can support large payloads 0f 500kg or more and supply up to
3 kW of electrical power. Disadvantages for remote sensing payloads 0n JEM-EF include a cluttered anti-RAM ﬁeld-of—
View due to extensive structures and moving solar and radiator panels; periodic maneuvers for spacecraft docking;
concerns about contamination in the local environment; and loose attitude maintenance requirements (dcl5O in pitch).
Since the [SS is a large, mechanically ﬂexible platform, obtaining accurate knowledge (<0.050) of attitude at the payload
location and 100k direction for our lirnb-scanning sensor is a challenge, so HREP includes a star tracker to provide
attitude information. The three issues of greatest concern for RAIDS were the pitch maintenance (due to the narrow
ﬁeld-of-View 0f the FUV spectrograph), the thermal performance of the IR detector box radiator (to minimize thermal
noise in the PMTs), and the cluttered ﬁeld-of-View (due to scattered light and glint concerns in the NIR/Visible sensors).
3.3 Refurbishment program
RAIDS was originally designed for a Sun-synchronous TIROS satellite in an SOO-km orbit, so a number of hardware
accommodations were required to adapt RAIDS for ﬂight aboard the new HTV launch vehicle and for operations aboard
the lower—inclination, lower—altitude space station. Satisfying safety requirements for the manned spaceﬂight
environment and fulﬁlling other veriﬁcations requirements were particularly challenging due to the obsolescence 0r

PrOC. Of SPIE Vol. 7438 7438OX-7

"
"8","unavailability of the experiment's original thermal and mechanical models and due to more stringent documentation
requirements beyond those for the original TIROS mission.
RAIDS underwent a calibration and hardware evaluation during April and May 2007. All sensor were found to be
performing nominally, with two exceptions: the 589 nm photometer photomultiplier tube was noisy, and the FUV
spectrograph exhibited lower—than—expected sensitivity at wavelengths shortward of 145 nm. The RAIDS mechanical
systems were found to perform very well during preﬂight testing, and analyses of the bearings, motors, and lubricants
conﬁrmed adequate performance to meet mission obj ectives.
We identiﬁed twelve RAIDS refurbishment tasks in three broad categories: (1) Repair and Upgrade tasks concerned
bringing sensors back to working order or upgrading sensors to meet the new science objectives. The highest—priority
repair and upgrade tasks centered upon converting the 589 nm Na photometer to sense an 02 atmospheric band for
therrnospheric temperature measurement. A lower—priority repair task entailed evaluating and mitigating poor short-
wavelength sensitivity of the FUV spectrograph, thought to originate in possible detector degradation. (2) Risk
Reduction tasks addressed hardware performance risks discussed at the initial RAIDS Science Team meetings. Most of
the concerns related to the long period during which RAIDS was in storage, and ranged from lubricant and bearing aging
to degradation of sensor optics to electronics aging. (3) Accommodation tasks were required to prepare for science
operation aboard the [SS and ﬂight aboard the HTV. RAIDS aboard HREP had to be modiﬁed to accommodate the
lower [SS altitude, the non-Sun-synchronous orbit, a new spacecraft, a new launch vehicle, and manned mission safety.
Table 4: RAIDS Refurbishment Activities
RUl Replace noisy photomultiplier tube on New Harnarnatsu R943-07 PMT‘s procured and installed
Photometer #3. in the IR detector box.
RU2 Replace the 589 nrn narrowband ﬁlter on New interference ﬁlter procured and installed.
Photometer #3 with 765 nrn ﬁlter.
RU3 Refurbish the FUV detector. FUV detector and electronics fully evaluated, detector
operates properly, but short-wavelength sensitivity is
still low.
RRl Off—axis rejection test and evaluation of NIR Off—axis testing spanning 109 dynamic range veriﬁed
spectrometer and photometers. scattered light performance measured in 1990.
RR2 Performance testing of scan platform and other Mechanical testing veriﬁed the performance of scan
mechanisms. drive, grating drives, and other mechanisms. Analysis
retired risks from lubricant aging.
RR3 Replace narrowband 630nm and 774.4nrn ﬁlters. Old ﬁlter was examined and showed some degradation.
New ﬁlters procured and installed.
A1 New FUV sensor mounting for 188 orbital New mounting feet fabricated and installed.
altitude.
A2 Replace ﬁber optic cables and re-route. New routing designed and new cables procured from the
original manufacturer.
A3 Narrow sun sensor ﬁeld-of-View. New sun sensor mechanical collimators fabricated and
installed.
A4 Modify the IR detector box, for cooling of IR New radiator panel, PMT tube mounts and sockets,
detectors in the ISS orbit. fabricated and installed.
A5 Optimize scan proﬁle by adjusting jumpers in Determined to required too much time and effort. Using
scan drive electronics. original scan proﬁle.
A6 Fastener replacement and load-path analysis. All accessible fasteners in the critical load path replaced
with new ISS-cornpliant fasteners.
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7438 7438OX-8

"
"9","A11 refurbishment activities required to achieve the science objectives were successfully completed, along With a number
of optional refurbishment tasks. The thermal performance of the redesigned IR detector box has been analyzed and
found to cool the PMT tubes With adequate performance margin. The cluttered ﬁeld-of-View cannot be changed,
although the off-aXis rejection performance of the NIlUVisible sensors is quite good.9 The poor attitude maintenance if
the [SS cannot be changed; operational adjustments in scan range can be made for the sensors on the scan head, and
since the FUV spectrograph is a second-tier sensor, the poorly-constrained pointing is acceptable.
4. OPERATIONS
4.1 Command and Data Handling
The [SS command, control, and data handling infrastructure using the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System
(TDRSS) allows for frequent, long-duration command Windows and downlink periods compared to typical LEO satellite
ground station overpasses and provides roughly 60-70% coverage for real-time telemetry and commanding. The RAIDS
experiment uses only the low rate 1553 science telemetry for transmitting data Which is obtained either by broadcast
over the internet or by downloading stored data ﬁles using FTP protocol. Commands are uplinked directly from ground
stations at NRL using NASA's Telescience Resource Kit (TReK) software, through a secure internet connection to
Marshal Spaceﬂight Center, and then to the ISS.
T0 supplement command modes already built into the RAIDS ﬂight computer, the HREP Instrument Interface Unit ﬂight
computer includes a scripting capability, Which can send repeated sets of RAIDS commands including time-delays and
loops. RAIDS Will operate most of the time in a default autonomous mode, With monthly shutdowns for sun-saﬁng,
periodic shutdowns for [SS operations, and occasional periods of targeted campaign observations.
4.2 188 ﬂight modes and Viewing geometry
RAIDS is a limb-scanning sensor, so most of the atmospheric airglow signal originates near the geometrical tangent
point along the line-Of-sight. The experiment does not require real-time attitudes for pointing control, merely Viewing
geometry knowledge for ground-based post-processing. Seven parameters are required for geolocation 0f RAIDS limb-
scan airglow signals: three axes of sensor position, three angles of sensor attitude, and the RAIDS platform scan angle.
Spacecraft position knowledge is required to i50 km in-track, ilO km in-track, and 1.7 km vertically, easily satisﬁed by
[SS ephemeris calculations. More stringent is the requirement for attitude knowledge: since the tangent point can be up
to 1500 km away from the ISS, such a long hypotenuse distance to the sample location causes small Viewing angle
uncertainties to multiply into unacceptably large altitude uncertainties at the tangent point. Concerned about the the
ﬂexure of the space station structure and its effect upon attitude uncertainty at the RAIDS location, the HREP payload
‘2“: ""“-:-*I’-‘,'.~_ I -_,
< 3— -,r>‘~uc“A 7‘ ‘ x».
i iﬁ.ii%\
‘ - i ' ~ . 325 km E 115:1131:"".‘11'1Lauii‘.
165° SEEM; Hﬁﬁﬁ ‘ -
. 53:4:- 75 km
:-‘_ii'i§1""_:‘i Cut? 119-”: [iii if ; ‘7 ;,¢§I:‘w;;~xni -_ ”4.. ""- “‘1
' , ﬁg”; ‘35:... ,
. ' ' ﬁfé-fa'ia'ghg 43?"" -
- 1 I '-.'
g, ?gigu:
-— utévﬁn‘? -
i \ .21}..-
. j:.. . H; >_ ' dﬂ—‘jﬁ'E’a-h
1 ~ ' KK‘IS.--_‘ "" , 1:- £9111
_ 4’4:
Fig. 3. Viewing geometry of RAIDS Viewing in the anti-RAM direction aboard the 188. Most of the signal originates near
the geometrical tangent point, typically located 1000-1500 km away from the sensor.
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7438 7438OX-9

"
"10","g,, 7 ~ m w , ~ ISS Altitude 380 km _- -—— --
a , i 340 km _
' FUV —Fixed4.1° FOV “e I I
- n 64 al ' de elemen s 30°
I 200]“ «41.5l:1t:each t ' . Fm _- l, ..
100 km i l . I . I""
l I
_ v’ﬁ' ' .; 7“""~' ‘
. 1"" , ‘5“? _"" vvzr *I‘”, ‘ ,-» ’6. 7
”I A
Fig. 4. Left panel: Schematic of the RAIDS ﬁeld-of—regard (2.4OXl6.50) with respect to depression angle and tangent point
altitude for an assumed ISS altitude of 380 km. The ﬁeld-of-View of the FUV spectrographs is 4.lOXO.lO, and the
instantaneous ﬁeld-of-View of the scanned instruments is 0.20X2.4O. Right panel: Fish-eye diagram of the completed
188 structure from the Viewpoint of RAIDS on the JEM-EF. While the ﬁeld-of—regard is clear, substantial structure
near the ﬁeld-of-View poses an off—aXis scattered light and glint risk for the NIR/Visible sensors on RAIDS.
includes a Terma SEAS star tracker to provide independent attitude determination to better than 5-arcsec, far exceeding
the RAIDS 0.05O requirement. Due to the scan direction and slit orientation, accurate knowledge of pitch is particularly
important to generate high-quality atmospheric vertical temperature and density proﬁles.
The issues of look direction also depends directly upon the nominal [SS altitude and attitude as it orbits. The altitude of
the space stations linearly affects the altitude range sampled by RAIDS. The space station pitch also affects the
atmospheric altitude range as RAIDS tilts up or down in the orbital plane. Space station roll changes the vertical
resolution of RAIDS measurements by tilting the instrument slits With respect to the horizon. The altitude and attitudes
are loosely-constrained Within the ranges of 330—410 km and i150, respectively. The [SS often ﬂies With a pitch bias of
several degrees, With small oscillations about the mean over the course of an orbit. The pitch bias and its variance has
signiﬁcant impact upon the RAIDS FUV spectrograph observations of the limb.10
Typically the [SS operates in the Torque Equilibrium Attitude (TEA) of LVLH (local vertical local horizontal) ﬂight
mode. In this conﬁguration the [SS +2 aXis points to Earth center. During periods of low beta-angle the [SS normally
operates in the XVV conﬁguration, Where the ISS +X aXis is oriented With the velocity vector. During periods of high
beta angle, Which occur 2-4 times per year, the [SS Will operate in a TEA of -XVV in Which the RAIDS sensor Will
essentially be RAM facing; at times in the past the 188 also operated in +YVV or -YVV during high beta periods. The -
XVV TEA conﬁguration Will last several days until the beta angle improves. The +XVV places RAIDS Viewing the
anti-RAM direction, While -XVV places RAIDS facing the RAM.
4.3 Clint and scattered light concerns
The RAIDS experiment Views the Earth's atmospheric limb in the anti-RAM direction, and to achieve the required
signal-to-noise for measuring weak atmospheric airglow emissions (a few Rayleighs) above a bright sunlit globe (many
mega-Rayleighs), the sensor optical designs incorporate off—aXis scattered light rejection elements such as bafﬂes, light
traps, low-reﬂectance surface treatments, and special blackening of the entrance apertures. This is especially critical for
the NIR/Visible sensors measuring passbands near the solar spectral irradiance peak. RAIDS was originally designed for
a 2n steradian clear View in front of the sensor package to eliminate all scattered light and glint contamination from
spacecraft structures. This ideal for total elimination of all glint sources is not achievable on the HREP mission due to
the presence of nearby space station structures in RAIDS' Viewing direction (Fig 4).
4.4 Modes of operation
The RAIDS experiment is microprocessor—controlled and includes a variety of pre-programmed operational modes that
are executed using a software sequencer. The built-in modes primarily control the relationship between spectrometer
scanning or ﬁxed wavelength (designated “lambda”) and scan platform scanning or ﬁxed positioning (designated
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7438 7438OX-1O

"
"11","Table 5. RAIDS Operating Modes
Scanvlatform Spectrometers
n Standby Instruments off, scanning stopped Stopped Stopped
Alpha Scan Monochromatic liinb scans Fixed Wavelengths
Lambda Scan Fixed set of altitude spectral scans Spectral Scans
Stationary Lambda Scan Single altitude spectral scan Spectral Scans
Single altitude monochromatic stare Fixed Wavelengths
B Both Lambda /Alpha Fixed set of altitude spectral scans Fixed positions Spectral scans stop on
with serendipitous monochromatic designated wavelengths
liinb scans between altitudes
“alpha”). A day/night sequencer keeps track of the time for the dayside and nightside portion of the orbit, which allows
different observing mode parameter for dayglow and nightglow observations. The non-scanning FUV spectrograph can
be synchronized with the limb scans or allowed to operate asynchronously.
These ﬁve original operating modes (Modes 0-4) remain unchanged. Those modes are controlled entirely internally to
RAIDS using the sequencer. A number of default wavelength positions and scan angles are deﬁned in ROM tables. The
scan angles are not appropriate for this [SS mission due to the ~375km orbital altitude. To use these built-in modes, we
will need to upload new parameter tables. These have not yet been deﬁned. (In fact some of the altitude limits may not
be fully determined until we execute our check—out tests to determine the lowest altitude to which we can safely point.)
Two new variations of these built-in modes are optimized for the HREP mission Viewing geometry and science goals:
“Dither Mode” and “Both Lambda/Alpha Mode”. Dither mode is like MODE 1, Alpha Scanning Mode, except that the
scan range must be restricted in angle both at low and high altitudes. This requires repeated issuance of timed
commands from the HREP Instrument Interface Unit with motion controlled entirely by step counting. Also, every 5
scans the scan platform must scan all the way to its upper altitude limit to hit the hard ﬁducial to ensure no step mis-
counting occurs. This mode will allow us to focus observing duty cycle on relevant science in the lower thermosphere
where we have good signal-tO-noise. Mode B is a combination of MODE 2 and MODE 1, except that spectral scans
start and stop on a speciﬁed wavelength of interest, thereby scientiﬁcally meaningful altitude scan segments are obtained
serendipitously during the scan to the next dwell altitude. This would be performed at a small number (5) of discrete
altitudes to maintain reasonable longitudinal cadence, e.g. ~180sec.
4.5 Operation periods
Missions operations are expected to occur in roughly four phases:
1. RAIDS Checkout & Commissioning. Once on-orbit and attached to Port #6 0n the J EM-EF, HREP/RAIDS will
undergo a thorough operational checkout, followed by a period where tunable parameters (such as scan angle range)
are optimized.
2. Thirty Days to Success. Due to the high-risk nature of the HREP ﬂight opportunity, RAIDS will focus upon a set
of observations to achieve minimum mission success quickly. This mode is expected to gather complete spectral
scans at a limited set of discrete altitudes.
3. Regular Mission Operations. After the period of discrete altitude spectral data, RAIDS will move into
operations performing continuous limb scans with spectrometers ﬁxed at designated wavelengths.
4. Extended Operations and Campaigns. As opportunities arise, RAIDS may alter its operations to support
observational campaigns or to follow-up on early observations. These plans are yet to be determined.
The RAIDS check—out plan has been adapted from the original plan for TIROS. The commissioning plan is a new effort
as it depends upon ISS—speciﬁc constraints that must be taken into account. The Thirty Days to Success concept is
deﬁned, but some issues, such as how many and which discrete altitudes is under discussion by the science team.
Regular mission operations for the primary science objective are straightforward, but the approach to accommodating
the secondary obj ectives is under study by the science team.
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7438 7438OX-11

"
"12","4.6 Data Management

The NRL Multimission Infobase implements an enterprise-level relational database system using a schema speciﬁcally

designed to organize and track global atmospheric remote sensing data. A principal feature of the Infobase system is its

integrated approach to data storage, search, retrieval, and tracking. Sensor measurements, experiment engineering data,
spacecraft engineering data, space environment parameters, data products, software, and documentation are integrated in
one storage area controlled by the database management system. As new data products are developed, they can be
incorporated into the Infobase and keyed t0 the both data and software that generated them. Additionally, this approach
allows cataloging and retrieval of spectrum and image data using efﬁcient Database Management System internal
software, rather than requiring the explicit coding of a separate catalog-retrieval system by the Infobase designers.

5. SUMMARY

The new RAIDS mission demonstrates how a high-quality, comprehensive survey experiment can be reconceived to

perform focused, high-relevance science. RAIDS will provide valuable science data to improve our understanding of the

lower thermosphere and ionosphere and serve as a pathﬁnder for future remote sensing experiments on the [SS and Kibo.
6. REFERENCES

[1] Qian, L., R. G. Roble, S. C. Solomon, and T. J . Kane, “Calculated and observed climate change in the thermosphere,
and a prediction for solar cycle 24”, Geophys. Res. Lett., 33, L23705, doi:10.1029/2006GL027185, (2006).

[2] Keskinen, M. J., “GPS scintillation channel model for the disturbed 10w-1atitude ionosphere”, Radio Sell, 41,
RS4003, doi:10.1029/2005RS003442, (2006).

[3] Straus, P. R., P. C. Anderson, and J . E. Danaher, “GPS occultation sensor observations of ionospheric scintillation”,
GeophyS. Res. Lett., 30(8), 1436, doi:10.1029/2002GL016503, (2003).

[4] Roble, R. G., and R. E. Dickinson, “How will changes in carbon dioxide and methane modify the mean structure of
the mesosphere and thermosphere?”, Geophys. Res. Lett., 16, 1441— 1444, (1989).

[5] T. J . Immel, E. Sagawa, S. L. England, S. B. Henderson, M. E. Hagan, S. B. Mende, H. U. Frey, C. M. Swenson,
and L. J . Paxton, “Control of equatorial ionospheric morphology by atmospheric tides”, Geophys. Res. Lett., 33,
L15108, (2006).

[6] Oberheide, J ., and J . M. Forbes, “Tidal propagation of deep tropical cloud signatures into the thermosphere from
TIMED observations”, Geophys. Res. Lett., 35, L04816, doi:10.1029/2007GL032397, (2008).

[7] McCoy, R. P., R. R. Meier, K. F. Dymond, J. M. Picone, S. E. Thonnard, G. G. Fritz, J. S. Merrill, A. B.
Christensen, D. C. Kayser, J . B. Pranke, and P. R. Straus, “Instrumentation 0n the RAIDS (Remote Atmospheric and
Ionospheric Detection System) experiment 1: far ultraviolet imaging spectrograph and scanning grating
monochromators for the middle and near ultraviolet”, Proc. SPIE, 1745, 75—88, (1992).

[8] A. B. Christensen, D. C. Kayser, J . B. Pranke, P. R. Straus, D. J . Gutierrez, S. Chakrabarti, R. P. McCoy, R. R.
Meier, K. D. Wolfram, and J . M. Picone, “Instrumentation 0n the RAIDS (Remote Atmospheric and Ionospheric
Detection System) experiment 11: extreme ultraviolet spectrometer, photometer, and near IR spectrometer”, Proc.
SPIE, 1745, 89—98, (1992).

[9] R. L. Bishop, S. A. Budzien, J . H. Hecht, A. W. Stephan, A. B. Christensen, P. R. Straus, Z. Van Epps, “The Remote
Atmospheric and Ionospheric Detection System on the ISS: Sensor performance and space weather applications
from the visible to the near infrared”, Solar Physics and Space Weather Instrumentation [[1, Proc. SPIE, submitted
(2009).

[10] A. W. Stephan, S. A. Budzien, R. L. Bishop, P. R. Straus, A. B. Christensen, J . H. Hecht, and Z. Van Epps, “The
Remote Atmospheric and Ionospheric Detection System on the ISS: Sensor performance and space weather
applications from the extreme to the near ultraviolet”, Solar Physics and Space Weather Instrumentation [[1, Proc.
SPIE, submitted (2009).

[“1 Military Handbook: Design, Construction, and Testing Requirements for One Of a Kind Space Equipment, DOD-
HDBK-343 (USAF), Department of the Air Force, Washington, DC (1986).

“21 Picone J. M., A. E. Hedin, D. P. Drob, and A. C. Aikin, “NRLMSISE-OO empirical model of the atmosphere:
Statistical comparisons and scientiﬁc issues”, J. Geophys. Res., 107, 1468, doi:10.1029/2002JA009430, (2002).
Acknowledgements: RAIDS/HICO is integrated and ﬂown under the direction of the Department of Defense Space
Test Program. RAIDS was built jointly by the Naval Research Laboratory and The Aerospace Corporation, with

additional support from the Ofﬁce of Naval Research.

Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7438 7438OX-12

"
