"","x"
"1","Data Processing and First Products from the Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal
Ocean (HICO) 0n the International Space Station
C.O. DaVisa*, R. A. Arnoneb, R. Gouldc, M.R. Corsond, and M. Montese
81Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA - cdavis@coas.oregonstateedu
bU.S. Naval Research Laboratory, Oceanography Division, Stennis Space Center, MS - arnone@nr1ssc.navy.1ni1
CU.S. Naval Research Laboratory, Oceanography Division, Stennis Space Center, MS - gould@nrlssc.navy.mi1
dU.S. Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC, USA — mike.corson@nrl.navy.1ni1
eU.S. Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC, USA — marcos.1nontes@nr1.navy.1ni1
Abstract — The Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal schedule of this space mission including using Commercial
Ocean (HICO) was installed on the International Space Off—The-Shelf (COTS) components where possible. HICO
Station on September 24, 2009. HICO is the ﬁrst was built in 16 months by the Naval Research Laboratory
spaceborne hyperspectral imager optimized for and was completed in July 2008 and integrated into the
environmental characterization of the coastal zone. HICO and RAIDS Experimental Payload (HREP) in
HICO data are collected and processed to produce August 2008. HICO was integrated, launched and ﬂown
maps including coastal bathymetry, bottom with support from and under the direction of the DoD
characteristics, and water column optical properties. Space Test Program. HREP was launched on the Japanese
Here we describe the HICO data processing system and H-2 Transfer Vehicle (HTV) September 10, 2009. The
give examples of HICO products. HTV rendezvoused with the 188 on September 17, 2009.
HREP was installed on September, 24, 2009 and the ﬁrst
Keywords: hyperspectral, coastalremote sensing, space HICO imagery was collected on September 25, 2009.
HICO is operating normally and Image quality is excellent.
A companion paper in this volume by Corson et a1.
1. INTRODUCTION discusses the HICO imager and its performance. Here we
give an overview of the data handling and processing and
The coastal ocean is a very complicated environment we present example results for coastal regions and river
containing high levels of phytoplankton, suspended and mouth areas.
dissolved organic matter, suspended sediments with various
bottom types and depths, all of which can vary signiﬁcantly 2. HICO DATA PROCESSING SYSTEM
on scales of tens to hundreds of meters. While
multispectral ocean color imagers with 1 - 4 kilometer HICO is a demonstration sensor and data is collected for
spatial resolution are excellent for imaging the open ocean particular study areas, from a target list compiled by NRL
the coastal ocean requires higher spatial sampling and personnel with input from Navy, university, and
multispectral data generally does not contain sufﬁcient international partners. The standard HICO scene is 42 X
information to quantify and characterize the coastal 192 km and a maximum of one scene is collected on each
environment (Davis et a1. 2007). Over the past two decades, 90 minute orbit. Data requests are compiled by NRL and
hyperspectral imaging from aircraft platforms has sent to the 188 by NASA for execution. Data is transmitted
developed as a powerful method of characterizing the from the 188 to NASA Marshall Space Flight Center and
coastal environment. A hyperspectral imager records a then transferred to NRL in Washington DC (NRL-DC) for
contiguous spectrum of the light received from each pixel processing. The initial processing from level 0 (raw data)
in the scene, and this extra spectral information is exploited to level 1b (calibrated radiances with geolocation
to produce the desired maps of bathymetry, water information) includes dark current subtraction, CCD smear
constituents, and other coastal properties (Goetz, et a1. correction, 2rld order correction, spectral calibration and
1985; Davis et a1. 2006). radiance calibration (Fig. 1). The calibrated data are then
sent to NRL Stennis Space Center (NRL-SSC) for further
The Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Ocean (HICO) processing using the NRL SSC Automated Processing
(Corson, et a1. 2005) is the ﬁrst spaceborne imaging System (APS). APS was developed for processing
spectrometer designed speciﬁcally to sample the coastal SeaWiFS, MODIS and other multispectral ocean color data.
ocean. HICO wi11 sample selected coastal regions at It ingests level 1b data and produces a wide range of
approximately 90 In with full spectral coverage (400 to 900 standard products. APS was modiﬁed in two fundamental
nIn sampled at 5.7 nm) and a high signal-to-noise ratio to ways to process HICO data: the capability to ingest full
resolve the complexity of the coastal ocean. HICO is hyperspectral data cubes was added, along with the
sponsored by the Ofﬁce of Naval Research as an Innovative capability to apply hyperspectral algorithms to make a
Naval Prototype (INP), and will demonstrate coastal variety of products from that data. Thus, APS HICO has
products including water optical properties (absorption and two processing lines: one for making standard APS
scattering coefﬁcients), bottom types, and bathymetry and products from HICO data convolved to multispectral bands
on-shore vegetation maps. As an INP, HICO also and one for exploiting the full hyperspectral data. Using
demonstrates innovative ways to reduce the cost and the multispectral line HICO data is binned spectrally to
* Corresponding author. Postal address: Oregon State University, 104 COAS Administration Building, Corvallis, OR,
97331, USA. Telephone: (541)737-5707. FAX: (541) 737-2064.
Proceedings Oceans from Space Symposium, Scoula Grande di San Giovanni Evangelista, Venice, Italy,
26-30 April 2010, JRC European Commission, EUR24324 EN-2010, pp 73-74.

"
"2","simulate MODIS data and then processed to produce all the we have not previously developed automated processing for
standard MODIS products but at 90 In ground sample hyperspectral ocean color data. The hyperspectral
distance (GSD) instead of the MODIS 1 km GSD. This is processing branch includes several options for atmospheric
important in coastal areas were the tides, diurnal winds, correction and product production. Additionally, the
river outﬂow and bottom features create complex patterns calibrated hyperspectral image cube is available and that
in the coastal ocean (Fig. 2). data is being used at NRL, OSU and other universities and
laboratories for developing new hyperspectral algorithms.
The Hyperspectral processing is more experimental. As
HICO is the ﬁrst ocean color hyperspectral sensor in space
L IN — L el 1!)-
:>- :>- ~
Vicarious
Calibration
Cdlblatlon
.'
Senootbands
WDIS
KRIS
OCM
SQWIFS
£11933: LL: :43 A_LLC C‘ 39—: #:l Atmospheric
_ 11112111 ';'.‘-.1T.;- _,'z‘ |V""—‘-""‘-'1:1;1:.11:'b Correction
LWCIZC: .1] 1-H] ‘ IIVAJ'iI‘ .- NM “ \lli‘Ilrl'u- HM MethOdS
u l ‘
“9,3,th —_
Products
, W
0“, s ‘22:"", u magma: A‘
MM“ 0cm“ WW“. I I I
Bb.b.CIIL dc Etc
(12» m m
—
“ _-
Fig. 1. Flow diagram for the HICO data processing system. The initial processing from Level 0 to 1b (blue boxes) is done at NRL-DC. The
remaining processing is done in APS at NRL-SSC. The multispectral processing line (pink boxes) is used to produce MODIS like products
at 90 m GSD. The Hyperspectral processing line (purple and green boxes) uses multiple approaches for atmospheric correction and product
production to test and evaluate new approaches to take advantage of the full spectral data. Level three and higher processing (geolocation,
binning, remapping, etc.) is then done to both data types.
Figure 2 is an image of the Florida Keys near Key Largo
3. EXAMPLE HICO PRODUCTS showing some of the products produced with the
multispectral HICO processing in APS. We continue to
"" "" ‘ test and validate new products from HICO particularly for
3""“ . the full hyperspectral data.
.13 4. CONCLUSION
' .-#_ The Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Ocean
. ._.- demonstrates the ability to produce coastal environmental
' products from spaceborne imagery. HICO and its products
. '. are pathﬁnders for future operational systems.
REFERENCES
‘ Davis C.O., K.L. Carder, B.-C. Gao, Z.P. Lee, and W.P.
i Bissett (2006). “The development of imaging spectrometry
of the coastal ocean”. IEEE Proceedings of the
International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium,
4, pp. 1982-1985.
| Radlance ] | :hl_n2 | ““4an Davis, C. 0., M. Kavanaugh, R. Letelier, W. P. Bissett, and
_ _ _ D. Kohler, (2007). “Spatial and spectral resolution
1121?;- 2- ExaénpleLAPS prgdncts frorn afHICO niage Ofth: Florida considerations for imaging coastal waters”. Coastal Ocean
nsgiegiirat ti: b21311 nentatlon ls mm sout WCSt at t 6 mp to Remote Sensing, edited by R. J . Frouin and Z. P. Lee, Proc.
' of. SPIE V01. 6680, 66800P, pp. 1-12.

"
"3","Goetz, A. F. H., Vane G., Solomon J., and Rock B. N.,
(1985). “Imaging spectrometry for Earth remote sensing”.
Science, vol. 228, pp. 1147—1153.

Corson, M. R., D. R. Korwan, R. L. Lucke, W. A. Snyder
and C. 0. Davis (2008). “The Hyperspectral Imager For
The Coastal Ocean (HICO) On The International Space
Station”. IEEE Proceedings of the International Geoscience
and Remote Sensing Symposium, 978-1-4244-2808-3/08.

"
"4",""
