"","x"
"1","NRL SSC HICO Article for Oceans 09 Conference
Title: The Hyperspectral lmager for the Coastal Ocean (HICO): Sensor and Data Processing
Overview
MD. Lewis, R.W. Gould, Jr., RA. Arnone, P.E. Lyon, P.l\/l. Martinolieh, R. Vaughan, A. Lawson,

T. Scardino, W. Hou, W. Snyder, R. Lucke, M. Corson, M. Montes, C. Davis
Abstract

The Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Ocean (HICO) is a new hyperspectral sensor that will be housed
on the International Space Station (188). The low-eost, rapid-development sensor was built by the Naval
Research Laboratory (NRL). NRL is also responsible for mission planning and operational data processing
for this new sensor. HICO is sponsored and funded by the Ofﬁce of Naval Research (ONR) within its
Innovative Naval Prototype (INP) program. HICO is integrated and ﬂown with support from and under the
direction of the Department of Defense Space Test Program. HICO will be the first spaceborne
hyperspectral sensor optimized for environmental characterization of both the coastal and open ocean.
HICO samples the 350 to 1070 nanometer spectral range in 128 spectral channels and has a spatial ground
sampling distance (GSD) of 100 meters. HICO is manifested for launch in September, 2009; once
operational it will be used to routinely collect imagery of select coastal regions around the world.

In the spirit of the INP program, HICO will be used as a prototype pathﬁnder sensor to establish sensor
management and algorithm requirements for future generations of spaceborne hyperspectral sensors. The
HICO project is designed as a one-year mission, with the goal of placing a similar sensor aboard a future
free-ﬂying satellite, following demonstration of the sensor capabilities on the ISS. Hyperspectral imaging
provides unique capability for coastal monitoring and ocean Characterization. Coastal products from HICO
such as bathymetry, optical properties, biological properties, and bottom characterization can provide
coastal managers and researchers new capabilities for ocean observation from space. HICO derived
products requires complex processing procedures from calibration, atmospheric correction, and in water
algorithms in order to exploit hyperspectral signatures. This presentation describes the HICO sensor and the
operational processing required to convert raw HICO data to ocean bio-optical products.

Introduction

The Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Ocean (HICO) is designed to provide hyperspectral imagery for
the study of the coastal ocean and adjacent land. The HICO sensor collects 128 contiguous spectral channels
of solar reﬂectance in the 350 to 1070 nm range. HICO will be installed on the International Space Station
(188) in September of 2009. The HICO data ﬂow from the 188 will provide a maximum of 15 scenes per
day. Standardized data processing is required to provide timely HICO data products and to create
coordinated evolution of the processing applications and data products. Several data reﬁnement
transformations are required to generate the products that are useful for research. These transformations
will be performed by the Remote Sensing and Oceanography Divisions of the Naval Research Laboratory,
located in Washington, DC and at the Stennis Space Center in Mississippi, respectively.

HICO will be installed on the Exposed Facility (EF) 0f Kibo, which is the J apanese Experiment Module

1
0-933957-38-1/09/$20.00 ©2009 MTS

"
"2","(JEM) 0n the 188. The BF section of Kibo was connected to Kibo's Pressurized Module (PM) on July 18,
2009. The HICO sensor will be one of the first experiments to be installed on the J EM-EF shown in Fig. 1.
After the sensor begins to provide a stream of hyperspeetral data scenes, NRL will pass the data through a
series of processing steps to create a set of data products. A sequence of software modules will transform
the raw data packets of HICO data into ocean parameter data products. First, the raw data (Level 0) will be
calibrated and geoloeated (Level lb). Then the data will be processed through a series of software modules
to yield ocean products, such as Chlorophyll concentration, absorption and backseattering coefficients, and
others. Several of these software modules will be developed within the Automated Processing System
(APS), a data processing system developed at NRL to create ocean products from a variety of satellite
sensors [1]. Each data transformation will be tested to ensure data quality. Once the data processing system
is ﬁnalized, the processed data sets will be distributed to Navy customers and the broader research
community.
Exper iment Logistics Module
, I"" i i i/Pressurized Section (ELll-PS)
l 1
I 1
‘ l ' iii Airlock
:‘tha I I l ‘ /Remote Manipulator System
i. “5‘ “.43: a a (JEIIRMS)
'- ‘13.”; v j, ‘17? wagi-
3""* ' Wﬁ ‘
”\‘K‘jl‘ rf f. ., A a
Pressurized Module ‘ Lsﬁw
_' ' i .5"" AF ' .‘
(PH) ‘ ‘. ‘ ‘ ‘ﬁ 5 ﬁg
Exposed Faci I ity "" .' x ’ .‘Jj
(EF) /
lnter-orbit Commnication SystemUCS) Experiment Logistics Module
~Exoosed Section(ELM—ES)
Figure 1. Kibo Module
The HICO sensor (Fig. 2) has been assembled, tested and evaluated by NRL [2]. The evaluation included
radiometric, spectral, and geometric calibration, Characterization of polarization sensitivity, and Vibration
and thermal-vaeuum testing. Once completed, HICO was integrated into the HICO RAIDS Experiment
Payload (HREP) which was subjected to further testing at NRL, NASA and the Japanese Space Agency
(JAXA). The HICO sensor is now at JAXA’s Tanegashima Island Launch facility ready for integration to
the H-II Transfer Vehicle (HTV) and is scheduled to be launched to the 188 on September 11, 2009. HICO
data will provide unique hyperspeetral data with 100 m ground sample distance (GSD) for selected regions
of the coastal ocean around the world. Data will be collected to demonstrate the utility of hyperspeetral data
for naval applications and for scientiﬁc studies of the coastal ocean. Due to the ISS orbit the HICO sensor
will sample selected coastal regions at different times of the day and from a range of Viewing angles. The
unique Viewing geometry and orbit of HICO 0n the 188 is quite different from existing ocean color sensors
in sun-synehronous, polar orbit (SeaWiFS, MODIS), providing a variety of data processing Challenges,
2

"
"3","including pixel geolocation, atmospheric correction, and bio-optical inversion to yield useful ocean
products. However, the ﬂexibility also makes HICO especially useful as a pathﬁnder for future ocean color
imagers, including those in geostationary orbits.

The data plan for HICO has three main components: data collection, data processing and data distribution.
In addition, processed data Will be validated by comparing it to other sensor data and in situ data sources.
Prior to launch, NRL assembled a “target deck” of desired ocean targets (geographic locations of interest to
the Navy and the scientiﬁc community). Data collection includes determining Which scenes are to be
acquired (based on priorities and sensor ephemeris data), and scheduling those scenes for acquisition. It
also includes the actual sensor activation and data storage. A mission plan containing the schedule of data
requests Will be created every 2 days based on the HICO constraint that no more than one scene can be
acquired per orbit.

These mission plans will be uplinked to the 188. After data collection the HICO data Will be downlinked
by NASA using standard procedures and communication links for the 188. Data Will then be transferred to
NRL for processing from raw data packets (Level 0 data) to calibrated and geolocated images (Level lb
data). Level lb data Will be archived at NRL and processed into ocean data products. Following product
generation, NRL Will distribute the data products to naval users and Oregon State University (OSU); OSU
will further distribute the HICO data products to university researchers and the international science
community.

{2mm Spectrumaw _-..,
Endourl ,, I .. ._
Farm DEL“ -.__:.' 1 \l
Rutary 3139:: J V» r I
m Pcinl Line 7' t 4 “r -. "" , I
afﬂiuht “R . :3 1. -..- r H.“ . . - .. . 1""“
: : IL - . .r '
i . _ _ _ ”*1“. . 1,: _
_ ‘w: _ . _
smmvmﬁam ‘5'/
Figure 2. HICO Sensor (Image Credit NRL)
HICO Mission Planning and Data Collection

A methodology for HICO mission planning and data collection has been established. This includes
implementing a system for selecting sites for HICO data collection and translating the scene information
into a data collection schedule. It also involves transferring that information to NASA for uplink to the ISS,
collecting the data and then downlinking the data to ground stations.

3

"
"4","1. Scheduling and Commanding

A list of desired scenes has been developed and prioritized. During the operating life of the HICO sensor
a two or three day mission plan Will be uploaded to the 188 every Monday, Wednesday and Friday. The
mission plans Will be developed using the Satellite Tool Kit (STK). STK is a software package available
from Analytical Graphics, Inc that allows compleX sensor orbital and Viewing computations to be performed
from airborne or orbital platforms. It Will be used to model the HICO sensor Viewing geometry from the
188. Other inputs into STK will be NASA operational data including the planned ISS orbital traj ectory and
attitude time line. STK Will be used to determine What scenes from the prioritized list can be acquired given
the planned ISS orbit and attitude information. The schedule is a 2 or 3 day list of scenes Within the HICO
field of regard, Which is +45 deg/—30 deg off—nadir. The HICO sensor Will then be programmed to acquire
these scenes.

2. Mssion and Data Characteristics:

The HICO sensor Will acquire at most one observation (scene) per orbit (15 orbits per day). The
integration time is 13.7 milli-seconds Which translates to 73 frames per second. During data collection the
sensor Will sequence through several positions and data collection phases. First, the rotating stage Will
position the sensor at the stowed position and the camera Will be turned on. Two hundred dark frames Will
be collected With the sensor in this position. Then the camera Will be turned off and rotated to the scene
imaging position. The sensor Will be turned on and the frames of the scene Will be acquired. After the
scene is acquired the camera Will be turned off and rotated back to the stowed position. Finally the camera
Will be turned on and additional dark frames Will be acquired before the camera is turned off. The dark
frames Will be used to calibrate the data by providing information on the inherent electronic noise generated
by the system.

This results in a standard HICO scene that consists of:

0 Dark frames before scene acquisition = 512 samples X 200 lines X 128 channels
0 Standard image = 512 samples X 2000 lines X 128 channels

0 Dark frames after scene acquisition = 512 samples X 200 lines X 128 channels
0 Scene total = 512 samples X 2400 lines X 128 channels X 2 bytes

0 Data ﬁle scene size is therefore 314.6 Mbytes

0 Geographic scene size is 50 km Wide by 200 km long

High spectral resolution observations of 384 spectral Channels Will occasionally be acquired for
wavelength calibration, tracking or special eXperiments. In this high spectral resolution mode the
integration time Will be set to 30 milli-seconds Which translates to 33 frames per second. In this mode only
500 lines of data and 200 lines of dark frame data Will be collected and the total scene size Will be 2753
Mbytes.

3. Data/Information Downloading:

The images Will be stored in ﬂash memory in the onboard computer until overwritten. The memory Will
hold approXimately 40 images or a minimum of 2.5 days of data. The images Will be placed in the
downlink queue immediately after collection. It should take less than one 188 orbit to downlink one HICO
scene to a ground station.

4

"
"5","Once the HICO data is downlinked t0 the NASA ground station it is forwarded to NRL to be reassembled
from its individual downloaded data packets. NRL will assemble the image data and processes it to Level
1b, which involves calibration of the raw counts to radiance values and appending geolocation information.
The imagery will then be stored in the Hierarchical Data Format (HDF) and processed further using APS.
HDF is a data ﬁle format designed by the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) to
assist users in the storage and manipulation of scientific data across diverse operating systems and
machines. NCSA developed a library of callable routines and a set of utility programs and tools for creating
and using HDF files [3].

HICO Data Processing in APS

To meet the research community's needs, HICO data must be processed and distributed in a timely
fashion. The data scenes need to be downlinked, ingested and processed into HICO data products, rapidly
and with minimal operator intervention. These processing steps include modules for quality assurance,
sensor calibration Checks, algorithm validation, and product generation. The data products will be
distributed to Navy operational users as part of the Innovative Naval Prototype (INP) demonstration and t0
the broader HICO science team and research community.

1. Automated Processing System (APS)

NRL developed APS, which processes satellite data into ocean color data products. APS is a collection of
methods used for ocean color processing which provide the tools for the automated processing of satellite
imagery [1]. These tools are in the process of being modiﬁed to handle the HICO data stream. APS was
developed for multispectral imagery from polar-orbiting satellites, s0 modiﬁcations are required to handle
the hyperspectral data stream and the unique Viewing geometry. Furthermore, additional atmospheric
correction routines will be adapted for HICO imagery and evaluated. This will include an implementation
of the TAFKAA atmospheric correction procedure which focuses on atmospherically correcting images over
shallow aquatic areas, where complications arise dur t0 the varying effects from specular reﬂection, wind
blown surface waves, and reﬂectance from the benthic substrate [4]. Cloud and Shadow and Near Infrared
(NIR) armospheric correction algorithms will also be evaluated.

APS currently processes data from the Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR), the
Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), the Medium Resolution Imaging Spectometer
(MERIS), the Sea-Viewing Wide Field-of-View Sensor (SeaWiFS), the Coastal Zone Color Scanner (CZCS),
and the Ocean Colour Monitor (OCM) sensors. There are some major differences between the HICO data
and the AVHRR, MODIS, MERIS, SeaWiFS, CZCS, OCM data. Specifically, HICO data is hyperspectral
providing many more spectral Channels than the currently processed data sets, which are all multispectral.
However there are substantial software methods and capability already eXisiting in APS which makes it a
good choice for the automated processing of HICO data. Methods of calibration, atmospheric correction
and bio—optical inversion algorithms for HICO data are being integrated into APS. In addition, many NRL
customers who plan to use HICO data already use APS and can readily ingest products at different data
levels from APS into their processing systems.

APS is a collection of UNIX programs and shell scripts designed to automatically generate map—projected
image data bases of satellite derived products from a heavy ﬂow of raw satellite data. Individual scenes are
sequentially processed using standard parameters from the raw digital counts (Level-l) t0 radiometrically
and geometrically corrected (Level-3) products within several minutes. APS further processes data into

5

"
"6","several different temporal (daily, 8-day, monthly, yearly, and latest pixel) composites or averages. These
products are stored in the HDF with APS speciﬁc attributes. Additionally, it automatically generates quick-
look “browse” images in J PEG format and may populate an SQL database using PostgreSQL.

APS was designed, developed, and implemented by the NRL Ocean Sciences Branch (Oceanography
Division) to handle continuous streams of satellite data from multiple sensors. Originally, the system was
designed to produce sea surface temperature maps from data collected by the Advanced Very High
Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR) sensor. Data from the AVHRR is received and processed daily (up to siX
passes per day). APS has since been upgraded to process ocean color satellite data from the MODIS,
MERIS, SeaWiFS, CZCS, and OCM sensors. APS provides near real-time processing with the additional
option of reprocessing historical data. This reprocessing capability provides a powerful tool to test
algorithm changes; we can easily compare results from previous processing versions with results using new
or modiﬁed algorithms. For example, we can reprocess the entire 11-year SeaWiFS archive of Gulf of
Mexico imagery in a few weeks.

APS uses a simple monitoring technique, which has been found to be reliable. The main driver regularly
polls a speciﬁed input directory for incoming data and, for each ﬁle that is found, executes what are known
as areas scripts on the ﬁle in a working directory. Multiple area scripts deﬁne the geographic regions of
interest to the user. If the image swath covers any of the areas of interest, the scene is processed and ocean
products are produced for each area covered. After each area script has been run on the ﬁle, the resulting
data products are moved to an output directory. This method uses the input directory as the queueing system
for data to be processed. The areas scripts do the actual construction of the desired data products.

2. APS Data Levels

APS transforms data through a series of processing levels. The data at each level is stored in units of
measurements consistent with the associated transformation. In addition, metadata containing information
about the scene will be added at speciﬁc levels. This metadata includes information such as the number of
rows, columns, and Channels as well as information such as Channel wavelength, geoloeation projection,
sensor Viewing geometry and ephemeris data.

The following discussion gives a brief introduction to the data levels that will be used by APS for HICO
data processing. Initially, the raw data are transformed to a calibrated and geoloeated format, eventually
ending at Level 1b. Higher order data products are created from the Level lb data.

Level 0 contains at-sensor data information stored as top of atmosphere radiance data in digital numbers.
It also contains metadata describing instrument status, 188 location and star ﬁnder/traeker data.

Level 1a incorporates navigational information into the top of the atmosphere radiance data set. This
includes geoloeation information for each pixel in the image and also stores additional status information of
the sensor.

Level 1b data is the result of a calibration transformation to top of the atmosphere radiance in units of
milli-watts/meter2/steradian. The geoloeation, sensor status and Viewing geometry metadata are also
updated. NRL is in the process of extending APS to transform the HICO Level lb data into a variety of
ocean data products. The system will be developed to automatically perform the transformations when new
HICO data is received. These data levels are described in the following paragraphs.

6

"
"7","Level 10 data contains HICO data that has been used to model speciﬁc multispectral sensor data. The
modeled data Will primarily be MODIS data, but can also represent data from other sensors Which are
currently processed by APS. The modeled MODIS data Will have 9 spectral Channels generated by
integrating the HICO Channels across the spectral response function of the MODIS Channels in the 350 nm
to 1070 nm range. This will enable the HICO data to be processed as though it were MODIS data, With
existing multispectral algorithms in APS, for direct comparison With and validation against MODIS
imagery.

Level 221 is the result of a transformation designed to remove sea surface glint. The sun glint correction
algorithms will incorporate methodology from Hedley, et al. [5] and/or Hochberg et al. [6]. These
algorithms were developed for 10 meter data and may need to be modified to accommodate the 100 meter
HICO data sets. The output of the glint correction may not be in units of remote sensing reﬂectance.
Depending on how and When this transformation is performed, the results could be glint-eorrected radiance
or glint—corrected at-sensor reﬂectance or glint-eorrected remote-sensing reﬂectance.

Level 2b data is the result of an atmospheric correction using the automated TAFKAA atmospheric
correction algorithm. This process Will use date, time, latitude, longitude, as well as the input radiance ﬁle
and scale factors to generate atmospherically corrected reﬂectance or Rm ﬁles.

Level 2c data is the result of standard APS multispectral algorithms. These transformations Will be only
performed on the Level 10 multispectral data modeled from HICO data. These data products Will include
the QAA optical products, the Gould water mass classification, and the radiance ratio derived Chlorophyll
concentration. Standard Level 2 pixel quality ﬂags Will be set for a variety of data quality conditions.

Level 2d data contains processed hyperspectral ocean water and bathymetry products. These data
products include data products of the water's inherent optical properties (IOP), optimization of absorption
and scattering coefﬁcients as well as bottom depth and bottom reﬂectance products. Metadata ﬂags for
conditions such as turbid water, high and negative radiance values Will be added.

Level 2e data contains land products such as the results of the Bachmann algorithms for vegetation/terrain
mapping.

Level 2f data contains hyperspectral remote sensing surface reﬂectance Rrs data products. It Will also
update the metadata for ﬂags showing land areas and water areas and also pixels covered by clouds and
those Which failed the atmospheric correction process.

Level 3 data contains previously described Level 1a data products that have been remapped to standard
projection systems such as UTM.

Fig. 3 shows the relationship and transformation ﬂow of the data as it passes through the various levels of
data transformation. The arrows show the data ﬂow from level to level. All of the output Will be archived
in the HDFS format.

7

"
"8","Level 0 Level 1a: Level 1b:
Navigation Calibration
Multiband Hyperspectral Algorithms
Level 1c: Modeled
sensor bands Level 1b: Calibration
MODIS
MERIS i
OCM Level 2a :
SeaWIFS Sea Glint
Level 2b : Level 2f: Cloud and
TAFKAA shadow atmospheric
Lev_e| 2°: Standard _APS Atmospheric correction
Mulltspectral Algorithm Correction
Products
Level 2d: Hyperspectral Algorithm
Derived Products
Level 3: Remapping |
Figure 3: HICO Data Levels
HICO Data Distribution
Once the data products have been processed through APS they will be made available to the research
community. Domestic users of the data Will be able to acquire dataset through NRL. International users of
the data Will be able to acquire data sets through OSU.
Data Product Validation and Usage
HICO data Will provide a rich set of data products for coastal ocean research. Multispectral data sets Will
be modeled by HICO. For example, HICO Channels Will be integrated across the MODIS spectral response
function. This will provide proxy data at 9 MODIS wavelength channels. However, the MODIS proxy data
derived from HICO will have the 100 meter HICO GSD. Comparison of the proxy multispectral data
products to the true multispectral data products Will give some indication of improvement in data products
due to the increased spatial resolution. Data products generated by multispectral sensors include standard
NASA products as well as navy-speeiﬁc products: Chlorophyll concentration, partitioned absorption
coefﬁcients (colored dissolved organic matter (CDOM), phytoplankton and detritus), backscattering
coefﬁcients, diver Visibility, bottom depth, bottom reﬂectance, optical water mass characterization, and
total/organiC/inorganic suspended particulate loads. The HICO bio—optieal products Will be compared to in
8

"
"9","situ ground truth data. This will enable assessment of HICO data product quality.

In situ data stored at the Martha's Vineyard Coastal Observatory (MVCO) in Massachusetts will be used
to validate HICO data. MVCO has a wealth of ocean data from the coastal waters of Massachusetts.
Among other data types this data sets includes wave ﬁelds, turbidity, Chlorophyll and temperature. Data
products derived from HICO data will be compared with the MVCO in situ data to quantify the accuracy of
the remotely sensed data products.

Other sites, such as White Sands, New Mexico, may be used in the validation process. The area around
White Sands has large homogeneous psuedo-invariant bright reﬂective Characteristics. Spectra from HICO
can be compared to spectral reﬂectance taken from the ground to also Characterize the spectral response of
the sensor and also atmospheric phenomenon.

Conclusions

The HICO sensor was built and tested by NRL, and NRL will manage the collection, processing, archival,
and distribution of the data. A wide variety of bio-optical products will be generated to support both Navy
and scientific missions in open-ocean and coastal waters. Furthermore, the 100 meter spatial resolution of
HICO will enable investigations of riverine and estuarine environments. With the wealth of contiguous
spectral wavelength information, HICO will facilitate development of new hyperspectral algorithms and
ocean products, and will advance our understanding of phenomena that are better identiﬁed in more narrow
wavelengths than current multispectral satellite sensors.

Acknowledgment

This program is supported by NRL 6.2 base program PE- 6000123, Autonomous “Processing for
Producing Hyperspectral Products on Tactically Relevant Time scales” and “Realizing the Naval Scientific
return of HICO”

References

[1] P. M. Martinolich, (2006), Automated Satellite Processing System User’s Guide 1257 Version 3.4, NRL. Washington, D. C., Accessed August, 2009,
(Available at http ://www73 3 3 .nrlssc.navy.mil/docs/aps_v3 .4/user/aps/)

[2] M. R. Corson, D. R. Korwan, R. L. Lucke, W. A. Snyder, C. 0. Davis, “The Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Ocean (HICO) on the International Space
Station,” Proceedings of IGARSS 2008 (IEEE International Geoscience & Remote Sensing Symposium), Boston, MA, USA, July 6-11, 2008

[3] The HDF Group — Information, Support and Software, Accessed August 2009, www.hdfgl‘oupDI‘g

[4] B. C. Gao, M. J . Montes, Z. Ahmad, and C. 0. Davis, 2000, “An Atmospheric Correction Algorithm for Hyperspectral Remote Sensing of Ocean Color from
Space,” Appl. Opt. 39(6): 887-896.

[5] J . D. Hedley, A. R. Harborne, and P. J . Mumby (2005), “Technical note: Simple and Robust Removal of Sun Glint for Mapping Shallow Water Benthos”,
International J ournal of Remote Sensing 26:10, 2107 — 2112.

[6] E. J . Hochberg, S. Andrefouet, and M. R. Tyler, (2003), “Sea Surface Correction of High Spatial Resolution lkonos Images to Improve Bottom Mapping in
Near—Shore Environments”, IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 41 :7, 1724 — 1729.

9

"
