"","x"
"1","Accessmg Space: 188 Integratlon for a US Payload on the
J EM-EF
Perry G. Ballard
Chief Engineer, DOD Payloads Ofﬁce
J ohnson Space Center
Mail Code: J SC/WRl
2101 NASA Parkway
Houston, TX
713-410-5835
Perry.g.ballard@nasa.gov
Abstract—The Department of Defense (DoD) Space Test payload operations. The objective of the Space Test
Program (STP) has launched the Hyperspectral Imager for Program is to implement missions to ﬂy the experiments on
the Coastal Ocean (HICO) & Remote Atmospheric & the DOD Space Test Program priority list. DOD
Ionospheric Detection System (RAIDS) Experiment experiments normally originate in DOD laboratories or in
Payload (HREP) to the International Space Station's research institutions. To obtain spaceﬂight for an
Japanese Experiment Module - Exposed Facility (JEM-EF). experiment, the sponsoring agency submits a request for
12HREP was launched as a NASA payload onboard the spaceﬂight through Channels to the Air Force headquarters.
JAXA HTV/H-IIB ﬁrst ﬂight from the Tanegashima Space The Air Force serves as DOD’s Executive Agent to execute
Center (TNSC) in September 2009. HREP was installed on the Space Test Program. Each year, headquarters convenes
the ISS and has been functioning since that time. Because a tri-Service board known as the Space Experiments Review
STP is the organization responsible for providing launch Board (SERB) to review and prioritize all submissions. The
services for all of DoD’s R&D space experiments and has prioritized list of experiments is then forwarded to the
used the International Space Station extensively in the past Space Test Program Ofﬁce [deletez of the Air Force Space
for its experiments, a concerted effort began seeking means Command] for planning and execution of the ﬂight
to continue use of the ISS once the Shuttle retires, HREP program.
launching on the JAXA HTV is one of these efforts.
Once an experiment makes the priority list, STP pursues
This paper presents both the development of HREP and its one of three methods used to launch the experiment into
188 integration as well as providing insights into issues space. First, STP funds, develops, integrates, and launches
related to taking a US payload to JAXA for launch. its own sophisticated free-ﬂying spacecraft for experiments
Speciﬁcally the paper deals with practical aspects not only with unique orbital requirements. Second, STP launches
of integration but also of living and working in experiments as a secondary payload (also known as a
Tanegashima. “piggyback”) onboard the spacecraft of other DOD, NASA,
and foreign space agencies. Finally, STP gains spaceﬂight
TABLE OF CONTENTS for many experiments by manifesting them on the Space
Shuttle and International Space Station. Often, technology
INTRODUCTION 1 . .
proven through STP experiments evolves into a new realm
REFERENCES 6 . . . .
of capabilities. The knowledge gained from STP
BIOGRAPHY6 . . . . .
experiments on radiation belts, satellite charging, and
rubidium atomic clocks greatly contributed to the creation
of the Navigation System using Timing and Ranging/Global
INTRODUCTION Positioning System (NAVSTAIUGPS). NAVSTAR/GPS
provides precise navigation information to a variety of
The Department Of Defense Space Test Program (STP): military and Civilian users. Since its inception in 1966, STP
managed by the Air Force Space and Missile Systems has ﬂown 494 experiments on 206 missions (as of Oct
Center, Space Development and Test Wing at Kirtland 2010), directly beneﬁting scientiﬁc research and many
AFB, New Mexico serves the military research and operational satellite programs.
development community by providing unique and valuable
spaceﬂight opportunities for advanced Department Of HREP combines two DOD experiment sensors into one
Defense (DOD)-sponsored experiments that do not have payload, HICO (Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal
their own means for spaceﬂight. In addition to providing Ocean) and RAIDS (Remote Atmospheric and Ionospheric
spaceﬂight opportunities, STP manages and funds the Detection System). The designation HREP comes from the
spacecraft and launch vehicle integration, and one year of J AX A tendency to add ""experiment payload"" at the end Of
their experiment names - hence HICO-RAIDS became
:U-S- GOVemment work nOthteCted by U-S- copyright ""HREP"". HICO is the ﬁrst Maritime Hyperspectral Imager
IEEEAC paper#1064, Vers1on 1, Updated 201 1 :01 :22
1

"
"2","from space and RAIDS will provide the most to the JEM-EF, and several thermistors used by JAXA for
comprehensive survey of the ionosphere and thermosphere monitoring temperatures. The robotics ﬁxture is a standard
in over 20 years. HREP was launched to the 188 as a part item for NASA to provide, the other items were provided by
of the inaugural ﬂight of the H-IIB Transfer Vehicle (HTV- JAXA Via NASA. HREP was shipped to the JAXA
1) mission and installed on the Japanese Experiment Tanegashima Space Center (TNSC) by NASA in April of
Module — Exposed Facility (JEM-EF), using a combination 2009, tested by the HREP team and delivered to JAXA for
of the ISS and JEM robotics systems (EVR). The installation into the HTV in May. The HTV was launched
International Space Station (188) provides power and on 10 September 2009 and arrived at the 188 on the 17th.
command and data handling through the NASA Payload HREP operations began with turn on and checkout on the
Operations and Integration Center (POIC) at the Marshall 24th of September, with full science operations starting on
Space Flight Center (MSFC) utilizing the Telescience u w. , _ ”5:7. v i3: 3*“ i 0
Resource Kit TReK . TReK rovides data and ‘ ' ~15 7,-5.1 1 - -' ‘ '
commanding dire(ctly to )the Principal Iiivestigators site with ,0 Hmmta ': t'dﬁ f0 JENLg ._
backup capability at the STP payload operations control .. ' a .-;~t:i"""" 4' .-
center (POCC) at the Johnson Space Center. HREP requires 7"""" ,, e ' 1:- ' _r "" I ,
. . . . . ‘ ,0. , i
no 188 crew 1nteractlon for completion of 1ts solence g'g- ""j"" {‘1 p! a
ObJCCtIVCS. (l: _,L ﬂm; 1r
«:1

Working with the NASA Space Station Payloads g .1“ ' “1
Ofﬁce and the Japanese Aerospace Exploration Agency -- . i - ..
(JAXA), STP proposed ﬂying two DOD experiments on the - \
Japanese Experiment Module-Exposed Facility (JEM-EF). IE? \
In early 2007, STP explored alternatives and possible 1; E: in...”
experiments that would work on the JEM-EF and held :'.: _,..
discussions with both JAXA and the science teams. Initial '2‘?! PictureCourtesy ofNASA
meetings with JAXA were positive and it was agreed that October 30th.
the project should move forward. Our initial meetings were
completed in February 2007 and we held a projeot kickoff STP chose this method of spaceﬂight for a couple of
meeting at.the. end 0f Mar 2007’ after all the part1es (STP? reasons. First, it was a way to get long time operations for a
NASA? Solentists, JAXA) were convmeed It was a feas1ble couple of science experiments that needed it; both HICO
plan. The. HREP Payload Integratlon Agreement, the and RAIDS required a host spacecraft that was substantial
NASA requirements document for the payload, was drafted by Space Test Program standards. The 188 could provide
hy the middle Of Aprll 2007 and the ﬁrst 0f HREPS three power, attitude control, and communications with relative
interface control documents (ICDs) were drafted. The three ease that met both experiment’s requirements. Second, it
HREP ICDS were 1) HREP to 188 (software or was the best ﬁt economically; NASA had an allocation on
command/control), 2.) HREP t0 JEMTEF’ .3) HREP t0 HTV' the ﬁrst HTV launch but no payloads were ready to ﬂy.
Each lCD had requirements and veriﬁcatlons that had to be STP could put HREP together in the time required which
reconcﬂed and tracked. The HREP team held a Prelirhlnary both took advantage of the HTV-l slot and provided STP
Des1gr1 Rev1ew In July Of 2007’ Wlth .each 0f the prirhary with an affordable mission for 2 large experiments.
experiments (HICO and RAIDS) holdlng separate reV1ews
previously over the summer. The ﬁrst safety review for
HREP was held in August of 2007 as a Phase 0/1. The _ _ _ _ _ ""' _ .- . : _' h
safety process for HREP was complicated by the fact that __i_-_:j_j-;'-=:_-_-1 H '-'...i |_'-'._'. l‘ n [‘1 illﬂlQ;
JAXA and NASA had not yet come to a mutual agreement , _ -T - _ 11, ' I- - 21,,- “-*~:E-il'r 7%..
on who would be in charge of what part of the process (188, "" '1 l” - r? 'i."" ""'5 "" .. . ' "" _ _"""" _
Launch Vehicle, Service Vehicle). Resolving this issue, so . .. :E.‘ E3154; i"" _
that all of the safety aspects of the entire HREP mission _ ""E__ .. _ —__ 1'1 f5. -_..""' '
could be addressed adequately and still satisfy both '-_ 1:31} I "" ' “c '1' , .
organizations was a bit of a coordination challenge. But, -.-.-_-. ""r"" J r.' "" f!!! .. .
once the ""leader/follower"" roles were deﬁned for each phase ._ _ '1 -_.-.-.J"" : -* - hi ‘
of HREPs ""lifetime"" was agreed upon the process worked . efffﬁ "" __*
fairly smoothly. The HREP Critical Design Review was -_ ' 'F.‘ _ '_ .- -- 1r 1'""
held in January Of 2008, with delivery of NASA provided -.' 4‘ -'-.. ""u“ ""
equipment occurring in March 2008 to be installed into the l! - - __
payload structure. _ . Picture 1:1: ' +153; c-I HREP Tum]

NASA provided items for the HREP payload With the cultural barriers of Japanese and American
included the robotics grapple ﬁxture, the payload interface language, differences in organizational cultures between

2

"
"3","STP and JAXA, as well as assumptions, the importance of with NASA; this is with the Payload Operations Integration
regular contact on all aspects of any joint project cannot be Center at Marshall, not at J ohnson. We actually took HREP
overestimated. For HREP we held meetings with the to Marshall Spaceﬂight Center to do electrical testing with
Japanese at milestones only. Teleconferences were reserved the ISS simulators they have there - it was very useful for
for resolving speciﬁc issues. From the previous sentences it working out some of our communications details and
is implied that this did not work well. Because our closing veriﬁcations. One last foot stomp on veriﬁcations -
interactions were infrequent, understanding was difﬁcult to it is absolutely essential to agree to all of these before
build. On the US side we did not comprehend the driving testing starts. You only want to do most tests once, so
forces behind some J apanese requirements until late in the understanding what you need to get out of each test is really
process. For example, the Japanese procedure was to important!
analyze every possibility in design, thus ensuring that any
question could be answered. On the HREP team we had Since HREP would be shipped to Japan from the
only a ﬁxed amount of time and money for analysis. So of United States, NASA was required to obtain an export
course we needed to know the minimum required to reach license for the payload on the ground support equipment. It
ﬂight. Our going in concept was to bound the requirements is very important to understand the export classiﬁcation of
as much a possible, analyze to the boundaries and be done. the shipment. HREP contained mostly commercial
Since the two sides (JAXA and STP) had very different electronics, but the star tracker drove us to get an export
assumptions - we had confusion. It took time to work license from the US Department of State. Work the
through the confusion, so you want to avoid that on future licensing as early as you can, the details of the process can
projects. Plan to talk to JAXA monthly and have face to really take some time to work out. A few comments about
face meetings on issues quarterly. You may not need all shipping; have a detailed inventory and keep it current! For
these, but planning for them up front creates the expectation shipping purposes as well as export control, HREP had
of interaction - which helps. A good point to remember is three types of equipment; Flight Hardware (the HREP
that JAXA, at least in the HREP time period, did not have a experiment, Controlled Ground Support Equipment (GSE
standing army of engineers. People were brought in to that would come back to the US), and Uncontrolled Ground
handle speciﬁc tasks and for meetings as required. For Support Equipment (GSE that may or may not come back,
HREP it meant that to speak to a speciﬁc engineer may depending on if it got used up). Wipes and clean room
require a week or more of scheduling. This fact of life booties are examples of Uncontrolled GSE, while a
caused us some consternation at ﬁrst, but it was easily calibrated torque wrench would be controlled GSE. Each
compensated for. type of equipment had its own set of export paperwork
(classiﬁcation worksheet and pro-forma invoice).

When working with multiple interface control
documents (ICDs) it is especially important to ensure that
they not contradict each other. Also, ensure that your ICDs
are the only applicable requirements for your proj ect. Other ‘
documents may be referenced, but only what is speciﬁcally HREP GSE Contain
called out in the ICD is what is required. As these a ‘
requirements drive your design and documentation - make i""; a 9’ ' {-
them right! Also, defend yourself from requirements creep ' I ‘
- it will drive you crazy and destroy your schedule. M\ ;

‘\\

Be aware that each requirement you have in your .
ICDs must be veriﬁed in some way. Key to that is some i ”:14; a 7.
kind of ""veriﬁcation plan"", even if it is just a table in the ,
back of each 1CD. For your veriﬁcations it is really .
important to give each one a number, understand what it "" —___‘
will take to complete it (close it in the vernacular), who """"

, Photo Couﬂesy of the HREP Team
must agree that 1t has been completed correctly, and when. . 7
You must agree on these things with JAXA, not NASA, and
deﬁnitely not among yourselves. If you have to make
several trips to Japan to do ""line by line"" reViews of your
ICDs, do it, It will pay off when you get ready for launch. To make things easier for ourselves and the shipping folks,
For HREP, since we had JAXA bolting on some critical the HREP team actually took pictures of each item with its
interface hardware, we actually shipped our ﬁrst payload number on the inventory so they could easily be identiﬁed.
structure base to Japan to allow JAXA to do ﬁt checks. When you have fourteen different types of tape this can be
This drove some procedural changes, as well as boosting important. Keep track of everything, especially if you have
everyone's conﬁdence that HREP would be mounted multiple boxes. You may need to be able to direct them as
successfully. The same thing goes for your software 1CD to which box something is in (in case an inspector spot
3

"
"4","checks the shipment.) We had a cargo container full of The Tanegashima Space Center (TNSC) is located
stuff and being able to tell them there was a binder full of on the southern end of Tanegashima. Just a quick language
pictures just inside the door was very helpful according to note — ""shima"" is the Japanese sufﬁx for island, so it is really
our shipper. The language barrier caused a little confusion, Tanegashima is literally ""Tanega Island"". In order to get
but if you can say ""it’s the roll of tape in picture number 23, there you can take a couple of routes, but all eventually go
container 8"", then they usually know what you are talking through the Kagoshima Airport to get to Tanegashima. The
about. It is important to keep track of what you use if you HREP team usually ﬂew into Tokyo's Narita Airport, spent
are going to send it back to the US. It will change your the night and then ﬂew from Haneda down to Kagoshima to
inventory, etc. .. In a related topic, if you buy anything in make a connection to Tanegashima. From the Tanegashima
Japan, it must go back on a separate shipment than the Airport you rent a car and drive to the town of Minimatane.
original because of Japanese export laws. So that means Our team stayed at the Sun Pearl Hotel and drove to the
you need more paperwork; plan well — you have to live with space center each day.

it!

The TNSC badging is similar to most of the
western space centers. You get a photo badge that is
electronically used in badge readers. There are also security

‘ 5“? t; .‘“ -4 "" guards at most of the outer fence lines, but we usually never
‘ EH? H ff’ikﬂm“ had any issues getting in and out. The normal work day at
M A 1.. §£?%JU??§%""M'1 TNSC is about 8am until 5pm, but since they have a lot
“°'"" M; Tm gig“ ""mﬁ’ngi;*F going on they are pretty ﬂexible if you want to work off
”31* f“ g )""é‘g. 1,1332%“ egg, normal hours. They are pretty strict about keeping
,f; ' Yamwuchiair§g$470kiiinia ?:ng: snags 7‘ weekends clear, so if you need to work on the weekends
' I Fukuokami‘ij‘ ' fig??? make sure you pre—coordinate the schedule. As a matter of
a ma 0M1 w I ‘ . . .
.. ms: (at m ”""25?“ ' , fact, it is a really good idea to have at least a ""day by day""
J’N “mﬁékqg’?” » ' '7 ' ' ' ' plan that you have talked to JAXA about. The HREP team
”1%.; um“ I was in Tanegashima during Japan's ""Golden Week"" of four
,1 ans; ea: . . . .
‘ ' national holidays (Showa Day, Constitution Day, Greenery
’ 1 Day, Boys Festival), and we had to plan around that as well.
.. . ' : '~ ‘ Most of the impact was when the TNSC Cafeteria would be
open (so we had to bring our own lunches). In your pre—
departure meetings ensure you go over what is expected to
happen each day, as a lot of people on the JAXA side will
The Japanese launch from the Tanegashima Space be interested.
Center (TNSC), which is located south of the main islands
in the Kagoshima Prefecture. Tanegashima is the island
where western ﬁrearms were ﬁrst introduced to Japan by a
the Portuguese. It is still pretty famous for making scissors 1“ ‘ J ‘ \/
and knives. t, ‘ An .
TNSC Progegging Area l
- , "" ' ‘2“ ’ ""1!:50 ‘
r )\: _ 7 77“,;9-53—‘7vi 5': #— ‘i‘x‘: .
, ‘ ﬁ, ﬁ F: . .. — / ﬁr; Q .4}
22:: ‘ . '7' V2; 333%.” 5, 1’: ’ g ,
M: Tom 5w J m; n - . ,~ . ,
'~. I FURzﬂfh-iﬁ’ﬁ _ _T&k:""$m 4' ma ,4. pm h. rt ‘fé I M v
1"" 5”
v A key point to understand is that the entire area inside the
ii.) ' ‘ ’ . 7 A 7 ‘ 7 ., . ‘ fence at TNSC (see the circle in the picture above) is
‘ 7 7 i it considered by JAXA an explosives safety area. So, they
require ""static resistant clothing"" and safety shoes to be
worn by everyone. This means you basically need to wear
some kind of uniform while working at both the spacecraft
4

"
"5","processing areas (a little leeway) and in the integrated ' .' ""T
facility (no leeway). We didn't understand this when we BO): Lunc'hes at thei-L-a‘mh S'te
ﬁrst got to Tanegashima and had to express order safety ﬁ‘ :1 : '
clothing for our team. We also had to borrow safety shoes — ‘; f 3 3” 3
all of this could have been avoided if the site requirements _ ' 3i ‘ ‘ $_- ‘2: -
had been better understood prior to us getting there. This .7 ‘K < @‘fgmﬁ ‘ * ‘ 5
was a mutual misunderstanding, JAXA thought their 332v -’ ‘ K 7: “gm“ 7_ ‘_
document was clear, and we didn't read it the same way. ‘2 ‘ '4’- - “-3“; 3 ‘3‘}
. . . . . g ‘ :9 «53""3923‘ wwwi-‘i‘k _i
We had this misunderstanding even after making a trip to 3 z ‘ l 4"" ‘ =""..3.__,_; ' :‘Egif
. . . a ’ ”W;Wsaﬁ>~ 3.3—; 3‘13
TNSC, so Just be extra spe01ﬁc and ask lots of questions. % , . , s'iﬁ 3
s p IH | m .w
u n ear ote ,3
‘x‘EllotolCQlirte'sl-y’dﬁheHREPTeam \ - ‘Q 1.
a ’ “KT“ -~ . g 5‘
W
V \T
3
.- \ ' . 33 SUNPEARL '3 3 Getting around Minimatane was pretty simple, once you
‘3 -~ 35“»? ', . ,3; n; found the map (see below)
:5: a '5; l x ,.'
an - ~ 3 3 .
‘f \‘~ '1} . I ii. i - , _ ._._... -_ _""___ __
é 3 r” ' “ 'K. 2 .. ""i”? T._ .2 ..
""35:"" H ’ , _ '..'.--.-:'.!-.:-:.: .-{._.-'..::._ _'-'-;a~.-- -..- ' . r3."" Eh -—-.-=' ,
a133, ,"".. 5.: t ‘ i ._I-:._ '-_§_ IJ -h:i ‘__,J_'-.‘ Fql'-_“ .. .3. :-
""'"" ll"" .' I - 1 . '. I . _ _‘:'='-.-""-..}... III !
'9 ' 'l' “W5 ‘L ' : a =‘—_;__.-. .-4:.ali'f£-E 1. I
""is {3% ”m: , ;""""-.'e'n.-*1:::= r-éi.”3*:-;i-'::Ee-rg’i**3%?- ' |
' =- 4: ""‘ a1 . l ""LT “FEW .. -
- I ““3‘MI . 5W"" _ a--I:.' . :_I
- .A ' . “J'r'ill-‘T‘HTI Lgfa. .» 77 I. II I. .'F-
PlCthggtr “WW""? _ . - ‘ P Team --
., .- ’45:“ ‘7 J ‘ Picture courtesy of HF-EEF' Team
We stayed at the hotel SunPearl in Minimatane, most of the There are several Of these English maps around tOWH; we
JAXA people stay there also. The hotel offers a western JUSt took a picture and printed 1t out. our team 3150 put
style breakfast and dinner service (Japanese style) as well as together an interactive map 111 power point 50 we COUId
laundry. The hotel will even make box lunches for you on ShOW what each place looked llke- Overall, the people and
request. We did this on several occasions and it made a very culture were very welcoming. Local restaurants were
enj oyable picnic. always happy to see us and even though our team spoke no
Japanese, we always seemed to communicate. We even had
locals who spoke some English volunteer to help us at
restaurants. We even found a taco restaurant to celebrate
Cinco de Mayo at on the island, and the owners welcomed
us (see picture below).
5

"
"6","_, -- ’ ' ' i I International Space Station payloads. Mr. Ballard
‘ ’ .4“ . - , ‘ .. 7 - 3 _ H - ‘1 represents OL—Y and DOD Space Test Program to interests
1’ to outside organizations in support of mission
accomplishment. Perry is also the Mission Manager for
several payloads in the launch process. During his 22 year
. _,.._:, a ‘ military career Perry was the Acting Program Director for
- r—e—* Li“. I l the DOD Space Test Program - where he lead a team that
' . ‘ Q ‘;~.: L 7“; i "" : , L ; , participated in the ﬁrst space launch from Kodiak, Alaska,
N"". J Law s ‘ :4: s; I ... r/y, : LqI I was assigned as the Collection Systems Program Manager,
\\ *2; £2! ,. ”WI : ;1 F r L. Director of Intelligence Operations of the Defense
, ‘L\\ ‘I’I'Jfgggg: ‘ - .3 ‘I 1 i E} Intelligence Agency and served as a Chief of Space Shuttle
r .""I - _ «I - 'l ~‘ 4 and Atlas Payloads at Cape Canaveral, Florida.
# 5L. . a “24.x {'5 *5“ - Mr. Ballard, a Florida native, received his commission from
' 3"" 'L . I ‘ i » I’ N ' s Ofﬁcer Training School in 1980 after earning a Bachelor's
Ié.,.: i a i 1. I Degree from the Missouri Institute of Technology. Perry
h k: -. ,: \\. . a \I ?I- , A also holds a master’s degree from the University of West
. I . ~ ?‘m a ""‘ '0' a I Florida. He has been working with space systems for over
9"" g“ «L. i'ﬁf’ff r Q ~ I 15 years. He was responsible for payloads on the space
7i .. l 5 ,_ x t : - ~ _ shuttle return to ﬂight from Challenger mission as well as
I’); 1’ . ‘ . ' ._ '1 I ' _ _ - "" ~. . payloads on over forty launches using nine different launch
7/ / ‘ {l I ' . 1; - .i'? 3.1 {53% systems. Mr. Ballard’s background includes ﬂight-testing,
L - ' '1 - ‘ ‘“""“”* x ‘ ’“Q-éii‘g: maintenance, program management, research and
development, and treaty enforcement in Bosina—
Hercegovina.
Overall, the HREP teams experience in
Tanegashima was very rewarding. All of us on the HREP
team would launch from TNSC again if the opportunity
arose.
References
6/1/201 NRL PRESS RELEASE:
HTTPS://WWW.NRL.NAVY.MIL/MEDIA/NEWS-
RELEASEs/65-10R/
BIOGRAPHY
Perry G. Ballard is the Chief Engineer, DOD Manned
Spaceﬂight Payloads Ofﬁce, Space and Missile Systems
Center, Operating Location Y, J ohnson Space Center
(Houston, TX). On behalf of the Director, Perry provides
senior engineering oversight of all DOD and STP Human
Spaceﬂight projects. Perry provides technical assistance to
Payload Integration in the areas of Systems Engineering,
Information Protection, and Export Control. He represents
the DOD Space Test Program to the NASA Export Control
Ofﬁce as the Export Control Representative for Shuttle and
6

"
