"","x"
"1","2004 IEEE Aerospace Conference Proceedings
Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Ocean (HICO)
T. Mosher, and M. Mitchell Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Utah State University, Logan, UT 84322, USA
tjmosher@engineering.usu.edu, mmitchell@cc.usu.edu
P. Lucey, Hawaii Institute of Geophysics and Planetology, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, [-1196 822, USA
lucey@higp.hawaii.edu
C. Davis, Code 7203, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC. 20375, USA curtiss.davis@nr1.navy.mil
”AbstracI—-The HICO sensor system, integrated in the distribution of ﬁres and active volcanoes in the context of
International Space Station (188) Window Observational mitigation ofnatural hazards.
Research Facility (WORF), will collect visible and short-
wave infrared hyperspectral data that will provide the The importance 0f the global coastal ecosystem and hOW it
following characterization of coastal regions: is directly being altered by global climate change is only
0 Determine water clarity and visibility, shallow water now being gtasped. A hey'aspect Of these ecosy‘stems, coral
bathymetry, and bottom type composition. reefs occur m the temtonal waters of approxunately 100
4: Detect underwater obstructions and characterize eountries arouhd the world: They are an important 31?“th
beaches and coastal areas. 1n the protectton 0f shorelmes and harbours, a. Slgmﬁcant
0 Research global properties of coral reefs, the maritime souree 0f tounsm and recreatlon, an? an 6001031831 reserve;
atmosphere and determine global distribution of ﬁres that IS popularly referred to as the ramforest of the sea.
and active volcanoes in the context of mitigating natural Reef: degradatlon through the loss of cohal‘hahltat and fauna
hazards. shlftmg to an overgrth of algae IS estlmated to be
It will achieve these objectives by coilecting hyperspectral acceleratmg at a dlsturbmgrate.
imaging data for over 70% of the Earth’s surface, the , ,
portion over ﬂown by 188, at a spatial resolution of 25 However, much of the knowledge about coastal reglons 18
meters. The desired data will be obtained using the Naval based 0“ a small data set _F°F “.16 Past decade many
Research Lab (NRL) Portable Hyperspectral Imager for researchers have worked With airborne hyperspectral
Low Light Spectroscopy (PHILLS—3) sensor with a pointing Imagery teehmques and. developed the selence algorithms
and stabilization system, and then later integrating it with a and demonstrated them m 2} senes Of expenments m U1 8'
short-wave infrared hyperspectral imager. coastal waters. However, alrborne :systems do not Prowde
' the global access needed for assessmg all areas of mterest,
Keywords: Hyperspectral Imaging, Coastal Regions, and nor the repeat coverage over seasone needeti for aetual
Coral Reefst model development. The program objectlve 18 to bulld a
seasonal time series of hyperspectral data at a signiﬁcant
T ABLE OF CONTENTS t number (25-50) of sites around the world. This cannot be
accomplished in a reasonable manner with airborne systems,
1. INTRODUCTION] nor are there any government (USAF, NASA, etc.) 01'
2. - PAST EFFORTSZ commercial hyperspectral satellite missions planned or
3. HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGING 0F COASTAL REGIONS- 3 programmed at this time that will gather this information.
4. THEWORFON-BOARDTHEISS.............................3 '
5. PRESERVING CORAL REEFS.5 Alternative means to hyperspectra] sensing from space to
6. CONCLUSIONS.5 develop the same characterization of coastal regions is also
REFERENCES.6 limited Visible radiation is the only part of the
' electromagnetic spectrum that penetrates the water.
1. INTRODUCTION Extensive studies .using shipboard measurements and
. , airborne hyperspectral imaging has shown that
Eﬂiz’ff‘inﬂe‘éiﬂEﬁaieiiﬁia‘iiﬁf Em: 335$: iii??? germ? imgging is El: 0n” 35;“ avail?” 1° W
need for characterization of the littoral battle space, e comp ex1ty 0 e coas a ocean om spac .

- including charting of coastal waters for beach .ingress and To meet military and civilian research needs, a
egress, and mapptng the dry land Portion 0f the llttoral zone. hyperspectral imager can be deployed on the 188. Both the
Cunl'thly ﬁber: 15 a weakness ""1h”; knowledﬁzrtog the University of Hawaii and the Naval Research Laboratory
W01. 5 _8 ore mes; .ntahy 0 W 10 . are “PC , e or have made efforts to place such an imager 0n the ISS and
lnagceizlbéf. Tfhehcwllllelljnlresearcittt Integest 19; ungroxiﬁd have established substantial capabilities to realize this goal.
un ers ,0 ng 0 e go a prope 1es 0 cora ree 5’ e - These ca abilities are hi 1 com lemen : NRL has
properties of the maritime atmosphere, and the global developecf the hardware mg: :oftwaf; necesstagry to deploy a

I visible hyperspectral imager on the space station; the

1 10-7803-8155-6/04/$17 00 © 2004 IEEE \ University of Hawaii anel its’ partners Utah State University
2IEEEAC paper #1518,.Version 4,Updmd January 30,2004 and Novasol have deSIgned a capable pomtmg system
0-7803-8155-6/04/$17.00 ©2004 IEEE 22

"
"2","enabling signiﬁcant improvement in performance to any 188 with non-unifonnity correction of the detector as the only
hyperspectral system. In addition a 1 - 2.5 micron infrared post processing necessary. -
imager suitable to greatly enhance the science return of the
visible hyperspectra] imager is planned. . PHILLS provides high quality data from a variety of aircraft
platforms, and has been thoroughly calibrated and
2. PAST EFFORTS characterized in the laboratory [1]. NRL has completed the
design, and most of the upgrades to modify PHILLS-3 for
The Ofﬁce Of Naval Research (ONR) and the Space use in the [SS WORF. These include ruggedization of the
Technology Development Corporation (STDC) entered into spectrometer and camera and an improved design for the
an agreement (CT) in December 1997 to _bulld the Nat’al order sorting ﬁlter and zero order trap. Extensive soﬁware
Earth Map Observer (NEMO) satellite ‘0 PYOV‘de is being written to allow essentially autonomous operation
hyperspectral data and co-registered panchromatic imagery on the ISS. -
[5]. The Coastal Ocean Imaging Spectrometer (COIS) was a
hyperspectral imager designed to meet Naval requirements In the nadir view PHILLS—3 would have a 130 m ground
for shallow water bathymetlyt and characterlzation 0f resolution, and roughly a 10 day revisit time to any location
bottom Md water optical properties. C018 has a VNLR and covered by the [SS orbit. To enhance the resolution for
SWIR spectrometer WhiCh together have 210 spectral coastal ocean applications a pointing system is being built
channels covering the 400 ‘2500 nm spectral range With 10 that will allow cross track pointing and along track nodding
nm resolution. STDC planned to sell land hyperspectral to increase the dwell time on each ground pixel. With this
data for minerai exploration, agriculture and environmental addition PHILLS will be able to image any area at 25 m
applications. After y ear 5 Of trying, the commercial partner ground resolution with a revisit time of 3 days. A picture of
was unable to obtain adequate funding for its’ half of the PHILLS-l (PHILLS-3 iS identical) in itS’ airplane mount iS
spacecraft and the NEMO mission was cancelled in April shown in Figure 1_
2002. .
However, the need 5""“ “15‘s to ﬂy 3“ lmagmg 3’???"" r f
spectrometer for the coastal ocean to meet military and ﬁﬁfhgf WWKCDW
shallow water bathymetry and bottom characteristics at 20 “93?! . ‘_ '.'.- w mﬁh$£§f§
m spatial resolution and to measure Colored Dissolved “’3‘” i?” jmwgﬁ ”*3:
Organ” Matter (CDOML Phytoplankton and suspended e2? . i * $§m§§
sediments in a wide range of coastal environments. The gégﬁég} *1 :ﬁggiﬂi :éf:la~
Navy remains interested in completing and ﬂying C015 and 3%??? _ met: , '52 ﬁﬁmﬁ
are looking for another opportunity to ﬂy the C018 sensor. §§2§f 53? a ' 92' éﬁgﬁ .
Currently there is a proposition for ﬂying COIS as a gefﬁfgetgytmﬁlmhgaaﬁu
demonstration proj ect through the Space Test Program on a ???zihzérsing’:mzm33’ii‘nimgg
spacecraft of opportunity. ”K&‘Qa‘xiﬁeaé‘gii4jw‘Me’k‘Fivmi-
In the near term. NRL is planning to ﬂy the Portable Figure 1. PHILLS-l Instrument
Hyperspectral lmager for Low-Light spectroswpy
(PHILLS), as a risk reduction effort to validate the (3013 In parallel, the University of Hawaii has been leading a team
concept and to conduct minimal cost data gathering using in developing for NASA the Coral Reef ECOSYStem SPCCUO'
the [SS Window Observational Research F acility (WORF) Photometric Observatory (CRESPO). FiTSt it was proposed
capability. PHILLS is an airborne version of the VNIR and funded for a conceptual StUdY under the NASA Earth
(400-1000 nm) COIS sensor. It uses the same Offner Sciences University Earth System Science (UnESS)
spectrometer design and thinned backside illuminated CCD program. Unfortunately theUnESS program was cancelled.
camera technology. The camera has a large dynamic range CRESPO was then proposed to the NASA Earth Selence
and high quantum efﬁciency in the blue (400450an with System Pathﬁnder {ESSP} program, but vttas net selected tot
a frame rate of at least 30 Hz. The spectrograph has low further study. During thiswork, the Universityiof Hawaii
smile and keystone distortion using an optimized design, to and the CBESPO team deSJgned a capable pomtlng system
counter astigmatisms. A s p e ciﬁ c groove density was . enabling Signiﬁcant improvement in perfonnance to any [88
designed for the spectrograph to give the preferred spectral hyperspectral system, and ii 1 _ 2'5 micron short wave
resolution and range. The instrument works by taking infrared (SW) imager suitable to greatly enhance the
images in through the spectrometer enterance slit, where the selence return 0f the v131ble by p ersp ectra] imager.
hght ls dispersed onto a detecto r array, allowmg the In 2002, the synergy between efforts of the two groups was
representatlon of each spectral pomt as a spectrum. The . .

. . . recognized. As a result the two groups have deeded to
grat‘f‘g 'magmg SPCCtF9gTaph “Sted for die PHILLS 811°“ panner, which should yield an outcome of a substantially
for Simultaneous acqulsmon of linearly dispersed spectrum, improved hyperspectral imaging capability than would be

accomplished by either group alone with only their available
23

"
"3","resources. composition and identity. Collection and calibration of the
spectral library typically involves in-situ sampling and
The combined project is called Hyperspectral Imager for the analysis. Both this cataloging process and the data
Coastal Ocean (HICO). The project will have four parts: 1) processing analysis steps are nontrivial, but fortunately in
Integration of the NRL hyperspectral imager and the the case of coastal regions, work in this area has already
pointing and stabilization system in the ISS WORF; 2) Use begun. For example, as a part of CRESPO and other efforts
of the stabilized NRL imager to allow high quality visible at the University of Hawaii, research is on-going in in-situ
hyperspectral imaging; 3) Integration of the Hawaii SWIR sampling and comparing airborne hyperspectral results to
Imager into the stabilized NRL system; 4) Use of the this catalog. Spectral reﬂectance measurements have been
combined NRL/Hawaii system. The four parts are expected made at 11 sites worldwide in four major coral reef
to require two to three years to execute, including six biogeographic zones, in 3 different oceans of greater than
months of space operation of the stabilized NRL instrument 350 reef communities and greater than 13,000 spectra.
, and six months of space Operation of the integrated '
‘ NRL/Hawaii instrument. Thus the expected plan for HICO will be similar to that
- represented in Figure 2. Observations at calibration sites ﬁx
3. HYPERSPECTRAL 1M AGING 0F COASTAL the radiance calibration and validate the atmoSpheric
. correction model. Then observations of sites with extensive
REGIONS ground truth validate the algorithms for the in—water
_ . _ _ . constituents (chlorophyll, sediments, etc.) that will be used
Hyperspectral lméglfig, unlike panchromatte tmagers, are as input to the coupled physical, bio—optical models. Finally
able {0 detect 311115510115 “OI only 1n Eh? V151ble range, '31“ in the last few steps the validated products now can become
.3130 man): other spectra. In the Y‘SIble and .the near- “groundtruth” for the model validation. Thus the process of
infrared, liquids and SOlldS are Identiﬁed by their spectral model validation is an iterative one comparing repeated
absorption and scattering of solar radiation. The unique observations with model predictions.
spectra or spectral signature of an object can then be used to
Identify the material of an object, usually qutte accurately. 4. THE WORF ON-BOARD THE ISS
Hyperspectral imagers typically sample between 20 and 100 .
plus bands 01' channels in the electromagnetic SPBCU'Um- The ISS is an untapped resource for Earth observation [3].
Often t0 di§tinguish between multiSpectral and When the space station developed into the ISS the
hyperspectral, a capability 0f greater than 30 bands is used inclination was changed from 28.5 to 51.6 degrees in order
{2} to accommodate the Russian launch site at Baikonur
_ Cosmodrome. This inclination allows the ISS an increased
HyperSPectral imagers produce large volumes 0f data area of visible Earth, encompassing all of the Earth’s coral
because each pixel has associated with it a continuous reefs. Figure 3 shows the ISS ﬂight path over the coral
Spectrum that is used to identify the material present in the reefs of the world. The average altitude of 400 km includes
pixel. While the large dataset associated with each pixel can coverage of approximately 75% of Earth’s land mass and
be used to produce a variety 0f analysis products, it can 95% of its population. The same location will be over ﬂown
prove Challenging for data storage and downloading. by the ISS nearly every three days, with repeated lighting
conditions every 3 months.
The spectral signature of an object is compared with an
existing spectral library to determine its chemical ‘
"" "" 2;- ‘ t' , *WlmVahdéted W T . Constitumts ‘
, :Ahmsphmccuntmnn . ‘(Modelhlputslr
.1. E; . N we , x ' ._ ‘ \g N Vahdated : I
- SCahbmmn : 2%?120eshﬁsrfiésé:téleasmmni% i - 3%émmceyd '
, sues ,- isms : ,, vandauonsltes ..
' Figure 2. Ocean Data Validation and Model Development
24

"
"4","m- "" Q44. j’”'*‘ . . ... .2 44 gig?"" :
in.“ ”i?” W,.-.', .1 :-..W.,.~.WW‘.,.‘M‘Eewuiwfﬁjivj. p.444.,-.«,4~q~,-.E.Wwi.-4..W’ I .mgawwv;%,444-437;”WWWWW..-‘ ‘.1.:~.¢'.:..,~. impenu 4:44-44
=- 4 f‘ ' _ 4,, 4W \‘2..<.\ .ngx 4‘}: »_ g4._.,-..'_ _'.I-'¢¢ .4! 4/..ny [y '
A I "" V , . . . :4 3.3““ ‘3"" 4A“ "" . 4:.   ” \f' . “4% a ""
,4-_‘ 44x; ,, 5W?” e *3;- '-; . __ -. .4 :-
4. . .1“ F! +5 :1 ._ a ’ ‘_,' .> .Aﬁ' ' 4 .f m“- .1 _. ‘ A.j ‘Qril ‘ g; t a _. .4."" W.-
» _ :5, _   cg“ W- _ Q, ~ # . __ _ 1 $4
§§qu With. _W_.W,,_ .4- _ «- Win: 5:, i. i_.:._iWii. _i- .____ WWWIWIW .E,_WW,W,W..-W.....- ,3. ,3, . «3.4-4.4 74:94. 1.. WW , .. .. “.3“ .y., .. WWW. ""EF_‘"".'"" 4-"" 754- 4.; _... 2. - 7 WW .W.W:.;;W...W.l. '3‘ - - . .. -i. u 3.. -I.-.,....:._,. -:ev .
Figure 3. 188 orbital coverage of coral reefs
The 188 provides a benign environment and crew support modiﬁed EXPRESS raCk with a cubic meter-sized void in
Option that can make it more favorable than a sensor on a the center of the rack.
free—ﬂying platform. The large nadir—facing windbw that
was successfully launched as a part of the “Destiny” _ .. z ,. W _v A
laboratory module in February at: 2001 offers excellent [NBOARDf
transmittance and wavefront quality. and is the highest _ $4”
quality window to ever ﬂy on a manned spacecraft [4]. T0 :WMW 1___ . 4 ~ -
withstand the space environment and ensure the highest ?‘ltnte-rqgi E'ITE‘SSUIBg
optical quality, the window is composed of 4 panes of glass. i: §- ‘ 93"";EV4-
An interior pane known as the “scratch” pane (11.4mm- .1:30f3t9h ?Péh’ghff m???
borosilicate) protects two outer redundant pressure panes ' ” "" ” "" "" ‘: :1
(3.1.75mm—fused silica each), which are protected from 3‘4 1% 4 ""CPressureF'anes ‘
micrometeoroids and debris by the “debris” pane (9.6mm- 3035115513.“; . ‘ 45,4; ‘ "" ' "" i ‘ ‘
fused silica). An external window shutter protects the entire f4” f 733,533 .
Window assembl . {i830 e’s‘tiﬁ ﬂ 4x4 "" :4 MW. _.
y _W ,4 . W W. 3"" .. ,..4..¢..,~.4..MM .454 W W
M 0.6 ul 4444:4140 u = ShuﬁetHandwheet
The scratch pane is not of the high optical quality as the ~ . \ ”‘44:. ‘TEﬁérhhl’Shhttéf‘z
other three panes;_and must be remOved an'dstowed by the _ iiEfﬁ'ernaili'Eressu reg"" 5"" “ * "" """" ’ ’J'
crew before 'science observations occur. To increase {?.C'mr era; ‘ v '
transmissivity and decrease reﬂectivity, coatings of anti- OUTBGARD“
reﬂective magnesium ﬂuoride are on the inner and outer F‘ 4 D . ' . d 1 d d , t . .
surfaces of the pressure panes and the debris pane. The 'gure 1:3 6'5.th wm 9W 6’3) 0 e ésgmehnc V'ew
window has a 20—inch diameter port, and analysis performed xterlor p ane oriente towar art .
earlier for CRESPO (current HICO performance is expected K th 1 d. 1 h' 11 t th
to be similar) showed greater than 95% transmittance for 903:“ as Spay 0% 2,0313% :18 arcade: 0:?8 30:883. 0d e
chosen visible bands and greater than 60% for infrared Win} a: hid 5:0ka ﬂat h?gchngnosu ?lecti eO ail: 0.“
bands. With the current calibration, the Destiny window can p ay 0 . w. e. n—re V. .p .1 WI
support sensors and instruments with apertures of up to 350 cover the ll’ltCl'lOI‘ of the payload volume to minimize stray
mm in diamet r [41' An ex 1 ded view of th Destin light. The aisle side hatch utilizes a “kayak shroud” in order
win do . h e i 1;. 4 p 0 e y to allow a crewmember to work in the payload volume,
Wlss own 11 iguIe ° without interfering with Earth photography by revealing
_ , ' glare from the Destiny Laboratory. The lower payload shelf
T1111? :65?“ 0f the WORFf‘S bgsed 3,"". the PLXP 1:355 m“); in the WORF is a 3.81 cm thick aluminum plate designed to
‘E’ 1° . ‘5 taut 3:120“? OtSt tape “33? 8 £003,333: minimize the transmission of vibrations in the Destiny
xpenmen S 0 e pace a 1011. envmg e Laborato . Im rovements in the mountin of the WORF
from this design takes advantage 0f the hardware, soﬁwate structurerybver pthe window coupled withg the stabilizing
and the accommodations for sub-rack payloads developed in payload shelf allow the WORF to meet vibration
the EXPRESS faCk PhilOSOPhY- Essentially the WORF '5 a requirements for all but the largest optical instruments
(250m optical diameter or larger). Delayed by the Columbia
25

"
"5","accident, the WORF is expected to expand the functionality Clean clear water is a critical aspect for the survival of
of the Destiny window by providing power, thermal coral. Unfortunately many coastlines are riddled with
management, and access to 188 data and communications. pollution and sediment, eroded from the near shore soils.
Its most obvious function is to serve as a mounting platform Runoff sediment can signiﬁcantly hamper reef productivity
for instruments. Currently the WORF iS expected to be by blocking the sunlight which is necessary for
launched 0!] the next fllght Of the Space Shuttle when it photosynthesis"" for many of the symbiotic algae that are
returns to ﬂight some time next Spring. Figure 5 shows a crucial to reef survival. Another threat for the reefs is
picture 0f the WORF- caused by the increase in water temperatures, contributed to
. _ _ global warming. As the temperatures of the waters increase
De§lgh studies performed independently by NRL and the the coral can become stressed, which can lead to a process
UniverSIty of Hawaii teams have veriﬁed that a payload to known as bleaching. The coral will expel the algae, which .
collect the desued data 0311 be accomplished within the they are dependent upon. The coral provide the microscopic
resotirees 0f the WORF and the 135- .There is even some algae with essential compounds such as ammonia and
POSSIhlhtY that the pomtmg system being developed could phosphate, While the algae provide food, and nutrients to the
become a resource for other ﬁiture payloads beyond the coral through photosynthesis.
HICO program. Discussions on that possibility continue
With other potential WORF users. A hyperspectral imager on the space station will provide the
3 4 W 3 ' means for fietection of subtle changes it} the {eef matter that
:FFont ‘33 are not v181ble t0 the naked eye. .Allowmg this type of early
,‘chnnéiimr: . MW detection to identify problems in the reef substrate, will
""Panel 3“”,33‘3xutt 3 enable preventative measures to protect the reefs, before
‘ .3 3'“:”“”;3 signiﬁcant damage occurs. Prior to hyperspectral imaging
; 3 3’ 3 techniques, reefs were monitored using aerial
r 3 3 4 3 photogrammetry. This process could only provide limited
‘7} 3 M.” 3 . 3 , data regarding reef conditions. The hyperspectral imaging
QiBt‘l'm‘hfﬂéhi‘e’ld :53; ""‘ u 33333565333333.3333 will provide maps of reef communities, for analysis of near
{?'SlidE‘Hahdle' 33%} ?SIide Handle real time variations in the reef substrate. This type of
I: 3 imaging will be very beneﬁcial for long term ecological
3‘3""£3_g_ 3UOP Passthru studies. The advantage of mapping in the hyperspectral
3:33” écmdeﬁ-ar region includes the ability to collect images in very narrow
3m; 3 bands of light. Aquatic vegetation and reef communities
. . . _ _ can be differentiated from pollution and other water
thure 5' WORF rack shown Wlth aisle Slde hatch removed characteristics. A hyperspectIal image of a reef, located at
Buck Island Coral Reef National Park is shown in Figure 6
' 5. PRESERVING CORAL REEFS [6]. ' _
Covering 4 million acres of the sea ﬂoor in the Paciﬁc ﬁﬁzw,’

- Sea, coral reefs are home to 25% of an marine species. 333333.
These complex marine ecosystems are a shelter and 33%“
breeding ground for millions of species of ﬁsh and .: * “3:3 ”‘53
invertebrates. Coral reefs also help prevent erosion of ’ 8:3..er _ ; ""
shorelines and damage from storms. In recent decades, the -'*""*-41;:#2:?:::i%>-:1:=:: Mt?“ .. t
health of the reefs has been degrading, and is a critical issue 3
for marine life. The degradation of the reefs is poorly Figure 6- Hyperspectral image 0f coral reefs ih Virgin
understood, but is suspected to be linked to human Islands
activities. Not only are the reefs a ﬂourishing marine
habitat for wildlife, but they are a Vital part of the marine ~ 6. CONCLUSIONS
3213393311131? 3:Zsi?;:ft:1§ (3:13:12? ti: 2:13:23}: :3: $203: 2233:]; The HICO system is expected to. create data that will allow
world’s reefs will be destroyed or degraded signiﬁcantly by for an unprecedented characterization of coastal regiohs
2020. For the purpose of preserving this complex around the world. Prodhets produced from this dataset W-lll
ecosystem, efforts are being made to protect and understand serve mthtaty and CWlhan heeds, and even potential
the processes that affect the health of the reefs. While coral commerCIal interests. The unique coverage offered by a
reefs are distributed throughout the world’s oceans, the reef sPace-based payload .WIH. Offer advantages over prior
forming variety of corals are generally concentrated in the airborne hyperspectral imaging efforts.

30 de ee North and 30 de ee South latitudes in shallow _ , _ . -
waters? The International Sirace Station if perfectly suited Wlth the p1:ev10iisly mdepehgent efforts 0f the NRL/Boemg
for mapping these regions, as can be veriﬁed in Figure 3' and the tJiiiver51ty of Hawan/Utah State Universny/Novasol
teams JOIng forces, a substantially improved hyperspectral

26

"
"6","imaging capability will result. NRL’s extensive experience BIOGRAPHIES
with the PI-HLLS instrument and the progress already made .
towards manifesting in the WORF give the HICO project a mvwﬁgx Professor P3111 G- Lucey ls‘a metnber 0f
head start. The University of Hawaii/Utah State *;~‘* A_ the faculty of the Hawan Instltute of
University/ITS capabilities will complement the PHILLS 5:"" m ""f; ' Ge9PhY§ICS and P 1393310109 (HIGP) at the
work and allow its capabilities to be enhanced. W ' vaersﬁy ofI:Iawa11 Heopursues reseai‘ch
: 1n planetary selence and m remote sensmg
Thus HICO should realize the potential of the 188 as a instrument development and teaches
remote sensing platform. With the Shuttle’s return to ﬂight 7: : courses through the D epattmeht 0f
expected soon, and the delivery of the WORF, a capability ' Geology and Geophysics . He Is Ijldltor of
to perform important remote sensing in a benign, human the Journal of Geophysical Research-Planets, published by
tended environment will create new payload opportunities. the American Geophyswal UDIOH- . .
The HICO program will serve both as a pathﬁnder and a TOdd 1- Mosher is an Assmtant '
demonstration of the valuable data that can be collected. ”jug?"" Professor at Utah State Unlversﬁy
__ (USU) in the Mechanical and
REFERENCES Aerospace Engineering department-
“ His research is in small satellites and
[1] Davis, c. 0., J. Bowles, R. A. leathers, D. Korwan, T. 7 payloads, advanced Space system
V. Downes, w. A. Snyder, w. J. Rhea, w. Chen, J. Fisher, “~ concepts, and new design
w. P. Bissett and R. A. Reisse, 2002, Ocean PHILLS ' methodologies. He teaches courses in
hyperspectral imager: design, characterization, and { astrodynamics, propulsion and space
calibration, Optics Express, 10(4): 2 10-22 1. system design. He joined USU in 2002
after serving as the Associate Director
[2] Lao, NY. and Wong, RC, 2000, Hyperspectral of the' Space Architecture Department at the Aerospace
Imagery Forecast 2000—2005. The Aerospace Corporation, ' Corporation. He also served as an instructor at UCLA
' TOR-2001 (8511)-1. teaching Introduction to Space Technology, Spacecraft
. Design and Space Hardware Design. He has fomteen years
[3] Runco, M., 2003, Earth Science and Remote Sensing of experience in space systems analysis, especially NASA
from the International Space Station Using the Destiny science missions and space transportation.
’ Laboratory’s Science Window and the Window
Observational Research F acility (WORF), 30th International f”? Dr Curtiss 0. Davis is Senior Scientist
Symposium 011 Remote sensing of Environment, Nov. 10- ‘“ for Optical Remote Sensing in the
14, Honolulu, HI- 2 Remote Sensing Division of the Naval
3:” Research Laboratory (NRL) in
[4] Scott, K., 2003, [SS Destiny Module Science Window 2‘ 1 , Washington, DC. He received his
Optical Characterization, Thirtieth International Symposium E i“ :‘w ‘ Bachelors of Science in Zoology from
on Remote Sensing of Environment. November 10-14, *Vig the University of California at
H0nolulu,Hl.' Rf“: ’ . Berkeley in 1966 and his Ph.D. in
x’éh Oceanography from the Uniyersity of
[5] Wilson, T., and C. O.- Davis, 1999, “The Naval Washington in 1973. He was Program Manager for the
EarthMap Observer (NEMO) Satellite”, Proceedings of the NASA Ocean Productivity Program, in 1984-86. He was a
SPIE, V. 3753: 2-11. Research Oceanographer and Group Supervisor of the
- Biological and Polar Oceanography at the Jet Propulsion
[6] Laboratory from Dec 1986 - Mar 1994. While at JPL he
http://www..spectrummapping.com/remhyperspectralhtml was the Pr0ject Scientist, for the High Resolution Imaging
- Spectrometer (HIRIS), July 1990 — Mar 1994. In 1994 he
., ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS moved to NRL to develop a program in hyperspectral
remote sensing of the coastal ocean. He is a member of the
The authors would like to recognize the funding provided by NASA SeaWiFS Science Team and has participated in
the ONR, Navy TENCAP, NASA and the DOD Space Test numerous calibration and validation experiments. He is the
Program. We also would like to acknowledge the great Project Scientist for the Navy’s HprI‘SPCCtI'a] Remote
support from our partners and those who have worked on Sensing Technology-(HRST) Program, a focused effort to
past efforts that have served as a foundation for the HICO develop the use of hyperspectral imaging for the
program. characterization of the coastal ocean. One product of the
HRST program is the PHILLS instrument and associated
‘ algorithms that will be used in HICO.
27

"
"7","w *‘iﬂ Megan Mitchell is a graduate student

§§¥¢ working toward her Masters and

LC mi? Ph-D- in Aerospace Engineering at

fig; Utah State University. Megan came ‘

”g to work with Dr~ Todd Masher at

it“: , degree in Aerospace Engineering at ‘ -
. va UCLA. She is currently working with

"" ' ' ' Dr. Mosher 0n the HICO project, and

acts as a team leader for the USU Blue Moon moonbuggy '

team for the NASA Great Moonbuggy Competition. While

attending UCLA Megan worked in the integrated Test

Facility at Raytheon Co. in El Segundo, California. '

Research interests of Megan’s include space vehicle design,

space systems development, astronaut ergonomics and

human factors engineering. Besides continuing her

education, Megan’s future aspirations include working in

Space, on the moon or Mars.

28

"
