"","x"
"1","THE HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGER FOR THE COASTAL OCEAN (HICO) ON THE
INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION
Michael R. Carson, Daniel R. Karwan, Robert L. Lucke, William A. Snyder
Remote Sensing Division, Naval Research Laboratory, 4555 Overlook Avenue SW, Washington, DC
20375
Curtiss 0. Davis
College of Oceanic and Atmospheric Sciences, Oregon State University, 104 COAS Admin. Bldg,
Corvallis, OR 97331
ABSTRACT Which are in general not met by systems designed for land
applications.

The HICO (Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Ocean)
program is the ﬁrst demonstration of environmental
characterization of the coastal zone using a spaceborne ’
maritime hyperspectral imager. HICO is sponsored by the ""
Ofﬁce of Naval Research as an Innovative Naval Prototype
(INP), and Will demonstrate coastal products including m
water clarity, bottom types, bathymetry and on-shore
vegetation maps. As an INP, HICO Will also demonstrate E
innovative ways to reduce the cost and schedule of this
space mission by adapting proven aircraft imager . =13: \ ,
architecture and using Commercial Off—The-Shelf (COTS) 3H» “a \ B (""1"" ' ﬁt jg“: 7

' Wo—‘r-' ‘ ..._ ~\ may _' ”1'."" r Saff-
components Where poss1b1e. 4.: {g?n‘e’si .. x},\ P? '1 re“ r»:- -

:; _' -. “h 313‘}; ' _! ""T. ‘hf- ff“?
Index T erms— hyperspectral, imaging spectrometry, ' ﬂ, \ /
ocean optics, littoral, coastal ‘ ‘ _ a
1. INTRODUCTION "" "" "" i ' P H
Visible and near infrared wavelengths in the approximate Figure 1- Illustration ShQWing the Optical COmP16Xity found
range 0.4 to 0.8 microns constitute the only portion of the In th? 0035131 ocean, Pamculaﬂy When “n?gmg the bOttom-
electromagnetic spectrum that penetrates water and directly Imagmg Speammeter data are requlred. to resolve
. bathymetry, bottom type and water column optical properties
probes the water column. In the coastal enVironment Where .
. . . . at the same tlme [1].
the water contains Signiﬁcant dissolved and suspended
matter and the bottom may be Visible, the scene image is . . .
. . . . Hyperspectral imaging of the littoral zone from space
spectrally complicated requiring well-calibrated
. . . offers repeat, all-season coverage of coastal zones
hyperspectral imaging to retrieve bathymetry, bottom type, . . . .
. . . worldW1de to produce enVironmental products including
chlorophyll content, and water inherent optical properties b . .
. . athymetry, water clarity, suspended and dissolved matter,
[1]. Furthermore the coastal ocean scene is dark, With an . . .
. . . bottom type, class1ﬁcat10n of on-shore vegetation, and the
albedo of only a few percent, and from space it is Viewed . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . opportunity to build time series of images to initialize and
through the atmosphere Which is Signiﬁcantly brighter in the . . .
. . validate predictive coastal models. However, hyperspectral
V1s1b1e wavelengths than the water surface, due to scattered . . . . . .

. . . . . . imaging of the littoral enVironment involves spe01ﬁc
sunlight. These conditions impose stringent requirements h 11 f d . h 1 . . f h 1 d
for a Maritime HyperSpectral Imaging (MHSI) system C a. enges not oun 1n yperspectra imaging 0 t e an '

While land generally presents a bright, high albedo scene,
the coastal ocean has a 10W albedo and is dark. In fact,
978—1—4244—2808—3/08/$25 .00 ©2008 IEEE IV - 101 IGARSS 2008

"
"2","when a maritime scene is Viewed from a high-altitude The considerations discussed in section 1 lead to speciﬁc
aircraft or space, the scattered light from the atmosphere is performance requirements for a MHSI, including
signiﬁcantly brighter than the underlying water scene over requirements for high signal-to-noise ratio for the low
most of the Visible spectrum (Figure 2), and careful removal albedo water scene, and accurate spectral and radiometric
of the effects of the atmosphere is required to obtain calibration [3].
accurate water-leaVing radiances. Water surface reﬂections Visible radiation is the only part of the electromagnetic
of both direct sunlight and sky background are also spectrum that penetrates water to signiﬁcant depths. The
signiﬁcant and must be accounted for. The special 400 - 700 nm spectral range is used to extract information
challenges of atmospheric correction over the ocean about the in-water constituents and bathymetry and bottom
required a new approach using a full vector radiative properties. Wavelengths from 760 to 860 nm are used to
transfer model and designed speciﬁcally to deal with estimate the aerosol properties over the water for
skylight reﬂecting off of the sea surface. This atmospheric atmospheric correction. Expanding the spectral range to 380
correction algorithm was initially published in 2000 [2] and — 1000 nm will provide additional channels to improve
versions have been developed for imaging spectrometers atmospheric correction.
ﬂying at any altitude including space. Spectral absorption features of liquids and solids are on
the order of 30 to 50 nm wide in the Visible and near
infrared. Extensive experience with AVIRIS data and with
100 , 3 2 nm hand held spectrometer data has shown that 10 nm
.. 2 TOtal spectral sampling is adequate to sample and resolve these

8 c 80 0 .. coastal features [1].

g g ”z, The ocean is a dark target and a very high SNR is

""-5 E 60 ’3” required for ocean imaging. Over 90 % of the at-sensor

g L ""0.... signal for an ocean scene is from the atmosphere. Based on

(—6 (:1? 4O ”3.... % two decades of experience with airborne imaging

43 g From Surface ’1‘...“ spectrometers [4] a SNR of >200:1 for a 5%.reﬂectancoe

(D g 20 . o,” .0 target is needed for ocean scenes so that sufﬁment SNR is

(3' V oWWm..o~ WW ”3 left after atmospheric correction to resolve ocean features.

0 ’ ”’3... The sky is highly polarized, and the polarization is
dependent on the sun elevation and azimuthal angle, the

0-4 0-6 0-8 1 Viewing geometry, wind speed and the amount of aerosols.
Wave|ength (microns) Although ocean measurenoients. are made at angles to avoid

Figure 2. Spectral radiance modeled (using MODTRAN) direct sun glint, some skylight is always reﬂected off the. sea

spectral radiance above the atmosphere for 5% surface albedo surface Into the sensor. TO avmd errors from polarized

and 45 degree solar zenith angle. In the blue wavelengths, the Skylight polarization sensitivity should be < 5% [5]

atmosphere (total minus surface) is signiﬁcantly brighter than The required Ground Sample Distance (GSD) depends

the surface. on the application. Extensive requirement studies including
Navy, NCAA and other users has determined that 100 m
The spatial scale 0f littoral hyperspectral imaging is GSD is required for many coastal applications including:

also signiﬁcantly different from that often required for land

applications. Hyperspectral imaging over land often - 2.5a Regional High Resolution Weather Impacted

requires a Ground Sample Distance (GSD) on the order of Imagery

meters, comparable to the size of man-made objects. For . 2.8 Shallow Water Bathymetry

practical spaceborne hyperspectral imagers, this small GSD . 2913 Coastal Ocean Color

leads to limitations on the .size of the scene that can be . 2101) Coastal Ocean Chlorophyll

imaged. In contrast, a Signiﬁcantly larger GSD of tens of . 2111) Coastal Ocean Optical Properties

meters, comparable to the spatial resolution of harbor charts, . 2.12 Bioluminescence Potential

is often satisfactory for environmental characterization of . 2.13 Littoral Sediment Transport (supporting)

the coastal zone because of the larger spatial scale of

environmental features. This larger GSD makes possible [6,7]. When the bottom is imaged the 100 m data will

scene sizes of thousands of square kilometers required to provide a useful product, but for many applications, such as

capture the scale 0f coastal dynamics. bathymetry, a higher resolution on the order of the 30 m
used for harbor charts is required.

2- COASTAL IMAGER DESIGN REQUIREMENTS To provide high quality data there is an additional set of
performance parameters that will be measured to evaluate
system performance. These parameters including MTF,

IV - 102

"
"3","stray light, saturation levels, and long term stability will be — Required to ﬁt image data to physical
measured and the performance accepted as measured. Any models to retrieve environmental data
problems that are identiﬁed will be corrected to the extent products
possible in the processing software. This is the approach - Polarization sensitivity: 5% or less
used with the airborne prototype for HICO the Portable — To preserve radiometric accuracy when
Hyperspectral Imager for Low-Light Spectroscopy observing polarized scene
(PHILLS) [8] which has resulted in high quality data. - Scene size: 50 X 200 km (nominal)
— Appropriate for coastal scene sizes
3. THE HICO PROGRAM - On-orbit lifetime: one year minimum
— Required to collect data over all seasons
The goal of the HICO program is to launch and operate the
ﬁrst spaceborne coastal Maritime Hyperspectral Imager There are many possible products from imaging
(MHSI). An MSHI is designed to have the high Signal-to- spectrometry data. For HICO we plan to demonstrate water
Noise Ratio (SNR) required for dark coastal scenes. It inherent optical properties, colored dissolved organic
captures large scenes at moderate spatial resolution matter, Chlorophyll, suspended sediments, and bathymetry
appropriate for the coastal ocean. HICO is designed to have and bottom—type mapping. These products will be
high sensitivity in the blue and full coverage of water- incorporated into seasonal dynamical models for
penetrating and near IR wavelengths representative coastal types worldwide.
A major goal of the HICO Program is to demonstrate
the scientiﬁc and naval utility of MHSI data from space. 3.2 HICO as an Innovative Naval Prototype
HICO data will be used to derive bathymetry, water optical
properties, bottom type, and terrain and vegetation maps for HICO is an Innovative Naval Prototype (INP) sponsored by
coastal areas of interest around the world. HICO is planned the Ofﬁce of Naval Research. In 2005, the Ofﬁce of Naval
to operate for at least a year to provide an annual time series Research (ONR) and the Naval Research laboratory (NRL)
of these products for the development of coastal models for began a program to design, build, and operate the ﬁrst
selected sites. spaceborne hyperspectral imagers optimized for the coastal
HICO is also an Innovative Naval Prototype. As ocean. This transition to space platforms is founded on
discussed below in section 3.2 HICO will demonstrate new more than a decade of airborne hyperspectral imaging
and innovative ways to develop and build the imaging experience at NRL and other laboratories, which provides
payload to reduce cost and shorten the time to launch. The the basis for imager performance requirements and
goal is to serve as an innovative pathﬁnder for future algorithms for atmospheric removal and littoral product
spaceborne hyperspectral imagers retrievals [4,5].
Wherever possible HICO uses Commercial Off-The-
3.1 HICO on-orbit imaging system performance Shelf (COTS) components (Figure 4) this includes the
camera, computer and rotation stage. To facilitate this
HICO was designed to meet the requirements as outlined in approach hermetic enclosures are used for the camera,
section 2. These are the key HICO measured and planned computers and electronics (Figure 3). This enables the use
performance:
- Ground Sample Distance: 100 m at nadir .
— Sufﬁcient for many coastal environmental seagzrgirgggure - ./~
features - ‘
- Spectral coverage: 0.38 to 1.0 microns \; .
— Includes all water-penetrating \ '
wavelengths ﬂ: % .
- Spectral binning: 0.0057 microns spectral bin 3 \ .. .
width W ‘ .
— Sufﬁcient to resolve spectral features in ‘\
coastal scenes
- Signal-to-Noise Ratio: greater than 200 to 1 for . Imaging
. . Rotation Stage . line
water-penetrating wavelengths, assuming 5 percent Point line ofsight of sight
effective surface albedo and 0.011 micron spectral
bins
— Required for sufﬁcient residual Signal to Figure 3. An engineering model of HICO. HICO is shown in
noise after atmospheric correction the imaging position.
- Radiometric accuracy: 5% or better
IV — 103

"
"4","0f ruggedized aircraft components and modern computers Scheduled Milestones:
that might not be space qualiﬁed for years greatly reducing HICO test readiness review - June 16, 2008
the cost and time to complete the instrument package. HICO delivery to combined payload September 1, 2008
Payload delivery to JAXA - February 16, 2009
3.3 HICO 0n the International Space Station Launch to International Space Station - July 9, 2009
On-orbit checkout complete - September 25, 2009
HICO is integrated and ﬂown under the direction of DoD’s
Space Test Program. HICO is combined with a second ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
NRL experimental payload the Remote Atmospheric and
Ionospheric Detection System (RAIDS) [9] to form the HICO is made possible by a talented and dedicated team.
HICO RAIDS Experiment Package (HREP). HREP will be We gratefully acknowledge funding from ONR and funding
attached to the Japanese Experiment Module-Exposed and technical support from the Space Test Program.
Facility (JEM-EF) in the International Space Station (188) Without their support and the cooperation and support from
where it will operate independently of the astronaut activity NASA and the J apanese Space Agency JAXA this program
inside the station. would not be possible.
HICO is manifested for July 2009 launch on the H2
Transfer Vehicle (HTV) from Tanegashima, Japan. The REFERENCES
HTV docks with the JEM and then a mechanical arm will [1] Z. P. Lee, and K. L. Carder., “Effects of spectral-band
transfer HREP and attach it to the JEM-EF (Figure 4). number on retrievals of water column and bottom properties
from ocean-color data”, Appl. Opt., 41, pp. 2191-2201, 2002.
——.. . _ l'I—‘f—_ l _ 4f [2] B.-C.Gao, M. J. Montes, Z. Ahmad, and C. 0. Davis, “An
a . . ' II :1.- -I _ a -. atmospheric correction algorithm for hyperspectral remote
I _-_:__ ' _ J. W sensing of ocean color from space,” Appl. Opt. 39(6): 887-
11:11.: *1""; ‘1 h ""It i. 1 [3] C. 0. Davis and K. L. Carder. 1997. “Requirements Driven
—_ i: __ I Design of an Imaging Spectrometer System for
' ﬁg“ ""' ‘ Characterization of the Coastal Environment”, Proceedings of
""'---.. ""--.._ 41......_. ___ .- Ii. ' 3"" the SPIE, Imaging Spectrometry III, 3118: 322-329 (1997).
- . . *r 3.5;""- [4] C. 0. Davis, K. L. Carder, B-C Gao, Z. P Lee and W. P.
I' 1 # 4:7"" ' Bissett, 2006, The Development of Imaging Spectrometry of
J"" h-i- _ ___ ""i55- . the Coastal Ocean, IEEE Proceedings of the International
r- ‘ _W‘:* ‘1 Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, V. 4: 1982-
'. _ #45“: «av. a ﬁzg"" 1985. _ _
u 7"". - 'h' __. [5] H. R. Gordon,, T. Du and T. Zhang, “Atmospheric correctlon
. __ ' - I of ocean color sensors: analysis of the effects of residual
instrument polarization sensitivity”, Applied Optics. 36(27):
6938-6948 (1997).
Figure 4. The Japanese Experiment Module (JEM) 0n the [6] NPOESS: Integrated Operational Requirements Document, 10
International Space Station. The arrow indicates Where the Dec 2001.
HICO and RAIDS Experiment Package (HREP) will be [7] J. D. Cunningham, D. Chambers, C. 0. Davis, A. Gerber, R.
attached to the JEM External Facility. Helz, J . P. McGuire and W. Pichel, “Ocean Observer Study:
A proposed National Asset to augment the future U. S.
HICO is on schedule for the July 2009 launch to the Operational Satellite System”, MT S Journal, 37 (3): 142-157
International Space Station. The program began in early (2003) _
2006 and is progressing on a very rapid schedule as listed [8] C' 0' Dams» BOWICS’ 1» Leathers» R' A” Korwan, D'»
b e1 OW. Downes, T. V., Snyder, W. A., Rhea, W. J ., Chen, W., Flsher,
J., Bissett, W. P., and Reisse, R. A., ""Ocean PHILLS
. Hyperspectral Imager: Design, Characterization, and
ComPleFed MllesftoneS‘ . Calibration"", Optics Express, 10(4), 210—221 (2002).
MISSIOH Reqmrements RGVIGW - February 28, 2006 [9] R. P. McCoy, Wolfram, K. D., Meier, R. R., Paxton, L. J.,
Mission Requirements Document - March 16, 2006 Cleary, D. D., Prinz, D. K., Anderson, D. E., Christensen, A.
HICO manifested on Space Station-March 2007 B., Pranke, J., Sivjee, G. G., and Kayser, D., ""Remote
Preliminary Design Review _ June 18, 2007 Atmospheric And Ionospheric Detection System"" in
Critical Design Review _ November 89 2007 Ultraviolet T echnolog., held in San Diego, CA, SPIE, 1986.
HICO imager delivery - May 30, 2008
IV — 104

"
