"","x"
"1","_"" ""—m
Hyperspectral Imaging of Coastal Regions from the ISS
Todd J . Mosher, Megan L. Mitchell
Utah State University, 4130 Old Main Hill, Logan, UT, USA 84322
Paul Lucey, Eric Hochberg
University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, USA 96822
ABSTRACT
The Hyperspectral Imager for Coastal Oceans (HICO) sensor system, integrated in the International Space Station
([88) Window Observational Research Facility (WORF), will collect visible and short-wave inﬁared hyperspectral
data that will provide the following characterization of coastal regions:
- Determine water clarity and visibility, shallow water bathymetry, and
bottom type composition.
- Detect underwater obstructions and characterize beaches and coastal areas.
- Research global properties of coral reefs, the maritime atmosphere and
determine global distribution of ﬁres and active volcanoes in the context
of mitigating natural hazards.
It will achieve these objectives by collecting hyperspectral imaging data for over 70% of the Earth's surface, the
portion ﬂown over by ISS, at a spatial resolution of 25 meters. The desired data will be obtained using the Naval
Research Lab (NRL) Portable Hyperspectral Imager for Low Light SpectrOSCOpy (PHILLS—3) sensor with a
pointing and stabilization system and then later integrating it with a short-wave infrared hyperspectral imager.
Keywords: Hyperspectral imaging, International Space Station, WORF, PHILLS, HICO
1. INTRODUCTION
The application of hyperspectral imaging for Earth remote sensing has been realized in the past few decades. The
limitation of airborne vehicles has transitioned hyperspectral imaging onto spacebome systems. Military and
civilian applications for remote sensing of coastal regions have increased the demand for such systems. The limited
knowledge of the world’s coastline has led to a military demand for characterization of the littoral battlespace.
Naval requirements for charting coastal waters include knowledge of water depth, shore traﬁcability and in-water
visibility for safe ingress and egress of combat areas. Similarly, civilian research interests lie in enhancing the
understanding of the maritime atmosphere and properties of coral reefs throughout the world, as well as tracking the
distribution of volcanic activity, ﬁre assessment, pollution dispersal and monitoring of wildlife and vegetation
conditions.
The major advancements in hyperspectral imaging technologies have made high-resolution broadband imaging
spectroscopy a powerful tool for remote sensing. While requirements such as ﬁeld of view (FOV), wavelength and
resolution speciﬁcations vary per the application, these systems can utilize commerciaI-off-the-shelf (COTS)
components, creating modular inexpensive systems. Missions such as the NASA EO-l satellite Hyperion
hyperspectral imager have demonstrated the capabilities of hyperspectral imaging ﬁom space. Unfortunately most
current hyperspectral imagers are not optimized for coastal applications. Hyperspectral imaging provides the only
capable means for characterization of coastal regions, since visible radiation is the only portion of the
electromagnetic spectrum capable of penetrating water]. The spectral properties of water and in-water constituents
such as phytoplankton and bottom-type characterization require high signal-to-noise ratios (SNR) especially in the
blue part of the spectrum. The advantage of hyperspectral imaging over multispectral images is that the numerous
bands (200+) of data collection enable a continuous reﬂectance spectrum for each pixel that makes up the scene.
Hyperspectral images can discriminate characteristics of Earth features such as reﬂectance and absorption that leads
to detailed identiﬁcation of materials and the abundance, which cannot be identiﬁed with conventional multispectral
imagerss.
The lack of knowledge of coastal regions around the world is a product of the access limitations of aircraft as well
as minimal seasonal data. Airborne imagers have been used to develop and verify algorithms for atmospheric
Ebys MATERlAL MAY BE PROTECTED BY U5 Active and Passive Remote Sensing of the Oceans, edited by
COPYRlGHT LAW ‘ Robert J. Frouin, Hiroshi Kawamura. Delu Pan, Prpc. of SPIE Vol. 5656
REQU (T lTLE US CODE 17), TW'E- Bellingham, WA, 2005) . 0277-786X/05/$15 - dOI: 10.1117/12.579767
ESTER IS LlABLE FOR lNFRlNGEMEiif-s'”
i‘.:-"".~-,-.I*‘égsjrészzzzf: ?‘2‘632’3'2 {.LL-s::;i?;3:. 2253-722; 7:23 1-: E‘Jfa ‘.2-‘.:‘l}’: 12‘. 453:3 ??:ﬁii 5’11” '53? ""‘~.a>:;r:.<-' :13? ~ii;-:-:-,-'.-* ?‘sgtﬁ,

"
"2","correction and ocean products, which will be modified for spacebome systems. The global coverage provided by

satellite missions will help provide extended time series data sets for numerous sites around the world.

The 188 provides global coverage encompassing all of the Earth’s coral reefs. The 51.6 degree inclination and

average altitude of 390m provide nearly 3 day repeat ground track coverage and repeat lighting conditions every 3

months. The pressurized environment of the ISS and crew support that is available for a payload in the WORF

makes the 188 more favorable than a free-ﬂying satellite for this validation effort. Taking advantage of the 185 as a

resource for remote Earth sensing will be advantageous for substantiation between the spacebome data and past

airborne imaging efforts and algorithms. Verifying the effectiveness of this system from the 188 will help promote
the value of a dedicated space platform for Earth hyperspectral imaging.

In order to satisfy both civilian and military interests, collaborations between the Naval Research Laboratory
(NRL), University of Hawaii (UH) and Utah State University (USU) have led to the Hyperspectral Imager for
Coastal Oceans (HlCO) program. HICO will place two sensors that will operate for up to 12 months, in the ISS
WORF facility, and will cover the ultraviolet, visible and short-wave infrared (UV-VIS-SWIR) spectrum. The
Portable Hyperspectral Imager for Low Light Spectroscopy (PHILLS) sensor will be provided by NRL for the ﬁrst
phase of the HICO program. A second sensor from UH, the Mars Alteration Hyperspectral Imager (MAHI) is a
planetary science imager which will be modified for use on the ISS. HICO will demonstrate the utility of space
based hyperspectral imaging for both civilian and military needs.

2. MILITARY APPLICATIONS
The requirements involved with a Naval hyperspectral space based system revolve around the safe ingress and
egress of uncharted beach areas to attain a combat target. Being able to assess shallow water bathymetry, water
clarity and visibility in addition to detecting underwater obstructions are important aspects that characterize military
needs from a program such as HICO. The necessity of comprehensive coverage emphasizes the need for a space
system with global reach. Military systems need 30 meter or better resolution in order to identify navigation hazards
such as coral reefs, kelp beds, rocks or manmade obj ects. The HICO sensors will provide up to 25 m resolution.
3. CIVILIAN APPLICATIONS

The primary civilian goal of HICO is to provide a uniform, global, representative database for coral reef health from
a single instrument. These data will be used to answer speciﬁc environmental questions on the ratios of coral, algae
and sand with respect to geographical limits, regional oceanography, reef morphology, seasonality and human use
patterns and impacts. Resource managers and scientists will use these summary data and maps to assess reef
function, status and health.

In recent decades the health of coral reefs throughout the ocean have been at risk due to global warming, pollution,
and destructive human activities. Covering nearly 4 million acres of the sea ﬂoor throughout the oceans across the
world, coral reefs provide shelter, food and breeding grounds to millions of species of ﬁsh and invertebrates. Linked
to human activities, the degradation of the reefs is a critical issue that is poorly understood. At the current
destruction rate it is estimated that by 2020 approximately 75% of the Earth’s reefs will be signiﬁcantly destroyed.
Current efforts such as HICO are being made to better understand and preserve these complex ecosystems.
Coral reefs not only provide shelter for ﬁsh, the reefs offer food (animal protein) for island residents around the
world, they act as a barrier ﬁ'om the breaking waves that would otherwise erode shorelines, and they also bring
millions of dollars to the tourist economy in hundreds of island communities. Requiring moderately temperate clean
clear water, the pollution that riddles many coastlines around the world is threatening these fragile ecosystems.
Sediment runoffs from on-shore construction can hamper reef productivity by blocking the sunlight that the reefs
require for photosynthesis for many of the symbiotic algae that are crucial to reef survival. Drastic highs and lows
in water salinity or temperature can also cause coral “bleaching.” Coral reefs can become “stressed” as water
temperature increases, and consequently the coral will expel the algae (zooxanthellae) upon which they survive. The
algae provide nutrients and food to the coral through photosynthesis while the coral supply the algae with essential
compounds such as ammonia and phosphate. Research has determined that bleaching can occur in as little as two
days if water temperature is raised 5-7 degrees Fahrenheit. Unfortunately, reefs are even more sensitive to slight

Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5656 129

"
"3","-——m
temperature ﬂuctuations (as little as 2 degrees) over several weeksé. The effects of global warming are apparent.
The death of the coral reefs will lead to extinction to over a million species within the next forty years7.

The impetus for this civilian application is that reef “health” is reducible to a quantitative measure. When corals die
their skeletons are rapidly colonized by algae; thus the amount of coral relative to algae is a measure of reef health.
Healthy reefs usually increase in coral coverage during recovery from stress, with coral often returning to the pre-
disturbance level”. In contrast, degraded reefs gradually become dominated by algae and rubble, with little or no
recovery of coral after disturbances. Thus, a key quantitative parameter to assess the health of a reef is the
distribution of living coral, algae and sand. Such a quantitative index can be effectively utilized to evaluate the
relative impacts of natural phenomena and human activities to reef communities. The relative distribution of coral,
algae and sand also allows for straightforward estimates of productivity using concepts of standard metabolic rates
for reef community types”. These techniques, with the aid of remote sensing imagery, have already been employed
to estimate the distribution of living resources and their carbon requirements in multiple case studies”’ 14.
There are three common methods for determining benthic cover on coral reefs: l) site-speciﬁc (1—10 m scale) photo
transects with quadrants, producing details on species composition; 2) community-scale (10-100 m) visual or video
transects; and 3) the reef-scale (100+ m) manta-tow which entails towing a diver on a sled behind a boat. The ﬁrst
two methods produce statistically rigorous results. The manta-tow is subjective, because the diver takes a guess at
bottom cover of coral, algae and sand, recording the data at intervals. The manta—tow is the accepted standard for
Global Coral Reef Monitoring Network”. Video transects are used in ﬁve regions, covering less than a km2 of
actual reef world-wide, and have an accuracy of 10% coral cover. Manta—tows are used in ~100 sites and directly
cover tens of km2 world-wide, with representative threshold categories of 10% coral cover. There are about 9,000
reefs in the world, covering 500,000 kmz. Current techniques are incapable of measuring global distributions of
coral, algae and sand.
The HICO goal is to measure the distribution of coral, algae and sand on 25% or more of the world’s coral reefs
(~2,300) with accuracies comparable to in-water surveys. This mission will increase the number of reefs surveyed
by more than an order of magnitude, and it will increase the world—wide total surveyed reef area by three orders of
magnitude. These data will be used to pursue the following objectives:
- Determine the coral/algae/sand ratios in pristine reefs versus human impacted reefs.
- Determine how coral/algae/sand ratios vary with reef morphology, underlying geology, latitude, seasonality,
disturbance events, and oceanographic conditions of wind, waves, and nutrients.
- Determine the spatial scales of responses in coral/algae/sand ratios to environmental changes.
- Develop appropriate indices for these ratios to help regional and local monitoring efforts.
- Determine how coral/algae/sand ratios interact with centers of coral diversity.
- Advise managers, locally and internationally, regarding how to respond to regional and local changes in reef
composition.
- Show how global space-based data can alter local perception of problems and help with management efforts.
- Determine how series of regional reefs add to regional productivity and recruitment to ﬁsheries.
0 Identify reefs that are excellent for more intensive monitoring and scientiﬁc investigation.
- Determine how coral/algae/sand are distributed in response to impacts from localized sedimentation, runoff
and nutrients.
- Provide input to hydrodynamic and biogeochemical models for reef function, and aid existing monitoring
programs.
- Identify speciﬁc, abnormal reef environments, either by reef morphology or coral/algae/sand index ratios.
0 Support many small scale existing studies. Available data will allow local scale studies to be put in a larger
context through large data-bases.
The ability to discriminate coral, algae and sand relies on the spectral distinctiveness of these bottom types.
Research has shown that coral, algae and sand have the clear potential to be mapped from spacelf” 17‘ 18. First, a very
high albedo easily distinguishes sand from the darker coral and algae. Second, corals have a unique spectral feature
near 570 nm, providing ready discrimination from algae and other reef bottom—types. Both of these features are
ubiquitous in a world-wide library of ~13,000 individual reﬂectance spectra.
130 Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5656
2 frzgsr'i‘s / if,';-;»:.j;a?:2§ ' (.1??.-‘3?'}‘ rzrs L‘r-é z ?:3- $53.2?Z'i}! :3? 12;. 3’ r« 1122‘ Use ?:i:;t<‘uﬁ

"
"4","Hyperspectal imaging from space will provide a means for detecting subtle changes in reef matter that would
otherwise be overlooked by the naked eye. Early detection of problems will enable preventative measures to protect
the reefs before it’s too late. The hyperspectral images can be used to produce maps of reef communities, for
analysis of near real time variations in the reef substrate. The narrow bands of light used for this type of imaging
will help with differentiation of reef communities (live coral and algae) and aquatic vegetation (grass beds) from
pollution and other water characteristics. A hyperspectral image of Kaneohe Bay is shown in Figures 1 & 2. Figure
l is a product of the AVIRIS hyperspectral imager subsetted for the wavebands from .4 -1 pm (65 total wavebands),
which is roughly equivalent to the range of PHILLS. Figure 2 is a classiﬁcation of Figure l.
{/y‘
- «49”»:
- . “t
' 4M ,4 9 ‘Nz‘in’w
”V“ "" 4 ' ""9 99
,, ~. aﬁwk ,4 I C "" ”iii
3“ 9,4239% 4,5?“ A ~
2* imfl tttﬂ¢t -- .9 ' _.
”‘9‘ a I ‘i ' . V "" 53*
‘ 5‘“ 99998? L 9 W * UNCLASSIFIED 9'9 "" ,
fa 4:1“ ”€3,414 £3 ORAL-domlmted
9"" .-- ,. m .I aaoon .
#29:; 9N 4 4&1”; Terrlgenous mud - domlnated ‘
‘ 9 ”‘“’ .,9. 9,1?"" I amonale sand-domlnated
9 - '324' "" 3"""" ﬂ -lgae-domlnated
, s ?teﬁ-DeeOcean
4
Figure 1. Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii, hyperspectral image from AVIRIS. Figure 2. Classification of the products in Figure 1.
One key feature to notice about these images is the cloud coverage that can be seen in Figure 1, results in the loss of
data in the classiﬁcation image of Figure 2. Classiﬁcations such as Figure 2 are difﬁcult to accurately verify, but are
a useful resource for providing information on in-water constituents for research purposes.
4. HICO SYSTEM
The HICO Program originally developed from two programs. The ﬁrst was a joint program between the Ofﬁce of
Naval Research (ONR) and the Space Technology Development Corporation (STDC) to create the Naval Eatth
Map Observer (NEMO) satellite. Using the Coastal Ocean Imaging Spectrometer (COIS) to fulﬁll naval
requirements for obtaining ocean hyperspectral imagery. The mission was cancelled in 2002 due to inadequate
commercial funding; however military and civilian needs still existed. In the meantime NRL proposed ﬂying the
PHILLS sensor on the 188 as a validation effort for the C018 system. The PHILLS sensor covers the visible and
near-infrared (VNIR) bandwidths from the C018 imager (capable of imaging in the .4 «2.5um spectral range.)
UH was simultaneously developing a Coral Reef Ecosystem Spectro-Photometric Observatory (CRESPO) for a
NASA Earth Sciences University Earth System Science (UnESS) program. When the program was cancelled by
NASA to address over runs in other Emth Science programs, NRL and UH along with USU combined efforts and
resources to create the HICO program.
4.1 188 Orbit
The 188 provides a suitable orbit for performing remote Earth sensing. Orbiting at a 51.6 degree inclination with 3
day revisit periods and 3 month repeat lighting conditions, the [88 covers 95% of the Earth’s population and 75% of
the land mass. A ﬁgure of the ground track of the ISS and several coral reef locations throughout the world can be
seen in Figure 3. The majority of the world’s coral reefs are located within the i: 30 degree latitudes, which makes
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5656 131
21';-'::-r=:e""zé=.;»:3-’.%a52<:: fizz»??? 5.83/71; 4 extras; (31"": 23!: :‘zﬁzrg :‘.‘i=’.’)’§ :‘5’. $4.; riff: 2‘22? 1.14:, 14-3313; «:3 1,152? gu‘ mg:;.~'€<=4z'rrs;;

"
"5","the ISS orbit advantageous for the HICO program. The ISS offers a shirt-sleeve environment with crew support for
operating and maintaining the sensors for this validation effort.

""5§3§%§»‘§:‘“¥:TFWIV»‘ HT“ ""w A::“., -ti‘uy‘lﬂ. 1.3""”

A .3”? * J V1.51"", “w

""L3H ~92: ’ é"": '_ VV (vi * sz

” ‘33 _ QM {ry—wk’"" V ,, stx

§?i‘,,'r"""""" V, l}...~..l..‘...§___l-~1""J:V;: “‘1'“.er {5""""JV’;""""'E:~,:,,'¢1' “Z.""wfri‘ '. '1‘ ‘j.-“- . 0.)], \«V-M..,J “4 5'3””! 11“- . ~‘

?\ﬁtdiﬂwﬁg; ~V _. _ ~75"". . xv; M7515; E&w‘ \""W-i—Av'“. :3 ﬂ.“ .

x f, 0"" . . ’N,‘ ‘55:)? “""534326HR - L), = V \|\ 5x“. 1‘ Hf"". ""2;“ Vt?"" {7r ' :

""Vi ' Fq’ , A‘s“. ' V ""’ i \“1’ m""? i ??”“x/E 1‘3 5”“! a

-. . . , Cc: \ .- ‘T'B-v‘WT‘n,‘ , ' V f! .. \ng ‘3‘) x’ﬂig‘ V V, «\k

, . _ 5 ' - . ’5'] V - $»..,_N_V '. . {x , 5:7 . ‘9th574"";”0»‘1th%324w .‘5

é ' x ,2 ‘ t. f r g, t 3

Figure 3. The ISS ground trace over the world. The red shapes represent coral reef regions.
The misconception concerning the ISS regards the stability of the orbit. The ISS experiences signiﬁcant 10-20km
altitude variations in a typical daily orbit. In order to conduct useful remote sensing, a thorough understanding of
the ISS orbit is required. For HICO an orbital analysis of the ISS has been conducted to verify target acquisition
feasibility as well as to create mission planning capabilities. Using the Satellite Orbit Analysis Program (SOAP)
created by The Aerospace Corporation simulations of the ISS orbit have been derived and compared to NASA
produced prediction trajectories of the ISS. The NASA predictions have been used to verify the utility of such
forecasts for ﬁJture mission planning purposes. The paper “An Orbital Analysis for Performing Remote Sensing
from the International Space Station” prepared for the 15th AAS/AIAA Space Flight Mechanics Meeting in January
2005 will provide more detail on this research.
The ISS analyses have conﬁrmed the necessity of a pointing and control system for the HICO program due to the
lack of coral reef viewing opportunities without such a system. The number of remote sensing opportunities (in a
year) from the ISS is on the order of a hundred or more with average access intervals of 70 seconds. These analyses
were conducted for the year of 2002 in order to more accurately simulate the ISS orbit as it is expected to have in
2006. The year 2002 was the last year that the Space Shuttle regularly performed maintenance and reboost
maneuvers on the ISS. The mean altitude of the ISS in 2002 can be viewed in Figure 4.
One viewing constraint that must be taken into account when using the ISS for remote sensing is attitude
maneuvers. The typical conﬁguration that the station ﬂies in is the Local Vertical Local Horizontal (LVLH)
reference frame. The LVLH reference frame aligns the z-axis with the Earth center of mass (nadir) and either the x
or y-axis near the positive velocity vector. This is the optimal conﬁguration for remote sensing, as the Destiny
window is nearly always nadir pointing. For solar array charging purposes the ISS will ﬂy in the X-axis
Perpendicular to Orbital Plane (XPOP) reference frame. This quasi-inertial reference frame limits Earth viewing
opportunities as the x-axis is pointed at the Sun.
Several other viewing constraints include docking maneuvers, weather statistics and lighting conditions. When
vehicles dock with the station the window shutter is in place to avoid contamination of the panes by the propellant.
Conditions including the sun glint at targets and cloud cover will also limit imaging opportunities.
132 Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5656
x;;~;¥té;‘;a<:is.=:zzé t 1315“???» 5:35;; 3: é :""».«""é;33‘ ff??? :23: re.) riff: 23:1»? 3.~/ .: 17:53:21 ~.::-‘ 1333?. ?‘sV‘metu>

"
"6","KILMTIRS
“’5 w*“‘M““?""W*MWWW*MT'“WWWW” : =
‘00 .i&+..;
./ “k.
395 , {EH . , , ,’ é¢1 . ii , \ t
.I' x
335 {1 .. . ‘2’ fl, ‘, . .. i 1 ; .. < . .
I = I:
‘-:.,-' I
:II
1_ :.‘ - ' 3 'N ; '1 9' : E 5 E 5 f 5 3
i; .i = : :' ‘2 3 i i 2' z
390 I .. . .,* v d,
1 :
:
31 5 .....................“n...“immmm......“........5..........t...mm.m..i.~.............,...............i.............................i.........“..............MiW...m.........,......§....................2..“mi.....................Wi.mm..mm-.ih.mwmm
O 36 . 667 73 . 333 110 19‘ . 6'1 183 . 33 220
13 . 333 88 91. 66"" 12B . 33 165 203.. 61
T1"". in DAYS
F igure 4. Mean Altitude 0f the 188 over 2002.
4.2 Destiny Window
The nadir pointing Destiny window on the 188 has been described as the best optical quality window to ever ﬂy.
The four paned window was calibrated and veriﬁed with greater than 95% transmittance for the visible bandwidths
and greater than 60% transmittance for infrared bandwidths“. The window is composed of an interior “scratch” pane
(l 1.4mm-borsilicate), which serves as protection for the two inner redundant pressure panes (31.75mm-fused silica)
and the outer “debris” pane (9.6mm—fused silica) protects the window from micrometeoroids and debris. When the
window is not in use an external shutter is situated on the outer window surface, while an internal pressure cover
provides a shield to the window from inside the station. With a 508mm diameter, the window can support
instruments and sensor with apertures of up to 350mm. Figure 5 displays an isometric view of the Destiny window.
| N B OARD
gym? Internal Pressure
% t , MM C 0v er
ﬂﬁymmﬁwmkﬁn
Scratch Pane ——u“ 3?:
‘5: wad?”
.;¢: * i
. ‘3‘; _ war. Pressure Panes
Debris Panexi‘
'33 D estiny 2W
Module Hu II “*wzm’gaj— Shutter Ha ndwh eel
«@{me’
/"" ‘ “14— Extern al Shutter
Extern al Pre ssu re . ""
C 0:; er
OU TBOARD
Figure 5. An isometric expanded view of the Destiny windows.
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5656 133
:‘.’;~r.:~..-::I:;s:.:;3::5,=2: ° ’ €"".L'::I.;Iirez:é 7.25722 32 :12"": 2-”- 35233; :fiiffz‘sjf. ""3 =38 2236.3 1” 7:1»: i'I,>::'::-=.t :3? 1:12.22: ?:?.?g‘s.555293-2-‘4f3.{gz‘ggﬁtigInna»:

"
"7","4.3 WORF
Based on a modiﬁed EXPRESS (Expediting the Process of Experiments to the Space Station) rack, the WORF will
provide the necessary mechanical mounting structure, electrical power, cooling and data communication between
the sensor payload and 188. While similar to the experiment racks currently in place on the station, the WORF has
been modiﬁed to support sensors in the inner volume, which consists of a cubic-meter sized void. In order to
optimize viewing conditions there is a black shroud in place over the outer opening, which allows a crew member to
perform adjustments to a payload in the WORF without inadvertently admitting 1i ght into the area. The inside of the
payload volume is painted with a non—reﬂective ﬂat black paint to minimize any additional stray lights. A view of
the WORF rack is shown in Figure 6.
‘ £323
WORF Avionics ix‘vf ‘};
__ i I -J \.ﬁ""'?
FrontConnectorF’anel Q1, "" ' V
ﬁii-iitjjm i ’
ll’e / \
' i M «r _- 2
.. m_Jkﬁgg . Destmy Mudute
:23? ScienceWindow
Aisle / '5”;
Side ’3‘ #7
Hatch é WORF Rack External
2’"" Composite Structure
WORF Payload
Volume
Figure 6. The WORF rack (isometric view) with respect to the Destiny windows.
4.4 Sensors
The PHILLS sensor is a pushbroom sensor capable of imaging the wavelength bands ﬁom .4 to 1pm with 10 nm
spectral binning and 200 to l SNRZ. The sensor has been developed to address the typical limitations of traditional
hyperspectral imagers. To reduce the excessive amount of data produced without degrading the spectral signatures,
an Optical Real-time Adaptive Signature Identiﬁcation System (ORASIS) was developed with PHILLS. The
ORASIS system sequentially analyzes the spectrum of each pixel in a scene and discards any duplicate spectra,
therefore analyzing unique spectra only through subpixel spectral demixing and extraction of distinctive features.
The system is low cost with nearly all COTS components and a wide range of system parameters. With the high
resolution and frame rate of the PHILLS sensor a powerful Digital Signal Processor (DSP) is used in series with the
ORASIS system. Fully adaptive endmember determination and real time unmixing can be performed on the raw
sensor data. The PHILLS sensor has been optimized for ocean imaging with a high SNR in the .4 - 1pm wavelength
range, with high quantum efﬁciency in the blue (.4 2 4.5pm)‘.
The sensor collects images through the spectrometer entrance slit which is oriented perpendicular to the direction of
motion. The light then disperses onto a charge coupled device (CCD), which builds the image line by line
representing each spectral point as a spectrum”. Figures 7 and 8 show the NRL PHILLS-3 sensor and a SWIR
sensor.
The SWIR sensor is a shortwave IR hyperspectral imager in the 1-2.5 micron wavelength range. It utilizes a 1024 x
1024 MCT FPA set up as a 1024 pixel pushbroom scanner with 1024 wavebands per pixel. Resolution is 40 m and
the sensor uses an integral Stirling cooler.
-‘ : i ’ i’ .. I ‘ ~ . ""éizzizxs 2*?
Figure 7. PHILLS-3 Sensor system Figure 8. SWIR system similar to MAHI
134 Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5656
2,249.2:‘.L2‘£""I‘i:£;i-:.>E ‘ 33335;?- e 1 .. '3;';:~;:‘~,; 1:22 25 E37713»; :2? ts: 115;"": 2133': .;.Ll"" ’.""€>:':?:s'- :11? {£5.25} 253;}.3.55;;‘toicz'siﬁé,Li;z‘:j;¢?é;?'r""='z.:=;

"
"8","4.5 Algorithms
Many algorithms for hyperspectral imagers have been developed based on collected aircraft data, which will
provide a foundation for the necessary spaceborne evaluation. The extended lifetime for data collection will
produce numerous viewing condition challenges. Validations will be used from airborne data that has determined
characteristics such as the emissivity, reﬂectance and transmissivity of water images. The existing PHILLS baseline
algorithms will be evaluated to determine which are the most suitable for processing the spaceborne data. Continued
testing and evaluation of these algorithms will take place throughout the HICO program.
NRL has developed an atmospheric compensation algorithm known as Taikaag. Taking position, time, viewing
geometry, sensor altitude, surface elevation and ozone amounts as inputs, Tafkaa yields an atmospherically
corrected model. Several diﬁerent approaches are used for determining bottom type and bathymetry algorithms for
different water types”).
4.6 Pointing and Control System
A pointing control system (PCS) is required for the PHILLS sensor due to limitation on the SNR and frame rate of
the sensor. The ground speed of the ISS is approximately 7,250 m/s, which would require a frame rate of 290
frames per second to achieve the 25m2 ground samples. Combined with an unacceptable SNR due to short
integration times, ground motion compensation (GMC) is required for PHILLS imaging from the ISS.
The HICO PCS was originally designed by NRL and has been modiﬁed and improved by the USU Space Dynamics
Laboratory (SDL). A two axis gimbal system will nod and tilt the sensor i 30 degrees. The system will ﬁt into the
WORF rack and provide ground motion compensation, vibration isolation and jitter attenuation. The modiﬁed
system was derived from another ISS WORF payload, the University of North Dakota Agricultural Camera
(AgCam), mounting conﬁguration, and allows simpliﬁed fabrication and assembly. Figure 9 shows the current
conﬁguration as designed by SDL.
“Rm ., 4- i M I N. --‘*:’--is;::e:é: ’""
“M ”$455
f
Figure 9. HICO Pointing Control System for mounting in the ISS WORF, as modiﬁed by SDL.
SDL also acquired the WORF Finite Element analysis, which was updated for consistency, and has been used to
characterize the disturbances that will be experienced in the WORF. A time history of the WORF vibrations
spectrum will be generated for a control model. Simultaneously, SDL has completed a 2-D control system model of
the HICO PCS. Using a blending ﬁlter methodology a jitter control law was developed, and a 3-D model was
created for comparison. SDL has also updated the NRL power supply design for the PCS, and is currently working
on ﬁnal selections for the HICO electronics design.
5. HICO DEVELOPMENT
5.1 USU
The developments for the I-IICO program in the past year have been signiﬁcant. Program management from USU
has implemented telecommunication technologies for enabling communication between all team members and
principal investigators. An interactive website provides ﬁle sharing capabilities and frequent telecommunications
offer status brieﬁngs to ensure recognition of any major issues or developments within the program.
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5656 135
::"".:s':-..v;r‘;§':;;‘3r:;sasazt "" ifE-EZ>EEF:I i'.’};<;;%;5é titrr‘riﬁ'; -’.‘.‘E: .L-‘ré §2‘4;'.tj; 2:2)""; 9.5:;- s 2221': 3.? “:34 49::‘1‘295. {:4 ‘ ??ii{.3.i;‘f:'-{.?E€}€,'§§,iﬁt'{3;‘?i1;t'z”:’iz-3

"
"9","Communications have commenced with the Space Test Program (STP) and Observational Research Working Group
(ORWG). A complete program schedule is available, and system specifications are currently in development.
HICO beneﬁted from the support of two graduate students working at Johnson Space Flight Center during the
summer of 2004. Close student work transpired with STP for [SS and WORF integration purposes. Interactions
with the University of North Dakota AgCam students enabled attendance at the AgCam ﬁt-check with the WORF
mockup at JSC. As programs with similar systems and requirements, this event improved the HICO program
requirements awareness. Connections were also established within NASA for an orbital analysis of the 188 for
program planning as mentioned in Section 4.1. NASA is providing 188 planning vectors and attitude information
through the Trajectory Operations and Planning Ofﬁce. From this data one of the graduate students is utilizing an
orbital analysis program to determine remote sensing opportunities for mission planning and target feasibility.
SDL participated in the WORF payload meeting on 4/28/04 at MSFC, and the NRL meeting on 6/3/04. These
meetings allowed the USU team to better understand the requirements and limitations for the WORF as well as to
transfer the previously done work on a pointing system on the WORF ﬁom NRL to USU. A great deal of valuable
information was gathered and this has affected the subsequent work done at USU and by the Space Dynamics
Laboratory.
The modiﬁcations that were made by SDL to the PCS system will enable easier fabrication and assembly, while
offering improved sensor placement in front of the window in the WORF. The improved stops on the mount, as
well as the changed sliding mechanism position will reduce the jitter experienced by the sensor when pointing and
nodding maneuvers take place. For data acquisition purposes, this improvement will minimize the amount of lost
time during viewing opportunities. This modiﬁed system will also be capable of accommodating other sensors.
Currently items for the PCS system are being purchased and ﬁnal design speciﬁcations are in progress for the HICO
electronics design.
5.2 UH
In the time since the project’s inception, the University of Hawaii has conducted activities related to mission
planning, in-water optics, bio—optics, accuracy assessment ﬁeld protocols and public relations. Production of an
airborne hyperspectral system for ground truth activities is in the advanced stage. Design is complete and long lead
purchase items are in house.
The University of Hawaii has purchased equipment to characterize inherent optical properties of natural waters.
The WETLabs AC-S measures spectral beam absorption and attenuation, while the WETLabs ECO-VSF-3
measures the volume scattering function at three wavelengths and three backscattering angles. Data from these
instruments are to be used in the development of through—water detection algorithms, as well as for ﬁiture vicarious
calibration/validation activities. Ongoing work includes developing a clean-water calibration facility and protocols
for sensor deployment during calibration and validation activities.
The University of Hawaii presented HICO to the coral reef research community at the 10th International Coral Reef
Symposium in Okinawa, Japan in late June and early July of 2004. The University of Hawaii utilized the
opportunity of this symposium to initiate partnerships with researchers around the world for HICO science and
calibration/validation activities.
5.3 Milestones
The key milestones for the HICO program over the next two years in preparation for manifestation on the 188
include approval for ﬂight from STP, deveIOpment and analyses of the PCS, preliminary and critical design reviews
with NASA, safety assessments, payload crew training and integration reviews. The currently pr0posed schedule for
HICO is based on an assumed shuttle return to ﬂight in spring 2005. Under this assumption the HICO sensors
would be launched in the fourth quarter of 2006. Although recent reports from NASA suggest further delays to the
shuttle return to ﬂight schedule due to hurricane damages experienced at Kennedy Space Flight Center, HICO will
maintain schedule. As the shuttle launch is delayed ﬁthher, skepticism regarding the delivery of the WORF to the
188 has grown. While HICO is dependent upon the WORF, the program is conﬁdent that the value of this mission
will endure the NASA setbacks and prove to be a valuable resource, independent of the WORF manifestation. The
HICO program will not be deterred by the questionable status of the shuttle or the WORF and will continue to make
progress for ﬂight readiness in 2006.

136 Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5656

"
"10","6. CONCLUSIONS
The HICO system will provide unprecedented characterization of coastal regions around the world. Appreciated as
an effort to fulﬁll both civilian and military requirements, HICO will offer advantages over prior airborne
hyperspectral imaging efforts. The knowledge and experience gained with this program will be valuable for
potential customers that want to take advantage of this type of capability.
HICO is a pathﬁnder for future dedicated oceanographic hyperspectral systems. At present there is no database of
oceanographic space-bome hyperspectral data that encompasses the full range of viewing geometries that can be
encountered, so the robustness of existing and future algorithms for derivation of water optical properties and
bathymetry cannot be tested and veriﬁed. Lacking these data, a free ﬂying satellite cannot be properly speciﬁed in
terms of viewing geometry constraints.
The valuable data that will be collected by HICO will serve as a demonstration for ﬁJture spacebome hyperspectral
imaging system. The considerable interest in HICO has already validated the considerable efforts that have been put
forth for this program thus far. Serving as a pathﬁnder for realizing the potential of such systems, HICO will be a
major step in improving the human understanding of the delicate ecosystems and unknown regions on our diverse
planet.

Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5656 137

"
"11","REFERENCES
1. Mosher, T.. Lucey, R, Davis, C., and Mitchell, M. “Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Ocean (HICO),”
Thirtieth International Symposium on Remote Sensing of Environment, (November 10-14) Honolulu, HI, 2003.
2. Corson, M., Bowles, 1., Chen, W., et 31. “Modiﬁcation of the ocean PHILLS hyperspectral imager for the
International Space Station and the HyGELA program,” Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC, 2003.
3. Antoniades, j., Haas, D., Bauback, M. et a]. “The PHILLS Hyperspectal Imaging System,” Naval Research
Laboratory, Washington, DC, 2004.
4. Scott, K., Biggar, S., Eppler, D., et a1. “ISS Destiny Module Science Window Optical Characterization,”
Thirtieth International Symposium on Remote Sensing of Environment, November 10-14, Honolulu, HI, 2003.
5. Lillesand, T., Kiefer, R., Chipman, J . Remote Sensing and Image Interpretation, 5th Edition, Wiley, New
York, 2004.
6. Davidson, O. 7126 Enchanted Braid: Coming to Terms with Nature 0n the Coral Reef, Wiley, New York,
1998.
7. Bryant, D., Burke, L... McManus, J._. et a1. Reef? at Risk: A Map-Based Indicator of Threats to the World’s
Coral Reeﬁ, World Resources Institute, 1998.
8. Runco, M., Eppler, D., Scott, K., et 31. “Earth Science and Remote Sensing from the International Space
Station Utilizing The Destiny Laboratory’s Science Window and the Window Observational Research Facility” ,
2003.
9. Gao, B.-C., M.J. Montes, and CO. Davis, “A curve —ﬁtting technique to improve wavelength calibrations
of imaging spectrometer data,” Proceedings of the AVIRIS Workshop, JPL, 2002.
10. Gao, B.-C., M.J. Montes, Z. Ahmad, and CO. Davis, “An atmospheric correction algorithm for
hyperspectral remote sensing of ocean color from space,” Appl. Opt. 39(6), 887-896, 2000.
1 1. Connell, J.H., “Disturbance and recovery of coral assemblages,” Coral Reefs 16: S101-S113, 1997.
12. Kinsey, D.W., “Metabolism, calciﬁcation and carbon production 1: Systems level studies,” Fifth
International Coral Reef Congress 4: 505-526, 1985.
13. Andréfouét, S., Payri, C., “Scaling—up carbon and carbonate metabolism of coral reefs using in-situ data
and remote sensing,” Coral Reefs 19: 259-269, 2000.
14. Atkinson, M.J., Grigg, R.W., “Model of coral reef ecosystem. II: Gross and net benthic primary production
at French Frigate Shoals, Hawaii,” Coral Reefs 3: 13-22, 1984.
15. UNESCO, UNEP-IOC-WMO-IUCN meeting of experts on long-term global monitoring system of coastal
and near-shore phenomena related to climate change: pilot proj ects on mangroves and coral reefs, Monaco (41),
1991.
16. Hochberg, E.J., Atkinson, M.J., “Spectral discrimination of coral reef benthic communities,” Coral Reefs
19: 164-171, 2000.
17. Hochberg, E.J., Atkinson, M.J., “Capabilities of remote sensors to classify coral, algae and sand as pure
and mixed spectra,” Remote Sensing of Environment 85: 174-189, 2003.
18. Hochberg, 13.1., Atkinson, M.J., Andréfouet, S., “Spectral reﬂectance of coral reef bottom-types worldwide
and implications for coral reef remote sensing,” Remote Sensing of Environment 85: 159-1732, 2003.
138 Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5656
' : "" r.""1“;§;‘;»;'.'2""f:=fi’.'$: ‘fi'afﬂ'ﬁ i343“??? E'.'.l’s"".}f"",e‘33 ,,Sf‘."":.3 :; "".23 W? 3:213}; $5.”: ‘56; 3.15:5"": 221:} 5.1;"" {La ????;?‘zi-i :15? 5. £5,133, 3';§?{}_,’,‘5§g;;sgzrji_zj,*~:':;;::;;rr2‘2:,

"
