"","x"
"1","5‘3“» Available online at www.sciencedirect.com _
5/3»
y ‘5‘? SCIENCE DIRECT® HR@UQA
W C
"""" [lﬂWﬁMl/llﬂllUHﬂ/l
PERGAMON Acta Astronautica 56 (2005) 883—889 m
www.elseVier.com/locate/actaastro
Aeeomphshments 1n b10astr0nautles research aboard Internatlonal
Space Statlon
J ohn J . Uria’ *, Cynthia P. Havenb
aISS Payloads Uﬁce, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX 77058, USA
bBioaslronaulz'cs Uﬁce, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX 77058, USA
Available online 23 March 2005
Abstract
The tenth long-duration expedition crew is currently in residence aboard International Space Station (188), continuing a
permanent human presence in space that began in October 2000. During that time, expedition crews have been operators
and subjects for 18 Human Life Sciences investigations, to gain a better understanding of the effects of long-duration space
ﬂight on the crewmembers and 0f the environment in which they live. Investigations have been conducted to study: the
radiation environment in the station as well as during extravehicular activity (EVA); bone demineralization and muscle
deconditioning; changes in neuromuscular reﬂexes; muscle forces and postﬂight mobility; causes and possible treatment of
postﬂight orthostatic intolerance; risk of developing kidney stones; changes in pulmonary function caused by long-duration
ﬂight as well as EVA; crew and crew—ground interactions; changes in immune function, and evaluation of imaging techniques.
The experiment mix has included some conducted in ﬂight aboard 188 as well as several which collected data only pre-
and postﬂight. The conduct of these investigations has been facilitated by the Human Research Facility (HRF). HRF Rack 1
became the ﬁrst research rack on 188 when it was installed in the US laboratory module Destiny in March 2001. The rack
provides a core set of experiment hardware to support investigations, as well as power, data and commanding capability, and
stowage. The second HRF rack, to complement the ﬁrst with additional hardware and stowage capability, will be launched
once Shuttle ﬂights resume. Future years will see additional capability to conduct human research on 188 as International
Partner modules and facility racks are added to 188. Crew availability, both as a subject count and time, will remain a major
challenge to maximizing the science return from the bioastronautics research program.
© 2005 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
1. Introduction absence, plays in biological and physical processes.
As a long-duration laboratory, it enables research
The International Space Station (ISS) is a unique that was not possible on earlier platforms. In par-
platform for conducting research in a variety of dis— ticular, 188 is ideally suited for studying the effects
ciplines; to better understand the role gravity or its 0f long-duration space ﬂight on humans, important
for perfecting counter—measures t0 the deleterious ef-
* Corresponding author. fects to ensure crew safety and to enable exploration
E—mail address: john.j.uri@nasa.gov (J .J . Uri). missions.
0094-5765/59 - see front matter © 2005 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
doi:10.1016/j.actaastr0.2005.01.014

"
"2","884 JJ. Uri, C.P. Haven /Acla Aslronaulz'ca 56 (2005) 883—889
2. ISS Assembly and Operations resupply items have been seven large research racks
and logistics totalling more than 6500 kg.
Construction of ISS began in late 1998, with the A signiﬁcant milestone for ISS-based research was
launch of the Russian module Zarjya. Since that time, the addition of the US Laboratory Module Destiny,
47 ﬂights of Russian and American vehicles have launched on the STS 98/5A mission in February 2001.
added 11 major elements to the station, enlarging Weighing 14,000 kg at launch, Destiny is a cylindri-
the platform from its original 20,000 kg single mod- cal module, 8.5m long with an external diameter of
ule conﬁguration to the current 180,000 kg facility 4.3 m. Internally, it is conﬁgured with 24 racks lining
depicted in Fig. 1(a). Russian Soyuz spacecraft and the four surfaces. The racks contain various systems
American Space Shuttles have brought eight long equipments such as life support, controls for the sta-
duration crews to live aboard the station for 4—6 tion’s robotic arms, medical hardware, a crew sleep
months each, resulting in a continuous human pres— station, and up to 10 research facilities, of which seven
ence in space since October 2000, and along with are already on orbit. The ﬁrst research rack, to be de-
unmanned Russian Progress vehicles have brought the scribed in more detail below, was the Human Research
required logistics to maintain the station and its crews Facility (HRF) Rack 1, installed a month after Des-
in a safe and productive environment. Among the tiny’s arrival.

Assembly of ISS will continue in the near future
with completion of the trusses, addition of solar arrays
for power generation and radiator panels for cooling,
and the International Partner research modules, lead-

/.x :.—-4,“ ~21 .' ‘ ~\\ ing to a conﬁguration represented in Fig. 1(b). The
.5 European Space Agency’s Columbus module will in—
“. ° . crease the station’s research capability with an addi—
_;£‘-=?’: tional 10 research rack locations, with the Japanese
' 1""? ~ Kibo module adding 11 more. The full suite of re—
“M "" search modules will also allow optimal location of life

sciences research racks for maximal synergy.

Concurrent with the launch of the ﬁrst research rack
in March 2001, the Payload Operations and Integra—
tion Center (POIC) at the Marshall Space Flight Center

(a) (MSFC) in Huntsville, AL, became operational. Addi—
tional payload—speciﬁc support beginning with Expe—
dition 2 was provided by Telescience Support Centers

‘3 \‘ “f. ———~=""’ at other NASA Centers, including J ohnson Space Cen—

, ter for human life sciences investigations. Remote sites

.o' _ . at investigators” institutes, domestic and international,

' ‘3’.:v‘::: 0 FT“- _ ”6""?"" are also routinely tied in during times when those ex-
.“ ' . ”f 3.9 .-: .«1 ? , ' J. f’i’kf’: ‘ periments are operating. The Telescience Resource Kit
-. 374% . ..' ‘*- .. ' '9‘"": “K2 (T ReK) developed by the MSFC has proved to be a

..‘"" .. “ .""a"". l"" 'h‘$¥_\ '- very reliable tool providing remote payload develop—

‘ , ‘ | .‘ - I ,. j'j g 5 :1 ‘ 7&3""- ers the ability to monitor and control their payloads

‘0"" I 15:3"" ‘ ’ . lgvgﬁf “I from their home locations.

‘1‘ ,l"" .$.WKQ. ‘: 8 ~ ,

v 1“"" ‘ . 8. . , x ‘.

7‘ 702,? ‘1': -. M

i J ~ g. 0': : 3. ._ 3. Facilities for human research

Fig. 1. (a) Current conﬁguration of ISS; (b) conﬁguration of ISS The tWO HRF RaCkS (Fig- 2) provide a core set
including International Partner modules. of experiment hardware to support science investiga—

"
"3","JJ. Uri, C.P. Haven /Acta Aslronautz'ca 56 (2005) 883—889 885
Gas ~ ’ rj-VJJ' ' W‘TT:_"" ;': Gas
Delivery .. Tait: [Q33 ~‘f;a.‘. 1‘ Delivery
System ' ""Vii“ ii PFM/PAM 37.1w. 2.57:1; System
"". --__~p '. ‘ ,. GASMAP ., 'A 7725'
r1 m.t- 21a: I ; 11-153 ....~‘¢'.F‘
. ‘erégL? .4 — {- 3:32-11. i ‘ Refrigerated
Ultrasound “ﬂ PLL.‘ !‘ _ f” -, cm, I centrifuge
.ql—f“ 2:“ ‘1 Workstation 1” 4'31 ""3
“ ~p....::-: .. SLAMMD ‘
F's kg?!“ 1' ""W .
(a) “ti“ (b) » 4 ~- '
Fig. 2. Human Research Facility Racks 1 and 2. Subcomponents described in text.
tions, as well as power, command and data handling ESA to develop a system for pulmonary physiology
and stowage, described below. The ﬁrst rack has been monitoring. The system Will be complete once both
on orbit since March 2001, While the second Will be HRF racks are on orbit. The components of the system
launched on the ﬁrst mission after shuttles resume are: Pulmonary Function Module (PFM), provided by
ﬂying. These racks Will initially reside in Destiny, ESA; Photoacoustic Analyzer Module (PAM), pro-
but Will be relocated to Columbus once that module Vided by ESA; Gas Analyzer System for Metabolic
arrives, Where they Will be joined by the European Analysis Physiology (GASMAP),pr0Vided by NASA;
Physiology Module (EPM) and the Muscle Atro— and Gas Delivery System (GDS), provided by NASA.
phy Research and Exercise System (MARES) racks. The PFM plus GDS can operate together With ei-
The EPM rack Will provide the infrastructure for up ther GASMAP 0r PAM; in the latter case the system
to eight Science Modules in a variety of life sci- is portable instead of rack-based as in the fenner
ence research disciplines, While the MARES facility case. The system can provide a Wide range of res-
is capable of assessing strength of muscle groups piratory and cardiovascular measurements, including
around a single joint or complete limb. These com- breath-by-breath measurements, pulmonary volumes
bined facilities, along With cold stowage capability and capacities, spirometry, cardiac output and other
provided by the ESA-provided Minus Eighty-degree specialized tests of pulmonary function.
Laboratory Freezer for 188 (MELFI), Which can The ultrasound device located in HRF Rack 1 pro-
store materials at —80 0C, —220C and +4OC, Will Vides for multiple imaging modes including Doppler
establish a powerful suite of instruments for con- for a variety of applications, both for science inves-
ducting in-depth studies of human physiology in tigations as well as operational medical diagnostics.
microgravity. The upgradable system can both record images locally
Integral to the functioning of the HRF Racks are and downlink imagery. In addition to 2D imaging, it
the computer Workstations and laptops. Each rack can also provide post-image processing to yield 3D
has its own Workstation, With the Rack 2 Worksta- reconstructions.
tion containing enhanced technologies allowed by Of importance to many biomedical investigations
its later launch. The workstations provide for data as well as to medical operations is the ability to
collection and storage, software interfaces to vari- accurately measure crewmember body mass. The
ous experiments, data downlinking, Video processing Space Linear Acceleration Mass Measurement De-
and graphics support. The laptop provides a plat- Vice (SLAMMD) follows Newton’s Second Law of
form for installing and executing software to per— Motion by having two springs generate a known force
form various rack functions as well as experiment against a crewmember mounted on an extension arm,
procedures. the resulting acceleration being used to calculate the
The Pulmonary Function System (PFS) is a col- subject’s mass. The device is accurate to 0.25 kg over
laborative effort between the United States and a range from 40 to 115 kg.

"
"4","886 JJ. Uri, C.P. Haven /Acla Astronautica 56 (2005) 883—889
Collection and in situ processing, such as density- calculated organ dose levels of radiation exposure 1eV-
based separation of ﬂuid samples is integral to many els. The ESA/DLR-provided DOSMAP experiment
biomedical experiments and to ﬂight medicine. The was composed of four different types of dosimeters:
6-chamber rotor in the refrigerated centrifuge can passive Nuclear Track Detector Packages to mea-
accommodate sample sizes from 0.5 to 50 ml, with sure the absorbed dose, neutron dose and heavy ion
speeds ranging from 1000 to 5000 rpm. The rotor inﬂuences along with spectral composition with re-
chamber is maintained at +4OC. spect to charge, energy and linear energy transfer;
Integral to most human life sciences investigations Mobile Dosimetry Units consisting of four minia-
is the collection of pre- and postﬂight data. Facili- ture dosimeter—radiometers; Dosimetric Telescopes
ties for ground-based data collection are established at to measure the ﬂuX of charged particles; and Ther-
J ohnson Space Center in Texas where astronauts train, moluminescence Detectors to measure dose rates for
at Kennedy Space Center in Florida, the launch site ionizing radiation and neutrons. The Japanese Bonner
and primary landing site for space shuttles, and Dry- Ball Neutron Detector (BBND) contained siX detector
den Flight Research center in California, the alternate spheres containing 3He to measure the neutron ﬂuX
Shuttle landing site. In the aftermath of the Columbia inside the station, at two speciﬁc locations in Destiny.
accident, Russian Soyuz vehicles temporarily replaced Two additional investigations have been the study-
the shuttle as the crew transport vehicle. Therefore, ing aspects of the space radiation environment. The
data collection capabilities were established on short aim of the Canadian EVARM experiment is to deter-
notice at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training center outside mine levels of radiation doses received by the skin,
of Moscow to enable US investigations. eyes and blood forming organs of crewmembers dur-
ing Extra-Vehicular Activity (EVA). Crewmembers
wear three small active dosimeters, located on the leg,
4. Investigations torso and near the eye, during EVA, and these data
are compared to background measurements inside
Through the current tenth long-duration ISS eX- the station. The German biodosinietric experiment
pedition, 18 unique investigations in human life sci- CHROMOSOME is studying chromosomal aberra-
ences have been completed or are still in progress tions in crewmenibers’ lymphocytes as an indicator
(Table 1). The following research areas have been of the mutagenic impact of ionizing radiation.
studied: radiation monitoring; bone demineralization; One of the well-documented (from Skylab and Mir
muscle deconditioning; neurosciences; cardiovascu— studies) effects of long-duration space ﬂight is bone
lar physiology, in particular orthostatic intolerance; demineralization. The SUBREGIONAL BONE eX-
pulmonary physiology; regulatory physiology, specif— periment is designed to measure the loss of bone mass
ically the risk of development of kidney stones; and its recovery postﬂight. Bone mineral density in
immunology; crew psychology, and evaluation of the hip and spine are measured before and after ﬂight
diagnostic imaging techniques. Most of the studies using Quantitative Computed Tomography (QCT), a
include data collection during space ﬂight; the re— technique that allows examination of trabecular and
Inainders rely on comparison of pre— and postﬂight cortical bone separately to localize the loss. The QCT
data. The number of investigations will continue to results are compared with Dual X-Ray Absorptiome-
grow and diversify into other areas as additional try (DXA) measurements of the spine, hip and heel,
capability is added to ISS. and Quantitative Ultrasound (QUS) measurements of
The ﬁrst group of investigations was begun during the heel taken concurrently. Postﬂight recovery of
Expedition 2 and involved a suite of radiation Inonitor— bone mineral density is monitored until one year after
ing hardware provided by three international partners, landing.
the United States, ESA/DLR and Japan. The United Along with bone demineralization; changes in
States provided the PHANTOM TORSO experiment, muscle size, tone and function have also been docu-
consisting primarily of a tissue—muscle plastic equiV— mented during and after space ﬂight. The goals of the
alent of a human head and torso. Passive and active BIOPSY experiment are to determine the time course
dosimeters contained within the torso model provide and extent of functional and structural changes in limb

"
"5","JJ. Uri, C.P. Haven /Acla Aslronaulz'ca 56 (2005) 883—889 887

Table 1
Investigations in human life sciences completed or in progress through 188 Expedition 8
Investigation Investigator Sponsor Exped. In-ﬂight (Y/N) Field of Study
DOSMAP G. Reitz Germany 2 Y Radiation
TORSO G. Badhwar US 2 Y Radiation
BBND T. Goka Japan 2—3 Y Radiation
BONE T. Lang US 2—8 N Bone
INTERACTIONS N. Kanas US 2—5,7—9 Y Crew psychology
HREFLEX D. Watt Canada 241 Y Neurosciences
RENAL STONE P. Whitson US 3—6,8a Y Regulatory physiol.
XENONI A. Gabrielsen Denmark 3—5 N Cardiovascular
PUFF J . West US 3—6 Y Pulmonary
EVARM 1. Thompson Canada 4—6 Y Radiation
BIOPSY R. Fitts US 5,7,9—10a N Muscle atrophy
MOBILITY J . Bloomberg US 5—10a N Neurosciences
MIDODRINE J . Meek US 521 N Cardiovascular
EPSTEIN-BARR R. Stowe US 5—621 N Immunology
CHROMOSOME G. Obe Denmark 6—10a N Radiation
FOOT P. Cavanagh US 6,8a Y Neuromuscular
JOURNALS J . Stuster US 8—10a Y Crew psychology
ADVANCED ULTRASOUND S. Dulchavsky US 8—10a Y Diagnostic imaging

aStudy continuing beyond Expedition 8.
skeletal muscle and to establish the cellular mecha— and hip torques Will be completed before and after
nisms 0f the observed changes. To measure functional ﬂight to document any changes in bone mineral den-
changes, crewmembers test the performance of their sity, muscle volume and muscle strength as a result
calf muscle using a Torque Velocity Dynamometer 0f the space ﬂight.
(TVD) several times before ﬂight and after ﬂight, One other aspect of muscle changes during long-
beginning as soon after landing as possible. Mag- duration space ﬂight is a decrease in muscle recruit-
netic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is performed on the ment. The Canadian HREFLEX experiment used
crewmenibers’ calves to measure any macroscopic Hoffmann reﬂex testing to measure reductions in
structural changes. A needle biopsy is obtained from spinal cord excitability, meaning a greater descending
the soleus and gastrocnemeus muscles before and after activity required to activate the same number of mo-
ﬂight, and the muscle samples undergo immunohisto- tor neurons. This would be manifest as an increase
chemical analysis to assess any shift from fast to slow in apparent effort for the same level of exercise, or
isozyme of myosin as well as electron microscopy to conversely a decrease in the level of exercise for the
assess any structural changes in myoﬁlaments. same apparent effort. This could in turn make in-

One of the causes of both bone demineraliza— ﬂight exercise potentially less effective at maintaining
tion and muscle changes is the decreased loading muscle mass and strength. During the experiment, an
of lower extremities during everyday life during electrical stimulus was applied to the subjects’ poste-
10ng-durati0n space ﬂight. The FOOT experiment is rior tibial nerve, and electromyography 0f the soleus
designed to quantify this decreased mechanical load- muscle recorded the muscle response. The experiment
ing. Crewmembers are instrumented for 12h during was performed before ﬂight, several times during the
a normal workday to measure ankle, knee and hip mission, and as soon after landing as possible.
joint movements, loads on the lower extremities, and Following space ﬂight, crewmembers experience
muscle actiVity, and compared against similar data on postural and locomotor instability, posing a poten-
the ground. In addition, DXA scans of the proximal tial risk in an emergency. The goal of the MOBIL-
femur, MRI of leg muscles and maximum ankle, knee ITY experiment is to ﬁrst document the postﬂight

"
"6","888 JJ. Uri, C.P. Haven /Acla Aslronaulz'ca 56 (2005) 883—889

changes in locomotor responses, and then later to em- ﬂight, while recording food and ﬂuid intake, exercise
ploy a variable in-ﬂight treadmill protocol to facilitate and any medications taken before and during the col-
a more rapid postﬂight recovery. Locomotor responses lection period. Aliquots of the collected in-ﬂight urine
are tested before and after ﬂight using a treadmill are returned to Earth for analysis of stone-forming
locomotion test, with the subject walking on a mo- markers and inhibitors.

torized treadmill while performing goal-directed gaze Previous studies have shown possible alterations in
stabilizing tasks, and a functional mobility test, which human immune function as a result of long-duration
has the subject walking through a simple obstacle space ﬂight. While the studies did not conclusivelyin-
course. dicate depressed immune function during ﬂight, and

One of the observed effects of space ﬂight is no clinical experience would indicate increases in in-
postﬂight orthostatic hypotension, the inability to fectious illnesses, immunosuppression during space
maintain arterial blood pressure upon standing. The ﬂight could be a potential hazard. One method to mea-
Danish XENONl experiment examined whether sure immunosuppression is to measure the reactiva-
changes in a local veno-arteriolar reﬂex in the lower tion of a latent Virus, such as the Epstein—Barr Virus
leg contribute to orthostatic hypotension. Before and (EBV), with which approximately 90% of the adult
after space ﬂight, subcutaneous blood ﬂow in the lower population is infected. The German EPSTEIN—BARR
leg is measured by the 133Xenon washout method experiment, using blood and urine collections before
before and after lowering the leg with the subject in and after ﬂight, seeks to assess the immune system of
a supine position, while also measuring ﬁnger arterial crewmembers engaged in long-duration space ﬂights.
blood pressure. The MIDODRINE experiment evalu- The samples are analyzed quantitatively for EBV repli-
ates the eﬂcicacy of the drug midodrine in protecting cation, determining Virus-speciﬁc T-cell immune func-
returning crewmembers from orthostatic hypotension, tion, and levels of stress hormones.
as measured by operational tilt tests after landing. Space analog studies and anecdotal reports from

The two major goals of the PUFF experiment were space ﬂight indicate possible changes over time in the
to determine the effects of long-duration space ﬂight interpersonal relationships within a crew and between
on pulmonary function, and to determine any effects the crew and ground controllers, which may inﬂuence
on pulmonary function from EVA, areas that have not the crew’s ability to function safely and effectively.
been well studied during long missions. Standard res- Cultural differences in multinational crews may com-
piratory function measurements were utilized to mon- pound these changes. During the INTERACTIONS
itor changes caused by long-term microgravity, such investigation, crewmembers complete standard mood
as possible anatomical alterations, or by effects caused and interpersonal group climate questionnaires on a
by long-term conﬁnement, such as possible pulmonary weekly basis. Mission controllers who have direct in-
impacts of accumulated particulates or contaminants. teraction with the crew and their tasking also com-
Monthly assessments of pulmonary function provided plete the same questionnaires. Cumulated data over
a time course of changes over the mission. Any EVA- multiple expeditions will be analyzed for a number of
related changes, such as possible formation of venous important interpersonal factors, such as tension, cohe-
gas microemboli, were measured by pulmonary tests sion, leadership role, and the relationship between the
before and as soon after EVA’s as possible. crew and the ground controllers.

Previous studies on shuttle and during long-duration Another crew psychology investigation called
Mir missions have demonstrated an increased risk of J OURNALS, based on experience from ground-based
renal stone development during and immediately af- analog environments, analyzes crewmember jour-
ter space ﬂight. The RENAL STONE experiment, a nal entries to obtain behaVioral and human factors
continuation of the previous space ﬂight studies, will data relevant to equipment and procedures design to
assess the renal stone-forming potential during long- support sustained human performance during long-
duration 188 missions, and also test the eﬂcicacy of duration space ﬂight. The results will provide infor-
potassium citrate, a proven therapy on the ground to mation on the relevance of various behaVioral issues to
minimize the risk of certain renal stones. Crewmem- prepare for long-duration missions, including explo-
bers collect 24 h urine samples before, during and after ration voyages. While in ﬂight, crewmembers make

"
"7","JJ. Uri, C.P. Haven /Acla Aslronaulz'ca 56 (2005) 883—889 889
journal entries at least three times per week, either on as subj ect and operator and perform a variety of scan-
paper or electronically, Which are then analyzed after 11ng exams of different organs and tissues, as well as
the mission. monthly bone scans Which are ultimately downlinked

As noted above, the HRF Rack 1 contains an ultra— for analysis.
sound device, available for both research and clinical
diagnosis. The ADVANCED ULTRASOUND inves-
tigation utilizes the Ultrasound hardware to demon- 5- Summary
strate its utility in novel clinical conditions and to
assess its feasibility to monitor realtime bone alter- The International Space Station is Still under con-
ations. In addition, optimal training strategies Will be struction, With many challenges yet to come. Despite
developed to ensure that crewmembers, With guidance somewhat constrained resources available for research
from the ground, can perform imaging of suﬂﬁcient to date, much has already been accomplished. Eigh-
quality for remote medical diagnosis. These objectives teen unique investigations in human life sciences have
have relevance both to space ﬂight, during which un- been completed or are still in progress, utilizing avail-
foreseen medical emergencies may require untrained able facilities on board, such as the Human Research
crewmembers to image their comrades, as well as to Facility. Additional facilities and capability Will be
similar terrestrial situations, such as remote location added in the coming years, and new types 0f investi-
telemedicine. Typically, two crewmembers alternate gations Will be enabled.

"
