"","x"
"1","MONITORING OF BIOFILTRATION EFFICIENCY OF BIOREACTOR
EXHAUST AIR BY AN ELECTRONIC NOSE
E. Martinelli‘, G. Pennazza‘, R. Paolesse”, E. Milién“, J. Albiol4,
F. Godia“, N. Van Ras5, J. Van der Waarde5, D. Demey“, C. Di Natale”, A.D’Amico""3
1. Department of Electronic Engineering, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”; Italy
2. Department of Chemical Science and Technology, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”; Italy
3. CNR-Institute Microelectronics and Microsystems, Rome; Italy
4. Department of Chemical Engineering, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona; Spain
5. Bioclear b.V., Groningen; The Netherlands
6. EPAS n.V., Nazareth, Belgium
email: martinelli@ing.unir0ma2. it
Abstract possibilities for an efﬁcient air ﬁltering the biological
In this paper, the application of an electronic nose to monitor filtration is gaining attention due to the lOW-energy
the 6195019770)” 0f a biOVeaClO’” OdOW 767770le by a biOlOgical consumption and long-term stability of the system. This
air ﬁlter (BAF) is presented. The bioreactor studied is part of condition Will be a requirement for long term manned space
a regenerative biological ﬁfe suppm’ SyS’em f” [0’73 term missionsmanned mission as those foreseen to Mars.
manned space missions in development by the European . .
Space Agency. Results show that the army 0f Among the solutions to treat volatile wastes, those based on
metalloporphyrins coated thickness shear mode resonators microorganisms are particularly appealing. Indeed it is
has a suﬁcient sensitivity to monitor the eﬁeciency 0f the BAF Widely known that microorganisms are capable Of
WilfO’” this applicaIiOH- degrading a large variety of chemical compounds and the
applications of biological treatments aimed at cleaning up
Keywords contaminated soils, waters, and gasses are increasing.
Electronic nose, odour removal efficiency, Biological air Among these applications those using biological air filters
ﬁlter. (BAF) for the recycling of air in closed environments are
INTRODUCTION particularly promising [3].
Long-term manned missions require some regenerative life The BAF consists of a bioﬁlm composed of selected non-
support system. For this scope, European Space Agency pathogenic bacteria catabolizing the contaminants to
promoted the Project MELISSA (Micro-Ecological Life harmless compounds, mainly carbon dioxide, water, and
Support System Alternative). This project has been salts [4]_
conceived ?‘S a micro-organisms and higher p13.“ based Bacteria are immobilized on a hydrophobic membrane
ecosystem intended as a tool to gain understanding of the . b t . from the aseous environment The
behaviour of artificial ecosystems, and for the development separgting . 39613. d bg bl h ' .
of the technology for a future regenerative life support mem rane 1s Slze in or er to .e permea. e tOt eorganic
. . compounds but not to the bacteria preventing the d1spers1on
system for long term manned space m1ss1ons, e.g. a lunar ofmicroorganisms
base or a mission to Mars, Nevertheless terrestrial . . ' . . .
applications have also been proposed [1]. MELISS A goes In practical applications of BAl: technology, in particular
further than other recycling systems used on Mir or the those aimed at continuous cleaning of air, it is necessary to
International Space Station which purify water and recycle utilise a system to monitor in real-time the efﬁciency of the
exhaled carbon dioxide, but do not attempt to recycle BAF-
organic waste for food production. The driving element of Biological degradation of wastes usually generates volatile
MELISSA is the recovery of food, water and oxygen from compounds that are responsible of the bad odours. If not
waste (faeces, urea), carbon dioxide and minerals [2]. degraded or removed those components would accumulate
MELISS A is organized in ﬁve compartments. The first in closed environments such as crew cabins and therefore
compartment is a liquefying reactor where human wastes different alternatives for removal are being studied. This is
and other non-edible biomass are degraded by colonies of also the case for the anaerobic degradation process taking
thermophilic anaerobic bacteria to soluble components. place ih the above mentioned compartment 1 Of the
These are further fermented into volatile fatty acids, C02 or MELISSA loop. The inost important odour eompounds are
lactic acid or alcoholic substances, causing a strong smell SUlphldCS (dimethyl-di-t -tr1-. and —tetrasulph1de), 4-methyl-
in the gas-phase of this compartment. phenol (cresol)? butan01c aold and indole. The presence of
There is then a strong requirement for odour removal dimethyl-sulphides suggests that HZS can also be present.
systems in manned space missions. Among the various
O-7803-8692—2/O4/$20.00 ©2004 IEEE. 368

"
"2","This is a typical situation where arrays of non-selective ?wwﬂgagiggwm_wwwmwm_‘_.__.___ﬂ
chemical sensors may be efﬁciently applied. Indeed, i
although it is generally considered as a negative 2
characteristic, the absence of selectivity was taken into “*“m a)
consideration (since the eighties) as the basis for a novel rm”...WW.”£199.95”..~.W..__.__._...-M.._.M__.._~.i._._..__..i
instrument able to provide global information about ‘ :
samples. This is somewhat resembling t0 the functioning of -—’—I———- b)
the human olfaction with odorants [5]. ,— lm'mm
These instruments are basically arrays on non-selective 5““ “W""“""r‘ffﬂi““'MWr“‘W‘““""‘“‘“‘“""""‘""“""“""‘:
sensors. In fact, the sensors response is not univocally *—
correlated with the concentration of a single compound (as , l Bomemm c)
in the classical analytical chemistry) but rather it is a sort of cleaning
combination of all the chemical information contained in §.____.__._____.I...“___._________._._._-___-__Qi
each sample. This is obtained through a broad selectivity, i
like a sort of chemical ﬁltration. Since then these arra s ::| E IBAE' I d)
9 y 9 Bowen water
now widely known as electronic noses, have been applied cleaning
to many different ﬁelds, such as foods and beverages, f““WI:‘""'“““'*‘”""*““““W“W““""*'“""*“”““*""*""
environmental control, industrial processes, and medical ’— j—l—tw' —
diagnoses. 3mm,” ' e)
In this paper the efficiency of a BAF system connected to a _ _ _ _
MELISSA compartment I for odour removal has been Flgure 2' Schern_atlc Vlew Of the ﬁve
. . measurement condltlons. C and e condltlons are
measured With an electronic nose based onoan array of those related to the measure of air before and
thickness shear mode resonators coated by various kinds of after the biofilter (B AF). Measurement d is
metalloporphyrins. performed to compare difference between BAF
The experiment was carried out at EPAS n.V. in Ghent OUtPUtS when reactor exhaust and ambient air
(Belgium). A BAF unit was connected in series with are processed. A and_ b provides references_in
MELISSA compartment I. The electronic nose was case_s Of nltrogen carrler and nItrogen mlxed w'th
connected on-line to test the air before and after the BAF. amblent a"" respectlvely.
EXPERIMENTAL
1'?! The last prototype of a series of electronic noses designed
and produced, since 1995, at the University of Rome Tor
Vergata was utilised. The instrument contains eight,
P. V thickness-shear mode resonators (TSMR) coated with
w various films of metalloporphyrins. Seven metal complexes
(Mn, Fe, Cu, Ni, Sn, Ru and C0) and a free-base of a
modified tetraphenylporphyrin (TPP) were used. Each
‘ molecule was functionalised with four alkyloxy chains
~ -- '~ ~ (O(CH2)3)CH3 in order to ensure the necessary porosity of
‘ the solid film for optimal analyte diffusion through the
absorbing ﬁlm [6]. Metalloporphyrins were deposited onto
AT-cut quartz surfaces (from Electroquartz, Milano, Italy),
oscillating at the fundamental frequency of 20 MHz. Film
deposition was done by the spray casting method.
Molecules were dissolved in chloroform and sprayed, with
a nitrogen carrier, onto the quartz surface, in order to
Figure 1. In picture two electronic noses of the deposit a fixed amount of sensing coating. The electronic
same model used in the experiment are shown. nose appearance is shown in ﬁgure 1.
Ebened Instrument shows the arrangement Of The capability of this electronic nose to monitor the
Ickness shear mode resonators. A temperature . .
sensor is also present in the measurement efﬁ01ency 0f edours removalosystems has been preV10usly
chamber. demonstrated in the case of mice cage em1ss10ns [7].
The experimental set-up required the connection of
electronic nose before and after the BAF unit. In order to
369

"
"3","not perturb the reactor nitrogen was used as carrier to b, c, and d-e. It corresponds to a distinction between
collect and sample the reactor headspace. Before to enter absence of reactor gas, reactor gas, and BAF treated gas.
the BAF sample flow was hhxed Wlth ambient ah to The classiﬁcation model has been optimized inaleave-one-
provrde oxygen for the bacterial conimunity 1h the BAF out cross validation procedure that provides a minimum of
uhlt' The sample humidity was kept at Its saturation value. classiﬁcation error using 3 latent variables. The prediction
Five different conﬁgurations were used as shown in ﬁgure results are displayed in a confusion matrix shown in table
2. Two configurations measured saturated humidity 2, presenting the number of samples assigned to each class,
nitrogen and nitrogen plus ambient air; the third as well as error rates of first and second order. For each
conﬁguration tested the reactor headspace. The fourth and class, the ﬁrst order error corresponds to samples of one
the fifth measured the output of the BAF when it is class which have been assigned to a different class (lower
connected to ambient air and to the reactor respectively. part of confusion matrix). The second order error
The last two configurations allow evaluating the efficiency corresponds to samples assigned to a class but which
of BAF in terms of complete removal of reactor odour. belong to a different class (upper part of confusion matrix)
Reactor exhaust air treated and non-treated by BAF was [81‘ , , , , ,
also measured by a conventional Olfactometer analysis. From the oonfusron matrix It is eVldeht that a
m1sclass1ﬁcation occurs between classes a-b and d-e that
corresponds to the same working condition of BAF.
Table 1. Olfactometer characterization of reactor Reactor efﬂuents are clearly identified without errors.
exhaust air before and after the BAF treatment
Ema Fla:
2
Sample Measured odour Dilution Odour m
concentration concentration 1-5 m m
[OUE/m3] in pure mm m
—sarnple 1 ”1 an $333
Reactor 1,902 200 380,400 “5 m m m“
exhaust 3H ' m ”1 :.-_=_P""‘£mm
. é Wm :34 "".giu.
Air treated 115 200 23,000 2 u m g,“
by BAF g “1 emu 1 a ”
-15 m m,“
nu “ n:
m E!
RESULTS "" a, u, i: m.
Table 1 shows Olfactometer results in terms of odour units -15 £5:
(OUE) per cubic meter. Olfactometer measurements gave
an odour removal efficiency of the BAF around 94%. 4:3 -3 4 —2 ﬂ 2 4 E
Probably the real efﬁciency was even higher, because the W‘W-“W
odour concentration of 115 OUE/m3 is only just higher than
a normal background concentration and the sample was Figure 3_ Score plot of the first latent variable of
diluted 200 times. Measurement of a sample of clean air the PLS-DA model aimed at classifying the five
can also result in an odour concentration of 50 OUE/m3. experimental conditions. Labels for o to 4
With regard to the efficiency of the BAF there is indicates the different measurement setups
consistence with the olfactometric measurements. indicated With letter from a to e in figure 1-
Electronic nose data were analyzed by discriminant
analysys in order to classify the data in the five Table 2. Confusion matrix of the classification
experimental conditions measured. Discrimination analysis model. Each class corresponds to a different
was calculated using the Partial Least Squares (PLS—DA) experimental conditions, class notation is the
algorithm. Partial Least Squares solution of a discriminant same °f figure 1'
analysis problem provides both the classification model and
also the plot of data onto latent variables sub-space where a true|:|
Visual inspection of classification properties is possible. assignedl] A B C D E
Figure 3 shows the data plotted in the plane of the ﬁrst two A 9 1 0 0 0
latent variables. This plot represents 91% of the total B 1 14 0 0 0
variance of the data. The plot shows a clear distinction of C 0 0 16 0 0
the whole data set in three clusters corresponding, using the D 0 0 0 13 4
notation used in ﬁgure 1, to the measurement conditions a- E 0 0 0 2 21
370

"
"4","CONCLUSIONS [2] Mergeay M., Verstraete W., Dubertret G., Lefort-Tran
In order to ensure life conditions in long-term manned M.) ChipauX C, Binot R; MELISSA - a
missions as those foreseen to Mars it is necessary to design microorganisms based model for CELSS development,
planetary bases with some method of recycling nutrients. Proceedings of the 3rd symposium on space thermal
Biotechnology can help in defining complex reactors that control & life support system. Noordwijk, the
can convert waste biomass into nutrients. These processes Netherlands, 3-6 Oct. 1988, 65-68
induce the formation of volatile compounds that results in a [3] Binot R.A., Paul P.G.; B AF _ an advanced ecological
progressrve deterioration of the quality of air 1ns1de the concept for air quality control, S A E Technical P ap er
spacecraft. For this reason, a bioreactor has to be matched series n. 891535 1989
with an efficient odour removal system to maintain the 9 ,
correct air quality. Bio ﬁltration has been demonstrated to [4] Van der Waarde J‘J"" Jag“ D"" Keunrng S"" Paul P‘,G""
be efﬁcient in odour removal in many different situations. B1notR.Ao.; BAF—detection Of microbial contamination
Since the odour composition as produced by the complex and Identlﬁwl‘?“ Of bIOﬁlm baFteﬂal strains ,m a
reactions taking place in the reactor is complicated an biological air ﬁlter, SAE Techmcal Paper series n.
electronic nose can optimally solve the problem of 941341’ 1994
monitoring the quality of indoor air and at the same time [51 Gardner J'o Pearce T., Nagle T.H., Schiffmann 53-
the efﬁciency of the bio filtration system_ (EdS.), Handbook Of Machine OlfﬂCthl’l, WllCY/VCH
In this paper, we demonstrated that a metalloporphyrins (New York/Weinheim), 2002
based electronic nose can with great accuracy detect the [6] Di Natale C'a P3016336 R., Macagnano A., Nardis 3-,
action of the bioﬁlter and then be used for monitoring the Martinelli E., Dalcanale E., C0313 M., D’Amico A-S
bioﬁlter efficiency and, more generally, the quality of air Sensitivity-selectivity balance in mass SGHSOTS3 the
inside a closed environment where complex bio reactions case Of metalloporphyrins, JOW’WZ 0f Material
take place. Chemistry 14 2004 1281-1287

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS [7] Willers H., de Gijsel P., Ogink N., D’AmiCO A.,
The work here described has been performed in the frame Martinelli E., Di Natale C., Van R35 N., Van der
Of the European Space Agency funded project “Biological Waarde J .; Monitoring of biological odour ﬁltration in
Air ﬁlter for Air Quality Control of Life Support Systems closed environments With olfactometry and an
in electronic nose, Water Science and T echnology 50
Manned Space Craft and other Closed Environments” 2004 93'100
MAP Project Number: AO-LS-99-MAP-LSS-Ol9 ‘BAF’. [8] Roussel S., Bellon-Maurel V., Roger J.M., Grenier P.;

Authenticating white grape must variety with

REFERENCES classiﬁcation models based on aroma sensors, FT-IR,
[l] Lasseur Ch., Verstraete W., Richalet J.; Process and and UV spectrometry, Jaurnal Of Food Engineering,

equipment for organic waste treatment and 60, 2003’ 407-419

applications of the process, French patent 9602131,

ESA, 21/2/96.

371

"
