"","x"
"1","gﬂ‘m‘; Available online at www.sciencedirect.com =
?%ngﬁ ' SCIENCE@DIRECT° “ND
mums
3‘0 B
ELSEVIER Sensors and Actuators B 101 (2004) 346—352 &
www.elsevier.com/locate/snb
Chemical sensors Clustering With the dynamic moments approach
Eugenio Martinelli M, Giorgio Pennazzaa, Corrado Di Natale a’b, Arnaldo D’Amieo 3""”
a Department OfEleclrom'c Engineering, University OfRome ”Tor Vergala Via del Politecnico 1, Rome 00133, Italy
b CNR-IMM Via del F0550 del Cavaliere, Rome 00133, Italy
Received 3 February 2004; received in revised form 3 February 2004; accepted 1 April 2004
Available online 19 May 2004
Abstract
One of the most important step in pattern recognition is the deﬁnition of features describing the entities that have to be assigned to classes.
From the point of View of chemical sensors, the extraction of features consists in the selection of some characteristics of the temporal
sequence of sensor signal taking place during the interaction between the sensors and the compound present in the environment.
In this paper, the morphological descriptors of the sensor trajectory in the phase space are introduced and investigated. The performance
of these new features have been compared with the usual features in three typical electronic nose applications.
© 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Chemical sensors; Feature extraction; Dynamic moments
1. Introduction the properties of dynamics systems may be utilized [2].
For instance, this approach has been followed adopting a
In recent years, the role of data analysis in chemical sens- non-linear dynamics model to calibrate the response of an
ing has been steadily growing. This is partly due to the emer— array of quartz microbalances [3] and to develop a drift
gence of subjects like electronic noses and tongues where counteraction strategy [4]. In another application the time
data analysis is necessary to extract any analytical informa- series expansion coefﬁcients were considered, for instance
tion from sensor signal. Also the interpretation of signals by Eklov et al. [5], as sensor features.
related to single sensors has been shown to be enhanced Beside the dynamic modelling, a number of methods
when a little bit more than conventional data analysis is aimed at providing a graphical representation of a system
used. Among the various data analysis tools those devoted have also been developed in the system theory realm. They
to the deﬁnition of novel features are particularly interest- are quite useful due to the immediate information display.
ing. To this regard, it is of great interest the fact that in- Such methods usually deﬁne suitable spaces where the state
creasing the number of features makes possible to perform of the system corresponds to a point and the time evolution
typical recognition application in a fashion usually reserved is represented by trajectories [6].
to sensor arrays but using only one sensor [1]. The use of this approach for chemical sensors has been
The extraction of features from a chemical sensor consists outlined in a recent paper where a phase space, suitable for
in the selection of some characteristics of the temporal se- thickness shear mode resonators, has been introduced [7].
quence of sensor signal taking place during the interaction This space was simply formed by the signal and its ﬁrst
between the sensors and the compound present in the enVi- time derivative, The description of sensor signals in these
ronnient. From a general point of View, a chemical sensor spaces may give rise to novel features that can alternatively
is a dynamic system whose signal temporally evolves fol- be used to build more accurate sensor models. For instance,
lowing, with its proper dynamics, the concentration of the the area spanned by the trajectory of the signal when it un-
analytes at which it is sensitive. dergoes a state transition has been proposed as an alternative
When a sensor is considered as a dynamic system any feature to estimate both gas concentration (in the frame of
of the currently available tools usually employed to study quantitative analysis) and class membership (in qualitative
analysis) [7]. Generally speaking, the area spanned by the
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +39-06-7259-7347; trajectory, namely the sum instantby instant of the prod-
fax: +39-06-2020-519. net of the Signal by its ﬁrst derivative, condenses the mag-
E—mail address: martinelli@ing,uniroma2,it (E. Martinelli). nitude of the interaction with its velocity while standard
0925-4005/59 — see front matter © 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.snb.2004.04.010

"
"2","E. Marlinelli el al./Sensors and Actuators B 101 (2004) 346—352 347
features usually considers only the magnitude of the signal analysis solved by partial least square discriminant analysis
shifts. (PLS-DA) and cross-validated by leave-one-out.

Nonetheless, the area being an obVious integral operation In the next section, an alternative phase space is intro-
neglects the characteristics proper of the signal evolution. duced along With the deﬁnition of the dynamic moments.
On the other hands, it is reasonable to expect that differ— Both the concepts are applied to an array of thickness shear
ent interactions may take place When a sensor is exposed to mode resonators coated by various chemically sensitive lay-
different compounds and that such differences should be re- ers.
ﬂected in the sensor signal evolution namely on its dynamic
properties. This makes important not merely the magnitude
of the signal shift or its integral combination With the inter— 2. Phase space, dynamic moments and chemical
action velocity (as in the area case) but also the shape of the sensors
trajectory in the phase space; so that, the interactions With
different compounds are expected to result in traj ectories Given a scalar observable quantity S(t) of a generic system,
differently shaped. it is possible to deﬁne a k—dimensional vector space, here-

The triVial way to describe a trajectory is to provide its an- With called phase space, With a deﬁned orthonormal base.
alytical representation, nonetheless actual sensor trajectories The fundamental property of the phase space is the corre-
may be difﬁcult to be ﬁtted With simple analytical functions. spondence between each point and the instantaneous state
Furthermore, trajectories could change making impossible of the system.
the use of a unique analytical function. A generic phase space can be deﬁned considering the

A better approach consists in the deﬁnition of a set of Taken’s Embedding theorem [6]. Given an observable quan-
descriptors able to capture general morphological properties tity S(t) and deﬁning a time delay lag r, the space coordi-
of the trajectories like the symmetries With respect to some nates are
ﬁxed directions such as the aXis and their bisectors.

In this paper, the sensor response Will be studied in a [S(t)s(t + T) ' ' 'SU + (k _ UT” (1)
phase space and the dynamic moments Will be introduced the time evolution of the signal S(t) results in a trajectory
as descriptors of the sensor trajectories. containing the dynamical properties of the system.

The use of moment descriptors as features in pattern Depending on the nature of the phenomena, trajectories
recognition problem Will be illustrated and discussed in prac- assume a large variety of shapes. Disregarding scale effects
tical electronic nose applications. Once a novel feature is the shapes of trajectories are expected to be associated to
introduced, in order to evaluate its performance it is nec- the properties of the physical phenomena. From this point
essary to compare its properties in a comparison test. This of View, it is interesting to deﬁne some morphological de-
is not a straightforward operation because this kind of tests scriptors able to encode the shape of the trajectories. These
is naturally inﬂuenced by the choice of the cases. Even so, morphological descriptors can then be used to obtain infor-
these tests provide an indication about the potentiality of a mation about the system dynamics.
feature extraction procedure, Which, from a practical point Here sets of morphological descriptors representing the
of View, is offered to the chemical sensors practitioners as parameters analogous to the second moments of the area of
an additional tool to be considered When chemical sensors a geometrical ﬁgure in a 2-D space are considered. These
applications are considered. quantities are sometimes called dynamic moments [8,9].

In this paper, dynamics moments features Will be con- They are calculated considering both the coordinates and
sidered as input of typical pattern recognition applications. bisectors of the space
Therefore, features Will be judged according to their capa- n
bility to increase the distance between the samples belong- Mpg = 12361.” (2)
ing to different classes and to decrease the distance between n i=1
samples of the same class. n

. Feature extraction is only the ﬁrst step of pattern reeog- MD3PB = @2063” _ Xiyz'Z) (3)
nition so in order to make the comparison effective it is 2n _
necessary that the Whole pattern recognition sequence of al- £21
gorithms Will remain unchanged. Nonetheless, the results ﬂ "" 3 2 2
may be different according to the kind of pattern recognition MD3SB = Z Z[2x i + 3 (x i yi + x W i )] (4)
classiﬁer following the feature extraction procedure. i=1

The choice of the pattern recognition classiﬁer has been 1 n
driven by the consideration that an optimal feature extraction MD3X = 2— :093 + 3xi yl-Z) (5)
should also tend to reduce the complexity of the data anal- n i=1
ysis. So that good results can be achieved using classiﬁers n
of low complexity. For this reason in this paper all the com- MD3Y 2 i205? + 3 x12 Yi) (6)
parisons have been performed using a simple discriminant 2” i=1

"
"3","348 E. Marlinelli el al./Sensors and Actuators B 101 (2004) 346—352

each term is labelled according to the notation used in [8], S(t) = Ale—t/ri + Aze—t/tz + c (8)

the number gives the degree of the moment. The subscript

indicates the direction along Which the moment is calculated: the tWO Signals differ for a httle variation 0f one Of the time

PB and SB are principal and secondary bisectors, x and y constants.

are the phase space axis. The quantities x and y are related The standard features extracted from this kind of s1gna1

to the observable quantity S(k) by the following relations is the net variation between the Signal measured before the
ex osure and after the transito . Obviousl accordin to

xk = S(k); yk = S(k —|— r) (7) .p . . . ry . y g
this deﬁnition these Signals result in the same feature and

each moment describes different morphological features of therefore they are not distinguishable.

the trajectory, so that the collective use of more than one The same signals can be represented in aphase space built

moment is required for an exhaustive description. It is also from the signal and its delayed value. The two trajectories

important to remark that the moments value depends on the are shown in Fig. 1b. Here the differences become more

time lag generating the phase space. eVident With respect to the time domain.

In order to apply dynamic moments to chemical sensors, Fig. 2a—c show three dynamic moments plotted versus the
let us consider a typical absorption—desorption experiment time lag. In order to improve the recognition between the
Where the sensor is abruptly exposed to a ﬁxed concentra- two signals the choice of both MD and the time lag are of
tion of some analyte. Assuming a proportion between the primary importance.
amount of the absorbed analyte and the sensor signal, sim- In this simple case, for MDZ (Fig. 2a) the largest differ-
ple absorption models leads to exponential behaviours of ence between the two signals occur for 11 = 1 s; for MD3PB
the sensor signal With time. In real cases, multi-exponential and MD3SB the separation is maximized considering TL 2
functions are more likely found [10,11]. 4 s. This simple example puts in evidence that dynamic mo-

The discerning property of dynamic moments can be i1— ments can emphasize the subtle differences between signals
lustrated considering the response of a sensor exposed to that appears rather similar in time domain. However, opti-
two analytes producing sensors signals very close one each mization of moment order and the time lag on Which the
other as shown in Fig. 1. These signals follow the following phase space is built is necessary to maximize the features
function performance.

Sensor Response , S(t)

W 150

E i i ::, ‘:1:::::::1::: i

>1 1 l :::::+_ “:‘::::‘:‘::::‘ I

8 1 : m:__1_>¥1__:_1__: :

g 100 1 :; i::i::i::; +:j::l; :

3 i : :1 ::::::::j:\_: 4:: /"" i

L: a a :-_____= / a

E.- 50 ____________________________§l:,\\l:\___i::::__.—_—:'i_""‘£:::::j:—____i _____________€_____________

3 ‘ : : :

O i i : :

o 100 200 $00 400 500 600
(a) Tlme ,[3]
Phase Space
a 6"" a a a = //’1
<0 40 ///
o 20 40 6O 80 100

(b) S(t)
Fig. 1. The signals of two model sensor exposed to a sudden concentration variation of a compound and a successive abrupt removal of the analyte.
Sensor signals obey to a two exponential behaviour in the time domain and they differ only for a little variation of one of the two time constants. Signals
are represented in the time domain (a) and in a phase space deﬁned by 5(1) and S(t + 5) as coordinates (b). The phase space representation makes more
evident the difference between the two signals.

"
"4","E. Martinellz’ et al./Sens0rs and Actuators B 101 (2004) 346—352 349
2 x 104 MD2
-3 ----!—-—___——-——
”3"""" _-
_4 __ ‘4—
z_----
'5 n-----
-6
O 5 1O 15 20 25 30
(a) Time Lag,[s]
5 x 105 MD3PB
4
3
2
O 5 10 15 20 25 30
(b) Time Lag.[s]
6
10
6.5 X MD3SB
6
5.5
5
4.5
0 5 1O 15 20 25 30
(c) Time Lag,[s]
Fig. 2. Three dynamic moments plotted vs. the time lag calculated from the trajectories shown in Fig. 1b. The plotted moments are: MD2 (a), MD3PB
(b) and MD3SB (c). A good separation between the two signals is achieved by the three moments, except the ﬁrst points of MD3PB, the separation
between signals is, in this case, not dependent from the time lag.
In the next section, the potentialities of MD will be in- of Rome “Tor Vergata” and Technobiochip) [12]. This
vestigated in two practical cases. electronic nose is based on thickness shear rnode quartz
resonators (TSMR). Sensors sensitivity is provided by a
molecular ﬁlm of metalloporphyrins coating the surface of
3. Experimental TSMR sensors [13,14].
The sensors signal is a sequence of frequencies sampled
The performances of the dynamic moments strategies with at the constant interval of 10 s. Time lags multiple of 10 s
respect to standard features have been evaluated in two typ- have been utilized in the phase space building.
ical electronic nose applications. These experiments were Measurements have been performed enclosing individual
typical pattern recognition application aimed, in particu- fruits in glass jars. Jars were then sealed and held at a con-
lar, at classifying between populations of kiwi-fruits and stant temperature for 20min in order to establish a steady
peaches. headspace composition. Headspace was ﬂuxed in the elec-
The ﬁrst experiment considers the difference ofheadspaces tronic nose measurement chamber by the LibraNose proper
0f kiwi-fruits 0f the same cultivar (hayward) but farmed pumping system.
in conventional and biological agriculture. Since biological Partial least square discriminant analysis has been
agriculture avoids the use of pesticides this is expected to used as classiﬁer. Models have been cross-validated with
result in the headspace composition. leave-one-out technique. In order to evaluate the iden-
The second experiment represents a classic ripening stage tiﬁcation performances of the dynamic moments have
discrimination, a number of peaches with three different been compared with the frequently shift between the
storage time were measured in order to detect the differences steady frequencies in measuring and cleaning phase. Fea-
in post-harvest processes. tures has been calculated and used without any additional
The experiments involved 45 kiwi-fruits and 19 peaches. pre-processing except autoscaling (zero mean and uni-
The chemical sensor array used for the experiments was tary variance). All calculations have been performed in
one of the prototypes of the LibraNose series (University rnatlab.

"
"5","350 E. Martinellz' el al./Sens0rs and Actuators B 101 (2004) 346—352
4. Results and discussion the frequency shift, the classiﬁer results biased towards the
most populated class.
4.]. Kiwi-fmits experiment This effect disappears When MD is used as input of the
classiﬁer. In this case being the feature more discriminant the
For this experiment we have used as feature MD2 With inequality in class population does not give any effect of the
TL 2 20 and 30 s and MD3PB With 11 = 20 s. The dynamic classiﬁcation and an almost perfect recognition is obtained.
moments have been extracted by sensor responses. As usual With PLS-DA models, classiﬁcation can be
In Table 1 the confusion matrices obtained by PLS-DA shown plotting the scores of the PLS model resolving the
models built considering as input either the frequency shift classiﬁcation problem. Fig. 3 shows the score plot of the
(Table 1a) or the MD2 (Table 1b) are shown. It is relevant to ﬁrst two latent variables of PLS-DA model built from MD
note that in the case of the shift of frequency the errors are features. Only 68% 0f the variance is explained in this
not equally distributed between the two classes. This effect is plot, nonetheless the tendency to separate the two classes is
mainly due to the fact that the data set is not balanced (only clearly Visible. It has to be remarked that the cross-validated
31% 0f the data are related to the biological cultivar) and as PLS-DA model is fenned by four 1atent variables.
a consequence due to the scarce discrimination property of
4.2. Peaches experiment
Table 1
Cf' t' fPLS-DA'th k"" ' tbt'd' . . .
ingitusmn ma “X 0 m 6 WI eXpenmen 0 am usmg as For this dataset the dynamic moments MD2 With 11 =
—.. 10s and TL 2 20s was considered. In Table 2 the confu-
Indusmal BIOIOglcal sion matrices resulting from the PLS-DA models obtained
(a) The shift of frequency With these dynamic moments and the standard features are
IQdUStrPl 29 2 shown. Also in this case the dynamic moment outperforms
BIOIOglcal 6 8 With respect to the standard frequency shift. The percentage
(19) The dynamic moment of correct classiﬁcation is around 89% With only two mis-
Industrial 30 1 classiﬁed samples and the performance improvement respect
Biological 0 14 t0 the PLS model built With the shift of frequency is around
The classiﬁcation rates are 82 and 97% for frequency shift and dynamic 16%' The cross-yalidation gives a minimum Of the .classiﬁ-
moments, respectively. cation errors us1ng four latent variables. The class1ﬁcat10n
Scores Plot
4
O1
3 0
01m '9
41 00
2 O1
O1
01 ‘
A 1 l 01 00
°\° o
3 O1 O1 \ 00
N O 01
a 0 m1 . —e% .
N 00
> 01 O 00
_l
-1 01 O
01
O1
-2
01
-3 O1
O1
.1
""33 -2 -1 o 1 2 3 4
LV1 (46.28%)
Fig. 3. Score plot of the ﬁrst two latent variables of the PLS-DA model calculated using the dynamic moments as input in the case of the kiwi-fruit
experiment. Class O and class 1 label industrial and biological cultivars, respectively.

"
"6","E. Martinellz’ et al./Sensors and Actuators B 101 (2004) 346—352 351
Scores Plot
0.8—I—I—‘72 T : I : -,
0.6 1
0.4— .33 4
32
0.2— “r3 ,7 H;
(H ‘ III l713
V (‘2 I I
’3 0 A ,. ,z I ___‘_;.,
:2 V11 (:1 Ix’ I 1'12 7
Q ”l I I
S '0-2_ ’1’ Q2 _;
V [II
3 ’ :2
~0.4 ‘ .
-o.6— 4
-O.8 “ 43.2 -*
-1 , :
(J1
-1.2 —-——1———1—' ’ ' ' ‘
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
LV 2 (14.13%)
Fig. 4. Score plot of the second and fourth latent variables of PLS-DA evaluated using the dynamic moments as input, in the case of the peaches dataset.
Ripeness states are indicated by integer numbers from 1 to 3 indicating the pre-ripe, ripe and over-ripe fruits. The plot explains only 15% of the total
variance of the data.
is spread over the four latent variables so that the better The difference in optimized parameters is not completely
separation between classes is obtained plotting the second clear; likely they depend on the different kinds of experi-
and the fourth latent variables as shown in Fig. 4, only 15% mental conditions that could mask the intrinsic dynamic in-
of the total variance is represented in this plot. Evidently, formation of the sensors. The time lag in particular, can be
the process of ripening in this population of peaches is not expressed only as multiple of the sampling rate of the sen-
straightforward and the ripening stage is not the only vari- sor signal, in the experiments here described the signal rate
ance source in the data. was large (10 s). A shorter sampling time could bring to a
Although in both the cases the dynamic moments outper— better prediction capability.
form the standard frequency shift the performance of the
method depends on the phase space (through the time lag)
and the particular selected moment requiring in practice an 5. Conclusions
adjustment of these parameters.
In this paper, a novel feature extraction procedure for
Table 2 chemical sensors has been illustrated and the properties have
Confusion matrix of PLS-DA for the peaches dataset calculated using as been investigated in the ease of an array of thickness shear
Input mode resonators. The explored feature consists in a set of
Pre-ripe Ripe Over-ripe synthetic descriptors of the morphological properties of the
(a) The frequency shift sensor Signal trajectory in a proper phase space. .
Pre-ripe 2 3 0 Such quantities are the dynamic moments that describe
Ripe O 8 O the symmetry properties of curves towards a number of ﬁxed
OVer-fipe 0 2 4 directions such as the coordinate aXis and their bisectors.
(b) The dynamic moments The properties of these features have been investigated
. mainly comparing the performances of a PLS-DA classiﬁer
Pre-rlpe 5 O O . . .
Ripe 0 8 0 fed alternatively With the standard frequency shift and the
Over-ripe 0 2 4 dynamic moments. Comparisons have been performed With
73% of samples are correctly classiﬁed feeding the classiﬁer with the tYVO data sets related F0 typical .eleCtronlc nose experiments
frequency shift, this value increases up to 89% when dynamic moments almed at grading fmlts according to dlfferent cultwars 01‘
are used as classiﬁer input. ripening stage. In both cases, the PLS-DA models built from

"
"7","352 E. Marlinellz' el al./Sensors and Actuators B 101 (2004) 346—352
dynamic moments have obtained the best classiﬁcation rates. enth International Conference on Solid State Sensors and Actuators,
Moreover in the kiwi-fruit dataset the discrimination was not [2] Eraﬁducer; 93:1 EOKIS/Ihilmiip' ”1331;11:10 JP“: 191:93' P t. H 11
. . . Jung, . a , o e mg 0 ynam1c ys ems, ren we a ,
inﬂuenced by the unequal population of the two ciasses. The Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1994.
results obtained reveal that these features contain tangible [3] F. Davide, C. Di Natale, A. D’Amico, A. Hieﬂemann, J_ Mitrovics,
part of the information related to the essential characteristics M. Schweizer, U. Weimar, W. Gépel, Structure identiﬁcation of
Of the System under measurement. non-linear models for QMB polymer coated sensors, Sens. Actuators
It is important to note that the optimal choice and the B 25 (1995) 830—842; . , . . .
number of MD and the time lags can be depending on the [4] IIVI'LHOImPérg’ FIDaVlde’ C' 1.31 Natale” A' D AHFCO’ F' quumf
. . . . . undstrom, Dr1ft counteract10n 1n odour recogn1t10n app11cat10ns.
SPECIﬁC apphcatlon as seen In the cases here under StUd' lifelong calibration method, Sens. Actuators B 42 (1997) 185—
ied. Therefore, in general it could be necessary to use dif— 194.
ferent dynamic models at different time lags to maximize [5] T. Eklov, P. Martensson, I. Lundstrom, Selection of variables for
the discrimination of the classiﬁcation model. In particular, 3:336:13; Egltharlate gas sensor data= Anal' Chlm' Am 381
the deﬁmtlon Of the phase Space IS important for the overall [6] F. Takens, Detecting strange attractors in turbolence, in: D. Rand,
quahty 0f the features- In thlS paper, a space deﬁned by de' L.S. Young (Eds), Dynamical Systems and Turbulence, Warwick,
layed signal coordinates has been used. The amount of time 1980, pp. 366—381.
lag is important both for the deﬁnition of the trajectory and [7] E. Martinelli, C. Falconi, A. D’Amico, C. Di Natale, Feature extrac-
for the associated dynamic moment. tion chemical sensors in phase space, Sens. Actuators B 95 (2003)
Dynamic moments have been shown to be rather sensitive 132—139'
. . . [8] A. Fichera, C. Losenno, A. Pagano, Clustering of chaotic dynamics
to small Changes In the sensors dynamics, thlS makes the of a lean gas-turbine combustor, Appl. Energy 69 (2) (2001) 101—
evaluation very sensitive to the chemical information but 117.
also to the disturbances as for example temperature and ﬂow [9] M. Annunziato, H.D.I. Abarbanel, Non linear dynamics for classi-
rate ﬂuctuations that, very likely, are expected to inﬂuence fication of multiphase ﬂow regimes, in: Proceedings of the Interna-
the sensor dynamics. t10na1.C0nference 0n Soft Computmg, SQCO, Geneva. 1999.
. . [10] R. Gu1terrez-Osuma, H.T.Nag1e, S.S. Sch1ffmann, Trans1ent response
Although the Inﬂuence Of suCh parameters necess1tate Of analysis of an electronic nose using multi-exponential models, Sens.
a deep investigation, we can conclude that the control of the Actuators B 61 (1999) 61 170—182.
measurement protocol parameters is of great importance. [11] P- Accettola, M- Balsi, A- D’Amiw, C- Di Natale, A- Macagnano,
Finally, the abundance Of features that iS possible to CX- F. Sortino, Time-constant extracting ﬁlters for fast gas identiﬁcation
tract from the morphological description 0ftraject0ries in the in elecmmic noses” Elecmn' Lett' 38 (2002) 510—511'

. . . [12] D.S. Ballantine (Ed.) Acoustic Wave Sensors: Theory, Design, and
phase space, makes thlS approach interesting to Study from Physico-Chemical Applications, Academic Press, New York, USA,
a different point of View the mechanisms that characterize 1996.
the adsorption—desorption process of chemical sensors, [13] C. Di Natale, A. Macagnano, E. Martinelli, R. Paolesse, E. Proietti,

A. D’Amico, The evaluation of quality of post-harvest oranges and
apples by means of an electronic nose, Sens. Actuators B 78 (2001)
26—31.
References [14] C. Di Natale, R. Paolesse, A. Macagnano, A. Mantini, C. G0-
letti, E. Tarizzo, A. D’Amico, Characterization and design of
[1] R. Konishi, T. Aoki, The proposal of gas discrimination method by porphyrins-based broad selectivity chemical sensors for electronic
one sensor using neural networks, in: Technical Digest of the seV- nose applications, Sens. Actuators B 52 (1998) 162—168.

"
