"","x"
"1","61St International Astronautical Congress, Prague, CZ. 2010.This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject
to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
IAC-10.B3.l.4
THE ERA OF INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION UTILIZATION BEGINS: RESEARCH
STRATEGY, INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION, AND REALIZED POTENTIAL
Ms. Tracy Thumm
ESCG/Jacobs, Houston, United States, tracy.thumm-1@nasa.gov
Dr. Julie A. Robinson and Dr. Tara Ruttley
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)/Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, United
States, iulie.a.robinson@nasa.gov tara.m.ruttley@nasa.gov
Dr. Perry Johnson-Green
Canadian Space Agency, Saint—Hubert, Quebec, Canada, germ.iohnson-green@asc-csa.gc.ca
Dr. George Karabadzhak
Korolyov (Moscow reg.), Russia, gfk@tsniimash.ru
Mr. Tai Nakamura
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), Ibaraki, Japan, nakamura.tai@iaxa.i9
Dr. Igor V. Sorokin
S.P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia, Korolev, Russia, igor.v.sorokin@rsce.ru
Dr. Martin Zell
European Space Agency (ESA), Noordwijk, The Netherlands, martin.zell@esa.int
Mr. Sabbagh Jean
ASI, Rome, Italy, iean.sabbagh@asi.it
With the assembly of the International Space Station (188) nearing completion and the support of a full-time crew
of six, a new era of utilization for research is beginning. For more than 15 years, the 188 international partnership has
weathered ﬁnancial, technical and political challenges proving that nations can work together to complete assembly
of the largest space vehicle in history. And while the ISS partners can be proud of having completed one of the most
ambitious engineering projects ever conceived, the challenge of successfully using the platform remains. During the
ISS assembly phase, the potential beneﬁts of space-based research and development were demonstrated; including
the advancement of scientiﬁc knowledge based on experiments conducted in space, development and testing of new
technologies, and derivation of Earth applications from new understanding. The conﬁgurability and human-tended
capabilities of the ISS provide a unique platform. The international utilization strategy is based on research ranging
from physical sciences, biology, medicine, psychology, to Earth observation, human exploration preparation and
technology demonstration. The ability to complete follow-on investigations in a period of months allows researchers
to make rapid advances based on new knowledge gained from 188 activities. During the utilization phase, the ISS
partners are working together to track the objectives, accomplishments, and the applications of the new knowledge
gained. This presentation will summarize the consolidated international results of these tracking activities and
approaches. Areas of current research on 188 with strong international cooperation will be highlighted including
cardiovascular studies, cell and plant biology studies, radiation, physics of matter, and advanced alloys. Scientiﬁc
knowledge and new technologies derived from research on the 188 will be realized through improving quality of life
on Earth and future spaceﬂight endeavours. Extension of the 188 through 2020 and beyond will insure that the
beneﬁts of research will be achievable for the International Partnership.
INTRODUCTION Space Agency (CSA), European Space Agency (ESA),
J apanese Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA),
Historical Perspective Federal Space Agency of Russia (Roscosmos) and the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Several years before the ﬁrst module of the (NASA) was developed. This partnership has worked
International Space Station (188) was launched in 1998, together for nearly two decades to complete one of the
an international collaboration between the Canadian most ambitious engineering projects ever conceived.
IAC-lO-B3.l.4 Page 1 of7

"
"2","61St International Astronautical Congress, Prague, CZ. 2010.This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject
to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
Over the past 12 years, the 188 Program has development; and, educational activities. (Figure 1)
successfully navigated ﬁnancial, technical and political
challenges to put the largest Inanned vehicle in history Physical and Material Sciences Much Of our
into low—Earth orbit (LEO). understanding of physics is based on the inclusion of
gravity in fundamental equations. Using the unique
As the assembly phase of the ISS nears completion, laboratory environment of the 188, scientists are able to
the focus is shifting to the utilization phase and t0 the study long—term physical effects in the absence 0f
potential research achievements conducted on this gravity, WithOUt the complications 0f gravity—related
research platform. Even before the ﬁrst crewmember processes such as buoyancy—driven convection and
took up residency 0n the 188, science and technology sedimentation. The microgravity environment allows
experiments were onboard and operating. Over the different physical properties to dominate systems, and
assembly period, there has been a signiﬁcant increase in these have been harnessed for a Wide variety 0f
the number of experiments conducted and the investigations in the physical sciencesm Within this
disciplines they span. This trend Will continue through discipline, the experiments fall into one Of the following
2020 and beyond — the “Era of ISS Utilization”. [1] subcategories: combustion science, ﬂUid physics,
materials science, fundamental physics, plasma physics
RESEARCH STRATEGY and macromolecular crystal growth (non—biological).
Scientists from around the world have a unique Biology and Biotechnology The 21“ century has
opportunity for their experiments to be conducted in been referred to as the “era 0f biology” due to advances
microgravity. Over the past year international and in genomic research and sequencing 0f the human
national organizations of scientists have reviewed the genome. Microgravity represents a distinct path 0f
important scientiﬁc potential of 188 as a research biological challenge to use in exploring genomic
platform[1’2] To date, there have been 59 countries response. Biological systems behave differently in the
represented by research and educational activities on the microgravity environment. Studying biological
188. As the era of utilization begins, it is anticipated development and processes under varying levels Of
that this number Will grow. gravity for long periods of time is possible on the 188.
Previous studies have shown that microbes have an
From 1998 through March 2010, a total of 552 increased Virulence after exposure to microgravitym.
experiments have been conducted on 188 by the partner Studies in rotating W311 bioreactors (a ground—based
agencies. The experiments have been placed into seven simulator 0f microgravity) have suggested potential
categories in order to track the accomplishments: increase in the pluripotency 0f cells and improves tissue
physical and material sciences; biology and morphogenesis in culture (for recent diverse examples,
biotechnology; human research; Earth and space see references [5: 6» 7])- All levels 0f biological
science; technology development; commercial organization, from cells to Whole organisms, respond to
Number of Experiments Performed Through Expeditions 213'22 (March 2D 1D}
E 133% lBiﬂlﬂgyand
E- BiDtEChr‘IDlﬂgy
E 33% l Earth and Space Science
i
E 63% lEducatinnalActiuities
E
E. 43% l Human Resea rch
..""'L'
D CI
E}, 23/5 I Physical and Materials
E Science
E 3% lTechr‘uJI-zzugi,»r
“'- CSA ESA JAKA NASARDsc-jsmns
F igure 1 .' Number ofexperiment conducted on the ISS through March 2010.
IAC—lO—B3.1.4 Page 2 0f7

"
"3","61St International Astronautical Congress, Prague, CZ. 2010.This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject
to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
the absence of gravity and can be studied on 188. math (STEM). Experiments conducted on the ISS offer
Furthermore, important exobiology questions can be many levels of student participation; from developing
addressed particularly by using the platforms on the hardware, software, or procedures to the execution of
exterior of the 188, such as the European Technology experiments using ground control to the analysis of
Exposure Facility (EuTEF). [8] In addition, the 188 is samples [13].
proved to be an excellent laboratory for biotechnology
implementation. INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION

Human Research The 188 provides an environment The International Partners from Canada, Europe,
to study various aspects of human health that will J apan, Russia and the United States have worked
beneﬁt long duration spaceﬂight crewmenibers and life together to develop and implement engineering designs,
on Earth. Many of the investigations conducted on the assembly, on orbit operations and scientiﬁc research
ISS address the mechanisms of the risks of spaceﬂight plans. This unprecedented global partnership has
to the human bodymm — the relationship to the succeeded through many challenges including ﬁnancial
microgravity and radiation environments — including difﬁculties and transportation concerns.
musculoskeletal physiology, cardiovascular health,
neurological systems, and human behavior and The partnership is not limited to engineering
performance. While this research is used to develop successes; it also includes collaboration on many ISS
countermeasures to reduce the risks of spaceﬂight, there research projects. Frequently, scientists from different
are also many beneﬁts that can be applied to daily life countries work together on a single experiment. One
of people on Earth. such experiment is the International Caenorhabditis

elegans Experiment: Physiological Study of Nematode

Earth and Space Science Low-Earth Orbit (LEO) is Worms in Weightlessness (ICE-Firsti). Investigators
a vantage point to observe Earth and the solar system. from Canada, France, Japan, and the United States
The 188 provides a dedicated permanent orbital worked together to study effects of the spaceﬂight
platform for observation instruments, external and environment on living systems. Each of the investigator
internal, plus the capability of servicing should it be teams studied a different aspect of effects which
necessary. The 188 is home to several instruments that included radiobiology, muscle protein changes, ageing,
are used to View cosmic radiation, solar events, Earth’s apoptosis, radiation effects on living organisms, and
ionosphere and surface to name a few. Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) damage and repair.

T echnology Development The 188 provides aunique The 188 partner agencies have a joint database
opportunity for scientists and engineers to test new containing summaries of the research conducted on the
technologies that are applicable for future space 188. In this library, experiments are tracked from the
exploration and for use on Earth. This discipline covers beginning until the ﬁnal results paper is published. Each
many applications of technology development including summary contains information on the science of the
environmental monitoring, communications, experiment, how the crew conducts the experiment,
characterizing the microgravity environment, micro-, where on 188 does the experiment take place, references
nano- and picosatellites, spacecraft systems, and such as published results and publications related to the
robotics. research, and investigator informationm]

Commercial Development Through the history of REALIZED POTENTIAL
the ISS, experiments have led to commercial
development of new technology that is used on Earth. Scientiﬁc research began on the 188 before the ﬁrst
These early applications include rapid screening of permanent crew lived aboard. Even though the primary
candidate vaccines, microencapsulation for improved focus during this time was on the construction of the
anti-tunior drugsﬂo’ 11], and high quality protein crystal ISS, nearly half of the experiments conducted have been
growth. [1’12] Many research topics that are initially basic completed. As the focus of the 188 changes from
or applied may eventually evolve into industrially assembly to utilization, the throughput of the
relevant processes and/or products on 188. experiments is accelerating and the number of

experiments completed in a short timeframe is expected
to increase. After activities are completed on 188, it

Education and Outreach The scientiﬁc and often takes 3-5 years for all the analyses to be
engineering accomplishments of the ISS provide an completed and results to be published.[15] Here we
opportunity to educate and inspire students of all ages in highlight recent investigations and remarkable results of
their studies of science, technology, engineering and 188 research during the assembly years.

IAC-lO-B3.l.4 Page 3 of7

"
"4","61St International Astronautical Congress, Prague, CZ. 2010.This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject
to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
experiment has led to additional experiments such as the
Physical and Material Sciences The ESA—sponsored ESA sponsored Plasma Crystal Research on the ISS
investigation, Simulation of Geophysical Fluid Flow (PK-3 Plus. Principal Investigator: H. Thomas, Ph.D.
under Microgravity (Geoﬂow. Principal Investigator: C. Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics,
Egbers, Brandenburg University of Technology, Garching, Germany).[16]
Cottbus, Germany), uses a model of the Earth’s crust
and liquid core comprised of silicone oil Biological Research Recent studies such as the
(incompressible ﬂuid) to evaluate ﬂuid behavior under Effect of Spaceﬂight 0n Microbial Gene Expression and
different conditions (Figure 2). Potential applications Virulence (Microbe Principal Investigator: C.
for this research include improvements to a variety of Nickerson, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona)
engineering applications, such as spherical gyroscopes and Microbial Drug Resistance and Virulence (MDRV
and bearings, centrifugal pumps and high—performance Principal Investigator“: D. Niesel, University of Texas
heat exchangers. Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas), have shown an
increase in microbial Virulence in some species When
I ~ ‘ ) activated in microgravity. Through this body of
'-. .; "" . r ’. ;. 1., research, the scientists have identiﬁed the controlling
_'-'. ,I ""v A. ‘. . ';;:"". ‘,-;', - 'L‘\‘ . . -
, . .«J‘ ﬁtﬁgg L, ‘39-» 7 ‘ t .> ¢A"":».f);.‘.;.;fx-._. gene. resp.ons11[)41e17]f0r the increased Virulence Salmonella
ju‘ "" 9,; kg , ‘-‘5"".': ""4.941“ i')‘ .' 3:3” lyphzmurlum. 9
. w .. - ~31
‘ Mi 6.: .. _~ * 212M - ‘ . .
'. g «f?f?_-...;’; J; '1 v ‘ 1:35..“ ‘ ﬂ _ 4‘ f Human Health The training methods developed by
.r' uﬁj %{‘ ‘1 \ﬁ . . §f, the Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Microgravity
* h, $.93 g; ,4, :3 “i“ 3f ” ., ’; (ADUM Principal Investigator: S. Dulchavsky, Henry
' ..:‘ ‘M ‘_ _' v- . : ...H' . . . . . .
”"" ~a?\7;<‘<\g-.>f‘;r.+‘°’ ”4‘ “‘3’ 4» 41' r Ford Health System, Detr01t, Michigan) investigation
’ have been incorporated by the American College of
\ , Sur eons Committee on Education into a com uter—
. . n g P
- ' '_-‘\ .1 ‘ _ - based program to teach ultrasound to surgeons. The
“3% ‘ ~n- t 'd t h ' d 1 (1 db th
V ; ﬁg. 1. _ v 15,-?""W35. rerrio e gui ance ec niques eveope were use y e
' mﬁﬂ , “1;; .v , 20f Ugﬁf‘ﬁ.m7 A United States Olympic committee to pr0V1de care
3}? ’ V .. , . 33,“ Y ‘ ' -. I 7‘ 9 during the Olympic Games. [1] (Figure 3)
’3; ,. 4 g"". .53.].‘5 ‘. w f “5
a: . :r g. ' -,-;— is
""’ ‘ '1‘ -~. . ""A t 7‘: ‘g-iir‘. '31""; .
"" 5-: ”‘57:?""3' f ' v ~ , 1“”! ’ l _
.4; IX ,, 7:"" 1 1"".‘-‘f’"" ~~""r I Q
. «mp i»- .. z;- ’ Mr a
Figure 2: The interferograms shown above are from the Geoﬂow JI‘ ‘ ‘ PW , - . i
experiment, Which is a model of Earth’s crust and liquid core. Here, a - ’ j '>‘ i; a I
Viscous incompressible ﬂuid (silicone oil) is used to understand ﬂuid ,‘ 2': . V ”Z"". ,7 ' r ‘
under different conditions. Applications include ﬂow in the y"", //
atmosphere and oceans, and movement of Earth’s mantle on a global t /- it ’ ﬂ 4""
scale, as well as other astrophysical and geophysical problems. / ., . , a . , ""f
Results from Geoﬂow Will also be useful for making improvements in s \ ~ :r‘ ' ’
avariety of engineering applications, such as spherical gyroscopes and ' ‘ .
bearings, centrifugal pumps, and high-perforrnance heat exchangers.
Image courtesy ofProfessor C. Egbers, BTU Cottbus. Figure 3: (Left) Utilizing the ADUM protocols, ISS Expedition
Commander Leroy Chiao performs an ultrasound examination of the
One Of the ﬁrst experiments conducted on the ISS eye on Flight Engineer Salizhan Sharipov. (Right) Mountain climber
th D t d L. 'd P1 C t 1 . C d't' performs a comprehensive chest ultrasound examination at the
was . 6 us y an Iqul asma 1‘75 a S In 011.1 Ions Advanced Base Camp on Mt Everest. The operator, Who had never
0f MlcrograVlty (PlaSma CWSMI- PrlIlClpal Investlgator: used ultrasound equipment, was guided remotely over the internet
V. Fortov9 Director Joint Institute for High using a satellite phone. Image provided courtesy of Scott A.
Temperature Russian Academy Of Science Russia). Dulchavsky, M.D., Ph.D., Henry Ford Health System, Detroit,
. . .’ . . ’ Michigan.
This investigation studied complex plasma, a low—
tem erature aseous mixture of ionized as neutral as .
p . g . . g ’ . g. ’ Human Performance The Perceptual Motor Deﬂ01ts
and micron—s1zed particles. The micrograwty . . . .
. . . . . in Space (PMDIS. Pr1n01pa1 Investigator: B. Fowler,
enVironrnent 0f the ISS pr0V1ded the spe01ﬂc conditions . . . .
. . York Un1vers1ty, Downswew, Ontario, Canada)
necessary to develop larger three—d1rnens1onal plasma . . .
. . experiment sought to identify the root causes of the
crystals in a weaker electric ﬁeld When compared to . . . .
. . decline in perceptual—motor coordination (e.g. ﬂne
crystals produced on Earth; Which revealed the unique . . . .
. . hand—eye coordination) that is observed during the
structural details of the crystals. This successful . . . . .
period of adaptation to spaceﬂight. This experiment
IAC—lO—B3.1.4 Page 4 0f7

"
"5","61St International Astronautical Congress, Prague, CZ. 2010.This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject
to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
took place on ISS using shuttle crew as subjects. Dr.
Fowler concluded that cognitive overload and stress- Commercial Development The Japan Aerospace
related factors drove the perceptual motor deﬁcits, Exploration Agency - High Quality Protein
rather than physiological changes to the vestibular Crystallization Project (JAM—GCF. Principal
system induced by microgravity. These results have Investigator: H. Tanaka, Japan Space Forum, Tokyo,
strong implications for training and operational Japan) Which was supported by Roscosmos for launch
strategiestlg] and recovery examined protein crystal growth in
microgravity of the HQL-79 (human hematopoietic
Earth and Space Observations Mounted externally prostaglandin D2 synthase inhibitor) protein. This
on the ISS is the JAXA sponsored experiment Monitor protein is a candidate treatment in inhibiting the effects
of All-sky X-ray Image (MAXI Principal Investigator: of Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy. The crystals grown
M. Matsuoka, Institute of Space and Astronautical in microgravity allowed researchers to more accurately
Science (ISAS) ISS Science Project Ofﬁce, Japan determine the three-dimensional structure of HQL-79
Aerospace Exploration Agency, Tsukuba, J apan). This Which led to the development of a more potent form of
investigation uses highly sensitive X-ray slit cameras to the protein (Figure 4). [”[16]
monitor over 1,000 sources of X-rays in space over an
energy range of 0.5 to 30 keV. The slit cameras scan ...t': t
the sky through the entire 96 minute orbit of the ISS. “:0 ____..... © -"". v;
The cameras determine the direction of X-ray sources ""‘omu'e { .5: ‘33"":
Within the narrow ﬁeld of View of the slit that is ?f: ‘53,.“
orthogonally oriented to a one-dimensional position- a ,:t&W~-€‘ iﬁtﬁr‘ftt
sensitive X-ray detector. As an X-ray source moves &,'¢$§ﬁf%‘:§9"" in §:
according to the motion of the International Space . 99""“: {'9 ‘
Station, another position of the X-ray source is h
determined When the sources are captured by the
collimated ﬁeld of View of the camera. t_k
T echnology Development The need to monitor the . 41.7""
presence and colonization of microbes on ISS has also e?!"" {t‘t’}\ “;
led to the use of advanced molecular technologies to ,r’}: 3‘ ' V “4», , /'
better understand the types of organisms the crew could {g} e - V
encounter, the sources, and the risks. The Surface, \1 ' ‘53“)-
Water and Air Biocharacterization (SWAB. Principal
Investigator: D. Pierson, Johnson Space Center, _ _ _
H ouston, T exas) experiment provided a method Of 0n_ Figure 4 : Electron Den31ty Maps of HQL-79 crystals grown in space
. . . . show a more detailed three-dimen31onal structure (top) as compared to
Ofblt mICI‘Oblal analySIS that could deteet far more types those grown on Earth (bottom), Which also uncovered the presence of
Of harmful microorganisms than standard ISS culture a newly identiﬁed water molecule. Figures courtesy of Yoshihiro
testing, including Legionella (the bacterium Which Urade-
causes Legionnaires' disease) and Cryptosporidium (a
parasite common in contaminated water). A different Education and Outreach AS part Of the educational
microbial monitoring study employs the hardware Lab- activities associated With the ﬁrst Canadian ISS
on-a-Chip Application Development-Portable Test Expedition crewmember, Robert Thirsk, 1.85 million
System (LOCAD-PTS. Principal investigator: N. students participated in hands-on learning activities
Wainwright, Charles River Endosafe, Charleston, South related to ISS science. Thirsk participated in ﬁve classes
Carolina), Which is a handheld device that enables from space With nearly 24,000 students attending. CSA
astronauts to perform microﬂuidic tests for endotoxins, ih conjunction With the International Space University
glucan, and lipoteichoic acid on an interchangeable conducted ah experiment on optical illusions in space
thumb-sized cartridge With a press of a button.t19] Real- With ThhSk-[ ]
time data analysis using microﬂuidics offers a drastic
reduction in time for detection of fungi as well as gram W
negative and gram positive bacteria (minutes versus
days), thus demonstrating the advantages of compact, The Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer-OZ (AMS'02-
user-ﬁiendly hardware that has the potential to provide Principal Spokesperson 5- Ting, CERN: Geneva and
astronauts With information to make autonomous Massachusetts Institute Of Technology, Cambridge,
decisions on contamination issues and mitigate risks to Massachusetts) is scheduled to launch to the ISS ih
their health. early 2011. The AMS-02 (Figure 5) is a state-of—the-art
IAC-10-B3.1.4 Page 5 of7

"
"6","61St International Astronautical Congress, Prague, CZ. 2010.This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject
to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
particle physics detector that uses the environment of The dawning of a new era of scientiﬁc research on
space to search for antiInatter, dark matter and the ISS is upon us as we move from the assembly phase
measuring cosmic rays. By detecting and characterizing t0 the utilization phase. Even though research has been
high—energy cosmic rays that are produced by highly conducted throughout the assembly phase, the future
energetic events such as supernovae explosions, it is will see an intensiﬁed research effort as this orbiting
expected that AMS—02 will advance knowledge of the laboratory reaches its full potential. As we begin the
universe and lead to increased understanding of the 21St century, the ISS represents an extraordinary leap
universe's origin.[1’ 20] forward in space technology and the future potential of
research and development is as least as great as the
__(_r_ . engineering achievements already achieved.
,5!% EtW-{I' \[Qi’f ‘15-. 4'"" The ISS. not enly represents hroad .perspectivestor a
,- ‘7- £# +1.. MM'IW 3.27? new future in seientiﬁc discoveries, it is a community of
' - ' ‘. 7 “1.; -- international collaborators who have overcome
‘ i _ _ ﬁnancial, technical and political challenges to assemble
. “\i.‘ :l‘ ‘5‘ ‘1, one of the greatest engineering accomplishments. This
1 7 a ‘\.__‘==—-_-=;;ﬁ #- partnership continues to reach for extraordinary
‘ 7777 _ achievements in science and technology — the future of
-1 ‘3’“ 9., ‘ """" the ISS will beneﬁt mankind on Earth and future space
‘. exploration.
Figure 5: The AMS-02 state-of-the-art particle physics detector. REFERENCES
Image courtesy of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, —
Cambridge, MA. 7
[1] NASA. Dietel M, Feuerbacher B, Fortov V, Hart D,
Kennel C, Korablev O, Mukai C, Sawaoka A, Suedfeld, P,
‘% . Ting, S, Wolf, P, Buckley, N, Fuglesang, C, Johnson-Green,
'- 14:"" P., Karabadzhak, G., Nakamura, T., Pettit, D., Robinson, J.,
\ Ruttley, T. Sorokin, 1., Thumm, T. Uhran, M., Zell, M. 2010.
I 7 ‘ ‘t The Era of International Space Station Utilization:
‘ ,. Perspectives on Strategy From International Research Leaders.
_/ a: U. - NASA/NP-2010-03-OO3-JSC.
7 ‘ t ‘ ‘1 3. .. 7 , [2] Committee for the Decadal Survey on Biological and
2... , . (13‘s ”3’3 ‘ ' 7. ' Physical Science in Space; National Research Council. 2010.
’ §""f . ‘ T "" - Life and Physical Sciences Research for a New Era of Space
Exploration: An Interim Report. The National Academies
Press.
Figure 6: R0b0naut2, the next generation of dexterous humanoid [3] NASA_ June 2009 International Space Station science
robots, was designed through a joint venture between NASA and research accomplishments during the assembly years: An
General MOtorS' analysis of results from 2000-2008. NASA/TP-2009-213146-
Revision A.
A technology development to watch is the Advanced
robotic technology such as Robonaut (Robonaut [4] Wilson J, Ott C, Hoener zu Bentrup K, Ramamurthy R,
Principal Investigator: M. Diftler, Johnson Space Quick L, Porwollik S, Cheng P, et a1. 2007. Space Flight
Center, Houston, Texas) scheduled for testing on the Alters Bacterial Gene Expression and Virulence and Reveals a
ISS in late 2010/early 2011. Robonaut (Figure 6) is a Role for Global Regulator qu. Proceedings of the National
robotic torso with movable hands and arms plus two Academy of same“ of the United States Of America“
hi h im m r f r Thi dexterous robot is 104(41):16299'16304'
g age ca e as 0 eyes. s
designed to perform tasks that .assist the human [5] Sakai S, Mishima H, Ishii T, Akaogi H, Yoshioka T,
crewmembers. For the lmtlal testing, Robonaut W111 Ohyabu Y, et a1. 2009. Rotating three-diinensional dynamic
manipulate switches, remove dUSt COVCTS and install culture of adult human bone marrow-derived cells of tissue
handrails. Once the technology is demonstrated, more engineering of hyaline cartilage. Journal of Orthopedic
difﬁcult tasks will be scheduled. Research. 27 :517-521.
[6] Lu S, Liu S, He W, Duan C, Li Y, Liu Z, Zhang Y., e al.
CONCLUSION 2008. Bioreactor cultivation enhanced NTEB formation and
differentiation of NTES cells 1nto cardiomyocytes. Clonmg
and Stem Cells. 10:1-8.
IAC—lO—B3.1.4 Page 6 0f7

"
"7","61St International Astronautical Congress, Prague, CZ. 2010.This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject
to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
[7] Gerecht-Nir S, Cohen S, Itskovitz-Eldor J. 2004. [12] Urban DL, Ruff GA, Brooker JE, Cleary T, Yang J,
Bioreactor cultivation enhances the efﬁciency of human Mulholland G, Yuan Z-G. Spacecraft Fire Detection: Smoke
embryoid body (hEB) formation and differentiation. Properties and Transport in Low-Gravity. 46th AIAA
Biotechnology and Bioengineering. 86:493-501. Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nevada. 2008
,7 - 10 January; AIAA 2008-806.
[8] Ruttley TM, Evans CA, Robinson JA. The Importance of
the International Space Station for Life Sciences Research: [14] International Space Station - Station Science. 2010
Past and Future. Gravitational and Space Biology. 2009 http://www.nasa.gOV/iss-science/
;22(2): 67 - 81.
[15] Tate J, Thumm T, Weiss R, Robinson J. 2007. Research
[9] NASA. January 2009. Human Research Program on the International Space Station: Understanding Future
Integrated Plan. NASA/HRP-47065-Revision-A. Potential From Current Accomplishments. 58th International
Astronautical Congress. IAC-07-B3.4.07.
[10] Le Pivert P, Morrison DR, Haddad RS, Renard M, Aller
A, Titus K, Doulat J. 2009. Percutaneous Tumor Ablation: [16] NASA. Harm, D., Ruttley, T., Johnson-Green, P., Zell,
Microencapsulated Echo-guided Interstitial Chemotherapy M., Nakamura, T., Robinson, J ., Karabadzhak, G., Sorokin, 1.
Combined with Cryosurgery Increases Necrosis in Prostate Research in Space: Facilities 0n the International Space
Cancer. T echnology in Cancer Research and T reatment. Station. NASA/NP-2009-08-604-HQ.
8(3):207-216.
[17] Wilson JW, Ott CW, Quick L , Davis R, Hoener zu
[11] Le Pivert P, Haddad R, Aller A, Titus K, Doulat J, Bentrup K, Crabbe A, et a1. 2008. Media Ion Composition
Renard M, Morrison D. 2004. Ultrasound Guided, Combined Controls Regulatory and Virulence Response of Salmonella in
Cryoablation and Microencapsulated 5-Fluor0uracil, Inhibits Spaceﬂight. PLOS One. 3(12): e3923.
Growth of Human Prostate Tumors in Xenogem’c Mouse
Model Assessed by Fluorescence Imaging. T echnology in [18] Fowler B, Meehan S, Singhal A. 2008. Perceptual-motor
Cancer Research and Treatment. 3(2):135-142. Performance and Associated Kinematics in Space. Human
Factors. 50: 879-892.
[12] Krauspenhaar R, Rypniewski W, Kalkura N, Moore K,
DeLucas L, Stoeva S, et a1. 2002. Crystallisation under [19] Maule J, Wainwright N, Steele A, Monaco L, Morris H,
microgravity 0f mistletoe lectin I from Viscum album with Gunter D, Damon M, Wells M. 2009. Rapid Culture-
adenine monophosphate and the crystal structure at 1.9 Independent Microbial Analysis aboard the International
angstrom resolution. Acta Crystallographica, Section D, Space Station (188). Astrobiology.Oct;9(8):759-775.
Biological Crystallography58:1704-1707.
[20] Aguilara J, Alcaraza J, Allabyb B, Alpatc G, Ambrosi C,
[13] Thomas DA, Robinson JA, Tate J, Thumm T. Inspiring Anderhube L, et a1. 2002. The Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer
the Next Generation: Student Experiments and Educational (AMS) 0n the International Space Station: Part I — results from
Activities on the International Space Station, 2000—2006. the test ﬁght on the space shuttle. Physics Reports. 366: 331—
ASA/TP-2006-213721. Also available online at: 405.
http://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa.g0v/20060015 7
18_2006014780.pdf.
iPrincipal Investigators for the ICE-First experiment include: N. Buckley, Canadian Space Agency, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada; A. Rose, Ph.D.,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada;C. Conley, Ph.D., Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA; L. Segalat,
Universite Lyon, Villeurbanne, France ; H. Kagawa, Japanese eXploration Agency, Tsukuba City, Japan; N. Ishioka, Japanese eXploration
Agency, Tsukuba City, Japan; S. Kim, Ph.D., Stanford University, Stanford, CA; S. Honda, Japanese eXploration Agency, Tsukuba City, Japan;
Y. Honda, Japanese eXploration Agency, Tsukuba City, Japan; B. Girten, Ph.D., Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA; A. Higashitani,
Ph.D., Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan; A. Higashitani, Ph.D. Iwate University, Morioka, Japan
” Additional Principal Investigators for the MDRV experiment include: M. McGinnis, Ph.D., University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston,
TX; B. Pyle, Ph.D., Montana State University, Bozeman, MT; C. Nickerson Ph.D., Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ
IAC-10-B3.1.4 Page 7 0f7

"
