"","x"
"1","Experimental Section [Viewpoint
Gerontology —
Gerontology 2014;60:138—142 Recewedi January 29, 2013
DOI: W ?SE‘IEIIZE‘ZZ ohllilng’eglljgljm ber 5, 2013
—
O O O
Spacefl lg ht and Ageing: Reflecting on
Caenorhabditis ele ans in ace
9 Sp
Yoko Hondaa Shuji Hondaa Marco NariciIO Nathaniel J. Szewczykb
aGenomics for Longevity and Health, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology, Tokyo, Japan;
bMRC/Arthritis Research UK Centre for Musculoskeletal Ageing Research, University of Nottingham, Derby, UK
Key Words ed mechanotransduction changes, neural and endocrine
Caenorhabditis elegans - Ageing - Spaceflight signals are altered in response to spaceflight and that these
may have both negative (e.g. |ess muscle protein) and some
— positive consequences (e.g. healthier muscles), at least for
Abstract invertebrates, with respect to health in space. Given that
The prospect of space travel continues to capture the imag— changes in circulating hormones are well documented with
ination. Several competing companies are now promising age and in astronauts, our view is that further research into
flights for the general population. Previously, it was recog— the relationship between metabolic control, ageing, and ad—
nized that many ofthe physiologicalchangesthat occurwith aptation to the environment should be productive in ad—
spaceflight are similarto those seen with normal ageing. This vancing our understanding ofthe physiology of both space—
Ied to the notion that spaceflight can be used as a model of flight and ageing. © 2013 s. KargerAG, Basel
accelerated ageing and raised concerns about the safety of
individuals engaging in space travel. Paradoxically, however,
space travel has been recently shown to be beneficial to
some aspects of muscle health in the tiny worm Caenorhab- Introduction
ditis elegans. C. elegans is a commonly used laboratory ani—
mal for studying ageing. C. elegans displays age—related de— Man has long shown a fascination for the stars and
dine of some biological processes observed in ageing hu— contrived to reach them since early history. This drive
mans, and about 35% of C. elegans’ genes have human culminated in Yuri Gagarin’s demonstration that man
homologs. Space flown worms were found to have de— can survive in space and Neil Armstrong and ‘Buzz’ A1-
creased expression of a number of genes that increase life— drin’s demonstration that man can survive travel to, work
span when expressed at lower levels. These changes were upon, and return from the Moon. Currently, we live in an
accompanied by decreased accumulation of toxic protein age when routinely living and working in space is a real-
aggregates in ageing worms’ muscles. Thus, in addition to ity. A select few have continuously manned our Interna-
spaceflight producing physiological changes that are similar tional Space Station (188) for more than 10 years, and a
to accelerated ageing, it also appears to produce some handful of individuals have purchased access to the 188
changes similar to delayed ageing. Here, we put forward the from companies. On the near horizon, several companies
hypothesis that in addition to the previously we||—appreciat— are promlsmg cheaper Wldespread ‘space tourlsm’, Wthh 3
KA RG E R 33323280281556 563301312533800/ O nghgggcess Eﬁgjrxftlhliifizsegecszeitfchth Centre for Musculoskeletal Ageing Research g
E-Mail karger@karger.com This is an Open Access article iicensed under the terms of the ggﬁggrggzgfgﬁtzgi? m E %
www.karger.com/ger Creatlve Commons Attr1but10n—NonCommerc1al 3.0 Un— . . g 2
ported license (CC BY—NC) (www.karger.com/OA—license), nathan1el.szewczyk@nott1ngham.ac.uk (g g
applicable to the online version of the article only. Distribu— E g
tion permitted for non—commercial purposes only.

"
"2","has been suggested to be a new consideration for doctors which suggest that space travel may cause some physio-
in a recent feature in the British Medical Journal. logical changes akin to delayed ageing. We close by re-
Spaceﬂight is both a risky and stressful endeavour. The proposing an idea from the dawn of the space age: altered
risk is highlighted by the increased incidence of acciden- metabolism underlies the physiological alterations 0b-
tal death in American astronauts [1] and Russian cosmo- served during spaceﬂight.
nauts; the most commonly considered stressors of ﬂight
are altered gravity and increased chance of irradiation.
The increased G forces associated with launch and land- Spaceflight as a Model of 'Accelerated Ageing’
ing have long been known, from studies of fighter pilots,
to pose potential operational problems. Intuitively, we The notion that spaceﬂight may be a model for accel-
also realize that the ‘micro-gravity’ that arises 0n orbital erated ageing has recently been reviewed [4]. During both
missions as the result of being in a state of constant free spaceﬂight and ageing, muscle and bone are lost, balance
fall around the Earth is also a physiological stress (when and coordination problems occur, and cardiovascular ca-
is falling not stressful?) Similarly, we know that exposure pacity is reduced. With spaceﬂight and bed rest, these
to increased radiation can lead to cancer. However, to changes are observed roughly 10-fold faster than with
date, cataracts and not cancer have been documented to ageing. Additionally, unlike ageing, the physiological
correlate with the increased radiation some astronauts changes observed with spaceﬂight and bed rest are large-
have received during spaceﬂight [1]. In contrast to these ly, if not completely, reversed upon re-adaptation to life
well-appreciated risks and stresses, we often forget that in on Earth or the non-bedridden state. Thus, it has been
the process ofidentifying and militating against the phys- postulated that the lack of mechanical load upon the
ical risks of spaceﬂight, Via spacecraft and subsystem de- mechanotransduction-mechanochemical transduction
sign, that iatrogenic problems can arise. For example, the systems underlies many of the changes seen with space-
American use of iodine in water purification systems ﬂight, bed rest, sedentarylifestyle, and ageing. In support
leading to thyroid problems [1]. of this theory is the observation that mechanosensitive
Historically, spacelife sciences and space medicine re- enzymes, such as focal adhesion kinase, are present in
search have focused on documenting the changes ob- lower amounts and with lower activity in human muscle
served in response to spaceﬂight and militating against that has atrophied as the result of immobilization [5],
undesirable physiological changes in space travellers. while they are present in higher amounts and with higher
Consequently, there is a vast body of data describing the activity in human muscle that has hypertrophied in re-
biological response of a variety of organisms to space- sponse to exercise [6].
ﬂight [2] and a general consensus that short-term orbital
ﬂight is safe for man, but that we lack the evidence base
to comment on the safety of human space travel beyond Concern for Individuals Engaged in Space Travel
low Earth orbit [3]. However, it is widely acknowledged
that a key barrier to travel beyond low Earth orbit is in- Despite the available evidence suggesting that most of
creased exposure to radiation [3]. the physiological changes experienced during spaceﬂight
In cataloguing the biological effects of spaceﬂight, 2 are reversed upon re-adaptation to life on Earth and the
main themes have emerged. First, in man, spaceﬂight lack of evidence of long-term negative consequences of
produces a host of changes that induce a state of frailty spaceﬂight [1], a cautionary principle still tends to be em-
akin to ageing [4]; notably, most of these changes are ployed in discussion of the health risks of spaceﬂight. For
quickly reversed upon re-adaptation to life on Earth. Sec- example, an international committee has produced a set of
0nd, in all organisms yet studied, growth and metabolism medical standards for certification of non-professional
are altered in ﬂight. This latter point may not be so sur- space travellers to be ‘space ﬂight participants’ onboard the
prising if one considers that spacecraft are closed ecolog- 188 by ‘relaXing’ the criteria used for professional astro-
ical systems and that adaptation to the environment re- nauts and cosmonauts [7]. Included within the criteria that
quires energy. Here, we brieﬂy recap past notions of can disqualify prospective participants are many condi-
spaceﬂight as a model for accelerated ageing, the health tions that commonly present in ageing individuals. For eX-
concerns expressed for individuals engaging in space- ample, glaucoma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
ﬂight activities and the alterations in metabolism in re- malignant tumours, hypertension, hypotension, coronary
sponse to spaceﬂight, and examine some recent data heart disease, arrhythmia, pacemaker, peripheral vascular 2
Spaceﬂight and Ageing: Reﬂecting on Gerontology 2014;60:138—142 139 i
C. elegans in Space D013 W §

"
"3","disease, diabetes, history of cerebrovascular accident, and ly of ‘micrograVity’ [10], it was proposed that this worm
neurodegenerative diseases. From an operational perspec- could be used for studies involving spaceﬂight and ageing
tive, this caution makes sense. The ISS was expensive to [11].
build and remains expensive to operate. Flying individuals C. elegans was the first multicellular animal to have its
who could compromise this international investment as genome sequenced, which gave us the tools and experi-
the result of exacerbation of an underlying condition ence needed to sequence the human genome. These ef-
would certainly lead to an international uproar and legal forts inform us that roughly 35% of C. elegans’ genes have
actions. From a scientiﬁc perspective, this list of disqualify- identified human homologs. Consequently, C. elegans re-
ing conditions suggests that adaptation to spaceﬂight re- mains at the forefront of animals used in experiments to
sults from more than a simple lack of mechanical load. understand how the genome controls health. Other eX-
periments with this worm have led to the discovery of
programmed cell death, the phenomena of gene silencing
Spaceflight Alters Metabolism by RNA interference, the discovery of microRNAs, evo-
lutionarily conserved genes that contribute to maximal
The 19605 was a decade of change. Not only did the first lifespan [12], and a reproducible genomic response to
men set foot on the Moon, but also the molecular biology spaceﬂight [13] (and subsequent ﬂights).
revolution began. Prior to the molecular biology revolu- C. elegans has a short lifespan and rapid generation
tion, much of biology was devoted to understanding how time, which make it an ideal animal for prospective stud-
metabolism controlled biology. Unsurprisingly, older ies of ageing and also evolution. As with other poikilo-
studies of organisms in space document that growth and therms, C. elegans displays an inverse relationship be-
metabolism are altered, while newer studies document tween temperature of cultivation and lifespan. While the
changes in gene expression and suggest molecular path- mechanism(s) underlying this relationship remain to be
ways that regulate such changes [1]. In astronauts, meta- established, the observation suggests that C. elegans’ life-
bolic effects of spaceﬂight include loss of body weight and span is responsive to the environment, possibly Via effects
negative metabolic balances of nitrogen, phosphorus, and upon metabolism. Like many other animals, including
calcium [8]. Some of these changes are thought to be due homeotherms, C. elegans also displays lifespan extension
to changes in ﬂuid homeostasis [8], some due to decreased when grown on any one of several restricted diets, again
energy intake which occurs for incompletely understood possibly Via effects upon energy metabolism or resulting
reasons that may include sensory and/ or neuronal altera- from altered substrate utilization. In the case of growth in
tions affecting palatability and/ or satiety [9], and some for a chemically defined diet versus the standard laboratory
still unknown reasons which might include altered pro- diet of Escherichia coli, the effects of temperature and diet
tein homeostasis in muscle which may occur due to al- are independent of each other, and various parameters of
tered mechanical load. If one assumes that decreased en- C. elegans’ life history scale identically as a percentage of
ergy production results in a necessary decline in energy maximal lifespan in response to temperature on the 2 di-
available to combat stress or infection and also for run- ets [14]. Thus, there appear to be at least 2 mechanisms
ning maintenance and/or repair processes, the impact of by which environmental factors (e.g. temperature and
spaceﬂight upon metabolism is sufficient to account for diet) impact upon C. elegans’ lifespan.
increased frailty. This suggestion is similar to some theo- In contrast to the incomplete molecular mechanistic
ries of ageing and/ or age-related decline that postulate de- understanding that underlies the clearly documented im-
creased energy production from the mitochondria occurs pact of environmental factors upon C. elegans’ lifespan,
with age and contributes to increased frailty. several genes and putative molecular regulatory pathways
have been identified. One of the earliest discovered and
arguably best-studied pathways is the daf-Z, age-I , daf-16
C. elegans as a Model for Studies of Spaceflight and pathway. Mutations in these genes, and others, have been
Ageing shown to act in a common signalling pathway to control
lifespan [15]. These genes encode an insulin/insulin-like
The tiny worm C. elegans is a common laboratory an- growth factor receptor, its downstream signalling kinase
imal. Prior to the initial studies of C. elegans in space, phosphoinositide-3-kinase, and the DAF-16/FOXO
which revealed that worms are susceptible to the muta- (FOrkhead BOX 0) transcription factor. At least part of
genic effects of increased radiation in space independent- the effect of the protein products of these genes upon 2
140 Gerontology 2014;60:138—142 Honda/Honda/Narici/Szewczyk é
DOI: 10.1159/000354772 g

"
"4","lifespan is achieved Via DAF-Z and AGE-l signalling al- controlled by DAF-16/FOXO [13] (and subsequent
tering the activity of DAF-16/FOXO. As DAF-16/FOXO ﬂights). These results suggest both that insulin-like sig-
is a transcription factor, these alterations result in chang- nalling may inﬂuence the gene expression changes in re-
es in transcription of genes controlled by DAF- 16/ FOXO. sponse to spaceﬂight to produce the subsequent biologi-
The transcription of several hundred genes is affected in cal alterations, and that, perhaps, worms grown in space
daf-Z mutants in a DAF-16-dependent fashion. This find- live longer than their Earthbound counterparts.
ing suggests that insulin/insulin-like signalling control of To directly test if depressed expression of some identi-
lifespan is complex. Given that DAF-Z is an insulin/insu- fied genes can lead to increased lifespan, 11 genes that
lin-like growth factor receptor that is well known to con- displayed large depressions in mRNA levels in response
trol energy metabolism in mammals, it is unsurprising to spaceﬂight were selected for evaluation. All 11 selected
that many of the genes displaying altered expression in genes were previously known to be involved in neuronal
long-lived daf-Z mutants are genes involved in energy or endocrine signalling but not regulation oflifespan. The
metabolism. To date, the precise relationship between inactivation, by loss- or reduction-of—function mutation
DAF-16-controlled alteration of energy metabolism and and/ or RNAi, of 7 of the 11 selected genes resulted in in-
lifespan remains incompletely defined in C. elegans. creased lifespan [18]. Thus, at least some of the gene eX-
C. elegans is used not only to understand what enVi- pression changes observed in spaceﬂight can increase
ronmental and genetic factors control lifespan and how lifespan (when knockdown occurs independently of ad-
they do so, but also to understand age-related diseases ditional induced depressions in gene expression). This
and changes in tissues and biological processes with age. finding raises the questions of whether spaceﬂight can di-
Intriguingly, expressions of mutant human proteins that rectly increase lifespan, at least in a worm, and how can
cause neurodegeneration with age in man also do so in C. spaceﬂight induce both frailty and longevity? Clearly, fur-
elegcms (for example: [S-amyloid, tau, and a-synuclein). ther experiments are required to answer both questions,
Similarly, both worm and man show an age-related de- and direct measurement of C. elegans’ lifespan on board
Cline in mobility that is an accurate predictor of death, the 188 is possible, resources permitting.
sarcopenia (the decline in muscle size and function with
age), and a decline in expression of mitochondrial en-
zymes required for production of energy. The fact that Reconciling Increased Frailty against Increased
there is a decline in mitochondrial enzymes required for Longevity
production of energy with age may be a potential expla-
nation for the decline of tissues with age and also the ap- With regards to spaceﬂight inducing both frailty and
pearance of age-related diseases such as the neurodegen- longevity, one possibility is that, as posed in the 1960’s,
eration disorders. While the evidence for a causal link be- altered energy metabolism is induced by spaceﬂight and
tween mitochondrial decline, tissue decline, and ageing this accounts for the physiological changes observed [19].
disorders is currently lacking, mutations in daf-Z [16] or It is important to remember that what we may label as
age-I [17] are sufficient to delay the onset of movement ‘accelerated ageing’ or frailty is context dependent. That
decline in C. elegans, perhaps again suggesting a link be- is, most of the physiological changes observed in space-
tween energy metabolism and ageing. ﬂight are quickly reversed upon return to Earth and there-
fore are not really accelerated ageing or a long-term state
of frailty, but rather physiological adaptation to space-
Could Spaceflight Increase C. elegans’ Lifespan? ﬂight (including the closed ecosystem of the spacecraft).
Various types of diet restriction are also known to induce
In contrast to the concerns with spaceﬂight producing altered metabolism, frailty, and longevity. This is true of
physiological changes akin to accelerated ageing and/or C. elegans, where DAF-16/FOXO appears to control al-
exacerbating common conditions associated with ageing, tered metabolism, increased risk of death during repro-
recent data suggest that spaceﬂight may have some posi- duction, and longevity in response to growth in a fully
tive consequences for the ageing process. Well, at least in chemical diet [14]. The diet restriction data demonstrate
worms. that it is possible to have increased frailty and longevity.
A series of ﬂights examining alterations in gene eX- However, the frailty with diet restriction is context de-
pression in space ﬂown worms all found decreases in pendent. That is, in the absence of reproduction or other
mRNA levels for genes whose expression is known to be stressors such as hypoxia or temperature, frailty would 2
Spaceﬂight and Ageing: Reﬂecting on Gerontology 2014;60:138—142 141 g
C. elegans in Space D013 W §

"
"5","not be noted in worms grown in a chemically defined diet. In conclusion, alterations in energy metabolism occur
Similarly, changes in muscle in response to spaceﬂight are with both spaceﬂight and ageing. While not yet proven
largely thought to be adaptive to the spaceﬂight environ- Via interventional studies, in some cases the alterations in
ment, with frailty noted upon return to Earth [3]. In this energy metabolism are theoretically sufficient to account
context, it is particularly interesting to note that not only for the physiological changes observed, particularly in-
do space ﬂown worms experience patterns of gene eX- creased frailty. Thus, it is plausible that neuroendocrine
pression in muscle, as experienced by astronauts as well control of energy metabolism may be a key determinant
(for example less myosin and less MyoD transcription and potential point of therapeutic intervention for the
factor), but also worms with a mutation that induces dys- ‘frailty’ associated with both spaceﬂight and ageing. How-
trophy appear less dystrophic in space [20], and worms ever, a potential key challenge is that as with endocrine
expressing a 35-glutamine repeat protein in muscle dis- disorders in the clinic, where it is frequently the case that
play less protein aggregation than Earthbound counter balance is key and ‘too little’ or ‘too much’ signal is prob-
parts [18]. Thus, changes observed in muscle in space lematic, with both spaceﬂight and ageing the ‘frailty’ may
could be labelled as increased frailty (in the context of the be adaptive and intervention may impair future adapta-
ability to deal with a mechanical stress), but by other mea- tions that may be required.
sures (e.g. less likely to develop myopathies) they are
‘healthier’ than on Earth.
References
1 Longnecker DE, Manning FI, Worth MH Ir >7 Bogomolov VV, Castrucci F, Comtois IM, ’14 Szewczyk NI, Udranszky IA, Kozak E, Sunga
(eds): Review of NASA’s Longitudinal Study Damann V, Davis IR, Duncan IM, Iohnston I, Kim SK, Iacobson LA, Conley CA: Delayed
of Astronaut Health. Washington, The Na- SL, Gray GW, Grigoriev AI, Koike Y, Kuklin- development and lifespan extension as fea-
tional Academies Press, 2004, p 94. ski P, Matveyev VP, Morgun VV, PochueV VI, tures of metabolic lifestyle alteration in C. el—
2 Committee for the Decadal Survey on Biolog- Sargsyan AE, Shimada K, Straube U, Tachiba- egcms under dietary restriction. I EXp Biol
ical and Physical Sciences in Space, National na S, Voronkov YV, Williams RS: Interna- 2006;209:4129—4139.
Research Council (eds): RecapturingaFuture tional space station medical standards and >15 Kenyon CI: The genetics of ageing. Nature
for Space Exploration: Life and Physical Sci- certiﬁcation for space ﬂight participants. AVi- 2010;464:504—512.
ences Research for a New Era. Washington, at Space Environ Med 2007;78:1162—1169. V16 Huang C, Xiong C, Kornfeld K: Measure-
The National Academies Press, 2011, p 442. >8 Altman PL, Talbot IM: Nutrition and metab- ments of age-related changes of physiological
3 Ball IR, Evans CH Ir (eds): Safe Passage: As- olism in spaceﬂight. I Nutr 1987;117:421— processes that predict lifespan of Caenorhab—
tronaut Care for Exploration Missions. 427. ditis elegans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004;
Washington, The National Academies Press, ’9 Smith SM, Zwart SR, Block G, Rice BL, DaVis- 101:8084—8089.
2001, p 318. Street IE: The nutritional status of astronauts >17 Herndon LA, Schmeissner PI, Dudaronek
V4 Vernikos I, Schneider VS: Space, gravity and is altered after long-term space ﬂight aboard IM, Brown PA, Listner KM, Sakano Y, Pau-
the physiology of aging: parallel or conver- the International Space Station. I Nutr 2005; pard MC, HallDH, DriscollM: Stochastic and
gent disciplines?Amini-review. Gerontology 135:437—443. genetic factors inﬂuence tissue-speciﬁc de-
2010;56:157—166. ’10 Hartman PS, Hlavacek A, Wilde H, Lewicki dine in ageing C. elegans. Nature 2002;419:
’5 de Boer MD, Selby A, Atherton P, Smith K, D, Schubert W, Kern RG, Kazarians GA, Ben- 808—814.
Seynnes OR, Maganaris CN, Maffulli N, Mo- ton EV, Benton ER, Nelson GA: A compari- ’18 Honda Y, Higashibata A, Matsunaga Y,Yone-
Vin T, Narici MV, Rennie MI: The temporal son of mutations induced by accelerated iron zawa Y, Kawano T, Higashitani A, Kuriyama
responses of protein synthesis, gene expres- particles versus those induced by low earth K, Shimazu T, Tanaka M, Szewczyk NI, Ishi-
sion and cell signalling in human quadriceps orbit space radiation in the fem-3 gene of Cae— oka N, Honda S: Genes down-regulated in
muscle and patellar tendon to disuse. I Physi- norhabditis elegans. Mutat Res 2001;474:47— spaceﬂight are involved in the control of Ion-
ol 2007;585:241—251. 55. geVity in Caenorhabditis elegans. Sci Rep
>6 Narici MV, Flueck M, Koesters A, Gimpl M, ’11 Iohnson TE, Nelson GA: Caenorhabditis ele— 2012;2:487.
Reifberger A, Seynnes OR,Niebauer I, Rittwe- gans: a model system for space biology stud- 19 Nicogossian AE, Huntoon CL, Pool SL (eds):
ger I, Mueller E: Skeletal muscle remodeling ies. EXp Gerontol 1991;26:299—309. Space Physiology and Medicine, ed 2. Phila-
in response to alpine skiing training in older >12 Curran SP, Rquun G: Lifespan regulation by delphia, Lippincott Williams and Wilkins,
individuals. Scand I Med Sci Sports 2011; evolutionarily conserved genes essential for 1989, p 420.
21(supp1 1):23—28. Viability. PLoS Genet 2007;3:e56. V20 Adachi R, Takaya T, Kuriyama K, Higashiba-
>13 Selch F, Higashibata A, Imamizo-Sato M, Hi- ta A, Ishioka N, Kagawa H: Spaceﬂight results
gashitani A, Ishioka N, Szewczyk NI, Conley in increase of thick ﬁlament but not thin ﬁla-
CA: Genomic response of the nematode Cae— ment proteins in the paramyosin mutant of
norhabditis elegans to spaceﬂight. Adv Space Caenorhabditis elegans. Adv Space Res 2008;
Res 2008;41:807—815. 41:816—823.
<2:
142 Gerontology 2014;60:138—142 Honda/H0nda/Narici/Szewczyk é
DOI: 10.1159/000354772 §

"
