"","x"
"1","gidif Available online at www.sciencedirect.com —
335.9% ADVANCES IN
will“ "" ScienceDirect SPACE
"" {g RESEARCH
ELSEVIER Advances in Space Research 44 (2009) 210—216 M
www.elseVier.com/locate/asr
Review
Reyiew of the results from the International C. elegans ﬁrst
experiment (ICE-FIRST)
AA. Adenle a, B. Johnsen b, N.J. Szewezyk a’*
a University Of Nottingham, School Of Graduate Entry Medicine and Health, Derby DE22 3DT, United Kingdom
bSimon Fraser University, Department Of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Burnaby, BC, Canada V5A 156
Received 23 J anuary 2009; received in revised form 6 April 2009; accepted 7 April 2009
Abstract
In an effort to speed the rate of discovery in space biology and medicine NASA introduced the now defunct model specimen program.
Four nations applied this approach with Caenorhabditis elegans in the ICE—FIRST experiment. Here we reView the standardized culturing
as well as the investigation of muscle adaptation, space biology radiation, and gene expression in response to spaceﬂight. Muscle studies
demonstrated that decreased expression of myogenic transcription factors underlie the decreased expression of myosin seen in ﬂight, a
response that would appear to be evolutionarily conserved. Radiation studies demonstrated that radiation damaged cells should be able
to be removed Via apoptosis in ﬂight, and that C. elegans can be employed as a biological accumulating dosimeter. Lastly, ICE—FIRST
gave us our ﬁrst glimpse at the genomic response to spaceﬂight, suggesting that altered Insulin and/ or TGF—beta signaling in ﬂight may
underlie many of the biological Changes seen in response to spaceﬂight. The fact that the results obtained with C. elegans appear to have
strong similarities in human beings suggests that not only will C. elegans prove an invaluable model for understanding the fundamental
biological Changes seen during spaceﬂight but that it may also be invaluable for understanding those Changes associated with human
health concerns in space.
Crown copyright © 2009 Published by Elsevier Ltd. on behalf of COSPAR. All rights reserved.
Keywords: C. elegans; Spaceﬂight; Muscle atrophy; Radiation; Microarray
1. Introduction organisms selected for NASA’s “model specimen”
approach. A brief overview of the rationale for the use of
In an attempt to increase the rate of progress in space eukaryotic genetic model organisms in general and C. ele-
biology, NASA decided to adopt a model organism gems in speciﬁc for space biology and medicine was pro-
approach, an approach that as of this writing has been Vided in the description of ICE-FIRST (Szewczyk et al.,
shelved in favor of experimentation largely upon humans 2008). Notably, since that publication an additional Nobel
alone. The premise of this model organism approach was prize in Chemistry (development of the green ﬂuorescent
that if standardized culturing conditions were employed protein) and a Lasker Award (discovery of microRNA)
then multiple investigators, working on multiple questions, were awarded for work ﬁrst done in C. elegans. C. elegans
could be accommodated within a single ﬂight. ICE-FIRST researchers have a community ethic and a C. elegans data-
was initiated by Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales base (AceDB, www.acedb.org) (Eeckman and Durbin, 1995)
(CNES) as an attempt to demonstrate the feasibility and has spawned a number of resources that are maintained by
utility of such an approach with the nematode Caenorhab- the community (Antoshechkin and Sternberg, 2007).
ditis elegans. C. elegans was one of a number of model Key websites include a PubMed indexed text (www.
wormbook.org) and an information repository that uses
* Corresponding author. AceDB as a backend master. database (www.wormbase.
E—mail address: nate@alumni.cmu.edu (N.J. Szewczyk). org). ReV1ews for the non-spe01a11st can also be found w1th
0273-1177/$36.00 Crown copyright © 2009 Published by Elsevier Ltd. on behalf of COSPAR. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.asr.2009.04.008

"
"2","A.A. Adenle et a1. /Advances in Space Research 44 ( 2009 ) 210—216 211
Corsi’s 2006 reView (Corsi, 2006) being a good starting for astronaut intervention (e.g. the medium would also be
point. useful for unmanned sate11ite and/or interplanetary mis-
Caenorhabditis elegans had previously been employed to sions). Third, the chemically deﬁned nature of the medium
study the impacts of spaceﬂight upon biology, typically by removes the theoretical health concerns to astronauts sur-
one investigator attempting to address a speciﬁc question. rounding the use of a bacterial food for C. elegans in ﬂight.
These studies involved four spaceﬂights. The study on Fourth, the chemically deﬁned nature of the medium
STS-42 showed that male animals mated successfully and removes the concerns of altered E. coli metabolism in ﬂight
the full 1ife-cyc1e of C. elegans occurred in space without being a confounding variable in determining the eﬂects of
obVious abnormal developmental process (Nelson et a1., spaceﬂight on C. elegans. Lastly, the new medium, in a
1994b). A study, which started on STS-42 and ﬁnished liquid form, removes the potential masking of microgravity
on STS—76, reported an increased rate of mutation as the eﬂects due to the surface tension forces (10,000—100,000 G)
direct eﬂect of cosmic radiation (Hartman et a1., 2001; Nel- that hold worms to plates.
son et a1., 1994b). Sadly, an experiment carried out by Based on these reasons and in anticipation of NASA’s
American high school students on STS-95 yielded no requirement that future C. elegans experiments in space
results and both the ground control and ﬂight animals died, to employ CeMM, ICE-First used CeMM instead of
probably due to anoxia. On the ﬁnal ﬂight (STS-107) NGM. The investigators showed that the growth and
before ICE-FIRST NASA began the process of establish- development of space ﬂown C. elegans, using either liquid
ing a new inﬂight culture system for C. elegans (Szewczyk or solid CeMM, was essentially the same as C. elegans
et a1., 2005). ICE-FIRST continued this process and also grown under similar conditions in the laboratory. These
demonstrated the potential utility of a model specimen results were as anticipated based upon previous demonstra-
approach in space biology (Szewczyk et a1., 2008). tions of normal growth and development in ﬂight for ani-
ICE-FIRST was a collaborative eﬂort among four mals grown on NGM (Nelson et a1., 1994a) and from the
nations: France, the United States, Japan, and Canada. extrapolation of normal growth and development in ﬂight
During ICE-FIRST, C. elegans were grown in or on cultur- for animals grown on both NGM and solid CeMM (Szewc-
ing media as described below. Fifty-three sets of animals zyk et a1., 2005); the later data were generated by extrapo-
were prepared and loaded in ﬂight hardware in Toulouse, 1ation due to the delayed recovery of samples following the
France 5—7 days prior to launch, as described by Szewczyk tragic breakup of the Space Shuttle Columbia. The demon-
and colleagues (2008), before they were ﬂown on the Euro- stration of grossly normal growth and development sug-
pean Space Agency’s 2004 Delta Mission which lasted gests that CeMM presents opportunities for further
approximately 10 days. Parallel sets of transport and studies including the possibility of automated experiments
ground control animals were also utilized (Szewczyk in ﬂight. This is absolutely critical for experiments on deep
et a1., 2008). The standardized culturing as well as the space ﬂights to other planetary bodies.
investigation of muscle adaptation, space biology radiation Caenorhabditis elegans and humans have a number of
and pattern of gene expression in response to spaceﬂight basic similarities, both on the anatomical and genomic
serve as the conceptual framework of this reView. level. They both have muscles, a nervous system, integu—
ment, gut, and a reproductive system. Both have approxi-
2. Validation of C. elegans Maintenance Media (CeMM) for mately 20,000 genes and approximately 60% of C.
spaceﬂight elegans’ genes have human homologues. In addition, both
have completely known genomic DNA sequence, which
Traditionally, C. elegans is almost exclusively grown on allows for indepth bioinformatic analyzes. Thus, it is antic-
Nematode Growth Medium with the uracil auxotrophic ipated that C. elegans can be used to understand more
bacterium Escherichia coli OP50 as a food source (NGM) detailed, non-population 1etha1, eﬂects of spaceﬂight on
(Brenner, 1974). This standardization of culturing has humans. Indeed, this has been previously demonstrated
proved essential in understanding the biology of C. elegans by showing that C. elegans display an altered rate of muta-
on Earth (www.wormbook.org). In parallel to these eﬂorts tion in response to spaceﬂight (Hartman et a1., 2001), and
a minority of researchers pursued developing a chemically by some of the results detailed in the sections below.
deﬁned medium for C. elegans growth (CeMM: C. elegans
Maintenance Medium); after many years of eﬂort this med- 3. Effect of spaceﬂight associated radiation
ium was completed and published (Lu and Goestsch,
1993). This alternative culturing medium was selected by Radiation is perhaps the most signiﬁcant medical chal-
NASA as ideal for growing C. elegans in space for a num- 1enge associated with manned spaceﬂight (Hagen, 1989;
ber of reasons. First, unlike traditional culturing, which Stewart and Lujan, 1993). For this reason, C. elegans has
requires astronauts to frequently transfer worms to new previously been used as a genetic model with which to
plates, CeMM allows worms to be cultivated without understand the mutagenic consequences of spaceﬂight.
transfer for at least four times as long. Second, the new On a pair of ﬂights to low Earth orbit (LEO), Nelson
medium, in a liquid form, can be used for automated cul- and colleagues showed a small but increased rate of muta-
turing and experimentation, thereby removing the need tion during spaceﬂight that was directly attributable to

"
"3","212 A.A. Adenle et a1. /Advances in Space Research 44 ( 2009 ) 210—216
high energy radiation particle bombardment(Ne1son et a1., described by Zhao and his colleagues (2006). These are:
1994b). LEO orbits are protected by the Earth’s magneto- (1) Capture of mutations in the unc-22 gene; (2) a1terations
sphere and therefore are not subject to the full eﬂects of in telomere length; (3) poly-G/poly-C tract integrity; (4)
solar and cosmic radiation that ﬂights to other planetary capture of mutations in the 6T1 balancer system, which
bodies will encounter. This is good for astronauts on the balances 1/6 of the entire genome (Rosenbluth and Baillie,
International Space Station but further deep space studies 1981). The investigators failed to detect any statistically sig-
are needed to analyze radiation eﬂects of ﬂights beyond niﬁcant alterations in spaceﬂown worms. With regard to
Earth orbit. In an attempt to expand our understanding actual detection eﬂicacy, a slight increase in telomere length
of the biological eﬂeets of radiation during spaceﬂight in was noted in the spaceﬂown vs. ground control animals, no
LEO, the investigators undertook studies designed to fur- mutations were detected in unc-22 in either set of animals,
ther develop C. elegans as a model system for studying no deletions were detected in G-tracts in either set of ani-
the biological eﬂects of spaceﬂight associated radiation. 1na1s, and 13 and 11 lethal strains were recovered from
These investigations were focused on two themes: apopto- the spaceﬂown and ground control 6T1 animals, respec-
sis and the mutational eﬂect(s) of spaceﬂight. tively. The 1etha1 strains recovered fell into three comple-
mentation groups for the spaceﬂown animals and eight
3.]. Occurrence ofapoptosis in Spaceﬂown C. elegans for the ground controls. These results suggest that the
mutagenic eﬂects of radiation in LEO are small.
Apoptosis plays an important role in normal metazoan Taken together, these data show that the 6T1 balancer
development and among its normal functions is the elimi- system is the best of the four systems tested for detecting
nation of cells that have suﬂered DNA damage that could mutagenic events resulting from radiation events in ﬂight.
lead to cancer or, in the case of germ cells, heritab1e genetic Additionally, the 6T1 system allows one to capture, main-
disorders. This would be extremely important on space- tain and recover mutations in spaceﬂown C. elegans,
ﬂights because of increased exposure to cosmic and solar thereby allowing one to investigate in a laboratory on
radiation with its concomitant increase in DNA damage. Earth mutagenic events captured during ﬂight. Lastly,
Therefore, the investigators examined these two apoptotic these data appear to imply that one could use the C. ele-
processes: physiological and checkpoint apoptosis. These gans 6T1 system as a “biological dosimeter” that could
studies were carried out using wi1d-type and ced—I mutant be employed to monitor the long term accumulation of
animals, as described by Higashitani and colleagues (2005). mutagenie events in ﬂight (Zhao et a1., 2006).
Physiological and checkpoint apoptosis were examined
by obserVing if the process occurred normally in cells in 4. Muscle adaptation in spaceﬂight
the regions of the germ line associated with each process.
The analysis uncovered no diﬂerences between the space- The molecular basis underlying muscle adaptation dur-
ﬂight and control animals. Wild-type animals had normal ing spaceﬂight is yet to be fully understood. Previous data
levels of apoptosis and the ced—I animals had the expected in tissue culture studies have shown decreased muscle gene
increase in cell corpses. Together these results demonstrate transcription in response to spaceﬂight (Vandenburgh
that the rate of apoptosis and engulfment of cell corpses et a1., 1999), and these changes are suﬂicient to account
occur normally during spaceﬂight. The investigators also for the muscle atrophy observed in whole mammals. There-
attempted to conﬁrm this by using Aﬂymetrix mieroarray fore the ICE-FIRST investigators undertook a study of the
analysis of checkpoint and apoptosis related genes. The response of C. elegans muscle to spaceﬂight to determine if
microarray analysis of checkpoint and apoptosis related this in vivo model can be used to gain insight into the
genes showed similar gene expression for both spaceﬂight molecular mechanisms underlying spaceﬂight-indueed
and ground control animals thereby again failing to dem- muscle atrophy and corroborate the past in vitro work.
onstrate a diﬂerence in apoptosis in response to spaceﬂight.
In summary, these data demonstrate that physiological 4.1. Alteration of muscle development in C. elegans in
apoptosis and checkpoint apoptosis occurred normally in response 10 Spaceﬂight
spaceﬂown C. elegans. This suggests that animals, human
beings included, retain the ability to eliminate cells that The eﬂeet of spaceﬂight upon C. elegans muscle devel-
failed to repair DNA 1esions caused by cosmic radiation opment was examined. The investigators assayed gene
during the spaceﬂight and may explain why cataracts and expression, post ﬂight movement, and muscle histology.
not cancer are a leading long term side eﬂect of spaceﬂight Gene expression was methodically analyzed using DNA
in American astronauts (Longnecker et a1., 2004). microarrays, rea1-tin1e quantitative PCR, 2D ge1 electro-
phoresis and Western blots. The myosin heavy Chain genes
3.2. Mutational eﬂect 0f Spaceﬂight in C. elegans (A, B, C and D), body-wa11 myogenic transcription factor
HLH-1(CeMyoD) and pharyngeal myogenic transcription
Four diﬂerent approaches were employed to measure factors (PEB-l, CEH-22 and PHA-4) showed decreased
mutational changes that occurred during the Canadian expression as assayed by microarray, PCR, and Western
Space Agency sponsored part of the spaceﬂight, as blot. The muscle speciﬁc genes tropomyosin (lev-II), tropo-

"
"4","A.A. Adenle et a1. /Advances in Space Research 44 { 2009 ) 210—216 213
nin C (1116-2) and troponin T (1111-2, -3 and -4) also showed with changes that appear similar or identical to those
signiﬁcant decreases in expression as assayed by miero- observed in mammals. Speciﬁcally, decreased MHC
array, whereas no signiﬁcant changes, as assayed by micro- expression, presumably due to decreased MyoD expression
array, were noted in actin (act-I, act-2, act—3 and act-4). The was noted and these changes correlated with a post-ﬂight
investigators suggested that the microgravity associated movement defect. Intriguingly, as is the ease for astronauts,
with spaceﬂight resulted in decreased expression of MyoD, there were population diﬂerences noted in the muscle adap-
which in turn resulted in decreased expression of myosin tation to spaceﬂight. Taken together these results suggest
heavy Chain. Of note, this model appears to be true for that C. elegans can be used to study an evolutionarily con-
both C. elegans body-wall muscle, which allows voluntary served mechanism that underlies spaceﬂight-induced mus-
movement, and pharyngeal muscle, which rhythmically ole alterations.
contracts like cardiac muscle. The investigators also
reported that similar changes are known to occur in space- 4.2. Alteration of muscle development in a paramyosin
ﬂown vertebrates, suggesting an evolutionarily conserved mutant
mechanism underlies altered development of muscle during
spaceﬂight. In addition to investigating the eﬂeet of spaceﬂight upon

Post-ﬂight movement was examined for defects using C. elegans muscle development in wild-type animals, the
recorded Video footage taken within two hours of landing. eﬂeet was also assessed in unc-15 (e73), paramyosin, mutant
The results showed that 10 randomly selected spaceﬂown animals. Paramyosin interacts with MHC A, an isoform of
animals were signiﬁcantly diﬂerent from 10 randomly myosin heavy chain in striated muscle. The investigators
selected ground control animals, indicating defects in assayed muscle histology and various muscle protein levels.
movement. While the previously described changes in gene As with wild-type animals, histologie study of unc-
expression can account for post-ﬂight movement defects, a 15 (673) animals was conducted using phalloidin and anti-
direct link between these genes and the post-ﬂight move- paramyosin staining. In both ground control and spaceﬂ-
ment defect was not shown by the investigators. Addition- own unc-15 animals, deformed thin ﬁlaments and the
ally, it should be noted that a second group of randomly aggregated paraerystalline form of paramyosin were noted.
selected spaceﬂown animals, from a diﬂerent population However, in spaceﬂown worms partially formed normal
did not display signiﬁcant post-ﬂight movement defects. paramyosin ﬁlaments were also observed. Additionally,
A comparison of gene expression changes revealed depres- the spaceﬂown animals displayed a normal muscle ﬁlament
sion of “neuromuscular” genes correlated with the post- to body-width ratio that was not observed in the ground
ﬂight movement defect (Seleh et al., 2008) as animals control animals. Thus, spaceﬂight appears to have partially
with a postﬂight movement defect had depressed expres- rescued the histologic defects of the paramyosin mutant.
sion of neuromuscular genes while animals without a post- Again as with wild-type animals, Western blots were
ﬂight movement defect had no depression in used to assess the levels of paramyosin, myosin heavy
neuromuscular genes. While the results of multiple inde- chains B and C, actin, and tropomyosin III. Spaceﬂown
pendent analyses are consistent with the notion that unc-15 mutant animals displayed increased levels of
depressed expression of muscle genes can result in a post- paramyosin and myosin heavy Chains relative to both
ﬂight movement defect, the direct casual link and reason ground controls and spaceﬂown wild-type animals. In con-
for individual diﬂerenees in depression of muscle genes trast, actin remained the same and tropomyosin III was
remains to be established. slightly depressed, although the depression was not statisti-

Musele histology of spaceﬂown wild-type C. elegans was cally signiﬁcant. Thus, as with wild-type animals, the thick
also carried out. Phalloidin and anti-paramyosin staining and thin ﬁlament proteins showed diﬂerent eﬂeets in
of post-ﬂight animals revealed no gross morphologic response to spaceﬂight. However, unlike wild-type animals,
changes, including no change in the width of the ﬁbers. which showed decreased thick ﬁlament proteins in response
While these results indicate a lack of spaceﬂight induced to spaceﬂight, unc-15 animals showed increased thick ﬁla-
“atrophy” of the ﬁbers, the animals used for histologie ment proteins. These observations suggest two things.
analysis did not show the same depression in paramyosin First, spaceﬂight has a diﬂerential eﬂeet on thick and thin
and myosin heavy Chain B (Adaehi et al., 2008) as the ani- ﬁlaments regardless of mutations in a thick ﬁlament gene.
mals that had a post-ﬂight movement defect (Higashibata Second, spaceﬂight allows animals to better compensate
et al., 2006), thus reinforcing the idea that there are indiVid- for a mutation in the thick ﬁlaments by increasing thick ﬁl-
ual speciﬁc diﬂerenees that underlie spaceﬂight-indueed ament gene expression.
alterations in muscle. If this is true than C. elegans would Together the histologie and Western blot data from unc-
appear to mirror the situation in human beings where there 15 animals suggest that altered muscle development,
appears to be great variability in muscle atrophy in induced by spaceﬂight, allows partial rescue of the defects
response to spaceﬂight (Fitts et al., 2001; Adams et al., induced by the mutation. A direct elucidation of the func-
2003). tional consequences and the mechanism underlying the res-

In summary, ICE-FIRST demonstrated that C. elegans cue remains to be demonstrated. If spaceﬂight does indeed
has altered muscle development in response to spaceﬂight rescue the functional consequences of mutations in muscle

"
"5","214 AA. Adenle et a1. /Advances in Space Research 44 { 2009 ) 210—216
proteins this suggests that muscle damaged in ﬂight may be The ﬁrst population analyzed (author’s sample 4) had
better able to repair than muscle damaged on Earth, a View signiﬁcant increases in expression for only 28 genes and
that runs counter to the current conventional wisdom. decreases in expression for 24 genes relative to expression
However, while we have presented the unc-15 data as under standard culturing conditions. When the results were
spaceﬂight having “rescued” the effects of the mutation adjusted to account for changes in the sister ground control
the investigators have correctly pointed out that there population and looked at in terms of “biologicalfunction”,
may be concerns with this apparent rescue. Speciﬁcally, this population appears to have decreased expression of
their data can also be interpreted to show that increased amino acid and lipid metabolism genes, decreased expres-
muscle protein degradation, a required component of mus- sion of collagen genes, and increased expression of fatty
ole atrophy, is found in the mutants vs. wild-type. If the acid oxidation genes. In the second population (author’s
investigators are correct, this reinforces the currently sample 22), there was a signiﬁcant increase in expression
widely held View that muscle damaged during spaceﬂight for only 25 genes and a decrease in expression for 28 genes
may not be properly able to repair. Future studies are relative to standard culturing conditions. When the results
Clearly needed. were adjusted to account for changes in the sister ground
control population and looked at in terms of “biological
5. Analysis of the genomic response to spaceﬂight function”, this population has decreased expression of neu-
romuscular genes, decreased expression of amino acid
Not only was C. elegans the ﬁrst animal to have its gen- metabolism genes, decreased expression of collagen genes,
ome sequenced, it has the most completely annotated and increased expression of heat shock stress response
sequence. This combined with the fact that the human gen- genes. The third population (author’s sample 23), had a sig-
ome has also been sequenced makes C. elegans a premier niﬁcant increase in expression for only 16 genes and a
model for genomic studies. Therefore, the ICE-FIRST decrease in expression for 23 genes compared to standard
investigators embarked upon one of the ﬁrst analyses of culturing conditions. Adjusting to account for changes in
the genomic response to spaceﬂight. Genomics is a young the sister ground control population and looking at “bio-
ﬁeld and thus methodology is a major driver both in inter- logical function”, this population has decreased expression
pretation of results and in fundamental vs. applied discov- of neuromuscular genes, decreased expression of intestinal
ery. For these reasons the investigators employed a variety genes, decreased expression of amino acid metabolism
of techniques and attempted to look at both fundamental genes, decreased expression of collagen genes, and
and applied questions. As discussed in the preceding sec- increased expression of muscle and heat shock stress
tions, the investigators employed a targeted approach to response genes. The investigators noted that the analysis
analyzing alterations in gene expression as they related to of genes identiﬁed as showing reproducible changes were
other ﬁndings such as altered muscle development, apopto- conﬁrmed in a fourth population of animals using RT-
sis and normal developmental process of C. elegans. The PCR, Western blotting and Affymetrix mieroarray (Hig-
investigators also employed a number of unbiased analyses ashibata et al., 2006).
in an effort to understand the global changes C. elegans Three themes emerge from the microarray data. First,
gene expression induced by spaceﬂight. Lastly, because there are few genes that show reproducible changes in
another group of investigators conducted a similar experi- response to spaceﬂight when assayed in multiple replicates
ment for another genomic model, Drosophila melanogaster, of a population. This may mean that gene responses to
on an ESA mission prior to ICE-FIRST, a comparative spaceﬂight are small and/or that the number of genes
genomic analysis was done. altered in response to spaceﬂight is relatively small. This
is not particularly surprising because gross development,
5.]. Gene transcription response 10 Spaceﬂight in C. elegans apoptosis (Higashitani et al., 2005), and DNA repair (Zhao
et al., 2006) all appeared normal in response to spaceﬂight.
The gene transcription response to a 10-day spaceﬂight Second, there are some genes that show reproducible
was examined using two full genome microarray platforms, changes in response to spaceﬂight both within replicates
the Stanford C. elegans CDNA array (Kim et al., 2001) and of a population and across populations. Notably, the genes
the Affymetrix array (Hill et al., 2000). Three independent that have these highly reproducible changes are largely
spaceﬂight and ground control population samples were metabolic (decreased) and stress response genes
compared to standard culture populations on Earth. The (increased). Additionally, the bulk of these genes are
investigators used a log 2 change of >2 as a cut-off mark thought to be regulated by two signaling pathways that
(p < 0.05 for 1.3- to 1.7-fold) across as many replicates as the worm uses to sense and respond to the external enVi-
possible (as many as three and as few as one). In an effort ronment, Insulin and TGF-beta. Third, within the Class
to understand the biological function/meaning of the of genes that gave reproducible changes in expression it is
observed changes in gene expression the authors plotted possible to identify genes that change in only two of three
their results against the genomic self—organizing map populations during spaceﬂight; for example, decreased
(Kim et al., 2001) using p < 0.001 to assign signiﬁcance to expression of neuromuscular genes. This may suggest dif-
ehanges within “mountains” on the map. ferential sensitiVity of populations to spaceﬂight or, as

"
"6","A.A. Adenle et a1. /Advances in Space Research 44 { 2009 ) 210—216 215
the authors state, population diﬂerences in exposure to mul- organisms is an under-representation of the conserved
tiple vs. individual stressors associated with spaceﬂight. This genomic responses and is expected for both methodological
may also explain why one population of spaceﬂown worms reasons (discussed by the authors (Leandro et al., 2007)
hadapost-ﬂight movement defect while one did not and also and for statistical reasons (e.g. the highly stringent selec-
why there is wide variability in muscle loss in astronauts and tion criteria employed by the authors)). However, the fact
cosmonauts (Fitts et al., 2001; Adams et al., 2003). that all of the identiﬁed genes are either metabolic and/or

Together the results paint a semi-conVinCing picture of neuromuscular “signaling” genes suggest that there is
how C. elegans modulates gene expression in response to indeed a conserved metabolic alteration in these two spe-
spaeeﬂight. First, worms use the same signaling pathways cies (and likely in mammals) that involves both a metabolic
as on Earth to sense and modulate gene expression in shift and altered neuromuscular development/function. It
response to spaceﬂight, namely Insulin and TGF-beta. Sec- remains to be seen if there are master genes (e.g. transcrip-
ond, the highly reproducible changes in gene expression are tion factors) controlling the response to spaceﬂight (for
metabolic genes. Third, there are individual diﬂerences in example, as seaﬂolding proteins SPON-l and/or TAG-
response to spaceﬂight that may be explained in terms of 117 could hypothetically be “gravity sensors” upstream
individual diﬂerence in metabolic demand due to multiple of an unidentiﬁed transcription factor). Regardless, it
stressors in ﬂight (for example spaceﬂight vs. spaceﬂight seems reasonable to speculate that altered metabolic gene
and hypoxia). It remains to be seen if these underlying mes- expression in response to spaceﬂight underlies the bulk of
sages will also emerge from spaceﬂown mammals. the changes observed in response to spaceﬂight and it is

clear that future work is needed to demonstrate the causal
5.2. Common changes in global gene expression in D. links, if any, between these siX genes and phenotypes asso-
melanogaster and C. elegans ciated with spaceﬂight.

The comparative analysis is described by Leandro and 6. Conclusions
his colleagues (2007). The authors used three diﬂerent
approaches to analyze the similarities and diﬂerenees in We have reViewed the results from ICE-FIRST and have
the gene expression and found only a few with common attempted to illustrate that C. elegans is a robust system for
gene expression changes. Given the strict statistical criteria studies addressing the impact of spaceﬂight upon biology.
applied and generally small reproducible set of genes A variety of investigations carried out during ICE-FIRST,
shown to change in spaceﬂown C. elegans, as discussed by researchers from four nations, have added to our knowl-
above, this result is not particularly surprising. However, edge of the biological response to spaceﬂight. With respect
siX genes were found to have a common response to space- to radiation eﬂeets during spaceﬂight, ICE-FIRST demon-
ﬂight. They were all identiﬁed as haVing decreased expres- strated that radiation damaged cells should be able to be
sion in both organisms: removed Via apoptosis in ﬂight and that C. elegans can

be employed as a biological accumulating dosimeter. With

(i) T04F8.2 (C. elegans) or CG9304 (D. melanogaster): respect to spaceﬂight eﬂects on muscle, ICE-FIRST dem-

yet to be Characterized but possibly a G-protein cou- onstrated that decreased expression of myogenic transcrip-
pled receptor. tion factors underlie the decreased expression of myosin
(ii) F10E7.4, Spon-I (C. elegans) or CG6953, fat-spondin seen in ﬂight, a response that would appear to be evolu-
(D. melanogaster): a fat-spondin-like protein involved tionarily conserved. Lastly, ICE-FIRST gave us our ﬁrst
in cell adhesion and notably important for neuron glimpse at the genomic response to spaceﬂight, suggesting
and muscle development (Woo et al., 2008). that altered Insulin and/or TGF-beta signaling in ﬂight
(iii) C01B7.4, tag-117 (C. elegans) or CG31243, CpO or may underlie many of the biological changes seen in
CG32717, sdt or CG1864, Hr38 (D. melanogaster): response to spaceﬂight. The fact that the results obtained
yet to be Characterized but possibly a membrane asso- with C. elegans appear to have strong similarities in human
ciated guanylate kinase involved in seaﬂolding and beings suggests that not only will C. elegans prove an
signaling in postsynaptie cells. invaluable model for understanding the fundamental bio-
(iV) F35H12.4 (C. elegans) or CG7004, fwd (D. melano- logical changes seen during spaceﬂight but that it may also
gaster): yet to be Characterized but possibly a phos- be invaluable for understanding those changes associated
phatidylinositol kinase. with human health concerns in space.
(V) F31F6.6,nac-1 (C. elegans) or CG3979, Indy (D. mel-
anogaster): a sodium coupled dicarboxylate Acknowledgements
transporter.
(Vi) F13D12.2, Zdh-I (C. elegans) or CG10160, ImpL3) ICE-FIRST experiments were funded by CNES, NASA,
(D. melanogaster): a lactate dehydrogenase. JAXA and CSA. The Dutch Soyuz mission, DELTA, was
facilitated by the Dutch Government. Comat, ESA, Ros-

Clearly the ﬁnding of only siX genes that show reprodue- cosmos and Energia all provided payload support for the

ible changes in response to spaceﬂight in two diﬂerent ICE-FIRST experiments. Work in NJS’ laboratory is

"
"7","216 AA. Adenle et a1. /Advances in Space Research 44 ( 2009 ) 210—216

funded by the NIH-NIAMS (ROLAR054342) and the Leandro, L.J., Szewczyk, N.J., Benguria, A., Herranz, R., Lavan, D.,

MRC (G0801271). Medina, F.J., Gasset, G., Loon, J.V., Conley, C.A., Marco, R.

Comparative analysis Of Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis
elegans gene expression experiments in the European Soyuz ﬂights to

References the International Space Station. AdV. Space Res. 40, 506—512, 2007.

Longnecker, D.E., Manning, F.J., Worth, M.H.J. (Eds.). Review of

Adachi, R., Takaya, T., Kuriyama, K., Higashibata, A., Ishioka, N., NASA’s Longitudinal Study of Astronaut Health. The National
Kagawa, H. Spaceﬂight results in increase of thick ﬁlament but not Academies Press, Washington, DC, 2004.
thin ﬁlament proteins in the paramyosin mutant of Caenorhabditis Lu, N.C., Goestsch, K.M. Carbohydrate requirement of Caenorhabditis
elegans. AdV. Space Res. 41, 816—823, 2008. elegans and the ﬁnal development of a chemically deﬁned medium.

Adams, G.R., Caiozzo, V.J., Baldwin, K.M. Skeletal muscle unweighting: Nematologica 39, 303—331, 1993.
spaceﬂight and ground-based models. J . Appl. Physiol. 95, 2185—2201, Nelson, G.A., Schubert, W.W., Kazarians, G.A., Richards, G.F. Devel-
2003. opment and chromosome mechanics in nematodes: results from IML-

Antoshechkin, I., Sternberg, P.W. The versatile worm: genetic and 1. AdV. Space Res. 14, 209—214, 1994a.
genomic resources for Caenarhabditis elegans research. Nat. ReV. Nelson, G.A., Schubert, W.W., Kazarians, G.A., Richards, G.F., Benton,
Genet. 8, 518—532, 2007. E.V., Benton, E.R., Henke, R. Radiation effects in nematodes: results

Brenner, S. The genetics of Caenarhabditis elegans. Genetics 77, 71—94, from IML—l experiments. Adv, Space Res. 14, 87—91, 1994b.

1974. Rosenbluth, R.E., Baillie, D.L. The genetic analysis of a reciprocal

Corsi, AK. A biochemist’s guide to Caenorhabditis elegans. Anal. translocation, eT1(III; V), in Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 99, 415—
Biochem. 359, 1—17, 2006. 428, 1981.

Eeckman, F.H., Durbin, R. ACeDB and macace. Methods Cell Biol. 48, Selch, F,, Higashibata, A,, Imamizo-sato, M., Higashitani, A., Ishioka,
583—605, 1995. N., Szewczyk, N.J., Conley, C.A. Genomic response of the nematode

Fitts,R.H.,Riley,D.R.,Widrick,J .J .Functional and structural adaptations Caenorhabditis elegans to spaceﬂight. Adv. Space Res. 41, 807—815,
of skeletal muscle to microgravity. J . Exp. Biol. 204, 3201—3208, 2001. 2008,

Hagen, U. Radiation biology in space: a critical review. AdV. Space Res. 9, Stewart, D,F,, Lujan, B,F, Medical concerns for exploration-class
3—8, 1989. missions. Acta Astronaut. 29, 633—638, 1993.

Hartman, P.S., Hlavacek, A., Wilde, H., Lewicki, D., Schubert, W., Kern, Szewczyk, N.J., Mancinelli, R,L,, Mclamb, W., Reed, D., Blumberg,
R.G., Kazarians, G.A., Benton, E.V., Benton, E.R., Nelson, GA. A B.S., Conley, C.A. Caenarhabditis elegans survives atmospheric
comparison of mutations induced by accelerated iron particles versus breakup of STS-107, space shuttle Columbia. Astrobiology 5, 690—
those induced by low earth orbit space radiation in the FEM-3 gene of 705, 2005,

CaenOrhabditiS elegans. Mutat. Res. 474, 47—55, 2001. Szewczyk, N.J., Tillman, J ., Conley, C.A., Granger, L., Segalat, L.,

Higashibata,A.,Szewczyk,N.J.,Conley,C.A.,Imamizo-sato,M.,Higash- Higashitani, A., Honda, S., Honda, Y., Kagawa, H., Adachi, R.,
itani, A., Ishioka, N. Decreased expression of myogenic transcription Higashibata, A,, Fujimoto, N., Kuriyama, K,, Ishioka, N., Fukui, K.,
factors and myosin heavy chains in Caenorhabditis elegans muscles Baillie, D., Rose, A., Gasset, G., Eche, B., Chaput, D., Viso, M.
developed during spaceﬂight. J . Exp. Biol. 209, 3209—3218, 2006. Description of International Caenarhabditis elegans experiment ﬁrst

Higashitani, A., Higashibata, A., Sasagawa, Y., Sugimoto, T., Miyazawa, ﬂight (ICE-FIRST). Adv. Space Res. 42, 1072—1079, 2008.

Y., Szewcyk, N.J., Viso, M., Gasset, G., Eche, B., Fukui, K., Shimazu, Vandenburgh, H., Chromiak, J ., Shansky, J ., Del tatto, M., Lemaire, J .
T., Fujimoto, N., Kuriyama, K., Ishioka, N. Checkpoint and Space travel directly induces skeletal muscle atrophy. FASEB J. 13,
physiological apoptosis in germ cells proceeds normally in spaceﬁown 1031—1038, 1999.

CaenOrhabditiS elegans. Apoptosis 10, 949—954, 2005. W00, W.M., Berry, E.C., Hudson, M.L., Swale, R.E., Goncharov, A.,

Hill, A.A., Hunter, C.P., Tsung, B.T., Tueker-kellogg, G., Brown, E.L. Chisholm, AD. The C. elegans F-spondin family protein SPON—l
Genomic analysis of gene expression in C. elegans. Science 290, 809— maintains cell adhesion in neural and non-neural tissues. Development
812, 2000. 135, 2747—2756, 2008.

Kim, S.K., Lund, J., Kiraly, M., Duke, K., Jiang, M., Stuart, J.M., Zhao, Y., Lai, K., Cheung, I., Youds, J., Tarailo, M., Tarailo, S., Rose, A.
Eizinger, A., Wylie, B.N., Davidson, G.S. A gene expression map for A mutational analysis of Caenorhabditis elegans in space. Mutat. Res.
Caenorhabditis elegans. Science 293, 2087—2092, 2001. 601, 19—29, 2006.

"
