"","x"
"1","- Available online at wvwv.sciencedirect.com ——
mg ADVANCES IN
em SCIenceDIrect SPACE
E RESEARCH
ELSEVIER Advances in Space Research 40 (2007) 506—512 (aCOS—w
www.elseVier.com/locate/asr
Comparative analys1s of Drosophlla melanogaster and Caenorhabdltls
elegans gene express1on experiments in the European Soyuz
ﬂights to the International Space Station
b / d /
L.J. Leandro a, N.J. Szewezyk ”C, A. Benguna , R. Herranz a, D. Lavan a,
- f b
F]. Medina 6, G. Gasset , J . van Loon g, CA. Conley , R. Marco a’*
a Departamento de Bioqul’mica-II. Biomédicas “Alberto Sols” { UAM—CSI C ), Madrid, Spain
b Ames Research Center, NASA, M/S 239-11, Moﬁ’ett Field, CA 94035-1000, USA
C Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
d Centro Nacional de Biotecnologz’a {CSIC), Cantoblanco, E—28041 Madrid, Spain
6 Centro de Investigaciones Biolégicas { CS1 C ), Ramiro a’e Maeztu 9, E—28040 Madrid, Spain
f GSBMS, Université “Paul Sabatier”, T oulouse, France
g Dutch Experiment Support Center, DESC @ OCB-ACTA-Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Received 9 J anuary 2007; received in revised form 25 May 2007; accepted 25 May 2007
Abstract
The European Soyuz missions have been one of the main routes for conducting scientiﬁc experiments onboard the International
Space Station, which is currently in the construction phase. A relatively large number of life and physical sciences experiments as well
as technology demonstrations have been carried out during these missions. Included among these experiments are the Gene experi-
ment during the Spanish “Cervantes” Soyuz mission and the ICE-lst experiment during the Dutch “Delta” mission. In both exper-
iments, full genome microarray analyses were carried out on RNA extracted from whole animals recovered from the ﬂight. These
experiments indicated relatively large scale Changes in gene expression levels in response to spaceﬂight for two popular model systems,
Drosophila melanogaster (Gene) and Caenorabditis elegans (ICE-lst). Here we report a comparative analysis of results from these two
experiments. Finding orthologous genes between the fruit ﬂy and the nematode was far from straightforward, reducing the number of
genes that we could compare to roughly 20% of the full comparative genome. Within this sub-set of the data (2286 genes), only siX
genes were found to display identical Changes between species (decreased) while 1809 genes displayed no Change in either species.
Future experiments using ground simulation techniques will allow producing a better, more comprehensive picture of the putative
set of genes aﬂected in multicellular organisms by Changes in gravity and getting a deeper understanding of how animals respond
and adapt to spaceﬂight.
© 2007 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Microarrays; Gene expression patterns; Microgravity; International Space Station; Drosophila melanogaster; Caenorhabditis elegans; European
Soyuz missions; Spanish Cervantes mission; Dutch Delta mission
1. Introduction information required for successful exploration and coloni-
zation of space. One critical scientiﬁc question is: How
The International Space Station (ISS) is the current much are organisms affected by changes in gravity? Gravity
facility designed for use in gathering the critical scientiﬁc is one of the fundamental, unchanging, physical parame-
ters on the Earth (Marco et 211., 2003). In addition to inter-
national involvement in construction and utilization of the
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +34 91 397 54 09; fax: +34 91 585 44 01. ISS’ the p revalent Idea among .the space SClentlﬁC Cqmnuk
E—mail address: roberto.marco@uam.es (R. Marco). n1ty was that It WOUld be poss1ble to perform experlments
0273-1177/$30 © 2007 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.asr.2007.05.070

"
"2","L.J. Leandra et al. / Advances in Space Research 40 ( 2007 ) 506—512 507

onboard the 188 under conditions similar to those nor- 2. Materials and methods
mally found in laboratories on Earth. Today, the hard real-
ity is much less encouraging. The scientiﬁc utilization of the 2.1. The Gene experiment in the Spanish Soyuz mission
188 has been curtailed by delays in its completion, budget-
ary overruns, crew limitations, etc. The laboratory facilities The experiment intended to study the eﬂeets of the space
are yet quite Spartan. Even when the ﬁnal European and environment on the gene expression pattern of D. melano-
Japanese modules are installed, the number and complexity gaster pupae exposed to microgravity during their develop-
of the experiments will remain limited. Critical among ment. In doing so, we could rely on previous experiments
these factors are the size of the permanent crew and restrie- performed in our laboratory to adapt ﬁxation methods to
tions in experiment transport and access to the station. space conditions (Herranz et al., 2005). Because we could
These concerns are now ampliﬁed as NASA has stated that not use an on-board glove box to meet the level of contain-
the Shuttle ﬂeet is too expensive, obsolete and/or unﬁt for ment imposed by safety for the use of toxic ﬁxatives, the
servicing the station as originally planned, namely, every experiment had to be entirely executed, in a completely
three months. automatic fashion, inside a Closed ESA type I container.

One Soyuz capsule is permanently attached to the 188, The original Berlingot concept (Tixador et al., 1981) had
serving as a lifeboat, providing an emergency escape route to be adapted. The Berlingot is a culture Chamber inside
for the crew. Initially conceived as an auxiliary facility, a small sealed plastic bag with two layers of polyethylene.
the Soyuz capsules are safe and robust, capable of provid- In the Berlingot design the samples are inside this dou-
ing shelter and return capability for up to three astro- ble-layered plastic bag that also holds glass ampoules eon-
nauts. In fact, the limited seating capacity of the Soyuz taining ﬁxatives (Fig. 1). When the ampoules are broken
is one of the reasons why the ISS crew is limited. To the ﬁxatives are released. Dutch Space (Leiden, The Neth-
assure the continued operability of capsules docked to erlands) had developed an automated system which was
the 188, new capsules are launched at regular intervals. able to break the glass ampoules at preset times; the
Newly launched capsules dock at the second Soyuz bay MAMBA hardware, “Motorized Ampoule Breaker
on the ISS and older capsules return to the ground. Assembly”. A power supply had to be built and sent to
Due to the limited capacity, the Soyuz capsule does not the 188 in time to be able to activate the MAMBA contain-
provide much cargo space. 188 bound cargo must be ers during the Spanish Soyuz mission.
shipped by the Shuttle ﬂeet or the unmanned Russian Two MAMBA containers were ﬂown with two bags
Progress, which has a more limited cargo capacity and each. The same number was prepared for the near synchro-
laeks the ability to transport large power requiring ele- nous ground controls including the cold transportation
ments of the 18$ (for example the European Columbus step (see below) and for a posterior ground control which
or Japanese modules). lacked such a cold transportation step. Due to ﬂight eon-

During the past ﬁve years, the European Space Agency straints, we had to limit our experiment to a particular
in collaboration with some of its member states has been developmental process, namely pupation. The whole pupa-
using these Progress and Soyuz ﬂights to try to implement tion process requires four days at normal room tempera-
a research program. These eﬂorts began somewhat tenta-
tively, but have recently become more systematic. Between
2000 and 2006, siX European Soyuz missions have been
ﬂown: one French (2001), two Italian (2001 and 2005), 7 _ Ber'iw’ﬂwsw'ampoumﬁ ‘7 ,7
one Belgian (2002), one Spanish (2003) and one Dutch .15"" , a 57,73""
(2004). The science run during these missions was recently ' 4-352], , . ~ jg"", ' - "" .,
reViewed at a meeting in Toledo and will be published soon _- ‘ c"" '54-“ i L' 1/)”, -
(van Loon et al., in press). _./ 5‘ ' 3,"" 37

During these missions, scientiﬁc experiments performed 1' ' ‘ ‘,"" . -x
covered both physical and life sciences. During two mis- 1;"" )7, I f/ I I ‘ ‘ ~
sions, the Spanish Cervantes and the Dutch Delta missions, ~ 7' - '/’ , ‘ /
experiments were conducted to detect global Changes in ., ' / ,«‘ / ,1."" 7
gene expression of multicellular organisms. The experi- . . . ‘ , '. .l ' l' — '
ments were quite diﬂerent, but they utilized two of the ‘ . ' ' ""
more important biological model systems available, _ ‘ . 0‘ '_
namely, D. melanogaster in the Cervantes mission and the ‘ ' ’
nematode C. elegans in the Delta mission. Since the gen- ‘ , ,. A -
omes of these two organisms have been sequenced, it is ' 7
possible to look at orthologues. The aim of this analysis Breaking rods Gearmotor
is to analyze the results of both experiments in order to ﬁnd
genes whose eXpression changed in both organisms during Fig. 1. The Berlingot and the MAMBA concepts included in a Type 1
their visits to the ISS, container are shown. The dimension of the type I container is 9 x 4 x 2 cm.

"
"3","508 L]. Leandra et a1. / Advances in Space Research 40 { 2007 ) 506—512
ture, 22 OC. During this time, the animals remain immobile 2.2. The I CE—I st experiment in the Dutch Soyuz mission
inside the pupal case. They do not require any food, only
oxygen. The sample preparation process is relatively corn- In the next European Soyuz ﬂight, in April 2004, a
plieated and required the use of dedicated equipment avail- group of International Laboratories (French, J apanese,
able in Toulouse, which could not be easily transported to Canadian, Americans) coordinated by Dr. Michel Viso
the launch site in Baikonour, Kazakhstan. We had previ- from the French Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales
ously shown the capability of Drosophila to survive at rel- (CNES), ﬂew a set of 53 culture bags containing C. elegans
atively lower temperatures than usual (Anthony et al., (Szewczyk et al., submitted for publication). The bags were
1996). The animals develop normally but more slowly. This made of the same material as the Gene experiment bags
provided the possibility to prepare the experiment in Tou- and housed within the same ESA Type 1 containers. The
louse (France) and transport the samples, at 14 0C, to the majority of the ICE-lst Type 1 containers were vented
launch site in Baikonour. After launch, the samples were (including the ones containing the animals utilized for the
exposed to the microgravity environment at room temper- microarray analysis) as they did not contain ﬁxative. The
ature (smoothly oscillating between 20 and 22 0C in the ICE-lst samples were prepared in Toulouse in the same
Soyuz capsule and ﬁxed 220 in the aquarius incubator in laboratory as the Gene experiment and transported to Bai-
the 18$) for three and half days. ESA kindly provided konour in the same Yellow Boxes. The containers were
the Yellow Box containers for the cold transportation step. inserted in the Kubik incubator developed by ESA set at
Twenty D. melanogaster Oregon R wild type larvae/ 12 0C during the day immediately preceding the launch in
early pupae were placed onto the centre of a ﬁlter paper the Soyuz capsule when the temperature in the incubator
of the appropriate size to ﬁt in each Berlingot bag, was raised to 20 0C. After two days the Soyuz docked the
3.2 x 10 em. The larvae were already migrating out of International Space Station and the Kubik was transferred
the food and starting pupation but were still easily to the Station with the nematode samples which were kept
detached from the plastic wall of the tube and transferred at 20 0C for an additional period of 10 days. After landing,
t0 the ﬁlter paper. The glass ampoules were ﬁlled with the samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen. Two sets ofeon-
acetone, the ﬁxative used, under low pressure as previ- trol sets of samples were prepared in the same way, but
ously described (Tixador et al., 1981). Twenty ampoules remained in either Moscow or Toulouse (1 set at each city)
were laid inside each bag. Since each ampoule held 30 Ml until landing of the space samples had taken place. They
a total of 0.6 ml of ﬁxative was released on the pupae were treated in a similar way. During the 12 days at
when the ampoules were broken. By removing as much 20 0C, the animals were able to develop and produce prog-
water as possible from the tissues using acetone we were eny. Animal growth and development in-ﬂight was normal
able to preserve RNA and protein in our samples. Ace- (Szewczyk et al., submitted for publication), apoptosis pro-
tone dehydration will work through the thick cuticles of eeeded normally in the germ line (Higashitani et al., 2005)
the pupae and imagoes. Once the acetone is released no increase in the rate of mutation was noted (Zhao et al.,
transferring the samples to low temperatures increases 2006), and altered muscle development with a movement
the recovery of the RNAs (Herranz et al., 2005). Once defect was noted upon return to Earth (Higashibata
the ampoules were broken, the two containers were trans- et al., 2006). RNA from three samples (4, 22 and 23) from
ferred to the ISS freezer at —22 0C in the Russian Seg- the experimental containers ICE-08 and ICE-05 was
ment. They remained there until the end of the mission, extracted and puriﬁed from mixed stage animals as
when they were brought into the passive biology transfer described (Selch et al., submitted for publication). The
box and transferred to the Soyuz TMA-2 capsule that RNAs were used for microarray analysis using standard
returned to the ground with Pedro Duque and the Expe- laboratory grown samples.
dition S7 crew, The containers were immediately trans- Two approaches were taken in analysing the microarray
ferred back to a Yellow Box at 3 0C after landing of data. First, a biased approach of examining genes associ-
the Soyuz. The samples were taken back to Moscow area ated with biological relevant processes revealed no changes
where, at Star city, they were returned to the scientiﬁc in gene expression for apoptosis related genes (Higashitani
team close to 12 h after landing. The containers were et al., 2005) and decreased expression of a number of “mus-
opened, the pupae removed and homogenized in Trizol, ele” genes including those that encode MyoD and Myosin
less than one hour later. The RNAs in the pellets were Heavy Chain (Higashibata et al., 2006). Second, an unbi-
put on dry ice until further processing in our laboratory ased comparison of whole animal, whole genome transcript
in Madrid. An almost parallel experiment, using pupae levels in three samples analyzed on a CDNA system and
prepared a day later and exposed to 14 0C during a sim- one sample on the Aﬂyrnetrix system (Selch et al., submit-
ilar period of time as for the actual ﬂight experiment was ted Advances in Space Research 2006). The unbiased anal-
perforrned (near synchronous ground control listed ysis suggested that each population of worms had
above). After the successful launch, the samples were population speciﬁc changes as well as changes that were
removed from the low temperature and the ampoules conserved between populations. In all, 21 genes displayed
were broken after a similar incubation time at 22 0C as increased expression across all four samples and 16 dis-
in-ﬂight. played decreased expression. The data suggest that across

"
"4","L.J. Leandra et a1. / Advances in Space Research 40 { 2007 ) 506—512 509
populations worms display decreased expression of eolla- intensity of the hybridization of the space samples vs the
gen (worm exoskeleton?), neuromuscular elements (inelud- ground control ones was used in the comparisons for the
ing MyoD and Myosin Heavy Chain), and amino acid two systems, Drosophila and C. elegans. The Chips detect
metabolism encoding genes as well as increased expression a large number of probe-sets (14,010 for Drosophila and
of intestinal components (worm equivalent of liver/kidney) 22,625 for the nematode). Nevertheless, only a subset of
and heat shock response genes. orthologue genes can be identiﬁed in both systems. Using

the Affymetrix software, it is possible to compare a relative
2.3. Comparative gene expression proﬁle analysis large number of genes using the Affymetrix database. First
we identiﬁed in the Affymetrix database the equivalent
The RNAs obtained from the pooled samples were name of the wormbase ID gene names given in the ICE-
hybridized to Aﬁymetrix chips for both experiments 1st analysis. Then we found the orthologue in the Drosoph-
(CDNA Chips were also used for the C. elegans experiment). ila genome as given by Affymetrix. As indicated below, this
They were processed and analyzed following Aﬂymetrix’s search did not cover the whole list of genes, probably due
recommendations. The equally normalized log2 ratios of to the current annotation situation in both systems. Only
a
U) A
B, V
4th . ’ § 1st
9 2 .0 O
O
. . 2. .0 0330?. . 33:. o. . D melanogaster Signal
. ’ o O «3 20 .0“ s o 0092)
o O’a‘g‘O , . 9% o o
9 O O I vm» a w
9 ° 9 .”.’:’:%M 2~¢2; :0.“ $.39, .. .
. . o. . ‘0"" 1 VT” 3 ' ,/ 532/ ' ‘.o” .
—4 —3 . .:-2. “a ’23:... . ~23» 0391)’ ° . :29 3
o .‘N. .’o ?%0‘ i ‘ ”ca... .O‘.. .
3. . o gg’30r52‘ ’0.” 9’3“. O”...
O . O O . . .. . .
o ‘ o. :0 o 0. . o
0 _2 .. O
O O
O
_3 O O O
3 d '4 2 d
r “
b ‘73
2.5 2% a
A A § .3’
4th . ~ 2.0 3v 1st
. ~ 3
. ~ 1.5
A ‘4‘ 1.0 y: -1,21058X+ 0,003
~ ~ ~ 0.5 R = 0’8759 Dmelanogaser Signal
~ ~ “092)
-2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 -0.5 ‘ ~Q.5 1 1.5 2
'\I._. -1.0 ‘ ~ ~
I A AA~ A
-1.5 ‘
y=-O,1247x-1,1826 ‘
R2 = 0,3896 -2-0
3rd 2nd
- GroupA&E: Genes that move in the same direction in both studies
A GroupB&D: Genes that move in opposite directions in both studies
—Regression line Group AE
- - IRegression line Group BD
Fig. 2. (a) The genes for which orthologues have been found between Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans are plotted indicating their
relative changes (10g2 ratios) in the International Space Station. Drosophila Gene (abscissa) and Caenorhabditis ICE-lst (ordinates) against their respective
controls. Being 10g2 ratios positive values indicate that these genes are up—regulated in space, while negative values correspond to down-regulated ones.
The number of genes in the different quadrants is as follows: lst 590, 2nd 456, 3rd 475 and 4th 750. Twelve genes lay on the abscissa axis and three on the
ordinates one. (b) The same plot limited to the genes that give relative changes of at least of zl.7-fold in both experiments. Most of them change in
opposite directions. Only ﬁve decrease in both systems but with a weak correlation line. None increase.

"
"5","510 L]. Leandra et a1. / Advances in Space Research 40 { 2007 ) 506—512
approximately 20% of the genes in the ICE-lst chip could identify among the Caenorhabitis genes the orthologues
be identiﬁed as having Drosophila orthologues in the of the genes that Beekingham’s group had found to be
Affymetrix database and therefore could be compared. affected in a genetic search in Drosophila identifying
This limitation has to be kept in mind when evaluating mutants with an altered geotropie response (Armstrong
the information given below. The results described in the et al., 2006).
following section correspond to this subset of genes. In the ﬁrst approach, we started with the collection of C.
elegans genes that produced reproducible, reliable data in
3. Results the ICE-lst microarray data, namely 13,596 genes. For
only 2277, (almost exactly 20%), we could identify the cor-
3.1. Similarities and diﬂerences in the gene expression responding Drosophila orthologues be identiﬁed. Seleh et al
proﬁles between D. melanogaster and C. elegans experiments had used three different samples from the Delta Soyuz mis-
sion and analyzed them both independently and pooled.
To establish the similarities and differences we employed We decided to pool the data from the three samples as
two initial approaches and a third, complementary we had done with the Drosophila Gene samples and to
attempt. The reason for these different methods is that compare the degree of variation against the controls. In
the only way to compare the results is to look into those Fig. 2a we can see plotted the results of such a comparison.
genes that we can identify as orthologues. As can also be seen in Table l, the majority of Drosophila
The ﬁrst approach was to take the normalized data and Caenorhabditis orthologue genes only give relatively
obtained in the microarray analysis of the Gene experi- small changes, less than 2-fold up or down in both experi-
ment (Marco et al., in preparation) and to compare them Inents. Moreover, they are similarly distributed among the
to the normalized data of the ICE-lst experiment (Seleh four quadrants, indicating that there are little hints that
et al., submitted for publication). The second approach they may be changing expression values in the same direc-
was to take the list of the genes that had been found to tion in both experiments. The same conclusion can be
give a signiﬁcant difference between the ﬂight and the syn- reached if we only plot the genes that give at least 2-fold
ehronous ground control in the C. elegans ICE-lst exper- changes in the ICE-lst and in the Gene experiment
iment and to look into the behaviour of their Drosophila (Fig. 2b). Only six genes decreased both in the Gene and
orthologues in the Gene experiment. Finally, we tried to in the ICE-lst experiments (3d quadrant) and none
Table 1
Number of orthologue genes in the total identiﬁed 2286 genes distributed in the different categories in the Gene experiment and in the ICE-lst
ISS D. melanogaster increase ISS D. melanogaster decrease ISS D. melanogaster no change
ISS C. elegans increase Group A (lst quadrant): 0 genes Group B (4th quadrant): 9 genes Group C: 80 genes
ISS C. elegans decrease Group D (2nd quadrant): 5 genes Group E (3rd quadrant): 6 genes Group F: 125 genes
ISS C. elegans no change Group G: 118 genes Group H: 134 genes Group I: 1809 genes
A relatively low cut-off of ml.7-fold (increase or decrease) was used in reaching these numbers.
3 E
4th 5; a 1st
I + tn 1:» +
X 2 gs: _
3
1
Dmelanogaster Signal
(|092)
—4 -3 -2 -1 <> 1 2 3
X -1
A-2 . A A .
._3 . .
3rd -4 2nd
Fig. 3. The correlation among the genes identiﬁed in Caenorhabditis experiment (Seleh et al., submitted for publication) as giving a large response in space,
at least 4-fold increase and decrease, and the changes in the Gene experiment of their Drosophila orthologues. Only those found as orthologues are plotted.
The points marked with the same type of symbols, correspond to genes that can be correlated withdifferent Drosophila ID gene numbers that show
differences in relative expression.

"
"6","L.J. Leandra et a1. / Advances in Space Research 40 { 2007 ) 506—512 511
Table 2
Gene ontology of the 6 genes that do show at least £1.7-fold decreases and can be identiﬁed in both experiments (3d quadrant of Fig. 2b)
C. elegans D. melanogaster Predicted function
T04F8.2 CG9304 Unknown
F10E7.4 (spon-l) CG6953 (fat-spondin) Cell adhesion//fat-spondin-like protein
C01B7.4 (tag-117) CG31243 (cpo) CG32717 (sdt) CG1864 (Hr38) Postsynaptic scaffolding-like protein
F35H12.4 CG7004 (fwd) Phosphatidyl kinase like protein
F31F6.6 (nac—l) CG3979 (Indy) Sodium sulphate membrane transporter like protein
F13D12.2 (ldh-l) CG10160 (ImpL3) Lactate dehydrogenase
increased (1st quadrant). The actual magnitude of the the experimental design that may responsible of this appar-
ehanges showed little correlation among the two sets. A ently negative result.
few more (Table 1) did move oppositely in both experi- First of all, it has been shown in the ease of the Drosophila
ments and the magnitude of the changes gave higher eorre- system that the cold exposure in the transport phase to the
lation values (2nd and 4th quadrants) but the relatively low launching site synergistically increased the microgravity
eut-off utilized and the low number of genes made us to dis- response in this system (Marco et al., in preparation). No
regard this negative correlation. such an effect has been reported for the C elegans system.
In the second approach, we started with the set of genes On the one hand, C. elegans is more resistant than Drosoph-
that had been suggested to be altered in the ICE-lst space ila to low temperatures of the magnitude used in this exper-
experiment with C. elegans (Selch et al., submitted for pub- iment. On the other, the C elegans animals had been
lication). They choose a more restricting eriterium, namely, maintained almost 12 days, at the normal temperature of
those genes that differed four-fold in expression between 20 0C, much longer than the Drosophila experiment, giving
the ﬂight and the ground control (28 up and 23 down in more time for quenching down of any potential synergistic
sample 4, 25 up and 28 down in sample 22, 16 up and 23 effects in Caenorhabditis.
down in sample 23). Only a handful of these genes were Additional reasons for the difference can be found. The
actually detected at the same time in the three replica sam- Drosophila experiment limited the exposure to microgravity
ples (21 up and 16 down across the three populations). to strictly synchronized samples during the pupal stage.
From this last group of genes, only 9 genes were among The pupae are immobile inside their case and do not
those that orthologues in D. melanogaster were identiﬁable respond to changes in the gravity vector in ways similar
in the Affymetrix data base, roughly again 20% of the ini- to Drosophila imagoes or to C. elegans adults. The develop-
tial list of genes. In Fig. 3, we plotted the expression ment of holornetabolous organisms is logically different
changes in the Gene vs the ICE-lst experiment. Some of from the development of organisms such as the nematode.
the genes had more than one potential orthologue form The C. elegans samples were, in this sense, a mixture of
in the Drosophila Gene experiment, therefore, more than organisms at different levels of development. Almost 50%
one dot appears in the ease of four of the genes. The eon- of the animals were mature adults and the other half was
elusion is the same, almost none of these genes changed sig- at different stages of development. Finally, the C. elegans
niﬁcantly in the same direction in both of the experiments samples were frozen on the ground after the experiment
(Table 2). had been retrieved from space. The Drosophila pupae were
Finally, among the genes found to respond to changes in ﬁxed in the International Space Station, two and half days
gravitaxis on the ground by the Beekingham’s group (Arm- after launch and three after the cold transportation step
strong et al., 2006) none of them was among the orthologue had been completed. Finally, the set-up of the experiments
gene list between Caenorhabditis and Drosophila. is not exactly the same; in particular, there are differences
between the MAMBAs and berlingots in the Drosophila
experiment and the conﬁguration of the ICE-lst experi-
4. Discussion Inent described above.
Thus, the idea that there may be a group of genes
While it is true that both experiments were able to show responding to the microgravity environment remains to
that multicellular organisms respond to the space enViron- be explored in more detail. More information in more
ment by modifying the expression levels of a relatively large strictly comparable conditions should be obtained. The
set of genes (Marco et al., in preparation; Selch et al., Gene experiment is now being continued using ground sim-
submitted for publication), the comparisons in this study ulation equipment, such as the random position machine
fail to identify a common set of genes for the two main (RPM) and magnetic levitation while the C. elegans results
invertebrate model systems, C. elegans and D. melanogas- are being conﬁrmed with another ﬂight onboard the ISS.
ter. It can be thought surprising that there is little overlap We already know that the Drosophila pupae respond
between the two experiments as one might suspect a corn- almost identically to the neutralization of gravity achieved
Inon group of genes respond to the microgravity enViron- by the exposure to the RPM than what had been previously
ment. On the other hand, there are many differences in found in the International Space Station. Even the syner-

"
"7","512 L]. Leandra et a1. / Advances in Space Research 40 { 2007 ) 506—512

gistieally effect of the cold transport step has been Armstrong, JD, Teéada, Ml, Munjaal, R» Baker, DA, Beclfingham,

reproduced on the ground conditions (Marco et al., in EM(Era‘fltag‘lim€1053§hgggmgglgggamnaforwardgenetlcscreen'

preparation). Running more experiments using these tools, Herra?:SRra}111usseonaV1) ,Villa— A ’ Faster M Medina F J Marco R

eomplemehtary t0 the more expenswe space expenments, Modiﬁcations in basic handling techniques to study the consequences

could prov1de the background to make more d1reet propos— of the Drosophila melanogaster. J . Gravit. Physiol., 1251—1260, 2005.

als for future missions Where the two key model systems Higashibata, A, Szewczyk, Ni, Conley, CA, ImamiZO-Sato, M.,

can be compared. Higashitani, A., Ishioka, N. Decreased expression of myogenic

.. . . .. . t 't' ft dM 'H Ch' 'C hbd't'

A ﬁnal po111t 1s the d1fﬁeulty 1n dee1d111g the p0te11t1al ransmp Ion ac ors an ypsm my mm m . am” a ”S
, , , eegans muse es eve ope urmg space 1g t. . Xp. 10. , —

Z ldldd ﬂhJE Bl2093209

orthologues of the genes respondmg to a s1m1lar parame- 3218,2006.

ter among different sequenced species. The availability of Higashitani, A., Higashibata, A., Sasagawa, Y., Sugimoto, T., Miyazawa,

a speciﬁc bio-informaties tool capable of automatically Y-, Szewczyk, Ni, Viso, M., Gassett, G., Eche, 3, Fukui, K.,

doing so would be of great help for future comparisons 831111.21?“ .T""1Fuﬂm0t0,’ N-,Kurlyaﬁla, K.,Iscliuoka, N.HCheCkpomf‘i and

and critical to the establishment of gene sets that can be p ”102%? .ap?ptOSIS:1 germ .0615 procee S norma y m Space own
C1 , h t. 1 h t , t. f th Caenor a ztzs eegans. p0pt051s 0, 949—954, 2005.

connegte Wlt par 1011 at p 6110 yplc proper 165 0 6 Marco, R., Husson, D., Herranz, R., Mateos, J ., Medina, F.J. Drosophila

organlsm(s). melanogaster and the future of ‘eVO—deVO’ biology in space. Challenges

and problems in the path of an eventual colonization project outside

the earth. Adv. Space Biol. Med. 9, 41—81, 2003.
ACkHOWledgments Selch, F., Higashibata, A., Imamizo-Sato, M., Higashitani, A., Ishioka, N,
Szewczyk, N.J., Conley, CA. Genomic Response of C. elegans to

The support Of the all organizations and people in- spaceﬂight. Adv. Space Res., submitted for publication.

volved in the Cervantes and Delta missions, the Spanish Slew?zyka_N-J_-a T111111“: J-a Conley, C.A., Granger: L7 Segalata L.,
Space Program (Spanish Ministery of Education and Sei- ng.aShltam’A""H9nda’ S""H0n.da’Y"" Kagaw?’ H"" Hl.g2.15hlbata’A""
h h A h FUJlmOtO, N., Kurlyama, K., Ishloka, N., Fukul, K., Ballhe, D., Rose,

61106), t e Dute Space Program). ES 9 t e CNES and A., Gasset, G., Eche, B., Chaput, D., Viso, M., Description of

NASA that made pOSSlble thlS WOI‘k IS gratefully International Ceonorhabditis elegans experiment ﬁrst ﬂight (ICE-

acknowledged. FIRST). Adv. Space Res., submitted for publication.

Tixador, R., Rafﬁn, J., Richoilley, G., Kordium, V.A., Kojarinov, V.,

Maneko, G. Ampoule de verre cassable contenant un liquide sous

References pression, éjectable e11 totalité lors de la cassure de l’ampoule. Brevet B.
148 11° 8007471. Innov. Tech. Biol. Med. 2, 12—14, 1981.

Anthony, P., Ausseil, J ., Bechler, B., Benguria, A., Blackhall, N., Briarty, van Loon, J .J ., Medina, F.J, Marco, R. (Eds.), “Experiments in the
L.G., Cogoli, A., Davey, M.R., Garesse, R., Hager, R., Loddenkem- European Soyuz missions to the International Space Station (2001—
per, R., Marchant, R., Marco, R., Marthy, H.J., Perry, M., Power, 2005)”. Microgravity Sci. Technol, special issue, in press.

J .B., Schiller, P., Ugalde, C., Volkmann, D., Wardrop, J . Preservation Zhao, Y., Lai, K., Cheung, 1., Youds, J ., Tarailo, M., Tarailo, S., Rose, A.
of Viable biological samples for experiments in Space laboratories. J . A mutational analysis of Caenorhabditis elegans in space. Mutat. Res.
Biotechnol. 47, 377—393, 1996. 601, 19—29, 2006.

"
