"","x"
"1",". - Trans..lSASS Aerospace Tech..lapan
Vol. 12, No. ist329, pp. Th_l-Th_4, 2014
Topics
Recent Crystal Growth Experiments onboard the ISS KIBO
By Izumi YOSHIZAKII), Taro SHIMAOKAZ), Takehiko SOME” and Toshiyuki TOMOBE4)
"" ISAS»’"".L4X4, Tsukuba, Japan
2) Japan Space F orum (JSF). C hiyoda, Japan
3‘ Japan Manned Space Svstems Corporation (JAMSS). Tsuchiura. Japan
4’ [HI AeroSpace. Tomioka. Japan
(Received June let. 2013)

Since the launch of the Japanese Experiment Module KIBO in 2008. three crystal growth experiments have been
performed. For each experiment, an Experiment Unit (EU) was developed based on the discussion with the Principal
Investigator (Pl). Using the EU. ground control experiments were conducted before ﬂight. After launch, experiments were
run repeatedly to check the reproducibility of the measurements. Experiment coordination process is introduced together
with the overview of the experiments.

Key Words: Crystal Growth. SCOF, ISS, Microgravity
1. Introduction ._ . i
a H 7’ -- 43'?

Five years have passed since the Japanese Experiment :' ""* L '2 9 l N“ 0
Module KIBO started its operation in 2008. Microgravity iv- -' 7/ "" a fl’ ;wI 4 «uryctti: I
experiment onboard the International Space Station (188) is no {17 ‘ ‘ "" 1w; ‘ .‘I‘ -
longer an extra-special event, it is rather one of the experiment - 4 t “’3‘ ' {:2 a , ‘f' ' I ,1 _
faCIIIty/opportumty for Iscxentists: Espemally for crystal -. l! sf -.._ ’J _ III :33. ll; . .
growth researchers, it IS a umque envnronment where “~ ~ 4‘ t» 5% *’ - "" . ""
convection or sedimentation is highly suppressed. In this “ “(r
paper, we would like to summarize the process of crystal ,' f t_II
growth experiment coordination. Experiment coordinators are 5g 7 L ‘.
responsible to develop the hardware, support the space V ‘ 3‘
experiment operation, work together with the PI (Principal , e,‘

Investigator) group to obtain ground control data and etc. t , ' -. J. ’
. . . I-II \. ’1. . '
Overv1ew of the experiments are also introduced. ng h I;
2. Preparation Before Launch Fig. l. Various EUS (inside view).
(a) lce CrystalCell

Once the ﬂight experiment proposal is approved, the (b) FacetCell
experiment coordinators have an intense discussion with the (C) Nano Step Cell
P1 to clarify the objectives, hypothesis and expected results. 2. i r , a «2*.-- I
Next, the speciﬁcations of the Experiment Unit (EU) is J ‘ l u .-
discussed. EU is developed for each experiment according to _ 'I H
its scientific requirements. ‘ q ~ _. ‘I. 91%? '

The EU will be connected to the Solution Crystallization F * 2’. SCOFUghtfzth ' .3
Observation Facility (SCOF) which provides electric power 4—4. w y .
and communication to the EU. Cooling water is provided to :13 - 1"" l 7‘
the cold plate on which the EU is installed. Therefore, the size . ‘re I.- .7 . '

. . . . I u.“ I
and resource of the EU 15 strictly restricted. In order to meet . \ ' ,
the unique scientiﬁc requirements such as temperature control, ""
motor control, and observation system, each EU is customized ' .. “ , ‘ ‘
and designed carefully. Fig.1 shows the various EUs. .
. . . . . Cold Piato

SCOF 13 also eqmpped With an amplltude modulation

' ' d ' e ch-Z hn e .
{nmmSCOPC’ bIrlght ﬁel Imicroscop ’ Ma ,6 d r type Fig. 2. Solution Crystallization Observation Facility
interference microscope With two wavelength light sources, (SCOF)
and two cameras (x2 and x4). The ﬁeld views are 2.4 mm x ' '
Copyright© 2014 by the Japan Society for Aeronautical and Space Sciences and lSTS. All rights reserved.

"
"2","Trans. J SASS Aerospace Tech. Japan Vol. 12. No. ist329 (2014)
3.2 mm and 1.2 mm x 1.6 mm and the spatial resolutions are experiment was named Ice Crystal Cell (ICC). There is a
200 pixels/mm and 400 pixels/mm, respectively. These crystal growth cell and a nucleation cell connected with a
cameras are located beneath the cold plate. The black arrow in glass capillary inside the ICC (Fig.3). The growth cell has a
Fig.2 indicates the SCOF light path. There is a hole in the cold cylindrical shape with a 26mm inside diameter and a 24mm
plate offering an observation window for the EU. This enables inside length. The nucleation cell has a disk shape with a 6mm
observation ofthe crystal ngth process. . diameter and 1.2mm length. The cells and the capillary are

We cheek the the function of the EU by actually growing completely ﬁlled with the sample (Heavy water, D20). D30
and observmg the crystal. Many try-and errors occut during was selected because of its higher melting temperature (i.e.
the development. Through these tests, we ﬁnalize the . .
experiment requirement, condition, and EU speciﬁcation. 3'82 mm?” and Its higher temperature dependence on
Ground control data is also obtained before launch. Vibration refractlye index when compared Wlth H30] When the
t est, off gassi n g t est, EMC (El e ctr o-M agn eti c C ompatibility) nucleation cell 15 cooled to -10 degrees by a Peltier dewce, the
tests are also preformed to verify the safety ofthe EU. ice crystal nucleates m the nucleation cell. The ice crystal

In a nominal case, this preparation phase is about 3~5 years. grows towards the crystal growth cell through the capillary
However, the ﬁrst two experiments were selected in 1993, so glass. The crystal growth cell is temperature controlled to a
it was more than 15 years waiting for the KIBO launch. certain undercooling level by Peltier devices. The operational

range of the Peltier devices is from 1.82 degrees (AT=2K) to
3. Experiments on the 188 3.79 degrees (AT=0.03K). The temperature control was stable
in the range of i002 degrees. This allows the study of the ice

After launch, the crew member installs the EU to SCOF. crystal growth under various undercooling conditions by
Then all the experiments can be operated from ground at the observing the growth cell. After each experiment, the crystal
“Space Station Integration and Promotion Center (SSIPC)” is dissolved by heating the nucleation cell and the growth cell.
located in Tsukuba Space Center, Japan. The MPEG-2 The ICC is also equipped with a bright ﬁeld microscope
compressed video images and temperature data are and Mach-Zehnder type interference microscope
simultaneously downloaded from 188. During times when the perpendicular to the light path 0f the SCOF (Fig. 3). Therefore,
satellite position is at LOS (loss of signal), if necessary, the it is possible to observe the growing ice crystal from tWO axial
video images are recorded on a hard disk onboard so that the directions. The ICC camera (X1) has a 4.8mm X 6.4mm
whole crystal growth process could be reproduced by ﬁeld ofview and a 100 pixels/mm resolution.
connecting the video image ﬁles. Before a long LOS (ex.
30min), we have to be careful because no images, no ' Nucleation Cell
telemetries are downloaded realtime. Of course, no
commanding can be done during LOS, so the experiment has kc Cam . lass Capmmy
to be carefully scheduled to avoid critical commanding during /

LOS. All telemetry data (including temperature data) during
LOS is downloaded later. ‘1‘ ‘ _,

The microgravity environment is measured using MMA : w
(Microgravity Measurement Apparatus) developed by JAXA. 0' - 5 icM‘th-zhr pm
The gravity level is l><10‘7 to l><10‘S g below 1H2 frequency M m 11min /
during 188 night time. In order to avoid the effect of g-jitter, / Crystalewtthll
the experiments are conducted during the 188 night time when
the crew members are asleep. 0""""

The experiments are run repeatedly to check the Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of the Ice Crystal Cell (ICC).
reprodticibility ofthe measurements under various experiment . The experiment was run from D e c e mber 2008 to February
conditions. Experiment coordinators always stay in the Users 2009 (total 134 experiment runs). C stal rowth was
Operation Area (UOA) in SSIPC during the experiment, and . . . . ry g. . .
inform the next experiment condition to the ground operator. observed in various supercoolmg rate. Flrét ofall, It, IS noticed
When the PI group is not in the UOA, the coordinator has to that the crystal shape 13 h'ghly symmetrical m m1erograv1ty
decide the condition. Thus, the coordinators are required to because the latent heat 15 transferred symmetrically by
have a deep understanding ofthe experiment objectives. diffusion (Fig. 4). Next, The velocities of dendrite tips parallel

to the a axis and the growth rates of basal faces parallel to the
4. Ice Crystal Experiment 0 axis were both analyzed under supercooling ranging from

0.03 to 2.0 K. Growth rates of the c axis was calculated using
The first experiment was “Ice Crystal” which focuses on the the interferometer fringes 0f the ICC (Fig. 5)- From the
growth of disk shaped/dendrite ice crystals. The experiment analysis, it was concluded that the growth process 0f the basal
was proposed by Professor Yoshinori Furukawa (Hokkaido faces has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the tip velocities ”. The
University). The EU developed speciﬁcally for this dendrite tip velocity was also shown to be smaller than that of

"
"3","LYOSHIZAKI et al.: Recent Crystal Growth Experiments onboard the ISS KIBO
terrestrial experiment results, because of the absence of material (Fig. 7). Since the melt is optically transparent with a
convection. Dendrite tip curvature was measured, and low melting point, it is suitable for in-situ observation of the
discussed with comparison to succinonitrile crystal growth 2). facet growth.

In very low supercooling such as 0.03K, the ice crystal As mentioned in Section 2, SCOF is equipped with a
forms a disk like shape (Fig. 6). The disk did not transform to Mach-Zehnder type interference microscope with two
dendrite dur ing the experiment. A “6}” growth model 1-0 wavelength light sources. Since the refractive index has a
understand the diSk growth was reported J). correlation with temperature and solution concentration, by

obtaining images of the interferometer fringes at the growing
.' ‘f a ‘ crystal interface such as Fig. 8, the temperature and butanol
I .. -» d, 1; concentration at the S/L interface can be calculated.
"" f a. ""5* From April 2009 to June 2009 and September 2010 to
’13:; '8' October 2010, total 60 runs were carried out with various
‘aa‘ growth conditions. The results are now being analyzed 4’5).
The brief summary of the obtained results at this point are as
follows. (1) Temperature and concentration distributions in
the vicinity of the S/L interface were successfully obtained
Fig. 4' Ice Crystal 0,, ground (a) and in microgravity (b) with high resolution by using the in situ observation method.
13110105126 is4.8mmX6.4mm. (2) The relationship between the growth rate and a kinetics
undercooling at the S/L interface, which is known as a driving
, force of crystal growth, was obtained. (3) Breakdown of the
growth interface occurred at the point with maximum kinetics
undercooling. Splitting of the S/L interface was caused by the
Q:- - - dense t-butyl alcohol, which decreased the melting point. (4)
The numerical simulation based on a phase-field model
validated the effect of latent heat on the morphological
: change.
Fig.5. Ice Crystalinterferogram. Photo size is 4.8mmX6.4mm.
00
M 5-H""—
, Fig. 7. Faceted cellular array growth (salol/t-butyl alcohol alloy)
Photo size is 2.4mm X 3.2mm.
Fig. 6. Disk shape Ice Crystal. Photo size is 1.2mm X 1.6mm.
5. Facet Experiment

The second experiment was “Facet” proposed by Professor
Yuko Inatomi (JAXA). “Facet” aims to elucidate the
mechanism of a facet-like crystallization (a crystal with ﬂat
surfaces) by precisely observing the phenomena at the
solid-liquid (S/L) interface. Since it . is well known that
crystals tend to develop structural defects and capture Fig. 8. 532nm Interferogram of the Faceted cellulararray growth
impurities when a new facet is generated, it is necessary to Photo size is 2.4mmX3.2mm.
examine the facet growth process to grow high-quality
semiconductors and superconductors. This study may also
contribute to the creation of new functional materials. Melt of
salol (phenyl salicylate) and t-butanol was used as a model

"
"4","Trans. J SASS Aerospace Tech. Japan Vol. 12, No. ists29 (2014)
protein surface (F ig. 9). Then, the temperature was controlled
6. NanoStep Experiment to change the supersaturation, and the crystal growth rate was
measured in a nanometer order by calculating the movement
The third experiment was “NanoStep” which focuses on of the interferometer fringes. Using SCOF Mach-Zehnder type
protein crystal growth mechanism. The experiment was interference microscope, the protein concentration gradient at
pr0posed by Professor Katsuo Tsukamoto (Tohoku the crystal interface was obtained (F ig. 10) simultaneously.
University). The perfection of space-grown protein crystals is The experiment was carried out from August 2012 to
generally known to be better under microgravity. However, December 2012, and the analysis is now ongoing.
the mechanism responsible for such conclusion is yet to be
understood from the fundamental point of view. The objective 7. ConcluSions
is to measure the crystal growth rate as a function of
supersaturation and observe the growing crystal surfaces by “Ice Crystal” “Facet” and “NanoStep” experiment were
Michelson-type interferometer at a molecular level resolution. condueted onboard the [SS KIBO using the SFOF' The
S uch a detailed measurement has not been made in space experiment objectives, hardware, operation and brief results
. were introduced. In order to successfully carry out the
Lysozyme was used as a model protein. _ , . _
. . experiment, the experiment coordinators work together With
Three sample cells were prepared wrth different , , ,
. . . . . . the Pl group to support the prellmmary ground experiments,
protem/impunty concentrations. Experiment duration was 35
, develop the EU by try-and error, and operate the space
days per cell. In the ﬁrst week, all the crystals were dissolved experiment
by 'mcreasmg the temperature except for the6)seed crystal In 2013’ another crystal growth experiment EU “Ice Crystal
Wthh was chemically ﬁxed by glutaraldehyde . In the next 2” Will be launched by HTV4 PI iS Professor Furukawa. ICC
week, the temperature was controlled to let the seed crystal Crystal 2 examines the growth rates and stability of ice
grow SIOWIY. After the whole seed crystal was covered by crystals in supercooled water including antifreeze
epitaxial growth layer, the angle of the crystal direction was glycoprotein (AFGP). The preferential adsorption of AFGP
precisely controlled from ground to obtain a good image of molecules at the ice/water interface controls the growth of
laser interferogram showing the surface topography of a ice crystals. Ice crystal oscillatory growth interacting with
the interfacial adsorption of AFGP will be precisely observed
in the microgravity environment where gravity-based
. .. ' convection is completely removed. The operation is planned
it t, . 3‘ from September to December, 2013.
f u.
i 1‘ ,' '\
._ ' Rx ‘
a ‘ I
"" ' . ’ References
F ig. 9. Laser interferogram showing the surface tcpography of a ') Yokoyama E"" Yoshizaki 1"" Shimaoka T“ Sone T“ Kiyota T' and
. . . _ F urukawa Y.: Measurements of Growth Rates of an Ice Crystal from
protein surface. Red arrow Indicates the protein crystal, and the Supercooled Heavy Water Under Microgravity Conditions: Basal
blue arrows indicates the reference mirror. Face Growth Rate and Tip Velocity of a Dendrite. The Journal of
Photo size is 0.96mm X 1.28mm Physical Chemistry B 115 (201 1) pp 8739-8745.
2) Yoshizaki 1., lshikawa T., Adachi S., Yokoyama E. and Furukawa
Y.: Precise measurements of dendrite growth of ice crystal in
microgravity. Microgravity Science and Technology, 24, 4 (2012)
pp. 245-253.
3) Adachi 8., Yoshizaki 1., lshikawa T., Yokoyama E., Furukawa Y.
and Shimaoka T.: Stable Growth Mechanisms of lee Disk Crystals
in Heavy Water. Physical Review E, PHYSICAL REVIEW E 84
(201 1) 051605.
4) lnatomi Y., Yoshizaki 1.. Sakata K., Shimaoka T.. Sone T., Tomobe
T.‘ Adachi S., Yoda S. and Yoshimura Y.: Investigation on
Mechanism of Faceted Cellular Array Growth in lntemational Space
Station, Defect and Diffusion Forum Vols. 323-325 (2012) pp.
533-537.
5) Wang J. and lnatomi Y.: Three-dimensional Phase F ield Modeling
Fig. 10. Measurement of surface concentration by of the Faceted Cellular Growth, 1811 International 50 (2010) pp‘
. . . . 1901—1907.
Mach-Zhender interferometry during the ngth 0f the protein 6) limura Y., Yoshizaki l., Rong L., Adachi S.. Yoda S. and Komatsu
crystal. Note the decrease of solution concentration at the surface 11.: DeveIOpment Of a reusable protein seed crystal processed by
as seen from the bent of the interference fringes. Red arrow chemical cross-linking. Journal of Crystal Growth 275 (2005) pp.
indicates the protein crystal. and the blue arrow indicates the 554—560‘
reference mirror.
Photo size is 2.4mm X 32mm.

"
