"","x"
"1","M ultI-scale klnetlcs of a erId-dlrected
col |0Ida| phase tranSItIon
James W. Swana, Paula A. Vasqueza, Peggy A. Whitsonb, E. Michael Finckeb, Koichi Wakatab, Sandra H. Magnusb,
Frank De Winne‘, Michael R. Barrattb, Juan H. Aguid, Robert D. Greend, Nancy R. Halld, Donna Y. Bohmand,
Charles T. Bunnelle, Alice P. Gastf, and Eric M. Furst""""'1
‘ aDepartment of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering and Center for Molecular and Engineering Thermodynamics, Allan P. Colburn Laboratory, 150
Academy Street, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716; bNASA Johnson Space Center, 2101 NASA Parkway, Houston, TX 77058; cEuropean Space
ﬂ Agency, Linder Hoehe, 51147 Cologne, Germany;- dNASA Glenn Research Center, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleveland, OH 44135;. eZin Technologies Inc.,
6745 Engle Road, Cleveland, OH 44130; and fLehIgh UnlverSIty, Ofﬁce of the PreSIdent and Department of Chemlcal Englneerlng, 27 Memorlal DrIve
a West, Bethlehem, PA 18015
a Edited by William R. Schowalter, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, and approved August 22, 2012 (received for review April 25, 2012)
Polarizable colloids are expected to form crystalline equilibrium coalesce into the crystalline phase are longer than those over
phases when exposed to a steady, uniform field. However, when Which reasonable experimental controls and measurements can
colloids become localized this field-induced phase transition arrests be made.
and the suspension persists indefinitely as a kinetically trapped, Beyond smart ﬂuids, similar arrested phase transitions arise in
_ percolated structure. We anneal such gels formed from magneto- a colloidal suspension When sufficiently strong attractive interac-
__ rheological fluids by toggling the field strength at varied fre- tions occur between particles (8—13). Like the percolated struc-
quencies. This processing allows the arrested structure to relax tures in MR and ER ﬂuids, colloidal gels are elastic solids; their _,
"""" periodically to equilibrium—colloid-rich, cylindrical columns. Two properties and stability are important in many industries. Despite :2
I _ distinct growth regimes are observed: one in which particle do- the similarities, however, the kinetic arrest of the coarsened state 2 Q
mains ripen through diffusive relaxation of the gel, and the other of MR ﬂuids can be circumvented, as Promislow and Gast (14, g E
where the system-spanning structure collapses and columnar do- 15) demonstrate, by periodically toggling the magnetic field off E 3
mains coalesce apparently through field-driven interactions. There and on. In the context of colloidal gelation, this is similar to in- 2
is a stark boundary as a function of magnetic field strength and stantaneously changing the system temperature (relative to the
toggle frequency distinguishing the two regimes. These results attractive interaction energy). During the field-off phase, free
demonstrate how kinetic barriers to a colloidal phase transition are Brownian motion of the colloids results in a degradation of cross-
subverted through measured, periodic variation of driving forces. linked chains and relaxation to lower energy microstructures. In
Such directed assembly may be harnessed to create unique materi- their experiments, after approximately one hour in the pulsed
als from dispersions of colloids. field, the suspension relaxed into ellipsoidal- 0r columnar-like
aggregates. This low energy phase of the MR ﬂuid consists of
magneto—rheological fluid | microgravity science | complex fluids compressible aggregates with a volume fraction determined by
the balance between the confining pressure exerted by the mag-
_. _ Smart ﬂuids, colloidal dispersions actuated by external mag- netic attractions and the osmotic pressure of their constituent
netic or electric fields, have diverse applications. In buildings, particles (16). Furthermore, the shape Of these structures is
g magnetO-rheological (MR) dampers are used to absorb the en- determined by the field-induced dipolar forces; in particular, a
. . _, . ergy of earthquakes, automobiles and trucks are equipped with competition between the demagnetizing field Which favors elon-
active MR shock absorbers, and electrO-rheological (ER) ﬂuids gation, and the aggregate surface energy, Which favors sphericity
enable haptic controllers and tactile displays in microelectronics (14, 17).
devices. It is the ability to rapidly and reversibly Change the rheo- In previous work and similar studies involving magneto-rheo-
logical properties of smart ﬂuids that makes them so attractive. logical ﬂuids (18—20), sedimentation Of the colloidal particles
Understanding the mechanisms that govern the formation and obscures a complete picture of field-induced phase separation.
dissolution of structures in such materials is essential (1, 2). Field- For this reason, studies in microgravity Offer a unique opportunity
induced interactions between particles is the primary mechanism to interrogate the structural evolution, pattern formation, and
of ER and MR ﬂuids, and is driven chieﬂy by the mutual attrac- aggregation dynamics of dipolar suspensions. The work presented
tion or repulsion of induced dipoles. here is an effort to examine fundamental aspects of MR ﬂuid
Upon application of a steady field, ER and MR ﬂuids respond aggregation in pulsed magnetic fields Without the inﬂuence of
by forming particulate chains along the field direction, imparting gravity. The distinguishing element of the present experiments is
enhanced Viscosity and the ability to resist transverse mechanical the duration over Which the field-directed process is Observed.
stresses. Following chain formation, thermal ﬂuctuations create Unlike other experiments, gravity does not cause the colloids to
lateral attractive forces between neighboring chains and cause sediment to the boundaries of the experimental vessel. Solvent
microstructural coarsening (3—5). Continued cross-linking be- ﬂows (hydrodynamics) and thermodynamic interactions (bound-
tween chains eventually damps the thermal ﬂuctuations that drive
coarsening in a self—retarding fashion. A kinetically arrested per- _ _

. . . . . Author contributions: P.A.V., J.H.A., R.D.G., N.R.H., D.Y.B., C.T.B., A.P.G., and EM. Furst
0018.th Structure results' HOWCVCI‘, IIIVCStlgathIIS Of the equﬂl- designed research; P.A.W., E.M. Fincke, K.W., S.H.M., F.D., and M.R.B. performed research;
brium thermodynamic properties of dipolar ﬂuids show that the J.H.A., R.D.G., N.R.H., D.Y.B., and C.T.B.contributed new reagents/analytictools;J.W.S., and
coarsened state is actually an arrested phase transition. Such di- P-A-V- analyzed data: and J-W-Su and EM Furst wrote the paper-
polar ﬂuids are predicted to form two coexisting phases: a particle The authors declare no conflict of interest.
rich, body-centered-tetragonal crystalline phase and a dilute ﬂuid This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
phase (6, 7). This contradiction With experimental Observation is Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
due to kinetic limitations; at typical ﬁeld Strengths (tens to hun' 1To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: furst@udel.edu.
dreds Of times stronger than the BOltzmann energY) the time This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/Iookup/suppl/
scales over Which the coarsened cross-linked intermediate would doi:10.1073/pnas.1206915109/—/DCSupplementa|.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1206915109 PNAS Early Edition | 1 of 6

"
"2","ary repulsion/attraction) change both the kinetics of structure A —;)H
growth and the eventual arrested structure, respectively. Chieﬂy,
the sedimentation rate of micron-sized structures in water scales
as rd!“1 where r is the characteristic size of the aggregate and df is
its fractal dimension (21). Therefore, aggregation processes, in t
which r grows with time and coarsening processes, in which df T“
does the same, naturally enhance sedimentation on Earth. In
the microgravity environment, the characteristic sedimentation
rate for colloids is one million times smaller than the terrestrial '7
rate. Therefore, no such boundary mediated kinetic or structural 0 s 10 s
I Changes occur. llllllllllIlllIlllIlllIllllllllllllllllIlllIlllElllIllllllllllllllllIllllllllllllllllllllllllll
4|. The present study follows a protocol similar to that of Promi- 10 mm: 60 mm'
. slow and Gast (14, 15) for which a dilute suspension of polystyr- .
a ene particles seeded with magnetic nanodomains is subjected to a - - . _ - -. .
q spatially uniform magnetic field pulsed off and on at a fixed fre- . -
. quency. The formation of columnar and ellipsoidal structures are .. .t
observed and their widths measured through the analysis of Video . __
micrographs. The suspension may experience two distinct modes ' ""'
of growth: a thermal regime in which the width of aggregates in- ~
creases with a subunity exponent of time (approximately 0.3) and a ’ "" "" i 5 0 _
ballistic regime in which the width of aggregates increases with a Mm
superunity exponent of time (approximately 1.5). In the former,
the suspension forms a sample-spanning network (percolates) B , —) H '
which ripens through aggregation in the direction normal to the 0.66 Hz w-” m. q...
applied field. In the latter, compact domains of particles advect ‘ i t '
through sample meeting tip-to-tip and condensing. The sample- . «5 "" . M 7
spanning state always precedes condensation, which only occurs “.33?“ . _ 4 1 _
under particular experimental conditions. Next, we present an 3;”; . . ““' ' ” '
analysis of these results and show that a clear demarcation mm m , .. ,. ‘
between the kinetic regimes of phase separation is given by a re- AA: A‘“ ff ' ""‘ 1’ {L -‘-'
lationship between the imposed field strength, H and the pulse r' . _: . L113“
frequency, 12. In particular, the quantity UH4/3 must not exceed a "" I ‘ ‘ '1 .5 J WA
critical value to observe ballistic condensation. Lastly, we discuss 20 HZ _ . .. 1-.” . l
the conclusions of this work, including potential applications for "" ' ___, '
the field-directed assembly of colloids and nanoparticles. 1:“ w
Results and Discussion "" .. .. ~
Dilute suspensions (<1% particles by volume) of superparamag- "" ' ' ' - ”W "" I 50 ,um
netic polystyrene spheres (radius 525 nm) in microgravity are sub- .... :1 ..... '3“ '3' “WM-
jected to magnetic fields pulsed with varied frequencies and field , ~ _‘ . . .......... .... .
strengths. Fig. 1A depicts micrographs of four characteristic . ‘ "" ""H” ""- """"‘"" ..
suspension structures observed in these experiments. These —l_)
images are captured under bright field illumination so that dark time 90 inin.
regions are particle rich and light regions are particle poor. When _ _ _ _ _
W W ' the magnetic field is off, the particles assume an isotropic struc- F'g' 1' (A) .A SUSpens'on Of 055% part'sles by V°'u.me '5 suhled to a
. . . . . . . . . 1,500 A/m fleld oscHIated at 0.66 Hz. Deplcted are mIcroscopy Images of
I ture in which any isolated region of the suspens10n 1s 1nd1st1n- the sus . b f th f. I d . I' d _ . .
. . . . penSIon e ore e Ie IS app Ie (top left), after 10 s In the ﬁeld
— _ guishable. from anOther (topO-left). Wlthm the flrSt S.CCOPdS after during which particles begin to chain (top-Ieft), after 10 min in the the field
the held 15 applled, the Partleles eXPenehee attraethea Intefpaf- when chains aggregate laterally to form a percolated network (bottom-Ieft)
tiClC forces oriented parallel to the magnetic field and fOl‘m and after 1 h in the field when coalesced elongated domains interact and
chains that aggregate laterally, forming a percolated, gel-like aggregate (bottom-right). (B) Here we compare structures emerging in time
structure (tOp-I‘ight) (18). Given longer duration under the pUl- (spatio-temporal) as the suspension microstructure develops by choosing a
sating field (approximately 10 min) all suspensions undergo a vertical slice throulghlthe vicleo micrograph a single pixel wiole and plotting
coarsening transition as ﬂuctuations in the orientations Of nearby consecotlve sllces In time. adjacent to one another. Each sIIce IS separated by
. . . . . . apprOXImately 200 s In tIme. The white spaces In between segments corre-
chains produce an attractive, chain-chain interaction force (bot- . . . . _ . o
. . . . spond to perlodlc refocusmg of the optlcs. Above. a suspenSIon of 0.65 /o par-
tom'leﬁ) (3) In some cases In WhOICh the magnetic .ﬁeld Strehgth ticles by volume, subject to a 1,500 A/m field oscillated with a frequency of
and pulse frequency are compatible, the eearsehlhg trahSItIOH 0.66 Hz condenses into columnar phases in the pulsed magnetic field. Below:
changes. The SUSpeHSiOD COHdCHSCS, and elongated dl‘OpletS Of a suspension 0.65% particles by volume, subject to a 1,500 A/m field oscil-
magnetic particles result. This process is apparent after approxi- lated with a frequency of 20 Hz fails to condense in the pulsed magnetic field.
mately an hour in the pulsed field and accelerates as time
proceeds. Pulsing of the field leads to formation of large colum- suspension. In each case we observe a long period over which
nar droplets with particles likely ordered on a body-centered- a fibrous, but system-spanning structure evolves. However, in
tetragonal lattice (bottom-right) (6, 7). the top half of the figure (0.66 Hz oscillation) after roughly
Fig. IB compares the structures that emerge in two experi- 60 min, the suspension collapses, contracts from the sample walls
ments with identical suspension volume fraction (6.5 x 10—3) in the field direction, and forms large dense domains of particles
and field strength (1,500 A / m) but different pulse frequencies that interact and coalesce. In the bottom half of the figure (20 Hz
(0.66 Hz and 20 Hz). One column of pixels from the center of oscillation), it appears that coarsening also slows, but the system
the recorded microscopy images is extracted and traced through spanning network remains stable and does not collapse into a
time in order to gain a sense of the rate of coarsening in the condensed phase.
2 of 6 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1206915109 Swan et al.

"
"3","When the suspension condenses, rapid and directed motion of The LangeVin equation prefigures several characteristic time
the particle droplets (i.e., ballistic motion) occurs. We hypothe- scales:
size that the droplets are reorganizing to minimize the magnetic
interaction energy much the way bar magnets thrown at random _ 2 pa2 _ _8
onto a ﬂat surface Will rapidly reorient and translate to find a TP — W — 1'4 X 10 5’
stable mechanical equilibrium. The pulsating field gives the dro-
plets ﬂuidity Which ptevents the system. from arresting in a meta- for Viscosity to slow an unforced particle,
stable state. The dr1V1ng force may be inferred from observation
of pairs of condensed ellipsoids meeting tip-to-tip, a magnetically 67m a 3
favorable configuration, and merging (see Fig. 2). A rapid rear- TD 2 k—T = 0.54 S,
I rangement 0f the merged condensate is seen during Which mass
*1. transfer Via surface motion of particles acts to form a neW, Wider for a particle to diffuse a distance equivalent to its radius and
. droplet that is shorter than the sum of the lengths of the two pre-
a merged domains. Presumably, the surface energy and magnetic 7211
q volume polarization are locally minimized by this swelling and 13 = W m 5 .9 X 10—3 S - 2-4 X 10—2 S,
I shrinking 0f the material. Furthermore, smaller structures (indi- ”0X
Vidual particles, chains, and remnants of the percolated network) . . .
are absorbed 0n collision With the condensed ellipsoids increasing felt two particle's aligned normal to the tlele and at contact to be
the ellipsoid size and magnetic moment. Ballistic coalescence fa- drivenone radius apart by the magnetie fleld' Central to these
mm the growth of large aggregates While depleting free particles scales1s the depennlence .0 n the particle me? .a' Notably, the time
in suspension. scale for Odipole—dipole 1nte1:act10ns, TB, is independent of the
The dipole—dipole interaction potential between a pair of particle. s12e. For the. app r oxztmately 0'5 ”m, radius patticles em-
paramagnetic colloidal particles labeled 0c and B and treated pleyed in these experiments, inertialirelaxation (1;)1s1mmed1ate
as point dipoles is While Brownian motion and field induced motion occur over :1.
comparable time scales. The d1mens10nless group g m
1 A A , 22’
U” _ 4nuoris (I eraﬁraﬁ) ' meme, x = 1—D = —“”0a3X2H2 % 20—110 [1] 3 §
T B 12kT E
Where is the vacuum ermeabili , r is the distance between . . . . . . <
the partticles and f'as is the unit vecttbr Oetbnnecting the centers of characterizes the strength Tau? 0f dIPQIC-dlpole fotces driV1ng
the particles and colon signifies the double-dot-product (22). In particle coalescence t0 entropic, restotring forees Whlel? aetively
the presence of a magnetic field, H, a particle, denoted 0c, pO- res1st fractionation. Sttong magnetic interactions are indicated
larizes to acquire the magnetic moment ma 2 31 W3H0XH, Where by 9» >> 1 While Brownian motion dominates When 9» << 1. Here
X is the particle magnetic susceptibility and a is the particle radius. we pr0V1de tepresentative values spanning the range of para-
Newton’s second laW (the LangeVin equation) written for par- meters examined on the International Space Station (138).
ticle 0c in a monodisperse MR ﬂuid is It has been observed for dilute ER ﬂuids in a steady field that
A Z 10 leads to a rigid, percolated network possessing a sizable
4 3 .. . 4WéH0X2H2 “as B yield stress and a typical shear Viscosity orders of magnitude lat-
gitpa X0‘ = —67tnaX0c — (#> V0‘ (2 FT) + F“, ger than that of the solvent (1). Although the predicted equili-
07m 0‘5 brium state of such materials is a condensed phase With body-
centered-tetragonal order in coexistence With a dilute ﬂuid phase,
a Where X0‘ is the position of the center of particle 0i, p is the particle the structural transitions accompanying phase separation appear
a density, Mag 2 (I — 31‘a5f'aﬁ) : HH / H 2 , and F5 is the stochastic to arrest long before equilibrium is reached (3, 6, 7). The reason
-.. _ Brownian force on the particle (21). Here we assume the hydro— for this arrest can be understood by renormalizing the diffusive
dynamic forces on the particle are due solely to the Stokes drag and magnetic time scales. The characteristic time scale for ther-
(i.e., there are no hydrodynamic interactions). mal rearrangement grows With the aggregate size as this requires
H collective motion particles in the aggregate. The time scale for the
0min. 1m in. magnetic interactions may decrease as the magnetic interaction
arises from volume polarizability. Consequently, there comes a
point Where thermal restructuring of the suspension is no longer
feasible and the particles become frozen in an athermal state far
from equilibrium (i.e., increasing the size of aggregates is func-
tionally equivalent to decreasing the temperature).
2mm 3min. In the presence of the pulsed field, however, there is an addi-
tional time scale
1/
50 um _ reﬂecting the period over Which the field is off and free Brownian
motion relaxes the suspension structure. Comparing this to the
Fig- 2- TWO columnar domains meet tiIO-tO-tip and merge forming a C0“- time required for a particle to diffuse a single particle radius,
densed droplet. The elapsed time is approximately 3 min so that the aggre- we find that TD/TO % 0.2_5 SO that our experiments encompass
gates are ”“3“”? mm a relat've veloc'ty 0t more that] 0'3 “m/it"" AS they are two different dynamical regimes: one in Which this ratio is small
at least 50 pm Wide, the rms speed such aggregates might achIre from ther- . . . . . .
mal motion is orders of magnitude smaller. The condensation is likely an and particles have cons1derab1e tune to rearrange d1ffus1vely 1n
athermal process. The concentration of particles is 0.56% by volume. The the ﬁeld Off State: and anOther m Wthh 1t 15 large and partlde
field strength is 1,500 A/m and the frequency is 0.66 Hz. Movie 51 depicts rearrangement is inhibited. More precisely, we may define a
the collapse of this suspension. capture radius, denoted rc, reﬂecting the distance at Which the
Swan et al. PNAS Early Edition | 3 of 6

"
"4","dipole—dipole interaction forces between a pair of particles Over a period of at least an hour and up to siX hours in the
[(47t/3)p0X2H2/rét] are comparable to the root mean squared magnetic field only suspensions with g < 70 condense into
(rms) Brownian force accumulated over the time it takes to diffuse columnar structures. This observation is robust with respect to
the capture radius (x/2kT/rc), viz variation in field strength (9t) and concentration (4)). However,
there are four contradictory experiments with g < 70 but no
’""_c : 27/6h1/3 z 6—11. apparent condensation—at 0.66 Hz with volume fractions of
a 0.40 ><10‘3 and 0.65 ><10‘3 with H = 1,000 A/m and at
O O O O O O 0.66 Hz with volume fractions of 0.48 X 10‘3 and 0.65 X 10‘3
This quantity describes the distance a particle contacting another and H : 1,500 A /m. The observation times for these particular
must. move to escape the attractlve magnetic potenttal- The time experiments were limited by the ISS crew schedule and were at
‘ required for a particle to diffuse the capture radius scales as least 10 min (approximately 15%) and up to 120 min (approxi-
q' 67tnarc ﬂeT. Therefore, the importance Of the pulsed. held fre- mately 60%) shorter than others at similar field strengths and
h quency 13 more properly evaluated by comparing thlS time to frequencies. In these exceptional cases, although condensation
a T0 30 that was not directly observed, the suspension structure coarsened
‘ 2 significantly. Presumably, given more time condensation would
I h : <T_D) (E) m 6—620. [2] occur in these cases too.
10 a As a means of directly comparing experiments, we define tc as
the time at which the average measured column width exceeds
It is apparent that g is the key parameter in determining whether a the magnetic capture radius. In Fig. 3B, the column width nor-
suspension relaxes to its equilibrium state in the pulsed field or malized by rc and plotted as a function of time rescaled by tc
arrests as a heaVily cross-linked network. In Fig. 3A we plot a phase demonstrates universal growth kinetics over all the experiments
diagram of observed final states (collapsed vs system-spanning) as resulting in condensation. Chieﬂy, in the sample-spanning re-
_ _ a function of )V and g and observe that there is a sharp transition gime, t < tc, we find that the aggregate width grows as a power
:-'ll3-""— —.: from collapsed to system-spanning structures. law in time with a subunity exponent (approximately 0.3) which is
it""‘tt indicative of a diffusion limited process (23). The characteristic
"" structural wavelength during diffusive coarsening is known to
A 102 0 l' A grow with power laws that vary depending on the mode of diffu-
90 o I : A v sion: bulk diffusion t1/3 and surface diffusion t1/4 (24). While
:3 System_spanning physically, we suspect that snrface diffusion dominates the coar-
60 collapsed :—> sening of theOsample-spanningO network as surface particles are
‘—: the most mobile, a power law fit to the data for t < tc cannot dis-
’< 50 . I IA v tinguish between the two modes. In the athermal regime, t > tc
40 and g < 70, another power law is apparent with a super-unity eX-
: ponent (approximately 1.5) when we observe ballistic coalescence
30 (i.e., coalescence driven by the magnetic interactions among dro-
. I A : v plet aggregates). What determines this power law and why the
20 I transition occurs when the columns grow larger than the magnetic
10 102 capture radius remain open questions. However, work on the late
_ 3 stages of spinodal decomposition suggest that the transition from
1"" _ _ diffusive (t1/3) to ballistic (t) coarsening may be anticipated dur-
_. B 100W... MW 2000MB, 22mm DO ing a ﬂuid-ﬂuid phase transition (25). For experiments in which
ff 1: , the dimensionless parameter g was too large (>70) we see that
' _ t “Z ' V V V ' V V 00’ slower growth rate persists well beyond tc. The structure is kine-
10 %' D35 tically arrested and can grow only through further chain-chain
3 D? ﬂuctuation interactions.
e O ' A long pursued goal of colloid science is the directed self-as-
g :5"")? v sembly of novel structured materials (26, 27). The rational design
: :5}: of exotic material properties calls on a detailed understanding of
E "":9,‘ thermodynamics and mechanics as well as other disciplines
g 1 y _‘r:'\ V v (among them hydrodynamics and electrodynamics). Ultimately,
O _""O‘ when the desired and thermodynamically stable structure can
0 2:? W'ﬁﬁj-‘ﬂ be identified, a direct route to phase separation may be hampered
Orb"" 0'3 9 O by various kinetic limitations—as with electrorheological and
magnetorheological suspensions. In a steady external field, sym-
' 0.1 1 1 metry of the dispersion is broken giving it tremendous rigidity
time: We that localizes particle motion (28). The kinetic barrier might
Fig. 3. Depicted in (A) is a phase diagram of observed final suspension state be subvertetl by gIVIng the SHSpenSlen a uquue microstructure
asafunction of 7»: the magnetic potential made dimensionless on the thermal before turhlhg the ﬁeld 011: though What thlS Strueture WOUld
energy and g: the product of the time required to diffuse the magnetic be or how it could be achieved is presently unpredictable. Instead,
capture radius and the field oscillation frequency. Solid symbols correspond we eliminate the barrier by turning the field Off and remobilizing
to the observation of condensed elongated droplets at experiments end the particles. In the field off state, symmetry Of the dispersion iS
while open symbols correspond to the persistence of a dense, sarnple-spen- partially restored, the gel loses rigidity and relative diffusion Of
ning network. Plotted in (B) is the width of aggregates as a function of time the COllOidS iS enhanced. Repetition Of this process drives the sus-
rescaled to collapse the results onto one of two master curves for sample . . . . . . .
spanning and condensation. The scheme of symbol color and shape is such pens10n 1nto Its. deSIr.ed equlllbrlum State' . .
that (red, blue, black, green) represent field strengths of (1,000; 1,500; 2,000; . We summarize the general process ObyO depicting the Phase
2,200 A/m), (circle,square, up triangle, down triangle) represent frequencies diagrams for hehethbnum ahd ethbrlum States In dipolar
of (0.66, 2, 5, 20 Hz) and (thin, filled, dot, thick) symbols represent volume hard-Spheres in Fig. 4. The two regimes are connected by a path
fractions of (4.0 x 10-3, 4.8 x 10-3, 5.6 x 10-3, 6.5 x 10-3). representing the nonequilibrium process of pulsing the field.
4 of 6 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1206915109 Swan et al.

"
"5","ates $> ages dipolar ﬂuids may be harnessed in the creation of unique materi-
w‘mh WW?“ als and electro-mechanical devices.
\AoWeQ"" Ea“
__ l | Materials and Methods
4 The MR fluid samples consist of colloidal particles (radius 525 nm, CV <3%;
Dynabead MyOne, Invitrogen) suspended in ultra-pure water (conductivity
H "" .Cfe/ﬁhe 5.5 ><10‘6 S/m) and stabilized by electro-static interactions. The particles
°' . . . a_é 7 ”M are composed of highly cross-Iinked polystyrene embedded with evenly dis-
: h tributed iron oxide nanoparticles. The magnetic moments of the monodo-
:6 WFCC main nanoparticles are randomly aligned in the polymer matrix, giving
1 0.58 W49055 the latex particles zero remnant magnetization. The particle susceptibility
I Ch characterized by a vibrating sample magnetometer is X : 1.4.
=1. _ _ _ _ _ _ Glass vials (dimensions: 2 mm wide, parallel to magnetic field; 0.2 mm
. Hg. 4. DepIcted are the kInetIcaIiy arrested regIons of the deolar hard- deep; approximately 50 mm '0th Wale Apparatus) of the MR ﬂuid with par-
” sphere phase dIagram and the eqUIItbrIIim phases for deoIar hard-sphe-res. tic|e volume fractions 4, : 4_0, 43, 5.6 and 6.5 x 10—3 were flown on Space
The InSPACE experIments enter the kInetIcaIIy arrested regIon when the ﬁeld Transportation System-120 to the ISS. The glass vials were held rigid in custom
q is first applied—progressing from (1) t0 (2)- The nonequilibrium process 0f fabricated aluminum sample holders. Samples were prepared and stowed
. pulsing the field, however, allows the suspension to relax and proceed to relatively soon before the shuttle launch in order to ensure that compaction
form the desired equilibrium structure—progressing from (2) t0 (3)- The sur- of the particles under gravity did not lead to an irreversibly aggregated sedi-
faces in blue represent the resection of the barriers driving kinetic arrest as ment. Additionally, evaporation of solvent was observed in the form of a
the annealing process proceeds. The transition from thermal to athermal bubble in the some sample vials. The rate of evaporation was less than
phase separation kinetics corresponds to the point labeled (4)- 200 nL/month; change in particle concentration due to evaporation and
irreversible, terrestrial aggregation was estimated to be no more than
Given a steadily applied magnetic ﬁeld, a dilute paramagnetic 10% by examining the saturation of micrographs of the sample vials taken
dispersion gels spontaneously. However, pulsing the field at the before the maghehc ﬁeld was appl'ed- _ _ _ _
proper rate allows the dispersion to traverse a “reaction coordi- ExperIments were performed onboard the ISIS In the MIcrograVIty SCIence :1.
,, . . . . Glovebox as part ofthe proiect |nSPACE-2 (InvestIgatIng the Structure of Para- 2
mate. The amorphous sohd relaxes to equilibrium—columns of . . . . m m
. . magnetIc Aggregates from CoIIOIdaI EmuISIons 2). The MSG experImentaI set- E {-5
body-centered-tetragonal CIyStatIS. 111 Other COHOldall mammals? up, depicted in Fig. 5, included a Helmholtz coi| surrounding a sample vial held “- E
traversals through the phase diagram and across the glass and within a rigid sample holder, an avionic setup to control the magnitude ofthe E E
gel lines reﬂecting kinetic hindrance t0 diFCCted assembly may magnetic field, H, and pulse frequency, v, and an optical assembly consisting E
also be achieved through measured, periodic variation of driving of two digital video (DV) cameras (Hitachi HV-C20, 768 x 494 pixels, 30 fps) ‘1
forces. We have demonstrated that nonequilibrium processes and afiber opticlight source. The two cameras were positioned perpendicular
may be engineered to drive escape from kinetically arrested and parallel to the direction of-the magnetic field.This configuration enabled
(nonequilibrium) states. HOW to rationally and generically design observatIon of a shspenSIon In two-dIfferent orIentatIons: a lateral VIew
- - - - (denoted RT) In thch the magnetIc erId |Ines and extended aggregates are
such processes remains a fruitful area of inquiry. . . . . .
. . . . . co||atera| WIth the horIzontaI erId of VIew (0.361 mm x 0.259 mm), and a
During the dlreCted, assembly Of paramagnetic 001.101dal parti- straight view (denoted ST) in which the magnetic field lines and and aggre-
cles by phlsed magnetic heldsa we observe the trans1tion from a gates extend normal to the field of view (0.347 mm x 0.256 mm). The data
sample-Spanning network to condensed dmplets 0n varying the presented in this paper were taken using the lateral (RT) view.
pulse frequency and magnetic field strength. The characteristic The initially quiescent and dispersed suspensions were subjected to a
percolated structure formed by the entanglement of chains of pulsed magnetic field (strength H = 1,000; 1,500; 2,000; 2,200 A/m) with
paramagnetic colloids drawn together by dipolar interactions is Symmetric duty Cycle (frequency v = 0-66, 2, 5. 20 H2) using a pair 01‘ Helm-
broken through annealing. Allowing the suspension microstruc- holtz cells. Astronauts aboard the ISS focused the DV-cameras (eIther the ST
ture to relax With the field off long enough for the percolated or RT V'ew) 0W“? sample V'al'.Thr°ughOUt the eXper'meht’ the camera Was
. . . refocused perIodIcaIIy to prOVIde the clearest pOSSIbie VIew of developIng
a structure t9 dleSOIVC’ leads to 8.1 more Cthensed mlcrOStruCture structures. The duration of experiments ranged from one hour to as long
a When the ﬁeld ls turned on agalh. Repetition Of Fhls PUISC results as six hours depending in part on the availability of the MSG facility and
_r—~_. _—. in a condensed microstructure s1m11arto the equilibrium thermo-
dynamic state for a hard-sphere dipolar ﬂuid: a condensed phase A Helmholtz Sample vial B Ir} 2'
of body-centered-tetragonal crystals in coeX1stence With a d11ute coil - assembly
ﬂuid phase. The maximum pulse frequency at Which this transi-
tion occurs scales inversely With a fractional power of the field ST —
strength §~ vmaXH4/3 = constant. A dependence of this transi- ‘ % CW
tion on particle size was untested but may be inferred from ana- —_
lysis of the same relaxation time scales so that vmaX ~ a‘5 as well. RT _
While past studies have observed large, condensed aggregates in -
suspensions driven by dipolar interactions (14, 15), a combination 9 . , M.» I K . . . ,v
of gravitational stresses and boundary effects lead to arrest of D j ’- -‘ , Th .. ’3‘}! .5: /'
such structures. The microgravity environment reveals the dy- . Llhwourcessemb“ ,7 hﬁ '
namics of growth Within the condensation regime—a temporal ﬁest- at... wit? , ,_ Y .-
transition from slow thermal ' she h h”: “g ii :3 ‘i it ""
, growth to rapid, athermal growth \5. '35:, ~; , :. , ,. f: ,
is observed. i ‘ Mae‘ ‘i
Although the InSPACE-Z apparatus is incapable of character- (I 5.... 1' r” 2e . “« e‘geiﬁ;
izing the detailed structure of the condensed columnar phase, the sa- j 4'1""“; ""Tivgzi'i—ﬁ»; -
relaxation of columns on cessation of magnetic field displays 2“). . w _ ' w—‘tf'rz/V ! \K’F— .
buckling indicative of an anisotropic compressibility and consis- fig”) '. a . : ‘h ', 4;
tent With body-centered-tetragonal crystals. As With other experi- "" . _ ‘ f\\ RTand STcameras I
mental studies of colloids in micro-gravity (29, 30), the results of l HalthItZ 0°11 4‘
the InSPACE'Z eXpet‘lmentS ShOW that in kmetlcally arreSted Sys' Fig. 5. (A) Schematic of the flight experiment. Sample images are shown
temsa the rele 0f graVItatIOhal compreSSIOh IS profound. HOWCVCI‘, taken from the (B) ST camera view, which is parallel to the external field,
through better understanding Of the equilibrium and out-of—equi- and the (C) RT camera, which is perpendicular to the field. (D) The experiment
librium phase behavior in the absence of gravitational stresses, in the ISS Microgravity Sciences Glovebox.
Swan et al. PNAS Early Edition | 5 of 6

"
"6","the ISS scientific crew. The typical experimental run lasted ninety minutes. with the Hitachi HV—C20 camera gives a minimum resolution to the measure-
The video micrographs were subsequently analyzed frame-by-frame using ments of 0.5 pm.
MATLAB software for image analysis. The characteristic feature size of col-
loidal aggregates was measured in the direction normal to the field by count- ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. Support from NASA (grant nos. NAG3-1887, NAG3-
ing the pixels of video darkened by the aggregate. Employing this method 2398, NAG3-2832 and NNX07AD02G) is gratefully acknowledged.
1- Halsey TC (1992) Electrorheological fluids. Science 2582761-766. 17. Halsey TC, Toor W (1992) Structure of electrorheological fluids. Phys Rev Lett
2. Klingenberg D (2001) Magnetorheology: Applications and challenges. AIChE J 65:2820—2823.
473246—249- 18. Fermigier M, Gast AP (1992) Structure evolution in a paramagnetic latex suspension.
3. Halsey TC, Toor W (1990) Fluctuation-induced couplings between defect lines or par- 1 Colloid Interface Sci 154.522_539_
ticle cha'i-ns. J StatIPhys 61:1257__1281' _ _ _ _ _ 19. Lemaire E, Grasselli Y, Bossis G (1992) Field induced structure in magneto- and electro-
ﬂ 4. Hagenbuchle M, ILIU J (1997) Cham formation and cham dynamics In a dilute magne- rheological fluids. 1 Phys II France 2:359—369.
torheologlcal flund. Appl Opt.36:7664_7§71f . . . 20. Grasselli Y, Bossis G, Lemaire E (1994) Structure induced in suspensions by a magnetic
""'1. 5. Furst EM, Gast AP (1998) Particle dynamics In magnetorheological suspensnons usmg _
h . . _ field. J Phys II France 4:253—263.
dIfoSIng-wave spectroscopy. Phys Rev E 583372—3376. _ _ _ _ _ _
a 6. Dassanayake U, Fraden S, van Blaaderen A (2000) Structure of electrorheological 21. RusseIWB, Savnlle DA, SchowalterWR (1989) COIIOIdaIDIsperSIons (Cambridge Univer-
fluids. J Chem Phys 112:3851—3859. Sity Press! Cambridge)-
q 7_ Hynninen A-P, Dijkstra M (2005) Phase diagram of dipolar hard and soft spheres: Ma- 22. Landau LD, Lifshitz EM, Pitaevskii LP (1984) Electrodynamics of Continuous Media
. nipulation of colloidal crystal structures by an external field. Phys Rev Lett 94:138303. (Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford), 200' edition.
8. Grant MC, Russel WB (1993) Volume-fraction dependence of elastic moduli and transi- 23- Witten TA, Sander LM (1981) Diffusion-Iimited aggregation, a kinetic critical phenom-
tion temperatures for colloidal silica gels. Phys Rev E 47:2606—2614. enon. Phys Rev Lett 47:1400—1403.
9. Verduin H, Dhont JKG (1995) Phase diagram of a model adhesive hard-sphere disper- 24. Sethna JP (2006) Statistical Mechanics: Entropy, Order Parameters and Complexity
sion. J Colloid Interface Sci 172:425—437. (Oxford University Press, Oxford).
10. Segré PN, Prasad V, Schofield AB, Weitz DA (2001) Glasslike kinetic arrest at the col- 25_ Siggia E (1979) Late stages of Spinodal decomposition in binary-mixtures. Phys RevA
loidaI-gelation transition. Phys Rev Lett 86:6042—6045. 20:595—605.
11. Bailey AE, et al. (2008) Spinodal decomposition in a model colloid-polymer mixture in 26. Dinsmore AD, Crocker JC, Yodh AG (1998) Self-assembly of colloidal crystals. Curr Opin
microgravity. Phys Rev Lett 99:205701. _ _ _ Colloid Interface Sci 3:5_11_
12' L” PJ' “at a"" (2008) Ge'at'on 0f part'c'es W'th Short'range attraCt'on' Nature 27. Grzelczak M, Vermant J, Furst EM, Liz-Marzén LM (2010) Directed self-assembly of
453:499—503. . _
13. Eberle APR, Wagner NJ, Castaneda-Priego R (2011) Dynamical arrest transition in nanbbartlcles. ACS Nano 43591—3695: _ _
nanoparticle dispersions with short-range interactions. Phys Rev Lett 106:105704. 28' Chef'kmFM’ Lubensky TC (2000) PrInCIples Of Condensed Matter PhySICS (Cambridge
14. Promislow JHE, Gast AP (1996) Magnetorheological fluid structure in a pulsed Umversnty Press, Cambridge).
magnetic field. Langmuir 1240954101 29. Zhu J, et al. (1997) Crystallization of hard-sphere colloids in microgravity. Nature
15. Promislow JHE, Gast AP (1997) Low-energy suspension structure of a magnetorheo- 387383—885-
logical fluid. Phys Rev E 55:542_551_ 30. Cheng Z, Chaikin PM, Zhu J, Russel WB, Meyer WV (2001) Crystallization kinetics of
16. Cutillas S, Bossis G, Cebers A (1998) Flow-induced transition from cylindrical to layered hard spheres in microgravity in the coexistence regime: Interactions between growing
patterns in magnetorheological suspensions. Phys Rev E 57:804—811. crystallites. Phys Rev Lett 88:015501.
H
6 of 6 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1206915109 Swan et al.

"
