"","x"
"1","47th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting Including The New Horizons Forum and Aerospace Exposition AIAA 2009-955
5 - 8 January 2009, Orlando, Florida
Fleld-Responswe C01101dal Suspensmns 1n MlcrograVIty
Eric M. Furst’f Paula A. Vasquez, Eric Bennung, Michael Boyle and Malvika Ogale
Department Of Chemical Engineering, University Of Delaware, Newark, Delaware 19716
Juan Agui and Donna Bohman
NASA, Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 44135
Charles Bunnell
ZIN Technologies, Inc., Cleveland, OH 44130
Peggy Whitson
NASA, Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX 77058
When exposed to a magnetic ﬁeld, paramagnetic colloidal particles acquire dipole m0-
ments. Interaction between induced moments leads to the formation of different mi-
crostructures that depend on the strength and characteristics of the external magnetic ﬁeld,
particle size, and the suspension concentration. Studies of suspensions of non-spherical
paramagnetic particles can expand the range of applications for magnetorheological ﬂuids
and provide further insight into their physics of aggregation. Here we present the fabri-
cation of anisotropic paramagnetic polystyrene particles following the particle stretching
method of Keville and coworkers.1’2
I. Introduction
Colloidal suspensions are ideal model systems for studying a Wide range of fundamental problems in
material science and condensed matter physics. Accordingly, the creation of complex colloidal structures With
speciﬁc properties, is of great scientiﬁc and technological signiﬁcance. The use of external ﬁelds to control
the microstructure of colloidal suspensions has long been recognized as a powerful means for generating
responsive mechanical, optical and electronic properties}?10 Magnetorheolegical (MR) suspensions provide
perhaps the most striking example. These normally stable, ﬁuid—like suspensions undergo a transition to
solid—like behavior Within milliseconds of exposure to an external magnetic ﬁeld. This rapid and reversible
transition in the material mechanics is due to the distinct microstructural transition in the ﬂuid driven by
the polarization of the suspended colloidal particles and the formation of particle Chains in the ﬁeld direction.
The magnetorheological response provides the basis for technologies ranging from actively controlled
dampers and actuators t0 magnetically sealed bearings and sensitive stress transducerslli13 Applications
in space exploration include their potential use in robots, rovers, and crew suits (mobility augmentation),
especially for endurance and fatigue countermeasure designs that aid in lifting, moving and supporting
loads during extra—vehicular activities (EVA’S). In addition to their immediate applications in mechanical
systems, MR suspensions have become important components in microﬁiuidic devices that could lead to
compact medical instrumentation and diagnostics for long—duration space ﬁightd‘k16
Fundamentally, ﬁeld—directed self—assembly of colloids promises to be a key paradigm in the creation of
novel functional micro— and nano—structures that Will enable new materials and devices. Directed assem—
bly by external ﬁelds enables precise control over the energetics of assembly, typically through a tunable
order—disorder transition. Furthermore, the ability to pulse the ﬁeld could lead to critically—needed anneal—
ing methods to avoid jammed 0r kinetically frustrated states and defects. The complex non—equilibrium
properties of these phenomena motivates experiments that can interrogate suspensions in pulsed ﬁelds.
*Associate Professor and Director, Center for Molecular and Engineering Thermodynamics. Electronic mail: furst©udel.edu.
1 0f 5
Copyright© 2009 by the American Institute of Aeronautics arfg‘IRgthﬁzaﬁtihgﬁil‘Egml $$$$th and Astronautics

"
"2","Microgravity is critical for the success of these experiments because it enables us to study suspension
structure over long periods of time in three—dimensions without the disruptive effects of gravitational sedimen—
tation. In previous ground—based studies of MR suspensions, signiﬁcant efforts were taken to density—match
MR particles; however, there are limits on how well density matching can eliminate the effects of gravity.
Imperfect density matching is unstable the suspension eventually sediments 0r creams. Sedimentation ef—
fects can be tolerated for some studies of individual Chains and particles, but they are magniﬁed as particles
aggregate to form networks of Chains and columns. Unlike individual Chains, columns grow heavier faster
than their drag coefﬁcient increases, causing catastrophic sedimentation. Sufﬁciently above the percolation
threshold, the network can support itself against gravity but near the threshold, the aggregation due to
sedimentation causes large thick columns to form and provokes catastrophic sedimentation. The Interna—
tional Space Station provides the quality long duration microgravity environment needed for the study of
concentrated MR suspensions and larger paramagnetic Chain structures.

Analogous to molecular systems, even subtle Changes in the the shape, or excluded volume, of colloidal
particles gives rise to modiﬁed phase behavior, aggregation phenomena and other physical properties that
may lead to new applications and improved material properties. In order to study the effects of particle shape
on the behavior of ﬁeld—responsive colloidal suspensions to compare with previous microgravity experiments,
we developed a method to fabricate ellipsoidal paramagnetic particles following the particle stretching method
of Keville and coworkers}?2 Before describing these particles, we ﬁrst brieﬂy review MR ﬂuids. Next, we
discuss key ﬁndings of previous microgravity experiments (InSPACE—Z). Finally, we describe the fabrication
process in the last section of this manuscript.

II. Magnetorheological Fluids

Magnetorheological (MR) ﬂuids undergo a rapid and reversible transition from liquid to solid upon the
application of an external magnetic ﬁeld. The basis of these properties lies in the rapid formation of Chains
of dipolar particles along the ﬁeld direction. During the application of an external ﬁeld, particles in an MR
suspension acquire dipole moments, mi, proportional to the magnetic ﬁeld, H,

m = 3mm, (1)
where a is the particle radius and X the particle magnetic susceptibility. Two dipoles will then interact Via
an anisotropic potential given by,

Uz‘j = 4L—mi ““7 _ 3 “’3' mi) (f ' m""), <2)
mm ”I“
where r is the vector between the particle centers, and f' = r/r.

The dipole strength A is a measure of the competition between the induced dipolar interactions and
Brownian motion. This non—dimensional ﬁeld strength is deﬁned as the ratio of the maximum interaction
energy, calculated from Eqn (2), and the thermal energy,

A = E : —W0a3X2H2. (3)
kBT QkBT
When the dipolar interaction between particles exceeds the thermal energy, A > 1, the particles aggregate
to form Chains of dipoles aligned in the ﬁeld direction. Because energy is required to deform and break
these Chains, this micro—structural transition leads to a large “tunable” macroscopic yield stress. Thus, the
formation of well—deﬁned microstructures in an MR suspension offers a Clear example of the interplay between
anisotropic particle interactions, structure, and rheology.

If the MR ﬂuid is comprised of ellipsoidal particles, the induced magnetic moment of the particles is

given by,
4 1
me — gﬁabCMoXH [m] 7 (4)
where nz is the demagnetizing factor and accounts for the strength of the internal demagnetizing ﬁeld:
1 — e2 1 + e :i1iil::.‘:_i_—__.‘__.H.V¢_i.?,iiiii.‘_~.i_~:_'fifi::
nz = — ln — — 26
l ll (1—6) l
2 0f 5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","with e = (1 — [92/c12)1/2 the ellipsoid eccentricity.

In contrast to spherical particles, the additional rotational degrees of freedom of the ellipsoids leads to
different aggregation pathways and ground states. Investigating the aggregation of paramagnetic ellipsoidal
particles offers unique information of practical and fundamental interest.

III. Previous Results from InSPACE-2

InSPACE—2 experiments were performed by ISS Commander Peggy Whitson in the microgravity science
glovebox (MSG) in J anuary, 2008. The samples for InSPACE—2 consisted of 1 ,urn polystyrene paramagnetic
particles suspended in an aqueous solution of dilute surfactant. The particles (Dynabead MyOne, Invitrogen),
were washed and redispersed in deionized water. Sodium azide, NaN3, was added to prevent bacterial growth.
42 experimental runs were carried out for InSPACE—2, each corresponding to a different combination of
three test parameters: ﬁeld strength, pulse frequency, and suspension concentration. The data obtained for
InSPACE—2 allowed us to observe for the ﬁrst time the long time three—dimensional aggregation kinetics of
MR ﬂuids in pulsed ﬁelds.

Previously, studies of MR ﬂuids in a pulsed ﬁelds were performed on Earth by Cast and coworkers”? 18
The studies were conﬁned to two—dimensions due to gravitational sedimentation. In contrast to steady (DC)
ﬁelds, in pulsed ﬁelds, particles are free to diffuse and rearrange within the aggregate during the half—period
when the ﬁeld is off. This enables the structures to evolve towards states of lower energy. Cast and coworkers
showed that, under their test conditions, MR ﬁuids relax into ellipsoidal—like structures as a result of the
competition between surface energy, inter—aggregate repulsion and the aggregate’s demagnetizing ﬁeld”? 18

In microgravity, we found that the evolution of MR structures in pulsed ﬁelds can be divided in three
distinct regimes. The ﬁrst regime occurs within seconds of starting the pulsed ﬁeld, and is Characterized
by the nucleation and growth of aggregates. This aggregation mechanism is driven by the induced dipoles
causing the particles to aggregate tip—to—tip. The evolution towards energetically favorable structures occurs
in the second aggregation regime. During this regime, the system relaxes into particle—rich and particle—
depleted regions. The rate of such relaxation and the shape of the resulting structures depend on the
volume fraction, ﬁeld strength and pulse frequency. The last aggregation regime corresponds to a liquid—like
coalescence of the condensed structures formed during the second regime. The rate of the aggregates growth
increases linearly with the concentration of the solution. The resulting structures are also inﬂuenced by the
ﬁeld strength and the pulse frequency, although, in contrast to the concentration, this dependence appears
to be non—monotonic. Figure 1 shows an example of the temporal evolution of structures in a pulsed ﬁeld,
for a ﬁeld strength corresponding to A = 121, a pulse frequency, V = 0.66 Hz and a suspension concentration,
gb : 0.56%. In addition to the evolution of the microstructure, we observed a new and unusual buckling

t = 1 min 20 min 60 min 100 min 135 min
_- _ - - :7..- -‘—:’. ~r ; W ’ ~ -,____
‘7': as- 22-23-13; *‘
2L = 1.20.9. V = 0.66HZ. (1) = 0.56% Scale bar 50,1111]
Figure 1. Evolution in time of the width of aggregates. Parameters: A = 121, qb = 0.56%, I/ = 0.66 Hz. The scale bar
is 50 ,um
instability of the particle columns. An example such instability is shown in Figure 2.

Our next objective in the investigation of the aggregation dynamics of MR ﬂuids is to study the effects of
particle shape and aspect ratio. To this end, we have fabricated in our lab ellipsoidal paramagnetic particles.
Such fabrication process will be described in the next section.

3 0f 5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","Figure 2. Buckling of columnar aggregates during ﬁeld off half—period in a pulsed magnetic ﬁeld.
IV. Fabrication of Ellipsoidal Particles
Paramagnetic polystyrene particles were fabricated following the methods proposed by Keville and
coworkers}?2 The spherical particles, with diameters between 2 and 3 mm were obtained from SpheroTech.
The particle suspension was washed several times and re—dispersed in a 5 mM sodium dodecdyl sulfate (SDS)
solution. The particle suspension was dispersed in a supersaturated solution of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) in
water. This dispersion was then cast and dried, forming a thin ﬁlm containing the spherical particles. Since
a homogenous PVA and particle matrix is necessary to assure uniformly stretched particles, the surfactant
is added to reduce the tendency of the particles to aggregate. Next, strips of the ﬁlm were clamped into a
metal frame and heated to a temperature of approximately T = 14000, which is above the glass transition
temperature of polystyrene (T9 % 10500). The strips were then stretched at a predetermined draw ratio, in
order to obtain ellipsoidal particles of known aspect ratio. After rapidly cooling the ﬁlm, the PVA matrix was
dissolved in a 7:3 water—isopropanol solution. Particles recovered in this fashion were washed and suspended
in deionized water. Figure 3 shows the sphere particles, 2—3 pm, before and after the stretching process. The
stretching method yields anisotropic, magnetically—active ellipsoids with an aspect ratio of approximately
6:1.
. 1 -.v9 ""gag. . T a ‘7 ‘h .’ i- v f , '(i|'r.«,!‘. ,
i - ¢- z y“ ‘3‘- ,.~,— 1 / -- 1 rm x ‘-
  ,. r’ ,f- ' r - ,, . , a
' . ""4'; w (-2-: (1.. 197-"" "" r * ‘i-‘X ""* f ,. i
r ﬁt“- ;-‘-- - 3'. (.7 gr 2' ‘ {\ \ 67 / t
( ( E. 5 W ’i‘ ‘ 'w‘ 3"" 1,. \ R 7‘ J\ . \ i: a —l..._;‘_:\ .
. ,z‘: «arr- ($7 \“Z\/\ ' x ‘
° c 1.. .,_ (._ 43 £1 ""#4, égi. \ \ ‘7! . \ 3
,. ..» v ' ’ "".,‘ , . .‘ . y. l; . ( (y I
' l3 I» - 4r""; If _ u l» ' .. _
UDEL LEI 3.0k‘u’ X4500 WD 7.5mm hm] UDEL LEI 3.0M! X2200 WD 7.8mm 10pm
Figure 3. Ellipsoidal particles (right) obtained from stretching 2-3 ,um paramagnetic polystyrene particles (left).
V. Conclusions
We have described the preparation of suspensions of ellipsoidal paramagnetic particles. These solutions
will be studied in DC and pulsed magnetic ﬁelds. Such study will be a continuation of NASA’s project
InSPACE, in which the aggregation kinetics of MR ﬂuids were investigated in a microgravity environment.
Previous results from InSPACE show that the aggregation of structures in microgravity, in contrast to
earthbound observations, exhibit an additional aggregation regime. This last aggregation regime consist
4 0f 5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","of the three—dimensional coalescence of condensed structures. Finally, we also observed a new buckling
instability of particle columns during the ﬁeld—oﬂ state in a pulsed ﬁeld.
Acknowledgments
Support from NASA (grant no. NNX07AD02G) is gratefully acknowledged. The authors would also like
to thank Dr. Alice Gast.
References
1K. Keville, E. Frances, and J . Caruthers. Preparation and characterization of monodisperse polymer microspheroids. J.
Colloid Interface Sal, 1442103—126, 1991.
2C. Ho, A. Keller, J . Odell, and R. Ottewill. Preparation of monodisperse ellipsoidal polystyrene particles. Colloid Polym.
Sci, 2712469—479, 1993.

3Y. A. Vlasov, X.-Z. Bo, J. C. Sturm, and D. J. Norris. On-chip natural assembly of silicon photonic bandgap crystals.
Nature, 4142289—293, nov 2001.

4S. O. Lumsdon, E. W. Kaler, and O.D. Velev. Two-dimensional crystallization of microspheres by a coplanar ac electric
ﬁeld. Langmuir, 2022108—2116, 2004.

5O. D. Velev and E. W. Kaler. In situ assembly of colloidal particles into miniaturized biosensors. Langmuir, 15(11)23693—
3698, 1999.

6Kai F. Hoettges, Martin B. McDonnell, and Michael P. Hughes. Use of combined dielectrophoretic/electrohydrodynamic

forces for biosensor enhancement . J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys, 36(20)2101—104, 2003.
7Kevin D. Hermanson, Simon 0. Lumsdon, Jacob P. Williams, Eric W. Kaler, and Orlin D. Velev. Dielectrophoretic
Assembly of Electrically Functional Microwires from Nanoparticle Suspensions. Science, 294(5544)21082—1086, 2001.

8J.-C. Bradley, H.-M. Chen, J. Crawford, J. Eckert, K. Ernazarova, T. Kurzeja, M. Lin, M. McGee, W. Nadler, and S. G.
Stephens. Creating electrical contacts between metal particles using directed electrochemical growth. Nature, 3892268—271,
September 1997.

9B. Comiskey, J . D. Albert, H. Yoshizawa, and J . Jacobson. An electrophoretic ink for all-printed reﬂective electronic
displays. Nature, 3942253—255, July 1998.

10R. A. Hayes and B. J. Feenstra. Video-speed electronic paper based on electrowetting. Nature, 425(6956)2383—385, 2003.

11Z.P. Shulman, RG. Gorodkin, E.V. Korobko, and V.K. Gleb. The electrorheological effect and its uses. J. N on—Newtom'an
Fluid Mech., 8229, 1981.

12.1. D. Carlson and K. D. Weiss. A growing attraction to magnetic ﬂuids. Machine Design, Aug. 8261—66, 1994.

13.1. D. Carlson and K. D. Weiss. Commercial magneto-rheological ﬂuid devices. In W. Bullough, editor, Proceedings 5th
Int. Conf. 0f Electro—Rheological, Magneto—Rheological Suspensions and Associated Technology, Sheﬁ‘ield, England, July 10—14,
1995, Singapore, 1996. World Scientiﬁc.

14Patrick S. Doyle, Jerome Bibette, Aurélien Bancaud, and Jean-Lous Viovy. Self—assembled magnetic matrices for DNA
separations. Science, 29522237, 2002.

15Tobias Sawetzki, Sabri Rahmouni, Clemens Bechinger, and David W.M. Marr. In-situ assembly of linked geometrically-
coupled microdevices. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, In press.

16SL Biswal and AP Gast. Micromixing With linked chains of paramagnetic particles. Anal. Chem., 76(21)26448—6455,
2004.

17.1. H. E. Promislow and A. P. Gast. Magnetorheological ﬂuid structure in a pulsed magnetic ﬁeld. Langmuir, 1224095—4102,
1996.

18.1. H. E. Promislow and A. P. Gast. Low-energy suspension structure of a magnetorheological ﬂuid. Phys. Rev. E,
5626422651, 1997.

5 of 5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
