"","x"
"1","International Journal of General Medicine Dove
a ORIGINAL RESEARCH
(‘2 o o f o
a. Iong-duratlon orbItaI space IIght
8
2
<4)
(\I
C
O
V-
SI
00' This article was published in the following Dove Press journal:
:3 International Journal of General Medicine
(‘2 3 November 20|6
05 Number of times this article has been viewed
0')
>~ —
f
g B ria n C ru C i a n ' Background: The environment of spaceﬂight may elevate an astronaut’s clinical risk for speciﬁc
g Ad rian a Babiak-Vazq u e22 diseases. The purpose of this study was to derive, as accurately as currently possible, an assess-
§ Sm ith JO h nston | ment of in-ﬂight clinical “incidence” data, based on observed clinical symptoms in astronauts
é _ D uan e L Pi erso n I on board the International Space Station (ISS).
E :2; C M a rk O tt I Methods: Electronic medical records were examined from 46 long-duration ISS crew members,
E CD each serVin a roximatel a 6-month mission on board the ISS constitutin 20.57 total ﬂi ht
3g Clarence Sams' _g pp _ y _ ’ g_ _ g
375 years. Ineldence for immunological-related adverse health events or relevant clinical symptoms
3 E 'Biomedical Research and - - - - - - - - -
E o) . . . . . was tabulated in a non-identiﬁable fashion. Event categories included infectious diseases, aller-
o 5 EnVIronmental SCIences DlVlSlon, _ _ _ _ _ _ _
E S N AS A- J ohnson Space Center, gles, and rashes/hypersens1t1V1t1es. A subsequent re-evaluation of more notable events, either of
% LL ZEPldemIOIOSY/Llfetlme Survelllance prolonged duration or unresponswe to treatment, was performed.
(U - u u u u u u u
g 30:55:21“??? P&Ziith’ KBR Wyle’ Results: For the disease/symptom categories used in this evaluation, the ISS ineldence rate was
E ’ ’ . . .
g 3 .40 events per ﬂight year. Skin rashes were the most reported event (1 . 12/ﬂ1ght year) followed
E by upper respiratory symptoms (0.97/ﬂight year) and various other (non-respiratory) infectious
.2 . .
g processes. During ﬂight, 46% of crew members reported an event deemed “notable”. Among
35 the notable events, 40% were classiﬁed as rashes/hypersensitiVities. Characterization of on-orbit
E rashes manifested as redness with irritation, and could present on a variety of body locations.
as . .
8 Conclusion: Based on reported symptoms, astronauts experience adverse medical events of
7: varying severity during long-duration spaceﬂights. The data suggests caution, from both a vehicle
§ design and biomedical countermeasures perspective, as space agencies plan for prolonged deep
(:5 space exploration m1ss1ons.
.3 Keywords: spaceﬂight, immunity, clinical incidence, astronauts, gravity, clinical risk, disease
E —
3
C
\ Bac kgrou nd
A vast evidence base demonstrates that dysregulation of the human immune system
occurs immediately following spaceﬂight},2 Speciﬁc post—ﬂight ﬁndings include:
altered cytokine production patterns;3‘7 diminished natural killer (NK) cell function;8
altered peripheral leukocyte distribution?”10 diminished monocyte function;11 dimin—
ished granulocyte function?“12 dysregulated T—cell intracellular signaling”15 altered
neuroendocrine responses;16’17 and inhibited leukocyte proliferation following activa—
tion. 18,19 Latent herpesviruses have been found to be reactivated in crew members during
or following spaceﬂight”—22 Humoral immunity may also be affected by spaceﬂight, as
Correspondence: Brian Crucian . . . . . . .
N AS A Johnson Space Center, animal studles have 1ndicated that the somatlc hypermutatlon process resp0n51ble for
2 I 0| NASA Parkway, Houston, diversiﬁcation of antibody binding sites was reduced during spaceﬂight.23 Recent data
$337 3588' :J853A70 6| collected on board the Space Shuttle and International Space Station (188) conﬁrms
Emai I brian.crucian- I @nasa.gov that human immune dysregulation is indeed an in—ﬂight phenomenon, and not merely
S”'mitywr""W‘u-Wipt International Journal of General Medicine 20|6:9 383—39l 383
Dove ""' —©20|6C' t|.Th' I' bl'hd dl' dbD Md'IP L""td.Thf||t fth'l' 'Ibl thtt:// .d . /t .
, '1 3' ""1 ﬂ ..:::'::.;.1I. 3.33;: arm's. II cm...airimgzsstIIa IIzzgi,7m::.z‘:I:.::::gI:;.:.;b,-n53m, :IizzsssgtI.
'0' you hereby accept the Terms. Non-commercial uses of the work are permitted without any further permission from Dove Medical Press Limited, provided the work is properly attributed. For
permission for commercial use of this work, please see paragraphs 4.2 and 5 of our Terms (https://www.dovepress.com/terms.php).

"
"2","Crucian et al Dove
a post—ﬂight stress response to landing and readaptation Program” (HSP). This program was implemented after an in—
following deconditioning.24’25 ﬂight infectious disease event occurred during an Apollo moon
Immune dysfunction seems to coincide with, and is likely mission. Other in—place mitigation strategies include microbial
the mechanistic cause for, the documented reactivation of monitoring of food, water, vehicles, and cargo.
various latent herpesviruses during short—duration ﬂight.20’21’26 Reports of adverse clinical events on board the 188 may
(‘2 Additional studies currently ongoing on board the 188 will appear in a variety of records or information sources. The
8. ascertain if other uninvestigated aspects of immune dysregula— primary source would normally be the crew electronic medi—
:3 tion persist for the duration of a 6—month orbital spaceﬂight. cal record (EMR), in which the ﬂight surgeon may document
§ Likely causes include physiological and psychological stress— on—orbit illness of his/her particular crew member. However,
ii ors, microgravity, and radiation. The effect of physiological notations of on—orbit illness may also be recorded in second—
5 stress on immunity is well established.27 Stress hormone levels ary sources of information, within both medical operations
E have been found to be elevated following ﬂight, heaVily depen— and biomedical research. The goal of our activity was to
g dent on mission duration”)28 Furthermore, “other” endogenous tabulate incidence of adverse clinical events during 188 mis—
E stress response systems, such as the endocannabinoid system sions Via reported symptoms by surveying the EMR and the
E in humans, have also been found to be dysregulated during secondary information sources. In most cases, a conﬁrmatory
% spaceﬂight.29 Persistent in—ﬂight immune dysregulation could diagnosis is simply not possible, given the paucity of medical
E). result in speciﬁc clinical risks to crew members participating laboratory equipment on board the 188. A limitation of this
g 5‘ in exploration class deep space missions.30 activity is that it is not a standard epidemiological survey,
ES Clinical events potentially related to immune system but rather represents a simple tabulation of all available
§- § dysregulation may include avariety of bacterial or Viral infec— recorded occurrence of symptoms during ﬂight. For some
g E“ tions (skin, upper respiratory, urinary tract, etc.), clinical Viral crew members, not all the various information sources were
E g reactivation, documented hypersensitivities, or increased populated with information. As it is logical to assume that at
g E incidence of allergies. During prolonged missions (Mars, least some events may not be recorded based on the purview
:3 asteroids, etc.), more prolonged—development diseases such of the crew member and/or ﬂight surgeon, the information
5 as autoimmunity or malignancies may become possible. reported here therefore may represent a baseline minimum
.3 During exploration missions, the risk for malignancies may compilation of known in—ﬂight clinical incidence.
§ be directly related to immune dysregulation (diminished NK The aim of this activity was to retrospectively analyze
:5 cell function) synergizing with radiation exposure. Basic eXisting astronaut medical records, to derive the most accu—
% understanding of the incidence of clinical symptoms during rate assessment of in—ﬂight clinical incidence technically
% orbital spaceﬂight is important for anticipation of potential possible within eXisting operational constraints. However,
EU clinical risks during exploration class deep space missions. to perform the survey, it was necessary to replace the actual
S This is especially true, considering the persistent immune conﬁrmed incidence with reported symptomatology, as in—
E“ dysregulation during spaceﬂight. ﬂight crews rarely have the ability to conﬁrm diagnoses,
E Immune dysregulation during orbital ﬂight, documented and treatment is usually based on presentation of symptoms.
g by research data as described above, may be perceived to only
\ result in subclinical changes. Crews are generally not thought, M ethods
with some well—publicized exceptions, to suffer signiﬁcant Subjects
illness during ﬂight. This is primarily due to the conﬁdential Per current NASA policy, an attributability review of the
nature of astronaut medical data. Whereas research ﬁndings information provided Via this article was conducted by the
may in a non—identiﬂable fashion be published, adverse medical Epidemiology Division/Lifetime Surveillance of Astronaut
events are known only to the crew member and his/her ﬂight Health at the J ohnson Space Center, and approval to publish
surgeon. But at what rate do astronauts actually experience was granted. Further, per NASA policy, research based on
illness on—orbit? Although it should be possible to examine extant de—identiﬂed data is exempt from institutional review
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) board (IRB) review. However, the current Chair of the NASA
medical records and report incidence in an anonymous fash— IRB has reviewed and approved release of the data contained
ion, literature evidence detailing in—ﬂight clinical incidence within this manuscript. The NASA IRB did not require writ—
is lacking. Also, there are already eXisting countermeasures ten informed consent be obtained from the participants, as
designed to limit crewillness during ﬂight. These include apre— this was a retrospective surveillance activity, and all data
ﬂight quarantine period deﬁned as the “Health Stabilization was de—identiﬂed.
W—WWCWWW?
Dove

"
"3","Dove Incidence of clinical symptoms during Iong-duration spaceflight
For this study, we examined medical records from 46 long— Table I In-flight tabulation of clinical symptoms, ISS Program
duration US astronaut missions on board the ISS. Of the 46 through EXPedition 37/38; 46 '55 crew members (nominally
US crew members completing ISS missions as of the date of W
this manuscript, all were included in this study. No symptoms MOe‘Oﬁca' conditions, T°tal events EYentS’
or immunological events were reported by 8 crew members. —dmlcal symptoms ﬂight year
O O O Allergic reaction (hypersensitivity) 2 0|

‘2 During the analys1s period, 5 astronauts actually repeated Prolonged congestion, rhinitis, 20 LG

§ long—duration space missions on board the ISS, for which sneezing

é? each long—duration mission was counted as a separate “ﬂight/ HerPeS Viruses (COId sores) 6 0'3

a mission”. Therefore, the records from 46 long—duration ISS Ear relaieOd: Pain’ congeStion’ itChiness 6 0'3

E O O O Pharyngltls (sore throat) I 0.|

g crew members were examined, Wthh actually cons1sted of 41 Skin infection (including Pus forming 6 0.3

; ﬂown US astronauts. Among the 46 US astronauts, there were wounds on wrist, ﬁnger, feet)

E 34 male and 12 female astronauts, with an average age of 47.51 Ski“ raSh/hyperse“5iti""ity (inCIUding 23 H

g years at time of ﬂight. The average mission duration was 162.95 Skin .conditions such. as tinea

F versncolor, dermatitis, rosacea)

3 days; the sum total for the 46 crew members (representing 38 Urinary tract infection 2 0|

:ED missions) was 7058 ﬂight days or 20.57 ﬂight years. Infections and other (including 4 0-2

3 conditions such as fever, aphthous

co . .

:3; Primary review of EM Rs ”Tlietzllymphademt's) 70 3.4

g >; For this report, an effort was made to reView and categorize W

ES in—ﬂight incidence, and tabulate those ﬁndings in a non—

§- § attributable fashion. The primary data review, consisting of apply to hypersensitivities. Two other conditions not con—

ﬁt EU ISS EMRs, was performed using the evaluation categories as tained within the IMM, malignancy and autoimmunity, were

E g described below. The ISS data set consists of 46 ﬂown space also evaluated during this activity. Finally, one additional

@145. station crew members (repeat ﬂyers were counted as separate category identiﬁed as “Infections, other” was created to

:2“ crew member missions), resulting in a total of 20.57 crew account for those infectious disease conditions that occurred

E ﬂight years. Data regarding the incidence of clinical symp— during spaceﬂight but were not associated with any speciﬁc

“SJ toms was obtained by reViewing the records of crew private IMM condition (Table 1). Some overlap between categories

§ medicalconferenees. Reported symptoms were evaluated for is possible depending on the speciﬁc clinical symptoms.

:5 correlation to the listed adverse event categories. Finally, the Skin rash and hypersensitivities were categorized, yet in

g mission date of each event was included in the crew records. some cases where rash was accompanied by symptoms of

g A breakdown of all reported events was derived by mission infection, it was classiﬁed under skin infection instead. For

EU month for the 6—month orbital spaceﬂights. all such instances, the epidemiologist and immunologist

S evaluators worked to select the most appropriate category

E“ Adve rse event categorization based on the event clinical symptoms reported. Observable

E The NASA integrated medical model (IMM) is an opera— symptom events thought NOT to be related to immune

g tional NASA tool that helps to align science, technology, dysregulation, such as brief episodes of loose stools, or

\ and operational activities. The IMM is intended for use in injury—related events, were not included in this evaluation.
optimizing crew health and safety and to ensure mission Causality and potential consequence is not always
success by quantifying the probability and consequences reported. An attempt was made to particularly tabulate events
of medical risks.31 The IMM has identiﬁed 83 medical con— that have the potential to relate to immune dysregulation.
ditions that have occurred, or have the potential to occur, There could be multiple events for individual crew members.
in—ﬂight. From this list, we identiﬁed 13 IMM conditions Events were not double scored into multiple categories.
that could be associated with dysregulated immunity during Where possible, if an event was reported as a recurrence of
spaceﬂight. For purposes of this review, otitis media and a previously noted event, we did not count twice. In addition
otitis externa were combined into a single analysis category to the 70 events reported and included in this tabulation, an
of ear—related symptoms: pain, congestion, and itchiness. additional 28 events were excluded, as they were deemed to
Additionally, the condition of upper respiratory infections not be associated with dysregulated immunity. Such events
was removed and the related symptoms, prolonged conges— included intestinal complaints due to food or nutrition,
tion, rhinitis, and sneezing were added instead. The IMM abrasions, eye irritations and/or tearing. Events such as
category identiﬁed as “skin rashes” was interpreted to also congestion, nausea, diarrhea, or constipation, which were
mtermtmnwmcenemMedmzmw—mwm

Dove

"
"4","Crucian et al Dove

reported and resolved within the ﬁrst 30 days of ﬂight, were 1.7 events per 6—month ISS expedition crew member. By far,

excluded and classiﬁed as space adaptation symptoms. the maj ority of the adverse events observed on board the ISS

were skin rashes (23 events), followed by upper respiratory

SGCODdar)’ tabu lation Of inddence data symptoms, including congestion, rhinitis and/or sneezing

from add itional SOU FCGS (20 events). Tabulating the various types of infectious disease
(‘2 Since additional sources of information eXist regarding medi— observed during spaceﬂight (including pharyngitis, skin
8. cal events on board the ISS, and due to operational constraints infection, etc.) indicates at least 13 infectious disease events
S” no single source would be complete for an individual crew occurred during the reporting period. Additional categories
§ member, we reviewed all available additional sources of clinical included in the review, but for which no on—orbit reports were
i: incidence information. These secondary sources included: observed, included: malignancies, autoimmunity, sepsis, and
; medical requirements reports, private medical conference notes anaphylaXis. Note that these immunologically related IMM
E (non—EMR), research clinical surveys, post—ﬂight experiment categories do consist of conﬂrmed—diagnosis disease states;
g debrieﬁngs, and space medicine operations team notes. Essen— however, for completeness, we report that no incidence of
E tially, anywhere a notation was possible of an in—ﬂight medical relevant symptoms for these diseases was observed for the
:ED anomaly, clinical symptoms, or treatment, the records were evaluated crew members.
é reviewed and events tabulated. It is important to note that this
SE; deviates from a standard epidemiological investigation, since Characterization Of notable medical
g 5‘ by deﬁnition, the recording techniques may differ among the events
E E 46188 astronauts, and conﬁrmatory laboratory diagnoses were A more detailed evaluation of the 70 reported medical events
35% 11.0tP0551b16- Therefore, thlS information represents .3 “tabula— further classified 42 events as “notable”. Notable events
“c; § tion ofreported 011111031 symptoms”. we further classrﬂed these included such characteristics as prolonged duration, repeated
g 3 events as non—notable or notable. For this review, the deﬁnition or recurring and/or, being unresponsive to treatment. These 42
@145. Of a “notable” event consisted Of an CV61“ 0f: 1) prolonged notable events were observed in 46% of the crew members,
:25 duration 0f>1 week, With some lasting through mission end; whereas the remaining 54% either experienced no notable
E 2) repeated and/ or intensiﬁed incidence; or 3) DOD'TCSPODSiVC events or only events that were not classiﬁed as “notable”
g to, or unresolved following, medication treatment during ﬂight. (Figure 1)_ The most likely diagnosis breakdown Of these 42
E . . . . noteworthy events, based on the reported symptoms, is pre—
:5 C I I n lcal C haracte Flzatl O n Of ras h es sented in Figure 2. Almost one—half were found to be prolonged
E onboard '55 rashes, followed by infectious disease, atypical allergies, and
% To generally characterize the rashes occurring on board the
EU ISS from a clinical perspective, a more detailed evaluation of
3 crew medical records documenting in—ﬂight rash occurrence
‘2“ was performed by a NASA ﬂight surgeon. This additional
é analysis was performed on all crew members who had rash
g events. This represented a l6—astronaut subset of the overall _
\ 46 participating crew members. For each subj ect, all available yinggivVgnS/o)

information (which could vary between subjects) was used for Notable events:

the evaluation. Rash appearance and location were recorded. 28 events 21 crew (46%)

In some cases, photographs of the rashes were available. 42 events

Resu Its

Tabulation of symptom events on ISS

Speciﬁc incidence data for reported symptoms from 46 No events

long—duration missions onboard ISS is summarized in Table 8 crew (17%)

l. Spanning all event categories, 70 reports of symptoms

potentially related to immune dysregulation were tabulated

during ﬂight, including both notable and non—notable events.

The accumulated incidence rate for these events was found :5:r:Joalsgﬁg’suiigsgﬁiazfsgdlsr‘s°:;:tab'e in'f'ight repmed medical events

to be 3.40 events per ﬂight year, or averaging approximately Abbreviation: ISS, International Space Station.

386 Smeitermanu-Wipt International Journal of General Medicine 20|6:9

Dove

"
"5","Dove Incidence of clinical symptoms during Iong-duration spaceflight
40%
1 8
1 6
14 29%
$2
8. 12
>
o A
Z. 5
R 52 10
c g o
o > o 17 /o
E UJ 8 14 /o
oo'
°°.
g 6
cs
2
>~ 4
f
E, 2
co""
8
03). 0
:3 Cold sores Prolonged rashes Atypical allergies Infectious disease
QR
E E Figure 2 Breakdown of 42 reported notable medical events reported in 2| of 46 International Space Station crew members.
§ 3 Notes: Relative percentages among the reported events are indicated.
-\- :
ﬁe
E E
E 3 Table 2 DlStf’lbUthh Of 42 notable ln-fllght medIcaI events by Flgure 4. The appearance of the rashes generally 0011818th
$53 ﬂ'ght month ofbumps/nodules and/or small brown scaly patches, With or
:2“ Flight month I 2 3 4 5 6 Without petechiae, redness/hyperemia, and itching.
E Medical events
‘3 Cold sores 3 o I o I I - -
CD
3%, Rashes 7 4 I 2 2 I DISCUSS'On . . . . .
g Allergy 6 0 0 0 0 I The concept of astronauts becoming 111 during spaceﬂight 1s
(EU Infection 2 0 5 3 I | not new. Early (Mercury, Gemini, Apollo) astronauts reported
g TOta' '8 4 7 5 4 4 illness, including a noteworthy urinary tract infection on
8 Notes: Forty-two recorded “notable” in-flight medical events, all from within Ap0110 139 WhiCh eventually resulted in thC NASA HSR32
o the 4 categorIes, were evaluated In the context of mISSIOn phase. Evaluated crew
(EU members (n=46) were in space for approximately 6-month missions. The HSP places astronauts 111 a 7-day period Of restricted
§ access before a spaceﬂight, in an attempt to mitigate crew
E“ cold sores. An evaluation of the 42 notable events in the context infectious disease on—orbit. The HSP is not a pure isolation, as
E of mission kinetics (month) is presented in Table 2. The highest astronauts still have contact With family and staff. Rather, the
«4:3 concentration ofnotable adverse medical events occurred dur— HSP limits contact to individuals Who have been medically
ing the ﬁrst month of ﬂight (18 events); however, beyond the screened and trained to minimize crew exposure to infectious
ﬁrst month, there was a generally even spread ofevents between disease. This program has been successful in reducing the
months 2 and 6 of ﬂight. An evaluation of the distribution of rate of on—orbit communicable infectious disease;3’2 however,
the 42 notable medical events among the 46 crew members is illness during spaceﬂight remains a possibility for astronauts.
presented in Figure 3. Eleven crew members experienced a Breaks in the HSP quarantine are possible, and astronauts
single notable in—ﬂight medical event, Whereas 10 individual may become infected before ﬂight and carry a pathogen to
crew members eXpeIienced 2 or more events. One unique crew orbit. Certain pathogens, such as latent herpesviruses, cannot
member experienced 9 in—ﬂight notable medical events. be screened out by a quarantine period.A1th0ugh studies are
ongoing to characterize immune dysregulation during ﬂight,
Clinical rash characterization increased microbial Virulence during space ﬂight may also
During spaceﬂight, rashes were observed to occur in the contribute to elevated risk for infectious disease. Recent
following locations: scalp, face, neck, chest, back, trunk, data has demonstrated that some microbes actually increase
abdomen, arms, and hands. A representative photograph from their Virulence during spaceﬂight.” Mermel recently sum—
a persistent rash incident on board the 188 is presented in marized the infectious disease risk in the context of immunity,
International Journal of General Medicine 201639 S“bmitywrmamu-W-HIDt 387
Dove

"
"6","Crucian et al Dove
1 2
1 O —
g 8 —
‘8 w
8. E
>
é.) E 6 — —
0’)
N 3
g e
a o 4 _ —
E
oo'
°°.
0)
$3 2 — —
03'
$2
3‘
E O
8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
8,"" Notable medical events (n)
E
E; Figure 3 Breakdown of 42 reported notable medical events reported in 46 crew members by individual crew member incidence.
O
‘0 .
g“ E“
g o
co . . . . .
E. g class m1ss10ns. Unfortunately, deta11ed meldence rates for
E‘ g the Space Shuttle and 188 programs have historically been
co . . .
E g lacklng, due to astronaut medical privacy concerns.
§ E Although an extremely large number ofUS astronauts were
1:“ able to ﬂy short—duration space missions onboard the Shuttle,
E incidence (or Clinical symptoms) data from the Space Shuttle
g era is likely to be artiﬁcially elevated due to the presence of
E early space—adaptatlon symptoms durlng a 2—week 0rb1ta1
E spaceﬂight. This is almost certainly true for stufﬁness and
g congestion, which may certainly resemble allergic symptoms.
% Short—duration spaceﬂight is extremely busy and stressful, as
‘2“ most waking time is accounted for to meet mission objectives.
§ Shuttle missions, with their short duration and very stressful
‘2“ timelines, are therefore likely to not be representative of the
.9 . . . . .
“g expected meldence for exploration class spaceﬂlght. It is for
«:3 this reason that incidence data from 188 missions must be
evaluated. 188 missions consist of long—duration exposure to
the microgravity and radiation environment of low Earth orbit
spaceﬂight. ISS crew members work on a somewhat more
reasonable schedule compared to Shuttle ﬂights and generally
adapt to the space environment by approximately 2—4 weeks
on—orbit. Furthermore, crews are isolated from daily contact,
Figure 4 Photograph of a persistent rash incident on a US astronaut during . . . . . . .
Iong-duration spaceflight on board the International Space Station. SO OppOI'tllIllty fOI‘ communlcable InfCCtIOUS d1sease IS drama“—
cally reduced. ISS incidence data therefore likely represents a
microbial Virulence changes, and environmental conditions more accurate reﬂection ofin—ﬂight clinical incidence, as human
such as air handling, recycling, and hygiene.34 In conjunc— physiology would equilibrate duringlong—duration spaceﬂight.
tion with research data regarding human physiology during Generating an appropriate terrestrial comparison group
ﬂight, it is important to know in-ﬂight incidence rates for for this dataset is particularly Challenging. The relevant space
the 188 program. The incidence data may provide the most agencies ﬂy extremely healthy and ﬁt individuals, screen their
important tool for assessing astronaut risk during exploration health frequently, put them through a pre—ﬂight quarantine, and
388 submitYW""manuscriPt International Journal of General Medicine 20 | 6:9
Dove

"
"7","Dove Incidence of clinical symptoms during Iong-duration spaceflight
then deploy them in an extreme and physiologically disruptive testing of crew members and various crew—use and/or food
(and entirely unique) environment. We suggest that the goal of products, and avoidance of any deﬁned irritants.36 Suggested
the spaceﬂight medical program is that the incidence numbers laboratory assays to further investigate rashes in astronauts
should therefore be “zero”. However, as rashes were the most could include immunoglobulin E, complement (C3a, 4a, 5a),
reported event on board the ISS and are of clinical concern to cytokines (interleukin 5 and 13), mast/baso/eosinophils 1eV—
(‘2 ﬂight surgeons, we wi11brieﬂy discuss rash presentation and e1s, prostaglandins (D2), stress hormones, and leukotrienes.
8. terrestrial incidence for this particular symptom. The preva— Medication usage is not routinely tracked onboard 188;
$3 lence of persistent rashes in the US population is about 0.044 however, a recent NASA pharmacology survey of astronaut
§ cases/year,35 and our observed incidence of rashes on board the archival health records indicated that antihistamines were the
g: 188 was elevated in comparison at 1.12 events per ﬂight year. most prescribed medication during ﬂight for chronic condi—
; The incidence for rashes on board the 188 is therefore 25—fold tions that persisted >7 days.38 For acute (<7—day duration)
E higher than terrestrial incidence. The body locations for rash issues, antihistamines were second only to sleep medications.
g occurrence on board the ISS seemed to vary; however, the Suggested treatments for persistent a11ergic/hypersensitiVity
E appearance was generally consistent, manifesting as bumps, symptoms in astronauts may include ora1antihistamines,topi—
:ED nodules, sma11 sca1y patches, and itchy redness. Presumed ca1steroids, antibiotics (if an infectious agents is suspected),
é diagnoses for such rashes could include eczema, contact der— or oral steroids. The NASA Human Research Program is cur—
:3). matitis, psoriasis, a11ergic cholinergic urticaria, and/ or simple rent1y characterizing the nature of immune system dysregula—
g 5‘ acne. Ilscus et a1 speculated that contributing factors to on— tion in astronauts. This research may result in a monitoring
ES orbit rashes could include constraints of hygiene, infection, strategy, which may be used to validate potential immune
§- § atypical herpesvirus infection, photo dermatitis, or cutaneous countermeasures. Addressing immune dysregulation itself

g E“ decompression sickness.36 Hygienic contributing factors may may signiﬁcantly mitigate the rash issue onboard 188.
E g include soaps and no—rinse shampoo use with suboptimal The clinical signiﬁcance of these numbers is open to
§U§ ability to completely rinse the body areas after cleansing. interpretation. Among the incidents reported here, certainly
:3 Irritation from operational equipment, such as extravehicular some category—speciﬂc clinical issues appear to be elevated
5 (EVA — spacewalk) suits, electrocardiography electrodes, or compared to the general terrestrial population, and almost
.03) oxygen masks could be other contributing factors, however certainly appear elevated based on expectations for extremely
§ the timing and locations of the rash events suggest that they healthy individuals in a putatively isolated environment.
:5 were not related to EVA actiVity. In addition, the enVironment The hypersensitivity f indings are seemingly discordant
g onboard 188 may be conducive to rashes, consisting of low with various research data that indicates other aspects of
% humidity, prolonged contact with moisture from sweat or wet adaptive immunity are depressed during spaceﬂight?)24 It is
EU clothing, and constrained airﬂow. It is also possible, given that established that several variables inﬂuence adaptive/ ce11u1ar
S the maj ority of the notable in—ﬂight events occurred in the ﬁrst immune parameters in a negative fashion (microgravity,
‘2“ month of spaceﬂight, that early space adaptation inﬂuences stress, radiation, etc.), although this phenomenon had been
é these incidence numbers (Figure 3). However, we speculate that believed to be largely subclinical (diminished function,
g the persistent dysregulation of the immune system, including altered cytokine proﬁles, 1atent Viral reactivation, etc.). For
\ some data indicating a Th2 shift, may be a signiﬁcant contrib— exploration missions, chronic immune dysregulation, coupled
uting factor to the incidence of on—orbit rashes. with increased radiation exposure and no return option, has
Recent research data conﬂrms persistent immunological the potential to progress into clinical diseases. It is therefore
dysregulation during spaceﬂight.24’37 Rashes and hypersen— interesting that what may be considered “precursor” clinical
sitiVities would suggest immune dysregulation of a hyper— conditions, such as tabulated here, are already being observed
sensitive nature. There is other anecdotal commentary from on—orbit. In fact, these incidence rates ﬁt perfectly the model
recent ISS astronauts during post—ﬂight experiment debrieﬁng of spaceﬂight—associated immune alterations reported in the
sessions that supports the possibility for some aspects of Th2 literature, which include diminished T—ce11 function (relates
immunity to be sensitized. These include statements from to infectious disease) and a Th2 cytokine shift (relates to
multiple astronauts regarding upper respiratory symptoms hypersensitivities).1 A linkage was recently reported between
(stufﬂness, etc.) which persisted for 6 months and were a1terationsin cytokine proﬁles in astronauts and the reactiva—
treated with, and reported responsive to, antihistamines tion of latent herpesviruses,37 which supports the postulate
(data not shown). Ilscus et a1 further suggested that possible that speciﬁc types of immune bias shifts wi11increase risks for
mitigations for on—orbit rashes might include a11ergy/patch speciﬁc types of disease. Although subclinical reactivation of
International Journal of General Medicine 20|6:9 SmeitYWVmaWSCHPt 389

Dove

"
"8","Crucian et al Dove

these Viruses has been previously reported during spaceﬂight, capture of crew clinical information and medication usage.

the incidence data conﬁrms that 6 instances of oral herpes— Operational inﬂuences (crew equipment, hygiene, sleep, and

Virus reactivation have already occurred on board the 188. work schedules), as well as deployment of unique allergens

Herpesvirus reactivation resulting in fever blisters has also into the ISS enVironment (such as a permanent murine

been reported by astronauts to occur during spaceﬂights. It habitat), must be thoroughly evaluated to not exacerbate an
(‘2 is also interesting that the highest concentration of reported already—eXisting Clinical issue.
8. events occurred early within the 6—month mission durations. Finally, we note that assessments of astronauts during ﬂight
:3 While the slope of immune alterations during spaceﬂight is may provide unique insight into “similar” conditions that pres—
g still largely unknown, the literature to date generally ﬁnds ent as immunological dysregulation on Earth. For example, it is
S: that alterations persist for the duration of a 6—month orbital well understood that stress adversely affects immunity, which
g spaceﬂight.25 We anticipate upcoming investigations on board may increase susceptibility to disease.27 Aged individuals are
3' the 188 will shed further light on the complexities of immune known to present with increased infectious disease or latent
g adaptation during ﬂight, and planned l—year mission dura— Viral reactivation, which may be related to immune senescence
E tions will improve our understanding regarding the kinetics with decreased T—eell function.39 Also, terrestrial “space ana—
E of these alterations. log” conditions exist; locations where remote deployment,
g The authors acknowledge that this is a subjective report; prolonged isolation, and extreme environment recreate some
:7); however, great rigor was exercised to achieve a repeatable of the stress effects of spaceﬂight.40 Examples include undersea
g 5‘ readout on 188 incidence (based on reported symptoms), deployment or Antarctica winter—over missions. It has been
E E given the criteria that were used. Where possible, if an event established that crew members participating in such terrestrial
§- § was reported as a recurrence of a previously noted event, we missions also shed latent herpesviruses.41 Similarly, better
EQ EU did not count twice. If there was no indication from the ﬂight controlled laboratory simulations of spaceﬂight conﬁnement,
E g surgeon notes or any other source documents that the event such as a recent Russian SOO—day Mars simulation, have also
@145. was a recurrence, we did not infer recurrence and as such, been found to re—create immune dysregulation, which shares
:2“ for the purposes of this tabulation, we counted it as a new some aspects of ﬂight—associated dysregulation.42 We suggest
E event. This criteria could lead to a higher frequency score. An monitoring strategies and countermeasures developed to assess
.3 evaluation of the same records using different criteria would and prevent incidence in astronauts may facilitate the reduction
§ likely generate different results. To ensure as accurate and of illness on Earth.
:5 unbiased reporting as possible, the immunologists had no
g exposure to the record evaluation process. Records evalua— Acknowledgments
% tion was strictly performed by the Epidemiology staff, after The authors wish to thank Ms J essica Garcia, NASA—JSC
EU the evaluation criteria were devised in consultation with the Epidemiology Group, for assistance in the reView ofthe raw
§ Immunology Discipline Team at the Johnson Space Center. data sources and compilation of category—speciﬂc incidence
jg 0n the Iss, factors associated with spaceﬂight, includ— data. We also thank Dr Hawley Kunz with KBR-Wyle at the
E ing conﬁnement, nutritional limits, and disrupted circadian NASA—JSC Environmental Sciences Branch for assistance
E rhythms, are likely to be similar to those anticipated for with preparation of the manuscript.

exploration class missions. Although a quick—return option

eXists for orbital ﬂight, in—ﬂight clinical care capability is Disclosure

likely similar to that experienced on exploration class mis— The authors report no conﬂicts of interest in this work.

sions. Therefore, we anticipate the incidence of adverse

clinical events during an 18.8 mission to represent the best R eferen C e S

available eVidence from which to extrapolate inordence rates 1_ Gueguinou N, Huin-Schohn C, Bascove M, Bueb JL, Tschirhart E,

for exploration class missions. The incidence for missions Legrand-Frossipa Frippiat JP- Could S:palceﬂight-aSSOciated immune

beyond Earth orbital spaceﬂight is likely to be higher than 1832:1111: 2:356 I}??£§:§i§igg§g§ﬁ§ 1110225111331; . presence beyond

the rate ObSCl‘VCd during 188 missions. Unfortunately, many 2. Borchers AT, Keen CL, Gershwin ME. Microgravity and immune

aspects Of human immunology remain relatively uninvesti— gzsgogigsgyeness: 1mpl1cat1ons for space travel. Nutrztzon. 2002;18(10):

gated during spaceﬂight. Further StUdieS on board the ISS 3. Chapes SK,Morrison DR,Guikema JA,Lewis ML, SpoonerBS.Produc-

Will complete our understanding of immune Status during tion and action of cytokines in space. Adv Space Res. l994;l4(8):5—9.

spaceﬂight. We suggest that a thorough investigation of Th2 4' 22312315?llsggvifgiﬁoff?;Toféafgﬁznciigggﬁ: Eggszc:

immunity on board the 188 must be coupled with precise Environ Med. 2008;79(9)2835—843.

390 S”'“nitym'rmanuscript International Journal of General Medicine 20|6:9

Dove

"
"9","Dove Incidence of clinical symptoms during Iong-duration spaceflight
5. Morukov VB, Rykova MP, Antropova EN, Berendeeva TA, Ponomarev 24. Crucian B, Stowe R, Mehta S, Uchakin P, Quiriarte H, Pierson D, Sams C.
SA, Larina IM. [Indicators of innate and adaptive immunity of cosmo- Immune system dysregulation occurs during short duration spaceﬂight
nauts after long-term space ﬂight to international space station]. Fiziol on board the space shuttle. J Clin Immunol. 2013;33(2):456—465.
Cheloveka. 2010;36(3):19—30. 25. Crucian BE, Stowe RP, Mehta SK, Quiriarte H, Pierson DL, Sams CF.
6. Sonnenfeld G. Effect of space ﬂight on cytokine production. Acta Alterations in adaptive immunity persist during long-duration space-
Astronaut. 1994;33:143—147. ﬂight. npj Microgravily. 2015; 1 : 15013.
7. Sonnenfeld G, Miller ES. The role of cytokines in immune changes 26. Stowe RP, Mehta SK; Ferrando AA, Feeback DL, Pierson DL. Immune

(0 induced by spaceﬂight. J Leukoc Biol. 1993;54(3):253—258. responses and latent herpesvirus reactivation in spaceﬂight. Aviat Space

§ 8. Rykova MP, Antropova EN, Larina 1M, Morukov BV. Humoral and cel- Environ Med. 2001;72(10):884—891.

$ lular immunity in cosmonauts after the ISS missions. ActaAstronautz'ca. 27. Webster Marketon J1, Glaser R. Stress hormones and immune function.

2? 2008;63(7—10):697—705. Cell Immunol. 2008;252(1—2):16—26.

R 9. Crucian BE, Cubbage ML, Sams CF. Altered cytokine production by 28. Stowe RP, Yetman DL, Storm WF, Sams CF, Pierson DL. Neuroendo-

5 speciﬁc human peripheral blood cell subsets immediately following crine and immune responses to 16-day bed rest with realistic launch

§ space ﬂight. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2000;20(6):547—5 5 6. and landing G proﬁles. AviatSpace Environ Med. 2008;79(2):1 17—122.

8; 10. Stowe RP, Sams CF, Mehta SK, Kaur I, J ones ML, Feeback DL, Pier— 29. Strewe C, Feuerecker M, Nichiporuk I, et al. Effects of parabolic ﬂight

2'; son DL. Leukocyte subsets and neutrophil function after short-term and spaceﬂight on the endocannabinoid system in humans. Rev Neu-

‘2 spaceﬂight. J Leukoc Biol. 1999;65(2):179—186. roscz'. 2012;23(5—6):673—680.

8' 11. Kaur I, Simons ER, Castro VA, Ott CM, Pierson DL. Changes in mono- 30. Crucian B, Sams C. Immune system dysregulation during spaceﬂight:

‘; cyte functions of astronauts. Brain Behav Immun. 2005; 1 9(6):547—5 54. clinical risk for exploration-class missions. J Leukoc Biol. 2009;86(5):

f 12. Kaur I, Simons ER, Castro VA, Mark Ott C, Pierson DL. Changes in neu- 1017—101 8.

E trophil functions in astronauts. Brain Behav Immun. 2004; 1 8(5):443—450. 31. NASA. Math and Science at Work: The Integrated Medical Model;

g 13. Boonyaratanakornkit JB, Cogoli A, Li CF, et al. Key gravity-sensitive 2013. Available from: http://www.nasa.gOV/audience/foreducators/

e signaling pathways drive T cell activation. FASEB J 2005; 19(14): mathandscience/research/Prob_IMM_detail.html. Accessed 2015.

if 2020—2022. 32. Wooley BC, McCollum GW. Flight crew health stabilization program.

8 5‘ 14. CogoliA. The effect of space ﬂight on human cellularimmunity. Environ In: Jones WL, editor. SP-368 Biomedical Results oprollo. Houston

ES Med. 1993;37(2):107—116. (TX): BioTechnology, Inc., NASA; 1975:141—149.

g 3 15. Schwarzenberg M, Pippia P, Meloni MA, Cossu G, Cogoli-Greuter 33. Wilson JW, Ott CM, Honer zu Bentrup K, et al. Space ﬂight alters

83 M, Cogoli A. Signal transduction in T lymphocytes — a comparison of bacterial gene expression and Virulence and reveals a role for global

“E“ g the data from space, the free fall machine and the random positioning regulator qu. Proc NatlAcad Sci U S A. 2007; 104(41): 16299—16304.

E ‘e machine. Adv Space Res. 1999;24(6):793—800. 34. Mermel LA. Infection prevention and control during prolonged human

Hg 8. 16. Stowe RP, Sams CF, Pierson DL. Effects of mission duration on neuroim- space travel. Clin Infect Dis. 2013;56(1):123—130.

§E mune responses in astronauts. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2003;74(12): 35. Cherry DK, Burt CW, Woodwell DA. National ambulatory medical

8 1281—1284. care survey: 2001 summary. Adv Data. 2003;(337):1—44.

E 17. Stowe RP, Sams CF, Pierson DL. Adrenocortical and immune responses 36. Ilscus LS, J ohnston SL, Moynihan S, Kerstman EL, Marshal GD. Rashes

g following short- and long-duration spaceﬂight. Aviat Space Environ and exanthems on long duration space ﬂights. Poster presented at: 80th

.02) Med. 201 1;82(6):627—634. Annual Scientiﬁc Meeting of the Aerospace Medical Association; 2009;

g 18. Grove DS, Pishak SA, Mastro AM. The effect of a 10-day space ﬂight on California.

i) the function, phenotype, and adhesion molecule expression of spleno- 37. Mehta SK, Crucian BE, Stowe RP, Simpson RJ, Ott CM, Sams CF,

Tu cytes and lymph node lymphocytes. Exp Cell Res. 1995;219(1):102—109. Pierson DL. Reactivation of latent Viruses is associated with increased

E) 19. Nash PV, Konstantinova IV, Fuchs BB, Rakhmilevich AL, Lesnyak AT, plasma cytokines in astronauts. Cytokine. 2013;61(1):205—209.

8 Mastro AM. Effect of spaceﬂight on lymphocyte proliferation and inter— 38. Wotring VE. Space Pharmacology. 1st ed. New York: Springer—Verlag

“5 leukin-2 production. JAppl Physiol (1985). 1992;73(2 Suppl):186S—190S. New York; 2012.

(:5 20. Mehta SK, Stowe RP, Feiveson AH, Tyring SK; Pierson DL. Reactiva- 39. Makinodan T, Hahn TJ, McDougall S, Yamaguchi DT; Fang M, Iida-

3 tion and shedding of cytomegalovirus in astronauts during spaceﬂight. KleinA. Cellular immunosenescence: an overview. Exp Gerontol. 1991;

§ JInfect Dis. 2000;182(6):1761—1764. 26(2—3):281—288.

8 21. Pierson DL, Stowe RP, Phillips TM, Lugg DJ, Mehta SK. Epstein-Barr 40. Crucian B, Simpson RJ, Mehta S, et al. Terrestrial stress analogs for

% Virus shedding by astronauts during space ﬂight. Brain Behav Immun. spaceﬂight associated immune system dysregulation. Brain Behav

GE.) 2005;19(3):235—242. Immun. 2014;39:23—32.

LE 22. Stowe RP, Pierson DL, Feeback DL, Barrett AD. Stress-induced reac- 41. Mehta SK, Pierson DL, Cooley H, Dubow R, Lugg D. Epstein-Barr
tivation of Epstein-Barr Virus in astronauts. Neuroimmunomodulatz‘on. Virus reactivation associated with diminished cell-mediated immunity
2000;8(2):51—58. in Antarctic expeditioners. J Med Virol. 2000;61(2):235—240.

23.Bascove M, Gueguinou N, Schaerlinger B, Gauquelin—Koch G, Frippiat JP. 42. Pagel J1, Chouker A. Effects of isolation and conﬁnement on humans-
Decrease in antibody somatic hypermutation frequency under extreme, implications for manned space explorations. J Appl Physiol (1985).
extended spaceﬂight conditions. FASEB J 2011;25(9):2947—2955. 2016; 120(12): 1449—1457.
International Journal of General Medicine DOVE
Publish your work in this journal
The International Journal of General Medicine is an international, The manuscript management system is completely online and includes
peer-reViewed open-access journal that focuses on general and internal a very quick and fair peer—reView system, which is all easy to use. Visit
medicine, pathogenesis, epidemiology, diagnosis, monitoring and treat- http://www.dovepress.com/testimonials.php to read real quotes from
ment protocols. The journal is characterized by the rapid reporting of published authors.
reviews, original research and clinical studies across all disease areas.
Submit your manuscript here: https://www.dovepress.com/internationaI-journal-of—generaI-medicine-journal

International Journal of General Medicine 20|6:9 SmeitYWVmaWSCHPt 39 I

Dove

"
