"","x"
"1","wab Available online at www.sciencedirect.com _____________
Eﬂﬁi‘
is: w 5 ° D' t mm
_ wit Clence Irec
"""" MWMJMWUHM
PERGAMON Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 659—677 m
WWW.elseVier.com/locate/actaastro
Review
Psychology and culture during long-duration space m1ss10ns
N. Kanasa’*, G. Sandalb, J .E. Boydc, V.I. Gushind, D. Manzeye, R. Northf,
G.R. Leong, P. Suedfeldh, S. Bishopl, E.R. FiedlerJ, N. Inouek, B. J Ohannesl,
D.J. Kealeym, N. Kraft“, I. Matsuzaki"", D. Mussonp, L.A. Palinkasq,
V.P. Salnitskiyd, W. Sipesf, J. Stusterr, J. Wangs
aDepartment of Psychiatry, University of California/San Francisco, VAMC (116A), 4150 Clement Street, San Francisco, CA 9412], USA
bUniversity of Bergen, Norway
CUniversity 0f California/San Francisco, and VA Medical Centen San Francisco, USA
dlnstitute for Biomedical Problems, Russia
eBerlin University of Technology, Germany
fNASA Johnson Space Center, USA
gUniversity of Minnesota, USA
. hUniversity of British Columbia, Canada
1University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, USA
JNan‘ionazl Space Biomedical Research Institute, USA
kJAXA Tsukuba Space Center, Japan
1DLR, Germany
mCem‘re for Intercultural Learning, Canada
11NASA Ames Research Centen USA
0University of Tsukuba, Japan
pMcMaster University, Canada
qUniversity of Southern California, USA
1“Alwzcazpaz Sciences, USA
SAstronaut Center, China
Received 21 August 2008; received in revised form 9 December 2008; accepted 14 December 2008
Available online 24 January 2009
Abstract
The Objective of this paper is twofold: (a) to reVieW the current knowledge of cultural, psychological, psychiatric, cognitive,
interpersonal, and organizational issues that are relevant to the behavior and performance of astronaut crews and ground support
personnel and (b) to make recommendations for future human space missions, including both transit and planetary surface
Operations involving the Moon 0r Mars. The focus Will be on long-duration missions lasting at least siX weeks, When important
psychological and interpersonal factors begin to take their toll on crewmembers. This information is designed to provide guidelines
for astronaut selection and training, in-ﬂight monitoring and support, and post-ﬂight recovery and re-adaptation.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
Keywords: Psychology; Culture; Long—duration space missions
% This manuscript is a shortened version of a study group report sponsored by the International Academy of Astronautics. The complete
study group report Will be published by the DLR.
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1415 7502072.
E-mail address: nick.kanas@ucsf.edu (N. Kanas).
0094—5765/$—see front matter Published by Elsevier Ltd.
doi:10.1016/j.actaastr0.2008.12.005

"
"2","660 N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 659—677
Contents
1.1ntr0duct10n661
2. Theimpactofculturalissues..............................................................................................................661
3. Personality,coping,andadaptation..........................................................................................................662
3.1.C0pingstrategiesduringshort-durationversuslong-durationspacemissions.................................................................662
3.2.Whatis“therightstuff’personality?...................................................................................................663
3.3.Implicati0nsformissionoperations.....................................................................................................663
33lSelect10n663
332Tra1n1ng663
333M0n1t0r1ngandsupp0rt664
3.3.4.Re-adaptati0nt0Earth............................................................................................................664
34Recommendat10ns664
4. Behavioralhealthandpsychiatry...........................................................................................................665
4.1.Psychiatricissuesinspace.............................................................................................................665
42Asthen1a665
4.3.Implicati0nsformissionoperations.....................................................................................................666
43lSelect10n666
432Tra1n1ng666
433M0n1t0r1ngandsupp0rt666
4.3.4.Re-adaptati0nt0Earth............................................................................................................668
44Recommendat10ns668
5.Cognitionandcomplexperformanceskills...................................................................................................668
5.1.0riginsofperformancedisturbancesinspace............................................................................................668
5.2.Effectsofmicrogravityoncognitiveandpsychomotorfunctions...........................................................................669
5.3.MaintenanceOfcognitiveandpsychomotorperformanceinspace..........................................................................669
5.4.MaintenanceOfcomplexcognitiveandperceptual-motorskills.............................................................................669
5.5.Performanceandculture...............................................................................................................670
5.6.Implicati0nsformissionoperations.....................................................................................................670
56lSelect10n670
562Tra1n1ng670
563M0n1t0r1ngandsupp0rt670
5.6.4.Re-adaptati0nt0Earth............................................................................................................671
57Recommendat10ns671
6.Interpersonalandorganizationalissues......................................................................................................671
61A11enat10n671
6.2.The“host—guest”problem..............................................................................................................672
6.3.Min0ritystatusandorganizationalculture................................................................................................672
6.4.Psych010gicalclosing,autonomization,anddisplacement..................................................................................673
65Crewaut0n0my673
6.6.Implicati0nsformissionoperations.....................................................................................................674
66lSelect10n674
662Tra1n1ng674
663M0n1t0r1ngandsupp0rt674
6.6.4.Re-adaptati0nt0Earth............................................................................................................674
67Recommendat10ns674
Acknowledgment675
References675
W*._M_m____
,0 ""' s ""' \ ""
""' '.‘ '1 \-~‘I
, V x“ \x I .
‘ ’ ‘.. . .' ""r: ‘ u {'1‘ i . ﬁx: I' t
- 0. Vb
. ~ I “.2"" * ‘
‘ . . . . 9LT»;- ' i J .
k‘- ...*.Q’ a 1!, ‘ 1‘ . f x.“
_ “.ﬁ, ; £4 ._; ‘. it .f’ a‘
. ‘t 2‘ ? SI / 35
+ 1 i '
, ah“ . 0. “gig. ‘ i
. O . 1:""; “i ' ' ¢ ‘ ‘ A ‘
-.& ..-r g;
. .- t 2“"" ‘-'u ‘ V I‘
' , f i ’ -.""1_'9 I
Fig. 1. Long-duration space travel can produce a sense of isolation and separation from family and friends. One can feel insigniﬁcant in the cosmos, with
resultant loneliness and homesickness. This plate is from the ﬁrst great star atlas, Uranometria, by Johannes Bayer, which was ﬁrst published in 1603. It depicts
the constellation Bootes, the herdsman, who was placed in the heavens by the ancient Greeks. In a sense, he became one of the ﬁrst “astronauts” in space
(courtesy of Star Maps: History, Artistry, and Cartography, N. Kanas, Springer—Praxis, 2007).

"
"3","N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 659—677 661
1. Introduction expeditions to Mars. This may not only increase the
psychological risks related to individual crewmember
During the early years of human space exploration, performance, but it also will produce new psychological
the impact of psychological and interpersonal factors on Challenges never before experienced. One of these Chal—
astronaut behaVior and performance was minimal. Mis— lenges has been referred to as the “Earth—out—of—View
sions were relatively short—term and were operated by phenomenon” and is related to the fact that astronauts
one space organization, and crews were homogeneously traveling to Mars will be the ﬁrst human beings put in
comprised of males from a similar national and profes— a situation where their home planet will be reduced to
sional background. However, with the advent of on—orbit an insigniﬁcant—looking dot in space [3]. The human re—
space stations, missions became longer, and crews be— sponse to such a situation is unknown. However, given
came more multinational and heterogeneous in terms of the positive value of looking at the Earth for astronaut
gender, cultural background, and professional training. well—being [4], it seems almost certain that seeing the
Therefore it was not surprising that anecdotal reports Earth as yet another dot in space will impact negatively
began to hint at the eXistence of psychosocial problems on the psyche of Mars travelers.
in space crews in both the American and Russian pro— This paper will reView the current knowledge of
grams [1—3]. For example, during one Salyut mission cultural, psychological, psychiatric, cognitive, inter—
a Visiting cosmonaut from Czechoslovakia felt socially personal, and organizational issues that are relevant
isolated and complained of being restricted from doing to the behaVior and performance of astronaut crews
productive work by his Russian crewmates, who were and ground support personnel. Recommendations will
concerned that this foreign “guest” might inadvertently be offered to space agencies for future long—duration
make an operational error. Similarly, a Russian cosmo— human space missions.
naut reported discomfort in the crew enVironment when
a Visitor from France came to the Salyut, even though 2. The impact of cultural issues
the crewmembers all got along during pre—ﬂight train—
ing [3] (Fig. 1). It is important to keep in mind that cultural issues
But long—duration stays aboard an orbital space sta- may impact on each of the areas that are discussed be—
tion represent but one step in the evolution of human low, in several ways. First, differences in personality
space exploration, which also aims at much more am- styles of coping with stress can occur within any space
bitious endeavors (e.g., an outpost 0n the M0011 or an crew, but the effects are more complicated if the crew is
expedition to Mars), and these can produce serious psy- also multicultural. This is because some Characteristics,
Chological and interpersonal consequences. For exam— such as emotional expressivity, may be common in some
ple, even though some aspects of Mars missions are cultures but relatively unusual in others. Second, men—
shared by other settings (e.g., long—duration stays on or— tal health issues may also manifest differentially across
bital space stations, historical expeditions to unknown cultural groups. For example, depressed mood may be
parts of the Earth, wintering—over in Antarctica), there more likely to co—occur with anxiety among Americans
are major differences, mostly associated with the enor— but with fatigue among Russians [5]. Third, cognitive
mous distances involved and the long mission duration and decision—making styles, along With individual be—
[3]. According to currently discussed mission scenariOS, haVior norms such as privacy expectations and personal
a mission to Mars may last up to three years. Depend- grooming habits, may also vary by culture. Fourth, cul—
ing on the distance between the Earth and Mars and tural differences in social behaVior norms, such as how
their relative orbital positions, a one—way audio or Video hosts are expected to treat guests or whether everyone
transmission between these two planets may take some is expected to socialize together at mealtime, can also
22min to accomplish. As a consequence, no real time impact on tension and cohesion during missions [6].
two—way communication will be possible. Furthermore, In addition, there are additional psychological is—
there Will be no possibility for emergency re—supply sues that are unique to culturally heterogeneous crews.
or rescue ﬂights. As a consequence, crews on a Mars For example, international missions may suffer when
mission will be exposed to a much higher level of au— there are individual differences in language skills or
tonomy and long—term conﬁnement and isolation than where crewmembers who are in the cultural minority
any previous space crew. At the same time, most strate— or from a different national culture than mission con—
gies of ground—based support that currently are used to trol [7,8]. In addition to national culture, other relevant
foster crew morale and psychological well—being dur— types of cultural heterogeneity include professional cul—
ing orbital space missions will be ineffective during ture, organizationalculture, and the unique culture thata

"
"4","662 N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 659—677
particular group forms over time. Even though diversity adaptation may occur in stages over time and that the
may represent an asset to the extent that it adds to the most serious problems are likely to occur around the
crew’s behavior and performance repertoire, having to third quarter. However, empirical evidence for the eX—
Cope with such differences also adds to the overall level istence of speciﬁc critical phases has been equivocal
of effort required from crewmembers. [13,18—20]. Also, recent studies in space have been
A thorough review of known differences between limited to on—orbit missions with durations of four to
speciﬁc sociocultural groups on these dimensions is be— siX months. The issue of critical periods in adaptation is
yond the scope of this report. Such differences have been important, given that such knowledge may enable both
well documented by the psychology, sociology, anthro— crewmembers and mission control personnel to pre—
pology, and business literatures regarding the general pare for problems and intervene before maladjustments
population, and to some extent regarding airline crews, result in operational impact.
but they are only just beginning to be documented for
space station crews [5,9]. 3.1. Coping strategies during Short-duration versus
A number of speciﬁc cultural issues related to space long-duration space missions
missions involving humans are imbedded in the four
sections that follow (see for example Sections 5.5 and In the context of long—duration space missions, it
6.3). Our cultural upbringing affects all of us and im— may be that the most severe stressors involve monotony
pacts upon our personality, behavior, cognition, and and boredom resulting from low workload, hypo—
Ways we afﬁliate in groups. Consequently, it seemed stimulation, and restricted social contacts due to isola—
more feasible in this report to integrate culture as an tion from family and friends. A number of individual
overarching concept into these sections than to expand factors may impact on the coping ability of crewmem—
it into a larger independent section that was separate bers in dealing with these living conditions. They
from the others. include: individual experiences, personality, leisure ac—
tiVities, coping strategies, and the kind of social and
3. Personality, coping, and adaptation emotional support available. Also, coping and adap—
tation are strongly related to interpersonal factors.
The success of most human space missions and the According to evidence from space and other isolated
numerous examples of complicated tasks that have been and conﬁned settings, intra—crew tension, leadership
accomplished are generally taken as evidence of the styles, and group dynamics are key factors responsible
ability of most astronauts to perform and cope in space, for exacerbating or ameliorating stress, or facilitating
both as individuals and as teams. Yet there is consid— coping and adaptation [3,21].
erable anecdotal and behavioral evidence that many Efﬁcient strategies to ameliorate stress levels dur—
Crewmembers have experienced psychological and in— ing short—term missions may become problematic or
terpersonal difﬁculties arising from the myriad stressors impossible during interplanetary voyages. For example,
inherent in space missions, especially those involving support provided to 188 crews includes private fam—
longer—durations [10]. Psychological and behavioral ily conferences Via audio or Internet Channels in real
reactions have included lapses of attention, sleeping time will not be possible during a Mars mission due
problems, emotional lability, psychosomatic symptoms, to the communication delays resulting from the great
irritability toward crewmates and/or mission control distances involved. Coping based on self—reliance and
staff, and a decline in Vigor and motivation [11]. Most autonomy will represent important psychological Chal—
of these reactions are not speciﬁc to spacefarers but lenges during such missions. There are stable cultural
also occur in other isolated and conﬁned environments and individual differences in how people habitually deal
[12—14]. During space missions, psychological difﬁcul— with stress. Such strategies may be more or less efﬁ—
ties not only affect individual crewmembers, but they Cient during long—duration isolation and conﬁnement.
may also affect the entire crew, with potentially disas— Although social support may act as a “buffer” against
trous effects on the mission (e.g., a Clinically depressed stress, there is anecdotal evidence that the conﬁnement
astronaut might be unable to perform required tasks in of a small group may lead to openness about a variety
an emergency situation). of personal matters, and that in some cases such self—
By deﬁnition, adaptation presumes an accommo— disclosure may produce discomfort and regret [14]. So—
dation over time. Observations during Russian long— Cial support factors operate differently in short—duration
duration space missions [15] and over—wintering in missions as compared with long—duration missions. In
Antarctic research stations [16,17] have suggested that the latter, the burden of support will have to shift away

"
"5","N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 659—677 663
from the “absent” network of family and friends to objectives, duration, and crew composition. In the
members of the present crew. This is an area that needs context of assigning crewmembers for multinational
further attention and research. space missions, communication and interpersonal

skills, interpersonal compatibility, and cross—Cultural
3.2. What is “the right stuﬂ” personality? competence must be regarded as mandatory. While
political and public relations issues will always be
Is it possible to predict from pre—mission assessments contributing factors in assignments for multinational
how an individual will adapt and perform during long— missions, this must not detract from the importance of
duration missions? A number of studies addressing psychologically—guided crew composition.
the “right stuff” for long—duration space missions have Assessment tools used for selection purposes usually
involved analyses of personality factors as possible pre— include performance tests, personality questionnaires,
dictors of adaptation and performance among person— analyses of biographical data, interviews, and behaV—
nel operating in space analog environments, including ioral observations. The combination of several tools is
Antarctic stations [22] and polar crossings [23]. Several likely to result in the most valid judgment. Particular
studies have linked superior performance to a personal— emphasis should be put on the development and vali—
ity proﬁle Characterized by a combination of high levels dation of behavioral testing tools (i.e., group exercises,
of instrumentality and expressiVity along with lower isolation Chamber tests) that are suitable to assess in—
levels of interpersonal aggressiveness [13,24,25]. Re— terpersonal skills and to predict individual reactions to
search in which personality traits have been validated stress, conﬁnement, and isolation. To date, the absence
against criteria of astronaut effectiveness during short— of formal and valid criteria for astronaut performance,
term space missions and training sessions have indi— coupled with limited research opportunities, have made
cated high “agreeableness” and low aggressiveness as it difﬁcult to evaluate the efﬁciency of crew selection
general Characteristics of high performers [26]. Yet, the strategies. Such evaluation also requires that select—in
“optimal” personality for short— and long—term missions criteria not be used in the initial selection process un—
may differ as a function of mission duration. Research til they have been found to reliably predict astronaut
conducted among over—winterers in Antarctic stations performance. One potential bias in validating selection
suggest that the ideal candidates for long—duration criteria on astronauts who have already gone through a
missions have low levels of neuroticism (emotional formal selection process is related to uniformity in the
lability), extraversion and conscientiousness, and show range of personality scores. In multinational pools of
a low desire for affection from others [20]. Although applicants, the possible impact of cultural differences
the implications of such Characteristics for coping and in scale usage and response styles also must be consid—
adaptation during long—term space missions have not ered when personality measures are used in selection.
yet been investigated, studies like these represent a ﬁrst Even though the different space agencies may agree on
step in providing empirical data for deﬁning the “right criteria, a common selection procedure may be difﬁcult
stuff” for such missions. There is also a need to deter— to achieve due to differences in preferred methodology.
mine how to translate behavioral data collected in other
isolated and conﬁned settings to the space program. 3.3.2. Training
Psychological training should be provided to both
3.3. Implications for mission operations space crewmembers and selected mission control per—
sonnel in order to prepare members of both groups
3.3.]. Selection for coping with psychological issues during long—term
At the individual level, the objectives of selection missions. General organizational research and studies
strategies are twofold: to eliminate unﬁt or potentially from aViation suggest that personality may determine
unﬁt applicants, and to select from otherwise qualiﬁed the effects of training programs [24]. The greatest
candidates those who will perform and cope optimally beneﬁt can be expected if selection is combined with
based on their basic aptitudes, personality Characteris— pre—mission training that focuses on further develop—
tics, attitudes, and prior experiences. A distinction is ment of the coping abilities of individual crewmembers
therefore drawn between “select—out” and “select—in” and crews. Training programs should be implemented
criteria. In contrast to select out, select—in criteria need by each space agency based on international agree—
to be developed in relation to speciﬁc aspects of the ments. These programs should include self—care and
mission, and the weighting of criteria needs to be based self—management, teamwork and group living, leader—
on systematic analyses of issues involving mission ship and followership, and cross—Cultural aspects in the

"
"6","664 N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 659—677
preparation for long—term missions. It will be essential leisure time activities that take into account Changing in—
for pre—ﬂight training to include a mission simulation terests and needs over the course of the mission [3,27].
that will allow for hands—on training, evaluation, and Other important support activities include private psy—
coaching of the crew under conditions of conﬁnement. Chological conferences, informal space—ground contact
An important consideration is that training needs to be and news from Earth (preferably in the crewmember’s
tailored to meet the needs of individual crewmembers native language and from homeland news sources), and
and speciﬁc crews based on differences in personality, opportunities to maintain Close contact with family and
cultures, and previous training backgrounds. friends on Earth on a regular basis.
An important issue that needs careful consideration

3.3.3. Monitoring and support concerns issues related to death, either of a fellow

Remote monitoring of crewmember behavior and per— crewmember 0r of a friend or family member on Earth.
formance represents an important basis for the early de— An 0n-b0ard death Will affect all Of the crewmembers
tection of impairments and for providing ground—based and may best be dealt with at the crew level, perhaps
counseling and advice to the crew. During the mission, with group counseling mediated by experts on Earth.
crewmembers may be reluctant to give information re— Bad news from home Will primarily affect a single
garding emotional stress and adaptation. Willingness to crewmember, and this should be dealt With individu—
discuss personal matters may be reﬂective of person— ally with support from fellow crewmembers. The news
ality differences as well as expectations of the privacy should probably be transmitted only after any near—
of information. Experience from multinational airlines term mission—critical Operation has been completed.
suggests that there are cultural differences in attitudes Providing support for families during the mission can
regarding discussion of personal problems and falli— contribute to maintaining the crewmembers’ concentra—
bility. These issues need to be addressed prior to the tion on the objectives of the mission by relieving them
mission. of considerations about possible problems at home and

For monitoring purposes, subjective reports used feelings of responsibility. In addition, families should be
in combination with more objective and non—invasiVe coached in interacting with their in—space family mem—
methods may be most useful. Such methods include ber and be prepared for possible psychological Changes
computerized performance tests, Video recordings of during the mission as a result of a psychological crisis.
crew meetings, and analyses of speech (including
yoice analysis). So far, such methods have been uti— 33.4. R e- a d apt ati on to E arth
lized mostly 1n.research, and more experience from Family support must not be limited to the in—ﬂight
operational ap p lications is needed. Approaches ShOUId phase. Evidence from various sources (e.g., submarines,
take into 21990111“ the operational constraints 9f the Antarctica) has indicated a persistent incidence of rein—
different m1ss10n scenarios. For examp 16’ monitoring tegration problems for family members absent for long
from the ground, and implementing interventions when periods of time [3]. Participation in long—term space
problems are detectecl, might be 1mp0ss1ble (luring fn— missions may have similar psychological effects on the
ture interplanetary m1ss10ns. During SUCh. m1ss10ns, 1t participant, which may make it difﬁcult to re—adjust t0
W11} be Cﬂtlcal that 9”“ are p r0V1ded WM} snfﬁment daily life on Earth and t0 reintegrate into “normal” fam—
training and tools With regards to self—monitoring and ily and work.
resolving their own problems.

During future long—duration on—orbit missions, pro—
Vision of in—ﬂight support to crewmembers is likely to 3.4. Recommendations
be an important countermeasure to stabilize emotional
state, ensure optimal well—being, and maintain a Close Based on the above, a number of recommendations
contact between space crew and ground. The meth— are suggested for space agencies to deal with issues
ods utilized for this purpose will rely on the availabil— related to personality, coping, and adaptation:
ity of effective space—ground communication systems
(audio—Video transmissions) and ofre—supply ﬂights that o More attention needs to be paid to human factors in
are used for sending support items to the crew. The lim— the planning of future long—duration space missions.
ited availability of on—site medical or counseling help 0 Psychological countermeasures must be implemented
emphasizes the necessity of accurate and easily avail— before, during, and after space missions that involve
able telemedicine/telepsychology consultation. Atten— crewmembers and their families, as well as relevant
tion should be given to enhancing individually tailored ground support personnel.

"
"7","N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 659—677 665
c To determine the generalization of reported experi— 4.]. Psychiatric issues in Space
mental ﬁndings for crews in space, the results from
analog studies must be compared with those from ac— Mental health problems affect both genders and oc—
tual space missions. cur across cultures (although the way they are mani—
o More empirical work is needed on deﬁning fested may vary from one culture to another). Some of
individual Characteristics (e.g., personality, attitude, these problems are more frequent than others during
motivation, skills, and coping strategies) and group space missions [3,32]. Most commonly reported are ad—
Characteristics that promote optimum coping and justment reactions, which are abnormal responses to in—
adaptation during different kinds of multinational temal or external stressors. For example, one astronaut
space missions, both short— and long—duration. beginning a long—duration space mission had symptoms
0 Amajor challenge in evaluating the efﬁciency of psy— of Clinical depression due to the isolation he felt on—
Chological countermeasures is the use of valid and orbit and his separation from his wife and family [3].
reliable performance criteria against which they can These symptoms resolved as he adjusted to his new en—
be tested. The 188 partners should identify and agree Vironment. Psychosomatic reactions also have been re—
on a set of common standards and procedures for the ported from space. For example, a cosmonaut wrote in
selection, training, support, and evaluation of multi— his diary that he experienced tooth pain following anX—
cultural crews working in missions involving the ISS, ious dreams he had of a tooth infection [30]. Problems
the Moon, or Mars and beyond. related to major psychotic disorders (e.g., bipolar or
maniC—depressive disorder and schizophrenia) have not
been reported during space missions, probably because
4. Behavioral health and psychiatry potential space travelers are well screened psychiatri—
cally for predispositions to these psychotic conditions
In the context of space travel, behavioral health is- based on genetic and family history background. How—
sues are normal psychological and interpersonal reac— ever, such severe psychiatric disorders have been re—
tions to the conditions of off—Earth environments. In ported in astronaut applicants, and they occur in up to
contrast, psychiatric issues are abnormal responses to 5% of people working in space analog environments,
these conditions. In a given person, genetic, constitu— such as submarines and the Antarctic [3,32].
tional, and developmental vulnerabilities may contribute Post—mission personality Changes and psychiatric
to the presence of psychiatric difﬁculties. However, op— problems also have affected returning space travel—
erational mission stressors (e.g., conﬁnement, danger, ers. These have ranged from positive changes, such
microgravity, and radiation) and psychosocial factors as new insights into the meaning of life and the unity
(e.g., crew tension, cohesion, leadership issues, cultural of mankind, to substance abuse, anXiety, and major
and language differences) also may play a role and need depression that have necessitated psychotherapy and
to be taken into account [3]. psychoactive medications [30]. Readjustment difﬁcul—
Before considering these psychiatric issues, it is im— ties also have been reported to affect the families of
portant to state that isolated and conﬁned environments people returning from long absences [33].
can also be growth enhancing and salutogenic [4,14,28].
For example, people in polar environments or space 4.2. Asthenia
may experience increased fortitude, perseverance, in—
dependence, self—reliance, ingenuity, comradeship, and According to Russian space psychologists and ﬂight
even decreased tension and depression. Some astro— surgeons, asthenia is anotherimportant psychiatric con—
nauts and cosmonauts in space have reported transcen— dition that may affect people in space. This syndrome
dental experiences, religious insights, or a better sense is deﬁned as a weakness of the nervous system that
of the unity of mankind as a result of Viewing the may result in fatigue, irritability and emotional lability,
Earth below and the cosmos beyond [29,30]. In his di— attention and concentration difﬁculties, restlessness,
ary, cosmonaut LebedeV [31] stated that his Earth pho— heightened perceptual sensitivities, palpitations and
tography experiences from the Salyut 7 space station blood pressure instability, physical weakness, and sleep
were restful and positive, and he hoped that they would and appetite problems [34,35]. In the Russian space
help him gain an advanced degree after he returned program, asthenia is Viewed as a problem that affects
from his 211—day mission. Thus, involvement in space most cosmonauts participating in long—duration space
missions and related environments can be positive for missions. Although “asthenization” is carefully moni—
some people. tored, and a number of countermeasures are employed

"
"8","666 N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 659—677
to prevent it from progressing, empirical evidence for rotation, a record could be kept of each individual’s
its eXistence as a discrete pathological entity has been score on interpersonally—oriented tests, and the total
equivocal [35]. In addition, although the full syndrome score for a prospective crew could be examined for com—
was ﬁrst described as “neurasthenia” in the late 1800s patibility before additional members are launched into
by the American George Beard, there is controversy space. Finally, it is essential that all of the crewmem—
as to its eXistence in the US, and it is not recognized bers are ﬂuent in the language that is considered to be
in the current American psychiatric diagnostic system. common for the mission.
However, neurasthenic spectrum disorders appear in
the international diagnostic system used in Europe, 4.3.2. Training
Russia, and China. Thus, if ﬂight surgeons only use Crewmembers and mission control personnel need
the US system, they may under—detect asthenic distress to be involved in pre—mission training, sometimes to—
in crewmembers, or label problems from a different gether, since these two groups are not only mutually de—
perspective than that used in other countries. Indeed, pendent in conducting the activities of the mission, but
there is some evidence that patterns of mood states they also may be involved in maladaptive communica—
are systematically different among astronauts versus tion patterns. Potential training topic areas for brieﬁngs
cosmonauts [5]. include: the effects of mission duration on crew tension
and cohesion, the relationship between crewmembers
4.3. Implications for mission operations and mission control personnel, the impact of cultural
differences on interpersonal interactions, and the appro—
4.3.]. Selection priate use of different leadership roles. Team building
In terms of selection, formal psychiatric examina— experiences in aircraft cockpit simulators using cockpit
tions, and psychological testing typically occur only at resource management (CRM) and line—oriented ﬂight
the time when candidates are screened in their appli— training (LOFT) have been useful in exposing inter—
cation to become astronauts [36]. The emphasis is on personal conﬂicts and performance problems in ﬂight
selecting—out people who have ahistory of mental prob— teams [37], and these kinds of activities need to be
lems, who have documented psychopathology, or who adapted for space missions and evaluated empirically
are likely to decompensate under the stressful condi— in the future. Crewmembers could be taught techniques
tions Characteristic of the space enVironment. However, such as relaxation training, meditation, biofeedback, or
for a specialized expedition—type mission (e.g., to Mars autogenic training to calm themselves and to lower anX—
or beyond), potential crewmembers may be under spe— ious arousal by controlling autonomic functions.
Cial scrutiny due to the long—duration of the mission
and to the unusual stressors to be expected. It is likely 4.3.3. Monitoring and support
that some sort of select—out procedure will be conducted 4. 3.3.1. In-flight monitoring. During future space mis—
speciﬂc to this mission. In addition, relevant select—in sions, the interactions of crewmembers in space need
procedures may need to be utilized that take into ac— to be monitored, and conﬂicts resulting from psy—
count not only personality traits but also interpersonal Chosocial issues need to be dealt with as they arise.
skills, with the aim of establishing a compatible, cohe— Russian space eXperts on the ground traditionally
sive group. have tracked crew—ground audio communications, ob—
Formal tests for interpersonal compatibility eXist and served Video behaVior, and held private conferences
have been used to enhance cohesion in space analog to assess crewmember well—being. Formal voice anal—
enVironments. Examples include the fundamental in— ysis of speech patterns and frequencies has not yet
terpersonal relations orientation—behaVior (FIRO—B) proven to be speciﬁc and sensitive enough to be prac—
test, sociometric questionnaires, and the personality tically useful [38], although recent ﬁndings in this area
Characteristics inventory (PCI) [3,24]. Careful attention have shown some promise [39]. It is important for
should be given to cultural differences and minority sta— crewmembers to monitor themselves, especially during
tus in crew composition so that an individual does not an expedition—type mission to Mars, where two—way
feel isolated on the basis of cultural background, gen— communications with Earth could be delayed by times
der, or work role. Potential crews should be observed of up to 45min. Although there likely will be behaV—
in simulation and other relevant group activities prior ioral and medical eXperts on—board who are trained to
to launch to test for compatibility and performance. For be sensitive to psychosocial issues, what happens if
missions conducted during programs where crewmem— these people become impaired or are part of the de—
bers in space are joined by others in a staggered Viant behavior? It is important for all crewmembers to

"
"9","N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 659—677 667
be aware of psychosocial issues and to be trained to the mission; (3) crisis intervention techniques and the
respond to them when they begin to impact negatively facilitation of group awareness, cohesion, and team—
on crew behaVior. Also, NASA doctors are evaluating building; and (4) the appropriate use of tranquilizers and
the use of computerized tests that may help crewmem— other psychoactive medications, including their useful—
bers assess their cognitive state and their ability to ness and side effects under conditions of microgravity
perform certain behaViors at various times during the [3,32].
mission.

. . . 4.3.3.4. Com uter—intemctive intervention r0 rams.
4.3.3.2. In-flzght support. In past space m1ss1ons, sup— . p . . . p g
. . . . . . . Computer—interactive intervention programs show
portive act1V1t1es have focused on prov1d1ng increased . . . .
. . . . promise for adaptation to long—duration space ﬂights.
novelty and stimulation for space crews during times . . .
. . . . A computerized format for presenting prevention and
of monotony or asthenia [3,34]. Such act1V1t1es have . . . .
. . . . . intervention information may be more comfortable
included delivering surprise presents and food Via re— . . .
. . . . . for some crewmembers than d1sclos1ng highly per—
supply vehicles, 1ncreas1ng on—board mus1c and light— . .
. . . . . sonal information to others. Outcome research suggests
ing, and prov1d1ng contact w1th people on Earth in . . .
. . . . . . that computer—based intervention programs applying
real time. For expedition—type m1ss1ons, the long dis— . . . . .
. . . cognitive—behaV1oral and self—help instruction may be
tances involved Wlll negate some of these supportive . . . . .
. . . . . as effective as face—to—face intervention for dealing w1th
act1V1t1es, and crews Wlll need to use on—board supplies . . .
. . . mild to moderate depress10n, anX1ety, and other types
and fac1lit1es for support. Crewmembers should have of s cho atholo [4043]
time set aside to discuss interpersonal differences (“bull p y p gy '
sessions”) and to debrief problems and other critical in—
cidents that have occurred. Attention should be given 4.3.3.5. Psychoactive medications. Medical kits are
to leisure time activities and work/rest schedules that available on—board during manned space missions that
take into account Changing interests and needs [27]. Fi— contain supplies to help the crewmembers cope with
nally, family members on Earth should be supported space motion sickness, illnesses, and injuries. Psy—
while their loved ones are on long—duration space mis— Choactive medications have been part of the formulary
sions, either Via formal discussions sponsored by the as well. For example, Space Shuttle ﬂights have in—
space agencies or Via informal groups led by trained eluded medications to counter anXiety, pain, insomnia,
counselors or the family members themselves. depression, psychosis, and space motion sickness [44].
Santy and her colleagues [45] have reported that 78%
4.3.3.3. Counseling. Crewmembers should be moni— of Space Shuttle crewmembers have taken medications
tored for symptoms and signs of developing psychiatric in space, primarily for space motion sickness (30%),
disturbances. In near—Earth orbital missions, counsel— headache (20%), insomnia (15%), and back pain (10%).
ing sessions or crisis intervention can occur between Newer psychoactive medications are being added, such
individuals in the crew and therapists on the ground as the so—called “atypical” antipsychotics (e.g., olan—
using private two—way audiovisual links. During deeper zapine and risperidone) and the selective serotonin
space missions (such as a trip to Mars), the distance reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressants. Prescribing
involved will result in communication delays. As a practices and usage rates may vary across cultures, and
consequence, supportive encounters will depend on the this issue needs to be studied further in order to better
skills of on—board culturally—sensitive crewmembers serve the needs of multicultural crews.
who are trained in counseling and the use of psychoac— Physiological Changes due to microgravity and other
tive medications. Facilities also need to be available effects of space may Change the pharmacokinetic Char—
on—board to seclude and restrain a potentially suicidal, acteristics of psychoactive medications, inﬂuencing
Violent, or impulsive crewmember. both their dosage and route of administration [46]. In
It is unlikely that a psychiatrist or Clinical psychol— microgravity, blood ﬂow increases in the upper part
ogist will be a member of the crew in early missions of the body and decreases in the lower part. Relative
involving a lunar base or a trip to Mars. However, it is disuse of muscle groups can cause atrophic Changes as
likely that a physician or some other medically trained well. As a result of these two effects, the blood avail—
person would be a crewmember. This individual should able and the amount of atrophy that has taken place
have a knowledge of: (1) individual psychopathology at a possible injection site will inﬂuence the bioavail—
and small group behaVior; (2) the individual and in— ability of medication from an intra—muscular injection.
terpersonal effects of stressors to be expected during For example, intra—muscular promethazine for motion

"
"10","668 N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 659—677
sickness usually is given in the arm rather than in the occur in space, especially during long—duration
hip in space, with good results [44]. missions away from the Earth’s immediate neigh—
Other physiological Changes also may affect medica— borhood, such as the Moon or Mars.
tion absorption and metabolism. The movement of oral o More psychosocial research should be conducted in
medications out of the stomach may be decreased by space, especially in the psychiatric area.
the weightlessness of the gastric contents in space, and 0 One area of research would be to help deﬁne as—
intestinal absorption rates may be reduced by blood and thenia as a discrete entity in space and determine
other ﬂuid shifts to other areas of the body. Fluid shifts if its occurrence is dependent upon one’s cultural
may also affect the bioavailability of medications sensi— background.
tive to the ﬁrst pass effect in the liver, where metabolism 0 Research needs to be done on the effectiveness of
occurs [46]. Finally, renal excretion rates also may be voice analysis and telemedicine to diagnose psychi—
inﬂuenced by microgravity. atriC conditions and to treat them through counseling
or computer—interactive programs.
434. Re-adaptation to Earth 0 Cultural factors related to psychotherapy (e.g., need
Readjustment to life on Earth after a mission needs to for COUHSCIOFP at1ent cultural match) Sho,”1d b? CX—
be addressed through debrieﬁngs at both the individual p lored, bOth through research and operational inter—
and the crew level. Some crewmembers may have had ventions. , ,
. . . 0 Further studies should be performed on the inﬂuence
unpleasant psychosoc1al experiences in space that need , , ,
to be debriefed. For example, a crewmember who was Of m1crograv1ty 0,11 the effects and s1de effects Of
scapegoated during a mission may have unresolved feel— p sychoactive medicationsa bOth .111 space (6%"" the
. . . . . ISS) and in micrograV1ty s1mulations on Earth, such
ings post—ﬂight that may affect future interactions w1th , ,
his or her former crewmates. Some returning space traV— as bed rest and water 1mmers1on.
elers have experienced psychological problems or per— . . .
sonality Changes as a result of being in space, in some 5' Cognition and complex performance Skllls
cases becoming more humanistic, religious, or spiritual , .
after observing the oneness of people on Earth or the The work Of astronauts in space usually incluoes
inﬁnity of the Cosmos [30]. Other returning in diVi du— a variety of tasks,.like operating complex technical
als may have difﬁculty dealing with the resulting fame systems. (6%"" docklng or undocking a spacecraft and
and glory of their mission, especially during a ﬁrst—of— controlling robot arms), conducting scientiﬁc experi—
its—kind mission such as a trip to Mars. Family reentry ments, 9r,1?erf0rmlng spec1ﬁc tasks during extravehic—
also may be difﬁcult. For example, studies have shown ular aet1V1t1es. Such tasks place (lemands on. different
that many wives of male submariners learned to adjust cognitive and p sychomotor ﬁlncuons and Skﬂls' AS a
to the absence of their sailor husband when he was on consequence, maintaining a hlgh level Of p erformance
sea patrol. However, over half experienced depression efﬁciency in astronauts duriITg, their stay in space repre—
or marital strife after he returned and tried to reinsert sents an important.pre—cond1tion Of success and safety
himself back into the family dynamics, which led to the Of long—duration m1ss1ons.
expression: “submariners’ wives syndrome” [33]. Thus, . . . .
support activities continue into the post—mission period 5'1' Orzgms ofperformance dzsturbances m space
and need to take into account not only crewmembers . . .
and mission control personnel but also family members The lack Of the usual grayitationaliorce in Space
and loved ones who may have their own adjustment has been.shown to affect differentbrain mechanisms.
issues. One particularly important effect is the disruption of
congruence between vestibular signals and other (e.g.,
Visual and tactile) receptors, as well as between the
4.4. Recommendations vestibular otolith and semicircular receptors caused by
the altered signals from the gravity—sensitive otoliths.
Based on the above, a number of recommendations Another direct effect of microgravity is related to me—
are suggested for space agencies to deal with issues Chanical and proprioceptive Changes during the exe—
related to behaVioral health and psychiatry: cution of movements, leading to a disruption of the
usual relationships among efferent and afferent signals
0 More attention should be paid to identifying and that has been referred to as a state of “sensorimotor
treating possible psychiatric problems that could discordance” [47]. Both of these effects can be expected

"
"11","N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 659—677 669
to require complex adaptive processes (e.g., a re— 5.3. Maintenance of cognitive and psychomotor
weighting of afferent information) and to thus affect performance in Space
the efﬁciency of cognitive and perceptual—rnotor skills
that have been established on the ground. Empirical studies addressing the possible effects of

In addition to these speciﬁc effects of microgravity, spaceﬂight—related stressors on human cognitive and
the working and living conditions of space can induce psychomotor performance have focused primarily on
stress states in astronauts that in turn can lead to degra— elementary cognitive and psychomotor tasks. Most of
dations of cognitive and psychomotor performance. them have been conducted during short—term (< 30
Examples of such stress states include decreased alert— days) spaceﬂights [52]. In spite of the comparatively
ness and fatigue, high workload, and emotional stress small number of studies using different methodological
due to interpersonal tension or the long—term effects of approaches, they have revealed a fairly consistent pat—
conﬁnement and isolation. Performance impairments tern of effects. Whereas performance in elementary cog—
in these states may result from a shift in the pattern of nitive tasks such as memory—search, logical reasoning,
physiological activation (arousal) into a region that is or mental arithmetic seem to remain largely unimpaired
non—optimal for efﬁcient performance, or from a com— in space, signiﬁcant disturbances have been found in
pensatory performance adjustment aimed at actively perceptual—motor and attentional tasks [53]. The origin
coping with stress and high workload by applying less of these effects (i.e., whether they reﬂect effects of mi—
effortful performance strategies [48]. crograVity on the central nervous system or unspeciﬁc

stress effects) has remained unclear. Whereas impair—
ments of perceptual—rnotor performance during an early
5.2. Eﬂects 0f microgravity on cognitive and phase of the mission most likely are related to direct ef—
psychomotor functions fects of microgravity on the sensorimotor system, most
of the other effects seem to be related to non—speciﬁc

The impact of microgravity on cognitive and pSy— stress effects arising from physiological changes, inad—
Chomotor functions has been primarily addressed in equate work—rest schedules, or sleep disturbances dur—
experiments focusing on the effects of microgravity— ing adaptation to microgravity and the extreme living
induced Changes in the vestibular and sensorimotor COIlditiOIlS in the space habitat.
system. The main effect of Changes in the vestibular Considering the impact of long—duration missions on
system involves a sensory conﬂict that seems to be the perceptual, cognitive, and psychomotor performance,
basic mechanism underlying Visual illusions of self and little systematic knowledge is available. A compre—
surround motions that are induced by head movement hensive performance monitoring study was conducted
disturbances of spatial orientation and space motion during a long—term mission involving one Russian cos—
sickness [49]. Although information from the vestibular monaut during a 438—day stay on—board Mir [53]. The
system and other graviceptors seems to affect different results Of this study suggest a remarkable resiliency of
parts of the Visual cortex, higher processes of Visual elementary cognitive and perceptual—motor functions
perception and cognition have been found to remain to the impact of spaceﬂight—related stressors, even
more or less unimpaired in space, or at least do not during an extraordinary long mission. Impairments of
eXhibit overt performance decrements [50]. performance, alertness, and subjective well—being were

The effects of microgravity on the sensorimotor sys— found only during the ﬁrst two weeks in space and
tem involve mechanical and proprioceptive Changes, back on Earth after the mission (i.e., during critical
as well as a reduced efﬁciency of central motor pro— phases of adaptation to Changed gravitational forces,
grams which have been established under 1g condi— Which also were associated with comparatively high
tions. Performance impairments resulting from these workload). After successful adaptation to the space en—
Changes include a loss of precision of voluntary move— Vironment, subjective mood and performance functions
ments, or a sloWing of movement times and changed returned to pre—launch baseline levels and remained
kinematics during execution of these movements, as stable throughout the remaining 400+ days in space.
compared to lg conditions [51]. Since adaptation
to most of the microgravity—induced Changes in the 5.4. Maintenance of complex cognitive and
sensorimotor system can be achieved very rapidly perceptual-motor Skills
in space, the emergence of these performance decre—
ments can be expected to be limited to an early ﬂight Nevertheless, maintenance of operational efﬁciency
phase [5 2]. and complex skills may become a serious problem, since

"
"12","670 N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 659—677
decrements in operational task performance have been 5.6. Implications for mission operations
observed during Russian isolation studies and space
missions. For example, Salnitski et al. [54] investigated 5.6.]. Selection
the level of performance of cosmonauts in a simulated Current practices of psychological selection of astro—
manual docking maneuver during their stay in space. nauts already ensure that only individuals are accepted
They found a considerable loss of skill after a period of as astronaut candidates who show comparatively high
three months in space, which was mainly attributed to levels of cognitive capabilities. Given the fact that at—
a lack of on—orbit refreshment training under Changed tentional and psychomotor skills in particular appear to
gravity conditions. Other degradations of operational be prone to performance degradations in space, these
performance in cosmonauts (i.e., errors made by crew kinds of capabilities should be given special weight in
members in conducting mission tasks) have been re— future selection activities.
lated to non—speciﬁc stress effects arising from distur—
bances of the usual sleep—wake cycle, high workload, 5.6.2. Training
or psychosomatic discomfort [55]. But systematic re— During pre—ﬂight training, astronauts should be
search addressing acquisition and retention of complex briefed about likely performance decrements in space.
cognitive and perceptual—motor skills during space mis— In particular, astronauts need to be made aware of the
sions is lacking. Apart from a few early studies of oper— possibility of impaired psychomotor performance dur—
ational efﬁciency during Skylab and the Russian studies ing their adaptation to the space enVironment (e.g., the
mentioned above, research efforts have been limited to precision and speed of their arm and hand movements
just a few studies that were performed during ground— may be impaired). These effects also must be taken into
based simulations of spaceﬂight [56]. The results of account in the planning and scheduling of motor—tasks
these studies did not provide any consistent pattern of during the mission, such as the setting up of experimen—
effects, and most of them suffered from methodological tal hardware. In addition, astronauts should be briefed
constraints, such as persistent learning effects through— on the importance of sleep and adherence to work—rest
out the experiment. Other areas of possible concern, like schedules in order to protect themselves against any
the effects of the space enVironment on higher—order resultant performance decrements. Rotational training
cognitive processes relevant for space operations (e.g., on the ground may also help astronauts learn to adjust
decision making), have not been studied to date. to spatial disorientation in space.
5.5. Performance and culture 5. 6.3. Monitoring and support
It has been shown that performance impairments

The aforementioned research suggests that the might be expected during adaptation to the space en—
speciﬁcs of the space enVironment and the different Vironment and during speciﬁc stress states induced
stressors astronauts are exposed to can cause detri— by sleep problems, high workload, and/or emotional
mental effects on basic cognitive, attentional, and burden. In order to detect such adverse effects and
psychomotor processes. Much less is known about if to provide appropriate support and countermeasures
and how these effects are moderated by culture. Con— (e.g., re—scheduling of mission tasks and accommoda—
cerning the effects of microgravity on performance, it tion of work—rest schedules), tools are needed which
does not seem likely that these effects are different for can discern subtle performance decrements before
members of different cultures. However, performance they escalate. One approach is to monitor the cogni—
may depend on the cultural background of astronauts in tive and psychomotor capabilities of astronauts during
other ways. One example regards the effect of lack of their stay in space by repeatedly assessing their per—
privacy and crowding in a conﬁned enVironment, like formance in speciﬁc screening tests, and to compare
a space habitat. Whether lack of privacy is perceived the results with a self—referenced baseline established
as a stressor, and thus entails detrimental effects on during pre—ﬂight training. One example of such a tool
mood and performance, largely depends on the cultural that is currently being used on the 188 is the Win—
background of individuals [57]. Similar effects may be Scat (Windows—Spaceﬂight Cognitive Assessment Tool
assumed for other psychosocial stressors as well, like [58]). The current focus on cognitive probing tasks
monotony and boredom, time pressure, or workload. In should be expanded by including tasks that measure
addition, culture might be a factor inﬂuencing higher— attention and psychomotor functions that have been
order cognitive processes, like decision—making or the found to be particularly sensitive to microgravity and
use of schemes in information processing. stress—related effects during space missions.

"
"13","N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 659—677 671
With respect to in—ﬂight support and maintenance basic cognitive performance tasks. Examples of is—
of performance functions, the currently available re— sues which have not been studied systematically,
sults point to the importance of sleep and appropriate but which are of concern for long—duration space
work—rest schedules as a signiﬁcant pre—condition for ﬂight, include the impact of the space environment
performance efﬁciency. In addition, in—ﬂight training of on higher—order cognitive processes like decision—
critical perceptual—motor tasks will become more and making, the impact of culture on performance, and
more important if mission lengths increase. The impor— the impact of transient exposure to artiﬁcial gravity
tance of these factors has been emphasized by the in— on mental functions, which will be important if arti—
Vestigations of a severe accident that occurred on the ﬁcial gravity is considered as a countermeasure for
former Mir station when one of the modules was hit future interplanetary space missions [60].
and damaged during the manual re—docking of a sup—
ply spacecraft. Among the factors that were identiﬁed 6- Interpersonal and organizational issues
as contributing to this accident were issues of maintain— . . .
ing the operator’s docking skills throughout the stay in . The ways in Wthh crewmembers. interact and func—
space and decrements in his performance due to fatigue. tion as a group can affect productwity and the accom—
plishment of mission goals. In order to optimize these
5.6.4. R e- a d a pt at i 0 n to E a rth interactions, it is important to understand several issues
B as e d on the currently availabl e database, no p erma— that may interfere w1th crew cohes1on. These include:
nent problems are expected with respect to basic cogni— (1) crew tens1on resulting from environmental stress and
tive processes and performance during re—adaptation to factors related.to crew heterogeneity; (2) time—related
Earth. The only exception relates to psychomotor skills drops .1n.cohes1on, espec1ally (luring the secondhalf Of
that might be impaired for a limited period of time due the m1ss1on; (3) p ooi leaclership Skﬂls (6%"" failure to
to re— a daptati on to Earth’s gravity. support the crew during times of low morale); and (4)
stress due to cultural and language differences [3].
57. Recommendations In addition, during long—duration space missions
there is evidence that time may inﬂuence the impact of
Based on the above, a number of recommendations these psychosocial issues. There have been reports that
are suggested for space agencies to deal with issues crewmembers in space or if? space 311.3102; environments
related to cognition and compleX performance skills: may experience p sychological and interpersonal (hm—
culties after the halfway p01nt of a m1ss1on [3,21,61].
o The range of cognitive performance assessment According to, this View, a SCITSC Of relief that half. Of
techniques employed in space research has been the m1ss1on is over is outweighed by the .realization
restricted. To obtain a full description and moni— that another half is yet to come. Another time model
toring of the nature of cognitive and psychomotor incorporates. Rohrer s.three seqnential .phases, WhICh
deﬁcits encountered in microgravity, an integrated include: (1)1n1t1alanX1ety, (2) m1d—m1ss1ondepress1on,
test battery should be developed and applied which and (3) terminal euphoria [16i62]' Other time models
not only assesses the behavioral aspects of infor— have emphas1zed decrements 11,1 p articular quarters Of
mation processing but also includes subjective and the m1ss1on, espec1ally. the thud quarter [21’61’63l
psychophysiological measures [59]. However, others have failed. to ﬁnd such time effects in
o The relative inﬂuence of microgravity stress versus space and space analog enVironments [18’64’65l ,
the stress resulting from working in isolated and con— The above issues can result in p sychological and in—
ﬁned conditions on basic cognitive and psychomotor terp ersonal p roblems If they are not understood and ad—
functions, as well as compleX skills, remains unclear. dressed: These inclu.de: (1) decreasecl “,6“, morale and
More research is necessary to resolve the comparative compatibility, (2) w1thclrawal or territorial behaV1or as
inﬂuence of microgravity and work—related stress. crewmembers ceaseto interact w1th“each.oth,er, (3) the
o The effects of radiation on cognitive (and psycholog— scapegoating Of an 1nd1V1dual as a solution to group
ical) functioning in space have not been adequately conﬂict, and (4) the formation Of subgronps that com—
determined, and further research is necessary to eval— p ete Wlth each other and destroy crew unity.
uate these effects during longer—duration missions be— 6. I. A li en ati 0n
yond the Earth’s immediate environment.
0 Current research in space and space analog enVi— Group tension can lead to feelings of alienation
ronments has only addressed a narrow range of and personal isolation. Although mission goals may

"
"14","672 N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 659—677
be achieved, tension could still be stressful for the one example on the Mir space station where Visiting
crewmembers, inﬂuencing their mood, sleep quality, crewmembers came for a short period of two weeks,
and general satisfaction with spaceﬂight conditions. their working capacity was low due to adaptation to mi—
Post—ﬂight debrieﬁngs have revealed differences in crograVity. However, playing the “hospitable host”, the
values among crewmembers arising from their differ— primary crewmembers had to postpone the completion
ences in professional culture, age or nationality. This of their own tasks to help the newcomers, which sub—
corresponds to ﬁndings from studies of small isolated stantially delayed the execution of their ﬂight program.
groups, where it was shown that in the process of co— The “host—guest” situation has been a source of psychic
hesive group formation, crewmembers began to regard tension and decreased effectiveness of interaction on—
each other as very “similar” or “Close”, sharing common orbit, and not necessarily only in cases where foreign
values and belief [66—68]. On the contrary, crewmem— astronauts participated [18,82,83].
bers who did not perceive themselves as Close and did Another aspect of the problem could be discussed
not make attempts to understand and share common from the point of View of Altman’s ecological approach
group values ran the risk of becoming the “stranger” or [84—86]. A cohesive crew, already adapted to life on
the “alien” in the group [69—73]. a space station, could regard the Visiting crew’s ap—
The “stranger’s” incapability or lack of motivation pearance as a psychological invasion. In the course of
to transform his or her own system of values and atti— space station habitation, the cosmonaut or astronaut
tudes can be rationalized in two ways: others might be forms his or her private psychological space, which
regarded as (1) conforming insincerely or (2) search— feels psychologically comfortable. The arrival of a Vis—
ing for and exaggerating objective factors (which iting crew, however, redistributes the station’s territory.
might actually inﬂuence understanding). Among these Even the presence of a newcomer in one’s “area” might
factors, astronauts and cosmonauts who participated be regarded as an encroachment and cause a certain
in MirﬂVASA studies mentioned language barriers, discomfort.
Cultural differences, gender differences, professional
variation, and differences in perspective [74,75]. Inter— 6,3, Minority status and organizational culture
estingly, in several isolation studies [68,76], the eXis—
tence of an individual seen as the “alien”, either inside Cultural differences were examined during two large
or outside (e.g., mission control) of the group, could international studies that were funded by NASA that
be a uniting factor that supported group cohesiveness. involved missions to the Mir space station and to the
This is consistent with the sociological literature [77]. International Space Station [3,18,64,82,83]. The Mir
Cultural, religious, professional and other differences study sample consisted of ﬁve American astronauts,
have played the role of triggers and formed a rationale eight Russian cosmonauts, and 42 American and 16
for tension appearing in space crews. These have, how— Russian mission control personnel. The 188 study sam—
ever, been overcome during the course of international ple consisted of eight American astronauts, nine Rus—
space missions [75,78—81]. It could be that the key sian cosmonauts, and 108 American and 20 Russian
factor that supports successful adaptation of the group mission control personnel. The ﬁndings suggested that
is the individual’s capability to share the general val— compared with the Americans, the Russians experienced
ues and aims of the group and to establish empathetic more direction, support, and self—discovery during the
relations with partners. In studies simulating the inﬂu- Mir missions; more tension/anXiety during the ISS mis—
ence of space ﬂight, crewmembers more favorably per- sions; and less pressure on the job in both studies. These
ceived those they referred to as “supportive”, “loving”, ﬁndings may have reﬂected cultural and attitudinal dif—
“warm”, “socially competent”, and who had an orienta— ferences between these two groups of people. But there
tion toward empathetic interrelations and the social side also were differences in the mission proﬁles that might
of life [68—70]. have inﬂuenced these results.
For example, in the Mir program the missions took
6.2. The “host—guest” problem place in a Russian space station, were largely Russian—
operated using the Russian language, and always had
Problems involving “guest” cosmonauts have been a Russian commander. The American astronaut was a1—
observed during Russian on—orbit space missions, when ways in the minority in the three—person crew and had
a Visiting crew joins the more permanent crew, whose less of an operational relevance. Thus, it is understand—
members have already adapted to space ﬂight conditions able that American participants would have felt less
and are executing their complicated ﬂight program. In comfortable and supported that the Russian participants.

"
"15","N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 659—677 673
In contrast, the 188 program had more variable crew source of mutual tension and misunderstanding. The
compositions, with both sides having Clearer work roles crew becomes more critical in their discussions of oper—
but with a decidedly American style of operations. This ations with mission control, frequently pointing out the
might have created tension or anXiety on the part of the discrepancies in their positions [61,68,73,76,79,9l,92].
Russian crew and ground participants, possibly from The most Vivid examples of autonomization of the crew
perceived differences in organizational culture between in space are the famous Skylab strike and the discrep—
the two space agencies. For example, it has been sug— ancy in opinions between mission control and one of
gested that compared with American organizational the Mir crews concerning the need for an EVA to repair
practices, the Russian space program typically utilizes some solar batteries.
fewer written procedures and relies more on expert Another phenomenon of group behaVior in space
opinion to deal with problems that arise [87—89]. Thus, crews that is Closely connected to autonomization is
it is possible that the Russian participants in the ISS displacement. This occurs when crewmembers in space
study may have been reacting to what they perceived experience high levels of anXiety, negative emotions,
as a less comfortable work environment in terms of and interpersonal conﬂict that cannot be resolved di—
familiar organizational practices. rectly. These unpleasant affects may be transferred
In terms of work pressure being higher in US subjects externally to people in mission control, resulting in
during the Mir program, working on a foreign space a belief that they are unempathic and non—supportive
station (Mir) or mission control center (Russian mis— [3,18,31,62,64]. Evidence for the occurrence of dis—
sion control) with relatively unclear goals might have placement has been found during both Shuttle/Mir [64]
created more job pressure for the Americans, who were and 188 missions [93]. Some space psychologists re—
also less experienced in conducting long—duration space gard this phenomenon as a coping strategy, allowing
missions. In the 188 program, being primarily respon— people in an isolated group to avoid open conﬂict by
sible for the complex operations involved with the con— draining out negative emotions, thus not perturbing
struction of a new space station would be expected to their psychological and interpersonal Climate. Whereas
impact more on the workload of US participants. this strategy might be effective in the short run, in
the long run it encourages negative feelings to fester
6.4. Psychological Closing, autonomization, and and build, resulting in blocked emotions, territorial
displacement behaVior, and poor cohesion.
Psychological closing in space is a phenomenon man— 6.5. C rew autonomy
ifested by decreased communication intensity as well as
increased ﬁltration and limitation of the scope and con— The relationship between crewmembers and people
tent of crew communication. It has been observed that in mission control also relates to crew autonomy. In
people in space tend to hide medical and psychologi— future space missions involving a lunar base or an eX—
Cal problems that occur in ﬂight from mission control. pedition to Mars, crewmembers will have to function
They also have demonstrated preferences in contacts more autonomously than before due to the long dis—
with mission control personnel, openly rejecting con— tances involved and the types of activities required in
tacts with some people and giving preferences to others setting up camp and exploring an alien surface [3]. In
[90,91]. This phenomenon is attributed to the combined all likelihood, crews will need to plan most of their
inﬂuence of the “forced” Character of communication day—to—day activities without mission control input, and
sessions (e.g., limited time and Choice of people to talk should a problem occur they would have to deal with
with), sensory deprivation and monotony in space, and it themselves. This planning extends to leaving time to
the intention of space crews to maintain their socially sleep, eat and exercise, since nutritional and physio—
desirable image as heroes. logical factors are important in maintaining crewmem—
Autonomization in space is expressed by crew ego— ber health and well—being [94], and they should not be
centrism and an attempt to deal with an out—group (i.e., compromised during the course of a busy work day.
mission control). This kind of development in isolated In addition, crewmembers will have to trust their on—
and conﬁned individuals is a natural and even neces— board resources for monitoring life support and provid—
sary stage of the formation of a cohesive group. Un— ing them with the information they will need to carry
fortunately, the manifestation of this process sometimes out their mission, so the human—machine interface will
results in mission control personnel being perceived become even more important. It is time to start think—
as opponents, not partners, and it sometimes is the ing about the issue of increased crew autonomy and the

"
"16","674 N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 659—677
role of mission control during such non—orbital actiVi— positive attitudes towards their teammates and reunit—
ties beyond the Earth’s immediate environment. ing crewmembers with their families. The role of space
psychologists is to facilitate this process.
6.6. Implications for mission operations
6. 6. 1. Selection 6.7. Recommendations
From the p 001 .Of highly .motivated p ersons Wlth Based on the above, a number of recommendations
well—developed coping strategies in the astronaut corps, d f r s ace a encies to deal with issues
psychologically compatible personalities are selected are suggeste O p g . . . _
, related to interpersonal and organizational issues.
for a particular crew. It would be useful to have an
internationally—approved test battery available that pre— . To encourage crew cohesion during future manned
dicted not only the interpersonal compatibility of the space missions crewmembers should undergo
crewmembers but also their ability to perform in a . ltrainin to e ther in a varie t of extreme con—
group. One such measure being used for crew selection zurvwa g g . . . y . .
in Star City in Russia is the Homeostat [68—70,95]. itions, SUCh as mountain Climbing,.polar w1nter1ng—
over, desert expeditions, parachute Jumping, etc.
6.6.2. Tm in in g o It is important that future space ﬂight erewmernbers
People working in space missions need to recognize train together during pre—launch operational training.
and deal with psychosocial problems before they dete— we believe .that the longer they train together, the
riorate crew performance and behaVior. Training coun— smoother W111 be the“. future interactions.
termeasures could include formal lectures and brieﬁngs ' Some pre—‘launch training ShOUId mVOlVC people
that address important psychological and interpersonal from m1ss1on. control .111 order to enhance. CREW—
issues in space, accompanied by training in conﬂict ground cohes1on and improve the communication
resolution, cultural sensitivity, and team building [3]. between crewrhembers and p eop 16 on the ground.
B ecaus e the crew—ground relationship is important, es— 0 Group sens1t1V1ty training for astronauts and cosmo—
pecially during on—orbit missions, it would be useful to nauts COUld r educe the 111119636 Of p er sonal, GURU? al,
include members from both groups during some of the national,‘ and other p eeuliarities Of behaV1or during
training sessions. the m1ss1on. This training needs to be executed by
experienced social and behaVioral eXperts who can
5.5. 3. Monitorin g and support supply astronauts and cosmonauts with complete and
Internationally approved procedures for the in—ﬂight precise information about their individual and group
monitoring of crewmember interactions and group per— behaviors.
formance should be created, especially for on—orbit 0 Communication and conﬂict resolution training al—
missions. Recent experiences in Russia suggest that the r eady used in modern industry (e.g., airline CRM and
monitoring of crew communication sessions by mission LOFT programs) could be tailored for use among
control, including voice frequency analysis, content space crews, With special attention paid to cultural
analysis Of speech, and face expression dynamics, gives differences. This includes the need to study the lan—
Valuable information about the psychosocial status of guage 0f one’s foreign crewmates, With special focus
the crew. However, such intense monitoring will be on words and terms describing everyday life related
less productive during non—orbital missions, such as a to leisure time and social activities.
lunar base or an expedition to Mars, due to the long 0 The opinion of crewmembers should be solicited
distances involved and the need for crews to be more before and during space missions regarding 0P""
autonomous in carrying out their missions. In addition, erational issues such as access to logistics, fair
the long distances will delay audio or Video trans— workload distribution, and leisure time, so that po—
mission times, thus hampering traditional supportive tential sources 0f quarrels can be identiﬁed and
strategies that have depended on real—time crew—ground offset. Crewmembers should have many lines 0f
communication, and the possibility of sending emer— communication, both among themselves and With
gency supplies or evacuating a sick crewmember will people on Earth.
be low. 0 Methods used in the social and behaVioral sciences
should be applied in the monitoring of intra— and
6.6.4. Re-adaptation to Earth inter—group relations, with the goal of providing a
After space missions, both crewmembers and mis— continual supply of objective data about the psy—
sion control personnel follow a strategy of keeping Chosocial Climate of crewmembers in space.

"
"17","N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 659—677 675

o Crewmembers working on the lunar surface 01‘ [14] P. Suedfeld, Invulnerability, coping, salutogenesis, integration:

participating in an expedition to Mars will be more four. Phases of Spéce Psychology, AViatiOH, Space and
autonomous and less dependent on mission control Enmonmegtal Medlcme 76 (2905) 1361—1366 _
d. t. d tth b d. [15] V1. Myasnlkov, LS. Zamaletdlnov, Psychologlcal states and
lrec 1011 2.111 sup p 01‘ an crewmem ers engege m group interactions of crew members in ﬂight (reprint), Human
an on—orb1t mlss10n. Research needs to done 1nV01V— Performance in Extreme Environments 3 (1998) 44—56.
ing the effects of increased crew autonomy during [16] J . Rohrer, Interpersonal relationships in isolated small groups,
space missions. in: B. Flaherty (Ed.), Psychological Aspects of Manned
Spaceﬂight, Columbia University Press, New York, 1961.
[17] J. Stuster, J. Bachelard, P. Suedfeld, The relative importance of
Acknowledgment behavioral issues during long—duration ICE missions, Aviation,
Space and Environmental Medicine 71 (Suppl. 9) (2000)
This manuscript is a shortened version of a study A17‘A25-

d b h I - 1 A d [18] NA. Kanas, V.P. Salnitskiy, J.B. Ritsher, V.I. Gushin,
group report sponsore y t e nternatlona ca emy D.S. Weiss SA. Saylor O.P. Kozerenko C.R. Marmar Human
Of ASH 6naut1CS. The complete suldy gr 011p report W111 interactions in space: 188 versus Shuttle/Mir, Acta Astronautica
be pubhshed by the DLR. 59 (2006) 413—419.

[19] J.—A. Wood, SJ. Hysong, DJ. Lugg, D.L. Harm, Is it really
References so bad? A comparison of positive and negative experiences in
Antarctic Winter stations, Environment and Behavior 32 (2000)

. . . . 84—110.

1R.Nth,H tfl—dt : , ,

[ ] or. uman. requiremen S or ong ura 10n 1n1ss10ns [20] L. Pahnkas, E.MKE Gunderson, AW. Holland, Predlctors
Antarctlc and Arctlc statlons, planetary surface operatlons, and f b h , d f , t , t . th
space transportation vehicles, Revista Portuguesa de Medicina :ntafcteilzloszZe 1; Zzggifcgggra: reIZSiaetilgnronSI?) :ICIGS' ancel
M'l't 40 1991 . ’ ’

1 1 at ( ) . Environmental Medicine 71 (2000) 619—625.

[2] JR. Ball, Safe Passage: Astronaut Care for Exploratlon . .

. . . . . . . [21] GM. Sandal, R. Veernes, H. Ursm, Interpersonal relatlons
MISSIOHS, Inst1tute 0f Medlclne, Natlonal Academy of Selences, . . . . . .

Washin ton DC 2001 durlng Slmulated space nnss10ns, AV1at10n, Space and
g ’ ’ ' . Environmental Medicine 66 (1995) 617—624.

[3] N. Kanas, D. Manzey, Space Psychology and Psychlatry, [22] G M Sandal C0 . . A . . . . . .

. . . . , plng 1n ntarctlca. 1S 1t pOSSIble t0 generahze
second ed., Mlcrocosm Press, El Segundo, CA, and Spr1nger, . . . .
results across sett1ngs?, AV1at10n, Space and EnV1ronmental
Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2008. Medicine 71 (2000) A37— A 43

[4] EC' Ihle’ J'B' RitSher’ N' Kanas’ POSMVG pSyChOIOgical [23] M.M. Atlis G.R. Leon G.M.. Sandal G. Michelle Decision
outcomes Of spaceﬂlght: an empmcal study, AV1at10n, Space processes and interactions during a two—woman traverse 0f

5 $111: Eglrgnmeﬁal £16m“: 177 ((320318) 935—1051. 1 C 1 1 Antarctica, Environment and Behavior 36 (2004) 402—423.

[ ] ', ' 1ts CF ' anas, ' ' us 1n, ' ay Of’ utura [24] TR. Chidester, R.L. Helmreich, E. Gregorich, C.E. Geis,Pi10t
dlfferences 1n patterns of mood states on board the Internatlonal personality and crew coordination implications for training
Space Statlon, Acta Astronautica 61 (2007) 668—671' and selection, International Journal of Aviation Psychology 1

[6] OP. Kozerenko, V.I. Gushln, AD. Sled, VA. EﬁmOV, (1991) 25_44
J'M' Pystinnikova, Some p roblems Of group interaction in [25] GM. Sandal, I.M. Endresen, R. Veernes, H. Ursin, Personality
prolenged space ﬂ1ghts, Human Performance In Extreme and coping strategies during submarine missions, Military
EnV1ronments 4 (1999) 123—127. Psychology 11 (1999) 381—404.

[7] N. Inoue, I. Matsuzaki, H. Ohshima, Group interactions [26] RM Rose LF Fogg RL Helmreich TJ McFadden
1n SFINCSS__99:_ lessons for ImPTOYmg behaV1oral. snpport Psychological predictors of astronaut effectiveness, Aviation,
programs, AV1at10n, Space and EnV1ronmental Medlclne 75 S p a c e and E mi 1 0 n m e nt 211 M e di ci n e 65 (1994) 910_925.
(2004) C28_C35' _ _ _ [27] AD. Kelly, N. Kanas, Leisure time activities in space: a survey

[8] GM. Sandal, Culture and ten810n durlng an Internatlonal Space of astronauts and cosmonauts, Acta Astronautica 32 (1994)
Station simulation: results from SFINCSS’99, Aviation, Space 451_457
and EnV1ronmental Med101ne75 (2004) C44_C51‘ _ _ [28] P. Suedfeld, T. Weiszbeck, The impact of outer space on inner

[9] NO. Kraft, T.J. Lyons, H. B1nder, Intercultural crew lssues 1n space, Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine 75 (Suppl.
long—duration spaceﬂight, Aviation, Space and Environmental 7) (2004) C6—C9.

Medicine 74 (2903) 575—578' . . . [29] M.M. Connors, AA. Harrison, ER. Akins, Living Aloft: Human
[10] DA. Shayler, Dlsasters and Acadents 1n Manned Spaceﬂlght, Requirements for Extended Spaceﬂight, N AS A SP—483, N AS A,
Springer/Praxis, Chichester, UK, 2000. Washington, DC, 1985.
[11] P' Suedfeld, Canadian space psychology: the future may be [30] N. Kanas, Psychological, psychiatric, and interpersonal aspects
almost here, Canad1an Psychology 44 (2) (2003) 85—92' of long—duration space missions, Journal of Spacecraft and
[12] J. RiVOlier, R. Goldsmith, DJ. Lugg, A.J.W. Taylor, Man in Rockets (AIAA) 27 (1990) 457—463.
Antarctica. The Scientiﬁc Work of the International Biomedical [31] V. LebedeV, Diary Of a Cosmonaut: 211 Days in Space,
Expedition to the Antarctica, Taylor & Francis, London, 1988- Phytoresource Research Information Service, College Station,
[13] GM. Sandal, T. Bergan, M. Warnche, R. Veernes, H. Ursin, TX, 1988.
Psychological reactions during P012” expeditions and isolation [32] N. Kanas, Psychiatric issues affecting long—duration space
in hyperbaric chambers, Aviation, Space and Env1ronmental missions, Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine 69
Medicine 67 (1996) 227—234. (1998) 1211—1216.

"
"18","676 N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 659—677

[33] RA. Isay, The submariners’ Wives syndrome, Psychiatric [51] O. Bock, B. Fowler, D. Comfort, Human sensorimotor
Quarterly 42 (1968) 647—652. coordination during spaceﬂight: an analysis of pointing and

[34] N. Kanas, Psychosocial support for cosmonauts, Aviation, tracking responses during the “Neurolab” space shuttle mission,
Space and Environmental Medicine 62 (1991) 353—355. Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine 72 (2001)

[35] N. Kanas, V. Salnitskiy, V. Gushin, D.S. Weiss, E.M. Grund, 877—883.

C. Flynn, O. Kozerenko, A. Sled, C.R. Marmar, Asthenia—does [52] D. Manzey, Monitoring of mental performance during
it eXist in space?, Psychosomatic Medicine 63 (2001) 874—880. spaceﬂight, Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine 7

[36] RA. Santy, Choosing the Right Stuff: The Psychological (2000) A69—A75.

Selection of Astronauts and Cosmonauts, Praeger Scientiﬁc, [53] D. Manzey, B. Lorenz, Mental performance during short—term
Westport, CT, 1994 pp. 81—96. and long—term spaceﬂight, Brain Research Reviews 28 (1998)

[37] R.L. Helmreich, J.A. Wilhelm, S.E. Gregorich, T.R. Chidester, 215—221.

Preliminary results from the evaluation of cockpit resource [54] V.P. Salnitski, V.I. Myasnikov, A.F. Bobrov, L.G. Shevchenko,
management training: performance ratings of ﬂight crews, Integrated evaluation and prognosis of cosmonaut’s
Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine 61 (1990) professional reliability during space ﬂight, Aviakosmicheskaia
576—579. i Ekologicheskaia Medits 33 (1999) 16—22.

[38] H]. Older, L.L. Jenney, Psychological Stress Management [55] AP. NechaeV, Work and rest planning as a way of crew member
through Voice Output Analysis, NASA CR 147723. Planar error management, Acta Astronautica 49 (2001) 271—278.
C0rp., Alexandria, VA, 1975, pp. 1—42. [56] J. Sauer, G.R.J. Hockey, D.G. Wastell, Maintenance of complex

[39] B. Johannes, V.P. Salnitski, H.—C. Gunga, K. Kirsch, Voice performance during a 135—day spaceﬂight simulation, Aviation,
stress monitoring in space—possibilities and limits, Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine 70 (1999) 236—244.
Space and Environmental Medicine 71 (Suppl. 9) (2000) [57] D. Raybeck, Proxemics and privacy: managing the problems
A58—A65. of life in conﬁned environments, in: AA. Harrison,

[40] K. Cavanagh, D.A. Shapiro, Computer treatment for common Y.A. Clearwater, C.P. McKay (Eds), From Antarctica t0 Outer
mental health problems, Journal of Clinical Psychology 60 Space, Springer, New York, 1991.

(2004) 239—25 1. [58] R.L. Kane, P. Short, W. Sipes, C. Flynn, Development

[41] J.H. Greist, I.M. Marks, L. Baer, K.A. Kobak, KW. Wenzel, and validation of the spaceﬂight cognitive assessment tool
MJ. Hirsch, I.M. Mantle, C.M. Clary, Behavior therapy for for Windows (WinScat), Aviation, Space and Environmental
obsessive—compulsive disorder guided by a computer or by a Medicine 76 (Suppl. 1) (2005) B183—B191.
clinician compared With relaxation as a control, Journal of [59] B. Johannes, V.P. Salnitski, V.V. Polyakov, K. Kirsch, Changes
Clinical Psychiatry 63 (2002) 138—145. in the autonomic reactivity pattern to psychological load

[42] G.R. Leon, Select—in and countermeasure considerations for under long—term microgravity—twelve men during 6—m0nth
long—duration crews, in: Proceedings of the 29th International spaceﬂights, Aviakosmicheskaia i Ekologicheskaia Medits 37
Conference on Environmental Systems, SAE Technical Paper (2003) 6—16.

Series 1999—01—2095, SAE International, Warrendale, PA, 1999. [60] L. Young, K. Yajima, Artiﬁcial Gravity as a Tool in Biology &

[43] J. Proudfoot, D. Goldberg, A. Mann, B. Everitt, 1. Marks, Medicine, International Academy of Astronautics Study Group
J.A. Gray, Computerized, interactive, multimedia cognitive— Report (in press).
behavioral program for anxiety and depression in general [61] V.I. Gushin, N.S. Zaprisa, T.B. Kolinitchenko, VA. EﬁmOV,
practice, Psychological Medicine 33 (2003) 217—227. T.M. Smirnova, A.G. Vinokhodova, N. Kanas, Content analysis

[44] A. Pavy—LeTraon, S. SaiVin, C. Soulez—LaRiViere, M. Pujos, 0f the crew communication With external communicants
A. Guell, G. Houin, Pharmacology in space: pharmacotherapy, under prolonged isolation, Aviation, Space and Environmental
in: S.L. Bonting (Ed.), Advances in Space Biology and Medicine 68 (1997) 1093—1098.

Medicine, vol. 6, JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, 1997. [62] N. Kanas, W.E. Feddersen, Behavioral, Psychiatric, and

[45] RA. Santy, H. Kapanka, J.R. Davis, DE Stewart, Analysis of Sociological Problems of Long—duration Space Missions, NASA
sleep on Shuttle missions, Aviation, Space and Environmental TM X—58067, Johnson Spacecraft Center/National Aeronautics
Medicine 59 (1988) 1094—1097. and Space Administration, Houston, TX, 1971.

[46] S. SaiVin, A. Pavy—LeTraon, C. Soulez—LaRiViere, A. Guell, [63] RB. Bechtel, A. Berning, The third quarter phenomenon:
G. Houin, Pharmacology in space: pharmacokinetics, in: S.L. do people experience discomfort after stress has passed?, in:
Bonting (Ed), Advances in Space Biology and Medicine, vol. AA. Harrison, Y.A. Clearwater, C.P. McKay (Eds), From
6, JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, 1997. Antarctica t0 Outer Space, Springer, New York, 1991.

[47] O. Bock, Problems of sensorimotor coordination in [64] N. Kanas, V. Salnitskiy, D.S. Weiss, E.M. Grund, V. Gushin, O.
weightlessness, Brain Research Reviews 28 (1998) 155—160. Kozerenko, A. Sled, A. Bostrom, C.R. Marmar, Crewmember

[48] G.R.J. Hockey, Compensatory control in the regulation of and ground personnel interactions over time during Shuttle/Mir
human performance under stress and high workload: a space missions, Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine
cognitive—energetical framework, Biological Psychology 45 72 (2001) 453—461.

(1997) 73—93. [65] J.A. Wood, SJ. Hysong, D.J. Lugg, D.L. Harm, Is it really

[49] M.F. Reschke, J.J. Bloomberg, D.L. Harm, W.H. Paloski, so bad? A comparison of positive and negative experiences in
C. Layne, V. McDonald, Posture, locomotion, spatial Antarctic Winter stations, Environment and Behavior 32 (2000)
orientation, and motion sickness as a function of space ﬂight, 84—110.

Brain Research Reviews 28 (1998) 102—117. [66] GM. Andreeva, Social Psychology, third ed., Astok Press,

[50] G. Leone, The effect of gravity on human recognition Moscow, 1998.
of disoriented objects, Brain Research Reviews 28 (1998) [67] V.I. Gushin, V.A. EﬁmOV, T.B. Kolinitchenko, C. DaVies,
203—214. Psychological evaluation and support during EXEMSI,

"
"19","N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 64 (2009) 659—677 677
in: S. Bonting (Ed), Advances in Space Biology and [82] N. Kanas, V. Salnitskiy, E.M. Grund, V. Gushin, D.S. Weiss,
Medicine: European Isolation and Conﬁnement Study 5 (1996) O. Kozerenko, A. Sled, C.R. Marmar, Social and cultural issues
283—295. during Shuttle/Mir space missions, Acta Astroautica 47 (2000)

[68] V.I. Gushin, VA. Eﬁmov, T.M. Smirnova, A.G. Vinokhodova, 647—655.

Dynamics of subjective perception of in—crew interactions [83] N. Kanas, V. Salnitskiy, E.M. Grund, V. Gushin, D.S. Weiss,
during long—term isolation and conﬁnement, Aerospace and O. Kozerenko, A. Sled, C.R. Marmar, Interpersonal and cultural
Ecological Medicine 31 (4) (1997) 23—29. issues involving crews and ground personnel during Shuttle/Mir

[69] V.I. Gushin, V.A. EﬁmOV, T.M. Smirnova, N. Kanas, et 211., space missions, Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine
Subject’s perception of the crew interaction under prolonged 71 (Suppl. 9) (2000) A11—A16.
isolation, in: Proceedings of the 68th Annual Meeting of the [84] I. Altman, W.W. Haythorn, The ecology of the isolated group,
American Aerospace Medical Association, Chicago, IL, 1997. Behavioral Science 12 (1967) 169—182.

[70] V.I. Gushin, VA. Eﬁmov, T.M. Smirnova, A.G. Vinokhodova, [85] I. Altman, D.A. Taylor, 1. Wheeler, Ecological aspects of
N. Kanas, Subject’s perception of the crew interaction dynamics group behavior in social isolation, Journal of Applied Social
under prolonged isolation, Aviation, Space and Environmental Psychology 1 (1971) 76—100.

Medicine 69 (1998) 556—561. [86] A. Harrison, M. Connors, Groups in exotic environments,

[71] R.L. Helmreich, J.A. Wilheim, T.E. Runge, Psychological Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 18 (1984) 49—87.
considerations in future space missions, in: S. Cheston, [87] Committee on Space Biology and Medicine/Space Studies
D. Winter (Eds), Human Factors of Outer Space Production, Board, National Research Council Commission on Physical
1980. Sciences, Mathematics, and Application, A Strategy for

[72] G.R. Leon, V.S. Koscheer, Cross—cultural polar expedition Research in Space Biology and Medicine in the New Century,
teams as an analog to long—duration space missions, in: National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1998.

Proceedings of the 68th Annual Meeting of the American [88] J.B. Ritsher, Culturalfactors and the International Space Station,
Aerospace Medical Association, Chicago, IL, 1997. Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine 76 (6, Section II)

[73] L. Penwell, Problems of intergroup behavior in human (2005) B135—B144.
spaceﬂight operations, Spacecraft 27 (1990) 464—469. [89] J. Clement, J.B. Ritsher, Operating the ISS: cultural and

[74] ME. Morphew, S. MacLaren, L. Herring, B. Azar, N. Thagard, leadership challenges, in: Proceedings of the 56th International
Voyage of discovery: American astronauts aboard Russia’s Mir Astronautical Congress, IAC—05—A1.5.05, Fukuoka, Japan,
space station, Human Performance in Extreme Environments 2 October 17—21, 2005.

(1) (1997) 40—61. [90] V.I. Gushin, Problems of psychological control in prolonged

[75] DP. Kozerenko, A.D. Sled, V.P. Salnitsky, Psychological space ﬂights, Earth Space Review 4 (1) (1995) 28—31.
support: Russian experience, in: Proceedings of the 68th Annual [91] V.I. Gushin, A. Yusupova, I. Popova, Crew—ground control
Meeting of the American Aerospace Medical Association, communication styles: preliminary results, in: Proceedings of
Chicago, IL, 1997. the 55th International Astronautical Congress, IAC—04—G.5.a.06,

[76] AD. Kelly, N. Kanas, Communication between space crews Vancouver, BC, Canada, October 4—8, 2004.
and ground personnel: a survey of astronauts and cosmonauts, [92] V.I. Gushin, S.F. Kholin, Yu.R. Ivanovky, Soviet psycho—
Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine 64 (1993) physiological investigations in experiments With simulated
795—800. isolation—some results and prospects, in: S. Bonting (Ed),

[77] RA. Dentler, K. Erickson, The functions of deviance in groups, Advances in Space Biology and Medicine: European Isolation
Social Problems 7 (1959) 98—107. and Conﬁnement Study 3 (1993) 5—14.

[78] B]. Bluth, The beneﬁts and dilemmas of an international space [93] N.A. Kanas, V.P. Salnitskiy, J.E. Boyd, V.I. Gushin, D.S. Weiss,
station, Acta Astronautica 2 (1984) 149—153. S.A. Saylor, O.P. Kozerenko, C.R. Marmar, Crewmember and

[79] A.I. Grigoriev, O.P. Kozerenko, V.I. Myasnikov, A.D. Egorov, mission control interactions during International Space Station
Ethicalproblems ofinteraction between ground—based personnel missions, Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine 78
and orbital station crewmembers, IAF 86—398, in: Proceedings (2007) 601—607.
of the 37th Congress of the International Astronautical [94] M. Heer, S. Smith, Integrated Physiology on Long—Duration
Federation, New York, 1986. Space Flight: Nutritional Aspects. International Academy of

[80] A.I. Grigoriev, O.P. Kozerenko, V.I. Myasnikov, Selected Astronautics Study Group Report, in press.
problems of psychological support of prolonged space ﬂights, [95] AA. SaViIOV, R.M. Bayevsky, A.F. Bystrytskaya, V.I. Gushin,
in: Proceedings of the 38th Congress of the International G.A. ManovtseV, LA. Nichiporuk, M.A. Novikov, LP.
Astronautical Federation, Washington, DC, 1987. Ponomareva, V.P. Salnitsky, On—board equipment—based study of

[81] RA. Santy, A.W. Holland, L. Looper, R. Marcondes—North, the dynamic of psycho—physiological and biomedical responses
Multicultural factors in the space environment: results of of the operators during 135—day isolation in the Mir orbital
an international shuttle crew debrief. Aviation, Space and station mock—up, Aerospace and Ecological Medicine 5 (1997)
Environmental Medicine 64 (1993) 196—200. 28—38.

"
