"","x"
"1","Paper to be presented at 56th International Astronautical Congress, Fukuoka, J apan, October 17-21, 2005.
IAC-05-A1.5.05
OPERATING THE 188: CULTURAL AND LEADERSHIP CHALLENGES
J ames L. Clement, J r., P.E.
NASA J ohnson Space Center, USA
james.l.clement@nasa.g0v
J ennifer B. Ritsher, Ph.D.
University of California/San Francisco and Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, USA
ritsher@itsa.ucsf.edu.
Abstract
The task of working with a multi-national team during the 24-hour-a—day, 7-day-a-week operation and continued
assembly of the International Space Station (188) presents a daunting array of leadership and cultural Challenges for
managers supporting this enterprise. Here we present key Challenges and approaches for addressing them, based on
preliminary data from an ongoing survey of senior NASA ﬂight controllers. The main leadership Challenges relate to
1) geographic dispersal of work teams, 2) historical differences between partner organizations, 3) extra effort
required to maintain morale of local teams, and 4) constant Change. The main cultural Challenges pertain to: 1)
cultural differences in relative importance of values, 2) bilateral approaches not necessarily being suited to
multilateral situations, 3) language differences, and 4) cultural differences being more disruptive for ground teams
than for space crews. The top ﬁve leadership approaches for successfully addressing this overall set of Challenges
were identiﬁed as: 1) ensuring effective communication, 2) cultivating robust relationships, 3) fostering ﬂexibility
and open-mindedness, 4) expanding cultural awareness, and 5) seeking and providing training. Our survey data are
also rich with examples of speciﬁc strategies that embody these approaches, and we summarize these and give
overall recommendations based on the results.
Background daunting array of cultural and leadership Challenges
for the ﬂight control team supporting this enterprise.
The International Space Station, or 188, is the largest
international scientiﬁc and technological endeavor Some of the most challenging assembly operations
ever undertaken. The 188 is a technological marvel, for the 188 are yet to be completed, and the operation
consisting of tons of hardware, miles of wire, and 0f the 188 has yet to be transitioned from mainly a
millions of lines of computer code, all orbiting the bilateral operations team concept to a truly multi-
Earth 220 miles above the facilities that control it. lateral team as European and Japanese elements
Equally impressive is that since October of 2000, arrive later in the assembly sequence. It is critical to
international crews of astronauts and cosmonauts help the leaders of this important international
have been living and working on board the 188 while endeavor determine if they are effectively using what
it continues to be assembled and re-supplied by has been learned to date in working with another
Visiting vehicles and crews. culture to prepare the ISS operations team for a more
thoroughly multi-cultural operation in the very near
The safe and effective ongoing operation of the ISS future. Mission success and crew safety not only
requires an unprecedented level of teamwork across hinge on the technical competence of the 188 team,
sites, organizations, and countries. Sixteen countries but equally on team members’ ability to work
spread over four continents have joined a team led by seamlessly together in a multi-cultural geographically
ﬁve space agencies for the common goal of dispersed environment.
performing research on long-duration space missions.
The 188 mission control team at the NASA Johnson Success depends upon the relationships established
Space Center in Houston, Texas works Closely with among members of the operations team, both within
colleagues at the NASA Marshall Space Flight NASA and with colleagues at 188 international
Center in Huntsville, Alabama and with centers partner organizations. The core of the ground
operated by Canadian, European, Japanese and operations team is the ﬂight controller, who is the
Russian space agencies. The task of working with a source of leadership and direction for the
geographically dispersed, multi-national team during commitment of operations resources within his or her
the 24 hour-a-day, 7 day-a—week operation presents a specialty area or technical discipline [1]. To achieve
1

"
"2","Paper to be presented at 56th International Astronautioal Congress, Fukuoka, J apan, October 17-21, 2005.
the overall 188 Program goals and objectives, ﬂight operation procedures. Nine of these ﬂight controllers
controllers direct and implement the plans that are have been deployed to the Mission Control Center—
constructed by teams of specialists [2]. It is crucial Moscow (MCC-M) in Russia for extended periods of
for the ﬂight control team members and leaders to time to provide operations liaison between the
maintain mutually beneﬁcial relationships with the American and Russian mission control teams. Five
Program ofﬁce, engineering and safety organizations, had experience in working with European and
international partners, and NASA managers [1]. Japanese ﬂight control team members in developing
Since the 188 is so much more complex than any plans for upcoming ISS operations involving
previous space program, the current cadre of ISS hardware, and all had worked with their international
ﬂight controllers have had to be pioneers in ﬁnding partner ﬂight controller counterparts in developing
ways to meet the leadership and cultural challenges ground and on-board procedures for orewmember
inherent in their expanded role. activities.
In this study, we sought to capture the expertise these Study participants were anonymous in the sense that
individuals have developed, in order to help them records of their identities were not kept, and
learn from each other and guide the way for others. A identifying information was removed from their data,
recent survey of NASA ﬂight controllers revealed a although their identities were known to the senior
serious level of concern about communications author (JLC). All participants provided informed
problems with the International Partners [3]. The consent, and the study procedures were approved by
present study sought to gain more insight into the human subjects committees at the University of
nature of this problem and what can be done about it. California/San Francisco, and at the NASA J ohnson
Focusing exclusively on senior ﬂight controllers who Spaceﬂight Center.
work directly with International Partners, we asked
for examples of the key leadership and cultural Procedure. Participants were requested to describe
challenges these pioneering leaders have faced as their observations and perceptions of the cultural and
well as the strategies that they have found effective leadership challenges associated with the job of
for surmounting them. operating the 188. All participants received a written
copy of the interView questions as well as a verbal
In this paper, we present our initial formulation of explanation of the goals of the study. At a minimum,
these lessons. The paper gives preliminary results the following siX questions were asked:
from our survey of ﬂight controllers, integrated with
conclusions drawn from a literature review and from 1. What are the leadership challenges/issues you have had to
our own experience. Usually these sources agreed deal with associated with the multicultural and 24/7 aspects
. . of your part of the Operatlons D1V1s1on ISS assembly/ops
w1th one another, but we note where th1s was not the job?
case. In fUtUI‘C WOl‘k, We intend t0 COHCCt more data 0 Consider complex human interfaces, cultural factors,
and to present more quantitative results from this Cf€W_pr€f€_r€nC€S, 1P driVGII constraints, and policy
ongoing study. COHSlderatlons.
2. Discuss leadership skills, strategies, tactics, techniques you
W developed and/or used.

. . . . . . ' o ' 9
mm. Study partlcipants lnoluded 14 SCDIOI‘ 3. ggfrgozrked and what d1d not and why. Success stones.
ﬂ1ght controller personnel involved in various aspects
Of mission planning and the CODdUCt Of day-to-day 4. What challenges stillremain? What do you think could be
operations on-board the 188. Each participant was £10116 t0 aderSS tth?
chosen on the basis of haVing had signiﬁcant _ _ _ _ _
.Xp........ with space perm Wing the Iss 5- 213a: ssm3:235;::§.:;:E.f:1g.ﬁarxrsjsr
1nternational partner cornrnunity. Cons1stent w1th the considerations Of working with the 1va as wall as the
demographics of the population of senior ﬂight considerations in the 13t bullet above.
controllers9 the sample included 13 men and 1 o What role do culturaldifferences play? Examples of
woman, all 14 were white, all appeared to be from issues andccﬁxes’fo‘mﬂ .. ,9
the American cultural mainstream, and they ranged in . What are your leademhlp 16880118 learned?
age from their late 205 to late 405- Two Of the 14 6. What additional leadership skills or training do our
speak Russian, and none of them speak Japanese. employees and managers need?

Five have experience in integration of international

detailed crew activity plans. Five have worked with Both written and verbal responses were accepted.

all of the international partners in developing station Additional unstructured diSCUSSiOD 01‘ follow-up
2

"
"3","Paper to be presented at 56th International Astronautioal Congress, Fukuoka, J apan, October 17-21, 2005.
questioning took place as needed to achieve clarity. Discussion
Verbal responses were transcribed as verbatim notes
by the senior author (JLC). The content of the 14 These responses are speciﬁc to operating the ISS and
transcripts (written responses and/or transcribed limited to the American point of View, but they mesh
verbal responses) was independently categorized by well with the more general scientiﬁc and professional
the authors into emergent themes, and the two literatures on spaceﬂight behaVior and performance,
resulting coding systems were integrated through cultural psychology, and managing geographically
discussion until consensus was achieved about the dispersed multicultural teams. Our results oornpare
categories. The entire dataset was then recoded using well with a broader study of ISS ﬂight controller
the ﬁnal coding system. The scientiﬁc literature was ratings on organizational risk performed by the
also consulted about the topics raised by the Human Factors and System Safety group of the Ames
participants and integrated into the material presented Research Center [3]. Their responses also ﬁt well
below. with what we have observed from our vantage points
as a senior NASA manager (JLC) and a cultural
The present paper is an initial report on an ongoing psychologist (JBR). Next, we describe each item in
project. We intend to continue to interView additional turn below, giving more detail about the survey
participants in the US and also in Russia, and to results as well as oontextualizing it with a brief
analyze the results in greater detail. synopsis of relevant research in the area.
Results Leadership Challenges in Operating the 188
Survey participants were consistent and substantially Operating the ISS involves the same fundamental
in agreement in identifying key leadership and leadership challenges as any large project, but here
multicultural challenges associated with the 188. we set those aside in order to focus on the special
They identiﬁed leadership approaches that they challenges that are posed by the extra complexity of
considered to be essential for meeting these operating the 188 versus previous space missions. We
challenges. Table 1 lists our consensus issues and the make a distinction between leadership and cultural
percent of respondents mentioning at least one challenges because the following leadership
example of the issue. challenges affect ISS ﬂight controllers regardless of
whether they work with international partners or in
{3be 1h“ dC 1 1Ch 11 I 1 d' O _ h 188 multicultural teams. Participants highlighted four
at: ferasldlelisaiiip AggiiigchesafoinSglfcsceIszgul/l: iitclldrgsesriéiiénTlier: , mam types Of leaderShlp challenges.
—%0f14 Team members dispersed across sites, organizations,
respondents time zones
Leadership Challenges:
. Efgamniggﬁgigngzi across s1tes, 100A) The ﬁrst leadership challenge (noted by 100% of our
. Historicaldifferences batman partner 100% respondents) is that team members are dispersed
organizations across sites, organizations, and time zones. Working
' MOE foort mqumd to maintain m0fal€ and 86% in a dispersed team has two main ramiﬁcations. First,
momatlon Oflocalteam it makes communication more difﬁcult [4]. As one
- Constant change 64% . ‘6 . . .
controller put it, sometimes the biggest challenge is
Cultural Challenges: getting ﬁve computer support personnel at ﬁve
0 Cultural differences in relative importance of 100% different locations around the world on the same
V?mes telecorn.” Since the 188 team is split over many time
o Bilateral approaches/workarounds may not work 86% . . . . .
for multilateral situations zones, this often means communicating Via e-rnall or
, Language diffmnces 50% having team meetings that occur outside of normal
. Culturaldifferences being more disruptive for 7% business hours for at least one party. Important
groundtGamsthan for 8132106 CI€WS nonverbal cues are lost when communication is not
Leadershi A roaches: faoe-to-faoe, and synergy ancl‘tirnae’liness may be lost
—p—Rp—. Ensuring effective communication 100% when communication is not llve 1n real tune. The
. Cultivating robustrelationships 93% probability of misunderstandings is dramatically
o Fostering ﬂexibility and open-mindedness 86% increased when communication iS impaired in such
° EXpanding cultural aWﬂfGHGSS 57% ways. These difﬁculties are further compounded by
W the fact that they are occurring in the context of
dissimilar organizational structures and cultures.
3

"
"4","Paper to be presented at 56thInternationa1Astronautical Congress, Fukuoka, J apan, October 17-21, 2005.
Several respondents stressed that in some our professional experience support this possibility,
organizations, it is the norm to spread information so we highlight the issue here as an area of potential
across coworkers and up and down organizational opportunity for 188 leadership.
levels routinely, but in others, workers will not
spontaneously share information unless speciﬁcally Historical differences between partner organizations
told to do so or unless someone higher in the chain of
command does it for them. Information may also fail The second main leadership challenge identiﬁed by
to spread because of differences in access to shared 100% of our respondents is that the Russian and
resources such as email and intranets. ISS leaders American space programs each have long histories
who are not aware of such differences between sites and different ways of doing things that they are
may incorrectly assume that every team member at a reluctant to alter since they have proven successful in
remote site has information that was given to only the past. Both organizations have mounted successful
one of them. international missions and both have operated

successful space stations, but their partnership with
All of these communication difﬁculties result in the one another is relatively new [7]. Our respondents
second ramiﬁcation of working in a dispersed team: noted that very early in this partnership, it became
difﬁculty cultivating strong working relationships. apparent that the two countries’ teams approached the
Trust and team spirit develop slowly, and it takes same problem from signiﬁcantly different ideological
longer to adjust to working with less personal contact bases. The US heritage was based on experience with
[5]. Our respondents reported that the NASA ﬂight short-duration Space Shuttle missions with some
control team learned that there was no prescribed recall of the Skylab space station operations, whereas
formula for gaining trust and credibility with remote the Russians entered the 188 program with a wealth
team members, but rather it had to be earned through of long duration space station operations experience
demonstrated hard work and a willingness to listen with a 30-year continuity frorn Salyut through Mir.
and try their ideas. The closest thing to a formula for The US entered into discussions with concepts and
developing trust was generally felt to be travel to processes originally outlined for the Freedom
meetings for face-to-face contact. This was believed program plus some experience from the Phase 1
to be very important and well worth the cost. The Program with US astronauts onboard the Mir. Senior
Arnes survey results also found this to be uniformly members of both teams had been trained in the
agreed to by the larger ﬂight controller group that military during the Cold War and had started their
participated in their study [3]. Early on, the American careers during the Space Race. When the joint ISS
ﬂight planning team recognized the Russian teams began, both the Russian teams and the
experience in long duration human spaceﬂight, and American teams felt that their own approaches to
deferred to their ideas in the initial phases of ISS manned spaceﬂight were more relevant than the
planning. Initially, each group mainly valued its own other’s. By becoming more open to new concepts, the
processes and products and this stance hampered the NASA group realized the relevance of the Russian
development of trust and productive team approach, and together the international team
functioning. Even when communication is good and modiﬁed the overall process and products to the
individuals are well bonded into a cohesive tearn, workable approach in use today. The senior ﬂight
their working relationship is still constrained by the controllers participating in this study observed that in
fact that 188 team members report to different the years since the beginning of the ISS partnership,
organizations and must represent differing common ground has been reached. By showing an
overarching policy requirements that are driven by increased recognition and respect for the
national interests. As one leader in our study put it, “I accomplishments of the long duration mission
have very little in the way of carrots or sticks” with experience of the Russian prograrn, discussions and
which to motivate team members from other negotiations are much more effective compared to the
organizations. difﬁculties experienced early on in this working

relationship.
Although haVing a dispersed team has its drawbacks,
a well functioning dispersed team that has strong Although some differences in procedures have been
communication and strong working relationships can solved by compromise, others must be worked
have major advantages. For example, it may mean around. For example, it is the norm in the Russian
that a responsive and responsible team member is space program to have ﬂight controllers stay together
always on duty somewhere in the world if a relevant as a group and work one long shift every few days,
issue arises [6]. To date, our survey data do not while the American shifts tend to rotate rnore
mention any such advantages, but the literature and frequently. Therefore, even when international

4

"
"5","Paper to be presented at 56th International Astronautical Congress, Fukuoka, J apan, October 17-21, 2005.
colleagues get to know each other, their work shifts organizational team means that there are often
are not compatible. Furthermore, it is the norm at ambiguities and frustrations that are never resolved.
NASA for a member of each specialty area to be on This is an added source of stress on local team
duty at all times and able to make decisions while on members that was not there when missions were
duty, but it is the norm in the Russian program for operated entirely in-house. Many of our respondents
responsible specialists to be available only during the mentioned that it creates lingering stress and
normal work day, and for decisions to be deferred frustration for them when other teams seem to agree
until the chief expert is available. These two stafﬁng to do something one way but then do it another way,
approaches, although different, tend to balance each and an explanation is never given to the local team.
other. A challenge for the future will be to integrate Although many respondents said that it was critical to
the stafﬁng philosophies of the European and develop the capacity to “not sweat the small stuff,”
Japanese partners, which also differ from the NASA letting questions go unanswered is stressful, and
approach, into the ongoing operation of the ISS. likely to be particularly so for the personality types

found in engineering professions represented by 188
More effort required to maintain morale and teams. In short, extra effort is required to maintain
motivation of local team the morale of 188 team members over the long term.
The third leadership challenge is the increased Constant change
amount of sheer effort required to conduct ordinary
leadership tasks in this more complex and stressful The fourth leadership challenge is that even if leaders
leadership environment. Aspects of this issue were manage to successfully meet the above three types of
raised by 86% of our sample. challenges, their efforts must be unﬂagging because

they are working in the midst of constant change.
One reason why leading 188 teams requires extra This issue was mentioned by 64% of our respondents.
effort is that unlike Apollo, Skylab and Shuttle Just in the past few years, NASA headquarters has
rnissions, ISS missions are continuous and scheduled reorganized itself twice and had 2 new
to go on indeﬁnitely. The task is no longer a sprint administrators; the Japanese Aerospace Exploration
but a marathon. It is now more difﬁcult to maintain a Agency (JAXA) was formed from the merger of
sustained level of enthusiasm and morale among three other organizations (the Institute of Space and
team members, even those who are at the same site. Astronautical Science [ISAS], the National
The 188 operations team works in a 24 hour a day, 7 Aerospace Laboratory of Japan [NAL], and the
day a week, 365 day a year environment. The most National Space Development Agency of Japan
often mentioned challenges associated with this long [NASDA]); and the Russian Aviation and Space
duration aspect of the job by the ﬂight controllers Agency, or Rosaviakosrnos, became the Federal
surveyed in this study were team stafﬁng, motivation, Space Agency, also with a new leader. Job turnover
and fatigue considerations. The increased complexity is another type of constant change that respondents
of ISS operations coupled with the ongoing nature of mentioned, and they said that it particularly occurs
the mission produce cumulative stress without among Americans and Japanese. Since the controllers
providing a built-in mechanism for relieving that operating the 188 are pioneering a newly expanded
stress. Although the ground controllers maintain their role in this extraordinarily complex system, the
role indeﬁnitely, the ISS crewrnernbers are still education process is lengthy since these skills are
associated with a particular mission. In response to primarily learned on the job. Thus, the education of
this challenge, the American 188 team has recently new team members is an additional strain on the
evolved so that teams of ground controllers are now team. Job turnover among international team
more speciﬁcally linked to each 188 rnission, members is especially stressful for the Russian
allowing them to orient their work around its life partners, who tend to prefer having a personal
cycle and feel a sense of closure and accomplishment working relationship with their foreign counterparts
at the end more like ground controllers were able to before feeling comfortable working with them.
do to in the past. Another stress-reduoing strategy Furthermore, engineers who are already stretching
that respondents mentioned is to make an effort to beyond their technical training in order to succeed in
distribute tasks in such a way that they mesh with the complex interpersonal tasks necessary in
each individual’s personality and motivation multicultural dispersed teams can ﬁnd it exceedingly
structure. difﬁcult to face the additional stress of being

uncertain whether their management will back their
Another reason that leading 188 teams requires extra decisions (such as to hold their ground during a
effort is that working in a multi-national, rnulti- disagreement with an international partner) since the

5

"
"6","Paper to be presented at 56th International Astronautical Congress, Fukuoka, J apan, October 17-21, 2005.
ground is shifting for management as well. Power expected that substantive work get done in such
struggles between countries, between organizations, meetings — to the contrary, the relationship—building
and between factions can cast a shadow on lower- should be considered to be a critical work task in
level negotiations, such that team members feel like itself at that stage. Respondents also noted that
pawns in a game that they don’t understand since efﬁciency was particularly important to Americans,
they are unable to see the bigger picture from their whereas checking with superiors before making
vantage point. On top of all those sources of change decisions or taking time to cultivate relationships
and ambiguity is the fact that Russian culture itself is (such as writing carefully crafted emails or
changing very rapidly, much more so than that of the congratulating one another on recent achievements)
other 188 partner countries. may have a relatively higher priority for Russians and

other international partners.
Cultural Challenges in Ogerating the 188

Moreover, cultures differ in how values are
The leadership challenges reviewed above affect ISS expressed. Both Russians and Americans value safety
leaders whether or not they work directly with and scientiﬁc evidence, but our respondents believed
international partners. Next, we reView cultural that there was a difference in philosophy such that the
Challenges that affect 188 personnel who do work Russians considered something safe until proven
with international partners, whether or not they are dangerous, whereas Americans considered something
leaders. Our respondents consistently emphasized the dangerous until proven safe. Although put in stark
importance of a good appreciation and awareness of oversimpliﬁed terms here for the sake of discussion,
the impact of cultural considerations in working with this difference has major ramiﬁcations for the way
the 188 international partners. Their observations are that space operations are planned and implemented,
consistent with other assessments that found that and respondents gave numerous examples. Another
ignorance of cultural considerations can lead to key difference that affects the space program was the
communications breakdowns and other unforeseen way that eXpertise is managed. Respondents
problems [5,7,8]. mentioned that Russian eXpertise tends to remain

with the expert and not to be documented in writing
Cultural differences in relative importance of values or distributed widely to coworkers, whereas openness

and documentation are core values for Americans.
Although all of the ISS partners share the basic Similarly, making contingency plans in advance is
values of safety, professionalism, teamwork, and highly valued on the American side, and being able
eXCitement about space exploration, they also must to make repairs and react effectively to surprises is
contend with cultural differences in values or in the highly valued on the Russian side. Creativity takes
relative importance of speciﬁc values. Some aspect the form of openly going beyond one’s job duties for
of this issue was raised by 100% of our respondents. Americans, and quietly working around constraints

for Russians.
For example, many respondents noted that it is more
important to Russians than Americans to establish a Again, it is important not to stereotype [9], but an
personal relationship with coworkers before feeling awareness of differences in value structures may help
comfortable working with them. Thus, although avoid confusion and enhance the behavioral
Americans also value bonding with coworkers, they repertoire and ﬂexibility of multicultural teams
don’t see it as an integral part of the job itself, which [7,10]. There are many other cultural differences and
is what it must become in order to work effectively rules of etiquette (such as not shaking hands in a
with Russians. This type of bond allows for greater doorway in Russia) that may affect the work of ISS
accuracy in perceiving what the other person needs teams, but these are already the subject of generic
and wants, and being able to come up with creative cultural training offered by consultants, or are
“win-win” solutions to difﬁculties. If it is Viewed as reviewed in more detail elsewhere [7,11,12], so we
part of the work rather than something extra, then will not delineate them here.
workers will not feel like they are wasting time when
they spend time on it, and it will become a routine Bilateral approaches/workarounds may not work for
part of training and evaluations of employees. The multilateral situations
relationship issue was one of the most important and
productive lessons learned by the respondents to this The second cultural challenge identiﬁed by 86% of
study. They stressed the importance of initial face-to- our respondents is a small but critical point: bilateral
face meetings with international partners in order to approaches and workarounds may not be adequate in
establish working relationships. It should not be multilateral situations. The Challenges that have

6

"
"7","Paper to be presented at 56th International Astronautioal Congress, Fukuoka, J apan, October 17-21, 2005.
surfaced in bilateral work between Russians and seems not to be the norm for ﬂight controllers who
Americans are difﬁcult but will be further work with Russians.
complicated when the Japanese and Europeans step
up their involvement with the 188, as they are Cultural differences being more disruptive for ground
expected to do soon when their modules are launched teams than for space crews
and attached to the 188. 188 crews have so far
included only US—trained astronauts and Russian— The fourth cultural Challenge was only mentioned by
trained cosmonauts. Even aside from cultural one respondent but we highlight it because it is a
differences, there are thorny technical issues that will critical point: cultural differences may be more
be exacerbated as more partners are included in core disruptive for ground and orew-ground interfaces
activities. For example, each space program has its than for orew-orew interfaces [13]. Much attention is
own activity scheduling software. It has been difﬁcult currently being paid by psychologists and trainers as
but possible to make an interface so that the Russian to how cultural differences may affect the behaVior
and American systems could work together, but it and performance of international teams of
will become much more difﬁcult to integrate crewmembers in space [12,14-19]. Space crews are
additional systems. small and train together in advance of their mission,

so cultural differences are attenuated by adjustments
Language differences that individuals make in these teams based on
personal experience with one another over time.
The most obvious culture-related difference affecting Also, crewmembers will make further adjustments
international teams is the language difference, based on the cultural training that they receive, and
although language issues were only mentioned by such training is expected to improve dramatically for
50% of our respondents. English is the ofﬁcial upcoming ISS crews as plans under development
language of the 188, but Russian translators and become implemented.
interpreters are used in many aspects of the day-to-
day operation of the 188 to preclude any However, ground controllers working in international
misunderstandings that could affect mission success teams have none of these advantages. They often
or ﬂight safety. Plans call for the European and must work together with neither extensive personal
Japanese ﬂight control team to communicate in experience nor cultural training, yet the outcome of
English during 188 operations, without interpreters. their work may have major repercussions for the
successful and safe operation of the 188. Therefore, it
It is important to understand that language is crucial for ground controllers to receive cultural
differences are not solved simply by the international training so they do not have to learn these lessons the
partner using English. The American side must also hard way, as our respondents did and are still doing.
be skilled at working with those who are speaking Some of the responses that we received revealed an
English as a second language. Respondents noted that ongoing lack of cultural awareness that could be
the international partners often had trouble rectiﬁed by further training, and our respondents are
understanding jargon or idioms even if they were probably among the most culturally aware of
ﬂuent in English. The language barrier still causes American ﬂight controllers.
statements to become misinterpreted and discussions
or email exchanges to be prolonged. Leadershig Amgroaches for Successfully
Addressing these Challenges
It was interesting that few of the respondents
mentioned the Challenges involved in speaking a Given the extraordinary nature of the leadership and
foreign language, suggesting that none of them speak cultural Challenges presented to the individuals
Russian or J apanese at a working level, even though Charged with the operation of the 188, how have they
Classes are offered at NASA, and eXisting foreign done it? What are the requisite skills that individuals
language skills may be a factor considered in hiring need to possess to work in this environment day after
ﬂight controllers. Several respondents noted that day? And equally important, what are some of the
ﬂight control team members who did take advantage speciﬁc strategies that have been developed by the
of language training opportunities found that any 188 team to ensure the continued successful operation
effort at learning the language of an intrenational and assembly of this technological marvel? Each of
partner paid back large beneﬁts from a team building the general approaches identiﬁed by our participants
standpoint. American crewmembers are routinely would be helpful in any leadership situation, but they
taught Russian if they don’t already speak it, but this are especially critical and they require speciﬁc skills
in the ISS context. The top ﬁve leadership
7

"
"8","Paper to be presented at 56th International Astronautioal Congress, Fukuoka, J apan, October 17-21, 2005.
approaches were identiﬁed as: l) ensuring effective Cultivating Robust Relationships

communication, 2) cultivating robust relationships, 3)

fostering ﬂexibility and open—mindedness, 4) Building relationships and establishing trust are

expanding cultural awareness, and 5) seeking and important for any team, but they assume a critical

providing training. Our survey data are also rich with importance in this particular team environment where
examples of speciﬁc strategies that embody these the lives of astronauts and cosmonauts are at stake on
approaches, and some are summarized in bullet a daily basis in an international research facility
points in each section below. orbiting the Earth. Research on the social Climate of

mission control teams in the US and Russia has found

Ensuring Effective Communication that they are more cohesive if the leader is perceived

to be supportive [21,22]. Numerous texts identify the

All of the study participants identiﬁed ability to establish trust as the one factor that

communicating effectively as the key to working determines success or failure in multi-oultural

with the large, geographically dispersed team Charged geographically dispersed teams [e.g., 4-6,23]. These
with operating the 188. For effective communications types of teams are highly dependent on trust, but
in such situations, careful attention must be paid to paradoxically, they typically operate under conditions
listening and to presenting one’s thoughts in a Clear that are not supportive of trust building.
and concise manner [4]. In addition, dispersed teams Relationships were mentioned by 93% of our study
tend to require increased information ﬂow and more participants, and they gave numerous examples of
frequent communications than local teams, and it is how this issue plays out on 188 operations teams.
helpful if such communication occurs redundantly

over multiple modalities, such as email and telephone The following are some of the strategies which

[6]. This type of “over-oomrnunioation” makes respondents found to be valuable in building robust

members of the team who are at remote locations feel working relationships across the ISS operations team:

included and also improves the quality of their

support to the team [20]. Faoe-to-face meetings are c Recognizing that trust is built slowly by setting a

optimal for communicating sensitive information [4]. personal example and earning trust.

0 Using a “prime the pump” approach of initially

The following are some of the strategies that giving without expecting an immediate return.

respondents fOUhd helpful ih communicating o Demonstrating a positive attitude and showing

effectively with the ISS operations team: respect for all team members and for the
international aspect of the operation. For

0 Ensuring all key persons and groups have the example, congratulating international partners on
same information at the same time CVCD if it their agency’s recent accomplishments 01'
requires W at different levels milestones. Search for common ground and
through the team. eliminate any “us vs. thern” mentality.

0 Keeping communications W, o Exercising patience and calm under pressure to
which may require that interpreters are briefed in ensure the team’s conﬁdence.
advance about relevant terminology. o Remaining tactful and empathetic by “placing

' Using W to verify oneself in the other’s shoes.”
that other team members have a Clear 0 Doing it “their way” - accepting or integrating
understanding of the situation and any action to processes or products developed by the
be taken 01"" plan to be made. international team members.

' Conducting m where 0 Seeing the “big picture” — focusing not only on
possible, both for initial team building and to what is right for NASA, but for the bigger
communicate new requirements which impact international program.
the content of the plan for on-orbit operations.

Faoe-to-faoe communications are facilitated by Fostering Flexibility and Open-Mindedness

having a small number of ﬂight controllers from

the MCC-Houston detailed to the International As noted by 86% Of our sample, ﬂexibility and open-

Partner MiSSiOh Control Centers. This approach mindedness are crucial for successfully leading

has been used very effectively to date With the multicultural, multi-organizational, geographically

Russians and is planned for the European and dispersed teams. Paradoxically, ﬂight controllers

Japanese control centers in the future. must both cultivate a tolerance for ambiguity and
spend extra effort resolving ambiguity. Many

8

"
"9","Paper to be presented at 56th International Astronautioal Congress, Fukuoka, J apan, October 17-21, 2005.

respondents mentioned the value of “not sweating the Expanding Cultural Awareness
small stuff” and making peace with the fact that they
may never know some of the behind-the-scenes Over half (57%) of our respondents said that they
reasons for behaviors that they observe among their learned how important it is to be aware of speciﬁc
international partners. Letting go of non-essentials cultural differences, such as about expected behaVior
allows time for creative and thorough solutions to during meetings or outside of formal work time. It
essential tasks. Respondents learned that ﬂexibility was also mentioned that it might be helpful to collect
and adaptability could mean abandoning their own more information from partners about what the US
group’s established practices in order to take on side can do to improve joint teamwork. Similarly,
others’ style of working, in order to achieve joint some said it might be helpful to ask both the US side
goals. At other times, it meant standing their ground and the partners about what partners can do to work
about how to do things, but using creativity in ﬁnding better with Americans.

ways to get the message across diplomatically.

Working to develop accurate empathy for the We were surprised that many respondents did not

partners’ situations allowed for solutions to be mention culture-related strategies at all. Interestingly,

developed that all sides could understand and accept none of our respondents to date mentioned speaking

[23]. or even beginning to learn a foreign language

themselves, nor did they mention numerous other

The following are some of the strategies that study established skills for working in international teams

participants found to be effective in maintaining the that probably would further enhance their

ﬂexibility necessary to deal with the differences effectiveness. We believe that unless ISS leaders
associated with operating the 1882 make cultural awareness a priority, they are
guaranteed to experience exasperation and stress. Our

0 Tolerating ambiguity about non-essential issues data did include the following strategies that
or complex open questions — “not sweating the respondents have found helpful:
small stuff” and avoiding premature closure.

0 Eliminating ambiguity — once a decision has 0 Attending to speaker, not interpreter. Write notes
been made, making extra efforts to conﬁrm during the translation, not when the international
mutual understanding. partner is talking. This shows respect and also

0 Thinking outside one’s usual comfort zone to increases overall communication accuracy
understand the nature of a problem and help because nonverbal cues are conveyed. Brief the
formulate the best solution. For example, it may interpreter 011 key terminology bCfOI‘C
be especially uncomfortable for highly trained discussions, to keep interpreter in background
engineers to realize that there may be multiple and to improve accuracy during discussion.
right answers or correct approaches in such a o Simplifying speech when not everyone is a
complex interpersonal environment. native speaker of English — keep statements short

0 Maintaining awareness of context — see ones’ and free from jargon, slang, and idioms. This
group in the context of the overall operation and increases accuracy and also minimizes partners’
the way that the organizational elements ﬁt and interpreters’ fatigue during long discussions.
together. 0 Learning culture-speoiﬁo do’s and don’ts, such

o Adapting the rules to the situation and as the level of formality expected during a
constructing creative work—arounds. meeting, or the strategic value of socializing at

0 Considering partners’ organizational politics and the workplace. Respondents did DOt appear to be
context when Choosing the timing of making aware 0f many speciﬁc helpful tips SUCh as to
requests. avoid shaking hands with a Russian across the

o Realizing that interpersonal mistakes and threshold ofa doorway.
blunders are unavoidable in a multicultural . . . . .
context, and that it is important not to View these mm
as failures but to learn from them and move . .
forward, and to allow enough time to let them MOSt study participants (86%) stressed the
surface and get resolved so that mission safety is 1mportanoe 0f being well prepared for the JOb 0f
not affected. interacting with the international partner team

0 Adapting to Changing situations and remain gpe_n members. Acquiring the necessary knowledge and
to the need to recalibrate or repeat a process. SklllS. 1s a lengthy and tlme . consurnlng process,

espeoially when all learning is done on the JOb.
Mentoring of new employees in cultural do’s and
9

"
"10","Paper to be presented at 56th International Astronautioal Congress, Fukuoka, J apan, October 17-21, 2005.
don’ts and speciﬁc training in best practices for organizational 188 program, leaders will be frustrated
working with IP’s was felt to be critical in helping to unless they realize that these leadership and cultural
reduce stress, not only for newer ﬂight controllers, Challenges are as integral to their job as the technical
but also for senior ﬂight controllers, who may have Challenges that they were trained for and that they
learned some of these lessons on their own but could had expected to face. Fostering the development of
still beneﬁt from a systematic reView. Moreover, it is these leadership and cultural skills in those Charged
also important for the lessons learned by the ﬂight with operating the 188 will continue to be critical for
controllers to be spread to others who interact with addressing future Challenges associated with
them, so that their expectations are appropriate. completing the ISS assembly, working more Closely

with European and Japanese partners, and preparing
The following are some of the training-related for missions to the Moon and Mars. The leadership
strategies the study participants identiﬁed: approaches identiﬁed in this study will be useful in
selecting, training, and supporting the teams involved
0 Seeking additional training for themselves. in these future missions. Just as studying the travails
Current senior ﬂight controllers said they would of historical terrestrial exploration teams inspires and
beneﬁt from additional training in areas such as educates current leaders [24,25], studying the
negotiation, managing stress, and job-relevant Challenges and triumphs of these pioneering ISS
cultural do’s and don’ts. leaders can help prepare future leaders for
0 Providing training to new ﬂight controllers. expeditions outside Earth’s orbit.
Current ﬂight controllers would like to pass on
what they have learned about best practices for m
working with international partners, so that new
ﬂight controllers can get “up to speed” quickly. Limitations of this study include the small sample
. Providing training to other groups. Flight size and our inability to test the degree to which
controllers beneﬁt when those who interact with participants are typical 0f other US ﬂight controllers.
them have accurate expectations about what is A150: we do DOt know what their international
possible to achieve in what time frame in this counterparts W0111d say about challenges in working
type Of setting. For example, questions that with them, but we intend to study that in future work.
require input from international partners may Due to 0111"" small sample size, we have DOt yet
have a longer turn-around time. presented detailed quantitative numerical results, but
. Seeking international partners’ feedback about we intend to do so after collecting additional data and
how to further improve teamwork, and rolling conducting further analyses.
this new information into ongoing training and .
mentoring strategies. Reoornm—endations
1. Use the results of this study as a basis for
Conclusion establishing an educational program focused on
improving leadership approaches and cultural
The 188 operations team has come a long way in awareness Of US ﬂight control personnel
understanding how to successfully operate a long- 561“?th fOI“ pOSIttth Of. leadership. 1n long-
duration manned spacecraft in a geographically duratlon space rn1ss1ons 1nvolv1ng 1nteraotlon
distributed, multicultural enVironrnent. Establishing a Wlth multl-oultural teams: For example,. rnal<e
workable operations concept for the 188 in a few cultural awareness and bas1e language fam111ar1ty
short years has not only been an outstanding courses a part of the Ind1V1dual Development
technical accomplishment, but a triumph of Plan. concept currently under reV1ew for all
leadership and oross-cultural cooperation. An MISSIOD Operations personnel. . These courses
important factor in this success has been the ability of eould be .a requirernent for 1nd1V1duals heaV1ly
the individuals on the team to effectively resolve the Involved In Intematlonal Partner OperatlonS-
many leadership and cultural Challenges identiﬁed in
this study. 2. Collect feedback from international partner
organizations involved in joint space mission
Our results showed that the day-to-day operational operations on (a) how they perceive the
management of the 188 requires a variety of leadership and eultural challenges 1n work1ng
leadership and interpersonal skills that may not be Wlth the1r Amerloan counterparts and (b) what
readily acquired in traditional engineering school can be done by the US and Partner teams to
curricula. In this 24/7/365/global/multicultural/multi- further Improve communlcatlon and teamwork-
10

"
"11","Paper to be presented at 56thInternati0na1Astronautical Congress, Fukuoka, J apan, October 17-21, 2005.
October 17-21, 2005.
References [15] NC. Kraft, T.J. Lyons, H. Binder,
Intercultural crew issues in long-duration

[1] NASA J SC, Memo DA-05-028. In: Flight spaceﬂight, Aviation, Space, and
Controller Manifesto, June 2, 2005. Environmental Medicine 74, 2003, 575-578.

[2] DH. Korth, T.P. LeBlanc, International Space [16] G.M. Sandal, Culture and tension during an
Station Alpha Operations Planning. In: International Space Station simulation: Results
International Workshop on Planning and from SFINCSS’99, Aviation, Space, and
Scheduling, AIAA, Houston, TX, 2002. Environmental Medicine 75 , 2004, C44—C5 1.

[3] B. Parke, J . Orasanu, Overview of 188 Flight [17] N. Inoue, I. Matsuzaki, H. Ohshima, Group
Controller Ratings on Organizational Risk and interactions in SFINCSS—99: Lessons for
T001Deve10pment Survey, Feb 2004, Ames improving behavioral support programs. In,
Research Center V01. 75, Aviation, Space, and Environmental

[4] J .A. Thompsen, Leading Virtual Teams, Medicine, 2004, pp. C28-C35.

Quality Digest September, 2000. [18] O.P. Kozerenko, V.I. Gushin, A.D. Sled, V.A.

[5] L. Crede, Getting high performance With a Eﬁmov, J .M. Pystinnikova, Some problems of
globally dispersed team, retrieved 8/5/2005 group interaction in prolonged space ﬂights,
from http://WWW.sheppardmoscow.eom, 2001. Human Performance in Extreme Environments

[6] M.E. Kossler, S. Prestridge, Going the 4, 1999, 123-127.
distance: The Challenges of leading a dispersed [19] L.M. Tomi, J . Hosein, K. Rossokha, Cross-
team, Leadership in Action 23(5) NOV/Dec cultural training and selection effectiveness:
2003, 3-17. Lessons for the 188 from studies on expatriate

[7] J .B. Ritsher, Cultural factors and the personnel, Aviation, Space, and
International Space Station, Aviation, Space, Environmental Medicine 73(3), 2002, 231-
and Environmental Medicine 76, 2005, B135- 232.

B144. [20] J .F. Geurts, The Special Challenges of

[8] R. Vinaj a, Major Challenges in multi-cultural Leading Geographically Dispersed Teams. In:
Virtual teams. In: Proceedings: Southwest Case Defense AT&L, V01. May-June, 2005, pp. 50-
Research Association, March 7, 2003, pp. 341- 66.

346. [21] N. Kanas, J . Ritsher, Leadership issues With

[9] L. Tomi, Critical analysis of American multicultural crews 0n the International Space
representation of Russians, Pragmatics 11(3), Station: Lessons learned from Shuttle/Mir,
2001, 263-283. Acta Astronautica 56, 2005, 932-936.

[10] M. J anssens, J .M. Brett, Meaningful [22] N. Kanas, V. Salnitskiy, J . Ritsher, V. Gushin,
participation in transnational teams, European D. Weiss, S. Saylor, C. Marmar, Psychosocial
J ournal of Work and Organizational interactions during 188 missions. In: 15th
Psychology 6(2), 1997, 153-168. Humans in Space Symposium: Beneﬁts of

[11] Y. Yasin, ""Russian soul"" and economic Human Presence in Space, Graz, Austria, May
modernization. In: Russia in Global Affairs, 22-26, 2005, pp. 21, Book of Abstracts.

Vol. 3 July/September, 2003. [23] R.L. Hughes, R.C. Ginnett, G.J. Curphy,
http://eng.globalaffairs.ru/numbers/4/489.html. Leadership enhancing the lessons of

[12] D.J. Kealey, Research on intercultural experience, McGraW-Hill/Irwin, 2006, 608 pp.
effectiveness and its relevance to multicultural [24] J . Stuster, Analogue Prototypes for Lunar and
crews in space, Aviation, Space, and Mars Exploration, Aviation, Space, and
Environmental Medicine 75(7), 2004, C58— Environmental Medicine Vol 76 (6), Section
C64. 11, 2003, B78—83.

[13] A. Holland, Culture, gender and mission [25] M. Morrell, S. Capparell, Shackleton's way:
accomplishment: operational experience. leadership lessons, Penguin Putnam Inc., New
Proceedings from: The 12th Man in Space York, 2001.

Symposium, Washington DC, June 8—13,
1997.

[14] J .B. Ritsher, N. Kanas, V.I. Gushin, S. Saylor,
Cultural differences in patterns of mood states
on board the International Space Station.
Proceedings from: 5 6th International
Astronautical Congress, Fukuoka, J apan,

1 1

"
