"","x"
"1","Acta Astronautica 69 (2011) 240—244
~ * . . . . '::=*""""' / 2"",
‘géj;i{;:._;:.g Contents IIStS available at SolenceDIrect '
(59333513. ‘1‘"" ' .
v 1; :33; Acta Astronaut1ca /
'5; f {I ” /5f’,’:::::f:§;
ELSEVIER journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/|ocate/actaastro {m} l'( j
—
H1gh versus low crewmember autonomy dunng a 105—day Mars
0 O O 0 %
s1mulatlon m1551on
0 >1: 0 o o o
N1cl< I(anas , Matthew Hams, Thomas Neylan, Jenn1fer Boyd, Dan1el S. Welss, Colleen Cook,
Stephanie Saylor
University of California and Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, USA
ARTICLEINFO ABSTRACT
Article history: Crewmembers participating in long—duration space expeditions beyond the Earth—Moon
RecelVEd 24 DeFember 2010 environment will have more autonomy than in previous on—orbit missions or missions to the
Rece‘YEd 1“ rEVISEd form Moon. In order to study the impact of high versus low crew autonomy on crewmembers ancl
ZAP“: 310115114 ,1 2011 mission control personnel we studied 6 men who were isolated for 105 days in a Mars
ccép e . pH mission simulator at the Institute for Biomedical Problems in Moscow, along with 18 outside
Ava1lable on11ne 11 May 2011 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
— 1nd1v1duals who mon1tored the1r act1v1t1es 1n a s1mulated m1ss10n control. Dur1ng the ﬁrst 10
KeJ/WOTdSI weeks of the isolation the crew interacted with mission control under a low autonomy
crewmem?er. aUtollorF‘y condition, where the latter developed the work schedule and communicated with the former
Mars Slmu atlon mlssmn in real time. During the last 5 weeks a high autonomy condition was instituted, where
crewmembers planned and revised their work schedule and where a Mars—like commu—
nication time delay occurred with the outside monitors. Both the crew and mission control
subjects completed weekly measures of mood, group interpersonal climate, work freedom,
and performance. The results suggested that high work autonomy was well received by the
crew, mission goals were accomplished, and there were no adverse effects. During the high
autonomy period, crewmember mood and self—direction were reported as being better but
the mission control personnel reported more anxiety and work role confusion. Despite
scoring lower in work pressure overall, the four Russian crewmembers reported a greater
rise in work pressure from low to high autonomy than the two Europeans. In contrast, the
European crewmembers reported a greater rise in negative dysphoric mood in going from
low to high autonomy, whereas the Russians’ emotional state remained the same or slightly
improved. Work freedom was rated slightly higher during high autonomy, but work
performance was about the same overall, although Russian scores increased and European
scores decreased on all four performance measures. It is time to study the effects of high
autonomy with larger subject samples during on—orbit space missions (e.g., to the Interna—
tional Space Station) in order to prepare for future deep space exploratory missions, where
high autonomy will be the norm.
© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Background coordinated crewmember work schedules, and crew—
ground communications have been frequent and in real
During previous on—orbit and lunar space missions, time. However, during future expeditionary missions
personnel in mission control generally have timelined and beyond the Earth—Moon neighborhood, the long distances
and mission durations will increase crewmember auton—
omy dramatically. Crewmembers will be responsible for
* This paper was presented during the 61 st IAC in Prague. plannlng mOSt Of tllEll‘ WOl‘k SChEdUIes and cleahng WIFh
* Corresponding author_ emergenc1es that anse. Furthermore, there w1ll be lags 1n
E-mail address: nick.kanas@ucsf.edu (N. I(anas). two—way communication With the Earth Of up to 44 min
0094—5765/$ — see front matter © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi: 1 0.1 01 6/j.actaastro.201 1.04.014

"
"2","N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 69 (2011) 240—244 241
from the surface of the Mars [1]. It is not known how this control personnel. All study participants completed a
increased autonomy will affect crewmember performance weekly questionnaire composed of POMS, CBS, and
and safety and what its impact will be on mission control WES items.
operations on the Earth. However, astronauts are very Our second autonomy study involved some of the
competent and intelligent people who are used to orga— personnel working on the Haughton—Mars Project during
nizing their activities in life. One might therefore theorize the summer of 2008 (HMP 2008). The location is an old,
that during high autonomy space missions, where they large impact crater on Devon Island, Canada that has
are able to ﬂexibly plan and schedule their workload with similarities to the martian surface in appearance and
maximal efﬁciency, crewmembers would enjoy their geological characteristics. Participants don space suits,
work activities more, experience more positive mood travel in a Mars—like rover, and conduct tasks similar to
states, and perform at a higher level than under condi— those planned for an actual Mars expedition. They have
tions where their schedule is timelined and controlled by great autonomy to plan their activities each day since
others. there is no formal mission control. Eight non—NASA
In 2006, we were directed by NASA/Johnson Space scientists and graduate students were subjects in our
Center to study the impact of high autonomy on crew— study and completed weekly POMS, CBS, and WES
members and monitoring personnel involved with a measures.
variety of space simulation missions conducted on the The ﬁndings from both studies suggested that the high
Earth. If increased autonomy could be shown to be safe autonomy condition was well received and that the
and advantageous, then the plan was to study its impact subjects were able to complete the mission goals safely
during on—orbit missions to the International Space Sta— and successfully [7]. Several questionnaire subscales
tion in preparation for expeditionary missions to Mars showed trends favoring high crewmember autonomy,
and other distant locations. To date, we have studied although the small numbers of subjects did not allow us
autonomy in three space simulation environments on to carry out rigorous statistical analyses. In the NEEMO
the Earth. study, crewmembers reported receiving more direction
Our methodology has been similar to that used in our from their leader and decreased fatigue under high versus
previous on—orbit studies involving the Mir and Interna— low autonomy and the topside personnel reported more
tional Space Station, where we evaluated mood and group role confusion but less work pressure during high auton—
interpersonal climate, both in space and in mission con— omy. In the HMP 2008 study, crewmembers reported
trol [1—3]. After signing informed consent, the American more cohesion than contrasting non—isolated groups of
and Russian crew and ground subjects completed a people in other jobs who worked under less autonomous
weekly study questionnaire that included items from conditions.
the proﬁle of mood states (POMS) [4] and two group
climate measures, the group environment scale (CBS) [5] 3. Mars 500 105-day study
and the work environment scale (WES) [6]. From these
measures, weekly mean subscale scores could be calcu— Our most recent study was conducted as part of the
lated that gave us an indication of changes over time in Mars 500 Program, which is designed to study the
constructs such as tension and other emotional states, performance and interactions ofa group of sixindividuals
group cohesion, and the task and support roles of the conﬁned for 520 days in a Mars mission simulator at the
leader. Institute for Biomedical Problems (IBMP) in Moscow. The
lower ﬂoor of the simulation habitat contains living and
2. Previous autonomy studies laboratory areas for the crew, and the upper ﬂoor is a
mock—up of the Mars surface on which the crew can
Our ﬁrst space simulation autonomy study involved simulate geological and other planetary activities. This
crews of the NASA Extreme Environment Mission Opera— mission began in June, 2010.
tions (NEEMO) Program. This program uses the Aquarius We participated in a pilot study for this mission, a
underwater submersible laboratory, which is located off 105—day simulation that was conducted at the IBMP from
the coast of Florida. Typically, four or more “aquanauts” March 31 to July 14, 2009. This pilot study involved a
conduct a variety of undersea space—like activities both crew of six men: two Russian cosmonauts (one of whom
within and outside of the habitat. Topside personnel was the commander),aRussian medicaldoctor,aRussian
monitor the crews and timeline their schedules. sports physiologist, a German mechanical engineer, and a
We studied two NEEMO missions: 12 and 13. NEEMO French airline pilot. Our subject pool also included 18
12 consisted of 12 days of low autonomy, where crew— mainly Russian monitoring personnel who were outside
member schedules were timelined by the mission control the habitat and worked in shifts as “mission control”.
personnel on the surface. The subjects included 3 NASA During the ﬁrst 10 weeks of the isolation the crewmem—
crewmembers and 6 topside personnel. NEEMO 13 com— bers interacted in real time with mission control, which
prised a total of 5 days of low autonomy and 5 days of planned the work schedule in a low autonomy condition.
high autonomy (where the crew had more ﬂexibility to During the last 5 weeks a high autonomy condition was
plan its own work schedule and experienced a 40 min instituted, where the crewmembers had more responsi—
two—way communication delay with mission control, as bility for planning their own activities and where a
such might be expected from the surface of Mars). The 40 min two—way Mars—like communication delay was
subjects included 4 NASA crewmembers and 8 mission instituted with the outside.

"
"3","242 N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 69 (2011) 240—244
Some of the POMS, CBS, and WES results have been work performance efﬁciency, and work performance
reported previously [7] but will be reviewed here. In accuracy:
general the high autonomy condition was successfully
employed, with no adverse results, and mission goals 1. compared to ausual week, the amount of freedom I had
were accomplished. The crewmembers reported liking the this past week in planning my work schedule was...
freedom of this condition during post—mission 2. compared to a usual week, the amount of freedom our
debrieﬁngs. group had this past week in planning our work
Due to the small crew sample size, we decided to focus schedule was...
our formal data analyses of crewmemberlow versus high 3. compared to my usual performance, this week my
autonomy differences using effect sizes, expressed in work efﬁciency was...
terms of Cohen’s d values. According to Cohen [8], values 4. compared to our usual performance, this week our
of .5 deﬁne a moderate difference and values of .8 or group’s work efﬁciency was...
above a large difference. Out of a total of 21 POMS, CBS, 5. compared to my usual performance, this week my
and WES subscales, 7 had effect sizes of .60 or higher work accuracy was...
(none were in the .46—.59 range). Of these, scores on 6. compared to our usual performance, this week our
measures of depression, activity, anger and aggression, group’s work accuracy was...
group leader direction, and outside monitor support
dropped during the high autonomy condition, and the The six crewmembers were instructed to rate these
self—discovery score increased. A measure of work pres— questions each week on a Likert—type scale with ﬁve
sure 3150 rose during high autonomy, htlt this effect was indicators: 1 (much less), 2 (somewhat less), 3 (about the
largely due to the four Russian subjects. Although they same), 4 (somewhat more), and 5 (much more). The ﬁrst
scored lower overall Oh this measure than the tWO two questions were viewed as validity Checks for low versus
Europeans, their scores increased enough from low to high autonomy, and the next four questions were seen as
high autonomy to result in a very high effect size performance measures of work efﬁciency and accuracy.
(d=4-00)- In terms of overall results, question 2 showed an increase
Reminiscent 0t 0111‘ NEEMO ﬁhdith, the mission ton"" in group planning freedom during high autonomy with an
trol subjects scored higher on measures of tension—anxi— effect size Of d=.66, followed by question 1, which showed
ety and COHfUSiOH and lower on task orientation during an increase with d=.39 (see the table below). Although these
the high versus 10W autonomy condition (51 > 50% sug— were in the expected direction, the mean scores were small
gesting that they were h0t clear about their duties. They (from 2.98 to 3.03 in both cases). The four performance
also scored lower on a measure of depressed mood but scores showed no meaningful changes (d<.12).
higher in group cohesion during this time.
. We also lool<ed.for possible nationality/condition Question LOW autonomy High autonomy Effectsize
1nteract10n effects in our subscales usmg a m1xed mean score mean score (Cohem d)
model analysis of variance procedure that allowed us to —
ﬁnd the partial eta squared (etaz) values as an indication 1 2-98 3-03 39
of how much of the variance was accounted for by the g :33 :8: E?
interaction. According to Cohen [8], values above .14, 4 3:02 3:03 :11
accounting for 14% of the variance, are large effects. 5 300 300 _00
Since our sample size was small (4 Russians and 2 6 3.00 3.00 .00
Europeans) we report here only those subscales with an
eta2 value of .25 or higher, and we present these ﬁndings The mean scores for Russian and European crewmem—
as suggestive outcomes needing conﬁrmation from larger bers taken separately likewise hovered around “about the
samples. same” level, but the four performance scores showed an
During high autonomy the Russian scores on mood interesting pattern. The Russian scores rose for all six
indicators remained the same or slightly improved, but questions from low to high autonomy (including the four
the European scores were higher on three POMS measures performance items), whereas the European scores
of negative dysphoric mood: fatigue, anger—hostility, and dropped for the four performance questions. The eta2
an overall measure of total mood disturbance (although values were .276 for questions 3 and 4 and .375 for
all values remained in the clinically healthy range). The questions 5 and 6 (see the table below).
Europeans also scored higher on an autonomy subscale,
but their scores dropped on a measure of direction from . . 2
, Question Low autonomy mean High autonomy mean eta
the1r commander. The results on other subscales were scores_ scores_
more mixed [7]. — —
Russ Euro Russ Euro
1 2.98 3.00 3.05 3.00 .065
4. New work performance scales 2 298 300 305 300 214
3 3.00 3.05 3.05 3.00 .276
For the 105—day study, we constructed and piloted 4 3.00 3.05 3.05 3.00 .276
six new questions that attempted to measure crewmem— 5 2-95 3-10 3-00 3-00 375
. . . . 6 2.98 3.05 3.00 3.00 .375
ber 1nd1v1dual and group work planning freedom, —

"
"4","N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 69 (2011) 240—244 243
The changes for question 5 are shown graphically, working under, we cannot deﬁnitively separate out the
below: effects of time and autonomy. To do so would require a
. _ larger study where each variable could be manipulated in
3.5 IndIVIduaIWork Accuracy Performance order to test for the possible independent effects.
There were some interesting cultural differences among
the crewmembers in the 105—day simulation. The four
3"": Russians had lower overall work pressure scores than the
3 Europeans, which was reminiscent of our previous on—orbit
g r: w work involving the Mir and International Space Station,
8 8 where the Russian crewmembers scored signiﬁcantly lower
5 “2 . Eur ans in work pressure than their American colleagues [3]. How—
5 3 2:: ope ever, in the 105—day study, the Russians reported a differ—
2% ' RUSS“ ential rise in work pressure in going from low to high
#3 § ,. autonomy, as compared with the Europeans. This might have
g E ""5 reﬂected national differences among our subjects in terms of
'3 response to increased group freedom or lack of direction by
' 3; outside authorities. Nevertheless, during the high autonomy
period, the four Russian crewmembers scored modestly
higher in work planning freedom, work performance efﬁ—
3‘~‘ . Ciency, and work performance accuracy. During high auton—
LowAutonomy HughAutonomy omy the two European crewmembers scored higher in
negative emotions and awareness of autonomy, but lower
5. Discussion and conclusions in direction from the crew commander and in work perfor—
mance efﬁciency and accuracy. These ﬁndings may have
Taken along with the ﬁndings from our earlier NEEMO been related to the fact that this simulation mission was part
and HMP 2008 studies, the results from this Mars 500 105— of a Russian—directed program with a Russian crew comman—
day pilot study suggest that high crew autonomy is well der, so the European crewmembers may have been less
received by crewmembers working in isolated space analog comfortable in this environment than their Russian counter—
settings. The mission goals were accomplished, there were no parts. Our previous on—orbit work has suggested that crew—
adverse effects, and crewmember mood, self—direction, and members have beneﬁtted from the support they receive from
freedom to plan work were rated as being higher. However, the Earth [1—3] and perhaps the lack of such support during
the effects of high autonomy were confounded with the the high autonomy condition played a role in the differential
communication time delay, and it is difﬁcult to partial out the reaction of the Europeans, who already might have been
relative inﬂuence of these two factors. Given the operational feeling more socially isolated than the Russians.
constraints of this simulation we could not alter the protocol Mission control personnel reported more anxiety and
and manipulate the time delay variable, but in future studies work role confusion during the high crewmember auton—
of autonomy this should be done to ascertain its importance. omy period, even though they experienced more cohesion
Nevertheless our current ﬁndings were supported by our and less depression. This suggests that attention needs to
previous Haughton—Mars study (see above), where there was be paid to the activities of mission control personnel as
no time delay to consider since there was no mission control well as to the activities of crewmembers during autono—
involved but just a group of isolated individuals working mous space missions.
under high autonomy conditions. The results from the Mars 500 105—day pilot study must
Another issue affecting the interpretation of the results be interpreted cautiously. The sample size was small, which
relates to the fact that due to operational constraints, the limited our ability to evaluate the ﬁndings using more
high autonomy condition followed the low autonomy con— rigorous statistical methods. In addition, the fact that only
dition in both the NEEMO 13 and the Mars 500 105—day pilot a single group of people was studied limits our ability to
studies. It is possible that the observed positive results were generalize the ﬁndings to other groups working under
more afactor of time sequence than high autonomy.Arguing isolated and conﬁned conditions (such as during a long—
against this notion is the fact that in our previous on—orbit duration space mission). Finally, as discussed above, the
research involving the Mir and International Space Station, effects of high autonomy were confounded with the com—
where we also used the POMS, CBS, and WES, we did not munication time delay and the time of its implementation
ﬁnd any evidence of time—related effects in comparisons that during the mission. But taken together with our previous
involved the ﬁrst half versus the second half of the missions NEEMO and HMP 2008 ﬁndings, we believe that our 105—
or any of the four quarters [1,2]. Where such effects have day study results demonstrate that people can work safely
been reported by others, such as in the so—called third and productively in isolated and conﬁned environments
quarter phenomenon [1], there have been negative changes during high autonomy conditions.
in mood state after the halfway point of an isolation mission. It is time to study the effects of low versus high
In contrast, in the pilot studies reported here, we generally crewmember autonomy using larger subject samples
found positive changes in mood, which we think were more during actual space missions on—orbit, such as to the
likely due to high autonomy than to time in isolation. International Space Station. Such a study will inform
However, under the operational constraints we were training and support strategies for future crews engaged

"
"5","244 N. Kanas et al. / Acta Astronautica 69 (2011) 240—244
on expeditionary missions to Mars and other settings [2] NA. Kanas, V.P. Salnitskiy, 1.3. Ritsher, v.1. Gushin, D.S. Weiss,
where long distances are involved and where high auton— S.A. Salylor, O.P. I(lozerenko, C.R.dMarmar, Crewmemlber and mission
- contro personne interactions uring Internationa Station Station
OIle W111 be the norm' missions, Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 78 (2007)
601—607.
[3] ].E. Boyd, N.A. I(anas, V.P. Salnitskiy, V.I. Gushin, S.A. Saylor,
ACRHOWIEdgementS D.S. Weiss, C.R. Marmar, Cultural differences in crewmembers and
mission control personnel during two space station programs,
- - Aviation, S ace, and Environmental Medicine 80 2009 532—540.
The work rePOFtEd 1n thlS paper was fundéd by NASA [4] D.M. McNapir, M. Lorr, L.F. Droppleman, Proﬁle of 12/10ch States
Contract number NNJO5H601A and the Natlonal Space Manual (revised), 1992 ed., Educational and Industrial Testing
Biomedical Research Institute Contract number NCC—9— Service,SanDiego,CA,1992.
58—NBPFOOOO5. [5] RH. Moos, Group Environment Scale Manual, 3rd ed., Consulting
- - - Ps cholo ists Press, Palo Alto, CA, 1994.
, The aUthorS WOUId hke to thank the InStltUt? fOI‘ Blome_ [6] Rﬁ. Moogs, Work Environment Scale Manual, 3rd ed., Consulting
dlcal Problems 1n Moscow for 1ts support of thls study. psychologists press, [3310 Alto, CA, 1994
[7] N. Kanas, S. Saylor, M. Harris, T. Neylan,]. Boyd, D.S. Weiss, P. Baskin,
References C. Cook, C. Marmar, High vs. low crewmember autonomy in
space simulation environments, Acta Astronautica 67 (2010)
731—738.
[1] N. Kanas, D. Manzey, Space Psychology and Psychiatry, 2nd ed., [8] J. Cohen, Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences, 2nd
Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, and Microcosm Press, El ed., Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, 1988.
Segundo, CA, 2008.

"
