"","x"
"1","IAC—OS-A1.5.02+
HUMAN INTERACTIONS IN SPACE: ISS VS SHUTTLE/MIR
N.A. Kanasl, V.P. Salnitskiyz, J .B. Ritsherl, V.I. Gushinz, D.S. Weissl,
S.A. Saylorl, O.P. Kozerenkoz, and CR. Marmar1

[University of California/San Francisco, and the Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San
Francisco, California, USA. Dr. Kanas’ e-mail address: nick21@itsa.ucsfedu.
21nstitutef0r Biomedical Problems, Moscow, Russia
ABSTRACT

This paper compares ﬁndings from two NASA-funded studies of international long-duration missions to
the Mir space station (Shuttle/Mir) and t0 the International Space Station (ISS). American and Russian
erewrnernbers and mission control personnel participated. Issues examined included Changes in mood and
group social elirnate over time, displacement of group tension to outside monitoring personnel, cultural
differences, and leadership roles. Findings were based on the completion of a weekly questionnaire that
included items from the Proﬁle Of Mood States, the Group Environment Scale, and the Work Environment
Scale. An examination of issues investigated in both studies revealed rnueh similarity in ﬁndings. There
was little support for the presence of Changes in levels of mood and group elirnate over time, and no
evidence for a “3rd quarter phenomenon”. Both studies also provided evidence for the displacement of
negative emotions to outside personnel in both erewrnernbers and mission control personnel. There were
similar patterns of differences between Americans and Russians and between erewrnernbers and mission
control personnel. Finally, in both studies, the support role of the leader was related to group cohesion
among erewrnernbers, and both the task and support roles of the leader were related to cohesion among
mission control personnel. Thus, in these four areas, the ISS study substantially replicated the ﬁndings
from the earlier Shuttle/Mir study, suggesting that common psychosocial issues affect people engaged in
0n-0rbit space missions.
1. BACKGROUND [1, 3, 5, 6, 10, 12]. These various psychosocial

issues have been related to mission duration,

People working for long periods of time in with many problems being reported after the
dangerous isolated and conﬁned environments, halfway point (e.g., the “3rd quarter
such as polar stations, submarines, and space phenomenon”) [1, 3,10-13].
stations, are impacted by a number of stressors We have examined these issues during two
that can affect their psychological well-being and large international studies that were funded by
their interpersonal interactions [1-12]. As a NASA that involved missions to the Mir space
result, they may experience negative effects in station (Shuttle/Mir study) and t0 the
mood and group social elirnate (e.g., increased International Space Station (ISS study).
tension, decreased group cohesion) over time. In Although there were some differences in what
addition, there have been reports that negative we evaluated in the two projects, there were also
feelings among members of an isolated group many similarities. The present report compares
that cannot be resolved may be displaced and contrasts the results of issues that were
outwardly to people monitoring their activities examined in both studies in order to determine
+ Presented at the 56th IAC (International Astronautical Congress), Fukuoka, Japan, October 17-21, 2005. Due to computer coding
errors, the original paper reported some erroneous ﬁndings, which have been corrected in this version.

1

"
"2","which were speciﬁc to one or the other program 2. METHODS
and which were not (and therefore may be
generic to any space station program where In both studies, the emotional state and
erewrnernbers are living and working on-orbit interpersonal environment of the crewmember
for long periods of time). There were four areas and mission control subjects were assessed
studied in both projects: 1) the presence or weekly through the completion of a study
absence of Changes in mood and group social questionnaire composed of items from three
elirnate over time; 2) the displacement of we11—known standardized psychometric
negative feelings to people monitoring activities measures: Proﬁle of Mood States, or POMS
from outside the group; 3) cultural differences [14]; Group Environment Scale, or GES [15];
between Americans and Russians; and 4) the and Work Environment Scale, or WES [16].
impact of different leadership roles on cohesion. From this questionnaire, subseales were obtained
Two groups were studied: erewrnernbers in space that measured levels of mood and group climate
and mission control personnel on the ground (e.g., Tension-AnXiety, Cohesion, Leader
who were involved with the missions. In both Support). There were a total of 21 subseales in
studies, the missions varied between 4 and 7 the Shuttle/Mir study and 20 subseales in the 188
months in duration. study (items for a Physical Comfort subseale
There were some differences between the Mir were deleted in the 188 study because the Mir
and 188 settings. The three erewrnernbers in the subjects reported that the questions were not
Shuttle/Mir study were launched in a somewhat relevant for space station enVironrnents). Scores
staggered manner, with the single American based on the included subseales were used to
going up at a different time than the two exarnine overall mean values as well as Changes
Russians. In contrast, the ISS erewrnernbers over time.
were all launched and returned at the same time, In both studies, data were analyzed using
allowing us to study crews whose members were methods appropriate for longitudinal data, which
together throughout the missions. Also, due to took into account multiple and varying numbers
the grounding of the Space Shuttle ﬂeet as a of observations per person [17, 18]. Procedures
result of the Columbia accident, and the resultant from two main strategies were employed: mixed
need to use the smaller Soyuz transport vehicle, model regression and the generalized linear
some of the later 188 missions we studied model, or GLM. Corrections were made to
consisted of only two erewrnernbers (one reduce the possibility of Type I errors using the
American and one Russian), whereas the earlier procedure of Benjarnini and Hochberg [19].
188 missions and all of the Shuttle/Mir missions The ﬁnal Mir study sample consisted of 5
had crews of three. In addition, all of the American astronauts, 8 Russian cosmonauts, and
Shuttle/Mir missions consisted of one American 42 American and 16 Russian mission control
and two Russians (one of whom was always the personnel. In the 188 study, the ﬁnal sample
commander), whereas the 3-person ISS missions consisted of four missions with 3-person crews
varied in national representation (i.e., one and three missions with 2-person crews. In total,
American and two Russians or one Russian and 8 American astronauts, 9 Russian cosmonauts,
two Americans), and the nationality of the leader and 108 American (from Houston and
also varied from mission to mission. In the Huntsville) and 20 Russian mission control
Shuttle/Mir study, mission requirements dictated personnel participated in the study. Although in
that all major operational activities were based at general the subjects who participated in each
the TsUP mission control center in Moscow, so study were different, some people participated in
all of our American and Russian ground subjects both, particularly in the Russian mission control
were located there. In contrast, in the 188 study, sample where some individuals were assigned to
operational activities were split among several work in multiple missions.
sites, so we studied Russian mission control
subjects at TsUP and American mission control 3. RESULTS
subjects at Johnson Space Center in Houston,
Texas, and Marshall Space Flight Center in 3.1 Time Effects
Huntsville, Alabama. Finally, the Mir missions
were largely under Russian control, whereas the The results from our Shuttle/Mir study [3, 20-
ISS missions included major American and 26] found none of the predicted 2nd half
international partners operational inﬂuences. decrements in functioning, as reﬂected by 12
subscale scores measuring levels of tension,
2

"
"3","cohesion, and leader support (except for a versus Russians), a main effect for Location
statistically signiﬁcant 2nd half drop in scores on (erewrnernbers in space versus mission control
one subseale that assessed the support role of the personnel on the ground), and their interaction.
Mir mission commander). For all 20 subseales, In terms of a main effect for Country, there
there were no differences in values across the were similarities between the results in our
four quarters of the missions, and there was no Shuttle/Mir and 188 studies that suggested the
evidence for a unique 3rd quarter effect. presence of cultural differences between the
Similarly, there were no 2nd half or quarter American and Russian subjects. These are
effects on any subseales tested during the ISS presented in Table l, where statistically
missions [27, 28]. Thus, in both on-orbit space signiﬁcant Russian-Arneriean subseale
station enVironrnents, time did not seem to be a differences from either study are shown after
factor in predicting Changes in mood or group applying the Benjamini and Hochberg
social climate, unlike what has commonly been corrections to reduce the possibility of Type 1
found in isolated and conﬁned settings on Earth. errors [19]. (The only missing result is from the
Physical Comfort subseale that was used in the
3.2 Displacement Mir study, which suggested that the Russians
were more comfortable with their work
We operationalized the concept of environment [Mir, TsUP] than the Americans).
displacement by predicting that there would be a Although there were siX signiﬁcant differences
negative association between high scores on siX in Shuttle/Mir and two in the 188 study, all but
subseales measuring dysphoric emotions and one of the corresponding non-signiﬁeant pair
perceived support from the outside supervisors comparisons trended in the same way as those
who were monitoring the mission. The siX that reached signiﬁcance (exception: Leader
indicators of negative emotions were: Tension- Support in the 188 study). Perhaps if our subject
Anxiety, Depression-Dejeetion, Anger-Hostility, numbers had been greater (thus leading to
Total Mood Disturbance, Anger & Aggression, increased statistical power), some of these trends
and Work Pressure. The Supervisor Support may have been signiﬁcant.
subseale was used to measure outside support.
Using mixed model regression analyses and TABLE 1. Main Effect for Country
pooled across crew and ground subjects, in the
Shuttle/Mir study all siX relationships were Subscale Shuttle/Mir E
statistically signiﬁcant and in the predicted Q RLSiah U-_S- RLSiah
negative direction. There was one interaction TenSion'AnXiety 4-97 7-10 4-11 8-04
effect showing that the relationship between Work Pressure 7'75 5'38 6'63 4'06
Work Pressure and Supervisor Support was TaSk Onentanon 7'43 8'41 7'94 8'31
. ManagerlalControl 5.31 6.75 5.90 6.52
stronger for the crew than the ground, and in fact Leader Su rt 5 66 7 51 7 67 6 89
. . . . . . . ppO . . . .
this relationship was statistically Signiﬁcant for SelfDiscovery 201 4.53 379 422
the crew but not for the ground- Vigor-Activity 19.33 17.41 15.07 15.27
In the ISS StUdYo 311 Six relationships were Subscales showing Signiﬁcant mean score dﬁerences
statistically signiﬁcant and in the predicted between Russians and Americans in either study
negative direction. There were four interaction (pooled crew and mission control subjects). Bold
effects showing that the relationships involving indicates that the htgherpat” S00” is Signiﬁcant-
Tension-AnXiety, Anger—Hostility, Total Mood
Disturbance, and Work Pressure were stronger Table 2 gives the GLM results for the
for the crew than the ground. A11 Of these four subseales that showed a statistically signiﬁcant
were statistically signiﬁcant for the crew, and all main effect for Location after applying the
but Tensi0n_Anxiety were signiﬁcant for the Benjamini and HOCthI‘g COUCCthDS. There are
ground. again many similarities in ﬁndings across the
two studies, especially among the dysphoric
33 Country and Location Differences subseales shown at the top, which suggest that
the erewrnernbers experienced less emotional
Using GLM methods, we tested for Russian- discomfort than mission control personnel in
American and erew_gr0und differences in both their work CDVlI‘OIlIIlCIlt. Crewmernbers in the
studies. We tested all of the subscales, and the 138 study 3150 reported having more Vigor,
models used predicted the values for each one in innovative experiences, and support from their
terms of a main effect for Country (Americans leader (the mission commander), although they
3

"
"4","also perceived having less task—related direction all mission control subjects and for Americans
than people on the ground. and Russians taken separately.
But for erewrnernbers in both studies, this
TABLE 2. Main Effect for Location relationship was found only for the supportive
role of the leader. There was no signiﬁcant
m W E relationship between the leader’s task role and
. . Cfﬂ M—C Cfﬂ M—C cohesion. This pattern was true for all
1:6?SIOH'IAnilety 3(1)? 2'33 :3; 2'3: erewrnernbers, Americans only, and Russians
a igue- ner 1a . . . .
Confusion-Bewilderrnent 1.87 3.50 1.95 4.92 only'
TotalMood Disturbance -6.30 10.48 -7.29 17.98
Anger-Hostility 2.54 5.84 2.03 6.26 4- DISCUSSION
Anger&Aggression 2.06 3.89 1.12 3.18 . .
Vigor-Activity 18.09 16.32 1332 14.36 In both the Shuttle/Mir and 188 studies, we
Innovation 3.34 3.98 4.53 3.32 failed to ﬁnd signiﬁcant Changes in mood or
Leader Control 6.77 6.08 5.08 6.27 group social climate over time in space, in
Leader Support 6-81 6-36 3-12 6-44 contrast to many studies (sorne using the POMS)
Subscales showing Signiﬁcant mean score dﬁerences of people living and working in isolated and
between Crew and Mission Control subjects in either conﬁned environments on the ground. A notable
Study (190016“, Russia"" and America"" S,“b]:eCtS)‘ BOId exception is a study involving two siX-rnernber
mdzcates that the hzgherpazr score ZS szgmﬁccmt. Australian teams WhO each trekked in the
In the Shuttle/Mir study, there were three Antarctic. for 100 days and who did Irldot show
subseales that showed signiﬁcant Country by strong eV1denee for group'stages or a 3 quarter
Location interaction effects: Leader Support, ghznornenon [331i tipeeiﬁeallly, (EH lreseareg
Expressiveness, and Independence. In all three 1n 11(ngs suggesz at peop e wt 0 ivet. 31;
eases, Russian erewrnernbers scored higher than wor , on-or ,It 0 (?Ot 39,9631“ O drou meg
- - - - eX er1ence 1ncrease ens10n 0r eerease
Americans, and American rn1ss10n control ii , d , h 2nd h 1f f h , ,
personnel scored higher than Russians. U.S. CO 651011 uringt e rd a O t e rn1ss10n, n0r
erewrnernbers 0n Mir scored the lowest of all $10 they eXhlblt the 3 quarter phenomenon (or
groups, possibly reﬂecting the sense of cultural intleed any changes across quarters Of the
is olati on r ep 0rt e d by some participating rn1ss10ns). Th1s absenee of time effects rnay be
astronauts [29] that resulted from the fact that relatedcto the fact that in both of our studies, the
each was the lone American in a 3-pers0n crew 0n-0rb1t erewmembers were supported by space
working in a Russian space station These psychologists in mission control who utilized a
ﬁndings were not replicated in the 188 study, variety of countermeasures to help them deal
since there were no signiﬁcant interaction effects Wlth stress, boredom, and monotony [3’ 4]' For
for any of the subscales evaluated example, crewmembers were encouraged to
' communicate with family and friends on the
3 4 L e a d ership R01 es ground Via audiovisual links or e-mail, and gifts
° and letters were sent up from home during
In our review of accounts of people working resupply missions. Such aetiV1t1es méy have
for long periods of time in isolated and conﬁned helpectl to 1:11th the k effects oﬁtperiods Of
environments [1-12. 30], both the task (or work- moi: ony an h0mes1e nes‘scon-or 1 ' t
oriented) and support (or rnorale-oriented) roles owever, C, anges 0V6? nne 11,133,] ye emerge
0f the leader were seen as being important to the as an issueduring rnore d1stantrn1ss10ns,.sueh as
group. Consequently we predicted that we an expedition to Mars. In sneh a rn1ss10n, the
would ﬁnd a p 0siti\:e relationship between distances involved w111result1nadelay ofnearly
subseales measuring task leadership (Leader 45 frninuteks frorn tthe ttlmehexptlﬁrers 0n the
Control) or support leadership (Leader Support) sur ace as a ques10n O W en 6,5] receive a
with a subseale measuring the level of cohesion response from Earth, and resupply ﬂlghts W111 be
in the group (Cohesion) Using mixed model seriously curtailed. The missions will last up to
regression analyses, we indeed found that for three years, the crew Will becrnore autonomous,
mission control p ers onn el in b 0th of our and the pressures from isolation and the lack of
Shuttle/Mir and 188 studies, the task and support Support W111 b; 1nereased [311 dAIStO’ hgrQUP
roles of the leader each signiﬁcantly and ynarnies rnayh e rlnorze congp 6X ue O aV1ng
positively related to cohesion. This was true for crews mg? t an t e ' or -person cgroups.we
have studied. Under these conditions, time
4

"
"5","effects may appear and cause decrements in sides having Clearer work roles but with a
morale and performance. Thus, more work decidedly American style of operations. This
needs to be done in this area, perhaps in might have created tension or anXiety on the part
simulations lasting for over a year under truly of the Russian crew and ground participants,
isolated conditions. who might have been reacting to the more novel
Our ﬁndings supported the presence of work environment. In terms of work pressure
displacement in both erewmembers and mission being higher in US. subjects in Shuttle/Mir,
control personnel in both our Mir and 188 working on a foreign space station (Mir) or
studies. In fact, the effect was stronger for the mission control center (TsUP) with relatively
isolated erewmembers than for the ground unclear goals might have created more job
subjects. The presence of this phenomenon in pressures for the Americans, who were also less
space is also supported by the ﬁnding from a experienced in conducting long duration space
separate 188 study conducted by one of our missions. In the 188 program, being primarily
Russian colleagues, who reported evidence that a responsible for the complex operations involved
erewmember was showing displacement towards with the construction of a new space station
people on the ground [32, 33]. Displacement would be expected to impact more on the
seems to be one way that erewmembers and workload of U.S. participants.
mission control personnel deal with tension and In both the Shuttle/Mir and 188 studies, the
unpleasant emotions that they are experiencing erewmembers reported haVing lower levels of
by reacting negatively to people outside of the negative dysphoric emotions than mission
group. Obviously, it would be best if people control personnel, and in the 188 study the crew
could develop their own strategies of identifying experienced more Vigor and innovation. The
and coping with intra-group stress directly and mood results may be explained by personality
not feel a need to take it out on members of an differences between astronauts or cosmonauts
“out—group”. Methods of doing this could be and people working in mission control, leading
taught pre-launeh during joint training sessions the former to experience less emotional distress
that involved both erewmembers and in response to work stress than the latter. In
representatives from their mission control addition, people in mission control received less
support team. formal psychological support than people
In looking at our results related to differences working in space. The results also may relate to
between Americans and Russians, the ﬁndings increased job motivation due to the excitement of
suggested that compared with the Americans, the being on-orbit and the fulﬁllment of the dream of
Russians experienced less pressure on the job; being in space by people who have spent years of
more tension/anXiety during the ISS missions; training and preparation for this experience. In
and more direction, support, and self discovery fact, space travel has been shown to have
during the Mir missions. It is possible that these positive and salutogenie effects on many of its
ﬁndings may have reﬂected basic cultural participants [37-41]. The Chance to work on a
differences between these two groups of people. new eXCiting space construction proj eet (the 188)
However, it is also possible that these differences may account for the relatively high Vigor and
reﬂected organizational cultures that are innovation scores among the ISS erewmembers.
Characteristic of the two space agencies. For But there is a caveat in discussing possible erew-
example, it has been suggested that compared ground differences: although the two groups may
with American organizational practices, the differ in one measure or another, we found that
Russian space program typically utilizes fewer both groups scored signiﬁcantly lower on most
written procedures and relies more on expert dysphoric subseales than a normative sample of
opinion to deal with problems that arise [34-36]. people on Earth working in non—space related
The Mir missions took place in a Russian space activities [14-16]. Therefore, despite some
station, were largely Russian directed using the differences from one another, erewmembers and
Russian language, and always had a Russian mission control personnel seem to be happier
commander. The American astronaut was working at their spaee-related jobs than people
always in the minority in the three-person crew working in other settings on Earth.
and had less of an operational relevance. Thus, it Mission control personnel saw a relationship
is understandable that Russians would have felt between both the task and support roles of their
more comfortable and supported than Americans leader and the cohesion of the group. This
in the Mir program. In contrast, the 188 program ﬁnding was predicted and is supported by studies
had more variable crew compositions, with both of leadership on the Earth [3, 5]. Although the
5

"
"6","crewmembers who participated in the Mir and the chances for crew safety and mission success.
ISS studies saw a relationship between the In conclusion, the results reported here for the
support role of the leader and group cohesion, ISS missions substantially replicated the results
they did not see a link between cohesion and the from our previous study involving missions to
task role of the leader. This conclusion is also the Mir space station. This suggests that despite
suggested by the lower leader task scores and the differences in mission proﬁles described
higher leader support scores for crewmembers earlier, there are more similarities than
versus ground subjects in the ISS mission, as differences involving psychosocial reactions
shown in Table 2. It is possible that the lack of during on-orbit space missions. Although it is
association between the task role of the leader possible that these similarities will not hold up
and cohesion among crewmembers might have during future exploratory missions to the Moon
been related to crew size. On the Mir and 188, or long-duration/long-distanee expeditions to
the crews consisted of two or three people, and Mars, it may well be that these are generalizeable
in such a small group each person has observations. Obviously, more monitoring and
specialized job skills that make them a leader in study of psychosocial issues will need to be done
tasks related to these skills. Thus, there is less during space activities beyond the Earth’s sphere
need for the kind of formal work—related of inﬂuence in order to resolve this issue.
leadership structure that is found in larger groups
of people. In addition, in small groups one’s
social support system is limited, and it is ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
important to be cordial and ﬂexible. Thus, group
cohesiveness would be more sensitive to support Supported by National Aeronautics and Space
from the leader than to task—related directions. Administration contracts #NAS9-l94l l,
The above results have important training #NAS9-98093, and #NCC9-0161.
implications for future space missions. Both Although the ﬁnal conclusions expressed in
crewmembers and mission control personnel this paper are those of the authors, a number of
should receive pre-launeh psychosocial people who are knowledgeable of the American
education that is relevant to their mission and Russian space programs provided helpful
priorities. The training should help the feedback to an earlier draft of this paper on the
participants learn ways to recognize behavioral meaning of some of our ﬁndings. The authors
problems that may arise during the mission and would like to thank these individuals: Frank
to develop problem—solving strategies to deal Carpenter, James Clement, Michael Fineke,
with them. Speciﬁc topic areas for this training Michael Foale, Gennady Padalka, David Scott,
should include: the potential effects of mission Mare Shepanek, and Peter Suedfeld.
duration on crew tension and cohesion, the
relationship between crewmembers and mission
control personnel (including the possibility of REFERENCES
displacement), the impact of cultural differences
on interpersonal interactions, and the appropriate 1. Gushin, V.I., Zaprisa, N.S., Kolinitehenko,
use of different leadership roles and their T.B., Eﬁmov, V.A., Smirnova, T.M.,
importance for maintaining group cohesion. Vinokhodova, A.G. and Kanas, N. Content
Some of this training should be done in joint analysis of the crew communication with
sessions involving both crewmembers and key external communieants under prolonged
personnel from mission control, where the isolation. Aviation, Space, and Environmental
participants could discuss strategies of Medicine 68:1093-1098, 1997.
interacting with one another in order to minimize 2. Gushin, V.I., Eﬁmov, V.A,, Smirnova, T.M.,
the development of unhealthy communication Vinokhodova, A.G. and Kanas, N. Subjeet’s
patterns and displacement. Although much of the perceptions of the crew interaction dynamics
above training would be done pre-launeh, review under prolonged isolation. Aviation Space, and
sessions should be provided during the mission Environmental Medicine 69:556-561, 1998.
in the form of on-board computer-based training 3. Kanas, N. and Manzey, D. Space Psychology
opportunities or interactive Video conferences and Psychiatry. Dordreeht, The Netherlands:
with people on the ground. In this way, Kluwer Academic Press, 2003.
crewmembers and mission control support staff 4. Myasnikov, V.I., Stepanova, S.I., Salnitskiy,
would be in the best position to deal with V.P., Kozerenko, O.P., and NeehaeV, A.P.
behavioral problems that arise, thus enhancing 171906116ch ncuxuqeczcoii acmeHus’auuu 6
6

"
"7","aﬂumeﬂbHOM KOCJI/lulleCKOﬂ/l nOJzeme [T he 17. Liang, K-Y and Zeger, S.L. Longitudinal
Problem of Psychological Asthenization during data analysis using generalized linear models.
Long Duration Flight], Moscow: SIOVO Biometrica 73:13-22, 1986.
Publications, 2000. 18. Littell, R.C., Milliken, G.A., Stroup, W.W.,
5. Kanas,N. and Feddersen,W.E. Behavioral, and Wolﬁnger, R.D. SAS System for Mixed
Psychiatric, and Sociological Problems ofLong- Models. Cary, NC: SAS Institute Inc., 1996.
duration Space Missions. Houston, TX: Johnson 19. Benjamini, Y. and Hochberg, Y. Controlling
Spacecraft Center/National Aeronautics and the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful
Space Administration, NASA TM X-58067, approach to multiple testing. Journal of the
1971. Royal Statistical Society 57:289-300, 1995.
6. Kanas, N., Weiss, D.S. and Marmar, CR. 20. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Weiss, D. 8.,
Crew member interactions during a Mir space Grund, E.M., Gushin, V., Kozerenko, 0., Sled,
station simulation. Aviation, Space, and A., Bostrom, A. and Marmar, C.R.
Environmental Medicine 67:969-975, 1996. Crewmember and ground personnel interactions
7. Kelly, AD. and Kanas, N. Crewmember over time during Shuttle/Mir space missions.
communication in space: A survey of astronauts Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine
and cosmonauts. Aviation, Space, and 72:453-461, 2001.
EnvironmentalMedicine 63:721-726,1992. 21. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V. Grund, E.M.,
8. Kelly, AD. and Kanas, N. Communication Weiss, D.S., Gushin, V., Kozerenko, 0, Sled,
between space crews and ground personnel: A and Marmar, C.R. Human interactions in space:
survey of astronauts and cosmonauts. Aviation, Results from Shuttle/Mir. Acta Astronautica
Space, and Environmental Medicine 642795-800, 49:243-260, 2001.
1993. 22. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Grund, E. M.
9. Kelly, AD. and Kanas, N. Leisure time Gushin, V., Weiss, D.S., Kozerenko, 0., Sled, A.
activities in space: A survey of astronauts and and Marmar, C.R. Social and cultural issues
cosmonauts. Acta Astronautica 322451-457, during Shuttle/Mir space missions. Acta
1994. Astronautica 47:647-655, 2000.
10. LebedeV, V. Diary of a Cosmonaut: 21] 23. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Grund, E.M.,
Days in Space. College Station, TX: Gushin, V., Weiss, D.S., Kozerenko, 0., Sled, A.
Phytoresouree Research Information Service, and Marmar, C.R. Interpersonal and cultural
1988. issues involving crews and ground personnel
11. Sandal, G.M. Coping in Antarctica: Is it during Shuttle/Mir space missions. Aviation,
possible to generalize results across settings? Space, and Environmental Medicine
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 71(9,Supp1.):A11-16,2000.
71(9,Suppl.):A37-43,2000. 24. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Grund, E.M.,
12. Sandal, G.M., Vaernes, R. and Ursin, H. Weiss, D.S., Gushin, V., Bostrom, A.,
Interpersonal relations during simulated space Kozerenko, 0., Sled, A., and Marmar, C.R.
missions. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Psychosocial issues in space: Results from
Medicine66:617-624,1995. Shuttle/Mir. Gravitational and Space Biology
13. Bechtel, RB. and Berning, A. The third Bulletin 14(2): 35-45,2001.
quarter phenomenon: Do people experience 25. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Grund, E.M.,
discomfort after stress has passed? In: From Weiss, D.S., Gushin, V., Kozerenko, 0., Sled,
Antarctica t0 Outer Space. (Harrison, AA, A., and Marmar, C.R. Human interactions
Clearwater, Y.A., and McKay, C.P., Eds.). New during Shuttle/Mir space missions. Acta
York: Springer-Verlag, 1991. Astronautica 48:777-784, 2001.
14. MeNair, D.M., Lorr, M., and Droppleman, 26. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Grund, E.M.,
L.F. Proﬁle ofMood States Manual (revised), Gushin, V., Weiss, D.S., Kozerenko, 0., Sled,
1992 ed. San Diego, CA: Educational and A., and Marmar, C.R. Lessons learned from
Industrial Testing Service, 1992. Shuttle/Mir: Psychosocial countermeasures.
15. Moos, R..H. Group Environment Scale Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine
Manual, 3rd ed. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 73:607-611, 2002.
Psychologists Press; 1994. 27. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Ritsher, J ., Gushin,
16. Moos R.H. Work Environment Scale V., Weiss, D., Saylor, S., and Marmar, C.
Manual, 3rd ed. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychosocial interactions during 188 missions.
Psychologists Press; 1994. 15th Humans in Space Symposium: Beneﬁts of
7

"
"8","Human Presence in Space. Graz, Austria, May and Environmental Medicine 75(7,Supp1.):C6—9,
22-26, 2005. Book of Abstracts, p. 21. 2004.
28. Kanas, N.A., Salnitskiy, V.P., Ritsher, J.B., 40. Ritsher, J.B., Ihle, E.C., and Kanas, N.
Gushin, V.I., Weiss, D.S., Saylor, S.A., Positive psychological effects of space missions.
Kozerenko, O.P., and Marmar, C.R. Acta Astronautica 57:630-633, 2005 .
Crewmember and mission control personnel 41. Ihle, E.C., Ritsher, J .B., and Kanas, N.
interactions during International Station Station Positive psychological outcomes of space ﬂight:
missions. Manuscript in preparation. An empirical study. Aviation, Space, and
29. Lugg, D. and Shepanek, M. Space analogue Environmental Medicine, in press.
studies in Antarctica. Acta Astronautica 44:693-
699, 1999.
30. Kanas, N. and Ritsher, J . Leadership issues
With multicultural crews 0n the International
Space Station: lessons learned from Shuttle/Mir.
Acta Astronautica 59:932-936, 2005.
31. Wood, .JA., Lugg, D.J., Hysong, S.J., and
Harm, D.L. Psychological Changes in hundred-
day remote Antarctic ﬁeld groups. Environment
and Behaviour 31(3):299—337, 1999.
32. Gushin, V.I., Yusupova, A., and Popova, I.
CreW-ground control communication styles:
Preliminary results. IAC-04-G.5.a.06. 55th
International Astronautical Congress.
Vancouver, B.C., Canada, October 4—8, 2004.
Paris: International Astronautieal Federation,
2004.
33. Gushin, V. and Yusupova, A. ereW-ground
control communication: Psychological issues.
15th Humans in Space Symposium: Beneﬁts of
Human Presence in Space. Graz, Austria, May
22-26, 2005. Book of Abstracts, p. 164.
34. Committee on Space Biology and Medicine.
Space Studies Board. Commission on Physical
Sciences, Mathematics, and Application.
National Research Council. A Strategy for
Research in Space Bilogy and Medicine in the
New Century. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press, 1998.
35. Ritsher, J .B. Cultural factors and the
International Space Station. Aviation, Space,
and Environmental Medicine 76(6, Section
II):B135-B144, 2005.
36. Clement, J . and Ritsher, J . B. Operating the
188: Cultural and leadership challenges. IAC-
05-A1.5.05. 56th International Astronautical
Congress. Fukuoka, Japan, October 17-21, 2005.
37. Palinkas, L.A. Health and performance of
Antarctic Winter-Over personnel: A f0110W-up
study. Aviation, Space, and Environmental
Medicine 57:954-959, 1986.
38. Suedfeld, P. Invulnerability, coping,
salutogenesis, integration: Four phases of space
psychology. Aviation, Space, and Environmental
Medicine 76(6,Supp1.):B61-66, 2005.
39. Suedfeld, P. and Weiszbeck, T. The impact
of outer space on inner space. Aviation, Space,
8

"
