"","x"
"1","@ 0°
Printed in Great Britain
www.elsevier.comllocate/actaastro PH: 50094-5765(01)00024-8 0094-5765101 S - see from matter
HUMAN [NTERACTIONS DURING SHUTTLE/MIR SPACE MISSIONS
Nick Kanas, M.D.*, Vyacheslav Salnitskiy, Ph.D.**, Ellen M. Grund, M.S.*, Daniel S.
Weiss, Ph.D.*, Vadim Gushin, M.D.**, Olga Kozerenko, M.D.**, Alexander Sled,
M.S.**, and Charles R. Marmar, M.D.*
* University of California and Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San
Francisco, California, USA
** Institute for Biomedical Problems, Moscow, Russia
Abstract was a perceived decrease in commander
support during the 2""d half of the
To improve the interpersonal climate missions, and for American
of crewmembers involved with long- crewmembers a novelty effect was found
duration space missions, it is important on several subscales during the ﬁrst few
to understand the factors affecting their months on-orbit. There were a number
interactions with each other and With of differences between American and
members of mission control. This paper Russian responses which suggested that
will present ﬁndings from a recently the former were less happy with their
completed NASA-ﬁmded study during interpersonal environment than the
the Shuttle/Mir program which evaluated latter. Mission control personnel
in-group/out—group displacement of reported more tension and dysphoria
negative emotions; changes in tension, than crewmembers, although both
cohesion, and leader support over time; groups scored better than other work
and cultural differences. In-flight data groups on Earth. Nearly all reported
were collected from 5 astronauts, 8 critical incidents came from ground
cosmonauts, and 42 American and 16 subjects, with Americans and Russians
Russian mission control personnel who showing important differences in
signed informed consent. Subjects response frequencies. Published by Elsevier
completed a weekly questionnaire that Science Ltd.
assessed their mood and perception of ----—--------------------------------------------
their work group’s interpersonal climate Anecdotal reports from space and
using questions ﬁom well—known, space simulation studies on Earth have
standardized measures (Proﬁle of Mood identiﬁed important psychosocial issues
States, Group and Work Environment that characterize the manner in which
Scales) and a critical incident log. There crewmembers interact with each other
was strong evidence for the and with people in mission control
displacement of tension and dysphoric during long-duration space missionsl"").
emotions from crewmembers to mission Signiﬁcant psychosocial issues include
control personnel and from mission tension, cohesion, and leader support,
control personnel to management. There and during international missions
777

"
"2","778 51s”! HF (""ungress
language and cultural differences also was seen as important in enhancing work
are important. Although these issues can performance. The European and
be affected by speciﬁc stressors, there is Russian Space Agencies conducted a
evidence that time alone may be a factor space simulation project in which three
during long-duration space missions. male Russian physicians (two of whom
For example, some investigators have were trained as cosmonauts) were
noted that crewmembers in Space or in secluded in the Mir space station
space analog environments on Earth simulator in Moscow for 135 days.
(e.g., Antarctic expeditions, subman'nes, Gushin and his colleaguesu'” found
hyperbaric chambers) experience evidence for increasing crew
significant psychological and disintegration, subgrouping, and tension
interpersonal difﬁculties after the over time, and the quality and quantity
halfway point of a mission (biphasic of communication varied with the
theory). Other time models also have personnel make-up of the different
been described that characterize three outside monitoring teams.
sequential phases or identify effects that Kanas, Weiss, and Manna: also
occur in different quarters of the studied this crew's. A rise in tension and
missions. unpleasant emotions in the 2nd half of the
Another important issue is seclusion was predicted. Instead, there
displacement, which occurs when was less tension and emotional
unpleasant emotions that arise within the disturbance during the last 10 weeks
crew cannot be expressed openly by than during the previous 9 weeks of the
crewmembers and instead are seclusion, possibly due to the lingering
misdirected to personnel on the ground, positive effects of a mid-mission
who then are perceived as unsupportive resupply event that brought the
and negative. Interactions suggestive of crewmembers replacement supplies,
displacement have been reported during preferred food, and letters from family
space missions and during recent space and friends. Cohesion scores declined
simulation studies on Earth. Thus, it is signiﬁcantly during the last 3rd of the
important to study not only space seclusion. There was evidence
crewmembers but also mission control suggesting that unpleasant emotions
personnel in order to understand fully were being displaced to the outside
the impact of both groups on the success monitoring personnel on four of the six
of a space mission. measures used to look for this effect, and
Our previous work has explored two of these were signiﬁcant. It was
several of the above psychosocial issues. pointed out in the report of this study
Kelly and I(anas'o'l2 conducted a that different space analog environments
retrospective questionnaire study of 54 may produce different results due to
astronauts and cosmonauts who had different psychological stressors, and no
ﬂown in space, and they found that simulation can reproduce all of the
factors judged to signiﬁcantly help both conditions that are found in space.
intra-crew and crew-ground Consequently, it was argued that
communication were related to having a psychosocial issues needed to be studied
shared experience and mutual under actual spaceﬂight conditions. and
excitement concerning space missions. this is the aim of the study that now will
Also, contact with loved ones on Earth be described.

"
"3","5/5: [AF Congress 779
Methods to correct for possible Type I errors due
to multiple signiﬁcance testing using the
Data were collected from false discovery rate procedure developed
crewrnembers and mission control by Benjamini & Hochberg'g; our use of
subjects who participated in the this procedure is described elsewhere”.
ShuttlefMir program. A questionnaire Subscales that were non-normally
was used that consisted of three well- distributed were dichotomized into high
known and standardized instruments: and low scores and were analyzed using
seven subscales ﬁ'om the Proﬁle of a Generalized Estimating Equation; all
Mood States (POMS)'6, ten subscales other subscales were analyzed using a
from the Group Environment Scale mixed model”.
(GES)”, and four subscales from the
Work Environment Scale (WES)'8. A Results
critical incident log also was included.
Atweekly intervals fourtimes before the Using regression analyses, strong
mission, during the mission, and twice support was found for displacement
after the mission, subjects completed the effects, which were hypothesized to
questionnaire, which took approximately occur from crewmembers to mission
15-20 minutes. Each subject used a control personnel and from mission
conﬁdential ID code that he or she control personnel to management. For
selected and did not divulge to anyone, crewmembers, all six displacement
including the investigators. Crew measures were signiﬁcant, and for
subjects on the Mir station completed a mission control subjects, ﬁve of the six
computerized version of the were signiﬁcant”.
questionnaire and saved their data to an Using a piecewise linear regression
optical disk, which later was transported analysis, one of the-two subscales used
to Earth on the Space Shuttle. Mission to test the hypothesized 2""‘1 half dmp in
control subjects preferred a hardcopy crewmember leader support was found
format; their questionnaires were stored to be signiﬁcant, suggesting that a
in a locked attache case and later were decrease occurred in on-board support
sent via Federal Express to the PI. from the commander. However, none of
There were 212 observations from the subscales used to look for 2""d half
13 prime crewmembers (5 U.S., 8 changes in crewmember tension and
Russian) and 1088 observations from 58 cohesion or mission control leader
mission control personnel (42 US, 16 support was signiﬁcant”.
Russian) that were collapsed across all Secondary analyses were conducted
the missions in the analyses. Mission on all 21 mood and group environment
control personnel consisted of ﬂight subscales in order to evaluate other time
surgeons, operations leads, engineers, effects that might be inﬂuencing the
mission scientists, spacecraﬁ crewmembersz'. First, a triphasic model
communicators, hardware specialists, of time was tested using a regression
and psychological support personnel. In approach to look for a U-shaped pattern
all statistical analyses that involved over the course of the missions (e.g.,
testing a number of mood and group high initial and terminal scores and low
environment subscales, an adjustment middle scores). There was no such
was made to the signiﬁcance threshold pattern for all subjects and for Russian

"
"4","780 51;! [AF Congress
subjects alone on any of the 21 crewmembers on four subscale measures
measures. However, when Americans of unpleasant emotions; however, both
were examined separately, a measure of groups scored signiﬁcantly lower than
overall order and organization produced published norms from studies on Earth.
such a U-shaped pattern, and three other In terms of interaction effects, for
subscales (assessing orientation to tasks, subscales measuring support from the
personal growth, and bonding among leader, perception that their interpersonal
crewmembers) showed a pattern of environmentencouraged free expression,
higher scores at the beginning of the and work independence, the Russian
mission that declined after the ﬁrst few crewmembers scored higher than their
months. Taken together, these ﬁndings American counterparts, and Russian
suggested that a novelty effect occurred ground subjects scored lower than
for the Americans on some of the American ground subjects. In all cases,
subscales as they initially became U.S. astronauts scored the lowest.
adapted to the Mir environment, Two of us (NK and EMG)
followed by a decline in scores as the independently content analyzed the
mission progressed. critical incident logs and assigned each
Since there has been some evidence reported incident to one of 17 categories
from space analog studies that subjects that were thought to be relevant by the
score differently in one quarter of the American research team. The agreement
mission compared to the other quarters, of the two raters was excellent, with a
a quartile model was tested using 1-way kappa of .685. The raters then reviewed
ANOVA's on the 21 subscales that the incidents where they differed and
compared the crew means in each of the assigned a single best consensus rating.
four quarters of the missions. No The results were examined
signiﬁcant differences were found across descriptively. The mission control
the four quarters on any of the 21 subjects contributed 96% of the total
subscalesm. reported critical incidents, with 37 of the
The overall level of 58 subjects reporting at least one
American/Russian and crew/ground incident. In terms of the two most
response differences, irrespective of frequently cited incidents by the Russian
mission ?hgse, was examined using an mission control subjects, 86 of their total
ANOVA *' . The American crew and of 273 were related to negative events
ground participants seemed less satisﬁed on-board the Mir (e.g., accidents,
with their interpersonal environment equipment failure), and 60 pertained to
than their Russian counterparts. resource problems and salary delays.
Americans reported higher scores on For the American mission control
subscale measures of job pressure and subjects, 49 of their 106 reported
general activity, and Russians scored incidents were related to interpersonal
higher on measures of support from the problems that affected their group (e.g.,
leader, job orientation, personal growth, disagreements with each other, the
orientation by management, and comfort leader, crewmembers. or Russian
with the physical conditions on the Mir. colleagues), and 16 pertained to negative
In addition, American and Russian events on-board the Mir.
mission control subjects scored higher Crewmembers contributed only 4%
than American and Russian of the total number of critical incidents,

"
"5","5L?! IAFCongress 78|
with 5 of the 13 subjects reporting at groups of people involved in long-
least one incident. The only two Russian duration space missions that may cause
responses were ﬁ'om the same disruptions in their interactions at
cosmonaut, who cited two negative various phases of the mission. The
events on-board the Mir. For the biphasie model ﬁnding suggested that
American crewmembers, 7 of their 13 there was a 2""d half decrease in
reported incidents related to crewmember support from the
interpersonal problems, and the other 6 commander. Perhaps the vicissitudes of
pertained to negative events on-board the long missions affected the ability of
the Mir. Since one astronaut contributed the commanders to be as supportive as
8 of the total number of reported critical before, or maybe there was a greater
incidents, this person strongly biased the need for support by the crewmembers as
overallAmerican crewmember ﬁndings. the missions progressed in time. The
other time ﬁndings suggest that the
Discussion American crewmembers might have
been impacted by the novelty of the
The occurrence of strongly situation during the ﬁrst few months of
consistent support for displacement in their missions. They initially perceived
both crew and ground subjects has the crew environment to be one where
ramiﬁcations for ﬁiture missions, since the overall organization and the
displacement may result in the transfer orientation to tasks was high, where they
of on-board or mission control dysphoria could grow individually, and where there
to the outside rather than allowing these was a strong bond among the
negative emotions to be dealt with more crewmembers. Over time, there was a
apprOpriately in the group. In addition, signiﬁcant decrease in these areas.
displacement can lead to in-group/out- Perhaps the novelty of being on—orbit
group distortions in communication. simply disappeared.
Both crewmembers and mission control American subjects reported more
personnel need to learn to recognize and dissatisfaction with their interpersonal
deal with the effects of displacement environment than their Russian
before such communication problems counterparts, especially American
emerge. Pre-ﬂight countermeasures crewmembers. As U.S. citizens working
should include formal lectures and team- in a program where the operational
building exercises that involve both control and the predominant language
crewmembers and mission controi were Russian, the Americans probably
personnel. During the missions, the were more negatively affected by
monitoring of the crew and ground cultural differences an.i pressures. In
interpersonal climate by specialists addition, on each mission the crew
trained to detect displacement effects composition included two Russians (one
could lead to counseling sessions aimed of whom was the commander) and one
at helping both parties deal with intra- American, making the astronaut a true
group issues before they become inter— minority without on-board support from
group problems. another person with the same cultural
Although the amount of support for background and native language.
the time models was limited, it suggests Mission control subjects were more
that there are time factors that affect dysphoric than crewmembers, as

"
"6","732 Sis: HF Congress
measured by signiﬁcant differences on frequently reported critical incident.
four of our mood measures. There are a Cultural issues related to working in
number of possible reasons to explain Russia in a program operationally
this, including a relatively better managed by Russians may have
adjustment to the work environment by sensitized the Americans to interpersonal
crewmembers or differences in kinds of factors, especially since many of them
stressors experienced by the two groups. speciﬁcally reported problems with their
But it should be noted that both crew and Russian colleagues as critical events.
ground subjects scored signiﬁcantly Russian mission control subjects were
better overall on our measures of strongly affected by resource and salary
unpleasant emotions than published concerns, which represented real issues
norms from samples in other studies on related to political changes in Russia and
the ground. Therefore, the relative the fact that many of them did not
degree of unhappiness by the mission receive their salary for several months
control personnel needs to be interpreted due to budgetary limitations.
with this comparison in mind.

In discussing the critical incident log References
results, only 4% of the total number of
reported incidents were from 1. Kanas, N. & Feddersen, W.E.
crewmembers. Of these, one person Behavioral, Psychiatric, and
accounted for both cosmonaut responses, Sociological Problems of Long-Duration
and another person accounted for 62% of Space Missions. NASA TM X-58067.
the astronaut responses. Consequently, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center,
individual respondents largely Houston, TX, 197].
inﬂuenced the crewmember scores. In 2. Kanas, N. Psychosocial factors
all four groups studied (Russian and affecting simulated- and actual Space
American crew and ground groups), missions. Aviation, Space, and
negative events that occurred on-board Environmental Medicine, 562806-811,
the Mir were cited as one of the top two 1985.
categories cited most frequently. This is 3. Kanas, N. Psychological and
understandable, since the focus of the interpersonal issues in space. American
missions was to support the activities on- Journal of Psychiatry. 1442703-709,
board the Mir, and important events that 1987.
took place there had repercussions for 4. Kanas, N. Psychological,
both crew and ground personnel. For psychiatric, and interpersonal aspects of
Russian mission control subjects, the long-duration space missions. Journal of
percent of reported critical incidents that Spacecraft and Rockets, (AIAA), 27:457-
dealt with on-board problems was more 463, 1990.
than double that mentioned by American 5. Kanas, N. Psychosocial support
mission control subjects (32% vs. 15%), for cosmonauts. Aviation, Space, and
which is understandable since the former Environmental Medicine, 62:353-355,
were operationally responsible for events 1991.
affecting the Mir space station. 6. Kanas, N. Psychosocial value of
Interestingly, Americans in both the space simulation for extended
space and ground environments cited spaceﬂight. Advances in Space Biology
interpersonal problems as their most and Medicine, 6:81-91, 1997.

"
"7","51:: [AF Congress 783
7. Kanas, N. Psychjalric issues Aviation, Space, and Environmental
affecting long-duration space missions. Medicine, 67:969-975. 1996.
Aviation, Space, and Environmental 16. McNair, D.M., Lorr, M. &
Medicine, 69:1211—1216,1998. Droppleman, L.F. Proﬁle of Mood
8. Kanas, N. Psychosocial issues States Manual (revised), 1992 ed. San
affecting crews during long-duration Diego, CA: Educational and lndustn'al
international space missions. Acta Testing Service, 1992.
Astronautica, 42:339-361, 1998. 17. Moos, R.H. Group Environment
9. Kanas, N. Psychosocial pressures Scale Manual, 3rd ed. Palo Alto, CA:
affecting astronauts. Directions in Consulting Psychologists Press, 1994.
Psychiatry, 19:95-99, 1999. 18. Moos, RH. Work Environment
10. Kelly, A.D. & Kanas, N. Scale Manual, 3rd ed. Palo Alto, CA:
Crewmember communication in space: Consulting Psychologists Press, 1994.
A survey of astronauts and cosmonauts. 19. Benjamjni, Y. & Hochberg Y.
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Controlling the false discovery rate: A
Medicine, 63:721-726, 1992. practical and pOWCI'ﬁll approach to
11. Kelly, AD. & Kanas, N. multiple testing. Journal of the Royal
Communication between space crews Statistical Society,57:289-300, 1995.
and ground personnel: A survey of 20. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Weiss,
astronauts and cosmonauts. Aviation, D.S., Grund, E.M., Gushin, V.,
Space, and Enviromnental Medicine, Kozerenko, 0., Sled, A., Bostrom, A. &
64:795-800, 1993. Marmar. C.R. Crewmember and ground
12. Kelly, A.D. & Kanas, N. Leisure personnel interactions over time during
time activities in space: A survey of ShuttlefMir space missions. Aviation,
astronauts and cosmonauts. Acta Space, and Environmental Medicine,
Astronautica, 32:451-457, 1994. (under revision).
13. Gushjn, V.I., Zaprisa, N.S., 2|. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Grund,
Kolinitchenko, T.B., Eﬁmov, V.A., E.M., Weiss, D.S., Gushin, V.,
Smimova. T.M., Vinokhodova, A.G. & Kozercnko, 0., Sled, A. & Marmar, C.R.
Kanas, N. Content analysis of the crew Human interactions in space: Results
communication with external from ShuttIe/Mir. 13th [AA Humans in
communicants under prolonged Space Symposium, International
isolation. Aviation, Space, and Astronautical Association. May 20-26,
Environmental Medicine, 68: 1093- 2000, Santorini, Greece.
1098, 1997. 22. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Grund,
l4. Gushin, V.I., Eﬁmov, V.A., E.M., Gushin, V., Weiss, D.S.,
Smimova, T.M., Vinokhodova, A.G. & Kozerenko, 0., Sled, A. & Marmar,
Kanas, N. Subject’s perceptions of the CR. Social and cultural issues during
crew interaction dynamics under Shuttle/Mir space missions. Acta
prolonged isolation. Aviation, Space, Astronautica,47:647-655, 2000.
and Environmental Medicine, 69:556- 23. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Grund,
561,1998. E.M., Gushin, V., Weiss, D.S.,
15. Kanas, N., Weiss, D.S. & Kozerenko,0. Sled, A.& Mannar,C.R.
Mannar, C.R. Crewmember interactions Interpersonal and cultural issues
during a Mir space station simulation. involving crews and ground personnel

"
"8","73-! 5h! HF Couqruss
during Shuttle/Mir space missions.

Aviation, Space, and Environmental

Medicine, 71(9, Suppl.), Al 1-16, 2000.

"
