"","x"
"1","Acta Astronautica 86 (2013) 24—38
, -. ,,2 ~ u , ,7; . . . . - ':::.-I:-__ / /__I‘/
* g;1;‘g-‘_;:._;:.g Contents IIStS available at SCIVerse SolenceDIrect '
«2:13:93»! * g“ "" ' .
w; 23:1 Acta Astronautlca /
ELSEVIER journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/|ocate/actaastro '7‘} U(li
—
Review
Back paln 1n space and post—ﬂlght splne 1njury. Mechanlsms ® CrossMark
and countermeasure development
- a,>1< b ° c d
JOJO V. Sayson ,Jeffrey Lotz , Scott Parazynskl , Alan R. Hargens
a The Ola Grimsby Institute, 4420 Hotel Circle Ct. Suite 210, San Diego, CA 92108, USA
b University of California, San Francisco, Orthopaedic Bioengineering Laboratory 513 Parnassus Ave, 51157, San Francisco,
CA 94143—0514, USA
C The University of Texas Medical Branch, 301 University Boulevard Galveston, TX 77555, USA
d University of California, San Diego, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, 350 Dickinson St. San Diego, CA 92103-8894, USA
ARTICLEINFO ABSTRACT
Article history: During spaceﬂight many astronauts experience moderate to severe lumbar pain and
R€C€§V€d 9 Decémber 2011 deconditioning of paraspinal muscles. There is also a signiﬁcant incidence of herniated
Rece‘YEd 1“ FEWSEd form nucleus pulposus (HNP) in astronauts post—ﬂight being most prevalent in cervical discs.
1 Aprll 2012 Relief of in—ﬂight lumbar back pain is facilitated by assuming a knee—to—chest position.
ACCEptEd 15 May 2012 The atho enesis of lumbar back ain durin s aceﬂi ht is most likel disco enic and
Available online 5 February 2013 p. g _ p g p g _ y _ g _
— somat1c referred (from the s1nuvertebral nerves) due to supra—phys1olog1c swelhng of
KeJ/WOTdSI . the lumbar intervertebral discs (IVDs) due to removal of gravitational compressive
InterYertEbral dlsc loads in microgravity. The knee—to—chest position may reduce lumbar back pain by
Exemse . redistributing stresses through compressive loading to the IVDs, possibly reducing disc
Low back paln . . . .
microgravity volume by ﬂu1d outﬂow across IVD endplates. IVD stress redlstrlbutlon may reduce
Mechanoreceptors Type IV mechanoreceptbr nerve impulse propagation in the annuius ﬁbrosus and
Hydrostatic pressure vertebral endplate resultlng 1n centrally med1ated pa1n 1nh1b1t10n dunng sp1nal ﬂex1on.
Disc herniation Countermeasures for lumbar back pain may include in—ﬂight use of: (1) an axial
compression harness to prevent excessive IVD expansion and spinal column elongation;
(2) the use of an adjustable pulley exercise developed to prevent atrophy of spine
muscle stabilisers; and (3) other exercises that provide Earth—like annular stress with
low—load repetitive active spine rotation movements. The overall objective of these
countermeasures is to promote IVD health and to prevent degenerative changes that
may lead to HNPs post—ﬂight. In response to “NASA’s Critical Path Roadmap Risks and
Questions” regarding disc injury and higher incidence of HNPs after space ﬂight
(Integrated Research Plan Gap—B4), future studies will incorporate pre— and post—ﬂight
imaging of International Space Station long—duration crew members to investigate
mechanisms of lumbar back pain as well as degeneration and damage to spinal
structures. Quantitative results on morphological, biochemical, metabolic, and kine—
matic spinal changes in the lumbar spine may aid further development of counter—
measures to prevent lumbar back pain in microgravity and reduce the incidence of
HNPs post—ﬂight.
© 2012 1AA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Abbreviations: IVD, intervertebral disc; HNP, herniated nucleus pulposus; MET, medical exercise therapy; STEP, scientiﬁc therapeutic exercise
progressions; 155, International Space Station; PG, proteoglycan; GAG, glycosaminoglycan; PLL, posterior longitudinal ligament; DRG, dorsal root
ganglion; TCH, torso compression harness; RM, resistance maximum.
* Corresponding author. Tel: +1 815 936 1992; fax: +1 815 936 0940.
E-mail address: jojovsayson@comcast.net (J.V. Sayson).
0094—5765/$ — see front matter © 2012 1AA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2012.05.016

"
"2","].V. Sayson et al. / Acta Astronautica 86 (2013) 24—38 25
Contents
1. lntroduct10n 25
2. Biophysicsofthespine................................................................................. 26
3. Mechanismsofintradiscalﬂuidhydrodynamics 27
4. Physiologyofthespine................................................................................. 27
5. Neurophysiologyofthelumbardisc....................................................................... 29
6. Possiblemechanismofbackpaininmicrogravity............................................................ 30
7. Otherpossiblemechanismsofbackpaininmicrogravity...................................................... 30
8. Possiblemechanismsofbackpainreliefinmicrogravity....................................................... 31
9. Backpaincountermeasures.............................................................................. 32
10. Possible countermeasures for spine deconditioning during spaceﬂight. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
10.1. Torsocompressionharness(axialloadingofthespine):................................................. 32
10.2. Pulleyexercises[speciﬁcallydesignedspinalexercises]:................................................. 32
10.3. Microgravity spine biomechanics (continuous spine movements without resistance) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
11. Flightphysicalexamination.............................................................................. 34
12. Summary 34
Submissiondeclaration................................................................................. 35
Acknowledgements.................................................................................... 35
References 35
1° Introduction loading on Earth, hydrostatic pressure clue to weight—
bearing exceeds swelling pressure and nucleus ﬂuid is
The vertebral bodies and compliant intervertebral driven from the disc into surrounding tissues, primarily
discs are important, weight—bearing tissues that have across the vertebral endplate into the bone vasculature.
adapted to upright gravitational stress over millions of During unloading, PGs cause intra—discal swelling via ﬂuid
years [1]. Consequently, the absence of gravitational axial movement across the vertebral endplates and into the
loads during exposure to microgravity likely disrupts discs [8]. Because the intervertebral discs are avascular,
normal spine physiology [2]. Spinal elongation is antici— the diurnal loading cycle is an important physiological
pated during spaceﬂight, and warrants special considera— mechanism that maintains the mechanical and metabolic
tion for spacewalkers who must ﬁt into conformal properties of the intervertebral discs [9].
Extravehicular Mobility Units (EMUs, or spacewalking Microgravity eliminates or signiﬁcantly reduces the
space suits) during their missions. Typically 2.5 cm of diurnal loading cycle and dynamic spinal compression,
additional torso height (shoulder—to—crotch length) is potentially accelerating disc degeneration and increasing
factored in to accommodate some but not all of this risk of disc prolapse 0r herniation upon return to a
microgravity growth. One of the authors (ret. Astronaut gravitational environment. Three potential mechanisms
S. Parazynski) measured 5.1—5.7 cm of height gain on each underlie this process. Biomechanically, the excessively
of his ﬁve Shuttle missions. As such, when he donned his swollen intervertebral disc distributes compressive and
EMU for the ﬁrst EVA of his missions, there was consider— bending stresses in a non—physiologic and adverse man—
able pressure on his shoulders. Over the course of EVA ner [10]. Second, excessive expansion of the nucleus
preparations, typically lasting slightly over an hour, the pulposus increases vertebral endplate and annular liga—
pressure abated, presumably clue to spinal compression ment stresses. Additionally, increased disc height will
and reduction in disc height. On subsequent EVAs during alter the anatomic relationships between adjacent verteb—
these same missions, this shoulder pressure sensation did rae and may excessively stress the facet joints, thus
not repeat, suggesting that the suited operations induced possibly generating capsular strain and facet pain. A
a lasting re—equilibration of disc pressures and disc height. potential fourth pathway could be clue to altered meta—
Duringlong spaceﬂight missions, deconditioning 0f the bolic activity of disc cells secondary to changes in disc
intervertebral discs and spinal muscles poses a serious hydration, osmotic pressure, and pH [11—13].
injury risk upon re—exposure t0 upright posture in a Lumbar back pain also known as Space Adaptation
gravitational environment [3]. During normal upright Back Pain is a common symptom experienced by astro—
activity, gravity and back musculature generate high axial nauts during early exposure to spaceﬂight [14—16]. Such
compressive loads on the spine, and cause diurnal ﬂuc— pain has the potential to interrupt challenging in—ﬂight
tuations in body height [4]. Axial loads reduce body tasks by reduction of restorative sleep and mental con—
height primarily by vertical height reduction of the inter— centration. To date, there is lack of quantitative research
vertebral discs [5] with a likely increase in disc diameter, addressing spinal adaptations and origins of lumbar back
and increasing lumbar lordosis [6]. For example, on Earth pain before, during and after spaceﬂight. The Flight
the body loses about 15—20 mm in height (1% of total Medical Clinic at NASA Johnson Space Center concluded
body height) following normal upright daytime activity that among Shuttle orbiter crewmembers, 68% report
[7].The disc maintains height and ﬂexible load bearing by some degree of low back pain during spaceﬂight [17].
swelling clue to hydrophilic, negatively—charged proteo— Documented back pain varies in duration from 14% t0
glycans (PGs) present within the disc nucleus. During 100% of a spaceﬂight while 28% described the quality of

"
"3","26 ].V. Sayson et al. / Acta Astronautica 86 (2013) 24—38
back pain as moderate to severe in intensity [17]. Back exercise, and deliberate compression of the spine [17,24].
pain was localised to the lumbar spine with a maximum Biomechanical research demonstrates that spine ﬂexion
discomfort experienced during the ﬁrst 6 day of a mission. transfers the sagittal instantaneous axis of rotation (IAR)
However, intensity did not correlate with the ﬂight dura— to the anterior discs and increases disc compression with
tion, age, or previous experience [17]. During his ﬁrst redistribution of tissue stresses that change the contour of
ﬂight aboard STS 41—D, Astronaut Mike Mullane, through the posterior annulus and soft—tissue elements [25—27].
a personal communication with the authors, reported The aetiology of back pain on Earth is broadly classiﬁed as
severe back pain in ﬁve out of six orbiter crew members visceral, non—mechanical, and mechanical (attributed to
including himself [18]. Back pain could precede more lumbar discs) [28] but the exact mechanism of back pain
debilitating conditions as in the case of a herniated in microgravity is unknown. Relieving low back pain in
nucleus pulposus (HNP) when spines are subjected to space by posture alteration towards ﬂexion implies a
greater mechanical demands on return to Earth. An mechanical pathogenesis. Altered spinal conﬁguration
analysis of epidemiological data regarding HNP incidence may relieve back pain by unknown mechanisms involving
(NASA’s Longitudinal Study of Astronaut Health at John— lumbar disc ﬂuid hydrodynamics, cellular nutrition and/or
son Space Center) on a 321 astronaut population (from annular deformation. Spinal ﬂexion may involve neuro—
April 1959 to December 2006) compared to 983 matched physiological pain relief through an inhibitory effect of
controls not involved with spaceﬂight, suggests a 4.3 local opioids in the spinal cord facilitated by collagen
times higher HNP incidence in the astronaut population stretch receptors in the posterior elements of the lumbar
[3]. There is currently no formal consensus regarding the spine. The objective of this review is to update our
pathogenesis of HNP during spaceﬂight but lack of knowledge of back pain in space and disc herniation upon
dynamic weight—bearing, excessive swelling, and poorer return to Earth, with a view to develop effective inﬂight
intradiscal cell nutrition during microgravity maybe countermeasures and prevent HNP upon return to a
important causative factors. gravitational environment such as on Earth, or Mars.
Body—length increases from 4 to 6 cm and the vertebral
column loses its normal curvature and ﬂexibility during 2. Biophysics of the spine
early exposure to microgravity [14,19,20]. Anecdotally,
one of the authors (ret. Astronaut S. Parazynski) experi— The human spine evolved over several million years to
enced 6.35 cm of body—length growth representing an 8% counteract Earth’s gravity especially as upright posture
growth during one of his Shuttle missions. By the time he was assumed in early humans. In bipeds, the spine
returned to crew quarters all of his height gain was lost. balances mobility and stability via the anterior interver—
Increased spinal length is caused by greater disc height tebral discs and the posterior facets. Spinal curvature may
from elevation of intradiscal ﬂuid volume and a reduction have evolved to counteract gravity in upright posture in
of thoracic and lumbar curvatures [15,21]. Disc swelling is bipedal man by the development of lordosis in the
a recognised factor in back pain pathogenesis. For exam— cervical and lumbar spines, and kyphosis in the thoracic
ple, spinal unloading during bed rest causes hydration to spine [29,30]. For example, cervical lordosis develops
increase within discs, and decrease within paraspinal when an infant raises its head to move around and the
muscles [22]. Morning back pain upon waking is a lumbar lordosis follows when the child starts upright
recognised clinical indicator of inﬂammatory low back walking [31]. Primary thoracic kyphosis is retained as a
pain [23]. To relieve back pain during spaceﬂight, astro— compensatory mechanism so that erect posture is main—
nauts assume a knee—to—chest position [14,17] (Fig. 1). tained in spite of cervical and lumbar lordoses [31].
Other techniques reported to ease back pain includes According to Borelli, this concept of sensible angulation
stretching, taking acetaminophen or ibuprofen, treadmill means that the spine was speciﬁcally angulated to protect
the spinal cord [32]. In addition, curvature of the vertebral
_ . column may aid the spine’s resistance to axial compres—
’{ ’, k, '-:~-’»;‘- sion [33]. During ambulation the pliable spine is able to
g» ‘ . m . _ dampen the ground reaction forces evidenced by a sagit—
’ ' ' W \ . \\ tal—plane curvature cyclic increase and decrease of 1—2
' ' , '\\‘_§~ ‘ degree amplitude per lumbar level during human loco—
.— 4 _ , ‘3; V motion [34]. In effect, the three ﬂexible curvatures of the
‘ ‘- a ”2 normal human spine (cervical, thoracic, and lumbar
’ ' { ‘ spines) redistribute forces generated in response to grav—
-- ’ ‘I I itational load, as a bowstring, allowing more efﬁcient
_ _ . force distribution [35]. The unloaded spine on the other
'1' .- 7:. , 2.. ._ ‘ ‘ hand, is subjected to spinal lengthening with a loss of
HE: ‘ curvatures and increased disc height [15,19], which may
. h .- increase risk for overload during upright stance [35].
. . .' -. ‘ The physiological loads on the spine include body
weight, external loads, and muscle forces [25]. However,
Fig. 1. The knee—to—chest position to help alleviate low back pain as Spmfdl loadlng W111 6115.0 vary when pOdy mass plus aCCEI_
assumed by an astronaut during the Skylab. Missions. (NASA photo eratlon 15 faCtOFEd 1n durlng spinal movement The
archives). equivalent percentages of body weight (BW) loaded on

"
"4","].V. Sayson et al. / Acta Astronautica 86 (2013) 24—38 27
the spine are approximately 8% BW exerted at the cervical activities during wakeful periods cause re—imposition in
spine, 50% BW at the lumbar spine, and 100% BW at the varying degrees of external compression on the nucleus
feet [36,37]. These forces are supported by muscles, pulposus. Cyclical or intermittent intradiscal pressure
tendons, and ligaments that generate trunk moments changes as a homoeostatic stressor depend on three—
while simultaneously providing compressive load and dimensional spine position and the amount of load
shear [38]. Paraspinal muscles not only act as force carried by the individual. Diurnal spinal loads increase
generators to establish mechanical equilibrium, but also intradiscal pressure that forces ﬂuid out of the disc by the
act as self—stabilizing springs that support the spine process of convection through the vertebral endplates.
without requiring neuromuscular control [39]. Impor— Hence, by the day’s end, disc volume and height diminish,
tantly, the spine with compressive loads due to muscle thus reducing spine length by 2—3 cm [50]. In addition,
contraction and gravity increase bending stiffness by an concurrent spinal soft—tissue adaptation at the end of a
order of magnitude [40,41]. Actual spinal load on the day’s load—bearing activities increases spine curvatures
spine in vivo is difﬁcult to quantify and at best, can only which may contribute to the total reduction of spine
be measured indirectly through electomyography (EMG) length. The diurnal result of cumulative spinal stress is a
studies using bipolar surface and needle electrodes reduction of stature with active awake hours and an
[38,42], intradiscal pressures using small transducers increased spinal length following unloading with recum—
[4,43] intra—abdomial pressures using a pressure—sensitive bency and sleep.
radio transducer [44] and mathematical models [45].

Since there is no gravitational compressive force or effect 4. Physiology of the spine
of momentum with dynamic motions of the spine in
microgravity, the anti—gravity muscles used for posture The lumbar IVD is largely composed of ﬂuid, proteo—
and stability invariably are the ones that show the most glycan (PG; consisting of a core protein and glycosami—
atrophy and degeneration [46,47]. noglycan, GAG, side chains), and collagen, and is sparsely
populated by cartilage—like cells in the nucleus, and
3. Mechanisms of intradiscal ﬂuid hydrodynamics ﬁbroblasts within the collagen ﬁbres of the annulus
[51]. The PG and collagen components are in varied types
Biological tissues depend on the transport of nutrients and proportions between the nucleus pulposus, the annu—
from blood to cells and the transport of metabolic waste lus ﬁbrosus, and the adjacent cartilaginous endplates. PG
products from cells to blood via the interstitium and has an extensive electronegative Charge causing a high
lymphatic vessels [48]. Fluid and solute inﬂux and efﬂux osmotic pressure that attracts and retains ﬂuid perhaps
between lumbar intervertebral discs and the vertebrae by more positive charged solutes in the nucleus pulposus.
through the vertebral endplates occur by two main Through this osmotic mechanism, the disc is able to resist
processes: convection and diffusion [48]. Diffusion occurs compressive loading during weight bearing. IVD chondro—
by movement of ﬂuids and nutrients from regions of high cytes can transform mechanical signals rapidly and differ—
to low solute concentration by random thermal motion in entially into metabolic effects (mechanotransduction)
the absence of external force ﬁelds. This process results in from the application of hydrostatic pressure [52—55].
the tendency of a solute to reach uniform distribution in Pressure also stimulates cells indirectly by compacting
the presence of a concentration gradient. Convection is a IVD matrix and changing the extracellular micro—environ—
more rapid transport especially for macromolecules and ment. Matrix compaction decreases tissue permeability
involves bulk ﬂow through a porous medium such as the [56,57], water content [12], oxygen tension [58], pH [11]
interstitium and intervertebral endplates due to hydro— and osmolarity [13]. These changes alter proteoglycan
static pressure gradients and sufﬁciently large Channels. and collagen synthesis via altered cell volume and cytos—
The interstitia of the annulus ﬁbrosus and nucleus pulpo— keletal rearrangement.
sus contain the ground substance of connective tissue Lumbar discs are the largest avascular tissues in the
comprising structural components (collagen ﬁbrils and body. In general, discs do not have lymphatic return and
GAGs) and ﬂuid components (water, proteins, ions, their limited blood supply only supports the external
and other metabolic substrates and end—products). Disc surface of the annulus [59,60]. When intra—discal pressure
hydrostatic pressure is signiﬁcantly reduced concurrent increases with posture and exercise—related load bearing,
with reduced load—bearing during sleep despite the com— intra—discal ﬂuid is driven out by convection through the
pressive load contribution by paraspinal muscle tone. endplates into the blood Circulation of the vertebral body
When the spine is unloaded during sleep, the hydrophilic [61]. Intervertebral disc deformation on Earth with static
nature of the PCs in the nucleus pulposus causes inﬂux of load—bearing as well as in combination with dynamic
ﬂuid and nutrients from the vertebral bodies through the spine activity promote ﬂuid and nutrient transport essen—
vertebral endplates by either of diffusion or convection, tial for disc viability [48]. Fluid efﬂux and inﬂux facilitate
depending on molecular size and Charge. Spine unloading transport of nutrients, water, and waste products into and
that facilitates ﬂuid inﬂux into the discs together with out of the nucleus pulposus. Cyclical and dynamic loading
PG’s ﬂuid imbibition via its macromolecular electronega— of the disc result in modiﬁed tension in the annular
tivity. In this regard, ﬂuid inﬂow is due to large negative collagen ﬁbre line of stress (Sharpey’s ﬁbres) as well as
ﬂuid pressures resulting from repulsive forces within a the scattered chondrocyte—like cells embedded within the
matrix of high anionic charge density in the nucleus disc [51]. Under normal physiological loads, the disc
pulposus. [49]. Resumption of normal spinal load—bearing follows Wolff‘s law (applied stress affects cellular activity

"
"5","28 ].V. Sayson et al. / Acta Astronautica 86 (2013) 24—38
and the disc remodels and strengthens to minimise stress) pressure across the cartilage endplate. This approach
[62,63]. Therefore, biomechanical stress or mechanical assumes the disc is a pressure vessel where the external
signals such as increased hydrostatic pressure [53], ﬂuid compressive stress (50) is balanced by nucleus pulposus
movement [64], and stretch [65] of discs raise GAG pressure (PN). The nucleus pulposus pressure is related to
production and promote collagen strength to maintain the effective pressure gradient across the endplate (PG)
disc health and cellular turnover. Thus, aside from and the osmotic pressure of the nucleus proteoglycans (P),
genetic, hormonal, and nutritional factors, development such that at equilibrium the nucleus pulposus pressure is
of the human spine requires biomechanical stresses equal to the osmotic pressure
derived from active weight—bearing motion for disc 0=PN=PG +17
maturation and continued health [66]. In this regard,
would humans born and raised in a microgravity or when the disc iS unloaded (50 iS negative), nucleus
hypo—gravity environment develop a lumbar lordosis? 131111305115 volume iS gained With increasing diSC height,
The human spine is kyphotic or C—curved in the womb leading to a decrease in the osmotic pressure. At the same
and develops the cervical and lumbar lordoses in response time, the ViSCoelaStiC behaViour Of the annUlUS ﬁbrOSUS
t0 conforming to an upright posture against gravity. Contributes to thlS VOlume gain as the COllagen ﬁbres
Perhaps, only the cervical spine would develop a lordosis creep. These tWO effects on nucleus swelling pressure are
in response to functional tasks. These are highly spec— represented via tWO model parameters D and G
ulative scenarios considering that the musculoskeletal 17: 170+ D[g(1')_go]_Gt
system develops and matures in response to deﬁned , , , , ,
biomechanical loading against gravity. where P0. 15 the 1n1t1al nucleus pulposus osmotic pressure,
High levels of static compression on Earth may produce D (MPa) 15 the model parameter that represents the strain
sufﬁcient stress and strain on the disc and surrounding dependzence Of the nucleus pulposus swell1ngpressure,G
structures to cause disc degeneration and low back pain (N/nim 5) represents the annular creep, g(t) 15 the ax1al
[67]. However, spinal loading is probably too low in micro— stra1n, and 80 15 the 33131 strain at t=0.
gravity to have the same pain mechanism as on Earth. These two expressmns can becombined to develop an
The pathogenesis of in—ﬂight back pain during microgravity expressmn for the pressure gradient across the endplate
is probably related to removal of the terrestrial spinal PG=00—(H0+D[8(t)—80]—Gt)
bioniechanical stresses. The typical 130d}, position during Finally, the ﬂuid ﬂux across the endplate (q) is
we1ghtlessness lS assoc1ated w1th reduced amplitudes . . . .
. . . ,, . . expressed both in terms of the change in d1sc he1ght
and frequenc1es of sp1ne mot10n [68]. DISC homoeostas1s . . . .
. . . . . . and in relation to the pressure gradient (PG) usmg the
requires cellular processes requ1nng b10mechan1cal Signals D
. . . arcy ﬂow model
converted to b10chem1cal events that occur through cyclical
variations in hydrostatic pressure with optimal spine load— q 2 hi d[8(t)+80] = 2KPG
ing. Mechanical stress or cyclic loading facilitates increases dt
in collagen density of disc cells in vitro due to increased cell where h,- is the initial disc height, g(t) is the axial strain, 80
diViSiOh [651- Dynamic loading 0f the diSCS With gravity 3150 is the axial strain at t=0, and K (m3/Ns) is the endplate
leads to variations in the hydrostatic pressure which further cartilage permeability normalised by its thickness. Com—
adds to the mechanical stress in the diSC [43]- Normal bining these last two equations gives an expression for
synthesis of proteoglycan requires that there is a physiolo— the axial strain as a function of time
gical hydrostatic pressure (300,000 N/mz) and hydration 00470 [116 2KDT G
[12,69]. DISC degeneration occurs when sp1ne load1ng as 8(t)=80+(T——2) x [1 —exp(— T)]+ ﬁt
well as the hydrostatic pressure is excessive (3000,000 N/ ZKD ‘
m2) or when it is insufﬁcient (100,000 N/mz) [65]. Within For human discs, K, D and C have been predicted
the disc, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)—3 production and from cadaveric experiments as 0.73 X 10—3 (m3/Ns),
decreased PG synthesis are due to excessive or insufﬁcient 55,000,000 N/m2 and 1.2 x 10—3 (N/mm2 5), respectively
hydrostatic pressure, respectively [53]. As a result, the [74].Using this model, the time—dependent change in disc
relationship between spine injury and load has been char— height in response to microgravity (so z —9000,000 N/
acterised as having a U—shaped distribution, where both m2; [4]) can be predicted, which in turn provides an
excessive and insufﬁcient loading can be detrimental estimate of the increase in nucleus pulposus water con—
[70,71,72]. These catabolic cell behaviours can alter matrix tent (and consequent decrease in osmotic pressure) and
integrity over time, and potentially cause increased risk for annular strain. The biologic consequences of these struc—
prolapse or extrusion post—ﬂight. tural changes can be inferred via in vitro disc cell studies
The link between structural (e.g., increased disc water that demonstrate the nucleus pulposus proteoglycan
content and annular strain) and cellular (e.g., decreased synthesis dependence on osmotic pressure [53,64,75]
proteoglycan synthesis, increased MMP production) con— and annular MMP activity and cell viability dependence
sequences of microgravity may be established using a on annular strain [76,77].
ﬂuid—transport model of disc creep, originally described Animal models may provide insight into probable
by Cassidy and co—workers [73]. This one—dimensional human disc component changes during microgravity
mathematical model captures the time—dependent exposure or simulated weightlessness. Studies show that
response of the disc to static loading or unloading as ﬂuid histological and biomechanical changes occur resulting in
ﬂows in or out of the disc in response to a differential less collagen orientation in rat lumbar intervertebral disc

"
"6","].V. Sayson et al. / Acta Astronautica 86 (2013) 24—38 29
annuli ﬁbrosus, signiﬁcant reduction of annuli ﬁbrosus subjects typically report back pain for three days
growth rate, reduced GAG/collagen ratio, decreased [82—84]. The Russian space programme however, reports
amount of PG, and reduced muscle volume [78,79,80]. very low incidence of back pain with only three cosmo—
Although the spines of Skylab—4 crew members lengthen nauts experiencing back pain in microgravity from 1975
twice the terrestrial values about 4—6 cm during 83 day in to 1987 [17]. Lower incidence of back pain in the Russian
space, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine space programme may be partly attributed to the penguin
after 8 day of microgravity exposure after STS—47 showed suit, a compression garment worn several hours per day
no evidence of disc expansion and there was a slight but while in microgravity [17,46].
non—signiﬁcant decrease in disc area post—ﬂight [81].

The difference in these spine measurements is that 5. Neurophysiology of the lumbar disc
Skylab crewmembers measured spine lengthening in—
ﬂight whereas STS—47 crewmembers’ spines were mea— The sinuvertebral nerve [also known as the recurrent
sured post—ﬂight with re—exposure to Earth’s gravity. nerve or nerve of von Luschka] innervates the lumbar disc
During supine unloading on Earth, intervertebral disc along its external surface and one third into the thickness
pressure is lower compared to standing erect although of the annulus [85]. The sinuvertebral nerve is a menin—
IDP remains positive during all postures [4,43]. The geal branch and also innervates the anterior dura, blood
unloaded spine in horizontal supine posture may not vessel walls, periosteum, and ligaments. This nerve is
entirely simulate spine unloading in microgravity condi— unmyelinated and mixed having sensory ﬁbres for noci—
tions because spinal muscles may have more tone on ception and sympathetic motor ﬁbres for the local blood
Earth than in space. Thus, bed rest with 6 degrees head— vessels [85] (Fig. 2)
down tilt(HDT) with spinal traction position is probablya Terminal nerve endings of the sinuvertebral nerves
better experimental model for simulating conditions that contain nociceptive Type IV mechanoreceptors [86,87].
elicit back pain during early space ﬂight [82,83]. Styf and Also known as free nerve endings, Type IV mechanore—
associates’ results for six subjects exposed to simulated ceptors function as collagen deformity receptors present
microgravity with balanced traction produced back pain in the annulus of the intervertebral disc and the posterior
and psychosomatic reactions similar to actual micrograv— longitudinal ligament (PLL) [59,88]. These nociceptive
ity [82,83]. Low back pain and lower abdominal pain as ﬁbres have a high threshold for nerve impulse propaga—
reported by subjects in HDT with balanced traction is tion and are facilitated by collagen ﬁbre deformation
similar in anatomic location to astronauts [17]. The beyond the normal physiological limit of approximately 3—
intensity of pain between these subjects is similar to that 4% length change [60]. Aside from stress beyond the plastic
experienced by astronauts during spaceﬂight [20,17]. range of collagen deformation, other factors that can cause
Crewmembers report of maximum back pain from nociceptive nerve impulse propagation include an acidic
Day 1 to Day 6 of the mission and duration of pain environment with reduction of pH, inﬂammatory exudates,
correlates with mission duration [17] while HDT test and changes in barometric pressure in cases of chronic
Innervation of Segmental Tissues
Spin .l Cord cet
@ ‘% Branch
~, x S; f r '1‘. \ \\ .
Fora ina 1,. xv; 9)!” .
Root ‘ SD;\\ a I
Mater ~ —..:::-—’""\ "" Recurrent ‘
Nerve White and Gray
Rami
,;-'*""-'“ Communicantes
» f‘i‘f"" Sympathetic
“ Trunk Ganglion
4000' Viscera
\ / Vessels
\ / [a
\__//
Fig. 2. Innervation of the intervertebral disc. The recurrent nerve (sinuvertebral or nerve of von Luschka). innervates the ipsilateral and contralateral
periphery of the lumbar intervertebral discs. Its innervations extends a third into the substance of the annulus ﬁbrosus and to the anterior but not the
posterior dura mater. (illustration reproduced with permission from the Ola Grimsby Institute).

"
"7","30 ].V. Sayson et al. / Acta Astronautica 86 (2013) 24—38
inﬂammatory and lumbar degenerative joint disease [89]. continue via the sinuvertebral nerves causing low back
Some key mediators of synaptic transmission for pain pain. Nerve impulse conduction is slower in unmyelinated
perception include bradykinin, serotonin, histamine, potas— versus myelinated nerves producing pain characterised as
sium, adenosine, protons, prostaglandins, leukotriences, and slow, dull, achy, gnawing, scalding or burning sensation
cytokines [90]. It is the Type IV mechanoreceptors or free and which may also be classiﬁed as neuropathic pain
nerve endings surrounding the discs that give rise to the [104]. During spaceﬂight, astronauts complain of pain
subjective perception of discomfort and pain. Pain from localised to the lower back and the nature of the pain is
tissue damage can also lead to muscle spasm and adapta— described as “dull” pain without any intense or incapaci—
tion in activation patterns in attempts to stabilise spinal tating nature [17].
segments and reduce noxious tissue stress [91,92]. This can
lead to muscle pain from contraction hyperactivity [93]. 7. Other possible mechanisms of back pain in

There are three other types of receptors found in microgravity
collagen namely: (a) Type I (Ruﬁnni corpuscles), (b) Type
II (Pacinian corpuscles), and (c) Type III (Golgi Tendon The most likely pain generator for back pain during
Organ) mechanoreceptors [86,87]. Collagen mechanore— spaceﬂight is the intervertebral disc as opposed to ver—
ceptors provide spatial orientation with facilitation tebral bodies and their endplates because nuclear swel—
through normal physiological collagen deformation when ling subjects the annulus to supraphysiologic axial strain.
the spine moves with muscle contraction. Proprioception Collagen ﬁbres have two types of viscoelastic properties:
or joint position sense is brought about by activation of ﬂuid phase and solid phase. The ﬂuid phase gives rise to
Types 1 and II mechanoreceptors in the ligaments and the viscoelastic response when collagen of the annuli
joint capsules as well as the muscle spindles [94]. With deform with greater magnitude by the application of
active movement, these spatial position receptors provide prolonged but low grade physical stress whereas the solid
a neurological feedback mechanism that directly med— phase is the collagen response by disc stiffening with less
iates vertebral segment position sensibility and muscular annular deformation by the application of high intensity
reﬂex stabilisation [95]. The neurophysiological effect of and short duration stress [60]. Fluid accumulation during
normal activation of Types 1 and II mechanoreceptors is spaceﬂight is slow and prolonged and thus causes more
explained by an interneuron effect centrally in the spinal annular deformity by ﬂuid phase viscoelastic property.
cord producing an inhibition at the spinal cord level to This is evidenced by a longer spine length in microgravity
any form of nociception or pain perception (from Type IV coupled with likely disc expansion.
mechanoreceptors) through locally—mediated opioids Another speculated pain generator is the posterior
such as enkephalins [96,97]. Hence, physiological loading collagen structures such as ligaments (posterior long—
and spine movement may produce naturally—occurring itudinal ligament, facet joint capsule, interspinous,
opioids such as endorphins and enkephalins essential for supraspinous, and intertransversarii, and posterior long—
nervous system homoeostasis and counteracting low back itudinal ligaments) dura, dural sleeves and myofascia. An
pain [96]. Because of reduced amplitudes of spinal motion immunocytochemical study by Kallakuri and colleagues
in microgravity, there may be reduced natural opioid demonstrated a signiﬁcant number of putative nocicep—
production as well. tive ﬁbres in the lumbar spinal dura and longitudinal

The adjacent vertebral bodies and cartilaginous end— ligaments which could make for argumentation as possi—
plates are innervated via the basivertebral nerve, which is ble sources of low back pain [105]. However, the posterior
a recurrent branch of the sinuvertebral nerve and enters longitudinal ligament (PLL) as well as the dura and dural
the vertebral body via the posterior basivertebral foramen sleeves are located posterior to the instantaneous axis of
[98,99]. The density of endplate innervation is compar— rotation of the spine and would be mechanically stressed
able to that of the peripheral annulus, suggesting that the with spine ﬂexion. Although all of the described posterior
endplate is an important source of discogenic pain [100]. collagen structures may become mechanically stretched
Endplate nerves are prototypical pain ﬁbres that demon— with spinal elongation in microgravity, spine ﬂexion in
strate nociceptor markers such as the neurotransmitter the foetal position would further stress and deform these
substance P and high afﬁnity nerve growth factor receptor anatomic structures that should cause pain provocation
trk—A [101]. The clinical signiﬁcance of vertebral innerva— instead of pain relief [14]. Therefore, posterior collagen
tion in back pain patients is reinforced by reports of pain deformation with spine ﬂexion during spaceﬂight is
amelioration after basivertebral nerve disruption during probably within normal ranges and is unlikely a possible
vertebroplasty [102] as well as pain provocation studies source of pain.
on human subjects [103]. Located anterior to the axis of rotation for spine ﬂexion

is the anterior longitudinal ligament (ALL). Spine ﬂexion
6. Possible mechanism of back pain in microgravity would relax the PLL to become mechanically slack and
unprovoked. It is unlikely that the ALL is a source of pain

When the spine lengthens in microgravity, the nucleus because it is twice as strong as the PLL [106]. Moreover,
pulposus increases its volume as previously discussed. due to its location, it is not possible to disrupt its ﬁbres by
When the disc expands, stretching of annular collagen ﬂexion or extension [107].
may surpass the normal 3—4% physiological collagen It is proposed that tensioning of intrathecal ligaments
expansion and stimulation of Type IV mechanoreceptors and nerve roots is a possible source of low back pain
(free nerve endings). Nerve impulse propagation may experienced by astronauts during spaceﬂight [21]. It is

"
"8","].V. Sayson et al. / Acta Astronautica 86 (2013) 24—38 31
unclear however, if intrathecal ligaments are innervated [109]. As such, spine ﬂexion will mechanically place the
at all with nociceptive free—nerve endings that cause the nerves in a stretched position that may potentially irritate
magnitude and quality of low back pain reported by these nerves but only if these are already ischaemic prior
astronauts. Biomechanically, sagittal ﬂexion of the spine to testing. The knee—to—chest position in spinal ﬂexion
in knee to chest position separates and increases distance provides relief during spaceﬂight possibly eliminating
between the spinous processes. This functional motion of spinal nerves as a primary cause of low back pain in space.
the vertebral segments will potentially stretch and Lastly, the Dorsal Root Ganglion (DRG) is another
deform these ligaments that tether the spinal cord to potential suspect as a cause of low back pain in space.
the posterior spinal arch. Because relief of back pain is by Animal models demonstrate pain provocation to the DRG
spine ﬂexion,invoking theseligaments as pain generators because it is sensitive to mechanical pressures [111].
is less likely to be a primary cause of back pain during Mechanical pressure of the DRG can only be achieved
spaceﬂight. when the intervertebral foraminal size is reduced but only

Muscle, along with its myofascia and blood vessels, has if there is already a space occupying lesion in the spinal
also been implicated as a back pain generator but our canal and vertebral foramina coupled with active and
analysis makes it unlikely as a primary source. Muscle passive extension of the spine. There is no documented
may only be a secondary pain generator as reﬂex muscle report of low back pain aggravation with spine extension
guarding and spasm occur with nociception arising from during spaceﬂight so the DRG can be removed from the
the discs. Noxious stress through likely accumulation of potential list of pain generators.
metabolites or excessive physical stresses can lead to It appears that the intervertebral disc is a more likely
further nociception causing continued muscle spasm pain generator during spaceﬂight [2]. During pre— and
[91. 92, 93]. External causes of muscle ﬁbre damage post—ﬂight, back pain in upright posture with spinalaxial
include crushing and laceration injuries as well as loading has been attributed to disc herniation, nerve—root
extreme heat or cold whereas internal causes include compression, or subsequent disc herniation—induced
traumatic muscle tears and tendon rupture after violent inﬂammation [3]. Loss of gravity loading to the disc may
contractions with eccentric loading. Lastly, muscle ﬁbre initiate an adaptive response to cause a net hypotrophic
damage can be due to diseases such as inﬂammation effect to the annulus ﬁbrosus. Annular collagen stiffness
(polymyositis, dermatomyositis) or inherited defects may be lost upon return to Earth gravity to predisposing
(Duchenne muscular dystrophy,malignant hyperthermia) the disc to segmental instability. This may result in
[108]. Conditions that entail violent muscular loading possibly, disc strain, compressive and shear deformation,
with sudden acceleration and deceleration which cause rupture with or without neurological compromise when
muscle tears or strains are probably not inherent with normal external loads are re—applied [112]. A sudden
activities performed by astronauts. A spinal muscle strain return to Earth gravity may create overloaded conditions
or tear is categorised as a ‘Contractile lesion.’ Its more to the disc that may cause annular tears or nuclear
deﬁnitive diagnosis in an orthopaedic manual physical protrusion. The worst possible disc response is annular
therapy model is by provocation of pain by three meth— failure causing disc herniation or prolapse with or with—
ods: (a) active contraction of the muscle (active extension out spinal nerve root compromise. In response to NASA’s
of the spine), (b) passive stretching (passive spine ﬂexion) Critical Path Roadmap Risks and Questions regarding disc
and by (c) contraction against a resistance to spine injury and higher incidence of HNPs after space ﬂight(IRP
extension (resistive extension) [31]. Thus, differential Gap—B4), the authors of this review together with other
diagnosis by manual methods does not deﬁne muscle as co—investigators are currently conducting a NASA Flight
a pain generator in astronauts because there is relief of Project “Risk of Intervertebral Disc Damage after Pro—
back pain when the posterior extensors are stretched with longed Space Flight” to investigate the effects of space—
spinal ﬂexion. A supplemental investigation could involve ﬂight on the human spine. This in depth study will use
a neurological examination in—ﬂight to rule out nerve root state—of—the—art, non—invasive imaging technologies to
affectation causing low back pain. quantify morphology, biochemistry, metabolism, and

Another possible cause of back pain in space is the kinematics for lumbar discs of crew members before
lumbar spinal nerves. It has been also proposed that and after prolonged space ﬂight. The data derived will
spinal nerves could be deformed by spine lengthening be correlated with low back pain that spontaneously
and may cause pain. Dorsal nerve roots of the lumbosacral arises in space so as to establish more deﬁnitive patho—
plexus when inﬂamed or irritated cause low back pain physiologic mechanism that will serve as basis for future
[109]. Neuropathic pain is deﬁned as pain originating countermeasure development.
from nerves when it becomes pathologic with ischaemia
clue to increased intra—neural pressure by prolonged 8. Possible mechanisms of back pain relief in
mechanical compression or by prolonged distraction microgravity
[110]. An ischaemic nerve will manifest alteration in
nerve conduction causing changes in the dermatomal Reduction of nucleus pulposus ﬂuid volume may
sensorium, myotomes, and deep tendon reﬂexes. The probably be achieved by compression of the lumbar
aetiology of pain from peripheral nerves is attributed to intervertebral discs with forced spine ﬂexion such as the
damage of nociceptive afferent axons [110]. Differential knee to chest position that astronauts assume to relieve
diagnosis is by provocation of pain with provision of a low back pain [14].The compression load may result from
mechanical stimulus to the dorsal roots by a slight stretch a transfer of the instantaneous axis of motion of a lumbar

"
"9","32 ].V. Sayson et al. / Acta Astronautica 86 (2013) 24—38
mobile segment towards a forward direction to the report extreme discomfort where the cord harness com—
anterior half of the intervertebral disc [106]. Lumbar spine presses the shoulders and pelvic region [115]. The use of a
ﬂexion causes an anterior rotation of the vertebral motion lower body negative pressure (LBNP) treadmill could be an
segment in the sagittal plane accompanied by anterior alternative but it has not yet been tested in space [36,116].
translation, whereas posterior rotation and translation The LBNP treadmill uses negative pressure to produce spine
occurs in spine extension [113]. Positive intervertebral loading inside a half—body height chamber as the subject
disc pressure is likely established with a compressive wears shoulder straps connected to a ﬂexible kayak—type
force in spine ﬂexion and may potentially cause intradis— waist seal [36]. Cosmonauts have used the penguin suit but
cal ﬂuid efﬂux back to the vertebral bodies and to the peer—reviewed studies in correlating spine compression and
systemic circulation. The knee—to—chest position may be lumbar back pain are not available. An in—ﬂight protocol of a
similar to spine loading on Earth that reduces disc height hammer throw exercise resisted by elastic cords while
at the end of the day [50]. It is apparent that reduction in wearing a penguin suit could produce spine compression
over—hydration of the nucleus pulposus requires elevation and rotation stresses which are essential for disc ﬂuid
of intradiscal pressure to produce a positive pressure dynamics and may have been contributing factors in lower
gradient to facilitate ﬂuid transport and transport into incidence of back pain in the Russian space programme
vertebrae above and below the disc, thus potentially [17,68]. To date, the US. space programme has no other
reducing annular stretching. Reduced annular deformity non—pharmacologic countermeasures against in—ﬂight lum—
may de—activate the sinuvertebral nerves (via Type IV bar back pain aside from assumingaknee—to—chest position.
mechanoreceptors) and counteract back pain.

The mechanism of lumbar back pain relief in the 10. Possible countermeasures for spine deconditioning
central nervous system is probably through a neutraliza— during spaceﬂight
tion of nociceptive neurotransmitters in the dorsal horn of
the spinal cord [96]. Substance P and Neurokinin A are the Strategies for countermeasures may depend on simu—
nociceptive neurotransmitters released at the pre—synap— lating Earth—like conditions to include (a) axial loading of
tic terminals in response to nerve impulses from periph— the spine equivalent to diurnal load—bearing, (b) speciﬁ—
eral nociceptive ﬁbres and neurochemicals that can cally designed exercises with resistance and intensity
suppress the effects of nociceptive neurotransmitters are dosage similar to loads lifted during activities of daily
called endocoids or opioids [96,114]. Enkephalins and living, and (c) continuous spine movements without
endorphins are a class of opioid neurotransmitters which resistance equivalent to functional movement activities
have analgesic effects and released centrally in the spinal such as transfers from sitting to standing and standing to
cord via stimulation of peripheral mechanoreceptors Type sitting and walking. Such activities are equivalent to low—
I (Rufﬁni corpuscles) and Type II (Paccinian corpuscles) load dynamic daily loading of the intervertebral discs.
embedded in the substance of collagen ﬁbres of liga—
ments, facet joint capsule, and myofascia [96]. These 10.1. Torso compression harness (axial loading of the spine):
mechanoreceptors have proprioceptive and pain—inhibit—
ing effects which are stimulated by stretching of the One possible countermeasure for spinal decondition—
posterior spinal ligaments as well as the facet joint ing is to provide an approximate 1—G load to an astro—
capsule and muscles when the spine is ﬂexed similar to naut’s spine using a proposed torso compression harness
the knee to chest positioning. Aside from pain relief a (TCH) worn for several hours equivalent to spine loading
concurrent effect by dorsal horn opioid suppression of during wakeful periods. In contrast to a Penguin suit
nociceptive neurotransmitters is apparently, a reduction which provides a vertical load to the spine with elastic
of the reﬂex fusimotor excitation of the spine muscula— cords [46], the TCH will produce a posteriorly directed
ture, and a reduction of perceived spine stiffness [114]. load to the spine (Figs. 3 and 4). The astronaut actively

ﬂexes the torso to resist the extension moment (created
9. Back pain countermeasures by elastic cords of the TCH) and to align the spine back
into its neutral position. Spine ﬂexion will facilitate

Aside from the reported knee to chest position as a muscle contraction of the rectus abdominis, external
back pain relief strategy, astronauts also report other and internal obliques, and the transverses abdominis
techniques to ease back pain such as stretching, taking which contribute to spinal stability by creating a rigid
acetaminophen or ibuprofen, treadmill exercise, and cylinder with an increase of the intra—abdominal pressure
deliberate compression of the spine [17,24]. The mode [117,118]. This form of actively resisted spine compres—
of stretching technique is not documented in the sion may increase the hydrostatic pressure of the lumbar
literature. intervertebral discs similar to Earth—like conditions

While exercising on the treadmill elastic cords secure the approximately 50% of the astronaut’s bodyweight [36,37].
crewmember but the mechanical loading is only equivalent
to 60—70% of bodyweight on Earth [115]. Relief of lumbar 10.2. Pulley exercises [speciﬁcally designed spinal exercises]:
back pain may be due to reduction of disc volume by
increased hydrostatic pressure delivered by the downward Astronauts exposed to microgravity experience spine
pull of the elastic cords on the torso as well as active deconditioning and atrophy. Current exercise countermea—
rotatory spine movements during locomotion to facilitate sures on 155 include a two—hour protocol using a
disc ﬂuid dynamics. Using elastic cords, however, astronauts treadmill, Advanced Resistive Exercise Device (ARED), and

"
"10","].V. Sayson et al. / Acta Astronautica 86 (2013) 24—38 33
. [47]. An adjustable pulley is suggested as the line of
resistance pull could be prepositioned to match the vector
force direction of spinal muscle ﬁbre contraction enhan—
M cing speciﬁc loading of the spinal muscles and discs.
\‘ii. Exercise prescription is probably beneﬁcial if a reference
)‘, » can be established to formulate a measurable resistance
. dosage speciﬁc to each crewmember’s spinal condition.
. / Determination of exercise resistance can be based on a
/'. percentage of 1 RM [119,120]. 1 RM on the other hand is
(f , .
t“ deﬁned as the max1mum load that can be overcome for
only one repetition [119,120].
: Our proposal for an exercise prescription using high
‘ ‘ 7‘ repetition dosage may be more functional based on the
type of muscle ﬁbre isoform predominance in the spine.
Human skeletal muscle is subdivided based on two iso—
forms (a) Myosin Heavy Chain muscle isoform Type 1
(MHC I) synonymous to red muscles/slow—twitch ﬁbres,
and (b) Myosin Heavy Chain muscle isoform Type II (MHC
IIx/d aka MHC IIb) or white muscles/fast—twitch ﬁbres
“ [121]. MHC I are oxidative and ﬁbre development results
, from low to moderate loads at higher repetitions (aerobic
- i metabolism) whereas MHC II are glycolytic and responds
Fig. 3. Posterior view of the Torso Compression Harness. A shoulder. by hlgher loads at lower repetitions (anaerOblC metabo—
component is connected to a pelvic component by elastic/resistive cords lism) [119,120,1221- POStural funCtioning MHC'I mUSCle
in a criss—cross direction. ﬁbres of the lower extremities atrophy in greater propor—
tion than MHC—II during spaceﬂight [122—125] but the
proportion of MHC—I to MHC—II atrophy in the spine is not
deﬁned. It is most likely that atrophy of the spinal
postural muscles becomes a primary musculoskeletal
response to unloading with deconditioning in—ﬂight. Back
‘ muscle volume decreases by 10% after an eight clay
Shuttle ﬂight [47] and it is likely that MCH I/Type I
m muscle ﬁbre type atrophies the most with reduction of
back muscle volume since anatomical studies show that
there is a predominance of Type 1 muscle ﬁbres in the
,4"" deep and superﬁcial multiﬁdus as well as the erector
spinae [126]. To match the exercise intensity suited to the
y "" predominant muscle isoform in the spine, exercise dosage
., / ‘ with lower load resistance and higher repetition incre—
, ‘ ments may be the most appropriate mechanical stress in
f the exercise protocol development [119,120].
, , If exercise intensity to the back muscles becomes too
high, it may cause injury. As such, even though the
‘ incidence of in—ﬂight musculoskeletal injuries with exer—
r. cise is low, there is a relatively high number of minor back
, ' injuries incurred while using current 155 exercise equip—
ment [127]. In microgravity the resistance of the pulley
\ . ‘* may include a pneumatic mechanism or a modiﬁed
. “ ﬂywheel that can produce a constant load [128,129]. A
, ; ‘.- specially—designed adjustable bench with straps to stabi—
- ﬂy ' . g_' d lise the pelvis and to pre—position the astronaut prior to
7_ , ‘ ;‘ ‘1'! commencement of the designated exercises is possible. In
3-; '_ * . * _ Mm microgravity conditions, the objective of these exercises is
. . . . . to provide biomechanical compression to the spine via
Fig. 4. Anterlor Vlew of the Torso Compressmn Harness showing the. optimised muscle contraction using functional spine
soft shoulder pads secured by Velcro underneath and two adjustable , , , , , ,
straps connected to the anterior pelvic component movements in tr1—planar directions [ﬂex10n or exten510n
combined with simultaneous side—bending and rotation]
an ergometer with bungee cord load trainer. However, as opposed to traditional uni—planar spine movement
there is no exercise protocol speciﬁc to the spine with exercises (strict ﬂexion, extension, or side—bending).
simulation of Earth—like disc loading. This may be the Functional spine exercises will likely cause efﬁcient
reason why back muscle volume loss is not mitigated mechanotransduction with cyclical stress to spinal structures

"
"11","34 ].V. Sayson et al. / Acta Astronautica 86 (2013) 24—38
conducive to soft—tissue homoeostasis including the inter— 10.3. Microgravity spine biomechanics (continuous spine
vertebral discs through likely re—establishment of normal movements without resistance)
ﬂuid hydrodynamics by intermittent compression and
decompression [130]. Osseous tissues of vertebrae may also Approximation of daily terrestrial spine movement for
beneﬁt from the stress ﬁeld under axial compression to help crewmembers may include repeated, but small magni—
maintain bony architecture [131]. tudes of movement approximating vertebral rotation in
The length—tension curve of muscle deﬁnes that mus— the transverse plane similar to ambulation. Continuous
Cle generates the most tension with concentric contrac— movement of the torso and pelvis in counter rotation
tion at its normal resting length at approximately15—20% movements simulates normal spine rotatory motions
beyond neutral position or mid—range of muscle length during walking. On Earth, walking may be the main
but less tension in a shorter length as well as in its activity that determines lumbar vertebral facet joint bone
maximal length [132]. Elastic cords generate progres— architecture [131]. Astronauts in space move their torso
sively increasing resistance with greater elongation less in rotation since there is no need to actively pre—
[119] but do not provide quantitative information on position the spine when performing most tasks. There are
their actual or relative resistance [133]. Elastic cords in foot restraints or foot loops on 155 that can be placed
their most stretched position produce the greatest load wherever work will need to be done and where a stable
against a progressively weaker inner—range of muscle position is required. When the feet are stabilized when
contraction. Thus, elastic cords are unable to accommo— performing tasks, the spine rotates but lacks compression
date normal length—tension curve of muscle contraction. in the absence of gravitational loads. It has been reported
Elastic cords are also subject to fatigue with repeated use that these foot stabilisers are used minimally (or not at
resulting in decreased tension [133]. On the other hand, all) per day depending on mission tasks. Development of
an adjustable pulley can accommodate to the normal microgravity biomechanics is an attempt to reproduce
muscle length—tension curve. The line of resistance can Earth—like biomechanical stimuli to all spinal structures
be placed perpendicular to the long axis of the bone including the intervertebral discs.
(longest weight arm of the load), thus matching the
strongest range of muscle tension (15—20% longer from 11. Flight physical examination
the mid—range length) [119,134]. It follows then that the
shortened and lengthened muscle ranges (weak muscle A ﬁnal suggestion by the authors to aid in under—
tension generated) now correspond to a shorter weight standing the crewmember’s spine is the addition of the
arm of the same load (lighter resistance) for both ranges human element of clinical insight. Correlation of all
(Fig. 5). pertinent data would probably beneﬁt from input from
qualiﬁed clinicians also involved with data analysis and
management of back pain treatment or countermeasures
development. An orthopaedic—based pre— and post—ﬂight
. assessment may entail a thorough manual spine evalua—
Pulley ReSlStance tion in an effort to correlate and compare clinical ﬁndings
to objective measures. It is suggested that clinical assess—
,_‘- ; ‘t"" ment procedures be performed by the same Clinicians
‘ﬁlv’c pre— and post—ﬂight for better reliability of collected data.
W 3‘“, Clinicians trained in precise manual diagnostic methods
W may involve qualiﬁed physicians, osteopaths, or physical
variéble ”Sismnce therapists with a specialty in Orthopaedic Manual Ther—
(ability to overcome
inertia) in various apy [135].
ranges of motion during ’
concentric work is \
determined by the B 12' Summary
length of the lever arm: ﬁm
— The precise pathophysiology of low back pain during
spaceﬂight is not established to date. It is hypothesised
Fig. 5. l3ulley.directi.on of resistance to muscle length tension of the that the intervertebral diSC iS the most probable a pain
pectorahs major. Th1s v1ew from above demonstrates r1ght shoulder . . .
horizontal ﬂexion in the transverse plane against a pulley with a generator d“? to .a hyPOFhESISEd dISC expanSIon beyond
pneumatic or ﬂywheel resistance. The axis of joint motion is through a normal phy51olog1cal llITlltS. PFOIOHSEd unloadlng 0f the
vertical axis at the glenohumeral joint of the shoulder. The right upper spine in microgravity probably causes excessive ﬂuid
extremity is positioned from the subject’s right to left side: (starting inﬂux, increased nucleus pulposus volume, reduced pG
position) lengthened muscle ﬁbres, (resting position) resting muscle matrix production and reduced nucleus pulposus swelling
ﬁbre length, and (1nner—range) shortened muscle ﬁbres. B represents 15— . . . .
20% beyond the resting length and will generate the most tension pressure1n the dISC. Lower mEChanlcal loads In space may
[119,132]. The line of resistance perpendicular to B represents the FEdUCe CyCliC variations in hdeOStatiC Pressure Within the
optimal direction of resistance since the load resistance force over the disc possibly disrupting the diurnal ﬂuid shifts and
Puney rePresemec‘ by the Purple box mUItiPIiEd by the dism‘ce normal nutrition of the disc. Moreover, viscoelastic col—
between the pulley handle and axis of joint motion (weight arm) la en deformation ma be less With short—duration hi h—
prov1des the most amount of load and corresponds to the strongest g y ’ g
length of the muscle. (Illustration reproduced with permission from the loads on Earth 35 compaFEd t0 prOIOHSEd lOW—load Stress
Ola Grimsby Institute). during spaceﬂight. A proposed end result explanation is

"
"12","].V. Sayson et al. / Acta Astronautica 86 (2013) 24—38 35
that excessive collagen deformation Of the annuli With [4] H.]. Wilke, P. Neef, M. Caimi, T. Hoogland, New in vivo measure—
diSC expansion suggest a probable pain mechanism by DEE: o7f5p5reéggres in the intervertebral disc in daily life, Spine 24
stimulation of n0c1cept1ve Type IV mechanoreceptors and [5] [V1.H. 12mg, MC Cohen, L_D_ Haug’ MH Pope, Body height Change
nerve impulse propagation through sinuvertebral nerves. during upright and recumbent posture, Spine 15 (1990) 202—207.
Relief of back pain in space by assuming a knee—to—chest [6] E-g-J- Anderfsion.lR-W- Multphy, R. Orctleieregl. A-L- Nachemsim, Ehe

- - - r1 uence o ac<rest1nc1nat10n an urn ar support on urn ar
posture fiexes the spine anci likely transfers the instanta— lordosis, Spine 4 (1979) 52_58_
neous 3X15 0f l‘OtathH anterior to the lumbar Interverteb' [7] AR. Tyrrell, T. Reilly,].D. Troup, Circadian variation in stature and
ral discs. This altered spine conﬁguration would seem to the effects 0f5pina1 loading. Spine 10 (1985) 161-164-
compress the discs and stretch the posterior soft—tissues. [8] [A Malko'. W'C: Humn' W'A' Palm?“ A“ 1“ VIVO magnet”
. . . . resonance lmaglng study of Changes 1n the volume (and ﬂuid
Countermeasures to 10W baCk pain In m1cr0grav1ty and content) of the lumbar intervertbral discs during a simulated
potential disc herniation post—ﬂight may include (a) con— diurnal load cycle, Spine 24 (1999) 1015—1022.
tinuous axial loading of the spine equivalent to diurnal [9] [VI Abdamsvtw- Hilts“? :16 Efgeét Ofspflsgége)‘36r16;h66§rid content“
. . . . . urn ar 1n erver e ra lSCS, 1ne — .
load—bearing, (b) SPECIﬁcally_dESIgn6d exerc1ses t0 act1— [10] W.C. Hutton, ].A. Malko, V\1/3.A. Fajman, Lumbar disc volume
vate Type I mUSCle ﬁbres using loads COHSiStent With measured by MRI: effect of bed rest, horizontal exercise and
activities of daily living, and (C) continuous spine move— vertical loading. Aviat- Space Environ- Med- 74 (2003) 73-78-
ments without resistance equivalent to functional move— [11] H' OhShima’ 121)“ urban’ .The Eff?“ 0f I?Ctate and ph 0? pr0t50gly'
, , , , can and protein synthe51s rates 1n the intervertebral dlsc, Spine 17
ment act1v1t1es such as locomotion and other common (1992)1079_1082_
daily movements, Adherence to validated countermea— [12] H. Ohshima, ].P.G. Urban, D.H. Bergel, Effect of static load on
- - - - matrix synthesis rates in the intervertebral disc measured in vitro
sures may Slmmate the usual grav1tat10nal loading. to [he by a new perfusion technique, J. Orthop. Res. 13 (1995) 22—29.
spine for IntervertEbral dlSC homOEOStaSIS and mltlgatlon [13] J. Chen, A.E. Baer, P.Y. Paik, W. Yan, L.A. Setton, Matrix protein
Of herniated nucleus pulposus incidence pOSt—ﬂight. gene expression in intervertebral disc cells subjected to altered
osmolarity, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 293 (2002) 932—938.
[14] WE. Thornton, G.W. Hofﬂer, ].A. Rummel, Anthropometric Changes
Submission declaration and ﬂuid shifts, in: Johnson RS, Dietlein LF eds, biomedical results
from skylab, Washington DC. NASA SP—377 1977, pp. 330—338.
. . . . [15] ].R. Styf, P. Kalebo, A.R. Hargens, Lumbar intervertebral disc
Thls manuscript has not been pUthhed preVIOUSIY- It heights as measured by sonography, Aviat. Space Environ. Med.
is not under consideration for publication elsewhere and 65 (1994) 450-
if accepted by Acta Astronautica, it Will not be published [16] BL. I(ertsman,.R.A. Scheurihg, M.C. Barnes,.T.B. DeKorse,.L.G. Saile,
, , , Space adaptation back pain: a retrospective study, Av1at. Space
elsewhere either in English or any other language as well Environ Med 83 (2012) 2_7_
as publication electronically in the same format without [17] RC. Wing, I.I<. Tsang, L. Susak, F. Gagnon, R. Gagnon, 1.13. Potts, Back
the written consent Of the copyright holder. pain and spinal Changes in microgravity, Orthop. Clin. North Am.
(1991) 255—262.
[18] M. Mullane, Riding Rockets: The Outrageous Tales of a Space
Shuttle Astronaut, Scribner, 2006.
[19] ].W. Brown, Crew Height Measurements, the Apollo—Soyuz Test
ACRHOWIEdgementS Project Medical Report, Washington DC: NASA; 1977. NASA SP—411.
[20] W. Thornton, T. Moore, Height Changes in microgravity, in:
Supported by NASA grants NNX10AM1SG and [\q/[Wi 1311139; TL-Dél- SBagian. “3:6 ngrgan. 3-121.) Lenka; (SEdS-).

- esu ts o t e 1e Clences s on ucte oar t e pace
NNXOQAPIIG' The aUthorS extend the” thanks for the Shuttle 1981—1988, Houston: NASA, Johnson Space Center, 1987.
Informatlon and feedbaCk pr0v1ded by: 013 Gl‘lmsby, the [21] D. Kershner, R. Binhammer, Intrathecal ligaments and nerve root
Ola Grimsby Institute, San Diego; William C, Hutton, MD, tension: possible sources of lumbar pain during spaceﬂight,Aviat.

- - - Space Environ. Med. 75 (2004) 354—358.
Dept. .Of orthopaEdlC Surgery, Emory UniverSIty SChOOl Of [22] Y. Matsumura, Y. Kasai, H. Obata, S. Matsushima, T. Inaba,
MEdlcmev Atlantav GA; Smlth 1"" JOhnStonv 111' MDv MS, NASA A. Uchida, Changes in water content of Intervertebral discs and
Medical Operations Flight Medicine Clinic, Johnson Space paravertebral muscles before and after bed rest, J. Orthop. Sci. 14
Center, Houston, TX; Jorma Styf, MD, PhD, Dept. of Ortho— (2009) 45—50- , , , ,

. . . . .. . [23] BE Walker, O.D. Williamson, Mechanlcal or 1nﬂammatory low
paedics, Sahlgrenska UniverSIty HOSpltal, theborg: SWEden’ back pain. What are the potential signs and symptoms? Man.
NASA Astronaut (ret.) CDR Brian Duffy, Vice PreSIdent and Then 14 (2009) 314-320
JSC Program Manager for Exploration Systems, ATK Aero- [24] LB. Gontcharov, I.V. K(ivachevich, S.L.ﬂPOfiﬂ, OCiL. lNavigkov,

, MR. Barratt, V.V. Bogomo 0v, N. House, In ig t me ica inci ents
space SySteme HOUSton’ TX’ NASA AStronaUt (mt) RObert in the NASA—Mir program, Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 76 (2005)
Springer, Pre51dent, Board of Directors at Kennedy Space 692_696_
Center Education Foundation, Rocklede FL; and NASA [25] H.]. Wilke, S. Wolf, L.E. Claes, M. Arand, A. Wiesend, Stability
Astronaut (ret.) Mike Mullane, Motivational Speaker, ”?crease 0f, the, lumbar Spine With different mUSde grOUPS' a
A th St . f 5 [LC Alb NM biomechanlcal 1h Vitro study, Spine 20 (1995) 192—198. .
u 01‘, ories rom pace ' uquerque' ' [26] EC. Parent, T. Videman, M.C. Battle, The effect of lumbar ﬂex1on
and extension on disc contour abnormality measured quantitatively
on magnetic resonance imaging, Spine 31 (2006) 2836—2842.
REferences [27] J. Zou, H. Yang, M. Miyazaki, Y. Morishita, F. Wei, S. McGovern,
].C. Wang, Dynamic bulging of intervertebral discs in the degen—
[1] AR. Hargens, D.E. Watenpaugh, G.A. Breit, Control of circulatory erative lumbar spine, Spine 34 (2009) 2545—2550.
function in altered gravitational ﬁelds, Physiologist 35 (1992) [28] VA. Lawrence, P. TquEH, A. Gafni, W. KOSUWOH. W.C. SpitZZEF.
580—583, Acute low back pain and economics of therapy: the iterative loop
[2] J.V. Sayson, A.R. Hargens, Pathophysiology of low back pain during approach, J. Clin. Epidemiol. 45 (1992) 301—311.

exposure to microgravity, Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 79 (2008) [29] S. Gracovetsky, H. Farfan, The optimum spine, Spine 11 (1986)

365—373. 543—573.

[3] S.L. Johnston, MR. Campbell, R. Scheuring, A. Feiveson, Risk of [30] K.K. Whitcome, L]. Shapiro, D.E. Lieberman, Fetal load and the

herniated nucleus pulposus among US. astronauts, Aviat. Space evolution of lumbar lordosis in bipedal hominins, Nature 450

Environ. Med. 81 (2010) 566—574. (2007) 1075—1078.

"
"13","36 ].V. Sayson et al. / Acta Astronautica 86 (2013) 24—38

[31]]. Cyriax, Textbook of orthopedic medicine, Diagn. Soft—Tissue anulus ﬁbrosus. inﬂuence of age, degeneration, directionand
Lesions Baillierie Tindall (1982). water content, Spine 24 (1999) 2449—2455.,.

[32] M.T. Provencher, W.A. Abdu, Historical perspective: Giovanni [58] S. Holm, A. Maroudas, ].P. Urban, G. Selstam, A. Nachemson,
Alfonso Borelli: father of spinal biomechanics, Spine 25 (2000) Nutrition of the intervertebral discsolute transport and metabo—
131—136. lism, Connect. Tissue Res.., 8 (1981) 101—119.:.

[33] A. Kiefer, A. Shirazi—Adl, M. Parnianpour, Stability of the human [59] N. Bogduk, W. Tynan, A.S. Wilson, The innervation of the human
spine in neutral postures, Eur. Spine J. 6 (1997) 45—53. intervertebral discs, J. Anat. 132 (1981) 39—56.

[34] M. Syczewska, T. Oberg, D. I(arlsson, Segmental movement of the [60] N. Bogduk, L. Twomey, Clinical Anatomy of the Lumbar Spine,
spine during treadmill walking with normal speed, Clin. Biomech. Churchill Livingstone, 1987.

14 (1999) 384—388. [61] AR. Hargens, K. Hutchinson, R. Ballard, I(.P. Fechner, G. Murthy,

[35] LA. Kapanjii, L.H. Honore, The Physiology of the Joints, the Trunk Intervertebral Disc: Loaded on Earth and Unloaded in Space,
and the Vertebral Column, Churchill Livingstone, 1988. Connective Tissue Biology, Integration and Reductionism, London,

[36] P. Cao, S. Kimura, B. Macia, T. Ueno, D.E. Watenpaugh, A. Hargens, Portland Press Ltd, 1998.

Exercise within lower body negative pressure partially counter— [62] W. Akeson, S. Woo, D. Amiel, R. Coutts, D. Daniel, The connective
acts lumbar spine deconditioning associated with 28—day bed tissue response to immobilityzbiomechanical changes in periarti—
rest,]. Appl. Physiol.. 99 (2005) 39—34. cular connective tissue of the immobilized rabbit knee, Clin.

[37] S. Kimura, G.C. Steinbach, D.E. Watenpaugh, A.R. Hargens, Lumbar Orthop. Rel. Res. 93 (1973) 356—361.
spine disc height and curvature responses to an axial load [63] D. Brickley—Parsons, M. Glimcher, Is the chemistry of collagen in
generated by a compression device compatible with magnetic the intervertebral disc an expression of Wolff‘s law?Astudy of the
resonance imaging, Spine 26 (2001) 2596—2600. human lumbar spine, Spine 9 (1984) 148—163.

[38] I(.P. Granata, W.S. Marras, An EMG—assisted model of loads on the [64] H. Ishihara, K. Warensjo, S. Roberts, ].P.F. Urban, Proteoglycan
lumbar spine during asymmetric trunk extensions,]. Biomech. 26 synthesis in the intervertebral disk nucleus: the role of extra—
(1993) 1429—1438. cellular osmolality, Am. J. Physiol. 272 (1997) C1499C—C11506.

[39] LA. Stokes, ].R. Fox, S.M. Henry, Trunk muscular activation pat— [65] T. Matsumoto, M. Kawakami, K. I(uribayashi, T. Takenaka,
terns and responses to transient force perturbation in persons T. Tamaki, Cyclic mechanical stretch stress increases the growth
with self—reported low back pain, Eur. Spine J. 15 (2006) rate and collagen synthesis of nucleus pulposus cells in vitro,
658—667. Spine 24 (1999) 315—319.

[40] J. Janevic, ].A. Ashton—Miller, A.B. Schultz, Large compressive pre— [66] ].R. Taylor, Growth of human intervertebral discs and vertebral
loads decrease lumbar motion segment ﬂexibility, J. Orthop. Res. 9 bodies, J. Anat. 120 (1975) 49—68.

(1991) 228—236. [67] ].C. Lotz, ].R. Colliou, N. Chin, A. Duncan, E. Liebenberg, Compres—

[41] M. Panjabi, Experimental determination of spinal motion segment sion—induced degeneration of the intervertebral disc: an in vivo
behavior, Orthop. Clin. North Am. 8 (1977) 169—180. mouse model and ﬁnite—element study, Spine 23 (1998)

[42] W5. Marras, C.M. Sommeric, A three—dimensional motion model 2493—2506.
of loads on the lumbar spine: model Validation, Hum. Factors 33 [68] W. Thornton, Work, Exercise, and Space Flight. In Workshop on
(1991) 139—149. Exercise Prescription for Long Duration Space Flight, NASA Con—

[43] A. Nachemson, Towards a better understanding of low—back pain: ference Publication no. 3051 (1989) 31—42.

a review of the mechanics of the lumbar disc, Hematol. Rehabil. 14 [69] W. Hutton, W. Elmer, S. Boden, S. Hyon, Y. Toribatake, K. Tomita,
(1975) 129—143. G. Hair, The effect of hydrostatic pressure on intervertebral disc

[44] N. Eie, P. When, Measurement of intra—abdominal pressure in metabolism, Spine 24 (19990 1507—1515.
relation to weight—bearing of the lumbosacral spine, J. 0510 City [70] SM. McGill, The biomechanics of low back injury,] Biomechanics
Hosp. 12 (1962) 205. 30 (1997) 465—475.

[45] A. Schultz, G. Andersson, Analysis of loads on the lumbar spine, [71] H. Heneweer, L.Vanhees, 5.]. Picave, Physical activity and low back
Spine 6 (1982) 76—82. pain, a u—shaped relation? Pain 143 (2009) 21—25.

[46] ].C. Buckey, Space physiology, in: Muscle Loss: 3 Practical [72] ].C. Lotz, Load and the spine: does the goldilocks principle apply?
Approach to Maintaining Strength. Oxford University Press 2006). Spine 11 (2011) 44—45.

[47] A. LeBlanc, R. Rowe, V. Schneider, H. Evans, T. Hedrick, Regional [73] ].]. Cassidy, M.S. Silverstein, A. Hiltner, E. Baer, A water transport
muscle loss after short duration spaceﬂight, Aviat. Space Environ. model for the creep response of the inververtebral disc, J. Mater.
Med. 74 (1995) 512—516. Sci. 1 (1990) 81—89.

[48] AR. Hargens, W. Akeson, Stress Effects on Tissue Nutrition and [74] N. Dhillon, E.C. Bass, ].C. Lotz, Effect of frozen storage on the creep
Viability, Tissue Nutrition and Viability, Springer—Verlag, New behavior of human intervertebral discs, Spine 26 (2001) 883—888.
York, Berlin, Heidelberg,Tokyo, 1986. [75] T. Handa, H. Ishihara, H. Ohshima, R. Osada, H. Tsuji, K. Obata,

[49] AR. Hargens, Interstitial osmotic pressure associated with donnan Effects of hydrostatic pressure on matrix synthesis and matrix
equilibria, in: Tissue Fluid Pressure and Composition. Baltimore, metalloproteinase production in the human lumbar intervertebral
Williams and Wilkins 1986. disc, Spine 22 (1997) 1085—1091.

[50] AR. Hargens, K]. Hutchinson, R.E. Ballard, A.R. Tyrell, T. Reilley, [76] G. Sowa, P. Coelho, N. V0, R. Bedison, A. Chiao, C. Davies, R. Studer,
].D.G. Troup, Circadian variation in stature and the effects of spinal J. Kang, Determination of annulus ﬁbrosus cell response to tensile
loading, Spine 26 (2001) 2596—2600. strain as a function of duration, magnitude, and frequency, J.

[51] J. Buckwalter, Spine update: aging and degeneration of the human Orthop. Res. 29 (2011) 1275—1283.
intervertebral disc, Spine 20 (1995) 1307—1314. [77] F. Rannou, P. Richette, M. Benallaoua, M. Francois, V. Genries,

[52] L. Lippiello, C. Kaye, T. Neumata, H.]. Mankin, In vitro metabolic C. I(orwin—Zmijowska, M. Revel, M. Corvol, S. Poiraudeau, Cyclic
response of articular cartilage segments to low levels of hydro— tensile stretch modulates proteoglycan production by interver—
static pressure, Connect. Tissue Res. 13 (1985) 99—107. tebral disc annulus ﬁbrosus cells through production of nitrite

[53] T. Handa, H. Ishihara, N. Oshima, Effects of hydrostatic pressure on oxide, J. Cell. Biochem. 90 (2003) 148—157.
matrix synthesis and matrix metalloproteinase production in the [78] I. Foldes, M. Kern, T. Szilagyi, V.S. Oganov, Histology and histo—
human intervertebral disc, Abstracts of Annual Meeting of chemistry of intervertebral discs of rats participated in spaceﬂight,
Society for the Study of the Lumbar Spine, Helsinki, Finland, June Acta Biol. Hung. 47 (1996) 145—156.

18—22, 1995; Toronto, Ontario, Canada: International Society for [79] W.C. Hutton, S.T. Yoon, W.A. Elmer, J. Li, H. Murakami,
the Study of the Lumbar Spine 1996. A. Minamide, T. Akarnaru, Effect of tail suspension (or simulated

[54] H. Ishihara, D.,.S. McNally, ].P.G. Urban, A.C. Hall, Effect of hydro— weightlessness) on the lumbar vertebral disc, Spine 27 (2002)
static pressure on matrix synthesis in different regions of the 1286—1290.
intervertebral disk,]. Appl. Physiol. 80 (1996) 839—846. [80] N. Holguin, S. Judex, Rat intervertebral disc health during hin—

[55] M. Kasra, V. Goel, J. Martin, S.T. Wang, W. Choi, J. Buckwalter, dlimb unloading: brief ambulation with or without vibration,
Effect of dynamic hydrostatic pressure on rabbit intervertebral Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 81 (2010) 1078—1084.
disc cells,]. Orthop. Res. 21 (2003) 597—603. [81] A. Leblanc, H. Evans, T.D. Hendrick, C.Y. Lin, L.C. Shackelford,

[56] A. Maroudas, Biophysical chemistry of cartilaginous tissues with Magnetic resonance imaging after exposure to microgravity
special reference to solute and ﬂuid transport, Biorheology 12 (284054): STS—47, Life Sciences Data Archive, Johnson Space
(1975) 233—245. Center, Houston, Texas 1992.

[57] W.Y. Gu, X.G. Mao, R.]. Foster, M. Weidenbaum, V.C. Mow, BA. [82] ].R. Styf, R. Ballard, K. Fechner, D. Watenpaugh, N. I(ahan,
Rawlins, The anisotropic hydraulic permeability of human lumbar A.R. Hargens, Height increase, neuromuscular function, and back

"
"14","].V. Sayson et al. / Acta Astronautica 86 (2013) 24—38 37
pain during 6 degree head—down tilt with traction, Aviat. Space [109] J. Cavanaugh, Neural mechanisms of lumbar pain, Spine 20 (1995)
Environ. Med. 68 (1997) 24—29. 1804—1809.

[83] K]. Hutchinson, D.E. Watenpaugh, G. Murthy, V.A. Convertino, [110] T. Hall, B. Elvey, Nerve trunk pain: physical diagnosis and treat—
A.R. Hargens., Back pain during 60 head—down tilt approximates ment, Manu. Ther. 4 (1999) 63—73.
that during actual microgravity, Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 66 [111] ].F. Howe, ].D. Loeser, W.H. Calvin, Mechanosensitivity of the
(1995) 256—259. dorsal root ganglia and chronically injured axons: a physiological

[84] ].R. Styf, K. Hutchinson, S. Carlsson, A.R. Hargens, Depression, basis for the radicular pain of nerve root compression, Pain 3
mood state, and back pain during microgravity conditions, Psy— (1977) 25—41.
chosom. Med. 63 (2001) 862—864. [112] ].W. Frymoyer, W. Akeson, K. Brandt, Clinical perspectives, in:

[85] M.H. Coppes, E. Marani, R. Thomeer, G. Groen, Innervation of ].W. Frymoyer, S.L. Gordon (Eds.), New Perspectives in Low Back
“painful” lumbar discs, Spine 22 (1997) 2342—2350. Pain, American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons (, Rosemont, Ill,

[86] MAR. Freeman, B. Wyke, The innervation of the knee joint. An 1989.
anatomical and histological study in the rat, J Anat. 101 (1967) [113] M. Pearcy, I. Portek,]. Shepherd, Three—dimensional x—ray analysis
505—532. of normal movement of the lumbar spine, Spine 9 (1984) 294—297.

[87] ED. Wyke, Articular Neurology and Manipulative Therapy, [114] A. Wright, Recent concepts in the neurophysiology of pain, Manu.
Aspects of Manipulative Therapy, Lincoln institute of health Ther. 4 (1999) 196—202.
sciences, Melbourne, 1979. [115] R. Whalen, Musculoskeletal adaptation to mechanical forces on

[88] T. Palmgren, M. Gronblad, J. Virri, E. Kaapa, E. I(araharju, An Earth and in space, Physiologist 36 (36) (1993) 5127—5130.
immunohistochemical study of nerve structures in the annulus [116] AR. Hargens, S. Richardson, Cardiovascular adaptations, ﬂuid
ﬁbrosus of human normal lumbar intervertebral discs, Spine 24 shifts, and countermeasures related to space ﬂight, Respir. Phy—
(1999) 2075—2079. siol. Neurobiol. 169 (2009) 530—533.

[89] Y. Kasai, K. Takegami, A. Uchida, Change of barometric pressure [117] AG. Cresswell, H. Grundstrom, A. Thorstensson, Observations on
inﬂuences low back pain in patients with vacuum phenomenon intra—abdominal pressure and patterns of abdominal intra—mus—
within lumbar intervertebral discs, J. Spinal Disord. Technol. 15 cular activity in man, Acta Physiol. Scand. 144 (1992) 409—418.
(2002) 290—293. [118] M.G. Gardner—Morse, I.A.F. Stokes, The effects of abdominal

[90] A. Dray, Inﬂammatory mediators of pain, Br. J. Anaesthesia 75 muscle co—activation on lumbar spine stability, Spine 23 (1998)
(1995)125—131. 86—91.

[91] M. Panjabi, Clinical spinal instability 82 low back pain, J. Electro— [119] O. Grimsby, Scientiﬁc therapeutic exercise progressions, J. Manu.
myogr. Kinesiol. 13 (2003) 371—379. Manipulat. Ther. 2 (1994) 94—101.

[92] R. Preuss,]. Fung, Can acute low back pain result from segmental [120] HP. Faugli, F. Jacobsen, R. Leirvik, A. Myklebust, O. Roen,
buckling during sub—maximal activities? A review of the current R. Stensnes, T. Torstensen, Medical Exercise Therapy, Laerergrup—
literature, Manu. Ther. 10 (2005) 14—20. pen for Medisinsk Treningsterapi AS, 1996.

[93] ].H. van Dieen, L.P.]. Selen, J. Cholewicki, Trunk muscle activation [121] R. Bottinelli, C. Reggiani, Human skeletal muscle ﬁbres: molecular
in low back pain patients, an analysis of the literature, J. Electro— and functional diversity, Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 73 (2000)
myogr. Kinesiol. 13 (2003) 333—351. 195—262.

[94] S. Brumagne, P. Cordo, R. Lysens, Verschueren, S. Swinnen, The [122] A. Frey, NASA Human Research Program summary: countermea—
role of paraspinal muscle spindles in Lumbosacral position sense sures for muscle atrophy and strength loss caused by long—
in individuals with and without low back pain, Spine 25 (2000) duration spaceﬂight and bedrest, Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 81
989—994. (2010) 79—80.

[95] S. Taimela, M. Kankaanpaa, S. Luoto, The effect of lumbar fatigue [123] H.]. Appell, Muscular atrophy following immobilization: a review,
on the ability to sense a change in lumbar position, Spine 24 Sports Med. 10 (1990) 42—58.

(1999) 1322—1327. [124] V.R. Edgerton, M.Y. Zhou, Y. Ohira, H. I(litgaard, B. Jiang, G. Bell,

[96] I.M. I(orr, Somatic dysfunction, osteopathic manipulative treat— B. Harris, B. Saltin, P.D. Gollnick, R.R. Roy, M.I(. Day, M. Greenisen,
ment and the nervous system: a few facts, some theories, many Human ﬁber size and enzymatic properties after 5 and 11 day of
questions, J. AOAC 86 (1986) 109—114. spaceﬂight, J. Appl. Physiol. 78 (1995) 1733—1739.

[97] L. I(atavich, Differential effects of spinal manipulative therapy on [125] ].]. Widrick, S.K. Knuth, KM. Norenberg, J.G. Romatowski,
acute and chronic muscle spasm: a proposal for mechanisms and ].L.W. Bain, D.A. Riley, M. I(arhanek, S.W. Trappe, T.A. Trappe,
efﬁcacy, Manu. Ther. 3 (1998) 132—139. D.L. Costill, RH. Fitts, Effect of a 17—day spaceﬂight on contractile

[98] MD. Antonacci, D.R. Mody, M.H. Heggeness, Innervation of the properties of human soleus ﬁbers,]. Physiol. 516 (1999) 915—930.
human vertebral body: a histologic study, J. Spinal Disord. 11 [126] DA. MacDonald, G.L. Mosley, P.W. Hodges, The lumbar multiﬁdus:
(1998) 526—531. does the evidence support clinical beliefs? Manu. Ther. 11 (2006)

[99] ].F. Bailey, E. Liebenberg, S. Degmetich, ].C. Lotz, Innervation 254—263.
patterns of pgp 9.5—positive nerve ﬁbers within the human lumbar [127] RA. Scheuring, C.H. Mathers, ].A. Jones, M.L. Wear, Musculoskele—
vertebra,]. Anat. 218 (2011) 263—270. tal injuries and minor trauma in space: incidence and injury

[100] A.Fagan,R.Moore,B.Vernon Roberts,P.Blumbergs,R. Fraser,Issls mechanisms in US. astronauts, Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 80
prize winner: the innervations of the intervertebral disc: 3 (2009) 117—124.
quantitative analysis, Spine 28 (2003) 2570—2576. [128] AR. Artino, R. Ballard, A. Tucker, D. Watenpaugh, A.R. Hargens,

[101] A]. Freemont, A. Watkins, C. Le Maitre, P. Baird, M. Jeziorska, Keiser. SX—1: a variable— resistance exercise devise to prevent
M.T. Knight, E.R. Ross, ].P. O’Brien, ].A. Hoyland, Nerve growth muscle atrophy during space ﬂight, J. Crew. Phys. 13: (2006)
factor expression and innervation of the painful intervertebral 73—80.
disc, J. Pathol. 197 (2002) 286—292. [129] L. Norrbrand,].T. Fajardo, R. Vargas, P.A. Tesch, Quadriceps muscle

[102] D. Niv, M. Gofeld, M. Devor, Causes of pain in degenerative bone use in the ﬂywheel and barbell Squat, Aviat. Space Environ. Med.
and joint disease: a lesson from Vertebroplasty, Pain 105 (2003) 82 (2011) 13—19.

387—392. [130] T. Hendricks, The effects of immobilization on connective tissue, J.

[103] S. I(uslich, C. Ulstrom, C.]. Michael, The tissue origin of low back Manu. Manipulat. Ther. 3 (1995) 98—103.
pain and sciatica: a report of pain response to tissue stimulation [131] TH. Smit, A. Odgaard, E. Scneider, Structure and function of
during operations on the lumbar spine using local anesthesia, vertebral trabecular bone, Spine 22 (1997) 2823—2833.

Orthop. Clin. North Am. 22 (1991) 181—187. [132] A. Guyton. Textbook of medical physiology, in: (6th ed.) Contrac—

[104] D. Bowsher, Neurogenic pain syndromes and their management, tion of Skeletal Muscle, W.B. Saunders Company 1981, pp. 122—
Br. Med. Bull. 47 (1991) 644—666. 137.

[105] S. Kallal<uri,_l.M. Cavanaugh, D. Blagoev, An immunohistochemical [133] G.G. Simoneau, S.M. Bereda, D.C. Sobush, A.]. Starskey, Biomecha—
study of innervation of lumbar spinal dura and longitudinal nics of elastic resistance in therapeutic exercise programs,]OSPT
ligaments, Spine 23 (1998) 403—411. 31 (2001) 16—24.

[106] A..White, M. Panjabi, Clinical Biomechanics of the Spine, 2nd ed, [134] A. BeiserSchaum, Outline series, theory and problems of applied
Lippincott Company 1990. physics, in: Chapter 12, McGraw—Hill Book Company 1976.

[107] R. Roaf, A study of the mechanics of spinal injuries, J. Bone Joint [135] American Physical Therapy Association, Guide to physical thera—
Surg. 423 (1960) 810. pist practice second edition; part one: a description of patient/

[108] A]. McComas, Skeletal muscle, form and function, Hum. I(inet. client management, chapter 3: what types of interventions do
1996. physical therapists provide? Phys. Ther. 81 (2001) 597—5120.

"
"15","38 ].V. Sayson et al. / Acta Astronautica 86 (2013) 24—38
Jojo V.Sayson, P.T., D.M.T., is an international disc biology and has published over 150 peer—reviewed journal articles.
. educator, motivational speaker, and research His laboratory work focuses on identifying mechanisms of intervertebral
"". scientist for NASA at the University of Cali— disc degeneration, exploring tissue engineering approaches for treating
l, ‘ j, fornia, San Diego (UCSD). He received his low back pain, and the biomechanics of spinal instrumentation.
*3» Bachelors of Science in Physical Therapy
3' from the Royal Pontiﬁcal University of Santo , , ‘4 Alan R. Hargens, Ph.D. is Professor and
Tomas 1n the Phlhppllles and hls lVlasters tg Director of the Orthopaedic Clinical Physiol—
Baelglehee’rigg 3333;??? a:lggglefﬁ; $23 ‘5' ogy Lab at the University of California, San
' ' '~ Diego (UCSD). He served as past Chief of the
. tute in San Diego, California. A Fellow of the | :s. ‘ Space Physiology Branch and Space Station
Ametican Academy Of OFthOPaEle Manual . -, Project Scientist at NASA Ames Research
' Phy51cal Therapists, Dr. Sayson 15 3150 a .., Center and Consulting Professor of Human
Board of Director and Examiner for the Ola .... -‘ Biology at Stanford University. Dr. Hargens
Grimsby Institute’s international doctoral candidates. His memberships received his undergraduate degree, Summa
include the American Physical Therapy Association, American Academy A Cum Laude, in Chemistry from the University
of Physical Therapists, the Aerospace Medical Association, and the of Minnesota, and his ph_D_ in Marine Biol—
American Astronautical Society. ogy from Scripps Institution of Oceanogra—
phy at UCSD. A recipient to countless awards
including two NASA honour awards, Dr. Hargens has edited seven books
‘ Scott Parazynski, M.D., former N AS A Astro— and published more than 270 peer—reviewed. articles, 47 chapters, 40
naut for 17 years, ﬂew 5 Space Shuttle NASA Reports,.and 520 abstracts. Memberships include the American
‘ Missions and conducted 7 spacewalks Physmlogy Soc1ety, Orthopaedic Research Society, International Soc1ety
, . (EVA’s). He currently serves as Director and for Grayitational Physmlogy, American Soeiety of Grav1tational and
” .. Chief Medical Ofﬁcer, Center for Polar Med— Space Biology, and Aerospace Medical Assoc1ation.
‘ / ' ical Operations, University of Texas Medical
Branch in Galveston, Texas. A graduate of
Stanford University and Stanford Medical
1 School, he trained at Harvard and in Denver
specializing in emergency medicine and
trauma. Dr. Parazynski is also physiologist
with expertise in human adaptation to
stressful environments. An accomplished
mountaineer and SCUBA diver, he is also a commercial, instrument,
multi—engine and seaplane—rated pilot with over 2,500 ﬂight hours. On
May 20, 2009, he became the ﬁrst astronaut to summit Mt. Everest. He
had also conducted a NASA—sponsored scientiﬁc dive in the summit
caldera lake of Licancabur volcano, the world’s highest lake.
Jeffrey Lotz, Ph.D. has been the Director of
the Orthopaedic Bioengineering Laboratory
at UCSF since 1992. Dr. Lotz earned a doc—
torate degree in Medical Engineering from
the Harvard/MIT Division of Health Sciences
and Technology, a Masters Degree in
Mechanical Engineering Design from Stan—
ford University, and Bachelors of Science in
Mechanical Engineering from UC Berkeley.
‘ Dr. Lotz has earned several awards for spine
research, including the ISSLS Prise (2007),
yr Volvo Award (1998), and the North American
' Spine Society Award (1993). He serves as a
Deputy Editor for the journal Spine, and an Associate Editor for The
Spine Journal. He has expertise in spine biomechanics and intervertebral

"
