"","x"
"1","Presented at the 57thInternati0na1Astronautical Congress, Valencia, Spain, October 2-6, 2006.
IAC-06-A1.1.6
LEADERSHIP CHALLENGES IN 188 OPERATIONS:
LESSONS LEARNED FROM J UNIOR AND SENIOR MISSION CONTROL PERSONNEL
J ames L. Clement, J r., P.E., M.B.A.
NASA J ohnson Space Center, USA
jarnes.1.clement@nasa.g0v
J ennifer Boyd Ritsher, Ph.D.
University of California/San Francisco and Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, USA
jennifer.ritsher@ucsf.edu
Nick Kanas, MD.
University of California/San Francisco and Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, USA
nick.kanas@ucsf.edu
Stephanie Saylor, MA.
University of California/San Francisco and Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, USA
stephanie.say10r@va.g0v
ABSTRACT
The International Space Station (188) is operated by a multi-national, rnulti-organizational team that is dispersed
across multiple locations, time zones, and work schedules. At NASA, mission control personnel have had to ﬁnd
ways to address the leadership Challenges inherent in such work, but have not had systematic training in how to do
so. We interviewed 12 junior controllers and 14 senior controllers to examine the maj 0r leadership Challenges they
face and to highlight the solutions that they have found most effective to surmount them. We contrast the
perspectives of the two groups. Further, we contextualize our survey results with new analyses of standardized
questionnaire data from 186 mission control personnel and a contrasting group 0f 30 space station crewrnernbers.
The interView data showed that respondents had substantial consensus on several leadership Challenges and on key
strategies for dealing with them, but junior and senior controllers’ perspectives were different. The questionnaire
data showed that the US mission control sample reported a level of support from their management that compared
favorably to national norms. Although speciﬁc to space station personnel, our results are consistent with recent
management, cultural, and aerospace research.
Background centers in the US and Russia. Thus, it is important to
take the opportunity now to prepare the NASA team
The International Space Station (188) is operated by a for future multilateral operations.
multi-national, multi-organizational team that is
dispersed across multiple locations, time zones, and The goals of this study were to examine the major
work schedules. This is an unprecedented level of leadership challenges faced by NASA ISS mission
global cooperation, and mission safety is constantly control personnel and to highlight the approaches that
at stake. At NASA, both junior and senior mission they have found most effective to surmount them. In
control personnel have had to be pioneers in ﬁnding previous work [1], we presented a more detailed
ways to address the leadership Challenges inherent in literature review, a transcript of the structured
such work, and have not had systematic training in interView questions, and detailed results from our
how to do so. original sample of senior controllers. The goal of the
present paper is to supplement that work with a new
Complex as it is, operating the 188 is about to comparison sample of junior controllers as well as
become even more Challenging as additional control new analyses of a different dataset that included
centers in Japan and Europe join in 188 operations. mission control personnel [2,3].
Currently the 188 is operated bi1atera11y from control
1

"
"2","Presented at the 57thInternati0na1Astronautical Congress, Valencia, Spain, October 2-6, 2006.
Methodology until consensus was achieved about the categories.
The entire dataset was then recoded using the ﬁnal
Participants. coding system.

Interview participants. We interviewed 14 Questionnaire participants completed a standardized
senior and 12 junior ﬂight controller personnel we11-estab1ished instrument designed to measure
involved in various aspects of mission planning and group interpersonal climate called the Work
the conduct of day-to-day operations 0n—b0ard the Environment Scale [6] on a weekly basis. They
ISS. Consistent with the demographics of the endorsed statements about their work group for the
population of ﬂight controllers, the senior sample previous week as either “true” or “false”. Subscales
included 13 men and 1 woman, and the junior sample were produced for data analysis by combining the
included 6 men and 6 women. All 26 respondents scores from nine related WES items. Differences
were white, and all appeared to be from the American between subgroups of respondents were assessed
cultural mainstream. We did not collect speciﬁc age using a 0ne-way ANOVA of weighted means, to
information, but senior controllers appeared to range adjust for the varying number of observations per
in age from their 30s to late 40s, while the junior person.Resu1ts frornarnodel that included a ‘country
controllers were mostly in their late 20s. A11 X crew’ interaction term are reported here for the
participants had worked with international partner Supervisor Support subscale.
ﬂight controller counterparts in developing ground
and 0n-b0ard procedures for crewrnernber activities.

Interview participants were anonymous in the sense Results

that records of their identities were not kept, and

identifying information was removed from their data, Survey participants were consistent and substantially

although their identities were known to the senior in agreement in identifying key leadership

author (JLC). challenges associated with the 188. They identiﬁed
solutions that they found to be helpful for meeting

Questionnaire participants. To further these challenges. Table 1 lists our consensus issues
explore the meaning of the interView ﬁndings, we and the percent of respondents mentioning at least
also conducted new analyses of data from a previous one example of the issue. Respondents gave a wealth
questionnaire study of 13 American astronauts, 17 of speciﬁc details supporting each of these items, but
Russian cosmonauts, and 150 U.S. and 36 Russian it is beyond the scope of this paper to present a
mission control personnel supporting the 188 0r Mir thorough review of them.
space stations. This dataset has been extensively
described elsewhere [2,3,4,5]. % 0f Sénior % of Junior

respondents respondents
All participants provided informed consent, and the L—p—g—eademhi Chane“ 683
study procedures were approved by human subjects ° Team “1.6mm dl§per§ed 100% 92%
. . . . . across s1tes, organlzations,
cornrmttees at the Un1vers1ty 0f Ca11f0rn1a/San time zones
Francisco, and at the NASA J ohnson Space Center. . Historical differences between 100% 92%
partner organizations
Procedure. . More effort required to 86% 42%
Interview participants were requested to describe mamtait} morala and
their observations and perceptions of the cultural and ?Otwatmn Oflocal team 0 0

. . . . 0 onstant change 64%) 0%)
leadership challenges ass001ated With the Job of
operating the 188. All participants received a written
copy of the interView questions as well as a verbal W
explanation of the goals of the study. Both written ° Ensuringéfféctiw 100% 100%

' ' communica 1011

and verbal responses were accepted. Additional . Cultivating robust 93% 92%
unstructured d1scuss10n 0r f0110w-up questioning relationships

took place as needed to achieve clarity. Verbal . Fostering ﬂexibility and Open- 86% 75%
responses were transcribed as verbatim notes by the mindedness

senior author (JLC). The content of the transcripts ° EXpanding culturalawammss 57% 92%
(written responses and/or transcribed verbal ' S€?k_ing and PmViding 86% 92%
responses) was independently categorized by the trammg—H

. . Table 1: Leadership Challenges Involved 1n Operatlng the
authors 1nt0 emergent themes, and the two resultlng ISS and Successful Solutions for Addressing Thern
coding systems were integrated through discussion ’

2

"
"3","Presented at the 57th International Astronautical Congress, Valencia, Spain, October 2-6, 2006.
Leadership Challenges in Operating the 188 More effort reguired to maintain morale and
motivation of local team
Operating the ISS involves the same fundamental
leadership challenges as any large project, but here The third leadership challenge is the increased
we set those aside in order to focus on the special amount of sheer effort required to conduct ordinary
Challenges that are posed by the extra complexity of leadership tasks in this more complex and stressful
operating the 188 versus previous space missions. leadership enVironrnent. Aspects of this issue were
Participants highlighted four main types of leadership raised by 86% of the senior but only 42% of the
Challenges. junior respondents of our sample. For example:
0 Missions are marathons, not short sprints as
Team members dispersed across sites, organizations, before
time zones 0 Ambiguities and frustrations that are never
resolved
The ﬁrst leadership Challenge (noted by 100% of our 0 Multi-national,.multl-organizatlonal
. 0 . . . tearns = confus1on
senior and 92A) of our JUDIOI‘ respondents) is that
. . 0 Local team not told why other group
team members are dispersed across s1tes, changed plan
organizations, and time zones. The implications of O Worker Often has to carry on without
this include, for example: answer
0 Team meetings occur outside of normal hours
0 Loss of face-to-face communications cues Constant Change
0 Dissimilar organizational structures and cultures
' Bulldlhg WOI‘klng relahOhShipS more difﬁcult The fourth leadership Challenge is that even if leaders
. . . . . manage to successfully meet the above three types of
Historical differences between artner or anizations challenges their efforts must be unﬂagging because
. . . . they are working in the midst of constant Change.
The second main leadership Challenge, ldehhhed by This issue was noted only by our senior respondents
109% Of our senior respondents. and 92% Of the (64% of senior versus 0% of junior respondents).
JUDIOI‘ respondents, is historical .differences between Junior respondents were apparently not aware of the
partner organizations. Thls. primarily referred to impact of this issue. By contrast, senior respondents
differences between the Russ1an and American space felt the effect of Change at multiple levels of analysis,
programs. For example: . . as summarized below:
' Russians have 35 years space statlon experlence 0 National political changes = funding instability
o Russ1an and Arnerlcan controllers have . Space agencies reorganize : confusion
1ncornhpat1ble sh1ft schedules but must work . M ana g ernent pri oriti es chan g e = uncertainty
tog“ er , , o J ob turnover = need to train new people
0 leferent approaches to documentatlon, plannlng, . ISS _
. procedures change — must tell all groups
problern solV1ng
. . L h}; App h y ' g
The results from the questionnaire data also eaders 1 roticesféggﬁggcszuu Address1n
. . . . . g
highlighted a difference across organizations. As
h ' T l 2 h ' ' l . . .
S own in ab e ’ t e US m1ss1on eontro sample A speoial skill set is needed for 188 operators
reported a level of support from their management . . . . . .
. . involved in international cooperation. Th1s
that compared favorably to national norms. American . . . . .
. . . extraordinary occupation poses 1mpress1ve leadership
m1ss1on control personnel and Russ1an crewmembers . .
. . . . and cultural challenges. Procurement of the requ1s1te
reported Signiﬁcantly higher superV1sor support than . . . .
. . . . skills can theoretically be obtained by education or
American crewmembers and Russ1an rn1ss1on control .
ersonnel [3] the expertise of others. However, ISS controllers
p ' have gained such knowledge “the hard way”,
primarily though trial and error. The lessons drawn
Crew ' Ground from the experiences of our participants would be
Variable US Russia . US Russia Norm helpful in any leadership situation, but their unique
SUPérViSOI 4.78 6.63 6.12 4.66 5.18 context is especially applicable to the 188 program.
%-— Suggested approaches for successfully addressing
a e ' upemsor uppo leadership issues associated with this kind of globally
distributed team can be summarized into ﬁve general
categories: 1) ensuring effective communication, 2)
3

"
"4","Presented at the 57th International Astronautioal Congress, Valencia, Spain, October 2-6, 2006.
cultivating robust relationships, 3) fostering About half (57%) of the senior respondents and
ﬂexibility and open-mindedness, 4) expanding almost all (92%) of our junior respondents said that
cultural awareness, and 5) seeking and providing they learned how important it is to be aware of
training. Our survey data are rich with examples of speciﬁc cultural differences, such as about expected
both intuitive and non-obVious strategies, and the behavior during meetings or outside of formal work
most salient are summarized in bullet points in each time. For example:
section below. 0 Be aware of cultural differences relevant to your

job (national, organizational, professional,
Ensuring Effective Communication gender, etc)-
0 Show that you are making an effort to
All of the study participants (100% of senior and accommodate .
100% of junior controllers) stressed that strategies to ° Leek fer clues that you and partners are operating
improve communication were critical for working . under dlffhrhht assuihthhS
with the large, geographically dispersed team Charged W
with operating the 188. The following are some of the . . .
strategies that respondents found helpful: MhSt. study participants mentioned some type Of
0 Learn chain of command in other organization, t1talhlhg that they thought would be helpful (86%) Of
and how information ﬂows through it. senior controllers and 92% of Juhior controllers).
, Give written agenda to international team in Although both groups mentioned this, it was striking
advance. that junior controllers generated many more speciﬁc
. Ask others to repeat what was agreed, to ﬁnd topic ideas, and that these training requests were for
hidden misunderstandings. themselves and their managers, not just for beginning
0 “Overcommunication” across multiple CODtI‘OHCI‘S. TO summarize:
modalities. 0 Junior controllers had many training requests.
Cultivating Robust Relationships 0 (One request was for their managers to get more
training themselves!)
Almost all participants in both samples (93% of ' The COHGCtiVe WiSdom and detailed adVice
senior, and 92% of junior respondents) stressed that it gathered hem our 188 experierlce She‘lld be
was critical to cultivate strong working relationships shared Wlth all team members Ineludlhg the
with team members at other sites. The consensus Ihterhahonal Partners.
seemed to be that th 1s 1s .ah essential part Of the.JOb Although it is beyond the scope of this paper to
itself, not Just a nice thing to do. They espeoially . .
stressed the following points: report a great Fleal of detall, we do intend to develop
. Remember trus t is buil t slowly on dispersed a training curriculum us1ng the collective Wisdom and
teams detalled adV1ce that we gathered from our
0 Socialize with team members (esp. Russians) respondents.
0 Face to face meetings are crucial (esp. at ﬁrst)
Fostering Flexibility and Open-Mindedness m
There was also substantial consensus (86% of senior Ah important factor th the success Of 188 operations
and 75% of junior respondents) that ﬂexibility and to. date has been the ability of the individuals on the
open-mindedness are crucial for successfully leading ﬂlght control team to effectively resolve the. many
multicultural, multi-organizational, geographically leadership and cultural Challenges idehtiﬁed in this
dispersed teams. The following are some of the study. Although there was substantial consensus
strategies that study participants found to be effective between the senior and junior groups 0f controllers,
in maintaining the ﬂexibility necessary to deal with the senior group was more aware 0f the following:
the differences associated with operating the ISS: ' Extra effort is needed in cohduoting ordinary
. A dapt y our work as situati on chan g e s lteziershlp tasks when worklng 1n a dlspersed
O
. EZTEIZfeniliffgi‘ifylSgrngfszvglﬁgggeﬁtifoigSZZIhent . The context ofconstant change (at all levels)
e s s e nti a1 i s su e s) o A hard-won repert01re of spe01ﬁc trled-and-true
0 Do extra work to eliminate ambiguity (for solutlons
important issues) _ .
The JUDIOI‘ controllers were more aware of the
Expanding Cultural Awareness follow1ng:
4

"
"5","Presented at the 57thInternati0na1Astronautical Congress, Valencia, Spain, October 2-6, 2006.
o The importance of cultural issues (not just [5] N. A., Kanas, V. P. Salnitskiy, J . B. Ritsher,
national culture) V. I. Gushin, D. S. Weiss, S. A. Saylor, O. P.
' An array 0ftfaining needs (f0r themselVeS and Kozerenko, C. R. Marmar, Human interactions
for their managers) in space: 188 versus Shuttle/Mir, Acta
Astronautica, 59,2006, 413-419.

Although speciﬁc to space station personnel, our [6] RH. Moos, Work environment scale manual,

results are consistent With recent management, 3rd ed., Palo Alto, C A, Consulting

cultural, and aerospace research [7-20]. Psychologists Press, 1994.

. [7] NASA J SC, Memo DA-05-028. In: Flight

Our results showed that the day-to-day operatlonal Controller Manifesto, June 2, 2005.

management 0f the 188 requires a variety Of [8] B. Parke, J . Orasanu, Overview of 188 Flight

leadership and interpersonal skills. These skills Will Controller Ratings on Organizational Risk and
become even more critical as European and Japanese T001 Development Survey, Feb 2004’ Ames
control centers are added to the team. Fostering the Research Center

development of these leadership and cultural skills [9] IA. Thompsen, Leading Virtual Teams,

along With the requisite technical skills in those Quality Digest September, 2000.

Charged With operating the 188 Will continue to be [10] ME. Kossler, S. Prestridge, Going the

critical for addressing future Challenges associated distance: The challenges ofleading a dispersed

With completing the ISS assembly, working more team, Leadership in Action 23(5) Nov/Dec

Closely With European and Japanese partners, and 2003’ 347.

preparing for missions to the Moon and Mars. The [11] J.B. Ritsher, Cultural factors and the

leadership approaches identiﬁed in this study Will be International Space Station, Aviation, Space,

useful in selecting, training, and supporting the teams and Environmental Medicine 76, 2005’ 3135.

involved in these future missions. Training Which B144.

includes enhanced leadership and cultural awareness [12] R. Vinaja, Major challenges in multi-cultural

content supports safety and mission success. Virtual teams. In: Proceedings: Southwest Case

Research Association, March 7, 2003, pp. 341-
346.

W [13] J .B. Ritsher, N. Kanas, V.I. Gushin, S. Saylor,
Cultural differences in patterns of mood states

[1] J . Clement, J .B. Ritsher, Operating the 188: on board the International Space Station.
Cultural and leadership challenges. Proceedings from: 56th International
Proceedings from the 5 6th International Astronautical Congress, Fukuoka, Japan,
Astronautical Congress, Fukuoka, Japan, October 17_219 2005.

October ”'21: 2005- . . . [14] GM. Sandal, Culture and tension during an

[2] NA .Kanas, V-P: Salnltskly, J-B- R1tsher, V-I- International Space Station simulation: Results
Gushln, D.S. Welss, S.A. Saylor, C.R.. from SFINCSS’99, Aviation, Space, and
Marmar, PsyChOSOCIal ISSUCSOD-OI‘blti Environmental Medicine 75, 2004, C44-C51.
Results from TWO Space Statlon Programs: [15] N. Kanas, J . Ritsher, Leadership issues With
Proceedlngs from the C0mm1ttee on Space multicultural crews 0n the International Space
Research 36th Scientiﬁc Assembly, Beijing, Station: Lessons learned from Shuttle/Mir,
ChmaeJuly 16-23, 2006- . . Acta Astronautica 56, 2005, 932-936.

[3] J-B- thsher, NA- Kanas, V-P° Salnltskly, V'I' [16] N. Kanas, V. Salnitskiy, J . Ritsher, V. Gushin,
Gushln, D.S. Welss, S.A. Saylor, C.R. Marmar D. Weiss, S. Saylor, C. Marmar, Psychosocial
Cultural and creW-ground differences in mood interactions during 188 missions. In: 15th
andcsocial climate: Results: from 2 space Humans in Space Symposium: Beneﬁts Of
Stathh programs. Proceedmgs from the Human Presence in Space, Graz, Austria, May
Committee on Space Research 36th Scientiﬁc 22-26, 2005, pp. 21, Book Of Abstracts.
Assembly, Beijing, China, July 1923’ 2006' [17] J . Stuster, Analogue Prototypes for Lunar and

[4] N. Kanas, V. Sa1n1tsk1y, D.S. Welss, E.M. Mars Exploration, Aviation, Space, and
Grund, V- GUShlho 0- Kozerenko, A- Sled, A- Environmental Medicine V01 76 (6), Section
Bostrom, C.R. Marmar, Crewmember and II, 2003’ B78—83.
ground personnel interactions over time during [18] M. Morrell, S. Capparell, Shackleton‘s way:
Shuttle/Mir space missions, Aviation, Space, leadership lessons, Penguin Putnam Inc., New
and Environmental Medicine, 72(5), 2001, York, 2001.

453'461- [19] P. J. Hinds & D. Bailey, Out of sight, out of
5

"
"6","Presented at the 57thInternati0na1Astronautical Congress, Valencia, Spain, October 2-6, 2006.

sync: Understanding conﬂict in distributed

teams, Organization Science, 14 (6), 2003,

615-632.

[20] S. L. Jarvenpaa & D. E. Leidner,

Communication and Trust in Global Virtual

Teams, Organization Science, 10(6), 1999,

791-815.

6

"
