"","x"
"1","IAC—06-A1.1.02+
DO PSYCHOSOCIAL DECREMENTS OCCUR DURING THE 2ND HALF
OF SPACE MISSIONS?
N.A. Kanas, J .B. Ritsher, and SA. Saylor

University of California/San Francisco, and the Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San
Francisco, California, USA. Dr. Kanas’ e-mail address: nick.kanas@ucsfedu.
ABSTRACT

Anecdotal reports from space and studies from space analogue settings on Earth suggest that some
people living and working for long periods of time in isolated and conﬁned environments (ICES)
experience mood and performance decrements during the 2nd half of the mission. According to this View,
the halfway point is an important milestone, in that people are relieved to arrive at this point in time but
then realize that they have another half to go until they can return home. This may result in increased
tension and the emergence of interpersonal problems, especially in the weeks just after the halfway point
(the “3rd quarter phenomenon”). A review of the literature found some ICE studies that supported the
emergence of 2nd half psychosocial decrements as a typical phenomenon and other studies that did not. To
test for such time effects in space, we studied 13 astronauts and 17 cosmonauts Who participated in the
Shuttle/Mir and International Space Station (188) programs to see if there were increases in tension and
decreases in cohesion during the 2nd half of the missions, particularly in the 3rd quarter. Subj ects completed
weekly questionnaires composed of mood and interpersonal environment measures that allowed us to track
crewmember psychosocial status over time. Our results failed to ﬁnd evidence of increased tension or
lowered cohesion in the 2nd half or during the 3rd quarter of the missions. One possible reason for this
ﬁnding may be related to the activities of support personnel in Mission Control in helping on-orbit
crewmembers cope With long-duration missions. Because such Earth-initiated support Will be less
available on a long-distance planetary mission, such as an expedition to Mars, it Will be important to
monitor expeditionary crewmembers for emotional and interpersonal problems throughout their mission.
Background stage occurs after tasks become routine and is

characterized by homesickness, depression, and

The stress of working in dangerous isolated interpersonal tension When individual
and conﬁned environments (ICES), such as polar idiosyncrasies become annoying. The ﬁnal stage
bases, submarines, and space stations, can impact occurs just prior to the end of the mission and is
negatively on the emotions and interactions of characterized by immature behavior and
the crewmembers [1,2]. Such stress may be euphoria due to anticipation of the return home.
inﬂuenced by mission duration, and several Elements of these three stages have been
people have identiﬁed distinct stages of reported anecdotally during long-duration
reactivity that are time-dependent. Russian space missions [4-6]. Especially

For example, in his classic review of problematic is the long second stage, Which
Antarctic and submarine missions, Rohrer begins to appear after 1-2 months. In his diary,
described three stages of response [3]. The ﬁrst Lebedev described incidents Where he and his
stage of his triphasic model occurs during the fellow cosmonaut became annoyed With one
ﬁrst few weeks and is characterized by anXiety another as the mission progressed, and they dealt
due to the novelty of the situation. The second With this situation through denial and
+ Presented at the 57th IAC (International Astronautical Congress), Valencia, Spain, October 2—6, 2006.

1

"
"2","withdrawing from each other [6]. Russian space Manned Space Infrastructure (EXEMSI), which
psychologists and psychiatrists have described a was a 60-day isolation study involving an
syndrome called asthenization, which they feel international European crew of three men and
occurs frequently during long-duration space one woman who were conﬁned in a hyperbaric
missions [7,8]. Characteristics include fatigue, chamber in Cologne in 1992. As in the ISEMSI
low energy, hypoactiVity, irritability, sleep study, Sandal and her colleagues found that
problems, and poor appetite. This syndrome may group functioning declined at the halfway point,
affect crew performance and contribute to and there were several periods of tension and
withdrawal, territorial behavior, and decreased negative emotions [10].
cohesion. Another space simulation, this time
Others have noted that some crewrnernbers in conducted in Russia, was the Human Behaviour
space or in space simulation environments on under Extended Space Missions (HUBES)
Earth experience signiﬁcant psychological and project, which was a 135-day ICE mission
interpersonal changes after the midpoint of their involving three rnale Russians who were
mission [9-15]. Anecdotally, participants have conﬁned in the Mir simulator at the Institute for
reported a sense of relief when the mission is Biomedical Problems (IBMP) in Moscow in
half over, but this is followed an emotional 1994. Gushin and his colleagues used a variety
letdown when they realize that there is another of content analytic measures to study the
half yet to come before they can see their family communications between crewmembers and
and friends again. The dysphoria experienced outside monitoring personnel. They found
right after the halfway point has been termed evidence for psychological closing and
“the 3rd quarter phenornenon”[9]. information ﬁltration as the mission progressed.
But what do scientiﬁc studies say about these There was a drop in the total intensity of
time effects? On the ground, two types of ICE communication after the ﬁrst month of isolation,
studies are especially relevant: space simulation and throughout the 2nd half there was an increase
studies in isolated enclosures on Earth which are in the need to get additional information from the
meant to simulate a space mission, and long-term outside, which the authors felt was due to
missions in polar regions that have many feelings of monotony [11]. These investigators
features analogous to actual space missions. In also used the Kelly repertory grid technique to
space, there are two major studies reported to assess crewrnernber attitudes and perceptions of
date that have looked at psychosocial time themselves and other people. They found
effects during on-orbit missions. These studies evidence that suggested a disintegrating social
will now be reviewed, and conclusions for future climate over the course of the mission, which
space missions will be discussed. resulted in tension and subgrouping [12].
Gushin and his colleagues also studied the
Space Simulation Isolation Studies crew and outside monitoring personnel involved
with another ICE project narned ECOPSY.
The effects of time on isolated groups were Again, three Russian subjects were conﬁned at
explored in the 1990s during a series of ground- the IBMP, this time for 90 days. The task was
based simulation studies conducted by the to monitor the growth of plants in a hermetic
European and Russian Space Agencies. The chamber and investigate their inﬂuence on the
ﬁrst of these was the Isolation Study for psychological state of the crew. The same
European Manned Space Infrastructure measures were employed as were used in the
(ISEMSI), which was a 28-day ICE study HUBES study, and the results were nearly
involving siX men from different European identical [11,12].
countries who were conﬁned in a hyperbaric Our group also participated in the HUBES
chamber in Norway in 1990. During this study, project. We studied the emotional state of the
Sandal and her colleagues assessed crew participants using the Proﬁle of Mood States
behavior over time using observational methods (POMS) and characteristics of the group
for scoring verbal and non-verbal interactions dynamics using the Group Environment Scale
[10]. They found that group functioning declined (GES) and the Work Environment Scale (WES)
about halfway into the mission, with periods of [16]. We expected the 3-man crew to show
tension and dysphoria occurring near the end of decrements in mood and group behaVior after the
the seclusion period. halfway point. Instead, we found a signiﬁcant
A second European simulation study was the lowering of tension and total mood disturbance
Experimental Campaign for the European scores in the 2nd half. We later discovered that at
2

"
"3","the halfway point of the mission, there was a most salient of which were related to group
planned simulated resupply event, where the member interactions. Although the small number
crew received some needed equipment, letters of subjects precluded statistical analyses, the
from their families, and a selection of favorite authors concluded that their data supported the
food. This event was intended to provide presence of greater negativity during the 3rd
support for the crew and probably served to quarter of the expeditions.

improve their morale for the rest of the isolation. Sandal looked at a number of psychological

Most of the studies reported above found a issues affecting male and female personnel
decline in emotional and interpersonal working in two Antarctic environments: on
parameters over time, although these were not board a ship and on land bases [15]. Using
always restricted to the 2nd half. An exception measures of personality and coping skills, she
was our study, which found an improvement in found that the 19 subjects stationed on board a
mood and group behaVior in the 2nd half that was ship showed high and stable levels of coping
related to a rnid-rnission resupply event. There throughout their entire rnission, whereas the 18
were also some methodological problems with subjects who were on land were more anxious
these studies. They suffered from having small and eXhibited a marked decline in coping around
subject sarnples, making statistical analyses the 3rd quarter. She related this difference to the
problematic. In addition, they each studied just less harsh and more predictable environmental
one crew, and there was a paucity of female conditions on the ship as compared to the
subjects. Some of these issues have been conditions faced by people working on land.
addressed in studies taking place during missions Not all polar studies have found 2nd half
to the north or south polar regions, and these will decrements in psychosocial functioning. As part
now be reviewed. of the Polar Psychology Project, Steel and

Suedfeld reported ﬁndings from four men and
Polar Space Analogue Studies one woman who were isolated in a high Arctic
weather station for seven weeks [17]. Based on

Due to the harsh and dangerous conditions, their responses to a daily mood scale measuring
along with the severe isolation occurring during dimensions of arousal and pleasure, there were
the wintering over period, many people believe no differences in the weekly mean scores across
that polar missions serve as a good analogue for the four quarters of the study. In fact, pleasure
long-duration space missions. A number of rose slightly in the 3rd quarter. They concluded
polar missions have been studied looking for that their data did not support the presence of a
patterns of psychological reactions over time. 3rd quarter phenomenon.

Palinkas and his colleagues performed a Wood and her colleagues used a variety of
secondary analysis of two large data sets mood and group performance measures to study
involving people wintering over in the Antarctic two 6-man groups that traversed the Lambert
and reViewed the ﬁndings from three other polar Glacier Basin in Antarctica for 100 days 18].
studies [13]. Their results included physiological Using sophisticated statistical techniques, they
as well as psychological ﬁndings, but relevant to did not ﬁnd evidence for a 2nd half decline or a
the 3rd quarter issue was their analysis of 83 men 3rd quarter phenomenon when the data were
and women who spent eight months at the aggregated, but they found some changes that
Amundson Scott South Pole Station between were related to a speciﬁc individual or to events.
1991 and 1994. The subjects completed the They concluded in their Abstract: “Most of the
POMS each month, and the results indicated a psychological discomfort and problems that
signiﬁcant elevation in total mood disturbance occurred appeared to be within the individual or
during the last four months as compared with the between individuals. They did not affect all
ﬁrst four months. The investigators related this members of the group equally”.
ﬁnding to the 3rd quarter phenomenon and Thus, despite haVing larger sarnples, female
suggested that it was due more to psychosocial subjects, and real danger, the literature on polar
factors than to environmental factors, such as space analogue studies, like the studies in space
weather conditions and latitude. simulators, gives mixed results as to the presence

Stuster and his colleagues did a content or absence of 2nd half decrements in mood and
analysis of the journals from nine leaders and interpersonal functioning or a 3rd quarter effect.
physicians of French circumpolar expeditions Although some individuals may show such
that ranged in duration from 69 days to nearly a effects, they do not seem universal among all
year [14]. A number of themes emerged, the participants or across all studies.

3

"
"4","Studies in Space 2nd half drop in scores on the Leader Support
subscale [19-25]. This may have been due to the
There have been two reported studies that fact that the commander was always a Russian
exarnined psychosocial time effects during actual and that some American astronauts reported
space missions, both conducted by our group. feeling culturally isolated and having an unclear
These were large international projects that were role during these Russian operated missions.
funded by NASA. One involved Space Shuttle Looking at individual quarters, there were no
missions to the Mir space station (Shuttle/Mir differences in scores for all crewmembers on
study), and the other involved missions to the these subscales across the four quarters of the
International Space Station (188 study) [19-29]. missions, and there was no evidence for a 3rd
As in our HUBES study, the emotional state quarter effect. For some Americans there were
and interpersonal environment of the transient elevations on a few subscales during the
crewrnernbers in both the Shuttle/Mir and 188 ﬁrst few weeks of the mission, suggesting a
studies were assessed weekly through the novelty effect upon arriving on the Russian space
completion of a study questionnaire composed of station, but these scores dropped to stable levels
items from the POMS, GES, and WES. The as the mission progressed.
ﬁnal Shuttle/Mir crewmember study sample In the 188 study, there were no 2nd half or
consisted of 5 American astronauts and 8 quarter decrements on any of the subscales [26-
Russian cosmonauts. Each crew consisted of 29], including the Leader Support subscale. This
one American astronaut and two Russian was true for all subjects, Americans alone, and
cosmonauts (one of whom was the commander) Russians alone. Unlike the Shuttle/Mir study,
who spent 4-7 months on board the orbiting Mir the nationality of the commander was alternated
space station. In the 188 study, the ﬁnal sample from mission to mission, and the Americans had
consisted of four missions with 3-person crews a major operational role in conducting the
and three missions with 2-person crews. In total, missions. Although a few individual subjects
8 American astronauts and 9 Russian showed increased tension or decreased cohesion
cosmonauts participated in the study, spending after the halfway point of the missions, such
4-7 months on board the 188. changes were not common enough to create a
We hypothesized that there would be a rise in detectable average effect across the whole
subscale indicators of tension on these two space subject sample. Thus, 2nd half or 3rd quarter
stations after the halfway point of the missions. effects did not seem to be typical or norrnative
These indicators were: Tension-AnXiety, Anger- experiences.
Hostility, Anger & Aggression, and Work
Pressure. We also predicted that there would be Conclusions
a 2nd half decrement in subscale indicators of
cohesion: Cohesion, Task Orientation, Order & Thus, in both the Shuttle/Mir and 188 studies,
Organization, and Vigor-Activity scores would we failed to ﬁnd signiﬁcant decrements in
dl‘Op, and Depression-Dejeotion and Fatigue- emotional state or group cohesion during the 2nd
Inertia scores would rise. Finally, we half of the missions, including the 3rd quarter.
hypothesized that scores Of Leader Support and This is in contrast to some (but not all) studies of
Supervisor Support would drop after the halfway people living and working in ICEs on the
point. ground. This absence of 2nd half psychosocial
To analyze these effects, we used methods decrements on-orbit may be related to the fact
appropriate for longitudinal data, such as mixed that the crewmembers were supported by space
model regression and the generalized linear psychologists in mission control who utilized a
model (ANOVA). We also examined the scores variety of countermeasures to help them deal
for each quarter of the mission using an analysis with the stress of being in space [2,7,8]. For
of variance to look for a 3rd quarter effect or any example, crewmembers were encouraged to
effect unique to a particular quarter. Because we communicate with family and friends on the
performed a number of analyses, we made the ground Via audio-Video links or e-mail, and gifts
appropriate corrections to our signiﬁcance levels and letters were sent up from home during
using the pI‘OCCdUI‘C Of Benjamini and HOCthI‘g resupply missions, Such activities may have
in order to reduce the possibility of Type 1 errors. helped to blunt the effects of periods of tension,
The results from the Shuttle/Mir study found {nonotony9 and homesickness on—orbit. These
none of the predicted 2nd half decrements on 0111‘ kinds of supportive activities have rarely been
12 subscales, except for a statistically signiﬁcant used in space simulation missions (with the
4

"
"5","exception of the HUBES study [16]), and due to Phytoresource Research Information Service,
the harsh weather conditions and distant 1988.
location, they are never available to people 7. Myasnikov, V.I., Stepanova, S.I., Salnitskiy,
working in polar environments during the harsh V.P., Kozerenko, C.P., and NechaeV, A.P.
wintering over period. 17p06jzema ncuxulteCKozli acmeHus’auuu 6
Changes over time may yet emerge during aﬂumeﬂbHOM Kocmuqeczcom nwzeme [T he

more distant non-orbital space missions, such as Problem of Psychological Asthenization during
011 a lunar base or an expedition to Mars, Where Long Duration Flight], Moscow: Slovo
unique factors play a role [2]. For example, for a Publications, 2000.
space crew working on Mars, the distances 8. Kanas, N. Psychosocial support for
involved Will produce in a delay of nearly 45 cosmonauts. Aviation, Space, & Environmental
minutes in two-way audio or Video Medicine, 62: 353-355, 1991.
transmissions, so real-time communications Will 9. Bechtel, R.B. & Berning, A. The third-
be hampered. Also, resupply ﬂights Will be quarter phenomenon: Do people experience
limited, and the ability to evacuate a discomfort after stress has passed? In: From
crewmember Who has a medical or psychiatric Antarctica t0 Outer Space, A.A. Harrison, Y.A.
emergency Wi11be ni1. The missions Wi111astup Clearwater & C.P. McKay (ed.), Springer-
to three years, the crew Wi11be more autonomous Verlag: New York, 1991.
than on any 0n-0rbit mission, and the stress from 10. Sandal, G.M., Vaernes, R. and Ursin, H.
isolation and the lack of support Will be Interpersonal relations during simulated space
increased. In addition, the Earth Will be seen as missions. Aviation, Space, and Environmental
a distant insigniﬁcant dot in space, and the Medicine66z617-624, 1995.
psychological effects of this situation may 11. Gushin, V.I.,Zaprisa, N.S., Kolinitchenko,
seriously affect the morale and we11-being 0f the TB, Eﬁmov, V.A., Smirnova, T.M.,
crew. Thus, it is important to continue studying Vinokhodova, A.G. and Kanas, N. Content
time effects during long-duration space missions, analysis of the crew communication With
perhaps in studies on the 188 0r lunar surface external communicants under prolonged
that attempt to replicate some of the conditions isolation. Aviation, Space, and Environmental
of a longer expeditionary mission. Medicine 68: 1093-1098, 1997.

12. Gushin, V.I., Eﬁmov, V.A,, Smirnova, T.M.,
REFERENCES Vinokhodova, A.G. and Kanas, N. Subject’s

perceptions of the crew interaction dynamics
1. Kanas, N. A. and Feddersen, W .E. under prolonged isolation. Aviation, Space, and
Behavioral, Psychiatric, and Sociological EnvironmentalMedicine692556-561, 1998.
Problems of Long-dumtion Space Missions. 13. Palinkas, L.A., Gunderson, E.K.E., Johnson,
Houston, TX: Johnson Spacecraft J .C., and Holland, A.W. Behavior and
Center/National Aeronautics and Space performance on long-duration spaceﬂights:
Administration, NASA TM X-58067, 1971. Evidence from analogue environments.
2. Kanas,N. and Manzey,D.Space Psychology Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine
and Psychiatry. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: 71(9, Suppl.):A29—36, 2000.
Kluwer Academic Press, 2003. 14. Stuster, J ., Bachelard, C., and Suedfeld, P.
3. Rohrer, J .H. Interpersonal relationships in The relative importance of behavioral issues
isolated small groups. In: Symposium on during long-duration ICE missions. Aviation,
Psychophysiological Aspects of Space Flight, Space, and Environmental Medicine 71(9,
B.E. Flaherty (ed). Columbia University Press: Suppl.):A29—36, 2000.
New York, 1961. 15. Sandal, G.M. Coping in Antarctica: Is it
4. Chaikin, A. The loneliness of the long- possible to generalize results across settings?
distance astronaut. Discover Feb. 1985,p.20—31. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine
5. Grigoriev, A.I., Kozerenko, C.P., and 71(9, Suppl.):A37—43,2000.
Myasnikov, V.I. Selected problems of 16. Kanas, N., Weiss, D.S. and Marmar, C.R.
psychological support of prolonged space ﬂights. Crew member interactions during a Mir space
Proceedings of the 38th Congress of the station simulation. Aviation, Space, and
International Astronautical Federation. AIAA: EnvironmentalMedicine672969-975, 1996.
Washington,D.C., 1987. 17. Steel, GD. and Suedfeld, P. Temporal
6. Lebedev, V. Diary of a Cosmonaut: 2]] patterns of affect in an isolated group.
Days in Space. College Station, TX: Environment and Behavior 23:749-765, 1991.

5

"
"6","18. Wood, J-A., Lugg, D.J., Hysong, S.J., and 28. Kanas, N.A., Salnitskiy, V.P., Ritsher, J.B.,
Harm, D.L. Psychologial changes in hundred- Gushin, V.I., Weiss, D.S., Saylor, S.A., and
day remote Antarctic ﬁeld groups. Environment Marmar, C.R. Psychosocial issues on-orbit:
and Behavi0r312299-337, 1999. Results from two space station programs. 36th
19. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Weiss, D. S., COSPAR Scientiﬁc Assembly. Beijing, China,
Grund, E.M., Gushin, V., Kozerenko, 0., Sled, July 16-23, 2006.
A., Bostrom, A. and Marmar, CR. 29. Kanas, N.A., Salnitskiy, V.P., Ritsher, J.B.,
Crewmember and ground personnel interactions Gushin, V.I., Weiss, D.S., Saylor, S.A.,
over time during Shuttle/Mir space missions. Kozerenko, 0.P., and Marmar, C.R.
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine Crewmember and mission control personnel
72:453-461, 2001. interactions during International Station Station
20. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V. Grund, E.M., missions. Manuscript under review.
Weiss, D.S., Gushin, V., Kozerenko, 0, Sled,
and Marmar, C.R. Human interactions in space:
Results from Shuttle/Mir. Acta Astronautica
49:243-260, 2001.
21. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Grund, E. M.
Gushin, V., Weiss, D.S., Kozerenko, 0., Sled, A.
and Marmar, C.R. Social and cultural issues
during Shuttle/Mir space missions. Acta
Astronautica 47:647-655, 2000.
22. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Grund, E.M.,
Gushin, V., Weiss, D.S., Kozerenko, 0., Sled, A.
and Marmar, C.R. Interpersonal and cultural
issues involving crews and ground personnel
during Shuttle/Mir space missions. Aviation,
Space, and Environmental Medicine
71(9,Supp1.):A11-16, 2000.
23. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Grund, E.M.,
Weiss, D.S., Gushin, V., Bostrom, A.,
Kozerenko, 0., Sled, A., and Marmar, C.R.
Psychosocial issues in space: Results from
Shuttle/Mir. Gravitational and Space Biology
Bulletin 14(2): 35-45, 2001.
24. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Grund, E.M.,
Weiss, D.S., Gushin, V., Kozerenko, 0., Sled,
A., and Marmar, C.R. Human interactions
during Shuttle/Mir space missions. Acta
Astronautica 48:777-784, 2001.
25. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Grund, E.M.,
Gushin, V., Weiss, D.S., Kozerenko, 0., Sled,
A., and Marmar, C.R. Lessons learned from
Shuttle/Mir: Psychosocial countermeasures.
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine
73:607-611, 2002.
26. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Ritsher, J ., Gushin,
V., Weiss, D., Saylor, S., and Marmar, C.
Psychosocial interactions during 188 missions.
15th Humans in Space Symposium: Beneﬁts of
Human Presence in Space. Graz, Austria, May
22-26, 2005. Book of Abstracts, p. 21.
27. Kanas, N.A., Salnitskiy, V.P., Ritsher, J .B.,
Gushin, V.I., Weiss, D.S., Saylor, S.A.,
Kozerenko, 0.P., and Marmar, C.R. Human
interactions in space: 188 vs. Shuttle/Mir. Acta
Astronautica 59:413-419, 2006.
6

"
