"","x"
"1","Paper presented at the 57th International Astronautical Congress, Valencia, Spain, October 2-6, 2006.
IAC-06-A1.1.3
CULTURAL AND LANGUAGE BACKGROUNDS OF
INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION PROGRAM PERSONNEL
J ennifer B. Ritsher Pth, Nick Kanas MDl, Vyacheslav P. Salnitskiy PhDZ,
Vadim I. Gushin MD PhDZ, Stephanie Saylor MAI, Daniel S. Weiss Pth, Charles Marmar MD1
[University of California/San F rancisco, and Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
San Francisco, USA. jennifer.ritsher@ucsfedu.
21nstitute for Biomedical Problems, MOSCOW, Russia.
Abstract
The International Space Station (188) requires a global degree of cooperation that is unprecedented in
human space ﬂight. Cultural and language issues may affect this type of teamwork. As part of a larger
study of mood and social climate among 188 personnel, we collected data on their cultural and language
background. The sample of 132 included 8 US astronauts, 9 Russian cosmonauts, and 95 US and 20
Russian mission control personnel. The analytic strategy included regression methods that accounted for
multiple analyses and multiple observations per person. “Cultural sophistication"" was deﬁned as having
social contact with other cultures, being knowledgeable about 188 partner countries, having Visited other
countries, and having foreign language skills. In addition, we asked respondents how important they think
it is for personnel to share a common language or dialect, which we termed “language ﬂexibility.” Results
showed that the overall level of cultural sophistication was higher among orewmembers than mission
control personnel. Russian participants had higher scores than Americans. Scores on cultural
sophistication were not related to most of the mood and social climate variables. American mission
control personnel had lower cultural sophistication and language ﬂexibility scores than the other groups in
our study.
1. Background and Purpose 2. Methods
The International Space Station (188) is a As part of a larger study of mood and social
joint venture with American, Russian, European, climate among 188 orewmembers and mission
Canadian, J apanese, and other international control personnel [4-6], we gave participants a
partners. This degree of cooperation is questionnaire assessing their culture and
unprecedented in the history of human space language background. This paper presents the
ﬂight [1]. Because mission safety is at stake, initial analyses of the culture and language data.
clear communication and trust are essential for Participants. The sample of 132 188
188 personnel working in international and personnel included 8 US astronauts, 9 Russian
geographieally-dispersed teams [2]. It is likely cosmonauts, and 95 US and 20 Russian mission
that interest in other cultures, knowledge about control personnel. These participants were all
other cultures, and foreign language skills would assigned to long-duration ISS missions of
facilitate effective teamwork under these between 4-7 months.
conditions [3]. Therefore, it is important to Procedure. After participants gave informed
understand how 188 personnel View cultural and consent [7], they completed the one-time culture
language issues. and language questionnaire consisting mostly of
new items designed for this study as well as a
1

"
"2","Paper presented at 57th International Astronautical Congress, Valencia, Spain, October 2-6, 2006.
few items used in prior work [8]. Participants method of Benjamini and Hochberg to control
also completed a weekly questionnaire Type I error [12].
containing mood [9] and social climate [10,11]
questionnaires that are described in detail
elsewhere [4-6]. All study materials were 3. Results
available in both English and Russian.

Scale development. Culture and language Results showed that the overall level of
items were factor analyzed to produce scales, cultural sophistication was higher among
which were tested for internal consistency crewmembers than mission control personnel
reliability. These scales showed the degree to (F(1,129)=12.53, p<.05), holding country
which participants reported having social contact constant. Russian participants had higher scores
with other cultures (8 items, Cronbach’s alpha = than Americans (F(1,129)=8.94, p<.05), holding
.80), being knowledgeable about 188 partner job type constant. Signiﬁcant results from an
countries (15 items, Cronbach’s alpha = .94), analysis with an interaction term indicated that
having Visited other countries and having the country differences may have been driven by
foreign language skills (5 items, Cronbach’s a signiﬁcant country X crew interaction
alpha = .74). A summary score provided an (F(1,128)=7.78, p<.05). A Tukey post hoc test
estimate of the overall level of what we will revealed that US mission control personnel had
refer to here as “cultural sophistication” (all 28 signiﬁcantly lower scores than any of the other
subscale items, Cronbach’s alpha = .92). This groups. No other speciﬁc post-hoc contrasts
paper presents the results pertaining to that were signiﬁcant.
overall cultural sophistication score. In addition, For the most part, respondents’ scores on
the questionnaire included 4 questions based on cultural sophistication were not associated with
items from a questionnaire that our team had their overall average mood or social climate
used in a previous study [8] about the degree to variables. Because there were 20 of these
which respondents thought it was important for variables, the adjusted threshold for clinical
space program personnel (crew or mission signiﬁcance was set at .0025 [12] per analysis.
control) to share a common language or the For the entire sample, there were no statistically
same dialect of a common language, which we signiﬁcant relationships between cultural
refer to here as “language ﬂexibility.” These sophistication and the 20 variables that met this
language ﬂexibility questions were not included rigorous criterion, although there were a few at
in the cultural sophistication score but were the trend level (which we deﬁne here as p<.05
analyzed separately, because they were per analysis). The same was true for mission
conceptually distinct, and because they did not control personnel alone. Among crewmembers
load well onto common factors with other types alone, there was one signiﬁcant negative
of items in factor analyses. association of cultural sophistication and

Analytic strategy. The cultural perceived supervisor support (b=-.20, p=.0002),
sophistication summary score was produced by and none of the 19 other variables were related
taking the mean of 28 standardized at even the trend level. Overall, we did not ﬁnd
questionnaire items and then rescaling the a strong or systematic pattern of association
resulting variable to have a mean of 50 and a between cultural sophistication and average
standard deviation of 10. Differences in these mood or social climate in our sample.
scores between subgroups were assessed by Because our prior work [2] showed that
analysis of variance (ANOVA). We also American mission control personnel ﬁnd
compared the cultural sophistication scores to language related issues to be challenging when
respondents’ overall average weekly mood and they work in globally dispersed international
social climate ratings, using a one-way ANOVA teams, we tested whether US and Russian
of weighted means to account for the varying mission control personnel have different levels
number of observations per person. These of language ﬂexibility. Using t-tests we found
analyses were conducted in sets of 20, using the that Americans had signiﬁcantly higher scores

on a question about the importance of controllers
2

"
"3","Paper presented at 57th1ntemationa1Astronautieal Congress, Valencia, Spain, October 2-6, 2006.

sharing the same dialect of a common language. [3] Ritsher, J. B. (2005) Cultural factors

(t(113)=2.581, p<.05). They also felt more and the 1ntemationa1 Space Station.

strongly that it is important for the crew to speak Aviation, Space, and Environmental

the same dialect of a common language Medicine, 76 B135-B144.

(t(113)=2.799, p<.05). This partially replicates [4] Kanas, N. A., Salnitskiy, V. P.,

the earlier ﬁndings with these items [8]. Ritsher, J. B., Gushin, V. 1., Weiss, D.
S., Saylor, S. A., Kozerenko O. P.,

4. Discussion and Conclusions Marmar, C. R. (in press) Psychosocial
interactions during 188 missions, Acta

American mission control personnel have a Astronautica.

lower degree of cultural sophistication than [5] Ritsher, J. B., Kanas, N., Gushin, V.
other groups in our study. This was found both 1., Saylor, S. (in press). Cultural
in terms of the cultural sophistication summary differences in patterns of mood states
score and in terms of language ﬂexibility. It is on boardthe1nternationa1Space
likely that these types of differences may affect Station, Acta Astronautica.
the work of international 188 work teams. For [6] Kanas, N. A., Salnitskiy, V. P.,
example, Russian mission control personnel may Ritsher, J. B., Gushin, V. 1., Weiss, D.
be more accustomed to “international English” 8., Saylor, S. A., Kozerenko, O. P.,
than their American counterparts are. The Marmar, C. R. (2006). Human
Russian personnel may thus experience less interactions in space: 188 versus
cognitive, emotional, or interpersonal strain Shuttle/Mir, Acta Astronautica, 59,
when working in international teams. These are 413-419.
open questions that await the results of future [7] Ritsher, J. B., Kanas, N., Saylor, S. (in
research. The present study did not ﬁnd much press). Maintaining privacy during
evidence to support an association between psychosocial research on the
cultural sophistication and the global average International Space Station. Human
overall mood or social climate indicators that we Performance in Extreme
had available. Therefore, it was not associated Environments.
with gross individual or group distress. Still, we [8] Kelly, AD. and Kanas, N. (1992).
know from other data [2] that American mission Crewmember communication in
control staff ﬁnd these issues to be challenging. space: A survey of astronauts and
Further research using different or more ﬁne- cosmonauts. Aviation, Space, and
grained indicators of culture or language-related Environmental Medicine, 63, 721-726.
strain or stress is needed to examine the impact [9] MoNair, D.M., M. Lorr, and L.F.
of these differences and to assess the nature of Droppleman, POMS Manual. San
cultural training that would be helpful in dealing Diego, CA: EdITS/Eduoational and
with them. Industrial Testing Service, 1992.

[10] Moos, R.H. Group Environment
References Scale Manual, 3rd ed. Palo Alto, CA:

Consulting Psychologists Press; 1994.

[1] Kanas, N' and D' Manzey, Space [11] Moos, R.H. Work Environment Scale
psychology and psychiatry, Dordreoht, Manual, 3rd ed., Palo Alto, C A,

The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Consulting Psychologists Press, 1994.
Publishers, 2093' [12] Benjamini, Y., and Hoohberg, Y.

[2] Clement, J'» Ritsher, J' 13' (2005)° Controlling the false discovery rate: a
Operating the 1883 Cultural and practical and powerful approach to
leadership Challenges. 56 multiple testing. (1995). Journal of
International Astronautical Congress. the Royal Statistical Society, 57, 289-
Fukuoka, Japan, October 17-21, 2005. 300.

Paper #1AC-05-A1 .5 .05. International
Astronautioal Federation, Paris.
3

"
