"","x"
"1","PSYCHOSOCIAL INTERACTIONS DURING ISS MISSIONS+
N.A. Kanasl, V.P. Salnitskiyz, J .B. Ritsherl, V.I. Gushinz, D.S. Weissl,
S.A. Saylorl, O.P. Kozerenkoz, and CR. Marmar1

[University of California/San Francisco, and the Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San
Francisco, California, USA. Dr. Kanas’ e-mail address: nick21@itsa.ucsfedu.
21nstitutef0r Biomedical Problems, Moscow, Russia
ABSTRACT

Based on anecdotal reports from astronauts and cosmonauts, studies of space analog environments on
Earth, and our previous research on the Mir Space Station, a number of psychosocial issues have been
identiﬁed that can lead to problems during long-duration space expeditions. Several of these issues were
studied during a series of missions to the International Space Station. Using a mood and group Climate
questionnaire that was completed weekly by erewmembers in space and personnel in mission control, we
found no evidence to support the presence of predicted decrements in well-being during the 2nd half or in
any speciﬁc quarter of the missions. The results did support the predicted displacement of negative
feelings to outside supervisors among both crew and ground subjects. There were several signiﬁcant
differences in mood and group perceptions between Americans and Russians and between erewmembers
and mission control personnel. Crewmembers related cohesion t0 the support role of their leader, and
mission control personnel related cohesion to both the task and support roles of their leader. These ﬁndings
are discussed with reference to future space missions.
1. BACKGROUND interpersonal difﬁculties after the halfway point

of a mission [1, 3, 14, 15]. One understanding of

A number of psychological and interpersonal this phenomenon is that although there is a sense
issues that may affect people working in space of relief in the participants that half of the
have been identiﬁed in anecdotal reports from mission is over, the relief is outweighed by the
astronauts and cosmonauts and in studies from realization that another half of the mission must
space analog environments on Earth, such as pass before they can leave for home. In
polar settings and isolation Chambers [1-11]. particular, the 3rd quarter has been seen as being
These issues have included tension resulting especially stressful emotionally, leading to the
from factors related to crew heterogeneity (e.g., suggestion of a distinct “3rd quarter
differences in personality, crew demographics, phenomenon” [3, 11, 14, 15].
and culture and language background) and drops Another important issue concerns how people
in group cohesion as a function of the in isolated and conﬁned environments deal with
misapplieation of important leadership roles interpersonal conﬂicts. It has been noted that
(e.g., task—oriented versus support-oriented). The when such conﬂicts are not resolved, there may
stresses of space also have resulted in psychiatric be a tendency for erewmembers to direct their
problems, such as psychosomatic reactions, frustration to monitoring personnel outside of the
depression, and asthenia (characterized by group and to perceive these people as being
extreme fatigue, hypoaetiVity, irritability, unsupportive and even hostile. Behaviors
emotional lability, and appetite and sleep suggestive of such a displacement of affect have
problems) [3, 4, 12, 13]. been reported anecdotally during space missions

There is evidence that time may inﬂuence the [3, 10] and in space simulation studies on Earth
impact of these psychosocial issues. For [1, 3, 5, 6, 12, 15].
example, it has been reported that erewmembers We examined many of these issues during our
in space or in space analog environments previous NASA-funded study that evaluated
experience signiﬁcant psychological and tension, cohesion, leadership role, and
+ Presented at the 15th 1AA (International Academy of Astronautics) Humans in Space Symposium, Graz, Austria, May 22-26, 2005.
Due to computer coding errors, the original paper reported some erroneous ﬁndings, which have been corrected in this version.

1

"
"2","displacement in crewmembers and mission Comparisons of mean subscale scores
control personnel during the Shuttle/Mir between Russians and Americans showed that
Program [3, 13,16-22]. During these rnissions, Russian subjects experienced more personal
the crews consisted of one American and two growth, task orientation, guidance from
Russians (one of whom was always the managers, and support from their supervisors,
commander) who lived and worked on the and less work pressure, than American subjects,
Russian Mir Space Station for periods of 4 to 7 regardless of any erew-ground differences on
months. The emotional state and interpersonal these same variables. At the same time,
environment of the crewmembers and their erewrnernbers experienced lower levels of
colleagues in mission control were assessed negative emotions than their mission control
weekly through the completion of a study colleagues, regardless of any Russian-Arneriean
questionnaire composed of items from three differences on the variables tested. In these same
we11—known standardized psychometric analyses, there were three country by location
measures: Proﬁle of Mood States, or POMS interaction effects, with American astronauts on
[23]; Group Environment Scale, or GES [24]; the Mir scoring the lowest of the four groups on
and Work Environment Scale, or WES [25]. The measures of leader support, expressiveness, and
standard subseales from these instruments independence.
measured levels of mood and group elirnate (e.g., In another set of analyses we found that the
Tension-AnXiety, Cohesion) and were used to erewrnernbers perceived the support (but not the
test our hypotheses. task) activities of the leader as being positively

The ﬁnal Mir study sample consisted of 5 associated with the level of cohesion in the
American astronauts, 8 Russian cosmonauts, and group. But for mission control personnel, both
42 American and 16 Russian mission control the task and support roles of their leader were
personnel. Data were analyzed using methods positively associated with cohesion in the group.
appropriate for longitudinal data (e.g., mixed Our just completed International Space Station
model regression and the generalized linear (188) study provided us the opportunity to
model, or GLM), which accounted for multiple replicate our Mir ﬁndings in areas related to time
and varying number of observations per person. effects, displacement, Arneriean-Russian and
Corrections were made to reduce the possibility erew-ground differences, and leadership roles.
of Type I errors using the procedure of This report presents our ISS ﬁndings in these
Benjamini and Hoehberg [26]. areas.

These data showed Virtually none of the
predicted 2nd half decrements in functioning as 2. [SS STUDY
measured by the scores of 12 subseales that were
hypothesized to indicate tension, cohesion, and 2.1 Methods
leader support, although there was a signiﬁcant
2nd half drop in one measure that assessed the Over a period of 4 years, we collected data on
support role of the Mir mission commander. 7 I88 crews and their mission control personnel.
There were no differences among any tested The mission durations were 4 to 7 months, and
subscale scores across the four quarters of the each consisted of 2 or 3 erewrnernbers, including
missions and no support for a unique 3rd quarter at least 1 American and 1 Russian. As in our
phenomenon. Mir study, the ISS erewrnernbers and mission

To test the displacement hypothesis, siX control subjects rated their emotional state and
subseales that measured tension and unpleasant social elirnate weekly using our study
moods were predicted to each correlate questionnaire, which included elements of the
negatively with a subseale measuring support POMS, GES, and WES.
from outside supervisors. Pooled across both It is important to note that there were
crew and ground subjects, all six relationships differences between the Mir and ISS study
were statistically signiﬁcant and in the predicted environments. First, in addition to the TsUP
negative direction. Moreover, there was one mission control center in Moscow, we studied
interaction effect showing that the negative two additional ISS mission control environments
relationship between Work Pressure and in the United States: one at Johnson Space
Supervisor Support was stronger for the crew Center (responsible for operations) and one at
then the ground subjects, and this relationship Marshall Space Flight Center (responsible for
was in fact statistically signiﬁcant for the former payloads, including science experiments), and
but not the latter. most American participants were from Marshall.

2

"
"3","Second, the ISS crewrnernbers who participated We did ﬁnd evidence to support the
in a given mission were all launched and displacement hypothesis. Pooled across crew and
returned together, rather than being staggered in ground subjects, all siX of the relationships were
time (as was the case for the Mir missions). This in the predicted negative direction and were
allowed us to study group dynamics over time in statistically signiﬁcant (i.e., below the Benj amini
a closed group of people who were together and Hochberg [28] threshold of p =.0500). In a
throughout the mission. Third, the 3-person ISS secondary set of analyses, we evaluated whether
missions varied in national representation, sorne these relationships might be different for
having two Russians and one American, sorne crewmembers versus ground control personnel.
having two Americans and one Russian. This Results showed a statistically signiﬁcant
allowed us to unconfound the effect of (p<.0333) interaction effect for four of the siX
nationality versus minority status, which was not relationships (Tension-AnXiety, Anger—Hostility,
possible in the Mir study. Fourth, sorne Total Mood Disturbance, and Work Pressure),
missions had a Russian commander and some each of which showed a stronger effect among
had an American commander (in Mir, the crewmembers than among mission control
commander was always Russian). Fifth, due to personnel. Therefore, the relationship between
the disruption of the Space Shuttle launches as a these four variables and Supervisor Support
result of the Columbia accident, and the resultant should be characterized for crewrnernbers and
need to use the smaller Soyuz transport vehicle, mission control staff separately rather than
some of the missions that we studied were pooled together. Estimates for crew and ground
composed of only 2 crewrnernbers (one subjects produced by these same models showed
American and one Russian). Finally, the 188 that for all four of these variables, the effect was
missions had a major American operational in the predicted direction and statistically
presence, whereas the Mir missions were largely different from zero (at p<.04l7), except for the
under Russian control. relationship between Tension-AnXiety and
Eight crews were asked to participate in the Supervisor Support among ground control
188 study after receiving an informed consent personnel, which was in the predicted direction
brieﬁng, and one of the crews opted out but not statistically signiﬁcant.
(although we still studied its associated mission Using GLM, we looked for Russian-
control personnel). The ﬁnal study sample American and crew-ground differences during
consisted of 4 missions with 3-person crews and the missions between the mean scores from each
3 missions with 2-person crews. One of our 20 mood and social climate subscales.
crewmember chose not to participate, but data The models predicted the values for each of
were collected from the rest of that crew. In all, these subscales in terms of the main effect for
8 American astronauts, 9 Russian cosrnonauts, Country, (Russians versus Americans), the main
and 108 American and 20 Russian mission effect for Location (crewrnernbers on the ISS
controlpersonnelparticipated in the study. versus personnel in mission control), and their
As in the Mir study, data were analyzed using interaction. Tables 1 and 2 present the ﬁndings
methods from longitudinal mixed model for the signiﬁcant main effects, showing the least
regression and GLM to account for multiple and square means. There were no signiﬁcant
varying numbers of observations per person [26, interaction effects.
27]. Corrections to reduce the possibility of
Type I error were employed using the procedure TABLE 1. Main Effectfor Country
ofBenjarnini and Hochberg [28]. Subscales Showing Signiﬁcant mean score
differences between Russians and Americans
22 RESUItS (pooled crewmember and mission control
subjects). Higher scores are in bold.
Our data showed no evidence of the predicted
time effects during the course of the missions. Subscale Mean Mean
Using a mixed model linear regression analysis, Russian American F*
there were no 2nd half changes in the scores of 12 500W 500%
standard subscales measuring tension, cohesion, TenSion'AnXiety 8-04 4-11 10-89
or leader support. Using the GLM, there were no w
differences in any of the 20 subscale scores A” p'values are. M {km the Benjamml and
. Hochberg [28] adjusted szgmﬁcance level threshold of
across quarters and no eVidence to support the _ . . . .
. rd p—.005 and are therefore statzstzcally szgmﬁcant.
eX1stence of a 3 quarter phenomenon.
3

"
"4","TABLE 2, Main Effect for Location addition, countermeasures employed by mission
Subscales showing Signiﬁcant mean score control support staff to help crews deal With
differences between Crewmembers and Mission stress, boredom, and monotony [3, 4, 13, 15]
Control Personnel (pooled Russian and may be successful in preventing late mission
American subjects). Higher scores are in bold. psychosocial problems, WhiCh otherwise W0111d
be likely to develop in such an environment.
Subscale Mean Mean However, it is unclear Whether time effects also
Crew- Mission F* Will be absent during an expedition-type mission
member COMM] such as a ﬂight to Mars, Where support from
$ Earth Will be less effective due to the long
Tensjon'An3tety 3'81 8'35 1453 distances and communication delays involved,
Anger'HOStllity 2'03 6'26 6'08 and Where group dynamics may be more
Fatlgue-Inertla 1.79 6.22 1 1.03 .
Confusion-Bewildennent 1.95 4.92 9.29 complex due to haV1ng crews larger than the ,2—
Total Mood Disturbance -7.29 17.98 12.02 or 3-person groups we have StUdletl' Perhaps in
Anger and Aggression 1_12 3.18 12.56 these more autonomous crews, discrete phases
Vigor-Activity 18.32 14.36 1249 Will develop over time as they have in other
Innovation 4.53 332 6.68 isolated and conﬁned settings.
Leader Control 5.08 6.27 8.21 Our ﬁndings supported the presence of
Leader Support 8.12 6.44 5.33 displacement in both crewmembers and mission
*All p-values are smaller than the Benjamini and control personnel. In fact, the effect was
HOChbei’g [28] adjusted Signiﬁcance [6V6] threShOZd 0f stronger for isolated erewmembers than for the
p=.025 and are therefore statistically signiﬁcant. ground subjects. These results generally
replicated the ﬁndings from our Mir study and
Using mixed model regression techniques, we the ﬁnding from a separate 188 study conducted
found a statistically signiﬁcant relationship for by one Of our Russian colleagues, Who reported
all mission control subjects between scores of a evidence that a erewmember was showing
subseale measuring the task role of the leader displacement towards people on the ground [29].
(Leader Control) and the Cohesion subseale Our results suggest that displacement occurs in
(b 2 ~20: P < -0150)- Similarly, there was a both isolated and non-isolated groups as a
signiﬁcant relationship between the scores of mechanism to deal With dysphoria by perceiving
subseale measuring the support role of the leader a lack Of support from people outside Of the
(Leader Support) and Cohesion (b 2 389 P < group. Obviously, it would be best if people
-0150)- Both Of these relationships were 3150 could deal With intra-group stress directly and
signiﬁcant for American and Russian ground not feel a need take it out on members of an
subjects analyzed separately. “out—group”. For this to happen, both
For 311 erewmembers, Leader Support W35 crewmembers and mission control personnel
signiﬁcantly related to Cohesion (b 2 ~31: P < would have to be sensitized to the presence of
0075)» PUt Leader Control was not (b 2 “003: intra-group tension and then be able to deal With
P 2 -9391)- This pattern 0f results was 3150 found it, such as having periodic “bull sessions” to
for American erewmembers only and for discuss psychosocial conﬂicts and then develop
Russians erewmembers 0h1Y- strategies of defusing them through discussion
and consensus. Methods of doing this could be
3- DISCUSSION taught in pre-launeh joint training sessions that
involved members of the crew and key members
Our failure to ﬁnd predicted decrements in Of mission control.
mood or perceived social Climate during the 2nd We found that Russians reported more
half 0f the missions or across quarters tension but less work pressure than Americans.
(particularly the 3rd quarter) replicates 011T In explaining these results, one should note that
ﬁndings in the Mir StUdY- Unlike some Earth- in multi-national groups working together under
bound space simulation environments (e.g., conditions of isolation and conﬁnement on Earth
Antarctic, isolation chambers), space crews do and in space, cultural differences have been
not appear to go through discrete psychological found to have an impact on the way that groups
phases over time during their missions. Perhaps Of people feel and perceive each other (3’ 30). It
the excitement and potential danger 0f being in is possible that Americans and Russians react in
space stimulates the crewmembers in a way that different ways to the stress of being in space
disrupts broad phasie trends from developing. 111 based on non-speeiﬁe national Characteristics.
4

"
"5","But is also is possible that organizational factors crewmembers did not see a link between the task
play a role that are related to the way that role of the leader and cohesion, although they did
different space agencies conduct their missions perceive a signiﬁcant relationship between the
(3, 31, 32). For example, in contrast to leader’s support role and cohesion. This
American organizational practices, the Russian conclusion is also suggested by the lower leader
space program has typically depended on fewer task scores (i.e., Leader Control) and higher
written procedures, more reliance on the opinion leader support scores from crewmembers verus
of experts when problems arise, and a tendency ground subjects, as shown in Table 2. It is
to ﬁx things that break rather than require possible that the lack of association between the
numerous redundant systems. Thus, it is task role of the leader and cohesion among
understandable if Russian crew and ground crewmembers might have been related to crew
personnel might be affected by differences from size. In small two or three person space crews,
their standard operating procedure during the 188 each person has specialized job skills that make
program, which was strongly inﬂuenced by them a leader in tasks related to these skills.
American operational activities. This might have Thus, there is less need for the kind of formal
led to more tension in some Russian participants work—related leadership structure that is found in
as they adjusted to new ways of working. On the larger groups of people. In addition, in small
other hand, the Americans may have felt more groups one’s social support system is limited,
responsible for dealing with the every day and it is important to be cordial and ﬂexible with
activities of the ISS construction, and this may the one or two human beings that are in within
have contributed to their relatively higher level 200 miles of your location! Thus, group
of pressure. This organizational explanation is cohesiveness would be more sensitive to support
supported by the fact that as mentioned earlier, in from the leader than to task—related directions.
the largely Russian-operated Mir program we The results from our study suggest a number
found that the Russians reported more personal of countermeasures for future space missions. In
growth, task orientation, guidance from terms of selection, crews should be composed of
managers, and support from their supervisors members who are sensitive to psychological and
than American subjects, who may have felt interpersonal issues and who are mature enough
somewhat socially isolated. to problem—solve issues as they emerge.
In terms of erew-ground differences, ISS Commanders should be selected who have
crewmembers reported having less negative demonstrated strengths in leadership (including
emotions and more Vigor and innovation than the supportive aspects) and who are open to
their colleagues in mission control. These erew- consider the impact of psychosocial issues that
ground differences may reﬂect personality may affect the crew. They also should be
differences between people who become experienced in working with people from
astronauts or cosmonauts and those who work in different cultures who may react differently to
the mission control setting. In addition, living authority [32].
and working in space is exciting and represents In terms of training, both crewmembers and
the fulﬁllment of a dream for many space mission control personnel should receive some
travelers. Consequently, they may experience pre-launeh psychosocial education training
more positive emotions and more personal together, since these two groups are dependent
growth than their mission control colleagues. In upon each other in conducting mission activities,
terms of leadership, the crews consisted of two and they may interact maladaptively due to
or three people, one of whom was the leader who unclear or unhealthy communication patterns.
interacted frequently with the other Speciﬁc topic areas for this training should
crewmembers during non-sleep hours every day. include: time effects, leadership roles, cultural
In contrast, people in mission control worked in differences, and the relationship between
deﬁned shifts in much larger groups, and the crewmembers and mission control personnel
leadership may have been perceived as being less (including displacement). Their training should
involved with day-to-day tasks and emotional encourage both groups to become sensitive to
support due to the scheduling factors and the problems that arise and to learn problem—solving
large size of the group. strategies to deal with them, taking into account
Finally, as we predicted, there was a general cultural differences at both the personal level as
feeling among mission control personnel that well as at the organizational level.
both the task and support roles of their leader In terms of mission monitoring and support,
were related to group cohesion. However, the mission control personnel and crewmembers
5

"
"6","should be sensitive to the stress0rs involved in REFERENCES
each other’s jobs and should take time to discuss
their communication patterns during the 1. Gushin, V.I., Zaprisa, N.S., Kolinitehenko,
missions. Computer-based training should be T.B., Eﬁmov, V.A., Smirnova, T.M.,
available in space and on the ground as a Vinokhodova, AG. and Kanas, N. Content
reminder and extension of the psychosocial analysis Of the crew communication With
training participants received pre-launeh. There external communieants under prolonged
should be a continuation of Opportunities for isolation. Aviation, Space, and Environmental
crewmernbers and ground personnel stationed in Medicine 68:1093-1098, 1997.
space or abroad to speak With family and friends 2. Gushin, V.I., Eﬁmov, V.A,, Smirnova, T.M.,
at home. Vinokhodova, AG. and Kanas, N. Subjeet’s
Finally, the impact of in-ﬂight psychosocial perceptions of the crew interaction dynamics
issues addressed in our study (i.e., displacement, under prolonged isolation. Aviation Space, and
cultural differences, leadership roles) suggests EnvironmentalMedicine692556-561, 1998.
that post-mission debrieﬁngs and supportive 3. Kanas,N. and Manzey, D. Space Psychology
activities (e.g., time alone With their families) and Psychiatry. Dordreeht, The Netherlands:
should be available to assist the crewmernbers t0 Kluwer Academic Press, 2003.
readapt to life on Earth. In addition, the families 4. Myasnikov, V.I., Stepanova, S.I., Salnitskiy,
Of all mission participants should have an V.P., Kozerenko, O.P., and NeehaeV, A.P.
opportunity for support, both during the missions 17p06jzema ncuxuqeczcoii acmeHus’auuu 6
and in the post-return period as they are being aﬂumeﬂbHOM Kocmuqeczcom nwzeme [ T he
reunited With their loved ones Who are returning Problem of Psychological Asthenization during
form space. Long Duration Flight], Moscow: SlOVO
Psychosocial issues need to be studied further Publications, 2000.
in space, especially in preparation for future 5. Kanas,N. and Feddersen, W.E. Behavioral,
expeditionary type missions, such as a ﬂight to Psychiatric, and Sociological Problems ofLong-
Mars. Psychological, interpersonal, and cultural duration Space Missions. Houston, TX: Johnson
strain should be treated as seriously as physical Spacecraft Center/National Aeronautics and
strain to the body and mechanical strain to the Space Administration, NASA TM X-58067,
equipment. Besides Earth-bound space 1971.
simulation settings (e.g., Antarctic, isolation 6. Kanas, N., Weiss, D.S. and Marmar, C.R.
Chambers), two off-Earth environments provide a Crew member interactions during a Mir space
good platform to conduct research related to station simulation. Aviation, Space, and
space exploration. First, the 188 is a good place Environmental Medicine 67:969-975, 1996.
to study psychosocial issues With reference to the 7. Kelly, AD. and Kanas, N. Crewmember
microgravity outbound and return phases of an communication in space: A survey of astronauts
interplanetary mission. Second, a lunar base and cosmonauts. Aviation, Space, and
Offers an excellent setting to study psychosocial Environmental Medicine 63:721-726, 1992.
issues With reference to a partial-gravity, ground- 8. Kelly, AD. and Kanas, N. Communication
based environment, such as a distant planetary between space crews and ground personnel: A
surface. Such studies Will allow us to further survey of astronauts and cosmonauts. Aviation,
deﬁne important psychosocial issues and to Space, and Environmental Medicine 642795-800,
develop countermeasures [22] to deal With them 1993.
before they become problems that may 9. Kelly, AD. and Kanas, N. Leisure time
jeopardize the success of future missions to Mars activities in space: A survey of astronauts and
and beyond. cosmonauts. Acta Astronautica 32:451-457,
1994.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 10. LebedeV, V. Diary of a Cosmonaut: 211
Days in Space. College Station, TX:
Supported by National Aeronautics and Space Phytoresouree Research Information Service,
Administration contracts #NAS9—98093 and 1988.
#NCC-0161. 11. Sandal, G.M. Coping in Antarctica: Is it
The authors would like to thank Dr. Frank possible to generalize results across settings?
Carpenter and Mr. James Clement for their Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine
helpful comments concerning an earlier draft of 71(9, Suppl.):A37-43, 2000.
this paper.
6

"
"7","12. Kanas, N. Psychiatric issues affecting long Shuttle/Mir: Psychosocial countermeasures.
duration space missions. Aviation, Space, and Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine
Environmental Medicine 69:1211-1216, 1998. 73:607-611, 2002.
13. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Gushin, V., Weiss, 23. MeNair, D.M., Lorr, M., and Droppleman,
D.S., Grund, E.M., Flynn, C., Kozerenko, 0., L.F. Proﬁle 0fM00d States Manual (revised),
Sled, A. and Marmar, C.R. Asthenia—Does it 1992 ed. San Diego, CA: Educational and
exist in space? Psychosomatic Medicine, IndustrialTesting Service, 1992.
63:874-880,2001. 24. Moos, R..H. Group Environment Scale
14. Bechtel, RB. and Berning, A. The third Manual, 3rd ed. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting
quarter phenomenon: Do people experience Psychologists Press; 1994.
discomfort after stress has passed? In: From 25. Moos R.H. Work Environment Scale
Antarctica t0 Outer Space. (Harrison, A.A., Manual, 3rd ed. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting
Clearwater, Y.A., and McKay, C.P., Eds.). New Psychologists Press; 1994.
York: Springer-Verlag, 1991. 26. Liang, K-Y and Zeger, S.L. Longitudinal
15. Sandal, G.M., Vaernes, R. and Ursin, H. data analysis using generalized linear models.
Interpersonal relations during simulated space Biometrica 73:13-22, 1986.
missions. Aviation, Space, and Environmental 27. Litte11, R.C., Milliken, G.A., Stroup, W.W.,
Medicine 66:617-624, 1995. and Wolﬁnger, R.D. SAS System for Mixed
16. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Weiss, D. 8., Models. Cary,NC: SAS Institute Inc., 1996.
Grund, E.M., Gushin, V., Kozerenko, 0., Sled, 28. Benjamini, Y. and Hochberg, Y. Controlling
A., Bostrom, A. and Marmar, C.R. the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful
Crewmember and ground personnel interactions approach to multiple testing. Journal of the
over time during Shuttle/Mir space missions. Royal Statistical Sociely57z289-300,1995.
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 29. Gushin, V.I., Yusupova, A., and Popova, I.
72:453-461, 2001. CreW-ground control communication styles:
17. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V. Grund, E.M., Preliminary results. IAC-04-G.5.a.06. 55th
Weiss, D.S., Gushin, V., Kozerenko, 0, Sled, International Astronautieal Congress.
and Marmar, C.R. Human interactions in space: Vancouver, B.C., Canada, October 4-8, 2004.
Results from Shuttle/Mir. Aeta Astronautiea Paris: International Astronautieal Federation,
49:243-260, 2001. 2004.
18. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Grund, E. M. 30. Gushin, V.I., Pustynnikova, J.M., and
Gushin, V., Weiss, D.S., Kozerenko, 0., Sled, A. Smirnova, T.M. Interrelations between the small
and Marmar, C.R. Social and cultural issues isolated groups With homogeneous and
during Shuttle/Mir space missions. Acta heterogeneous composition. Journal ofHuman
Astronautiea 47:647-655, 2000. Performance in Extreme Environments 6(1):26-
19. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Grund, E.M., 33,2001.
Gushin, V., Weiss, D.S., Kozerenko, 0., Sled, A. 31. Committee on Space Biology and Medicine.
and Marmar, C.R. Interpersonal and cultural Space Studies Board. Commission on Physical
issues involving crews and ground personnel Sciences, Mathematics, and Application.
during Shuttle/Mir space missions. Aviation, National Research Council. A Strategy for
Space, and Environmental Medicine Research in Space Bilogy and Medicine in the
71(9,Supp1.):A11-16,2000. New Century. Washington, D.C.: National
20. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Grund, E.M., Academy Press, 1998.
Weiss, D.S., Gushin, V., Bostrom, A., 32. Ritsher, J.B. Cultural factors and the
Kozerenko, 0., Sled, A., and Marmar, C.R. International Space Station. Aviation, Space,
Psychosocial issues in space: Results from and Environmental Medicine 76(6, Section
Shuttle/Mir. Gravitational and Space Biology II):B135-B144, 2005.
Bulletin 14(2): 35-45, 2001.
21. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Grund, E.M.,
Weiss, D.S., Gushin, V., Kozerenko, 0., Sled,
A., and Marmar, C.R. Human interactions
during Shuttle/Mir space missions. Acta
Astronautiea 48:777-784, 2001.
22. Kanas, N., Salnitskiy, V., Grund, E.M.,
Gushin, V., Weiss, D.S., Kozerenko, 0., Sled,
A., and Marmar, C.R. Lessons learned from

7

"
