"","x"
"1","The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-7/W3, 2015
36th International Symposium on Remote Sensing of Environment, 11—15 May 2015, Berlin, Germany
DATA COLLECTION FOR DISASTER RESPONSE FROM THE INTERNATIONAL
SPACE STATION
W. L. Stefanov a’b’* , C. A. Evans b
a International Space Station Program Science Ofﬁce, NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, USA —
william.l.stefanov@nasa.gov
b Astromaterials Research and Exploration Science Division, Exploration Integration and Science Directorate, NASA J ohnson Space
Center, Houston, Texas, USA — cindy.evans-l@nasa.gov
KEY WORDS: Space Station, Hyperspectral, Imager, Astronaut, Hazards, International Charter
ABSTRACT:
Remotely sensed data acquired by orbital sensor systems has emerged as a Vital tool to identify the extent of damage resulting from a
natural disaster, as well as providing near-real time mapping support to response efforts on the ground and humanitarian aid efforts.
The International Space Station (188) is a unique terrestrial remote sensing platform for acquiring disaster response imagery. Unlike
automated remote—sensing platforms it has a human crew; is equipped with both internal and externally-mounted remote sensing
instruments; and has an inclined, low-Earth orbit that provides variable Views and lighting (day and night) over 90 percent of the
inhabited surface of the Earth. As such, it provides a useful complement to autonomous sensor systems in higher altitude polar orbits.
NASA remote sensing assets on the station began collecting International Charter, Space and Major Disasters, also known informally
as the International Disaster Charter (IDC) response data in May 2012. Since the start of IDC response in 2012, and as of late March
2015, there have been 123 IDC activations; NASA sensor systems have collected data for thirty-four of these events. Of the successful
data collections, eight involved two or more 188 sensor systems responding to the same event. Data has also been collected by
International Partners in response to natural disasters, most notably J AXA and Roscosmos/Energia through the Urugan program.
1. INTRODUCTION volcanic eruptions, that a polar orbiting platform might miss due
to its orbit parameters. As such, it provides a useful complement
1-1 International Space Station to free-ﬂyer based, sun-synchronous sensor systems in higher
0 0 0 . altitude polar orbits.
Natural disasters — including such events as tropical storms,
earthquakes, ﬂoods, volcanic eruptions, and wildﬁres — effect
hundreds of millions of people worldwide, and also cause billions _ _ _ -.
of dollars (USD) in damage to the global economy. Remotely MW _
sensed data acquired by orbital sensor systems has emerged as a “ﬂ?""- __- :1“
Vital tool to identify the extent of damage resulting from a natural ' '1” ' «+1
disaster, as well as providing near-real time mapping support to _,.-_ elm!-
response efforts on the ground and humanitarian aid efforts. The ,. -_,_, $3; . ' '_ :5,""
International Space Station (188) is a unique terrestrial remote T‘ “?J'J'fl‘: L51:
sensing platform for acquiring disaster response imagery. Unlike *1 '15: ' ' .- _: . '* 3+
automated remote—sensing platforms it has a human crew and is '5' 14:;
equipped with both internal and externally-mounted remote I.
sensing instruments.
The 188 has an inclined, equatorial low-Earth orbit that provides _
variable Views and lighting (day and night) over 90 percent of the
inhabited surface of the Earth (Fig. l). The orbit allows for nadir
Viewing of the Earth surface between approximately 52 degrees
North and South latitudes at altitudes ranging from 350 to 455
km above sea level. The 188 orbit is sun-asynchronous, such that
for a given observation target there will be similar illumination Figure l. The inclined equatorial orbit of the ISS (ground tracks
conditions for a 3-4 day period every 90 days (Vanderbloemen, shown in gold).
Stefanov, and Evans 2014). These orbital characteristics are
important as they allow sensors on the 188 to image the surface 1.2 International Disaster Charter
at different times of day and night, providing the opportunity to
capture processes that occur at times other than at a ﬁxed While several nations have well-developed terrestrial remote
equator crossing time as it typical with polar orbiting, sun- 56115ng programs and assets for Earth observation data
synchronous platforms_ The 188 orbit also provides the collection (e.g., National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
opportunity to acquire data for short-duration events, such as or NASA; European Space Agency, or BSA; Japan Aerospace
* Corresponding author
This contribution has been peer—reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives—XL-7-W3-851-2015 851

"
"2","The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-7/W3, 2015
36th International Symposium on Remote Sensing of Environment, 11—15 May 2015, Berlin, Germany
Exploration Agency, or JAXA) many developing nations do not image frames sensitive to the Visible green, Visible red, and near-
have ready access to such resources. The International Charter, infrared wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum. The
Space and Major Disasters (also known as the “International individual frames were then combined to form a single
Disaster Charter”, or IDC; http://www.disasterscharter.org/) rnultispectral (three-band) image.
addresses this disparity. The Charter was initiated by BSA and The ISSAC demonstrated its capabilities for disaster response
the French space agency CNES (Centre national d'études soon after it became operational by collecting images of ﬂooding
spatiales) in 1999, and became operational in 2000. It is an from the Souris River near Minot, North Dakota, on June 24,
agreement between agencies of several countries to provide 2011 (Fig. 2). Because ISSAC imagery is recorded in
remotely sensed data of natural disasters to requesting countries wavelengths similar to Landsat, scientists could easily compare
in support of disaster response. the ISSAC data with earlier Landsat data of the Souris River
valley, clearly illustrating the extent of ﬂooding in and around

The initial United States agency to become a signatory to the Minot.
IDC was the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
or NOAA. The NOAA subsequently delegated authority for _ _ LanmeM mﬂﬁﬂmn m
interaction with the IDC to the United States Geological Survey ”mm If."" ""M EM"" .'
(USGS). When an IDC request or “activation” is received, the E
USGS notiﬁes the science teams for NASA instrurnents—both
on free-ﬂyer robotic platforms and the ISS—with targeting
information for data collection. The ISS became a “participating
platform” in NASA data collection efforts in 2012. All data 03:33: _
collection is performed on a “best effort” basis, in that response ..
to an IDC activation by any given sensor is not mandatory; rather Minnt
data is collected only if it does not conﬂict with the sensor’s
prime mission activities or operational constraints. ' -
2. NASA ISS EARTH OBSERVATIONS SYSTEMS FOR I

DISASTER RESPONSE anl :4: untw nub ISSAC ﬂﬁfl-ﬂfiﬂll ”
2.1 NASA ISS Earth Observation Systems t 4
Following completion of ISS assembly, NASA remote sensing
assets began collecting IDC response data in May 2012. .
International Partner ISS remote sensing systems are not ﬂiﬁﬂf
discussed here, as each Partner has developed their own protocol .. ""H"" _
for data collection and delivery in response to IDC activations. Minut -
The initial NASA ISS sensor systems available to respond to 1* .
IDC activations included the ISS Agricultural Carnera (ISSAC); '
the Crew Earth Observations (CEO) Facility; and the |_-
Hyperspectral Irnager for the Coastal Oceans (HICO). The '
ISSAC completed its primary mission and was removed from the Figure 2. ISSAC data collected on 24 June 2011 in dicating
Winslow Observational Research Facility (WORF) in the US ﬂooded regions near Minot, North Dakota (bottom). A pre-
Destiny Laboratory Module in January 2013' ﬂooding Landsat Thematic Mapper image (top) is provided for
The ISSAC was replaced by the very high resolution ISS comparison.
SERVIR Environmental Research and Visualization System 2.1.2 Crew Earth Observations Facility: Astronauts have
(ISERV) Pathﬁnder, 318.0 installed in the WORF' The ISERY been photographing the Earth surface from low Earth orbit since
completed its pr1rnaryrn1ss1on in December 2014, but remains in the Mercury missions of the 1960s to the present ISS crews
stowage on the ISS for potential future use. The HICO completed (S te fanoV e t al 2013) The as tronaut photography datase t
its mission in late 2014 following failure Of a core processing (available on1ine9at http:.//eol.jsc.nasa gov) covers much of the
unit after a strong solar storrn. Three new external sensor earth’s 1an d and coas ta1 surface .as well as atmospheric
systems have been recently installed on the ISS; the High phenomena such as hurricanes ancal aurora. Unlike unmanned
Deﬁnition Earth Viewing (HDEV) Video system, Cloudeerosol free-ﬂyer sate11ite-based sensors, astronauts on the ISS use
Transport System (CATS)’ and ISS‘RaPIdSCAT' Whlle these digital cameras to image the earth, rather than rnission-speciﬁc
new systems are not CXPCCth to routinely. respond to IDC instruments. Such equipment limits astronaut photographs to the
activations, they are described below as they w111 collect data that Visible and near-infrared wavelengths in three bands (red, green,
may be Of interelst K; the natural hazards. cornrnunity (e.g. storrn blue, and/or near-infrared with appropriate ﬁlters), similar to
systems, tropica cyc ones, volcanic eruptions). what is collected by aerial photograph surveys (Fig. 3). A wide

, variety of both ﬁxed and zoom lenses are available for use with
2'1'1' ISS Agrlcultural CamerazThe ISSAC was developed the current Nikon D4 cameras, and the handheld nature of data
by students and faculty at the University of North Dakota, and its collection results in a wide range of spatial resolution (N3
pr1rnepurpose was to COHCCF data in support Of agr 1cu1tnra1 rn/pixel to >50 rn/pixel) and look angles (nadir to highly oblique
act1V1t1es and related research in the upper rnidwest of the United Views). Earth observation data is acquired through nadir-Viewing
States (Changyong et a1., 2014)‘, The sensor system .used. two windows in the US Destiny Laboratory Module, Russian Service
digital still cameras equipped w1th ﬁlters to collect 1nd1V1dua1 Module, and from the ISS Cupola.

This contribution has been peer—reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-7-W3-851-2015 852

"
"3","The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-7/W3, 2015
36th International Symposium on Remote Sensing of Environment, 11—15 May 2015, Berlin, Germany
The presence of astronauts on-board the ISS allows for a :2 3 ~3 ',
“serendipity factor”, in that the crew can observe a developing ""' ' 1 .1
event from orbit and collect data immediately, without requiring ‘ : : . . i x"";
direction or upload of targeting instructions/cornrnands from a ﬁg,"" . . A - ‘ v ..
ground system. The Crew Earth Observations ground support ,. .01? , ‘, 3 -- f- ', , 2 . . -
team also provides speciﬁc targeting information to the crew for "" . ' ~' . '-':§Y‘ . I
ofﬁcial IDC activation targets (described in section 3.0 below). A . f, r, ' ‘
disadvantage of handheld digital imagery from the ISS is the lack ’ 9’? f, ""'
of native geolocation information; currently, individual images 2' ' '. ‘ ‘ '.
must be geolocated by hand using other georeferenced N ‘ ,5 , ,f i ’
information such as Google Earth imagery or Landsat data. This
limits the immediate usefulness of CEO data for disaster Figure 4. Subset of HICO scene acquired on 16 October 2013 in
response, however it has also been the only data collected from response to IDC activation for ﬂooding in India following
the ISS for some IDC events under the best-effort paradigm. Tropical Cyclone Phailin.
2.1.4 ISS SERVIR Environmental Research and
Visualization System Pathﬁnder: The ISERV irnager system is
internally mounted in the WORF, and includes a Canon EOS 7D
camera body mated to a Celestron 925 telescope tube and
Hyperstar 3 lens to achieve approximately 3 rn/pixel spatial
resolution Visible to near-infrared wavelength images. The
optical system is attached to a ground-cornrnanded (from the
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama)
mount that allows for 23 degrees of cross- and along-track
pointing for precision targeting of ground sites. The primary
mission of the ISERV was completed in December 2014,
however the system remains on-board the ISS in stowage for
K potential redeployment. The ISERV image dataset is accessible
N through an on1ine rnap tool at
http ://www. serVirglob a1.net/rnapresources/iserV/ .
Figure 3. Astronaut photograph ISSO36-E-34510 acquired on 21
August 2013 in response to IDC activation for ﬂooding of the ISERV was developed to support a joint NASA/US Agency for
Arnur River in eastern Russia. International Development (USAID) project known as SERVIR.
The word “serVir” is Spanish for “to serve”. The SERVIR
2.1.3 Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Oceans: project (http://www.nasa.gov/rnission_pages/serVir/) provides
HICO was the ﬁrst spaceborne, hyperspectral irnager optimized satellite data and tools to environmental decision makers in
for environmental characterization of the coastal ocean and large developing countries and operates Via regional “hubs” in
lakes. It was an inexpensive, Visible through near-infrared Nairobi, Kenya; Kathmandu, Nepal; and Panama City, Panama.
hyperspectral system (128 bands at N 90 rn/pixel spatial ISERV’s primary targets are areas threatened by or already
resolution) that was sponsored by the US Ofﬁce of Naval experiencing ﬂoods, landslides, forest ﬁres, or other disasters.
Research and Department of Defence-Space Technology The images can be used to monitor events, evaluate damage
Program using mostly commercial off—the-shelf components on extent and direct evacuation and disaster relief efforts. The
an accelerated build-and-ﬂy-to-ISS schedule (Kappus et 31., in ISERV has also provided useful data for IDC response, and other
press; Moses et a1., 2015). The system began operation in 2009, calls for imagery from the ISS to support ground relief and
and collected over 10,000 scenes in support of various Principal recovery efforts (Fig. 5)-
Investigator-led science proposals prior to an instrument ""Swami? 3 ,3 . «.3? . , ,3 , [Ms
processor failure in September 2014. 3’ “,3? ‘2 "" \ t '
”1““... :2 ""V 7 .. ’ ‘45""
3’ 4*?“ ' 1.1 i..:-'«*.. :r:"":f’.:.:_-5 1»- \\”«_w‘ 4'12""
The sensor system was mounted externally on the J apan ??wauazv‘: 3:: v4 .?773'5“f’§7§éi?ilg§; “f \\\§f;'-,;:'E:::£
Experiment Module Exposed Facility (J EM-EF) which provided gnggﬁfggé::g:iﬁmgfﬁ% ‘r¥:': §~31§§ij§§
nadir Viewing opportunities. The HICO could also point cross- “Fqé-&ﬁa¥?7:”rﬁt,$h*&yjhr 3 3 3 3 \ 37 3:
track 45 degrees to port and 30 degrees to starboard. Following ,{—”""=,a;vii;rr,.‘-p : ‘1; ,3 14:3??? [2,“...2‘!
completion of Navy goals for HICO in late 2012, NASA i"" .3”: l‘éiﬂdéi},vr ‘3‘; "" 0' '
assumed sponsorship of the sensor to continue its operation on ,_ , . ' A ~“ fl"" s 2853.37” ‘x; 1;? ' "" ""
ISS. As such, the HICO also became a participating sensor for “_ .. ”i3 F3335. “Eﬁk’ﬁ f
IDC activations (Fig. 4). The HICO dataset is available from J93 :3 ' ‘f- W3,£,.ﬂ}g3é‘:'dguiix i 4""):
websites maintained by Oregon State University g; 3 ' 3 3:97:35” 3.1,: b;°€{'%11;§;-:;Mi -tﬂ . 3 ‘—
(http://hico.coas.oregonstate.edu/; original data cropped to 87 .7 t f- xﬁéi‘vwmfiirczgr '7 {/xt'k‘
bands) and the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s ~: : , 3; ~n?§,;;j; 1333f! * 39%
OceanColor Web site (http://oceancolor.gsfc.nasa.goV/crns/; full '3\.._ 35"":ggip‘f'15. “2.3,, n;
128-band data). ‘ 7 ijziq 15* :- i '7‘ N
Figure 5. ISERV scene used to map ﬂooding in Calgary, Alberta,
Canada on 22 June 2013. Red areas are ﬂooded.
This contribution has been peer—reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-7-W3-851-2015 853

"
"4","The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-7/W3, 2015
36th International Symposium on Remote Sensing of Environment, 11—15 May 2015, Berlin, Germany
2.1.5 High Deﬁnition Earth Viewing System: The High- commanded sensor targeting, the nugget is delivered to all
Deﬁnition Earth Viewing camera system participating NASA sensor teams for use in their operations.
(http://eol.jsc.nasa.gov/HDEV) includes four different _ _
commercial, high-deﬁnition cameras on the ESA Columbus jﬂwemm, mmfmwf‘rﬂmﬂ Wm""... 1.1""“...Wmu ....MHHSETLUW m. .mntnm
Module External Payload Facility. The investigation is assessing Iﬂﬂ'ﬁﬁﬂﬁfﬂﬂiﬁ3:195'35mmpmm'm $333.12???i'-Eﬁﬂf-Ei-Eiﬁ:L-Eﬂr'lulilﬂiﬂm um
camera quality while taking Earth imagery and the hardware’s ??wﬁrﬁﬁaetenﬁmn 'Iearr-adur He:?;Tltlﬂgﬂsi'ﬂmplt??'IL€$ZE$:3
ability to survive and function in the extreme thermal and |ﬁﬁmﬁﬂiﬂbﬂr-wﬁi' r1':1:EE:ﬁr:ifIii:[ﬁxiﬁlﬁéiﬂjﬁlfmﬁlﬁ 3::
radioactive environment of low—Earth orbit. The high-deﬁnition ”mm mmmr EmSTDTZ'EE'ﬂiﬂuﬂiﬂﬂiTngii'nmﬁfﬂ
(HD) cameras are oriented to provide different Views from the ELTEEE'E'EL'KA”ZT'LELL'EcaHannELnEme
188; one camera is pointed forward relative to the ISS orbit ﬂgﬁgﬁgjﬁgmﬂfﬂ ﬂﬁﬂlﬂﬂ'ﬂiﬂfu‘""
vector, one camera is pointed nadir, and two cameras are point W—mwﬂam—
aft relative to the ISS vector. “W” ”W""
A near real-time HD Video feed is downlinked from the station as ' .
each camera is cycled on for one orbit revolution. The feed may
be interrupted while the system is switching cameras, and no data
is transmitted while the ISS traverses the night-side of Earth, as hm I _ .
the camera light sensitivity is not sufﬁcient to record detailed * "" __ ”mm
surface patterns caused by city lights. While the HDEV Video :tﬂﬂm
feed has not yet been utilized for disaster response, it remains a
potential source of useful imagery for investigations of disaster-
causing events such as tropical cyclones or catastrophic volcanic Figure 6. Example Of IDC targeting “nugget” for an eruption Of
eruptions. Turrialba Volcano in Costa Rica.
2-1-6 Cloud-Aerosol Transport System: The Cloud Aerosol While there is no ofﬁcially designated time period of data
Transport System (http://cats.gsfc.nasa.gov/) is a LiDAR sensor collection associated with an IDC activation, the ESRS (in
that obtains measurements of atmospheric aerosols and clouds. agreement with the USGS) establishes a ten—day data collection
The sensor is mounted Oh the Japan Experiment Module window from the date of activation. If data is collected by a
Exposed Facility. Clouds and aerosols reﬂect a signiﬁcant NAS A 188 sensor system, it is reviewed by ESRS Staff for
proportion 0f the sun’s energy back to space, but their complex quality (e.g. cloud cover percentage, illumination, etc.) and
interaction in Earth’s atmosphere is not yet fully understood. delivered to the USGS for posting on their Hazards Data
Data from CATS will allow scientists to better assess the role Distribution System, or HDDS (http://hddsexplorer.usgs.goV/)
and impact 0f clouds and aerosols 0h Earth’s global energy and made available for download to the requesting agency and
budget and climate. the public. The 188 International Partners have their own
procedures for independently supporting IDC activations using
2-1-7 ISS-RapidSCAT: lSS-RapidSCAT monitors ocean their assets on 188, and there is currently no joint coordination
surface wind speed and direction to provide essential with N AS A 188 sensor teams.
measurements used in weather predictions, including hurricane
monitoring (http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/rnissions/iss-rapidscat/). 3.2 Results ofResponse from N AS A Sensor Systems
The sensor is mounted on the ESA Columbus Module External
Payload Facility, and measures the echo strength of microwaves Since the start of IDC response by NASA sensors on the 188 in
reﬂected off of the ocean surface. Several Views of the same sea May 2012 and as of this report, there have been 123 IDC
surface area provides radar return signals that can be used to activations; NASA sensor systems have collected data for thirty-
estirnate wind speed and direction. four of these events (Table 1). Of the thirty-four successful data
collections, eight involved 2 or more 188 sensor systems
3. NASA IDC RESPONSE responding to the same event. Data has also been collected by
International Partners in response to natural disasters, rnost
3-1 Sensor Team Notiﬁcation Process notably JAXA and Roscosrnos/Energia through the Urugan
. . program.
In the case of the 188, the Earth Solences and Remote Sens1ng
(ESRS) . Umt’ .part Of. 0&0“: Astrornaterials Research and Data delivered to requesting agencies through the USGS HDDS
Exploration Solence D1V1sion, .Exploration Integration. and is then used by those agencies to develop secondary products
Solence Directorate and supporting the 185 Program Solence useful for humanitarian response such as ﬂood rnaps. As of this
Office at NASA? Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, report, over 1000 images collected by NASA ISS sensor systems
receives notiﬁcation from the USGS that the ID(? has been have been downloaded from the HDDS (C. Gacke, USGS,
activated, together Wlth .any spec1f1c targeting information personal communication 2014), however speciﬁc information on
proV1ded by the. requesting agency. The ESRS team then the end users or products derived from those images is not
develops a target information Package or “nugget” that inclucles available. Nevertheless, the volume of data downloaded indicates
detailed target coord1nates0(p01nt Slte or polygon area), graphics that the 188 has assumed a valuable role in disaster response
illustrating the area of interest, and contextual information efforts and natural hazard research.
regarding the disaster event (Fig. 6). The nugget is intended to
support crew handheld camera data collection, so it also includes
detailed information on camera lenses, ISS windows, and desired
Viewing angles. As the information is also useful for ground-
This contribution has been peer—reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives—XL-7-W3-851-2015 854

"
"5","The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-7/W3, 2015
36th International Symposium on Remote Sensing of Environment, 11—15 May 2015, Berlin, Germany
Table 1. IDC Data Collection by NASA ISS Sensor Systems 4. CONCLUSION
Event Time CEO HICO ISERV ISSAC The 188 is a unique platform for disaster response in that it will
Floods, Russia 07/2012 have multiple users over its lifetime, a wide array of both active
(Krymsk) ---- and passive remote sensing systems, presence of a human crew
Fires, North --- . for recognition of evolving events and “on the ﬂy” data
Algeria collection, and that no single remote sensing system has a
Earthquake,1ran_--_ . permanent internal or external berth. This is well demonstrated
F100(ilsacamer00n_--_ . by the completion of the ISSAC and HICO missions, and the
Fires» Ecuador _n-_ installation of new sensors systems HDEV, ISS-RapidSCAT,
Floods» Pakismn _--_ . and CATS. NASA and the International Partners continue to
F109ds’weSt --- 0 develop the remote sensing capabilities of the 188 through
Ame? selection of new instruments. The Center for Advancement of
32:31am Sandy, --- 0 Science In Space, or CASIS, also supports development of non-
H . S d “/2012 NASA sensor systems on 188 for other US agencies, academia,
umcane an y, , , , , , ,
USA ---- ’ and commerc1al/1ndustr1al ent1t1es. This scheduled turnover
Floods 01/2013 provides for development of new remote sensing capabilities
Mozarnbique ---- relevant to disaster response—as well as both research and
Copahue Volcano, 05/2013 applied science. This represents a signiﬁcant contribution to
Chile ---- continuance and enhancement of the NASA mission to
Floods, Germany _--— investigate changes on our home planet, and provide beneﬁts to
FloodS, --- humanity from the International Space Station.
Uttarakhand, India
----
Cam“? ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
- -II-
:Tﬁheii: (13113;: _nn— £151.13th woullglslilhe to thaénh the (1)8; Earth Observations
_ _ g roup, rogram c1ence ice, NASA ISS Earth
Floodmg’ Paletan _n-_ observation sensor teams, and United States Geological Survey
213$;Zi’9USA ---- Hazards Data Distrihution System team for supporting the use of
Cyclone Phailin, ---- 188 data for international disaster charter response efforts.
India
Wildﬁres, 10/201 3
E::$::,V1etnam _--— Changyong, D., Xiaodong, Z., Huadong, G., Chunming, H. and
Cambodia ---- Ming, L., 2014. Improving the geolocation algorithm for sensors
Cyclone Haiyan, 11/2013 on-board the 188: Effect of drift angle. Remote Sensing, 6, pp.
Philippines ---- 4647-4659-
MH 370 Search Kappus, M., Ackleson, S., Bowles, J., Corson, M., Davis, C.,
Forest Fires, Chile _n-n Gao, B-C., Gould, R., Korwan, D., Lewis, D., Lucke, R., Montes,
Flooding, ---- M., Nahorniak, J ., Patterson, K., and Wagner, E. Hyperspectral
Afghanistan Imager for the Coastal Ocean (HICO) on the International Space
Flooding» Balkans _--— Station (188). In: Shen-En, Q. (ed.), Optical Payloadsfor Space
Flooding, Vietnam _-n_ Missions. J ohn Wiley & Sons, New York. In press.
- -II-
Ramasun’ Chma Moses, W. J ., Bowles, J . H., and Corson, M. R., 2015. Expected
F100d1ng,northern 08/2014 . . . . . .
In dia ---- improvements in the quantitative remote sens1ng of optically
F100 (1 and 08/2014 complex waters with the use of an optically fast hyperspectral
Landslide,Panama ---- spectrometer — a modeling study. Sensors, 15(3), pp. 6152-
Bangladesh
Flooding, Sri 12/2014 Stefanov, W.L., Evans, C.A., Runco, S.K., Wilkinson, M.J., and
Lanka ---- Willis, K., 2013. Astronaut photography: Handheld camera
Flooding, Malawi _n-_ imagery from low Earth orbit. In: Pelton, J .N., Madry, S., and
Note: CEO = Crew Earth Observations Facility; HICO = Camacho—Lara, S. (eds), Handbook of Satellite Applications.
Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Oceans; ISERV = 188 Springer, New York, pp. 683-728.
SERVIR Environmental Research and Visualization System;
ISSAC : 188 Agricultural Camera. Time is month/year Of IDC Vanderbloemen, L.A., Stefanov, W.L., and Evans, C.A., 2014. A
activation. researcher’s guide to: International Space Station earth
observations. NASA Publication NP-2013-06-011-JSC, Lyndon
B. J ohnson Space Center, Houston, TX, USA.
This contribution has been peer—reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-7-W3-851-2015 855

"
