"","x"
"1","64th International Astronautical Congress, Beijing, China. 2013. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not
subj ect to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
IAC-13.B3.3.4
International Space Station Accomplishments Update: Scientiﬁc Discovery, Advancing Future Exploration, and
Beneﬁts Brought Home to Earth
Ms. Tracy Thumm
Mission and Program Integration Contract, Barrios Technology, J ohnson Space Center, Houston, TX, United
States, tracythumni- 1 @nasa. gov
Dr. Julie A. Robinson, Dr. Camille Alleyne and Mr. Pete Hasbrook
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)/J0hns0n Space Center, Houston, TX, United
States, julie.a.r0bins0n@nasa. gov, camille.alleyne@nasa.gov, pete.hasbr00k@nasa. gov
Ms. Susan Mayo
Mission and Program Integration Contract, Barrios Technology, J ohnson Space Center, Houston, TX, United
States, susan.may0@nasa.g0v
Dr. Perry J ohnson-Green and Dr. Nicole Buckley
Canadian Space Agency, Saint-Hubert, Quebec, Canada, nicole.buckley@asc-csa.geca,
pergj0hns0n-green@asc-esa.geca
Dr. George Karabadzhak,
K0r01y0V(M0scow reg), Russia, gﬂ<@tsniimash.ru
Mr. Shigeki Kamigaichi and Ms. Sayaka Umemura
J apan Aerospace Exploration Agency (J AXA), Ibaraki, J apan, kamigaichi.shigeki@jaxa.jg,
umemura.sayaka@jaxa.jp
Dr. Igor V. Sorokin
S.P. KoroleV Rocket and Space Corporation Energia, KoroleV, Russia, igor.v.s0r0kin@rsce.ru
Dr. Martin Zell and Mr. Eric Istasse
European Space Agency (ESA), Noordwijk, The Netherlands, martin.ze11@esa.int, eric.istasse@esa.int
Dr. J ean Sabbagh and Mr. Salvatore Pignataro
ASI, Rome, Italy, jean.sabbagh@asi.it, salvatore.p_ignatar0@asi.it
Throughout the history of the International Space Station (188), crews on board have conducted a variety of
scientiﬁc research and educational activities. Well into the second year of full utilization of the ISS laboratory, the
trend of scientiﬁc accomplishments and educational opportunities continues to grow. More than 1500 investigations
have been conducted on the 188 since the ﬁrst module launched in 1998, with over 700 scientiﬁc publications. The
188 provides a unique environment for research, international collaboration and educational activities that beneﬁt
humankind. This paper will provide an up to date summary of key investigations, facilities, publications, and beneﬁts
from 188 research that have developed over the past year. Discoveries in human physiology and nutrition have
enabled astronauts to return from 188 with little bone loss, even as scientists seek to better understand the new puzzle
of “ocular syndrome” affecting the Vision of up to half of astronauts. The geneLAB campaign will unify life
sciences investigations to seek genomic, proteomic, and metabolomics 0f the effect of microgravity on life as a
whole. Combustion scientists identiﬁed a new “cold ﬂame” phenomenon that has the potential to improve models of
efﬁcient combustion back on Earth. A signiﬁcant number of instruments in Earth remote sensing and astrophysics
are providing new access to data or nearing completion for launch, making 188 a signiﬁcant platform for
understanding of the Earth system and the universe.
In addition to multidisciplinary research, the ISS partnership conducts a myriad of student led research
investigations and educational activities aimed at increasing student interest in science, technology, engineering and
IAC-13-B3.3.4 Page 1 0f9

"
"2","64th International Astronautical Congress, Beijing, China. 2013. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not
subj ect to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
mathematics (STEM). Over the past year, the ISS partnership compiled new statistics of the educational impact of
the ISS on students around the world. More than 43 million students, from kindergarten to graduate school, With
more than 28 million teachers located in 49 countries have participated in some aspect of ISS educational activities.
These activities include student—developed investigations, education competitions, and classroom versions of ISS
investigations, participating in ISS investigator experiments, ISS hardware development, educational demonstrations,
and cultural activities. Through the many inquiry—based educational activities, students and teachers are encouraged
to participate in the ISS program thus motivating the next generation of students to pursue careers in STEM.
INTRODUCTION decades, The Canadian Space Agency (CSA), European
Space Agency (ESA), J apan Aerospace Exploration
The International Space Station (ISS) is a unique Agency (JAXA), Federal Space Agency of Russia
laboratory that enables research in life, physical, Earth (Roscosmos) and the National Aeronautics and Space
and space sciences, technology development and Administration (NASA) have worked together to
educational activities. Well into the second year of full assemble the ISS and conduct research on this orbiting
utilization of the ISS laboratory, the trend of scientiﬁc laboratory. Collaboration is a hallmark of research
accomplishments and educational opportunities investigations in order to maximize available
continues to grow. This paper Will provide a summary resourcesm
of key investigations, facilities, publications, and
beneﬁts from ISS research that have developed over the Between December 1998 through March 2013, the
past year. We Will also look at new developments for partnership has conducted more than 1500 scientiﬁc
ISS and how students from around the world beneﬁt investigations, technology demonstrations and
from ISS. educational activities (Figure 1). Over 1600
investigators from 69 countries have participated in
THE ORBITING LABORATORY research and educational activities on the ISS.
International Partnership Over the last two
Research Discipline of ISS Investigations By Partner Agency:
Expeditions 0-34
December 1998 - March 2013
W I I I I I
90%| I I I I
80%| I I I I
70% 7- - I Biology and Biotechnology
I I . I I I Earth and Space Science
60% N 7' I Educational Activities
I I I I I
50% I Physical Science
I I ITechnology
40% I I I I I
30%| I I I I
I I I I
10% ,
0% I I I I I
CSA ESA JAXA NASA/U.S. Roscosmos
26 228 440 444 364
Figure 1: This graph shows the breakdown of investigations by scientiﬁc disciple and educational activities across the ﬁve ISS partner agencies.
IAC—13—B3.3.4 Page 2 of9

"
"3","64th International Astronautical Congress, Beijing, China. 2013. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not
subject to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
Research Results The microgravity environment on
the 188 provides unique laboratory conditions that The NASA 188 Program identiﬁes annually key
cannot be reproduced on Earth. The scientiﬁc discoveries and applications stemming from 188
disciplines studied on the 188 include: biology and Research. These achievements are honored at the
biotechnology; Earth and space sciences; human American Astronautical Society (AAS) 188 Research
research; physical science; technology development and and Development Conferencem (Table 1).
demonstration. Results from science and technological
activities may contribute to applications on Earth, Human Health.
expand our knowledge and help prepare humankind for Many different aspects of human health are studied
the next step in exploration. [2] in the unique environment of the 188. New results are
emerging on bone loss, indicating signiﬁcant progress
As of March 2013, over 700 journal publications on this problem that has plagued astronauts since
describe ISS researchm. The top 5 journals, based on Gemini.
Eigenfactor®[4] that have published 188 research are:
Nature, Proceeding of the National Academy ofScience Bone loss is a major concern for humans, whether in
of the United States of America, Physical Review microgravity or on Earth. For the ﬁrst time, a recent
Letters, Journal of Biological Chemistry, and PLOS study found that 188 crew members whose caloric
ONE. Non-journal publications attributed to 18$ intake met their energy needs combined with Vitamin D
utilization include nearly 200 conference proceedings supplementation and high-intensity resistive exercises
and 40 reports and product publications. did not experience decreases in bone mass density
typically observed. The resistive exercises were
RESEARCH THAT BENEFITS HUMAN KIND conducted Via the Advanced Resistive Exercise Device
(ARED), allowing for loads up to 6001b (1675N)
The [SS Beneﬁts for Humczrzz'ly[5 1, published in (Figure 2). Bone-speciﬁc alkaline phosphatase increased
2012[2], provides information on several 188 research towards the end of the mission and for the 30 days post-
investigations that have beneﬁtted human kind in the landing. The results are relevant to the treatment of
areas of Human Health, Earth Observation and Disaster osteoporosis on Earth because crewmembers as subjects
Responses, and Global Education. There have been do not have the other complicating factors that can
additional beneﬁts identiﬁed since this initial confuse other studies. The interest of these ﬁndings for
publication including new health beneﬁts and physical researchers studying osteoporosis on Earth is indicated
science breakthroughs that expand the fundamental by the role of one of the papers as a cover story for the
knowledge of physics. Journal ofBone and Mineral Research.[7]
Discoveries in Microgravity Bone Loss Thornas Lang, Ph.D
Joyce Keyak, Ph.D.
Scott M Smith, Ph.D.
Adrian LeBlanc, Ph.D.
-_-
Peter Cavanagh, Ph.D.
Earth Science Ocean Protection (HICO)
Materials
Education
Hubertus Thomas, Ph.D.
Table 1. Honorees of ISS Achievement Recognition awarded at the 2nd annual American Astronautical Society (AAS) 188
Research and Development Conference[6].
IAC-13-B3.3.4 Page 3 of9

"
"4","64th International Astronautical Congress, Beijing, China. 2013. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not
subject to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
—-  , x ' '11 .-
‘t t: . . -. ’\""“ .7 V} '5‘} .. \i |-
,"";:,‘ ‘ 5% t mifsu'( ""I ‘ . ttlﬂ IE;
\\ e: m - = .
\ \xtggii T._r-‘i;ir3 ’ .igtr e'e’ l1
'- Ia“. '\ - , ' "" '57 .
z: : ~ m ' \‘I‘ 7 ‘1‘ '
\ K-m aw- a ~ ' 5 ~ -
|SSO22E081587
Figure 2: NASA astronaut Jeffrey Williams, Expedition 22
commander, exercises using the Advanced Resistive Exercise Device
(ARED) in the Tranquility node of the International Space Station. Figure 3. Ignition Of 4.5mm droplet on tethering ﬁbers
ImageCredit1NASA. (crossed ﬁbers shown as glowing lines) developing into a
large weak ﬂame which quickly radiatively extinguishes (t =
Preventing 1055 Of overall bone mass is the 10.8 seconds). This is followed by period of low-temperature
beginning of the story. To evaluate risk of fracture, burning (~ 2 seconds) with no Visible ﬂame, which is then
advanced imaging techniques, such as dual-energy X- followed by a brief return to high-temperature burning marked
ray absorptiometry (DXA) and quantitative computed by a ﬂame burSt (laSting abOUt 1-5 seconds at t = 12-9
tomography (QCT), were used to evaluate bone density seconds). This cycle repeated once, until the fuel droplet was
and architecture. Early studies data was used to predict Completely eehsumed' (NASA)'
the amount of bone loss expected for each crewmember. . .
With the addition of QCT scans, bone geometry has Nanoparticles can be used 1h the absence of
been evaluated to determine bone strength and fracture sedimentation to help 1h the Sthdy of advanced
risk. Recommendations for using both types of imaging, materials. For the InSPACE-2 experiment, two distinct
resistive exercise, proper nutrition and pharmaceuticals particle greWth processes were .observed: one where
(such as alendronate) to reduce bone loss have been particle-rich and particle-poor regions form and become
released by the N AS A Bone Summit panel. [8] ""trapped"", and the other where the system-spanmng
structure suddenly collapses and particle columns form.
Physical Sciences. These two processes were separated by a distinct
Combustion research that is taking place on the ISS boundary that depended on the magnetic ﬁeld strength
evaluates how various fuels burn in microgravity. As and magnetic frequency, and results demonstrated that
part of the Flame Extinguishing Experiment (FLEX), energy barriers preventing eollmdal phase trans1tion ean
scientists observed never-before-seen dual modes of be overcome by changing the magnetic ththg
combustion and extinction when using heptane droplets frequency and forces. The experiments showed that 1h
approximately 3mm in size. A nominal, “hot” ﬂame these gel systems, grayity plays a dominant role arid
was seen during the ﬁrst combustion/extinction. The Wethd SIOWIY. compress and deform the gel structures 1h
droplet continued to experience dynamic vaporization Slmhar experiments performed on Earth. 1h space these
after the traditional ﬂame extinguished; researchers structures can be maintained as long as themagnetic
believe that this second mode was sustained by a lower- forces are applied. Through better understanding of the
temperature, soot-free “cool” ﬂame.[9] (Figure 3) stable and unstable phase behaV1or 1n the absence of
gravitational stresses, these results demonstrate how
This unexpected discovery led researchers to colloidal suspensions may be harnessedin the creation
examine n-octane and decane fuels where they found of umquematerials and electro-mechamcal deV1ees by
similar two-stage burning. Applications of these new ht'fgtpulatmg the magnetic forces holding them intact.
discoveries include modiﬁcations in numerical models
that predict ﬂame, fuel and combustion behaviors; and
could lead to pollution reduction and better gas mileage Complex plasma research has been conducted on the
in combustion engines on Earth. ISS through a collaboration w1th BSA and Roscosmos
with the Plasma Krysta1-3 Plus (PK-3 Plus)
IAC-13-B3.3.4 Page 4 of9

"
"5","64th International Astronautical Congress, Beijing, China. 2013. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not
subject to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
investigation over a period of seven years. Complex however, the AMS-02 data shows a decrease followed
plasmas are of interest in fundamental science, since the by a rise. AMS scientists ﬁnd that the positron fraction
microparticles, which are highly charged in the plasma, increases from roughly 5% at an energy of 10 giga-
show interesting phenomena due to their electrostatic electron volts (GeV) to more than 15% at an energy 35
interaction such as the formation of crystalline times as high.[“]
structures (plasma crystal). Since the particles can easily
be observed by charged coupled devices (CCD) FUTURE ISS ENDEAVORS
cameras, complex plasmas serve as ideal model systems
for other many-body systems in physics. Complex (or Over the next few years, there will be new
dusty) plasmas play also an important role in approaches to research for the 188. The geneLAB
astrophysics, e.g. planet formation, and in technological campaign will harness bio-informatics in support of life
applications, e.g. microchip production using plasma sciences. A database of genomic, proteomic, and
etching. Furthermore, cold plasma has a potentially a metabolomics information from a variety of life science
myriad of applications to beneﬁt humans on Earth and experiments will be created to provide a resource for the
future space exploration. One area of application is study of space effects on life as a whole. 188 research
wound healing. Cold atmospheric plasma (CAP) can be data stored in geneLAB would allow researchers who
applied to temperature sensitive surfaces including skin would not normally have opportunities to participate in
and mucosa where it effectively inactivates bacteria, 188 research to access relevant data. This could lead to
fungi, Viruses and spores. In ground studies, CAP can ground-breaking science, increased application for life
inactivate a number of bacteria including science data from space and take advantage of new bio-
Staphylococcus aureus, Methicillin-resistant molecular research technologies.
Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus puilus, Escherichia
6011', to name a few. Through this knowledge, CAP can In material sciences, the ElectroMagnetic Levitator
be used for hygienic applications to destroy the bacteria (EML) is a multi-user facility for the melting and
before it causes infection. This technology has been solidiﬁcation of conductive metals, alloys, or
used to disinfect chronic wounds. When plasma therapy semiconductors, in ultra-high vacuum, or in high-purity
was added onto patients’ treatment, a signiﬁcant germ gaseous atmospheres. This is especially important for
reduction was observed along with no adverse side reactive materials, whose properties can be very
effects or allergic reactions. [6] sensitive to contamination. The heating and positioning
of the sample are accomplished using electromagnetic
Astrophysics. ﬁelds generated by a coil system. Melting and
The Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer-02 (AMS- solidiﬁcation can both take place without containers,
02) was installed on the 188 in 2011. This state-of—the- thanks to the weightlessness environment. While EML
art particle physics detector measures cosmic rays and is has been developed between the BSA and the German
key in the search for antimatter and to gain an Space Agency (DLR), NASA will also signiﬁcantly
understanding of the nature of dark matterm AMS-02 contribute to its on-orbit resources requirements. The
is not only the largest and most complex scientiﬁc EML targetlaunch date is foreseen in 2014.
instrument installed on the International Space Station —
its magnetic ﬁeld is 4000 times stronger than Earth’s — In plasma physics, the next-generation of Plasma
but it is also the largest international collaboration on a Krystall experiment, PK-4, is soon heading to 188. This
single experiment in space. The multinational AMS instrument is a continuation of the successful
project has been mostly built by institutes in Italy, experiment PKE-Nefedov, operated on board of the 188
France, Germany, Spain, Portugal and Switzerland, from 2001 to 2005, and its successor PK-3 Plus,
together with the participation of US, China, Russia and launched to 188 in 2005 and operated presently, for
Taiwan. In all, the experiment’s team consists of 56 investigating complex plasmas (low-temperature
institutes from 16 countries. During the ﬁrst 18 months plasma, i.e. ionized gases, containing microparticles of
of data collection, AMS-02 collected more than 30 size of a few micrometers) under microgravity
billion cosmic rays; recent analysis of the positron and conditions. Whereas PKE-Nefedov and PK-3 Plus are
electron events indicate an excess in high-energy experiments using an RF-chaniber, PK-4 will study
positron fraction; this is even higher than previous complex plasmas in aDC-chamber. The DC-chamber is
measurements taken by the Payload for Antimatter particularly well suited for investigating the liquid state
Exploration and Light-nuclei Astrophysics (PAMELA). of complex plasmas at the kinetic and microscopic
The AMS-02 measurements conﬁrm excess amounts of level, in particular the transition from laminar ﬂow to
positrons compared to the number expected from known turbulence, nozzle ﬂow, lane formation, dust acoustic
processes. The prevalent theory suggested that positrons waves, and determination of the forces acting on the
levels should be small and fall with energy increases, microparticles. Furthermore, the plasma crystal, shock
IAC-l3-B3.3.4 Page 5 of9

"
"6","64th International Astronautical Congress, Beijing, China. 2013. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not
subj ect to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
formation and propagation, solutions, boundary layers data using light from the sun or the moon, depending on
and instabilities, phase transitions, and agglomeration the location in the ISS orbit, to determine the
shall be studied with this new scientiﬁc instrument. distribution of aerosol and ozone in the upper
Future on-orbit activities will be envisaged as a troposphere through the stratosphere. SAGE III-ISS
partnership between the Russian Space Agency will also provide temperature and trace gases proﬁles in
(Roscosmos) and the European Space Agency (ESA). the stratosphere and mesosphere. This instrument is
scheduled to launch to the 188 in the 2014-2015
188 is being recognized as a platform for Earth timeframe.
remote sensing. A signiﬁcant number of new
instruments in Earth remote sensing and astrophysics New astrOphysics instruments range from meteor
are nearing completion, making 188 a signiﬁcant detection with Project Meteor to a cosmic ray detector
platform for understanding of the Earth system and the with the Cosmic Ray Energetics and Mass (CREAM) t0
universe. the CALorinietic Electron Telescope (CALET) that will
look for dark matter signatures. These new instruments
The Cloud-Aerosol Transport System (CATS), will be launched to the 188 in 2014-2015.
sponsored by NASA, uses a light detection and ranging
(LiDAR) for remote detection of atmospheric aerosols The Atomic ClOCk Ensemble in Space (ACES) iS a
and clouds. This high repetition rate laser operates at fascinating new ESA mission developed in cooperation
three wavelengths _ 1064, 532 and 355 nm _ to with the French Space Agency (CNES) that will expand
determine the layer height, layer thickness, optical the range of research on the 188. The atomic clocks
depth, extinction and particle type in clouds. The data frequency reference generated on-board the 188 will be
obtained from this investigation will give researchers a used by a worldwide network Of ground terminals to
better understanding of cloud and aerosol particulates perform comparisons With the best available atomic
which may lead to improved Earth system models clocks 0n the ground. The most precise measurement of
associated with climate feedback. Operations are time yet — in space — Will be used to probe our
expected to begin in late 2014/early 2015, knowledge of the fundamental laws of physics ruling
the Universe. ACES will test Einstein’s general
The Atmosphere—Space Interaction Monitor (ASIM)9 relativity and alternative thCOI'lCS Of gravitation. Taking
a project led by ESA’ will use camera and X—ray— and y— full advantage Of the microgravity environment and
detectors 0n the 188, It will observe the upper worldwide coverage provided by the ISS, ACES will
atmosphere, looking for sprites, jets and elves in establish a stable and accurate onboard timescale which
connection with thunderstorms. It is hoped that Will be used t0 perform space-tO-ground and ground-to-
measurements of these phenomena from space will ground comparisons of best available atomic frequency
contribute to our understanding of the upper standards. This is why measuring time as accurately as
atmosphere. Its launch is scheduled for 2016, possible in space is of extreme interest. The ACES
launch is currently foreseen in 2016.
The NASA QuikSCAT satellite, responsible for
measuring ocean vector winds, experienced issues with W
an antenna resulting in a loss of data coverage. Within
the next year a new instrument, ISS Rapid-SCAT, is set In addition to multidisciplinary research, the 188
to launch to the 188. This radar scatteronieter will partnership conducts a myriad of student led research
measure the ocean surface wind speed and direction investigations and educational activities aimed at
ﬁlling a gap in the global constellation of wind increasing student interest in science, technology,
scatteronieters. The orbit of the 188 gives researchers engineering and mathematics (STEM).
data coverage over multiple orbits per day where the
current scatteronieters are in a polar sun-synchronous Over the past year, the partnership compiled new
orbit where the instrument passes over the same point at statistics Of the educational impact Of the 155 Oh
the same time every day, The advantage of multiple students around the world. More than 43 million
passes per day at lower inclination is greater coverage students, from kindergarten to graduate SChOOl, With
and calibration that will improve the scatterometer more than 28 million teachers located in 49 countries
constellation as a whole. Scatterometer data is used have participated in some aspect Of 155 educational
operationally in the predictions of eyewall regeneration activities. ThCSC activities include StHdCht-dCVClOpCd
ofhurricanes. investigations, education competitions, and classroom
versions of ISS investigations, participating in 188
The Stratospheric Aerosol and Gas Experiment 111- investigator experiments, ISS hardware development,
188 (S AGE 111-188) will collect high resolution spectral educational demonstrations, and cultural activities.
IAC-l3-B3.3.4 Page 6 0f9

"
"7","64th International Astronautical Congress, Beijing, China. 2013. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not
subj ect to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
Through the many inquiry—based educational activities, it}: * .. -.
students and teachers are encouraged to participate in 3!: 7 T
. . . ”“1 1,111
the ISS program thus rnotlvatlng the next generatlon of a - “f *1.“ I _1-1 21
- [12] ~ """":£s-‘.t'i»e=: ‘ , ‘1‘- -
students to pursue careers 1n STEM. '1 25*, ‘1 “ _“ .- _11 .
.19. ‘1, :1: _ . }
Education competitions have generated interest in , ,3» "" 7ft 4"" 431-,” "" - ~
students from around the globe. In 2012, YouTube ‘Li‘i z 1 ' ” “a ’
SpaceLab conducted a competition for 9—12th grade "" I , ,, 7*"" ‘

- . . 1 \ ﬁg 0 , ~
students to des1gn a selence experlment that could be , .4. - *N ( 2:"") \,
performed in space. The winning entries would have 4 £33“ _ Lailp' 5' -
their experiment conducted on the ISS. Out of the 2,000 ,, _ ,3, .‘f: x! \ ""‘ ._ .
entries from 80 countries, six regional winners were e; 5"""" X 1. i 5, l k
seieCted. from the U'S' along Wth tW0 gbbal grand Figre 4: View of the Synchronized Positioanolzl, Engage, Reeorint,
prlze w1nners. The tWO grand prlze w1nners are from Experimental Satellites Zero Robotics (SPHERES) in the Japanese
the U.S. and Egypt. The U.S. based student winners ExperimentModu1e(JEM). Flight Engineer Andre Kuipers (BSA) is
examined the anti-fungal properties Of Bacillus subtilis conducting atest of the SPHERES Satellites. Image credit: NASA.

h h ' f E l k . .
:heereeiertat:Stucbeeliia31):)puerrm;efnta r9311 gypt soizleid 3: access them for use 1n thelr classrooms. To date,
. p . 1?;2] . J p g p 370,000 K—12 students and 500 teachers have
nncrograV1ty. The pI‘OJCCt lead for Google, Zahaan . . .
. partlclpated/used the rnaterlals generated from these
Bharmal, recelved an award at the ISS Research and . [12] . .
. experlments. Currently, the rnaterlals are 1n the
Development conference for the scale at Wthh the . . .
. process of belng translated 1nto Inultlple languages for
YouTube SpaceLab contest had global educatlon
. [6] use around the world.
1mpacts.
Student developed experiments are conducted under ’j‘\ __ - ‘ :- .1 .
the idance of a teacher or mentor for the sole beneﬁt ' V1. - "" g. ”1-...“ i ’
gu . . / /_ , ——t' - ."" _, 72
of the student. One such example of th1s 1s the ff"" ‘5’ , » ‘ f.»- ° 1- ' ..
Synchronized Position Hold, Engage, Reorient, ‘5‘ CI; 1 ’3' A, 4 ‘
Experimental Satellites (SPHERES) Zero—Robotics. For , ‘ t ,e” I,{ ' , r .
this competition, students, alongside local mentors, . ‘/ '3 _/I o. . _ :
develop algorlthms to test on the ISS us1ng bowllng - -7-»—.- -- - ~- . 1"" v: - ,~ -— .
ball— size satellites. This is a competition, under the ~ ~ ‘ , ._..' ‘ 7
guidance of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ; , .
(MIT), which is held in both the US. and Europe where / - ' ,
. . . . ./ -‘/ . f
teams cornpete 1n elnnlnatlon rounds on the ground . _p’,,. \\
under reallstlc InlcrograV1ty condltlons. Once the two ,___ 7"" ‘ ;
ﬁnalists are determined, the winners’ algorithm will be . .1» ’ ' ’ "" - .
uploaded to the SPHERES on the ISS for the ﬁnal round . ' .
of competition. This competition has been conducted in . _ ‘ .
the U-S- Since 2009 and expanded to incmde Europe in Figure 5: View of Nephila clavz'pes (golden orb spider) inside the
2011. The 2013 competition is scheduled to take place spider habit while onboard the ISS during 2011-2012. Image credit:
in the fall.[12][5] (Figure 4) BioServe Technologies.
Butterﬂies, Spiders and Plants in Space is an example Middle school students from all over the world use
of utilizing the unique environment of the ISS for the the Sally Ride Earth Knowledge Acquired by Middle
area of education demonstrations and activities. This School Students (Sally Ride EarthKAM) to learn about
program through a collaborative effort between orbital mechanics, space operations, and geography-
BioServe Space Technologies and Baylor College of Students determine geographic targets to capture
Medicine’s BioEd Online “31 conducted four life science through imagery from the Sally Ride EarthKAM camera
experiments between 2008 and 2012, These onboard the ISS. Commands are sent to the camera
experiments featured Araneidae (orb—weaver spiders), from students Via the online Sally Ride EarthKAM
Vanessa cardui (painted lady butterﬂies), Nephilla program 01106 the images are acquired, students and
clavipes (golden orb spiders) and Brassica rapa teachers annotate the images and discuss geographic
(mustard seeds) as the subjects (Figure 5). During their matters. Through 2012, this global student—developed
time on orbit, Video and photos were taken and have investigation has reached approximately 2800 school
now been added to an archive where teachers today can
IAC—13—B3.3.4 Page 7 of9

"
"8","64th International Astronautical Congress, Beijing, China. 2013. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not
subj ect to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
With 190,000 students and 3000 teachers in 49 Nakamura, T., Kamigaichi, S., Sato, R., Aiba, T.,
countriestmm Koyama, M., Miyagawa, Y., Ogawa, S., Kaneko, Y.,
Ruttley, T., Alleyne, C., Evans, C., StefanOV, W.,
Richards, E., Fogarty, J ., Carrodeguas, J ., Knowles, C.,
W Blue, R., Humphries, K., Curie, M., Buck, J ., Boen, B.,
Rainey, K., Karabadzhak, G., Sorokin, 1., AVdeeV, 8.,
Since the ﬁrst research investigation started on the ZagreeV, B. 2012. International Space Station Beneﬁts
188 more than a decade ago, there have been over 1500 for Humanity. N AS A/NP_2012_02_003_JSC.
investigations conducted through March 2013.
Researchers from 69 countries produced over 700 @155 Research & Development Conference
scientiﬁc publications. Beneﬁts are now being gleaned httg://astronautica1.org/issrdc/2013
from this research and applied to life on Earth.
[7] Smith, S.M., Heer, M.A., Shackelford, L.C.,
Looking forward, the 155 is growing into a mature Sibonga, J .D., Ploutz-Snyder, L., Zwart, SR. 2012.
Earth and Space observation platform With several new Beneﬁts for bone from resistance exercise and nutrition
instruments launching in the upcoming years. These in long-duration spaceﬂight: Evidence from
instruments will measure characteristics from ocean biochemistry and densitometry. Journal ofBone and
Wind speeds to aerosols in the atmosphere to cosmic ray Mineral Research, 27:1896-1906.
to detecting dark matter. New opportunities to use data
from 188 investigations will come to light through the [8]Orwoll, E. S., Adler, R. A., Amin, S., Binkley, N.,
geneLAB project. Major new international research Lewiecki, E. M., Petak, S. M., Shapses, S. A., Sinaki,
cooperations will commence soon in various science M., Watts, N. B. and Sibonga, J. D. 2013. Skeletal
diSCiPlines. health in long-duration astronauts: Nature, assessment,
and management recommendations from the NASA
The 185 is 3150 a platform that is used to conduct bone summit. Journal ofBone Mineral Research, 28:
educational activities aimed to increase student 1243_125 5. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1948
participation in STEM. Through 2012, 43 million [9] Vedha Nayagam, Daniel L. Dietrich, Paul V.
students, from kindergarten to graduate school, With Ferkul, Michael c. Hicks, Forman A. Williams, Can
more than 28 million teachers located in 49 countries 0001 ﬂames support quasi-steady alkane droplet
beneﬁtted from these activities burning?, Combustion and F lame, Volume 159, Issue
12, December 2012, Pages 3583-3588, ISSN 0010-
MENCES 2180,
http_://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.combustﬂame.2012.07.012.
[1] Thumm, T., Robinson, J ., Ruttley, T., J ohnson-
Green, P., Karabadzhak, G., Nakamura, T., Sorokin, 1., [10] Swan, J.W., Vasquez, P.A., Whitson, P.A., Fincke,
Zell, M., Sabbagh, J . 2011. International Space Station E.M., Wakata, K., Magnus, S.H., De Winne, F., Barratt,
Researchfor the Next Decade: International M.R., Agui J, Green, R.D., Hall, N.R., Bohman, D.,
Coordination and Research Accomplishments. 62nd Bunnell, C.T., Gast, A.P., Furst, EM 2012. Multi-scale
International Astronautical C0719” ess. IAC'll-B3-1-5 kinetics of a ﬁeld-directed colloidal phase transition.
Proceedings of the National Academy ofScienceS 0f the
[2] Thumm, T., Robinson, J .9 Buckley, Nu Johnson- United States ofAmerica. Volume 109(40): 16023-
Green, P., Karabadzhak, G, Nakamura, T., Kamigaichi, 16028. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1206915109.
S., Sorokin, 1., Zell, M., Fuglesang , C., Sabbagh, J .,
Pignataro, S. International Space Station Research [11] Aguilar-Benitez M, et 31. First Result from the
Beneﬁtsfor Humanity. IAC-12.B3.1.2 Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer 0n the International
Space Station: Precision Measurement of the Positron
[3] International Space Station Results, NASA Fraction in Primary Cosmic Rays of 05-350 GeV.
WW Physical Review Letters. 2013 Apr 3; 110: 141102—1 —
W 141102-10.DOI: 10.1103/PhysReVLett.110.141102.
[4] Eigenfactor ® W [12] Alleyne CW, Mayo SI, Robinson JA, Steinberg M,
Clement J , Savage ND, Koyama M, Miyagawa Y,
[5] Robinson, J ., Thumm, T., Buckley, N., J ohnson- AVdeeV S, Blue RB, Carrodeguas J, Knowles
Green, P., Piekutowski, T., Steinberg, M., Clement, J,, C. Inspiring the Next Generation: International Space
Chicoine, R.A., Zell, M., Fuglesang, C., Hatton, J.) Station Education Opportunities and Accomplishments
Sundblad, P., Savage, N., Suenson, R., Harrod, J ., 20004012. N AS A/EP_2012_07_020_JSC.
IAC-13-B3.3.4 Page 8 0f9

"
"9","64th International Astronautical Congress, Beijing, China. 2013. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not
subj ect to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
[13] BioEd Online http://WWW.bi0ed0nline.0rg/

IAC-13-B3.3.4 Page 9 0f9

"
