"","x"
"1","BRIEF REVIEW
0

THE ASTRONAUT-ATHLETE. OPTIMIZING HUMAN
KYLE J . HACKNEY,1 JESSICA M. SCOTT,2 ANDREA M. HANSON,3 KIRK L. ENGLISH,4
MEGHAN E. DOWNS,5 AND LORI L. PLOUTZ-SNYDER2
JDepdn‘mmz‘ ofHede‘ﬂ, Nuz‘n'l‘z'oiz, and Exercise Sczlmc‘e, Noﬁﬂ Dakota State Um’vem'zy ngo, Noﬂﬂ Dakota; ZExerake
Pﬂysz'ology 472d Countermeasures Laboratory, Umbem'z‘zles Space Researc/z Association, Houston, Texas; 3Ndz‘z'oiml Aeronautics
and Space Admzhzkz‘mz‘z’oiz, Exerc‘zlve Pﬂysz'ology 472d Countemedszmes Laboratory, Houston, Texas; 4Exerczke Pﬂysz'ology 472d
Countermeasures Laboratory, JES 7196/2, Houston, Texas; and 5Depdn‘mmz‘ ofHedZZ/z and Human Peiformdm‘e, Umbem'zj/ of
Houston, Houston, 7??de
ABSTRACT habitat construction, equipment repairs, planetary exploration,
Hackney, KJ, Scott, JM, Hanson, AM, English, KL, Downs, ME, and emergency response).
and Ploutz-SnIyder, LL. The astronaut-athlete: optlmlzmg human KEY WORDS spaceflight, exercise countermeasures, dietary
performance In space. J Strength Cond Res 29(12): 3531— supplementation, pharmaceuticals, aging
3545, 2015—It is well known that Iong-duration spaceflight re-
sults in deconditioning of neuromuscular and cardiovascular sys- INTRODUCTION
tems, leadin to a decline in h sical fitness. On reloadin in . .

I I g I p y I I g ver the last 10 years, the strength and condltlon—
gravntatlonal enVIronments, reduced fitness (e.g., aerobic capac- . . .

I I I mg commumty has expanded 1ts reach beyond
Ity, muscularIstIrength, and endurance) could ImpaIr humaIn per- its traditional domain of sport athletes into the
formance, mISSIon success, and crew safety. The level of fitness world of occupational physiologic training. This
necessary for the performance of routine and off-nomlnal terres- relatively new ﬁeld Of tactical strength and conditioning is
trial mission tasks remains an unanswered and pressing ques- based on the understanding that individuals in physically
tion for scientists and flight physicians. To mitigate fitness loss demanding professions, such as ﬁre and rescue, law enforce—
during spaceflight, resistance and aerobic exercise are the most ment, and military operations, need specialized strength and
effective countermeasure available to astronauts. Currently, 2.5 conditioning programs to ensure Optimal occupational per—
h-d—1, 6—7 d-wk—1 is allotted in crew schedules for exercise to formance; as such, these occupational athletes are not dis—
be performed on highly specialized hardware on the International similar to traditional spoIrt athletesIand require their 0er1
Space Station (ISS). Exercise hardware provides up to 273 kg needs analyzes t0 1dent1fy the tmlque demands Of them
. . . . . . profess10n (47). Astronauts comprlse a very small and umque
of loading capability for reSIstance exerCIse, treadmill speeds I I I I I
_1 group w1th1n th1s 0ccupat10nal athlete populatlon, possess—
between 0.44 and 5.5 ms , and cycle workloads from , , , , , , , ,
I I I I mg h1ghly d1verse athlet1c and phys1olog1c tralmng back—
0 and 350 W. Compared to ISS mnssnons, future mnssnons . . . .
I I I I I grounds. These select p110ts, engmeers, teachers, phys1c1ans,
beyond low earth orbit WIII likely be accomplished WIth less - - -

I I sc1ent1sts, and armed forces members must tram and perform
vehICIe volume and power allocated for exerCIse hardware. Con- in one ofthe most unique arenas known to humankind. Their
comltant factors, such as dIet and age, WIII also affect the phys- job requires them to live and work in an extreme environment
'OIOQ'C responses to exercnse trammg (9-9-1 anabolic resnstance) that includes microgravity, radiation exposure, social isolation,
in the space environment. Research into the potential optimiza— conﬁnement, reduced daily physical activity, and closed air
tion of exercise countermeasures through use of dietary supple- and water systems. Under these circumstances, astronauts
mentation, and pharmaceuticals may assist in reducing must perform not to secure ﬁrst place but to complete their
physiological deconditioning during Iong-duration spaceflight mission and return to earth safely. Furthermore, unlike sport
tionally related astronaut tasks (e.g., extravehicular activity, the added challenge ofmcorporatmg exerc1se1nt0 an 1ntr1n—

sically catabolic environment (i.e., limited dietary options

— and reduced mechanical loading) using a small suite of men—
Address correspondence to Kyle J. Hackney, kyle.hackney@ndsu.edu. itoring systems and exercise hardware Currently, their
29(12)/3531—3545 home, ofﬁce, and training center are the International Space
Jouma; osz‘rng/z am; Coﬂdlﬁ-Omhg Researc/z Station (ISS). The ISS is 109—m wide, has a mass of approx—
© 2015 National Sz‘rengZ/z 472d Condz'z‘z'amhg Assoa'az‘zbﬂ imately 420,336 kg, and orbits the earth at 7,700 111's_1 and
VOLUME 29 | NUMBER 12 | DECEMBER 2015 | 3531

"
"2","Astronaut-Athlete
an altitude of 375 km (94). However, it is expected that (37). There are also signiﬁcant declines in plantar ﬂexor
future missions will take astronauts well beyond low earth strength ranging from 15% after 28 days of ULLS (25) to
orbit and eventually to the surface of other terrestrial bodies 55% after 90 days of bed rest (113). Although strength
such as Mars whose partial gravity environments will sub— decline is generally greater than muscle mass loss, the neural
stantially increase physiologic demands beyond those of the mechanism of adaptation has been elusive. Evidence for
microgravity that current 188 crewmembers experience. a decline in neural drive, obtained using surface electromy—
During the extended transits necessary to reach these deep ography (69), has been reported after 90—180 days of space—
space destinations, reductions in ﬁtness could prevent astro— ﬂight. Furthermore, evidence obtained from ground—based
nauts from performing critical mission tasks such as a suc— analogs using the twitch interpolation technique (24,122)
cessﬁll unassisted exit from a landing vehicle in the event of suggests a potential decline in muscle activation; however,
an oﬂ—nominal (on Mars) or remote landing (on Earth). prespaceﬂight and postspaceﬂight data have not been pub—
Furthermore, during these missions, it is expected that the lished (133). Sensorimotor disruptions and postural instabil—
size and available power for exercise equipment will be limited ity are also well—documented and unwanted adaptations to
and that crewmembers will be required to maintain their the space environment (75,76).
ﬁtness more autonomously because of communication delays Skeletal muscle and the nervous system are clearly not the
with ground personnel. In this review, we ﬁrst summarize the only systems negatively inﬂuenced by unloading as exposure
neuromuscular and cardiovascular ﬁtness adaptations that to both spaceﬂight and bed rest also result in ﬂuid loss, ﬂuid
have been observed in spaceﬂight and disuse analogs. Second, shifts, and cardiac remodeling (12,16). For example, Perho—
we explore methods for identifying the ﬁtness levels necessary nen et al. (101) demonstrated that left ventricular mass mea—
for adequate performance and mission success. Finally, we sured by MRI decreased by 8% during 6 weeks ofsupine bed
review in—ﬂight exercise hardware, exercise prescriptions, rest and by 10% after 10 days of spaceﬂight (101). Although
and potential methods to optimize in—ﬂight exercise counter— cardiac atrophy does not seem to aﬂect systolic ﬁlnction,
measures for this unique population of astronaut—athletes. cardiac atrophy after spaceﬂight may impact diastolic ﬂinc—
tion, as shown during 30 days of bed rest (80). Invasive
FITNESS LOSS DURING SPACEFLIGHT AND studies of cardiac performance before and after 2 weeks of
DISUSE ANALOGS head—down—tilt bed rest have shown a leftward shift in the
The loss of skeletal mass, strength, and aerobic capacity in diastolic pressure—volume curve after bed rest, resulting in
response to microgravity exposure has been a medical and a smaller left ventricular end—diastolic volume for any given
physiological concern since the early days of human ﬁlling pressure (84). These reductions result in a decline in
spaceﬂight (27,56). The US. Space Shuttle program pro— upright stroke volume and cardiac output (36,102,132),
Vided an early opportunity to assess several of these out— which may negatively impact aerobic capacity (Vogpeak).
comes. LeBlanc et al. (78) used magnetic resonance Decreased aerobic capacity during the ﬁrst 2 weeks of un—
imaging (MRI) to evaluate lower limb muscle volumes loading may also be attributed to decreased circulating blood
before and after an 8—day exposure to microgravity. They volume (13), although with longer periods of disuse, addi—
observed 6% volume losses for the calf and quadriceps mus— tional structural changes in the myocardium (101) and the
ole groups. Not surprisingly, more dramatic losses of up to vasculature (153) contribute to impaired performance capac—
24% have been documented in these muscle groups after 6 ity. Previous work by Levine et al. showed a 20—25% reduc—
months of spaceﬂight on the ISS (51,77,78,146). Further— tion in Vogpeak associated with 9—14 days of spaceﬂight
more, ground—based bed rest analog research has established (83). In a direct comparison between responses after space—
that quadriceps and calf muscle mass can decrease by 18— ﬂight and after bed rest, Trappe et al. (147) reported that the
30% after 90—120 days of unloading (4,121). decrease in Vogpeak during supine cycle ergometry in 4
Greater losses in muscle strength relative to muscle mass crewmembers after a 17—day mission (—10%) was compara—
have generally been observed after long—duration spaceﬂight; ble with that observed in 8 subjects after 60 head—down—tilt
this ﬁnding provides some evidence that negative adapta— bed rest of the same duration (—7%). Most recently, a 17%
tions occur in the nervous system (24,38). For instance, on decrease in Vogpeak was measured on the ISS in 14 astro—
Mir ﬂights of 6 months duration, 3 cosmonauts showed nauts after the ﬁrst 2 weeks of spaceﬂight. In these astro—
declines of20—480/0 in calfplantar ﬂexion maximal voluntary nauts, Vogpeak increased throughout the remainder of the
contraction (MVC) (27). Similar to spaceﬂight, evidence of mission (5—6 months) but never returned to preﬂight levels
strength loss during several diﬂerent microgravity analogs (90). It is noted that in the current microgravity environment
has been reported, including decrements in MVC of knee of the ISS, astronauts are rarely required to perform tasks at
extensors up to 16% after 20 days of bed rest (3) to 45% maximal intensities, and most activity can be performed with
after 90 days ofbed rest (3). Large decreases in strength after submaXimal efforts. However, a reduction in maximal aero—
unilateral lower limb suspension (ULLS), another musculo— bic capacity can result in work being performed at a higher
skeletal unloading analog (55), are also evident, with up to relative percentage of heart rate and Vogpeak (1). This may
a 42% decline in knee extensor MVC occurring after 21 days be problematic considering that there is a concurrent shift
3532 Jdﬁrnal of Strength and Conditioning Researcli

"
"3","Jéhﬁrnal of Strength and Conditioning Researcli | www.nsca.c0m
from slow to fast in skeletal muscle myosin heavy Chain according to mission destination (Table 1) (108). One logical
isoforms (18,44), which drives energy metabolism toward approach to maintaining higher in—ﬂight ﬁtness levels is to
a greater reliance on carbohydrate to ﬁiel mechanical work emphasize preﬂight exercise training to create a higher base—
(53,141). Therefore, maintaining a high level of aerobic line, ﬂirther from this threshold of impaired performance
capacity to perform prolonged activity near ventilatory (Figure 1). This concept is supported by Moore et al. (90),
threshold (28) or critical speed (1) is important and a difﬁcult who showed that astronauts with a higher preﬂight Vogpeak
cardiorespiratory ﬁtness parameter to protect during long— generally had greater losses early in ﬂight, but were still at
duration spaceﬂight (42,143). For ﬂirther discussion of higher levels of aerobic capacity than crewmembers that
spaceﬂight deconditioning or disuse physiology adapta— started with a lower Vogpeak. Maintaining a high level of
tions, the reader is directed to the following reViews aerobic capacity is considered important for numerous oper—
(2,45,46,54,79,93,99,106,135,136). ational tasks (e.g., extravehicular activity) and emergency

response situations. Recently, Ade et al. showed that running
WHAT LEVEL OF FITNESS IS REQUIRED DURING and arm cranking Vogpeak were signiﬁcant predictors of10—
SPACE MISSIONS? km walk—back time, a ﬁeld test that reﬂects ﬁiture terrestrial
Although the medical health of potential astronauts is mission scenarios in which an astronaut would have to walk
rigorously examined during the selection process, the back to a base area on mechanical failure of a rover (1). For
advertised basic qualiﬁcation requirements do not contain current microgravity missions, National Aeronautics and
speciﬁc stipulations pertaining to ﬁtness (108). As such, Space Administration (NASA) attempts to prevent Vogpeak
astronaut candidates possess a wide variety of athletic back— losses of greater than 25% and to maintain an aerobic capac—
grounds and training histories ranging from former college ity greater than 32.9 ml-kg‘l-min—1 (108), a value based on
football players and marathoners to largely sedentary indi— the metabolic cost of a microgravity spacewalk and that will
Viduals who perform little or no formal exercise. On ﬂight almost certainly be revised upward for missions to terrestrial
assignment, astronauts are paired with an Astronaut surfaces with partial gravity.
Strength, Conditioning, and Rehabilitation specialist As previously discussed, maintaining muscular strength is
(ASCR) and work closely with them to increase or maintain also an important element for the performance of mission
preﬂight ﬁtness, maintain ﬁtness during ﬂight, and recondi— tasks. Identifying strength thresholds is challenging because
tion after return. of the difﬁculty of earth—based task simulation. Ryder et al.
Historically, the purpose of exercise before, during, and recently used a weighted garment to alter test subjects’
after spaceﬂight has been centered on the protection of the strength—to—body weight ratio (0—120% of body weight
health (both acute and chronic) of the individual astronaut. added) and subsequently evaluated the eﬂect of reduced rel—
Without neglecting this health emphasis, the focus has more ative strength on the performance of astronaut—related occu—
recently shifted to performance and the importance of pational tasks (supine and upright seat egress and walk, rise
identifying occupational physiologic requirements and then from fall, hatch opening, ladder climb, object carry, and con—
training crewmembers to these standards. Currently, there struction activity) (117). This novel approach is one of the
are no established preﬂight or in—ﬂight ﬁtness requirements few available methods to identify strength thresholds for
(108). Despite this, a basic needs’ analysis for astronauts spaceﬂight mission tasks. In this study, isometric leg—press
suggests that, particularly in partial and ﬁll gravitational en— strength relative to body weight ratios below 17.9 Nm-kg‘1
Vironments (e.g., Mars and the Earth), they must possess showed compromised performance (time to task comple—
strength in the postural muscles of the trunk and legs, and tion) during upright seated egress and walk (117). This
also strength and endurance in their shoulders and forearms weighted—garment model was strengthened when preﬂight
to work against the external resistance of a pressurized and postﬂight astronaut data were included, and it demon—
spacesuit and gloves. Metabolically, many astronaut tasks strates a threshold of strength that is required for optimal
are predominantly aerobic in nature although others, such performance of a simple laboratory—based egress task. It is
as setting and operating heavy equipment (e.g., drills on important to note that the tasks required only 15—30 seconds
Mars) and performing emergency operations such as egress to perform and were not physically demanding; although
from a vehicle in the water or rescue of an incapacitated this precludes implementing the threshold for operational
crewmember will necessitate substantial contributions from use, it demonstrates a Viable strategy for establishing
anaerobic energy systems. mission—related strength thresholds. For comparison, previ—
Although ﬁtness standards remain unidentiﬁed, minimum ous work with healthy older adults (no weighted garment)
thresholds do exist below which crew safety or mission shows that isometric unilateral knee—extension strength of
success could be compromised. Identifying such thresholds 3.0 Nm-kg‘1 is the threshold below which performance of
is difﬁcult as they are highly task speciﬁc and thus must be everyday activities declines, at least for men and women in
based on the most demanding mission scenarios. Further— their eighth decade oflife (109). In the absence ofestablished
more, the tasks or mission scenarios to be performed by thresholds for the performance of mission tasks, NASA’s
astronauts are not always well—characterized and will vary current goal is to limit strength losses to no greater than
VOLUME 29 | NUMBER 12 | DECEMBER 2015 | 3533

"
"4","Astronaut-Athlete
TABLE 1. Examples of potential occupational tasks based on mission destination.*
Mission destination Energetics required
ISS (0 9)
Emergency egress on return to earth on land or water Power, strength, and muscular endurance (water)
EVA Muscular and cardiovascular endurance
Remote arm operation Fine motor skill and steadiness
Moon (1/6 9)
Emergency egress on return to earth on land or water Power, strength, and muscular endurance (water)
10-km walk Cardiovascular endurance and strength
Hatch opening Strength and power
Construction task Strength and cardiovascular endurance
Ladder Climb Muscular endurance and strength
Sample retrieval Strength, steadiness, and balance
Other types of EVA Strength and cardiovascular endurance
Asteroid (unknown 9)
Emergency egress on return to earth on land or water Power, strength, and endurance (water)
Sample retrieval Muscular endurance, steadiness, and balance
Other types of EVA Strength and cardiovascular endurance
Mars (1/3 9)
Emergency egress on return to earth on land or water Power, strength, and endurance (water)
Hatch opening Strength and power
Construction task Strength and cardiovascular endurance
Ladder Climb Muscular endurance and strength
Sample retrieval Strength, steadiness, and balance
Other types of EVA Strength and cardiovascular endurance
*EVA = extravehicular activity.
20% during spaceﬂight (108). Research planned over the kg) (126). Advanced resistive exercise device uses 2 vacuum
next several years will ﬁlrther elucidate muscle strength cylinders (constant external resistance) and ﬂywheels (iner—
and power thresholds below which performance of tial loading) to mimic free weight exercise. Advanced resis—
mission—related tasks may be compromised. tive exercise device accommodates individuals from the ﬁfth
to 95th percentile in size and oilers loads ranging from 5 t0
RESISTANCE AND CARDIOVASCULAR EXERCISE 273 kg through use of the main arm assembly. An exercise
COUNTERMEASURES IN SPACE cable oilers focused upper—body and lower—body strength
Exercise is the cornerstone of countermeasures to prevent training at loads ranging from 5 to 68 kg. Hardware attach—
unloading—induced remodeling ofphysiological systems (29). ments include an exercise bench with belt, heel—raise plat—
The design of exercise hardware has evolved with our form, cable pull bar, cable pull handles, and ankle cuffs.
understanding ofwhat is required to keep astronauts healthy Custom ARED software receives prescriptions from the
during extended—duration missions (7,56). A summary of ground, displays the workout t0 the crewmember, and re—
exercise capabilities by era is shown in Table 2 (7). The cords data. The data acquisition system on ARED was de—
current suite of ISS exercise hardware is more robust than signed to provide repetition counts, sets completed, static
ever, and U.S.—pr0vided hardware includes the advanced and dynamic load measurements, and exercise start and stop
resistive exercise device (ARED, Figure 2), the cycle ergom— times. Because of malﬁlnctions in the instrumentation sys—
eter with Vibration isolation system (CEVIS, Figure 3), and tem, these data are currently self—reported. A new instrumen—
the second—generation treadmill (T2, Figure 4). Each exer— tation box is slated to arrive at the ISS and will return power
cise device is mounted on a Vibration isolation system t0 t0 the ARED instrumentation and data acquisition systems
protect the structural integrity of the ISS by minimizing in 2015. Both a force—plate redesign and portable load—
the transfer of force generated during exercise to the station. monitoring devices are under consideration as means to
Advanced resistive exercise device is used to maintain measure exercise loads, more accurately track resistance
skeletal health and also muscular strength and endurance exercise performance, and accommodate biomechanical
(85). It has been operationally available since early 2009 and analyses.
oilers increased functional performance over its predecessor, Cycle ergometer with Vibration isolation system was
the interim resistive exercise device (maximum load of 135 installed on the ISS in early 2001 to provide aerobic and
3534 Jgﬁrnal of Strength and Conditioning Researcli

"
"5","the . . , m
Journal of Strength and Condltlonlng Research | www.nsca.c0m
— — Exercise Countermeasures with Optimization
- - - - Standard Exercise Countermeasures
— No-exercise Countermeasures
1-; . Enhanced Preflight Astronaut Baseline from Exercise Training
:‘é I Standard Astronaut Fitness Baseline
D ‘ ‘ Impaired Performance Threshold (Unknown Value) 8
> ‘\ C
L \ \ (U
Q “~ \ g
_Q §~~ ~ ~ — — — 0L)
8— ~~----- ——————_ o-
S ---——-——-—-____---- Te
8 -----———-- 'E
C \\ 2
m ‘x \
E ‘~~ \
8 “~ ‘ ‘
H— “~- ‘ ‘ — ~
L ~. ~ — — — —
Q) ‘-—__ — — —
& —-—-—--———-_-__-_--
I— E
4.) L
O
3 E
C o.
O “o
+5 e
2 '2
E
Preflight Fitness Loss in Space
Figure 1. Modeled relationship between astronaut task performance and fitness loss in space. “No-exercise countermeasures"" is a hypothetical situation given
exercise in space is a medical requirement for US. crewmembers. “Standard exercise countermeasures"" refers to Astronaut Strength, Conditioning, and
Rehabilitation specialist (ASCR) exercise prescription without additonal optimization. “Optimization” refers to enhanced nutritional or pharmaceutical support of
ASCR exercise prescription to enhance performance.
cardiovascular conditioning; it is also used to conduct in the astronauts’ daily schedules. Astronauts are encouraged
periodic ﬁtness evaluations of aerobic capacity. Cycle to wear heart rate monitors and keep exercise logs during
ergometer with Vibration isolation system operates from preﬂight training, but this is not a requirement. Tracking and
0 to 350 W and allows pedal speeds from 0 to 125 management of in—ﬂight exercise data are similarly challeng—
revolutions per minute. Exercise prescriptions are uploaded ing. Astronaut Strength, Conditioning, and Rehabilitation
t0 the control panel, and data are downloaded by ground specialists develop in—ﬂight exercise prescriptions based on
personnel through the station’s network server. The control individual ﬁtness parameters (e.g., peak cycle tests performed
panel records resistance, speed, and torque, from which 60—90 days before launch, and ground ARED training ses—
power output can be calculated. An integrated heart rate sions) and previous experience working with individuals in
monitor synchronizes performance data with heart rate. microgravity. Although crewmembers complete preﬂight
The T2 was installed on the 188 in 2010. Second— familiarization sessions on ground training units of the ISS
generation treadmill, which replaced the treadmill with exercise hardware, these devices are designed for use in
Vibration isolation system, was derived from a commercial 3 reduced gravity environment, and thus, they are not opti—
Woodway Path treadmill and has a redesigned passive mized for daily exercise training in earth’s gravity. As such,
Vibration isolation system. Improved ﬁmctional capabilities most preﬂight training is performed on traditional exercise
include a greater maximum speed (up to 5.5 m-s‘l). Use at equipment.
low speed results in signiﬁcant instability and tends to satu— In—ﬂight ARED exercise prescriptions are developed
rate the Vibration isolation system and impart higher—than— during these preﬂight training sessions performed on an
desired loads to the vehicle, so crews are limited to operating ARED ground unit. Early mission resistance exercise
at 21.3 m-s‘l. prescriptions are relatively conservative to provide acclima—
tization t0 loading in a microgravity environment. Because
EXERCISE MONITORING AND PRESCRIPTION a crewmember’s body mass does not contribute substantial
Historically both on the ground and during ﬂight exercise resistance in microgravity, this must be added to the external
has been challenging to document in detail. Preﬂight load. For example, an 80 kg crewmember that squats 100 kg
exercise training is prescribed by an ASCR and is included would need to load the ARED bar to 180 kg to attain
VOLUME 29 | NUMBER 12 | DECEMBER 2015 | 3535

"
"6","Astronaut-Athlete
TABLE 2. US exercise hardware across the eras of space missions.*t
Mercury Gemini Apollo Skylab Shuttle ShuttIe-Mir ISS (1993—
(1959—1968) (1961—1966) (1961—1972) (1965—1979) (1972—201 1) (1995—1998) present)
None Bungee Exer-genie Cycle ergometer Cycle ergometer Cycle ergometer CEVIS
exercisert
Cycle§ Teflon treadmill Passive treadmill EDO Treadmill TVIS
ergometer
MKI/mini gym EDO treadmill iRED
MKII EDO Rower AREDH
T21]
*ISS = International Space Station; CEVIS = cycle ergometer with vibration isolation system; EDO = extended duration orbiter;
TVIS = treadmill with vibration isolation system; MKl/mini gym = isokinetic rope and pull device; iRED = interim resistive exercise
device; MKII = handle and spring assembled exercise device; ARED = advanced resistive exercise device; T2 = second-generation
treatijﬁrirlillihformation adapted from Refs. 6,122. Adaptations are themselves works protected by copyright. So in order to publish this
adaptation, authorization must be obtained both from the owner of the copyright in the original work and from the owner of copyright in
the translation or adaptation.
tGemini |V only.
§Dropped because of weight constraints.
HAvailable 2009.
ﬂAvailable 2010.
a similar static load. However, unlike on earth, the entire in—ﬂight studies are forced to make assumptions on exercise
load is directed through the shoulders down the axial skel— performance (e.g., repetitions, work load, number of muscle
eton; this musculature is unable to support such high loads contractions, calorie intake, and expenditure) based on crew—
(19). As a result, during ﬂight, the ASCRs monitor individual member recall.
crewmember exercise form, performance, and comfort level Monitoring astronauts’ exercise performance (as an indi—
to adjust exercise prescription. cator 0f spaceﬂight—induced deconditioning) will be more
The current ISS exercise equipment was designed to important than ever on missions beyond low earth orbit.
provide basic performance monitoring. For example, T2 and On earth, consumer demand for performance—enhancing
CEVIS have integrated heart rate monitoring capabilities and technologies and training tools has led to market availability
require crewmembers to do a chest strap to transmit heart of instrumented footwear, high—tech sports watches, activity
rate data to the integrated receiver. Users operate the monitors, and interactive gaming systems. These devices
treadmill from a laptop computer and custom software allow data to be logged and shared through wireless inter—
interface. The treadmill operates in either a powered or active networks. As these types of technologies mature and
a nonmotorized passive mode. The T2 logs data from sensors advance in robustness, they may warrant consideration for
and accelerometers located under the treadmill surface from use by crewmembers during in—ﬂight exercise. These tools
which ground reaction forces can be derived. The T2 also could enhance the in—ﬂight training experience and provide
records belt speed, resistance, and start and stop times. After ASCRs and/or researchers with invaluable performance
each exercise session, the crewmember logs off of the control information to enhance the eﬂicacy and eﬂiciency of space—
panel and the data are then pushed to T2’s central computer, ﬂight exercise. Furthermore, although aerobic capacity can
from which ground personnel downlink these data. Wrist be tested in—ﬂight (90), there is currently no reliable means of
watches are used as the backup data—logging method when testing muscular strength as traditional strength tests such as
the primary system is not available. The watch ﬁles are man— the one—repetition maximum are considered too risky to
ually downloaded to a laptop computer and these data are perform in spaceﬂight. Potential candidates to facilitate in—
downlinked to the ground for analysis. ﬂight strength testing are the muscle atrophy research and
From a science perspective, exercise data are classiﬁed as exercise system, a dynamometer that was developed by the
protected medical information and require special permis— European Space Agency (39), and force sensing shoes that
sion for research use. Investigators have obtained data— could be worn during the performance ofmaximal isometric
sharing agreements and subsequently reported their ﬁndings movements on ARED (e.g., a mid—thigh pull).
(51,126,146). The quality of the exercise data has sometimes Currently, crewmembers are scheduled 2.5 h- d—1 of exer—
suﬂered given issues, such as instrumentation malﬁlnction, cise, 6—7 d-wk‘1 (20,126,146). Aerobic exercise is prescribed
downlink interruption, software bugs, and operator error. At 6 d-wk‘1 and is performed on either CEVIS or T2. Crews
times, researchers evaluating exercise—based outcomes from are assigned 60 minutes for aerobic exercise, which also
3536 Jéhﬁrnal of Strength and Conditioning Researcli

"
"7","Jéhﬁrnal of Strength and Conditioning Researcli | www.nsca.c0m
'— M . ‘ o ‘w , \ "" '~ ' 55/ . ‘o ,1 .7 V V.
. l , .1 *9 ‘ ~ . t- . . ~ _ .,. u i V. - w
\ 6“"" ’ '-' ' '6' ~ ' J ' ‘ q i t {‘f“ . n- ‘, '17-‘1/7 .1 57' g
,. ~ ‘2 fb. .1. .. k a \ . a ' .12“
Q ""‘l' i - ~ '; I \l \I
. E‘- \ I-m 1 . l '
it ‘ i i"" i I l ‘i .
V g ‘2 i «cg ‘ ,. S l’\ 1‘ ,i \‘
\ é , ,- t v . . .1 .‘ :2 i ‘w u: 'i'; 1. ‘ , i
; W . 1 .1 _ , .~ ,4 q i
2. = ,' 9:11:93?” “ 1 i i 6‘ 1' i w
"" .7,_ 1 KP: m .7 ' , l] i -.~_ 1;. ' 4., 1
""'\’ g 1—; g 1° ‘ I "" i r ' - ' it. 1 ' '1 i 3‘;
0' , ‘ \\ ,—"" j"" '\ E :4 ““U .. . 3
~ 4&2)"" ""'v— E 4f \ .""
\ 8 ,
Figure 2. The advanced resistive exercise device (ARED). Photograph
courtesy of National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Figure 3. The cycle ergometer with vibration isolation system (CEVIS).
Photograph courtesy of National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
includes data transfer and cleanup. Crewmembers are allot— has been applied to spaceﬂight exercise prescriptions, espe—
ted 90 minutes for ARED sessions but, as with athletes on cially given the enhanced capabilities of ARED. Most
earth, only 40—60 minutes is spent on actual exercise with recently, the Integrated Resistance and Aerobic Training
the remaining time consumed by equipment setup, hardware Study (SPRINT) has formally emphasized high intensity for
inspections, and transitions between exercises, data logging, both resistance and aerobic exercise across the duration of the
stowage, and cleanup. Because crew time is at a premium, it mission (107). The exercise prescriptions for this study were
is important to understand the minimum amount of exercise inﬂuenced by (a) a series of detraining studies that showed
time required to maintain physical ﬁlnction. This will require exercise intensity was the most important factor for maintain—
sound scientiﬁc evidence demonstrating that shorter exercise ing ﬁtness (60,61); (b) evidence demonstrating that intervals of
prescriptions can elicit positive outcomes in musculoskeletal short (20—30 seconds) (17,48,49), medium (2 minutes) (52,81),
and cardiovascular systems. The recent hardware upgrades and long duration (4 minutes) (57,154) were efﬁcacious in
have permitted increases in exercise intensity, and research is improving ﬁtness; and (c) unloading studies (bed rest and limb
underway to determine how to safely reduce time spent on suspension) suggesting that lower frequency (3 d-wk‘ 1) resis—
resistance and aerobic exercise. Exercise is a psychological tance exercise could maintain muscle mass and strength
countermeasure as well; thus, it is also important to under— (5,119). Participation by crewmembers in SPRINT is volun—
stand the amount of exercise time required for behavioral tary. Once enrolled in the study, crewmembers are asked to
health beneﬁts. It is certainly possible that physical ﬁinction keep detailed records of exercise performed both before and
may be maintained with short episodes of high—intensity during ﬂight, participate in acquisition of dependent variables
exercise, but that psychological beneﬁts may require addi— (e.g., MRI, muscle ﬁinction and VOZpeak), and adhere to study
tional exercise. Nevertheless, understanding how to maXi— constraints (e.g., a minimum of 4 hours between resistance
mize the efﬁciency of exercise is critical. and aerobic sessions). The results from SPRINT will enhance
Numerous studies demonstrate that higher intensity the understanding of how exercise hardware capabilities and
exercise prescriptions result in positive musculoskeletal and exercise prescriptions interact to prevent physiological decon—
cardiovascular adaptations (17,48,49,57,154). This concept ditioning during long—duration spaceﬂight.
VOLUME 29 | NUMBER 12 | DECEMBER 2015 | 3537

"
"8","Astronaut-Athlete
days before ﬂight, throughout the ﬂight, and for 18 days on
their return (63). Crewmembers during the Skylab missions
V‘uvi ‘ '1 (,1 thus consumed 99% of the WHO recommendations (72)
Q‘ ' with protein, carbohydrate, and fat constituting 15, 58, and
7 ""‘ 26% of their energy intake, respectively (72). These data
“"" I demonstrate that when food intake is mandated, crewmem—
8 \ , ‘ , bers are capable of meeting the WHO recommendations.
' l. ""' However, the postﬂight comments of the Skylab astronauts
.' . regarding the required food intake were so negative that this
-, ' \ ‘ ) practice has not been repeated (135). Since the Skylab mis—
K?» ' ’0 (A \ sions, a voluntary reduction in energy intake has been a con—
"": . ‘ Z/l/ ' sistent ﬁnding during space missions. Lane et al. (72)
V“ ‘ ‘ 2: ' ____¢_,. J‘ summarized energy intake from crewmembers on all mis—
3‘ - ‘ L7 i ‘ z ‘ .1 sions (n = 33) up to 1994 and found that astronauts averaged
:13 i, ‘Pl . ' 7,864 kJ-d_1, which was only 64% of the WHO recommen—
$ I; . i 7 , . dations. Macronutrient intake for protein, carbohydrate, and
- _1 fat during this period was 16, 58, and 28%, respectively.
‘ 1 K . ,v. According to reports, few complaints were made about the
ll: i . food quality or choices during US. Space Shuttle missions
L"" . 9 . - (72); however, crewmembers may have had limited time to
7 [‘5' , _~__ _ consume food because of their rigorous schedules (72). On
' , M ,1 .. I missions of longer duration, Stein et al. (139) reported that
/ “ "" ' crewmembers consumed 11,946 kJ-day_1 which was ~78%
"" - of their preﬂight value. More recently on the 188, Smith et al.
K , f!"" m (130) showed mean energy intake during ﬂight was 9,563 k]
——~..‘————————‘———————""‘-': _. per day, which was equivalent to ~80% of the WHO rec—
' -. ommendations. Total protein intake was 102 ot29 g-d‘1
_ . . (1.37 g-kg‘l-d_1); carbohydrate and fat intake were not
:1:ELZiIA;::::::::S:nS::::niéﬁﬁgilrlsgfri Phowgraph courtesy Of reported independently. Historically, total energy intake
has been lower than recommended levels (136), which facil—
itates a loss of body weight at a rate of 2.4% per 100 days of
F A CT ORS INFLUEN CIN G EXERCISE spaceﬂight (88). Howeyer, more recent missions suggest that
C OUNTERME ASURE S EFFI C A CY total energy 1ntake 1s 1mprov1ng w1th resultant welght loss
m1t1gatlon (126).
Energy Intake and Macronutrient Composition
The history of nutrition during exposure to microgravity is Aging and Anabolic Resistance
well documented (100,129,131,135). Energy and water are In studies that have examined astronauts and exercise
the essential human consumables; they inﬂuence numerous countermeasures, subjects were on average 48 years of age
physiological systems and are primary contributors to the (46,90,146). Between the ages of 20 and 70 years, muscle
overall health of the human body. An exhaustive discussion mass losses on earth range from 0.26 to 0.56% per year
of this topic is beyond the scope of this reView. Thus, an (30). This natural age—associated decrease in muscle mass
emphasis will be placed on total energy intake and the com— may be problematic for astronauts for several reasons. First,
position of macronutrients ingested during spaceﬂight. The a loss of contractile tissue results in decreased voluntary
requirements for energy intake in space are based on equa— force production (22,23). Decreased strength is associated
tions established by the World Health Organization (WHO), with impaired balance, ﬁinctional decline (6,43,111,149),
assuming moderate levels of actiVity. Macronutrient require— and falls (32,86,91,116). Falls may also be linked to the loss
ments are based on a percentage of the total energy intake of muscle power (i.e., the ability to produce force rapidly)
and are 12—15% protein, 50—55% carbohydrate, and 30—35% (59). Therefore, an older astronaut may have less baseline
fat (70—72,129). (preﬂight) strength and power than a younger counterpart.
During the Skylab program (1973—1974), extensive meta— A second and more subtle consequence of age—related mus—
bolic data were collected during missions lasting 28, 59, and cle loss is its effect on metabolism (155). Skeletal muscle
84 days (63). To date, the data obtained during these mis— tissue is the largest endogenous source of amino acids, which
sions represent much ofwhat is known about energy intake are essential to the synthesis of new proteins and immune
and expenditure during prolonged exposure to microgravity. ﬁinction. Skeletal muscle is also a primary target of insulin
Crewmembers were asked to eat their formulated diet for 21 and the largest reservoir ofglucose (in the form of glycogen);
3538 Jéhﬁrnal of Strength and Conditioning Researcli

"
"9","Jéhﬁrnal of Strength and Conditioning Researcli | www.nsca.c0m
it is also a major site of oxidation of both glucose and free (e) higher ambient carbon dioxide levels. Given the difﬁculty
fatty acids from the systemic circulation (155). Large de— of addressing all of these factors, it may be necessary to
creases in muscle mass can have deleterious consequences include dietary supplementation to assist with energy bal—
for systemic homeostasis and lead to the onset of metabolic ance and increase performance capability.
disorders (26,141). Protein and Am'n A 'd

Aging also seems to exacerbate muscle loss during I 0 Cl 5 . . .
inactivity as older adults lose muscle mass much more One consequence Of reduced energy intake IS a reduction Of
rapidly than their younger counterparts (40,67,97). The ﬁn— muscle protein synthes1s, .Wthh may Shlﬁ net protein

. . balance (synthes1s—degradation) to a negative state (10).
damental mechanisms of aging—related muscle loss are not . . .
well understood Protein breakdown does not seem to be Without adequate energy1ntake,exerc1se to prevent the loss
elevated in healthy older adults (151), and investigators have Of carcliiacc and 81k eltetal nlluscle<1§s6s)ueDn1:y hnnlilntentionflly
been largely unable to identify diflerences in basal (postab— exacer a e muse e issue 088 ' 1e S 1g in pro e1n
sorptive) muscle protein synthesis between young and have been repeatedly demonstrated to protect lean mass
elderly subjects (31 151) However a number 0 f stu dies have during the negative energy balance of weight loss or intense
. ’. . ' .’ . training (64,74,82,92,98). During spaceﬂight, recommended
documented a d1m1n1shed anabolic response in elderly sub— . . . 0 0 .
. . . protein intake is 12 /0—15/0 of total energy intake (70—
JCCtS to feed1ng(31,65,66,150) and exerc1se (68), both potent 72 129). in th A 11 Sk 1 b Sh ttl d 188
anabolic stimuli. This blunted anabolic response has been .’ ’ e p0 0’ y a ’ u e, an proigranis,
“ . . ,, this has corresponded to a range of 0.8—1.6 g-kg 1-d 1
termed anabolic res1stance (104,115). Although astronauts (136) Pr t in int k f 102 -d_1 (1 4 -k _1. d—l) h
are middle—aged adults, anabolic resistance may be a contrib— ' 0 e a es 0 g ' g g . . .ave
uting mechanism underl ing spaceﬂi ht-induced muscle been documented on the 188 (130). Whether this is suﬂic1ent
y g . . to maintain muscle size and strength during spaceﬂight has
loss. Furthermore, although muscle loss during d1suse seems . .
to be driven primarily by a reduction in muscle protein syn— been d1scussed from both muscular and skeletal perspectives
thesis (67,96,144), this is still vigorously debated (105,114). (345135—1137) For liStSZCC’tEed rest ancll 11:11; inimogliiatior}
Muscle protein breakdown is largely unaltered by bed rest in .S u es ave exp. 0 e e muscu OS. e e a e 6C S O
. increased protein intake (35), the prov1s1on of branched—
young adults (41,144); however, we lack corresponding data . . . . . .
in older populations. Although an increase in breakdown of chain amino acids (138’140)? essential amino ac1ds (97’157)’
muscle protein would be consistent with the accelerated loss ancl the essential amino ac1d.le1.1c1ne alone. (148) and the
. . . timing of essential amino ac1d intake relative to exerc1se
ofmuscle mass1n older adults, anabolic res1stance (104,115) (15) T d t n ith r r t . _ 1 t d . 'd
or a blunted protein synthetic response to mixed nutrient ' O a e, e e p O e1n re a e .nor amino a.Cl
meals is likely to play a much greater role (150). Supporting ielated countermeasures have been cons1dered for 1n—ﬂ1ght
data have also been reported by researchers using a 14—day 31111: lenientatcilon Ilgescaurs: :lfi conctterns lover eiliteacy,bc3st Of
unilateral knee immobilization protocol (50). In a cohort of e V6 y 0. e ’ 8i e p0 en la. associa ion . e.ween
young healthy subjects postabsorptive basal muscle protein elevated animal protein/sulﬁJr—containing amino ac1d intake
synthesis in the vastus lateralis of the immobilized leg fell by and markers .Of. bone breakdown (5.4’157’158) Another
27%. Furthermore the nonimmobilized leg had an increase aspect ofprotein intake With the potential to improve muscle
in muscle protein synthesis that was as much as 68% greater outcomes in spaceﬂight 1s protein distribution across meals.
than the response of the immobilized leg to available amino In a ground—basecl study, evenly dIStrlbUted protein 1ntal<e
acids. The authors concluded that both the decrease in post— (30 g per meal) elic1ted 25/0. higher rates Of muscle protein
absorptive muscle protein synthesis and the impaired post— sryiltlhesgioovle; a ii—lgcgur Piriid 2h? .Clhd a 81k ewed 1350?“;
prandial response cause the muscle loss that occurs during a e ’ ’ a . g a . e 31y. mea S.’ respec ivey
immobilization (50) Similar Chan es ma ex lain a lar e that is representative of typical American dietary practice
ortion of the muscle loss with s agceﬂi h: p g (87). Together with other data which indicate that ~30 g
p p g ' of high—quality protein elicits a maximal anabolic response
ENHANCEMENT 0F IN-FLIGHT (145), meal—based protein prescription represents a payload—
EXERCISE COUNTERMEASURES free strategy to potentially enhance the protective eflect of
Ener Intake protein that is already in the astronaut diet (73,95,156).
Incregzisin voluntar ener intake to the WHO— Future research to explore the effects of protein distribution
recommeided level ihas beeiy su ested as an im ortant and protein/essential amino acid/leucine supplementation
step toward improving crewmeiigber health (135) and on the optimization of exercise countermeasures and muscle
enhancing the effectiveness of near—daily resistance and aer— outcomes IS warranted.
obic exercise. Stein et al. (135) suggest several possible rea— Phosphocreatine Intake
sons for the reduced intake, which include (a) enhanced food Phosphocreatine, in combination with the enzyme creatine
processing that decreases food gratiﬁcation, (b) altered gas— kinase, is used as an immediate energy source to rapidly
trointestinal transit, (C) decreased satiety due to food not regenerate adenosine triphosphate for muscle contraction
settling in the stomach, (d) thermoregulatory issues, and (14). Other hypothesized effects of phosphocreatine include
VOLUME 29 | NUMBER 12 | DECEMBER 2015 | 3539

"
"10","Astronaut-Athlete
decreased blood levels of proinﬂammatory cytokines, an mance. Alternatively, it can be argued that pharmaceutical
increase in satellite cell proliferation, and upregulation of interventions must be considered as a realistic and potentially
genes for protein synthesis and cell repair (118). Phospho— Viable adjunct therapy during spaceﬂight. Exercising intensely
creatine supplementation (5 g-d‘l) in combination with 6—7 days a week for 6 months (and much longer for ﬂiture
resistance exercise training has been shown to increase mus— Mars missions) is physically taxing, consumes energy stores
cle mass and strength in younger adults (33). Similar mus— and valuable crew time, and still is not 100% eﬂective at pro—
cular improvements (34) and enhanced cognitive function tecting muscle strength and cardiovascular endurance for all
have been reported in older adults (112). During upper— astronauts. In addition, alternative approaches must be con—
extremity immobilization, Johnston et al. (62) showed that sidered as contingencies for catastrophic exercise equipment
consumption of creatine on days 15—21 of immobilization failure. Pharmaceuticals such as myostatin inhibitors (89,123),
resulted in better maintenance of lean tissue (+ 1%), strength testosterone (152), and selective androgen receptor modula—
(—4%), and endurance (—10%) than placebo (—4, —22, tors (8,120) are just a few candidate agents that may prove
—43%, respectively). Because creatine was not provided until eﬂicacious. These and others may warrant ﬂirther investiga—
the third week of immobilization, it is unknown if earlier tion in analog research to determine the safety and eﬂicacy of
supplementation could ﬂirther attenuate muscle mass, extended use during long—duration exploration missions.
strength, and endurance losses. In contrast, Hespel et al.
showed that creatine supplementation was not effective to CONCLUSION
maintain muscle mass and power during 2 weeks of leg The human body rapidly adapts to the microgravity
immobilization, but did improve rehabilitation outcomes enVironment, resulting in central and peripheral system
(58). One limitation of these studies is the technique used impairments relative to the function of these systems on
to stimulate disuse atrophy and strength loss. Cast immobi— earth. Although astronauts do not perform exercise training
lization and the restriction of joint movement result in for sport or competition, a strict dedication to aerobic and
greater muscle atrophy and strength loss than unloading resistance exercise before and during spaceﬂight is important
during limb suspension (55) or bed rest (21). Furthermore, as a defense against impaired task performance. The answer
neither of these 2 studies evaluated phosphocreatine intake to the central question of how much ﬁtness is required for
with exercise, which is a critical catalyst for physiological space mission success is still unknown and requires further
adaptations. Further research coupling creatine supplemen— work to elucidate the strength, power, and aerobic capacity
tation and exercise countermeasures is needed in spaceﬂight thresholds associated with eﬂective simulated astronaut task
analogs such as bed rest or limb suspension. performance. Variables, such as energy intake and aging, also
Vitamin D need to be considered to gain a better understanding of
. . . multilevel interactions that inﬂuence ada tation durin
To our knowledge, Vitamin D (400—500 IU-d‘l) is the only . . . p g
. . spaceﬂight. Future research exploring exerCise countermeas—
dietary supplement that has been supplied to astronauts dur— . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . ures w1th manipulation of Vitamin D, protein/amino ac1d
ing ﬂight (124,130); this supplementation was introduced in . . .
. . . . intake, and phosophocreatine supplementation represents
response to declines of25—360/0 in serum 25—hydroxy Vitamin . . . .
. . the next stage of exploratory strategies to optimize exerCise
D concentrations during and after 3—month t0 4—month countermeasures and erformance durin s aceﬂi ht Phar
ﬂights (127,128,130). Vitamin D is known to be beneﬁcial . p g .p g. '
. . . . maceutical approaches also must be cons1dered, given the
for calc1um metabolism and bone tissue (9). However, w1th im ortance o f success full ex lorin dee s ace
the discovery ofvitamin D receptors in skeletal muscle (134), p y p g p p '
it is biologically plausible that Vitamin D may play a role in PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS
muscle mass, stren h, and erformance, articularl in older .
gt p .p . y . Astronauts are a small group of occupational athletes who,
adults (11,103,110). Currently, the relationship between in— . . . .
. . . . . . . like others in the tactical athlete population, need strength
ﬂight Vitamin D supplementation and in—ﬂight and postﬂight . . . . .
. . . . and conditioning programs tailored to the unique demands
serum Vitamin D status is unclear (130). Also unknown is . . .
. . of their profeSSion. These programs must be implemented
how supplementation inﬂuences muscle mass and strength . . .
. . . both before and during spaceﬂight to ensure optimal
during micrograVity exposure. . . . . . . .
performance and ultimately, miss10n success. Critical in this
Pharmaceutical Intervention process is the identiﬁcation of muscle strength/power and
Evidence exploring anabolic hormone changes during space— aerobic capacity thresholds below which mission task
ﬂight is difﬁcult to interpret. Early data suggested that performance is likely to be impaired; such work has been
testosterone may be reduced with spaceﬂight (142); however, successﬁilly conducted in other tactical professions (e.g., ﬁre,
more recent studies do not support this conclusion (125). police, and military) and must be performed to maximize the
Serum cortisol and dehydroepiandrosterone were also potential for ﬂiture mission success. Last, advances in
unchanged during spaceﬂight in crewmembers (125), indicat— spaceﬂight exercise monitoring and prescription and also
ing that nonpharmacological approaches may be safer for the research to characterize the potential beneﬁts of various
optimization of exercise countermeasures and human perfor— nutritional adjuncts and pharmaceuticals will serve to better
the . . , 1M
3540 Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research

"
"11","the . . . m
Journal of Strength and Condltlonlng Research | www.nsca.c0m
prepare and protect the astronaut—athlete during perfor— maximal cardiac output response to six weeks of exercise training.
mance Of their unique missions. Am J P/zyszol Regul Integr Comp P/zyszal 306: R752—R760, 2014.
14. Brooks, GA, Fahey, TD, and Baldwin, KM. Exercise P/zysz‘alog:
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Human Bz'amelgez‘z'cs and Its Applz'mz‘zbm. Boston, MA: McGraw—
Hill, 2005.
The authors would like to thank all members of the Exerc1se 15. Brooks, N, Cloutier, G], Cadena, SM, L ayn 6’ JE, N 613 CH, C A,
Physiology and Countermeasures Laboratory at NASA Freed, AM, Roubenoff, R, and Castaneda—Sceppa, C. Resistance
Johnson Space Center for their efforts in making this training and timed essential amino acids protect against the loss of
1. . . 1 h h . 11 ﬁll muscle mass and strength during 28 days of bed rest and energy
pub ication.p0381b e. T e aut ors ate espec1a y grate t0 deﬁcit. JAPPZP/Zy31b11053 2 41_2 48, 2008.
JOhri DCWItt, PhD’ from Wylé’ Selence, TeChnOIOgy and 16. Buckey,JC Jr, Lane, LD, Levine, BD, Watenpaugh, DE, Wright, S],
Engmeermg Group, and Wllham Amonette, PhD, at the Moore, WE, Gaffney, FA, and Blomqvist, CG. Orthostatic
University of Houston, Clear Lake, for their helpﬁll sugges— intOICI‘aHCC after Spaceﬂight JAPPZ P777379] 813 7—18, 1996-
tions that improved the manuscript. This work was partially 17- Burgomaster, KA, Howarth, KR, Phillips, SM, Balfobowchuk,.M,
ﬁmded by North Dakota NASA Experimental Program to Maedopald’ MJ’. MCGee’.SL’ and Glbala’ MJ' 8181113? metabOhC
, , , adaptat10ns durmg exerCISe after lOW volume sprmt Interval and
StlmUIate Competltive ResearCh (EPSCOR) t0 KJ- HaCkHCY- traditional endurance training in humans. J P/zyszbl 586: 151—160,
The results of this study do not constitute endorsement of 2008.
the product by the authors or the National Strength and 18. Caiozzo, VJ, Haddad, F, Baker, M], Herrick, RE, Prietto, N, and
Conditioning Association Baldwin, KM. Microgravity—induced transformations of myosin
' isoforms and contractile properties of skeletal muscle. J Appl
R P/zysz'al81: 123—132, 1996.
EFERENCES 19. Caldwell, E, Newby, N, and Ploutz—Snyder, L. A better ARED.
1. Ade, C], Broxterman, RM, and Barstow, T]. Standardized “pre- Presented at: NASA Human Research Program Investigators’
ﬂight” exercise tests to predict performance during extravehicular Workshop; 2014; Galveston, T X.
act1v1t1es 1n a lunar env1r6nment. Presented at: 2015 .Human 20. Cavanagh, PR, Gene, KO, Gopalakrishnan, R, Kuklis, MM,
Research Program InvestIgators Workshop, Integratwe Pathways . . .
t M . 2015. G 1 t TX Maender, CC, and R1ce, A]. Foot forces durmg typ1cal days on the
O ars, ’ 21 V63 0n, ' international space station. J szmec/z 43: 2182—2188, 2010.
2' $?goggggxggggﬁﬂ’eggf; n83: tiiricgg6fglif¥uggga 1?:nspo rt 21. Clark, BC. In Vivo alterations in skeletal muscle form and function
Med Scz'Spon‘s Exerc 47: 1351—1361, 2015. after dISUSC atrophy. [lied SCI Sports Eaten 41: 1869—1875, 2009.
3. Akima, H, Kubo, K, Kanehisa, H, Suzuki, Y, Gunji, A, and 22. Clarlf, BC. and Mahmi, TM. Sarcopema =/= dynapema. J Gerontol
. . . . A 320] S62 Med SCI 63. 829—834, 2008.
Fukunaga, T. Leg—press remstance training durmg 20 days of 6 .
degrees head—down—tilt bed rest prevents muscle deconditioning. 23. Clark, BC and Manini, TM. Functional consequences Ofsarcopema
Eur J Appl P/zysz'ol 82: 30—38, 2000. and dynapenia in the elderly. Curr 0pm 672'” Nqu M61215 Care 13:
4. Alkner, BA and Tesch, PA. Knee extensor and plantar ﬂexor 271—276’ 2010'
muscle size and function following 90 days of bed rest With or 24- Clark, BC, Manini, TM, Bolanowski, SJ, and Ploutz—Snyder, LL-
Without resistance exercise. Eur J Appl P/zysz‘ol 93: 294—305, 2004. Adaptations in human neuromuscular function following
longed unweighting: II. Neurological properties and motor
5. Bamman, MM, Clarke, MS, Feeback, DL, Talmadge, R], pro . .
Stevens, BR, Lieberman, SA, and Greenisen, MC. Impact of Imagery efﬁcacy. JAR“ P/zyszal 101' 264—272’ 2006'
resistance exercise during bed rest on skeletal muscle sarcopenia 25- Clark, BC, Pierce, JR, Manini, TM, and Ploutz—Snyder, LL- Effect
and myosin isoform distribution. J Appl P/zyszbl 84: 157—163, 1998. Of prolonged unweighting of human skeletal muscle on
6. Bendall, M], Bassey, E], and Pearson, MB. Factors affecting neuromotor force control. Eur J Appl P/zyszal 100: 53—62, 2007.
walking speed of elderly people. Age Ageing 18: 327—332, 1989. 26. Clarke, MS. The effects of exercise on skeletal muscle in the aged. J
7. Beyene, N. The art of space ﬂight exercise hardware: Design and chuloséelez‘ Neummzl Interact 4: 175—178’ 2004'
implementation. American Institute OfAemmzuz‘z'cs and Astronautics, 27. Convertino, VA. Physiological adaptations to weightlessness:
1—10, 2004. Effects on exercise and work performance. Exerc Sport Scz'Rev 18:
8. Bhasin, S and Jasuja, R. Selective androgen receptor modulators as 1194“” 1990'
function promoting therapies. Curr 0pm 672'” Nqu Metaﬁ Care 12: 28. ConvertinO, VA, Karst, GM, Kirby, CR, and Goldwater, DJ- Effect
232—240, 2009. of simulated weightlessness 0n exercise—induced anaerobic
9. Bikle, DD. Vitamin D and bone. Curr Osteapoms Rep 10: 151—159, threshold. Avid; Space Emma” Med 57: 325—331’ 1986'
2012. 29. Convertino, VA and Sandler, H. Exercise countermeasures for

10. Biolo, G, Ciocchi, B, Stulle, M, Bosutti, A, Barazzoni, R, Zanetti, M, spaceﬂlght. Ada Astronaut 35: 253—270’ 1995'

Antonione, R, Lebenstedt, M, Platen, P, Heer, M, and Guarnieri, G. 30. Cruz—Jentoft, A] and M0rley,JE. Sarcapem'a. Chichester, UK:
Calorie restriction accelerates the catabolism of lean body mass Wiley—Blackwell, 2012.
durmg 2 wk of bed rest. Am J Clm Nutr 86: 366—372, 2007. 31. Cuthbertson, D, Smith, K, Babraj, J, Leese, G, Waddell, T,

11. Bischoff, HA, Stahelin, HB, Dick, W, Akos, R, Knecht, M, Salis, C, Atherton, P, Wackerhage, H, Taylor, PM, and Rennie, M].
Nebiker, M, Theiler, R, Pfeifer, M, Begerow, B, Lew, RA, and Anabolic signaling deﬁcits underlie amino acid resistance of
Conzelmann, M. Effects of Vitamin D and calcium wasting, aging muscle. FASEB J 19: 422—424, 2004.
supplementation Oil falls: A randomized controlled trial. J Bone 32 de Rekeneire N Visser M Peila, R N evitt MC C aul e A

c . ' 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 y9 J 9
Mm” R63 18' 343—351’ 2003' Tylavsky, FA, Simonsick, EM, and Harris, TB. 13 a fall just a fall:

12. Blomqvist, CG, Buckey,JC, Gaffney, FA, Lane, LD, Levine, BD, Correlates offalling in healthy older persons. The health, aging and
and Watenpaugh, DE. Mechanisms of post—ﬂight orthostatic body composition study. J Am Geriatr Soc 51: 841—846, 2003.
Intolerance. J Gmwz‘ P/zyszal 1: P122_P124’ 1994' 33. Dempsey, RL, Mazzone, MF, and Meurer, LN. Does oral creatine

13. Bonne, TC, Doucende, G, Fluck, D,Jac0bs, RA, Nordsborg, NB, supplementation improve strength? A meta—analysis. J Fam Pma‘
Robach, P, Walther, G, and Lundby, C. Phlebotomy eliminates the 51: 945—951, 2002.

VOLUME 29 | NUMBER 12 | DECEMBER 2015 | 3541

"
"12","Astronaut-Athlete

34. Devries, MC and Phillips, SM. Creatine supplementation during 53. Grichko, VP, HeyWOOd—Cooksey, A, Kidd, KR, and Fitts, RH.
resistance training in older adults—a meta—analysis. Med Sa‘Spon‘s Substrate proﬁle in rat soleus muscle ﬁbers after hindlimb
Exerc 46: 1194—1203, 2014. unloading and fatigue. J Appl P/zysz'al 88: 473—478, 2000.

35. Dirks, ML, Wall, BT, Nilwik, R, Weerts, DH, Verdijk, LB, and van 54. Hackney, K] and English, KL. Protein and essential amino acids to
Loon, L]. Skeletal muscle disuse atrophy is not attenuated by protect musculoskeletal health during spaceﬂight: Evidence of
dietary protein supplementation in healthy older men. J Nqu 144: a paradox? L9? 4: 295—3 17, 2014.

1196—1203’ 2014' 55. Hackney, K] and Ploutz—Snyder, LL. Unilateral lower limb

36. Dorfman, TA, Levine, BD, Tillery, T, Peshock, RM, Hastings,JL, suspension: Integrative physiological knowledge from the past 20
Schneider, SM, Macias, BR, Biolo, G, and Hargens, AR. Cardiac years (1991—2011). Eur J Appl P/zysz'al 112: 9—22, 2012.
gggghy 1n women followmg bed rest. J14? P Z P/zy 320] 103: 846’ 56. Hagan, RD and Schaffner, G. Exercise countermeasures used

' during space ﬂight. Presented at: Second Joint EMBS/SMES

37. Dudley, GA, Duvoisin, MR, Adams, GR, Meyer, RA, Belew, AH, Conference; 2002; Houston, TX,
and Buchanan P. Adaptations t0 unilateral lower limb suspension .

. ’. . . 57. Helgerud,], Hoydal, K, Wang, E, Karlsen, T, Berg, P, Bjerkaas, M,
m humans. szczz‘ Space Emma” Med 63. 678—683, 1992. Simonsen, T, Helgesen, C, Hjorth, N, Bach, R, and Hoff, J Aerobic

38- Dudley, GA, Hather, BM, and Buchanan, P. Skeletal muscle high—intensity intervals improve VO2maX more than moderate
responses to unloading With special reference to man. J Fla Med training. Med Scz'Spon‘s Exerc 39: 665—671, 2007.

Assoc 79: 525—529’ 1992' 58. Hespel, P, Op’t Eijnde, B, Van Leemputte, M, Urso, B,

39- English, KL, Hackney, K], De Witt, JK, Ploutz—Snyder, R], Greenhaff, PL, Labarque, V, Dymarkowski, S, Van Hecke, P, and
GOCtChiUS, EL, and Ploutz—Snyder, LL- A ground—based Richter, EA. Oral creatine supplementation facilitates the
comparison Of the Muscle Atrophy Research and EXCl‘CiSC System rehabilitation of disuse atrophy and alters the expression of
(MARES) and a commercially available isokinetic dynamometer. muscle myogenic factors in humans. J P/zyyz‘ol 536: 625—633,
Ada Asz‘mmzuz‘ 92: 3—9, 2013. 2001,

40- English, KL and Paddon—Jones, D- Protecting mflSC16. mass and 59. Hess,JA, Woollacott, M, and Shivitz, N. Ankle force and rate of
ﬁlﬂCthﬂ In older adults during bed rest. CW?” 0,01” Cl”? N107” M6315 force production increase following high intensity strength training
CW6 131 34-39, 2010- in frail older adults. Agzhg 672'” Exp Res 18: 107—115, 2006.

41. Ferrando, AA, Lane, HW, Stuart, CA, Davis—Street, J, and 60. Hickson, RC, Foster, C, Pollock, ML, Galassi, TM, and Rich, S.
Wolfe, RR..Pr010nged.bed FCSt decreases skeletal muscle and WhOIC Reduced training intensities and loss of aerobic power, endurance,
body protem synthes1s. Am J P/zyszal 270: E627—E633, 1996. and cardiac growth. JAR“ 13/23/3le 58; 4924199, 1985.

42- Ferretti, G, Girardis, M, Meia, C, and Antonutto, G- EEC“? 0f 61. Hickson, RC and Rosenkoetter, MA. Reduced training frequencies
PFOIOngd bed rest on card10vascular oxygen transport durmg and maintenance of increased aerobic power. Med Sa‘Spon‘s Exerc
submaximal exercise in humans. Eur J Appl P/zysz'al Occup P/zysz'al 13; 13—16, 1981.

7?: 398—402’ 1998' . . 62. Johnston, AP, Burke, DG, MacNeil, LG, and Candow, DG. Effect

43- Flatslrone, MA and Evans, VVJ Exerc1se 1n the OIdCSt Old- TOP of creatine supplementation during cast—induced immobilization
Genaz‘r 126/7451] 53 615—77, 1990- on the preservation of muscle mass, strength, and endurance.

44. Fitts, RH, Riley, DR, and Widrick, J]. Physiology ofa microgravity J Sfrmgf/z Cami Res 23: 116—120, 2009-
environment invited review: Microgravity and skeletal muscle. 63. Johnston, RS and Dietlein, LF, eds. Bz'oc/zemz'm] Resultsﬁam Séylaﬁ.
JAR“ 13/73/570] 89‘ 823—839, 2000- Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration,

45. Fitts, RH, Riley, DR, and Widrick,]]. Functional and structural 1977-
adaptations of skeletal muscle to microgravity. J Exp Biol 204: 64. Jesse, AR, Atkinson, S A, Tarnopolsky, M A, and Phillips, SM.
3201—3208, 2001- Increased consumption of dairy foods and protein during diet— and

46. Fitts, RH, Trappe, SW, Costill, DL, Gallagher, PM, Creer, AC, exercise—induced weight loss promotes fat mass loss and lean mass
C0110t0n, PA, Peters,JR, R0mat0wski,JG, Bain,JL, and Riley, DA, gain in overweight and obese premenopausal women. J Nqu 141:
Prolonged space ﬂight—induced alterations in the structure and 1626-1634, 2011-
function ofhuman skeletal muscle ﬁbres. J P/zyszbl 588: 3567—3592, 65. Katsanos, CS, Kobayashi, H, Shefﬁeld_M00re’ M, Aarsland, A, and
2010' Wolfe, RR. Aging is associated With diminished accretion of

47. Fleck, SJ and Kraemer, W] Dgyzgmhg Reyz‘ymmg 772127227257 Programy, muscle proteins after the ingestion of a small bolus of essential
Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics, 2014. amino acids. Am J 672'” Nqu 82: 1065—1073, 2005.

48. Gibala, M] and McGee, SL. Metabolic adaptations to short—term 66- Katsanos, CS, Kobayashi, H, Shefﬁeld—Moore, M, Aarsland, A,
high—intensity interval training: A little pain for a lot of gain? Exerc and Wolfe, RR. A high proportion ofleucine iS required for
Sport Scz' Rev 36; 58_63, 2008, optimal stimulation of the rate of muscle protein synthesis by

49. Gibala, M], McGee, SL, Garnham, AP, Howle t t, KF, Snow, R], and ggsggltlal ammo ac1ds 1n the elderly. Am J P/zyszal 291: E381—E387,
Hargreaves, M. Brief intense interval exercise activates AMPK and '
p38 MAPK signaling and increases the expression of PGC—lalpha 67. Kortebein, P, Ferrando, A, Lombeida, J, Wolfe, R, and Evans, W
in human skeletal muscle. J Appl P/zysz'al 106: 929—934, 2009. Effect of 10 days of bed rest on skeletal muscle in healthy older

50. Glover, EI, Phillips, SM, Oates, BR, Tang,JE, Tarnopolsky, MA, adults. JAM 297: 1772—1774’ 2007'

Selby, A, Smith, K, and Rennie, M]. Immobilization induces 68- KOSCk, DJ, Kim,JS, Petrella,JK, CFOSSJM, and Bamman, MM-
anabolic resistance in human myoﬁbrillar protein synthesis With Efﬁcacy of 3 days/Wk resistance training on myoﬁber hypertrophy
low and high dose amino acid infusion. J P/zysz'al 586: 6049—6061, and myogenic mechanisms in young vs. older adults. J Appl P/zysz'al
2008. 101: 531—544, 2006.

51. Gopalakrishnan, R, Gene, KO, Rice, A], Lee, SM, Evans, H], 69. Lambertz, D, Perot, C, Kaspranski, R, and Goubel, F. Effects of
Maender, CC, Ilaslan, H, and Cavanagh, PR. Muscle volume, long—term spaceﬂight on mechanical properties of muscles in
strength, endurance, and exercise loads during 6—m0nth missions in humans. J Appl P/zysz'al 90: 179—188, 2001.
space. szaz‘ Space Emma” Med 81: 91—102' 70. Lane, H, Grigorov, E, Bourland, C, Agureev, A, Pierson, D, and

52. Greenleaf, JE, Bulbulian, R, Bernauer, EM, Haskell, WL, and Doborovolsky, V. Nuz‘n'z‘z'oizal Reguz'nemem‘sfar Intematz'amzl Space
Moore, T. Exercise—training protocols for astronauts in Sz‘az‘z'aﬂ: Mission UZb Ta 360 Days. Houston, TX: NASA Johnson
microgravity. J Appl P/zysz'al 67: 2191—2204, 1989. Space Center, 1996.

the . . , 1M
3542 Journal of Strength and Condltlonlng Research

"
"13","the . . , m
Journal of Strength and C0nd1t10n1ng Research | www.nsca.com

71. Lane, H, P001, S, and Huntoon, CL. Nuz‘n'z‘z'omzl Reguz'remem‘sfar 90. Moore, AD Jr, Downs, ME, Lee, SM, Feiveson, AH, Knudsen, P,
Extended Duration Oréz'z‘er Mission (30—90 D) and Space Sz‘az‘z'aiz and Ploutz—Snyder, L. Peak exercise oxygen uptake during and
Freedom (30—120 D). Houston, TX: NASA Johnson Space Center, following long—duration spaceﬂight. J Appl P/zyszbl 117: 231—238,
1992. 2014.

72. Lane, HW, Smith, SM, Rice, BL, and Bourland, CT. Nutrition in 91. Moreland,JD, Richardson,JA, Goldsmith, CH, and Clase, CM.
space: Lessons from the past applied to the future. Am J 672'” Nqu Muscle weakness and falls in older adults: A systematic
60: 801S—805S, 1994. review and meta—analysis. JAM Geriatr Soc 52: 1121—1129,

73. Layman, DK. Dietary Guidelines should reﬂect new understandings 2004'
about adult protein needs. Nuz‘r M61215 (Lona? 6: 12, 2009. 92. Murphy, CH, Hector, AJ, and Phillips, SM. Considerations for

74. Layman, DK, Evans, E, Baum, J1, Seyler, J, Erickson, DJ, and protein intake in managing weight loss in athletes. EurJ Sport Sci
Boileau, RA. Dietary protein and exercise have additive effects on 15: 1‘8’ 2014'
body composition during weight loss in adult women. J Nqu 135: 93, Narici, MV and de Boer, MD. Disuse of the musculo—skeletal
1903—1910, 2005. system in space and on earth. Eur J Appl P/zyszb] 111: 403—420,

75. Layne, CS, Lange, GW, Pruett, CJ, McDonald, PV, Merkle, LA, 2011'

Mulavara, AP, Smith, SL, Kozlovskaya, IB, and Bloomberg,JJ 94. NASA. International space station. Available at: http://WWW.nasa.
Adaptation Of neuromuscular activation patterns during treadmill g0v/missi0n_pages/station/main/Qnthestation/facts_and_ﬁgures,
walking after long—duration space ﬂight. Ada Asz‘mmzuz‘ 43: 107— html. Accessed October 31, 2013,

119’ 1998' 95. Paddon—Jones, D and Rasmussen, BB. Dietary protein

76- Layne, CS, McDonald, PV, and B100mberg,JJ. Neuromuscular recommendations and the prevention Ofsarcopenia. Curr 0pm Clz'iz
activation patterns during treadmill walking after space ﬂight. Exp Nuz‘r M6315 Care 12; 86_90, 2009,

Brain Res 113: 104—116, 1997. .
96. Paddon—Jones, D, Shefﬁeld—Moore, M, Cree, MG, Hewhngs, SJ,

77- LeBlanc, A, Lin, C, Shackelford, L, Sinitsyn, V, Evans, H, Aarsland, A, Wolfe, RR, and Ferrando, AA. Atrophy and impaired
Belichenko, 0, Schenkman, B, Kozlovskaya, 1, Oganov, V, muscle protein synthesis during prolonged inactivity and stress. J
Bakulin, A, Hedrick, T, and Feeback, D. Muscle volume, MRI Clzh Eﬁdgc‘rfﬂgl M6315 91; 4836—4841, 2006.

?Exatigg ::$e§9(.'12‘21)5,8ah2c1122d2yoggmp031tion after spaceﬂight. 97. Paddon—Jones, D, Shefﬁeld—Moore, M, Urban, RJ, Sanford, AP,
PP y ' ’ ' . Aarsland, A, Wolfe, RR, and Ferrando, AA. Essential amino acid

78. LeBianc, A, Rowe, R, Schneider, V, Evans, H, arid Hedrick, T. and carbohydrate supplementation ameliorates muscle protein loss
Regional muscle 1033 after short duration spaceﬂight. szaz‘ Space in humans during 28 days bedrest. J 672'” Endacn'ﬂal M61215 89:
Environ Med 66: 1151—1154, 1995. 4351—4358, 2004.

79. Lee, SM, Moore, AD, Everett, ME, Stenger, MB, and Platts, SH. 98. Pasiakos, SM, Cao, J], Margolis, LM, Sauter, ER, Whigham, LD,
Aerobic exercise deconditioning and countermeasures during bed McClung, JP, Rood, JC, Carbone, JW, Combs, GF Jr, and
rest. Amid SP4“ Environ Med 813 52—63, 2010- Young, AJ. Effects ofhigh—protein diets on fat—free mass and muscle

80. Lee, SM, Schneider, SM, Boda, WL, Watenpaugh, DE, protein synthesis following weight loss: A randomized controlled
Macias, BR, Meyer, RS, and Hargens, AR. Supine LBNP exercise trial. FASEB J 273 3837—3847, 2013-
maintains exercise capacity in male twins during 30—d bed rest. Med 99. Pavy—Le Traon, A, Heer, M, Narici, MV, Rittweger, J, and
Sa‘Spon‘s EM” 393 1315—1326, 2007- Vernikos, J From space to earth: Advances in human physiology

81. Lee, SM, Schneider, SM, Boda, WL, Watenpaugh, DE, from 20 years of bed rest studies (1986—2006). Eur J Appl P/zyszbl
Macias, BR, Meyer, RS, and Hargens, AR. LBNP exercise protects 1013 143—194, 2007-
aerobic capacity and sprint speed offemale twins during 30 days Of 100. Perchonok, M and Bourland, C. NASA food systems: Past, present,
bed rest JAPPZ P/Zyo‘w/ 106= 919-928, 2009- and future. Num‘zz‘m 18: 913—920, 2002.

82- Leidy, H], Carnell, NS, Mattes, RD, and Campbell, W W Higher 101. Perhonen, MA, Franco, F, Lane, LD, Buckey,JC, Blomqvist, CG,
protein intake preserves lean mass and satiety With weight loss in Zerwekh, JE, Peshock, RM, Weatherall, PT, and Levine, BD.
pre—obese and obese women. 056570” 153 421—429, 2007- Cardiac atrophy after bed rest and spaceﬂight. J Appl P/zyszb] 91:

83. Levine, BD, Lane, LD, Watenpaugh, DE, Gaffney, FA, Buckey,JC, 645—653, 2001-
and qumqVISt’ CG- Magimal eXCtClSC performance after 102. Perhonen, MA, Zuckerman, JH, and Levine, BD. Deterioration of
adaptation to micrograVIty. JAR“ 13/73/570] 81‘ 686—694, 1996- left ventricular chamber performance after bed rest:

84, Levine, BD, Zuckerman, JH, and Pawelczyk,JA. Cardiac atrophy “cardiovascular deconditioning” 0r hypovolemia? 0276111417072 103:
after bed—rest deconditioning: A nonneural mechanism for 1851-1857, 2001-
orthostatic intolerance. Circulation 96: 517—525, 1997. 103. Pfeifer, M, Begerow, B, Minne, HW, Abrams, C, Nachtigall, D, and

85. L0ehr,JA, Lee, SM, English, KL, Sibonga,J, Smith, SM, Hansen, C. Effects of a short—term Vitamin D and calcium
Spiering, BA, and Hagan, RD. Musculoskeletal adaptations to supplementation on body sway and secondary
training With the advanced resistive exercise device. Med Sa‘Spon‘s hyperparathyroidism in elderly women. J Bone Mineer 15: 1113—
Exerc 43: 146—156, 2011. 1118, 2000.

86. Lord, SR, Ward,JA, Williams, P, and Anstey, KJ.Physi010gical 104. Phillips, SM, Glover, EI, and Rennie, MJ. Alterations of protein
factors associated With falls in older community—dwelling women. turnover underlying disuse atrophy in human skeletal muscle. J
J Am Geriatr Soc 42: 1110—1117, 1994. Appl P/zyszb] 107: 645—654, 2009.

87. Mamerow, MM, Mettler,JA, English, KL, Casperson, SL, Arentson— 105. Phillips, SM and MCGlory, C. CrossTalk proposal: The dominant
Lantz, E, Sheﬂield—Moore, M, Layman, DK, and Paddon—Jones, D. mechanism causing disuse muscle atrophy is decreased protein
Dietary protein distribution positively inﬂuences 24—h muscle protein synthesis. J P/zyszbl 592: 5341—5343, 2014.

SyntheSIS in healthy adults. JNqu 144: 876—880’ 2014' 106. Platts, SH, Stenger, MB, Phillips, TR, Arzeno, NM, Brown, AJ,

88. Matsumoto, A, Storch, KJ, Stolﬁ, A, Mohler, SR, Frey, MA, and Levine, B, and Summers, R. Evidence Based Revzle'w: Risk ofCardz'ac
Stein, TP. Weight loss in humans in space. sz'az‘ Space Environ Med R/zyZ/zm Proﬁlems During Space Flzg/zz‘. Houston, TX: National
82: 615—621, 2011. Aeronautics and Space Adminstration Johnson Space Center,

89. McPherron, AC and Lee, SJ. Double muscling in cattle due to 2010'
mutations in the myostatin gene. Proc NaZZAmd Sci U S A 94: 107. Ploutz—Snyder, L. In—ﬂight exercise—sprint. Presented at: Human
12457—12461, 1997. Research Investigators Workshop; 2012; Houston, TX.

VOLUME 29 | NUMBER 12 | DECEMBER 2015 | 3543

"
"14","Astronaut-Athlete

108. PloutZ—Snyder, L, Ryder, J, English, KL, Buxton, R, Bloomberg, J, 128. Smith, SM, Wastney, ME, O’Brien, KO, Morukov, BV, Latina, 1M,
and Ploutz—Snyder, R. Strategies for identiﬁcation of strength Abrams, SA, Davis—Street,JE, Oganov, V, and Shackelford, LC.
thresholds for exploration tasks. Presented at: 2015 Human Bone markers, calcium metabolism, and calcium kinetics during
Research Program Investigators’ Workshop, Integrated Pathways extended—duration space ﬂight on the mir space station. J Bone
to Mars; 2015; Galveston, TX. Miner Res 20: 208—218, 2005.

109. Ploutz—Snyder, LL, Manini, T, Ploutz—Snyder, R], and Wolf, DA. 129. Smith, SM and Zwart, SR. Nutritional biochemistry of spaceﬂight.
Functionally relevant thresholds of quadriceps femoris strength. J Adv 672'” 6726772 46: 87—130, 2008.

GerontolA BIO] Sm Med SCI 57: 13144—13152 2002' 130. Smith, SM, Zwart, SR,B10Ck, G, Rice, BL, and Davis—Street,JE. The

110. Pojednic, RM and Ceglia, L. The emerging biomolecular role of nutritional status of astronauts is altered after long—term space ﬂight
vitamin D in skeletal muscle. Exerc Sport Sa‘Re‘v 42: 76—81, 2014. aboard the International Space Station. J Nqu 135: 437—443, 2005.

111. Rantanen, T, Guralnik, JM, Ferrucci, L, Penninx, BW, Leveille, S, 131. Smith, SM, Zwart, SR, and Heer, M. Human Adapz‘cmbﬂ 1‘0 Spacg‘lzg/zz‘:
Sipila, S, and Fried, LP. Coimpairments as predictors of severe 7726 R016 ofNum'z‘z'aﬂ. Houston, TX: National Aeronautics and Space
walking disability in older women. J Am Geriatr Soc 49: 21—27, Administration Johnson Space Center, 2014.

2001' 132. Spaak,], Montmerle, S, Sundblad, P, and Linnarsson, D. Long—term

112. Rawson, ES and Venezia, AC. Use of creatine in the elderly and bed rest—induced reductions in stroke volume during rest and
evidence for effects on cognitive function in young and 01d. Amz'iza exercise: Cardiac dysfunction vs. volume depletion. J Appl P/zysz'al
Acids 40: 1349—1362, 2011. 98: 648—654, 2005.

113. Reeves, NJ, Maganaris, CN, Ferretti, G, and Narici, MV. Inﬂuence 133. Spiering, BA, Lee, SM, Mulavara, AP, Bentley,JR, Buxton, RE,
of simulated microgravity on human skeletal muscle architecture Lawrence, EL, Sinka, J, Guilliams, ME, Ploutz—Snyder, LL, and
and function. J Gme P/zysz'al 9: P153—P154, 2002. B100mberg,JJ.Test battery designed to quickly and safely assess

114. Reid MB Judge AR and B 0 dine SC. CrossTalk opposing view: diverse indices of neuromuscular function after unweighting. J
The dominant mechanism causing disuse muscle atrophy is Sz‘rengZ/z 0072071263 25: 545—555’ 2011'
proteolysis. J P/zysz'al 592: 5345—5347, 2014. 134. Srikuea, R, Zhang, X, Park—Sarge, OK, and Esser, KA. VDR and

115. Rennie M] Selby A Atherton P Smith K Kumar V Glover EL CYP27B1 are expressed in C2C12 cells and regenerating skeletal
and Philips, SM. Facts, n ois e and Wishful thinking: Mus cl e protein muscle: Potential rele in suppression of myoblast proliferation. Am
turnover in aging and human disuse atrophy. Scam] J Med Scz'Span‘s J P/zyszal Cd] P/zyszol 303: C396_C405’ 2012'

20: 5—9, 2009. 135. Stein, TP. Nutrition in the space station era. Nutr Res Rev 14: 87—

116. Rubenstein, LZ. Falls in older people: Epidemiology, risk factors and 118’ 2001'
strategies for prevention. Age Agezhg 35(Suppl 2): ii37—ii41, 2006. 136. Stein, TP. Weight, muscle and bone loss during space ﬂight:

117. Ryder,JW, Buxton, RE, Goetchius, E, Scott—Pandorf, M, Another perspective. Eur J Appl P/zyszal 113: 2171—2181, 2013.
Hackney, K], Fiedler,], Ploutz—Snyder, R], Bloombergjj, and 137. Stein, TP and Blane, S. Does protein supplementation prevent
Ploutz—Snyder, LL. Inﬂuence of muscle strength to weight ratio on muscle disuse atrophy and loss of strength? C77? Rev F0047 Sa‘Nuz‘r
functional task performance. EurJAppZP/zyszbl 113: 911—921, 2013. 51: 828—834, 2011.

118. Sakkas, GK, Schambelan, M, and Mulligan, K. Can the use of 138. Stein, TP, Donaldson, MR, Leskiw, M], Schluter, MD,
creatine supplementation attenuate muscle loss in cacheXia and Baggett, DW, and Boden, G. Branched—Chain amino acid
wasting? Curr 0pm 672'” Nqu M61215 Care 12: 623—627, 2009. supplementation during bed rest: Effect on recovery. J Appl P/zysz'al

119. Schulze, K, Gallagher, P, and Trappe, S. Resistance training 94: 1345—1352 2003'
preserves skeletal muscle function during unloading in humans. 139. Stein, TP, Leskiw, M], Schluter, MD, Donaldson, MR, and
Med Sci Sports Exerc 34: 303—313, 2002. Latina, 1. Protein kinetics during and after long—duration spaceﬂight

120. Segal, S, Narayanan, R, and Dalton,JT. Therapeutic potential of on MIR' Am JP/zyszol 276: E1014_E1021’ 1999'
the SARMs: Revisiting the androgen receptor for drug discovery. 140. Stein, TP, Schluter, MD, LeskiW, M], and Boden, G. Attenuation of
Expert 0pm Invesz‘zg Drugs 15: 377—387, 2006. the protein wasting associated With bed rest by branched—Chain

121. Shackelford, LC, LeBlanc, AD, Driscoll, TB, Evans, H], amino ac1ds. N uz‘m‘zmz 15: 656—660’ 1999'

Rianon, N], Smith, SM, Specter, E, Feeback, DL, and Lai, D. 141. Stein, TP and Wade, CE. Metabolic consequences ofmuscle disuse
Resistance exercise as a countermeasure t0 disuse—induced bone atrophy. J Nqu 135: 1824S—1828S, 2005.
1033' JAR“ P/zyszal 97: 119—129’ 2004' 142. Strollo, F. Hormonal changes in humans during spaceﬂight. Adv

122. Shield, A and Zhou, S. Assessing voluntary muscle activation With Space Biol Med 7: 99—129, 1999.
the tWItCh interpolation technique. Sp 0713 Med 34: 253—267’ 2004' 143. Sundblad, P, Spaak,], and Linnarsson, D. Cardiovascular responses

123. Smith, RC and Lin, BK. Myostatin inhibitors as therapies for to upright and supine exercise in humans after 6 weeks of head—
muscle wasting associated With cancer and other disorders. Curr down tilt (ss6 degrees). Eur J Appl P/zysz'al 83: 303—309, 2000.

0pm Support Pallzaz‘ Care 7: 352—360’ 2013' 144. Symons, TB, Shefﬁeld—Moore, M, Chinkes, DL, Ferrando, AA, and

124. Smith, S and Zwart, SR. Nutrition issues for space exploration. Paddon—Jones, D. Artiﬁcial gravity maintains skeletal muscle
Ada Asz‘mmzuz‘ 63: 609—613, 2008. protein synthesis during 21 days of simulated microgravity. J Appl

125. Smith, SM, Heer, M, Wang, Z, Huntoon, CL, and Zwart, SR. P/zyszal 107: 34—38’ 2009'

Long—duration space ﬂight and bed rest effects on testosterone and 145. Symons, TB, Sheﬂ‘ield—Moore, M, Wolfe, RR, and Paddon—
other steroids. J 672'” Endacn'ﬂal M61215 97: 270—278, 2012. Jones, D. A moderate serving of high—quality protein maximally

126. Smith SM Heer MA Shackelford LC Sibonga, JD P1 outz— stimulates skeletal muscle protein synthesis in young and elderly
Snyder, L, and Zwart, SR. Beneﬁts for bone from resistance exercise SUbJeCtS' J14,” D Z 61‘ ASSOC 109: 1582—1586’ 2009'
and nutrition in long—duration spaceﬂight: Evidence from 146. Trappe, S, Costill, D, Gallagher, P, Creer, A, Peters, JR, Evans, H,
biochemistry and densitometry. J Bone MherRes 27: 1896—1906, 2012. Riley, DA, and Fitts, RH. Exercise in space: Human skeletal muscle

127. Smith SM Wastney ME M orukov BV Latina IM Nyquist LE after 6 months aboard the international space station. J Appl P/zysz'al
Abrams, SA, Taran, EN, Shih, CY, Nillen,JL, Davis—Street,JE, 106: 1159—1168’ 2009'

Rice, BL, and Lane, HW. Calcium metabolism before, during, and 147. Trappe, T, Trappe, S, Lee, G, Widrick,], Fitts, R, and Costill, D.

after a 3—m0 spaceﬂight: Kinetic and biochemical Changes. Am J Cardiorespiratory responses to physical work during and following

P/zysz'al 277: R1—R10, 1999. 17 days ofbed rest and spaceﬂight. J Appl P/zysz'ol 100: 951—957, 2006.
the . . , 1M

3544 Journal of Strength and Condltlonlng Research

"
"15","the . . , m
Journal of Strength and Condltlonlng Research | www.nsca.c0m
148. Trappe, TA, Burd, NA, Louis, ES, Lee, GA, and Trappe, SW. 154. Wisloff, U, Stoylen, A, L0ennechen,JP, Bruvold, M, Rognmo, 0,
Inﬂuence of concurrent exercise or nutrition countermeasures 0n Haram, PM, Tjonna, AE, Helgerud, J, Slordahl, SA, Lee, S],
thigh and calf muscle size and function during 60 days of bed rest Videm, V, Bye, A, Smith, GL, Najjar, SM, Ellingsen, O, and
in women. Ada P/zyszb] (099”) 191: 147—159, 2007. Skjaerpe, T. Superior cardiovascular effect of aerobic interval
149. Vellas, B, Baumgartner, RN, Wayne, SJ, Conceicao, J, Lafont, C, training versus moderate continuous training in heart failure
Albarede, JL, and Garry, 13]. Relationship between malnutrition patients: A randomized study. Cz'rrulczz‘z'oﬂ 115: 3086—3094, 2007.
and falls in the elderly. Nufﬂi‘lbﬂ 81 105-108, 1992- 155. Wolfe, R. The underappreciated role of muscle in health and
150. Volpi, E, Mittendorfer, B, Rasmussen, BB, and Wolfe, RR. The disease. Am J 67""” Nutr 84: 475—482, 2006-
FCSPOHSCPf mhscleprotein anabolism to combined . . . 156. Yang, Y, Breen, L, Burd, NA, Hector, A], Churchward—Venne, TA,
hypefamlhoamdemla and g1uc03e—1nc1uced hyper1nsulmem1a 13 Jesse, AR, Tarnopolsky, MA, and Phillips, SM. Resistance exercise
1mpa1red1n the elderly. J C1272 Endomﬂol M61215 85: 4481—4490, 2000. enhances myoﬁbrillar protein synthesis With graded intakes Of
151. V01pi,E, Shefﬁeld—Moore, M, Rasmussen, BB, and W01fe,RR.Basal whey protein in older men. B?” J N107” 1081 1780-1788, 2012-
muscle amino acid kinetics and protein synthesis in healthy young 157. Zwart, SR, Davis—Street, JE, Paddon—Jones, D, Ferrando, A A,
and older men. JAM Med 143305 2863 1206—1212, 2001- Wolfe, RR, and Smith, SM. Amino acid supplementation alters
152. Weitzel, LR, Sandoval, PA, Mayles, VVJ, and Wischmeyer, PE, bone metabolism during simulated weightlessness. J Appl P/zyszb]
Performance—enhancing sports supplements: Role in critical care. 991 134-140, 2005-
07” Cd” Med 37: 8400—8409’ 2009' 158. Zwart, SR, Hargens, AR, and Smith, SM. The ratio of animal
153. Wilson, TE, Shibasaki, M, Cui,], Levine, BD, and Crandall, CG. Effects protein intake to potassium intake is a predictor ofbone resorption
of 14 days of head—down tilt bed rest on cutaneous vasoconstrictor in space ﬂight analogues and in ambulatory subjects. Am J 012'”
responses in humans. J Appl P/zyszbl 94: 2113—2118, 2003. Nqu 80: 1058—1065, 2004.
VOLUME 29 | NUMBER 12 | DECEMBER 2015 | 3545

"
