"","x"
"1","ISS EXERCISE COUNTERMEASURES —
Evolution of Russmn MicrograVIty Countermeasures
Eugenia N.Yarmanova; Inessa B. Kozlovskaya; N. N. Khimoroda; Elena V. Fomina
INTRODUCTION: Countermeasures to prevent or partially offset the negative physiologic changes that are caused by the effects of
microgravity play an important role in supporting the performance of crewmembers in ﬂight and their safe return to
Earth. Research conducted in Russia on the orbital stations Salyut and Mir, as well as simulation experiments on the
ground, have demonstrated that changes that occur during extended spaceﬂight in various physiologic systems can be
prevented or signiﬁcantly decreased by using countermeasures. Hardware and techniques used on the ISS have been
substantially improved to reﬂect the experience of previous extended missions on Russian orbital stations. Countermea-
sures used during early ISS missions consisted of the US. treadmill (TVIS), cycle ergometer (85-3), a set of resistance
bands, a postural muscle loading suit (Penguin-3), electrical stimulator (Tonus-3), compression thigh cuffs (Braslet-M), a
lower body negative pressure (LBNP) suit (Chibis), a lower body g-Ioading suit (Kentavr), and water/salt supplements.
These countermeasures are described in this article.
KEYWORDS: microgravity, International Space Station, exercise, treadmill, cycle ergometer, LBNP, resistance bands, muscle loading,
ﬂuid loading.
Yarmonova EN, Kozlovskaya IB, Khimoroda NN, Fomina EV. Evolution of Russian microgravity countermeasures. Aerosp Med Hum Perform. 2015;
86(12, Suppl.):A32—A37.
( :ountermeasures to prevent or partially offset the nega- Treadmill (511-2)
tive physiologic Changes that are caused by the effects The foundation of the Russian program of onboard counter-
of microgravity play an important role in supporting measures in long-term spaceﬂight is exercise on the treadmill.
the performance of crewmembers in ﬂight and their safe Ihe U.S. treadmill with the Vibration isolation system (TVIS)
return to Earth.1’2 Research conducted in Russia on the orbital was on the station when the ISS-l crew arrived. Ihe treadmill
stations Salyut and Mir, as well as simulation experiments 011 had not undergone operational testing, so during the ﬁrst mis-
the ground, have demonstrated that changes that occur during sions it did not support consistent implementation of the exer-
extended spaceﬂight in various physiologic systems can be pre- cise protocol. During increments 188-1 through 188-6, the
vented or signiﬁcantly decreased by using countermeasures.3‘7 treadmill did not operate for 87 (1 due to the failure of the V18
An important role is to decrease the effects of redistribution system (8 d) and 0f the treadmill itself (79 d). rihere were con-
of blood and ﬂuids both during microgravity and during the stant constraints on maximum belt speed, longitudinal axial
period of readaptation t0 the Earth's gravity. ﬂiese counter- loading on the crewmember's body while running, and on the
measures take the form of negative pressure applied to the TVIS modes of operation.
lower body during ﬂight, and positive pressure to the lower Experts at the Institute of Biomedical Problems (IBMP)
body during descent with a g-loading suit. Hardware and tech- were tasked with creating backup means that could be used in
niques used on the ISS have been substantially improved to the event of TVIS failure. A Russian treadmill was selected for
reﬂect the experience of previous extended missions on Russian this purpose because it had already been developed, produced,
orbital stations. Countermeasures used during early ISS mis- and undergone a complete cycle of ground testing to support
sions consisted of the US. treadmill (TVIS), cycle ergometer
(1313-3), a set Of resistance bands, a postural muscle loading From the Institute ofBiomedicalProblems,Moscow, Russia.
Sllit (Penguin_3)) electrical stimulator (TODUS-3), compression Address correspondence ta: Jacqueline M. Recres, NASA Johnson Space Center, Division
. . Resource Support, Blomedlcal Research & Env1r0nmental Sc1ences DIVISIOI’I, 2101 NASA
thlgh CllffS OBIaSlet'M)’ a IOWGI‘ bOdy negative pressure (LBNP) Parkway, MC Wyle/SK/37, Houston, TX 77058; Jacquelinem.reeves@nasa.g0v
Sllit (ChibiS), a IOWGI' bOdY g-lOading suit (Kentavr), and water/ Reprint & Copyright © by the Aerospace Medical Association, Alexandria, VA.
salt supplements.6 DOI:10.3357/AMHREC05.2015
A32 AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol.86,No.12,SeCtiOh || DecemberZOiS

"
"2","EVOLUTION OF COUNTERMEASURES—Yarmanova etal.
crews 0n the Buran space vehicle. Treadmill BIL-l has a small 0 heart rate, using the compatible heart rate monitor with an
volume and mass, did not require any onboard interfaces, was accuracy of i 1 bpm;
simple to operate and reliable, and its delivery did not require 0 mode of exercise (active, passive, mechanical belt lock);
large ﬁnancial outlays.9 BIL-l was composed of the treadmill 0 treadmill belt speed with an accuracy of i 0.1 kph, distance
itself, a built-in restraint system, and a standardized training/ with an accuracy of i 1 m, and total exercise time ranging
loading suit (THK-Y—l). The THK-Y—l was used together with from 0 to 99 min with an accuracy of i 1 min;
the BIL-l restraint system to create a constant static load (up to 0 exercise time in active and passive modes with an accuracy
60% of body mass) along the longitudinal axis of the body The of i 10 s;

THK-Y—l was certiﬁed for use with TVIS instead of the U.S. 0 longitudinal aXial load (0 to 70 kgf) exerted by the restraint
suit and was used on the 188 with TVIS by the Russian crew- system on the crewmember, with an accuracy of i 0.2 kgf;
members of 188-8 through 188-12. and
As TVIS neared the end of its operational life, U.S. and - load-bearing reaction forces and moments in the three axes
Russian experts grappled with the issue of developing and (FX, Fy, FZ; MX, My, Mz) that occur during walking and run-
making new treadmills to replace it. Following an agreement ning (0 to 300 kgf with an accuracy of i 0.5 kgf and 0-100
in 2006, U.S. and Russian experts developed uniﬁed medical N-m, with an accuracy of i 0.3 N-m).
and technical requirements for any new treadmill. The U.S.
treadmill T2 was developed and installed in the U.S. module
in 2009. The new Russian treadmill was planned for comple- Cycle Ergometer
tion in 2012. The Russian countermeasures program on the 188 also includes
The Russian treadmill BIL-2 (Fig. 1) operates in the follow- exercise on the cycle ergometer (BB-3). The BB-3 is composed
ing modes: active (moving), passive (idle and braking), and of a seat with restraints for the crewmember, a control panel,
with mechanical lock of the treadmill belt. Running speed on and a generator assembly on the pedal shaft. The cycle ergometer
the treadmill can reach 20 kph (12 mph). The operating area of has 3 modes of operation: idle, operating, and free movement.
the treadmill belt is 400 mm (16 in) wide and 1080 mm (43 in) Idle is operation of the generator without loading. In this
long. A passive Vibration isolation system, comprised of a frame case, power exerted on the pedal shaft is spent in overcoming
and eight shock absorbers (four main and four auxiliary) is the resistance of the gears, loss in the generator, and the small
used to isolate forces while walking and running. The tread- amount of electrical power needed to power the device's elec-
mill's restraint system is capable of exerting longitudinal axial trical circuit. Operating mode corresponds to operation of
loading of 40 to 70 kg (88 to 154 1b) 0n the exerciser's body. the generator under loading and is set on the control panel.
A pressure plate was included with the design of BIL-2 to mea- Free movement corresponds to rotation of the pedal shaft in
sure the load-bearing reactions during running and walking, the direction opposite its rotation during idle mode and under
and to measure the initially set longitudinal load. loading, and is enabled using a free movement coupler.
The control panel of the treadmill is a tablet computer with The BB-3 provided the necessary load on the pedal shaft
a touch screen. Software was developed to enable not only the and measured operating time and theoretical distance cycled.
typical running timelines indicated in crew procedures, but Telemetry downlinked the load that was set and pedal rota-
also the creation and tracking of individualized exercise proto- tion speed. A unique, important aspect of the BB-3 is that the
cols. The BIL-2 provided the capability to measure and down- loading is without inertia; in other words, the load remains
link the following parameters: constant and equal throughout the entire pedaling cycle.
Power on the cycle ergometer pedal shaft can be set incre-
‘ ‘l n ‘ ‘v v‘ mentally: 50 (idle), 100, 125, 150, 175, 200, 225, and 250 W With
. , . y b _ , ""-. , a consistent accuracy of i 5% throughout a range of rotation
. , ' ‘ - .4 .4 ' M ’i ' 3, speeds starting at 40 rpm. When using the BB-3, its control
_ ., ' ' ‘ - , rwqr‘ .4» u- ‘3 ' ' ‘ panel displays the following parameters: pedal shaft rotation
. \ #26:” ‘ "" ‘0 ‘ 1 speed, rpm; set load power, W; total exercise operating time,
‘ - i '_‘ l ‘ "" _\ hours/minutes/seconds; operating time at a given load, hours/
m' i,"" a' k ‘ 4 ’3 “‘r‘ ‘1“ ; ,ry minutes/seconds; work output during exercise, W - h_1; and
""R“ . 4.,“ ‘ ‘3 £1: : r theoretical distance cycled, km. The accuracy of measuring
"" >, . “3M ‘7‘ ' . time intervals was at least i 0.5%; for work and theoretical dis-
, ‘5‘“. , - w ' . tance, it was at least i 10%. The cycle ergometer BB-3 operates
‘ g5 i 3 0n autonomous power and its mass is less than 25 kg (55 1b).
""5""; , "" ’ . At the onset of ISS operations, the cycle ergometer control
_, _‘ . panel had a liquid crystal display, whose use during low ambi-
- 1 a ‘ ent lighting led to constant complaints from crewmembers that
, ' - T the display was not readable. In response, a new panel was sub-
sequently developed with a button for switching loads but with-
Fig. 1. Ground testing oftreadmill 50—2 on a verticaIIy—mounted test stand. out a display of pedal shaft rotation speed. The neW panel and
AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 12, Section II December2015 A33

"
"3","EVOLUTION OF COUNTERMEASURES—Yarmanova etal.
the control unit required to support its operation were delivered Resistance Bands
t0 the 188 in 2004. However, this upgrade did not resolve the In accordance with the requirements of the Russian counter-
issue of the constant malfunctioning 0f the cycle ergometer, s0 measures program, a set of resistance bands was sent to the 188
in 2010 the modiﬁed BB-3M (Fig. 2) was delivered to the 188. for the purposes of strength training on the mechanically
The output speciﬁcations were retained, while a series of Changes locked treadmill belt. However, as previously noted, starting
were made: contact pedals were added to the cycle ergometer to with ISS-l, using resistance bands on TVIS was prohibited due
attach cycling shoes, two fans were installed to cool the loading to safety concerns. As a result, crewmembers began to use the
unit on the cycle ergometer frame during operation, and a dis- resistance bands by attaching them to 188 structural elements.
play ofpedal shaft rotation speed was added to the control panel. The set contained three short bands to load the shoulder
muscles, medium ones to load the muscles of the torso, and
Force Loader long ones to load the muscles of the torso and legs. When
The ban on using the TVIS belt for exercise with resistance the working part is extended to its maximum length, the
bands to load various muscle groups required development of a band's design provides the following forces: in the short band
separate force loader for Russian cosmonauts. This force loader (length 1050 i 50 mm) a maximum 18 kgf; in the medium
(HC)-1 was installed in July 2002 on the BB-3. The (HC)-1 band(1ength 1315 i 50 mm) amaXimum 22 kgf; and in the long
made it possible to exercise by loading the arms, legs, and back band (length 2665 mm) a maximum 25 kgf. A new set of resis-
concentrically (overcoming resistance). The loader is composed tance bands was developed in 2010 due to the need to replace
of a control panel, power unit, loaders 1 and 2, four removable materials; and instructions for performing exercises with the
rollers, and a support plate, which were delivered to the 188 in crewmember secured to 188 interior structural elements were
December 2005. Each of the two loaders on this device pro- supplied with that set.
Vides maximum loading of 30 kg (661b) and minimum loading In addition to active physical training, the Russian coun-
of 5 kg (11 1b). The operating principle is to create resistance to termeasures system includes the capability for crewmembers
the force of movement against a set load on the control panel. to use passive means, making it possible to supplement active
The control panel displayed the set load during exercise, the countermeasures or replace them in the event of equipment
number of repetitions, and operating time in the given mode. breakdown, deterioration in crewmember health status, or
All components of the force loader (HC)-1 were installed on other reasons hindering physical training.
the cycle ergometer BB-3.
The force loader supports the following exercises: rowing, Loading Suit (Penguin-3)
hammer throw, “the saw,” forearm curls, and trunk ﬂexion and The purpose of the Penguin-3 suit is to compensate for the
extension. The loader is powered from the station network. lack of loading on the skeleton and musculature to guarantee
Following crew comments on the lack of smoothness and the stipulated level of safety during crew deorbit 0n the Soyuz
signiﬁcant asymmetry Ofloading, the (HC)-1 was upgraded to vehicle. Elastic components in the suit's design generate a
the (HC-IM). The main output speciﬁcations of the loaders compression force along the longitudinal axis of the body
were retained but the following Changes were made: the dimen- (from shoulders to feet) to load the skeleton and muscles over
sions of the control unit and panel were decreased, the control extended periods of time. The amount of loading of the
panel display was replaced with a touch screen, the loading Penguin-3 suit worn for 6 t0 8 h per day at maximum tension
asymmetry and lack of smoothness during exercise were elimi- of the elastic bands can approach 50% 0f the crewmember's
nated, a holder bar was added, and the capability to record weight on the ground.
exercise results and downlink them was provided. The new The Penguin-3 is a suit containing a tension system and
force loader (HC-IM) is planned for delivery to the ISS. boots. The belt and straps on the legs of the suit are made of
elastic banding. Rubber cords (bungees) are used for the ﬂexible
. 3 , .. ».‘ 7 components; the tension is adjusted with buckles. The gastroc-
. \ ‘ \ - 1;“ I nemius muscles are additionally loaded with a special short
‘ » | i _ “$3 J $ f. ’, strap (stirrup) attached to the toe of the boot. The extent of ten-
‘* ' ,: 3:4 1 34— 'l. : t g T Q sion in the elastic components, i.e., the amount Ofloading 0f the
i \‘t' _ 4-: . , 3,31 , bones and muscles, is adjusted at the crewmember's discretion.
‘ ‘4 (*7 . ,1 ' ; The belt (the lower edge is attached to the leg straps; the upper
71"" \ a . 7 , :11, r part is attached to the torso bungees) performs an important
‘9 ﬂ... ,1"" . 3;. I ‘51,, function of the suit. When tightened, the belt makes it possible
I 731’ “ \ ‘__‘ ' ‘ V [I to individually adjust the amount of tension for each compo-
‘ J ‘ ' ‘ nent, up to completely removing loading from the torso while
I , 'l ___l ""‘ / maximally loading the legs over a broad range. It also allows
i. . . ti; :5 4 - 4.5! separate adjustments for ﬂexor and extensor muscles.
'4' . _ >0 L; ' ' In 2007, Yuri Malenchenko used the Penguin-3 suit with
‘ - -. ‘ ""‘13P ‘ ,. the load measuring system (CI/IH) for the ﬁrst time on the
Fig. 2. Cycle ergometer BB—3M. 188 (Fig. 3). The load measuring system in the Penguin suit
A34 AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 12, Section II December2015

"
"4","EVOLUTION OF COUNTERMEASURES—Yarmahova etal.
' .‘ ,«u ff"": 4'
' K -._'.’ ""
u _ ‘_ ‘74.??— . .-
~\ ' I .. _ L.
‘ ‘
I
J; f - é”, . ‘~ ' .
. -“‘-l Liv..- A.)
. . , . p, ,. . ‘ ‘ o .
. y - .1 _‘
: .g d' P i; I ' ' ‘ Iq‘i
: .- ' '7 r . I
J I 3 n' lgli I /
.u , ' / w .4
c. / . t.» _
‘\ \ . _ - J ./ \
» \\ _ I
I / 2“: .
-7» -44\,\ - .
I
Fig. 3- Cosmonaut YU“ Malehchehko using the Penguin—B loading SUit With Fig. 4. Cosmonaut PaveIVihogradov using the StimuI—Ot LF set on the ISS.
load measuring system on the ISS.
provided objective monitoring of longitudinal axial loading operates in four programs: Program 1 — stimulation of calf and
0f the vertebral column, skeleton, and main muscle groups of quadriceps muscles, Program 2 — calf and hamstring muscles,
the crewmember's lower extremities and torso. The CI/IH is Program 3 — calf, abdominal, and back muscles, and Program
composed of 20 tension dynamometers, a distribution unit, and 4 — shoulder muscles.
a kit that contains a power cable, analog-to-digital converter, The Tonus-3 simulation output signals are in the form of
and electronic storage device to record data. The tension dyna- “packets” of electrical impulses, Which are harmonic signals at
mometers are connected to the suit's bungees and are located a frequency of 10 i 1.5 kHz. The pulse repetition frequency
inside the distribution unit, Which is secured With Velcro t0 the in the packet is 60 i 6 Hz. The maximum current amplitude
outside of the Penguin-3 suit. The distribution unit contains of output signals for an equivalent load is 300 i 45 mA. The
the power unit, converting voltage at 27V DC from a station pulse envelope has a steep leading edge and an exponential
power source into stabilized voltage at 5V DC, thus powering tail. Pulse duration at 0.1 of the amplitude value is 1 i 0.2 ms.
the dynamometers. The station computer has software that pro- Pulse amplitude in the packet increased to 0.9 of the maximum
cesses input signals, calibrating, scaling, and recording them in value in 0.5 s. Each stimulation channel supports two operat-
the form of forces (in kilograms) acting on the crewmember ing modes: 1) generating impulses in packets at durations of
While wearing the suit. The station PC software supports the 0.5 i 0.05 s and 1.5 i 0.15 s With pauses between packets of
following: load sensor polling at a given frequency (10 to 1.5 i 0.15 s; and 2) generating impulses in packets at a duration
50 HZ); output on the computer's display of a table containing 0f 10 i 1 s With a pause 0f 50 i 5 s. This electrical muscle
the current loading of all straps, individually and totals by stimulator supports phased alternation of impulse packets
group (Fig. 3); placing brief comments on the experiment on and pauses at channel outputs 1 and 4, 2 and 5, and 6 and 3.
the computer screen; and archiving results. The electrical muscle stimulator receives power from the sta-
tion network. Its power requirement is 8 W Stimu1-01 HF Set,
Electrical Muscle Stimulator (Tonus-3) like Tonus-3, is designed for the targeted high frequency stim-
The T0nus-3 electrical muscle stimulator is used to stimulate ulation of skeletal muscles of the legs, back, shoulders, arms,
the skeletalmuscles ofcrewmembers to prevent muscle atrophy and neck. In addition to electrical muscle stimulation for
on the 188 (Fig. 4). It is composed of an impulse generator and the purposes of training, the system also supports stimula-
set of electrodes in a bag. The electrical muscle stimulator tion for the purposes of rehabilitation.8 The amplitude of the
AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 12, Section II December2015 A35

"
"5","EVOLUTION OF COUNTERMEASURES—Yarmanova etal.
stimulation signal in the Stimul-01 HF system does not exceed vacuum within the suit and providing ventilation. When the
60 V; its form is an alternating sinusoidal electrical signal at an cap on the throttle is turned, the vacuum within the suit
audio frequency of 2500 HZ, modulated rectangular pulses at a increases. ""lhe Chibis suit was designed for maximum differ-
frequency of 50 HZ, and at a duration of 10 ms. ential pressure of 60 i 5 mm Hg. ""lhe manually adjustable
""lhe maximum duration of high frequency stimulation is vacuum level within the Chibis suit when using the HBK-IL
40 min; stimulation is powered from the station. Stimulation control unit is within the range of 10 to 60 mm Hg. ""lhe Chibis
data are relayed to the station computer and then downlinked. suit vacuum pump is powered from the station. Vacuum levels
Stimul-01 LF Set, is a wearable electrical muscle stimulator in the suit are downlinked by telemetry
that provides low-frequency and relativelylow-amplitude elec- ""lhe long-term operation of the Chibis suit, which was
trical muscle stimulation of the quadriceps and hamstrings, developed by Russian designers in the 1970s, brought to light
front and back calf muscles, long muscles of the back, Chest a number of deﬁciencies, such as unreliable pressurization,
and lumbar spine. It was delivered to the 188 in 2006. ""lhis elec- discrepancies between its structure and the anthropometric
trical muscle stimulation, unlike high frequency, can be used parameters of the ISS operators, the presence of a long air
over long periods of time (up to 6 h per day) without distracting hose, and the need for space to set up the pump unit in direct
the crewmember from work performance (Fig. 4). According to proximity to the suit. As a result, a new Chibis-M suit was
the results of ground testing, low-frequency electrical-muscle developed that included the vacuum suit HBK-2, a Granat tab-
stimulation is an effective countermeasure for gravitational let computer and on-station kits.
muscular unloading.4’8 ""lhe Stimul-01 LF set is comprised of a Like HBK-l, HBK-2 was designed in the form of corru-
personal suit with electrodes, two electrical muscle stimula- gated pants with 3 sealing bands on the belt that supported a
tion units and a Charging unit for the rechargeable battery. broader range of crewmember anthropometric parameters.
Leg and back muscles are electrically stimulated at the same ""lhe shell of the new Chibis suit contained an MP2-2P -1 mini
time by two electrical muscle stimulators on the right and left pump, a Granat tablet computer, a vacuum regulator, a pressure-
of a belt attached to the crewmember’s body. ""lhe electrical measuring unit, and the HBK-2 controlpanel.111e manual con-
muscle stimulation signal amplitude is 0 to 45 V and controlled trol of pressure in the Chibis-M suit was supplemented with
by buttons, one for each of the 6 Channels, located on the front automatic control hardware using a touch keyboard on the
panel of the device. tablet computer. Hie tablet computer checks the readiness of
""lhe stimulator operates in cycles: 1 i 0.1 s of stimulation the automatic pressure control system for operation and pro-
alternating with a pause of 2 i 0.1 s. Treatment is in the form Vides reference materials and troubleshooting recommenda-
of a bipolar symmetrical rectangular impulse, with a duration tions. There are 13 ﬁxed programs in the PC's memory. ""lhe
of 1 i 0.05 ms at a pulse rate of 25 i 1 Hz. The maximum crewmember simply enters the number to select a program.
duration of low frequency electrical muscle stimulation without The system also operates according to random, ﬂexible pro-
recharging the battery is 6 h. grams. Parameters are entered on the computer's touch key-
""lhe Stimul-01LF set collects data on individual, crewmember- board, respecting the following constraints: pressure cannot
selected values for electrical muscle-stimulation signals, plus exceed 60 mm Hg and the total session time cannot exceed
date and time of the stimulation, and relays these data to the 60 min. All information on the set and the actual program
station computer Via an RS-232 interface, with subsequent parameters are downlinked Via telemetry and displayed on
downlink. In 2011, the personal suit with electrodes was the PC’s screen, presented in graphic (more user-friendly) or
replaced with a set of electrode attachment devices. numerical format as selected by the crewmember. ""lhe crew-
member can also temporarily pause the session time counter
Lower Body Negative Pressure Suit (Chibis) while keeping the given level of pressure, can stop the session
""lhe Chibis suit supports the procedure for creating negative early and eXit the program at a controlled rate of 1 mm Hg - s_l,
pressure to the lower part of the crewmember’s torso (LBNP). and can stop the session on an emergency basis, with the high-
""lhe Chibis suit consists of the following: a vacuum suit (HBK-l), est possible repressurization speed while exiting the program.
a pump unit HBK-IL, a bundle of hoses, and a power cable. Iust ""lhe Chibis-M LBNP suit (HBK-2) was also designed for a
as in prior units on Russian orbital stations, the HBK-l is pressure differential of 60 i 5 mm Hg.111e strap that connected
designed in the form of corrugated pants with a corrugated the HBK-l version of the suit to the permanently installed
shell made of air-tight fabric. Metal rings on the shells prevent HBK-IL unit and the HBK-IL unit itself was removed from the
compression upon unloading. ""lhe corrugations also enabled modiﬁed Chibis suit with the introduction of the mini pump
the aXial compression of the shell. ""lhere are aluminum alloy MP2-2F -1. ""lhe system is powered from the station.
boots at the bottom of the shell. ""lhere is a waist-sealing band on It is important to note that the Russian LBNP Chibis suit dif-
the belt of the Chibis suit and shoulder attachment straps. ""lhe fers from the U.S. LBNP suits in that there is no support saddle
suit has a vacuum regulator (throttle), a vacuum (safety) valve, and the presence of the Chibis corrugated pants creates a force
and a vacuum indicator. ""lhe suit is depressurized using the that must be opposed by muscular contraction of the lower
HBK-IL unit, which contains a mini pump. Air from the sur- extremities, resulting in a different response to LBNP between
rounding environment is drawn into the suit through the the two suits. ""lhe Russian suit will likely not elicit as much ﬂuid
throttle, enters the pump, and is released externally, creating a shifting or as much stress on the cardiovascular system as the
A36 AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 12, Section II December2015

"
"6","EVOLUTION OF COUNTERMEASURES—Yarmanova etal.
U.S. suit, but probably does provide more countermeasure pro- loader (HC-lM), and the Stimul-Ol high frequency set are
tection by stimulating the lower extremity vasculature. ready for delivery to the ISS soon. As a part of the Mars-500
experiment, a new resistive training device (MDS) has under-
Braslet-M gone ground testing to support the strength training of crew-
During the initial ﬂight period, some crewmembers use the members and to monitor the status of their muscles on the
Braslet-M thigh cuffs to decrease the intensity of the cephalad station. In conclusion, it can be stated that over the course of
redistribution of blood that occurs as a result of microgravity. ISS operations, all Russian countermeasures have been signiﬁ-
""lhe cuffs contained in the Braslet set are worn on the crew- cantly upgraded or new ones have been developed.
member’s thighs over ﬂight clothing or undergarments. Pulling
on special straps generates compression of the cuffs. Crew-
members are given recommended levels and durations of ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
compression during test calibrations 0n the ground. While
Braslet-M is for personal use, it iS custom made for each CI‘GW- This work was supported by Russian Science Foundation grant number:
member preﬂight according to their size (thigh circumference). 14-25-00167-
Authors and aﬁiliations: Eugenia. N. Yarmanova, Inessa B. Kozlovskaya, M.D.,
Water-Salt SUPplements Ph.D., D.Sc., Nikita. N. Khimoroda, E. V. Fomina, Ph.D., D.Sc., Institute for
Saline loading is used before landing as a countermeasure Biomedical Problems, Moscow, Russia.
to quickly replenish intravascular ﬂuid volume and increase
hydration, by additional intake of ﬂuid and sodium chloride.
Crew procedures stipulate taking three to four doses of three REFERENCES
sodium chloride tablets (0.9 g each) with 300 mL of ﬂuids _ _
(water or juice) 1 d before the end of a ﬂight. ""lhe Servak pack 1' ::::1:(:WO§;EI:§:’E::§I’ziiggglﬁSpace medlcme‘ YeSterday’ tOday’
Of SOdium Chloride tablets iS located in the nutritional sup- 2. GrigorieV.AI, Kozlovskaya 1B, aSawin CF, Mueller SA. Countermeasure
Plemehts kit- to short-term and long-term space ﬂight. In: Dietlein LF, Pestov ID,
editors. Space biology and medicine: joint U.S./Russian publication in
Kentavr 5-5""“ ﬁve volumes, Vol. IV Chapter 8. Washington (DC): NASA, and Moscow:
All Russian cosmonauts use the Kentavr G-suit in the ﬁnal Nauka Press;2004‘157_195° _
. . . . 3. Kozlovskaya 1B. Countermeasures for long-term space ﬂlghts. Lessons
Stage Of ﬂlght durmg descent m the SOyuZ V€h1Cl€. The Kentavr learned from the Russian space program. I Gravit Physiol. 2002; 9(1):313—7.
deViCe generates Pressure in the lower Part Of the bOdY> limit' 4. Kozlovskaya 1B. Fundamental and applied immersion research tasks.
ing the redistribution of blood that occurs with g-loading dur- Aviakosm Ekol Med. 2008; 42(5):3—7.
ing the descent phase. The Kentavr iS custom ﬁtted individually 5. Kozlovskaya 1B, Grigoriev AI. Russian system of countermeasures on
for each crewmember, and is made of a highly elastic woven 32:;:ittggolit:;?:ti:)r_lg381; ace Station USS): the ﬁrSt results‘ Ada
material that conSiStS Of long Shorts’ a P air Of leggings’ a hygiene 6. Kozlovskaya 1B: Grigoriev A1,.Stepantzov VI. Countermeasure 0f the
undergarmehta ahd Camelia-A underwear. Before leaVihg the negative effects of weightlessness on physical systems in long-term space
188 and entering the Soyuz, the crewmember adjusts the suit ﬂights. Acta Astronaut. 1995; 36(8—12):661—8.
ﬁt using the straps to generate compression on the lower body. 7. Kozlovskaya 1B, Stepantsov VI, Egorov AD. Physical training in extended
The Kentavr suit' S effe ctiven e S S in C ()th ering g_10 ads iS achieved spaceﬂight. In: Grigoriev AL editor. Mir Orbital Station. Space Biology and
Med1c1ne. Vol. 1. Medlcal Support 1n Long-term Spaceﬂlght. Moscow:
at a Pressure Of 30 mm Hg' Meditsina; 2001:393—414.[Russian]
8. Kozlovskaya 1B, Yarmanova EN, Vinogradova OL, Shipov AA,
Summary Tomilovskaya ES, Fomina EV. Prospects for using an exercise device
The Penguin-3 countermeasures loading suit With the load to support and rehabilitate the condition of the musculature in
measuring system, the Stimul-Ol low frequency electrical mus- 1;: 11: 1111:: g;f:;:i§{::1K:iiragzeO§; 0:15 jfigae p0pu1atim' Teoriya i
Cle stimulator in a set with the electrode attachment devices, the 9. Yarmanova YeN, Kozlovskiya 13:, Bdgomolov VV, Sukhachev VL
upgraded ChibiS'M suit) and the Cyde ergometer BB'3M have Rumyantseva ON, Melnik KA. The Russian treadmill BII-l, a backup
recently been delivered to the ISS. ""lhe treadmill BIL-Z, the force asset to the US. TVIS treadmill. Aviakosm Ekol Med. 2006; 4(1):50—55.
AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 12, Section II December2015 A37

"
