"","x"
"1","AIAA 2015-4581
SPACE Conferences &amp; Exposition
31 Aug-2 Sep 2015, Pasadena, California
AIAA SPACE 2015 Conference and Exposition
The International Space Station and the Commercialization of LEO
S.]. Scimemi
Director, International Space Station
NASA Headquarters
AIAA Space 2015
Pasadena, CA
August 31 — September 2, 2015
Abstract
3 With the extension of International Space Station (158) operations until at least
g 2024, NASA and the United States have the opportunity to leverage the utilization,
E operations and transportation to and from the 155 to enable the development of a
35 low Earth orbit (LEO) commercial market. NASA envisions a future state of
E sustained economic activity in LEO enabled by human spaceﬂight, driven by private
g» and public investments creating value and benefitting Earth through commercial
g supply and private and public demand.
5°“ Today, NASA is the primary driver of both the supply of and demand for human
g spaceﬂight in LEO. Once the 155 is nearing its end-of—life, NASA will no longer be the
.2"" primary driver in this market, including the demand for capabilities and services.
3; NASA is currently planning for this transition by developing commercial cargo and
3 crew services to ensure robust and cost effective access to LEO. NASA is also
3 pursuing other activities to enable the commercial market to provide the other
E capabilities and services that human spaceﬂight requires to operate in space. These
8 activities will provide the opportunity for industry to gain the experience needed to
§ design and safely operate and maintain the infrastructure necessary for human
2 spaceﬂight.
9 However, thls Infrastructure, or supply of capab111t1es and serV1ces, must be
in: developed based on private market demands and not dependent on future
E» government needs or requirements. It is NASA’s goal that NASA is not the primary
3;: driver for the supply in the future. Given that there is no lack of new and
ED established private companies that are eager to sell to the government capabilities
5 or services, it will be a Challenge to wean industry off of the cycle of government
funding to successfully transition to a private market demand cycle.
NASA has also begun the development of private (and other government agency)
demand for LEO through a Cooperative Agreement with the Center for the
Advancement of Science in Space (CASIS). In its short time in existence, CASIS has
made significant inroads in broadening the private use of the 185; however, this
demand does not have depth nor able to sustain and support permanent platforms
in LEO or the transportation to / from LEO. Building the demand is a bigger
challenge than just CASIS or the efforts of NASA.
This material is declared a work ofthe US. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

"
"2","This paper will explore the opportunities and challenges in developing the
commercial market in LEO through the 155 program and all its facets, including
operations, mission support activities, utilization, and contracting. The role of
NASA-funded research in the vertical translation of basic research in space to
practical application in the market or to other government service agencies will also
be addressed. Other aspects, including government regulation, investment and tax
incentives, and possible roles of various government agencies will also be explored.
Of particular importance, the role of private industry, currently in the supply
business, in the development of the demand for LEO capabilities and services
beyond the federal government will be highlighted.

E In conclusion, this paper will address the prospects in reaching the goal of

§ commercializing LEO starting from where we are today in human spaceﬂight and

g the International Space Station.

5.

E

g —

£2

E

?3

8

E

2

8

E

2

:2

<

i

E

8

.\ . V
~33 ‘
\
2

"
"3","1. Background
Dating back to at least the 1980s, NASA, policy organizations, and other commercial
space interests have conducted numerous studies and development activities
associated with the commercial exploitation of low Earth orbit, mainly focusing on
the Space Station. Even as the Space Shuttle was in its infancy and Space Station
Freedom was beginning development in 1984, the challenges of uncertain and
inconsistent government funding resulted in government directed
commercialization activities rather than private industry driven efforts. The
Heritage Foundation wrote that:
3 At the heart of the issue lie two different approaches to space commercialization.
§ One envisions NASA taking the lead, with the Space Shuttle as its primary tool. The
2 other sees the private sector as the appropriate leader in the commercial
:2: development of space.1
0
Q
Q» As discussed in the Heritage Foundation paper of 1984, the primary driver for the
-§_ NASA-driven approach is directed toward the sustainment and survival of NASA as
7% the national space program, and therefore remaining the primary driver for the
5°“ supply industry. The other approach recognizes that private industry, the supply
g industry as well as the demand industry for low Earth orbit research and
g"" applications must eventually assume responsibility for commercialization.
E
(:3; ...it is widely accepted that the private sector eventually must and should assume
E responsibility for space commercialization—the only issue is when!
E
(E Later studies moved beyond the Space Shuttle as the commercialization focus and
2-5 moved on to the International Space Station as the driver. An initial
E commercialization study, funded by NASA, International Space Station
é Commercialization Study, Potomac Institute for Policy Study, 1 997, focused primarily
a on the supply industry for human spaceﬂight. This study recognized many of the
g same rationales that drive NASA’s commercialization efforts today:
:3 - Increased availability of improved and more affordable space assets.
E3 - Release of NASA resources for application to new frontiers.
5 - Leverage private investmen t.
- Improved innovation and importation of commercial technology to space
endeavors.
- Increase public support for space operations?
This report also highlighted some of the challenges that still exist to some degree,
which are the focus of current NASA commercialization activities that will be
addressed in the following sections:
- Impediments to space access.
- Lack of fulﬁllment of policies and promises.
3

"
"4","- Procurement and procedural inﬂexibilities.
- Budget allocation to commercialization is low and declining.
- Reorganizations have left NASA Without an institutional center to
accommodate commercial participants...C0de C was eliminated?
In 1999, NASA commissioned another independent study, this time on the
commercial use of the International Space Station, NASA: Commerce and the
International Space Station, KPMG, 1 999. This study begins to get at the heart of
NASA’s current plans to remove or reduce barriers to commercialization activities.
; Impediments t0 Commercialization. For almost two decades, NASA has promoted
3 both the Space Shuttle and the 155 as valuable platformsfor conducting unique
g space-based Research and Development [R&D] that would have signiﬁcant value
E for US. industry and taxpayers. However, in that time, the level Ofcommercial
E interest in conducting these missions have been limited at best. The weak interest
E is understandable, given the barriers to and immaturity Ofcommercial space
E» development that have existed and continue today.
7% - Uncertainty and magnitude 0ft0tal price [i.e. transportation, integration and
5°“ operations] makes return on investment [ROI] impossible to calculatefor
é poten tial commercial users;
.2"" - The lack ofawareness in the non-aerospace community regarding the deﬁning
3; Characteristics of the 155
E - ...restrictions in existing rules, regulations and policy
3 - ...burden Ofcomplex rules and procedures associated with accessing the 155...
E - Lack ofguaranteed Space Shuttle access on a regular basis...3
LU
U
(:3 All these impediments are quite familiar to anyone who has tried to perform
E research or technology development onboard the ISS, whether as a government or
é private industry user. These are also familiar to the aerospace supply industry in
a previous commercialization efforts including NASA’s own Office of Commercial
in: Programs.4 The next sections in this paper will address NASA current efforts to
E» address the issues and impediments in the commercialization of 10w Earth orbit.
E
Q
4

"
"5","’3 i! h
f. 3! :"""")’*i‘
g 'y ‘ 4"""" ' 9‘“
1...; w... .-~1/ ...-- _-
:. ,.-.-- . - - . ""‘ ""' 2'; ~* '?,.';€E;?‘=’f;‘ ”76$: . f "".f -‘ ‘2‘...
a :_;‘;-‘W ‘W‘ﬁ , ‘e :e:.: v ’ .-~~I ”g: f. '- ""%‘\J‘
a» «~%«.~«- ~ .. :- «.., . m». z. ”-chx
3 w .— ‘0' . , 46""; c»- ‘ w . - ”‘1 —-‘~ » ‘3; “'3;
§ ﬂ. .1, "" 3k '4 h; I .Q'tP- ""L 2;.
‘5 q J; "" 'A ,, I ‘ . ‘ , 0‘- ‘\
:2: I ’53:"" “*4“- l, "" 7"".
g 2. A Break with the Past
8
‘0”; Many of the past studies and activities have mainly focused on the government or
E academic perception of what supply side technologies or capabilities would be
(53 Viable in a commercial market place. The previous studies also focused on the
a perception of what commercial research or applications demand would be Viable
52* from a government, supply industry or academic perspective.
Z
Q
g As an observation, the previous studies were conducted at a time when the Space
at Shuttle was not a reliable access platform for anyone besides government
<2: sponsored payloads; the Space Station (Freedom and 155) was still either in
E development or being assembled, the actual performance and capabilities of the
Li Space Station platform were unknown, and access to the Space Station was limited
E to the Space Shuttle.
Since that time, three significant developments have occurred; 1) retirement of the
Space Shuttle for access to LEO and replacement by commercial cargo and crew; 2)
the ISS assembly is complete and its performance and capabilities are known; and 3)
the creation of the 155 National Laboratory and with it government-sponsored
access and on-orbit resources are available.
5

"
"6","Regular access to 155
Today nearly 15% 0f the global launch market is destined for the 155.5 This
represents unprecedented access to LEO, to a single destination that has not ever
been seen before for a human spaceﬂight platform. Year to year, there are between
13 to 15 ﬂights of supply cargo and crews to the 155 to support on-orbit operations
and maintenance, crew supplies, and to accommodate government and commercial
research and technology development. This access capability is provided by a
combination of Partner nations; mainly Russia, Japan and the United States. NASA’s
commercial partners SpaceX and Orbital ATK provide the US. contribution to cargo

; resupply through the 155 Commercial Resupply Services (CRS) contract. These US.

3 commercial space transportation capabilities were enabled under a partnership that

g leveraged NASA and private industry investments for industry to develop and

E demonstrate safe, reliable, and cost effective services to and from LEO. The SpaceX

E and Orbital ATK space transportation systems now provide regular access, thus

‘2 mitigating previous 155 access limitations, not withstanding the recent launch

E? failures of Orb-3 and SpaceX-7. Facilitating development and purchasing

§ transportation services from commercial industry has also significantly reduced the

:33 cost for access to LEO and 155 as compared to a government-only sponsored

59“ development and operation. It has also opened up access to LEO and t0 the 155 to

g commercial users where the government is not required to be the arbiter of services

2"" provided and allows private supply industry to work directly with private demand

é industry for services or capabilities.

t3 . .

t! :3

‘z‘ ,

3 As with commercial cargo services, NASA is facilitating the development of private

g» industry commercial crew space transportation systems to LEO and the ISS. NASA
expects additional private-industry-to-private-industry activities to mature as it has
with cargo. In this model, NASA does not drive the industry to a government
solution.
155 is open and ready for business
With the completion of ISS assembly, the 155 Program has shifted from being
“systems and elements"" focused to “customer"" focused. All through the design,
testing and assembly of the 155, the Program was focused on building the vehicle
and ensuring its safe operation and the safety of the crew. Today, crew safety is still

6

"
"7","paramount, but the whole purpose of why the 155 was built was to perform research
and technology development. Since achieving assembly complete in 2011, the 155
Program has been reorganized and its processes are being revamped to shift from a
government—focused user base to a commercial user base. This has been driven not
only by the creation of the National Lab, but also by non-traditional users including
Earth and space science, commercial companies, and other government agencies
such as the National Institute of Health. This change in focus, though many years
later than identified in the KPMG report of 1999 as noted in Section 1, is meant to
reduce the burden on private industry and others to get their research onboard the
ISS. Together with regular access to the ISS, efforts such as the ISS Program’s

; Revolutionize 155 for Science and Exploration, or RISE, will significantly reduce key

3 barriers to enabling the demand for research and technology development onboard

i the 155.

E A National Laboratory in LEO

O

Q

g» With the NASA Authorization Act of 2010, the 155 National Lab was created to allow

é broader use of the 155 by non-NASA government agencies and the private sector. By

:3: law, the National Lab was allocated 50% of the ISS resources, from crew time, to

5°“ upmass, rack space and other resources. Together with the creation of the non-

g profit organization CASIS, to populate and manage the National Lab, NASA

2"" significantly changed its management approach to utilizing the 155 from mainly a

3; NASA-focused research platform to one that was open to the broader government

(:3; research community and the broader U.S. economy. This has driven profound

3 changes in the traditional integration and planning of NASA sponsored research —

E from payload integration, to resource planning, to developing research objectives.

LU

U

E C S I S

A

E Based on the NASA sponsored study by ProOrbim/éz NASA held an open solicitation
for a cooperative agreement to run and manage the 155 National Lab. NASA selected
the Center for the Advancement of Science in Space (CASIS), as the National Lab
operator in 2011. Within four years, CASIS has managed to fully exploit its 50% of
the ISS resources with private and non-NASA government research. This has been
done by educating, promoting and interacting with private industry and non-NASA
government agencies on the benefits of micro-graVity to research in cell biology,
materials, tissues, Viruses and other fields. CASIS also educates potential research
partners on the ISS capabilities, integration and safety processes, as well as cargo
manifesting and other pertinent information needed to determine what possible
research would be Viable on the ISS. CASIS’s activities and projects as a whole also

7

"
"8","address the impediments that were originally identified back in the 1999 KPMG
report and extensively existed until CASIS began to fulfill its mission.
As evidenced (Figure 1), CASIS has been successful in attracting major private
industry research business across the US economy including material companies,
pharmaceuticals, and others.

c A 515

326, W *3 MERCK (l)

g d— Be well NOVA RTI s

Q

a 5' .- «BR AD

g E l N S T(l)'l~ U T E 9 ASTRIUM ﬁprengeneS

E“ N%VOPYXIS Q’JMED @‘vm§1_ﬂ§; w Bagtgtaz

m v m -

a VLCOY ‘ ' H S ”j 2R

o“ NANOMEDICINES SPAC"" I_.N._,,,=,_.c,1..:,N..5. eed ‘

E . 'm Hy CgMFﬁTING V 593943 techshnt

S ..' _.--'l-'

a :maamrig Ebeth A r

a .. -. Q 4

(g t- ® EDT“ v Ho n eywel I Rajagems

Eu: ® B E RY L LI U M gquﬁwwﬁi NovoWurks V

(a JAMSS AMERICA 33D (a

(L3 @%§ogies — '""c' Biosciences, Inc.

<1

5 14

E Figure 1: Representative Commercial Companies that are working with CASIS to

i perform research onboard 155.

Z

3: Within the last year CASIS has also fulfilled the goal to utilize all of their allocated

:3 ISS critical resources, 50% 0f the 155 US. resources such as crew time, upmass and

5 downmass capabilities with private, non-NASA government, and academic research.
CASIS is expected to continue to fully utilize the National Lab allocation of 155
research indefinitely.
3. Vision for LEO commercialization and the 155
Since the extension of the 155 to at least 2024 in January 2014 by the Obama
Administration at the International Space Exploration Forum, NASA has been
focused on developing a strategy to transition LEO from a government driven
enterprise to a private industry driven market. Through a series of interactions
with stakeholders, non-profit organizations, private industry, and other government

8

"
"9","agencies, including Requests For Information, Broad Agency Announcements,
workshops, and NASA sponsored studies, NASA is proposing the following Vision for
the commercialization of LEO:
Vision: Sustained economic activity in LEO enabled by human spaceﬂight, driven
by private and public investments creating value and benefitting Earth through
commercial supply and private and public demand.
To reach this Vision, NASA has identified multifaceted goals to accomplish that
include:
3 ° Goal 1 — LEO commercialization enabled by leveraging 155
§ o To leverage 155, the Revolutionize 155 for Science and Exploration (RISE)
E effort is being undertaken to implement customer friendly process
2: improvements to enable research and maximize throughput onboard.
‘2 Demonstrating and communicating the value proposition and utilizing
é? more commercial friendly acquisition strategies will also be explored to
g better leverage 155 in stimulating commercial LEO markets.
iii ° Goal 2 — Policy and regulatory environment promotes commercialization of LEO
Em o To foster this environment, NASA will leverage current interagency
g working groups and establish working groups as needed to address
f regulatory and policy issues concerns. Additionally, identifying barriers
g and develop strategies to mitigate.
E“ ° Goal 3 — A robust, self—sustaining, and cost effective supply of U.S. commercial
j services to, in, and from LEO accommodates public and private demands
E o To stimulate the supply of commercial LEO services NASA will leverage
g the NEXTSteps BAA studies and follow-on activities while also enabling
E Earth-similar capabilities for 155 that can transition to commercial
% platforms. Eventually, LEO capabilities will transition from being supplied
a by NASA to being commercially provided once available.
3 ° Goal 4 - Broad sectors of the economy using LEO for commercial purposes.
g o To foster and facilitate consortia—type activities for potential high success,
5 market—enabling microgravity and LEO applications with public and
:1; private funds to support development (protein crystallization, exotic
E fibers, 3D tissues, etc.).
Q
Several conditions now also exist that help enable reaching the Vision for sustained
economic activity in LEO. These conditions were previously missing, and hindered
fostering commercial activity. The conditions include:
1. Operational 155 in LEO with known capabilities
2. 155 will be operational for at least the next decade
3. Spaceﬂight access is now routine
9

"
"10","4. The National Lab, enabled by CASIS, is now up and running with significant
non-NASA demand including private industry and other government
agencies

5. Private supply industry is now mature in some aspects of human spaceﬂight

6. 155 access, transportation and resources are provided by NASA.

4. Conclusion
‘s I ""52
,. .1, 4;; iv
; 'V ‘ . ' (A ‘.
é: ‘ 4. ' ‘ ‘1, II ‘ ,‘(g ' ' ‘
~ . I c t K _ ’ *
Q. _ - ‘- . ‘1 . y. 7‘ , . .
: ‘i -. ,. ,/
g ‘ “‘3’; ¢ 3. - ';'r:/‘<’
a ‘a ~' I: "" /
:ﬁ - ’ 9“» h j z ‘ ~’ I :.
I x ‘ Er”
g t
8
E
% . . . . .
E Slnce the Infancy of NASA’s efforts to c0mmerc1allze LEO through 1ts human
1;: spaceﬂight programs from the Space Shuttle, to Space Station Freedom, to the
.3 International Space Station, NASA and the nation have struggled to find the right
g model to enable the full breadth of the U.S. economy to take advantage of the unique
:E; environment and perspective of space in LEO. From the early policy and
Q programmatic struggles of the early 19805, attempting to commercialize a
fundamentally government program, the Space Shuttle, t0 duplicating the same
model with Space Station Freedom and the International Space Station, NASA, along
with private commercial industry, has evolved to a different place. NASA and the
supply and demand industries have matured to a state where we can jointly begin to
plan the transition of LEO from a NASA-driven enterprise to a marketplace where
the supply industry responds to the demand industry’s needs for services and
capabilities.
10

"
"11","However, there is much work left to be done, particularly in the following areas, to
further enhance the ability for a robust commercial market to develop in LEO:

- A policy and regulatory framework needs to be developed with other
government agencies and the Executive and Legislative branches that spans
the life of 158 to the next capabilities in LEO; and

- NASA needs to articulate its plans for transitioning from LEO t0 exploration
in order to allow private industry to leverage NASA’S next steps in human
spaceﬂight.

; Both are topics for future papers.
2 References:
25 1 The Perils of a NASA Space Monopoly, The Heritage Foundation, 1984
g» 2 International Space Station Commercialization Study, Potomac Institute for
-§_ Policy Study, 1997
7;? 3 NASA: Commerce and the International Space Station, KPMG, 1999
5°“ 4 NASA Historical Data Book, Chapter 5, Commercial Programs
g 5 FAA Annual compendium of Commercial Space Transportation: 2014
.2"" 6 Reference Model for the International Space Station U.S. National Laboratory,
3; ProOrbis, 2010
E 7 Protein Crystallization and Drug Development: A Prospective Empirical
E Appraisal of Economic Effects of ISS Microgravity, Vonortos, 2015
E
8
8
E
%
(E
<
i”:
i
Q
11

"
