"","x"
"1","Final Report
NASA
PRO TEIN CR YSTALLIZA TION FOR DR UG DEVEL 0PMENT:
A Prospective Empirical Appraisal ofEconomic Effects of
ISS Microgravity
Nicholas S. Vonortas
Center for International Science and Technology Policy
& Department of Economics
The George Washington University
June 2015

Acknowledgements: This research has benefited very significantly from the support
of Nathan Basch, an economics major at the George Washington University. We
want to thank many people for educating us quickly regarding the issues of ISS
commercialization and especially Patrick Besha and Alex Macdonald from NASA HQ.
Lynn Harper (Ames), Cynthia Bouthot and Warren Bates (CASIS) provided very
useful support regarding the contents of the specific study. The participants in two
workshops at NASA HQ (January 20 and March 30, 2015) offered very useful
comments. I maintain responsibility for all remaining mistakes and
misunderstandings.

"
"2","Table of Contents
Executive Summary
1. Introduction
2. Protein Crystallization and Biopharmaceutical Research
2.1 Declining Research Productivity in New Drug Development
2.2 Use of Protein Crystals in Biomedical Research
2.2.1 Protein crystallization history and process
2.2.2 155 additionality for protein crystallization
2.3 Summing Up (Collaborative Agreement and Policy Implications)
3. Policy Considerations
3.1 Collaborative Agreement
3.2 Key Questions
4. Modeling Drug Development Costs
4.1 Phases of Pharmaceutical Research
4.2 Effect of Improved Protein Crystals: Model Development and an Example
4.3 155 Additionality in Developing Improved Protein Crystals
4.4 Summing Up
5. Concluding Remarks
Appendix I — Proteins that Showed Significant Difference in Space
Versus Ground Crystallization in the DeLucas Study
Appendix II — New Details Regarding Costs of and Demand for Protein
Crystallization in Microgravity
ii

"
"3","Executive Summary
One of the basic missions of NASA is to use the International Space Station (158) to
facilitate the growth of a commercial marketplace in low Earth orbit for scientific
research, technology development, observation and communications, and human
and cargo transportation.Whi1e the private sector has shown some interest, and
while there exist significant potential commercial applications, the ISS currently
lacks the ability to exist independently as a commercial entity due to significant
technical, financial and policy barriers, as well as the lack of information among
prospective users. 0ft sited barriers include (i) transportation costs, frequency, and
risk for cargo and research crew, (ii) intellectual property rights, and (iii)
appropriate investment and tax incentives to entice the private sector.
Bioscience has long been promoted as one of the more promising applications in the
effort to commercialize LEO. A specific application — expanding research in protein
crystallization 0n the 155’s microgravity environment could prove important in the
development and design of drugs to treat diseases such as arthritis, cardiovascular
disease, multiple sclerosis, osteoporosis, cystic fibrosis, and even cancer. This is the
focus of the present paper.
The paper is part of a set of five contributions taking a fresh look at the subject. Two
of these papers follow a more ""macro"" approach (Mazzucato-Robinson; Tassey)
while the remaining three follow a more ""micro"" approach (Link-Maskin; Lerner-
Leamon-Speen; Vonortas). Mazzucato and Robinson provide an overview of shifting
policy priorities for NASA and LEO's rising importance ending with some big picture
recommendations. Tassey places LEO in the context of the innovation system and
suggests three alternative approaches for promoting technology commercialization.
Link and Manskin drive home one important idea: that LEO commercialization has
until now suffered from the lack of information. Lerner, Leamon and Speen follow
up by detailing the currently weak points of LEO tech business in the eyes of the
private sector and the types of information, regulation, and regular service
provision that will make business calculations more favorable towards LEO. This, in
turn, links well with the present paper regarding the uncertainties faced by
prospective investors in the specific example of protein crystallization in
microgravity and the types of information necessary for calculating a specific cost-
benefit model to guide the pharmaceutical industry in investing on growing protein
crystals on the 155. Our discussion of a possibly different approach to more generic
and more applied protein research closes the loop by reminding Tassey's preferred
third alternative approach for promoting technology commercialization through
""holistic technology development infrastructure that allows joint management with
industry partners of R&D project portfolios"".
Humans contain over 100,000 proteins that are Vital in their everyday functions.
Full understanding of protein function requires information on the three
dimensional structure of these proteins and leads to the development of better
drugs that target these proteins more effectively. To obtain this information

iii

"
"4","scientists model proteins with a process called X-ray crystallography whose
effectiveness, in turn, depends on the use of good quality protein crystals.
The 155 has for long been argued as the ideal place for protein crystallization.
Crystals grown in microgravity do not face the same convection forces seen on Earth
— such as wind and gravity — which adversely affect the orientation and size of
crystals. While crystals grow much slower in microgravity, they provide massively
more data points as crystals grown on Earth. Because of this, it is argued that the 155
has the potential of becoming the new frontier of pharmaceutical research, assisting
in the discovery of new uses of proteins never before thought possible when tested
on Earth.
The promise of opportunity notwithstanding, several constraints remain for the
establishment of high-budget (i.e., Viable) protein crystallization research on the 185:
proof of concept, experiment duration, size restraints, and transportation. At
present, it is questioned whether there is strong enough evidence that crystal
quality improvement is high enough to justify the effort of sending proteins to space.
To answer this, Dr. Lawrence DeLucas from the University of Alabama is currently
leading a study of 2000 membrane protein crystals grown in space versus Earth,
which will likely be completed in the summer of 2015. DeLucas’ April 2014
expedition purported to accomplish two goals: a) inform scientists on the structures
of membrane proteins and b) conclusively measure the overall impact of
microgravity on protein crystallization. The entire analysis is being performed as a
“double blind"" experiment. DeLucas’ project becomes of critical importance in
determining the additionality 0f the 155 in protein crystallization and thus enabling
cost-benefit analysis of this line of activity on the 158. At the time of this writing,
there are only preliminary, yet very encouraging, results of the DeLucas study.
There are four stages of research with heavy contribution by protein crystallization
to drug development:

1. Production of high quality crystals

2. Collection of generic information to identify and validate possible drugs

3. Modeling of a drug to a specific target during the preclinical stage

4. Fine tuning of the drug during the clinical stage
The first two stages can be described as generic research, with the results being of
interest across the pharmaceutical industry (also including bio). The last two stages
are appropriately described as private research of interest to individual companies.
The 155’s contribution as currently envisioned falls squarely in the very first stage
but its effects are very much felt all the way across. Assuming the distinction
between more generic and more applied research stages holds, the policy
approaches to address them are different.
On the one hand, the more generic research stages may be addressed through a
collaborative agreement between the main stakeholders on the supply side. This is a
tool well-tried out in the previous 2-3 decades in various sectors to alleViate the

iV

"
"5","conditions for suboptimal investment in generic (or precompetitive) research by the
private sector (i) due to the presence of uncertainty regarding research paths and
the prospective applicability of the results within the confines of individual
companies and (ii) due to expectations of imperfect appropriability of the results.
Compounded with the four barriers listed earlier in relation to the 155, this creates a
straightforward need for government intervention through the sanctioning of
collaborative research as well as its subsidization.
On the other hand, the more applied research stages may be addressed with better
information about the expected beneﬁts and costs and risks involved in order to
facilitate private sector investment. It is these stages of research that are the major
focus of the latter part of the paper. The purpose here is to expose a specific model
that can be utilized to empirically analyze the effect of protein crystallization in
space to the pharmaceutical sector. To achieve this goal one needs to take two steps.
First, one must evaluate the effect of improved (larger, clearer) protein crystals on
drug development. Second, one must evaluate the additionality of 155 in developing
such improved crystals in microgravity as compared to other Channels of doing so.
It is shown that a detailed model recently developed by RTI researchers sponsored
by the New York Academy of Sciences can indeed be used in carrying out the first
step, i.e., evaluating the effect of improved (larger, clearer) protein crystals on drug
development. The attraction of this model is that it estimates the effect of better
infrastructure for research on the productivity of R&D for a specific disease. The
availability of better quality protein crystals can be considered in economic terms as
better infrastructure leading to increased productivity of pharmaceutical R&D. A
model like the one showcased here can help assess the benefits of improved protein
crystals on drug development much more precisely than has been the case until now.
For the second step we must wait for the full results of DeLucas’ study. Preliminary
reported results of the study find considerable additionality. Assuming this holds,
the improvement in commercial drug costs would be quite significant.

V

"
"6","1. Introduction
One of the basic missions of NASA is to use the International Space Station (158) to
facilitate the growth of a commercial marketplace in low Earth orbit for scientific
research, technology development, observation and communications, and human
and cargo transportation.Whi1e the private sector has shown some interest, the ISS
currently lacks the ability to exist independently as a commercial entity due to
significant technical, financial and policy barriers, as well as lack of information
among prospective users. 0ft sited barriers in this respect include (i) transportation
costs, frequency, and risk for cargo and research crew, (ii) intellectual property
rights, and (iii) appropriate investment and tax incentives to entice the private
sector. An additional barrier that has transpired during the meetings with experts in
the context of this panel is the apparent newness of the operation and, consequently,
lack of awareness of the possibilities across industry until recently.1 CASIS is one
organization most Closely involved with alleviating several of these barriers,
increasing awareness, and facilitating access.
There are several potential commercial applications for the 155. As has been argued
throughout the years by a long list of experts and NASA itself, one of the more
promising applications in the effort to commercialize LEO is bioscience. In particular,
it is argued that expanding research in protein crystallization on the 155 is a low
hanging fruit in terms of allowing CASIS — the manager of the federal laboratory - to
develop a sustainable activity by leveraging an extant bioscience sector. There are
strong expectations that the space station’s microgravity environment will prove
1 Link and Manskin's paper in this collection drives home the idea that the lack of information about
previous projects has hindered the willingness of additional users to engage in R&D on the 155. This
message is picked up by the Lerner, Leamon and Speen's paper in this collection who provide a lot of
detail through their VC interviews and literature review about what are the weak points of LEO tech
business in the eyes of the private sector, what information is missing, and what types of information,
regulation, and regular service provision will make business calculations more favorable towards
LEO.

1

"
"7","important in the development and design of drugs to treat diseases such as arthritis,
cardiovascular disease, multiple sclerosis, osteoporosis, cystic fibrosis, and even
cancer.
This paper explicitly addresses this issue. In a short time period we have tried to
understand the added value of the ISS microgravity environment for building better
quality protein crystals than is possible on the ground. The scientific implications of
our study are quite broad as it involves a huge potential area of biomedical research
spanning across diseases and NIH centers. In this case study, we are more interested
in the economic aspects of protein crystallization on the ISS. Within a time span of
3-4 months we have tried to understand both what scientists say about it and how
economists would approach the cost-benefit analysis of this activity. At this point,
we think we understand to some extend the basic scientific idea and can propose a
model that can guide a collection of appropriate data from industry experts in order
to quantify microgravity’s “value added"", while taking into account the expected
benefits, expected costs, and risks involved. Obviously, as any analysis of its kind,
what is proposed here is based on certain assumptions and the required data for
estimation will depend on past experience in pharmaceuticals (e.g., Tufts database)
as well as on certain opinions from industry experts. In other words, there is some
margin for error.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section two below discusses the topic of protein
crystallization in biomedical research as well as our current understanding
regarding the contribution of microgravity in developing better quality crystals.
Section three addresses possible policy intervention, also including the introduction
of a government funded consortium to diffuse risk. Section four outlines a specific
model that has recently been developed by RTI International, which provides an
interesting quantitative framework for measuring private sector costs.2 The
2 We are indebted here to our co-panelist, Professor Al Link, who had participated in the specific RTI
project and pointed out to us two critical outputs of it.

2

"
"8","outcome of this section is essentially a list of needed data and data sources. Finally,
Section five concludes.
2. Protein Crystallization and Biopharmaceutical Research
2.1. Declining Research Productivity in New Drug Development
The white paper published by the Federal Drug Administration more than ten years
ago (FDA, 2004)3 openly identified a critical Challenge in biomedical research: an
ever faster pace of basic science discoveries are not being translated quickly into
more effective, affordable, and safe medical products for patients. In economic
parlance, one would describe the problem as a decrease in biomedical research
productivity. The problem was identified as concentrating on an outmoded medical
product development path that has become increasingly complex, inefficient and,
thus, very costly resulting in decreased numbers of both new drug and biologic
applications submitted to FDA and medical device applications. In contrast, the
costs of product development reportedly had soared over the previous decade. If the
calculation of the cost of successful drug development reported in the academic
literature is anything to go by, the situation has not improved since then. On the
contrary, it is getting worse (DiMasi et a1, 2003, 2007, 2014).
In FDA’s View, the problem was said to be that applied sciences needed for medical
product development have not kept pace with the tremendous advances in the basic
sciences. The discovery process had accelerated much more rapidly than the
technology development process. “[N]0t enough applied scientific work has been
done to create new tools to get fundamentally better answers about how the safety
and effectiveness of new products can be demonstrated, in faster time frames, with
more certainty, and at lower c0sts.""(FDA, 2014, p.ii). Developers were said to often
use antiquated tools and concepts resulting in high product failure during clinical
trials and significant loss of time and resources. Obviously, as in any industry,
3 And revisited more recently (FDA, 2014).
3

"
"9","producers cross-subsidize failures from successes. In an industry where the costs of
drug development are already high due to extensive regulation and complicated
science, antiquated drug development structure further amplifies costs. It
consequently also leads to greater attention towards a few potential mega-products.
The FDA white paper called for a new product development toolkit containing
powerful new scientific and technical methods such as animal or computer-based
predictive models, biomarkers for safety and effectiveness, and new clinical
evaluation techniques (p.ii). Such a toolkit would improve predictability and
efficiency along the path from laboratory concept to commercial product.
While there is no silver bullet to achieve this objective, this opens up a window of
opportunity for improvements in the process of protein crystallization. Better
crystals can be considered as part afbetter research infrastructure — exactly like
better biomarkers, for instance — that would contribute to decreasing risk in the pre-
clinical Phase of new drug development and allow better compounds to be
differentiated from the chuff much earlier in the follow-up clinical research Phases.

2.2. Use of Protein Crystals in Biomedical Research
Humans contain over 100,000 proteins that are Vital in their everyday functions.
Without them, our bodies could not “repair, regulate, or protect themselves"" (NASA,
2015). Full understanding of protein function requires information on the three
dimensional structure of these proteins and leads to the development of better
drugs that target these proteins more effectively. To obtain this information
scientists model proteins with a process called X-ray crystallography whose
effectiveness depends on the use of good quality protein crystals.

2.2.1. Protein Crystallization History and Process
Protein crystallization is the process by which protein molecules are formed into 3D
crystals so that they can be studied much more effectively under a process called X-

4

"
"10","ray crystallography. Using X-ray crystallography, scientists study the way proteins
interact with other molecules, how they undergo conformational changes, and how
they perform catalysis in the case of enzymes.
Protein crystallization is a 100-year-old process that has gained notoriety as a drug
discovery tool over history. Max von Laue has been credited for the discovery of the
diffraction of X-rays by crystals in 1914. Using the process of X-ray diffraction,
William Henry Bragg and William Lawrence Bragg won the Nobel Prize in 1915 for
analyzing crystal structures at the atomic level. It was John Bernal and his student
Dorothy Hodgkin in 1934 who produced the first X-ray diffraction photograph of a
digestive enzyme, Pepsin, marking what many scientists consider the beginning of
protein crystallography. Hodgkin went on to discover the structure of penicillin
through protein crystallography, which allowed pharmaceutical companies to mass-
produce the antibiotic. Herb Hauptman and Jerome Karle, who won the Nobel Prize
in 1985, found a more efficient method for determining crystal structures that
improved the accuracy and time of experiments.
Hauptman and Karle’s improvement of protein crystallography has become an
essential tool in today’s drug discovery industry. More than 85 percent of known
protein structures have been discovered through the process of protein-
crystallography (NIH, 2007, 14). In this process, a pure, highly concentrated sample
of a protein is combined with a variety of liquids that will eventually evaporate,
resulting in the formation of a crystallized protein. The best crystals are long, three
dimensional, and tightly packed with organized molecules. Since diffraction-quality
crystals can be hard to produce, thousands of samples are often created for just one
protein.
After creating a successful protein crystal, X-ray diffraction is preformed. Using a
large machine called a synchrotron, X-rays are blasted through the crystals, which
are being automatically rotated, to capture the full scope of diffraction data. Given
data on diffraction patterns, proteins can be accurately modeled in three dimensions.
5

"
"11","With the resulting three-dimensional protein model, pharmaceutical companies can
design novel drugs that target a particular protein or engineer an enzyme for a
specific industrial process. This development process is known as structure-based
drug design. There are several empirical examples of protein crystallography’s
contribution to medicine throughout history. Notably in the 1980s, protein
crystallography was Vital in producing treatments for HIV. Scientists were able to
model the structure of HIV protease, a protein that causes HIV to spread throughout
the body. Using the three-dimensional structure, scientists engineered protein
inhibitors — such as the drug Viracept — to slow down the progress of the disease.
Because of the billions of molecules that can be studied under one protein crystal,
the possibilities of using protein crystallization are said to be Virtually endless.
Pharmaceutical companies often utilize protein crystallization during the early
phases of the drug discovery process, even prior to the preclinical phase. When
scientists want more information about the receptor site of the target drug, protein
crystallization is used to identify and validate the target. Once there is a general idea
of a leading target, protein crystallization can be used further during the drug design
phase to model a drug specific to the target. Specifically, scientists use software to
test fit a drug candidate to the molecule’s receptor site. Protein crystallization is
more commonly used in the drug discovery process due to the time it takes to
effectively analyze crystals for new targets.
While the key to accurate 3D protein modeling is high quality protein crystals,
protein crystallization has historically been the most difficult part of the
crystallography process. Protein crystals are very fragile, and can be affected by
small changes in heat or pressure. With a very low margin of error, scientists must
increase the sample sizes of possible crystals, this way increasing both the cost and
time of experiment. Another issue is that protein structure in a crystal is not always
the same as in an actual cell. Biological structures are difficult to measure solely
through a representative crystal. To address this, scientists complement their

6

"
"12","analysis of the crystal structure with a protein’s activity, which provides more
accurate data but increases the time of experiment further. In the past 15 years,
technology and automation of the process has significantly lowered costs and
increased the purity of tested proteins (Netterwald, 2007).4
In 1992, Dr. Lawrence 1. DeLucas strongly argued that the microgravity environment
on the 155 would be ideal for growing better quality protein crystals. The question of
the benefit from space crystallization still remains today. Why are crystals grown on
the ISS better than the alternatives obtained on the ground? How much better are
they and at what additional cost?

2.2.2. 155 Additionality for Protein Crystallization
The 155 is argued as the ideal place for protein crystallization due to the Space
Station’s microgravity environment and the existing MERLIN hardware. Crystals
grown in microgravity do not face the same convection forces seen on Earth — such
as wind and gravity — which adversely affect the orientation and size of crystals.
While crystals grow much slower in microgravity, they provide approximately twice
as many data points as crystals grown on earth (P001, 1989). Because of this, it is
argued that the 155 has the potential of becoming the new frontier of pharmaceutical
research, assisting in the discovery of new uses of proteins never before thought
possible when tested on Earth.
The promise of opportunity notwithstanding, several constraints remain for the
establishment of high-budget (i.e., Viable) protein crystallization research on the 185:
proof of concept, experiment duration, size restraints, and transportation.

0 Proof of concept: While it is generally understood that proteins crystallize
better in microgravity than earth, it is still unknown to what extent exactly
this is true and which proteins may be exceptions. According to CASIS,

4 See Appendix II for more detailed Protein Crystallization costs on earth.
7

"
"13","protein resolution in low-earth orbit improves about 20-30% over crystals
grown on earth (CASIS Opportunity Map, 2012, 27).

0 Experiment duration: Length of experiment may be a most important issue.
What might take 1-2 weeks on earth could take 6 months on the ISS. CASIS
interviews indicate that the biotech industry would ideally like their results
in 4-8 weeks.

0 Lab size: The small size of the 155 could hinder pharmaceutical companies
from testing large samples and executing a scalable model.

0 Transportation to and from the 185: The absence of a reliable workhorse
transporting vehicle that will undertake the journey at regular, frequent, pre-
announced dates places a lid on what can be done and at what cost (including
operational and insurance).

At present, some within the community of possible business investors argue that
there isn’t yet strong enough evidence that crystal quality improvement is high
enough to justify the effort of sending proteins to space (CASIS Opportunity Map,
2012, 27). Still, CASIS finds that protein crystallization has the potential to become
one of the strongest commercial applications to the 155.
Dr. Lawrence DeLucas from the University of Alabama is currently leading a blind
study of 2000 membrane protein crystals grown in space versus Earth, which will
likely be completed in the summer of 2015.5 DeLucas’ April 2014 expedition6
purported to accomplish two goals: a) inform scientists on the structures of
membrane proteins and b) conclusively measure the overall impact of microgravity
on protein crystallization. The entire analysis is being performed as a “double blind""
5 Membrane proteins make up a 67% of commercial drugs, yet information about the structure of
these proteins is lacking due to inability to grow proper crystals on earth. For this reason, Dr.
DeLucas believes that membrane protein crystallization has the potential to be a strong piece of a
commercial space industry. Other useful proteins with potential commercial application are “high-
value aqueous proteins and protein complexes"" (NASA, 2015).
6 The protein samples were launched to the 155 on April 18, 2014, and returned to the investigator on
October 27, 2014.

8

"
"14","experiment to eliminate any perceived bias by colleagues. They use a statistically
relevant number of different proteins and for each analyzed protein a statistically
relevant number of crystals. Assuming results in well-defined statistical confidence
intervals, DeLucas’ project becomes of critical importance in determining the
additionality 0f the 155 in protein crystallization and thus enabling cost-benefit
analysis of this line of activity on the 155.7
The most relevant results of DeLucas’ project to the question under investigation in
our study will be the measured differences of protein crystals in microgravity and
earth. Evidence of significant additional value of microgravity will support NASA’s
goal to commercialize this capability of the 155. Dr. DeLucas’ earlier press release
notes that even a small improvement in crystals would have “a significant impact on
scientist’s ability to use the resulting structures to provide insights into biological
mechanisms"" (NASA, 2015). This “significant impact"" can be critical in reducing the
cost of existing infrastructure and R&D.
At the very last moment of this writing, Larry DeLucas announced preliminary
results of his study (DeLucas, 2015). The data were interesting and the pictures
compelling in the sense of pointing out that in certain cases of those examined the
obtained protein crystals were largely improved in microgravity as compared to
those created on Earth. Yet, it is still difficult to determine why these proteins could
be so important to medicine. Appendix I presents the layman’s View of these
proteins, communicated to us by Dr. Lynn Harper of NASA Ames Research Center.8
It is important to underline that these are preliminary impressions ofpreliminary
results. While strong caveats apply, there are indications here for very significant
and widely applicable results.
7 Participants included government labs (Oak Ridge, Los Alamos, Scripps, NIH), industry (Emerald
Biostructures, Astra-Zeneca, prress Genes, St. Jude Research Hospital), and 24 universities
(including the University of California, the California Institute of Technology, New York University,
Columbia University, University of Leeds, and Martin Luther University).
8 Email of April 28.

9

"
"15","More information has just come to surface regarding the costs of and demand for
protein crystallization in microgravity. This information can be seen in Appendix II.
3. Policy Considerations

One can distinguish four stages of research with heavy contribution by protein
crystallization to drug development that may be liable for possible policy
intervention. The stages can be seen below:

5. Production of high quality crystals

6. Collection of generic information to identify and validate possible drugs

7. Modeling of a drug to a specific target during the preclinical stage

8. Fine tuning of the drug during the clinical stage
The first two stages can be described as generic research, with the results being of
interest across the pharmaceutical industry (also including bio). The last two stages
are appropriately described as private research of interest to individual companies.
The 155’s contribution as envisioned comes squarely in the very first stage but its
effects are very much felt all the way across. Assuming the distinction between
more generic and more applied research stages holds, the policy approaches to
address them are different. The more generic stages may be addressed through a
collaborative agreement between the main stakeholders on the supply side. The
more applied stages may be addressed with better information about the expected
benefits and costs and risks involved in order to facilitate private sector investment.

3.1 Collaborative Agreement

10

"
"16","There has been a long strand of research in the economics, business management,
and policy literatures on collaborative research.9 The reason for the development of
this extensive literature in its earlier phases in the 19805 and 19905 sounds
tantalizingly similar to the first two stages of protein crystallization contribution
seen above. In a few words, generic (or precompetitive) research creates the
conditions of suboptimal investment by the private sector (i) due to the presence of
uncertainty regarding research paths and the prospective applicability of the results
within the confines of individual companies and (ii) due to expectations of imperfect
appropriability 0f the results (Arrow, 1962, Nelson, 1959). Compounded with the
four barriers listed earlier in relation to the Space Station (Section 2.2.2), this
creates a straightforward need for government intervention through the sanctioning
of collaborative research as well as its subsidization.

3.2 Key Questions
As the manager of the national lab, CASIS already subsidizes research related to
protein crystallization 0n the 155. The question, of course, is if the subsidy is enough
and if it is used to support generic research rather than just basic research.10
In order to understand whether the subsidy is at the appropriate level, one needs to
consider several issues:

1) Is there additionality 0f the ISS microgravity environment in building better
protein crystals?

2) Assuming significant additionality, should there be a collaborative
undertaking involving protein crystallization using the ISS microgravity
environment?

9 Starting in the early 19805, the literature on collaborative R&D has grown really large. There are
several surveys of this literature, some contributed by two members of this panel. See, for example,
Vonortas (1997), Iankowski, Link and Vonortas (2001), Vonortas and Zirulia (2015), and Hagedoorn,
Link and Vonortas (2000).
10 Basic research produces, of course, a public good which is supported by the public purse.

11

"
"17","3) What does it take to build such a collaborative agreement? Does it make
sense to build it solely among American firms and research institutes or,
given that 155 is a 15-nati0n endeavor, build it across all partners?

4) How should the latter two stages of protein crystallization’s contribution to
the private sector — specifically pharmaceutical research — be considered in
these calculations?

5) What are the true private and social benefits to consider in a proper cost-
benefit analysis?

We must await the full results of Robert DeLucas’ ongoing study (Section 2.2.2) to
answer the first question. Assuming significant additionality, the argument to
answer the second question should be affirmative. A recent study of the National
Research Council (2015) summarizes this argument for collaborative generic
research in a different technology area (ﬂexible electronics) in a form that can
readily be applied here. But the argument has been settled long ago in detailed
investigations of the theoretical and empirical aspects of the rationale of
cooperative R&D needed to support legislation like the National Cooperative
Research Act (NCRA) of 1984 and its sequel, the National Cooperative Research and
Production Act (NCRPA) of1993.11
Calculating the optimal level of support for this type of consortium (third question)
could be the subject of an entirely separate analysis. The government could take
several approaches in determining the size of public expenditure. One approach is to
match private investment, as seen in other consortiums. Alternatively, the
government could fund all costs associated with obtaining better protein crystals
from space (e.g. space travel and samples). Generic protein crystals could then be
distributed (or sold) to pharmaceutical companies for further collaboration and
11 Vonortas (1997) provides an almost exhaustive review of the theoretical and empirical arguments
utilizing mainstream economic concepts from transaction cost economics, public goods and
externalities, and investment behavior under conditions of uncertainty, impactedness and
opportunism. Hemphill and Vonortas (2003) expand to arguments from the management literature
such as real options and competitive advantage.

12

"
"18","examination. No matter what method, the government must contribute enough to
ease the uncertainty and risk involved from obtaining space crystals.
The remaining two questions pertain to the cost-benefit analysis of protein
crystallization contribution to new drug development. It would be easier, but
misguided, to build the argument on the basis of the first two stages of protein
crystallization contribution only (first paragraph Section 3). All four stages should
be considered instead. The estimation can follow the standard approach in health
economics of calculating the costs and benefits of new drug development, then try to
disentangle the purely private from the purely social benefits.
4. Modeling Drug Development Costs
The purpose of this section is to explore a specific model that can be utilized to
empirically analyze the effect of protein crystallization in space (188) to the
pharmaceutical sector. To achieve this goal one needs to take two steps. First, one
must evaluate the effect of improved (larger, clearer) protein crystals on drug
development. Second, one must evaluate the additionality of 155 in developing such
improved crystals in microgravity as compared to other channels of doing so.
4.1. Phases of Pharmaceutical Research
The literature has advanced an aggregate model paradigm that depicts the drug
development process as pretty much linear With several Phases.
Preclinical. The preclinical Phase of the drug development process typically
encompasses discovery and preclinical development testing. Discovery programs
aim at synthesizing compounds that then undergo preclinical testing in assays and
animal models.
Clinical. The clinical part of the drug development process refers to human testing.
13

"
"19","Clinical testing typically proceeds through three successive phases:

0 Phase I: a small number of usually healthy volunteers are tested to establish
safe dosages and to gather information on the absorption, distribution,
metabolic effects, excretion, and toxicity of the compound.

0 Phase II: trials are conducted with human subjects who have the targeted
disease or condition. These trials are conducted on larger numbers of
subjects than in phase I (maybe hundreds) and are designed to obtain
evidence on safety and preliminary data on efficacy.

0 Phase III: testing typically consists of a number of large-scale trials designed
to establish efficacy and to uncover side-effects that occur infrequently. The
number of subjects is now the largest and can total in the thousands.

4.2. Effect of Improved Protein Crystals: Model Development and an
Example12
We use as a base the model by Scott et a1 (2014) [also in NY Academy of Sciences
(2013)], which measures the cost of drug development as a function of cost, time,
and risk. The expected cost of developing a new drug is given by the sum of the risk-
adjusted, capitalized cost of each Phase of development:
where tstart denotes time in months from start of Phase to date of new drug approval
tend denotes time in months from end of Phase to date of new drug approval
c is cost per month per compound in Phase
p is the probability that a compound undergoing this Phase of development is
ultimately approved for marketing
r is cost of capital as an annual interest rate.
12 This section borrows heavily from Scott et a1 (2014) and NY Academy of Sciences (2013). It also
consults extensively DiMasi and Grabowski (2007) and DiMasi, Hansen and Grabowski (2003). A
new study recently released by the Tufts Center for Drug Development (DiMasi, 2014) was not
available to us at the time of this writing.
14

"
"20","Drug development is a lengthy process, implying substantial time costs to investing
in R&D long before any potential returns can be earned. The time costs of drug
development can be captured by capitalizing costs forward to the point of marketing
approval at an appropriate discount rate. Capitalization is achieved by continuous
compounding at the annual interest rate r, which can be set at 10.5-11% through the
CAPM model or otherwise for the biopharmaceutical industry (Harrington, 2012;
DiMasi and Grabowski, 2007).
Capitalized costs are the sum of out-of-pocket (cash) costs and time costs. It should
be noticed that in order to obtain time costs one needs, in addition to an appropriate
discount rate, a timeline over which out-of-pocket costs are capitalized forward to
marketing approval. Using data for several compounds, DiMasi and Grabowski
(2007) and DiMasi et al. (2003) estimate average Phase and regulatory review
lengths. On the other hand, in their case study on Alzheimer’s disease Scott et al
(2014) obtain estimates of duration — as well as estimates of cost and probability (to
progress to next Phase) — by experts in Alzheimer’s research and drug development.
They used data provided by experts.
Table 1. Duration of Drug Development Phases (Months)
(DiMasi & Grabowski, 2007) Existing Improved
(Scott et al., 2014)
mﬁ——szT—————ﬁT—W—
PhaseI 12.3 12.8 12.6
Phase II 26.0 27.7 25.2
Phase III 33.8 50.9 39.4
Regulatory Review 18.2 18.0 16.9
T—ﬂmTr—————————
Source: Adapted from NY Academy of Sciences (2013), Table B-2.
15

"
"21","Table 2. Transition Probabilities* Between Phases
Phase — Typical New Biopharmaceutical Alzheimer’s Disease*
(DiMasi & Grabowski, 2007) Existing Improved
(Scott et al., 2014)

Phase 1311 (1) ——— 0—71— —— 0.67 0.69

Phase II to 111 (2) 0.44 0.47 0.42

Phase III to Approval (3) 0.68 0.24 0.58

Phase II to Approval (2)x(3) 0.30 0.11 0.24

Phase I to Approval (1)X(2)x(3) 0.21 0.07 0.16

Ratio of Phase 11 failures 0.80 0.60 0.77

to total failures in Phase
II and III

* Averaggported

Source: Adapted from NY Academy of Sciences (2013), Table 8-3.

Table 3. Average Costs (typical new biopharmaceutical - $m)

— Out-of-pocket (monthly) Capitalized at 11%

Typical New Biopharmaceutical Typical New Biopharmaceutical
($m./m01ecule in development) ($m / new drug approved)
(DiMasi & Grabowski, 2007; (DiMasi & Grabowski, 2007;

Phase DiMasi et al, 2003) DiMasi et al, 2003)

PreclinFal 0.72 510

Phase I 2.73 338

Phase II 2.00 312

Phase 111 5.64 385

Total 1,565

Sourcemapted from NY Academ370f Sciences (2013), Table 8-4.

The older estimates above have been calculated on the basis of data from the Tufts

database on drugs developed by traditional pharmaceutical companies (DiMasi et a1.,

2003) and by biotechnology companies (DiMasi and Grabowski, 2007). The latter

paper concentrated on the types of molecules on which biotech companies focus,

specifically recombinant proteins and monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). Thirteen of a

16

"
"22","total seventeen examined compounds13 first entered clinical testing during 1990-
2003 ; the remaining four compounds examined in this study were from the Tufts
database. The newer estimates specific to Alzheimer’s disease were developed on
the basis of detailed expert interviews from the pharmaceutical industry and
academia (Scott et al., 2014; NY Academy of Sciences, 2013).
Tables 4 and 5 below use steps mathematically identical to the formula presented
earlier in this section to highlight (i) the expected cost of entering a drug candidate
in Phase I trials and (ii) the total capitalized cost of a new drug approval. The
important take-away here is how even small [apparent] Changes in the cost, likelihood
ofsuccessful completion, and time length ofa Phase lead to dramatic decreases in
overall costs ofsuccessful drug developmen t.
13 The sample consisted of 9 recombinant proteins and 8 mAbs.

17

"
"23","Table 4. Cost of Alzheimer’s Disease-Modifying Development with Existing Infrastructure
Eventual Outcome — Cost CapFalEd t0 —— Costglﬁse I Start _
For 3 Compound Out-of—pocket Date Development Stops (Present Value)
Entering Phase I Cost ($m) 0r Drug Approved ($m.) ($m., 11% discount rate) Probability
Development steps 71 89 79 0.33
after Phase I
Development stops 126 177 122 0.35
after Phase II
Development stops 413 648 280 0.24
after Phase 111
Drug is approved 413 765 280 0.07
Expected present-value cost = (79X0.33) + (122X0.35) + (280x024) +(280X0.07) = $ 157 m
Cost per new drug approval = $157m / 0.07 = $ 2,087 m
Cost capitalized to date of drug approval = $2,087m X e(109-4)(0-11/12) = $5,693m
(Phase I starts an average of 109.4 months prior to approval)
Notes: (1) Numbers have been rounded. For example, $2—087—m comesf—rom—dividinga—ppgximately $156.5m by approximately 0.075.
(2) Out-of—pocket cost is the monthly cost for each Phase (Table XX) times the number of months spent in that Phase (Table 1):
71 = (0.72)(50.1) + (2.73)(12.8) 126 = 71 + (2.00)(27.7) 413 = 126 + (5.64)(50.9)
(3) Present-value cost is the value of costs incurred at the beginning of Phase I: XXXX
(4) Probabilities are derived from Table 2 (they may not sum to 1 because of rounding): 0.33=1—0.67, 0.35=(0.67)(1-0.47), 0.24=(0.67) (0.47)(1-0.24).
Source: NY Academy of Sciences (2013), Table B-5.
18

"
"24","Table 5. Cost of Alzheimer’s Disease-Modifying Development with Recommended Infrastructure
Eventual Outcome Cost Capitalized to Cost at Phase I Start _
For 3 Compound Out-of—pocket Date Development Stops (Present Value)
Entering Phase I Cost ($m) 0r Drug Approved ($m.) ($m., 11% discount rate) Probability
Development stops 70 87 78 0.31
after Phase I
Development stops 12 1 167 118 0.40
after Phase II
Development stops 343 507 250 0.12
after Phase 111
Drug is approved 343 592 250 0.17
Expected present-value cost = (78X0.31) + (118x040) + (250x012) +(250X0.17) = $ 144 m
Cost per new drug approval = $144m / 0.17 = $ 855 m
Cost capitalized to date of drug approval = $855m X e(94-1)(0-11/12) = $2,027m
(Phase I starts an average of 94.1 months prior to approval)
Notes: (1) Numbers have been rounded. For example, $855m comes from dividing approximately $143.5m by approximately 0.168.
(2) Out-of—pocket cost is the monthly cost for each Phase (Table XX) times the number of months spent in that Phase (Table 1):
70 = (0.72)(49.9) + (2.73)(12.6) 121 = 70 + (2.00)(25.2) 343 = 121 + (5.64)(39.4)
(3) Present-value cost is the value of costs incurred at the beginning of Phase I: XXXX
(4) Probabilities are derived from Table 2 (they may not sum to 1 because of rounding): 0.31=1—0.69, 0.40=(0.69)(1-0.42), 0.12=(0.69) (0.42)(1-0.58).
Source: NY Academy of Sciences (2013), Table B-6.
19

"
"25","Finally, Table 6 shows the estimated costs of developing a disease-modifying drug
for Alzheimer’s across the industry (NY Academy of Science, 2013). This is the
typical way the literature has reported estimates for drug development costs and
include the cost of failures by multiple companies expected by the interviewed
experts before one drug is approved by the FDA for marketing. Notice that totals of
each column match the totals in Tables 4 and 5 respectively.
Table 6. Average Costs (Alzheimer’s disease - $m)

Existing Infrastructure Recommended Infrastructure
Phase ($m. / new drug approved) ($m / new drug approved)
@ﬁ—W—W——
Phase I 1,193 458
Phase 11 1,048 387
Phase 111 1,794 539
Total 5,693 2,027
Sourcemlapted from NY Academy of Sciences (2013), Table 8-4.

4.3. 155 Additionality in Developing Improved Protein Crystals
We are unable to provide much input here in terms of actual numbers before the
conclusion of the ongoing study led by Larry DeLucas (Section 2.2.2).
4.4 Summing Up
The same, or very similar, model to that outlined in Section 4.2 can be utilized to
assess the effect of improved protein crystals on R&D targeting a specific disease.
Assuming the use of average data regarding the effects across various types of
diseases — e.g., across all types of cancer or all types of diabetes — one can estimate
20

"
"26","average estimates for the industry. The important limitation currently is missing
data on:

a) the duration (number of months) of the various phases of drug development

b) the cost per month, and

C) the probabilities that the compounds under investigation will pass through

each phase successfully.
Appendix 1 0f the NY Academies of Science (2013) study provides the questionnaire
utilized in that study14 to elicit such data through interviews with a significant
number experts including 27 industry representatives and 5 academics. The
majority of the industry interviewees were reported to be at the level of Vice
president (or equivalent) and above in 11 companies pursuing Alzheimer’s disease
drug discovery and development and they themselves were responsible for research
either on Alzheimer’s disease directly or on diseases of the central nervous system
more broadly. The 5 non-industry interviewees each had more than 20 years
experience in Alzheimer’s related research.
The interviewees were provided with estimates on cost, cycle times, and transition
possibilities found for pharmaceuticals in general and were asked to customize
them for Alzheimer’s disease twice: with and without a new environment of better
infrastructure which was clearly defined.
How does this translate to our research project on protein crystallization in
microgravity? The availability afbetter quality protein crystals can be considered in
economic terms as better infrastructure leading to increased productivity of
pharmaceutical R&D.15 A model like the one shown in this section should then help
assess the benefits of improved protein crystals on drug development much more
precisely than has been the case until now.
14 Troy Scott, Alan O’Connor, and A] Link for RTI and Diana L. van de Hoef for the NY Academy of
Sciences.
15 One could think of it as analogous to what economists argue about basic research and its impact on
applied research and development.
2 1

"
"27","If a questionnaire is to be utilized to collect data, a well-defined target must be
selected in order for the interviewed experts to provide more accurate answers. A
follow up final step would be to calculate the societal cost savings from reducing
disease.

5. Concluding Remarks
Protein crystallization is an essential part of protein crystallography — the main
process used in drug discovery today. Advancements in the technology of protein
crystallization over the last hundred years have been remarkable. The prospect of
improving protein crystals through the use of the International Space Station has
the potential to be the next great chapter in drug discovery history.
We must wait for the full results of Lawrence DeLucas’ study — which measures the
true value-added of space on protein crystallization — before we make any firm
conclusions. Preliminary reported results of the study find considerable
additionality. Assuming this holds with the final results, the improvement in
commercial drug costs would be significant. For the private sector, better protein
crystals mean better 3D models of proteins in the preclinical stage. The improved
modeling should carry over in clinical stages as well, advancing overall drug
infrastructure. Recent relevant work supported by the New York Academy of
Sciences for a specific disease strongly indicates that even marginal improvements
in infrastructure can Significantly reduce costs in overall drug development.
The leap from earth crystals to drastically pricier (yet better quality) space crystals
may be too risky of an investment to expect from private pharmaceutical companies,
even with significant projected cost reductions. A government-subsidized
consortium may be the best plan to alleviate some of the early-stage, precompetitive
financial risk. The government therefore may wish to fund space missions for

22

"
"28","protein crystals for generic use, where improvements in these proteins’ 3D models
could lead to extensive efficiencies in drug discovery and development for a wide
range of diseases. While pharmaceutical companies would still be in competition,
improving their overall infrastructure of basic protein knowledge could provide an
overwhelmingly public and private benefit.
While private cost reduction can be measured with the model seen in Section 4,
public benefit from disease treatment and potential government revenue are
difficult to measure. The potential costs to pharmaceutical companies — even with
the easing of a consortium — must also be measured to gauge private interest. If
publiC/private benefits outweigh publiC/private costs, then investment in protein
crystallization on space is a fiscally Viable use of ISS resources. Pending the final
results of Lawrence DeLucas’ study and other missing pieces of information, we will
be able to more effectively weigh the costs and benefits of protein crystallization
aboard the International Space Station.

23

"
"29","References

Arrow, Kenneth (1962) ""Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for
invention,"" in Richard R. Nelson (ed.) The Rate and Direction of Inventive
Activity, Princeton University Press.

CASIS Opportunity Map (2012) “Maximizing the Value of the CASIS platform —
Bioscience Opportunity Map"".

DeLucas Larry (2015) “Comprehensive Analysis of Microgravity Protein
Crystallization"", Presentation, March 19.

DiMasi, Ioseph A., Ronald W. Hansen, and Henry G. Grabowski (2014) “Innovation in
the Pharmaceutical Industry: New Estimates of R&D Costs"", Report, Tufts Center
for the Study of Drug Development, Tufts University.

http:[[csdd.tufts.edu[files[uploadsZTuftS CSDD briefing on RD cost study -

Nov 18, 2014..pdf

http:[[csdd.tufts.edu[news[complete storylcost study press event webcast

DiMasi, Joseph A. and Henry G. Grabowski (2007) “The cost of biopharmaceutical
R&D: Is biotech different?"", Managerial and Decision Economics, 28: 469-479.

DiMasi, Joseph A., Ronald W. Hansen, and Henry G. Grabowski (2003) “The price of
innovation: New estimates of drug development costs"", journal ofHealth
Economics, 22: 151-185.

Food and Drug Administration (2004) “Innovation Stagnation: Challenge and
Opportunity 0n the Critical Path to New Medical Products"", US Department of
Health and Human Services. Revised 2014.

Hagedoorn, Iohn, Albert N. Link, and Nicholas S. Vonortas (2000) “Research
Partnerships,"" Research Policy, 29(4—5): 567-86.

Harrington, S. E. (2012) “Cost of Capital for Pharmaceutical, Biotechnology, and
Medical Device Firms"" In P. M. Danzon and S. Nicholson (eds), The Oxford
Handbook 0fthe Economics 0fthe Biopharmaceuticals Industry (pp. 75—99). New
York: Oxford University Press.

Hemphill, Thomas and Nicholas S. Vonortas (2003) “Strategic Research Partnerships:
A Managerial Perspective"", T echnologz Analysis and Strategic Management, 15(2):
255-71.

Iankowski, John E., Albert N. Link, and Nicholas S. Vonortas (eds) (2001) Strategic
Research Partnerships, National Science Foundation

24

"
"30","NASA (2015) “ Commercial Protein Crystal Growth - High density protein crystal
growth Modified (CPCG-HM), US Department of Defense.

National Institutes of Health (2007) “The Structures of Life"", US Department of
Health and Human Services.

National Research Council (2015) The Flexible Electronics Opportunity, Board on
Science, Technology and Economic Policy, Washington, D.C.: The National
Academies Press.

Nelson, Richard R. (1959) ""The simple economics of basic scientific research,""
lournal of Political Economy, lune: 297-306.

Netterwald, James, ed. ""Crystallography Illuminates Drug Targets."" Drug Discovery &
Development. N.p., 6 Sept. 2007. Web. 09 Apr. 2015.

New York Academy of Sciences (2013) “Economic Analysis of Opportunities to
Accelerate Alzheimer’s Disease Research and Development"", Report, The New
York Academy of Sciences.

P001, Robert. ""Zero Gravity Produces Weighty Improvements."" Science 246.4930
(1989): 580.]STOR. Web. 09 Apr. 2015.

Scott, Troy 1., Alan C. O’Connor, Albert N. Link, Travis I. Beaulieu (2014) “Economic
analysis of opportunities to accelerate Alzheimer’s disease research and
development"", Annals of the New YorkAcademy ofSciences, 1313: 17-34.

US Department of Defense (1997) “SEMATECH 1987--1997: A Final Report to the
Department of Defense"", US Department of Defense.

Vonortas, Nicholas S. (1997) Cooperation in Research and Development, Kluwer

Academic Publishers.
Vonortas, Nicholas S. and Lorenzo Zirulia (2015) “Strategic Technology Alliances and
Networks"", Economics of Innovation and New T echnology, 24(5): 490-509.
25

"
"31","Appendix I — Proteins that Showed Significant Difference in Space
Versus Ground Crystallization in the DeLucas Study
The following proteins showed significantly better crystallization in space versus
ground in the DeLucas 155 double blind protein crystallization study:
3902c An unknown missense variant of the pathogen
(Slide 20) responsible for Grénblad—Strandberg syndrome, a
genetic disease that causes fragmentation and
mineralization of elastic fibers in some tissues. The most
common problems arise in the skin and eyes, and later in
blood vessels in the form of premature atherosclerosis.
The mechanism of action is similar to sickle cell disease.
Vibrio cholera According to the World Health Organization, cholera
(Slide 20) causes the deaths of 120,000 children under the age of 5
each year.
Aspartate This enzyme is an archetypal example of protein
carbamoyltransferase regulation important to a wide range of basic and applied
(Slide 21, 45) research areas as it modulates some of the most
important metabolic processes in all living organisms.
Aspartate carbamoyltransferase catalyzes the first step in
the pyrimidine biosynthetic pathway, which makes the
building blocks of DNA.
The following showed a significant difference between ﬂight and ground, but the
double blind study is still underway so we do not know which was better (ground or
ﬂight):
PadA A theory that is gaining increased support is that an
(Slide 31) infectious agent plays a role in cardiovascular disease.
Among several pathogens identified, the oral bacterium
Streptococcus gordonii has been implicated as a plausible
agent. Removal of the protein PadA prevents the Strep
from implementing a critical step in the infection process
and is thus a therapeutic target for drug design.
SPMV SPMV is particularly relevant to increasing field yields of
(Slide 32, 36) crops used in biofuels. Satellite panicum mosaic Virus
(SPMV) is a plant satellite Virus. A satellite is a subViral
26

"
"32","agent composed of nucleic acid that depends on the co-
infection of a host cell with a helper or master Virus for its
replication. This provides understanding of the nature of
such a satellite Virus, which can then be used to develop
agents that either block the infection of the master Virus
or use it as a vehicle to deliver antiviral agents.

Bacterial Cellulose Bacterial Cellulose Synthetase plays a critical role in the

Synthetase production of bacterial cellulose. Bacterial cellulose can

(Slide 34) be tailored to have specific desirable properties,
including unique mechanical properties and applications
to biotechnology, microbiology, and materials science.
With advances in the ability to synthesize and
characterize bacterial cellulose, the material is being used
for a wide variety of commercial applications including
textiles, cosmetics, and food products, as well as medical
applications. While cellulose is a basic structural material
of most plant substances, it is also produced by bacteria.
Bacterial cellulose has different properties from plant
cellulose and is characterized by high purity, strength,
moldability and increased water holding ability. While
bacterial cellulose is produced in nature, many methods
are currently being investigated to enhance cellulose
growth from cultures in laboratories as a large-scale
process. Many patents have been issued in microbial
cellulose applications and several active areas of research
are attempting to better characterize microbial cellulose
and utilize it in new areas.

Putative citrate The enzyme Citrate synthase exists in nearly all living

synthase 2 cells and stands as a pace-making enzyme in the first step

(Slide 34, 46) of the Citric Acid Cycle (or Krebs Cycle). The Krebs Cycle
is one of the essential processes for most life on Earth.
The Krebs Cycle is not only part of the pathway for the
breakdown of glucose into energy, but also for the
breakdown of all metabolites, including other sugars,
amino acids and fatty acids. Each of these groups of
molecules has a pathway that leads into the Krebs Cycle.
Basically, this is how we get energy from food.

FE++ Alcohol Iron based Alcohol Dehydrogenase occurs in bacteria and

Dehydrogenase fungi. In fuel cells, alcohol dehydrogenases can be used to

(Slide 35, 40) catalyze the breakdown of fuel for an ethanol fuel cell.
Hemoglobin is the protein that makes blood red because

27

"
"33","(Slide 35) it carries oxygen throughout the body. Blood transfusions
have saved countless lives. However, the need for
matching blood type, the short life of stored blood, and
the possibility of contamination are still major concerns.
An understanding of how hemoglobin works, based on
decades of biochemical study and many crystallographic
structures, has prompted a search for blood substitutes
and artificial blood. The most obvious approach is to use
a solution of pure hemoglobin to replace lost blood. The
main challenge is keeping the four protein chains of
hemoglobin together. In the absence of the protective
casing of the red blood cell, the four chains rapidly fall
apart. To avoid this problem, novel hemoglobin
molecules have been designed where two of the four
chains are physically linked together and two additional
glycine residues form a link between two of the chains,
preventing their separation in solution. The blood of the
newborn horse was found to have a higher affinity for
oxygen than that of the mother. Unlike many other
species, the hemoglobins 0f the newborn and adult horse
have been shown to be structurally identical, which offers
the possibility of using this factor to enhance artificial
hemoglobin.

O-methyltransferase Methyltransferases are found in many metabolic

Family Protein 85 pathways and are implicated in genetic diseases, cancer,

(Slide 39, 42, 45) and metabolic diseases. The O-methyltransferases have
also been associated with brain disorders.

Acyl-CoA This class of enzymes’ function is to catalyze the initial

dehydrogenases step in each cycle of fatty acid B-oxidation in the

(Slides 39, 40) mitochondria of cells. Deficiencies in these enzymes are
linked to genetic disorders involving fatty acid oxidation
(i.e. metabolic disorders), including sudden infant death
syndrome.

Enoyl-CoA hydratase This enzyme is essential to metabolizing fatty acids from

(Slide 40): foods to produce energy efficiently and quickly.At1east
11 mutations have been found involving this enzyme that
potentially cause neurological problems such as
movement disorders and problems with thinking ability
(cognition) by enabling acids to accumulate in the ﬂuids
that surround and protect the brain and spinal cord.

dehydrogenase (Slide very large family of enzymes that have a great diversity of

28

"
"34","40) functions. The clinical findings in those with confirmed
short-chain acyl-COA dehydrogenase (SCAD) deficiency in
newborns, for example, range from severe (dysmorphic
facial features, feeding difficulties /fai1ure to thrive,
metabolic acidosis, ketotic hypoglycemia, lethargy,
developmental delay, seizures, hypotonia (weak
muscles), dystonia (involuntary muscle contractions),
and myopathy(muscles do not function) to normal.

Flockhouse Virus FHV has been shown to overcome the kingdom barrier

(FHV) (Slide 41) and to replicate in plants, insects, yeast and mammalian
cells. When adult mosquitoes were orally fed 0r injected
with the Virus, FHV antigen was detected in various
tissues and infectious Virus was recovered. This can
provide insight into the mechanisms of Viral replication
and potentially identify novel targets for broadly effective
antiviral agents.

Inorganic This enzyme catalyzes the conversion of one molecule of

Pyrophosphatase pyrophosphate to two phosphate ions. Dysregulated

(PP(i)) cellular PP(i) production, degradation, and transport all
have been associated with disease, and PP(i) appears to
directly mediate specific disease manifestations. In
addition, natural and synthetic analogs of PP(i) are in use
or currently under evaluation as prophylactic agents or
therapies for disease. The functionality of this enzyme
plays a critical role in lipid metabolism (including lipid
synthesis and degradation), calcium absorption and bone
formation, and DNA synthesis, as well as other
biochemical transformations.

29

"
"35","Appendix II — New Details Regarding Costs of and Demand for
Protein Crystallization in Microgravityl6
Estimated Protein Crystallization Costs on Earth17
Protein Type
Aqueous protein: $10K-$30K
Large/complex proteins: Make up a substantial percentage $100K
of proteins of interest to Pharma
Membrane proteins, protein- Wide range of applications $1M
protein complexes, protein-
ligand complexes:
Added Protein Crystallizations Costs in Space (Estimations )18
ISS Specification
Price/lb in ﬂight: $15K/lb
Flight cost for protein crystallization unit: $1.5M
Market for Protein Crystallization19
There is large demand for high quality protein crystals. There are over 8,000 highly
valued proteins that have not been crystallized with significant quality on Earth and
over 100,000 of general interest to medicine, according to the NIH.20 As a response,
the NIH created the Protein Structure Initiative (PSI) to assemble a collection of
three-dimensional protein structures for research and drug development:
Project Number Total Costs Number of PSI Average value of
Period of Centers structures protein structure
July 2005 — 14 $325M (funded 4,800 $325M/4,800
June 2010 mostly by = $67K
National Institute
of General
Medical Sciences)
16 All information courtesy of Lynn Harper (June 8 email). It is preliminary; strong caveats apply.
17 Cost includes isolation, crystallization, diffraction, and determination of protein structure.
18 One 155 protein crystallization unit can hold about 1000 crystallization samples (25 lb) plus the
incubator holding the proteins (80 lb).
19 PSI data as of August 2010.
20 See http: [ [www.nature.com[nrdeournalZVS [n10qulland2132html for list generated in 2006
30

"
"36","31

"
