"","x"
"1","M' '
1crob1al
Ecolo a
e
Microbial Characterization during the Early Habitation of the
International Space Station
V.A. Castrol, A.N. Thrasherl, M. Healyz, C.M. Ott1 and D.L. Pierson3
(1) EASI/Wyle Laboratories, Microbiology Laboratory, Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX 77058, USA
(2) Bacterial BarCodes, Incorporated, 8080 N. Stadium Drive, Suite 1200, Houston, TX 77054, USA
(3) Habitability and Environmental Factors Ofﬁce, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX 77058, USA
Received: 19 February 2003 / Accepted: 23 June 2003 / Online publication: 2 February 2004
A bs trac t The microgravity environment provides the 0pp0rtunity
for sc1ent1ﬁc investigations while presenting unique
An evaluation of the microbiota from air, water, and challenges to those responsible for maintaining the
surface samples provided a baseline of microbial Char— health, safety, and productivity of the crewrnernbers.
acterization onboard the International Space Station Other serni—closed systems, such as submarines [3, 11, 22,
(188) to gain insight into bacterial and fungal contami— 23], environmental chambers [10, 14], and ofﬁce build—
nation during the initial stages of construction and ings [4, 6, 18], have been evaluated; however, microbial
habitation. Using 168 genetic sequencing and rep—PCR, monitoring of the ISS permitted Characterization of the
63 bacterial strains were isolated for identiﬁcation and organisms onboard as well as contamination tracking as
ﬁngerprinted for microbial tracking. Of the bacterial new components and hardware were introduced into the
strains that were isolated and ﬁngerprinted, 19 displayed environment.
similarity to each other. The use of these molecular tools At completion, the 188 will consist of more than 10
allowed for the identiﬁcation of bacteria not previously habitable modules provided by the United States and
identiﬁed using automated biochemical analysis and international partners. Thus far, the 188 includes several
provided a clear indication of the source of several ISS habitable environments, including the Zarya Control
contaminants. Strains of Bradyrhizobium and Sphingo- Module, the Unity Node, the Zyezda Service Module, the
monas unable to be identiﬁed using sequencing were Joint Airlock, and the Destiny Laboratory Module [24].
identiﬁed by comparison of rep—PCR DNA ﬁngerprints. The projected life of the 188 after completion of con—
Distinct DNA ﬁngerprints for several strains of Meth- struction is about 10 years, during which the station will
ylobacterium provided a clear indication of the source of experience periodic Visits from international spacecraft
an 188 water supply contaminant. Fungal and bacterial for crew exchanges, resupply of food and other con—
data acquired during monitoring do not suggest there is a surnables, and many payloads and scientiﬁc investiga—
Current microbial hazard to the spacecraft, nor does any tions. The crewrnernbers will be the predominant sources
trend indicate a potential health risk. Previous spacecraft of bacteria, with other sources arriVing with ground—
enyironrnental analysis indicated that microbial con— supplied materials [13]. Data from previous space ﬂights
tarnination will increase with time and will require con— have demonstrated that microorganisms are ubiquitous
tinued surveillance. throughout the habitable modules of spacecraft [13].
— Data obtained from the Apollo [6], Skylab [21], Space
Shuttle [9, 13], and the Russian space station Mir [7]
Introduction have demonstrated the capability to provide and main—
, , , tain space environments compatible with human occu—
The international Space Station (188) was designed as a pation. However, the ISS presents substantial Challenges
multifunctional research Platferrn f0? COH‘lHCth a ,Wlde to limit microbial contamination and preserve the health
range of phys1cal and biological sc1ence investigations. and safety of the crews and the integrity of the 188.
The goal of this study was to develop a baseline
— 0f microbiota during the initial stages of construction
Correspondence to: V.A. Castro; E—mail: Victoria.a.castrol@jsc.nasa.gov and habitation from Which to assess future Changes in
D01: 10.1007/500248—003—1030—y . Volume 47, 119—126 (2004) . © Springer-Verlag New York, LLC 2004 119

"
"2","120 VA. CASTRO ET AL: MICROBIAL CHARACTERIZATION OF 188
bacterial and fungal diversity. These changes will form Ground—Based Sample Processing. Samples proc—
the basis for decisions regarding crew health and systems essed during ﬂight were incubated at ambient tempera—
perforrnance. Fungi were identiﬁed using phenotypic ture (280C to 300C) and returned for ground—based
analysis, whereas bacteria cultured onboard 188 were analysis on the next available shuttle ﬂight. Because ﬂight
characterized using 16S ribosomal sequencing and the samples were received up to 3 months after collection,
VITEK Identiﬁcation System (bioMérieuX, Hazelwood, many of the samples were overgrown 0r desiccated, and
MO). Subsequent repetitive sequence—based PCR (rep— Viable cultures could not be recovered from all colony
PCR) ﬁngerprint analysis was used to provide pre— types. A colony of each morphology type observed was
surnptiye identiﬁcation of isolates that could not be subcultured upon arrival and incubated at 37°C.
identiﬁed, as well as to differentiate the various strains Aliquots of 100 mL frorn archived water samples
and track speciﬁc isolates to their source. were passed through 0.22pm membrane ﬁlters (Milli—
pore, Bedford, MA), cultured on RZA medium (Rernel,
Lenexa, KS), and then incubated at 37°C for 48 h. One
Materials and Methods colony of each Visually distinct colony type was then
selected and subcultured.
Sample Collection and ln-F/ight Processing. Preﬂight
samples from surfaces and air were collected from a re— Bacterial DNA Extraction and Identification. Cells
usable cargo container [designated as the Multi—Purpose from pure cultures were lifted directly from media plates,
Logistic Module (MPLM)], which is carried aboard the and DNA was extracted using the Ultraclean Microbial
Space Shuttle to transport ﬂight hardware and consum— DNA Isolation Kit (M0 Bio Laboratories, Inc., Solana
ables t0 and from the ISS. Pre—ﬂight MPLM surface Beach, CA). Quality and quantity of DNA isolated was
samples and others from ﬂight hardware were collected veriﬁed on 1% agarose gels. DNA extraction was suc—
frorn 25—crn2 areas using calcium alginate swabs in cessful in 99% of bacterial cultures. The remaining cul—
phosphate buffer (pH 7.2) as a wetting agent. Surface tures were not analyzed.
samples onboard the 188 were collected using contact Microbial 16S rDNA was ampliﬁed using the PCR
slides containing tryptic soy agar and Sabouraud dextrose module of the Microseq 500 16S rDNA Bacterial Se—
agar with chloramphenicol (Biotest Diagnostics Corpo— quencing Kit under conditions speciﬁed by the manu—
ration, Denville, NJ) or by swabbing 25—<:rn2 areas with facturer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). PCR
calcium alginate swabs as above and inoculating the products were conﬁrmed by agarose gel electrophoresis.
contact slides. Air samples (84.9 L) were collected from Prior to cycle sequencing, PCR products were puriﬁed 0f
the MPLM and on the 188 using a modiﬁed Burkard excess nucleotides enzymatically using exonuclease I
microbial air sampler (Burkard Manufacturing Co. Ltd., (USB Corporation, Cleveland, OH) and dephosphoryl—
Hertfordshire, UK) containing tryptic soy agar plates for ated 0n the 5' ends using shrimp alkaline phosphatase
bacterial analysis and Sabouraud dextrose agar plates for (USB Corporation, Cleveland, OH). The sequences were
fungal analysis. Water samples were taken from several compared by BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search
sources onboard the 188. These included Moscow and Tool) analysis to all sequences in the GenBank database
Kennedy Space Center area ground water, as well as [2]. Positive identiﬁcations were made based on a 98% or
Space Shuttle fuel—cellwater delivered through a Russian— better alignment with database entries. In addition, all
built dispenser (designated SVO—ZV). Also evaluated was bacterial isolates were subcultured on blood agar at 37°C
water collected from the hot and cold ports (designated for 24 h and identiﬁed using the VITEK Identiﬁcation
“SRV—K hot” and “SRV—K cold”) of the Russian system System.
used for humidity condensate recovery [17]. Water
transferred from the Space Shuttle fuel cells and stored in Rep-PCR DNA Fingerprinting. A master mix was
portable containers (designated CWC for Contingency prepared using reagents supplied in the reppRO Uprirne—E
Water Containers) was also analyzed. Water was collected rep—PCR Kit (Bacterial Barcodes Inc., Houston, TX), Taq
into sterile Teﬂon bags (American Fluoroseal, Gaithers— DNA polymerase (Applied Biosystems), and extracted
burg, MD) and either processed during ﬂight or returned bacterial genomic DNA. DNA ﬁngerprints were prepared
to Earth for analysis. Water samples from the SVO—ZV, by electrophoresis on a 1.5% agarose gel in 1X TAE buffer
“SRV—K hot”, and “SRV—K cold” ports were processed and ethidium bromide staining. The images were digitally
during ﬂight using a syringe system in which lOO—rnL captured with a Cherni Imager system (Alpha Innotech
aliquots were pulled through a 0.45pm cellulose acetate Corporation, San Leandro, CA) and analyzed using
ﬁeld monitor (Millipore, Bedford, MA) [8]. A liquid R3A BioNurnerics (Applied Maths, Belgium). Pairwise simi—
growth medium was added to an absorbent pad on the larities between the digitized ﬁngerprints were calculated
downstream side of the ﬁlter surface for analysis during using Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient. A dendrograrn
ﬂight [1]. was constructed from the resulting similarity rnatriX

"
"3","V.A. CASTRO ET AL: MICROBIAL CHARACTERIZATION OF 188 121
Table 1. Bacterial isolates from surface samples
Source Tracking number Sample location Identiﬁcations
Reusable cargo MS—1 A2P outlet, ceiling air diffuser Paenibacillus species
container, MPLM MS—2 F38 inlet, ﬂoor 300—pm ﬁlter Staphylococcus epidermidis,
(preﬂight) caprae 0r capitis
MS—3 F38 inlet, ﬂoor 300—pm ﬁlter Micrococcus luteus
MS—4 F38 inlet, ﬂoor 300—pm ﬁlter Micrococcus luteus
MS—S F2P outlet, ceiling air diffuser Micrococcus luteus
MS—6 F2P outlet, ceiling air diffuser Staphylococcus capitis
MS—7 Ceiling locker bay 2 Curtobacterium luteum
MS—8 Ceiling locker bay 2 Curtobacterium species
MS—9 Ceiling locker Bay 2 Brevundimonas diminuta
MS—10 Ceiling locker bay 2 Acinetobacter radioresistens
MS—11 A2S inlet, ﬂoor 300—pm ﬁlter Staphylococcus epidermidis
MS—12 Hatch handle, forward Pseudomonas oleovorcms
MS—13 Hatch handle, forward Curtobacterium citreum
MS—14 Hatch handle, forward Unidentiﬁed Gram—negative rod
MS—15 Hatch handle, forward Brevundimonas diminuta
Hardware (preﬂight) HS—1 Advanced Video Interface Unit Staphylococcus pasteuri
HS—2 Buffer interface assembly Staphylococcus epidermidis
HS—3 Printer Staphylococcus pasteuri
HS—4 Printer Bacillus ﬂexus
HS—5 Multi use tether end effector Staphylococcus pasteuri
ISS (in—ﬂight) IS—1 Node 1, Starboard Air Supply Diffuser Staphylococcus aureus
IS—2 Service Module, Treadmill Corynebacterium afermentans
IS—3 Service Module, Treadmill Staphylococcus epidermidis
IS—4 Service Module, Treadmill Corynebacterium tuberculostearicum,
accolens 0r segmentosum
IS—5 Service Module, Forward Air Diffuser Staphylococcus aureus
IS—6 Service Module, Forward Air Diffuser Acinetobacter radioresistens
IS—7 Service Module, Forward Air Diffuser Staphylococcus aureus
IS—8 U.S. Laboratory Module, Oerskovia xanthineolytica
Trace Contaminant Control
Subassembly
IS—9 U.S. Laboratory Module, Bacillus pumilus
Trace Contaminant Control
Subassembly
IS—10 U.S. Laboratory Module, Staphylococcus aureus
Viewing Window
using unweighted pairwise grouping with arithmatic rnon isolates being Staphylococcus aureus (four occa—
averages (UPGMA). Isolated bacteria were considered sions), Staphylococcus pasteuri (three occasions), and
indistinguishable if their ﬁngerprints were over 93% Micrococcus luteus (three occasions). S. pasteuri was
similar and appeared Visually indistinguishable. found on three different hardware surfaces sampled
during the same preﬂight sampling session; however,
Mycology. Fungal isolates were subcultured on S. aureus strains were isolated exclusively on surfaces
Sabouraud dextrose agar and incubated at 300C upon sampled during ﬂight and not recovered from any pre—
their return. Fungi were identiﬁed microscopically by ﬂight samples. The Staphylococcus isolates 18—5 and 18—7
their morphological characteristics [15, 16]. isolated from the Service Module (forward air diffuser),
IS—l isolated from Node 1 (starboard air supply diffuser),
Results and 18—10 isolated from the Viewing window were in—
distinguishable using Rep—PCR analysis (Fig. 1a). Fur—
Bacteria/ Characterization. Of the 63 bacterial strains thermore, S. epidermidis isolate 18—3 from the Service
that were isolated and ﬁngerprinted, 19 displayed simi— Module was indistinguishable from the S. epidermidis
larity to each other using rep—PCR analysis. Of those 19 MS—ll isolated from a different module. Rep—PCR—based
strains, 12 had been isolated from the 188 water system. ﬁngerprinting of contaminants conﬁrmed the transfer of
Thirty bacterial colony types were isolated from isolates from preﬂight surfaces to the 188. For example,
preﬂight and ﬂight surface samples (Table 1). Isolates indistinguishable strains of Staphylococcus epidermidis
were predominantly Gram—positive, with the most com— were found both before ﬂight on the surface of the

"
"4","122 VA. CASTRO ET AL: MICROBIAL CHARACTERIZATION OF 188
Ham mm {M19164 [umrmm]
thrmE
355EEEEEHEEEﬁEEEE‘EEﬁa
I '[. . . _
= _ '1': .' Hastma Mcpha W?
I - ' I Fleistmia eurqana w-m
: ' _' I-ll i - Fldstmia Eurqnha W12
I 5“; .' [9h Fldstmia Manila we
I Manmznm luteus M54
: R' [g Mammals Imam I'u'E-S
: 4“.- I .WI I¥ ﬂ: WWW UIEUS H4
I I' I 1 Miumm htms m
I 'I-.IHIII_ ' ?lll Mhmurm mars l'I-E-E
E : Stamylammus aureus 55
i H i I Simmons ﬂll'ﬂlﬁ Er?
' ' _. Staﬂwlmrs altar; E1
1 ' 5 [ Wm aueus E-m
: ' 3mm aﬁmrnﬂs H'E-11
: | [[11, Wmeﬁmrnﬁs 33
l I g i I Starmlmﬁ eﬁrﬂrnﬁs As
A . lla‘: ! ill 4' Wm aﬁmrmdis H52
Figure 1. (a) Rep—PCR ﬁngerprint comparison of selected isolates.
MPLM (MS—ll) and during ﬂight on the surface of the ﬁngerprint. In a similar fashion, a Sphingomonas pauci-
ISS treadmill (18—3). mobilis strain was isolated from both fuel cell water
SiX bacterial colony types were isolated from pre— transferred from the Space Shuttle (W—24) and the hu—
ﬂight and ﬂight air samples (Table 2), with no similar midity condensate processor “SRV—K cold” water port
species identiﬁed. Five of the siX isolates were Gram— sample (W—Z). S. paucimobilis isolates W—l and W—6 were
positive. S. epidermidis was recovered from preﬂight also isolated from the “SRV—K cold” water port but
(MS—ll and HS—Z) and in—ﬂight surfaces (18—3), as well as demonstrated a different ﬁngerprint pattern. Isolates of
in—ﬂight air samples (A—6), though the air isolate ap— Ralstonia eutropha with indistinguishable ﬁngerprints
peared unrelated to the surface S. epidermidis isolates (W—7, W—lO, and W—12) were found in water samples
using rep—PCR (Fig. 1a). All M. luteus isolated from taken from three different sources, including the “SRV—K
preﬂight surface and air samples had distinctly different cold” water port, the SVO—ZV water dispenser, and the
ﬁngerprints (Fig. 1a). ﬁlter reactor component of the SRV—K humidity con—
The potable water supply generated by reclaiming densate processing system, which leads to the “SRV—K
humidity condensate consistently provided water with cold” water port.
bacterial levels below the U.S. acceptability limit of 100
CFU/lOO mL; however, the bacterial content of ground— Fungal Characterization. Nineteen fungal isolates
supplied and space shuttle—provided potable 188 water were identiﬁed from surfaces and air samples consisting
did occasionally exceed this limit [12]. Twenty—seven mainly of Aspergillus and Hyphomycetes species (Tables 4
bacterial colony types were isolated from ﬂight potable and 5). Most of the eight samples collected during ﬂight
water samples. Water samples were predominantly were from the genus Aspergillus.
Gram—negative and were predominantly made up of the
genera Sphingomonas (25%) and Methylobacterium Discussion
(18%) (Table 3). Using rep—PCR to track contamination
in the water systems indicated the route of contamination This study emanated from the environmental monitoring
for several bacteria (Fig. 1b). The Methylobacterium fuj- and assessment program, which was implemented to
isiwansae strain isolated from the water transferred from provide an environment promoting the health, safety,
the Space Shuttle fuel—cell contingency water containers and productivity of the international crewmembers.
(isolate W—Zl) was also isolated from the Russian SVO— Lessons learned from the Space Shuttle, Skylab, and the
ZV water dispenser samples (isolates W—ll and W—19). Russian space station Mir were implemented into the 188
Another M. fujisiwansae strain (isolate W—15) was also to ensure an environment capable of supporting human
isolated from the SVO—ZV, but had a distinctly different habitation for many years. For example, HEPA ﬁlters

"
"5","V.A. CASTRO ET AL: MICROBIAL CHARACTERIZATION OF 188 123
P-nmEu-mliim [CI pm .Dﬂ'h'u] E.MJWQE]
UprIrnI-E :
grafﬁgaﬂﬁmsggmgggifﬁ
Aclnatmactar raciuresistens M340
' Acinatmaclar raciureslstens 15-6
{Jarsmuia xmlhlnmwica 15-3
Unidantlfiad organism W—Ea
Bacillus. lama H54
' Psaummmas Iulva A-E
' Bmuunnlmnnas uimlnuta MS-EI
Psaummmas dauwrans M342
: Staphylncncnus paslauril HE-ﬂ
' Staphylncuccus paslaur'r HS-E
: Staphwuccccus paslauri HS-‘I
I ﬁﬂrynabactarium app- lS-d
' Famibacllhs app- M54
Bmuundimnnas dimlnuta “5—15
' ﬁnryrnabactadum alarmenlas IS-E
' Unluanllfiad mganiam MS-H
' Unhdanllﬂad mganism w-d
' Ba cm us pum ilus IS-El
Mﬁcrubactenum sup- w-EE
' Curtuhactarium app- ME-B
' Aclnatnﬂactar sup. W—EE
' Dalﬂia amdavnrana W4?
: Halalnnia autmpha w-v
' Halslmia Hutrupha w-1 t}
: Halslunia autmpha W4 2
' Halslmia autmpna W-B
' Mlcrmnccus luteus A4
' M Icr mnccus Iuteus A -1
I Gurtnbacterium luteum MS-T
: M mhyluna ctarium Iujisawaa n53 we 1
' M thlnba :ta-riurn fujiaa waa n55 w-: 1
: M aihylnna ctanurn I'uir5awaa ma mm 9
' M alhyluba cterium fuiisa waa n55 WA 5
I M lcrmuccua lutaus MS—E
' Enhmhactamr HI. app. W-EE
: M Icrncnccua {utaus M541
I M icrncuccus Iu'teus MS-E
' Curlnhacleriurn cllraunn M543
' Unldanlilled organism W-I?
I Slaphyiu-cnccus app. ME-E
' Staphylucuccus capitis ME-E
' Bacﬂlus lichanifcﬂ'mis 11-5
: Ephrngummas paucimubil'rs wen
1 Ephrngummas paucimnbilis w-E
’ Ephingumunaa paucimublls wua
Ephrngummaﬁ paucimuhnis W4
: Sphinuumunu nwﬂi W+2IJ
* Spﬂmammaa am- W4 II
Sphingumunas styg‘ﬁlis W—E
Sphirhgumunas styg'alia W—ﬂ
Unidantiliad urganiam W—1 E
I Unidant'rliﬂd mganiEm W- 1 B
: Slaphylncuccus auraus l5~5
' Slaphylacuccus auraus lSr?
Slaphylncnccus aurﬂus l5—1
I Staphylﬂcuﬁcus Humua IS-HZII
' unimnmind mganum W-S
: Bmﬂyﬂ'l’rxah‘rum 1am nmm W4 3
Bacillus magalan‘um A43
: Stag: hyI-n cactus epidermidis MS- 11
I Staphylucuccus apidarrnidis IS—E
I Etaphyﬂutuccus apidarmidm A-ﬁ
Stapnyrlncuccus epidermidis HE-E
B I
Figure 1. (b) Rep—PCR DNA ﬁngerprint analysis of all bacterial isolates.

"
"6","124 VA. CASTRO ET AL: MICROBIAL CHARACTERIZATION OF 188
Table 2. Bacterial isolates from air samples
Source Tracking number Sample location Identiﬁcations
Reusable cargo container, MPLM (preﬂight) A—1 Aft Micrococcus luteus
A—2 Forward Pseudomonas fulva
A—3 Forward Bacillus megaterium
A—4 Forward Micrococcus luteus
188 (in ﬂight) A—5 Service Module Bacillus licheniformis
A—6 U.S. Laboratory Module Staphylococcus epidermidis
were incorporated into the air handling system to ensure are Cleaned and disinfected as soon as practical. Accept—
consistently low levels of airborne bacteria, fungi, and able levels of bacteria in potable water are maintained
particulates [13]. Levels of airborne bacteria were con— using silver as the disinfectant. Choices 0f disinfectants
sistently below the 10,000 colony forming units (CFU)/ are restricted by toxicological concerns with usage in the
rn3 acceptability limit [13]. The bacterial and fungal serniclosed environment of the ISS.
contaminants on internal surfaces of the 188 are rnini— The results of other studies [5, 19, 20] led us to
rnized through a robust housekeeping program that in— expect that 168 sequencing would increase our ability to
eludes weekly Cleaning and biweekly disinfection. identify bacteria to the species level over conventional
Bacterial contamination of internal surfaces of the ISS biochemical analyses. The use of 168 sequence identiﬁ—
was below the acceptability limits of 10,000 CFU/100 ern2 cation increased the speciation of isolates from 24.6% to
more than 75% 0f the sampling times [13]. Surfaces 75.4% when compared to the use of only standard bio—
where contamination has been shown to exceed accept— Chemical analyses. The predominance of Staphylococcus
ability limits and areas with heavy crew contact or airﬂow species (13 0f the 36 colony types isolated) cultured from
Table 3. Bacterial isolates from water samples
Source Tracking number Sample origin Identiﬁcations
Humidity condensate processor W—1 Processed during ﬂight Sphingomonas paucimobilis
SRV—K cold W—2 Processed during ﬂight Sphingomonas paucimobilis
SRV—K hot W—3 Processed during ﬂight Sphingomonas stygialis
Filter W—4 Processed during ﬂight Unidentiﬁed Gram—negative rod
W—5 Processed during ﬂight Bradyrhizobium japonicum 0r
Blastobacter denitriﬁcans
W—6 Archive Sphingomonas paucimobilis
W—7 Archive Ralstonia eutropha
W—8 Archive Ralstonia eutropha
W—9 Archive Sphingomonas stygialis
W—10 Collected at Filter Ralstonia eutropha
Reactor within system
Water dispensing unit SVO—ZV W—11 Processed during ﬂight Methylobacterium fujisawaense
W—12 Processed during ﬂight Ralstonia eutropha
W—13 Processed during ﬂight Bradyrhizobium japonicum
W—14 Processed during ﬂight Sphingomonas species
W—15 Archive Methylobacterium fujisawaense
W—16 Archive Bradyrhizobium japonicum 0r
Blastobacter denitriﬁcans
W—17 Archive Unidentiﬁed Gram—negative rod
W—18 Archive Bradyrhizobium japonicum 0r
Blastobacter denitriﬁcans
W—19 Archive Methylobacterium fujisawaense
W—20 Archive Pseudomonas stygialis
Contingency water containers (CWCs) W—21 S/N 5110 Methylobacterium fujisawaense
W—22 S/N 5031 Acinetobacter calcoaceticus 0r baumcmnii
W—23 S/N 5031 Unidentiﬁed Gram—negative rod
W—24 S/N 5056 Sphingomonas paucimobilis
W—25 S/N 5055 Microbacterium liquefaciens,
luteolum, 0r oxydcms
W—26 S/N 5055’r Enterobacter species or Klebsiella species
W—27 S/N 5055’r Delftia acidovorans
*Not collected under sterile conditions.

"
"7","V.A. CASTRO ET AL: MICROBIAL CHARACTERIZATION OF 188 125
Table 4. Fungal isolates from surface samples
Source Sample location Identiﬁcations
Reusable cargo container, A38 Inlet Filter Penicillium species
MPLM (preﬂight) A38 Inlet Filter Hyphomycetes
A38 Inlet Filter Aspergillus species
A38 Inlet Filter Penicillium species
Ceiling Locker Bay 2 Aspergillus species
Ceiling Locker Bay 2 Trichophyton species
Ceiling Locker Bay 4 Streptomyces species
Hatch Door, Forward Microsporium species
Hardware (preﬂight) Buffer Interface Assembly Curvularia species
Buffer Interface Assembly Hyphomycetes
Printer Hyphomycetes
Node 1, Starboard Air Supply Diffuser Aspergillus species (two colony types)
188 (in—ﬂight) Node 1, Air Return Vent Aspergillus species
Service Module, Treadmill Hyphomycetes
Service Module, Forward Air Diffuser Aspergillus species (three colony types)
U.S. Laboratory Module, Grill Front of Aspergillus species
Trace Contaminant Control Subassembly
the 188 samples was also found in the rnicrobiota isolated well deﬁned. Other possibilities of identifying a small
from the space shuttle [13], from Mir Space Station [7], number of similar strains could be the result of artifacts
and from closed environments on Earth [14]. All of the associated with sampling protocols which lead to over—
staphylococci isolated during ﬂight were Staphylococcus grown or desiccated cultures, or differences in growth
aureus and Staphylococcus epidermidis, which may be the requirements that may result in an inability to recover
result of a clean system primarily affected by human certain organisms.
occupation. Fungal ﬂora isolated from the Mir Space Station
Rep—PCR DNA ﬁngerprinting of bacteria isolated differed from that of the ISS, and the diversity of fungal
from the 188 during this study provided insight into the species aboard Mir was much greater than seen aboard
source of contamination of several systems and also al— the 188. These differences may be explained by the rela—
lowed the identiﬁcation of two isolates, which were not tiye ages of Mir and the 188 when the microbial charac—
identiﬁed using either 168 sequencing or VITEK bio— terization was conducted. Mir was approximately 10
chemical analysis. Sphingomonas stygialis W—14 and years old when the study was conducted. By this time Mir
Bradyrhizobium japonicum W—5 were identiﬁed by com— had seen many different crewrnernbers, been resupplied
paring the DNA ﬁngerprints to those of W—ZO and W—13 countless times, and conducted many investigations in—
(indicated by the highlighted organisms in Fig. 1b). In cluding plants and other investigations which may pro—
addition, the use of bacterial ﬁngerprinting provided rnote fungal growth. Perhaps more importantly, Mir had
evidence that the collection of the same bacterial clone experienced numerous malfunctions leading to elevated
during random sampling is not a common eyent, even in temperatures, high humidity, and large amounts of water
a relatively closed system. Seventy percent of all bacterial condensate accumulating on various surfaces. In contrast,
strains analyzed displayed unique ﬁngerprints. The ma— the surface, air, and water samples for this study were
jority of the samples with similar ﬁngerprints were re— collected when the 188 was only in the initial stages of its
covered from the water system, whereas only 19% of air operational life.
and surface isolates were similar. The low number of These results represent the beginning of ISS habita—
isolates with the same DNA ﬁngerprint may be the result tion and provide a baseline of rnicrobiota onboard. While
of insufﬁcient sampling (Fig. 1b). An increase in sam— increasing the sampling frequency could prove beneﬁcial,
pling frequency would provide additional insight into the practical concerns such as use of crew time must be
actual level of bacterial diversity in the baseline rnicrob— considered in a cost—reward assessment. For this study,
iota, although the optimum sampling frequency is not the ultimate purpose of determining a microbial baseline
was to protect crew health and ensure systems perform—
, , ance. The current data do not suggest there is a potential
Table 5. Fungal Isolates from a1r samples . . .
— enyironrnental hazard, nor does any trend indicate a
50W“ Sample location Identiﬁcations potential health risk. However, microbial evaluations
ISS (In—Flight) Node 1 Phoma species from Mir suggest that the potential for microbial con—
Sel'ViCC MOdUIe ASPeT’gillW SPCCiCS tamination will increase with time and will require con—
w tinued surveillance. As environmental monitoring on the

"
"8","126 VA. CASTRO ET AL: MICROBIAL CHARACTERIZATION OF 188
188 continues, it will be interesting to compare the 11. Morris, IE (1972) Microbiology 0f the submarine environment.
ﬁndings during the initial occupation with results in Proc R SOC Med 65} 799—800 .
f ture ears. 12. Mudgett, PT), Ben01t, M], Orta, DR, Schultz, TR (2002) Quahty of
u Y water supphed by shuttle to 188. 32nd Internatlonal Conference on
Environmental Systems, San Antonio, TX
A k I d t 13. Pierson, DL (2001) Microbial contamination of spacecraft. Gray
0 now 6 gmen S Space Biol Bull 14: 1—6
The authors thank Bacterial BarCodes, Inc, for their 14' P @5011; DL’ .9“) .CM’ Groves’ TO (2002) Charaqerization 0f
. . . h . d 1 . f 1‘6 —PCR mlcroblal act1v1ty 1n the chamber systems and env1r6nment. In:
contnbutlon In t, e .pI‘OCESSIHg an ana YSIS O P Lane, HW, Sauer, RL, Feeback, DL (Eds.) Isolatlon: NASA
baCtenal ﬁngerprmtmg. we thank Jane Krauhs Of Wyle Experiments in Closed—Environment Living. Univelt, San Diego,
Laboratories, Inc, for technical editing, and James R. pp 229—259
Lupski, MI)” Ph.D., for his review of this manuscript. 15. Samson, RA, Hoekstra, ES, Frisvad, IC, Filtenborg, O (2000) In—
We also thank the crew Of the 188 for sample collection troduction to Food— and Airborne Fungi, 6th ed., Centraalbureau
d . th 188 P Ofﬁ (:1 th M. _ voor Schimmeelcultures, The Netherlands
€111 pI‘OCESSIHg, e rogram C6, an e ICI‘O. 16. Samson, RA, Pitt, )1 (1989) Modern Concepts in Penicillium and
bIOIOgY Laboratory at the IOhnSOH Space Center. Thls Aspergillus Identiﬁcation. Plenum Press, New York
study was supported by NASA contract NAS9-97005 and 17. Samsonov, NM, Bobe, LS, Gavrilov, LI, Korolev, VP, Novikov,
NASA grant PWC 111—30—40—97, VM, Farafonov, NS, Soloukhin, VA, Romanov, S], Andrechuk, PO,
Protasov, NN, Rjabkin, AM, Telegin, AA, Sinjak, IE, Skuratov, VM
(2002) Water recovery and oxygen generation by electrolysis
References aboard the International Space Station. 32nd International Con—
ference on Environmental Systems, San Antonio, TX
1. Atlas, RM (1993) In: Handbook of Microbiological Media, 2nd ed., 18. Stenberg, B, Eriksson, N, Hansson Mild, K, Héég, I, Sandstrém,
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL M, Sundell, I, Wall, S (1993) The Ofﬁce Illness Project in northern
2. Benson, DA, Boguski, MS, Lipman, D], Ostell, I (1997) GenBank. Sweden. An interdisciplinary study of the “sick building—syn—
Nucleic Acids Res 25: 1—6 drome” (SBS). Indoor Air ‘93 Proceedings. Helsinki, Finland
3. Boyden, DG (1962) The bacterial ﬂora in ﬂeet ballistic missile 19. Tang, YW, Ellis, NM, Hopkins, MK, Smith, DH, Dodge, DE,
submarines during prolonged submergence. In: U. S. Naval Persing, DH (1998) Comparison of phenotypic and genotypic
Medical Research Laboratory. Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, techniques for identiﬁcation of unusual aerobic pathogenic gram—
Navy Department negative bacilli. J Clin Microbiol 36: 3674—3679
4. Burge, HA, Pierson, DL, Groves, TO, Strawn, KF, Mishra, SK 20. Tang, YW, Von Graevenitz, A, Waddington, MG, Hopkins, MK,
(2000) Dynamics of airborne fungal populations in a large ofﬁce Smith, DH, Li, H, Kolbert, CP, Montgomery, SO, Persing, DH
building. Curr Microbiol 40: 10—16 (2000) Identiﬁcation of coryneform bacterial isolates by ribosomal
5. Drancourt, M, Bollet, C, Carlioz, A, Martelin, R, Gayral, JP, DNA sequence analysis. J Clin Microbiol 38: 1676—1678
Raoult, D (2000) 16S ribosomal DNA sequence analysis of a large 21. Taylor, GR, Graves, RC, Brockett, RM, Ferguson, IK, Mieszkuc, B]
collection of environmental and clinical unidentiﬁable bacterial (1977) Skylab environmental and crew microbiological studies. In:
isolates. J Clin Microbiol 38: 3623—3630 Johnston, RS, Dietlein, LF (Eds.) Biomedical Results from Skylab.
6. Ferguson, IK, Taylor, GR, Mieszkuc, B] (1975) Microbiological in— Scientiﬁc and Technical Information Ofﬁce, National Aeronautics
vestigations. In: Johnston, RS, Deitlein, LF, Berry, CA (Eds.) and Space Administration, pp 53—63
Biomedical Results of Apollo. Scientiﬁc and Technical Information 22. Thomas, TL, Hooper, TI, Carmaca, M, Murray, I, Sack, D, Molé,
Ofﬁce,NationalAeronautics and Space Administration,pp 83—103 D, Spiro, RT, Horn, WG, Garland, FC (2000) A method for
7. Kawamura, Y, Li, Y, Liu, H, Huang, X, Li, Z, Ezaki, T (2001) monitoring the health of U.S. Navy submarine crewmembers
Bacterial population in Russian space station “Mir.” Microbiol during periods of isolation. Aviat Space Environ Med 71: 699—
Immunol 45: 819—828 705
8. Koenig, DW, Bell—Robinson, DM, Johnson, SM, Mishra, SK, Sauer, 23. Upsher, IF, Fletcher, LE, Upsher, CM (1994) Microbiological
RL, Pierson, DL (1995) Microbiological analysis in space. 25th conditions on Oberon submarines. Department of Defence, De—
International Conference on Environmental Systems, San Diego, fence Science and Technology Organisation, Melbourne, Victoria,
CA: SAE Technical Paper Series 951683 Australia
9. Koenig, DW, Pierson, DL (1997) Microbiology 0f the space shuttle 24. Williams, DE, Lewis, I, Carrasquillo, RL, Reysa, R, Gentry, G
water system. Wat Sci Technol 35: 59—64 (2002) International Space Station environmental control and life
10. Levine, HB, Cobb, IM, Cobet, AB (1970) The Tektite—I dive. Arch support system status: 2001—2002. 32nd International Conference
Environ Health 20: 500—505 on Environmental Systems, San Antonio, TX

"
