"","x"
"1","Author” s Accepted Manus eript W
/ / /
111W MSUTBUJMUUHM

Expanded Beneﬁts For Humanity From The

International Space Station

Amelia Rai, Julie A. Robinson, Judy Tate-Brown,

Nicole Buckley, Martin Ze11, Kazuyuki Tasaki, WWW W

Georgy Karabadzhak, Igor V. Sorokin, Salvatore WWig'e'ZZZZ ﬁg <2

Pignataro W50“ ,2, {3,

www.elsevier.com/locate/actaastro

P11: SOO94-5765(16)30198-9

DOI: http://dX.d0i.0rg/1O.1016/j.aetaastr0.2016.06.030

Reference: AAS 877

To appear in: Acta Astronautica

Received date: 29 February 2016

Accepted date: 16 June 2016

Cite this article as: Amelia Rai, Julie A. Robinson, Judy Tate-Brown, Nicole

Buckley, Martin Ze11, Kazuyuki Tasaki, Georgy Karabadzhak, Igor V. Sorokin

and Salvatore Pignataro, Expanded Beneﬁts For Humanity From Th

International Space Station, Acta Astronautica

http://dX.d0i.0rg/1O.1016/j.actaastr0.2016.06.030

This is a PDF ﬁle of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted f0

publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version o

the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo eopyediting, typesetting, an<

review of the resulting galley proof before it is published in its ﬁnal eitable forIr

Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered Whiei

could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain

"
"2","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
IAC-15.B3.3.5
EXPANDED BENEFITS FOR HUMANITY FROM THE INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION
International Space Station Program Science Forum*1
Ms. Amelia Rai
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), J ohnson Space Center, United States,
amelia.e.rai@nasa.gov
Dr. J ulie A. Robinson
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), J ohnson Space Center, United States,
julie.a.robinson@nasa.gov
Ms. J udy Tate-Brown
Barrios Technology, United States,
judy.tate-brown- 1 @nasa. gov
Dr. Nicole Buckley
Canadian Space Agency (CSA), Canada,
nicole.buck1ey@asc-csa. goca
Dr. Martin Zell
European Space Agency (BSA), The Netherlands,
martin.ze11@esa.int
Mr. Kazuyuki Tasaki
J apan Aerospace Exploration Agency (J AXA), J apan,
tasaki.kazuyuki@jaxa.jp
Dr. Georgy Karabadzhak
TSNIIMASH, Russian Federation,
gﬂ<@tsniimash.ru
Dr. Igor V. Sorokin
S.P. KoroleV Rocket and Space Corporation Energia, Korolev, Russia,
igor.v.sorokin@rsce.ru
Mr. Salvatore Pignataro
Italian Space Agency (ASI), Italy,
salvatore.pignataro@asi.it
In 2012, the International Space Station (188) [Figure 1] partnership published the updated International Space
Station Beneﬁts for Humanity [1], a compilation of stories about the many beneﬁts being realized in the areas of
human health, Earth observations and disaster response, and global education. This compilation has recently been
revised to include updated statistics on the impacts of the beneﬁts, and new beneﬁts that have developed since the
ﬁrst publication. Two new sections have also been added to the book, economic development of space and
innovative technology. This paper Will summarize the updates on behalf of the 188 Program Science Forum, made
up of senior science representatives across the international partnership.
1 Including the section editors and contributors for the International Space Station Beneﬁtsfor Humanity, 2nd
edition: Hasbrook, P., Ruttley, T., Alleyne, C., Evans, C., Stefanov, W., Read, M., Costello, K., Hornyak, D.,
Thumm, Anderson, S., Byerly, J ., Buck, J ., Cohen, L., Chicoine, R., Giguere, C., Istasse, E., Hatton, J ., Ngo-Anh, J .,
Savage, J ., Weems, J ., Kamigaichi, S., Umemura, S., Oikawa, K., Watanabe, H., Fujimoto, N., Koyama, M.,
Miyagawa, Y., Aiba, T., Ogawa, S., Ikeda, T., Lavrenko, E., Zhukova, N., Biryukova, N., Belakovskiy, M.,
Kussmaul, A., Sabbagh, J ., Galoforo, G.
Page 1 of 20

"
"3","66th International Astronautical Congress, Jerusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.

The new section on “Economic Development of Space” highlights case studies from publiC-private partnerships
that are leading to a new economy in low earth orbit (LEO). Businesses provide both transportation to the 188 as
well as some research facilities and services. These relationships promote a paradigm shift of government-funded,
contractor-provided goods and services to commercially-provided goods purchased by government agencies. Other
examples include commercial ﬁrms spending research and development dollars to conduct investigations on 188 and
commercial service providers selling services directly to 188 users. This section provides examples of 188 as a test
bed for new business relationships, and illustrates successful partnerships.

The second new section, “Innovative Technology,” merges technology demonstration and physical science
ﬁndings that promise to return Earth beneﬁts through continued research. Robotic refueling concepts for life
extensions of costly satellites in geo-synchronous orbit have applications to robotics in industry on Earth. Flame
behavior experiments reveal insight into how fuel burns in microgravity leading to the possibility of improving
engine efﬁciency on Earth. Nanostructures and smart ﬂuids are examples of materials improvements that are being
developed using data from 188.

The publication also expands the beneﬁts of research results in human health, environmental change and disaster
response and in education activities developed to capture student imaginations in support of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics, or STEM, education internationally. Applications to human health of the knowledge
gained on 188 continue to grow and improve healthcare technologies and our understanding of human physiology.
Distinct beneﬁts return to Earth from the only orbiting multi-disciplinary laboratory of its kind. The 188 is a
stepping stone for future space exploration by providing ﬁndings that develop LEO and improve life on our planet.

I. INTRODUCTION

In the second edition of the International Space Station Beneﬁts for Humanity [2], we share the successes of the
International Space Station (188). The 188 is a unique scientiﬁc platform that has existed since 1998 and has enabled
over 2,400 researchers in 83 countries and areas to conduct more than 1,700 experiments in microgravity through
just September 2014, and the research continues.

Since November 2, 2000, the 188 has maintained a continuous human presence in space. Even before it was
habitable, the research began on the only orbiting laboratory of its kind. In 2011, when 188 assembly was complete,
the focus shifted to fully utilizing the lab for continued scientiﬁc research, technology development, space
exploration, commerce, and education.

The tremendous value of the ISS began through the engineering achievement evolving over a decade.
Components were built in various countries around the world—many without the beneﬁt of prior ground testing—
allowing us to learn a vast amount about construction and about how humans and spacecraft systems function in
orbit. This testament to the international achievement exempliﬁes cultural harmonization through cooperative
teamwork leading to an international partnership that has continued to ﬂourish and foster international cooperation.
While each 188 partner has distinct agency goals for research conducted, a uniﬁed goa1 eXists to extend the
knowledge gleaned to beneﬁt all humankind.

In the ﬁrst edition of the book released in 2012 [1], the scientiﬁc, technological and educational accomplishments
of 188 research that impact life on Earth were summarized through a compilation of stories. The many beneﬁts
being realized were primarily in the areas of human health, Earth observations and disaster response, and global
education. [Figure 2.]

This second edition [2] [Figure 3] includes updated statistics on the impacts of those beneﬁts as well as new
beneﬁts that have developed since the ﬁrst publication. In addition, two new sections have been added to the book:
Economic Development of Space and Innovative Technology.

Economic Development of Space highlights case studies from publiC-private partnerships that are leading to a
new economy in low-Earth orbit (LEO). Businesses provide both transportation to the 188 as well as some research
facilities and services. These relationships promote a paradigm shift of government-funded, contractor-provided
goods and services to commercially-provided goods purchased by government agencies. Other examples include
commercial ﬁrms spending their research and development dollars to conduct investigations on 188 and commercial
service providers selling services directly to 188 users. This section provides examples of the use of 188 as a test bed
for new business relationships and illustrates successful partnerships.

Page 2 of 20

"
"4","66th International Astronautical Congress, Jerusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.

The second new section, Innovative Technology, merges technology demonstration and physical science ﬁndings
that promise to return Earth beneﬁts through continued research. Examples include robotic refueling concepts for
life extensions of costly satellites in geo-synchronous orbit that have applications to the robotics industry on Earth,
ﬂame behavior experiments that reveal insight into how fuel burns in microgravity leading to the possibility of
improving engine efﬁciency on Earth, and nanostructures and smart ﬂuids examples of materials improvements that
are being developed using data from 188.

The publication also expands the beneﬁts of international research results in human health, environmental change
and disaster response. It provides examples of education activities developed to capture student imaginations in
support of science, technology, engineering and mathematics, or STEM, education. Applications to human health of
the knowledge gained on 188 continue to grow and improve healthcare technologies and our understanding of
human physiology.

The 188 is a stepping stone for future space exploration, as the only orbiting multi-disciplinary laboratory of its
kind, returning research results that develop LEO and improve life on our planet. The goal of the publication is to
serve as a source of pride for those Who read it and learn of the unique shared laboratory orbiting our planet that
provides ground for the development of critical technologies and ways to keep humans healthy in space. The NASA
188 Program identiﬁes annually, key discoveries stemming from 188 research. These achievements are honored at
the American Astronautical Society (AAS) 188 Research and Development Conference [See Table 1]. This year,
researchers were recognized in the areas of innovation and for compelling results. Our publication provides an
overview of the updates in beneﬁts summarized previously, and outline details of some of the newly developed
beneﬁts described for the ﬁrst time.

11. HUMAN HEALTH

The International Space Station (188) is a unique laboratory for performing investigations that affect human
health both in space and on Earth. During its time in orbit, the space station has enabled research that is providing a
better understanding of many aspects of human health including aging, trauma, disease and environmental impacts.
Driven by the need to support astronaut health, several biological and human physiological investigations have
yielded important results that can also be of beneﬁt on Earth. These results include new ways to mitigate bone loss,
insights into bacterial behavior, and innovative techniques for improving wound-healing. Advances in telemedicine,
disease models, psychological stress response systems, nutrition, and cell behavior are just a few more examples of
the beneﬁts that have been gained from applying studies in orbit to human health back on Earth.

11.1 Health Technology

Research on 188 has allowed for innovations in surgical performance through the world’s ﬁrst robotic technology
capable of performing surgery inside MR1 machines [3]. This technology is making difﬁcult brain tumor surgeries
easier and impossible surgeries possible. Soon, medical technology stemming from space station robotics Will enter
clinical trials for use in the early diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer by providing increased access, precision
and dexterity resulting in highly accurate and minimally invasive procedures. [Figure 4.] In addition, the
development of an advanced technology solution for pediatric surgery is in the design stages. In common laser
surgeries to correct eyesight, a new technology developed on 188 is now used on Earth to track the patient’s eye and
precisely direct a laser scalpel. Thermal regulation research on 188 has also led to the use of sensor technology for
monitoring during surgery.

When medical facilities are not readily available such as in remote and underdeveloped regions of the world,
ultrasound units are used in conjunction With protocols for performing complex procedures rapidly With remote
expert guidance and training [4]. These telemedicine and remote guidance techniques empower local healthcare
providers and provide patients With access to more timely and diagnostic care, thereby making the healthcare system
more efﬁcient.

A lightweight, easy-to-use device to measure nitric oxide in air exhaled by astronauts on 188 is used to study
possible airway inﬂammation before health problems are encountered [5]. This device is now used at some health
centers to monitor levels of asthma control leading to more accurate medication dosing, reduced attacks, and
improved quality of life.

Page 3 of 20

"
"5","66th International Astronautical Congress, Jerusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.

The study of plasmas (Which are Charged gases that can permeate many materials and spread evenly and quickly),
reveals that they support the disinfecting of chronic wounds [6], the neutralization of bacteria, the boosting of tumor
inactivation, and even the jumpstarting plant growth.

11.2 Preventing Bone Loss

The common problem of bone loss in the elderly is also observed in astronauts When they are in space. Ongoing
studies on 188 indicate a reduction in bone loss and renal stone risk through use of a bisphosphonate and exercise to
increase bone load and muscle training, and in a well-balanced, low-sodiurn diet [7]. In promoting the health of the
elderly at risk of osteoporosis, improved scanning technologies are under development to provide a reference
technique to enable the early detection of osteoporosis and in the development of more effective countermeasures to
its effects [8].

11.3 Immune Defenses

Virtually the entire population is infected With one of eight herpes Viruses, four of Which reactivate and appear in
body ﬂuids in response to the stress of spaceﬂight [9]. A patent-pending device designed for use in either a doctor’s
ofﬁce or on a spacecraft allow for the rapid detection of one of these Viruses [VZV, Figure 5], Which can lead to
earlier treatment and prevent the onset of painful shingles [10]. Microgravity studies on 188 help researchers
pinpoint genetic triggers for immune responses in T-Cells leading to future medical treatments on Earth for
immunosuppression [l 1]. Determining the Changes that occur to the immune system in space is providing the means
to develop targeted countermeasures to adverse effects in space, as well as providing additional information for
targeted treatments on Earth for the development of pharmaceuticals that can suppress immune response to help
manage autoimmune diseases or organ transplants [12].

11.4 Developing New Therapies

Studying the unique and complicated structures of proteins in the human body leads to the development of
medical treatments. Microgravity allows unique conditions for growth of protein crystals Where there is no gravity
or convection to disrupt their growth [13]. The protein expressed in certain muscle ﬁbers of patients With
Duchenne’s Muscular Dystrophy, Which affects l in 3,500 boys, has been successfully crystallized in space [Figure
6] revealing a new inhibitor several hundred times stronger than the prototype inhibitor [14].

Microencapsulation is the process by Which tiny, liquid-ﬁlled, biodegradable rnicro-balloons are created
containing speciﬁc combinations of concentrated anti-turnor drugs. The goal is to deliver this medication using
specialized needles to speciﬁc treatment sites Within a cancer patient. The microgravity environment, Where density
differences do not cause layering of the medication, has allowed for the development of devices on Earth to create
these microcapsules and devices that Will aid in the drug delivery using this technology [15]. Progress continues
towards Clinical studies in cancer patients one day in the future.

Ongoing research of gravitational unloading supported by dry immersion technology allows for a broad spectrum
of possible Clinical applications [16] such as the early diagnosis of slow-developing neurological disorders, the
combating of edema that responds poorly to medication, post-operative rehabilitation, sports medicine and
rehabilitation for premature babies.

11.5 Food and the Environment

Microbiology is a vitally important area, not only Within human spaceﬂight but also for humans on Earth.
Microorganisms such as bacteria, archea, fungi and algae have a detrimental or a beneﬁcial impact on our daily
lives. This research has far-reaching effects feeding into many different areas of biotechnology as microorganisms
have a role in food spoilage, waste and sewage treatment and processing, nutrient cycling and exchange, pollution
control, and in increased greenhouse gases.

Studying the effects of gravity on plants led to the development of an ethylene scrubber [17]. This technology is
now used as an air puriﬁer that destroys airborne bacteria, rnold, fungi, Viruses, and odors. The scrubber is used for
food preservation in major supermarkets, high-end refrigerator technology, and in trucks that carry groceries to
remote regions of countries such as India, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait to name a few. Even the health care industry

Page 4 of 20

"
"6","66th International Astronautical Congress, Jerusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.

beneﬁts from the use of these units in Clinics, operating rooms, neonatal wards and waiting rooms making these
locations safer for their inhabitants.

Plant research in a space greenhouse [Figure 7] has allowed the study of root zone substrates in space allowing
scientists to improve predictions of how artiﬁcial soi1s will behave when irrigated both in space and on Earth in
experimental forests [1 8] .

11.6 Heart Health and Biorhythms

Studying spaceﬂight effects on the cardiovascular system has led to the creation of unique instruments that can
be used on Earth for the detection of the earliest deviations in health status [19]. These technologies are now used to
examine motor vehicle drivers and civil aviation pilots to evaluate risks and prevent accidents. Twenty-four-hour
ECGs of astronauts were also analyzed to understand the space environment’s effect on biological rhythm and
cardiac autonomic nervous activity leading to recommendations for maintaining a we11-ba1anced biological rhythm
on Earth. One of these recommendations is maintenance of a regular sleep schedule [20]. In studying the sleep
patterns of cosmonauts using a miniature device that ﬁts in their pocket [Figure 8], information is recorded and sent
to Earth for analysis of sleep quality. An Earth model of this device is placed under the pillow or mattress to record
movements related to the heart and breathing [21].

11.7 Improving Balance and Movement

A new technology developed to correct motor disturbances in weightlessness has been used to treat patients with
cerebral palsy, stroke, spinal cord injuries, balance problems and motor decline due to aging [Figure 9]. Assessment
of eye movement reactions of cosmonauts preﬂight and postﬂight has led to faster and less expensive diagnoses and
treatment of patients suffering from vertigo, dizziness and equilibrium disturbances [22]. A patented computerized,
non-pharrnacological method of preventing and correcting unfavorable perception and sensorimotor reactions is
used to train patients and astronauts to acquire the ability to suppress vertigo, dizziness and equilibrium disturbances
[23].

A system of hardware and software that collects information on body movements of astronauts on 188 has led to
motor imagery protocols used in the research environment of a hospital in Rome in treatment of adult stroke patients
and Children with cerebral palsy [24]. Other body movement research on 188 lead to the development of a suit for
astronauts to compensate for the lack of daily loading from gravity. The Clinical version of this suit is used for the
comprehensive and drug-free treatment of cerebral palsy in Children in Russia [25]. Another clinical variation of this
suit is used on patients who have suffered from stroke or brain trauma [26].2
111. EARTH OBSERVATION AND DISASTER RESPONSE

The International Space Station (188) is a “global observation and diagnosis station.” It promotes international
Earth observations aimed at understanding and resolving the environmental issues of our home planet. A wide
variety of Earth observation payloads can be attached to the exposed facilities on the station’s exterior as well as in
the Window Observational Research Facility located within the Destiny module. The presence of a human crew also
provides a unique capability for real-time observation of the Earth, and “on the ﬂy” data collection using hand-held
digital cameras, and the astronauts may also provide input to ground personnel programming the station’s automated
Earth observation systems [28]. Several instruments are currently collecting data from 188; in addition, some
instruments have completed their data collection missions, with other remote sensing systems in development or
proposed by researchers from the partner countries, NASA, academic institutions, and corporations. The existing
international partnerships, fundamental to the ISS, facilitate data sharing that can beneﬁt people around the world
and promote international collaboration on other Earth observation activities. The space station contributes to
humanity by collecting data on the global climate, environmental Change, and natural hazards using its unique
complement of crew-operated and automated Earth observation payloads. Subsections 111.1 and 111.2 provide insight
into the two areas of this section.

111.1 Environmental Earth Observations
2 Small studies based in the US. and Israel were not able to distinguish improvements from Adeli suit therapy with traditional physical therapy
[27]. Therefore, this therapy has not been adopted in North America.

Page 5 of 20

"
"7","66th International Astronautical Congress, Jerusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.

The space station Offers a unique vantage for observing the Earth’s ecosystems and atmosphere With hands-on
and automated equipment. The size, power, and data transfer capabilities of the space station enable a Wide range of
sophisticated sensor systems including optical multispectral and hyperspectral imaging systems [Figure 10] for
examining the Earth’s land surface and coastal oceans, as well as active radar and Light Detection and Ranging
(LiDAR) systems useful for investigating sea surface Winds and atmospheric aerosol transportation patterns.
Astronauts using hand-held digital cameras provide an additional imaging capability for Obtaining both detailed
images of the Earth surface as well as sweeping panoramic Views of its atmosphere. This ﬂexibility is an advantage
over sensors on unmanned spacecraft, especially When unexpected natural events such as volcanic eruptions and
earthquakes occur.

111.2 Disaster Response

Remotely sensed data acquired by orbital sensor systems has emerged as a Vital tool to identify the extent of
damage resulting from a natural disaster [Figure 11], as well as providing near-real time mapping support to
response efforts on the ground and humanitarian aid efforts [29]. The 188 is a unique terrestrial remote-sensing
platform for acquiring disaster-response imagery. Unlike automated remote-sensing platforms it has a human crew;
is equipped With both internal and externally mounted still and Video imaging systems; and has an inclined, lOW-
Earth orbit that provides variable Views and lighting (day and night) over 95 percent of the inhabited surface of the
Earth. As such, it provides a useful complement to autonomous sensor systems in higher-altitude polar orbits for
collecting imagery in support of disaster response [30].
1V. GLOBAL EDUCATION

The International Space Station (188) has a unique ability to capture the imaginations of both students and
teachers worldwide. The presence of humans aboard the station provides a foundation for numerous educational
activities aimed at capturing interest and motivating Children towards the study Of science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM). Projects such as the Amateur Radio on International Space Station (ARISS); Earth
Knowledge Acquired by Middle School Students (EarthKAM) [Figure 12]; and Synchronized Position Hold,
Engage, Reorient Experimental Satellites (SPHERES) Zero Robotics competition, among others, have allowed for
global student, teacher and public access to space through student image acquisition and radio contacts With crew
members [31]. Projects like these and their accompanying educational materials are distributed to students around
the world. Through the continued use of the station, we Will Challenge and inspire the next generation of scientists,
engineers, writers, artists, politicians and explorers. Sections 1V.1 and 1V.11 describe global education endeavors in
both inquiry-based learning environments as well as using 188 as a tool for inspiration.
1V.l Inquiry-based Learning

From the launch of the ﬁrst modules of 188 into orbit, students have been provided With a unique Opportunity to
get involved and participate in science and engineering projects. Many of these projects support inquiry-based
learning—an approach to science education that allows students to ask questions, develop hypothesis-derived
experiments, Obtain supporting evidence, analyze data, and identify solutions or explanations [Figure 13]. This
approach to learning is well-published as one Of the most effective ways to engage students to pursue careers in
scientiﬁc and technology ﬁelds [32].
1V.2 Inspiration

Conducting education activities is not the reason the space station was built, but the presence of astronauts aboard
the ISS serves as an inspiration to students and their teachers worldwide. Having the Opportunity to connect With
crew members real-tirne, either through “live” downlinks or simply speaking Via a ham radio [Figure 14], ignites the
imagination of students about space exploration and its application to the ﬁelds of science, technology and
engineering [33].

V. INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGY
Page 6 0f 20

"
"8","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.

In space, physical processes can be better understood with the control of external inﬂuences such as gravity.
Technical innovations designed for space systems are tested on the International Space Station (188) before use in
other spacecraft systems. While investigating how new technologies operate in space, unexpected discoveries are
possible. Simpliﬁed physical systems can also be directly used to improve models of physical processes leading to
new industrial techniques and materials.

The 188 provides the unique capability to perform long-duration experiments in the absence of gravity and in
interaction with other spacecraft systems not available in any other laboratory. Additional insight comes from the
presence of the ISS crew observing and interacting with these experiments and participating in the discovery
process.

The 188 research portfolio includes many engineering and technology investigations designed to take advantage
of these opportunities. Experiments investigating thermal processes, nanostruetures, ﬂuids and other physical
Characteristics are taking place to develop these technologies and provide new innovations in those ﬁelds.
Additionally, advanced engineering activities operating in the space station infrastructure are proving next-
generation space systems to increase capabilities and decrease risks to future missions. Emerging materials,
technology and engineering research activities on the 188 are developing into beneﬁts for economic development
and quality of life.

V.l Fluids and Clean Water

Whether in the vacuum of space or the relative comfort of the Earth’s surface, access to Clean water is essential
for living organisms. The challenges of moving and processing ﬂuids such as water using compact, reliable systems
in the microgravity environment of space have led to advances in the way we purify water sources on the ground
[34]. Testing methods developed to ensure water quality on the 188 have led to advancements in water monitoring
here on Earth [See Figure 15]. Investigations into the basic dynamics of how ﬂuids move in space have also led to
advances in medical diagnostic devices [35].

V.2 Materials

The 188 provides a unique laboratory environment for the testing of new materials. In microgravity, sedimentation
and buoyaney-driven convection do not take place, thus allowing us to witness how materials Change and develop
over longer periods. This allows researchers to manipulate their materials in unique ways [Figure 16]. These
opportunities are leading to a better understanding of how material processes work on Earth thereby enabling the
manufacturing of new materials with well-deﬁned structures, improved strength, and better function [36].

V.3 Satellites

The 188 offers a unique platform for access to LEO through its J apanese Experiment Module (J EM) airlock working
in coordination with the J EM robotic arm. This small airlock allows small devices such as CubeSats to be deployed
into LEO while making the trip up to space in the relative comfort of a pressurized cargo container. This can have
many beneﬁts in reducing the cost to small satellite operators speciﬁcally in the number of launch testing and
redundancy requirements for the developer. Lower cost leads to more ﬁnancial incentive to enable small operators to
design and prove out their technology in space. [Figure 17].

V.4 Transportation Technology

Combustion science is one of the longest running ﬁelds of research on the 188. [Figure 18.] There is a long
running campaign to understand just how both simple and more complex fuels burn in space. Understanding this
process in microgravity helps us reﬁne combustion models on Earth where gravity and turbulent buoyaney-driven
convection ﬂows make this process too difﬁcult to model. Recent observations on 188 have shown that a
phenomenon known as “cool ﬂarnes” can be witnessed in the combustion Chambers in orbit to understand how
lower temperature burning could have signiﬁcant applications towards more efﬁcient fuel use and new combustion
engine designs in the future [37].

V.5 Robotics
Page 7 of 20

"
"9","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.

Key to enhancing human spaceﬂight missions is the ability of robots to work alongside the human crew to
perform necessary tasks more efﬁciently. These tasks include those that are monotonous or risky and impose on the
available time astronauts have to focus on science experiments. The 188 provides an excellent platform where these
operational concepts and procedures can be developed, tested and evolved in an actual space environment while
demonstrating robotic systems performance and reliability over the long duration [38]. The precision and reliability
requirements for space robotics led to dual-purpose technologies and advanced robotic capabilities for use on Earth.
[Figure 19.]

VI. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF SPACE

While the International Space Station (188) has proven its value as a platform for a broad waterfront of research
disciplines as well as technology development, it also provides an ideal opportunity to test new business
relationships. This allows an opportunity to shift from a paradigm of govemment-funded, eontraetor-provided goods
and services to a commercially provided, govemment-as-a-eustomer approach.

This interest in promoting a more commercially oriented market in low-Earth orbit (LEO) is driven by several
goals [39]. First, it can stimulate entirely new markets not achievable in the past. Second, it creates new stakeholders
in spaceﬂight and represents great economic opportunity. Third, it ensures strong industrial capability not only for
future spaceﬂight but also for the many related industries. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, it allows cross-
pollination of ideas, processes, and best practices, as a foundation for economic development.

From commercial ﬁrms spending some of their research and development funds to conduct research on the space
station, to commercial service providers selling unique services to users of the orbiting lab, the beginnings of a new
economy in LEO are starting to emerge.

V1.1 Commercial Service Providers

Evolution of the space station as a laboratory in the vanguard of research in microgravity relies on a new and
growing number of commercial service providers [Figures 20 and 21]. Rather than follow the traditional model of
govemment-funded, eontraetor-provided hardware or capability, a number of ﬁrms are entering a new phase of
development of LEO—establishing a market. In this model, commercial ﬁrms develop capabilities that are then
offered to government users and also marketed widely to potential new users of the 188 as a research platform [40].
The space station gains important new (or updated) capability, while the service provider gains a new market in
which to offer its services.

V1.2 Commercial Research

The unique environment of microgravity provides opportunities for many types of eommereially-Viable research.

Using model organisms (such as rodents or ﬂatworms) to help understand terrestrial concerns such as:

0 bone loss [41]

0 muscle wasting [42]

o performing materials research on colloids to develop products that are more uniform and have a longer shelf life
[43],

0 growing larger protein crystals on the space station [Figure 22] to help develop monoclonal antibodies [2]

0 using the station as a launchpad for a ﬂock of Earth-observing satellites [2].
These are just a few examples of the diverse research interests of the corporate world and how they intersect
with the ISS.

VII. CONCLUSION

The International Space Station (188) is a unique scientiﬁc platform enabling researchers from all over the world
to put their talents to work on innovative experiments that could not be done anywhere else. Although each space
station partner has distinct agency goals for station research, each partner shares a uniﬁed goal to extend the
resulting knowledge for the betterment of humanity. We may not know yet what will be the most important

Page 8 of 20

"
"10","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.

discovery gained from the space station, but as exempliﬁed in the International Space Station Beneﬁtsfor Humanity
2nd Edition [2], we Clearly already have some amazing breakthroughs.

In the areas of human health, innovative technology, education and observations of Earth from space, there are
already demonstrated beneﬁts to people back on Earth. Lives have been saved, station-generated images assist with
disaster relief, new materials improve products, and education programs inspire future scientists, engineers and
space explorers. Some beneﬁts in this updated second edition have expanded in scope. In other cases, new beneﬁts
have developed.

Since the publication of the ﬁrst edition [1], a new constituency has developed, one that is using the 188 in a
totally different fashion—to develop a commercial market in low-Earth orbit. From pharmaceutical companies
conducting commercially-funded research on 188, to private ﬁrms offering unique research capabilities and other
services, to commercial cargo and crew, the 188 is proving itself to be just as adaptable to new business relationships
as it has been for a broad diversity in research disciplines.

Our book summarizes the scientiﬁc, technological and educational accomplishments of research on the space
station that have had and will continue to have an impact to life on Earth. All serve as examples of the space
station’s potential as a groundbreaking research facility. Through advancing the state of scientiﬁc knowledge of our
planet, looking after our health, developing advanced technologies and providing a space platform that inspires and
educates the science and technology leaders of tomorrow, these beneﬁts will drive the legacy of the space station as
its research strengthens economies and enhances the quality of life here on Earth for all people.

VIII. REFERENCES
[1] Robinson, J ., Thurnrn, T., Buckley, N., J ohnson-Green, P., Piekutowski, T., Steinberg, M., Clement, J ., Chicoine,
R.A., Zell, M., Fuglesang, C., Hatton, J ., Sundblad, P., Savage, N., Suenson, R., Harrod, J ., Nakamura, T.,
Karnigaichi, S., Sato, K, Aiba, T., Koyarna, M., Miyagawa, Y., Ogawa, S., Kaneko, Y., Ruttley, T., Alleyne, C.,
Evans, C., Stefanov, W., Richards, E., Fogarty, J ., Carrodeguas, J ., Knowles, C., Blue, R., Humphries, K., Curie, M.,
Buck, J ., Boen, B., Rainey, K., Karabadzhak, G., Sorokin, 1., AVdeeV, S., Zagreev, B. 2012. International Space
Station Beneﬁtsfor Humanity. NASA/NP-2012-02-003-JSC.
[2] Robinson JA, Rai A, Buckley N, Cohen L, Chicoine RA, Giguere C, et al. International Space Station Beneﬁts
for Humanity, 2nd Edition. NASA Education Publication. 2015;NP-2015-01-001-JSC.
[3] Sutherland, GR, Larna S, Gan LS, Wolfsberger S, Zareinia K. Merging machines with microsurgery: Clinical
experience with neuroArrn. J ournal of Neurosurgery. 2013 March;118(3): 521-529.
[4] Hamilton DR, Sargsyan AE, Martin DS, Garcia KM, Melton SL, Feiveson AH, Dulchavsky SA. On-orbit
prospective echocardiography on International Space Station crew. Echocardiography. 2011 May; 28(5): 491-501.
[5] Karlssorn LL, KerckX Y, Gustafsson LE, Hemmingsson TE, Linnarsson D. Microgravity Decreases and
Hypergravity Increases Exhaled Nitric Oxide. J ournal of Applied Physiology. 2009 November; 107(5): 1431-1437.
[6] Shimizu T, Steffes B, Pompl R, J amitzky F, Bunk W, Ramrath K, Georgi M, Stolz W, Schmidt H-U, Urayama
T, Fujii S, Morﬁll GE. Characterization of Microwave Plasma Torch for Decontamination. Plasma Processes and
Polymers. 2008;5:577—582.
[7] LeBlanC AD, Matsumoto T, Jones JA, Shapiro J , Lang TF, Shackelford LC, Smith SM, Evans HJ, Spector ER,
Ploutz-Snyder RJ, Sibonga JD, Keyak J H, Nakamura T, Kohri K, Ohshirna H. Bisphosphonates as a supplement to
exercise to protect bone during long-duration spaceﬂight. Osteoporosis International. 2013 July; 24(7): 2105-2114.
[8] Vico L, Zouch M, Arnirouche A, Frere D, Laroche N, Laib A, Thomas T, Alexandre C. High-Resolution pQCT
Analysis at the Distal Radius and Tibia Discriminates Patients With Recent Wrist and Femoral Neck Fractures.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research. 2008;23(11):1741-1750.
[9] Mehta SK, Crucian BE, Stowe RP, Simpson RJ, Ott CM, Sarns CF, Pierson DL. Reactivation of latent Viruses is
associated with increased plasma cytokines in astronauts. Cytokine. 2013 January; 61(1): 205-209.
[10] Harding RE, Cohrs RJ, Gilden DH, Pierson DL, Mehta SK. Methods for the Diagnosis of Varicella Zoster
Virus Infection. United States Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce.20110262895. October 27 2011.
[11] Chang TT, Walther 1, Li C, Boonyaratanakornkit JB, Galleri G, Meloni MA, Pippia P, Cogoli A, Hughes-
Fulford M. The Rel/NF-KB pathway and transcription of immediate early genes in T cell activation are inhibited by
microgravity. Journal of Leukocyte Biology. 2012; 92(6): 1133-1145.
[12] Battista N, Meloni MA, Bari M, Mastrangelo N, Galleri G, Rapino C, Dainese E, Finazzi-Agro A, Pippia P,
Maccarrone M. 5 -Lipoxygenase-dependent apoptosis of human lyphocytes in the International Space Station: data
Page 9 of 20

"
"11","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
from the ROALD experiment. FASEB: Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology J ournal. 2012;
26(5): 1791-1798.
[13] Carter, D., PCAM: a multi-user facility-based protein crystallization apparatus for microgravity. J ournal of
Crystal Growth. 1999 196(2-4): 610-622.
[14] Tanaka H, Tsurumura T, Aritake K, Furubayashi N, Takahashi S, Yamanaka M, Hirota E, Sano S, Sato M,
Kobayashi T, Tanaka T, Inaka K, Urade Y. Improvement in the quality of hematopoietic prostaglandin D synthase
crystals in a microgravity environment. J ournal 0f Synchrotron Radiation. 2011 J anuary 1; 18(1): 88-91.
[15] Le Pivert P, Morrison DR, Haddad RS, Renard M, Aller A, Titus K, Doulat J . 2009. Percutaneous Tumor
Ablation: Microencapsulated EChO-guided Interstitial Chemotherapy Combined With Cryosurgery Increases
Necrosis in Prostate Cancer. Technology in Cancer Research and Treatment. 8(3):207-216.
[16] Navasiolava NM, Custaud M-A, Tomilovskaya ES, Larina 1M, Mano T, Gauquelin-Koch G, Gharib C,
Kozlovskaya 1B. Long-Term Dry Immersion: Review and Prospects. European J ournal of Applied Physiology.
2011;111(7): 1235—60.
[17] Burstyn J , Ellis AB, Green 0, Smith NA. Photoluminescent ethylene sensors. United States Patent and
Trademark Ofﬁce.7,105,274. Sep 12, 2006.
[18] Link BM, Busse J S, Stankovic B. Seed-to-Seed-tO-Seed Growth and Development Of Arabidopsis in
Microgravity. Astrobiology. 2014 October; 14(10): 866-875.
[19] Baevsky RM, Luchitskaya ES, Funtova II, Chemikova AG. Study Of the autonomic regulation of blood
circulation during a long-term space ﬂight. Human Physiology. 2013 October 11; 39(5): 486-495.
[20] Yamamoto N, Otsuka K, Kubo Y, Hayashi M, Mizuno K, Ohshima H, Mukai C. Effects of long-term
microgravity exposure in space on Circadian rhythms of heart rate variability. Chronobiology International. 2015
April; 32(3):327-340.
[21] Funtova II, Luchitskaya ES, Slepchenkova IN, Chemikova AG, Baevsky RM. Noninvasive investigation of the
body functional state during night sleep in microgravity. Cardiometry. 2014 November; 14(5): 50-65.
[22] Kozlovskaya, I.B., Sayenko, I.V., Sayenko, D.G., Miller, T.F., Khusnutdinova, D.R., Melnik, K.A. Role of
Support afferentioation in control of the tonic muscle activity. Acta Astonautica. 2009, 60:285-294.
[23] Komilova LN, Computerized Method Of Comprehensively Assessing the State Of Vestibular Function, Sensory
Interactions, and the Eye Tracking Function.Russian Federation Patent. #2307575. October 10, 2007.
[24] G. Neri, V. Cotronei, G. Mascetti, S. Pignataro, V. Zolesi; Elite S2 - An instrument for motion analysis on
board the international space station; 60th International Astronautical Congress, Daej eon, 2009.
[25] Bogomolov VV, Grigoriev AI, Kozlovskaya 1B. The Russian experience in medical care and health
maintenance of the International Space Station crews. Acta Astronautica. 2007 February; 60(4-7): 237-246.
[26] Kremneva E1, Chemikova LA, Konovalov RN, Krotenkova MV, Saenko IV, Kozlovskaia 1B. Activation of the
sensorimotor cortex With the use Of a device for the mechanical stimulation of the plantar support zones. Fiziologiia
cheloveka. 2012 Jan-Feb;38(1):61-8. [Russian].
[27] Bar-Haim S, Harries N, Belokopytov M, Frank A, Copeliovitch L, Kaplanski J , Lahat E. Comparison Of
efﬁcacy of Adeli suit and neurodevelopmental treatments in Children With cerebral palsy. Developmental Medicine
& Child Neurology. 2006;48: 325—330.
[28] Robinson JA, Amsbury DL, Liddle DA, Evans CA. Astronaut-acquired orbital photographs as digital data for
remote sensing: spatial resolution. International Journal Of Remote Sensing. 2002; 23(20): 4403-4438.
[29] Molthan AL, Bell JR, Schultz LA, Burks J E, McGrath KM, J ediovec G.J. Application Of Earth Remote Sensing
in Response to Meterorological Disasters. 46th American Geophysical Union (AGU) Annual Fall Meeting, San
Francisco, CA; United States. 9-13 Dec. 2013.
[30] Stefanov WL, Evans CA. Data collection for disaster response from the International Space Station. The
International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing, and Spatial Information Sciences.
2015;40(7/W3):851-855.
[31] Alleyne CW, Mayo SI, Robinson JA, Steinberg M, Clement J , Savage ND, Koyama M, Miyagawa Y, Avdeev
S, Blue RB, Carrodeguas J , Knowles C. Inspiring the Next Generation: International Space Station Education
Opportunities and Accomplishments 2000-2012. NASA Education Publication; 2012.
[32] Barell J . PBL: An Inquiry Approach. Skylight Training and Publishing, Inc. Arlington Heights, 111. 1998.
[33] Ivey TA, Colston NM, Thomas JA. Bringing space science down to earth for preservice elementary teachers.
Electronic Journal Of Science Education. 2015; 19(2): 19 pp.
[34] Murdoch, K., Goldblatt, L., Carrasquillo R., Harris, D. Sabatier Methanation Reactor for Space Exploration.
Space Exploration Conference; Orlando, FL, United States. 30 J an. - 1 Feb. 2005.

Page 10 0f 20

"
"12","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
[35] Nishino K, Yano T, Kawamura H, Matsumoto S, Ueno I, Ermakov MK. Instability 0fthermocapi11ary
convection in long liquid bridges of high Prandtl number ﬂuids in microgravity. J ournal of Crystal Growth. 2015
June 15; 420: 57—63.
[36] Swan JW, Vasquez PA, Furst EM. Buckling instability of self—assembled colloidal columns. Physical Review
Letters. 2014 September 23; 113(13): 138301.
[37] Farouk TI, Hicks MC, Dryer FL. Multistage oscillatory “C001 Flame” behavior for isolated alkane droplet
combustion in elevated pressure microgravity condition. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. 2015; 35(2):
1701—1708.
[38] Diftler MA, Ahlstrom TD, Ambrose RO, Radford NA, J oyce CA, De La Pena N, Noblitt AL. Robonaut 2 —
Initial Activities On—Board the ISS. 2012 IEEE Aerospace Conference, Big Sky, MT; 2012 pp.1—12.
[39] Read, ME, Commercialization of LEO: Using the International Space Station as a Stepping Stone. Wernher von
Braun Memorial Symposium. October 28, 2014 [Presentation].
[40] Scimemi SJ, The International Space Station and the Commercialization of Low Earth Orbit. AIAA SPACE
2015 Conference and Exposition, Pasadena, CA: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
[41] Lloyd SA, Morony SE, Ferguson VL, Simske SJ, Stodieck LS, Warmington KS, Livingston EW, Lacey DL,
Kostenuik PJ, Bateman TA. Osteoprotegerin is an effective countermeasure for spaceﬂight—induced bone loss in
mice. Bone. 2015 August; epub.
[42] Sandona D, Desaphy J , Camerino GM, Bianchini E, Ciciliot S, Danieli—Betto D, Dobrowolny G, Furlan S,
Germinario E, Goto K, Gutsmann M, Kawano F, Nakai N, Ohira Y, Ohno Y, Picard A, Salanova M, Schifﬂ G,
Blottner D, Musaro A, Betto R, Camerino DC, Schiafﬁno S. Adaptation of Mouse Skeletal Muscle t0 Long—Term
Microgravity in the MDS Mission. PLOS Biology. 2012 Mar 28; 7(3): e33232.
[43] Sabin J , Bailey AE, Espinosa G, Frisken B. Crystal—Arrested Phase Separation. Physical Review Letters. 2012
November 9; 109(19): 195701 (5).
~ Trn<
_ {7! It! mat“ M f,'-/"" (“t/v-
w
. i‘,‘ ~ 423:1.9 .5
V ‘21:; ‘ '2“’i‘}3§ -——-—- ' "" “ ‘ “ "" “2;: 31., ~
kgmw a‘éwy . ig‘éwi’-
"" n: g : - -
Fig 1: The International Space Station (Image credit: NASA)
Page 11 of 20

"
"13","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
Research Discipline of ISS Investigations By Partner Agency:
Expeditions 0-42
December 1998 - March 2015
100%
90% I Biology and
80% Biotechnology
I Earth and Space
70% Science
I Educational Activities
60%
50% I Human Research
40% . I Physical Science
30% I Technology
20%
10% —
0%
CSA ESA JAXA NASA/U.S. Roscosmos
28 267 506 661 460
Fig 2: Research Discipline of ISS Investigations By Partner Agency: Expeditions 0—42, December 1998 — March
2015. (Data under review.)
' .D
. ' . ?'I
. , . Z
' . I
. , ‘ . _‘ ‘ -|
_ . . ‘ l I ’— la
0 ﬂ
. . D
‘23
E
. i 4)
, '. , >
. . . ' A z 77
' . . - .: "" 0/ I
V /\ \ j
‘ ‘ 1' ¢ 31%;?“ \
'4‘ » K av
,. 4‘ “ 4’2“?
' i§2$ 1/
. I
' . l
I t
n.
Fig 3: International Space Station Beneﬁtsfor Humanity 2nd Edition Front Cover (Image credit: NASA)
Page 12 0f 20

"
"14","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
ISS Research Award Recipient(s)
Innovation in Biology and Image-Guided Autonomous Robot _
_ _ Dr. Mehran Anvarl
Medlcme (IGAR)
Innovation in
_ _ _ CASIS Protein Crystal Growth-3 Paul Reichert
Commercnallzatlon
Innovation in Technology _ _ _
_ 3-D Prmtmg In Zero-G Technology Jason Dunn
Demonstration
. TransgenicArabidopsis Gene Dr. Robert Ferl
Compelling Results _ _
ExpreSSIon System - Intracellular Dr. Anna-Llsa Paul
Compelling Results Constrained Vapor Bubble Dr. Joel Plawsky
Experiment Dr. Peter Wayner
_ NanoRacks-CellBox Effect of _ _
Compelling Results _ _ _ Dr. Daniela Grimm
MicrograVIty on Human TherId
Table 1: International Space Station (ISS) Research Award Recipient List from the 4th Annual American
Astronautical Society (AAS) ISS Research and Development Conference
A. ‘7 V
Fur ug .r
. "" r ~ 5 « "" i. \""/1
a t '57.; - ‘ P . - .-
g . . h. , I' ’ . .
A ‘-' 7- f‘ . / I 3:: ‘ _.
‘Vi . . -_ .' , .. ‘ ’1; o
‘-°\‘ ' - ' b ’* 7' c
. .‘yi ~. "" 1 ) y “ ‘7.- J"" , , A ~.
I-..‘ ‘ "". /\ H \‘A 'u
\% ’.\ ’ 1’ ,2 . ‘ x
.l I ' i x 4 A
. ‘ i '. ‘3‘. , ‘u,‘
_. i i -
Fig 4: Medical team prepares for SYMBIS Surgical System use in the operating room. (Image credit: University of
Calgary)
I Page 13 szo

"
"15","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
Fig 5: Varicella zoster—infected MeWo cells showing typical herpes Virus—induced, multinucleated giant cells.
Cultures are stained With acrydine orange to identify RNA (red) in the cytoplasm. (Image credit: NASA)
Q :: ﬂ
5 ‘3: W W t» I
V. ‘ ages
‘ /’ ~ ‘ \ ' “ AVCIJ.‘ 3
' (I 4‘ u» {3%. ""I
n ‘ ‘\ "" ‘\\ (I [r f, K, .
-. _ ~ A! i )3}.
l I . .. .‘K . .. . 4
v 1 7"""" (Q3 Q"" ‘
‘ v .;\ . \ 6 ‘ K) ,
j “1""! a t Q ' ,3 A ‘/ )
ii“? ' '7
n‘ ~ :5 I ‘
‘ 3 s
Fig 6: High-quality crystals of H—PGDS—Inhibitor complexes. The detailed structure of muscular dystrophy related
protein became clear through a space experiment. (Image credit: Osaka Bioscience Institute/Tsukuba
University/Maruwa Foods and Biosciences, Inc./JAXA)
Fig 7: Astronaut Peggy Whitson With the ADVASC soybean plant growth experiment during Expedition 5. (Image
credit: NASA)
J1? ""L , ‘ ‘ .
I . ""
‘ L ‘5 gm"" \
.3. | ”‘ . v,
' ' l n. Cl t i . ‘ "" ‘
' . , Pt; ‘ 't ‘ '1. .
n ‘ ' E"". u ‘
v m -‘
, / .A
b . _, ' .
x ‘ 1457i: :7;
5; ~ ‘ g“ x /
. I. _ ~ « - ..
. "" \ i , Page 14 of20
‘ 7"" .»

"
"16","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
Fig 8: Crew member sets up the Sonocard device before sleep in spaceﬂight. (Image credit: Roscosmos)
ﬂ‘! ‘ - 48"" o
. ~ \
’
V O
i l"" \2 ‘
t 1 _

‘

Fig 9: The support unloading compensator. (Image credit: Institute of Biomedical Problems)
«in. Q
\
, 5 2“ ’ A» !
if‘ f: ./ ‘1"" ""Hr
<1
\ . 5.: R71 / w
2335‘
(i: ii Jm-nggl'j'
ﬁgﬁﬂ“ a
Fig 10: Hyperspectral Imager for Coastal Ocean being installed on the J apanese Experiment Module - Exposed
Facility 0f the Kibo Laboratory, Sept. 23, 2009. (Image credit: NASA)
Page 15 of 20

"
"17","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
.' . . r - '33"": ' _‘ ~ . ' o.‘ '14. [GO ‘ .
< err-I'V ' < h, M . .7 , . a ,7 7 . lngilwopg
' ‘~:\."" ' ‘ ' gj ' . , 6‘ "" ‘ .‘r! Gonguw
I "" 3“"" 4. <23 - i
. , 4;, . - . . . ‘ /‘ ‘ . u ~ 1
R"", .4. ”g‘“ w $‘ .M . - V ‘
7‘3. ""1“"" f. ~15 v
:A': {v.1 ‘ .;.;.Tr' - '. "" i . <' ~ Oto 3:219? '
Fig 11: Before and after images of ﬂooding from two rivers inundating downtown Calgary. Canadian ofﬁcials used
the images to help in their disaster assessments and to improve their ﬂoodmapping algorithms. (Image credits: left,
Digital Globe; right, NASA/SERVIR)
1‘ ‘ h I ;.
ﬂ ‘ II ’ ‘,
I :3
ll. ﬁg!» , i, Q;- . ""-i V
'. .. 7 k. ' ' 3 .,~
f '1'. .
,' . ﬂ»: 4 K . ‘
“7"""" E , 5 Q‘\
‘0 - _ ' Fig 12: ISS Chief Scientist Julie Robinson talks about ISS orbits
-' With a student preparing a photo request for the EarthKAM
camera. (Image credit: NASA)
Page 16 of 20

"
"18","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
Fig 13: Grade 3 students measure their tomato plants as part of the TomatosphereTM experiment. (Image credit:
CSA/TomatosphereTM)
.2751:
\ o
$
1‘} n , V I
\
/ ,
) O
\.
Fig 14: A student talks to a crew member aboard the International Space Station during an Amateur Radio on the
International Space Station (ARISS) contact. (Image credit: ARISS)
Ii ' ‘.. “-7
E, ' 1 \
, 73. .I ,\ -
V : I f I ‘ < . 45:44.:
I. r 1. i? 1} :3:
J; I , I /
1 t i .
_/ L 1
\ -
Fig 15: Girl at hydration station. (Image credit: Sinergia Systemas)
Page 17 of 20

"
"19","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
Fig 16: Investigating the Structure of Paramagnetic Aggregates from Colloidal Emulsions science Video image of
aggregates (columns forming). (Image credit: NASA)
/ ""

. ' '2

_ Q
. . -V -\ b .j ' . I

. f\‘ .‘ Jo

’ [a 1 SA"".

1 g ..

. 7' . ‘r _ '

/ ‘ \

, $‘. . .

""f :5? ,

Fig 17: The Robotic Refueling Mission investigation (center, on platform) uses CanadarmZ, the International Space
Station’s robot arm, and the Canadian Dextre robot (right) to demonstrate satellite-servicing tasks. (Image credit:
NASA)
- Page 18 szo

"
"20","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
Fig 18: A burning heptane droplet during the Flame Extinguishing Experiments investigation on the International
Space Station. (Image credit: NASA)
\ \‘ "" 3'
O
V.‘
4 ‘ ,
\t
~» Ni)” ’ e
-1 - \ -
L .\ ‘3
3 ,
‘_ g 9 5.
x ~
7 i ' <. - \ ‘\\;}\‘~\
3.... . ‘ — =' {a 3.3:?!"" {13.17: C\
-"" 9 ‘ fﬁ’ﬁ. \
Fig 19: The RobO-Glove was built through the continuing partnership between NASA and General Motors. It uses
R2 technology to decrease fatigue and stress When a human grasps an object. (Image credit: NASA)
Page 19 of 20

"
"21","66th International Astronautical Congress, J erusalem. This is a work of the US. Government and other governments and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.
Fig 20: SpaceX’s Dragon capsule as it approaches the 188, Oct. 25, 2014. (Image credit: NASA)
e» k
,_7..-»-.- - ‘ﬁj -
g...
\yg,‘ 1 \'
. “\\ .3: ""
. ' \m
= nu; -._\ - K
‘. A .. ’.'.'.. ‘32. ’32:“ {‘22 7 2,
.31; 5. ﬂing
%‘~ 1
w \ ""3 ‘
Fig 21: Orbital’s Cygnus vehicle about to be berthed t0 the International Space Station, July 16, 2014. (Image
credit: NASA)
’/ ‘I,/// \. “I ‘li‘it‘ \
1 .1, 4‘ IQ ,0 V ‘ u
’ :3 H4 \. -‘
I- ‘1 N V ..‘
J ‘ \ ﬂ 4
“ ' ” \‘\‘ H§V3\ '1.
Ground(A6) ‘ A
y‘I— '/l ‘3 i.§;’:& / _ ‘c ""
V“ "" t \ ff ’1"" 1""
ea: 1 "" ’ 4
. V. _ , -, . a 35‘ I
‘ \ {a ‘:__ \ — :i
Fuom (A3) 0‘.
Fig 22: The difference between protein crystals grown on the ground (top) versus in microgravity (bottom). (Image
credit: Merck)
Page 20 of 20

"
