"","x"
"1","ISS EXERCISE COUNTERMEASURES —
Exercise Countermeasures on ISS: Summary and Future
DI rectlons
Linda H. Loerch
INTRODUCTION: The ﬁrst decade of the International Space Station Program (ISS) yielded a wealth of knowledge regarding the health
and performance of crewmembers living in microgravity for extended periods of time. The exercise countermeasures
hardware suite evolved during the last decade to provide enhanced capabilities that were previously unavailable to
support human spaceﬂight, resulting in attenuation of cardiovascular, muscle, and bone deconditioning.The ability to
protect crew and complete mission tasks in the autonomous exploration environment will be a critical component of
any decision to proceed with manned exploration initiatives.The next decade of ISS habitation promises to be a period
ofgreat scientiﬁc utilization that will yield both the tools and technologies required to safely explore the solar system.
Leading countermeasure candidates for exploration class missions must be studied methodically on ISS over the next
decade to ensure protocols and systems are highly efﬁcient, effective, and validated. Lessons learned from the ISS
experience to date are being applied to the future, and international cooperation enables us to maximize this excep-
tional research laboratory.
KEYWORDS: Microgravity, exercise countermeasures.
Loerch LH. Exercise countermeasures on /SS.'summary and future directions. Aerosp Med Hum Perform. 2015; 86 (12, Suppl.):A92—A93.
he ﬁrst decade of the International Space Station Pro- potential within the ISS countermeasure suite. Improved heart
I gram (ISS) yielded a wealth of knowledge regarding rate monitoring hardware has been deployed for use with the
the health and performance of crewmembers living in cycle and treadmill protocols. ESA’s subject load system, which
microgravity for extended periods of time. Ihe exercise coun- is planned for use on ISS later in 2016, will enhance the capabil-
termeasures hardware suite evolved during the last decade to ity for higher subject loading during treadmill exercise. ﬂiese
provide enhanced capabilities that were previously unavailable enhanced exercise countermeasure and monitoring capabilities
to support human spaceﬂight, resulting in attenuation of car- offer a tremendous opportunity to evaluate novel exercise hard-
diovascular, muscle, and bone deconditioning. ware and protocols and maximize use of the ISS through 2020
Ihe advanced resistive exercise device (ARED) replaced the as a multidisciplinary research platform.
interim resistive exercise device (iRED) in 2008, providing far NASA’s Human Research Program (HRP) was Chartered in
greater load challenge, improved eccentriczconcentric ratios, 2005 with the primary objectives being to conduct research that
and selection of additional whole body and single joint exercise quantiﬁes the human health and performance risks associated
motions. Both the ARED and iRED offered skeletal muscle with human exploration missions, and to validate countermea-
strength and endurance never before available on any space sures and technologies that prevent or mitigate adverse out-
Vehicle. Shortly thereafter, the second generation treadmill (T2) comes of these risks. Ihe HRP currently maintains “roadmaps”
was deployed to the ISS, replacing the treadmill with Vibration designed to resolve over 25 health risks. 1116 overall process
stabilization (TVIS), which expanded the exercise countermea- requires correlating data from in-ﬂight medical operational
sures capabilities by increasing maximum running speed along
with the capability to collect ground reaction force data. Ihe From the NASA Johnson Space Center,Houston, TX.
European Space Agency (ESA) provided the portable 131111110- Address correspondence ta: Jacqueline M. Reeyes, NASA Johnson Space Center, Division
, , . . . Resource Support, Blomedlcal Research & Env1r0nmentalSc1ences DIVISIOI’I, 2101 NASA
nary functlon SYStem (PPFS)> Wthh Slgnlﬁcanﬂy 1mP roved Parkway, MC Wyle/SK/37, Houston, TX 77058; Jacquelinem.reeves@nasa.g0v
thSiOlOgiCal mODitOring Capabilities. The recently dCPIOYed Reprint & Copyright © by the Aerospace Medical Association, Alexandria, VA.
Russian BD2 treadmill further improved locomotor exerciser DOI:10.3357/AMHREC12.2015
A92 AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 12, Section II December2015

"
"2","SUMMARY & FUTURE DlRECTlONS—Loerch
exercise sessions and periodic ﬁtness evaluations With research from the 188 to next generation monitoring and data acquisi-
findings. A11 188 International Partner agencies have been tion systems.
charged With the responsibility to collaborate in the Charac- ""ihe parameters offuture exploration space missions, includ-
terization and mitigation of adverse crew health issues ass0- ing transit and surface time, vehicle and habitat resources,
ciated With prolonged microgravity exposure. Each agency intravehicular and extravehicular physical constraints, gravi-
has a Vigorous program of ground analog and spaceﬂight stud- tational ﬁeld exposure, and access to Earth-based communi-
ies in progress. cation and monitoring, Will dictate the countermeasure needs

Although the expanded ISS exercise countermeasure suite of these crews. ""ihese requirements should drive ISS-based
has resulted in decreased post-mission decrements in crew research While this platform is still available to us. Requirements
health, ﬁndings from the ﬁrst decade of ISS habitation have for protection of crewmember strength, power, endurance,
been highly variable due to a multitude of factors, including: orthostatic control, ﬂexibility, bone integrity, and neuroves-
exercise hardware reliability; use of exercise protocols that were tibular health Will inform the countermeasure hardware and
tailored to address crew needs and preferences; differences in protocols necessary to enable completion of astronaut critical
exercise countermeasure emphasis among International Part- mission tasks. Critical mission tasks may be planned (i.e., habi-
ner agencies; complexities associated With utilization of non- tat deployment or surface planetary activities) or off-nominal,
exercise interventions (e.g., pharmaceuticals and nutrition such as emergency egress of an incapacitated crewmember
countermeasures); relatively low total number of crew Who after landing. Several planned or current 188 research studies
have resided 0n the ISS; competition among research studies Will reveal how exploration mission tasks map to physiological
for crew time; and uncontrollable factors such as anthropo- performance capabilities, Which in turn Will guide future coun-
metrics, age, and gender. For these reasons, it is imperative that termeasure requirements. ""ihe ability to protect crew and com-
International Partner agencies collaborate and share focused plete mission tasks in the autonomous exploration environment
research and longitudinal medical data sets to reveal crew Will be a critical component of any decision to proceed With
health trends, further improve exercise countermeasure pro- manned exploration initiatives.
tocols, and optimize crew health and performance. These ""ihe next decade of ISS habitation promises to be a period
efforts are “a work in progress” and are essential if we are to of great scientiﬁc utilization that Will yield both the tools and
maximize outcomes given the limited ISS resources. Finally, technologies required to safely explore the solar system. Lead-
While the exercise capabilities have improved on the 188 com- ing countermeasure candidates for exploration Class missions
pared to previous space platforms, the monitoring of simple must be studied methodically on 188 over the next decade to
parameters such as exercise heart rate and resistive exercise ensure protocols and systems are highly efﬁcient, effective, and
ground-reaction forces has proven to be far more complex and validated. Lessons learned from the ISS experience to date are
Challenging than anticipated. ThiS is due to many factors, includ- being applied to the future, and international cooperation
ing the electromagnetic interference environment on the ISS, enables us to maximize this exceptional research laboratory.
engineering speciﬁcations for spaceﬂight hardware (e.g., Vibra-
tion isolation, materials limitations, advanced lead time neces-
sary to certify and ﬂy hardware, etc.), and limited resources ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
available to troubleshoot exercise hardware issues in a timely
faShi0n° Engineering, medical) and researCh communities muSt Author and aﬁiliation: Linda H. Loerch, M.D., Ph.D., NASA Johnson Space
collaborate and address these issues by applying lessons learned Center, Houston, TX.

AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 12, Section II December2015 A93

"
