"","x"
"1","|AC-10.E1.5.3
NASA EDUCATION ACTIVITIES ON THE INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION:
A NATIONAL LABORATORY FOR INSPIRING, ENGAGING, EDUCATING AND
EMPLOYING THE NEXT GENERATION
Mark T. Severance1, Judy Tate-Brown2 and Cynthia L. McArthur3
1Office of Education, and National Laboratory Office, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas,
USA
2 Engineering and Science Contract Group, Jacobs Technologies and International Space Station
Program Scientist’s Office, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, USA
3Teaching from Space Office, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, USA
ABSTRACT
The International Space Station (ISS) National Lab Education Project has been created as a part
of the ISS National Lab effort mandated by the US. Congress The project seeks to expand ISS
education of activities so that they reach a larger number of students with clear educational
metrics of accomplishments. This paper provides an overview of several recent ISS educational
payloads and activities. The expected outcomes of the project, consistent with those of the NASA
Office of Education, are also described.
NASA performs numerous education activities as part of its ISS program. These cover the gamut
from formal to informal educational opportunities in grades Kindergarten to grade 12, Higher
Education (undergraduate and graduate University) and informal educational venues (museums,
science centers, exhibits). Projects within the portfolio consist of experiments performed onboard
the ISS using onboard resources which require no upmass, payloads flown to ISS or integrated
into ISS cargo vehicles, and ground based activities that follow or complement onboard activities.
Examples include ground based control group experiments, flight or experiment following lesson
plans, ground based activities involving direct interaction with ISS or ground based activities
considering ISS resources in their solution set. These projects range from totally NASA funded to
projects which partner with external entities. These external agencies can be: other federal, state
or local government agencies, commercial entities, universities, professional organizations or non-
profit organizations. This paper will describe the recent ISS education activities and discuss the
approach, outcomes and metrics associated with the projects.
INTRODUCTION
Education has always been an important the Agency, the Space Act of 1958. In recent
component of the NASA mission. The years, the NASA Authorization Act of 2005
genesis of today’s NASA Office of Education (Public Law 109-155, 30 December 2005)
is contained within the founding legislation of provided the Agency with US. Congressional
1

"
"2","direction to “...seek to increase the utilization Investigator, JSC Education Office) and ISS
of the ISS by other Federal entities and the Education Downlinks (Cindy McArthur,
private sector through partnerships, cost- Principal Investigator, JSC Education Office)
sharing agreements or other arrangements have had a lengthy history of successful
that would supplement NASA funding of the operations and have involved hundreds of
ISS.” In 2007, as part of the 21St Century thousands of students throughout the world.
Competitiveness Act Conference Report, the Table | and Table II presented at the end of
Agency received additional direction to use this paper document the numbers of schools,
the ISS National laboratory to support by country, that have participated in the
science, technology, engineering and math ARISS and EarthKAM activities, respectively.
(STEM) education.
Conducting educational related activities on Under the ISS National Lab and ISS National
NASA human spaceflight missions or from Lab Education Project concept, payloads
onboard the ISS is notanew concept Ahost such as the Commercial Generic
of educational activities and educational Bioprocessing Apparatus (CGBA) Science
payload operations have been conducted as Inserts (CSI, Bioserve Space Technologies,
NASA sponsored activities or as activities Louis Stodieck, Principal Investigator), the
sponsored by the ISS Program International Synchronized Position Hold Engage and
Partner space agencies. Previous ISS Reorient Experimental Satellite (SPHERES,)
related educational activities have involved and Space Dynamically Responding
an over 31 million students worldwide in just Ultrasonic Matrix System (Space-DRUMS,
the first 6 years of permanent occupation of Jacques Guigné, Principal Investigator) are
the ISS (Ref. 1). What is new and different is poised for additional partnering opportunities
the US. Congressional mandate to and expansion of their educational activities.
incorporate education as part of the ISS Some of these payloads will expand their
National Laboratory effort. Specifically, educational scope to incorporate content
NASA has been given Congressional applicable in the both the Kindergarten
direction to pursue activities which leverage through 12th grade (K-12) as well as at the
the resources of entities external to NASA, University level (undergraduate through post-
including commercial companies, academic graduate grade levels). Activities to further
institutions, not-for-profit organizations and incorporate international student participation
other US. Government agencies. as well as students from traditionally
Collaborative educational activities directly underrepresented and underserved
partnered with, or in conjunction with, the ISS institutions will also be emphasized.
Program International Partner space
agencies will also be included in this Commensurate with these goals, the
expansion of ISS educational activities. The NanoRacks ISS National Lab payload (also
partnering mandate is seen as a force known as CubeLab,Jeffrey Manber,PrincipaI
multiplierfor the ability to conduct ISS related Investigator) is now offering flight
educational activities. opportunities for K-12 schools and
Universities to conduct experiments of their
ACTIVITIES OVERVIEW own design within the NanoRacks facility. In
March 2010, the Valley Christian School of
In conjunction with the ISS National Lab San Jose, California purchased a Nanorack
Education Project, the traditionally successful insert to conduct an experiment designed by
educational projects and payloads, such as their students. Similar University-Ievel
those managed by the Teaching from Space contracts as well as purchase agreements
Office at the NASA Johnson Space Center, involving student organizations outside of the
are expected to continue. Payloads and United States are anticipated shortly. The
activities such as Earth Knowledge Acquired NanoRacks /CubeLab hardware is developed
by Middle School Students (EarthKAM, Earth by Kentucky Space, an ambitious non-profit
Knowledge Acquired by Middle School enterprise focused on R&D, educational and
Students, Sally Ride, Principal Investigator), small entrepreneurial and commercial space
Amateur Radio on ISS (ARISS, Amateur solutions involving several Universities in the
Radio on the International Space Station, state of Kentucky. The Kentucky Space
Kenneth Ransom, N5VHO, Principal model contains student involvement at all
2

"
"3","ends of the supply chain: from the area where the virtual part would be
development of the NanoRack/CubeLab host assembled. The middle school students were
flight hardware to student involvement in the required to program the satellite to perform
development and operation of an experiment these steps autonomously, without any
sponsored by the payload customer school. human intervention after the NASA Astronaut
Shannon Walker started the tests (Ref. 2)
1 - '_ 5H“ ‘ v ""x - W ~t
'- ML. E: . e ‘5'”
.. :ﬁ’ I r ‘ ,_ 1:"" L ""_L I
(‘3': -( ""4 I '1 4mm”: L
1L ﬂ 1'"" E X'NEM J g t :‘j ‘i‘- ‘ .
J ”J '1 I ___f‘ggdrt j .23 ’ _m ' :t
'I-. '. t- . 9; {1"" 11‘ 1 Lg: . I e
' . . 'r , [I i "" ”ﬂ 5 ,-.r, r
I i ’1- i1"" ..1' 5 WM F
""T.' ” ""/L
Fig. 1: NASA Astronaut Shannon Walker works With
the NanoRaCk/CubeLab payload onboard the ISS. Fig. 2: The SPHERES internal satellites ﬂying inside
the ISS under the control of student developed software
The SPHERES payload is continuing as a
workhorse for both educational and The CGBA Science Insert payload is
professional payload customers_ The currently preparing for itS next set Of CSI
SPHERES satellites operate inside the student science experiments, after the
modules of the ISS under the supervision of resoundingly successful CSI-4 “Butterflies in
an ISS Astronaut. They use pressurized Space” exeperiment. Painted Lady butterfly
carbon dioxide for propulsion and have larvae completed their lifecycles in a habitat
configurable software and docking hardware contained inside of the CGBA payload
for testing. College students use them to test onboard the ISS. Over 180,000 students
new ways to control satellites. In the Zero were engaged in Classroom based control
Robotics competition, SPEHRES is used to group experiments using a standard habitat
for educational goals. Zero Robotics enables design. Students participated in the CSI-4
middle and high-school students not only to mission by conducting their own open-ended
observe space science and engineering, but investigations of the growth, development
to be part of it. As part of a robotics and behavior of the butterflies growing in
competition, students program their sate||ites microgravity COhditiOhS, while comparing
for autonomous operations, After the these to similar butterflies under the normal
students complete their software they watch gravity conditions of their own classrooms.
as they see whether their programming works Butterflies in Space was developed by
to achieve their objective. The sate||ites race BioServe Space Technologies, a component
against each other to perform a relevant of the University of Colorado, in conjunction
engineering task. The races takes place in with the Baylor College of Medicine and the
simulation at the Massachusetts Institute of National Space Biomedical Research Institute
Technology and then onboard the ISS. In (Ref 3).
August 2010 as part of NASA’s Summer of
Innovation program, with funding provided by
the Massachusetts Space Grant, middle
school students from 10 schools and
educational groups were involved in a
SPHERES competition. The SPHERES
sate||ites simulated the assembly steps of a
larger satellite. They first navigated through
virtual obstacles, reached a docking location
(for example, where a new virtual part would
be picked up), and then went to the finish
3

"
"4","_ , l
' 1-” ‘ °‘ 7’ . - . t
_ . —‘ ""1! w a
. m‘ ’ ° ﬂ
Fig. 3: The CSI—4 experiment — Monarch butterﬂies Fig. 4: Buzz LightyearTM, the inspiration for the Kids
inside of their habitat contained Within the CGBA ISS In Micro—g Challenge and the host of the Buzz
Payload. Lightyear ISS Mission Log special feature Videos
produced by Disney/Pixar.
Not all student experiments have involved the
use of sophisticated payload hardware NOt all education onboard the ISS OCCUl'S
onboard the |ss_ The Kids In Micro—g design inside the pressurized modules. Student
challenge (Debbie Biggs, NASA Education developed Cubesat (nanosat class) satellites
Office, Principal Investigator) was developed have been deployed from Space Shuttles
with the opposite in mind. Given a set of set after undocking from the '33- One SUCh
of simple items commonly found in Cubesat under the ISS National Lab purview
Classrooms as well as onboard the ISS, 5th was the Dual Radio Frequency Astrodynamic
through 8th grade students were asked to Global Positioning System (GPS) Orbital
develop a microgravity experiment or Navigation Satellite (DRAGONSat),
demonstration that would have an observably developed jointly by the University Of Texas
different outcome from the Classroom when and Texas A & M University - The objective 0t
performed by astronauts in the microgravity DRAGONSat was to demonstrate GPS based
environment of the ISS. A series of 9 student autonomous rendezvous and docking using a
developed experiments were selected for pair 0t cubesats. A tOIIOW on mission is
execution onboard the ISS. The materials currently under development by these
used ranges from rubber bands, to a pen and UhiVGl‘SitieS. Additional Cubesat launches
paper, pen caps, empty shampoo bottles, fruit associated with ISS missions are anticipated
drink and hot sauce. The experiments were when the SpaceX Dragon '33 commercial
designed to examine phenomena associated cargo vehicles become operational.
with projectile motion, microgravity interaction
of objects, fluid mixing and absorption and
Astronaut adaptability to microgravity.
Kids In Micro—g was rolled out as part of the
informal education activities of the Buzz
LightyearTM on ISS public outreach activity. In
conjunction with the latter, two special feature
videos of “Buzz Lightyear’s ISS Mission Logs”
were included in the recent re-release of the
Toy StoryTM 1 and Toy Story 2 DVD movies.
The Disney/Pixar special feature videos,
written in consultation with staff from the ISS
Program ISS National Lab Education Project,
targeted younger audiences with
explanations of the basic concepts of
spaceflight, the construction and operation of
the ISS, life onboard the ISS, and research
being done on the ISS.
4

"
"5","K,
g fee H et;

llii _ 2

R -. -- . 2%
N_\ J /

Fig. 6: A drawing of the ARISSat-l educational

satellite. The Kursk University experiment is the gray

cylinder in the lower most corner of this View.
; , -- \
‘si 9;.» Not all ISS educational activities focus on the
E"", ”5-"" - “ . operation of an experiment on or around the
g, _j-_ e ' ISS. The High Schools United With NASA to
t .4. . Create Hardware (HUNCH) program (Stacy

Hale, Project Lead) is an activity where
Fig. 5: DRAGONSat deployment from Space Shuttle middle school and high school students build
Endeavour on mission STS-127 after undocking from flight and training hardware for use in the ISS
theISS- program. HUNCH currently involves over 20

schools in 8 states. Mentored by
'33 Educational satellites in the larger professionals from the NASAteam, students
microsat Class, are also under development. participate in all aspects of the hardware
The Radio Amateur Satellite Corporation design and fabrication_ The hardware
(AMSAT), the hardware provider for the '33 fabricated has ranged from cargo transfer
HAM payload WhiCh is used for the ARISS bags used onboard the ESA’s Automated
SChOOt contact activity, is developing Transfer Vehicle (ATV) ISS cargo spacecraft,
ARISSat, an educational satellite Wlth the to training hardware for avionics equipment
capability to carry 4 t0 5 student developed used in the ISS simulators at the NASA
experiments. In addition to providing a Marshall Space Flight Center and the NASA
space communications utility for use by Johnson Space Center. NASA currently
amateur radio operators worldwide, ARISSat funds the HUNCH program, and realizes a
can provide data telemetry from its onboard significant cost savings due to the production
StUdent experiments Via amateur radio links. of professional grade hardware required for
ARISSat is being developed in COhJUthiOh ISS operations at essentially a materials-only
Wlth RSC-Energia and the '88 National Lab cost The program is currenﬂy being
Education Project. expanded to the United States Military

Academy, where West Point cadets will gain
ARISSat-1, the firSt Of a planned series Of project management experience while
ARISSat satellites, WI” be launched to '88 in managing the production of ISS training
late 2010- It Wt” then be manually deployed hardware that will be fabricated at several
by '33 Cosmonauts during a spacewalk middle schools and high schools in the state
currently scheduled for February 2011. Of New York.
Aboard ARISSat-1 is an experiment from
Kursk University in Russia, to derive
atmospheric density measurements in situ
based on readings from an onboard pressure
sensor. The objective is to obtain these in
situ measurements daily from the
experiments pressure sensor. Experiment
telemetry will be downlinked via amateur
radio, until the satellite’s orbit decays and the
satellite is destroyed during re-entry.

5

"
"6","@ NASA In doing so the ISS National Lab Education
Project will serve as an educational resource
t"" . for educators, students and life-Iong learners
3;; f: $ worId-wide for the duration of the ISS
r ' ‘37. Program.
_'.. -._.__. ""'1': 5:} ’ '2! _l: .._— -
r ril'rli. ('2 —1 I""_'_ -'
.- 3115' 1 I 3 References:
{-1. .-"" I 1. Insgiring the Next Generation:
"" . . 1._ Student Exgeriments and Educational
I _ Activities on the International Sgace
""-'~J :5-5 ' Station, 2000-2006, NASA/TP-2006—
1!? 213721,May 2006
h - - 2. Press Release: “NASA Summer of
Innovation Zero Robotics SPHERES
Fig. 7. NASll? Asgciatte Administratfr dfcit‘ Spacef Summer Program, 2010-08-19"",
0 CI‘ﬁthl’lS W1 1am CI‘S enmaler 21006 S C IVCI‘ O -
ISpS training hardware from the pClear CZeek MassaChusettS InStltUte Of TeChnOIOgy
IndependentSChOOlDlStmt 3. Butterflies in Sgace, ISBN: 978-1-
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES 88899.7'59'0’ Bay'or C°”ege 0f
MedICIne, 2009.
The ISS National Lab Education Project “ .
continues to expand opportunities for STEM 4' NASA Educatl’en Goals . and
education for students from the Kindergarten Outcomes, FY11 ’ NASA Ofﬁce Of
to Post-Graduate levels, using the space Educatnon,NASA-HQ
station as a catalyst to engage students. The
partnering opportunities enabled by the ISS
National Laboratory will provide new ideas Acknewledgements . .
educational actIVItIes and payloads. at | A C 2010-
At its core, the project strives to allow for
participation the ISS mission by the world-
wide public, educators and students (Tables |
and II). Consistent with the goals of the NASA
Office of Education (Ref. 4), the project will
continue to develop a portfolio of STEM
(Science Technology Engineering and
Mathemqatics) education activities with the
expected outcomes of:
0 Developing the next generation of
STEM workforce in disciplines
needed to meet NASA’s strategic
goals
a Attracting and retaining students in
STEM disciplines through a
progression of education and
research opportunities for students,
formal and informal educators and
faculty.
0 Building strategic partnerships and
linkages that promote STEM literacy
through formal and informal
educational opportunities
6

"
"7","Country No. of Schools

Country No. of Schools Argentina 9
Australia 29 Australia 1
Belgium 32 Belgium 1
Brazil 4 Brazil 1
Canada 43 Canada 14
Croatia 1 Chile 1
Ecuador 1 France 2
Finland 3 Germany 11
France 14 India 2
Germany 13 Japan 31
Greece 3 Mexico 4
Hungary 2 New Zealand 1
Ile de La Reunion 1 Republic of Korea 4
India 5 Spain 8
Ireland 1 United Kingdom 5
Israel 1 United States 1164
Italy 34 Total 1259
Japan 46 Table 11. Number of schools, by country that
FAU‘I’VEJ'J‘. 3 have participated in EarthKAM missions, as

a a Sla .
Mali y 1 0f Aprll 2010.
New Zealand 3
China 3
Peru 2
Poland 3
Ponugal 4
Republic of Korea 2
Russia 23
Senegal 1
Slovenia 1
South Africa 4
Spain 4
Sweden 2
Switzerland 6
Taiwan 1
Thailand 2
The Netherlands 6
Turkey 2
United Kingdom 14
USA 222
Total 548
Table I. Number of schools, by country that
have participated in ARISS school contacts,
as of August 2010.
7

"
