"","x"
"1","Compliance is Mandated by Federal Regulations
Please Read Carefully
This document may contain a “Destination Control Statement” (DCS) or
other label that limits or restricts the release of its contents. If there is no
DCS on the document that addresses export compliance, then it may only be
released to, reviewed by or transferred to:
. US. Citizens working on behalf of a US. agency or company
with a NASA/JSC affiliation;
or
. a “Lawful Permanent Resident” (also called a “Permanent
Resident Alien” holding valid documentation (referred to as a
“Green Card”) and working on behalf of a US. agency or
company with a NASA/JSC affiliation
This document may not be transferred or released in any form to any non-
U.S. person until the document has been reviewed for export compliance
issues and an appropriate DCS has been included. This document shall not
be posted electronically, transferred, or otherwise made available without
prior authorization by an authorized NASA official. Public release of
technical information requires processing a JSC Form 548 or NASA Form
1676.
Verify that this is the current/correct version before use.
This document is not to be posted electronically.
Scientific and Technical Information Center
Main Library/ISZ3
NASA/Johnson Space Center
2101 NASA Parkway
Houston, TX 77058-3696
281-483-4245
Jsc-sticnter@mail.nasa.gov
http: //library. jsc.nasa.gov/default.asgx
This page is not part of the original file.

"
"2","45th International Conference on Environmental Systems |CES—2015-[241]
12-16 July 2015, Bellevue, Washington
Inﬂlght Mlcroblal Monltorlng- an alternatlve method to
culture based detectlon currently used
on the Internat1onal Space Statlon
Christina L. Khodadad1 and Michele N. Birmele2
Sierra Lobo, Inc, Kennedy Space Center, FL 32899
Monsi Roman3
NASA, Washington DC, 20024
Mary E. Hummerick4
Vencore, Ina, Kennedy Space Center, FL, 32899
David J . Smith5
NASA, Ames Research Center, Moﬂett F ield, CA 94035
and
Raymond M. Wheeler6
NASA, Kennedy Space Center, FL, 32899
Previous research has shown that potentially destructive microorganisms and human
pathogens have been detected on the International Space Station (ISS). The likelihood of
introducing new microorganisms occurs with every exchange of crew or addition of
equipment or supplies. Microorganisms introduced to the ISS are readily transferred
between crew and subsystems (i.e. ECLSS, environmental control and life support systems).
Current microbial characterization methods require enrichment of microorganisms and at
least a 48-hour incubation time. This increases the microbial load while detecting only a
limited number of the total microorganisms. The culture based method detects
approximately 1-10% of the total organisms present and provides no identiﬁcation. To
identify and enumerate ISS microbes requires that samples be returned to Earth for
complete analysis. Therefore, a more expedient, low-cost, in-ﬂight method of microbial
detection, identiﬁcation, and enumeration is warranted. The RAZOR EX, a ruggedized,
commercial off the shelf, real-time PCR ﬁeld instrument was tested for its ability to detect
microorganisms at low concentrations within one hour. Escherichia coli, Salmonella enterica
Typhimurium, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa were detected at low levels using real-time
DNA ampliﬁcation. Total heterotrophic counts could also be detected using a 168 gene
marker that can identify up to 98% of all bacteria. To reﬂect Viable cells found in the
samples, RNA was also detectable using a modiﬁed, single-step reverse transcription
reaction.
Nomenclature
ARC = Ames Research Center
COT S = Commercial off the Shelf
1 Biologist 111, Engineering Services Contract, ESC 24.
2 Manager of Chemical and Biological Sciences, Engineering Services Contract, ESC 24.
3NASA, AST, Life Support Studies
4 Research Scientist 111, Engineering Services Contract, ESC 24.
SNASA, Research AST, Ames Research Center, CA
6NASA, Plant Physiologist and NASA Technical Lead, NASA Engineering-Surface Systems, NE-S.

"
"3","DNA = Deoxyribonucleic acid
E CLSS = Environmental control and life support systems
ISS = International Space Station
KSC = Kennedy Space Center
LLOD = Low Level of Detection
mm = nanometer
PBS = Phosphate buffered saline
PCR = Polymerase Chain Reaction
qPCR = Quantitative PCR
RNA = Ribonucleic Acid
T SA = Trypticase Soy Agar
T SB = Trypticase Soy Broth
I. Introduction

PreVious research has shown that potentially destructive microorganisms and human pathogens have been
detected on the ISS. The likelihood of introducing new microorganisms occurs with every exchange of crew or
addition of equipment or supplies making it necessary to monitor the water, air, and surfaces to identify microbial
contamination and prevent adverse effects on crew health and environmental control systems (Pierson et al., 2012).
PreVious research has also shown that microorganisms introduced to the ISS are readily transferred between crew
and subsystems (i.e., ECLSS, environmental control and life support systems). Current microbial characterization
methods are time consuming, requiring enrichment of microorganisms thereby increasing the microbial load. This
method can detect only a limited number of microorganisms and therefore is an incomplete picture. To identify and
enumerate ISS microbes requires that samples to be returned to Earth for complete analysis. Neither route would be
feasible for long duration spaceﬂight especially beyond low Earth orbit. Therefore, a more expedient, low-cost, in-
ﬂight method of microbial detection, identiﬁcation, and enumeration is warranted.

Although the current approach has sufﬁciently protected ISS crew members from infection, many subsystems on
the ISS have been negatively impacted by microbial biofoulingl. In 2011, microbiologists and other subject matter
specialists recommended implementing molecular-based technologies, such as real-time quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR), to evaluate if it could replace current culture-based technologies. The following year, in
2012, the NASA Space Technology Mission Directorate Game Changing Technology Program initiated a project to
identify current platforms capable of microbial monitoring in microgravity conditions. Platforms capable of
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were selected and evaluated2. PCR is a method designed to take a small amount of
genetic material (DNA) from cells and amplify it using optimized reagents. Within a short period of time, one copy
of the cellular DNA is ampliﬁed to billions of copies without the need to cultivate the microorganisms (Figure 1). If

successful, it would provide a fast, reliable monitoring technology,
Region Edymerase Chain ReaCtiOf"" PCR enabling operational decisions for the ISS and for future long-

.n.§.fe:E—‘::""WWW 2 duration spaceﬂight missions.
DNA ‘94-‘0 (4m) The goal of this study was to describe and test the capabilities of a
5""1-1—1—r-r—n—r-r-r—r-r—r-u—r—r-w-r 3“ Denaturauon candidate microbial monitoring system that would identify and
3,.. . . . . . . . . .. ... ... .. ._. 5.. 3:2:32‘95 DNA provide relative abundance information for a subset of
15:11 £611; ()3 microorganisms previously sampled aboard the ISS. The RAZOR
F: p CW R: :gggjyggd EX® (Bioﬁre Defense, Inc, Salt Lake City, UT) is a compact,
— —_ W; $$$$$an lightweight, ruggedized, automated PCR instrument capable of
V DNA‘e—‘ﬁp'a‘e providing rapid microbial identiﬁcation and relative enumeration.
m £35332; Designed to readily detect microorganisms in the ﬁeld, the
soxi:?:.sn:rs'?:..rt instrument is easily operated by untrained crew members and can
I DNAStrand provide real-time data for air, water, surface and biomedical samples

I I 513.33.93.13; (Figure 2)-
I I I I 231.231.0225.): Additional goals included the development and testing of species
I I I I I I I I speciﬁc assays for detection of target organisms; testing to conﬁrm
the lowest level of detection for the RAZOR polymerase chain
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I reaction (PCR) instrument for targeted organisms; and determining
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII the effects of media, solutions and complex matrices on the detection
Figure 1. Polymerase chain reaction of microorganisms. Assays were also tested to determine if
(PCR) step-Wise process. 2
International Conference on Environmental Systems

"
"4","communities of microorganisms would interfere with the detection
r of each individual type of microorganism through competition, and
a 0 ‘ 9 whether total heterotrophic counts of microorganisms could be
12.5 cm :®,éf 9 9 performed to provide cellular enumeration data. Ultimately, these
‘ ‘ Qw combined data would be presented to down—select a COTS
‘ platform suitable for microbial monitoring aboard ISS. Once the
' * ~ - \ above goals were completed, the RAZOR was then applied to
'a additional. programs (i.e., Food Safety) to further evaluate its
‘* ‘ 7 "" functionality.
15cm 11. Materials and Methods
7 I A. Microorganisms
118 cm Four targeted microorganisms were identiﬁed as potential human
26 cm pathogens and have been isolated from the ISS (Table l).
RAZOR 5x0 Escherichia 6011', Salmonella enterica Typhirnuriurn, Pseudomonas
Figure 2. RAZOR EX PCR instrument aeruginosa, and Enterobacter aerogenes were cultured
(BioFire Defense, Salt Lake City, UT) independently on trypticase soy agar (TSA) plates at room
temperature in the laboratory, and transferred to fresh agar plates
on a weekly basis. No more than 5 transfers/passages were
considered. A single colony was cultivated in trypticase soy broth (TSB) for 16—18 hours at 370 C at a rotary speed
of 125 rpm. The concentration of each was determined on a Genesys Spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientiﬁc,) at 590
nm and either DNA extracted or serial dilutions created from le8 to lel. To conﬁrm concentrations, either acridine
orange direct counts and/or plating methods on TSA media were used. Each set of cultures were completed
separately in triplicate. Combinations of the four targeted microorganisms were made by combining equal amounts
of each dilution for all four microorganisms. These combined cultures were used to determine competition or
interference of multiple organisms co—located in the same media as this is what would be encountered in the water
samples aboard the ISS. Serial dilutions were also created using phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and culturing
media to determine if the media would have an effect in downstream reactions.
B. RAZOR HybProbe Testing
The RAZOR EX HybProbe and pre—forrnulated water and food pouches were used to determine the lowest level
of detection (LLOD) for Salmonella enterica Typhirnuriurn in both water and food samples. The organism was
cultivated in trypticase soy broth (TSB) and serially diluted in sterile water to concentrations ranging from le8 to le2
prior to being introduced to each respective test pouch. Cultures were also mixed with various food types such as
meats, juice, yeast, tomato, and spinach. One hundred microliters were introduced into each well in triplicate and
vendor provided PCR protocols followed. Upon completion, ampliﬁcation results were determined based upon
instrument detection (Table 2). After initial testing of the HybProbe system, the remainder of the investigation and
testing utilized the RAZOR EX TaqMan system which allowed for development of customized species speciﬁc
assays based on customer requirements.
C. DNA and RNA Isolation
Cultures of each of the four targeted microorganisms were grown in TSB for 16—18 hours at 37 OC. DNA was
extracted from the four targeted microorganisms from approximately 5e8 cells and used to verify prirner speciﬁcity
and also serve as a positive control. DNA extractions were completed with the MoBio Microbial Kit per vendor
protocols (MoBio, Carlsbad, CA) and were quantiﬁed on the NanoDrop 1000 spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher,
Waltham, MA) or the Qubit 2.0 (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY). DNA quality was detected between 1.7 and 1.9.
RNA was extracted from cultures of E. coli K—l2, and Salmonella enterica using the Qiagen RNEasy Minikit
(Qiagen, Valencia, CA), DNase treated with the Ambion Turbo DNase kit (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY),
and quantiﬁed with the Qubit 2.0 RNA high sensitivity assay kit (Life Technologies). RNA quality was determined
using the NanoDrop 1000 spectrophotometer. RNA concentrations were prepared at l, 3, 6, and 10 ng/ul.
D. PCR Assay Development and PCR Assays
A thorough literature search was conducted to identify various sets of primers and ﬂuorescently labeled probes
for each of the targeted microorganisms. The four targeted microorganisms have been thoroughly researched by the
scientiﬁc community and numerous primer pairs and ﬂuorescently labeled probes are well described. Primers and
3
International Conference on Environmental Systems

"
"5","probes for quantitative PCR were researched and selected based on size, speciﬁcity, and selectivity. All probes were
selected and veriﬁed using commercial software tools available by the primer/probe manufacturer with probes
labeled with 6-FAM (ﬂuorescein) at the 5’ end and a black-hole quencher at the 3’ end to increase detection of the
small amplicons.

Each primer/probe set was tested for speciﬁcity to ensure that ampliﬁcation of the DNA would only occur for the
identiﬁed species (i.e., the invA gene primer/probe was speciﬁc to Salmonella and would not amplify any of the
other microorganisms tested.) All combinations were tested for cross-ampliﬁcation and conﬁrmed with qPCR and
agarose gel electrophoresis. The speciﬁcity test was accomplished with the Roche LightCycler 480 qPCR instrument
using a protocol adjusted for capability of the RAZOR EX and enabled the optimization of reactions.

In addition, DNA from each of the four microorganisms was tested with 16S rRNA universal primers to determine
that each would amplify in PCR. In contrast to the primers/probes for each microorganism, a universal primer and
probe were required to select and amplify DNA from most bacterial species simultaneously. The 16S rRNA primer
was selected from previously identiﬁed research and determined to be suitable for over 95% of all bacterial genomes
(Suzuki, et al., 2000). Real time PCR was performed using the four identiﬁed microorganisms, and the PCR
reactions run on the Bio-Rad C1000 and the Roche LightCycler 480 using identiﬁed protocols to begin optimization
(Appendix A).

PCR chemistries for all assays were optimized for maximum performance. All reagents were acquired from Life
Technologies (Grand Island, NY) and the polymerase enzyme, AmpliTaq Gold 360 was selected based on its
performance and its low error rate. All reagents were combined into a master Ian and aliquoted in 50 ul volumes
(Appendix A). Sample templates were added in 100 pl volumes for a total of 150 pl to allow for additional volume
in the syringe and eliminate air bubbles in the test pouch wells. Puriﬁed molecular grade water was utilized as a
negative control to conﬁrm contaminant free reactions and isolated DNA served as a positive control for each
pouch.

Once all chemistries were prepared, the reagents were loaded into a syringe ﬁtted with a cannula to introduce the
reagents into each test pouch well. Each sterile syringe with cannula was inserted into a well and allowed the ﬂuid to
dispense for approximately 30 s. The appropriate 100 pl volume was automatically dispensed into each test pouch
well when the vacuum seal was broken; manual injection is not required The PCR program recorded for each
microorganism was optimized based on the annealing time and temperature of the primer/probe set (Appendix A).
Annealing temperatures for the species-speciﬁc primers were at 600 C while the optimal annealing temperature for
the 16S universal primers was at 5 60 C.

Optimization of the reverse transcription reaction was completed with the Invitrogen Superscript 111 RT -PCR one-
step reaction kit (Life Technologies) using a combination of vendor protocols and real time PCR protocols for the
uidA gene and invA gene primers and probes previously developed at Kennedy Space Center, FL. Preliminary
optimization was conﬁrmed on the Roche LightCycler 480 prior to placing the reaction on the RAZOR EX
instrument.

RNA protocols and barcodes to program the RAZOR EX were developed and created using instrument speciﬁc
software (BioFire Diagnostics, Inc) and LabelView 2012 (TeklynX). Samples were loaded into the RAZOR EX
pouch and the protocol run. The RT-PCR protocol was as follows for both microbes: reverse transcription, 50 °C for
30 min; the initial denaturation, 94 °C for 2 min; followed by 60 cycles at 94 °C for 15s and annealing at 60 °C for
60 s. Protocols for RAZOR EX PCR conditions were run on the Roche LightCycler 480 to ensure chemistries and
abbreViated annealing times and temperatures were optimal.

Samples from a food safety project were provided for testing on the RAZOR EX. Samples were acquired from a
1 cm2 surface area of a freshly grown radish exposed to Salmonella enterica Typhimurium. Samples were acquired
from the surface of radish based on location (top, middle, and bottom regions) and by method (adhesive, swab, and
whole blended vegetable) then placed in sterile water. Using the optimized PCR reactions developed with RAZOR
EX microbial monitoring protocols, samples were evaluated for the presence of Salmonella. RAZOR EX was able to
detect samples acquired by all methods and from each location on the vegetables.

III. Results and Discussion

RAZOR EX testing began with the RAZOR HybProbe instrument and preformulated pouches produced by the
vendor which included detection of Salmonella in both water and food sources. Salmonella was detected 100% of
the time when cell number was determined at 50 cells per 100 pl reaction or 500 cells niL'1 (Table 1). When cell
concentration dropped below 50 cells mL'l, detection occurred only 50% of the time. When Salmonella was
combined with another organism (i.e. Pseudomonas), the detection level decreased to 1e4 cells niL'1 indicating
competition or interference with the PCR chemistry. When Salmonella was mixed with food samples, ampliﬁcation

4
International Conference on Environmental Systems

"
"6","and detection occurred similarly as with water except when samples were not optically clear (i.e., opaque from
chunky meat samples).
Table 1. Lower limit of detection (LLOD) for
Salmonella 0n the RAZOR EX HybProbe Microbial
Monitoring System.
Salmonella % Detected in
Cells/reaction N Replicate Assays

-__—

——.—

To further evaluate the RAZOR EX, additional testing proceeded with the RAZOR EX TaqMan PCR instrument
which allowed for the selection of additional primers and probes and other species speciﬁc assays. Four of the top
targeted microorganisms were selected and assays developed and optimized (Table 2). Of those tested, three of the
four assays were successfully optimized and tested further. A11 genes tested were speciﬁc to the microorganism at
the genus or species level and there was no cross ampliﬁcation to other organisms. For example, the invA gene
primer set ampliﬁed only DNA from Salmonella, and not E. coli, Pseudomonas, 0r Enterobacter. Only the
Enterobacter aerogenes assay failed to provide results. This may have been due to the speciﬁcity of the primer set,
the probe, or the strain of Enterobacter that was used in this testing. Further investigation for this microorganism
should include additional primer/probe sets.

Table 2. Target microorganisms selected for testing on RAZOR EX TaqMan System

Serial dilutions of each targeted microorganism were tested to determine the LLOD for each of the species
speciﬁc assays (Table 3). The assays for Salmonella, E. coli and Pseudomonas were detected at the same level as the
original RAZOR EX HybProbe at 50-60 cells per 100 p1 reaction. Detection below these levels was seen but was not
reported at 100%. In addition, it was determined that the LLOD for selected microorganisms on both RAZOR
systems (HybProbe and TaqMan) was observed in multiplexed matrices as well as single reactions. At higher
concentrations both PBS and TSB interfered with the PCR reaction which was not unexpected and at lower
temperatures produced inconsistent results. Each media type contains salts which will change the optimal salt
concentration of the buffered PCR reagents. After several attempts with PBS and TSB, the remainder of the serial
dilutions were completed in sterile molecular grade water.

5
International Conference on Environmental Systems

"
"7","Table 3. PCR results of serial diluted cultures for the four targeted microorganisms diluted in sterile
water. Template was 100 pl of each concentration run in duplicate in each pouch. Each culture was
prepared in triplicate. N=no ampliﬁcation detected, Y=amplification did occur prior to the last ﬁve
PCR am o lifieation c cles, NT = not tested.

Typhimurium

Consideration of the outcomes of the testing of both RAZOR EX systems qualiﬁed the RAZOR for
consideration in a COTS trade study for a potential Microbial Monitoring System. Voice of the Customer (VOC)
comparison was completed by personnel at Kennedy Space Center, FL (Lineberger, et al, 2013). Results of the VOC
comparison which included attributes of each system, including safety, engineering, and the instruments capabilities
placed RAZOR EX at the top of the list of those instruments being considered (Table 4)8.

Table 4. Total VOC Critical Customer
Requirements (CCR) scores for the top 4
COTS instruments considered for microbial
monitorin_ uPCR instruments.

Preliminary optimization of RNA on the Roche LightCycler was successful indicating the reagents and protocol
should produce cDNA from the 1 ng and 10 ng RNA templates. The volume of each reagent, once optimized, was
converted to accommodate the test pouch well volume and RAZOR PCR runs followed again with 1 ng and 10 ng or
3, 6 and 10 ng. In all reactions the RNA was converted to DNA which was then ampliﬁed using the previously
described protocols (Figure 3). In addition, both culture and DNA was used as a template. There was no
ampliﬁcation when genomic DNA served as the control template, and culture ampliﬁed at a later cycle than the
RNA template.

IV-Conclusion
1300 ll..'.""' Current microbial characterization methods aboard the ISS
provide an incomplete picture of the microorganisms present
microbial load and potential nsk Polymerase caihn reaciton
9°” an efﬁcient method of detection which does not require
enrichmentandthe RAZOREX, amggedized, compactPCR
7""” instrument provides a fast and efﬁcient method of detection-
The capabilities ofthe RAZOR EX surpassed other COTS
500 T[T.’T.’T.’T?TTTTTTTTTT’I’T’I’T'I’T'I’ .T:111’:T:T11"".1"".’rt’rt’ri’ri’ri’ri’ri’: . . . . . . . . .
4 0 0 i___iii i i i ___:ii i i i i i i units and optimized assays prov1des additional ﬂeXIbility to
300 issssssssssasisshz::::::::fffffifif‘5553=1=1=1=HW=W the PCRunit. Anin-ﬂight microbialmonitoring instrument
. 1 5 1° 15 2° 25 3° 35 4° 45 5° 5.5 f0 such as the RAZOR EX would enable efﬁcient and rapid

FlguIZe 3' RAZOR EX reverse transcrlptlon assessment of the microbial environment of the 188, leading

reactlon ff"" Salmonella. P0§ltlve control.(10 to expedited operational decisions. Reducing the detection

ng RNA) 1s red, L12; negatlve control, hght time from several days to approximately 1 hour would be

blue 1n L11;. Lanes 1 & 2’ darok blue and beneﬁcial to the health of the crew aboard the ISS and would

green are dlfferent concentratlons 0f the decrease the time to mitigation should any anomaly occur.

RNA template.

6
International Conference on Environmental Systems

"
"8","Appendix A.
List of Primers and Probes for the tareted microoranisms PCR reaents & PCR rotocol.
Pseudomonas
Optimized PCR chemistries for targeted microorganisms and respective genes.
Microor_anism

Salmonella

QPCR Run 16SrDNA

10X Buffer

ZSmMMgClz

2.5 mM each dNTP's 200 MM 200 MM 200 MM 200 MM 200 MM
900 nM 500nM 400 M 1.5 MM
900 nM 500nM 400nM

TaqMan Probe 100 nM 200 nM 250 nM 200 nM 500 nM

AmpliTaqGold Enzyme 5U/uL 0.025U/uL 0.025U/uL 0.025U/ uL 0.025U/ uL 0.025U/uL
100m 100m 100m 100m 100m
PCR Conditions for Ampliﬁcation

PCR Stage Temperature °C 16S rDNA

Denature DNA

6066*
Acknowledgements
The investigators would like to thank the KSC Research & Technology Review Board for awarding the CTC for the
In-ﬂight Microbial Monitor proj ect. The Principal and co-investigators would also like to extend their thanks for the
valuable assistance from the following individuals and for their participation in the completion of this project at
Kennedy Space Center, FL: Mary Hummerick, Lashelle Spencer, J anicce Caro, and Gerard Newsham. We would
also like to extend our thanks to the members of the Microbial Monitoring Science Team led by Monsi Roman.
Members include C. Mark Ott, Cherie Oubre, Victoria Castro, Kasthuri Venkateswaran, Darrell J an and David J .
Smith.
7
International Conference on Environmental Systems

"
"9","References
1Pierson, D.L., Botkin, D.J., Bruce, R.J., Castro, V.A., Smith, M.J., Oubre, C.M., Ott, C.M., “Microbial Monitoring of the
International Space Station,” in Environmental Monitoring: A Comprehensive Handbook, edited by J . Moldenhauer, DHI
Publishing: River Grove, IL., 2012, pp. 1-27.
2Oubre, C.M., M.N. Birmele, VA. Castro, K.J. Venkateswaran, P.A. Vaishampayan, K.U. Jones, A. Singhal, A.S. Johnston,
MC. Roman, T.A. Ozbolt, D.X. Jett, M.S. Roberts, C.M. Ott. Microbial Monitoring of Common Opportunistic Pathogens by
Comparing Multiple Real-Time PCR Platforms for Potential Space Applications. 43rd International Conference on
Environmental Systems, Vail, CO. 2013. SAE Technical Paper, Chapter DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-3314.
3Hoorfar, J ., Ahrens, P., and Radstrom, P., Automated 5’ Nuclease PCR Assay for Identiﬁcation of Salmonella enterica. J ournal
of Clinical Microbiology, Sept 2000, p 3429-3435.
4Frahm, E and Obst, U., Application of the ﬂuorogenic probe technique (TaqMan PCR) to the detection of Enterococcus spp. and
Escherichia coli in water samples. Journal of Microbiological Methods 52 (2003) 123-131.
5Lee, C.S., Wetzel, K, Buckley, T., Wozniak, D., and Lee, J . Rapid and Sensitive Detection ofPseudomonas aeruginosa in
Chlorinated Water and Aerosols targeting gyrB gene using Real-time PCR., J ournal of Applied Microbiology, 2011, Oct; 111(4):
893-903.
6Swayne, R.L., Ludlam, H.A.., Shet, V.G., Woodford, N. and Curran, M.D., Real-time TaqMan PCR for rapid detection of genes
encoding for ﬁve types of non-metallo-(Class A and D) carbapenemases in Enterobacteriaceae, International J ournal of
Antimicrobial Agents (2010).
7Suzuki, M.T., Taylor, L.T., and DeLong, E.F. Quantitative Analysis of Small-Subunit rRNA Genes in Mixed Microbial
Populations Via S’Nuclease Assays. Applied Environmental Microbiology, 2000 66 (11):4605.
8Lineberger, K., Levitt, J ., Smith, D.J., and Peter, A.M. Quantitative comparison of molecular instruments for use on the
International Space Station. Procedia Computer Science, 2014.
8
International Conference on Environmental Systems

"
