"","x"
"1","jfiaws'ietsw
Microg rGVIty Stress: Bone a nd Con nectlve Tissue
Susan A. Bloomfield,” Daniel A. Martinez,2 Ramon D. Boudreaux,3 and Anita V. Mantri7/4
* ABSTRACT
The moior alterations in bone and the dense connective tissues in humans and animals exposed to
microgravity illustrate the dependency of these tissues' function on normal gravitational loading.
Whether these alterations depend solely on the reduced mechanical loading of zero g or are
compounded by fluid shitts, altered tissue blood ﬂow, radiation exposure, and altered nutritional
status is not yet well defined. Changes in the dense connective tissues and intervertebrol disks
are generally smaller in magnitude but occur more rapidly than those in mineralized bone with
transitions to 0 g and during recovery once back to the loading provided by i 9 conditions.
However, ioint iniuries ore proiected to occur much more often than the more catastrophic bone
fracture during exploration class missions, so protecting the integrity of both tissues is important.
This review focuses on the research performed over the lost 20 years in humans and animals ex-
posed to actual spaceflight, as well as on knowledge gained from pertinent ground-bosed models
such as bed rest in humans and hindlimb unloading in rodents. Significant progress has been
made in our understanding of the mechanisms for alterations in bone and connective tissues with
exposure to microgravity, but intriguing questions remain to be solved, particularly with reference
to biomedical risks associated with prolonged exploration missions. © 2016 American Physio-
logical Society. Compr Physio/ 6:645-686, 2016.
Infrod ucﬁon for the impact of reduced gravitational loading on mechanical
properties of bone and additional effects of radiation. Tissue—
The skeleton and its associated dense connective tissues (car— level and molecular mechanisms derived from in vitro cell
tilage, tendon, and ligament) serve a number 0f essential culture studies must ultimately be tested in these animalmod—
functions in vertebrate animals. Most obviously, the skele— els to validate their physiological relevance. There are some
ten provides a scaffolding for muscle to enable movement 0f lessons to be learned from Clinical models such as spinal cord
the organism; the associated connective tissues enable a rich injury, particularly about the long term (5—10 years) adap—
Variety of joint structures that allow for effective leverage of tation to profound disuse. We also know much more now
rhuscular activity. Bony tissue aiso provides essentiztl protec— about modiﬁers 0f the bone response to zero gravity, such
heh 0f key organs (e.g., the brain by the dense cranium) and as ﬂuid shifts, vascular adaptations, nutritional factors, and
as a mineral reservoir, particularly for periods when dietary sympathetic neural input. However, adaptations of the dense
calcium intake proves insufﬁcient to maintain tight regulation connective tissues and joint function to reduced or zero grav—
of serum calcium. ity have received much less attention, Which are particularly
Bone, cartilage, tendon, and ligamentous tissues have important for understanding the capacity for recovery from
evolved over millennia in a 1 g (normal earth gravity) environ— joint injuries that might be expected with planetary surface
ment. We Will never fully understand the inﬂuence of reduced activity on exploration missions.
or zero gravitational ﬁelds on the skeleton until several suc— This review is limited to the publications in the English—
Cessive generations of animals have grown to maturity in the language literature accrued in these topical areas over the
absence 0f Earth gravity. Only a very few bed rest studies 18 years since the last Chapter addressing this topic in the
and human soj ourns in space have extended to 1 year in dura—
tion, so our understanding of adaptations to reduced gravity *COFFGSPOHdence *0 5b|00m@f0mU-edu
extending beyond 12 months is extremely limited. [Russian 1De_l0<3|”mem Of Health & KiHGSiObQYI Texas A&M UniVGFSiWI COHGQG
Cosmonaut Valeri Polyakov holds the endurance record for a itat'on' Texas” USA _ _ _ _ _
human presence in low—earth orbit at 438d aboard Mir (169).] HZEEETETO? ﬁgzhan'cal Eng'neer'ng' un'vers'ty Of HOUSton'
That said, impressive progress has been made over the last two 3B‘ d. | E ' . . T A&M U . . C II S .
, , , , Iome ICC] ngineerlng, exas nwersnty, o ege tation,
decades in understanding human adaptation to the micrograv— Texas, U 5 A
ity Oflow—earth orbit during 4' t0 6'm0hth miSSiOhS and t0 pI‘O— 4Health Science Center School of Medicine, Texas A&M University,
longed (60—90 days) bed rest. In addition, data derived from College Station, Texas, USA
animals actually ﬂown in space or subjected to ground analogs Published online, April 201 6 (comprehensivephysio/ogy. com)
0f microgravity provide critical information that cannot be DOI: tO.tOOZ/cphy.ct 30027
easily or ethically derived from human subjects, particularly Copyright © American Physiological Society.
Volume 6, April 2016 645

"
"2","Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology
Handbook of Physiology (187) was published. Our primary surfaces of cortical shells as well as cancellous (trabecular)
objective is to summarize and integrate for the reader data surfaces (see Fig. 1). “Endosteal” technically encompasses
derived from humans and animals exposed to spaceﬂight and, all bone surfaces in contact with bone marrow. Terming the
secondary, from ground—based analog studies such as bed rest inner surface of cortical shells “endocortical” helps distin—
and rodent hindlimb unloading. Wherever possible, animal guish this surface from the far larger surface area of cancel—
research involving skeletally mature animals will be empha— lous bone in metaphyses of the long bones and inside many
sized; the qualitative impact of disuse can be quite different ﬂat bones (pelvis, skull, and sternum). Changes in mechanical
on young, rapidly growing bones and connective tissue ver— loading up— or downregulate cellular actiVity on speciﬁc bone
sus tissues in the mature adult. Cell culture investigations are surfaces. For example, a very common ﬁnding with disuse
often pivotal in identifying molecular mechanisms, but those in animal models is increased resorption at the endocortical
mechanisms must be conﬁrmed with experiments conducted envelope (235). This section will brieﬂy reView important
in live animals or humans before we can appreciate their full background about bone cell populations, their key functions
relevance to human physiology. and roles in modeling/remodeling of bone; for more thorough
After presenting some basic background on bone and con— explications of these topics in bone biology, consult refer—
nective tissue biology, we start with the adaptation of the ences (32, 119, 231). The vast majority of bone surfaces at
skeleton to microgravity, reviewing the human data acquired any one instant in time in the adult skeleton are covered by
during sojourns in low—earth orbit and in ground—based bed ﬂat, elongated lining cells; these are considered to be quies—
rest trials; whatlessons can be gleaned from studies of animals cent precursor cells that can, in response to certain stimuli,
exposed to spaceﬂight itself and ground—based models simu— differentiate into active osteoblasts. Lining cells have also
lating the unloading of microgravity, as well as to modeled been described as “resting” osteoblasts. The source of these
space radiation; and, ﬁnally, evidence for various mechanisms cells is presumed to be mesenchymal osteoblast precursors or
responsible for the bone alterations in the space environment. simply inactive osteoblasts (119).
A brief consideration of effective countermeasures for dis— Mature osteoblasts are classically described as plump,
use/zero gravity—induced bone loss will be included insofar cuboidal cells with a rich network of endoplasmic reticulum
as their efﬁcacy informs us about underlying mechanisms for and Golgi bodies, expressing alkaline phosphatases. When
altered structure and function of these skeletal/joint tissues in active, they appear in tight clusters along a bone surface,
this unique environment. We conclude withathorough reView under which can be seen osteoid, the organic bone matrix
of the much smaller literature describing the dense connec— synthesized and secreted by osteoblasts. Osteoid is composed
tive tissues and their adaptations to microgravity. Throughout, mostly of type I collagen and a ground substance rich in
gaps in knowledge will be identiﬁed. glycosaminoglycans, along with many noncollagenous pro—
teins (e.g., biglycan and decorin). Once formation actiVity
ceases, osteoblasts return to a quiescent state as ﬂat lining
BCICkg round cells or become encased in mineralizing matrix to become
. osteocytes or undergo apoptosis. Their maturation and actiV—
Bone b'OIOQY ity are regulated by a multitude of systemic endocrine, local
Bone is unique among tissues in that the vast bulk of its paracrine, and transcription factors (11). Endocrine factors
volume is mineralized extracellular matrix. There are two favoring increased osteoblast differentiation and/or actiVity
key types of bone, structurally speaking. Dense cortical bone include estrogen, insulin, and leptin. Negative systemic reg—
comprises shafts of the long bones and supportive shells at ulators include glucocorticoids, parathyroid hormone (PTH),
long bone epiphyses (ends of long bones beyond the growth and sympathetic neural input (128). Growth factors (232)
plate) and metaphyses, vertebrae, and ﬂat bones (e.g., pelvis), (e.g., TGF—B and IGF—1) and various cytokines (108) (notably,
surrounding the rich lattice—work of interconnected rods and the interleukins) also play important roles in local coordina—
plates that we call cancellous bone (also referred to as tra— tion of osteoblast actiVity.
becular or “spongy” bone; Fig. 1). Cancellous bone has a Histomorphometric assessment of osteoblast actiVity
very large surface area relative to its volume, most of which quantiﬁes bone surfaces covered by osteoblasts or by their
is in close communication with capillaries and other vessels product, unmineralized osteoid. A more powerful tool is
in the marrow compartment. These characteristics explains afforded by using ﬂuorochrome markers (administered twice,
in part why cancellous bone is often affected ﬁrst and most often aweek apart) to quantify the rate at which osteoid is min—
dramatically with altered endocrine status (e.g., declines in eralizing (mineral apposition rate), which usually parallels
circulating estrogen at menopause) or reduced mechanical formation rate of matrix (Fig. 2). Osteoblastic actiVity is often
loading (as during spaceﬂight) (119). assessed on a systemic level by measuring serum levels of
Mineralized matrix in all these bone compartments is cre— various proteins speciﬁc to the mature osteoblast phenotype,
ated and maintained by the independent and sometimes coor— such as osteocalcin, N—terminal propeptide of type I collagen
dinated actiVity of bone resorbing cells,osteoclasts, and bone— (PlNP) and bone—speciﬁc alkaline phosphatase (BSAP)
forming cells, osteoblasts, which can act only on existing (27, 279). Many argue that osteocalcin is more an indicator
bone surfaces: the periosteal (outer) and endocortical (inner) of bone turnover than exclusively a formation marker (93).
646 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"3","Comprehensive Physiology Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue
m - Cartilage
3°“ .I 8' 09”
marrow __
, Endosteum .' '50 Calelfled
ﬂavjv’ #293347. (cancellous) wf; cartilage
Epiphysis ,57534 ,,-;71/33.« -, -'
r-‘(sdx'lfg'f'risdx'lfd 2 P -
, 'jl' ‘7""7\""‘l'o’5,’;7'F-'C -' rlmary
,,_ . . -‘ ., __. .
167 ' e .,. , _.| 1,_ sponglosa
Metaphysis { 'J (Lg j} :9 Giriwm ‘ ‘
- '1 '; ff; ' p a e Secondary
Bone -
1 sponglosa
Cancellous bone
periosteum Longitudinal section
Endosteum \
/’ (cortical) \
. . ’
DlaphySIS Medullary
canal \ m
.. WK“ Haversian
| gm *fj’fz‘fy‘. SYStem
. ‘ ’ ll,‘ 4 \W ‘
. 31,1"" f/ﬁ/ﬂf’f.’ Cortical bone
' N. _-.~-~.’""~. .. v Cross section
Mgtﬁﬂﬁg/ V
1‘§:~ﬂ J~ ' ,' Y
Osteoclast
Psteoblast
Q /
ﬂ . ,. v: f. 1
“ .. .t ‘ ”Q3 0 O 0 0'0 ‘
""1- “:. v ' o? 09 ‘. i “l\
Lining I. W ; -.\‘\‘ e \
cell / ‘ w
\ Howshlp’s
if ‘ g, lacuna
OSteOCVte Bone cells
Figure 1 A typical long bone: anatomical regions, envelopes, compartments and bone cells. Epi-
physes are distal and proximal to growth plates while they are still open, but fuse with metaphyseal
compartments once the growth plates close. The maior bone ”envelopes"" or surfaces are the perios-
teum, endosteum (any bone surface bordering bone marrow in the medullary canal; also called ”endo-
cortical” it referring to inner border of cortical shaft), and intracortical Haversian canals, within which
are housed blood vessels and nerves. The insert at top right is an enlargement of cancellous bone
just below the growth plate. In the primary spongiosa adjacent to the growth plate, cartilage spicules
are gradually mineralized (black); secondary spongiosa refers to the lattice-work of cancellous rods
and plates that are fully mineralized. The cross—section of the cortical mid-diaphysis illustrates multiple
Haversian systems (osteons) and multiple osteocytes in lacunae, connected by canaliculi. Bone cells
illustrated at lower right are (from left) Hot, inactive lining cells, active osteoblasts (bone-torming cells),
osteocytes embedded in the mineralized matrix, and an active osteoclast, residing in the Howship’s
lacuna it has created by its resorptive action. Figure from Morey—Holton et al., 1996 (t 87), used with
permission.

Osteoclasts are histologically unique giant cells With mul— Which fuse into a giant cell and differentiate into a mature
tiple nuclei that can vary Widely in size and nuclear number; osteoclast. TWO major regulatory factors controlling osteo—
all have, however, a distinctive rufﬂed border, Which maXi— Clastogenesis and activity of mature osteoclasts are recep—
mizes surface area for secretion of lysosomal enzymes that are tor activator of NFK-B ligand (RANKL) and osteoprotegerin
necessary to breakdown mineralized matrix. This resorptive (OPG) (281). The stimulatory effect of RANKL 0n osteoclast
activity creates minute pits on the bone surface termed HOW- maturation and mature function is inhibited by OPG, Which
ship’s lacunae (or, more simply, resorption pits). They derive serves as a decoy receptor for RANKL. Although a few osteo—
from hematopoietic cells of macrophage—monocyte lineage, Clast regulators can act independent of RANKL (e.g., TNF—a
Volume 6, April 2016 647

"
"4","Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology
\
{g \
“b a \ _ ‘
7|\\—i—r . ‘— "" '— — —’— ——:III{ I ;—77 #77777 'V’»Hﬂ‘m ‘7 ¥—
'\
Cage control ‘1‘ 28 d unloaded
3:
_,.r-""_L/
Figure 2 BFR, as measured by tluorochrome label administration, decreases dramatically
in rodents subiected to hindlimb unloading, simulating the disuse of microgravity. Calcein,
iniected 2 and 9 days before the end of the experiment, binds to circulating calcium and
effectively labels those bone surfaces that are actively mineralizing in the 36 to 48 h postin-
iection. Measuring the average distance between labels yields mineral apposition rate (MAR);
quantitating surfaces with single and double labels yields % mineralizing surface (%MS/BS).
The product of these two measures is BFR. Skeletally mature rats exhibit 80% to 90% declines
in BFR within 2 weeks of hindlimb unloading.
and IL—1) (281) most act by modulating osteoblast/stromal thinking is that ﬂuid shear stress created by movement of
cell production of RANKL 0r OPG. Hence, an assessment of interstitial ﬂuid Within canaliculi (320) (Fig. 3) at bone sites
altered RANKL/OPG ratio can effectively predict the impact undergoing compression or tension is the signal that acti—
on resorptive activity. The important systemic regulators of vates a cellular response that is then signaled to bone surface
osteoclasts [PTH, Vitamin D, estrogen, and glucocorticoids cells to activate osteoblast activity. One of the more eXCit—
(endogenous or delivered pharmacologically)] each have dis— ing stories in bone biology of the last decade has been the
tinctive effects on this RANKL/OPG ratio (233). discovery of the osteocyte—speciﬁc protein sclerostin, Which
Histomorphometric measurement of bone surfaces inhibits Wnt signaling—induced osteoblast activity (159, 227).
covered by osteoclasts or by erosion pits (Howship’s lacunae) Increased mechanical loading of bone in animal experi—
provide measures of bone resorption activity, although ments diminishes sclerostin expression, hence allowing for an
ingenious adaptations of ﬂuorochrome labeling can quantify upregulation of Wnt signaling and increased bone formation.
extent, if not rate, of resorptive activity (49) in cross—sectional
comparisons among samples. More commonly, serum or
urine biomarkers are assessed;. most are collagen cross—link from Duncan &Tumer Calcif-Tissue Int. 57:344’1995
fragments released by degradation of extracellular matrix (N—
. . . . New bone
and C—terminal cross—linking telopeptides of type I collagen, _ _ matrix
N—terminal telopeptide (NTX)—I and C—telopeptide (CTX)—I; S'gnal Eggsjgﬁﬂggsthmugh
. . . . _ . . / \ ‘
deoxypyr1d1n011ne,DPD) .Isoform 5b Oftartrate res1stant ac1d 3:; A \
phosphatase (TRACPSb) is often used to estimate osteoclast O O \( 0 %
numbers' Mechanical , ) 'ﬁ
, , _ —. a—(ﬁ PGs. IGFs——-'© _
By far the most ub1qu1t0us bone cells are osteocytes, Slgnal ?4 v ? C Osteoprogemtor
housed individually in tiny void spaces in mineralized bone \ ”('0 +—<$/
called lacunae. Osteocytes communicate With each other and ‘bL W# 'D / BreOb
With bone surface cells by gap junctions connecting dendritic— 3'“? \0b
like cellular extensions housed in connecting Channels termed A- (32:0'
canaliculi (Fig. 1). Individual osteocytes can persist for up to 0"" JBLC
20 to 25 years, unless they are destroyed during osteoclastic . . . . .
resorptive activity 01, undergo apoptosis in response to vari— Flgure.3 F|UId shear stress en osteocytes and/or theIr dehdrltlc lero-
. 1 Th. t. f 11 'th b t 25 000 cesses IS the key mechanical Signal that IS transduced to a biochemical
Gus Signaé' TS SynCy mm 0 C6 8’ W1 3 011 ’ per response, resulting in the stimulation of osteoblast activity and new bone
mm2 in mlnerallzed bone, is thought to be the mechanosensor Formation. Only slight bone deformation is required to generate areas
. f b ’ . d d b 1 d. 58 Al h h within the millions otcanaliculo connecting lacunae housing osteocytes,
Hons. 0 one Hiatl‘lX pI‘O U96 y Ga mg ( ) t 011g thought to be the key mechanosensorsinside bone. Figure From Duncan
prec1se mechanisms are still being deﬁned, the current & Turner, 1995 (68), used with permission.
648 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"5","Comprehensive Physiology Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue
Otherwise, sclerostin provides for a constitutive inhibition of directions (210). This is indeed modeling, which often func—
bone formation, a mechanism posited over a decade ago by tions to add new bone to periosteal surfaces in response
two prescient bone biologists (171) (170). to large increases in daily loading stimuli. Expanding a
There are two terms generally used to describe the inde— long bone’s diameter at the periosteal surface is mechani—
pendent and coordinated activities of osteoblasts and osteo— cally advantageous, since small increments in a long bone’s
clasts, which are often confused: remodeling and modeling. moment of inertia can produce large increases in resistance to
Remodeling describes the highly coordinated actiVity (both in bending or fracture (247).
time and space) of severalosteoclasts and teams of osteoblasts This reView includes a section on lessons gleaned from
(designated as the Basic Multicellular Unit or BMU) (119). animal research about bone alterations with reduced or zero
Osteoclasts can be recruited to start resorption on any bone gravitational loading. The bulk of these data derive from
surface, but targeted remodeling is believed to be the mech— rodent (mice and rat) studies, which provide a useful mam—
anism by which microcracks (tiny defects 30—100 microns malian model for alterations in cancellous bone with reduced
in length inside bone) are repaired (302). Osteocyte apopto— gravity that simulate changes in human cancellous bone quite
sis may well be the initiating event signaling a new cycle of accurately [e.g., see reference (252)]. In fact, the ovariec—
remodeling, although the precise signaling mechanisms pro— tomized rat is the preclinical model of choice for pharmaceu—
moting recruitment of preosteoclasts and preosteoblasts (pro— tical intervention trials (126). Of course, mice are the species
genitors to fully differentiated osteoclasts and osteoblasts) of choice when genetic models are desired; the growing
to the remodeling site are yet to be deﬁned (247). Once prevalence of conditional knockouts (e.g., osteoblast—speciﬁc
resorption ﬁnishes (generally 1—3 weeks), teams of mature deﬁcit of IGF—I receptors) provides for powerful experimental
osteoblasts move in and synthesize enough bone matrix to ﬁll designs. An important caveat about the use of rodents in mod—
all (or almost all) of the volume of bone resorbed. This organic eling reduced gravity effects on bone is that animals smaller
matrix then begins to mineralize; this process is about 70% than ferrets generally lack the Haversian systems (Fig. 1)
complete within 10 days, but full mineralization takes some seen in human bone (292). The void space at the center of
months to complete (119). Hence any skeletal site which is each Haversian system houses blood vessels and nerves and
undergoing high turnover will have relatively undermineral— is often the initiation site for remodeling in long bones; hence,
ized bone, due to the prolonged time it takes for new bone if intracortical remodeling is pivotal to the research question,
matrix to achieve the same tissue mineral density as surround— larger animals (most typically dogs) must be used. See ref—
ing older tissue. erence (292) for an excellent discussion of the advantages
The duration of one full remodeling cycle thus requires of various animal models commonly used in bone biology
about 6 months in humans (119); this deﬁnes the minimum research.
amount of time it takes for the human skeleton to reach a
new homeostatic level of bone mineralization in response to . . .
an imposed regimen (e.g., reduced calcium intake, increased The dense connec’rlve ’rlssuesz.Tendon, Ilgamen’r,
mechanical loading). A tiny deﬁcit in volume of bone replaced m’rerver’rebrol d'SkSI and CO r’rllage
with each remodeling cycle accounts for the age—related bone Tendon and ligaments are dense ﬁbrous connective tissues
loss that is universally observed in humans after the age of with speciﬁc musculoskeletal functions. Their extracellular
30 to 35. The rate of aging—related bone loss can vary a matrix protein composition is primarily collagen type I with
good deal, depending on endocrine status, dietary intake, varying amounts of other collagen phenotypes (type 111, V,
and habitual exercise. Chronic disuse (or non—weight bearing) VI, XI, and XIV), proteoglycans, and other dry weight com—
typically results in accelerated remodeling, which increases ponents yet to be deﬁned (78). It is not appropriate to group all
intracortical porosity and, in cancellous compartments, can dense ﬁbrous connective tissues together into a homogeneous
diminish trabecular thickness, number and connectivity pool of tissues, since location and attachment sites dictate
(247). biomechanical function. Tendons attach skeletal muscle to
Modeling describes the independent actiVity of osteoclasts bone and are a Viscoelastic material. Ligaments span joints
and osteoblasts that is responsible for the large changes in and anchor bone at the proximal and distal ends and aid in the
bone shape during growth in the immature animal. To main— articulation of joints. Ligaments and tendons have the ability
tain the ﬂared shape of bone metaphyses next to joints dur— to adapt to best support locomotive movements during ambu—
ing rapid longitudinal growth, for example, osteoclasts must lation and exercise. Both tissue types respond by adapting to
resorb large sections of bone while osteoblasts add new bone cyclic load histories, local factors, and systemic factors as eVi—
to other surfaces (119). The dogma among bone biologists denced by tissue changes observed in the contexts of increased
until the mid—1980s was that modeling did not occur in the ground reaction forces (GRFs) (exercise and overuseinjuries),
adult skeleton. However, the use of precisely controlled exter— (56, 79, 104, 134, 135, 153, 165, 178, 179, 200, 216, 278) or
nal loading devices to study mechanical loading effects on decreased GRFs (immobilization, bed rest, and unloading)
bone revealed robust increases in osteoblast formation actiV— (5, 71, 105, 173, 195, 216, 217, 287, 296, 333).
ity with no preceding period of resorption when the loading Less attention has been given to dense ﬁbrous connec—
stimulus was large or applied in unique (nonphysiological) tive tissues with regards to acute or chronic eXposure to
Volume 6, April 2016 649

"
"6","Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology
spaceﬂight; important new information will be gleaned from Bone Alterations in Humans Exposed 1.0
current European Space Agency sponsored studies on carti— , , ,

lage aboard 188. On Earth, knees are injured more often than the MICFOQ l'ClVli')’ EnVI ronment

any other joint structure (7) and ligament injuries result in a Fewer than 500 humans have ﬂown in space to date; the
signiﬁcant disability in ap p roximately 100’000 p atients p er vast majority of data derives from those spending less than
year (104)' Despite current modalities Of treatment, 15% Of 3 weeks in low—earth orbit. Accumulating in—ﬁight data from
p .atients Witha.media1 co11atera111gament injur y develop ear 1y crewmembers has historically been difﬁcult due to small crew
81,3118 Of arthr1t1s, suggesting an incomp 1616, return to knee sta— numbers on each ﬂight. Further, variations in age, seX, ﬂight
b111ty. It 1s well known that phys1ca1 act1V1ty and/or exer01se duration, and compliance with exercise and diet regimes can
can signiﬁcantly modify the ultimate strength and extracel— confound 1 nt e rp r et ati o n of in—ﬁight data. N AS A policy on
1u1ar matrix turnover 1n tendons and ligaments, as W811 as privacy constraints that govern use of routinely collected crew
1n other (161186 ﬁbrous connective USSUCS (cartilage and 1nter— medical data by external researchers limits the rate of progress
vertebral disks); these adaptations are dependent on the type, in this a r e a as w e11 (21).

duration, magnitude, and frequency of exercise loading. Like— The Ru s si an s p a c e program has accumulated much more
Wise, it is well established that immobilization, disuse, and eXp eri e n C e in 1 on g— durati on ﬂight, since their Mir space sta—
injury can cause a reduction in extracellular matrix volume tion was 1 aun Ch e d 14 years before the International Space
in the dense ﬁbrous connective tissue; the reduction in load— Station (188) was ﬁrst occupied in 2000. Before 1990, there
ing cycles causing a cascade of catabolic and degradative was minimal sharin g of data b etW e en the US and Russian
events. , , programs; since the thawing of the Cold War, however, there

Despite the current understanding of dense ﬁbrous con— h . . .

, , , , , ave been multiple coordinated research efforts along W1th
nect1ve t1ssues, very little has been established regarding the advent of mixed American &Russian crews on Mir [e.g.,
the homeostasis of dense ﬁbrous connective tissues during s e e (1 50)]. C 011 ab orati on b etW een the two 11 ati ons’ sp a C e pro—
reduced gravitational loading and, speciﬁca11y, during space— grams has been quite active regarding animal samples and
ﬁght There have been yery few op p ortun1t1es to study the data; however, sharing of routinely collected medical data
biomechanical, biochemical, and molecular changes 1n ten— and experimental ﬁndings on American and Russian crew
don and ligament dpﬂng the 138? f9,“ decades Of spaceﬁight members is still challenging. This reVieW is self—limited to
research due to ethical and feas1b111ty concerns Of acquiring the English language literature; should future reviews be able
b1ops1es from astronauts and cosmonauts. Further, OP p 011.11— to include data available in the Russian language published
n1t1es to study adaptations Of (1611,86 ﬁbrous COHITCCFIVC US- literature, our appreciation of the human biomedical response
sues 1n animals exposed to spaceﬂight have been limited due to mi 0 r o g r aVity would no doubt be e nh an C e d.
to W,h016 host Of factors. In 11'6“, Of access ,tO spaceﬂight— Current methods of assessing bone health in humans
spe01ﬁc StUdleS to study the indirect and direct effects 9f include techniques that detect changes in (1) bone geometry,
altered GRFS on dense ﬁbrous eonnect1vet1ssues, rnosteXperi— mineral density, and structural integrity, (ii) bone formation
ments have been conducted us1ng the rodenth1nd11mb unload— and b o n e r e s o rpti o 11 vi a sy st e mi C bi o m ark e rs, and (iii) cal—
ing rnodel to mimic some of.the p hysiological adaptations Cium metabolism. Data documenting in—ﬂight bone changes
eXp er1enced by the body during spaceﬂight (186’ 18.9) To Will be addressed ﬁrst, followed by evidence for mechanisms
be brief,.based on a “Pm?“ Of ?Xp er1ments by bas1c and deduced from relative effectiveness of countermeasures for
orthopedic researchs01ent1sts, animals €161), rived Of normal bone loss and, ﬁnally, information on recovery of skeletal
GRFs through hindlimb. unloading eXh1b1t ligament and ten— integrity upon return to 1 g.
don strength Changes, ligament and tendon length Changes,
changes in tissue cross—sectional areas, and changes in the
dense ﬁbrous connective tissue extracellular matrix composi— . .
tion (5, 71, 105, 173, 195, 216, 217, 287, 296). Based on data A“?“’“°“~°’ '“ bone mass” geometryl and Strength
derived from 1988 to the present, it can be said that the struc— durlng spaceHIgh’r
ture and function of dense ﬁbrous connective tissues sub— The reduced mechanical loading of the microgravity enVi—
jected to acute hindlimb unloading ranging from 7 to 28 days ronment has direct and remarkably rapid effects on bone
are functionally compromised. Reloading experiments sug— structure and mechanical integrity. Current methods used to
gest that dense ﬁbrous connective tissues can recover over detect these alterations in human include dual X—ray absorp—
time (5,71, 105, 173,216,217, 287, 296) and that the rate of tiometry (DXA), peripheral quantitative computed tomogra—
recovery of structural integrity is probably faster than that phy (pQCT), Clinical CT (QCT), and ﬁnite element modeling
for adjacent bone affected by unloading. However, depending (FEM). Increased loads due to physical activity have been
upon the gradients of G—force exposure Where the recovery shown to increase skeletal mass and its mechanical strength
occurs (moon, Mars or Earth), there is arisk of injury to struc— (137). Bone strength is altered by changes in both exter—
tures containing dense ﬁbrous extracellular matrix materials nal cross—sectional area, cortical thickness, and mineraliza—
and they may be impacted by the severity of tissue adaptation tion quality (in cortical bone compartments) as well as by
and the duration of microgravity eXposure. cancellous bone mass (BV/TV) and its microarchitecture
650 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"7","Comprehensive Physiology Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue
[e.g., trabecular number and thickness, connectivity of tra— adding new bone at the periosteal surface in a long bone or at
beculae) (187)]. the femoral neck can improve bending strength, even with no
Although the gravitational environment of spaceﬂight Change in total bone mineral content (BMC), by increasing
unloads the entire skeleton, bone decrements are most pro— the cross—sectional moment of inertia (roughly dependent on
nounced in the spine and the lower limbs, sites experienc— cross—sectional area) (8). Data collected on early ISS crew
ing the largest deﬁcit in aXial loading forces (55). LiVing in members document highly signiﬁcant decrements in integral,
the free—fall of low Earth orbit requires relatively little use cortical, and particularly cancellous volumetric bone mineral
of the lower limbs, since astronauts often use their arms to density (VBMD) of the femoral neck without any compen—
propel themselves Via hand—holds throughout the space sta— satory increases in proximal femur volume or femoral neck
tion. In addition, the majority of mission tasks require mus— cross—sectional area after their 4 to 6 month missions (146).
cular activity of the hands and arms rather than feet and legs. However, more recent analyses performed on a subset of
Earlier evidence showed that mass deﬁcits in the tibia were the original crew members studied reveal a small increase
much greater than those in the radius (55, 309). At least one in total femoral volume and femoral neck cross—sectional
paper reports increases in density of the skull (245). Com— area along with a decline in cortical volume, suggesting
prehensive DXA studies of altered bone mass in cosmonauts in—ﬂight increases in resorption at the endocortical surface
returning from Mir space station ﬂights of 126 to 438 days (46,147). The loss of bone VBMD at these sites remain large,
conﬁrmed preservation of upper limb BMD but loss of lower so no increase in total BMC accompanied the slight periosteal
limb BMD at 1% to 1.6% per month (150). Notably, this rate expansion observed. The declines in cortical VBMD may also
of loss is about tenfold more rapid than that observed in post— reﬂect an increase in cortical bone porosity (46).
menopausal women (150). A key unknown is whether this rate The functional concern about these Changes in bone mass
of bone loss will continue unabated over a multiple—year mis— and geometry relates to their impact on increasing fracture
sion or if the rate of bone loss would diminish over time. Clues risk at the affected bone site. It is important to note that these
might derive from the pattern of cancellous bone loss incurred increased risks are not a concern in low—Earth orbit, but only
after spinal cord injury (SCI), which tends to plateau after 2 come into play upon increased mechanical loading during
to 3 years postinjury at ~50% below preinjury levels (85). return to Earth or exploration of planetary surfaces such as
SCI is, however, an imperfect analog for spaceﬂight, owing the Martian or Lunar environments. To fully understand the
to the major disruption of neural tonic input and resulting functional impact of these losses in cortical and cancellous
paralysis of the surrounding musculature. Even if this bone VBMD, the structural integrity of the lower limb bones must
loss in healthy, neurally intact crew members complying with be assessed. Mathematical predictions of bone strength based
countermeasures is halved (246), a 25% reduction in BMD on QCT data of ISS crew members reveal dramatic decreases
at any bone site might result in a large increase in fracture (16%—17%) in strength of the femoralneck under bending and
risk. However, lacking Clear epidemiological evidence vali— compression forces as compared to preﬂight values (147). A
dating what the impact of a speciﬁc reduction in femoral neck calculated indeX of compressive strength for crew members’
BMD on femoral neck fractures in otherwise healthy men lumbar spine declined by ~2% per month during ﬂight (146).
and women matching crew members ages (35—55 years), we A much more precise estimation of bone strength can be
cannot with certainty predict fracture risk for crew members provided by FEM, often employed in engineering settings to
on long—duration missions. perform “Virtual” strength testing of a structure. Data from
The application of improved methods of noninvasive QCT scans can be used to create small volumetric elements
imaging of bone structure (pQCT and Clinical QCT) post or voxels of particular predeﬁned dimensions, densities, and
—2000 reveals that the most signiﬁcant bone loss in micro— material properties to create a computerized 3D model of
graVity occurs in the cancellous bone compartment. The some region of interest. FEM has been employed to conduct
largest declines in BMD typically occur in cancellous—rich Virtual mechanical testing of structures of irregular geometry,
bone sites such as the calcaneus (146, 253, 290) lumbar spine diverse material composition, and complex loading enViron—
(46, 146, 199, 253), distal tibia (55, 309), proximal femur ments, and hence is incredibly useful as applied to human
(147, 268), and femoral neck (46, 146, 147, 253). Compar— bone, incorporating Changes in geometry as well as bone den—
ing bone responses in two cosmonauts ﬂying 1— and 6—month sity computed at the voxel level (131). Algorithms applying
missions, increasing time in microgravity ampliﬁed cancel— loading vectors can then be applied at various angles to exam—
lous bone losses in the distal tibial metaphysis and eventually ine the combined effects different structural Changes have on
affected cortical regions as assessed by QCT (55). A subse— the total strength and elastic modulus of the whole object.
quent publication examining a larger group of cosmonauts FEM is abetter predictor of fracture risk than DXA and pQCT,
conﬁrmed that deﬁcits to cortical bone compartments were as evaluated by comparing the prediction of femoral neck
not detectable until after roughly 2 months in space (309). fracture in human cadaveric samples (53,130) and in prospec—
The use of three—dimensional (3D) methods such as Clin— tive studies of elderly men and women (132). Patient—speciﬁc
ical QCT has enabled examination of bone geometry as well FEM using QCT images provides for noninvasive assessment
as mineral content/density, which provides important insight of maximal loads the bone can resist with imposition of loads
into altered bone strength and fracture risk. For example, as experienced during standing, walking, running, or during
Volume 6, April 2016 651

"
"8","Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology
(A) (B)
(a) (a) Stance loading
\ O
'l o
'5
20 >\
-!§§iiiilil:ll:l!!! --
.I ~—- _ — - I A
IﬁL’i'iﬁll-IIEL-EL—H'illﬁhl' - _._-..;:_‘._,;__,.-—..-,, - - - - - + - - - - - - Premenopausal +-
i‘IIIiii-‘iuii:iuiuiimll-t. In""!!!j.-‘;-'§iu"" ""
IIII ~ ‘ IIIIII' , ,..'Ir'-—.-.- - ""11'.- 16 5
“VIII'-""""""-'"""" lillI|!1—_-.:;:--..-_~;.!'_IIIII_IIL-‘,u g A p
.:u--.==::.-.'.-.::::=:...—Ei:g;:-t==::'a'.!t=ttti%. 0” \‘
lu'lIIIn-I-II-IIII‘II "" 1-.--“ Ilil'.’""~“ \w “A '
l.gnnln IIIIIIIIII .ILI !.-!!!IIL iningm LL . .
h1l==:lllﬂilllllIIIEa”:'ii'!!}=}=:.ﬁﬂllﬂﬂl u. ‘
“-‘-!..-.-'.-'.-:-'.t‘:’.*!it.i'-.t':!:'-.-.-:=:=:::iﬁtl==t=§=tiiitt ‘ ‘ °
“""--!.:.:-:-;.1.-.'=:a:ataaégrﬂamaaﬁtmfgyt 12 _ - _ - - - _ _ _ _ _ _ - _ _ - Elderly +
“'I=='-'-'-'.'.I""""'EJ:H=""’FJH I
79““III""J'I'II-til-ﬂ'u'tml. ”'
'!!L--.II.-'E. III IIIII III!""
Ir-LllI-nin_jI-hI-IIJIIH' ‘
Inﬁnﬁg-n-JI. Inqmlm nut,
I_--I._. .llI-IIIII-IIn-lll’” a
#:aaisa:=J-§=ag::§=ggﬁit 8
~ I. . II II I u I,
:§:asasazasisasgég» o 2 4 6
I .. I' ' .
Easgiiggﬁgﬂ} Tlme (months)
(b) (b) Fall loading
1 .
O
A 4.5
4
WW ;\
.1 21:27? *‘\\
tq‘kt 3/36 g 3.5 \+ * .. <
gﬁﬁ¢§hkéﬁ>§y$¥ﬁf§¥$¥ m _ _ _ _ _ - _ _ - _ _ _ _ _ _ Premenopausal +-
~ .A‘” 5(3),: "":1 ,A‘. 7,"" 2‘. x""; ’ ~ xu‘r ‘/ "" ‘/ 'V' -
.té-*..‘~s;x/2E§I:<¢zimﬁr‘xx‘RK-3193v ’--‘«;>:f>i€<3x*;i:> :fX/xfka \w ' ’ '
rﬂ;¢;x;pa'zxcfggﬁgnikg><k;\;g;:g;;x<‘ §X5; U} A\,
“1511""'X21fié/‘§?§f§§f§¢‘¥-ii;341‘éﬁfzﬁfﬁiﬁéﬁ’fff‘xﬁé;. N! ‘
k-‘ivsz/gpgézMM&érgﬁa52:233.agaisaééx/i;ﬁre:
KW ~>.-’/:>?~/~ éémxa-yx “MM ivé-XAX ‘9”, 2 5 . A o
""Yﬁ‘XELX-é'éi‘fﬁi»:.&T%;:fftﬁfxﬁf¥6122421325451354537 ' *‘
W44wr/ “Vietéx/ﬂééjax
w/ﬁwe/éj,’§xkﬁ/CY§§/ - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - _ _ _ _ - Elderly -+-
w»23.1w:.r/‘k'wév’ag i'"" a
gasﬁkgxﬂﬁigéi‘éaéﬁ?’
.1 - <1. ‘. v‘ 4.4%???
‘1"" \‘Yﬂf/K‘ /‘»/ .
o 2 4 6
Time (months)
Figure 4 Proximal temur strength deteriorates over 4.5 to 6 months in low earth orbit. Panel A illustrates sample finite element model
(FEM) of one crew member’s proximal femur derived From QCT data illustrating loading in (a) singIe-Ieg standing and (b) a Fall to the side
impacting the greater trochanter. In panel B, individual data For 13 ISS crew members (40-55 years, 12 males, 1 Female) are detailed for
pre- and posttlight FEM-computed proximal femur strength normalized to body weight (FFE/BW) for both stance (c1) and to“ (b) loading. The
dotted lines represent median values For femoral neck strength assessed by the same patient—specitic FEM procedure in populations of healthy
premenopausal (36-45 years; top line) and elderly (62-81 years; bottom line) Caucasian women. Figure from Keyak et al., 2009 (131),
used with permission.
a fall (131). A recent NASA report recommends more fre— underestimating fracture risk. Furthermore, FEM predicted
quent application of QCT and FEM to more effectively deﬁne that the rate of strength decreases per month in—ﬂight in these
fracture risk for crew members returning from 188 missions healthy crew members (age 40—55 years) were ﬁve to ten
(202). times the rate observed in postmenopausal women, indicat—
FEM estimates of femoral neck strength in 188 crew pre— ing a much greater risk of hip fracture, especially for male
dict deﬁcits in proximal femoral strength of up to 5.0% per astronauts (131), upon return to 1 g loading conditions.
month for standing and up to 3.9% per month with a fall to As previously mentioned, deﬁcits in the structural
the side (Fig. 4). The total magnitude of bone strength loss integrity of lower limb bones impose the greatest fracture risk
in those crew members (middle—aged males, 1 female) losing When astronauts return to Earth, or land on a reduced gravity
the most were similar to lifetime losses documented in earth— planetary surface, after a prolonged sojourn in 0 g. Therefore,
bound Caucasian women (131). DXA BMD data on these FEM has also been used to model hypothetical fracture risk
same crew members decline by roughly 0.4% to 1.8% per in both men and women upon reentry into a 1 g or partial g
month, illustrating that non—FEM methods may be grossly environment after prolonged periods of microgravity in two
652 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"9","Comprehensive Physiology Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue
Table 1 Calculated Fracture Risk with Running or Falling in 1 g MOI‘C recently, procollagen type I carboxy—terminal propep—
(Earth) or 3/ 8 9 (Mars) After 6 Months SOiOUF“ i“ MiCFOQFOViW tide (PICP) has been proven to be an effective marker of
bone formation (77, 206). During the synthesis of type 1 col—
Men Women lagen used in bone formation, PICP is cleaved from the type
I collagen ﬁber and released into the bloodstream. There—
Running on Earth Moderate Moderate fore, increased levels of PICP have shown to be indicative of
Running on Mars Low Low increased bone formation (206). Markers of bone resorption
Falling on Earth High High are usually found in urinary samples, although a few can be
measured in serum samples. Breakdown of type I collagen
Falling 0“ Mars MOdemte High during bone resorption leads to the increased production of
Estimates of fracture risk were derived with finite element modeling 00119569 CIOSSJmk. degradailo.“ prOdUCtS SUCh as NTX’ CTX’
using measured changes in femoral neck VBMD and geometry in ISS pyrldlmum CIOSS—hnks, pyrldlnohne, DPD, and hehcal pep-
crew members. Risk isﬂdetined relotiveﬂto computed factor of risk (FOR) tide (HP) Increases in urine 01‘ serum levels of these collagen—
2039;? [17/ 325?: 1 ZFStRFngt 1T0?ihga::o:el:cd)itiegé?h :9 ”i; derived proteins are interpreted as evidence of increased bone
femoral neck equals the loads imposed by running or falling to the side. TCSOYPtiOH activity.
Impact forces on.the Mars suttoce included the weight of spocesuits Data from short and long—duration mission crew members
Sgﬁggz-igﬂ'ggobﬁg ?:th Btltoeﬁgglgggmg ??haffner’ used by consistently demonstrate increased levels of bone resorption.
I ' ' Early evidence from the Skylab missions clearly indicated
increased urine calcium; analysis of archived specimens With
conditions: With a sideward fall and during running (Table 1). cross—link assays developed decades later conﬁrmed signiﬁ—
Computed fracture risk after a 6—month soj ourn in micrograv— cant increases in multip 16 markers of bone resorption (262)'
ity is moderately to highly elevated With a fall in both Earth Increased urinary CTX and NTX urine levels can be, seen as
and Martian (3/8 g) gravitational environments, while the risk early as the eighth day in space (43)' Later StUdleS 1n astro—
during running back in 1 g (Earth) is moderate (37). The low nauts Wh? were aboard the 18,8 for 4 t0 6 months conﬁrmed
fracture risk seen for running on Mars is likely due to the fact thls early increase bone resorption markers (7570—12570 above
that, even With a full spacesuit required for activities on the p reﬂight values). Notably,.these markers remain elevatedby
Martian surface, the total loads imposed on the femoral neck 50% to 75% above baseline for several days after landing
during running in 3/8 g are far lower than on Earth. These (263)' , , , , , , ,
ingenious estimations of fracture risk also incorporated the , Very me?“ eVidence inciicates a p otent1a1 mitigation Of
impact of contraction of atrophied muscle surrounding the this increase ,1n bone resorp £1011 in those 1,88 crew members
hipjoint during running or falls. us1ng.NASA s advanced res1stance exerCise device (aRED)
One additional concern related to fracture risk for crew aHOWHFg for higher CXCIFISF: 1ntens1t1es and, importantly,
members is the impact of the spaceﬂight environment on the achieving adequate caloric intake. HOWCVCF’ those resorp—
fracture healing process, should a fracture occur in—ﬂight or tion biomarkers Pp on landing were 5?” Signiﬁcantly ele—
upon landing on a reduced gravity planetary surface. These vated above p reﬂight values and remaineci elexfated for the
studies require (for ethical reasons) the use of animal mod— ﬁrst 30 days Of normal weight—bearing act1V1ty.1n 1 g (26.”
els; the existing consensus is that fracture healing is sub— It is p oss1b1e.that the salutary eftects Of the higher 1‘”de
stantially delayed in animals subjected to actual microgravity achievable Wlth, the aRED.comb1ned Wlth Imprf’Yed caloric
or hindlimb unloading (8). Given the impact of radiation on intake resulted in sorne gain in p cm? teal appos1tion. by new
. . . bone formation (or mitigated resorption on endocortical sur—
osteoprogenitor cells, future studies should focus on the addi— , , ,
tive impact of unloading and space—relevant radiation eXpo— faces). [The tnvo—d1mens1onainature Of DXA data disallows
sure on the fracture healing process. any conﬁrmation of changes in bone cross—sectional geome—
try, from Wthh deductions can be made about gains or losses
on particular bone surfaces] Nonetheless, the impact of bet—
ter nutrition and increased resistance exercise intensity on
'5 redueecl skeletal. mass Clue to altered bone mitigating bone resorption in cancellous bone compartments
Formatlon, resorptlon, or both? appears to be small, given that this effect was observed in only
Biomarkers of bone formation and bone resorption, assessed one (urinary HP) out of ﬁve resorption markers measured in
in serum or urine samples, can provide valuable insight into the aRED group (261). Given the relatively long duration of
Whether impaired osteoblast activity or accelerated osteoclast one remodeling cycle in human bone (3—4 months), it should
activity, respectively, is responsible for the bone loss With not be surprising to see some additional small decrements in
microgravity. The most common markers of bone formation BMD following return to 1 g, if osteoclast activity has been
used in research include osteocalcin and BSAP. Osteoblasts strongly stimulated during the mission itself. These changes
secrete both of these proteins as part of the calciﬁcation pro— could lead to altered structural integrity of bone in the ﬁrst few
cess in the bone matrix and can be detected in the serum. months after return to 1 g, and raise the clear possibility of a
Volume 6, April 2016 653

"
"10","Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology
large imbalance between muscle strength (Which is restored increased serum calcium and dramatically increased urine cal—
Within weeks) and the mechanical integrity of bone at muscle Cium observed in crew members is associated With decreased
insertion sites (202). levels of PTH (263). Meticulous stable isotope studies have
Data on serum biomarkers for bone formation marker leV— revealed a decrease in bone calcium deposition (bone forma—
els are less consistent. Early evidence conﬁrmed the decrease tion) and a signiﬁcant increase in mobilization ofbone mineral
in bone formation rate (BFR) previously documented in ani— by resorption (260,263). The loss of calcium from mineral—
mal models (55, 309). Astronauts aboard the Mir space sta— ized matrix of bone is due to a combination of decreased
tion for 21 days and 180 days were found to have signiﬁcant calcium absorption from the gut and increased bone resorp—
decreases in serum markers for bone formation [osteocalcin, tion, both contributing to increased urinary calcium excre—
BSAP, and PICP] (43,55). PICP decreased by 60% below pre— tion and a negative calcium balance of —234 g/day (263).
ﬂight levels as early as the eighth day in microgravity (43). Hence, it is now believed that the decreased mechanical loads
Later studies revealed that, during 4 t0 6 month missions 0n the skeleton during spaceﬂight are the primary driver
aboard the ISS, crew members eXhibited decreased levels of inducing increased osteoclastic activity, mobilizing calcium
osteocalcin and BSAP early in ﬂight, but these levels nor— from mineralized bone matrix into the Circulation. This leads
malized as the mission continued (263). In contrast, others to a negative feedback to the parathyroid glands, inhibit—
have noted no Changes in osteocalcin levels throughout 3— ing PTH secretion. This results in downregulated renal 10(—
to 6—month missions (261, 262). Consistent increases in all hydroxylase activity, resulting in reduced conversion of 25—
bone formation markers have been observed upon return to (OH) D3 to 1,25—(OH2)D3 and contributing to the decline
1 g, reaching levels above preﬂight levels after 2 t0 3 weeks in intestinal absorption and renal reabsorption of calcium
(43,55, 263). These increases in bone formation markers post— (263).
ﬂight reﬂect the osteogenic effects of increased mechanical LOW UV exposure and insufﬁcient dietary intake of
loading (full weight—bearing and rehabilitative exercise) in a Vitamin D in—ﬂight reduce the amount of Vitamin D pre—
1 g environment. cursors synthesized in skin and liver, reducing 25—(OH)D3
stores available for conversion to serum 1,25—(OH2)D3
. . . . . . levels (260,263). Early trials at calcium and/or Vitamin D
Alfera’rlons m COIC'Um me’raboIIsm durlng spaceHIgh’r supplementation (400 IU/d) in ﬂight did not mitigate bone
Normal calcium metabolism is primarily regulated by losses (101, 341). Recently, Vitamin D status and effective
the actions of blood calcium levels, PTH, and 1,25— levels of supplementation have been re—evaluated, and NASA
dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25—(OH2)D3, the bioactive form of now suggests Vitamin D supplement doses of 800 IU/day
Vitamin D) (263). These molecules have direct or indirect (261). Recent evidence indicates signiﬁcant mitigation of
effects on bone remodeling, renal function, and intestinal BMD losses at multiple bone sites in crew members ingesting
absorption. Dietary calcium is normally absorbed from the this increased daily dose of Vitamin D and also performing
intestinal tract and enters the Circulation. Calcium can then resistance exercise at higher intensities (261). [Since all
(i) combine With phosphate to be stored as hydroxyapatite crew members Changed both nutritional intake and exercise
crystals in the bone; (ii) transported intracellulary for use intensity, it is impossible, however, to conﬁrm the separate
in metabolism and signaling pathways; or (iii) be ﬁltered effects of these two factors] Other stimulators of increased
through the renal tubules of the kidneys and excreted in bone resorption such as high dietary intake of sodium
the urine. Blood levels of total calcium in normal, healthy Chloride (80) and animal protein intake (344), which can both
adults are tightly regulated Within a narrow range of induce mild metabolic acidosis, may exacerbate bone loss and
2.12 to 2.62 mmol/L. Declines in blood calcium lead to have been investigated in ground—based bed rest studies (see
increased secretion of PTH, Which in turn activates renal later).
10c—hydr0xylase activity, leading to increased conversion of Increased calcium urine content elevates risk for develop—
25—(OH) D3 to 1,25—(OH2)D3. This latter molecule is the ing renal stones;hence, any countermeasures that can mitigate
active Vitamin D metabolite Which increases calcium absorp— the increased bone resorption observed during spaceﬂight are
tion in the gut and calcium reabsorption in the renal tubules, likely to reduce renal stone risk as well. There are anecdotal
boosting serum calcium levels. Hence, increased Circulating reports of at least one crew member WhO has experienced
PTH normalizes serum calcium levels Within several hours a renal stone in—ﬂight, Which could severely impact mission
of any Challenge that might tend to decrease serum calcium. goals and success. Decreased ﬂuid intake during spaceﬂight
Dramatic increases in urine and fecal calcium Within exacerbates stone formation risk, as it allows for supersatu—
7 days of liVing in microgravity, ﬁrst documented on the Sky— ration of calcium oxalate and uric acid salts and increased
lab missions over 30 years ago (221),Were the ﬁrst human data time for renal stone formation (323). Fortunately, ingest—
suggesting that signiﬁcant bone loss was aconsequence of life ing potassium Citrate, Which alkalinizes urine and mitigates
in low—earth orbit. It was reasonable to conjecture that there urine supersaturation, combined With increasing ﬂuid intake
might be an endocrine mechanism for the elevated urine cal— appears to effectively mitigate this elevated stone risk (323),
Cium, to wit, increased serum PTH driving bone resorption, Which risk can extend into the postﬂight period upon return
as observed in primary hyperparathyroidism. However, the to earth (214).
654 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"11","Comprehensive Physiology Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue
Efficacy of in-High’r countermeasures allotted a 2—h exercise period, the total loaded time during
Various exercise countermeasures have been utilized from CXCICISC averaged only about 43 min in StUdleS quantifying
the start of the Russian and US space programs starting with daily loads quite pre01sely (48); much Of the time allotment
basic bungee cord exercises in the very tight quarters of the 1s spentlolrll Settlng-llipri); stoytvmg CXEICISC 631111? ment 31:1? (in
Gemini capsules [see Cavanagh et al. 2005 (47) for an excel— p ersona ygiene. .u er, 1 may e s1mp y imposs1 e ,0
. . . . replace all loading incurred during a 24—h day in 1 g even if
lent overV1ew of exer01se countermeasures]. Should in—ﬂight 1 h f d ,1 , , h' (1
exercise be effective in mitigating bone loss, this would be seveira ours O talt ytelxermiing (wereatc 1eve ' , ,
encouraging evidence that it is truly the deﬁcit in mechanical Epm‘lemeﬁ Sd ,0 , e on 05? £16,818 ance; 63:21:65 6:31:11)—
loading thatis the key driver ofboneloss. However, signiﬁcant men averetsut :h in limes: oa 1ngf(upto C g) a is
bone loss after low—earth orbit missions has been consistently more cons1sen roug on e range 0, mo 1911' rew mem—
documented in Russian and American crews even in to the Mir bers us1n g this advance res1stance exer01se dCVICC (the aRED),
and 188 era (146, 309). The only exercise devices available to imp 1611.16311th in 2009 aboard the 188’ ,eXhlblted very Slgmﬁ‘
crew members aboard Mir were treadmills a cycle ergome— cant mitigation of BMD losses at multiple bone s1tes. Whole
. . . . body BMD was actually maintained over the 6—month mis—
ter, and bungee cords for low—1ntens1ty res1stance exer01ses. , , ,
Declines in DXA—measured bone mass in cosmonauts after 4 810118 and the usual sup p ress1on Of p arathyr01d hormone was
. . blunted. As mentioned earlier in the discussion of calcium
to 14 months aboard the Mir space station were comparable
to the deﬁcits seen in bed rest subjects without any access to metabolism, there was,however, m1n1malev1dencethataRED
exercise countermeasures (150) users exhibited any mitigation of bone resorption during the
This lack of success in preventing bone decrements mission and in the early weeks of recovery on Earth as com—
with exercise countermeasures suggests that (i) other factors 11:11:31 t0 Ctrew ?ZTbegiﬁsmg the ﬁp rev:?‘ls gfenﬁration ??tertlrﬂ
beyond mechanical unloading of the skeleton are major con— 1 8.318321: )' 1 U?C];);141§II:C 1: i t ese m: 1ga e
tributors to this bone loss or (ii) that the exercise countermea— ofsses 1:11 , 1 .rrtieastires f0 b hr??? all 0 main :Earg;
sures are simply not yet effective enough in replacing the daily 9 m? amCClaFgli/Iegﬂ i] O (1316’ :11 If thh reqéntre . d
mechanical loads as experienced in 1 g on Earth. [Controlled imaging an 'd anaﬂystest. one]; efessiﬂ :86 ala p row :1
intervention trials with actual crew members are impossible, encouraging CV1 ence .a 1 may e eas1 e 0 rep ace muc
since no crew members can ethically be required to avoid all Of the daily 1 g loads Wlth the ap p rop r1ate CXCICISC hardware.
exercise during a mission.] Cavanagh et al. addressed the latter :Irlonlically, 1tf1tshh11ghly unllikely/ that crﬁvggnembers W11 11 have
concern by having crew members exercise with instrumented ,6 nxury 0 e ”36 V0 urne mass a , on an 63p .ora 10H
inserts in their shoes. Their results reveal that peak GRFs dur— m1ss1on to Mars, given stringent ant101pated restrictions on
ing walking and running aboard the 188 are reduced by 25% volnﬂtehandIrlnasslin.eXpllortation—Ielass 81p lacegraft. f th k 1
and 46%, respectively, as compared to the same activities per— oug rep aolng OS mec 211.11% oa mg 0 e S e e—
formed on Earth (Fig. 5) (48). Although ISS astronauts are ton appears to be reasonably effective, this may not be sufﬁ—
cient without optimizing nutritional intake and avoiding the
catabolic consequences of prolonged negative energy balance
(57). It is important to remember that those crew members
180 exhibiting better retention of bone during 6—month ISS mis—
160 _ sions using the aRED also consumed more calories and pro—
I'—_- tein than previous iRED users, so not all improvements in
t t t t . . . . .
m 140 I maintaining bone mass can be attributed to the increased exer—
§ 120 Cise loads alone. In the past, many astronauts were consuming
g 100 I as little as 70% to 80%. of their calculated energy require—
8 I ' (02mg ments, leading to a loss in body mass of 10% to 15% (com—
""E 80 - . pared to preﬂight values) and giving rise to the term “space
g 60 I “_ anorexia” (101). Although average food intake has improved
E I in the ISS era to nearly meet energy needs (261), there are still
40 I ‘w unanswered questions regarding microgravity—induced alter—
20 ‘7 . ations in taste, appetite, and gastrointestinal function (57).
0 I v ‘ Beyond the value of Vitamin D as noted earlier, deﬁcits in
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 Vitamin Khave been hypothesized to contribute to bone loss
ln-Shoe Peakforce magnitude (BW) in microgravity. Vitamin K acts as a coenzyme for gamma—
Figure 5 Foot forces oboord ISS are much reduced compared to l g. glutamylcarboxylase, WhiCh catalyzes the pOSttranSIational
In-shoe peok force magnitudes recorded during activities of daily living carboxylation Of glutamate res1dues 1n prOtemS' OSteocalcm’ a
on Earth and aboard ISS. Both magnitude and frequency of the GRFs gamma—carboxyglutamate protein synthesized by osteoblasts
Observed 1“ l 9 are reduced onboord '55- NO GRF'S > 2 X BW were and stored in mineralized bone matrix, is normally modiﬁed
recorded in microgravity (as seen in l g), with the vast majority of peak h. d h d d . . .
forces during running in 0 g at l .6 x BW or less. Figure from Covonogh by t 15 enzyme an t us epen em on Vltamm K' TWO er
et al., 2010 (48), used with permission. cosmonauts exhibited increased levels of undercarboxylated
Volume 6, April 2016 655

"
"12","Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology
osteocalcin and increased urinary excretion of the resorption member still had a deﬁcit of 2.5% in the tibial cancellous
marker CTX, suggesting that altered Vitamin K activity with mass and no signiﬁcant restoration of lost cortical mass as
spaceﬂight could contribute to increased bone resorption (43). compared to preﬂight values (55). However, the extent of
In older adults, undercarboxylation of osteocalcin is associ— recovery efforts (i.e., resistance exercise training and weight—
ated with an increased risk of hip fracture (303); supplementa— bearing aerobic activities) during rehabilitation was not eluci—
tion of Vitamin K can reverse osteocalcin undercarboxylation dated. More complete data were collected by another French
and diminish bone resorption in elderly women (136). More group, which examined Changes in 11 cosmonauts participat—
recent evidence from 188 crew members, however, found no ing in a rehabilitation program after 6—month stays on Mir
changes in serum phylloquinone and markers of Vitamin K— (details of the program were not provided) (309). Immediate
dependent protein turnover after 2 to 6 months aboard the ISS postﬂight deﬁcits to the cortical shell BMD of the distal tibia
(347). The same report Cites very similar results in three bed averaged 1.8% and to the cancellous BMD of the distal tibia
rest studies (21—90 days in duration) and a 14—day saturation averaged roughly 5.4%, but with huge variability noted in
dive study, all suggesting minimal involvement of Vitamin K the magnitude of loss, particularly for cancellous bone. After
in bone loss in spaceﬂight analogs. There are other nutrients 6 months of weight bearing recovery, none of the cosmonauts
that, in excess, may exacerbate bone loss (sodium Chloride BMD values returned to preﬂight levels in either bone com—
and animal protein) that have been evaluated in bed rest trials partment (309). Therefore, recovery periods roughly equal
and are discussed later. to the time period spent in microgravity do not fully restore
One key point of note is the high level of individual vari— mass or BMD losses, at least at this susceptible bone site
ability observed in the magnitude and perhaps rate of bone loss (55, 309).
that occurs among astronauts during sojourns in micrograV— More recent QCT—based studies have focused on longer
ity, in addition to wide variability in starting values preﬂight. recovery periods and include valuable information on bone
Cancellous bone in the distal tibia after 6 months aboard Mir geometry as well as BMD, providing further insight into the
ranged from 2% to 24%; these Changes range from a neg— mechanisms of bone restoration upon return to Earth. After
ligible loss to deﬁcits equal to those observed in the ﬁrst one year, totalBMC was restored at the lumbar spine, femoral
6 months following spinal cord injury (309). Preﬂight val— neck, and proximal femur, but total (integral, including cor—
ues for bone mass and geometry vary a good deal based on tical shell and cancellous core) VBMD was not (46, 147),
ethnicity, preﬂight physical activity, age, and gender. In addi— remaining at ~92% of preﬂight values, respectively (147).
tion, in—ﬂight exercise times and activities as well as nutri— Over this 1 year of recovery, cortical shell VBMD did not
tional intake often vary between astronauts, thus introducing Change signiﬁcantly, whereas the cancellous compartment
further complications (48). Even when controlling for these VBMD increased slightly in the proximal femur sites dur—
confounding factors in ground—based bed—rest studies, large ing recovery, but still remained at 89% to 93% of preﬂight
amounts of variability in the response to unloading may still values, respectively (46, 147). Ominously, cancellous VBMD
been seen (see discussion later). This variability may man— in the lumbar spine continued to decline during recovery in
date individualizing predictive measures for fracture risk, in— 1 g (46). Compensatory Changes are eVident, however, in bone
ﬂight countermeasures, and rehabilitation efforts. Deﬁning geometry; total bone tissue volume and cortical shell volume
the sources of this individual variability (e.g., effect of larger increased at the femoral neck (46, 147) and proximal femur
starting values for BMD, genetic, or seX differences) should (147). In addition, femoral neck cross—sectional areas after 1
be a key priority for future research. year of 1 g recovery were 5% to 6% greater than preﬂight
values, with much smaller increases in lumbar spine vertebral
body cross—sectional area (46, 147).
. These data suggest that the periosteal surface is the most
How reveFSIlole ore Skelel‘f'l losses Upon re’rum ’ro responsive during reloading, with new bone formation stim—
normal grav'lal'onal loadlng? ulated on the outer surface of the cortical shell. This is a
Return to Earth after time in the microgravity of low—earth mechanically advantageous response to increased bending
orbit reintroduces 1 g gravitational loads to the lower body. For strains at the femoral neck and increased compressive loads at
many physiological functions, for example, orthostatic intol— the lumbar spine that occur with locomotor activity and simple
erance, neurovestibular control of gait, muscle strength and weight bearing in 1 g (46,147). An increase in periosteal appo—
power, resumption of normal daily loading activities reverses sition may compensate for the loss of trabeculae within the
deﬁcits provoked by long—duration spaceﬂight within days cancellous compartment (46,147),but may not be sufﬁcient to
or weeks. However, postﬂight assessments have shown that protect against sudden, forceful impact loads exerted by falls
recovery efforts focused on skeletal integrity are incomplete (147). Since cancellous bone volume does not fully recover
and often ineffective in reversing fracture risk. Early pQCT after 1 year, the increased cortical mass at the spine and at
assessments tracked Changes in cortical and cancellous com— long bone metaphyses does not have optimal mechanical sup—
partments in the tibia of a cosmonaut who had spent 6 months port provided by cancellous bone at these sites (8). Therefore,
aboard the Mir space station, which included 2—h exercise traumatic loads could result in bone failure at lower loads
bouts twice per week. Even 6 months after landing, this crew than would be the case preﬂight, leading to an increased risk
656 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"13","Comprehensive Physiology Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue
of fracture with accidental falls. Although steady increases 10
in the bending and compressive strength indices of the prox— , .. -- -r """" """" ""' — "" _ _
imal femur were seen in crewmembers over the course of 1 5 ’ z ’ T . 0
year, these indices still remained at 15% and 20% below pre— § 0 ‘ ’ __
ﬂight values, respectively, with some evidence for incomplete ‘0'; W. + : o
mineralization of new cortical bone after 1 year (147). g _5 8"" 1 z. : °

Data tracking even longer recovery periods do not offer 6 _10 ° “o ° L o, -— 3’ """" ""' —. — —°— — — —
evidence of effective bone restoration. Early photon absorp— E J: ’ |
tiometry measures of BMD 0n Skylab astronauts noted a m 45 I
continuing bone demineralization in the calcaneus after a 5— -20 I
year follow—up (290). Strikingly, even after 2.5—4 years of
postﬂight recovery in 188 crew, persistent deﬁcits have been _25 0 300 600 900 1200 1500
documented, with cancellous VBMD at the total femur and Days after landing
femoral neck at 88% and 81% 0f preﬂight values, respectively
(46); these observations suggest greater losses beyond what Figure 6 Recovery of proximal femur (trochonter) BMD in Shuttle
is expected With normal aging in this healthy astronaut popu— crew members takes many—fold longer than short duration of mission
18.th11 (<O.5%/YC3.I) (223) Although llll’IleI‘ SplIlC BMD did 5:23 days). Potted lines represent 9.5%) confidenge limits for the BMD

, , 010. Immediate postflnght BMD defICIts were ~84) of prefllght levels,

1""CCOVCNOlnﬂeﬂlghtValues after2.5t04years,losses1ncancel— 50% recovery time (dashed vertical line) was estimated to be ~8.5
lOllS bone were not replaced, With median yearly Changes of months. Repeat Hiers’ data are denoted by ”+” signs. Figure from
—1.3% per year in vertebral cancellous VBMD in the second Sibonga 910'"" 2007 (253)' used With permiSSion'
and third years postmission (46). Total bone mass (volume
and BMC) at the proximal femur and femoral neck increased It is important to note that in these reports on crew mem—
during this time, but cortical BMD values remained below , ’ .

. . . bers recovery proﬁles, changes 1n bone geometry and mass
preﬂight values after 2.5 to 4 years postlanding, suggesting during recovery are compared to preﬂigh t values for each
increases in cortical bone porosity that could negatively affect . . . . .
bone strength at these sites (46). 1nd1V1dual. However, this type of comparison may not be

The progression 0 f BMD recovery in crew members who entirely appropriate, Since recovery postﬂight 1S confounded

. by underlying aging—related bone loss (most crew members

had ﬂown 4.5 to 6 months aboard the M11 or 188 through are between 40 and 45 years of age when they ﬁrst ﬂy)

several years of recovery was mathematically modeled by These bone mass or eomet Chan es due to the unload:
Sibon a et al. (253). Immediate postﬂight losses in BMD . . g . ry g .

g . . . . mg of prolonged micrograV1ty exposure are superimposed on
were seen 1n all Sites measured, ranging from 3% 1n the cal— aging losses incurred by crew members, thus compounding
..
the crewmembers, that tracked BMD changes as compared .8111? e hip fractures 1n elderly p at1ents are p re dictive Of mortal—

ﬂ' ht values The number 0 f da 5 after landin after 1ty 1n prospective stud1es (264), these deﬁ01ts 1n femoral neck
331:1: 515% 0 f the total BMD loss was ﬂecovered was (i ﬁned strength which elevate fracture risk may contribute to the

. . astronauts’ projected mortality after a mission is completed.
as the 50% recovery time, which ranged from 97 days for the V 1 f d—b d t 1 h ft b d . d
pelvis to 255 days for the trochanter (Fig. 6). In many cases a ues .or groun. ase con 10 S ave 0 en 6.611 6.3m]?

. . . from epidemiological surveys of BMD changes w1th ag1ng 1n
(espe01ally 1n the femoral trochanter), complete recovery time healthy populations [e.g., Riggs e t al. (223)]; however, these
exceeded missmn duiation by several fOId. and ap p reached subjects may not meet the high standards for general health
roughly 3 years (s1xt1mes the duration of micrograV1ty eXpO— and ﬁtness typical 0 f astronaut corps members. Until I g p0p-
SUIC)’ . . . . . ulation comparisons can be made, the true deﬁcit in recovery

. Very limited data are available on. crew ﬂy1ng multip 16 of bone mass following exposure to microgravity will not be
missmns to address unanswered questions, such as whether fully elucidated
recovery from a second mission is slower or more incomplete '
than after a ﬁrst mission. Multiple linear regression analyses
on cosmonauts ﬂying multiple missions yielded a good pre—
diction (r = 0.63) of BMD loss after a second ﬂight using Lessons Lea meal from Ground-Baseol
magnitude of bone loss due to the ﬁrst ﬂight and the magni— Bed Rest TFlCIIS
tude of bone regain during recovery; adding baseline BMD .
before the ﬁrst ﬂight did not improve predictive value (198). Altered bone structure and bone C9” Fund'on
Confounding factors such as individual variability, exercise Carefully designed bed rest protocols provide a valuable
countermeasure protocol, and the largely unknown effects of ground—based analog for microgravity’s effects on both the
multiple exposures to microgravity will need to be addressed skeleton and the dense connective tissues. The subject com—
in futureinvestigations on recovery ofbone mass and integrity mitment to strict bed rest is enormous, as is that of project
following life in 0 g. personnel, since a supine/prone postures must be maintained
Volume 6, April 2016 657

"
"14","Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology
while eating, showering, and engaging in interventions for investigations. Hence, many investigators conclude that
weeks to months. By adding in a 6° head—down tilt (HDT), declining bone formation is not a mechanism for bone loss
the cephalad ﬂuid shifts observed in space can be simulated. with microgravity or prolonged bed rest in humans, which
The tremendous advantage over in—ﬂight studies is, of course, contrasts with the consistent evidence that BFR is signiﬁcantly
that dietary intake and compliance with any interventions can reduced in rodents ﬂown in space (49, 310, 328) or subjected
be strictly controlled. To detect Changes in structural bone out— to ground simulations of microgravity (35,188,306). This dis—
comes (BMD or bone geometry/microarchitecture) requires a crepancy may simply reﬂect the limited ability of serum bone
minimum of 60 days, although several studies have effectively formation markers to detect site—speciﬁc decreases in bone
detected signiﬁcant alterations in urine or serum markers of formation.
bone resorption with much shorter duration bed rest trials A few rare bed rest investigations have collected bone
(10,191) (15). ArecentreView (209)provides interesting his— biopsies from the iliac crest (the standard site for diagnos—
toricalbackground as well as detailed explication of important tic measures of metabolic bone disease), enabling direct
results from bed rest trials since 1986. measures of mineral apposition rate (MAR, mean distance
Although some previously believed that bone loss during between two ﬂuorochrome labels administered ~7—10 days
strict HDT bed rest in 1 g could stimulate only about half the apart) and computation of BFR. Remarkably, MAR and BFR
bone loss seen after actual spaceﬂight (191), the growing con— decline by 9% and 22%, respectively, after a mere 7 days
sensus is that studies of at least 2 months in duration allow of strict HDT bed rest (10); in these seven male subjects,
for detection of BMD losses in those skeletal sites that are histological indicators of resorption were similar to those of
normally weight bearing in 1 g (lower limb bones, including ambulatory controls. Of interest, the decline in BFR after one
femoral neck, and the lumbar spine/pelVis). Using the stan— week of bed rest was inversely related to habitual physical
dard Clinical measure of dual energy X—ray absorptiometry activity (miles walking/day); hence, the most active subjects
(DXA) over bed rest trials of 47 to 90 days, losses of 1% experienced the largest declines in osteoblastic activity during
to 1.5% BMD per month have been conﬁrmed in a mixed unloading.
gender group of subjects (25—55 years of age), which is not An early collaboration between French and Soviet
signiﬁcantly different from the rate of bone loss observed researchers demonstrated alower MAR and increased indica—
in long—duration 188 ﬂights at the lumbar spine, hip, pelvis, tors of osteoclast resorption activity after 120 days of bed rest,
and heel (268). These alterations were similar in magnitude even though no decline in cancellous bone volume (%BV/TV)
and site—speciﬁcity as those observed by other investigators was detected (308). Another Moscow bed rest trial of simi—
(149,209,248). Importantly, there is a large variation in indi— lar duration conﬁrmed no Change in BV/TV but did docu—
Vidual BMD responses to HDT bed rest; some of this can ment a signiﬁcant decline in trabecular number and a non—
be minimized by more strict regulation of study rules regard— signiﬁcant 23% increase in trabecular thickness in iliac crest
ing in—bed physical activity (268). An ingenious study design biopsies (205). Notably, these investigators found evidence
recruitingidenticaltwin pairs to test exercise countermeasures for increased incidence of deep erosions and even complete
provides the best possible control for genetic variability (257), perforations of individual trabeculae by osteoclastic activity;
beyond crossover design protocols, which are not feasible for they conjectured that increasing trabecular thickness repre—
long—term bed rest studies. For example, in women twin pairs, sented a compensatory adaptation to a decreased connectivity
a 1.5% to 2% decline in BMD was detected at the femoral of the trabecular latticework. This observation is a critically
shaft and total hip with only 30 days on HDT BR (343). To important one: even in the context of maintained cancellous
date, there are few if any reports of bed rest—induced alter— bone mass (BV/TV), these breaks in the individual trabecular
ations in femoral neck bone geometry, either with application struts can contribute to proportionately large declines in can—
of hip structural analysis software to DXA scan raw data or cellous bone mechanical strength (190). It is also important
by QCT scans, as has been applied to 188 crew members [e.g., to remember that iliac crest bone (site of these biopsies) does
references (46, 146)]. not experience the dramatic decrease in normal daily loading
There eXists a wide consensus from both in—ﬂight data history as does the weight—bearing long bones or the spine.
(263) and bed rest trials that increased bone resorption, rather Further, the 5 — to 8—mm—diameter samples collected at biopsy
than declining bone formation, is responsible for the bone loss sample a much smaller region of interest than do noninvasive
observed in the human skeleton with the unloading of micro— bone densitometry techniques (DXA, CT).
gravity. Bone resorption markers (DPDand NTX) are signif— This decrease in trabecular number along with a (non—
icantly elevated during bed rest (by 50%—100% vs. baseline signiﬁcant) increase in mean trabecular thickness was con—
values) and to a similar degree as observed during 188 mis— ﬁrmed by a more comprehensive computerized analysis of
sions (268). In fact, with very careful control of sample col— iliac biopsies collected after 120 days, just before exercise or
lection and dietary intake, signiﬁcant elevations (18%—29%) bisphosphonate interventions began during the longest dura—
in resorption markers can be demonstrated on the second tion bed rest trial of record lasting 370 days (286). It may
day of strict HDT bed rest (15). On the other hand, bone be that the thinnest trabeculae in cancellous compartments
formation markers (osteocalcin, BSAP, and PlNP) rarely are culled by resorptive activity, yielding this increase in
Change to any signiﬁcant degree in most published bed rest mean trabecular thickness. This study also revealed a 6%
658 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"15","Comprehensive Physiology Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue
decline in BV/TV and more than a 50% reduction in com— disuse by decreased intake of energy; increased dietary
pressive strength determined by mechanical testing of sepa— sodium Chloride and animal protein contributing to disrupted
rate iliac crest biopsies (274). Hence, even these small changes acid—base balance; and by modulators of oxidative stress (iron)
in cancellous microarchitecture may yield disproportionately or inﬂammation (omega—3 fatty acids).
greater decreases in mechanical integrity. In a mixed gender
group undergoing 3 months of bed rest, Zerwekh et al. (337)
observed suppressed osteoblast surfaces in cancellous bone - - - - - . - -
. . . Con exercnse, Vibration loading, or or’nﬁcnol grovn’ry

and a doubling of osteoclast surfaces in both cortical and can— . .
cellous bone from iliac crest biopsy samples, but no Change in replgce mechanlcal loadlng and prevent bone loss
cancellous BV/TV. However, in the same subjects signiﬁcant Clurlng bed rest?
(3 %—4%) declines in DXA measures of BMD occurred at the Bed rest studies provide the best platform for testing the efﬁ—
lumbar spine and the trochanter (hip). These coincident ﬁnd— cacy of replacing gravitational loading by exposing subjects
ings suggest that biopsy data derived from the nonloaded iliac to artiﬁcial g or various exercise interventions. The more suc—
crest (and sampling from a small 5— to 8—mm core) underesti— cessful these loading paradigms are, the more conﬁdent we
mate the alterations in bone formation and resorption activity can be that reduced mechanical loads on the skeleton are
in the weight bearing bone sites usually studied by DXA or the important proximate cause for microgravity—induced bone
CT imaging. loss. Many different exercise paradigms have been used in—

The advent of improved noninvasive imaging will no ﬂight over the last 40 years by both Russian and American
doubt allow for a more comprehensive understanding of how crews [see (47) for a useful review].
bone microarchitecture is altered in humans with prolonged The most successful of the many exercise interventions
disuse or microgravity exposure, since it allows for repeat tested during prolonged bed rest trials utilized an aggressive
measures on a more frequent basis. High—resolution periph— weight training program in male and female subjects under—
eral computed tomography (HR—pQCT, resolution of ~80 um) going 17 weeks of horizontal bed rest. This protocol was
can accurately detect trabecular number and total bone vol— unique in using a wide range of upper and lower body lifts, all
ume; then trabecular thickness and trabecular separation can performed in the prone or supine position, with progressive
be mathematically derived (assuming plate—model geometry) increases in volume and intensity. Bone loss was effectively
(60) from those two primary measures, yielding a more com— mitigated or even prevented in the lumbar spine, calcaneus,
plete description of cancellous microarchitecture. The Women and femoral neck (but not in other regions of the proximal
International Space Simulation for Exploration (WISE 2005) femur) in resistance—trained subjects (248).
investigations utilized HR—pQCT in 24 young healthy women More recent bed rest trials testing exercise countermea—
over 60 days of HDT bed rest and detected small (~2%) but sures have focused on devices that might be more practical
signiﬁcant declines in both BV/TV and volumetric BMD of for actual in—ﬂight application than the full—scale traditional
the cancellous compartment of the distal tibia, accompanied weight training devices utilized by Shackelford et al. Male
by a 1.5% decrease in trabecular thickness. Importantly, none subj ects on 90 days of HDT bed rest utilized a ﬂywheel device,
of these parameters recovered one year after these women which can generate high loads in both eccentric and concen—
resumed normal weight—bearing activity (9). This HR—pQCT tric modes; these exercising bed rest subjects exhibited partial
study is unique in demonstrating signiﬁcant declines in can— mitigation of decrements in BMC of mid—tibial cortical bone
cellous bone mass in the distal radius of the arm, which were but not of cancellous BMC in the tibial epiphysis (225). Using
about half the magnitude of those observed in the tibia (9). the same device in combination with lower—body negative

Aclue to apotentialmechanism for this remarkablelack of pressure (LBNP) treadmill running, the WISE bed rest trial
recovery lies in assessment of bone marrow fat accumulation (young women subjects, 60 days of HDT bed rest) demon—
by MRI in these subjects (291). The 9% increase in lumbar strated mitigatedloss of DXA—measured BMD at the proximal
spine bone marrow fat observed in these women over 60 days femur (but not at femoral neck region or lumbar spine) with
of bed rest represented a 24—fold acceleration of aging—related this exercise regimen. Interestingly, this combined exercise
gain in marrow fat measured in ambulatory individuals; this protocol effectively promoted a 50% increase in PINP, a bone
gain in marrow fat persisted after one year of normal weight formation marker, but did not suppress 50% to 75% increases
bearing activity. These ﬁndings suggest that prolonged non— in bone resorption markers (259). Nor was it effective in miti—
weight bearing can affect the bone marrow mesenchymal stem gating negative changes in cancellous bone microarchitecture
cell population, tilting differentiation away from osteoblasto— at the distal tibia and distal radius (9). Separate studies testing
genesis in favor of adipogenesis (151). efﬁcacy of LBNP treadmill running during HDT bed rest (with

The rate of bone loss observed during prolonged bed twice the volume of running sessions as in the WISE trial)
rest or sojourns in microgravity can be modulated by var— demonstrated effective mitigation of increased resorption in
ious nutritional factors, either due to individual variances women bed rest subjects (343). These observations suggest
in dietary intake or speciﬁc attributes of the food system that the impact loading provided by treadmill running (which
supplied to crew members during mission. The Mechanisms is not provided by ﬂywheel exercise) is important to mitigat—
section details evidence for modulation of bone loss with ing increased bone resorption during prolonged unloading.
Volume 6, April 20l 6 659

"
"16","Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology
It may be unrealistic to expect any exercise intervention to The most effective form of mechanical loading replace—
totally replace all the loads the skeleton normally experiences ment in mitigating bone loss during prolonged microgravity
over a typical 24 h in l g (47). Experiments ﬁrst done on exposure as modeled by HDT bed rest will be very difﬁcult
the functionally isolated turkey ulna suggested that very low— to determine with certainty until bed rest trials utilize com—
magnitude, high—frequency loading (LMHF, akin to Vibration) mon outcome measures and dietary controls. The consensus
is effective in mitigating disuse bone loss (239). More recent to date indicates that replicating l g impact forces on the
data in very young mice (7 weeks) exposed to 3 weeks of dis— lower limbs is important and that resistance—type exercise,
use suggest that LMHF helps preserve osteogenic potential of which also provides a robust stimulus to maintaining muscle
marrow cells and improves recovery of cancellous bone dur— mass (and therefore muscle forces on the skeleton), remains
ing weight—bearing recovery (204). These animal experiments the optimal form of mechanical loading to mitigate bone loss
utilize a platform producing 0.2 g accelerations at frequencies during prolonged unweighting.
between 30 and 90 Hz. This type of mechanical signal may be
replacing the tonic input to bone from postural skeletal mus— . .
Cles that are activated throughout most of the typical day in l g Sex Cllfferences m the skeletal response to bed res’r
but absent in microgravity (109). One year of LMHF Vibration Another important advantage of bed rest studies is the
treatments in arandomized Clinical trial with postmenopausal improved opportunity to detect any seX—speciﬁc differences
women (0.2 g, 30 Hz) effectively mitigated declines in BMD in the response to simulated microgravity, although even in
at the lumbar spine and proximal femur only in a small subset the bed rest literature the data base is sparse. One of the rare
of the entire subject population (lighter weight women in the studies to publish male and female subject data side—by—side
most compliant quartile) (237). There are no published data, (248) had, unfortunately, too few subjects in each gender to
however, demonstrating efﬁcacy of this LMHF stimulation provide adequately powered statistical comparisons for seX
during bed rest in humans. differences. Nonetheless, it is interesting to note that BMD
If a more Vigorous Vibration stimulus (2.4 g acceleration, losses in control (nonexercised) bed rest in women over 17
20—30 Hz) is combined with resistance exercises (e.g., toe and weeks were 30% to 80% less than relative losses in the male
heel raises, squats) over 56 days of bed rest, some mitigation of subjects for seven of ten bone sites measured, even though
bone loss in the distal tibia can be achieved, particularly when Changes in systemic bone resorption markers were remarkably
assessed over one year of subsequent recovery.. However, no similar between the two genders. (It should be noted, however,
mitigation of DXA—measured lumbar spine and femoral neck that for all but one bone site, the seX differences are smaller
BMD could be detected in these same subjects (224). If this than the precision error of DXA.) Paradoxically, losses in
same Vibration intervention is tested alone (without concur— muscle volume assessed by MRI were 50% to 70% higher in
rent resistive exercise), there is no detectable impact on sys— women control subjects for siX of nine lower back, calf and
temic markers of bone formation or resorption during 14 days thigh muscle volumes reported; % loss of “posterior back”
of HDT bed rest (14). Hence, although earlier experimental muscle volume was threefold greater in women. Although we
evidence in animal models supported a robust anabolic effect cannot make deﬁnitive conclusions based on these small sub—
of Vibration on cancellous bone (238) (which declines most ject numbers, it is tempting to speculate that women lose far
rapidly with disuse), the evidence thus far does not support the less bone than men relative to the degree of muscle volume
notion that disuse bone loss in humans can be effectively miti— loss. Presuming that this study’s male subjects started with
gated with either version of these Vibration—based mechanical higher muscle volumes and BMD values than women, the
loading paradigms. impact of starting values may be different between muscle
Certainly, replacing gravity in—ﬂight might be the most and bone during prolonged nonweight bearing.
direct, if not technically most Challenging, means of prevent— Another set of bed rest studies examining the responses
ing bone loss with prolonged removal from 1 g forces; salu— of female identical twin pairs (343) observed elevations in
tary effects of replacing the effect of gravity could be due to one bone resorption marker (HP) that were roughly double
increased GRFs on the lower limb or increased ﬂuid pressures those observed in male twin pairs subjected to the exact
in the leg or both. Preliminary trials using a short—arm human same bed rest protocol (257). Notably, the women’s val—
centrifuge producing l g forces at the heart and 2.5 g forces ues for resorption biomarkers exhibited a good deal more
at the feet, applied daily for 1 hour (258), were of too short variability than those measured in the male cohort; much of
a duration to fairly test the impact on bone mass/geometry. this may be due to cyclic variations in serum estrogen (343).
Elevations in systemic markers of bone resorption were unaf— Interestingly, in these women subjects no signiﬁcant relation—
fected by the artiﬁcial gravity treatment, whereas markers of ship between endogenous acid production (estimated from
bone formation tended (p = 0.08—0.09) to be lower during the ratio of dietary animal protein to potassium) and bone
bed rest in those subjects who were centrifuged (258). One resorption markers was detected, as was found for male bed
hour of centrifugation increases the static GRF on the lower rest subjects in previous trials (342, 344). It may be that the
limb, but there is rich evidence from in vivo animal studies variability due to seX hormone ﬂuctuations over the menstrual
that dynamic, intermittent forces are much more osteogenic cycle masks smaller variations in bone resorption markers that
(236). might be related to dietary factors.
660 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"17","Comprehensive Physiology Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue
Gleanings from the Animal Lifera’ru re Bone resorption, as evidenced by osteoclast number and
activity, remains largely unchanged in growing rats during
Animals in Flight short—term microgravity exposure (294, 305). In normal phys—
Since the inception of the space program, animals have been iological conditions, osteoblasts and osteoclasts eXhibit a
a key tool for understanding the complexities of outer space coupled relationship; coordinated communication between
and for determining whether or not humans could survive these cells ensures a Close balance between bone forma—
and thrive in a weightless environment. Only one month tion and resorption. During spaceﬂight, however, decreased
after spaceﬂight ofﬁcially began, Russia launched the ﬁrst bone formation .ih rapidly growing rodents is not matched
animal in space on November 3, 1957. Laika the dog tol— by a corresponding drop in bone resorption. This imbalance
erated both the stresses of launch and several hours of life Of bone turnover eventually leads to declines in bone mass
in the space environment. After siX subsequent Russian dog and deleterious Changes in cancellous bone microarchitecture
ﬂights were successfully performed from 1960 to 1961, Yuri (335), even after relatively short duration ﬂights (18'22 days)
Gagarin, the ﬁrst human in space, was launched on April 12, (31, 329). In as few as seven days, reduced trabecular num—
1961. The United States quickly followed suit and ﬂew their bet and thickness and increased trabecular spacing have been
ﬁrst nonhuman primate, Enos, on November 29, 1961. Enos observed in young r ats (307)'
was successful at performing tasks during launch, weight— More recent ﬁndings in mice document a reduction 0f
lessness, and reentry, and paved the way for the launch of the serum OPG (RANKL antagonist, suppresses osteoclast activ—
ﬁrst American in orbit, John Glenn, on February 20, 1962. ity) in young (2—m0nth—old) mice after 91 days in micrograv—
Thus, in the early stage of space exploration, animals played ity (284) and a doubling of TRAP—stained osteoclasts in the
a pivotal role as predecessors of human space travel. Follow— proximal femur ofmatur e 4—month—old mice after a shorter 15'
ing the Apollo Lunar Missions (December 1968—December day sojourn in space (33) suggest a species difference among
1972), spaceﬂight animal research shifted its focus from the rodents. The latter investigation also documented increased
question of in—ﬂight survival to the complex physiological osteocytic (lacunar) osteolysis as a second contributor to bone
concerns Oflong duration missions, such as the skeletal adap— loss observed in pelvic bone coincident with upregulation of
tations of reduced gravitational forces. The reader is referred the metalloproteinase MMPIO ih osteocytes. Both popula—
to an excellent review on data gained from animals exposed tions of mice eXhibited some evidence for decreased bone
spaceﬂight (295). formation. Gene expression (mRNA) for alkaline phosphatase
Investigations on humans exposed to spaceﬂight are and osteocalcin was reduced in the younger mice exposed
markedly limited by a small pool of test subjects as well to 3 months Of microgravity 63)‘ In the mature mice, the
as confounding factors of age, ﬁtness, and nutrition. In—ﬂight eell cycle inhibitor CDKNla/p21 eXhibited increased local—
animal research provides the opportunity to conduct larger ization in periosteal osteoblasts, providing a potential molec—
and more uniformly controlled studies, with the added beneﬁt ular mechanism for reduced bone formation in murine bone
of incorporating invasive techniques (e.g., mechanical test— With microgravity exposure (33)'
ing and quantitative histomorphometry) that human studies Mechanical properties of cortical and cancellous bone in
lack. Because of a primary interest in how microgravity might growing r ats are also impaired With spaceﬂight (207,249,269,
affect bone during growth and the stringent weight limitations 297’ 335’ 336)‘ After one week in—ﬂight, bending stiffness in
of in—ﬂight research, young, growing rats were the in—ﬂight the tibia and humerus of growing rats is 19% and 33% less
animal model of Choice for bone research from 1972 to 2003 than ground contr 015’ r espectively (249)' Since bending Stiff""
(295). Although translating results from growing animals to ness is a function Of bone mass, geometry, and composition,
adult humans may be problematic, using ground—based aging these spaceﬂight—induced deﬁcits may be explained by eVi—
controls provides the ability to distinguish impaired growth dence of inhibited periosteal apposition, cross—sectional area,
from absolute losses in, for example, bone area. The animal and circumference in growing rats ﬂown for 12'5 days (297),
enclosure modules ﬂown on most Shuttle ﬂights and now IS S as well as impaired mineralization and collagen metabolism
can accommodate many more young rats than large adult rats, following one week Of ﬂight aboard NASA Spacelab 3 (249)'
boosting subject numbers. The most startling ﬁnding in the Similar deﬁcits have been shown in young rat humerus as 12.5
earliest studies was the remarkable decline in periosteal bone days in—ﬂight (Cosmos 1887 biosatellite) led to a 39% decline
formation and longitudinal growth, which may be reduced in bending stiffness compared to aging controls (297). Within
as early as four days in—ﬂight (49, 69,74). In a 19—day mis— 12.5 days, in—ﬂight vertebrae withstood 22% less maximum
si0n, ﬂuorochrome labeling demonstrated a marked reduc— compressive force when loaded to failure (336). Furthermore,
tion in both bone formation and periosteal growth (185). failure load, yield stress, energy to failure, and elastic modulus
Decreased bone formation was later explained by evidence of are all lower in young r ats exposed to one week 0f spaceﬂight
microgravity—induced reductions in osteoblast differentiation, versus ground contr 015 (249)' Altogether, these alterations in
proliferation, activity, and number (61, 118, 226, 294, 334). geometry, strength, periosteal growth, and mineralization all
Moreover, markers of bone formation, such as osteocalcin, contribute to declines in bone quality at the structural and at
are decreased with spaceﬂight (13, 30, 208). the material level (145’ 177’ 254)‘
Volume 6, April 2016 661

"
"18","Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology
These spaceﬂight—induced changes in bone formation, (A) (q) (B)
resorption, strength, and quality are all appropriate adapta— @
tions to the reduced mechanical loading bone is experiencing —_-—_-=%_—:
in microgravity, downregulating the extraneous skeletal mass. - ' » J
The challenge arises upon return to a gravity environment, ﬁ
such as the Earth, a Lunar surface, Mars, or a near—Earth aster— 3:3
oid (37, 295). As NASA shifted its interest to targets beyond 33
low—Earth orbit, research priorities shifted to bone loss coun— . ‘
termeasure and a growing interest in ﬂying mice to answer 3 ,-
. . . . I (I
these questions (194). The shift from rats to mice in space— . '
ﬂight experiments was precipitated by several beneﬁts of the I
mouse model. Mice require less oxygen and produce less car— ‘ ’.
bon dioX1de per animal, require fewenresources, and take up .. ’. ‘\
less space on the spacecraft. For a given volume and mass ‘1 p
of payload, mice allow for larger sample sizes than rats and a K ""\
thus increase the statistical power of the study. Both mice and g’q _
rats are well—accepted ground—based models for testing inter— .
ventions for osteoporosis and for disuse bone loss (161, 252).
At this time, however, only preliminary reports (abstracts, Figure 7 Partial weightbeoring (A) 0nd hindlimb SUSPGHSion (B)
conference proceedings) eXist of experiments aboard space mdem mOdelsz Partial weighl'b.earing mngif‘g ”0F“ 16% lo 70%. Of
, , , , , , total body weight can be achieved by daily odlustment of tensnon
shuttle ﬂlghts teStmg Vaﬂous pharmaCOIOglcal InterVentlonS on the spring above the triangular harness support. In the traditional
(osteoprotogerin, sclerostin antibody) in young mice. hindlimb (toil) suspension model, hindlimbs are elevated to disallow
weight bearing without immobilization; the heod-olown posture also
induces a cephalic Huiol shift. Figure from Ellmon et ol., 2013 (72),
Ground-bosed animal research used With permlsmn'
Live animal experiments utilizing ground—based analogs of
microgravity have the advantage of utilizing a range of animal stress hormone have been reported after 3 or 7 days of unload—
species in experiments testing more complex interventions ing in younger mice (116,314).
(e.g., resistance exercise). A large literature eXists describing Similar to What has been observed in rodents ﬂown on
the bone effects of muscle denervation (most frequently by shuttle missions or satellites, bone turnover is signiﬁcantly
sciatic neurectomy) and spinal cord injury, but these models altered in rodents exposed to HLS (267,277,339). Twenty—one
will not be included in this review. The reduction in skeletal days of HLS in 12—week—old (young adult) female mice sup—
muscle activity in these models is far more profound than is presses cancellous bone mineral apposition rate (distal femur)
experienced during spaceﬂight; further, the reduced mechan— by over 50% (267). In adult male rats, 28—day HLS produces
ical loading of denervation and spinal cord injury may be similar reductions in mineralizing surface, mineral apposi—
confounded by the removal of neural input to skeletal muscle tion rate, and BFR in proximal tibia cancellous bone (277).
and bone in the affected limbs. Similar decrements in bone formation have been shown in cor—
tical bone on both periosteal and endocortical surfaces (164).
. . . Skeletal unloading also leads to an inhibition of osteoblastic
HInd/Imb suspenSIon d' . . .
ifferentiation of bone marrow stromal cells and an increased
A thoroughly validated and well—accepted ground—based number of bone marrow adipocytes (267, 339). Conﬂicting
model for simulating the skeletal unloading of micrograV— results eXist for Whether bone resorption increases in rodents
ity is the hindlimb suspended (HLS) rodent (186, 188, 189). in response to HLS. Some studies report a doubling of the
In this model, the animal’s hindlimbs are chronically elevated bone resorption marker TRAP5b following HLS in skeletally
by connecting a tail harness to an overhead pulley system mature mice (161), While others using young rats mark no
(Fig. 7); suspended rodents quickly learn how to naVigate on Change (158). Some of this confusion may result from vary—
their forelimbs to access food and water and groom and sleep ing durations of HLS before samples are collected for analy—
comfortably Within 24 h. The head—down orientation of the sis. Nonetheless, HLS studies consistently report dramatically
rodent (mouse or rat) simulates space ﬂight by (i) removing suppressed bone formation Without any corresponding drop in
mechanical loads from the hindlimbs but, importantly, not bone resorption. This uncoupling of formation and resorption
immobilizing them and (ii) inducing a cephalic ﬂuid shift. in response to reduced mechanical loading ineVitably leads to
HLS animals appear to experience minimal stress as demon— declines in bone mass.
strated by normal weight gain and food intake after the third With unloading, deﬁcits are larger and onset of loss is
day of initiating suspension. Young adult rats eXhibit nor— more rapid in cancellous bone compartments than in corti—
mal plasma corticosterone levels through the third day of cal bone. Cancellous microarchitecture is altered by HLS in
unloading (96). However, twofold to ﬁvefold increases in this both young, rapidly growing (<3—4 months old) and adult
662 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"19","Comprehensive Physiology Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue
(>4 months old) rodents (35, 162, 267, 339). For example, a a countermeasure to these sustained losses, numerous inter—
37% decrease in cancellous bone volume after three weeks of ventions, such as aerobic and resistance exercise, have been
HLS in young male rats is accompanied by a large decline in investigated during recovery from unloading (125, 158, 251).
trabecular number (—32%) and increased trabecular spacing Five weeks of either treadmill or jumping exercise following
(+16%) (but no Change in trabecular thickness) at the proxi— fourteen days of HLS in growing rats completely reversed
mal tibia (124). Cancellous degradation has also been shown disuse—induced losses in cancellous bone volume, thickness,
at the proximal femur after eight weeks of unloading in grow— and number (125). Improvements in mechanical strength
ing rats (158) and in the tibial metaphysis and femoral neck of Via squat training in young rats have also been documented
adult rats (252). Suspension also causes degradation of cor— (158).
tical bone and losses can be dependent upon animal gender Exercise interventions during HLS, rather than after, have
and estrogen status (158,252). In skeletally mature female also been explored. Jump training in young growing rats (124)
retired breeder rats (who eXhibit wide variability in baseline or simulated resistance training (SRT) using stimulated mus—
cancellous bone volume), cortical bone is more responsive to Cle contractions in skeletally mature rats (164, 277) during
unloading than is cancellous bone (2). Twenty—eight days of HLS can mitigate cancellous microarchitectural Changes. It
HLS in these females lead to marked reductions in BMC and is reasonable to conjecture that combining an antiresorptive
cross—sectional area of the cortical shell in the proximal tibia, pharmacological agent (alendronate) with the anabolic impact
but do not result in the signiﬁcant declines in cancellous bone of exercise might provide even better protection against disuse
volume typically observed in mature male rats (3, 35). The bone loss. However, when SRT was combined with abisphos—
muted response in these retired breeder female rats may be phonate (alendronate), the osteogenic response from exercise
related to their highly variable and often lower—than—average was actually blunted by alendronate (164,277). Cancellous
cancellous bone mass (2); perhaps with low starting values BFR, for example, was higher in SRT—only groups compared
for cancellous VBMD, absolute losses are minimized. These to SRT animals receiving alendronate (277). Because resorp—
studies utilized in V1VO pQCT at a voxel resolution of 100 tion and formation activity are normally tightly coupled,
um3; its possible absolute Changes may have slipped below the antiresorptive action of bisphosphonates subsequently
a detection limit for pQCT. Other investigators ﬁnd minimal reduces bone formation, thus mitigating the anabolic response
differences in the response to hindlimb unloading between of exercise. Intensive resistance training during bed rest in
male and female skeletally mature rats (103). There may also humans produces increases in bone formation biomarkers,
eXist subtle species differences; skeletally mature female mice reﬂecting the histological veriﬁcation of increased BFR in
lose more bone (as % deﬁcit) in both cortical and cancellous this rodent model. Recently published data suggest that, when
bone compartments than do male mice with HLS (270). Inde— alendronate is taken by 188 crew members also performing
pendent of gender, however, bone compartments with higher resistance exercise, an additional mitigation of bone loss is
surface—to—volume ratios and higher baseline osteoclast and achieved (148), in contrast to the animal studies Cited earlier.
osteoblast activity appear to be the most susceptible to disuse Confounding factors in the 188 control group (using two dif—
(270). ferent exercise deVices at varying intensities, but not ingesting
Importantly, alterations in bone mechanical properties are alendronate) disallow deﬁnitive conclusions as to the indepen—
eVident following unloading. Traditional mechanical testing, dent impact of bisphosphonates on in—ﬂight bone loss.
such as three—point bending, reveal declines in elastic modu—
lus’ Stlffriess’ maXImum.f0rce’.maX1mu.m Stress’ and energy Other models of reduced mechanical loading
in the tibia and femur d1aphys1s follow1ng exposure to HLS
(158,251, 252, 330). The signiﬁcant declines in femoral neck Along with HLS, other models of immobilization in rodents
maximum force (—17.5%) following 28 days of HLS in adult have been explored. Unilateral hindlimb immobilization in
rats are of greater relative magnitude than the declines in adult female rats reduces midshaft tibia cortical area (—8%),
both BMC (—7%) and VBMD (—7%) losses (252). Finite corticalBFR (—75%), cancellous BMD (—20%), and cancel—
element analysis (FEA) modeling of compression loading lous BFR (—36%) (156,157). Surgical ﬁxation of the right
of the distal femur (a mixed bone site containing a cancel— hindlimb in 4—month—old adult female rats increased serum
lous core) reveals an 18% HLS—induced reduction in bending concentrations of pro—inﬂammatory cytokines and decreased
stiffness versus controls (267). Given that the most dramatic proximal femur BMD up to 8 weeks after surgery (250).
losses observed with unloading are in the cancellous bone Other studies using similar immobilization techniques for as
compartments, there is a need for more data deﬁning the few as 3 weeks yield declines in BMC and BMD of up to
effect of unloading on the mechanical integrity of this bone 10% (127). Rodent cortical bone does not eXhibit the osteons
compartment. (Haversian systems) present in human bone, so larger species
Fortunately, HLS—induced declines in bone integrity are (ferrets and larger) must be used to test the impact of dis—
not necessarily permanent, although losses may persist despite use on intracortical remodeling, which initiates in Haversian
return to normal 1 g loading. Following exposure to 28—day or Volkman canals. Long—term disuse experiments in dogs
HLS, adult male rats continue to lose proximal tibia BMD produce similar results to bed rest studies on humans, where
(up to —10%) and do not fully recover until day 84 (3). As cortical bone loss in the lower limbs averages 3% to 4% each
Volume 6, April 2016 663

"
"20","Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology
month (154). Retired female breeder beagle dogs exposed to (A) 11

12 months of forelimb cast immobilization show reductions A | |

in cortical area (—42%), cortical thickness (—40%), stiffness c}: 10

(—78%), and maximum stress (—44%). Intracortical tunnel— E *

ing increased over ﬁvefold With this prolonged disuse. These 5 9 H *

data, along With histomorphometric veriﬁcation of increased 5

resorption and formation, indicate that long—term disuse in g 8 *

dogs leads to a state of high turnover in cortical bone With a Q 7

delay in the onset of bone formation. That is, bone resorption '—

is heightened to a greater extent than bone formation, and this 6 1 1
imbalance, or delay, leads to continued reductions in bone HLU pWB2O pWB40 pWB70 pWB100 CON
mass, architecture, and strength. (B) 0.17

Although the aforementioned models are successful at E 016 IE
removing exogenous gravitational forces (e.g., ground reac— g ' *
tions forces), they do not eliminate the endogenous forces g 0-15 ’
that are imparted on bone through the contraction of mus— :c: 0.14 * *

Cles. To remove muscle—derived forces on bone, intramus— E 013 * *

cular botulinum toxin (Botox) injections are used to tem— Tug '

porarily retard muscle activity and strength to explore the th> 0-12

relationship between muscle contractions and bone health 0 0.11

(1, 12, 41, 90, 167). This model has the advantage of being 01 H I 1
eas11y revers1ble (as cornpared to neurectomy) s1nce mus— HLU PWB2O PWB 40 PWB7O PWB1OO CON
cle paralys1s from Botox is temporary (3—4 weeks), but does

not preclude some incidental weight bearing on the para— Figure 8 Graded reductions in weight bearing produce graded
lyzedlimb. Botox—injected female mice suffer dramatic reduc— redUFﬁonS in b0_ne V0|Ume~ Micro .Computed tomogrﬁlphy “959'”
mmcanceuousbonevolume «54%» trabecularthickness 2mm 3.2mm?magma?againstng'i;‘1:zﬁ:z:;z
625%), and cortical shell volume (—20%) in the proximal %BW; CON = control; * = different from CON (P < 0.05),- # = HLU
tibia 21 days after BotOX treatment (317). Femoral microar— different from PWB1OO .(P < 0.05); brackets = pairwise differences
chitectural properties remain deﬁcient even after 7 to 8 weeks Efggﬁﬂhpgfmgggﬁf' F'gure adapted from Ellman et 0'"" 2013 (72)’
of weight bearing recovery, after the muscle paralysis resolves

and the animal resumes normal locomotion (91).

Peak GRFS remain 1.5%.1ower 1n BOtOX—IIIJCCth limbs for respectively) With normal quadrupedal ambulation. Adreno—
up to 21 days versus sahne—injected controls. It has been pos— . 1 tiVi t (estimated from fecal corticosterone metabo—
tulated, however, that these sustained losses following Botox— 190m? 21C 3:1. PWS . b . . 'ﬁ 1 d'ff
induced muscle paralysis are not solely the result of dimin— ﬁes) 1hs e evate 1n dnnce,1 gissnotzs1g§1 dcant y 1 5:611;
ished muscle performance. GRFs in Botox—injected limbs are t an tllat 1n mace ontral Elona 1 (7 )' 1.6 ueltiociils O dOt
reduced following paralysis as rodents begin to favor the non— cance ous an .Cortica. one V0 ume are me.” y epen ent

, , , , on level of loading during 21 days of PWS (Fig. 8).
paralyzed limbs during ambulation (168). To help delineate
the individual roles of muscle contraction and reduced GRFs,
a recent study subjected young adult Virgin female mice to . .
both Botox injection and HLS. When superimposed, Botox— P095 exposure to space md'ahon exacerbate the
induced muscle paralysis and HLS led to greater decrements Impact Of welgh’rlessness on bone?
in cancellous microarchitecture and cortical BFR than that In addition to the lack of gravity, the radiation unique to the
observed With either intervention alone (316). These data spaceﬂight environment is another major Challenge to crew
conﬁrm that muscle contraction, even in the nonweight bear— member bone health. For ethical reasons, we must rely on
ing microgravity environment, can provide some protection animal models for experimental evidence in this area. Space
against bone loss. radiation consists of galactic cosmic radiation (GCR) and

It is important to note, however, that the aforementioned solar particle events (SPE). Absorbed tissue dose from GCR
studies reduce weight bearing in the hindlimbs only, Whereas in humans in low—Earth orbit is approximately 0.4 to 0.8
spaceﬂight unloads the entire body. Recently, Wagner et a1. mGy/day (197). Of higher concern are SPEs, Which can occur
developed a mouse model providing reduced weight bear— spontaneously and deliver doses as high as 2 Gy to an unpro—
ing of the entire skeleton (312) (Fig. 7). This partial weight tected human (e.g., during EVA) in a relatively short period
suspension (PWS) system can be titrated to variable levels of time (26, 34, 273). Although this ionizing radiation dose
of weight bearing and allows for the investigation of how is equivalent to just one round of radiotherapy typically used
sensitive bone is to graded reductions in weight bearing for cancer treatment (94), it is not ﬁnely targeted to one small
(e.g., 1/6—g and 3/8—g simulating Lunar and Martian surfaces, area (as When treating a speciﬁc tumor) but instead eXposes
664 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"21","Comprehensive Physiology Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue

(A) .g-“aa‘ _ (B) (C)

""W ”4.2;! f“? N ‘rs sg‘x
‘4 (5-3? W ' , . "". ""
g 1‘1”} V w! , y ‘ ‘ . :a;
a a
W W W
Control Gamma Proton

Figure 9 Radiation produces dramatic reductions in cancellous bone volume and altered microarchitecture. Micro-

CT images of the proximal tibia in young mice that were (A) SHAM exposed, (B) exposed to 2 Gy gamma radiation,

or (C) exposed to 2 Gy proton radiation. Both gamma and proton exposure led to decreased trobeculor volume

fraction (—29 and —35%, respectively) and increased trobeculor spacing (+19% and +21%, respectively). Figure

adopted from Hamilton et al., 2006 (98), used with permission.
all body tissues to 2 Gy of high—energy ionizing particles. Spaceﬂight—relevant doses and types of radiation lead to
Oncologists are just beginning to appreciate the devastat— long—term reductions in cancellous bone quantity and quality
ing effect on bone in, for example, pelvic cancer patients, (22, 98), Which compromise the overall mechanical strength
in Whom hip fracture rates increase dramatically. For some of bone and lead to an increased susceptibility to fracture.
years, NASA’s attention focused almost exclusively on space Failure loads from aXial compression testing were reduced 12
radiation’s impact on cancer risks over a crew member’s life— weeks after young adult mice receive either 5 or 20 Gy of X—
time. More recently there is increased interest in the growing rays in the lower limbs of mice (322). FEA testing of mouse
evidence for s0—called “late tissue effects,” including a surpris— L4 vertebra reveals a decrease in cancellous bone volume (Via
ingly large negative impact on bone mass, structural integrity, losses in trabecular number and connectivity) that results in
and strength (6, 322). Adult male mice exposed to 2.0 Gy compromised corticocancellous stress sharing (6). This unfa—
of 56Fe (among the most biologically damaging particles in vorable distribution of mechanical stress corresponds to an
GCR) eXhibit signiﬁcant reductions one month later in cancel— overload 0n the cortex and a reduction in ultimate force capac—
lous volume (BV/TV, —14%), trabecular number (—9%), and ity. Interestingly, these radiation—induced reductions in bone
connectivity density (—18%) in the spine (6) (Fig. 9). Indi— strength often occur in the presence of an initial enhancement
caters of bone mechanical integrity, such as vertebral elastic of cortical BMD. This altered relationship between bone mor—
modulus (from FEA testing), were also diminished. phology and strength suggests an alteration of bone quality at

Although the exact mechanisms remain unknown, damage the material level.

to bone cells is thought to be a major contributor to bone loss The suspected mechanisms responsible for acute
following radiation exposure (141). Evidence from Clinically radiation—induced increases in bone resorption are upregu—
relevant doses of radiotherapy reveal that damage to osteoblast lated proinﬂammatory cytokines. An eloquent summary of
precursors, reduction in osteoblast proliferation and differen— this theory is presented in by Willey er al. (325). Brieﬂy,
tiation, and declines in osteoblast number and activity have inﬂammation is a consistent response to ionizing radiation,
all been attributed to radiation—induced reductions in bone resulting in the release of several proinﬂammatory cytokines,
formation (44, 63, 81, 140, 243, 280, 324). High—dose radia— such as TNF—oc, IL—1, and IL—6, Which have been shown
tion (15—30 Gy) also causes increased apoptotic sensitivity to play both a direct and indirect role in bone metabolism
in osteoblasts (280). The reaction of osteocytes to radiation (29, 152, 222, 282, 319). During bone remodeling, tumor
is less Clear. While some studies record high—dose radiation— necrosis factor—alpha (TNF—oc) decreases bone formation and
induced osteocyte death in cortical bone, these cells are gener— increases bone resorption (42, 166). Suppression of bone for—
ally recognized as relatively resistant to irradiation (220,230). mation by TNF—oc is achieved by inhibiting osteoblast dif—
Spaceﬂight—relevant radiation exposures reveal both a pro— ferentiation and collagen synthesis and enhancing the rate
longed suppression of osteoblastic bone formation and early 0f osteoblast apoptosis (50, 86, 155). TNF—oc stimulates bone
increases in bone resorption Via heightened osteoclast num— resorption by increasing the proliferation of osteoclast precur—
ber and activity (324). Within 24 hours of Whole body X—ray sets, by regulating other osteoclastogenic factors, such as IL—
(2 Gy) exposure, the bone resorption marker tartrate—resistant 6, and by heightening osteoclast differentiation and activation
acid phosphatase (TRACP5b) is elevated in young adult mice (275, 282, 313). Overall, early increases in osteoclast activity
by 50% compared to nonirradiated controls (325). Further— followed by sustained suppressions in osteoblast activity in
more, histomorphometric analyses reveal an early increase in unweighted bone exposed to radiation may be explained by a
osteoclast number and surface (326). radiation—induced inﬂammatory cascade (Fig. 10).
Volume 6, April 2016 665

"
"22","Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology
—
‘ ' _ OH—
""' g?! |% OHOEOZ. |L-1 * TNFoc 'L-1 TNFoc
fig)‘ ._._ ’oi’m , m f“ . f“ ’00 ”W
if "" 0 a o o o : ‘
‘ ”I
1' Astronaut 9493190095 2- Radiation affects —> 3. Marrow —> 4. Phagocyte—> 5. Inflammatory cytokine _, 6. TNF ||_-1 RANKL: —> 7_ Fracture
fuII-body radlatlon m _'normal tissue (bone cell death infiltration expression, RANKL Increaseoi bone resorp. by
space and bone marrow) released by osteoblasts osteoclasts

Figure 10 Proposed radiotion-induced inflammatory cascade leading to increased fracture risk following crew member exposure to radiation.
Rapidly dividing marrow cells in exposed bone are damaged and die, in part from damage from ROS (OH‘, 02‘); phagocytes are then recruited
to remove dead cells. These phagocytes also release proinflammatory cytokines like TNF-oc and |L-1, which in turn stimulate osteoclasts directly
or indirectly by stimulating receptor activator of NF-Kﬁ ligand (RANKL) release from nearby osteoblasts. Accelerated loss of bone by osteoclastic
resorption contributes to impaired bone structural integrity, elevating fracture risk for the affected individual. Figure from Willey et al., 201 1 (325),
used with permission.
Combined irradiation and unloading is a well—established osteogenic stimulus and could perhaps

, , , , , , , be used to counter the deleterious skeletal response following
Whlle the aforernentioned studies are beginning to illuminate radiation and disuse. On the other hand, damage to bone cells
thethreatofraciiationt0.the.ske1eta1health oicrew mernbers, from radiation may impair the ability of bone to respond to
few reports. eX1st investigating the combination of radiation anabolic stimulus of exercise. Following 21 days of PWS,
and unloading. It is 1m? ortant to know whether exposure to recovery of bone mass can be enhanced With resistance exer—
low—dose high—energy 10n1z1ng.particles Of GCR and SPES Cise during recovery. However, the osteogenic response of
alters the skeletal response to disuse. Recent data suggest an exercise observed in nonirradiated animals’ cancellous bone
additive response 0f.the two exposures \fvhere the combina— was completed abolished in mice exposed to 0.5 Gy 56Fe
t10n is more deleterious than either radiation or unloading just previous to the 21 days of PWS (unpublished ﬁndings).
31,0116 (1,61) In adult female mice, 1 Gy Of p rotons, com— These data have profoundimplications for long—duration mis—
bined Wlth HLS’ reduced .cancellous b0?” .Volume, trabec— sions, as exercise is a primary modality for preserving skeletal
ular “Pmber’ 2,1114 connect1V1ty dens1ty Signiﬁcantly greater integrity in—ﬂight. Nutritional countermeasures to radiation—
than either radiation exposure or HLS alone.(161). Mechan— induced cellular damage have been studied by a number of
ical p iop erties, snch as max1mum and elastic strength, 2980 investigators. Known antioxidants, such as Vitamins C and E
expenenced ?ddltwe £28868 (16” In skeletaily mature mice, and folic acid, and diets rich in 0mega—3 polyunsaturated fatty
irradiation Wlth 2 Gy Fe €3,115,“ reductions in vertebral can— acids have been shown to be radioprotective (293). Although
cellous number and connectwity 31 days after exposure (,6) these data are encouraging, this is an understudied area that
In the same study, .14 .days Of HLS 1n sham—exposed mice warrants further investigation before deﬁnitive dietary rec—
lead to trabecular thinning andaltered morphology; however, 0mmendati0ns can be made. Important gaps in our current
animals exposed u.) both radiation and short—term HLS eXhlb_ knowledge include the impact of mixed radiation (protons and
ited greater reductions in vertebral cornpresswe strength than GCR components), more complete dose—response determina—
Wl,th e1thentreatrnent alone. Sup p ressmnbtosteoblastogen— tions, the impact on Closely related tissues such as muscle,
6818 and stimulation Of osteoclastogenes1s in mm marrow and the biological effects of very low—dose and low dose—rate
strgém a1.ce11s harvested from yO‘Tng adult HLS mice exposed Chronic exposures to high energy radiation better simulating
t0 . Fe is rnore pronounceci than in mice enposed to only HLS GCR, as opposed to the acute (single—pulse).
0r irradiation (332). Despite these deﬁnitive effects on bone
cell activity, the impact on cancellous bone mass (BV/TV)
in young adult mice exposed to gamma irradiation for up
to 14 days of HLS was no worse than in mice subjected Mechanisms for Bone Loss with
to either insult alone (141). What'remains unbietermined is Prolonged EXPOSUI‘G 1.0 MiCl‘OQ FCIVH')’
Whether longer periods of unloading in irradiated animals
might exacerbate the impact of radiation on skeletal structural The alterations we observe in bone mass, microarchitecture
integrity. and mechanical properties With exposure to the space enVi—

In sum, emerging data suggest that irradiation acceler— ronment are likely due to a number of mechanisms related
ates losses of bone integrity properties due to the disuse of to mechanical unloading, alterations in important cytokines
microgravity. To develop effective countermeasures, further and growth factors, ﬂuid shifts, and altered SNS signaling. If
research is necessary to elucidate the mechanisms responsible signiﬁcant radiation exposure is added into the picture, the
for this interactive effect of mechanical unloading and ioniz— preceding discussion suggests that bone loss Will be exacer—
ing radiation on bone cells. Resistance exercise, for example, bated beyond that due to the unloading of microgravity alone.
666 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"23","Comprehensive Physiology Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue
Ferreting out the most important contributors to bone loss more practical for exploration mission in—ﬂight application
in the space environment is a key challenge to integrative than the large aRED. Male subjects on 90 days of HDT BR
physiologists, requiring validation of mechanisms identiﬁed utilizing a ﬂywheel device which can generate high loads in
in vitro with carefully designed studies in live animals and, both eccentric and concentric modes eXhibited an increase
when feasible, human subjects. in bone formation markers (318) and a 50% mitigation of
pQCT—assessed BMC loss at distal tibia, a bone site with a
. . large cancellous bone compartment (225). However, proxi—
Reduced mechanlcal IOCIClI ng mal femur BMD (by DXA) was not effectively protected, nor
It is now presumed among most bone biologists that the was the increase in bone resorption markers mitigated (318);
large reduction in daily loading history and imposed strain hence, this particular protocol (30 minutes every third day)
on the weight bearing bone sites (lower limbs, spine) is the was minimally effective.
prime driver behind the rapid bone loss observed with dis— Using the same device in combination with LBNP tread—
use. This presumption is supported by the effective model— mill running, the WISE bed rest trial (young women subjects,
ing of spaceﬂight—induced bone loss by ground simulations 60 days of HDT bed rest demonstrated a signiﬁcant mitigation
that are designed to remove or reduce weight—bearing with of bone loss in the proximal femur with this exercise regimen
or without cephalic ﬂuid shifts [e.g., (186, 312, 316)]. These (259). Interestingly, exercising subjects exhibited the same
ground—based animal simulations have provided consistent elevation in bone resorption markers as nonexercising bed
and compelling evidence that reduced mechanical loading, be rest women, but signiﬁcantly higher bone formation mark—
it from disallowing contact of hindlimbs with the cage ﬂoor or ers. This suggests that the anabolic effect of loading during
by blocking muscle contractile forces (e.g., with botulinum this period of disuse can partially counterbalance the large
toxin), is a major contributor to bone loss in these models. increase in bone resorptive actiVity. It is possible that, with
[The reader is referred to the earlier section on Ground—Based the shift of body ﬂuids to the lower limbs during LBNP, this
Animal Research.] The accumulating evidence that higher intervention’s success was due in part to the increased inter—
intensity exercise protocols can mitigate losses of bone den— stitial pressures and/or to the increased GRFs (up to 1 BW)
sity and/or structure in human bed rest subjects and 188 crew that was achieved during the treadmill running. Although the
members is consistent with this primary role of mechanical bulk of evidence from ground—based exercise interventions
unloading, but the lack of success in signiﬁcantly mitigating support resistance exercise as the most effective for improv—
bone loss with exercise [until one recent report; see (261)] ing bone mass (137), operational needs to protect multiple
suggests that other factors are also important contributors. physiological systems including cardiovascular ﬁtness will
Bed rest studies provide the best platform for testing the almost certainly require both aerobic and resistance exercise
efﬁcacy of replacing gravitational loading by exposing human modes to protect crew member health and maximize physical
subjects to artiﬁcial g or various exercise interventions. The performance during exploration missions.
more successful these loading paradigms are, the more conﬁ—
dent we can be that reduced mechanical loads on the skeleton .
are the key mechanism for microgravity—induced bone loss. A Molecular mechcm '5m5
useful reView of exercise countermeasures (47) emphasizes One of the most exciting developments of the past decade
the point that It may be unrealistic to eXpect any exercise in our understanding of mechanisms for disuse bone loss is
intervention, even if engaged in for several hours daily, to the sclerostin story as it relates to Wnt—B—catenin signaling
totally replace all the loads the skeleton normally experiences in bone. Several threads of research linking the function of
over 24 h in 1 g. A number of exercise interventions have the Wnt Lrp 5/6 receptor complex and the regulatory role
been tested for their impact on bone loss during prolonged of sclerostin, the osteocyte protein product of the gene 5051,
bed rest trials, with a majority using resistance training. The have led to a better understanding of how Wnt—B—catenin sig—
most successful of these utilized an aggressive weight training naling modulates bone formation with changes in loading.
program in male and female subjects undergoing 17 weeks Classic genetic linkage analysis studies tracking a high bone
of horizontal bed rest; this protocol was unique in using a mass (HBM) phenotype found in healthy individuals (160)
wide range of upper and lower body lifts, all performed in pointed to the key role of low—density lipoprotein receptor—
the prone or supine position in these bed rest subjects, with related protein 5 (Lrp5) in regulation of bone mass. Notably,
progressive increases in volume and intensity. Bone loss was these HBM individuals had normally shaped bones, in con—
effectively mitigated or even prevented in the lumbar spine, trast to the sclerostin—deﬁciency clinical conditions result—
calcaneus, and femoral neck (but not in other regions of the ing in bone overgrowth of the skull, mandible and/or hand
proximal femur) in resistance—trained subjects (248). These digits [van Buchem’s disease (20) and sclerosteosis (19)],
results were a primary motivator for the design of the aRED, which are caused by deletions in the Sost gene. This led
now installed aboard 188, which provides for much higher bone biologists to identify the protein product of 5051, scle—
training intensities than its predecessor. rostin, which inhibits binding of Wnt to the Lrp 5/6 recep—
More recent bed rest trials testing resistance—based exer— tor [as mediated by sclerostin binding to Lrp 4 (51)]. This
cise countermeasures have focused on devices that might be inhibition of Wnt binding leads to downregulated actiVity of
Volume 6, April 2016 667

"
"24","Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology
KMechanical signal
w
Extracellular
1 1 1 Frizzled
Lrp5/6 ~ Intracellular
degradation
9 t
m@- Inactive
9 9
—
z - - .
Transcription. \
‘Nucleus v —l—)Osteoblast differentiation
markers
‘ I — — ‘
Figure 1 1 Sclerostin regulation of canonical Wnt signaling. Binding of Wnt to the trizzled receptor
complexed with Iow-density lipoprotein 5 or 6 (Lrp5/Lrp6) receptor complex initiates a signaling cascade
resulting in B-cotenin tronslocoting to the nucleus, where it activates transcription factors regulating Wnt
target genes. Wnt pathway activation promotes osteoblast proliferation, maturation and differentiated
activity and, via mature osteoblast production of osteoprotogerin, decreasing osteoclost differentiation
and activation (24). With reduced mechanical loading, osteocyte production of sclerostin increases,
blocking Wnt binding and resulting ultimately in reduced osteoblast and increased osteoclost activity.
the Wnt/B—catenin signaling pathway, resulting in downregu— antibody can effectively mitigate the loss of bone and dimin—
lated osteoblast function (Fig. 11). ished BFR observed With reduced weight bearing (267). If
Sclerostin’s function provided the molecular validation of $051 is deleted genetically, these 5051* mice eXhibit lit—
the concept advanced years earlier by Marotti (170) and Mar— tle to no loss of cancellous 0r cortical bone in response to
tin (171) that some bone cells constitutively produce a signal hindlimb unloading (159) or to muscle paralysis induced by
that inhibits bone formation by osteoblasts on bone surfaces botulinum toxin (192). However, this story is complicated by
and that increases in mechanical loading reduce the expres— new data demonstrating that 5051 mRNA expression in osteo—
sion of that signal, hence allowing for site—speciﬁc upregula— cytes located in metaphyseal compartments (both trabeculae
tion of bone formation. There is growing evidence that Wnt— and the cortical shell) decreases With 10 days of disuse, as
B—Catenin signaling modulates differentiation of mesenchy— opposed to consistent increases in 5051 observed in mid—shaft
mal stem cells into the osteoblastic cell line. In addition, cortical bone in the same 1imb(163).There are also otherregu—
it may indirectly impact on osteoclast function by regulat— lators of Wnt signaling that act at the Lrp 5/6 receptor, such as
ing osteoblast (24) and osteocyte (142) release of osteopro— Dickkopf—l (Dkkl), Wise, and secreted de—related—proteins
togerin, a decoy receptor for RANK that inhibits osteoclast (38), some of Which may increase in a compensatory fashion
differentiation. in the absence of sclerostin. This last possibility would pro—
Published data documenting increases in serum sclerostin Vide an explanation for the enhanced bone formation response
after 60 days of a 90—day bed rest protocol in young men to cyclic aXial loading of limb bone in anesthetized 5051*
(266), as well as in bedridden stroke patients (84), suggest mice as compared to the response in Wild type controls (192).
that this mechanism may well be relevant during extended Key gaps in our understanding of sclerostin’s mechanistic
stays in microgravity. Several independent laboratories have contribution to disuse bone loss include Why osteocyte scle—
conﬁrmed an increase in osteocyte—speciﬁc sclerostin and/or rostin in different bone compartments respond in diametri—
SOST expression in cortical bone With reduced weight bear— cally opposed fashion to reduced mechanical unloading and
ing in mice (227, 267) (159) and rats (164), and With sci— how other regulators of Wnt signaling contribute to disuse
atic neurectomy in mice (193). More convincingly, sclerostin bone less.
668 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"25","Comprehensive Physiology Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue
Table 2 Candidate Molecular Mechanisms for Microgravity—Induced Bone Loss
Impact of K0 on Impact of K0 on
Gene deleted Function of protein A Formation A resorption A cortical mass A %BV/TV
(3—1 integrin1 (1 16) Cell adhesion, mechanotransduction No effect Exocerbotes No effect No effect
CIZ (107) Cell adhesion; transcriptional regulator 01 Abolishes No effect Abolishes Abolishes
mineralized matrix degradation enzymes
Cx432 (162) Gap junction protein; bone cell Abolishes No effect No effect Mitigates
differentiation, suppresses apoptosis (cortical
surfaces)
MURF1 (138) Skeletal muscle—specific ubiquitin ligase Abolishes Abolishes Mitigates Aloolishes3
Osteopontin Integrin binding site; adhesion of bone Abolishes Abolishes NM Mitigates
(1 14,1 15) cells to mineralized matrix
p53 (240) Cell cycling, apoptosis Abolishes Abolishes NM Abolishes
Po|k44 (315) Negative regulator of pyruvate No effect Nearly NM Mitigates
dehydrogenase complex (generates abolishes
ocetyl Co—A for TCA cycle)
SOST (159, 192) Inhibits Wnt binding to LRP5/6 Abolishes NM Abolishes Abolishes
Abbreviations: CIZ, cos—interocting zinc finger protein; Cx43, connexin 43; MURF1, muscle RING finger protein; Pdk4, pyruvate dehydrogenase
kinase 4; NM, not measured.
1Transgenic model, (3—1 receptor with dominant negative activity targeted to osteoblasts/osteocytes.
2Cx43KO conditional to osteocytes/osteoblosts.
3Weight—bec:1ring MURF1 KO mice exhibit ~30% lower %BV/TV vs. WT.
4K0 in BCL2 Tg mice, overexpression specific to osteoblasts, yields disrupted osteocyte network.

A number of published studies have quantiﬁed changes in cancellous bone compartments. This effect is accomplished
in expression of multiple genes in response to spaceﬂight or by abolishing both the usual decline in bone formation and the
hindlimb unloading [e.g., see (33)]. More powerful demon— increased bone resorption With hindlimb unloading in these
strations of a particular protein’s mechanistic contributions knockout mouse models. Conditional deletion of connexin—
are afforded by the use of genetic models With transgenic 43 (a gap junction protein prevalent in bone cells) (162) in
(over—eXpression) or global or cell—conditional deletions of osteocytes and osteoblasts effectively mitigates declines in
speciﬁc genes. A number of genetic models that have been cancellous BV/TV, but only bone formation is affected in this
tested for their response to disuse bone loss are listed in model; increased resorption is not affected by this genetic
Table 2, including several involved With mechanotransduc— manipulation. The challenge moving forward is to explore
tion ((3—1 integrin) or cell adhesion to mineralized matrix how these various molecules and their signaling pathways
(CIZ, osteopontin). When genes for the latter two proteins might interact in contributing to the alterations in skeletal
are deleted, hindlimb unloading bone loss is abolished, as integrity With disuse or the prolonged nonweight bearing of
decreases in bone formation and/or increased bone resorp— the space environment.
tion With disuse are prevented (107, 114, 115). Interestingly,
the (3—1 integrin transgenic model exhibited exacerbated bone . . .
resorption With unloading and n0 mitigation of cortical 0r Al’rerqhons m endocrlne Factors: beyond PTH and
cancellous bone less (116). In another transgenic model that V'mmm D
overexpresses BCL2 in osteoblasts, the osteocyte network Given the importance of endocrine changes to aging—related
is disrupted; at the age of 4 months, When about 75% of bone loss and the dramatic elevations in urine and fecal cal—
a11 osteocytes are apoptotic, these mice eXhibit resistance to cium noted in Skylab crew members (221), early mecha—
unloading—induced boneless. Unique to these Tg—BCL2 mice, nistically oriented research focused on the potential role of
pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (Pdk4; a negative regula— endocrine regulators of serum calcium, especially parathy—
tor of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex) does not vary With roid hormone and Vitamin D. Although these important reg—
Weight—bearing status as is observed in Wild—type mice, nor ulators of calcium homeostasis eXhibit moderate changes
does osteoclastogenesis increase With unloading, suggesting in human crew members during spaceﬂight, those changes
a regulatory role for Pdk4 (315). are more likely generated by, rather than the prime cause

Global deletions of p53 (a cell cycle/apoptosis regulator) of, unloading—induced bone loss, as discussed in the ear—
(240) and 0f MURF—l (a ubiquitin ligase in skeletal muscle) lier section examining alterations in calcium metabolism
(138) are particularly effective in preventing disuse bone loss in—ﬂight.

Volume 6, April 2016 669

"
"26","Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology
Elevations in corticosterone With stress can stimulate Negative energy balance and disrupted acid-base
osteoclast activity and suppress osteoblast function and balance
thereby bone formation (321). As previously noted, there .
is evidence for short—term elevations in serum over the ﬁrst The fact that pXé—measuredbone loss. in recent 18.8 crew
10 days 0 f unloading in mice (116 314) but young a dul t members is Signiﬁcantly minimized in those us1ng the
rats exhibit no Changes in serum corticosterone When tested improved aREi) a nd, importantly, Who are also eonsuming
during the third day of unloading (96). One report utilizing adequate caloric intake <26” suggests that negative energy
. . . balance is another contributing mechanism for bone loss
analyses of 24—h fecal collections documented a tripling 0f . d' 1 E rth b't E 'd d d .1
fecal corticosteroid metabolites in young adult mice over the inenrre 1n OW_ a .or 1 ' v.1 ence en re uce energy avai _
ﬁrs t 3 days 0 f hindlimb unloading as compared to singly ability (total energy intake minus daily energy expenditure)
housed weigh t bearing controls by 5 to 10 days 0 f unloading 1n exerc1s1ng women clearly indicates s1gn1ﬁcant1ncreases in
fecal corticosteroid metabolites declined some but remained resorp t10n biomarkers and declines in foimation biomarkers
twofold higher than controls (72). There is a dearth of data after only 5 days (112); remarkably, the time course Of alter—
documenting plasma or fecalcorticosteronelevels Withlonger ations inbone resorption and formation markers ceineided
term unloading in rats or mice so it is difﬁcult to assess the tightly Wlth those in serum estrogen and IGFJ’ respectively.
impact of elevated corticosteroids With HU studies of 21 days In women, chronic reductions in energy availability impact on
or longer. However, an elegant spaceﬂight experiment utiliz— ieprociuctive and metabolic. hermene status as well as ”W
ing adrenalectomized young rats (6 weeks old) treated With integrity 69)’ It ap p ears highly likely that these endocrine
replacement corticosteroids demonstrated that the suppres— alterations CPUId be relevant to rnaleas “7.611 as female crew
sion of bone formation in animals ﬂown in low—Earth orbit members, given the 50% reduction in urinary triiodothryo—
for 17 days was in depen den t 0 f glucocorticoid status (334). nine (T3)excret10n observed during space shuttle ﬂights When
Although alterations in the calcium—regulating hormones energy intake averaged.80% Of p reﬂight levels (272) .
do not appear to drive unloading—induced bone loss 01 der There are few published controlled intervention trials on
studies in dica te d that mechanically unloaded bone can the combined effect of energy restriction and modeled micro—
develop a reduced sensitivity to growth hormone. Hypophy— gravity. Reducing energy availability by 20% in young males
. . . . . by decreasing fat content of the food supplied during two
sectomized young rats given growth hormone during hindlimb k fHDT b d t d t h th fb
unloading eXhibited increases in uptake of labeled hydrox— wee Si) e res oes n0 C ange e response 0 one
yproline and calcium in the tibia but there was no rescue resorption and formation markers (209). If adult male rodents
0 f the depressed trabecular bone volume (BV/TV) nor in are subjected to a 30% reduction in food intake during pro—
periosteal BFR. These results were interpreted as demonstrat— lonigecligil/iigdhmb unloadiini, the (10;: :11 Eromfinal. Elma 11m:—
ing a selective resistance (by metaphyseal trabecular bone and gm ‘1] (1;: aggrava e , eyonll 2: .1n tuce W; 113 Oil;
periosteal surfaces) to the normally anabolic effect of growth 1fng c? 011:, t' ' oweverf, tslilnce f: Itlu €16}: lat: re tuce dWl d
hormone (95). Later studies by the same investigators shifted 00 ies HC {011, some 0 1s 6.: CC .mig e ue 0 re uce
to examine the role 0 f I GF—I which is now believed to medi— protein, ca1C1um, or other nutrients important to bone. Actu—
ate the bone—speciﬁc effects of growth hormone. If IGF—I is ally, It COUld be argued that thls p aradigm better models the
given to growth—hormone—deﬁcient dwarf rats it does stim— reduced food intake documented in the past in shuttle mis—
ulate increases in periosteal BFR in weight—bearing bones s10n crew members (averaging 70% Of ass1gned fOOd intake)
(including the weight—bearing humeri of tail suspended rats) (57)' Although 1t .WOUld ap p ear that negative energy bal—
(241) However IGF—I given to tail—suspended rats does not ance could be eas11y corrected, there is Clear eVidence for
increase periosteal BFR nor trabecular bone volume in the independent effects Of stress hormones, altered light—dark
unloaded tibia nor did IGF—I added to bone marrow stro— cycles and radiation exposure on ap p et1te, gastric empty—
mal cells harvested from those unloaded rats stimulate the ing, and gastr01ntest1na1 function that complicates this picture
usual increase in cell proliferation. One mechanism for this (57)()th t 't' 1 f t b d t t 1 . t k
resistance appears to be a downregulation of signaling by the , t er 111:1 ﬂ 1(1)na SC (:rst gyoél. fha .energty 1? al e Cf:
integrin ocVB3 in osteoprogenitor cells (242). This acquired H.111) ac 0n ene 088' es. S u 16 .18. e impac O eeva e
resistance to IGF—I by bone cells is an interesting mechanism dietary p rotein intake, Wthh can Signiﬁcantly alter ac1d—base
. . . . . . . balance if not counterbalanced by enough foods containing
by Wthh bone m1 ght maintain its appropriate downregulation . . . .
0 f bone mass to Chronic decreases in mechanical 10a ding. base precursors, as estimated from dietary p0tass1um intake.
The fact that food restriction exacerbates the bone loss In male HD.T bed rest SUbJeCtS W.h0 had some freedem to
observed in hindlimb—unloaded rodents is consistent With an select fOOd items during the experiment, an elevated dietary
important role of IGF—I since this growth factor declines pre— animal p rotein—to—p 0tass1um ratio was highly p redictive Of
Cipitously With prolonged negative energy balance (89).There higher .bone resorption rates, estimated from the systernic
. . . . resorption markers NTX (344). In a separate bed rest trial
is a lack of published data on the impact of unloading or the d , d t t t th , t f , 'd 1 t (
space environment on the many cytokine factors (interferons, es1gne 0 es 6.: impac 0 an am.” am 8.111.) p emen a
in terleukins and TNF—oc) known to regulate 0s teoblas t and le ofessential amino ac1ds),ma1e subjects exhibited slightly
0s teoclas t flinction (108) higher urinary NTX and DPD and signiﬁcantly higher urine
670 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"27","Comprehensive Physiology Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue
calcium values than nonsupplemented subjects on bed rest, Early investigations conﬁrmed reduced femoral arterial
as well as small but signiﬁcant reduction in total body BMC blood ﬂow in hindlimb unloaded rodents (228); however,
(342). blood ﬂow to different tissues within the hindlimb may be
Another nutritional factor impacting on acid—base balance differentially regulated. Conﬁrmation of signiﬁcantly reduced
is sodium chloride (NaCl), high intakes of which can produce blood ﬂow to multiple bone compartments with both acute
low—grade metabolic acidosis leading to elevated bone resorp— (7 days) and chronic (4 weeks) hindlimb unloading in
ti0n(80).NaC11ntakes of astronauts routinely exceed the rec— adult rats was provided by subsequent radiolabelled micro—
ommended daily intake of < 85 mmolﬂ. sodium by twofold t0 sphere studies (54). The reductions in bone blood ﬂow were
ﬁvef01d(102).Evenoverashort14—daybedresttria1,atenfold explained by increased resistance in bone vascular beds at
higher NaCl intake in young male subjects produces a low— both time points; perfusion pressure, another important con—
grade metabolic acidosis and exacerbates increases in urinary tributor to tissue blood ﬂow, was normal at 7 days, but
calcium excretion and bone resorption, but not bone forma— declined signiﬁcantly by 4 weeks. Certainly, reduced sup—
tion, markers. Urinary nitrogen losses are threefold higher ply of nutrients and/or oxygen could impair bone cell activity,
in bed rest subjects ingesting a high NaCl diet, suggesting but a parallel reduction in interstitial ﬂuid pressures in bone
an additional negative impact on muscle protein loss during might be even more important. Further, altered release of
short—term disuse (80). Alternatively, in 1 g—based trials in various signaling molecules from vascular endothelial cells
humans, increasing dietary intake of alkalinizing potassium responding to reduced blood ﬂow (including nitric OXide (28)
salts can produce beneﬁcial effects on calcium balance and and prostaglandin 12) may interact with mechanical loading
bone mineralization, as well as minimizing risk of renal stones signaling pathways (54). Given the link between impaired
(75). vasodilation and reduced cancellous bone mass with aging
(215), impaired perfusion of bone may well be a contribu—
tory mechanism to bone loss in microgravity. [Interesting1y,
, , , very recent eVidence demonstrating impaired vasoconstrictor
ROIGPF oxnda’rlve damage and read've oxygen function in cerebral vessels after spaceﬂight (285) may offer
speCIes clues to reports of increased skull bone density in bed—rested
Thatlow—gradeinﬂammation and/or oxidative status may con— humans (338).] Intriguing eVidence that a B2—ag0nist, dobu—
tribute to bone loss during microgravity is suggested by seV— tamine, mitigates bone loss in hindlimb—unloaded adults rats
eral lines of eVidence utilizing bed rest trials. Higher dietary (36) (276) is consistent with a mechanistic role of reduced
intake of omega—3 fatty acids during the ﬁrst 60 days of HDT bone blood ﬂow, as this agent has the capability of increasing
BR is highly predictive of smaller elevations in the resorption peripheral vasodilation and perhaps thereby improving bone
marker NTX. The protective effect of omega—3 fatty acids blood ﬂow during hindlimb unloading.
may be explained by their effect on decreasing activation of Osteocytes detect minute deformations of bone during
NF—KB, a signaling molecule central to many signaling path— normal activity by responding to the shear stress generated
ways associated with inﬂammation (346). Iron—supplemented by ﬂuid ﬂow within the tiny channels (canaliculi) connecting
processed foods provided to crew members exacerbate the lacunae, within which reside the osteocytes. Hence, reduc—
endogenous rise in iron stores resulting from the lysis of red tions in interstitial ﬂuid pressures might reduce this fun—
blood cells early in adaptation to microgravity (345). Excess damental physical signal to which osteocytes are respond—
free iron can interact with reactive oxygen species (ROS) ing. This presumption is borne out by elegant studies testing
and exacerbate oxidative stress in tissues. With mounting eVi— the impact of subjecting intact bone in disuse conditions to
dence that oxidative stress is an important contributor to bone oscillating intramedullary pressure. Bone formation on both
loss with aging and estrogen deﬁciency postmenopause (4), periosteal and endocortical surfaces of the mid—shaft ulna
this mechanism for microgravity—induced bone loss and nutri— increases proportionally with transcortical ﬂuid pressure gra—
tional modulation thereof merits further study. dients and intracortical porosity is decreased, independent
of any mechanical deformation of the bone. Hence, both
modeling and remodeling actiVity in bone is modulated by
. . . these ﬂuid ressure radients (218). More recent studies in
Impac’r OF Altered Infers’rl’rlal FIU'd Pressures and mice conﬁrfn that pliglsatile changes in interstitial ﬂuid ﬂow
BIOOd Flow 10 Bone in murine bone delivered during a period of hindlimb unload—
The microgravity environment produces a profound cephalic ing can indeed signiﬁcantly mitigate the bone loss observed
ﬂuid shift, almost certainly reducing interstitial ﬂuid pres— with disuse (144). There may be an additional bone cell
sures in the lower limbs and perhaps reduced blood ﬂow to type beyond osteocytes that are responding to the reduc—
bone. Treadmill running combined with LBNP, which pulls tion in mechanical loading and/or interstitial ﬂuid ﬂow, since
ﬂuid into the lower limbs, mitigates increases in bone resorp— mice with targeted deletions of osteocytes show similar or
ti0n during bed rest (257, 343). These ﬁndings suggest that enhanced responses to pulsatile interstitial ﬂuid ﬂow during
reduced interstitial ﬂuid pressures in the lower limbs play a hindlimb unloading as compared with wild—type littermates
contributory role to bone loss during microgravity exposure. (143).
Volume 6, April 2016 671

"
"28","Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology
A Nove| Regulator of Bone Mass; The Sympathetic unloading—induced bone loss is attenuated(139).Notably,e1e—
Nervous System vated sympathetic tone has been demonstrated in humans
An intriguing line of evidence about the mechanistic role of exposed to the spaceﬂight enVironment. The p 1V9 ta1 Neuro—
the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) in the regulation of Lab STS—90 experiments documentedrnoderate increases in
bone mass arose at the turn of the century from experiments p eroneal “er,“ muscle sympathetic agtwlty and p lasmanora—
exploring the role of the a dipokine leptin. 019/019 and db/db drenaline sp111over and Clearance during that 16—day m1ss1on
mice, deﬁcient in the genes for leptin or leptin’s receptor, have (73)' Hence, 1t1s reasonable to speculate that increased sym—
higher vertebral cancellous bone mass than wi1 d— type litter— pathetic tonemay be another contributor to bone loss incurred
mates. When supraphysio—logical levels of leptin are delivered in micrograyity. , , , , ,
directly to the CNS Via intracerebroventricular (ICV) injec— An earlier section reV1ewed the impact Of radiation on
tions, vertebral bone mass is reduced to wild—type littermates bone.a1terations 1n the space enVironment; a grow1ng body
values (62). These ICV injections do not affect peripheral of eVidence docurnents that the constant low—dose but high—
(serum)1eve1s of leptin or impact on body weight, but reversed energy exposures incurred, espe01a11y on p 1anetary or Lunar
the reduction in sympathetic tone observed in leptin—deﬁcient surfaces) can Signiﬁcantly enhance bone .1988 during exp 10—
mice, as measured by uncoupling protein 1 (Ucp 1) expression ration m1ss1ons. In addition) altered nutritional status (e.g.,
in brown adipose tissue. In separate experiments, both 019/019 reduced energy availability, iron O,V “193(1) Wthh may inter—
and wild—type mice treated with an adrenergic agonist (iso— actw1th ,eildOCﬂP e or p aracrine Signaling to bone, changes
proterenol) also eXhibit declines in vertebral bone mass (283). in interstitial ﬂmd p ressures and/or. bone b100d ﬂow due to
B2—adrenergic receptor ( A drB2)—nu11 mice eXhibit the same ﬂuid shifts in zero or reduced grayity, and contributions by
HBM phenotype as 019/019 mice, which eanno t be rescued by heightened sympathetic outﬂow are important factors in the
ICV leptin infusions (70). In sum, these experimental results space enVironment that may aggravate the impact Of reduced
established a direct impact of sympathetic neuronal signaling mechaniea11oad1ng on the skeleton. A.key gap in our knowl—
in regulating bone cell activity, sparkingafascinating new line edge base is hf” space—relevant radiation exposnre might
of research into the mechanistic role of adrenergic signaling exacerbate the impact Of these 9th“ relevant contributors to
in the regulation of bone mass. More recent evidence derived spaeeﬂight—induced decrements 1n skeleta11ntegr1ty. An inte—
from mice deﬁcient in either 151' and 152—3 drenergic recep— grat1vephys1010gyexperimentalapproachisrequiredto deter—
tors, or null for both receptors, demonstrates that 151' and mine how thesefactors interact to weaken skeletal integrity
152—3 drenergic signaling results in opposite effects on bone. and what eoordinated suites of countermeasures w111 effec—
Sympathetic signaling Via [51 receptors results in an enhance— tively rnitigate fracture. “SK and p reserYe long—term bone
ment of the anabolic effects of growth and mechanical load— health in humans exploring the space enVironment.
ing, with some involvement of circulating IGF—I (213). By
contrast, Bz—adrenergic receptor signaling upregulates bone
resor tion durin a in b modulatin RANKL eX ression . .
(70)? g g g y g p Spaceflight Adaptation of the Dense

A generalized increase in sympathetic outﬂow may be Fibrous Connective Tissues
another modulator of osteoblast and osteoclast activity con— , , , . .
tributing to bone loss in the space environment. Providing pro— A brlefhls’rory OF SPOFGH'QH opportunl’rles to study
pranolol (a nonselective beta—adrenergic blocker) to hindlimb— dense ﬁbrous connec’rlve hssues
unloaded rats (17) and mice (139) signiﬁcantly reduces loss Very few human investigations involving connective tissue
of cancellous VBMD. Blocking beta—adrenergic signaling in adaptation during or following spaceﬂight have been per—
adult rats (17) maintained BFR and abolished the threefold formed over the 50+ years of manned space travel. For this
increase in bone resorption surfaces observed at the end of reason, the focus in this particular section is on data derived
the 28—day experiment in vehicle—treated unloaded animals, from animals exposed to actual or ground simulations of
suggesting that adrenergic signaling plays a more important spaceﬂight; the handful of human studies, including data on
role later than earlier during this unloading period. Sim— dense ﬁbrous connective tissues following spaceﬂight, are
ilar preservation of osteoblast function and suppression of highlighted and referenced where appropriate.
osteoclast resorptive activity were demonstrated in unloaded Spaceﬂight research using mammalian animal models
mice treated with propranolol (139). Administering the beta— to investigate the musculoskeletal adaptations associated
agonist isoproterenol produced the same amount of bone loss with acute microgravity exposure started in earnest with the
in weight bearing mice as did 10 to 14 days of unloading; USﬂJSSR joint missions using the BION space capsule spe—
no further increase in bone loss was produced by adding cialized for carrying nonhuman primates and other animals
unloading to the isoproterenol treatments. These pharmaco— aboard Russian made Soyuz—2 rockets in 1977 (Cosmos 936)
logical experiments were supplemented with a genetic manip— in 1977 (Cosmos 936) and extended through 1989 (Cosmos
ulation; in mice with a heterozygous deletion of dopamine 2044). A detailed history of the BION Cosmos 2044 mis—
beta—hydroxylase gene, required for normal sympathetic tone, sion is provided by Grindeland et a1. (92). Mineralized tissue,
672 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"29","Comprehensive Physiology Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue
skeletal muscle, and many other tissue types were collected 14 days (83) (NASA—SL3, Cosmos 1887, and Cosmos 2044,
from Cosmos animals in a well—organized tissue sharing pro— respectively) consistently indicate that microgravity blocks
gram to study changes in multiple morphologic, metabolic the induction of osteogenesis in the periodontal ligament, but
and molecular markers. Much of the initial data was derived postﬁight recovery of osteogenic capability is observed.
from the Cosmos biosatellite projects through joint collab—
orations between NASA, the Institute of Biomedical Prob—
lems (IMBP; Moscow, Russia) and members of the European Tendon Clncl ligament adaptation to ground-basecl
Space Agency (ESA). However, very little attention was ded— simulations of microg ravi’ry
icated to the dense ﬁbrousconnective tissue research during DepriVing the hindlimbs of GRFs during rodent hindlimb
the Cosmos spaceﬂight m1ss1ons as well as during NASA? unloading can delay wound healing in medial collateral liga—
AEM Animal EITCJOSUIC MOdlﬂ? (ABM) and Researgh Am"" ments (173, 216, 217) and reduces ligament strength. Earlier
mal Holding Fa0111ty (RAHF) mid—deck Shuttle experiments. studies using the same unloading model suggest that tendon
Hence, much of what we know and understancl about dense and ligament adapt to 7 to 28 days of decreased GRFs by
ﬁbrous connective tissue adaptation tospaceﬁight has been decreasing ligament length and strength, weakening bone—
deriyed ﬁom ground Simulations Of micrograVIty us1ng the ligament—bone junctions, decreasing the surface area and
r at hmdhmb unloading model. diameters of individual ﬁbrils (195), and decreasing total col—
lagen and proteoglycan tendon concentrations (296, 298, 300).
The mechanisms for these deﬁcits in tendon/ligament func—
Tendon and ligament adaptation during Spaceflight tion and structure have not been fully deﬁned, but important
A rare study Of rat tendon morphological adaptations to space— candidates include shifts in local catabolic and anabolic fac—
ﬁight was performed by the US/Soviet team of Doty and tors, as well as blood supply. Many cytokines and growth fac—
Kaplansky et 31. (61), which ﬁew adult rats for N14 days tors, [e.g., insulin—like growth factor—1(IGF—1), transforming
aboard Cosmos 2044. One purpose of the Cosmos 2044 mis— growth factor—8 (TGF'B), and interleukin—6] have been postu—
sion was to verify the experimental results of Cosmos 1887, lated to modulate ligament and tendon ﬁbroblast activity due
which landed early (12. 5 days) and thousands of kilometers to increases in load, thereby inducing the secretion of collagen
away from the recovery team, thus exposing all animal tis— into the extracellularmatriX (23,87,104,256). Deﬁcits in seV—
sues to normal gravitational loading for 535+ hours following eral Of these growth factors occur during hindlimb unloading
landing. In Cosmos 2044 tendon experiments, electron micro— (31,242) Regional blood ﬂow is diminished to the hindlimbs
scopic analysis of ﬂight tendon specimens displayed a disor— in this ground—based simulation 0f microgravity (54), which
ganized and haphazard de novo collagen ﬁbril arrangement likely decreases blood supply to ligament and tendons in the
surrounding the space juxtaposed to the tendon ﬁbroblasts unweighted hindlimbs, as demonstrated nearly 50 years ago
that was not found in ground control tendon specimens. It was during cast immobilization (2340- A reduction in anabolic
suggested that the newly forming tendon ﬁbrils located just growth factors, as well as blood supply, couldinﬁuence tendon
outside the ﬁbroblast were polymerizing in a random man- and ligament ﬁbroblast Vlablllty and function. The reduction
ner due to a “loss of ﬁbroblast control,” perhaps mediated by 0f regional blood ﬂow is postulated to occur during exposur e
the absence of normal GRFs experienced during spaceﬂight t0 spaceﬂight and could have the same effect on ligament and
(G.N. Durnnova and A.S. Kaplansky, personal communica- tendon tissues and would be especially detrimental to these
tion). There were no spaceﬂight—induced changes noted in already semiavascular tissues.
any other tendon extracellular matrix components as evalu—
ated hlsmloglcaﬂy' . . Biomechanica/ adaptation of tendon and ligament
To our knowledge, there are no peer—reV1ewed published to hindlimb unloading
data on the adaptation of ligaments at mobile skeletal joints
(knee, elbow, ankle, or shoulder), in human or animal, that Much of the earlier research performed on rodent ligament
have been subjected to acute or Chronic microgravity eXpo— or tendon in response to unloading focused on biomechanical
sure. The most relevant dense ﬁbrous connective tissue stud— adaptations due to the deprivation of GRFs (5,195,298,300).
ied during spaceﬂight that shares some similar structure to Seven days of hindlimb unloading decreases the ultimate load
the traditional bone—ligament—bone complex is the alveolar— of the femur—medial collateral ligament—tibia (FMT) complex,
periodontal ligament, which is a specialized group of extra— decreases the MCL length (6%), and increases the MCL sur—
cellular matrix ﬁbers that attach the teeth to the alveolar bone face area ~10% (300), while 14 days of hindlimb unloading
Via cementum. Early work performed by Garetto and Roberts showed no Change in MCL surface area but large decrements
suggests there is aspaceﬁight—induced inhibition of osteoblas— in FMT biomechanical properties (298). The discrepancies
togenesis, as indicated by an early increase in osteoprogenitor in MCL surface area volume measurements could be due
cells and adecreased number of preosteoblasts, as determined to a number of factors, which may include: (i) interlabora—
by nuclear volume testing. Data taken from three different ani— tory measuring methodology and/or (ii) the age and strain
mal experiments lasting 7 days (76, 226), 12.5 days (82), and of rodent used. Measures of biomechanical properties of the
Volume 6, April 2016 673

"
"30","Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology
FMT complex from independent laboratories conﬁrm that as osteoblasts in the rat skeleton due to the hindlimb unload—
little as 7 to 14 days of nonweight bearing elicits a signiﬁcant ing perturbation. Reloading of the Achilles tendon increased
FMT weakening independent of alterations in the ligament Colla1 and Col3a1 eXpression at recovery day 4, indicating
morphological measurements. Decreases in Achilles tendon that extracellular matrix Changes did take place during unload—
collagen ﬁber thicknesses/diameters and a decrease in tendon ing and/or there is a shift to de novo collagen production in
surface area were demonstrated in 6—week—old rats follow— the tendon following reloading (105).
ing 35 days of hindlimb unloading (195). Older (adult) rats These alterations in collagen phenotype can impact on
unloaded for 21 days demonstrated signiﬁcant decreases in skeletal muscle as well. A shift in the ratio of the collagen I to
Achilles tendon maximal stress (—38%) and tangent modulus the collagen III phenotype in soleus muscle without an asso—
(—41%), suggesting that tendon stiffness could be signiﬁ— ciated Change in total soleus muscle collagen concentration or
cantly reduced without a concomitant decrease in Achilles hydroxylysyl—pyridinoline (H—PYR) content during hindlimb
tendon cross—sectional area (5). unloading (1, 14, and 28 days) could account for the decrease
in soleus muscle stiffness associated with hindlimb unloading
(180). Other studies of disuse atrophy during immobilization
Biochemical and molecular adaptation of tendon and wound healing mimic some of the trends Viewed dur—
and ligament f0 hindlimb unloading ing hindlimb unloading, which include decreases in tendon
Very few data eXist regarding the biochemical and molecular ultimate load, Young’s mOdFllus’ .extraeelluiar matrix eontent
. . . . and concentration, and an inferior microtissue architecture
Changes assoc1ated w1th dense ﬁbrous connective tissues and
hindlimb unloading. Given the small size of these tissues in (133)'
rodents (the most prevalent animal model), it can be cost—
prohibitive to include the large numbers of animals required . . . .
to generate enough tissue to collect both structural/material Tendon and Ilgamen’r Clolap’rablll’ry ’ro Increased
properties and extracellular matrix composition. Another bar— exerCIse and hyperg mv't)’
rier in the past was the relatively large amount of dense ﬁbrous Most of the current knowledge regarding tendon and ligament
connective tissues needed to perform biochemical and molec— adaptation stems from orthopedic research on dense ﬁbrous
ular extracellular matrix analyses with older technologies. An connective tissues wound healing. However, recent advances
early study documented that rat patellar tendon uronic acid utilizing in vitro and in vivo experimentation have allowed
and hydroxyproline concentrations were decreased without researchers to exploit fundamental mechanisms of growth and
changes in tendon cellularity following 28 days of hindlimb repair to engineer tissues as a Clinical option for replacement
unloading (296). The majority of the recent studies involv— of damaged tendons and ligaments (311).
ing mechanistic extracellular matrix adaptation have focused Exercise studies in ligament and tendon (88, 134, 135,
on mineralized bone (25, 64, 99, 100, 113, 196, 212, 242, 340), 153, 287) have demonstrated that these tissues adapt to acute
skeletalmuscle connective tissue(180), and the myotendinous perturbations in dynamic loads. Increased synthesis of col—
junction region (79, 271). A common thread from ﬁndings lagen (179) and localized expression of growth factors such
in the aforementioned studies investigating connective tissue as IGF—1, TGF—B, and IL—6, and matrix metalloprotease can
adaptation suggests that some collagen regulatory pathways be demonstrated in chronically exercised human tendons [see
are fundamentally altered due to GRF deprivation. reView by Kjaer et al. (135)]. Tendon adaptations can vary
In one of the most mechanistic studies to date, the reg— with the type of dynamic loading/exercise. Voluntary run—
ulation of collagen expression in the Achilles tendon was ning on awhee1,Vibrationp1us strength training, and strength
studied by quantifying growth factor gene expression associ— training alone have been tested during a 12—week period
ated with extracellular matrix collagen regulation in female in young rats (153). Regardless of the exercise mode, rat
rats subjected to 7 and 14 days of hindlimb unloading (105). Achilles tendon demonstrates no Changes in tendon cross—
Achilles tendon demonstrated no atrophy regardless of the section area; however, wheelrunning produced more Changes
unloading duration despite a concurrent 50% loss in soleus in TIMP—l mRNA compared to these other forms of exercise
muscle mass. Collagen type I (Colla1), TGF—B, and con— (153). Strenuous exercise increases tendon collagen turnover
nective tissue growth factor (CTGF) tendon gene expression and decreases H—PYR cross—link content in chickens exer—
remained unchanged while collagen type III (Col3a1) tended Cised vigorously at 70% to 80% V02 max for 8 weeks
to decrease at day 7 of hindlimb unloading (105). The ten— (56). Exercise could prove to be a useful countermeasure to
don IGF—l isoforms [IGF—1Ea and IGF—1Eb, also known as ameliorate potential extracellular matrix Changes associated
mechano—growth factor (MGF)] showed a signiﬁcant 2—fold with long duration spaceﬂight and prevent connective tissue
elevation in gene expression at day 7, with a trend toward an injuries upon reloading in a 1 g environment. However, it
increase at day 14, suggesting similarities to the bone response is unclear at this time what duration, frequency, and magni—
to unloading (31,105). It has been suggested that an increase tude of exercise is optimal for protecting the dense ﬁbrous
in the gene expression of the local tissue IGF—l isoforms connective tissues during exploration missions or recovery
is secondary to the overall IGF—l resistance experienced by therefrom.
674 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"31","Comprehensive Physiology Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue
Po’ren’rial Repair Strategies For Dense Fibrous molecular, and biomechanical characteristics of the healing
Connective Tissues MCL tissues-
The relative importance of IGF—1 as a potent anabolic stim— In light Of this work and that by others, tissue engineering
ulator and modulator of collagen in dense ﬁbrous connective and gene therap y could beuseful 1n hastening healing times Of
tissues is . t b innin t b nd r t d. M 1 k 1 t I wound IIIJUI‘ICS by 1mprov1ng the quality of dense ﬁbrous con—
1118 eg go eu esoo uscuoseea , , ,
. . . . nective tissue in the absence of a large blood supply to these

and dense ﬁbrous connective tissues differentially eXpress , , ,
isoforms of IGF—1; hence, it is important to identify the splice t1ssues. Further work testing these ap p roaches 1n the context

. . . . . . of actual or Simulated micrograV1ty is needed to determine
variants of IGF—1 during hindlimb unloading in tendon and ,
li t t nd r t nd th r 1 t r 1 f thi r th whether this gene therapy method or others could be used

gamen ou esa e eguaory oeo sgow , ,

factor. Bone formation during skeletal unloading has been as Vlable countermeasures for, or treatment Of’ ligarnent or
shown to be resistant to the effects of IGF—1 (241); however, tendon ruptures that may occur during long—term m1ss1ons.
IGF—l administration during weight—bearing recovery follow—
ing hindlimb unloading CffCCthCly stimulates bOIlC formation Bone-fendon interfaces and myotendinous iuncﬁons
and a faster recovery of bone mass (40). Recently, splice vari— S H. h t rm f
ants of IGF—1 have been deemed extraordinarily important in P ace ’9 eXpe I en 5
determining the fate of unloaded and loaded skeletal mus— Skeletalmuscles are attached to bone by tendons comprised of
Cle (39, 135). It has been determined that IGF—Ela (IGF—lA) aligned collagen ﬁbers, which then embed into mineralized
and the IGF—Elb (IGF—lB or mechano growth factor—MGF) bone matrix and are now termed Sharpey’s ﬁbers. Tendons
are differentially expressed based upon the load experienced transfer mechanical force created by contraction of the skele—
by the musculoskeletal tissue and the level of repair state tal muscles to bone to effect movement of the skeleton. In
(52, 97, 106, 176,203). the absence of muscle activity, the Sharpey’s ﬁber attach—

Recently, differential expression of these IGF—l isoforms ment site at bone becomes compromised by bone resorption,
was documented in rat Achilles tendon in a compensatory reducing the number of ﬁber attachments per unit area of
hypertrophy model; a rapid increase in collagen type 111 (Col bone and weakening the bone—tendon structure (300). One
3A1) and MGF (IGF—lB) mRNA expression occurred at day of the more complete spaceﬂight studies on tendon attach—
2, followed by an increase in the expression of collagen type ment sites involved pregnant female rats; after 11 days in
I (CollAl) and IGF—lA at day 8 (201). The gene expression microgravity, signiﬁcant cortical bone erosion at the tibial
pattern of IGFBP—4 paralleled the early increases in Col3A1 tuberosity and ﬁbular head was observed in ﬂight animals,
during early muscle loading, while IGFBP—5 decreased at resulting in decreased Sharpey’s ﬁber density at both anatom—
day 8 (201). Others have found that IGFBP3, IGFBP4, and ical locations (122). The authors concluded these negative
IGFBP5 mRNA expression in unloaded skeletal muscle is changes at the tendon—bone junctions in these animals were
dependent on the age of the animal and can inﬂuence IGF—l’s a direct result of atrophic changes in the skeletal muscles
biological availability to alter extracellular matrix, based on and their accompanying tendons. These spaceﬂight—induced
their ability to aid in the local storage of IGF—1 or promoting weakening of the tendon—bone structures may predispose crew
binding of IGF—I to its receptors (265). members to injury when readjusting to normal gravitational

These studies are quite relevant to protecting crew member conditions upon return to Earth (121, 122).
health during exploration—class missions, particularly since Similar aberrant changes in connective tissue structures
work activity on other planetary surfaces involves an inher— can be Viewed in other types of myotendinous junctions fol—
ent risk of injury to musculoskeletal structures weakened lowing spaceﬂight in animals (45, 79, 229, 288, 333). The
after some months of travel in microgravity conditions. More myotendinous junction is that highly concentrated site that
recent studies have focused on therapies for repair of wounded transmits force from the collagen ﬁbers of the tendon across
dense connective ﬁbrous tissue and also tissue engineering the muscle cell membrane to the myoﬁbrils. Nearly all of the
of autologous tissues for reimplantation Data from Martinez aforementioned investigations involved the analysis of the
et al. suggest that the IGF—lB isoform can be used as thera— muscle cell sarcolemmal membrane, various organelles, and a
peutic agent for ligament wound healing (172). A genetically junctional membrane—folding factor, a measure of the increase
modiﬁed IGF—lB was used along with a nonpathogenic self— in junctional membrane surface area attributable to folding.
complementary adeno—associated serotype—2 Virus (scAAV2— A brief (4 day) exposure to spaceﬂight reduces the myotendi—
IGF—lB) as a gene therapy approach to increase IGF—I nous junction area in rat plantaris muscle, which in turn
protein expression in primary rat medial collateral liga— reduces the folding factor (the ratio of the myotendinous
ment (MCL) ﬁbroblasts. Rats with bilateral MCL surgi— junction area to myoﬁbril cross—sectional area); the func—
Cal transections were treated with the MCL ﬁbroblast cells tional result is a reduced ability of the structure to transmit
overexpressing IGF—l protein; these were implanted using forces across the cell membrane (288). Similarly, skeletal
a ﬁbrin sealant glue vehicle (Tisseel) and tracked during muscles of rats and monkeys ﬂown for 4 and 14 days of
3 weeks of healing. The results indicate that the scAAV2—IGF— spaceﬂight demonstrate comparable negative ultrastructural
1B therapy improved the extracellular matrix biochemical, Changes, such as shredding of the myotendinous structures
Volume 6, April 2016 675

"
"32","Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology
and other abnormalities in the skeletal contractile compo— cellular and subcellular mechanical forces across myotendi—
nents, as compared to the 1G controls (45, 229, 333). nous structures and should be furtherinvestigated With regards
to unloading during spaceﬂight.
Ground—based experimental data . Another matricellular protein Withincreased expression
in and near the myotendinous complex is tenasc1n—C (TN—C),
More invasive and mechanistic studies can be achieved a hexabrachion—shaped glycoprotein protein, Which acts as a
through ground—based musculoskeletal models of unloading, modulator of cell—matriX interactions and can be inﬂuenced
such as limb immobilization and hindlimb unloading. There by the presence and absence of mechanical loads. Soleus—
have only been a handful of ground—based studies investi— gastrocnemius—Achilles’ tendon units in male rats subjected
gating the role of unloading at the myotendinous junction, to cast immobilization for three weeks eXhibited substantial
which may inform our understanding of spaceﬂight—induced decreases in TN—C immunoreactivity (117). In rats returned
myotendinous junction abnormalities. Changes in intramus— to normal cage activity after hindlimb unloading or to larger
cular mononuclear cells and myoﬁbril organization may play increases in loading with forced treadmill running TN—C
a signiﬁcant role in altered myotendinous junction integrity expression at myotendinous junctions normalized to control
during reloading following a period of unloading. Early work levels.
from Tidball et al. (271) investigated macrophage activa— In summary, the extracellular matriX and other noncol—
tion and remodeling of skeletal muscle and microtendon lagenous proteins in the myotendinous junction are sensi—
after 10 days of rat hindlimb unloading and following 0, tive to acute and Chronic Changes in mechanical strain due
2, 4, and 7 days of reloading recovery. ED1+, ED2+, and to unloading and reloading. Evidence of in vitro deleterious
1a+ macrophages were normally distributed in myotendinous Changes in talin, tenascin—C and the juxtaposed macrophage
junctions of weight—bearing control and hindlimb unloaded cells surrounding collagen and muscle ﬁbers in myotendi—
animals following 10 days of unloading. However, during nous junctions following acute unloading, and the subsequent
reloading recovery, the number, size and location of ED2+ recovery of these proteins upon normal weight—bearing sug—
Cells Changed at 2, 4, and 7 days; immunohistochemical gests that structuralchanges at this particular musculoskeletal
detection of developmental isoforms of myosin heavy chain site may be deleterious to the function of the myotendinous
(dMHC) expression was also altered at day 7 of reload— junction unit in the early reloading period.
ing recovery (271). Electron microscopic analysis of the
myotendinous junction in these animals showed quiescent
mononuclear cells not actively synthesizing or secreting any Interverfebral disks
rote1n. .
P The fact that increased numbers of ED2+ macrophages Spacef/Ighf data
localized to active remodeling sites in myoﬁbrils and micro— Astronauts experience signiﬁcant back pain during space—
tendons during reloading could serve several purposes. A ﬂight; one questionnaire documented 28% of respondents
number of cytokines released by ED2+ macrophages may afﬁrming symptoms of moderate to severe back pain
modulate cytoskeletal organization and induce remodeling postspaceﬂight (327). One proposed mechanism for this
through the release of IL—1oc, IL—1B, y—interferon, TNF—oc, spaceﬂight—induced back pain is the lengthening of the verte—
and PDGF. Cytokines are well known to inﬂuence cell focal bral column and loss of normal thoracic and lumbar curvature
contacts, Which are structurally and functionally similar to due to intervertebral disk expansion while in microgravity
myotendinous junctions. PDGF and IL—18, in particular, (129). The normal diurnal cycle of erect and supine posture
have been shown to remodel focal contacts and intracellular on Earth causes large Changes in the compressive cyclic loads
actin cytoskeleton components at the myotendinous junction experienced by the spine; the absence of this daily cycle during
With associated talin protein phosphorylation (219, 289). The spaceﬂight causes the intervertebral disks to swell and limits
enhancement of talin at the myotendinous junctions may pre— the ﬂuid exchange essential disk nutrition (110). Astronauts
dispose this musculoskeletal site to similar regulatory path— eXhibit a higher risk for herniated intervertebral disks, with
ways during the preceding unloading. In vitro studies conﬁrm a 4.3—fold higher incidence ratio versus the normal control
that talin mRNA and protein expression is modulated after population (123).
48 hours of stretching (loading) of C2C12 mytotubes (79). The intervertebral disk is a Viscoelastic structure com—
Cyclic loading increased talin gene expression (+180%) and prised of a central nucleus pulpous (NP) and an outer annulus
talin protein expression (+68%) versus unloaded controls. ﬁbrosus (AF) consisting of multiple layers of ﬁbrocartilage.
Parallel in vivo experiments in hindlimb unloaded animals Both the NP and AF contain extracellular matriX collagens
demonstrated similar increases in talin expression (+136% type I and II, leucine—rich hydrophilic proteoglycans that
mRNA, + 68% protein) concentrated and colocalized at the osmotically attract water and other ﬂuids that cause tissue
myotendinous junctions of the soleus muscles (79). Since swelling and aid in the support against compressive loads.
talin is highly concentrated at the myotendinous junction and During spaceﬂight and bed rest, ﬂuids in the disk eXpand dur—
has high afﬁnities for transmembrane structural proteins, it ing unloading and contract during reloading. In the third and
appears to be an integral protein related to the transmission of fourth decade of human life, more than 50% of all pathological
676 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"33","Comprehensive Physiology Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue
intervertebral disks specimens eXhibit some peripheral tears were assayed for glycosaminoglycan (GAG) content and gene
on the AFs, which can develop into radial tears accompanied expression of various proteoglycan—related proteins (331). In
by volume loss and decreased disk height (304). hindlimb unloaded animals, GAG content declined in both
In rats subjected to 14 days of spaceﬂight (Cosmos 2044), the NP and AF regions (by 27% to 42%) without histological
the entire intervertebral disk demonstrated a 34% decrease in tissue degeneration. GAG content recovered to pre—HLU lev—
total proteoglycans and a 15% decrease in total collagen (175). els in the NP region, but not the AP region, following 3 weeks
The wet and dry weights of the AFs were signiﬁcantly smaller of reloading. Expression of aggrecan (an anabolic gene) and
compared to ground controls (175,211). In ﬂight rats, the AF TIMP—1 (an anti—catabolic gene) was signiﬁcantly downreg—
had a signiﬁcantly greater collagen t0 proteoglycan ratio with ulated in the NP region following unloading, but normalized
no changes in the proportion of collagen type I and II ﬁbers or with 3 weeks of reloading. In the AF region expression of
nonreducible hydroxylysylpyridinoline collagen cross—links. MMP—3 (a catabolic gene) was signiﬁcantly elevated follow—
Similarly, in a shorter 5 —day spaceﬂight, thoracic and lumbar ing 6 weeks of unloading, suggesting initiation of degradative
disks from ﬂight animals had a 3.3—fold increase in collagen pathways in the AF with the lack ofnormal compressive forces
to proteoglycan ratio; this Change is similar to that found in Together, these results suggest that a reduction in proteogly—
degenerative disks and results in increased stiffness and a can content following HLU may be due to increased degrada—
decreased ability to absorb compressive loads (255). Space— tion induced by the inhibition of load—sensitive proteoglycan—
ﬂight unloading may Change the nutritional balance across related gene transcripts. In a more recent study (120), inter—
intervertebral disks, altering the biomechanical integrity of the vertebral disks harvested from 10—week—01d mice were rotated
overall tissue and leading to dysfunction and increased risk of in a bioreactor to simulate some aspects of weightlessness for
injury (123). Caudal and lumbar verterbrae in mice subjected up to 30 days and compared to control intervertebral disks
to 13 days of spaceﬂight aboard shuttle mission STS—133 residing concurrently in a static bioreactor Chamber. Similar
eXhibited a 12.6% smaller disk height and a 23% lower strain to ﬁndings from the in vivo hindlimb unloading experiments,
dependence on swelling pressures (creep D—parameter, mea— disks cultured in the rotating bioreactors eXhibited degener—
suring compressive creep properties) (18). Disk biomechani— ation of the AF region, decreased GAG content, declines in
cal properties and disk heights did not recover at either 1 0r 7 GAG t0 hydroxyproline ratios, and signiﬁcant increases in
days postﬂight, suggesting that spaceﬂight induced interver— MMP—3 gene expression with upregulated apoptosis quanti—
tebral disk degeneration in the caudal disk specimens. These ﬁed by TUNEL assays (120).
ﬁndings corroborate earlier ﬁndings by the sameinvestigators In summary, based on these data from spaceﬂight and
from an earlier shuttle mission (STS—131). ground—based simulations, the intervertebral disks are sen—
Based upon these animal spaceﬂight data verifying decre— sitive to load deprivation caused by reduced GRFs, as eVi—
ments in intervertebral disk biomechanical integrity, human denced by decreases in proteoglycan and glycosaminogly—
crew members could be at a greater risk for intervertebral can contents and increased disk swelling. The intervertebral
disk pathologies due to the harsh loading environments dur— disks appear to be in a catabolic state leading to degenerative
ing launch and reentry, as well as during the initial weeks Changes, with the AF region more sensitive to reduced load—
of readaptation t0 Earth’s 1 g environment. Clearly, fur— ing than the NP region. Mechanical reloading testing tissue
ther research should address the importance of exercise on recovery of the NP and AF constituents suggests that the NP
stren gthenin g the trunk/core musculature to better protect the region of the intervertebral disks can be rescued, while the AF
spine and the IV—disk components during spaceﬂight and on region may require more time to attain preﬂight extracellular
return to Earth. matriX integrity and biomechanical strength. Further research
is required to determine if more Chronic exposures to micro—
. graVity will have a more permanent impact on the strength
Ground—based experlmenfs and quality of intervertebral disks. Based on previous data, it
There are limited data from ground—based hindlimb unload— is possible that degenerative Changes in intervertebral disks
ing studies investigating the effects of simulated spaceﬂight may cause astronaut low back pain that may or may not fully
on intervertebral disks (111, 120, 331). The main concern recover to preﬂight levels.
is that, beyond the expansion of intervertebral disks previ—
ously mentioned, the lack of compressive pressure on the . . . . . .
intervertebral disks in actual or simulated microgravity can C'elr’rliage Cllffereh’rla’rlon durlng spaceHIgh’r and
cause degradation of extracellular matriX components leading hmdl'mb unloadmg
t0 herniated NP (123, 244). Proteoglycan content of lumbar The growth plate’s role in the endochondral ossiﬁcation pro—
intervertebral disks decreased by 35% in rats subjected to 4 cess leading to long bone growth and development is very
weeks of hindlimb unloading (111), but there were no sig— important. For a number of years, it has been thought that
niﬁcant Changes in collagen content or collagen phenotypes, the blunted longitudinal growth of limb bones in skeletally
conﬁrming previous Cosmos ﬂight results (111). In another immature animals subjected to spaceﬂight is due to signiﬁ—
hindlimb unloading and reloading recovery study (3 and 6 cant Changes in cartilage differentiation at the growth plate.
weeks of HLU + 3 weeks of reloading) intervertebral disks Much of the seminal work in this area of microgravity’s
Volume 6, April 2016 677

"
"34","Microgrovity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology
impact on cartilage differentiation has been performed by whether the potential growth plate adaptations that occur with
the laboratory of Dr. Pauline Duke and Dina Montufar—Solis Chronic eXposures to microgravity can be rescued by hyper—
(65—67, 181, 182, 184). Rodent growth plates ﬂown aboard gravity countermeasures to maintain normal bone growth in
Cosmos 1887 for 12.5 days examined with light and electron skeletally immature space travelers.
microscopy exhibited an alteration in cartilage differentia—
tion and chondrocyte proliferation, and a decrease in colla—
gen ﬁbril maturation and organization. These results were COHCIUSth
consistent with results from Cosmos 1129 and NASA SLS—
3 space experiments investigating rat epiphyseal and growth Tremendous progress has been made over the last 20 years
plate regions (65,66,174). Interpretation of data from the Cos— in deﬁning the skeletal response to microgravity. The advent
mos 1887 spaceﬂight is very difﬁcult due to the long eXposure of the ISS era has generated a much larger number of poten—
of animals to 1 g upon landing off—course (+2 days away from tial crew members from whose data we can learn beyond
recovery vehicles/team) prior to euthanasia. that available from the small number of Mir crew mem—
Follow—up studies on Cosmos 2044 (14 days spaceﬂight, bers. Gleanings from human crew data could be even more
10 h recovery) in older animals revealed a decrease in the rapidly advanced if NASA regulations about crew mem—
height and cell number in the growth plate’s hypertrophic and ber data conﬁdentiality were amended viS-c‘z-vis Institute of
calcifying zones; however, since there were no concomitant Medicine Safe Passage report (21), which provides useful
decreases in matrix aggregation in the proliferative zone, this guidance for alternative approaches. Critical new information
suggested more cells were accumulating in the growth plate on alterations in bone geometry and compartment—speciﬁc
reserve zone after landing (183). In a separate study, Changes VBMD Changes using Clinical quality 3D noninvasive imag—
in the older adult rat growth plate matrix organization at the ing has enabled ﬁnite—element modeling analyses document—
ultrastructure level was not as dramatic as those observed ing dramatic declines in bone strength after 6 months in 0 g.
in young growing animals, suggesting that the growth plate More recent evidence suggesting that increased intensity of
response to microgravity eXposure may be an age—dependent resistance exercise in combination with improved nutritional
phenomenon (183). intake effectively mitigates BMD loss needs to be conﬁrmed
In vitro fetal mouse limb bud models in the International with computational engineering analyses of bone strength
Microgravity Laboratories 1 and 2 (IML—1,—2) experiments (e.g., FEM) before we can be assured that muscle contraction
ﬂown for 4 days on the Shuttle middeck exhibited reduced in a 0 g environment can effectively overcome the Chronic lack
mineralization and increased resorption, without any Change of 1 g gravitational loading. If a once—active international col—
in the rudiment length (299, 301). Attempts to mitigate the laboration can be revived to pursue studies of the impact of
effects of spaceﬂight on these embryonic limb buds was per— brief eXposures to artiﬁcial gravity, it would be useful to test
formed on the IML—2 mission, when some limb buds were centrifugation in combination with exercise.
exposed to 1 g bouts with a centrifuge located within the By contrast, beyondafew studies using MRI to document
shuttle for 3, 6, or 12 h per day. The most lengthy eXposure to Changes in intervertebral disks with spaceﬂight or after bed
the 1 g countermeasure mitigated the reductions in mineraliza— rest, there eXists precious little information about alterations in
tion caused by microgravity (301). The maj or effect of altered the dense connective tissues (ligament and tendon), cartilage,
gravitational loading in the IML—2 experiment on these non— and intervertebral disks in humans exposed to microgravity.
mineralized cartilaginous fetal limb buds was a modiﬁcation Our information on altered integrity of these tissues relies
of the cartilage phenotype, which was associated with sup— almost exclusively on animals exposed to microgravity or
pressed extracellular matrix production and secretion (67). hindlimb unloading in 1 g. These data suggest less dramatic
For more thorough discussions regarding the stages of carti— acute Changes than in bone but an increased susceptibility to
lage differentiation as studied with in vivo and in vitro space— jointinjury with prolonged eXposure to microgravity. The high
ﬂight experiments, the reader is referred to earlier reViews incidence of back pain in—ﬂight and especially upon return to
(67, 182). 1 g among crew members certainly merits more investigation.
The research that has been performed investigating Because the integrity of these tissues is heaVilyinﬂuenced by
Changes in the long bone endochondral ossiﬁcation (mouse the integrity of subchondral bone and surrounding skeletal
limb bud experiments) and cartilage differentiation demon— muscle, studies of joint injury and recovery therefrom should
strates that these sites are sensitive to Changes in gravitational include concurrent evaluation of bone and muscle Changes.
force and strongly suggests that young growing bone is more Ground—based models (bed rest in humans, hindlimb
susceptible to unloading than is the mature skeleton. Since all unloading in rodents, and other animal disuse models) are
countries’ space programs at present are ﬂying only mature essential to testing mechanisms for the physiological impact
adults, vulnerability to negative Changes at the growth plate of microgravity on bone and the dense connective tissues.
Closure is not of current concern. However, if mankind ever Given the multiple proposed mechanisms for deleterious
decides to colonize space or other worlds, reproduction, long effects on these tissues in microgravity, an integrative phys—
bone growth and maturation of our species may be affected by iology approach is increasingly required. High—energy, bio—
Chronic eXposure to microgravity. The question remains as to logically damaging radiation is an inescapable aspect of the
678 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"35","Comprehensive Physiology Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue
space environment; the additional impact of space—relevant 16. Baek K, Barlow A, Allen M, Bloomﬁeld S. Food restriction and sim-
radiation on these tissues merits further attention. Aggressive 111%)??? gégfgggvggmgﬁws on bone and serum lepun' J Appl Phys“
use Of both NASA’S Space Radiation Laboratory and the most 17. Baek K, Bloomﬁeld SA. Beta—adrenergic blockade and leptin replace—
unique national laboratory of all, the 188, to study both human gllgeJItZeggegcm/ely mitigate disuse bone loss. J Bone Mmer Res 24. 792—
and animal adaptations to microgravity would most rapidly 18. Bailey JF, Hargens AR, Cheng KK, Lotz JC. Post—spaceﬂight recov-
advance our.understanding of mechanisms in this fascinating Egg: 1311.2?266czhggﬁa71’1313’1pfues Of mums mterveﬁebml dISCS' Gravzt
area Of 1nqu1ry. 19. Balemans W, Ebeling M, Patel N, Van Hul E, Olson P, Dioszegi M,
Lacza C, Wuyts W, Van Den Ende J, Willems P, Paes—Alves AF, Hill S,

Bueno M, Ramos FJ, Tacconi P, Dikkers FG, Stratakis C, Lindpaintner

K, Vickery B, Foernzler D, Van Hul W. Increased bone density in

A k I CI sclerosteosis is due to the deﬁciency of a novel secreted protein (SOST).

C now 9 gements Hum M01 Genet 10: 537—543, 2001.

20. Balemans W, Patel N, Ebeling M, Van Hul E, Wuyts W, Lacza C,

S. Bloomﬁeld gratefully acknowledges support from the D}OSZ6gl M, leléefs FG, Hlldeflng P, Wlllems PL Verbal] JBGM,

. . . . , Lindpaintner K, Vickery B, Foernzler D, Van Hul W. Identiﬁcation of

Natlonal Space Blomedlcal ResearCh Institute and NASA 5 a 52 kb deletion downstream of the SOST gene in patients With van

Space Biology and Human Research Programs. R. BoudreauX 13110th dlsease- J Med Genet 393 91-97, 2002- . .

. . . 21. Ball J, Evans Jr C. Safe Passage: Astronaut Care for Exploratlon MlS-

and A- Mam“ were supported as Space Llfe Selence Predoc— sions. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2001.

toral Fellows by the National Space Biomedical Research 22. Bandstra ER, Pecaut M], Anderson ER, Willey JS, D6 C3110 F, StOCk
. SR, Gridley DS, Nelson GA, Levine HG, Bateman TA. Long—term dose

Institute. response of trabecular bone in mice to proton radiation. RadiatRes 169:

607—614, 2008.
23. Banes A], Tsuzaki M, Hu P, Brigman B, Brown T, Almekinders L,
Lawrence WT, Fischer T. PDGF—BB, IGF—I and mechanical load stim—
Refe ren C e S 11115218235NIA§ sygggesis in avian tendon ﬁbroblasts in Vitro. J Biomech 28:
24. Baron R, Rawadi G. MinireVieW: Targeting the Wnt/B—catenin pathway

1. Aliprantis A0, Stolina M, Kostenuik PJ, Poliachik SL, Warner SE, to regulate bone formation in the adult skeleton. Endocrinology 148:
Bain SD, Gross TS. Transient muscle paralysis degrades bone Via rapid 2635—2643, 2007.
osteoclastogenesis. FASEB J 26: 1110—1118, 2012. 25. Basso N, Heersche JN. Effects of hind limb unloading and reloading

2. Allen MR,B100mﬁe1d SA. Hindlimb unloading has a greater effect on on nitric oxide synthase expression and apoptosis of osteocytes and
cortical compared With cancellous bone in mature female rats. J Appl chondrocytes. Bone 39: 807—814, 2006.

Physiol 94: 642—650, 2003. 26. Benton E, Benton E. Space radiation dosimetry in low—Earth orbit

3. Allen MR, Hogan HA, Bloomﬁeld SA. Differential bone and muscle and beyond. Nucl Instrum Methods Phys Res B 184: 255—294,
recovery following hindlimb unloading in skeletally mature male rats. 2001.

J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact 6: 217—225, 2006. 27. Bergmann P, Body J—J, Boonen S, Boutsen Y, Devogelaer J—P, Goe—

4. Almeida M, Han L, Martin—Millan M, Plotkin L, Stewart S, Roberson maere S, Reginster J—Y, Gangji V, Markers MotABoB. Evidence—based
P, Kousteni S, O’BRien C, Bellido T, Parﬁtt A, Weinstein R, Jilka R, guidelines for the use of biochemical markers of bone turnover in the
Manolagas S. Skeletal involution by age—associated oxidative stress and selection and monitoring of bisphosphonate treatment in osteoporosis:
its acceleration by loss of seX steroids. J Biol Chem 282: 27285—27297, A consensus document of the Belgian Bone Club. Int J Clin Pract 63:
2007. 19—26, 2008.

5. Almeida—Silveira MI, Lambertz D, Perot C, and Goubel F. Changes in 28. Bergula A, Haidekker M, Huang W, Stevens H, Frangos J. Venous
stiffness induced by hindlimb suspension in rat Achilles tendon. Eur J ligation—mediated bone adaptation is NOS 3 dependent. Bone 34: 562—
Appl Physiol 81: 252—257, 2000. 569, 2004.

6. Alwood JS, Yumoto K, Mojarrab R, Limoli CL, Almeida EA, Searby 29. Bijl M, Reefman E, Limburg P, Kallenberg C. Inﬂammatory clearance
ND,G10bus RK. Heavy ion irradiation and unloading effects on mouse of apoptotic cells after UVB challenge. Autoimmunity 40: 244—248,
lumbar vertebral microarchitecture, mechanical properties and tissue 2007.
stresses. Bone 47: 248—255, 2010. 30. Bikle DD, Harris J, Halloran BP, Morey—Holton E. Altered skeletal

7. Andriacchi T, Sabiston P, DeHaven K, Dahners L, W00 S, Frank C, pattern of gene expression in response to spaceﬂight and hindlimb
Oakes B, Brand RA, Lewis J. Ligament: Injury and repair. In: W00 SL— elevation. Am J Physiol 267: E822—827, 1994.

Y, Buckwalter JA, editor. Injury and Repair of the Musculoskeletal Soft 31. Bikle DD, Sakata T, Halloran BP. The impact of skeletal unloading 0n
Tissues. Park Ridge, 111: American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, bone formation. Gravit Space Biol Bull 16: 45—54, 2003.
1988, pp. 103—128. 32. Bilezikian J, Raisz L, Martin T. Principles OfBone Biology: Elsevier,

8. Androjna C, McCabe N, Cavanagh P, Midura R. Effects of spaceﬂight 2008.
and skeletal unloading on bone fracture healing. Clinic Rev Bone Miner 33. Blaber E, Dvorochkin N, Lee C, J S A, Yousuf R, Pianetta P, Globus
Metab 10: 61—70, 2012. R, Burns B, Almeida E. Microgravity induces pelvic bone loss through

9. Armbrecht G, Belavy D, Backstrom M, Beller G, Alexandre C, Rizzoli osteoclastic activity, osteocytic osteolysis, and osteoblastic cell cycle
R, Felsenberg D. Trabecular and cortical bone density and architecture inhibition by CDKN1a/p21. PLOS One 8: e61372, 2013.
in women after 60 days of bed rest using high—resolution pQCT: WISE 34. Blakely E. Biological effects of cosmic radiation: Deterministic and
2005. J Bone Miner Res 26: 2399—2410, 2011. stochastic. Health Phys 79: 495—506, 2000.

10. Arnaud S, Sherrard D, Maloney N, Whalen R, Fung P. Effects of a 35. Bloomﬁeld S, Allen M, Hogan H, Delp M. Site— and compartment—
1—Week head—down tilt bed rest on bone formation and the calcium speciﬁc changes in bone With hindlimb unloading in mature adult rats.
endocrine system. Aviat Space Environ Med 63: 14—20, 1992. Bone 31: 149—157, 2002.

11. Aubin J. Mesenchymal stem cells and osteoblast differentiation. In: 36. Bloomﬁeld S, Girten B, Weisbrode S. Effects of Vigorous exercise
Bilezikian J, editor. Principles of Bone Biology, 3rd edition. Boston: training and [3—ag0nist administration on bone response to hindlimb
Academic Press, 2008, pp. 85—107. suspension. J Appl Physiol 83: 172—178, 1997.

12. Ausk BJ, Huber P, Poliachik SL, Bain SD, Srinivasan S, Gross TS. 37. Bloomﬁeld SA. The risks to bone health during missions to the moon
Cortical bone resorption following muscle paralysis is spatially hetero— and mars. In: Cavanagh PR, Rice AJ, editors. Bone Loss During
geneous. Bone 50: 14—22, 2012. Spaceﬂight: Etiology, Countermeasures, and Implications for Bone

13. Backup P, Westerlind K, Harris S, Spelsberg T, Kline B, Turner R. Health on Earth. Cleveland: Cleveland Clinic Press, 2007, pp. 229—
Spaceﬂight results in reduced mRNA levels for tissue—speciﬁc pro— 237.
teins in the musculoskeletal system. Am J Physiol 266: E567—E573, 38. Bonewald L and Johnson M. Osteocytes, mechanosensing and Wnt
1994. signaling. Bone 42: 606—615, 2008.

14. Baecker N, Frings—Meuthen P, Heer M, Mester J, Liphardt A. Effects 39. Booth F. The many ﬂavors of IGF—I. J Appl Physiol 100: 1755—1756,
of Vibration training on bone metabolism: Results from a short—term 2006.
bed rest study. Eur J Appl Physiol 112: 1741—1750, 2012. 40. Boudignon BM, Bikle DD, Kurimoto P, Elalieh H, Nishida S, Wang Y,

15. Baecker N, Tomic A, Mika C, Gotzmann A, Platen P, Gerzer R, Heer Burghardt A, Majumdar S, Orwoll BE, Rosen C, Halloran BP. Insulin—
M. Bone resorption is induced on the second day of bed rest: Results like growth factor—I stimulates recovery of bone lost after a period of
of a controlled crossover trial. J Appl Physiol 95: 977—982, 2003. skeletal unloading. J Appl Physiol 103: 125—131, 2007.

Volume 6, April 2016 679

"
"36","Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology

41. B0uvardB,Mabilleau G,LegrandE,Audran M,ChappardD.Micr0 and 65. Duke J, Janet L, Campbell M, Morrow J. Microprobe analyses of
macroarchitectural changes at the tibia after botulinum toxin injection epiphyseal plates from Spacelab 3 rats. Physiologist 28: 8217—218,
in the growing rat. Bone 50: 858—864, 2012. 1985.

42. Caetano—Lopes J. Osteoimmunology—The hidden immune regulation 66. Duke PJ, Durnova G, Montufar—Solis D. Histomorphometric and elec—
of bone. Autoimmun Rev 8: 250—255, 2009. tron microscopic analyses of tibial epiphyseal plates from Cosmos 1887

43. Caillot—Augusseau A, Vico L, Heer M, VorovieV D, Souberbielle J— rats. FASEB J 4: 41—46, 1990.

C, Zitterman A, Alexandre C, Lafage—Proust M—H. Space ﬂight is 67. Duke PJ , Montufar—Solis D.EXposure to altered gravity affects all stages
associated With rapid decreases of undercarboxylated osteocalcin and 0f endochondral cartilage differentiation. Adv Space Res 24: 821—827,
increases of markers of bone resorption Without changes in their circa— 1999.

dian variation: Observations in two cosmonauts. Clin Chem 46: 1136— 68. Duncan R, Turner C. Mechanotransduction and the functional response
1143, 2000. of bone to mechanical strain. Calcif Tissue Int 57: 344—358, 1995.

44. C210 X, Wu X, Frassica D, Yu B, Pang L, Xian L, Wan M, Lei W, 69. Durnova G, Kaplanskii A, Morey—Holton E, Vorobeva V. Investigation
Armour M, Tryggestad E, Wong J, Wen C, Lu W, Frassica F.1rradiati0n of tibial bones of the rats exposed on board “Spacelab—2”: Histomor—
induces bone injury by damaging bone marrow microenvironment for phometric analysis. Aviakosm Ekolog Med 30: 21—26, 1996.
stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108: 1609—1614, 2011. 70. Elefteriou F, Ahn J, Takeda S, Starbuck M, Yang X, Liu X, Kondo H,

45. Carnino A, Rofﬁno S, Chopard A, Marini JF. Effects of a 14—day Richards W, Bannon T, Noda N, Clement K, Vaisse C, Karsenty G.
spaceﬂight 0n soleus myotendinous junction ultrastructure in the rhesus Leptin regulation of bone resorption by the sympathetic nervous system
monkey. J Gravit Physiol 7: 865—868, 2000. and CART. Nature 434: 514—520, 2005.

46. Carpenter RD, LeBlanc AD, Evans H, Sibonga JD, Lang TF. Long— 71. Eliasson P, Fahlgren A, Pasternak B, Aspenberg P. Unleaded rat
term changes in the density and structure of the human hip and spine Achilles tendons continue to grow, but lose Viscoelasticity. J Appl Phys-
after long—duration spaceﬂight. Acta Astronaut 67: 71—81, 2010. iol 103: 459—463, 2007.

47. Cavanagh P, Licata A, Rice A. Exercise and pharmacological counter— 72. Ellman R, Spatz J, Cloutier A, Palme R, Christiansen B, Bouxsein M.
measures for bone loss during long—duration space ﬂight. Gravit Space Partial reductions in mechanical loading yield proportional changes in
Biol 18: 39—58, 2005 . bone density, bone architecture, and muscle mass. J Bone Miner Res

48. Cavanagh PR, Gene KO, Gopalakrishnan R, Kuklis MM, Maender CC, 28: 875 —885 , 2013.

Rice A]. Foot forces during typical days on the International Space 73. Ertl A, Diedrich A, Biaggioni I, Levine B, Robertson R, Cox J, Zuck—
Station. J Biomech 43: 2182—2188, 2010. erman J, Pawelczyk J, Ray C, Buckey J, Lane L, ShiaVi R, Gaffney

49. Cavolina JM, Evans GL, Harris SA, Zhang M, Westerlind KC, Turner F, Costa F, Holt C, Blomqvist C, Eckberg D, Baisch F, Robertson D.
RT. The effects of orbital spaceﬂight on bone histomorphometry and Human muscle sympathetic nerve activity and plasma noradrenaline
messenger ribonucleic acid levels for bone matrix proteins and skeletal kinetics in space. J Physiol 538: 321—329, 2002.
signaling peptides in ovariectomized growing rats. Endocrinology 138: 74. Evans GL, Morey—Holton E, Turner RT. Spaceﬂight has compartment—
1567—1576, 1997. and gene—speciﬁc effects on mRNA levels for bone matrix proteins in

50. Centrella M, McCarthy T, Canalis E. Tumor necrosis factor— rat femur. J Appl Physiol 84: 2132—2137, 1998.
alpha inhibits collagen synthesis and alkaline phosphatase activity 75. Fettman M. Dietary instead of pharmacological management to counter
independently of its effect on deoxyribonucleic acid synthesis in the adverse effects of physiological adaptions to space ﬂight. Pﬂugers
osteoblast—enriched bone cell cultures. Endocrinology 123: 1442—1448, Arch 441: 15—20, 2000.

1988. 76. Fielder PJ, Morey ER, Roberts WE. Osteoblast histogenesis in peri—

51. Chang M—K, Kramer I, Huber T, Kinzel B, Guth—Gundel S, Leupin Odontal ligament and tibial metaphysis during simulated weightless—
O, Kneissel M. Disruption of Lrp4 function by genetic deletion or ness. Aviat Space Environ Med 57: 1125—1130, 1986.
pharmacological blockade increases bone mass and serum sclerostin 77. Francini G, Gonnelli S, Petrioli R, Bruni S, Marsili S, Aquino A,
levels. Proc NatlAcad Sci U SA E5187—E5195, 2014. Camporeale A. Procollagen type I carboxy—terminal propeptide as a

52. Cheema U, Brown R, Mudera V, Yang SY, McGrouther G, Gold— marker of osteoblastic bone metastases. Cancer EpidemiolBiomarkers
spink G. Mechanical signals and IGF—1 gene splicing in Vitro in rela— Prev 2: 125—129, 1993.
tion to development of skeletal muscle. J Cell Physiol 202: 67—75, 78. Frank CB. Ligament structure, physiology and function. J Muscu-
2005 . loskelet Neuronal Interact 4: 199—201, 2004.

53. Cody DD, Gross GJ, Hou F], Spencer HJ, Goldstein SA, Fyhrie DP. 79. Frenette J, Tidball JG. Mechanical loading regulates expression of talin
Femoral strength is better predicted by ﬁnite element models than QCT and its mRNA, Which are concentrated at myotendinous junctions. Am
and DXA. JBiomech 32: 1013—1020, 1999. JPhysiol 275: C818—C825, 1998.

54. Colleran P, Wilkerson M, Bloomﬁeld S, Suva L, Turner R, Delp M. 80. Frings—Meuthen P, Baecker N, Heer M. LOW—grade metabolic acido—
Alterations in skeletal perfusion With simulated microgravity: A pos— sis may be the cause of sodium chloride induced exaggerated bone
sible mechanism for bone remodeling. J Appl Physiol 89: 1046—1054, resorption. J Bone Miner Res 23: 517—524, 2008.

2000. 81. Gal T, Munoz—Antonia T, Muro—Cacho C, Klotch D. Radiation effects

55. Collet P,UebelhartD,Vic0 L,M0r0 L,HartmannD,R0th M,Alexandre 0n osteoblasts in Vitro: A potential role in osteoradionecrosis. Arch
C. Effects of 1— and 6—m0nth spaceﬂight on bone mass and biochemistry Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 126: 1124—1128, 2000.
in two humans. Bone 20: 547—551, 1997. 82. Garetto LP, Gonsalves MR, Morey ER, Durnova G, Roberts WE. Pre—

56. Curwin SL, Vailas AC, Wood J. Immature tendon adaptation to strenu— osteoblast production 55 hours after a 12.5 —day spaceﬂight 0n Cosmos
ous exercise. J Appl Physiol 65: 2297 —2301, 1988. 1887. FASEB J 4: 24—28, 1990.

57. Da Silva M, Zimmerman P, Meguid M, Nandi J, Ohinata K, Xu Y, 83. Garetto LP, Morey ER, Durnova GN, Kaplansky AS, Roberts WE.
Chen C, Tada T, Inui A. Anorexia in space and possible etiologies: An Preosteoblast production in COSMOS 2044 rats: Short—term recovery
overview. Nutrition 18: 805—813, 2002. of osteogenic potential. J Appl Physiol 73: 148—188, 1992.

58. Dallas SL, PrideauX M, Bonewald LF. The osteocyte: An endocrine 84. Gaudio A, Pennisi P, Bratengeier C, Torrisi V, Lindner B, Mangiaﬁco
cell and more. Endocr Rev 34: 658—690, 2013. R, Pulvirenti I, Hawa G, Tringali G, Fiore C. Increased serum sclerostin

59. De Souza M, West S, Jamal S, Hawker G, Gundberg C, Williams N. levels associated With bone formation and resorption markers in patients
The presence of both an energy deﬁciency and estrogen deﬁciency With immobilization—induced bone loss. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 95:
exacerbated alterations of bone metabolism in exercising women. Bone 2248—225 3, 2010.

43: 140—148, 2008. 85. Giangregorio L, McCartney N. Bone loss and muscle atrophy in spinal

60. Dempster DW, Compston JE, Drezner MK, GlorieuX FH, Kanis JA, cordinjury: Epidemiology, fracture prediction, and rehabilitation strate—
Malluche H, Meunier PJ, Ott SM, Recker RR, Parﬁtt AM. Standardized gies. J Spinal Cord Med 29: 489—500, 2006.
nomenclature, symbols, and units for bone histomorphometry: A 2012 86. Gilbert L, He X, Farmer P, Boden SD, Kozlowski M, Rubin J, Nanes M.
update of the report of the ASBMR Histomorphometry Nomenclature Inhibition of osteoblast differentiation by tumor necrosis factor—alpha.
Committee. JBone Miner Res 28: 2—17, 2013. Endocrinology 141: 3956—3964, 2000.

61. Doty SB, Morey—Holton ER, Durnova GN, Kaplansky AS. Morpholog— 87. Gillery P, Leperre A, Maquart FX, Borel JP. Insulin—like growth factor—
ical studies of bone and tendon. J Appl Physiol 73: 108—13S, 1992. I (IGF—I) stimulates protein synthesis and collagen gene expression

62. Ducy P, Amling M, Takeda S, Priemel M, Schilling A, Bell F, Shen in monolayer and lattice cultures of ﬁbroblasts. J Cell Physiol 152:
J, Vinson C, Rueger J, Karsenty G. Leptin inhibits bone formation 389—396, 1992.
through a hypothalamic relay: A central control of bone mass. Cell 88. Gillette PD, Fell RD. Passive tension in rat hindlimb during suspension
100: 197—207, 2000. unloading and recovery: Muscle/joint contributions. J Appl Physiol 81:

63. Dudziak M, Saadeh P, Mehrara B, Steinbrech D, Greenwald J, Gittes 724—730, 1996.

G, Longaker M. The effects of ionizing radiation on osteoblast—like 89. Giustina A, Mazziotti G, Canalis E. Growth hormone, insulin—like
cells in Vitro. Plast Reconstr Surg 106: 1049—1061, 2000. growth factors, and the skeleton. Endocr Rev 29: 535—559, 2008.

64. Dufour C, Holy X, Marie PJ. Skeletal unloading induces osteoblast 90. Grimston SK,G01dberg DB, Watkins M, Brodt MD, Silva MJ, Civitelli
apoptosis and targets alpha5beta1—PI3K—Bcl—2 signaling in rat bone. R. C0nnexin43 deﬁciency reduces the sensitivity of cortical bone to the
Exp Cell Res 313: 394—403, 2007. effects of muscle paralysis. J Bone Miner Res 26: 2151—2160, 2011.

680 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"37","Comprehensive Physiology Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue
91. Grimston SK, Silva MJ, CivitelliR.B0neloss after temporarilyinduced 116. Iwaniec U, Wronski T, Amblard D, Nishimura Y, van der Meulen
muscle paralysis by BotOX is not fully recovered after 12 weeks. Ann N M, Wade C, Bourgeois M, Damsky C, Globus R. Effects of disrupted
Y Acad Sci 1116: 444—460, 2007. betal—integrin function on the skeletal response to short—term hindlimb

92. Grindeland R. Overview of the COSMOS 2044 BION Mission. J Appl unloading in mice. J Appl Physiol 98: 690—696, 1985.

Physiol 73: Sl—S3, 1992. 117. Jarvinen TA, Jozsa L, Kannus P, Jarvinen TL, Hurme T, KVist M,

93. Gundberg C. Matrix proteins. Osteoporos Int 14: 837—842, 2003. Pelto—Huikko M, Kalimo H, Jarvinen M. Mechanical loading regulates

94. Hall E, Giaccia A. Time, dose, and fractionation in radiotherapy. Radio- the expression of tenascin—C in the myotendinous junction and tendon
biology for the Radiologist. Philadelphia, USA: Lippincott, Williams but does not induce de novo synthesis in the skeletal muscle. J Cell Sci
& Wilkins, 2006. 116: 857—866, 2003.

95. Halloran B, Bikle D, Harris J, Autry C, Currier P, Tanner S, Patterson— 118. Jee WS, Wronski TJ, Morey ER, Kimmel DB. Effects of spaceﬂight 0n
Buckendahl P, Morey—Holton E. Skeletal unloading induces selective trabecular bone in rats. Am J Physiol 244: R310—R314, 1983.
resistance to the anabolic actions of growth hormone on bone. J Bone 119. Jee WSS. Integrated bone tissue physiology: Anatomy and physiology.
Miner Res 10: 1168—1176, 1995. In: COWin SC, edited. Bone Mechanics Handbook (2nd ed.). Boca

96. Halloran BP, Bikle DD, Cone CM, Morey—Holton E. Glucocorticoids Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2001, pp. 11—168.
and inhibition of bone formation induced by skeletal unloading. Am J 120. J in L, Feng G, Reames DL, Shimer AL, Shen FH, Li X. The effects of
Physiol 255: E875—E879, 1988. simulated microgravity 0n intervertebral disc degeneration. Spine J 13:

97. Hameed M, Orrell RW, Cobbold M, Goldspink G, Harridge SD. Expres— 235—242, 2013.
sion of IGF—I splice variants in young and 01d human skeletal muscle 121. Johnson RB. The bearable lightness of being: Bones, muscles, and
after high resistance exercise. J Physiol 547: 247—254, 2003. spaceﬂight. Anat Rec 253: 24—27, 1998.

98. Hamilton SA, Pecaut MJ, Gridley DS, Travis ND, Bandstra ER, Willey 122. Johnson RB, Tsao AK, St John KR, Betcher RA, Tucci MA, Benghuzzi
JS, Nelson GA, Bateman TA. A murine model for bone loss from HA. Effects of spaceﬂight 0n the attachment of tendons to bone in the
therapeutic and space—relevant sources of radiation. J Appl Physiol hindlimb 0f the pregnant rat. Anat Rec 282: 147—156, 2005.

101: 789—793, 2006. 123. Johnston SL, Campbell MR, Scheuring R, Feiveson AH. Risk of her—

99. Hamrick MW, Shi X, Zhang W, Pennington C, Thakore H, Haque niated nucleus pulposus among U.S. astronauts. Aviat Space Environ
M, Kang B, Isales CM, Fulzele S, Wenger KH. Loss of myostatin Med 81: 566—574, 2010.

(GDF8) function increases osteogenic differentiation of bone marrow— 124. Ju Y1, Sone T, Ohnaru K, Choi HJ, Choi KA, Fukunaga M. Jump
derived mesenchymal stem cells but the osteogenic effect is ablated exercise during hindlimb unloading protect against the deterioration of
With unloading. Bone 40: 1544—1553, 2007. trabecular bone microarchitecture in growing young rats. SpringerPlus

100. Hardiman DA, O’Brien F], Prendergast PJ, Croke DT, Staines A, Lee 2: 35, 2013.

TC. Tracking the changes in unloaded bone: Morphology and gene 125. Ju Y1, Sone T, Ohnaru K, Choi HJ, Fukunaga M. Differential effects of
expression. Eur J Morphol 42: 208—216, 2005. jump versus running exercise on trabecular architecture during remo—

101. Heer M. Nutritional interventions related to bone turnover in Euro— bilization after suspension—induced osteopenia in growing rats. J Appl
pean space missions and simulation models. Nutrition 18: 853—856, Physiol 112: 766—772, 2012.

2002. 126. Kalu D. Animal models of the aging skeleton. In: Rosen C, Glowacki J,

102. Heer M, Boerger A, Kamps N, Biener C, Kerr C, Drummer C. Nutrient Bilezikian J, editors. The Aging Skeleton, . San Diego: Academic Press,
supply during recent European missons. Pﬂuger Arch 441: R8—R14, Inc, 1999, pp. 37—50.

2000. 127. Kannus P, Sievanen H, Jarvinen TL, Jarvinen M, KVist M, Oja P,

103. Hefferan TE, Evans GL, Lotinun S, Zhang M, Morey—Holton E, Turner Vuori I, Jozsa L. Effects of free mobilization and low— to high—intensity
RT. Effect of gender on bone turnover in adult rats during simulated treadmill running on the immobilization—induced bone loss in rats.
weightlessness. JAppl Physiol 95: 1775—1780, 2003. JBone Miner Res 9: 1613—1619, 1994.

104. Heinemeier K, Langberg H, Olesen JL, Kjaer M. Role of TGF—betal in 128. Karsenty G, Elefteriou F. Neuronal regulation of bone remodeling. In:
relation to exercise—induced type I collagen synthesis in human tendi— Rosen C, editor. Primer on the Metabolic Bone Diseases and Disorders
nous tissue. J Appl Physiol 95: 2390—2397, 2003. ofMineral Metabolism (7th ed.). Washington, DC: American Society

105. Heinemeier KM, Olesen JL, Haddad F, Schjerling P, Baldwin KM, of Bone and Mineral Research, 2008, pp. 56—60.

Kjaer M. Effect of unloading followed by reloading on expression of 129. Kershner D, Binhammer R. Intrathecal ligaments and nerve root ten—
collagen and related growth factors in rat tendon and muscle. J Appl sion: Possible sources of lumbar pain during spaceﬂight. Aviat Space
Physiol 106: 178—186, 2009. Environ Med 75: 354—358, 2004.

106. Hill M, Wernig A, Goldspink G. Muscle satellite (stem) cell activation 130. Keyak JH, Kaneko TS, Tehranzadeh J, Skinner HB. Predicting proximal
during local tissue injury and repair. J Anat 203: 89—99, 2003. femoral strength using structural engineering models. Clin Orthop Relat

107. Hino K, Nakamoto T, Nifuji A, Morinobu M, Yamamoto H, Ezura Res 437: 219—228, 2005.

Y, Neda M. Deﬁciency of CIZ, a nucleocytoplasmic shuttling pro— 131. Keyak JH, Koyama AK, LeBlanc A, Lu Y, Lang TF. Reduction in
tein, prevents unloading—induced bone loss through the enhancement proximal femoral strength due to long—duration spaceﬂight. Bone 44:
0f osteoblastic bone formation in ViVO. Bone 40: 852—860, 2006. 449—453, 2009.

108. Horowitz M, Lorenzo J. Local regulators of bone: IL—1, TNF, lympho— 132. Keyak JH, Sigurdsson S, Karlsdottir G, Oskarsdottir D, Sigmarsdottir
toxin, interferon—gamma, the LIF/IL—6 family, and additional cytokines. A, Zhao S, Kornak J, Harris TB, Sigurdsson G, Jonsson BY, Siggeirs—
In: Bilezikian J, Raisz L, Martin T, editors. Principles ofBone Biology dottir K, Eiriksdottir G, Gudnason V, Lang TF. Male—female differences
(3rd ed.). San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 2008, pp. 1209—1234. in the association between incident hip fracture and proximal femoral

109. Huang, Robert P, Rubin CT, McLeod K]. Changes in postural muscle strength: A ﬁnite element analysis study. Bone 48: 1239—1245, 2011.
dynamics as a function of age. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 54: 133. Khatod M, Akeson WH, Ameil D. Ligament injury and repair. In:
B352—B357, 1999. Pedowitz RA, O’Connor JJ, Akeson WH, editors. Daniel’s knee

110. Hutton WC, Malko JA, Fajman WA. Lumbar disc volume measured Injuries: Ligament and Cartilage Structure, F uhction, Injury, and
by MRI: Effects of bed rest, horizontal exercise, and vertical loading. Repair (2nd ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2003,
Aviat Space Environ Med 74: 73—78, 2003. pp. 185—201.

111. Hutton WC, Yoon ST, Elmer WA, Li J, Murakami H, Minamide A, 134. Kjaer M. Matrix loaded and unloaded: Can tendons grow When exer—
Akamaru T. Effect of tail suspension (or simulated weightlessness) 0n cised? (editorial). J Appl Physiol 102: 515, 2007.
the lumbar intervertebral disc: Study of proteoglycans and collagen. 135. Kjaer M, Magnusson P, Krogsgaard M, Boysen Moller J, Olesen J,
Spine 27: 1286—1290, 2002. Heinemeier K, Hansen M, Haraldsson B, Koskinen S, Esmarck B,

112. Ihle R, Loucks A. Dose—response relationship between energy avail— Langberg H. Extracellular matrix adaptation of tendon and skeletal
ability and bone turnover in young exercising women. J Bone Miner muscle to exercise. J Anat 208: 445—450, 2006.

Res 19: 1231—1240, 2004. 136. Knapen MHJ, Jie K—SG, Hamulyak K, Vermeer C. Vitamin K—induced

113. Ishijima M, Ezura Y, Tsuji K, Rittling SR, Kurosawa H, Denhardt DT, changes in markers for osteoblast activity and urinary calcium loss.
Emi M, Nifuji A, Neda M. Osteopontin is associated With nuclear factor Calcif Tissue Int 53: 81—85, 1993.
kappaB gene expression during tail—suspension—induced bone loss. Exp 137. Kohrt WM, Bloomﬁeld SA, Little KD, Nelson ME, Yingling VR. Phys—
Cell Res 312: 3075—3083, 2006. ical activity and bone health. Med Sci Exerc Sports 36: 1985—1996,

114. Ishijima M, Rittling S, Yamashita T, Tsuji K, Kurosawa H, Nifuji A, 2004.

Denhardt D, Neda M. Enhancement of osteoclastic bone resorption 138. Kondo H, Ezura Y, Nakamoto T, Hayata T, Notomi T, Sorimachi H,
and suppression of osteoblastic bone formation in response to reduced Takeda S, Neda M. MURF1 deﬁciency suppresses unloading—induced
mechanical stress do not occur in the absence of osteopontin. J Exp effects on osteoblasts and osteoclasts to lead to bone loss. J Cell
Med 193: 399—404, 2001. Biochem 112: 3525—3530, 2011.

115. Ishijima M, Tsuji K, Rittling S, Yamashita T, Kurosawa H, Denhardt D, 139. Kondo H, Nifuji A, Takeda S, Ezura Y, Rittling S, Denhardt D,
Nifuji A, Neda M. Resistance to unloading—induced three—dimensional Nakashima K, Karsenty G, Neda M. Unloading induces osteoblas—
bone loss in osteopontin—deﬁcient mice. J Bone Miner Res 17: 661—667, tic cell suppression and osteoclastic cell activation to lead to bone loss
2002. Via sympathetic nervous system. J Biol Chem 280: 30192—30200, 2005.

Volume 6, April 2016 681

"
"38","Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology
140. Kondo H, Searby ND, Mojarrab R, Phillips J, Alwood JS, Yumoto K, A mutation in the LDL receptor—related protein 5 gene results in the
Almeida EA, Limoli CL, Globus RK. Total—body irradiation of postpu— autosomal dominant high—bone—mass trait. Am J Hum Genet 70: 11—19,
bertal mice With (137)Cs acutely compromises the microarchitecture 2002.
of cancellous bone and increases osteoclasts. Radiat Res 171: 283—289, 161. Lloyd SA, Bandstra ER, Willey JS, Rifﬂe SE, Tirado—Lee L, Nelson
2009. GA, Pecaut MJ, Bateman TA. Effect of proton irradiation followed by

141. Kondo H, Yumoto K, Alwood JS, Mojarrab R, Wang D, Almeida hindlimb unloading on bone in mature mice: Amodel 0f long—duration
EA, Searby ND, Limoli CL, Globus RK. Oxidative stress and gamma spaceﬂight. Bone 51: 756—764, 2012.
radiation—induced cancellous bone loss With musculoskeletal disuse. 162. Lloyd SA, Lewis GS, Zhang Y, Paul EM, Donahue HJ. ConneXin 43
J Appl Physiol 108: 152—161, 2010. deﬁciency attenuates loss of trabecular bone and prevents suppression

142. Kramer I, Halleux C, Keller H, Pegurri M, Gooi J, Weber P, Feng of cortical bone formation during unloading. J Bone Miner Res 27:
J, Bonewald L, Kneissel M. Osteocyte Wnt/B—catenin signaling is 2359—2372, 2012.
required for normal bone homeostasis. M01 Cell Biol 30: 3071—3085, 163. Macias B, Agholme F, Aspenberg P. Paradoxical Sost gene expression
2010. response to mechanical loading in metaphyseal bone. Bone 53: 515—

143. Kwon R, Meays D, Meilan A, Jones J, Miramontes R, Kardos N, Yeh 519, 2013.

J, Frangos J. Skeletal adaptation to intramedullary pressure—induced 164. Macias BR, Swift JM, Nilsson MI, Hogan HA, Bouse SD, Bloomﬁeld
interstitial ﬂuid ﬂow is enhanced in mice subjected to targeted osteocyte SA. Simulated resistance training, but not alendronate, increases cor—
ablation. PLOS One 7: e33336, 2012. tical bone formation and suppresses sclerostin during disuse. J Appl

144. Kwon R, Meays D, Tang W, Frangos J. Microﬂuidic enhancement Physiol 112: 918—925, 2012.
of intramedullary pressure increases interstitial ﬂuid ﬂow and inhibits 165. Magnusson SP, Hansen P, Kjaer M. Tendon properties in relation to
bone loss in hindlimb suspended mice. J Bone Miner Res 25: 1798— muscular activity and physical training. Scand J Med Sci Sports 13:
1807,2010. 211—223, 2003.

145. Lafage—Proust MH, Collet P, Dubost JM, Laroche N, Alexandre C, 166. MajeskaRJ.Cellbi010gy 0fb0ne.1n: Cowin SC, editor. Bone Mechan-
Vico L. Space—related bone mineral redistribution and lack of bone ics Handbook, 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 2—21 to 2—24
mass recovery after reambulation in young rats. Am J Physiol Regal 2001.

Integr Comp Physiol 274: R324—R334, 1998. 167. Manske SL, Boyd SK, Zernicke RF. Muscle changes can account for

146. Lang T, LeBlanc A, Evans H, Lu Y, Genant H, Yu A. Cortical and boneless after botulinum toxininjection. CalcifTissue Int 87: 541—549,
trabecular bone mineral loss from the spine and hip in long—duration 2010.
spaceﬂight. J Bone Miner Res 19: 1006—1012, 2004. 168. Manske SL, Boyd SK, Zernicke RF. Vertical ground reaction forces

147. Lang TF, Leblanc AD, Evans HJ, Lu Y. Adaptation of the proxi— diminish in mice after botulinum toxin injection. J Biomech 44: 637—
mal femur to skeletal reloading after long—duration spaceﬂight. J Bone 643, 2011.

Miner Res 21: 1224—1230, 2006. 169. Manzey D, Lorenz B, Polyakov V. Mental performance in extreme

148. LeBlanc A, Matsumoto T, Jones J, Shapiro J, Lang T, Shackelford L, environments: Results from a performance monitoring study during a
Smith S, Evans H, Specter E, Ploutz—Snyder R, Sibonga J, Keyak J, 438—day spaceﬂight. Ergonomics 41: 537—559, 1998.

Nakamura T, Kohri K, Ohshima H. Bisphosphonates as a supplement 170. Marotti G. The structure of bone tissues and the cellular control of their
to exercise to protect bone during long—duration spaceﬂight. Osteoporos deposition. Ital J Anat Embryol 101: 25 —3 1, 1996.
Int 24: 2105—2114, 2013. 171. Martin R. Toward a unifying theory of bone remodeling. Bone 26: 1—7,

149. LeBlanc A, Schneider V, Krebs J, Evans H, Jhingran S, Johnson P. 2000.

Bone mineral loss and recovery after 17 weeks of bed rest. J Bone 172. Martinez DA, Ball SE, Gutierrez L. A gene therapy application for lig—
Miner Res 5: 843—850, 1990. ament wound healing: In Vitro scAAV—IGF—l delivery to rodent medial

150. LeBlanc A, Schneider V, Shackelford L, West S, OganOV V, Bakulin collateral ligament ﬁbroblasts [abstract]. Trans Orthop Res Soc 97: 235,
A, Voronin L. Bone mineral and lean tissue loss after long duration 2011.
space ﬂight. J Musculoskel Neuron Interact 1: 157—160, 2000. 173. Martinez DA, Vailas AC, Vanderby R, Jr, Grindeland RE. Temporal

151. Lecka—Czernik B, Rosen C, Kawai M. Skeletal aging and the adipocyte extracellular matrix adaptations in ligament during wound healing and
program: New insights from an “old” molecule. Cell Cycle 9: 3648— hindlimb unloading. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 293:
3654, 2010. R1552—R1560, 2007.

152. Lee S, Kim T, Choi Y, Lorenzo J. Osteoimmunology: Cytokines and 174. Matthews JL. Mineralization in the long bones. In: Heinrich MR, Souza
the skeletal system. BMB Rep 41: 495—510, 2008. KA, editors. In: Final Reports of US Rat Experiments F lawn 0n the

153. Legerlotz K, Schjerling P, Langberg H, Bruggemann GP, Niehoff A. Soviet Satellite Cosmos 1129. Moffett Field, CA: NASA TM—81289,
The effect of running, strength, and Vibration strength training on the 1981, pp. 199—228.
mechanical, morphological, and biochemicalproperties 0f the Achilles 175. Maynard IA. The effects of space ﬂight on the composition of the
tendon in rats. J Appl Physiol 102: 564—572, 2007. intervertebral disc. Iowa Orthop J 14: 125—133, 1994.

154. Li CY, Price C, Delisser K, Nasser P, Laudier D, Clement M, Jepsen 176. McKoy G, Ashley W, Mander J, Yang SY, Williams N, Russell B,
K], Schafﬂer MB. Long—term disuse osteoporosis seems less sensitive Goldspink G. Expression of insulin growth factor—1 splice variants
to bisphosphonate treatment than other osteoporosis. J Bone Miner Res and structural genes in rabbit skeletal muscle induced by stretch and
20: 117 —124, 2005. stimulation. J Physiol 516(Pt 2): 583—592, 1999.

155. Li J, Sarosi 1, Yan XQ, Morony S, Capparelli C, Tan HL, McCabe S, 177. Mechanic GL, Arnaud SB, Boyde A, Bromage TG, Buckendahl P,
Elliott R, Scully S, Van G, Kaufman S, Juan SC, Sun Y, Tarpley J, E11i0ttJC,Katz EP, Durnova GN. Regional distribution of mineral and
Martin L, Christensen K, McCabe J, Kostenuik P, Hsu H, Fletcher F, matrix in the femurs of rats ﬂown on Cosmos 1887 biosatellite. FASEB
Dunstan CR, Lacey DL, Boyle WJ . RANK is the intrinsic hematopoietic J 4: 34—40, 1990.
cell surface receptor that controls osteoclastogenesis and regulation of 178. Miller BF, Hansen M, Olesen JL, Schwarz P, Babraj JA, Smith K,
bone mass and calcium metabolism. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97: Rennie MJ,KjaerM.Tend0n collagen synthesis at rest and after exercise
1566—1571, 2000. in women. JAppl Physiol 102: 541—546, 2007.

156. Li X, Jee W. Adaptation of diaphyseal structure to aging and decreased 179. Miller BF, Olesen JL, Hansen M, Dossing S, Crameri RM, Welling RJ,
mechanical loading in the adult rat: A densitometric and histomorpho— Langberg H, Flyvbjerg A, Kjaer M, Babraj JA, Smith K, Rennie MJ.
metric study. Anat Rec 229: 291—297, 1990. Coordinated collagen and muscle protein synthesis in human patella

157. Li X, Jee W, Chow S—Y, Woodbury D. Adaptation of cancellous bone tendon and quadriceps muscle after exercise. J Physiol 567: 1021—1033,
to aging and immobilization in the rat: A single photon absorptiometry 2005.
and histomorphometry study. Anat Rec 227: 12—24, 1990. 180. Miller TA, Lesniewski LA, Muller—Delp JM, Majors AK, Scalise D,

158. Li Z, Tan C, Wu Y, Ding Y, Wang H, Chen W, Zhu Y, Ma H, Yang Delp MD. Hindlimb unloading induces a collagen isoform shift in the
H, Liang W, Jiang S, Wang D, Wang L, Tang G, Wang J. Whole— soleus muscle of the rat. Am J Physiol Regullntegr Comp Physiol 281:
body Vibration and resistance exercise prevent long—term hindlimb R1710—R1717, 2001.
unloading—induced bone loss: Independent and interactive effects. Eur 181. Montufar—Solis D, Duke PJ. Gravitational changes affect tibial growth
J Appl Physiol 112: 3743—3753, 2012. plates according to Hert’s curve. Aviat Space Environ Med 70: 245—249,

159. Lin C, Jiang X, Dai Z, Guo X, Weng T, Wang J, Li Y, Feng G, Gao 1999.

X, He L. Sclerostin mediates bone response to mechanical unloading 182. Montufar—Solis D, Duke PJ, D’Aunno D. In ViVO and in Vitro studies of
through antagonizing wnt/b—catenin signaling. J Bone Miner Res 24: cartilage differentiation in altered gravities.Adv Space Res 17: 193—199,
1651—1661,2009. 1996.

160. Little R, Carulli J, Del Mastro R, Dupuis J, Osborne M, F012 C, 183. Montufar—Solis D, Duke PJ, Durnova G. Spaceﬂight and age affect
Manning S, Swain P, Zhao S—C, Eustace B, Lappe M, Spitzer L, tibial epiphyseal growth plate histomorphometry. J Appl Physiol 73:
Zweier S, Braunschweiger K, Benchekroun Y, Hu X, Adair R, Chee 19S—25S, 1992.
L, FitzGerald M, Tulig C, Caruso A, Tzellas N, Bawa A, Franklin 184. Montufar—Solis D, Duke PJ, Morey—Holton E. The Spacelab 3 simula—
B, McGuire S, Nogues X, Gong G, Allen K, Anisowicz A, Morales ti0n: Basis for a model of growth plate response in microgravity in the
A, Lomedico P, Recker S, Van Eerdewegh P, Recker R, Johnson M. rat. J Gravit Physiol 8: 67—76, 2001.

682 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"39","Comprehensive Physiology Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue
185. Morey ER, Baylink DJ. Inhibition of bone formation during space 209. Pavy—Le Traon A, Heer M, Narici MV, Rittweger J, Vernikos J. From
ﬂight. Science 201: 1138—1141, 1978. space to Earth: Advances in human physiology from 20 years of bed

186. Morey—Holton E, Globus RK, Kaplansky A, Durnova G. The hindlimb rest studies (1986—2006). Eur J Appl Physiol 101: 143—194, 2007.
unloading rat model: Literature overview, technique update and com— 210. Pead M, Skerry T, Lanyon L. Direct transformation from quiescence t0
parison With space ﬂight data. Adv Space Biol Med 10: 7—40, 2005. bone formation in the adult periosteum following a single brief period

187. Morey—Holton ER, Whalen RT, Arnaud SB, van der Meulen MC. The of bone loading. J Bone Miner Res 3: 647—656, 1988.

Skeleton and its Adaptation to Gravity. In Compr Physiol 2011, Sup— 211. Pedrini—Mille A, Maynard JA, Durnova GN, Kaplansky AS, Pedrini
plement 14: Handbook of Physiology, Environmental Physiology. First VA, Chung CB, Fedler—Troester J. Effects of microgravity 0n the com—
published in print 1996. doi: 10.1002/cphy.cp040131. position of the intervertebral disk. J Appl Physiol 73: 268—328, 1992.

188. Morey—Holton ER, Globus RK. Hindlimb unloading of growing rats: 212. Perrien DS, Akel NS, Dupont—Versteegden EE, Skinner RA, Siegel ER,
A model for predicting skeletal changes during space ﬂight. Bone 22: Suva LJ, Gaddy D. Aging alters the skeletal response to disuse in the
838—888, 1998. rat. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 292: R988—R996, 2007.

189. Morey—Holton ER, Globus RK. Hindlimb unloading rodent model: 213. Pierroz D, Bonnet N, Bianchi E, Bouxsein M, Baldock P, Rizzoli
Technical aspects. J Appl Physiol 92: 1367—1377, 2002. R, Ferrari S. Deletion of [3—adrenergic receptor 1, 2, or both leads

190. Morgan E, Bouxsein M. Biomechanics of bone and age—related frac— to different bone phenotypes and response to mechanical stimulation.
tures. In: Bilezikian J, Raisz L, Martin T, editors. Principles OfBone J Bone Miner Res 27: 1252—1262, 2012.

Biology (3rd ed.). San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 2008, pp. 29—51. 214. Pietrzyk R, Jones J, Sams C, Whitson P. Renal stone formation among

191. Morgan J, Zwart S, Heer M, Ploutz—Snyder R, Ericson K, Smith S. astronauts. Aviat Space Environ Med 78: A9—A13, 2007.

Bone metabolism and nutritional status during 30—day head—down—tilt 215. Prisby R, Dominguez J1, Muller—Delp J, Allen M, Delp M. Aging and
bed rest. J Appl Physiol 113: 1519—1529, 2012. estrogen status: A possible endothelium—dependent vascular coupling

192. Morse A, McDonald M, Kelly N, Melville K, Schindeler A, Kramer I, mechanism in bone remodeling. PLOS One 7: e48564, 2012.

Kneissel M, Van der Meulen M, Little D. Mechanical load increases 216. Provenzano P, Alejandro—Osorio A, Grorud K, Martinez D, Vailas
in bone formation Via a sclerostin—independent pathway. J Bone Miner A, Grindeland R, Vanderby R, Jr. Systemic administration of IGF—1
Res 29: 2456—2467, 2014. enhances healing in collagenous extracellular matrices: Evaluation of

193. Moustafa A, Sugiyama T, Prasad J, Zaman G, Gross T, Lanyon L, loaded and unloaded ligaments. BMC Physiol 7: 2, 2007.

Price J. Mechanical loading—related changes in osteocyte sclerostin 217. Provenzano PP, Martinez DA, Grindeland RE, Dwyer KW, Turner J,
expression in mice are more closely associated With the subsequent Vailas AC, Vanderby R, Jr. Hindlimb unloading alters ligament healing.
osteogenic response than the peak strains engendered. Osteoporos Int J Appl Physiol 94: 314—324, 2003.

23: 1225—1234, 2012. 218. Qin Y—X, Kaplan T, Saldanha A, Rubin C. Fluid pressure gradients,

194. Nagaraja MP, Risin D. The current state of bone loss research: Data arising from oscillations in intramedullary pressure, is correlated With
from spaceﬂight and microgravity simulators. J Cell Biochem 114: the formation of bone and inhibition of intracortical porosity.J Biomech
1001—1008, 2013. 36: 1427—1437, 2003.

195. Nakagawa Y, Totsuka M, Sato T, Fukuda Y, Hirota K. Effect of disuse 219. Qwarnstrom EE, MacFarlane SA, Page RC, Dower SK. Interleukin
0n the ultrastructure of the Achilles tendon in rats. Eur J Appl Physiol 1 beta induces rapid phosphorylation and redistribution of talin: A
Occup Physiol 59: 239—242, 1989. possible mechanism for modulation of ﬁbroblast focal adhesion. Proc

196. Nakai K, Tanaka S, Sakai A, Nagashima M, Tanaka M, Otomo H, Naka— Natl Acad Sci U S A 88: 1232—1236, 1991.
mura T. Cyclooxygenase—2 selective inhibition suppresses restoration 220. Rabelo G, Beletti M, Dechichi P. Histological analysis of the alterations
of tibial trabecular bone formation in association With restriction of on cortical bone channels network after radiotherapy: A rabbit study.
osteoblast maturation in skeletal reloading after hindlimb elevation of Microsc Res Tech 73: 1015 —1018, 2010.
mice. Bone 39: 83—92, 2006. 221. Rambaut P, Goode A. Skeletal changes during space ﬂight. Lancet 2:

197. NCRP. National Council of Radiation Protection and Measurements. 1050—1052, 1985.

Radiation Protection Guidance for Activities in LOW—Earth Orbit, NCRP 222. Rho J, Takami M, Choi Y. Osteoimmunology: Interactions of the
Report No. 132 (National Council on Radiation Protection and mea— immune and skeletal systems. M01 Cells 17: 1—9, 2004.
surements, Bethesda, Maryland). 223. Riggs B, Melton 111 L, Robb R, Camp J, Atkinson E, Peterson J, Rouleau

198. OganOV V. The Skeletal System, Weightlessness, and Osteoporosis. P, MCCOllough C, Bouxsein M, Khosla S. Population—based study Of
Moscow: Firm Slovo, 2005. age and sex differences in bone volumetric density, size, geometry and

199. OganOV VS, Rakhmanov AS, Novikov VE, Zatsepin ST, Rodionova structure of different skeletal sites. J Bone Miner Res 19: 1945—1954,
SS, Cann C. The state of human bone tissue during space ﬂight. Acta 2004.

Astronaut 23: 129—133, 1991. 224. Rittweger J, Beller G, Armbrecht G, Mulder E, Buehring B, Gast U,

200. Olesen JL, Heinemeier KM, Gemmer C, Kjaer M, Flbejerg A, Lang— Dimeo F, Schubert H, de Haan A, Stegeman D, Schiessl H. Prevention
berg H. Exercise—dependent IGF—I, IGFBPS, and type I collagen changes of bone loss during 56 days of strict bed rest by side—alternating resistive
in human peritendinous connective tissue determined by microdialysis. Vibration exercise. Bone 46: 137—147, 2010.

J Appl Physiol 102: 214—220, 2007. 225. Rittweger J, Frost H, Schiessl H, Ohshima H, Alkner B, Tesch P,

201. Olesen JL, Heinemeier KM, Haddad F, Langberg H, Flbejerg A, Kj aer Felsenberg D. Muscle atrophy and bone loss after 90 days’ bed rest and
M, Baldwin KM. Expression of insulin—like growth factor I, insulin—like the effects of ﬂywheel resistive exercise and pamidronate: Results from
growth factor binding proteins, and collagen mRNA in mechanically the LTBR study. Bone 36: 1019—1029, 2005 .
loaded plantaris tendon. J Appl Physiol 101: 183—188, 2006. 226. Roberts WE, Fielder PJ, Rosenoer LM, Maese AC, Gonsalves MR,

202. Orwell E, Adler R, Amin S, Binkley N, Lewiecki E, Petak S, Shapses Morey ER. Nuclear morphometric analysis of osteoblast precursor cells
S, Sinaki M, Watts N, Sibonga J . Skeletal health in long—duration astro— in periodontal ligament, SL—3 rats. Am J Physiol 252: R247—R25 1,
nauts: Nature, assessment, and management recommendations from the 1987.

NASA Bone Summit. J Bone Miner Res 28: 1243—1255, 2013. 227. Robling A, Niziolek P, Baldridge L, Condon K, Allen M, Alam I,

203. Owino V, Yang SY, Goldspink G. Age—related loss of skeletal muscle Mantila S, Gluhak—Heinrich J, Bellido T, Harris S, Turner C. Mechan—
function and the inability to express the autocrine form of insulin—like ical stimulation of bone in ViVO reduces osteocyte expression of
growth factor—1 (MGF) in response to mechanical overload. FEBS Lett SOST/sclerostin. J Biol Chem 283: 5 866—5 875 , 2008.

505: 259—263, 2001. 228. Roer R, Dillaman R. Decreased femoral arterial ﬂow during simulated

204. OzciVici E, Luu Y, Rubin C, JudeX S. LOW—level Vibrations retain bone microgravity in the rat. J Appl Physiol 76: 2125—2129, 1994.
marrow’s osteogenic potential and augment recovery of trabecular bone 229. Rofﬁno S, Carnino A, Charpiot P, Marini JF. Increase in rat soleus
during reambulation. PLOS One 5: e11178, 2010. myotendinous interface after a 14—d spaceﬂight. C R Acad Sci 111 321:

205. Palle S, Vico L, Bourrin S, Alexandre C. Bone tissue response to four— 557—564, 1998.
month antiorthostatic bedrest: Abone histomorphometric study. Calcif 230. Rohrer M, Kim Y, Fayos J. The effect of c0balt—60 irradiation on
Tissue Int51: 189—194, 1992. monkey mandibles. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 48: 424—440,

206. Parﬁtt AM, Simon LS, Villanueva AR, Krance SM. Procollagen type 1979.

Icarboxy—terminal extension peptide in serum as a marker of collagen 231. Rosen C. Primer on the Metabolic Bone Diseases and Disorders of
biosynthesis in bone. Correlation With iliac bone formation rates and Mineral Metabolism. Washington, DC: American Society of Bone
comparison With total alkaline phosphatase. J Bone Miner Res 2: 427— and Mineral Research, 2008.

436, 1987. 232. Rosen C, Niu T. Insulin—like growth factors and the IGF binding pro—

207. Patterson—Buckendahl P, Arnaud SB, Mechanic GL, Martin RB, teins:1mplicati0ns for bone biology.1n: Bilezikian J, Raisz L, Martin T,
Grindeland RE, Cann CE. Fragility and composition of growing rat editors. Principles ofBone Biology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press,
bone after one week in spaceﬂight. Am J Physiol 252: R240—R246, 2008, pp. 1069—1094.

1987. 233. Ross P. Osteoclast biology and bone resorption. In: Rosen C, editor.

208. Patterson-Buckendahl PE, Grindeland RE, Martin RB, Cann CE, Primer on the Metabolic Bone Diseases and Disorders of Mineral
Arnaud SB. Osteocalcin as an indicator of bone metabolism during Metabolism (7th ed.). Washington, DC: American Society of Bone and
spaceﬂight. Physiologist 28: 8227—8228, 1985. Mineral Research, 2008, pp. 16—22.

Volume 6, April 2016 683

"
"40","Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology
234. Rothman RH, Slogoff S. The effect of immobilization 0n the vascular exercise as a countermeasure to bed rest—induced bone loss in women
bed of tendon. Surg Gynecol Obstet 124: 1064—1066, 1967. during 60—day simulated microgravity. Bone 42: 572—5 81, 2008.

235. Rubin C, Lanyon L. Regulation of bone mass by mechanical strain 260. Smith SM, Heer M. Calcium and bone metabolism during space ﬂight.

magnitude. Calcif Tissue Int 37: 411—417, 1985. Nutrition 18: 849—852, 2002.
236. Rubin C, Lanyon L. Osteoregulatory nature of mechanical stimuli: 261. Smith SM, Heer MA, Shackelford LC, Sibonga JD,P10utz—Snyder L,
Function as a determinant for adaptive remodeling in bone. J Orthop Zwart SR. Beneﬁts for bone from resistance exercise and nutrition in
Res 5: 300—310, 1987. long—duration spaceﬂight: Evidence from biochemistry and densitom—
237. Rubin C, Recker R, Cullen D, Ryaby J, McCabe J, McLeod K. Preven— etry. J Bone Miner Res 27: 1896—1906, 2012.
tion of postmenopausal bone loss by a low—magnitude, high—frequency 262. Smith SM, Wastney ME, Morukov BV, Larina 1M, Nyquist LE, Abrams
mechanical stimuli: Aclinical trial assessing compliance, efﬁcacy, and SA, Taran EN, Shih C, Nillen JL, DaVis—Street JE, Rice BL, Lane
safety. J Bone Miner Res 19: 343—351, 2004. HW. Calcium metabolism before, during, and after a 3—m0 spaceﬂight:
238. Rubin C, Turner AS, Mallinckrodt C, Jerome C, McLeod K, Bain Kinetic and biochemical changes. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp
S. Mechanical strain, induced noninvasively in the high—frequency Physiol 277: R1—R10, 1999.
domain, is anabolic t0 cancellous bone, but not cortical bone. Bone 263. Smith SM, Wastney ME, O’Brien KO, Morukov BV, Larina 1M,
30: 445—452, 2002. Abrams SA, DaVis—Street JE, Oganov V, Shackelford LC. Bone
239. Rubin C, Turner S, Bain S, Mallinckrodt C, McLeod K. Low mechanical markers, calcium metabolism, and calcium kinetics during extended—
signals strengthen long bones. Nature (London) 412: 603—604, 2001. duration space ﬂight on the Mir space station. J Bone Miner Res 20:
240. Sakai A, Sakata T, Tanaka S, Okazaki R, Kunugita N, Norimura T, 208—218, 2005.
Nakamura T. Disruption of the p53 gene results in preserved trabecular 264. Soderqvist A, Ekstrom W, Ponzer S, Pettersson H, Cederholm T, Dalen
bone mass and bone formation after mechanical loading. J Bone M iner N, Hedstrom M, Tidermark J, Stockholm Hip Fracture G. Prediction of
Res 17: 119—127, 2002. mortality in elderly patients with hip fractures: A two—year prospective
241. Sakata T, Halloran BP, Elalieh HZ, Munson SJ, Rudner L, Venton L, study of 1,944 patients. Gerontology 55: 496—504, 2009.
Ginzinger D, Rosen CJ, Bikle DD. Skeletal unloading induces resis— 265. Spangenburg EE, Abraha T, Childs TE, Pattison JS, Booth FW. Skele—
tance t0 insulin—like growth factor 1 on bone formation. Bone 32: 669— tal muscle IGF—binding protein—3 and —5 expressions are age, muscle,
680, 2003. and load dependent. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 284: E340—350,
242. Sakata T, Wang Y, Halloran BP, Elalieh HZ, Cao J, Bikle DD. Skeletal 2003.
unloading induces resistance to insulin—like growth factor—I (IGF—I) by 266. Spatz J, Fields E, Yu E, PajeVic P, Bouxsein M, Sibonga J, Zwart S,
inhibiting activation of the IGF—I signaling pathways. J Bone MinerRes Smith S. Serum sclerostin increases in healthy adult men during bed
19: 436—446, 2004. rest. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97: E1736—E1740, 2012.
243. SakuraiT, Sawada Y,Y0shim0t0 M, KawaiM, MiyakoshiJ. Radiation— 267. Spatz JM, Ellman R, Cloutier AM, Louis L, van Vliet M, Suva LJ,
induced reduction of osteoblast differentiation in C2C12 cells. J Radiat Dwyer D, Stolina M, Ke HZ, Bouxsein ML. Sclerostin antibody inhibits
Res 48: 5 15 —5 21, 2007. skeletal deterioration due to reduced mechanical loading. J Bone Miner
244. Sayson JV, Hargens AR. Pathophysiology of low back pain during Res 28: 865—874, 2013.
exposure to microgravity. Aviat Space Environ Med 79: 365—373, 2008. 268. Specter E, Smith S, Sibonga J. Skeletal effects of long—duration head—
245. Schneider V, Oganov V, LeBlanc A, Rakmonov A, Taggad L, Bakulin down bed rest. Aviat Space Environ Med 80: A23—A28, 2009.
A, Huntoon C, GrigorieV A, Varonin L. Bone and body mass changes 269. Spengler DM, Morey ER, Carter DR, Turner RT, Baylink DJ. Effects
during space ﬂight. Acta Astronaut 36: 463—466, 1995. of spaceﬂight on structural and material strength of growing bone. Proc
246. Scott J, Warburton D, Williams D, Whelan S, Krassioukov A. Chal— Soc Exp Biol Med 174: 224—228, 1983.
lenges, concerns and common problems: Physiological consequences 270. Squire M, Brazin A, Keng Y, JudeX S. Baseline bone morphometry and
of spinal cord injury and microgravity. Spinal Card 49: 4—16, 2011. cellular activity modulate the degree of bone loss in the appendicular
247. Seeman E. Modeling and remodeling: The cellular machinery respon— skeleton during disuse. Bone 42: 341—349, 2008.
sible for the gain and loss of bone’s material and structural strength. 271. St Pierre BA and Tidball JG. Macrophage activation and muscle remod—
In: Bilezikian J, Raisz L, Martin T, editors. Principles ofBone Biology, eling at myotendinous junctions after modiﬁcations in muscle loading.
3rd edition (3rd ed.). Boston: Academic Press, 2008, pp. 3—28. Am JPathol 145: 1463—1471, 1994.
248. Shackelford L, LeBlanc A, Driscoll T, Evans H, Rianon N, Smith S, 272. Stein T, Schluter M, Moldawer L. Endocrine relationships during
Specter E, Feeback D, Lai D. Resistance exercise as a countermeasure human spaceﬂight. Am J Physiol 276: E155—E162, 1999.
to disuse—induced bone loss. J Appl Physiol 97: 119—129, 2004. 273. Stephens D, Jr., Townsend L, Hoff J. Interplanetary crew dose estimates
249. Shaw SR, Vailas AC, Grindeland RE, Zernicke RF. Effects of a 1—wk for worst case solar particle events based on historical data for the
spaceﬂight on morphological and mechanical properties of growing Carrington ﬂare of 1859. Acta Astronaut 56: 969—974, 2005.
bone. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 254: R78—R83, 1988. 274. Stupakov G, Kazeikin V, Morukov B. MicrograVity—induced changes
250. Shen WW, Zhao JH. Pulsed electromagnetic ﬁelds stimulation affects in human bone strength. Physiologist 32: 841—844, 1989.
BMD and local factor production of rats with disuse osteoporosis. 275. Suda T,TakahashiN,Udagawa N,JimiE, Gillespie M,Martin T. Mod—
Bioelectromagnetics 31: 113—119, 2010. ulation of osteoclast differentiation and function by the new members
251. Shimano MM, Volpon JB. Biomechanics and structural adaptations of of the tumor necrosis factor receptor and ligand families. Endocr Rev
the rat femur after hindlimb suspension and treadmill running. Braz J 20: 345 —357, 1999.
Med Biol Res 42: 330—338, 2009. 276. Swift J, Hogan H, Bloomﬁeld S. Beta—1 adrenergic agonist dobutamine
252. Shirazi—Fard Y, Kupke JS, Bloomﬁeld SA, Hogan HA. Discordant mitigates unloading—induced bone loss by maintaining formation. Med
recovery of bone mass and mechanical properties during prolonged Sci Exerc Sports 45: 1665—1673, 2013.
recovery from disuse. Bone 52: 433—443, 2013. 277. Swift JM, Swift SN, Nilsson MI, Hogan HA, Bouse SD,B100mﬁeld SA.
253. Sibonga JD, Evans HJ, Sung HG, Specter ER, Lang TF, Oganov VS, Cancellous bone formation response to simulated resistance training
Bakulin AV, Shackelford LC, LeBlanc AD. Recovery of spaceﬂight— during disuse is blunted by concurrent alendronate treatment. J Bone
induced bone loss: Bone mineral density after long—duration missions Miner Res 26: 2140—2150, 2011.
as ﬁtted with an exponential function. Bone 41: 973—978, 2007. 278. Szomor ZL, Appleyard RC, Murrell GA. Overexpression of nitric oxide
254. Simmons DJ, Grynpas MD, Rosenberg GD. Maturation of bone and synthases in tendon overuse. J Orthop Res 24: 80—86, 2006.
dentin matrices in rats ﬂown on the Soviet biosatellite Cosmos 1887. 279. Szulc P, Delmas P. Biochemical markers of bone turnover in osteoporo—
FASEB J 4: 29—33, 1990. sis. In: Rosen C, editor. Primer on the Metabolic Bone Diseases and
255. Sinha RK, Shah SA, Hume EL, Tuan RS. The effect of a 5—day space Disorders ofMineral Metabolism (7th ed.) Washington, DC: American
ﬂight on the immature rat spine. Spine J 2: 239—243, 2002. Society of Bone and Mineral Research, 2008, pp. 174—179.
256. Skutek M, van Griensven M, Zeichen J, Brauer N, Bosch U. Cyclic 280. Szymczyk K, Shapiro 1, Adams C. Ionizing radiation sensitizes bone
mechanical stretching enhances secretion of Interleukin 6 in human cells to apoptosis. Bone 34: 148—156, 2004.
tendon ﬁbroblasts. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 9: 322—326, 281. Takahashi N, Udagawa N, Kobayashi Y. Osteoclast generation. In:
2001. Bilezikian J, Raisz L, Martin T, editors. Principles of Bone Biology
257. Smith S, DaVis—Street J, Fesperman J, Calkins D, Bawa M, Macias B, (3rd ed.). San Diego: Academic Press, Inc., 2008, pp. 175—192.
Meyer R, Hargens A. Evaluation of treadmill exercise in a lower body 282. Takayanagi H. Inﬂammatory bone destruction and osteoimmunology.
negative pressure chamber as a countermeasure for weightlessness— J Periodontal Res 40: 287—293, 2005.
induced bone loss: A bed rest study with identical twins. J Bone Miner 283. Takeda S, Elefteriou F, Levasseur R, Liu X, Zhao L, Parker K, Arm—
Res 18: 2223—2230, 2003. strong D, Ducy P, Karsenty G. Leptin regulates bone formation Via the
258. Smith S, Zwart S, Heer M, Baecker N, Evans H, Feiveson A, Shack— sympathetic nervous system. Cell 111: 305—317, 2002.
e1f0rdL,LeBlancA. Effects of artiﬁcial gravity during bed rest on bone 284. Tavella S, Ruggiu A, Giuliani A, Brun F, Canciani B, Manescu A,
metabolism in humans. J Appl Physiol 107: 47—53, 2009. Marozzi K, Cilli M, Costa D, Liu Y, Piccardi F, Tasso R, Tromba G,
259. Smith S, Zwart S, Heer M, Lee S, Baecker N, Meuche S, Macias B, Rustichelli F, Cancedda R. Bone turnover in wild type and pleiotrophin—
Shackelford L, Schneider S, Hargens A. WISE—2005: Supine treadmill transgenic mice housed for three months in the International Space
exercise within lower body negative pressure and ﬂywheel resistive Station (188). PLOS One 7: e33179, 2012.
684 Volume 6, April 2016

"
"41","Comprehensive Physiology Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue
285. Taylor C, Hanna M, Behnke B, StableyJ, McCulloughD, Davis 111R, 309. Vico L, Collet P, Guignandon A, Lafage—Proust M—H, Thomas T,
Ghosh P, Papadopoulos A, Muller—Delp J, Delp M. Spaceﬂight—induced Rehailia M, Alexandre C. Effects of long—term microgravity exposure
alterations in cerebral artery vasoconstrictor, mechanical, and structural 0n cancellous and cortical weight—bearing bones of cosmonauts. Lancet
properties: Implications for elevated cerebral perfusion and intracranial 355: 1607—1611, 2000.
pressure. FASEB J 27: 2282—2292, 2013. 310. Vico L, Novikov VE, Very JM, Alexandre C. Bone histomorphometric

286. Thomsen J, Morukov B, Vico L, Alexandre C, Saparin P, Gowin comparison of rat tibial metaphysis after 7—day tail suspension VS. 7—day
W. Cancellous bone structure of iliac crest biopsies following 370 spaceﬂightAviat Space Environ Med 62: 26—31, 1991.
days of head—down bed rest. Aviat Space Environ Med 76: 915—922, 311. Vunjak—Novakovic G, Altman G, Horan R, Kaplan DL. Tissue engi—
2005. meeting 0f1igaments.Annu Rev Biomed Eng 6: 131—156, 2004.

287. Thornton GM, Shrive NG, Frank CB. Healing ligaments have decreased 312. Wagner EB, Granzella NP, Saito H, Newman D], Young LR, Bouxsein
cyclic modulus compared to normal ligaments and immobilization fur— ML. Partial weight suspension: A novel murine model for investigating
ther compromises healing ligamentresponse to cyclic 10ading.J0rth0p adaptation to reduced musculoskeletal loading. J Appl Physiol 109:
Res 21: 716—722, 2003. 350—357, 2010.

288. Tidball JG. Distribution of collagens and ﬁbronectin in the subepi— 313. Walsh M,Kim N,Kad0n0 Y,Rh0 J,Lee S,L0renzo J,Ch0iY. Osteoim—
cardium during avian cardiac development. Anat Embryol 185: 155— munology: Interplay between the immune system and bone metabolism.
162, 1992. Annu Rev Immunol 24: 33—63, 2006.

289. Tidball JG, Spencer MJ. PDGF stimulation induces phosphorylation 314. Wang K, Shi Y, Denhardt D. Osteopontin regulates hindlimb—
0f talin and cytoskeletal reorganization in skeletal muscle. J Cell Biol unloading—induced lymphoid organ atrophy and weight loss by modu—
123: 627—635, 1993. lating corticosteroid production. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104: 14777—

290. Tilton FE, Degioanni JJC, Schneider VS. Long—term follow—up of Sky— 14782, 2007.
lab bone demineralization. Aviat Space Environ Med 51: 1209—1213, 315. Wang Y, Liu W, Masuyama R, Fukuyama R, Ito M, Zhang Q, Komori
1980. H, Murakami T, Moriishi T, Miyazaki T, Kitazawa R, Yoshida C, Kawai

291. Trudel G, Payne M, Madler B, Ramachandran N, Lecompte M, Wade Y, Izumi S, Komori T. Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 induces bone
C, Biolo G, Blane S, Hughson R, Bear L, Uhthoff H. Bone marrow fat loss of unloading by promoting osteoclastogenesis. Bone 50: 409—419,
accumulation after 60 days of bed rest persisted 1 year after activities 2012.
were resumed along With hemopoietic stimulation: The Women Inter— 316. Warden SJ, Galley MR, Richard JS, George LA, Dirks RC, Guilden—
national Space for Exploration study. J Appl Physiol 107: 540—548, becher EA, Judd AM, Robling AG, Fuchs RK. Reduced gravitational
2009. loading does not account for the skeletal effect of botulinum toxin—

292. Turner A. HOW to select your animal model for osteoporosis research. induced muscle inhibition suggesting a direct effect of muscle on bone.
In: Duque G, Watanabe K, editors. Osteoporosis Research: Animal Bone 54: 98—105, 2013.

Models. London: Springer—Verlag, 2011, pp. 1—12. 317. Warner SE, Sanford DA, Becker BA, Bain SD, Srinivasan S, Gross

293. Turner N, Braby L, Ford J, Lupton J. Opportunities for nutritional TS. Botox induced muscle paralysis rapidly degrades bone. Bone 38:
amelioration of radiation—induced cellular damage. Nutrition 18: 904— 257—264, 2006.

912, 2002. 318. Watanabe Y, Ohshima H, Mizuno K, Sekiguchi C, Fukunaga M, Kohri

294. Turner R, Evans G, Wakley G. Spaceﬂight results in depressed can— K, Rittweger J, Felsenberg D, Matsumoto T, Nakamura T. Intravenous
cellous bone formation in rat humeri. Aviat Space Environ Med 66: pamidronate prevents femoral bone loss and renal stone formation dur—
770—774, 1995. ing 90—day bed rest. J Bone Miner Res 19: 177 1—177 8, 2004.

295. Turner RT. What do we know about the effects of spaceﬂight on bone? 319. Wei S, Siegal G. Mechanisms modulating inﬂammatory osteolysis: A
J Appl Physiol 89: 840—847, 2000. review With insights into therapeutic targets. Pathol Res Pract 204:

296. Vailas AC, Deluna DM, Lewis LL, Curwin SL, Roy RR, Alford EK. 695—706, 2008.

Adaptation of bone and tendon to prolonged hindlimb suspension in 320. Weinbaum S, Cowin SC, Zeng Y. A model for the excitation of
rats. J Appl Physiol 65: 373—376, 1988. osteocytes by mechanical loading—induced bone ﬂuid shear stresses.

297. Vailas AC, Zernicke RF, Grindeland RE, Kaplansky A, Durnova GN, J Biomech 27: 339—360, 1994.

Li KC, Martinez DA. Effects of spaceﬂight on rat humerus geometry, 321. Weinstein R. Glucocorticoid—induced bone disease.1n:Rosen C, Bouil—
biomechanics, and biochemistry. FASEB J 4: 47—54, 1990. Ion R, Compston J, Rosen V, editors. Primer on the Metabolic Bone

298. Vailas AC, Zernicke RF, Grindeland RE, Li KC. Suspension effects Diseases and Disorders ofMineralMetabolism (Eighth ed.). Somerset,
on rat femur—medial collateral ligament—tibia unit. Am J Physiol 258: NJ: Wiley—Blackwell, 2013, pp. 473—481.

R724—728, 1990. 322. Wernle J, Damron T, Allen M, Mann K. Local irradiation alters bone

299. Van Loon JJ, Bervoets DJ, Burger EH, Dieudonne SC, Hagen JW, morphology and increases bone fragility. J Biomech 43: 2738—2746,
Semeins CM, Doulabi BZ, Veldhuijzen JP. Decreased mineralization 2010.
and increased calcium release in isolated fetal mouse long bones under 323. Whitson PA, Pietrzyk RA, Jones JA, Nelman—Gonzalez M, Hudson EK,
near weightlessness. J Bone Miner Res 10: 550—557, 1995. Sams CF. Effect of potassium citrate therapy on the risk of renal stone

300. Vanderby R, Jr., Vailas AC, Graf BK, Thielke RJ, Ulm MJ, Kohles SS, formation during spaceﬂight. J Urol 182: 2490—2496, 2009.

Kunz DN. Acute modiﬁcation of biomechanical properties of the bone— 324. Willey JS, Livingston EW, Robbins ME, Bourland JD, Tirado—Lee L,
ligament insertion to rat limb unweighting. FASEB J 4: 2499—2505, Smith—Sielicki H, Bateman TA. Risedronate prevents early radiation—
1990. induced osteoporosis in mice at multiple skeletal locations. Bone 46:

301. Veldhuijzen JP, Van Loon JJ, Haaijman CM, Bervoets TJ. Short—term 101—111, 2010.
exposure to 1— g conditions counteracts micro—g effects on mineraliza— 325. Willey JS, Lloyd SA, Nelson GA, Bateman TA. Ionizing radiation and
tion in isolated fetal mouse long bones. ASGSB Bull 9: 89, 1995. bone loss: Space exploration and clinical therapy applications. Clin Rev

302. Verborgt 0, Gibson G, Schafﬂer M. Loss of osteocyte integrity in asso— Bone Miner Metab 9: 54—62, 2011.
ciation With microdamage and bone remodeling after fatigue in ViVO. 326. Willey JS, Lloyd SA, Robbins ME, Bourland JD, Smith—Sielicki H,
J Bone Miner Res 15: 60—67, 2000. Bowman LC, Norrdin RW, Bateman TA. Early increase in osteoclast

303. Vergnaud P, Garnero P, Meunier PJ, Breart G, Kamihagi K, Delmas PD. number in mice after Whole—body irradiation With 2 Gy X rays. Radiat
Undercarboxylated osteocalcin measured With a speciﬁc immunoassay Res 170: 388—392, 2008.
predicts hip fracture in elderly women: The EPIDOS study. J Clin 327. Wing PC, Tsang 1K, Susak L, Gagnon F, Gagnon R, Potts JE. Back
Endocrinol Metab 82: 719—724, 1997. pain and spinal changes in microgravity. Orthop Clin North Am 22:

304. Vernon—Roberts B, Fazzalari NL, Manthey BA. Pathogenesis of tears 255—262, 1991.
of the anulus investigated by multiple—level transaxial analysis of the 328. Wronski T, Morey E. Effect of spaceﬂight 0n periosteal bone formation
T12—L1 disc. Spine 22: 2641—2646, 1997. in ratS.Am JPhysiolRegulIntegr Comp Physiol 244: R305—R309, 1983.

305. Vico L, Bourrin S, Genty C, Palle S, Alexandre C. Histomorphometric 329. Wronski TJ, Morey—Holton E, Jee WS. Cosmos 1129: Spaceﬂight and
analyses of cancellous bone from COSMOS 2044 rats. J Appl Physiol bone changes. Physiologist 23: 879—882, 1980.

75: 2203—2208, 1993. 330. Yang P, Jia B, Ding C, Wang Z, Qian A, Shang P.Wh01e—b0dy Vibration

306. Vico L, Bourrin S, Very JM, Radziszowska M, Collet P, Alexandre effects on bone before and after hind—limb unloading in rats.AviatSpace
C. Bone changes in 6—m0—01d rats after head—down suspension and a Environ Med 80: 88—93, 2009.
reambulation period. J Appl Physiol 79: 1426—1433, 1995. 331. Yasuoka H, Asazuma T, Nakanishi K, Yoshihara Y, Sugihara A, Tomiya

307. Vico L, Chappard D, Palle S, Bakulin AV, Novikov VE, Alexandre C. M, Okabayashi T, Nemoto K. Effects of reloading after simulated
Trabecular bone remodeling after seven days of weightlessness eXpO— microgravity 0n proteoglycan metabolism in the nucleus pulposus and
sure (BIOCOSMOS 1667). Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol anulus ﬁbrosus 0f the lumbar intervertebral disc: An experimental study
255: R243—R247, 1988. using a rat tail suspension model. Spine 32: E734—E740, 2007.

308. Vico L, Chappard D, Palle S, Minaire P, Riffat G, Morukov B, Rak— 332. Yumoto K, Globus RK, Mojarrab R, Arakaki J, Wang A, Searby ND,
manov S. Effects of a 120 day period of bed—rest on bone mass and Almeida EA,Lim01iCL. Short—term effects of Whole—body exposure to
bone cell activities in man: Attempts at countermeasures. Bone Miner (56)Fe ions in combination With musculoskeletal disuse on bone cells.
2: 383—394, 1987. Radiat Res 173: 494—504, 2010.

Volume 6, April 2016 685

"
"42","Microgravity, Bone, and Connective Tissue Comprehensive Physiology

333. Zamora A], Carnino A, Rofﬁno S, Marini JF. Respective effects of hind—limb unloading in two inbred strains of miceAviat Space Environ
hindlimb suspension, conﬁnement and spaceﬂight 0n myotendinous Med 76: 530—535, 2005.
junction ultrastructure. Acta Astronaut 36: 693—706, 1995. 341. Zittermann A, Heer M, Caillot—Augusseau A, Rettberg P, Scheld K,

334. Zerath E, Novikov V, Leblanc A, Bakulin A, Oganov V, Grynpas M. Drummer C, Alexandre C, Horneck G, Vorobiev D, Stehle P. Micro—
Effects of spaceﬂight on bone mineralization in the rhesus monkey. gravityinhibitsintestinalcalcium absorption as shown byastable stron—
J Appl Physiol 81: 194—200, 1996. tium test. Eur J Clin Invest 30: 1036—1043, 2000.

335. Zernicke RF, Hou JC, Vailas AC, Nishimoto M, Patel S, Shaw SR. 342. ZwartS,DaVis—Street J,Padd0n—J0nes D,Ferrand0 A,W01fe R,SmithS.
Changes in geometrical and biomechanical properties of immature male Amino acid supplementation alters bone metabolism during simulated
and female rat tibia. Aviat Space Environ Med 61: 814—820, 1990. weightlessness. J Appl Physiol 99: 134—140, 2005 .

336. Zernicke RF, Vailas AC, Grindeland RE, Kaplansky A, Salem GJ, 343. Zwart S, Hargens A, Lee S, Macias B, Watenpaugh D, Tse K, Smith S.
Martinez DA. Spaceﬂight effects on biomechanical and biochemi— Lower body negative pressure treadmill exercise as a countermeasure
cal properties of rat vertebrae. Am J Physiol 258: R1327—R1332, for bed rest—induced bone loss in female identical twins. Bone 40: 529—
1990. 537, 2007.

337. Zerwekh J, Ruml L, Gottschalk F, Pak C. The effects of twelve weeks 344. Zwart S, Hargens A, Smith S. The ratio of animal protein intake to
of bed rest on bone histology, biochemical markers of bone turnover, potassium intake is a predictor of bone resorption in space ﬂight ana—
and calcium homoeostasis in eleven normal subjects. J Bone Miner Res logues and in ambulatory subjects. Am J Clin Nutr 80: 1058—1065,
13: 1594—1601, 1998. 2004.

338. Zhang B, Cory E, Bhattacharya R, Sah R, Hargens A. Fifteen days 345. Zwart S, Morgan J, Smith S. Iron status and its relations With oxida—
of microgravity causes growth in calvaria of mice. Bone 56: 290—295, tive damage and bone loss during long—duration space ﬂight on the
2013. International Space Station. Am J Clin Nutr 98: 217—223, 2013.

339. Zhang R, Supowit SC, Klein GL, Lu Z, Christensen MD, Lozano R, 346. Zwart S, Pierson D, Mehta S, Gonda S, Smith S. Capacity of omega—3
Simmons DJ. Rat tail suspension reduces messenger RNA level for fatty acids or eicosapentaenoic acid to counteract weightless—induced
growth factors and osteopontin and decreases the osteoblastic differen— bone loss by inhibiting NF—kB activation: From cells to bed rest to
tiation of bone marrow stromal cells. J Bone Miner Res 10: 415—423, astronauts. J Bone Miner Res 25: 1049—1057, 2010.

1995. 347. Zwart SR, Booth SL, Peterson JW, Wang Z, Smith SM. Vitamin K

340. Zhong N, Garman RA, Squire ME, Donahue LR, Rubin CT, Hadjiar— status in spaceﬂight and ground—based models of spaceﬂight. J Bone
gyrou M, JudeX S. Gene expression patterns in bone after 4 days of Miner Res 26: 948—954, 2011.

686 Volume 6, April 2016

"
