"","x"
"1","FEMS Microbiology Reviews Advance Access published June 26, 2016
«QMWN 0%,. FEMS Microbiology Reviews, fuw015
04
9
E JOURNALS d '- 10 1093/f m r /f 015
5’ Investing In suence R::iew'Artid: S e “W
OXFORD ”81120511189
REVIEW ARTICLE
0 O p O O O
Venturing into new realms. Mlcroorganisms in space
Christine M01ssl-E1ch1nger1’2'*, Charles Cockell3 and Petra Rettberg4
1Department for Internal Medicine, Medical University of Graz, 8036 Graz, Austria, 2BioTechMed Graz,
8010 Graz, Austria, 3UK Centre for Astrobiology, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh EH10 4EP, UK and 4Radiation Biology Department, Institute of Aerospace Medicine, German c:
Aerospace Center (DLR), 51147 Cologne, Germany 37
93
*Corresponding author: Medizinische Universitat Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 15, Graz, 8036, Graz, Austria. Tel: +43 316 385 72808; g
E-mail: Christine.moissl-eichinger@medunigraz.at g?
One sentence summary: Some terrestrial microorganisms can colonise space habitats, such as the International Space Station, space vehicles or B
potentially even other solar system bodies; for the search for extraterrestrial life, the study of terrestrial microorganisms from extreme environments is g
indispensable. :-
Editor: Sonja-Verena Albers g”
—g3
'o
i,
0
ABSTRACT E
0
One of the biggest challenges of science is the determination of whether extraterrestrial life exists. Although potential 5
habitable areas might be available for complex 11fe, it is more likely that microbial 11fe could eX13t in space. Many .5
. . . . . . O
extremotolerant and extremophilic microbes have been found to be able to w1thstand numerous, combined envnronmental 03
factors, such as high or low temperatures and pressures, high-salt conditions, high doses of radiation, desiccation or g
nutrient limitations. They may even survive the transit from one planet to another. Terrestrial Mars-analogue sites are one ”Q
focus of researchers, in order to understand the microbial d1ve1r31ty in preparation for upcoming space m1331ons aimed at 2%
the detection of 11fe. However, such m1331ons could also pose a risk With respect to contamination of the extraterrestrial ;
environment by accidentally transferred terrestrial microorganisms. Closer to the Earth, the International Space Station is 0%
the most enclosed habitat, where humans work and live—and with them numerous microorganisms. It is still unknown E;
how microbes adapt to this environment, possibly even creating a risk for the crew. Information on the microbiology of the F
ISS will have an impact on the planning and implementation of long-term human spaceﬂights in order to ensure a safe, 2
stable and balanced microbiome on board. 3
Keywords: International Space Station; planetary protection; habitability; extremophiles; Mars-analogue; Panspermia
—
INTRODUCTION of the entire Earth surface, has an average temperature of 20C,
Life in s ace is ass med to face extreme chemical and h si and harbours ~12 X 1029 microbial cells (Whitman, Coleman
P. u . . . . . p y and Wiebe 1998; Kallineyer et al. 2012). In addition, more than
cal conditions. No matter if thnv1ng 1n the International Space 0 . . .
. . . 70 A of all freshwater on Earth occurs as ice (Pnscu and Christ-
Station (ISS), in space vehicles on the way through space, or on ‘ , . .
. . . ner 2004). The occurrence of such extreme env1ronments is re-
other planets, such as Mars. Surv1v1ng or grow1ng under extreme .
. . . . . markably broad and includes some of our body areas, e.g. the
conditions is a remarkable feature of many terrestrial microor- . . .
. . . . . urogenital tract (With respect to pH), skin (water content) and
ganisins, such as fung1,bactena and archaea. The con31deration
. . . . colon (lack of oxygen).
of what is extreme and what not is certainly driven by the hu- . . . .
. . . Follow1ng a deﬁnition of Thomas D. Brock, env1ronments can
man p01nt of View: we con31der e.g. temperatures from 150C to . . . . . .
. ‘ be con31dered as extreme, when the microbial diver31ty therein
300C (370C for body temperature) to be normal, a pH of 7 is neu- . . . .
, . . . is lower than elsewhere (Brock 1969). Usually, this is assoc1ated
tral . However, the marine env1ronrnent, covering more than 70%
Received: 29 February 2016; Accepted: 23 May 2016
© FEMS 2016. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
1

"
"2","2 l FEMS Microbiology Reviews
Table 1. Overview on the physical and chemical borders of life for known microbial growth and survival. For an excellent review, please see
also Rummel et a1. (2014).
Limits For growtha For survival (estimated)
Temperature Low temperature: —15°C, Planococcus halocryophilus —263°C to +150°C
Or1, (Mykytczuk et a1. 2013); —18°C, Rhodotorula
glutinis FMT157 (yeast) (Collins and Buick 1989)
High temperature: +113°C, Pyrolobus fumarii, (Blochl
et a1. 1997)b
Water availability aW = 0.605, Xeromyces bisporus (Pitt and Christian aW = 0 (vacuum) to 1.0
1968)C
Salinity 30% NaCI (w/v) Possible in salt crystals
pH pH = 0—13 (e.g. Picrophilus torridus, (Schleper et a1. pH = 0—14 (Krulwich and Guffanti 1989; Dhakar and
1996); Plectonema nostocorum (Stolp 1988)) Pandey 2016)
Pressure Low pressure: 1—10 Pa, Vibrio sp. (Pavlov et a1. 2010); From vacuum to up to 100 MPa (Jebbar et a1. 2015)
700 Pa, Carnobacterium spp. and Serratia quuefaciens
(Nicholson et a1. 2013; Schuerger et a1. 2013)
High pressure: 90 Mpa, Colwellia hadaliensis Oebbar U
et a1. 2015) C2)
Nutrients High metabolic versatility Not required; presence potentially even decreases ET
High starvation tolerance survivability of dormant microbes i
Oxygen Aerobic/anaerobic growth Not required; presence potentially even decreases g
survivability of dormant microbes :
Radiation UV: D. radiodurans F10 (254 nm) 600 J/m2 D10 2 6 kGy Z”
(Bauermeister et a1. 2009) g
Ionizing radiation: acute irradiation T hermococcus g
gammatolerans D10 6 kGy Oolivet et a1. 2003) g
Chronic irradiation D. radiodurans <60 Gy/h c3”
(Venkateswaran et a1. 2000) §-
5:
Time 20 min up to years Millions of years (permafrost, rock salt) a
m
aGrowth is here deﬁned as cell division. Reports on metabolic activity of microorganisms under extreme conditions differ signiﬁcantly. 03
bIt shall be noted that another archaeon was described to be physiologically active at higher temperatures (1210C, strain 121; Kasheﬁ and Lovley 2003). In addition, 3‘
Methanopyrus kandleri was reported to proliferate under high—pressure conditions at 1220C; however, this ﬁnding could not be re—conﬁrmed to date. Ué
cSpore germination was observed under these conditions. In addition, there was one anecdotal observation where the growth of molds was found below 50% rh, 3
however, under not always controlled conditions (Pack 2011). g
>
with a general reduction of microbial abundance, since only a such conditions (see also Table 1) for their growth are called ex— 0:?
few microbial species can survive and thrive. Beyond that, eX— trernophiles (they ‘love’ the extreme conditions). E
trerne environments can be considered biotopes providing one In the following, we will review the current body of Iiter- r
or more environmental parameters with values permanently ature with respect to microorganisms, which grow in the ISS, E
close to lower or upper limits known for life in its various are potentially transferred to other planets, are living in terres— 0‘
forrns. trial Mars—analogue sites and survive in extreme space—sirnilar
During the course of evolution, microorganisms have stresses, and we wi11tack1e the question about a potential trans—
colonised numerous niches. Due to the physiological ﬂexibility fer of microbes between planetary bodies.
of microbes in general, sorne representatives are even able to
deal with extreme physical and chemical conditions and as such
they deﬁne the boundaries of life. MICROORGANISMS WITHIN THE
This border is deﬁned by the physiological functionality of a INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION
biological system: proteins are close to being denaturated, and AND IN SPACECRAFT FOR LONG-TERM
D.N.A 1sdarnaged. Some rn1crobes can snrylve under these con— SPACE MISSIONS
d1t10ns. they can w1thstand such condltlons for a shorter (or
longer) period oftirne, by either shutting down their metabolism The human body carries approximately the same order of mag—
(by e.g. forming spores), by synthesizing protecting compounds nitude of microbial and human cells (Sender, Fuchs and Milo
(e.g. heat-shock proteins, EPS or compatible soluteS) or being 2016) and interacts closely with its microbiorne. The human—
able to repair the accumulated damages after exposure. These associated microorganisms are strongly connected to human
microbes are named extremotoIerant. body processes, and the correct interplay is very important for
Other microbes are highly adapted and prefer to grow health and we11—being. As a consequence, the human body car—
(=proliferate) under such challenging conditions: their enzymes ﬁes a microbial cloud (Meadow et al. 2015), spreading its mi-
are fully functional, the metabolism, transcription and trans- croorganisrns to the biotic and abiotic environment; microbes
1ation processes are working optimally. Microbes that require are intimately associated with the human body, and thus WiII

"
"3","Moissl-Eichinger et al. I 3
always be present in crewed, conﬁned habitats. Exchange of mi— the proper monitoring method and possible countermeasures
croorganisrns, however, is deemed critical for beneﬁcial input of that might be necessary to be taken (BIOSIS: BioSafety in Space
microbes, which can, for instance, also be mediated by plants project, ESA). Spaceﬂight simulations, such as MARS 300 and
(Mahnert, Moissl—Eichinger and Berg 2015). The human body is MARS 500, and microbial monitoring thereof (Project: MICI—IA)
adapted to a constant input of microorganisms, and suffers in are extremely helpful in order to plan a microbiologically safe
cases, when isolation is necessary, such as in hospital environ— trip to Mars and beyond. However, much more research in this
ments, or (long—term) spaceﬂight conditions, by the loss of mi— area is needed to ensure the health and well—being of the crew
crobial diversity (Sonnenburg et al. 2016). However, due to a lack during such missions.
of knowledge and the fear of infections, such encapsulated en—
vironments are under strict microbiological control, which in-
volves the usage of disinfection procedures, killing the majority
of present microorganisms, but supporting hardy survival spe— SPACE MISSIONS AND PLANETARY
cialists (Moissl-Eichinger 2012). PROTECTION
The microbiorne of the ISS is of special interest for several
reasons: for crew’s health, but also for the integrity of space— Ensuring the integrity of ongoing and future (life detection)
craft materials. In addition, microorganisms are indispensable space missions and the integrity of a potential extraterrestrial
for bioregenerative life support systems, such as MELISSA (Go— ecosystem before it is examined comprehensively is the goal
dia et al. 2002). of planetary protection regulations (forward contamination pre—
In recent years, NASA has increased the efforts in space rni— vention), in addition to the protection of Earth from poten—
crobiology beyond standardised, cultivation—based monitoring, tially harmful extraterrestrial agents (backward contamination C
also due to the ﬁnding that Salmonella enterica shows elevated prevention). These international rules have been in place for %
virulence when cultured under spaceﬂight conditions (Wilson 40 years, and each space—faring nation adheres to them (Plan— g
et al. 2007) and that the human immune system responses to— etary Protection Policy, maintained by the Committee on Space :3;
wards the changed environment (Borchers, Keen and Gersh- Research (COSPAR), in line with Article IX of the Outer Space 8;
win 2002). Various projects have been started recently, such as Treaty from 1967; (Kminek and Rummel 2015). g
the ‘Microbial Observatory’ and research related to microbial re— The goal of this agreement and the implementation guide— g
sponse to spaceﬂight conditions and plant—rnicrobe interaction lines therein is to avoid microbial contamination levels (biobur— ET
(Ott et al. 2014). This need for research has also been recognised den) above a certain level for spacecraft intending to ap— 5
by the JAXA ‘Microbe’experirnent series (Ott et al. 2014), Roskos— proach or land on an extraterrestrial planet or moon of sig— 2
mos and BSA (projects: ARBEX, No—Bioﬁlrns and others) as well. niﬁcant chemical and biological interest with respect to the 2
The ﬁrst evidence of the impact of space microbiology was origin of life and evolution. Contamination by Earth microbes E:
retrieved from the orbital station Mir. Based on a 15 years’ expe— could have severe impact on life detection results (false pos— §-
rience on microbial monitoring, resulting in 234 isolated species itives through contamination), or an indigenous ecosystem, if S
of bacteria and fungi thereof, it has been concluded that the it exists. 3%
microbial community adapts to the spaceﬂight conditions and Nowadays, spacecraft carry highly sensitive instruments, 5
bears a number of medical and technical risks, including corro— and they cannot be sterilised as a whole spacecraft (as was done ;
sion of on board hardware (Novikova 2004; Alekhova et al. 2005, for the Viking spacecraft in the 1970s, for instance). For that 2,:
2007, 2015). reason, it is extremely difﬁcult to construct a sterile spacecraft. §
Nonetheless, microbial control on ISS is currently performed Some of the highly sensitive instruments cannot be exposed to g
by focussing on suppression of microbial growth, by the preven- high-temperature sterilisation, and the application of gases, ion— :>
tion of humidity, air ﬁltration, routine housekeeping and rnon— ising radiation and other sterilising agents techniques would 0:0
itoring of surfaces, water and food (Yamaguchi et al. 2014). I-Iu— disturb their function (e.g. leave traces on optical devices or a
rnidity is a major factor for uncontrolled microbial growth on damage electronics). As a consequence, spacecraft to high—risk »;
panels and other surfaces. For instance, placing wet clothing and targets are built under biological control, i.e. in special bioburden S
towels close to a fabric panel to dry caused visible fungal growth controlled clean rooms (Fig. 1) and are subject to comprehensive a
in this particular area (Yamaguchi et al. 2014). quality control throughout the construction process in order to
Staphylococcus, Bacillus and Micrococcus, as well as Penicillium, determine the level of contamination (bioburden) and catalogue
Aspergillus, Cladosporium and Hyphomycetes have been detected the associated microorganisms on spacecraft and in clean room
in air and surface samples most frequently during 1998 and (biodiversity; Moissl—Eichinger, Rettberg and Pukall 2012).
2011 (Yamaguchi et al. 2014). Interestingly, in a study of 29 dif— I-Iowever, Earth is a microbial world, and avoiding a contam—
ferent Staphylococcus and Enterococcus isolates from I88, 22 re— ination above a certain level on spacecraft requires a signif—
vealed resistances to one or more antibiotics, and 83% were ca— icant amount of effort, which has to be considered from the
pable of bioﬁlm formation (Schiwon et al. 2013). Since the next— very beginning of mission planning. In addition to resistant
generation sequencing is now broadly available and cheap, this environmental microorganisms, e.g. bacterial spores, human—
technology has also entered the area of space microbiology. A associated microorganisms are the most critical type of contam—
recent report about the rnicrobiornes from dust particles that ination, since engineers are actively working on the spacecraft.
were collected in the ISS conﬁrms the presence of predomi— Certain precautions include proper clothing and behaviour in
nantly hurnan—associated microorganisms, such as Corynebac— the clean room, but also clean room architecture plays an im—
terium and Propionibacterium (Checinska et al. 2015). portant role (Moissl-Eichinger et al. 2015). Microorganisms cover
Regarding a long—term spaceﬂight, many questions are cur— the entire surface of the human body, and spread. This ‘rnicro—
rently unresolved, which tackle mainly the maintenance of a bial cloud’ (Meadow et al. 2015) has to be kept under control as
healthy microbiorne of the human body, the enclosed environ— much as possible.
ment and all items therein, including the safe production of food Besides precautions during AIT (assembly, integration and
and wastewater recycling. This has also raised the question of test) activities, monitoring and calculations of the bioburden

"
"4","4 l FEMS Microbiology Reviews
- ' to be deﬁned protocols concerning the treatment of biological
~t , t ' ""t . ' , ‘ waste, and concerning the cleaning and sterilisation procedures
‘ '. l ' t for space suits and vehicles necessary for surface operations. In
.. addition, one particular concern remains the possible contami-
ﬁ. . F / nation of crew members by Martian materials and the possible
f, (m "" ‘ backwards contamination to Earth (Kminek and Rummel 2015).
j 1 At this point, it is completely clear that further develop-
“ ments, monitoring methods and new regulations are necessary.
These activities have to consider crewed missions, and in partic-
~ _ u1ar also missions to the icy moons, which will soon be target of
' ‘ t “ spacecraft. Research must include developments for monitoring
‘ ' microbial communities and their behaviour, developing meth-
ods to minimise impact of (human) microbes on environments,
’ and to understand the Mars environment (and other mission
targets), as a possible source of biocida1 chemical and physical
parameters.
Figure 1. View into an ESA bioburden controlled cleanroom during AIT (ESTEC, EXTREMOPHILES AND H ABIT ABILITY
Noordwijk, NL).
An important concept in space microbiology or astrobiology is U
‘habitabi1ity’, which is essentially an assessment of whether an 2
3.130 have to consider the microbial contaminants included in environment can support the activity ofa given organism, where g
the (raw)materia1s used for spacecraft constructions: the encap- activity might be maintenance, growth or reproduction. Due to :39;
sulated bioburden (Bauermeister et al. 2014). In case of a crash, the fact that we have only one example of a life-bearing planet ;
0T weathering on an extraterrestrial planet, enclosed microbial so far, these considerations are restricted to life as we know it, g
SPOTGS 0T vegetative C8113 C0111d be released and P038 a certain even, if in some theoretica1studies a broader approach has been g
risk for the preservation 0f the area. considered (Baross 2006). For an environment in any location on 2
Areas 0h Mars, which are considered to possibly support ter- Earth or elsewhere to be habitab1e, it must have several charac- g”
restria11ife, are called special regions (Rettberg et al. 2016). These teristics. They are: g;
special regions also include areas, which might have a high po- 2
tentia1 for the existence of extant Martian life forms even if today , , , , , , , , Eb
no Martian life forms are known (Kminek and Rummel 2015). (1) availability Of water, at least ternporarily 1n a11qu1d state, £1
The r rn t r f r i 1 r i n r t : w t r tivit b _ (11) appropriate temperature cond1tions, g
paa eesospeca egosaeseas aeac ye , ,, B
tween 0.5 and 1.0; lower limit for temperature: —250C (Kminek (1,11) ava11ab111ty Of an energy source, , , ‘3
(1v) carbon plus major other elements requ1red by a11known11fe 5”
and Rummel 2015). Currently, these areas are not touched by a 9:
lander mission due to extremel strict r t ti n r 1 ti n forms (HNOPS) and 0E
, y poeco eguaos. , , , 0.
According to new knowledge, about the environmental condi- (V) other elements requ1red by a spec1ﬁc organism as trace e1- (3:
tions on Mars and about the limits of a1ife on Earth, these p1an- ements. g
etary protection guidelines and the deﬁnition of special regions g
are updated on a regular basis (Rummel et al. 2014; Committee For an environment to be habitab1e, these requirements must :>
to Review the MEPAG Report on Mars Special Regions et al. 2015; be available and co-located at the scale of the organism. I-Iow- 0;
Rettberg et al. 2016). ever, for distant planets and moons, which cannot directly be a
The ESA ExoMars lander (mission lead BSA, in cooperation investigated in detail, a more generic catalogue of the presence «5
with Roscosmos), which is intended to be launched in 2020 of these requirements on planetary bodies can be compiled as S
from Baikonur Space Center was judged a category IVb mis- a ﬁrst order assessment of whether a planetary body is likely to a
sion (‘1ander systems designed to investigate extant Martian host habitab1e conditions on some part of its surface or interior
Life’; Kminek and Rummel 2015). The planetary protection pro- (Cottin et al. 2015; Cockell et al. 2016).
cedure includes, amongst strictest regulations, a bioburden con- Perhaps, most crucial for the assessment of the habitabi1ity
trol for the carrier module, a bioburden controlled assembly and of the space environment and other planetary environments is
a bioburden controlled launch operation. the second factor—the physical and chemical limits of life on
Another concern tackles sample return missions. Samples, Earth and how these overlap with extraterrestrial conditions.
from Mars or other planets or bodies in the solar system, could Once we have shown the presence of water, energy and ma-
contain life forms, which possibly harm the ecosystem Earth jor elements, the known physico-chemical extremes of life can
(backward contamination (Kminek and Rummel 2015). Special be used for determining whether an environment could support
care has to be taken in order to avoid accidental contamination microbia11ife.
of Earth. Crewed missions, however, pose another risk for p1ane- Both 1aboratory-based and theoretical investigations in com-
tary protection. As already mentioned above a human body car- bination with ﬁeld studies have led to signiﬁcant advances in
ries about 1014 microbial ce11s, making crewed mission rather establishing limits for microbial growth under extremes. These
complicated (for comparison: a robotic mission of mission cat- range from high and low temperatures to extremes of sa1in-
egory III currently allows 5 x 105 microbial (heat-shock surviv- ity and oxidizing compounds, hydrostatic pressure and sev-
ing) cells per entire spacecraft). The current Planetary Protection era1 other stressors, e.g. ionizing radiation and elevated con-
Policy clearly states that the contamination limits should not be centrations of heavy metals (Rothschild and Mancine11i 2001;
relaxed, in order to accommodate a human mission to Mars. As Rebata-Landa and Santamarina 2006; Pikuta, Hoover and Tang
a consequence, the human crew would have to follow strict yet 2007; Dartne11 2011; Oren 2011). No deﬁnite limits have yet been

"
"5","Moissl-Eichinger et al. I 5

established for life under any extreme, and the true physical and extremophilic prokaryotic strains. Approximating the shape of
chemicalboundaries for life remain undiscovered. the biosphere as a function of temperature, NaCl concentra—

However, for many extremes there are established limits tions and pH (Fig. 2) illustrated how the limits of growth estab—
that remain open to revision. For example, the lower limit for 1ished for prokaryotic isolates have broadened over the previous
metabolic activity in microbes is thought to be ~ —250C (Junge, two decades (against an earlier temperature—salinity—pI-I map
Eicken and Deming 2004; Mykytczuk et al. 2013; Clarke 2014). in Dartne11 2011). The minimal and maximal habitab1e temper-
Up to now, no convincing evidence for reproduction has been atures measured under atmospheric pressure have decreased
demonstrated below ~ —180C (Table 1), although longer term eX— from 00C to —150C and increased from 108C to 1130C (Table 1).
periments and more sophisticated approaches may well change Moreover, the lowest reported habitab1e pH value for prokaryotic
this assumption. isolates has decreased from 2 to 0.

Liquid water can exist below this temperature at values that The approach taken by Harrison et al. (2013) illustrates a few
are applicable to planetary environments. For example, eutec— general points about our understanding of the habitabi1ity of
tic solutions of perchlorates, which have been found on Mars environments for microbial life. Figure 2 shows an absence of
have theoretical freezing points down to ~ —650C (Chevrier, I-Ian— hyperthermophilic a1ka1iphi1es and data from habitats charac—
1ey and Altheide 2009), well below the current lower limit for terised by a combination of extreme acidity and subzero tem—
metabolic activity. It is not known whether the lower temper— peratures. This may be due to insufﬁcient sampling and analysis
ature limit for microbial metabolic activity is coterminous with and/or the rarity of such environments on Earth (Pikuta, Hoover
the lowerlirnits for liquid water in the environment. and Tang 2007; Bowers and Wiegel 2011), and so these plots

Liquid water can exist at temperatures well above the cur— give us indications of where valuable microbial ecology research
rent upper limit for microbial growth (Table 1). As chemical re— might be done in attempting to explore these spaces. There is U
action rates including destructive processes increase exponen— also a paucity of strains occupying the region of Fig. 2, charac— %
tia11y with temperature, according to the Arrhenius equation, we terised by extremely high temperatures and sa1inities (Pikuta, g
might expect that a point is reached when destruction of ce11u— Hoover and Tang 2007). :81).
1ar structures and non—cova1ent interactions caused by thermal The synergistic impacts of extremes on microbial growth 3;
energy exceeds the energy that can be harnessed from the envi— have been demonstrated by experiments, using individual taxa g
ronInent by an organism to repair damage (Clarke 2014; Corkrey (Waters and Lloyd 1985; Wimpenny and Waters 1987; Thomas g
et al. 2014). This limit is estimated to be in the order of 140C and Wimpenny 1996). For example, an enhanced range of tol— Er
—1500C (Cowan 2004). As liquid water can exist at greater than erance to both low water activity and pH was demonstrated for 5
3000C at pressures exceeding 10 MPa, it is possible that the up— Glaciecola punicea ACAM 611T when this organism was grown at a
per temperature limit for life falls short of the upper limit for low temperatures (Nichols et al. 1999). However, the physiologi— 2
liquid water availability. These data suggest that the tempera— ca1basis of this observation has not been determined. It is possi— Eb
ture limits for life are an important ﬁrst—order determinant of b1e that similar interactions inﬂuence the plots obtained by I-Iar— §-
habitab1e conditions (McKay 2014). rison et al. (2013). 5

Another example of another extreme with we11—deﬁned lim— Some of the empty regions might reﬂect real spaces where 3%
its is water activity, aw, for which the lowerlimit for replication is it is energetically unfavourable to cope with multiple extremes, 6%
currently thought to be 0.605 (Table 1). Although such limits are showing that not only do we have much research to do studying ;
unlikely to be met on a planetary scale, on Mars as on Earth, they new environments where nove1 polyextremophiles might live, 2:,
could be localised to speciﬁc brines (Martin—Torres et al. 2015). but we also have much to learn about the biochemical basis of §

Whilst the isolated impacts of extremes on microorganisms adaptation and whether different or identical pathways are used g
have been widely researched, attempts to deﬁne their combined to cope with different extremes imposed together. :>
inﬂuences on life are uncommon, especially for anaerobes. This These studies will allow us to deﬁne the physical and 0:0
is surprising because most environments are characterised by chemical parameter space for microbial life and thereby bet— a
several co—existing stressors. An increasing number of microbial ter be able to assess the potentia1habitabi1ity of extraterrestrial »;
strains isolated from these habitats are able to tolerate multiple environments. 2
extremes (Cayol et al. 1994; Nichols et al. 1999; Kaye and Baross a
2004; Dib et al. 2008; Pointing et al. 2009; Antunes, Ngugi and
Stingl 2011; Mesbah and Wiegel 2012; Stock et al. 2012). Organ—
isms tolerating more than two extremes are known as polyex— STUDY 01:- M ARS- AN ALOGUE TERRESTRIAL
trem)ophi1es (Mesbah and Wiegel 2008, 2012; Bowers and Wiegel SITES AND IMPLICATIONS FOR LIFE ON M ARS
2011 .

One way to compare environmental extremes against the ca— Searching for life on extraterrestrial planets is a goal of many
pacities of microorganisms is to construct ‘maps’ that depict the space missions, no matter if uncrewed or crewed. The question
extremes of the growth of microbial life against given physi- ‘Are we alone?’ or better: ‘Is life out there?’ has been a major
ca1 extremes. A single study has used this approach to create driving factor for space exploration during the last decades.
bivariate approximations of habitabi1ity based on temperature, The upcoming ExoMars mission of the European Space
sa1inity, pH and radiation (Pikuta, Hoover and Tang 2007). A few Agency (ESA) will search for habitab1e conditions in the Mar—
multifactorial investigations of microbial responses to different tian environment by tracking methane and drilling 2 In below
stressors exist and they have focused on a limited selection of the Martian surface, searching for biomarkers of extant and eX—
Inain1y aerobic microbes and environments (Waters and Lloyd tinct life. Methane, which can be measured in ppb levels in the
1985; Wimpenny and Waters 1987; Thomas and Wimpenny 1996; Martian atmosphere from time to time, is currently considered
Kaye and Baross 2004; Bowers, Mesbah and Wiege12009). as a possible sign for past or present life on Mars: so—ca11ed

Harrison et al. (2013) constructed three—dirnensional repre— Inethanogenic archaea could possible produce (or could have
sentations of the habitab1e volumes for microbial life under produced) methane as a product of their metabolism (Mumma
synchronous extremes, using general growth data available for et al. 2009; Taubner et al. 2015; Webster et al. 2015). It should be

"
"6","6 l FEMS Microbiology Reviews
(a) mentioned that also other sources of methane like volcanism
(less likely) and meteorites are possible (Webster et al. 2015).
35 However, for a sophisticated analysis of extraterrestrial ma-
. 3 terial for biomarkers of extinct and extant life, either a crewed
30 E ‘- mission or in particular a sample return mission may be re-
25 - : quired. Both types of missions are currently being discussed
A g and prepared, but it will take tens of years until they are im-
g 20 plemented. In preparation for such an opportunity, researchers
o\° analyse (Mars-) analogue sites on Earth to learn as much as they
5 15 Can about (microbial) life that has adapted to the most extreme
g and weirdest places.
10 : Planetary analogues are selected on thebasis ofgeology,min-
eralogy, topography and environmental conditions, e.g. water
5 availability, temperature, pH, depending on the planet or moon
of interest, and have been subject of numerous studies during
20 H the last years (Fairén et al. 2010; Léveillé 2010; Preston and Dart-
° 20 40 81012 1“ nell 2014). It shall be stressed that the analogue microbiology is
Temperatu 60 80 10012002 4 6 H not restricted to Mars-like environments. In particular, ice/water
re (°C) p bearing moons of the outer solar system planets, e.g. Europa and
Enceladus (Kerr 2011), moved into the focus of research recently. D
(b) However, since this area of research is just at the beginning, this 2
review focuses on the Martian habitat and terrestrial analogue g
35 i sites thereof. The Martian environment exhibits a number of eX- 2.3.
30 ' treme conditions, as summarised in Table 2. g
g The most obvious model ecosystems on Earth are permafrost g
A 25 environments (Frolov 2003), Rio Tinto (Amils et al. 2007), high- g
g i salt biotopes (McGenity et al. 2000), deserts (Azua-Bustos, Urre- if
g 20 jola and Vicuna 2012) and subsurface environments (Szponar g
g 15 et al. 2013). However, none of these biotopes has all possible ﬁ
cu § g stresses that Martian microorganisms would have to withstand. '0
Z 10 Nevertheless, by analysing these environments, we can learn, :5:
1 for instance, how biomarkers of life change in such environ- £1
5 - ments, which metabolic capabilities these microbes have and S
O Vi“); , ' 20 how we can adapt our methodology to be able to detect, analyse %
o ’ 2 . . 20"" 0 and cultivate these organisms. 0%
4 6 60 40 e (:0) A good example, used for illustrative purposes here, is per- g
”H 8 1o 12 ‘1'20 100 8° 93‘5““ mafrost. It is estimated that 20%—25% of the land area of Earth is 0:
14 1 at“ permafrost (Jansson and Tas 2014) and is permanently frozen for g
(C) at least two consecutive years. At the ﬁrst glance, permafrost en- g
vironments appear hostile to terrestrial life. However, they har- :>
35 bour an enormous diversity and relatively high quantity of mi- GE
30 croorganisms (105—108 cells per gram dry soil). Most microbial, a
psychrophilic life in permafrost environments is found in so- «T
9 25 i called cryopegs, which are salty water lenses enclosed in per- E
E 20 ' mafrost soil (Gilichinsky et al. 2003); similarly, liquid brine veins, 9
°\o .. existing in ice wedges, could support microbial proliferation. Mi-
5 15 é ‘ crobial communities are also found in active status in upper
g 10 layers of the permafrost, which are supplied with liquid melt
water (Jansson and Tas 2014). In general, the permafrost micro-
5 é biology is characterised by slow growth rates, due to the adap-
o I tation to the challenging habitat. The most intriguing microbial
‘Ziliiii-Faj""""‘ifgl; component of permafrost environments are methanogenic ar-
)j201oo """"::._._‘.i:.‘l.-:.:;--- chaea, together with a large variety of anaerobic bacteria, such
@020 8° 60 _ ~ . as denitriﬁers, sulphate and iron (III) reducers. Microbial iso-
@491, 40 ‘ 2 o lates, such as Camobacterium spp. (Nicholson et al. 2013), serve
0% 20 o "" 10 l 8 6 4 as excellent models to study the adaptations towards such an
{00/ '20 14 12 PH extreme habitat. In particular methanogenic archaea from per-
mafrost environments have been exposed to numerous Martian
Figure 2.Thelimits of life. The three-dimensional space of pH, temperature and conditions, and many Of them seem to be capable to tolerate
salinity calculated using the growth ranges of a variety of eXtremophiles (image: many ofthese stresses in simulati on experiments (Kral, B ekkum
from Harmon et al' 2013)’ and McKay 2004; Kendrick and Kral 2006; Morozova and Wagner
2007; Morozova et al. 2015; Taubner et al. 2015). For instance, a
novel methanogen, Candidatus Methanoﬂorens stordalenmirensis,
was found to be the most prevalent methanogen in thawing

"
"7","Moissl-Eichinger et al. I 7
Table 2. Physical and chemical parameters of Martian conditions, and possible analogue sites on Earth.
Conditions on Mars Potential analogue sites on Earth
Temperature 20°C (noon, equator, summer), —153°C (poles); Permafrost areas, glaciers
average: —60°C
Water availability Frozen (ice; permafrost, polar ice caps) or present as Salt deposits, hypersaline marine environments,
temporary liquid brines hot and cold deserts
Salinity Localised deposits of halite Boulby mine, other hypersaline environments, such
as salt deposits, anoxic hypersaline marine
environments, salt lakes
pH Slightly alkaline (~pH 8—9), depending on the Different sites available, including natron lakes
location
Pressure 6 hPa on average (depending on the altitude) Normal: 1013 hPa (Mars pressure not naturally
available)
Rock/regolith composition Fine-grained igneous rock, iron-rich smectite clays, Not naturally available; Mars regolith simulants
magnesium sulfate, iron oxides, e.g. hematite and from Hawaii, synthetic mixtures of minerals with
jarosite, reactive oxidizing agents, e.g. perchlorates. compositions found on Mars
Nutrients Lack of organic compounds; chlorobenzene (150—300 Some subsurface environments, highly diluted C:
parts per billion by weight (ppbw)) and C2 to C4 aqueous biotopes. C57
dichloroalkanes (up to 70 ppbw) (Freissinet et al. :8;
2015) ;
Atmosphere composition Carbon dioxide: 95.32%, nitrogen: 2.7%, argon: 1.6%, Same composition not available naturally. 3
oxygen: 0.13%, carbon monoxide: 0.08%, minor g
amounts of: water, nitrogen oxide, neon, hydrogen, Sn
deuterium, oxygen, krypton and xenon g
m
Radiation Surface: UV200—400nm < 40 Wm—2 (Patel et al. 2003), Not naturally available i
ionising radiation 76 mGy/ a (Hassler et al. 2014) En
Subsurface: model calculations for different depths é
(Pavlov, Blinov and Konstantinov 2002; Dartnell et al. 8
2007a,b; Pavlov et al. 2012) a
m
Time Unknown 33.5 billion years 0%
— E
00
§
permafrost, thus, having strong impact on climate change number of different Mars analogues, such as permafrost, Boulby 3
on Earth (Mondav et al. 2014). Methanogenic archaea from mine(Woolmar1 et al. 2015), Rio Tinto (Amils, Fernandez-Remolar ;
permafrost environments have been subjected to Raman mi— and Team 2014), anoxic sulﬁdic springs (Rudolph et al. 2004; 0:0
crospectroscopy, in order to analyse their speciﬁc biomarkerpat— Probst and Moissl-Eichinger 2015) and a cold, acidic freshwater Z’.
terns, for a possible usage of this technique also in life—detection lake in Iceland (Lake Graenavatn), which are analysed with re- ,:
missions directly on Mars (Serrano et al. 2014; Serrano et 611.2015). spect to their chemical, physical and microbial characteristics. 8
A challenge in Mars-analogue research on Earth is the oxy— The selection of different sites also included a Mars analogue a
gen content of the terrestrial atmosphere. Oxygen, however, is mission that took place in 2015 at the Kaunertal Glacier in Aus—
present in the Martian extremely thin atmosphere, but makes tria (AMADEE 15; Fig. 3). Besides cultivation of model species
only a very low portion of 0.13% (p02 2 1Pa; on Earth: 101.3 kPa). from these environments, special focus is biomarker analysis,
Although it is currently assumed that Mars once had an oxygen— based on fossilisation of representative samples and subsequent
rich atmosphere (Tuff, Wade and Wood 2013), the composition analysis (Westall et al. 2015), as well as biomarker search, based
nowadays would not be supporting most aerobic microorgan— on the SOLID technology (Fernandez—Calvo et al. 2006), right in
isms as we know them from terrestrial environments. Based the ﬁeld. The entire effort should provide a link of environmen-
on this, there is a particular interest in research on strictly or tal characteristics, microbial life adapted to it, and its biomark—
facultatively anaerobic microorganisms from terrestrial Mars— ers. The outcome of this project will certainly be an important
analogue sites. Since Earth’s atmosphere contains 21% oxygen, prerequisite for the (successful) search for life on Mars or other
special caution has to be taken during sampling of possibly sen— planets.
sitive microbial communities and special equipment is neces—
sary to cultivate them in the laboratory.
The European MASE consortium (‘Mars analogues for space MICROBIOLOGICAL EXPERIMENTS IN SPACE
eicploration) was establishecl to focus on the ariaerobic micro— AND IN GROUND-BASED SPACE SIMULATION
bial communities in terrestrial analogue Sites, in order to un—
derstand their adaptation and survival capabilities to different FACILITIES
Mars—relevant stresses, but also the biomarkers associated with Investigations to determine the limits Of life and to assess the
them over time (http://mase.esf.org/). The consortium picked a survivability of Earth organisms in space and on other planets

"
"8","8 l FEMS Microbiology Reviews
(A) ' . (B) ~ * (D) . .
‘ '2.- Qﬁ . g. ’5‘“ a3""
,_ 1.: - . \ ,. “Ia: ’3"" '2 1 _- “4; * : ff ﬂ“?
1'- '- , . TV ZN: 7, .7 ‘: 1;; #5153. - : , M. 5
V \‘3 “1’; "" '7‘“ 'sz "" d
1 ~ x5: A. r’ ‘ - = l ;* ' ,_
‘7; “‘51:"": ““3”“ . .‘u .7. ‘ /; : . , g. 5 l""
1.1;; , :‘V .5; 7.1;»: Li. 3; ‘7 2 J - . 7 . . f ~ . CE; fie?
' 1'5 3* ‘ L4“ ‘w' £31. ,. "" . i‘
. . . . . . . . . . . c?
Figure 3. Studying Mars-analogue Sites. (A) Mars analogue m1551on AMADEE 15. (B) an0X1c sulﬁdic spring in Southern Germany. (C)Anaerob1c sampling in the ﬁeld. (D) g
Sampling at Lake Graenavatn, Iceland. 2»—
$33
%
and moons require controlled and standardised experimental Recent measurements of the ionising radiation in space and ;
conditions. Space is a hostile environment characterised by vac- on the surface of Mars are available from Mars Science Labora- g
uum and depending on the location by high ﬂuences of extrater- tory mission with the Curiosity rover carrying the MSL-RAD in- g
rrestrial UV radiation with short wavelengths, high dose rates strument. The measured values reﬂect the mixed radiation ﬁeld if
of ionising radiation with a complex radiation ﬁeld and tem- in space and on Mars composed of galactic cosmic rays and so- 5
perature extremes. On Mars the environmental conditions are lar energetic particles. During the cruise phase to Mars, the dose 2
somewhat less hostile with a thin anaerobic atmosphere dom- rate and the equivalent dose rate were higher than on the sur- 3
inated by C02, a UV radiation climate with deleterious wave- face of Mars due to the shielding provided by the planet itself :3
lengths >200 nm, ionising radiation with an ~200—300 times (Zeitlin et al. 2013; I-Iassler et al. 2014). On Mars the dose rate from @-
higher biological effectiveness than on Earth and low tempera- the galactic cosmic rays was found to be 76 mGy/ a on the Mar- 5
tures ranging from about —1300C to +200C depending on location tian surface and was calculated to decrease in the subsurface to 3%
and season (Table 2). Several of these environmental conditions 1.8 mGy/ a at 3m depth. This complex radiation ﬁeld cannot be 0%
can be reproduced in laboratories on Earth, e.g. different temper- simulated on Earth. Q
atures, vacuum or low pressure environments (Olsson-Francis Biologically important components of galactic cosmic rays 3:
and Cockell2010). Fora deeper understanding of the cellular and are heavy ions. Absorbed by an organism, their energy is de- §
molecular mechanisms, organisms need to resist extreme envi- posited in a small volume in a cell. This process can cause com- g
ronmental conditions, the effects of each single parameter has plex DNA damages which are difﬁcult to repair enzymatically s:>
to be determined and compared to the effect of the combined (Goodhead 1994; Asaithamby and Chen 2011). On Earth heavy 0;
martian environmental factors (Rettberg et al. 2004; Newcombe ion accelerators can be used to investigate the basic mecha- E
et al. 2005; Fendrihan et al. 2009; Hansen et al. 2009; Kerney and nisms of damage induction by heavy ions followed by enzymatic u;
Schuerger 2011; Baqué et al. 2014; Mastascusa et al. 2014). The repair (Imamura et al. 1997; Kawaguchi et al. 2013). However, only 8
combined effect can be additive or synergistic. One fundamen- one heavy ion with a speciﬁc energy coming from one direction a
tal exception is the radiation environment the full complexity of is available at the same time. In space, the radiation ﬁeld is com-
which cannot be simulated on Earth. posed of different ions with different energies and the radiation
The simulation of the extraterrestrial UV radiation down to is coming from all directions. This situation cannot be simulated
the very short wavelengths of vacuum UV (<200 nm) is impossi- on Earth.
ble due to the unavailability of UV sources capable of reproduc- Several attempts to simulate Martian surface and subsurface
ing the polychromatic extraterrestrial UV radiation spectrum. conditions were performed. However, it was not possible to re-
For short UV wavelengths I-Ig/I-Ie lamps (122 nm), Xe (147 nm) produce and monitor the whole set of Martian environmental
or CH4/I-Ie (193 nm) can be used. However, they emit UV radia- parameters simultaneously. In the past, several planetary and
tion not in a form of a continuous spectrum as the sun, but in a space simulation facilities were built ranging from simple anaer-
form of discrete emission lines. Other UV sources emit a broader obic jars to more sophisticated Mars simulation chambers. Sev-
spectral range, e.g. H2 (122 and 160 nm) or D2 discharge lamps eral facilities are listed in Jensen et al. (2008) and Tarasashvili
(190—400 nm; Gomez et al. 2010; Cottin et al. 2012),but these emis- et al. (2013). Examples of the use of Mars simulation facilities
sion spectra are very distinct from the emission spectrum of the are investigations with the acidophilic iron—sulfur bacterium
sun. For the simulation of the Martian UV climate, solar simula- Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans and Deinococcus radiodurans (Gomez
tors with high-pressure Xe lamps (190—400 nm) in combination et al. 2010; Bauermeister, Rettberg and Flemming 2014). In this
with optical ﬁlters are used (Rabbow et al. 2012) and offer an op- example, A. ferrooxidans has been shown to grow under Mars-
portunity to investigate the effect of the simultaneous exposure like geochemical conditions solely on the minerals contained in
of organisms to different wavelengths. synthetic Mars regolith mixtures with no added nutrients. The

"
"9","Moissl-Eichinger et al. I 9
protective effect of thin layers of Mars minerals resulted in a sub— is the most deleterious factor applied. However, if shielded from
stantial increase in survival. The limiting factor for growth was solar irradiation, about 8% of MW01 spores survived in LEO con-
the Martian pressure prohibiting growth at 6 hPa. ditions, and 100% survived in simulated Martian conditions,
Only a few facilities allow the investigation of the aeolian compared to the laboratory controls (Wassrnann et al. 2012). Sim—
transport of dust on Mars (Merrison et al. 2008; Sobrado, Martin— ilar conclusions could be drawn from another part of the ADAPT
Soler and Martin—Gago 2015). So far, no biological experiments experiment, during which epilithic microbial communities aug-
have been performed to determine the survivability and dis— mented with cyanobacteria were exposed in the same space eX—
tribution of microorganisms in Martian dust in detail. Sorne perirnent. Only cells of Chroococcidiopsis could be cultivated after
Mars simulation facilities can also be used to study liquid ﬂow the return (Cockell et al. 2011).
through under Martian conditions (Martin and Cockell 2015). In the EXPOSE-E experiment PROTECT, the resistance of mi-
Another possibility for the analysis of the effects of space crobial spacecraft isolates, namely spores of B. subtilis 168 and
parameters is the utilisation of exposure facilities in Low Earth B. pumilus SAFR—32, to outer space conditions was tested. The
Orbit (LEO). Different ESA exposure facilities have been con— results obtained for survivability, mutation induction and tran—
structed and used successfully in the past and are in use scriptornic response are in line with the outcome of ADAPT and
(I-Iorneck, Klaus and Mancinelli 2010; Olsson—Francis and Cock— previous experiments. They demonstrate a high probability for
ell 2010). In addition, the Japanese exposure facility Tanpopo survival of spores on a Mars mission, if protected against so—
is accommodated outside on the ISS now (Yamagishi et al. lar radiation (Moeller et al. 2012; Nicholson et al. 2012;Vaisham-
2009). The ESA EXPOSE facilities simulate Martian environrnen— payan et al. 2012). A higher mutation rate, up to four orders of
tal conditions especially with the focus on the Martian UV cli— magnitude higher than on Earth, was observed on the UV eX—
mate in LEO. The advantage of this type of Mars simulation is posed ﬂight samples in addition to an increased level of general D
that the original spectral emission of the sun is used as UV stress response. 3
source. The Martian UV spectrum is produced by the applica— EXPOSE—R was another ESA EXPOSE facility mounted on the g
tion of a cut—off ﬁlter on top of the samples, which prevents Russian module of the ISS for almost two years with eight mi— :81).
the penetration of the short UV wavelengths to the samples crobiological and biological experiments and two chemical eX— ;
but allows wavelengths >200 nrn representative for the Martian perirnents. In addition to bacterial spores also cyanobacteria, 3
surface to reach the samples. The biological samples can be ac— halophilic archaea, fungal and fern spores, a bacteriophage and g
cornrnodated in closed sample carriers with a simulated Martian fungi were investigated in space. In the experiment SPORES the ET
atmosphere and the low Martian pressure. survival of bacterial spores in space inside an artiﬁcial rnete— 5
One example for such a facility for short—term exposure to orite was demonstrated showing that 1ithopanspermia in prin- a
space or simulated Martian conditions up to ~2 weeks was the ciple is possible (Panitz et al. 2015). The EXPOSE-R mission and 2
BSA facility BIOPAN mounted on Russian Earth—orbiting FOTON the results of the space experiments were published in a spe— E:
satellites (for more details see section Microbialtransfer through cial issue of the International Journal of Astrobiology (Panitz g.
space, or: Are planets biogeographical islands?) Different bac— et al. 2015). The third and the last ESA EXPOSE mission EXPOSE- S
teria, but also lichens, endolithic cyanobacteria and fungi were R2 was launched in 2014, and the biological samples from the 3%
tested under space and simulated Mars conditions (I-Iorneck experiment BOSS and BIOMEX will be brought back to Earth in 6%
et al. 2001a; Rettberg et al. 2004; Sancho et al. 2007; I-Iorneck, Klaus 2016 for analysis. ;
and Mancinelli 2010). B:
For several years, long—term exposure to space or simulated §
Martian conditions was possible in the ESA multiuser facili— g
ties, EXPOSE, outside on the ISS. The sarn les are re ared on . :>
the ground exposed in LEO brought baclI: to Earth aInd anal— MICROBIAL TRANSFER THROUGH SPACE, OR. 0%
. ’ . ’ ARE PLANETS BIOGEOGRAPHICAL ISLANDS? E
ysed 1n the laboratories on the ground. EXPOSE—E mounted on C
a platform on the European Columbus module was in space for Pansperrnia is the idea that organisms can be transferred from u;
1.5 years. Two microbiological experiments in addition to two one planet to another originally discussed by Kelvin (Thom- g
biological and one chemical experiment were accommodated son 1871) and Arrhenius (Arrhenius 1908). From an ecological a
in the facility. A description of the facility, the mission param— perspective, panspermia is merely island biogeography applied
eters, the operational procedures and most of the EXPOSE—E re- on an interplanetary scale. For example, on Earth, organisms
sults are published inaspecial issue of Astrobiology (Wassmann can be dispersed from one region of a continent to another,
et al. 2012). In the experiment ‘ADAPT’, the molecular adaptation and they can be dispersed from one continent to another (Wil—
strategies of microorganisms to space and Mars UV conditions son and MacArthur 1967). Pansperrnia addresses the question
were investigated. The very UV—resistant Bacillus subtilis strain of whether planets are biogeographical islands or whether, like
MW01 was obtained from an artiﬁcial evolution experiment in continents, they can exchange biological material.
the laboratory, where a continuously growing culture of B. subtilis For an organism to be transferred from one planet to another,
was adapted to the Martian UV climate (Wassrnann et al. 2010, it would have to survive several dispersal ﬁlters (Fig. 4). First, the
2011). Bacterial endospores of this new strain were exposed ejection of organisms in rocks from a planetary surface in an
to space and simulated Martian surface conditions in LEO for asteroid or comet collision involves extreme forces of acceler—
548 days, with and without simulated Mars UV radiation. In ad— ation, shock and temperature excursions. The effect of accel—
dition to the ﬂight samples, a ground reference experiment was eration during ejection has been investigated with both B. sub-
performed in planetary and space simulation facilities accord— tilis and D. radiodurcms in riﬂe experiments (Mastrapa et al. 2001).
ing to the UV and temperature data obtained from the ISS. As an Survival values of 40%—100% after accelerations up to 4.5 x 106
additional laboratory control identical samples were kept under rn s—2 suggested that acceleration is not a strong dispersal ﬁl—
arnbient laboratory conditions, i.e. at room temperature in air ter. Bacillus subtilis spores, isolated from Sonoran desert (USA)
without exposure to light. The results showed that solar eX— basalt, survived accelerations up to 1.5 x 1010 rn s—2 (Benardini
traterrestrial UV radiation as well as the Martian UV radiation et al. 2003). These data might be accounted for by the resistant

"
"10","10 l FEMS Microbiology Reviews
1_ Ejection from planet 2. Transfer through space
Impact 1 ‘Transit through atmosphere
' . 1"" ‘ 4. Conditions for. 1
growth at landing site
Planet of Destination
origin planet

Figure 4. Are planets biogeographical islands? Dispersal ﬁlters in planetary island biogeography (adapted from Cockell et al. 2016).
to jerk and acceleration caused by the tough spore coat (Riesen- 2005). A diversity of published work shows that layers of differ-
man and Nicholson 2000). ent mineral types ﬁlter the UV radiation and reduce the ﬂuence U

Planetary ejection involves shock pressures. The launch of reaching the microbes (Mancinelli and Klovstad 2000; Rettberg g
rocks to escape velocity from a planetary surface is possible et al. 2002, 2004; Schuerger et al. 2003). Mancinelli and Klovs- E:
at moderate temperature and shock pressures (Melosh 1984). tad (2000) showed that even dust layers of 12 ,um could provide %
Empirical knowledge of shock pressures experienced by ejected shielding to B. subtilis spores, with 10% survival measured after ;
rocks is obtained from Martian meteorites, which show shock exposure to 12.3 k] m—Z. In another study, I-Iorneck et al. (2001a) §
pressures from ~5 to 55 GPa (Fritz, Artemieva and Greshake showed that B. subtilis spores mixed within clay, sandstones or g
2005). Shock experiments using both light gas gun and plate- Martian meteorite (Zagami) were protected against UV radiation, 2
ﬂyer equipment show that spores of B. subtilis have high resis- although thin layers were ineffective, possibly because UV pene- g
tance to shock, with survival of pressures greater than 50 GPa re- trated through cracks or because of the formation of toxic photo- ﬁ
ported from separate experiments (Burchell et al. 2001; I-Iorneck chemical products. The work of Schuerger et al. (2003) supports E3
et al. 2001b; Burchell, Mann and Bunch 2004; Stofﬂer et al. 2007; the idea thatlayers must be sufﬁciently thick to completely block <3
I-Iorneck et al. 2008). Burchell et al. (Burchell et al. 2001; Burchell, all wavelengths of UV radiation. E1
Mann and Bunch 2004) showed survival of B. subtilis up to 78 GPa. The data on the thickness of material required to provide UV B

In contrast, vegetative cells are susceptible to disruption by protection, when compared with information on the extent of :2;
low-shock pressures. In ﬂyer-plate experiments, the asporoge- the ablation of rocks entering the atmosphere (Ceplecha et al. 0%
nous rock-inhabiting cyanobacterium, Chroococcidiopsis sp., was 1998) and the experiment reported by Cockell et al. (Cockell E
killed at shock pressures greater than 10 GPa (Stofﬂer et al. 2007; et al. 2007) suggests that the depth of ablation of a rock during 0a
I-Iorneck et al. 2008). The ruptured cell walls observed at this and atmospheric transit is likely to be much greater than the depth 2
higher shock pressures suggest that the vegetative cell walls are required for UV protection, i.e. if an organism is deep enough 8
susceptible to mechanical failure, an observation that would be to survive ablation and heating caused by atmospheric transit 55>
consistent with the observations of the effects of shock on Es- (at least several millimetres), it is deep enough to be completely 0%
cherichia coli (Willis et al. 2006). However, vegetative photobionts protected from UV radiation during the period in interplanetary :
associated with a lichen symbiosis survived shock pressures up space. “S
to 30 GPa (Stofﬂer et al. 2007; I-Iorneck et al. 2008). The photo- Another detrimental factor is cosmic radiation, which is E
biont is surrounded by the symbiotic mycobiont, which consti- much more penetrating than UV radiation. Mileikowsky et al.
tutes part of a thick cortex. The cortex might, in this case, offer (2000), using experimental data on the survival on B. subtilis
protection for the vegetative photobiont (Stofﬂer et al. 2007; I-Ior- spores to heavy ion doses, suggest that behind 1 In of shielding,
neck et al. 2008). spores could survive for about 1 million years, with this survival

In addition to shock, organisms will be exposed to brief tem- period dropping to 300 000 years behind 10 cm of shielding due
perature pulses (Stofﬂer et al. 2007; I-Iorneck et al. 2008). In the to secondary radiation effects. Clark similarly ﬁnds that within
case of the experiments described above, these temperature 1 million years a meteorite would be sterilised to 1 In depth, cal-
pulses were 10C —1000C for 1.4 ,uS with post-shock temperatures culating that the top 3 cm of a rock would be sterilised within
depending on equilibration of the container with the surround- 100 000 years (Clark 2001). The molecular basis of this disper-
ings. sal ﬁlter will be radiation damage to nucleic acids and other cell

The experiments show that even for desiccated vegetative macromolecules.
cells, shock pressures at the lower end required for escape veloc- As discussed already before in the section‘Microbiological eX-
ity from Mars (and Mars-like planets) can be survived. The pres- periments in space and in ground-based space simulation fa-
ence of spore-forming states, a thick cortex, etc., will increase cilities’, a range of experiments have studied survival of organ-
the range of shock pressures which organisms can survive, in- isms in space. Mancinelli, White and Rothschild (1998) ﬂew the
creasing the chances of survival of planetary ejection. halophilic cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. isolated from a salt

Following transit through the atmosphere, the organisms deposit in Baja California in Earth orbit for 15 days on the BIOPAN
must survive interplanetary transfer. Interplanetary ultraviolet facility. Temperatures during the ﬂight ranged from —180C to
(UV) radiation has been shown to be a signiﬁcant detrimental 150C and the total solar UV(200_400 hm) ﬂuence was 104 k] m—Z. The
factor (I-Iorneck et al. 2001a; Nicholson, Schuerger and Setlow organisms exhibited nitrogen ﬁxation and carbon uptake upon

"
"11","Moissl—Eichinger et al. I 11
their return and growth on Earth. Similarly, lichens ﬂown in taminate other planetary bodies and whether indigenous life
BIOPAN exhibited unaltered physiological activity after 16 days could exist beyond the Earth. Currently, and in near future, exo—
in Earth orbit (Sancho et al. 2007), consistent with ground—based planets are beyond human reach and thus the work of astrobiol—
experimental results (De Vera et al. 2004). Other experiments, ogists is restricted to inferring conditions for habitability based
using the EXPOSE facility, have investigated the survival or rni— on spectral data rather than direct studies of microorganisms,
croorganisrns for over one year and found a range of organisms, although the gaseous products of microbial metabolism guide
including lichens, cyanobacteria and Bacillus spores to survive in the search for spectral signatures of life (‘biosignatures’).
LEO (I-Iorneck and Zell 2012 and papers therein). These experi- In terms of the future, this review highlights a number of ar-
ments were of short duration compared to the time periods for eas of investigation important at the intersection between as—
interplanetary transfer (generally between rnillennia and many trobiology and microbiology. In the scientiﬁc context, continued
millions of years), but they suggest the possibility that desic— investigation of the limits for life under physical and chemical
cated organisms protected from UV radiation can survive in in— extremes is important for deﬁning the limits of life on Earth and
terplanetary space. assessing extraterrestrial environments as being habitable. One
Organisms rnust survive transit through the atmosphere crucial way to ﬁnd out the responses of microorganisms to eX—
of the destination planetary body (Clark 2001). Bacillus subtilis trerne space conditions, and particularly to combined stresses,
spores inoculated onto granite domes were subjected to hyper— is to take them to diverse locations in space. A future goal of eX—
velocity atmospheric transit twice by launch to ~120 krn alti— ploration missions should be to expand the number of possible
tude on an Orion two—stage rocket (Fajardo—Cavazos et al. 2005). space platforms and locations where microbiologists can carry
Spores were shown to have survived on the sides of the rock eX— out experiments, for example, the Moon, Mars and interplane-
cept for the forward—facing surface, which was subjected to a tary space. U
maximum temperature of 1450C. There are improvements that could also be made from the 2
Under the ESA STONE experiment, an experimental carn— point of view of data organisation. Currently, data from ana— g
paign designed to investigate the survival of artiﬁcial meteorites logue research, but also laboratory—based simulation tests are :81).
during atmospheric entry (Brack et al. 2002), the effects of atrno— not available in a structured way. Improved databases would S;
spheric entry on photosynthetic organisms were investigated help tremendously to access the current boundaries of life, and g
(Cockell et al. 2007). Chroococcidiopsis sp. was inoculated into a recognise patterns amongst microbial communities from ana— g
gneissic irnpactite to the depth at which phototrophs are found logue sites. Although microbial ecology has entered the area of ET
growing in the natural habitat. Neither the organisms nor their next generation sequencing, cultures are still very important to 5
biornolecules survived atmospheric entry. The experiment pro— understand biosignatures that microbes produce and the bio— a
vided a simple, but empirical demonstration of the effectiveness chemistry and physiology of microbes in the astrobiology con— 2
of atmospheric transit as a dispersal ﬁlter in the transfer of pho— text. Culture and data collections can help to provide insight E:
tosynthetic organisms (Cockell et al. 2007). The potential inef— into what is already there, and where we still lack knowledge. §-
fectiveness of this atmospheric transit ﬁlter if organisms are at Systernatically, these gaps need to be ﬁlled, in order to prepare 5
sufﬁcient depths within some rocks is evidenced by the recovery optimally for life detection beyond Earth. 3%
of Martian meteorites with minerals inside them indicating that (3
they experienced temperatures no greater than 400C since their ;
launch (Weiss et al. 2000), suggesting that conditions in the in— FUNDING 3:0
birrbiézﬁl:r:11<ssdr::ge:11i:1“rof:l:slhe surv1val Of atmospheric trans1t This work was supported by the European Commission’s Sev— gr
. . . . . enth Framework Program (FP7/2007—2013) under Grant Agree— 5
In summary, ex1st1ng empirical data suggest that the main . :>
. . . ment no. 607297 (MASE: Mars Analogues for Space Exploration). :
dispersal ﬁlters required for organisms to be transferred be— . . . . . 0g
tween planets seem to be survivable by organisms on Earth. Support was also prov1ded by Sc1ence and Technology Fac1lit1es Z:
. . . Counc1l (STFC) Grant no. ST/M001261/ 1. :
Planets may therefore not be biogeographical islands. In “N
planetary systerns,.w1th more than one habitable planet, the Conﬂict of interest. None declared. E
transfer of life, particularly oxygenic photosynthes1s, may have
important implications for the detection and interpretation of
gaseous biosignatures examined in future studies of exoplanets, REFERENCES
if they are ever found (Cockell 2008). It remains an open question
as to whether life has ever been transferred from one planet to Alekhova T, Aleksandrova A, Novozhilova TY et al. Monitoring of
another; nevertheless, the data reviewed above allow us to un— microbial degraders in manned space stations. Appl Biochem
derstand how an old ecological question might be expanded to Micro 2005;41:382—9.
an interplanetary scale using experimental methods. Alekhova T, Zagustina N, Aleksandrova A et 611. Monitoring of ini-
tial stages of the biodarnage of construction materials used
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK in aerospace equipment using electron microscopy. J Surf
lnuestrg-X-ra 2007;13411—6.
Microbial life on Earth is remarkably resistant to a large diversity Alekhova T, Zakharchuk L, Tatarinova NY et al. Diversity of bac-
of chemical and physical stresses. Microbes are highly adapt— teria of the genus Bacillus on board of international space sta—
able, and the most successful group of organisms on Earth for tion. Dokl Biochem Biophys 2015;465:347—50.
more than 3.5 billion of years. Microbes are to be found on the ISS Arnils R, Fernandez—Rernolar D, Team I. Rio Tinto: a geochem-
and habitats for life to grow could exist on other planetary bod— ical and mineralogical terrestrial analogue of Mars. Life
ies. To our knowledge, microbes could survive the ﬂight through 2014;4z511—34.
space. These capacities show us that much research is yet to be Arnils R, Gonzalez—Toril E, Fernandez-Remolar D et al. Extreme
done to understand the limits of life, how microbes will inﬂu— environments as Mars terrestrial analogs: the Rio Tinto case.
ence human spaceﬂight, whether they can grow and thus con— Planet Space Sci 2007;55:370—81.

"
"12","12 l FEMS Microbiology Reviews
Antunes A, Ngugi DK, Stingl U. Microbiology of the Red Sea Checinska A, ProbstAJ, VaishampayanPet aLMicrobiomes of the
(and other) deep—sea anoxic brine lakes. Environ Microbiol Rep dust particles collected from the international space station
2011;3z416—33. and spacecraft assembly facilities. Microbiome 2015;3z1.
Arrhenius S. Worlds in the Making: The Evolution of the Universe. Chevrier VF, I-Ianley J, Altheide TS. Stability of perchlorate hy—
New York: Harper, brothers, 1908. drates and their liquid solutions at the Phoenix landing site,
Asaithamby A, Chen DJ. Mechanism of cluster DNA damage re— Mars. Geophys Res Lett 2009;36.
pair in response to high—atomic number and energy particles Clark BC. Planetary interchange of bioactive material: probability
radiation. Mutat Res-Fund Mol M 2011;711:87—99. factors and implications. Origins Life Euol B 2001;31:185—97.
Azua—Bustos A, Urrejola C, Vicuﬁa R. Life at the dry edge: Clarke A. The thermal limits to life on Earth. Int J Astrobio
microorganisms of the Atacama Desert. FEBS Lett 2014;13:141—54.
2012;586:2939—45. Cockell C, Bush T, Bryce C et al. I-Iabitability: a review. Astrobiology
Baqué M, Verseux C, Rabbow E et al. Detection of macro— 2016;16:89—117.
molecules in desert cyanobacteria mixed with a Lunar min— Cockell CS. The interplanetary exchange of photosynthesis. Ori-
eral analogue after space simulations. Origins Life Euol B gins Life EvolB 2008;38:87—104.
2014;44:209—21. Cockell CS, Brack A, Wynn-Williams DD et al. Interplanetary
Baross J. The limits of organic life in planetary systems. Bull Am transfer of photosynthesis: an experimental demonstration
Astro Soc 2006;38:1070. of a selective dispersal ﬁlter in planetary island biogeogra—
Bauermeister A, Bentchikou E, Moeller R et al. Roles of PprA, IrrE, phy. Astrobiology 2007;7:1—9.
and RecA in the resistance of Deinococcus radiodumns to ger— Cockell CS, Rettberg P, Rabbow E et al. Exposure of phototrophs
micidal and environmentally relevant UV radiation. Arch Mi- to 548 days in low Earth orbit: microbial selection pressures U
crobiol 2009;191:913—8. in outer space and on early earth. ISMEJ 2011;5z1671—82. %
Bauermeister A, Mahnert A, Auerbach A et al. Quantiﬁcation Collins M, Buick R. Effect of temperature on the spoilage of g
of encapsulated bioburden in spacecraft polymer materials stored peas by Rhodotorula glutinis. Food Microbiol 1989;6: :81).
by cultivation—dependent and molecular methods. PLoS One 135—41. S;
2014;9ze94265. Committee to Review the MEPAG Report on Mars Special Re— 3
Bauermeister A, Rettberg P, Flemming I-I—C. Growth of the aci— gions. Review of the MEPAG Report on Mars Special Regions. g
dophilic iron—sulfur bacterium Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans Washington, DC:Nationa1Academies Press, 2015. if
under Mars—like geochemical conditions. Planet Space Sci Corkrey R, McMeekin TA, Bowman JP et al. Protein thermo— 5
2014;98:205—15. dynamics can be predicted directly from biological growth a
Benardini JN, Sawyer J, Venkateswaran K et 611. Spore UV and ac— rates. PLoS One 2014;9ze96100. 2
celeration resistance of endolithic Bacillus pumilus and Bacil- Cottin I-I, Guan YY, Noblet A et al. The PROCESS experi— Eb
lus subtilis isolates obtained from Sonoran desert basalt: im— ment: an astrochemistry laboratory for solid and gaseous §-
plications for lithopanspermia. Astrobiology 2003;3z709—17. organic samples in low—Earth orbit. Astrobiology 2012;12: 5
Blb'chl E, Rachel R, Burggraf S et al. Pyrolobus fumarii, gen. and Sp. 412—25. 3%
nov., represents a novel group of archaea, extending the up— Cottin I-I, Kotler JM, Bartik K et al. Astrobiology and the possibility (3
per temperature limit for life to 113 degrees C. Extremophiles of life on Earth and elsewhere. . .. Space Sci Rev 2015, 1—42. ;
1997;1z14—21. Cowan D. The upper limit of life: how far can we go. Trends Mi- 2,:
Borchers AT, Keen CL, Gershwin ME. Microgravity and im- crobiol 2004;12:58—60. §
mune responsiveness: implications for space trave1.Nutrition Dartnell L. Biological constraints on habitability. Astron Geophys g
2002;18:889—98. 2011;52:125—128. :>
Bowers KJ, Mesbah NM, Wiegel J. Biodiversity of poly- Dartnell LR, Desorgher L, Ward JM et al. Martian sub—surface ion— 0:0
extremophilic bacteria: Does combining the extremes ising radiation: biosignatures and geology. Biogeosci Discuss a
of high salt, alkaline pH and elevated temperature approach 2007a;4:455—92. »;
aphysico—chemical boundary for life? Saline Syst 2009;5z9. Dartnell LR, Desorgher L, Ward JM et al. Modelling the sur— 2
Bowers KJ, Wiegel J. Temperature and pH optima of extremely face and subsurface martian radiation environment: im— 0‘
halophilic archaea: amini-review.Extremophiles 2011;15:119— plications for astrobiology. Geophys Res Lett 2007b;34, DOI:
28. 10.1029/2006GL027494.
Brack A, Baglioni P, Borruat G et 611. Do meteoroids of sedi— De Vera J—P, I-Iorneck G, Rettberg P et al. The potential of the
mentary origin survive terrestrial atmospheric entry? The lichen symbiosis to cope with the extreme conditions of
BSA artiﬁcial meteorite experiment STONE. Planet Space Sci outer space II: germination capacity of lichen ascospores
2002;50:763—72. in response to simulated space conditions. Adv Space Res
Brock T. Microbial growth under extreme conditions. Sym Soc Gen 2004;33:1236—43.
Microbi 1969;19:15—41. Dhakar K, Pandey A. Wide pH range tolerance in extremophiles:
Burchell MJ, Mann J, Bunch AW. Survival of bacteria and towards understanding an important phenomenon for fu—
spores under extreme shock pressures. Mon Not R Astron Soc ture biotechnology. Appl Microbiol Biot 2016, 1—12.
2004;352:1273—8. Dib J, Motok J, Zenoff VF et al. Occurrence of resistance to an—
Burchell MJ, Mann J, Bunch AW et al. Survivability of bacteria in tibiotics, UV—B, and arsenic in bacteria isolated from extreme
hypervelocity impact. Icarus 2001;154:545—7. environments in high—altitude (above 4400 m) Andean wet—
Cayol J-L, Ollivier B, Patel B et al. Isolation and characterization lands. Curr Microbial 2008;56:510—7.
of I-Ialothermothrix orenii gen. nov., sp. nov., a halophilic, Fairén AG, Davila AF, Lim D et al. Astrobiology through the ages
thermophilic, fermentative, strictly anaerobic bacterium. Int of Mars: the study of terrestrial analogues to understand the
J Syst Bacteriol 1994;44:534—40. habitability of Mars. Astrobiology 2010;10:821—43.
Ceplecha Z, Boroviéka J, Elford WG et al. Meteor phenomena and Fajardo—Cavazos P, Link L, Melosh H] et al. Bacillus sub-
bodies. Space Sci Rev 1998;84:327—471. tilis spores on artiﬁcial meteorites survive hypervelocity

"
"13","Moissl—Eichinger et al. I 13
atmospheric entry: implications for lithopanspermia. Astro- Jensen LL, Merrison J, Hansen AA et al. A facility for long-term
biology 2005;5:726—36. Mars simulation experiments: the Mars Environmental Sim-
Pendrihan S, Bérces A, Lammer H et al. Investigating the ef— ulation Chamber (MESCI-I). Astrobiology 2008;8:537—48.
fects of simulated Martian ultraviolet radiation on I-Ialococ— Jolivet E, L’I-Iaridon S, Corre E et al. Thermococcus gammatolemns
cus dombrowskii and other extremely halophilic archaebac— sp. nov., a hyperthermophilic archaeon from a deep—sea hy—
teria. Astrobiology 2009;9:104—12. drothermal vent that resists ionizing radiation. Int J Syst Evol
Pernéndez-Calvo P, Néke C, Rivas LA et al. A multi—array compet— Micr 2003;53:847—51.
itive immunoassay for the detection of broad—range molecu— Junge K, Eicken I-I, Deming JW. Bacterial activity at —2 to —20
lar size organic compounds relevant for astrobiology. Planet C in Arctic wintertime sea ice. Appl Environ Microb 2004;70:
Space Sci 2006;54:1612—21. 550—7.
Freissinet C, Glavin D, Mahaffy P et 611. Organic molecules in the Kallmeyer J, Pockalny R, Adhikari RR et 611. Global distribution of
sheepbed mudstone, gale crater, mars. J Geophys Res-Planet microbial abundance and biomass in subseaﬂoor sediment.
2015;120:495—514. P Natl Acad Sci USA 2012;109:16213—6.
Fritz J, Artemieva N, Greshake A. Ejection of Martian meteorites. Kasheﬁ K, Lovley DR. Extending the upper temperature limit for
Meteorit Planet Sci 2005;40:1393—411. life. Science 2003;301:934.
Frolov AD. A review of the nature and geophysical studies of the Kawaguchi Y, Yang Y, Kawashiri N et al. The possible interplane—
thick permafrost in Siberia:re1evance to exploration on Mars. tary transfer of microbes: assessing the viability of Deinococ-
J Geophys Res 2003;108:8039, DOI: 10.1029/2002JE001881. cus spp. under the ISS environmental conditions for perform-
C—ilichinsky D, Rivkina E, Shcherbakova V et a1. Supercooled wa— ing exposure experiments of microbes in the Tanpopo mis—
ter brines within permafrost—an unknown ecological niche sion. Origins Life Euol B 2013;43:411—28. U
for microorganisms: a model for astrobiology. Astrobiology Kaye JZ, Baross JA. Synchronous effects of temperature, hy— %
2003;3:331—41. drostatic pressure, and salinity on growth, phospholipid g
Godia F,A1biolJ,MontesinosJetal. MELISSA: aloop of intercon— proﬁles, and protein patterns of four I-Ialomonas species :81).
nected bioreactors to develop life support in space. J Biotech- isolated from deep—sea hydrothermal—vent and sea surface S;
nol 2002;99:319—30. environments. Appl Environ Microb 2004;70:6220—9. g
Gémez F, E Mateo—Marti, Prieto—Ballesteros O et al. Protection of Kendrick MG, Kral TA. Survival of methanogens during des— g
chemolithoautotrophic bacteria exposed to simulated Mars iccation: implications for life on Mars. Astrobiology 2006;6: Er
environmental conditions. Icarus 2010;209:482—7. 546—51. 5
Goodhead Dt. Initial events in the cellular effects of ionizing ra— Kerney KR, Schuerger AC. Survival of Bacillus subtilis endospores a
diations: clustered damage in DNA. Int J Radiat Biol 1994;65: on ultraviolet—irradiated rover wheels and Mars regolith 2
7—17. under simulated Martian conditions. Astrobiology 2011;11: Eb
Hansen AA, Jensen LL, Kristoffersen T et al. Effects of long- 477—85. §-
term simulated martian conditions on a freeze—dried and Kerr RA. Enceladus now looks wet, so it may be alive! Science 5
homogenized bacterial permafrost community. Astrobiology 2011;332:1259. 3%
2009;9:229—40. Kminek G, Rummel JD. COSPAR’S planetary protection policy. (3
Harrison JP, Gheeraert N, Tsigelnitskiy D et al. The limits Space Res Today 2015;193. ;
for life under multiple extremes. Trends Microbiol 2013; Kral TA, Bekkum CR, McKay CP. Growth of methanogens on a 2,:
21:204—12. Mars soil simulant. Origins Life Evol B 2004;34:615—26. §
I-Iassler DM, Zeitlin C, Wimmer—Schweingruber RF et al. Krulwich TA, GuffantiAA. A1ka10philicbacteria.Ann Rev Microbiol g
Mars’ surface radiation environment measured with the 1989;43:435—63. :>
Mars Science Laboratory’s Curiosity rover. Science 2014;343: Léveillé R. A half—century of terrestrial analog studies: from 0:0
1244797. craters on the moon to searching for life on Mars. Planet Space a
I-Iorneck G, Klaus DM, Mancinelli RL. Space microbiology. Micro- Sci 2010;58:631—8. »;
biol Mol Biol R 2010;74:121—56. Mahnert A, Moissl-Eichinger C, Berg G. Microbiome interplay: S
I-Iorneck G, Rettberg P, Reitz G et al. Protection of bacterial spores plants alter microbial abundance and diversity within the 0‘
in space, a contribution to the discussion on panspermia. built environment. Front Microbial 2015;6.
Origins Life Evol B 2001a;31:527—47. Mancinelli R, White M, Rothschild L. Biopan-survival I: exposure
I-Iorneck G, Stb'fﬂer D, Eschweiler U et al. Bacterial spores survive of the osmophiles Synechococcus sp.(Nageli) and Haloarcula sp.
simulated meteorite impact. Icarus 2001b;149:285—90. to the space environment. Adv Space Res 1998;22:327—34.
I-Iorneck G, Stéfﬂer D, Ott S et al. Microbial rock inhabitants sur— Mancinelli RL, Klovstad M. Martian soil and UV radiation: micro-
vive hypervelocity impacts on Mars—like host planets: ﬁrst bial viability assessment on spacecraft surfaces. Planet Space
phase of lithopanspermia experimentally tested. Astrobiology Sci 2000;48:1093—7.
2008;8:17—44. Martin D, Cockell CS. PELS (Planetary Environmental Liquid Sim-
I-Iorneck G, Ze11 M. Introduction to the EXPOSE—E mission. Astro- ulator): a new type of simulation facility to study extraterres—
biology 2012;12:373. trial aqueous environments. Astrobiology 2015;15:111—8.
Imamura M, Murata T, Akagi K et 611. Relationship between LET Martin-Torres FJ, Zorzano M—P, Valentin-Serrano P et al. Tran-
and RBE values for Escherichia coli determined using car— sient liquid water and water activity at Gale crater on Mars.
bon ion beams from the TIARA cyclotron and I-IIMAC syn— Nat Geosci 2015;8:357—61.
chrotron. J Gen Appl Microbiol 1997;43:175—7. Mastascusa V, Romano I, Di Donato P et al. Extremophiles sur—
Jansson JK, Ta§ N. The microbial ecology of permafrost. Nat Rev vival to simulated space conditions: an astrobiology model
Microbial 2014;12:414—25. study. Origins Life Euol B 2014;44:231—7.
Jebbar M, Franzetti B, Girard E et al. Microbial diversity and adap— Mastrapa R, Glanzberg I-I, Head J et al. Survival of bacteria ex—
tation to high hydrostatic pressure in deep—sea hydrothermal posed to extreme acceleration: implications for panspermia.
vents prokaryotes. Extremophiles 2015;19:721—40. Earth Planet Sci Lett 2001;189:1—8.

"
"14","14 l FEMS Microbiology Reviews
McC—enity TJ, C—emmell RT, Grant WD et al. Origins of halophilic Nicholson WL, Moeller tPT, Ralf et al. Transcriptomic responses
microorganisms in ancient salt deposits. Environ Microbiol of germinating Bacillus subtilis spores exposed to 1.5 years
2000;2z243—50. of space and simulated martian conditions on the EXPOSE—E
McKay CP. Requirements and limits for life in the context of ex— experiment PROTECT. Astrobiology 2012;12:469—86.
oplanets. P Natl Acad Sci USA 2014;111:12628—33. Nicholson WL, Schuerger AC, Setlow P. The solar UV environ-
Meadow JP, Altrichter AE, Bateman AC et al. Humans differ in ment and bacterial spore UV resistance: considerations for
their personal microbial cloud. PeerJ 2015;3ze1258. Earth—to—Mars transport by natural processes and human
Melosh I-I. Impact ejection, spallation, and the origin of mete— spaceﬂight. Mutat Res-Pund Mol M 2005;571:249—64.
orites.1carus 1984;59:234—60. Novikova N. Review of the knowledge of microbial contam-
Merrison JP, Bechtold I-I, C—unnlaugsson H et al. An environmen— ination of the Russian manned spacecraft. Microb Ecol
tal simulation wind tunnel for studying Aeolian transport on 2004;47:127—32.
mars. Planet Space Sci 2008;56:426—37. Olsson—Francis K, Cockell CS. Experimental methods for study—
Mesbah NM, Wiegel J. Life at extreme limits. Ann NY Acad Sci ing microbial survival in extraterrestrial environments. J Mi-
2008;1125:44—57. crobiol Methods 2010;80:1—13.
Mesbah NM, Wiegel J. Life under multiple extreme condi- Oren A.Thermodynamiclimits to microbiallife at high salt con-
tions: diversity and physiology of the halophilic alkalither— centrations. Environ Microbiol 2011;13:1908—23.
mophiles. Appl Environ Microb 2012;78:4074—82. Ott M, Pierson D, Shirakawa M et 611. Space habitation and mi—
Mileikowsky C, Cucinotta PA, Wilson JW et 611. Natural transfer of crobiology: status and roadmap of space agencies. Microbes
viable microbes in space: 1. From Mars to Earth and Earth to Environ 2014;29:239.
Mars. Icarus 2000;145:391—427. Pack CA. A Fungus among Us: Mold Growth In Museum Enuiron- U
Moeller R, Reitz C, Nicholson tPT et al. Mutagenesis in bacterial ments. 2011, https://museumbu11etin.ﬁ1es.wordpress.com/ %
spores exposed to space and simulated martian conditions: 2012/04/crista-pack-research-paper.pdf. 37
data from the EXPOSE—E spaceﬂight experiment PROTECT. Panitz C, I-Iorneck C, Rabbow E et al. The SPORES experiment of :81).
Astrobiology 2012;12:457—68. the EXPOSE-R. Int J Astrobio 2015;14:105—14. ;
Moissl-Eichinger C. Extremophiles in Spacecraft Assembly Clean Patel M, Bérces A, Kolb C et al. Seasonal and diurnal varia— 3
Rooms. Vienna: Springer, 2012. tions in Martian surface ultraviolet irradiation: biological and g
Moissl-Eichinger C, Auerbach AK, Probst AJ et al. Quo vadis? Mi— chemical implications for the Martian regolith. Int J Astrobio Er
crobial proﬁling revealed strong effects of Cleanroom mainte— 2003;2z21—34. 5
nance and routes of contamination in indoor environments. Pavlov A, Shelegedin V, Vdovina M et 011. Growth of microorgan- 2
Sci Rep 2015;5z9156. DOI: 10.1038/srep09156. isms in martian-like shallow subsurface conditions: labora— 2
Moissl-Eichinger C, Rettberg P, Pukall R. The ﬁrst collection of tory modelling.1ntJ Astrobio 2010;9:51—8. E:
spacecraft—associated microorganisms: a public source for Pavlov AA, Vasilyev C, Ostryakov VM et al. Degradation of the g.
extremotolerant microorganisms from spacecraft assembly organic molecules in the shallow subsurface of Mars due to 5
clean rooms. Astrobiology 2012;12:1024—34. irradiation by cosmic rays. Geophys Res Lett 2012;39. 3%
Mondav R, Woodcroft BJ, Kim E-I—I et al. Discovery of a novel Pavlov AK, Blinov AV, Konstantinov AN. Sterilization of Martian CE
methanogen prevalent in thawing permafrost. Nat Commun surface by cosmic radiation. Planet Space Sci 2002;50:669—73. ;
2014;5z3212. Pikuta EV, Hoover RB, Tang]. Microbial extremophiles at the lim- 2,:
Morozova D, Moeller R, Rettberg P et al. Enhanced ra— its of life. Crit Rev Microbiol 2007;33:183—209. §
diation resistance of Methanosarcina soligelidi SMA— Pitt J, Christian J. Water relations of xerophilic fungi isolated g
21, a new methanogenic archaeon isolated from a from prunes. Appl Microbiol 1968;16:1853—8. :>
Siberian permafrost—affected soil in direct comparison Pointing SB, Chan Y, Lacap DC et al. Highly specialized micro- 0:0
to Methanosarcina barkeri. Astrobiology 2015;15:951—60. bial diversity in hyper—arid polar desert. P Natl Acad Sci USA a
Morozova D, Wagner D. Stress response of methanogenic 2009;106:19964—9. »;
archaea from Siberian permafrost compared with Preston LJ, Dartnell LR. Planetary habitability: lessons learned 2
methanogens from nonpermafrost habitats. FEMS Microbiol from terrestrialanalogues.1ntJ Astrobio 2014;13:81—98. a
Ecol 2007;61:16—25. Priscu JC, Christner BC. Earth’s icy biosphere. Microb Divers Bio-
Mumma MJ, Villanueva CL, Novak RE et 611. Strong release prospect 2004, 130—45.
of methane on Mars in northern summer 2003. Science Probst AJ, Moissl—Eichinger C. “Altiarchaeales”: Uncultivated Ar—
2009;323:1041—5. chaea from the Subsurface. Life 2015;5:1381—95.
Mykytczuk NC, Poote SJ, Omelon CR et al. Bacterial growth at— Rabbow E, Rettberg P, Barczyk S et al. EXPOSE—E: an BSA as—
15 C; molecular insights from the permafrost bacterium trobiology mission 1.5 years in space. Astrobiology 2012;12:
Planococcus halocryophilus Or1. ISME J 2013;7:1211—26. 374—86.
Newcombe DA, Schuerger AC, Benardini JN et al. Survival Rebata—Landa V, SantamarinaJC. Mechanical limits to microbial
of spacecraft—associated microorganisms under simulated activity in deep sediments. Geochem Geophys Geosyst 2006;7.
martian UV irradiation. Appl Environ Microb 2005;71:8147—56. Rettberg P, Anesio AM, Baker VR et al. Planetary protection and
Nichols D, Creenhill A, Shadbolt C et al. Physicochemical pa— mars special regions—a suggestion for updating the deﬁni—
rameters for growth of the sea ice bacteria Glaciecola punicea tion. Astrobiology 2016.
ACAM 611Tand Gelidibacter Sp. Strain IC158. Appl Environ Mi- Rettberg P, Eschweiler U, Strauch K et al. Survival of microor-
crob 1999;65:3757—60. ganisms in space protected by meteorite material: results of
Nicholson WL, Krivushin K, Gilichinsky D et 611. Growth of the experiment ‘EXOBIOLOC—IE’of the PERSEUS mission. Adv
Camobacterium spp. from permafrost under low pressure, Space Res 2002;30:1539—45.
temperature, and anoxic atmosphere has implications for Rettberg P, Rabbow E, Panitz C et al. Biological space experiments
Earth microbes on Mars. P Natl Acad Sci USA 2013;110: for the simulation of Martian conditions: UV radiation and
666—71. Martian soil analogues. Adv Space Res 2004;33:1294—301.

"
"15","Moissl—Eichinger et al. I 15
Riesenman PJ, Nicholson WL. Role of the spore coat layers in olite, Gros Morne National Park: a Mars analogue. Icarus
Bacillus subtilis spore resistance to hydrogen peroxide, arti— 2013;224:286—96.
ﬁcial UV—C, UV—B, and solar UV radiation. Appl Environ Microb Tarasashvili M, Sabashvili SA, Tsereteli S et al. New model of
2000;66:620—6. Mars surface irradiation for the climate simulation chamber
Rothschild LJ, Mancinelli RL. Life in extreme environments. Na- ‘Artiﬁcial Mars’. Int J Astrobio 2013;12:161—70.
ture 2001;409:1092—101. Taubner R—S, Schleper C, Firneis MG et al. Assessing the ecophys—
Rudolph C, Moissl C, I-Ienneberger R et al. Ecology and microbial iology of methanogens in the context of recent astrobiologi—
structures of archaeal/bacterial strings—of—pearls communi— cal and planetological studies. Life 2015;5:1652—86.
ties and archaeal relatives thriving in cold sulﬁdic springs. Thomas LV, Wimpenny]. Investigation of the effect of combined
FEMS Microbiol Ecol 2004;50:1—11. variations in temperature, pH, and NaCl concentration on
Rummel JD, Beaty DW, Jones MA et al. A new analysis of nisin inhibition of Listeria monocytogenes and Staphylococcus
Mars ‘special regions’: ﬁndings of the second MEPAG Spe— aureus. Appl Environ Microb 1996;62:2006—12.
cial Regions Science Analysis Group (SR—SAG2). Astrobiology Thomson W. Presidential address to the British association for
2014;14:887—968. the advancement of science. Nature 1871;4z262.
Sancho LG, De la Torre R, I-Iorneck G et al. Lichens survive in Tuff J, Wade J, Wood B. Volcanism on Mars controlled by
space: results from the 2005 LICI—IENS experiment. Astrobi- early oxidation of the upper mantle. Nature 2013;498:
ology 2007;7z443—54. 342—5.
Schiwon K, Arends K, Rogowski KM et al. Comparison of antibi— Vaishampayan PA, Rabbow E, I-Iorneck G et al. Survival of Bacillus
otic resistance, bioﬁlm formation and conjugative transfer pumilus spores for a prolonged period of time in real space
of Staphylococcus and Enterococcus isolates from International conditions. Astrobiology 2012;12:487—97. U
Space Station and Antarctic Research Station Concordia. Mi- Venkateswaran A, McFarlan SC, Ghosal D et al. Physiologic de— %
crob Ecol 2013;65:638—51. terminants of radiation resistance in Deinococcus radiodumns. g
Schleper C, Pﬂhler G, Klenk I-I-P et al. Picrophilus oshimae and appl environ microb 2000;66:2620—6. :81).
Picrophilus torridus fam. nov., gen. nov., sp. nov., two species Wassmann M, Moeller R, Rabbow E et al. Survival of spores of g
of hyperacidophilic, thermophilic, heterotrophic, aerobic ar— the UV—resistant Bacillus subtilis strain MW01 after exposure 3
chaea. Int J Syst Bacteri011996;46:814—6. to low—Earth orbit and simulated martian conditions: data g
Schuerger AC, Mancinelli RL, Kern RG et al. Survival of en- from the space experiment ADAPT on EXPOSE-E.Astrobiology ET
dospores of Bacillus subtilis on spacecraft surfaces under sim— 2012;12:498—507. 5
ulated martian environments: implications for the forward Wassmann M, Moeller R, Reitz G et al. Adaptation of Bacillus sub- 2
contamination of Mars. Icarus 2003;165:253—76. tilis cells to Archean—like UV climate: relevant hints of micro- 2
Schuerger AC, Ulrich R, Berry B] et 611. Growth of Serratia lique— bial evolution to remarkably increased radiation resistance. Eb
faciens under 7 mbar, 0 C, and CO2—enriched anoxic atmo— Astrobiology 2010;10:605—15. §-
spheres. Astrobiology 2013;13:115—31. Wassmann M, Moeller R, Reitz G et 611. Growth phase— 5
Sender R, Fuchs S, Milo R. Revised estimates for the num— dependent UV—C resistance of Bacillus subtilis: data from a 3%
ber of human and bacteria cells in the body. Bioinu 2016; short—term evolution experiment. Arch Microbiol 2011;193: 6%
036103. 823—32. ;
Serrano P, I-Iermelink A, Lasch P et al. Confocal Raman mi— Waters P, Lloyd D. Salt, pH and temperature dependencies 2,:
crospectroscopy reveals a convergence of the chemical of growth and bioluminescence of three species of 1u— g
composition in methanogenic archaea from a Siberian minous bacteria analysed on gradient plates. Microbiology g
permafrost—affected soil. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 2015, DOI: 1985;131:2865—9. :>
10.1093/femsec/ﬁv126. Webster CR, Mahaffy PR, Atreya SK et 611. Mars methane detection 0:0
Serrano P, Wagner D, Béttger U et al. Single—cell analysis and variability at Gale crater. Science 2015;347:415—7. a
of the methanogenic archaeon Methanosarcina soligelidi Weiss BP, Kirschvink JL, Baudenbacher FJ et al. A low tem- »;
from Siberian permafrost by means of confocal Raman mi— perature transfer of ALI—I84001 from Mars to Earth. Science 2
crospectrocopy for astrobiological research. Planet Space Sci 2000;290:791—5. a
2014;98:191—7. Westall F, Foucher F, Bost N et al. Biosignatures on Mars: what,
Sobrado J, Martin—Soler J, Martin—Gago J. Mimicking Martian where, and how? Implications for the search for martianlife.
dust: An in—vacuum dust deposition system for testing the Astrobiology 2015;15:998—1029.
ultraviolet sensors on the Curiosity rover. Rev Sci Instrum Whitman WB,C01eman DC, Wiebe WJ. Prokaryotes: the unseen
2015;86:105113. majority. P Natl Acad Sci USA 1998;95:6578—83.
Sonnenburg ED, Smits SA, Tikhonov M et al. Diet-induced ex- Willis M, Ahrens T, Bertani L et al. Bugbuster—survivability of
tinctions in the gut microbiota compound over generations. living bacteria upon shock compression. Earth Planet Sci Lett
Nature 2016;529:212—5. 2006;247:185—96.
Stock A,Breiner I-I-W,PachiadakiMet aLMicrobialeukaryotelife Wilson EO, MacArthur RI—I. The Theory of Island Biogeography.
in the new hypersaline deep—sea basin Thetis. Extremophiles Princeton, NJ, 1967.
2012;16:21—34. Wilson J, Ott C, Zu Bentrup KI—I et 611. Space ﬂight alters bac—
Stb'fﬂer D, I-Iorneck G, Ott S et al. Experimental evidence for terial gene expression and virulence and reveals a role for
the potentialimpact ejection of viable microorganisms from global regulator I-Ifq. P Natl Acad Sci USA 2007;104:16299—
Mars and Mars—like planets. Icarus 2007;186:585—8. 304.
Stolp I-I. Microbial Ecology: Organisms, Habitats, Activities. Cam— Wimpenny J, Waters P. The use of gel—stabilized gradient plates
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988. to map the responses of microorganisms to three or four
Szponar N, Brazelton WJ, Schrenk MO et al. Geochemistry of environmental factors varied simultaneously. FEMS Microbiol
a continental site of serpentinization, the Tablelands Ophi— Lett 1987;40:263—7.

"
"16","16 l FEMS Microbiology Reviews
Woolman PF, Pearson VK, Cockell C et al. Subsurface I-Ialophiles: Yamaguchi N, Roberts M, Castro S et al. Microbial mon—

An Analogue for Potential Life on Mars. In: UK Planetary Forum itoring of crewed habitats in space—current sta—

12th Early Career Planetary Scientists’ Meeting, 19—20 February tus and future perspectives. Microbes Environ 2014;

2015, University ofKent, 2015. 29:250.

Yamagishi A, Yano I-I, Okudaira K et al. TANPOPO: astrobiology Zeitlin C, I-Iassler D, Cucinotta F et al. Measurements of energetic

exposure and micrometeoroid capture experiments. T Jpn Soc particle radiation in transit to Mars on the Mars Science Lab—

Aeronaut S 2009;7sz_49—55. oratory. Science 2013;340:1080—4.
D
O
2
D
5
:33
O.
(D
O.
:27
O
B
E
*3.“
5
Q
8
'o
N
5”
H
81
O
S:
B
‘3
§
H
”i
O""
'~<
GO
5:
8
8
D
>
5:
(M
E
“N
S
O\

"
