"","x"
"1","Chapter 1 9
Conducting Plant Experiments In Space
John Z. Kiss
Abstract
The growth and development of plants during spaceﬂight have important implications for both basic and
applied research supported by NASA and other international space agencies. While there have been many
reviews of plant space biology, the present chapter attempts to ﬁll a gap in the literature on the actual pro—
cess and methods of performing plant research in the spaceﬂight environment. The author has been a
principal investigator on siX spaceﬂight projects and has another two space experiments in development.
These experiences include using the US Space Shuttle, the former Russian space station Mir, and the
International Space Station, utilizing the Space Shuttle and Space X as launch vehicles. While there are
several ways to obtain a spaceﬂight opportunity, this review focuses on using the NASA peer—reViewed sci—
ences approach to get an experiment manifested for ﬂight. Three narratives for the implementation of
plant space biology experiments are considered from rapid turnaround of a few months to a project with
new hardware development that lasted 6 years. The many challenges of spaceﬂight research include logisti—
cal and resource constraints such as crew time, power, cold stowage, and data downlinks, among others.
Additional issues considered are working at NASA centers, hardware development, safety concerns, and
the engineering versus science culture in space agencies. The difﬁculties of publishing the results from
spaceﬂight research based on such factors as the lack of controls, limited sample size, and the indirect
effects of the spaceﬂight environment also are summarized. Finally, lessons learned from these spaceﬂight
experiences are discussed in the context of improvements for future space—based research projects with
plants.
Key words Gravitational biology, International space station (188), Microgravity, Space biology,
Spaceﬂight
1 Importance of Plant Space Biology
The spaceﬂight era began with the launch in October 1957 of
Sputnik 1. Shortly thereafter in November 1957, the dog Laika
was the ﬁrst animal sent into orbit around the Earth although fruit
ﬂies were the ﬁrst animals sent to space by a V—2 rocket in 1947
from White Sands, New Mexico. The earliest questions in space
biology centered on whether living organisms can simply survive
in weightlessness or the microgravity environment of low Earth
orbit [1]. While there are some signiﬁcant physiological Changes in
Elison B. Blancaflor (ed.), Plant Gravitropism: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 1309,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-2697-8_19, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
255

"
"2","256 John Z. Kiss
living organisms in microgravity, animals and humans adapt
remarkably well to the conditions of weightlessness.

The study of plants was an important part of space biology
from the dawn of the spaceﬂight era. The ﬁrst plant materials sent
into space in May 1960 on Sputnik 4 were seeds, including those
of maize, peas, Wheat, and spring onion [2]. Plant space biology
can be divided into two broad and interrelated themes: (1) under—
standing plants for use in bioregenerative life support systems, and
(2) using microgravity as a novel research tool in order to study the
fundamental aspects of plant biology. Of course, the latter ﬁeld has
implications for the former, and several researchers have taken a
more synergistic approach since these two areas Clearly are inter—
related (e.g., [3]).

While plant space biology in many ways can be considered in
its infancy, we have made interesting discoveries, and there are seV—
eral excellent reviews on this topic [2—6]. As an example of a key
discovery, in the ﬁeld of bioregenerative life support, several stud—
ies have shown that it is possible to grow multiple generations of
plants seed—to—seed and that microgravity does not deleteriously
affect the plant life cycle [7, 8].

We also have made progress in fundamental plant biology by
using microgravity as a research tool. For instance, Circumnuta—
tion, an oscillatory 0r helical growth pattern around an aXis, was
hypothesized by Charles Darwin [9] to be an endogenous feature
of plants While others have suggested that it is a gravity—dependent
phenomenon [10]. Spaceﬂight experiments provided a way to
resolve these controversies by providing an environment in Which
Circumnutation could be studied Without the “complications” of
an effective gravity vector [10]. Thus, Iohnsson et a1. [11] in an
experiment on the International Space Station (188) demonstrated
that While endogenous Circumnutations occur in stems as Darwin
predicted, gravitational accelerations can amplify these mutations.
Another example of space research used to answer basic questions
comes from our own work on the study of tropisms. We showed
that red—light—based phototropism in stems occurs in seedlings
grown in microgravity (Fig. 1) and that this phototropic response
is masked by the normal 1g on Earth [12]. This discovery has
implications for understanding the evolution of land plants since
directional red—light responses occur in 1g in older plant lineages
such as mosses and ferns [13].

While there is an extensive scientiﬁc literature of plant biology
in space, to date, very little has been written about the Challenges
and unique opportunities of spaceﬂight research. A few reports in
the peer—reviewed scientiﬁc literature consider the prospects of
performing spaceﬂight experiments With plants [2] as well as the
limits and constraints of such space experiments [14:]. There also
are some non—reViewed technical publications of the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the European

"
"3","Conducting Plant Experiments in Space 257
- . '1 ‘ m
I 1 I l. r 1
Ir l -
t 1*
‘ - * 1 rd .. J
« . * * - N
‘ ' H
D
N
(Y)
N
Fig.1 Seedlings that developed in microgravity exhibited a positive phototropic
curvature toward red light in hypocotyls (indicated by arrows) and roots (indicated
by stars). Images were from the TROPI—2 spaceflight experiment on the ISS, and
unidirectional red light was from the left side of the image. The text on the image
indicates Greenwich Mean Time and Experimental Container number (A2)
Space Agency (ESA) that consider the topic of conducting biological
experiments in space [15, 16]. Given this dearth of literature and
the dated nature of the existing publications, the aim of this review
is to consider the technical, organizational, and logistical aspects of
performing experiments in plant biology using orbiting spacecraft
in platforms such as the 188.
2 Principal Methods of Spaceflight Research
One of the major goals of spaceﬂight experiments in plant biology
is to obtain conditions of near weightlessness by free fall, in Which
the gravity effects on objects are effectively reduced [16, 17]
so that biological phenomena can be studied Without a constant
gravity vector. Some methods to obtain free fall conditions or
microgravity in plant research include parabolic ﬂights of airplanes,
rockets, and space vehicles in low Earth orbit such as the former
American Space Shuttle, Russian Soyuz, and the 188 [18, 19].
By deﬁnition, the gravitational acceleration 0n the surface of the
Earth is 1g (in SI units, 9.8 m/sz), and microgravity conditions
can be deﬁned in the range of 10—6—10‘4g [14].

"
"4","258 John Z. Kiss

While methods such as parabolic ﬂights and sounding rockets
have been useful in studies of plant biology [19, 20], this reView
focuses on the utilization of space vehicles in low Earth orbit. 1n
the past, these experiments were on the Space Shuttle, but now the
opportunities will be in laboratories 0n the 188. Space stations,
including the former American Skylab and Russian Mir, provide
the possibility to study plant biology in a microgravity environ—
ment for a longer duration. Other related topics beyond the scope
of this reView include the use of microgravity “simulators” such as
clinostats and the use of biosatellites [4:].

3 Our Experience with Spaceflight Research with Plants

To date, our group (with I. Z. Kiss as Principal Investigator) has
had siX spaceﬂight projects ﬂown on vehicles in low Earth orbit
(Table 1), and we have another two spaceﬂight projects scheduled
for 2014: and 2016. These projects have been performed on the
Space Shuttle as well as on the ISS, and we have used both the
Space Shuttle and Space X as launch vehicles. Interestingly, ﬁve of
the siX projects (the exception being BRIC—16), were collaborative
with the European Space Agency (BSA) and involved European
hardware and laboratory facilities developed for spaceﬂight research
with plants (Table 1). ERIC is an acronym for Biological Research
in Canisters.

Our ﬁrst two projects, PREPLASTID 0n STS—81 (Space
Transportation System, the formal name of the Space Shuttle) and
PLASTID (for the role of plastids in gravity perception) 0n STS—
84 in 1997, were on the Biorack facility which ﬂew in the Spacehab
module (a pressurized unit in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle).
These Biorack projects were concerned with mechanisms of gravity
perception in plants [21, 22]. We used seeds of Arabidopsis wild
type (WT) and a series of starch—deﬁcient mutants, and the eXperi—
ments were performed in ESA’s Biorack, which was a multiuser
facility for biological research [23]. 111 these projects, seedlings that
developed in microgravity were given gravitational pulses from an
on—board centrifuge. Hypocotyls of WT seedlings responded to
these pulses while those of starch—deﬁcient mutants had reduced or
no responses, thereby adding support for the starch—statolith model
of gravity perception. In addition, seedlings were chemically ﬁxed
in space, and subsequent electron microscopic studies did not
show deleterious effects of microgravity 0n the structure of the
gravity—perceiving columella cells in the root cap [24:].

The interaction between phototropism and gravitropism [25,
26] was the focus of our neXt two space projects which ﬂew in
2006 (TROPI—l) and 2010 (TROP1—2) 0n the 188 (Table 1).
TROPI was a code name for the study of Wopz'sms. We utilized the
European Modular Cultivation System (EMCS) and were the ﬁrst

"
"5","Conducting Plant Experiments in Space 259
8
g \Oﬂr—i r—+ O m
= H Vl"" H n 00 00 N
h °? °? '7‘“ 7* ""ﬂ 0
B m m m: m m a
CD H H H H H m
n: m m m m m m
21* N LO
'5 H N m
c"" :4 s; O s;
E H :14 u u m u
3 00 00 G Ci r—I Ci
. 1: m' m‘ :3 :3 m' :3
O cu H H H
‘5' n. m m :3 :2 m :2
a
I:
m
“>’ 2
.E 'c H
E cu r-f o o N
.2- -= H <14 N m m ><
‘9 2 °? °? '7‘ 7* ""ﬂ 0
.E :5 m m m m m g
Q :1: H H H H H m
cu _I m m m m m m
.:
4-:
g o
..O .D u v
m c: c: m m c: —‘ m
= .ﬂ .4: £2 £2 m2 8 $2
'5 M U M U I I m tj'd I
h 3 u g u 3 W W ' 5'5 60
q; = C6 Q cc Q U U Uﬂ-v-I U
m -5 5.4 L4 2
ow ow 2 2 2w 2
h a ”—1 ""—4
g u. no cc: m In co m
4-:
:I
:1:
OJ C Ci
.= O O m g m
""' ‘43 '43 M 9 2/
ﬁ >< >< L5 ‘52 L5
; 8nf 80E :8“ g E g
_.= U, m 8 m 8 m E” o g0 76 o g)
h '5 4-» a 4—» a 4—» N ""C N .3 ""d N
° 2 8:; 82 8 8 88 a 88
§ ‘5 .2 u 2 u 22¢: 22¢: 2 32¢:
”:3 2 > > > > o >
E
o
— b!)
.E .9
W 2 2 13 '“ =2
2 o 0 cu 513 cu o
U 4:} 4:} U 0 W U 5-4
I_ 0-4 Q >3 3 .—4 d an 0-4
-= g) g) .4: ""C 03: a g)
09 u u > U SUI: m c:
> :3 :3 me 3: 92 'au
8 m a £8? £5 0 a 2 ?‘3
= J? J? .2 b .2'5 88 ‘53
E .2 '> '> 0.4“"" m8 ‘5 o H K
c 8' g g g E 8 b!) a b0 2 u
“- I— U U H H Q4 m
.52
u
.2.
O l\ Vl""
h 0 y—I
-= I I
,9 h l\ l\ \o o o m
= :1: O\ O\ O r-< r—I y—I
cu cu O\ O\ o o o o
g >- H r-I N N N N
a.
m
.2 a
Il-l H
is 2 H '7‘
> E 2 B '74 (7] ‘0 boa
h 4-: >_] H H H H C} B
F m 0 Q4 Q4 Q1 I ""—4 O
E 6 ‘0 o o O 2 *4
CD '_‘ <1 ""CU
_ E o q M m a u
a h a.)
:1: :I 0. Q4 m H H m m
l—UJ

"
"6","260 John Z. Kiss
research group to use this facility on the 188. The EMCS is an
incubator with atmospheric control and high—resolution Video
camera system [27, 28]. In addition, the EMCS contains two vari—
able centrifuge rotors so that a 1g control can be performed as
well as reduced gravity levels.

While TROPI—l had a number of technical difﬁculties as is
typical the ﬁrst time space hardware is ﬂown [29], we still were able
to report a fascinating new ﬁnding. Speciﬁcally, a novel positive
phototropic response to red light was observed in hypocotyls of
seedlings that developed in microgravity. This type of red—light—
based phototropism cannot be detected in normal 1g conditions
on Earth nor was it observed in the in—ﬂight 1g control [12].
Thus, these studies showed that some ﬂowering plants may have
retained a red—light sensory system for phototropism, and this dis—
covery may have implications for understanding the evolution of
light sensory systems in plants.

In TROP1—2, we had solved many of the technical and organi—
zational difﬁculties encountered in TROPI—l [30]. In addition to
studying phototropism in microgravity, we also considered reduced
gravity levels that were generated by using the EMCS centrifuge.
The red—light—based phototropism was conﬁrmed, and the reduced
or fractional gravity studies showed an attenuation of red—light due
to gravitational accelerations ranging from 0.1 to 0.3 g [13]. The
transcriptome of seedlings grown in space in TROP1—2 was ana—
lyzed, and we found that 280 genes were differentially regulated
(at least twofold) when comparing spaceﬂight samples with ground
controls [31].

The BRIC—16 project in 2010 was our only spaceﬂight project
that was exclusive to NASA and took place in the middeck region
of the Space Shuttle (Table 1). We found that an endogenous
response in seedlings causes the roots to skew toward one direction
in microgravity and that this default growth response is masked by
the normal 1g conditions on Earth [32]. Our most recent space—
ﬂight experiments in 2013, termed Seedling Growth 1, was a joint
project again using the EMCS with BSA [33]. While the NASA P1
(I. Z. Kiss) continues to explore phototropism in the absence of
gravity, the ESA P1 (F. J. Medina) is interested in the effects
of microgravity on the cell cycle.

4 How Do You Get an Experiment to Fly in Space?
There are several pathways to get biological experiments to ﬂy into
space on the 188. Currently, four principal approaches for spon—
sorship of spaceﬂight experiments are: (a) NASA peer—reViewed
research, (b) National Laboratory research, (C) educational activi—
ties, and ((1) international partner research. This list is not exclusive

"
"7","Conducting Plant Experiments in Space 261
as there have been other methods to gain access to space such as
through NASA’s Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and
Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Programs, among
others [34:]. In 2005, the US segment of the ISS was designated as
a National Laboratory available for use by other federal agencies,
nonproﬁt organizations, and the private sector [35], and this effort
is managed by the Center for the Advancement of Science in Space
(CASIS).

This reView will focus only on NASA—funded spaceﬂight
research since the author has direct experience with this approach.
A key Characteristic of this method of securing space biology
ﬂight opportunities is that the science is peer reviewed by eXperts
in the ﬁeld [36]. The concept of peer—reViewed science is very
important since some of the other ways to get experiments into
space do not always involve the strict process of peer reView,
which, despite its limitations is considered the hallmark of main—
stream scientiﬁc investigations [37]. In the past, some spaceﬂight
projects that did not undergo peer reView had received unfavor—
able commentaries from some groups of scientists [38] as well as
in the news media.

In the NASA—funded spaceﬂight approach, following scientiﬁc
peer reView, proposals then receive a technical feasibility reView
[36]. However, there have been some highly ranked scientiﬁc
projects, but they were not rated feasible due to the lack of inst—
rumentation and/ or other resources (e.g., crew time). Thus, it is
important for investigators to pay attention to descriptions of
existing spaceﬂight hardware and capabilities when this informa—
tion is provided in the call for proposals. Generally following peer
and technical reViews, there also is a programmatic reView to see
how the project ﬁts into NASA’s broader goals at the time. An
interesting twist to the peer reView and the technical reView is that
one or both of these panels may have a group of international
scientists and engineers.

The ISS has modules from the US, Japan, Europe, and Russia
as well as other international partners, and facilities and crew time
are shared, so it can be important to have scientists and engineers
from these partners represented on the panels. In general, most of
the scientiﬁc cooperation involves the United States Orbital
Segment (USOS) of the I88 [39], which includes NASA, ESA, the
Canadian Space Agency (CSA) and Japan Aerospace Exploration
Agency (IAXA). When scientiﬁc peer reView was ﬁrst conducted by
international panels, some adjustments had to be made due to the
differing approaches used by peer reViewers from different coun—
tries and cultures.

"
"8","262 John Z. Kiss

5 Three Narratives for Implementation of Spaceflight Experiments

5.1 Biarack Our ﬁrst experience with spaceﬂight research was with the joint
NASA/ESA Biorack project in 1997 (Table 1). The Biorack mod—
ule, developed by BSA was a multiuser facility which serves as a
small laboratory for the study of cell and developmental biology in
unicellular organisms, plant seedlings, and small invertebrates [23],
and Biorack ﬂew on six Space Shuttle missions. This facility had
two incubators with variable speed centrifuges (for use as a 1g
control), a glovebOX, and eXternal cameras.

The call for proposals was made in November 1994 jointly by
NASA and BSA, and the proposals were due in January 1995 [40].
Peer reView was conducted in March 1995 which was followed by
a technical reView, and proposals were selected for a “deﬁnition”
phase starting in June 1995. Following this deﬁnition stage in
which the feasibility of the space experiment and the resources
required were determined, projects were formally accepted by
NASA for spaceﬂight.

Biorack ﬂew in the Spacehab module of the cargo bay of
the Space Shuttle and was part of the Shuttle—to—Mir (the former
Russian space station) missions [23, 40]. Our ﬁrst experiment,
PREPLASTID, ﬂew and was completed on mission STS—81 in
January 1997, and the second experiment PLASTID was completed
on STS—84 in May 1997 [4:1]. PREPLASTID was considered a
small scale, preliminary experiment to the larger main experiment
PLASTID. Unfortunately, the two projects were too close together
to make signiﬁcant changes between the two experiments. For
instance, we discovered an ethylene effect on seedlings in the ﬁrst
experiment [42] and did not have time to potentially mitigate this
effect in the second experiment [41].

Since the turnaround time was considered short by NASA
standards, principal investigators were to use already developed
hardware from a list of spaceﬂight hardware that had ﬂown on
three previous Biorack missions. In our case, we used the lentil—
roots hardware (Fig. 2) developed by CNES (Centre National
d’Etudes Spatiales), the French Space Agency, for use by Perbal
and co—workers [43]. We had to modify the non—permanent inter—
nal conﬁguration of the hardware to accommodate the Arabidopsis
seeds which were much smaller than lentil seeds that were used by
Perbal [44].

Our Biorack hardware set consisted of two parts (Fig. 2).
Standard Biorack type 1 containers housed the units for plant
growth, and the type 11 containers had the device for chemical ﬁxa—
tion. The type 1 container, which had a drilled hole that allowed for
gas exchange, accommodated two minicontainers for seed germi—
nation and seedling growth. The growth medium was injected
by an astronaut with a syringe adapted for ﬁtting to one of the

"
"9","Conducting Plant Experiments in Space 263
Ti III
E hm i
. = :..---—I-"" I £571!"" l
- .1 1 cm nirJFuc-t. .
i ii i'
E33 F - Hi
:5.
.-*-' 1' ' 7:...{3
ﬂ E
Fig. 2 Spaceflight hardware utilized in the Biorack PLASTID experiments on the Space Shuttle. Type | contain—
ers (I) house two minicontainers (m) in which seeds developed into seedlings, and two minicontainers were
placed into a metal holder (H). Each type II container (II) houses a fixation unit (F) which can accommodate
three of the minicontainers. The fixation unit was used to inject glutaraldehyde into the minicontainers (two are
shown which are ready for fixation) by turning a key (K). L: lid which covers the fixation unit. Scale bar: 5 cm
minicontainers, which had a transparent plastic cover to allow for
observations. During the ﬂight experiments, the astronaut mission
specialists transferred minicontainers from the type I container to
the ﬁxation device in the type II container.

The concept of a standard external container with specialized
internal components has been used by several ESA spaceﬂight facil—
ities including Biorack, BioPack, Biopan, and Kubik [23, 45—48],
and all of these facilities used the same Type I (internal dimensions
81 x40><20 mm) and Type 2 (87x63 x63 mm) containers. This
idea was extended to the newer facilities on the 188, including
Biolab and EMCS [49], which used standard containers that,
however, were different from the earlier Types I and II containers.
These standardized containers are appealing to engineers who then
can design experimental unique equipment into containers with
known parameters that can provide an interface to the larger
facility.

We also conducted full—scale “dress rehearsals” of the experi—
ments on both ﬂights at about 6 months prior to the ﬂight. ESA
termed these activities ESTs, or Experimental Sequence Tests,
which performed the full time line of the experiments in order to
determine if there were any technical or logistic problems. In fact,
in the EST for the STS—81 mission, we did discover that seeds
did not receive enough red illumination from the resident Biorack
ﬂuorescent lamps. Seeds of many plant species require red light

"
"10","264 John Z. Kiss
pretreatment to stimulate germination [26]. Thus, working with
NASA, we had to develop a light box with red LEDs to promote
seed germination to robust levels [44:]. This light box worked well,
and seed germination on the Biorack missions ranged between 92
and 100 % in the spaceﬂight experiments [41].

5.2 EMGS In contrast to our experience with Biorack, when the time between
selection and ﬂight was about 1.5 years, the EMCS project termed
TROPI—I, which was selected in 2000 and ﬂew in 2006 (Table I),
had a development period of about 6.5 years. There were three
major factors in this protracted period. The ﬁrst was the loss of the
Space Shuttle Columbia, which occurred in February 2003 causing
system—wide delays, and the second was that TROPI—I was the ﬁrst
experiment to utilize the EMCS on the ISS. Finally, while EMCS
had standardized hardware termed Experiential Containers (ECs),
we had to develop the internal EUE (experimental unique equip—
ment) for the growth of Arabidopsis seedlings (Fig. 3).

Similar to Biorack, EMCS was an ESA facility, so we had to
work closely with both NASA and BSA engineers on hardware
development [48]. ESA provided the ECs (Fig. 3a) while NASA
had to develop the internal EUE (Fig. 3b). The concept for the
seedling cassettes was largely based on the Biorack Type I minicon—
tainers in which seeds were aﬂixed to a black membrane [28]. Both
the Biorack and EMCS experiments were launched with dry seeds,
and the experiments were activated by hydration of the seeds, which
then developed into seedlings. In the case of Biorack, hydration was
performed manually by the astronauts with pre—ﬁlled syringes [44],
and with EMCS, the hydration was programed or occurred Via tele—
metric commands from the ground [29].

Our experiment TROPI—I was the ﬁrst to utilize the EMCS,
and in fact, was launched in July 2006 on STS—I2I, the same ﬂight
on which the EMCS facility was launched [48]. During the course
of hardware development from 2001 to 2005, we traveled several
times to Germany to test the interface between the EUE, the ECs,
and the ﬂight model of the EMCS.

One major difference from the Biorack experiments is that
TROPI—I was a largely automated experiment with limited crew
time. We had to be proactive with obtaining high quality imaging
that was needed to study growth, development, and phototropism
of the seedlings. Thus, the transparent plastic cover (Fig. 3a) on
the ﬁve seedling cassettes (per EC) had a transparent anti—fogging
heater membrane attached so that condensation did not interfere
with Video observations [28]. In addition, the plastic cover had
four slots with a gas permeable membrane covering them to allow
for gas exchange with minimal moisture loss.

A comprehensive series of biocompatibility and other related
tests were performed during the deﬁnition and development phase
of the project [28, 50]. Additional tests were conducted because

"
"11","Conducting Plant Experiments in Space 265
a
itrﬂ'g‘h L‘
1. I. I;- _- AH. .1. ‘- II '1. - . vi
. *‘h "" ﬂ .
.h «.1 ‘ H. - _ .
----<>§ . w. w
'_..-_'_ _ - J 4.: i?
.. 1 , ""Id /'. 'I Hi
km « ‘ 3* ""
N I'll 5"" :-
'1 f‘,»
b
' : I l t,
__ t ' e l_- : i
t 1 g - __; '2‘.
i .- J t t 2'41;
134--""10319335 ""I F11
Fig. 3 TROPI hardware used to grow seedlings in EMCS spaceflight experiments.
(a) Hardware in an EMCS Experimental Container (EC) showing five cassettes
which are used for seedling growth. The dimensions of the EC are 186 mm
(length) x 100 mm (width) x 90 mm (height). (b) View of the top of the EC showing
the growth of seedlings of Arabidopsis thaliana in the cassettes during a space-
flight experiment. The text on the image indicates Greenwich Mean Time and
Experimental Container number (A1)
we designed new EUE and also because this was the ﬁrst project
scheduled on the EMCS. These tests examined numerous factors
such as: types of materials used in the EUE, optimal LED illumina—
tion (quality and quantity), temperature (and temperature toler—
ance), humidity in the EC, placement of red illumination period in
the timeline to optimize seed germination, Video compression
ratios during downlinks, quality of optical surfaces used in imag—
ing, and numerous other parameters.
While TROPI—l had some success and we were able to identify
a novel red—light—based phototropism in microgravity [12], there
were a number of serious issues and concerns. For instance, due to
operational constraints of NASA and the 188 program, seeds were

"
"12","266 John Z. Kiss

stored in sealed ECs for 6 months, 7 months, and 8 months in runs
1, 2, and 3, respectively [29]. During the spaceﬂight experiments,
seed germination dropped dramatically between runs 1 (58 %) and
2 (23 %), and was even lower in run 3 (11 %). A major factor result—
ing in this low germination was that seed storage for these long
periods allowed for accumulation of gasses from materials, includ—
ing the conformal coating of circuit boards that is required for
safety considerations.

Other problems encountered in TROPI—l included lack of
hydration of seeds in the ﬁrst attempt, issues with image capture
from Video tapes, difﬁculties with cryo—transfer procedures in ﬂight
as well as other operational issues [29]. Many of these difﬁculties
could be attributed to the fact that this was the ﬁrst mission to use
the TROPI hardware and the ﬁrst operational mission of the EMCS.

Since we had such low seed germination in TROPI—l, we had
to modify the experiment in near real time by telemetric com—
mands. The original plan called for studying seedlings in reduced
gravity or fractional gravity (provided by the EMCS centrifuges) as
well as in microgravity. However, we cancelled the reduced gravity
runs so as to boost the sample size in the microgravity and 1g
control seedlings [12].

Another problem in TROPI—l was that we did not conduct a
full EST, Experimental Sequence Test, or “dress rehearsal” for the
spaceﬂight experiments. The main reasons for the lack of an EST
were: the lack of hardware availability, expense of conducting this
test in Europe at the Norwegian Users Operations Control Center
(Trondheim, Norway), and organizational constraints at NASA.
We believe that some of the problems encountered would have
been mitigated by performing an EST.

Despite these issues, the experiment had enough successes that
NASA allowed us to develop TROPI—Z which was conducted on
the 188 in 2010 (Table 1). Given that TROPI—Z was considered a
reﬂight, we had signiﬁcant technical improvements in this project
that allowed for a vastly improved experiment [30]. Highlights of
changes in procedures included decreased storage time in hardware
which increased seed germination and growth of the seedlings [13].
We also eliminated the use of Video tapes (that were used in
TROPI—l) and utilized direct downlinking of digital images from
the 188 to obtain better quality images. In addition, the cryo—
storage and cryo—transfer procedures during TROPI—Z maintained
the low temperatures needed for good—quality RNA for use in
microarray analyses [31].

While we did not perform an EST for TROPI—Z, we performed
a more abbreviated OVT, Operations Veriﬁcation Test, which did
help us optimize a number of parameters including focusing
and imaging of the specimens [30]. The OVT had a limited num—
ber ofeXperimental containers compared to a full EST. Nevertheless,
having this OVT did help us to achieve a better operational success
which improved the scientiﬁc yield of TROPI—Z [13, 31].

"
"13","Conducting Plant Experiments in Space 267
5.3 BRIO-16 While our Biorack project proceeded in a relatively quick manner
and our EMCS project took much longer, the BRIC—16 experience
occurred in a greatly accelerated time frame. The general approach
used by NASA in BRIC—16 was for a “Rapid Turn Around” space—
ﬂight projects, and BRIC—16 was the ﬁrst test of this method [51].
The solicitation was released in September 2009, and proposals
were due in November 2009. Both the scientiﬁc peer reView and
the technical feasibility reView were conducted in December 2009
with ﬁnal proposal selection in January 2010 in which three proj—
ects were selected. The spaceﬂight experiments were scheduled to
launch on mission STS— 131 in March 2010. Fortunately (at least in
this case), there was a ﬂight delay, and the BRIC—16 payload
launched in April 2010, allowing us more time to prepare for the
project.

Similar to the scenario with the Biorack projects, we were
able to conduct a “dress rehearsal” for our BRIC—16 experiments.
Unfortunately NASA and BSA seemingly use different terms for
these events, and the ground experimental test for the time line of
BRIC—16 was called a PVT, 0r Payload Veriﬁcation Test. 111 some
NASA projects an addition ground test is performed, which is
termed an SVT 0r Science Veriﬁcation Test. The SVT considers the
science speciﬁcally and is a precursor to the PVT which is a full
dress rehearsal of the time line and the post—ﬂight analysis.

The three P1s selected for the BRIC—16 project in January
2010 were summoned to Kennedy Space Center in February 2010
to plan for the PVT. There was no time for an SVT, which was
unfortunate as the chances of success typically improve with fur—
ther ground testing. While we had some results [32], there were
difﬁculties with post—ﬂight processing of our samples for micros—
copy since we lacked the time to fully analyze the results from the
PVT. Thus, while a rapid turnaround from ﬂight selection to
implementation is desirable, this experience was in fact “too fast.”
Fortunately, the BR1C—17 and BRIC—18 projects had a longer time
to prepare for the actual spaceﬂight experiments [51], and these
missions allowed for both SVTs and PVTs to be performed.

In contrast to our other experiences, BRIC—16 was a NASA—
only project that was performed on the middeck 0f the Space Shuttle
(although STS—131 docked t0 the 188). The hardware system, term
BRIC—PDFU (Petri Dish Fixation Unit) was relatively simple com—
pared to our Biorack and EMCS projects (Fig. 4:). The BRIC system
lacked an imaging system, atmospheric control, and Video downlink
capabilities. In addition, another key difference in BRIC compared
to the Biorack and EMCS experiments, is that there was no on—
board centrifuge. This instrument has been critical in distinguishing
between spaceﬂight effects and true microgravity effects on living
systems [40, 4:1, 52, 53]. 111 general, many NASA laboratory facili—
ties lack centrifuges as a control while ESA has typically included
this instrument in their spaceﬂight laboratories [54:].

"
"14","268 John Z. Kiss
..-.;.r- ' I FU
'-'_':"" . fifih:
= f Ch FC
c __ :ﬁi
. i _ . f. .- \'\
K: PD 1 a ..
.r , 1
_ - {thin :: '._,""T:j;_-_-1-.r_-3:_ ""'15? ' ' .
b
-. .""' '1 l _ 3%
K

Fig. 4 Petri Dish Fixation Unit (PDFU) hardware used in the BRIC—16 project.
(a) The bottom of a standard polystyrene Petri dish (PD) was placed into a PDFU,
which has a chamber (Ch) for the dish and a fluid chamber (FC) filled with fixa—
tive. The Petri dish was directly covered with a manifold (M), and an additional
cover (C) was attached to the PDFU polycarbonate body. Note the dimensions
of the Petri dish are 60 mm in diameter with a depth of 15 mm. (b) Seedlings of
Arabidopsis thaliana were grown on nutrient agar in the dark in a PDFU during a
ground control, and the covers were removed to show that seedlings exhibited
vigorous growth

Despite its relatively simple nature, the BRIC—PDFU was
robust and at that time, had already successfully ﬂown on STS—
87in 1997 [55] as well as on the ill—fated STS—107 mission in 2003
[56]. The hardware consisted of a chamber With a single Petri dish
(in Which seedlings were grown), and ﬁxation occurred With ﬂuids
from another chamber (Fig. 4). In our experiments on STS—lSl, we
used three different ﬁxation ﬂuids: paraformaldehyde, glutaralde—
hyde, and RNAlater® in order to study growth, development, and
gene expression [32].

"
"15","Conducting Plant Experiments in Space 269

Other colleagues in the BRIC—16 project also had successes
With this hardware and the “Rapid Turn Around” approach. For
instance, one group reported that endogenous growth patterns of
seedling roots in microgravity are suppressed by the actin cytoskel—
eton [57]. The other investigators obtained data to support to the
hypothesis that undifferentiated plant cells could detect Changes in
gravity in the absence of more specialized tissues that are found
in Whole plants [58].

6 Challenges of Space Research

6.1 Logistical Issues The fundamental Challenge of spaceﬂight research is that work is
being performed outside of the investigator’s laboratory. In fact,
the project is a long way from the lab, and once it is launched, the
investigator has very little control over its fate. One of the most
respected staff scientists at ESA (Who helped to implement space—
ﬂight experiments) came from a scientiﬁc career of haVing per—
formed ecological research in remote desert regions, and this
background certainly was part of his success [53].

As stated above, once a project passes peer review, technical
feasibility review, and meets programmatic relevance criteria, there
then is a period of deﬁnition and development. Of the three space—
ﬂight examples given, Biorack (1 year) and BRIC—16 (2 months)
had accelerated times of deﬁnition and development While the
EMCS had a protracted period of 6.5 years. Biorack and BRIC—16
had less formal stages of deﬁnition and development While the
EMCS project had several stages including pre—Phase A, Phase A,
Phase B, and Phase C/ D [59]. Thus, While there appears to be a
formal process for spaceﬂight experiments as we experienced With
the EMCS project, the requirements and exact procedures differ
from project to project.

The processes of the implementation of a spaceﬂight project
have been delineated in a recent NASA document [59]. However,
this section also outlines the general approaches and issues consid—
ered in the execution of such projects. The deﬁnition portion of
the space project occurs When the preliminary plan that was in the
grant proposal becomes a more detailed time lined experiment.
Thus, experimental requirements are deﬁned, schedules are deter—
mined, and the speciﬁcations of the experiment become more
precisely delineated [48]. In the development phase, the exact
hardware conﬁguration is selected, and the precise time during the
ﬂight is ﬁnalized. At the end of the development phase, the dress
rehearsal activities (or ground simulations of the experiment) such
as SVTs, PVTs, and ESTs are performed.

Deﬁnition and development periods also result in a mountain
of paperwork. One of the key documents is termed an ERD, or
Experiment Requirements Document [40]. In ESA’s terminology,

"
"16","270 John Z. Kiss

this document is called an ESR, Experiment Scientiﬁc Requirements.
The goal of these documents is to capture all of the experimental
and resource requirements for the successful completion of a space—
ﬂight eXperiment. Thus, the Principal Investigator (PI) and his
team will need to work Closely with NASA scientists and engineers
to provide very detailed inputs on all aspects of their space eXperi—
ment. These details may include what they consider routine aspects
of their research that may typically be taken for granted. This type
of detailed consideration makes already precise scientists think
more precisely.

Related to the space experiments is the need for a laboratory at
a NASA facility in which the experiment has to be prepared. In the
case of Biorack and BRIC— 16, our laboratory was at Kennedy Space
Center (KSC) while for the EMCS project, the lab was at Ames
Research Center (ARC). Even in the latter case when the main lab
was at ARC, we needed additional space for the processing of
frozen samples retrieved from the return of the spaceﬂight eXpe—
riments at KSC.

One of the many Challenges is having your group work in one
of these NASA facilities both prior to the eXperiment and upon the
return of your eXperiment [14, 60]. Firstly, all of the items that you
routinely need have to be Clearly deﬁned since it can be difﬁcult to
order laboratory items expeditiously. In addition, all safety stan—
dards are enforced, and documentation of potential risks is very
strict in the NASA setting compared to the situation in most uni—
versity labs. As an example, it was necessary for us to ﬁle the
Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) for water when we worked at
a NASA laboratory. Access also is more strictly controlled at NASA
sites compared to the freewheeling nature of typical academic
settings and requires some degree of security Clearance and back—
ground Check. If a member of your team is a foreign national, then
the security Clearance takes much longer than it does for US
Citizens.

Other logistical Challenges include travel and housing your
research team. The uncertainties of launch dates in the Space
Shuttle era seem to be extending to the post—Shuttle era with com—
mercial rocket launches, such as Space X, carrying experimental
payloads into orbit. Thus, the research team may have to travel to
the launch site several times and may have to travel home if there
are extended delays. The costs of airline tickets, rescheduling, and
housing on site can become expensive.

6.2 Development We have had the entire continuum of experience in terms of hard—
of Spaceflight ware development (Table 1). In the BRIC—16 project, we used the
Hardware hardware in the exact conﬁguration it was provided as it had ﬂown
and Procedures several times prior to our mission [32]. During the Biorack eXperi—
ence, we used the lentil—roots hardware in Type I and Type II con—
tainers that was developed by Perbal and his colleagues [61], but

"
"17","Conducting Plant Experiments in Space 271
we modiﬁed the internal conﬁguration to accommodate small
seeds of Arabidopsis thalimm [44:]. In contrast, in the EMCS proj—
ect, we were on the new frontier in that NASA ARC, along with
our Close cooperation, developed hardware speciﬁc for our project
[28, 50]. In addition, our experiment was the ﬁrst one to use the
EMCS facility which was launched to the ISS on the same Space
Shuttle mission (i.e., STS—IZI) that launched the facility [30, 4:8].

Certainly, the simplest method was to use already established,
proven, and ﬂown hardware [14:] as we did in our BRIC— 16 project,
and the most difﬁcult and time—consuming method is to develop
completely new hardware as in the EMCS. In most cases, the inves—
tigators have little Choice in this matter as the call for proposals for
space experiments will list available hardware for the proposed mis—
sions, although it is possible for NASA to develop new hardware.

Since our TROPI—I experiment was the ﬁrst to utilize EMCS,
we had an extended opportunity to develop spaceﬂight hardware
for our project and to test the hardware in the ﬂight model of the
EMCS, which was located at the manufacturer in Germany, prior to
its launch and delivery to the ISS. However, this aspect of hardware
development added to the logistical complexity of the project [28].
As noted above, in our case, the general concept for the new hard—
ware was largely based on our Biorack experience with the PLASTID
project. In recent years, as a cost saving and practical measure,
NASA and BSA have been moving away from hardware speciﬁc to
single spaceﬂight experiment, and these agencies have been devel—
oping both modular and reusable hardware [47, 4:8, 60].

An important caveat regarding hardware development is that it
is common for payloads to have problems that develop during the
ﬁrst spaceﬂight. Risk is reduced when there is a reﬂight of success—
fully ﬂown hardware. Thus, in the Biorack project, we used the
lentil—roots hardware with relatively minor adaptations for the
smaller seeds [44:]. Our TROPI—I experiment had potentially large
risks due to the fact that it was the ﬁrst time that both the TROPI
hardware ﬂew, and this mission (launched on STS—IZI) was the
ﬁrst for the EMCS facility as well.

In addition to hardware risks, there also are risks inherent in
developing new operations in spaceﬂight experiments. As an exam—
ple, the TROPI—I experiment was activated by an automated
sequence of programed events in the EMCS beginning with the
hydration of seeds. During the mission’s ﬁrst hydration attempt,
telemetry from the EMCS indicated that the hydration command
was successfully performed, but Visual information from the down—
linl<ed images indicated that the seeds were, in fact, not hydrated
[29]. A programming issue appeared to cause the problems, which
were resolved by telemetric commands to the EMCS, and a second
hydration attempt was successful. Fortunately, due to the robust
nature of our procedures (i.e., an additional Video downlink), the
problems of hydration were discovered, and the experiment pro—
ceeded nominally.

"
"18","272 John Z. Kiss

6.3 Resource Both during hardware development and the execution of a plant

Constraints spaceﬂight experiment, the PI is faced with a large number of

in Spaceflight resource constraints. One of the ﬁrst issues confronting the inves—

Experiments tigator is the relative lack of crew time available to perform experi—
ments. In our Biorack projects on the Space Shuttle, there seemed
to be a generous amount of astronaut time, and we did not face
major hurdles in terms of this parameter. For instance, a relatively
large amount of time of three astronauts was dedicated to the
Biorack payloads on STS—84 [41]. However, ironically, in the ISS
era, crew time constraints have become very apparent.

EMCS was an early utilization facility that is largely automated
and can be controlled by telemetry from the ground [28, 49].
Even with this automation, EMCS projects were limited by lack of
crew time to initiate and terminate the experiment. However, from
the author’s perspective, while NASA indicated serious issues with
crew time, an ample amount of time somehow becomes available
during the performance of space experiments. Due to the relatively
simple nature of the hardware, crew time was not a major issue in
the BRIC—16 project [32].

The availability of Video downlinks from the ISS is another
example of a resource issue common to space experiments. As stated
in the previous section, having the images from Video downlinks
helped resolve problems encountered during the hydration of
seeds in TROPI— I and saved the experiment [29]. However, NASA
personnel initially objected to the inclusion of Video downlinks
early in the time of the space experiment, arguing that these down—
links were not needed because of the telemetry coming from the
EMCS. Fortunately, we were able to successfully defend our posi—
tion on the importance of downlinks to monitor the progress of
the space experiments.

Crew training also Changed dramatically between the Shuttle
era and the advent of the ISS. In our Biorack projects, the PIs met
with the astronauts involved in the space experiments in order
to give them a theoretical framework for the importance of the
research while hands—on training was provided by NASA and BSA
staff. In the ISS era, the model was to avoid interaction between
PIs and the astronauts, and crew training was done by NASA staff
primarily on DVDs. In the author’s opinion, there was something
lost by lack of direct interaction between the scientists and the
crew members performing the experiments.

Crew training also involves the preparation of very detailed
procedures taking into account aspects of the experiment that may
be taken for granted by PIs and the unique aspects of microgravity
(e.g., tools ﬂoating away). While NASA personnel typically prepare
the crew procedures based on input from the scientists, it is impor—
tant for the PI team to carefully evaluate and reView these proce—
dures. As an example, in TROPI—I, we lost part of the samples that
were placed into the —80 OC freezers on the ISS during the transfer

"
"19","Conducting Plant Experiments in Space 273
from the ISS freezer to a cold bag (for the transfer to the ground)
due to lack of instituting an explicit limit of keeping the frozen
specimens at ambient temperature [29].

Related to this issue, another typical resource constraint has
been cold temperature storage that is required by many plant biolo—
gists to preserve the samples resulting from a spaceﬂight experiment.
In the Space Shuttle era, this problem appeared to be more acute
due to the lack of space on the shuttle. Fortunately in the ISS era,
the international partners have installed three freezers termed
MELFI (Minus Eighty—Degree Laboratory Freezer for 188), which
is designed to keep samples at —80 0C [62]. However, several inde—
pendent compartments in MELFI allow for higher temperatures
such as —20 0C, which may be more suitable for some experiments.

The most recent problem since the decommissioning of the
Space Shuttle is keeping samples cold in the downloading of exper—
iments from the 188. The only current option is the unmanned
Space X Dragon capsule which is capable of both up mass and
down mass from the 188 [63] although other vehicles will be
added through NASA’s COTS (Commercial Orbital Transportation
Services) program. Space X has been ﬁtted with freezers including
MERLIN (Micrograyity Experiment Research Locker/Incubator)
with temperatures down to —15 OC and GLACIER (General
Laboratory Active Cryogenic ISS Experiment Refrigerator) with
capabilities from —80 to —180 0C [64:].

Another issue, more general than cold stowage, for spaceﬂight
experiments is the availability of power which has been a problem
for plant biology experiments since the early days of the space pro—
gram [14:]. We faced the issue of power constraints when we were
working with NASA to design the TROPI hardware. While the
ﬁnal version of the hardware had ﬁve seedlings cassettes per EC,
and earlier version had siX cassettes, but the power requirements
could not support the higher number of cassettes [28]. We also
faced power issues regarding the quantity of light output from the
LEDs in the TROPI cassettes.

Safety issues also fall into the general categories of a constraint
of performing a spaceﬂight experiment [29, 65]. A common require—
ment of biological experiments is to have some type of ﬁxative such
as an aldehyde or RNAlater®. Hardware must have three levels of
containment for ﬁxatives as was possible with the BRIC—PDFU
hardware we used in one of our space experiments [32]. The quan—
tity of ﬁxatives and the restraints on corrosive or radioactive materi—
als that are commonly used in ground—based experiments may pose
additional limitations on spaceﬂight investigators.

6.4 Organizational One issue that becomes readily apparent to an investigator of a
Issues With NASA spaceﬂight experiment is that there are a large number of scientists
and Other Space and engineers involved with this effort. As an example, in our
Agencies TROPI—Z experiment on EMCS [30], we had the following parts

"
"20","274 John Z. Kiss

of NASA afﬁliated with the experiment: Ames Research Center
(ARC) as the science lead, Johnson Space Center (ISC) for ISS
crew interface, Marshall Spaceﬂight Center (MSFC) for ISS opera—
tions, Kennedy Space Center for launch operations, and NASA
Headquarters for overall supervision. In addition, since EMCS was
an ESA facility, we also were involved with BSA Headquarters
(Paris), ESTEC (European Space Research and Technology Center
in Noordwijk, the Netherlands), N—USOC (Norwegian User
Support and Operations Center in Trondheim, Norway), and
Astrium Space Transportation in Friedrichshafen, Germany.

Whenever there is such a large, multinational group working
on a project, conﬂicts and communication issues inevitably will
arise. Even within NASA, the individual centers have a rivalry
and competition for resources. In the course of these spaceﬂight
projects, the author has been caught in the middle of inﬁghting
between NASA centers. In addition, there have been conﬂicts
about approaches and resources between NASA and BSA, and the
author has had to navigate in these waters as well. These potential
disagreements can be managed, and the PI needs to keep his / her
concerns about the integrity of the science as paramount.

To the author, another issue that became evident in his space—
ﬂight management experiences is the difference between the engi—
neering and the scientiﬁc perspectives. As PI, the driving force is to
maximize the success and scientiﬁc output from an experiment.
However, while engineers certainly want to have a successful
experiment, they may be more concerned with operational and
safety aspects that will make the experiment feasible. At times, the
different approaches will have the scientists wanting to increase
complexity and the engineers to favor simplicity. One comment
was that the engineers are always concerned about biologists ruin—
ing their elegant hardware—so it was better to ﬂy it up and down
empty. However, it is Clear that there are a number of good engi—
neers and scientists who want to break the barriers between these
two cultures by trying to understand other perspectives and work—
ing together for a successful spaceﬂight project.

6.5 Interpretation Compared to typical laboratory research, spaceﬂight research is dif—
and Publishing Data ﬁcult and typically requires a signiﬁcant effort of time on the part
from Spaceflight of investigators. PIs can wait many years before their experiment
Experiments ﬂies in space. In addition, because many aspects of the environment
are difﬁcult to Characterize, it also has been difﬁcult to distinguish
between “spaceﬂight effects” and true microgravity effects on bio—
logical systems [5, 24:, 31]. Some of these space effects not directly
related to microgravity include the Vibrations, the gaseous atmo—
sphere, elevated radiation, and other environmental factors.

In terms of plant biology, several observations that were
reported to be effects of microgravity were shown to be a limita—
tion of the spaceﬂight hardware required to grow plants [4:]. As an
example, growth of plants in spaceﬂight experiments has been

"
"21","Conducting Plant Experiments in Space 275
shown to be slower, faster, and the same as on the ground. It turns
out that the consensus is the growth rates of plants in microgravity
are greater than on the ground when the hardware is optimized [5].
The slower growth reports were largely due to problems such as
poor gas eXChange, accumulation of ethylene as well as other factors.

Some of the issues in distinguishing spaceﬂight effects from
true microgravity effects can be resolved by haVing a 1g centrifuge
as control [43, 4:8, 52, 53]. Thus, investigators can compare among
ﬂight—mierograVity, ﬂight 1g (centrifuge), and 1g (normal ground
conditions). If biological phenomena are the same in the ﬂight—
microgravity and ﬂight 1g (and differ from the ground), then it is
likely to be an environmental effect rather than a true microgravity
effect. In fact, in the Biorack missions, in which there was an on—
board centrifuge, and several investigators reported differences
between the 1g ﬂight and 1g ground (e.g., [53, 66]).

The availability of a centrifuge in our Biorack projects helped
resolve whether the observed differences in plant morphology
were due to environmental conditions during the spaceﬂight or to
true microgravity effects [24, 4:1]. For example, we observed an
anomalous, exaggerated hypocotyl hook structure (Fig. 5) of seed—
lings grown in microgravity [41]. However, while this structure
was observed in the 1g in—ﬂight control, it was not observed in
seedlings in the 1g ground control (Fig. 5). Subsequent ground
studies showed that the anomalous hypocotyl structures observed
in the seedlings in the space experiments (Fig. 5) were due to rela—
tively high levels of ethylene present aboard the orbiting spacecraft
[41]. While there are a number of centrifuges aboard the 188 [19],
many space experiments with plants have lacked a 1g centrifuge
(reviewed in [2, 5, 6]), and certainly the availability of this control
would beneﬁt spaceﬂight research with plants and aid in the goal of
publishing results in peer—reViewed publications.

Another difﬁculty of publishing spaceﬂight data in plant
biology is the lack of replication. Due to the limited nature of
spaceﬂight opportunities, it is often difﬁcult to replicate and reﬁne
experiments as would be possible in typical ground—based research.
In addition, the one—time nature of many space research projects
puts enormous pressure on investigators to succeed on the ﬁrst
attempt. Sometimes during the time of the spaceﬂight, investiga—
tors have been asked to estimate the percentage of success even
before they have any real data.

Fortunately, our group has had progression of experiments
with improvements in design and procedures that resulted in stud—
ies with replication, improved analyses, and more reﬁned conclu—
sions. Speciﬁcally, we started with TROPI—l during the ﬁrst ﬂight
of the EMCS facility and had many technical problems [29] but
with some interesting results on mechanisms of phototropism [12].
We were able to continue with TROPI—Z and to conﬁrm the essen—
tial discovery of red—light—based phototropism in microgravity [30].

"
"22","276 John Z. Kiss

3 F #3 b F 13 _ i

c G lg C! G ethy
Fig. 5 Images of seedlings from the Biorack space project and the ground con-
trols. Scale bar: 0.5 mm. (a) Light micrograph of an exaggerated hypocotyl hook
from a seedling grown in-flight in microgravity (F-ug). (b) Seedling with an exag-
gerated hypocotyl from the in-flight, 1 g control (F-1 g; with the 1 g provided by
the on-board centrifuge). (c) Seedling with a normal hypocotyl from the ground
control (G-t g). (d) Seedling with an exaggerated hypocotyl from the ground con-
trol with exogenous ethylene (G-ethy)
With the lessons learned from TROPI—l, we also were able to
expand the experiment to consider plant phototropism at reduced
gravity levels, which is relevant to the NASA agenda of exploration
of other planets such as Moon and Mars [13, 19]. Currently, we
are working on new series of experiments in the Seedling Growth
project which builds on our previous technical and scientiﬁc knowl—
edge to consider the inter—relationships among gravity sensing,
light sensing, and the cell cycle [33].

Several other investigators in plant space biology from interna—
tional space programs have been able to maintain a steady progres—
sion of space research. For example, on the ESA side, Perbal and
his coworkers had a series of Biorack experiments on gravity sens—
ing in lentil roots [4:3, 61]. On the NASA side, Musgrave and her

"
"23","Conducting Plant Experiments in Space 277
group had several space experiments to study the potential effects
of microgravity on plant reproduction [7, 67]. More recently, Perl
and his colleagues have been using the ABRS facility to examine
gene expression in spaceﬂight grown plants in a progression of
experiments [68—70]. In fact, one of the concepts behind the
NASA “Rapid Turn Around” spaceﬂight projects was to poten—
tially use the BRIC hardware in a series of several space eXperi—
ments [51]. In any case, it is certainly desirable to continue to ﬁnd
opportunities to replicate and eXtend experiments in plant space
biology as the ﬁeld continues to mature.

7 Lessons Learned

Our group has been fortunate to have had siX spaceﬂight projects
that have been completed to date as well as two additional projects
that have been scheduled (Table 1). We have worked with NASA,
ESA, other international space agencies, and industry with scien—
tists, engineers, astronauts, and managers in a sometimes complex
structure in a collaborative manner in order to be successful as
space biologists.

One of the ﬁrst lessons learned is to keep experiments as simple
as possible while maintaining the scientiﬁc objectives and integrity
of the research. This concept is more important in experiments
which involve a potentially large amount of crew time. As an exam—
ple, in our proposal for the Biorack project, we had approximately
twice as many treatments as was performed in the ﬁnal spaceﬂight
experiments [41, 44]. Fortunately, while this was our ﬁrst eXperi—
ment in space, we had a mentor in Gerald Perbal who was an
experienced investigator with several ﬂights with Biorack [43].
While our initial inclination was to maximize the scientiﬁc yield by
developing a complex experiment, Perbal recommended reducing
the number of treatments in order to ensure the completion of the
project in space.

Our project on Biorack was operationally successful and resulted
in several publications in peer—reViewed journals [24, 41, 42, 71].
While a seemingly obVious concept, it is important for spaceﬂight
investigators to publish in regular, peer—reViewed journals. A great
deal of progress has been made in this area since the early period
from 1960 to 1980 when many results from space experiments
were non—peer reviewed and appeared in obscure outlets such as
NASA technical reports. In recent years, space experiments have
been published in very good journals with strong impact factors
(reviewed in [5, 6]), and this trend needs to continue.

As mentioned above, in the course of a space project, there can
be an inherent tension between the investigator and NASA ofﬁ—
cials. While caution is needed in asking for “too many” resources,

"
"24","278 John Z. Kiss

investigators should clearly indicate the spaceﬂight resources that
are needed. In the case of our TROPI experiments, when we ﬁrst
requested Video downlinks to monitor the hydration of seeds to
conﬁrm activation of the experiment, we were told that this was
not needed since telemetry already was provided for this conﬁrma—
tion [29]. In fact, the telemetry was erroneous, and the downlinks
saved the experiment. Thus, it was important that our team was
ﬁrm in our pursuit of this important resource in the face of the
initial opposition of our request.

In the course of such a complex endeavor such as a spaceﬂight
experiment, inevitably some mistakes will be made. The important
concept in these situations is to learn from the errors and to improve
the project/procedures for future experiments. In our experience
with working with NASA centers, at times, there appears to be a
tendency to want to assign “blame” to an individual, to a group of
individuals, or to another NASA center. However, this approach is
not helpful and needs to be avoided.

In the TROPI—I project, we had a problem with cold stowage
and cryotransfer procedures. Seedlings frozen at —80 0C at the end
of the experiment were returned on three Space Shuttle missions,
and we experienced problems during the ﬁrst sample return on
STS—116 in that RNA was degraded and not usable (Table I).
A post—ﬂight analysis following the ﬁrst mission suggested that the
issue was due to a problem in cold transfer and crew procedures [29].
The plant samples remained frozen in the —80 OC freezer but
needed to be transferred from the freezer to the NASA cold stow—
age bags for return on the Space Shuttle. NASA ofﬁcials estimated
that the transfer time by the astronauts ranged from 7 to 29 min,
but our analysis showed that the samples would warm to unaccept—
able temperatures within 3 min.

The initial reaction was to try to assign blame, but the inves—
tigators insisted that a solution needed to be found for the remai—
ning two shuttle ﬂights (STS—II7 and STS—IZO) which would
be returning samples. We had excellent cryopreservation once we
instituted a “3—min rule” which stated that this was the maximum
time that frozen samples retrieved from the —80 OC freezer could
be at ambient temperature prior to insertion into the NASA cold
bag [29]. To meet this objective, two astronauts were required to
perform the cold transfer procedures, these resources were pro—
vided, and the remaining samples yielded good quality RNA that
was suitable for gene proﬁling studies [31].

Spaceﬂight experiments need to be robust, which is deﬁned by
the Merriam—Webster dictionary as “successful or impressive and
not likely to fail or weaken.” Our TROPI—I project was a robust
experiment in two aspects: the large sample size and the plan we
used for imaging [12, 29]. Initially, we had designed our eXperi—
ments to study phototropism in microgravity as well as in reduced
gravity (from the on—board EMCS centrifuge). However, we had to

"
"25","Conducting Plant Experiments in Space 279
cancel the reduced gravity runs due to low seed germination.
Nevertheless, we had a successful experiment with data since we
increased sample size to the microgravity runs by using the seeds
originally intended for the reduced gravity runs. As described, we
also had a redundant system to assay for hydration of the seeds
for the activation of the space experiment. When one failed (telem—
etry), we still had a second system (Video downlinks) to monitor
the hydration events. In a sense, the concept of redundancy, which
is used by NASA for rockets and other space vehicles, can also be
applied on a smaller scale to the design of spaceﬂight experiments.

Spaceﬂight experiments can be difﬁcult to replicate and reﬁne
as is possible in a typical laboratory setting on Earth primarily due
to the lack of ﬂight opportunities. This approach puts tremendous
pressure on the principal investigator and his / her group to have a
ﬂawless experiment. However, many of the more successful inves—
tigators have had multiple spaceﬂight opportunities, and NASA
and the international partners should encourage repetition as much
as is possible. As mentioned above, there are several examples of
repetition and reﬁnement such as the projects on plant develop—
mental and reproductive biology involving a series of siX space—
ﬂight experiments between 1989 and 1995 [7].

Our own experience in these matters may be instructive. Initially,
in the Biorack project, we were offered one spaceﬂight opportunity,
but during the deﬁnition and development phase, we successfully
negotiated for a small preliminary experiment on another ﬂight in
the Biorack series. Thus, PREPLASTID ﬂew on STS—Sl [42], and
the larger, main experiment ﬂew on STS—84: [4:1]. TROPI—l led
to a more reﬁned TROPI—Z, which greatly increased the scientiﬁc
output [12, 13, 31]. As we move ahead, impetus for projects which
involve multiple spaceﬂight opportunities should come from both
the space agencies as well as the principal investigators. This approach
would help to make space biology more similar to the standard prac—
tices in scientiﬁc researCh—execution, reﬁnement, and repetition of
experiments.

8 Outlook and Future Prospects
While plant space biology has made signiﬁcant contributions to
both basic and applied plant biology, there are a considerable num—
ber of important questions that still need to be addressed. How do
plants integrate gravity and light sensory systems.> What are the
direct versus the indirect effects of microgravity on plants? How
does the high radiation environment of spaceﬂight inﬂuence plant
growth and development? How does spaceﬂight and microgravity
affect plant—microbe interactions in terms of both pathogenic
microbes and beneﬁcial symbiotic microbes? While the answers to

"
"26","280 John Z. Kiss
these questions have important implications for basic science, they
also are compelling since plants Will likely serve as part of bioregen—
erative life support systems during long—range space travel and
colonization of other planets such as Mars [3, 72].
The approach to solving these issues in plant space biology
Will need to come from a robust program in terms of using
both ground—based and spaceﬂight research methods. The NASA
commitment to continue the 188 program recently has been
extended from 2020 to 2024: and is likely to last beyond this date.
However, compared to its international partners, NASA has under—
utilized microgravity opportunities such as sounding rockets and
biosatellites, and access to space Via these methods should be
increased. While the ISS certainly has facilitated international
cooperation in space research, research collaboration between
American investigators and emerging nations With space programs,
such as China and India, should also be developed and encour—
aged. The Challenges for spaceﬂight researchers Will be to maintain
access to the microgravity environment for high—quality, peer—
reviewed science so that the progress made in the last decades Will
continue in the future.
Acknowledgements
We have been fortunate to have ﬂown a relatively large number of
space experiments and appreciate the ﬁne support provided by seV—
eral NASA centers (ARC, KSC, JSC, and MSFC) and European
facilities (ESTEC and N—USOC). Thanks are due to NASA for
continued ﬁnancial support of our spaceﬂight research and to BSA
for providing excellent research laboratories for space research.
I also Wish to acknowledge my colleagues, friends, students, and
the many astronauts Who have contributed to the successes of our
spaceﬂight projects.
References
1. Clement G, Slenzka K(2006) Fundamentals of 6. Paul AL, Wheeler RM, Levine HG, Ferl R]
space biology: research on cells, animals, and (2013) Fundamental plant biology enabled
plants in space. Springer, New York, NY by The Space Shuttle. Am I Bot 100:
2. Halstead TW, Dutcher FR (1984:) Status and 226—234
prospects. Ann Bot 54(83):3—18 7. Musgrave ME, Kuang A (2001) Reproduction
3. Perl R}, Wheeler R, Levine HG, Paul A—L during Spaceﬂight by plants in the family
(2002) Plants in space. Curr Opin Plant Biol Brassicaceae. l GraVit PhYSiOI 8329—32
5:258—263 8. De Micco V, Pascale S, Paradiso R, Aronne G
4. Halstead TW, Dutcher FR (1987) Plants in (2014) Microgravity effects on different stages
space. Annu Rev Plant Physiol 3 82317—34 5 of higher plant life cycle and completion of the
5. Wolverton SC, Kiss lZ (2009) An update on seed—to—seed cycle. Plant Biol 16:31—38
plant space biology. GraVit Space Biol 22: 9- Darwin C, Darwin F (1880) The power 0f
13_20 movement in plants. John Murray, London

"
"27","Conducting Plant Experiments in Space 281
10. Kiss IZ (2009) Plants circling in outer space. 25. Kiss IZ, Mullen IL, Correll M], Hangarter RP
New Phytol 182:555—557 (2003) Phytochromes A and B mediate red—
11. Iohnsson A, Solheim BGB,1versen T—H (2009) light-induced POSMVC phototropism in room-
Gravity ampliﬁes and microgravity decreases PlantPhysiol131:1411—1417
Circumnutations in Ambidapsis thaliana stems: 26. Molas ML, Kiss IZ (2009) Phototropism
results from a space experiment. New Phytol and gravitropism in plants. Adv Bot Res 49:
182:621—629 1—34
12. Millar KDL, Kumar P, Correll M], Mullen IL, 27. Brinckmann E, Schiller P (2002) Experiments
Hangarter RP, Edelmann RE, Kiss IZ (2010) with small animals in BIOLAB and EMCS on
A novel phototropic response to red light is the International Space Station. Adv Space Res
revealed in microgravity. New Phytol 186: 30:809—8 14
648—656 28. Correll M], Edelmann RE, Hangarter RP,
13. Kiss IZ, Millar KDL, Edelmann RE (2012) Mullen IL, Kiss IZ (2005) Ground—based
Phototropism ofAmZ/Iidopsis thaliana in micro— studies of tropisms in hardware developed for
gravity and fractional gravity on the International the European Modular Cultivation System
Space Station. Planta 236:635—645 (EMCS). Adv Space Res 36:1203—1210
14. Krikorian AD (1996) Strategies for “minimal 29. Kiss IZ, Kumar P, Millar KDL, Edelmann RE,
growth maintenance” of cell cultures: a per— Correll M] (2009) Operations of a spaceﬂight
spective on management for extended duration experiment to investigate plant tropisms. Adv
experimentation in the microgravity environ— Space Res 44:879—886
111th Of a space station. BOt RCV 62341—108 30. Kiss IZ, Millar KDL, Kumar P, Edelmann RE,
15. Looft F] (1986) The design of ﬂight hardware, Correll M] (201 1) Improvements in the re—ﬂight
V01 2401, NASA conference publication. of spaceﬂight experiments on plant tropisms.
NationalAeronautics and Space Administration, Adv Space Res 47:545—5 52
Washington DC, pp 109-116 31. Correll M}, Pyle TP, Millar KDL, Sun Y, Yao I,
16. Briarty LG (1989) Biology in microgravity. A Edelmann RE, Kiss IZ (2013) Transcriptome
guide for experimenters. ESA Publications, analyses ofAmZ/Iiplopsis thaliana seedlings grown
Noordwijk, The Netherlands in space: implications for gravity—responsive
17. Klaus DM (2001) Clinostats and bioreactors. genes. Planta 238519—533
GraVit Space Biol Bull 14:55—64 32. Millar KDL, Johnson CM, Edelmann RE, Kiss
18. Claassen DE, Spooner BS (1994) Impact of IZ (2011) A11 endogenous growth pattern 0f
altered gravity on aspects of cell biology. Int roots is revealed in seedlings grown in micro-
Rev Cytol 156: 301_373 gravity. Astrobiology 11:787—797
19. Kiss IZ (2014) Plant biology in reduced gravity 33- Kiss 1Z3 Aanes G) SChiCﬂOC M) (3061110 LHE»
0n the Moon and Mars. Plant Biol 16(81): Millar KDL» Edelmann RE (2014) Changes 1n
12_17 operational procedures to improve spaceﬂight
20. Limbach C, Hauslage I, Schafer C, Braun M experiments in, p lgnt biology in the European
(2005) How to activate a plant graVireceptor. Modular Cultlvatlon System. Adv Space Res
Early mechanisms of gravity sensing studied in 532818—827
Characean rhizoids during parabolic ﬂights. 34- NASA (2014) Ofﬁce Of small business pro—
Plant Physiol 13931030_1040 grams. Available at: http://osbp.nasa.gov/
21. Kiss IZ, Wright 113, Caspar T (1996) GraVi— SBIR—STTRhtml. Accessed 0h 9 June 2014
tropism in roots ofintermediate—starch mutants 35- Ruttley TM: Evans CA» Robmson 1A (2009)
of Ambidopsis. Physiol Plant 97:237—244 The. importahce 0f the International Space
22. Kiss IZ, Guisinger MM, Miller AL Sta ckh ous e Statlon for .hfe selehces research: past and
KS (1997) Reduced gravitropism in hypocotyls future. GraV1t Space B101 222.6778;
of starCh—deﬁcient mutants of Ambidopsis. 36- NSPIRES (2014) NASA sohc1tat10n and pro—
Plant Cell Physiol 38:518—52 5 posal integrated review and evaluation system.
23. Manieri P, Brinckmann E, Brillouet C (1996) Avallable at: http://nsp1res.nasaprs.c0m. Acce—
The Biorack facility and its performance during 886d 0h 9 June 2014 . . .
the 1ML—2 Spacelab mission. I Biotech 47: 37- Raff H) Brown D (2013) ClVlla 563511316, and
71—82 constructive peer review in APS journals.
24. Guisinger MM, Kiss IZ (1999) The inﬂuence JAPPIPhYS101115=295‘296
Of microgravity and spaceﬂight on columella 38. National Research Council (1995) Peer review
cell ultrastructure in starCh—deﬁcient mutants in NASA life sciences programs. National
Of Ambidopsis. Am 1 Bot 86:13 57_1 366 Academy of Sciences Press, Washington, DC

"
"28","282 John Z. Kiss
39. Voels SA, Eppler DB (2004) The International neW directions for research on the ground and
Space Station as a platform for space science. in spaceﬂight. GraVit Space Biol Bull 5:43—57
AdV Space Res 343594—599 53. Brinckmann E (2012) Centrifuges and their
40. Brillouet C, Brinckmann E (1999) Biorack application for biological experiments in space.
facility performance and experiment operations Microgravity Sci Technol 242365—372
on three Spacehab Shuttle t0 Mir missions. 54. Dutcher FR, Hess EL, Halstead TW (1994)
1h: Perry M (ed) Biorack 0h Spacehab (31)"" Progress in plant research in space. Adv Space
1222). ESA Publications, Noordwijk, The Res 14:159_171
Netherlands, p p 3_21 55. Kern VD, Sack FD (1999) Irradiance depen—
41- Kiss 1Z3 Edelmann RE» Wood PC (1999) dent regulation of gravitropism by red light in
Gravitropism 0t hYPOCOtYlS 0t Wild—type and protonemata 0f the moss Cemtodon purpmmm.
starch—deﬁcient Ambidapﬂs seedlings in space— Planta 2093299_307
ﬂight Studies- Manta 209396—103 56. Kern VD, Schwuchow 1M, Reed DW, Nadeau
42- Kiss 1Z3 Katembe W}: Edelmann RE (1998) IA, Lucas I, Skripnikov A, Sack FD (2005)
Gravitropism and development 0t Wild—type Gravitropic moss cells default to spiral growth
and starCh—deﬁcient mutants of Ambidapﬂs on the clinostat and in microgravity during
during spaceﬂight. Physiol Plant 102:493—502 spaceﬂight. Planta 2213149_157
43- Perbal G (2009) From ROOTS t0 GRAVI'13 57. Nakashima I, Liao F, Sparks IA, Tang Y,
twenty ﬁve years for understanding hOW plants Blancaﬂor EB (2014) The actin cytoskeleton is
sense gravity. Microgravity Sci Technol 213 a suppressor of the endogenous skewing behav—
3—10 iour 0f Ambidopsis primary roots in micrograv—
44. Katembe W], Edelmann RE, Brinckmann E, ity. Plant Bi0116(S1):142—150
Kiss Iz <1998> The development ofspaceﬂight 58. Paul AL, zupanska AK, 03th DT, Zhang Y,
experiments With Ambidopsis as a model sys— Sun Y, Li I—L, Shanker S, Farmerie WG,
tem in gravitropism studies. I Plant Res 111: Amalﬁtano CE, Ferl R] (2012) Spaceﬂight
463—470 transcriptomes: unique responses to a novel
45. Brinckmann E (1999) Spaceﬂight opportuni- environment. Astrobiology 12:40—56
ties Oh the 188 for plant research— the ESA per— 59. Jet Propulsion Laboratory (2014) Basics of
spective. AdV Space Res 243779—788 space ﬂight. Available at: http://WWW2.jpl.
46. Willemsen HP, Langerak E (2007) Hardware nasa.g0V/basics/bsf7—1.php. Accessed 0n 9
for biological microgravity experiments in June 2014
Soyuz missiOHS- Microgravity Sci Technol 19: 60. Porterﬁeld DM, Neichitailo Gs, Mashinski AL,
75—79 Musgrave ME (2003) Spaceﬂight hardware for
47. Astrium (2012) Space biology product catalog. conducting plant growth experiments in space:
Astrium, Friedrichshafen, Germany the early years 1960—2000. Adv Space Res
48. Kittang A—1, Iversen T—H, Fossum KR, Mazars 313183—193
C, Carnero—Diaz E, Boucheron—Dubuisson E, 61. Perbal G, Driss-Ecole D (1994) Sensitivity to
Le Disquet 1, Legue V, Herranz R, Pereda— gravistimulus 0f lentil seedling roots grown in
Loth V, Medina F] (2014) Exploration ofplant space during the 1ML 1 mission of Spacelab.
growth and development using the European Physiol Plant 90:313—318
Modular Cultivation System facility Oh the 62. De Parolis MN, Crippa G, Chegancas I, Olivier
International Space Station. Plant Biol 16: F, Guichard I (2006) MELFI ready for sci—
528—538 ence — ESA’s —80 OC freezer begins work in
49. Brinckmann E (2005) ESA hardware for plant space. ESA Bull 128226—31
research Oh the International Space Station. 63. Stem SA (2013) The low—cost ticket to space.
Adv Space Res 36:1162—1166 Sci Am 308(4):68—73
50- Kiss 1Z3 Kumar P, Bowman RN» Steele MK» 64. Robinson IA, Thumm TL, Thomas DA(2007)
Eodice MT, Correll M1, Edelmann RE (2007) NASA utilization of the International Space
Biocompatibihty studies ih preparation for a Station and the Vision for Space Exploration.
spaceﬂight experiment on plant tropisms Acta Astronaut 612176—184
(TROPD' Adv Space Res 39:1154—1160 65. Lewis ML, Reynolds IL, Cubano LA, Hatton
51. Camacho IR, Manning—Roach SP,Maresca EA, JP, Lawless BD, Piepmeier EH (1998)
Levine HG (2012) BRIC'PDFU rapid thth' Spaceﬂight alters microtubules and increases
around spaceﬂight hardware. ASGSR Meeting, apoptosis in human lymphocytes (Iurkat).
Abstract Book, 19- 87 FASEB J 12:1007—1018
52. Brown AH (1992) Centrifuges: evolution of 66. Van Loon H, Bervoets 1).]’ Burger EH,
their uses in plant gravitational biology and Dieudonne SC, Suzanne C, Hagen I—W,

"
"29","Conducting Plant Experiments in Space 283
Semeins CM, Doulabi BZ, Veldhuijzen P] Later ﬁxed tissue. GraVit Space Biol 25:
(1995) Decreased mineralization and increased 40—43
calcium release in isolated fetal mouse long 70. Paul AL, Zupanska AK, Schultz ER, Ferl R]
bones under near weightlessness.IBone Miner (2013) Organ—speciﬁc remodeling of the
Res 103550—557 Arabidopsis transcriptome in response to
67. Kuang A, Popova A, McClure G, Musgrave spaceﬂight. BMC Plant Biol 1321—11
ME (2005) Dynamics ofstorage reserve depo— 71. Kiss IZ, Brinckmann E, Brillouet C (2000)
sition during Bmm'm WP” L- POHCH and seed Development and growth of several strains of
dCVCIOPant in microgravity. Int J Plant SCi Ambidapsis seedlings in microgravity. Int I
166285-96 Plant Sci 161255—62
68- P3111 A_L) POPP MP» Gurley WE» Guy C) 72. Paradise R, De Micco V, Buonomo R, Aronne
NOYWOOd KL, Ferl R] (2005) Arabidopsis G, Barbieri G, De Pascale S (2014:) Soilless cul—
gene CXPYCSSiOH patterns are altered during tivation of soybean for Bioregenerative Life—
spaceﬂight. AdV Space Res 361175—1181 Support Systems: a literature review and the
69. Paul A—L, Ferl R] (2011) Using green ﬂuo- experience 0fthe MELiSSA ProjeCt—Food Char—
rescent protein (GFP) reporter genes in RNA acterisation Phase 1. Plant Biol 16(81):69—78

"
