"","x"
"1","Microbes Environ. V01. 00, N0. 0, 000-000, 2014

https://www.jstage.jst.g0.jp/br0wse/jsme2 doi:10.1264/jsme2.ME14031 @ 2§%?§gﬁﬁ:nl¥’s
Minireview

Microbial Monitoring of Crewed Habitats in Space—Current Status and
Future Perspectives

NOBUYASU YAMAGUCHII, MICHAEL ROBERTS2, SARAH CASTRO3, CHERIE OUBRE4, KOICHI MAKIMURAS, NATALIE LEYS6,
ELISABETH GROHMANN7, TAKASHI SUGITAS, TOMOAKI ICHIJOI, and MASAO NASU1*

1Environmental Science and Microbiology, Graduate School ofPharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, 1—6, Yamadaoka,
Suita, Osaka 565—08 71, Japan; 2Space Life Sciences Lab, CASIS, NASA Kennedy Space Center, FL 32899, USA; 3Bi0medical
Research and Environmental Sciences Division, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX 77058, USA; 4Science, Technology
& Engineering Group, Wyle, I290 Hercules Avenue, Houston, Texas 77058, USA; 5Lab0mt0ry ofSpace and Environmental
Medicine, Graduate School ofMedicine, Teikyo University, 359, Otsuka, Hachioji, Tokyo 192—0395, Japan; 6Molecular and
Cellular Microbiology, Belgian Nuclear Research Center SCK-CEN, Boertang 200, BE—2400, M01, Belgium; 7Division of
Infectious Diseases, University Medical Centre F reiburg, Hugstetter Strasse 55, D- 79106 F reiburg, Germany; and
8Department ofMicrobiology, Meiji Pharmaceutical University, 2—522—1 NOShi0, Kiyose, Tokyo 204—8588, Japan

(Received February 18, 2014—Accepted June 17, 2014—Published online August 12, 2014)

Previous space research conducted during short-term ﬂight experiments and long-term environmental monitoring on board
orbiting space stations suggests that the relationship between humans and microbes is altered in the crewed habitat in space.
Both human physiology and microbial communities adapt to spaceﬂight. Microbial monitoring is critical to crew safety in
long-duration space habitation and the sustained operation of life support systems on space transit vehicles, space stations, and
surface habitats. To address this critical need, space agencies including NASA(Nati0na1Aer0nautics and Space Administration),
ESA (European Space Agency), and J AXA (J apan Aerospace Exploration Agency) are working together to develop and imple-
ment speciﬁc measures to monitor, control, and counteract biological contamination in closed-environment systems. In this
review, the current status of microbial monitoring conducted in the International Space Station (ISS) as well as the results of
recent microbial spaceﬂight experiments have been summarized and future perspectives are discussed.

Key words: International Space Station, microbial monitoring, on-site analysis

Previous space experiments conducted during short-term Area 06. http://WWW.nasa.g0V/pdf/500436main_TA06-
ﬂights and aboard orbiting space stations suggest that the HHLSHS—DRAFT-N0V2010-A.pdf), ESA (European Space
relationship between humans and microbes may be changed Agency; Towards Human Exploration of Space: a European
in space habitats (environmentally controlled closed eco— Strategy [THESEUS] Roadmap. http://theseus.hd20.h0sting.
systems under microgravity and elevated radiation). The punkt.de/fileadmin/Docs/Eg_rep0rts_r0admap/R0adMap_
pathogenicity and virulence of some bacteria, such as web.pdf), and JAXA (J apan Aerospace Exploration Agency;
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, have been shown Kibo Utilization Scenario toward 2020 in the ﬁeld of Life
to increase under microgravity, and this has been attributed to Science. http://iss.j axa.jp/en/kib0eXp/scenario/pdf/life%20
enhancements in the formation of extracellular matrices and science.pdf), rapid and robust environmental monitoring is
production Ofbioﬁlms (59). The immune system responses of required to provide essential information on microbiological
astronauts during spaceﬂight are also a1tered(6)p0ssib1y due safety (e.g., deﬁne correct upper and lower thresholds of
to the stress associated With crewed habitats in space. Manned microbes in the air, surface, and water) to enable continued
missions to Mars, Which may be realized Within the next success in long-duration space habitation.
two decades, may weaken the immune status of the crew due Additional research is needed to better understand the
t0 long-duration missions in a conﬁned environment and dynamics of microbial colonization under space habitat con-
ultimately cause profound changes in the composition of the ditions and how interactions between microbial communities,
bacterial ﬂora in the intestinal tract, nasal passages, and upper humans, and life support systems impact on both human
airways, resulting in an increased risk of infection. Therefore, and system performance. Contamination by microorganisms
research on the relationship between human physiology and in conﬁned environments represents a potential risk for
microbial ecology in space habitats is critical for the long- the health of the crew as well as 0n-b0ard systems (37, 53).
term operation and sustaining engineering of a human pres- Therefore, each space agency has developed and imple-
ence in space (38). As outlined in the mission roadmaps 0f mented speciﬁc measures to prevent contamination by
the international partners on the 188, including NASA microorganisms, continuously monitor the crewed habitat
(National Aeronautics and Space Administration; Human and life support systems, and develop deployable microbial
Health, Life Support and Habitation Systems—Technology control and disinfection.

In this review, we describe the current status of microbial

* Corresponding author. E-mail: nasu@phs.0saka-u.ac.jp; monitoring conducted on the 188, the results of recent micro-

Tel: +81—6—6879—8170;Fax: +81—6—6879—8174. bia1 spaceﬂight experiments, and future perspectives on
Copyright 2014 by J apanese Society of Microbial Ecology / J apanese Society of Soil Microbiology / Taiwan Society of Microbial Ecology

"
"2","2 YAMAGUCHI et al.
international cooperation to share, standardize, and improve during ﬂight and microbial identiﬁcation on samples returned
methods, procedures, and technology. to the ground for analysis (Fig. 1, Table 1).
A swab is Widely used for ground processing and on-orbit
S a m plin g in sp a c e h abit ats surface sampling of space vehicles (61); however, this
approach requires water to wet the surface for effective
NASA has monitored the presence of microorganisms microbial collection, and multiple steps are involved in the
since early human spaceﬂight into a low Earth orbit (an current swab sampling protocol. Therefore, new sampling
altitude between 160 km and 2,000 km) including the NASA- devices With simpliﬁed procedures are needed. One such
Mir and Space Shuttle programs. Preﬂight surface, air, and device uses an adhesive sheet With several improvements
water samples are typically collected between 2 months to 10 (1 over swab-based methods, including a simpliﬁed procedure,
prior to a launch based on the sample type. Samples include no water requirement for sample collection, and improved
surface swabs of randomly selected hardware items as well as ease of transport and storage (Fig. 2). The ability of the
air and surface samples from the habitable volume of the adhesive sheet to collect microbes from a metal plate and
vehicle. Air, surface, and water samples are also collected on laptop palm rest (plastic, rough surface) was found to be
a quarterly basis With microbial enumeration being performed equivalent to that of the swab (24). Therefore, the adhesive
Surfaces Air Water
-‘\,/- ‘ \',v-~ ""' ' "" ‘
‘ \‘7 ‘ A1 --‘i’ 9: *wzi * 41,3""
.., 1’.“ “K53"" :0
:+7 --..— i3 -- as."" 1.
. ‘ ﬂ ' l C I ' I ,i
. s. m T f) . Ea .
r — Ix. ,w ' ' . _
.___ 53.1.» K -— .. I32 B3
' a I. i “‘~ . ‘ @ K
‘ k - A
Samples are returned to ground for microbial identification
Fig. 1. Spaceﬂight surface, air, and water samples are collected and microbial colonies are enumerated during ﬂight, While microbial identiﬁcation
is performed on the ground. Inﬂight sample collection activities include swabbing surfaces (A1), air sample collection using air sample equipment
(A2), and collecting water from potable water sources (A3). Enumeration is performed on incubated samples that include contact slides from surface
samples (B 1), culture plates from air samples (B2), and colony growth on ﬁlter discs from water samples (B3).
Table 1. NASA current microbial monitoring
Sample Type Media Incubation Temp/Time
Pre-ﬂight Air1 TSA5 and SDA6 w/ chloramphenicol plates TSA: incubation at 37°C for 48 h
SDA: incubation at 30°C for 5 d
Flight Air2 TSA and SDA w/ chloramphenicol plates TSA and SDA plates incubated at ambient cabin
temperature for 5 d
Pre-ﬂight Surface Sterile nuclease-free water-moistened swab into 3 mL of TSA incubated at 35°Ci2°C for 48i2 h
TSB7. 0.1 mL each spread onto TSA (4 plates + 2 plates SDA 30°Ci2°C for 5 d
0.01 mL) and SDA (2 plates), SDA w/ chloramphenicol (1
plate), FDA8 (1 plate)
Flight Surface Collection using either a sterile saline-moistened swab Contact slides (TSA or SDA W/ chloramphenicol)
onto a contact slide or direct sampling using a contact incubated at ambient cabin temperature for 5 d
slide depending on the location
Pre-ﬂight Wate1r3a4 RZA Milli-ﬂex cassettes RZA incubated at 35°Ci2°C for 48i2 h
Flight Water Microbial Capture Device With modiﬁed R3A broth; Microbial Capture Device and Colifonn Detection bags
Colifonn detection using Colisure Reagent incubated at ambient cabin temperature for 44i4 h
1 SAS Super 180 Air sampler collecting for 1 min at 180 L min‘l.
2 Modiﬁed portable impaction sampler (Burkard Manufacturing Co. Ltd., Hertfordshire, UK); 84.9 L sample collected.
3 Processed by ﬁltration for heterotrophic plate counts and molecular identiﬁcation.
4 the only water samples currently obtained are typically courtesy samples shared by ESA or J AXA.
5 TSA: Trypticase Soy Agar, 6 SDA: Sabouraud dextrose agar, 7 TSB: Trypticase Soy Broth, 8 FDA: potato dextrose agar
Copyright 2014 by J apanese Society of Microbial Ecology / J apanese Society of Soil Microbiology / Taiwan Society of Microbial Ecology

"
"3","Microbial Monitoring ofa Space Habitat 3
I Cover sheet
I (polyethylene terephthalate)
:' Clean face
/ Adhesive area:
X] [—1 2.5 cm X 2.5 cm Adhesive
[sterilized by gamma radiation]
1 7 cm X 8 cm H
at . ,l
‘ J
I dhesg I i
A x . v' »/
H - 5
Fig. 2. Adhesive sheet for microbial monitoring in the space habitat. 1. Photograph of the adhesive sheet; 2. Attach the adhesive area to the sam-
pling site and press; 3. peel the adhesive sheet off the sampling site.
sheet represents an alternative device for sampling in a space 188). It was later discovered that wet clothing and towels
habitat and has been used for surface microbial sampling in were placed against the fabric panel to dry, causing a wet area
Kibo, the J apanese Experiment Module 0f the 18$ (24). that allowed for microbial growth. Initial remediation efforts
included altering crew hygiene practices to prevent wet items
Micr 0 b i a l b i 0_ c 0 n t a m in a ti 0 n c 0 n t r 0 I from being placed in direct eontaet with the fabric surface and
decrease the potential for microbial growth.

NASA has Obtained much information on the risks of The prevention of bio—contarnination should include ratio-
microbial contamination to the crew members as well as nal habitat designs. For example, habitats designed to mini-
the vehicle from spaceﬂight microbial environmental rnoni— mize the spread of biological aerosols beneﬁt from the
toring, and has consequently developed engineering controls development of a reliable model to disperse biO-aerosol con-
and monitoring strategies to minimize detrimental microbial tarnination from point or diffuse sources in the habitat.
growth during spaceﬂight (39). The microbial control efforts BIOSMHARS (BIOcontarnination Speciﬁc Modelling in
Of NASA are focused on preventing microbial growth by HAbitats Related to Space; http://www.bi0srnhars.eu/) is
reducing humidity and eliminating free water, maintaining the ﬁrst joint EU-Russia research project to address this
high-volurne exchange and air ﬁltration, and implementing a issue. The ﬁrst phase of this project aimed at developing,
schedule of routine housekeeping and food monitoring. The calibrating, and validating a mathematical model to predict
microbial environmental acceptability limits for preﬂight and the dispersion of microbial bio—aerosols in the BIOS facility
inﬂight (Table 2) were developed through spaceﬂight experi- (http://www.bi0srnhars.eu/eXpe/bios-3), a closed environ-
ence and data collected by subject matter experts in microbial ment in size and concept relevant for space, so far without
monitoring and control. These limits have focused on crew human activity and under Earth conditions. The long-term
health and safety in addition to the prevention Ofbiofouling t0 Obj ective 0f the BIOSMHARS team is to develop a versatile
maintain space vehicle system integrity. and robust modeling tool to predict airborne microbial con-

If preﬂight 0r inﬂight samples exceed the deﬁned lirnits, taminant dispersion and deposition in a manned spacecraft
remediation 0r mitigation steps are implemented and include in ﬂight.
repeat sample collection to verify that remediation pro— Microbes are intimately associated with life and biological
cedures are adequate to meet environmental speciﬁcations. processes on Earth and will always be present in manned
An example of an inﬂight anomaly occurred in 2004 during space habitats. If a better understanding can be obtained on
Expedition 9 when a suspected mold was identiﬁed on a panel the dynamics of microbial dispersal, survival, and prolifera-
front in the Functional Cargo Block (Russian Segment 0n tion in indoor conﬁned habitats, it will help to deﬁne better

strategies to monitor, manage, and control microﬂora t0 ben-
eﬁt crew health and performance.
Table 2. NASA preﬂight and inﬂight acceptability limits for air,
water, and surface samples . . .
m Abundance ofbacterla and fungl m the ISS
Preﬂight 300 CFU m‘3 500 CFU 100 cm‘2 50 CFU mL—1 Each space agency has been continuously monitoring the
15383;??? _3 ?gigiirtiilloo _2 No detectable abundance and diversity of bacteria and fungi in their res-
Fungi m Fungi cm coliforms pective medules 1n the .188 .to better understand microbial
Inﬂight 1,000 CFU m-3 10,000 CFU 50 CFU mL-1 dynamws 1“ Ciewed habltats 1“ Space: .
Bacteria 100 cm—2 Bacteria NASA preyiously reported microbial abundance in the 188
100 CFU m—3 100 CFU 100 0110—2 N0 detectable based on the continuous monitoring and recovery of Viable
Fungi Fungi coliforms cells using cultivation based methods (9). Staphylococcus,
Copyright 2014 by J apanese Society of Microbial Ecology / J apanese Society of Soil Microbiology / Taiwan Society of Microbial Ecology

"
"4","4 YAMAGUCHI et al.
Bacillus, and Micrococcus species have been the most fre- resistance of staphylococci and enterococoi isolated from the
quently recovered bacterial genera from air and surface ISS was determined. In a collection of ISS isolates from
sampling from the ISS based on quarterly samples returned sampling campaigns between 2002 and 2006, twenty-nine
between August 1998 and August 2011. The most commonly Staphylococcus and Enterococcus isolates were investigated
isolated fungal genera from the air and surface samples for antibiotic resistance, horizontal transfer capability, and
during the same time period were Penicillium, Aspergillus, bioﬁlm formation (46). Resistance to one or more antibiotics
Cladosporium, and Hyphomycetes. The most commonly was detected in 22 out of 29 (75.8%) strains examined. The
isolated organisms from spaceﬂight water samples analyzed most prevalent resistance determinants among the staphylo-
during ground identiﬁcation between 2009 and 2012 were cocci were ermC, tetK, and different cat genes conferring
Ralstonia pickettii and Burkholderia multivomns. resistance to rnaorolide, tetracycline, and chloramphenicol,
In the United States Operating Segment of the ISS, the respectively (46). Plasmids were present in 86.2% of the
Water Recovery System (WRS) is aphysiooohemical system isolates; eight of the Enterococcus faecalis isolates har-
oornprised of a Urine Processor Assembly (UPA) and Water bored a large plasmid of approximately 130 kb, likely to be
Processor Assembly (WPA) that is designed to recycle crew self-transmissible. Transfer genes encoding key proteins of
member urine and humidity condensate for reuse as potable the oonjugative transfer process, such as the ATPase deliv-
water. Direct counts by microscopic enumeration revealed ering energy for the transfer process and the coupling protein
8.4 X 104 cells rnL‘1 in the humidity condensate sample, but indispensable for linking the DNA transfer and replication
no oolony-forrning cells. In contrast, 3.3 X 105 cells rnL‘1 complex (Dtr) with the so-oalled mating pair formation
were detected in a surface swab of the WRS waste tank, and (Mp1) complex from the well-known resistance plasmids
included oolony-forrning bacteria and fungi recovered after a from gram-positive bacteria such as pIP501, pRE25, pSK41,
12-d incubation on solid agar media. Based on 18S rRNA pGOl and pT181, were detected in the total DNA of 86.2%
sequencing and phenotypio characterization, a fungal bioﬁlrn of the strains. Most pSK41—hornologous transfer genes were
raft recovered from the ﬁlter was determined to be detected in isolates belonging to coagulase-negative staphy-
Lecythophom mutabilis. Abaoterial isolate recovered from a locoooi. Twenty—eight percent of the isolates contained at
biofouling sample of the membrane in the WRS was identi- least one vir signature gene, virBI, encoding a murarnidase
ﬁed by 16S rRNA gene sequence data as Methylobacterium locally opening the peptidoglyoan in the cell wall, virB4,
radiotolemns (unpublished data). encoding the motor ATPase of the plasmid transfer process,
JAXA has also been continuously performing bacterial and virD4, encoding the oonjugative coupling protein,
monitoring in Kibo (docked with the ISS in March 2008) respectively. Through solid surface matings, it was demon-
sinoe 2009 (Research title: Microbe). Sampling was per- strated that several Staphylococcus spp. isolates could
formed in September 2009 (Miorobe-I), October 2010 transfer their resistance genes to distinct Enterococcus and
(Miorobe-II), February 2011 (Miorobe-II’), and October Staphylococcus spp. Bioﬁlrn formation was observed in 83%
2012 (Microbe-III). In this research, the relative abundance of the isolates (46). As rnethioillin-resistant Staphylococcus
and phylogenetic afﬁliation of bacteria and fungi collected aureus (MRSA) or vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus
from the interior surfaces of Kibo were determined by (VRE) was not detected, the health risk associated with
quantitative PCR, PCR—DGGE, and the assembly of clone Enterococcus and Staphylococcus infections for the crew was
libraries. The surface of the Cell Biology Experiment Facility assessed as low.
(CBEF; incubator), inside of the door of the CBEF, laptop To monitor fungal rniorobiota in the ISS—Kibo, culture-
palm rest, air intake, air diffuser, and handrail were selected based methods were used for swab- and ﬂat sheet media
as sampling sites. A new sampling device, the rnicrobe- samples in the Microbe-I experiment. Tests on orbita1 sam-
colleoting adhesive sheet (Fig. 2), was used in addition to the ples using either sample collection method were negative.
traditional swabbing method (24). Although adhesive sheet samples were also examined by ﬁeld
Bacterial abundance at each site, except for the air intake, emission-soanning electron microscopy, no microbial cells
was equivalent to or less than the quantiﬁcation limit of were detected. However, fungal DNAs were detected using
quantitative PCR (cells orn‘2) in multiple experiments oon- rea1-time PCR (33) and then analyzed by the clone library
ducted in different missions (Miorobe-I and Microbe-II). method. Alternaria sp. was the dominant fungal species
Meanwhile, their abundance was below the minimum detec- before the launch, but the most abundant fungal species
tion1irnitata11sarnp1ing sites in Miorobe-II’ and Microbe-III. changed to Malassezia spp. on orbit. The dominant species
The phylogenetic afﬁliation of bacteria collected from the found in ground control samples collected from the air con-
Microbe-II mission was determined, and bacteria in the phyla ditioner diffuser, 1ab bench, door push panel, and facility
Actinobacteria and F irmicutes were frequently detected on surfaces in a university laboratory were Inonotus sp.,
the surface of the PC palm rest and handrail, which were Cladosporium sp.,MalasseZia spp., and Pezz'cula sp., respec-
touched frequently by astronauts. Most of these bacteria have tively. Malassezia spp. constitute human skin rniorobiota and
been detected on human hands as part of the normal human Inonotus sp., Cladosporium sp., and Pezz'cula sp. are often
skin rnicrobiota; thus, bacterial cells may be transferred to the found in natural environments such as soil and plants. These
surface of Kibo Via astronaut contact. results suggested that the fungal biota in Kibo changed from
Staphylococci and enterococoi are a part of the normal soi1-borne fungi to a human origin. It was concluded in 2009
human ﬂora and are, thus, commensal microorganisms. that cleanliness in Kibo was equivalent to that in an ISO Class
However, they can also be opportunistic pathogens that 7 clean room environment on the ground (45).
cause a wide range of diseases. Therefore, the antibiotic In the Microbe-II experiment, 14 strains belonging to 5
Copyright 2014 by Japanese Society of Microbial Ecology / Japanese Society of Soil Microbiology / Taiwan Society of Microbial Ecology

"
"5","Microbial Monitoring ofa Space Habitat 5
fungal species grew on board Kibo and changes in the fungal increased when access to bathing facilities was limited over a
community structure were observed using clone libraries long period of time and the skin microbiota of astronauts may
(unpublished data). In the Microbe-III experiment (September have changed for that reason.
to October, 2012), 10 strains belonging to 4 fungal species From microbial abundance and their phylogenetic afﬁl-
were cultured from surface samples, but no fungi grew from iation, the Kibo module has been microbiologically well
air samples collected by an air-sampling device. maintained. However, increases were reported in bacterial
A major source of the microbes found on surfaces in and fungal numbers in previous space stations due to
the ISS is thought to have been the human skin microbiota. long-duration habitati0ns (37), and microbial abundance in
The human skin microbiota includes various types of micro— Kibo may also increase with prolonged exposure to astro-
organisms, such as Viruses, bacteria, and fungi. The body nauts. Continuous bacterial monitoring in Kibo is required to
sites involved include sebaceous 0r oily sites, moist sites, ensure crew safety and better understanding of microbial
and dry sites. The predominant bacterial species differ at dynamics in space habitation environments.
each body site. For example, Actinobacteria, including
Cnrynebacterium and Propionibacterium species, predo— Mi (3 r obi al r esp 0 n s es to m 1' cr 0 gr avity
rninate at sebaceous 0r Oily s1tes, glabellar creases, and canals
(22). Regarding the fungal rnicrobi0ta, Malassezia is the The short generation time of microorganisms makes them
predominant group at all body sites, although a few hundred uniquely suited for studies to assess responses to altered
fungi exist on human skin (20, 48). Therefore, the fungal environmental conditions. Therefore, microbial cells were
microbiota differs from the bacterial microbiota. among the ﬁrst Earth-based life forms to be sent into the
The fungal microbiota 0f 10 astronauts who spent time on environment of space. Early studies revealed that the space-
the ISS was analyzed by quantitative PCR. Skin samples ﬂight environment did not affect the Viability of micro-
were collected from the astronauts once during the pre-ﬂight organisms (28, 63, 64). However, by assessing Escherichia
stage, twice during the in-ﬂight stage, and once during the 6011' on several Vostok (Russian spacecraft) ﬂights, these
post-ﬂight stage. The astronauts stayed on the ISS for 6 initial spaceﬂight studies documented an increase in the
months. On the ISS, the colonization levels OfMalasseZia on number of phage particles produced, as well as a variant
the astronauts increased, but decreased in post-ﬂight (Fig. 3) colony type of the bacteria, which were concluded to be
(unpublished data). A few hundred thousand high-quality the result of spaceﬂight factors (28, 63, 64). The studies that
reads were obtained by pyrosequencing, and more than100 followed included assessments of basic microbial character-
fungal genera were detected in the samples collected from the istics, such as alterations in cell density as a result of space-
10 astronauts; Cladosporium and Malassezia were predomi- ﬂight cultures. Over the course of several ﬂight experiments,
nant, followed by Aspergillus and Cryptococcus. The fungal S. Typhirnuriurn, E. 6011', Candida albicans, and Bacillus
diversity of samples collected in-ﬂight decreased while the subtilis displayed greater growth proﬁles in spaceﬂight than
fungal diversity of post-ﬂight samples increased. The fungal ground controls (l2, 16, 25, 26, 49).
microbiota sampled from both environmental surfaces in With evidence that bacteria were able to sense and respond
the ISS and skin of crew members revealed an increase in t0 the microgravity environment of spaceﬂight, the concern
the proportion of Malassezia species. In cheek samples, of spaceﬂight researchers shifted to how these variations
Malassezia accounted for 95% 0f the overall fungal species could impact on human health. Over the course of numerous
in the in-ﬂight samples, whereas it comprised only 50 and spaceﬂights, researchers from various countries analyzed
60% 0f the pre- and post-ﬂight samples, respectively (unpub- changes in antibiotic resistance by E. coli and S. aureus (5 l).
lished data). The level of microbial colonization markedly Speciﬁcally, the minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC) of
oxacillin, chloramphenicol, and erythromycin for S. aureus
and colistin and kanarnycin for E. coli were evaluated among
5 107 in-ﬂight cultures and compared to ground controls. These
El A studies reported an increase in bacterial resistance to all
E g antibiotics tested for both S. aureus and E. 6011'. Additionally,
8 g 106 the researchers observed a thickening of the cell wall that
{g ""g accompanied the increase in the antibiotic resistance of S.
“8’ LE: aureus once returned from ﬂight (51).
§ “5 To further deﬁne the impact of spaceﬂight culture on the
E 5 105 pathogenesis of microorganisms, researchers again turned to
:3 E S. Typhirnuriurn, launching it into orbit, allowing it to grow,
g E and returning it for assessments in a murine model of salmo-
E, 104 nellosis (59). Mice infected with bacteria cultured in-ﬂight
l— _ _ _ . dis la ed a decreased tirne-to—death, increased ercent mor-
Pre-fllght In-fllght In-fllght POSt'ﬂ'ght taliIt)y,§and decrease in the lethal dose required t(I: kill 50% of
Fig. 3. Temporal change in the colonization level of Malassezia in the mice (LDSO) (59)- In addition» samples that were ﬁxed
cheek skin samples from astronauts. The colonization level of in-ﬂight and analyzed on the ground revealed the differential
Malgssgzéa wats detgmiinednilsling (11:01 ll/aiuﬂsbsiloﬂv $16 aintrEtlgthr expression of 167 genes and 73 proteins, which led to the
33333.3333311.33.333.13 33...: 3.33313... 3.33 3.3 .......... .. ._ 1...... .1. f. .h. 1...... prom
ﬂight). qu, 1n the bacterial response to cultures in the spaceﬂight
Copyright 2014 by J apanese Society of Microbial Ecology / J apanese Society of Soil Microbiology / Taiwan Society of Microbial Ecology

"
"6","6 YAMAGUCHI et al.
environment (59). This was the ﬁrst study to elucidate both for modeling this environment: 1) remaining in a constant
the molecular response connected With a regulatory rnecha- state of suspension and 2) experiencing a quiescent sur-
nisrn and alterations in bacterial Virulence as a consequence rounding, devoid of shearing, turbulent forces. It is these
of growth in spaceﬂight. A f0110W-up investigation With aspects of the microgravity culture environment that the
S. Typhirnuriurn conﬁrmed these Virulence ﬁndings and RWV bioreactor effectively sirnulates. The components of
determined that the media ion concentration inﬂuenced the the RWV bioreactor system include the vessel, rotation base
spaceﬂight-related Virulence response in this organism (60). unit With an oxygen pump, and power supply. The vessel is
The transcriptional and proteomic responses of spaceﬂight a thin, cylindrical disc to Which the cell culture media is
cultured Pseudomonas aeruginosa have recently been docu- introduced by a syringe Via ports on the face of the vessel.
rnented, and the involvement of qu and the qu regulon was Once attached to the base unit, the power supply initiates
noted (15). These studies on the involvement Ofoq represent rotation of the vessel and provides a supply of oxygen
the ﬁrst account of a common molecular regulatory rnecha- through a gas permeable membrane on the inner backside
nisrn, shared among different bacterial species, in response of the vessel. The entire system can be housed in an incubator
t0 the spaceﬂight environment. Although inroads into the to allow for optimal cell growth at a ﬁxed ternperature
rnechanisrn(s) behind microbial adaptations have been made (Fig. 4B). As the rotation of the fully ﬁlled vessel increases,
using spaceﬂight as a platform, and even though there have its rotational velocity is transferred radia11y inward unti1re1a-
been more than 100 spaceﬂight experiments involving rnicro— tive ﬂuid motion ceases (Fig. 4C), at Which point the solid
organisms during the past 50 years, our knowledge of how body rotation of the ﬂuid is achieved (27). A cell Within this
their response to this environmental pararneter impacts their environment experiences the sedimentation effect irnparted
ability to cope With antibiotics and other environmental by gravity. As it begins to fall toward the bottom of the vessel
stresses has largely been generated through investigations (“settle out”), it is carried back upward by the solid body
utilizing a spaceﬂight analog cell culture system. rotation of the media and, thus, rernains suspended in the ﬂuid

Continuous microgravity conditions cannot be created on in an orbital path (Fig. 4D), modeling the ﬁrst aspect of the
Earth; however, aspects of the microgravity environment can microgravity environment described above. Therefore, When
be mimicked using ground-based simulators. The rotating- cultured in the RWV bioreactor, a microorganism experi-
Wall vessel (RWV) bioreactor has been increasingly used to ences a quiescent, 10W-shear, 10W-turbu1ent environment that
enhance our understanding of microbial responses that may is devoid of shearing forces and, thus, is analogous to the
be occurring during spaceﬂight (8, 18, 30, 34—3 6). The RWV second aspect of spaceﬂight described above. As it is import-
(Fig. 4A) is an optimized form of suspension culture in Which ant to note the 10W-shear effects of the ﬂuid on cells, the term
cells are grown under physiologically relevant 10W-ﬂuid- LOW-Shear Modeled Microgravity (LSMMG) has been
shear conditions. A cell in liquid media in microgravity is adopted for use to accurately describe the environment pro-
known to experience two unique aspects that are important duced by the RWV bioreactor (57).

A. i/S ' B. Y. ‘ : ~
~ I ; ac v
, ' I-I-I—I-L—n ""—-- *
R0tating-wa11 vessel (RWV) RWVs Housed in an Incubator
C' D' :;E§.P::3¢’f’~.
Kégx
m 53
60 22$
0' . six.
LSMMG Control , 1' Otatlon 0
Orientation Orientation Cell Maintained in Orbit
Fig. 4. The Rotating-Wall Vessel (RWV) Bioreactor. (A and B) Image of the NASA-designed RWV apparatus. (C) The altered positioning of the
RWV resulting in two culture orientations, the arrows depict the directions of rotation. The low-shear modeled microgravity (LSMMG) environment
is achieved by rotation of the RWV on an axis parallel to the ground, Whereas the axis of rotation in the control orientation is perpendicular to the
ground. (D) Depiction 0f the orbital path of a cell When cultured in the LSMMG orientation. The continued combination of the sedimentation effect,
whereby gravity and a lack of motility cause a cell to settle to the bottom of the vessel, and the clock—wise solid body rotation of the media results in
continuous suspension of the cell in an orbit. Modiﬁed from Castro, et al., 2011 (8).
Copyright 2014 by J apanese Society of Microbial Ecology / J apanese Society of Soil Microbiology / Taiwan Society of Microbial Ecology

"
"7","Microbial Monitoring ofa Space Habitat 7
Through the study of numerous microorganisms cultured monality between organisms is changes in responses to enVi-
within the RWV bioreactor, similarities have been noted ronmental stressors following cultivation within the RWV. In
to both spaceﬂight responses and among organisms (36). response to a challenge with osmotic stress, S. Typhimurium
For example, scanning electron microscopy images revealed and E. 6011' each displayed increased resistance following
an unidentiﬁed extracellular matrix around S. Typhimurium cultivation within the RWV (31, 58). Furthermore, S.
cells following spaceﬂight cultures (59). Additionally, bio— Typhimurium, E. coli, and P. aeruginosa all exhibited an
ﬁlm formation in P. aeruginosa was documented during increased ability to survive thermal conditions post-RWV
growth in spaceﬂight (32). In response to the modeled micro— culture (2, 14, 31, 58). However, increased survivability to
gravity conditions within the RWV bioreactor, bioﬁlm for- environmental stress has not always correlated to RWV cul-
mation by P. aeruginosa, S. aureus, E. coli, and C. albicans ture conditions. While E. coli and P. aeruginosa are better
was increased (8, 14, 31, 47). This increase in bioﬁlm forma- able to withstand oxidative stress, S. Typhimurium and S.
tion has been correlated with an increase in resistance by S. aureus were found to be more sensitive to this stressor fol-
aureus, E. coli, and C. albicans. Another signiﬁcant com- lowing growth within the RWV (2, 8, 14, 58). A summary of
Table 3. Microbial responses to modeled microgravity
. . Response to Modeled Microgravity
M1croorgan1sm within the RWV bioreactor Reference
° Increased Virulence in a mouse model,
resistance to acid, thermal, and osmotic stresses, Nickerson, 2000 (35)
S T himurium 3339 and macrophage survival Wilson, 2002 (57)
' yp X ° Decreased LPS production, resistance to Wilson, 2002 (58)
oxidative stress, and qu expression Wilson, 2007 (59)
- Differential gene expression
° Increased Virulence in a mouse model and
S. Typhimurium 14028 cellular invasion Chopra, 2006 (11)
- Differential gene expression
. - Increased bioﬁlm formation and resistance to
E‘ 0011 AMS6 osmotic, ethanol, and antibiotic stresses Lynch, 2006 (31)
E. coli E2348/69 ° Increased intimin production Carvalho, 2005 (7)
E. coli MG1655 ' Dfmeased ngth . Tucker, 2007 (52)
- D1fferent1al gene express10n
E. coli K12 0 Differential gene expression Vukanti, 2008 (54)
. . - Increased resistance to thermal and oxidative
E“ call 083'H1 stresses and adhesion to epithelial cells Allen, 2008 (2)
- Increased bioﬁlm formation, elastase,
rhamnolipid, and alginate production; resistance
P. aeruginosa PAOl to oxidative and thermal stress, and qu 32111311312, 38(1):; 831;
expression a e,
- Differential gene expression
Streptococcus pneumoniae TIGR4 ° Differential gene expression Allen, 2006 (1)
° Increased bioﬁlm formation and susceptibility
to whole blood
S. aureus N315 ° Decreased growth, carotenoid production, Castro, 2011 (8)
resistance to oxidative stress, and qu
expression
° Decreased carotenoid production and hemolytic
S. aureus RF1, RF6, RF11 activity Rosado, 2010 (42)
- Differential gene expression
S. aureus 25923 ° Increased growth and membrane integrity Vukanti, 2012 (55)
Stenotrophomonas paucimobilis 10829 ° Decreased growth Baker, 2005 (4)
S. paucimobilis isolated from the 188 water system ° Increased growth Baker, 2005 (4)
Yersinia pestis KIMD27 ° Decreased Hela cell rounding Lawal, 2010 (29)
- Increased antibiotic resistance
Haloferax mediterranei 0 Differential pigment production and protein Dornmayr-Pfaffenhuemer, 2011 (17)
expression
° Decreased cell aggregation
Halococcus dombrowskii 0 Differential pigment production and protein Dornmayr-Pfaffenhuemer, 2011 (17)
expression
Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Inereasecl aberrant budding PureVdorj-Gage, 2006 (41)
- D1fferent1al gene express10n
° Increased ﬁlamentous growth, bioﬁlm
Candida albicans formation, antimicrobial resistance ‘g‘ ltenburégé 1210 0;; 9(3)
- Differential gene expression ear es, ( )
Copyright 2014 by J apanese Society of Microbial Ecology / J apanese Society of Soil Microbiology / Taiwan Society of Microbial Ecology

"
"8","8 YAMAGUCHI et al.
certain bacterial, fungal, and archaeal responses to the simu- dations for 10ng-durati0n mission microbial monitoring
1ated microgravity conditions within the RWV bioreactors during a 2011 workshop at the NASA Johnson Space Center.
can be found in Table 3. The consensus of the group was that NASA should investi-
MicrograVity is merely one unique environmental para- gate and implement a rnolecular-based form of microbial
meter of the spaceﬂight environment. Investigations assessing detection, such as rea1-tirne PCR, that could be performed
the responses of microorganisms to additional factors, such in-ﬂight. Moving forward, NASA scientists initiated a com-
as radiation and the vacuum of space, have been conducted prehensive market survey of commercially available real-
in space and through simulated laboratory experimentation time PCR platforms. In order to be considered for ﬂight
(23). The ﬁndings of these studies showed that organisms evaluation, the technology must meet multiple design criteria:
and bacterial spores were able to withstand the extremes 1. Use quantitative 0r semi-quantitative PCR technology
associated with exposure to the environment of space (23). with multiplexing abilities;
Speciﬁcally, the bipolar lichen species, Rhizocarpon 2. Have a low limit of detection (3 400 cells sarnple‘1 in a
geographicum and Xanthoria elegans isolated at above 2,000 100 ML sample volume);
In from the mountains of Spain, were able to survive 16 d 3. Use reagents that are she1f—stab1e at room temperature
of exposure to radiation and the vacuum of space (44). for arninirnurn of six months;
Assessments of the survival and DNA repair rnechanisrn(s) 4. Provide a rapid assessment of the microbial environment
utilized by microorganisms to withstand these extremes are on the ISS;
ongoing. A thorough discussion of microbial responses to the 5. Expand monitoring of microorganisms beyond current
numerous environmental parameters associated with the means;
spaceﬂight environment can be found within the reView by 6. Reduce the frequency of sampling events;
Horneck et al. (23). 7. Allow for crew autonomy during sample analysis; and
8. Have the ability to function in a microgravity environ-
. . . . . . ment,
New methods for mlcroblal momtormg m space habitats Three platforms were selected for testing: the Cepheid
As mentioned above, the cleanliness of the spacecraft and SrnartCycler, BiOFire Diagnostic(f0rrner1yIdah0 Technologies,
crewed environments has been a focus of each space agency Inc.) RAZOR EX, and iCubate 2.0 systems. Testing is
since their inception. The historical records of microbial ongoing and these instruments are being validated to assess
monitoring of the air, water, and surfaces of the spacecraft their ability to detect target pathogens in potable water. The
have provided an insight into the diversity and abundance of RAZOR EX and iCubate 2.0 systems have demonstrated the
microorganisms within the spacecraft environment. ability to meet 10w detection limits using a sarnple-tO-answer
The current methods of bacterial and fungal monitoring on methodology. T0 fairly identify and provide a screening pro-
the ISS depend on the culturing of microorganisms during cess for additional hardware that may be able to meet the
spaceﬂight and subsequent ground-based identiﬁcation. This needs of microbial monitoring during ﬂight, a testing rnatriX
approach requires substantial crew time and uses perishable was developed during initia1testing for further evaluations of
consumables that require frequent resupply because of short eXisting commercial technology and the identiﬁcation of
shelf lives. These resource requirements in combination with additional requirements to be used during a competitive pro-
sample collection and analytical constraints limit rapid posal process.
responses to microbial contamination when detected. In addition to rnolecular-based identiﬁcation methods,
Furthermore, sample return and ground-based identiﬁcation NASA is also investigating simple portable systems for
will not be an Option during future 10ng-terrn missions. microbial monitoring. For example,techn010gy utilizing gold
Previous environmental monitoring using traditional culture- nanoparticles for the detection of medically signiﬁcant micro-
based monitoring methods has resulted in an understanding organisms is of interest because gold nanoparticles have seV-
0f the culturable microbiota 0f the spacecraft, but this only era1 properties, e.g. high stability, low toxicity, and photonic
represents a small percentage of the extant microbial commu- properties, that support their use in biodetection applications
nity. As we move farther away from Earth and deeper into for crewed habitats in space (50). The absorption of light is
the frontier of space, the development of new microbial correlated to nanoparticle size, and therefore, the reﬂected
monitoring technologies aimed at detecting, quantifying, and color of the nanoparticles changes as a result of the size of the
identifying the presence of target organisms of interest will particle and/or aggregation of particles. In addition to their
become increasingly important. optical properties, gold nanoparticles can be functionalized
As human spaceﬂight moves beyond a 10w-Earth orbit for by the covalent attachment of various biornolecules. The
extended periods of time, the ability to monitor microbial functionalization process has provided targeted delivery of
contamination in-ﬂight is just as critical as the need to rapidly these nanoparticles to numerous cell types, increased their
detect, diagnose, and treat infectious diseases. NASA is detection by bioirnaging, and improved their utility for gene
currently working to deﬁne eXisting and develop new micro— and drug delivery for multiple therapeutic and diagnostic
bia1 detection methods that will provide spaceﬂight crews applications (10). The sensitiVity and speciﬁcity of the assay
with a rapid, simple, and an autonomous means of detecting is dependent on the use of different ligands (116., passivating
microorganisms in the spaceﬂight environment, thereby molecules) on the surface of the gold clusters. While the
mitigating microbial risks to both crew and craft. Subject physical chemical nature of the passivating layer is normally
matter experts from industry and academia, in cooperation to simply stabilize the gold core, an appropriate modiﬁcation
with NASA microbiologists, generated a list of recornrnen- of this layer can lead to “sensing” of particular functional
Copyright 2014 by Japanese Society of Microbial Ecology / Japanese Society of Soil Microbiology / Taiwan Society of Microbial Ecology

"
"9","Microbial Monitoring ofa Space Habitat 9
groups on the target. Therefore, gold nanoparticles function- microchips [Fig. 5]) or capillaries are powerful tools for
alized by the conjugation of a ligand can serve as chrorno- “on-chip” ﬂuorescent staining and enumeration of targeted
genic biosensors in which binding of the target to the ligand microbial cells in any sample that can be ﬂuidized (62).
results in the agglomeration of nanoparticles and a red—to- Microchip—based analyses are faster, can be performed on
purple shift. very small sample scales, and consume less sample and

In proof—of—concept studies of the gold nanoparticle reagent volumes than conventional approaches (5).
approach, NASA researchers are developing a biodetection Furthermore, microﬂuidic deVices can reduce the biohazard
system to detect S. aureus, a common infectious agent that risk because cells are analyzed in a closed system using dis-
has been repeatedly isolated aboard the 18$ (10, 40). Gold posable components or deVices that can be easily cleaned
nanoparticles have been modiﬁed by the covalent attachment of contaminants and sterilized after each use. Therefore,
of an antibody that has a high binding afﬁnity for a protein microﬂuidic deVices in various forms have been used to
on the cell wall of S. aureus. Data from preliminary testing miniaturize ﬂow cytometers (on-chip ﬂow cytometry [19, 21,
of the gold nanoparticle biodetection system has shown that 43, 56]). However, most of these microﬂuidic deVices were
S. aureus could be detected in a sample in as quickly as 10 developed to entrap or analyze the characteristics of targeted
min. The system, as constructed, was speciﬁc to S. aureus, ce11s rather than to determine cell numbers by a simple pro-
as other bacteria assessed during the studies were not bound cedure. A new microﬂuidic system was recently developed to
by the nanoparticles, and the binding of S. aureus was not count total bacteria and harmful bacteria without extensive
affected by the presence of other microorganisms in the sample preparation steps such as sample concentration or the
sample. These initial investigations have shown that a simple pre-staining of bacterial cells (Fig. 5).
system capable of rapidly detecting a low-density target This new system has been applied to count bacterial cells
pathogen in a complex environment using simple to interpret in potable water. Bacteria in potable water samples were
colorimetric indication is feasible. The development and stained“on-chip”with the DNA—staining dye (4',6-diarnidino-
validation of this system is ongoing. 2-pheny1indole [DAPI]) and counted in a microﬂuidic system

Culture-independent techniques using direct ﬂuorescent for direct comparisons against bacterial enurneration deter-
staining are also effective for the rapid detection of microbes. mined by ﬂuorescence microscopy (62). The ratios of the
However, these methods are often labor intensive and cell microﬂuidic counts to microscopic counts were 73% in puri-
concentration steps or large sample volumes are required to ﬂed household tap water and 80% in groundwater samples.
obtain reliable results when samples contain low numbers of The microﬂuidic system can detect bacterial cells in potable
target bacteria. Flow cytometry is an effective alternative to freshwater within one hour and the system enables the rapid
ﬂuorescence microscopy because the procedure is rapid and detection of signiﬁcant increases in bacterial numbers in
sensitive. However, ﬂow cytometers are often complex and water samples, a critical requirement for the routine evalua-
sometimes require skilled operators for their operation, rnain- tion of microbiological water quality on orbit.
tenance, and analytical interpretation. Therefore, a simpler JAXA is now developing a portable microﬂuidic system
and smaller system should be more useful for “on-board” for “real-tirne” and “on-board” microbial monitoring. This
counting of targeted microorganisms in a space habitat. system will contribute to safe and sustainable long-duration

Microﬂuidic systems that use microﬂuidic channels (e.g., space habitation. In addition, these rapid microbiological

Detecting part Mixing part
4—} 4—?
Inlet C for sheath
Inlet A for sample
_!_!‘!__ I
- .1.‘ ‘-
@ II. ‘ Bfordye
‘|_.'___h
(iii) (ii) (i)
bacteria
#
Flow
Fig. 5. Details of the microﬂuidic device for on-chip staining and counting of bacterial cells (size: 5 cm X 2.5 cm). (i) Samples and ﬂuorescent dye
solution ﬂow separately and are then mixed through the “mixing part” of the microchannel. (ii) Alignment of sample ﬂow by sheath ﬂuid. (iii) Flow
of bacterial cells in the “detecting part” of the microchannel.
Copyright 2014 by J apanese Society of Microbial Ecology / J apanese Society of Soil Microbiology / Taiwan Society of Microbial Ecology

"
"10","10 YAMAGUCHI et al.
systems Will not require the cultivation of potentially patho— 11- ChOPYa, V» A-A- Fadl, J. Sha, 51- ChOPYa, C-L- Galindo, and AK-
g eni C microbes in the closed 6 C 01 O gical system Of the space- Chopra. 2006. Alterations in the Virulence potential of enteric patho-
. . . . gens and bacterial-host cell interactions under simulated microgravity
Craft and W111 ehahle the Tapld geheraheh 0f hlghly aeeurate conditions. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health A. 69:1345—1370.
results. In addition to their application in space, these meth- 12. Ciferi, 0., O. Tiboni, AM. Orlandoni, and ML. Marchesi. 1988. The
ods can be used in various industries such as pharmaceutical effzegtsgfItheIrCErany 0h ggliftilc) r69§?3i;1a]t3ipn ithsegeriehliabCSllia
- - - _ _ - _ p. — .n . 0ng0n,an . aV1 e.,10rac 0n pacea :
manilfacturihg, f0.0d prqductlori, and as pOlnt Of care dlag An Overview of the First Flight of Biorack, an ESA Facility for Life
HOSUC teChmqueS m Chmcal settings. Sciences Research in Microgravity. ESA Publishing Division,
Noordwijk.
. “ . . . . 13. Crabbe, A., P. de Boever, R. Van Houdt, H. Moors, M. Mergeay,
F “m’” 3 Per spectlve 0f enVlronmenml mlc’mbw’ogy m and P. Cornelis. 2008. Use of the rotating wall vessel technology to
crewed habitats in space” study the effect of shear stress on growth behaviour of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa PA01. Environ. Microbiol. 10:2098—2110.
AS deﬁned by the roadmaps of each space agency9 indoor 14. Crabbe, A., B. Pycke, R. Van Houdt, P. Monsieurs, C. Nickerson, N.
environmental quality control is critical in order to reduce Leys, and P- comehS- 2010- ReSPOHSC .Of Pseudomonas aerugm?”
. . . . PAOl to low shear modelled mlcrograVIty mvolves AlgU regulatlon.
potential hazards for the crew and vehicle. On-gomg micro- Environ. Microbiol. 12:1545—1564.
biological monitoring in the ISS mUSt be continued, 15. Crabbe, A., M.J. Schurr, P. Monsieurs, et al. 2011. Transcriptional
improved, and expanded to accumulate original data on and proteomjc responses ofPseudOWQnaS aeruginOSa PAOl t0 Spaee-
microbial dynamics in the space station environment, and ﬂ1ght conchtlons 1hvolve qu regulatlon and reveal a role for oxygen.
. . . . . . . Appl. EnV1r0n. Mlcroblol. 77:1221—1230.
m101‘0b1al .Spaceﬂight experiments to predlCt microbial 16. Crabbe, A., S.M. Nielsen-Preiss, CM. Woolley, et al. 2013.
dynamics In CICWCd habltatS 1D space ShOUld be pl‘OInOted. Spaceﬂight enhances cell aggregation and random budding in
Evaluating data on microbial community dynamics in the ISS Candida albicanS- PLOS ONE 81e80667—e80700- .
C an be promoted by formally sharing currently C Ollected 17. Dormhayr-Pfaffenhuemer, M., A. Legat, K. SchWImbersky, S.
. . . . . Fendrlhan, and H. Stan-Lotter. 2011. Responses of haloarchaea to
information among the international partners, then deﬁning simulated microgravity. Astrobiology11:199—205.
and verifying a common standardization of the protocols for 18. Fang, A., D.L. Pierson, S.K. Mishra, D.W. Koenig, and AL. Demain.
microbiological monitoring in the space station environment 1997_- Grc'élmieiﬁh S Elfefhgefeggyzlgzcillus brews ih Simulated miere-
- - - - graV1ty. urr. 1C1‘O 10 . : — .
for fun“? m,0mt0“ng° Wlth better data Sharmg and pmtOCOl 19. Fu, A.Y., H.P. Chou, C. Spence, F.H. Arnold, and SR. Quake. 2002.
Standardlzatlono we can deﬁne upper and lower :[hreShOIdS for An integrated microfabricated cell sorter. Anal. Chem. 74:2451—2457.
the indoor environmental quality control of air, water, and 20. Gao, Z., G.I. Perez-Perez, Y. Chen, and M.J. Blaser. 2010.
surfaces in space habitats. Quantitatioh of inajoi human cutaneous bacterial and fungal popula-
tlons. J . C1111. Mlcroblol. 48:3575—3581.
21. Gawad, S., L. Schild, and P. Renaud. 2001. Micromachined imped-
References ance spectroscopy ﬂow cytometer for cell analysis and particle sizing.
_ Lab Chip. 1:76—82.

1- Allen, C.A., C..L Galmdo, U- Pantiye, D-A- Watson, A-K- Chopra, 22. Grice, E.A., and J.A. Segre. 2011. The skin microbiome. Nat. Rev.
and D.W. Nlesel. 2006. Transcrlptlon proﬁles of Streptococcus Microbiol. 9:244_253_
pneumoniae grown under different conditions of normal gravitation. 23_ Homeck, G., D.M. Klaus, and R.L. Mancinelli. 2010 Space micro-
Acta Astronautlca 601683-444- biology. Microbiol. M01. Biol. Rev. 74:121—156.

2- Allen, C.A., D-W- N16361: and AC1.Torres. 200$- The. effects 0f 24. Ichijo, T., H. Hieda, R. Ishihara, N. Yamaguchi, and M. Nasu. 2013.
low-shear stress 0“ adherent-mvaswe Escherzchza 001‘- EnV1ron. Bacterial monitoring with adhesive sheet in the International Space
MICYObIOI- 1031512—1525- _ _ Station-“Kibo”, the Japanese Experiment Module. Microbes Environ.

3. Altenburg, S.D., S.M. Nlelsen-Prelss, and LE. Hyman. 2008. 28:264—268.

Increased ﬁlamentous growth of Candida albicans in simulated 25_ Kacena, M.A., GA. Merrell, B. Manfredi’ E.E. Smith, D.M. Klaus,
mlcrograwty. Genom. Proteom. Blomform. 6342—50 _ _ and P. Todd. 1999. Bacterial growth in space ﬂight: logistic growth

4- Baker, P-W» and L- Leff. 2004- The effect O_f Shhhlaied micrograVlty curve parameters for Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis. Appl.
011 bacterla from the Mn space statlon. MlcrograV1ty $01 Technol. Microbiol.Bi0techn01. 51:229_234_

15335—41- _ 26. Klaus, D., S. Simske, P. Todd, and L. Stodieck. 1997. Investigation of

5- Blankenstem, G.,.and U-D- Larsen. 1998- Modular COhCe‘Pt Of a space ﬂight effects on Escherichia coli and a proposed model of
laboratory on a Chlp for chemlcal and blochemlcal analy31s. Blosens. underlying physical mechanisms. Microbiol. 143:449_455_
Bloelectron. 133427—438 _ _ _ 27. Klaus, D.M. 2001. Clinostats and bioreactors. Gravit. Space Biol.

6. Borchers, A.T., C.L. Keen, and M.E. Gershwm. 2002. MlcrograV1ty Bull. 14:55—64.
and immune responsiveness: Imphcatlons for space travel. Nutrltlon. 28. Klemparskaya, N.N. 1964. Effect of the conditions of cosmic ﬂight on
183889—898 _ 9 _ the dissociation ofEscherichia coli. Artif. Earth Satell. 15:106—110.

7- Carvalho, H-M-, L.D.Tee1, G- Gopmg, and A-D- O Brlen. 2005- A 29. Lawal, A., O.A. Jejelowo, and J .A. Rosenzweig, 2010. The effects of
three-dlmensmnal tissue culture model f0? the StUdY 0f attach ahd low-shear mechanicalstress 0n Yersiniapestis Virulence. Astrobiology
efface 1e310n formatlon by enteropathogemc and enterohaemorrhaglc 10:881—88 8.

Escherichia 00111Cell-Mlcroblol-711771-1781 30. Lynch, S.V., E.L. Brodie, and A. Matin. 2004. Role and regulation

8- Castro, S.L., _M- Nelman-Gonza1ez, C-A- Nlcherson, and C-M- Ott- of OS in general resistance conferred by low-shear simulated micro-
2011. Inductlon 0f attachment-mdependent bloﬂlm formatlon and gravity in Escherichia coli. J_ Bacteriol. 186:8207—8212.
repression 0f qu expression _ by 10w-ﬂ111d-shear culture 0f 31. Lynch, S.V., K. Mukundakrishnan, M.R. Benoit, P.S. Ayyaswamy,
Staphylococcus 61W eus - APPI- EthrOh- MlcmblOl- 7736368—6378- and A. Matin. 2006. Escherichia coli bioﬁlms formed under low-shear

9- C331“), Y-A-a _A--N Thrasher, M.Hea1y, C-M- 0“: and _D-L- Plerson. modeled microgravity in a ground-based system. Appl. Environ.
2004. Mlcroblal characterlzatlon durmg the early habltatlon 0f the Microbiol. 72:7701_7710_

International Space Statlon. Mlcrob. ECOI- 473119—126 _ _ _ 32. McLean, R.J., J .M. Cassanto, M.B. Barnes, and H.K. Joseph. 2001.
10- Chan, P.H., and Y-C- Cheh- 2012; Human serum albumm stablhzed Bacterial bioﬁlm formation under microgravity conditions. FEMS
gold nanoclusters as selectlve lummescent probes for Staphylococcus Microbiol. Lett. 195:115_119_
aureus and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Anal. Chem.
84:8952—8956.
Copyright 2014 by J apanese Society of Microbial Ecology / J apanese Society of Soil Microbiology / Taiwan Society of Microbial Ecology

"
"11","Micmbial Monitoring ofa Space Habitat 11
33. Miyajima, Y., K. Satoh, T. Uchida, T. Yamada, M. Abe, S. Watanabe, 48. Sugita, T., E. Zhang, T. Tanaka, A. Nishikawa, M. Tajima, and R.
M. Makimura, and K. Makimura. 2013. Rapid real-time diagnostic Tsuboi. 2013. Recent advances in research on Malassezia microbiota
PCR for T richophyton rubrum and T richophyton mentagrophytes in in humans. Med. Mycol. J . 54:39—44.
patients with tinea unguiurn and tinea pedis using speciﬁc ﬂuorescent 49. Taylor, GR. 1974. Space microbiology. Annu. Rev. Microbiol.
probes. J. Dermatol. Sci. 69:229—235. 28:121—137.

34. Nauman, E.A., C.M. Ott, E. Sander, D.L. Tucker, D. Pierson, J.W. 50. Tiwari, P.M., K. Vig, VA. Dennis, and SR. Singh. 2011.
Wilson, and CA. Nickerson. 2007. Novel quantitative biosystern for Functionalized gold nanoparticles and their biomedical applications.
modeling physiological ﬂuid shear stress on cells. Appl. Environ. Nanomaterials 1:31—63.

Microbiol. 73:699—705. 51. Tixador, R., G. Richoilley, G. Gasset, er al. 1985. Preliminary results

35. Nickerson, C.A., C.M. Ott, S.J. Mister, B.J. Morrow, L. Burns— onytos2 experiment.ActaAstronautica12:131—134.

Keliher, and D.L. Pierson. 2000. MicrograVity as a novel environ- 52. Tucker, D.L., C.M. Ott, S. Huff, Y. Fofanov, D.L. Pierson, R.C.
mental signal affecting Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium Willson, and GE. FOX. 2007. Characterization of Escherichia coli
Virulence. Infect. Immun. 68:3147—3152. MG1655 grown in a low-shear modeled microgravity environment.

36. Nickerson, C.A., C.M. Ott, J.W. Wilson, R. Ramamurthy, and D.L. BMC Microbiol. 7:15—30.

Pierson. 2004. Microbial responses to microgravity and other low- 53. Venkateswaran, K., M.T. La Due, and G. Horneck. 2014. Microbial
shear environments. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 68:345—361. existence in controlled habitats and their resistance to space condi-

37. Novikova, ND. 2004. Review of the knowledge of microbial tions. Microbes Environ. in press.
contamination of the Russian manned spacecraft. Microb. Ecol. 54. Vukanti, R., E. Mintz, and L. Leff. 2008. Changes in gene expression
47: 127—132. of E. 0011' under conditions of modeled reduced gravity. MicrograVity

38. Ott, M., D. Pierson, M. Shirakawa, F. Tanigaki, M. Hida, T. Sci. Technol. 20:41—57.

Yamazaki, T. Shimazu, and N. Ishioka. 2014. Space habitation and 55. Vukanti, R., MA. Model, and LG. Leff. 2012. Effect of modeled
microbiology: status and roadmap of space agencies. Microbes reduced gravity conditions on bacterial morphology and physiology.
Environ. in press. BMC Microbiol. 12:4—14.

39. Pierson, D., D.J. Botkin, R.J. Bruce, VA. Castro, M.J. Smith, C.M. 56. Wang, Z., J. El-Ali, M. Engelund, T. Gotsaed, LR. Perch-Nielsen,
Oubre, and C.M. Ott. 2012. MicrobialMonitoring 0f the International K.B. Mogensen, D. Snakenborg, J.P. Kutter, and A. Wolff. 2004.
Space Station, p. 1—27. In J . Moldenhauer (ed.), Environmental Measurements of scattered light on a microchip ﬂow cytometer with
Monitoring: A Comprehensive Handbook. DHI Publishing, River integrated polymer based opticalelements. Lab Chip. 4:372—377.
Grove. 57. Wilson, J .W., C.M. Ott, R. Ramamurthy, S. Porwollik, M.

40. Pierson, D.L., M. Chidambaram, J .D. Heath, L. Mallary, S.K. McClelland, D.L. Pierson, and CA. Nickerson. 2002. Low-Shear
Mishra, B. Sharma, and GM. Weinstock. 1996. Epidemiology of modeled microgravity alters the Salmonella enterica serovar
Staphylococcus aureus during space ﬂight. FEMS Immunol. Med. Typhimurium stress response in an RpoS-independent manner. Appl.
Microbiol. 16:273—281. Environ. Microbiol. 68:5408—5416.

41. PureVdorj-Gage,B.,K.B. Sheehan, and L.E. Hyman. 2006. Effects of 58. Wilson, J.W., R. Ramamurthy, S. Porwollik, M. McClelland, T.
low-shear modeled microgravity on cell function, gene expression, Hammond, P. Allen, C.M. Ott, D.L. Pierson, and CA. Nickerson.
and phenotype in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl. Environ. 2002. Microarray analysis identiﬁes Salmonella genes belonging to
Microbiol. 72:4569—4575. the low-shear modeled microgravity regulon. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.

42. Rosado, H., M. Doyle, P.W. Taylor, and J. Hinds. 2009. Low-shear U.S.A. 99:13807—13812.
modelled microgravity alters expression of Virulence determinants of 59. Wilson, J .W., C.M. Ott, K. Honer zu Bentrup, er al. 2007. Space ﬂight
Staphylococcus aureus. Acta Astronautica 66:408—413. alters bacterial gene expression and Virulence and reveals a role for

43. Sakamoto, C., N. Yamaguchi, and M. Nasu. 2005. Rapid and simple global regulator qu. Proc.Nat1. Acad. Sci. USA. 104:16299—16304.
quantiﬁcation of bacterial cells by using a microﬂuidic device. Appl. 60. Wilson, J .W., C.M. Ott, L. Quick, 61‘ al. 2008. Media ion composition
Environ. Microbiol. 71:1117—1121. controls regulatory and Virulence response of Salmonella in space-

44. Sancho, L.G., R. de la Torre, G. Horneck, C. Ascaso, A. de Los Rios, ﬂight. PLOS ONE. 3:e3923—e3932.

A. Pintado, J . Wierzchos, and M. Schuster. 2007. Lichens survive in 61. Yamaguchi, N., H. Hieda, and M. Nasu. 2010. Simple and reliable
space: results from the 2005 LICHENS experiment. Astrobiology swabbing procedure for monitoring microbes in the International
7:443—454. Space Station. Eco Eng. 22:27—30.

45. Satoh, K., Y. Nishiyama, T. Yamazaki, T. Sugita, Y. Tsukii, K. 62. Yamaguchi, N., M. Torii, Y. Uebayashi, and M. Nasu. 2011. Rapid,
Takatori, Y. Bermo, and K. Makimura. 2011. Microbe-I: fungal biota semiautomated quantiﬁcation of bacterial cells in freshwater by using
analyses of the Japanese experimental module KIBO 0f the a microﬂuidic device for on-ship staining and counting. Appl.
International Space Station before launch and after being in orbit for Environ. Microbiol. 77:1536—1539.
about 460 days. Microbiol. Immunol. 55:823—829. 63. Zhukov-Verezhnikov, N.N., I.N. Mayskiy, V.I. Yazdovskiy, AP.

46. Schiwon, K., K. Arends, KM. Rogowski, S. Fiirch, K. Prescha, Pekhov, N.I. Rybakov, AA. Gyurdzhian, and V.V. Antipov. 1962.
T. Sakinc, R. Van Houdt, G. Werner, and E. Grohmann. 2013. Microbiological and cytological studies on spaceships.Pr0b1. Space
Comparison of antibiotic resistance, bioﬁlm formation and con- Biol. 2:148—155.
jugative transfer of Staphylococcus and Enterococcus isolates from 64. Zhukov-Verezhnikov, N.N., I.N. Mayskiy, V.I. Yazdovskiy, er al.
International Space Station and Antarctic research station Concordia. 1963. Problems of space microbiology and cytology. Probl. Space
Microb. Ecol. 65:638—651. Biol. 1:133—155.

47. Searles, S.C., C.M. Woolley, RA. Petersen, L.E. Hyman, and S.M.

Nielsen-Preiss. 2011. Modeled microgravity increases ﬂlamentation,
bioﬁlm formation, phenotypic switching, and antimicrobial resistance
in Candida albicans. Astrobiology 11:825—836.
Copyright 2014 by J apanese Society of Microbial Ecology / J apanese Society of Soil Microbiology / Taiwan Society of Microbial Ecology

"
