"","x"
"1","AIAA 2015-4582
SPACE Conferences &amp; Exposition
31 Aug-2 Sep 2015, Pasadena, California
AIAA SPACE 2015 Conference and Exposition
Rapld Access: Dream Chaser® Spacecraft Space Trafﬁc
Management and Operatlons to Enable Near-Immedlate
Payload Access for Responswe M1ss10n and Payload Support
Christopher J Allison1 and Frank W. Taylor 2
Sierra Nevada Corporation — Space Systems, I 722 Boxelder St, Louisville, CO 80027
As research institutions all over the world are placing a higher value on space—based
g science, the need for rapid access to vehicles returning from space carrying experiments
:1 grows more important. One of the challenges of enhanced science utilization is rapid access
é to space vehicles post-llight, Which is signiﬁcantly enabled by effective space trafﬁc
E management and integration of space operations into a mature commercial aviation system
3% to achieve radically improved orbit t0 researcher timelines. Sierra Nevada Corporation’s
E (SNC) Space Systems’ Dream Chaser® reusable spacecraft is designed for multiple
8 applications including cargo and/or crew resupply t0 the International Space Station and
g independent long duration science missions. The Dream Chaser is an optionally-piloted,
g reusable lifting-body spacecraft that lands horizontally on a runway, similar to the Space
g Shuttle. Unlike the Space Shuttle, the Dream Chaser design supports the unique capability
i of being able to land at many domestic and international commercial and public-use
E airports, and offers access to cargo and/or crew almost immediately thereafter. Though this
Q capability presents a unique opportunity for researchers in the ﬁeld of microgravity science,
2» there are challenges When considering the current landscape of regulation, public risk, and
E autonomous ﬂight. The potential opportunities associated With landing the Dream Chaser at
E public-use airports to enable globally convenient and rapid access to crew, cargo, and time
312‘ critical microgravity experiments post-ﬂight are identiﬁed and addressed in this paper.
Q
52
E
g Nomenclature
<2) AR = Atlantic Routes
% AST = Ofﬁce Of Commercial Space
% ATC = Air Trafﬁc Control
% ATO = Air Trafﬁc Organization
‘2 CM = Cargo Module
i CRS2 = Commercial Resupply Services Phase 2
i DLR = German Aerospace Center
""g E0 = Expected Casualty
E FAA = Federal Aviation Administration
E FCC = Federal Communications Commission
9 FFDP = Final Flight Data Package
FSE = Flight Support Equipment
FSS = Flight Safety System
FTS = Flight Termination System
GS = Ground Systems
GSE = Ground Support Equipment
ICAO = International Civil Aviation Organization
188 = International Space Station
ITAR = International Trafﬁc in Arms Regulations
1 Systems Engineer — Space Exploration Systems, Christopher.allison@sncogp.com, AIAA Member
2 Director Of Technology — Space Exploration Systems, frank.tay10r@sncogp.com, AIAA Member
1
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics
© 2015 Sierra Nevada Corporation
Copyright © 2015 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. The US. Government has a royalty-free license to exercise all rights under the copyright claimed herein for Governmental purposes.

"
"2","kias = knots indicated airspeed
KSC = Kennedy Space Center
LEO = LOW Earth Orbit
LOAs = Letters of Agreement
LS = Launch Systems
MSL = Mean Sea Level
NAS = National Airspace System
11m = Nautical Mile
NPRM = Notice of Proposed Rule Making
NTIA = National Telecommunications and Information Administration
RCS = Reaction Control System
RLV = Reusable Launch Vehicle
N RSO = Range Safety Ofﬁce
E SLF = Shuttle Landing Facility
2' SNC = Sierra Nevada Corporation
S STM = Space Trafﬁc Management
a UAB = University of Alabama Birmingham
g VAFB = Vandenberg Air Force Base
25
g) I. Introduction
g The Sierra Nevada Corporation (SNC) Dream Chaser® is a unique, optionally-piloted, reusable lifting body
g spacecraft designed to carry up to seven crew members and/or cargo to and from lOW Earth orbit (LEO),
i; including the International Space Station (188). The cargo design is capable of 10 days Of independent ﬂight With
E docking stays at the 188 Of up to 45 days.
3 The Dream Chaser does not use any hazardous materials for operation; therefore, the spacecraft can land on any
2, suitable runway around the world Without requiring specialized equipment. Unlike the Space Shuttle Orbiters, Which
:3 required a signiﬁcantly longer runway—generally between 12,000 feet to 15,000 feet—the Dream Chaser can land
""0% on a compatible runway that meets the minimum length (10,000 feet/3,050 meters long) and desired Width (150
E“ feet/46 meters) requirements. This capability Opens the door to broader landing locations and Opportunities for
g space-based science to be more accessible post ﬂight. Furthermore, by using all n0n-t0Xie ﬂuid consumables,
é including propellants, the Dream Chaser allows for near immediate access to cargo post landing.
% Currently, the Dream Chaser is the only reusable, lifting body spacecraft capable of landing on commercial
a runways around the world. This capability does not come Without challenges. Although the Dream Chaser can land
if anywhere that is compatible, problems With National Airspace System (NAS) integration and Space Trafﬁc
2 Management (STM) need to be considered. Integration into the NAS is currently a limiting factor for spacecraft
8 reentering Closer to the laboratories that process the science. Better integration would allow for fewer handoffs of
E the science and runs a lower risk of contaminating or damaging an experiment during transportation.
Q Industry leaders indicate that the drivers for early access and a benign reentry environment are as follows:
E 0 To prevent reversion of any Changes induced in samples in microgravity upon return to a 1-g environment
5‘ 0 To reduce changes to preserved samples (particularly frozen samples) from thawing or being damaged
3: before they can be retrieved from carriers
ED 0 To minimize the time spacecraft systems sustain live specimens, causing degradation or stress to the
5 samples
0 To get samples as close to the laboratory as possible to allow preparation With a minimum of other
transportation and handling steps often required to get specimens to the scientists
0 To avoid salt water intrusion damage to science that can occur With water landings
The process of getting the experiment from a reentry vehicle to the laboratory is addressed by a comment from
University of Alabama Birmingham (UAB) Professor, Dr. Lawrence Delueas: “A protein crystal is like an ordered
jelly,” DeLueas said. “If you touch it, it Will just fall apart.” These samples are ferried to Illinois in a cooler, Which
rides With the engineers on a commercial ﬂight.” I A paper outlining Bioserve-sponsored ﬂights comments that they
need access to the experiments post ﬂight in less than 2 h0urs2. The Dream Chaser provides a solution to both the
problems for rapid post ﬂight access and the extensive transportation process required to get science back to the
laboratory.
2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
© 2015 Sierra Nevada Corporation

"
"3","Another advantage of the lifting body design of the Dream Chaser is the reduced reentry loads, Which are on the
order of 1.5 gs or less. The gentle reentry helps preserve sensitive scientiﬁc payloads and provides a benign
environment for return. Many of the cargo return solutions being used today are capsule designs. The reentry
environment for a capsule is normally 5-6 gs, and in an off—norninal ballistic reentry can reach as much as 10-20 gs.
Because there is limited capability to return experiments in a low-G environment and support rapid post ﬂight
access, some experiment requirements are not met or results obtained are not valid. Other problems With current
reentry systems such as potential exposure to salt water and other contaminants from ocean landings or time to
experiment retrieval can lead to damaged experiments or dismissed results.

This paper outlines the current regulatory scheme and beneﬁts of tackling the challenges and seizing the
opportunities of integrating the Dream Chaser into the NAS With more efﬁcient STM, limiting post ﬂight
transportation, and providing rapid access of space-based science to the research community.

N 11. Dream Chaser Overview
Er: SNC is currently developing the Dream Chaser Cargo System to ferry cargo to LEO and both dispose of and
§ return material from space. The Dream Chaser is intended to provide timely, ﬂexible, and reliable access to
g destinations in LEO, including a broad range of missions that offer satellite servicing, microgravity research,
if technology demonstrations, and testing, Earth observation, active debris removal, and a host of other applications.
$ The Dream Chaser Cargo System has the beneﬁt of being “launch vehicle agnostic”, affording multiple launch
(2 options that provide ﬂexible, reliable, affordable, and environmentally safe launch capabilities. Figure 1 shows the
g interchangeable conﬁguration between the Atlas V and Ariane 5 launch vehicles.
3 A. Dream Chaser Cargo System
i; SNC developed the Dream Chaser Cargo System architecture to best meet the needs of NASA on Commercial
3 Resupply Services Phase 2 (CRSZ) by providing a high performance system satisfying two primary goals: 1)
g provide a consistent cargo delivery service that minimizes the number of required cargo delivery ﬂights to the ISS
2.x per year thus reducing ISS crew workload and simplifying cargo logistics planning; 2) provide rapid, safe cargo
E return and disposal to serve the science community.
E These goals were met by creating an architecture that uses a mature, safe, reusable spacecraft, the uncrewed
é“ Dream Chaser, coupled With a simple, expendable delivery and disposal Cargo Module (CM). The spacecraft, Which
8 is comprised of the integrated uncrewed Dream Chaser and CM and launches on either an Atlas V (the Dream
E3 Chaser Cargo System baseline) or alternate launch vehicle, is designed to carry a maximum of 5,500 kg of total
% cargo, composed of up to 5,000 kg of pressurized cargo and up to
CS 1,500 kg of unpressurized cargo. Precious, perishable scientiﬁc cargo
E is returned rapidly and gently With a low-g entry and runway landing
2 at the Shuttle Landing Facility (SLF) located at Kennedy Space Center ‘ ’
8 (KSC) or other spaceport/airport locations. The unscrewed Dream 5‘
E Chaser uses only non-toxic ﬂuid commodities, including propellants, ~.;:
:5 enabling rapid cargo access upon touchdown. I /' \
<2: The Dream Chaser Cargo System architecture is comprised of four l l
3 major elements: the uncrewed Dream Chaser, CM, Launch Systems ‘ j‘
E (LS), and Ground Systems (GS). The spacecraft travels to the 18$, 3
Li delivers pressurized and unpressurized cargo, and returns carrying
g: pressurized and unpressurized cargo. The uncrewed Dream Chaser
provides pressurized upmass and both standard and accelerated return
downmass capability, While the CM hosts both pressurized and I
unpressurized cargo upmass and provides disposal for both. The LS
are comprised of the launch vehicle, launch sites, and associated cargo
integration and operation components. The GS element consists of the
processing and operations facilities, ground support equipment (GSE), '1 ‘_ ,
ﬂight support equipment (FSE), and support personnel required for "":2
Dream Chaser Cargo System operations, maintenance, and pre-launch l a 6 a
and post-landing activities that all nominally occur at or near KSC. Ariane 5
Figure 2 gives a high-level look at Dream Chaser Cargo System Atlas V
elements and the concept of operations. Figure 1. The interchangeable launch
conﬁgurations of the Dream Chaser
3 Cargo System.
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
© 2015 Sierra Nevada Corporation

"
"4","f g7""; .‘ r ""-‘fvri;-'r‘:"" r
r' -‘ .u «:14» . \m
m ,
. ' \ZZ/I ‘ 9» > I: a 2. "":1“
,/’i t ‘4.""\ a. I:
4 _ y i . 4°; \ .3
.\ ‘f‘;
’1 / ﬂu. .
, Mlsslon Flexlblllty: 10+ day on-orblt Iolter for Disposal \\1
pre-docking checks and phasing a "" s
I Mission Capability: Propulsion used for I55 0
2 : ‘ dock/undock, deorblt, entry and ISS reboost
r
N
z!) _ , . Rapid Cargo Access “~47 ""‘v
2 «5:44 4 - '5, m . - ,_«
g _.M , ’3 ,. 1-;g’:;\4—,‘[.'~4__ : .. .
K}. 7, (k ‘ Le ‘. 0:. L 'A _. ‘_ .\ -71, 2‘
g ; ‘ﬁ ‘33 ‘ -7 - ‘ _ . _ 7 Ht=~v~ ‘ i ,
<2 Figure 2. Dream Chaser Cargo System launch and reentry concept of operations for an ISS mission.
E
o,
S 111. Dream Chaser Landing Opportunities
ff: The Dream Chaser has frequent deorbit opportunities to landing sites in the United States and internationally
E With the ability to perform runway landings on every orbit during LEO missions (Fig. 3). Thus, experiments could
2 be delivered much closer to the laboratory facilities Where they are analyzed. With this capability for reentry and
S"" landlng operatlons, 1t IS to be expected that the Dream Chaser has faced both opportunltles and challenges W1th
g regard to mission planning. The current regulatory bodies are working very hard to maintain pace With industry
5 While trying not to stiﬂe any one company With over regulation or compliance but maintain balance With public
9% safety.
8
m
E IV. Current Reentry Vehicle and Landing Authorities/Regulations
5 This section outlines the major stakeholders for a U.S.-based operator such as SNC conducting operations both
:3 domestically and internationally and the major elements the Dream Chaser team considers in the mission planning
(”A phase.
z
o
m . .
E .‘x . A .__ .' 4 . .
h - * ' - «1“? ti? "" r : ‘.-.- * * - ' ‘ “-12; 'r:;?7-‘;&<*«$3<£“""2 ~72 -- —
(fat - / - , ,-;““v ',.- _ v‘ o - u _ 'v, I, - \ \ﬁ;v’:.{{,>/t¢;.j -4 -
Z '~ ‘ ' x - .4» >4 wag, 4(qu -4
E \ ,9: ‘ . ~ .- . _, 4 3 ‘4 fgxx. - . .. --
Fo \ ‘ ‘ "" - . ° , . igl-fgg ; . _. ' '
é ,“ ~ 3'14 "" ‘ ~ ’ V *7 A '
.2 7, K ‘ ,_ ' ‘3; \§, "" . . "" ”.7: o
a ' ' . _. ‘. b - . . _, . '. .. ' '
E 1- Rfj""..'.r“ 0“ . v ~
Q ,_‘\7... 0/ \,__.“._4'/."" ‘
> ‘ 1/ n, o ‘ I"" :4 r""
4 . . ‘4' * ./ .0‘ """"'~'/. I .‘ ’ .
.; . 4 ..“"" .,'. ~ , -
44 «:4
. (‘< "" ;-. -."". - .
, ,.
.1 7 -4
_ _—_£:: _ _»;-_ _~_—_ '_,_-,
Figure 3. Dream Chaser Landing Opportunities. A CVOSS-Vange capability of more than 1,000 nmi (distance
illustrated by circles) allows forfrequent landing opportunities on every CONUS overﬂight. The dots (yellow and
reen indicate OSSible Dream Chaser landin or an ISS mission, whereas the ellow dots indicate revious
g P g y P
Shuttle landing and abort locations. 4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
© 2015 Sierra Nevada Corporation

"
"5","A. Domestic Stakeholder Organizations:
As a commercial space provider, SNC is subject to governance mainly by the Federal AViation Administration
(FAA) but for certain operations abide by the authority of the Federal Launch Ranges, Department of State,
Department of Commerce, NASA, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the National
Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA). This section discusses the general approach
commercial companies developing a reentry vehicle follow to seek approval to conduct an operation.
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA): The Ofﬁce of Commercial Space (AST) Within the FAA oversees the
reVieW and licensing of spaee-bound vehicles such as Dream Chaser prior to an operation or operations taking place.
In the current process, work begins years in advance from holding a pre-application meeting to Chart the best
regulatory path forward to submitting and reviewing a license application. The FAA publishes licensing
requirements and guidance for space ﬂight under Title 14 CFR Chapter III. Here, several subehapters and parts eXist
to account for the different types of licensing conditions. All versions of the Dream Chaser would be licensed under
N a Part 435, Reentry of a Reentry Vehicle Other than a Reusable Launch Vehicle (RLV) License. SNC is only
E required to apply for a reentry license as the launch portion of a mission is covered by the launch provider. The
.1"" Dream Chaser, from the launch perspective, is a payload being transported by a launch vehicle, thus the license is
§ held by the launching organization. A key point to be made is that FAA AST licenses of launch and reentry
a activities are different from their counterparts in the FAA that oversee the aircraft industry. Aircraft are certiﬁed at
g the vehicle level, While spacecraft are licensed to conduct a particular operation.
5 In the current process, mission planning begins years in advance of an intended operation. A company’s formal
3 start With the FAA is the pre-applieation meeting Which allows the company to brief their history, planned
93:) operation(s), and timeline. The FAA can then identify any potential pitfalls and Chart an appropriate path forward
a With the company. The company then takes time to further mature the concept and completes the license application.
:5 This can be an iterative process With the FAA With further meetings and Q&A sessions. Once the application is
g submitted, the FAA has a period of 180 days to reVieW and make a determination. Overall, this process takes time,
; consideration, and requires several elements to reach approval. It is the FAA’s duty to protect the unaware public
§ While permitting the commercial space industry to grow.
g Federal Ranges: A Federal Range has a stake if a speciﬁc launch or reentry operation occurs at one of their
ﬁg sites. Dream Chaser missions landing at either the SLF at KSC or Vandenberg Air Force Base (VAFB) require
4% compliance With the Range requirements AFSPCMAN 91-710. In these scenarios, SNC must meet the intent of the
(0”; Range requirements in addition to obtaining the reentry license from the FAA. The tailoring process, too, can take
3‘: years of planning and pre-eoordination between the operating company and the Range.
; Local Site Coordination: Interestingly, there has been a signiﬁcant increase in the number of licensed spaceports
(“3 and sites seeking spaceport licensing in recent years. The Dream Chaser has the ability to land on a runway that
(:3 supports a Boeing 737 or Airbus 320, thus opening opportunity for the Dream Chaser to land at publiC-use airports.
% All of these landing and launch options open commercial space to conducting operations outside the purview of a
% Federal Range.
% As introduced above, non-range site operations are not subject to Federal Range requirements, but the FAA
Q oversight remains. These alternative landing sites each have their own local features, rules of operation, and do not
i necessarily have formal requirements that must be met for reentry activities to take place. Individual landing sites
i have their own unique stakeholders interested in certain aspects of a reentry operation and SNC Will work With the
g site to both identify and develop agreements With those local entities. Letters of Agreement (LOAs) With said
’3 entities are required by the FAA prior to receiving a reentry license.
E Department of State and of Commerce: An export license is needed if the Dream Chaser lands in a foreign
‘3 country. Because the spacecraft is currently International Trafﬁc in Arms Regulations (ITAR) controlled, this is the
jurisdiction of the Department of State. If the deﬁnition of ITAR Changes in the future such that the Dream Chaser is
no longer ITAR controlled, the licensing justiﬁcation would shift to the Department of Commerce.
B. International Stakeholder Organizations
When conducting international operations as a U.S.-based company, the FAA always maintains licensing
jurisdiction, but coordination With local stakeholders is required. This particular subject becomes very difﬁcult to
discuss in general terms as many foreign entities structure their governance of ﬂight and space operations
differently. At a high level, there is a need to coordinate With the International Civil AViation Organization (ICAO),
local air trafﬁc control (ATC), FAA equivalent agencies, and the landing site to develop LOAs. In most cases, many
of these foreign destinations have not developed an equivalent set of FAA licensing requirements and they rely on
our licensing activity With the FAA to cover most of their interests.
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
© 2015 Sierra Nevada Corporation

"
"6","V. Major Elements of Reentry to be Reviewed for Approval

Elements of a reentry application and approval to conduct a reentry operation include such tasks as an
Environmental Review, Risk Analysis, and in the ease of the unerewed Dream Chaser, a Flight Termination or
Flight Safety System (FTS/FSS) determination. As previously mentioned, the Federal Ranges and FAA have the
responsibility to ensure space operations do not put the unaware public at unnecessary risk. It is the operator’s task
to ensure proper data are provided for each of the outline elements to conﬁrm compliance With criteria deﬁned by
the Federal Ranges and FAA. Currently, this process can take a lot of time, and as discussed, many of those Who are
interested in spaee-based science simply cannot or Will not wait that long for results. Often times, experiments are
simply not ﬂown or other means of conducting their science are explored, Which drives business away from
commercial space. The following sections detail three of the major elements reviewed by the stakeholders, but it
should be noted this is not a comprehensive list of all elements required. These particular items are the rnaj or hurdles
to providing rapid access and limited transportation of spaee-based science to laboratories around the world.

3? A. EnvironmentalRevieW
g There are nearly 30 different elements to reVieW in depth for a typical environmental review and the process can
g take up to 18 months. Many elements do not pertain to a reentry vehicle such as the Dream Chaser as SNC is not
if building new infrastructure at an airport or Range and the spacecraft uses non-toxie liquid commodities. This
$ simpliﬁes the environmental reVieW process but does not make the process triVial.
<2 The sonic boom is the major element that requires reVieW. The Dream Chaser returns for landing With an
E airspeed in excess of Mach 5 above 100,000 ft. and signiﬁcantly slows on the ﬂight proﬁle With a landing speed of
g about 200 KIAS. Supersonic ﬂight is generally prohibited over land in the continental U.S., although FAA does
g grant waivers. To determine the acceptability of the proposed landing ﬂight corridor, an analysis must be made of
i; the potential for sonic booms to be heard on the ground. The concern goes beyond humans as the invested parties
i also take into account any sensitive species of animal in the area that would be impacted by large overpressures seen
3 With a sonic boom.
:1 Currently, the FAA does not have speciﬁc guidelines for the level of sonic boom over pressures that are
E acceptable during the approach, and approval depends on problems such as population density and environmental
""g sensitivity of the overﬂight area. This represents a problem the FAA is currently studying and the requirements may
3* change in the coming years. Based on initial analyses, the maximum overpressure of the sonic boorn(s) generated by
g the Dream Chaser during landing is expected to be less than the maximum overpressures generated during a Space
é Shuttle landing.
%
E B. Risk Analysis
g Prior to any operation taking place, any potential risk to the unaware public must be evaluated. Both the Range
2 and FAA require several risk calculations to be conducted. Typically, the Range takes information from an
8 operator’s Final Flight Data Package (FFDP) to plug into their models in order to assess the risk. The FAA requires
g the operator to present a calculation and methodology as part of the application. The FAA runs internal models to
:3 verify the operator calculation. The FAA has publicly available an advisory Circular and ﬂight safety analysis
E handbook for expected casualty (EC) calculations that detail the approach an operator should follow to generate
3 expected casualty. The onus is on the applicant company to supply the calculation to a level of detail that meets the
E FAA’s expectations.
Li An EC calculation takes into account vehicle properties such as debris breakup predictions, failure modes, and
E trajectory in order to calculate an expected public risk of either serious injury or fatality due to a reentry mishap.
Currently, the FAA uses a limit of not to exceed 0.00003 casualties (30X10'6), Which deﬁnes the level to Which the
public is exposed to hazards from the ﬂight. This value is more restrictive than both the Federal Ranges and NASA,
Which have a 100x10""6 EC limit. In a recent Notice of Proposed Rule Making (NPRM), the FAA has recommended
updating their EC limit for both launch and reentry operations to 1X10""4 to be consistent With the other organizations.
They also propose that the calculations be split for both launch and reentry to accommodate more vehicle and
mission types.
C. Flight Termination 0r Safety System (FTS/FSS)

There is the added requirement for an unerewed vehicle to carry an FSS, typically referred to as an FTS because
of the destructive output typically seen. It should be noted that for a reentry vehicle a destructive method is not
required and other approaches may be considered like ﬂight control manipulation or the use of a parachute. In any

6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
© 2015 Sierra Nevada Corporation

"
"7","case, the goal is to terminate thrust and lift in the event the vehicle has gone off its intended trajectory and is putting
the public at increased risk.
Conventional launch and reentry events occur at a Range Where there are many certiﬁed assets used for tracking
a vehicle and commanding an FTS if need. The approach is human-in-the-loop With a Range Safety Ofﬁce (RSO)
Who receives pertinent live vehicle telemetry and makes a terminate decision, if necessary. With this system the
limitation for a reentry vehicle comes from the fact that a termination command can only be sent line of sight to the
vehicle. A typical reentry event occurs half way around the world Where line of sight cannot be established; in fact it
is common for line of sight to not be established for a reentry vehicle until about 400 nautical miles from the
intended landing site. This gives the R80 a very limited amount of time and space to make a decision. If a high
altitude failure occurs that is beyond line of sight, there are limited actions available to the R80 .Those periods of
ﬂight are assessed by risk analysis to ensure the public is not at increased risk.
The space industry is moving toward autonomous FSS, Which would remove the human-in-the-loop and allow
N an independent system onboard the spacecraft to determine the status of the ﬂight and act accordingly. Major
E beneﬁts of an independent system are reduced costs to reenter and more portions of ﬂight are under positive control
”5"" of a FSS in the event something off nominal occurs. Expensive, day of reentry costs of Range assets and personnel
g needed to conduct a reentry can be mitigated. Also, the potential impact areas can be further limited With more FSS
3: coverage - preserving a high level of public safety. An autonomous solution presents some major opportunities but
g does not come Without challenges. Certiﬁcation and reliability of such a system are more difﬁcult to implement, and
5 there is still a negative public perception about haVing a fully autonomous vehicle. Much attention Will be given to
a) an autonomous solution in the coming years, especially as more and more companies are interested in conducting
E operations on a Range site Where the standard tracking and commanding assets for FSSs do not eXist.
i; VI. Integrating Dream Chaser into the National Airspace System (NAS)
9
E
E A. How Is the NAS Deﬁned and Controlled?
3“ Operationally considered, the NAS is deﬁned from zero feet mean sea level (MSL) to 60,000 feet MSL (FL600).
§ Above 18,000 feet MSL (FL180) is Class A airspace, Which is controlled and aircraft are required to be on an
a Instrument Flight Rules ﬂight plan. Several other classes of airspace eXist below Class A that depends on nearby
g airports and terrain. These other classes are described in further detail Within Fig. 4. Certain equipment requirements
(g exist Within different airspace classiﬁcation that allow for air trafﬁc controllers and other aircraft to see one another.
33 Controllers are bound by spacing limits on aircraft in transit, Which is driven by equipment reliability and signal
E latency. These spacing limitations imply there is a ﬁnite number for aircraft allowed in a particular sector at a time,
a Which is an important concept When considering the integration and effects of space trafﬁc on the NAS.
SE
53
% FL 600
(g .
g Alrspace
5‘) CI 'f' t'
<23 aSSI Ica '0“ 18,000' MSL
5‘ (Not To Scale)
8
2?:
.2
E .
o ‘ 4
Q
14,500' MSL
1200' 1,200' 5’57""? 1,200- r"" — ’“~
AGL AGL AGL Nontowered
CIaSS G Nontowered 700' 700' 700' (m- _ ., , airport with
airport with AGL AGL ‘ AGL no instrument
i nstrument r—ﬁ ‘ approach
approach Class G Class G ‘ Class G ..
. . . . . mass G
Figure 4. Deﬁnitions of airspace classiﬁcation in the U7nited States NAS (Credit: FAA)
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
© 2015 Sierra Nevada Corporation

"
"8","Many other divisions within the FAA, such as the Air Trafﬁc Organization (ATO), deal With and coordinate
various elements of commercial air transportation from airports to air trafﬁc controllers. ATO is the operational arm
of the FAA. It is responsible for providing safe and efﬁcient air navigation services to 30.2 million3 square miles of
airspace. This represents more than 17 percent of the world’s airspace and gives awareness to how vast and complex
the NAS can be.

B. Space Trafﬁc Impact to the NAS

In the current scheme, launch and reentry activity can be very impactful 0n the NAS With large areas and time of
airspace closure. These closures are driven by the safety analysis conducted by the FAA and Range to ensure the
safety of aircraft during an operation. For example, consider a launch from the Cape that has a 4—hour launch
Window, the airspace is closed at the start of the Window and then either released after the launch occurs or the
Window is over. When the hazard area is in effect many of the Atlantic Routes (AR) cannot be used by aircraft When

N transiting North and South along the East coast. Much of the trafﬁc is rerouted inland causing a ripple effect across
E the eastern routes pushing trafﬁc further and further inland and off their most optimum routes. Even after the launch
2' activity is complete and the airspace is released it can take the NAS several hours to recover. Another consideration
g is that airliners need to know of reroutes prior to takeoff in order to plan appropriate fuel loads and for possible
3: delays. This is a large integrated problem that presents a few challenges as launch and reentry activities are on the
g rise. FAA initiatives to lower the impact of such activities are discussed later in this paper.
g).
:0 C. Dream Chaser Reentry Operations
‘3 The Dream Chaser reenters the NAS unpowered like the Shuttle Orbiter. This means the spacecraft has one
2% opportunity to land and cannot deviate much from its traj ectory once a deorbit burn has been committed. A Dream
5: Chaser reentry impacts the NAS by having aircraft deviate around potential hazard areas or hold in a trafﬁc pattern
g2 While the Dream Chaser lands. Figure 5 depicts a typical Dream Chaser reentry once the upper limit of the NAS is
E reached.
8“ A reentry begins on—orbit With a deorbit burn, slowing the Dream Chaser to a controlled atmospheric entry. At
3: high altitudes, the control surfaces have no effect due to the lack of air thus a Reaction Control System (RC8) is
2’
EL
£
G
O ., o
E: Maw/M/space Sys tem \Nk$\ “§“\“ >2 >- -
z
E? . - 2 2 _ f 50,000 ft MSL _
35 \K . . - '
m s. ., .- ,
z 3 - 2 2 -
0
C0 J
E f -
2 i '
<1 i i»: 3. Id- ""at; —
m -22, «w. W _ __ ..
< - .I.;’2.2§i2“ - "" ’
z . 22- 2 _ ,
ﬂ 3 . 32.. Yrs??? ’2""
a E . .. -.--.a 34,000 ft MSL 2
L3 “K. .2 . , ,2 _ ‘ '- - . . ' B—V‘l~ ' ’2“ “‘32:
i 7 V 1‘2. 1‘ “.- mk‘VQ"" . .. ”#1 ‘wm‘wﬁlq _‘ . ‘.._ 2~-° .,v'-';.s ‘-;_ s=7f‘2ﬁye. 2
E SW SONiC 2' - i - - 3-7;»: ' *9"" 251*.“ £532) x?%at
- - 2 -z- 2. «31%. J; .2 -.-==-—_ﬁ: ' _- 22 22- » 2— ~ g- .2 F“.
Q FlIghtRegIon , 22 .. 2”... .2 . as
_. 2&9. . \2"" .. Ni; 22.22 __2 ‘ 5.2.2., "":5; f'--.‘ * 522...: 91:: .
-.. "" ' $2“ J""! . A“ ""Ww 21:5. _ $2.; T ’ , ﬁ
?:ﬂI‘LJI-‘J'i- E _‘ -""'“’2 ‘ - ._ - .2 ﬂ . vl’ds',’ I ' 2 -14? ?%‘iw; ? '- $2 ',:'D -.-::“ .i -' .2 V» \ ', r7: -‘; ‘_\ ‘;$53.;1? 7'1”.
‘ ' "" 2 - 2 2 . -. .. - a:- :22. ?a.-- ' .-.. - 2 .22». 2 . ~-
E :5 V "" 135;: {'3 -d\+:::r}>'§'a 751*: kazf'ﬁ '3‘ T?“ 7.af£2 _ ,- . 2f? 55:4 \ \i .1. N :.-\\27’ 22:“
7:? mp“ *“jf? ,9"", ﬁg ; i 3:. 2"".;;:.;p .m: -. ,:,_ : ,Jﬁ.a.ﬁl 5» ~ _
. a'f' “ 2223-2 22? . ~- * 231; 22.1 2 :a "" 2.. ‘2 2- 2 s "" 2 .2122 ~-. 2 2’ 2 .
' - ”-2 . 2 .. 2- - If 2 - -- '2 '2'. .1 ‘ ”5 La.» '~‘ ”5“? .‘ ”‘52 ‘2‘?»‘3’32122 —’ 42 - -
,) . ’ , ., ‘3‘ J» _; i v- -- «Q! .B"" i“ ‘TWW‘NM v _.1 . . .» 3.-. Y“- ‘\\ > (,1: g?
. 2- ~32 . 42$“cﬂ'.22“""’=°“*2“~~ . ,7- 2 2 51.1.?u‘11' .' '2 r. 2 ~2< 2 ., 2 .32 .. - £2,322 \ i
-l.. 2‘33“ “K i _... ‘ ‘ ’ 3.2. 3‘ i'r- 5 ‘22. ' '. “""2122i ~ ‘ 4A“... «2.. -’ _.‘2 “'74 ' 3‘22 7 k.-
'12: hazéigturr :__.‘£‘22‘ ' ‘ ”a if“ 4 "" ' 113:..1? .- i ‘ 22-; 2 27:2"" “'ﬁhﬁags‘a 2.: h_—- 12/ I
L ' ‘~‘- 1.2 ‘ 2'! 2 21. i ' 2 ' .. -
g..;.;__2__12-2o nm.__:v.2____._-2,.: , 2 . ,, Mean sea Levél.(MSL)= 0ft .2; /,, 2
Figure 5. Vertical View of the typical Dream Chaser reentry proﬁle in the NAS
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
© 2015 Sierra Nevada Corporation

"
"9","used to adjust the trajectory. Once {:3 _ 1 _ ..

the spacecraft enters Slzable FFSafe F‘ngse‘réd . Rafe VEHICIG tHV ’ I Vent Resmual Sae
atmosphere, the control surfaces take Wheel Stop 3‘1 safg'ggféoe:'lmo 1“ Select S-Band ‘J Nb Propane - to Approach
over. At the spacecraft’s ﬁrst the correctposmom‘ 8“"" and GHQ ""'eh'c‘e
intersection With NAS, the Dream *2 Minutes

Chaser is traveling nearly Mach 2 .‘_____*_."" 1:33:31 Lfifzwﬁgnmﬁ 1* _.,,_ ‘_ ; 47. _i;|,; .0;

. “ ‘ rlnsenSafln ' ‘ !
performing maneuvers to 510W [ AttachTCS {4 J9 0' gr.“ Key :througii g] GSE Flooy H] OpenAft 7);; Equalze
down. Around 34,000 feet MSL the , (38E Coolmg } “ 53:3“ ‘ allhatcm ‘ Install? *' Hatch ‘ P&ZEEE
spacecraft transitions to the subsonic ! I . ‘ ""OW' ' _

. . . . I :45” 7? | ~10 Minutes
ﬂight regime continuing to slow ’1 Hook Up . __T'_
down to a landing speed of about ‘ pG’éklr‘dd |‘:—*‘: 3‘
200 KIAS at the runway. The Dream E36251: pplhoto ' Prep Vehcle '
N Chaser is in the NAS a total time of Pvlamenance ”01mm l “ﬂow
E 3—4 minutes and a distance of no Pane' .
L"" more than 20 nm from the runway. It mstiate Ready.
0 Ground ' Attach Tow
S should be noted that the Dream Purge for ‘OéTOfV Off BE""
3: Chaser is non—propulsive 0n reentry UP"" “May ' .
g and is gliding toward the runway, ” V "" “5 TWO ""8 ”mums
5 thus only has a single attempt at DesugnateCPost
E landing; go—arounds are not an Piocefsm
‘30 - . . ocauon
‘5, option at the targeted landing s1te. . . . . 5mm
g Flgure 6. Publlc-Use Runway Post-Fllght Operatlons (Uncrewed).
53 Estimated duration is 20 minutes on an active runway.
E D. Post Landing Operations
3 The ATC impacts do not end once the Wheels touch the runway. After the Dream Chaser has stopped it does not
8“ have the ability to taxi off the runway like a conventional aircraft, Which means landing at a public—use airport or
3: landing site With frequent air trafﬁc cannot be approached in the traditional sense. Figure 6 illustrates a proposed
5% high—level post—landing task ﬂow for the time an autonomous vehicle is on a runway. The ﬂow presented in Fig. 6
g presents a new approach from Shuttle Orbiter that is optimized to reduce impact on a runway post—landing to allow
‘2 sites to resume normal operations as soon as possible.
0 . . . . . .
33 This post landing process assumes an FTS Wthh traditionally 1s ordnance—based although the Dream Chaser
E development team is considering a few options that are not. For purposes of this case study, an ordnance solution is
g) assumed as a worst case because it presents the highest level of hazard and saﬁng requirements, Which take time.
3:) Unlike the Shuttle Orbiter, the Dream Chaser can be approached by ground crews almost immediately after landing
?5 because it contains non—toxic ﬂuid consumables, including propellants, thus allowing the ﬂow to be time efﬁcient.
é Also quarantine 0f the vehicle is not required like legacy systems. Figure 7 depicts an estimated timeline of cargo
E and payload retrieval and handover, showing that landing near a laboratory or processing facility could signiﬁcantly
9 reduce the time and handover.
i
z
5‘ . a - . _ _ t
B . .
E g A :_ , Transpon .1 -.
E 4-31?"" H. "" '
Q ’ . I
Wheel Stop Cargo Unloading Begins Early Return Cargo
R+0 R+30 minutes Handover
R+3 hours
k Trans ort r“- H 0 ""i""
’ “y ‘4‘? p L .
Optiona/Additional 9 K, J -' 8? “
Accelerated Return xxgmmth k‘ H"" F» 87 _.
Additiénal Cargo Additional Accelerated
Unloading Cargo Handover
R+3 to 6 hours R+6 hours
A6297-2021.3
Figure 7. Retrieval Operations Focused 011 Critical Cargo. SNC streams the initial uncrewed Dream Chaser
groundprocessingﬂow to prioritize time-critical cargo argdpayload retrieval and handover.
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
© 2015 Sierra Nevada Corporation

"
"10","VII. Future Integrating into the NAS
Now that an understanding of the regulations has been established, this section focuses on the path forward being
pursued by the FAA and areas Where improvements could make a drastic difference in space trafﬁc management
and integration into the NAS.
A. Current FAA Initiatives
The FAA has several initiatives at work to address many of the Challenges outlined in this paper. Their NextGen
program is addressing some of the problems of long airspace Closures due to launches and reentries. The FAA is
working to develop the ability to have more dynamic hazard areas that only go active When in use. This requires an
upgraded system that allows air trafﬁc controllers to be aware of the Closure and actively route trafﬁc during its
effect and then resume normal operation instantly after the airspace is released. The NextGen plans include such
systems as described that Will better connect air trafﬁc controllers With space operations and the aircraft that are
% affected. Other goals of NextGen include better trafﬁc avoidance, spacing, more direct aircraft routing, and inter-
Er: plane communications.
g With a more reactive system, in the case of an anomaly, aircraft can be rerouted as needed to avoid falling
g debris. The thing to note is that most of reentry or launch operation occurs well above the NAS so the problem is
if four dimensional because time is included. It takes time for debris to intersect trafﬁc, thus in many cases With an
$ integrated system air trafﬁc controllers would be able to Clear aircraft at risk. This type of system allows less
<2 airspace to be Closed ahead of time assuming a failure and rather allows operations to occur normally unless
g something off nominal happens.
g The implementation of these tools is phased and Will take time to be fully integrated. The true Challenge facing
5 this emerging market and mission area is that space trafﬁc and air trafﬁc are increasing and the transition to a
i; broadly considered air and space operations environment that is fully included and implemented in the NextGen
E V1s1on.
a
g B. Areas for Improvement
E Several areas of improvement have been identiﬁed in both analysis and regulations that could substantially
""0% increase the amount of true integration rather than the accommodation that currently eXists. More advanced models
3‘ for predicting hazard areas could signiﬁcantly reduce the amount of airspace Closed for a particular operation.
8 Several companies are in the process of increasing the ﬁdelity of their models - thus providing more accurate results,
E which limits the total hazard area. Of course, removing conservative assumptions from a model must be justiﬁed but
% many of the tools in use today are potentially over conservative.
é Coupled With taking a less conservative approach to modeling are the regulations that guide certain assumptions
g and criteria. Risk criteria like EC are currently being loosened With the FAA proposed Change, but looking
2 historically at the E0 of the Shuttle Orbiter, risks were orders of magnitude larger than What is acceptable in the
8 proposed regulations. This example alone begs a second look at the regulations and a frank conversation on What the
g risk posture of the Government really should be.
2 From an industry prospective, vehicles designed With higher reliability Will better integrate into the NAS. Higher
E reliability reduces the risk of a failure and potential impact to either a neighboring aircraft or the unaware public on
3 the ground. As congestion is already a problem facing the NAS, having justiﬁed smaller spacing between spacecraft
E and aircraft supports a smoother operation of both.
Li The NAS operates on predictability. The FAA has proven that if advanced notice can be given to carriers for
E weather or other operational delays, the airlines can make decisions to mitigate the effect to their customers. The
space industry is no different and should also strive to provide a level of predictability so that the entire NAS can
better plan instead of reacting to disturbances.
Finally, the space industry can do a better job of educating other parts of the FAA Who do not deal With space on
a daily basis about how our vehicles operate. Often people assume Dream Chaser operates like an airplane because it
has Wings and looks similar to one. There are some important differences that tend to surprise people. With a better
understanding of everyone’s respective systems, both air and space, common ground can be found and leveraged to
achieve an integrated NAS in Which everyone can work.
10
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
© 2015 Sierra Nevada Corporation

"
"11","VIII. Standard Approach to Designate Preferred Landing Sites
In an effort to streamline integration of the Dream Chaser into the NAS, SNC has developed a standard approach
to evaluating and approving landing sites around the world Within the framework of the FAA reentry licensing
requirements. This method has been informally reviewed Within the FAA and by the DLR (German Aerospace
Center) for an international perspective.
To obtain a SNC Preferred Landing Site designation, applicants participate in a multiphase evaluation. SNC
allows applicants to choose from options that vary in timeline, scope, and outcome. All site evaluation options begin
With a Compatibility Interview and, assuming no problems are identiﬁed in the interview, a Landing Site Evaluation.
From there, 3 options on how to proceed are available (Fig. 8):
0 Option 1: Perform a Landing Site Evaluation Only
0 Option 2: Apply for a Safety Approval on Core Elements (14 CFR Part 435.5 Review)
0 Option 3: Apply for a Reentry License (14 CFR Part 435 License)
g The options identiﬁed above require different levels of initial investment and have a different timetable for
E completion. The three options are not progressive steps, and each result in different levels of preparedness to support
é Dream Chaser spacecraft landings.
E o The product of Option 1 is a Landing Site Evaluation, Which includes preliminary analyses, assessments,
g and coordination needed to conﬁrm the Viability of a landing site and demonstrate the characteristics of the
2. site to potential mission requestors. It is possible to start down the path of Option 1 and change to Option 2
a or 3 at a later time.
g” o The product of Option 2 is a FAA-issued Safety Approval for core elements related to licensing for
§ conducting a landing at the speciﬁc site. Option 2 does not include a full environmental review of the site,
5% nor Will a reentry license be issued, both of Which Will need to be completed at the time a mission is fully
E deﬁned.
g o The product of Option 3 is that a 14 CFR Part 435 Reentry License is issued by the FAA, Which includes the
g speciﬁc landing site, and all applicable environmental reviews have been completed With respect to that
2“ license.
53 It should be noted in accordance With the FAA regulation, the Safety Approval 0r Reentry License is granted to
1,: SNC for the spacecraft, but is tied to a speciﬁc landing site. Therefore, the license is restricted to use only at a
(“3’ particular site.
:2 Overall, this standard approach to evaluating landing sites is a step toward ﬁnding common ground between
E aviation and commercial space in order to better integrate. With more landing sites pre-coordinated and approved for
5 Dream Chaser landings, this adds more ﬂexibility and predictability t0 the NAS.
8
<
53
z
8
E
Q
(2‘
<
z
>~.
g Dpthn 1
a __
E MissiDn—Specilic Reentry License
m -- - .___
15-"": ' ' av -
“311m"" 5'- mj-
' Hissinn
Ccrrnpatibility Landing Site _ Safety [leﬁnitinn and '_
Review Evaluatinn Apprmal Reentry
Licensing
Dpﬁm 3 *- ﬁf—
IEE]! _ . Missipn— h; ' ‘-
lrElﬂ'tblrlﬂnIqu'rh Reentry Llcenslng 5pe_cr_fic
- _ “th I . I Hewlsmn
Figure 8. Options available for obtaining a preferred Dream Chaser Landing Site Designation in order to
streamline integration into the NAS for future Dream ﬂhaser ﬂights.
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
© 2015 Sierra Nevada Corporation

"
"12","IX. Conclusion
With access to space becoming more commonplace, a need for increased integration into the NAS has been

identiﬁed to support near-immediate payload access for responsive mission and payload support. The Dream Chaser
is the only reusable, lifting body spacecraft capable of landing on commercial runways around the world. This
capability presents numerous Opportunities for the space community to have expanded possibilities With space
research, testing, and science. At the same time, Challenges arise When attempting to capitalize on the Dream Chaser
capability. Conducting landing Operations in the NAS can stress the system for other users and drive them to
accommodate space activity rather than truly be integrated. One Of the maj 0r hurdles to rapid access and minimized
payload transportation post reentry is integration into the NAS and more effective methods of STM. This paper has
identiﬁed the work being done currently to move toward a more integrated NAS, provided inputs for a more
inclusive NextGen implementation, and identiﬁed areas that further improvements can be made across all
participants. Overall, as space becomes more accessible, the need for rapid access and minimized payload

% transportation Will push the NAS to its limit Without careful preparation.

g2

g Acknowledgments

E The authors thank Sierra Nevada Corporation’s Space Systems for providing research funding, computer time

5 and other technical resources for accomplishing this work. Speciﬁc thanks to SNC employees John Olson, John

Q Roth, Kelly Diaz, Kathy Benzin, and Vickie Terry for technical support and input.

Q

95? References

3, 1Windsor, M., “Space Race: Inside a high-stakes experiment in protein crystallization,” University of Alabama Birmingham

53 (UAB) News, 13 Apr. 2015, URL: http://www.uab.edu/news/innovation/item/S958-space-race-inside-a-high-stakes-experiment-

g in-protein

g 2Holemans, J.1, Cassanto, J.M., Moller, T.W., Cassanto, V.A., Rose, A., Luttges, M., Morrison, D., Todd, P., Stewart, R.,

§ Korszun, R.Z., Deardorff, G., “The BIMDA shuttle ﬂight mission: a low cost microgravity payload,” PubMed PMID:11708362,

2“ URL: http://www.ncbi.n1m.nih.gOV/pubmed/1 1708362

33 3Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Air Trafﬁc Organization (ATO), URL:

1% http://www.faa.gOV/about/ofﬁce_org/headquarters_ofﬁces/ato/

é‘

8

m

LU

F

%

U

LU

O

<

%

z

o

m

E

Q

<

m

<

z

E

B

2?:

.2

Q

a

O

Q

12
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
© 2015 Sierra Nevada Corporation

"
