"","x"
"1","Review—
New Insights in Plant Biology Gained from Research in Space
Ashley E. Cannon, Mari L. Salmi, Gregory Clark, and Stanley Roux
Department ofMolecular Biosciences, The University of T exas, Austin, TX
ABSTRACT plants in space have used Arabidopsis thaliana,
. . . but the single-celled, Ceratopteris richardii spore
Recent spaceﬂight experiments have prov1ded .
. . . . . is also a valuable model system that has been used
many new 1n31ghts into the role of graV1ty 1n plant . .
. . to understand plant graV1ty response. Experiments
growth and development. Seientists have been . .
. . . usmg these fern spores have revealed a dynamic
taking seeds and plants into space for decades 1n . . 2+
and graV1ty-resp0nswe trans—cell Ca current that
an effort to understand how the stressful . . . .
. directs polarization of these spores and a p0331b1e
enVironment of space affects them. The resultant . . . .
. . . . role of extracellular nucleotides 1n establishing or
data have yielded Signiﬁcant advances 1n the . . .
. contributing to this current. As technology
development of advanced life-support systems for . . . . .
. . continues to improve, spaceﬂight experiments w111
long-duration spaceﬂight and a better . . . .
. . prov1de many new 1n31ghts into the role and
understanding of the fundamental role of graV1ty .
. . . effects of graV1ty on plant growth and
1n directing the growth and development of plants.
. . . development.
Experiments have improved as new spaceﬂight
hardware and technolegy paved the way for INTRODUCTION
progresswely more 1n31ghtful and rigorous plant
research in space. The International Space Station Studies on the role of gravity in plant growth
(188) has provided an opportunity for scientists to and development, especially tropisms, have been
both monitor and control their experiments in ongoing for well over a century. With the advent
real-time. Experiments on the 188 have provided of space travel, the microgravity environment has
valuable insights into endogenous growth provided a unique experimental condition where
responses, light responses, and transcriptomic and scientists can investigate how altering the gravity
proteomic changes that occur in the microgravity stimulus affects signaling and the subsequent
environment. In recent years most studies of response. Plants have always been a topic of
interest in relation to long-term human space
. travel because of their ability to provide food and
Key words Piant Space Research, , . to clean used water and air — essential
Gravitropiein, Polarizatien, Plant Biology, components of a life support system. In recent
Arabzdnpszs, Cer atopter 1S9 GraV1ty years, plant biology experiments in space have
Perception provided many new insights about gravity-related
Correspondence to: Stanley Roux signaling and how the microgravity allows for
1 University Station STOP A6700 novel or altered responses to environmental
University of Texas stimuli.
Austin, TX 78712 One major goal of plant space research is the
Telephone: 512-471-4238 development of a self—sustained life support
E-mail: srouX@austin.utexas.edu system (Galston, 1992; Paul et a1., 2013b). Plants
Gravitational and Space Research Volume 3 (2) Dec 2015 3

"
"2","Cannon et al. -- Plant Biology Insights from Space Research

have the unique ability to purify the air using changes in plant growth and development, genetic
photosynthesis — a process by which water and material, tropisms, and endogenous movements
carbon dioxide are converted into carbohydrates (Paul et al., 2013b). The ﬁrst plant experiments in
and oxygen. Plants also have the ability to purify space were focused on understanding how the
water through the process of transpiration — a microgravity and cosmic radiation of the space
process where water is ﬁltered before being environment affect biological systems. Dormant
transported through the plant until it eventually seeds of many different plant species were ﬂown
evaporates out of pores in the leaves. In an on Discoverer 17 in 1960 and Sputnik 4 in 1961
enclosed life-support system, the condensation (Halstead and Dutcher, 1984). After multiple un-
formed from evaporated water would be potable. manned, orbiter missions, the ﬁrst plant growth
Additionally, if crops are the plants chosen to experiments began to take place on the manned
grow in this life-support system, they will provide Skylab spacecraft and on the Russian Salyut space
food for the crew. All of these resources would be station in the early 1970s. The experiments
valuable on long-duration missions where conducted on the Russian spacecraft ﬂights and
carrying large amounts of supplies or going aboard the Salyut space station showed how
through re-supply missions is not feasible. microgravity, long-term space exposure, and

The National Aeronautics and Space ﬂight conditions caused genetic changes that were
Administration (NASA) has begun developing deleterious to seeds and seedlings (Dubinin et al.,
portions of the advanced life-support system on 1973; Vaulina et al., 1981; Kordyum et al., 1983;
the International Space Station (188). A current Kostina et al., 1984).
study that could provide a crop-based addition to Experiments conducted on the ﬁrst space
the life-support system is the development of the station developed by the United States — Skylab
Vegetable Production System (VEGGIE). — showed the effects of the space environment
VEGGIE was developed in an effort to provide on plant growth, phototropism, and cytoplasmic
the crew not only with salad-type vegetables, but streaming (Summerlin, 1977). During the Skylab
also the relaxation that comes from observing experiments, germination was delayed during
green things growing (Retrieved from spaceﬂight but growth progressed normally after
http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/resear the initial interruption. However, the direction of
ch/eXperiments/863.html; Accessed 10/7/15). This plant growth was random and stems were not
system will provide an additional resource for phototropic (Summerlin, 1977). Cytoplasmic
plant space research because the tissue from crops streaming was initially observed by astronauts but
grown inside can be preserved and used to stopped by the second observation because the
evaluate how plants sense and respond to gravity. plants died, most likely because of their inability
Although understanding the role of gravity in to photosynthesize due to a lack of access to C02.
plant growth and development through space Although there were many complications
research is valuable, increasing our understanding associated with these experiments, they provided
will also help improve our ability to grow plants valuable insight into the growth and development
on Earth. The two missions VEG-01 and VEG-03 of plants in space and the need for further study
have provided useful information about the (Summerlin, 1977).
VEGGIE hardware, microbial load, and growth The construction of the space shuttle allowed
media (Retrieved from http://www.nasa.gov for larger projects, advanced hardware, and
/mission _pages/station/research/eXperiments/ 863. repeated experiments due to the shuttle’s capacity
html, accessed 10/7/15 and http://www.nasa.gov/ and the crew’s ability to work on experiments
mission _pages/station/research/eXperiments/ 1294. (Paul et al., 2013b). During the experiments ﬂown
html, accessed 10/7/15). on the shuttle, plant scientists initially

In addition to developing plants for a self— encountered difﬁculties when they tried to grow
sustained, advanced life-support system, space plants from seed-to-seed during spaceﬂight. In the
travel has provided a venue for fundamental plant unfamiliar condition of space, plants experienced
research. Since the beginning of the space delayed development. Through a series of
program, scientists have been sending plants to experiments over the course of multiple missions,
space and analyzing its effects by assessing plant growth chambers were modiﬁed to include
4 Gravitational and Space Research Volume 3 (2) Dec 2015

"
"3","Cannon et al. -- Plant Biology Insights from Space Research

an air exchange system and supplemental carbon Research System (ABRS). The ABRS was
dioxide (Kuang et a1., 1996b; Musgrave et a1., designed to support small biology experiments
1997). These changes allowed reproductive with plants, microorganisms, and small arthropods
development to proceed normally and for pollen (Camacho, 2015; Paul and F er1, 2015). The ABRS
transfer and fertilization, leading to seed is useful for plant biology experiments because it
production. These experiments, along with many can be equipped with a hydrated foam base and a
others (Morrow et a1., 1994; Kuang et a1., 1996b; Green F luorescent Protein (GFP) imaging system
Kuang et a1., 1996a; Musgrave et 211., 1997; — two tools that have been used by plant
Musgrave et a1., 1998; Porterﬁeld et a1., 2000), biologists to conduct experiments in space (Paul
allowed plant scientists to optimize plant growth and F er1, 2015). Similar to the EMCS and Biolab,
conditions in order to achieve results that could be the environmental and light conditions can be
attributed conﬁdently to true spaceﬂight managed and recorded throughout experiments
conditions, not the poor growth conditions of the (Camacho, 2015; Paul and F er1, 2015).
hardware. Additionally, two units designed for vegetable

As the shuttle program progressed and growth have recently been installed on the ISS.
continued to succeed, the United States took up The Lada-Vegetable Production Unit was
the task of developing a bigger and better space launched by the Russian Space Agency in 2002
station for scientiﬁc experiments. The components and was installed in the Russian segment of the
were built, launched, and assembled beginning in 188 — the Zvezda module. This unit contains
the late 1990s. The launch and assembly of the two independent greenhouse modules that are not
188 paved the way for the development of more temperature-regulated and are open to the cabin
equipment designed for plant space research. The for air exchange. This unit was designed in an
European Space Agency has provided a plant effort to provide a tool for investigating food
research platform with the European Modular production and safety (Paul and F er1, 2015).
Cultivation System (EMCS) and Biolab NASA also designed a similar chamber for
(Brinckmann, 2005). Both of these plant growth vegetable growth called Veggie-Vegetable
facilities contain incubators equipped with a Production System (Veggie-VPS). Engineers
centrifuge that can provide acceleration from installed LED lights in this unit that provide
0.001 g to 2.0 g. They also have illumination and optimal light for plant growth. Like the Lada-
Video options that allow experiments to be Vegetable Production Unit, Veggie-VPS is not
tailored to collect plant growth images and Videos. temperature-controlled and is open to the 18$ for
The installations of Biolab and the EMCS have gas exchange(Pau1andFer1, 2015).
also improved investigators’ ability to monitor In the near future, NASA will be installing a
and adjust environmental parameters. Both of new growth habitat 0n the ISS called the
these plant growth chambers are hooked up to the Advanced Plant Habitat. The Advanced Plant
Life Support System, creating a controlled Habitat will be a large volume chamber designed
atmosphere where 02, C02, and humidity levels for multigenerational studies. The atmosphere
can be monitored and optimized. This Life and light in this chamber wi11betight1y monitored
Support System also enables scientists to reduce and regulated during experiments. The Advanced
C02 and ethylene levels during experiments Plant Habitat is being designed as a tool that will
(Brinckmann, 2005). Novel experiments contribute to the Bioregenerative Life Support
investigating the threshold of gravity needed to System, an essential component of long-duration
induce gravitropism (Driss-Ecole et a1., 2008), space travel (Paul and Ferl, 2015). Space
circumnutation (Johnsson et a1., 2009), rosette leaf agencies worldwide have designed and installed
movements (Solheim et a1., 2009) in space, and plant growth facilities on the 188 that provide the
the positive phototropic reaction ofArabidopSis to tools necessary for plant biologists to continue
red-light in microgravity (Millar et a1., 2010), conducting spaceﬂight experiments that contribute
have been completed in the EMCS since it was a better understanding of the role of gravity in
insta11ed(Brinckmann, 2005; Kittang et a1., 2014). plant growth and development. These tools a1s0

NASA designed and installed a similar system further improve the Bioregenerative Life Support
on the ISS called the Advanced Biological system necessary for long-term space travel.

Gravitational and Space Research Volume 3 (2) Dec 2015 5

"
"4","Cannon et al. -- Plant Biology Insights from Space Research
Another major advance for space research in process of applying for support to fund plant
recent decades has been optimizing the process of spaceﬂight experiments. These reviews outlined
in-ﬂight preservation of samples for cellular or the considerations that have to be taken into
molecular analysis after they return to Earth. account when planning an experiment, and they
Initially, samples needed to be chemically ﬁxed to provided information on data-collection strategies
maintain the integrity of cell structure or frozen to to gain the most valuable information from a plant
maintain high-quality nucleic acids and proteins. spaceﬂight experiment (Kiss, 2015; Paul and F er1,
Due to issues with ﬂash freezing and maintaining 2015). Collectively, these articles provided
ultra-cold temperature during their return to Earth, valuable information that will help future space
scientists began to use a chemical ﬁxative — p1antbiologists design and ﬂy experiments. As the
RNAlaterTM (Ambion) — to preserve the multiple commercial companies continue to
molecular integrity of samples. The study of this improve their space travel vehicles and the
ﬁxative under multiple conditions (Paul et a1., international cooperation among space agencies
2005) — along with the development of the progresses, this new age of plant space biology
Kennedy Space Center F ixation Tube (KFT) — should generate even more exciting and credible
has allowed molecular biologists to conduct discoveries.
transcriptomic (Paul et a1., 2013a; Kwon et a1.,
2015) and proteomic (Fer1 et a1., 2015) studies on INSIGHTS ON THE EFFECTS OF
tissue samples preserved in space and returned to GRAVITY ON PLANT GROWTH GAINED
Earth. RNAlater has also been shown to be an FROM RECENT SPACEFLIGHT
effective tool for preserving samples in space for EXPERIMENTS
morphological studies using scanning electron Since the beginning of the space program,
microscopy (Schultz et a1., 2013)‘ Mote recently, astronauts and scientists have collaboratively
Nakashima et al. (2014b) optimized a 1 d h - t ff t 1 t th -
1utara1deh de ﬁxation method usin KFTs b exp ore OW- grav1 y a 6C S p an grow - using
g . y . g y the space env1ronment. In recent years, seientists
1ncreas1ng the concentration of glutaraldehyde, have begun to focus on understanding the role of
storing the ﬁxative at 4°C, and bubbling nitrogen - - -
. . . grav1ty in plant rhythmic movements.
(N2) gas over the ﬁxative prior to loading the Speciﬁcally, the question, “is the force of gravity
KFT.S' All Of these changes were made based on needed to initiate and sustain ultradian leaf
prev1ous StUdleS where seedlings had not been movements?” has been explored. U1tradian leaf
adequately preserved for .morphological. StUdleS' movements follow a recurrent cycle repeated in
These new methods of tissue .preservation, and periods ranging from minutes to hours, and a
others. hke them, .have greatly improved the way recent report by Solheim et a1. (2009) has
seientists investigate morphological Changes convincingly demonstrated that they can be
assogiated ﬁlthbthe. extraterrfestlr 1a1 env1ronment. . affected or initiated by the force of gravity. These
incet e. eginning 0. p ant experiments in authors carried out their nove1 studies by growing
space, 3016.“ tIStS and engineers have constantly Arabidopsis in the EMCS. In the microgravity
WWW to improve the condition Of plant growth space environment, rhythmic leaf movements sti11
fa0111t1es, ensuring future experiments would be occurre d and their periods varie d base d on the
better than the last. As we have now trans1tioned presence of light. After years of studies by several
from the space shuttle to a new era Of commermal 1abs on these ultradian leaf movements in the 1 g
space travel, the technology available for plant environment on Earth there was still debate on
biology experiments. in space has improved the role of gravity in, initiating them. However,
dramatically. .These improvements have led to Solheim et a1. (2009) showed that even when the
many new 1ns1ghts about plant space biology. Paul force of gravity is minimal, leaves have rhythmic
and . Fer1 (2015) and . KISS (2015) recently movements. In addition, they also observed when
published thorough rev1ews that deseribe the leaves are grown in microgravity they have a
lessons learned ﬁom decades of experiments in more pronounce d gravitropic response when they
space. B 0th rev1ews covered the approach and are transitioned to a 1 g environment. Both of
constraints asso<31ated Wlth spaceﬂight these ﬁndings provide novel insights on gravity-
experiments. Kiss (2015) also described the
6 Gravitational and Space Research Volume 3 (2) Dec 2015

"
"5","Cannon et al. -- Plant Biology Insights from Space Research
independent leaf movements and beg the question grown on rotors aboard the ISS and images of
of what mechanisms cause them. inﬂorescence stems were taken over time to
The mechanism behind the ultradian leaf document the effect of microgravity 0n
movements may be explained by an additional circumnutation (Johnsson et al., 2009). Johnsson
experiment using the data collected during the et al. (2009) showed that circumnutations in
MULTIGEN—l (MULTIple GENerations 1) microgravity, although present, have a much
experiment use by Solheim et al. (2009). In this lower magnitude. Using controlled centrifuge
experiment, the MULTIGEN—l data were also pulses on the ISS, circumnutations at 0.8 g were
used by F isahn et al. (2015) to analyze the effects monitored. When stems were exposed to a higher
of lunar gravity on leaf movement. The original g-force, circumnutations were ampliﬁed by a
hypothesis, made by Dr. Gunter Klein, states that factor of ﬁve to ten (Johnsson et al., 2009). Data
the movement of bean leaves grown in constant from monitoring leaves and stems of plants grown
environmental conditions with no entraining 0n the 188 showed that although there are gravity-
stimuli are a result of the lunar tidal force (Barlow independent endogenous growth movements, the
et al., 2008). Barlow et al. (2008) demonstrated force of gravity has an effect on their magnitude
this hypothesis by establishing a correlation 0r amplitude, showing these responses are
between the two by monitoring the downward endogenous but can be affected by environmental
movement of leaves and comparing this rhythm to factors like the force of gravity.
changes in the tidal force. In order to ﬁnd a direct Other plant movements associated with
connection between the tidal force and leaf growth are root skewing and waving. These
movements, Fisahn et al. (2015) designed an growth movements, which were ﬁrst observed in
experiment where the lunisolar gravitational force Arabidopsis roots (Okada and Shimura, 1990;
would be altered by monitoring plants grown on Mullen et al., 1998; Thompson and Holbrook,
the 188. The 188 provides a unique environment 2004; Oliva and Dunand, 2007), were initially
because the gravitational pull from Earth is hypothesized to be an integrated response to
reduced and the location of the Moon changes gravity, mechanical, and touch stimulation as the
constantly during orbit. In this experiment, the tip of the root grows along the surface of a growth
periodicity and phase of leaf ultradian rhythms medium. However, experiments performed in
were compared to changes in the lunisolar microgravity showed unexpectedly that root
gravitational force. Fisahn et al. (2015) showed waving and skewing patterns do not require a
lunisolar gravitational proﬁles had a periodicity of gravity stimulus. In fact, three spaceﬂight
45 minutes in orbit and that Arabidopsis leaf experiments showed signiﬁcant differences in
movements had a similar periodicity and growth patterns between space and ground-grown
synchronous phase. This discovery corroborates Arabidopsis roots (Millar et al., 2011; Paul et al.,
the data collected by Klein and analyzed and 2012a; Nakashima et al., 2014a). Millar et al.
summarized by Barlow et al. (2008) on Earth. All (2011) found Arabidopsis (ecotype Landsberg)
of these ﬁndings provide unique insights into the roots eXhibited increased skewing t0 the left and
behavior of leaf movements when the interference suggested that this was due to an endogenous
of Earth’s gravity is minimal. However, the response. Arabidopsis (ecotypes Wassilewskija
answer to the question of the necessity of gravity and Columbia) roots also showed exaggerated
in initiating and sustaining leaf movements is still skewing in microgravity conditions (Paul et al.,
not clear. 2012a). Another spaceﬂight study found that the
In addition to leaf movements, scientists have actin cytoskeleton actively suppresses this
long been fascinated by plant rotational growth endogenous skewing response in Arabidopsis
patterns associated with growth oscillations called roots (Nakashima et al., 2014a). Thus it seems
circumnutations. Much like the leaf movements more likely that root waving and skewing are
mentioned above, circumnutation could be an directed mainly by mechanical stimuli, rather than
endogenous plant action that can be altered by by gravity (Roux, 2012).
environmental factors — like gravity — or it may In addition to modulating root waving and
be caused by environmental stimuli. In order to skewing, mechanical stimuli also induce the
investigate this question, Arabidopsis plants were release of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) into the
Gravitational and Space Research Volume 3 (2) Dec 2015 7

"
"6","Cannon et al. -- Plant Biology Insights from Space Research

extracellular matrix (ECM) of Arabidopsis roots due to unidirectional light — is an essential aspect
(Weerasinghe et a1., 2009). Extracellular ATP of plant survival, but studies of this phenomenon
(eATP) can modulate the growth of plant cells on Earth always have to consider the force of
(Clark et a1., 2014), and the addition of ATP gravity as a contributing factor. Recently, Millar
inhibits root gravitropism and induces root curling et al. (2010) conducted a study of red-light and
(Tang et a1., 2003). Exogenous ATP was also blue-light phototropic responses using the EMCS
shown to increase root skewing in 21 pH-dependent on the 188 in order to avoid the complications of
manner (Haruta and Sussman, 2012). The the 1 g environment. One advantage of the EMCS
concentration of eATP is regulated partially by is the ability to use the centrifuge for 21 1 g space
enzymes called ecto-apyrases (ecto-nucleoside environment control. Using this growth chamber,
triphosphate diphosphohydrolases). In plants, Millar et 211. (2010) observed 21 novel red-light
apyrases play 21 pivotal role in controlling growth phototropic response in Arabidopsis hypocotyls
and development (Clark et a1., 2014). Recently, grown from seed in microgravity. This response
we found apyrases also play an important role in was not seen in Earth-grown controls or in the 1 g
regulating the root skewing response in space environment controls. Millar et al. (2010)
Arabidopsis (Yang et a1., 2015). In combination also showed a more robust blue-light response
with the results from spaceﬂight experiments, compared to the 1 g control.
these new insights indicate that endogenous actin- In addition to providing an environment
dependent signals and mechanical stimuli where the interference of gravity is minimal,
mediated by eATP and ecto-apyrases help spaceﬂight experiments provide an opportunity
regulate the Arabidopsis root skewing response. for organisms to experience an extraterrestrial
Recently, a lectin kinase receptor — DORN1 — environment where conditions are distinctly
was identiﬁed as the ﬁrst plant eATP receptor and different from Earth. This allows scientists to
found to play a role in defense responses (Choi et evaluate changes in gene expression caused by the
al., 2014). Thus, it will be important to determine multiple environmental changes of the space
if DORN1 mediates apyrase and eATP effects on environment. Microarray analysis of RNA from
root skewing. seedlings and culture cells grown in space

Also recently, a plasma membrane receptor- revealed a statistically signiﬁcant difference in the
like kinase — F ERONIA — was demonstrated to expression of about 300 genes when compared to
play an important role in Arabidopsis root ground controls (Paul et al., 2012b). Although
skewing responses (Shih et a1., 2014). FERONIA both seedlings and cell cultures showed changes
is a receptor-like kinase in the CrRLKlL in gene expression due to spaceﬂight, the genes
subfamily that has previously been implicated in that were differentially expressed in each system
regulation of many aspects of plant growth and were not the same. Paul et al. (2012b) suggest this
development (Escobar-Restrepo et a1., 2007; could be due to the uniformity of the cell culture
Deslauriers and Larsen, 2010; Kessler et a1., 2010; compared to the complexity of the multi-cellular
Duan et a1., 2011). The study by Shih et al. (2014) seedling, or that it could be the presence of a
found calcium signals induced by mechanical coordinated, organ-speciﬁc response in seedlings
stimulation were lacking or altered in ferom’a (fer) compared to a generic response in undifferentiated
mutants. In addition to an impaired skewing cells. This pioneering study showed how complex
response, fer mutant roots showed disrupted the spaceﬂight response is in both undifferentiated
ability to penetrate agar surfaces and altered cells and multi-cellular seedlings. The gene
growth response to impenetrable objects. The fer expression changes could not easily be explained
mutant also showed decreased levels of by changes in gravity or other environmental
expression of certain touch-inducible genes in factors we associate with the terrestrial
response to hypoosmotic stress compared to wild environment.
type (WT). Another gene-eXpression study, conducted by

The space environment provides a unique Kwon et al. (2015), examined how the space
opportunity to study environmental effects environment alters gene expression by comparing
without the interference of gravity. For example, the transcripts of plants grown in space for two
phototropism — the directed growth of a plant weeks to plants grown on Earth. The evaluation of
8 Gravitational and Space Research Volume 3 (2) Dec 2015

"
"7","Cannon et al. -- Plant Biology Insights from Space Research

the two transcriptomes showed genes associated expression changes similar enough to be
with oxidative stress, cell wall remodeling, and compared using a relatively stringent statistical
the endomembrane system are repressed in space- ana1yses (Paul et a1., 2011). The gene expression
grown Arabidopsis plants. Additionally, after changes due to parabolic ﬂight were related to
further analysis, Kwon et a1. (2015) discovered changes in graVity and stress (Paul et a1., 2011).
many of the transcripts down-regulated in space Aubry-Hivet et a1. (2014) showed roots exposed
are enriched in root hairs. Data showing the to transient microgravity 0n parabolic ﬂights have
average root hair length of space-grown seedlings distinct transcriptomic changes that are dependent
was signiﬁcantly less than ground controls upon auXin signaling by comparing the transcripts
support this observation. Kwon et a1. (2015) from WT, pin2, and pin3 Arabidopsis seedlings.
independently conﬁrmed the transcriptome Hausmann et a1. (2014) used transgenic
changes seen in space-grown seedlings caused Arabidopsis callus to monitor H202 and Ca2+
altered root hair growth by assessing root hair during parabolic ﬂight. The same cells were used
phenotypes of homozygous mutants of the genes to analyze transcripts after microgravity exposure;
down-regulated in microgravity. This mutant many of the genes up-regulated were Ca2+ and
screen led to the identiﬁcation of two peroxidase ROS re1ated(Hausmann et a1., 2014).
mutants with defective root hairs. These root hair Collectively, hardware improvements along
changes could affect water and nutrient uptake in with knowledge gained from decades of
space — an essential component of plant survival spaceﬂight experiments have paved the way for
and growth. This novel observation provides scientists to design and conduct experiments that
valuable insight into the effects of 10ng-term provide valuable insight into the effects of graVity
spaceﬂight on plant development. on plant growth. Recent experiments have

To complement the studies of transcriptome explored the role of graVity in plant movements,
changes done by Paul et al. (2012b), Fer1 et a1. revealed a novel red-1ight phototropic response,
(2015) recently analyzed the proteome of space- and provided valuable information about plant
grown Arabidopsis seedlings. This study gene expression changes in space. This new
pioneered the use of RNAlater for the information will help engineers and scientists
preservation of samples for protein analysis. This design a Bioregenerative Life Support System for
method worked we11en0ught0 provide protein for 10ng-durati0n missions using plants — a major
the identiﬁcation of 1570 proteins and the goal of international space agencies — and
quantitation of 1432 proteins using the iTRAQ provide information that can be used to optimize
method, with biological replicates allowing for a plant growth on Earth, which is a key contribution
statistical analysis of quantitative differences. This as agricultural land availability decreases and our
analysis was the ﬁrst proteomic study in space- population increases.
grown seedlings. Moreover, the lot of seedlings
used came from a very similar group of plants ASSAYING GRAVITY EFFECTS IN SINGLE
grown on the 18$ for transcriptomic studies CELLS USING CERATOPTERIS RICHARDII
completed by Paul et al. (2013a), so the SPORES AS A MODEL SYSTEM
transcriptome changes could be compared to
proteomic changes. As technology improves and In recent years, most studies of plants in space
the ability to do more experiments on the 188 have focused on the model plant, Arabidopsis
increases, scientists will have the opportunity to thaliana. H0W€V€L another valuable model
identify both celLspeciﬁc and generic responses system — 1116 sing1e-ce11ed Ceratopteris richardii
t0 the space environment (Fer1 et a1., 2015), fern spore — has also been used to understand the

In addition to using the 188 to evaluate gene- effects of gravity on plant cells. This sing1e-ce11ed
expression changes associated with spaceﬂight, model is valuable because it provides a simpliﬁed
scientists have now developed methods to use system to monitor how plant cells sense gravity
parabolic ﬂights for molecular biology and direct subsequent development based on this
experiments. Arabidopsis seedlings that went mechanical fOI'C6. Ceratopteris richardii 18 a
through parabolic ﬂights on different days with homosporous fern With large, 100-150 Hm
different logistical aspects9 showed gene (2112111‘16161‘9 SpOI‘6S. Th6 fern 11f€ Gy016, 111(6 2111

Gravitational and Space Research Volume 3 (2) Dec 2015 9

"
"8","Cannon et al. -- Plant Biology Insights from Space Research

pteridophytes, consists of alternation of free-liVing Ceratopteris spores germinate readily in
haploid and diploid generations. Ceratopteris standard laboratory culture conditions (Hickok et
spores are produced on diploid fronds through a1., 1987). The basic progression of spore
meiosis. Ceratopteris spore germination is a red- germination events is depicted in Figure 1. While
light induced process mediated by the it is still a single cell, the spore can sense and
photoreceptor phytochrome. Germination results respond to gravity. Developmental polarity is
in the development of haploid, photosynthetic, established in response to the vector of gravity, as
monoecious, or male gametophytes. Ceratopteris demonstrated by Edwards and Roux (1994), and it
spores are extremely resilient to environment results in the downward migration of the cell
change; spores germinate after exposure to 4°C or nucleus, followed 48 hours later by the emergence
37°C for up to 30 days. Spores remain dormant 0f the primary rhizoid from the spore coat and its
for many years if stored dry, and hydrated spores growth in the direction established in the ﬁrst 30
will remain dormant if kept in the dark for up to hours of germination.
90 days.

Initiation of

Germination Ca"" Cur“?m Nuclear Furs! RhlZOid

by Light (332° Migration Cell Duvusion Emergence

' . ' [—1 re
Cain !
—L—l—_’
Hour 0 f 9 24 48 72
Polarity Fixation
by Gravity

Figure 1. Early growth and developmental time-line 0f Ceratopteris richardii spores. Spore germination is
initiated by water and red light. Within hours of initiation, calcium enters through channels at the bottom of
spores and there is an efﬂux of calcium out of the top. The calcium efﬂux peaks between 7 and 12 hours after
light-initiated germination begins. Polarity of development is set by gravity after 24-30 hours of growth and
it results in the downward migration of the cell nucleus and a subsequent asymmetrical cell division. A Visual
representation of the direction of polarity set by gravity is the emergence of a downward-growing rhizoid 72
hours after germination begins.

The continuous microgravity conditions on time and induced by the absence of the polarity
the space shuttle ﬂight STS-93 resulted in random directing force of gravity. Around 5% 0f the
orientation of nuclear migration and rhizoid unique transcripts analyzed in this study eXhibited
emergence in germinating Ceratopteris spores, as a difference induced by microgravity conditions in
demonstrated by Roux et a1. (2003). In the same at least one of the developmental time points
space shuttle mission, spore samples were analyzed. The stress of the space environment did
exposed to light and allowed to develop for not result in a general trend toward gene
various time points in microgravity before being suppression, as an approximately equal number of
frozen and returned to Earth for analysis of gene down- and up-regulated changes were induced
expression changes (Salmi and Roux, 2008). A11 under the conditions of this experiment.
of the samples included in this study were frozen Transferase- and hydrolase-type enzymes were
prior to the ﬁrst division of the spore cell, the molecular functions most abundantly
allowing gene expression analysis of differences represented in the differentially regulated
in transcript abundance within the same cell over transcripts. Enzymes with these molecular
10 Gravitational and Space Research Volume 3 (2) Dec 2015

"
"9","Cannon et al. -- Plant Biology Insights from Space Research
functions modify other proteins, suggesting the developmental period when spores are responsive
post-translational modiﬁcations involved gravity to gravity (Salmi et al., 2011). Heterologous
perception and might be altered in microgravity expression in yeast demonstrated this enzyme had
conditions. functional pump activity (Bushart et al., 2013).
Within the developmental stage when spores Spore plasma membrane speciﬁc Ca2+-ATPase
are responsive to gravity reorientation (e.g., the activity was inhibited by treatment with 2',4',5',7'-
ﬁrst 30 hours of development), there is a tetrabromoﬂuorescein (Eosin Yellow), and this
differential calcium ion ﬂux around spores inhibition of calcium efﬂuX was veriﬁed using the
(Chatterjee and Roux, 2000; Salmi et al., 2011). CEL-C calcium sensor. Even though the
EfﬂuX is strongest at the top of the spore relative extracellular calcium differential was eliminated
to gravity, and inﬂux occurs primarily at the by treatment with Eosin Yellow, when this
bottom of the spore. This calcium transport treatment was limited to the period of gravity
differential reorients coincident with spore perception it did not alter the gravity-directed
rotation (Salmi et al., 2011), indicating the ion polar growth of the primary rhizoid. However,
channels and pumps responsible for calcium ﬂux continuous treatment with Eosin Yellow does
are regulated almost instantaneously by gravity completely inhibit rhizoid development,
stimulation. indicating this calcium pumping activity is
This rapid regulation of calcium ﬂux was also necessary for polar tip growth of the rhizoid.
observed in the changing g-force environment of These data are consistent with the important role
parabolic ﬂight. These ﬂight experiments, in of Ca2+-ATPase in maintaining a low cytoplasmic
which the periods of hyper-g (hypergraVity) and calcium concentration and facilitating tip growth.
hypo-g (hypograVity) were of short-duration, The results are also consistent with the model of
demonstrated that the magnitude of the calcium spore gravity perception that implicates a
differential is correlated with the level of gravity localized region of high cytoplasmic calcium at
applied to spores (Salmi et al., 2011). They the bottom of a germinating spore as the key
revealed how rapid the responses to gravity signal for the direction of gravity-directed
ﬂuctuations are in germinating spores, suggesting polarization. Consistent with this interpretation,
changes in the magnitude and direction of the g- the calcium channel antagonist, nifedipine, blocks
force can rapidly alter the transport activity of the gravity-directed downward polarization of
calcium channels and pumps. rhizoid growth (Chatterjee and Roux, 2000). The
Control of the gravity-directed calcium ion predicted gravity-induced calcium entry
distribution in spores is the subject of continued speciﬁcally at the bottom of a spore may be
investigation. Calcium signaling is important in mediated by a mechanosensitive channel.
diverse physiological processes of bacteria, fungi, To date, three classes of MechanoSensitive
plants, and animals. Cells generally keep their (MS) channels have been identiﬁed in plants
cytoplasmic calcium concentrations 10W — based on their sequence similarity to channels in
typically below micromolar — so temporal and other cell types: MscS-like, Midl complementing
location-speciﬁc increases in calcium activity, and two-pore potassium channels
concentration can serve as a Speciﬁc signal (Hamilton et al., 2015). MscS channels are well-
(Gilroy et 211., 1993). This intracellular 10W characterized MS channels of small conductance.
calcium concentration means that the efﬂuX of In bacteria (i.e., E, 0011') the MscS proteins form
calcium observed at the tOp Of germinating homoheptomers which have an open pore size of
Ceratopteris spores would be the result of an just under 13 A (Wang et al., 2008), Recently,
energy-requiring calcium pump, and the inﬂux Of point mutational analysis has demonstrated the
calcium observed at the bottom of the spore would MscS channel is kept in a closed state due to
b6 mediated by a calcium 61121111161. T11616 has b6611 intrinsic membrane pressure, and it is the
recent progress in identifying the transport application of tension to the membrane that causes
proteins that facilitate these processes. the pore to open as a relief valve, like a jack—in-
A candidate for calcium efﬂuX activity has the-box (Malcolm et al., 2015), In the open
been identiﬁed in a plasma membrane-type C212+- conformation, the bacterial MscS channel allows
ATPase that is expressed coincident with the
Gravitational and Space Research V01ume3(2) Dec 2015 11

"
"10","Cannon et al. -- Plant Biology Insights from Space Research

ions into cells to relieve the osmotic stress that In the model plant Arabidopsis, anneXin 1
exerts tension on the plasma membrane. (AnnAtl) is the best characterized of the eight

In eukaryotic cells — including plants — MS anneXins and is a strong candidate for
channels have long been proposed as a graVity participating in the mediation of graVity
sensing mechanism. In this model, some settling responses. There is abundant evidence that
mass (e.g., statolith or protoplasm) exerts tension AnnAtl facilitates calcium transport, either
on the bottom of the cell that results in opening of directly or indirectly (LaohaVisit and Davies,
MS ion channels (Toyota and Gilroy, 2013). This 2009), and also plays an important role in stress
results in local areas of high ion concentration. responses (Clark et al., 2012). Recently,
This model of graVity perception is consistent experiments on Arabidopsis cell cultures during
with the data obtained from Ceratopteris thus far. parabolic ﬂight showed the onset of microgravity
We have recently identiﬁed three members of the conditions induced an increase in calcium and
MscS family of MS channel in Ceratopteris based H202 (Hausmann et al., 2014). This same study
on sequence similarity (Salmi and Roux, found phosphorylation of AnnAtl was rapidly
unpublished results). It will be important to induced in Arabidopsis callus culture cells by
demonstrate MS activity of the proteins encoded hypergraVity condition.. This kind of post-
by these genes and, if they prove to be functional, translational change would be expected to
characterize their role in Ceratopteris spore decrease the peroxidase activity of AnnAtl
development. (Gorecka et al., 2005). Because changes in

The current model of calcium directed graVity gravitational ﬁelds induce changes in reactive
perception in spores also involves candidates for oxygen species (ROS) levels (Barjaktarovié et al.,
graVity-induced downstream signaling steps 2009; Hausmann et al., 2014), and peroxidase
including the Ca2+-binding proteins, calmodulin, activity can reduce ROS levels, changes in the
Ca2+-dependent protein kinase (CDPK), and expression and phosphorylation status of AnnAtl
anneXin. All of these proteins would be the likely might play an important role in regulating the
signal transducers that help mediate cell changes in ROS that occur in microgravity.
polarization events guided by graVity. Annexins AnnAt2 is closely related to AnnAtl and
are a multigene family of multifunctional calcium- hypergraVity conditions, as well as horizontal
dependent membrane proteins found in animal clinorotation (simulated weightless conditions),
and plant cells (Clark et al., 2012). In plants, the induced an increase in AnnAt2 protein levels in
number of anneXin genes in any particular species root apices (Tan et al., 2011). This study also
varies; e.g., the model plant Arabidopsis has eight found AnnAt2 was differentially expressed in the
distinct anneXin genes and rice has ten (Clark et root-cap columella cells of wild-type and pin2
al., 2012). An early study revealed anneXins are mutants. This and other ﬁndings on graVity effects
likely targets of calcium action during graVity on anneXins raise the question, “Do Ceratopteris
responses in plants because graVity induced a spores eXpress any anneXins during the period
redistribution of anneXin immunostain in pea when graVity is ﬁxing the polarity of these cells?”
plumules (Clark et al., 2000). The role of anneXins Two full-length Ceratopteris anneXins —
in graVity responses was hypothesized based on AnnCrl and AnnCr2 — have been identiﬁed and
their participation in the Golgi-mediated both of these anneXins are expressed at the 10
directional secretion of materials to the plasma hour time point after induction of spore
membrane and ECM (Konopka-Postupolska et al., germination during the peak of the trans-cell Ca2+
2011). Localized secretion is a key component current. Transient suppression of AnnCrl
required for polarity establishment and expression by RNAi resulted in polarity disruption
maintenance in plant cells (Belanger and in Ceratopteris spores (Stout et al., 2003). So
Quatrano, 2000). Control of secretion is likely to these anneXins could play an important role in
be important in the response phase of responding to the calcium current and/or
graVitropism, because this phase requires the maintaining this current in germinating spores. A
asymmetrically directed transport of wall key question that needs to be addressed is whether
polysaccharides and newly synthesized plasma the distribution of AnnCrl and/or AnnCr2 in
membrane to the expanding cell periphery. spores becomes polarized as graVity ﬁxes the
12 Gravitational and Space Research Volume 3 (2) Dec 2015

"
"11","Cannon et al. -- Plant Biology Insights from Space Research
polarity of the cells between 9 and 18 hours after a1., 2009; Demidchik et a1., 2011). The
they are induced to germinate, and, if so, does this hypothetical model shown in F igure 2 postulates
polarity change When the spores are turned u side how a lied ATP and PPADS P ridoxal-
p pp y

down? phosphate-6-azopheny1-2', 4'—disu1fonate) could
suppress the gravity response. In this model,

HYPOTHETICAL MODEL OF THE gravity induces the opening of stretch-activated
INITIAL GRAVITY RESPONSE IN channels preferentially along the bottom of the
CERATOPTERIS SPORES spore as predicted by the data in Salmi et al.
The data collected from experiments (2011), and these channels would release ATP, as
investigating the mechanism of gravity perception they , are , known to do from animal and
and response in Ceratopteris have 1e (:1 to the Arabzdapszs ce11s (Weeras1nghe et a1., 2009). If
development of a hypothetical mo de1 of the ATP is released primarily from the bottom of the
cellular events that contribute to the gravity spore, this asymmetric distribution COUIFI induce
response in Ceratopteris richardz’i spores. This the Egggmg 9f callcmiln charﬁneLs (DemliChlk 6t
model is based largely on the pharmacological Th b ) prfimariydi a or? t e f(iAtitTII? O 8120?
observation that blocking calcium channels With . e ottom- ocuse gra 1ent O . W011 e
nifedipine randomized the direction of rhizoid disrupted When extracellular.nucleotides or ATP
emergence (Chatterjee and Roux, 2000). This receptor antagonists are applied, thus altering the
observation along With data showing that Within asynﬁjlnetricalfenltlry ofca101um.f h' h h . 1
hours of germination initiation, gravity induces a (:1 la; y Ob t e asg)e§t:: t IS fy 21“ etigal
calcium current that rapidly changes in parallel mo e ave een V6“ 16 ' .ey test 0 t e 1110.6
With changes in the g-force (ul Haque et a1., 2007; yv111 be to ineasure the eATP in order to determine
Salmi et a1., 2011), outlines the importance of the If a .graehent between the top and bottom . Of
calcium current to the gravity response. germinating. spores eX1sts. A self-referencmg
In addition to the calcium differential between electrochemical biosensor was developed by

the top and bottom of spores, there is now Yapegas et a1. (2.015) t.0 directly measure eATP in
evidence for another gravity-induced chemical 11V1ngs ce11s. [1s1ng thl.s tool, a gradient 9f eATP
gradient in spores that could help to regulate their Wis m easured 1n gernnnating Ceratopterzs spores
polarization (i.e., an eATP gradient). A role for Wlthm 0'5 hours (if hght. exposure ‘i‘nd between
eATP in gravity-directed polarization would be 16-22 hours after hght-mltlated germinationThis
consistent With studies showing calcium channels gradient . pers1sted throughout the critical
in plant cells can be regulated by extracellular polarization period. S1199,“ that thls gradient
nucleotides and that the concentration of these cou1c1p1ay a role in mediating gravity-induced 9611
nucleotides is regulated by ecto-apyrases (Clark polarization is that .disrupting It by applying
and Roux, 2011) _ enzymes necessary for the extracellular nueleotides nniformly around the
polarized growth of pollen tubes and root hairs. spores, or blocking Its act1V1ty by a purinoceptor
The documented expression of an apyrase-like antagonist,. mhlblts the grayity response .1n
enzyme in Ceratopteris during the period of Ceratop 1.6m. spores When they are applied during
polarity ﬁxation led us to hypothesize the ﬁéznaatioln Eeriod. d d . f h
extracellular nucleotides and apyrases might play itiona ata are, nee e .tO V6“ y t e
a role in gravity-directed early growth and model. Among the model s predictions, one of the
development (Bushart et a1 2013) most important that remains to be demonstrated is
Data in Bushart et a1, (2013') show spores that extracellular ATP can actually establish or
release ATP as they gernainate and grow and help contribute to the calcium current. To help
applied nucleotides and a purinoceptor antagonist address thls question, Ceratopterzs spores
suppress gravity-directed polarization. harvested from plants expresszing the Yellow
Collectively, these observations are consistent Cangellei);1p3.60nF§ ET‘biis 6:11 1E: ah senfsor Yul b:
With the hypothesis that extracellular nucleotides use ' .W1 e app 16 .0t . uni 0”? y an
could inﬂuence calcium transport in Ceratopteris unilaterally in order to determine if there is a link
spores as they do in Arabidopsis (Demidchik et between extracellular nucleotides and calcium
uptake in Ceratopteris spores. Using the newly

Gravitational and Space Research V01ume3(2) Dec 2015 13

"
"12","Cannon et al. -- Plant Biology Insights from Space Research
developed Ceratopteris richardii transformation if knocking-out speciﬁc genes related to calcium
methods (Plackett et a1., 2014; Bui et 211., 2015; and eATP signaling can block spore gravity
P1ackett., 2015), scientists can begin investigating response.
° .. ° o°c'2‘un2r"";:5g=52é’3~aa§132.2%::W ° .. “ e
n n "" a 2."" ”'g-2Fﬂ’«;{::j:g}?is’9 7,5311 :3 c c c ""
,. v .’ §c;§;;;€1€§>§g&ga§;3.2;:2 o
’ a “ ~ “""¢""§’:‘§s?gs%:;grg to 5 = ° ..
c ' r. c n “09’ cﬂcn .‘ ""‘-.‘(.a c ""‘30"" 'c,,c n 0
n er. c chno 0' 0% C 2"" 5,9330 "" 5. °
0 c (,0 00...: €001: . 0 'ﬂ Zeno 0“ “CO ‘: r.
c ‘ r - c. "" 'o . ‘ l [ O n o “n o C
o 'u ,. t “ "" .' "" -“' n 5 °
‘3 c o 9 “ p. O h c 0 ‘3 o
“r. c "" a o c. \ “~ .“ ""' / ' ?o D “ ﬂ
0 r: 2‘ a 0 c- I “‘~ .° .' o 0 O 00 c
ﬂ '- cy . o c c'n‘hn (.0 v
Cr, . :0 \ 56’. uc::c.€‘ (/ ca ( O
O 0"" n"" \ c 7’7"" :q ' ' V“ 2. 0:"" > 7” n (-0
r ""' ‘ n Chou: 0°05 .‘n "". ° 0
r 0 (”L OD rv‘r O"" c ; ‘0 :0 O
° ° .‘ i .c. 4. :“‘f °.'.O° . ‘. U .-. o c
n (- / : .‘c': A. f '4 A 5 0° ""- n . \K c 0
0 c _ ‘ 'c n 9 . 2 ~
0 a / . - .. ‘3‘ Q ATPE. ( r. .0 O N O a 1:
a 5 . c.::;l.c O 1:: ° 0 F9 o r ,~ c
c o c o .,. c .0 3:000:02 .,::Oo.:.or».c,.¢ a .. .0 o o
o h a :Oo.::o:02..:‘:.: ’::-.c°o.o.::z° 0 =
o . . .r=.:.c c .. 0.0.019 0.09. . o .
c I . - o c n. on c. Q . o , o c
.. '0 co. 0.0 '0“. \
. o . /// ' . r“ \ , ,.
(I O o [f \\ 1‘ c P.
, v: _‘ ° 0 0 °
|C'ﬂn!Ca). :0“. c D
'- . g .
,_. ‘ o C o n o r. . . c o
. g . 6. . o O u f O “' O O O n n . °
‘caloumpumps o ' . , . c o o , o , °
"" c 0 . o . n . c. . c. V D Q
‘ . ., ° ° 0 a O D O n 0 ' E. .c O 0 °
mmiaumchannels ‘ '0 ° "" ° '0‘ 0 ° , ° . ° 0 ""
Q 9 . I I . 0
I' ,1 m, ngh eATP
I
Figure 2. Hypothetical model showing the role of eATP and calcium in polarization of Ceratopteris richardii
spores. In response to gravity, an undeﬁned mass would settle, selectively activating mechano-sensitive
channels primarily along the bottom of the spore. These mechano-sensitive channels could release ATP. The
ATP released accumulates asymmetrically, resulting in a gradient Where the eATP 0n the bottom of the spore
is higher than the top. The eATP could activate calcium channels directly or indirectly, establishing or
contributing to the initiation of the trans-cell Ca2+ current that is essential for gravity-directed polarization.
Ground-based experiments, along With results the results could assist both plant and animal
from spores grown in space, have provided scientists in understanding how cells sense and
valuable insight into the molecular mechanisms of respond to gravity, allowing them to improve
gravity perception and response in single plant conditions for astronauts and plants in space.
cells. These results are unique because they can
be used to explain how many different eukaryotic CONCLUSION
cells are affected b Chan es in mechanical forces - -
h . t X th g . t ’ Durmg the last several decades, the umque
suc as raw . 8 ese eX erlmen s ro ress - -
g y p p g ’ env1r0nment of space has prOVIded valuable
14 Gravitational and Space Research Volume 3 (2) Dec 2015

"
"13","Cannon et al. -- Plant Biology Insights from Space Research
insights into the role of gravity in plant growth on plants and spaceﬂight and man-made
and development. As science and technology environments on biological systems.
progresses, the experimental conditions for Advances in Space Research 36: 1162-1166
carrying out research in space have greatly Bui LT, Cordle AR, Irish EE, Cheng CL (2015)
improved. These improvements included, Transient and stable transformation of
prominently, providing “smarter” and more Ceratopteris richardii gametophytes.
versatile growth chambers, opportunities for BioMed Central (BMC) Research Notes 8:
longer-term experiments, better environmental 214
monitoring and control, and advanced data Bushart TJ, Cannon AB, 111 Haque A, San Miguel
telemetry of real-time operations. Additionally, P, Mostajeran K, Clark GB, Porterﬁeld DM,
scientists and engineers have also developed Roux SJ (2013) RNA-seq analysis identiﬁes
better preservation methods, ensuring genomic potential modulators of gravity response in
and morphological studies Will have high-quality spores of Ceratopteris (Parkeriaceae):
results. Using all of these new tools, scientists evidence for modulation by calcium pumps
have gained and Will continue to gain many new and apyrase activity. American Journal of
insights about the role of gravity in plant growth Botany 100(1): 161-174
and development of multicellular and single-cell Camacho J (2015) Advanced Biological Research
plant systems. System (ABRS). National Aeronautics and
Space Administration, Washington, DC,
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS USA. Website http://www.nasa.g0v/
Experimental work and support during the 1612:1321 _1pages/station/research/eXperiments/
rrinfhimn ri ri '
%:%:atg:an; 1211\ISX13aA111\jI(541(3}t gasSfRozrﬂiedGlg: Chatterjee 1.61, Roux SJ (2000) Ceratopteris
and NNX15AB8 5A to SJR and MLS. rzchardzz: a preductlve model for revealmg
secrets of Slgnalmg and development.
REFERENCES gggrnal ofPlant Growth Regulation 19: 284-
Aubry-Hivet D, Nziengui H, Rapp K, Oliveira 0, (31101 J, Tanaka K, Cao Y, Q1 Y, Qiu J, Liang
Paponov IA» Li Y, Hauslage J» Vagt N: Y, Lee SY, Stacey G (2014) Identiﬁcation of
Braun M, Ditengou FA: Dovzhenko A, plant receptor for extracellular ATP.
Palme K (2014) Analysis of gene expression Science 343; 290-294
during parabolic ﬂights reveals distinct early Clark GB, Morgan RO, Fernandez MP, Roux s]
gravity responses in Arabidopsis roots. Plant (2012) Evolutionary adaptation Of plant
31.01083” 163 129-141 annexins has diversiﬁed their molecular
Barjaktarovié Z: SChﬁtZ W: Madlung J: Fladerer structures, interactions, and functional roles.
C, Nordheim A: Hampp R (2009) Changes in New Phytologist 196: 695-712
the effective gravitational ﬁeld strength Clark GB, Morgan RO, Fernandez MP, Salmi
affect the state of phosphorylation of stress— ML, Roux SJ (2014) Breakthroughs
related pfOtCll’lS in callus cultures Of spotlighting roles for extracellular
Arabidopsis thaliana. JOW’WZ 0f nucleotides and apyrases in stress responses
Experimental Botany 60: 779-789 and growth and development. Plant Science
Barlow PW, Klingele E, Klein G, Miroslav M 225; 107-116
(2008) Leaf movements 0f bean plants and Clark GB, Rafati DS, Bolton RJ, Dauwalder M,
lunar gravity. Plant Signaling and Behavior Roux SJ (2000) Redistribution of anneXin in
3: 1083-1090 gravistimulated pea plumules. Plant
Belanger KD» Quatrano RS (2000) Polarity: the Physiology and Biochemistry 38: 937-947
fOlC Of lOCﬂllZGd S€Cf€thfL Current OplI/llOI/l Clark GB, Roux SJ (2011) Apyrases, extracellular
in Plant 31.01083” 3: 67'72 ATP, and the regulation of growth. Current
Brinckmann E (2005) ESA hardware for plant Opinion in Plant Biology 14; 700-706
research on the International Space Station. Demidchik V, Shang Z, Shin R, (3012100 R,
Space Life Sciences: gravity-related effects Laohavisit A, Shabala S, Davies JM (2011)
Gravitational and Space Research Volume 3 (2) Dec 2015 15

"
"14","Cannon et al. -- Plant Biology Insights from Space Research
Receptor-like activity evoked by Galston AW (1992) Photosynthesis as a basis for
extracellular ADP in Arabidopsis root life-support on Earth and in space.
epidermal plasma membrane. Plant Bioscience 42: 490-493
Physiology 15: 1375-1385 Gilroy S, Bethke PC, Jones RL (1993) Calcium
Demidchik V, Shang Z, Shin R, Thompson E, homeostasis in plants. Journal of Cell
Rubio L, Laohavisit A, Mortimer JC, Science 106: 453-462
Chivasa S, Slabas AR, Glover BJ, Gorecka KM, Konopka-Postupolska D, Hennig J ,
Schachtman DP, Shabala SN, Davies JM Buchet R, Pikula S (2005) Peroxidase
(2009)P1antextrace11u1ar ATP signalling by activity of anneXin 1 from Arabidopsis
plasma membrane NADPH oxidase and Ca2+ thaliana. Biochemical and Biophysical
channels. Plant Journal 58: 903-913 Research Communications 336: 868-875
Deslauriers SD, Larsen PB (2010) FERONIA is a Halstead TW, Dutcher FR (1984) Status and
key modulator of brassinosteroid and prospects: Experiments on plants in space.
ethylene responsiveness in Arabidopsis Annals ofBotany 54: 3-18
hypoeotyls. Molecular Plant3: 626-640 Hamilton ES, Schlegel AM, Haswell ES (2015)
Driss—Ecole D, Legue V, Carnero-Diaz E, Perbal United in diversity: mechanosensitive ion
G (2008) Gravisensitivity and channels in plants. Annual Review of Plant
automorphogenesis 0f lentil seedling roots Biology 66: 113-137
grown on board the International Space Haruta M, Sussman MR (2012) The effect of a
Station. Physiologia Plantarum 134: 191- genetically reduced plasma membrane
201 protonmotive force on vegetative growth of
Duan QH, Kita D, Li C, Cheung AY, Wu Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology 158: 1158-
HM (2011) FERONIA reeeptor-like kinase 1171
regulates RHO GTPase signaling of root hair Hausmann N, Fengler S, Hennig A, Franz-
development. Proceedings of the National Wachtel M, Hampp R, Neef M (2014)
Academy ofScienceS USA 107: 17821-17826 Cytosolic calcium, hydrogen peroxide, and
Dubinin NP, Vaulina EN, Kosikov KV, Anikeeva related gene expression and protein
ID, MoskVitin EV, Zapadnaya AA, Kostina modulation in Arabidopsis thaliana cell
LN, Shtrauh GA, Kryzhanovskaya LM, cultures respond immediately to altered
Gubareva 1G, Nechitailo GS, Mashinsky AL gravitation: parabolic ﬂight data. Plant
(1973) Effects of spaceﬂight factors on the Biology 16: 120-128
heredity of higher and lower plants. Life Hickok LG, Warne TR, Slocum MK (1987)
Sciences in Space Research 11: 105-110 Ceratopteris richardii: applications for
Edwards ES, Roux SJ (1994) Limited period of experimental plant biology. American
graviresponsiveness in germinating spores of Journal ofBotany 74: 1304-1316
Ceratopteris richardii. Planta 195: 150-152 Johnsson A, Solheim BGB, Iversen TH (2009)
Eseobar-Restrepo JM, Huck N, Kessler S, Gravity ampliﬁes and microgravity decreases
Gagliardini V, Gheyselinek J, Yang WC, circumnutations in Arabidopsis thaliana
Grossniklaus U (2007) The FERONIA stems: results from a space experiment. New
reeeptor-like kinase mediates male-female Phytologist 182: 621-629
interactions during pollen tube reception. Kessler SA, Shimosato-Asano H, Keinath NF,
Science 317: 656—660 Wuest SE, Ingram G, Panstruga R,
Ferl RJ, Koh J, Denison F, Paul A-L (2015) Grossniklaus U (2010) Conserved molecular
Spaceﬂight induces speciﬁc alterations in the components for pollen tube reception and
proteomes of Arabidopsis. Astrobiology 15: fungal invasion. Science 330: 968-971
32-56 Kiss JZ (2015) Conducting plant experiments in
Fisahn J, Klingele E, Barlow P (2015) Lunar space. In Plant Gravitmpism: Methods and
gravity affects leaf movement ofArabidopSiS Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology,
thaliana in the International Space Station. Blaneaﬂor E.B. (ed.) 1309: 255-283. New
Planta 241: 1509-1518 York: Humana Press
16 Gravitational and Space Research Volume 3 (2) Dec 2015

"
"15","Cannon et al. -- Plant Biology Insights from Space Research
Kittang AI, Iversen TH, Fossum KR, Mazars C, revealed in microgravity. New Phytologist
Carnero—Diaz E, Boucheron-Dubuisson E, Le 186: 648-656
Disquet I, Legué V, Herranz R, Pereda-Loth Morrow RC, Bula RJ, Tibbitts TW, Dinauer WR
V, Medina FJ (2014) Exploration of plant (1994) The ASTROCULTURETM ﬂight
growth and development using the European experiment series, validating technologies for
Modular Cultivation System (ECMS) facility growing plants in space. Advances in Space
on the International Space Station. Plant Research 14: 29-37
Biology 16: 528-538 Mullen JL, Turk E, Johnson K, Wolverton C,
Konopka-Postupolska D, Clark G, Hofmann A Ishikawa H, Simmons C, Still D, Evans
(2011) Structure, function, and membrane ML (1998) Root-growth behavior of the
interactions of plant annexins: an update. Arabidopsis mutant rgrl - roles of
Plant Science 181: 230-241 gravitropism and circumnutation in the
Kordyum EL, Sytnik KM, Chernyaeva II (1983) waving/coiling phenomenon. Plant
Peculiarities of genital organ formation in Physiology 118: 1139-1145
Arabidopsis thaliana (L) Heynh. under Musgrave ME, Kuang AX, Brown CS, Matthews
spaceﬂight conditions. Advances in Space SW (1998) Changes in Arabidopsis leaf
Research 3: 247-250 ultrastructure, chlorophyll and carbohydrate
Kostina L, Anikeeva I, Vaulina E (1984) The content during spaceﬂight depend on
inﬂuence of spaceﬂight factors on Viability ventilation. Annals ofBotany 81: 503-512
and mutability of plants. Advances in Space Musgrave ME, Kuang AX, Matthews SW (1997)
Research 4: 65-70 Plant reproduction during spaceﬂight:
Kuang AX, Musgrave ME, Matthews SW (1996b) importance of the gaseous environment.
Modiﬁcation of reproductive development in Planta 203: 8177-8184
Arabidopsis thaliana under spaceﬂight Nakashima J, Liao F, Sparks JA, Tang Y,
conditions. Planta 198: 588-594 Blancaﬂor EB (2014a) The actin
Kuang AX, Xiao Y, Musgrave ME (1996a) cytoskeleton is a suppressor of the
Cytochemical localization of reserves during endogenous skewing behaviour of
seed development in Arabidopsis thaliana Arabidopsis primary roots in microgravity.
under spaceﬂight conditions. Annals of Plant Biology 16: 142-150
Botany 78: 343-351 Nakashima J , Sparks JA, Carver Jr JA, Stephens
Kwon T, Sparks JA, Nakashima J , Allen SN, SD, Kwon T, Blancaﬂor EB (2014b)
Tang Y, Blancaﬂor EB (2015) Delaying seed germination and improving
Transcriptional response of Arabidopsis seedling ﬁxation: lessons learned during
seedlings during spaceﬂight reveals science and payload veriﬁcation tests for
peroxidase and cell wall remodeling genes Advanced Plant EXperiments (APEX) 02-1
associated With root hair development. in space. Gravitational and Space Research
American Journal ofBotany 102: 21-35 2: 54-67
LaohaVisit A, Davies JM (2009) Multifunctional Okada K, Shimura Y (1990) Reversible root tip
annexins. Plant Science 177: 532-539 rotation in Arabidopsis seedlings induced by
Malcolm HR, Blount P, Maurer JA (2015) The obstacle-touching stimulus.
mechanosensitive channel of small Science 250: 274-276
conductance (MscS) functions as a jack—in- Oliva M, Dunand C (2007) Waving and skewing:
the-bOX. Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta- how gravity and the surface of growth media
Biomembranes 1848: 159-166 affect root development in Arabidopsis. New
Millar KDL, Johnson CM, Edelmann RE, Kiss JZ Phytologist 176: 37-43
(2011) An endogenous growth pattern of Paul A-L, Amalﬁtano CE, Ferl RJ (2012a)
roots is revealed in seedlings grown in Plant growth strategies are remodeled by
microgravity.Astr0biology11: 787-797 spaceﬂight. BioMed Central (BMC) Plant
Millar KDL, Kumar P, Correll MJ, Mullen JL, Biology 12: 232
Hangarter RP, Edelmann RE, Kiss JZ (2010) Paul A-L, Ferl RJ (2015) Spaceﬂight exploration
A novel phototropic response to red light is in plant gravitational biology. In Plant
Gravitational and Space Research Volume 3 (2) Dec 2015 17

"
"16","Cannon et al. -- Plant Biology Insights from Space Research
Gravitropism: Methods and Protocols, microgravity. Advances in Space Research
Methods in Molecular Biology, Blancaﬂor 31: 215-220
E.B. (ed.) 1309: 285-305. New York: Salmi ML, Roux SJ (2008) Gene expression
Springer Science Business Media changes induced by spaceﬂight in single-
Paul A-L, Levine HG, McLamb W, Norwood KL, cells of the fern Ceratopteris richardii.
Reed D, Stutte GW, Wells HW, Ferl RJ Planta 229: 151-159
(2005) Plant molecular biology in the space Salmi ML, 111 Haque A, Bushart TJ, Stout SC,
station era: utilization of Kennedy Space Roux SJ, Porterﬁeld DM (2011) Changes in
Center (KSC) ﬁxation tubes With RNAlater. gravity rapidly alter the magnitude and
Acta Astronautica 56: 623-628 direction of a cellular calcium current. Planta
Paul A-L, Manak MS, Mayﬁeld JD, Reyes MF, 233: 911-920
Gurley WB, F erl RJ (2011) Parabolic ﬂight Schultz ER, Kelley KL, Paul A-L, Ferl RJ (2013)
induces changes in gene expression patterns A method for preparing spaceﬂight
in Arabidopsis thaliana. Astrobiology 11: RNAlater-ﬁxed Arabidopsis thaliana
743-758 (Brassicaceae) tissue for scanning electron
Paul A-L, Wheeler RM, Levine HG, Ferl RJ microscopy. Applications in Plant Sciences
(2013b) Fundamental plant biology enabled 1(8)
by the space shuttle. American Journal of Shih HW, Miller ND, Dai C, Spalding EP,
Botany 100: 226-234 Monshausen GB (2014) The receptor-like
Paul A-L, Zupanska AK, Ostrow DT, Zhang YP, kinase FERONIA is required for mechanical
Sun Y, Li JL, Shanker S, Farmerie WG, signal transduction in Arabidopsis seedlings.
Amalﬁtano CE, Ferl RJ (2012b) Spaceﬂight Current Biology 24: 1887-1892
transcriptomes: unique responses to a novel Solheim BGB, Johnsson A, Iversen TH (2009)
environmentAstrobiology 12: 40-56 Ultradian rhythms in Arabidopsis thaliana
Paul A-L, Zupanska AK, Schultz ER, Ferl RJ leaves in microgravity. New Phytologist 183:
(201321) Organ-speciﬁc remodeling of the 1043-1052
Arabidopsis transcriptome in response to Stout SC, Clark GB, Archer-Evans S, Roux SJ
spaceﬂight. BioMed Central (BMC) Plant (2003) Rapid and efﬁcient suppression of
Biology 13: 112 gene expression in a single-cell model
Plackett ARG, Huang LD, Sanders HL, Langdale system, Ceratopteris richardz’i. Plant
JA (2014) High-efﬁciency stable Physiology 131: 1165-1168
transformation of the model fern species Summerlin LB (1977) Skylab, Classroom in
Ceratopteris richardz’i Via microparticle Space. Scientiﬁc & Technical Information
bombardment. Plant Physiology 165: 3-14 Ofﬁce, National Aeronautics and Space
Plackett ARG, Rabbinowitsch EH, Langdale JA Administration, US. Government Printing
(2015) Protocol: genetic transformation of Ofﬁce,Washingt0n, D.C.,USA
the fern Ceratopteris richardii through Tan C, Wang H, Zhang Y, Qi B, Xu GX, Zheng
microparticle bombardment. Plant Methods HQ (2011) A proteomic approach to
11: 37 analyzing responses of Arabidopsis thaliana
Porterﬁeld DM, Barta DJ, Ming DW, Morrow root cells to different gravitational conditions
RC, Musgrave ME (2000) using an agravitropic mutant, pin2, and its
ASTROCULTURETM root metabolism and Wild type. Proteome Science 9: 72
cytochemical analysis. sze Sciences: Space Tang WQ, Brady SR, Sun Y, Muday GK, Roux
sze Support Systems and the Lunar Farside SJ (2003) Extracellular ATP inhibits root
Crater SAHA Proposal. Advances in Space gravitropism at concentrations that inhibit
Research 26: 315-318 polar auxin transport. Plant Physiology 131:
Roux SJ (2012) Root waving and skewing - 147-154
unexpectedly in micro-g. BioMed Central Thompson MV, Holbrook NM (2004) Root-gel
(BMC) Plant Biology 12: 231 interactions and the root waving behavior of
Roux S], Chatterjee A, Hillier S, Cannon T (2003) Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology 135: 1822-
Early development of fern gametophytes in 1837
18 Gravitational and Space Research Volume 3 (2) Dec 2015

"
"17","Cannon et al. -- Plant Biology Insights from Space Research
Toyota M, Gilroy S (2013) Gravitropism and 6 orbital station. Advances in Space Research
mechanical signaling in plants. American 1: 163-169
Journal ofBotany 100: 111-125 Wang W], Black SS, Edwards MD, Miller S,
111 Haque A, Rokkam M, De Carlo AR, Wereley Morrison EL, Bartlett W, Dong CJ, Naismith
ST, Roux SJ, Irazoqui PP, Porterﬁeld DM JH, Booth IR (2008) The structure of an
(2007). A MEMS fabricated ce11 open form of an E. coli mechanosensitive
electrophysiology biochip for in Silica channel at 3.45 A resolution. Science 321:
calcium measurements. Sensors and 1179-1183
Actuators B: Chemical 123: 391-399 Weerasinghe RR, Swanson SJ, Okada SF, Garrett
Vanegas DC, Clark GB, Cannon AE, Roux SJ, MB, Kim SY, Stacey G, Boucher RC, Gilroy
Chaturvedi P, McLamore ES (2015) A self— S, Jones AM (2009) Touch induces ATP
referencing biosensor for real-time release in Arabidopsis roots that is
monitoring of physiological ATP transport in modulated by the heterotrimeric G-protein
plant systems. Biosensors and Bioelectronics complex. F ederation of European
74: 37-44 Biochemical Societies (FEBS) Letters 583:
Vaulina EN, Anikeeva ID, Kostina LN, Kogan 2521-2526
1G, Palmbakh LR, Mashinsky AL (1981) Yang X, Wang B, Farris B, Clark G, Roux
The role of weightlessness in the genetic SJ (2015) Modulation of root skewing
damage from preﬂight gamma-irradiation of in Arabidopsis by apyrases and extracellular
organisms in experiments aboard the Salyut ATP. Plant Cell Physiology 56: 2197-2206
Gravitational and Space Research Volume 3 (2) Dec 2015 19

"
