"","x"
"1","ISS EXERCISE COUNTERMEASURES —
RuSSIan Countermeasure Systems for Adverse Effects of
Microg raVIty on Long-Duratlon ISS Flights
Inessa B. Kozlovskaya; E. N.Yarmanova; A. D.Yegorov;V. |. Stepantsov; E.V. Fomina; E. S.Tomi|ovaskaya
INTRODUCTION: The system of countermeasures for the adverse effects of microgravity developed in the USSR supported the successful
implementation of Iong—duration spaceﬂight (LDS) programs on the Salyut and Mir orbital stations and was subse-
quently adapted for ﬂights on the International Space Station (ISS). From 2000 through 2010, crews completed 26 ISS
ﬂight increments ranging in duration from 140 to 216 d, with the participation of 27 Russian cosmonauts.These ﬂights
have made it possible to more precisely determine a crewmember’s level of conditioning, better assess the advantages
and disadvantages of training processes, and determine prospects for future developments.
KEYWORDS: spaceﬂight, human, history.
Koslovskaya |B,Yarmahova EN, Yegorov AD, Stepantsov VI, Fomiha EV,Tomilovaskaya ES. Russian countermeasure systems for adverse effects of microgravity on
long—durat/on ISS ﬂights. Aerosp Med Hum Perform. 2015; 86(12, Suppl.):A24—A31.
esearch performed during long-duration spaceﬂights Long-Duration Spaceﬂight Factors and Their
(LDS) has shown that those countermeasures which Effects on the Body
eproduce a distribution of bodily ﬂuids similar to that During spaceﬂight, a person encounters a new, challenging
on Earth prevent or signiﬁcantly reduce the manifestation of environment full of unusual sensations and stressful, critical
unfavorable changes resulting from exposure to spaceﬂight work that is strictly regimented time-Wise. Successful execution
factors.1’2’4’5 ﬂiese countermeasures typically compensate for of a mission is tied to recognition of the fact that errors by the
microgravity’s insufﬁcient loading of the musculoskeletal and crew or some other causes could lead to unforeseen, dire conse-
cardiovascular systems. 1116 system of microgravity counter- quences. Ihe human body responds to this Challenge by devel-
measures developed in Russia to support the safe execution oping universal adaptive reactions, the intensity and time
of LDS includes the f0110wi11g23’5’8’11’13’16 characteristics of Which are individual in nature.3
While the environment of outer s ace is hostile to humans,
1. Physical exercises that create loads on the musculoskeletal, . . . p . .

_ _ _ spaceﬂight takes place in vehicles that are equipped With pres-

cardiovascular, and other systems stimulate propriocep- . . . .
_ _ _ surized habitation compartments and the necessary life sup-
tive and related sensory systems and thus fac111tate nor- . . . . h . 'ﬁ
1 function 0 f the re ulator s stems for 0sture and port systems. Ionizing radiation does not ave a s1gn1 cant
ma _ g Y Y p effect on the crewmember’s body during ﬂights below the
locomotion. , . . . . . .
_ _ _ _ Earths radiation belts and during periods of 10W solar act1V1ty.
2. Phys1cal methods and equipment intended to reduce redis- .
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Crewmembers may experience adverse effects from nervous
tribution ofbodily ﬂuids in m1cr0grav1ty and during readap- . . . .
_ _ _ and emotional stress related to their critical, stressful work,
tation t0 1 G—occlus10n cuffs 1n the early stages of exposure . . . . .

_ _ _ _ _ particularly in the event of off-nominal Situations 0r emer-
to m1cr0grav1ty conditions, negative pressure on the lower encies However durin LDS the mos t si mi ﬁcan t factor
half of the body (the Chibis suit) during ﬂight, and the Ken- g ' ’ g ’ g
tavr G-suit during landing and postﬂight adaptation.

3. Measures facilitating ﬂuid retention—Water and salt From the Institute for Biomedical Problems, Moscow, Russia.
supplements. Address correspondence to: Jacqueline M. Reeves, NASA Johnson Space Center, Division
. . . . Resource Support, Biomedical Research & Environmental Sciences Division, 2101 NASA
4' PharmaCOIOglcal preparations Intended to prevent pOSSIble Parkway, MC Wyle/SK/37, Houston, TX 77058; Jacquelinem.reeves@nasa.g0v
negatiVe VGStibUIar) cardiovascular, and metabOIiC €ff€CtS 0f Reprint & Copyright © by the Aerospace Medical Association, Alexandria, VA.
microgravity DOI: 10.3357/AMHREC042015
A24 AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 12, Section II December2015

"
"2","DEVELOPMENT OF RUSSIAN CMs—Kozlovskaya etal.
affecting the human body is microgravity, Which prompts the and locomotor functions. ""ihese physical methods are intended
development of a broad spectrum of negative Changes in vari- to reproduce in microgravity a distribution of bodily ﬂuids that
0us bodily systems: cardiovascular, motor, sensory, musculo- closely resembles that on Earth. Water and salt supplements,
skeletal, and others.3’12 Which foster the body's retention of ﬂuid, increase orthostatic

""ihe main link in the mechanism of the microgravity effect is stability and tolerance to g loads during descent. Also, a well-
the removal ofbodyweight and, as a consequence, the deforma- balanced diet and medicines are used to correct possible nega-
tion of key human body structures (including, ﬁrst of all, the tive vestibular, cardiovascular, and other bodily reactions to the
lead gravity receptors—the otoliths, proprioceptors, and sup- effects of microgravity.13’18
port-reference receptorsg’lo) concurrently With the redistribu- A key element in the countermeasures system for 188 ﬂights,
tion of bodily ﬂuids caused by the removal of hydrostatic as well as for previous ﬂights on Russian space stations, is the
pressure in ﬂuid media. ""ihese changes trigger subsequent phys- twice-daily physical training that takes place over the course of
iological functional and structural changes in bodily systems 2.5 h using all available onboard training equipment. Physical
that are summarized belowz6’7 training includes locomotor and cycle ergometer exercise, as
. Demineralization 0 f the skeleton; well as strength trainingfihe regimencrecomnaended for Russian

. . . . cosmonauts 1s set forth 1n a 4-Wktra1n1ng mlcrocycle protocol,
- Decondltlonlng, atrophy, and structural changes 1n the mus- . . . .
cular apparatus; 1nclud1ng: 3 10ad1ngcdays and 1 day of actlve rest. ""ihe levels
. . . . of locomotor loads 1n the treadmlll cycle vary on dlfferent
- Dlsrupted coordlnatlon of movement (posture, locomotlon, . . .
purposeful movements); days between 3.00_01 to 4400 m W1th an average 1ntens1ty 0f
. . . . 117—135 m - mm ; 0n the cycle ergometer they are 19,700
- Decondltlonlng 0f the cardlovascular system; _1 . _1 .
0 Reduced orthostatic tolerance; to 23’250 kg . m (3220 t0_31800 W_-1m1n ) W1th a_I} aver-
. . . age load of about 800 kg - m -m1n (130 W - min ). ""the
0 Reduced res1stance t0 graV1tat10na110ads; . .
. Re duce d overall capability to work. energy cost of the loads on var10us days of $1164 gncrocycle
ranges from 380 to 580 kcal (1600 to 2500 kl). ’ ’

""ihe typical progression of the aforementioned disorders dur- ""ihe ISS physical training program was created taking into
ing LDS has allowed specialists to combine them, according to account universal principles of human adaptation to physical
etiological factors, into a series of syndromes listed in Table I. 10ads,7’14 including: systematic physical training throughout

the entire ﬂight, including variety, With the primary objective
Physical Training During Long-Duration Spaceﬂight being to maintain speciﬁc physical parameters and prevent
""ihe ever-present tendency for deconditioning to rapidly functional and structural changes in the body's main systems.
develop in microgravity dictates that LDS must include the sys- Activities include static (loading suits), dynamic (walking, run-
tematic performance of physical exercise. According to crew- ning, jumping, strength training), and inertial-impact actions
members' reports,1apses in exercise over the course of 7 to 10 d in the physical training program. In-ﬂight physical training is
during LDS are accompanied by sensations of a “rapid deterio- characterized by its high intensity, interval-based structure and
ration” of physical functioning, and the time necessary to restore precise focus of each day of the cycle on training various physi-
functioning is much longer than the duration of the lapse.7 cal parameters (Fig. 1).

""ihe present system of countermeasures used by Russian Hie exercises on the ﬁrst day of the microcycle are aimed
International Space Station (188) crewmembers is based on the at maintaining speed and load-bearing endurance and
experience of LDS (up to 430 d) on Russian space stations.9’11 include, along With walking and running at a rate of 120 to
As noted previously, this system includes the following: physi- 140 steps/min, sessions of high-speed running at a rate of
cal exercises and specialized suits that provide loads, including 200 to 300 steps/min [12 to 14 km/h (7.5 to 8.7 mph)], Which
aXial weight loading, on the musculoskeletal and cardiovascu- promotes the maintenance of speed and strength proper-
lar systems and thus activate proprioceptive systems (particu- ties of the skeletal muscles and the anaerobic mechanisms of
larly the sensory input system) that aid in retaining postural the cardiovascular system. Pulse rate upon completion of
Table l. Weightlessness Syndromes.

PHENOMENON
OR SYNDROME SYMPTOMS ACTING FACTORS
Motion sickness Illusions, dizziness, disorientation, body orientation disturbance, complex Disruption ofthe activity of normal gravity receptor
vegetative disorders — nausea, vomiting entries and intersensory interactions
Gravitational ataxia Disordered posture, locomotion, metrics of all types of ﬁne voluntary Removal of support, reduction of proprioceptive activity,
movements (locomotor, postural), atonia, hyperreﬂexia, and other Change in motion biomechanics
disru ptions of motor control system activity
Muscular hypogravity Atonia, atrophy, reduced speed and strength properties, and reduced Reduced physical loads and body weight, Change in
syndrome endurance, with the greatest manifestation ofthe aforementioned motion biomechanics; removal/reduction of activity
in the system of extensor muscles in gravity receptor systems — support, vestibular
Orthostatic deﬁciency Increased heart rate, lowering ofthe arterial pressure, and, in severe cases, Extended period spent in conditions that do not require
syndrome collapse when transitioning to the upright position and under 9 loads maintenance ofan upright posture in a gravitational ﬁeld
AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 12, Section II DecemberZOlS A25

"
"3","DEVELOPMENT OF RUSSIAN CMs—Kozlovskaya etal.
200,00 16,00 200,00 * » 16,00
14,00 1 14,00
8 150,00 ' ' 12,00 { 8 150,00 ’ ' 12,00 %
5’. 10,00 § i. 1 10,00 2
52 3 x 11‘
‘1: 100,00 ' 08,00 1°; g 100,00 ~ 08,00 16',
1- 1-
§ 0590 § 3. 1 06,00 g
50.00 1 - 04,00 ° ° 50,00 1 1 04,00 °
02,00 ' 02,00
00,00 00,00 00,00 00,00
8888823833333333333333’3338 88888333993333333333333338
88888838333:zzszazzznnzazz 8888888338832232232222222:
éééééééééééééééééééééééééé éééééééééééééééééééééééééé
spam epemn
—Load1<r —HeartRatc —Tamps —Spccd KM/w —L0ad Kl’ —HeartRate —Tamps —Speed KM/q
Key:
200,00 . . 16,00
1 14,00 npnmr = restramt force
9 150,00 1 1 12,00 1
U E
1'. 1 10,00 :5 IICC = heart rate
3 100,00 ~ 08,00 3
ES 8
a ‘ 05100 g cxopocrb = speed
= 50,00 1 04,00 9
‘ 02""” BpeMﬂ = time
00,00 00,00
§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§ Kr=kg
epemn
—Load Kr —HeartRate —Tamps —Speed KM/q KM/tI = km/h
Fig. 1. Chart of locomotor training in the microcycle of Cosmonaut K.
physical training on the ﬁrst day averages 140 to 160 bpm, performed by crewmembers, and also providing, if necessary,
peaking during high-intensity exercise at 180 bpm and recommendations for corrections.
higher. The exercise structure is based on the principle of The exercise quantity and intensity of loads during physical
interval training. training on the treadmill were monitored as well as the qual-

The second day of the cycle focuses mainly on load-bearing itative features of these exercises and their correspondence
endurance training. To achieve this goal, the amount of loco- to recommended methods of execution. Data from daily re-
motion performed in the treadmill's passive motion mode cords of treadmill with Vibration isolation system (TVIS)
increases (Fig. 1). Accordingly, the load on that day is medium; training sessions were analyzed after being copied to storage
the intensity is medium to above medium. The total energy cost media with subsequent downlink t0 the ground Via telemetry
of two exercise sessions reaches 1882 to 2092 k] (450 to 500
kcal) [versus 1590 to 1757 k] (380 to 420 kcal) 0n the ﬁrst day].

The structure for the third day's training session consists Ofrela- Table II. Application ofthe Russian System of Countermeasures at Various
. . . Flight Stages.
tively slow and medlum-speed steady-state runnlng over the —
course of relatively long time intervals—up t0 4 t0 6 min—and STAGE APPL'CAT'ON
pedaling 0n the cycle ergometer in a similar mode, which helps 1 lnitial stage (FD1—10)-OCC1U51011 0111503 < 50 mmH91012010
stabilize the oxygen consumption in tissues and increases their 30 mm) and phys'ca' tra'n'ng W'th a load Of Up to 50% Ofthat.
. recommended. If necessary, pharmacologlcal remedles to relleve
blood supply (aeroblc modes). . .
_ _ _ _ _ space mot10h Slckhess.

AnalYSIS 0f data Obtalned durlng long-duratlon spaceﬂlghts 2 Condition stabilization stage. Physical training twice a day for 1 and
on Russian stations and from ground studies ShOW that, in 1.5 h (2.5 h/d) using the treadmill, cycle ergometer, and bungee
microgravity, high-intensity interval training is much more cords; if desired or necessary, use of passive alternative measures.
effective than aerobic training. The modes for studying coun- 3 Pre—EVA. Same training, with emphasis on the cycle ergometry
termeasures during LDS differ in accordance with the tasks in usmg the arms

_ _ 4 Final stage (R—BO d).Two sessions per day on the treadmill; LBNP for
the ﬁve stages 0f LDS (Table II)- Monltorlng and control 0f the two to four preliminary sessions and two ﬁnal sessions; water and
crewmembers’ training process during ﬂight on the 188 include salt supplements (0.9% NaCl, 18 to 20 ml ~ kg'1 of body mass three
systematically monitoring the level of conditioning, determin- to four times over the course of the last 12 to 20 h before landing).
ing the efﬁcacy and correctness of the physical training being w
A26 AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, N0. 12, Section 11 December 2015

"
"4","DEVELOPMENT OF RUSSIAN CMs—Kozlovskaya etal.
systems. These analyses allowed specialists to determine the cosmonaut's voluntary selection of intensity at each stage. The
intensity, scope, and structure of training sessions, as well as the intensity of the speeds selected by crewmembers served as an
cosmonauts' level of conditioning. It is known that the load additional indicator of the cosmonaut’s conditioninglevel. Data
intensity selected by the cosmonauts, the scope of work they from the locomotor parameters on the treadmill and heart rate
perform, the duration of high-intensity work periods, and the were recorded on special cards and returned to the ground.19
breaks after completing them fairly accurately reﬂect total work The overall work capacity of cosmonauts was also assessed
capacity. Individual recommendations for improving the train- according to readings from the 3-step cycle ergometer test
ing process were created and uplinked to the station once a ([MO]-3) with loads of 125, 150, and 175 W with a standard 3
week. Determining the level of physical training was signiﬁ- min duration for each step; the last step corresponds to approx-
cantly easier when information on heart rate during exercise imately 75% of maximum capability. The total duration of work
was available. Unfortunately, a number of cosmonauts did not in the test was, thus, 9 min. During the test, a DS lead ECG
use a heart rate monitor in ﬂight, which reduced the accuracy of reading was obtained and arterial pressure was measured
assessing the physiological costs of the work being performed according to the Korotkov method in real time at each load step
and, by extension, the creation of individual recommendations. for test safety.18
It must be noted that the capability to register each training ses- Before extravehicular actiVity (EVA) in Russian spacesuits,
sion was ﬁrst implemented during ISS operations. Previously cosmonauts performed a test on the cycle ergometer involv-
on Russian stations, physical training and conditioning levels ing hand pedaling “towards oneself.” The work level was set at
were monitored by a system that involved the monthly recording 150 \N, then total work time to eXhaustion and heart rate at the
of 3 d of the training cycle on the treadmill and cycle ergometer, end of each minute were recorded. Heart rate was also recorded
then downlinking data for analysis, evaluation of the crew- during the 3-min recovery period.
member’s conditioning level, determination of his compliance Crew messages about the status of training equipment and
with physical training and crew procedures, and ﬁnally devel- the performance of physical training, as well as the results of the
opment of recommendations for future training. tests performed, were clariﬁed and supplemented during cos-

The level of conditioning and, consequently, the effective- monauts’ private radio conferences, which were held on a regu-
ness of the training sessions performed by crewmembers on ISS lar basis once a month with participation by the ﬂight surgeon
ﬂights were also determined through evaluation of results from and countermeasures specialists. The effectiveness of the equip-
tests with graded increasing locomotor and cycle ergometer ment and countermeasures regimens used by cosmonauts was
loads, which were performed once a month in accordance with determined after the ﬂight using data from a broad postﬂight
crew procedures. The duration of the locomotor test (test clinical and physiological examination of the status of the main
[MO]-3) is 11 min with an energy cost of about 4184 k] (100 bodily systems (Table 111).
kcal). The test, which is performed on TVIS in passive mode
with aXial loading comprising at least 60% of bodyweight, Cosmonauts’Use of Countermeasures During Long-Duration
involves 3 min of warm-up walking, 2 min of slow running, Flights on the ISS
2 min of middle-range running, 1 min of running at maximum All Russian ISS crewmembers used the recommended system
speed, and 3 min of cool-down walking (Fig. 2). The distin- of countermeasures as a baseline; however, wide variability in
guishing feature of the test is the standardization of the sequence the implementation of some elements of the system resulted
and the duration of each of the three loading stages and the due to the operational conditions of life and work aboard the

station, as well as the functional

status of the training equipment.

. In light of the heavy workload

, ,- and the signiﬁcant duration of

‘ preparatory operations for exer-

d? cising, more than half of Russian

k“ crewmembers preferred to fol-

‘ “ ‘ low (up to 80% of the ﬂight time)

'-; [K Fast a once-daily training regimen,

‘ 4‘ Middle running despite the fact that long-duration

range ﬂights on Russian stations had

‘ ‘ rusnlrclmg running ‘ provided convincing proof of the
significantly greater efficacy of

Walking Walking 0 twice-daily training.7 Cosmonauts
performed. locomotor training

a a 0 m o Q j; sess1ons dally; the rare om1ss1ons
————————_— kw: were generally related to the crew’s
4-6 Kmlhour 7-8 Kmlhour 9-10 Kmlhour >11 Kmlhour 6-4 Kmlhour heavy workload. The training reg-

Fig. 2. Diagram ofgraded locomotortest [MO]—3. imens, however, varied Widely
AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 12, Section II December2015 A27

"
"5","DEVELOPMENT OF RUSSIAN CMs—Kozlovskaya etal.
Table III. List Of Sensory and Motor Clinical and Physiological Studies as a necessary addition to TVIS training sessions, even during
Performed on Russian ISS Crewmembers Pre— and Post—Spaceﬂight. the ﬁnal ﬂight phase.
CHARACTERISTICS STUDIED RESEARCH METHODS In the ﬁrst 188 increments, cosmonauts performed resistive
Mineral density of bone tissue Osteodensitometry exercises using the Russian strength trainer, bungees, and resis-
MUSCle properties |SOkin€tiC dynamometry Ofthe thigh tance bands; starting with ISS-19, they used two U.S. devices,
and calf mUSdeS . the Interim Resistive Exercise Device and the Advanced Resis-
Tens'ob measurements OfmdUCEd tive Exercise Device (ARED), according to the protocols rec-
tetanlc contractions ofthe calf muscles
Biopsy ofthe soleus muscle 0mmended by the U.S. side. Illese protocols included squats
Motor control system Tendon (Achilles) reﬂex and a number of other exercises. In accordance with the rec-
Equilibrium (corrective FGSIOOHSES) ommendations of Russian specialists, the majority of Russian
Strength gradatiome“ . . cosmonauts performed resistance training 2 to 3 times per
Head and eye motor coordination . . . . . .
Locomotion week, alternat1ng 1t w1th cycle ergometer tra1n1ng. In reallty,
Vestibular system Battery of sensory adaptation tests the degree Of use Of the ARED varied significantly, depending
— on the cosmonauts’ individual preferences. It was used most
intensively by three Russian crewmembers; one spent more
and, as a rule, differed significantly from the recommenda- time exercising on ARED than on locomotor training. Mean-
tions. ""lhe locomotor training protocols of only siX cosmonauts while, a number of other cosmonauts used it less while some
corresponded to the recommendations over the course of the did not use it at all.
entire ﬂight. Passive countermeasures have been used rarely on 188
""lhe main alternative to the recommended high-intensity ﬂights. ""lhis occurred, as a rule, only in cases when their use was
interval regimen on 188 ﬂights consisted of jogging-type loco- dictated by limited opportunities to perform locomotor train-
motion aimed at training aerobic endurance, which is notable ing for one reason or another. ""lhe Penguin-3 loading suit, regu-
for its lower intensity and energy cost and signiﬁcantly lower larly used by Mir crewmembers, has been used much more
prevention efﬁcacy ""lhe choice of this as the primary form of rarely on the ISS. ""lhe exceptions have been cosmonauts
exercise seemed to be because it was less difﬁcult to perform, whose relatively large size prompted the need to prevent the
and because it was possible to combine steady-state running expansion intrinsic to microgravity (particularly in the verte-
with watching movies, listening to music, etc. To compensate bral column) to maintain their fit into the Kazbek protective
for the insufﬁcient efﬁcacy of this exercise, some cosmonauts seats used during landing. All Russian cosmonauts who
signiﬁcantly increased their locomotor loading. were tall periodically wore the Penguin suit, using it particu-
Between 30 to 40 d before completing their ﬂights, all Rus- larly during the last month of ﬂight. ""lhe Chibis pneumatic
sian ISS crewmembers, with rare exceptions, switched to the vacuum suit, the Kentavr G-Suit, and water and salt supple-
recommended training protocols for the ﬁnal phase, according ments, which ensure safe landing and greater tolerance to g
to which locomotor training sessions were to be performed loads during the descent phase, were used by all Russian crew-
twice a day per the regimen of the ﬁrst day of the microcycle. members precisely in accordance with crew procedures.
To illustrate the wide distribution of locomotor training The Russian countermeasures system has conﬁrmed its high
sessions accomplished during LDS, Fig. 3 shows a diagram of efﬁcacy in long-duration ISS increments. Despite the frequent
one cosmonaut who was part of the group of Russian ISS failures of exercise equipment (particularly during the ﬁrst 10
crewmembers with the best postﬂight health and conditioning increments) and the individual variations noted in the use of
indicators. Analysis of LDS data from the Russian stations, countermeasures, the health of Russian crewmembers during
which included 28 crews on the Mir station, showed that an ﬂight and postﬂight was evaluated as good, or more rarely, only
intensive physical training regimen assured increased ortho- satisfactory. ""lhe crew of 188-6, whose spacecraft performed a
static tolerance and normalization of vascular tone postﬂight. ballistic descent and landed 500 km (310 mi) from the calculated
Cosmonauts also varied signiﬁcantly in their use of the pas- site, was forced to wait for the rescue team for several hours. Even
sive treadmill belt mode versus the active or motorized mode. It in those conditions, a Russian crewmember was able to eXit the
was recommended that approximately 25—30% of exercise descent module without help and assist the others.
should be in passive belt mode, as the belt resistance in this Similar to long-duration expeditions on other Russian
mode is greater and the mode itself provides greater loading. space stations, crewmembers on the ISS demonstrated vary-
However, for 188 cosmonauts, the overall amount of locomotor ing degrees of reduced physical performance, orthostatic
exercise in passive mode varied from 13 to 30%. tolerance, coordination, sensory, and vestibular-Vegetative
ISS cosmonauts devoted signiﬁcantly less time and atten- dysfunction postﬂight.11 Moreover, the extent of the changes
tion to exercising on the cycle ergometer than was the case on in the actiVity of the cosmonauts’ various bodily systems
Mir. As a rule, the cycle ergometer saw intensive use only during ﬂight and in the postﬂight period eXhibited a direct
before monthly testing of general work capacity and in the
preparatory pCI'IOd fOI' EVA as hand pedaling fOI' training the * It should be noted that monitoring the fulﬁllment of this part of the countermeasures
arms- Only two cosmonauts used the cycle ergometer “nomi— 323:1“:‘31521352;:ieiiessffsﬁz11:13:13.:31?:J::;.2:::$3323.22?12:3:n:.:‘::;§;
nally” in strict compliance with the recommended protocols the training device.
A28 AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 12, Section II December2015

"
"6","DEVELOPMENT OF RUSSIAN CMs—Kozlovskaya etal.
'80 *— fourth sessions, this indicator for
.60 , Group B was signiﬁcantly lower
“0 ,- than in Group A.
ﬁle coefﬁcients of heart rate/
“E '30 * maximum running speed during
€100“ the in-ﬂight testing ofGroupA
g did not differ from baseline val-
) ‘ ues. Meanwhlle, 1n Group B,
E: 6° I - throughout the ﬂight, they were
“ 4o.--- signiﬁcantly (P < 0.03) higher
. .-. ___-___“, 7 than baseline, which evidenced
‘0 ﬁ/ W W % the increased physiological cost
n Eecommeﬂd: ‘ 2 _’— 3 ‘ 5 6 _‘ of locomotion (Fig. 4). Tlhe dif-
anm Month ference 1n the coefﬁc1ents of
Fig. 3. Distribution of the scope of locomotion in various periods of ﬂight. Black sections = active run, V = 5.5—9.0 heart rate/maXImum runnlng
km/h; sections with left—hand stripes = active run, V = 9.0—1 5 km/h; white sections = passive run,V = 6.0—8.0 km/h; speed between the two groups Of
sections with right—hand stripes = active vvalk,V = 4.0—5.5 km/h; grey sections = active walk,V = 4.0—5.5 km/h. cosmonauts, WhiCh did DOt eXiSt
in the baseline, reached a signiﬁ-
cant level.
correlation with how fully and closely they respected the Hiere was an interesting dynamic in the level of lactate in
countermeasures program. capillary blood during the course of the ﬂight. Before ﬂight,
Hie experimental rationale for the varying effectiveness of the both groups had levels of about 1.0 i 0.1 mmol - L‘1 in the ﬁrst
locomotor exercise regimens used by cosmonauts in ﬂight was minute of the recovery period after the locomotor test. For all
developed during the Proﬁlaktika experiment on board the ISS, in-ﬂight testing sessions, Group B’s blood lactate levels, normal-
in which 14 Russian cosmonauts from 12 expeditions partici- ized for speed, were signiﬁcantly elevated, while Group A’s leV-
pated.19 Hie cosmonauts split into two distinct groups (A and B), els were lower (Fig. 4). ﬁle difference between the groups for
with roughly the same number of members, according to the this indicator in the third and fourth in-ﬂight sessions was sta-
type of locomotor training. Group A consisted of cosmonauts tistically signiﬁcant, which indicates that Group B eXhibited a
performing intensive training with a large number of transitions greater proportion of anaerobic processes during test loading
from walking to high-speed running (interval training). Group B and, consequently, their level of physical performance was
consisted of cosmonauts who performed steady-state aerobic lower. Postﬂight, only three of the eight cosmonauts in Group B
exercise in the moderate intensity zone. Hie effectiveness of each were capable of performing the locomotor tests on R+5 through
exercise regimen was assessed using a test program based on the R+8, which demonstrated the signiﬁcant decrease in the per-
tests described above with increasing loads on TVIS ([MO]-3) formance level in the “aerobic” group, and also signiﬁcantly
and the cycle ergometer ([MO]-5). Heart rate and ventilation hampered comparisons of the postﬂight test results between the
volume were recorded at rest, when performing work, and in the groups.
recovery period. At the ﬁrst and ﬁfth minute of recovery, the ﬁle results of the cycle ergometer test matched the data from
presence of lactate in capillary blood was also determined. In the the locomotor test: the differences between the two groups’
locomotor test, the maximum running speed and the coefﬁcients indicators of the physiological cost of work and ventilation vol-
of the ratio of maximum heart rate, maximum ventilation vol- ume increased over the course of the ﬂight, reaching a level of
ume, and lactate at 1 min of recovery after maximum running signiﬁcance by the ﬁnal in-ﬂight sessions. Moreover, a compari-
speed were taken as the performance criteria. ﬁle use of these son of data from the two tests distinctly demonstrated the
coefﬁcients was dictated by the requirements for standardizing greater sensitiVity of the locomotor test. Analogous results were
the cost of loading, as the [MO]-3 test allowed cosmonauts to obtained in tests with graded physical loading on the cycle
select their speed of locomotion; consequently, they varied from ergometer ([MO]-5 test). In Group A, out of 70 tests, only 21
one to another. Tests were performed on LDS crewmen once (i.e., 30%) were evaluated as “satisfactory,” while 70% of test
before launch and four times during ﬂight at intervals from FD results were “good.” In Group B, whose members used aerobic
30 to 40, FD 60 to 80, FD 110 to 120, and 30 d before the ﬂight locomotor training, the percentage of tests with “satisfactory”
ended (R—30). After the ﬂight, testing was performed on R+8 evaluations was 86%, and only 14% were rated as “good.”
through R+11, depending on the cosmonaut’s condition. Hie results of postﬂight research correlated well with the in-
As shown in Fig. 4, before ﬂight, maximum running speed ﬂight data. For example, during moderately paced locomotor
in the groups did not differ signiﬁcantly Yet during ﬂight, testing (90 steps/min), the amplitude of the EMG for the three
Group A’s maximum running speed did not change throughout main muscles of the lower leg—the tibialis anterior, gastrocne-
the ﬂight, while this indicator for Group B was lower, differing mius, and soleus—increased markedly in the aerobic training
signiﬁcantly from both the baseline speed and the speed in group (Group B),which indicatedareduction in the strength of
Group A (Fig. 4). In all in-ﬂight sessions, in the ﬁrst, third, and the locomotive muscles, both for the ﬂexors (tibialis) and
AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 12, Section II December2015 A29

"
"7","DEVELOPMENT OF RUSSIAN CMs—Kozlovskaya etal.
km/h Maximum running speed (Vmax) Development of Countermeasures Equipment and Methods
100 A A A Flights on the 188 also served as a platform for future develop-
* * * ment of Russian countermeasures. First and foremost, this con-
90 ' * cerns both the improvement and expansion of the assortment
3.0 . of exercise equipment. Specialists from IBMP developed the
7 0 _ Stimul-Ol M low-frequency electrical muscle stimulator and
' delivered it to the station, having previously received a positive
5.0 ’ evaluation in a pilot experiment performed by cosmonauts
50 . G. Padalka and S. AVdeer 0n the Mir station (Padalka G, AVdeer
S. Unpublished experiment, August 1999). Comparative evalu-
4'0 pre-f|ight Session. Session I. Session In Session IV ation of the effectiveness of low-frequency stimulation of the
_ . muscles in the lower extremities versus high-frequency myo-
330 f Emcofheartrateto 381mg"" speed 7 7 7 7 7 stimulation in 7-d “dry immersion” and strength training on
’ the “MDS” multifunction trainer during a 105-d isolation also
31.0 ' *' * ' * showed superiority of the Stimul-Ol M for prevention of motor
290’ "" "" "" "" '” ' ’ ' "" ' "" ""*"""" ‘ "" A ’ "" ”’ dysfunctions.
27,0 ~ ' ‘ A ' - Work has continued on improving the design and meth-
250 . , . . . . , , . , , , . , , . odology 0f the “support unloading compensator,” which
23.0 . provides mechanical stimulation to the support areas of the
soles of the feet in natural locomotion modes. Physiological
21‘0 l 7 V V V 7 7 7 V 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 W i 7 7 V 7 7 7 tests of various modiﬁcations of the apparatus and modes for
19-0 ’ ’ ’ ’ ' ' its use during dry immersion have demonstrated its high
170 +7 ,. ,, t ,- ,, t W , *t‘ W effectiveness for preventing the negative effects resulting
15.0 H . . a _ _ , _ . from unloading of the locomotor system. ﬁle device has
Pre‘ﬂ'ght sess'on I sess'on "" sess'on ”I sess'on N passed all technical tests and is being prepared for testing on
mmol Blood lactic acid concentration, lst minute of recovery board the 188‘
2.0 A modiﬁed version of the Penguin aXial loading suit, which
‘ .8 . * * is equipped with a system for the objective registration offorces,
1.0 , * * A has passed testing on board the ISS and been included in the
1.4 , L L A I onboard equipment. Evaluation included assessing the effects
‘ 2 . \ \\ . L § of loads that varied in both magnitude and direction. In par-
' § § § \ ticular, it was demonstrated that when using the asymmetric
""0 ' § § \ § loading mode, with a greater load on the front half of the body,
°‘8 ' L‘ \ § \ § the crewmember attempts to maintain a vertical position and
°'° ' \ voluntarily exerts the muscles of the back, the backs of the
°-“ ‘ thighs, and the calves, which creates a signiﬁcant training effect
0-2 ' ‘ in them.
0.0 ‘ The creation of a new treadmill, the BIL-Z, is complete;
Pre-flight Session | Session II Session III Session IV . . . . . . .
1ts technlcal spec1ﬁcat10ns were developed )01ntly by Russ1an
Fig. 4 Pattern ofchanges in [MOB test parameters,top to bottom: maximum and U.S. specialists, taking into account all the comments
running speed, heart rate, and lactate level In the capillary blood of cosmonauts _ _ _
in GroupsA (black columns) and B (striped columns) during ﬂight, where* is the and requlrements that arose durlng TVIS Operatlon, and the
difference from baseline, P < 0.01, and the white triangle is the difference resultsofacomprehensivesearch for newtechnicalapproaches
between the two groups of cosmonauts, P < 0.05. and solutions. Hie IBMP staff, together with Austrian special-
ists from the University of Vienna's Centre for Sport Science
extensors (soleus). ﬂiese changes were distinctly evident in and the Vienna University of Technology, developed a resis-
Group B both on R+5 and R+8. Meanwhile, in the interval run- tive training device that provides the capability for exercises
ning group (Group A), the changes in the electromyographic that load the legs, back, and arms eccentrically, concentrically,
cost of locomotion were not signiﬁcant 0n R+5; 0n R+7 they and isometrically.15 Hie maximum load generated on the
were completely absent. training device is 250 kgf (550 lbf). In concentric and eccen-
According to osteodensitometry data, the mineral density tric modes of operation, the device can be controlled by speed:
losses in the area of maximum losses were signiﬁcantly greater 0.15, 0.3, and 0.6 m - s_l, with the control panel displaying all
in the aerobic locomotion group.” rlhis ﬁnding implies that the necessary training parameters: operating mode, load, type of
locomotor protocol (i.e., treadmill) protected skeletal integrity exercise, number of repetitions, rate of performing the exer-
better than cycle ergometer exercise. Cise, duration of training session for each exercise, and cur-
rent time. Signiﬁcant changes have been made to the system
H Study data kindly provided to us byV. S. Oganov. t0 enable the tracking Of training.
A30 AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 12, Section II December2015

"
"8","DEVELOPMENT OF RUSSIAN CMs—Kozlovskaya etal.
AS indicated previously onboard the ISS, locomotor speed 6. Grigoriev AL Kozlovskaya 1B, Potapov AN,YegOI‘OV AD, et a1. Biomedical
and heart rate during exercise on the treadmill were recorded support foi expeditions. In: Manned expeditiens to Mars. Moscow: KB.
011 a daily basis for the ﬁrst time Daily monitoring has made it TSIOlkOVSkIY Russmn Academy Of Cosmonautlcs; 20062320
_ _ ° _ 3 7. Grigoriev AI, Kozlovskaya 1B, Sawin CF, Mueller SA. Countermeasure
FOSSIble to more prec1sely determme the crewmembers levels to short-term and long-term space ﬂight. In: Dietlen LF, Pestov ID,
Of conditioning and better assess the advantages and diSadVaIl- editors. Space biology and medicine: joint U.S./Russian publication in
tages 0f the training process. Flights on the 188 have also made ﬁve volumes, Vol. IV, Chapter 8. Washington (DC): NASA, and MOSCOW:
it possible to determine prospects for future developments, NaPka_PreSS; 2004‘157‘195° _ _
Chief among Which are optimizing the conditions for physical 8' Gngonev AL Stepantsov VI’ TIShler VA’ .Mlkhaylov V.M’ Pometov
_ _ _ _ _ _ YuD, Dorokhova BR. Countermeasures against the negatlve effects of
tralnlng (VOIumeS> temperature, alr env1r0nment, humldlty)> weightlessness. In: Gurovskiy NN. Results ofmedical research conducted
improving training equipment, expanding the aSSOI'tmeDt Of 0n the Salyut-6—Soyuz orbital scientiﬁc research complex. Moscow:
countermeasures equipment and methods, and increasing their Nauka; 1986:125—144.
convenience. One important task for improving the counter- 9. Kozlevskaya 1B, Barmin V1.1, Stepantsov VI, Kharitonov NM. Results of
. studies of motor functions in long-term space ﬂlghts. Physmlogist. 1990;
measures system IS to further automate the processes that con- 33“ Supp1)-Sl—S3
tI'OI thSical training; at itS heart lies the development Of an 10. Kozlovskaya 1B, Dmitriyeva I, Grigorieva L, Kirenskaya A, Kreidich
expert computerized system for the assessment Of crewmem- Yu. Gravitational mechanism in the motor systems. Studies in real and
beI‘S' physical parameters to guide mOdiﬁcation of exercise simulated weightlessness. In: Gurﬁnkel VS, Ioffe ME, Massion I, Roll JP,
proto C018, taking into aCC0th the capabilities Of the training editors. Stance and motion. Facts and concepts. New York (NY): Plenum
' Table on the station. Press; 1988:37‘48'
equlpment aval 11. Kozlovskaya 1B, Grigoriev AI. Russian system of countermeasures on
board the International Space Station (188): the ﬁrst results. Acta Astronaut.
2004; 55(3-9):233—237.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 12. Kozlovskaya 1B, Grigoriev AI, Stepantsov VI. Countermeasures 0f the
negative effects of weightlessness on physiological systems in long-term
This work was supported by Russian Science Foundation grant number: ﬂights. Acta Astronaut. 1995; 36(8'9)2661_668°
14-25-00167. 13. Kozlovskaya 1B, Pestov ID, Egorov AD. [The countermeasure system
for extended space ﬂights.] [Article in Russian] Aviakosm Ekolog Med.
Authors and aﬁiliation: Inessa B. Kozlovskaya, M.D., Ph.D., D.Sc., Eugenia N. 2008; 42(6)366—73-
Yarmanova,Anat01y D. Egorov, M.D., Ph.D., D.Sc., Viktor I. Stepantsov, Ph.D., 14- Kozlovskaya 13: Stepantsov V1: EgOYOV AD- Physical training on long-
ElenaV. Fomina, Ph.D., D.Sc., and Elena S.Tomi10vaskaya,Ph.D.,IBMP, Moscow, duration ﬂights. In: Grigoriev AL editor. Mir Orbital Station, VOL 1°
Russia. Moscow: Meditsina; 2001:393—414.
15. Kozlovskaya 1B, Yarmanova EN, Vinogradova 0L, Shipov AA, Tomilovskaya
ES, Fomina EV. Prospects for using training equipment to maintain and
rehabilitate properties of the muscular apparatus in various professional
REFERENCES and age groups of the population. Teoriya i Praktika Fizicheskoy Kultury.
2009; 3(1):18—20.

1. Bogomolov VV, Grigoriev AI, Kozlovskaya 1B. The Russian experience in 16. Stepantsov VI, Yeremin AV, Tikhonov MA. Equipment and methods for
medical care and health maintenance of the International Space Station human physical training during long-duration spaceﬂights. In: Stepantsov
crews. Acta Astronaut. 2007; 60(4-7):237—246. VI, Yeremin AV, Tikhonov M. Weightlessness. Biomedical studies. Moscow:

2. Bogomolov VV, Kozlovskaya 1B, Alferova IV, Egorov AD, Kovachevich Izdatel’stvo Meditsina; 1974:298—313 [In Russian].

IV. Medical support for Russian cosmonauts’ health on the ISS. Aviakosm 17. Tishler VA, Stepantsov VI. Physical training in the biomedical
Ekolog Med. 2008; 42(6):58—65. support system during long-duration spaceﬂights. In: Simonov PV,

3. Gazenko OG, Grigoriev AI, Egorov AD. The human body’s reactions to Kasyan II, editors. Physiological Research in Weightlessness. Moscow:
space ﬂight. In: Gazenko OG, Kas’yan NI, editors. Physiological problems Meditsina; 1983:229—25.
0f weightlessness. Moscow: Meditsina; 1990:15—48 [In Russian]. 18. Turchaninova VF, Alferova IV, Golubchikova ZA. Reaction of the

4. Gazenko OG, Grigoriev AI, Egorov AD. Physiological effects of weight- cardiovascular system to dosed physical loading. In: Grigoriev AI, editor.
lessness on humans during spaceﬂight. (Dmemon quIOBeKa. 1997; 23(2): Mir OrbitalStation,V011.Mosc0w:Meditsina;2001:282—2.

138—146. 19. Vinogradova OL, Popov DV, Khusnutdinova DR, Shenkman BS,

5. Grigoriev AI, Kakurin LI, Pestov IS, Mikhaylov VM, Shashkov VS, et a1. Kozlovskaya 1B. Dynamics ofphysical performance during long-duration
Protecting the body from the negative effects of weightlessness. In: Space space ﬂight (ﬁrst results of countermeasures experiment). I Gravit Physiol.
biology and medicine. Moscow: Nauka; 1987:59—87. 2004; 11(2):231—232.

AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, NO. 12, Section II December 2015 A31

"
