"","x"
"1","SHORT COMMUNICATION
Dtt' fR I dU' T tPt°
B f d Aft S f l ' ht y
LYUDMILA KH. PASTUSHKOVA, KIRILL S. KIREEV,
ALEXEI S. KONONIKHIN, VLADIMIR A. IVANISENKO,
IRINA M. LARINA, AND EVGENY N. NIKOLAEV
PASTUSHKOVA LKH, KIREEV KS, KpNONIKHIN AS, IVANISENKO of the other major proteins like albumin and globulins
VA’ FARINA IM’ NIKOLAEV EN' ,Detecu‘?"" of renal “""4 ””""aty ml“ (10). For collection of samples, the noninvasive nature of
proteins before and after spaceflight. AV1at Space Env1ron Med 2013; . . .
84:859_63. urlne collectlon IS a welcome Change for crews that may
Background: The recent evolution of genomics and subsequently pro- prefer to aVOid COHECtiOD by Other more invasive tech-
teomics offers a major advance in the ability to understand individual niques such as venipuncture.
human variation in disease and the m'olec'ul'ar level Changes'induced by The development Of quantitative protein detection
certain envnronmental exposures. ThIs original study examines urinary h d d. d h 1 d. b 1. f h . .
proteome composition to enable the understanding of molecular ho- met 0 S lsprove. t e ong-stan Olng .e 1e. t at urlne IS
meostatic mechanisms in spaceflight and presents the potential for proteln-free; PTOteth are Present 1h urlhe In very small
early detection of subclinical disease, microgravity risk mitigation strate- concentrations that may undergo changes in pathological
gies, and countermeasure development'f'or explorationiclass missions. conditions 01. in the presence Of environmental stressors.
Methods: The urinary proteome composutlon of SIX Russnan cosmonauts P . h d d . 11 d h d .
(men, ages 35-51) who flew long-duration missions of 169-199 C! was rOteomIC met 0 S ramettca y ecrease t e etectIOh
determined 30 d before flight and compared to repeat studies 1 and 7 d thteShOld tOI"" proteln ahaly515 ahd aHOW aCCurate 1d€ht1‘
postflight. Results: There were 430 proteins identified. Of those, 15 pro— fication of minute quantities of excreted proteins, This
tems'orlgmated m the renal tissues. Of the 15 urinary proteins, 10 were opportunity is Of great interest to space medicine and
consistently present In the urme. However, the presence of five of the h . 1 . th t ﬂ' ht ff t
urinary proteins—neutral endopeptidase (NEP), afamin (AFAM), aqua— P ySIO Ogy’ smce e exposure ospace 18 a eC S
porin-2 (AQP2), aminopeptidase A (AMPE), and dipeptidyl peptidase water-salt balance and renal functlon (6). In fact, the
4 (DEPAt)—was dependent on spaceflight exposure. Discqssion: PtO— known microgravity changes to urinary function such
teomlc Investigation of pre- anel postfhght urme and blomfortnatlon as reduced urine volume and increased excretion Of
approaches to proteome analysns provnde Important data relative the 1 . 't d h h 1 d d
mechanism of kidney function in spaceflight. In this initial study, we ca Clum’ I11 rogen, an P 081:) orus P 1.18 ecrease C9D-
determined that the evaluation ofurinary proteins may help investigators eehtratleh 0t Cltrate haVe beeh assoc1ated Wlth ah 1h'
understand Changes that are occurring in microgravity. Once additional creased risk Of in-ﬂight and postﬂight urinary calculi.
ground-baseel and m-fhght data are collected, It IS feasnble to develop This study for the first time examines urinary protein
targeted studies for tracking speCIfIC spacefhghtrelated Changes, deter— m iti n f m n t t b tt 1‘ nd 1‘ t d th
mine countermeasure and risk-mitigation effectiveness, and possibly CO p08 0 O CO? 0 au S 0 e e u e S an e
detect subclinical disease in ﬂight crewmembers. molecular mechamsms of homeosta51s that may lead to
Keywords: International Space Station, urine proteome, bioinformation improvements in the protection Of crewmember health
approaChes- and well-being through countermeasure development,
early detection of disease, and optimizing the spacecraft
THE PROTEIN COMPOSITION (proteome) of an in- enVlrS’nmént- The Value 9f Fhls type 0f StUdY may be
dividual’s tissues is determined primarily by genetic espec1a11y 1mportant 1n mtssaons of extended duratlohs
make-up, but responds and adapts to various diseases (uplto ,1 yrf or tongeé). Th1; vyork flocuses on proteomlc
as well as other internal and external environmental ana 3,515 O urme O tame rom u551an cosmonauts
factors. Certain disease states are also associated with
abnormal prOtelnS and dlsease 01‘ stressors may .affeCt From the Institute of Medicobiologic Problems, Russian Federation
the PTOteome through pOSt'trahSIatIOhat changes 1h the State Scientific Research Center Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow,
shape or function of the proteins. It is these changes in Russia; the Yuri A. Gagarin Research & Test Cosmonaut Training
proteins that lea d to the hope for improve d pharma C eu_ Center, Star C1ty, Russm; the Emanuel Instltute ofoBlochemlcaol Phy31cs
. 1 h . 1 . . . . . Russmn Academy of Sc1ences, Moscow, Russm; the Instltute for
tlca t .eraples,. ear y dlagnostlc testmg, and preclmlcal Energy Problems of Chemical Physics Russian Academy of Sciences,
detectlon Of dlsease. The urmary proteome has been Moscow, Russia; and the Institute of Cytology and Genetics Siberian
extensively studied in the last decade for its diagnostic Br??? RUSSian Academy Of .SCiEdHEES' NOYOSibirSX R1531;- 1
capabilities, disease process monitoring, and prognostic ls manusmet Was .recewe 0r rewew m uguSt O 2' It was
. . . accepted for publlcatlon 1n March 2013.
utlllty, ahd many databases 0f the urlhe Preteeme are Address correspondence and reprint requests to: Kirill S. Kireev,
currently in existence (5). F01“ space-based research, the 141160, Medical Department, Star City, Moscow, Russia; kir-kireev@
roteomic anal sis of urine has certain technical advan- yandEX-m-
P h y 1 b'l' d h 11 Reprint & Copyright © by the Aerospace Medical Association,
tagesf suc as samp e sta 1 1ty . ue to t e sma amotmts Alexandria, VA.
of urmary proteases and relatlvely low concentratlons DOI: 10.3357/ASEM.3510.2013
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 84, N0. 8 - August 2013 859

"
"2","URINARY PROTEOMES 8: SPACEFLIGHT—PASTUSHKOVA ET AL.
who were long-duration crewmembers 0n the Interna- that the protein spectra of the liver, bone, connective tis-
tional Space Station (155). To our knowledge, urinary sue, kidney, prostate, and pancreatic tissues had signifi-
proteomic determination with appropriate bioinforma- cantly stronger representation than the respective spectra
tion-based data analysis has not been previously con- of the corresponding tissues in the TiGER database (P <
ducted in any astronaut or cosmonaut populations. 0.05 with consideration of Benjamini-Hochberg cor-
rection for multiple comparisons). Lymph node and
METHODS testicular tissues were significantly less represented in
Urine samples from six Russian cosmonauts (men), all samples. Splenic tiss11e was significahtly more repre-
ages 3551 yr, were collected preﬂight and postﬂight for sented only 1n the preﬂ1ght samples .(Flg. 1). Increased
analysis. All subjects provided written informed con- or decreased levels .(relative to the. T1GER elatabase) 0t
sent to participate in the experiment titled ”Proteome presence Of the spec1f1c t1ssue proteins In urine revealed
analysis on long duration (169 _ 199 days) missions on the cemplex1ty of the penetration process of dlfferent
the 155.” Urine samples were collected 30 d before protems 1nto the urme. One of the causes could be the
launch and on the first and seventh days after landing. difference in protein expression in diverse tissues, lead-
The second morning void was used since this sample ing to the different protein concentrations ehtering the
shows the least variability in terms of protein compo- bloodstream, wh1ch, 1h 1tS turn, 15 reﬂected m the un-
sition. Urine samples were spun at 2000 G for 10 min nary prote1rr spectrarh. . .
at O_4OC’ and the supernatant was frozen at —86OC. The protein 1dent1f1catron of all 430 protems was fol-
Preparation of samples for mass spectrometric analysis lowed by. analys1s 0t their functions and cellular lecal-
followed a previously described standardized proce- izationusmg the Gene Ohtology database.We.determ1ned
dure (11). that 54.1% of the 1dent1f1ed protems were 1nvolveot 1n
Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis bmdmg/Otransport of macromolecules and rnetabolltes
was performed in triplicate on a nano—HPLC Agilent 1100 anol 3.87 /0 were regulators 0t cellular function. The re-
system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) in combi- malrung 7.2 /o belong to otherrdifferent fuhctions.
nation with a 7-Tesla LTQ-FT Ultra mass spectrometer OUt Of the 430 detected pept1des1ntheT1GER database,
(Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) e quipped with a 23 IPIs were attributable to the kidneys; 1.e., IPI markers
nanospray ion source (in-house system). Liquid chroma- 0t protems expressed 1h renal t1ssue. These are of con-
tography-mass spectrometry data were searched using a s1derable 1mportance smee the renal system represents
Mascot software search engine (Matrix Science, London, an 1mportant homeostatic system involved 1h mamte-
UK; version 20.04) to identify proteins from the human nance of the human 1nternal env1ronment that is affected
International Protein Index (IPI) protein sequence data- by the m1crograv1ty COhdttlohset lohg-duratmn space-
base from the European Bioinformatics Institute (version thght' A total Pt. 15 proteins orlgmatmg from the renal
3.82; released 06.04.2011; 92,104 entries). Automatic filtra- “55118 were dlYlded mt? three groups based on thelr
tion of the Mascot results and comparison of the identi- date Of COHECUOD (preﬂ1ght, postﬂ1ght day 1 01"" POSt'
fied proteins was completed using software developed in ﬂ1ght day 7)° These data are found In Table 1' Of .the
NikolaeV’s group (1). Identified proteins were annotated peptides, 10 were consistently present In the urine:
according to the information available from the UniProt cubrlm (CUBNX megahr} (LRPZ), k1n1n0gen-1 (KNG1),
KB, Tissue-specific Gene Expression and Regulation l<all1l<re1nj1 (KLK1), epldermal growth factor (EGF),
(TiGER), Gene Ontology. osteopontm (OSTPr), V1tam1n K-dependent prote1h Z
(PROZ), uromodulm (UROM), vascular cell adhes1on
RESULTS protein 1 (VCAM1), and B-defensin-1. Our analysis
places the synthesis and function of these proteins at the
The results of the mass-spectrometric analysis were renal proximal tubular epithelial cells, the main site of
aggregated in a set of 54 HTML files containing reports renal protein handling.
of IPI identification by the Mascot database. Files con-
tained 430 different IPI indices with scores ranging from .
20 to 1700. This score is a characteristic of reliability of hver |_l_l_._l_l_
protein identification. It is connected to the probability bone .—
of correctness of the result, with higher numerical score connective tissue 5::
denoting higher reliability. The information on attribu- kidney .—‘—*——-—T——
tion of IPIs to specific tissues was obtained from UniProt prostate ._==I_
KB and TiGER databases. The latter contains informa- pancreas 1
tion on tissue-specific gene expression for 30 different spleen '———L_ ‘
types of human tissue. (')—'_ 10 20 30
From the 430 identified proteins, 209 were associated Numbmofpmm
withnknown tissue origin. Preﬂight samples contained . TiGER database ﬁrst day after ﬂight
119 t1ssue-spec1f1c protems; samples obtamed on day 1 . .
after landing had 121 proteins; day 7 samples contained ' preﬂlght day I seventh day after ﬂ1g11t
108 tissue-specific prOteihS° AnalySiS Of diStribUtiOh Of SPE- Fig. 1. Over—represented tissues for the identified urinary proteins in
cific tissue proteins in each group of samples demonstrated comparison to the TiGER database.
860 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 84, N0. 8 - August 2013

"
"3","URINARY PROTEOMES 8: SPACEFLIGHT—PASTUSHKOVA ET AL.
TABLE I. RENAL PROTEINS IN THE COSMONAUTS’ URINE BEFORE AND AFTER SPACEFLIGHT.
Renal Tissue Proteins Before Flight 1st Day After Landing 7th Day After Landing
CUBN, cubilin present present present
LRP2, megalin present present present
KNG1, kininogen—1 present present present
KLK1, kallikrein-1 present present present
EGF, epidermal growth factor present present present
OSTP, osteopontin present present preset
PROZ, vitamin K-dependent protein Z present present present
UROM, uromodulin present present present
VCAM1, vascular cell adhesion protein 1 present present present
BDO1, B-defensin-1 present present present
DPP4, dipeptidyl peptidase 4 present absent present
NEP, neutral endopeptidase present absent absent
AFAM, afamin absent present absent
AQP2, aquaporin-2 absent present absent
AMPE, aminopeptidase A absent absent present
CUBN and LRPZ are membrane glycoprotein recep- urine under physiological conditions. Its biological func-
tors. LRPZ and CUBN are involved in receptor-mediated tions have been linked to water/ electrolyte balance and
endocytosis in the apical membrane of the proximal to kidney innate immunity. UROM expression resulted
tubular epithelial cells. They play a critical role in the in a significant increase of neutrophil adhesion (after
reabsorption of glomerular-filtered proteins and are binding the heavy and light chains of IgG) and transepi-
elements of a low-affinity, high—capacity system. Ap- thelial migration in both the apical-to—basolateral and
pearance of membrane receptor fragments in the urine the basolateral-to-apical directions.
suggests that they are excreted through the exosome for- VCAMl is induced on endothelial cells by inﬂam-
mation process in the proximal tubular epithelial cells. matory cytokines and binds mononuclear leukocytes
The proteins of the kallikrein—kinin system, KNGl through the integrin very late antigen-4 (alpha 4 beta 1).
and KLK1, were consistently present in the urine as This adhesion pathway has been implicated in a diverse
well. This proteolytic system plays an important role in group of physiological and pathological processes, in-
regulation of physiological functions. KLKl is synthe- eluding B-cell development, leukocyte activation, and
sized in many organs, including the kidneys and arter- recruitment to sites of inﬂammation, as well as athe-
ies, where it can generate the vasodilators bradykinin rosclerosis. B-defensin-l has a vast spectrum of anti-
and kallidin. In the kidney kallikreins are synthesized microbial activity, activates components of the innate
in the proximal tubular epithelial cells, which are the immune system, induces cytokine synthesis, and par-
source of their release into the urine. Experimental and ticipates in gene expression of receptors for cytokines
Clinical studies have shown an inverse correlation be- and chemokines.
tween urinary kallikrein levels and blood pressure. KLKl The most important finding was the postﬂight altera-
is likely involved in the maintenance of normal cardiac, tion of the presence in urine of proteins Dipeptidyl pep-
renal, and neurological function, and it has been sug- tidase 4 (DPP4), Neutral endopeptidase (NEP), Afamin
gested that the kallikrein—kinin system can protect from (AFAM), aminopeptidase A (AMPE), and Aquaporin—Z
hypoxia, prevent interstitial fibrosis, mediate vasodila- (AQPZ). DPP4 was found in preﬂight urine samples and
tation and inﬂammation, and activate the innate im- on the seventh day after ﬂight. DPP4 is a type II trans-
mune system (3). membrane glycoprotein. It is also known as CD26 or
EGF regulates cell proliferation through the EGF adenosine deaminase binding protein and is a major
receptor. It has been shown that EGF stimulates magne- regulator of various physiological processes, including
sium reabsorption in the distal convoluted tubule. OSTP immune, inﬂammatory, nervous, and endocrine func-
is a highly phosphorylated glycoprotein present in tions. DPP4 modulates effects of multiple biologically
many tissues and body ﬂuids. In urine, OSTP is a potent active peptides, and it can act as a proteinase which
inhibitor of nucleation, growth, and aggregation of activates degradation of the extracellular matrix (9). It
calcium oxalate crystal; this suggests a possible role in is widely expressed on the surface of a variety of epithe-
the prevention of renal stone formation. It has been lial and endothelial cell types, several cytokines, and
identified among the major protein components of renal chemokines.
calculi (4), but its role in nephrolithiasis is somewhat NEP was noted in preﬂight urine samples and was
unclear. absent in the postﬂight urine samples. It is known that
PROZ is a multidomain Vitamin K—dependent plasma NEP is a zinc metalloendopeptidase with relatively
protein. It functions in bones and arteries and plays broad substrate specificity. The enzyme is located in the
pivotal roles in the physiology of mineralization and in plasma membrane of cells where it splits extracellular
preventing ectopic calcification. UROM (Tamm-Horsfall peptides. NEP is considered one of the key enzymes
protein) is the most abundant protein excreted in the in the metabolic inactivation of many active peptide
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 84, N0. 8 - August 2013 861

"
"4","URINARY PROTEOMES & SPACEFLIGHT—PASTUSHKOVA ET AL.
hormones, including vasodilator endogenous peptides: biochemical reactions, acting as messengers, controlling
atrial natriuretic peptide, brain natriuretic peptide, c-type cell regulation, inﬂuencing growth and development of
natriuretic peptide, substance P, and bradykinin. This various tissues, and defending the body against disease
protein is also involved in metabolism of vasoconstric- are important follow-ons to genomics. With regard to
tors: endothelin-1, angiotensin-H, and endogenous opi- our study, we are particularly interested in the unique
oids. The physiological action of NEP is maintenance effects of the spaceﬂight environment on the urinary
of balance between vasodilatation and vasoconstriction. protein complement and possible post-translational mod-
Increased NEP levels in the urine cause decreased pro- ification to proteins, protein families, and variations in
duction of natriuretic peptides and natriuresis (2). NEP size, shape, and function. The specific functions of hu-
inhibition stimulates natriuretic peptides and restricts man cell populations and tissues are determined by the
activity of the macula densa in renin synthesis. Thus, expression of specific spectra of proteins; each cell type
NEP can affect multiple functions of the renal tubule. synthesizes a set of proteins specific for the given tissue.
AFAM was found only in the postﬂight day 1 sam- To date, urinary proteome analysis has revealed from
ples. It is an alpha-tocopherol binding protein that func- 1500 to 3500 different proteins (5,10). Of urinary pro-
tions as an antioxidant and anti-apoptotic protein (7). teins, 35% are also present in plasma and find their way
Altered AFAM urine concentration is observed in hy- into the urine through glomerular filtration. The remain-
percalcemia with increased endothelium-dependent re- ing 65% (up to 2000 proteins) of the urinary proteome
laxations, mediated Via Ca+ + activated K+ channels. are secreted by the epithelial cells of the kidney and uro-
AQP2 was found only in the postﬂight day 1 samples. genital system or are added to the urine by means of
AQP2 is an apical membrane protein of the renal collect- apoptosis or the secretion of exosomes. Biomarkers for
ing duct epithelial cells that forms molecular channels altered function of the kidney and urogenital system can
(pores) for water transport across lipid membranes. be found in the urinary proteome (10). This is the first
Aquaporins selectively conduct water molecules while study to Characterize both permanent and variable parts
preventing the passage of charged ions. Renal water ex- of the human urinary proteome in relation to spaceﬂight
cretion is mainly regulated through the effects of vaso- and demonstrates the possibility of detecting presymp-
pressin on AQP2. Altered AQP2 protein presence in the tomatic occult disturbance of the urogenital system in
renal collecting system is largely responsible for water spaceﬂight.
balance abnormalities associated with lithium-induced In some functional conditions, both quantity and
diabetes insipidus, congestive heart failure, and the syn- spectrum of urinary proteins may change and include
drome of inappropriate antidiuresis. The excretion of proteins beyond the common spectrum of ”physiologic
AQP2 in the urine increases in response to vasopressin proteinuria” (albumin, Tamm—Horsfall protein, immuno-
(12). Exosomes can transfer functional AQP2 between globulin light chains, hormones, and enzymes). We
cells and the amount of AQP2 in exosomes released identified several urinary proteins by their tryptic frag-
from the collecting duct cells is physiologically regulated. ments, which, according to the TiGER database, are tis-
AQP2 excretion is significantly higher during high salt sue-specific to the kidneys and urogenital system. Two
intake, indicating that water transport Via AQP2 is in- proteins (aminopeptidase A and neutral endopeptidase)
creased. Inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis decreases belong to the group of brush border enzymes of the
renal sodium excretion by increased absorption of so- proximal renal tubules. These proteins have been associ-
dium. Urinary AQP2 decreased, indicating that water ated with tubular dysfunctions. DPP4 was absent only
transport Via AQP2 fell. in the postﬂight day 1 samples. It is a major regulator
AMPE, also known as aminopeptidase A, is the prin- of immune functions, which may be altered during and
cipal Vital enzyme which helps to regulate blood pres- after spaceﬂight. We also identified aquaporin-2 and
sure through degradation of angiotensin II. AMPE is an afamin; their presence in the postﬂight day 1 urine of the
apical membrane peptidase of the proximal tubular epi- cosmonauts may be associated with spaceﬂight-specific
thelial cells. It intermittently appears in urine as a marker physiological changes caused by adaptation to weight-
of mild and reversible tubular dysfunction (8). The pro- lessness and readaptation to Earth gravity.
tein was found in the urine only on the seventh day after Vasopressin regulates the water permeability of the
spaceﬂight; it was not present in the preﬂight samples kidney collecting duct by trafficking aquaporin-2 from
or in the first day after ﬂight samples. the intracellular vesicles to the luminal plasma mem-
brane. As a consequence water is reabsorbed, leading to
urine concentration. The excretion of aquaporin-2 in the
DISCUSSION urine increases in response to vasopressin. Damaged
As noted above, all five proteins related to spaceﬂight intracellular recirculation of aquaporin and increased
are membrane proteins of renal cells. Proteomics is a renal water reabsorption (12) are associated with the
relatively new area of medicine, but offers considerable loss of aquaporin-2. Increased renal water reabsorption,
promise in clinical medicine, drug development, diag- relative state of hypovolemia to an absolute state of
nostics, and molecular medicine. While there may be hypovolemia, and anemia are characteristic for kidney
approximately 20,000 genes in the human body, it is conditions noted after spaceﬂight (6).
estimated that there may be 2 million identifiable pro- There are several potential sources of afamin in
teins. Understanding how proteins function in catalyzing the postﬂight urine samples. Urinary calcium excretion
862 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 84, N0. 8 - August 2013

"
"5","URINARY PROTEOMES 8: SPACEFLIGHT—PASTUSHKOVA ET AL.
during spaceﬂight is caused by bone reabsorption, which ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . . .
causes hypercalcemia. Plasma and urinary calcium in- Thls researth was suppormd by Fhe Russmn Foundatlon. for gas.“
, Research (pro]ect 10-04-13306-RT_of1), a program of the Russmn Mmls-
Creases. early and tends to remaln elevated throughOUt try of Science and Education (project 14.740.11.0755 and 16.740.11.
spaceﬂight, thus leading to a progressive negative cal- 0369).
cium balance. Altered afamin urine concentration is N‘Thle 311210125 811$: gratemlﬁo IgOEA- POPOY/figor V- DOPII‘DOkhOtOV/ aid
observe d in hypercalcemia (7). Further, afamin affects 1co ay . o c anov; W 0 ma e a Slgm leant .contri utlon to t e
. . . research, and to Dr. Rlchard Jennmgs for 1118 sc1ent1f1c counsel and
contractility of smooth muscles of vessels and urinary encouragement
bladder via Ca+ —l— activated K—l— channels and could Authars and aﬁliations: Lyucimila Kh. Pastushkova, Ph.D., and Irina
have Ol‘i inated from those sources. M. Lanna, M.D., Ph.D., Instltute of B10medical Problems, Russian
Th g 1 . . f . . h ﬂ' h Federation State Scientific Research Center RAS,Moscow,Russia;Kirill
. e exosoma 01‘1ng 0 some preteihs In t e pOSt 1g t S. Kireev, M.D., Yuri A. Gagarin Research & Test Cosmonaut Training
urine deserves spec1a1 c0ns1derat10n 1n the future. Pro- Center, Star City, Russia; Alexei S. Kononikhin, Ph.D., and Evgeny N.
mi n i ' ' Nikolaev, Ph.D., Emmanual Institute of Biochemical Ph sics RAS, and
teo c a a ys s 0 t e urinary exosome using tan em y
- the Institute for Energy Problems of Chemical Physics RAS, Moscow,
mass spectrometry has shown that exosomes contain R . . . . . .
, , ussm, and Vladlmlr A. Ivamsenko, Ph.D., Instltute of Cytology and
both membrane and cytosolic proteins. Exosomes ac- Genetics SB RAS,Novosibirsk,Russia.
count for around 3% 0f the total protein in normal human
urine samples. After spaceﬂight the process of exo- REFERENCES . . .
some formation may increase and exosomes may subse- 1‘ MESOgOV DM' Agmn IA’ Konomkhl.“ AS’ POPOV IA' leOIaev
, , , . ata filtratlon for more robust allgnment of chromatograms
quently release membrane Pl‘OtemS mtO the urme- The of complex peptide mixtures. Bioorg Khim 2011,- 37:165—70.
regulatory mechanism Of exosome formation remains 2. Bae EH, Ma SK, Lee J, Kim SW. Altered regulation of renal nitric
unknown. oxide and atrial natriuretic peptide systems in angiotensin
. . . . . II-° d dh ° .R 1P 211°1721—7.
Thls study has several hmtatms that may be 1m- 3. CarreltrérSCEA.ygiiiﬂiloieﬁfélaﬁgarid ltheO iallikrein-kinin
proved in subsequent investigations. The ﬁrst is that system. J Clin Invest 2005; 115:588—91.
proteomic research has been somewhat difﬁcult to re— 4. Christetlsen. B, Petersen TE, Serensen ES. Post-translatiohal
produce between laboratories and the accuracy of this Egggéﬁtiogggiﬁggfgm Processmg 0f urmary OStEOPOHtm-
type Of IDYeStlgétlgn ShOUId improve. Also! these were 5. Coon J], Zurbig P: Dakna M, Dominiczak AF, Decramer S, et a1.
long-duration m1ss10ns, but the data were only collected CE-MS analysis of the human urinary proteome for biomarker
preﬂight and postﬂight. It is hoped that the importance (211955??? and disease diagnostics- Proteomics C1111 APP1 2008;
Of prOteomIC i‘esearch W111 .lead to more advanced 1n_ 6. Gazenko OG,Grigor’eVAI,Natochin IuV. [Water-salthomeostasis
ﬂlght 155 studles on both anlmals and humanS- and space ﬂight] Probl Kosm Biol 1986; 5421—238 [Article in
In conclusion, the proteomic analysis of urine samples Russian} .
in different phases Of space missions With a bioinforma- 7. Kratzer I; Boernhart E; Wmtersperger A, Hammer A, Waltl S, et a1.
t. h . . d . f' . b Afamm IS synthe51zed by cerebrovascular endothellal cells and
10D approac t0 prOteln 1 ?ntl lcatlfﬂl appears to . e a mediates alpha-tocopherol transport across an in Vitro model
promismg area Of study as It offers InSIght into mICI‘O- of the blood-brain barrier. J Neurochem 2009; 108:707—18.
gravity-induced changes to urinary proteins and occult 8- MOtOYOShi Y, Matsusaka T, SaitO Ag Pasta“ L WiHHOW TE; et al-
disturbances of the urinary tract. Further animal and Zdegalm contrlblitesmthe. eariymmry Of prommaltubule C9115
, , , , , urmg nonselectlve protemurla. Kldney Int 2008; 74:1262—9.
human StUdleS may lead to 1dent1f1cat10n Of VUlnera' 9. Sumitomo M, Shen R, Nanus DM. Involvement of neutral
bilities Of the human kidneys and other organ systems endopeptidase inneoplastic progression. Biochim Biophys Acta
during extended-duration space travel. In addition, the 2005;1751‘52—9-

. . . . . 10. Thongboonkerd V. Practical points in urinary proteomics. I
ﬁeld of proteomics research With urine and other tissue Proteome Res 2007. 6.388190.
samples may lead to better understanding Of the human 11. Valeeva OA, Pastushkova LKh, Pakharukova NA, Dobrokhotov
body in space, drug interaction and efﬁcacy, preclinical IV, Larina IM. [Variability Of urine proteome Of healthy persons
Chan es Of certain diseases im roved in-ﬂi ht dia 1108- during 105-daily isolation] Fiziol Cheloveka 2011; 37298—102.

. g . . f . p. g f g 12. Wen H, Frokiaer ], Kwon TH, Nielsen S. Urinary excretion of
t1C testing, and. néw rISk mitigation Strategles 01‘ explo- aquaporin—2 in rat is mediated by a vasopressin-dependent
ration-class m1ss10ns. apical pathway. JAm Soc Nephrol 1999; 10:1416—29.

Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 84, N0. 8 - August 2013 863

"
