"","x"
"1","|NTERD|SC|PL|NARY TRANSPORT PHENOMENA
Cellular and Genetlc Adaptatlon
1n Low-grav1ty Env1ronments
Alamelu Sundaresan“ and Neal R. Pellisb
“Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas, USA
bNational Aeronautics and Space Administration, Lyndon B.fohnson Space Center,
Houston, Texas, USA
Genetic response suites in human lymphocytes in response to microgravity are impor-
tant to identify and study further to augment physiological adaptation to new milieus.
Human peripheral blood from normal donors was used to isolate peripheral blood
mononuclear cells. Blood traverses through most organs and hence is a suitable overall
physiological predictor. The cells were cultured in 1g (T ﬂask) and modeled microgravity
for 24 and 72 h. Cell samples were collected and subjected to gene array analysis. Data
were collected and subjected to a two-way analysis of variance. Different groups of genes
related to the immune response, cardiovascular system, and stress response were then
analyzed. These three groups focused on human adaptation to new environments. Many
molecules related to T cell activation and second messengers, located both in the cell
membrane and cytoplasm, were signiﬁcantly altered (positive or negative regulation) in
modeled microgravity. Cardiovascular biomarker expression and stress response gene
expression also presented an aberrant response in analog microgravity. Previous ﬁnd-
ings in our laboratory showed lymphocyte activation and locomotion to be signiﬁcantly
suppressed in microgravity. Further analysis at the protein levels of genes involved in
these responses could lead to development of prophylactic and countermeasure steps
to augment human physiology for long-term space travel. Detailed results from the
genetic analyses are presented in this study, including differential responses in stress
response genes, cardiovascular and atherogenic genes, and T cell activation genes.
Key words: acute coronary syndrome; copy ribonucleic acid; microgravity; micrograv-
ity analog culture system; modeled microgravity; RNA; placental growth factor; three-
dimensional cell growth; T cell activation; vascular endothelial growth factor
Introduction sic cellular mechanisms and furthermore pro-
vide opportunities in applied cell science. In-
Microgravity affects cells and tissues, either vestigations in microgravity and ground-based
through direct response elements within the cell model systems have opened D€W ViStaS in tis—
or by inﬂuencing the environment in which the $116 engineering, disease modeling, drug test-
Cell lives. Cells respond to decreased gravity ing, vaccine pI‘OdUCtiOD, and space C611 biOl'
and the reordering offerces by Changes in gene OgY- In microgravity, C6118 no longer sediment
expression and cellular function. Microgravity to surfaces but rather freely associate with each
is a unique environment in which cells, tissues, 0th€13 forming largﬁ assemblies that can mph-
and organisms undergo novel adaptations. The cate in three dimensions. NO dOUbt th€ diminu-
adaptational responses provide insight into ba— tion Of gravity from th€ C611 culture setting 211-
lows the remaining forces to be more apparent.
The rapid assembly and three—dimensional
(3D) growth afford insight into the nature of
Address for correspondence: Alamelu Sundaresan, Ph.D., Biology De- - -
partment, Texas Southern University, 3100 Cleburne St, Houston, TX physmal forces that affect hf€ 2ft th€ cellnlar 1€.V€1
77004. Voice: 713-313-7926; fax: 713-313-7932. sundaresana@tsu.edu and other new prospects 1n US$116 englneerlng.
InterdisciplinaryTransport Phenomena: Ann. NY. Acad. Sci. 1161: 135—146 (2009).
doi: 10.1111/].1749—6632.2009.04085.x © 2009 New York Academy of Sciences.
1 35

"
"2","136 Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
Mierogravity tissue morphogenesis produces muscle mass and function, most likely caused
functional 3D constructs that are useful eX— by skeletal unloading and reduced activity In
perimental models and may ultimately be addition, eephalad ﬂuid shifting, neurovestibu—
amenable to transplantation. The reordering lar disturbances, and a general malaise termed
of forces in microgravity is reﬂected in the pro— “space sickness” are experienced by astronauts
found shape Change, gene expression, differ— soon after arrival in microgravity In many in-
entiation, and metabolic alterations identiﬁed stances, the basis of the negative inﬂuence of
in space experiments. Despite the dramatic re— microgravity on human systems may be inves—
sponse, cells not only survive but also thrive t0 tigated using eell—based systems. This commu—
give a new perspective to biological systems. nieation will offer a selected review of the past
As life evolved on Earth, a multiplicity of work at the cellular level and invoke models to
physical and chemical factors invoked adapta— test in forthcoming opportunities on the Inter—
tions and participated in the complicated se— national Space Station.
leetion process.1 For many factors, there are Arnajor Challenge in studying the adaptation
clear examples of the role of physical forces in of terrestrial life to space conditions resides in
determining the pathways in evolution. A no— convincingly delineating the responses induced
table exception is gravity The force of gravity by microgravity from the radiation and stress
has been constant for the 4.8 billion years of experienced in spaceﬂight. Various parameters
life evolutionary processes on Earth. Therefore, of immune function are suppressed in humans
there is little or no anticipated genetic memory during and returning from space missions}6
for terrestrial life to respond to gravitational Exposure to cosmic radiation, along with phys—
foree Changes. As we transition from terrestrial ieal and psychological stresses, occurs concur—
life to low—gravity environments and study the rently with the microgravity 0f spaceﬂight. Un—
adaptive processes in the cell, we will increase derstanding the effect of each of these factors
our understanding of gravity’s role in shaping in the physiological Changes observed during
life on Earth. spaceﬂight is a formidable Challenge for space
The species on Earth evolved to perform research programs (e.g., for immune function,
various functions and processes in a force per which is affected independently by all three fae—
unit mass of 9.8 rn/s2. Some gravity—dependent tors: microgravity, stress, and radiation).
processes are obvious, such as balance and the It is unlikely that single cells can “sense”
ability of higher organisms to proceed along a gravity through biophysical Changes within the
surface. Others are less obvious but are demon— (:ell.7 Three theoretical approaches address
strated through experimentation, such as the this problem and are reviewed by Cogeli and
directional growth ofplants (gravitropisrn).2 For Gogoli—GreuterS: (l) a direct effect, the direct in—
most species (microbial, plant, or animal) only a teraetion of gravity with one or more cellular
smallproportion 0f the functions inﬂuenced by organelles of a density, different from that of
gravity are known. During the past 40 years, the cytoplasm, generates a pressure on neigh—
the ability to achieve Earth orbit and eXpe— boring structures (e.g., the cytoskeleton) and
rienee long—terrn microgravity has created a consequently a signal that is transdueed into
need to understand the role of gravity in hu— a biological event; (2) a nonaquilibrium thermody—
rnan, animal, and plant systems in prepara— namic ﬂeet, the interaction of gravity with a few
tion for exploration—elass missions into the solar organelles is not sufﬁcient to trigger one event,
system. but a series of small Changes is ampliﬁed to
Many biological stresses are induced by generate an important effect; and (3) an indirect
spaceﬂight and are Visible in many areas of hu— ﬂeet, alterations in gravity induce Changes in
man physiology The most dramatic response the mieroenvironrnent 0f the cell and the cell
to spaceﬂight is the signiﬁcant loss of bone and responds to the new environmental conditions.

"
"3","Sundaresan & Pellis: Genetic Adaptation in Low Gravity 'I37
Studies by Pollard suggest that in cells metabolic rate of the cell, diffusion and sur—
smaller than 10 um in diameter, Brownian face tension may not be sufﬁcient to fulﬁll the
motion caused by impacts from molecules in metabolic requirements of the cell. These and
the culture ﬂuid are sufﬁcient to counteract other microgravity—indueed alterations in the
gravity—indueed seolirnentation.9’10 How much physical and Chemical mieroenvironrnent alter
sedimentation can occur in cells larger than cellular function.
10 um is not known. Furthermore, this ap- Emerging technologies, such as DNA mi—
proaeh assumes that cells act like bags of wa— eroarray proﬁling, have the potential to iden—
ter, containing solutes and undissolved particles tify novel genes that are involved in mediating
(starch granules, oil vacuoles, and organelles). adaptation to these environments. Such target
This theory does not agree with the obser— genes might prove to be therapeutically valu—
Vations that the aqueous phase of the cell is able as new targets for countermeasures or as
heterogenous, containing solution properties, predictive biomarkers of response to these new
colloidal regions, suspended and attached or— environments. However, this analysis also helps
ganelles, and contractile eytoskeletal structures. us understand whether there is a general strat—
Studies by N ace11 suggest that organelles of the egy used by the cell to link speeiﬂe signaling
cell may impart signiﬁcant torque on the ey— pathways with cell stress—sensing events.
toskeleton by using the force of gravity It is Immune suppression has been known as
not known what effect the mierogravity—related a consequence of space ﬂight for more than
loss of this torque has on cellular physiology.11 20 years.16 There is sufﬁcient evidence to sug—
Nevertheless, the possibility of a direct gravity gest that several aspects of space ﬂight affect
sensor within mammalian cells exists, although immune performance measures. First, stress at—
it is as yet unknown. tendant to space ﬂight can induce neuroen—
The likelihood that gravity, a small force, doerine Changes that signiﬁcantly affect im—
would affect cell function is questionable. The mune performance, especially until the crew
nonequilibriurn thermodynamic effect, or the adapts to the conditions in the spacecraft. See—
bifurcation theory, provides the reasoning to ond, layered onto the stress, and even after
allow such small Changes to exert a signiﬁcant adaptation, exposure to radiation can tem—
effeet on biochemical processes of the cell. This porarily or permanently affect immunity Fi-
theory, outlined by Mesland, argues that the nally, the microgravity of space can dramat—
bioeherniealproeesses of a cell are described in ieally affect hemodynamics and the ﬂow of
terms of nonlinear nonequilibriurn thermody- lymph that trafﬂcs and disseminates lympho—
narnies with Chaotic outeornes.12’ 13 Therefore, eytes throughout the body An additional affect
the direction in which these reactions proceed of microgravity is the effect of decreased grav—
is extremely sensitive to environmental condi— ity (acceleration) force on the individual cells in
tions. This sensitivity may allow the seemingly the immune system. Therefore, there is a com—
small effect of gravity Changes to have dramatic pelling need to address the risks, and the decline
effects on cellular processes. in immunity can be clinically signiﬁcant. Previ-
Microgravity can possibly alter the biophysi— ous experiments by our laboratory and others
ealrnieroenvironrnent around cells, and in turn, have demonstrated that lymphocyte activation
affect the shape, metabolism, and function of and locomotion are impaired in microgravity
the (:ell.14’15 For example, the lack of sedimen— and modeled microgravity (MMG). With hu—
tation and thermal convection in mierograv— man exploration and long—term space travel,
ity leaves only simple diffusion and possibly the immune system of the astronaut has to
surface tension—driven phenomena to move be optimally maintained. Heat—shoek proteins
waste products away from the cell and bring (HSPs), also called stress proteins, are a group of
nutrients toward the cell. Depending on the proteins that are present in all the cells of all life

"
"4","138 Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
forms. They are induced when a cell undergoes symptoms seen in astronauts during spaceﬂight.
various types of environmental stresses, such as These include reduced cardiac function, loss of
heat, cold, and oxygen deprivation. Mierograv— bone, reduced immune response, and ortho—
ity is another stressor that might regulate HSPs. static hypotension. Perhaps some of the physio—
HSPs trigger immune response through aetiV— logical adaptations seen in aging share com—
ities that occur both inside the cell (intraeellu— mon physiological bases with those Changes
lar) and outside the cell (extracellular). HSPs seen in spaceﬂight. Because microgravity af—
interaet with multiple key components of sig— feets prokaryotie and eukaryotie cell function
naling pathways that regulate growth and de— at a subcellular and molecular level, space of—
Velopment. The molecular relationships among fers us an opportunity to learn more about ba—
HSPs, various signaling proteins, and partner sic biological mechanisms that are essential to
proteins appear to be critical for the normal life.16
function of signal transduction pathways. The The health status of an astronaut before
relative levels of these proteins may be impor— and after spaceﬂight has been a prime eon—
tant, because too little or too much HSP—7O 0r eern of NASA throughout the Apollo series
HSP—9O can result in aberrant growth control, of lunar landings, Skylab, Apollo—Soyuz Test
developmental malformations, and cell death. Projects, and the new Spaeelab—shuttle mis—
Although the functions of HSPs as molecular sions. Both humoral and cellular immunity
ehaperones have been well Characterized, their have been studied using Classical Clinical pro—
eomplementary role as stress—indueed proteins eedures. Serum proteins show ﬂuctuations that
to monitor Changes and alter the biochemical can be explained with adaptation to ﬂight. Con—
environment of the cell remains elusive. Ge— versely, cellular immune responses of lympho—
netie and molecularinteraetions among HSPs, eytes appear to be depressed in both in viva
their eoehaperones, and components of signal— and in vitro. If this in vivo and in vitro depres—
ing pathways suggest that eross—talk between sion is a result of the same cause, then hu—
these proteins can regulate proliferation and manity’s adaptation to outer space living will
development by preventing or enhancing cell present interesting Challenges in the future. Be—
growth and cell death as the levels of HSPs cause reduced gravity may be the cause, per—
vary in response to environmental stress or haps the designs of the experiments for space—
disease.” ﬂight will offer insights at the cellular levels
Physiological changes in humans during that will facilitate development of mechanisms
spaceﬂight upon return to Earth have been for adaptation. Furthermore, if the aging pro-
attributed to systemic adaptation, response to eess is Viewed as an adaptational concept or
stress, and lack of normal exercise. Studies model and not as a disease process, then per—
from the Skylab, SL—B, and D—l missions have haps spaceﬂight could easily interact to sup—
demonstrated that signiﬁcant physiological al— ply some information on our biological time
terations are seen in single—eell prokaryotes and Clocks.18
eukaryotes, as well as in animal tissues. Ba— When cells are exposed to conditions ofpro—
sic cellular functions, such as electrolyte eon— teotOXie stress (e.g., heat shock), the expression
eentration, cell growth rate, glucose utilization, of HSPs, including members of the HSP-IOO,
bone formation, response to growth stimula— —90, —70, —60, —40, and small HSP families, is
tion, and exocytosis, are modiﬁed in mierograv— induced.17’ 19 HSPs have a critical role in the re—
ity Many of the physiological Changes seen in covery ofeells from stress and in eytoproteetion,
humans, other vertebrates, and simple organ— guarding cells from subsequent insults. They
isms in spaceﬂight may originate from dysfune— protect stressed cells by their ability to recog—
tion of basic biological mechanisms caused by nize nascent polypeptides, unstructured regions
microgravity Aging humans share many of the ofproteins, and exposed hydrophobic stretches

"
"5","Sundaresan & Pellis: Genetic Adaptation in Low Gravity 139
of amino acids. In doing so, ehaperones hold, dieators in stressful environments is still largely
translocate, or refold stress—denatured proteins undiscovered.
and prevent their irreversible aggregation with Many space missions have shown that pro—
other proteins in the (:ell.17’19’20 In addition to longed spaceﬂight may increase the risk of car—
their roles in protecting cells from stress, nearly diovaseular problems. Alterations of the vas—
allHSPs are constitutively expressed under nor— eular endotheliurn together with a decreased
rnal growth conditions, where they function release of endothelin 1 may entail postﬂight
to maintain protein homeostasis by regulating health hazards for astronauts. Long—terrn space
protein folding quality control. The ehaperone exploration necessitates studying the proﬁle of
activities of HSPs enable folding of newly syn— atherogenie genes in microgravity In our study,
thesized proteins and assist protein transloea— placental induced growth factor (Ple) gene
tion across intracellular rnernbranes.21’22 They expression was upregulated in MMG.24 This
function in protein refolding and putting pro— is a cardiovascular mediator and a negative
teins into functional units (chaperones and regulator of vascular endothelial growth fae—
Clients). tor (VEGF) and is now Clinically considered a
Several different families of HSPs have been more speciﬁc biomarker than C—reaetive pro—
identiﬁed. Certain diseases caused by aberrant tein (CRP) for predicting stroke and heart at—
expression of HSPs are polyglutarnine disease, tacks. It can also be detected in early—onset and
spinoeerebellar ataxia type 3,Machado—Joseph progressive stages of cardiovascular dysfunc—
disease, Huntington’s Chorea, spinobulbar rnus— tion. This newly described molecular marker of
eular atrophy, and dentatorubral pallidoluysian inﬂammation is the best indicator yet of trouble
atrophy Increased HSP—7O in serum correlates for people who suffer chest pain serious enough
with a better outcome for patients after heat— to bring them to hospital emergency depart—
stroke or severe trauma. Expression of HSP— rnents, according to German cardiologists.25
70 was signiﬁcantly upregulated in rnierograv— Ple was named for the organ in which it
ity (Classic adaptive stress response). HSP—9O was ﬁrst detected. It is a major actor in the in—
is present in the cytosol, nucleus, and endo— ﬂammatory process that has recently emerged
plasrnic reticulum and eXists in many tissue as a major risk factor for heart attack, stroke,
types. It performs a chaperone function with— and other cardiovascular conditions. A study of
out which Client proteins would collapse into a 547 patients who came to the emergency de—
useless aggregation ofrnalfolded amino acids. It partment with acute chest pains found elevated
also aids cell motility Decreased HSP—9O ere— levels of Ple that predicted a high risk of heart
ates a higher possibility for increased oxida— attack or death in the hospital and continuing
tive stress.23 The HSPs are highly conserved, problems for those who were (liseharged.25
ubiquitous, and abundant proteins essential for Studies of inﬂammation in cardiovascular
cellular Viability. They can be induced by hy— disease have centered on a different molecu—
poxia, nutrient deprivation, oxygen radicals, lar marker, CRP. It is a useful indicator of risk
metabolic disruption, Viral infection, and trans— for people with stable heart disease, but because
formation. Common disease states involving CRP is released by any inﬂammatory response,
HSPs are polyglutarnine disease, ataxia, eardio— it is sometimes difﬁcult to determine whether
vascular disease, atherosclerosis, and rheuma— the CRP elevation is really related to inﬂam-
toid arthritis.17 The HSP—90—null genotype is rnatory processes in the arterial walls.
lethal in eukaryotes. HSP—9O was downregu— In contrast, Ple is released only when the
lated in MMG in our experiments presenting delicate endothelial cells that line artery walls
an opposite spectrum as that of HSP—70, which become inﬂamed, a reaction that can cause se—
was upregulated in MMG. Although much is vere chest pain. In the emergency department,
known about them, their important role as in— Ple was an extremely powerful predictor for

"
"6","140 Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
early cardiovascular events. The risk of heart Ple is one of a family of platelet—derived pro—
attack or death in the next 30 days was more teins that function as potent chemoattractants
than triple for patients with severe chest pain for monocytes and are involved in the regula—
and who had high Ple levels—21.2%, corn— tion of vascular endothelial growth. Ple is a
pared with 5.3% for those with normal levels, 50—kDa heterodirner consisting of 149 amino
as reported by the researchers.25 acids and has high homology with VEGF. Ple
Ple also has gained the attention of cancer exists in two forms, Ple—1 and Ple-2, which
researchers working on ways to curb tumors differ only in that Ple—2 has an insertion of a
by interfering with angiogenesis, the creation highly basic 21—amino acid stretch at the car—
of new blood vessels that a cancer needs to boxylend.Various tissues express PlernRNA,
grow It stimulates the growth of endothelial including thyroid, placenta, and lung, indicat—
cells, which line the blood vessels of a tumor. ing that the protein functions in these tissues.
N ewer reports suggest that highlevels ofPle The biological functions of Ple are not com-
in breast cancer patients were signiﬁcantly as— pletely understood, but they appear to involve
sociated with a higher degree of lymph node primarily initiation of the inﬂammatory pro-
involvernent, poorly differentiated tumors, and cess, which includes the recruitment of circu—
an overall poor outlook for the patient,” as per lating macrophages into atherosclerotic lesions,
Parr et al.26 This is because Ple is a mem— stimulation of smooth muscle cell growth, and
ber of the VEGF family, a group of potent upregulation of both tissue necrosis factor 0L
inducers of tumor angiogenesis that can ac— and MCP—l by macrophages. Ple also report—
tivate both endothelial cell proliferation and edly activates stem cells from a quiescent to
migration.26 proliferative state and in this way stimulates
Parr et al.26 examined the ability of Ple to hematopoiesis in the bone marrow of mice.
inﬂuence breast cancer development by using The search for important components that
152 tissue samples obtained from breast cancer regulate the immune system has been driven by
patients. Using polymerase chain reaction tech— the knowledge that atherosclerosis and plaque
niques, the team found that PleeXpression was instability are fundamentally an inﬂammatory
far higher in the 1 19 samples from breast can— process. Although elucidation of pathways and
cer tissue than in the 33 samples ofbackground factors central to this system has led to consider—
breast tissue (mean transcript copies, 0.66 ver— able advances in basic understanding, many of
sus 0.03). Growth factor levels also correlated the substances identiﬁed are unstable in circu—
with several measures of disease severity. Ple lation and therefore are impractical biomarker
levels were far lower in patients who had re— candidates. Pleappears to be stable in circula—
rnained disease free over the next 6 years than tion and must be considered a strong candidate
in those who experienced recurrence, metas— as a biomarker for plaque instability, myocar—
tasis to a distant site, or who died from breast dial ischemia, and prognosis of patients in the
cancer (mean transcript copies, 0.09 versus 2.6). spectrum of acute coronary syndrome (ACS).
“Patients with a poor prognosis displayed dra— Ple is present in nanogram-per—liter concen-
rnatically elevated levels of FIG?” (p. 2820), the trations in serum and plasma.
researchers report in the Europeanjoumal ochm— Particular interest in Ple has been sparked
667”. Ple may play a role in the rapid restoration by a proposed role as a principal instigator of
of a tumor blood supply after treatment and atherosclerotic plaque instability, which is the
thus may enhance the possibility of recurrence. physiological common denominator for coro—
Therefore, the angiogenic factor demonstrates nary artery thrombus formation and ACS. Fur—
strong prognostic potential.26 The magnitude thermore, compelling data have shown that in—
of PIG? s importance in prognosis of cardiovas— hibiting the actions of Ple suppressed plaque
cular events has gained impetus since 2004. instability and coronary heart disease. Thus,

"
"7","Sundaresan & Pellis: Genetic Adaptation in Low Gravity 141
Ple is not merely a risk marker but also a dis— mononuclear cells. These cells were cultured
ease marker, and it may represent a new thera— in 1g (T ﬂask) and microgravity analog culture
peutie target for mitigating the disease process system (MACS) for 24 and 72 h. To identify
behind A0327 possible response suites in the genetic makeup
Plasma Ple measurements are an indepen— of immune cell, that is, the lymphocyte in mi-
dent biomarker of adverse outcome in pa— erogravity, gene array analysis was performed
tients with suspected ACS. Plasma Ple ap— on normal human peripheral blood mononu-
pears to extend the predictive and prognostic clear cells cultured in MMG (MACS) and in
information gained from traditional biomark— 1g (tissue culture ﬂasks). The MACS was devel—
ers of necrosis, platelet activation, and systemic oped at NASAJohnson Space Center and is an
inﬂammation. Ple is increased in ACS regard— accepted model for modeling some aspects of
less of the eTnT concentration, which implies microgravity on the groundm’28 Cell samples
that it is a biomarker of ischemie events, such were collected at 24 and 72 h, and total RNA
as plaque instability, plaque disruption, or im— was prepared and subjected to gene array anal—
pending thrombosis, in the context of ACS. ysis using the Affymetrix HG_U95 array. First—
Biomarkers providing independent insight into strand CDNA synthesis performed using total
the various physiological components of ACS RNA (10—25 mg), a T7—(dT)24 oligomer (5’—
will probably be combined in a synergistic pro— GGCCAGTGAATTGTAATAC GACT CAC-
teomies strategy for risk assessment, diagnosis, TAT AGGGAGGCGG—dT24—3’), and su—
therapeutie guidance, and therapeutic moni— perseript 11 reverse transcriptase (GIBCO—
toring in the future. It appears that Ple has BRL Life Technologies, Gaithersburg, MD).
potential for playing an important role.27 Seeond—strand synthesis converted the CDNA
Ple appears to have great potential as an into a double—stranded DNA template for use
independent biomarker for plaque disruption, in an in vitro transcription reaction. The T7
ischemia, and thrombosis. Larger trials are promoter introduced during ﬂrst—strand CDNA
forthcoming and may aid in the possible eom— synthesis provided the necessary sequence for
mereialization of Ple.27 In microgravity with directing the synthesis of CRNA by using bacte—
the contemplation and implementation of long riophage T7 RNA polymerase. The CRNA or
ﬂights (lunar missions, 30 days; Mars missions, target RNAs were labeled with biotin during
6 months), increased inﬂammation leading to the transcription reaction. Biotin—labeled tar—
multiple system risks is an impending reality. get RNA was fragmented to a mean size of 200
The regulation ofinterleukin genes was also an— bases to facilitate their hybridization to probe
alyzed. These genes are crucial for the differen— sequences on the gene Chip (Affymetrix, Santa
tiation ofnaive T helper (TH) cells into the TH2 Clara, CA) array. Each target RNA sample was
eﬂeetor cells that promote humoral (antibody) initially hybridized to a test array. This array
immunity and provide protection against respi— contained a set of probes representing genes
ratory and intestinal pathogens. Interleukin 4 that are commonly expressed in most cells (e.g.,
(IL—4) also has a central role in the pathogenesis human aetin, GAPDH, transferrin receptor,
of allergic inﬂammation. transcription factor ISGF—B, 18S RNA, 28$
MicrograVity as an experimental perturba— RNA, and alu). Test arrays conﬁrmed the suc—
tion also offers a new blueprint in cellular eessful labeling of the target RNAs and pre—
adaptation. vented the use of degraded or nonrepresen—
tative target RNA. Hybridization of gene chip

Methods (Aﬂymetrix) arrays were performed at 4500 for

16 h in 0.1 mol MES, pH 6.6, 1 mol NaCl,

Human peripheral blood from normal 0.02 mol EDTA, and 0.01% Tween 20. Four
donors was used to isolate peripheral blood prokaryotie genes(bioB, bioC, and MOD from the

"
"8","142 Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
Escherichia coli biotin synthesis pathway and are, VEW‘I AWHWSiE 0” HNUVH 3 WEWI Gravity HQ Dr
the reeombinase gene from P1 bacteriophage) Mmgrt'wtt‘l' E‘F‘”,'“.'TE GEMS d'frﬂrﬂnt'auy D;
expresgcd In GFEUHFJMILrﬂ-grﬂvlhf and Ter'IE' Ell: Ell)”:
were added to the hybridization cocktail as in- HWWHW ontidence Intewal m _H
ternal controls. These control RNAs were used 3’ I
to normalize expression levels between experi—
ments; because the control RNAs were added
at various copy numbers (BioB, 1.5 pmol; BiOC, 44
5 pmol; BiOD, 25 pmol and ere, 100 pM), they
were used in estimating relative abundance of “'“”'”'T""""“
RNA transcripts in the sample. Arrays were
washed using both nonstringent (1 mol N aCl,
2500) and stringent (1 mol NaCl, 5000) con—
ditions prior to staining with phyeoerythrin— Figure 1. Human peripheral blood from normal
streptaVidin (10 mg/mL ﬁnal). Gene chip ar- donors was used to isolate peripheral blood mononu-
rays were scanned using a Gene Array Scanner clear cells. These cells were cultured in 19 (T flask)
Hewlett Packard Palo Alto CA) and were ana— cmd MMG for 24 and 72 h' C9” samples were FOI-
( , ’ , ’ , , lected cmd sublected to gene array analysrs usmg
lyzed us1ng the Affymetrlx Gene Chlp Analys1s the Affymetrix HG_U95 array. Data were collected
SUit€ 3-3 software; thﬁ original g€n€ array data and subjected to ca two-wcry analysis of variance.
can be obtained from the University of Texas Different groups of genes related to the immune re-
Medieal Branch bioinformaties Web site. sponse were then analyzed using Spottire and Unix
Data were collected and subjected to a two- software. A total of 7%3 genes were affected by G
. . . type (19 or mrcrogravrty analog), 176 genes were
WY analys1s Of varlance. Thosegenes d1ffer- affected by the length of time alone, and 44 were
ent1ally expressed 1n MMG condltlons tWOfOId affected by the interaction of time and (3 type. In this
above normal 1g control samples were used for set one set of examples from each group of genes is
ﬁnal interpretation. Different groups of genes elaborated (stress response, cardiovascular function,
related to the immune response, eardiovaseu— interleukins).
lar function, and stress response were then
analyzed using Spotﬁre and Unix software. gene expression Changes will not be as dramatic
Results displayed are representative of seven as seen in transformed cell lines. However, even
experiments. a small change in normal cells is considered
physiologically consequential.
Mieroarray analysis revealed downregula—
ReSUII'S tion of T cell activation genes, such as DAG
kinase (43-fold), human serine/threonine ki-
Many molecules related to T cell aetiva— nase (38—fold), and tyrosine kinase (24-fold),
tion and second messengers located in both and upregulation of others (Fig. 1). A total of
the cell membrane and cytoplasm were signif— 78 genes were affected by G type (1g or micro—
ieantly altered (positive or negative regulation) gravity analog), 176 genes were affected by the
in MMG.29 Cardiovascular biomarker expres— length of time alone, and 44 were affected by
sion and stress response gene expression also the interaction of time and G type. In this set
presented altered responses in analog miero— one set of examples from each group of genes
gravity Lymphocyte activation and locomo— is e1ab0rated(stress response, eytokines). These
tion are signiﬁcantly suppressedin microgravity genes were further divided into three groups.
(space and MMG).30 Genes expressed twofold The ﬁrst category was gene members belong—
greater than lg—eultured samples were used for ing to the calcium response and stress protein
further interpretation and analysis. Peripheral group. These genes are sensitive to the organ—
bloodlymphoeytes are normaleells; hence, the ism’s environment and affect the adaptation

"
"9","Sundaresan & Pellis: Genetic Adaptation in Low Gravity 143
Calcium-Stress Response Genes Cardiﬂvascular genes
Gravity Gra-atty
Hspnmflwc rum Ilt'ftint'.
H5 meatlr pwnm “l h1,], m-segf
H-'.|-'E:H.+ H h PILHE+
51311911“ ""

Figure 2. Regulation patterns of calcium re- Figure 3. Peripheral blood from normal donors
sponse genes in human lymphocytes cultured in mod- was used to isolate peripheral blood mononuclear
eleci microgravity(MACS). Peripheral blood from nor— cells. These cells were cultured in 19 (T flask) and
mal donors was used to isolate peripheral blood MMG for 24 and 72 h. Cell samples were col-
mononuclear cells. These cells were cultured in 19 lecteci and subjected to gene array analysis using
(T flask) and MMG for 24 and 72 h. Cell samples the Affymetrix HG_U95 array. Data were collected
were collected and subiecteci to gene array analy— and subjected to a two-way analysis of variance,
sis using The Affymetrix HG_U95 array. Data were and a probe set for cardiovascular and atherogenic
collected and subjected to a ’rWO-WCIy analysis Of genes was generated and significantly regulated
variance, and a probe set for calcium and stress re- genes were analyzed further. The most significant
sponses was generated and significantly regulated finding was that the expression of angiogenic gene
genes were analyzed further. HSPAiA (i.e., HSP- PIGiwas upregulateci significantly (more than sixfold,
70) was upregulated by more than twofold, whereas P < 0.001), PIGt seen in bold in Figure 3 was at-
HSP9A9B (i.e. HSP-90) is downregulateci by more tected by the interaction of both time and gravity;
than twofold (P < 0.001 for both genes). Both genes that is, its expression increased with longer exposure
were affected by gravity alone. of lymphocytes to MMG.
process of the organism (Fig. 2). The second
group of genes analyzed (Fig. 3) were ones in— Interleukin QEHEE
volved in cardiovascular function. These are
also involved in the adaptation process and
equilibrating process of the organism to its sur— Gram
rounding milieu. The ﬁnal group of genes ana— .L 4341”.”
lyzed consisted 0fthose related to the elicitation IL 4.11.“. Lu.
0f the inﬂammatory response (Fig. 4). u. m 1"" MW

Figure 2 reveals the regulation patterns of _| W +
calcium pathway genes and stress response
genes in human lymphocytes cultured in
MMG. HSPAIA (i.e., HSP—70) is upregulated
by more them tWOfOId (P < 0'001)’ whereas Figure 4. Regulation of interleukins in human
HSP9A9B (1.e., HSP-90) ls downregulated by lymphocytes reveals opposing expression patterns of
more than tWOfOld (P < 0-001)- HSP'7O was the TH2 immunity mediators, |L-4, and |L-4 receptor.
upregulated by more than twofold in micro- This Venn diagram reveals iolci changes exhibited
gravity culture, whereas HSP-90 was signiﬁ- by significantly upregulateci or downregulateci inter-
cantly downregulated (Fig. 1). HSP-70 is not leukln genes (morethan twaiolci, P < 0.001) In lym-

. . . . phocytes cultured In the micrograVIty analog. Both
typlcally expressed 1n e111 C6118? 131“ 1t .18. 6X_ these genes seem to be affected by the presence
pressed at hlgh 137615 1n stressed condltlons. or absence of gravity as was the case with the |L-é
HSP—70 participates in translation, protein receptor.

"
"10","144 Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
translocation, proteolysis and protein folding, Chronic inﬂammation as well as destruction of
suppressing aggregation, and reactivating de— bone and cartilage in rheumatoid arthritis. Hu—
natured proteins. rnanized anti—hurnan IL—6 receptor antibody,
Analysis of cardiovascular entities in this toeilizurnab, speciﬁcally recognizes human
gene array revealed the upregulation of Ple, IL—6 receptor and inhibits IL—6 actions. This
which is an angiogenie factor (Fig. 3). Among may be a redundancy mechanism in the lyrn-
the genes signiﬁcantly Changed in MMG, Ple phoeyte to reduce the inﬂammatory response
levels were the most startling. Ple levels in similar to the effect ofupregulated HSP—70.
MMG—eultured lymphocytes were more than
sixfold higher than lg—eultured controls. The
real—time polymerase Chain reaction that fol— Discussion
lowed corroborated the gene array ﬁndings
(data not shown). Increased levels of Ple in- With long-terrn space travel and other eX—
dieate trends toward increased inﬂammation. ploratory ventures planned, the immune sys—
During interleukin proﬁling, the IL-4 gene tern of the astronaut must be maintained opti—
was signiﬁcantly downregulated, whereas the mally. Further analysis at the protein levels of
receptor was upregulated (Fig. 4). IL-4 is crucial genes involved in the immune response could
for the differentiation of naive TH cells into the lead to development of prophylactic and coun—
TH2 effector cells that promote humoral (anti— termeasure steps to augment the immune sys—
body) immunity and provide protection against tern for long—term space travel. Furthermore,
intestinal helminths. IL—4 also has a central the gene expression Changes Cited here af—
role in the pathogenesis of allergic inﬂamma— feet not only the immune system but also the
tion. Many transcription factors are involved cardiovascular system and the stress response.
in the regulation of expression of the gene en— Tabulation of molecular functional indicators
coding IL-4. IL-4 is also proinﬂammatory, and as sensors in response to unusual milieu, such as
excessive IL—4 produces asthma in humans.30 microgravity, compounded by other variables,
The apparent contradictory expression pattern such as radiation, should be prerequisite for
of the cytokine and its receptor indicates that long-term space missions. Astronauts are sus—
speeiﬁe humoral immunity may be affected in eeptible to a variety of conditions, such as mo—
the microgravity analog conditions in human tion sickness, muscular atrophy, bone deminer—
lyrnphoeytes. alization, and cardiovascular deeonditioning.
The regulation of interleukins in human lyrn- These ﬁndings suggest that the adaptation to
phoeytes reveals opposing expression patterns the absence of gravity is due, at least in part, to
of the TH2 immunity mediators, IL—4, and the effects exerted by microgravity at the cellu—
IL-4 receptor. This Venn diagram reveals fold lar level. Indeed, several studies have indicated
changes exhibited by signiﬁcantly upregulated that gravity affects mammalian cell growth and
or downregulated interleukin genes (more than differentiation through the modulation of gene
twofold, P < 0.001) in lymphocytes cultured expression.
in the microgravity analog. The IL—lOL down— HSP—90 was signiﬁcantly downregulated in
regulation is consistent with Maier et al.’s ﬁnd— expression in microgravity (deviation from
ing in endothelial cells cultured in MMG.31 adaptive response and potentially dangerous).
Their results showed an upregulation of HSP— It is highly expressed in times of stress (tern—
70, as in our data, with a parallel decrease in perature, hypoxia, isehernia, heavy metals, ra—
IL-IOL expression. IL-IOL is a potent inhibitor diation, calcium increase, glucose deprivation,
of endothelial cell growth, also implicated in cancer, and microbial infection). It provides an
promoting senescence. IL—6 plays pathological inherent protection mechanism from adversity
roles in promoting autoimmune reactions and in the human body It performs a chaperone

"
"11","Sundaresan & Pellis: Genetic Adaptation in Low Gravity 145
function, without which Client proteins would Using simple, deﬁned, and well—studied
collapse into a useless aggregation ofrnalfolded model systems, such as E. coli, Caenorhabditis 6!—
amino acids. It also aids cell motility. Decreased egcms, Drosophila melanogaster, pisceans, and am—
HSP—9O creates a high possibility for increased phibians, will also provide insight into micro-
oxidative stress. The HSPs are highly eon— gravity effects on many fundamental processes
served, ubiquitous, and abundant proteins es— as they transcend the cell to tissues, organs,
sential for cellular Viability. However, the up— systems, and organisms. Microgravity as an eX—
regulation of HSP—7O is expected, and usually perimental tool has gained impetus, and with
both HSP—9O and —70 are upregulated in par— the establishment of the International Space
allel in cells that are stressed by different fae— Station and reliable ground—based analogs, mi—
tors. Do only cells that sense microgravity as erogravity will provide new inroads into cell
a stressful condition and, consequently, overeX— biology. Unusual physiological milieus, such as
press HSP—7O maintain their proliferative po- space, isolated environments, high altitude, fa—
tential in MMG? The HSP-9O ﬁnding war— tigue, differential pressure, underwater habi—
rants further inspection in relation to nitric tats, and hypothermia, present aVital scientiﬁc
oxide pathways and possible increased oxida— resource to study unique and common genetic
tive stress. signature in the adaptation paradigms of hu—

Taken together, upregulation of Ple eou— man beings and other living creatures.

pled with the downregulation of HSP—9O and

IL—4 suggest an overall increase in inﬂamma— Acknowledgments

tiOTl’ and further in vivo studies are essential We thank Mildred Young for manuscript
to implicate n1tr1e ox1de and 1nereased ox1da- . .

tive stress. Doing so could lead to a signal preparation. Thls work was supported by
blue rint stress res onse suite in micro raVit . NASA Grants #NNAOGCBHH and #NNJO6

p p . g Y HA4OG.

These could also be used as biomarkers to as—

sess health of a particular tissue and overall Conflicts of Interest

health of crew members. Gene express1on in

microgravity is signiﬁcantly different in many The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.
cell types as opposed to lg conditions. Micro—

gravity reorders forces exerted on cells. The

cell’s response to this will provide novel insights References

into cellular and functional mechanisms. Space

biology opens Vistas, including but not limited 1. Darwin, C. .1859. 0n the Orzgin ofSpecz'es by Means of

. . . Natural SelectzonJohn Murray. London.

to underStandlng human eX1stence In space, ad_ 2. Merkys, A. &J. Darginaviciene. 1997. Plant gravit-
jUStment Of Homo 56111926725 t0 lesser'graVity mi"" ropic response. Adv. Space Biol. Med. 6: 213—230.
liens, and identiﬁcation of existing traits that 3. Grigoriev, A.I. & A.D. Egorov. 1991. The effects of
would favor life in low gravity. Gene expression prolonged Spaceﬂights 0“ the human b0dY~ Ada 519406
Changes as found here are also profound, indi- Biol Med 1‘ 1—35“

eating the magnitude Of gravity in the adapta— 4. Gn1gor1eV,A.I. &A.D. Egorov. 1992. General mech-

, , , , an1sn1s of the effect of we1ghtlessness on the human
tional responses in cells in space. Genomic and body. A dz). Space Biol. Med. 2: 142

proteomic analysis of different cells on the In- 5. Grigoriev, A.I. & A.D. Egorov. 1992. Physiological
ternational Space Station will greatly enhance aspects of adaptation of main human body systems
the existing knowledge. Further analysis at the during and after spaceﬂights. Adv. Space Biol. Med. 2:
protein levels of genes involved in these re— 43—82“ . . .

6. N1cogoss1an, A.E., S.L. Pool &JJ. Ur1. 1993. H1stor—

sponses COUld lead to development Of prophy- icalperspectives. In Space P/gysiology andMedicine. A.E.
laCtiC and countermeasure Steps to augment Nicogossian, CL. Huntoon & S.L. Pool, Eds: 3—49.
human physiology for long—term space travel. Lea & Febiger. Philadelphia.

"
"12","146 Annals of fhe New York Academy of Sciences
7. Gogoli, A. & EK. Gmunder. 1991. Gravity effects tion and reactivation ofdamaged proteins. Annu. Rev.
on single cells: techniques, ﬁndings, and theory. Adv. Genet. 27: 437—496.
Space Biol. Med. 1: 183—248. 20. Bukau, B. & A.L. Horwich. 1998. The Hsp70 and
8. Gogoli, A. & M. CogOIi-Greuter. 1997. Activation Hsp60 chaperone machines. Cell 92: 351—366.
and proliferation of lymphocytes and other mam- 21. Hart1,F.U. &M.Hayer—Hart1. 2002.M01ecu1ar chap-
malian cells in microgravity Adv. Space Biol. Med. 6: erones in the cytosol: from nascent chain to folded
33—79. protein. Science 295: 1852—1858.
9. P011ard,E.C. 1971. Physical determinants ofreceptor 22. N eupert, W 1997. Protein import into mitochondria.
mechanisms. In Gravity and the Organism. A. Gordon & Annu. Rev. Biochem. 66: 863—917.
M. Cohen, Eds.: 25—34. University OfChicago Press. 23. Cu, Y., DF. Lewis, Y. Zhang, et a1. 2006. Increased
Chicago. superoxide generation and decreased stress protein

10. Pollard, EC. 1965. Theoretical studies on living sys— Hsp90 expression in human umbilical cord vein en-
tems in the absence ofmechanical stressj’. 7726M. Biol. dothelial cells (HUVECS) from pregnancies compli-
8: 112—123. cated by preeclampsia. Hypertens. Pregnangy 25: 169—

11. Nace, GW 1983. Gravity and homoeostasis 0f the 182.
cell. COSPAR Adv. Space Res. 3: 159—168. 24. Infanger, M., D. Ulbrich, S. Baatout, et a1. 2007.

12. Mesland, DAM. 1992. Mechanisms of gravity ef— Modeled gravitational unloading induced downreg-
fects on cells: are there gravity-sensitive windows. Adv. ulation of endothelin-1 in human endothelial cells. j’
Space Biol. Med. 2: 211—228. Cell Biochem. 101(6): 1439—1455.

13. Mesland, DA. 1987. Biorack experiments in Space- 25. Heeschen, 0., S. Dimmeler, S. Fichtlscherer, et a[.
lab D-1 and IML-1: further developments in gravita- 2004. Prognostic value of placental growth factor in
tional biology In Proceedings ()ft/ze 3rd European Sympo- patients with acute chest pain. jAZMA 291: 435—441.
Siam on L9? Sciences Research in Space, ESA SP-271: 307— 26. Parr, (1., G. Watkins, M. Boulton, et a1. 2005. Placenta
312. growth factor is over-eXpressed and has prognostic

14. Schatz, A., R. Reitstetter, W Briegleb & A. Linke- value in human breast cancer. Eur]. Cancer 41: 2819—
Hommes. 1992. Gravity effects on biological systems. 2827.

COSPAR Adv. Space Res. 12: 51—53. 27. Khurana, R., M. Simons,J.F. Martin & IF. Zachary.

15. Schatz, A. & A. Linke-Hommes. 1989. Gravity and 2005. Role of angiogenesis in cardiovascular disease:
the membrane-solution interface: theoretical investi- a critical appraisal. Circulation 112(12): 1813—1824.
gations. COSPAR Adv. Space Res. 9: 61—64. 28. Sundaresan, A., D. Risin & NR. Pellis. 2002. Loss

16. Sundaresan, A., D. Risin & NR. Pellis. 2004. Cell of signal transduction and inhibition of lymphocyte
growth in microgravity. In Engyclopedia ofMolecular Cell locomotion in a ground based model ofmicrogravity.
Biology cmdMolecular Medicine, Vol. 2. RA. Meyers, A. In Vitro Cell Dev. Biol. Anim. 38: 118—122.

Sendtko & P. Henheik, Eds.: 303—321. Wiley-VCH. 29. Sundaresan, A., AD. Kulkarni, K. Yamauchi &N.R.
Weinheim, Germany. Pellis. 2005. Biomarkers of cell and tissue injury in

17. N 011en, E.A.A. &R.I. Morimoto. 2002. Chaperoning analog microgravity. In Proceedings 0f the International
signaling pathways: molecular chaperones as stress— Astronautical Congress, Oct. 17—2 1, Fukuoka,Japan.
sensing ‘heat shock” proteins.j’. Cell Sci. 115: 2809— 30. Amsen, D.,J.M. Blander, GR. Lee, et a1. 2004. In-
2816. struction of distinct CD4 T helper cell fates by dif-

18. Cotrupi, S. &J.A. Maier. 2004. Is HSP70 upreg- ferent notch ligands on antigen-presenting cells. Cell
ulation crucial for cellular proliferative response in 117: 515—526.
simulated microgravitij’. Gram}. P/gysiol. 11: P173— 31. Carlsson, S.I., MT. Bertilaccio, E. Ballabio, &J.A.
P176. Maier. 2003. Endothelial stress by gravitational un-

19. Parsell, DA. & S. Lindquist. 1993. The function loading: effects on cell growth and cytoskeletal orga-
of heat-shock proteins in stress tolerance: degrada- nization. Biochim. Biop/gys. Acta 1642: 173—179.

"
