"","x"
"1","J ournal of Space Safety Engineering — Vol. 1 No. 1 - June 2014
MISHAP INVESTIGATION BOARD SUMMARY OF EXTRAVEHICULAR ACTIVITY 23:
LESSONS LEARNED FROM A SPACEWALK CLOSE CALL
Christopher Hansen“), Christopher Cassidy”)
mNASA-Johnson Space Center, 2101 NASA Parkway, Houston, TX USA, Emailsap.hansen@nasa.g0v
(2)NASA-J0hnS0n Space Center, 2101 NASA Parkway, Houston, TX USA, Emailschristophekj.cassidy@nasa.g0v

ABSTRACT During the post—EVA debrief, Parmitano reported that

he had impaired Visibility and breathing, with water
The Space Station program convened a Mishap covering his eyes, nose, and ears. In addition, he had
Investigation Board (MIB) to investigate a High Visibility audio communication issues because of the water. When
Close Call which occurred during US Extravehicular returning to the airlock, Parmitano had to rely on manual
Activity (EVA) 23 on July 16, 2013. The MIB established feel of his safety tether’s cable for pathway directions.
the speciﬁc cause for the potentially catastrophic water The event was classiﬁed as a High Visibility Close Call
leakage inside the Extravehicular Mobility Unit (EMU), and a Mishap Investigation Board (MIB) was created. A
which was a clog inside the EMU Fan Pump Separator, related concern occurred during apost—EVA 23 suit dry-out
caused by inorganic material that led to water spilling into procedure. A vacuum cleaner was used and unexpectedly
the vent loop. Additionally, the MIB identiﬁed Root Causes suctioned 02 from the suit’s secondary high pressure oxygen
as any of the multiple factors (events or conditions, that tank, causing a potentially hazardous mix of electricity and
are organizational factors) that contributed to or created pure 02, which could have ignited ﬂammable materials in
the proximate cause and subsequent undesired outcome. and around the vacuum cleaner, although fortunately no
Root causes are ones that if eliminated or signiﬁcantly incident of this nature occurred. This paper will discuss the
modiﬁed, would have prevented the undesired outcome. mishap, the results from the subsequent investigation, and
Trouble-shooting also identiﬁed a catastrophic failure lessons to be learned from the event.
rnode previously unknown to the 188 program. The The Mishap Investigation Board was commissioned by
lessons learned resulted in 49 separate recommendations William H. Gerstenmaier, Associate Administrator for the
to the 188 Program to correct these issues that led to this Human Exploration and Operations Directorate at NASA
incident and prevent future such mishaps. Many of these Headquarters in Washington, DC. on July 22, 2013. The
recommendations were being implemented before the ﬁnal report, reference [1], was submitted on December
report was complete, and all of them are being speciﬁcally 20, 2013. The MIB members appointed were Chairman
addressed by the 188 Program. Additional insights from Chris Hansen, Dr. Sudhakar Rajulu and Mike Foreman
NASA astronaut and EVA 23 spacewalker Christopher of the Johnson Space Flight Center, Joe Pellicciotti of
Cassidy are included to provide additional insight to the the Goddard Space Flight Center, and Richard Fullerton
incident and the resulting lessons learned. from NASA Headquarters. The MIB investigation ran

concurrently with an 188 Program investigation and relied

on multiple experts to complete its work.
1. INTRODUCTION
On July 16, 2013, Christopher Cassidy(EV1) and European 2. BACKGROUND
Space Agency (ESA) astronaut Luca Parmitano (EV2)
eXited the International Space Station US Airlock to begin The International Space Station is located in low Earth
U.S. Extravehicular Activity 23 (US EVA 23). Roughly orbit about 400 km (250 mi) above the Earth’s surface. It
44 minutes into EVA 23, Parmitano reported water inside serves as a microgravity and space enVironrnent research
his helmet on the back of his head. The EVA ground team laboratory for the physical and natural sciences. The 188 is
and the crew members were unable to identify the water’s also a tested of spacecraft systems and equipment required
source. As Parmitano continued to work, the amount of for future missions to the Moon and Mars. 188 EVAs,
water in his helrnetincreased and eventually migrated from or spacewalks, are performed outside the spacecraft to
the back of his head onto his face. EVA 23 was terminated build and maintain the orbital laboratory: installing new
early and the crew safely ingressed the airlock. A nominal components; re-wire systems, modules, and equipment;
rate was used to re-pressurize the airlock followed by an monitor, install, and retrieve scientiﬁc experiments. EVAs
expedited suit removal. The water quantity introduced into also provide critical contingency capability to assure ISS
his helmet was later determined to be almost 1.4 liters. Viability and crew safety.

32
International Association for the Advancement of Space Safety

"
"2","J ourna1 of Space Safety Engineering — Vol. 1 No. 1 - June 2014
-.:____Origina11y, the maintenance cycle for an individual
. _ I, - ' - - . :- 9 suit was after each Shuttle ﬂight. Suit requirements
_, ‘"" .- 'dr 3;- _ a supported three EVAs before ground conditioning. In
-‘ _' "" '* _ ""‘1'”: ' ~.-' - order to support continuous ISS operation, the period
1"": ___ : .4115 _ 4""“? ' ff . of EMU maintenance cycles was extended to one year
.3 .- 4:"" - a . . '- , - I _ or 25 EVAs. This maintenance period was extended to
F: -. _ - '7 in: 'ler _: _ —- - - two years in 2002 and to three years in 2007. The current
9‘1,"" ""*_ %;WJ_ '1'?“ operational certiﬁcation is 6 years. NASA’s decision to
1.. _ . .- . .. it! 4-le retire the Shuttle ﬂeet in 2011 required another change to
' . ﬁ' '_ .-,+ .- ' the EMU operations concept. The complement of EMUs
H'“ _ ""F _ on 188 was increased from three to four. Additional
—-- ground processing is required for the EMU hardware
Figure I. Extravehicular Mobility Unit (EMU) to meet this longer 6-year maintenance interval. This
processing includes cleaning or replacing water ﬁlters
along with the stripping and recoating of areas with
The current 188 Extravehicular Mobility Unit (EMU) known susceptibility to corrosion.
(shown in Fig. 1), a complex spacesuit that provides
protection from the extreme conditions of space, is a mobile
life support system with an oxygen supply, e1ectrica1 3. EVENTS IMMEDIATELY LEADING UP TO
power, water-cooling equipment, ventilating fan, and an MISHAP
in-suit drink bag. The EMU was originally developed for
use on the U.S. Space Shuttle to mitigate failure scenarios Prior to EVA 23, Cassidy had completed ﬁve EVAs,
in which the Shuttle payload bay doors failed to close and totaling 29 hours and 43 minutes. Parmitano had
lock properly prior to atmospheric re-entry. An additional completed one EVA (EVA 22), which was 6 hours and 7
postulated failure scenario involved achieVing “rescue” rninutes. On May 12, 2013, 188 crewrnernbers conducted
of a disabled orbiter by EVA crewmernbers entering US EVA 21. An EVA crewrnernber on this EVA wore
a depressurized vehicle and accessing the ﬂight deck. EMU 3011, the EMU that experienced the close call on
This particular risk mitigation approach required that the EVA 23. The crewrnember did not experience water in
EVA suit and the Portable Life Support System (PLSS) the suit during EVA 21.
assembly be sized—width and depth—to pass through On July 9, 2013, just one week prior to EVA 23, Cassidy
the Shuttle hatch openings to the ﬂight deck. The EMU and Parrnitano conducted US EVA 22 with the same
has since evolved from a suit to mitigate Shuttle failure EMUs that would be worn on EVA 23. When Parrnitano
scenarios to one capable of deploying, capturing, and removed his helmet post—EVA 22, he discovered between
repairing satellites, and enabling astronauts to assemble, 0.5 and 1 liter of water in the helmet. Cassidy reported
repair, and maintain the 188. that when he was face-to-face with his partner at the
As mission objectives expanded, the once sing1e-rnission airlock hatch prior to ingress, there was no Visible
EMU certiﬁcation was incrementally extended to an indication of water in Parmitano’s helmet. Therefore,
operational life of multiple years on the ISS.The evolution the crew concluded that the water must have entered
of the suit over the years resulted in a long history of the helmet during re-pressurization actiVities. Also,
issues that led to many modiﬁcations to the EMU. The during EVA 22 repress, Parrnitano was looking down
Quest Joint Airlock module in the US. segment of the and leaning forward. It was concluded that he likely
ISS maintains the habitable environment when astronauts had pressed on the drink bag (shown in Fig. 2) with his
are eXiting or entering the spacecraft for EVA operations. chest and could have pinched the bite valve open with
It consists of two main parts: the equipment lock and his chin, releasing water into his helmet. The ground
the crew lock. The equipment lock is where the EMUs team accepted the crew’s drink bag leak suggestion and
are stored and preparations for spacewalks are carried the presence of excessive water in the helmet was not
out. The crew lock is depressurized during spacewalks. investigated further. The crew cleaned up the residual
Continuous ﬂight of the 188 requires spacesuits to be water, and the ground team sent up procedure changes for
left on-board for longer periods of time than the suit’s EMU stowage to help the equipment dry out. The ground
original Shuttle certiﬁcation allowed. team instructed the crew to use a new drink bag for the
At the beginning of the 188 Program, EMUs were upcoming EVA 23. There was no discussion of water in
delivered by the Space Shuttle; a complement of suits the helmet during EVA 23 pre-briefs which were held on
was left on 188 when the Shuttle Orbiter un-docked. On July 11 and July 15.
subsequent Shuttle missions, suits were replaced and
returned to the ground for maintenance and refurbishment.
33
International Association for the Advancement of Space Safety

"
"3","Journal of Space Safety Engineering — Vol. 1 No. 1 - June 2014
"" r """" . '
' ‘rii ' 41 . i
’ 523533235251 ' ' 1;. ﬁr 1‘ ""
H .
I
r ;, vg§ F igure 3 . [SS Crew Members removing Luca Parmitano :9
1 4 if helmet after E VA 23
I j 475 During a post—EVA debrief, Parrnitano reported having
""/ impaired Visibility and breathing with water covering his
eyes, nose, and ears during his translation to the Airlock.
In addition, he mentioned having audio communication
F i gure 2. Drink bag used inside EM U during spacewalks issues due to water in his communication cap. At the same
time, the sun also had just set, making the enVironment
very dark. The combination of the presence of water
4. EVENTS AT THE TIME OF THE MISHAP inside the helmet and darkness due to the loss of sunlight
so signiﬁcantly reduced Visibility that Parmitano was
On July 16, roughly 38 minutes into US EVA 23, forced to rely on the manual feel of the safety tether cable
Parmitano (wearing EMU 3011) had a “C02 Sensor Bad” for pathway direction for the return to the airlock.
alarm in his suit. At 44 minutes, he reported feeling water
inside his helmet on the back of his neck and head. Less
than 10 minutes later, he reported an increase of water 5. A VIEW FROM INSIDE — THOUGHTS FROM
behind his head. Neither the ground team nor the ﬂight ASTRONAUT CHRISTOPHER CASSIDY
team were able to identify the water source. Cassidy
Visually conﬁrmed the pooling water. The amount of When one is about to do, or just starts doing, something
water continued to increase. At 23 minutes after the that they have been looking forward to for a long time
ﬁrst report of water, the Mission Control Team called there is always a certain level of excitement and happy
an EVA termination, directing Parmitano to translate emotions involved. For astronauts, EVA is exactly that.
back to and ingress the airlock. An EVA termination It comes with many months of pre-ﬂight training, and
allows for a crewmember with an EMU issue to return weeks of in-ﬂight preparation of the plan, the suits, and
to the safety of the airlock while the other crewmember the hardware. Even the act of getting out the door is a
safes the worksite, followed by a nominal and orderly multi-hour process. So when it ﬁnally happens, and I ﬁnd
re-pressurization of the airlock. During his translation myself looking through my Visor, between my toes at
to the Airlock, the water behind Parmitano’s head the world zipping by at 5 miles per second, I’m always
began to migrate onto his face. During this maneuver, relieved that no little gremlins had crept into our world to
he experienced intermittent communication difﬁculties prevent the occasion from happening. Such was the case
with the ground. Next, Cassidy ingressed into the on July 16th...or so we thought! I distinctly remember
airlock which was then re-pressurized (at the nominal what went through my head when I heard Luca say that
rate). The suit removal for Parrnitano (shown in Fig. 3) there was water in his helmet: “Oh that is going to take
was expedited. Video downlink conﬁrmed signiﬁcant the ground about 20 minutes to think through, but we
water covering the helmet interior when the helmet was should be OK, because we are about 40 minutes ahead
removed. Parmitano’s Liquid Cooling and Ventilation of the planned timeline.” I continued to work as quickly
Garment (LCVG) was relatively dry, however his as I could while talking with Luca about the possible
communications cap and helmet interior were completely sources. Then he said something that made me switch my
soaked with water. thinking from this being simply a speed bump in our plan
to “this is serious and this EVA is over.” That key piece of
34
International Association for the Advancement of Space Safety

"
"4","Journal of Space Safety Engineering — Vol. 1 No. 1 - June 2014

information was the temperature of the water. When he determined that no Visible cuts, holes or other damage

said that the water was very cold, I knew we were done. eXisted. The crew then ﬁlled the drink bag and applied

The water in the drink bag is basically body temperature pressure. No leaks were noted. EMU water recharge was

because of its location next to our chest. Sweat and urine performed nominally and 3.84 lbm (1.75 Liters) of water

are also obviously body temperature. Cooling water, went into the suit. This correlated with the crew report of

however, is somewhere in the high 30’s after it passes 1 to 1.5 L of water in the helmet post—EVA in addition to

over the frozen sublimator. In the heat of the moment, I what would nominally be expended by the suit during a 1

couldn’t understand how cooling water could get to his hour and 40 minute EVA. After water recharge, the crew

head, but I just knew that Luca needed to head back to executed water leak troubleshooting steps: The PLSS fan

the airlock. Right about this time is when Flight Control was turned on with the Secondary Oxygen Pack (SOP)

voiced up that we would be terminating this spacewalk. Check Out Fixture (SCOF) installed to cover the Vent

In the military, we say that problems happen at the fold port and O2 Actuator in IV setting for approximately 14

of the map, at the intersection of four grid-squares at minutes. The installed SCOF is shown in Fig. 4.

night. This seemed to now be the situation we found

ourselves in, because just then the sun set and darkness

once again engulfed us. Because of the planned routing

of our safety tethers, the long retractable dog leash-like SCOF Relief Valve ,

reels that keep us connected to the ISS, Luca and I had i

to take different paths back to the airlock. I will forever

have the image in my brain of Luca’s silhouette moving

aft on the top of Node 1, and then disappearing into the R. ’> A ‘~§ .

blackness and around the comer, back to the airlock. At I ~. 3""} ‘

that moment I had the sickening thought that I was not .. -.. f:

with my “dive buddy” when he might need me. I gave .. 'i A ,

very serious thought to telling him to stop, connecting 1 . i ” ' “L"" ,1

to him, and releasing my tether so that we could go back ‘1"" I f

as a pair. In those few seconds I talked myself out of this I /"" ”i:

plan because if I worked efﬁciently, we would only be SCOF installed .i 4 ’ )1

apart for 5-7 minutes, or less, and at the time we were over T2 “ ' ._,_.4«//‘

communicating ﬁne.

Unfortunately it was during these short minutes of 7____ W

separation that the water migrated around his head and

the problem went from potentially bad to serious as he

blindly retraced his safety tether back to the airlock. I F igure 4. EM U SOP Check Out F ixture (SCOF)

was about half way back when he arrived at the hatch

and the Flight Control team and I conﬁrmed with Luca

to just get inside and I would get the hatch closed. The No off—nominal conditions were noted and inspection

volume of the airlock is rather small and it is somewhat of the suit revealed no Visible water. When the SCOF

difﬁcult to see each other’s faces due to the nature of how was removed per procedure, the crew reported hearing

we align ourselves head to toe. With the hatch closed, and a “sucking” sound and the fan stopped operating. The

the pressure increasing, I was ﬁnally able to maneuver to crew was directed to turn off the suit fan and move the 02

see his face and what I saw startled me. The water was Actuator to OFF. The crew then turned the suit fan back

obviously in his ear cups because he couldn’t hear very ON and again set the O2 Actuator to IV. The fan brieﬂy

well, but I could see it in his eyes, over his nose, and began spinning and then shut down almost immediately,

most notably very close to his mouth. I remember being with the crew reporting a water “sucking” or “gurgling”

very thankful that the whole team took the actions when sound. Subsequent inspection revealed water in the

we did because, in aViation terms, we didn’t have much METOX canister (CO2 scrubber) outlet and suit inlet

runway in front of us. ports. The crew additionally reported seeing droplets of
water in the neck vent port (called T2). While the crew
was awaiting further direction from the ground, the

6. EVENTS FOLLOWING THE MISHAP — Infrared (IR) CO2 transducer in the suit began to show

INCLUDING IDENTIFYING A NEW HAZARD an increase in its reading and eventually went off—scale
high, most likely due to moisture in the vent loop near

Initial troubleshooting of the incident began the day the CO2 transducer.

after the EVA. The crew inspected the drink bag and After the fan in the EMU water separator pump was

35
International Association for the Advancement of Space Safety

"
"5","J ournal Of Space Safety Engineering — V01. 1 N0. 1 - June 2014
ﬂooded, the ground team developed a procedure for During discussions of the post-EVA 23 SOP issue,
drying out EMU 3011’s Vent Loop using a wet/dry interViewees indicated that there was at least a perceived
vacuum at the crew’s next available 0pp0rtunity.After the pressure to perform the dry out procedure at the next
crew executed the EMU 3011 vent 100p wet/dry vacuum available crew opportunity rather than take the time to
and dry-out activity, the EVA ofﬁcer in Mission Control perform a proper procedure veriﬁcation 0n the ground
noticed a nearly 500 psi reduction in SOP pressure had using high-ﬁdelity ﬂight hardware. Only a ﬁt check of the
occurred during a Loss of Signal (LOS), a time period wet/dry vacuum 011 a non-functional Class-3 EMU was
where there is no telemetry available between the ground performed.
and 188. Pressure in the SOP dropped from an initial Several further troubleshooting steps were performed
value of 5580 psi to 5081 psi. The crew reported the on orbit, including an unmanned run of the EMU at
SOP pressure gauge read ~5200 psi which matched the ambient, shown in Fig. 5, removal and inspection of an
telemetry data within the allowable +/— 490 psi range for internal valve and ﬁlter shown in Fig. 6, and removal and
the gauge. inspection of a gas trap, shown in Fig. 7.
7‘ , 31\ ""F? - \ 1;; N ,
y : . ‘ - ,0;\ ‘ 1.: . 2 “433,1 7:
"" / / - . LU i "" ’0‘ ﬂ
f . "" w. t q. . #5.; ‘1}
I'x ~ , f.‘ _. BE i
’ .7; . 4. 1,5“ ~ 30 .. - "" K _ '
-.‘-':. ‘,. . . . , 00 v_ ‘
., Q. N . .
_ - \~ 1‘ ‘
,1 . $3"" F igure 6. Valve and F ilter from EM U 3 011 Post-Anomaly
\~ -‘ .
F igure 5. Extravehicular Mobility Unit (EMU) With / “ ‘
Water in Helmet During Post-EVA 23 Screening T est , %’3
On July 26, during EMU 3011 troubleshooting, it was ‘ i x‘ fl""?
noticed that the SOP pressure reading had increased to ' W '- "".,
5271 psi; the increase being due to the warming of the "" 1-5
bottle contents after the expansion cooling experienced . ., '
during the inadvertent ﬂow initiation. The use of a wet/ F igure 7. Gas T rap from EMU 301] Post-Anomaly
dry vacuum during this troubleshooting procedure was
an off-norninal operation. The EMU team did not fully
appreciate that the SOP would engage and ﬂow with the 7. CAUSES OF THE MISHAP
EMU O2 Actuator in the OFF position. The transmitted
procedure was not fully ‘Validated 0n the ground, and once The tOp-level Fault Tree is shown in Fig. 8. The causes for
implemented aboard ISS, caused an unsafe condition that this mishap evolved from (1) inorganic materials causing
exposed the crew and 188 to a potential ﬁre hazard during blockage of the drum holes in the EMU water separator
inadvertent activation of the EMU SOP. resulting in water spilling into the vent loop; (2) the NASA
A mechanical design reView that was conducted after tearn’s lack of knowledge regarding this particular failure
this incident indicated that the vacuum force was enough mode; and (3) misdiagnosis of this suit failure when it
to partially open the SOP regulator valve. The vacuum initially occurred on EVA 22.
produced by the vacuum cleaner in the vent 100p provided The source of the inorganic materials blocking the water
enough delta-Pressure to cause the bellows 0f the SOP separator drurn holes had not been experienced during
regulator to overcome the spring force designed to keep an EVA before and was still undergoing investigation
the regulator closed. When this occurred, it created a at the time this paper was written. The results of this
potentially hazardous mix of electricity and pure 02, investigation will ultimately lead to resolution of this
which could have ignited ﬂammable materials in and issue; however, since the investigation into the source of
around the vacuum cleaner. the debris is expected to continue for many months, the
36
International Association for the Advancement of Space Safety

"
"6","J ournal of Space Safety Engineering — Vol. 1 No. l - June 2014
without recognizing EMU failure on water during EVA 23. terminate EVA as soon as water was Airlock unaccompanied during EVA
EVA 22. reorted in the helmet. termination.
| | I |
MIB did not have the required data to determine the root and applied resources that demonstrated its awareness of
causes of the contamination source, which must ultimately both the seriousness of this event and the importance of
be determined to prevent future rnishaps. Because the fully understanding and correcting the deﬁciencies that
hardware investigation must continue, the MIB report allowed it to happen. Many of the recommendations in
was diVided into two unique areas of focus. First, the the report had already been implemented prior to release
report focuses on the hardware failure investigation and of the report as a result of the involved organizations’
understanding of the hardware involved, work completed proactive response.
to date, preliminary results, and future work needed to
determine root causes. Second, the report focuses on real-
time operation activities that can be improved to help the 8. ROOT CAUSES OF THE MISHAP
ground control teams and crew quickly recognize and
react rapidly to emergencies of this type. Since this failure A Root Cause is one of multiple factors (events
had not been seen previously or anticipated, the NASA or conditions, that are organizational factors) that
team did not know or understand that an event like this contributed to or created the proximate cause and
could occur. Without this awareness, the team’s response subsequent undesired outcome and, if eliminated or
to the failure took longer than it typically should have. modiﬁed, would have prevented the undesired outcome.
The team applied what they did know to the symptoms Typically, rnultiple root causes contribute to an undesired
they saw during EVA 23. Several possible causes were outcome. Additional root causes to the hardware failure
discussed in real-time between the ﬂight control team and will be identiﬁed as the investigation of the inorganic
the crew members. Ultimately, the team came to the correct materials found in the Fan/Purnp/Separator continues.
conclusion that the water in Parrnitano’s helmet was more The MIB identiﬁed the following ﬁve Root Causes:
serious than anything that could be explained by previous
experience and the EVA was terminated. In addition, the 1) Program emphasis was to maximize crew tirne
lack of understanding of this failure mode, along with on orbit for utilization.
several other reasons discussed in the report, caused the
team to rnisdiagnose the failure when it initially occurred The 188 Program must place a strong emphasis on
at the end of EVA 22. Had the issue been discussed in performing utilization (science) with the 188; it is in fact
more detail at the end of that EVA, the team likely would the very reason ISS exists. However, the strong emphasis
have realized that the water experienced in the helmet on utilization was leading team members to feel that
was “out of family” and needed to be investigated further requesting on-orbit time for anything non-science related
before pressing ahead to EVA 23. That investigation was likely to be denied and therefore tended to assume
most likely would have discovered this failure mode and their next course of action could not include on-orbit
EVA 23 would have been postponed while the issue was crew time. The danger with that thought process is that
resolved, thus preventing this rnishap. The MIB strongly lower level team members were in effect making risk
believed that both spacewalkers and the ﬂight control decisions for the Program, without necessarily haVing a
team performed well given what they knew at the time Prograrn wide Viewpoint or understanding the risk trades
of this rnishap. Parrnitano’s calm derneanor in the face of actually being made at a Program level.
his helmet ﬁlling with water possibly saved his life. The
ﬂight control tearn quickly discussed and sorted through 2) 188 Community perception was that drink bags
rnultiple possible explanations for the water in the helmet. leak.
The 188 Program also assembled an investigation team
which responded to this failure with a level of concern The MIB could not identify a clear reason why the EVA
37
International Association for the Advancement of Space Safety

"
"7","J ournal of Space Safety Engineering — Vol. 1 No. l - June 2014
community at large had the perception that the EVA drink not be a hazardous condition. When water began entering
bags leaked, other than a history of leakage with earlier Parrnitano’s helrnet, the ground tearn discussed anti-fog/
designs. When presented with the suggestion that the eye irritation concerns and Visibility concerns; however,
crew rnernber’s drink bag leaked out the large amount of a more hazardous condition was not expected because
water that was found in the helmet after EVA 22, no one the presence of water in the helmet had been norrnalized.
in the EVA community challenged this determination and
investigated further. Had that conclusion been challenged,
the issue would likely have been discovered prior to EVA 9. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
23 and the mishap would have been avoided.
The Mishap Investigation Board made 49
3) Flight Control Tearn’s perception of the anomaly recommendations to the 188 Program to correct the issues
report process as being resource intensive made that led to this mishap, or correct issues discovered that
thern reluctant to invoke it. could lead to future rnishaps. All of the recommendations
will not be discussed in this paper, however, the
Based on interViews and MIB investigation, it was clear recommendations fall into general categories that are
that several ground team members were concerned that worthy of discussion.
if the assumed drink bag anornaly experienced at the end
of EVA 22 were to be investigated further, it would likely Program Management structure: The EVA
lead to a long, intensive process that would interfere with management ofﬁce evolved over the years to be a
necessary work needed to prepare for the upcoming EVA separate organization which developed its own language,
23, and that this issue would likely not uncover anything processes and risk management philosophies. However,
signiﬁcant enough to justify the resources which would the 188 Program was very dependent on EVA to maintain
have to be spent. the safety and operation of the 188. The separation
between the ofﬁces led to risk decisions being made by
4) No one applied knowledge of the physics of each organization without full insight of the implications
water behaVior in zero-g to water coming from of those risks to the other organization.
the PLSS vent loop.
Safety documentation: The 188 program and EVA
The MIB learned that while there is a signiﬁcant amount activities had been extremely successful historically.
of knowledge about the way water behaves in zero- This led to an almost unconscious belief that the safety
gravity, the ground tearns did not properly understand documentation that explained hazards and dictated their
how the physics of water behaVior inside the complex control was no longerirnportant. By failing to continually
environment of the EMU helrnet would manifest itself. reView and update these documents, the opportunity to
The teams believed that if signiﬁcant water entered the identify a hidden potential hazard was missed.
helrnet through the vent loop that it would cling to the
inner surface of the helmet rather than cling to the crew Hardware upgrades: The EMU has been in operation
rnernber’s head. They also believed that if a signiﬁcant successfully for over 30 years. Yet when issues arose,
amount of water entered the vent loop, the Fan/Purnp/ like CO2 sensors failing and anti-fog material irritating
Separator would likely stall, as it had in l-G when the eyes of astronauts, they were often just accepted
signiﬁcant water entered the vent loop. Therefore, the as the price of doing business. This led to a form of
signiﬁcant hazard it presented was not anticipated. complacency and normalization of deviance. Hardware
upgrades to combat srnaller issues must continually be
5) The occurrence of minor amounts of water in investigated and improvements traded in systems with
the helmet was normalized. signiﬁcant hazards.
Through interViews with ground personnel and reView of Flight Rules and Procedures: It was recognized early on
data from previous EMU performance, it was clear that in the investigation that the ﬂight rules and procedures for
some water entering the helmet was considered normal recognizing and dealing with the hazard of water entering
by the ground tearns. Despite the fact that water carryover the helmet must be made very clear, be implemented, and
into the helmet presented a known hazard of creating eye be rigorously trained into the ﬂight control teams and the
irritation due to its interaction with anti-fog agents, and astronauts themselves.
also presented a potential fogging hazard, the ground
tearns grew to accept this as normal EMU behaVior. Tracking water quality: Years of operation of the 188
Since these smaller amounts of water carryover had have identiﬁed that water quality in such complex systems
never caused a signiﬁcant close call, it was perceived to is dynamic and continually changing. Systems that are
38
International Association for the Advancement of Space Safety

"
"8","Journal Of Space Safety Engineering — V01. 1 N0. 1 - June 2014
sensitive to water quality (equipment and humans!) time could have prevented it. Organizations must ﬁnd
depend on a good understanding of the water quality to ways to make every individual on their teams understand
which they are being subjected. Processes need to be put that th_ey are as responsible for the safety of others as
in place to track water quality to the level required for anyone else and that they have the ability to personally
systems that are sensitive to it. save lives.
10. LESSONS LEARNED 11. REFERENCES
In the history of human space ﬂight, the hardest lessons 1. NASA Mishap Investigation Report: International
learned have often come at the expense of the health Space Station (188) EVA Suit Water Intrusion High
and lives of our people. In this mishap, the opportunity Visibility Close Call, IRIS Case Number: 8—2013—
to learn serious lessons about how to improve the safety 199—00005, Redacted copy available at:
of our astronauts was provided without the high cost http://www.nasa.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/ﬁles/Suit_Water_
Of human lives. It would be a tragedy not to take that Intrusion_Mishap_Investigation_Report.pdf
opportunity to learn from our mistakes.
It must be noted that the failure investigation into the
hardware failure is ongoing. That investigation is already
uncovering many more lessons learned that should be
studied and acted upon, along with those identiﬁed in this
investigation. For this investigation, there are several key
lessons learned that must be remembered.
A preoccupation With failure is critical for maintaining a
highly reliable organization. Human nature pushes people
into looking for patterns and categorizing information to
save energy. However, when successful organizations
who deal with complex and hazardous environments
begin assuming that they understand everything
perfectly, simply because they have been successful in
the past, they become subject to complacency, and the
cost is failure.
Speak up: Often after tragedies we ﬁnd individuals being
overtly pressured by managers and higher authorities to
accept risk with which they are not comfortable. This
issue can exist; however, an equally dangerous behavior
that is far more subtle was discovered in this mishap. Dr.
David Aiken stated it concisely: “People in groups tend
to agree on courses of action which, as individuals, they
know are stupid.” Group think must be actively fought
against with constant public questioning, diversity of
thought, and the promotion of a culture that accepts such
behavior as healthy.
A failure of imagination: The Apollo 1 ﬁre was referred
to by Frank Borman as a failure of imagination. They
couldn’t imagine a ground test could be hazardous. In this
mishap, many very smart individuals couldn’t imagine
water in this situation could be so hazardous.
Anyone, in any organization (safety, engineering,
operations, ﬂight crew, etc.) could have had an impact
on preventing this mishap. A simple question at the right

39
International Association for the Advancement of Space Safety

"
