"","x"
"1","' . . www.nature.com/npjmgrav
npj | M ICFOQFaVIty All rights reserved 2373—8065/15
REVIEW ARTICLE OPEN
Mlorograwty protem orystalhzatlon
Alexander McPherson1 and Lawrence James DeLucas2

Over the past 20 years a variety of technological advances in X—ray crystallography have shortened the time required to determine
the structures of large macromolecules (i.e., proteins and nucleic acids) from several years to several weeks or days. However, one of
the remaining challenges is the ability to produce diffraction—quality crystals suitable for a detailed structural analysis. Although the
development of automated crystallization systems combined with protein engineering (site—directed mutagenesis to enhance
protein solubility and crystallization) have improved crystallization success rates, there remain hundreds of proteins that either
cannot be crystallized or yield crystals of insufﬁcient quality to support X—ray structure determination. In an attempt to address this
bottleneck, an international group of scientists has explored use of a microgravity environment to crystallize macromolecules. This
paper summarizes the history of this international initiative along with a description of some of the ﬂight hardware systems and
crystallization results.
npj Microgravity (2015) 1, 15010; doi:10.1038/npjmgrav.2015.10; published online 3 September 2015
INTRODUCTION clearly demonstrated that gravity effects must be included as a
The use of X—ray crystallography to determine the structures of key crystallization parameter.
macromolecules has progressed markedly in recent years. At one It has long been recognized for crystals grown from the melt,
time, the analysis Of the structure of a single crystalline protein that mass and heat transport processes are critical determinants in
might have occupied the efforts of several crystallographers for the character and quality 0f the product. Indeed, many important
many years. Collection of X—ray diffraction data were extremely crystal growth techniques have been developed to explicitly
time consuming and computing procedures were Simi|ar|y control the relative contributions of convective and diffusive
tedious. Few techniques existed for detailed examination of transport to growth processes.3 Transport processes, particularly
structure once it had been determined. This has changed in a mass transport, are 0f importance ih the growth 0t crystalline
striking manner. X-ray sources, both rotating anode generators materials from aqueous SOIUtiOhS 35 we||.4‘7 A5 a consequence 0t
and synchrotrons, have been developed that yield X—ray ﬂux the development 0f density differences near growing crystal
densities several orders of magnitude more intense than those surfaces, produced by active recruitment 0t iOhS or molecules
available only 10 years ago. New area detector systems for the from SOIUtiOh into the lattice, convective ﬂOW8 iS generated in the
measurement of diffracted X—rays have come into use and these crystal’s immediate environment.9‘15 Transport 0f molecules by
have had an extraordinary impact on the rate and accuracy with solutal convection competes with transport by pure diffusion, and
which X-ray data can be gjyccumularceel,1 What was formally a the interaction of the two determines the modes and kinetics of
process requiring several years of intense effort has now been the presentation of nutrient molecules to a growing crystal.
markedlyreduced.Computing speed and precision has advanced Transport affects h0t only the molecules or iOhS that are
proportionately, accompanied by the invention of mathematical incorporated into the growing crystal, hUt it 3'50 affects the rate
procedures that greatly enhance our ability to utilize X-ray 0f adsorption/incorporation 0f impurities.4‘7 Because impurity
diffraction to determine and study macromolecular structure.2 incorporation can have a marked impact on the size, morphological
However, the production of diffraction—quality crystals remains development, and ultimate perfection of a crystal, differences in
the major obstacle preventing determination of hundreds of form or quality produced by diversity in transport phenomena can
important proteins. Because its value to the process was never be unexpectedly large. Impurities may be of particular signiﬁcance
fully appreciated, its practice considered as much art as science, in macromolecular systems which are marginally pure to begin
the process of protein crystal growth was ignored and relegated with, and in addition may contain a wide variety of naturally
to obscure corners of laboratories. Not only did the phenomenon occurring, and often unavoidable macromolecular aggregates,
of protein crystal growth remain a mystery, but its practitioners clusters, or oligomers.16‘23 These impurities may be of ﬁxed size,
languished. Furthermore, the difﬁculties of growing protein composition, and arrangement; they may be speciﬁc aggregates,
crystals are many and varied. The key to overcoming this or they may be of a more random, variable nature.
bottleneck lies in the development of new and reliable Mass transport by convection can, of course, only occur if
techniques, more systematic and scientiﬁc, for obtaining suitable gravity is present. Only then will heavier ﬂuids fall and lighter
protein crystals. This obviously includes the optimization of all ﬂuids rise, and only then can convective currents be established in
relevant physical parameters. As a result of studies supported by a bulk solution. There are some other kinds of convection, such as
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and surface-tension-driven convection,13 but these are believed to be
space agencies representing several other countries, it has been of little consequence for most experiments involving crystal
1University of California, Irvine, CA, USA and 2University of Alabama at Birmingham, Center for Biophysical Sciences and Engineering, Birmingham, AL, USA.
Correspondence: LJ DeLucas (duke2@uab.edu)
Received 13 November 2014; revised 20 July 2015; accepted 22 July 2015
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited npj Kﬁrﬁgamer

"
"2","npj Review of microgravity protein crystallization
A McPherson and L James DeLucas
2
growth from solution, but admittedly, this has received little Uniqueness of macromolecular crystals
attention. Macromolecules, being unique in their properties, both in terms of
Experience With many types 0t crystal growth conﬁrmed, almost size and complexity, give rise to crystals that are also unique.”—33
without exception, that the minimization of convective transport, We cannot, therefore, expect that macromolecular crystals will
WhiCh allows growth to occur principally by dittUSiOh 0t molecules necessarily develop according to precisely the same mechanisms
to the surfaces, generally resulted ih crystals 0t superior quality and principles as do conventional crystals.33'34 This is important
with improved optical and mechanical properties, reduced defect because, if we do not know how protein and virus crystals grow,
densities, and greater size. Thus, it follows that crystals grown in a as well as understanding their detailed characteristics, then we
zero gravity, or a reduced gravity environment, might demon- cannot expect to understand how gravity affects the process and
strate enhanced properties. Because vehicles in space typically the quality of crystals grown in space.
experience gravity forces of 10—3 to 10—79, this appeared to be an Macromolecular crystals are relatively small in comparison with
attractive possibility for the production of improved, perhaps even conventional crystals, rarely exceeding a millimeter on an edge, and
novel crystalline materials. Indeed, earlier experiments in micro— generally smaller. Because only one stereoisomer of a biological
gravity where ionic and conventional small molecule crystals were macromolecule naturally exists, they 0'0 h0t form crystals possess—
grown supported this ideaF‘t-Ze ing inversion symmetry, and, therefore, generally exhibit simple
shapes that lack the polyhedral character of small-molecule crystals.
, , , , They are extremely fragile, often crushing at the touch, degrade
MicrograVIty m gravrty outside a narrow temperature, ionic strength, or pH range, generally
Vehicles orbiting the Earth do not, Of course, completely escape exhibit weak optical properties,35 and diffract X-rays to resolutions
gravitational forces. For example, the force of attraction from the far short of the theoretical limit.36 The reason for most of these
Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld 0h a satellite ih high orbit is about the character deﬁciencies is that macromolecular crystals incorporate
same as on the surface 0f the Earth. HOW then can an orbiting large amounts of solvent in their lattices, ranging from about 30%
vehicle experience zero, or microgravity? This is particularly well at the lower limit to 90% or more in the most extreme case5,37l38
explained by the following passage provided by the NASA.29 Proteins also have, as individual molecules, an array of water
Many people 0'0 h0t realize that Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld molecules, which surround them and are relatively tightly bound
extends far out into space, in fact far beyond the orbit of the both in solution and in the crystal.39
Space Shuttle. If it were possible to build a tower reaching to the There are two other crucial differences between macromolecular
height of the Shuttle’s orbit, then gravity would be almost as and conventional crystal growth that have important practical
strong at the top of the tower as it is on the ground. A person consequences. The ﬁrst is that macromolecular crystals are usually
stepping off this tower would drop to the ground, just as he or she nucleated at extremely high levels of supersaturation, often several
would from a tall skyscraper. But if this is true, why do Shuttle 100 to a 1000%, while conventional crystals, on the other hand,
crewmembers ﬂoat and a microgravity environment exist for usually nucleate at only a few percent supersaturation.14 Virtually
experiments? Sir Isaac Newton hypothesized how an artiﬁcial every quantitative aspect 0t crystal growth is a direct tUthth 0t
satellite could be made to orbit the Earth. He envisioned a very tall supersaturation.5 Although high supersaturation may be essential
mountain extending above the Earth’s atmosphere so that friction to promote nucleation, it is far from ideal for growth, and the many
with the air would not be a factor. He then imagined cannons at problems observed for macromolecular crystals attest to this.
the top of the mountain that ﬁred cannonballs parallel to the Furthermore, supersaturated macromolecular solutions, in addition
ground. As each cannonball was ﬁred, it was acted on by two to crystal nuclei, produce alternate solid states. that we refer to
forces. One force, the explosion of the black powder, propelled the collectively as amorphous precrpltates. Unlike conventional
cannonball straight outward. If no other force were to act on the systems, competition exrsts at both the nucleation and growth
cannonball, then the shot would travel in a straight line and at a stages hetWee—h crystals and precrpltate; particularly acute because
constant velocity. But Newton knew that a second force would act competition '5 pronaoted by h'gtl leyels 0f supersaturation. Because
on the cannonball. Gravity would act to pull the cannonball down amorphous precrpltates are kinetically fayored’ though ,Of less
. favored energy state, they tend to dominate the equilibration
toward Earth. Because of the presence of gravrty, the path the . . . .
. . process and often Inhibit or preclude crystal formation.
cannonball would travel would be bent Into an arc ending at the . . .
Earth’s surface. Given the compleXItIes that beset macromolecules, can we
, . . . reasonably expect theIr crystallization to resemble that of
Newtons thought experiment demonstrated how additional . . . .
. . conventional molecules? Evrdence to this pomt suggests that
cannonballs would travel farther from the mountain If the cannon . . . . . .

, , , , the answer IS In prmcrple yes, but In practice, no. It appears that
were loaded With more black powder each time It was ﬁred. With the fundamental mechanisms and pathways of macromolecular
each shot{ the path would lengthen and soon, cannonballs were crystal growth are the same as for conventional crystals40'4t but
disappearing over the. horizon. Eventually, it cannonball was ﬁred that the magnitudes of the underlying kinetic and thermodynamic
wrth enough energy, In Newton 5 Imagination! that It fell entirely parameters that govern the process differ markedly.
around the Earth and came back to Its starting pomt. Provrded Current evidence conﬁrms that macromolecular crystals grow
that nothing would interfere with the cannonball’s motion, it by the same mechanisms and reﬂect the same physical principles
WOUld continue circling the Earth: it was lh orbit. as do conventional crystals. These generally assume the genera-

This is how the Space Shuttle stays in orbit above the Earth. It is tion of growth steps by two-dimensional nucleation and by spiral
launched ih a trajectory that arcs above the Earth 50 that the dislocationsS'40'41 and pictures the ordered addition of individual
orbiter is traveling at lUSt the precise speed to keep it falling while molecules at the step edges at a constant rate determined by the
maintaining a constant altitude above the surface. For example, it level of supersaturation, o. Disorder in the crystal, which limits
the Shuttle climbs to a 320—km-high orbit, it must travel at a speed diffraction resolution, is generally ascribed to the statistical spread
0f about 27,740 km/h to achieve and maintain orbit. At that speed of incorrect orientation and position of molecules from the mean.
and altitude, the Shuttle’s falling path will be parallel to the The model is made somewhat more realistic by addition of the
curvature of the Earth. Because the Space Shuttle is free falling concept of mosaicity,36 which describes the real crystal in terms of
around the Earth and the friction with the upper atmosphere is semiordered crystalline blocks. In general, the growth surfaces are
extremely low, a microgravity environment is established. considered to be relatively smooth, as are the step edges, with
npj Microgravity (2015) 15010 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

"
"3","Review of microgravity protein crystallization npj
A McPherson and L James DeLucas
3
’- ‘l . , . I ,
l. ...,, ,,
{w ‘ ., i I I , f
1,) 1t. ‘ ¥/\ “ "" p ff.
1.. 1 ‘3 - , "".40.”
~- - 1&4 '1'“ hi?
,’ ' 00., “:7 i f , - ~J,‘:I,.},,H .19!
Th ’l'i .‘. Y ' I' t tt""
l.“ ,3"" |' . u } _..-' g
W11“ t: t, ‘ 1:5 ' Q?
'I ‘1 IS ‘, '\ 4""}. .‘
l1"" 310‘ \‘ ,. I a I , '7 I
'H: '3 "" X4 \ ‘
Figure 1. Astronaut payload specialists Congressman William Nelson and Charles Walker review hold initial version of the hand-held Vapor
Diffusion Apparatus (VDA) as they discuss crystal photographic documentation ﬂight procedure.
defects rather rare, though large amounts of impurities may perturb
these features.
I
INITIAL RESULTS (PROOF OF CONCEPT)
As stated earlier, crystals grown in microgravity may demonstrate
enhanced properties and vehicles experiencing microgravity are . ~ ‘
an attractive possibility for the production of improved crystalline ‘
materials. An unfortunate aspect of the research carried out in ‘ ,
microgravity is that much of it has gone undocumented, or is .'
described only in space agency reports, or technical notes. This is .
particularly true of failures or marginal successes that did not i _
merit publication in the greater literature, or those not deemed ! ‘
worthy of serious treatment by the investigators. In some cases, g -
for example, Russian and Chinese investigations, language or lack
of access to international journals inhibited broad disclosure. If
some surprising or exceptional results were obtained, then these 1
possibly found their way into press, but little else. Thus, there is
only an incomplete record of many of the experiments performed
during the 19705 and 19805.
Prior to the US Space Shuttle Challenger disaster in early 1986, a t
primitive version of what was called the Vapor Diffusion ,
Apparatus, VDA,42 was ﬂown on four different space shuttle u
missions (Figure 1). Initially the simple VDA device consisted of a . 3
series of syringes in an aluminum frame loaded with protein ‘ Li, '
solutions. Each of these extruded a 20 to 40 pl droplet of mother ‘3' :
liquor onto its tip. The drop then equilibrated against a porous ”Q
material saturated with a precipitant solution that shared its
sealed chamber. This took place in individual chambers organized ._ 1‘
in trays with 24 experiment chambers. The trays were simply 7“""-
taped to partitions of middeck lockers of the Space Shuttle during
a mission. Drop extrusion was performed manually by an Figure 2. VDA syringe with protein droplet extruded on syringe tip:
astronaut using an Allen key. These htSt experiments were carried one of the earliest experiments on the crystallization of proteins in
out principally at the instigation and direction of Professors microgravity. (1) Used the hand—held Vapor Diffusion Apparatus
Charles Bugg and Fred (Bud) Suddath and Larry DeLucas at the (VDA). Here the protein canavalin is seen by crystallizing in a drop of
University of Alabama at Birmingham. mother liquor extruded into the chamber of the VDA. Porous
In spite of (or perhaps because of) the simplicity of the device, material in the lower part of the chamber was saturated with the
and the lack of any temperature stabilization or control, a number precrpitating SOIUt'O“ and served as the reservorr.
of different protein crystals were grown in microgravity (Figure 2). _ _ _
Among these were lysozyme (an enzyme), canavalin (a seed— proteins, though not deﬁnitivesoggested that the crystals also
storage protein), serum albumin (a transport protein), and a diffracted toa higherresolutlon IImIt than equwalent crystals grown
number of others whose crystallization properties were reasonably in the laboratory (many Of these initial results were hOt reported
well established on the Earth. From these early experiments the due to the lack temperature control for the space experiments thUS
conclusion emerged that crystals grown in space were of uniformly preventing precise control experiments).
higher quality and generally of greater size.42 Some of the criteria Although experiments With the simple hand—held VDA came to
on which the crystal quality conclusions were based include an end with the Challenger disaster in January 1986, it served as
diffraction resolution, comparison of l/sigma (l) evaluated through— an important precursor for the design and fabrication of a
out the resolution range, and temperature factors (B-factors). Some considerably more sophisticated VDA system that came into use
preliminary X—ray diffraction measurements on canavalin and other following resumption of space shuttle missions on 26 October
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited npj Microgravity (2015) 15010

"
"4","npj Review of microgravity protein crystallization
A McPherson and L James DeLucas
4
""19w ,2 ‘ -.. 4* '-;‘t 1 cm '
, ~. zeisnxgiuei
.r-'«'r**~r-Pns&gquh
e ""“ .‘L'fﬁ'é’
Figure 3. Second generation VDA. The image on the left contains 20 vapor diffusion experiment chambers (three of these trays were
contained in one space shuttle incubator for a total of 60 vapor diffusion experiments. The image on the right shows a triple barrel syringe
used for each experiment chamber.
1988. This enhanced VDA consisted of 60 vapor diffusion
experiments maintained at constant temperature, 1 at 4°C and _ O _
1 at 22 °C, and activated automatically by a mechanical drive that :7; .
extruded protein and precipitant solution, each contained in 2 t \.
barrels of a tripIe-barreled syringe. The solutions were mixed by . 0 in. 0
extruding them onto the syringe tip followed by withdrawing the -,. . ‘ .-
combined solutions into a much narrower third barrel and then .-,__.. ,...,. "".33 “w .
re-extruding them back onto the syringe tip (Figure 3). This ' t, . ""
procedure was repeated until the two solutions were thoroughly "" '
mixed. The importance of providing a mechanism for thorough
mixing is critical, as partial mixing often results in regions where m
the precipitant concentration in contact with protein solution is '
ex.ceedlng|y ,h'gh’ badmg to unwanted protein preCIpItatIon. The Figure 4. Cryostat crystallization ﬂight hardware. This hardware was
mixed proteIn/preCIpItant solution remained on the syringe tip, built by DARA, the German Space Agency, and provided fourteen
thereby allowing it to equilibrate With a precipitant/reservoir crystal chambers maintained at controlled temperatures.
solution that saturated a porous material lining the chambers.
Prior to re-entry the droplet containing crystals was withdrawn
into the two larger barrels and capped via an opposing plunger. Concurrent with the VDA experiments, developments were
From these, and the many similar experiments which followed, continuing in Europe, and in Russia, toward more sophisticated
numerous proteins, provided by many coinvestigators, were devices using, not only vapor, but the liquid—quuid diffusion
crystallized under a great variety of conditions by vapor diffusion. technique44 as well. The Cryostat device (Figure 4) was designed
An important early paper was published in 1989 in Science43 and built by DARA, the German Space Agency and was based
reporting the X—ray analyses of several microgravity experiments on Walter Littke’s original design.45‘47 Cryostat provided 14
that had produced some particularly impressive results. For the crystallization chambers maintained at controlled temperatures.
ﬁrst time, it was demonstrated quantitatively that crystals of This system was really the ﬁrst well designed and engineered
superior X-ray diffraction properties could be produced as a apparatus for crystallization of macromolecules using directliquid
consequence of growth in a microgravity environment, It was diffusion methods and, provided the ﬁrst clearly successful
shown that for several crystals at least two diffraction character- application Of that method 0“ lML-T. In the Cryostat dEViCE‘,
istics were improved; I/sigma ratio (roughly, the signal to noise crystals Of the ﬁrst virus, satellite tobacco mosaic virus (STMV) like
ratio) over the entire resolution range, and the resolution limit those seen in Figure 5, were obtained by liquid—quuid dittU5i0h~
itself. The signiﬁcance of these results is discussed more fully
below. Improved crystal size and perfection signiﬁcantly increased Post-challenger results—an accumulation of data
the available X—ray data for those protein crystals, which in turn From 1988 to the present, many experiments have been
permitted a more precise deﬁnition of the molecular structures. In conducted that produced both interesting and encouraging
addition, the VDA experiments PVOVidE—‘d some 0f the ﬁrst results. In the VDA experiments that commenced again in 1988,
evidence that crystal morphology W35 susceptible to the inﬂuence crystals of y-interferon, porcine elastase, and isocitrate |yase were
of gravity. It should be noted that there are several uncontrollable shown to grow larger, display more uniform morphologies, and
harmful factors that interfere With microgravity PFOtE—‘ih crystal yield diffraction data of higher resolution than equivalent crystals
growth investigations.These include the lack of frequent access to grown on Earth.43 Similar results were obtained for canavalin,48
microgravity (researchers often wait a year or more before their and positive results continued to accumulate from this
experiments are ﬂown). Additional delays subsequent to the apparatus,” On USML-1, experiments in the glove box using a
protein samples being loaded on the launch vehicle or retrieved modiﬁed vapor diffusion technique, yielded crystals of malic
once the samples are returned can cause unwanted protein or enzyme of substantially enhanced properties.”51 On |ML-1 in the
crystal degradation. Finally, the signiﬁcant amount of documenta- Cryostat,48'52'53 the VDA, and on |ML-2 in the European Space
tion associated with the ﬂight approval process combined with Agency (ESA) Advanced Protein Crystallization Facility, APCF
uncertainty regarding when an experiment will ﬂy contribute to (which also supported liquid—quuid diffusion experiments) mor-
the lack of widespread participation by the scientiﬁc community. phological alterations to crystals of canavalin, seen in Figure 6, and
npj Microgravity (2015) 15010 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

"
"5","Review of microgravity protein crystallization npj
A McPherson and L James DeLucas
5
3‘; “b4 , "" .i-""s a s . 1;. b
,a k w” I ‘5"" ”
Y3 -. .. ""' .-'
~ "" 3” . ,"" ‘. .3,
{ J} .3 “. ""t- “ 1‘ , ft ; I ‘31.
"" 5‘0 0 -,"":>
..~ |.. ‘\\,-9 \ 'I. -.\' t _. _‘d
- gut; 1‘ ~ '3 ‘3.
‘ .""V’v \‘ . ,V"" a -
X. "" 5 '7‘} » - ~ 2
“d . Hm r . I.&‘ ‘ ‘ a
k ‘7 ‘t ‘1 ‘ ' t? o ' ' .
.. N . , q, ~. é .. .
v t g5 5-"" 5. - 9 ﬂ."" D ._._t
d a ,_ 4 ' 9 ~ .1
Figure 5. In (a) is an orthorhombic crystal of satellite tobacco mosaic virus (STMV) that is more than 1.5 mm in length and was about 30 times
the volume of any STMV crystal ever grown on Earth. It was grown in the Cryostat instrument on IML -1. The small STMV crystals in the
background formed after return to Earth when the retrograde solubility of the virus remaining in the mother liquor was induced to crystallize
by the heat of the microscope lights used for observation. In (b) is an equivalent sized cubic crystal of the same virus, again, far exceeding in
dimensions any grown in an Earth laboratory.
crystals of insulin and interferon.56 The complete lack of
temperature-induced convection in a microgravity environment
provides a clear advantage for crystallization of proteins amenable
to thermally dependent crystallization. Other US investigators
carried out protein crystal growth experiments on the Russian
“ Space Station Mir, using vapor diffusion—based crystallization
devices,57‘59 including ribosomes,6O as have Europeans“—63 In
agreement with other results cited above, the Americans reported
that experiments on 5 of 21 proteins produced results superior to
' 9 those obtained on Earth.58'59
' ' An intriguing aspect of the results accumulated from multiple
' '- missions was that when the same protein was crystallized by a
_ variety of different techniques in microgravity, a range of crystalline
,_. products could be produced,52'64 pointing to the need for serial ﬂight
, experiments with incremental optimization. The experiments, in sum,
‘ I provided persuasive evidence that growth in microgravity could
""’- produce protein crystals of larger size, better morphology, and higher
quality than were obtained on Earth. In addition, they also showed
that beneﬁts from microgravity crystal growth could, in some cases,
be crucial to success in protein structure determination.65
Some experiments carried out by a group of European
investigators using the INTOSPACE facilities and the Russian
Cosima space carrier were indeterminate according to their
report6t'63 although several interesting observations emerged. A
number of different proteins were crystallized, in some cases with
positive beneﬁt, whereas for others the contrary was true.62
Similarly ambiguous results were obtained as well from experi—
ments carried out on the Russian Space Station. Some proteins
apparently crystallized with improved characteristics and others
showed no effects.58 A difﬁculty with some of these studies,
however, was that there was generally no detailed quantitative
Figure 6. Top right is a typical hexagonal crystal of the protein analysis of the crystals carried out withregarol to size distribotion,
canavalin grown on Earth, and equivalent crystals grown in ug on morphology, defect densrty, or X—ray diffraction characteristics.
|ML-2. The distinctive cusp in the Earth-grown crystal becomes a International MicrograVIty Laboratory-2 (|ML'2) afforded the
hexagonal lumen within the prismatic crystal grown in space. This is unique opportunity to compare, on a single space mission,
shown schematically for each below. The alteration in lumen or cusp crystallization of identical samples in two different types of
morphology is a direct consequence of nutrient depletion in pg at apparatus, one based on vapor diffusion apparatus (VDA) and the
the most rapidly growing face of the crystals and it illustrates the other (European APCF) on liquid—quuid diffusion.54'55 The growth
effect of the concentration gradient that PetSiStS in space. |ML-2, of crystals of canavalin, which had been investigated a number of
International MicrograVIty Laboratory—2. times previously, and the ﬁrst virus crystallization attempted in
space, satellite tobacco mosaic virus (STMV), were both crystallized
another larger virus, turnip yellow mosaic virus (TYMV), seen in during the 13-day mission in both hardware systems. The results
Figure 7, were clearly demonstrated.54'55 from |ML—1 were presented in detail52'64 and they provided some
A third technique, temperature-induced batch crystallization of the more compelling evidence that, not only did gravity
(Figure 8), was reported to produce larger, higher resolution inﬂuence the macromolecular crystallization process, but that the
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited npj Microgravity (2015) 15010

"
"6","npj Review of microgravity protein crystallization
A McPherson and L James DeLucas
6
-
/
Figure 7. At left are hexagonal by—pyramidal crystals of turnip yellow mosaic virus (TYMV). Note the ﬂat faces of the crystals. At right are
crystals of the same virus grown in microgravity. Because of diffusion limited transport of nutrient under pg conditions, the faces are strikingly
creased and the edges indented. Crystals were grown in the Advanced Protein Crystallization Facility (APCF) on |ML-2. |ML-2, International
Microgravity Laboratory—2.
E] II! E
...._. . {f f)»
I l ’
 .
4 / . ‘
“ 1 . L 11%: ‘ , pr V
o g ‘ : .1 Pol sulfone
I I
V l l t C (V .7
end containing metal conducting cap of K‘ ’ ""n \ ‘x"" ;
polysulfone cylinder is in contact V *
with incubator cold plate ' .
Figure 8. (a—c) Protein Crystallization Facility (PCF): (a) hardware inserted into containment tray that slides into incubator containing a cold
plate that contacts the metal end of crystallization cylinders; (b) 50—ml cylinders stacked end-to-end thereby creating different thermal
gradients for each experiment; (c) metal containment cylinders are shown along with 500 ml, 200 ml, and 100 ml crystallization cylinders and
metal caps.
methodology employed also played a major role. The results the structure to a higher resolution than has been obtained
obtained from both the VDA and the European Advanced Protein for any other virus.66 This provided the most striking example
Crystallization Facility (Figure 9) were clearly positive, but they to date of how the growth of macromolecular crystals in
were also of a different nature.55 microgravity can impact the quality and precision of X—ray
There are currently four broad criteria that are considered in diffraction analyses.
comparing crystals grown in microgravity with equivalent crystals Canavalin crystals grown in both the VDA and the APCF55 were
grown in Earth laboratories. These are (1) subjective visual quality, uniformly very small, but those grown in microgravity by liquid—
(2) maximum size and size distribution, (3) morphology, and (4) liquid diffusion (Figure 6) displayed a remarkable variation in their
X-ray diffraction qualities. The crystals grown on |ML-1 were clearly morphology when compared with their ground-grown counter-
different than ground—based controls in all categories. In the case parts. As shown diagrammatically in Figure 6, these hexagonal
of STMV grown in both the VDA and the CRYOSTAT, the crystals canavalin crystals, of prismatic habit, characteristically have conical
were uniformly more perfect asjudged by visual inspection, but in occlusions along their central axes when growing, and this
the case of the CRYOSTAT grown crystals they were more than 15 normally ﬁlls in by the time the crystals are mature. The crystals
times the volume of the Earth-grown crystals. Furthermore, X-ray grown in space, however, had a conical cusp along their centers,
analysis demonstrated that the crystals from CRYOSTAT diffracted but a ﬁnely etched hexagonal lumen whose sides appeared
to beyond 1.8-A resolution using conventional X—ray sources, almost parallel with the external faces. This was not an
compared with laboratory crystals that diffracted to no more than observation limited to a few of the crystals grown in microgravity,
a resolution of 2.3 A. In addition, for 15 different microgravity but was characteristic of all.
grown crystals, the l/sigma ratio was signiﬁcantly better than for A second compelling example from the same experiment
those from the best ground grown control crystals, and this revealed a unique scalloping of edges and indentation of faces
improvement extended over the entire resolution range. on hexagonal crystals of TYMV, the largest macromolecule ever
As a consequence of the extended resolution and improved crystallized in space (280-A diameter, 3.5 million molecularweight).
signal to noise for the data, an additional 50% more X—ray The scalloping effect was clearlya consequence ofthe alteration of
intensities were available. This ultimately permitted reﬁnement of transport in microgravity (Figure 7).54'55
npj Microgravity (2015) 15010 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

"
"7","Review of microgravity protein crystallization npj
A McPherson and L James DeLucas
7
a
‘3. ~» -.- -.~ ~ .--: f"" g. g)
. I'f‘
i < -- u i; .1; x
k . ' r $4.13.: in} m;- :4 h .t. ti - ‘h 7 :l-‘i‘t
..--mm L . ( a: aw :: :
Figure 10. Glove box crystallization hardware.
b
_ _ -. ~ 1‘ m t polysulfone cylinder with the cap afﬁxed to a cold plate within an
,, ? ' .._ Wt '* ""e . incubator. As the temperature of the plate was automatically
‘7' - . A it ”(Hg . . raised or lowered (depending on the solubility characteristics of
' . ' . ' ’ :th '-.. ' the protein) a thermal gradient was created down the long axis of
2 ‘.y_ ‘ ;. - ,» 6‘ t ‘ 3 the cylinder. Crystals were consistently obtained of uniformly
' I ‘ . n. 7 greater size and improved habit, as shown by morphometric
w. 3 . -' ‘ , analysis.56 This provided support for the idea that bulk crystal—
_/ lization of commercially valuable proteins in space might indeed
have useful application. A second crystallization experiment for
interferon a—2b was derived from a protein therapeutic for
, , , , .. treatment of hepatitis C (as opposed in producing crystals for
“9"".” 9‘ .Advaneed Protein Crystallization .Fac'l'ty; (a) shows the X—ray diffraction and structure determination). A solution formula-
entIre faCIIIty which accommodates 48 experimental reactors and (b) . . . . . . . .
shows individual reactors for vapor, liquid and dialysis crystallization “on 0_f the protein rapidly clears upon 'hJeCt'Oh resuitlng 'h an
techniques. effective therapeutic haIf-IIfe of only a few hours. Schering—Plough
was investigating use of crystalline interferon a-2b for hepatitis C
treatment as a subcutaneous depot formulation, where interferon
An unusual, and ultimately very proﬁtable, opportunity for oi—2b crystals slowly dissolve at the injection site and have
macromolecular crystal growth in microgravity appeared with the sngPIﬁcantly longer haIf—Ilfe (thus acting as a time—release drug).
Space Shuttle mission United States Microgravity Laboratory-1. Uh ortunately, laboratory—grown crystals tend to eXhlblt e broad
The payload specialist on this ﬂight of nearly 2-week duration was snze distribution thereby precluding the” use as an Injectable
Dr Lawrence DeLucas a rotein cr sta| rowth ex ert and X—ra therapeutic. Thus, m thls case the goal was to 30'1”?“ the chemical
crystallographer. On thispmission,yhe vgas able th) perform ah conditions ahe the thermal gradient to grow small Interferon a—2b
extended series of protein crystallization experiments, numbering crystals m. micrograVIty that would hopefully eXh'b't a more
in the hundreds, in an enclosed glove box. The great advantage to uniform snze d'etr'bUtloh (W'th sizes between 150 and . 10‘0
this investigation was that Dr DeLucas could conduct crystal— microns). The rnlcrograVIty experiments resu'te‘t m a ”“Pforh‘
lization trials, evaluate results, and repeat the experiments in population ofmncron—snged crystals that “T‘Et the Injectable Chteha'
space with altered, and incrementally improved, conditions. The These crystals, used ,m prlrnate studies at Schering-hlough,
availability of the glove box enabled astronauts to microscopically demonstrated a S'gh'hcaht Improyement 'h the haIf-Iife for
observe the growing crystals and then using stock solutions and effective drug serum levels (unpublished data). ,
syringes, adjust solution parameters (i.e., precipitant and protein It ?hOUId be noted that net a|| micrograylty experiments have
concentration) in an attempt to optimize crystallization conditions. requnred long duratlens SUCh as those proyioied by the US Space
Once the solutions were prepared the top portion (contained 5huttle or Space Stations. For exarnple, L. Sjolln and hIs colleagues
three wells for protein solution) is combined with the bottom 'h Sweden have reported the rapid, seeded, growth of.crysta|s 0f
portion (contained three reservoir solutions) thereby sealing the Ribonuclease S aboard a SOUhd'hg rocket W'th a mnssnon that
protein chambers over their respective reservoir chambers and afforded at most 30 min 0f microgravity. From these crystals they
therefore initiating the vapor diffusion process (Figure 10). From nonetheless, reported extension 0f the diffraction analysis to a
this mission a number of positive results were obtained for a signiﬁcantly higher resolution than had been previously
variety of macromolecules.5°'51 obtained.67 There are, however, few proteins that can be reliably
At the same time that vapor diffusion investigations were being crystallized in SUCh a short time period. Thus, thiS approach to
carried out, experiments in collaboration with scientists at microgravity has h0t seen much interest.
Schering—Plough Pharmaceutical Company on the crystallization 'h the interval between the ﬂight 0f ”VH—‘1 and itS sequel |ML—2,
of interferon a—2b by application of thermal gradients were the European Space Agency, along With Dornier Aerospace,
conducted on a number of missions. In these experiments, large designed and hunt the APCF that accommodated 48 crystal
volumes of mother liquor ranging from 50 to 500 ml were growth reactors (Figure 9) in a thermally controlled chamber.68
employed using ﬂight hardware designed to produce a tempera- The design was such that individual reactors could utilize any of
ture gradient down the long axis of nonconducting cylindrical three crystal growth techniques, vapor diffusion, liquid—quuid
polysulfone containers (Figures 8a—c). This was accomplished by diffusion, or dialysis. Of the 48 reactors, 12 could be observed
incorporating a metal thermaI-conducting cap on one end of the periodically and recorded by video microscopy.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited npj Microgravity (2015) 15010

"
"8","n ' Review of microgravity protein crystallization
pl A McPherson and L James DeLucas
8
n E 120000
'3 Micro ravity rown —
h g Earthfimwnfomml """"“""""
§ 100000 —
§
8.
53 80000 -
ﬂ
5’
8 0.0023 degrees
£5 60000 -
E
E
40000 —
g
I O
‘ 8
. . M 20000 —
Figure 11. ThaumatIn (a) and tunaﬁsh cytochrome c (b) crystals ,..-.
grown in the Advanced Protein Crystallization Facility. “20‘3“deg'f'f ""5.""...
_............| I I l ' 'I' "" '
0 5.70 5.72 5.74 5.76 5.78 5.80 5.82
Scanindegrees
22.0
Figure 13. A comparison of the rocking curves for crystals of hen
20.0 egg white lysozyme grown both on Earth and in microgravity in the
Advanced Protein Crystallization Facility (APCF) aboard the US Space
13'"" Microgravity Shuttle. The much sharper peak on the right compared with the
b m, Crystals diffuse peak on the left clearly shows the micrograVIty lysozyme
a crystals to be superIor In terms of mosaIc spread.
:11 14.0
3
§ 12.0
< 10.0 exhibited >30 times the volume of equivalent crystals grown on
Earth. The cubic crystal form of STMV, when grown on Earth, was a
8.0 . . . . . . a
poorly dIffractIng crystal WIth a resolutIon IImIt of about 6A. The
6-0 corresponding limit for the microgravity grown crystals was 4A,
, with an improvement in the l/sigma ratio over the entire resolution
4.0 . .
range (ﬁgure 12). Although not of larger $Ize than crystals
2-0 previously grown in the laboratory, crystals grown by liquid—liquid
1.49 2.74 3.98 5.23 6.47 diffusion in the APCF of both the rhombohedral and the hexagonal
- 2 2 2 form of the protein canavalin demonstrated a substantially higher
Sm 0/?» x10 _ _ _ _ _ _ 6970
resolutIon IImIt. As Illustrated by comparatIve WIlson plots, '
391$“? mgstalcf V'rgsih-l—Ee trI‘nterASIty. t0 5'9??? ratIo for tXI-ray Because of a signiﬁcantly improved l/sigma ratio for all reﬂections,
' rac '0“ a a or . 0 ar an mIcrograVI.y grown .crys as '5 these crystals provided nearly twice the measurable X—ray
plotted as a functIon of shells of equal SIze and IncreaSIng d'ff t' ol t ol 'th t l . l . th
resolution. The estimated s.d. (sigmas) were based on the deviations ' rac '0“ a a compare W' CW5 a S preVIous y grown m e
from the mean of symmetry-related and redundant measurements laboratory: or m other space experiments as well. _ _
Of individual reﬂections. In addItIon to the quantItatIve X—ray dIffractIon studIes
described above, another important ﬁnding using X—rays was
reported by J. Helliwell of Oxford University. This was based on an
Flights of APCF included two entire units totaling 96 reactors, analysis of the half width of rocking curves of intensities produced
providing opportunities for a host of European and American by lysozyme crystals grown, also by liquid—liquid diffusion, on
investigators and resulting in a bounteous yield of protein crystals. |ML—2 (Figure 13). He found that the rocking curves were
In addition, the samples provided fascinating observations55 signiﬁcantly narrower than those from equivalent crystals grown
regarding the resiliency of macromolecular crystals in their mother on the ground.71 These measurements had profound implications
liquors in response to the stresses of ﬂight and reentry (Figure 11). regarding the degree of order and perfection of the crystals. They
Figure 11a is a tetragonal crystal of the ”sweet” protein thaumatin provided additional, quantitative evidence that macromolecular
grown by liquid—liquid diffusion in the ESA sponsored but NASA crystals grown in space exhibited greater inherent order and
associated APCF on International Microgravity Laboratory—2 (|ML—2) perfection. A parallel study arriving at the same conclusions was
by McPherson and colleagues at the University of California, Irvine. carried out later on thaumatin crystals grown in microgravity.72
The crystal is ~1 mm in length. The truncated end of the crystal, The US Space Shuttle does not reliably provide a quiescent
denoted by an arrow in Figure 11a, is the point at which the crystal environment for protein crystallization. There are perturbations in
nucleated on the glass wall of the crystallization cell, where it the microgravity level due to crew activity, and Vernier rocket
remained until recovered in an Earth laboratory following the space activity (used to maintain the shuttle’s speed and altitude as it
shuttle landing. Figure 11b shows a long needle-like crystal of the circles the Earth). Activities such as these cause unwanted g-jitter
protein cytochrome c from tuna ﬁsh, also grown on |ML-2 in the and accelerations, both of which cause growing crystals to move
APCF. The crystal is about 5-mm long and even after experiencing within their growth solutions. Dr Juan Garcia-Ruiz et 0/. studied the
the rigors of Shuttle re-entry it also remained attached to the glass relationship between microgravity perturbations versus crystal
wall at one end where it nucleated. movement and their effect on crystal growth rate and quality.73'74
While positive results from various laboratories were presented Although most of the experiments described to this point were
at conferences but unfortunately, never found their way into the carried out on the US Space Shuttle and restricted the time period
literature, some impressive ﬁndings were documented.55 In the over which crystals could be grown, some long-term crystallization
APCF, for example, cubic crystals of STMV were grown by liquid— experiments were later carried out on space stations using
liquid diffusion in several reactors (Figure 5). These crystals somewhat different, and interesting approaches. An extensive
npj Microgravity (2015) 15010 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

"
"9","Review of microgravity protein crystallization n '
A McPherson and L James DeLucas p]
9
«qkﬁ‘v‘ﬁ‘wfw ""w. - - '
(\EMUi‘xdah-ﬁ‘xu - ..' "" av , A
‘1'? 3‘ 't‘ "" ‘3‘ ‘L' 1 x 3
mi - a w. ., r
“ '-_ ‘. N‘ ’ﬂb"".. ‘ er , 3‘ ‘4’.
it’: ""h"" ""t‘ -¥$ P t. {7 l' ., l
{in $5351 i: g%' ' i T L 1 '~
="".' o é“. #2 77‘»- , "" “
4 4 t V“? . . '. . t ‘5 .f
13;...2; (fir ﬁg; a 1 .1 , ~-
‘5"". ‘ ’ ‘ _ ,_\.' ‘31.- .1
'3; \a’ﬁ ﬂ 1)“ .,f:_4'. , I! a u
:’ 4"" V g .a‘ '1 ‘k /"" l ‘l M
5:; ' \ 1 ‘ﬂ’. ‘ 3 l,"" x ,' ""1 ’>\
2,44. , . :_ , r. 1 psi»: 1‘,
“X / 5"" i ' 0‘ ' i“ ‘7' ~ ‘ ~~ '
I p"" ‘ ”‘6“ I |T . ‘ J /‘.’V( ‘
- "" t , Q. (I i {3‘ r \X- 1 'x'
7' #52}? ER."" - “43)., 9* .“v' x) ”f 1“ .‘ 5‘15
. .7 11¢"": . VT» ‘""‘ ' ‘ .
x; g _' Er, , P ' '4 N 51‘1‘1-1. 4! J I ‘ \,' ;' Ix.
P ? ' ‘0 \¢""_:: ' - 1 ' “t - h s .\ ' .' \‘- ’ 1- i“
c , Q"" ‘ fr: ‘2' »‘. 'V, A O . _ '7' ‘.
. . ,. E ~4’.',..__-‘.s._ / II E] v», II
=5 n‘ os'V
I #1 ‘1’ K I. I i J ‘ 1 1 _
.3 a ,0 e .. \
,. . a 1‘ ~1’1“_~t,‘ v ‘ I a
a . ,9 9,256u11 .- -
0 , ' )7 ‘
II I] 0 III II
Figure 14. An array of crystals grown in the dewar device that used liquid—quuid diffusion from frozen biphasic samples. This experiment was
performed by American investigators (Koszelak et 0]."") on the Russian Space Station Mir. The crystals (labeled by row from left to right) are of
top row: (a) rhombohedral canavalin, (b) creatine kinase, (c) lysozyme, (d) beef catalase; middle row: (e) porcine alpha amylase, (f) fungal
catalase, (g) myglobin, (h) concanavalin B; and bottom row: (i) thaumatin, (j) apoferritin, (k) sate||ite tobacco mosaic virus (STMV), (l) hexagonal
canavaﬁn.
————"" V \
3mm Mr” E ‘
"" ""'"" ...‘£ '
. 4""."" ‘ W
. , .1
i (Q ® Q) t g
r u}
x u [I .
5 a m @ r ‘ '
- / , V‘ /
. A A ‘ / /H I K ‘1‘ — ..
.4- ' ‘ /' ’ . x . ‘ ﬂ
‘2. a E I , J ' \T- ‘ ”41H? 3""
-' I“: “it w ®
'1!
Figure 15. Protein Crystallization Apparatus for Microgravity (PCAM) in the typical ﬂight conﬁguration in an incubator containing a total of 378
experiments. Crystal growth interfaces were activated or deactivated in a ﬂight cylinder arrangement. Each cylinder contained 9 trays with 7
experiments per tray for a total of 63 experiments per cylinder. PCAM also ﬂew as an ambient stowage item on several ﬂights. Individual
cylinders are activated and deactivated by the crew.
series of microgravity crystallization investigations were per- required no electrical or other Mir resources, required no astronaut
formed by American investigators ﬁrst on the Russian Space attention, and required no signiﬁcant ﬁnancial resources to create.
Station Mir, and then continued on the ISS. Some results from That is, it had to utilize NASA off the shelf hardware. The need was
these experiments and a more complete description of the met by the simple expedient of making a biphasic ”popsicle” of a
approach and device were previously published.75 The idea for the protein solution directly, physically apposed to a precipitant
experiments grew out of NASA’s need for an experiment that solution in a short plastic tube and cryogenically freezing them.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited npj Microgravity (2015) 15010

"
"10","npj Review of microgravity protein crystallization
A McPherson and L James DeLucas
10
a 3"" 3."" la!!-
,‘m . .
‘55? lfj ' ‘ l... .
'11. I l l. :_ f , - ,_ ' ' 1
irq.f—r,: ,- lg”? ’ 2'. __ L_V _.——-.
. ”3.1- .— _,_ -- __. _
Figure 16. Liquid-Diffusion-Controlled Crystallization Apparatus for Microgravity (DCAM) is a multiuser diffusion-controlled crystallization
apparatus which provided passive pre-programmed individual control of rate of approach to supersaturation in both bulk and dialysis
experiments. Since each experiment was individually programmed and passively controlled, no crew interaction is required.
Literally hundreds of such samples could be made well in advance experiments. The capillary crystallization tubes are inserted into a
of a space mission and kept frozen and stable until ﬂight. The protective containment sleeve as shown in Figure 17.
samples were ultimately loaded into a NASA supplied liquid It is important to note that crystals grown in space represent
nitrogen Dewar, which maintained the samples frozen until not only common proteins useful in crystallization studies, such as
transfer to the space station. At that point the frozen, biphasic canavalin and lysozyme, but other very unique macromolecules as
samples thawed, thereby causing the two liquids to diffuse into well. These include viruses, DNA, numerous pharmaceutical
one another in microgravity, and crystallization commenced. targets, and a variety of membrane proteins. As additional

The experiments were quite successful and a vast number of experiments are carried out in the future, one of the most
crystals of different proteins, some of which are shown in important objectives will be to determine which classes of
Figure 14, were obtained. The Mir and later ISS experiments macromolecules, and which speciﬁc members of those classes
using this system were particularly valuable in another sense, as will obtain the greatest beneﬁt from crystallization in microgravity.
they were coupled with a NASA educational outreach program.
l-Iigh school students made the biphasic, cryofrozen ﬂight samples More recent research of a quantitative nature
In Instructive ”workshops” where they learned the scrence behind , , , , ,
the experiments but were also able to directly participate in the Virtually all experiments supported by. NASA Inyolvmg American
space research. The educational beneﬁts were substantial and the screntists were focused ,0“ the comparison 0f mrcrogravrty—grown
results from space at the same time provided many samples that crystals With those obtained In laboratories on Earth, the objective
became available for X—ray analysis on Earth. being to evaluate whether the forrner were superior In srzeand

Dr Daniel Carter designed two different liquid—diffusion hard— quality to this?) latter. L'ttle attention was given. to acqurring
ware systems referred to as Protein Crystallization Apparatus for physrcal data on crystals grown? m mrcrogravrty that might
Microgravity (PCAM) and DCAM, both of which resulted in shed. light on .why differences might eXIst. The only systern
improved crystals for a variety of different investigator’s specrﬁcally desrgned for that pugbose, the Observable Protein
proteins.76 The PCAM is a multiuser vapor diffusion based crystal Crystal Growth Apparatus (OPCGA) thOUQh fully constructed and
growth system (Figure 15). PCAM was the ﬁrst example Of a tested, failed to ﬂy as a consequence of the Colurnbia Space
disposable interface ﬂight hardware system. It featured a Shuttle disaster. That system contalngzd two sophisticated, solid
disposable cassette hardware interface that allowed the crystals optics Mach—Zehnder Interferometers as well as polarized “91m
to be photographed in situ and directly distributed to the video microscopy (Figure 18). Following that misfortune, most
coinvestigators without extensive documentation and disturbing microgravity science in lOW Earth orbit W35 abandoned for a
the crystal samples. The design also allowed for rapid preﬂight signiﬁcant time. Figure 19 ShOWS lysozyme crystals growing in a
loading and reloading and post-ﬂight distribution. This hardware lquld—lquld diffusion C9” 0f the OPCGA 0“ Earth as observed by
ﬂew successfully on numerous Shuttle and ISS missions. Mach—Zehnder interferometry.

The DCAM, (Diffusi0n_contro||ed Crystallization Apparatus for At least two foreign investigations with distinctive scientiﬁc
Microgravity) proved to be especially useful for the production of data gathering OblE‘CtiVE—‘S continued and these yielded very
extremely large centimeter size crystals for neutron diffraction and encouraging and promising VGSUltS that went some distance in
was uniquely suited for long—duration ﬂight opportunities establishing the concept of depletion zones in microgravity as
(Figure 16). As for the PCAM, this hardware featured a disposable responsible for observed improvement in space grown crystals.
ﬂight hardware interface. This hardware ﬂew successfully on a The ﬁrst of these investigations, under the direction of Professor
series of Mir, Space Shuttle, and ISS missions. In 2002, coin— J.M.Garcia—Ruiz from Granada,Spain was sponsored by ESA using
vestigator Dr Gerry Bunick and colleagues grew crystals of glucose an instrument called the Protein Crystallization Diagnostics Facility
isomerase in the DCAM that were used to commission the Los that was designed and built by Dornier Aerospace, Friedrichsha—
Alamos neutron beamline for biological diffraction (featured on the fen, Germany (Figure 20) Using Mach—Zhender interferometry for
cover of the ACA Newsletter Winter, 2002 vol. 4), observation of crystals grown by liquid—liquid diffusion and

In 2002, another capillary crystallization system, the Granada counter-diffusion methods, stable depletion zones around grow—
Crystallization Facility (GCF) was developed by Dr Juan Garcia-Ruiz ing crystals were visualized and recorded.83 Quantitative measure-
et al.77'78 On the basis of the concept of counter diffusion,79 the ments were made regarding the extent of the depleted volumes
ﬁrst and second generations of this ﬂight hardware system were and their kinetics of formation. In addition, the data suggested
ﬂown on multiple space missions of varying durations. The GCF mixed—diffusion—interface kinetic controlled growth close to the
external containment box measures 12.5><12.5><8.5 cm. It is diffusion-controlled regime.84 Important observations were also
capable of carrying a maximum number of 138 crystallization recorded showing the movement of crystals growing in a cell in
npj Microgravity (2015) 15010 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

"
"11","Review of microgravity protein crystallization npj
A McPherson and L James DeLucas
11
I — 1 . _
' ‘ —— ""ii
‘ i l ‘ , .
- , f i "" ' t
Figure 17. Granada Crystallization Facility. Left image shows the containment box with 138 capillaries (maximum capacity) is shown on left
with middle and right images showing the capillaries in their protective containment tubes.
2 '_ during the same period that the experiment is carried out in
. . x microgravity. According to classical practices of investigation, this
’3‘"" i would seem to be the proper control. But in the case of
' . i microgravity experiments one can ask whether it is really the
F -7 ' most appropriate, useful, accurate, and strictest control.
' — ~' ""WT"" Most investigators believe the answer, in the case of space
1 experiments, is no. While it may be useful, and it is probably
prudent to carry out such an experiment, to evaluate carefully the
effects of conditions, apparatus, and sample, this does not provide
W. the best control. A better case can be made that because the
' 9.1 ‘...__, ,0 objective is to evaluate whether, and how microgravity, per se,
“1""; ' \ improves the inherent quality86 ofspeciﬁc macromolecular crystals,
‘ ' ~ : ‘1 then a more stringent test is necessary to compare the crystals
; grown in space, and their diffraction and physical properties, with
"" ' "" the best crystals ever grown under any conventional laboratory
I condition.
If one bears in mind that the comparison here is between the
Figure 18. Observable Protein Crystal Growth Apparatus (OPCGA). results 0f only a few, generally nonrepetitive, highly restricted,
microgravity crystallization trials, against literally thousands of
experiments carried out under vast arrays of conditions and
methods in the laboratory, then it seems clear that there should
microgravity, and the effects of microgravity instabilities during be little in favor of the microgravity results. Even assuming that
growth.85 Finally, the experiments validated the use of the microgravity conditions and samples have been identiﬁed and
counter-diffusion method for growing protein crystals in space, chosen to be the best in the laboratory, it is still a remarkably
and the interferometric observations demonstrated unequivocally rigorous kind of control.
the existence of a self—organized supersaturation wave traveling A further consideration in this regard, is that a crystallization
across the diffusion reaction system. experiment carried out in space simply does not proceed in the
Interferometry was used as well in more recent experiments same manner as an equivalent experiment executed in the
carried out by Professors Yoshizaki, Tsukamoto, Oshi and laboratory. For example, with vapor diffusion the kinetics of the
colleagues and sponsored by the Japan Aerospace Exploration equilibration process cannot be, and are not the same in the two
Agency(JAXA). In these investigations, lysozyme seed crystals were environments. This is suggested by theory, and has been
used to initiate growth in microgravity and the subsequent process conﬁrmed by practice. Even more marked is the difference
recorded in a way that again allowed the extraction of quantitative between a liquid—quuid diffusion experiment in a 1—g and
measures of the growth parameters.53 The ﬂight hardware microgravity environment. This was ﬁrst shown in a striking
(designated Nanostep) consisted of a combination of Mach— manner by professor Littke’s photographs of the diffusion process
Zehnder (M2) and Michelson (EU) interferometers (Figure 21). as it occurred in space on a sounding rocket.45‘47'87 An
McPherson and colleagues used Michaelson Interferometry to extraordinarily ﬂat liquid front of precipitant was visualized to
study the solution characteristics around growing canavalin move evenly and without disruption into the protein solution over
crystals. Figure 22a shows a Michaelson interferogram of the a period of nearly 15 min, and then, once re—entry re—established
growing face of a canavalin exhibiting a single screw dislocation. gravity, the interface disintegrated in a turbulent ﬂurry of mixing.
Figure 22b is a Mach—Zehnder interferogram showing the The former would be the experience in any space experiment, the
bending of interferometric fringes near the active surfaces of a latter in one experiment carried out in the laboratory. It is,
growing lysozyme crystal. therefore, simply not possible to use ground equivalents of space
experiments as meaningful controls. At this time virtually the entire
investigative community compares their space results with the
CONTROLS AND COMPARISON CRITERIA best that have been recorded on the ground.
It can be argued that the most valid control for a crystal growth The question of what comparisons can, or should be drawn
experiment in microgravity, is a parallel experiment in which between crystals grown in microgravity and those obtained in
portions of the identical samples ﬂying in space are crystallized on conventional laboratories is similarly complicated. This is due in
Earth in precisely the same way, under identically the same some part to our limited understanding of the physical properties
chemical conditions, in an exactly equivalent apparatus, and of macromolecular crystals, the mechanisms by which they
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited npj Microgravity (2015) 15010

"
"12","n ' Review of microgravity protein crystallization
pl A McPherson and L James DeLucas
12
an - qr w~m~u - A
’9' W I 'I'. '. ‘
4000
s 7-0 -
.‘:-. -. j 19 _
312v; ‘ ‘ ' ‘
f“; ‘ ' 3000 . y '
s A.» - .3 '4‘;- i E
x . 5 200° ‘ .. =
. ' -n.rv.*“w-.a l. . ‘ ‘ ' E
"" - I - _ 1000 . .
3‘4. _ ; 3 '
‘ 1 J 0i -JM. I'l‘ . i
- ~7‘ ‘ 0 1000 2000 3000 4000
i Microns
4000 .
r."" _ _ 0
l."" A . v‘l , 3000 l E
“ .: ‘ g -.
i ' e o
, . £2000 o
23$ t _ i 1000* 7 - ~
- 9 0 M. .1
‘ ‘9‘ 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Microns
“II“ n
a 4000 ' ‘
.-;. {a """"V , ""'- O I
'4 ' 3000 ' ;
.1 |— \ g :
'1 ~—’- 2
, v“ .— - y .2
g 22000 i. _ é
I"". . u
‘ * 1 ; y . 1000: ,
1; o .g
.1; ' 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Microns
Figure 19. Lysozyme crystals growing in a liquid—liquid diffusion cell of the OPCGA on Earth as observed by Mach—Zehnder interferometry.
Even in a 1-g environment, a depletion zone can be seen forming about the crystal, though it is ultimately unstable owing to convective
transport in the cell. On the right each of the interferograms were quantitatively evaluated to obtain a precise description of the
concentration gradient surrounding the crystal.
nucleate and grow, and a general lack of available techniques to inclusions, or do not extinguish polarized light well under crossed
measure their characteristics. The only quantitative method nicols. Generally, the experimentalist chooses the best and largest
historically applied to protein, nucleic acid, and virus crystals is among them for his studies, and only 1 in a 100 grown may be
X—ray diffraction analysis. It now provides the principal source actually analyzed.
of data and the primary basis for quantitative comparisons of One of the most striking, early observations of microgravity
quality. investigations was that an unusually large number of visually
In terms of visual examination with a light microscope, perfect crystals returned from space. 3 Agreed, optical perfection
generally used with polarized light, most crystals grown in the is subjective, and as Heilbroner said, ”If it’s not numbers, it’s not
laboratory show many kinds ofimperfections.Like diamonds from science; it’s opinion”. Nonetheless, a substantial number of
nature, usually only one from many is without visible defects. Most experienced X—ray crystallographers upon seeing these ﬁrst
have ﬁne cracks, striations, ill-formed faces or edges, grow in crystals and were convinced that microgravity growth of
contact with other crystals, have satellites or spurs, contain macromolecule crystals was worth further pursuit. Observations
npj Microgravity (2015) 15010 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

"
"13","Review of microgravity protein crystallization n '
A McPherson and L James DeLucas p]
13
a [A.h‘ c ' f. I
~ ' ‘ , _ 1 l"" .
.0 ‘L‘ ‘1 i ~~-. . _.
51 “ V ‘ {ﬁz-
' l ' --’.ﬁ~.'.
. \“\ I im‘ .3"" /’ ‘ml; W]. . . . ,
11‘ , . I I a ‘ 3"" .' ii '- vi. . "" 7 i
~-. _ ,1 :3» ' L . m. --r‘- ..
\__\ -',~ :3! . ‘ . -‘ 1 - .1 _.' .
""I """" ~- ' 1’ 1 ' a ""' L ‘4 :' .: l ""
.-— , ‘ I.E 1' - .-\’o. i ' G a y ‘ . . / ‘
\ , i , ﬂ .0 _ $.14... . , .
b ._‘ i x‘ | a t ' m i“ _ ‘ ’1
, __ - ‘ M ,3 o C‘ ‘. . ' ' I. d
~ _. ~ \- a a . ,1
‘ . 1 -... .L - ﬂ .- ,
r ‘3 - . 7’ \( f Q . o- . .- '
"" O ' A L , x ,. Eb“, ' J
Figure 20. Protein Crystallization Diagnostics Facility (PCDF): (a) external image of ﬂight unit, (b) crystallization growth cell with optical
windows to support a variety of optical diagnostics, (c) internal view of PCDF.
a IIIT LED
[El W nghtSource
LightSource
Crystal
Reference
Glass \ /
Solution ?
, r
' |
‘- 'f’; 0
]b [I‘erW f. -_ Me . g!
— 7 ’ ‘ ‘ LightSource
.. ._ . ,,.,., \Qa 1' Growth Cell
..:3;;’ n‘ ‘ ' ~ “
. ' , 2‘ WLED mum
T; \_ , J; 1’ .. CCD Camera ‘ cco Camera
Figure 21. NanoStep Hardware: outer (a) and the inner (b) views of the NanoStep hardware (arrow indicates the position of the protein
sample) and (c) diagram of Mach—Zehnder interferometer.
of this nature have accumulated from many investigations since, compared with equivalent ground trials.56 Here the question is not
and continue to attract researcher’s interest. whether the maximum size of the space grown crystals is greater,
Two uses have been made of the size parameter. In some but whether the distribution of sizes is narrower, or whether the
experiments the largest crystals grown in space exceed, in some mean of the distribution has shifted to higher or lower values.
cases by orders of magnitude,5 ‘52'55'64 the size of the largest This, as it happens, is of some importance in the pharmaceutical
crystals of the macromolecule ever grown in Earth’s gravity. This is uses of protein crystals and protein crystallization. Space
clearly of signiﬁcance. The important quantity is not the largest experiments using large volumes of several proteins suggest that
single dimension, but the total volume of the crystal. This is a signiﬁcant change in the size distribution can be produced in
because the average measured intensity for all of the Bragg microgravity.56
reﬂections that make up a crystal’s diffraction pattern is directly Morphological changes, though difﬁcult to quantitate, are
proportional to the volume of the crystal. The greater the crystal’s often obvious. In the ﬁrst weII—documented paper on microgravity
volume, the more unit cells there are that contribute to the Bragg crystal growth, the observation was made that dendritic
reﬂections, and the larger the observed intensities. forms of crystals of isocitrate lyase, virtually always obtained in
A second application of the size criterion is the analysis of the the laboratory, were transformed in microgravity into solid,
size distribution of crystals grown in microgravity experiments three-dimensional forms suitable for X-ray diffraction analysis.43
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited npj Microgravity (2015) 15010

"
"14","npj Review of microgravity protein crystallization
A McPherson and L James DeLucas
14
a b
m ‘7 "" ""‘ “‘""‘""‘ ""
’v . ‘ ‘ .2. -~
‘ 3 '. ‘3 .‘
. ‘ § ""-‘ t 3.5"".2' '2 ""3‘ . ‘.
. ‘..‘.\ 5f ...- _4.Q ﬁ.
m”? .- t « 2 -. e“
A t rt?» 't‘ ti: , 1’02""-
‘ _ (i _. ; .‘.t .'..-e.;.."".'
. '\ '. . .~ ’7-""'§E.'«'t '{o

1‘ ' .

. ‘ '.‘ ‘\ c. . .

\ . ‘ - , . ii.” . I l ' i! "" :e‘.:t‘:'.:1

. -‘ Que ' o .'

50 m
p
Figure 22. Michaelson (a) interferogram of the growing face of a canavalin crystal and Mach—Zehnder (b) interferogram showing bending of
the interferometric fringes in the vicinity of a growing lysozyme crystal.

Clear modiﬁcations in the habit, edges, faces, or general The limit at which diffraction intensities disappear for a
morphological character of TYMV and canavalin crystals have particular crystal deﬁnes its resolution and this, in turn determines
already been noted as a consequence of microgravity,52'55'64 the precision of the structural model derived from that analysis.
and others have been reported from both vapor diffusion and The limit is generally far short, for macromolecular crystals, of the
liquid—quuid diffusion experiments carried out in a number of theoretical limit which is A/2. This is owing to two causes, the
different instruments.43'49‘51 inherent structural variation of the molecules that make up the

Virtually all changes in morphology, with the exception of crystal, and the degree of disorder of the molecules in the crystal
alternate polymorphs, can be ascribed to the dominance of pure lattice. Although there is no reasonable way that gravity COUId
diffusive transport, as it exists in microgravity, in contrast to the affect the conformational heterogeneity 0f the molecules, the
convective transport that dominates a 1—9 environment. These order 0f the crystal is determined by the mechanisms and
changes provide some of the strongest, direct visual evidence that kinetics 0f the crystallization process, thUS it is a property that we
the absence of gravity does indeed affect the kinetics and the might reasonably expect to be altered by the presence or absence
underlying development of macromolecular crystals. 0t graVIty: _

X—Ray diffraction provides data for a number of kinds of There '5 some. disagreement as to hOW one measures the
analyses that allow quantitation of the relative quality of crystals tnaxnmum resolution Of a d'ttraCt'Oh patternhthat '5' the minimurn
grown under different conditions. The most important considera— Interplanar spacnng that .produces diffraction. The question _'5
tion, so far as diffraction analysis is concerned, has been assumed when eloes .dlffractlon 'htehs'ty er S'ghel' become IOSt m
to be the resolution limit, or extent, of the diffraction pattern. This ﬂuctuations m the background nonse. Various standards haye
is usually speciﬁc and reproducible for any particular variety of been assumed, most of these based on those traditionally used In
macromolecular crystal, though it may vary among polymorphs, as X-ray structure reﬁnements. In general, when the ratio of l/SIgma
it does for example for STMV and canavalin. It may also, of course, declines totessthe"". three,.or m the more liberal casetwo, the“

. . the resolution limit IS conSIdered deﬁned. Because micrograVIty
be dependent upon the quality and purity of the sample used to . . . . .
grow the crystals. experimentation IS usually concerned With a comparison based on
No attempt will be made here to explain the principles of X—ray data collected from standard, or control. crystals grown m the
. . . . laboratory, the absolute measure IS less Important than consns—
crystallography 390' Its application t38_r9n1acromolecules, the) has tency in how it is measured. That is, so long as the identical
been presented ,m eletall .elsewhere bet a .few pelnts are criterion is applied to both Earth and ground-grown crystals, the
necessary to this discussmn. Every reﬂection In a diffraction comparison should be valid.
pattern '5 obtained by directing a coliimatecl beam 0t X—rays onto A second quantitative criteria that has routinely been applied to
a crystal. In a S'mpl'hed sense, the 'htehs'ty 0t each diffraction comparisons of diffraction data from Earth and space crystals is
peak corresponcls to reﬂection bf.X—r.ays from a family of planes In the l/sigma ratio itself.69'7° If the plot of l/sigma is consistently
the crystal haVIng a characteristic Interplanar spacmg d. The d higher over the entire resolution range, then this means,
spacing is relategl t0 the X-ray scattering angle 9 by Braggs |aw effectively, that the signal-to—noise ratio of the reﬂections that
which is nA=sin 9M where A is the wavelength of the radiation. made up the diffraction pattern is uniformly enhanced, and it
The smaller the value 0f (1, the more ﬁnely the family 0f planes implies that the crystals yielding the higher ratio are of improved
samples the contents 0f the crystal, and the more detailed is the quality. The results shown in Figure 12 for satellite tobacco mosaic
information that itS diffracted intensity contains. The smaller (1, the virus crystals illustrate exactly the kinds of results that are
greater the correSponding Bragg scattering angle, theta (9), and anticipated in microgravity protein crystallization experiments.
the farther from the primary X—ray beam the reﬂection falls in the Although suggestions have been made as to why crystals
diffraction pattern. Another way of saying this is that the farther a grown in microgravity might produce improved l/sigma ratios, it is
reﬂection appears from the center of the diffraction pattern, the still not clear what physical property of the crystals is responsible.
more detailed is the information that it contributes to the Although an improvement in statistical order might explain an
structure determination. improvement in the maximum resolution, it is not obvious that it
npj Microgravity (2015) 15010 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

"
"15","Review of microgravity protein crystallization npj
A McPherson and L James DeLucas
15
should produce a signiﬁcant change in the l/sigma ratio at lower induced convection would inﬂuence the mixing kinetics and this
resolution. It appears more likely that an improvement in the I/ would most certainly affect the nucleation process.
sigma ratio may reﬂect a reduction in the defect density of crystals Gravity expresses itself in ﬂuids, including crystallization mother
grown in microgravity.92 liquors, by altering mass transport (which in turn affects the
Another feature of the diffraction pattern that tends to reﬂect transport of heat). Unlike nucleation, it is quite apparent that
the inherent order of a crystal is its mosaicity,36'93 and this is transport has a real, and in some cases profound effect on several
manifested by the width, or spread of the intensities. That is, it aspects of growth. As already noted, this has been shown for
represents the width of the Bragg angle over which a particular conventional organic crystals, crystallization from the melt, and for
family of planes in a crystal will constructively scatter X—rays, macromolecular crystals themselves.3 This was markedly illus-
Mosaicity is in a sense a measure of the block substructure or the trated, by the direct visualization 0t convective plumes during the
distribution of various kinds of physical defects in a crystal. growth 0t lysozyme crystals by M- Pusey and his colleagues at
Early measurements of rocking curves for individual reﬂections Marshall Space Flight Center. It therefore seems reasonable to
of some crystals suggested that reﬂections produced by those expect that it is by altering growth 0t crystals once a critical
grown in microgravity were narrower, thereby implying crystals nucleus has formed that is important in understanding the effects
having improved organization of their block structure. Recently, 0t microgravity. 5
J. Helliwell and his colleagues at Oxford have used synchrotron Transport WOUld seem to be Of particular importance for
radiation at Darsbury along with very sophisticated and carefully macromolecular and virus crystallization because the size of the
designed apparatus to measure rocking curves for crystals of entities involved requires them to have extremely low diffusivities,
lysozyme both grown in space and in the laboratory. Their results two to three orders 0t magnitude less than for conventional
(Figure 13) clearly demonstrate a Signiﬁcant improvement of the molecules. Nonetheless, it is not at all clear how transport processes
latter over the former.93 Similar results with the same conclusions directly affect crystal quality, resolution 0t their diffraction patterns,
emerged from a study of microgravity-grown thaumatin crystals.94 or the” ﬁnal965|ze: Indeed, prevrous analyses suggested that they
Measurements such as these, though requiring skill and patience, ShOUld hOt' El'm'hat'Oh 0t ﬂurd. CQhVE—tCt'Oh may, however,
will undoubtedly be used to an even greater extent in the future. markedlytaffect the movement and d'Stt'bUttm 0t macromolecules
Other quantitative measures such as R-factors tend to reinforce 'h the “UP, and the” transport and absorption t0 crystal surfaces.
claims that crystals grown in microgravity are of improved In addition, most macromolecules, particularly at high concen-
properties have been reported in several cases. The R factor is a ttat'Oh' tend to form aggregates and clusters 'h SOlUt'Oh 0t b9th
measure of agreement between the amplitudes of the structure ordered oligomeric structure, or more random, non-specrﬁc
factors calculated from a crystallographic model and those from aggregates' These may very well be, for macromoleeules, the
the original X—ray diffraction data (it is basically a measure of the major contaminants that Incorporate Into crystal lattices and,
goodness of ﬁt between the model of the structure versus that theFEtﬁ’re—I a major inﬂuence on. the growth process. By Virtue 0f
obtained from the measured X—ray diffraction data) (reference). the” srze, ?“d eyen lower dlthSlYlty’ the movement 0f aggregates
Structure reﬁnements yielding better R factors and other ‘1er large Imporities m solution '5 even more Signiﬁcantly altered
reﬁnement statistics69'70'83‘85'90'9t'93 and lower symmetry R factors (Figure 23)‘ Finally, as. discussed. above, some macromolecular
for data sets have all been noted. Although these may simply be crystals grow by the direct addition of three-dImenSIonal nuclei
reﬂections of properties already discussed, they do, at the least, and even microcrystals. All macromolecular crystals are, at least,
provide an end product evaluation of the quality of the data affected by these. processes..The transport Of three-drmensronal
obtained. A difﬁculty, again, is that it is not straightforward to “UClel’ again by vrrttJe Of the” srze, ShOUld be radically altered m
. . . the absence of gravrty.
correlate these measures With phySIcal properties or the growth M l l r solutions are com lex the contain the
mechanisms by which the crystals were obtained. acromo ecu a. . . . . . p . ’ y
crystallizmg specre In equrlibrium wrth higher aggregates, they
contain ions, precipitants, other contaminating macromolecules,
SOURCES OF CRYSTAL IMPROVEMENT IN MICROGRAVITY foLeign par’glcles, the walls Of Ctontaininghvessels, and a thSt Of
. . . . . . ot er possi e impurities. By c anging t e transport mo es in
IvhheetrltglOgrail/littilstalgfgcf:theanctrlgntﬁerlgIahﬁyg’gttggwthhhttfhatt general, the speciﬁc modestfor each of the individual components
does gravity affect growth? What is the mechanism by which are altered as well. Thos, eliminating convection may superﬁcrally
, , , , , seem Simple and straightforward, but the consequences can be
gravrty inﬂuences or Intervenes In the process? Does It operate at broad and profound.
the hucleationhstageh or. only to bmodifytgrovt/tthitDoes ?it S“ by As discussed above, two principal effects were observed when
_ _ _ _ terms of IntenSIty statistics as a function of Bragg angle, an
solution, or theIr rate of presentation and absorption to surfaces?
Does it reduce the density of defects, change their nature,
diminish the incorporation of impurities, or relieve limits to
unrestricted growth? Does it do several of these simultaneously? DEPL‘ETION zoth A§9UND s; ”k
Most current research is directed at answering these questions tﬁﬁ, ﬁst} A&“gﬁﬁg’ciiﬁxl‘ t W
and identifying the means by which gravity inﬂuences macro- \.}€
molecular crystallization. _\ see; t_. \“t
On the question of whether gravity affects nucleation, growth, % H ' ﬂit; . 25-. 2,: -3
or both, the method of Quasi Elastic Light Scattering may yield the .5 7/3 > m ’ . ’1 ‘t‘
most information because it focuses on the prenucleation stages ..'5 AG“ ﬁn qt - ll Q
of the process up to the appearance of microcrystals. It is . r 1) $3 l ‘ttm;
conceivable that alteration of ﬂuid properties, the occurrence of “é"" + .t x; . 3; I ~
density ﬂuctuations, or some unsuspected property such as these xxx; ‘ ‘ l , I i
could affect nucleation. Indeed, any alteration in the path ﬁt 35% Gradientofmonomersatggregates ti /»:. 3:}
between starting conditions and those in the supersaturation @ 59% andlargelmpurltles 3 ta.
region of the phase diagram for crystallization could have an
effect on nucleation. In a liquid-diffusion experiment, buoyancy- Figure 23. Developing protein depletion zone.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited npj Microgravity (2015) 15010

"
"16","npj Review of microgravity protein crystallization
A McPherson and L James DeLucas
16

extension of the resolution to higher values, and a general striations.Similareffects undoubtedly occur in solution growth as
improvement of the data quality in all ranges of sine. In some well, though probably to a lesser extent. Because of the
cases, such as for STMV on |ML—1, both effects have characterized instabilities and ﬂuctuations in transport due to convection, there
the data from microgravity grown crystalsSZ'64 and in others43'48 will be corresponding variances in the supersaturation over
only the latter effect was realized. regions of the crystal surface and the concentration of impurities

The maximum extent of the diffraction pattern, orthe resolution as well. Solution composition will affect surface tension thereby
limit, for any protein crystal is generally thought to be a function altering the degree of surface—tension-driven convection (espe—
of the inherent statistical disorder of the molecules rather than of cially in vapor diffusion experiments where a solution-air interface
thermal effects, which predominate in most conventional crystals. exists). This could in turn lead to mixed growth modes, with
This is illustrated, for example, by the observation that lowering different growth centers, or even different growth mechanisms
the temperature of a protein crystal, even to the temperature of competing with one another. This might well be expected to
liquid nitrogen, prolongs the crystal’s lifetime but only rarely produce defects and discontinuities in crystals.
produces an extension of its resolution limit. The statistical Lysozyme, for example, has been observed to grow by both
disorder is essentially ”frozen in”. spiral dislocations and two- dimensional nucleation simulta-

The statistical disorder indigenous to protein crystals arises neously on different faces, while exhibiting normal growth on
principally from two sources, the structural variability of the another face.104 It is possible that transient variations in super-
protein molecules that occupy the lattice points, and the saturation caused by convection could affect competition
distribution of the individual molecules about their lattice points. between mechanisms on an individual face, perhaps even causing
It is difﬁcult to see, and indeed no one has argued, that cessation of one and acceleration of the other, or even determine
microgravity should produce any improvement in the conforma- the kind of growth mechanism that dominates growth of another
tional homogeneity of the population of protein molecules that face. That is, convection could produce differential effects on
give rise to crystals. Thus, the improvement in the quality and mechanisms as they pertain on different faces of the growing
resolution of X-ray data from crystals grown in microgravity must crystal. Such effects could well alter the defect density, introduce
arise from enhanced order of the molecules about the crystal’s discontinuities, and modify overall morphological development.
lattice points, that is, an improvement in the packing order. To the contrary, however, it must be pointed out that the very

We can distinguish at least two classes of disorder found in slow growth rate of most macromolecular crystals, compared with
protein crystals. In the ﬁrst case, all or virtually all, of the molecules conventional crystals, would tend to dampen the effects of
in the crystal are very close to the mean orientation and lattice convective instabilities.
point position, having a scatter about the lattice points roughly Unlike most conventional crystals, protein crystals are, in
that ofthe average statistical disorderofall of the molecules in the general, not initiated from seeds but are nucleated ab initio at
crystal. That is, all the molecules are reasonably ordered and the very high levels of supersaturation, usually reaching 200 to 1000%.
resolution limit of the X-ray data gives a measure of that average It is this high degree of supersaturation required for the nucleation
residual statistical disorder. of protein crystals that, in large part, distinguishes their formation

In the second case, there are severe defects and dislocations in and growth from that of conventional crystals. A consequence of
protein crystals92 as has been clearly shown by atomic force the elevated supersaturation required for nucleation is that once a
microscopy. Molecules affected by such defects will not be slightly stable nucleus has formed, it must subsequently grow under very
misaligned, but completely disordered. They will contribute unfavorable conditions of excessive supersaturation. Distant from
virtually no constructive component to the discrete transform of the metastable zone where controlled, ordered growth could
the crystal, the diffraction intensities which are measured, but only occur, crystals instead accumulate molecules very rapidly, and,
to the background scatter (of which the estimated error, 0 is a concomitantly, statistical disorder and a high frequency of defects.
measure). Defects and dislocations, therefore, will reduce the The tendency of dislocations to promote more rapid growth
number of usefully scattering unit cells, to which the intensity I is results in a cascade of events.
proportional, while at the same time increasing diffuse scatter, or Protein crystals grow in relatively large volumes of mother
background. liquor, hence consumption of molecules by growing crystals does

Thus, while the resolution limit of a protein crystal may be not signiﬁcantly exhaust the solution of protein nutrient for a long
extended in microgravity by an overall improvement in the period of time. Thus, normal protein crystal growth may proceed
statistical order of the molecules about lattice points, as was seen to completion at high supersaturation and never approach the
for example with elastase,43 STMV,52'64 anol malic enzyme50'51 a metastable phase of supersaturation where growth might proceed
general improvement in the overall quality of the data as seen for more favorably. |n Earth’s gravity, there is continuous density
canavalin48 and other proteins43 may be due to a reduction or driven convective mixing in the solution due to gradients arising
near elimination of discrete defects and dislocations. Because from temperature and from incorporation of molecules by the
defects may also be a determinant with regard to ultimate size, growing crystal. The effects of diffusive transport in the laboratory
this may also explain the observation of generally larger crystals are by comparison almost negligible because of the very slow rate
grown in microgravity. The question remains then as to the of diffusion of large macromolecules. Because of convective
mechanism by which microgravity improves the general statistical mixing, protein crystals nucleated in Earth’s gravity are continu-
order of protein crystals, i.e., their resolution limit, and how it ously exposed to the full concentration of protein nutrient present
eliminates defects and dislocations. in the bulk solvent.

There are observations and data to support the contention that Convection thus maintains, at the growing crystal interface,
pronounced density driven convective ﬂow at growing crystal excessive and unfavorable supersaturation as growth proceeds.
surfaces introduces statistical disorder, defects, and dislocations This provides an explanation as to why microgravity may
into conventional crystals.9'97'98 For protein crystals, growth rates signiﬁcantly improve the quality of protein crystals. The mechan-
have been observed to be lower than for conventional ism for enhanced order and reduction of defects may not be
crystals,98‘104 but nonetheless, experience indicates that very directly due to convective turbulence at growing crystal surfaces,
rapidly grown protein crystals are also generally afﬂicted with but to reduction of the concentration ofnutrient in the immediate
lower order and increased defects. neighborhood of the growing crystals. In Figure 24 the plot at top

Convective transport of material, as it applies to crystal growth, shows that for a large, rapidly growing crystal a difference in
tends to be variable and erratic. |n melt growth, for example, concentration of nearly 40% may exist between the surface of the
where convection plays a major role, it gives rise to visible growth growing crystal and the bulk solvent. In the absence of gravity,
npj Microgravity (2015) 15010 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

"
"17","Review of microgravity protein crystallization npj
A McPherson and L James DeLucas
17
a creates for itself an environment equivalent to the metastable
1.0 . . .
region where optimal growth might be expected to occur.
. It seems likely that stabilization of depletion zones and the
. :' creation of local regions of reduced supersaturation around
§ (.5 growing protein crystals provide the primary mechanisms for an
‘ 1 _ improvement of protein crystal quality by a microgravity
_ environment. A fundamentally uncontrolled growth process in
l“ M the presence of gravity becomes self—regulating in microgravity.
If this argument is indeed correct, then protein crystals
3‘” 3“ 4'"" ‘5 5'“ 5“ ""0 demonstrating the greatest degree of improvement should be
b w those that have the highest growth rates, and those that nucleate
only at very high levels of supersaturation. We might expect
me m . .79 similar quality enhancement in Earth’s gravity if mechanisms could
3' be found to promote nucleation at reduced supersaturation, for
_\\ 4“” (,5 example by seeding with existing crystals, or with heterogeneous
"" \ ' J4 and epitaxial nucleants.1°6'107 Furthermore, improvement should
I m be expected if procedures can be devised to eliminate convective
M ﬂuid transport and thereby preserve depletion zones developing
around growing crystals. Crystals grown in gels or in highly
3‘“ 3“ 4°"" “'5 5'"" 55 6‘“ viscous solutions might provide such means.95'1°8‘“° A viscous
Figure 24. (a) Solution concentration gradients surrounding a gel (typically agarose gels are used) retards buoyancy-induced
growing crystal: crystallization mathematical modeling by Rosen— convective ﬂow (particularly the movement of large macromole-
berger and his colleagues ('0) 0t the concentrationOgradients cules) thereby simulating the diffusion—dominated microgravity
preollcted to form around growrng crystals In a mrcrogravrty environment.
envrronment. Those crystals grown in microgravity that demonstrate
improved [/0 ratios for all ranges of 9M should contain fewer
pronounced defects and dislocations. Defect density can be
there is no convective mixing of the solution and nutrient evaluated using electron or atomic force microscopy techniques.
transport is dominated entirely by diffusion. It is important to Thls would be particularly Informative for crystals.of.large,
emphasize, that for protein molecules, this is extremely slow. asymmetrie protein molecules..F|nally, a. direct examination 9f
If surfaces of some other material bound the cr stallization the depletion zones. surrounding protein crystals growrng m
m l whi h m t be then surface—tension-driven yconvection micrograyity, along W'th controlsgrowrng m Earth’s grayity WQUId
sa pe, . C US. ’ . be revealing and should according to models105 exhibit vrsrble
(Marangonl convection) can be present as well. Convective ﬂow differences ’ ’
from this source, however, is proportional to the change in surface Althou h convection and convective mixin tend to dominate
tension as a function of chemical composition and temperature. d' . g f t l th . . 9c th ff t f
Because most protein crystals are grown isothermally or at least ISSUSS'On .0 crys a grow . m mrcrogravr y, e 6.3 ec S 0
within a narrow temperature range, temperature-induced con- sedimentation ShOUId not be Ignored: It '5 clear from time lapse
vection is likely to be insigniﬁcant thereby limiting the micro- vrdeorecordings of.prote|n crystallization on Earth that Virtually all
gravity surface convective forces to those affected by chemical “Ude' reaching microcrystal srze Immediately sediment to the
composition. bottom of their containers, whether these are glass plates, tabes, or
As a macromolecule crystal forms in microgravity, a concentra- hanging CP'VOPS- AS they proceed to grow, they are Invariably m
tion gradient, or ”depletion zone” is established around the contact With the surfaces ofthelreontalners,and usually In contact
nucleus. This has been suggested not only by experimental results W'th_ other. growrng crystals m the sample. SUCh contact,
presented above, but by mathematical models of the transport particularly In the latter case,.may have .profound effects of the
process.105 The concept of a depletion zone as it should exist in morphology, degree of perfection, and ultimate srze of the crystals.
microgravity is shown schematically in Figure 23. As a crystal This IS certainly not the case In microgra.vity.There, crystalsare
grows from solution, recruitment of molecules from the surround- seen to maintain a stable and deﬁned p0§'t'0“ over long periods
ing medium produces a concentration gradient, or depletion zone, 0f time, to appear to arrange themselves Virtually equrolistant from
that extends some distance from its surfaces. Thus the concentra- one another, and to experience few encounters. Th's 0f COWS?—
tion of nutrient near the crystal is less than that of the bulk provrdes the most. favorable ?OtUt'O“ envrronment.for multiple
solution and the crystal experiences an environment of reduced growing crystals srnce 't minimizes overlap 0f their respective
supersaturation. |n microgravity, because there is no convective diffusion ﬁelds and aseres more or less uniform access of all faces
mixing and only diffusion can act to transport molecules the to nutrient molecules.
depletion zones are quasi stable. The nutrient molecules (on the Atomic force microscopy (AFM) 0f protein and particularly virus
right) diffuse very slowly because of their large size thus crystal growth ShOW even more dramatically the effect 0f
prolonging and extending the effect. In addition, large impurities, sedimentation. For several crystals studied by AFM it W35 clear
which include other proteins and aggregates of the nutrient that three dimensional nuclei and even microcrystals continually
molecule (on the left) diffuse even more slowly than monomers, sediment Oh the surfaces 0f growing crystals.21'“2 These were
thus the depletion zones serves as a kind of ”diffusion ﬁlter” to then incorporated both With, and without the formation Of visible
protect the growing crystal from incorporation of some harmful defects. In either case, however, it is difﬁcult to imagine that the
impurities. As shown in Figure 24, the developing depletion zone phenomenon WOUId be favorable to the quality 0f the crystals.
expands further from the crystal. Because protein diffusion is Very Hence, elimination of the sedimentation of microcrystals and
slow, the depletion zone is quasi—stable and the net effect is that nuclei in a microgravity environment should provide further
the surfaces of the growing crystal interface with a local solution unique advantages to crystal growth. This should be particularly
phase at a signiﬁcantly lower concentration of protein nutrient so for crystals such as those of the virus STMV, which even involve
than exists in the bulk solvent. The crystal, as it grows, experiences adsorbed nuclei as a principal mechanism for growth. Even for
a reduction in its local degree of supersaturation and essentially more conventional proteins such as lysozyme, however, which has
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited npj Microgravity (2015) 15010

"
"18","n ' Review of microgravity protein crystallization
pl A McPherson and L James DeLucas
18
also been observed to incorporate micro—nuclei, this may be of response to this report, there are a number of microgravity
signiﬁcant consequence. investigations currently underway that involve challenging crystal—
By elimination of sedimentation, other technical advantages lizations for aqueous proteins, protein-protein complexes and
may also be obtained for growing crystals that are not available on membrane proteins. The growing availability of commercial
Earth. For example, in the free interface diffusion method (see vehicles capable of transporting experiments to and from the
above), once a nucleus develops at the interface between two International Space Station is projected to provide bimonthly access
liquids, its increasing weight causes it to fall away from the in the not too distant future. The ability to provide frequent
interface where it was growing into a solution where it can no access should help investigators perform statistically relevant
longer do so. Thus this technique is inherently self-limiting crystal quality evaluations for a variety of challenging, biologically
because of gravity. The only crystals that really do well are those signiﬁcant proteins. Positive results from these investigations
that nucleate on and adhere to the walls of the containing vessel. combined with more frequent access to the unique microgravity
In space, however, the liquid—liquid diffusion method works environment should attract a large group of users from academia
extremely well as shown now by numerous experiments.43'45 and industry.
Another important advantage may be obtained (though to this
point it has not) in the case of macromolecular crystallization from
containerless processing.113 Using either acoustic, electrostatic or COMPETING INTERESTS
magnetic levitation and positioning methods free ﬂoating The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
droplets of mother liquor could be deployed and maintained
stationary in microgravity.ll4'115 This would completely eliminate
any contact between mother liquor and crystals with a foreign REFERENCES
surface. It might be expected that such containerless approaches 1 Pﬂugrath JW. Developments in X-ray detectors. Curr Opin Struct Biol 1992; 2:
would reduce heterogeneous nucleation on vessel walls and 8h'815- _
eliminate surface effects in general. 2 F1n2el BC. Sottware for macromolecular crystallography: a users overv1ew. Curr
Opin Struct Biol 1993; 3: 741—747.
3 Hurle DTJ. Handbook of Crystal Growth Vol 1B Transport and Stability. North
Summary Holland: Amsterdam 1994.
Use of a microgravity environment to improve the quality of 4 Bennema P Crystal ngth from solution—theory and experimentJCryst GrOWth
macromolecular crystals has been under investigation since 1985. 1974; 24‘ 76° _
Results from a large and diverse on a number Of proteins suggest 5 Chernov AA. Modern Crystallography I1] Crystal Growth. Springer: Verlag, 1984.
. . . . . . . 6 Chernov AA. Present day understanding of crystal growht from aqueous solu-
that the d1ffusron—dom1nated envrronment prov1ded v1a different tions. Frog Crys Growth Charact1993;26: 195_218.
mlcrograVlty platforms '5 Often beheﬁClal to several dlffereht 7 Sarig S. Fundamentals ongueous Solution Growth in Handbook of Crystal Growth
pretelh cry5talllzatl0h teChhlqueS- The researCh was performed by Vol 2b. Bulk Crystal Growth, Growth Mechanisms and Dynamics; North Holland:
group of international investigators who were sponsored by space Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1994.
agencies from several countries including the National Aeronau- 8 Frankenheim L. Ueber das entstehen und das wachsen der krystalk nach mik-
tics and Space Administration (NASA), ESA, JAXA, Canadian Space roskopischen beO Bach tungen. Ann Physik 1860; 111: 1-60.
Agency (CSA), German Aerospace Center (DLR) and the China 9 Beth M,Broom H,Witherow \JVK,RS Snyder,DC Carter.Preliminary observations of
National Space Administration. In addition to the microgravity :1; e1fgict of solutal convection on crystal morphology. J Ciyst Growth 1988; 90:
crystallization. experiments these agenCleS also prov1ded support 10 Chen PS, Shlichta PJ, Wilcox WR, Lefever RA. Convection phenomena during the
for lnveStlgatlonS that address the fundamental theoretlcal and growth of sodium chlorate crystals from solution.J Cryst Growth 1979; 47: 43—60.
eXperlmehtal aspects aSSOClated With macromOIeCUIar cry5tal‘ 11 Molenkamp T, Janssen PBM, Drenth J. Protein crystallization and Marangoni
lization. These investigations lnClUded the dGVelopment 0f nOVGI convection: ﬁnal reports of sounding rocket experiments in ﬂuid science and
crystallization techniques and hardware that often include special materials science, European Space Agency Reports, 1994; 1132: 22—43.
diagnostic capabilities, Results from the microgravity and ground— 12 Pusey M, Witherow WK, Naumann R. Preliminary investigations into solutal ﬂow
based studies have provided a fundamental understanding of about growing tetragonal lysozyme crystals. J Cryst Growth 1988; 90: 105—111.
hOW gravity can adversely affect crystal nucleation and growth. 13 Rosenberger F. Fundamentals of Crystal Growth I. Springer: Berlin; 1979. .
Although there is sufﬁcient evidence demonstrating the potential 14 Rosenberger F. Inorganic and protein crystal growth - Similarities and differ-
. . . . . ences. J Cryst Growth 1986; 76: 618.
for a mlcrograVlty enVlrpnment_ _to Improve ,the quality 0f 15 Wilcox WR. Inﬂuence of convection on the growth of crystals from solution.
macromolecular crystals this capability has not gained w1despread J Cryst Growth 1983; 65. 133.
ehthUSlasm and Utilization by the academlC/lhdus’trlal Structural 16 Caylor CL, Dobrianov |, Lemay SG, Kimmer C, Kriminski S, Finkelstein KD et al.
biology community. AS noted previously, this is predominantly Macromolecular impurities and disorder in protein crystals. Proteins 1999; 36:
owing to multiple constraints associated with space research 270—281.
induding (1) inabi|ity t0 uti|ize the microgravity environment on a 17 Hirschler J, Fontecilla-Camps JC. Contaminant effects on protein crystal mor-
regular basis, (2) launch delays that often result in sample phology in different growth environments. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr
degradation, (3) delays in retrieving crystalline samples (resulting 1996; 52lPt4l‘806'812' _ _ _ _ __ .
in crystal degradation), (4) the substantial amount Of paperwork 18 McPherson A, IKuznetsov YG. Mechanlsrns,lk1net1cs, Impurities and defects.
. . . . . . consequences 1n macromolecular crystallization. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol
assoc1ated w1th obtaining ﬂight approval for.prote1n samples, and Commun 2014; mm 4): 384403.
(5) the geheral Uhcertalhty related to spaceﬂight. The mOSt recent 19 HirschlerJ, Halgand F, Forest E, Fontecilla-Camps JC. Contaminant inclusion into
NRC reVleW 0f NASAIS mlcrograVlty pretelh crYStalllzathh program protein crystals analyzed by electrospray mass spectrometry and X-ray crystal-
(http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v394/n6690/full/394213b0. lography. Protein Sci 1998; 7: 185—192.
html) stated that results were inconclusive, The review concluded 20 Kors CA, Wallace E, Davies DR, Li L, Laible PD, Nollert P. Effects of impurities on
that many of the reported crystal quality improvements were membrane-protein crystallization in different systems. Acta Crystallogr D Biol
incremental and noted that there were difﬁculties conducting C’YStallogr 2009; 65_(Pt 10): 1062—1073 _ _ _ _
appropriate control experiments. The review concluded that 21 lVlcPherson A, Malkin AJ, Kuznetsov YG, Koszelak S. Incorporation of Impurities
. . . . . . . . Into macromolecular crystals. J Cryst Growth 1995; 168: 1—4.
m1crograv1ty protein crystallization had thus far resulted In a limited 22 v k'l . .
, , e IOV PG, Rosenberger F. Dependence of lysozyme growth kinetics on step
effect on structural biology. |t concluded by suggesting that future sources and impurities. J Cryst Growth 1996; 158: 5404,51.
mlcrograVlty eXperlmehtS focus on compelllhg bl0loglcal prOblemS 23 Yoshizaki |, Fukuyama S, Koizumi H, Tachibana M, Kojima K, Matsuura Y et 0/.
where the production Of diffraction—quality crystals is extremely Impurity-induced defect and its effect on protein crystal perfection. J Cryst
challenging and the chief barrier preventing structural solutions. In Growth 2006; 290: 185—191.
npj Microgravity (2015) 15010 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

"
"19","Review of microgravity protein crystallization n '
A McPherson and L James DeLucas p]
19

24 Gatos HC. Summary Science Report, Appo-Soyuz Test Project Volume 1. NASA 56 Long MM, DeLucas LJ, Smith C, Carson M, Moore K, Harrington MD et 0/. Protein
Johnson Space Center: Washington, DC, 1977. crystal growth in microgravity-temperature induced large scale crystallization of

25 Kroes RL, Reiss D. Properties of TGS aqueous solution for crystal growth. J Cryst insulin. Microgravity Sci Technol 1994; 7: 196—202.

Growth 1984; 69: 414—420. 57 Stoddard BL, Strong RK, Farber GK, Arrott A, Petsko GA. Design of apparatus and

26 Lal RB, Batra AK, Aggarwa MD, Wilcox WR, Trollinger JD. Growth and Study of experiments to determine the effect of microgravity on the crystallization of
Triglycine Sulfate (TGS) Crystals in Low-G for Infrared Detector Applications biological macromolecules using the Mir spacestation. J Cryst Growth 1991; 110:
(1991, Jan 01). Paper presented at A|AA/IKI Microgravity Science Symposium: 333—338.

Moscow. United States 1991. 58 Stoddard RK, Strong A, Arrott A, Farber GK. Mir for the crystallographer‘s money.

27 Naumann RJ, WHerring HW. Materials Processing in Space: Early Experiments. Nature 1992; 360: 392—394.

NASA SP-443: Washington DC, 1980. 59 Strong RK, Stoddard BL, Arrott A, Farber GK. Long duration growth of protein

28 Rindone GE. Materials Processing in the Reduced Gravity Environment of Space. crystals in microgravity aboard the Mir space station. J Cryst Growth 1992; 119:
North-Holland: New York, NY, USA 1982. 200—214.

29 Rogers MJB, Vogt GL, Wargo MJ. Microgravity—a teacher’s guide with 60 Trakhanov SD, Grehenko A|, Shirikov VA, Gudko AV, Egorov AV, Barmin IN.
activities in science, mathematics, and technology, EG-1997-08-110-HQ, Crystallization of protein and ribosomal particles in microgravity. J Cryst Growth
Education Standards Grades 5—8 (A), 9—12 (|:|) 1997; 97—98. Available at 1991; 110: 317.
http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/315950main_Microgravity_Around_the_Wor|d.pdf. 61 Brau B, Hilgenfeld R, Schlingmann M, Marquardt R, Birr E, Wohlleben W.

30 Giege R, Dock AC, Kern D, Lorber B, Thierry JC, Moras D. The role of puriﬁcation Increased yield of a lysozyme after self—cloning of the gene in streptomy-
in the crystallization of proteins and nucleic acids. J Cryst Growth 1986; 76: 554. cescoelicolor muller. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 1991; 34: 481.

31 Lorber B, Giege R. Crystallization of Nucleic Acids and Proteins: A Practical 62 Erdmann VA, Lippmann C, Betzel C, Dauter Z, Wilson K, Hilgenﬂed R. PIass-Link.
Approach. Oxford University Press: Oxford, 1992. FEBS Lett 1989; 259: 194.

32 McPherson A. Methods ofBiochemica/Analysis Vol 23. Academic Press: New York, 63 Hilgenfeld R, Liesum A, Storm R, Plaaslink A. Crystallization of two
NY, USA, 1976. bacterial enymes on an unmanned space mission. J Cryst Growth 1992; 122:

33 McPherson A, Malkin AJ, Kuznetsov YG. The science of macromolecular crys- 330—336.
tallization. Structure 1995; 3: 759—768. 64 McPherson A. Effects of a microgravity environment on the crystallization of

34 Malkin AJ, Kuznetsov YuG, Land TA, DeYoreo JJ, McPherson A. Mechanisms of biological macromolecules. Paper presented at: Proc of the VI” European
growth for protein and virus crystals. Nat Struct Biol 1995; 2: 956—959. Smposium on Materials and Fluid Sciences in Microgravity; 12—16 April 1992

35 Wood EA. Crystals and Light, In Introduction to Optical Crystallographyan University of Brussels: Brussels, Belgium, 1992.
eanover Pub. Inc.: New York, NY, USA, 1977. 65 He XM, Carter DC. Atomic structure and chemistry of human serum albumin.

36 Cowley JM. Diffraction Physics; 2nd (edn). 1984. Nature 1992; 358: 209—215.

37 Gilliland GL. A biological macromolecular crystallization databse - A basis for a 66 Larson SB, Day J, Greenwood A, McPherson A. Reﬁned structure of satellite
crystallization strategy. J Cryst GFOWl‘h 1988; 90: 51-59. tobacco mosaic virus at 1.8 A resolution. J Mol Biol 1998; 277: 37—59.

38 Gilliland GL, Tung M, Blakeslee DM, Ladner JE. Biological Macromolecule 67 Sjolin L, Wlodawer A, Berggvist G, Holm P, Loth K, Malmstrom H. Protein crys-
Crystallization Database, Version 3.0: new features, data and the NASA archive tallization facilities for microgravity experiments. J Cryst Growth 1991; 110:
for protein crystal growth data. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 1994; 50(Pt 4): 322—331.

408—413. 68 Bosch R, Lautenschlager P, Potthast L, Stapelmann J. Experiment equipment for

39 Frey M. Water structure associated with proteins and its role in crystallization. protein crystallization in ug facilities. J Cryst Growth 1992; 122: 310—316.

Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 1994; 50(Pt 4): 663—666. 69 Wilson AJC. The probability distribution of X-ray intensities. Acta Clyst 1949; 2: 218.

40 Buckley HE. Crystal Growth. John Wiley and Sons: London, UK, 1951. 70 Wilson AJC. Largest likely values for the reliability index. Acta Cryst 1950; 3:

41 Burton WK, Cabrera N, Frank FC. The growth of crystals and the equilibrium 397—398.
structure of their surfaces. Philos Trans R Soc A 1951; 243: 299. 71 Helliwell JR. Perfection of Lysozyme Protein Crystal sGrown in Microgravity and

42 DeLucas LJ, Suddath FL, Snyder RS, Naumann R, Broom MB, Pusey M et al. on Earth. Paper presented at: Proc of 9th European Symposium on Gravity
Preliminary investigations of protein crystal growth using the space shuttle. Dependent Phenomena in Physical Sciences May, 1995; Berlin, Germany.

J Cryst Growth 1986; 76: 681—693. 72 N9 JD, Lorber B, Giege R, Koszelak S, Day J, Greenwood A et 0/. Comparative

43 DeLucas LJ, Smith CD, Smith HW, Vijay-Kumar S, Senadhi SE, Ealick SE et 0/. analysis of thaumatin crystals grown on earth and in microgravity. Acta Crys-
Protein crystal growth in microgravity. Science 1989; 246: 651—654. tallogr D Biol Crystallogr 1997; 53(Pt 6): 724—733.

44 Salemme FR. A free interface diffusion technique for the crystallization of prO- 73 Garcia-Ruiz JM. On the sensitivity of protein crystallization due to the quality of
teins for x-ray crystallography. Arch Biochem Biophys 1972; 151: 533—539. the microgravity environment. Microgravity Sci Technol 1998; XI: 74—77.

45 Littke W, John C. Protein single crystal growth in a microgravity ﬁeld. 74 Otalora F, Novella ML, Rondon D, Garcia-Ruiz JM. Growth of lysozyme crystals
X. Glugwuss. Weltraumforsch ung 6: 325, 1982. under microgravity conditions in the LMS (STS-78) mission. J Cryst Growth 1999;

46 Littke W, John C. Protein single crystal growth under microgravity. Science 1984; 196: 649—664.

225: 223. 75 Koszelak S, Leja C, McPherson A. Crystallization of biological macromolecules

47 Littke W, John C. Protein single crystal growth under microgravity.J Cryst Growth from ﬂash frozen samples on the Russian Space Station Mir. Biotechnol Bioeng
1986; 76: 663—672. 1996; 52: 449—458.

48 McPherson A, Greenwood A, Day J. The effect of microgravity on protein 76 Carter DC, Wright BS, Miller TY, Chapman J, Twigg P, Keeling K. PCAM: a multi-
crystal growth. Adv Space Res 1991; 11: 343—356. user facility-based protein crystallization apparatus for microgravity. J Cryst

49 DeLucas LJ, Long MM, Moore KM, Rosenblum WM, Bray TL, Smith C. Recent Growth 1999; 196: 610—622.
results and new hardware developments for protein crystal growth in micro— 77 Garcia-Ruiz Jm, Gonzalez-Ramirez LA, Gavira JA, Otalora F. Granada
gravity. J Cryst Growth 1994; 135: 183—195. Crystallisation Box: a new device for protein crystallisation by counter-

50 DeLucas LJ, Moore KM, Vanderwoerd M, Bray TL, Smith C, Carson M. Protein diffusion techniques. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 2002; 58(Pt 10)(Pt 1):
crystal growth results from the United States Microgravity Laboratory-1 mission. 1638—1642.

Conference Proceedings: Paper presented at: USML-1 and USMP-1 Joint L+1 78 Gonzalez-Ramirez LA, Carrera J, Gavira JA, Melero-Garcia E, Garcia-Ruiz JM.
Science Review Sept 22-24, 1993; Huntsville, AL. Granada Crystallization Facility-2: A Versatile Platform for Crystallization in Space.

51 DeLucas LJ, Moore KM, Bray TL, Rosenblum WM, Einspahr HM, Clancy LL. Protein Crystal Growth and Design 2008; 8: 4324—4329.
crystal growth results from the United States Microgravity Laboratory-1 mission. 79 N9 JD, Gavira JA, Garcia-Ruiz JM. Protein crystallization by capillary counter-
J Phys D: Appl Phys 1993; 26: 100—103. diffusion for applied crystallographic structure determination. J Struct Biol 2003;

52 Day J, McPherson A. Macromolecular crystal growth experiments on Interna- 142; 218—231.
tional Microgravity Laboratory--1. Protein $ci1992; 1: 1254-1268. 80 Shlichta PJ. Feasibility of mapping solution properties during the growth of

53 McPherson A. Effects of a microgravity environment on the crystallization of protein crystals. J Cryst Growth 1986; 76: 656—662.
biological macromolecules. Microgravity Sci Technol 1993; 6: 101—109. 81 McPherson A, Malkin AJ, Kuznetsov YG, Koszelak S, Wells M, Jenkins et al. The

54 McPherson A. Recent advances in the microgravity crystallization of biological effects of microgravity on protein crystallization: evidence for concentration
macromolecules. Trends Biotechnol 1997; 15 (161): 197-237. gradients around growing crystals. J Cryst Growth 1999; 196: 572—586.

55 Koszelak S, Day J, Leja C, Cudney R, McPherson A. Protein 300' virus 82 Cole T, Kathman A, Koszelak S, McPherson A. Determination of the local
crystal growth on international microgravity laboratory-2. Biophys J 1995; 69: refractive index for protein and virus crystals in solution by Mach-Zehnder
13—19. interferometry. Anal Biochem 1995; 231: 92—98.

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited npj Microgravity (2015) 15010

"
"20","n ' Review of microgravity protein crystallization
p] A McPherson and L James DeLucas
20
83 Kundrot CE, Judge RA, Pusey ML, Snell EH. Microgravity and macromolecular 103 Kuznetsov YG, Malkin AJ, Glantz W, McPherson A. The nature and density of
crystallography. Cryst Growth Design 2001; 1: 87—99. defects in macromolecular crystals. Protein Sci 1995, in press.
84 Snell EHaH JR. Macromolecular Crystallization in Microgravity. Reports on 104 Malkin AJ, McPherson A. Light-scattering investigations of nucleation processes
Progress in Physics 2005; 68: 799—853. and kinetics of crystallization in macromolecular systems. Acta Crystallogr D Biol
85 Sigler P, Boskey AL, Jones ND, Kuriyan J, Miller WM, Shuler ML et 0/. Future Crystallogr 1994; 50(Pt 4): 385—395.
biotechnology research on the International Space Station (National Research 105 Lin H, Rosenberger F, AlexanderJlD, Nadarajah A. Convective-diffusive transport
Council Report). National Academy Press: Washington, DC, 2000. in protein crystal growth. J Cryst Growth 1995; 151: 153—162.
86 Cabrera B, Vermilyea DA. Growth and Perfection of Crystals. John Wiley, 1958. 106 McPherson A, Schlicta P. Heterogeneous and epitaxial nucleation of protein
87 Littke W. The Growth of Single Crystals from Proteins in Gravity-Free Space. 17th crystals on mineral surfaces. Science 1988; 239: 385—387.
Aerospace Sciences Meeting, New Orleans, LA, January 15-17.1979. 107 McPherson A, Schlicta P. The use of heterogeneous and spitaxial nucleants to
88 Blundell TL, Johnson LN. Protein Crystallography. Academic Press: NY, USA, 1976. promote the growth of protein crystals. J Cryst Growth 1989; 90: 40—46.
89 Drenth J. Principles of Protein X—ray Crystallography. Springer-Verlag: New York, 108 Robert MC, Bernard Y, Lefaucheux F. Study of nucleation-related phenomena in
NY, USA, 1994. lysozyme solutions. Application to gel growth. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr
90 McPherson A. The Preparation and Analysis of Protein Crystals. John Wiley and 1994; 50(Pt 4): 496—503.
Sons: New York, NY, USA, 1982. 109 Thiessen KJ. The use of two novel methods to grow protein crystals by micro-
91 Rhodes G. Crystallography Made Crystal Clear. Academic Press: New York, NY, dialysis and vapor diffusion in an agarose gel. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr
USA, 1993. 1994; 50(Pt 4): 491—495.
92 Malkin AJ, Kuznetsov YG, McPherson A. Defect Structure of Macromolecular 110 Cudney R, Patel S, McPherson A. Crystallization of macromolecules in silica gels.
Crystals. J Struc Biol 1996; 117: 124—137. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 1994; 50(Pt 4): 479—483.
93 He||iwe|| JR. Macromolecular Crystallography with Synchrotron Radiation. 111 Boistelle R, Astier JP. Crystallization mechanisms in solution.J Cryst Growth 1988;
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 1992. 90: 14—30.
94 N9 JD, Kuznetsov YG, Malkin AJ, Keith G, Giege R, McPherson A. Visualization of 112 Malkin AJ, Kuznetsov YG, Yu G, McPherson A. Incorporation of microcrystals by
RNA crystal growth by atomic force microscopy. Nucleic Acids Res 1997; 25: growing protein and virus crystals. Proteins 1995; 24: 247—252.
2582—2588. 113 Rhim WK, Chung SK. Containerless protein crystal growth method. J Cryst Growth
95 Garcia-Ruiz JM, Morena A. Investigations on protein crystal growth by the gel 1991; 110: 293—301.
acupuncture method. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 1994; 50(Pt 4): 484—490. 114 Aibara S. Crystal growth of enzymes in microgravity. Paper presented at:
96 Grant MJ, Saville DA. The role of transport phenomena in protein crystal growth. Proceedings of the First Workshop on Containerless Experimentation in
J Cryst Growth 1991; 108: 8—18. Microgravity, 17—19 January 1990.
97 Baird JK, Meehan EJ, Xidis AL, Howard SB. Convective diffusion in protein 115 Wada H,Hirota N,Matsumoto S,Okada H,Kiyohara M,OdeTet al.App|ication of
crystal growth. J Cryst Growth 1986; 76: 694—700. high-ﬁeld superconducting magnet to protein crystallization. Phys Procedia 2012;
98 Pusey M, Naumann R. Growth kinetics of tetragonal lysozyme crystals. J Cryst 36: 953—957.
Growth 1986; 76: 593—599.
99 Fiddis RW, Longman RA, Calvert PD. Crystal growth kinetics of globular-proteins-
lysozyme and insulin. J Chem Soc Faraday Trans 1 1979; 75: 2753. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
100 Koszelak S, Martin D, Ng J, McPherson A. Protein Crystal growth rates deter- av International License. The images or other third party material in this
mined by time lapse microphotographyJCryst Growth 1991; 10: 177—181. article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated
101 Koszelak S, McPherson A. Time lapse microphotography of protein crystal otherwise in the creditline; ifthe material is notincluded underthe Creative Commons
growth using a color VCR. J Cryst Growth 1989; 90: 340—343. license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the
102 Kuznetsov YG, Malkin AJ, Glantz W, McPherson A. Michelson interferometric material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/|icenses/
studies of protein and virus crystal. J Cryst Growth 1995; 166: 913—918. by/4.0/
npj Microgravity (2015) 15010 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

"
