"","x"
"1","The Internatlonal Space Statlon: Unlque In-Space Testbed
as Exploratlon Analog
Young H. Lee1 and Donald E. Eagles2
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of T echnology, Pasadena, CA 91109, USA
and
Frank M0ren03, Mike R0driggs4, Susan Beiserts, and Debbie Stapleton6
NASA Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX 77058, USA
Final assembly of the International Space Station (ISS) was completed in 2011. As
articulated in the 2011 NASA Strategic Plan, the Agency’s ﬁrst goal is to extend and sustain
human activities across the solar system. Thus, the emerging NASA Vision is to launch a
bold and ambitious new space initiative to enable human space exploration beyond 10w-
Earth orbit t0 Lagrange points, the moon, near-Earth asteroids (NEAs), and Mars and its
environs. To accomplish this Vision, it is necessary to develop and validate innovative
exploration technologies and operational concepts. With the extended life of the ISS to 2020
and possibly 2028, NASA has a mandate to maximize the potential of the Nation’s newest
National Laboratory. Exploration and ISS teams within NASA’s Human Exploration and
Operations Mission Directorate (HEOMD) have initiated a cooperative effort: the ISS
Testbed for Analog Research (ISTAR), a high-ﬁdelity operational analog that complements
existing NASA terrestrial laboratory and field testing. To maximize use of the ISS platform
to evaluate new exploration technologies, capabilities, and operational concepts to better
comprehend and mitigate human spaceﬂight risks, ISTAR seeks out and encourages
investigations dubbed “exploration detailed test objectives” (XDTOs). These XDTOs,
building blocks of ISTAR missions, develop and optimize the operations concepts and the
use of new technologies that should reduce risks and challenges facing astronauts on long
exploration spaceﬂight voyages. In this paper, we describe (1) the rationale behind ISTAR,
(2) a ﬁve-year strategic plan, (3) the approach for mission formulation, development,
integration, and execution, (4) concepts for near-term missions that implement a phased
approach for using ISS as an exploration testbed, and (5) the planned Mars mission
simulation using the ISS. This paper7 will also document several challenges ISTAR must
address to execute its missions.
1 Program Area Manager for Operations and member of the ISTAR Integrated Product Team, Human/Robotic
Mission Systems Ofﬁce, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Mail Stop 301-420.
2 System Engineer and member of the ISTAR Integrated Product Team, Mission Operations System Engineering
Group, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Mail Stop 301-270.
3 Deputy Manager, ISTAR Mission Integration Ofﬁce, Human Exploration Development Support Ofﬁce, 2101
NASA Parkway, Mail Stop YA13.
4 Manager, ISTAR Mission Integration Ofﬁce, Human Exploration Development Support Ofﬁce, 2101 NASA
Parkway, Mail Stop YA13.
5 Deputy Manager, ISTAR Mission Integration Ofﬁce, Human Exploration Development Support Ofﬁce, 2101
NASA Parkway, Mail Stop YA13.
6 Former Manager, ISTAR Mission Integration Ofﬁce, Human Exploration Development Support Ofﬁce.
7 “US. Government work not protected by US. copyright.”
1

"
"2","I. Introduction

THE International Space Station (188) Test Bed for Analog Research (ISTAR) project was begun in the Fall Of

2010 at the NASA Johnson Space Center (JSC) as a part Of NASA’s exploration test and risk mitigation
strategy. Strategic Goal 1 0f the 2011 NASA Strategic Plan] is to “Extend and sustain human activities across the
solar system.” Thus, the emerging NASA Vision is to launch an ambitious new initiative to enable human space
exploration beyond low-Earth orbit t0 Lagrange points, the moon, near-Earth asteroids WEAS), and Mars and its
environs. To accomplish this Vision, it is necessary to develop and validate new and innovative exploration
technologies. The 2011 NASA Strategic Plan sub-g0al 1.1 is to “Sustain the Operation and full use Of the
International Space Station (188) and expand efforts to utilize the 188 as a National Laboratory for scientiﬁc,
technological, diplomatic, and educational purposes and for supporting future Objectives in human space
exploration.” With the extended life span of the 188 to 2020 and possibly 2028, NASA wants to maximize the
potential of the Nation’s newest National Laboratory. One approach to meet the 2011 NASA Strategic Plan goal is to
conduct sustained, full-use Operations of the 188 in order to support human exploration Objectives.

Exploration and 188 teams within NASA’s Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate (HEOMD)
have initiated a joint cooperative effort: the ISS Testbed for Analog Research (ISTAR), a high-ﬂdelity operational
analog that complements eXisting NASA terrestrial analogs in order to develop and validate innovative exploration
technologies and techniques using the ISS platform. ISTAR supports and encourages investigations dubbed
“exploration detailed test Obj ectives” (XDTOs) to maximize use Of the ISS platform for the evaluation of exploration
technologies, capabilities, and Operational concepts that mitigate human spaceﬂight risks.

The goal of ISTAR is to utilize the 188 as a test platform to reduce exploration risks for crewed NEA 0r Mars
missions. The 188 can provide conﬁnement and a micrO-g Operational environment to simulate the crew experience
during long duration transit ﬂights and arrival activities on NBA 0r Mars missions. ISS pre-ﬂight preparation could
simulate exploration mission preparation processes including mission management team functions, ﬂight planning
and design, crew training, ﬂight procedure development, and certiﬁcation of ﬂight readiness. ISTAR’s long-term
goal is to conduct long-duration 188 Mars Analog missions 0n-b0ard the ISS, beginning prior to the end of 2015
using technologies and Operational tools and concepts developed and tested during earlier ISTAR missions and
Earth-based laboratory and ﬁeld testing. The purpose of these 188 Mars Analog missions is to address key
exploration technology and Operational concept gaps before conducting human exploration missions beyond low-
Earth orbit. Findings from these missions will contribute to the development of a set of design criteria for
spaceﬂight and support systems that enable safe and affordable human exploration missions, in particular to NEAs
and Mars.

A. ISTAR’S Objectives

0 Identify exploration investigations that require use Of the 188 to advance exploration technology and

capability needs or buy-down risk,

0 Advance preparations for autonomous crew Operations supporting NEA 0r Mars exploration,

0 Evaluate and assess new exploration technologies, Operations techniques, and methods as they become

available,

0 Collect lessons-learned and disseminate them to stakeholders and use them to streamline and reﬁne

subsequent ISTAR mission processes, and

0 Identify effective and affordable ways to send humans beyond low-Earth orbit and enable them to conduct

autonomous mission Operations.

ISTAR’s proposed 188 Mars Analog missions could last siX months or longer while exercising Mars exploration
mission phases and crew arrival, departure, and landing activities as realistically as possible within 188 Operational
constraints.

B. What is an Analog?

Analog missions are remote isolated ﬁeld tests in locations that are identiﬁed based on their physical similarities
to the extreme space environments of a target mission. Analog missions exercise multidisciplinary activities that
simulate features of human exploration missions in an integrated fashion in order to enable new capabilities for
human exploration. Analog missions test robotics, vehicles, habitats, communication systems, in-situ resource
utilization, and human performance as it relates to these technologies. Exploration analog missions are conducted to
validate architecture concepts, conduct technology demonstrations, and gain a deeper understanding of system—wide
technical and Operational challenges needed to support crewed missions beyond low-Earth orbit, such as to NEAs 0r
Mars.

2

"
"3","C. Why ISS as a Testbed?

The ISS provides an in-space operational environment that cannot be completely simulated in any of the
terrestrial analogs. Its environment is as close to the crewed space exploration environment as is currently possible--
providing a unique in-space micro-graVity analog opportunity not available in any of the terrestrial analogs. It is an
excellent testbed to simulate crew activities for long-duration ﬂights and crew arrival at a NEA or Mars, and to
research (1) the effects of isolation and conﬁnement on ﬂight-crew autonomy, behavior, and interaction with
advanced technologies, the ground, and each other, (2) the most beneﬁcial forms of medical and psychological
support, (3) the effects of micro-gravity and physical deconditioning on the Mars landing transition, and (4) the
effects of the increasing two-way light time on crew planning, interaction with the ground, and anomaly resolution.
In contrast to the current mission-control paradigm of real-time crew access to and signiﬁcant reliance on mission
ground control, delayed space-to-ground communications requires an increase in the responsibility of the ﬂight crew
for their safety and the safety of the ﬂight vehicle.

D. ISTAR Five-Year Strategic Plan

ISTAR has developed and is implementing a phased approach to use the ISS as an exploration testbed and to
provide a realistic exploration experience to ﬂight-crew and ground-control personnel by (1) beginning with short
analog missions to test risk-mitigation technologies and operational tools, (2) establishing baselines for crew
performance and behavior with and without these technologies and tools, (3) developing countermeasures to the
negative effects of the long-duration missions, and (4) testing increasing periods of ﬂight-crew and ﬂight-vehicle
autonomy by modifying crew procedures and mission-control operations in response to the increasing light-time
communication delays. Figure 1 describes this phased approach.

A Primarily current ISS operations and activities. Operational, experimental protocols to protect
Evaluate ISS safety, health, efﬁciency of ISS crewmembers are evaluated for their applicability to Mars (and
Capabilities NEA) missions.

[2011-2012]

B Discrete Mars-forwaxd activities are inserted, such as intermittent multi-day periods of diﬁ‘erent
Short-Period degrees of bounded autonomy by the ISS crew, including communications delays typical of Mars
Simulations missions. Sets of assigned tasks would be accomplished with minimal intervention by the MCC, but
[2013-2014] few alterations would be made to on-board procedures and MCC monitoring of ISS systems. Impact

to non-Mars onboard science operations would be minimized. F light rules specify threshold at
which simulation is broken in case of emergency or system malfunction. Add “exploration” tasks to
post-landing timeline.

C More rigorous, longer periods of autonomy would be introduced. Crew procedures, MCC oversight

Longer-Period are modiﬁed to provide a more realistic experience in autonomous operations to both crew and
Simulations ground personnel. There would be some impact to onboard non-Mars science operations. Post-
[2014-2015] landing multi-day exploration analogs would be conducted.
D Transits to Mars (and NEAs) would be simulated as rigorously as feasible in low Earth orbit with
6-month Mission existing infrastructure. Progressively increasing communications delays would be introduced,
and Crew reaching the maximum delay aﬁer 6 months to mimic Mars proximity. On-board science operations
Deconditioning would be compatible with Mars-like mission parameters. Use of post-landing exploration mission
[post 2015] analogs would increase.

Figure 1. ISTAR Five-Year Strategic Plan
E. Approaches for ISTAR Mission Formulation, Development, and Execution

It is crucial to promote collaboration and synergy where possible by fully engaging the NASA exploration
community in strategy development and the execution approach for ISTAR missions. Field-tested lessons-learned
from other analogs are integrated into ISTAR planning. Lessons-learned from ISTAR missions will be provided
back to exploration-systern planners, designers, and operations personnel to reﬁne their processes and enhance their
follow-on system development. A mission concept development process was created and includes an integrated
product tearn (IPT) forum to identify and vet exploration mission demonstrations that require use of the unique ISS
platform. The IPT is a NASA multi-Center team, with representation from the ISS program, exploration systems,

3

"
"4","exploration analogs, the Flight Crew Ofﬁce, the Human Research Program (HRP), and mission operations and
engineering.

Mission planning is closely coordinated with the Human Spaceﬂight Architecture Team (HAT) to ﬁrmly base
mission selections on exploration technology and capability needs and t0 buy-down risks of Mars and NBA design
reference missions (DRMs). ISTAR is working with the NASA Headquarters’ Strategic Analysis and Integration
Division (SAID) that sponsors HAT, the Advanced Exploration Systems Division (AES) that funds AES projects--
including the NASA analog missions, and the NASA Ofﬁce of Chief Technologist (OCT) to establish the best path
forward and develop synergistic exploration technologies and operations concepts, and to strategically plan missions
that align with ISS increments. ISTAR is partnering with HRP to identify and coordinate ISTAR missions that
require approval by the Committee for the Protection of Human Subj ects (CPHS) review board. ISTAR also works
closely with the ISS Program in mission formulation, planning, integration into ISS, and on-orbit operations.

ISTAR has established a solid working relationship with the AES projects, including the Analog Missions
Project, to integrate plans for ISTAR analog testing. As a part of the NASA analog mission family, ISTAR
collaborates with Earth-based analogs including the NASA Extreme Environment Mission Operations (NEEMO),
Research and Technology Studies (RATS), In-Situ Resource Utilization (ISRU), and the Pavilion Lake Research
Project (PLRP) in order to infuse the maturing technologies and operational tools, techniques, and concepts they
have developed and the lessons they have learned into ISTAR mission designs.

11. Advanced Exploration Systems Analog Missions

To prepare for the challenge of deep space exploration missions to the moon, asteroids, Mars, or beyond, NASA
conducts ""analog"" missions here on Earth in remote locations that
have physical similarities to extreme space environments. The
following describes several of the more important NASA “analogs”?

A. NASA Extreme Environment Mission Operations (NEEMO)

NASA’s Extreme Environment Mission Operations project
(Figure 2), known as NEEMO, utilizes a 45-f00t-10ng, 13-foot-
diameter underwater laboratory, named Aquarius, located 62 feet ’ _
below the surface within the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary
3.5 miles off the Key Largo coast. A surface buoy provides
laboratory connections for power, life support, and communications.

Because of its isolation and real underwater hazards, this laboratory’s
environment makes it an excellent site for testing space exploration
concepts. J

NEEMO missions, lasting up to three weeks, provide astronauts
the opportunity to simulate living on a spacecraft and executing .
undersea extravehicular activities (EVA). During these activities they .
are able to test advanced navigation and communication equipment, Figure 2. An astronaut stands in front of an
extravehicular activity (EVA), integrated human-robotic system exploration vehicle mockup during NEEMO
interactions, remote science and medical operations, and future ﬁeld tests.
exploration vehicles.

B. Research and Technology Studies (RATS)

NASA’s Research and Technology Studies (RATS) (Figure 3)
analog team evaluates exploration technologies, human-robotic '
systems, and extravehicular equipment in the high desert near {Rxm\fP/t -.
Flagstaff, Arizona. RATS exercises provide information that helps 4:5; 4f 4 I _, 8’: ”I ;.;.__ %
scientists and engineers design, build, and operate equipment for 4"" [:‘LT‘ ﬂ; 3%; gig; ""“"" “ 1:;
exploration missions, and establish requirements for exploration 4’"". , i . 2 ‘23” [q "" ‘""“ '
operations and procedures. f"" a - ; '11 ¥ ‘ -»

The Arizona desert has a rough, dusty terrain and extreme ~ *4 ; ' a
temperature swings that simulate conditions that may be ~— ”“fawzuza _
encountered on planetary, lunar, 0r asteroid surfaces. Some ” ‘7 ' 7 7 , "" 3 ~ \ ' — ‘T“‘-—-;;- 1
examples of technologies the RATS team has evaluated include . h j"" ' - , ”
high-ﬁdelity prototype hardware, space-suit equipment, robots, Figure 3, Two rovers are connected to the

Habitat Demonstration Unit during RATS ﬁeld
4 tests in Arizona.

"
"5","rovers, habitation modules, exploration vehicles, surface mapping and navigation techniques, and power and
communication systems.

RATS objectives are to advance future human exploration '
capabilities by maturing operational concepts and technologies through ' . .
integrated demonstrations and to reveal operational lessons-learned and a . “‘?
technical deﬁciencies that enable improvements in system design. 5;

' l t
1 Li
C. In-Situ Resource Utilization (ISRU) Demonstrations i . 13...; l 1 .

In-situ resource utilization is a process that harnesses local regolith J_ﬁ I. .sz-""I. \\ .,,» 5 ‘_a 7
(surface) or atmospheric resources at an exploration destination (moon, E); V; (\Tlg,~ﬂ\7:7 \ D J
asteroid, or Mars) for use in human and robotic exploration. ISRU ‘ D. ‘17::3‘::'7\""Q' 9:}, n7» ‘ .v
demonstrations exercise extraction, separation, and storage of desired ~N i - f ~ L I, T ‘ I s
exploration commodities (e.g., oxygen, hydrogen, methane, water). i 3 -_‘I J: . :91» ""*

NASA conducts ISRU analog demonstrations (Figure 4) at Mauna .9 ~ ‘ ' "" ‘

Kea in Hawaii in collaboration with partners such as the Paciﬁc ' ""

International Space Center for Exploration Systems, and the Canadian Figure 4. N AS A and its international
Space Agency. These demonstrations are used to develop or improve partners test equipment during In-Situ ﬁeld
systems and technologies that could be used to look for and extract tests at Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii.
desired commodities at exploration destinations.

The terrain, rock distribution, soil materials, and permafrost at Mauna Kea
provide an ideal setting for testing hardware and operations not available in
laboratories or NASA centers.

D. Pavilion Lake Research Project (PLRP)

The Pavilion Lake Research Project (Figure 5) is an international, multi-
disciplinary, science and exploration effort that seeks to explain the origin of the
freshwater microbialites that grow in Pavilion and Kelly Lakes in British
Columbia, Canada.

NASA conducts this analog mission because it is in a critical science research
location that provides a challenging setting to test and develop research and
exploration methods for future site surveys and science data collection.

Scientists use submersible vehicles and methods of exploration that are similar to
how robotic precursor missions would explore near-Earth asteroids. The process Figure 5. The Deep Worker
reﬁnements for traverse planning and science data collection will help improve submarine searches for
techniques for future space exploration missions and scientiﬁc research. microbialites during ﬁeld tests at
Pavilion Late in British Columbia,
111. International Space Station3 canada°

The 188 (Figure 6) is the largest orbiting man-made object. It is composed of about one million pounds of
hardware, brought to orbit over the course of a decade. The 188 includes 1) primary structures--the external trusses
which serve as the backbone of the station and the
pressurized modules that are occupied by the ISS crew,
and 2) functional systems made up of replaceable units--
systems that provide basic functionality such as life w
support and electrical power made of modular
components that are replaceable by astronauts on orbit.

The 188 was constructed to support three activities:
scientiﬁc research, technology development, and . 7
development of industrial applications. The facilities D' ' ”1‘3”. ~ .‘ . .‘
aboard the ISS allow for ongoing research in R“ ‘. '
microgravity, studies of other aspects of the space ,
environment, tests of new technology, and long-term ' m7 (.1! gr?
space operations. The facilities also enable apermanent J}; $ 3‘."" : Eﬁ‘ ‘J '. 1
crew of up to siX astronauts to maintain their physical J 3” : £33 ""'3’"" - '
health standards while conducting many different types ' fit? 9 ' ' _,—' ' . 37!”;
of research, including experiments in biotechnology, ’"" ""F. '1}; ﬁg ."" {1 ﬂ

5 Figure 6. The International Space Station

"
"6","combustion science, ﬂuid physics, and materials science, on behalf of ground-based researchers. Furthermore, the
188 has the capability to support research on materials and other technologies to see how they react in the space
environment.

Two ground facilities at the Johnson Space Center in Houston are especially well suited to prepare ﬂight
crewmembers and ground controllers for analog operations on the ISS--the Space Station Training Facility (SSTF)
(Figure 7) and the Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory (NBL) (Figure 8). The SSTF is a full-scale, high ﬁdelity mockup
0f the Space Station module cluster. This 188 replica provides interfaces to train ﬂight crewmembers, controllers,
and instructors on 188 operations, crew systems, station maintenance, and crew health care. The SSTF is also used
to develop and validate operating procedures planned for use on the 188.

The NBL is an astronaut training facility consisting of the world’s largest indoor pool of water, where astronauts
perform simulated EVA tasks in preparation for upcoming missions. The NBL contains a full-sized mock-up 0f the
ISS.

-, .--|"" .14 . ' - ""£9“,

. 3i ‘ ‘ “‘“Eim ,' ts . ?in

a jg ‘ - unannmnmull n mm Ill :5.

A “49.3%.”. r f "" 7 J: : '1 $3 ‘ I -. T
I xx"" “\Jr ‘3...“15 - ,.' 4 '

t \\ r ‘ - ‘ , """" quill?""
\ , ~ ;. V i ' _ .‘ . ﬁ
, < . 2‘ \ r I I .
’ ../ _ ‘ ‘, V ' Q g t p I
.L‘ V.’ i o. .
2/ ‘ '
./ "" ‘ C

Figure 7. The Space Station Training Figure 8. The Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory (NBL) at the

Facility (SSTF) at the J ohnson Space Center J ohnson Space Center
IV. Human Spaceﬂight Architectural Team4

One of ISTAR’s important stakeholders is the Human Spaceﬂight Architecture Team (HAT), a multi-
disciplinary, cross-agency study team within NASA Headquarters” HEOMD that conducts strategic analysis cycles
to assess integrated development approaches for architectures, systems, mission scenarios, and concepts of operation
for human space exploration. During each analysis cycle, HAT iterates and reﬁnes design reference mission (DRM)
deﬁnitions to develop integrated, capability-driven approaches for systems planning to exploration destinations
beyond low-Earth orbit.

HAT has generated ( Figure 9) a list of risks5 to the successful accomplishment of crewed exploration
missions and a list of mission architecture questions that must be answered before completing design for such
missions. ISTAR uses these HAT-generated risks and architectural questions for inﬂuencing its mission
formulation, development strategy, and mission-evaluation criteria.

V. Human Research Program6

A11 188 experiments or activities that involve man-in-the-loop testing, including ISTAR exploration detailed test
objectives (XDTOs) that require crew testing as well as planned ISTAR 188 Mars Analog missions, require
coordination with and/or approval by NASA’s Human Research Program (HRP). HRP, a program managed by the
Johnson Space Center’s Space Life Sciences Directorate, seeks to perform research necessary to understand and
reduce spaceﬂight human health and performance risks, enable development of human spaceﬂight medical and
human performance standards, and develop and validate technologies that reduce human spaceﬂight medical risks.

To accomplish these goals, HRP focuses its research on establishing an evidence base on astronaut health and
performance for long-duration micro-g missions, on identifying the greatest risks and developing an optimal
approach to mitigate those risks, on testing space biomedical technology and medical-care procedures, and on
actively collaborating with NASA’s international partners on space biomedical research. Figure 107 shows HRP’s
list of human health and performance risks, and its assessment of the criticality of these risks.

6

"
"7","ISTAR seeks HRP’s advice, help, and collaboration when developing and executing ISTAR missions because
ISTAR will exercise operations concepts that challenge ﬂight crews to work progressively longer periods without
direct assistance from ground teams, forcing them to deal with increasingly delayed communications by exercising
increasingly autonomous activities. HRP and ISTAR have jointly developed clinical research investigations that
assess the impact of communication delay on ﬂight-crew performance. These investigations are being worked
through the ISTAR Joint Operations Panel to establish a communication delay protocol and select speciﬁc crew
tasks and procedures as part of ISTAR Mission 3. See Section VI D (ISTAR Mission 3) below for additional
information.

ID Exploration Mission Architectural Questions

M'EDL EDL of la rge Mars payloads Q1 What Is the safest way to approach a small/non-cooperative/

E-EDL Earth re-entry at high velocities non-stable object? (Le. NEA, satellite)
W Launch vehicle failures Q2 What is the safest and quickest way to anchor to a NEA?
""'d' Lander 97°90'90"" systems failure 03 What Earth Orbit activities are needed to reduce risk for deep
CSM Long duration low/zero b.g[lgﬁgugv-storage and space missions?
management 04 What are the Impact of the planetary protection
CFT In-space cryogenic ﬂuid transfer requirements on operations and elements?
lsp In-space propulsion failures Q5 What are the functional/volumetrlc requirements for
Reliability veriﬁcation Of advanced ln-space habitation and IVA activities in zero and low - 3?
A45? propulsion Q6 What Is the difference In operational efﬁciency between crew
Environmental risks: radiation, MMOD, dust, size? (3 and 4 crew for NEA' 4 and 6 crew for Mars)
Env electromagnetic Q7 What Is the most efﬁcient way to communicate under a long
Dock Docklng/assembly failures >30 sec time delay? Does this change as the time Increases?
5Y5 Systems failures: ECLSS, power, avionics, thermal Q3 :nggprovements Of logistics and packaging can be
EVA EVA system/sult failure 09 What is the most effectives trade between level of repair and
Comm Operations under time delayed communication 00-0be manUfaCtUI’ins?
6.9L. Autonomous crew/vehlcle operation Q10 How do you best reuse/repurpose disposable materials?
Health Crew health: behavioral, health care/remote Q11 What is the most effective means of surface transportation?
medical, mlcro-gravity (NEA, Moon/Mars short distance, Moon/Mars long distance)
SW Software failure Given current robotic capabilities, what level of human/
Hum Human error Q12 robotic Interaction provides the highest level of operational
ISRU ISRU - . ul - ment fallure: ~ ro - ellant, consumables emdemy? (EVA at desmaﬁm"" ”'5ch EVA' 'VA'
Ielemeraﬁeas)
Q13 What level of IVA/EVA activities at a destination provides the
most beneﬁt?
Figure 9. Human Spaceﬂight Architecture Team's (HAT) Exploration Mission Risks and Architectural Questions
VI. ISTAR Missions

ISTAR’s ﬁve-year strategic plan, the exploration community’s exploration risks--in particular those identiﬁed by
HAT ( Figure 9), HRP research objectives that mitigate exploration mission risks such as those in Figure 10, and
the rationale for using the ISS as a testbed, all guide the formulation, development, and integration of ISTAR
missions into ISS. ISTAR also heeds the following National Research Council (NRC) priorities for key
technologies needed to extend and sustain human activities beyond low-Earth orbitg:

0 Radiation Mitigation for Human Spaceﬂight,

o Long-Duration Crew Health,

0 Environmental Control and Life Support Systems (ECLSS),

0 Guidance, Navigation and Control (GN&C),

0 (Nuclear) Thermal Propulsion,

o Lightweight and Multifunctional Materials and Structures,

0 Fission Power Generation, and

0 Entry, Descent and Landing (EDL) Thermal Protection Systems (TPS).

A. ISTAR Mission Development Process

To aid in formulating its planned missions, ISTAR introduced the term “exploration detailed test objective

(XDTO)” to describe the technology and operations-concept building blocks of its missions. ISTAR then developed
7

"
"8","a unique reView process synchronized with the ISS payload integration template to identify, screen, score, and
recommend XDTO candidates for appropriate ISS increments.
Human - HHC: Human Health Countermeasures
. SHFH: Space Human Factors & Habitation
H RP Ris ks & c riticali r 5939?” map ' Wm W ""‘1‘“
rog am ( ) - BHP: Behavioral Health 8. Performance 4
Elements: - SR: Space Radiation
HRP Elem Rusk Title (Short Title) U: Unacceptable Rusk. A: Acceptable Rusk. C: Controlled Rusk. I: Insufﬁcuent Data Immm
Risk of Orthostatic Intolerance Dun'ng R&Exposure to Gravity (Short Title: OI)
Risk of Eari Onset Osteoporosis Due to Spaceﬂi 9 ht Short Title: Osteo
Risk Factor of Inad- ouate Nutrition Short Title: Nutrition
Risk of Compromised EVA Performance and Crew Health Due to Inadequate EVA Suit Systems (Short Title: EVA) - Pending
Human S stem Risk Board HSRB Risk ManaoementAnal sis Tool RMAT Anroval
Risk of Impaired Performance Due to Reduced Muscle Mass. Strength and Endurance (Short Title: Muscle)
Risk of Renal Stone Formation Short Tlﬂe: Renal
Risk of Bone Fracture Short Title: Fracture v .
Risk of lntewertebral Disc Dama 9 Short Title; IVD : 3
Risk of Cardiac Rhythm Problems (Short Title: Arrhythmia) - Pending HSRB RMATApproval
Risk of Reduced Physiwl Performance Capabilities Due to Reduced Aerobic Capacity (Short me: Aerobic)
Risk of Crew Adverse Health Event Due to Altered Immune ReSo . se Short Title: Immune j '
Risk of Impaired Control of Spacecraft. Associated Systems and Immediate Vehicle Egress due to Vestibular! Sensorimotor
Alterations Associated with S 09 Fliht Short Title: Sensorimotor
Risk of Therapeutic Failure Due to lneﬂ‘ectiveness of Medication (Short Tuue: - Pending HSRB RMATApprova/ _ .
Risk of Mic . . . ' -lnduoed Visual Im imlentllntracranial Pressure Short Title: VIIP - Pendin HSRB RMATA rova/ 1
Risk of Injury from Dynamic Loads (Short Title: Occupant Protection) ‘
Em- Risk of Performance Decrement and Crew Illness Due to an Inadequate Food System (Short Title: Food)
m Risk of Inadequate Human-Computer Interaction (Short Title: HCI) - Pending HSRB RMATApprovaI
m Risk of Performance Errors Due to Training Deﬁciencies (Short Title: Train) - Pending HSRB RMATApprova/
m Risk of Inadequate Design of Human and Automatioanobotic Integration (Short Title: HARI) - Pending HSRB RMATApomrv
EIEI- Risk of Poor Critical Task Design (Short ﬁtle: Task) - Pending HSRB RMATApprova/
m Risk of Adverse Health Effects of Exposure to Dust and Volatiles During Exploration of Celestial Bodies (Short Title: Dust) —
Pendin HSRB RMATA orova/ . _
EIEI- Risk of an Incompatible VehiclelHabitat Design (Short Title: - Pending HSRB RMATApproval
m Risk ofAdverse Health Eﬂects Due to Alterations in Host-Microorganism Interactions (Short Title: Mcrohost 1 A
Inability to Adequately Recognize or Treat an III or Injured Crew Member (Short Title:
m Risk of Adverse Behavioral Conditions and Psychiatric Disorders (Short ﬁne: Bmed) - Reference RMATs for Risk of Adverse
Behavbml Conditions. and Risk of Ps hiatric Disorders
m Risk of Performance Errors Due to Fatigue Resulting from Sleep Loss, Cimdian Desynchronization. Extended Wakefulness. and
Work Overload Short Title: Sleeo
m Risk of Performance Decrements due to Inadequate Cooperation. Coordination. Communimﬁon. and Psychosocial Adaptation
within a Team Short Title: Team
m Risk of Radiation Carcin . . enesis Short Title: Cancer
m Risk of Acute Radiation S ndromes Due to Solar Particle Events Short Title: ARS
m Risk of Acute or Late Central Nervous System Effects from Radiation Exposure (Short Title: CNS) ' '
m Risk of Degenerative Tissue or other Health Effects from Radiation Exposure (Short Title: ‘
Figure 10. NASA's Human Research Program (HRP) Risks and Criticality
For each XDTO candidate, ISTAR documented the candidate’s resource requirements (on-orbit crew time,
hardware/software development cost and time, payload up-/down-rnass and volume, development funding proﬁle,
projected earliest readiness date, etc.) using an xDTO Survey F arm. Proposed XDTO candidates were evaluated by
applying a weighting factor (using a scale of 1-3) against the following XDTO selection criteria:

o 188 as a Testbed: Is the 188 (or an ISS ground facility) required to test this XDTO candidate? Two points
were assigned when 188 was required and no ground facility could be used to test the XDTO candidate, and
one point when 188 was not mandatory since an ISS facility (e.g., NBL or SSTF), other facility, or a
terrestrial analog could used to test the candidate. No points were assigned when neither the 188 nor ISS
ground facility was required. ISTAR selected this criterion as one of its critical criteria with high value (3-
point) weighting factor.

0 Mission Applicability: What is the applicability of this XDTO candidate to an exploration mission
destination? Three points were assigned when a proposed XDTO candidate technology or mitigation
method(s) was applicable to a NEA, Mars, and to the 188 as a destination, two points when applicable to
both NBA and Mars as destinations, and one point when applicable only to a NEA (or NBA and 188) or to
Mars (or Mars and 188) as a destination. No points were assigned when a proposed XDTO candidate was
applicable to 188 only, to non-NEA/Mars destination(s) only, or to ISS and non-NEA/Mars destination(s)
only, since exploration destinations are of high value. ISTAR selected this as another of its critical criteria
with a 3-point weighting factor.

8

"
"9","0 Safety (Risk) Concern: Does this XDTO candidate introduce any risk to the ISS vehicle or crew? If so, can
the risk be quantiﬁed? Three points were assigned when no risks were identiﬁed, two points when low risks
or no known risks (or only acceptable risks) were identiﬁed, or one point when medium risk [or an
unacceptable risk(s)] was identiﬁed. ISTAR selected this as another of its critical criteria with a 3-point
weighting factor.

0 Architecture Relevancy: Does this XDTO candidate respond to HAT’s assessment of Human Space Flight
architecture relevance? Three points were assigned when HAT assigned the candidate a high assessed
value, two points when HAT assigned a medium assessed value, and one point when HAT assigned a low
assessed value. ISTAR selected this as another of its critical criteria with a 3-point weighting factor.

0 Mission-Risk Mitigation: Does the knowledge gained from this XDTO candidate reduce the risks of a
crewed NEA or Mars mission? Three points were assigned to Class 1 XDTO candidates (see listing of
ISTAR “classes” immediately below), two points to Class 2 XDTO candidates, and one point to Class 3
candidates. No points were assigned to Class 4 candidates. ISTAR selected this as another of its critical
criteria with a 3-point weighting factor. The following describes ISTAR’s XDTO candidate classes:

0 Class 1 XDTO candidates intend to provide/improve radiation protection for ﬂight crews (Class 1a),
intend to mitigate physiological effects of long-duration micro-gravity (Class 1b), and intend to mitigate
psychological effects of long-duration isolation (Class 10).

0 Class 2 XDTO candidates support development of technology to improve ﬂight-crew life support
(including closed loop) and/or habitation systems (Class 2d), support development of technology to
improve autonomous systems and avionics (Class 2e); and intend to improve ﬂight-crew productivity
during long-duration missions (Class 21).

0 Class 3 XDTO candidates contribute to supporting ﬂight-crew medical diagnosis and/or acute care (Class
3g), support development of technology to provide or improve automated rendezvous and docking
(Class 3h), and intend to improve ﬂight-hardware maintenance/supportability (Class 3i).

0 Class 4 XDTO candidates include those dealing with ﬂight operations, crew clothing or extravehicular—
intravehicular suit systems, emergency equipment, experiments/fabrication/facilities, ﬁre detection and
control, human systems, materials research, power management, etc. (Class 4j).

0 Potential for Mission-Risk Reduction: 1f the proposed XDTO candidate is selected and succeeds, what
percent of its associated mission-risk could be mitigated? Three points were assigned if signiﬁcant (>25%)
risk could be mitigated, two points when moderate (>10% but <25%) risk could be mitigated, and one point
when only minimal (<10%) risk could be mitigated. ISTAR selected this as the last of its critical criteria
with a 3-point weighting factor.

0 Cost: 1f development of this XDTO candidate is not fully funded, how much additional funding is required?
Four points were assigned when $0.5M or less is required, three points when $0.5M-$1.5M is required, two
points when $1.5M-$3.5M is required, or one point when more than $3.5M is required. ISTAR assigned
this selection criterion a 2-point weighting factor.

0 Crew Time: What is the total crew time (hours) needed to support operation of this XDTO candidate? This
was assigned three points when 5 or fewer hours are needed, two points when 5-40 hours are needed, or one
point when greater than 40 hours are needed. ISTAR assigned this selection criterion a 2-point weighting
factor.

0 XDTO Readiness: What is the progress of any XDTO-candidate hardware/payload-safety certiﬁcation or
safety and mission assurance assessment? Three points were assigned if a candidate had passed its Phase
0/1, 11, and 111 safety reViews to-date, two points if a candidate had passed its Phase 0/1 and 11 safety reViews
to-date, and one point if a candidate had passed its Phase 0/1 safety reView to-date. ISTAR also assigned
this selection criterion a 2-point weighting factor.

0 ISS Flight Resource Dependency: What is anticipated amount of ISS resources (e.g., power,
communications, ﬂuid/gas/atmosphere consumables, imagery, tools, crew-aids/provisioning, stowage,
attitude/pointing) required to support this XDTO candidate? Three points were assigned when few or no ISS
ﬂight resources are required, two points when a moderate amount of resources is required, and one point
when a large amount of resources is required. ISTAR assigned this selection criterion a 1-point weighting
factor.

Utilizing the ISTAR 1PT forum, ISTAR conducted high-level reViews with stakeholders and management to
prioritize and rank XDTO candidates for recommendation to the ISS Program. ISTAR forwarded its recommended
list of XDTO candidates, denoting them for ﬂight consideration on speciﬁc ISS increments, to the ISS Program’s
Research Planning Working Group (RPWG) during their ISS utilization planning for an increment period. ISTAR

9

"
"10","will monitor the on-orbit execution of its recommended XDTO candidates, conduct post-mission analyses of
successfully mitigated exploration mission risk, and collect and disseminate and lessons-learned.
B. ISTAR Mission 1

Ground-based analog missions have found that time delay is an impediment to communication. An in-space
operational environment is needed to validate communication delay effects on individual and team performance and
behavioral health outcomes. Reduced communication is the ﬁrst step toward a maj or cultural shift for mission ﬂight
and ground crews in the operation of exploration missions. In contrast to the current mission control paradigm of
real-time crew access and signiﬁcant reliance on ground mission control, delayed communication requires an
increase in ﬂight crew responsibility for safety of crew and space vehicle, which may cause initial discomfort for
both ﬂight and ground crews. The ﬁrst ISTAR mission will study countermeasures for communication delays. HRP
will sponsor a study on a later mission (planned for ISTAR Mission 3) that will look at the effects of communication
day on crew performance.

Ground-based analog missions have also found that the impact of a communication delay is lessened when
autonomous procedures and text messaging are available. The primary purpose of ISTAR Mission I, planned for
188 Increments 31/32, is to prepare the ﬂight and ground crews for more autonomous ﬂight operations by the
execution of autonomous crew procedures and by the engineering evaluation of communication delay
countermeasures (text messaging) when voice communication is not being used (but is available). The autonomous
crew operations and communication delay countermeasures are separate activities and will be performed at different
times to so that the variables can be studied independently before the ISTAR Mission 3 test is performed.

0 Crew Procedure Execution - Communication delays will force the exploration crews and their vehicles to
be more autonomous. Crewmembers will not have the ground to rely on for instant assistance, advice, and
troubleshooting help while performing procedures. The objective is to prepare the ﬂight and ground crews
for more autonomous ﬂight operations (including autonomous crew procedure execution). This will give
the procedure authors experience in developing autonomous procedures, understand what extra information
the ﬂight crew would need to perform a speciﬁc procedure autonomously, and develop methods to train
ﬂight crewmembers to perform autonomous execution of procedures. This will give the crew experience in
executing procedures without relying on the ground. This may also provide insight into how
communication delay might affect not only procedures but also the design, building, and operation of
hardware and software for future spacecraft and systems.

0 Communication Delay Countermeasures - During periods of communication delays that will be simulated
in later ISTAR missions, the standard voice communication between the crew and ground is expected to be
operationally ineffective. Communication delay scenarios have been simulated on Earth-based analogs and
these delays have been found to make space-to-ground voice communication difﬁcult and inefﬁcient. The
objective of ISTAR Mission 1 is to explore other methods of space-to-ground communication in order to not
sacriﬁce operational efﬁciency. As a secondary objective, the results will be compared with the results of
RATS, NEEMO, and Pavilion Lake ﬁeld tests.

Additional exploration-related studies will be performed on 188 during Increment 31/32 but are not sponsored by
ISTAR; these include Synchronized Position Hold Engage Reorient Experimental Satellites (SPHERES) free-ﬂyer
simulated extravehicular inspection, Robonaut 2 simulated extravehicular routine and emergency operations, and
exploration-related HRP studies being performed on 188. The focus of these experiments will be on gathering
lessons-learned for exploration-risk mitigation.

C. ISTAR Mission 2

ISTAR Mission 2, a continuation of ISTAR Mission 1, coincides with 188 Increments 33/34. Lessons-learned
during the ISTAR Mission 1 investigation will be incorporated into the ISTAR Mission 2 study. Additional
autonomous procedures will be performed, and additional variables or different countermeasures may be added to
the communication delay countermeasures study--such as performing the test using more than one crewmember at
the same time and/or inserting a time delay. Additional exploration-related studies that will be performed on 188
during these increments that are not sponsored by ISTAR include SPHERES, Robonaut 2, 188 Crew Control of
Surface Telerobots, Radiation Environment Monitor, Microbial Growth and Control in Space Suit Assembly (SSA)
Gear, and several exploration-related HRP studies. The focus of these experiments will also be on gathering
lessons-learned for exploration-risk mitigation.

10

"
"11","D. ISTAR Mission 3

The HRP study Of the impact of communication delay on ﬂight crew performance is the primary focus of ISTAR
Mission 3. This study, starting in Increment 36, will determine whether the communication delays likely to be
experienced on a long-duration mission to an asteroid or to Mars will result in clinically 0r operationally signiﬁcant
decrements in crew behavior and performance. The test will validate ground test ﬁndings and determine and
evaluate: 1) risks to ﬂight crew behavioral health and performance, 2) risk of performance decrements due to
inadequate cooperation, coordination, communication, and psychosocial adaptation within a team, 3) risk of
psychiatric disorders, and 4) risk of adverse behavioral conditions. The crew will use the countermeasures and
autonomous procedures developed for ISTAR Missions 1 and 2 in this study.

Additional exploration-related studies that will be performed on 188 during this increment that are not sponsored
by ISTAR include 188 Crew Control Of Surface Telerobots, Radiation Environment Monitor, Quantiﬁcation of In-
ﬂight Physical Changes—Anthropometry and Neutral Body Posture (NBP), Microbial Growth and Control in Space
Suit Assembly (SSA) Gear, and exploration-related HRP studies.

VII. 188 Mars Analog Mission

In February 2012 the Associate Administrator for HEOMD at NASA Headquarters challenged ISTAR to
perform its ﬁrst Mars-mission simulation on the 188 before 2016. The main goal of this 188 Mars Analog mission is
to address key exploration technology and Operational concept gaps before conducting human exploration missions
beyond 10w Earth orbit. Findings from this 188 Mars Analog mission will contribute to the development of a set of
design criteria for spaceﬂight and support systems that enable safe and affordable human exploration missions--in
particular to NEAs and Mars. Discussions have begun on possible approaches to meeting this challenge. The
following is a description of one possible approach to conducting such a Mars-mission simulation on the 188:

A. Mission Objectives (Notional)

0 Conduct Mars exploration mission launch, transit, and landing transition phases as realistically as possible

within 188 Operational constraints,

0 Understand the highest risks to human systems during long duration missions and learn how to mitigate
them in order to prepare for human exploration missions:

0 Understand what capabilities are required and what tasks/Operations should fall under autonomous crew
Operations for missions to Mars,

0 Gain insight into how best to plan roles and responsibilities between ﬂight and ground for long-duration
crewed missions,

0 Understand which are the critical mission preparation processes including exploration mission
management team functions, ﬂight design, crew training, ﬂight procedure development, ﬂight software
needs, and certiﬁcation of ﬂight readiness that are unique to long duration missions 0r mission to Mars,

0 Determine the most efﬁcient way to communicate under a long time delay. Investigate how this changes
as the time delay increases incrementally during the “transit” to Mars. (HAT architectural question 7),

0 Investigate risk of adverse behavioral conditions and psychiatric disorders (HRP risk Bmed) due to long-
term, close-quarters conﬁnement,

0 Identify requirements for needed capabilities for crewed exploration missions,

0 Test and validate DRM architectures and space exploration concepts, and

0 Inform customers and stakeholders of ISS Analog mission results and lessons-learned.

o Collaborate with NASA’s International Partners to develop an integrated strategy for conducting joint
exploration missions, including roles and responsibilities and the management model for a Mars mission,

0 Work with the International Space Exploration Coordination Group (ISECG) and HAT to ensure that the
latest version of the Mars design reference mission is available, and that exploration risks and
technology/capability gaps are addressed to the greatest extent possible,

0 Demonstrate and validate exploration technologies and Operations concepts developed by HEOMD’s
Advanced Exploration Systems (AES) Division and NASA’s Ofﬁce Of Chief Technologist (OCT) t0 the
greatest extent possible, and

o Collaborate and synergize with the NASA HQ’s Science Mission Directorate (SMD) to infuse ﬂight proven
robotic exploration capabilities and projected science Operations to the extent possible.

B. Mission Level 1 Requirements (Notional)
MR1: The 188 Mars Analog mission shall mitigate the impact to ongoing nominal ISS 0n-b0ard Operations.
1 1

"
"12","MR2: Eighty percent of 188 Mars Analog mission ﬂight-crew activities shall support planned 188 system/
experiment activities.

MR3: The 188 Mars Analog mission shall be conducted by three or more ﬂight crewmembers.

MR4: The 188 Mars Analog mission shall be conducted for a minimum of four (TBR) months.

MR5: Participating ﬂight crewmembers shall interact with only each other during 85% 0f the 0n-0rbit mission
phase.

MR6: If four or fewer ﬂight crewmembers participate in the 188 Mars Analog mission, 85% 0f the 0n-0rbit
mission phase time shall be conducted within an ISS habitable volume of 22.5 m3/crewmember or less.

MR7: A separate 188 Mars Analog mission ground control team shall control the 188 Mars Analog mission and
report activities and simulation progress to the normal 188 ground control team.

MR8: The 188 Mars Analog mission shall be conducted with a communications delay that varies by distance
from Earth and corresponds to the delay expected during an Earth-tO-Mars transit mission.

MR9: The 188 Mars Analog mission communications delay shall apply to all (TBR) voice, data, and command
interaction between the participating 188 Mars Analog mission ground control team and the participating 188 Mars
Analog mission ﬂight crew.

MRlO: The 188 Mars Analog mission ground control team shall have representation from participating
International Partners (IPS).

C. Mission Operations Concept (Notional)

The 188 Mars Analog mission timeline will be based on the latest Ofﬁcial design reference architecture for a
crewed mission to Mars [currently Design Reference Architecture (DRA) 5.09 (Figure 11) created by the NASA
Headquarters’ Mars Architecture Working Group]. Detailed timeline activities will be based on analogous ISS
Operations, applicable NASA robotic exploration mission activities, and projected unique human exploration
mission tasks with a special emphasis on execution of increased crew autonomous Operations.

A separate 188 Mars Analog mission ground control team will control the 188 Mars Analog mission and report
activities and simulation progress to the normal 188 ground control team so that the ISS ground control team can
maintain overall ISS awareness and control. This will allow the ISS mission control team to monitor both 188 and
Mars Analog mission systems and activities to ensure ISS safety, while the 188 Mars Analog mission ground control
team controls the progress of Analog Operations. Separate mission timelines will be used--the ISS mission timeline
that also contains Mars Analog mission activities, and an 188 Mars Analog mission timeline--a ﬂltered version of
the ISS mission timeline (TBR)--t0 govern the activities of the 188 Mars Analog mission.

At a minimum the simulation planning will include the Mars—mission phases of Earth launch/ascent (item 7 in
Figure 11), on-Orbit (i.e., Mars transit) Operations (item 8), Mars entry (represented by Earth entry) (item 9), and
Mars—graVity adaptation (represented by Earth-graVity adaptation) 0n the Mars surface (e.g., the ﬁrst three weeks of
item 10).

D. Mission Development Schedule and Simulated Mars-Transit/Arrival Timeline (Notional)

Figure 12 shows a possible 188 Mars Analog mission development schedule.

Figure 13 shows a timeline of typical crew activities during the launch, transit to and arrival at Mars, and Mars-
graVity adaptation periods for a crewed mission to Mars. Where possible, the simulation ﬂight crew will conduct
their ISS-experiment and 188 Mars Analog mission activities to simulate the following typical Mars—mission
activities:

° Crew launch, low-Earth-orbit (LEO) activities, Mars Transfer Vehicle (MTV) check—out, and Mars—transit
injection,

° General housekeeping, food preparation and meals, equipment maintenance and repair, exercise, personal
hygiene/tirne/recreation, and communication with family and friends,

° MTV turns, battery temperature maintenance, MTV attitude maintenance, public affairs activities, and crew
just-in-time and refresher training,

° Trajectory correction maneuvers 1-6,

° Subsystem engineering checkout periods 1 and 2, MTV switch to medium—gain antenna, ﬂight software
update, and Entry/Descent/Landing (EDL)-parameter update,

° Crew subsystem maintenance and emergency refresher training,

° Crew arrival, orbit, EDL, and surface activities training,

0 Crew arrival in Mars orbit, docking with Surface Habitat (SHAB), teler0b0tics of surface infrastructure, and
EDL, and

° Three-weeks of crew adaptation to Mars gravity.

12

"
"13","10 ~5OO days on Mars
ISRU/pmpenant 9 H H “""
production 10' MAV 11 MAV ascent to orbit
AC / EDL or MDAV I Cargo Lander 0
Q Crew: Jemson DM 8.
. . consumables pn’o: to TEI
Habitat Lander AC ,
intoMarsOrbit 9"" .j ""-3- ; 1 t""""' ‘ ”’5':
i e Cgew: Use On’on/SM to
transfef to Han Lander. men
03'903 I EDL on Mars
9 ~350 days . \ g
t Ma :25""? . 1
o '3 ‘1’"" 1 a— o Crew:Jettison drop ‘a. /.\,‘ 1.? $1 .
, . \ tank aﬂerTMl; ~180 . r 4‘ ‘1 3"""" ""
' days out to Mars / ~
Cargo ‘
0 . MWS . l 0 Crew ~1800ays
~ ~ ‘ ‘ ‘ - .‘ Crewed back to Earth
a “ a "" . MTV
0 Ares-I Crew Lamch
4 Ares-V Car 0 ' '
Launchesg o 3 Anes-v Cargo Launches .
' ~26 Q ~30 I
months .' 3 months .
, .. ‘ ~ ’11:, .f Eanh return
- -. ---.- :P’ ,_, - ‘——<-
Figure 11. Mars Design Reference Architecture (DRA 5.0) Mission Proﬁle--Nuclear Thermal Rocket (NTR) Option
WW"" ISS Mars Analog Mlssmn Development Schedule
FY12 FY13 FY14 FY15 FY16
Q3 Q4 (11 02 03 Q4 01 02 03 Q4 01 02 03 Q4 01 02 QB
Preliminary Simulation Critical Simulation Design ISS Integrated Status
Design Review (PSDR) ‘ Review (CSDR) ‘ Review (ISR) ‘ — '55 Mars Analog Mission
3/2013 3/2014 2/2015
Phase 0/! Safety Review‘ Phase II Safety Review‘ Phase III Safety Review‘
3/2013 3/2014 3/2015
Figure 12. Representative (Notional) ISS Mars Analog Mission Development Schedule
VIII. Challenges
Several challenges must be overcome in order for ISTAR to succeed in its plan to assess and recommend critical
exploration technologies, conduct ISS Mars Analog simulations, and develop operations concepts that can reduce
the risks of crewed missions to exploration destinations. These challenges include:

1. Building a business case for the ISS Mars Analog mission: It will be a challenge to design an ISS Mars
analog mission that won’t disturb the conduct of other ISS on-board operations—in particular, science
related research. Open discussions are necessary to have a better understanding of this mission’s impacts on
other ISS activities and to mitigate those impacts. As with the objectives of the ISTAR XDTO candidates
selected to ﬂy on the ISS, the objectives of a Mars Analog mission on ISS must be thoroughly vetted to
ensure the mission makes a signiﬁcant contribution to meeting NASA Strategic Plan and, in particular,
exploration goals.

13

"
"14","[WSW ISS Mars Analog MISSIon TranSIt/Arrlval Tlmellne
Month 1 , Month 2 Month 3 Month 4 Month 5 Month 6 Month 7
Week|1| 2| 3|4 |E| 6|7|8 |9||10|11|12|13|14|15|16|17|£8|19|20|21|24|23l24|25 |26|27|28|29|
g g Gen.Housekeeping; Food Prep&Meals; Equipmt Maintenance&ﬂepair; Exercise;PersonalHygiene/‘ﬁme/Recreation;Communication with Family/Friends :6 {-Same
§§AA A A A A AA A A A AA Agaawmew

g g,"" MTV Turns; Battery Temp Maintenance; Attitude Maintenance; Public Affairs Activities; Crew Just-In-Time & Refresher Training mg 0""; A3332?""

E; ’8: Trajectoryﬁrrection 1 Trajectorygrrecﬁon 2 Trajectorygrrecﬁon 3 Traj Correc-é"" E Gravity

5:: g tion 4/5/6""? “:23
a e‘ A r A A A A? f
C U Subsystem Swnchto Med GaunAntenna SubSvStem FSW EDL Param.Updatem S

,3 £95,001 mC/OZ Update ,3 :3

s f .3

Subsystem Maintenance& Subsystem Maintenancea. Arrival, Orbit, EDL, and ': 213
Emergency Refresher Training Emergency RefresherTraining Surf Activities Training .5? .53
< E
5 e
U
Figure 13. ISS Mars Analog Mission Transit/Arrival Timeline (Notional)

2. Exploration community buy-ins: It is absolutely essential to work collaboratively and synergistically with
all affected ISS Mars Analog mission planning and implementing organizations (including ISS teams and
HRP) and stakeholders (ABS and OCT) in the planning of ISTAR missions, including ISS Mars Analog
missions. Obtaining adequate support from the involved organizations during mission formulation and
planning—competing with their other priorities and with today’s tight budgets—will be a very daunting
task. However, it will be critical to maintain their consistent participation Via technical interchange
meetings and workshops in order to obtain early buy-in and continuing support of ISTAR’s objectives and
missions.

3. Support by the Human Research Program (HRP) and NASA’S Crew Ofﬁce: Conducting a Mars
Analog mission on the ISS that contributes to understanding and reducing spaceﬂight human health and
performance risks of this exploration mission, and that requires participating ﬂight crewmembers to undergo
the simulated rigors of such a mission necessitates a continuing close cooperation with HRP and the Flight
Crew Ofﬁce. Only with their detailed understanding and support can this ISS Mars Analog mission
succeed.

4. Resolution burn-down challenges: During the formulation process of the ISS Mars Analog mission,
adequate resources must be allocated to resolve to-be-determined (TBD) and to-be-resolved (TBR) items to
ensure that pre-mission preparation meets planned development timelines and that the simulation will meet
planned objectives.

IX. Conclusion

By its efforts to encourage use of the ISS as a test platform to reduce exploration risks for crewed NEA or Mars
missions, ISTAR has made a good ﬁrst step towards achieving NASA’s goal to “expand efforts to utilize the ISS as
a National Laboratory for supporting future objectives in human space exploration.” Meeting the objectives of
ISTAR Missions 1-3 addresses this goal by contributing towards understanding the challenges and mitigating the
risks of conducting crewed exploration missions. The ISTAR ISS Mars Analog mission, if recognized challenges
are overcome, would support the development of design criteria for these crewed exploration missions that would
enable NASA to meet its strategic goal of “extending and sustaining human activities across the solar system.”

14

"
"15","Appendix A
Acronym List
AC AerO-Capture
AES Advanced Exploration Systems Division (or Proj ect) (HEOMD)
A-ISP Advanced In-Space Propulsion
CFT Cryogenic Fluid Transfer
C/O Checkout
CPHS Committee for the Protection Of Human Subjects (NASA J SC)
CSM Cryogenic Storage and Management
DM Descent Module
DRA Design Reference Architecture
DRM Design Reference Mission
EDL Entry/Descent/Landing (M-Mars; E-Earth)
ENV Environmental
EVA Extravehicular Activity
FSW Flight Software
HAT Human Spaceﬂight Architecture Team
HEOMD Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate (NASA HQ)
HQ Headquarters
HRP Human Research Program (NASA J SC)
1P International Partner
IPT Integrated Product Team
ISECG International Space Exploration Coordination Group
ISP In-Space Propulsion
ISRU In-Situ Resource Utilization
188 International Space Station
ISTAR ISS Testbed for Analog Research
IVA Intra-Vehicular Activity
J SC J Ohnson Space Center (NASA)
LEO LOW-Earth Orbit
LV Launch Vehicle
MAV Mars Ascent Vehicle
MCC Mission Control Center (at J SC)
MDAV Mars Descent/Ascent Vehicle
MMOD MicrO-Meteroid Orbital Debris
MTV Mars Transfer Vehicle
NBL Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory (J SC)
NBP Neutral Body Posture
NEA Near Earth Asteroid
NEEMO NASA Extreme Environment Mission Operations
NRC National Research Council
OCT Ofﬁce Of Chief Technologist (NASA HQ)
PLRP Pavilion Lake Research Project
RATS Research and Technology Studies
RPWG Research Planning Working Group
SAID Strategic Analysis and Integration Division (NASA HQ)
1 5

"
"16","SM Service Module

SMD Science Mission Directorate (NASA HQ)

SPHERES Synchronized Position Hold Engage Reorient Experimental Satellites

SSA Space Suit Assembly

SSTF Space Station Training Facility (J SC)

SHAB Surface Habitat

SW Software

TBD TO-be-Determined

TBR TO-be-Resolved

TEI Trans-Earth Inj ection

TMI Trans-Mars Injection

XDTO Exploration Detailed Test Obj ective

Acknowledgments

This research was carried out at the Lyndon B. J Ohnson Space Center and J et Propulsion Laboratory, California

Institute Of Technology, under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
References

1 “2011 NASA Strategic Plan,” National Aeronautics and Space Administration Headquarters, NP-2011-01-699-HQ,
Washington DC, Feb. 2011, p. 5.

2 “Analog Missions and Field Tests,” National Aeronautics and Space Administration, NASAfacts NF-2011-04-534-HQ.

3 “NASA: Signiﬁcant Challenges Remain for Access, Use, and Sustainment 0f the International Space Station,” US
Government Accountability Ofﬁce (GAO) report number GAO-12-587T, March 28, 2012.

4 Culbert, Chris, “Human Space Flight Architecture Team (HAT) Overview,” Brieﬁng t0 the Global Exploration Roadmap
(GER) Workshop, November 2011.

5 Stegemoeller, Charlie, “International Space Station Mars Analog Update,” Brieﬁng to NASA Advisory Council, August 2,
2011, slides 7, 8.

6 Charles, John B., “Preliminary Planning for 188 as Analog for Mars Transit,” Brieﬁng to Future In-Space Operations
Colloquium, June 29, 2011, slide 3.

7 “Human Research Program Requirements Document,” Human Research Program, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, HRP-47052 Rev E, May 2011.

8 “Restoring NASA’s Technological Edge and Paving the Way for a New Era in Space,” Aeronautics and Space Engineering
Board, National Research Council Report In Brief, J anuary 2012, page 3.

9 “Human Exploration of Mars: Design Reference Architecture 5.0,” Mars Architecture Steering Group, National Aeronautics
and Space Administration, NASA-SP-2009-566, July 2009.

16

"
