"","x"
"1","INNOVARE [OURNAL OF LIFE SCIENCE *I—“m “Em
Vol 4, Issue 4, 2016 ISSN - 2321-550X
Review Article
ALGAL RESEARCH IN SPACE: HISTORY, CURRENT STATUS, AND FUTURE PROSPECTS
SVETOSLAV ALEXANDROV*
Department of Experimental Algology, Institute of Plant Physiology and Genetics, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria.
*Email: saturn@gbg.bg
Received: 13 lune 2016, Revised and Accepted: 14]une 2016

ABSTRACT
The aim of this article is to give a brief review of the history and current status of research experiments with cyanobacteria, algae, and lichens
concerning their adaptation in space or their potential use for the needs of astronauts. The future of algological space research is also being discussed
with regard to creating self—sustainable stations and terraformation of Mars.
Keywords: Cyanobacteria, algae, space
INTRODUCTION By the mid-60s, it became clear that short duration spaceﬂight is
Th 'd 1 f h _ _ 1 survivable by Earth organisms (including algae as cited above).

h e 1733 to grill: ?gae or fuman consuréiptioiiglsz Csrrﬁntg mor: However, what about long duration missions? On 22 February 1966,
t an _ years 0 a ter It was IFSt suggeste ’ 1n ’ y ar er an a Voskhod rocket launched the Soviet spacecraft Cosmos 110 with the
von Witsch [1,2] that organisms such as diatoms could be source of . . .

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ dogs Veterok and Ugolyok and numerous other organisms, including
lipids Wthh could be used for food, With a detailed analys1s published . .

_ _ _ Chlorella cultures (LARG-l, LARG-3) strains. The spacecraft stayed in
subsequently by Spoehr in 1951 [3]. The concept of grow1ng algae in . . .
, orb1t for 22 days before it safely landed, duration far longer than any of
space for the needs of cosmonauts precedes even the launch of Earth s . . . . . .

_ _ _ the prev1ous m1ss10ns. The occurrence frequency of V1s1ble mutations
first cosmonaut. Lockhart [4] stated 2 years before the ﬂight of Yuri . . . .

_ _ _ _ _ has been surveyed, and no Significant differences have been found
Gagar1n that there is little doubt that unicellular algae Will be part of . .

_ _ _ between test cultures and the control samples on Earth. Statistically
the diet of cosmonauts because they consume a minimum of space due . . . .

_ _ _ _ _ s1gn1f1cant reduced surV1val of Chlorella cells has been noted only for
to their ability to grow1n closed systems. This author also advanced the . . . .
. . _ the LARG-3 strain [10], but otherw1se, it was estimated that algae
idea stating the fact that you can eat the whole algal plant in contrast . . . .

. . . _ possess the ability to surV1ve even after 22 days in space.

to higher plants where you have to discard a large amount of inedible
r(1)ots andlgtlems. 121:“ early space age, 1tfhas alsilbleiln prgposcelztl thgt Not only algae ﬂew in space before Gagarin, algal cells also went to
a gae cou d e use f: reagerrﬁlra e oxygen tror-n-ex a e Ccalr Son IOXI e the moon before first humans traveled there. On 15th September 1968,
in manne spacecra [ ]' e prominen V1s1onary ar agan even 10th November 1968 and 7th August 1969 Zond 5, Zond 6, and Zond 7
suggested the bold idea that algae could be used to terraform the other .

1 t fth 1 t d k th 't bl f r E rth 1_ f [6] spacecraft were launched, and they ﬂew the whole distance from the
p ane S 0 e SO ar sys em an ma e em SUI a e O a 1 e ' Earth to the Moon and back to the Earth. Each of those spacecraft
However, although decades have passed since then, nowadays the algae had onboard Chlorella cultures. Results have been contradictory; cell

. . . H ,, . H . surV1vab111ty was lower on Zond 5 and Zond 6, whereas space had no
are stillbe1ng cons1dered anovelexample w1th tremendous potential _ _ _ _ _
. . . ,, . . effect on the cellV1ab111ty1n the experiment onboard Zond 7 [11].
for applications in space [7], Without actually being used as food or
as a source Of oxygen-aboard the International Sbace Station. Alas, the Chlorella cells have been used in experiments aboard the Soviet space
prospect of terraforming the planets remains as distant as it was during . . . .
. . stations. Between 1977 and 1982, the Sov1et Union operated the station
the early space age. What is the current state of the algal research in . . . .
7 . Salyut 6. Aboard this station it has been proven that we1ghtlessness
space. What has been done and what still has to be done? We seek . . . . .
. . . . does not affect a grow1ng algal population, nor1t affects the relationship
answers to these questions in this manuscript. _ _ _ _
between the alga and its enV1ronment. Results received from Sov1et
ABRIEF HISTORY OF STUDYING CYANOBACTERIAL AND ALGAL Space 15mm“; Shgvc‘l’ thft welghﬂfeslsness_ 15 “0t 31“ lozbsmde t0 the
SURVIVABILITYIN SPACE norma growt an eve opmento p ants 1n genera [ ].
Algae ﬂew in space as soon as the space race began and before the When we talk about studying plants in space, we must clarify which
ﬂight of Gagarin. On 19 August 1960, a Vostok rocket launched the spaceﬂight conditions are being tested in experiments. In the cases
spacecraft “Korabl-Sputnik 2."" The most famous passengers aboard the cited above, we are talking about algae which have ﬂown on the inside
spacecraft were the two dogs Belka and Strelka that later successfully of spacecraft, i.e., pressurized containers, with strictly controlled
returned to Earth. However, the dogs were accompanied by 40 white conditions. Thus, only two factors could be studied - weightlessness
mice, two rats, numerous ﬂies, seeds, fungi, and cultures of the alga and increased radiation. Of these usually, the focus is on weightlessness.
Chlorella pyrenoidosa [8]. The mission duration was very short, and the Studying radiation is more challenging because radiation conditions on
spacecraft returned home after just a day, so it offered only a short-term the inside of spacecraft depend on orbital parameters and structure of
assessment of how organisms react in space conditions. The results the spacecraft. Experiments about survivability of algae on the inside
with Chlorella from this particular ﬂight are well documented. It was of spacecraft are useful, but they say nothing about how algae react in
estimated that launch, landing, and short-duration stay (25 hrs) in harsh conditions of space with all other factors - vacuum, direct solar
spaceﬂight conditions do not impact the main physiological processes illumination, and extreme temperatures. This is being reviewed in the
such as growth, development, and reproduction. The only deviations following paragraphs.
were a higher number of dead cells in spaceﬂight cultures compared
to control cultures and the photosynthetic activity in the spaceﬂight A Russian FOTON-M spacecraft launched successfully from the
culture was lower than expected [9]. Baykonur cosmodrome on May 31, 2005, Via a Soyuz rocket. Aboard

"
"2","Alexandrov
Innovare journal of Life Sciences, V014, Issue 4, 2016, 1-4
the spacecraft ﬂew lichens Rhizocarpon geographicum and Xanthoria Even though as cited above, researches give decades before the
elegans, symbiotic organisms composed of algal and fungal cells. biological life support systems to mature, work in this field continues.
Lichens stayed space for 16 days before returning safely to Earth after In fact, some interesting experiments with algae have been conducted
full exposure to space conditions including vacuum, UV illumination, in the past few years, and they have been described below.
extreme temperatures, and weightlessness. It was confirmed that
lichens were able to recover within 24 hrs to their full metabolic An assessment study has been conducted about the integration of an
activity [13]. Much longer experiments with lichens have also been algal photobioreactor into an environmental control and life support
conducted aboard the International Space Station foratotal of 1.5 years. system of a space station. The study is focused on the performance
It was confirmed that lichens X. elegans and Aspicilia fruticulosa can of the photobioreactor as a food production system in addition to air
maintain their photosynthetic and physiological activities even after a revitalization. Researchers conclude that it is unfavorable to convert all
year and a half exposure, but R. geographicum was described as “slightly the metabolically produced carbon dioxide within the photobioreactor,
damaged"" [14].Aboard the external EXPOSE facility of the International but it does contribute to the closure of the carbon cycle. They claim
Space Station was also conducted experiments with different algae that resupply mass savings of 16% compared to physico-chemical life
as separate organisms, not part of lichen symbiosis, and it was support systems are achievable. The photobioreactor would add to the
estimated that cells of Chlorella and Rosenvingiella and cyanobacterium oxygen and food supply for the astronauts. The authors also conclude
Gloeocapsa sp. survived after a year and a half exposure to vacuum that the cultivation of higher plants is advantageous when we talk about
in dark conditions. In experiments aboard, the same EXPOSE facility further closure of the carbon cycle, reducing resupply requirements,
which included exposure to both space vacuum and extraterrestrial UV and providing more variety to the nourishment [21].
spectrum, Chroococcidiopsis cells survived, but cells of Nostoc commune
did not [15], One of the most challenging hurdles to the development of
bioregenerative life support systems is that it is very hard to maintain
GROWING ALGAE IN SPACE AS PART OF REGENERATIVE LIFE stable concentrations of O2 and C02. Indeed, sometimes, the balance
SUPPORT SYSTEMS between 02 and CO2 could be greatly disrupted, could algae be used to
_ _ _ regulate the balance during scheduled maintenance, or be implemented
TO_ l<eep the astronauts 311V? 1n space, llfe support systems must be as a compensatory system during emergency conditions? According
utlllzed. So far, all space statlons [those 1n the past plus the currently to Li et al. [22], the alga Chlorella vulgaris is a promising organism
present Internatlonal SpacelStatlon) have been constructed in low in such cases. Sometimes, cultivation of higher plants could fail and
Earth orb1t, andlthey have “3th on cont1nuous resupply Of fOOd’ water, subsequently lead to an imbalance of O2 and C02. Stabilizing the habitat
and oxygen dellvered by spacecraft. Open loop hfe support systems just by recultivating higher plants would be slow, and the use of algae
havelbeen successful on short duratlon m1ss1ons. However, when space could be advantageous. The authors conclude that using C. vulgaris,
m1ssions get longer, the supplyload gets heaV1er and resupply becomes the original productivity could recover within 5 days, and this would
proh1b1t1ve [16]. Th1s w111 be the case when we need to construct ensure stability until the higher plant is regrown.
bases on the Moon and send people to Mars. We will need closed loop
technologies which will provide regenerative functions. So far, there are PROSPECTS OF USING CYANOB ACTERI A AND ALGAE FOR
some regenerative devices already developed, like the Water Recovery TERRAFORMING M ARS
System aboard the International Space Station, which is able to convert
urine back into drinking water. However, this is still not enough. In In contrast to the first chapter, in which the focus was more on
order for self—sufficient stations to become reality, reliable regenerative survivability of algae during spaceﬂight and less on growing them, in
life support systems must be created first. this chapter, we talk about terraforming of other planets and moons,
or changing their conditions so they could be suitable for life. This
Regenerative life support systems can be divided to physico-chemical implies something different - algae should not just survive but should
and biological. So far, all life support systems used for the needs of the be photosynthetically active, able to grow, reproduce, and accumulate
present or past space stations have been physico-chemical.According to biomass. Although the word “terraforming” might imply changing
Belz et al. [17], biological regenerative life support will not be available other planets (or moons) to be like Earth in a strict sense, making them
in the next 50 years, as there is much fundamental research to be done. suitable for human life, it is not necessary to be so. It could simply make
This is quite a long time, but the authors state that there is a logical just a fraction of the foreign world inhabitable, not the whole world,
intermediate step between physico-chemical and bioregenerative or by “terraforming” we could mean changing the planetary (moon)
life support system, and this is the hybrid life support system which surface to the point we are able to produce food, although it may still
uses integration of physico-chemical and simple biological system not be ideal for humans to live there [23].
components. Such biological components, according to the authors,
could be algae which are grown in photobioreactors. It has been widely accepted among the society that the most probable
world for colonization and settlement in our foreseeable future is
Despite the hardships, biological life support systems have been studied Mars. Unfortunately, Mars has a strong oxidative atmosphere, low
by several space agencies during the last decades including NASA, IAXA, temperatures, extremely dry conditions and high UV radiation, which
and BSA. In Europe, the effort is mainly performed within the MELiSSA, makes its surface a harsh place for life [24]. Of these, the UV radiation is
an international project led by BSA. The aim is to create a closed loop the most deleterious factor because UV rays are able to directly damage
Via the use of five main compartments (a compartment for waste the DNA structure - a result which has been confirmed after tests with
liquefaction, compartment for carbon transformation, compartment for Viruses, bacterial, or fungal spores [25]. UV radiation conditions are a
nitrification, compartment for food, water, and oxygen production, and bit different on the surface on Mars, compared to open space, because
crew compartment). An algal photobioreactor is being used as part of C02, which comprises 95% of the atmosphere, is able to absorb short-
the compartment for food, water, and oxygen production, inhabited by a wavelength UV radiation and no radiation at wavelength below 200 nm
culture of cyanobacteria Arthrospira platensis [18]. All of the mentioned reaches the surface of Mars. The main problem with the Martian
compartments include living organisms and the project MELiSSA atmosphere, however, is the extremely low concentration of O3 and
as a whole is based on the principle of an “aquatic” lake ecosystem most of the time UV radiation above 200 nm penetrates the atmosphere
where waste products are processed using the metabolism of plants and reaches the surface [26]. This may have rather unfortunate
and algae which in return provide food, air revitalization, and water consequences in the efforts to colonize Mars and its terraforming with
purification [19]. Christophe Lasseur, project manager of MELiSSA, has the use of algae. Yes, it is true that cyanobacteria possess various UV-
stated publicly: “We are looking into the future. Let us give MELiSSA absorbing or screening compounds [27], and while they allow for them
another 25 years"" [20]. to thrive in extreme conditions on Earth, UV conditions could be a
2

"
"3","Alexandrov
Innovare journal of Life Sciences, V014, Issue 4, 2016, 1-4

problem for algae to live on unprotected planetary surface. Mars is more organism, including the one of being a critical part of the chlorophyll
extreme than the most extreme places on Earth such as deserts, arctic, molecule. Mars Rover Curiosity, which is working on the Martian
and antarctic conditions which are typically inhabited by algae. That is surface since 2012, recently confirmed the presence of “fixed” nitrogen
why, it has been suggested that since you cannotjust inoculate cultures in the form of nitrates, as opposed to atmospheric nitrogen which is
from Earth and expect them to thrive on Mars, initial engineering inaccessible for most living organisms [33]. These findings could
(ecopoiesis) would be needed to change the planetjust enough to allow mean what if we are to grow algae on the surface on Mars; we will
the organisms to live there [28]. not need to bring certain chemicals with Earth spacecraft. However,

the soil of Mars also contains chemicals that are not very common on
It is possible to create simulation chambers on Earth where you can Earth - perchlorates. Two different landers (phoenix and curiosity) on
mimic Martian conditions to study how organisms adapt. This could two different locations (vastitas borealis and gale crater, respectively)
affirm which algal organisms are suitable for terraforming the planet. have found evidence for their presence [34]. The possible culprit for the
Mars in the process of ecopoiesis would probably resemble the formation of perchlorates may be UV photooxidation of chlorides [35].
conditions of early Earth, so most probably primitive cyanobacteria Unfortunately, it is hard to access how the presence of perchlorates
which are considered similar to the earliest forms of cyanobacteria in the Martian soils could affect the prospects of growing algae for
that appeared on the surface on our planet will be prime candidates food on Mars or for terraforming the planet. Uptake of perchlorate
for terraformation. An example of such organisms are the rock— and perchlorate reduction in plant tissues have been studied in land
inhabiting cyanobacteria from the genus Chroococcidiopsis, which grow plants [36,37], however, detailed studies how perchlorates affect
in the most extreme dry habitats on our planet, such as McMurdo Dry growth and development of algae have yet to be conducted. This is a
Valleys in Antarctica and the Atacama Desert in Chile. Chroococcidiopsis task algologist could be able to conduct in the future.
cyanobacteria have been suggested for growing on Mars due to their
ability to grow in the deserts, inside porous rocks and on the lower CONCLUSIONS
surface of translucent stones, as well as due to its resistance to . . . . .

. . _ _ _ _ It is a common sentiment among people that the pace of the sc1ent1f1c
des1ccation and high salinity [29]. Experiments have been conducted . . . .

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ development is very slow. This is espec1ally true about space
under s1mulated Mars conditions which confirm that cells retain their . . .
_ _ _ _ exploration. Although it has been suggested early1n the space age that
membrane integrity, photosynthetic pigments, autofluorescence, and
_ _ _ _ algae could be grown for the needs of astronauts, we can say that years,
dehydrogenase act1V1ty, but it has also been reported that organisms . . . . .
_ _ _ _ _ _ even decades Wlll yet have to pass before this turns into reality. Still,
are unable to form colon1es [30]. Still, this is a prom1s1ng result because . . .

1 '11 b bl M 'f' _ h h _ 11 important research has been conducted. We know that m1crograv1ty
an a ga W1 not e a e to grow on ars 1 It is not p otosynt et1ca y does not significantly affect the growth of algae. It has been proven that
act1ve. . .

some strains are able to surV1ve even after a long exposure to harsh
conditions includin vacuum and extreme tern eratures. Work is bein
Another experiment has been conducted with the extremophile lichen g . . p g
_ _ _ _ _ conducted to develop bioregenerative support systems, even though
PleopSIdlum chlorophanum, and it was estimated that the organism . . . .
_ _ _ _ bas1c research still needs to be done. Terraforming Mars With the use of
adapts differently if it is on an unprotected surface, exposed to harsh . . . .

_ _ _ _ _ _ algae is still an idea worth to be cons1dered.

conditions, or in protected n1ches such as cracks and fissures in rocks.
Under unprotected surface, researchers were .not able to confirm Robotic space probes have made important discoveries about the
successfully the photosynthes1s of the algal symbiont, but the organism conditions of the planets in our solar system. We have already
remained photosynthetically active 1h protected site COhdlthhS' determined important facts about the composition of the surface of
De Vera et al. concluded that terrestrial hfe most likely can adapt Mars. This gives us some directions of fundamental research that could
phys1olog1cally to live on Mars [31]' Here, It IhUSt be p01nted Oht that De be conducted during the next years. How, for example, would commonly
Vera et a1. conclus1ons were hOt used to Justity terraforming the planet, meet chemicals in the soil of Mars affect growth of algae? This is an
but rather they stated the exact oppos1te - stringent measures should be important question that awaits its answer.
taken to prevent human activities from infecting Mars with terrestrial
organismS- REFERENCES
It should be stressed that there are two major public opinions 1- Harder R3 von‘Witsch H- Report on attempting 0f photosynthesis by
concerning colonization of Mars with regards to the possible existence 22:81:;th m1croorgamsms, Research Serv1ce Spe01al Issue 1942;
Of hf? there. The opinions are often exbressed 1e a stark and polarized 2. Harder R, von Witsch H. The mass cultivation of diatoms. Reports of
way in the public space. The first one is that if life on Mars does exist, the German Botanical Society 1942; 60:146-52.
we ShOUId do everything to protect 1t from Earth organisms Wthh 3. SpoehrHA. Chlorella asasource of food. ProcAm Phil Soc 195 1;95:62.
could displace it. This would mean strict measures and sterilization of 4_ Lockhart JA_ The care and feeding Of spacemen. Eng Sci 1959;22;11_3_
anything that goes to Mars, even refraining from sending humans to the 5. Gafford RD, Richardson DE. Mass algal culture in space operations.
surface of the planet and keep exploring it only robotically. The second J Biochem Microbiol Technol Eng 1960;2:299-311.
opinion is that spreading humanity to other planets is a must for the 6- Sagan C- Carl Sagan’s COShUC Chhhﬁihthhi Ah Extraterrestrial
long-term survival of the human species, even if this could bring some 7 ﬁrspectw; ilw Ysrk: Cambridge U336??? gross; 1973t d f t
h . 1 1 11. f . . omson . gae armmg 1n ow ea or 1 : as presen an u ure.
dangers to t e pOSSIb e “3 1 9 J Br Interplanet Soc 2014;67:332-7.
T f . . h _ 'd _ h 'd 8. Hall R, Shayler DJ. The Rocket Men: Vostok & Voskhod. The First
lerra orrn1ngMars1st e exact oppos1te1 ea t0 preservation-t e1 ea Soviet Manned Spaceﬂights. Chichester, UK: Springer Science &
1s plant life on Mars, so the planet would become Earth-like. This is the Business Media; 2001_
DOSitiOh I support 35 an author Of this review. 9. Semenenko VE, Vladimirova MG. Effects of cosmic ﬂight conditions
in the Sputnik-ship on the Viability of Chlorella. Physiology of Plants
In order for algae and lichens to grow on Mars, specific chemical 1961; 8:743-9.
compounds must be present. Of course, the most important one for 10- AhtiPOV VV, 13610119 NL, Ntkitih MD, Parfyonov GP, Saxonov PP-
photosynthesis is the carbon dioxide, which is abundant in the Martian 891116 “25111th radiobiological StUdleS performed on (30511105410
atmosphere. However, it is not enough. Various macro- and micro- b1osatell1te. LlfeSCl Space Res 1969’7'207'8'
11. Vauhna EN, Anlkeeva ID, Gubareva 1G, Shtraukh GA. Inﬂuence of
elements must also be ensured. Recent research, conducted on the . ,, ,, . . .

_ f f' h _ h _ 1 Space-Fllght Factors aboard Zond Automatlc Statlons on Surv1val
Martian sur ace, clon 1rms t at rnany important C emica S are already and Mutability of Chlorella Cells. Cosmic research 1971; 9(6):940-4.
present there. It 15 already estimated that the 5011 Of Mars contains 12. SycheV VN. Investigations of the effects of microgravity on biological
Fe-, Ca-, and Mg-sulfates [352]- Of thesei the presence 0f Mg-sulfates objects-components of closed ecological systems of life support and
is especially important because Mg has many Vital roles in the plant development of cultivation technologies. Moscow IMBP-RANg2000.

3

"
"4","Alexandrov
Innovarejournal ofLife Sciences, V014, Issue 4, 2016, 1-4
13. Sancho LG, de la Torre R, Homeck G, Ascaso C, de Los Rios A, 25. Homeck G. Exobiology, the study of the origin, evolution and
Pintado A, et al. Lichens survive in space: Results from the 2005 distribution of life within the context of cosmic evolution: A review.
LICHENS experiment. Astrobiology 2007;7:443-54. Planet Space Sci 1995 ;43(1-2):189-217.
14. De Vera JP. Lichens as survivors in space and on Mars. Fungal Ecol 26. Homeck G. The microbial world and the case for Mars. Planet Space
2012;5(4):472-9. Sci 2000;48(11):1053-63.
15. Cockell CS, Rettberg P, Rabbow E, Olsson-Francis K. Exposure 27. Sinha RP, Héder DP. UV—protectants in cyanobacteria. Plant Sci
of phototrophs to 548 days in low Earth orbit: Microbial selection 2008;174(3):278—89.
pressures in outer space and on early earth. ISME J 2011;5:1671-82. 28. Fogg MJ. Terraforming Mars: A review of current research. AdV Space
16. Eckart P. Spaceﬂight Life Support and Biospherics. V01. 5. New York: Res 1998;22(3):415-20.
Springer Science & Business Media; 2013. 29. Friedmann E1, Ocampo-Friedmann R. A primitive cyanobacterium
17. Belz S, Ganzer B, Messerschmid E, Friedrich KA, as pioneer microorganism for terraforming Mars. AdV Space Res
Schmid-Staiger U. Hybrid life support systems with integrated fuel 1995;15(3):243-6.
cells and photobioreactors for a lunar base. Aerosp Sci Technol 30. Billi D, Ghelardini P, Onofri S, Cockell CS, Rabbow E, Homeck G.
2013;24(1):169-76. Desert cyanobacteria under simulated space and Martian conditions.
18. Pilo Teniente S. Simulation of the gas phase integration between EPSC Abstracts 2008;3zEPSC2008—A.
compartments CIVa and CV of the MELiSSA Pilot Plant. Master 31. de Vera JP, Schulze-Makuch D, Khan A, Lorek A, Koncz A,
Thesis, Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya Master in Aerospace Méhlmann D, et al. Adaptation of an antarctic lichen to Martian niche
Science & Technology; 2015. conditions can occur within 34 days. Planet Space Sci 2014;98:182-90.
19. ESA. Closed Loop Compartments; 2015 . Available from: http://www. 32. Kounaves SP, Hecht MH, Kapit J , Quinn RC, Catling DC, Clark BC,
esa.int/Our_ActiVities/Space_Engineering_Techn010gy/Melissa/ er al. Soluble sulfate in the Martian soil at the Phoenix landing site.
C10sed_Loop_Compartments. Geophys Res Lett 2010;37(9):L09201.
20. ESA. An Ecosystem inA Box; 2015.Availab1e from: http://www.esa. 33. Hand E. Planetary Science. ‘Fixed’ nitrogen found in Martian soil.
int/Our_ActiVities/Human_Spaceﬂight/Research/An_ecosystem_in_a_ Science 20 1 5 ; 347: 1403 .
box. 34. Glavin DP, Freissinet C, Miller KE, Eigenbrode JL, Brunner AB,
21. Ganzer B, Messerschmid E. Integration of an algal photobioreactor into Buch A, et al. Evidence for perchlorates and the origin of chlorinated
an environmental control and life support system of a space station. hydrocarbons detected by SAM at the Rocknest aeolian deposit in gale
Acta Astronaut 2009;65(1):248—61. crater. J Geophys Res Planet 2013;118(10):1955-73.
22. Li M, Hu D, Liu H, Hu E, Xie B, Tong L. Chlorella vulgaris culture as 35. Schuttleﬁeld JD, Sambur JB, Gelwicks M, Eggleston CM, Parkinson BA.
a regulator of CO 2 in a bioregenerative life support system. AdV Space Photooxidation of chloride by oxide minerals: Implications for
Res 2013;52(4):773-9. perchlorate on Mars. JAm Chem Soc 2011;133(44):17521-3.
23. Beech M. Terraforming: The Creating of Habitable Worlds. New York: 36. van Aken B, Schnoor JL. Evidence of perchlorate (ClO4-) reduction
Springer Science & Business Media; 2009. in plant tissues (poplar tree) using radio-labeled 36ClO4-. Environ Sci
24. Gémez F, Mateo-Marti E, Prieto-Ballesteros O, Martin-Gago J , Technol 2002;36(12):2783-8.
Amils R. Protection of chemolithoautotrophic bacteria exposed to 37. Yu L, Caﬁas JE, Cobb GP, Jackson WA, Anderson TA. Uptake of
simulated Mars environmental conditions. Icarus 2010;209(2):482-7. perchlorate in terrestrialplants. EcotoxicolEnViron Saf2004;58(1):44-9.
4

"
