"","x"
"1","Mlcrometeormd and OrbItal Debrls Impact
Damage Recordlng System
Gregory T. Swanson (1’ 2), Alan M. Cassell (2)
(”Santa Clara University, Department of Electrical Engineering, 500 El Camino Real, Santa Clara, CA 95053 USA
Email: gregoryt.swans0n@nasa.gov
(2)[ERC Incorporated], Entry Systems and Vehicle Development Branch, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA
94035 USA Email: alan.m.cassell@nasa.g0v
Abstract— Damage from Micrometeoroid and Orbital representative models of the CEV backshell TPS. The TPS
Debris (MMOD) impacts poses a substantial risk for the models were fabricated in a ﬂight-like conﬁguration
loss of crew for the currently planned CEV missions to the integrating the EDR sensor at the bondline. The DRS
International Space Station (ISS). 1 2 The Columbia Space accurately indicated damage to the TPS models on all seven
Shuttle accident in 2003 spurred an investigation that led to hypervelocity impact tests. These results have conﬁrmed
the requirement of an active impact monitoring system on the feasibility of the DRS employing the EDR sensor as a
the Shuttle Orbiter. The MMOD impact Damage Recording Viable MMOD impact sensing solution. Vehicle integration
System (DRS) presents a reliable, mass- and power-efﬁcient and further space environment testing remain critical steps
Thermal Protection System (TPS) impact detection system in maturing this technology to ﬂight qualiﬁcation.
that can be readily integrated with manned and robotic
spacecraft. Thus, the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) is TABLE OF CONTENTS
considering inclusion of active MMOD detection systems
for monitoring damage to the backshell TPS. 1. INTRODUCTION................................................................ 1
2. DAMAGE RECORDING SYSTEM 2
MMOD impact detection systems have been developed and 3. TESTINGS
ﬂown on satellites and probes dating back to the 1960s. 4.APPLICABILITYTO ENTRYVEHICLES............................6
These technolo iCS WCI‘C dCSl 116d rimaril to understand S.COMPETING TECHNOLOGIES7
g g P Y
and characterize the MMOD environment found in low 6. FUTURE WORK7
. . . . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS........................................................7
earth orbit (LEO). The only impact monitoring system
qualiﬁed for use on manned spacecraft is the Wing leading BIOGRAPHIES 8
edge impact detection system (WLE IDS). During Shuttle
ascent, the WLE IDS monitors impacts due to insulating
foam shed from the external fuel tank onto the WLE. The 1' INTRODUCTION
WLE is particularly vulnerable due to the high heating The Columbia Space Shuttle accident in 2003 has spurred
enVironment experienced during reentry. .Eyer-inereasmg the requirement for a Thermal Protection System (TPS)
accumulation of man-made debris is magnifying this threat impact monitoring system. Presently, wireless impact
to shuttle and other spacecrafts eperating 1h .LEO' monitoring sensors have been implemented within the
Therefore, thedevelopmerit ofbn-orbit impact monitoring leading edge of the Space Shuttles’ wings to detect foam
systems that aid in the mitigation of the threat to manned shed from the fuel tank during ascent [1]. Development of
spacecraft is needed. the shuttle’s successor coupled with ﬂexible, thin ﬁlm
electronic sensing technologies, has spurred interest in the
This paper describes the development and testing 0f the development of an impact monitoring system that could be
DRS, a mass- and power-efﬁcient wireless MMOD impact implemented for a variety of MMOD risk mitigation
detection system designed for potential incorporation into approaches in N AS A’s new human-rated vehicle design.
the backshell 0f the CEV. The DRS utilizes wireless data
acquisition Via custom designed wireless nodes. The DRS Micrometeoroid and Orbital Debris
wireless nodes determine MMOD impact damage by
employing an Embedded Damage Recorder (EDR) sensor. Micrometeoroid and Orbital debris (MMOD) in the low
A variety of EDR sensor designs were considered based Earth orbit (LEO) environment is made up Of micro-
upon different damage detection and TPS integration meteoroids and man-made debris. The man-made debris
requirements. The DRS system design was recently tested primarily consists of fragmented rockets and satellites that
at the University of Dayton Research Institute’s have 300111111113th from the over 50 years Of space
hypervelocity impact range. During this test series, seven exploration. MMOD found in LEO have velocities
hypervelocity impacts were conducted using aluminum and averaging 10 km/s (229000 mph), WhiCh can cause
nylon projectiles to simulate MMOD impacts to catastrophic damage to TPS or other spacecraft structures in
the event of an impact [2]. Risk from MMOD impact
damage is a growing threat to operations in LEO as
1 978-1—4244-7351-9/1l/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE.
2 IEEEAC paper#153l, Version 1, Updated 2010;10:27
l

"
"2","increased debris from man-made sources accumulates in a dependent on the area of the vulnerable structure that needs
variety of Earth orbits. to be monitored for impact damage.
MMOD having a diameter of greater than 10 cm can be The DRS can easily be tailored to many different
monitored and tracked by ground systems. These larger applications ranging from armor to inﬂatables. For the
MMOD objects can be avoided by maneuvering the purpose of this work the DRS has been optimized for space
spacecraft out of the projected MMOD path, minimizing the vehicle systems. When the DRS is integrated With a space
threat. Smaller MMOD, having a diameter of less than 1 vehicle, each of its three components has a speciﬁc purpose.
mm, are generally not large enough to cause substantial TPS The SMicro sensors are the ﬁrst line of detection. In the
damage from hypervelocity impact. However, MMOD event of an impact the SMicro sensors trigger the WDAS to
having a diameter of greater than 1 mm and less than 10 cm ‘Wake up’ from its low power state. The WDAS then scans
pose the greatest threat. This range of MMOD is hard to the EDR sensors performing an algorithm to determine if
track by ground systems, but is large enough to cause critical damage has occurred. The damage indicated by the
serious damage to a spacecraft [2]. Therefore, alternative EDR sensors is then Wirelessly transmitted by the WDAS to
means are being considered to mitigate the threat posed by the health monitoring system of the vehicle.
MMOD that creates signiﬁcant risk to manned spacecraft.
Embedded Damage Recorder Sensor
Shuttle S ng Leadmg Edge Impact Detectzon System The EDR sensor functions by mechanically storing breaks
Accelerometer sensors were integrated into the remaining in a network of Wire traces that are embedded Within a
Orbiters’ Wing leading edge (WLE) as an outcome of the ﬂexible printed circuit board. Performing a continuity test
return to ﬂight process. During launch the accelerometer on the network of Wire traces can then determine impact
sensor system, created by Invocon Inc., continuously damage by detecting factures.
samples each accelerometer at 20 kHz. This data is then
transferred Via Wireless communication to a data acquisition In greater detail, the EDR continuity test determines
system Within the Space Shuttle crew compartment [1]. Whether electrical current ﬂows through a Wire trace by
Unfortunately this system is limited, capable of only applying a potential at one end and then monitoring the
monitoring the Space Shuttle’s WLE during the duration of other end [3]. If there is high current ﬂow through the Wire
launch day activities. The system is not able to actively trace, indicating low resistance, then the substrate is intact
sense throughout the mission due to the system’s high throughout. If current ﬂow does not eXist through the Wire
power consumption. The integrity of the TPS for the trace during the continuity test, indicating an inﬁnite
remaining extent of the mission is then determined using an resistance, then the Wire trace must be fractured. This is the
optical process. This process uses the Space Shuttle’s functional basis of the EDR sensor. The main advantage of
payload bay robotic arm, and dependent upon the mission, the EDR break Wire system is that it acts as a mechanical,
the International Space Station’s (ISS) cameras during a 360 non-volatile memory by permanently storing the impact
degree pitch maneuver before docking. The nature of this damage data Within its structure, making it attractive for
tedious optical process and the development of the new damage detection and aiding potential Visual inspection.
human-rated vehicle have spurred interest in impact
detection systems that are capable of detecting impacts on Detecting impact damage on large surfaces requires more
all TPS surfaces throughout the duration of the mission. than one Wire trace. Various Wire trace impact grid
geometries have been designed to give the approximate
One potential solution for determining critical impact damage size and location. The impact grid design for a
damage to the backshell TPS on the CEV is described particular region of the TPS depends upon the critical
below. Critical damage in this context is deﬁned as impact damage criteria deﬁned for the operational environment of
damage that perforates the outer facesheet of the metallic the vehicle. When realizing the sensing grid, many Wire
honeycomb/composite structure Within the aeroshell (see traces must be laid out uniformly to cover the surface of
Figure 5). interest on the aeroshell skin. Since each Wire trace in the
sensing grid requires continuity testing, it is more efﬁcient
2. D AM AGE RECORDING SYSTEM to connect one end of each Wire trace to a constant potential.
. . The other ends of the Wire traces are then monitored to
The custom des1gned Damage Recording System (DRS) verifyimpact damage.
delivers impact detection through the utilization of three
main components: the Embedrled Damage Recorder (EDR) Figure 1 describes the operating principle of the EDR
sensor, the .Shock MIC“) (SMicro) sensor, and the Wireless sensor. The dark solid lines indicate intact Wire traces, While
Data Acquis1tion System (WDAS)' Together, these three the lighter dashed lines indicate a failed continuity test,
components form one node of the DRS. Constrained by. the representing a fracture in the Wire trace.
WDAS design, each node can employ up to three SMicro
sensors and eight EDR sensors. The required number of As seen in the ﬁgure 1 example, there are ﬁve broken Wire
DRS nodes and the amount Of sensors per node are traces. By analyzing Where the broken Wire traces intersect,
2

"
"3","I ' Minimum
Damage
I I Maximum
' I "" Damage
' ' Broken
Trace Figure 3 — Top (left) and Bottom (right) Layers of the
III... 2X2 Serpentine EDR Sensor
_ Intact
' ' Trace In order to appropriately denote the 2X2 Serpentine sensor,
the layout of the left side and right side serpentine traces,
F' 1 _ S . G . d D I d' t' E l are established as X and Z, Which overlay the top half and
lgure ensmg r1 amage n ma 1011 xamp e bottom half serpentine traces, W and Y. This creates four
. . detectable quadrants as seen in Figure 4. Damage to Q1 is
the damage location can be determined and the damage realized by breaks in serpentine traces W and X, Q2 by W
diameter can be estimated. In Figure 1, the lightly shaded and Z, Q3 by Y and X, and Q4 by Y and Z. Impacts
squares in the sensing gridillustrate the minimum possible resulting in a single line break would only indicate the
impact damage area that is indicated by the ﬁve broken Wire requisite top/bottom or left/right as being damaged, still
traces, While the darkly shaded squares illustrate the allowing for localization of the damage.
maximum possible impact damage area.
After multiple EDR design cycles, an optimized prototype
sensor design was realized that meets the MMOD damage
detection criteria for the CEV application, While
maintaining a low mass and small footprint. The optimized
EDR sensor has been designated as the 2X2 Serpentine,
Which is shown in Figure 2.
--..----.-.-..-....I Figure 4 — Four Quadrants 0f the 2X2 Serpentine Sensor
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
==::===============: The 2X2 Serpentine EDR sensor is lightweight at 3.0 grams,
EEEEEEEEEEEEEE:==EEE andlow profile measuringless than 9.2 mm thick. It is
II
..-.-.-.---...--:..- fabricateduSing ﬂeXible printed Circuit board technology.
llllllllllllllllllll FleXible Circuits reduce the Size and mass ass001ated With
==:=:==::======:==== iigid circuit board layout, along With nial<ing the circuit
==::::============:= itself eaSily pliable [4]. The two layet des1gn of the EDR
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII sensor is comprised of a bottom polyinnde layer, a lower
:=:=====:======EEEEE copper layer, a middle polyimide layer, an upper copper
illiilI-iiIl'l' layer and a top polyimide layer. [6]. Polyiniide’s
III . . . . .
===============g=III demonstrated durability in the harsh enVironment found in
LEO (resistance to atomic oxygen, thermal and chemical
_ . . . stability), combined With Widespread use in ﬂexible printed
Flgure 2 — 2 X 2 Serpentlne EDR Sensor Wlth 1 cm PltCh circuit board manufacturing make it ideally suited for use in
this application [5].
The 2X2 Serpentine EDR sensor displayed in Figure 2
employs four serpentine .copper traces in.a grid size of 20 As seen in Figure 2, the 2X2 Serpentine EDR sensor has
cni square (Whleh approx1niates the footprint Of theAETB—S been fabricated With cut—outs in between the copper traces in
tiles on the CEVbackshell) and IS fabricated.Within a two— order to embed the sensor at the bondline between the TPS
layer ﬂeXible printed eircuit. The serpentine traces are and the underlying carrier. This approach removes 64
spaced 1cm apart to niaintain an impact detection resolution percent of the polyimide sheet between the Wire traces,
Of 1 cm, and are pos1tioned m a 2X2 formation 50 that they greatly reducing the mass of the EDR sensor, and allowing
form four 10 cm square quadrants for damage location. The for minimal bondline integrity interference. This can be
can be seen in Figure 3 and Figure 4. The four serpentine seen in the TPS stack of Figure 5.
traces have been labeled W, X, Y, and Z.
3

"
"4","monitoring up to three SMicros and eight 2X2 Serpentine
EDRs. The WDAS employs a PIC18F microprocessor to
run the impact damage monitoring algorithm. It then
TPSM . communicates any sensed critical damage data Via a
V atenal M . .
. aXStream XBee Wireless transceiver.
7 , 1 /RTV
”1“,“ \//:|“ Strain 'So'atio"" Pad The EDR and SMicro sensor support circuits located on the
""ﬁﬁg'?"" 1.5:? EDR Sensor WDAS both utilize a resistor pull—up scheme to determine
illlrllrf’:fpv1ﬂ‘llm‘ RTV the state of the sensors. The SMicro sensor circuits are
Ilir'lml directly connected to the hardware interrupt pins of the
microprocessor, enabling WDAS ‘Wake up’ after an impact
Figure 5 — 2X2 Serpentine EDR Sensor Placed at the ?;??t' Giza; the large gmounttﬁf EDR 81611.8(” sighais, t2?)
B011 dline in aTPS S tack .. mu 1p exers con ense e Signa inpu s me e
microprocessor.
ShOCk Mzcro Sensors The WDAS is extremely low power requiring 0.6mA during
The SMicro sensor is manufactured by Signal Quest (New EDR sensor scanning, SZmA during Wireless data
Hampshire, USA). During the occurrence of a shock event, transmission, and 5.5uA during low power sleep mode.
the SMicro sensor produces a pulse that can be used to Utilizing a lAh half size AA lithium battery, and an hourly
interrupt, or ‘Wake—up’ a microcontroller. The sensor is fully system check lasting approximately two seconds, the
passive, requires no signal conditioning, and operates With WDAS could survive remotely for a little over three years
currents as low as 0.25 14A. The SMicro sensor is offered (assuming room temperature battery operation).
With sensitivity between 20g and ZOOOg. The mass of the
SMicro sensor is minimal at 0.6 grams, and the dimensions g- Miami-
are 3.3 mm X 6.9 mm [7]. liltﬂp‘ix ‘ _ .- ,-
The SMicro sensor has been integrated With the DRS us1ng :3 afhmw “=13 ’Tf: '
a resistor pull—up circuit. The sensor is connected to the H_:_T.;:..-;' ' H ‘
circuit ground and acts as an electrical short until a shock #i...” ‘15 J. u I . . \ ‘
event occurs. During the shock event, the sensor connection 3’ ' ' ' - C _ 3
becomes an open circuit, and the pull—up resistor in the ' V7"" “'3‘ ;
circuit becomes the path of least resistance. The circuit then EDR SEMI. Inputs Shack 5am], Inputs
generates a pulse to communicate With the WDAS[7]. The
SMicro sensor and its prbtotype interface can be . seen in Figur e 7 _ WDAS (right) and the WDAS M ount e d in
Figure 6.. The attachment interface and placement still needs Protective Housing for T estin g at UDRI (left)
to be optimized.
The WDAS including battery and protective housing can be
seen on the left side of Figure 7, While the WDAS alone can
be seen on the right side of Figure 7. Including the half size
-_ _. __ . __ _ AA lithium battery and protective housing, the module
5:4:19” 2;; __ weighs 59.4 grams, and its footprint is 3.6 cm square by 3.2
' :: cm tall.
""-;;_1___ Damage Recording System Software
ii 1‘ The DRS impact detection algorithm is implemented Within
_ ""'1‘ng the microprocessor program code. To better understand the
- - ‘5 capabilities of the DRS system, the following algorithm was
_ ""3 developed as a baseline for spacecraft integration testing.
‘ . Unless prompted earlier by the SMicro hardware interrupt,
|II'II'II'I'IIIIIII II”. ' _I I ___ I _ -' once per hour the WDAS Will wake—up from its low power
' ' vii ' "" I I X. _ sleep mode, and scan the EDR sensors for recorded damage.
If recorded damage is not found, then the system quickly
Figure 6— SMicro Sensor and Prototype In terface transmits ‘No Damage Detected.’ and returns to its low
power sleep mode for an hour until the next system scan. If
. . . . recorded damage is found then the microprocessor
Custom Wzreless Data Acquzsztzon System calculates the proximity of the damage given the damaged
The WDAS acts as an interface between the DRS sensors Wire traces, and then transmits ‘Critical Damage Detected
and the structure’s health monitoring system. It is capable of on Panel X, Quadrant X’ alerting the health monitoring
4

"
"5","system of the problem. If the SMicro sensors are triggered Figure 8 — UDRI Test Setup in the TWO Stage Light Gas
due to impact, then the system will scan the EDR sensors as Gun Vacuum Chamber
stated previously.
Results from the ﬁrst shot indicated a successful DRS test.
3. TESTING The system successfully detected the initial impact from the
SMicro sensor which triggered the WDAS to scan the EDR
Multiple versions of the DRS system have been tested at sensor. This scan found a break in the W and Z traces
White Sands Hypervelocity Impact Test Facility, University indicating critical damage in quadrant Q2 of the EDR
of DaytonResearch Institute (UDRI), and on the ISS. Thls sensor. The WDAS then wirelessly alerted the health
section Wlh discuss the two most recent testing events, monitoring system that critical damage had been detected
Whleh includes the seven shot series ht UDRFS due to impact. Figure 9 shows the location of the impact
Hypervelocrty Impact .Range, and the Materials on the due to the projectile, and a close up View of the damage
International Space Station Experiment (MISSE)' cavity where it is possible to see one of the broken EDR
traces.
University ofDayton Research Institute
In August 2009 a seven shot test series was performed at the r: ""i .“E’ .
UDRI Hypervelocity Impact Range to test the DRS :3 ﬂﬁi/ ImpactLucatlnn
performance. Each of the seven shots was conducted using :13; : ,
a two stage light gas gun that launched a projectile at a test ' 51' .
article located in a vacuum chamber. The projectiles used to '; , —-. Bra ken EDR Trace
simulate MMOD impact were approximately 3 mm spheres 1 I i ll
made from either aluminum or nylon. Projectile velocities _ '
were approximately 7 km/sec. The primary objective of this ----. _ l; J I
test series was to achieve damage to the outer facesheet of ' : ' _ "" *1.“ I _ .
the composite honeycomb structure in the test model stack. ’5'! 1-,; '
Described below are detailed results from the ﬁrst shot Of . ""e921; . ' It.
the test series as the subsequent shot results were similar. "" JET"" ' i -
The test article utilized for the ﬁrst impact, provided by Fig. 9. First Shot Impact Location and Close Up View of
Lockheed Martin, employed the 2X2 Serpentine EDR sensor Broken EDR Trace.
at the bondline of a TPS stack—up between the outer
facesheet and the strain isolation pad as illustrated in Figure The next siX shots were identical in setup, except the
5. The SMicro sensor was placed on the frame holding the projectile material alternated between aluminum and nylon.
test article for initial impact detection. Both sensors were On all seven hypervelocity shots, the DRS correctly
connected to the WDAS inside the vacuum chamber identiﬁed critical damage at the bondline of the TPS test
completing a DRS node. This setup can be seen in Figure 8. articles. This indicated that the DRS is a reliable device to
Outside the test chamber a health monitoring system mock— determine MMOD impact damage for the CEV application.
up was assembled to receive wireless data from the DRS The details, pictures, and results of each test shot can be
node. found in the UDRI HVI DRS August 2009 Test Report
compiled by NASA Ames Research Center [8].
l - WM,“ - Materials International Space Station Experiment
* w The Materials International Space Station Experiment
"" ‘ ‘ (MISSE) is a materials and sensor testbed that is mounted
. ' external to the 188. The platform allows for the
I i l investigation of long—term exposure to the harsh
., environment of space, which includes atomic oxygen,
-< .. \ T t A t' I ultraviolet radiation, direct sunlight, ionizing radiation, and
\ . , ' es r 'c e extremes of heat and cold, which all need to be accounted
J for in—space component design [9]. MISSE is a collaborative
‘ .’ ""r. ., effort between various NASA Centers, the Department of
. , R _ ' ' Defense (DOD) and private industry partners. Each
_ SMicro sensor“) ‘ ' .3 collaborator contributes experiments which are all conﬁned
, ¢ . . \ WDAS to a small test package abcut the Size and shape of a suit
,x- case. Once all of the experiments have been integrated into
""‘ I the test package, the package is then launched to the 188 on—
board the Space Shuttle and deployed to an attachment point
external to 188 by the Shuttle crew. Once at the 188, a
5

"
"6","mission specialist performs an extravehicular activity allow for the fasteners between the top and bottom
(EVA) to mount the test package to the outside of the aluminum plates. The EDR is adhered to the top aluminum
station. This conﬁguration can be Viewed in Figure 10. After plate and soldered to a 14—pin header to allow connection of
on—orbit exposure (typically 9—18 months) the test package the 12 EDR sensor traces and the constant reference signal.
is removed through a second EVA and brought back to The chance of an impact to the EDR sensor is unlikely, but
Earth for analysis. the evidence of long duration space exposure to the sensor is
invaluable. Possible failures that Will be evaluated upon the
V , "" MISSE 7 test package return to Earth are EDR sensor
» , delamination and degradation from the harsh space
I‘ "" environment. In addition, unexpected damage can be
¢ ’ “ correlated in order to further understand operation of such
, - . % sensors in LEO.
/‘// ' . /’1 ha . . t“ 4. APPLICABILITY TO ENTRY VEHICLES
\x’ 2- .r
.// . 1w}, ”£3. ‘5; "" g”. V k While the design of the DRS was primarily driven by
1’? 2 ._ \oﬁttezg, 'ﬁ ' .1 "" . - requirements for CEV missions to the 188, the DRS
. ’ 4:: ” ? tr. t . M; component technologies are generally applicable to a variety
3 ‘1 ‘ :u‘f‘u,‘ “ '. ""t, . of entry vehicle health monitoring needs. For rigid entry
‘ - . “’- """"- "" - 4 "" vehicle aeroshells, ﬂexible electronic instrumentation offers
. . . a compliant, thin—ﬂlm substrate that is lightweight and
Flgure 10 _ MISSE 6 Oh'Orblt Conﬁguratlon. adaptable to a variety of sensing modalities and placements
Within the aeroshell. Many aeroshell designs utilize
Oh MISSE 7» scheduletl for return from 188 by STS'1349 an honeycomb composite as the structure underneath the TPS.
EDR sensor has been included as one of the NASA Ames As shown in Figure 12, the utility of embedding the EDR
experiments that are mounted in the ram—facing direction. sensors in between layers of composite facesheets in
The EDR Will be actively monitored by a data acquisition honeycomb composite structures has been explored. Not
system, developed by NASA Ames, on board the test only does this approach offer a method for impact damage
package. The test package is then linked to the 18$ for data recording for composites, but the approach also
transfer, and once a.day the .data is downlinked to ground demonstrates the possibility for routing signal, power and
systems for analys1s. A picture Of the NASA Ames ground lines Where traditional Wired methods are not
experiment incorporating the EDR sensor is found in Figure possible. Furthermore, integrating circuit components
11' The MISSE 7 EDR sensor is a two layer serpentine directly onto the ﬂexible substrate expands the design space
sensor, With. six vertical serpentine Wire traces, and six for distributed sensing Within the aeroshell. A custom
horizontal ere traces. designed ﬂexible circuit is shown in Figure 13.
Additionally, temperature, pressure, strain, and structural
____________._————— __ integrity monitoring can be facilitated by employing ﬂexible
I' ﬂ electronics With Wired or Wireless data acquisition systems.
""'~,_ \\
' \
/ \
\$
. “y .w 9
t ’
\g“ t 1 —
. \
- EDR Sensor
Figure 11 _ EDR Sensor Integrated With N AS A Ames Figure 12 — EDR sensor embedded in between composite
Research Center MISSE 7 Payload facesheets in an aluminum honeycomb composite panel
There are eight cutouts in the sensor to allow exposure to
different TPS material plugs, along With four corner holes to
6

"
"7","\‘ F iber Optics
f Utilizing ﬁber optic technology, Smart Fabric has been
developed by the University of Toronto Institute for
Aerospace Studies. The Smart Fabric is manufactured by
weaVing optical ﬁbers into Kevlar forming a grid detection
network, similar to the layout of the EDR sensor. The
. Smart Fabric utilizes support electronics that initiate and
monitor a light signal that is propagated through the
l. ‘ individual ﬁbers. If the signal in a ﬁber attenuates, it is
, considered to be damaged. If the signal cannot be
'- -- - propagated, then the ﬁber is determined to be severed [10].
' - . . 1 I Fiber optics present a damage detection device where the
' data is mechanically stored within the system, analogous to
Fi gu r e 13 _ Fl exibl e E mb e d d e d D am a g e R e c or d er the EDR sensor technology. But when the twe technologies
sensor prototype With ci r cuit c 0 m p 0 n e nt s i nt e g r at e d areconipared. specrﬁcally, twoniain tradesex1st. The ﬁber
dir e ctly onto the ﬂexible sub st r at e optic system is a(lvantageous given the adclitional capability
to sense bends in addition to breaks Within the sens1ng
Flexible aeroshells are currently under consideration for ﬁbers. Unfortunately thls advantage ls (111111318th by the
atmospheric entry applications at Earth and Mars. Inﬂatable assocrated mass .COSt Of the teChnO.10gy' .Untll ﬁber optic
and deployable aeroshell concept development could greatly support. electronies are further miniaturized on a broad
beneﬁt from ﬂexible electronic instrumentation and wireless production scale, It .Wlll not make. sense to develop a ﬂight
data transmission due to their stringent packaging system over conipeting technologies. In our opinion this is
requirements and form factors. [11]. why a ﬁber optic detection system is yet to be employed on
a spacecraft.
5. COMPETING TECHNOLOGIES
6. FUTURE WORK
During the development of the DRS, a literature reView was . . .
conducted to research and deﬁne competing technologies. The DRS integrationrequires further development. One hey
Acoustic emission and ﬁber optics have been determined to des1gnation thf‘“ remains to be selected IS a 10W rISk location
be the leaders as Viable impact detection systems in of spacecraft integration. To enibed the EDR sensor at the
. . . . bondline of the TPS, many risks must be analyzed and
aerospace applications. These two technologies are brieﬂy . . . .
detailed and analyzed for proﬁciency. nntigated through ground and ﬂight testing: The mest
important is a pull test to determine the bondline integrity
Acoustic Emission with the embedded EDR sensor. It is imperative that the
EDR sensor does not induce failure at this critical junction.
Acoustic emission (AE) sensors are a piezoelectric element,
which can generate a signal without the use of a power The WDAS needs to be structurally improved for use in
supply. This characteristic allows the signal processing extreme environments, and space qualiﬁed through a ﬂight
system to use the sensor itself as a trigger to ‘wake Up’ the test. The protective housing and cable connectors need to
data acquisition, allowing the system to remain in a 10W be ruggedized in order to withstand Vibration and shock.
power state unless impacted [1]. Connections between the WDAS and DRS sensors also will
need to be ruggedized to minimize mass and maximize
An AE sensor system enables the impact location to be strength. The SMicro sensor’s protective housing and
determined by triangulation and comparison of the signal interface needs to be developed further for system
strength seen by the sensors. Also given the properties of integration. The WDAS has been qualiﬁed for ground use
acoustic wave propagation, an AB system has the potential by the UDRI 2009 test series. To be qualiﬁed for space
to characterize the depth and area of damage within a ﬂight the WDAS will have to undergo extreme environment
structure. The main disadvantage to an AB system is the ﬂight testing, much like the EDR sensor on MISSE 7.
potential for false information. An impact that does not
induce damage to the structure may be detected if the ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
impact force is substantial. Another drawback is the AE
system only has a fraction of a second to sense the transient WC WiSh to thank Ethiraj Venkatapathy and James Arnold
event. The AE sensors and data acquisition system has to (NASA ARC) for their invaluable guidance and support
perform ﬂawlessly every time to detect this short duration throughout the DRS project. Eric Christensen and 13- Alan
data, ensuring system integrity. DaVis (NASA J SC) for providing and facilitating the
opportunity to continue work on the DRS project. The
University of Idaho’s Team Impact senior design team for
fabricating the embedded EDR composites. Joshua Miller
7

"
"8","for facilitating the secondary test opportunity at UDRI. The BIOGRAPHIES
UDRI Impact Test Facility for their hard work.
Greg Swanson is a PhD student at Santa Clara University
and an employee at NASA Ames
Research Center in the Entry
_ Systems and Vehicle Develop-
REFERENCES ‘ ment Branch. His work
[1] Champaigne, K. D., & Summers, J . (2006). Low—power . involves developing wireless
Electronics for Distributed Impact Detection. IEEE , 2— ' embedded sensing systems for a
3, variety of applications and
custom data acquisition system
[2] Christiansen, E. L., & Crews, J . C. (1992). The NASA design. Greg received his BS
J SC Hypervelocity Impact Test Facility (HITF). AIAA and MS in Electrical
92—1640, Engineeringfrom the University
of Idaho in 2007 and 2009,
[3] Smith, S. (2003). What is Electrical Continuity? respectively.
Retrieved March 22, 2009, from WiseGEEK:
http://WWW.Wisegeek.com/What—is—electrical— , [K , f, , _ ° Alan Cassell received his PhD
continuityhtm —' e 3‘ '7‘ in Materials Chemistry in 1997,
which was followed by
[4] Dart—Creations. (2007, September 22). Dart—Creations. postdoctoral research at
Retrieved March 26, 2009, from Flexible Circuit: ’ -- Stanford University to develop
http://WWW.dart—creations.com/article—tree/ (h ; carbon nanomaterial nano-
foreX/ﬂexible—circuit.html ‘ fabrication approaches for
l sensors and electronics.
[5] Mills, L. A. (2008, August 21). All About Polyimide. 1 Currently, Alan is a Systems
Retrieved April 18, 2009, from Enzine Articles: . Engineer in the Entry Systems
http://ezinearticles.com/?All—Ab0ut— I and Vehicle Development
Polyimide&id=1431895 Branch at NASA Ames Research
Center supporting re-entry mission analysis and design. In
[6] Mince. (2008). Flex Circuit Manufacturing. Retrieved addition, Alan develops embedded wireless sensor systems
April 20, 2009, from Flex Circuit Construction for thermal protection materials as well as supporting
Capabilities: http://WWW.minco.com/ qualiﬁcation of thermal protection systems for planetary
products/ﬂex.aspx?id=1 12 entry probes. T hermal protection system instrumentation
development includes on-orbit testing aboard the
[7] Signal Quest, Inc. (2009) Datasheet: SQ—ASX Series: International Space Station. Past projects include the Mars
http://WWW.signalquest.com/datasheets/SQ— Science Laboratory and the Orion Crew Exploration
ASXDatasheet.pdf Vehicle thermalproteetion system qualiﬁcation and testing.
[8] Swanson, G., Cassell, A., & Miller, J . (2009) Test
Report: UDRI HVI DRS Testing, NASA Ames
Research Center
[9] NASA LaRC. (2001, July 10). NASA. Retrieved April
10, 2009, from MISSE: Testing Materials in Space:
http://WWW.nasa.gOV/centers/langley/news/
factsheets/MISSEhtml
[10] Tennyson, R. C., Rethoret, B., & Morison, W. D.
(2005). Design Study of Fiber Optic MOD Impact
Detection System for Spacecraft Structures. Toronto:
University of Toronto Institute for Aerospace Studies.
[11]Brand0n, E]. et a1., Structural Health Management
Technologies for Inﬂatable / Deployable Structures:
Integrated Sensing and Self—Healing, Acta Astronautica
(2010), doi:10.1016/j.actaastr0.2010.08.016
8

"
