"","x"
"1","Development of a low-cost student—built multi—spectral sensor for the
International Space Station
Douglas R. Olsen*, H0 J in Kim, J aganathan Ranganathan, Soizik Laguette
Dept. of Earth System Science and Policy, J ohn D. Odegard School of Aerospace Sciences,
University of North Dakota, 4149 University Ave, Grand Forks ND 58202-9011
ABSTRACT
Built by students and faculty at the University of North Dakota (UND), the International Space Station (188)
Agricultural Camera (ISSACTM) is a multi-spectral Earth-imaging sensor currently onboard the ISS. Capabilities include
three spectral bands (green, red, near-infrared), medium (~20m) spatial resolution, and off-nadir pointing (+/—30 degrees)
for episodic rapid-response imaging. We describe the low-cost electrO-Optical design approach, Which utilizes a student-
centered design and operations team and relies on modiﬁed commercial components operating Within a passive Vibration
isolation mounting, installed inside the Window Observational Research Facility, Viewing the Earth through the US
Laboratory Science Window. Interfaces, safety, and other factors unique to the human-rated operational environment of
the 188 are outlined. Pre-launch sensor characterization results, including spatial distortion and radiometric
measurements, indicate Earth remote sensing using such a sensor is a Viable approach for demonstrative operational
missions. An element of the 188 National Laboratory, ISSAC was launched on HTV-2 t0 the 188 in J anuary 2011. Initial
operations began in June 2011. Methods of sensor operations are described, using a student staff working Within the ISS
operational environment. Some initial early imaging results are shown.
Keywords: International Space Station, multi-spectral remote sensing, student-centered design
1. INTRODUCTION
The Earth System Science and Policy (ESSP) department is an academic element of the John D. Odegard School of
Aerospace Sciences at the University of North Dakota (UND), fulﬁlling the teaching, research, and service missions of
the University. Offering degrees at the Master’s and Ph.D. levels With environmental policy, management, and
sustainability emphasis, the department also conducts basic and applied multi-disciplinary and inter-disciplinary research
across a broad range of related topicsl. One focus of these efforts has been to deliver applied research solutions that
directly beneﬁt practicing land management general-public end users in the regionz; principally private sector production
agriculture participants (farmers, ranchers, crop consultants), government agencies (local, state, and federal), and tribal
0fﬁcials3.
A central element of these applied research solutions has been the development of custom sensors to address speciﬁc
needs of end users. In collaboration With the School of Engineering and Mines (SEM) at UND, the Airborne
Environmental Research Observational Camera (AEROCamTM) was developed Within an experiential learning
framework“. In operation since 2001, AEROCam utilizes a 3-band Redlake MS-3100 sensor and support equipment,
ﬂown on a UND Aerospace aircraft in support of requesting end user applied research ﬁeld investigationss.
Building on the technology base of AEROCani, the International Space Station (188) Agricultural Camera (ISSACTM) is
a multi-spectral Earth-imaging sensor designed and built to operate on the ISS, and is currently in active operations.
Capabilities include three spectral bands (green, red, near-infrared), moderate (15-20 m) spatial resolution, and off-nadir
pointing (+/—30 degrees) for episodic rapid-response imaging. ISSAC has been designed, developed, tested, and operated
by university graduate and undergraduate students6, With system integrative and niche technical specialties supported by
UND faculty and staff, and selected subsystem vendors. Adherence to this student-centered approach for development
and operations yielded original ISSAC ﬂight sponsorship — a necessary prerequisite for 188 research program
participation — by the NASA Ofﬁce of Education.
>‘<01sen@aer0.und.edu, phone 1 701 777-3543

"
"2","Now referred to as ISSAC, the payload was originally known as simply the Agricultural Camera, or AgCam. The name
was changed to ISSAC in 2010 to resolve a trademark issue; legacy documentation and references of necessity retain the
original AgCam name. Initial ISSAC components (then called AgCam) were launched to the ISS onboard STS-126
Endeavour (cargo designation of Utility Logistics Flight (ULF)-2) in November 2009, with additional components ﬂown
up on the J apanese HTV-2 ELV in J anuary, 2011.

2. INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION
The International Space Station (188) is a multi-national human—occupied spacecraft, assembled and operated in low
Earth orbit. The largest spacecraft ever built at a combined mass of over 360 metric tons, the external dimensions of the
188 are about 109 by 51 by 20 meters, including deployed solar arrays. Capable of supporting a continuous crew of 6
inside 837 cubic meters of pressurized volume, the primary research emphasis of the 188 is to take advantage of the
unique environmental properties of low-Earth orbit, principally to perform research in micro-gravity effects (bio-
technology, life sciences, materials research), but also in space physics, solar physics, and Earth remote sensing7.
The 188 is a collaborative effort among four principal partners — the United States (US), Russia, Europe, and Japan —
with Canada participating in a smaller yet critical role (space robotics, telerobotics). Each partner shares in providing —
and are allocated access to — onboard and launch/return vehicle resources based in part on their historic and ongoing
funding levels for the ISS. Within the US allocation, a portion of the available resources is operated and managed by
NASA as a designated US National Laboratory8; ISSAC is a National Lab payload.
Construction of the ISS began in 1998, with the ﬁrst permanent crew expedition beginning in October 2000. Station
completion was ofﬁcially recognized by NASA in May, 2011. In 2010, 188 partners each committed to support funding
and operations for the 18$ for at least another decade, through 20209. Going forward NASA and its international partners
intend to emphasize ISS scientiﬁc investigations that are of relevance and broadly beneﬁcial to all of humanity; Earth
observations, and in particular in support of disaster monitoring, among them. Such Earth observations from the 188 can
be implemented either as an instrument on an external platform of the 188, or from within the internal volume of the ISS,
Viewing the Earth through observing windows.10
2.1 The 188 as an Earth remote sensing platform
The 188 orbits at 51.6 degrees inclination, nearly circular, at a mean altitude of a little over 350 km; orbital period is thus
typically about 91 minutes. 188 altitude degrades relatively quickly, necessitating several re-boosts per year. From an
Earth remote sensing perspective, this varying altitude does cause the achievable spatial resolution of a given system to
also vary, which needs to be taken into account when analyzing resultant imagery.
With construction of the 188 now complete, the spacecraft is maintained in a relatively stable earth-oriented attitude.
Within the local reference frame, the X-aXis is deﬁned to be parallel to the velocity vector and the Z-aXis parallel to
Earth nadir, with Y-aXis orthogonal to both. Nominal ﬂight orients the positive X-aXis in the direction of the velocity
vector, referred to as +XVV. To be able to image the Earth, ISSAC requires the 188 to be in this earth- attitude (known
as Local-Vertical, Local-Horizontal, or LVLH); imaging could potentially occur with any orientation about the Z-aXis,
though ISSAC ground commanding and telemetry processing software assumes a +XVV orientation vector.
Since the ISS orbit is not sun-synchronous, it cannot offer a sensor payload the advantages of sun synchronous
operations — chieﬂy a repeating ground track with overﬂights over any speciﬁc point on the Earth occurring at the same
local time for each overﬂight passll. For observing the Earth’s surface, such an orbit is typically synchronized with a
morning pass, to statistically reduce the chance of cloud cover. For example, with the Landsat 7 system, ground track
repeatability is tightly controlled such that image products are provided in the familiar Worldwide Reference System
(WRS) Path-Row location matrix; overﬂights occur every 16 days, with each descending node Equator crossing
occurring at about 10:00 local time”.
In contrast, the ISS orbit ground track has no ﬁxed repeating pattern, and for a given location on the ground, can occur at
any 24-hour local time instance. Considering only those overpasses that occur in sunlight (herein referred to as a revisit,
or access), remote sensing from the ISS produces reVisits which vary both seasonally and with latitude; more frequent
reVisits occur with greater latitude and the longer days of seasonal summer. A cross-track sensor pointing capability can
signiﬁcantly shorten times between reVisitsl3. The ISSAC sensor can point up to 30 degrees either side of ground track,
or about 200 Km at the 188 mean altitude of 350 km.

"
"3","Figure 1; developed using Satellite Took Kit by Analytical Graphics Inc.“, illustrates ISSAC reVisit characteristics for
two different ground targets located at 5 ON; 90W; and at the equator for 90W. Shown on the left is the sun angle for each
access of these targets in 2010. For the northern target; the broad annual cycle of maximum sun angle is as would be
expected for seasonal mid—latitude locations. Within this; a more rapidly changing cycle is observed; which reﬂects the
varying local time of overpasses as the ISS orbit precesses relative to the Earth—Sun geometry. On the right; an alternate
perspective is shown; which indicates days until the next revisit; for any access times with a sun angle of 15 degrees or
higher. For the northern target; during the growing season (generally; April—October); there are 3—4 periods with of order
3—4 weeks during which no access times are available. On the other hand there are also 3 periods of 4—5 weeks during
which there is at least one access every 1—2 days.
70 —
40
60
35
' Ill 30
40 , A . v 3‘,
)0
20 ...._. ... . . . . .. ..
* | | IN ‘°
.. III 2 ITI 2 ""
0 III I I I I . I II. II .1 I U
0» o o o o o o o o o o o x} x,"" x} O '0 Q «5‘ N."" '9' 9' N}
19° ’9'» ’9'» ’19” ’9'» ’19"" ’9'» ’9'» ""9» $6» ’19» ’9'» (19 \‘9 09 (Lo 00 (19 \‘9 (Lo \‘9 (‘9 00
00¢ '59) 4L9 9’9) 509 809 6‘9 N9 $09 9(9) ”0(9) 00¢ $9 69 0x9 “\xo «9V0 <o\\'° «(9 $9 9‘9 «9‘9 «9.9
(a) (b)
0 so
80
7o ‘ ~ :10
I I I I 30
SO 7 .- _. - .- -. - 7 v . H
“0 ‘ ’ ‘ ‘ ‘ 20
10 . . . . . . . ~
O.l..I.I.lIII. I III. ()oxxxxxxxxx'x'»
“96'"" 09 9x0 09 9x5) 6‘9 0x0 6‘0 0.9 0x0 0,9 9‘9 095 09'» 09‘» (195 055» 095 09'» <9"" QQN 05$» 093 09""
09¢ ”\wa $\me ”£0 £9 0)va b\mxo «0x9 $90, yo ”00$ 93'9“ 009’ ‘9'» “0'9 0’0“» g""? ‘00""; ‘09:) (“.9 $0“; 0506) $9» $9
(c) (d)
Figure l: ISS Target Revisit Characteristics, using Satellite Tool Kit (STK). (a) Sun angles during 2010 for location 50N,
90W; (b) Days to next revisit during 2011, with sun angle > 15 degrees, for location 50N, 90W; . (c) Sun angles during 2010
for location 0N, 90W; (b) Days to next revisit during 2011, with sun angle > 15 degrees, for location 0N, 90W.
The same pattern is apparent for all targets at 50N; regardless of longitude. For the southern hemisphere; with the time
scale centered at J anuary 1 instead of July 1 a similar pattern is observed at 5 OS. For either hemisphere; as latitude values
decrease; reVisits occur less predictably and frequently; with the minimum annual reVisits occurring at the equator. Even
at this minimum; on average reVisits occur more frequently than the 16—day repeat cycle of Landsat.
2.2 Window Observational Research Facility
Like most habitat modules of the 188, the US Laboratory (US Lab) “Destiny” is cylindrical in shape; built to take
maximum volumetric advantage of the space shuttle’s cargo bay. Externally 8.5 meters long with a diameter of 4.3
meters; once fully equipped the internal volume of the US Lab is about 8 m X 2 m X 2 1n. Lining this passageway; on all
four surfaces — these are designated Deck (Earth side); Overhead; Port; Starboard — are individual experiment racks;
facilities; and activity stations. Among these are numerous Expedite the Processing of Experiments to the Space Station

"
"4","(EXPRESS) racks, Which are designed With standardized interfaces to simplify accommodation of individual sub-rack
payloads from many different researchers and organizations.
Built into the Deck-side hull is the US Laboratory Science Window, Which was designed to accommodate Earth-Viewing
experiments from Within the pressurized volumels. Shown in Figure 2a, the Science Window consists of a dual Pressure
Pane (fused silica, 3.175 cm each), With an external Debris Pane (0.38 inches fused silica) and internal Scratch Pane. The
Scratch Pane, While transparent in the Visible spectrum, incorporates ultraviolet and infrared ﬁlters for crew protection
but is removable for operation of experiments that utilize these wavelengths. The Debris Pane, Which protects the
Science Window from contamination inherent in the external orbital environment (micro-gravity, vacuum, material
outgassing) 0f the ISS, can be exchanged for a new Debris Pane by the crew. To minimize the need for this, mounted on
the outside of the hull is the US Laboratory Window Shutter, Which protects the Debris Pane itself When the Science
Window is not being actively used.
mm OUTBOARD
my W¢Pm+>
11—3/3? 1""‘ Q."" IL 3‘35
am” — “ __""' “.- - _ .
r T— 4 - Frnnt - - - -- 'n- + 1 '~
— F W me W Cﬂggﬁg’lmr : 1"""":""11513 :1
W """" - ﬂ . m _ -;
cum momma .""1"" . 1:1: .
4114 mm . . J-
%a .u M “mm $5“ Eiump Shield , ' .: Winduw Shutter
m % e L Slide Handle —* 5‘ - 14.4 i1 ‘ Slide Handle
arm, mm i; «am» — - - _ .1! _.
§%—_ mmmmrm 1n"" "" ' —-..1I
.. .. 1E _.“ mn-Bﬂ $10. 5:11; Lﬁﬁ.2"".""__. 1-£1I1_ UUF‘ F'EISE-H'II’U
writ Eugw‘nnrgo‘sgknm J_J‘ELh—hh 1.__ '.'r CDHHEETEII’
INBOARD _- "" 1
(a) (b)
Figure 2: (a) US Laboratory Science Window; (b) Window Observational Research Facility (WORF).
Within the pressurized US Lab, surrounding the Science Window is an EXPRESS rack variant known as the Window
Observational Research Facility (WORF)16. Shown in Figure 2b, Within its 0.64 cubic meter (approximately 90 X 89 X 63
cm) internal payload volume the WORF accommodates experiments Via the standard power and data interfaces of
EXPRESS racks, but also provides a 3.8 cm thick Payload Support Shelf and an improved EXPRESS rack mounting
design to minimize transmittance of ISS Vibrations to internally mounted sensors. Other WORF services include fan-
circulated air cooling, ﬁre detection and suppression, and a dark, non-reﬂective internal volume.
2.3 Crewed Vehicle Impacts
As a crewed vehicle, the ISS environment necessarily leVies additional complexities 0n payload designs than would be
need for a free-ﬂying spacecraft. Payload safety is a maj or concern, With a detailed methodology established for deﬁning
safety hazards, controls to mitigate hazards, and veriﬁcation methods and documentation for the hazard controls”. Other
human factors that must be considered include physical design accommodation, training simpliﬁcation, and on-orbit
crew time efﬁciency. Conversely, presence of crew (1) enables post-launch assembly Which simpliﬁes design
requirements of the launch environment; (2) enables complex on-orbit reconﬁguration for changing operational
environments; and (3) offers potential for trouble-shooting and repair in the event of anomalous behavior or component
failure. ISSAC payload design takes advantage of all three.
Astronaut crew members are typically rotated every siX months, in expeditions of three, With the start of each rotation
offset from the next such that there is some overlap between expedition increments. Vehicle and payload operations of
the ISS are organized around these creW-based expeditions, each increment number corresponding to a crew expedition.

"
"5","For example, the time period in 2011 between early April and early October, during Which ISSAC commenced initial
operations, is known as Increment 27/28.
For ﬂight crews, payload tasks requiring onboard crew actions are trained 9 to 12 months in advance of the start of the
increment. Thus for ISSAC, astronaut Ron Garan, Who performed assembly of ISSAC in orbit, was trained on ISSAC in
July of 2010.This required development of ISSAC crew training materials, including a medium-high ﬁdelity physical
model, by May 2010 timeframe. Flight crew time is highly constrained and tightly managed; With less than an hour of
training time available to ISSAC, of necessity task—based training (performed by NASA personnel in coordination With
the ISSAC team) emphasized ISSAC-unique features and crew actions. To ensure knowledge continuity onboard, at
least one crew member during each 6-month planning increment is trained on ISSAC.
2.4 Command and Telemetry Communications
Payload operations onboard the 188 are managed by the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), located in
Huntsville, AL. A cadre of NASA and contractor personnel Within the Payload Operations and Integration Center
(POIC) control onboard operations of facility class payloads and EXPRESS racks, and integrate operations of a large
number of both US and IP payloads, allocating onboard resources (crew tinie, power, thermal, communication links,
among others) to achieve science objectives for the increment.
NASA operates space-ground communication links to and from the 188, With command uplinks sent Via S-band ground
transmitters, and telemetry downlinks received over Ku band receivers. Communication links are relayed through the
NASA Tracking and Data Relay Spacecraft System (TDRSS) operated out of White Sands, NM. From a payload
developer’s operational perspective these data links are relatively transparent, though communication With the 188 is
neither instantaneous nor continuous. A variable delay of several seconds is inherent in the many communication paths
and computational systems involved. More signiﬁcantly, both uplink and downlink paths are subject to frequent
interruptions (known as Loss of Signal, or LOS), due to hand-off of signal among spacecraft in the TDRSS constellation,
signal occultation by intervening ISS structural elements, or a myriad other factors. This intermittency requires payloads
controlled from the ground to operate only Within duration-variable communication Windows (known as Acquisition of
Signal, or AOS), or else to implement a semi-autonomous time-based or other event-driven operational capability.
Given the ~7.2 km/s orbital speed of the 188, to image a speciﬁc ground target ISSAC needed to implement the latter.
For ISSAC, commands to acquire an image, along With other payload conﬁguration and status query commands, are
time referenced With a 1-second resolution and uplinked to the payload during AOS periods. For ISSAC telemetry,
payload H&S is generated and transmitted continuously Whenever the payload is powered and operating nominally.
ISSAC Science data transmitted is initiated only in response to a ground command. Any telemetry generated by ISSAC
during 21 L08 period is temporarily stored in the ISS High-Capacity Onboard Recorder (HCOR), and received later
during HCOR playbacks.

3. ISSAC PAYLOAD DESIGN
Primary ISSAC system ﬂight components include an ISSAC Sensor Assembly (ISA), a Base Mounting Assembly
(BMA), a Slide/Pointing Assembly (SPA), 21 Power/Data Controller (PDC), associated cabling and support items, and a
NASA-supplied T61p Laptop, including power supply, and interconnecting power and data cables. The Base Mounting
Assembly provides a solid mounting to the internal WORF payload support shelf. The Slide/Pointing Assembly has a
slide mechanism to facilitate crew setup and activation Within the WORF, and incorporates an integral gearbox and
controller to point the lens assembly up to 30 degrees cross-track. The Power/Data Controller individually powers on the
gearbox/controller and the ISA. Within the ISSAC Sensor Assembly, a Vibration isolation and absorption system helps
prevent excessive jitter in the ISSAC images. A single 150 mm lens and optical beam splitter supply light to three digital
framing cameras, each With its own bandpass ﬁlter.
3.1 Electro-Optical Sensor
The electro-optical sensor of ISSAC, designed and built by Fluxdata Corp. of Rochester NY, consists of a modiﬁed
Commercial Off—The-Shelf (COTS) lens (Sigma f/2.8 APO EX-DG Macro HSM) mounted (Via Nikon f—mount) on to
the ISSAC Sensor Assembly (ISA), Whose components include the Sensor Optics, Sensor Backplate (With internal
Firewire hub), and interconnecting Firewire and Trigger cables. The ISA, in its on-orbit conﬁguration — mated to the
ISSAC Lens, mounted into the Vibration isolating Sensor Frame, and With attached Sensor Cables (USB, Firewire, and
Sensor Power) is shown in Figure 3a.

"
"6","The ISSAC primary lens is a Sigma f/2.8 APO EX—DG Macro HSM, modiﬁed to ﬁx the aperture at f/4.0, to permanently
set focus at inﬁnity, and to incorporate a lens cap that would contain glass fragments should shattering occur during
launch. A backup ﬂight lens retains variable focus, but is otherwise identical.
, ’ f
l 3 "" :x w «
/ "" ‘ 5, <7: ' I , *
Ox,“ . , _, ‘ _ ' , , u, \
\ozg,‘ u : . , 1/ 4- v, _. 1
’ / i; ‘ "" '5 * ' .. \\
[1, ,. 3| . . \

i {i 4 j? ' ’$'aiii‘ilﬁ“ '
\zésgr» a: , - v :7 q - 7__ ~* ,4

Figure 3: (a) Integrated ISSAC Sensor Assembly (ISA), shown mounted inside Vibration-isolation and absorption Sensor

Frame, with ISSAC Lens and Sensor Cables attached; (b) Internal Sensor Optics removed from ISA.
Light from the ISSAC Lens enters the Sensor Optics and impinges on an internal 3—way glass prism block, which by
means of cascaded optical ﬁlter coatings on multiple surfaces, splits the light energy into three wavelength bandpasses
(Green: 515—600 nm; Red: 630—700 nm; Near Infrared 740—910 nm). Bandpasses were speciﬁed to coincide with
comparable Landsat bandpasses. These bandpasses are directed to three identical Sony CCD chipsets, each connected to
a COTS Firewire camera (Scout, by Basler), operated in 12—bit quantization mode. Each chipset contains a CCD array of
1040 X 1392 pixels of 6.45 microns each, oriented with the wider side cross—track to the orbital direction. The Optics
Assembly design, based on US Patent 6,215,597, is derived from FluXdata’s FD—1665 camera, with ruggedized
mechanical packaging to meet launch loads.
Internal components of the Sensor Backplate include a General Purpose Input/Output (GPIO) micro—controller board and
a modiﬁed COTS Firewire Hub (Point Grey FWB—HUB—5PORT). The GPIO Board draws power for its own operation
from the ISSAC Laptop Via the USB 2 interface, and draws power for distribution to internal ISA components Via the 12
VDC power connection to the PDC. The hub connects the incoming IEEE 1394a signals to three separate Firewire
cameras in the Sensor Optics Via IEEE 1394b connections and cables (Red Cable, Green Cable, Infrared Cable).
However, for supplying power to the 1394b connections the hub draws power from the GPIO Board, which can thus
provide individual camera power switching capability. The GPIO board also supplies power to the hub, as the laptop
connection uses IEEE 1394a. In order for the three cameras in the Sensor Optics to image the same target, their image
acquisitions must be synchronized. The GPIO Board internal to the Sensor Backplate provides this synchronization Via a
trigger pulse sent simultaneously to all three cameras. Connection is made from the Sensor Backplate Via the Trigger
Cable using a Hirose Push/Pull connector.
In addition to the backup lens, other on—orbit ﬂight spares (Sensor Backplate, internal ISA cabling, as well as selected
external cables) enable crew reconﬁguration in the event of on—orbit failure of one of these components.
3.2 Passive Vibration Isolation
Vibration onboard the International Space Station (188) varies from low to high frequency excitation with variable
amplitudes depending on the current conﬁguration and activities onboard. The Space Acceleration Measurement System
(SAMS—II), a distributed system of sensors currently on board the 188, is used to measure Vibrations and transient
acceleration disturbances resulting from the ISS vehicle activities, 188 systems operations, experiment operations, crew

"
"7","movements and ISS structure thermal expansion and contractionls. While the WORF Will further isolate disturbances,
for a conservative approach the SAMS-II measured disturbances were used as the baseline environment to design and
implement a Sensor Frame (shown in Figure 3a) that uses both isolation and absorption components to effectively
attenuate the Vibration over a Wide frequency range. The system utilizes Sorbothane, a Viscoelastic element that
incorporate both stiffness and damping into the system19’20. To evaluate the performance of a Vibration isolation system
on an optical payload, the jitter — deﬁned as rotation through the instantaneous ﬁeld of View of an ISSAC sensor pixel
that is residual after attenuation — is calculated about both X and y aXis (Figure 4). J itter levels peak at about 0.7 meters
(about 5% of ISSAC pixel ground sample distance at nominal altitude — see Section 4.2). With the added WORF
performance improvement, the peak jitter levels are expected to have negligible effects on overall ISSAC spatial
resolution.

UH | | ' | | | | ' . .

.Iltter about K—aws

Ur' ‘rﬁt
E3 .. -' 3 3' ""x.
E, +. *_ 1*: RH

n3 : :1“;

i—‘ijr ﬁx
I ~-~--.ﬁ__ _ __ _
U M I I E 2 Excitation FijquencﬂHz} 3 35 J £6 E
Figure 4: Ground Translation J itter (m) in Vs Excitation Frequency

3.3 Other ISSAC Components
Figure 5 illustrates in functional schematic form the remaining ISSAC components integrated together With the WORF.
The ISA is represented by the Lens, Beamsplitter (BS), three cameras (C1, C2, C3), FireWire hub, and GPIO board.
The ISA, mounted Within its Sensor Frame, attaches to a mechanical cam interface on the Slide Pointing Assembly
(SPA). The SPA utilizes a closed loop Pointing Control System (PCS) to orient the ISA up to 30 degrees across track in
response to ground commands. The PCS, Which is based on COTS (MicroMo Inc.) components (brushless servomotor,
optical encoder, MVPZOOIAOI controller electronics) 21, can be controlled to one thousandth of a degree. Controller
parametric speciﬁcations, acceleration proﬁles and duty cycles were selected to minimize both transit and settling time
in the microgravity environment”.
The SPA and the ISA are both powered by the ISSAC Power/Data Controller (PDC). Internal to the PDC, a Power
Control Board (PCB), receives and isolates incoming 28 VDC power from the WORF, and supplies conditioned 28 VDC
and 12 VDC power to ISSAC subsystems23. A custom Data Acquisition Card (DAQ) acquires temperature, current, and
logic state values from sensors and supplies resultant data to the ISSAC laptop Via a parallel port interface. Integral fans
maintain thermal cooling in the micro-gravity environment.
The ISSAC Flight Software (FSW) is resident on a NASA-supplied space-qualiﬁed IBM t61p laptop computer, installed
by the crew from a DVD binary image. Running under Windows XP, the FSW receives commands and transmits
telemetry data over Ethernet communication With the WORF (TCP/IP), and controls and interacts With the ISA using
USBZ and Firewire (IEEE 1394a), With the SPA using serial port (RS-232) communications, and With the PDC using

"
"8","parallel port communications. Originally developed to run under Windows 2000 on an IBM A31p Laptop, the FSW is a
Microsoft Foundation Class (MFC) multi-task threaded application which incorporates separate command queues for
time-based VS. immediate execution, a supervisory processor for the MicroMo controller in the SPA, and an image queue
directory for managing acquired imagery, storing ﬁles locally on the laptop hard drive“. The FSW was later revised to
add Firewire communications and control for the new ISA sensor, to accommodate the new t61p and Windows XP
environment, and to better optimize operationszs.
2 2 r----------------------------------------1
I | um I
. ' 23m . I
2 . : I
LEGEND ' lﬂ‘ﬂlﬂ a :i'm-""z-I E I
H | 1;” U I
_;,I, [mm m : W {:1 Tent I
m ~ - = [1A0 25'?” m - m: i '
—JI~ m1: é ' 2- It—Iiie : : I
w ' E '2‘ _ mm : i I
' In ' :2 ' m : '
g, ' I3 l : I
i n I m 25 - i :
I W E PCS E III! E I
mm: ., IE-I' Hum :2 I :
' ‘51? . H Um: : i I
I (ail; ﬂ ‘1: E :
L-_____________________________ﬁ::::"":::;l
RadiaﬁﬂnEﬁ‘ecﬁ Radiance I
Omital Envirnnment @
Figure 5: ISSAC Functional System Diagram
The SPA incorporates a slide/roller mechanism to enable crew deployment close to the US Lab Window during
operations, and connects to a Base Mount Assembly (BMA) mounting bracket, which in turn mounts to the payload
support shelf of the WORF26. Prior to launch and installation of the WORF, ISSAC utilized an Alternate Conﬁguration
(Alt Conﬁg), which enabled mounting directly to the frame of the window”. Remaining ISSAC components include
interconnecting cables and black cloth (N0mex®) cable connector covers, the latter used to minimize stray light
reﬂections within the WORF internal volume.
3.4 ISSAC Payload Veriﬁcation, Test, and Launch
A11 payloads designed for operation as an EXPRESS sub-rack payload 0n the ISS must conform to detailed NASA-
speciﬁed requirements, both in terms of interface deﬁnition and interface veriﬁcation. Allowed methods of analysis,
inspection, demonstration, and/or test are speciﬁed on a per-requirement basis. To fulﬁll these NASA requirements,
major integrated tests performed on the ISSAC system included Electromagnetic Interference/ Electromagnetic
Compatibility (EMI/EMC), launch proﬁle random Vibration, acoustic emissions, and software functional performance
and interface validation. Other tests, demonstrations, and inspections measured microgravity disturbance levels,
subjected the lens to rapid decompression/recompression, validated physical ﬁt and function with the WORF, and
veriﬁed conformance with human factor requirements. In total, over 75 individual veriﬁcation reports were generated to
document ISSAC compliance with safety, interface, and launch environment requirements.

"
"9","When launched, most payload components are packed in closed mini-cell foam inside soft-sided Crew Transfer Bags
(CTBs). To minimize launch volume, default foam thickness is 1.25 cm, unless a requirement for additional foam can be
shown. For ISSAC, additional launch Vibration attenuation was desired given the presence of shatterable material
components and extensive use of COTS components with unknown Vibration susceptibilities. During preparations for
Vibration testing, adding foam thickness up to 5 cm was shown to be beneﬁcial, beyond which additional Vibration
attenuation was minimal”. Having crew capability for on-orbit assembly signiﬁcantly simpliﬁed the design and
performance of foam packing, and reduced the overall volume required for launch. Packing for ISSAC component
launch was performed by NASA personnel at KSC, with UND inspection and approval.
The completed ISSAC payload, integrated onboard the ISS within the WORF internal volume, is shown in Figure 6. ISS
direction of ﬂight in the photo is towards the bottom of the page. The WORF bumpshield is stowed and the sensor is
shown extended towards the US Lab Window, in its operational conﬁguration. The window external shutter is closed.
, n r * ,7 ‘i "" ' I g
. ' Mg xi ' _
"" ' an“: ‘9’ i
/ a . _
, ' x“ .. . i
t P 1'] /‘ ““'*‘ ﬁll). c ‘
r, a // ‘ .‘ t 9
i532 ‘ inn "" ' 3’ "" , - i 7""”.‘J' '5 3 é 52’!
gg ’4’ '3' L’J""\‘q : ' Sgi
E , V ~ 95%"". P _ 1'? 53
° -- ”q j W“ “7% 7*)! x “’ , f ’ a
, 1.; p §‘ x‘l ‘ i _ «K
0 \ ""H ,-”' I ,/
i 53 ,, “ ""'* / I
1 _ 8i ' / i
vmlﬁuv‘ ”.1 I / I
' ISSOZ7E023675
Figure 6: ISSAC installed on orbit inside WORF (Photo courtesy NASA, ISSOZ7E023675)
3.5 Student—Centered Design and Development Process
ISSAC has principally been designed, developed, tested, and is being operated by university graduate and undergraduate
students. To date, over 60 individual students have contributed to the project, from eight different departments across
campus. Though numbering only 13 of these to date, dominantly the technical contributions of students have come in the
form of Graduate Research assistantships (GRAs). Of these, nine were thesis, four were non-thesis graduate projects.
Almost half of the students have been compensated in an hourly position; most of these have been undergraduates,
though a few were graduate students at the time of their employment. Contributions from a number of students came
through participation in an NSF-funded Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) project. A few participated for
academic credit only, such as undergraduate senior design projects, or graduate level independent research topics.
GRAs and the resultant thesis research topics have been invaluable to the development and test of ISSAC systems.
However most have required additional integration, veriﬁcation, and documentation tasks be completed in order to

"
"10","ﬁnalize the system for ﬂight and operations. Hourly students could fulﬁll part of this role, though in a few cases the
graduating GRA student was hired as temporary staff for a few months to complete their work and integrate it with that
of others. In numbers the vast majority of personnel who have worked on ISSAC have been students; nevertheless,
critical system integrative roles and tasks have been supported by UND faculty and staff, as well as subsystem vendors
for selective niche technical specialties. Thus, the ISSAC experience has been that while a student-centered engineering
project has been demonstrated to be a Viable alternative for design and development of a science payload for the 188, the
extensive interface and veriﬁcation requirements of the ISS environment d0 necessitate dedicated faculty and/or staff to
integrate among multiple student contributions, especially given the student turnover that occurs over time.
4. SENSOR CALIBRATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
4.1 Data Products and Sensor Calibration
The ISSAC project will deliver three types of Level-l data products: Level-lR, Level-lGO and Level lGT, as is
illustrated in Figure 7.
R a w Level-l} Level—l R Level—l G1] Level—l GT
I} ""rwuliul'ecl 1:; Stﬂﬂiﬂlﬁﬂﬂlld Flat-ﬁelclﬂ: ScaledRadiauce Gemuetric
L . 1”“ , L tﬁBﬂlldCﬁ' Radimuetric at Sﬂlsm'witll Cfm'rectimldiz
Rebullcllmw IJN regicztered 1- 1.1}, t' 1 f. 1r 1 l' f. F f 1 . U
SingleBauds ._ ~- ~ :31 13_ 14.11 Ijergap 11c 1&4. ie Element,
-— bﬂlld Applled Int] 4311 atta clued Applled { gentlﬂ}
Figure 7: Schematic ﬂow of ISSAC image data processing and product generation.
When acquired over a target, ISSAC imagery is collected in overlapping frame sequences. Both frame rate (degree of
overlap) and frame count can be adjusted, the latter generally in response to uncertainty in along-track target location
accuracy. Raw imagery data consists of acquired data that has been downlinked Via a packetized telemetry stream and
rebuilt (de-packetized) into individual single-band (green, red, near-infrared) 16-bit images (albeit retaining the 12-bit
quantization), in a track—down orientation — direction of ﬂight is at the bottom of the image. The Level-O product is
rotated to track—up orientation, and band-band co—registered into a single 3-band .tif image.
The Level-lR product has radiometric calibration coefﬁcients applied to produce scaled at-sensor radiance. Level-lR
products are also delivered with jpeg format browse images. For pre-ﬂight characterization of the ISSAC sensor, spectral
and radiometric calibration was conducted in collaboration with the Airborne Sensor Calibration Laboratory (SCL) at the
NASA Ames Research Center 29. Characterizations performed of all three detectors 0f the new sensor were comparable
to those performed for the original ISSAC sensor 30, which included (1) bandpass spectral responsivity using a tunable
narrow-band monochrometer; (2) radiometric responsivity of output digital counts corresponding to known input
radiance using an integrating sphere; and (3) CCD array variance and lens fall-off characterization using a ﬂat-ﬁeld
illumination device. Response of each spectral bands was determined at a wavelength interval of 5 nm.
Custom software written in Interactive Data Language (IDL) was developed in-house to perform image stacking, ﬂat-
ﬁelding, and radiometric calibration. Flat-ﬁelding which removes both un-even responsivity throughout the ﬁeld and
artifacts of the detectors was applied prior to radiometric correction. In order to convert DN t0 radiance at the sensor, the
unit conversion coefﬁcients (radiometric calibration coefﬁcients) and offsets are used (below equation). Calibrated
spectral radiance at sensor is expressed in unit of Watt/(mZ-sr-ttm) as shown in Equation 1.
Radiance (at sensor) = [DN >< Calibration gain + Offset]*TW (l)
TW represents percent transmittance of the US Laboratory window, as measured during pre-ﬂight characterization”. For
the ISSAC green, red, and NIR bandpasses, window transmittance is about 95.53%, 97.48%, and 93.30%, respectively.
Level-lGO data have a coarsely-determined center coordinate latitude and longitude information attached, wherein
center coordinate latitude and longitude were obtained from Satellite Toolkit (STK: Analytical Graphics, Inc, Exton, PA)
using near-real time 188 ephemeris and attitude provided from NASA.
Level-lGT correction processing is under development at the time of this paper publication. Level-lGT correction will
employ parameters of the spacecraft attitude, ephemeris, and sensor Viewing angle to ﬁrst establish geo—location t0

"
"11","within a few kilometers. To deliver fully geo—corrected imagery with geodetic latitude and longitude coordinates
embedded in the image, additional factors will be incorporated. These will include both ﬂight-comparable measured lens
radial distortion and a modeled US Lab Window radial distortion, and will utilize a digital elevation model (DEM) and
ground control points (GCPs) designated to eXisting georeferenced imagery from other sensors. Leve1-1GT correction
will be performed on a time-available basis, utilizing reference datasets as may be freely available, such as Digital
Elevation Model (DEM) or Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) for terrain, and other sate11ites or airborne
imagery data for GCP referencing.
4.2 Spatial Resolution
As described in Section 3, the ISSAC sensor incorporates three separate band-dedicated CCD arrays, with pitch of 6.45
microns, and total array size of 1040 X 1392 elements. Pairing this with the 150 mm Sigma lens at a nominal ISS altitude
of 350 km yields a Ground Sample Distance (GSD) of 15.05 meters, and a total ﬁeld of View of 15.65 X 20.95
kilometers. This nominal GSD will vary depending on actual altitude and sensor pointing angle. Table 1 indicates the
range of GSDs for ISSAC, across the ISS operational altitude range ISSAC pointing angles.

(min) 340 14.63, 14.62, 14.63 14.79, 14.85, 14.93 15.40, 15.56, 15.69 16.60, 16.88, 17.18

15.06,15.05,15.06 15.85,16.02,16.15 17.09,17.38,17.69
(max) 390 16.78, 16.77, 16.78 16.97, 17.03, 17.13 17.66, 17.85, 18.00 19.05, 19.36, 19.71
Table 1: ISSAC Ground Sample Distance for Near Edge, Center, and Far Edge Pixels
For evaluating pre-ﬂight spatial performance of the imaging system, when transitioning a slant-edge boundary between
dark and light areas on a target, the distance in piXel count between when the pixel value rises from 10% to 90% 0f the
dynamic range can be used as a simpler method to measure the Modular Transfer Function (MTF) of a system”. The
performance of the ISSAC sensor in such a test was measured on the slant-edge target during the sensor accepting
testing conducted at Rochester, NY on July 8, 2010. The slanted edge target was set up on a sidewalk at a distance about
600 m away from the ISSAC imaging system, to avoid near-ﬁeld effect of the inﬁnity-focused lens. The target was a 40
X 42 inch rectangular box with half black and half white color printed using infrared Visible ink. Angle of the slant edge
in the middle of black and white boundary was 5 degrees. The target panel was rotated 90 degrees to measure both
horizontal and vertical edge response distance. Table 2 shows the results the edge distance in piXel count.
___-ﬁ-
Table 2: 10-90% rise distance measured from the slanted edge target in pixel count
For example, 10-90% distance of green band corresponds to 2.4 piXel distance which means 1 line pair could be
identiﬁed by 2.4 piXel distance. Applying this approach to the results shown in Table 2 indicates the eXpected ISSAC
spatial resolution on the ground, with a nadir 100k angle at nominal altitude, to be 18 — 21m.
5. ISSAC OPERATIONS AND EARLY RESULTS

5.1 ISSAC Science Operations Center
As described in Section 2.4, 188 payload operations are managed by the FDIC at the NASA MSFC in Huntsville, AL.
The FDIC facility manages on-orbit ISS payloads and payload support systems in coordination with the Mission Control
Center in Houston (MCC-H), the International Partner (1P) Payload Control Centers (PCCs), several NASA Telescience
Support Centers (TSCs), and payload-unique facilities32. For ISSAC, this payload-unique facility is the ISSAC Science
Operations Center (SOC), located in Clifford Hall on the UND campus.
The SOC has eight workstation consoles used cooperatively to perform mission planning, send commands, process
telemetry and images, and implement Video, voice, and data connectivity; all communications with NASA are
transmitted over Internet 2 secure network links. Two large overhead screens are used to display live 188 Video when
there is a crew interaction activity. Voice communcation is Via the Internet Voice Distribution system (IVODS), which

"
"12","NASA uses to coordinate among the payload centers, the FDIC, the MCC—H, and the crew onboard. Command and
telemetry data communication between the SOC and the ISSAC payload onboard are structured Within the Consultative
Committee on Space Data Systems (CCSDS) layered packetization format, and transmitted Via Virtual Private Network
(VPN). Telemetry is organized into separate data streams for payload Health and Status (H&S), and payload Science.
Custom software running on the workstations uses the NASA—supplied Telescience Resource Kit (TReK) application
programmer interface to implement the CCSDS packetization, provides graphical user interfaces (GUIs) to enable
console operators to formulate ISSAC commands and monitor telemetry, and records commands sent and data received
in a local relational database25’ 33’ 34’ 35. Also installed and operating on the workstations is Satellite Tool Kit (STK),
software from Analytical Graphics to compute the access time and pointing angle of our targets based on the ISS
traj ectory information”.
ISSAC is operated by students, staff, and faculty at UND. At present, ISSAC is staffed by siX student—console operators
from multiple campus academic departments (Aviation, Business—Entrepreneurship, Computer Science, Physics, and
Electrical Engineering). Student operators undergo an extensive training regimen, With tailored learning modules
(Introduction, Mission Planning, Real—time Ops, Post Processing, NASA protocols and systems) given by both UND and
NASA personnel. In addition to time spent on console to operate ISSAC, students use STK to make daily and weekly
target acquisition plans, process received telemetry into deliverable data products, and develop and reVise SOC standard
operating procedures (SOPs) to document and standardize procedural tasks. To date, ISSAC has been operated for 13
days and collected over 250 target locations worldwide.
5.2 Initial Results
Quantitative analysis of spatial peformance 0f the imaging system is currently underway at the time this paper is written,
and therefore ﬁnal determination of ISSAC on—orbit spatial resolution capability has not yet been ﬁnalized. Figure 8
offers a qualitative Visual inspection of ISSAC spatial performance.
KM“ Arizona ""
California f 1‘
i \x, L‘##_,£
°
i ‘3 , 200m
hifv»: . ,f’"" ’ .9""? g} #:kMW-J 1:
i {7(- 1:"" ‘ ’3’ ff 4 i
\"" '~ _ 5r J *3 i f” 7,1 «.1 '5 .
.. ' , , 1.123;; f 141’ '~. {{3’
7.1.7 g!"" _ '1"" , x N‘ A, "" ‘ :‘L’x
Figure 8. Visual comparison between images from ISSAC and Landsat 5 TM acquired over Imperial Reservoir, AZ
The ﬁgure shows a subset of an ISSAC image acquired over Imperial Reservoir, near Yuma, AZ, at 13:56 local time on
July 1, 2011, taken at an off—nadir 100k angle of 16.2 degrees. The reference ﬁne resolution image from Google Earth
shows a dam and parking lot of the Imperial Reservoir located about 14 miles NE of Yuma. For comparison, the same
area was subsetted from a Landsat5 TM image acquired at 10:59 AM on June 20, 2011. As can be seen in the ﬁgure,

"
"13","ISSAC image is able to depict more detail overall. For example, the open area that oriented NE and SW direction
between water bodies in the middle of the image are apparently occupied more pixels in ISSAC image than that of
Landsat5 TM. The results in the ﬁgure show the Red band only (the NIR and Green band comparisons show similar
results). While preliminary and qualitative at best, this indicates that ISSAC can deliver somewhat ﬁner spatial
resolution than Landsat5 TM.
Radiometrically, plans are in place to perform Vicarous calibration conﬁrmation of pre-ﬁight sensor characterization.
Among these include acquisition of ISSAC imagery over known reﬂective surfaces and vegetation, using a calibrated
hand-held spectro-radiometer for ground validation, as well as performance of same coincident With Landsat
overpassess. Qualitatively, initial indications are that the ISSAC sensor is providing imagery that is approximately
comparable to What is expected from pre-ﬁight performance asssessments.

6. ANTICIPATED SCIENCE APPLICATIONS
For the last 50 years or so, relationships between spectral data and crop and soil properties have been established and
have been incorporated into numerous expert systems to address agricultural analysis, interpretation, and decision-
making needs. ISSAC imagery Will be used in scientiﬁc projects related to precision agriculture, crops management and
monitoring, crop yield estimate, and related fast-response applications”. With spectral bands almost similar to the ones
of Landsat 5, and spatial resolution ﬁner than Landsat 30 m (see section 5), remotely sensed information extracted from
ISSAC imagery Will capture vegetation canopy reﬂectance With high spatial ﬁdelity. Among others, science
investigations Will compare and analyze the opportunity of replacing, or complementing, Landsat imagery by ISSAC
imagery in precision farming support tools such as ZoneMAP38. Additionally, ISSAC imagery may have applications in
crop modeling or ecosystem studies, in particular While undergoing rapid vegetative change, such as during green-up or
senescence, or as a result of disturbances ranging from grazing and harvesting to ﬁres and ﬂoods.
Because of its off—nadir capability and temporal resolution, ISSAC Will be able to provide multidirectional data, and
bidirectional effects could be studied. Bidirectional Reﬂectance Distribution Function (BRDF) has applications in
remote sensing for correction of the sun and Viewing angle effects, for deriving albedo, for land cover classiﬁcation, for
cloud detection, for atmospheric correction and for other applications.
Orbits for sun-synchronous imagers are typically established With sunlit overpasses in the niid-niorning, as for most
regions this is statistically the timeframe With least probability for clouds. However, for some locales, such as tropical
coastal and/or mountainous regions, this can be the least likely time for cloud-free imagery. ISSAC images, taken at
alternate times, may be the few available for these niche regions.
Place-based design projects beneﬁt from an understanding and representation of the local terrain; currently most
commonly accessible Digital Elevation Models (DEM) data in non-urban areas are at a 30 m range. With its 18 to 20 m
spatial resolution and multiple look angle potential ISSAC data Will be evaluated to develop local DEM at a regional
scale, Which has very interesting possibilities for developing scientiﬁc application in hydrology or glaciology.
ISSAC near-real time data acquisition and delivery capability, and its high-medium spatial resolution, Will favor the
development of applications to address the need for rapid response to events such as ﬂoods, earthquakes, eruptions,
forest ﬁres, and other natural emergencies. Scientiﬁc applications developed Will focus on 1) a rapid ﬁrst look and
estimate of the events that just occurred; 2) monitoring and assessing on a frequent basis the events as they progress; 3)
helping the event early management and future decision making.

7. CONCLUSIONS

Student-centered engineering projects are a Viable alternative for design and development of science payloads for the
188, an important consideration given its new designation as a National Laboratory in orbit. Beneﬁts to STEM academic
improvement can be signiﬁcant, though the extensive interface and veriﬁcation requirements of the ISS environment do
necessitate dedicated faculty and/or staff to integrate among multiple student contributions over time. Extensive use of
low-cost COTS components can be accommodated Within this veriﬁcation requirements framework, and can produce
valid scientiﬁc measurements in Earth remote sensing application areas.
ISSAC radiometric (Green, Red, NIR) and spatial (estimated 18-20m) resolution requirements were primarily deﬁned to
deliver images for applications pertaining to vegetation such as applications in precision farming, crop and grassland
monitoring, grassland ecosystem, or land use land change study. In addition, the sensor off—nadir capability from the ISS

"
"14","orbit enables ISSAC to deliver multidirectional data at different sun and Viewing angles and at higher temporal

resolution than sun-synchronous imagers; at higher latitudes, even several days in a row, or several times a day. This

provides additional capabilities for scientiﬁc projects that proﬁt from acquiring target reﬂectance as a function of
illumination geometry and Viewing geometry, such as scientiﬁc applications using BRDF or Digital Elevation Models

(DEMs). ISSAC repetitiveness and targeting capability make it also a sensor adequate and potentially quite useful for

evaluating and/or monitoring hazardous events.

Finally, ISSAC is the ﬁrst science payload to make extensive use of the WORF and the US Laboratory Window onboard

the ISS, and offers the opportunity to perform multi-spectral medium-resolution remote sensing investigations using the

unique characteristics of the 188. Such investigations can be used to acquire a good understanding of the implications of
look-angle, sun angle, and the ISS orbit and ground track on target access frequency, as well 188 operational constraints
and weather and atmospheric effects, Which can be applied to any future Earth observation imaging system.

8. REFERENCES

[1] http://www.essp.und.edu/

[2] Laguette, S., Seielstad, G., Seelan, S., Wivell, C., Olsen, D. , Lawrence, R., Nielsen, G., Rattling Leaf, J ., Clay, D.,
Dalsted, K., Welling, L., “Precision farming management Via information dissemination”, Free. International
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium in Sydney Aus., 837-839 (2001).

[3] http://www.umac.0rg/

[4] Semke, W., Johnson, A.F., Schultz, R., Won, C., Gullicks, J ., Hulst, N, Olsen, D., Seielstad, G., “The development
of an airborne remote sensing camera array at the University of North Dakota”, Proc. 64th Annual American
Society of Engineering Education (ASEE) North Midwest Section Annual Conference in Madison WI, (2002).

[5] Hulst, N., Gullicks, J ., Johnson, J ., Lauinger, G., Larsen, D., Lemcke, S., Johnson, A.F., Schultz, R., Semke, W.,
Won, C., Giesinger, B., Olsen, D., Osburnsen, P., Seielstad, G., Wivell, C., “The Airborne Environmental Research
Observational Camera (AEROCam): A multispectral digital photography system for remote sensing”, Proc.
National Conference on Undergraduate Research in Whitewater WI, (2002).

[6] Hulst, N., Barton, J ., Carpenter, J ., Frey, C., Hammes, J ., Johnson, A.F., Olsen, D., Schultz, R. Scilley, B, Seielstad,
G., Semke, W., Threinen, S., Ubbi, P., Voeller, R. Wambsganss, W., Webster, A., Won, C., Zeller, A., “AgCam:
Scientiﬁc Imaging for the 188 Window Observational Research Facility.” Proc. IEEE Aerospace Conference in Big
Sky MT, (2004).

[7] http://www.nasa.gOV/missi0n_pages/station/main/onthestation/indexhtml

[8] http://WWW.nasa.gOV/mission p_ages/station/research/nlab/

[9] Bolden, C. “Statement by Charlie Bolden, NASA Administrator”, NASA Feb 1St Budget Press Conference, (2010).

[10] Watson, P.M., “Remote sensing from manned 10W Earth orbit spacecraft: implications for the International Space
Station”, Proc.SPIE 7673, 76730F (2010).

[11]B0ain, R., “A-B-Cs 0f sun-synchronous orbit mission design”, 14th JPL/NASA AAS/AIAA Space Flight
Mechanics Meeting in Maui HI, (2004).

[12] Goward, S., Masek, J . Williams, D., Irons, J . Thompson, R.J., “The Landsat 7 mission: Terrestrial research and
applications for the 21st century”, Remote Sensing of Environment, 78 (1-2), 3-12 (2001).

[13] Giesinger, B., “Design of an imaging system for AgCam — the International Space Station based Earth observing
camera for precision agriculture”, M.S. Thesis in Dept. Elec. Eng. at Univ. of North Dakota, (2002).

[14] http://www.agi.com/

[15] Scott, K., Biggar, S. Eppler, D., Zalewski, E., Brownlow, L., Lulla, K., “International Space Station Destiny Module
Science Window Optical Characterization”, 30th ISRSE in Honolulu HI, (2003).

[16] Runco, M.; Eppler, D.; Scott, K.P.; Runco, S. ,”Earth science and remote sensing from the international space
station using the destiny laboratory’s science Window and the Window observational research facility”, 30th ISRSE
in Honolulu HI, (2003).

[17]Bart0n, J ., “Critical analysis of the NASA payload safety and payload integration processes”, M.S. Independent
Study in Dept. Space Studies at Univ. of North Dakota, (2004).

[18]Sut1iff, T.J., “Space Acceleration Measurement System-II: microgravity instrumentation for the International Space
Station research community”, Proc. 16th IEEE Instrumental and Measurement Technology Conference in Venice
Italy, 1, 254-259 (1999).

[19] Webster, A.; Semke, W.H., “Broad-band Viscoelastic Rotational Vibration Control for Remote Sensing
Applications”, J ournal 0f Vibration and Control, 1339-1356 (2005).

"
"15","[20] Webster, A., “Analysis and development of a Vibration isolation system for the agricultural camera (AgCam) remote
sensing camera system”, M.S. Thesis in Dept. Mech. Eng. at Univ. ofNorth Dakota, (2003).

[21]Ze11er, A., “The analysis and design of a single-axis precision pointing control subsystem for the AgCam remote
sensing camera system”, M.S. Thesis in Dept. Mech. Eng. at Univ. of North Dakota, (2007).

[22] Hammes, J ., “Substructure coupling for motion proﬁle tuning for the Agricultural Camera (AgCam) remote sensing
camera system”, M.S. Thesis in Dept. Mech. Eng. at Univ. ofNorth Dakota, (2004).

[23] Wambsganss, W., “Electronics design and test strategies for an International Space Station remote sensing payload”,
M.S. Thesis in Dept. Elec. Eng. at Univ. ofNorth Dakota, (2005).

[24] Hulst, N., “Near-real-time data processing and operation of an Earth-observing remote sensing payload”, M.S.
Thesis in Dept. Elec. Eng. at Univ. ofNorth Dakota, (2004).

[25]Chennamaneni, B., “""Application of software engineering principles for mission critical software"", M.S. Thesis
(expected) in Dept. Comp. Sci. at Univ. of North Dakota, (2011).

[26] Threinen, G. 8., “Analysis and development of a linear positioning system for the Agricultural Camera (AgCam)
remote sensing camera system”, M.S. Thesis in Dept. Mech. Eng. at Univ. of North Dakota, (2004).

[27] Dunnigan, A., “Design, analysis, and NASA requirements for the alternate Agricultural Camera (AgCam) IMAX
mounting assembly”, M.S. Thesis in Dept. Mech. Eng. at Univ. ofNorth Dakota, (2007).

[28]V0e11er, R., “Closed cell foam characterization for packaging and testing of the Agricultural Camera (AgCam)
system, M.S. Thesis in Dept. Mech. Eng. at Univ. ofNorth Dakota, (2005).

[29] Brown, S. W., Johnson, B. C., Biggar, S. F., Zalewski, E. F., Cooper, J ., Hajek, P., Hildum, E., Grant, P., Barnes, R.
A. & Butler, J . J ., “Radiometric validation of NASA's Ames Research Center's Sensor Calibration Laboratory”,
Applied Optics 44, 6426-6443 (2005).

[30] Olsen, D., Dou, C., Zhang, X., Hu, L., Kim, H. & Hildum, E., “Radiometric Calibration for AgCam”, Remote
Sensing 2, 464-477 (2010).

[31] Smith, W., “The Scientist & Engineer’s Guide to Digital Signal Processing”, California Technical Pub., (1997).

[32] Schneider, M.; Lapenta, C.C. “Payload Operations Integration Center Remote Operations Capabilities”, AIAA
Conference and Exhibit on 188 Utilization in Cape Canaveral FL, (2001).

[33]Sci11ey, B., “A real-time telemetry and commanding interface for an International Space Station imaging payload”,
M.S. Thesis in Dept. Elec. Eng. at Univ. ofNorth Dakota, (2004).

[34] Watson, E., “Building reliable ground operations”, M.S. Thesis in Dept. Space Studies at Univ. of North Dakota,
(2006)

[35]Patch0ng, D. F. N., “Evaluating the beneﬁts of software engineering principles in mission critical environments”,
M.S. Thesis in Dept. Comp. Sci. at Univ. ofNorth Dakota, (2008).

[36] Frey, C., “Mission planning, operation, and simulation for a space imaging system”, M.S. Thesis in Dept. Elec. Eng.
at Univ. of North Dakota, (2004).

[37]Seie1stad, G., Clay, D., Dalsted, K., Lawrence, R., Olsen, D., Zhang, X., “[Precision Crop Protection — The
Challenge and Use of Heterogeneity. Chapter Title: Providing Precision Crop and Range Protection in the US
Northern Great P1ains]”, Springer Science + Business Media, 367-3 83 (2010).

[38]Zhang, X., L. Shi, X. Jia, Helgason, C., Seielstad, G., “Zone mapping application for precision-farming: a decision
support tool for variable rate application”, Precision Agriculture 11(2), 103-114 (2010).

"
