"","x"
"1","44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2006-521
9 - 12 January 2006, Reno, Nevada
The In- Space Solderlng Investlgatlon (ISSI): Meltmg and
Sohdlﬁeatlon Experlments Aboard the Intematlonal Space
Statlon
R.N. Grugeli L.J. CottonT, and RN. Segrei
*Marshall Space F light Center, Huntsville, AL, 35812, USA
TBoeing Corporation, Houston, TX USA
1Physics Department, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322 USA
and
J .A. Ogle§, G. Funkhouser**, F. Parrish: L. Murphy”, and D. Gillies§§
§Sverdmp, Huntsville, AL, 35812, USA
** Morgan Research, Huntsville, AL, 35812, USA
ﬂ Sverdmp, Huntsville, AL, 35812, USA
H Marshall Space F light Center, Huntsville, AL, 35812, USA
§§ Marshall Space F light Center, Huntsville, AL, 35812, USA
and
F. Huam and AV. Anilkumarw
***Intel Corporation, Santa Clara, CA, 95054, USA
W Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, 37235, USA
The In-Space Soldering Investigation (1881) took place over four increments aboard the International
Space Station (188) in the Maintenance Work Area (MWA). Conducted primarily as “Saturday Science” it
utilized available tools and materials to promote our understanding of joining techniques, shape equilibrium,
wetting phenomena, and microstructural development in a microgravity environment. The work presented
here focuses on the melting dynamics and subsequent solidiﬁcation shapes observed during microgravity
processing and are compared to ground-based efforts. The value of the 188 as a research platform in support
of Exploration Missions is also discussed.
Nomenclature
188 = International Space Station
1881 = In-Space Soldering Investigation
MWA = Microgravity Workbench Area
VO = streaming velocity
rps = rotations per second
CT = surface tension gradient
M = dynamic Viscosity
v = kinematic Viscosity
* Scientist, Exploration Division, Marshall Space Flight Center, MS-XD41, Senior Member.
T Payload Integration Manager, Boeing Corporation.
I Assistant Professor, Emory University, 400 Dowman Dr.
§ Payload Operations, Sverdrup C0rp., Huntsville.
Payload Operations, Morgan Research, Huntsville.
ﬂ Payload Operations, Sverdrup C0rp., Huntsville.
H Project Manager, MSFC, Huntsville.
§§ Scientist, Exploration Division, Marshall Space Flight Center, MS-XD41.
Scientist, Solder Metallurgy, 2200 Mission College Blvd.
WResearch Associate Professor, Mechanical Engineering, Box 1592, Station B.
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

"
"2","I. Introduction
SOLDERING is acknowledged as an important joining and repair technique which is likely to be utilized during
extended space missions. Unfortunately when using ﬂuxed solder, internal porosity is produced that severely
compromises material properties such as fatigue strength, electrical conductivity, and heat transport, Fig. 1, right.
dun- 3*-
II;-:'.' I .- I: H
ﬁg 1mm 3
Figure 1. Left: Photograph of a solder drop hanging from a silver-coated strand of copper Wire. Right:
Sectional micrograph through the left figure showing porosity internal to the drop and at the Wire interface.
Understanding solidiﬁcation behavior of ﬂuxed solders in a reduced gravity environment is in a nascent stage [1—
4]. Here one would expect enhanced surface tension contributions and, due to minimized buoyancy, additional
detrimental porosity. An opportunity to improve our understanding of soldering phenomena in a reduced gravity
environment came when NASA HQ called for new experiments on the International Space Station (188). The
caveat being they should require little, preferably zero, up mass. After a quick search of ISS equipment/tools it was
found that a well equipped soldering kit was available aboard, Fig. 2. Consequently, a systematic set of simple
experiments was designed to be conducted on the ISS.
. - I pr""! '-i-'-'.:'~:-t-.
lq' ‘ - "" ‘51-. |' -~- .1
- ~ ‘ Illf . w “1253
t: _ gs . . - _ .II 5.33:?"" a.
”f: 9 439 «55"" - P “ . cw
‘ ‘b ;. ' ﬂ."" ' l=- , 9-21 .' “‘1
l. W“? ?\V: . t
F“ ' U 1‘ ' U.~,«V~""“""i ”V l
L“: “' 1 ’ U
, h‘L- - h—J '---.____—-""' I
Figure 2. Photograph of the ground-based soldering set equivalent to that aboard the 188. Left: Photograph
of the soldering iron, solder, battery, and accessories. Upper right: Photograph of the Pin Kit containing a
variety of electrical connectors and coiled Wire. Lower right: Photograph of the stranded 12-gauge Wire from
Which test coupons were cut and fabricated.
2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","11. Experimental Procedure

A. International Space Station

The proposed experiments basically consisted of taking pieces of silver—coated copper wire and bending/twisting
them into simple conﬁgurations for test coupons. Selected lengths of Kester “44”® 60—40 rosin core solder (5 and 10
cm) were then cut and wrapped around a selected portion of the coupon, to be later melted by heat conduction
through the wire using a soldering iron. A second set of experiments involved feeding 5 and 10 cm lengths of solder
onto similar shaped coupons that were being heated by the iron. In principle, the soldering iron was never meant to
come in contact with the molten solder. There were several reasons for this experimental aspect. First, consistent
amounts of solder were preferred for each experiment; wetting by the soldering iron would make this difﬁcult if not
impossible. It was also thought that the less interaction of the soldering iron tip with the wire and rnolten solder, the
more chance for porosity to develop and be better characterized; presumed “worst case” scenarios were desired.
Finally, it was preferred to minimize any interactions that could possibly disrupt equilibriurn shape formation and
microstructural development. Although the materials necessary to conduct potential soldering experiments aboard
the 188 were available, it became quickly apparent that the extent of their use would be limited. The initial request
to use a couple of meters of on—board wire was not well received. Subsequently, examination of the ground—based
equivalent showed that the 12 gauge wire actually consisted of 19 indiVidual strands twisted together. A foot (~30.5
cm) of the 188 stock was made available that (when out into 5 cm lengths, insulation removed, and strands
separated) provided 114 indiVidual wires for testing. These indiVidual wires were tailored into test coupons by
wrapping a wire around a screwdriver shank to form a loop (Fig. 3), for holding the soldering iron tip (and another
for later ﬁlling by solder). The request for several meters of the 0.025” (0.635 mm) diameter solder was granted
after presenting a brief calculation that showed the desired amount only accounted for a small fraction of what was
present on—board. To accomplish one aspect of the conductive melting experiments approximately half of the
samples had solder wrapped about the wire, Fig. 4. All in all, ﬁve soldering sessions were conducted on the 188 that
culminated in 86 samples comprising seven different wire conﬁgurations, two different solder lengths (5 and 10
cm), and two different rnelt procedures (conduction melting of wrapped solder and conduction melting of solder
being fed onto the wire).

MT”. _/V/I \ ‘ - t

, ,3: g“; ,3 ‘T m‘ f
x, ‘1 iii: ‘* 55:5 +4"" '?' I {—I ' ‘
‘il‘ 2‘; .23? -0 ,7 t
Figure 3 Figure 4

Figure 3. Photograph of 5 cm long Wire strands obtained from the 12 gauge stock that were twisted about a
Phillips head screwdriver shank to form a small loop for one of the proposed experiments. Figure 4.
Photograph of two sets of samples that had solder (5 and 10 cm lengths) wrapped about the Wire end for later
melting by conduction. It was envisioned that the tip of the soldering iron would be inserted into the loop.

The melting experiments took place in the Maintenance Work Area (MWA), a portable facility used to make
repairs and conduct other operations. Figure 5 shows Astronaut Mike Fincke at the MWA as it was set—up in the
ISS. Basically it is a ﬂame retardant enclosure; an exhaust port, hooked to a vacuum cleaner, can be seen in the
lower right. An internal View of the MWA and the 1881 experimental set—up is seen in Fig. 6. The soldering iron is
off to the left, three samples are clamped in the Kapton® tape wrapped jaws of a Vise—Grip® which is attached to the
MWA base. A digital camera is placed behind the samples to record the melting and subsequent solidiﬁcation
experiments. Video footage and still pictures were down linked after each experimental session.

3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4",",, ...‘ w .,~_. . - .«_ ~ ; ~ 1- l
l . / Li‘x j ’ ~- 34 gwil‘,» .. a g ' ' .
Q ' f ' :éa v. ﬁ'fgx-r‘ 1 i _-
. ‘/ a "" b b . ,y , \ éf’ 1 ._ “ 4;; W... - I l. \\
i W 7 i..i¢ﬁxz: “84’ E; J .5 r g""
n 3 ‘ v;‘«' 'N/ r,‘_~.‘ \; ‘ , . m o \ \ ‘ ’ 5. ,
‘ '.‘ ‘. 4""— ,
Figure 5 Figure 6
Figure 5. Photograph of 188 Science Ofﬁcer, Mike Fincke, working at the Maintenance Work Area aboard
the 188. Figure 6. Photograph showing the 1881 experimental set-up inside the MWA.

Fig. 7 is a photograph of Mike Fincke conducting a set of three melting/solidiﬁcation experiments within the
MWA. Here 10 cm of solder had been previously wrapped about the wire tip as seen in the far right sample. The
central sample is in the process of being, or just has, melted. Initially the soldering iron was placed in the loop, but
melting took too long to occur. It was then decided to remove the iron and place the tip a few millimeters below the
wrapped wire after which melting quickly commenced. Later it was decided to give the wrapped solder a slight
squeeze with pliers which effectively increased the solder/wire contact area and further accelerated melting. Both
changes were suggested by the ground observers while watching down linked Video and demonstrate the value of
being able to communicate in “real time” with the crew. The sample on the left has been melted and re—solidiﬁed;
note the equilibrium “football” shape and ﬂux accumulation. Figure 8 shows a set of three samples in which a
measured length (5 or 10 cm) of solder was fed and melted at the wire tip while the soldering iron was held slightly
below. The feed is exempliﬁed by the roll of solder still attached and “ﬂoating” nearby. The attached solder is
snipped and a “tail” is left attached to the molten solder ball. This will serve as a point, upon rnetallographic
examination, from which development of the microgravity solidiﬁcation microstructure can be followed.

a ._
.. ‘ “ z‘ x . ‘
{:1 Q / ‘li l. M .
.' . ' it Q {77‘- ,.
. “N- W: / ﬁ .‘ . ,.
As; 1. . O” ’ r I w “ .s.
’ "" . ii; '
. mm“ 1 C o .‘i “ g J
Figure 7 Figure 8
Figure 7. Photograph of 188 Science Ofﬁcer, Mike Fincke, conducting a set of melting experiments within the
Maintenance Work Area. Figure 8. The photograph shows a set of experiments Where a measured length of
solder was fed onto the test Wire and then cut leaving a tail from Which the solidiﬁcation microstructure can
be followed.

The potential experiments were also constrained by the time available for the crew to conduct them. A proposal
for the investigation was submitted in April 2003. It was accepted and added to the Increment 7 schedule on 1 May
2003 with the understanding that they would most likely be conducted as “Saturday Science” experiments, i.e.
during the crews’ free time. Brieﬂy, the experiments covered 4 increments. Ed Lu (Increment 7) prepared the test
coupons from the wire stock, Mike Foale (Increment 8) wrapped the wire pieces with solder, Mike Fincke
(Increment 9) conducted the ﬁrst three sets of melting experiments, and Leroy Chaio (Increment 10) conducted the
remaining two sets, the last on 22 December 2004. The samples were returned on 23 September 2005, Figs. 9 and
10.

4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","B. Ground-based
The ground—based experiments _ a
were conducted using equipment 1 A ‘5\ ;‘
and supplies that were for all \ . ""é"" ‘
purposes identical to those aboard _ , s t, \
the 188. One difference was the "" l ‘I ﬁll: __
soldering iron. That aboard the 188 J “g
was modiﬁed to heat using a ., 5f 5 f {5*
rechargeable battery, not 110 volts - i i 35‘?
AC. The 188 iron was set to work at - - i ' ' ’ 5
600°F (315.6°C) and ground based Figure 9. 1881 return bag . ' ~ ‘3'”
experiments were conducted by inside shipping box. Flgure 10. Returned samples
dialing up to that temperature. from the second set of conducted
Ground—based experiments were experiments.
performed for several reasons, the primary one being to note differences
from the samples processed in the microgravity environment aboard the 188. In short, the microgravity experiments
can not be duplicated. This is clearly apparent when Fig. l is compared with Fig. 7. Temperature measurements are
crucial to characterizing solidiﬁcation experiments and, unfortunately, this could not be done on the space processed
samples. A simple experiment was conducted with the intent of gaining insight regarding the temperature history of
the melting and solidifying solder sample. Figure 11 shows the initial set—up which uses the ISS identical clamps,
solder, and wire; here, however, a ﬁne k—type thermocouple is inserted into the solder. The soldering iron tip, set at
Solder Drop Temperature
Iron Tip 2.5 mm from left
'13; lws: , _, - f1;— 3200 Solidiﬁcatio
‘ 4”"" T 5° _-
1“ ‘ ' ?”?I
’3 9” a
. ""H Figure 12. Melted and o . . . . . .
Figure 11. 10 cm of solder solidiﬁed drop hanging from 0105 0128 01:16 (Minﬂfjjsﬂonjjfe 0259
sitting on a loop with an the Wire With included Figure 13. Temperature history
inserted thermocouple. thermocouple. of sample seen in Figs. 11 and 12.
600°F (315.6°C), was placed ~25 mm to the left of the thermocouple which effectively melted the solder, Fig. 12; a
small residue mark be seen. Initially this experiment was conducted using a straight wire, as the ISS ones were, but
the weight of the liquid drop overcame the holding power of the surface tension and it inevitably fell. To overcome
this shortcoming a small loop was turned into the wire which was just sufﬁcient to keep the drop suspended. The
melting and solidiﬁcation history was recorded by the thermocouple as displayed in Fig. 13. Additional melting and
cooling experiments were conducted with the soldering iron tip placed at different distances along the suspending
wire.
III. Experimental Results
A. International Space Station-based
The experimental results can be grouped into two
categories, the processed samples themselves and the
down linked Video and photographs. The samples, 5 , . »-
recently returned, will be carefully evaluated, ﬁrst 41:? 7' ”35;:
non—destructively and then destructively. The latter -? - '
will utilize conventional metallographic procedures .. r . : 7‘
and will provide insight regarding porosity size, “' M
volume, and distribution, much as seen in Figure 1, Figure 14- Observation Figure 15- A fraction 0f
right. Microstructural development and 0f ﬂux (yellow glob) a second after Fig. 14 the
phase/constituent distribution and measurements will spinning about the ﬂux is seen to have
also be evaluated. Non—destructive evaluation will molten 501d“ ball. traveled~180 degrees.
include assessment, to whatever degree possible, by transmission X—rays and computed tomography. Real time and
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","down linked Video of the ISS experiments provided direct
observation of solder melting, equilibrium shape attainment by
the liquid, and ﬂux movement; behaVior of the latter being Pl°t°fFIUX R°t°ti°n
particularly unexpected. When the solder begins to melt, its 5 1°
internal core of rosin ﬂux is released and initially stays within § 8
the caVities of the yet un-melted solder. As the solder nears § 6
complete melting the ﬂux, in the form of a drop, migrates to the 2 4 m
perceived bottom of the solder drop, closest to the heat source. 3% 2 m
Shortly thereafter it begins to rapidly spin around the solder “‘3 0 _
drop. This continues until the soldering iron (heat source) is 0 5 10 15 20 25 30
removed after which the rotation rate slows to a stop and the Time<8econds)
solder (metal) sample subsequently solidiﬁes. Still . .
photographs, Figs. 14 and 15, were grabbed from the Video in Flgure 16' PIOt 0f the ﬂux rf’tat‘f’“ rate
an attempt to convey the observation. observed on the samples seen In Flgure. 7.

Flux rotation was observed on a number of the ISS Arrows 1nd1cate the tlme when the solderlng
processed samples. For example, this occurred on all the Iron tlp was removed.
samples seen in Fig. 7; the ﬂux on the central wire is currently rotating. The ﬂux rotation rates for the three samples
were measured from subsequent frames of the down linked .aVi ﬁles and are plotted in Fig. 16. Generally speaking
the rotation rate increases rapidly, reaches a plateau, and when the heat source is removed (denoted by arrows)
rotation slows to a stop. The rotation path varied over the sample surface, sometimes equatorial and sometimes
between the north and south poles. Note that each sample appears to have a different maximum value.
B. Ground-based

The intriguing ﬂuX-rotation phenomenon observed in Space appears unique to the microgravity environment,
and has not been duplicated on the ground. Metallographic sections from systematic ground-based solder melting
experiments, such as seen in Fig. 1, can be examined and internal features such as porosity and microstructure can
be carefully measured. As previously mentioned, there is no temperature history of the experiments conducted in
space. Here the ground-based work described above (Figs. 11-13) attempts to provide some insight to this
shortcoming. Fig. 13 is particularly informative. Recall that the soldering iron tip was placed ~2.5 mm to the side
of the solder sample. The thermocouple trace shows an initial rise in temperature, ﬂattens slightly as the solder
nielts, rises again and plateaus between 220 and 225°C. When the iron is removed the temperature drops (a slight
inﬂection indicating primary solidiﬁcation can be seen ~182°C) and the eutectic solidiﬁcation plateau (178°C)
develops. Once the sample is completely solidiﬁed it cools to room temperature. Two aspects of this temperature
trace are relevant to the space experiments. First, a maximum internal temperature between 220 and 225°C was
achieved with the soldering iron tip ~2.5 m away from the molten solder. Secondly, there is a human factor
associated with the experiments; the measured variation in temperature (220 to 225°C) is directly related to how
well the operator maintains consistent tip contact (i.e. area) at the wire and how well the tip position is maintained.
Deviation in either is quickly reﬂected in the thermocouple response. With this in mind, when the soldering iron tip
is placed ~1 mm from the molten solder a plateau of 232 to 242°C was measured; at ~5 rnm distance a plateau was
observed from ~200 to 212°C. Obviously the measured ranges could be narrowed considerably by improving
experimental design and operator capability, but the point regarding sensitivity of the tip placement and
contact/movement with the temperature of the molten solder has been made.

IV. Discussion

A physical examination of the recently-returned space processed samples is just beginning, there is only little to
say about their external appearance and essentially nothing regarding the internal morphology. Pending their
evaluation, let us consider the observed ﬂux rotation. First of all, this was not planned for, much less expected. In a
microgravity environment ﬂuid convection due to unstable temperature and/or solute gradients is minimized.
However, with a free surface, temperature gradients can induce thermocapillary ﬂow, the steeper the gradient the
stronger the ﬂow. Thermocapillary ﬂow, which is prevalent in a microgravity environment, drives the ﬂux motion.
With this premise consider the data presented in Fig. 16. There is an initial period over which the drop picks up
speed, fairly typical of a particle accelerated in a stream. Following which, there is scatter seen in each set of plotted
rotation values. There are two obVious reasons for this. First, the rotation path is seen to change at will during the
experiment. Assuming the ﬂux has a constant velocity, a circular route near one of the solder “football” poles would
be faster than one at the circumference. The observed elliptical rotations, essentially from pole to pole, would be the

6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","longest distance and subsequently the slowest rotation. Secondly, it is probably not reasonable to assume a constant
velocity. The rate will depend on the imposed temperature gradient and that can vary for any number of reasons,
one of which, as discussed above, can easily be attributed to the experimenter. The maximum observed rotation rate
is different for each sample. The maximum ﬂux rotation on left sample was about 5 rps, the center ~7 rps, and the
right ~9 rps. Recall the ground-based thermocouple experiments and how distance from the applied tip affected the
solder temperature. Review of the Video tapes provided the following information. For the left side sample the
soldering iron is initially positioned ~5 mm below the bottom of the molten solder and after 13 seconds is moved to
a position ~3.4 mm below the solder ball. The iron on the central sample starts out at ~3.1 mm below and after 12
seconds moves to ~19 mm below. For the sample on the right the iron starts out and stays at ~1.5 mm below solder
ba11.

In View of the space-based observations and the ground-based experiments a model is brieﬂy described that
provides insight to the observed ﬂux spinning. Initially heat is transmitted Via the highly conductive wire that melts
the solder. The pole of the solder closest to the heating iron will be the hottest and the opposite pole probably the
coldest. The temperature gradient along the solder surface induces a thermocapillary ﬂow that also assists the
melting process. As the solder melts, the ﬂux accrues into a drop which, because of Viscous drag exerted by the
surface ﬂow, effectively acts as a tracer particle that tracks the velocity. The heat loss due to conduction and
radiation from the solder surface is balanced by the heat input from the soldering iron. In the steady state, a steady
thermocapillary ﬂow is sustained on the solder surface, and the ﬂux drop essentia11y piggy-backs on it. The
thermocapillary return ﬂow is through the bulk; however, the ﬂux is not constrained by this, so it keeps moving
around in different paths, energizing itself as it approaches the bottom pole.

Using appropriate material properties [4-6] in conjunction with a wire diameter of 0.041 cm and a spherical
liquid solder ba11 having a diameter of 0.37 cm a temperature difference, AT, of 76°C is calculated from the drop’s
bottom (near the soldering iron tip) to the cooler top. Similarly, it was found that the temperature drops 9°C from
the tip of the soldering iron over a distance of 0.2 cm to the bottom of the solder ba11. Assuming that the tip is at
300°C the sample’s temperature at the bottom and top would be, respectively, 291°C and 215°C. For a strong
thermocapillary convection (Re >>1) in a low Prandtl number liquid (solder Pr <<1), the correlation for surface
streaming velocity, V0 is given by: VO = (GT - AT / ”)2/3 - (v/ R) “3. Here GT is the surface tension gradient, u is the
dynamic Viscosity, v is the kinematic Viscosity, and R is the solder sample radius. Substituting appropriate values
into the correlation gives VO 2 10 cm/s. Again assuming that the ﬂux drop is in equilibrium with the surface
streaming ﬂow its frequency, f0, in terms of circular transitions is approximately Vo/ ch where b is the length of the
major ellipse aXis (in this case circumference, TC - 0.45 cm). For the simpliﬁed analysis a value of f0 = 7H2 is found
which is in good agreement with the data shown in Fig. 16. It follows that a shallower temperature gradient will
develop if the soldering iron is lowered which will result in a slower surface velocity. Finally, the frequency will
increase if the ﬂux takes on a different, smaller axis, as is possible in the space experiments.

Conclusion

A series of simple systematic experiments that involved conductively melting 10 cm lengths of solder about the
top end of a thin silver-coated wire were conducted in the microgravity environment aboard the International Space
Station. The molten solder was observed to form an equilibrium “football” shape. Shortly after which the accrued
ﬂux was seen to spin around the sample’s surface. The velocity of Marangoni surface ﬂows was calculated on the
basis of a heat ﬂow analysis and found to be in agreement with the experimental observations. Efforts to duplicate
the space results on the ground proved fruitless.

Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to NASA Headquarters, the Marshall Space Flight Center, and the Johnson Space
Center for their support of this work. The technical help of Mr. Bryce Watson of the Kester Solder Corporation is
also appreciated. Finally, the authors are grateful to Astronauts Ed Lu, Mike Foale, Mike Fincke, and Leroy Chaio
for their individual efforts aboard the International Space Station in support of this investigation.

References
lWinter, C. and J ones, J . C., The Microgravity Research Experiments (MICREX) Database, NASA TM-108523, 1996.
2Pettegrew, R.D., Struk, P.M., Watson, J .K., and Haylett, D.R., Experimental Methods in Reduced Gravity Research, NASA-TM
2002211993 (2002).
7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","3Pettegrew, R.D., Struk, P.M., Watson, J.K., Haylett, DR, and Downs, R.S. Gravitational Effects on Solder Joints, Welding
Journal, pp. 44-48 (2003).
4Struk, P.M., Pettegrew, R.D., Downs, RS, and Watson, J .K., The Effects of an Unsteady Reduced Gravity Environment on the
Soldering Process, AIAA-2004-1311 and NASA / TM -2004-212946 (2004).
5Watson, B., Technical Service Engineer, Kester Solder Corporation, personal communication.
6Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 57th Edition, 1976-1977, R.C. Weast, ed., CRC Press.
8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
