"","x"
"1","NASA /TM—2002-211993
‘Lvllg 2!? i,
Experimental Methods in Reduced-Gravity
Soldering Research
Richard D. Pettegrew
National Center for Microgravity Research, Cleveland, Ohio
Peter M. Struk
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
John K. Watson
Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas
Daniel R. Haylett
National Center for Microgravity Research, Cleveland, Ohio
December 2002

"
"2","The NASA STI Program Office . . . in Profile
Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to 0 CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected
the advancement of aeronautics and space papers from scientific and technical
science. The NASA Scientific and Technical conferences, symposia, seminars, or other
Information (STI) Program Office plays a key part meetings sponsored or cosponsored by
in helping NASA maintain this important role. NASA.
The NASA STI Program Office is operated by 0 SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientific,
Langley Research Center, the Lead Center for technical, or historical information from
NASA’S scientific and technical information. The NASA programs, projects, and missions,
NASA STI Program Office provides access to the often concerned with subjects having
NASA STI Database, the largest collection of substantial public interest.
aeronautical and space science STI in the world.
The Program Office is also NASA’S institutional 0 TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. English-
mechanism for disseminating the results of its language translations of foreign scientific
research and development activities. These results and technical material pertinent to NASA’S
are published by NASA in the NASA STI Report mission.
Series, which includes the following report types:
Specialized services that complement the STI
0 TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of Program Office’s diverse offerings include
completed research or a major significant creating custom thesauri, building customized
phase of research that present the results of databases, organizing and publishing research
NASA programs and include extensive data results . . . even providing Videos.
or theoretical analysis. Includes compilations
of significant scientific and technical data and For more information about the NASA STI
information deemed to be of continuing Program Office, see the following:
reference value. NASA’S counterpart of peer-
reViewed formal professional papers but 0 Access the NASA STI Program Home Page
has less stringent limitations on manuscript at http://www.sti.nasa.gov
length and extent of graphic presentations.
0 E-mail your question Via the Internet to
0 TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientific help@sti.nasa.gov
and technical findings that are preliminary or
of specialized interest, e.g., quick release 0 Fax your question to the NASA Access
reports, working papers, and bibliographies Help Desk at 301—621—0134
that contain minimal annotation. Does not
contain extensive analysis. 0 Telephone the NASA Access Help Desk at
301—621—0390
0 CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientific and
technical findings by NASA-sponsored 0 Write to:
contractors and grantees. NASA Access Help Desk
NASA Center for AeroSpace Information
7121 Standard Drive
Hanover, MD 21076

"
"3","NASA / TM—2002-211993
5v '3;
Experlmental Methods 1n Reduced-Grav1ty
Soldermg Research
Richard D. Pettegrew
National Center for Microgravity Research, Cleveland, Ohio
Peter M. Struk
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
John K. Watson
Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas
Daniel R. Haylett
National Center for Microgravity Research, Cleveland, Ohio
Prepared for the
Second International Brazing and Soldering Conference
sponsored by the American Society for Metals
San Diego, California, February 17—19, 2003
National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
Glenn Research Center
December 2002

"
"4","Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the following individuals for their valuable contributions to this project: Gregory
Fedor, Michael Dobbs, Jack Kolis, Anthony Butina, Michael Conley, Robert Lowe, William O’Hara, Edward Van
Cise, Allison Bahnsen, Owen Farmer, and Julio Estrada.
This report contains preliminary
findings, subject to revision as
analysis proceeds.
Trade names or manufacturers’ names are used in this report for
identification only. This usage does not constitute an official
endorsement, either expressed or implied, by the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Available from
NASA Center for Aerospace Information National Technical Information Service
7121 Standard Drive 5285 Port Royal Road
Hanover, MD 21076 Springfield, VA 22100
Available electronically at http:[ [gltrsgrcnasagov

"
"5","EXPERIMENTAL METHODS IN REDUCED -GRAVITY
SOLDERING RESEARCH
Richard D. Pettegrew
National Center for Microgravity Research
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
Peter M. Struk
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
J Ohn K. Watson
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
J Ohnson Space Center
Houston, Texas 77058
Daniel R. Haylett
National Center for Microgravity Research
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
ABSTRACT

The National Center for Mierogravity Research, NASA’s Glenn Research Center, and NASA’s
J ohnson Space Center are conducting an exp erimental program to explore the inﬂuence of
reduced gravity environments on the soldering process. An improved understanding of the
effects of the acceleration environment is important to application of soldering during current
and future human space missions. Solder joint characteristics that are being considered include
solder ﬁllet geometry, porosity, and microstructural features. Both through— hole and surface
mounted devices are being investigated.
This paper focuses on the experimental methodology employed in this proj eet and the results of
macroscopic sample examination. The speciﬁc soldering process, sample conﬁgurations,
materials, and equipment were selected to be consistent with those currently 011- orbit. Other
apparatus was incorporated to meet requirements imposed by operation onboard NASA’s KC-
135 research aircraft and instrumentation was provided to monitor both the atmospheric and
acceleration environments. The contingent of test operators was selected to include both highly
skilled technicians and less skilled individuals to provide a population cross- section that would
be representative of the skill mix that might be encountered in space mission crews.

INTRODUCTION
Future long— duration human exploration missions will be challenged by constraints on mass and
volume allocations available for spare parts. Addressing this challenge will be critical to the
success of these missions. As a result, it is necessary to consider new approaches to spacecraft
maintenance and repair that reduce the need for large replacement components. 011 the
International Space Station the maintenance concept for avionics has evolved from removal and
replacement of entire Orbital Replacement Units (ORU’s) to removal and replacement of circuit
cards when possible. The next step to reducing the size of the items being replaced would be to
implement component-level repair, which is the repair mode used by the US. Navy 011 vessels at
sea. Factors in the decision to implement component level repair include operational issues
(such as skill requirements and crew training), systems issues (including fault diagnosis and post-
repair veriﬁcation), and process issues (including potential inﬂuences of a reduced gravity
environment 011 the metallurgical characteristics and conﬁguration of solder joints). The process
issues are the thrust of this proj eet.
NASA/TM—2002-2l 1993 l

"
"6","BACKGROUND
Several automated on- orbit soldering experiments have been conducted since the beginning of
the Shuttle program with experiments ﬂying on STS-4, -7, -11, -17, and —40 (Ref. 1). Some of
these experiments malfunctioned and yielded no results. Others functioned nominally but post-
ﬂight analyses were not performed, were not reported, or only considered gross macroscopic
effects. The dominance of surface tension was noted (allowing ﬁlling of wider gaps than would
be possible in normal gravity), as well as an increased entrapment of ﬂux in the solidiﬁed joints.
These experiments were conducted in vacuum; their applicability to practical repair operations is
therefore limited since such operations would be carried out in a pressurized “shirtsleeve”
environment.
A manual soldering experiment was conducted on STS- 57. In this effort, a orewmember
soldered and de- soldered a variety of samples mounted on circuit cards. These tests were started
in an onboard glove box, but the orewmember concluded the tests in the open cabin environment.
The samples included various electronic devices and wire junctions. A reView of Videotapes
made during the course of the experiment yields some interesting qualitative observations based
on the orewmember’s comments. First, the molten solder alloy appeared to solidify at a slower
rate than during 1— g training. Second, the solder ﬁllets appeared to be more “convex” than in 1— g.
This paper will compare the external joint geometry, cooling rates, and ﬂux entrapment
characteristics of solder joints produced in reduced gravity to those produced in normal gravity.
TECHNICAL APPROACH
Aircraft Facilities
Flying an aircraft (NASA’s KC-135) in a
""—-‘——<” '7‘""""'(;' Tim“ parabolic traj eotory generates the reduced gravity
/ environment (Ref. 2, 3). The maneuver starts
\ with a full power climb, after which the nose is
Nummn begin parabola : lowered to trace the parabolic. are (Figure 1)..
‘ \ From the tune that the nose beglns to lower, until
/ » the pullout (from the ensuing “dive” on the back
side of the traj eotory), the experiment and crew
\ / experience a 20-25 second period of ‘reduoed
24; mm, Péiimi’lslmi graV1ty’, orelatlve to the1r surroundmgs. .While the
acceleratlon levels exper1enoed durlng these
. maneuvers are qualitatively very low, some
Flgure 1 . . . .
Schematic of aircraft trajectory during res1dual acceleratlons (englne and a1rframe
reduced—gravity maneuvers Vibrations; etc) remain-
Experimental Hardware
The experimental apparatus (Figure 2) provides accommodations for a test operator, who is
seated and strapped to a seat, to manually solder on a circuit board in an enclosed glove box.
The test operator places their hands into the glove box Via two access holes. The soldering iron
is a Weller® TCP 12P with a PTP7 tip and is the same model as currently ﬂown in the soldering
kit aboard the International Space Station. The glove box is vented between tests Via an
overboard vent valve. The apparatus includes Video recording of each solder joint, glove box
temperature, relative humidity, and ambient pressure. On select joints, thermo couples were spot
welded or soldered to the circuit board pad to obtain heating and cooling proﬁles of the solder
NASA/TM—2002-2l 1993 2

"
"7","TM°LTlZZW joint. Additionally, the Space
\25 GLOVEBox smumR g Acceleration Measurement
= mo CAMERA __— System (SAMS) . program at
.1 “IF SAMSTSH NASA GRC pr0V1ded a 3-aX1s
ﬂ 0 ‘0 _:'_A lam- _| accelerometer for local
—i 2x 0 mm m comment,” PS 1m acceleration measurements.
% POWER SUPPLY VENT VALVE *1 P.S. 24voc
‘ lﬁllill‘ ' 5m liT-1] A “plated through-hole”
_‘ I conﬁguration (Figure 3) has been
‘ ' ' "" ' m used as the standard test
Figure 2 conﬁguration. This arrangement
ExperimentalHardware used on KC-135 Aircraft is representative of a typical
serViee joint on an electrical
circuit board. The components consisted of resistors that were fastened to the sample card using
an epoxy. Future tests will examine surface mount device (SMD) conﬁgurations.
| 65.9 | The primary solder alloy consisted of Sn/Pb 60/40 withoa
resm ﬂux core. Select samples used a euteetle
T +A composition of Sn/Pb 63/37 solder again with a resin ﬂux
core. Additional tests were conducted using a solid core
++A 6353/19- solder (Sn/Pb 60/40). During these tests, liquid ﬂux was
65.9 applied to the solder joint prior to heating and adding
solder t0 the joint. Application of the solder ﬂux was
primarily done during the 2-g pull-up just prior to the
reduced gravity portion of a parabola 0n the KC-l35
aircraft. During seleet tests, the liquid ﬂux was applied
6.35%. in reduced gravity to observe the flowing characteristics
of the ﬂux. Results of the solld-eore solderlng are
A — A currently being investigated and are not reported.
typ. 8 ples.
1.59 approx. In addition to low-gravity testing, samples were also
i soldered under normal gravity conditions while onboard
:3 DIET the KC-l35 aircraft to determine a baseline sample set
: for comparison. Initially, normal gravity tests were
applysolder conducted in the same orientation as during reduced
this Side gravity tests with the circuit board at approximately a 530
angle relative to the horizontal (as shown in Figure 2).
Figure 3 During all subsequent testing, the sample card was
Plated through-hole sample conﬁguration positioned in the horizontal plane for the normal gravity
(3“ dimenSionS in millimeters) tests, allowing the gravity vector to be perpendicular to
the circuit board.
Multiple operators were used during the testing. The effect of operator skill was characterized
by using multiple ‘unskilled’ operators (all of whom attended a common training class, similar to
the training given to astronauts), as well as a “skilled” technician, who is qualiﬁed to solder
space ﬂight hardware. Since this effort is designed to evaluate the practical aspects of soldering
NASA/TM—2002-21 1993 3

"
"8","by an astronaut, control of operational parameters (dwell time of soldering iron on joint, amount
of solder added, etc) were at the test operator’s discretion. The mass of solder added, while not
controlled, was determined by measurement (before and after the test) of the mass of the solder
piece used.
Post-ﬂight analysis (done jointly at NASA Glenn and NASA Johnson) consists of a Visual
inspection, photography, and leg-length measurements of the soldered joints, followed by cross-
seetioning / porosity measurements and optical metallographie characterization. Metallographie
analysis will be presented in a future paper.
RESULTS
Testing was performed with the plated through hole conﬁguration using ﬁve test operators. A
total of 297 reduced gravity samples and 143 normal gravity samples were obtained using the
resin-ﬂuX cored solder. In these tests, a higher incidence of porosity occurred in reduced gravity
compared with normal gravity (see below). In an attempt to mitigate the increase in porosity,
tests were conducted using a solid core wire with ﬂux applied externally t0 the joint producing
160 reduced gravity samples and 64 normal gravity samples. The results of the solid core wire
soldering are currently under analysis.
Acceleration Environment
010 _ . The acceleration environmeht was measured
3 . LongccelemmeterData g, +0.02 g/ge durmg the test usmg a 3-axis aeoeelerorneter
g 005 .°-. f. system. Whlle ‘zero-grav1ty’ IS the goal,
é f“ ._ ,; :55 / small amplitude, high frequency
§ 000 ?&‘3‘:m accelerations are routinely observed, with
2:3 ?&‘W larger amplitude, low frequency
2 -005 "" i‘ i \ accelerations observed at times. Figure 4
g -o.02 glge shows an acceleration plot typical of those
'0-10 observed throughout the test series. The
0 5 10 Tin::(s) 20 25 3” horizontal lines indicate acceleration levels
of 0.02, 0.0, and —0.02 g/ge, respectively.
Fi “re 4 Parabolas where the acceleration ievel was
Typical acceleration environment aboard reduced gravity between +/_ 0'02 g/ge for the (11.1”th Of the
aircraft along the vertical axis of the aircraft tlme between SOlder appheatlon and
solidiﬁcation were judged to be acceptable.
Visual Inspection
A Visual inspection on the solder joints from the ﬁrst two ﬂight weeks yielded the results shown
in Table 1. The inspection followed the standard set forth by NASA-STD-8739.3 (Ref. 4).
Workmanship failures include excess or insufﬁcient solder added to the joint, cold solder joint
(insufﬁcient heating which exhibits poor wetting), overheated solder joint, and poor or non-
wetting joints. Void failures describe solder joints that have Visually apparent holes or evidence
of subsurface voids.
Cause of failure Normal Gravity Reduced Gravity
Voids 3.1% 10.0 %
Table 1: Visual Inspection — Failure rates in normal and reduced gravity samples
NASA/TM—2002-21 1993 4

"
"9","Geometry
.l' i... - ' _ q.
1‘ _ - Circuit Board ' - ""
'5
“TOP” “Bottom”
Solder applied to this side
Figure 5
Front illuminated photograph of a solder joint used for leg length measurements
Each sample was photographed and the leg length of the “top” and “bottom” of the solder joint
was measured as shown in Figure 5. The ratio of the leg lengths (top to bottom) is shown in
Table 2. This table shows that the acceleration environment affects ﬁllet geometry. In reduced
gravity, the upper and lower legs are about the same length. In normal gravity, the lower leg is
longer than the upper leg (the 20% change in normal gravity leg length between Week 1 & Week
2 is attributed to the sample orientation change, previously discussed). It is possible that the O-g
solder joints may respond differently than l-g solder joints to operating stresses. We are
currently investigating the implications of this result.
. During the STS-57 Shuttle experiment, the
Reduced graV1ty crewmember made the observation that the
. shape of the solder joint appeared more
Normal grav1ty convex than was expected. Samples from
the current experiment were examined
. . (subj ectively) for this characteristic by means
L162“ vertlcal Leg Length (LT/LB) rams of Visual inspection of the sample cross-
sections. The ﬁllet geometry of samples
produced in reduced gravity tended to exhibit a more convex shape than those produced in
normal gravity. However, this change in overall shape may be attributable (at least in part) to an
increase in the mass of solder used in the reduced gravity tests. Measurements of the solder mass
used indicate that test operators tended to add more solder in the reduced gravity tests than in the
normal gravity tests (Table 3). This trend was evident in 4 0f the 5 operators in this data subset.
Overall, the mass of the reduced gravity samples was about 9% greater than those soldered in
normal gravity. No explanation of this observation is offered at this time, but this factor,
combined with the changes in leg length (previously described) are likely to account for the
perceived change in the overall shape.
NASA/TM—ZOOZ-Zl 1993 5

"
"10","W
Normal gravity: 0.023 g 0.026 g 0.032 g 0.028 g 0.030 g
Avg. mass added
Avg. mass added
Table 3: Mass of solder used by each operator in normal and reduced gravity tests.
Porosity Measurements
_ EMEE Samples from the ﬁrst two ﬂight weeks
, - '~ ""E . were examined for internal porosity
"" i ~00 O . .
t E 5-» a content by mounting the samples 111
i??? -- (7 ’ ° ‘metallographic’ mounts and grinding
f _. 9,,» \ .1 ""g I... them down to approximately the sample
‘11; .1 ' T ' eenterline. The percentage of porosity
EEJE... 5 E. 3? ” 0,, exposed by this was then measured by
- N a imaging the sample, designating (Via
3, 5?; 17-7.. ”Q a computer program) what areas were
I .0 ‘ ' ‘ >23 / Q ‘Void’ (porous) areas, and dividing that
.. 7 EE . area by the total area of the sample.
This technique complies with ASTM
F—iw Standard E1245-00 (Ref. 5), which
Image 9fj°int9 prepared for Digitally enhanced image of addresses porosity measurements. This
analy.SlSi PPriiafeFeten as J'Oillt, With YBUOW areas technique was carried out for both
me es m elom ° inqicafinngoresfg‘ WhiteEareaS normal gravity and reduced gravity
1nd1cat1ng solld materlal. .
samples for the ﬁrst two ﬂight weeks.
_ Figure 6 illustrates an example of a
Occurrence of PorOSIty . . .
sample (after mounting and grinding)
7000 along with a digitized image showing
00.00 the area measurement.
2 5000 Results of this analysis are displayed in
g 40.00 EILowg Figure 7, which is a bar chart showing
g 3000 the occurrence of porosity as a function
£20.00 0f the percentage of porosity. The
colored bars (blue for reduced graV1ty,
10-00 red for normal gravity) indicate the rate
0.00 of occurrence of samples with a given
<2 2'5 5'10 10::rce;f'::roszi::25 25'3” ”'35 35'4” porosity content. For example, the set
of bars 011 the far left of the plot
Figure 7 indicate that about 63% 0f the normal
Rate of occurrence of porosity in normal and reduced gravity samples showed 2% 01‘ less
graVity samples porosity, while about 29% of reduced
gravity samples displayed 2% or less
porosity.
NASA/TM—ZOOZ-Zl 1993 6

"
"11","Overall, this plot indicates that about 96% of normal gravity samples show porosity rates of 10%
or less, while only about 58% of the reduced gravity samples show 10% or less porosity. The
hypothesized reason for this is that liquid ﬂux vaporized and was trapped in the liquid solder (in
the reduced gravity cases); without the presence of gravity to drive these gas bubbles out, they
solidiﬁed into the pores seen in these measurements.
Thermocouple Data & Cooling Times
Thermocouple junctions spot-welded or soldered to the joint provided temperature traces for a
subset of both the normal and reduced gravity tests. Figure 8 shows representative temperature
data for both cases.
350 Total Heating Time Events such .as solder application and
300 solidiﬁcation time were determined through
6 _ Pu SolderApplication examlnatlon of the Video data, and
:7 250 2:“ temporally correlated to the thermocouple
g 200 \ data. The cooling time (for solidiﬁcation)
g 150 _Ij'"" ""i ' __ determined from this data was compared to
g 100 '.= _4 193' §-___ __._._____ﬁ _ the Video data by looking for evidence of
50 _.._’J-"" . L°W9 _ _' ' - ' - phase change. The temperature data
' T'me Takento 8°“d'fy correlated well with the Visual data,
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 allowing the image data to give cooling
Time (8) times for all tests (including samples
EM without thermocouples). This data is
Representative temperature measurements of the C ompile d in Table 49 along With the
solderlng process
average mass of the samples.
__—
Table 4: Average sample mass and solidiﬁcation times for normal and reduced gravity samples
This shows that, although the solidiﬁcation time was about 7% greater in the reduced gravity
samples (compared to the microgravity samples), this is accounted for by the increased mass of
the reduced gravity samples, with the slightly larger samples having a greater thermal inertia.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
The effect of reduced gravity on the soldering process was examined in a plated through-hole
conﬁguration aboard a reduced gravity aircraft. In the absence of gravitational forces, geometric
changes (as measured by the ratio of the ‘leg’ lengths of the joint on the top and bottom of the
board) were observed; in reduced gravity, the joint ‘leg’ on the top surface (where solder was
applied) was longer than that on the bottom side, whereas in normal gravity, the bottom side had
greater leg lengths.
NASA/TM—2002-21 1993 7

"
"12","Samples soldered in reduced gravity were (subj eotively) observed to be more convex than those
produced in normal gravity. However, measurement of the mass of solder applied revealed that
on average, about 9% more solder was applied during reduced gravity tests. This additional
mass, combined with the measured changes in leg length of the joint, may account for the
slightly more convex shape of the reduced gravity samples. The increased mass is also likely to
account for the slight increase in solidiﬁcation times (as measured by thermocouples and Video
analysis) for the reduced gravity samples.
Signiﬁcantly more Visual defects and internal porosity were also observed in the reduced gravity
samples. A reasonable explanation for this could be that ﬂux is trapped in the liquid solder, and
after vaporization, the bubbles are unable to migrate to the surface due to the lack of buoyant
forces. These trapped bubbles are then preserved as porous voids in the joint after solidiﬁcation.
Due to this observed increase in porosity in reduced gravity samples, efforts were made to
mitigate the porosity through a procedural change. Instead of using a ﬂuX- cored solder (as is
currently manifested on 188), solid- cored solder (along with liquid ﬂux) was used. Liquid ﬂux
was applied ﬁrst, and (after application of the soldering iron) allowed to vaporize before
application of the solid solder. If the hypothesis that entrapped ﬂux is responsible for the
increased porosity is correct, this approach may help mitigate the problem. Data from this ﬂight
week is currently under analysis, and will be presented in a future paper. The possibility of an
on— orbit ISS experiment is also being examined, to validate the recommendations for porosity
abatement that will come from the current efforts.
REFERENCES

1. Winter, C. and J ones, J . C. 1996. The Miorogravity Research Experiments (MICREX)

Database, NASA TM- 1085 23, (hm;://mgravig.itso.uah.edu/miorogravig/mioreX/).
2. Lekan,J.; Neumann,E.S.; and Sotos, KG. 1992. Capabilities and Constraints of NASA’s

Ground-Based Reduced Gravity Facilities, NASA CP-10113
3. Operations User’s Guide: J SC Reduced Gravity Program User’s Guide, Johnson Space

Center, J SC Document 22803.
4. Soldered Electrical Connections. 1997. NASA Technical Standard2 NASA— STD-8739.3
5. ASTM Committee E—4. 2001. Standard Practice for Determining the Inclusion or Second-

Phase Constituent Content of Metals by Automatic Image Analysis. Annual Book of ASTM

Standards 2001 Sect. 3, Vol 03.01 July.
NASA/TM—2002—2l 1993 8

"
"13","Form Approved
REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE OMB No_ 0704_0188
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this
collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson
Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503.
1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 2. REPORT DATE 3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED
December 2002 Technical Memorandum
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 5. FUNDING NUMBERS
Expen'mental Methods in Reduced—Gravity Soldering Research
6. AUTHOR(S) WU—101—58—0F—00
Richard D. Pettegrew, Peter M. Struk, J OhIl K. Watson, and Daniel R. Haylett
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
REPORT NUMBER
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
J OhIl H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field E— 13664
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 — 3191
9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 1o. SPONSORING/MONITORING
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Washington, DC 20546—0001 NASA TM—2002—21 1993
11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES
Prepared for the Second International Brazing and Soldering Conference sponsored by the American Society for Metals,
San Diego, California, February 17—19, 2003. Richard D. Pettegrew and Daniel R. Haylett, National Center for
MicrograVity Research, Cleveland, Ohio 44135; Peter M. Struk, NASA Glenn Research Center; and J OhIl K. Watson,
NASA J OhIlSOIl Space Center. Responsible person, Peter M. Struk, organization code 6712, 216—433—5948.
12a. DlSTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE
Unclassified — Unlimited
Subject Category: 29 Distribution: Nonstandard
Available electronically at http://g1trs.grc.nasa.gov
This publication is available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information, 301—621—0390.
13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words)
The National Center for Microgravity Research, NASA Glenn Research Center, and NASA J OhIlSOIl Space Center are con—
ducting an experimental program to explore the inﬂuence of reduced gravity environments on the soldering process. An im—
proved understanding of the effects of the acceleration environment is important to application of soldering during current
and future human space missions. Solder joint Characteristics that are being considered include solder fillet geometry,
porosity, and microstructural features. Both through—hole and surface mounted devices are being investigated. This paper
focuses on the experimental methodology employed in this project and the results of macroscopic sample examination. The
specific soldering process, sample configurations, materials, and equipment were selected to be consistent with those
currently on—Orbit. Other apparatus was incorporated to meet requirements imposed by Operation onboard NASA’S KC—135
research aircraft and instrumentation was provided to monitor both the atmospheric and acceleration environments. The
contingent of test Operators was selected to include both highly skilled technicians and less skilled individuals to
provide a population cross—section that would be representative of the skill miX that might be encountered in space mission
crews.
14. SUBJECT TERMS 15. NUMBER OF PAGES
. . . . 14
MicrograVity applications; Micrograwty; Soldered JOlIltS; Fluxes; Solderlng —16, pRICE CODE
17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT
OF REPORT OF THIS PAGE OF ABSTRACT
Unclassified Unclassified Unclassified
NSN 7540-01-280-5500 Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89)
Prescribed by ANSI Std. 239-18
298-102

"
