"","x"
"1","AIAA 2013—5473
September 10-12, 2013, San Diego, CA
AIAA SPACE 2013 Conference and Exposition
Development and Executlon 0f Autonomous Procedures
Onboard the Internatlonal Space Statlon to Support the
Next Phase of Human Space Exploratlon
Susan Beisertl, Michael Rodriggs2, Francisco Moreno3,
David Korth4, and Stephen Gibson5
NASA Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX 77058, USA
and

m Young H. Lee6 and Donald E. Eagles7
1% NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of T echnology Pasadena, CA 91109, USA
é Now that major assembly of the International Space Station (ISS) is complete, NASA’s
E focus has turned to using this high ﬁdelity in-space research testbed to not only advance
g fundamental science research, but also demonstrate and mature technologies and develop
5 operational concepts that Will enable future human exploration missions beyond 10w Earth
a) orbit. The ISS as a Testbed for Analog Research (ISTAR) project was established to reduce
g risks for manned missions to exploration destinations by utilizing ISS as a high ﬁdelity
'3 micro-g laboratory to demonstrate technologies, operations concepts, and techniques
:5 associated With crew autonomous operations.
4% One of these focus areas is the development and execution of ISS Testbed for Analog
; Research (ISTAR) autonomous ﬂight crew procedures intended to increase crew autonomy
3 that Will be required for long duration human exploration missions. Due to increasing
3; communications delays and reduced logistics resupply, autonomous procedures are expected
ﬁg to help reduce crew reliance on the ground ﬂight control team, increase crew performance,
§ and enable the crew to become more subject-matter experts on both the exploration space
E vehicle systems and the scientiﬁc investigation operations that Will be conducted on a long
a duration human space exploration mission. These tests make use of previous or ongoing
E projects tested in ground analogs such as Research and Technology Studies (RATS) and
a NASA Extreme Environment Mission Operations (NEEMO).
Q Since the latter half of 2012, selected n0n-critical ISS systems crew procedures have been
E used to develop techniques for building ISTAR autonomous procedures, and ISS ﬂight crews
8 have successfully executed them Without ﬂight controller involvement. Although the main
E focus has been preparing for exploration, the ISS has been a beneﬁciary of this synergistic
E effort and is considering modifying additional standard ISS procedures that may increase
Q crew efﬁciency, reduce operational costs, and raise the amount of crew time available for
E scientiﬁc research.
E The next phase of autonomous procedure development is expected to include payload
g science and human research investigations. Additionally, ISS International Partners have
5 expressed interest in participating in this effort. The recently approved 0ne-year crew
Q expedition starting in 2015, consisting of one Russian and one US. Operating Segment

1 Mission Manager, ISTAR Mission Integration Office, Human Exploration Development Support (HEDS) Office,

2101 NASA Parkway, Mail Stop YA13.

2 Project Manager, ISTAR Mission Integration Office, HEDS Office, 2101 NASA Parkway, Mail Stop YA13.

3 Mission Manager, ISTAR Mission Integration Office, HEDS Office, 2101 NASA Parkway, Mail Stop YA13.

4 Flight Director, Mission Operations Directorate, 2101 NASA Parkway, Mail Stop DAB.

5 Operations Planner Mission Operations Directorate, 2101 NASA Parkway, Mail Stop D047.

6 Program Area Manager for Operations and member of the ISTAR Integrated Product Team, Human/Robotic

Mission Systems Office, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Mail Stop 321-520.

7 System Engineer for ISTAR Integrated Product Team, Mission Operations System Engineering Group, 4800

Oak Grove Drive, Mail Stop 301-2 70.

1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"2","(USOS) crewmember, will be used not only for long duration human research investigations
but also for the testing of exploration operations concepts, including crew autonomy.
I. ISTAR Exploration Risk Reduction Process
NASA’S human exploration strategy calls for the use of 188 to mitigate beyond low earth orbit
(BLEO) exploration risk. ISTAR supports exploration risk reduction by:
° Conducting exploration capability and risk gap analyses to identify opportunities for 188
exploration testing.
0 Developing exploration relevant test objectives utilizing 188.
° Documenting, tracking, and communicating completion of exploration objectives.
° Accurately showing how 188 is being used to mitigate exploration risks.
E ° Providing exploration risk buy-down progress feedback to exploration community.
3 ° Participating in increasing awareness of the contributions of 188 for exploration in support of
§ education and outreach.
g Exploration risks must be reduced in a systematic fashion, using a risk reduction process. There are
g ﬁve phases to this process: Exploration Design Reference Missions (DRMS) and Concept of Operations
5 (ConOps) data sources, analysis and assessment, product development, 188 integration and execution, and
m . . .
:0 post-mlsswn evaluatlon.
g DRMs and architectures deﬁne the risks traveling to and from, and living at each exploration
3 destination. NASA’S Human Spaceﬂight Architecture Team (HAT) has generated (Figure 1) a list of
5:: risks1 to the successful accomplishment of crewed exploration missions and a list of mission architecture
5 questions that must be answered before completing design for such missions. Similarly, NASA’s Human
g Research Program (HRP) has a list11 of human health and performance risks and an assessment of the
3“ criticality of these risks (Figure 2). ISTAR uses these HAT- and HRP-generated risks and architectural
3; questions for inﬂuencing its mission formulation, development strategy, and mission-evaluation criteria.
g Arrows point to the risk and question most relevant to crew autonomous procedures.
.3
O
m
E ID Exploration Mission RISK ID Exploration Mission Architectural Questions
8 M'EDL EDL 0' [3'89 M375 Weds Q1 What is the safest way to approach a small/non-cooperative/
(L3 E-EDL Earth re-entry at high velocities non-stable obiect? (Le. NEA. satellite)
é W launch vehlde failures (:2 What Is the safest and quickest way to anchor to a nu?
; W' Lander 9"" 090190"" systems “""079 03 What Earth Orbit actMﬂes are needed to reduce risk for deep
8 CSM Long duration low/zero bolloff crvo-storage and space missions?
é management 01 What are the impact of the planetary pmtection
Q CFT ""F3980! cryogenic flu“ transfer requirements on operations and dements?
é ISP lmspam propuls‘oﬂ faﬂures m W .n the {uncuOMl/W'lﬂnetdc requwemms ’0'
E A '5', Reliability veriﬁcation of advanced ln-space habitation and IVA activities In zero and low - g?
% ' propulsion (3 What is the difference in operational efﬁciency between crew
.13
3 Environ mental rtsks: radiation, MMOD, dust, d""? (3 and ‘ m b' ”M ‘ ""d 6 m f"" M‘“)
'0 5"""" What is the most efﬁcient way to communicate under a long
g electromagnetic Q7
~ 0 | | >30 sec time delay? Does this change as the time Increases?
E Indassembly fnllum What lmmments at logistics and packagin can be
8 5Y3 Systems failures: ECLSS, power, avionics, thermal ‘3 realized? a
EVA EVA system/sul't failure 0.9 What is the most effective: trade between level of repair and
Comm Operations under time delayed communication 00W Wﬂmm‘ﬂi?
Aut Autonomous crew/vehkle operation 010 How do you best nm/npurpose disposable materials?
H lth Crew heahh: behavioral, health cane/remote Q11 WM ‘3 ”’0 ""‘09 0581*” mum of Wm“ transvomﬁon?
ea medlcal, mlcro-gravlty (REA, Moon/Mars short distance, Moon/Mars long distance)
SW Software failure Given current robotic capabilities, what level of human]
Hum Human error (112 robotic Interaction provides the highest level of operational
ISRU ISRU - oul -ment failure: . - - - lant consumabl ~ M? (EVAatdestination, ""HP'"" EVA' WA-
teleooentims)
0,13 Whit level at lVA/EVA activities at a destination provides the
most beneﬁt?
Figure 1: Human Spacecraft Architecture Team's (HAT) Exploration Mission Risks and Architectural Questions
2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","Human . HHC Human Hoartr Caummuus
Research - SHFH Space Human Factors & Haomoon '.
' ' ' ' ' EXMC: Exptorabon Medusa! Capab rty NAsA
HRP RISKS & Cf'tlcallty Program (HRP) . BHP: BehavioralHealL’hAPerformwoe

Elements: - SR Space Radation
m Risk of Orlhostatic Intolerance Dun‘ng Re-Exposure to Graviy (Short Title: OI)
Risk of Canpmised EVA Performance and Ctew Health Due to Inadequate EVA Sun Systems (Shun hue EVA) - Penamg

Human S ’starn Risk Board .""HSRBI R'sk Manawrrwn! Ana‘vws Toot ""RMATJ ' arvvai‘

_
m_—
m_ﬂ_—
Risk of Catduac Rhythm Probtms (Short TuUe:Anhy1hmia)- Dencxng H898 RMAT App'OwJ‘
.33 Risk of Reduced Physrcal Performance Capabilities Due to Reduced Aerobic Capaaty (Short Tme: Aembic)
m_m——

vp NtemﬂonsAasociatedwm a:v- Flio t ShonTme: g, rt . .

2

8 mm

9

E _

N- _

3. _

5 _

a _

a“ _

0, Pendan‘ HSRB RMATA mural

g _

3 _—

is m Inability lo Moqualely Rooogmze or Treat an m o: Injured Crew Member (Short mo. MC

3 Behavioral Conditions, and Risk of P hiatric Disaders

: Iiil_

S Workaerload ShortTItIe:Sl:u

N m Risk of Performance Decrements due Io Inadequate Coopemtion. Coordnation. Communication. and Psychosoa‘at Manamn

3“ wilhun a Yeam Short Tue: Team

5 m_—

g m————

8 _

8 _—

S

:2 Figure 2: NASA's Human Research Program (HRP) Risks and Criticality

LU

E

Z . . . . .

(L3 Analy31s and assessment tools determme the key rlsks usmg HAT and HRP ﬁndmgs and gap analyses.

:3 These key risks are used to select objectives using exploration risk—based criteria. The ISTAR Integrated

95 Product Team (IPT) (Figure 3) coordinates and integrates these risk assessments.

g The ISTAR IPT has proposed operations concepts and techniques for 188 simulations that mitigate

é exploration risks. Candidate operations concepts and techniques that are submitted to and approved by

O . . . .

j: the ISS merement research plannmg process are 1mplemented and tested usmg standard 188 processes.

1;: Results are tracked, reported, and communicated internally at NASA Via presentations and reports, and to

g» the public Via papers such as this.

8

'0

GS

E II. Exploration Research on 188

O . . . . . . . . . . .

D In add1t10n t0 supportmg exploration rlsk mitlgatlon and capablhty development, ISTAR studles have
been beneﬁcial to the 188 by demonstrating the value of its use as a high ﬁdelity testbed for exploration
research by:

0 Providing iterative evaluation of exploration risk reduction using 188
0 Analyzing results of exploration operations techniques and providing lessons learned
0 Providing options for future exploration testing on 188 using exploration DRMS and risk—based
criteria
0 Providing vetted high-value exploration risk mitigating operations techniques and simulations
° Working with the NASA and international exploration community to effectively burn down
exploration risk
° Actively collaborating with organizations across NASA that are developing operations
investigations
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","ISS Testbed for Analog Research (ISTAR) WA
lnterated Product Team IPT ‘
Approval Boards ISSP
RPWG->MRPWG
IPT Members ->R|CB->MPCB/ISSP
NASA HQ
0 HEOMD(SAID,AES)
iSEI’CIIepresentatives
. 02, 0c Investigations
HRP
2:00 ’ mm
MOD Review/Screen/Recommend Research
E EVA Exploration Investigation Candidates Planning
g SNaIIEItXYFieId Centers
9. Priorities, DRM Technologies Concepts SEIf-BCU?""
8 KDRs Crltena
§ Figure 3: ISTAR IPT
g ISTAR has provided 188 integration products (e.g. investigation summaries, requirements for ﬂight
5 rules, procedures) and developed protocols for exploration investigations. Additionally, ISTAR has also
2 developed an ISS one-year exploration simulation plan.
§° ISTAR has showcased exploration studies on 188 by explaining the “why,” not just the “how” of
i; exploration testing on 188. Awareness of the contributions of 188 for exploration has been increased by
g providing scorecards 0f ISSP investigations traced to exploration risks and capability gaps and by
@ proposing new exploration relevant operations techniques utilizing 188. For example, ISTAR’s J et
ES Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) team members performed an analysis of NASA payloads that have ﬂown
E recently or are planned to ﬂy that help mitigate exploration risks. The study analyzed how many 188
E Increment 31-38 payloads addressed HAT and HRP mission risks and how many addressed HRP risk
(32 areas. Figure 4 summarizes the results of the study.
2
2 III. ISTAR History
i In October 2010, ISTARiii was established within the Human Exploration Development Support
‘2‘ (HEDS) Ofﬁce, which provides expertise and knowledge in BLEO mission design, analysis, planning,
5 and integration. The focus of ISTAR is to reduce risks for manned missions to exploration destinations
g by utilizing 188 as a high ﬁdelity micro-g laboratory to demonstrate technologies, operations concepts,
E and techniques. This was planned by exercising crew activities during simulations of exploration missions.
3 In addition, ISTAR has planned for long duration Mars Transit and Landing Transition simulations. By
utilizing technology and operational tools and concepts developed and tested during previous ISTAR and
Earth-based Analogs, strategic planning of increasingly complex ISS-based exploration mission
simulations could be accomplished.

ISTAR is part of the exploration planning process. ISTAR fully engages the NASA exploration
community by working with HAT, NASA’s pre-eminent exploration formulation group, to identify
exploration capability needs and buy-down exploration risk for DRMs. ISTAR collaborates with
NASA’s Strategic Analysis Integration Division (SAID), Advanced Explorations Systems (AES), HRP,
and the Office of the Chief Technologist (OCT) on 188 testing of exploration capabilities and capability
development efforts. ISTAR provides synergistic operations concepts and techniques and has
established a solid working relationship with Marshall Space Flight Center’s Payload Operations

4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","Integration Center (POIC) to integrate the exploration community’s ISS testing plans and possible use of
new technologies and payloads.
Total NASA Investigations *

80

70

60

50 I I I I

40 I I II

m 30 I—I—I

a 20 I I I I

E 10

§- 0 I I I I

g Increment Increment Increment Increment

5' 31-32 33-34 35-36 37-38

Q

§° l Non-Exploration Investigations

3 l Exploration Relevant Investigations [Non-HRP)

g“ l Exploration Relevant Investigations (HRP) **

f; * From Increment Rollup Ascent/Descent Spreadsheet published by 188 Program’s Research Integration Ofﬁce (OZ).

E ** Sum represents payloads addressing HRP exploration risks and those addressing HAT “Crew Health” risks.

,9

a

E Figure 4: Exploration Mission Risks Addressed by 188 Payloads

E

E3 ISTAR deﬁnes objectives, requirements, and simulation operations timelines, and obtains buy-in from

a the exploration community (HAT, HRP, etc.). The ISTAR team develops mission integration timelines,

5 plans, and protocols, and provides recommendations for exploration investigation candidates to the ISSP

g for implementation; this includes estimating the required staffing and funding resources for planning,

% design, execution, and post-simulation analysis. ISTAR supports procedure execution, documents

% lessons-learned and feedback, and applies these results to future missions. Team members track results of

<2 investigation objectives met and explorations risks retired, and report to the exploration community and

g ISSP.

i ISTAR has worked to mitigate exploration risks by submitting exploration related investigation

g candldates t0 the 188 Technology Demonstratlon Ofﬁce for Increments 31 — 38. The team IS workmg

Lg“ with the J ohnson Space Center’s (J SC)” Mission Operations Directorate (MOD), NASA/Headquarters’

:3 Advanced Exploration Systems (AES) Division, the HRP, and AES’ Autonomous Mission Operations
(AMO) Project to test various communication delay techniques and communication delay
countermeasures. ISTAR has performed a J SC/JPL/Ames Research Center (ARC) collaborative effort to
augment existing human and robotic activity scheduling systems to enable intelligent autonomous crew
activity scheduling.

ISTAR team members at JPL have developed an ISS exploration testing “scorecard” to identify ISS
payloads that mitigate exploration risks. Their assessment of exploration related technology
demonstrations and operations testing conducted during 188 Increments 31 — 38 have been traced back to
exploration gaps/risks (e.g. HAT, HRP) to help identify areas that still need to be addressed.

ISTAR has performed several standalone studies for exploration planning. A preliminary crew
isolation location assessment was conducted using the current and future 188 conﬁgurations. Team
members have analyzed historical human spaceﬂight and 188 timelines and started building Mars mission

5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","timelines. ISTAR has coordinated technical interchanges with AES Projects to develop 188 Mars
simulation objectives traceable to exploration gaps/risks and to determine participation by AES projects
in the simulation. ISTAR is working with ISSP to support the Human Exploration and Operations
Mission Directorate (HEOMD) Integrated Human Spaceﬂight Plan to utilize the 188 for exploration
testing.

ISTAR has focused much of its recent work in the area of operations techniques and simulations. By
necessity, initial ISTAR missions have focused on discrete exploration forward activities. A primary
focus has been on crew autonomous procedures.

IV. ISTAR Crew Autonomous Procedures

Since the latter half of 2012, selected non-critical ISS systems crew procedures have been used to
g develop techniques for building ISTAR autonomous procedures, and 188 ﬂight crews have successfully
i executed them without ﬂight controller involvement. While the main focus has been preparing for
é exploration, the 188 has been a beneficiary of this synergistic effort. The 188 program is considering
E modiﬁcation of additional standard 188 procedures that may improve ISS crew efficiency, reduce
E operational costs, and increase the amount of crew time available for scientiﬁc research.
Q Why do we need to perform tests using crew autonomous procedures? Communications delays will
3 force the exploration crews and their vehicles to be more autonomous. Crewmembers will not have the
‘03:) ground to rely on for instant assistance, advice, and troubleshooting help while performing systems
g operations procedures. The objective is to prepare the ﬂight and ground crews for more autonomous
f5? ﬂight operations (including autonomous crew procedure execution). Procedure authors will gain
5°“ experience in developing autonomous procedures and get a better understanding of the information the
g crew would need to autonomously execute procedures. This information will also help them develop
g“ crew training methods. This will give the crew experience in executing procedures without relying on the
3; ground and may also provide insight into how communication delay might affect not only procedures but
g also the design, building, and operation of hardware and software for future spacecraft and systems.
a The goal of the ISTAR crew autonomous procedures study is to evaluate autonomous procedures as a
34: countermeasure to the communication delays expected on missions that involve travel over long distances.
E Procedure authors have already developed many tools and techniques for writing procedures for
C; autonomy for the study.
if The ISTAR versions of existing 188 procedures give the crew more ownership of the hardware.
2 However, this can be a concern to the hardware owners. Procedure modifications must be reviewed
8 thoroughly with the hardware owners and NASA safety personnel. The crew must be able to interact with
E the ground personnel if needed, even though this impacts the autonomy aspect of the study.
<C
<2: A. Autonomous Procedure Selection
§ To date, fourteen 188 system activities have been performed using ISTAR autonomous procedures.
3 These procedures were selected based upon their opportunities to test various aspects of autonomy, such
E as commanding, off—nominal condition response, analysis of results to determine subsequent actions, and
Q use of just-in-time training. The crew and ﬂight controllers have completed questionnaires indicating

which changes they found to be beneficial for autonomy.
B. Flight Control Team Role in Autonomous Procedures

The ﬂight control team’s role in an autonomous procedure is with procedure development and
preparation of the crew for the upcoming procedure. The ﬂight controller responsible for the task
provides the crew with “big picture” information on why the procedure is being performed as an ISTAR
procedure, and explains the goal of the procedure so that if the crew encounters a problem, they will know
the reasoning behind the procedure and be able to resolve the issue appropriately.

During the procedure, the ﬂight control team monitors the data displays and Video, following along
with the crew. The ﬂight controllers do not interact with the crew unless the ﬂight controller is concerned

6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","about crew safety or hardware health, the crew calls down with a question, or the crew has a serious
problem that requires aborting the test.

If a crewmember that performs an autonomous procedure reaches an impasse, falls far behind the
timeline, or is concerned about damaging ﬂight hardware, he or she may abort the test and call Mission
Control Center (MCC) using ordinary space-to-ground voice. The crewmember and the MCC can then
make a plan to complete the task. If a life- or hardware-threatening emergency arises on 188 during an
autonomous procedure, the crew and MCC will abort the test and respond to the emergency as they have
been trained.

C. Crew and Flight Control Team Surveys
The crew and ﬂight controllers have completed questionnaires indicating which changes they found to
m be beneficial for autonomy. The surveys ask the crew and ﬂight controllers to provide acceptability
% ratings of both the original procedure and the autonomous procedure for comparison, and they also
g include a rating that will help determine to what extent outside inﬂuences affected the test. The surveys
g inVite respondents to provide any additional data to support their responses. Additional questions for the
E? crew include start and stop times of the procedure and whether another crewmember assisted in the
E procedure. Additional questions for the ﬂight controllers include the amount of time spent modifying the
a procedure to make it autonomous. Since ﬂight controller responses are voluntary, not all ﬂight controllers
9:? have responded to the surveys.
g D. Autonomous Procedures Performed to Date
3% Fourteen ISTAR autonomous procedures have been performed as of June 2013. These include the
E Treadmill 2 (T2) Monthly, Quarterly, and 6-Month Maintenance activities, Inter-Module Ventilation
i (IMV) ﬂow measurement using the Velocicalc device, Extravehicular Mobility Unit (EMU) Loop Scrub,
E and Ultrasonic Background Noise Test (UBNT) sensor placement. Seven crewmembers have
g performed at least one ISTAR procedure; one, Kevin Ford, has performed siX.
8
E E. Preliminary Results
E ISTAR autonomous procedure testing is in its infancy, and the results are preliminary at this time.
(”3 With very few data points, it is premature to determine whether to accept or reject the ISTAR hypotheses
(:3 that increased autonomy for crew procedures will be beneficial for mitigation of exploration mission
3 communication delays. In addition, varying numbers of respondents participated in each survey, so the
% data is not complete. The results presented here should be Viewed with this in mind.
3 Acceptability Results
E Figure 5 graphically illustrates the results of the acceptability portion of the questionnaire from the
3 tests that have been performed to date. On a scale of l to 6, with 6 being the highest score, autonomous
33 procedures executed on the 188 are rated. Then the original, non-autonomous procedure is also rated
E using the same scale. The blue bars represent the acceptability of each original, non-autonomous
8 procedure. That bar is compared to the red bar from the autonomous procedure to determine which
procedure, autonomous or original, the crew and ground controllers found more acceptable. The green
bars indicate the degree to which outside inﬂuences inﬂuenced each test. Note: In this chart, higher
values for acceptability and lower values for outside interference are better.

Each crewmember who performed an actiVity responded to his survey. However, not all ground
controllers responded to each survey. In some cases, several ﬂight controllers responded, while in other
cases none did. In addition, several respondents did not rate the acceptability of the original procedure
since they were not familiar with it. As a result, the ﬁndings shown in Figure 5 are not conclusive and
additional autonomous procedure executions and modifications must be made to accurately gauge the
comparison and acceptability of original vs. autonomous procedures. Below is a brief narrative on each
procedure.

7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","Preliminary ISTAR Acceptability Results, June 2013
6
5
4 l Acceptability of Original
Procedure
3 [ >4 is significant]
I Acceptability of
2 Autonomous Procedure
Q (>4 is significant]
3 1 l Outside inﬂuence on
8 Test (>2 is significant]
§ 0
E3 ~o c *0 & G:
2' Cy 62$ 906V $59 636° 62% V?
»'—1 %® 0?? ‘0' 4&0 00Q §
§ & 4» $2 Q»
2;: ‘vi
:5; Figure 5: ISTAR Acceptability Results (Preliminary)
%
E Treadmill 2 {T2} Monthly Maintenance
3 The ISTAR T2 Monthly Maintenance procedure was performed four times. This procedure moves
“E engineering data from the ground to the crew to allow the crewmembers to continue troubleshooting and
g) recognize next step operations. Also, the procedure incorporates Video to help qualify acceptable play
3 “wiggle” in snubbers. The primary lesson learned from executing this procedure is that the procedures
3 need more descriptive information to explain what steps the crew is accomplishing.
E No anomalies occurred during the ISTAR T2 Monthly Maintenance procedure. As anticipated, the
g autonomous procedure was found to be more acceptable for crew use than the original procedure.
LU
U
(32 T2 uarterl Maintenance
g The ISTAR T2 Quarterly Maintenance procedure was performed twice. This procedure moves
% engineering data from the ground to the crew to allow the crewmembers to continue troubleshooting and
Q recognize next step operations. It also includes descriptive information to explain what various steps are
(:5C accomplishing.
E During the ISTAR T2 Quarterly Maintenance procedure execution, the crew had to perform some of
g the ISTAR contingency steps due to problems with the T2 hardware. The crew could autonomously
Li perform the contingency steps without ground communication and so the T2 device was available much
g: quicker than usual. This allowed the crew to perform the exercise activity that was scheduled immediately
after the T2 maintenance activity. Without the ISTAR procedure, this exercise activity would have
needed to be rescheduled or deleted. However, the autonomous procedure was found to be less
acceptable for crew use than the original procedure, most likely because the crew was confused with the
subjective wording regarding the amount of “wiggle” that was acceptable for adjusting one piece of
hardware.
W
The ISTAR T2 Quarterly Maintenance procedure was performed once. This procedure moves
engineering data from the ground to the crew to allow the crewmembers to continue troubleshooting and
recognize next step operations. It also includes descriptive information to explain what various steps are
accomplishing.
8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","No anomalies occurred during the ISTAR T2 6-Month Maintenance procedure. The autonomous
procedure and the original procedure were found to be equally acceptable for crew use.
Velocicalc Ops — Inter-Module Ventilation {IMV} ﬂow measurement

The ISTAR Velocicalc Operations procedure was used on two occasions to perform the IMV ﬂow
measurement activity (see Figure 6). Initially, the only modification to this procedure has been for the
crew to perform initial safing commanding. For the long term engineering data from the ground to the
crew to help the crewmembers analyze readings and determine whether ducts need cleaning.

No anomalies occurred during the Velocicalc procedure. The autonomous nature of the procedure
allowed the crewmember more ﬂexibility in executing the task during a very busy day (Soyuz docking)
that might have caused the task to be deferred if implemented in a more traditional non-autonomous

m manner. The autonomous procedure was found to be more acceptable for crew use than the original

3?? procedure, as expected.

g :9; $3 . "" ' / ( “‘_ «ﬂ

8 i”” ‘$<am

:5 .30)? l“- - . ' i ,. ‘ ‘

: I(e-15\§3}""( .

E . , .- , M

E Figure 6: ESA Astronaut Andre Kuipers holds the Velocicalc meter

E while performing an ISTAR procedure (source: NASA)

LU

é Extravehicular Mobility Unit {EMU} Cooling Loop Maintenance

5 The ISTAR EMU Cooling Loop Maintenance procedure was performed once (see Figure 7).

% Modifications to the procedure include crew complex commanding of critical systems (previously

% performed by ground controllers), crew data evaluation, crew critical thinking, and the addition of

Q operations constraints within the procedure. Procedure developers also included more descriptive

in”: information to explain overall intent and constraints.

a During execution of the loop iodination portion of the activity, the crewmember encountered water

3 loop temperature issues requiring him to step into subordinate troubleshooting steps. The autonomous

Lg“ procedure was found to be less acceptable for crew use than the original procedure because there was a

g» subordinate (nested “if’) procedure that led the crew to a procedure that had not been modiﬁed for
autonomy. This caused confusion, as the crew was unsure how to perform the procedure autonomously.
Ultrasonic Background Noise Test {UBNT} Sensor Placement

The ISTAR “crib sheet” used as a supplement to the UBNT procedure was available for the crew to
use if needed (see Figure 8). It was used four times, including twice on two separate days. This “crib
sheet” contains supplementary execution references that aid in troubleshooting various problems, similar
to the “crib sheet” used in EVAs. In addition, UBNT used just-in-time training.

No anomalies occurred during the UBNT Sensor Placement procedure. The autonomous procedure
was found to be less acceptable for crew use than the original procedure because there were signiﬁcant
problems with the rack rotation prior to one of the UBNT sensor placements. However, it should be
noted that the rack rotation was not part of the ISTAR sensor placement autonomous procedure.

9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"10","Respondents said in their survey responses that it was difﬁcult to separate the rack rotation task from the
UBNT sensor placement activity.
5% * I
92 g.- .
’9 O ‘. . .
g \ "" -J‘ ’3
'4’ “
E ‘ ' _ ._ ~“\
(”3! 'L- ’ i - ‘ ,
2
<2 Figure 7: Astronaut Tom Marshburn performs the
:0 ISTAR EMU Loop Scrub procedure (source: NASA)
‘5.
E“ 4. “4“ "" ” £_;;;:; 7
.2 .‘ : ‘ ‘.. _
E , _ ' .‘ ~__ 7/7
\0“ I “W ‘—’ ' \ Q 49'
g I .13.???"" 4? l #59? L _
m
E ‘i
z ,
I ?i» . '
Lu ‘1 i“ 7 “5’3”
2 ' ‘41“ .
(n5 _ A... - 4: \
E
a Figure 8: CSA Astronaut Chris Hadﬁeld installs UBNT Sensors
9 using ISTAR procedures (source: NASA)
<1
(0
‘z‘
z,“ Execution Time Results
'0 . . . . . . . . .
§ Flgure 9 below 111ustrates the dlfference between executlon tlme 1n the or1g1na1 procedures and in the
E ISTAR autonomous procedures. These results are preliminary since there are very few data points. The
8 limited data available indicate that the ﬁrst time a crewmember performs any activity, the execution time
will be longer than it will be on subsequent executions. This would explain the minor differences in the
T2 and Velocicalc procedures. The ISTAR EMU Loop Scrub took far longer than the original procedure
primarily because of the additional activities that the crew needed to perform in order to make the
procedure autonomous. The T2 6-Monthtin1e is not included because the crew did not record start and
stop times for the activity.
Lessons Learned
That crew can perform procedures autonomously without ground interaction is not a new lesson, but
one that has been proven throughout manned spaceﬂight. The question for exploration is how much
autonomy is appropriate for a crew? Consideration must be given to the additional time it might take to
execute a procedure autonomously. For example, the crew experienced an anomaly during the T2
10
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"11","Quarterly procedure executed in December 2012 and had to perform a 30-minute contingency step.
While that step took nearly 30 minutes to execute, if the procedure had not had this autonomy already
implemented, the interaction with the ground to determine that this step was needed, and then to uplink
the necessary actions, would have made the activity even longer. On the other hand, the modiﬁcations to
the EMU Loop Scrub procedure performed in J anuary 2013 to make it autonomous will extend the time
needed — even if there are no contingencies — by over an hour, due to the additional crew tasks that the
ground nominally performs. However, for exploration the benefit of increased crew autonomy may
outweigh the time increase and it is expected that autonomous procedure execution time will decrease as
the crew gains more experience with it.

§ 250 Preliminary ISTAR Execution Time Results, June 2013

E: 200

S

g) 150 l Original

2 (average)

100 - ISTAR

EL (average)

£1

g 50

i; 0

E T2 T2 IMV EMU Loop UBNT

g Monthly Quarterly Velocicalc Scrub

E

8 Figure 9: ISTAR Procedure Execution Time (Preliminary)

LU

U

(3; Automation available on 188 could be used to perform repetitive tasks. For example, the IMV Flow

E Measurement/Velocicalc procedure is very tedious and requires large amounts of data entry. This would

a be well suited for Robonaut, once it has the required capabilities.

E Just-in-Time-Training (JITT) could be very useful for autonomous procedures. J ITT reduces pre-

2 ﬂight crew training, which is a limited resource. Often, the crew does not perform an activity until two

E years after they were trained, so they have forgotten much of what they had learned. J ITT would use

§ Videos and other tools to provide the crewmember refresher training, or it could provide all of the training

Li required for an activity.

E There are times when a crew activity is deferred or cancelled, and there are “gaps” in a crewmember’s
day. It would be beneficial to have autonomous procedures available that the crew could execute if the
opportunity arises.

Writing an Autonomous Procedure

ISTAR purposefully did not give rules for writing crew autonomous procedures. The goal was to
inspire procedure authors to think of creative methods to implement autonomy, and this has been
successful.

The ISTAR tests have helped procedure developers determine the information needed by the ﬂight
crew to autonomously execute procedures that have normally either been performed by the ground or by
coordinating with ground controllers. Flight crews have also provided a greater understanding of what is
involved in making procedures more autonomous. Some of the lessons learned are described below.

1 1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"12","Perhaps the most important lesson learned in writing autonomous procedures is that the crew must
have all of the information they need to perform the procedure. “Big picture” words must explain the
procedure goals; without this information, the crewmember cannot resolve anomalies that might occur.
Similarly, many steps will need rationale, such as whether the crewmember may continue with the
procedure if certain failures occur. Examples include contingency steps, safety concerns, and critical
commanding.

A picture may be worth 1000 words, but a short Video clip can mean the difference between success
and failure. Subjective wording causes confusion, but a Video that shows how much “wiggle” is
acceptable, for example, can show that which cannot be described adequately in words.

Troubleshooting steps, saﬂng steps, and pause/stop points should be included in the procedure. “Crib
sheet” tables and “star blocks” within procedures list contingency actions for specific anticipated failure

m causes. Saﬁng steps place the hardware into a safe configuration in case the procedure must be halted

3w abruptly, and pause/stop points allow the crewmember to pause or stop indeﬁnitely the procedure

2 execution.

g The crew needs to know what constraints they will be working under. Examples include the amount

g of time that hardware can be unpowered, wait-time constraints, and expected time needed for

g troubleshooting steps.

3 The crew needs to know what information to provide to the ground. If there is a need to troubleshoot

93 beyond the detail written in the procedure, the hardware experts on the ground will need to have the

g appropriate data, pictures, or Video. If the crew knows this ahead of time, they can collect this data as

:5 they proceed through the procedure, when it is appropriate and convenient, and can relay the information

g to the ground in an efficient manner.

5 Stowage has been an issue throughout manned spaceﬂight. With so many pieces of equipment in a

in small amount of space, and most of them hidden behind several other pieces of hardware, it is often

g difficult for the crew to ﬁnd the parts they are looking for. Sometimes, ground personnel know of

g alternate locations for the equipment, and they should provide the crew with this information.

95; Some procedures require large amounts of data to be input. This can be a tedious task for a

34: crewmember. Procedure writers can help the crew by splitting up large tables into smaller pieces that are

g more easily dealt with.

<2 How deep within the failure tree should the troubleshooting go? There is a tradeoff among time

2-5 saVings by haVing the procedures available, the time spent developing the steps, and the comfort level of

g the hardware engineer with the troubleshooting steps.

8 Writing a procedure to make it autonomous can save the crew time in many cases. However, it must

E be noted that there is a time cost to make these updates on the ground. Crew time is far more expensive

% than an engineers’ time on the ground, so there is beneﬁt to writing many procedures to be autonomous;

E however, time must be budgeted to allow for adding the autonomy modifications discussed above.

$3“

g Implementation Process

E Once a procedure is written, the ﬂight control team updates several elements of the crew’s

‘3 documentation to implement the procedure. The procedure is reviewed through the standard 188
procedure review process, and is uplinked t0 the crew’s International Procedure Viewer (IPV). Words are
added to the crew’s Daily Summary to provide the “big picture” of the actiVity. The crew actiVity block,
including Execute Notes and Ops Notes, which provide procedure references and details, is added to the
crew timeline. The actiVity block for the questionnaire, which includes the questionnaire itself and the
original, non-ISTAR procedure (for reference when filling out the questionnaire) is also added to the crew
timeline. A ﬂight note is submitted to provide information on the ﬂight controller survey location and
process.

When scheduling an ISTAR procedure, time is added to the crew actiVity blocks for the crew survey
(15 minutes, to include time to both set up the computer for the survey and ﬁll in the survey itself). Time
is added to the procedure the ﬁrst time a crewmember executes it, as per standard 188 scheduling. For
ISTAR procedures, it is beneficial to schedule the procedure before unscheduled crew time, if possible,

12
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"13","since contingency steps add time to the procedure if they are executed, and this minimizes the impact to
the crew day.

The ﬂight controllers who participate in the procedure and author it or having responsibility for its
execution (Flight Director, CAPCOM, and systems operator(s)), ﬁll in the survey electronically using the
system developed by NASA JSC/Human Health and Performances Directorate personnel.

Open Work

While the lessons learned from crew autonomous procedure testing have been significant, many
questions remain unanswered. What is the most effective way to handle referenced procedures and data
needed in subordinate (nested “if”) procedures? In which cases are contingency steps best placed in
embedded star blocks, and which are better in “crib sheets”? What is the best way to effectively convey

m task execution constraints, so that this reference information is not lost or forgotten? Autonomous
E procedures will continue to be tested on 188 to help answer these questions.
g V. Future ISTAR Testing
E ISTAR will continue its work on autonomous procedures. In addition, ISTAR is collaborating with
g several other organizations on additional tests.
Q
g A. Autonomous Procedure Testing
g More crew autonomous procedures are planned for 188 including additional executions of those
iii previously performed and newly updated procedures. Additionally, International Partners and payload
F: developers plan to perform some of their procedures autonomously. In most cases, after the ISTAR
g procedure has been performed and the survey filled out three times, the procedure should remain onboard
3 188 as the prime procedure. If the ISTAR autonomous procedure takes longer than the original procedure,
g or if there are specific concerns with using it as the prime procedure, the original, non-ISTAR procedure
§ should to be used once the ISTAR procedure testing period is complete. Autonomous procedure testing is
g planned to continue through at least Increment 40.
:34
g B. Instant Messaging (IM) Texting
CS The goal of the IM Texting study is to evaluate IM texting as a countermeasure to communication
E delay. The ISTAR team will evaluate operations and protocols for use as a supplement to voice
2 communications. MOD personnel have developed texting protocols based on lessons learned from analog
8 studies such as RATS and NEEMO.
E For the ISTAR study, an IM client will be uplinked to the crew’s Space Station Computer (SSC)
% and/or iPad. Texting will be scheduled for one crewmember during moderate ground/crew interaction in
EC times of low criticality, during the ISS Orbit 2 shift (starting ~8 am Houston time). Communications will
g: not be delayed during this test. The tests will increase in scale and complexity to evaluate use of texting
E with multiple control centers and the effect on control teams’ situational awareness.
g The IM texting capability should be implemented during Increment 36 and will continue through
D Increment 38.
C. Communications Delay Testing

The ISTAR team has collaborated with HRP to develop a Behavioral Health & Performance (Voice)
communication delay study. The HRP will study the effects of communications delay on the ISS crew
and ground controllers. This communication delay study is planned for Increments 39 and 40. The
subjects are the crew, Flight Directors, and CAPCOMs. For the test, the delay will be 50 seconds 1-way;
the delay will be implemented only during a task — not the entire day. Only voice will be delayed.

Instant messaging will not be used during communication delay testing because it requires the use of
the ISS KU band communication link, which has long periods of signal loss.

The communication delay will be implemented by using special MCC ground equipment to delay a
space-to-ground voice loop. Several challenges are being worked, such as how best to reconfigure

13
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"14","(disconnect the communication delay box) in case of ISS needs the loop, and how to simulate acquisition
of signal (AOS)/loss of signal (LOS) clocks. For example, if the simulated round-trip delay is 20 minutes,
operators would begin talking 10 minutes before the real A08 and stop talking 10 minutes before the real
LOS. This will be the ﬁrst analog to implement communication coverage LOS.

D. Crew Self—Scheduling

Exploration missions may require the crew ability to autonomously plan and re-plan. The ISTAR tests
will evaluate which types of data, tools, and capabilities are necessary for the crew to effectively and
efﬁciently perform these functions. A series of exercises will be performed, increasing in complexity,
data needs, and tool functions:

' Basic scheduling (pre- and post-sleep, meals, exercise)

Q ' De-conﬂicting resources (exercises, conferences)

i ' Scheduling a sequence of events

é ' Scheduling a sequence of events with complex resource requirements and constraints

E The results of this testing will be used for the next phase, when the crew will be provided tools to

E enable more extensive self—planning and re-planning. The crew will make use of the previous operations

g techniques developed to plan and execute one or more complete days of ISS operations; eventually, the

E entire crew may schedule and execute a week of operations. The crew and ground will also evaluate the

‘03:) tools and materials needed to sustain planning and scheduling by crews as well as the appropriate

§ complexity of tasks to be planned and/or scheduled. Crew self—scheduling activities are planned for

i: Increment 36 through Increment 40.

g E. Autonomous Crew Systems Management

;« The ISTAR team has also collaborated with the Autonomous Mission Operations (AMO) group at

g Ames Research Center to evaluate tools, procedures, and reference materials provided to enable the crew

g to manage an onboard operational system. The Total Organic Compound Analyzer (TOCA) will be used

‘5; for this test. Additionally, the crew may monitor the performance of their SSCs. Larger and more

3:: complex ISS systems will be added to this list when appropriate.

E The concept of this AMO test is to turn over as much operations/management of a system as possible

:3 to the crew without increasing preﬂight training; software aids will be provided onboard for training.

if Areas included in the test are failure recognition, procedure recommendation, analysis and “Go for

2 Operations” capability, constraint compliance, scheduling, and system expertise.

8 This test will not change the nominal ground analysis processes, but will be performed in addition to

5 them.

i Autonomous crew scheduling activities are planned for Increment 39 and 40.

2

g: F. Other 188 Exploration Testing

3 Headquarters NASA and the Russian Federal Space Agency (Roscosmos) have recently approved a

g one-year crew expedition starting in 2015. The primary purpose of this one-year expedition is to perform

Q long-duration multilateral human research investigations, but it will also test exploration operations
concepts, including crew autonomy. The results from this NASA and Roscosmos scientiﬁc study will be
used to help send explorers to new destinations. The ISTAR team is helping to define operations-
technique objectives for this mission.

The ISTAR team has also worked with the NASA Headquarters HEOMD to include 188 exploration
risk mitigation testing and NEA/Mars simulations as part of an executable framework for spaceﬂight
through 2021 and a strategy for BLEO missions post-2021. ISTAR is a member of the product team
responsible for developing plans to support 188 testing and simulations.

14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"15","Acronym List
AES Advanced Exploration Systems Division (NASA HQ/HEOMD)
AMO Autonomous Mission Operations
AOS Acquisition of Signal
ARC Ames Research Center (NASA)
ARGOS Active Response Gravity Ofﬂoad System
BLEO Beyond Low Earth Orbit
DRM Design Reference Mission
EA J SC Engineering Directorate
g EMU Extravehicular Mobility Unit
3 EVA Extravehicular Activity
g FCOD J SC Flight Crew Operations Directorate
£7 HAT Human Spaceﬂight Architecture Team
5 HEDS Human Exploration Development Support
§ HEOMD Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate (NASA HQ)
9;: HQ Headquarters
3 HRP Human Research Program (NASA J SC)
ff; IDRD Increment Deﬁnition and Requirements Document
g IM Instant Messaging
i IMV Inter-Module Ventilation
é IPT Integrated Product Team
§ 188 International Space Station
E ISSP International Space Station Program
g ISTAR ISS Testbed for Analog Research
8 J ITT Just In Time Training
{:3 JPL J et Propulsion Laboratory (NASA)
2 J SC Johnson Space Center (NASA)
% KDR Key Driving Requirement
9 LOS Loss of Signal
g MCC Mission Control Center
3 MOD J SC Mission Operations Directorate
E MPCB ISSP Multilateral Payloads Control Board
ED MRPWG ISSP Multilateral Research Planning Working Group
8 MSFC Marshall Space Flight Center (NASA)
NEA Near-Earth Asteroid
NEEMO NASA Extreme Environment Mission Operations
NRC National Research Council
OC ISSP Mission Integration and Operations Office
OCT Office of the Chief Technologist (NASA HQ)
OZ ISSP Research Integration Ofﬁce
P/L Payload
PCB Payloads Control Board
POIC MSFC’S Payload Operations Integration Center
RATS Research and Technology Studies
15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"16","RPWG ISSP Research Planning Working Group

SAID Strategic Analysis and Integration Division (NASA HQ)

SSC Space Station Computer

T2 Treadmill 2

TIM Technical Interchange Meeting

TOCA Total Organic Compound Analyzer

UBNT Ultrasonic Background Noise Test

USOS United States Operating Segment

Acknowledgments
g This research was carried out at the Lyndon B. J ohnson Space Center and J et Propulsion Laboratory,
3 California Institute of Technology. Many thanks to the ﬂight control members from the medical, life
i support, and maintenance teams who devoted considerable time in developing the autonomous procedures
3: for use in this study as well as the crew members from expeditions 31-36 who graciously and diligently
g participated in these on-orbit tests. The results of their efforts are helping pave the way for future human
:2 exploration missions.
3 References
:2: i Stegemoeller, Charlie, ”International Space Station Mars Analog Update,"" Briefing to NASA Advisory
g Council, August 2, 2011, slides 7, 8.
§ ii “Human Research Program Requirements Document,"" Human Research Program, National Aeronautics
8“ and Space Administration, HRP-47052 Rev E, May 2011.
ﬁg iii Lee, Y; Eagles, D; Moreno, F; Rodriggs, M; Beisert, S; Stapleton, D; ”The International Space Station:
g Unique In-Space Testbed as Exploration Analog"" in the SpaceOps 2012 Conference, Stockholm, Sweden, June
1; 11-15, 2012.
m
LU
E
z
LU
U
LU
O
<
a
z
8
E
9
§
<
z
E
B
2?:
%
E
Q
16
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
