"","x"
"1","NASA/TM—2011-21703 3

luvlbvv 2!? i,

Final Report for Intravenous Fluid Generation
(IVGEN) Spaceﬂight Experiment

John B. McQuillen, Terri L. McKay, and DeVon W. Grijﬁn

Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio

Dan E Brown and John T Zoldak

ZIN Technologies, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio

July 2011

"
"2","NASA STI Program . . . in Proﬁle
Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to the - CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected
advancement of aeronautics and space science. The papers from scientiﬁc and technical
NASA Scientiﬁc and Technical Information (STI) conferences, syrnposia, seminars, or other
program plays a key part in helping NASA maintain meetings sponsored or cosponsored by NASA.
this important role.
- SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientiﬁc,
The NASA STI Program operates under the auspices technical, or historical information from
of the Agency Chief Information Ofﬁcer. It collects, NASA programs, projects, and missions, often
organizes, provides for archiving, and disseminates concerned With subjects haVing substantial
NASA’s STI. The NASA STI program provides access public interest.
to the NASA Aeronautics and Space Database and
its public interface, the NASA Technical Reports - TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. English-
Server, thus providing one of the largest collections language translations of foreign scientiﬁc and
of aeronautical and space science STI in the world. technical material pertinent to NASA’s mission.
Results are published in both non-NASA channels
and by NASA in the NASA STI Report Series, which Specialized serVices also include creating custom
includes the following report types: thesauri, building customized databases, organizing
and publishing research results.

- TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of

completed research or a maj or signiﬁcant phase For more information about the NASA STI

of research that present the results of NASA program, see the following:

programs and include extensive data or theoretical

analysis. Includes compilations of signiﬁcant 0 Access the NASA STI program home page at

scientiﬁc and technical data and information http://www.sti.nasa.g0v

deemed to be of continuing reference value.

NASA counterpart of peer-reViewed formal - E-mail your question Via the Internet to help@

professional papers but has less stringent Srinasagov

limitations on manuscript length and extent of

graphic presentations. 0 Fax your question to the NASA STI Help Desk

at 443—757—5 803

- TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientiﬁc

and technical ﬁndings that are preliminary or - Telephone the NASA STI Help Desk at

of specialized interest, e.g., quick release 443—757—5 802

reports, working papers, and bibliographies that

contain minimal annotation. Does not contain - Write to:

extensive analysis. NASA Center for AeroSpace Information (CASI)

7 l 15 Standard Drive

- CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientiﬁc and Hanover, MD 21076—1320

technical ﬁndings by NASA-sponsored

contractors and grantees.

"
"3","NASA/TM—2011-21703 3
luvlbvv 2!? i,
Final Report for Intravenous Fluid Generation
(IVGEN) Spaceﬂight Experiment
John B. McQuillen, Terri L. McKay, and DeVon W. Grijﬁn
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
Dan E Brown and John T Zoldak
ZIN Technologies, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio
National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
July 2011

"
"4","Trade names and trademarks are used in this report for identiﬁcation
only. Their usage does not constitute an ofﬁcial endorsement,
either expressed or implied, by the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration.
Level ofReview: This material has been technically reviewed by technical management.
Available from
NASA Center for Aerospace Information National Technical Information Service
7115 Standard Drive 5301 Shawnee Road
Hanover, MD 21076—1320 Alexandria, VA 22312
Available electronically at http://WWW.sti.nasa.g0V

"
"5","Contents
Summaryl
1.0 IntroductionandBackground...............................................................................................................1

1.1 Standards2
1.2 SpacecraftPotableWater............................................................................................................4
2.0 Previous Spaceﬂight Experiment: Sterile Water for Injection SystemS
3.0 IVGEN Trade Studles6
3.1 M1X1ngStudles6
3.2 WaterPuriﬁcationStudies..........................................................................................................8
3.2.1 D13t111at10n9
3.2.2 OsmOSIS9
3.2.3 Delonlzatlonll
3.2.4 Mlcrowavell
3.2.5 KSCClearwaterSystem..............................................................................................13
3.2.6 Cartridge Sizing for IVGEN 14
4.0 DemgnoflVGENlS
4.1 AccumulatorlS
4.2 Pur1ﬁer17
4.3 MlxerAssemb1y18
5.0 Procedure20
6.0 Results21
6.1 HydrodynamicCharacterization...............................................................................................22
6.2 C0nduct1v1ty24
6.2.1 Pur1ﬁcat10n24
6.2.2 M1X1ngUn1form1ty27
6.3 Post-FllghtAna1y31s29
7.0 P1ans31
7.1 Test1ng31
7.2 OperationalSystemDesign......................................................................................................31
8.0 Conclu310n32
References32
AppendiXA.—AcronymsandAbbreviations.............................................................................................35
Append1xB—TestResu1ts37
B.1 Bag1,NormaISa11ne37
B.2 Bag2,NormaISa11ne41
B.3 Bag3,Pur1ﬁedWater44
B.4 Bag4,Pur1ﬁedWater46
B.5 Bag5,Pur1ﬁedWater49
B.6 Bag6,Pur1ﬁedWater51
Appendix C.—Investigation Results for Out-of—Speciﬁcation Saline Concentration 55
C.1 CompletedTestPlaHSS
C.2 Chemical Analysis Results of Bag Contents (Performed by Precision Analytical).................. 66
C3 Conver31onAna1y31s72
NASA/TM—ZOI 1—217033 iii

"
"6",""
"7","Final Report for Intravenous Fluid Generation (IVGEN)
Spaceﬂight Experiment
J ohn B. McQuillen, Terri L. McKay, and DeVon W. Grifﬁn
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
Dan F . Brown and J ohn T. Zoldak
ZIN Technologies, Inc.
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
Summary
NASA designed and operated the Intravenous F luid Generation (IVGEN) experiment onboard the
International Space Station (188), Increment 23/24, during May 2010. This hardware was a demonstration
experiment to generate intravenous (IV) ﬂuid from 188 Water Processing Assembly (WPA) potable water
using a water puriﬁcation technique and pharmaceutical mixing system. The IVGEN experiment utilizes a
deionizing resin bed to remove contaminants from feedstock water to a purity level that meets the
standards of the United States Pharmacopeia (USP), the governing body for pharmaceuticals in the United
States. The water was then introduced into an IV bag where the ﬂuid was mixed with USP-grade
crystalline salt to produce USP normal saline (NS). Inline conductivity sensors quantiﬁed the feedstock
water quality, output water purity, and NS mixing uniformity. SiX 1.5-L bags of puriﬁed water were
produced. Two of these bags were mixed with sodium chloride to make 0.9 percent NS solution. These
two bags were returned to Earth to test for compliance with USP requirements.
On-orbit results indicated that all of the experimental success criteria were met with the exception of
the salt concentration. Problems with a large air bubble in the ﬁrst bag of puriﬁed water resulted in a
slightly concentrated saline solution of 117 percent of the target value of 0.9 g/L. The second bag had an
inadequate amount of salt premeasured into the mixing bag resulting in a slightly deﬁcient salt
concentration of 93.8 percent of the target value. The USP permits a range from 95 to 105 percent of the
target value.
The testing plans for improvements for an operational system are also presented.
1.0 Introduction and Background
The Vision for Space Exploration (Ref. 1) outlined a new direction for NASA, consisting of missions
to return astronauts to the Moon and test the technologies required for Mars missions. The International
Space Station (188) will also be used as a test bed for some of these new technologies. NASA’s
Exploration Systems Architecture Study (Ref. 2) presented several Design Reference Missions (DRMs)
that were used to facilitate the derivation of various requirements for the essential technologies such as
the Environmental Control and Life Support Systems (ECLSS), spacecraft power and propulsion, and
communications. These DRMs included 188 expeditions, Lunar Sorties lasting 7 days, a Lunar Outpost
with crew exchanges once every 6 months, and various options for a trip to Mars. With the exception of
the ISS expeditions, there is limited capability for emergency medical evacuations because of the distance
from Earth and their associated return timelines. The ability to stabilize and treat patients on exploration
missions will depend on access to needed consumables. IV ﬂuids have been identiﬁed as required
consumables. Miller et al. (Ref. 3) reviewed the 188 Patient Condition Database (PCDB), which lists over
400 medical conditions that could require treatment during 188 missions. These conditions are a subset of
possible conditions that could be encountered during long-duration, Extravehicular Activity (EVA)
intensive, exploration missions. Of the 442 conditions, approximately 115 could require medical
NASA/TM—201 1-217033 1

"
"8","fl!‘ 1 7 i-ﬁ
- ‘4‘; l ¢\.
. i'.’:‘.“‘i—_ - '
. l”; _~ L E:\E"" a‘
i: , J - x. t
Figure 1.—Advanced life support pack.
ﬂuids during the course of treatment. Terrestrial treatment would typically include ﬂuids such as normal
saline (NS, 0.9 percent NaCl), 5 percent dextrose, Lactated Ringer’s, or blood products. Watkins (Ref. 4)
provided a condition list, the Space Medicine Exploration Medical Condition List (SMEMCL), for the
Exploration Medical Capabilities Element of the Human Research Program that examined seven DRMs
and listed the breakdown of various medical conditions and treatment priorities.

Currently, the 188 stocks a large complement of diagnostic medical equipment and supplies for the
purpose of both biomedical research and treatment of injuries and illnesses among the crewmembers. The
philosophy for life-threatening and severe cases is to provide initial treatment to stabilize the patient and
evacuate the patient back to Earth in a timely fashion. To implement this philosophy, the Advanced Life
Support Pack (ALSP), shown in Figure 1, contains IV ﬂuid of 0.5-L bags of dextrose solution and 0.5-
and l-L bags of 0.9 percent NS solution for a total of 4.5 L. Due to shelf life considerations, each of the
contents of the ALSP is replaced at least every 18 months (Ref. 5).

Operational constraints such as mass limitations and lack of refrigeration may limit the type and
volume of such ﬂuids that can be carried onboard the spacecraft. Consequently, the objective of the
IVGEN experiment was to develop, design, and validate the necessary methodology to purify spacecraft
potable water into a NS solution thus reducing the amount of IV ﬂuids that are included in the launch
manifest.

1.1 Standards

The United States Pharmacopeia (USP) is the authoritative source for medicine and healthcare
product standards. These standards are in place to improve public health by ensuring the quality and
safety of products. As such, the USP has developed monographs detailing standards for drug products,
including various types of water to be used for pharmaceutical purposes. The monographs for these water
products include a cascade of multiple techniques and requirements as illustrated in Figure 2. The
classiﬁcation for the ﬁnal products depends not only on the preparation method, but the usage and
packaging as well. For example, “Sterile Water for Irrigation” (SWFI) and “Sterile Water for Inj ection”
(SW1) may be prepared identically, but SWFI is packaged “in bulk” or in sterile containers that hold more
than 1 L of ﬂuid While SW1 must be packaged in containers no larger than 1 L.

Some monographs include process-oriented descriptions, that is, they describe a series of operations
or procedures that are not veriﬁed directly Via measurements of quantiﬁable values, such as a
concentration, for all possible contaminants. As an example, the USP standard for puriﬁed water requires
that source water meet Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) National Primary Drinking Water
Regulations (NPDWR). To meet USP requirements for water for irrigation (WFI) distillation, reverse
osmosis, or an equivalent or superior process is acceptable; however, there are no quantiﬁable values for
assessment.

NASA/TM—ZOl 1—217033 2

"
"9","Drinking Water
(Complying with US EPA NPDWR or drinking water regulations of EU
or Japan or WHO Guidelines for Drinking Water)
Typical Treatment Steps could include:
Distillation De-ionization
Reverse osmosis Prefiltration
Dechlorination Softening
De-ammonification Ultrafiltration
Organic scavenging UV Light
Distillation, reverse osmosis or equivalent/superior process for
removing chemicals and micro-organisms
Packaging and sterilization
Water for injection (bulk packaged)
Sterile water for injection
Sterile water for irrigation
Bacteriostatic water for injection
Sterile water for inhalation
Figure 2.—Process for manufacturing water for injection.

The EPA does not have limits on all possible contaminants, such as iodine and silver because these
biocides, Which are generally used in space vehicle water, are not normally present in public water
systems. Biocides are not allowed in SW1 and must be removed. Bagdigian et a1. (Ref. 6) discuss in detail
the various agencies and regulations governing water quality and allowed contaminant levels in water to
be used for different purposes.

It should also be noted that there are additional stipulations listed Within the USP National Formulary
(Ref. 7) that are imposed upon these processes that are not readily apparent otherwise. For example, With
regards to distillation, provisions need to be incorporated that eliminate the possibility of evaporator
ﬂooding and mist carryover. Furthermore, during periods of system nonusage, provisions need to
incorporate the ability to drain and dry the distillation apparatus to minimize the possibility of microbial
inﬁltration and growth. Finally, there needs to be a process to validate and periodically inspect the process
to assure that quality standards are being met.

Cascading requirements and procedures are not limited only to the preparation of WFI. Per the USP
National Formulary, the speciﬁcation for NS solution, “Sodium Chloride Injection,” is 0.9 weight percent
concentration of sterile sodium chloride in WFI. Therefore, a NS solution must meet the EPA
requirements for potable water; and the USP requirements for puriﬁed water, WFI, sodium chloride
injection and sterility. The USP monographs may be found at their online website.

NASA/TM—ZOI 1-217033 3

"
"10","1.2 Spacecraft Potable Water

NASA potable water must meet requirements deﬁned in the Spacecraft Water Exposure Guidelines
(SWEGs) (Ref. 8) in NASA Space Station Program (SSP) 41000 (Ref. 9) and CXP 20024 (Ref. 10), if
they are different than EPA NPDWR standards. While there is some overlap in the two standards,
NASA’s standards cover contaminants speciﬁc to spacecraft water. Furthermore, the SWEGs establish
limits based on exposure durations that include 1, 10, 100, and 1000 days. These standards reduce the
acceptable concentration as the exposure duration increases. Some contaminant standards, such as
manganese salts, are not addressed by the NPDWR, while the SWEGs establish a limit.

While using the vehicle’s potable water for the SW1 source is an obVious choice, other potential
sources do eXist. Short-duration missions could use fuel cells, such as those in the shuttle, to generate
high-purity water. Moderate-duration missions feed potable water into an additional deionizing bed to
remove the iodine biocide before feeding the water into an electrolysis unit to generate oxygen. The feed
water into the electrolysis unit could also be used to generate SW1. A generic emergency water source to
be used for oxygen generation, medical emergencies, or replenishing potable water stores may be a Viable
option for moderate- to long-duration missions. Water obtained from in situ resource utilization would
presumably go through processing to bring quality up to potable water standards. In addition, other
sources of nonpotable water (SSP 57020 (Ref. 11)), such as the 188 technical water, which is water
generated from fuel cells without any effective biocide additive, eXist and might be usable provided
sufﬁcient treatment could be assured of the water supply.

During initial phases of assembly for the 188, water was either supplied directly from terrestrial
sources or the shuttle fuel cells. Water from the space shuttle or Space Transportation System (STS), was
stored in multiple Contingency Water Containers (CWCs) and emptied as needed. The CWCs were
treated with a silver biocide and could store 44 L of ﬂuid, much larger than the 1 L of ﬂuid required for a
normal IV bag. CWCs were replaced by Contingency Water Container Iodine (CWC—I) that used iodine
as the biocide. While shuttle fuel cells do have the ability to provide relatively high purity water, additives
were used to adjust the taste and prevent bacterial growth. Subsequently, as part of the ECLSS, the Water
Processing Assembly (WPA) was launched. Drinking water for the astronauts from the WPA is dispensed
Via the Potable Water Dispenser (PWD). Samples from both the STS potable water source and the WPA
were periodically returned to Earth and their water quality was tested. Some results (Ref. 12) are
presented in Table 1 and show that the purity standards that are required are met with ample margin.

TABLE 1.—ISS WPA POTABLE WATER SAMPLING RESULTS
carbon, Ing/L Ing/L urnhos/crn Ing/L Ing/L
rng/L
—ﬂ""---
level (MCL)
—ﬂ""---
level source 41000
November 22, 200881 1.05 <0.1 0.174 6 1.69 7.7 0.21
November 25, 2008 0.35 <0.1 0.031 3 0.42 7.48 1.40
November 26, 2008 0.23 <0.1 0.011 3 0.05 7.06 1.89
November 26, 2008 0.19 <0.1 0.009 3 0.13 7.43 1.90
December 8, 2008 0.23 <0.1 0.016 9 0.10 7.79 2.41
February 9, 2009 0.12 <0.1 <0.002 3 0.11 6.91 2.54
February 27, 2009 0.12 <0.1 <0.002 3 0.25 6.82 2.70
March 10, 2009 0.09 <0.1 <0.002 3 0.12 6.49 2.70
aRepresents primarily residual water in the WPA at launch, not processed water
bTotal I maX/total I at point of consumption
NASA/TM—201 1-217033 4

"
"11","2.0 Previous Spaceﬂight Experiment: Sterile Water for Inj ection System

In the late 1980s and early 1990s, NASA conducted a detailed investigation to determine the
possibility of producing IV ﬂuids on orbit as part of the Health Maintenance F acility for the Space Station
F reedom Program. The NASA J ohnson Space Center (J SC) led this effort, which included contracts with
Krug International, Sterimatics, and Baxter, and culminated in a ﬂight experiment on STS—47 from
September 12, 1992, through September 20, 1992. Part of that decision was based on the ability to rapidly
return ill crewmembers to Earth, an option that becomes increasingly more difﬁcult as the time duration
of exploration missions and the distance from Earth increases.

As part of the SWIS effort, Creager of Krug Life Sciences (Ref. 13) evaluated siX scenarios requiring
ﬂuids for medical treatment. F luid volumes were calculated for each scenario using seven types of
solutions. The volume required to treat a particular scenario ranged from 11 to 90 L, averaging 37 L. The
total volume required to treat all individual scenarios enVisioned for a mission and the minimum volume
required to any single scenario in a mission were also calculated. The total volume of the seven types of
solutions required to cover one incident of all of the scenarios was 220 L, while 141 L was the maximum
required to cover any single scenario. (The report suggested that the minimum was 123 L but there was an
18 L error in the calculations for the minimum amount of NS required.)

Krug International, as lead contractor for the Health Maintenance F acility on Space Station F reedom,
subcontracted with Sterimatics Corporation to develop a Sterile Water for lnj ection System (SWIS) to
produce IV ﬂuids. The SWIS was a ﬂlter/adsorption-based technology to produce SW1. The design goal
was to convert ISS “hygiene water,” which has a lower quality than 188 potable water, to SW1. System
requirements included producing at least 6 L of SW1 at 6 L/hr with a sterile shelf life of 90 days utilizing
a ﬁlter with a minimum shelf life of 1 year. As developed, the SWIS had a dry mass of 2 kg and produced
9 L of SW1 from water-containing contamination levels 10 times the ISS potable water speciﬁcation.
Testing indicated that at least 20 L of SW1 could be produced from potable water.

As part of the SWIS proj ect, Baxter worked on developing methods to miX both powders and
concentrates, but was unable to overcome problems in mixing powders (Ref. 14) even in a normal gravity
environment. The development was constrained by a requirement to miX “passively” by utilizing only
water pressure. Baxter conducted experiments with a dyed concentrate and observed a low degree of
mixing, with the heaVier, dyed concentrate located on the bottom of the bag in 1 g testing. No quantitative
mixing studies were completed in normal or microgravity. Subsequent analysis and tests have
demonstrated that these mixing techniques can easily be gravity-driven and care must be taken not to
interpret those results as a testament to their effectiveness in microgravity (Ref. 15).

The SWIS was ﬂown on STS—47 in September 1992 as part of the F luid Therapy System (F TS) on
the Spacelab—J (Spacelab—Japan). The test plan called for a purge sample of approximately 350 to
400 mL of liquid to purge the SWIS cartridge, followed by an assortment of 1-L bags of four sterile
water samples, three 5 percent dextrose samples, and three NS solution samples. Problems were
encountered with the system including the following (Ref. 16):

. Small bubbles were present in all of the ﬁlled bags.

. Air was detected in the IV line.

While post-ﬂight microbiological analysis indicated that all of the samples were sterile (Ref. 17),
there were some problems that the chemical analysis detected (Ref. 18):

. The saline concentration for two of the three bags was slightly higher than allowable tolerances

per the USP speciﬁcations.

. The Total Organic Carbon (TOC) content for both ground testing and spaceﬂight testing was

considerably above USP speciﬁcations.
NASA/TM—ZOI 1-217033 5

"
"12","Based on these results and vehicle constraints, NASA decided not to produce sterile water or IV
ﬂuids on Space Station, but to use prepackaged IV ﬂuids. No ﬂight-ready hardware was fabricated for
sterile water production.

3.0 IVGEN Trade Studies

Several trade studies were performed as part of the effort to develop the IVGEN experiment to
evaluate different aspects for the design. Mixing techniques were evaluated in a manner in normal gravity
that minimized natural convection due to density differences between the solvent and the solution
mixture. The selected mixing technique was then veriﬁed in low gravity aboard the C—9 aircraft.

A second series of trade studies were performed to select water puriﬁcation techniques and included
both analysis and testing. After the selection of the water puriﬁcation technique, a secondary study was
performed to size the cartridge.

3.1 Mixing Studies

In their 2006 trade study, Niederhaus and Miller (Ref. 15) evaluated several different mixing
techniques. Their evaluation criteria were qualitative and included the following:

. Efﬁciency or minimal power consumption

0 Ability to maintain sterility

. F IeXibility to accommodate both powders and concentrates

. Overall system mass

. Confidence that the technique could be adapted to use in the microgravity environment

. Amount of crew time required to set up and operate the system coupled with degree of difﬁculty

The mixing techniques included the following:

. Recirculation within the IV bag that is generated Via a peristaltic pump attached to a tubing

appendage on the IV bag

. Mixing cartridge with the powdered pharmaceutical placed in the inlet ﬂow path to IV bag;

dissolution and/ or mixing would occur as the water passes through the cartridge and enters the
bag

. Magnetic stir bar prepositioned within the bag

. Impeller mixing with a rotating shaft that penetrates the IV bag walls

. A rod that penetrates the IV bag walls and Vibrates ultrasonically

. IV bag deformation or kneading

. Vibrating surface in external contact with IV bag wall

. High frequency acoustic emitter placed in external contact with IV bag wall

Niederhaus and Miller assessed each mixing technique an adjectival rating of “High,” “Medium,” or
“Low” for every evaluation criteria listed above. Numerical scores were assigned to the adjectival rating
and summed and then ranked in Table 2 (Ref. 15). Based on their results, the magnetic stir bar and
Vibrating wall methods were selected for normal gravity testing. They used Planar Laser-Induced
F luorescence (PLIF) and schlieren were used to determine mixing times.

PLIF utilizes a laser beam shaped to be narrow in one dimension and 5 to 6 centimeters wide in the
orthogonal direction, thus illuminating a plane. In this case, Niederhaus and Miller doped the ﬂuid with
particles that would ﬂuoresce under laser illumination. A Video camera perpendicular to the plane of
illumination captures a time sequence of images of the particles in the ﬂow, thus mapping out the mixing
process as a function of time.

NASA/TM—ZOI 1-217033 6

"
"13","TABLE 2,—EVALUATION OF MIXING METHODS ACCORDING TO SELECTION CRITERIA
a a 8

a z» *5 é a a 3‘13 E

q % 2 .2 tr: .2 CL €13 <1)

~°~’ :3 I—§ .‘é‘ a 5 TC: '5 .5

a : £5 a a a s E a

La m L: Lu 8 1 O D D m
———————-—n
———————-—n

A schlieren system passes collimated light from a point source through a test section of interest, where
the obj ect under test must have refractive indeX differences, which in the case of mixing, are produced by
density differences. After passing through the test section, the light is focused with a knife edge in the focal
plane obscuring half of the focal spot. A camera that is focused on the test section is placed after the focal
spot. By using this arrangement, the camera records images of density differences in the test section that
appear as shadows moving across the ﬁeld of View. This system records the mixing process without the
need to dope the ﬂuid. Alternatively, the optical conﬁguration for schlieren is much more complicated and
less compact than PLIF, so each has its advantages. By using both techniques, Niederhaus and Miller were
able to ensure that they had the best possible technique to collect the mixing data.

While Niederhaus and Miller demonstrated that both mixing techniques showed promise, the presence
of an air bubble in the IV bag greatly enhanced the mixing efﬁciency for the Vibrating wall technique
whereas the stir bar technique did not require such assistance. Tests of the Vibrating wall technique that were
conducted in single phase liquid with no air bubble eXhibited mixing times that approximated mixing by
diffusion, which means that the Vibrating walls were producing essentially no mixing.

As shown in F igure 3, using 30— by 3-mm (length by diameter) and 35- by 3-mm stir bars at various
angular velocities, mixing times were well under the 20 min target. For example, the data revealed that
the 30-mm stir bar at 700 rpm could achieve a homogeneous solution for liquid-liquid mixing in less than
2 min. The 30-mm stir bar at 700 rpm could aid in the dissolution of a solid and achieve thorough mixing
in under 8 min (Ref. 19).

F ollowing the l g testing, Niederhaus and Miller conducted preliminary microgravity experiments in
the Glenn Research Center (GRC) 2.2-Second Drop Tower. Results indicated that faster spinner velocities
are required to move bubbles away from the bag wall to prevent possible “dead zones” of no ﬂow;
however, not enough time was available to achieve a “steady-state” condition. Longer duration
experiments were then performed aboard the NASA C—9 to examine concerns such as whether powder
granules would collect in bag corners, and whether large bubbles would interfere with the mixing process.

Small nonsoluble polymer spheres (250 and 500 um in diameter) were used as surrogates for
pharmaceutical powders to track and analyze particle motion within various bag geometries during the
mixing process. The use of a surrogate eliminates the regulatory issues associated with using actual
pharmaceutical. These tests revealed that small particles do not become lodged in dead zones within the
bag, such as ﬁll ports and corners within the IV bag, and that bag shape does not prevent particles from
being uniformly distributed. In microgravity, the mobility of the particles greatly increased as particles
“rose” into the bulk ﬂuid, rather than resting on or against, the bag “ﬂoor” as occurs in l g. Experiments
demonstrated that air bubbles, some as large as 100 mL, did not interfere with the mixing process as the
bubbles were sheared apart when contacting the rotating stir bar.

NASA/TM—ZOl 1-217033 7

"
"14","800 A 20rrmx 3rrm R2=O.99151
A x 30mm 3n'm. R2=0.95155
o 35nmx 3rrm R2=O.99429
A 600
i”,
E
s 400
o\°
8
9 200
.“g’ X ‘ .
l.—
0
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200
RPM
Figure 3.—Mixing times from stir bars, sized 20 to
35 mm, at various rpms.

Bag ﬁlling tests were also conducted in microgravity. High liquid ﬁll rates (1700 mL/min) produced a
turbulent jet that dissolved the salt almost completely by the time the bag was full. However, low ﬂow
rates (~20 mL/min) did not aid rapid salt dissolution. Furthermore, the stir bar did not rotate easily when
the bag contained very little water, and the stir bar became trapped within solid salt crystals. The
dissolution of these salts crystals was limited because of the small amount of water within the bag. As the
bag ﬁlled with water, the salt that trapped the stir bar dissolved and the stir bar would begin rotating.

3.2 Water Puriﬁcation Studies

The USP speciﬁes both requirements and processes for generating SW1 based on the concept that “the
nature and robustness of the puriﬁcation process is directly related to the resulting purity (Ref. 20).” As
speciﬁed by the USP, distillation and reverse osmosis (R0) are the “acceptable” means of producing
SW1; however, provisions are included to utilize other processes, provided that these processes deliver
water of equivalent quality.

In addition to mixing, Niederhaus et al. (Ref. 21), examined several sterilization processes including
the following:

. Distillation—Puriﬁcation by phase change and collection of steam. Special provisions are needed

to negate any liquid carryover in the form of droplet mists or boilover surges.

. Reverse osmosis—Osmotic pressure removes the contaminants by applying a pressure gradient
across a semipermeable membrane.

. Adsorption—lmpurities are chemically absorbed onto a packing material.

. Ultraﬁltration—Water is puriﬁed by ﬂowing through a ﬁlter medium with very small pore
diameters that physically block the passage of impurities.

In addition, three recently developed techniques were examined as part of the current effort:

. Microwave—UMPQUA, Research Company, under a Small Business Innovative Research
(SBIR) contract, examined the use of microaning the water under pressure to kill any
microorganisms. This technique would still need to be coupled with some ﬁltering mechanism to
remove impurities such as ions, organic carbon, and endotoxins.

NASA/TM—ZOl 1-217033 8

"
"15",". Artificial kidney—Dr. Shuvo Roy, formerly an Assistant Staff member in the Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic F oundation, and currently
with the University of California, San F rancisco, demonstrated the performance of a nanodeVice
prototype that should ﬁlter all impurities from input potable water.

. F Urward osmosiS—Several manufacturers now offer a device that can take unpuriﬁed and
untreated water, pass it through an osmotic membrane in the forward direction and generate a
sports drink from a syrup. The physical principles governing that process can be directly applied
to generating a pharmaceutical mixture for IV administration.

F urther discussion of these techniques, including analysis and some experimental evaluations, is

discussed below.
3.2.1 Distillation

Puriﬁcation by distillation relies on the evaporation and/or boiling of water and the ﬂow of the water
vapor to a separate location where the vapor is condensed. Sterilization is achieved by subj ecting the
water to sufﬁciently hot temperatures to kill any bacteria. Puriﬁcation is accomplished by collecting the
water condensate over a narrow range of temperature and pressure conditions whereby any compound
that is more volatile than water is vented prior to collection and any compound less volatile than the water
never vaporizes and ﬂows into the condenser. Historically, this technique was the ﬁrst acknowledged
puriﬁcation method and is still used today especially for the puriﬁcation of large quantities of water.

It should be noted, however, that within the USP, there are several additional constraints placed upon
the puriﬁcation technique. Among these constraints are the following:

. Provisions must be made to demist the vapor ﬂow, that is, liquid droplets cannot be present

within the vapor stream as they are likely to contain impurities that would have remained behind.

. Provisions must be made to eliminate “boil-over.” A rapid increase in the amount of vaporization
can result in the pockets of liquid mass drops and globules being carried over from the boiler/
evaporator to the condenser as the vapor surges in. These liquid slugs would be carrying
impurities with it.

. The distillation system must be periodically inspected, drained, and cleaned for mineral deposits.

. During periods of nonusage, the system must be drained and dried.

Distillation is a puriﬁcation technique that relies heaVily on buoyancy forces to achieve separation
between the puriﬁed vapor and the source liquid. Aboard the 188, the Urine Processing Assembly (UPA)
utilizes a centrifuge operated at low pressure to achieve the evaporation and phase separation (Ref. 6).
Consequently, this 188 hardware is heavy and power intensive.

Given that some medical conditions within the SMEMCL involve burns, there is a possibility that the
same event that caused the injury may have also damaged the spacecraft and thus limited the power
production capability of the spacecraft.

Therefore, because of the numerous gravitational complications, large power demands, and mass and
volume requirements incompatible with constraints on system size, distillation was discounted as a
method to generate puriﬁed water in an emergency situation.

3.2.2 Osmosis

Osmosis is the process of a solvent diffusing across a semipermeable membrane from a region of low
concentration to a region of higher concentration. This movement results in the dilution of the more
concentrated region, and as a result, the local pressure adj acent to the membrane is higher on the
concentrated side of the membrane. This process is known as forward osmosis. These membranes have a
ﬁltering capacity for removing particles larger than 0.1 pm. F ilters that can sterilize water typically have a
particle removing capacity of 0.2 pm or smaller.

NASA/TM—ZOl 1-217033 9

"
"16","By applying a higher pressure to the concentrated solution side of the membrane, it is possible to
reverse the ﬂow and drive the solvent ﬂuid from the solution side to the solvent side of the membrane
purifying it in the process. This technique is known as R0 and was the other standard process recognized
by the USP for purifying water.

Both osmotic processes, forward and reverse, will be discussed.
3.2.2.1 Reverse Osmosis

When reverse osmosis is used to purify water within a terrestrial application, typically the system is
conﬁgured in a manner whereby only a portion of the feed stream is puriﬁed as it passes through the
membrane (permeate) while some of the feed solution becomes more concentrated and eXits the device
without passing through the membrane (concentrate also known as retentate) (Ref. 22 and EPA/625/R—
96—009) as shown in Figure 4. Consequently, there is a signiﬁcant amount of feed water that is “rejected”
from the system. Nonetheless, it was decided to test the effectiveness of this technology at nearly
complete conversion of the feed water.

For this testing, a thin-ﬁlm composite (TFC) membrane, similar to that used in NASA Kennedy
Space Center’s (KSC’s) Clearwater device (Refs. 23 and 24), was tested. Testing revealed that the RO
ﬁlter (manufactured by General Electric’s Osmonics Desal, model 18 GPD TFC RO Membrane) failed to
remove sufﬁcient quantities of endotoxins, chloride ions, carbon dioxide, and oxidizable substances and
failed sterility. It should be noted though, that the RO ﬁlter was included in the Clearwater system to meet
the USP requirements at that time. The Clearwater system is discussed in greater detail in Section 3.2.5.

Ultimately, RO technology was rejected since it demonstrated that it was not possible to achieve the
necessary purity without a substantial efﬂuent ﬂow of water.

E55133? __;.. '3' "" I- 9 II 0 U Q l} _ —-;I- Enncentrate
{dragﬂut} .. I‘ nth . L, —_ U
I _ I _
_ . o
l- l E? .I G .- .D II
I C} 'l‘ U '
I' I ' {j I l I
«IL— Membrane
' I I -
I "" ' l
l I
I
I
Water
{permeate}
Figure 4.—Simplified flow schematic of reverse osmosis process.
NASA/TM—20l l-2l7033 lO

"
"17","3.2.2.2 Forward Osmosis

Osmostic membranes are used within sports drink bags that are marketed for those participating in
outdoor wilderness activities that may not have access to a potable water source. Hydration Technology
Innovation LLC’s X-pack can provide l-L increments of a sports drink from a syrup and “muddy” water.
The syrup is poured into the concentrate side of the X-pack and the water is poured into the other side.
Analysis showed that the X-pack was able to meet the USP requirements; however, the ﬂow rate was
substantially lower than the requirements for the IVGEN experiment. F urthermore, there were concerns
about the impact of liquid positioning within the X-pack in a low-graVity environment and its impact on
X-pack performance. Speciﬁcally, if the liquid were in poor contact with the membrane, there would be
insufﬁcient transfer of puriﬁed liquid across the semipermeable membrane especially during the latter
stages of puriﬁcation.

3.2.3 Deionization

Deionization (D1) or demineralization uses ion-eXChange resin particles to bind with mineral salts. A
combination of different resin particles are used to remove cations such as sodium, potassium, etc., and
anions, such as chloride and ﬂuoride. Two different DI cartridges were tested: cartridges from the KSC
Clearwater system and Prismedical Corporation’s MainStream (Ref. 25) device.

Two identical cartridges, Pentek Part Number PCF l—lOMB, are used in the KSC Clearwater system.
These cartridges contain a “semiconductor-grade” deionizing resin. The cartridges are constructed with a
hollow core so that ﬂow through the resin beads is directed radially. The cartridges are typically installed
in ﬁlter housings that permit ﬂow through the annular region outside the cartridge, through the resin
cartridge, and out the central core region inside the cartridge. Performance testing demonstrated that the
cartridge was able to meet USP purity requirements for SWFI; however, because of the cartridge
geometry, challenges were encountered with bubbles and unusual hydraulic characteristics during normal
gravity testing as the ﬂow direction with respect to the gravity vector was changed. This cartridge and its
resin were not selected though, primarily due to a shelf life of 6 months that was posted on its package.

Prismedical developed for the Army, as part of the SBIR program, the MainStream system, F igure 5.
The entire system was sealed within a foil-barrier envelope and contained a source water bag, the
puriﬁcation module, and a sterile receiver bag. The puriﬁcation module contained both hydrophilic and
hydrophobic ﬁlter material, as a means of removing any gas that either entered or was trapped in the
system, and a ResinTech, lnc., deionizing resin. The system had a shelf life of 5 years. The MainStream
could use any available source water, ranging from potable to contaminated, and produce up to 3 L of
SWFI. The MainStream device did pass the USP requirements for SWF I but did not work when
attempting to ﬂow against gravity. The team conducted this test in an effort to identify gravity-related
performance issues. An investigation revealed that an internal hydrophilic membrane did not allow the
trapped gas present within the interstitial volume in the device to eXit through the puriﬁed water eXit port
during the initial ﬁlling. The gas vent port is located adj acent to the water inlet port. The device was
removed from consideration because of concerns with regards to ﬂow in microgravity: the gas will co-
ﬂow with the liquid and attempt to eXit through the liquid eXit port. Gas has not been observed to counter-
ﬂow through porous media in microgravity.

3.2.4 Microwave

Under a SBIR contract to the NASA Glenn Research Center (GRC), UMPQUA Research Company,
developed a system to produce medical-grade water using microwaves. The system immersed a
microwave generator within a ﬂow loop that sterilized and pyrolyzed the source water (F igure 6 and
Ref. 26). Analyses and tests were conducted over a range of ﬂow rates and power levels to determine the
temperatures equivalent to autoclave conditions and sterilize the source water to meet acceptable
standards. For example, typical steady-state operating conditions in experiments on this system included a
NASA/TM—ZOl 1-217033 ll

"
"18",". L""?
3;; ’I-Onogn’m
.. "" Vic
I. I ‘1?wa
  ‘ V Q’u‘mmlhkﬁ
_ me‘ﬁmww
,2
""ﬁx: 0510!“
M h (64 a‘n-N‘i”
Figure 5.—Prismedical’s MainStream Device.
69 Thermocouple
Back-Pressure
Regulator (BR)
Closed-Cell Foam _
Insulation _ Microwave
Power In
Removable Microwave
Insulation Antenna Inside Coaxial
Chamber Cable
_ I E I _
@ -r :-__—:-=
‘
Inlet :3,
LA
A - @
Outlet b 4 1- EIIIE y 4 +
I— Sterilizable Connector Section —I §
Pressure
Gauge
Figure 6.—UMPQUA’S Microwave Medical Water Generation System.
NASA/TM—2011-217033 12

"
"19","single-phase liquid ﬂow rate of 13 mL/min and a microwave power of 150 W, resulting in a sterilization
temperature between 155 and 158 °C. Under these conditions, the system demonstrated effective
sterilization and inactivation of endotoxins. While the technique was successful, this technique was
discounted from further evaluation based on power consumption and the system mass and volume.
3.2.5 KSC Clearwater System
Components of the KSC Clearwater system, namely the R0 and DI ﬁlters, were mentioned earlier.
The system as a whole was developed by NASA KSC with Tiger Puriﬁcation Systems (Figure 7) using
multiple ﬁlters to produce up to 300 L of WFI. The system features its own pumps, valves, and redundant
ﬂow paths (Figure 8). Source water ﬁrst entered 5 14m sediment ﬁlters to remove particulate matter so
that it would not burden ﬁlter elements downstream. A KDF—55 heavy metal and chlorine ﬁlter was used
to remove some of the ions, particularly chloride ions, to prevent premature depletion of the reverse
osmosis membrane that was located downstream. Waste water from the RO membrane was recycled back
into the source water, but eventually all water was processed by the system. A deionizing resin ﬁlter was
followed by a Posidyne ELD ﬁlter (Pall Corporation) primarily to remove any air bubbles from the ﬂow.
While the system could produce up to 300 L of WFI at a rate of 5.3 L/hr, the Clearwater system was
removed from consideration for several reasons including the size of the system (52.5 - by 28.4- by
23.2-cm), dry weight of the system (19.5 kg) and the need for an electrically driven pump to supply the
ﬂow. Furthermore, each parallel leg could only be used once to generate the WFI for no more than 100 L.
Once each leg had been used, the ﬂow through that leg could not be reestablished without Violating
sterility protocols for Pall ﬁlter.
. ., :3: -.;:P"" -
K ‘-- 3'”:
IV-GMDE WATER
FILTRATION SYSTEM
iai.- 1 '7’1.""t;‘;:£lﬁ
31-:- _. 3”? ég‘é-él‘: 7;}
I , \ L”; (£'ng . m ~—
.4: _ — .N M 1‘.“ -
3'7: “t 94 3 , m
@5313 ,.———.— 5.; k-‘ j
- ‘1: fl . 5‘; -42.:445:
Figure 7.—Prototype Clearwater |V-Grade Water
Filtration System.

NASA/TM—2011—217033 l3

"
"20","'1‘ %
ll-ll EIS- —D}[
FLEX TUBE
LEGEND:
I ‘l-l' .Elg. 2,-. —N— CHECK VALVE
-Il IEIII PUMP
VALVE SELECTOR
'll-lla Eli El-D _ _ _ $$—
. . . $ BALL VALVE
SEDIMENT KDF FILTERS MEMBRANES
FILTERS DI POST-FILTERS
$ THREE WAY STOPCOCK
; :L @ FLOW RESTRICTOR
AIR REMOVAL
FROM WATER X I :4 l3 PRESSURE SWITCH
SOURCE ON
SHUTTLEIISS
. . . IV BAG FILL
v v v
Figure 8.—F|ow schematic of the KSC Clearwater System.
3.2.6 Cartridge Sizing for IVGEN
After completing the testing associated with the IVGEN trade study, the project team determined that
DI resin bed technology augmented with ultraﬂltration would best meet medical operations, USP, and
spaceﬂight requirements. As a result of that decision, the next tasks were to identify the best DI resin to
produce USP WFI, and to determine the appropriate storage technology to ensure a resin lifetime long
enough for exploration missions. During the course of this effort, system-level requirements needed to be
established. Among these requirements included the following:

. Production rate of the WFI: It was assumed that a few bags of NS solution would be available for
immediate use in the event of an emergency. After discussions, it was determined that a
production of approximately 1 L/hr—would be sufﬁcient to replenish consumed supplies.

. Production per cartridge: Terrestrially, the treatment protocol for a severe burn requires up to
16 L per patient for the ﬁrst 24 hr (Ref. 27). Additional amounts may be required during the
subsequent days. However, 1 to 2 L per day may only be required for infusions of certain
medications for treatment of infections and dehydration. Given that the USP requires that the
distribution system be drained and dried during periods of prolonged nonuse, a balance between
producing small quantities of ﬂuid for slow consumption rates versus large quantities for faster
consumption must be achieved. Furthermore, while only the DI resin is depleted during the
puriﬁcation, the packaging of the DI resin, the tubing, ﬁttings, etc., consume the signiﬁcant
portion of the cartridge mass and size. It was decided to size the cartridge to produce up to 6 L of
WFI from the shuttle potable water supply.

. Shelf life of D1 resin: IV ﬂuid is typically rotated through the 188 every 18 months, which
corresponds roughly to recommended shelf life of most producers of IV ﬂuid. The DRMs to Mars
were as short as 18 months; however, some were proj ected to last up to 3 years.

The volume of the DI resin is one of the principal variables in determining the total amount of water

that can be puriﬁed. The water ﬂow rate into the cartridge also determines the amount of water that can be
NASA/TM—ZOl 1-217033 l4

"
"21","puriﬁed as well as the level of purity achieved. The amount of time that the water spends in contact with
the resin beads is known as the resonance time and is directly proportional to both the amount of water
puriﬁed and the purity level. The resonance time is calculated by dividing the volume of the cartridge bed
by the ﬂow rate.

In normal gravity, packed bed reactors have been known to suffer from bed occlusion, in which a
portion of the packing is blocked by the gas phase from reacting with the liquid phase. Motil et al.

(Ref. 28) found that two-phase ﬂow through a packed bed of spherical beads in a microgravity
environment tended to be well dispersed throughout the entire volume. They were operating at much
higher ﬂow rates than Holder and Parker (Ref. 29) who found regions of occlusion where there were no
ﬂow and liquid interaction with the nonspherical packing shapes, thus implying that there would be no
chemical reaction or absorption in these regions. The required volumetric ﬂow rates for this system are
similar to that of Holder and Parker, but the packing material is similar to Motil et al. Given the
puriﬁcation efﬁciency of the selected resin, the packing material density similar to Motil et al. is used and
the inner diameter of the cartridge (1.27 cm) was sized to yield a “superﬁcial” or empty tube velocity that
was closer to Motil et al. than Holder and Parker.

The IVGEN hardware would ideally be manufactured and stored in such a way that a 5-year shelf life
would be possible. As the deionizing resin degrades when eXposed to oxygen, the storage would likely
involve storing the hardware in a sealed manner to prevent such exposure. Initially, ResinTech Resin type
MBD—lO—NG or nuclear grade was purchased and tested because it met MlL—SPEC—DTL—24l l9D(SH).
This MlL-SPEC outlines a storage standard for resin, which allows a life of at up to 5 years; however, the
method of storage prescribed within the MlL—SPEC does not correspond to the desired method of storage
for this NASA technology development. The MlL—SPEC is subj ect to export control laws; therefore, a
more detailed description of the method outlined within the document will not be disclosed in this report.
A second resin, Resin type MBD-lO-Ultra, was purchased because the manufacturer had determined a
method of storage that allowed for a storage life of up to 5 years. The method included using a heat-
sealing technique to enclose the resin a ﬁlm with low permeability. As the outer most resin in a stored
volume degrades the quickest, the shelf life is likely dependent on the volume of resin stored.
Consequently, a test program was deVised and is being implemented to evaluate the storage techniques for
the both the MBD—lO—NG and MBD-lO-Ultra.

4.0 Design of IVGEN

The objective of the IVGEN experiment was to verify in a microgravity environment the ability to
produce WF I and miX it with a predetermined amount of salt to produce a 0.9 percent NS solution. It
should be noted that to verify the performance of this system, diagnostic instrumentation was placed in
critical locations to measure hydraulic and puriﬁcation characteristics. Thus, the design of an operational
system should be much simpler with minimal diagnostics. F igure 9 shows the ﬂow schematic for the
system to verify the operational concept. The primary components include the accumulator, the puriﬁer
module, the mixing stand that holds both the mixing bag and transfer bag, and an avionics box. These
components will be discussed in greater detail in the sections that follow. The design utilized Video
cameras, pressure transducers, thermocouples, conductivity sensors, and a ﬂow meter to characterize on-
orbit system performance and provide forensic data, if needed. While these sensors characterized the
relative mixing uniformity, demonstrating the compliance of the solution produced with USP
requirements would have required such an extensive array of tests so two transfer bags of mixed saline
were returned to Earth for USP testing by a certiﬁed laboratory.

4.1 Accumulator

The accumulator was designed to receive potable water from either the shuttle fuel cells Via the
CWCs or the ISS WPA (F igure 10). Two hoses that met the requirements for connecting to each water
supply were fabricated with identical connections to the accumulator. The accumulator consisted of a
NASA/TM—ZOl 1-217033 15

"
"22","WW 3 @ ea
__/ / _________[_c>; W/‘ﬂﬂ
WEST T T Tl a [CD ’93“ ﬁ - I
@\ /®:: ::['f@/@/@/' [@f' /@ a O :4
I II | I ll Q .. >4 I
®—\E\ QM.“ .l- £11165“. >4 54 g IN - >4 % ""LN:_____ ____QJ
@qu L \@ L 4 @/®/ ®/ 2 3y a \@ 22$:th
4PLACES| |
@:\ N \ bOII2MFAIOb2
L_ _\/l\wmm§o IVGEN OPERATING SCHEMATIC
Figure 9.—IVGEN purification, mixing, and transfer flow schematic.
. ' rmﬁi; Z, ' F‘ ‘ ‘1
‘. ,7. M; f ‘ :7 . ""P . . ""
ﬁve??? -' 4.. _ ""'lu r /
‘_ 5.3.1-7 .j '. [,9
‘_\ ’ _..
Figure 10.—Accumu|ator.
polycarbonate housing and an internal bag, or bladder that was ﬁlled with the liquid and was sized to
accommodate 1.5 L of water. To pump the water from the bladder, the housing was pressurized using the
gaseous nitrogen source provided within the MicrograVity Science Glovebox (MSG). In the event that
pressurized sources are not available or operational in a space vehicle, other pressure sources, such as a
hand pump, may be used in an operational system.

To meet the concentration speciﬁcation for NS solution, the liquid ﬁll needed to be within 19 mL of
the speciﬁed amount of water provided that the amount of salt was accurately measured to within 0.67 g.
Estimates were made to account for the volume of the empty liquid transfer line between the WPA or
CWC and the bladder. However, in the very late stages of ﬂight hardware build and veriﬁcation activities,
ECLSS required that a ﬁlter be added to the IVGEN Accumulator Fill Hose for WPA (IVGEN Drawing
Number 60112MFAll9l) to prevent baok—oontamination into the WPA. The ﬁlter added signiﬁcant air
volume (55 mL) to the system. That air volume meant 55 mL less water in the saline solution resulting in
a 3.8 percent increase in salt concentration. While the addition of the ﬁlter did not guarantee an out-of—
speciﬁcation sample, it drastically reduced the allowable tolerance of other factors such as the amount of
dry salt in the bag, air bubbles introduced by the WPA, and completeness of accumulator ﬁlling. This
dramatically reduced the acceptable uncertainties required to meet the USP tolerance bound for salt
concentration in the ﬁnal product. Prior to the addition of the ﬁlter, the IVGEN system could tolerate a
reasonable amount of error while still producing saline within USP speciﬁcation. Consequently, the
amount of residual air in this transfer line was larger than expected and the ﬁrst ﬁlling of the accumulator
did not have sufﬁcient water.

The ﬁnal ﬂight conﬁguration was tested prior to launch. Schedule constraints only allowed for the
generation and analysis of two saline bags. One bag passed all USP tests while the other passed all but the
saline concentration. The test results indicated that while the ﬁnal ﬂight conﬁguration was capable of
NASA/TM—ZOl l—217033 l6

"
"23","producing USP NS, there was very little margin for error when it came to meeting the concentration
speciﬁcation. Due to the amount of time required to send the solution for test, testing time, and reporting
time, the IVGEN team was not aware of the failure until after the hardware had been launched. Section
6.3 provides a detailed summary of the post-ﬂight investigation to determine the cause of the anomalies.
4.2 Puriﬁer

The puriﬁer module was the core of the experiment. It included the DI resin cartridge, air removal
ﬁlters, and the instrumentation. An aluminum box with a transparent top housed the components in two
layers (Figure 11). A Coriolis ﬂow meter was used to provide the necessary accuracy to track the total
amount of water that had passed through the system and the liquid ﬂow rate for the hydraulic
measurements, and also measured the density of the ﬂuid ﬂowing through the meter. Using this density
measurement, it was possible to track whether gas or liquid was ﬂowing from the accumulator into the
puriﬁer. A dual-ring conductivity probe was used to measure the baseline conductivity of the source water
prior to puriﬁcation. Because of the lack of conductivity for air, the probe also was able to detect bubble
passage into the puriﬁer.

Two pairs of Supor ﬁlters (Pall Corporation) were used primarily to prevent air from entering the DI
cartridge. These ﬁlters had a polyethersulfone membrane with a pore diameter of 1.2 pm in a 0.7 mL
housing. As water began to ﬂow through the system, the membrane would wet, thus permitting water
passage while venting air bubbles through openings in the housing. In the event that the ﬁlters would plug
due to particulate accumulation, each pair of ﬁlters had an isolation valve that could be used to divert
ﬂow from one pair of ﬁlters to the other pair or to a bypass line.

The DI cartridge was machined from medical-grade polycarbonate into a hollow cylinder that had an
outer diameter of 21.3 mm and an inner diameter of 15.9 mm with a length of approximately 170 mm.
The outer diameter at each end was machined with threads to accept stainless steel end caps.

‘ ii: 0 1* .-
- --=' r
I :11? 5 . E:
1 ~11. 1..
. _ 1,— .
-.. «1-5 “ 1 :5
3;:- ' 7""“ i ‘1' ""lm ‘
. 1.5 5 95 ﬁ' 9“ W1 .
' """" f ' ‘ It
Cm. ,
.. . . ._ ., ""5;— ~
' © 1 i"" l ‘_._.:.-_ .
| J \-_ , ;
W’ "" ‘ .3
Figure 11.—Top level of purifier module.
NASA/TM—2011—217033 l7

"
"24","The cartridge was loaded with DI resin from ResinTech. The speciﬁc resin used was MBD—lO—
ULTRA and has the following characteristics:

. 60 percent anion

— Hydroxide form
— Type 1 strong-base gel
— R4N+OH (type 1 gel)
— 1.40 meq/mL min capacity (leorm)
. 40 percent cation
— Hydrogen form
— Strong acid
— Sulfonated gelular polystyrene
— RSO3-H+ (gel)
— 1.95 meq/mL min capacity (Na+ form) permit volume

This resin was certiﬁed by ResinTech to have a 5-year shelf life in a terrestrial environment. A space
environment could impact the shelf life because of radiation, but this assessment was beyond the scope of
this effort. The resin is retained in the cartridge by polyester felt ﬁlter discs that were positioned at each
end of the cartridge and extended across the cross-sectional area of the tube. The discs had an average
pore diameter of l um.

To minimize settling of the resin particles, a procedure was developed to ﬁll the cartridge with small
amounts of resin beads and periodically compress the interstitial volume by gently tapping on the beads
with a blunt rod. To prevent the formation of voids or empty spaces within the resin bed, a compressed
spring was positioned between the upstream cap and ﬁlter disc. If additional compaction occurred due to
Vibrations, such as those imposed by launch, the spring would maintain a constant level of pressure on the
bed to minimize the formation of voids. The spring was positioned between the end cap and the upstream
ﬁlter disc so that any decomposition of the spring could be absorbed by the DI resin.

A series of Posidyne ELD ﬁlters were used primarily to prevent air from entering the collection or
saline bags. These ﬁlters use a nylon membrane with a pore diameter of 0.2 um and also provide particle,
bacteria, and endotoxin retention. This ﬁlter, like the Supor ﬁlter, permits water passage while air bubbles
are vented through openings.

A ﬂat plate sensor measured the conductivity of the puriﬁed water and also could provide an
indication of the efﬁciency of the Pall ﬁlters in removing air bubbles. Using this and the inlet conductivity
sensor, it is possible to determine the puriﬁcation efﬁciency of D1 cartridge.

Three absolute pressure transducers were plumbed into the system to measure the pressure loss across
the two types of Pall ﬁlters and the DI cartridge and to provide a means of determining the density of any
gas that would be present within the system.

The water would ﬂow through the puriﬁer out to the mixing assembly. After the salt dissolution was
completed, the water would ﬂow back into the puriﬁer into a third conductivity sensor. This sensor was
used to measure the uniformity of the salt concentration within the mixture before the solution ﬂowed into
the sterilized collection bag.

4.3 Mixer Assembly

The mixer assembly, F igure 12, consisted of two ﬂat aluminum plates, a mixer motor and its
controller, and the saline and collection bags. The mixer used two samarium cobalt rare earth magnets on
a rotor driven by a direct current (DC) motor. The motor had a maximum speed of 900 rpm. The motor
could be activated and its speed controlled remotely by the Data Acquisition and Control Unit (DACU),
but there were provisions to locally control Via a dial and switch. The rotor was Visible through the bags
to verify its functionality.

NASA/TM—ZOl l-217033 l8

"
"25","7’3
.
. T l
I
Figure 12.—Mixer assembly
(without bags).

Both the collection and saline bags were multilayer bags manufactured from ethyl Vinyl acetate. To
prevent over-pressurization of the system, the accumulator was designed to supply only 1.5 L of water
and the collection, saline, and transfer bag volumes were 2.0 L. Each bag had three ports: liquid inlet and
outlet ports and a ﬁlling port. The ﬁlling port was used to place the salt and stir bar into collection bag
and the port was then sealed. A 13.5 i 0.67 g of USP-grade NaCl was speciﬁed to be introduced into each
saline bag.

The stir bar was Teﬂon (DuPont) resin coated and octagonal shaped. The bar measured 28.6 by
7.9 mm and featured a molded-on pivot ring. The mixing tests conducted by Barlow indicated that the
complete mixing could be achieved in shorter time periods using stir bars 30 mm or longer (see Figure 3).
However, during prototype testing, the longer stir bars would snag on the ethyl Vinyl acetate bag walls
and decouple from the rotation of the stirring motor. It was necessary to shut off the stirring motor to
reengage the stir bar. Additional prototype testing revealed that the 28.6-mm bar did not eXhibit similar
behaVior within the ethyl Vinyl acetate bag.

Isolation valves were installed on the inlet and outlet bag ports and were used to maintain the integrity
of the collection bag contents. The valves were opened and closed to accept or drain liquid into or from
the bags as needed.

The transfer bags were constructed in a similar fashion as the collection bags; however, the transfer
bags were gamma irradiated as part of the sterilization process and needed to be manufactured from
polyethylene (PE) to avoid degradation due to the irradiation process.

Isolation valves were also used on the inlet and outlet ports of the transfer bags; however, a Pall
Pediatric IV ﬁlter was spliced between the bag and the valves. This ﬁlter uses a Supor membrane with a
pore diameter of 0.2 pm which is retentive of B. diminuta and meets USP ZS/NF 2O requirements for a
sterilizing-grade ﬁlter per American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) F838—83 test methods.
Thus, as the salt solution ﬂowed through this ﬁlter into the transfer bag, it was sterilized. The ﬁlters also
vented any air that was entrained in the liquid from the collection bag to the transfer bag.

NASA/TM—ZOl l—217033 l9

"
"26","5.0 Procedure

The MSG is a single rack facility onboard the 188 that provides power, thermal control, command
and control, and imaging to scientiﬁc investigations (Ref. 30). The IVGEN hardware was designed to
operate autonomously after the system was conﬁgured. IVGEN was installed into the MSG on May 4,
2010. The installation included mounting the accumulator, the puriﬁer module, and the mixer assembly to
the MSG baseplate and the power converter and DACU to the MSG back wall. Cabling was connected for
power, command, and control functions, and data between the MSG facilities and IVGEN. A hose to the
MSG nitrogen port was installed to provide the pressurant to the accumulator housing to drive the ﬂow of
the water during the puriﬁcation process from the accumulator bladder, through the puriﬁer into the
collection bag mounted on the mixing assembly. In addition, liquid hoses were installed between the
accumulator and puriﬁer, the puriﬁer and the collections bag on the mixing stand and the puriﬁer and the
transfer bag on the mixing stand for each test.

Cameras were provided by MSG. One camera was focused on the parallel plate conductivity cell to
verify that the cell was properly primed as ﬂow through the puriﬁer was initiated and later repositioned to
View the Posidyne ﬁlters in the puriﬁer. Another camera was positioned to View the Pall 1.2-um Supor
ﬁlters in the puriﬁer module, and the last camera imaged the collection bag side of the mixer assembly.

Potable water was supplied from the WPA. IVGEN was required to install a sterilizing ﬁlter between
the receiving container and the potable water reservoir (PWR) to prevent back contamination of the WPA
Via the PWR. After ensuring that the nitrogen supply was closed, the nitrogen hose was disconnected
from the accumulator. The water hose between the accumulator and the puriﬁer was also disconnected.
The accumulator was removed from the MSG and transported to the WPA where the accumulator was
connected to the PWR. Potable water was transferred into the accumulator until it was ﬁlled. The
accumulator was disconnected from the PWR and carried back to the MSG where the nitrogen and water
hoses were reconnected to it.

Prior to the start of each test generating saline, the crewmember installed a new collection bag on the
mixing stand, along with a new transfer bag. For those tests that did not generate saline, but merely tested
ﬁlter capacity, the crewmember only installed a collection bag. The crewmember annotated unused
Videotapes with the recorder designation and date and loaded them into recorders in the MSG Video
drawer.

To ﬂow water from the accumulator through the puriﬁer to the collection bag, the accumulator was
pressurized with nitrogen from the MSG gas supply. At the initiation of a test, the shutoff valve for the
gaseous nitrogen supply in MSG was opened; however, the accumulator hand valve was left closed. Thus,
the accumulator was not yet pressurized. To avoid degradation of the DI resin, the DI cartridge was
isolated from the rest of the system by shutoff valves. The potable water shutoff valve on the puriﬁer was
also opened. After these steps had been completed, the hand valve on the accumulator was opened and
liquid began to ﬂow through the system.

During the puriﬁcation, the astronaut crewmember watched for leaks and tracked the progression of
liquid through the system. After about 1 min, the liquid had ﬂowed to the collection bag inlet valve. Gas
was vented through a Posidyne ﬁlter. The collection bag inlet valve was opened and liquid ﬁlled the bag.
The system was periodically surveyed for trapped bubbles and leaks.

The system was operated for siX puriﬁcation cycles. For the ﬁrst two cycles, the puriﬁed water
ﬂowed into one of the collection bags containing the premeasured salt to test the mixing capability and to
generate NS solution. For the remaining four cycles, the puriﬁed water ﬂowed into empty collection bags
to test the capacity of the DI resin cartridge. Two cycles were performed each day with no changeout of
the DI cartridge.

For the NS generation cycles, after approximately 500 mL of liquid had been puriﬁed (based on ﬂow
meter readings), the magnetic stirrer was remotely started Via the DACU. The operator would periodically
check that the stir bar was still centered adj acent to rotor.

NASA/TM—ZOI 1—217033 20

"
"27",". ‘4.“ 7:51 . y ""7"""" _. r27».
r 9: ‘ ‘.
3' .-. LC},
‘ d» —* Md
\K
Figure 13.—Collection bag inserted into blood pressure cuff.

For all cycles, after the water supply in the accumulator was exhausted, the operator veriﬁed that the
collection bag was full. The MSG gaseous nitrogen supply valve, collection bag inlet valve, the puriﬁer’s
potable water shutoff and DI cartridge isolation valves were closed.

Mixing continued for 20 min after the puriﬁcation was completed for the ﬁrst saline bag and only 5 min
for the second saline bag. The actual mixing began shortly after puriﬁed water began to ﬂow into the bag,
thus the total mixing time was at least 30 min.

After mixing was completed, the operator veriﬁed that the stir bar had ceased rotating. The collection
bag was removed from the mixer assembly and inserted into a blood pressure cuff (Figure 13). The outlet
line was connected to the saline port on the puriﬁer. The valves on the outlet port of the collection bag
and the inlet port of the transfer bag were opened. The blood pressure cuff was inﬂated to pump water
from the collection bag, through the conductivity sensor in the puriﬁer and the 02-le Supor sterilizing
ﬁlter into the transfer bag. Periodically, the operator would check the ﬂow and reinﬂate the blood
pressure cuff if necessary to ensure that the liquid would continue to ﬂow. After the liquid transfer had
been completed, the valves on both bags were closed and the tubing ends were capped. The bags were
stowed and returned to Earth for analysis on STS—l32 in May 2010.

For the remaining four collection bags of puriﬁed water that were produced, there was no liquid
transfer to other bags. The crew emptied these collection bags by transferring the water back into the 188
water reservoir. These bags and the saline bags were returned to Earth.

Upon return to Earth, the transfer bags containing NS were inspected, weighed, and photographed.
They were shipped to Pace Analytical Services, Inc., Life Sciences for compliance with USP testing
requirements. The collection bags were also inspected and were placed into bonded storage.

6.0 Results

During operation of the IVGEN experiment, conductivity, temperature, ﬂow rate, and pressure data
were measured and recorded by the DACU Via the appropriate sensors. These data were analyzed to
assess the puriﬁcation effectiveness, hydrodynamic performance, and the gas bubble removal
effectiveness. For the sake of brevity, some representative plots will be shown here, with a tabulation of
results from all the samples generated on the 188 within the body of this text. Plots of the remaining data
are shown in Appendix B.

Video imaging provided evidence of the proper priming of the ﬂat plate conductivity sensor and the
type of ﬂow into the collection bag. The Video imaging also provided a qualitative assessment of the gas
bubble removal in the Pall ﬁlters and the mixing process in the collection bag.

NASA/TM—ZOl 1—217033 21

"
"28","6.1 Hydrodynamic Characterization
The characterization of the ﬂow loop is quantiﬁed Via the ﬂow meter and the pressure losses across
the Pall ﬁlters and the DI resin cartridge. A time trace of the ﬂow rate through the system and
corresponding pressure drops are shown in Figure 14 and Figure 15. The ﬂow and pressure spike at the
start of this puriﬁcation cycle was due to the initial opening of valves that resulted in an inrush of ﬂuid.
Flow and pressure oscillations at the end of this cycle were due to air bubbles that entered the system
from the accumulator. The Coriolis ﬂow meter has the capability to measure the density of the ﬂuid
passing through it and registered signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations. These ﬂuctuations were also recorded in the
inlet conductivity sensor and conﬁrm the presence of air bubbles prior to the Pall 12-le Supor ﬁlters.
4 May Zﬂlﬂ, Bag #1, Saline.-
515
E
E. :5 '
E. + ' i
111
E 55
I ill 1' I-
E 35
LI.
2 ﬁt.“ .5 '
i: *+ u
:1:- ' ""'
E 15 1.;
E
s n
-5 ‘
[1:[1[1 [1:[11' [1:14 [1:11 [1:23 [1:35 [1:43 [1:511 [1:51
Elapsed Time {hh:mm}
Figure 14.—Time trace of flow rate through IVGEN system.
4 May Zﬂlﬂ, Bag #1, Saline
2.5
'___ 4- Inlet Falls
E - DI Cartridge _
3 1'3 + Exit Falls ' ""
E +- Tntal ; I 1' L;
i 1.5 . +3.1.
l:- I . I.
a 1:} . ...._.._-.--..---_..._.._... _._._.___......____--..-.... .__+.._._____1_-.u‘3.[m.
a ' - ‘1!
E
~I—I ', i
E ”'5 WK Jr
“Ill! - . h"" i
E cm - w |' “15d
—[1.5
[1:[111 [1:[11' [1:14 [1:21 [1:23 [1:35 [1:43 [1:5[1 [1:51
Elapsed Time [hhcmm]
Figure 15.—Time traces of pressure losses through IVGEN system.
NASA/TM—ZOl l-217033 22

"
"29","The method of characterizing ﬂow through a packed bed is the Darcy equation:
kA AP
Q H L (1)
where

Q volumetric ﬂow rate

k Darcy constant

A cross-sectional area

AP pressure difference

L length of the packed bed

This equation may be applied to ﬂow through the Pall ﬁlters; however, given that the parameters of
the cross-sectional area and the length, or thickness, of the hydrophilic membrane are ﬁxed quantities, this
is combined with the Darcy constant to yield the following:

Q=-C£ (2)
a
with C being deﬁned as
kA
6— L (3)

Due to the costs and constraints of the spaceﬂight experiment, the IVGEN system was tested for only
one set of Pall ﬁlters and DI resin cartridge at nominally the same ﬂow rate. This set of data can be
compared to normal gravity data obtained over a wider range of ﬂow rates and system temperatures and
tabulated.

The results of the spaceﬂight tests are shown in Table 3. The NS—l and NS—2 collection samples
were generated on the ﬁrst day of test operations. WF 1—3 and WP 1—4 collection samples were generated
on the second day of operations and WP 1—5 and WP 1—6 were generated on the third and ﬁnal day of
operations. Overall, while the liquid ﬂow rate was slightly faster than desired, it was acceptable, because
the conductivity data suggested that the DI cartridge was providing acceptable puriﬁcation. The total
pressure loss through the system showed a 7 percent increase from the ﬁrst sample to the last samples
produced. The pressure loss within the DI cartridge increased by 30 percent through the course of the
experiment. While it is plausible that the DI cartridge may have captured additional particulate matter that
contributed to the gradual increase, the Inlet Pall ﬁlters should have captured this matter. Other
possibilities remain: Swelling of the resin beads due to continued exposure to the water or a shifting,
settling of the resin beads over time due to Vibrations encountered either during ﬂow or exposure to low
gravity, or crushing and crumbling of the particles and subsequent plugging of interstitial ﬂow paths
within the cartridge.

The maximum pressure drop is encountered when the ﬂow valve between the accumulator and the
puriﬁer is opened. The ﬁrst sample had the lowest maximum pressure drop among all of the samples
generated. This may be because the system was relatively dry at this point and the pressure required to
pass single-phase air through the system is much lower than single-phase liquid or a two-phase gas and
liquid mixture. Minor differences in the timing of opening the valves on the puriﬁer unit may also
contribute to the differences in the maximum pressure loss encountered.

After the ﬁrst day of operations, the components with the most signiﬁcant contribution to the
maximum pressure drop were the eXit Pall ﬁlters. While there may be slight differences in the purity of
the potable water supply, it is more likely that the eXit Palls were becoming plugged with particulate
matter. These ﬁlters have a life of 96 hr which fell within the operational parameters of the experiment.
NASA/TM—ZOl 1-217033 23

"
"30","TABLE 3.—HYDRODYNAMIC TEST RESULTS FROM SPACEFLIGHT EXPERIMENT
o D Inlet Palls, psi 0.25 0.27 0.28 0.27 0.26 0.26
g) g % DI cartridge,psi 0.14 0.15 0.14 0.14 0.19 0.18
3 gm? ExitPalls,psi 1.08 1.09 1.10 1.09 1.11 1.10
Total, psi 1.47 1.50 1.51 1.50 1.55 1.55

g .
2 E Palls Pa11s Palls Palls Palls Palls

TABLE 4.—FLOW CONSTANTS FOR

CRITICAL COMPONENTS OF IVGEN

011113/s2

Inlet Pa11s 0.00256

DI cartridge 0.00433

Referring back to Equations (2) and (3), the values of the constant —C are shown in Table 4. It should
be noted that these values can easily be adjusted for a number of reasons. F irst, there are additional ﬂow
system components, namely the isolation valves and the conductivity sensors, which were lumped into
these calculations and add ﬂow resistance or pressure loss. In addition, both sets of Pall ﬁlters were
plumbed into the system in parallel, the net effect being to reduce the pressure loss. Nevertheless, these
values may be used as an approximation for an operational system.

F rom a hydrodynamic standpoint, the IVGEN system did not exceed the maximum pressure drop
within the system, which was 10 psi. The average pressure drop was 1.5 psi and the peak value
encountered was less than 5 psia. The average ﬂow rate for the IVGEN system was 28 mL/min which
was very close to meeting the target ﬂow rate range of 17 to 25 mL/min. This range was selected to meet
the minimum production rate required for the system (approximately 1 1/hr) and to provide sufﬁcient
residence time, or exposure, for the liquid within the DI cartridge. Even with the slightly faster ﬂow rate,
the IVGEN system was able to meet the puriﬁcation requirements.

6.2 Conductivity

As was noted earlier, conductivity sensors were positioned within the puriﬁer to measure the
effectiveness of the DI cartridge in purifying the water and to determine the mixing effectiveness. All six
samples were evaluated for the puriﬁcation effectiveness, but only two samples, NS—1 and NS—2, were
evaluated for the uniformity of solution concentration after the mixing was completed.

6.2.1 Puriﬁcation

The time trace for NS—1 sample is shown in F igure 16. Both the potable water input and the puriﬁed
water output are shown. It should be noted that there is an initial spike in both the input and output
streams that is partially attributable to a temperature effect on conductivity (F igure 17) and to bed
“rinsing.” As liquid stagnates within the bed, the DI resin leaches some of its contents into the water. Bed
rinsing ﬂushes this solution from the bed. Towards the end of the time trace, there are several points
where the conductivity for the potable water drops below the average value. These values are most likely
NASA/TM—201 1-217033 24

"
"31","attributable to bubble passage through the conductivity sensor. Similar drops in the density measurement
and Widely ﬂuctuating ﬂow rate measurements from the Coriolis ﬂow meter were recorded during this
time period. Further analysis included calculating the mass ﬂow rate based on the volumetric ﬂow rate
and density and integrating the mass ﬂow rate over the experiment duration to obtain a total mass
collected. The total mass was in agreement With the post-ﬂight weight of the NS—l collection bag. These
results revealed that the IVGEN system processed an insufﬁcient amount of liquid.
4 Mil!”' 2010, Bag #1, Saline
3
T r Putable Water
g E _ - Purified Water
a n
‘-' 5
I
E 4 _
U
2‘
E 3
D i. «r
u g m
2 r—
l +
1 l
D . .41. . I
[1:00 (1:0? {1:14 {1:21 [1:23 {1:35 {1:43 [1:50 0:5?
Elapsed Time [hh:mm}
Figure 16.—Time history trace for DI cartridge purification capability.
4 May 2010, Bag #1Jr Saline
3D
. Putable Water
1:? 19 l- ! . . = '. _ -
Ill
:3; 13 IL _
I‘ll
D. -. . ._. ___._
E 1? ._J _
|—
25
25
mm {11}? {1:14 (1:21 0:23 [1:35 {1:43 [1:50 {1:51'
Elapsed Time [hh:mm}
Figure 17.—Time history trace for water temperature in conductivity sensors.
NASA/TM—2011-217033 25

"
"32","As was stated earlier, the conductivity sensors provided a limited veriﬁcation that the puriﬁed water
produced would meet USP standards for WFI. Solution sterility and other contaminants, such as
endotoxins, oxidizable substances, and particulate matter, could not be measured in a timely and cost-
effective manner on orbit, but the contents of NS bags were tested by a F ood and Drug Administration
(F DA)-certiﬁed 1ab after these bags were returned from the 188 on STS—132. It should be noted that the
USP does adjust the maximum acceptable conductivity levels for temperature as shown in Table 5
(Ref. 20). As can be seen from the table, the maximum acceptable conductivity for WFI is between 1.3
and 1.4 uS/cm for the test conditions.

TABLE 5.—TEMPERATURE CORRECTED
ACCEPTABLE CONDUCTIVITY
VALUES FOR WFI

OC uS/cm
15 1.0
20 1.1
25 1.3
30 1.4

To provide additional margin, for this data analysis the maximum acceptable concentration was taken to
be 1.0 uS/cm. While the initial spike in the potable water supplied to the IVGEN may be due to warming of
the liquid within the MSG, ionic impurities leaching from the DI resin beads into the stagnant water are the
probable culprit. This conductivity spike was noted each time ﬂow through the DI cartridge was initiated.
The DI resin manufacturer speciﬁes that within seven “bed volumes,” the output water will have ﬂushed
these impurities away (Ref. 31). For the IVGEN experiment, a bed volume was approximately 30.1 mL.

Average puriﬁcation was deﬁned as the percentage change in the instantaneous conductivity between
the input (potable water) and output (puriﬁed water) from the DI cartridge:

F : 100% CPotable — CPuriﬁed (4)
CPotable

Table 6 presents a synopsis of the puriﬁcation capability of the DI cartridge from the two
conductivity probes in the puriﬁer assembly. Overall, average puriﬁcations of about 98 percent were
achieved for each bag of potable water that was processed. It should be noted that the WPA supplied a
very clean water supply that had an average conductivity of about 4 uS/cm with no maximum value
greater than 7 uS/cm. The minimum values for the instantaneous conductivity data for the potable water
were most likely due to the passage of air bubbles from the accumulator into the puriﬁer. The ﬁrst set of
Fall ﬁlters, which removed large particulate matter and air bubbles, were located downstream of both the
ﬂow meter and the inlet conductivity sensor. As was discussed earlier, the Coriolis ﬂow meter is capable
of measuring the ﬂuid ﬂow rate and the ﬂuid density. Comparison of the sample volume and the sample
mass appears consistent with the exception of NS—1. For this sample, there is approximately a 2:1
discrepancy between the volume and mass measured. A closer examination of F igure 16 reveals at the
end of the time trace, signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations in the conductivity for the potable water input. Again, this
was most likely due to the presence of air within the source water. This discrepancy has repercussions
later in the experiment, during the generation of the NS solution.

With regards to the puriﬁed water produced, with the exception of the startup spike for NS—1 and
WP 1—3, all samples fa11we11 within the criteria for the maximum acceptable conductivity. For these two
samples, the ﬂushing of a single bed volume of liquid (30 mL) through the DI cartridge brings the volume
averaged conductivity measurement to within speciﬁcations. The remaining samples also had startup
spikes; however, the spikes did not exceed the USP threshold of 1.3 uS/cm, but as an academic exercise, a
much lower threshold was chosen (0.2 uS/cm), and the rinse volumes for these samples were calculated.
NASA/TM—2011-217033 26

"
"33","TABLE 6.—SYNOPSIS OF PURIFICATION CONDUCTIVITY DATA
Volume, mL 2621 1516 1520 1521 1501 1488
I *5 Average, uS/cm 4.02 3.87 3.57 3.57 3.32 3.36
g g Maximum, uS/cm 6.99 6.49 4.96 4.24 4.09 3.78
E a H Minimum, uS/cm 3.80 0.48 2.06 2.20 2.72 2.94
02 g g Maximum, uS/cm 6.08 5.32 5.89 4.92 3.55 3.74
> ?:s Minimum, uS/cm 4.03 3.02 3.59 3.59 2.77 3.35

3 E Average, uS/cm 0.068 0.058 0.065 0.050 0.067 0.050

g 4% Maximum, uS/cm 1.636 1.013 1.107 0.436 0.967 0.040

g E Minimum, uS/cm 0.034 0.040 0.046 0.041 0.048 0.232

5

gag) % g Maximum, uS/cm 1.440 0.769 0.084 0.390 0.660 0.052

E > ?:s Minimum, uS/cm 0.074 0.072 1.105 0.057 0.079 0.190
——————m_

Rmse Instant, mL 10.4 42.5 9.8 22.2 32.8 13.3
volumes
Average, mL 21.7 181.1 16.7 58.0 171.6 0.0

It should be noted that a single DI cartridge easily produced about 9 L of puriﬁed water and showed
no signs of exhausting the puriﬁcation capability. However, ground-based testing using tap water that had
an average conductivity ranging from 250 to 300 uS/cm would show cartridge exhaustion within 6 L of
processed water. Again, this is due to the high purity of the WPA water used as a source for IVGEN.
6.2.2 Mixing Uniformity

For samples NS—l and NS—2, software activated the magnetic stirrer after the collection bag had
received one-half of the total ﬁltered liquid volume. After puriﬁcation ceased and ﬂow into the collection
bag had stopped, a crewmember closed the valve between the collection bag and the puriﬁcation
assembly. Stirring continued for 20 min for sample NS—l and only 5 min for NS—2.

Prior to the ﬁll, all sample/collection bags had some residual air content. This was particularly true for
the two bags containing the premeasured quantity of salt and stir bar. Consequently, as puriﬁed water
entered the bag, a large air bubble was trapped inside the bag. When mixing was initiated, the large air
bubble would periodically encounter the rotating stir bar and have a portion shear off into smaller bubbles
(F igure 18).

Per the procedure, the collection bag was removed from the mixing assembly and placed in a blood
pressure cuff that was inﬂated to pressurize the collection bag. The collection bag was connected to the
puriﬁer assembly that was connected to the sterile transfer bag assembly. This arrangement permitted the
measurement of the solution conductivity as it ﬂowed from the collection bag to the transfer bag.

As can be seen from F igure l9 and F igure 20, with the exception of the conductivity dropouts, due to
the passage of air bubbles through the conductivity sensor, the upper bound of the conductivity is fairly
ﬂat with some minor variations that coincide with temperature ﬂuctuations within the solution.

Referring to F igure 19, the time-averaged conductivity measurement is 18.5 i 0.4 mS/cm from the
time ﬂow is initiated until after 43 min have elapsed. However, if conductivity readings associated with
the passage of bubbles through the conductivity cell are discounted from the averaging routine, the
average is 20.2 i 0.4 mS/cm, which corresponds nicely with F igure 20.

Similarly, the same averaging methodology is applied to sample NS—2 in F igure 20. This time,
however, the time average for the ﬁrst 25 min of the ﬂuid transfer is 16.3 i 0.4 mS/cm while an average
NASA/TM—2011-2l7033 27

"
"34","over the entire transfer period that discounts the readings associated With bubble passage yielded a value
of 16.5 i 0.4 mS/cm. For this case, good agreement is obtained between both values.

It should be noted; however, that While both mixtures appear to be uniform, there is considerable
difference in these baseline conductivity measurements even though the target salt concentration was
0.9 g/L of water. This discrepancy Will be discussed in more detail in the next section.

<7) “ .“ \ xii t . c7: ‘ .- - a ’ ’1
E ' \\ 9 ' E . i ' W-
2 ;., 4 i i 8 / i. ‘ ‘3
f. l _ __ ' ’71,; ‘.: .
[I e 1341px. ' “W i] P ’f‘. "" -. ‘ ‘
i r] ‘ “ , . :.~_ 5/
:9: D ‘ "" ' I
. v Z"" - ' ‘
./ . i I r; I -
‘l T a
_ .Jr ' '
, . t; /
: x . \ 4 .
i‘? :w 2',,/ ""7;! ,.
. W '3 ‘ /
i 1 ﬂ * A i""
Figure 18.—Collection bag for NS—1 prior to (left) and during mixing (right).
4 May“ 2011], Bag #1, Saline
3D 32
E AI _ H
:21 3” 1- .. *ﬁ-fﬂfr-m‘ * ' 23 E
E hi"" u: 1* ‘ ' . w
E 15- '- l- -I- i' ' l. 1- i E
E . 26 E
+- - .. cu
£2.51 lﬂ 1* l I r I i- 1:.
ﬂ l + Ii ‘ E
E I 1‘ "" 24'! E
U 5- * I i' 'q ,- ‘ I-
ll *' l 'I I l-
D ""' Jilin . “1* i .. 2.1
0:01: 0:0? [1:14 £121 [1:23 ﬂﬂE [1:43 ﬂ:5ﬂ| {1:5?
Elapsed Time {hh:mm}
Figure 19.—Mixing uniformity results for NS—1.
NASA/TM—2011-217033 28

"
"35","May 4th, Bag #2, Saline
E —n_ 15 n
U I I I _ I U
E 25 - - - 24 2..
w: Ill
:- gﬂ - Temperature ._ .9 H I:-
.4: . n.- 1.. i.- Zﬂ E
2 ""' i I i I' ll 1. '- E
'D l- "" I 1- _ 15
E m — E
u 5 14
__ 11
ﬂ '- 1:11
[1:111] [H]? {1:14 {1:21 (1:23 0:35 {1:43
Elapsed Time [hh:mm}
Figure 20.—Mixing uniformity results for NS—2.
6.3 Post-Flight Analysis

Upon sample return, the NS—1 and NS—-2 sample bags were inspected, photographed, and weighed.
These bags were then shipped to Pace Analytical Services, Inc., an FDA-certiﬁed laboratory, to evaluate
the contents for compliance with USP standards for sterile sodium chloride solution for injection. The
types of tests and results are shown in Table 7.

As was stated earlier, the experiment requirements called for 13.5 i 0.67 g of sodium chloride to be
measured and preloaded into each of the two collection bags. The requirements also called for ﬂow rate
measurements that were within i1 percent of the full-scale measurement range to ensure that a tolerance
of 25 ml in the total volume was collected.

Several potential causes for the failure were identiﬁed and evaluated. Among these causes are the
following:

. Incorrect amount of water introduced into the collection bag

. Incorrect amount of salt introduced into the mixing bag

. Insufﬁcient mixing that did not sufﬁciently dissolve salt crystals or homogenize solution

. Evaporation from the bag

TABLE 7,—USP TESTING RESULTS
Test Speciﬁcation NS—1 NS—2
result result
Sterile sodium chloride for injection 95.0 to 105.0% of target 117.0% Fail 93.8% Fail
<o.oosOEU/mL
Heavy metals by USP <231> Not more than (NMT) 0.001%
Identiﬁcation sodium by USP <191> Sample responds to tests for sodium
Identiﬁcation chloride by USP <191> Sample responds to tests for chloride
Myusp NMszpm
Particulate analysis by USP <788> :25 particles per rnL larger than 10 am 3.40 Pass 1.20 Pass
S3 particles per rnL larger than 25 am 0.00 Pass 0.00 Pass
sterilitybyust
thestingbyusp<791> 4.5mm
NASA/TM—2011—217033 29

"
"36","Reviewing the sensor data from the orbital operations, it was highly likely that an insufﬁcient amount
of water was puriﬁed and charged into collection bag NS—l. This was conﬁrmed by post-ﬁight weight
NS—l bag assembly of 1371 g, which is signiﬁcantly less than the speciﬁed mass of water of 1500 g.
Nevertheless, additional analyses were conducted to decisively eliminate other potential causes. The
water volume in the NS—2 bag was within acceptable margins, based on both sensor data and the post
ﬂight weight.

With regards to insufﬁcient mixing time, per Barlow (Ref. 19), a time of 4 min for a smaller stir bar at
900 rpm should have been sufﬁcient to achieve the necessary homogeneity within the solution. Even at a
revolution rate of 50 percent of the target value, 10 min should have been sufﬁcient. Actual mixing times
ranged from 5 to 20 min after the collection bag had been ﬁlled and did not account for the 34 min of
mixing time while NS—l was ﬁlling. F urthermore, the conductivity sensor during the ﬁll of the transfer
bag indicated a relatively consistent level. There was still concern that residual salt crystals may have
been trapped inside the ﬁll port of collection bag and did not get immersed by the water and thus
dissolved during the mixing process.

While it was not the original plan, the collection bags for NS—l and NS—2 were returned from the
188. A procedure was developed to take advantage of this opportunity by analyzing the residual contents
of the bags to better determine the cause of the saline discrepancy. It was decided to use a technique
called inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (lCP/OES). Sodium was chosen since
lCP/OES has a sensitiVity of 50 ng/L while ion chromatography is used for chloride content but has a
detection limit of 50 mg/L. However, the sample needed to be diluted since the technique required at least
100 mL of sample, and there was only an estimated 10 to 20 mL of residual solution within each bag.
Details of this procedure and test results can be found in Appendix C, Investigation Results for Out-of—
Speciﬁcation Saline Concentration.

Each bag was weighed and approximately 100 mL of ASTM Type I water (highly puriﬁed) was
added to the bag and the bag was reweighed. The water was sloshed around the bag in various
orientations to ensure that any undissolved salt crystals would contact the water. The contents were
drained into clean sample containers and sent to Precision Analytical, Inc., for the lCP/OES analysis. The
“empty” bag was weighed, dried with gaseous nitrogen, and reweighed.

The samples were analyzed and the results were 1.36 g/L of sodium for NS—l and 0.568 g/L for
NS—2. This concentration equates to 13.78 g for NS—l and 12.59 g for NS—2. As stated earlier, each
collection bag should have been ﬁlled with 13.5 i 0.67 g of sodium chloride, thus NS—l was ﬁlled with
an acceptable amount of salt while NS—2 had an insufﬁcient amount of salt. The completed test plan, the
results from the chemical analysis performed by Precision Analytical, and an analysis that converts these
ﬁndings into the salt mass loaded into each bag is in Appendix C.

Additional collection bags were prepared with stir bars and salt, but were placed in bonded storage
and not used. During this anomaly investigation, the contents of three of these bags were evaluated. The
bags had an “extracted” salt mass of 13.34, 13.23, and 12.76 g. This measurement was simply based on
the salt that was removed from the bag. To negate the possibility of sample loss during this process, a
second set of measurements were also made. The bags were weighed initially before the salt extraction.
After the salt was extracted, the bags were rinsed to remove any residual salt and then reweighed. The
difference between these weights yielded a calculated salt mass of 13.595, 13.449, and 12.773 g,
respectively. Thus, while two of the bags were within the speciﬁcation, at least one additional bag did not
meet the requirement. To summarize the ﬁndings:

. NS—l ’s salt concentration was too high. The cause was that an insufﬁcient amount of puriﬁed
water was supplied to the collection bag because a signiﬁcant amount of air had entered the
accumulator during the ﬁlling process. Consequently, the estimate for the amount of residual air
in this transfer line was larger than expected and the ﬁrst ﬁlling of the accumulator did not have
sufﬁcient water. One potential resolution is to place a bubble separator at the accumulator inlet.

. NS—2’s salt concentration was too low. The cause was that an insufﬁcient amount of salt was
placed into the collection bag during the bag assembly process. While certiﬁcates of conformance

NASA/TM—2011-217033 30

"
"37","received with the salt-ﬁlled bags indicated that the salt quantity met the tighter manufacturing
speciﬁcation of 13.5 i 0.5 g. Each individual bag was not tested directly for salt quantity.
However, initial lot testing—conducted prior to the full-up ﬂight system conﬁguration tests—was
performed in which several bags were ﬁlled with a known quantity of water (1500 mL) and
analyzed for salt concentration. The salt concentration was found to be within an acceptable range
for all tested bags. Performing a pre-salt and post-salt mass analysis on all bag assemblies should
be done rather than lot testing, but this would have signiﬁcantly affected the ﬂight hardware
delivery schedule for IVGEN.

7.0 Plans

Although the spaceﬂight experiment was conducted and test results evaluated, there is still a
signiﬁcant amount of work that should be completed, both with regards to testing and the design of an
operational system.

7.1 Testing

Two types of testing and the subsequent data analysis are in the process of being performed. Data
have been obtained but need additional analysis to assess the effect of temperature on the system. In the
event that an IVGEN operational system is needed to address a spaceﬂight medical emergency, the
chances are that the environmental control and life support system may not be functioning optimally. One
result of this may be that the cabin and or potable water supply temperature may be either very warm or
very cold. A series of tests were performed to assess the DI cartridge’s performance with input water at
temperatures of 4, 15, 25, and 35 °C. The performance with regards to the cartridge puriﬁcation ability
and the pressure loss as a function of the ﬂow rate through the cartridge is being evaluated. In addition,
given that some DRMs have durations of at least 2 or 3 years, the packaging technique and the effect of
shelf life on the DI resin are also being evaluated. As received from the manufacturer, the resin has a
moisture content of about 60 percent and the storage container prevents direct contact with the
atmosphere. The storage technique is important because the resin is degraded by both desiccation and
exposure to carbon dioxide, which it absorbs. Exposure to the atmosphere produces both of these negative
outcomes and, therefore, must be avoided by proper packaging.

To validate the IVGEN storage technique, two sets of cartridges have been prepared and are
undergoing shelf life testing. The ﬁrst set of cartridges contains ResinTech’s MBD—lO—NG resin within a
polycarbonate tube that is capped with stainless steel ﬁttings at each end. The second set of cartridges
contains ResinTech’s MBD—lO—ULTRA resin also within a polycarbonate tube that is capped with
stainless steel ﬁttings at each end, but in a hermetically sealed bag. It was learned early in the program
that vacuum sealing these bags was detrimental to the DI resin puriﬁcation performance as it dried the
resin. Once every 6 months, one cartridge from each set will be removed from storage and tested. Pending
the results of these tests, it may be necessary to reevaluate the storage technique and restart testing.

7.2 Operational System Design

The operational IVGEN system will not be identical to the experimental system. The experiment
included conductivity sensors and temperature sensors to verify purity of water. However, with the use of
either a color-indicating DI resin to indicate capacity or by certifying that a D1 cartridge cannot produce
more than a given quantity of puriﬁed water, it is not necessary to use these sensors. A ﬂow meter was
used to identify ﬂow-induced causes for anomalies, such as the air bubble. The Pall ﬁlters performed as
advertised; however, an additional set of ﬁlters should be placed on the inlet of the accumulator. If that
step were to be taken, the user could be conﬁdent of an appropriate saline concentration. Pressure
transducers were used to determine the scalability of the system in terms of cartridge length versus
quantity of puriﬁed water produced.

NASA/TM—ZOI 1—217033 31

"
"38","Based on the experiment results, though, the following should be addressed:

. Shelf life and storage techniques: Testing is ongoing and needs to be continued to verify that the
components of the system can be stored for up to 5 years and maintain desired capability.

. Accurate metering of water volume: Based on the results from NS—l testing, the amount of water
that is introduced into the salt bag is critical to producing an NS solution of acceptable
concentration. There are several technologies that may be used to address this concern including
the use of more bubble separators 0r traps in strategic locations within an operational system or
the use of a microgravity-rated, liquid-only, volumetric ﬂask.

. Testing of puriﬁcation “challenges”: In determining the ﬁnal spaceﬂight experiment hardware,
the IVGEN team worked closely with a pharmaceutical consultant to develop a pharmaceutical
process validation plan. Execution of this test plan with the ﬁnal system should be performed to
document the maximum capacity of the system for each known contaminant. These challenges
should include preparing and testing samples of puriﬁed water with known concentrations of
particulate matter, endotoxins, sucrose, ammonia, and representative water meeting the NASA’s
SWEG, 41000 and CXP 20024 guidelines by ﬂowing it through the system.

. Depletion of puriﬁcation capability: The 188 already provides highly puriﬁed water courtesy of
the WPA. Future exploration systems may not provide potable water of such quality.
Consequently, either the cartridges will have to be rated for the potable water supply of each
spacecraft system or some method, such as either conductivity probes 0r color-indicating, purity-
sensitive DI resin will need to be used to ensure a quality product.

8.0 Conclusion

Intravenous F luid Generation (IVGEN) experiment was operated onboard the International Space
Station (188) during May 2010. This hardware demonstrated the capability to generate intravenous (IV)
ﬂuid from 188 Water Processing Assembly (WPA) potable water using a water puriﬁcation technique and
pharmaceutical mixing system. SiX 1.5 -L bags of puriﬁed water were produced. Two of these bags were
mixed with sodium chloride to make 0.9 percent normal saline (NS) solution. These two bags were
returned to Earth to test for compliance with USP requirements.

On-orbit results indicated that all of the experimental success criteria were met with the exception of
the salt concentration. Problems with a large air bubble in the ﬁrst bag of puriﬁed water resulted in a
slightly concentrated saline solution of 117 percent of the target value of 0.9 g/L. This problem can be
resolved by placement of a gas-liquid separator ﬂlter immediately upstream of the liquid inlet to the
accumulator. The second bag had an inadequate amount of salt premeasured into the mixing bag resulting
in a slightly deﬁcient salt concentration of 93.8 percent of the target value. The United States
Pharmacopeia (USP) permits a range from 95 to 105 percent of the target value.

The testing plans for improvements for an operational system were also presented and included shelf
life testing of the storage technique for the DI resin cartridge and challenging the puriﬁcation ability of
the DI resin cartridges.

References
1. “The Vision for Space Exploration,” NASA,

http://www.nasa. gOV/pdf/SSS 83main_Visi0n_space_eXplorati0n2.pdf, F ebruary 2004.

2. “Exploration Systems Architecture Study F inal Report,” NASA/TM—2005-214062,
http://www.nasa. gOV/pdf/ 140649main_ESAS_full.pdf
3. Miller, F .J ., Niederhaus, C., Barlow, K., Grifﬁn, D., “Intravenous Solutions for Exploration Missions,

“45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, AlAA—2007—544, 2007.

4. Watkins, S.D. “Space Medicine Exploration: Full Medical Condition List,” NASA/TP—2010-

216118, 2010.

NASA/TM—2011-217033 32

"
"39","5. Crew Health Care System (CHeCS) — International Medical Hardware Catalog, Ver 5.1, April 2005.

6. Bagdigian, R., Cloud, Dale, and Bedard, J ., “Oxygen Generation Systems Status of the Regenerative
ECLSS Water Recovery,” SAE 2006—01—2057, 2006

7. United States Pharmacopeia National F ormulary (2007).

8. James, J .T., and Torin McCoy, J ., “Spacecraft Water Exposure Guidelines (SWEGS),” J SC—63414,
November 2008.

9. “System Speciﬁcation for the International Space Station,” NASA SSP 41000 ReV B, May 1997.

10. “Constellation Program Human-Systems Integration Requirements,” CXP70024, December 2006.

11. “Pressurized Payload Accommodation Handbook: International Space Station Program,” SSP 57020,
2004.

12. Carter, D.L., “Status of the Regenerative ECLSS Water Recovery System,” SAE 2009—01—2352,
International Conference on Environmental Systems, Savannah, GA, 2009.

13. Creager, G., “An Evaluation of IV F luids Requirements for the Space Station F reedom Health
Maintenance F acility Assuming a 10-Day Therapeutic Stay,” Krug Life Sciences, 1991.

14. “Space Station LVP Mixing System: Interim Report #2,” J . Ogle, M. F inley, and J . Kipp, Baxter
Healthcare, June 1989.

15. Niederhaus, C.E, and Miller, F .J ., “Intravenous F luid Mixing in Normal, Partial, and MicroGraVity:
Down-selection of Mixing Methods,” NASA/TM—2008-21500, 2006.

16. Lloyd, C., Creager, G., Guess, T., Giglio, D., “Post Mission Summary—Two Week Report, Spacelab
J (STS 47): Inﬂight Demonstration of the Space Station F reedom Health Maintenance F acility F luid
Therapy System,” October 1992.

17. Koenig, D.W., Bruce, R.J., and Stowe, R P., “Analyses of Spacelab-J F luid Therapy System
Samples,” Test Report #M078/92, October 1992.

18. Schultz, J .R., Memo on “Chemical Analysis Results from the F luid Therapy System F light Test on
STS-47,” to Richard L. Sauer, November 12, 1992.

19. Barlow, K.L., “Intravenous ﬂuid mixing times quantiﬁed using planar laser-induced ﬂuorescence,”
Master’s Thesis, Case Western Reserve University, 2007.

20. United States Pharmacopeia — National F ormulary F ifth Supplement, Physical Tests/Water
Conductivity (645) 3465—3467.

21. Niederhaus, C.E., Barlow, K.L., Grifﬁn, D.W., Miller, F .J., “Medical Grade Water Generation for
Intravenous F luid Production on Exploration Missions,” NASA/TM—2008-214999, 2008.

22. King, C.J., Separation Processes, Second Edition, McGraW-Hill Book Company, pg 45—48, 1980.

23. Wykes, V., F ong, K., Gilmore, S., Scarpa, P., Woodward, D., “Onboard System for Production of
Intravenous F luids,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine, Vol. 76, N0. 3, p. 220, March
2005.

24. Wykes, V., J ayakumar, P., Scheuer, W., Guess, T., Scarpa, P., F ong, K., “A Portable Intravenous
F luid Production System Using Reverse Osmosis Technology for Medical Emergency in Space,”
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine, Vol .77, N0. 3, p. 333, March 2006.

25. Taylor, M.A., Alambra, E.F., Anes, J ., Behnke, J ., Enachescu, B., Fitzgerald, C.L., F ortado, M.,
Sizelove, M.L., “Remote Site Production of Sterile Puriﬁed Water from Available Surface Water,”
Prehospital and Disaster Medicine, Vol. 19, N0. 3, pp. 266—277, 2004.

26. Akse, J .R.; Dahl, R.W.; Wheeler, R.R., “Continuous-F 10W System Produces Medical-Grade Water,”
NASA Tech Briefs, LEW—18159—1, pp. 25—26, March 2009.

27. The Society of U.S. Naval F light Surgeons, The United States Naval F light Surgeon Handbook, 2nd
edition, 1998.

28. Motil, B.J., Balakotaiah, V., and Kamotani, Y., “Effects of Gravity 0n Coeurrent TWO-Phase Gas-
Liquid F lows through Packed Columns,” AIAA—2001—0767 and NASA/TM—2001-210705, 2001.

29. Holder, D.W. and Parker, D.S. “Volatile Removal Assembly F light Experiment and KC—135 Packed
Bed Experiment: Results and Lessons Learned,” SAE 2000—01—225 1, 30th International Conference
on Environmental Systems, Toulouse, France, 2000.

NASA/TM—2011-217033 33

"
"40","30. Spivey, R., Sheredy, W., and F lores, G., “An Overview of the Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG)
F acility, and the Gravity-Dependent Phenomena Research Performed in the MSG 0n the International
Space Station (188),” ALAA—2008—812, 46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno,
NV, 2008.

31. ResinTech, Inc. “Speciﬁcation Sheet for MDB—IO, Mixed Bed Resins,”
http://www.resintech.com/products/frm_Pr0ductInfo.ast?qPr0ductId=78, 201 1.

NASA/TM—2011-217033 34

"
"41","Appendix A.—Acr0nyms and Abbreviations
ALSP Advanced Life Support Pack
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials
CEV Crew Exploration Vehicle
CHeCS Crew Health Care System
CWC Contingency Water Container
DACU Data Acquisition and Control Unit
DC direct current
DI deionization
DRM Design Reference Mission
ECLSS Environmental Control and Life Support Systems
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
EVA Extravehicular Activity
F DA F 00d and Drug Administration
F TS F luid Therapy System
GRC Glenn Research Center
ICP/OES inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry
188 International Space Station
IV intravenous
IVGEN Intravenous Generation
J SC J ohnson Space Center
KSC Kennedy Space Center
MCL maximum contaminant level
MDL Shuttle Middeck Locker
MSG Microgravity Science Glovebox
NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NMT not more than
NPDWR National Primary Drinking Water Regulations
NS normal saline
OGS Oxygen Generation System
PCDB Patient Condition Database
PE polyethylene
NASA/TM—2011-217033 35

"
"42","PLIF Planar Laser-Induced F luorescence
PWD Potable Water Dispenser

PWR Potable Water Reservoirs

RO reverse osmosis

SAL Sterility Assurance Level

SBIR Small Business Innovative Research
SM Service Module

SMEMCL Space Medicine Exploration Medical Condition List
SSP Space Station Program

STS Space Transportation System (Space Shuttle)
SWEG Spacecraft Water Exposure Guideline
SWF I Sterile Water for Irrigation

SW1 Sterile Water for Injection

SWIS Sterile Water for Injection System

TF C thin-ﬁlm composite

TOC Total Organic Carbon

UPA Urine Processing Assembly

USP United States Pharmacopeia

WF I water for irrigation

WPA Water Processing Assembly
NASA/TM—2011-217033 36

"
"43","Appendix B.—Test Results
B.1 Bag 1, Normal Saline
4 May 2010, Bag #1, Saline
95
E
:5. 1'5 ' i
E. 1* ' 1r
ﬁll
E 55
I ill 1' I-
E 55
3 ﬂ“ ‘ I
i:- *+ u
cu ' ""'
E 15 1.;
2
:2 m
-5 ""E
ﬂ:ﬂﬂ DH? [1:14 ﬂﬂl ﬂﬂﬂ {1:35 {1:43 {1:51.} 0:5?
Elapsed Time {hh:mm}
Figure B.1.—Bag 1, time trace of volumetric flow rate.
4 Mﬂ‘f Zﬂlﬂ, Bag #1, Saline
11
g l'
.3
= :r'
E —....-=
E 5 . .
i'.‘ +
E 3 t :.
m * Ir. *
n 1 . .-
E ""' ' ""' """" i
E -1 4.
_ *
-3, ..
ll-
—5
ﬂﬂﬂ D:ﬂ? {1:119r ﬂﬂl [1:23 {1:35 ﬂﬂﬁ ﬂ:5ﬂ {1:5?
Elapsed Time {hh:mm]
Figure B.2.—Bag 1, time trace of fluid density.
NASA/TM—2011—217033 37

"
"44","3n 4 ME? 2010, Bag #1, Saline
25
-—- 20
~33.
H 15
'11
ti: 1:]
n: “-- .
g 5 i . “I
E {1 '.
a L '4' g. - El- 4
g —5 I ..
—1ﬂ
-15 ""
—2ﬂ
ﬂ:[1[1 [111? [1:14 [1:21 [1:23 [1:35 [1:43 [1:5[1 [1:51r
Elapsed Time [hh:mm}
Figure B.3.—Bag 1, time trace for mass flow rate.
4 ME? 2010, Bag #1, Saline
2.5
_ . Inlet Falls
7% 2 ﬂ - Ell Cartridge
5 ' 1 Exit Pall5 - ' '-
H'I .
4- Tntal ' "" '-
E 1 5 11:14"";
[I.I ' .. _ . i-
s _ ' ' 1""
E 1.4] _._.._...-.._-_._._._..._._._.___....._..-.-.-_.. .._._ .........__.._..._-...._._.... '1 [ 1.5.
.1 - J
E
-l—‘ - i
5 ”-5 Whit
IE . _ k. i
E m: -'—--——-—--'-'-—'-'—-‘-—-——-—-'1- nth;
—[1.5
[1:[I1 [111? [1:14 [1:21 [1:23 [1:36 [1:43 l1:5[1 [1:5?
Elapaed Time [hh:mm}
Figure B.4.—Bag 1, time trace of pressure drop.
NASA/TM—2011—217033 38

"
"45","4 ME? 2010, Bag #1, Saline
ﬂ
1' 1r Putahle Water
E E - Puriﬁed Water
""--. .
‘9.
.. 5 I
3‘ I
'5 4 -
U
:5
E 3
a i i. til...
2 .— '
I *
1 l '
ﬂ . I.“
DIILI Dd]? {lkliﬂr {1:21 [1:23 {1:35 {1:43 [1:51.] ﬂ:5}‘
Elapsed Time [hh:mm}
Figure B.5.—Bag 1, time trace on conductivity for potable water input and purified water output from
DI Cartridge.
4 I'M“r Zﬂlﬂ, Bag #1, Saline
31.] 32
* Canductiviw
25
I Temperature :- 3“
E 4:!"" ._.
E. I .. "" E
E: 15 “'4’ m ""‘ I—II—I-F ' 3
E M 15 E
”g 1:) . . - - 3
=1 E
E 24 ,_
U 5' '- 1r
l i... l 'I l l-
a a
ﬂﬂﬂl {1:0} [1:14 ﬂﬂl [1:23 ﬂﬂE [1:43 I‘.1|:E-:ﬂI {1:5?
Elapsed Time {hh:mm}
Figure B.6.—Bag 1, time trace of conductivity and temperature during transfer of saline solution to sterile bag.
NASA/TM—2011—217033 39

"
"46","4 l'qlr‘la'gir 211111, Bag #1, Saline
1[1[1
m
fl
95 I 1'
9D
.5. l =2"":
4-; 41
t I I... .. I
a 5“ -‘*
?5 I * *1. 1' 'i...‘
I i I “'
m ' . .
III
55
1, .
I'fii
Eﬂ
l1:[1[1 [1:l1? {1:14 l1:21 {1:23 ﬂﬂﬁ {1:43 l1:5{1 (1:5?
Ha psed Time [hh:rn m}
Figure B.7.—Bag 1, time trace for purification efficiency.
4 May 2111111,. Bag #1, Saline
2
1.3 -
E. 1 E : - Inst. Puriﬁed Water
1:: ' - .. Aug. Puri 2 Water
3 1“ I
3‘ I
1 I
'g [1.3 .
5 I1
” I L
”‘4 IL
[1.2 - ‘
D _ . - _ I -
{1:[111 [1:l1? l1:1:l'lr l[1:21 [1:23 ﬂﬂﬁ {1:43 [1:31 l1:5?
Elapsed Time [hh:mm}
Figure B.8.—Bag 1, time trace for instantaneous and average conductivity for the purified water output
from DI Cartridge.
NASA/TM—2011-217033 4O

"
"47","B.2 Bag 2, Normal Saline
MB? 4th, Bag #2, Saline
5[1
E 45
E 4:: 1
E
-r 35
I:I.II
1'11 30 L -—-—m
”E —
3 25 .
2 —
“- 2[1
E _
1'5 15
E —
3 m —
g 5 _
[1
ﬂ:[1[1 [111? [1:14 [1:21 [1:23 [1:35 [1:43 [1:31 [1:51Ir 1:114
Elapﬁed Time {hh:mm]
Figure B.9.—Bag 2, time trace of volumetric flow rate.
May 4th, Bag #2, Saline
3.11
E . Inlet Falls
3 2.5 I I rtrllge
HI-
E 2.1] . Exit Falls
g k - Tntal
:3 1.5 ,‘ I I
ﬂ. 1‘
:ﬁ 1“] L— -... .- _...n. .__-....u-.a._._n.-I—I-|-h.-u-.u.-.-.—_.n_n_n_...a. _22-- ._ __ 1. -. .
H
E
a —
g ”-5 ”m
a .
W ""t... _-_ --_.. .
Ill]
[1:[1ﬂ [1112' [1:14 [1:21 [1:23 [1:35 [1:43 0:5!) [1:52 1:[14
Elapsed Time [hh:mm}
Figure B.10.—Bag 2, time trace of pressure drop.
NASA/TM—2011-217033 41

"
"48","I'llur‘lqayr 4th, Bag #2, Saline
1'
+- Pntahle Water
Eu .
”E - Puriﬁed Water
L1 5 l
11?
a 4 l
E .. _ _ _.__*_____ __.,,___._..__. ._
-:—: 3
L1
:1
E 2
n
u
1
u L
[1:[1[1 [1:l]? [1:14 [1:21 [1:23 [1:36 [1:43 [1:51] [1:52r 1:[14
Elapﬁed Time {hh:mm]
Figure B.11.—Bag 2, time trace on conductivity for potable water input and purified water output
from DI Cartridge.
Mﬂ‘f 4th, Bag #2, Saline
1[1[1
95 l
C 9D I
E
E 35
.3
15 [H]
E
25
‘aﬁ
2D
[55
EU
ﬂ:[1[1 [1:ﬂ? [1:113r [1:21 [1:23 [1:35 [1:43 [1:5[1 [1:52 1:[14
Elapsed Time [hh:mm}
Figure B.12.—Bag 2, time trace for purification efficiency.
NASA/TM—201 1-217033 42

"
"49","May 4th, Bag #2, Saline
2.0
LE
'E' LE
73'"" 1'4 . nst. ' ur E ""ater
Z 1'2 I 0g. mm 2 ""ater
-‘=' 1.0
.2
E 0.0
1' .
“E 0.5 -'
E 0.4
. ‘l ..
0.0
0:00 0:0? 0:14 0:21 0:20 0:30 0:43 0:50 0:5? 1:04
Elapsed Time [hh:mm}
Figure B.13.—Bag 2, time trace for instantaneous and average conductivity for the purified water output
from DI Cartridge.
Wklyr 4th, Bag #2, Saline
E —n_ 15 _
u : * : . . - U
E 25 mm— ” L
Ill
; ED '- II I '- - '- 22 E
E 15 m 13 3
i 15 E
c 10 ‘ E
a 5 m 1:
w H
n 3 10
0:00 0:0? 0:14 0:21 0:20 0:36 0:43
Elapsed Time [hh:mm}
Figure B.14.—Bag 2, time trace of conductivity and temperature during transfer of saline solution to sterile
bag.
NASA/TM—2011-217033 43

"
"50","B.3 Bag 3, Puriﬁed Water
5 I'llur‘layr 2010, Bag #3: 1IMFI
?D
E- ﬁﬂ
”E: 5U
E .
g 4:: 5L
II
E 30 —n—
LI. —
.3 2U
*5 _
E 10
3 _
E n
—1[]
ﬂﬂﬂ ﬂ:14 {1:28 E43 ﬂ:5?
Elapsed Time [hh:mm)
Figure B.15.—Bag 3, time trace of volumetric flow rate.
5 May 2ﬂlﬂ, Bag #3: WFI
4.0
E 3.5 - Inlet Falls
E 3 ﬂ - DI Cartridge
E I - Exit Falls
3 2.5
m g - Tntal Pressure L055
’3: 2.3 '-
E 1.5 'L
F: HE
E: III_.- -|'-|—--m_—lml .
CI- ﬂﬂ L_L_._.______._..__.____.__._._.__.._._._._.__..___.._.__.__ --——..— __—
43.5
[1:00 [1:14 [1:23 E43 3:5?
Elapsed Time [hh:mm}
Figure B.16.—Bag 3, Time Trace of Pressure Drop.
NASA/TM—2011-217033 44

"
"51","5 May 2010, Bag #3: 1WFI
0.0
5.0
”E
E. 4.0
E .
E 3.0
E - Pntable Water
'3 2.0 -
E I Purified Water
1.0
{1.0 L—
0:00 0:14 0:28 0:43 0:5?
Elapsed Time [hh:mm}
Figure B.17.—Bag 3, time trace on conductivity for potable water input and purified water output
from DI Cartridge.
5 ME}! 2010, Bag #3: WFI
120
100 r_—""""' ' '
E 30
H
Li
E 00
‘5
n.
BE 40
20
0
0:00 0:14 0:23 0:43 0:5?
Elapsed Time {hh:mm}
Figure B.18.—Bag 3, time trace for purification efficiency.
NASA/TM—2011-217033 45

"
"52","5 I""I|.\“I.a1ylr 2010, Bag #3: WFI
2.0
1.3
__ 1.6
E 1.4
3 1.2
2:!-
E' 1'“ _ 1' Inst. Puri IE Water
a 0.0 '.
'I:l .. I + '
E 0.6 it 40-. Purified Water
""’ {1.4 '=
ﬂ 2 1k
' hh— _
0.0
0:00 0:14 0:28 0:43 0:5}r
Elapsed Time [hh:mm}
Figure B.19.—Bag 3, time trace for instantaneous and average conductivity for the purified water
output from DI Cartridge.
B.4 Bag 4, Puriﬁed Water
5 May 2010, Bag #4: 1WFI
20
E 00
E
:-
E 50
E- l‘
E 40 LL
F3. 30 - - --—
E 2” _
E
g 1” _
0
0:00 0:0? 0:14 0:21 0:28 0:30 0:43 0:50 0:52 1:04
Elapsed Time {hh:mm}
Figure B.20.—Bag 4, time trace of volumetric flow rate.
NASA/TM—2011-217033 46

"
"53","5 I'H‘IEI‘HIr 2010, Bag #4: WFI
4
*- lnlet Falls
E - [1| Cartridge
53
ﬂ - Exit Falls
3
g = 1r Tntal Pressure L055
a 2 ‘:
E
E1 -_-...-.._ ...*....._.__._......_.......i............... .
..'-“'_’
ﬂ LWW- ._._.-.._.._
[1:[1[1 [1:[11Ir [1:14 [1:21 [1:23 [1:35 [1:43 [1:5[1 [1:51Ir 1:[14
Elapsed Time {hh:mm}
Figure B.21.—Bag 4, time trace of pressure drop.
5 lhﬂmr 2010, Bag #4: WFI
4.5
4 .
__ 3.5 L» - - ‘ - .
E
E“ 3
:I.
E 2.5
E 2 .. Patahle Water
E I Purified Water
E 1.5
E
1
[1.5
ﬂ 1..
[1:[1[1 [1:[11' [1:14 [1:21 [1:23 [1:36 [1:43 [1:50 [1:5? 1:[14
Elapsed Time [hh:mm]
Figure B.22.—Bag 4, time trace on conductivity for potable water input and purified water output
from DI Cartridge.
NASA/TM—2011-217033 47

"
"54","5 May 2010, Bag #4: 1WFI
1[1I[||
93 r —*—‘""——'———'——'—""—-
E15 '
94
1:
E 92
I'll
512‘ 90
E 33
3E
35
34
32
3D
[1:[1[1 [1:[11'r [1:14 [1:21 [1:23 [1:35 [1:43 [1:50 [1:51' 1:[14
Elapsed Time {hh:mm]
Figure B.23.—Bag 4, time trace for purification efficiency.
5 ME? 2111!], Bag #4: 1IMFI
[1.5
III-h. [1.4
E
L1
ta ; _ .
3 [1.3- 1 I I . I i. . -
1: i -
3 . - Aug. Pu nfied Water
“3 n 2 j'
3 .
1:1
E
a [L
U I11 _‘--—r
[1
[1:[1[1 [1:[11' [1:14 [1:21 [1:23 [1:36 [1:43 [1:5[1 [1:51' 1:[14
Elapsed Time {hh:mm]
Figure B.24.—Bag 4, time trace for instantaneous and average conductivity for the purified
water output from DI Cartridge.
NASA/TM—2011-217033 48

"
"55","B.5 Bag 5, Puriﬁed Water
5 [111.3151r 20111, Bag #5: 1WFI
91]
'E‘
E El]
2-
E ?D
111
15 El]
1::
g 51]
E .
2 w L
E 3“ —
:I ll]
3 —
h m —
l]
111]] [1:1]? [1:113r [1:21 [1:23 11:35 [1:43 [1:51] [1:5? 1:04
Elapsed Time [hh:mm}
Figure B.25.—Bag 5, time trace of volumetric flow rate.
IE May 21110, Bag #5: WFI
5
. Inlet Falls
4 . - - _
E I nge
E 3 *- Exit Falls
E + Tatal Pressure Lass
[I.I ""
E M
n- 1 __._ _ _ . . . _ . _. . _. .
n W -
[1:[1ﬂ [1:14 [1:28 [1:43 [1:51r 1:12
Elapsed Time {hh:mm}
Figure B.26.—Bag 5, time trace of pressure drop.
NASA/TM—2011-217033 49

"
"56","a May 2111:], Bag #5: WFI
__ 5
E
11'.
3 4
3 ' .
El- 3 L . .L-
[J
:F
‘D
E
a 2 ' i ; i '- - - ; =
3 .
3 - Purified Water
= 1
I‘ll-
[=1
I'll-
+- L__
E 0
0:00 0:0? 0:14 0:21 0:23 0:35 0:43 0:50 0:5? 1:04
Elapsed Time {hh:mm}
Figure B.27.—Bag 5, time trace on conductivity for potable water input and purified water output
from DI Cartridge.
5 ME? 2010, Bag #5: 1[MFI
1115
100
95 r
.E 9“ i
E 35 i
E El]
ﬂ.
3R ?5
?0
55
50
0:00 0:0? 0:14 0:21 0:28 0:36 0:43 0:50 0:5? 1:04
Elapsed Time [hh:mm}
Figure B.28.—Bag 5, time trace for purification efficiency.
NASA/TM—2011—217033 50

"
"57","6 ME? 201D, Bag #5: WFI

2
E 1-5 . n5. '_IIUI'IIIE ”3 er
""--.
3 I Aug. Puriﬁed Wﬂter
_"".'I--
i; 1
E
‘D
E 0.5

kg
[1 ..._
[1:[1ﬂ [1:02 [1:14 [1:21 [1:23 [1:36 [1:43 [1:53 [1:52 1:[14
Elapsed Time {hh:mm]
Figure B.29.—Bag 5, time trace for instantaneous and average conductivity for the purified water
output from DI Cartridge
B.6 Bag 6, Puriﬁed Water
6 May 2010, Bag #6: WFI
513

_ 45
.E
E 41.1
1‘ L
E 35
‘3 L
E 3[1
a: ——ﬁ
3 25 _
3 2“ _
E 15
E —
T“ m —
:3 5 _

[1

[1:[1[1 [1:14 [1:23 [1:43 [1:52 1:12

Elapsed Time {hh:mm}
Figure B.30.—Bag 6, time trace of volumetric flow rate.
NASA/TM—2011-217033 51

"
"58","6 May 2010, Bag #6: WFI
3.0
. Inlet Falls
E 2.5 I I . I 'I : -
'3; . Exit Falls
3 2-D .. n a 'ressure [:55
i1!
L
El.
:311] L-_-_.—_—_—_—_—_————I—I_H—-ﬂ—-I_—--—I-—__ .
E
E _
E 0.5
a m
ﬂﬂ MH— 1...-..“
{1:00 ﬂ:14 {1:23 {H13 0:5? 1:12
EIEIPSE'd Time {hh:mm]
Figure B.31.—Bag 6, time trace of pressure drop.
5 Maryr 2011], Bag #6: 1WFI
4
E- 3
""'-.
3
3‘ 2
E 1r Pnta- 2 Water
E I Puriﬁed Water
D
U 1
U L
ﬂﬂﬂ ﬂ:14 [1:23 [1:43 0:5? 1:12
ElapSE-d Time {hh:mm_'l
Figure B.32.—Bag 6, time trace on conductivity for potable water input and purified water output
from DI Cartridge.
NASA/TM—2011-217033 52

"
"59","6 May 2010, Bag #5: 1IMFI
190
93 [ ._ .__. w-w.wwﬂw_ﬁ
96
.E 94
E 92
E 911
D.
32 33
SE
34
32
SD
ﬂﬂﬂ {1:14 {1:23 {1:43 (1:5? 1:12
Elapsed Time {hh:mm}
Figure B.33.—Bag 6, time trace for purification efficiency.
5 lhﬂawr 2111!], Bag #6: WFI
[1.5
I Inst. Puriﬁed Water
1' A Puriﬁed Water
[1.4 HE
E
""--.
3 0.3
3:
E
E 0.2
'D
l: .
D
u D 1 IL
- _
[II
[1:01] [1:14 [1:23 [1:43 0:5? 1:12
Elapsed Time {hh:mm}
Figure B.34.—Bag 6, time trace for instantaneous and average conductivity for the purified water
output from DI Cartridge.
NASA/TM—2011—217033 53

"
"60",""
"61","Appendix C.—Investigati0n Results for
Out-of—Speciﬁcation Saline Concentration
C.1 Completed Test Plan
Out of Speciﬁcation Salinity Root Cause Analysis Test Plan
And Procedure For The Intravenous Fluid Generation
(IVGEN) Experiment
November 9, 2010
,NASA
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio
NASA/TM—ZOI 1—217033 55

"
"62","SIGNATURE PAGE
Date: November 9, 2010
Revision: 1.0
Project Selentnst ’ ( . “/mk / , ;
T LMK \ "" ‘k-fl.£ #Flbi )Lil:
em ' C ay Signature . Date
CONCURRENCES
ZlN Technologies:
Mechanical Lead t. WW I ”
-» #6? 0
Daniel F. Brown M Jl—I——'—
Slgnature Date
Project Lead ’ ' ‘ ’ ‘ .
15' AMn - m.
J ohn T. Zoldak S'nature I Date
Quality Assurance Manager // .., Z/ .
Debra R. Lyden . , ,
Slgnature ate
CONCURRENCE
N ASA Glenn Research Center:
Principal Investigator 0 f f ,
. . w .Msh cg 4;; 20;
John B. McQuillen ‘( b j Z “ i C U 0
ignature Date
APPROVED BY
NASA Glenn Research Center:
Project Manager I W 7
. z: 4-2%1/ £sz—
DeVon W. Grlfﬁn ' _m,// Date
P M ‘0 ""”
rogram anager . * ”F (J /
! A ' Y. I /
\MMJW \Cb U f”) \O
Marsha M. Na“ . _
‘ 1 gn ature Date
ii
NASA/TM—2011-217033 56

"
"63","DOCUMEN T SUMMARY:
The purpose of this test plan is to deﬁne the analysis that will be conducted on the returned mixing bags
from the IntraVenous ﬂuid GENeration (IVGEN) ﬂight project. The goal of this effort is to provide
insight into the out of speciﬁcation concentration results for both ﬂight experiment saline samples.
REVISION HISTORY:
Initial Release: November 9, 2010
iii
NASA/TM—2011—217033 57

"
"64","TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.1 BACKGROUND 1
1.2 TEST SUMMARY 2
2.0 ITEST SAMPLE DESCRIPTION 3
3.1 GENERAL GUIDELINES 3
3.2 POST-ANALYSIS 4
4.0 TEST FACILITY4
5.0 TEST DESCRIPTION4
7.0 APPENDIX A: TEST PROCEDURE CHECKLIST 5
8.0 APPENDIX B: ASSEMBLY DRAWINGS AND IVGEN SCHEMATIC 8
9.0 APPENDIX C: PACE ANALYTICAL LABS ANALYSIS REPORTS...... 10
10.0 APPENDIX D: SALT CONCENTRATION ANALYSIS........................... 22

iv

NASA/TM—ZOI 1—217033 58

"
"65","1.0 Introduction

This test plan documents the procedure and analysis which will be used to investigate the saline
concentration results of the samples returned from the IVGEN ﬂight experiment. This will include
evaluation and testing of each of the two samples for salt remaining in the saline bags which were used
for mixing.

1.1 Background

The lntraVenous Fluid Generation (IVGEN) experimental hardware was ﬂown and tested onboard the
International Space Station (188) in May 2010. The IVGEN experiment aimed to demonstrate the
capability to purify ISS potable water and mix the water with salt to produce a normal saline ﬂuid in situ
that met the United States Pharmacopeia (USP) standards required for intravenous injection. The two
samples that were produced met all of the speciﬁcations listed in the current USP monograph for Sodium
Chloride Injection except for the speciﬁcation for Sodium Chloride concentration of 95.0 — 105.0% of the
labeled amount of NaCl.

1V GEN operations involved, ﬁrst ﬁlling the IVGEN accumulator from the pressurized potable water
source onboard the 188. Once ﬁlled, the accumulator was connected to the puriﬁer and pressurized. The
pressure forced water through the IVGEN puriﬁer, which housed multiple ﬁlters and diagnostic
instruments, and then into the saline bag. The saline bag contained a premeasured amount of salt to make
a 0.9% sodium chloride solution, as well as a magnetic stir bar. After the bag was ﬁlled, the stir bar mixed
the solution. Mixing occurred concurrently with the bag ﬁll. The ﬁrst bag that was generated was then
mixed for an additional 20 minutes after ﬁlling was complete. The second bag was mixed for an
additional 5 minutes after ﬁlling was complete. Following mixing, the ﬂuid passed out of the mixing bag,
through a conductivity sensor to measure uniformity, and into a ﬁnal sterile collection bag which was
returned to Earth for USP testing. The assembly drawing for the collection bags and a schematic of the
IVGEN hardware can be found in Appendix B.

The target speciﬁcation for concentration was 0.9% Sodium Chloride in Sterile Water for Injection (SW1)
with an acceptable range of 95% to 105% of that speciﬁcation. This equates to dissolving 13.5 grams into
1500 mL of water. The ﬁrst bag that was generated was at 117.0% of the target range. The second bag
that was generated was at 93.8% of the target range. The USP test facility’s Standard Operating Procedure
(SOP) requires an investigation for all Out Of Speciﬁcation (008) results. The initial investigation
involved assessment of: sampling and sample integrity, method and process used, data, calculations,
equipment and materials, samples, standards, reagents, media, cultures, and analyst training. As no
deﬁnitive error was determined from the initial investigation, both samples were retested by two separate
analysts. The result of the retest conﬁrmed the original 008 results. Results for both samples as well as
the DOS investigation form can be found in Appendix C.

Multiple hypotheses have been developed to explain the 008 results. The ﬁrst bag that was generated
was more concentrated than expected. The possibilities for this occurring that have been identiﬁed are as
follows:

0 An error in the salt measurement may have resulted in too much salt in the mixing bag.

0 A bubble may have been trapped in the accumulator during the accumulator ﬁll which would
have resulted in less water than expected being delivered to the bag.

0 The accumulator may not have been completely filled which would have resulted in less water
than expected being delivered to the ﬁrst bag generated.

0 The holdup volume of the dry system may have been higher than anticipated which would result
in less water than expected being delivered to the bag. Holdup volume is deﬁned as the volume
in the plumbing components between the accumulator and the mixing bag. The ﬁrst bag was
generated using a dry system and therefore the holdup volume was estimated from measurements
based on the qualiﬁcation unit.

1
NASA/TM—2011-217033 59

"
"66","Electronic data, obtained during IVGEN operations aboard the 188, from the flow meter indicated that
between 1309 and 1329 grams of water ﬂowed through the IVGEN experiment to mix with the
predetermined amount of salt. The ﬁrst value was determined by summing the mass output from the flow
meter. The second value was determined by summing the volumetric output and dividing by the
instantaneous density of the liquid. Each bag was also weighed at the USP testing facility. The first bag
weighed 1371.6 grams (which includes tubing and ﬁlters).

The saline concentration in the second bag was less than expected. The possibilities for this occurring that
have been identiﬁed are:

0 An error in the salt measurement may have resulted in too little salt in the bag.

0 The decreased mixing time may have resulted in incomplete mixing. If mixing were incomplete,
some salt may have remained in the mixing bag resulting in a lower than expected salt
concentration.

0 Salt may have been trapped in the port that was used for adding the salt to the bag which would
have resulted in a lower than expected salt concentration.

Electronic data obtained from the ﬂow meter for the second bag indicated that between 1499 and 1518
grams of water ﬂowed through the IVGEN experiment to mix with the predetermined amount of salt.
The bag was also weighed at the USP testing facility. The second bag weighed 1576.5 gram (which
includes tubing and ﬁlters). In order to thoroughly eliminate the possibility of an error in salt
measurement or incomplete mixing due to the shortened mixing duration, it is necessary to analyze the
residual salt concentration in the bag
1.2 Test Summary
The purpose of this test is to determine the amount of salt remaining in the mixing bags after the transfer
to the collection bags was completed on orbit. From this information and the results obtained from the
analytical test facility, a mass balance calculation will be performed to determine whether the correct
amount of salt was in the mixing bag. It may also be possible to determine whether or not the anomalous
results were due to incomplete mixing. The test plan pertains speciﬁcally to generating a sample from
each mixing bags to be sent out to a test lab for quantitative analysis. The test lab will analyze the sample
for sodium using Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS). The reporting limit for this
method is 50 pg/L and requires a 100 mL sample. The concentration of sodium chloride will be
calculated based on the sodium concentration results.
2
NASA/TM—2011-217033 60

"
"67","2.0 Test Sample Description
The residual contents of the saline bags used for mixing during the IVGEN space ﬂight experiment will
be analyzed. The saline bags (60112MFA1120 SNl and 8N2) were returned after the IVGEN experiment
was conducted in May 2010. The assembly drawing for these bags is shown in Figure 2.1.
4 - 3 2 I
COMMERCIAL PARTS LIST ““3
"" ggﬂgggsgggyurmcs mm m “l
—— 2. FOR Dlll 0F IITEIIALS SEE COLE PAIIEI BIAIIIG
ﬂI—_
’- wmm'5.::°r;2=2.::.1:*.s::::52
- & ""PL! 1’ X l' VELEO LN? PADS ‘3 WI.
lLlGﬂ III"" ""05 0' lllllﬁ TMT “SERUM
ﬂl-—
5. ""LIME UIYH (LEM LllT-NEE GLOVES
l. IEFOOE ""MAM, MOYECT WITH CWYQIIIMIOI MRIIER.
03E CLEAN. IEI. YIMSPAREM POUUNYLENE BAG FOI
139$ 352% :13‘3321.‘.31%."":l°§.:l""ll”l.22‘.1§':‘.tﬁ“
PAH NUMBER!” SEIIMILOY Ill!!! “3 IPECIHED
ll Ml ORDER PEI “E AMTO. [£11100 IS.
3 4321343333 A move (inn tons mu m mu 5mm m
‘_ 3.33.», ' ’~ ‘5”; I&SEIIU. ITEI Cl IISlIG LII“ MAINE! '0"" ON
3 .3. w. mscm 25m Lona STIR m, :nmLL Zme
. .1 «'4 ""~. STIR MB. Nil (3 THIDUGH lllﬁE '04"" 0"" IRS.
,3. '. Q'\ ""If CAIE II NOT IEIOHIG ML! (""8111‘ VIN GM.
3 k . IF; ‘ C
' ‘-- 3‘ ﬁ-‘r 21v?"" ’ ‘
‘ twrkﬁma WM 1 3
4&1?!“ K: f”
‘4'}? '5? . I.?EgNI- '- 1.” ?gibﬁgi‘u % ”I ‘5‘ ' ;l@ “.7... . . . ~ _ __ 21's! 39""!
‘ x 3,} . _,',._.’:..vt§‘;,:;_ -. ;' 13‘:__;;3;1‘%:‘§:’Hs~:3j1 .. . ""'43:"" 312* £333. _ N
A ~ 1:?- .*=~ » 1 43* ' ‘ :
- 1%"". .« 4- 1 l 314.}: u. ‘3 - i’f ' E
. .1... n_- 1‘:
"" ‘ mmm_f 3
W'
n 1 s 01 III 2 uecm o 3"" munuuu unum. Inn All I u mumrm “D
314....5 u: .. m: @f .a... '3, $.51“
-@— gkﬁﬁﬁlmw 33:335.. °
m_x—ma—_ I m m
—_u-m—wmumm— ""’65
A _—mI-mm1-HH’Afil—suuznrmoo A
THIS DRAWING IS UNDER COIFIGURATION
. ‘ ' ' = n It nu a 0:9
-w-E m be IBM
- ' 3 II A I x . ~ 4
A a WEMW
Figure 2.1 Saline Bag
3.0 Test Procedure
3.1 General Gundelmes
1. A 100 :t 2 ml sample from each saline bag shall be submitted.
2. A control sample of the reagent grade water used to dilute the samples and contained in
containers identical to the sample containers shall also be submitted.
3. All test activities shall be documented, including dates and signatures. Photo documentation of
the bags before and after sample extraction is required.
a. The mass of each bag, before and after sample extraction, shall be measured and
recorded.
b. The mass of each sample container, before and alter sample introduction, shall be
measured and recorded. _
~ 3
NASA/TM—2011—217033 61

"
"68","4. Environmental conditions for sample dilution and extraction shall satisfy standards speciﬁed in
ASTM 4453, Standard Practice for Handling of Ultra-Pure Water Samples.

5. Reagent grade, ASTM Type I water, shall be used for sample dilution to ensure the sample will
not be contaminated by the dilutant.

6. Containers and transfer equipment, which will be in contact with the dilutant or sample, shall
satisfy standards in ASTM 4453, Standard Practice for Handling of Ultra-Pure Water Samples. In
particular the container material recommendations and procedure speciﬁed in 5.2.2 of ASTM
4453 for the Analysis of Other Trace Ions shall be followed.

7. Sample containers for storage and submission of the samples for ICP analysis shall be obtained
from the analytical test facility. httpzl/www.grecisionanalﬁical.com/

8. Samples should be submitted to the test facility on the day of extraction. Samples shall be
submitted to the test facility within 24 hours of extraction.

9. The test procedure checklist in Appendix A shall be used for sample extraction and post-sample
extraction steps.

10. Either the IVGEN P] or PS shall be present during sample extraction and post-extraction steps.

3.2 Post-analysis

1. Calculate grams of dissolved salt in undiluted solution based on analysis results.

2. Compare undiluted residual concentration of salt bags to concentration results obtained from
initial USP analysis.

4.0 Test Facility

The test facility shall be Precision Analytical of Cleveland, Ohio.

http://www .precisionanalytical .com/

5.0 Test Description

As the test for Sodium is significantly more sensitive than the test for chloride (50 pg/L versus 50 mg/L),

the samples will only be tested for Sodium. The NaCl concentration will then be calculated based on the

sodium concentration. Precision Analytical tests for Sodium using ICP-MS. See Appendix D for salt

concentration calculations based on 100 mL extracted samples.

6.0 Test Report

Results will be documented in a Test Report.

4 .

NASA/TM—2011-217033 62

"
"69","7.0 Appendix A: Test Procedure Checklist
E2], Don nitrile gloves.
d Photograph the front and back of each saline bag including labels. Photgraph using white, black
and gray background.
d Label the three sample containers which will be used to submit the samples for analysis. Include:
1. Sample ID - For extraction samples, reference mixing bag label (SN! or SN2). For
control sample, the sample ID should be ASTM Type I water.
2. Date
8/ Carefully inspect both bags and record any relevant ﬁndings below.
Notes: 8/9 6-; SNZ €PfEﬁ. (EA 222 CQ/g'M/A/ mm mm W Mme [1’th £150 5% A 4 SIéNi’F/ot’h'f
4W5 iI-f‘i- a
ﬂmw‘u’r 53F 51;? ﬁassLES IN 21;: cums? 7035. W: “I‘
84g SN2 H.413 ﬁstmui M9 ZJQ- wA IN avrter TuJSE.
E Record the scale model, part number, serial number, and calibration date below.
Scale Manufacturer: $HB‘ID/ZWS iso ML
Part/Model Number: [.6 3-20[ A “ DQMS
Serial Number: ‘50 ND 5’5 5’ 3
Calibration Date: MAL; IS 20“) Ava H1312 [S , 20H __ _
d Tare the scale. Record Value displayed: 0.:1‘00 9
M Record the mass (:1: 0.01 gram) of each bag (including tubing and ﬁttings) and each of the three
empty sample containers (with lids) below.
Saline Bag SN] Mass: / ‘i/ . ‘7 ‘H‘ 53.
Saline Bag SN2 Mass: ['25, 930
Saline SN] Sample Container: '23. 02 i 6‘
Saline SN2 Sample Container: ‘2 93:9 006 9,
ASTM Type I Water Container: zen, 9 359
d Add 100 :t: 3 ml of reagent grade, ASTM Type I water, to each saline bag. Add the water through
the port which saline ﬂowed out of during the IVGEN experiment.
d Close Port
d, Record the mass (i: 0.01 gram) of each bag (including tubing and ﬁttings) to verify that the water
speciﬁcation was met.
Saline Bag SN] Mass: 2%”. 533% _.
Saline Bag SN2 Mass: 226.27.65j ‘
5
NASA/TM—2011-217033 63

"
"70","d Ensure water enters bag ports and dilutant mixes with residual sample:
1. Orient bag with ports down, let liquid set for 10 minutes.
Time Started: [0 : 31
Time Finished: [0 f 9‘!
2. Rotate bag in planar direction 6 times at a rate no faster than 1 rotation per 2 minutes
with agitation. M IH‘HD
Time Started: +945? /0 “V5
Time Finished: :0 2’57
3 . Rotate bag in orthogonal direetion 6 times at a rate no faster than 1 rotation per 2
minutes with agitation.
Time Started: i0 15‘}
Time F inished: H 1'09
d Extract atleast 100 :i: 2 m1 of ‘liquid from each bag into labeled sample containers provided by the
test facility. Extract sample through same port that was used for adding the reagent grade water.
d Add 100 :t 3 ml reagent grade, ASTM Type I water to the control sample container.
8/ Again, record the mass (:t 0.01 gram) of each bag (including tubing and ﬁttings) and each of the
three sample containers below.
Saline Bag SNl Mass: / 30. 5 36% V
Saline Bag SN2 Mass: /'2?. 564% g
Saline SN] Sample Container: 1’51}, 2 35 6;
Saline SN2 Sample Container: IZE DVD % 7’
ASTM Type I Water Container: [2 7.. ”29' :‘gg
dRecord date and time of sample extraction completion.
Date: lf—l‘i-m Time: H :35 ﬁﬂ EST
Ell Verify sample container lids are secure and attach QA label to verify seal.
Rf Pass dry nitrogen through saline bags to evaporate any remaining visible water.
d Record mass (i 0.0] gram) of each bag (including tubing and ﬁttings).
Saline Bag SNl Mass: I 20. 37009
Saline Bag SN2 Mass: HQ- ?.gi g
d Again, photograph from and back of each saline bag including labels . Use white (or black
background?). '
Sm ~ 920 .3000}
6
‘3“!‘41 "" M ﬁll?”
NASA/TM—ZOI 1-217033 64

"
"71","d Record rhass displayed by empty scale pan: D, cgag
m Send all three samples to the analytical lab for analysis. Record date and time of sample pick-up.
Date: H‘l‘l’ID Time: /‘7 55’ PI"") EST
8/ Witnesses sign and date below.
(«— I
ZIN Analyst Signature: /;’;_j~ ' 57:1; a Date: 4 - [6120/0
' ‘ / %
ZIN QA Signature: v.2 '11....4/ L A - LA?! % Date: W
GRCPSorPI Signatureg 593221 E 2 (ﬁg; 216 Date: “-1ngng
7 .
NASA/TM—2011-217033 65

"
"72","C.2 Chemical Analysis Results of Bag Contents (Performed by Precision Analytical)
Precision Analytical. Inc.
P R E C I s | o N 4450J0hnston ParkwayUnitE
Cleveland, OH 44126
TEL: 216 663 08081241? 216 663 065C
11""ebsite: wmv'w. grecisionanalytical. com
November 23; 2010
Dan Brown
ZIN Technologies, Inc.
6745 Engle Rd.
Middleburg Hts; Ohio 44130
TEL: (440) 625-2219
FAX: (440) 625-2354
RE: IVGEN Order No.: 1011516
Dear Dan Brown:
Precision Analytical, Inc. received 3 sample(s) on 11/22/2010 for the analyses presented in the
following report.
There were no problems with the analytical events associated with this report unless noted in an
attached Case Narrative. Quality control data is within laboratory deﬁned or method speciﬁed
acceptance limits except if noted. Note that sample results reported relate only the samples as
received at the laboratory.
Solid samples are reported in ug/Kg or mg/Kg as received, unless speciﬁed in the units as dry
weight. Unless otherwise noted, results have not been background or blank corrected.
If you have any questions regarding these tests results, please feel free to call.
Certiﬁcations: Ohio EPA - 4041; NELAC NY - 11167; NELAC PA - 68-00434;
W.Va DEP - 245; KY UST - 69
Sincerely,
Scott Bolam
QA/QC Manager
Page 1 of 4
NASA/TM—2011—217033 66

"
"73","Precisionz‘lnabﬁtl’cal, Inc. .
p R E c | 5 | o N 445010hnst0n PL} Units Analytlcal Report
A N A L Y T | C A l. ’ I N C . Cleveland. OH 44128 (consolidated)
TEL: .216 663 0808 17m:- 216 663 0656 WO#: 101 1516
Website: nm-‘w.grecisionanalytical.con; Date Reported: 11/23/2010
CLIENT: ZIN Technologies, Inc. Collection Date: 11/19/2010 11:35:00 AM
Project: IVGEN
Lab ID: 101 1516-001 Matrix: AQUEOUS
Client Sample ID SNl
Analyses Result RL Qual Units DF Date Analyzed
METALS ANALYSIS BY ICP E200.7 Analyst: STB
Sodium 1,360,000 5,000 pg/L 100 11/23/2010 1:06:29 PM
Qualiﬁers: ”51X Value exceeds hvimcimum Contaminant Level B Analyte detected in the associated M ethod Blank
DF Dilution Factor H Holding times for preparation or analysis cxcccdcd
J Analyte detected below quantitation limits M I\-Ia11ual Integration used to detennine area response
MDL Method Detection Limit N Tentatively identiﬁed compounds
ND Not Detected at the Reporting Limit PI, Permit Limit
RL Reponing Detection Limit ( PQL) S Spike outside acceptance limits
Page 2 of 4
NASA/TM—2011-217033 67

"
"74","Precision Analytical. Inc. .
P R E C I S | o N 4450 Johnston Parkway Unit B Analytlcal Report
A N A L Y T . c A L . , N c . Cleveland, OH 44125, (consolidated)
TEL: 21 6 663 0808 FM.- 21 6 663 0656 WO#: 1011516
l-f’bbsite: wnmagrecisionanalytical.com Date Reported: 1103/2010
CLIENT: ZIN Technologies, Inc. Collection Date: 1 1/19/2010 1 1:35:00 AM
Project: IVGEN
Lab ID: 1011516-002 Matrix: AQUEOUS
Client Sample ID SN2
Analyses Result RL Qua] Units DF Date Analyzed
M ETALS ANALYSIS BY IC P E200.7 Analyst: STB
Sodium 568,000 5,000 pg/L 100 11/23/2010 1:06:29 PM
Qualiﬁers: *‘C Value exceeds Maximmn Contaminant Level B AnalyTe detected in the associated Method Blank
DF Dilution Factor 11 Holding times for preparation or analysis exceeded
J Analyte detected below quantitation limits M Manual Integration used to dctcrminc area response
MDL Method Detection Limit N Tcntativcly identiﬁed compounds
ND Not Detected at the Reporting Limit PL Permit Limit
RL Reporting Detection Limit (PQL) S Spike outside acceptance limits
Page 3 of 4
NASA/TM—2011-217033 68

"
"75","PrecisionAnalytical. Inc. .
' p R E c | 5 I o N 4450JohnstonParkmyUnitB Analytlcal Report
A N A L Y 1' ' C A L .- . N C . Cleveland. OH 44125 (COHSOhdath)
TEL: 216 663 0808 EALX': 216 663 0656 WO#2 1011516
Website: mm-v.grecisionanalytical.com Date Reported: 11,23,2010
CLIENT: ZIN Technologies, Inc. Collection Date: 11/19/2010 11:35:00 AM
Project: IVGEN
Lab ID: 1011516-003 Matrix: AQUEOUS
Client Sample ID ASTM Type 1 Water
Analyses Result RL Qual Units DF Date Analyzed
METALS ANALYSIS BY ICP E200.7 Analyst: STB
Sodium ND 50.0 pg/L 1 11/23/2010 1:06:29 PM
Qualiﬁers: *JX Value exceeds Maximum Contammant Level B Anal“: detected in the associated Method Blank
DF Dilution Factor H Holding times for preparation or analysis exceeded
J Analyte detected below quantitation limits M 1\-'Ianual Integraﬁon used to. determine area response
MDL Method Detection Limit N 'I'cntativcly identiﬁed compounds
ND Not Detected at the Reponing Limit PL Pemmit Limit
RL Reporting Detection Limit (PQL) S Spike outside acceptance limits
Page 4 of 4
NASA/TM—2011—217033 69

"
"76","”‘3 2
~\. 0. E a: --
l— m g
E e
—...-.""'....- m ‘2’ a: Q
B ""“"""""" .1
g 8
O. {% w
E r»- 3
'- ﬂ 0‘:
4t ‘0 0‘ w \c
c: 2 I ' 8 m
U: ‘ .
O ' g” ‘13 ‘\ ~
3‘3 “"" 5 — IIIIIIIIII I 2"" N
o , g '* ‘
>. . U , 7
H: E
o: - ' .
g “3 \ q.
< O ‘ K
g :2 L ‘3
S Q’ J.) V
0'3 s m .
(1) .~- (I)
E 9‘” ““1 -ﬁlﬁﬂlllll III! \ 7
m ‘- ‘3} R’ A >
.3 g N \J . ‘93\- g
x- C’ d z»? "" . ‘ e
8 s r 4 -/<-><IIII III. \ %
J: .. , “91“ L.
o 9 g ?- 5 *"" xzmvw =* -— 9?» \ 3
s a 2 a E 8 3 ‘ .x, ' «1
LL - a g
t— .
a 3 0.2 g’\ >
.6 :9 00 a \x a
1‘ O >~ 20 U \.‘\ U
z 4: o: cu m
"" “"" ”5 S IIIIIIIIIIII I m ‘m
C: |— x.
‘ \
a r A 9 g g to n: 1% A;
. L” U) u) Q E \ E
. wt. 0 ”J O E van ‘. _
Q 03 0 ‘~ 2., m Lu 0 F"" x F“
cu 873. n. .0.) >- g o
‘—- ‘ﬁ-
2 <3- gm‘ "".2 g ‘3 S‘ 3"" 3? m .3“ w
-:r N w =5 Lu *3 ~:\ 1 w w ..
Em }— C .Jw c .‘ . {U *1“ (U
I E: %2 FR .‘Q {Q 0 2 0
PAC 3 ﬁx m o 3 ed: 5; .,
E - -3 ’m ‘5 E u. m K . 2
Q "" M a Y” Q) \
Z (D ’5 N E? t: E: V
x a)! CO ‘ FC"" w ‘00 ‘H m ""\ 'J .5
g 5 o 4 h m c) L. <‘C ”JUJ (
w LU . 2”,; m; 2' S m 11:— W I '
‘ N ~ _ u—
> m 3 D t .. mg 2< ~ 9 x. A A
m w to <z~ "" 5 ° 6 = <0 ? 7 T 9 93
w ._J (D A .4 ,1 § 1 “55:5 0 ‘9- w 72“ 3:- 7: 3 B
0 f5- ;0 EV c: .. '8 g g
% a 35"" a» > . O I: Ch 01
T"" ‘3‘0‘ L... ‘- 'h- ..— .—
9 CD N O u: ‘~ 4: m :2 on m) 0)
v z —, N m G) v x V
1*- x ~ x g h .. - 51 \7 S
...... “t n. m 0’ '0 .0 .D
Z < \ “ El 5 ‘ a 3 U \7g .5
E :3 U. '~/\ a.‘ -' i“ m >- (D (D
_ o ,4! \ J: g -% 2 m .L: .C
>"" w x ,1) co 0 1} Q '33 Z 92 I g
4 O ‘53 V <1- : "" E a: Q g. ”-3.
g CO U ‘ 5 2 ‘3 Q P” LT. c
O ‘4 ' D ‘2: U: Q < x . a :=
X'- I Q: U w ,J 32: 3-9— 5-3 a) 03
gum 2 RES ruaa m' x
Q 0~ A g Q N 5 3 5*; a g
2 no & ~.\ .u [:1 e 4 \ :2 -
m 0 & ~ “ C: . 2 a a w 5‘
m +- v & < . , :- g a a
U) N N‘- ‘5 , g ‘3' ‘L 3\ z E Q
2 k: :5 3 (z: a :3 Ix E w L""
g 2 \ rd 7) . 0 \A 3 (n C (I
ma 8 m>~°om<-vgﬂm ‘ 165%
g a ‘ IL K9 \‘3 .. c Q 2r 0) E :J “J :1 g
3: "" 'A I m .2 <2 0 :1 O Ck Ki . 0,
ﬁg §§§Q*;Egkcdg£ .\ mﬁa
2- ‘.:- , - .- ..
8 &§*‘E‘3£>m \ch 9‘3
*- In 0 o -- E x «A m m
"" m z '- ‘V ‘3 W m '1: — a
II: LU W .3 (U '6 V) \ (D
0 E E r: ‘3 w 0
f 35 c: E 3: '2 5 9- d w N v ‘1’
u: < o a. u: 1- m 2 "" :2 $8 $2 (D u:

"
"77",".. Form 244
P R E C I S I O N Sample Receipt ”Checklist 5’2""”
m“ Work Order No. I I i ‘ | 5 . ‘ Q
RUSH: [3 Yes [E No DNA
Date & Time Received: I \ 1931 I (Z2 ﬂ '.&0 Received By: 0199——
Date 8: Time Logged ln.‘ H [2 2 g H 2 I H 3 q 7 Logged in By: ,‘T LG)”
Date & Time Reviewed. \\ ‘ 2‘3 l LU qﬁm Reviewed By: %-a =1
Carrier Name: [21 PA] [:1 UPS D FedEx [:1 Cﬁent D Other
Samples Analyzed In House? 1K3 Yes D No Subbed To
ls Chain Of Custody Present? m Yes D N0
ts Chain Of Custody Propeny Filled Out? {EYES D No
Does Chain Of Custody Match Sample Labels? [EYES [:3 N0
Are Sampies Past Hold Time? [3 Yes [X] No D NA
Are Samples In Proper Containers? X] Yes D N0 Intact? 53 Yes D No
No, Of Containers? 3) D Glass Eplastic Cl Baggie E] VOA [3 Micro D Other
When Applicable, ls Headspace Present? [:1 Yes D No mm
Matrix: £3 Aqueous [3 Liquid [1 Sludge L—J Solid [:1 01! D Drinking Water [3 Soil D Other
On Ice? 08 ﬁg C] No 153 NA
Are Samples Preserved? )XI Yes [:1 No g’N/A
000m NH3____M__ Phenoim mom TKN/TONW Phosm NoZNoBW DH2804
Sulﬁde_____~_ C] NaOH & ZnAcetate :‘ Other E
Field Data: [3 pH 1:] Temp D Flow [:1 TRC D TRC Low D Color D Odor UTurbidity [:1 Other .4
mmmmmmmw
NASA/TM—2011—217033 71

"
"78","C.3 Conversion Analysis
Postﬂightconcentrationnb 1
I I I

IV-Gen. Post-Fllght Salt Concentration
Mathematica V5.1 by Wolfram Research, www.wolfram.c0m
Experiment operations were conducted aboard the International Space Station (IS S) for the IntraVenous ﬂuid GENeration
(IV-Gen) experiment during May 2010. Two bags of Normal Saline (NS) solution were produced and returned to Earth for
analysis by a United States Pharmacopeia (USP) certified testing facility. While both samples passed several of the tests,
they both failed to be within tolerances (i5%)for the salt concentration.
The salt concentration for first bag was at 117% of the target value, while the salt concentration for second bag was at
93.8%.
Ideal Case

IdealVolume (*ml H20*) = 1500.0 (*ml H20*)

1500.

IdealSaltMass (*g NaCl*) = 13 . 5 (*g NaCl*)

13.5
Although a tolerance was specified 0f i0.5 g NaCl, it is still possible to meet the USP requirements if a tolerance of 0.75 g
was used.

SaltTolerance (*g NaCl*) = 0 . 75 (*g NaCl*)

0.75

Id als ltMa N Cl
IdealConcentration (* Lam *) = w
“‘1 H2 0 IdealVolume (*ml H2 0*)
0.009
I I I NaCl IdealSaltMass - SaltTolerance (*g NaCl*)
MinmumConcentratlon (*5— *) = —
ml H2 0 IdealVolume (*ml H2 0*)
0.0085
I I 9 NaCl IdealSaltMass + SaltTolerance (*g NaCl*)
MaszmumConcentratlon (*— *) = —
““1 H2 0 IdealVolume (*ml H2 0*)

0.0095

John.B.McQuillen@nasa.g0v AMDG 7 December 20] 0
NASA/TM—2011-217033 72

"
"79","Postﬂightconcentrationnb 2
NSDensity (*g/m1*) = 1 . 0046 (* ﬁ -- Reported in CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physicsw)
1.0046
DilDensity (*g/m1*) = 0. 9989
(* é -- Reported in CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physicsw)
0.9989
Bag #1
I Saline Solution
There was no direct measure of the ﬂight sterile saline bag weights. Therefore, an estimate was made based on the average
bag weight of 5 of the 12 bags in bonded storage. This weight was adjusted to include the weight of the ﬂight labels,
Kapton tape, and the blue hose clamp, see Dan Brown's email dated September 3, 2010, 2:55PM.
SterileBaglEmptth (*g*) = 96.4 (*g*)
96.4
An analysis was performed by Pace Analytical to verify compliance with the United States Pharmacopeia (USP) for a
Normal Saline Solution.
SterileBaglFulth (*g*) = 1371.6(*g -- measured by Pace *)
1371.6
PerCentOver (* % *) = 117 . 0 (* %-- measured by Pace *)
1 l7.
SterileBaglLquol (*m1*) =
(SterileBaglFulth (*g*) — SterileBaglEmptth (*g*)) / NSDensity (*ﬁak)
1269.36
However, review of the water ﬂow rate data from the IV-Gen DACU and adjusting it for the passage of bubbles yields a
total water mass of 1309 g passed through the puriﬁer. While approximately 13 g of salt can be added to the water weight,
there is still a discrepancy of a 50g of water. Nonetheless, the value of 1371.6 g will be used.
SterileBaglConc (*%*) =
1
PerCentOver (* % *) * — IdealConcentration (*g NaCl/ml 820*)
100 (* % *)
0.01053
J0hn.B.McQuillen@nasa.g0v AMDG 7 December 2010
NASA/TM—2011—217033 73

"
"80","Postﬂightconcentrationnb 3

SterileBangaltMass (*9 NaCl*) =

SterileBaglConc (* :ﬂN—ié: *) * SterileBaglLquol (*ml*)

13.3664
- Residuals Analysis
The residual analysis refers to the liquid that was retained within the mixing bag. This bag contained the premeasured
abount of salt, the stir bar, and had some tubing. The amount of residual liquid was determined by weighing the bag,
emptying, drying and then reweighing the bag.

SaltBangry (*g*) = 120 . 700 (*g*)

120.7

SaltBaglLiqRes (*g*) = 141. 794 - SaltBangry(*g*)

21.094
It should be noted that about four months ago, this bag, with the residual liquid, weighed 143 .835 g.
Precision Analytical was contracted to perform a quantitative analysis on the amount of sodium in residual water. How-
ever, in order to do this, they needed at least 100 m1 sample. Therefore, approximately 100 m1 of ASTM Type I
(distilled/deionize/purified) water was added to dilute the sample.

Dilutioanol (*g*) = 240. 888 - SaltBangry (*g*)

120.188
Precision Analytical used a techique call ICP 0r inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES), is
an analytical technique to detect the sodium. This technique is a type of emission spectroscopy that uses the inductively
coupled plasma to produce excited atoms and ions that emit electromagnetic radiation at wavelengths characteristic of a
particular element. The result obtained was 1,360,000 %.

1 N 58 . 5 N Cl
PostBaglConc (*Lfclac) = 1360000(*$*) * ﬂ * #
1*106(*ug Na *) 23(*9 Na *)

3.45913
The amount of salt left in the mixing bag was

BaglResSaltMass (*g NaCl*) =

D ' l t' 1V 1 1 l
PostBaglConc (*%aCl *) * w * #
DilDensity Hm"") 1000 (* m1*)

0.416204
Adding together the salt in sterile saline bag and the salt left in the mixing bag yields
J0hn.B.McQuillen@asa.g0v AMDG 7 December 20] 0

NASA/TM—2011-217033 74

"
"81","Posy’lightconcenn'ationﬂb 4
BangotalSaltMass (*g NaCl*) =
BaglResSaltMass (*g NaCl*) + SterileBangaltMass (*g NaCl*)
13.7826
This quantity falls within the acceptable limit.
For yucks, the concentration of the salt left in the mixing bag with the residual liquid yields a value of
BaglResSaltMass (*g NaCl*)
ResidualConcl = _—
SaltBaglquRes (*g*)
NSDensity (*g/ml-k)
0.0198217
This is over twice the concentration in the sterile saline bag. Either the mixing was incomplete or there was another source
of sodium that contributed to this analysis.
Bag #2 Saline Solution
Again, since there was no direct measure of the actual weight of the ﬂight sterile saline bag, an average was used
SterileBagZEmptth (*g*) = 96 . 4 (*g*)
96.4
Results from Pace Analytical are as follows:
SterileBagZFulth (*g*) = 1576 . 5 (*g -- measured by Pace *)
1576.5
PerCentUnder (* % *) = 93 . 8 (* % — — measured by Pace*)
93.8
SterileBagZLquol (*ml*) =
(SterileBagZFulth (*g*) - SterileBagZEmptth (*g*)) / NSDensity (*ﬁic)
1473.32
For this case, review of the water ﬂow rate data from the IV-Gen DACU and adjusting it for the passage of bubbles yields a
total water mass of 1499 g passed through the purifier. While approximately 13 g of salt can be added to the water weight,
there is still a discrepancy of a 50g of water. Nonetheless, the value of 1480.1 g will be used.
SterileBagZConc (*EaN—Iﬁ *) =
1
PerCentUnder (* % *) * — IdealConcentration (*g NaCl/ml H20*)
100 (* % *)
0.008442
John.B.McQuillen@nasa.g0v AMDG 7 December 201 0
NASA/TM—2011-217033 75

"
"82","Postﬂightconcentrationnb 5
SterileBagZSaltMass (*g*) = SterileBagZConc (*% *) * SterileBagZLquol (*ml*)
12.4378

I Residuals Analysis
Similar to the first mxing bag, the residual analysis refers to the liquid that was retained within the mixing bag. This bag

also contained the premeasured abount of salt, the stir bar, and had some tubing.
SaltBagZDry (*g*) = 119 . 281 (*g*)
119.281
SaltBagZLiqRes (*g*) = 128 . 93 - SaltBagZDry(-kg*)
9.649

It should be noted that about four months ago, this bag, with the residual liquid, weighed 143.835 g.

Approximately 100 ml of ASTM Type I (distilled/deionize/pulified) water was added to dilute the sample.
DilutionZVol (*g*) = 228.225 — SaltBag2Dry (*g*)
108.944

ICP was used on this sample to detect the sodium content, and the result obtained was 568,000 %.

1 N 58 . 5 N Cl
PostBagZConc (*Llach) = 568000(*-‘%*) * ﬂ * #
1*106(*ug Na *) 23(*9 Na *)

1.4447

The amount of salt left in the mixing bag was
Bag2ResSaltMass (*g NaCl*) =

D ' l t' 2V 1 1 l
PostBagZConc (*if‘Cl*) * _w * #
DilDensity (*m *) 1000 (* m1*)

0.157564

Adding together the salt in sterile saline bag and the salt left in the mixing bag yields
Bag2TotalSaltMass(-kg NaCl*) =

Bag2ResSaltMass (*g NaCl*) + SterileBagZSaltMass (*g NaCl*)

12.5954

J0hn.B.McQuillen@nasa.g0v AMDG 7 December 20] 0

NASA/TM—2011-217033 76

"
"83","Poslj’lightconcentrationnb 6
This quantity falls below the acceptable limit and explains the likely cause as to why the bag failed the USP requirements
for normal saline solution
For yucks, the concentration of the salt left in the mixing bag with the residual liquid yields a value of
_ BagZResSaltMass (*g NaCl*)
Re31dualCon02 = —
(SaltBag2L1qRes (*g*) —Bag2ResSaltMass (*g NaCl-k) )
DilDens ity (* ‘nT1_s_S%E'i_cE *)
0.0165824
This is also nearly twice the concentration in the sterile saline bag. Either the mixing was incomplete or there was another
source of sodium that contributed to this analysis.
Conclusions:
From the combined chemical analyses performed by Pace Analytical on the sterile saline bags and by Precision Analytical
0n the mixing bags, the following statements can be made:
1. For Mixing Bag 1, the amount of salt loaded into the bag was acceptable. The most likely cause for the unaccept-
able high normal saline concentration is that the insufficient water was loaded into the bag.
2. For Mixing Bag 2, the amount of salt loaded into the bag was below the acceptable range and is the most likely
cause of the abnonnal 10w saline concentration.
3. Both mixing bags had a residual sodiumt concentration that was about double of that found in the sten'le saline
bags. While this finding is disturbing, it is inconsequential 0n the amount of salt loaded into each bag.
John.B.McQuillen@nasa.g0v AMDG 7 December 20] 0
NASA/TM—2011-217033 77

"
"84","Form Approved
REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE OMB No. 0704-0188
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this
burden, to Department of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports (0704-0188), 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302.
Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB
t | b .

EEEESEUETO e[\IIFOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS.
1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM—YYYY) 2. REPORT TYPE 3. DATES COVERED (From - To)
01-07-201 1 Technical Memorandum
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 5a. CONTRACT NUMBER
Final Report for Intravenous Fluid Generation (IVGEN) Spaceﬂight Experiment

5b. GRANT NUMBER

50. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER
6. AUTHOR(S) 5d. PROJECT NUMBER
McQuillen, J ohn, B.; McKay, Terri, L.; Grifﬁn, DeVon, W.; Brown, Dan, E; Zoldak, J ohn,
T.

5e. TASK NUMBER

5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER

WBS 444543.01 .02.01
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
National Aeronautics and Space Administration REPORT NUMBER
J ohn H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field E'17731
Cleveland, Ohio 4413 5-3191
9. SPONSORINGIMONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSORINGIMONITOR'S
National Aeronautics and Space Administration ACRONYWS)
Washington, DC 20546-0001 NASA

11. SPONSORINGIMONITORING

REPORT NUMBER

NASA/TM-2011-217033
12. DISTRIBUTIONIAVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Unclassiﬁed-Unlimited
Subject Categories: 34 and 52
Available electronically at http://www.sti.nasa.gov
This publication is available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information, 443-75 7-5 802
13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES
14. ABSTRACT
NASA designed and operated the Intravenous Fluid Generation (IVGEN) experiment onboard the International Space Station (188), Increment 23/24, during May 2010. This
hardware was a demonstration experiment to generate intravenous (IV) ﬂuid from 188 Water Processing Assembly (WPA) potable water using a water puriﬁcation technique
and pharmaceutical mixing system. The IVGEN experiment utilizes a deionizing resin bed to remove contaminants from feedstock water to a purity level that meets the
standards of the United States Pharmacopeia (USP), the governing body for pharmaceuticals in the United States. The water was then introduced into an IV bag where the ﬂuid
was mixed with USP-grade crystalline salt to produce USP normal saline (NS). Inline conductivity sensors quantiﬁed the feedstock water quality, output water purity, and NS
mixing uniformity. Six 1.5-L bags of puriﬁed water were produced. Two of these bags were mixed with sodium Chloride to make 0.9 percent NS solution. These two bags were
returned to Earth to test for compliance with USP requirements. On-orbit results indicated that all of the experimental success criteria were met with the exception of the salt
concentration. Problems with a large air bubble in the ﬁrst bag of puriﬁed water resulted in a slightly concentrated saline solution of 117 percent of the target value of 0.9 g/L.
The second bag had an inadequate amount of salt premeasured into the mixing bag resulting in a slightly deﬁcient salt concentration of 93.8 percent of the target value. The
USP permits a range from 95 to 105 percent of the target value. The testing plans for improvements for an operational system are also presented.
15. SUBJECT TERMS
Microgravity applications; Water treatment; Separation; Fluid ﬂow; Medical equipment
16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 17. LIMITATION OF 18. NUMBER 19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON

ABSTRACT OF STI Help Desk (email:help@sti.nasa.gov)
a. REPORT b. ABSTRACT c. THIS PAGES 19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (include area code)
U U [PJAGE UU 85 443-757-5802
Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98)
Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18

"
"85",""
"86",""
