"","x"
"1","46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2008-802
7 - 10 January 2008, Reno, Nevada
Status of MlcrograVIty Selence and ISS/JEM Utlllzatlon
1n J AXA
Masahiro Takayanagi* and Shin-ichi YodaJf
J apan Aerospace Exploration Agency
2-1-1 Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8505, J apan
After the establishment of the J apan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) in October

2003, the activities on microgravity science promotion and on utilization of the International

Space Station (188) have been maintained and developed in the new J apanese space

organization. In this paper, we introduce JAXA’s activities in the ﬁeld of microgravity science

and [SS utilization as well as the science promotion mechanism. The future plans to the extent

of the post—ISS era to promote and develop microgravity science are also discussed.

1. Introduction

The J apan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) has been established in October 2003 by the merger of
former three J apanese institutes and organizations carrying out research and development related to aerospace
and aeronautics, i.e., National Space Development Agency of J apan (NASDA), the Institute of Space and
Aeronautical Science (ISAS) and National Aerospace Laboratory of J apan (NAL). JAXA continuously play a
role of a core organization in fundamental research, development and utilization in aerospace by combining
accumulated knowledge, technology and experience in the ﬁeld. The activities on microgravity science and on
utilization of the International Space Station (188) have been also maintained and developed in J AXA. The
activities include the following points.

1) Development of mechanisms and organizations of microgravity science promotion

2) Research activities of microgravity science including preparation of ISS/JEM utilization

3) J AXA’S long-term Vision and relation and placement of microgravity science in it

11. Mechanisms for microgravity science promotion in JAXA

The philosophy the establishment of JAXA is to make a new organization, which can carry out research and
development in the ﬁelds of space development and utilization, space science and aeronautical engineering more
effectively. There are ﬁve fundamental policies of the uniﬁcation, that is, (i) to select functions being necessary
for development of the original space development and utilization in J apan, (ii) to accelerate development of
fundamental technology in space and aeronautical disciplines, (iii) to establish an organization being suitable for
improving efﬁciency of research and development, (iv) to establish the most suitable organization for obtaining
the fruitful and the world’s top-level results in the space science, and (V) to get reliance from industries by
advancing cooperation with them.

The fundamental purpose of the new organization is decided to contribute to human prosperity and advance
of civilization by using the space. The detail purposes of JAXA in space development and utilization are decided
as follows; (i) to improve national security and security of the J apanese, (ii) to improve afﬂuence and quality of
the J apanese life, (iii) to increase human intangible assets. Based on these policy and purposes, JAXA decided
four strategies for the space development and utilization. The ﬁrst one is to advance the space development and
utilization from the Viewpoint of J apanese national strategy, that is, continuous development of a nation of
science and technology. The second is to maintain position of a leading country by developing the world’s
top-level technology and to improve intellectual presence in the world by contributing to progress in the
forefront space science. The third is to advance the space utilization as a result of development of original
technology for the space development and utilization on J apan’s own initiative. The last is to promote
international cooperation by applying the original technology for the space development and the utilization.

In order to act in accordance with the strategies, JAXA established four divisions. Two of four divisions are
associated with the ISS utilization, that is, the OSFO and the ISAS as mentioned previously. The organizations
associated with the ISS utilization is shown in Figure 1. Before the uniﬁcation of J AXA, there are two
* Deputy manager/Senior Scientist, 188 Science Project Ofﬁce, Institute of Space and Astronautical Science,

AIAA Member
T Professor, Department of Space Biology and Microgravity Science, Institute of Space and Astronautical
Science, Non-member
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2008 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. All rights reserved.

"
"2","departments in NASDA, z'.e., the Space Utilization Research Center (SURC) and the Space Utilization Research
System (SURS). At the uniﬁcation, these departments were dissolved and three new departments are established,
that is, the Space Environment Utilization Center (SEUC) in the OSFO, the 188 Science Proj ect Ofﬁce (IS3PO)
in the ISAS with the Department of Space Biology and Microgravity Science (SBMS). The main roles of the
SEUC are development of experimental apparatus, planning of the apparatus operation and enhancement of
space environment utilization. In the enhancement of the space environment utilization, domestic announcement
of ground-based research aiming future microgravity experiments and support of educational, cultural, artistic
and commercial J EM utilization are included. On the other hand, those of the SBMS are to carry out research,
which will develop to future microgravity experiments in the ﬁelds of microgravity science and space biology.
The main roles of the IS3PO are to carry out ﬂight proj ects in microgravity science, space biology, space science,
and space engineering by establishment of experimental plan, and development of an experiment unique
equipment (EUE).

We have established a new consultative committee named the Steering Committee on Space Utilization
(SCSU) in February 2004 to promote the microgravity science in J apan in the Institute of Space and
Aeronautical Science (ISAS) 0f JAXA. The SCSU members consist of scientists from JAXA and J apanese
representative scientists from various ﬁelds outside of JAXA. SCSU encourages J apanese domestic scientists’
community by public announcement to form groups to discuss future plans and/or to realize space experiments.
We deﬁne this mechanism as the committee’s science research working group (WG). The committee reviews
proposals for WGs and supports by funding to their activities through pier reView process.

111. Research activities of microgravity science
1) Preparation of space experiments on ISS/JEM

The preparations of experiments on the ﬁrst stage (2008-2010) utilization of the J apanese Experiment
Module (J EM), 0r “KIBO”, which is J apanese nickname of J EM of 188 are now on the stages of their peaks. For
example, KIBO and the experimental apparatuses 0f the Fluid Physics Experiment Facility (FPEF) and Solution
Crystallization Observation Facility (SCOF) will be launched by the STS ﬂight of “U” and experiments using
these apparatuses will be started within this year. It is a matter of course that the preparations of space
experiments are mainly consist of research activities on ground as well as the development of experiment unique
equipments (EUE). Figure 2 shows EUE 0f FPEF, for example.

ofJapan {NASDA}
- i
-
‘ Institute 0f Space and Astronautical
Institute cf Space and Aetmnautical ' Science
Science {ISAS} \
\L Departmentafﬁpace Einlngyand
l
Institute nf Space Technnlngy and
Aernnautics
Fig. 1 Organization Related to Microgravity Science Before and After Merger of JAXA
2
American Institute ofAeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","Table 1. Current Schedule of Flight Experiments on ISS/JEM
Marangoni convection
Tokyo
formatlon of dendritic crystal by a method of . .
. . . Hokkaldo Univ.
1n-s1tu observation 2008 SCOF
Array Growth
Experimental Assessment of Dynamic Surface
Deformation Effects in Transition to Oscillatory Satoshi Matsumoto/ 2008 FPEF
Therrnocapillary Flow in Liquid Bridge of High JAXA
1A0 Prandtl Number Fluid
Crystals in Microgravity J AXA
*) We have had two types ofAO, the Domestic AO (DAO) conducted within J apan in 1993 and the International
AO (IAO) in 2000.

The ﬂight project consists of several tasks, for example, -. .. _2
execute 0f the microgravity experiments, development of the I’lli I
EUE, planning of experimental conditions under the : 2; a ""_ ' glh
microgravity and research being indispensable for solving - L I "" ' i -- _' . .22
problems on advancing these works. All of the proj ects are 2.221 ' “' 2 ‘. -~ '5'“ . 1.221
selected as the candidates of the microgravity experiments K3; -' '_ - .hﬁ i"";
through the ﬁrst domestic AO (#IDAO) and the ﬁrst ""21-2 . . ‘_ - H? ' 3"")
internationalAO (#11AO)processes. -- 2', <\ J22

The #IDAO was performed domestically in August 1993. . "" ' _ 2. I :2 i; ' -' j
By evaluating proposals from the several Viewpoints such as HR ' 'r . :2 1' _ 2 ”it
necessity of microgravity or science rnerit, 50 candidates of ' - -‘
microgravity experiments in material and life sciences in total 2 2 2
were selected in 1994. The candidates associated with the Flg‘ 2 thht Experlment Unuque
microgravity science were 29 at the time. Several experiments Equlpment for FPEF
have been performed by using the Space Shuttle, for example, the MSL-l mission. Some of the candidates were
already withdrawn due to some reasons such as mandatory retirement. Hence, at present, 6 ﬂight proj ects eXist in
the #IDAO experiments. In the #IDAO proj ects, there are two kinds of missions, that is, to obtain fruitful results
from the scientiﬁc Viewpoint and to verify functions of experimental apparatuses and J EM.

The #IIAO was publicly advertised in autumn 2000. Science merit of proposals was reviewed by
international reView boards. Then engineering maturity was evaluated by corresponding space agencies related
to the 188 program. Finally, programmatic consistency was judged by each agency. Thus seven ﬂight projects
were selected through the #IIAO process.

The JEM and the experimental apparatuses, FPEF and SCOF will be launched soon, 1J-ﬂight in this
February, 2008. By using these apparatuses, 4 experiments will be carried out as listed in Table 1. The Inter—orbit
Communication System (ICS) will be launched in early summer 2008. The ICS is used for communication with
a J apanese Data Relay Test Satellite (DRTS). The DRTS relays experimental data to Tsukuba Space Center
(TKSC) directly from 188. The overall transfer bit rate is about 40 Mbps. The ICS will be indispensable in cases
of experiments accompanying with the large amount of experimental data such as Video data for a long period.
However, in the cases of experiments for a short period, another transfer method Via US may be available.
Actually, experiments by using the FPEF will be carried out before the ICS launch. Note that the latest delay of
launch schedules of the Space Shuttles would not make any effects on these schedules at present. The last
experiment listed in Table 1 will be carried out by the Gradient Heating Furnace (GHF) which will be launched
by the H—II Transfer Vehicle (HTV) in 2010.

Ground-based research activities are indispensable for preparation of space experiments such as 188
utilization above mentioned. These activities are outlined below in each research ﬁelds.

3
American Institute ofAeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","2} Material processing and
crystal growth research

The merits of space 1
summarized by a couple of S 0.8 ’00 O
representativekeywords; '43 0] —
‘convection-free’. Containerless d: 0-6 m
processing of metals, alloys and 2 0.5
othermaterialspmidesa g 04 —
number ofadvantages and '

- - U! 0.3 _‘ ,'M»M“W¢:(¢““‘“ ‘
crystal growth. For example the E 0.2
lackofacontainerwau 0.1 —
precuesasomldoffor '
heterogeneous nucleation. This 0
promotes greater undercoolings 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
in molten materials Which upon Distan ce (mm)
can achieve novel material
properties, reﬁned grain, glassy Fig. 3 Axial InAs concentration proﬁles in a 10mm diameter
phases, etc. In particular, the crystal grown by the TLZ method.
research group of JAXA for
materials processing under microgravity environment has devoted their research source and activity into
containerless processing of various materials using the experimental techniques that can simulate the
microgravity environment. In a lot of outcomes, to be mentioned specially is the formations of metastable phase
from the deeply undercooled melts of dielectric and magnetic materials, and the spherical single crystal of Si for
a solar cell.

Achievement of a diffusion—dominated condition in liquid is regarded as one of the most promising method
to understand the mechanism of crystal growth from the liquid, While temperature and concentration gradients in
the liquid becorne driving forces of convection in the liquid and the convection inﬂuences the morphology of the
s01id/1iquid(S/L) interface. The buoyancy convection can be strongly damped by utilization of low-gravity and a
strong static magnetic ﬁeld. For example, J AXA research team has invented a new crystal growth method named
traveling liquid-zone (TLZ) method [1].

3) Thermo—physical properties

Microgravity provides us a unique experimental

environment for thermophysical property measurements. ' '-

Since, natural convections are suppressed, such transport ‘

properties as thermal conductivity and diffusion —--.--
coefﬁcients of liquid can be measured With high accuracy.

Diffusion coefﬁcients measurements of liquid tin over '

Wide temperature range were conducted using the Space I ..

shuttle in 1990s. The temperature dependence of the

measured diffusion coefﬁcients did not followed the ‘ ‘ N
Arrhenius equation and this result stimulated our 1 _

curiosity,“ What kind of mechanism dominates the ~ _ 5 _ ‘
diffusion and how the diffusion coefﬁcients are ' ' -
determined? ” . . .

Another merit for thermophysical property F1g.4 Electrostatlc LeVItated Sample
measurements is“ containerless processing ”, Which
means that liquid samples can be maintained Without containers. The use of a containerless technique for
materials processing has many technological and scientiﬁc advantages. The absence of a crucible allows the
handling of chemically reactive materials such as molten refractory metals, alloys, 0r semiconductors, and
eliminates the risk of sample contamination in overheated as well as in undercooled states (liquid phase below
melting temperature). This offers excellent opportunities to characterize the structure of materials and to
determine accurately their thermophysical properties in those states. Currently, thermophysical property
measurements of high temperature melts are being conducted in JAXA using two levitation methods,
electrostatic (ESL) and electromagnetic (EML).

4
American Institute ofAeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","4) Fluid physics

Marangoni convection is dominant ﬂow under microgravity, since thermal convection is always minimized
in this condition. Therefore, Marangoni convection is so interesting and important phenomena under
microgravity, which is difﬁcult to measure and/or observe on the earth. Microgravity experiments are always
needed to understand it, which would be contributed to progress of ﬂuid physics with ﬂow occurred by a
localized force only at liquid surface. Marangoni convection is a phenomenon which still offers fundamental
questions both in science and technology. When a liquid has a non-uniform distribution of temperature or
concentration, the distribution of surface tension over the free surface also becomes non—uniforIn, because
surface tension generally depends on temperature and concentration. This results in the occurrence of Marangoni
convection. At present the scientiﬁc issues in Marangoni convection phenomena are as follows:

(1) The mechanism of transition behavior from stationary to oscillatory ﬂow.
(2) The origin of transition behavior of ﬂow such as stationary, oscillatory and turbulence ﬂow.
(3) The effects of Prandtl number on ﬂow pattern of Marangoni

To make clear the above issues, we need to have high precise measurement of Marangoni ﬂow. Usually,
Maranogni convection has been measured by Half—zone liquid bridge. Half—zone (HZ) liquid bridge is a system
in which the liquid is sustained by surface tension between two disks. In particular, one with the hot top disk and
the cold bottom disk has been actively investigated for the following reasons: From the technical point of View,
HZ conﬁguration simulates half the ﬂoating-zone (FZ) crystallization method. In FZ method oscillating
Marangoni convection results in the formation of striations, which means the degradation of the produced crystal.
Therefore, the grasp and control of the convection are strongly required. To get high precise ﬂow pattern in the
temperature gradient in two disks, we need a larger size of liquid bridge which is impossible to form on ground
more than 5 mm diameter with silicon oil. Therefore, microgravity experiments are need to get high precise ﬂow
pattern data with a larger size of liquid bridge.

Regarding to items (1) and (2), JAXA research team plan to do microgravity experiments by International
Space Station in 2008 to 2009 to get and observe the high precise ﬂow with the larger size of liquid bridge more
than 30 mm diameters. The experimental unique hardware for the experiments has been developed so far by
doing several kinds of ground study to determine its speciﬁcation. The behavior has not been made clear for long
time, so that these experiments have been expected to establish a model of the behavior. A model which can
explain the Marangoni number vs liquid diameter with the same aspect ratio (liquid length vs liquid diameter)
has not been proposed so far. Therefore, we also have tried to understand the transition behavior theoretically by
establishing theoretical modeling. The existing model can not explain the behavior, so that J AXA research team
tried to consider the temperature distribution of the free surface of liquid bridge which introduces modiﬁcation
of Marangoni number and u are the temperature difference, distance between the disks, temperature coefﬁcient
of surface tension, thermal
diffusivity, and the Viscosity of the ‘ (“MW m,“
ﬂuid, respectively. This parameter ( _, _, )
speciﬁes the strength of the ""1NI’CriI‘W'1‘ i /' M'
driving force of convection. N ﬁg Ab

Regarding to item (3), the g _‘ [Hwy HM / ,m, ' ,mk
purpose is to complete 3; 'ﬁmmnmmummn
understanding of Marangoni ﬂow g I i , w
by using the high and low Prandtl 3 3""""""“""‘ ”m“ "" ‘ "" i
liquid. That is, heat transfer ¥+——-—+
mechanism is different with high “(In ”N; , Wu 7 : ‘» -""~-‘
and low Prandtl number ﬂow. .. .

. ~Simulation _ , ‘_ .- 4. ""
Heat transfers by ﬂow in low , . A
Prandtl number ﬂuid and by 2 ~ m‘ .. 9
thermal diffusion in hi h Prandtl .2 . ., . , . I.” x .' ,I ' i ,
number ﬂuid, respectifely. J AXA a {1/“—fllIMMSWRHHHBRH. '1‘ fl ill“! , ' i “
research team have tried to f; ‘ bl F' r
concentrate to ground base H —~. 3
experiments by using liquid Sn
with diameter Of 5 mm. Low Murangoni number .Uu (or time I)
Prandtl number liquids are always
metal, alloy and semiconductor. Fig.5 Schematic of Transition processes in Marangoni convection
The surface tensions of these
liquids are so strong rather than
high Prandtl number

5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","5} Combustion

The maj or goals of the researches in combustion science are to provide predictive and controlling
capabilities to enhance combustion technology and ﬁre safety. Furthermore, environmental concerns recently
dominate needs of combustion research for the realization of low-emissive, efﬁcient energy generation and
utilization. The utilization of microgravity is an exceedingly useful tool for the scientiﬁc research for realization
of physics and dynamics of combustion phenomena, such as spray combustion. Many eXperiments have been
conducted in order to investigate combustion phenomena without natural convection. Now in addition,
numerical simulation becomes useful method for further understanding of combustion phenomena. From the
fundamental Viewpoints, the interactions among ﬂuid dynamics, scalar transport, thermodynamics and Chemical
kinetics that are Characteristic of combustion phenomena have been investigated by above experimental and
numerical methods.

One of the most important aspects in spray combustion is ﬂame spreading bettween droplets. This process
enables maintaining the ﬂame holding and stabilizing mechanism in practical spray eombustors such as gas
turbines and furnaces. Furthermore, ﬂame spreading in reciprocating engines such as the DI-engine plays an
important role in smoothly and rapidly enhancing the combustion area. JAXA research team have numerically
investigated the ﬂame propagating process using a detailed simulation program and demonstrated good
agreement with theoretical predictions and with microgravity eXperiments [2, 3]. This droplet microgravity
eXperiments project has been implemented by a sounding rocket which is collaborated proj eet with BSA. The
launch schedule will be in spring 2009. JAXA research team have been developing experiment hardware and
doing several kinds of ground base research to determine experimental parameter so far. Obj eetives of the
present research are clariﬁcation of ﬂame propagation mechanism along a fuel droplet array using microgravity
enVironment as greatly useful tools, and establishment of reasonable model for improved understanding of more
complex spray combustion mechanism. It includes numerical analysis that revealed detail ﬂame propagation
process and novel experimental data supported by advanced experimental techniques. Furthermore, through the
theoretical considerations, JAXA research team have Classiﬁed Characteristic modes of ﬂame propagation of a
fuel droplet array, and constructed a mode map. The ﬁnal target of this work is to complete a numerical
simulation technology with all kinds of combustion phenomena as well as convection and sedimentation, which
can allow us to predict some combustion behaVior on the earth.

6} Dusty Plasma

The dusty plasmas research has one of the conspicuous scientiﬁc issues in the ﬁeld of fundamental science
in microgravity science, recently. Dusty plasmas are a mixture of plasma and dust particles. Dusty plasmas
research originally began in a ﬁeld of astrophysics such as interstellar molecular Clouds [4], proto-planetary
disks, cometary tails or planetary rigs. In 1986, a theoretical work on Coulomb crystal formation by using the
dusty plasmas was published [5]. In order to observe the Coulomb crystals, many eXperiments and additional
theoretical researches had been carried out in many laboratories. In 1994, the Coulomb crystals were
successfully observed in several laboratories at almost the same time [6—9]. In these experiments, external
electrodes, walls or grooves on electrodes were often used to trap dust particles since a mechanism of the
Coulomb crystal formation was expected as repulsive force due to the theoretical research history. After the
success in observation of the Coulomb crystals, many scientiﬁc applications of the dusty plasmas have been
proposed, for example, critical point phenomena [10], phase transitions, phonon propagation. In addition, the
dusty plasmas will contribute to fusion plasma physics near diverter plates and colloidal physics. Although it is
expected that the dusty plasmas research contributes to many scientiﬁc disciplines, one essential scientiﬁc
problem still eXists. The problem is that mechanisms of the Coulomb crystal formation are not fully understood
yet. For example, although many scientists believe that the Coulomb crystal is a repulsive system, existence of
attractive force is also reported [1 1]. Therefore, JAXA research team have developed and improved an
experimental apparatus without any artiﬁcial potential control mechanisms to investigate the Coulomb crystal
formation mechanism since December 2005.

IV. JAXA long-term Vision and microgravity science

JAXA announced the long-term Vision in March 2005 named ‘JAXA 2025’. The Vision is JAXA’s proposal
on its own initiative and the ideal situation of aerospace areas in the next 20 years and the executive direction for
its realization, taking into account forecasts for the future of Japan and the global society. The Vision reViews and
takes into account the overall situation of Japan. Therefore, the realization of the Vision requires the
comprehensive approach involving all taxpayers. It is hoped that the Vision would stimulate broad discussions
within and outside JAXA resulting in better understanding of and support for future aerospace activities by the
public opinion. JAXA hopes that the Vision would be appropriately taken into account in the deeision-making
process to develop national strategies, various plans and policies of Japan.

6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","Considering the purposes of space development and utilization in J apan, J AXA Vision is determined as
follows, that is, (i) to develop launch vehicles and satellites With the highest reliability and world Class capability,
contributing to the realization of a secure and prosperous society, (ii) to promote top-level science in the ﬁeld of
space science While preparing for J apan’s own human space activities and the utilization of the moon, (iii) to
conduct ﬂight demonstration of a prototype hypersonic vehicle With the cruising speed at Mach 5 and (iv) to
contribute to turning the aerospace industry into a key industry With all Of the above activities. The more detailed
explanations of the Vision are (i) to contribute to building a secure and prosperous society through the utilization
of aerospace technologies, (ii) to contribute to advancing our knowledge of the universe and broaden the horizon
of human activity, (iii) to develop the capability to carry out autonomous space activities through the best
technologies in the world, (iv) to facilitate growth of the space industry With self—sustenanee and world Class
capability and (V) to facilitate the growth of aviation industry and aim for technological breakthroughs for future
air transportation. For the ﬁst decade, JAXA proposes prioritizing the realization of an innovative space
utilization system that can contribute to building the secure and prosperous country. For the second decade,
JAXA proposes continuing to promote the Wide use of aerospace technologies in the society by basing on the
executive direction set by the government and by taking actions toward the realization of new space utilization,
including the utilization of the moon, and J apan’s own human space activities.

The Vision includes the promotion of top-level science in the ﬁeld of space science While preparing for
J apan’s own human space activities and the utilization of the moon. In the second decade, JAXA wants to
promote the Wide use Of aerospace technologies by taking actions toward the realization of new space utilization,
including the utilization of the moon, and J apan’s own human space activities. We can ﬁnd the future strategy of
microgravity science of the post ISS-era according to the Vision to apply knowledge and experience to the
technology development to realize moon surface utilization.

References

1) Kinoshita, K. et al., Adv. in Astronautieal Sciences 117 (2004) 865.
2) Kikuehi, M. et al., Proe. Combust. Inst., 29, (2002) 2611—2619.
3) Mikami, M. et al., J . Combust. Society J apan, in Japanese, 45-134, (2003) 238—247.
4) Draine, B. T. et al., Astrophys. J. 320, 803 (1987)
5) Ikezi, H., Phys. Fluids 29, 1764 (1986).
6) Chu, J . H. et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 4009 (1994).
7) Thomas, H. et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 652 (1994).
8) Hayashi, Y. et al., Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 33, 476 (1994).
9) Melzer, A. et al., Phys. Lett. A 191, 301 (1994).
10) Totsuji, H. et al., Prog. Theor. Phys. 52, 42 (1974).
11) Vladimirov, S. V. et al., Phys. Rev. E 52, R2172 (1995).

7

American Institute OfAeronauties and Astronautics

"
