"","x"
"1","NASA/TM-2010-216130

Behavioral Issues Associated With Long-
Duration Space Expeditions: Review and
Analysis of Astronaut J ournals
Experiment 01-E104 (J ournals): Final Report
Jack Stuster, PhD, CPE

Principal Investigator

NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston

National Aeronautics and

Space Administration

J ohnson Space Center

Houston, TX 77058

July 2010

"
"2","THE NASA STI PROGRAM OFFICE . . . IN PROFILE
Since its founding, NASA has been 0 CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientific and
dedicated to the advancement of technical findings by NASA-sponsored
aeronautics and space science. The NASA contractors and grantees.
Scientific and Technical Information (STI) 0 CONFERENCE PUBLICATION.
Program Office plays a key part in helping Collected papers from scientific and
NASA maintain this important role. technical conferences, symposia,
The NASA STI Program Office is operated seminars, or 05h? Eifgggs SPODSOIEd
by Langley Research Center, the lead center or COSPOHSOIE y '
for NASA’S scientific and technical 0 SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientific,
information. The NASA STI Program Office technical, or historical information from
provides access to the NASA STI Database, NASA programs, projects, and mission,
the largest collection of aeronautical and often concerned with subjects having
space science STI in the world. The Program substantial public interest.
Ofﬁce ”3150 NASA 5 IPSUF‘JUOMI . TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. English-
mechamsm for disseminating the results of 1 . .
. . . . anguage translations of foreign
its research and development act1v1t1es. . . . . .
. . seientific and technical material
These results are published by NASA in the ertinent to N AS A’s mission
NASA STI Report Series, which includes the p '
following report types: Specialized services that complement the
. TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports .STI Programpfﬁce S dwerse Offgmgs .
, include creating custom thesauri, building
of completed research or a ma]or . . .
. . . customized databases, organizing and
Significant phase of research that . .
publishing research results . . . even
present the results of NASA programs . . .
. . , prov1dmg Videos.
and include extenswe data or theoretical
analysis. Includes compilations of For more information about the NASA STI
significant scientific and technical data Program OfﬁC9, see the fOHOWngI
and information deemed to be of 0 Access the NASA STI Program Home
continuing reference value. NASA’S Page at httpi/ / www.sti.nasa.gov
counterpart of peer-reviewed formal 0 E-mail your question Via the Internet to
professional papers but has less help@sti.nasa.gov
stringent limitations on manuscript 0 Fax your question to the NASA Access
length and extent of graphic Help Desk at (301) 621-0134
presentations. 0 Telephone the NASA Access Help Desk
. TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. at (301) 621'0390
Scientific and technical findings that are ' Write t0:
preliminary or of specialized interest, NASA ACCESS H6113 DESk
eg, quick release reports, working NASA Center fOl‘ AeroSpace
papers, and bibliographies that contain Information
minimal annotation. Does not contain 7115 Standard
extensive analysis. Hanover, MD 21076-1320

"
"3","NASA/TM-2010-216130

Behavioral Issues Associated With Long-
Duration Space Expeditions: Review and
Analysis of Astronaut J ournals
Experiment 01-E104 (J ournals): Final Report
Jack Stuster, PhD, CPE

Principal Investigator

NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston

National Aeronautics and

Space Administration

J ohnson Space Center

Houston, TX 77058

July 2010

"
"4","The Views and conclusions contained in this document are those of
the author and should not be interpreted as representing the ofﬁcial
policies, either explicit or implied, of the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration.
. - {/1 .. 1E). .
._ r i "" f
:h- (:ol‘ﬁ‘ i. .I ‘—
, ﬁ' '7” ’_ ___-L‘
Dr. Claude Bachelard writing in his journal during the
International Biomedical Expedition to the Antarctic
(IBEA), in 1981; the electrodes on his face and chin are
for monitoring EEG and EMG. From, Rivolier, J .,
Goldsmith, R., Lugg, D.J., and Taylor, A.J.W. Man in the
Antarctic: The Scientiﬁc Work of the International
Biomedical Expedition to the Antarctic (IBEA), Taylor &
Francis: London, 1988.
Available from:
NASA Center for AeroSpace Information National Technical Information Service
7115 Standard Drive 5285 Port Royal Road
Hanover, MD 21076—1320 Springﬁeld, VA 22161
301—621—0390 703—605—6000
This report is also available in electronic form at http://st0n.j sc.nasa.gOV/collections/TRS/

"
"5","EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This report describes a content analysis of personal journals that were maintained for this purpose
by NASA astronauts during expeditions onboard the International Space Station (188). Using methods
developed during previous analogue research, the study provides the ﬁrst quantitative data on Which to
base a rank-ordering 0f the behavioral issues associated With long-duration space operations.

The ﬁrst level of analysis identiﬁed the relative salience of 24 major categories of issues With
behavioral implications, among Which the top 10 categories account for 88 percent of all j ournal entries:
Work, Outside Communications, Adjustment, Group Interaction, Recreation/Leisure, Equipment, Events,
Organization/Management, Sleep, and Food. The second-level of analysis identiﬁed 108 subcategories
Within the maj 0r categories and calculated their relative frequencies and temporal distributions. The third
level of analysis focused on the tone of entries as an indicator of speciﬁc problems and general morale,
using a metric deﬁned as Net Positivity/Negativity (NPN); results of the NPN analysis support hypo-
theses concerning a third quarter phenomenon, Which also is explained in the report. Responses to ques-
tions asked before, during, and after the expeditions suggest that living and working onboard the 188 is
not as difﬁcult as the astronauts anticipate before starting their siX-month tours of duty. Astronauts
reported that they beneﬁted personally from writing in their journals and recommended continuation of
the research.

Examples of j ournal entries and graphic representations of data are used to illustrate the quantita-
tive analyses. Together, the entries and analyses provide a comprehensive description of ISS operations
from the crew perspective. Example entries included in the report concern activities, events, and observa-
tions and reﬂect the normal ups and downs of daily life onboard an orbital space station. It is important to
note that no single journal entry, nor even a subset of entries, accurately describes an entire expedition,
but rather, the most salient issue at the time the entries were written. The results show that NASA’s
efforts concerning interpersonal issues, teamwork, psychological support, and leadership have been par-
ticularly effective. Operational implications of study results are summarized and then presented in the
form of speciﬁc recommendations to facilitate living and working in space, Whether onboard the 188, a
spacecraft bound for an asteroid, or an interplanetary ship.

i

"
"6","“Truly, the Whole secret lies in arranging things sensibly,
and especially in being careful about the food.”
- F ridtj 0f Nansen
ii

"
"7","CONTENTS
Page
Background 1
Objective 1
Coding the Data 4
Questlonnalres 5
Inter-Rater Rehablhty 6
Other PotentialThreats t0 the Validity OfStudy Results 7
CategoryAna1y31s 9
SubcategoryAnaly31s 10
Work 10
Outside Commumcatlons 14
Adjustment 17
Group Interactlon 21
Recreatlon/Lelsure 23
Equlpment 27
Event 29
Organization/Management....................................................................................................... 30
Sleep 32
Foodqnnnnnnnnnnnnnn”nun”nnnnnnnnn”nnnnnnnnnnnnn”nnnnn”nnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn 34
Logistics/Storage 37
Exetelse 38
Procedures/thuals 39
Leadershlp 4O
Medlcal 41
Net P031t1V1ty/Negat1V1ty 43
Questionnaire Results 48
SECTION 42 IMPLICATIONS 49
Implications 0fthe CategoryAna1y31s 49
Implications 0fthe Subcategory Analysm 51
Schedules and Time-Related Stress 51
Tedious and Frustrating Work/Procedure Problems 52
Triviallssues Are Exaggerated 52
Adjustment to the Condltlons 53
Implications 0fthe Net Positivity/Negativity Analysis 54
Implications 0fthe Questionnaire Results 55
Recommendatlons 55
Conclusmns 57
FinalNote 58
APPENDIX A: NOTE CONCERNING THE 1961 NORTH AMERICAN AVIATION SIMULATION 59
APPENDIX B: THE THIRD QUARTERPHENOMENON 61

iii

"
"8","FIGURES
Figure Title Page
Results 0fthe French Diaries Study 2
Mission Duration in Days 4
Numbers ofEntries, Sessions, and Words by Subject 5
Numbers of Primary, Secondary, and Tertiary Category Assignments Combined.............................. 9
Numbers 0f“W0rk” Entries by Subcategory and Quarter 10
Numbers of “Outside Communications” Entries by Subcategory and Quarter 14
Numbers 0f“Adjustment” Entries by Subcategory and Quarter 17
Numbers 0f“Gr0up Interaction” Entries by Subcategory and Quarter 21
Numbers 0f“Recreati0n/Leisure” Entries by Subcategory and Quarter 23
Numbers 0f“Equipment” Entries by Subcategory and Quarter 27
Numbers 0f“Event” Entries by Subcategory and Quarter 29
Numbers of ""Organization/Management"" Entries by Subcategory and Quarter 30
Numbers 0f“Sleep” Entries by Subcategory and Quarter 32
Numbers 0f“Food” Entries by Subcategory and Quarter 34
Numbers 0f“L0gistics/St0rage” Entries by Subcategory and Quarter 37
Numbers 0f“Exercise” Entries by Subcategory and Quarter 38
Numbers 0f“Procedures/Rituals” Entries by Subcategory and Quarter 39
Numbers 0f“Leadership” Entries by Subcategory and Quarter 40
Numbers 0f“Medical” Entries by Subcategory and Quarter 41
Net Positivity/Negativity by Quarter: All Journals Combined 44
Net Positivity/Negativity by Quarter for Each J ournalz All Categories Combined 46
Net Positivity/Negativity by Quarter for Each J ournalz Adjustment Entries Only 47
Net Positivity/Negativity by Quarter Comparisons: Adjustment Entries Only 48
Average Pre-, Mid-, and Post-EXpedition Questionnaire Responses 48
Duration and Number of Science Hours During Expeditions 1 — 2O 50
NPN Comparisons: Management VS. Personal Communications & Procedures VS. Customs/Rituals .. 54
Average NPN 0fthe Categorles 54
3"" 3 ‘ﬁ 33> 111"":
11 '4. ii ' 1, 1+4: 1:2
l, _ .} ' :j‘ l 1...; :3
'1. '1 1% 1g i3. \_ 4’ .
r- 1"" 1 A ‘ I KW ‘5: :1; 1 '.
.11 f H x '7 ‘
1 7 ~ 4""“
Subj ects in a study of isolation and conﬁnement
prepare to enter their spacecraft simulator for a
12—day experiment in 1961. See Appendix A for
more information.
iV

"
"9","INTRODUCTION

This report describes research conducted under Cooperative Agreement NCC9-171 for the
Behavioral Health and Performance Ofﬁce at NASA’s J ohnson Space Center. The study described in this
report is based on the premise that the introspective accounts of individuals who are living and working in
stressful or unusual environments can provide useful information about the factors that affect individual
and group performance under those conditions. The study uses methods developed during space analogue
research to systematically analyze the content of conﬁdential journals that were maintained for this
purpose by crew personnel during expeditions to the International Space Station (188). The report is
presented in four sections. This introduction describes why the study was conducted and provides
background information and the historical context of the research. The introduction is followed by a
description of the research tasks performed to collect and analyze the data and, in turn, is followed by a
section devoted to study results. The report concludes with a discussion of operational implications and
recommendations based on those results.
BACKGROUND

Since the beginning of human space ﬂight, mission planners have asked ﬂight surgeons, psy-
chologists, and psychiatrists for quantitative data concerning the relative importance of the behavioral
issues that must be considered when planning operations and designing equipment and habitats for long
duration space expeditions. The response always has been that interpersonal relations among crew
members is the most important issue, a belief shared by many science ﬁction writers, the general public,
and most important, astronauts. However, physicians and behavioral scientists could not justify the
primacy of “getting along with each other” empirically, nor provide a systematic method for calculating
how much more or less important any issue is than another. Planners and equipment designers are data-
driven and need a metric to guide the allocation of scarce resources, but laboratory and space analogue
studies usually focus on a speciﬁc issue (e.g., sleep, communications), which makes it impossible to place
the various inﬂuences on human behaVior in order of importance to space crews.1

A previous content analysis of journals that were written during expeditions on Earth provided
the ﬁrst quantitative data on which to base a rank-ordering of behavioral issues in terms of salience, or
importance. 2 That study identiﬁed 22 major categories of behavioral issues associated with living and
working in isolation and conﬁnement and placed the categories and constituent themes in order of priority
based on the relative frequency of category assignments. The information derived from this and other
space analogue studies has been instructive. However, research opportunities on the 188 have made it
possible to study the issues under operational conditions with the participation of space crews. The ﬂight
experiment documented in this report was the logical next step beyond analogue studies and addresses the
behavioral and human factors questions of highest priority in NASA’s Critical Path Roadmap, risk assess-
ments, and mitigations.
OBJECTIVE

The objective of this study has been to identify the relevant behavioral factors and obtain data to
inform decisions concerning the priorities that should be placed on the various behavioral issues to
prepare for and manage future space expeditions. Study results can be applied to improve selection,
training, support, scheduling, and the design of equipment and procedures.
1 For more information about space analogue research see, Suedfeld, P., and Steel, GB. The environmental psychol-
ogy of capsule habitats. Annual Review ofPsychology, 51, 227-253, 2000.
2 The project was a collaboration among NASA’s Division of Life Sciences, the French Space Agency (CNES),
Territoire des Terres Australes et Antarctiques Franeaises (TAAF), and Institut Franeais Pour La Recherche Et La
Technologie Polaires (IFRTP).

1

"
"10","THE ""FRENCH DIARIES STUDY""
A content analysis was performed of nine personal journals that were maintained for this purpose by the leaders
and physicians at the Dumont d’UrviIIe Antarctic facility and three French research stations located on small
islands in the South Indian Ocean; the ”diaries” were written during a 13-month period in 1993-1994 as part of
the International Antarctic Psychological Program (IAPP). The investigators assigned all diary entries to a primary
category and more than half of the entries also were assigned to a secondary category, based on similarity of
content. ”Group Interaction” was found to be the most frequentIy-assigned of the 22 categories to emerge from
the analysis, as illustrated in the following figure. Themes (clusters of entries on similar topics) also were
identified from the diary entries within each category of behavioral issues. 3
0 100 200 300 400 500 600
Group Interaction
Outside Communications ____
Workload “a
Recreation & Leisure _ \.
MedicalSupport I .. -
Adjustment - .
Leadership I I m
Event _ _ _ fr""
Food Preparation _ _. 1 _ "" '
Organization/Mgt. _ man... ‘3.“
Equipment ' L. |
Sleep ' i' '
Safety r ---;=-- '
PersonnelSelection ' i
Waste Management 3.; ' '-
Internal Communications ' :-.:.-|- ' i ‘_
Exercise II""\\ \b I .. m” , I I ' 3E1""
Habitat Aelslthetlcs H ﬁt h; . w“! 1""""!
yglene I""'-.,__ .- fs-
Personal Hygiene ""--._,1_____ H;
Privacy/Personal Space """"""-—-——.——-""'
Clothing
All entries were coded as positive, negative, or neutral in tone, to permit analyses using a metric defined as net
positivity-negativity, which was derived by dividing each journal into chronological quarters and then subtracting
the proportion of negative entries from the proportion of positive entries within each segment. The analysis of
Net Positivity/Negativity found evidence of a decline in morale during the third quarter, regardless of mission
duration or location. Some study results were contrary to the expectations of experts. For example, shorter mis-
sions (69 to 180 days) generated greater negativity than the longer missions (230 to 363 days) and diaries from
the insular stations, where visitors disrupt the routine, were more negative than diaries from the isolated and
austere Antarctic base. More than 100 specific themes were identified among the 22 categories of issues.
3 Stuster, J ., Bachelard, C. and Suedfeld, P. The Relative Importance of Behavioral Issues During Long—Duration
I.C.E. Missions. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine (71) 9, 2000 (September).
Stuster, J ., Bachelard, C. and Suedfeld, P. In the Wake of the Astrolabe: Review and Analysis ofDiarieS Maintained
by the Leaders and Physicians at F rench Remote Duty Stations. Technical Report to the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration, 1999 (February). http_://WWW.anacap_asciences.com/publications/Astrolabe.p_df
2

"
"11","THE RESEARCH

Calculating the number of cases, observations, or subjects required for an experiment to have
meaningful results is a concern of all scientists and usually involves a compromise between the ideal
research design and what is practical to achieve. For example, public opinion surveys are administered to
samples of at least 2,000 carefully-selected individuals in order to obtain sufﬁcient conﬁdence that results
accurately reﬂect the beliefs of a larger segment of the population. In contrast, the designers of more
intrusive experiments, such as those requiring painful muscle biopsies, are content with as few as ﬁve
subjects. The current study was confronted with an unusual variation of the sample size dilemma: How
many subj ects would be necessary to produce meaningful results if the subjects were to participate one at
a time for periods of approximately siX months each? The inclination to maximize statistical power with a
large sample was tempered by the recognition that the ideal study could take so long to complete that it
would be both too expensive and too late to be of use to the sponsoring agency. Many medical and physi-
ological experiments rely on only ten subj ects, so ten was the number speciﬁed by the Pl during the plan-
ning phase of the experiment. It would take a minimum of ﬁve years to obtain the criterion number of
subjects—longer if any astronauts declined the inVitation to participate in the study or agreed to partici-
pate and then did not produce an acceptable journal.

Ten subjects normally would be considered insufﬁcient for statistical analysis in studies of human
behaVior. However, in the current project each subject generated an exceptionally large volume of data in
the form of multiple journal entries during a prolonged period under operational conditions. The large
volume of data per subject more than compensates for the relatively small sample if it can be assumed
that the astronauts who participated in the study accurately represent the population from which the crews
of future space missions would be selected. The ten participants do, in fact, reﬂect the composition of the
Expedition Corps, the cadre of astronauts preparing for long duration tours of duty onboard the ISS and
beyond; the sample includes men and women; scientists, engineers and pilots; and civilian and military
personnel.

The study is based on the assumption that the more a person writes about a topic in a j ournal or
diary, the more important that topic is to the person at that time. It is a reasonable assumption, but main-
taining a continuous written record for a period of siX months requires sustained commitments of time
and effort. Participants were asked to make journal entries at least three times per week while on the 188
using a laptop computer and MSWord template that automatically inserted the date on a new page each
time the ﬁle was opened; sessions usually were hard scheduled (i.e., appeared on the daily timeline), but
moved to the optional task list during periods of high-tempo activity. Participants were encouraged to
address whatever topics were most salient to them and to write candidly about their experiences and
observations, but they were cautioned to avoid focusing exclusively on negative issues. Crews were
assured during Informed Consent Brieﬁngs (ICBs) that no one other than the astronaut and principal
investigator would have access to the original journals and that all identifying information would be
removed from any excerpts or examples used in reports, articles, or presentations. The journals were
protected by passwords and encrypted during downlink and transfer to the investigator, a process that was
performed monthly according to a formal protocol designed to further ensure the security of the data. The
encrypted ﬁles were deleted from the NASA server immediately after the transfers were completed,
usually within 15 minutes of the downlink.

The durations covered by the ten j ournals obtained during the study ranged from approximately
150 to more than 200 days, with an average of 187.7 days on board the 188; all but one of the journals
spanned a period of at least siX months, as illustrated in the following ﬁgure.4
4 Random numbers have been assigned to replace subjects’ names and the orders of the expeditions have been
altered in all ﬁgures to prevent the identiﬁcation of individual participants in the study.

3

"
"12","Mission Duration in Days

Subject
Subject

__!7~‘A‘m’tmiem“' ~W'z—«w ;’ ‘r
Subject ‘
Subject — _ 1""

”hr f” 4'; «é‘rf’VE-ﬁi‘fq ,‘3S""‘-WW"" ,1"" ”*2“
Subject W
Subject , A

L: .‘ “3.7;..‘59633-1 V
Subject
Subject
Subject
CODING THE DATA

The investigator read all j ournals in increments following each monthly downlink. Each j ournal
was read again following completion of the expedition and converted to a database format using a spread-
sheet conﬁgured for this purpose. J ournals were divided automatically into chronological “sessions” by
the date that was inserted each time a journal was opened. Coding began by parsing journal text into seg-
ments concerning a topic and then entering the text in the appropriate cells of the spreadsheet; these seg-
ments, called “entries” in this report, ranged in length from a single sentence to a complete paragraph. All
entries were assigned to a primary topical category and most also were assigned to a secondary category;
about half of the entries also were coded for a third category, a departure from the method followed in the
previous analogue study, intended to provide a comprehensive accounting of topics mentioned in the jour-
nals. Two categories emerged almost immediately during the coding process that were not among the 22
identiﬁed during the previous study; Logistics/Storage and Procedures/Rituals were added to the list for a
total of 24 major categories. Sub-categories (clusters of entries on similar topics) later were identiﬁed
from the diary entries within each major category of issues. The process is described below using two
examples; the results of this and other analyses are presented in the following section of the report.

Maj or Category: Logistics/Storage > Subcategory: Resupply

We’ve been unpacking the Progress. Found our personal items; the US food is once again stocked

and we enjoyed some fresh fruit. The first thing I did was eat a grapefruit and it was very good.

Maj or Category: Food > Subcategory: Food Supply

Z flew into the Lab and tossed me a fresh apple soon after the Progress arrived. That was really

great! It was a welcome change.

The ﬁrst example was assigned to Logistics/Storage as the primary category because the sentence
began with a reference to unpacking and then mentioned the resupply of food. In contrast, the second
example began with a reference to the apple and then to the recent arrival of supplies. Primary category
assignments were made on the basis of order of reference for all coding decisions that involved overlap-
ping behaVioral issues (e.g., Outside Communications vs. Organization & Management). The subcategory
analysis focused on primary category assignments exclusively to avoid counting entries more than once.
The semantic rule was applied systematically, but in many cases the distinction seems to be overly pre-
cise. It might be instructive to eventually analyze data sets composed of entries from different maj or cate-
gories, but similar sub-categories (e.g., Resupply and Food Supply).

4

"
"13","Entries also were coded as positive, negative, or neutral in tone, to permit analyses using the Net
Positivity/NegatiVity metric suggested by Peter Suedfeld during the French Diaries Study. That is, each
j ournal was divided into chronological quarters and then the proportions of positive, negative and neutral
entries were calculated by quarter; the proportion of negative entries was subtracted from the proportion
of positive entries to derive the single metric, NPN. Proportions were used in these calculations, rather
than actual numbers, to control for differential j ournal actiVity among the participants. The entries and
associated data were entered into spreadsheets with each row, or record, composed of the following ﬁelds.

Subj ect Number (Coded)

Role (C for commander, FE for ﬂight engineer, SO for science ofﬁcer)

Mission Day (1 — 200+)

Category 1 (The primary category of behavioral issues to which the entry was assigned)

Category 2 (The secondary category of behavioral issues to which the entry was assigned)

Category 3 (The tertiary category of behavioral issues to which the entry was assigned)

Page (The page number of the original journal on which the entry can be found)

Tone (Whether the entry is positive, negative, or neutral in tone)

Entry (Text of the journal entry)

Nearly all of the participants exceeded the minimum commitments, writing more frequently and
candidly than expected and producing detailed, personal accounts of life onboard an orbital space station.
The 10 participating astronauts devoted a total of 705 sessions to the J ournals Experiment and produced
4,247 separate entries composed of nearly 285,000 words—the equivalent of a 1,100-page book. The
following ﬁgure illustrates the contributions of the astronauts to the numbers of sessions, entries, and
words comprised by the J ournals database.5

Numbers of Entries, Sessions, and Words BySubject
700 70,000

62,794 637
600 575 60,000
535
500 494 50,000
399 415

400 350 ﬂ . 32 352 40,000

314 6,659 31,804

20,03
200 - _ 171894 * 20,000
9,000
100 I. J'F'ﬂ"" 59 . a _ 10,000
0 '_' _ 'I 0
Subject 28 Subject 89 Subject 37 Subject 71 Subject 42 Subject 93 Subject 19 Subject 56 Subject 32 Subject 24
L—I Entries =Sessi0ns + Words
QUESTIONNAIRES

In addition to the journal entries, participants completed brief questionnaires prior to launch, at
the mid-point of their expedition, and following their return to Earth. Five of the seven questions are
reproduced below as they appeared on the pre-launch questionnaires.

5 At a minimum of 15 minutes per session, the crew time devoted to the journals exceeded 176 hours, which is
believed to be more than any other experiment conducted in space. Most of the astronauts spent far more time main—
taining their journals than the minimum commitment.

5

"
"14","A. How PHYSICALLY difﬁcult do you expect this expedition will be?
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
l—l—l—l—l—l—l
very easy medium difﬁculty very difﬁcult
B. How MENTALLY difﬁcult do you expect this expedition will be?
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
l—l—l—l—l—l—l
very easy medium difﬁculty very difﬁcult
C. Do you expect that there will be EQUIPMENT problems?
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
l—l—l—l—l—l—l
110116 801116 V6I'y many
D. Do you expect that there will be ORGANIZATIONAL problems?
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
l—l—l—l—l—l—l
110116 801116 V6I'y many
E. Do you expect that there will be INTER-PERSONAL problems?
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
l—l—l—l—l—l—l
110116 801116 V6I'y many
The two open-ended questions asked,
What do you anticipate will be the most difficult aspect of your job during the expedition? And,
What do you anticipate will be the most enjoyable aspect of yourjob during the expedition?
Mid-eXpedition and post-landing questionnaires asked the same questions, but in the past tense
(interrogative). For example, the ﬁve questions requesting responses on Likert scales and the two open-
ended questions were phrased in the following manner.
How PHYSICALLY difficult has your work been?
What was the most enjoyable aspect of your job during the first half of the expedition?
INTER-RATER RELIABILITY
The investigator prepared a sample of the coded journals for inter-rater reliability testing by
replacing all names in the text with random initials and all references to shuttle, Progress, and Soyuz
missions with the letter “X” or the word “blank”; references to other events (such as hurricanes and elec-
tions), certain equipment, and maj or tasks also were masked to prevent the possibility of attribution to a
speciﬁc expedition. The “sanitized” sample was sent to Professor Peter Suedfeld for independent coding
and analysis.6 The results are presented here, rather than in the following section, because the procedure
inﬂuenced coding. That is, the ﬁrst sample received reliability scores in the range of 68 to 80 percent,
which were accompanied by detailed annotations concerning each coding disagreement. This information
led the P1 to identify several coding errors in the sample (e.g., entering E for Event instead of E0 for
Equipment) and a few inconsistently applied rules, which prompted a review of all ten journals. Correc-
tions and changes based on adjustments to the assignment criteria were made to the database and then an
additional sample was prepared for analysis. That sample received reliability scores of 94 percent for tone
and 89 percent for category, both of which are within the acceptable range for content analysis. Further
adjustments to the coding rules were applied to the entire database to increase reliability prior to data
analysis and additional errors were detected and corrected during subsequent analytical tasks. The effects
of those improvements to reliability have not been estimated.
6 Peter Suedfeld is Professor Emeritus at the University of British Columbia, Past President of the Canadian Psycho-
logical Association, and foremost expert on the content analysis of spoken, transcribed, and written text. Dr.
Suedfeld also happens to be the leading authority on the effects of isolation and conﬁnement on human behavior.
6

"
"15","OTHER POTENTIAL THREATS TO THE VALIDITY OF STUDY RESULTS

Additional potential threats to the internal validity of the study might include variance among the
participants in journal activity, volume, net-positiVity/negatiVity, or candor. The previous ﬁgure showed
the distributions of journal sessions, words, and entries for the ten study participants: sessions ranged
from 27 to 120; words from 17,083 to 62,794; and entries from 255 to 637. The number of sessions had
the greatest variance, with participants’ contributing between 3.8 and 17 percent of the 705 sessions
recorded in the journals. The numbers of words written by the astronauts also varied considerably,
representing between 6 and 22 percent of the total volume. No correlation is evident in the relationship
between the numbers of sessions and the numbers of words written; for example, the most proliﬁc par-
ticipant wrote more than twice the average number of words, but ranked sixth in the number of sessions,
and the astronaut with the most sessions wrote the fewest words. The lowest variance was found in the
numbers of entries derived from the ten j ourna1s, with individuals contributing between 6 and 15 percent
of the 4,247 entries contained in the database (i.e., separately-coded statements about an issue, event, or
observation). The data show that some participants wrote more frequently than others; some used more
words per entry; and some addressed more issues and events in their j ourna1s, but the range for the third
variable was less than for the other two.

Entries are the primary units of the content analysis as they are the data that are categorized and
counted and from which all study results are derived. It is reasonable to question whether differences in
the numbers of entries extracted from the j ourna1s might enable individual participants to dominate the
analysis and thereby distort results. It was to control this variable that frequencies of category assignments
were converted to percentages within each journal (calculated by quarter) to equalize the contributions of
all participants to the temporal and overall analyses of NPN. The effects of this procedure were to nor-
malize the data and allow meaningful comparisons among the participants. However, the ta11ies of entries
on which the category and subcategory analyses are based involved combining data from all journals and,
for this reason, the process reﬂects the differential production of the participants. This approach is
consistent with the fundamental premise of the method, which assumes that the frequency a topic is
mentioned in a journal is a measure of the topic’s salience to the author. If a procedure were to be
performed that equalized the contributions of the participants to the category and subcategory ana1yses, it
would diminish the study’s sensitiVity to differences in the astronauts’ experiences on the ISS. Concern
about this potential threat to validity is further obviated by the near absence of variance in the categories
of issues the astronauts considered to be important; for example, the same four categories (Work, Outside
Communication, Adjustment, and Group Interaction) appear in the top ﬁve of all ten study participants,
and in the top four categories of the astronauts who generated the fewest and the most entries. The overall
rank—ordering of categories represents the combined values of a11ten participants.

Candor is the least quantiﬁable of the process variables and is most appropriately assessed in
binary terms, that is, astronauts were either candid or they were not. It is impossible to determine if the
participants wrote candidly in their j ourna1s at all times, but it is sufﬁcient to report that all ten j ourna1s
included entries concerning personal matters and all were peppered with statements that the authors
would not want to be attributed. The participants’ willingness to write candidly about their experiences
contributed to the utility and validity of study results. I have done my best to ensure the anonymity of
their contributions.

Because of the large number of behavioral categories, the relatively small number of study
participants, and individual differences among them, it was judged to be inappropriate to subject the data
to inferential tests of signiﬁcance.

7

"
"16","7..“ 7'5 . :,_:""I.I“/. : I -,. “-.‘\ 7‘: '1; '4 r . 3 1 77
. ,- '-‘.-t'.,-. _. f' '-
- ' ‘-.. _- .13"" “ 1.12.4"": -.; r , .
J 7 7‘ -.. ,r—A.'.‘-1‘it._'.’/I,':-’;‘v \raj‘ﬁ""ﬂ. 2"" }‘, 1;; ‘ .' ‘ I
. - . , .. eh; ~ )4} , / .' 7- 4., ,r, -._'.'_. _. -
,.’-.. - 9:54, ,7 aw ﬂ' ’ ’77 “22:51:, - 4‘ _.
' ‘ v,«='?-ir;f.’;'i.':u57;: ’
t V , r . . . ‘ ’ . ~ .' ' -,' '- t_g’ -
~ 7. - ""1“ wean .-_¢ A --.”“-r.-‘."".7~”'4"" ' -
r - “-1."";‘3‘lv0 "" kit?"" 7.,"" ""
,. 7' 1‘ ”f“; I._§‘.q _ 7. «e- V .‘ I w ?%5 ) ..,| ‘1» V‘ ,
‘ L z?"":-:-‘.'.:‘-‘.‘4t1-J‘2-e-p-J 351-43“ I' .. ..r;,.;3éf_l-l:;ogx‘ ‘ y 7, 7
‘i , '1;‘i""7‘:=‘Tf-'.."":3‘-ﬁ/"" ~.:tfﬂ"":'ﬂv’.g§?p‘n5“4 . 5f? I/‘j‘f’7ui' 7”
J.JEKTE?‘ J: . :71)”; ‘g‘ilﬁw I ‘ 572:1/lé‘ﬁ, ' ~ ,.
7 ‘ ,._I ., [£1.77]; 97:23:. A... A .Npg I ' ‘ _ .-""9’ ,I"" ..__.».7 :1 5"",77_‘,'IA.',\ 7
7 . .1; ._ _ :tc.,y_:t-.£ h"". ‘ '1' 'f%_u\: Q:- -.'...‘;‘.':I;l::y{“,-. Pv§ W‘F‘ETJ:,: if""
s .1 \ ,-_ ‘7../ _ ., . . ‘41)..7. lun‘_ ‘
”1.1;! - Aw. . , , .7 —, _- -'.,:___ ' ' V.’ .3” ’{i‘ '
2:.» * aw, """"3: ~.
“’ji‘v/hjgy ?:P? , "" 5:; 7-...' u.“ .7‘\3,.ﬁgtzf}‘f71'l‘.""'
1W"". -“ ‘- .- ~:‘ 1 :‘r‘ =--*-’*"" 4“ .;.:«-'y/‘:;-'.¢;t;.¢;""‘-“‘
.: .“‘(.‘.-}_I,'u;, ,N ' 7'.- 7 ‘7‘ . ._. a 7 , 7 7 . '-""i',"".'"". . 1'. Q J‘ £.{\', ,' I ,7

. ._ --”.T'~.v“’.u_: ' .T‘ "" 1' 2%,”; r 111-..4ﬂ‘ 3-.«i'r’i‘3-F-7-Lﬂf
. . 5""” Wai‘é-""f‘ v ~_ .. 7152-3.- ‘37:.”
""1‘ =i‘~ -. -.-- . . . . . mm? “.‘rz’xv’ﬁfﬁxz

:71}1:m"" $5.?” '. _ , F .7 “l"" ﬂagrvrﬂ- 4%;{1

‘ , l“.;'/ 40, L V'.‘ ' v.’ 7,. 7"" . ‘ 7 ' . . ' ’ “’:('9’ ‘1‘ ' ’J A; '
‘ 7:2,}-434’ 473...: '4dtq.¢(w ‘ T a .7.“ ,, “3’3"" . 3:25-7:-
3539'59/‘2/ .:,- ,7 c, _ . . ' 7""”7Z'“I§315""{-‘:’-‘:T“;‘,
4 5-4:...15 . » h 4% mm af/mabéy ‘ 'ei' ~w=""»rr~<>;,miz
3.155??? 9' ‘ - ‘ "";""-.""?r‘-“ xa‘i‘ft'ié‘ti‘
7:“ - . ~ * ‘ ' whit 3:3“
' ""av"" ~-"".';‘ 'W ‘ - V. ,5‘ ,- ' :g.‘; ~.
' ‘.7:% ‘ 3;“ Elf]? .' _ “ V .; * .h , "" I . *- Pu‘ '.""* I ‘15.? n

0113“"" ?_a-G‘oﬁgkr‘.r ""Qt , s m’ ‘ ’0’ ' ‘-2""_;.'_""' . '43:; ‘7' 7“,

' 7 11¢; 149w“: W , ha * , i , i. “- A‘ $453725."" 3:? 'i‘fi

- '22}? 4;} .‘ "" '0 ‘ $3. c ‘: '*.5.x’tT~-.<'
, . .1 a. c...‘,~.‘ _ .‘M ‘ 7. - . .
. 3-314 Pt ' ""as , r . ' v.53». -‘ 5'1""?“

7 :7 Og‘z‘aaﬁg M “‘th v “,5 . ""-.,~;,‘; “.37; 1.5331}:

' 2' :’;-'(- .> l..-.“'.I""( \JtVV Av- ' . ' » - I -' a 4. AH'H"" ‘-- I ‘Y y—‘g :4 '1' .

' mu 1. N :-- ,7 ,. a ,7 .. vi‘kx""l'.0 t .si‘.‘
7/577 . .9533“ """"'¢‘.l‘;41_65'31‘5""¢ ‘ «k'l‘a .-,. 2' :v. $9375; : :
M""«JW« ”w ""; '— M *7 .

I A'. ""'1’: 22’” ‘ _\r‘;, :n- Jim! 7 ‘% ‘.. _: *a **§hf F-. -""'P.'{.‘_"":.“:: . _ A

-'.¢?I;:'h::r:. ?JV(""70.A' "" ‘ ' 'V I ' l‘. i ' ' ' 4 ' 59”)"": V’y"") ?Qz‘ . '
. ._ _ I,' ’ 7.. , , , 7 u ,. A“ I . ».t"".' ,' a-
' ""'57 fgggz “ﬂu” ; . 1 i. ._ "" 7 {,1” Unit- - €3- '\"".;2.“., w

. 7')??QO “A.?JZ: J: ‘I. V ‘ 31‘ 5, "" "" _.' 91f 'a'ﬁ'} 2. "" » 4.1(15’; » .
= 3': ‘ {ftﬂ M *3 15"",“‘vwz,
-‘_':,"""".'2~.:'%::‘:§1r.""ﬁ~.‘f7f;. “""1” '3‘. ’: ‘ ‘.--' '. . L,""- 3,315 .'-_:_:'. :-."" '- ‘

""’1' ““ ‘2 ’2, .e F 'd‘ _‘ ‘22""!- ',‘ ,, '7v*\‘.—7.-.""‘.1"".""' '_.'; - ”137; u
‘ * ~;n\'~?:éu;2,... 511-27 '. ‘ t ' .- 7-49. , tar"" 333.1: rt: 2
. - - w t . . a «s _, m 1:; -
"" ’ W"". -'v::‘3,-:.-J' ‘ .. - a . ' k ‘ ‘MZ' ‘. 1""; ' -. ""{t - 7‘
- , W973“ z}: ”7 ”3"":xgj’ a ‘-
.31."" -4~f. '- ‘77,”... ""w ,‘ “-. ..""..~:""'ll' ""j 1' 3'7""
’ 3 ' 124"" :mn -’ Ink». J2: .
Galileo Galilei recorded what he saw on 7 J anuary 1610 when he pointed his new
“glass” at Jupiter. His observations during the next eight nights led him to the real-
ization that moons, later named 10, Europa, Callisto and Ganymede, orbited the
planet. It was arguably the most signiﬁcant scientiﬁc discovery of all time.

"
"17","RESULTS

Study results are presented in sections addressing the analyses of maj or categories of behavioral
issues; sub-categories, or themes, within the major categories; Net Positivity/Negativity; and the pre-,
mid-, and post-eXpedition questionnaires.

CATEGORY ANALYSIS

The numbers of j ournal entries assigned to the 24 maj or topical categories were tabulated for each
journal and then combined to calculate the overall total for each category. The results of that procedure
are presented in the following ﬁgure, which lists the categories in descending order of frequency. Notable
differences between the astronaut j ournals and the French diaries from the previous study include the
astronauts’ relatively greater emphasis on work (ranked ﬁrst VS. third in the French diaries), group inter-
action (ranked fourth VS. ﬁrst), adjustment to the conditions (ranked third VS. sixth), equipment (ranked
sixth VS. eleventh), leadership (ranked fourteenth VS. seventh), and medical issues (ranked sixteenth VS.
ﬁfth). The astronauts’ greater emphasis on work and equipment reﬂects the highly-scheduled, often tech-
nical tasks performed by 188 crew; the greater frequency of entries concerning leadership and medical
issues in the French diaries probably is related to the authors’ roles, which were as leaders and physicians
at remote research stations.

Explanations for two of the differences are more speculative. Fewer entries assigned to the group
interaction category among the astronaut journals might reﬂect obstacles to interpersonal relations caused
by language differences, a factor that was not present at the French research stations. Also, astronauts and
cosmonauts spend much of their time working independently of each other in different modules of the
station, and the near absence of conﬂict reported in the j ournals reﬂects astronauts’ training and sincere
motivation to avoid interpersonal problems. The astronauts probably wrote more about adjusting to their
conditions than the previous diarists because their isolation and conﬁnement was greater and only one of
the novel aspects to which they must adapt onboard the ISS. Nearly all of the other categories occupy the
same rank on both lists or are within one or two in the orders.

Numbers of Primary, Secondary, and Tertiary Category Assignments Combined
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600
Work —1523
Outside Communications — 1456
Adjustment — 1082
Grouplnteraction — 777
Recreation/Leisure —533
Equipment — 497
Event — 435
Organization/Mgt. T . ' -—
Sleep —-—.._-.. 253:
Food —45
Logistics/Storage rl. 242 -
Exercise —' ' -
Procedures/Rituals '-.'*'—-. r .
Leadership =' ' -. Ir _ 1r” 1. . .-
Safety —!$ “' -r;_'- ' . L
Medical _— d,- a' .3. . -..__ -. '1 _
Waste Mgt. .~_. 52_?.5' é H3; ""-' ' Z.-
Privacy/PersonalSpace - 36 - ' 1 ,_ '1.- 1;; r: . . ﬂ
Clothing ' 28 h _ ' ""T"": 'i’u'h I‘-
PersonnelSeIection ' 27 '- qitg- I”:- . file'E-r... .1'-__'-r_, . ‘ ..... -

Internal Communications ' 24 . .5... ,. ' _ '1""-- ' '5‘}??? 5"""" . h _ '
Habitat Aesthetics ' 19 t... .‘I; * _':‘-_ __ .- 1 ""LT. *1 '
PersonalHygiene 17 '1‘: _ T -. ‘1 ﬁff1:-—.ﬂ:n_. H!“

Habitat Hygiene 10 . . 13' I ' 3:"" ...,

9

"
"18","SUBCATEGORY ANALYSIS
All entries from the 10 journals in the database were assembled according to their primary cate-
gory assignments and the mission quarter during which they were written; each category was reviewed in
turn and the constituent entries assigned to sub-eategories, or themes, based on similar content. The
results of this procedure are presented below in sections devoted to 15 of the maj or categories. Figures list
the sub-eategories within each category and illustrate the numbers of primary assignments to each one by
quarter. Discussion and representative examples of entries follow for most sub-eategories.
Numbers of ""Work"" Entries by Subcategory and Quarter
Lack of Teamwork '
Physical Effects '1'""
Low Workload 1' '—
Problems '—
—
Teamwork _--
High Workload -— _
Concern — '— —
——
Workis Good —
—‘——

Tedious/Frustrating —
——“—
——_-— —

Described — —
O 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 225
n=976entries IFirst HSecond HThird I Fourth Quarter
The leading subcategory within the major topic of Work is composed of entries that describe
tasks performed by the crews. Examples of this large number of descriptive entries are:
I’ve been working about 50% with X and about 50% alone, doing lots of pre-pack operations for
shuttle, routine maintenance, as well as some more interesting work. Spent a lot of time in the
airlock today, doing some maintenance and checkout work in prep for the shuttle visit. Also had
my first robot arm operation, and did a pretty good job in grappling a fixture on the station.
The test of the Soyuz rockets is complete. My only job was to try to film it from the window of
the SM. I had a clear view of the rockets, but I didn’t see them firing at all, probably because we
were in bright sunlight. Didn’t hear or feel anything, either, but they all worked okay.
Scheduling issues account for the second most-frequently assigned communications subcategory.
These entries include many complaints about insufﬁcient time allocated for tasks. Examples follow.
Sunday is meant to be a day of rest, but somehow Houston managed to make it feel like Monday.
The problem is that I overreached myself a couple of weeks ago, feeling I was really helping out
the ground to understand the problem with the .
The lack of ”padding” in the schedule means that there is little time to accomplish small tasks, or
to recover from mistakes.
Today was a hard day. Small things are getting to me. I am tired. I think that the ground is
scheduling less time for tasks than before. So, there is very little, if any fat left in the schedule for
me to use to catch up on little things during the day.
10

"
"19","Only 30 minutes [were scheduled] to execute a 55-step procedure that required collecting 21

items. It took 3 or 4 hours.

Skipped breakfast and finally made up the work and time. Otherwise it would have been a fairly

nice pace today.

Several of the procedures, as usual, just took much longer than timelined. We have some tasks,

as is too often the case, that were written without our input and which we never actually

performed, except on paper.

[The Russians] save the really |ow—ski|| work for me—changing filters, cleaning fan grills, etc. I

don’t mind—they schedule plenty of time, so I’m not rushed, and it’s somewhat relaxing.

Expressions of frustration concerning work and reactions to tedious and repetitive tasks compose
the third most-frequently assigned subcategory. Note the relatively few assignments to this and the
previous subcategory during the fourth quarters of expeditions. Example entries follow.

We need to figure out how to do better on inspections and maintenance. We spend a huge

amount of time doing inspections and routine maintenance on several small items that should be

designed to not require so much.

I had to laugh to myself at the procedures today. To replace a light bulb, I had to have safety

glasses and a vacuum cleaner handy. This was in case the bulb broke. However, the actual bulb is

encased in a plastic enclosure, so even if the glass bu|b did break, the shards would be

completely contained. Also, I had to take a photo of the installed bulb, before turning it on. Why?

I have no idea! It’s just the way NASA does things.

There have been no problems, yet we must periodically perform extensive inspections even

though the results are always negative.

Busy work also causes me to miss home more. I think | feel less of a sense of purpose if I don’t

believe in the tasks that I am doing. Of course, I will continue to do them and to press on. But, it

does make the days go longer.

A lot of our work right now involves inventory and stowage in prep for the |aunch...Not very gla—

morous work, but necessary. Scientific work is pretty limited.

It was a frustrating day. The urine collection started disastrously first thing this morning. | thinkl

got about 75% in the bag; the rest was all over me. Not a good way to start the day.

Istarted the consumables audit—too tedious for words. | become more convinced every day that

we sacrifice crew efficiency and time on orbit to make things easier/cheaper for the ground.

Instead of tracking consumables, we periodically require the crew to open up a myriad of bags,

take everything out, count everything, and then put it back. We ought to keep a running count.

Yesterday was painfuI—trash gathering. Theoretically, this should not hurt, but when they want

the trash items listed off by serial number it can get a bit ridiculous.

I was not able to finish many of the tasks in the time allotted. The frustration is that so much

more meaningful work could be done.

It has been a pretty tedious week with tasks that were clearly a||otted too little time on the

schedule. Talking to [the MCC] today, I realized he just doesn’t understand how we work up here.

I have concluded that I hate to perform maintenance. Science is okay; installations are okay;

maintenance sucks. The tools are inadequate and the equipment is not designed to be opera-

tionally compatible or ”user friendly.”

One of the reasons it gets tiring up here, I realize, is that many of the tasks we have to do are

frustrating. This has to do with the way the Station was designed, how we use it differently than

intended perhaps, and how the owners of each system and piece of equipment want us to do the

work. The 4 hours of work to set up and take down the medical equipment is an example.

11

"
"20","Not all entries concerning work are complaints or bland descriptions of tasks. Many entries
express genuine pleasure and gratiﬁcation for work gone well, especially during the ﬁrst and fourth quar-
ters of the expeditions.

Busy day today! Lots of work on the system. It was really fun getting in there and working

on taking things apart and putting them back together again. Seems like that is the best work we

have going on! It is fun.

All in all, a very good day to end a good week. Nothing has been a ”stressor” today—absolutely

nothing. Work has been relaxing, accomplished well ahead of the timeline and the ground has

been great to work with.

Another good day of work... everything went smoothly. Maintenance work continues with no

problems.

It is also great to be getting some real science done... There have been several problems along

the way toward getting this experiment operational, so it is wonderful to be getting results now.

Another great day on orbit! Conducted some very interesting experiments this afternoon...

We were an efficient crew today. I was well ahead of the timeline all day, which feels really great.

The contrast between being ahead and falling behind is huge in terms of how I feel during the

day.

A good day. Almost cleaned out the Task List again. Also, I got a big head start on tomorrow.

Very productive day. Everything looks good with the checkout.

The EVA was a ”home run!” We did all of our tasks and then some.

I depart the Station with full satisfaction with what we accomplished and how we accomplished

it. It has been a reward of complete fulfillment both professionally and personally. No major

issues were encountered. No real minor issues were even encountered.

More than 80 entries expressed concern about work, usually about impending tasks.

lam a little apprehensive about this EVA. It will, in all likelihood, be my last one. I would like for it

to be successful, of course. Not only for the good of the program, but also for professional and

personal satisfaction. If all goes well it will be unremarkable to folks on the ground (which is
good, the best result that one can hope for!). However, if we have problems, we will be
remembered poorly, since it is human nature to remember the latest events.

I am ready, but a bit nervous. Lots of connections have to go right tomorrow—and be on time.

We have several ”bingo” points where we might have to back out if we are not far enough along.

Hopefully, it won’t come to that.

My last few days aboard have been busy, but not particularly fulfilling. The end brought the

typical (at least for me) rush of activity, most of which could easily have been done earlier in the

increment. I had months to do certain things and did most of them in the last seven days.

Astronauts expect periods of high tempo operations and high workloads, but they also expect and
eagerly await an occasional day off from their unrelenting task masters on Earth. A few examples:

Had an uneventful rendezvous and docking, but then had to work quite a few hours that day in

order to unpack the Soyuz and ready it for an emergency landing if necessary. I found myself

getting pretty inefficient; by the time | go to bed tonight my work day will have been about 27

hours, and that’s on top of 2 nights with pretty minimal sleep. I don’t know what could be done

about it, but I think they should give us time off after docking.
12

"
"21","One thing is for sure—I’m ready for the weekend. The past couple of days of reduced sleep and

eating opportunities have added a little strain. I felt it especially yesterday. Today, the fatigue

and hunger are present but not the strain.

The fatigue was evident when a couple of minor mistakes were made today on some payload

activities. The ground caught the mistake and helped me out. But it is an obvious indicator of

fatigue.

I haven’t been saying much about our long workdays, but we’re getting a lot done too. There

have been many PR events as well—probably an average of once per day.

That made for about an 18-hour working day. Our working day started at midnight, by the way,

just to make sure we were extra tired.

I feel that the workload is going up; these last few weeks seem to have been pretty taxing. I’m

very tired.

It was meant to be a day off, but Houston added payload activities, etc, so the day ended up

being very busy.

It seems like I spent all day today working as fast as I could only to keep falling behind.

Everyone experiences problems at work, but only 188 crew must endure the special conditions of
space and the constant scrutiny of minders While attempting to solve theirs.

When we finally got the hatch open, things started flying out like you see in the movies. We had

positioned some wet and dry napkins (in small packages that were in turn in two different draw-

string bags) in the DC in the event we had to clean up. When we went to vacuum, the individual

bags became bloated, and all would no longer fit in the drawstring bags. This resulted in them

being jettisoned from said bag. At that point they were floating free inside the DC until the hatch

was opened. Then they all seemed to be sucked out into space by some invisible wind. They were

accompanied by at least three rather large bolts.

I had to wait to get started, so began working on something else instead that ran into problems.

Before I knew it I had 3 different partially complete things going on, which is normally fine, but

the number of bags and hoses and cables and wires and boxes that were all in my way—well, I

guess it got me a bit frustrated. Starting off already behind on an ambitious day is a recipe for a

huge amount of stress. I sort of became aware of how stressed I was when I raced down to take

a picture at the specified time. The weather was perfect, but I couldn’t find the darn [target].

Eventually I did, but then I had 5 seconds to get it into the frame of the lens, and at 800mm, I

tried over and over to find it, line it up, find it, line it up, find it, and failed. I slammed one of the

panels with my fist in frustration and yelled something I wouldn’t want on tape. This happened in

front of my crew-mates and I was immediately aware that it was a display they hadn’t seen from

me before. It shocked me back into a reality check, and the rest of the day I tried to actively cool

myself off.

13

"
"22","Numbe rs of ""Outside Communications"" Entries by Subcategory and Quarter
Medical ' |
Comm Problems m
News/Sports m
Schedule ' _
Management - _
PsychSupport 1' —
MCC/PAYCOM _ —
——
O 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450
n=876entries lFirst uSecond HThird I Fourth Quarter

Many of the entries concerning personal communications refer to email messages, but it is the
availability of the IP phone onboard the 188 that is largely responsible for the extraordinary number of
entries in this subcategory. Despite the positive tone of most of these entries, including the examples
inserted below, astronauts also learned of natural disasters, car crashes, illnesses, and deaths of loved
ones, but they preferred it to being uninformed.

Getting email certainly is appreciated.

Loving the phone we have. It makes me feel closer to home.

Had a few wonderful phone calls that absolutely made my day.

I made a couple of other calls today that were very upbeat and boosted the morale...

And the most rewarding tool here—the IP phone! What a treat to talk to family and friends!

What a treat to be able to blow them away with a call from space! It brings tears of joy to my

eyes every time.

This journal would be really different, if we did not have so much ability for communications. We

would fall into our routines, oblivious of all the bustle and gossip on Earth, and time would fly all

the faster, never distracted to worry about whether someone is going to reply in a day or so!

Comm is both a blessing and a curse. Maybe JPL scientists are better off in some ways. They have

to treasure the meager flow of bits they receive, like I used to treasure the infrequent scented

letters from girls, with long gaps of mystery and anticipation in between. Oh, the good old days

when people wrote letters.

ISS crew members communicate daily With personnel in the Mission Control Center (MCC) at
the J ohnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, and With payload communicators (PAYCOMS) located at
the Marshall Spaceﬂight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. Most participants are aware that good relations
between on-orbit and ground personnel can contribute to effective task performance, but the result has
been a tradition that might be called “praise inﬂation”—profuse complements, even When undeserved, and
a general avoidance of criticizing ground personnel for deﬁciencies, real and perceived. It seems that at
least a portion of the ground personnel are more sensitive to certain remarks than the crew living in
isolation and conﬁnement, a condition known to cause hypersensitivity and exaggeration of trivial issues.
Rather than facilitating the relationships, praise inﬂation was a source of annoyance to most of the study’s
participants. Examples from the MCC/PAYCOM subcategory follow.

14

"
"23","The ground seems to treat almost every request we make a little defensively, as if a crew request

implies irritation or dissatisfaction. I will need to work on that.

X rubbed me the wrong way again. In general, he sounds patronizing and condescending on the

radio, and always must have the last word. When I ask a question, he has a tendency to talk

down to me as if I don’t know what I’m doing.

Interesting, how you can be on top of the world one moment (literally) and then be completely

demoralized the next, because of what is said on the ground.

Ifeel that the ground has often made my life more difficult here, thus making it hard to hand out

praise on such a frequent basis. I have developed a list of folks who have gone above and beyond

the call, and I plan to reward them when I return to Earth. But I feel that the praise the shuttle

crews hand out is a bit overdone. If they are expecting to be praised over and over and then

someone challenges their work and focus, it may be why the relationship is strained.

As the time goes on, my natural inhibition against lashing out on the radio about something that

isn’t going right for various reasons is noticeably reduced. I need to be careful, because I know

very well that I can undo a good reputation with a single misplaced or inappropriate sentence. As

it is, | sort of lashed out last week about a few things. I don’t think I said anything so inappro-

priate, but my tone of voice and manner were not as polite as usual.

I really enjoy working with Huntsville. Nice folks and they are always enthusiastic and interested.

Today, ”Scottie” as we call him, organized a tribute for me—a wonderful gesture that caught me

by surprise and truly made me smile. He is full of spirit and a sense of humor. I look forward to

seeing him in Huntsville after the mission.

W carries on his twice-daily arguments with his mission control center as usual, but I’ve learned

that what appears to an American to be a dispute is actually just their normal mode of conversa-

tion. To me it’s interesting to hear the difference in the US and Russian interactions. US radio

conversation is minimaI—sometimes we go all day without saying a word to Houston. The

Russians, however, have marathon discussions on nearly every subject that comes up.

NASA provides “psychological support” to 18$ astronauts in the forms of periodic Video confer-
ences With family members and occasional private conversations With celebrities (e.g., authors, actors,
ﬁlmmakers), among other Crew Discretionary Events and services. The entries in this subcategory were
very positive, With those few coded as negative in tone related almost exclusively to technical problems
that degraded the experience. The journal entries convey sincere appreciation for these special considera-
tions, as evident in the following examples.

It’s wonderful to have the weekly video linkup with [the family]. That is sure a luxury of modern

spaceflight. It makes a huge difference in morale for everyone.

I had a great PFC with my wife today. She looks so beautiful!

Really nice family conference. They sound excited that the end is in sight.

Had an absolutely delightful PFC with good video.

Had a good PFC. The family is in good spirits.

Ienjoy the e-magazines that I get uplinked from the ground—they’re among the best of the psych

support products.

Good day today—first access to psych support web site—great video clips.

Some interesting ”psych” relief was provided to me yesterday with an arranged conversation

with X. I was wondering who was more nervous about talking to the other. We were both very

good at breaking the ice, although I let him ask me a bunch of questions first, and then I started

in on him.

15

"
"24","Last night I had a once-in-a-Iifetime experience, and I must admit, it was one that I hoped to have

some time in my life, but never really expected it to happen. I spoke directly to the most famous

spaceship commander of all time. It was awesome.

Relations between management and labor are occasionally strained under nearly all circum-
stances, but the dynamics of life onboard the ISS can render those relationships even more problematic
than usual. The lack of proximity is largely addressed by frequent communications, but it is inevitable
that management cannot fully understand What it is like to live and work in isolation and conﬁnement.
More important, ISS crews have two sets of managers With Which to contend and often are caught in the
middle of bureaucratic struggles between the space agencies. Participants in this study frequently served
as unofﬁcial diplomats to maintain good relations; one wrote that he considered it a good day When the
agencies were not angry With each other and he had not overlooked something he could do to help. This
subcategory included several entries by a participant Who discovered that personal email messages were
not as private as he had been led to believe by management personnel; it was perceived as a breach of
trust and negatively inﬂuenced the participant’s morale. A few examples from the management subcate-
gory follow.

The US side tried to put words into my mouth and the Russian side tried to put words into X’s

mouth, fairly opposite in their conclusions. We both resisted and looked to see each other’s

reactions as we carefully focused our answers on simple statements. Both sides were asking us to

speculate on what they should do, but I said, ”We should not be asked to comment on those

larger programmatic issues, because we do not have all the considerations at hand—it is your job

to do that.”

We had another open loop call from [the NASA administrator] yesterday. The 4th I think in this

expedition. X always goes to sleep during them. He simply categorizes this continuous contact

with US senior management as a distraction, or a chance to sleep if there is no video. He either

thinks a) I am an incredibly important person or b) US management has nothing better to do with

their time! A very big difference between US and Russian culture there. Neither of us can imagine

[the Russian managers] making a social call to see how we are doing! For them, we are minions

to be kept in line and working, and better not heard about. I appreciate the good will expressed

by [NASA senior managers] giving their time. The content of the calls is not the point.

I found out a few days ago that I got a $2000 performance bonus this year. After taxes, that will

roughly pay for our mission-related party obligations. Not bad.

I had a good conference today with X. He was very supportive of our mission and activities and

again conveyed his satisfaction with how we have conducted the mission and ourselves. He is the

best chief that we’ve had.

We had a conference with the ISS Program Manager today and he seemed very happy with how

things are going. He gave us some great news in that they are going to send up some ice cream—

that made my day!—not only because we get ice cream but that they are looking for ways to

”reward” us.

H
I ‘ , .
I I
16

"
"25","N umbers of ""Adjustment"" Entries by Subcategory and Quarter
Fatigue ' '—
Beauty/Wonderment - _
Visitors Crew Rotation I
—w
Problems Adjusting '—
——'—- —

Thoughts of Home —

—w——
Time
——'_'———

Helps Adjustment —
T————
—————__——

Successful Adjustment
———-__————
High Morale
O 10 20 3O 4O 50 6O 7O 80 90 100
n=545 entries I First H Second H Third I Fourth Quarter

Entries assigned to the Adjustment category range from references to physical and mental fatigue
to explicit comments about individual and group morale. The ﬁgure reveals disproportionate numbers of
assignments to the low morale subcategory during the third quarters of expeditions and the high morale
subcategory during the fourth quarters. Examples of entries concerning high and low morale are presented
below.

The morale among the crew is excellent. No issues to speak of on board or with the ground.

Our mood is very good. We’re off to a smooth start.

All is going very well. Morale is high, tasks are going well and we only have 30 days to go.

Spirits are high on board. Everybody is having a great time.

Another great day in space!

I have been in a good mood today. Probably lots of work makes me feel accomplished and a

good workout makes me a little tired. I am ready to eat dinner and call it a night.

I am ”riding high” today. Morale is very high among the entire crew. Yesterday was the highlight

of the expedition.

Today was a great day! I’m not sure why.

I’m doing my best and so far all has gone really well. This is a lot of fun. It’s a lot of work, but I’m

still thoroughly enjoying it.

Another great day on orbit and I couldn’t ask for things to be better. Morale is very high, here

and on the ground, and operations are going smoothly. Overall, we are sleeping well and eating

well. Our mood is great.

Ifeel a little lost today.

Last week was difficult and long. Probably seemed like it, because of the food situation.

I’m sure this is a natural cycle of moods and hopefully won’t last very long.

ISS crewmembers and shuttle crew are not treated equally.

Too bad that ISS crews don’t get the publicity that the shuttle crews seem to get!

17

"
"26","Starting to feel like this is a little ”routine.”

Stuff on the ground is also affecting my mood.

I hesitate to use the word ”depression,” but it seems an appropriate description of my mood

lately. Nothing seems to cheer me up much.

Perhaps this is the 3rd quarter ”blues” setting in. | always figured that it would be the hardest

period of the expedition. Perhaps the Shuttle crew’s return to Earth (leaving us here) has also

contributed to it. I am tired of being here but have to continue to work it out so as to maintain a

steady course.

Just feeling downright grumpy today. At lunch I was throwing food away because I was frustrated

with how it is packed and organized. Later I was complaining about how the water sampling pro-

cedures were organized.

I can’t believe that other astronauts have not been just as frustrated as I am. Maybe they just

don’t say anything.

Was in a bit of a bad mood yesterday (Sunday); perhaps a reaction to the cancellation.

As the end of the mission approaches, I will no doubt start to think of all of the things I could

have and should have done. One of them is to have chronicled things better—both my thoughts

and emotions, and the day-to-day things that went on.

The comments he shared with me from the ground really hurt me. I have still not recovered and

am not myself. I had been having quite a bit of fun up here, but the last few days have been far

from fun.

I’ve been feeling slightly depressed lately, which I sort of measure by my inability to get going on

a number of personal projects that I really need to make headway on. Today would have been a

good opportunity. I had some free time. But I just couldn’t force myself to work on anything

(beyond what I was required to do for myjob).

With time on my hands for half an hour, Ifeel slightly melancholy, for some reason. This happens

quite often in space, among astronauts in general (and cosmonauts), and space seems to some-

how amplify our emotions, positive or negative, however they might be. Maybe it is the remote-
ness, or the beautiful scene outside, or a consciousness that we are in a unique situation, bene-
fiting from the work of others. News stories have powerful emotional impacts on me.

The journals contained many entries that described successful physical and mental adaptation to
life onboard the ISS and other entries that referred to speciﬁc factors that contributed to adjustment.
Examples from these two sub-categories are included below.

Looks like we’re settling in for the long haul.

Doing great here—settling in and catching up on sleep.

All's going great up here. They keep us very busy, but it is sure a pleasure to be doing things for

real instead ofjust simulating them. And Zero-G is a blast! I love it.

I am excited and feel very prepared for the journey ahead. I hope to make the ground teams

proud of my crew and think that, at least on the US. side, we have a decent shot at accomplish-

ing that.

Adjusting to life here on ISS has been really easy; it is like coming home for me. Physically I have

adapted much quicker than last time, and of course, I know most of the ropes already, except for

a few that are new or changed.

Idon’t feel uncomfortable at all. Ifeel like this is okay. There are lots of things I don’t know, but I

feel confident about handling issues that come up. I am surely glad the ground is watching our

backs. That really makes me feel better.
18

"
"27","I am comfortable here now. I can fly around quickly and efficiently. I can work pretty easily in any
attitude. I can read the procedures and multi-task. I am not forgetting nearly as much. I don’t
mind when I lose things—usually | find them in a day or so.
One thing that I am thankful of is that I haven’t started noticing any resentment or anger toward
the ground team or ”management” or anybody else like many other crews have experienced. I
continue to believe that everybody is pouring their heart into the mission. I received an email
from a previous crewmember that referred to the anger of several long-duration flyers. It is a
major problem for sustaining this program and I hope to find a few ”secrets” to apply as a coun-
termeasure. It is largely the same anger and resentment that periodically crops up in the training
environment and it tends to act as a poison among the entire group.
Showering (or more precisely—washing with a wet towel) is an example. Just the placement of
things, how I secure myself and the sequence of steps have evolved to become very efficient and
easy. In this case, what I have is an empty rack location with crossed bungee cords across the
front. I can do whatever I need to do in there, and I’ll just bounce off the bungee cords, rather
than float out into the middle of the module. So I can try to keep myself in place, or I can just
float around and comfortably stay within the privacy of that volume. It works really well. In any
case, the adaptation process continues, and once-in-a-while | get fed up with something that’s
been nagging me, and I figure out a better way to do it. It doesn’t feel like camping anymore.
Now it’s just life.
One of the really neat things about this whole adventure is that by the time you’re doing it,
everyone you’re doing it with is a long-time friend. This even holds true for the folks on the
ground. Every voice I’ve heard on the radio so far has been someone who I know.
Thank goodness we have the IP phone and Email to keep in touch with our loved ones.
Happy it is the holiday and we get to drive our own schedule. That feels a little like we have some
control over our lives. I think that is why it feels good.
Weekends have come to mean two things: a break from the schedule enslavement and the tick-
ing of a countdown for return home. Initially they marked a count up but now seem to be transi-
tioning to be more of a countdown.
I have regained my sense of humor and shrugged off the tedium. The Capcom has done a good
job of disarming my potential for getting frustrated.
Suddenly I’m really appreciating the solitude that I have here. It does help to have control of your
own environment if you’re going to be isolated. I’m trying to picture what it would be like up
here with a crew of 6. It would be totally, completely, absolutely different. It would be more fun
at times, and there would be more camaraderie. That would be positive. But, the entire US seg-
ment is the equivalent of my house right now and sharing it would be huge difference. We are
very lucky to be here a time when the Station is so huge, yet there are only 3 of us to share it.
This is quite a luxury!
Today, I am glad we have normal work to do. The time goes by better and | feel more cheerful,
with the little ups and downs of getting the day’s plan accomplished.
It was a well-timed event personally, because it brought me out of a state of ”blues” that had
been hanging over me all day. I woke up this morning thinking, ”OK I don’t want to ’play’ any—
more. | just want to be home sleeping in our bed, eating at the dining table, sitting in my
recliner.”
Some words that have helped came from my friend _, who flew last year. He said ”At this par-
ticular time, you just have to start letting go. It’s time to move on, and you can’t hold onto the
role that you had, so don’t even try. Instead take comfort in knowing that you did a good job and
that it’s time to come home.”

19

"
"28","I blew off some steam by sending Emails to some close confidants. I suppose this will be a good

test to see if they are reading every note.

I realize that often times I use this journal to vent my frustrations. This helps me collect my

composure to deal with the situations. I must continue to look at the big picture and count

myself lucky to be here.

Ithink it is good to write this down—typing gets out some of these frustrations.

Writing in this journal helps to let off steam!

Examples of the more than 60 entries that referred to the passage of time are listed below. It
appears that the transition from counting up to counting down occurs at about the four-month point and
there is general agreement that siX months is a long time to be away from home.

Day 16 in space.

Twenty days? The time is flying by.

Ican't believe I've been up here for 3 weeks already.

Now that we have passed the first month, I note that we have 5 to go.

Well, our sixth week draws to a close. We’ve accomplished a lot.

We are 2 months down; 4 to go—1/3 of the way through!

Hard to believe we’re into our eleventh week on orbit.

Well, I made to 100 days. At this moment my watch says 100 days, 0 hours, 54 minutes, 29

seconds since blast off. I can hardly believe it.

We are approaching the half-way point in our voyage.

Three months in orbit! It seems like it’s gone by pretty quickly at times, and somewhat slowly at

times. In any case, our mission is roughly half over.

Today is the 4 month point!

Seven weeks from tomorrow, we are scheduled to land.

Under 40 days to go before landing!

Still trying to stay out of the ”countdown” mode, but it’s getting harder. In fact, we still have over

a month to go.

I still think that the ideal space station mission length (for me) would be three months. It would

be a different story if we were going somewhere (moon/mars)!

I’m starting to understand why people have said that 3 months is the ideal mission duration.

I can honestly say that I’m ready to go home. For me personally, five months would be the ideal

flight; six is a bit long.

The only way I am remembering the dates is when I enter something into this journal.

A few examples of entries concerning problems adjusting to life onboard the 188 are listed below.

This place is really an emotional rollercoaster for me.

There is so much going on that I feel overwhelmed. I am worried that I don’t remember as much

of my training as I should. I am looking forward to the pace slowing a bit, so that I can settle in.

One of the problems is that our training doesn’t really cover some of the basics of life in orbit

that we need to have under control. We spend all of our time on emergency scenarios and

spacewalks. Sometimes understanding how to live would go a long way to increasing the success
ofthe mission.
20

"
"29","I think this would be frustrating regardless of where I was, but I definitely need to let go of this
and forget about it.
I believe I have learned that I do not have what it takes to be a long duration crewmember. I
have accomplished much up here, and I am proud of that, but I don’t believe my future is in long
duration.
Numbe rs of ""Group Interaction"" Entries by Subcategory and Quarter
Celebration — — |
Discussion
w
Work
— _
Solidarity
— —
Conflict
——T-—
Getting Along
O 10 20 3O 4O 50 6O 7O 80
n=244entries ﬂFirst LJSecond “Third I Fourth Quarter
Nearly all of the participants in this study wrote prior to launch that getting along with their
crewmates would be their highest priority. It is evident from the journals that astronauts and cosmonauts
shared this objective and actively worked to maintain interpersonal harmony by cooperating, avoiding
certain topics in conversation, and other sincere acts of comradeship. Perhaps they were aware of what
twice Hero of the Soviet Union, Cosmonaut Valery Ryumin, wrote in his journal during a particularly
difﬁcult period onboard the Salyut 6 space station: “All the conditions necessary for murder are met if
you shut two men in a cabin measuring 18 feet by 20 and leave them together for two months.” The
Russians and Americans got along ﬁne together nearly all of the time and, for this reason, most of the
entries concerning conﬂict describe disagreements between astronauts. Examples of getting along and
interpersonal conﬂict are provided below.
W and I are getting along well. We did some tasks together and everything worked okay.
X and I continue to get along very well and have a few laughs now and then.
Y is in a particularly good mood this evening which is already making a positive impact on me.
Everything is fine with Z and me—I don’t think either of us gets on the other’s nerves too much.
I have to say, I’m pretty lucky. At 108 days I’m not the least bit annoyed or tired of these guys.
The crew dynamic on board is excellent.
The crew interaction on board was near perfect, as was the interaction among the on-board crew
and the ground teams. Never did any kind of issue arise between crewmembers.
We had our first heated discussion, yesterday. It was over lunch and he flew off very emphati-
cally that irresponsible scientists [were] trying to find favor with politicians—I am not sure if we
were getting towards oil and global warming, but he went on for about 5 minutes, got inter-
rupted by an activity he had to do, and came back to say he realized he had been very adamant,
but he felt it was all a big problem with scientists pushing theories as fact to a gullible populace,
and worse, scheming politicians. Ijust listened and let it a” calm down. I cannot afford to have
arguments of any type with [my crewmate].
21

"
"30","I was really surprised this morning to find that X had completely failed to perform a task yester-

day, one required in order for me to perform a task this morning. I was quite angry and later

apologized and accepted responsibility for not ”monitoring” more closely. I’m still disappointed

that X never took responsibility for the mistake.

Had a 5 minute break. Went to grab some coffee. Y has now decided not to have the water

heater on continuously, so had no hot water. Again amazed by how inconsiderate Y is.

We did have a run-in one night. I was really livid after Z snapped at me quite viciously about

something that wasn’t my fault. I let Z have it, like I can’t remember ever before in a professional

relationship, and stormed off.

We moved some racks together today, in the morning and throughout that entire process U was

barking at me constantly.

I’m finding myself losing tolerance for T. I can’t explain exactly what it is that bothers me.

Ifeel like I am complaining in these journals, and maybe that is what they are for. But regardless,

I am lucky I have this opportunity and it will be gone before I know it, so I am enjoying it to the

maximum | can—even with the I have to stay here with.

The essence of the group interaction described in the journals is not found in the preceding entries
concerning conﬂict, but rather, in the entries about solidarity, teamwork, and celebrations. Examples:

We’ve got to take care of each other. I admire his concern for making sure that I’ve eaten. We

make a good crew.

I notice X is very consistent to answer honestly each morning, when I float in to the SM, how he

slept, after saying good morning. I do the same for him and it seems we both always ask the

other, if that was left out. X also is pretty good at telling me spontaneously if he has been having

a couple of bad days.

It is good that we have this kind of relationship. This mission is so easy, since we are of like per-

sonality and thought.

I’m grateful that Z and I launched having built a strong personal relationship. That has been

important in helping us deal with the stresses of adjusting to being here, exacerbated by the

intensity of our first two months on orbit.

W is amazing as a crewmate. Nothing fazes his even demeanor and steady work. He is just a

great guy to be stuck in a ”tin can” with for six months.

It seems like the EVA stuff bonds folks. We feel each other’s pain and understand the hardships

associated with what we are doing.

We have some inside jokes; we talk about the other cosmonauts and astronauts, which seems to

be a favorite topic for him. We watch movies together on the weekend nights. S and I had some

longer talks, but that is possible because his English is so good.

Tonight we celebrated our last night together as Expedition xx. There wasn’t much emotion, but

perhaps a bit more than usual. M seemed to want to say, ”I love you, man,” without the alcohol

to us both. He commented on how much he liked how we all lived together. When I asked him

what characteristic he would use to describe what he liked, he answered that it was laid back

(my translation). I guess he’s right, but at the same time it’s a little difficult to imagine things

being otherwise. My only other experiences have been short duration flights, where the pace just

doesn’t allow the seeds of conflict to germinate. Our time together has been remarkably conflict

free; W and I did have words a couple of times, but never once with M and never even felt any-

thing remotely close to having to bite my lip. I don’t know if it’s always that way.

22

"
"31","N umbers of ""Recreation/Leisure"" Entries by Subcategory and Quarter
Studying in
Sleeping u
HAM Radio H
Computer i
Chess I I
News
Music
Relaxing
Reading
General
Earth Viewing
MOVleS — — —
.4. —
Photography —
0 10 20 3O 4O 50 6O 7O 80 90 100
n=329 entries I First u Second H Third I Fourth Quarter

More pages have been written about recreation in space than any other behaVioral issue, most
during the 1960s when it was assumed that an expedition to Mars would follow a successful Apollo Pro-
gram. The emphasis on leisure activity reﬂected the widely-held belief that astronauts would be at psy-
chological risk during interplanetary voyages and heeded admonitions from the past that boredom was the
primary enemy of polar explorers.7

An expedition to the Moon, Mars, or an asteroid would present opportunities for unstructured
time and idle hands to work their legendary mischief, especially if equipment malfunctions, atmospheric
conditions, or some other factor prevented performance of scheduled tasks and resulted in prolonged
periods without meaningful work. The importance of meaningful work to adjustment and morale is eVi-
dent in many of the journal entries included as examples in this report. However, all participants com-
plained about trivial, redundant, and tedious tasks, but few complained about the low workload periods
that are typically experienced during the latter stages of transferring responsibility for the 188 to a
replacement crew. The high-tempo of scheduled work usually limited the participating crews’ leisure
time, which was put to good use when available, as described in the entries reproduced below.

References to Earth Viewing and photography accounted for 40 percent of all entries assigned to
Recreation and Leisure as the primary category. The preeminence of these activities, which are essentially
the theoretical and applied versions of the same pursuit, was predicted by previous spacecraft and space
analog experience. The Skylab crews spent nearly all of their free time at their window and recommended
bubble-like observation domes on future stations, and the cupola that was (ﬁnally) installed on the 188 in
March 2010 was inspired by the most popular design feature on NASA’s 1969-1970 T ektite undersea
habitat.

7 For more on this topic see Chapter 14, “Recreational Opportunities” in, Stuster, J . Bold Endeavors: Lessons F mm
Polar and Space Exploration. US Naval Institute Press: Annapolis, MD, 1996.
23

"
"32","Deriving pleasure from observing nature probably is hardwired, Which When coupled With Type-
A personalities, a great View, and a camera With an 800 mm lens has resulted in a zillion extraordinary
images of our planet and contributed to the habitability of the 18$ for many astronauts. NASA’s Crew
Earth Observations (CEO) program speciﬁes targets of interest for the astronauts to photograph (e.g., Mt.
Kilimanjaro Without cloud cover, Wildﬁres in California, a hurricane approaching the Gulf Coast). The
target opportunities are hard-scheduled and performance of the tasks inspires most astronauts to develop
skill With the powerful lens and then to capture images of their own choosing. The results have been an
enormous catalog of interesting and beautiful images (84 percent of Which were selected by the astro-
nauts), and the complete elimination of boredom as an enemy for most 188 personnel. The availability of
Earth photography opportunities, Which are determined by orbital dynamics and weather even inﬂuences
individual morale. It is important to note that this source of recreation and personal gratiﬁcation Will be
less available to interplanetary explorers during long periods of their voyages.

Traveling around the globe every 90 minutes provides lots of opportunity to view the geography,

oceans, cloud formations, sunrises and sunsets, thunderstorms, city lights and many other things

in vivid detail. In both the Russian Segment and the US Segment of the Station we have a com-

puter map program running to show us where we are and to provide prediction for future passes

over specific sites on the Earth.

We are in what X calls ”boring orbits.” Our orbit is such that we are mostly over oceans by day

and continents by night. About the only land we see is southern South America and Australia.

I am trying to make more time for photographing the earth. It is enjoyable and useful, with

tangible results.

I am getting some good photos of the Earth. It is interesting work. On my shuttle flights, there

was never time to experiment and to get into the details of photography. Now that I have more

time, especially on the weekends, I can experiment with settings and exposures and lenses to see

what works best.

At least I have my new hobby, photography of the Earth. It’s really exciting and I look forward to

getting good shots!

Itook a peek out the side-facing JEM windows one evening, without camera in hand, and was so

mesmerized that I ended up gazing upon the Earth for an entire 90 minute orbit. A hundred

times I thought ”I should go grab the camera” but I decided to just try to capture this one orbit

with my own eyes and burn it into my brain.

This is a point of irritation for crews—they built us a great window, but we’re not supposed to

use it unless MCC directs us to.

Ifinally photographed a place that I have tried to spot for a week. It’s called Kerguelen Island, a

French research outpost in the South Indian Ocean. There’s a small cadre of researchers there,

supplied by a ship every few months. Sort of like a station expedition. It’s almost always cloudy

there, but today I got a nice photo of most of the island. I think I’ll try to email it to the folks

there. [Note: The physician and leader of this research station in 1993 participated in the experi-

ment, described previously, on which the current study is based.]

In a space of 20 minutes we flew directly over the Cape of Good Hope, the tip of the Horn of

Africa, and K2 (second tallest mountain on Earth). I got photos of all three places.

I have been looking at the Earth, from the point of view of a visiting extraterrestrial. Where

would I put down, and how would I go about making contact? The least dangerous thing would

be to board the International Space Station and talk to those people first.

Ithink I’m going to spend the rest of my life trying to understand what I saw here every day for 6

months. It’s become a ritual for me, on my way home from the Service Module at night, to take a

detour and stop in the Russian Docking Compartment to stare out the window before I go to bed.

The view is awe-inspiring and beyond comprehension.

24

"
"33","We’re flying sideways again, and we’re in an orbital phase where the Sun is never very high in the

sky and where we see mostly Patagonia. But I just got my first ever glimpse of the South Georgia

Islands! These islands were the location of a whaling base for many years, and are probably best

known as the site of Shackleton’s trek overland to find help for his crew.

[Notez Ernest Shackleton, the most revered polar explorer, never made it to a planned destina-

tion, but he never lost a man, either.]

By some strange coincidence, in one day, I saw most of the places I’ve ever lived. Not only did I

see them, but I captured some extremely clear pictures.

Photography has been disappointing lately. The earth is very smoggy these days, especially over

coastal China. There, I literally can’t get an even semi-clear image of the land form through the

smog, even when directly nadir. The US and Europe have been covered with clouds. It’s definitely

winter time on Earth!

Haven’t had much chance to look out the window lately, but our orbit is definitely getting more

scenic. We’re starting to cross Europe and North America in daylight, and we’ve had lots of good

passes over Africa and the Middle East.

Our orbit does not currently provide for very interesting Earth observation photos. However, I

caught some nice shots of the moon descending towards and through the Earth limb. Pretty

spectacular!

The orbits are starting to get interesting again. It is time to try to get the last photos that I need

to round out my collection. In reality, I have most of them [already]. It’s still the most enjoyable

thing that I do onboard.

So many pictures have now been taken of the earth that very rarely do we get requests to take

big wide field of view pictures, with the Earth’s curve in view. After a while, I decided to take pic-

tures for myself of the curve of the earth with a big horizon, looking on the line of travel of the

station. Wow, it is great to do this. The view is like being in the nose of an airplane, head out in

front. I use a 17mm lens, which is wide angle enough to produce an image just as the eyes see

the scene. I take a series of pictures, every 30 seconds or so for the last quarter of an orbit, as we

go toward darkness and the terminator. The result is a series of pictures that reproduces the

path of the station over the Earth that I can review and marvel at. Yes, they are not as good as

the real scene, but the key is that they are a record of what I have seen, and will be with me after

flight to remind me.

We’re still getting lots of views of North America out the window. I’ve given up on trying to get

good photos—it’s much more pleasant just to watch.

Watching movies together was the second-most frequently reported form of recreation by the
astronauts and continues a tradition of group entertainment that has been enjoyed by remote duty person-
nel since soon after the advent of the medium. F ilms worn from repeated showings at Antarctic stations
were creatively re-spliced With hilarious results in the decades before Videotape players. 188 crews have
beneﬁtted immensely from the availability of a plasma screen, stereo system, and laptop computer capa-
ble of playing DVDs. The camaraderie and group solidarity that result from “movie nights” are evident in
the entries that compose this subcategory, as is the sensitivity of the astronauts to the feelings of their
Russian comrades; that is, considerable effort is devoted to the goal of avoiding interpersonal conﬂict,
Which extends to careful selection of the movies a crew Views together. It also is evident from the entries
that the 1968 Stanley Kubrick/Arthur C. Clarke classic, 2001: A Space Odyssey and the 1984 sequel 2010
are considered to be the best movies about space exploration, at least by this sample of experts.

On Saturday I showed 2001 a Space Odyssey to X, as we have been talking a lot about space

exploration. What a class movie. No stars visible; airlock ops, maneuvers, all just right on. We

really felt for Bowman, all alone, no return without going to Jupiter first, and doing the manly

thing—carrying the mission through.

25

"
"34","Saturday night we watched a contemporary Russian movie for 3 hours—with good Soviet-capi-
ta|ist type discussion of the value of the Russian aristocracy.
Z and I agreed this would be an opportunity to watch movies, and we did, 3 nights in a row.
We watched another movie this weekend. I was not sure Q was in the mood, as he had been
rather gloomy, probably for similar reasons as mine, so I decided I would not bring it up. How-
ever, he suddenly seemed to wake up at dinner on Saturday and proposed setting it up, but not
proposing any film in particular.
So the movies filled the time. We watched East West—a Russian French movie set in Stalin’s
Soviet Union in Russian and French with Russian subtitles. I realized as we were watching how
the hero, a Russian émigré returning to Russia and his French wife and son were being abused
and moving through a very frustrating and sad life, that M was not going to be happy with it.
X and I continue watching movies about 4 nights a week. Usually it takes 2 sessions to finish a
film. We’ve been watching mostly American films, since our Russian selection is pretty poor.
| uncertainly proposed The Right Stuff. Not a very good movie and did much to overinflate the
already huge egos of test pilot astronauts worldwide. The characters, other than Glenn, are not
very nice people, as portrayed. However, Y jumped at it, and even though the flying scenes and
the launches were unrealistic, he said he enjoyed the movie.
We had not watched a flick in a couple of weeks, but we renewed our movie habit tonight,
watching the first half of Master and Commander. It’s a bit hard for X to understand the nine-
teenth century navy jargon, but it’s a good movie.
We watched the first half of Silverado last night, but I don’t think I want to watch the second half
tonight, since I really need to do my prep for tomorrow. But, I guess I could be talked into it.
We watched True Lies tonight—it was a fun movie. I had forgotten most of it and can’t help but
think about Tony Robbins’ commentary on why we watch movies that we’ve already seen. Since
we know the outcome, it is predictable, and it is a comfortable feeling when your life and your
environment are predictable. But we also need uncertainty to keep us active, alert, and stimu-
lated. So we hope that we forgot enough of the movie that we find it exciting even though we
already know what’s going to happen. It works! It was exciting and also predictable.
I’m dragging [my crewmates] through all the Star Trek movies. It’s been a lot of fun to be the
lucky person to introduce Star Trek to a couple of Space enthusiasts who never had the oppor-
tunity to see how we made the dream come alive on TV and on the big screen in America. A few
movies back, when Spock’s father took leave of him after saving the planet, the two Vulcan’s
raised their hands, did the Vulcan salute, and said the proverbial ”Live Long and Prosper.” I died
laughing as [they] spontaneously tried to give the same salute. To see them doing something for
the first time that I did for the first time about 40 years ago was unbelievably funny and nostal-
gic. They are really into this and I’m having a great time showing it to them.
We watched 2010, in part because we started with 2001. Y seemed to enjoy Hollywood’s
depiction of the Russians, who save the mission and deliver our American heroes to Jupiter.
After our EVAs were over, we had a day and a half off. It was one of the first times in which we
had some time off 2 days in a row during the mission, so we planned dinner and a movie night.
The movie 2010 was fun to watch because it was about a joint US-Russian mission. So we were a
joint US-Russian crew watching a joint US-Russian crew, and enjoying all the inter-cultural
exchanges and how they were portrayed in the movie. In particular, when they had to sever
relations and stay on their own ships due to the breakdown in the political situation on Earth, we
started joking about how we would do that up here—and I was in big trouble with the bathroom,
oxygen generator, and rescue vehicle across the border. It really is amazing that we are here,
Russians and Americans, on a massive international spaceship. We might not be orbiting Jupiter,
but 40 years after 2001 came out, the barely imaginable has become abso|ute|y real.

26

"
"35","In addition to Earth Viewing, photography, and watching movies together, the astronauts’ journals
contained many references to reading, listening to music, and catching up on news from Earth. Some of
the astronauts devised guessing games and triVia contests to engage and entertain their ground controllers,
and one participant started a game of chess With ground personnel that quickly spread to the Russian
MCC and eventually blossomed into an international, Earth VS. Space tournament. Others spent off—duty
time contacting HAM radio operators, communicating With friends and family, or preparing collections of
images and Video to document their expeditions. It also is apparent that most of the participants devoted
considerable free time to maintaining the personal j ournals that are the subject of this study.

Numbe rs of ""Equipment"" Entries by Subcategory and Quarter

Electrical ' ‘-

Payload —- _
Lost/Misplaced —
Communications — _
Corn puters _ - _
Described -—
—
Exercise ——-
—1F——
0 5 10 15 20 25 3O 35
n=159 entries I First I..l Second H Third I Fourth Quarter

The journal entries assigned to the Equipment category mostly refer to problems, rather than the
smooth functioning of machinery and other systems, although some describe the joy that accompanies a
difﬁcult but successful repair. The topics range from habitability and life support equipment to the limita-
tions of disposable batteries in space. Examples from the sub-categories are provided below.

We looked at it, cleared it—and presto, we have a decent table now that does not knock you

while running on TVIS, and its built-in fan and heaters work! He said, ”Why did you not mention

this earlier?!” We are pleased and will carefully store the pieces in the F68, behind a panel.

There’s only room for two at the table, so three of us just float and juggle our food. I’m not sure

what the idea is for when we have six of us up here.

After a week here, I notice the noise on the ISS. It is markedly louder in the SM, where I wear ear

plugs all the time. In the USOS, it is quieter, but still loud near the aft end of the lab. Fortunately,

inside the TESS is very quiet. In the USOS, I generally wear ear plugs too, but I do give my ears

stretches without. Wearing ear plugs constantly irritates the ears, so some breaks are necessary.

I will mention a relatively minor thing that is starting to become an irritant. That is the high-

pitched loud noise that comes from the _ rack. I’m pretty sure it is the _ pump and it is way

too loud. One of the environmental things I miss the most is quiet—complete silence. Unfortu-

nately my primary work place is right in front of it because of its proximity to the _ panel and

the laptop I use most.

We had a tag-up today to discuss options. There aren’t many. None of the other gloves onboard

is a better fit. The EVA may be at risk.

27

"
"36","During the day, the Service Module feels like a steam bath. Usually there are 4 or more people in
there, and the systems are just not keeping up to maintain temperature, humidity, and C02
under control. As I fly through the Station and enter the SM, it feels like running into a blanket of
muggy stale air. I am very glad that my work is generally elsewhere.
We heard the usual clicks over the loudspeakers, a byproduct of the relays operating, and X
floated nearby, and then said, ”Over here—it is the smell again.” It was like you had your face in
a can of paint. This is very dangerous, so I said we should turn it off and close the valves now. X
seemed uncertain, and I said we can’t let it go on. He reported the smell as coming from _just
before we lost comm with Moscow. They came right back and said shut it down; I was relieved.
Physically, I am exhausted. My arms and hands are somewhat beat up and worn out. The suit
could have fit better.
So, at the moment we have no systems working to purify and circulate our air, control tempera-
ture, or generate oxygen. This all comes after a separator pump failure last night that knocked
out our toilet. We do have spares onboard and hope that replacing the separator will solve the
problem. In the meantime, we are using the Soyuz facility, which has very little capacity. When it
rains it pours. Until today, Survival Mode was just the name of a mode of the Command and Con-
trol Computers, which I had to understand theoretically. It’s taken on a more substantial mean-
ing for me today.
M was tired even before we started. His cooling failed twice, causing him to egress the suit and
troubleshoot connections, etc. Problem was a chronic bend in a water tube, one that M thought
should have been fixed long ago after the problem plagued someone else. That added being
frustrated to being tired, and put us over an hour behind before we ever opened the hatch.
The biggest news here was a meltdown of the file server yesterday. The biggest impact has been
a loss of email for a day. It happened just after I composed and launched a bunch of emails.
So many laptops have failed that we now have to scavenge. Psychologically, this is significant
because I am now effectively computerless in the SM, so spend my browsing time in the Lab
away from X. It feels strange—only meals and the toilet lead me to the SM now.
We almost had another ”upset” for the weekend when our OCA Router died today. Fortunately
we recovered with a reboot. I believe the parts are overheating and need to be replaced.
The only irritant I continue to work through is the TVIS and the discomfort with the harness while
running. Being a lover of running it is very frustrating. I also worry that it might cause long-term
damage to my hips.
Latest pet peeve: I don’t think we can get to the Moon and Mars on disposable batteries.
The connectors are gamma type, which translates into being a royal pain in the ass. T said the
only reason that you need to timeline two folks to do this is so that one person can swear full-
time. At one point, we thought we might need to get Y, so that we could have 2 people swearing!
W ,
‘ x ‘, ;\ . .""m
I ~ \‘1 + ..;
, . . .f «:91 ’J""
- mqtl‘w
William Clark Writing in His J ournal at Eagle Creek, 31 May 1805,
by Gary R. Lucy.
28

"
"37","Numbers of ""Event"" Entries by Subcategory and Quarter
I
Onboard Event |
Milestone
Danger I —
EVA ‘—
$_—
LaunCh —
Honday T—
-l_-———
External Event
——ﬂ-_—
Docking/ U ndocking
———w——
Crew Rotation
O 5 10 15 20 25 3O 35 4O 45 50
n=229entries lFirst uSecond HThird [Fourth Quarter
Event emerged as a category during the coding of the French diaries to accommodate periodic
external and internal inﬂuences on crew behavior. For example, storms that conﬁned an expedition to its
habitat or destroyed equipment usually had a cascading sequence of consequences. Some events that
inﬂuence ISS crews are reasonably predictable, such as Shuttle, Soyuz, and Progress launches; dock-
ing/undocking; crew rotations; and holidays, While others are not, such as onboard emergencies, increased
solar activity, and hurricanes that threaten friends and family on Earth (and affect station operations). The
disproportionate numbers of entries concerning crew rotation during the ﬁrst and fourth quarters, illu-
strated in the ﬁgure, reﬂect the salient experiences of replacing the previous crew and being replaced by
the next crew, respectively. A few examples from the sub-categories follow.
Well, we’re finally here. The launch met all my expectations. Damned small vehicle.
The Space Station is no longer a peaceful and quite place anymore. There are busy people every-
where and in all directions. It was an amazing sight to see the Shuttle pull into view below the
Station. It wasn’t at all like watching a Soyuz or Progress. The Shuttle is a gorgeous and huge
spaceship by comparison, and so much more capable. It brought tears to my eyes, and I couldn’t
help but think of it as my ride home at that moment.
Another tumultuous day. We said goodbye to our crewmates and I was sad to see them go.
It is difficult having the place raided and in such an upheaval. It will take the rest of the expedi-
tion to regain order I’m sure.
The Soyuz approach was absolutely amazing. They approach the near phase hot with jets blasting
away to slow the craft and capture the station-keeping target prior to the fly around.
It felt like a scene from 2001! The Soyuz seats three abreast. The commander sits in the center
seat; I’m in the left seat with a duplicate computer display, entry keypad, a set of unique direct
command keys, but no flight controls.
This attitude really screws up Ku coverage. I really hate it.
I have been ”on top of the world” since watching the Soyuz launch this morning and knowing
that relief is on the way. We also are enjoying watching the Shuttle trail behind us. What a great
docked mission that was.
We are beginning to ramp up with the EVA preparations. I am looking forward to this one more
than the last, because I feel more in control with what we are doing.
29

"
"38","Today is EVA day. I’m starting to have that |-think-I-must-be-forgetting-something feeling. MCC-
M just called to disallow me from using the _. It’s too close to the EVA to let myself get upset,
but I can tell that I will be. It’s all about ”not invented here.”
We heard a big bump in the morning yesterday that we think could have been a meteor strike.
Lots of radiation flashes bothered me last night.
Today is the third day of unexpected solar flare activity. We had to take shelter in designated
areas inside of ISS.
| always knew that this could happen [another solar flare] and it is a little disconcerting. How-
ever, there is nothing we can do about it. If we had been on a mission to the Moon or Mars, we
would have taken the full brunt of the radiation. That is a problem for which we don’t have a
good solution as of yet.
All is well on board, at least now it is. We had a fire—or at least smoke—out of the _ that
caused a little commotion for a couple of hours. It was brought under control right away, we
never had to don masks and the filtering of the atmosphere was completed quickly.
My lOO-day party is coming up this week. That will be an interesting and fun event. I’m not sure
how it will be to interact with a big group from here, but I’m psyched we’re having a party.
Happy New Year! We’ve really enjoyed our time off.
New Year’s Eve is over, I must say with some relief. I was aware that it was as important for X’s
family as Christmas was for mine, so I suggested activities. He invited me to join his family video
conference, and | politely waved and joked for 15 minutes or so and then discretely left.
I am not sure I look forward to Holidays on ISS, especially those that are not followed by a week-
end. The effort is made to be happy and people on the ground go out of their way to help each
other and us, but the effect is to fill the Holiday with a lot of friendly social stuff, chatter on the
air to ground, some expectancy for a little show from the crew, VIP telephones calls etc. Mean-
while the things you really count on, like email updates, swift responses to your questions about
work matters etc. degrade, because the ground teams have gone to [partial staffing]. Unlike on
Earth where this would be enjoyable, because you do not have to work, here it is spoiled because
there are always high priority work tasks that just cannot wait until the next day. I can clearly see
from my whining here that time pressure is the biggest factor affecting my mood.
Numbers of ""Organization/Management"" Entries by Subcategory and Quarter
Request by Mgt. ‘-
Commentary —'— —
—-—
POllcy — — —
————
—— —
Agency Relations
—r—
Deficiencies — — —
—v——
Action/ Inaction
O 5 10 15 20 25 3O 35

n=131entries lFirst uSecond HThird I Fourth Quarter

Communicating With management was addressed in the discussion of Outside Communications.
In contrast, the major category labeled Organization/Management is composed of entries concerning
management actions, policies, and relations between the space agencies. Examples follow.
30

"
"39","This is actually a source of some frustration for station crews—they train us for years, but when
the shuttle crew comes up they do most of the operational work.
I still get frustrated by the degree to which we get left out of the loop. This has been a perpetual
problem in the ISS crew world.
Contrary to the briefing last night, the ground wanted to begin arm motion earlier than
scheduled, prior to my availability. This certainly did nothing to give me confidence in the ground
team and reinforces my belief that the ground too often fails to consider the crew when making
decisions and taking action.
Something that Houston has continued to do that is a little irritating, is cancel events for me
because of a perception that I am too busy. Yes, I do have a full work schedule, but Houston is
canceling fun events, like talking to celebrities and doing interviews. I sent our folks a polite note
asking them to let me do these things. I am not too busy.
Although there are a lot of seemingly little things (it’s hard to gauge how big they are, being too
close to it all) that are bothering me about NASA, I must not let it get to me.
I continue to be amazed by the degree to which the ground has gotten into the habit of taking
action and not informing the crew.
It’s difficult to put up with what I see as tasks that waste my time, while other things that I want
to do fall off as lower priority. I am in a difficult position, in that if I want to discuss these issues
with the ground, I may be perceived as grumpy or complaining.
The expectation is that I’ll just do the right thing, regardless. I would expect at least some inter-
est in identifying obsolescence with an eye toward correcting it in the future. It doesn’t happen.
I learned today during the weekly planning conference that my schedule is so packed that they
had to schedule 3.5 hours of work for me on one of my upcoming days off. This is a bit irritating. I
wasted so much time this week and to now take it out of my scheduled time off is going a bit far.
I get the feeling the US and Russian teams are a little stressed with each other. An incredibly
unnecessary and pedantic US procedure to __ should have no consequence to the Russian side,
but my whole morning activity carrying out this procedure was cancelled, because it involved X
helping me read a meter for 5 minutes, so opening the door to have the Russians review and
probably ridicule the US procedure. Houston simply told me when I pressed them that the Rus-
sians had not blessed the procedure, and Ijumped to these conclusions. It is probably a reaction
by the Russians to Houston nagging Moscow about the upcoming _, making them take a bit of
their own medicine. I am not sure what X and I can do to ease all this. At least we can work
together calmly and make that evident to Moscow and Houston.
The teleconference was very interrogative and left me a little ticked off. I did not even bring it up
with S until the next day, because I knew it would make him angry at the US side and I did not
want to spoil his good mood on the eve of the weekend.
I like the incremental approach the Russians use for preparing for this sort of event; the Ameri-
cans would assume that you’ll do all your mental preparation in your spare time.
I was a bit upset today as I reviewed plans for the week and EVA prep. Turns out there are no
PAO events after our EVA. Ifind this unacceptable and voiced my opinion. The response was that
there are too many high priority items to be taken care of. I want the US taxpayers to know what
we are doing up here and it only takes about 30 minutes of our time to do an event. I offered my
weekends and personal time if that would help them out. We shall see.
The problem at NASA is that nobody can or will stand up to the safety organization. The safety
folks seem to concentrate on minutia while neglecting big things. We need managers to override
the safety organization or we will never get to Mars. The journey itself will be deemed to be too
unsafe. Can you imagine Koroliev or Von Braun succeeding in this environment?

31

"
"40","The week finished on a high note, I had our regular Astronaut office and Flight director’s confer-
ences yesterday, as well as the Program manager’s conference today. In all three, we discussed
my concerns about inefficient use of time onboard and the consequences to doing meaningful
science and other work. All were very receptive, so I was satisfied with the meetings. I am sure
that I am not the first crewmember to voice such sentiments. Time will tell whether or not things
change. There’s a lot of inertia at a large organization like NASA.
N umbers of ""Sleep"" Entries by Subcategory and Quarter
— —
Nap
—
GoodSIeep
——
SleepShift ‘
——ﬂ
— — —
Poor Sleep
——*——
Other
——— —
Long Sleep
——w——
— — —
Tired
O 5 10 15 20 25 3O 35
n=170 entries I First :4 Second E Third I Fourth Quarter
Few people know What it is really like to live and work in space, but we all are familiar With the
performance-degrading effects of poor or insufﬁcient sleep. Humans can endure many forms of depriva-
tion and motivation can even counter the effects of fatigue, but only temporarily because the requirement
is ﬁnite and deﬁcits are cumulative. We all eventually succumb to the need for sleep. The numbers of
journal entries about being tired and poor sleep recorded during the ﬁrst quarters of ISS expeditions, and
the numbers of entries about long sleep during the ﬁrst and second quarters suggest that astronauts learn
their limits of reasonable deprivation and develop effective strategies during the initial period; that is, they
learn to sleep in space. The diminishing frequency of references to poor sleep supports this explanation.
The subcategory labeled “Other” includes references to dreams, ﬂashes caused by solar particles striking
retinas, sleep interruptions, and sleeping location; some are simply statements that it is time for bed.
Examples from the sub-categories follow.
It’s late and I’m tired, but I want to get into some sort of routine doing this.
lam trying to get to bed to buy back some of the sleep deficit I’m building up.
Ijust need sleep.
Ifell asleep while typing.
Ifeel pretty tired today. The fatigue is the result of getting only 6 hours of sleep most nights. The
temptation to try to get a jump on tomorrow has been too great to ignore.
I was awakened in the middle of the night by the ground telling me to close the shutter on the
lab window. It is beyond me why it couldn’t wait until wake up time.
Very tired. Woke up at 2 am and couldn’t get back to sleep. Finally fell asleep and overslept.
Half a day off today...| slept a solid NINE hours. I didn’t know I could sleep that long!
32

"
"41","I slept in this morning until 0900 and it really felt good. I was really exhausted last night (for no
particular reason) and think I slept for about 10 hours. The alertness is much better today.
Islept until 10 am on Saturday, which is very unusual for me.
Really slept in this morning. Got up so close to exercise time that I could only drink a black coffee.
Feel much more rested.
The morning started disastrously. I slept through two alarms, one set for 0600 and another a
haIf-hour later to remind me to take some CEO pictures. My body apparently went on strike for
better working conditions.
Islept poorly again last night.
Iagain woke up earlier than I wanted, not feeling quite rested but afraid to squander any time.
The time shift is starting to make the end of the day tough. We are pretty tired right now having
shifted about 6 hours over the weekend.
We started sleep shifting back to the left about 8.5 hours. I chose not to take any Ambien
because although we were scheduled to go to bed early, I was pretty tired and figured I wouldn’t
need it to fall asleep. I was correct, but failed to anticipate that I’d wake up a few hours into the
sleep period and not be able to fall back asleep. I stayed awake for a couple of hours and was
feeling rather anxious—not sure what about.
Slept great last night. Makes a” the difference.
Got some good sleep last night, so maybe that will make today more interesting.
Since I haven’t been sleeping well I decided to preemptively move my sleeping bag elsewhere
where it might be cooler. I chose my familiar home of the airlock, but slept poorly there anyway.
We are passing through the South Atlantic anomaly during our sleep and I have noticed a few
more characteristic radiation streaks in my visual field as | drift off.
| feel that I’m s|ow|y understanding how to better manage my time, but even tonight when I
thought I had a good chance of being in bed by 2200, it’s almost 2300 and I am not yet there.
I need to get more sleep tonight than the past few. I can feel the fatigue accumulating and it will
be important to be rested for the undocking in a few days. For that reason I will close for now.
I ‘ \ _ i .
' / :8 \W t
i '7 _ r‘ & &
f ‘ ‘ _A__. ‘
4.- ‘3
«‘7‘ 1‘ i .
1’ 1‘ ‘ ‘ i _
. .7- ‘ - - \S! P ‘
‘~ «C? ‘m ‘
Dr. J 06 Kerwin wearing electrodes in his Skylab sleep chamber, 1973.
33

"
"42","N umbers of ""Food"" Entries by Subcategory and Quarter
Packaging u |
Eating Well 1' _
Described —
MealsTogether
FoodSuppIy
O 10 20 3O 4O 50 6O
n=142entries lFirst I..ISecond HThird lFourth Quarter

Food assumes added importance When access to friends, family, leisure pursuits and other normal
sources of gratiﬁcation are denied. The importance of food during isolation and conﬁnement is well-
known to the managers of oil rigs, commercial ships, Antarctic research stations and nuclear submarines,
all of Whom serve large quantities and varieties of high-quality food daily. The polar explorers of the
heroic era recognized the role that food can play in facilitating adjustment to conﬁned and austere condi-
tions, as did the managers of airlines until recently. Food is the quintessential habitability issue.8

References to the onboard supply of meal items compose the most-frequently reported subcate-
gory of journal entries concerning food. Most Within this subcategory were written in response to running
low on supplies during a few of the increments and some are eerily reminiscent of Robert Falcon Scott’s
meticulous chronicling of his expedition’s dwindling supplies While attempting to return from the South
Pole. All of the participants described disappointment concerning the depletion of favored food and drink
items, and many wrote about the joy of ﬁnding an item that had been believed to be long gone. The
beneﬁts of crews eating meals together also are reﬂected in the j ournals. A disproportionate number of
entries from this major category are provided below to reinforce Fridtjof Nansen’s admonition to be
especially careful about the food.

We actually have a pretty wide assortment of food and it’s not bad at all. One of my concerns

was being able to put up with the food for six months. Although it’s not quite home cooking, the

folks in the food laboratories in Houston and in Moscow have done a pretty good job on the

menu, providing us a wide assortment of quality food and drinks.

I really do wish for more American type breakfast food. The Russians eat a lot of cheese stuff,

some of it quite good. I enjoy most of their food and am even trying new things that I didn’t care

for previously. I hope it doesn’t get too ”old” after several months!

Only now do we understand the depths of [a different previous crew’s] plunder of our food! X

took all of Y’s canned fish, including those in his bonus containers! Fortunately, we have some

left. We joked with them on a scheduled air/ground conference, but are a little sore about it.

lam sti|| concerned about the food situation. How could the ground have miscalculated so badly?

Not much we can do about it, but it is irritating.

We are getting tired of eating chicken all the time, but it will be OK.

I hate the idea of not having enough to eat in space. The data suggest that one is much better off

eating a lot, in terms of keeping bone density up and overall health too.
8 For more on this topic see Chapter 10, “Food Preparation” in, Stuster, J . Bold Endeavors: Lessons F mm Polar and
Space Exploration. US Naval Institute Press: Annapolis, MD, 1996.

34

"
"43","Our food supply is in worse shape than we had believed. Projections now show us running out of
main courses two weeks before Progress arrives. The projection is conservative, so I hope that
we will not be eating crackers and water for two weeks. That would be like the stories of prison.
So, we should not have complained about chicken, since that chicken may soon run out!
Food is still our biggest concern. We are out of side dishes, such as potatoes and vegetables. We
still get some vegetables in the soups, but not much. We have packaged fruit left, so that’s at
least something. We still have eggs and bread, but don’t know how much longer that will last.
The food situation is getting worse; we are definitely running out of things and are starting to
resent the last crew for not telling the ground what was going on. We could have brought more
food with us.
I’ve lost 4.5 pounds over the last two weeks and S has lost about 3.5. We are trying to make a
joke of it, to keep a positive attitude.
The ground has now realized the dire food situation. I performed a detailed audit and sent the
results down. For real food, I think we only have in the neighborhood of 1200 calories per day
per person. Include all the sugar on board (candy, desserts, extra juices and sweetened drinks)
and we have plenty of calories, but we don’t plan on eating too many sweets.
I discovered extra main course rations in my bonus containers, so we enjoyed a dinner of
and were very happy. It is amazing how this seemingly small thing made our evening. On the
ground, this food would not be considered particularly appetizing. However, take it away from us
and it seems like the most delicious food in the world.
It is probably not a bad thing to lose a few pounds, but psychologically, it makes a big difference
whether one is choosing to lose the weight or if one is being forced. We are able to remain in
good spirits overall, with moments of anger and frustration at what [a previous crew] did to us.
The good news is that we have good food on board now. It makes such a huge difference in men-
tal attitude. We should be fit and ready for the EVA.
We ran out of coffee with cream and sugar a couple of days ago and I really like my coffee in the
morning. Then I enjoyed a small victory when I discovered the mother lode hidden in a CTB in the
Node. I’m happy again.
Found out that the program wasn’t planning to include salt in our food shipment. Not a pleasant
surprise. I sent an email making it clear that we were not involved in that decision and were
extremely displeased. Folks are trying to get some added to the Progress manifest.
The food is getting somewhat old to us. On paper we have quite a variety and it is not too bad
actually, but I think it is starting to all look and taste the same. Perhaps we are just tired of eating
out of a can or wrapper.
We sorted through and found all our favorites and saved them, pitching the jellied beef tongue
we had in abundant quantities (because none of us will eat it).
I have had many programmatic fights with the Russians about the inequality of Russian/US foods
(supposed to be 50/50). They have always had more Russian on board, using the rationale that
people like Russian food better. That is bull .
I like writing this after lunch. A bag of tea slurping past my lips makes me relaxed and calm. I can
even handle the news we just heard that all the food containers sent up on the Progress are not
for us, but the next crew.
We opened new food containers yesterday, so every meal is like a fiesta, with lots of things to
choose from and no reason to eat anything you don’t like. When the cupboard starts getting
bare, | start eating things like asparagus for breakfast and drinking ultra-sweet fruit drinks and all
the things I put off until last. But in general, our food is quite good.

35

"
"44","No one ever told me that there are practically no tortillas onboard, even though everyone knows
they are incredibly popular for eating just about anything.
Everything is good health-wise and food-wise. One of the food containers we opened yesterday
was actually intended for and it had some good stuff in it that is absent from our menus,
including some of my favorites.
Z flew into the Lab and tossed me a fresh apple soon after the Progress arrived. That was really
great! It was a welcome change.
I’m trying to figure out the food situation, AGAIN. If the Unpack List is correct, we’ll run out of
some US food items well before E_ arrives. I don’t understand why management doesn’t put a
higher priority on this.
The big decision for dinner last night was what we should eat with our onions! I am not sure why
onion tastes so fabulous up here.
I was very happy the other day to reopen a bonus food container—one from which I thought I
had pillaged all of the coffee—to find a cache of both espresso and lattes. I am now set for the
rest of the mission (I had been rationing myself; having a latte only every other day and on off
days mixing an espresso with an instant breakfast drink or, on one rare occasion, a cocoa).
Finally opened a food ”kit,” which is packed in a 0.5 CTB versus standard food containers. I had
been told that a food kit has the equivalent of two food containers. Doesn’t look like it to me.
This kit ostensibly was ”meats and entrees.” Approximately 15% of the volume of the container
was taken by coffee and tea. My estimate is that we’ll go through this in 20 days instead of the
promised 30. This whole food business just hasn’t been done well.
Still chapped about the food. Not only are we short, what we have doesn’t really support our
menu selections. I simply don’t understand.
We had a great dinner last night. Even X took a break from packing to enjoy the company and
camaraderie. It was a testament to the unique bonds we all have from sharing the experience.
Last evening we had a great dinner with downlink video to the ground. |think it was a hit on the
ground and we all had a great time around the table (mostly playing with the food).
Almost supper time! It’s amazing how meals become the high points of the day sometimes.
We ate together and talked and laughed. It was a good day for our crew.
The Russian stuff is a little greasy, but it is tasty. I like the fact that we hang out together and eat
together. |think we are lucky in that regard. The Russians have that part down well.
It is time to put supper in the oven. | find that it makes a difference to spend a little extra time in
preparing the meals to make them more enjoyable. Although there is only so much you can do
with space food, a little effort goes a long way.
My favorite dish is and I had been waiting for the day when we could open a new food
container of main meat courses. I dug in with such great enthusiasm and was so disappointed
that the container, which said it had 3 in it, had none. The next container 10 days later also
had none (but at least this one didn’t show one on the list). We’ve run into several mislabeled
containers since then. It can be disappointing.
One last funny story—during the first month of our stay, I noted that the labeling on two types of
food packets were backwards: ”Beef Tips with Mushrooms” was actually ”Chicken Teriyaki” and
vice-versa. I reported this to the food people and they thanked me for pointing out the labeling
error. Today I wanted chicken teriyaki. So, I gambled that the labeling problem had not fixed for
the new batch of food that came up recently, and selected ”Beef Tips with Mushrooms.” I was
rewarded for not having overestimated NASA! The chicken was in the packages labeled beef.

36

"
"45","N umbe rs of ""Logistics/Storage"" Entries by Subcategory and Quarter
Disorder H
Lost/Misplaced — _
Resupply -
— ﬂ
Stow/Restow
O 5 10 15 20 25 3O 35 4O
n=83 entries ﬂFirst ..ISecond uThird I Fourth Quarter

Logistics and Storage emerged as a major category in response to the large numbers of entries
referring to the tasks and problems associated With supplies. Only 83 entries received primary category
assignments to Logistio/Storage, but the total of related entries is three times that number; several exam-
ples of entries With secondary assignments to Logistic/Storage have been reported in discussions of other
major categories (e.g., Work, Food). An inverse relationship during fourth quarters between resupply
concerns and stowing items in preparation for crew rotations is evident in the ﬁgure.

Itried to keep up by entering the items in the Inventory Management System. X is not too keen

on that (most of the Russians seem not to be), but he does recognize its importance. I would say

that the data base is 90 percent or more correct for the US segment; probably less than 50

percent for the Russian side. It’s hard to be a perfectionist up here.

Finally got the EVA equipment restow sorted out. It was pretty confusing. I had been warned that

you could get info from as many as 5 places for a single task. I think this was only 4, but it sure

was confusing. Don’t want to fuss at the ground about it.

Stowage is the biggest issue. I had some time today, so I helped with the _ pack. Wow, what

craziness. I think we did a good job keeping the situation happy and light, but I am sure it was

frustrating for the folks on the ground. They want to give us a good product, but there is just

some situational awareness that is missing—or some constraints that really seem crazy to us. But

that is how it goes. W told me about this and I am starting to realize some of the frustration I saw

in him before he left, particularly on the Russian side in regards to stowage. I really think either

they don’t get it or the cosmonauts don’t want to play. There are bags behind all the panels with

just stuff in them. It is rather humorous! It is really too difficult to get aggravated about.

Spent the entire morning unpacking. I am starting to get irritated at the stowage plan. Every time

| unpack a bag, I have to stow the empty bag somewhere (they are only semi-collapsible). I am

now getting overwhelmed by bags. The airlock is a disaster area; I have attempted to keep it

orderly since I’ve been here, but it’s simply swamped with the volume of stuff we’ve thrown into

it. Every light is blocked, so working in there is like spelunking. I’m not sure where the ISS

designers figured we were going to put all this stuff.

We made it though without a great deal of difficultly, although once again, the stowage onboard

was a problem and the procedures were inadequate.

We’re going to take our time on the unpacking, since everything we remove from the supply ship

has to be accommodated somewhere on the station. We haven’t found our care packages yet.

We’ve been unpacking the Progress. Found our personal items, the US food is once again stocked

and we enjoyed some fresh fruit. The first thing I did was eat a grapefruit and it was very good.

It took all of the 25 minutes allocated to uncover the right panel (picture 20-30 food containers

flying everywhere).

37

"
"46","It looks like the US food is in good shape, but the Russian food is not quite what we expected.
They sent us a bunch of crackers and cookies and drinks, even though we told them not to. I
think we don’t have enough cans of main courses. I have asked the ground to come up with
guidelines on consumption rates of different categories of food.
Really think our provisioning folks have set up a system that’s convenient for them, not for us.
The stowage is completely disorganized and the stowage locations are notoriously unreliable.
Istarted encountering errors in the prepack list. That is slowing things down a lot.
This afternoon was spent with Progress unloading. The only thing I unloaded was a bag with
office supplies. Hard to believe we send up one pencil at a time. There must be a better way.
One big victory on Saturday was that we finally located a that has been lost for over a year.
It’s the size of a home water heater, so it’s hard to imagine how it got lost, but we found it
behind a seldom-opened panel. In fact, before the ground suggested that we look there, I never
even realized it was a stowage space.
N umbers of ""Exercise"" Entries by Subcategory and Quarter
ii |
Pain ‘-
Decondition _
Good Workout _
—
Equipment
Schedule
———
Described
O 5 10 15 20 25 3O 35
n=104entries E First uSecond HThird I Fourth Quarter
The largest subcategory of j ournal entries concerning exercise is composed primarily of declara-
tive statements about having performed one or more forms of exercise; more than half of these entries
were written during the ﬁrst quarters of expeditions. The second most-frequently-assigned subcategory is
composed primarily of complaints about exercise schedules; most of these entries were written during the
third quarters. The next subcategory consists of entries that describe the exercise equipment, With most of
these written during the ﬁrst quarters, as might be expected. The remainder of the entries in this category
range from references to the pleasure derived from a good workout to the pain derived from these activi-
ties. A few examples are provided below.
The rest of the morning was spent exercising.
Just finished running and will lift here soon.
I’ve been exercising a |ot—about 2 hours every day.
Rode the bike, but decided to skip my weight workout for the first time in a month.
It’s strange how that workout has become sort of sacred to me.
Exercise came late, which delayed lunch.
I have not exercised in 3 days, which is an indication of how far behind I feel we are getting.
38

"
"47","Wow, another slightly oversubscribed day. I am unimpressed with the scheduling process.
Knowing how much I like running, I had IRED scheduled for the morning and CEVIS for the after-
noon. I am convinced there are hidden scheduling constraints. It was so simple for me to just run
in the morning and lift in the afternoon. Why can’t they figure this out?
Today I ran on the treadmill for the first time. It worked pretty well. You have to wear a harness
with a heavy bungee cord and an adjustable length set of hooks to adjust the load. The treadmill
is stabilized by a gyro as well as mounted with vibration isolators (throw masses) that compen-
sate for your bouncing around. The treadmill essentially tries to float and avoid passing the loads
into the Station structure. The harness feels like you're wearing a heavy backpack, but I was able
to run with it just fine. I was happy with myself today, because I've heard that it takes weeks
(perhaps 6 weeks) to get comfortable with the treadmill—until then it is supposed to be torture.
I didn't exactly run a marathon today, but it felt great—so I'm off to a good start with it.
It feels good to finally get to do more exercise on a regular basis.
Off to exercise... It was good to exercise and then get cleaned up. TVIS is difficult especially with
the entire load on the shoulders.
I was tired at the end of the day and it was really good to get on the bike and work out. Put on
music and enjoyed the ride.
Numbe rs of ""Procedures/Rituals"" Entries by Subcategory and Quarter
Procedure l
Problem
Custom/ Ritual
O 5 10 15 20 25 3O
n=47 entries I First ....|Second uThird I Fourth Quarter
This category consists of entries that describe customs and rituals associated With spaceﬂight and
188 operations, and entries that refer to problems With procedures. Examples follow.
The farewell ceremony yesterday was tough. X was feeling very emotional and so were Y and Z,
as well. It got written up in one of the press articles. I think W thought we were nuts!
The change of command was awesome.
I rang them onboard with the ship’s bell.
Our lOO-day party was yesterday, and V and I phoned in to the bar and chatted with all the folks
there. It sounded like everyone was enjoying the party. I received an email this morning showing
scenes from the party. They had set up life-sized cardboard cutouts of W and me and the
pictures showed us surrounded by adoring women. Very nice!
Last night, I remembered to write the poem US Navy tradition seems to expect of commanders
on ships, at New Year. |t delayed me going to bed an hour, which did not improve my attitude to
the tradition, but I feel great now that it is behind me!
I found a few procedure problems already. I don’t have much tolerance for that, and some pro-
cedures are written so poorly.
Idon’t like it when they uplink procedures with errors. I sometimes wonder what they do all day.
They clearly aren’t in the procedures along with the crew.
The ground team was working very hard to get the various updates incorporated into the proce-
dures and training products on board for our use.
39

"
"48","Uplink consisted primarily of the ground procedures, containing steps and commands that have
no significance to me as a crewmember. Accompanying this esoteric procedure were pages of
tiny images that, with no context, are useless.
The radiogram was pretty simple: remove the _, disconnect the power cable, replace with a
_ and the new _, connect the cable. Done. However, there was so much involved that
wasn’t taken into account in the procedure. I had to cut the cable out of a huge bundle of cables,
the cable had a grounding wire of its own, the tool callouts weren’t even close to that required,
the bolts were installed backwards on one of the new _, there was a bolt missing from
another, the terminator on the grounding wire on the new cable was too small for the bolt that
attaches it to go through, and more. It was overwhelmingly obvious that no one had looked at
the procedure on any kind of flight-Iike mockup. It took me the three hours to install just one.
We discussed options and looked at the 5 word description of the task (a couple of times) and
decided I needed to remove the _ and clean under there. After chasing down the right tools, I
took one _ off and it was also clean. I think I know why there is a cosmonaut union now!
Numbers of ""Leadership"" Entries by Subcategory and Quarter
G iving Advice
Qualities
Commentary
Leadership
Tasks
O 5 10 15 20 25 3O
n=63 entries lFirst uSecond HThird I Fourth Quarter
All of the entries assigned to the Leadership category were references to leadership qualities or
descriptions of leadership tasks. Some of the entries were written by leaders and others were written about
leaders. The content and tone of the entries suggest that the expedition commanders were conscientious
and that their efforts were appreciated. Examples follow.
I need to get X into the USOS more. He really doesn’t know what’s here and how to use the
equipment.
Igot a little terse with Y because he’s not reading/following US procedures. He goes through Rus-
sian procedures with painful thoroughness, but just wings it with US procedures.
I just think as the commander of this little ship the priority is to see how the other folks are
doing.
The CDR has been helpful, involving me where possible and acknowledging my presence before
docking.
I am setting the tone for us, staying upbeat and staying nice with the ground teams. They are
we||-intentioned and do their best. We must help them with what we need.
He tries to have us eat our meals together as much as possible. It doesn’t always work out, but
usually we do (not counting breakfast).
One of my goals was to exercise positive leadership, both for the crew and for the ground teams.
Ithink | accomplished that.
I must make sure that Z gets to exercise too. This is an important week to stay in shape!
I need to recommit myself to being mentor, versus driver.
40

"
"49","He’s been a great commander and I really appreciate his ability to command only as needed. He
completely leaves me in charge of everything that’s not Russian and has never once tried to dic-
tate how or what should be done anywhere other than in the Russian segment.
I am a bit angry today. It appears that my Commander is off making agreements that affect me
without consulting me. I do not necessarily disagree to do the work, but I definitely disagree with
his making agreements without even discussing it with me. That is NOT the sign of a good com-
mander. I am ready to be going home. The stress is getting to me a bit.
I put him in charge of housekeeping discipline, because he was becoming irritated by the dis-
order created mostly by Q, and all the other activities around him. I did this with the whole crew
present and said he had the right to scold anybody, as it was in his interest. After that, he started
to be more tolerant, and by the time we got to the ceremony he was joking kindly about the bad
habits and already Q and Z especially, were doing better in keeping themselves in order.
Numbers of ""Medical"" Entries by Subcategory and Quarter
Drugs
—
Headache
—
Other
——
Pain
. —— ——
Mada. ——-—
support —————
O 2 4 6 8 10 12
n=36 entries I First uSecond HThird I Fourth Quarter
The entries assigned to the medical category are primarily descriptions of the normal aches and
pains that result from heavy exercise, but also include the effects of micro-gravity, such as headaches
(from the lack of convection and/or insufﬁcient CO2 scrubbing) and skin and nerve irritation from work-
ing in EVA suits. A few examples are provided below.
$0, I finally called the doc today to discuss it. I am thinking it will just get better with time.
We had a medical CPR OBT. It went well.
Healthwise I’m feeling fine—occasionally I’ve had headaches brought on by C02.
I have been waking up with headaches. It seems to go away when I take some Sudafed, which
definitely clears up my stuffy head. I am feeling much better right now. It also helps when I eat
something.
One stressor today was that my left forearm is acting up a bit. It has bothered me for a couple of
nights, and I am thinking I must have just strained it a bit flying around and catching on a handrail
or something.
I ended up with some nerve irritation due to the gloves apparently. It is a little better today. I was
pretty exhausted mentally after the EVA, but felt pretty good physically overall. I could certainly
te|| toward the end that I was ready to come inside.
Igot a little nervous today. I am worried about getting sick up here. Just don’t have time for that
right now--maybe later in the increment, but not now.
41

"
"50","I .‘i'r- .- “7:;
r. j‘ -"" f;
'l - iffy 3‘
. J, ‘ ___
x"" m}; ‘ 32“. .,
1."" . ' . V . 2“}:1“:
. f9"" ' _ 7 ’ ,7’7 ' ‘ $1.5 ' »

/ J‘J r 1""."" . ,- , '1':- ii

‘ I ‘ t l"": 5. gg‘

.. w . (2532,; Rs: ., _ ... ,

“2‘ : *E'Hi-E‘hsiitﬂ —:.“‘-' '1}

a - \m‘32: w?

- ’1'954‘35: - . if

«L Q: .~ ,_ - - - '

‘4: u ‘--_ 217 ~ '— v,“

The F mm in the Ice, by William Gilkerson
Fridtj of Nansen reclined in his snug cabin onboard the F ram reading an account of Elisha
Kent Kane’s disastrous expedition in search of Sir J ohn Franklin in 1852. The tempera-
ture outside was -36 degrees F (-38 degrees C) and the sturdy ship and polar icecap on
which it was cradled were shrouded in the perpetual darkness of the Arctic winter. The
F ram had been locked in the ice for siX months, but Nansen and the other 13 members of
the Norwegian Polar Expedition were enjoying the experience and feeling guilty about
their comfortable conditions while loved ones worried about them at home. Nansen
reached for his journal and wrote:
Thursday 28 December 1893
I am almost ashamed of the life we lead, with none of those darkly painted sufferings of the long
winter night which are indispensable to a properly exciting Arctic expedition. We shall have
nothing to write about when we get home. I may say the same of my comrades as I have said for
myself; they all look healthy, fat, in good condition; none of the traditional pale, hollow faces; no
low spirits—any one hearing the laughter that goes on in the saloon, the fall of greasy cards, etc.,
would be in no doubt of this. But how, indeed, should there be any illness? With the best of food
of every kind, as much of it as we want, and constant variety, so that even the most fastidious
cannot tire of it, good shelter, good clothing, good ventilation, exercise in the open air ad Iibitum,
no over-exertion in the way of work, instructive and amusing books of every kind, relaxation in
the shape of cards, chess, dominoes, halma, music, and story-telling—how should anyone be ill?
Every now and then I hear remarks expressive of perfect satisfaction with the life.9
9 Nansen, Fridtjof. F arthest North. Volume 1, New York: Harper & Brothers, 1897 (pages 354—356).
42

"
"51","NET POSITIVITY/NEGATIVITY

It was described previously that each journal entry was assigned a code to indicate whether the
statement was positive, negative, or neutral in its tone or content and that a metric called Net Positiv-
ity/Negativity (NPN) was derived by subtracting the proportion of negative entries from the proportion of
positive entries.10 This metric was calculated for all primary category assignments by quarter for each
expedition. F our sets of NPN analyses were performed: 1) By category with data from all journals com-
bined; 2) By j ournal with data from all categories combined; 3) Adjustment entries only by j ournal; and
4) Comparisons of subgroups within the sample. The results of these analyses are presented in four sets of
ﬁgures in the following pages. All ﬁgures use the same -1.0 to +1.0 scale to facilitate comparisons.

NPN analyses were conducted to test hypotheses concerning a “third quarter phenomenon,” a
decline in affect, general attitude, or “morale” during the third quarters of missions, regardless of duration
(suggested by anecdotal accounts and evidence from the previous content analysis of expedition journals).
Analyses also were performed by dividing the journals into siX chronological segments (the rough equiva-
lents of months), but no patterns of NPN were evident. More information about the third quarter
phenomenon is presented in Appendix B.

NPN BY CATEGORY: ALL J OURNALS COMBINED

The ﬁrst set of ﬁgures illustrates the results of the NPN analyses by category with the primary
assignments from all 10 journals combined for each category. These ﬁgures are presented on the follow-
ing two consecutive pages, arranged in descending order of the number of category assignments for each
of the top 18 of 24 categories; categories to which no entries were assigned during one or more quarter
are not presented. The ﬁnal ﬁgure in the set shows NPN by quarter with data from all categories and all
journals combined (i.e., all 4,215 entries). The combined ﬁgure and eight of the category ﬁgures show
declines in average NPN during the third quarter.

NPN BY J OURNAL: ALL CATEGORIES COMBINED

The second set consists of 10 ﬁgures, one for each of the j ournals, and illustrates NPN by quarter
for all of the categories combined. Subj ects were assigned number codes using a random number genera-
tor and the order of the expeditions was scrambled to prevent identiﬁcation of study participants. SiX of
the 10 ﬁgures show declines in average NPN during the third quarter (i.e., all categories combined).

NPN BY J OURNAL: ADJUSTMENT ENTRIES ONLY

The third set also consists of 10 ﬁgures, one for each of the j ournals, but illustrates NPN by quar-
ter for the entries assigned to the Adjustment category only. This analysis focuses exclusively on entries
concerning adjustment to life onboard the ISS and was performed because the Adjustment category most-
closely reﬂects what might be characterized as individual attitude or morale. Nine of the 10 ﬁgures show
a decline in NPN during the third quarters of the expeditions on this measure. The one exception (Subject
71) eXhibited the lowest individual NPN value of the study during the second quarter. It also is note-
worthy that a third quarter decline in Adjustment NPN was found for Subj ect 24, whose combined meas-
ure of NPN showed a linear, positive progression and for Subject 28, whose combined NPN increased
substantially during the third quarter and was the only one to decline during the fourth quarter.

NPN COMPARISONS BY SUBSET WITHIN THE SAMPLE

The ﬁnal set of four ﬁgures illustrates the results of comparisons of NPN Adjustment values
between subsets within the lO-astronaut sample: Commanders vs. Flight Engineers/Sciences Ofﬁcers;
Men vs. Women; and Two-Person vs. Multi-Person Crews (two versions of the ﬁgure). The latter subset
consists primarily of three-person crews, but with considerable overlap of Visitors and replacement per-
sonnel. Of the siX subsets compared, only journals from multi-person crews failed to eXhibit the third
quarter decline in Adjustment. However, a third quarter decline is evident when data from the journal
with extreme second quarter negatiVity, described previously, is removed from the analysis.

10 Proportions were used in the NPN analyses to control for differences in the numbers of entries written by the
astronauts (i.e., to give equal weight to each of the 10 journals).
43

"
"52","Net Positivity/Negativity by Quarter: A11 J ournals Combined
Work: Net Positivity/Negativity By Quarter Outside Communications: Net Positivity/Negativity By Quarter
1.00 1.00
0.80 0.80
050 05° 0339
0.40 0099 0278 0.40 ‘
0.071 - w
020 W 020 028, ~ ——
~020 ‘ -0.20 .
0.40 0.40
0.60 0.60
0.80 0.80
.11» 4.“)
n-982enuies Mamas
Adjustment: Net Posiﬁvity/Negativity By Quarter Grow) Interaction: Net PositivityINegativity By Quarter
1110 1.00
0.80 0.80
0.60 0.60
0.383
0.” 0.” ¥
— m
“'41-”: m
m _ m
0.20 ‘ .010 .
0.40 0.40
0.60 0.60
0.80 0.80
-1.00 41K)
n=548emries n=244enlries
Recreation/Leiswe: Net Positivity/Negaﬁvity By Quarter Equipment: Net Posiﬁvity/Neeaﬁvity By Quarter
1.00 11»
0.80 0.80
*
0.60 0.693 0.667 0.726 “60 0.60
0.40 0.40
0.20 0.20
000 0.00
-0.278
-020 . 4,20 .
-—._ ms
'0.” '0.” v
.0“ '050 m
0.579
0.80 0.80
4.!” -1.00
n=328enll'i5 n=159 allies
Event: Net Posiﬁvity/Negativity By Quarter Orgaltintion/Management: Net Posiﬁvity/Negaﬁvity By Quarter
1.00 1.00
0.80 0.80
0.556
0.60 0.60
0.40 V 0.40
0.20 cm 0.288 0.20
0.00 0“
-0.20 ‘ -020 .
0.40 0.40
-0.613
0.60 0.60 ——
m m»
0.80 0.80 ~ -
-1.00 41K)
n=236 allies ﬂ=131EIIﬁES
Sleep: Net Posiﬁvity/Negaﬁvity By Quarter Food: Net Positivity/Negativity By Quarter
1.00 1.00
0.80 0.80
0.60 0.60
0.40 0'“ 0435 *
m I- ~ m
°""° _‘ °""° m
-020 # -0.20 .
-0.40 0146 -o.171 -0.40
0.60 0.60
0.80 0.80
-1M -1.00
n=171em'ies n=134 allies
44

"
"53","Net Positivity/Negativity by Quarter: A11 J ournals Combined (Continued)
Logisﬁu 8: Storage: Net PositivityINegativity By Quarter Exercise: Net Posutl' 'vitleegativity By Quarter
1.00 1.00
0.80 0.80
0583
°‘° °‘° __
°""° °""° W“ —
°""° m m m °”° -——V'
-0.20 — —— -0.20 ‘
-0.179 -0.182
-0.40 -0.40
-0.60 -0.60
-0.80 -0.80
—1.00 -1.00
n=82emries n=103emies
Prooedues/Rituals: Net Posiﬁvitv/Negaﬁvitv By Quarter Leadership: Net Posiﬁvitylﬂegativity By Quarter
1.00 1.00
0.80 0.80
0.60 0.60
0.40 030 - — A 0313
020 0.100 0.111 0.111 020 0.455 0.455
°""° W' °”°
-0.20 ‘ -0.20 ‘
-0.40 -0.40
-0.60 -0.60
-0.80 -0.80
-1.00 -1.00
mm n=63enu'ies
Safety: Net Posiﬁvity/Negaﬁvity By Quarter Medcal: Net PositivityINegativity By Quarter
1.00 1.00
0.80 0567 0.80
°‘° — °‘°
°""‘° — °""°
0.20 0.20
”1° — — ‘ ”2° ‘
*‘“° .VA— M” -__... m
-0.60 -0.60
m m m
_ —°°°
-1.00 -1.00
n-18elllies n=36ulries
Waste Management: Net PositivityINegativity By Quarher PrivacylPersoml Space: Net Posiﬁﬁtleegaﬁﬁty By Quarter
“'° “’° — m
°’° °‘° —A
°‘° °‘° —_
0.40 0.40
—_ om
m m '-
°”° _1__ °”° —__""'
”2° _ ‘ .1. ”2° _"" ‘
-0.40 -0.40
— w
'°‘° — M”
'°“‘° .57 M”
-1.00 -1.00
n=21emi5 n=14entria
All Categories Combined: Net Positivity/Negaﬁﬁty By (matte!
1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
0.174 0.173
0.20 w- ""
-— 0249
0.00 0.074
-0.20 - '
-0.40
-0.60
-0.80
-1.00
n=4,215emies
45

"
"54","Net P051t1V1ty/Negat1V1ty by Quarter for Each J ournalz A11 Categorles Combmed
Subject 93: All Entries Net Positivity/Negativity by Qua rter Subject 42: All Entries Net Positivity/Negativity by Qua rter
1.00 1.00
0.80 0.80
0.60 0.60
040 0.350 0.318 0.40
—A om
0.224
000 _ 0'194 000 A i 7
0.053
-0.20 5 ‘ -0.20 ‘
-0.043
-0.40 -0.40
-0.60 -0.60
-0.80 -0.80
-1.00 -1.00
n=415 entries n=399 entries
Subject 24: Net Positivity/Negativity by Quarter Subject 55! Na Positivity/Negativity by Qua rter
1.00 1.00
030 0.80
0.60 0.60
. . 2
040 0.277 0 305 040 0.182 0 3 6
020 0.20 0.101
0.219 0237
0.00 0.00 ~ ,
-0.20 . -0.20 - A
.040 -0.40
-0.60 -0.60
-0.80 -0.80
-1.00 -1.00
n=637 entries n=535 entries
Subject 32: Net Positivity/Negativity by Quarter Subject 71: Net Positivity/Negativity by Quarter
1.00 1.00
0.80 0.80
0.60 0.500 050
_ 0.610
0.20 0 248 0'20 0 049
-
0-00 0210 0-00 -——O—_ 7
-020 ‘ -0.20 ‘
.040 -0.40
-0.60 -0.60
-0.80 -0.80
-1.00 -1.00
n=576 entries n=350 entries
Subject 28: Net Positivity/Negativity by Quarter Subject 89: Net Positivity/Negativity by Quarter
1.00 1.00
0.80 0.80
0.60 0.60
040 0.287 0.282 040
0.20 A 0.20
000 -'A °-°°° «mes
' ﬂ; 0'00 w
_0-20 ‘ A _0_20 —‘ A
mes -012
-0.40 -0.40
-0.357
-0.60 -0.60
-0.80 -0.80
-1.00 -1.00
n=255 entries n=272 entries
Subject 37: Net Positivity/Negativity by Quarter Subject 19‘ Net Positivity/Negativity by Quarter
100 100
080 080
0.60 050 0.388
0'40 0'40 m
0.20 '31 0-116 020 * W
L 000 M
0'00 0.058 '
-0.20 ‘ -0.20 ‘
-0.072
-0.40 -0.40
-0.60 -O.6O
-0.80 -O.80
-1.00 -1.00
n=314 entries n=494 entries

"
"55","Net Positivity/Negativity by Quarter for Each J ournalz Adjustment Entries Only
m— —
—
——- m
_—-
__ _—
—_— _
__— —
m— —
—
— —
—_ m
_-
——-
— _-
— _—
_ _—
— —
— —
— —
— —
—
-—- —
_- —
___ _
“_
_— _—
—_ .—
— ‘—
— _—
— _—
— —
—- —
m —
_ _ —
m
_ m
— mm
— “
— —
— —
— —
—
‘— _-
—A— w
n—
mV—le- _
—
— —
— —
— —

47

"
"56","Net Positivity/Negativity by Quarter Comparisons: Adjustment Entries Only
Commanders vs. Flight Engineers Adjustment: NPN By Quarter Men VS- Women Adjustment: NGt Positivity/Negativity BY Quarter
1.00 1.00
0.80 0.80
0'60 0.387 O'f67 0.60 0487 0 375 °-481
0'00 0.082 V 0'00 0.145 0012
-0.20 1 2 4 -0.20 1 2 3 4
-O.110
-0.40 -0.40
-0.60 -0.60
-0.80 -0.80
-1.00 -1.00
n=203entries +Commanders G Engineers n=345entries n=461entries +Men wit Women n=87entries
2-Person vs. Multi-Person Crew Adjustment: NPN By Quarter 2-Person vs. Multi-Person Crew Adjustment (- Su bject 71): NPN By Quarter
100 0.761 100 0.761
0.80 0.80
0.60 ‘ 0-665 050 ‘ 0.666
0.40 m 040 m
0.20 9 0.005 V v— 0.20 hi 0; V v
0-00 —.—. 0.00 ' = —.—.
-0_20 1 2 3 0.050 4 -O.20 1 2 3 0.050 4
-0.40 -0.40
-0.60 -0.60
-0.80 -0.80
-1.00 -1.00
n=251entries +2-Person Crews w} Multi-Person Crews n=297entries n=251entries +2-Person Crews 1} Multi-Person Crews n=256entries
QUESTIONNAIRE RESULTS
Results of the ﬁve scaled questions on the pre-, mid-, and post-expedition questionnaires are pre-
sented in the following ﬁgure. A11 mid-mission values are substantially lower than pre-launch estimates.
Estimates of physical and mental difﬁculty are lower still during the second halves, While interpersonal
problems increase. Overall, fewer problems were experienced than astronauts expected would occur.
Average Pre, Mid, and Post Expedition Questionnaire Responses
5.5
5.10
5.0
4 5 4.70
' 4.30
4.0 “x‘ 3'90 I
4.00 ~~~ _ . 3.90
3 5 . “x. 33H 3.60
. I ‘~“ 3.20 - '_- -'.-,.- I . I I - 7'
3.20 ~~ »--.-,---.r.- _ . _-_ 33o
_ - ' 3.30 - ' “'1 .-
3.0 _ - __ = ., *
' . 2.80
2.5 '
- 2.40
2.0
2.00
1.5
Pre Mid Post
+ Physically Difficult l Mentally Difficult + Equipment Problems
—0— Organizational Problems + Inter-personal Problems 0 Combined
48

"
"57","IMPLICATIONS

At the time of this writing, approximately 235 people have been onboard the International Space
Station since the ﬁrst components were delivered to orbit in 1998, which is nearly half of all people who
have made it to low Earth orbit, or beyond. More than sixty Americans, Russians, Europeans, Canadians,
and J apanese have served as crew during two dozen ISS “increments” since Bill Shepherd rang a ship’s
bell to commence Expedition 1 in October 2000. Several astronauts and cosmonauts already have
returned for a second siX-month tour of duty.

I was referring to the current period when I wrote in a 1984 report that astronauts would perform
admirably even under extremely austere conditions if they were among the ﬁrst crews of a space station
or interplanetary craft; however, our research and development efforts should be directed toward the
design of equipment and procedures that are not only tolerable, but conducive to work during routine
operations.11 Our word “routine” is derived from the French for a customary path. Life onboard the 188
has become routine and low Earth orbit a well-traveled highway during the station’s ﬁrst decade.

It is clear from the j ournal entries analyzed during the current study that conditions onboard the
188 are far better than tolerable, but short of what is necessary to support optimum human performance
for sustained periods of routine operations. Crews have performed admirably, as expected, and the jour-
nals contain many positive statements about living and working in space. However, the tone and content
of some entries describe serious problems and convey levels of frustration and annoyance that could
increase now that 188 operations have become routine.

The most salient implications of study results are presented below in sections devoted to the
category, subcategory, and Net Positivity/NegatiVity analyses, followed by a discussion of questionnaire
results. The report concludes with recommendations and a ﬁnal note.

IMPLICATIONS OF THE CATEGORY ANALYSIS

The top four behaVioral categories, Work, Outside Communications, Adjustment, and Group
Interaction, received 59 percent of all primary, secondary, and tertiary category assignments of journal
entries. Adding Recreation/Leisure, Equipment, Event, Organization/Management, Sleep, and Food to
form a list of the top 10 categories accounts for 88 percent of all category assignments. The remaining 14
categories of behaVioral issues are relatively unimportant, according to the assumptions of the study
described in the Introduction to this report. Some of the issues considered by behaVioral scientists to be
very important received too few category assignments to be included in the presentation of results, such
as Internal Communications, Habitat Aesthetics, and Privacy/Personal Space. Each of these three cate-
gories has been the subject of study and passionate debate, but combined they represent less than one per-
cent of all journal entries in the database. Why might this be?

It is possible that these issues were addressed sufﬁciently by design of equipment and procedures
to mitigate legitimate concerns, but it is equally likely that key factors have not yet conspired to elevate
their importance. No one would deny the criticality of maintaining the proper mixture of gasses in the 188
to sustain human life, even though C02 levels, out-gassing, and leaks were mentioned in only a few
journal entries. The number of references means that the life support system has functioned well, not that
it is unimportant. The same probably is true for some of the infrequently mentioned behaVioral issues.
However, component failure, human error, or other perturbations could alter the balance and promote a
previously low-priority issue to critical status.

11 Stuster, J . Space Station Habitabilily Recommendations Based on a Systematic Comparative Analysis ofAnalog-
ouS Conditions, Moffett Field, CA: Ames Research Center. NASA Contractor Report No. 3943, 1986 (originally
published as an Anacapa Sciences, Inc., Technical Report in December 1984).

49

"
"58","Even changes implemented to improve conditions could have unintended, negative consequences.
For example, the shifts to three-person crews with Expedition 14, to multi-person crews with Expedition
16, and to permanent siX-person crews with Expedition 20 have permitted greater distribution of the
tedious inventories and logistics tasks that seemed to dominate crew time during earlier increments.
Larger crews also have resulted in greater science productivity, as illustrated by the following ﬁgure.
However, the doubling of crew size inevitably has had a cascading series of negative effects, such as
increased competition for exercise equipment, loss of privacy, and more opportunities for interpersonal
conﬂict, to name a few. The latter effect probably contributed to the substantially lower NPN Adjustment
values of multi-person crews, which were compared to NPN values of two-person crews in a previous
ﬁgure (i.e., average NPNs of 0.128 vs. 0.466); in addition, 68 percent of the entries assigned to Group
Interaction’s Conﬂict/Disagreement subcategory were from the journals of multi-person crew members.
Duration and Numberof Science Hours During ISS Expeditions 1-20
6-person crews begin
600
500 J
3-person crews resume
’ .I .1"" Eli
300 _-_ ._-_- _ -_ '.L'r_=T-'-r:'-*
3-person crews 1 _ _ J! i"" ﬂ"" V”
200 _ 1. _ _ l' _ ' .. _
lellllllll” ' l
O
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Expedition
.1 Number of Science Hours EEx-edition Duration in Da 5
The effects of crew size on privacy and personal space cannot be fully evaluated with the current
journals data, as all subjects participated prior to the introduction of permanent, siX-person crews. The 10
astronaut journals contained only 36 entries concerning privacy and personal space—too few to even
justify inclusion in the subcategory analysis. If privacy and territoriality are important to remote duty
crews, why were these issues ranked so low in the (previous) French Diaries and (current) Journals
studies? The leaders and physicians at the French research stations were the only members of their
expeditions to have private quarters, to which they retreated frequently for respite from the stations’
crowded conditions. Similarly, most of the astronauts’ entries on this topic described having entire mod-
ules of the station to themselves for working and sleeping. Privaoy/Personal Space was a non-issue for the
participants of both studies, but that is rare in isolation and conﬁnement and probably has changed
onboard the ISS since the conclusion of the study, as suggested by the following entries. The ﬁrst was
written during a two-person expedition and the second pair during periods of transition to new crews.
During the light days, we arranged things in the station to our liking. I moved into the sleep
station in the US Lab. It’s much quieter inside and it is nice to have a closed-off, private space.
Whereas the Station with three people is a very quiet place, it is just bustling with six. There
seems to be a body sleeping in every module. / It is more crowded now and I have to share my
living space, which has not been much fun so far.
50

"
"59","IMPLICATIONS OF THE SUBCATEGORY ANALYSIS

Ten astronauts wrote more than 4,200 separate journal entries, which were assigned to 24 maj or
categories of issues with behaVioral implications; 15 of those categories received sufﬁcient numbers of
assignments to be included in the subcategory analysis, which further divided the entries into 108
“themes” or subcategories based on similarity of topic according to the established coding rules. Many
examples of journal entries that address the subcategories were included in this report to illustrate results
of the analysis. More excerpts from the journals were included than originally intended because the astro-
nauts wrote eloquently and candidly about their experiences and observations, and their own words are far
more credible than an investigator’s summary.

The primary implications of the subcategory analysis are presented below and additional implica-
tions are discussed among the recommendations based on study results, which appear later in this report.

SCHEDULES AND TIME-RELATED STRESS

The main theme to emerge from the subcategory analysis concerns the overriding pressure of
work schedules on crew personnel, which is caused largely by unrealistic time estimates made by those
developing procedures and the mission planners who prepare the timelines that schedule nearly every
minute that an astronaut spends on the 188. Many jobs create time-related stress for the incumbents, from
assembly-line workers to corporate and government engineers, scientists, and managers. Stress of this
type is tolerable when experienced occasionally, but it can quickly become dangerously intolerable when
a job involves a relentless stream of scheduled deadlines with insufﬁcient time allotted to perform the
tasks. The usual consequences of this condition are fatigue, low morale, interpersonal problems, and a
propensity for error. The crew of Skylab 4 also experienced time-related stress during their 84-day
mission in 1973, as described by mission commander, Gerald Carr:

Everything was done sequentially on a very tight schedule. We were all so success-oriented and

job-oriented that ”following the carrot” got us in trouble, because if you make a mistake it is hard

to go back and do the task over again. If you do, you get farther behind, the work keeps piling up,

and you finish the day frustrated because you didn’t accomplish all that had been scheduled.

There is going to be a morale effect because of all that pressure and the fact that you are not

doing what you set out to do. There was no slack in the schedule; it only made the situation

worse.12

Every tenth day was supposed to be a day of rest for the Skylab crew, but they sacriﬁced their
ﬁrst three days off in an attempt to catch up to the schedule. When mission controllers suggested that they
work through their fourth assigned rest day, Colonel Carr’s response was, “No, we had better not work
today; we had better get some rest.” The crew took their scheduled day off, which was widely and incor-
rectly described as a mutiny in space. It was, in fact, a triumph of reason and leadership over unrealistic
scheduling demands. NASA learned about the importance of providing off—duty time for crew from this
incident, which also led to removing all tasks from the schedule that were not dependent on the station’s
orbit and placing them on a “task list.” Despite these lessons and decades of subsequent space operations
experience, the agency persists in scheduling insufﬁcient time for the performance of many tasks. The
following entries from the J ournals database echo the Skylab 4 commander’s words.

The most significant stress factor so far is that everything on the schedule takes longer than

planned. So I’m always behind. There are all kinds of reasons ranging from my own speed to not

finding something where it is supposed to be. But the bottom line is that running behind

schedule all day is stressful.
12 Carr, G. Untitled presentation. In, Behavioral Issues Associated with Isolation and Conﬁnement: A Panel Discus-
sion Conducted at the Tenth Psychology in the DoD Symposium, J . Stuster, chair and editor. US Air Force Acad-
emy, Colorado Springs, CO, 17 April 1986.

51

"
"60","We are, by nature and by training, performance and goaI-oriented. We tend to feel bad about
ourselves if we do not complete the plan. I am aware of this and have consciously tried to get
perspective on this and not feel that I must complete all tasks and in the given time. However, I

think there is an underlying frustration that builds when I do not complete everything on time.

TEDIOUS AND FRUSTRATING WORK / PROCEDURE PROBLEMS

The shift to larger crews has provided opportunities for schedulers to distribute the tedious tasks.
Sharing housekeeping chores and unpleasant work equally is a tradition of polar explorers and the
practice would reduce the levels of frustration experienced by 188 crew. The following j ournal entry from
a member of a multi-person crew suggests that this is occurring already.

Teamwork can now suddenly be part of the approach to the entire day. This is a huge difference,

which enables synergy that makes it possible to get more than twice the work done.

Only a portion of the astronauts’ criticism was directed at the tasks. Although few Will derive the
satisfaction they need to remain motivated by counting light bulbs, underwear, or food containers, the
astronauts recognize that certain menial tasks are necessary. The majority of the most-critical journal
entries concerned the procedures that astronauts are directed to follow When performing the tasks. Adding
people to the crew increases the station’s capacity for work, but it also increases opportunities for ill-con-
ceived and poorly-written procedures to annoy more crew. Several examples of procedure problems were
included in the presentation of results and two more are provided below to suggest that all procedures
receive thorough reviews periodically as part of an on-going quality control effort.

The procedure wasn’t too bad until we got to the point where I was instructed to put a piece of

tape over the _. I searched high and low to find this _, which turned out to be labeled

something else. Do you get the picture about how stupid some of this is and how aggravating it

can be?

I am frustrated that words used to describe items in procedures are not the same as the words

on the equipment. I attribute this to laziness. We don’t go back and review procedures to see

how they may be updated to better serve the crew.

TRIVIAL ISSUES ARE EXAGGERATED

The exaggeration of trivial issues is a well-known principle of life in isolation and conﬁnement.
Minor annoyances, differences of opinion, and perceived transgressions that would be inconsequential
under normal conditions can be magniﬁed by isolated and conﬁned personnel into issues of monumental
importance. This tendency might even be greater for astronauts than for most remote duty personnel,
because as a group they are the epitome of high achievers. The astronauts Who participated in this study
possess enormous capacities for work, but this trait often is accompanied by low tolerance for poor
performance by others. The astronauts largely refrained from voicing their disappointments to the ground,
but many of their j ournal entries expressed the sentiment illustrated by the following examples.

I am not looking forward to this week. I will have more tedium, starting with the final battery

search. If this battery is so important, why didn’t the ground do their homework to begin with

and have me separate it months ago when the items were gathered, rather than have me search

through the trash now?

One of my frustrations up here is that we constantly have to redo work. For example, X changed

a cable today that I had installed about a month ago. Why didn’t the ground have me install the

correct cable at that time?

52

"
"61","Astronauts and ground personnel realize the importance of maintaining pleasant relations and
some probably are aware that isolation and conﬁnement can inﬂuence behaVior in predictable ways, such
as the exaggeration of triVial issues. The pattern of “praise inﬂation,” described previously, appears to be
a response to this understanding. Some astronauts crave recognition and most require frequent reinforce-
ment to sustain their characteristically high levels of motivation. However, heaping disingenuous praise
on them does not compensate for failing to correct inadequate procedures or asking the astronauts to ﬁll
holes they previously had been directed to dig. And, it is unrealistic for ground personnel to expect praise
from space unless their performance is exceptional.

The best ways for ground personnel to maintain pleasant relations With on-orbit crew is to support
their work With accurate and clearly written procedures, schedule sufﬁcient time for task performance,
respond promptly to requests, and avoid creating annoyances that could be exaggerated.13 Most important,
everyone involved in human space operations should recognize and acknowledge the fact that only the
remote duty personnel truly understand the conditions under Which they live and work. This issue is not
unique to space operations. Words similar to the following j ournal entry have been uttered about every
remote duty operation since humans set up the ﬁrst branch cave in a new area.

They can’t imagine what it’s like and what we have to deal with every day to make things work.

It’s not their fault, but they can’t see it from our perspective.

ADJUSTMENT TO THE CONDITIONS

Providing an appropriate habitat and meaningful work to a carefully-selected and well-trained
crew can reduce the stress that accompanies life in isolation and conﬁnement and thereby contribute to
the likelihood of a successful mission.14 However, it is not possible to eliminate all sources of stress or the
possibility that conditions might change and allow previously-addressed problems to emerge. Stress is
cumulative if not mitigated in some manner and individuals respond differently to chronically stressful
conditions. Most develop constructive coping methods, such as exercise, devotion to work, engaging in a
personally gratifying activity, or commiserating With a comrade. Others respond With poor sleep, physical
problems, degraded task performance (errors, omissions), irritability, Withdrawal from social contact, or
more serious behaVioral aberrations.15

The results of the subcategory analysis were reviewed again to identify astronauts’ explicit refer-
ences to activities or factors that contributed to their adjustment. The reVieW found the leading contributor
to be What has been described in this report as “meaningful work,” Which includes extravehicular activity
(i.e., EVA), science experiments, Earth photography, and construction/installation; study participants also
reported deriving satisfaction from completing almost any task Within the allotted time. Additional
contributors to personal adjustment identiﬁed by the reVieW are: the IP phone (and email); Psychological
Support activities (e.g., teleconferences With family, crew discretionary events); onboard celebrations
(e.g., holidays, birthdays, milestones); meals and movie nights together; and personal projects (e.g., Earth
photography, HAM radio contacts, engagement With ground personnel such as triVia contests and the
chess tournament). Also, nearly all study participants mentioned writing in their personal journals as an
activity that helped them adjust to living and working on the 18$.

13 J ournal entries complained about the condescending tone of some ground personnel When explaining a procedure
or answering a technical question. Most ground control personnel routinely perform their jobs With skill, sensitivity,
and devotion to the program. The astronauts rely on these people and sincerely appreciate their efforts.
14 “Stress” is used in this context to refer to the effects of speciﬁc and general stressors to which 188 crew are
exposed. These include microgravity, separation from friends and family, schedule pressure, personal and external
expectations, and constrained choices, among others.
15 The examples of emergent psychosis among polar explorers represent the extreme of this response, but even less
seriously disturbed individuals can threaten mission success.

53

"
"62","IMPLICATIONS OF THE NET POSITIVITY/NEGATIVITY ANALYSIS
The Net Positivity/Negativity analysis found substantial evidence of a third quarter phenomenon.
Overall, NPN declined in the third quarter for only eight of the 18 categories of behaVioral issues that
were analyzed, but two of the top three categories were among the eight (Work and Adjustment), which
contributed to a third quarter decline when data from all categories were combined. SiX of the 10 astro-
naut j ournals showed a decline during the third quarter on the combined measure and nine out of 10 in
entries assigned to Adjustment, the category that most closely reﬂects individual morale. In addition,
comparisons of subsets found third quarter declines in NPN for all three pairs (Commanders vs. Flight
Engineers, Men vs. Women, and Two-Person vs. Multi-Person Crews). Two comparisons of subcatego-
ries within a maj or category also were performed: 1) On average, communications concerning manage-
ment and personal communications both declined during the third period, with the dip more pronounced
for the management subcategory; and 2) Entries concerning customs and rituals declined during the third
quarter, but remained positive during all four quarters, compared to entries about procedures which
increased in NPN during the third quarter and remained negative during all four quarters. The results of
these analyses are illustrated in the following ﬁgures.
Managementvs. Pe rsonal Communications: NPN By Quarter Customs/Rituals vs. Procedures: NPN By Quarter
1.00 1.00 —
030 0.80 1.000
0.60 0,60
0-40 vﬁ% v— 0.40 EAV
0.20 y— _015_4 — 0.20 0.083
v
020 7 . -o.2o ‘
-040 —' -040 -0500 4 —
V -0-333 -O.6OO
—0.60 0.455 —0.60 —v—
-0.80 -0.80 -O 750
-1.00 -1.00 I
n=64entries +Mgt.Comms v PersonalComms n=426entries n=27entries *Customs/Rituals 1} Procedures n=20entries
An overall measure of NPN was calculated for the top 18 maj or categories, which found entries
concerning recreation and leisure to be the most positive in tone and entries about organization and
management to be the most negative, as illustrated in the following ﬁgure.
Ave rage NPN ofthe Categories
-0.800 -0.600 -0.400 -0.200 0.000 0.200 0.400 0.600 0.800
Recreation/Leisure 0.687
Leadership 0_.463
Group Interaction 0.406
Event 0.380
Food 0.265
Exercise 0.247
Outside Comm‘unicat'rst ' 0.238
. :ﬁ__. mdjusf ’ FT ___: ..-' 36, u ,_.1,
"" ‘P‘Tivacy/P'E‘i-son ' ce ' 'll-
_ Proced ' . ' I r EH '
man"": E E] H .. _ ._.- 1 l. I I
.-_—---- =-. .-; e'e . ---i-'. -
J -1 ..-- "" L Eh /St_r-‘=BFE‘"" . _ 'E- {5.55}? ail L
__ . 543.2231 °._ _cs___ 0 ae 1,. i “""""ﬁui ;: z .
.- ‘ ""—0.286___Waste Mat. “-37"" __| _-—--.:_.‘h 5.: i
. J -O.296 m' III- ﬂ"". "" ._"". 3 I 1‘.-
4"" . ""II- I' _ - ""- - '-..
.. _—0.416 EHUIment ﬂ .__..
h 0625 Medical '1': - +.
-0.641 Oranization Mt. I - - ' '- i""
54

"
"63","IMPLICATIONS OF THE QUESTIONNAIRE RESULTS
The primary implication of the questionnaire results is that life onboard the 188 is not as difﬁcult
as the astronauts expect it will be prior to launch. Overall, mid-eXpedition responses to the ﬁve questions
were 24 percent lower than the pre-launch values and post-eXpedition responses were 25 percent lower.
The physical demands appear to be progressively easier for the astronauts to handle as they gradually
adapt to the conditions. Mental difﬁculty and the numbers of equipment and organizational problems
remained about the same during the second halves of the expeditions as they were during the ﬁrst halves.
The numbers of interpersonal problems increased by an average of 20 percent during the second halves,
but did not reach pre-launch expectations. However, it is important to note that the astronauts’ estimates
of interpersonal problems were the lowest of the ﬁve measures.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The 10 personal journals that are the subject of this study provide a detailed record of ﬁve person-
years of living and working in space. Many recommendations can be derived from the nearly 300,000
words written by the astronauts about their experiences onboard the ISS. Those sufﬁciently interested in
the topic to have read the Results section of this report probably have identiﬁed several actions that would
improve adjustment to long-duration isolation and conﬁnement. The following list presents only the most
salient items to emerge from the analysis. Some of the recommendations would involve additional work
by astronauts to implement and others would require additional effort by ground control, mission plan-
ning, and/or management personnel. Some of the items might already have been implemented.
0 Distribute tedious and housekeeping tasks as evenly as possible among the crew.
0 Design tasks to have tangible results, to the extent possible. Encourage astronauts and
investigators to collaborate on biological and physical science experiments.
0 Schedule sufﬁcient time for the performance of all tasks. Include time to locate and
assemble tools, materials, and procedures needed, and time to set-up, perform the task,
and return all items to their previous locations. Allocate additional time in the schedule
when in doubt of the requirements. Assign former ISS crew personnel to review sche-
dules to ensure that sufﬁcient time has been allocated to complete all task elements under
operational conditions.
0 Note all errors (and deﬁciencies) in procedures as they are discovered during operations
and correct the document within 24 hours if the procedure is expected to be used at any
time in the future. This will avoid subjecting another astronaut, or the same one again, to
the problem. Do not delay correcting procedures until it might be convenient to do so,
because it probably never will be. Assign former ISS crew personnel to review the mod-
iﬁcations.
o Assign former ISS crew personnel to review new procedures to ensure that the words
used to describe on-orbit items match the words used in 188 documentation and labels.
0 Allow ISS astronauts to control their individual schedules as much as possible.
0 Involve crew personnel in discussions of all issues that might affect them, even relatively
minor issues. Individuals may choose to decline, but it is important to ask.
0 Schedule ISS crews to meet with the PAYCOM and MCC personnel with whom they
later will be working as part of standard, pre-eXpedition preparations.
0 Revive the Expedition Corps Training Program that was developed by the Astronaut
Ofﬁce in 1999 and include the two-day seminar in pre-eXpedition training. Add sessions
about speciﬁc topics necessary for adapting to 18$ conditions with the assistance of
former ISS crew personnel and ﬂight surgeons (e.g., how to obtain sufﬁcient sleep,
methods for expressing concerns, useful coping behaviors).
55

"
"64","0 Provide in-serVice training to MCC and PAYCOM personnel to increase understanding

of the behaVioral issues associated with isolation and conﬁnement. This could be as brief

as a two-hour session based on the Expedition Corps seminar, augmented by study

results and recent operational experience.16

0 Enable the Psychological Support Ofﬁce to expand delivery of the types of services
already provided to 18$ astronauts and their families, which are among the most impor-

tant contributors to successful adjustment, according to the current study (e.g., crew dis-

cretionary events, family teleconferences, IP phone).

0 Be especially careful about the food (to paraphrase Fridtjof Nansen’s famous advice);

that is, ensure individual requests are satisﬁed and that packages are labeled accurately.

Include surprises in some containers in addition to the items indicated on a label; an

unexpected treat contributes to morale among remote duty personnel when found (e.g.,

special food, extra tortillas, a note) and is a tradition of expedition outﬁtters.

0 Include food items that can be assembled to create special meals to be shared by a crew.
0 Maintain sufﬁcient backup supplies to ensure that normal quantities of food and other
consumable items are available during contingency operations (i.e., eight months without

the possibility of resupply). Distribute storage to avoid loss of all food in a single event.

0 Expect third quarters of expeditions to be especially difﬁcult for remote duty personnel.

Schedule more crew discretionary events (CDEs) and meaningful or novel tasks during

these periods.17

0 Continue the J ournals F light Experiment.

The ﬁnal recommendation is more than the usual pitch by an investigator to conduct additional
research. Conditions changed on the 188 during the study period and subsequently: STS resumed,
equipment and modules were added, operations beneﬁtted from experience, and crew size, multinational
composition, and the numbers of Visitors increased. The doubling of crew size, in particular, has altered
the conditions onboard the 188 since most of the journals were written. For these reasons, it is now
appropriate to study the effects of these changes on the behaVioral issues. However, an equally
compelling reason for continuing the journals ﬂight experiment is that it serves as an outlet for frustration
that if expressed directly could damage relationships. Study participants recognized this unintended
beneﬁt of the experience, as illustrated by the following entries and public statements.18

Ifeel like I am complaining in these journals, and maybe that is what they are for.

I often I use this journal to vent my frustrations. This helps me collect my composure to deal with

the situations. I must continue to look at the big picture and count myself lucky to be here.

Ithink it is good to write this down—typing gets out some of these frustrations.

Writing in this journal helps to let off steam!

So that was fun. Today’s log was intended as an outlet for myself to just vent, and have some fun

with the things that I notice that are not perfect.

I used it almost as a therapy for myself; if I were upset about something or frustrated, I’d write

about it. Sometimes those entries were long.

Writing in my journal helped me keep proper perspective on events. It alerted me to when I was

becoming too negative about something and reminded me of the things I enjoy about my job.

16 This recommendation was suggested by a highly-experienced payload communicator.
17 Most of the journal entries concerning CDEs were written during the second and fourth quarters of expeditions. It
is unknown whether the number of reported CDEs during third quarters reﬂects depressed affect or fewer events.
18 The only regrets expressed by participants concerning the study were that they wished they had written more fre-
quently in their journals.

56

"
"65","Continuing the journals experiment to provide an outlet for crew frustration, in addition to
collecting data, is not a substitute for the psychological support services and medical consultations
provided by NASA. However, there are institutional obstacles that occasionally prevent astronauts from
communicating candidly with individuals in the organization, including their personal physicians; the
relationship between operators and ﬂight surgeons always is tempered by the physician’s authority to dis-
qualify his or her patient from ﬂight opportunities. Several journal entries describe astronauts’ reluctance
to conﬁde in anyone about certain matters. Mostly when astronauts refrained from speaking candidly
during private conferences with medical or management personnel it was to avoid being perceived as
difﬁcult or a complainer, but they wrote about the issues that bothered them in their journals and felt
better afterwards.

The astronauts who beneﬁtted in this manner might have experienced similar effects if their jour-
nals had remained unread by anyone else, but I doubt it. Rather, I believe the astronauts made regular
journal entries and wrote honestly about their experiences because it was, 1) science (i.e., meaningful
work); 2) an opportunity to contribute to improving conditions for future space crews; and 3) a reason to
produce the written record they wanted to help recall events later (i.e., tangible results for their effort).
The cathartic effects described by the astronauts seem to have been unexpected, but were derived primar-
ily from knowing that someone outside the organization would read the entries sympathetically. They did
not simply “let off steam,” they conveyed their frustrations to another human being. It is a relatively safe
and effective coping mechanism that also happens to generate large volumes of behaVioral data.
CONCLUSIONS

This study has provided the ﬁrst quantitative data from space operations on which to base a rank-
ordering of behaVioral issues. The ﬁrst level of analysis identiﬁed the relative salience of 24 maj or cate-
gories of issues among which the top 10 accounted for 88 percent of all category assignments: Work,
Outside Communications, Adjustment, Group Interaction, Recreation/Leisure, Equipment, Events,
Organization/Management, Sleep, and F ood. The second-level of analysis identiﬁed subcategories within
the maj or categories and calculated their temporal distributions. The third level of analysis focused on the
tone of entries as an indicator of speciﬁc problems and general morale; results of the NPN analysis sup-
port hypotheses concerning a third quarter phenomenon. The operational implications of these and other
study results were assembled in the form of recommendations to facilitate living and working in space,
whether onboard the 188, a spacecraft bound for an asteroid, or an interplanetary ship.

Much has been written about the personal qualities of astronauts—achievement-oriented,
competitive, analytical, etc. There probably is substance to at least some of the generalizations, as well as
considerable individual variation within the Astronaut Corps. However, the most salient personal quality
evident from my interactions with astronauts during this study is that they share an unusually well-
developed sense of self—awareness. I had been led to believe that astronauts tended to be overly conﬁdent
and certainly unwilling to admit to possessing ﬂaws or normal human frailties. I am sure that some astro-
nauts are afﬂicted with these traits, but those participating in this study demonstrated keen awareness of
their capabilities and limitations, a personal quality that further distinguishes them from nearly everyone
else.

The astronauts wrote candidly and insightfully about their experiences with the hope that their
journals would be used to improve conditions for subsequent ISS crews and the crews of future space
expeditions. I have done my best to mask the identity of participants in the study and to prevent the attri-
bution of entries to speciﬁc individuals. However, the astronauts whose journals are examined here
deserve recognition for the discipline they eXhibited by maintaining continuous records of their expedi-
tions and the courage necessary to write candidly.

57

"
"66","FINAL NOTE
In the ﬁrst days of the year 2001, the crew of ISS Expedition 1, Commander William Shepherd
and Flight Engineers Yuri Gidzenko and Sergei Krikalev, watched the 1968 movie, 200]: A Space
Odyssey and the 1984 sequel 2010—the latter describing a joint American-Soviet mission to Jupiter. The
irony of former cold war adversaries living and working harmoniously in space was not lost on Bill
Shepherd, Who had spent most of his naval career preparing for war With the Soviet Union. He also felt
strange watching a movie about a space expedition While he was on one, the same feeling expressed by
several participants in the current study. Captain Shepherd wrote his ﬁnal entry in the station 10g two
months later:
Change of command is an ancient naval tradition — the passage of responsibility for mission,
welfare of crew, and integrity of vessel from one individual to another. We are on a true space
ship now, making her way above any Earthly boundary. We are not the first crew to board Alpha,
or the last to depart. But we have made Alpha come alive. We gave her a name and put sub-
stance to the ideas — that our crews can work together as equals and our countries as partners.
We pass to your care Alpha's log, with the hope that many successful entries are recorded here,
that explorations carried out onboard are prodigious, and discoveries wondrous. May the good
will, spirit, and sense of mission we have enjoyed onboard endure. Sail her well.
i a o i . -.
3‘37543 W 1“
- - r. w . w _
. . . 1' H... 7,...“
k’ 1 \ ""r ‘: ‘
9E“ ‘ ""1?“: m, 8‘ f
a ‘ 1
r a .' ’ , ‘r/
58

"
"67","APPENDIX A
NOTE CONCERNING THE 1961 NORTH AMERICAN AVIATION SIMULATION

Donald Brown is Professor Emeritus in the Department of Anthropology at the University of
California, Santa Barbara; he is an expert in the peoples and cultures of Borneo and author of Human
Universals, Which is among the ﬁnest examples of synthesis in the behavioral sciences. While a student at
UCLA in 1961, he volunteered to serve as a subject in a 12-day simulation conducted by North American
Aviation to help identify life sciences requirements for the Apollo Program. Dr. Brown provided the
image that appears below the list of ﬁgures in the table of contents on page iV of this report (he is on the
right) and the following description of his participation nearly 50 years ago in one of the 1itt1e-known
studies that contributed to the human presence in space. Information about the investigator is presented
after Don’s delightful description of the experiment.

The thinking behind that experiment that I was aware of was the assumption that basically space

flight would be boring and repetitive but that when action might be required responses might

need to be very fast and accurate. So we were given a boring but demanding task to perform.

The panel in front of us went right to the limits of our vision, so you had to keep your eyes

straight ahead. The flashing of a light was a rare event but you had to be continuously vigilant, as

the time that elapsed after a light went on and you correctly responded determined the pay.

We took our blood pressure, pulse, and heart rate periodically while we were not at the task.

These were recorded in a journal. I do not recall whether we were invited or requested to write

more in the journals.

One guy found it so frustrating that he opted out after about a week. He then sat around for the

remainder of the time. We all got along well with each other. They were med students and I was

the technician.

We were on duty for 2 hours then off for 4, round the clock. There were two bunk beds, each

with a red blanket. The turnover of air in the capsule was so vigorous that the blankets

substantially disintegrated over the two weeks.

At one end of the capsule was a curtained-off john. It had a freezer of food in it, and as we

removed food we inserted our feces in plastic bags. In the end there was a bit of panic as the

doctor wanted to analyze the feces but no one had thought to ask us to identify whose were

whose. As it turned out, we had all used different knots, so sorting them out was not a problem.

We were observed through one-way windows and I presume the psychologists were making

various observations and probably had some sort of experimentation going on. We had all been

psychologically and medically examined before the experiment.

One technical problem developed in the course of the experiment. It was a loose wire that I

could have fixed in 2 minutes, but the people outside wanted to discover remotely what it was

and try to fix it themselves. They did ultimately determine the problem but then I fixed it.

Each of us had been allowed to bring a cubic foot of personal items into the capsule. I forget

what all was disallowed. I think mostly we just took reading material.

The principal figure in charge was [flight surgeon, Dr. Toby Freedman] from the med school at

UCLA. He is mentioned in Angle ofAttack, but I have never looked for his publications to see if he

might have written something about the experiment. It surely must be the case though that the

experiment was described in NAA’s proposal to NASA.19
19 Gray, M. Angle ofAttaek: Harrison Storms and the Race to the Moon. New York: Penguin Book, 1992. This
thoroughly-researched and engaging account of the most challenging technology project of the Twentieth Century
should be required reading for everyone involved in the human exploration of space. The author dedicated the book
to “the 400,000 men and women Who built the ﬁrst spaceship from Planet Earth and to the American people Who
picked up the tab.” Mike Gray also wrote The China Syndrome.

59

"
"68","Dr. Toby Freedman

Toby Freedman was an Air Force ﬂight surgeon during the Korean War and in 1954 was part of a
team that treated the test pilot who had barely survived the ﬁrst ejection at supersonic speed, which led
him into the new area of aerospace medicine. He was hired by North American Aviation to assist on the
X-15 project and when Harrison Storms received authorization to bid on the Apollo program, he brought
Freedman t0 the aircraft plant in Downey, California, to handle the life sciences section of the proposal.
Space life sciences had to be invented as they went along, as there was no previous experience in the
effects of spaceﬂight on humans. Toby Freedman’s simulation experiment, conducted in a partitioned
area of the factory’s 01d cafeteria, led to several insights that were, indeed, incorporated in North
American's proposal. No one expected the company to win the contract, but NASA was impressed by the
proposal’s attention to detail, which included preliminary data concerning human performance in
isolation and conﬁnement.

Dr. Freedman continued to lead human factors engineering for North American (later known as
North American Rockwell and then Rockwell International), and served as personal physician to the
senior engineering managers, several of whom he nursed through heart attacks brought on by the stress of
meeting the goal of landing astronauts 0n the Moon within the decade.

.4337“; g; , 4?
f ._ :‘ ‘ 7' l"":— ‘_ 4‘
6O

"
"69","APPENDIX B
THE THIRD QUARTER PHENOMENON

The term, “Third Quarter Phenomenon,” was coined by Robert Bechtel to describe a characteris-
tic of ﬁnite-time stressful situations that he identiﬁed primarily from anecdotal accounts collected during
a study of life in cold regions (Bechtel and Berning, 1991). Bechtel found that the incidence of accidents,
assaults, and requests for marital counseling peaked after the worst of the winter conditions had passed,
rather than at the mid-point, as might be expected. He then read about the interviews of Antarctic winter-
over personnel conducted by J ohn Rohrer in 1958 as part of the International Geophysical Year (IGY)
science program; those interviews led Rohrer to identify three stages of reaction to long-duration isola-
tion: An initial stage of heightened anXiety; a second stage of settling into a routine, which is accom-
panied by depression; and a third stage of anticipation, which is characterized by emotional outbursts and
aggressiveness (Rohrer, 1961). Rohrer observed that the sequence of stages remained the same regardless
of the length of the mission. Bechtel also found a paper about adjustment to life onboard early Polaris
nuclear submarines by psychiatrist, Jim Earls, which described a seven-stage response that included a
“half way syndrome” characterized by depression; however, the data show the response occurring well
after the ha1f-way points of the missions, that is, during the third quarters. Earls cited depression as the
most common response to long-duration submarine patrols and described the pattern clearly:

The crux of the various forces leading to this depressive position would appear to be the anger

experienced by the various members of the crew. The anger is an outgrowth of the frustrations

experienced by the submariner in dealing with his environment. However, there appears to be

no personally or culturally acceptable means of discharging this anger. The paternalistic organiza-

tion of the military system is one which does not permit the direct expression of anger and

aggression toward the military system. In addition, there is the personal fear that the overt

expression of anger may lead to a socially isolated position within an already isolated commu-

nity. The individual has little opportunity to handle his hostile affect by sublimation, except

through humor. The submariner is then forced to deal with his anger by denial, suppression, or

turning against himself. The hostile affect becomes internalized, but it ultimately manifests itself

as a depressive phenomenon. (Earls, 1969, p. 122)

Eric Gunderson and Paul Nelson reported s1eep1essness, depression, irritability, and anXiety after
the mid-winter period among 90 US Antarctic winter-over personnel (1963), which does not allow
attribution to the third quarter, but is suggestive, as is the reference to “drifting behavior” as a late winter
phenomenon by Popkin et a1. (1974).

It was mentioned previously that the French Diaries study found evidence of a third quarter
phenomenon across broad ranges of expedition durations and crew sizes (Stuster, Bachelard, and
Suedfeld, 1999, 2000). Further, Marilyn Dudley Rowley and her associates reported evidence for a third-
quarter phenomenon in the form of increased rates of deviance and conﬂict during polar and space
expeditions (2000). G. Daniel Steel found moderate empirical support for a third-quarter phenomenon at a
New Zealand Antarctic base using mood scales, with certain dimensions more susceptible to temporal
effects than others (Steel, 2001). And, Greg Decamps and Elisabeth Rosnet reported third-quarter
phenomena among 27 personnel of the F rench Dumont d’UrVille Antarctic station, based on observations
made by the expedition physician during a 50-week period (Decamps and Rosnet, 2005).

Nick Kanas and his international team of investigators found no evidence of a third quarter effect
on any of the 21 subscales used in the Interactions Study to assess mood among US and Russian crew
members during nine expeditions on Mir and the 188 (2006). However, the study discovered strong
evidence to support displacement of tension and negative emotions from crewmembers to mission control
personnel and from mission control personnel to management.

61

"
"70","Psychiatric interpretation is beyond the scope of this study, Which is concerned primarily With the
behavioral outcomes of physical and cognitive processes. However, an exception must be made for
“displacement,” Which is the shifting of actions or feelings from one entity to a substitute When there are
obstacles to the original object; it is probably the most Widely understood psychiatric concept. The cliche
example is, “The boss shouts at me. I go home and shout at my Wife. She shouts at our child. With no one
remaining, the child kicks the dog.” This common coping behavior might explain some of the negativity
in the journal entries concerning ground control and management personnel.

REFERENCES

Bechtel, R. and Berning, A. The Third Quarter Phenomenon: Do People Experience Discomfort After
Stress Has Passed? In, F ram Antarctica t0 Outer Space: Life In Isolation and Conﬁnement. A.
Harrison, Y. Clearwater, and C. McKay, Eds. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1991.

Decamps, G. and Rosnet, E. A Longitudinal Assessment of Psychological Adaptation During a Winter-
Over in Antarctica, Environment and Behavior, 37: 3, 418-435, 2005.

Earls, J .H. Human Adjustment to an Exotic Environment: The Nuclear Submarine. Archives of General
Psychiatry 20:117-123, 1969.

Gunderson, E.MKE and Nelson, P.D. Adaptation of Small Groups to Extreme Environments. Aerospace
Medicine 34,1111-1115, 1963.

Kanas, N.A., V.P. Salnitskiy, J .B. Ritsher, V.I. Gushin, D.S. Weiss, S.A. Saylor, O.P. Kozerenko and
C.R. Marmar. Human Interactions in Space: 188 vs. Shuttle/Mir. Acta Astronautica 59: 1-5, 413-419,
July-September 2006.

Popkin, M., Stillner, V., Osborn, L., Pierce, C., and Shurley, J . Novel Behaviors in an Extreme
Environment. American Journal ofPsychiatry 131, 651-654, 1974.

Rohrer, J . Interpersonal Relationships in Small Isolated Groups. In, Psychophysiological Aspects ofSpace
F light, B.E. F laherty, Ed. New York: Columbia University Press, 1961.

Rowley, M., Nolan, P., Bishop, 8., F arry, K., and Gangale, T. Crew Composition, Time, and Subjective
Experience in Mars-Analog Expeditions. Paper presented at the Third International Convention of the
Mars Society, Toronto, Ontario, August 2000.

Steel, G.D. Polar Moods: Third Quarter Phenomena in the Antarctic. Environment and Behavior, 33: 1,
126-133, 2001.

Stuster, J ., Bachelard, C. and Suedfeld, P. In the Wake 0fthe Astrolabe: Review and Analysis ofDiaries
Maintained by the Leaders and Physicians at French Remote Duty Stations. Technical Report to the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1999 (F ebruary).

Stuster, J ., Bachelard, C. and Suedfeld, P. The Relative Importance of Behavioral Issues During Long-
Duration I.C.E. Missions. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 71 9, 2000 (September).

The principal investigator is grateful to the astronauts Who participated in this study and t0 the many

NASA and contractor personnel Who made it possible, including Suzanne McCollum, Lauren Leveton,

Karen Lawrence, Laura Campbell, Curtis Kershner, and Dave Carsey. Special thanks to Ellen Baker for

leading the review of the ﬁnal report on behalf of the Astronaut Ofﬁce and for her excellent suggestions.

£9
62

"
"71",""
"72","Form Approved
REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE OMB No. 0704-0188
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including
suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302,
and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503.
1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave Blank) 2. REPORT DATE 3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED
J uly 2010 Technical Memorandum
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 5. FUNDING NUMBERS
Behavioral Issues Associated With Long-duration Space Expeditions: Review and Analysis
of Astronaut J ournals — Experiment 01-E104 (J ournals): Final Report
6. AUTHOR(S)
J ack Stuster, PhD, CPE”<
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
REPORT NUMBERS
Lyndon B. J ohnson Space Center S-1075
Houston, Texas 77058
9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 1o. SPONSORING/MONITORING
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER
National Aeronautics and Space Administration TM-2010-21 613 0
Washington, DC 20546-0001
11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES
>kAnacapa Sciences, Inc., Santa Barbara, Calif.
12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE
Unclassiﬁed/Unlimited
Available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information (CASI)
71 15 Standard
Hanover MD 21076-1320 Cate_0r : 53
13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words)
Personal journals maintained by NASA astronauts during 6-month expeditions on board the International Space Station (188) were
analyzed to obtain information concerning a Wide range of behavioral and human factors issues. Astronauts wrote most about their
work, followed by outside communications (With Mission Control, family, and friends), adjustment to the conditions, interactions With
crew mates, recreation/leisure, equipment (installation, maintenance), events (launches, docking, hurricanes, etc.),
organization/management, sleep, and food. The study found evidence of a decline in morale during the third quarters of the missions,
and identiﬁed key factors that contribute to sustained adjustment and optimal performance during long-duration space expeditions.
Astronauts reported that they beneﬁted personally from writing in their journals because it helped them maintain perspective on their
work and relations With others. Responses to questions asked before, during, and after the expeditions show that living and working on
board the 188 is not as difﬁcult as the astronauts anticipate before starting their 6-month tours of duty. Recommendations include
application of study results and continuation of the experiment to obtain additional data as crew size increases and operations evolve.
14. SUBJECT TERMS 15. NUMBER OF 16. PRICE CODE
PAGES
human behavior; human factors engineering, manned space ﬂight; man environment
interactions; morale, psychology; human performance; adjustment 74
17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT
OF REPORT OF THIS PAGE OF ABSTRACT
Unclassiﬁed Unclassiﬁed Unclassiﬁed Unlimited
Standard Form 298 (Rev Feb 89) (MS Word Mar 97) NSN 7540-01-280-5500
Prescribed by ANSI Std. 239-18
298-102

"
"73",""
"74",""
