"","x"
"1","; Current Genomics, 2005, 6, 487-490 487 i
Using MicrograVIty for Deﬁning Novel Antl—Atherosclerotlc Therapy
§ Auke Verhaar', Kausilia K. Krishnadath1 and Maikel P. Peppelenbosch2’*
{ 1Lab. For Experimental Interim! Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands and 2Dept. Cell Bi-
,2"" ology, A. Deusinglaan I, University Medical Center Groningen, University ofGroningen, The Netherlands
2 Abstract: Among the most important insights into coronary and inflammatory disease is that the formation of vessel oc—
cluding placques is its essence an inflammatory process, that is counteracted by anti-inﬂammatory drugs Current thera—
peutical options of dealing with the increased challenge to public health posed by increased vessel disease are limited and
:3 unsatisfactory. Disturbingly, an increasing cohort of patients does not react to the immunosuppressive drugs available.
iv Importantly, however, space travel is associated with well—tolerated immunosuppression and thus identiﬁcation of the
molecular mechanisms underlying this space travel—associated immunosuppression may have signiﬁcant beneﬁt for di-
recting clinical research on earth. Devising an experimental set up for investigating the molecular details of space ﬂight-
"" induced immunosuppression is, however, fraught with difﬁculties. Two recent ESA-sponsored space missions (the Delta
1'; Taxi ﬂight to 188 and Maser 10 sounding rocket mission) have now shown that these technical hurdles can be successfully
tackled.
Received on: 8 September 2005 - Revised on: 18 September 2005 — Accepted on: 22 September 2005
; INTRODUCTION on earth may be a fairly safe way of suppressing the action
Already in the early days of manned space ﬂight it was of $.16 imgugefystf“; intgeentf suffering gemfpleeve ﬁg;-
clear that many physiological functions are effected when ma‘ion. n or unaie y, e m'o ecu ar mo e 0 action y l
; . . . which space travel interferes With the act1v1ty of our Immune
; humans are put into orbit, as might have been expected from .
. . . . . . . system remains obscure at best.
staying in an isolated enVironment m which astronauts are
{ exposed to microgravity, stress, radiation, dietary disruption Nevertheless, ﬁnding novel ways 0f dealing With over-
and a disturbed circadian rhythm. Among the more promi- activated immunity is urgently called for . Immune cells play
f nent effects on human functioning was a clear repression of an important role in atheromatous plaque formation and pro-
§ the immune system [1]. Subsequent studies have shown that gression and in the phase 0f ""active plaque"" and 0f the COh'
a multitude of events in the immune system was effected: for sequent clinical manifestations (reviewed in 8)- Endothelial
' instance in space, upon challenge our immune system is im- malfunction is the premier determinant step in atherogenesis. l
paired in the production of cytokines (hormones 0f the im- Circulating monocytes are engaged and internalized and I
mune system) which the cells in our body use to coordinate lipoproteins are stored in the subendothelial area where they
; defence against bacterial and viral attack) [2-4], our macro- undergo oxidation (oxidized LDL) and are removed by
e phages (sentinels of our immune system that eliminate small- macrophages forming foam cell in turn attracting other
i time bacterial invasion) ﬂatten out within seconds of expo- monocytes, activated endothelial cells and smooth muscle
; sure to zero gravity [5], neutrophils (which handle more cells. Recruitment of monocytes and lymPhocytes occurs as
1 massive bacterial invasion) lose their capacity to produce a result of increased expressmn of adhesmn molecules and
bactericidal metabolites [6], natural killer cells (which elimi- the plaque progresses to a se-called advanced lesion. Finally
nate cancer cells) are less effective [4] and T cells lose their the activation of monocytes and T cells induces the plaque
i edge in disposing virus—infected cells [4, 7]. Hence, dimin- activation and rupture in presence of inducing agents such as
’ ished activity of the immune system is among the most oxidized LDL. The process may be increased by the stimu-
foremost effects of space ﬂight on the human body. lation of platelets, tissue factor, coagulation-ﬁbrinolytic sys-
. , . , , , , , tem which can contribute to thrombus formation, plaque
, Importantly, although this diminished activity of the 1m- rupture and artery occlusion [8].
» mune system IS likely to become a problem w1th respect to
the longer missions currently being planned (especially a . Furthermore, the last .decades have seen a tremendous
manned mission to Mars may yield speciﬁc challenges in increase m so-called auto-immune disease, w1th.as most eye-
:I this respect), space-related immunosuppression is well— catching examples the almost epidemlcal rise in. hay fever,
; tolerated. Over forty years of experience with manned space tOOd allergy, rheumateid arthritis, asthmatic disease, and
?I ﬂight have now conclusively demonstrated that man can inflammatory bowel disease. Forty years ago, ""1 Western
; easily survive and work in weightless conditions, despite soc1et1es these diseases werean eddity, these days they ef-
{ chronic repression of the bodies immune functions. This fect.up to 20 % 0fthelpopulat10n In. some way or another._An
suggests that mimicking space-related immunosuppression undisputed explanatlon for this increase 18 still lacking.
Many immunologists now favour the aptly-named hygiene ;
*Address correspondence to this author at the Dept. Cell Biology, A. Deus- hypothesis. In thlS lme 0f reasoning, the Increased supply in
:§ inglaan 1, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, refrigeration, clean water and food, vacuum cleaners etc. has
2- Groningen, The Netherlands; Tel: +31-50-363 2522; Fax: +31-50~363 2512; almost eliminated all pathogenic attack on the human body i
3 E‘mai'5 g-“OPPC“@med-umcg~“l (diarrhoea has now become rare in Europe). At same time, :
Z 1389-2029/05 $50.00+.00 ©2005 Bentham Science Publishers Ltd.

"
"2",". x .. V _. —.v...-. imam? ___..._--.:,_l - -._ W, ,3H,- ‘ﬂmm , , 7 “?Mﬂw ,, , MAI“ ., ., -. ~-~ 2 :xdma?wuh“mu.m4s
488 Current Genomics, 2005, V01. 6, N0. 6 Verhaar et al.
however, our immune system has become bored out of its microgravity associated with space travel has important im-
skull, which for lack for anything better to do starts attacking munosuppressive actions. Isolated leukocytes (a term that f
otherwise harmless stimuli (like cold air in the case of asth— covers all professional immunity-mediating cells) of various 9
matic disease). Whatever the reason, it has grown into possi— types are clearly impaired in their functioning when chal- :
bly the most important challenge to contemporary health lenged outside the body. For instance, proliferation of T cells 5
care. Current clinical practice has only two major strategies (a response to pathogenic attack) is depressed by an average
of dealing with auto-immune disease, steroids and NSAIDs of 56 % in a sample of 129 astronauts and similar reductions
(aspirin-like compounds). Unfortunately, both types of ther- in activity have been noted in other types of immune cells. ' .
apy have significant drawbacks. Prolonged use of steroids Identiﬁcation of the molecular factors mediating these re- ' .
leads to Cushing’s syndrome (the typical buffalo neck, full sponses may be exceedingly useful for devising novel treat- f '
moon face, striated bowel, muscular atrophy, and poor merits of autoimmune disease on earth[1]. g
wound healing observed in Chronic steroid users) and it is i .
difﬁcult to maintain high doses of steroids in patients for a mmV” .
lon g time. Alternatively, NSAIDS are associated with severe i
allergic disorders, bowel ulceration and bleeding, especially k T :
in the brain and kidneys (to give an idea of the problem, _ ‘
every year more people die from using aspirin or related __ 1
compounds as people succumb to leukaemia). Highly dis- Set Cyg Ser 3 ‘
turbing is current trend that more and more people do not “J_Pi'o‘ His Pro if 1
react to either medication, leaving the medical practioner y a _ §

. Pi o be: P10 : 1
more or less empty-handed when confronted With these ._ _. ;
(sometimes very ill) patients. Thus, if research on immuno- Pm“ ® St“ Tl“ ; .
suppression caused by space travel could deliver a novel way Thi‘ Alf? Glu j_
of dealing with immune system hyperactivity, this would be “ A11! Asp le . 1
most welcome. Pro Leu Pro .

' Thr Pro Met _ i
500 gm - 4
450 Eewtilgﬁieie
--- imeﬁewmmwwxweggm w
m 400 aw» . . . . . . . . . : i
'53 E“? Fig. (2). The prmczple of kmome proﬁling. Each mdmdual klnase . j
:3; 350 ﬁﬁfiiﬁwﬁéx” recognises different motifs made up out of amino acids (here de- . j
g g 300 - p1cted by three letter codes). If a lysate contains an active kmase, it ; j
g m o gijkiiil will add phosphate groups only to strings of amino acid containing . ;
>‘ :m g 250 ﬁewi‘éi'ﬁﬁﬁf 'ﬁﬁw g; the nght motif. In this example a MAP kinase adds a radioactive 1
g g t 200 giﬁ‘éfggmg’! ;_ phosphatate to the its specnﬁc motif, but not to other motifs. If all f 3
“5 a {ﬁgﬁmméﬁfﬁiﬁg iii"" motifs present in the cell are spotted on glass, the incorporation of . ‘
a, V 150 *2ng ﬁéﬂrﬁw’ ﬁﬁﬁgg radioactmty 1n the 1nd1v1dual motifs reveals the actiwty of cellular _-
g 100 ngix ﬂ: kmases. .
5 0 gﬁ Efﬁe; get it? . t n . .,
‘1'}: ' . , 23;; L“ *
1971 1981 1991 2005 ‘- :
. ‘ fﬁf '
Flg- (l)- Diseases m which the Immune system overreacts to a ‘5 . ' .
harmless stimulus are becoming more common. Depicted here is "" -g .
the historical trend in the incidence of hay fever, in which pollen 9? $1“ "" "" 1'
. . . n 5»: 5 =???é‘iéié:jjig’iiaigiiiégi;e23"":‘
evoke severe inﬂammation of the mucosal surfaces of the respira- 5; ﬁg i ' 11;. 3
Astronauts remain and labour in crowded, isolated envi- i ' § , ' '
ronment, prone to arouse anxiety, psychological conﬂict and 1"" 1 2
sleep deprivation. It can thus come as no surprise that at least "" F
part of the physiological effects seen in astronauts may at- . '
i . . . . . . » .
tributeti t0 the stressful conditions they. work and live in. Fig. (3). A volunteer donates blood at Esrange for the Maser 10 ;
Stress IS an interestmg immunocompromismg envnonmental mission. 1
condition, and many immunologists are investigating it to ;
see whether some of the biological mechanisms involved can The above—mentioned considerations have prompted us 9
be harnessed for practical clinical use. But in addition, the to explore effects of microgravity on a cellular level. Pin- ' .j

"
"3","V Using Microgravity for Deﬁning NovelAnti-Atherosclerotic Therapy Current Genomics, 2005, Vol. 6, N0. 6 489
pointing molecular targets in cellular physiology used to be a human blood on the launch site for late access to the launch
tedious business, involving more or less random testing of vehicle. In the big university laboratories studying human .
the involvement of certain molecular cellular constituents immunity, this isolation is performed with bulky centrifuges f
, often on a hunch of the researcher involved. Fortunately, weighing hundreds to thousands of kilograms, and transpor-
, technology has advanced and these days especially kinome tation of these instruments is not immediately obvious.
' proﬁling has emerged as a particularly powerful technology Hence, we have developed protocols for isolating immune
' for establishing interaction points in cellular physiology cells employing miniature centrifuges, weighing only 2 kilo-
, [9,10]. This technology is based on the predominance of grams and with a volume of6 litres easily ﬁtting into a nor-
reversible phosphorylation as a regulator of cellular metabo- mal suitcase. Furthermore, thermo control of cells is of ut-
, lism, speciﬁc biological processes being switched on after a most importance (human cells quickly deteriorate if not ex-
, phosphate group is attached to a protein by a family of en— actly on 37 °C) and in the laboratory this achieved ~again- by
' zymes called kinases, and being switched off by removal of employing large bulky heavy incubators. We have shown 3
the phosphate group by a family of enzymes called phos— that we can also provide adequate thermo control by using a
phatases. [n 1992 Edwin Krebs was awarded the Nobel Prize hotplate of 4 kg and 8 litres volume with a 37 °C set point,
,_ for this discovery [1 1]. Thus to know kinase activities is to again allowing easy set up of suitable experimental condi-
' know the cell. If all cellular kinases are liberated from cells tions, even when local laboratory facilities at the launch site
by lysis in a mild detergent and subsequently incubated with are limited or not existent (like e.g. at Baikanur). The set up
arrays that contain specific substrates for each individual of our mobile low—weight, and also importantly low-cost,
: kind of kinase in the cell, a complete blueprint of the entire laboratory now allows us to isolate fresh immune cells from
; cellular metabolism can be generated. Thus effects of treat— human blood for loading in experimental containers at al-
' ments on cellular metabolism become immediately obvious most any place on the planet.
j using this technique called kinome proﬁling. Together with
BSA and SRON (the Dutch Space Research Foundation), we
"" have now accommodated this technology to fit type I con-
' tainers as to allow its application in space experimentation, 4
, representing an important advance for investigating the ef-
fects of space travel on physiology at a cellular level.
3e; ‘9; W: i :f b ; . .2 .. --. MW
3 55"""" ”T, i' Mt?” F ig. (5). The delta mission moves towards the la unch piatform.
, , . \r "" Will rese arch 0n space-based immuno-suppression provide a new
, : "" White blOOCI
.255 99” fraction After isolation of immune cells, cells are maintained in
restin g conditions in the type—l containers until the onset of i
experimentation at exactly 37 0C. The experience at Maser '
10 ﬂight has shown that this poses no special challenge to
the hardware involved. At start of the experiment (shortly ‘
after the be ginnin g of microgravity) the immune cells are
activated by exposin g them to a bacterial component called
, #461 LPS (a molecule that combines various fatty acids and sugar
: g F lg (4). At the launch site the immune cetls are isolated. from the Elaiieeiileierfi)tis?::f:iii $21,: 1:31:6eg 3:;rgiaizrslasggéngsngtoyﬂi
sf . vozunteer blood. The large amount of wh1te cells combined w1th indispensable motifs is LPS. Hence, all gram-negative bacte-
,. low amount of sedimentation show the excellent cond1t10n of the ria contain LPS and our immune system uses the presence of
volunteer. LPS as an unmistakable sign that a bacterial infection is
. . . . . . . afoot. Once, an immune cell sees LPS it will throw every-
A major hurdle in investigating the immune system in . . . . . . . .
. . . . . thing it has at its disposal for ﬁghting the infection (that is
. m1crograv1ty was the necessny to use relatively fresh im- .
» . . why the presence of LPS in the bloodstream, also called
. mune cells and thus the requirement to Isolate them from

"
"4","_ .. ..____ _._ y .. W , _ ¢.,,H_,__.__,,‘—_— — x ,. -m ><.-_“;n~')':“ =0 -» “vrﬂd-«a-v‘r v-v-*~'~~-~-~ H. my ,Mlﬂmmwrwm ’-' "" ' ' "" ' ‘7 ' ""'7"" 17’7777WI'V jinn"" ‘ M-WKN;/;:
{3:
490 Current Genomics, 2005, Vol. 6, N0. 6 Verhaar et at
blood oisonin or se tic shock, is so dan erous; in fact trol module resulted in ex eriments not bein activated on
p g I p 0 u g I o I p o g
most fatalities happemng on the intenswe case of a hospltal the Delta mlssmn, whereas the hard—landmg 0f the Maser-IO
are a conse uence of the resence of LPS in the blood . Thus due to a failure of the main arachute t0 0 en destro ed our
q P. . _ . P P Y
LPS re resents a robust stimulus for immune cells, and that sam [es in an otherWIse erfect ex erimental se uence.
P . . . . . . P . . P P. q .
is why LPS 13 our stimulus of chonce for investigatlng the However, the biological obstacles to this type of experimen—
immune system during microgravity. tation have clearly been taken and thus together with BSA
In our actual experimental set up, we challenge cells for 5 we are now well—placed t0 dlSPOVGF the molecular baSlS Of
. . . . . . space-related immunosuppressmn. As a reflights of these
mm With LPS, after which a ﬁxmg solution 18 poured over ex eriments is lik 1 'n N0 emb 2007 th M 11
the cells to ensure that the cells remain in pristine condition whperea 3 ch an : Zr} tY :r di d t f?“ F t asle<r b'k,
for further analysis. As a control, we use a centrifuge, which i sio S ""t! Seth) tine"" fl: fa c n a ebor 2:] u ure hu fl
is also loaded on the launch vehicle, but by spinning during m S . n, 1 seem a ene 1 rom space- ase researc or
. . . . . medicine down here on earth may be forthcoming sooner
micrograVIty retains the cell as 1 g. Thus, good lI‘lSlght can than one mi ht think
be obtained on microgravity effects on LPS-induced re- g '
s onses. ,
p ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
LPS having a robust response or not, the cells of most Th h k I d h f N
2 people do not react to LPS in a reproducible fashion. Having e :1"" ohrs 3.“: “0‘,” e. ge t e support 0 SRO grant
had a cold or the ﬂu in recent weeks, having taken aspirin, or MG'063 0” 6"" investigations
having being exposed to substantial stress all inﬂuence LPS REFERENCES
5 reactivity (for this reason astronaut blood is less suitable for
. experimentation, as being launched certainly represents [1] Cogoli, A. Hematological and immunological changes during space
' stress). Hence, after a stringent medical selection procedure ﬂight-Acta Astronaut. 1981,81 995-1002
(both for selecting healthy people as well as for protection to [2] Ber“ W.D.; Murphy: JD”, s,m‘th’ B'Aﬁ Tayler, GR' and Sonnen-
bl d b d. f th I . I d f feld, G. Effect of micrograwty modeling on interferon and inter-
00 ' ome “eases 0"" e Personne ""W0 V6 )’ a.grouP 0 leukin responses in the rat.J/nterferon Res. 1991,11:243-9.
VOIunteer bIOOd donors was seleCted- F01” PerlOd 0f 6 [3] Sonnenfeld, G.; Mandel, A.D.; Konstantinova, I.V.; Taylor, G.R.;
monthes, we regularly isolated immune cells from the blood Berry, W.D.; Wellhausen, S.R.; Lesnyak, A.T. and Fuchs, B.B. Ef-
of this group of volunteers and exposed these cells to LPS gems 0; Spf‘ceﬂiglhylngﬁ’ﬁ aén4d8asc3‘iVi‘Y 0f 'mmune 06""5- Awar-
‘ - ° pace nwron. 6. , I - .
followed by measurlnog the eVOked. respenses. From this [4] Konstantinova, I.V.; Rykova, M.P.; Lesnyak, AT. and Antropov,a
group we 561630th a 5 A’ SUbgrOUp displaying unusually Sta' EA. Immune changes during long-duration missions. J. Leukoc.
ble LPS responses (and thus presumably are unusually Bio}. 1993, 54: 189-201.
healthy) and it is from this pool of volunteers we dwell for [5] Armstrong, J.W.;_Ge{ren, RA. and Chapes, SK. .The effect Of
01“. experiments. Nevertheless, rockets for space experi- space and parabolic flight on macrophage hematopmesns and func-
t t. t dt b l h d f t. I . t10n.Exp. Cell Res. 1995, 216: 160-8.
men a 10? en 0 e aunc 6 mm 6X0 10 p acais’ In our case [6] Kaur, 1.; Simons, E.R.; Castro, V.A.; Mark Ott, C. and Pierson,
from Balkanur and Lapland, and by tranSportlng b100d d0“ D.L. Changes in neutrophil functions in astronauts. Brain Behav.
nors to such places, they are exposed to substantial travel, Immun. 2004,18:443-50.
changes circadian rhythm and different nutrition, which may [7] Taylor: ?'R' and g?nnéy, R-‘E- Eelaﬁed Artic'ifa Lig‘fs 1’; vao mt""
. . - _ mg con irms a untmg 0 t e uman ce -mc late Immune
; cm“ the ”Spouses measurefd m the 'mmune cells' For“? mechanism duringspace ﬂight.J. Leukoc. Biol. 1992, 51: 129—32
' “?tCIYa however: our seleCtlon procedure appeared sufﬁ‘ [8] Pasqui, A.L.; Bova, G.; Maffei, S. and Auteri, A. Immune factors
. Ciently rigorous to select for volunteers capable of dealmg in atherosclerosis. Ann. Ital. Med. Int. 2005,20: 81-9.
from these environmental factors, because the blood ob- [9] Diks, SH; Kok, K.; O'T0016,T.; Hommes, D-W_.;_Van Dijken,'P.;
; tained at the actual launch site was of excellent condition and 1.00“?) J' and ??ppe'?“b05°h’ M'P- _K'""9me prOf""'“g_ for Study'“g
; f 11 . t LPS lipopolysaccharlde Signal transduction in human peripheral blood
3 was ” yrespons‘ve 0 - mononuclear cellsJ. Biol. Chem. 2004, 279; 49206-13. _
Thus it appears sturdy protocols have now established [10] D‘ks’ S'.H' and ??ppelenbOSCh’ M‘P' smgle cc“ pmteom'cs for ?’1
b t bl. h d f . th ff t f . . personalised medicme. Trends Mol. Med. 2004, 10: 574-7 I
_ 66“ es a ls e 01‘ measurlng e e cc 0 mlcrograyity 0“ [ll] Krebs, E.G. Nobel Lecture. Protein phosphorylation and cellular
immune functlon, as tw1ce now successfully experiments regulation 1, Biosci. Rep 1993, 13; 127-42.
have been prepared under the hectics of an actual launch. It
is unfortunate that a technical malfunction in the Kubik con-
|
!

"
