"","x"
"1","Kw» Available online at www.sciencedirect.com -—————
5/3»
m}\‘r’ SCIENCE mnec‘ro [mgﬁm
“e C
“"" meimlmmntm
PERGAMON Acta Astronautica 56 (2005) 623—628 __—=___——
www.elsevier.com/locate/actaastro
Plant molecular b1010 gy 1n the space statlon era: Utihzatlon 0f KSC
ﬁxatlon tubes Wlth RNAlater
Anna-Lisa Paula, Howard G. Levinea’ b, William McLamba‘ C, Kelly L. N orwooda’ C,
David Reed“, Gary W. Stuttea’ b, H. William Wells“, Robert J . Ferla’*
aDepartment of Horticultural Sciences, University of F lorida, Gainesville FL 32611, USA
bDynamac Corporation, Kennedy Space Cemet; FL 32899. USA
cBionetim Corporation. Kennedy Space Centel: FL 32899, USA
Received 14 November 2003; received in revised form 30 June 2004; accepted I] October 2004
Available online 26 January 2005
__—___________________—_————————
Abstract
Spaceﬂight experiments involving biological specimens face unique challenges with regard to the on orbit harvest and ‘
preservation of material for later ground-based analyses. Preserving plant material for gene expression analyses requires that
the tissue be prepared and stored in a manner that maintains the integrity of RNA. The liquid preservative RNAlater (Ambion) ‘
provides an effective alternative to conventional freezing strategies, which are limited or unavailable in current spaceﬂight
experiment scenarios. The spaceﬂight use of RNAlater is enabled by the Kennedy space center ﬁxation tube (KFT), hardware
designed to provide the necessary containment of ﬁxatives during the harvest and stowage of biological samples in space.
Pairing RNAlater with the KFT system provides a safe and effective strategy for preserving plant material for subsequent ‘
molecular analyses, a strategy that has proven effective in several spaceﬂight experiments. Possible spaceﬂight scenarios for
the use of RNAlater and KFTS are explored and discussed.
© 2004 Published by Elsevier Ltd. ‘
MM 1
ti
1, Introduction systems that will ultimately support long—term occupa- t
tion of orbital facilities and extended spaceﬂight mis-
NASA’S interest in plant biology is decades old and Sims [4—61- Second, plants are excellent model SYS'
extensive research has been conducted in the interest tems for studying the effects 0f abiotic stress. Plants
of understanding physiological responses of plants in must deal Wlth their enVironment in 81th, this they
spaceﬂight and related environments [1—3]. There are have evolved hlgh')’ sensmve, adaptive metabolisms
two primary reasons for this interest. First, plants are that can be employed to cope With unique env1r0n-
central components of the advanced life support (ALS) ments, SUCh 35 spaceﬂight [7]-
__ Most of the plant research conducted in recent years
* Corresponding author. required that at least some of the harvests be conducted
E-mail address: robferl@uﬂ.edu (RJ. Ferl). on orbit [8-10]. In-ﬁight harvests provide material that
0094-5765/$-see front matter © 2004 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2004.10.00]

"
"2","624 A.-L. Paul (31 al. / Acta Astronautica 56 (2005) 623—628
is uncompromised by landing and post-ﬂight handling quality RNA in harvested plant samples. Manipulat-
and delays, but in-ﬁight harvests are not trivial to ac- ing Chemical ﬁxatives in microgravity requires, how-
complish and the proper storage of harvested sam- ever, a method of containment in order to isolate po—
ples presents one of the most challenging aspects of tentially hazardous liquids from the crew. One means
spaceﬂightexperiments. Samples collected for experi- of containment is the Kennedy space center ﬁxation
ments that are conducted to address questions of plant tube (KFT) [12]. The KFT is designed to provide
metabolism and physiology typically fall into one of three levels of containment while enabling samples
two categories: those that require freezing for subse- to be harvested directly in the Space Shuttle or In-
quent biochemical and molecular analyses, or those temational Space Station (188) environment without
that require chemical ﬁxation to preserve cellular and the need for a glove box. Since their development in
sub-cellular structures suitable for microscopy. 1995, KFTs have predominantly been used for cellular
Preserving samples by freezing has long been a ﬁxatives [e.g. [8,10,]3—15]] and histochemical stains
mainstay for molecular and cellular biologists in [9]. The most recent application of KFTs has been to
ground studies. Snap freezing in liquid nitrogen use RNAlater as preservative reagent to obviate some
(LN2) and storage at —80 °C is a very effective way of the problems of harvesting and storing tissue for
to maintain the integrity of proteins and nucleic acids. molecular analyses.
Flight experiments have followed suit. The KSC High-quality RNA can be difﬁcult to preserve under
Gaseous Nitrogen freezer (GN2) provides near LN2 the best of circumstances, and the constraints imposed
temperatures on orbit. However, depending on the by many aspects of a spaceﬂight environment make
load, current GN2 freezer designs hold temperature the challenge even greater. The goal of the present
for a maximum of 35 days, making them suitable study is to investigate the range of potential uses of
for short duration ﬂights only [I I]. On orbit freezer RNAlater in applications relevant to the study of gene
opportunities for the 188 are in the developmental expression in spaceﬂight material and codify the use
phase, and include the MELFI and MERLIN units. of this preservative with plant material in conjunction
MELFI is designed to have the capacity to store sam- with KFT spaceﬂight hardware. These studies are in-
ples at ——80, —26 and at +4 °C, and is targeted for tended to provide options that minimize the need for
installation in the near future. MERLIN is a dedicated low and ultra-low temperature requirements and to
—20 °C freezer that is still under development. Al- provide a means to tolerate temperature ﬂuctuations
though the options afforded by MELFI and MERLIN that may occur over the course of orbit, descent and
are good for storage of samples, the inability to snap- return from an ISS mission.
freeze samples at harvest may still pose problems
for the preservation of samples destined for molec-
ular analyses. In addition, return samples that have 2. The conundrum
been stored in MELFI must be transferred to another
temperature controlled device for descent. Currently, A signiﬁcant concern for molecular biologists con-
devices containing passive phase-change materials ducting spaceﬂightexperiments is that samples be har-
are under consideration for transport, and the option vested and stowed in such a way as to maximize the
of launching the KSC GN2 freezer for transporting return of high quality RNA. The preparation of qual-
return samples also exists. Thus, issues surrounding ity RNA in ground based studies presents only minor
the maintenance of ultra-cold temperatures on orbit challenges as a complete range of harvesting and stor-
and during descent remain. Chemical preservative age resources are available. These resources are not
reagents may serve to ameliorate some of these issues fully available in spaceﬂight experiments, where the
for molecular biology applications. greatest threat to quality sampling comes at the stage
Chemical ﬁxation is an alternative method for tis- of tissue preservation and storage. RNA is extremely
sue preservation that is often used for microscopic susceptible to degradation by endogenous nucleases
analyses but has only recently been applied to sam- that are released as cells break down after harvest.
ples for molecular analyses. RNAlaterTM (Ambion) is Thus, the conundrum presented to researchers wish-
a liquid reagent that is effective in preserving high ing to preserve RNA during long term space missions

"
"3","A.-L. Paul et al. / Acta Astronautica 56 (2005) 623 —628 625
is that the best traditional method, snap-freezing in ple tube ﬂanked by a series of plugs and valves: the ex-
LNZ and storage at —80°C, has limited application. pansion plug, top plug, base plug, ﬁll plug and plunger
RNAlater provides a workable alternative, but requires (Fig. lb). The main tube can contain up to 35 mL of
the certiﬁed handling of a liquid preservative in human liquid; the volume being detemiined by the location of
spaceﬂight regimes. Here we present the procedural the expansion plug relative to the bottom of the tube.
details required for the successful use of RNAlater and The sample tube and actuating mechanism assembly
KFTs to solve these problems. are installed into the appropriate location in the main

tube, after which the base plug is installed. The liq-

uid reagent is loaded into the bottom of the main tube
3- RESUItS and diSCUSSiOH prior to ﬂight through a port in the base plug. After lill-

ing, the ﬁll plug is inserted into the base plug, which

RNAlater is designated a toxicity level 1 solution seals the KFT as the ﬁn plug seats against three 0-

requiring two levels of containment on orbit (Veriﬁca- rings located inside the base plug. Leak testing com-
tion report #MP-ER-001)- The necessary containment pletes the process, and the ﬁlled, sealed KFT is then
is provided by KFTS, which are extensively tested with stowed with its accompanying plunger until needed
any new reagentbefore approval for that application is in ﬂight. For harvest, the specimen is placed inside
granted. The process includes testing the effect of the sample tube and the plunger assembly is inserted into
reagenton the hardware itself to ensure that none of the the sample tube as it is nested within the main tube.
levels of containment are compromised by the mate- The plunger assembly is then used to seal the top of
rial, as well as testing the efﬁcacy Of the reagent in pre- the main tube and actuate a mechanism that loosens
serving biological samples within the hardware when the seals on the expansion plug. This action pushes
presented with a spaceﬂight mission proﬁle. Mission the sample tube down against the sample plug, which
proﬁles typically fall into one Of tWO classes: the short ﬂoods the sample tube with the reagent, Samples are
duration missions ofa Space Shuttle sortie (5-18 dayS) thereby immersed in the liquid reagent (Fig. lc) and
or long duration missions conducted on the 183 (1—6 the entire KFT is re—stowed.
months). Short duration missions can make use Of the KFTS are certiﬁed for Space Shuttle and [SS appli-
near liquid nitrogen temperature of the GN2 freezer, cations for several preservative solutions frequently
which facilitates an effective strategy for preserving used with biological materials (e.g. glutaraldehyde
tissue for subsequent RNA analyses. Long duration and formaldehyde-based ﬁxatives). Certiﬁcation tests
ﬂights must rely on powered facilities on the 188 to with RNAlater were conducted to test the integrity
maintain low temperatures, SUCh as the MELFI unit. of the containment seals by soaking the O—rings in
Although MELFI is designed to provide —80°C stor- RNAlater/O.1% Tween-80 for 67 days, followed by 21
age, ffeSh plant tissue subjected to a 810W freeze, even qualiﬁcation leak test at the maximum use conditions
at —80°, can result in RNA degradation. In addition, (NASA veriﬁcation number MP-ER-001)_ Ground
samples may be subjected to variations in storage tem- tests also certiﬁed that KFTs loaded with RNAlater
peratures during transfers, especially to and within the and subsequently actuated could be successfully
reentry vehicle. The incorporation of RNAlater in the stowed at temperatures of4 and at _2() °C [16] with-
exPeriment scenario appears to enhance the preserva- out harm to the KFT structure or function. Stowage
tion of RNA, but in the case of frozen samples sub- of KFTS at _80 0C is not possible since the poly-
jected to temperatures eXCUI‘SiODS above freezing, it carbonate tubes are subject to cracking at cryogenic
would make the difference between a devastating loss temperatures.
and only minor effects on RNA integrity.

3.2. Options for in-ﬂight harvests—the eﬂects 0f
3. I . The Kennedy space centerﬁxation tubes alternative RNAlater storage proﬁles and treatments

on. RNA quality in ground—based studies

The KFT hardware provides three levels of contain-

ment, conferred by a series of nested tubes and valves Fig. 2 shows the results of a ground-based study
(Fig. la). The main outer tube encases a smaller sam- designed to examine RNA integrity after subjecting

"
"4","626 A.-L. Paul et al. / Acta Astronautica 56 (2005) 623 —628
KSC ﬁxation Tube KSC Fixation Tube
Furyctional Diag1ram Functional Dia ram 3
? (mam tube not 5 own) (ready to ﬁre? ‘
"" Asmﬁhy “ Ea"" mgs ‘ ' f '
i rgr.»Sample Tube H ér’m'"" Tube idé'"" :3
2i . s f 5 g
; “*1 ""W'MTrigger Mechanism 3‘3: k 1%
' 7 iﬁ w 'x'i Trigger ROdS ?Hﬁ T: ,
t . ﬁrming W H ""
1 1 meag-Fixative * "" “
,i f Baseip = m Solution
2 i 14 """"""""‘. rw‘u-m :_:-’
~~ , av,""
(a) (b) (C)
Fig. l. The Kennedy space center fixation tube (KFT). (a) A photograph of the empty hardware. (b) A schematic illustrating the components
of the hardware. The internal components are shown on the left and the entire assemblage inserted into the main tube is shown on the
right. (c) Photograph of a ﬁxed plant contained within the sample volume.

1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 Fig. 2a shows the typical electrophoretic gel banding
I'm m 1- ” m m attem of intact RNA from fresh Arabido sis leaves,
WW mm “-1-? a With the two top bands being the letrger cytoplasmic
» m :22: W W ew‘ W rRNAs and the next smaller bands bem lastid rRNA.

g p
There is no degradation of the RNA in this lane as ev-
Arabidopsis Wheat idenced by the fact that the cytoplasmic rRNA bands
;: frleshf 20° C ;: frleshf 20° C are present in equimolar amounts. Lane 2 illustrates
I SOW reeze - I S OW reeze - ' , _ o
3: RTRNAIater10d 3: RT RNAlater10 d the effect of freezmg lea.ves slowly at 2t) C. The
4: 4°C RNAlater10d 4: 4° C RNAIater10 d Slow-freeze was accomphshed by putting tlssue m a
. . 0 . . .

5- ‘20° C RNA'ate’ 10 d i '20 C RNA'ate' 10 d microfuge tube and placmg the tube In a freezer for 10
(a) ( ) ' days. In this case, the RNA was broken down almost
Fig. 2. The use of RNAlater for various in-ﬂight harvest and completely by endogenous nUCIeaseS and mm? RNA
storage options. Lanes of RNA are shown from Arabidopsis plants was recovered Lane 3 Shows the reSUItS Of hOIdmg “5‘
in panel (a) and from wheat plants in panel (b). The individual sue in RNAlater at room temperature (RT: 22-240C)
lanes.show RNA from differentially treated samples (descritged for 10 days. Although this treatment was better than
fully m text)—lane l. freshly Isolated, lane 2. slow freeze —20 c)C, the slow freeze shown in Lane 2, a fair amount Of RNA

lane 3: room temperature (RT) RNAlater 10 days, lane 4: 4 C d d . h (1 Th . . f h .
RNAlater 10 days, lane 5: —20°C RNAlater 10 days. egra 3‘10“ a? occur“: - e mtegnty 0 t 6 RNA 1“
Lanes 4 and 5 18, however, equal to that of the freshly
isolated RNA shown in Lane 1. After being harvested
Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana CV WS) and wheat to RNAlater, the sample shown in Lane 4 was stored
(Triticum aestivum cv Apogee) tissues to the preser— at 4°C for ten days before the RNA was isolated, and
vation options currently available on orbit. Lane 1 of the sample shown in lane 4 was stored at —20°C for

"
"5","A.-L. Paul et a1. / Acta Astronautica 56 (2005) 623 —628 627
10 days. Both of these RNAlater—stored samples ex- 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5
hibited excellent preservation of RNA. Fig. 2b illus- w m m m m m m WW
trates similar results for wheat. The relative migration ' ' ’ z W , , .. _ . , ..
of the RNA species is slightly different for wheat, but m m 1” ”a m m m
3 comparison among the lanes in 2b recapitulate the W? m t, *4 aw: mm . 2,
results demonstrated for Arabidopsis in 2a. These re-
sults clearly illustrate that harvesting samples directly Arabidopsis Wheat
t0 the —20°C freezer on the 188 would be an un— ; 2%530 10d 2;: ﬁgs? C H
acceptable option. Harvesting samples into RNAlater 3; -20: C 7 mo 3; _200 c 7 mo
followed by storage at either 4 or —20 °C for ten days, 4: '20 C 3ka RT1 Wk 4: -20° C 3wk, RT 1 wk
however, would maintain RNA integrity comparable 5: PESTO
to that seen in freshly extracted material. (a) (b)
Fig. 3. Samples stored in RNAlater at —20 °C over short and long
3-3- Plant samples and RNAlater in spaceflight mission time scales. Lanes of RNA are shown from Arabidopsis
Storage scenarios plants in panel (a) and from wheat plants in panel (b). The indi-
vidual lanes show RNA from differentially treated samples (de~
Preservation in RNAlater creates a number of stor- scribed fully in text)—lane l: freshly isolated, lane 2: RNAlater
_ . , —20°C for 7 days, lane 3: RNAlater —20°C for 7 months, lane
age options and adds a level 0f sample safety m that 4: RNAlater —20°C for 3 weeks, then to room temperature for 7
temperature excurSionS are ""Qt immediately deStruc‘ days, lane 5(b): RNA isolated from the PESTO ISS experiment.
tive to the sample. Plant tissue can be harvested to
KFTS containing RNAlater and stored according to middeck for transit to the 188. On 27th May, wheat
mission proﬁles similar to those expected aboard the samples were harvested t0 KFTs with RNAlater and
188 without compromising the integrity of the RNA. then stowed in the —25 °C ARCTIC freezer. On 14th
Fig. 3 shows RNA isolated from plants exposed to a se- J une 18 days later, the KFTs were transferred to a mid-
ries of storage proﬁles. Lanes 1—4 of Figs. 3a and b il- deck locker 0n STS-l 12, and remained at ambient tem-
lustrate what could be expected from harvesting plants perature (23 °C) for the return trip of 5 days. STS-l 12
t0 RNAlater during either a short, or long duration landed on 19th June and the KFTs were transferred to
(two 188 increments) mission. The storage condition a 4°C facility for their return to KSC. On let June,
for the samples shown in these lanes was —20°C to the samples were removed from the KFT, placed into
mimic the —25 °C compartment of the MELFI freezer. fresh RNAlater and stored at —20 °C. On 29th Novem-
The cytoplasmic and plastid bands of rRNA are Clearly her, the samples were transferred to a —80 °C freezer,
seen in all lanes, even after 7 months of storage in where they remained until transport to the University
RNAlater at —20°C (Lane 3). Lanes 4a andbillustrate of Florida (on ice) in December. The samples were
that tissue that has been stored at —20 °C in RNAlater then stored at —20°C until the RNA was extracted on
can withstand an excursion to room temperature for a 14th January 2003.
week with minimal cost to RNA integrity. There are two especially signiﬁcant ﬁndings illus-
The RNA in Lane 5 of Fig. 3b, was isolated from trated by the evidence of high quality, intact RNA in
wheat samples harvested on orbit in the spring of 2002 the PESTO sample. First, plants can be successfully
during the PESTO experimenton increment four. The harvested t0 KFTS loaded with RNAlater 0n orbit.
quality of the RNA is comparable to that of the freshly Problems with wetting and liquid submersion are a
extracted control shown in Lane 1, however, the di- constanttrouble in microgravity, but it appears that the
minished ratio of the intensity of the top rRNA band conﬁguration of the tissue and liquid inside the KFT
to the second band is evidence that some degradation afforded an excellent level of preservation of the RNA.
has occurred in these samples. Nonetheless, the chal- Second, samples that have been preserved on orbit
lenges presented to these PESTO samples were rig- with RNAlater are resilient to changes in temperatures
orous, unambiguously demonstrating the efﬁcacy of subsequent to their harvest and stowage, even ﬁve days
RNAlater in KFT hardware.STS-1101aunched on 8th at ambient temperature, before being removed from
April 2002, with RNAlater—loaded KFTs stowed in the the KFTS.

"
"6","628 A.-L. Paul et al. / Acta Astronautica 56 (2005) 623—628
3.4. The eﬁect ofada’ing Tween-80 t0 RNAlater for ing that the use of RNAlater in KFTs presents an
wheat effective alternative to ultra-low temperature storage
. _ when cryogenic freezing and storage is unavailable,
Wheat leaves are covered Wlth ﬁne hairs that ap- tentative or otherwise problematic.
pear to compromise the ability of RNAlater to uni-
formly wet the leaf surface, an effect that becomes
more pronounced in mature leaves. Addition of the References
surfactant Tween-80TM to a concentration of 0.1% in
RNAlater was tested to determine if the addition fa- [1] RR. Dutcher, E.L. Hess, T.W. Haistead, Progress in plant
cilitates better wetting of the surface, an effect that 2:953?! in Space’ Advances in Space Resemh 14 (1994)
WOUId seemmgly enhance the ab'hty Of RNAlater t0 [2] R. Ferl, R. Wheeler, 1-1.0. Levine, A.L. Paul, Plants in space,
preserve RNA integrity. Although RNAlater solutions Current Opinion plant Biology 5 (2002) 258—263.
containing Tween are better able to wet the surface [3] T.W. Halstead, F.R. Dutcher, Plants in space, Annual Review
of the leaf and submerge the samples, the addition of Of Plant PhYSiOIOEY 38 (1987) 3'7‘345; . .
Tween does not appear to signiﬁcantly enhance the [4] AB. Drysdfile, Life suppert trade studies mvolvmg plants.
SAE Technical Paper Series 200l-0l-2362, 200l.
Efﬁcacy 0f RNAlater. [5] D. Chamberland, W.M. Knott, J.C. Sager, R. Wheeler,
Controlled ecological life-support system. Use of plants for
4 Conclusions and recommendations humah iife-support in space, Journal of Florida Medical
' Assocmtton 79 (1992) 537—544.
_ . . [6] R. Wheeler, G.W. Stutte, G.V. Subbarao, N. Yorio, Plant
The data presented here pr0v1de operational gu1de- growth and human life support for space travel, in:
lines for the use of RNAlater in spaceﬂight scenarios. M. Pessarakli (Ed.), Handbook of Plant and Crop Physiology.
RNAlater is stored at room temperature before use, en- Marcel Dekkeh Inc., New Tefk, Basel, 200', PP~ 925-939-
abling KFT’s to be loaded and stored in essentially any [7] M“ [?a”"" R1J' Fer"" Mo'ecumr aSPCCtS, 0f Stress'gene
. . . . . regulation during spaceﬂight, Journal of Plant Growth
misSIOn-relevant temperature proﬁle. This capability Regulation 21 (2002)- 166—176.
allows the use Of Virtually any launCh vehICle conﬁgu- [8] HO. Levine, W.C. Piastuch. A method for the imbibition and
ration; middeck lockers, Spacehab, Progress vehicles germination of wheat seeds in space, Life Support Biosphere
etc. RNAlater is an effective preservative over a wide Seienees 6 U999) 221-230- _
range of environmental conditions in ground tests that [9' 2t Eiitvogaj' RDfugé‘g‘y'Tghé'ge:hgkngonChpazﬁgfi
mlmIC ﬂlght missmn.proﬁles m terrhs Of temperature indicate that spaceﬂight affects stress signal perception and
and duratlon- Parmenng RNAlater With the Km ﬂ‘ght transduction in arabidopsis, Plant Physiology 126 (2001)
hardware therefore presents a proven, effective oper- 613—621.
ational system for preserving plant tissue on orbit for [101 M- Ryha-White, 0- NedUkha, 13- Hilaire, J-A. GUikema»
subsequent molecular analyses. E. Koreyhom, J.E. Leach, Growth in microgravity increases
The current data support the manufacturers’ (Am- susceptibility of soybean to a fungal pathogen, Plant Cell
. . . Physnology 42 (2001) 657—664.
bth) gUldehne that the eeeler the samples ea“ be [111w McLamb, H.W. Wells, Passive cryogenic hardware
stored once they are ﬁxed in RNAlater, the better. for international space station ﬂight experiments, SAE
However, mission environment proﬁles and space- International, ICES 2003-01436: 2003- ‘
ﬂight scenarios are not always predictable, and even if “21 H'W' Walls: Portable dev‘ce for Chem‘cal hxaf‘o”
. . . o . . of a biological sample. http://www.nasatech.com/Bnefs/
samples are initially stored at —20 C, it IS not always July99/KSC1 1993mm] K301 1993.
POSSlble t0 mamtam that temperature from 1n-ﬂ1ght [13] A. Kuang, A. Popova, Y. Xiao, M.E. Musgrave, Pollination
harvest t0 the return to the investigators. Excursions and embryo development in Brassica rapa L. in microgravity,
into temperatures above freezing, which would be International Journal Of Plant Sciences 16] (2000) 203-21 1.
disastrous for un-ﬁxed samples, are well tolerated by “4] 13' Stmewsm’ 3’ Peterson’ G'w' St‘f‘w’ Hw Wells, Long
. . term storage of wheat plants for light microscopy, SAE
samples preseryed 1n RNAlatei"" (Figs. 3a, b, lane 4?. I m emaﬁo ml, ICES 200001-223], 2000.
The PESTO ﬂight samples (Fig 3b, lane 5) experl- [15] LSSC,Life Science Service Contract,CUE FlightSafety Data
enced a very challenging temperature proﬁle during Package: Document LSSC-SOl-F03.
descent and after landing, yet the integrity of the RNA [16] LSSC, Life Science Service Contract, BPS Flight Safety Data
from those samples remained very good, demonstrat- PaCkage‘ Document LSSC'BPS’PESTO‘F03'

"
