"","x"
"1","Neuroscience and Behavioral Physiology, Vol. 34, N0. 8, 2004

The Role of Gravitation-Dependent Systems in Visual Tracking

L. N. Kornilova
Translated from Rossiiskii Fiziologicheskii Zhumal imem’ I. M Sechenova, Vol. 89, N0. 3, pp. 280—291,
March, 2003. Original article submitted October 15, 2002.
The effects of prolonged microgravity conditions on the performance of Visual tracking functions such as
ﬁxational rotations of the eyes (saccades), smooth tracking of linear and curved movements of a foveal
point stimulus, and following a vertical pendulum-like movement of foveoretinal optokinetic stimuli were
studied. Experiments were performed on 31 cosmonauts in freefall conditions, in ten cases followed by
additional studies after a cycle of head movements and in 14 after resting. These experiments showed that
while intrinsic Visual functions were retained in microgravity conditions, there were decreases in the pre-
cision and speed measures of all types of Visual tracking (ﬁxational rotations of the eyes, smooth track-
ing) and, in some cases, complete degradation of the smooth tracking reﬂex, an increase in the time taken
to ﬁx the gaze on a target (by factors of 2 or more), and decreases in the frequency of stimulus tracking.
During the initial period of adaptation to the altered gravitational conditions and periodically during pro-
longed ﬂight, the system of smooth Visual tracking was found to undergo a transition to a strategy of sac-
cadic approximation, in which gaze tracks the movement of the target using a set of rnacro- or rnicrosac-
cadic movements. These irnpairrnents, seen in Virtually all the cosmonauts, resulted from vestibular depri-
vation (functional deafferentation of the otolith input) in conditions of weightlessness, while in cosmo-
nauts conceptualizing space on the basis of perceiving the positions of the feet and head additionally
showed support-tactile deprivation.
KEY WORDS: saccades, smooth tracking, microgravitation.

The stability of the perception of the environment and [15, 21, 23, 30], the nature of intersensory interactions, and
the adequacy of the tracking function of the eyes are sup— the characteristics of the central integration of sensory
ported by the distinct and coordinated functioning of senso— information [29, 42, 50]. During adaptation to changes in
ry and effector body systems. In conditions of terrestrial gravitational conditions, there is a search for the afferent
gravitation, the processes of intersensory integration, orien- input which assists orientation in the new conditions.
tation, and Visual tracking depend on the activity of gravita- One source of reliable information on earth [3—5, 17]
tion-dependent systems, and the most important role and in conditions of altered gravitation [2, 28, 51] is the
belongs to the vestibular apparatus, whose otolith input is a Visual input, as it is not a gravitation-dependent system, and
mechanoreceptor formation tuned to operate in a gravita- is the organ of perception of Visual objects. However, this
tional ﬁeld [6, 25, 36, 48]. raises the question of how adequate this system is, consid-

Studies have demonstrated [2, 8—10, 12—14, 20, 24, 28, ering that the gravitation-dependent (the vestibular and tac-
32, 37, 40—43, 47] that periods spent in microgravity condi- tile-support systems) and gravitation-independent sensory
tions are accompanied by speciﬁc sensory reactions (orien- systems are functionally tightly connected [1, 18, 19, 26,
tational illusions, vertigo, and difﬁculty in ﬁxing gaze and 27, 49] and the nature of their interaction determines the
tracking Visual objects in the ﬁeld of Vision) whose devel- accuracy of Visual tracking. The hypothesis that the Visual
opment results from changes in vestibular afferentation input is of limited value in conditions of altered gravitation

may seem more correct. Questions of the roles and speciﬁc
contributions of particular gravitation-dependent inputs (the
State Scientiﬁc Center of the Russian Federation and Institute of month and tactile-support inputs) in performing various
Medical-Biological Problems, Russian Academy of Sciences, types 0f Visual tracking in altered gravitational conditions
76a Khoroshevskoe Chaussee, 123007 Moscow, Russia. are alSO controversial.
773
0097-0549/04/3408-0773 ©2004 Plenum Publishing Corporation

"
"2","774 Kornilova
The aims of the present work were to identify the taneous illusory reactions, and the characteristics of orien-
inﬂuences of altered gravitational conditions on the perfor- tation in space (preference for certain Visual coordinates or
mance of different types of Visual tracking and to compare the longitudinal aXis of the body) during ﬂight; assessments
the importances of the vestibular and tactile-support inputs were based on questionnaires and recordings of verbal state
in forming the tracking function of the eyes. assessments on audiotape [20, 42, 43].
Analysis of oculograms included assessment of the
nature and form, amplitude, frequency, rate, and time char-
METHODS acteristics of eye movements, the synchronization of oculo-
motor responses, the latent periods, phase shifts, and ratio
The tracking function of the eyes was studied in terms of the rate of movement of the Visual stimulus to the rate of
of the nature of oculornotor responses to foveal and foveo- the eye movement (coefﬁcient of oculomotor response
retinal stimuli. The foveal stimulus was a dot of size strength, CORS), and the coefﬁcient of tracking efﬁciency
0.5—0.6O moving in steps in the horizontal and vertical (the ratio of the number of Visual stimuli to the number of
directions as well as smoothly in the horizontal, vertical, oculomotor responses). Transfer of gaze during perfor-
and diagonal directions and in circles of radius 100 with fre- mance of all tests was always from the central position,
quency of 0.5 Hz. The number of stimuli presented ranged which served as the null reference point. Mathematical-sta-
from 6 to 9. For stepwise movement of the Visual stimulus, tistical processing was based on correlation analysis and
the point remained in each position for 2—8 see. The foveo- Student’s test.
retinal stimulus consisted of light spots of different diame-
ters moving on the dark background of a spherical screen in
a sinusoidal fashion (amplitude i250, frequency 0.5 Hz). RESULTS
Studies were performed with the head upright, ﬁxed using
a collar stand and collar around the head attached to the Questionnaires completed by the cosmonauts showed
frame of the monitor. The instruments used for these stud- that a majority (58%) formed their concepts of space and
ies were computer—based systems with analog-to-digital their position in it in microgravitation conditions only on
converters and ampliﬁers for oculographic signals [8, 13, the basis of Visual “attachment.” This group of cosmonauts
33, 46]. Eye movements were recorded on an electrooculo- were regarded as Visually orientating people. The concepts
grarn (EOG). All data were recorded on computer in digital of space and their position in it in 34% of the cosmonauts
form on a mechanical carrier, and the recorded signals were were formed on the basis of internal body coordinates (the
analyzed using special program after return to earth. longitudinal, sagittal, and frontal axes, above and below for
A total of 2000 experiments were performed, involving determination of the positions of the head and feet). This
31 cosmonauts, 27 of whom spent long periods in micro- group of cosmonauts consisted of people with postural ori-
graVity (ﬂights lasting 76—438 days), while four rnade short entation.
ﬂights (7—9 days): 13 cosmonauts took part in two or more Spontaneous oculornotor activity was recorded before
ﬂights. Cosmonauts were aged 28—50 years. Studies were studies of the tracking functions of the eyes. During the ini-
performed on days 30 and 10 before ﬂight and on days 2—3, tial period of adaptation to weightlessness, Virtually all cos-
5—6, and 28—30 days of exposure to microgravity, then once monauts showed destabilization of the eyes, associated with
per month or two months before ﬂights ended, then on days increases in slow drift, the appearance of a large number of
1—2, 4, and 8 after ﬂights, and then as indicated. A total of saccades, and spontaneous nystagrnus, mainly in the verti-
68 cosmonauts took part in the pre- and post—ﬂight studies. cal lead of the ECG. These data were always considered for
Studies of the tracking functions of the eyes during processing and analysis of measures of the tracking func-
ﬂight were performed in essentially freefall conditions; tions of the eyes.
10 cosmonauts were then studied after a cycle of active
head movements around the longitudinal and frontal axes of
the body. In each case, cosmonauts performed 60 head FIXATIONAL ROTATIONS OF THE EYES
movements under metronome control in one minute. Head
movements were recorded on Videotape. In 14 cosmonauts, Static Saccades. Studies of ﬁxational static saccades
tracking functions were also studied in conditions of tactile- (ﬁxational rotations of the eyes in conditions of stepwise
support afferentation. Support was created by ﬁxing the movement of a point, static ﬁxation) in ﬂight conditions
spine and feet by strapping to the wall panel of the space showed Virtually no changes in the characteristics of ﬁxa-
station or with aXial straps on a treadmill to produce aXial tional rotations of the eyes in tracking a stepwise moving
pressure forces on the feet equal to 50—60% of individual point stimulus in the horizontal plane in the initial stages,
body weight. though there was a signiﬁcant decrease in the amplitude of
All cosmonauts, simultaneously with studies using the ﬁxational saccades from 10.1 i 0.80 to 7.5 i 0.40 (p < 0.05)
apparatus, underwent assessment of subjective state, spon- in tracking a vertically moving stimulus. Correcting move-

"
"3","The Role of Gravitation-Dependent Systems in Visual Tracking 775
CA (ﬂight day 3) 1
iiil'ﬂllll
I. l‘l J_ —n-.. _
IIIIIIIIEI
l sec
CB (ﬂight day 3)
II!‘IIIII,I.IIIII!IIII
ganiqlllrulullnaumllg,
.IIIIIEIEIIIIIL‘EIIII-Ih
CC (ﬂight month 6)
II!!iIIIII!!iEIIlEE-’ill
I‘EIIIEHIHIIIIM-IIIIHI!!
LdIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIm
IIIIIIIIIIIII-I-IIIII-
CD (ﬂight day 5) 2
-—--|ii-
, _----I- __
i::3::i:::::::1::1;:i:::::1::::::1::i::i:1:i::i:It:1:::1::::....::i::i“:""'""E:1:;:;:::....:3:::1:::::::i::._.%'""“'“""“""'""'é::::::1:::1;_::::::::1::::..;:::;:::::""' -!!..l---—
1 sec
_ _ _ _ _ 2 CE (ﬂight month 3)
1 sec
I H
Fig. 1. Examples of traces of anomalous tracking in various cosmonauts during prolonged periods in microgravity conditions. Native curves for dif-
ferent tracking tasks using a point foveal stimulus. 1) Before ﬂight; 11) during ﬂight. 1) Smooth tracking of a point moving in a circle; 2) ﬁxationa1
rotations of the eyes in tracking of stepwise movements of a point (A is ﬁxation of the point in the horizontal; B is ﬁxation of the point in the vertical).
CA—CE are the cosmonauts studied. Arrows show the direction of movement of the point.
ments were seen in 47% of cases (additional microsac- ic transitional nystagmus (gaze nystagmus), Which on rota-
cades), adjusting the eyes to the target during following tion of gaze to the initial position led to alteration in direc-
stepwise movements of the stimulus in the vertical, Which tion to the opposite to that preceding the gaze nystagmus
led to an increase in the response time by factors of 2—3. (reverse nystagmus). The amplitudes of these forms of nys-
The most signiﬁcant decrease in the amplitude of vertical tagmus depended on the direction of the spontaneous nys-
ﬁxational saccades occurred after additional time spent in tagmus. Examples of traces of anomalous tracking after dif-
microgravity conditions during ﬁxation of a stimulus mov- ferent periods of time in weightlessness are shown in Fig. 1.
ing upwards (3, 6, 12, and 14 months of ﬂight, to 4.9 i 0.70). The latent period of ﬁxational saccades, increasing
This period also showed a sharp increase in the number of (especially for vertical saccades) from 205.0 i 11.4 to
corrective saccades: from 15—21% in baseline conditions to 245.0 i 17.7 msec during initial adaptation to weightless-
61—76% after prolonged ﬂight. In 22% of cases, transfer of ness conditions (ﬂight days 2—3), decreased by ﬂight days
gaze to the extreme position following a moving stimulus in 5—6 to the preﬂight level and then, throughout prolonged
the vertical resulted in recording of so-called ﬁxational stat- space ﬂights, remained either at or slightly above the pre-

"
"4","776 Kornilova
'15
10 E 1;: == é:
F F F F F
0 ""E"" g E E E E E E g g E IE
—10 "" 3 E
—15
Baseline 3D 6D '1M 3M 6M
Fig. 2. Dynamics of the amplitude of dynamic saccades. The horizontal axis shows days (D) and months (M) spent in
microgravity conditions; the vertical axis shows saccade amplitude, degrees. Above: Horizontal eye movements; below:
vertical eye movements. White columns show amplitude at rest (freefall); shaded columns show saccade amplitude after
vestibular stimulation; black columns show saccade amplitude using the support in conditions of tactile-support
afferentation.
ﬂight level: 205.0 i 11.4 and 220.0 i 12.7 msec respectively. SMOOTH TRACKING
The angular rate of static saccades in the horizontal did not
change signiﬁcantly from the preﬂight value. The rate of ver- Tracking of Linear and Circular Movements of
tical ﬁxational static saccades decreased from 340.0 i 12.7 to Point Foveal Stimuli. While the saccadic component of eye
280.0 i 28.4O/sec, though these changes were not statisti- tracking responses in weightlessness remained relatively
cally signiﬁcant. unchanged (except for the sharp reduction in the amplitude

Dynamic Saccades. Dynamic saccades (ﬁxational of vertical saccades, the appearance of correcting saccades,
rotations of the eyes in response to each appearance of a gaze nystagrnus, and reverse nystagrnus), smooth dynamic
point stimulus at the edge of the screen and subsequent tracking of point stimuli with linear movement in the verti-
tracking of its smooth 1inear movement in a speciﬁed direc- cal 0r diagonal or in a circle was signiﬁcantly impaired. At
tion and stepwise return to the original position, i.e., foveal the beginning of ﬂights (2—3 days), the reﬂeX for smooth
optokinetic nystagrnus) showed a tendency to a decreased tracking of a point stimulus in the horizontal plane
and unstable amplitude during initial adaptation to micro— remained essentially stable in the cosmonauts. In 40% of
gravity conditions (ﬂight days 3—6). There were also losses the cosmonauts, there was almost complete loss of the sinu-
Of saccades, leading to a decrease in the coefﬁcient of track— soidal curve when tracking of a stimulus moving in a circle,
ing efﬁciency from 1.0—0.9 to 0.7. During long periods 0f or the curve becarne stepwise (Fig. 1), i.e., smooth tracking
time in weightless conditions (ﬂight days 76—438), the (ST) turned into saccadic movements, increasing the reac-
characteristics of horizontal dynamic saccades correspond- tion time by factors of 2—3. The amplitude of the stepwise
ed essentially to those seen in background conditions, sinusoidal ECG was insigniﬁcantly increased (19.6 i 1.90
though the amplitudes of vertical dynamic saccades compared with 18.2 i 1.30 before ﬂight). The greatest
decreased sharply. The most marked changes were seen for change during initial adaptation to weightlessness was seen
tracking of a stimulus moving linearly from above down- in smooth tracking of stimuli moving in the vertical and
wards: the mean amplitude of the upper vertical dynamic diagonal planes. Complete loss of the structure of the track-
saccades decreased from 18.2 i 0.5 to 14.1 i 0.90, the vari- ing reaction was seen in 40% of cases: smooth movement of
ation range of the amplitude reached 4°, and the coefﬁcient the eyeball was replaced with several rnacrosaccadic eye
of tracking efﬁciency decreased to 0.4. movements.

Studies of ﬁxational, static, and dynamic saccades dur- Studies performed towards the end of the ﬁrst and the
ing ﬂight showed clear asymmetry in oculornotor respons- beginning of the second month in space showed that the
es to presentation of stimuli moving in different directions, structure of smooth tracking was similar to that in the pre-
especially in tracking of stimuli with vertical 1inear rnove- ﬂight period. However, the amplitude of the tracking move-
ments (asymmetry = 30—40%). ments of the eye, especially when tracking stimuli moving

"
"5","The Role of Gravitation-Dependent Systems in Visual Tracking 777
1.5
1 E E E
0 g a E E E E g E g g g I;
—1.5
Baseline 3D 6D 1M 3M 6M

Fig. 3. Coefﬁcient of strength of optooculomotor reactions in smooth tracking of the linear movement of a point foveal

stimulus. The vertical axis shows the coefﬁcient of strength. White columns show the coefﬁcient of strength for smooth

tracking at rest; shaded columns show the coefﬁcient after vestibular stimulation; black columns show the coefﬁcient

using the support. For further details see caption to Fig. 2.
in circles and in the vertical plane was signiﬁcantly decrea- EOG relative to the stimulus was 0.5—0.6O throughout
sed (from 18.2 i 1.30 to 15.5 i 2.20). Starting from the third ﬂights. After ﬂight (days 1—2), the phase shift was insignif-
month of ﬂight, sorne cosmonauts with complete loss of the icantly increased (to 0.80) and the smooth sinusoidal track-
srnooth tracking reﬂex at the early stage of ﬂights, as well ing curve was interrupted by saccadic movements.
as in some cosmonauts not showing this type of reaction at
the initial stage of adaptation, showed episodic recurrence
of changes in the structure of smooth tracking: smooth eye THE EFFECTS OF VESTIBULAR AND
movements were replaced with jumps, a situation which TACTILE-SUPPORT AFFERENTATION
was reminiscent of the structure of the task consisting of ON THE TRACKING FUNCTIONS OF THE EYES
ﬁxational rotations of the eye (the saccadic approximation
strategy). A similar pattern also occurred in half the cosrnO- Vestibular stimulation in the form of active head move-
nauts one day after ﬂights. rnents signiﬁcantly improved measures of static and espe-

The coefﬁcients of strength of oculornotor reactions cially dynamic saccades in all cosmonauts. Along with the
during tracking of a point stimulus with linear horizontal improvement in the structure of ﬁxational rotations of the
movement were stable throughout ﬂight at levels of eyes, active head movements were followed by increases in
0.8—0.9. The coefﬁcients of strength for vertical smooth the amplitude of dynamic saccades, which approached
tracking decreased from 0.9 to 0.7—0.6. baseline values (Fig. 2). In tracking of a horizontally mov-
Traeking 0f Vertical Sinusoidally Moving Foveo- ing stimulus, the coefﬁcient 0ftracking efﬁciency increased

retinal Optokinetie Stimuli (OKS). In 8% 0f cosmonauts, from 0.7 to 1.0, while the increase was from 0.4 to 0.7 in
adaptation to altered gravitational conditions resulted in tracking of a vertically moving stimulus. Vestibular stimu-
the appearance of repeated breaks in the sinusoidal EOG lation restored the structure of the smooth tracking reﬂex
curve characterizing synphasic tracking of the sinusoidal and led to an increase in the coefﬁcient of strength for
movement of Optokinetic stimuli; this periodically had a smooth tracking (Fig. 3).
saccadic form in 9% 0f cosmonauts. The EOG amplitude Most cosmonauts reported subjective beneﬁt from
was insigniﬁcantly increased (14.9 i 2.10 compared with additional tactile-support afferentation, with improvement
13.5 i 1.30 before ﬂight), while the phase shift (the delay of in well-being, especially at the beginning of ﬂights.
the ECG relative to the stimulus) was decreased (0.5 0 corn- However, when analysis was performed without considera-
pared with 0.90 before ﬂight). After the adaptation period, tion the characteristics of orientation in space, additional
the smoothness and synphasic nature of tracking recovered. tactile-support afferentation had no signiﬁcant effect on the
The amplitude of tracking eye movements after prolonged nature of tracking in microgravity conditions (Figs. 2, 3).
periods in weightlessness varied over the range 10.2 i 2.70 Analysis Of the effects of this afferentation in relation to ori-
and 15.5 i 1.80 at different times. The phase delay of the entation in space showed that improvements in the parame-

"
"6","778 Kornilova
1.5
1
0 E E E E 2 I3 E E 2 IE
—0.5 I IE I; E I; E
—1
—1.5
Baseline 3D 6D 1M 3M 6M
Fig. 4. Coefﬁcient of strength of optooculomotor reactions during smooth tracking of the linear movement of a point
foveal stimulus in groups with different types of orientation in space. The vertical axis shows the coefﬁcient of strength.
White columns show the coefﬁcient of smooth tracking strength at rest; shaded columns show the coefﬁcient using the
support. For further details see caption to Fig. 2.
ters of ocular tracking of point foveal stimuli were seen Tracking Ofpoint Visual objects moving linearly can be
only in those cosmonauts (34% 0f the group) who f0rrnu- divided into two components: saccadic eye movements in
lated concepts of space and their position in it on the basis response to the appearance of the stimulus (a reﬂeX
of internal body coordinates (the postural type) (Fig. 4). response) and intrinsically smooth tracking of a stimulus
Foveoretinal tracking of sinusoidal optokinetic stimuli moving at a deﬁned rate across a monitor (dynamic saccade
was not affected by additional tactile-support stimulation. plus smooth tracking at a selected stimulus frequency — this
is in fact the foveal optokinetic reﬂex). In terrestrial condi-
tions, performance of the tracking stepwise movements of a
DISCUSSION point Visual stimulus and its subsequent rectilinear move-
ment across the screen produced clear saccades of stable
These studies performed in microgravity conditions amplitude, with virtually no corrective movements. The
produced by effective freefall demonstrated retention of number of oculomotor responses corresponded to the num-
h0rizontal saccades and quite good retention of the struc- ber of stimuli presented. After the saccade, the eye smooth-
ture of vertical saccades. However, in certain conditions 1y followed the stimulus, synchronously with its movement.
there were sharp reductions in the amplitude of vertical sac- At the initial periods of space ﬂight (days 2—3), the sac-
cades, with appearance of corrective saccades, gaze nystag- cadic component of the reaction was retained, though there
mus, and reverse nystagmus. The decrease in the amplitude was an increase in corrective saccades (additional adjusting
0f ﬁxational static and dynamic saccades in vertical eye eye movements). As regards the second component of the
movements in microgravity conditions occurred only dur- reaction — intrinsic dynamic tracking — there were changes,
ing performance of speciﬁc Visual tasks associated with sometimes with complete degradation of the structure of
tracking and ﬁxation of a stimulus. We have previously smooth tracking: instead of smooth eye movements there
demonstrated [8—10, 42] that in the absence of Visual were micro— and macrosaccadic jumps. Thus, the saccadic
afferentation (extreme displacement of the eyes vertically system replaced the 10st smooth tracking reﬂex, contributing
and horizontally in response to a sound command with the to gaze control. However, by ﬂight day 6, the smooth track-
eyes closed), weightlessness conversely produced signiﬂ- ing reﬂeX function of the eye recovered. In addition, increas-
cant increases in the amplitude of eye movements (espe- es in the time spent in weightlessness resulted in a decrease
cially with up—and-down movements), which we believe is in the amplitude of eye movements in tracking in the verti-
due to changes in the otolith signal. Performance of volun- cal and diagonal planes and of circular movements.
tary static and dynamic stimulus-ﬂXing saccades required After prolonged periods of time in microgravity condi-
active inclusion of the cortical parts of the brain, which had tions (ﬂight days 90—438), subjects showed periodic
inhibitory inﬂuences on the appearance of reﬂeX and V01— changes in tracking reactions. This applied particularly to
untary oculomotor responses. smooth tracking, while saccades persisted.

"
"7","The Role of Gravitation-Dependent Systems in Visual Tracking 779
Thus, despite the retention of intrinsic Visual func- Studies of the role of additional support in conditions
tions, microgravitation decreased the precision and rate of deﬁciency of proprioceptive and tactile afferentation and
characteristics of all forms of Visual tracking (in some cases distortion of vestibular afferentation have demonstrated that
leading to complete degradation of the smooth tracking the effect of tactile-support afferentation (TSA) in micro-
reﬂeX), with signiﬁcant increases in the time taken to estab- gravity conditions was seen only in subjects who formulat-
lish gaze on a target (by factors of 2 or more) and decreas- ed their concepts of space and their position in it on the
es in the frequency of stimulus tracking. Microgravitation basis of perceiving the positions of the head and feet (the
resulted in a transfer of smooth Visual tracking systems to a postural type). The absence of any signiﬁcant effect from
strategy of saccadic approximation in which gaze tracks the tactile-support afferentation in the other cosmonauts is eVi-
displacement of the target using a set of macro- and dence for the narrowly specialized role of the otolith recep-
rnicrosaccadic movements. tor in modulating oculornotor reactions and its leading role
It can be suggested that the stability of the saccadic in the mechanisms of tracking.
component is associated with its reﬂex nature, while the Thus, the impairments seen in Visual tracking in Virtu-
variability of the voluntary, intrinsic, tracking component is ally all the cosmonauts were due primarily to vestibular
associated with its dependence on central inﬂuences, i.e., deprivation developing in conditions of weightlessness
on the characteristics of intersensory integration and the (functional deafferentation of the otolith input), while in
functional state of the central nervous system (CNS). The cosmonauts formulating their concept of space on the basis
accuracy of Visual tracking is based on the ability of the of internal body coordinates, support-tactile deprivation
CNS to integrate Visual and vestibular sensory stimuli, as also played a role. Changes in afferentation frorn gravity-
well as stimuli of other modalities, in the areas of rnultisen- dependent sensory inputs and the deﬁciency of sensory
sory convergence and to realize these adequately in percep- information inevitably lead to impairment of the interaction
tive and sensorimotor reactions. of sensory systems, this leading to the development of
Studies on monkeys [21, 23, 30, 44] have demonstrated changes in the tracking functions of the eyes. Microgravity
that there are changes in the level and nature of vestibular signiﬁcantly alters the activity of the gravity-dependent sys-
afferentation in conditions of weightlessness, along with terns, impairing their usual evolutionarily acquired interac-
changes in the nature of intersensory interactions and central tions with the gravity-independent systems, and the anoma-
regulation, which produces alterations in voluntary and reﬂex lous tracking reactions developing in microgravity condi-
oculomotor reactions. Our studies have shown that along tions are a direct result of sensory changes and the follow-
with the mechanisms of sensory disintegration in micrograv- ing processes of sensory adaptation.
ity conditions, sensory deprivation mechanisms also operate, Thus, although microgravity itself has no direct inﬂu-
especially affecting the vestibular system. Improvements in ence on Visual functions, it nonetheless alters the level and
the characteristics of the tracking functions of the eyes after nature of vestibular and support-tactile afferentation and,
active head movements provide evidence for a deﬁciency of Via the central mechanisms of the vestibular systems, leads
vestibular afferentation in microgravity conditions. to decreases in the precision and rate of all forms of Visual
The profound level of mutual “intrusion” of the Visual tracking. Even with the head immobile there are (a) impair-
and vestibular analyzers in the activity of the each of these ments to gaze ﬁxation — destabilization of the eyes associ-
has been demonstrated by many neurophysiological, rnor- ated with an increase in slow drift, along with the appear-
phological, and clinical studies [6, 7, 22, 25—27, 31, 35]. It ance of large numbers of saccadic movements and sponta-
is also known that in conditions of gravity, proprioceptive neous nystagrnus; (b) impairments in the precision of sac-
and tactile afferentation, converging on the nuclei of the cadic tracking (especially in the vertical plane) with
vestibular complex, have inhibitory inﬂuences on vestibular development of a new strategy for saccadic tracking with a
excitability [11, 16, 39]. In microgravity conditions, disap- decrease in the amplitude of the ﬁrst main saccade and
pearance of gravitational forces in support-free space leads additional saccades constantly bringing the gaze to the tar-
to alterations in the functioning not only of each of the graV- get; and (c) profound impairments of slow tracking reac-
ity-dependent sensory systems individually, but also the tions all the way to complete degradation (especially with
interactions between all sensory systems which have devel- vertically moving stimuli) and transfer of the smooth Visu-
oped over evolution [29, 34, 50]. al tracking systems to a strategy of saccadic approximation,
Space ﬂight, which is accompanied by sensory depri- whereby gaze is brought to the target using a set of saccadic
vation, is a unique experiment allowing assessment of the movements.
signiﬁcance and speciﬁc contribution of one or another sen- In all cases, the decrease in the accuracy of Visual
sory input to the development of oculornotor impairments tracking and the transfer of Visual tracking systems to a new
and disturbances to intersensory interactions, aiding our tracking strategy have the effect that the time required for
understanding of the nature, characteristics, and timing of considering and recognizing a target and establishing the
rearrangements of the mechanisms of intersensory interac- gaze onto targets increase signiﬁcantly (by factors of 2 or
tions during prolonged periods in microgravity conditions. more), with a corresponding decrease in the frequency of

"
"8","780 Kornilova
stimuli Which the system iS able to track (the coefﬁcient of 17. L. I. Leushina, “The oculomotor system and its functions,” in:
tracking efﬁciency in the vertical decreased from 1 to 0.6). senéogygymm Physjozogy [in RuSSianL Nauka (1977)» Chapter 1=
PP- — -
18. A. A. Mit’kin, “Contemporary questions in Visual-Vestibular interac-
tions,” Usp. Fiziol. Nauk, 13, No. 13, 56—81 (1982).

REFERENCES 19. V. S. Raitses, “Neurophysiological mechanisms of the interaction of

the vestibular system with other sensory systems,” Kosmz’ch. Biol.

1. E. Sh. Airapet’yants and A. S. BatueV, Principles of the Convergence Aviakosmz'ch. Med, 8, No. 5, 3—11 (1974).
ofAnalyzer Systems [in Russian], Nauka, Moscow (1969). 20. M. Reshke, L. N. Kornilova, D. Kharm, J . Blumberg, and V. Peloski,

2. I. I. Bryanov, G. I. Gorgiladze, L. N. Kornilova, I. K. Tarasov, and “Neurosensory and sensorimotor functions in weightlessness.
1. Ya. YakovleV, Sensory Systems. Vestibular Function. Results of Current Russian-American data,” in: Space Biology and Medicine
Medical Studies Performed in the Orbital Science Research Complex [in Russian], Nauka, Moscow (1997), Vol. 3, Book 1, Chapter 7,
Salyut 6—Soyuz, [in Russian], Nauka, Moscow (1986), Part 1, pp. 213—328.

Chapter 10, pp. 169—185; Part 2, Chapter 5, pp. 248—256. 21. M. G. Sirota, B. M. BabaeV, I. N. Belozerova, S. B. Yakushin, and

3. Yu. B. Gippenreiter, Movement of the Human Eye [in Russian], 1. B. Kozlovskaya, “Bioelectric activity of the vestibular nuclei in
Moscow State University Press (1978). conditions of microgravitation,” in: Results of Biosatellz'te Studies

4. V. D. Glezer, “The characteristics of the eye as a tracking system,” [in Russian], 0. G. Gazenko (ed.), Nauka, Moscow (1992),
Fiziol. Zh. SSSR, 45, 271—279 (1969). pp. 29—34.

5. V. D. Glezer and L. I. Leushina, “A model of the Visual ﬁxation of 22. I. M. Faienberg, Clinical Impairments 0f Analyzer Interactions
an object and functions of ocular microsaccades,” in: Motor [in Russian], Meditsina, Moscow (1975).

Components of Vision [in Russian], Nauka, Moscow (1975), 23. S. B. Yakushin, I. N. Beloozerova, M. G. Sirota, B. M. BabaeV, and
pp. 56—68. I. B. Kozlovskaya, “Neuronal activity of the brainstem and cerebel-

6. M. Diks and Dzh. Khud, Vertigo [in Russian], Meditsina, Moscow lar vestibular nuclei in monkeys during space ﬂight,” in:
(1987). Proceedings of the Ninth All—Union Conference on Space Biology

7. I. B. Kozlovskaya, A. A. Repin, Yu. V. Kreidich, and V. A. Barmin, and Medicine [in Russian], Moscow, Kaluga (1990), pp. 359.
“Coordination of eye and head movements during performance of a 24. C. Andre-Deshays, 1. Israel, and O. Charade, “Gaze control in
Visual ﬁxation response,” Fiziologiya Cheloveka, 7, No. 1, 34—39 microgravity. Saccades, pursuit, eye-head coordination,” J. Vestib.
(1981). Res., 3, 331—344 (1993).

8. L. N. Kornilova, G. Bodo, and I. K. Tarasov, “The nature of vestibu- 25. G. R. Barnes, “Head-eye coordination in normals and in patients
lar responses and interanalyzer interactions in conditions of weight- with vestibular disorders,” in: Advances in Otorhinolaryngology:
lessness (data from the “Ontokinesis” experiment),” Kosmich. Biol. Vol. 25, Frontiers in Vestibular and Oculomotor Research, Uppsala
Aviakosmich. Med, 24, No. 5, 16—20 (1990). (1979), pp. 197—201.

9. L. N. Kornilova and G. Bodo, “Characteristics of the optokinetic, 26. G. R. Barnes, A. J . Benson, and A. R. J. Prior, “Visual-vestibular
optooculomotor, and vestibulooculomotor responses in weightless— interaction in the control of eye movement,” Aviat. Space and Env.
ness,” Vestn. Otorinolaringologii, 3, 37—43 (1990). Med, 62, No. 3, 201—205 (1988).

10. L. N. Kornilova, A. M. Goncharenko, and V. Grigorova, “The nature 27. U. Buttner and J . Buttner—Ennever, “Present concepts of oculomotor
of spontaneous oculomotor activity in conditions of weightlessness organization,” in: Neuroanatomy 0f the Oculomotor System
and during the readaptation period,” Vestn. Otorinolaringologiz', 1, J . Buttner—Ennever (ed.) (1988), pp. 3—23.

18—21 (1992). 28. G. Clement, C. Andre-Seshays, and C. Lathan, “Effects of gravita-

11. L. N. Kornilova, O. N. Klyushnikova, S. B. Korsunskii, and tional force variations on vertical gaze direction during oculomotor
V. G. Kozlova, “Vestibulooculomotor responses in conditions of reﬂexes and Visual ﬁxation,” Aviat. Space Env. Med, 60, 1194—1198
immersion hypokinesia,” Kosmich. Biol. Aviakosmz'ch. Med, 26, (1989).

No. 2, 15—22 (1992). 29. B. Cohen, D. Tomko, and F. Guedry, “Vestibular and sensorimotor

12. L. N. Kornilova, G. Bodo, V. Grigorova, and L. M. Chernobyl’skii, function in microgravity,” Ann. NY. Acad. Sci., 682, 340—353
“Neurophysiological features of the adaptation of vestibular system (1992).
to conditions of microgravitation,” Aviakosmz'ch. Ekol. Med, 29, 30. M. Correia, A. Perachio, J . Dickman, and I. Kozlovskaya,
No. 5, 23—30 (1995). “Vestibular primary afferent and vestibulo-ocular changes in rhesus

13. L. N. Kornilova, Kh. Myuller, G. Vest, L. M. Chernobyl’skii, monkey following 14 days of microgravity,” Soc. Neurosci. Abstn,
G. Shtainvender, S. Toier, and A. V. Polyakov, “Spontaneous and 16, 735 (1990).

Visually induced oculomotor responses in weightlessness (data from 31. J . Dichgans and T. Brandt, “Visual-vestibular interaction: effects on
the “Optovert” experiment),” Aviakosmz'ch. Ekol. Med, 30, No. 5, self—motion perception and postural control,” in: Perception,
10—16 (1996). Springer, Berlin (1978), pp. 755—804.

14. L. N. Kornilova, “The tracking function of the eye in conditions of 32. S. Glasauer, M. F. Reschke, and A. Berthoz, “The effect of space
microgravitation and readaptation to terrestrial gravitation,” ﬂight on gaze control strategy,” in: Proc. 5th Eur. Symp. Life
Aviakosmz'ch. Ekol. Med, 35, No. 6, 30—39 (2001). Sciences Research in Space, Arcachon, France, September 26, 1993

15. I. B. Krasnov, “Increases in the sensitivity of the otolithic apparatus CNES/ESA (1994), pp. 339—344.
in weightlessness. Morphological evidence,” in: Proceedings of the 33. V. Grigorova and L. Kornilova, “Microgravity effect on the vestibu-
20th Meeting of the ”Interkosmos” Working Group on Space lo-ocular reﬂex is dependent on otolith and Vision contributions,”
Biology and Medicine [in Russian], Berlin, GDR (1987), Vol. 2, Aviat. Space Env. Med, 67, No. 10, 947—954 (1996).

p. 127. 34. K. Hofstetter-Degen, J . Wetzig, and R. Baumgarten, “Oculo-

16. Yu. V. Kreidich, A. A. Repin, V. A. Barmin, and I. B. Kozlovskaya, vestibular interaction under microgravity,” Clinik. Investigator, 71,
“The effects of immersion hypokinesia on the characteristics of eye 749—756 (1993).
and head movements during performance of a Visual ﬁxation 35. T. Kwasai and D. S. Zee, “Eye-head coordination in labyrinth-defec-
response in humans,” Kosmz’ch. Biol. Aviakosmz'ch. Med, 16, No. 5, tive human beings,” Brain Res., 144, No. 1, 123—141 (1978).

41—45 (1982). 36. H. Kornhuber, Vestibular System, Berlin (1974), Part 2, pp. 581—615.

"
"9","The Role of Gravitation-Dependent Systems in Visual Tracking 781
37. L. N. Komilova,A. M. Goncharenko, andV. Grigorova, “The patterns 44. I. Kozlovskaya, M. Sirota, B. Babaev, L. N. Kornilova, and
of spontaneous oculomotor activity under weightlessness and readap- V. A. Barmin, “Human and animal results on vestibular research in
tation period,” Physiologist, 33, N0. 1, Supplement, 23—39 (1990). space,” in: Fourth European Symposium on Life Sciences Research
38. L. N. Kornilova, A. M. Goncharenko, G. Bodo, and V. Grigorova, in Space, Trieste, Italy, May 28 to June 1 (1990), pp. 353—357.
“Pathogenesis of sensory disorders in microgravity,” Physiologist, 45. I. B. Kozlovskaya, V. A. Barmin, Yu. V. Kreidich, and A. A. Repin,
34, No. 1, Supplement, 36—39 (1991). “The effect of real and simulated microgravity on vestibulo- and
39. L. N. Kornilova, O. N. Klushnikova, S. B. Korsunskiy, and oculomotor interactions,” Physiologist, 28, No. 6, 51—56 (1958).
B. G. Koslova, “Examination of eye movements under immersion,” 46. Ch. Mueller, L. Komilova, G. West, et a1., “Visually induced vertical
Physiologist, 34, 218—219 (1991). vection self—motion sensation is altered in microgravity adaptation,”
40. L. N. Kornilova, A. M. Goncharenko, and V. Grigorova, J. Vestib. Res., 4, No. 2, 161—164 (1994).
“Modiﬁcations of spontaneous oculomotor activity in microgravita- 47. J . J . Uri, B. J . Linder, and T. P. Moore, Saccadz'c Eye Movements
tional conditions,” Acta Astronautica, 23, 79—84 (1991). During Space F light, NASA (Washington DC (1989).
41. L.N. Komilova,V. Grigorova, and G. Bodo, “Vestibular ﬁmction and 48. R. B. Welch and D. H. Warren, “Intersensory interactions,” in:
sensory interaction in space ﬂight,” J. Vestib. ReS., 3, 219—231 (1993). Handbook OfPerceptz'on and Human Performance, New York, V01. 1,
42. L. N. Komilova, “Vestibular function and sensory interaction under N0. 35, pp. 25—41 (1986).
the condition of altered gravity,” in: Advances in Space Biology and 49. L. R. Young, M. Shelhamer, et a1., “Visual-vestibular interaction in
Medicine, JAI Press Inc. (1997), V01. 6, No. 12, pp. 275—313. weightlessness,” Exptl. Brain Res., 64, 299—307 (1986).
43. L. N. Komilova, “Orientation illusions in space ﬂight,” J. Vestib. 50. L. R. Young, D. K. Jackson, et a1., “Multisensor integration in micro-
Res., 5, No. 5, 1—11 (1997). gravity,” Ann. NY. Acad. Sci., 682, 340—353 (1992).

"
