"","x"
"1","ASTROBIOLOGY
Volume 9, Number 5, 2009
© Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/ast.2008.0275
Research Article
A FIeId-Based Cleaning Protocol for Sampling
Devnces Used In LIfe-Detectlon Studies
Jennifer Eigenbrodej’2 Liane G. Benning,3 Jake Maulej’6 Norm Wainwright,4
Andrew Steele,1 Hans E.F. Amundsen,5 and the AMASE 2006 Team
Abstract
Analytical approaches to extant and extinct life detection involve molecular detection often at trace levels. Thus,
removal of biological materials and other organic molecules from the surfaces of devices used for sampling is
essential for ascertaining meaningful results. Organic decontamination to levels consistent with null values on
life-detection instruments is particularly challenging at remote field locations where Mars analog field investi-
gations are carried out. Here, we present a seven—step, multi-reagent decontamination method that can be
applied to sampling devices while in the field. In situ lipopolysaccharide detection Via low-level endotoxin
assays and molecular detection Via gas Chromatography—mass spectrometry were used to test the effectiveness
of the decontamination protocol for sampling of glacial ice with a coring device and for sampling of sediments
with a rover scoop during deployment at Arctic Mars-analog sites in Svalbard, Norway. Our results indicate that
the protocols and detection technique sufficiently remove and detect low levels of molecular constituents nec-
essary for life-detection tests. Key Words: Organic decontamination—Sterilization—Life detection—Biosignature
contaminants—Mars analog—Ice coring. Astrobiology 9, 455—465.
Introduction nucleic acids, pigments, lipopolysaccharides, lipids and their
fossil hydrocarbons]. However, the ubiquitous nature of nat-
ORGANIC DECONTAMINATION OF SAMPLING TOOLS and ural and synthetic organics on Earth challenges the thor-
storage materials is crucial for life-detection, habitabil- oughness 0f decontamination and sampling protocols for
ity, and ecological investigations of extremophiles, which live extreme terrestrial and planetary research.
in the most inhospitable niches on Earth and, potentially, 0n Minimizing forward contamination of extraterrestrial
Mars and elsewhere. Molecular compositions and distribu- bodies with Earth—derived biological materials is particularly
tions are key observations used to identify and decipher fin— important to the search for extraterrestrial life (Rummel,
gerprints 0f extant and extinct life. When investigations are 2001; Mancinelli, 2003). Disinfecting space hardware to
confronted with trace-level quantities of organic molecules minimize forward contamination by Earth biology has been
and low biological activity, unwanted signals from earlier investigated (Venkateswaran et (11., 2004). However, decon-
sample acquisition and handling (forward contamination) can taminating spacecraft hardware to low threshold levels as
compromise meaningful observations and irreversibly alter determined for ultrasensitive 0rganic-compound or life-
the pristine environments that are sought to be Characterized. detection instrumentation developed for ﬂight is necessary
Ultrasensitive analyticaldetectionlimits have been developed for authenticating martian observations in upcoming mis-
for essential biomolecules and monomers associated with life sions such as the ESA-NASA ExoMars and future Mars
on Earth [e.g., adenosine triphosphate (ATP), amino acids, landers and sample return missions. The increasing sensitivity
1Geophysical Laboratory, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington, DC.
2NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland.
3Earth and Biosphere Institute, School of Earth and Environment, University of Leeds, UK.
4Charles River Laboratories, Inc, Charleston, South Carolina.
5Earth and Planetary Exploration, Oslo, Norway.
6Lab-On—a-Chip Application Development (LOCAD) Group, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama.
455

"
"2","456 EIGENBRODE ET AL.
of terrestrial laboratory analytical techniques will make these type of disinfection required for the specific application.
issues even more important for future sample return mis- Although sterilization does not necessarily remove organics,
sions. Similarly, molecular-level decontamination of sam- it is Clearly advantageous to disinfect sampling devices prior
pling devices and avoidance of cross contamination between to organic decontamination, since many disinfectants mod-
sampling steps are critical for any astrobiology field study in ify and break down cell walls and membranes and react
Mars analog environments on Earth (Christner et (11., 2005). with biomolecules so as to make them more susceptible to
The stringent requirement for an effective blank in mo- other types of removal, like solvation. For instance, ethanol
lecular life-detection studies necessitates both sterilization or isopropanol are effective disinfectants for vegetative bac-
(destruction of vegetative microorganisms and spores) and teria, Viruses, and fungi [but not spores (McDonnell and
organic decontamination (removal of remnant organic Russell, 1999)], and are also suitable solvents for many bio-
molecules from cells, other samples, storage and handling, molecules and oils. Similarly, many disinfectants are oxi-
lubricants, detergents, etc.). It is critically important to rec- dizing agents that effectively break down nonrefractory
ognize that sterilization procedures have varying degrees of organics (free and biologically bound biomolecules) and thus
effectiveness and do not necessarily remove organic con- also serve as decontamination agents for removal of a variety
taminants. High-temperature destruction of microbes (Via of organics.
steam autoclaving) or organics (i.e., Via dry oxidation in air at The application of 30% hydrogen peroxide (H202) solution
>4500C for an extended period of time), ultraviolet sterili- for cleaning spacecraft hardware is a good example of a
zation, and plasma cleaning [e.g., chemical oxidation with sterilant/decontamination agent. In liquid form, H202 is in
hydrogen peroxide at high temperature (Crow and Smith, general an effective sterilant (McDonnell and Russell, 1999)
1995)] may effectively decontaminate surfaces for some lab- and is safe for most metals, but it has variable sporicidal
oratory and ﬂight hardware components, but these tech— (Kempf et (11., 2005) and bacteriocidal properties. H202 tends
niques are not applicable for studies in remote field sites or to be more effective against Gram—positive bacteria com-
for specific ﬂight hardware. In such cases, Chemical and pared to Gram—negative bacteria (McDonnell and Russell,
physical cleaning techniques are the only practical options. 1999). Moreover, catalase and peroxidase enzymes can ren-
However, both Chemical and physical approaches can be der H202 inactive by breaking it down into 02 and H20
problematic. In particular, Chemicals selectively remove bio- (Pardieck et (11., 1992). In contrast, oxidation of organic matter
logical and nonbiological organics based on the reagent com- proceeds when >*OH radicals formed from H202 attack aro-
position, but these can also damage and alter the surfaces of the matic, — CH2 —, — CO —, — COOH, — OH, — NHZ, and other polar
sampling devices. Moreover, impure reagents (e.g., phthalates functional groups. Thus, H202 causes oxidation of proteins
or other plasticizers from reagent bottles) and Chemicals or and peroxidation of lipids in cell membranes, and it breaks
particulates shed from applicators (e.g., plastic or cellulose fi- down nucleic acids. As such, H202 is an effective sterilant;
bers from swabs and wipes) during the Cleaning and testing but, more importantly, it aids in decontaminating surfaces
processes can add other contaminants. Lastly, complete de- through the degradation of biomolecules to smaller polar
contamination is almost impossible to achieve because the products, which are readily rinsed off by the aqueous H202
environment in terrestrial Mars analog field studies is not solution or other polar solvents.
controllable, and biological materials are ubiquitously present Breakdown of more-complex macromolecules in humic,
(e.g., in aerosols). The challenges faced in achieving sterile, lignin, or kerogenous materials by H202 yields water-soluble
organiC-Clean surfaces have prompted the development of carboxylic acids that can be oxidized further (Goldstone et al.,
various cleaning protocols that are usually tailored to specific 2002). For this reason, H202 is also commonly used by geo-
research needs. The reagents and techniques commonly used Chemists to oxidize organic matter in soils and sediments
to disinfect and oxidize organics are explored below, and the (Mikutta et al., 2005); however, sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl)
development of a new protocol for field application that re- and disodium peroxodisulfate (NaZSZOS) have been shown
moves organics from the surfaces of sampling devices is pre- to be more effective for these applications. All three of these
sented. Disinfectants that sterilize surfaces are also used in this oxidizing reagents have been shown to be most reactive with
protocol to promote organic removal. polar organic molecules, such as recently produced biomol-
ecules, and to have little effect on the aliphatic hydrocarbons
Existing decontamination methods (Mlkulta et al.., 20.05) .
Similar ox1dat1ve reagents have been applied to deep
Chemical disinfectants commonly used in medical facilities, subsurface ice cores acquired with drilling ﬂuids [e.g., Vostok
pharmaceutical Clean rooms, and environmental laboratories (Christner et al., 2005, and references therein)]. After exten-
(e.g., acids, alcohols, quaternary ammonium compounds, sive investigation into methods for removal of exterior mi-
phenols, amphoteric surfactants, aldehydes, hypochlorites, crobes and nucleiC-acid contaminants from the outer ice halo
and hydrogen peroxide) induce different reactions with cel- of ancient ice, Rogers et al. (2004) and Christner et al. (2005)
lular materials, unbound organics, and inorganic materials concluded that sequential rinsing with a 5% sodium hypo-
(McDonnell and Russell, 1999; Penna et al., 2001). The re- Chlorite (NaOCl) solution combined with surface melting
sultant biocidal effectiveness for bacteria, fungi, Viruses, and and removal was the most effective post-sampling decon-
spores differs for each reagent. Bacillus and Clostridium tamination treatment. Many of the above described decontam-
spores are the microbes most resistant to disinfectants ination protocols have either been tested solely in laboratory
(McDonnell and Russell, 1999, and references therein) and studies (i.e., ﬂight hardware) or in post-sampling decon-
have been the focus of sporicide studies (e.g., Setlow, 2006). It tamination (i.e., ice cores and soil); for in situ field studies in
is important to note that disinfectants are usually Chosen terrestrial Mars analog settings, no suitable protocols are as
based on preserving the integrity of instruments and on the yet available.

"
"3","FIELD-BASED DECONTAMINATION PROTOCOL 457
Here, we describe the development of a new cleaning pro- each step. Bleach was replaced with an alternative disinfec-
tocol for removing organics from surfaces of sampling devices tant (CIDecon disinfectant wipes containing active ingredi-
used in habitability and life-detection studies. The protocol ents 0.27500% glutaraldehyde, 0.01375%, o-phenylphenol,
was designed for, but is not limited to, application in remote and 0.00275% tertiary arnylphenol, which are fixatives that
field locations. Supporting data show that the new protocol, l<ill but preserve cells). Organic solvents (100% alcohols and
which involves a ”cocktail” of reagents, can achieve repro- gas chromatography—grade dichloromethane) were used to
ducible, below-detection—limit levels of organics. In this wash away dead cells and free organics. All surfaces were
study, the presence of bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) was wiped repeatedly. Specifically, surfaces were wiped sepa-
used as an operationally defined marker for organics. LPS is rately and sequentially with the following commercial cloths:
a component of Gram—negative bacteria and ubiquitous in (i) Fisherbrand 100% distilled-water wipes, (ii) CIDecon
nature (Maeda and Taga, 1979; Herbert, 1990; Trent et (11., disinfectant wipes, then (iii) Contec wipes saturated with
2006). LPS is commonly used as an estimate for microbial 70% isopropanol in distilled water. The inner barrel surface
biomass. Due to LPS involvement in inﬂammatory responses, was then (iv) rinsed with ethanol and dichloromethane (pure,
these molecules have been classed as bacterial endotoxins, gas chromatography—grade solvents), and the outer barrel
and several tests have been devised for their rapid and surface was wiped with ethanol applied to a sterile polyester
sensitive detection. The presence of LPS is exclusively used wipe (SterileLP, ITW Texwipe). All solvents applied to wipes
as a measure of cleanliness of equipment in the food and were gas chromatography grade without modification.
pharmaceutical industries (Roslansky and Novitsky, 1991) However, even after this four-step method, LPS remnants
for the purposes of evaluating health risks in accordance (>0.2 EU/crn2 for triplicate swabs of different regions) were
with guidelines set by the US. Food and Drug Administra- measured on inner and outer barrel surfaces.
tion and assessing biological contamination in controlled The continual presence of remnant LPS on surfaces cleaned
laboratories. In the present study, testing for bacterial LPS with the above two methods implied that other biological
concentrations on surfaces of field-deployed sampling de- and organic materials were not removed. Forward contam-
Vices was undertaken with use of the Limulus Amebocyte ination by suspect organics could compromise astrobiolo-
Lysate (LAL) assay in which surface samples were collected gical samples that contain trace-level organic biosignatures;
on dry, sterile, LPS—free, polyester-tipped swabs for analy- therefore, these two cleaning methods were deemed unac-
sis. The LAL investigations were supplemented with tests ceptable for trace organic and life-detection studies. Based on
for a broader suite of organic compounds detected Via gas these tests, a more extensive decontamination and validation
chromatography—mass spectrometry. protocol was developed and extensively tested during
AMASE 2006.
Materials and Methods
Cleaning protocol development was carried out during the Seven-step Cleaning protocol
2005 and 2006 field seasons of the Arctic Mars Analog Sval- The novel protocol developed in this study involved both
bard Expeditions (AMASE) at various geological settings chemical and physical removal of particulates and organics
(Steele et (11., 2008). Cleaning was conducted primarily on the Via a seven-step procedure (Table 1). Concerns for adverse
deck of a ship in ambient weather conditions that were com— effects on the sampling device materials were considered for
parable to those of deployment sites onshore. Occasionally, both devices but not thoroughly investigated herein. All
cleaning was done on the glacier or at the rock outcrop before solutions used (reagents 4—7 in Table 1: distilled/deionized
deployment. The protocol developmentinvolved tests on two water, 5% sodium hypochlorite, 30% H202, 70% ethanol)
sampling devices: arnanually deployable coring device (Mark were prefiltered with sterile, single-use polycarbonate filter
V, Kovacs Enterprises, Inc., USA) and the sampling scoop on units (Fisherbrand, 0.2 urn) to assure particulate-free re-
the robotic arm of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Cliffbot agents. Blank tests on these filters showed that organics were
rover (Huntsberger et aL, 2007). Following each cleaning, not leached from the filters into the aqueous solutions; thus,
decontamination of surfaces was gauged based on LPS con- the filtering did not affect the decontamination protocol.
centrations determined Via the LAL assay for LPS collected on The goal of step #1, which involves the use of distilled
polyester-tipped swabs wiped over surfaces. Tests for the water wipes, is to remove particulate contamination, such as
presence of other organic compounds by gas chromatography— dust, sediment, and residues from storage and prior sam-
mass spectrometry were reserved for the final protocol test. pling. Step #2 is the initial disinfecting step that aims at fixing
Details of the two analytical approaches are discussed below. and breaking up cell material. The isopropanol wipes of step
Brieﬂy, a simple two-step cleaning of the coring device #3 provide additional disinfection but also remove organics
during AMASE 2005 did not sufficiently remove cellular and residuals from the earlier wipes. In steps #4—7, all sur-
remnants as demonstrated by the high LPS concentrations/ faces were cleaned with woven polyester, clean-room—grade
cm2 (2—3 orders of magnitude above the LAL detection limits wipes saturated with various reagents in order to decrease
of <0.002 endotoxin units/crn2 or EU/cmz, data not shown). the level of particulates and have a better control on reagent
In this two-step cleaning, we used bleach-saturated wipes application. The water wipe and rinse of step #4 removes
(Clorox, containing 5% sodium hypochlorite) that were pre- organic and inorganic residuals from the three earlier steps.
moistened with 100% distilled water (Fisherbrand). The Although NaOCl and H202 are known to be strong sterilants
bleach residue was then removed with more pre-moistened, and sporicides (Russell, 1990; Sabli et al., 1996; Young and
distilled-water wipes. Setlow, 2003), steps #5 and #6 effectively chlorinate and ox-
In a second test, four steps were employed. We added idize (Alimova et (11., 2005) remaining organics, which makes
additional reagents and emphasized mechanical action in them more readily soluble in ethanol. Thus, the final ethanol

"
"4","458 EIGENBRODE ET AL.
TABLE 1. SEVEN-STEP CLEANING PROTOCOL
Step Reagent and application Source Action*
1 Distilled water pre-saturated wipe Fisherbrand premoistened wipes Wipe
2 Disinfectant pre-saturated wipe CIDecon disinfectant wipe Wipe
(containing glutaraldehyde,
0-pheny1phen01, and tertiary
amylphenol)
3 Isopropanol (70%) pre-saturated wipe Contec Wipe
4 Distilled water saturated clean-room wipeJr 18 mega-Q filtered water: Wipe and rinse
5 Sodium Hypochlorite (5%) saturated clean-room wipeJr Laboratory grade (VWR)i Wipe
6 Hydrogen Peroxide (30%) saturated clean-room wipeJr Perhydroli Wipe
7 Ethanol saturated clean-room wipeJr Laboratory grade (VWR)i Wipe and rinse
>*All surfaces were wiped twice with repeated rubbing action: inside, from center to each end, and outside, from top to blades.
TClean-roorn wipe: woven polyethylene-filarnent, clean-roorn class 100 wipe (SterileWipe LP, TEXWIPE).
1LFiltered with Nalgene single-use, sterile filter units with 0.2 urn filters.
wiping (step #7) removes remnant organic contaminants by was additionally wrapped in sterile lab bench pads for cush-
solvation. Dichloromethane or other less polar solvent for ioning and added protection during transport to the sample
aliphatic hydrocarbons was not included in the developed site.
protocol because of possible reaction and degradation of the Alpine glacial ice samples were acquired from the central
epoxy-based barrel of the coring device. part of Friedrichsbreen, Bockfjorden (UTM coordinates: 33x
Wiping was done in parallel bands as much as possible to 0461401 8820574). The barrel was unwrapped on site, and
avoid contact between a clean surface and a wipe that had different 25 cm2 regions were swabbed outside and inside the
already collected contaminants. Surface wiping was carried barrel in duplicate for tests of cell-wall lipopolysaccharide
out from top to bottom (for the corer), from inside to the abundance with dry, single-use, sterile, Dacron polyester-
outside (for the scoop) and for both devices from the fiber-tipped, polyethylene-stemmed swabs (ATP-free swabs
”cleanest” t0 the ”dirtiest” parts. The contaminated wipes by Copan, Inc., which have no detectable LPS as determined
were folded repeatedly to provide a clean surface and avoid Via the LAL assay described below). A consistent swabbing
multiple use of the same wipe surface. For each cleaning technique was employed, which involved rotation of the
step, multiple wipes (usually 2—3) were used. swab and a back and forth motion once over the surface.
During cleaning, powder-free nitrile gloves (nonsterile) The barrel was also swabbed for organic contaminants
were worn and exchanged frequently. Every attempt was with three cotton-tipped, wood-stemmed swabs, the tips
made to avoid direct contact of the gloves with the sampling predipped in dichloromethane (gas chromatography grade).
devices to minimize contamination with nitrile compounds Cotton-tipped wood swabs were required for organic tests
(organics with cyanide functional groups). Instead, the cor- because plastic swabs, such as those used for LPS tests, are
ing device was held in place with heavy-duty aluminum not compatible with many solvents, especially chlori-
baking trays (washed with Simple Green detergent and nated solvents. Most of the plant organics inherent to new
rinsed with distilled/deionized water) and heavy-duty alu- unused cotton-tipped swabs had been previously extracted
minum foil (not washed). The trays and aluminum foil were from the swabs by soaking them twice in a Soxhlet extractor
previously baked at 500C in circulating air for 8h to com- in a solution of dichloromethane2methan01 (2:1, V /V, gas
bust residual trace organics. In contrast, the rover scoop was chromatography—grade solvents) for 24h each time.
held in place by the mobile rover arm (Huntsberger et (11., During the manually powered ice coring, the barrel top
2007). Aqueous and ethanol rinse wastes were collected in was covered in aluminum foil to prevent contamination of
the aluminum trays for proper disposal. After cleaning, both the top surface of the ice core. While on the glacier, the ac-
sampling devices were wrapped in baked, heavy-duty alu- quired ice core was immediately extruded from the barrel
minum foil prior to transport to the field. onto new aluminum foil and broken into sections using a
chisel and hammer that were both cleaned Via the seven-step
Coring device deployment and ice sampling protocol. Since the hammer was more difficult to clean due
to its rough, worn surfaces, it was also wrapped multiple
The first sampling device tested was a 14-inch diameter, times in baked heavy-duty aluminum foil and rewrapped, as
1.15-rneter Mark V coring device made from glass filament— necessary, to ensure that material from the hammer did not
wound epoxy composite with stainless steel blades and fall onto ice samples. Care was taken not to rip the foil 0n the
screws at the base (Kovacs Enterprises, Inc.). The metalblades hammer. The inside of the barrel (post-sampling) as well as
and screws were removed and sequentially cleaned by soni- the ice-core top, side, and interior (after sectioning into pieces
cation in distilled/deionized water, 5% sodium hypochlorite, with cleaned tools) surfaces were swabbed for both LPS and
30% H202, 70% ethanol (reagents 4—7 listed in Table 1). This organic analyses, as described above, to track forward and
was followed by a rinsing with dichloromethane (gas chro- backward contamination. Blanks were collected for both
matography grade) to ensure removal of petroleum and other analyses by exposing a set of swabs to air at the field site
organic residues. After reassembly and barrelcleaning Via the for 30s, which is equivalent to the duration that core and
seven-step protocol described above, the foil-wrapped barrel equipment were exposed to the external environment before

"
"5","FIELD-BASED DECONTAMINATION PROTOCOL 459
sampling. Positive controls were also collected, which included as the endotoxin activity, as measured by the LAL assay, of
the skin of the person swabbing and snow algae adjacent to 100 pg of reference standard endotoxin (RSE) from Escherichia
the coring site. The LPS swabs were re-inserted into their coli isolate EC-6 (US. Food and Drug Administration, 1987,
original containers, while the cotton-tipped swabs were 1991). EU per milliliter measurements were converted into EU
stored in glass Vials (previously washed with Simple Green per unit area swabbed. The Endosafe-PTS cartridges have
detergent, rinsed with distilled/deionized water, and baked built-in positive product controls that contain endotoxin.
at 5000C for 8h) and returned to the ship and laboratory, Spike recoveries on this endotoxin control are used to monitor
respectively, for analysis. for LAL inhibition and enhancement due to extraneous par-
ticulates and Chemicals in samples.
Rover deployment and sediment sampling In general, 1 EU approximates to 105 cells of a single strain
A second sampling device used for the decontamination Of 13'. COZZ’ where 6each bacterium typically15consists Of ap-
. . prox1mately 2><10 LPS molecules, 1.6., 10 g LPS (Raetz,
tests was the mechanical scoop of the Jet Propulsion Labora- . . . . .
, . . . 1986). Extrapolation from EU to cell numbers is d1ff1cultw1th
tory s Cliffbot rover, which was made of carbon—flber 3D . . .
. . . enVironmental samples, which are often made up of a variety
composite With a stainless steel serrated edge and screws. At . . . .
. . . . . of spec1es or strains, each expressing various amounts of LPS
the first rover site, the Cliffbot scoop was cleaned in the ﬁeld . . .
. . . . (e.g., Neidhardt, 1987). Assuming that the surface Chemicals
Just prior to deploymentv1a the standard f1eld-deployment Jet . . . . .
. . swabbed were s1m11ar to RSE EC-6, the lower detection limit
Propulsion Laboratory cleaning method (Terry Huntsberger, 2 2
. . . . . . of 0.05 EU/ 25 cm (or 0.2 pg/Cm ) would represent less than
personal communication). This cleaning technique involved . 2 .

. . . . . . four cell-number equivalents per cm . Cell-number equiva-
Wlpmg Of internal surfaces Wlth 2_3 sterile water w1pes lents/cm2 were calculated based on the above assum tion
soaked with an aqueous solution of 30% hydrogen peroxide p '
(reagent 6 in Table 1) while at the field site. Tests for LPS .

. . . Organic analyses

concentrations were conducted on the interior scoop surface

(two different 25 cm2 regions) two times—before and after The cotton-tipped swabs from each sampling of surface
sampling outcrop or sediments—to establish a baseline organics and blanks were extracted with dichloromethane:
comparison to the seven-step procedure tested during the methanol (2:1, V/V) Via sonication. The extracts were con-
second rover deployment. The LPS tests were conducted in densed, transesterified at 1000C for 1 h by using a prepared
the same manner as described above—swabbing surfaces 5% solution of acetyl Chloride (>99%, Sigma Aldrich) in
with LPS—free, polyester-fiber swabs and analyzing the LPS methanol, then extracted with hexane:chloroform (4:1, V / V) 3
abundance on the swabs Via the LAL assay (described below). times without neutralization (method of Masood et (11., 2005,

For a second rover site (Huntsberger et (11., 2007), the scoop modified with the addition of chloroform). Since some or-
was Cleaned on the deck of the ship prior to field deployment ganics will not easily hydrolyze with the above method (e.g.,
Via the seven-step protocol (Table 1) and was then wrapped some carbohydrate-bound lipids), the methylated extracts
in baked aluminum foil for transport. The aluminum foil were separated into neutral (fractions I) and polar frac-
Cover was manually removed at the field site, and two dif— tions (fractions 11) on a silica gel column with hexane:
ferent 25 cm2 sections of the scoop interior were tested for dichloromethane (1:1, V /V) and methanol, respectively. Frac-
LPS concentrations prior to collecting a sample. After the tion II was subjected to a second, more thorough hydrolysis
outcrop sample was transferred to a storage container, the with 0.5 N KOH (Fisherbrand, certified ACS reagent) in
scoop interior surface was retested for LPS concentrations. In methanol at 700C overnight (16h), extracted with hexane:
addition, the surface of the sampled rock formation was also chloroform (4:1), dried under N2, then silylated with 50%
swabbed with a polyester-tipped swab (again two regions of N—(t-butyldimethylsilyl)-N—methyltriﬂuoroacetamide (Pierce
25 cm2) to determine the natural level of LPS present on the Biotechnology) in acetonitrile (99.9% Acros Organics) at 700C
exposed rock surfaces and provide a baseline for environ— overnight in NZ-ﬂushed sealed Vials. All solvents used for
mental LPS levels. organic analyses were gas Chromatography grade (Fisher

Optima or GCResolve) unless specified. All glassware was
LAL analyses baked at 5000C for 8 h.
The polyester swab tips were manually broken off (within 30th fractions were analyzed Vla gas chromatography—
. . . . mass spectrometry in full scan mode (50—650 Da). An Agilent
the original swab container), removed w1th baked tweezers, . . . .
. . 5973N MSD was ﬁtted With an Agilent 6890 GC equipped
and transferred into prepackaged sterile polypropylene tubes . 0 . .
. . . With a 5 /o-phenyl-methylpolys1loxane capillary column (HP-
where they were mixed With 1 ml endotoxm—free, LAL re- . . . .
. . 5M8; 30 m><25 um 1.d., 0.25 mm film thickness) and He carrier
agent water (Charles River Laboratories, product No. W110). . . . .
. gas. Samples in 50 Ml hexane (fraction I) or as neat derivatives
A 100 Ml aliquot of each sample was analyzed for the con- . . . . . .
. . . . in 100 Ml solvent (fraction II) were injected in pulsed splitless
centration of cellular LPS w1th use of a single-use, disposable . O . . .
. . . . mode into a 300 C injection port. The gas Chromatograph
Charles River-Endosafe PTS cartridge containing LAL assay 0 .
. . . . . (GC) oven was programmed from 50 C (held for 1 min) to
for 5—0.05 EU/ml detection and a miniaturized handheld 1n- 0 O . . O .
. . . 300 C (at 3 /m1n), and then held for 10 min at 300 C. Total ion
strument called Lab-On—a-Chip Application Development
. Chromatogram (TIC) results from blank swab controls were
Portable Test System (LOCAD-PTS; by Charles River La-
. . . . subtracted from the sample TIC results.
boratories) s1m11ar to that used for meeting forward contam-
ination, i.e., ”planetary protection,” tests on NASA’s Mars Results
Exploration Rovers. LPS measurements were made in endo-
toxin units per ml for each aliquot. An endotoxin unit (EU) is Semi-quantitative results that we used to assess the thor-
currently defined by the US. Food and Drug Administration oughness of our cleaning method included LAL assay for LPS

"
"6","460 EIGENBRODE ET AL.
concentrations (as EU per unit area) and organic compound derivatives were identified in fraction I of all samples (e.g.,
detection Via gas chromatography—mass spectrometry. Fig. 1A, Table 4), including the blanks, which also served as

The LAL results on (a) the decontaminated coring device swab controls (Fig. 13). The only other major compounds
prior to deployment, (b) the exterior ice-core surfaces and (c) identified as part of fraction I were a set of high—molecular
the coring device after coring, and (d) the blanks and positive weight (HMW) saturated fatty acids (C25zo—C34zo) observed in
controls are shown in Table 2. The data reveal that the seven- swabbed top surface of the ice core (Fig. 1C, Table 4). In-
step cleaning protocol (Table 1) effectively removed all target terestingly, in this atypical sample, the HMW fatty acids
molecules to values within or below the detection limits of were nearly twice as abundant as the LMW fatty acids, yet
<0.002 EU/crn2 [determined by the area swabbed (25 cm2) even-carbon-chain lengths dominated both sets of fatty acids.
and the detection limits of the LAL assay cartridges All other extraneous compounds were not identified but also
(0.05 EU/ml) used in the Endosafe PTS instrument]. After observed in blanks.
coring, both the ice core exterior and interior (after section- In contrast to fraction I, fraction II yielded quantitatively
ing) were also below detection. The only surfaces that and qualitatively similar compositions for all samples, includ-
showed LPS values slightly above detection were the interior ing blanks (not shown). In general, the gas chromatograph—
surfaces of the corer barrel and the top surface of the ice core mass spectrometer (GC-MS) response for fraction II was 1—5
itself. Notably, both positive controls (of snow algae and the times greater than for fraction I. Fraction II was dominated
analyst) yielded 3 to 5 orders of magnitude greater LPS by plant-derived steroid and pentacyclic terpenoids bio-
concentrations. markers. Traces of C14_24 even-chain-length saturated and

Lipopolysaccharide concentrations were measured on unsaturated fatty acids (as tert-butyldimethylsilyl deriva-
freshly cleaned surfaces (pre-sampling) and after collection tives) were also observed. Detection limits for fatty acids
and storage of a sample (post-sampling). The LPS concen- were estimated to be 1 ng/cm2 for swabbed surfaces.
trations on the rover scoop surfaces after the first cleaning
test employing H202 only, revealed 2 orders of magnitude Discussion
higher values (0.186 EU/cmz) than after the seven-step pro-
cedure cleaning, which brought the values down to below The data presented above show that decontamination
detection (<0.002 EU/crnz; Table 3). For the seven-step with one or two reagents (i.e., H202; NaOCl and water) was
cleaning protocol, the LPS levels on swabs collected post- insufficient at removing LPS from sampling-device surfaces
sampling of the inside of the scoop increased by 2 orders of (both ice-coring device or scoop surface). These procedures
magnitude (0.167 EU/cmz) relative to pre-sampling levels. were similar to earlier published decontamination protocols
LPS levels on the scoop surface after sampling were roughly (McDonnell and Russell, 1999; Penna et (11., 2001; Rogers
equivalent to those detected on the rock surfaces, which in- et al., 2004; Venkateswaran et al., 2004; Christner et al., 2005;
dicates backward contamination of the scoop by the rock Kempf et al., 2005; Mikutta et (11., 2005). Notably, some of
sample. Post-sampling LPS concentrations on the scoop after these prior investigations aimed at post—sample-acquisition
the simple H202 cleaning were another order of magnitude decontamination (e.g., soil and ice core) as opposed to pre-
higher (up to 2.43 EU/crnz; Table 3), which demonstrates sampling approaches (e.g., ﬂight hardware). The scoop re-
again that simple H202 cleaning was not effective in re- sults demonstrate that wiping with H202 alone is insufficient
moving organic signals detected Via the LAL assay. at reducing biosignature measurements to null values (these

The coring device, ice-core surfaces, and blanks were tes- surfaces were up to 2 orders of magnitude ”dirtier” than
ted for organics. Low—molecular weight (LMW) saturated those cleaned with the seven-step protocol). Positive results
fatty acids (as methyl esters; C16.0—C24.0), and carbohydrate for LPS after cleaning with these simplified procedures in-
TABLE 2. LPS CONCENTRATIONS DETECTED ON THE CLEANED BARREL OF THE CORING DEVICE (PRE- AND POST—DEPLOYMENT),

ON THE VARIOUS ICE-CORE SURFACES, AND FOR THE POSITIVE CONTROLS
LPS concentration Coefficient of Cell—number

Sample (mean EU/sz) variation (%)* n* equivalentﬁrm?r
Precoring
Blank (swab control) <0.002 NV 2 <4
Positive control (analyst)i 0.015 14.6 2 30
Coring device barrel interior and blades <0.002 NV 3 <4
Coring device barrel exterior <0.002 NV 2 <4
Ice core
Ice-core exterior side surface <0.002 NV 2 <4
Ice-core top surface >0.002 5.4 2 >4
Ice-core interior after break <0.002 NV 2 <4
Postcoring
Coring device barrel interior and blades <0.003 9.9 2 <6
Positive control (snow with algae): 0.790 — 1 1580

>*NV, no variation; 11, number of swabs analyzed for each measurement.

lAssurning that the surface chemicals swabbed were similar to RSE EC-6 (see text).

1LSample was diluted by 100>< in order to test within the detection limits using the LAL assay.

"
"7","FIELD-BASED DECONTAMINATION PROTOCOL 461
TABLE 3. CONCENTRATIONS OF LPS ON THE INTERIOR SURFACE OF THE CLIFFBOT SCOOP, BEFORE AND AFTER CLEANING,
AND POST-SAMPLE-ACQUISITION INCLUDING POSITIVE CONTROL

LPS concentration Coefficient of Cell—number
Sample (mean E U/ cmz) variation (%) n* equivalent/Cm2T
HZOZ—only Cleaning
Scoop pre-sampling 0.186 0.04 2 372
Scoop post-sampling (test 1:) 2.430 30.3 3 4860
Scoop post-sampling (test 2:) 1.890 142 3 3780
Seven—step Cleaning
Scoop pre-sampling <0.002 — — <4
Scoop post-sampling 0.167 1.70 2 334
Positive control (rock sample) >0.200 — — >400
*n, number of swabs analyzed for each measurement.
TAssuming that the surface chemicals swabbed were similar to RSE EC-6 (see text).
1:The scoop was used to sample sedimentary outcrops.
dicate that some biological and organic materials were not both terrestrial Mars analog sample acquisition studies and
removed, a result that could compromise trace organic and for design and applications of ﬂight and analytical hardware
life-detection studies and prompted us to pursue method in future Mars missions. Furthermore, post-sampling, high
development for extensive decontamination and validation LPS concentrations on surfaces indicate backward contami-
protocol. nation and the need for decontamination measures between
In addition, LAL assays show that levels of LPS following samplings to avoid cross contamination of astrobiological
sediment sampling by the Cliffbot rover were still high (up to samples.
103 greater), which corroborated that ”in—between—sample The cocktail of reagents in the seven—step protocol act
cleaning” or ”single-use sampling devices” are crucial for both to sterilize and decontaminate the surfaces of sampling
Carbohydrate
derivatives _ A
I—r LMW Fatty aCIds
I—l
' o
O I
0
° B
0
° 0
I
G)
g o
O
D.
U)
a, O
D: HMW
0; Fatty acids C
E \ '
OJ
0: o
C
C
Time —>
FIG. 1. Total ion Chromatograms from gas Chromatography—mass spectrometry analyses of fraction I of swab extracts. (A)
Organics observed on the interior surfaces of the coring device after cleaning but before coring include carbohydrate
derivatives and low—molecular weight (LMW) fatty acids (as methyl esters; C16;0—C24;0). (B) Organics detected in the swab
control were qualitatively the same as those in (A) but slightly more abundant, most likely due to incomplete extraction of the
swabs before use. (C) Organics from the ice-core top surface are shown as sample TIC minus the TIC for the blank. High—
molecular weight (HMW; C25;0—C34;0) fatty acids are also present in the top ice surface and are similar to those observed in
snow algae and cryoconites (Eigenbrode, unpublished). Dots indicate even carbon numbers for fatty acid Chains.

"
"8","462 EIGENBRODE ET AL.
TABLE 4. GROUPS OF ORGANIC MOLECULES DETECTED IN FRACTION I VIA GAS CHROMATOGRAPHY—MASS SPECTROMETRY
FOR THE CORING DEVICE AFTER CLEANING AND ICE-CORE SURFACES

Carbohydrate C14_24 fatty C28_34 fatty TIC of

Sample derivatives>6 acids* acids* Figure 1
Precoring
Blank (swab control)l + + — 1C
Coring device barrel interior and blades + + — 1A
Coring device barrel exterior + + — 1A3;
Ice core
Ice-core exterior side surface + + — 1A:
Ice-core top surface + + ++ 13
Ice-core interior after break + + — 1A:
Postcoring
Coring device barrel interior and blades + — — 1A:

>9+, presence of compounds; ++, stronger relative response of HMW fatty acids compared to LMW fatty acids in the same sample.

lBackground is defined by the qualitative composition of the blank.

1:Figure 1A is representative of multiple samples.
devices and thus contributes to its effectiveness. Through the signal above GC-MS background. This discrepancy is due to
course of method development, however, the need for a the lower sensitivity and selectivity of gas Chromatography—
combination of mechanical and Chemical action became mass spectrometry organic analysis compared to the LAL
apparent. Most likely, the physical action assisted in the assay for LPS.
removal of contaminants adhered to the surfaces. In the final, The presence of lipopolysaccharides on interior core barrel
seven-step protocol, each surface was wiped at least 14 times. surfaces after sampling the ice is particularly interesting. Mea-
The wide range of disinfectants (glutaraldehyde, phenyl- sured values are just above detection limit (<0.003 EU/sz),
phenol and tertiary amylphenol, alcohol, sodium hypochlo- which indicates backward transfer of ice-derived cell wall
rite, and hydrogen peroxide) applied in the seven-step material to the core barrel. Diverse life has been documented
protocol was necessary to ensure the destruction of chemi- below (Skidmore et (11., 2000; Abyzov et (11., 2001; Bhatia et al.,
cally resistant strains of both vegetative cells and spores. 2006; Mader et (11., 2006; Kastovska et (11., 2007) and within

The LAL assay results from the coring device cleaning tests (Catranis and Starmer, 1991; Karl et al., 1999; Priscu et (11., 1999;
show that the seven-step cleaning protocol removed all de- Abyzov et (11., 2001; Sheridan et (11., 2003; Christner et (11., 2003;
tectable traces of cell wall material (as LPS). Thus, it is likely Miteva and Brenchley, 2005) glacial ice. Life on glacier sur-
(though not tested) that other biological macromolecules, faces includes snow algae (Miiller et al., 1998; Benning et al.,
such as DNA, proteins, complex carbohydrates, lipids, were 2006) and cryoconite or snow-pack microbial communities
also removed. The post-cleaning GC-MS results for organics (Christner et (11., 2003; Gunde-Cimerman et (11., 2003; Amato
present on the swab extracts are consistent with this conclu- et al., 2007). In the accreted Vostok lake ice, Karl et al. (1999)
sion, since the only sample with detectable traces above blank detected ~ 100 pg of LPS per liter ice. The backward transfer
levels was from the top surface of the ice sample—a location of the smallest detectable amount of LPS from the sampled ice
where organic biosignatures, such as HMW fatty acids (Table to the ice coring barrel, as found in this study, is consistent
4) identified in surface life (in cryoconites,wind-blown debris, with earlier findings of microorganisms, including Gram-
snow algae, etc.), are expected to be strong. The relatively negative bacteria (the producers of LPS), within glacial ice at
abundant and diverse array of compounds present in the other sites. It also indicates that the seven-step protocol suf-
blanks and their affinity to other plant molecular signatures ficiently decontaminates sampling device surfaces so that
(Simoneit, 2002; Vichi et al., 2007) indicate that the cotton/ traces of life in extreme environments, like the Arctic ice and
wood swabs, though thoroughly extracted before use, were rocks, can be detected and quantified in a contamination—free
the source of the high backgrounds and degraded the test’s mode.
sensitivity. The seven-step protocol, though highly practical and ap-

The organic molecules in the swab extracts of the corer plicable for most laboratory studies, still poses Challenges
surfaces were largely comparable in composition and quan- when tested in the field in terms of complexity of the cleaning
tity to extracts for the blank swab control, which indicates that steps and keeping materials clean in the field. During
the organics in these samples were derived from the cotton AMASE, the availability of instruments on board the re-
and wood of the swab. Fraction I of swab extracts from the ice- search ship and at deployment sites allowed this protocol to
core top surfaces showed significantly higher quantities and be developed and tested. Despite the successful tests carried
larger variations in composition compared to all other sam- out in the field so far, reducing the seven-step protocol to
ples, which indicates detectable quantities of ice-derived or- fewer steps will be a focal point of our future research. The
ganics, such as wind-blown debris and snow algae (Fig. 1A, current method targets removal of a wide variety of organic
13). The GC-MS results are consistent with relative differences contaminants that may not be characterized before cleaning.
in LPS concentrations except for the traces of LPS detected in Reduction in the number of steps will likely depend on the
the interior core barrel after coring. The correlative swab ex- abundances and types of organic contaminants present and
tracts for organics from the same surface showed no detectable the material being Cleaned.

"
"9","FIELD-BASED DECONTAMINATION PROTOCOL 463

Field-based applications of this protocol will be particu- tailored and tested for specific field, lab, and planetary in-
larly crucial for cleaning and decontamination of sampling vestigations.
devices that are not single use (i.e., for successive sample
acquisitions). Decontamination between sample collections Conclusions
is important when organic concentrations in samples are . . .
already very low, which makes the sample susceptible to .0“? results show that the combinatioh and step-w1se ap-
forward contamination, and when sample devices have been plicatiori 0f disinfectants Wlth. oxidative and .solvation
used for more-complex sample matrixes with higher organ— properties for organic decontamination are effective at re-
ics or bioload, which can contribute to backward or sample- movmg cellular remnants and other organic traces to levels
to-sample contamination (e.g'l successive rock sampling with necessary for life-detectiori studies. The validation of this
a rover scoop). Sequential sampling with a device will re- seven—step protocol—spec1f1cally for 1C9 sampling—allows us
quire a thorough and stringent decontamination protocol t9 proceed WM} confidence in terrestrial analog investiga-
after each sampling step. The possibility of utilizing single- “ODS 0f 1cy enVironments; thus, lhls protocol may be aPPh'
use sampling devices that are pre-cleaned according to the cable to future astrobiology missions to my regions 0f Mars,
seven—step protocol may be a compelling alternative to Europa, and Enceladus.
cleaning devices on site between sample collections. Single-
use sampling devices may be specifically suitable for plane- ACknOWledgmentS
tary applications. We thank the 2005 and 2006 AMASE teams and crew of

Future adjustments to the newly developed decontami- the Norwegian Polar Institute’s R/ V Lance for assisting the
nation protocol will entail a switch to polyester clean—room ,, . . ,, . .

. , , cleaning ladies during the ﬁeldwork. We are grateful for
w1pes throughout the whole decontamination process, as enerous su ort from the Geo h sical Laborator Carne-
this will be more conducive to other simplifications. Efforts g. I . . pp f h' p dy h . . y’f
will also be made to reduce the number of steps and further gie nstitution 0 Was ington, an t e Uruversity 0 Leeds.

, We are indebted to the University Centre in Svalbard (UNIS)
decrease background levels of organics. Cotton/wood swabs for safety training and logistical support and we thank
for organic analyses, which attributed to diverse organics in Charles River Laboratories Inc for kindly providing the
blanks, will be replaced with organic-free glass fiber wipes L AL assa instrumentation and consumables This work wa
held with forceps. The effectiveness of the multi-step de- f nd (1 by N AS A AMASE-ASTEP tl. d b A St 1s
contamination protocol will also be cross-correlated in future aid She garath and Biosphere Institutgrgrrid gchobfl of 13:31:
deployments with other life-detection techniques, including (1 E . t tth U . . t fL d h f' . 1
measurements of a broader range of organics identifiable an nVironmen a e niversi f0 ee 5’ W ose 1nanc1a

. , , , help made these f1eld seasons poss1ble.
from swab and rinse extracts Via gas and liquid chromatog-
raphy. In particular, tests for LPS and gas chromatography— _
amenable organics will be supplemented with measurements Author DISCIosure Statement
of total ATP, which will allow investigators to exploit more No competing financial interests exist.
fully the potential of cellular activity or remnants.

The Charles River Endosafe LQCAD-PTS unit capable of Abbreviations
quantiflcations of LPS concentration was tested on the In-
ternational Space Station in March 2007, and similar units are AMASE, Arctic Mars Analog Svalbard EXPEditiOD; ATP,
likely to be used for future BSA and NASA Mars missions. adenosine triphosphate; EU, endotoxin unit; CC, gas chro-
Although such units are not yet widely used in the terrestrial matograph; GC-MS, gas chromatograph—mass spectrometer;
Mars-analog research community or in ﬂight hardware de- HMW, high molecular weight; LAL, Limulus Amebocyte
contamination testing, the data presented above show that Lysate; LMW, 10W molecular weight; LOCAD-PTS, Lab-
the combination of a thorough cleaning protocol with the On—a-Chip Application Development Portable Test System;
low-level LPS detection capabilities of such units is invalu- LPS, lipopolysaccharide; RSE, reference standard endotoxin;
able with regard to a clean sample-device treatment—both TIC, total ion chromatogram.
prior to deployment and between sampling events—that
could be applied to terrestrial field-based astrobiology re- References
search and future planetary missions. . .

Application of the seven—step protocol was successful in AbYZOV’ S.S., MltSkeV1?h’ I'N"" Poglazova, M'N"" Barkov, N'I""
decontaminating epoxy-resin fiberglass, stainless steel, and Lipenkov, V.Ya., Bobm, N'E"" Koiidryashov, B'B"" PaShkeVICh’
carbon—fiber 3D composite materials of two sampling de- X'M"" alld lvanov, MBV' (20211) 13er%)? :1 thjiasagl strat; at
Vices to null levels deemed necessary for our life-detection 2811;?)r1c—t;c061ce core a ove t e OStO a e. v. pace es.
tests. l3urther,. there were no obv1ous adverse effects on the Alimova, A., Katz, A., Siddique, M., Minko, (3., Savage, H.E.,
sampling equipment, LAL assay,.and organic chemical tests. Shah, M.K., Rosen, KB, and Alfano, RR. (2005) Native ﬂuo-
Although the protocol was deSIgned to remove the most rescence changes induced by bactericidal agents. IEEE Sens.
reactive reagents, incomplete removal of glutaraldehyde, ]_ 51704411.
sodium hypochlorite, and H202 COUId adversely affect Amato, P., Hennebelle, R., Magand, 0., Sancelme, M., Delort,
other analytical tQStS- In addition, chemical reagents “59d A.M., Barbante, C., Boutron, C., and Ferrari, C. (2007) Bacterial
here are “Qt compatible With all sampling hardware mate- characterization of the snow cover at Spitzberg, Svalbard.
rials. Thus, the seven—step protocol in its entirety is not ap- FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 59:255—264.
propriate to all life-detection studies; however, it does lay the Benning, L.G., Jorge Villar, S., Stibal, M., Fogel, M., Steele, A.,
groundwork by which decontamination protocols can be Edwards, H.G.M., and AMASE (2006) Survival of the fittest:

"
"10","464 EIGENBRODE ET AL.
snow-adapted microorganisms in Arctic environments Astro- Miteva, V.I. and Brenchley, ].E. (2005) Detection and isolation of
biology 6:110. ultrasmall microorganisms from a 120,000-year-01d Greenland

Bhatia, M., Sharp, M., and Foght, I. (2006) Distinct bacterial glacier ice core. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71:7806—7818.
communities exist beneath a high Arctic polythermal glacier. Miiller, T., BleiB, W., Martin, C-D., Rogaschewski, S., and Fuhr,
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72:5838—5845. G. (1998) Snow algae from northwest Svalbard: their identi-

Catranis, CM. and Starmer, W.T. (1991) Microorganisms en— fication, distribution, pigment and nutrient content. Polar Biol.
trapped in glacial ice. Antarct. ]. U.S. 26:234—236. 20:14—32.

Christner, B.C., KVitko, B.H., and Reeve, ].N. (2003) Molecular Neidhardt, F.C. (1987) Chemical composition of Escherichia coli.
identification of bacteria and eukarya inhabiting an Antarctic In Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium. Cellular and
cryoconite hole. Extremophiles 7:177—183. Molecular Biology, 1St ed., edited by PC. Neidhardt, ].L. In-

Christner, B.C., Mikucki, ].A., Foreman, C.M., Denson, ]., and graham, KB. Low, In, B. Magasanik, M. Schaechter, and HE.
Priscu, ].C. (2005) Glacial ice cores: a model system for de- Umbarger, American Society for Microbiology, Washington
veloping extraterrestrial decontamination protocols. Icarus DC, pp 3—6.

174:572—584. Pardieck, D.L., Bouwer, E.]., and Stone, A.T. (1992) Hydrogen-

Crow, S. and Smith, ].H. (1995) Gas plasma sterilization— peroxide use to increase oxidant capacity for in situ bioreme-
application of space-age technology. Infect. Control Hosp. Epi— diation of contaminated soils and aquifers: a review. I. Contam.
demiol. 16:483—487. Hydrol. 9:221—242.

Goldstone, ].V., Pullin, M.]., Bertilsson, S., and Voelker, B.M. Penna, T.C.V., Mazzola, P.G., and Martins, A.M.S. (2001) The
(2002) Reaction of hydroxyl radicals with humic substances: efficacy of Chemical agents in Cleaning and disinfection pro-
bleaching, mineralization, and production of bioavailable grams. BMC Infect. Dis. 1:16.
carbon substrates. Environ. Sci. Technol. 36:364—372. Priscu, ].C., Adams, E.E., Lyons, W.B., Voytek, M.A., Mogk,

Gunde-Cimerman, N., Sonjak, S., Zalar, P., Frisvad, ].C., Di- D.W., Brown, R.L., McKay, C.P., Takacs, C.D., Welch, K.A.,
derichsen, B., and Plemenitas, A. (2003) Extremophilic fungi in Wolf, C.F., Kirshtein, ].D., and AVCi, R. (1999) Geomicrobiol-
Arctic ice: a relationship between adaptation to 10w temper- ogy of subglacial ice above Lake Vostok, Antarctica. Science
ature and water activity. Physics and Chemistry of the Earth 286:2141—2144.

28:1273—1278. Raetz, CR. (1986) Molecular genetics of membrane phospho-

Herbert, RA. (1990) Methods for enumerating microorganisms lipids synthesis. Annu. Rev. Genet. 20:253—295.
and determining biomass in natural environments. Methods in Rogers, 8.0., Theraisnathan, V., Ma, L.]., Zhao, Y., Zhang, (3.,
Microbiology 22:1—39. Shin, S.G., Castello, ].D., and Starmer, W.T. (2004) Compar-

Huntsberger, T., Stroupe, A.W., Garrett, M., and Younse, P. isons of protocols for decontamination of environmental ice
(2007) TRESSA: teamed robots for exploration and science in samples for biological and molecular examinations. Appl.
steep areas. Journal of Field Robotics 22:79—92. Environ. Microbiol. 70:2540—2544.

Karl, D.M., Bird, D.F., Bjorkman, K., Houlihan, T., Shackelford, Roslansky, P.F. and NOVitsky, T.]. (1991) Sensitivity of Limulus
R., and Tupas, L. (1999) Microorganisms in the accreted ice of Amebocyte Lysate (LAL) t0 LAL-reactive glucans. J. Clin.
Lake Vostok, Antarctica. Science 286:2144—2147. Microbial. 29:2477—2483.

Kastovska, K., Stibal, M., Sabacka, M., Cerna, B., Santruckova, Rummel, ].D. (2001) Planetary exploration in the time of astro-
H., and Elster, I. (2007) Microbial community structure and biology: protecting against biological contamination. Proc.
ecology of subglacial sediments in two polythermal Svalbard Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98:2128—2131.
glaciers Characterized by epiﬂuorescence microscopy and Russell, AD. (1990) Bacterial spores and Chemical sporicidal
PLFA. Polar Biol. 30:277—287. agents. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 3:99—119.

Kempf, M.]., Chen, F., Kern, R., and Venkateswaran, K. (2005) Sabli, M.Z.H., Setlow, P., and Waites, W.M. (1996) The effect of
Recurrent isolation of hydrogen peroxide-resistant spores of hypochlorite 0n spores of Bacillus subtilis lacking small acid-
Bacillus pumilus from a spacecraft assembly facility. Astro- soluble proteins. Let. Appl. Microbiol. 22:405—407.
biology 5:391—405. Setlow, P. (2006) Spores of Bacillus subtilis: their resistance to and

Mader, H.M., Pettitt, M.E., Wadham, ].L., Wolff, E.W., and killing by radiation, heat and Chemicals. J. Appl. Microbiol.
Parkes, RJ. (2006) Subsurface ice as a microbial habitat. 101:514—525.

Geology 34:169—172. Sheridan, P.P., Miteva, V.I., and Brenchley, ].E. (2003) Phyloge-

Maeda, M. and Taga, N. (1979) Chromogenie assay method of netic analysis of anaerobic psychrophilic enrichment cultures
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) for evaluating bacterial standing obtained from a Greenland glacier ice core. Appl. Environ.
crop in seawater. J. Appl. Bacterial. 47:175—182. Microbial. 69:2153—2160.

Mancinelli, R.L. (2003) Planetary protection and the search Simoneit, B.R.T. (2002) Biomass burning—a review of organic
for life beneath the surface of Mars. Adv. Space Res. 31:103— tracers for smoke from incomplete combustion. Appl. Geochem.
107. 17:129—162.

Masood, A., Stark, K.D., and Salem, N. (2005) A simplified Skidmore, M.L., Foght,].M., and Sharp, M.]. (2000) Microbial life
and efficient method for the analysis of fatty acid methyl beneath a high Arctic glacier. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66:
esters suitable for large Clinical studies. ]. Lipid Res. 46:2299— 3214—3220.

2305. Steele, A., Amundsen, H., Fogel, M., Conrad, P., Benning, L., and
McDonnell, G. and Russell, AD. (1999) Antiseptics and disin- the AMASE teams of 2006 and 2007. (2008) The Arctic Mars
fectants: activity, action, and resistance. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. Analogue Svalbard Expedition update. Astrobiology 8:355.

12:147—179 Trent, M.S., Stead, C.M., Tran, A.X., and Hankins, ].V. (2006)

Mikutta, R., Kleber, M., Kaiser, K., and Iahn, R. (2005) Review: Diversity of endotoxin and its impact on pathogenesis. ]. En-
organic matter removal from soils using hydrogen peroxide, dotoxin Res. 12:205—223.
sodium hypochlorite, and disodium peroxodisulfate. Soil Sci. US. Food and Drug Administration. (1987) Guideline 0n vali-
Soc. Am. I. 69:120—135. dation of Limulus Amebocyte Lysate test as an end-product

"
"11","FIELD-BASED DECONTAMINATION PROTOCOL 465
endotoxin test for human and animal parenteral drugs, bio- Extraction (ASE) coupled to gas Chromatography—mass spec-
logical products, and medical devices. Food and Drug Ad- trometry (GC-MS). Food Chem. 102:1260—1269.
ministration, Rockville, MD. Young, SB. and Setlow, P. (2003) Mechanisms of killing of Ba-

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (1991) Interim guidance for Cillus subtilis spores by hypochlorite and Chlorine dioxide.
human and veterinary drug products and biologicals: kinetic J. Appl. Microbiol. 95:54—67.

LAL techniques. Food and Drug Administration, Rockville,
MD- Address correspondence to:

Venkateswaran, K., Chung, S., Allton, ]., and Kern, R. (2004) Iennifer Eigenbrode
Evaluation of various Cleaning methods to remove bacillus N AS A Goddard Space Flight Center
spores from spacecraft hardware materials. Astrobiology 4:377— Code 699
.399 , , , , , Greenbelt, MD 20771

V1ch1, S., Santml, C., Natah, N., Rlpom, C., Lépez-Tamamesa, E., US A
and Buxaderas S. (2007) Volatile and semi-volatile compo-
nents of oak wood Chips analysed by Accelerated Solvent E-mail: Jennifer.Eigenbrode@nasa.g0v

"
"12",""
