"","x"
"1","ASTROBIOLOGY
Volume 12, Number 9, 2012
© Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/ast.2012.0863
Rapid Culture-Independent MleOblal AnaIySIs Aboard
the International Space Station (ISS) Stage Two:
Quantifying Three MleOblal Biomarkers
Heather C. Morris,1 Michael Damon,2 Jake Maule,2 Lisa A. Monaco,1 and Norm Wainwright3
Abstract
A portable, rapid, microbial detection unit, the Lab-On-a-Chip Application Development Portable Test System
(LOCAD-PTS), was launched to the International Space Station (188) as a technology demonstration unit in
December 2006. Results from the first series of experiments designed to detect Gram-negative bacteria on 188
surfaces by quantifying a single microbial biomarker lipopolysaccharide (LPS) were reported in a previous
article. Herein, we report additional technology demonstration experiments expanding the on-orbit capabilities
of the LOCAD-PTS to detecting three different microbial biomarkers on 188 surfaces. Six different astronauts on
more than 20 occasions participated in these experiments, which were designed to test the new beta-glucan
(fungal cell wall molecule) and lipoteichoic acid (LTA; Gram-positive bacterial cell wall component) cartridges
individually and in tandem with the existing Limulus Arnebocyte Lysate (LAL; Gram-negative bacterial LPS
detection) cartridges. Additionally, we conducted the sampling side by side with the standard culture-based
detection method currently used on the 188. Therefore, we present data on the distribution of three microbial
biomarkers collected from various surfaces in every module present on the 188 at the time of sampling. In
accordance with our previous experiments, we determined that spacecraft surfaces known to be frequently in
contact with crew members demonstrated higher values of all three microbial molecules. Key Words: Planetary
protection—Spaceﬂight—Microbiology—Biosensor. Astrobiology 12, 830—840.
1. Introduction rial and/or fungal contamination sources but not Gram-
positive bacterial molecules. Ideally, multiple Classes of mi-
THE POTENTIAL FOR microbial contamination in multiple crobes should be surveyed in order to assess more completely
industries, including food, environmental health, phar- the overall bioburden inside a spacecraft. Since the 188 has
maceutical, and others, requires the capability to rapidly de- been operational for 13 years (10 of which have been human
tect and address such contamination (Morris et (11., 2010). The tended), surface sampling will become particularly important
same need for microbiological detection exists in many as the space station’s lifetime is extended.
spaceﬂight-related activities as we11,ranging from crew health Previous studies conducted on the Russian space station
concerns to degradation of materials in key systems. Tradi- Mir attributed surface degradation of multiple materials to
tional, culture-based methods to quantify microbes require microorganisms collected and isolated from space-grade
several days to yield information. Making time-critical deci- aluminum-magnesium and multiple polymers (Novikova,
sions on board current and future spacecraft demands new, 2004). Such results underscored the need for continuous
nonculture methods that can report results in minutes to crew monitoring of surfaces, air, and water aboard the 188.
members responsible for taking necessary actions. Previously, Therefore, a repetitive cleaning and microbial monitoring
we reported the first use of our system, Lab-on—a-Chip Ap- protocol based upon the use of a standard agar-based culture
plication Development Portable Test System (LOCAD-PTS), system has been in place aboard the 188 before, during, and
to successfully quantify bacterial molecules on multiple sur- after construction. In this protocol, contact slides (Biotest,
faces within the International Space Station (188; Maule et (11., Rockaway, NJ) are brieﬂy placed on a ﬂat surface, incubated
2009). These initial studies were limited to a single type of for 5 days, and then Visually inspected for colonies. Inter-
reagent cartridge capable of detecting Gram—negative bacte- estingly, promoting growth of bacteria with these contact
1Jacobs Technology, Inc, ESTS Group, Huntsville, Alabama.
2BAE Systems, Huntsville, Alabama.
3Charles River Laboratories, Charleston, South Carolina.
830

"
"2","QUANTIFYING THREE MICROBIAL BIOMARKERS ON ISS 831
slides actually creates potential biohazards that then require and software. A LOCAD-PTS cartridge is inserted into an
appropriate containment, disposal, and in some cases ar- opening at the front of the instrument. Liquid samples are
chiving for transfer to ground if further analysis is required. introduced into a sample well exposed on the cartridge end.
In order to improve upon the current protocol, multiple as- The onboard pump draws the sample into the Channels of
say platforms, including the LOCAD-PTS, are currently be- the cartridge where dry reagents are hydrated and the assay
ing considered for future environmental monitoring of the is performed. At the completion of each test, the results are
ISS and possible long—range human ﬂight projects. To date, displayed on the LED screen, which indicates the endotoxin
no ﬂight-qualified system has proven to be all-inclusive in concentration of the sample in Endotoxin Units per milliliter
the detection, quantification, and Characterization of surface (EU/mL), the amount of glucan in the sample in nanograms
bacteria on the ISS, primarily due to the sheer diversity of per milliliter, or the quantity of LTA in the sample in milli-
microbial species. grams per milliliter. The reader was manufactured by

When using available techniques, the vast majority of Charles River Laboratories and modified for spaceﬂight in
environmental bacteria cannot be cultured (Kaeberlein et (11., conjunction with Marshall Space Flight Center.

2002), and more inclusive methods should be analyzed for
future use. At present, the best scenario may be a set of 2.2. Cartridges
assays that would work in coordination With one another to For each cartridge, all reagents are fully contained within
conform to crew health and safety standards. The LOCAD- .

. . . each of four Channels; therefore, gloves are not required for
PTS suite of cartridges, based upon the Lzmulus Amebocyte . . . . . .

. handling. Liquid samples are directly pipetted With the use

Lysate (LAL) assay, detects live as well as dead Gram— .

. . . . . of the swab unit (see below) to a sample well at the end of
negative and Gram—positive bacteria, mold, and fungi re- .

. . . . each Channel, then pumped down the Channel and mixed
gardless of their ability to be cultured (Morris et (11., 2010). with dried L AL rea ent and a chromo enic substrate The
The ability of the LOCAD-PTS to detect dead bacterial cells is g . g °

. absorbance of the reacted sample is measured and compared
a major advantage over current and proposed methods for . . .

. . . . . . . to an internal standard curve. Follow1ng analys1s, the used
microbial monitoring on the ISS in that it prov1des a more . . . .

. . . cartridges are sealed in a plastic bag and placed in a down-
comprehens1ve picture of the surface bioburden. However, . .
. . . ,, . ,, . mass disposal bag. The three types of cartridges used are as
from a crew health perspective, it is the live or Viable follows'
signatures that are of concern to the ﬂight surgeons. '

Herein, we report the results obtained during the contin- 0 LAL (Limulus Amebocyte Lysate; detects Gram-negative
uation of our technology demonstration aboard the ISS from bacteria, mold, and fungi)—Each cartridge Channel
June 2008 through August 2009. Upon the successful com— contained the LAL reagent and a chromogenic substrate
pletion of our first round of technology demonstration tests, for the detection of endotoxin. Channels 1 and 3 re-
our team’s primary objective was to expand the capabilities ceived a known amount of endotoxin as a positive
of the equipment that we currently had available on the ISS control. The range of the cartridges was 0.05—5 EU/mL.
by developing low-mass, swift time-to-ﬂight cartridges spe- ° Gram-positive (detects LTA, a component of Gram-
cific for additional microbial molecules. The molecules beta- positive bacterial cell walls)—Each cartridge Channel
glucan, a component of fungal cell walls, and lipoteichoic contained the LTA-specific reagent and a chromogenic
acid (LTA), a molecule found in Gram—positive bacterial cell substrate. Channels 1 and 3 contain LTA as a positive
walls, were selected for ease of assay development. They control. The range of the cartridges was 0.05—5 mg/rnL.
were developed, produced, and launched to the ISS for 0 B-Glucan (detects beta-glucan, a component of fungal
testing within 2 years. The expanded capabilities afforded by cell walls)—Each cartridge Channel contained beta-
these additional cartridges allowed us to design a set of ex- glucan—specific LAL. Channels 1 and 3 contained CM-
periments to determine the ability of the LOCAD-PTS to Pachyrnan as a positive control. The range of the
quantify three microbial molecules both separately and in cartridges was 1—100ng/mL.
parallel on ISS surfaces. Therefore, our new objectives for this
second round of testing were as follows: 2.3. Swab unit and swab kits

0 Perform side-by-side analysis of a location with beta- The swab unit and swab kits were designed and manu-

glucan or Gram—positive (LTA) cartridges and contact factured by Marshall Space Flight Center’s LOCAD team.
media slides; The swab unit is similar in size and function to a standard

0 Conduct parallel analysis of at least one site with all single-Channel laboratory pipette. The swab unit is utilized

three cartridges and contact media slides. during both the sample swabbing and sample dispensing
steps. The swab kit consists of a water cartridge, swab tip,
2. Materials and Methods and dlspensmg up

The essential elements to the LOCAD-PTS are the reader, 2.4. Sample collection, processing, and analysis
cartridges, swab kits, and the swab unit. For a complete . . .

. . . . . . The preferred sampling site was one that was prev1ously
description of each element, refer to the descriptions listed in . . .
Maule e t al (2009) sampled With the LOCAD-PTS. If a prev1ously tested site was

' ' not available, suggestions from the LOCAD science team were
conveyed to the crew. The crew were also allowed to choose

2.1. Reader . . . . . .
several locations at their discretion, most opting for locations

The LOCAD-PTS reader is a handheld spectrophotometer that they hypothesized may have a high microbial presence.
with built-in heater and pump, integrated with electronics To begin a sampling session, a Bacterial Contact Slide and a

"
"3","832 MORRIS ET AL.
TABLE 1. COMPLETE DATA SET COLLECTED DURING THE SECOND STAGE OF EXPERIMENTS
WITH THE LOCAD-PTS RAPID MICROBIAL DETECTION INSTRUMENT ON THE 188
Site Sample # Cartridge Value Units % CV Bacteria Fungi
Node 1, Air supply diffuser, starboard side 1 Glucan < 1.00 ng/mL 0 1 1
on panel NOD1_O234
Node 1, Air supply diffuser, starboard side 2 Glucan 18.7 ng/mL 12.5
on panel NOD1_O234
Node 1, Air supply diffuser, starboard side 3 LAL (by mistake) 2.12 EU/mL 0
on panel NOD1_O234
Node 1, Air supply diffuser, starboard side 4 LAL (by mistake) 5.4 EU/mL 1.9
on panel NOD1_O234
Crew palm 5 LAL (by mistake) < 1.88 EU/mL 43.1
LAL reagent water 6 LAL (by mistake) ?3.77 EU/mL 105.9
Node 1 D1 in area of CWC stowage 7 Glucan 5.69 ng/mL 25.1 0 0
Node 1 D1 in area of CWC stowage 8 Glucan < 1.00 ng/mL 0
Node 1 D1 in area of CWC stowage 9 Glucan 18.1 ng/mL 14.3
Node 1 D1 in area of CWC stowage 10 Glucan 3.51 ng/mL 4.9
Audio Terminal Unit (ATU) starboard 13 Glucan 23.8 ng/mL 21.9 N / a N/ a
cone (OB, OF)
Biolab (BLB) Glovebox main door 14 Glucan < 1.26 ng/mL 14.2 N / a N/ a
Columbus, Return Grid Sensor Housing 15 Glucan < 2.05 ng/mL 49.8 N / a N / a
Port Deck Module (PDM) (OB, OF)
Cabin Air Diffuser Overhead Forward 1 (OF1) 16 Glucan < 30.9 ng/mL 34.1 N / a N/ a
European Drawer Rack, LUDP 17 Glucan 0.48 ng/ mL 16 N / a N / a
Floor area in TeSS where her feet 18 Glucan < 1.43 ng/mL 23 N / a N/ a
touch each day
CEVIS frame 19 Glucan > 100 ng/ mL 0 N / a N / a
JEM PM, airlock handle 20 Gram + ?0.185 mg/mL 107.5 N / a N / a
JEM PM, door handle to IATCS Bypass 21 Gram+ < 0.050 mg/mL 0 N / a N/ a
Valve/ECLSS ARS Shutoff Valve,
starboard aft
JEM PM, handle to tray, DMS2-4, overhead 22 Gram+ < 0.056 mg/mL 7.2 N / a N/ a
JEM PM, Return Grill (A2D), aft deck 23 Gram+ < 0.087 mg/mL 38.3 N / a N/ a
US. Lab, TeSS fabric 24 Gram+ < 0.050 mg/mL 0.00 N / a N/ a
US. Lab, CEVIS 25 Gram+ 0.05 mg/mL 34.00 N / a N/ a
NOD1_PD2_24, area of CWC stowage 26 Gram+ < 0.050 mg/mL 0.00 N / a N/ a
FGB, Waste Hygiene Compartment (WHC) 27 Gram+ < 0.56 mg/mL 68.10 N / a N/ a
FGB, handrail near Hygiene Station 28 Gram+ < 0.050 mg/mL 0.00 N / a N/ a
CEVIS handle 28 LAL 0.05 EU/mL 0 13 0
CEVIS handle 29 Gram + 0.097 mg/mL 46.6
CEVIS handle 30 Glucan 4.75 ng/ mL 11.4
CEVIS handle 31 Glucan 1.93 ng/ mL 45.4
NOD1D5 32 LAL 0.05 EU/ mL 0 3 0
NOD1D5 33 Glucan 5 ng/ mL 30.5
NOD1D5 34 Glucan 2.79 ng/ mL 52.6
NOD1D5 35 Gram + 0.069 mg/mL 52.6
Back wall of Waste Hygiene 36 LAL 1.47 EU/mL 9.3 3 0
Compartment (WHC)
Back wall of Waste Hygiene 37 Glucan 11.2 ng/mL 9
Compartment (WHC)
Back wall of Waste Hygiene 38 Glucan 66.4 ng/mL 0
Compartment (WHC)
Back wall of Waste Hygiene 39 Gram+ < 0.058 mg/mL 9
Compartment (WHC)
Node 2 Port, Crew Quarters 41 LAL < 0.06 EU/mL 9.5 N / a N / a
Node 2 Port, Crew Quarters 42 LAL < 0.05 EU/mL 0
Node 2 Port, Crew Quarters 43 LAL 0.206 EU/mL 14.6
Node 2 Port, Crew Quarters 44 LAL < 0.05 EU/mL 0
Node 1 D3 Port, Galley Table where 17 LAL < 0.071 EU/mL 19.3 6 1
everyone puts their feet
Node 1 D3 Port, Galley Table where 18 LAL < 0.070 EU/mL 18.6
everyone puts their feet
Node 1 D3 Port, Galley Table where 19 LAL < 0.050 EU/mL 0
everyone puts their feet
(continued)

"
"4","QUANTIFYING THREE MICROBIAL BIOMARKERS ON ISS 833
TABLE 1. (CONTINUED)

Site Sample # Cartridge Value Units % CV Bacteria Fungi

Node 1 D3 Port, Galley Table where 20 LAL ?0.210 EU/mL 96.8

everyone puts their feet
Lab1 D6 starboard aft handrail foot 60 Gram+ 0.119 mg/mL 20.2 14 0

restraint (gets a lot of traffic)

Lab1 D6 starboard aft handrail foot 61 Gram+ 0.05 mg/mL 0
restraint (gets a lot of traffic)

Lab1 D6 starboard aft handrail foot 62 Gram+ <0.050 mg/mL 0
restraint (gets a lot of traffic)

Lab1 D6 starboard aft handrail foot 63 Gram+ <0.050 mg/mL 0

restraint (gets a lot of traffic)

The background levels for LAL, beta-glucan, and Gram—positive cartridges are <0.05 EU/mL, 1ng/mL, and 0.05 mg/mL, respectively.
Bacterial and fungal colony-forming units (CFUs) are also presented when culture-based tests were performed.

Bolded values indicates samples that were ﬂagged due to samples with coefficients of variation (CVs) that exceeded 25%. The ”?” symbol
in front of a value indicates that one of the two sample channels to be averaged did not have an expected value. Coefficients of variation
greater than 25% indicate excessive variability in the optical readings obtained from the two sample wells. N / a =not applicable and refers to
the experiments where swabs were taken of surfaces chosen by astronauts without using contact media slides in parallel.

Fungi Contact Slide were placed on the selected surface. The ule (IBM), providing a unique opportunity to be one of the
slides were placed on the surface for 1—2 seconds and then first detection technologies utilized in that space. Because of
removed. After removal, the slides were sealed and incubated. the rigorous Cleaning and contamination prevention pro-

The surface for each swabbing procedure covered an area tocols in place prior to launch, we expected to observe
of 25 cm2, a 5><5cm square. To prepare the swab unit for signals close to the background levels of the cartridges
surface swabbing, a water cartridge is attached to the lower used. As listed in Table 1 and Fig. 213, the values obtained
end. Then a swab tip is attached to the other end of the water from all four surfaces swabbed and sampled in the IBM and
cartridge. Both ends of the water cartridge are identical, so analyzed with the Gram-positive cartridges were at or near
orientation is irrelevant. In this configuration, the swab unit background. We were unable to test enough surfaces to
is held perpendicular to the surface to be swabbed while analyze samples, using all three cartridges, but these results
swabbing in a baCk-and-forth motion, covering the entire do provide one set of baseline measurements for a new
area. Following swabbing, a dispensing tip is applied over module.
the swab tip. The swab unit is then manipulated such that As depicted in Fig. 1, almost every module of the ISS at the
the collected sample on the swab tip is mixed with the sterile time of the experiments has now been sampled. Since the
water in the water cartridge. After completing a standard- values listed in Fig. 1 are averages, they are in no way in-
ized mixing protocol, four 25 ,uL samples are placed in a tended to be used to interpret the relative Cleanliness of the
cartridge for testing. Please refer to Maule et al. (2009) for a various modules. However, from the results obtained in
more detailed explanation of the sampling apparatus and Phase 1 testing and the values listed in Table 1, we observed
procedure and for photos of the sampling process on the ISS. consistently elevated levels of microbial molecules in the

Zarya module and Node 1 (Unity), the two oldest modules,
3. Results using all three cartridges. Some of the readings obtained
This paper presents results for the Phase 3 and Phase 4 set from surfaces in relatively newer modules (6'57"" 27°03 ng/mL
. . . . beta-glucan 1n the US. Destiny lab or 11.70 ng/mL beta-
of experiments spanning 2008 and 2009, which continued the . , .
. . glucan 1n ESA s Columbus lab) were higher than those ob-
Phase 1 and 2 experiments reported prev1ously (Maule et (11., . . .
. . . . served in Node 1 but still lower than the values obtained
2009). During Phases 3 and 4, the Gram-pos1t1ve cartridges . . . .
. . from Zarya. These data could be attributed to the variation in
detecting the molecule LTA and beta-glucan cartridges for .
. . the texture, material, and crew contact of the surfaces sam-
detecting yeast and mold were tested, expanding the reper- . . .

. . . . pled in different modules, even though most s1tes Chosen

t01re of the LOCAD-PTS. Us1ng the Gram—pos1t1ve, beta- . .
. . were from instruments or panels With frequent crew member
glucan, and LAL cartridges in parallel, we analyzed a total of . . . . .
. . contact. The data listed in Table 1 and depicted in Fig. 1
52 samples. As was observed for the LAL cartridges in the . . . . . .
. . . prov1de the ﬁrst complete data set summarizing the distri-
Phase 1 and Phase 2 testing, the highest beta-glucan readings . . .
. . . . bution of microbial molecules throughout the ISS as deter-
were from the Cycle Ergometer With Vibration Isolation and mined b an onboard ra i (1 detection device
Stabilization (CEVIS), a stationary exercise bicycle. However, y ’ p '
only one site sampled registered a significant level of LTA;
this was the Waste Hygiene Compartment (WHC) in the 3.2. Microbial molecule values can vary significantly
Russian Functional Cargo block (FGB or Zarya). even on the same surface
3.1. LOCAD-PTS cartridges have surveyed surfaces .A5 Observed m Phas? 1 and 2 te.Stmg Of th? LAL car-
tridges, the values obtained from different sections of the
from many modules of the ISS .
same surface returned markedly diverse values for both the

The onset of these experiments coincided with the arrival, beta-glucan and Gram-positive cartridges (Table 2). Similar

attachment, and opening of the Japanese Exploration Mod- to the methods performed during the first rounds of testing

"
"5","834 MORRIS ET AL.
the LAL cartridges, a surface was selected with an area large positive cartridges, realizing the constraints imposed by the
enough to place a fungal contact media slide and a bacterial relatively low sensitivity.
contact media slide side by side. Four areas—north, south, In light of the relative insensitivity of the Gram-positive
east, and west—of the contact slides were then swabbed and cartridges, the fact that we obtained a positive signal from
analyzed with four separate beta-glucan cartridges or four the foot restraint is significant (0.119 mg/mL vs. 0.05 mg/
Gram-positive cartridges. As listed in Table 2, the values mL, the background value). This result was observed in
returned by the beta-glucan cartridges varied significantly conjunction with a relatively large number of colonies
between each area sampled. Although the level of beta- grown on the contact slides [14 colony-forming units
glucan detected on Swab Area 3 is higher than the other (CFUs)], which were probably composed of both Gram-
three swab areas (18.1 ng/mL), it is lower than some values positive and Gram-negative species. The background values
obtained elsewhere in the space station (e.g., 66.4 ng/mL in returned by the samples from other areas of the foot restraint
the WHC). The remaining three swab areas reported values could be due to a concentration of the bacteria to one area of
at or very near background (1 ng/mL), which is in agreement the foot restraint.
with the lack of colonies that grew on either contact media
Shde' . . 3.3. Microbial molecules were elevated at sites
We observed cons1stently low values when us1ng the frequently con tac te d by crew members
Gram-positive cartridges, reﬂected in the numbers listed in
Table 2. However, these results were not unexpected. We Similar to the experiments performed in Phase 2 of LAL
attempted to produce a very sensitive cartridge for detecting cartridge testing documented previously (Maule et (11.,
Gram-positive cells, using a colorimetric-based assay, the 2009), we requested that the operating ISS crew member
basis for our instrument platform. Our ground tests con- select multiple locations to sample with either beta-glucan
ducted prior to ﬂight demonstrated reproducibility but not or Gram-positive cartridges. As shown in Fig. 3, most sites
sensitivity (Fig. 2). We determined that it would take ap- returned background values for both cartridges (1 ng/mL
proximately 104 bacterial cells from laboratory culture to for beta-glucan and 0.05 mg/mL for Gram-positive). How-
yield a signal on the low end of the standard curve, which is ever, both cartridges detected elevated levels of their re-
a large number of cells compared to the sensitivities of both spective microbial molecules at sites contacted frequently
the LAL and beta-glucan cartridges (Fig. 2). The low reac- by crew members.
tivity of whole cells may be due to the lack of bioavailability The majority of the sites surveyed by crew members were
of the LTA, meaning the LTA molecules may be buried in the those frequently handled, such as airlock handles, drawers,
bacterial cell wall and therefore be unable to react with the and audio terminal units (ATUs). Other sites surveyed with
test reagents. Since these assays were developed postlaunch the beta-glucan cartridges, such as the Biolab Glovebox and
to take advantage of existing equipment on orbit, and due to the ﬂoor area in the Temporary Sleep Station (TeSS), re-
time constraints, we elected to launch and test the Gram- turned background values, even though they are frequently
SEWiEE MﬂdUIE Average Readings
Emd'ﬂ LAL, LTA, Glucan
gfggﬂ/ﬂr ""f” LAL Phases 1 and 2
FEB nfa — nut appllcahle
- ' Iarya
W . _ W. 1.4:: 0.029, 33.3 Japanese Experiment Module
*- . . 1.05 Nudel bea
~. :3»: Destiny nXa, H.032, nxu
- “ﬂ ”'“* 1.13, 0.21, 5.3-: ""f""
_ ' _ £3.03?
:1. 1 Q 21.4. "" :- “53:? ' . _-,-.
”- ..' :17; _ _ i
t"" “In- ' . ' "" ""l""
.3... __ - . ¢
l I 'I Made 2
U5 Airlock U5 Lab ' 3"" Hannany
Quest Destiny -. ESA Lab €1.95, Ma, nfa
”fa; ”fa: ”fa 3.0.5, ”.3115, 210 COIUMDUS ﬂﬂﬂ
”-15 ”""15 nfa, nxa, 113::
nfu
FIG. 1. A diagram of the ISS depicting levels of microbial molecules for each module. LOCAD-PTS cartridges have been
used to sample surfaces from most modules of the ISS. Values listed for LAL, Gram—positive (LTA), and beta-glucan
cartridges are averages of all the values obtained for each of the types of cartridge from each module. LAL results from
Phases 1 and 2 are taken from Maule et al. (2009). Color images available online at www.liebertonline.com/ast

"
"6","QUANTIFYING THREE MICROBIAL BIOMARKERS ON ISS 835
TABLE 2. LEVELS OF BETA-GLUCAN AND LTA DETECTED AT SWAB AREAS IN NODE 1 AND THE US. LAB
IN ADDITION TO THE AVERAGE VALUES AND OBSERVED CFUS
Cartridge Swab Swab Swab Swab
ISS Module Site Type Area 1 Area 2 Area 3 Area 4 Average CPU
Node 1 Area of CWC Stowage Glucan 5.69 1 18.1 3.51 7.075 0
US. Lab Starboard Aft Foot Restraint Gram+ 0.119 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.06725 14
(Destiny)
Values obtained from beta-glucan and Gram—positive cartridges are given in ng/mL and mg/L, respectively.
contacted by crew members (Fig. 3A). The TeSS fabric sam— The CEVIS (the cycle exercise machine), the back wall of
pled with Gram—positive cartridges also returned a back- the WHC, and the ATU demonstrated the highest levels of
ground value (Fig. 3B). Crew members frequently Clean the beta-glucan recorded during this series of experiments
TeSS with stringent protocols, which may have contributed (> 100, 66.4, and 23.8 ng/mL, respectively; Table 1). By
to these low values. Alternatively, the texture of the surface comparison, measurements of beta-glucan taken at the
may have prevented an adequate sampling of the surface Shuttle Launch Facilities at Kennedy Space Center gave re-
using our current swab tool. Similar results have been ob- sults ranging from 0.010 to 0.160 ng/mL 0n exposed exterior
served using sterile cotton swabs, our swab tool, and LAL surfaces of the space shuttle just prior to launch and 0.021—
cartridges for analysis on fabric surfaces in the laboratory 0.688 ng/mL in samples taken from adjacent ocean and
(Morris et (11., unpublished data). beach surfaces (Maule et (11., unpublished data). The data
LAL
3.50 |- — — — --
g 3.43:}
“S"" 2.5:: \\—‘
E 2.11:: -
E 1.50 . yr = {1.3039}: + 2.41'10
g l H1 = c.9905
a 1-00 -—
E nan I
0.00 |—
-1.500 -1.000 43513;] 0.000 0.500 1.000
LugIEUImLJ
FIG. 2. Standard curves for all three LOCAD-PTS
cartridges. These cartridges demonstrated repro- Glucan
ducible standard curves, allowing for accurate data
interpretation. Purified LPS, glucan, or LTA was di- .5. 3'5”] —
luted in endotoxin-free, ultrasterilized water to yield ﬂ 19']
the following concentrations: 0.05 EU/mL, 0.5 EU/ E 15'” ?;x—
mL, 5 EU/mL for LPS; 1 ng/mL, 10 ng/mL, 100 ng/ i: 2.00 ' ‘r' = 0421?}: + 23121
mL for glucan; or 0.05 mg/mL, 0.5 mg/mL, 5mg/ E 1-5'5 —_—RT=_EIF}§1_——
mL for LTA. These dilutions were analyzed with 5 1-3'3 '—
LAL, beta-glucan, and Gram-positive cartridges, re- ED 1150' '
spectively. Onset time is given in seconds and in- 000 '—
Creases as the amount of microbial molecule in a El 1 2
sample decreases. Color images available online at Lnglngfmll
www.liebertonline.com / ast
Gram pusitive
3.50
E 3.00 —
“E 2.50 - :
E 2.0:] _ y=_—0.:1331x + 2.4234 _
H H =n3934
a 1.5:: -
5 1.3:: -—
E {1.50 -—-
0.00 —--
-1.500 -1.000 -D.5ﬂﬂ 0.000 D.SEID 111m]
LngIImgme]

"
"7","836 MORRIS ET AL.
#1 Beta Glucan
12!]
1110
EU
_I
'--E.. ED
m
E
40
2!]
D
ATU Binlah Eulumbus, Cabin Air European Floor area in EE‘JIS frame
Starhnard Eluvehux Return Grid Diffuser Drawer Rack T255
Cane Sensor Dverhead
Huusing
Gram Pusitive LTA
B
0.5
114
.I
E. u 3
m .
E
[1.1 I
ID
JEM JEM Duur JEM JEM T955 CE'H'IS NDDI - WHC Handrail
Airluck Handle ta Handle to Return Fabric frame CW: near
Handle IATCS Thai"",t Grill stowage Hygiene
Station
FIG. 3. Graphical representation of beta-glucan and LTA signals detected at sites frequently contacted by 188 crew mem-
bers. (A) Beta-glucan cartridges were used to analyze samples collected from seven surfaces scattered throughout the 188.
Units are given in ng/mL. (B) Gram—positive (LTA) cartridges were used to analyze nine different surfaces. Units are given in
mg/mL.
obtained from sampling surfaces at Kennedy was collected Interestingly, the CEVIS returned only background-level
by more sensitive (pg/mL sensitivity) beta-glucan cartridges results when using the Gram—positive cartridges (Fig. 3).
than those available at the time of these 188 experiments; Again, this result is possibly due to the significant difference
however, they underscore the possibility that more microbial in sensitivity between the two cartridge types. Alternatively,
molecules may be present on certain 188 surfaces than pre- different surfaces of the machine may have been sampled,
viously expected. The beta-glucan results for the CEVIS and since the tests were performed by different crew members at
the ATU had no contact media slides used in parallel on the different times. Two significant readings from the Gram-
same surfaces while samples were collected, but contact positive cartridges were obtained from the JEM airlock handle
media slides for both bacteria and fungi were used in con- (0.185 mg/mL) and from the WHC (<0.56 mg/mL). Tal<en
junction with all three cartridges in sampling the back wall of together, these data confirm that microbial molecules can be
the WHC. N0 fungal colonies were recovered, despite the detected on surfaces frequently contacted by crew members.
elevated levels of beta-glucan (Table 1). This apparent dis-
crepancy could be due to the stringent d1s1nfect1ng/clean1ng 3.4. 8 tan dar d culture- base d methods and molecular
protocols performed on the 188, which would kill all the . . . .
. . . monitoring yield different results from most surfaces
microbes on a surface, potentially exploding the cells and
releasing contents but not removing all the microbial mole- The second objective of this study was to perform a par-
cules. Therefore, no Viable organisms remain on the surface, allel analysis of a single surface by using all three cartridges
but the build-up of microbial particles could account for the and contact media slides. The contact media slides were
elevated numbers seen on the CEVIS, in the WHC, and on placed on a surface, and four adjacent sites were swabbed
the ATU relative to exposed surfaces on the ground. and analyzed. These four samples were then analyzed with

"
"8","QUANTIFYING THREE MICROBIAL BIOMARKERS ON ISS 837
one LAL, two beta-glucan, and one Gram—positive car- formed aboard the ISS from 2007 through 2009. These data
tridges. In keeping with the LAL results from Phase 1 (Maule are the first to provide molecular data on the distribution of
et (11., 2009) and the beta-glucan and Gram—positive results three microbial molecules in every habitable module of the
described previously (Table 2), each of the three surfaces ISS during that time frame. From these results, we have
sampled demonstrated differences between the results ob- demonstrated that most surfaces on the ISS are relatively free
tained from one type of cartridge to another and between the of microbial molecules and that the LOCAD-PTS provides a
results from the same type of cartridge (beta-glucan). These rapid method of detecting these molecules on a variety of
results are listed in Table 3 and depicted graphically in Fig. 4. surfaces.

Interestingly, we observed a large number of CFUs (13 Our previously published data demonstrate that 31 sam-
CFUs) on a handle of the CEVIS. However, all the cartridges ples gave an endotoxin level Classified as ”low” or ”absent.”
returned values at or near background levels (Table 3). An additional 11 samples returned values of endotoxin that
Conversely, 3 CFUs were cultured from the surface of a wall we Classified as ”moderate” or ”high.” All the sites from
of the WHC, and elevated levels of LAL and beta-glucan these 11 samples were those that had frequent crew contact.
were observed from adjacent sampling sites (1.47 EU/mL The site with the highest LAL readings was the CEVIS
and 66.4 / 11.2 ng/ mL, respectively). The third site tested, a training hardware (Maule et aL, 2009).
panel in Node 1 that is frequently handled, returned the On selected sampling locations on the ISS, we were able to
same number of CFUs as the WHC (3 CFUs), yet all the record results with traditional culture methods and LOCAD-
cartridges demonstrated background-level signals. PTS cartridges measuring Gram—negative (LAL), Gram-

These data are very similar to the observations made in positive (LTA), and fungal (beta-glucan) contaminants
Phase 1 and 2 of LAL cartridge testing. Relatively poor cor- simultaneously. Rapid assessment of the specific type of
relation could be drawn between the two methods—molec- contamination could enable ameliorative actions specific for
ular and culture-based (Maule et aL, 2009). Multiple bacterial or fungal contamination events aboard the space
laboratory and field studies performed by different investi- station. As a result of the relatively Clean environment on the
gators have borne this out for multiple molecular assay ISS, the number of locations showing elevated positive mi-
platforrns, though sometimes overall trends (more ”dirty,” crobial results is small. The example of an elevated LTA
more ”Clean”) can be established (Cooper et (11., 2011; Wain- measurement coincident with 14 CFUs detected on the
wright et aL, 2005). These two methods measure different starboard aft food restraint highlights the utility of the rapid
Characteristics—the ability to grow and survive on media nonculture method, validated by the multiday, traditional
versus the mere presence of microbial molecules—leading to culture-based method. Unfortunately, we were unable to
the difficulty in establishing an exact correlation between the perform any Gram staining or other differential tests on the
two methods (Morris et (11., 2010). Molecular methods could colonies grown on the ﬂight media slides in order to discern
detect the presence of dead microbes or those that are Viable whether the majority of the colonies were indeed Gram-
but nonculturable (Barer, 1997). Regarding the results from positive.
the CEVIS handle, microbial density varying across a surface Currently, researchers are unable to perform any sort of
or differences in sampling (contact slide vs. swab tool) could Gram stain or other basic microbial identification assay on-
account for the discrepancies observed in the elevated CFU board the ISS. Therefore, it is impossible for the crew in
levels and the lower molecular values. space, or environmental control personnel, or medical su-

pervisors on Earth, to know what species of organisms are
4- Discussion present on a given surface without analyzing samples on the
ground many weeks later. Due to these limitations, we were

Herein, we present the final data set, which completes the also unable to discriminate between Gram—positive and
data collected from all the LOCAD-PTS operations per- Gram—negative colonies grown on the culture media plate,

TABLE 3. LEVELS OF MICROBIAL MOLECULES DETECTED BY ALL THREE DIFFERENT CARTRIDGE TYPES

USED ON FOUR DIFFERENT, ADJACENT AREAS OF ONE SURFACE SITE

155 Module Site Swab Area Cartridge Type Value Average ( +/— SD) CPU
U.S. Lab (Destiny) CEVIS Handle 1 LAL 0.05 n.a. 13
US. Lab (Destiny) CEVIS Handle 2 Glucan 4.75 3.34 (1.99)
US. Lab (Destiny) CEVIS Handle 3 Glucan 1.93
US. Lab (Destiny) CEVIS Handle 4 Gram+ 0.097 n.a.
Node 1 D5 1 LAL 0.05 n.a. 3
Node 1 D5 2 Glucan 5 3.90 (1.56)
Node 1 D5 3 Glucan 2.79
Node 1 D5 4 Gram+ 0.069 n.a.
U.S. Lab (Destiny) Back wall of WHC 1 LAL 1.47 n.a 3
US. Lab (Destiny) Back wall of WHC 2 Glucan 11.2 38.8 (39.0)
US. Lab (Destiny) Back wall of WHC 3 Glucan 66.4
US. Lab (Destiny) Back wall of WHC 4 Gram+ 0.058 n.a.

Averages, where applicable, and CFUs collected from the site are also included. Values of LAL, beta-glucan, and Gram—positive cartridges
are given in EU/rnL, ng/mL, and mg/mL, respectively.

"
"9","838 MORRIS ET AL.
70

=

3 50

E

E 40

E 30 — -

D J

E 20 I I 5 - 5 ﬂ - —

_I . I I I . _

10 0 ii L 4 b E u 9‘ Back Wall anHC
0 - 6 3 0 £ Node 1 D5 Panel
LAL Glucan i E CEUIS Handle
Glucan
Gram +
FIG. 4. Variation in the quantities of microbial molecules occurs across different sections of the same surface. Endotoxin,
LTA, and beta-glucan were detected with LAL, Gram+, and beta-glucan cartridges, respectively. Swab samples were
collected from four areas of the same surface (north, south, east, and west). Sites include the Waste Hygiene Compartment
(WHC), a panel in Node 1 (D5), and the cycle ergometer handle (CEVIS). Units for LAL, glucan, and Gram+ cartridges are
given in EU/mL, ng/mL, and mg/mL, respectively. Color images available online at www.liebertonline.com/ast
simply lumping them together as total CFUs. Recently, a be recovered within 50% to 200%. Spike values outside that
”Gram ID” cartridge has been developed for the LOCAD- range may be caused by substances in the sample that could
PTS, which can determine whether a culture is Gram-posi- inhibit or enhance the assay. Also, because each cartridge has
tive or Gram—negative. Similar to the other cartridges, it uses four Channels (two with positive spikes and two without
a modified version of the LAL colorimetric assay. A rapid spikes), the reported results are an average of each of the two
completion of the test indicates the presence of a Gram- Channels in those groups. The coefficient of variation (CV)
negative organism, while a Gram—positive sample remains must be within 25%. In normal ground operations, the oc-
blank due to the paucity of lipopolysaccharide present in the currence of invalid test data is relatively rare. A possible
sample. Adding Gram ID cartridges to further ﬂight tests cause of an invalid test result could be the presence of a
would enhance researchers’ ability to analyze environmen- detergent on space station surfaces that inhibits the assay
tal, microbial data. enzymes. The solution would be to dilute the sample and run
Although we did not obtain many positive readings with it again.
the Gram-positive cartridges, we can easily attribute that to The number of invalid assay results on the 155 was higher
the lack of sensitivity mentioned previously. Therefore, the than those during ground operations. Especially prevalent
fact that we observed three significant positive values when were instances of CV values that were too high (> 25%), or a
using these cartridges is worth noting (JEM airlock handle, result labeled with a ”?”, meaning that one of the two
0.185 mg/mL; WHC, < 0.56 mg/mL; and aft foot rest, Channels to be averaged did not have an expected value. The
0.119 mg/ mL). As mentioned previously, whole cells— most likely cause of this type of error was that the liquid
Viable, Viable but nonculturable, or dead—may render LTA sample was not sufficient to fill the optical read area, re-
molecules invisible to this detection method by burying turning a zero or infinity value for that sample.
them inside the cell wall. Therefore, any means of extracting Crew members observed that the amount of volume in the
the samples from a surface may expose more LTA by rup- water cartridge of the swab tool, used to extract the swab
turing cells or simply disturbing the cell wall, which would and fill the sample Chamber, was diminishing with storage
thereby improve subsequent LTA detection. The LTA re- time aboard the 153. The likely cause of this was water loss
covered by our swab tool and the LTA-positive samples on through an improper sealing of the water cartridge. Obser-
the 155 may differ significantly from environmental sam- Ving the liquid as it filled each sample, crew members noted
ples, where cells may be live, dead, or in various stages of that less than a full water cartridge sometimes caused air
degradation. In such cases, a positive LTA result may in- bubbles to be introduced into the sample. When an air
deed be caused by far fewer cells than observed in con- bubble gets pulled into a reaction Channel, the leading edge
trolled laboratory experiments or those we performed on may enter the optical area and cause a very high (or infinity)
the ISS. reading. If no sample reaches the optical area, zero absor-
When using the LOCAD-PTS, for data to be considered bance is recorded.

valid, the test results must fall within the standard curve One solution proposed to the crew was to observe the
range, sample volume must be sufficient to fill the optical presence of bubbles in the swab tool and shake the bubbles
read areas of the cartridge, and the positive spike value must out of the liquid path. After implementing this solution,

"
"10","QUANTIFYING THREE MICROBIAL BIOMARKERS ON ISS 839
significantly fewer invalid test results were obtained. tool redesign with encouraging preliminary results. Future
However, we have begun planning more permanent so- technological improvements upon the LOCAD-PTS platform
lutions to this issue. On newer PTS units, as the sample is will target the need to discriminate live versus dead micro-
drawn into the channel, there is an infrared LED and organisms. To achieve this goal, multiple technical ap-
photodiode that senses the leading and trailing edge of a proaches are being investigated, including ATP content of
sample. Through a programming change, we can count the the cells, selective PCR amplification, and live/dead ﬂuo-
number of pump steps between those edges and calculate rescent staining. Eventually, the ability to detect specific
the volume of a sample. In the future, implementation of species of interest, such as potential pathogens, will be
this change will result in ”ﬂagged” samples—those that available with the use of specific antibodies (or pools of an-
could have returned invalid results based on sample vol- tibodies) and species-specific DNA probes. We also plan to
ume ranges. expand the capabilities of sample collection and analysis to
A redesign of the water cartridge will also be necessary include air and water monitoring.
to remove the source of this problem. We have begun to New rapid microbial testing methods are certainly
focus on how water is sealed in the swab tool. One po- needed while going forward to missions beyond low-Earth
tential design contains the water in a ”bulb” with a valve orbit. Crews must have the autonomy to collect routine
that requires the seal to be broken before water is released. monitoring information and make critical decisions with-
Initial attempts on the ground have produced promising out the need for material support or even real-time
preliminary results. Stability testing at room temperature communication with the ground. Instrumentation devel-
and 370C has shown minimal water loss (<50/0) over 12 opment and testing, such as we have reported here, is in-
months. We are confident that further improvements along tegral to maintaining crew member health and equipment
these lines will greatly improve simplicity of the assay and whether in low-Earth orbit or on long-duration space
the integrity of results. missions.
When quantifying live bacteria, a limitation in the LO-
CAD-PTS system has been the fact that the method does not A .
. . . . . . uthor Dlsclosure Statement
discriminate between live or dead microbes. While some
space missions, such as those in astrobiology or planetary Dr. Norman Wainwright is the Director of Research and
protection, may require extreme cleanliness (i.e., the absence Development at Charles River Laboratories, which manu-
of all biological markers), others may have a greater em- factures the Endosafe-PTS upon which the LOCAD-PTS in-
phasis on eliminating all live organisms. For instance, po- strument is based. No other competing financial interests
tential pathogens that are dead may pose no health risk to exist.
crew, yet the LOCAD-PTS method would report a positive
reacling. This ”uncertainty” could malje setting requirements Abbreviations
difficult. The tentative requirements suggested prev1ously
(Maule et (11., 2009) would indeed be useful for a general ATU, audio terminal unit; CEVIS, Cycle Ergometer with
cleaning indicator but inadequate to address crew health Vibration Isolation and Stabilization; CFUs, colony-forming
requirements if the positive were triggered by predominately units; CV, coefficient of variation; EU/mL, Endotoxin Units
dead organisms. per milliliter; FGB, Functional Cargo block; ISS, International
Space Station; JEM, Japanese Exploration Module; LAL,
5 C . . . Limulus Amebocyte Lysate; LOCAD-PTS, Lab-On-a-Chip
. onclusmns and Impllcatlons . . .
Application Development Portable Test System; LPS, lipo-
By incorporating cartridges that could detect all three polysaccharide; LTA, lipoteichoic acid; TeSS, Temporary
classes of microorganisms, this study significantly expands Sleep Station; WHC, Waste Hygiene Compartment.
the usefulness of rapid microbial assessment by LOCAD-
PTS, which had previously only been able to detect Gram- References
negative contamination and fungal contamination. The
report of assay results in minutes, instead of the days re- Barer, MR. (1997) Viable but non—culturable and dormant bac-
quired for culture-based methods, gives information to the teria: time to IQSOIVG an oxymoron and a misnomer? J Med
crew that will allow for near real-time decisions concern- Mzcrobzol 461629—631 .
ing the need to clean a particular surface. Additionally, Cooper, M"" La Duc, M'T'ﬁPrObSt’ A"" Vaishampayan, P""
information provided regarding the type of microorgan- Stam, C., Benardini, ].N., Piceno, Y.M.,.Andersen., G.L., and
ism present helps determine possible causes for the con- Venkateswaran, K' (2011) Comparison Of innovative
. . . . . molecular approaches and standard spore assays for as-
tamination. For instance, fungal contamination could . . . . .
, , , , , sessment of surface cleanliness. Appl Envzron Mzcrobzol 77.
indicate excess m01sture or poor ventilation that could be 5438—5444.
improved. . Kaeberlein, T., Lewis, K., and Epstein, SS. (2002) Isolating
Whlle LOCAD'PTS 1s a nonculture method that shows ”uncultivable” microorganisms in pure culture in a simulated
promise and fulfills a partial need, more capability is needed. natural environment. Science 296:1127—1129.
We have begun to seek additional hardware capability in the Maule, J"" Wainwright, N-, Steele, A., Monaco, L., Morris, H.,
LOCAD-PTS handheld format that can discriminate live cells Gunter, D., Damon, M., and Wells, M. (2009) Rapid culture-
versus dead and measure pathogen-SPecifiC IGVGIS when independent microbial analysis aboard the International Space
desired. A more relevant name for such hardware may be Station (ISS). Astrobiology 9:759—775.
Real Time Bioburden Assessment (RTBA). Problems en- Morris, H.C., Monaco, L.A., Steele, A., and Wainwright, N.
countered with water loss have already resulted in a swab (2010) Setting a standard: the Limulus Amebocyte Lysate assay

"
"11","840 MORRIS ET AL.
and the assessment of microbial contamination 0n spacecraft Address correspondence to:
surfaces. Astrobiology 10:845—852. Heather C. Morris

Novikova, ND. (2004) Review of the knowledge of microbial 1525 Perimeter Parkway, Suite 330
contamination of the Russian manned spacecraft. Microb Ecol Huntsville, AL 35806
47:127—132.

Wainwright, N.R., Child, A., Williams, K., and Baker, A. (2005) E-mall: heather.C.m0rrls@nasa.gov
Rapid enzyme-based microbial burden assays: the case for
certifying Limulus Amebocyte Lysate assay for use on space- Submitted 11 April 2012
craft hardware. NASA IPL D-31144, National Aeronautics and Accepted 24 May 2012
Space Administration, Washington DC.

"
