"","x"
"1","Pom 6P I T x AW
s It, em 5 W\ %
BULLETIN OF THE PUGET SOUND MYCOLOGICAL SOCIETY “@kk
Number 443 June 2008 1% l i“
THREE MUSHROOMS FROM MUSHROOM in sand. There was a whole shoe box full of beautiful specirnens.
M AYNI A! Brian Luther I showed it to Joe Ammirati, and he was eager to have it for the

rnycology herbariurn. B. phalloides starts out looking like a mas-
Although Hildegard and I didn’t get a lot of people bringing in sive Amanita coming up, with a very heavy cap; but of course it
specimens for identiﬁcation during Mushroom Maynia!, three has no gills to go with the huge volva/cup at the base of the stern.
fascinating collections were brought in to the Burke Museum It is a pale offwhite until rnaturity, then the whole elevated glebal
which I thought you might like to know a little about. rnass (what looks like a mushroom cap) starts forming rnillions
Malanogaster tuberiformis - This is a false trufﬂe (Basidiornycete) Of spores on a heavy tthk stalk. Joe sa1d he had seen It before
i. _I -. _ I Jr - I: with a rounded or slightly lumpy to ir- (rarely) from the Seattle area.
.__ ~n- : -;.'--:""' :l': i'.-"" .""-_-_I1regulartubershape andathick brown Contumyces rosella (=0mphalina
.— _._ """" ii peridiurn, sorne slightly more than I - .,_ rosella) - This was brought in by one
. ""IF; 2 cm across in the largest dimension, ”-1,: of the PSMS volunteers from Cougar
4|- . '. "" '_ £1.:-'.';‘:: -.'-""' _ with a glistening gelatinous black """" "" Mountain for a mushroom tray ar-
_ I _: __ .::-I '3"":-ZI'_ H111 n""; gleba having ﬁne white chamber—like _ I rangement. This species was conﬁrmed
_ . '--. _ ._ _ -. :. """":'.I‘__-_.'.E-* .. markings on the inside. The gleba '.""' by Joe Ammirati and Steve Trudell. It
- -. i: 1-... '- was very distinctive in appearance, - 'E is avery distinctive little ornphalinoid
especially under a dissecting rnicro- fungus with widely spaced, decurrent
scope, and the whole fruiting bodies had a strong garlicky odor. gills; it has a funnel-shaped cap at maturity with pinkish colors
M tuberiformis is considered edible and good according to trufﬂe and grows in rnoss. It can be found in Moser’s Keys to A garics
literature. The gleba was so gelatinous that I was not able to make a and Boleti. (p. 99) under the genus Omphalina and on-line under
thin section for microscopic observation. My new sharp razor blade Contumyces, the new genus it was transferred to. Apparently it is
couldn’t even get a bite on the heavy gelatinous tissue. I had to widespread here in spring, but often overlooked.
remove some of it with ultra-ﬁne micro forceps for a squash mount. . f d . h d (1
Because I suspected (correctly) that it was going to be dark spored, I :Ietdup “:10 rn1I(I:rosI(I:opes neﬁtg me or IrIlIy use urIljng :1 e anyIan
I mounted the tissue in 3% ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH) only, I ha no 1 ea t . att ere onu 6180 H112“: éntherest ylt e pu 11C 1E
with no stains added. This species has beautiful rich warrn brown, W at I was do1ng. Severa peop e as ed.1 t ey cou d come 90
. . . . 1n the rn1croscopes at what I was observ1ng, so I spent some t1rne
very th1ck-walled, lernon-drop—shaped bas1dlospores rneasurlng i th th ml kin t im 11
12—15 X 7—8 pm, which often have a small section of the thick, W e 00 g a spec e 8'
untapered sterigrnata still attached to the hilar end. Apparently
DNA studies have shown it to be closely related to the boletes. I
left the specimens in a paper cup in my mycology lab overnight, GYROMITRAS AND DISCINAS WANTED
and when I came back the next day the whole room had a pleasant Joe Ammirati
aromatic garlicky smell. They were brought in from a woman’s
garden in north Seattle, where they were growing a few inches Kerry O’Donnell is interested in receiving recent collections of
deep in soil near good sized Douglas Fir trees. She was hoping it gyrornitras and discinas—he needs digital phOtOS and good 1003-
was a trufﬂe, but I told her it was most likely a false trufﬂe, False tion and ecological data. I can process and/or send him rnaterials;
trufﬂes are Basidiornycetes. True trufﬂes, of which we have a if you want to send materials directly to him you may do so as
couple of species here in Washington State, are Ascornycetes in fOHOWSI
the order Tuberales. Ninety-nine percent of what people bring or Kerry O’Donnell
send to me hoplng for trufﬂes are actually false trufﬂes. However, 1815 N. University St.
a couple of months ago I d1d get a spec1rnen 1n the mall from a lady P e oria, IL 61604
1n Bremerton, and after rn1croscop1c observatlons I concluded 1t E-rnail: kerly.odonnell@ars.usda.gov
was, 1ndeed, T uber glbbosum, one of our true trufﬂes. Phone: (309) 681-63 83
Battarrea phalloides - This is a very large stalked puffball with a FAX: (309) 681-6672
massive, deep, bowl-shaped volva or _. . ._. _ . Webpage: http://www.ars.usda.gov/spZUserFiles/Place/
cup. It was brought in from a garden I- IE, _;_:_ '-... ___;.‘- 36207000/MGB-ODonnell2.pdf
in Ballard overlooking Shilshole Bay -I'-..:__.. f"";
above Ray’s Boathouse. The specimens ._1.’ ' f- ' - EH 'r. 1 .
were dried, but when fresh the stalks __ =.! = :15""; - - 1'54 MOQCHELLA (TRUEl/MOQELS) WWW mu meom/A 3%va
are easily 15 or more inches tall. I had _ I'L' ' '-"" ' _' - 'I. M M” 43:! ii) ﬂ§
previously seen it only from eastern \T- '_ -2--' -.._ ', 50/ l i ﬁx “’9 @222“???
Washington and other cold, sagebrush ' -'-I I*.-'__._ '. 3?: §- ' \\ / I0 ', e""; , M \ I (:11ij??- Q73: 14
desert locations, where it was growing ' - ' aWsllces esculela ? blakmf'éa liar; 630119. @122
page 1

"
"2","MEMBERSHIP MEETING

S pore P ri nts Tuesday June 10, 2008, at 7:30 pm at the Center for Urban Hor-

, , tioulture, 3501 NE 41st Street, Seattle.
1s publ1shed monthly, September through June by the W .11 b h t' D Ad If C k d _ . .. ﬂ . V
e w1 e os1ng r. 0 es a an -, ="" xx -‘ ‘
PUGCEZZeriiteSrchTJ];eiiilflggciﬁtlgelcgc‘; 38525§ETY Oluna Ceska, respected Canadian botanists % _ a
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195 and rare plaritspeoialists, who are based in §;~<;M~;4 . '5
(206) 522-6031 http://www.psms.org Victoria, British Columbia. They w111 be i w} \ :I 7
User name: Password: speaklng on “Four years of fungi survey on ““ ‘ "" ' ‘ ""
_ . Observatory Hill in Victoria, BC,” a special place with three rnaj or

OFFICERS: Patrloe Benson, Eres1dent forest “eoosysterns”—Garry oak (Oregon White Oak), old-growth
iggﬁngigﬂlfﬁ \{Elffaggesﬁdent Douglas ﬁr, and Western Red Cedar—oontaining an incredible
Dennis Oliver, 8ecretary diversity of both common and rare fungal species. Adolf is a

_ professional botanist who retired from the British Columbia Con-

TRUSTEES: MOUY Bernstem, Colleen Compton, servation Data Center in 2002. Oluna is a recognized authority on
Marllyn Droege, Steve Haynaok, fu . d 1 Th b f th S th V I 1 d
Younghee Lee, Jarnle Notrnan, ngi an .a gae. . ey are mem ers o e ou ancouver s an
Lynn Phillips, Carissa Thornock, Mycologioal Socnety, are founding members of the Native Plant
Doug Ward Society of BC, and contribute to the Eﬂora website. They operate
Ron Post (Immed. Past Pres.) Ceska Geobotanioal Consulting in Victoria and were involved in

ALTERNATE; Luis Felix several regional invasive plant proj ects including Eurasian milfoil

SCI. ADVISOR: Dr. J oseph F. Ammirati and, more recently, carpet burweed.

EDITOR: Agnes A. Si e ger, 271 Harmony Lane, Would members with last names beginning with L—Z please bring
Port Angeles, WA 98362 a plate of refreshments for sharing after the meeting.
sieger@att.net

Annual dues $25; full-time students $15
SOME FACTS ABOUT MORELS Aven Andersen
Olympic Peninsula Mycological Society Newsletter, May 2008
CALENDAR Ever wonder why nearby rnorels appear different? It has to do
with rnorel genetics. Morels are formed by myoelia that are more
June 7 Field Trip, Swauk Creek like colonies than individuals (known as heterokaryotic myoelia).
June 9 Master Gardener’s ID Clinic, 4_7 pm, CUH Thus, rnorels appearing side by side often have different sets of
_ _ genes. For more on this interesting subject, read Ecology and
June 10 Membership Meeting, 7330 pm, CUH Management ofMorelS Harvestedfmm the Forests of Western
June 16 Master Gardener’s ID Clinic, 4_7 pm, CUH North America by Pilz et al. (US Forest Service, PNW—GTR-710,
, March 2007, www.fs.fed.us/pnw/publioations/grt710/).
June 23 Board Meeting, 7:30 pm, CUH
, , , More information from this report: Morels seem to have relation-
June 23 Master Gardener S ID Chmc’ 4_7 prn, CUH ships with certain trees (e.g., ponderosa pine, Douglas ﬁr, apple),
June 28,29 Mushroom Festival, Lacey, Washington but not always. Originally, people believed rnorels were decom-
posers, but several studies have shown them to be mycorrhizal or
“facultative myoorrhizal,” whereby they obtain nutrients and water
MUSHROOM PHOTOS NEEDED Martha Perry from tree roots and may, in turn, provide the trees some beneﬁts.
The abundant fruiting of rnorels following the deaths of their tree
The Photography Interest Group is soliciting photos for possible partners (and food source) might represent a “last-ditch effort” to
inclusion in a PSMS calendar. We are looking for olose-ups 0f reproduce. Other factors that trigger fruiting are soil temperatures
mushrooms, horizontal (landscape) orientation, digital in JPG or and rainfall. Although they seem to appear overnight, rnorels go
TIFF format, sharp enough to be printed at 81/2 X 11 in. size. The through a growth period that can last a month, With above-ground
photo must be taken by a PSMS member and be of a PNW rnush- growth and maturation taking 10 or more days. Mammals and
room. Deadline for submissions is July 1. Please e-mail photos to birds rarely eat rnorels, hUt certain insects love them. In one eX'
Martha Perry at marthaaperry@verizon.net. perimental plot in Alaska, half of the rnorels were consumed by
We will also have a photo display and contest at the annual eXhibit. 1nseots known as fungus gnats.
For this we will need a print—no restrictions on orientation or Another good reference is M07915 by Michael K1109 2005- Uhi'
whether olose-ups or overview. Details will be posted later on the versity ofMichigan Press, Vh + 206 PP- LiSt $2795- It covers the
discussion group website. biology of rnorels; other spring mushrooms; where and when to
ﬁnd rnorels; cleaning, cooking, and preserving rnorels; taxonomy;
. and other aspects of rnorels and rnorel hunters.
T wo thousandyears ago, Martial wrote about aphrodisiacs. MS.
If envious age relax the nuptial knot, Nit» 3.1.,
Thyfood be mushroom, and thyfeast shallot. ittéiiii/ 51% % “f“! ‘3 “hawﬂt,
1 eeenaxtre Me!
page 2

"
"3","EN DOPHYTIC FU NGI http://bugs.bio.usyd.edu. ranges from single cells (Rhabdoclineparkerz) to patchy distribu-
au/Mycology/Plant_|nteractions/Endophytes/inGeneral .shtml tiOD through leaves and stems (Chaetomium 8101905 W”)- The PTGS'
ence of speciﬁc endophytes, the lack of signs of disease, and the
Endophytes colonize plant tissue and remain within the tissue long-lived association indicate that further study of the association
except that fruiting structures may emerge through the surface. may yield interesting information of the precise beneﬁts to plants
Indeed, leaves may be fully colonized by a variety of fungi within associated with these colonists.
a ﬂew weeks Of emergenroe. Thehcolon1es relm a1n1 :symptomatlc Plants may beneﬁt from the presence of endophytes in many ways.
an some in perennia pa S may ave a very ong 1 e. Potential plant beneﬁts have been examined in only a few cases.
Endophytic fungi are found in all divisions of fungi so have pre- Rhabdoclineparkeri produces a compound that reduces needle at-
sumably evolved the association independently on many occasions. tack by borers. Metabolites produced by Phomopsis spp. in cotton
The most common endophytes are anamorphic members of the appear to deterlarvae of Helicoverpa from feeding on leaves. The
Ascomycota, and they are often closely related to fungi known to parallels with Neolyphodium are clear. In addition, aphids feed-
cause disease, either in healthy tissue or as secondary invaders of ing on leaves of cotton may become colonized by Lecanicillium
damaged tissue. This suggests that the endophytes may have evolved Zecanii, when conditions permit. Thus the aphid may be killed or
from pathogens or Vice versa. The mechanisms of host recognition it may transfer the fungus to another leaf.
and development of colonization may also be common. In a d dition, endophytes may up regulate host responses to
A wide range of plants have now been examined for endophytes, pathogens and pests. Chaetomium globosum has been shown to
and endophytes have been found in nearly all of them. An enor— increase host resistance to rust and tan spot pathogens in wheat.
mous number of different fungi can be isolated from plants grow- Direct interactions appear to be too small to measure in this case.
ing in their native habitat. Most of the fungi are uncommon and Presence of Lecanicillium lecam'i appears to reduce the feeding
narrowly distributed, taxonomically and geographically. However by aphids from leaves of cotton. The interaction is probably due
a few fungi are widely distributed with the host, suggesting a to induction of host responses, which is perplexing because plant
long standing, close, and mutually beneﬁcial interaction. Indeed, regulatory pathways for responses to insects and pathogens are
some fungi are found in many different terrestrial hosts, especially not thought to be complementary.
endophytes Of crop plants. Wh1le most .1nformat1on has been Endophytes appear to have direct and induced effects on plant
gathered from terrestr1al ecosystems, fungl are found 1n algae and - - - - - - -
. responses to blotlc agents. The 1nteractlon w1th ablotlc agents
sea grasses. Just as we know less about mar1ne ecosystems, our .
. . . . rema1ns largely unexplored.
understandlng of the blology of mar1ne endophytes 1s extremely
limited and will not be discussed further. The broader, ecological function of endophytic associations is
. . . . . still being debated. Many fungi that are associated with the initial
Dispersal of the endophytic fungi remains puzzling. Apart from . . . . .
. . . stages of 11tter decompos1tlon are found 1n healthy t1ssue of the
Neothyphodzum and related spe01es, endophytes are transmitted . . . . .
. . . . same plants. Thus they are 1nvolved 1n the 1n1t1al stages of resource
horizontally. That 1s, each plant is colonized by fungal propagules . . . . . . .
. . . . recyollng. Endophytes are also assoc:1ated w1th aquatlc aot1V1t1es.
that arrive from the enV1ronment. The source of transm1ss1on has . . . . . .
. . Many aquatlc fungl have an endophytlc stage 1n the1r 11fe cycle.
been determined in only a few cases. Propagules of some endophytes . . .
. . . . An enormous dlvers1ty of endophytes 1s found. Endophytes are
have been found in the body of insect pests of the host. Intriguingly, . . . . .
. probably ass001ated w1th a w1de var1ety of host functlons.
at least two entomopathogens have been documented as endophytic . . .
fungi. Thus insects may disperse the fungi from host to host. Fungal Blology, Un1vers1ty 0f Sydney, http://bugs.bio.usyd.edu.
.. . . . . /M | /P|t|t t' /Edht/'G |.ht|
Aer1al d1spersal e1ther 1n the w1nd or on vectors 1s probably the au yco ogy an — n erac Ions n op y es m enera S m
most common mechanism for fungal dispersal. Endophytic fungi
colonize various parts of the plant. Many of the fungi sporulate in
culture, 1nd1oat1ng the potent1al to release spores1n the an. Indeed, N ATIVE ORCH I D TOU R Jamie Notman
sporulatlon 1s seen after senescence of plant t1ssues. However,
few cases ofhd1spersal have been docurgented 1n the Wlld and the As President of the Northwest Orchid Society I have been called
var1ous mec an1sms rema1n uneXp ore ' upon by Ron Post to lead an expedition to look at wild orchids
Nutrients are cycled between the host and fungus. The fungus around the Hurricane Ridge area of the Olympic National Park this
clearly gains a predictable environment in which nutrients are summer. Ron is planning on renting a van that will seat 15 people
readily available. Thus the beneﬁts are clear for fungi establishing with 3 of the seats already spoken for. We would like to keep the
endophytic associations. The loss of plant resources to the fungus, group to around 30 people. We were thinking that someone else
and the potential of some fungi to grow rapidly, indicates that the interested in going may have a van or some other form of group
host regulates development of colonies. transportation.
Each plant host has a range of physical, chemical, constitutive, The adventure will begin on July 20 at 9 am at the information
and induced controls over the spread of fungi within tissues. An center right on Race Street outside of Port Angeles just before the
enormous diversity of phenolic and other deterrent plant com- entrance into the park. Once
pounds is associated with the presence of endophytic fungi, in fact _ 1. the group has ar-
more than are associated with potent pathogens in the same host. ' ' I 1 rived we will begin
In addition, presence of endophytes up-regulates plant responses 'l't our native orchid
to pathogens. In the absence of plant controls, proliferation of _ __ _ ' tour.
endophytes through tissues would be expected. :: _ _: ..: _ : _- -_ .' . .. ‘ Th er e will be a
The reaction of the plant to endophytes suggests that the interaction ""i -' : 'i . ' I ' ' - '- sign-up sheet at
is one of conﬁnement by the plant. Colonization by endophytes ' the June meeting.
page 3

"
"4","MUSHROOM WALK REPORT Brian Luther The nernatode-killing abilities of the oyster rnushroorns, plus
Hohenbuehelz'a, are not found in other gilled mushrooms. Instead,
I had a very successful public nature walk at Twanoh State Park they form a separate group that, in an evolutionary context, is
May 17 with perhaps 25 or so people, including Stacy Ruland, close to the family of the deer fungus, Pluteus. However, fungi
who is one of the main park rangers, her boss, Larry Otto (manager in the Phylum Ascornycetes have come up with the same idea to
of the park), and Larry’s boss, Joel Pillars. I gave some intro- supplement their Spartan carbon diet. One order in particular, the
ductory information and a handout and talked about plants and Orbilz'ales, is rich in species that have come up with fascinating
mushrooms as we hiked along the trails. About 20 species of fungi trapping deVices. The genus Orbilia is an example; its species form
were found, including some surprises. Phyllopoms rhodoxanthus very small, glassy, brightly colored little cups on wood, which are
(with brilliant golden-yellow gills) and Clitocybe nuda (the Woods easily overlooked.
l31ewett) were the two Off season oddballs that turned up. Other The classical and thorough work—with beautiful illustrations— on
interesting ﬁnds 1ncluded Kuehnemmyces mutabzlzs, Baeospom . . .
. . . these nernatode-trapping fungi was done by Drechsler 1n the 193 Os.
myrzodophylla which has plain brown caps and gorgeous deep . . .
. . . . There are at least ﬁve different models of these traps, including
purple gills, and one solitary spec1rnen of the beautiful Ascornycete . . . .
. . . adhes1ve knobs, two-d1rnens1onal or 3-D networks of adhes1ve
Plectama melastoma which has abundant sparkling rust-colored . .
. . . cells, adhes1ve columns, and a lasso-like structure made up of
granules covering the outs1de and the rim of the cup. No rnorels . . .
. . . three cells that inﬂate (like an air bag) when the nematode pokes
were found, but after all this was western Washington. I prov1ded . . . . .
. . 1n. Rings that do not inﬂate are also found, but only in cornb1na-
fresh bagels, crearn cheeses, hot coffee, and JUICGS for the group, . . . . .
. tion With the adhes1ve knobs (which makes sense). Educational
which they had not expected. . . .
rnov1es on the workings of those traps can be found online at www.
The really good news is that several couples wanted to join PSMS microbelibralyorg. How these structures have evolved, and which
afterward. So maybe we’ll be getting three new members from ones are more derived, is not yet quite clear—the two papers deal-
the Brernerton/Port Orchard area. ing with this issue reach opposite conclusions. One paper has the
3-D networks primitive and the adhesive knobs derived, while the
other reverses the order.
FU N G AL SNARES AN D 0TH ER STIC KY EN D 3 Recently, hyphae with non-constricting rings were found in a piece
. of amber dating from the Late Albian period during the Cretaceous
Else C. Velllnga . . .
M N M S f S F . F b 2008 (around 100 million years ago). Nernatodes were present in the
ycena ews, yco. 00' 0 an ranc1sco, e ruary sarne arnber, which indicates that this type of interaction is not a
For over twenty years we have watched a fallen oak be devoured rnodern invention at all. TO .put this in perspective, small mush-
. roorns, very closely resembling rnodern Marasmzus spec1es, have
by oyster mushrooms. At ﬁrst the decay went slowly, but during . . .
. . . been found in 90—94 rnillion-year-old arnber from New Jersey.
the last few years it has accelerated. Th1s w1nter, for the ﬁrst . . .
. Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi have been found in much older
time, we could not really ﬁnd the wood, and the oyster rnush- d 't d t' f th 0 d . . 460 .11.
rooms had disappeared. Wood is a very inhospitable substrate. epos1 8’ a 1ng rorn e r ov1c1an ( m1 ion years ago).
Its components are hard to break down and, though they are rich There is a huge interest in using the nernatode-trapping fungi as
in carbon, nitrogen (an essential component for amino acids and possible biocontrol agents for those nernatodes that cause animal
proteins) is in very low supply. Wood decayers have come up and plant diseases, and also in the fungal species that might be a
with ingenious ways to cope with this shortage, including one threat to those nernatodes which are, themselves, used to control-
chernical pathway that has biolurninescence as a by-product (e.g., ling plant-pathogenic insects.
in the Jack O Lantern). Oyster mushrooms can be found on :3» 3.. . . -
Oyster mushrooms and their relatives in the genus Hohenbuehelz’a almost every walk in the woods, and ‘ , "" ~ A ' 1 =3
(gilled mushrooms chock full of thick—walled incrusted cystidia, the soils of the grasslands and forests "" ‘ C} "" . E
with a gelatinous layer in the cap) have come up with a remarkable harbor many species of other nema— ,;_ ‘ ~ -. A ., I—
alternative—they devour nernatodes, which are very small worrns. tode trappers. Does this make you ' ' ‘F a; ‘ -
The rnyceliurn of these species forrns drops (in the case of Pleu- think of Gulliver? You might not want f ‘ “V‘s,”
rams) or adhesive knobs (Hohenbuehelia), which contain toxins to stand in one spot for too long! . 7 J <- ,
that paralyze the nernatodes. The reaction of a nernatode to these PleurOtuS Ostreatus
toxins is irnrnediate—it stops wriggling and forms a simple target Further reading:
for the hyphae Of the fungus. Th? hyphaehoée 1n 01} thgmoulh Barron, G.L. & R.G. Thorn, 1986. Destruction of nematodes by
of the nematode and enter theanirnal, which is at this pcint still species of Pleumtus. Can a dian Joum a Z ofBotany 65: 774—778.
alive. The hyphae proceed 1ns1de and devour the nematode frorn . .
the inside out. Just like humans eat meat for their protein supply, Drechsler, C., 1937- Some Hyphomycetes that prey on free11V1ng
so does the oyster mushroom “eat” the nematode. terr1colous nernatodes. Mycologza 293 447—552-
Hohenbuehelia species that do this have been known for a long LioY'o K-D- Hyde, R Jeeown, L- Cai, D- Vijaykrishna & K Zhangg
time, but mostly not in the form of fruiting bodies; rather, they 2005: l’hylogenetics and evolution 0f nernatodetrapping fungi
eXist as sterile rnycelia in the soil under the genus narne Nema- (0719111611?) estimated from 1111016311"" and protein coding genes.
tactonus. Another source of nitrogen for the oyster mushrooms Mycologza 973 1034—1046-
is bacteria, and this might be the case for .more species than we Schmidt,A.R., H. Dorfelt & V. Perrichot, 2007. Carnivorous fungi
realize. There‘ls a report that Laccaria .spec1es can obtain nitrogen from cretaceous amber. Science 318: 1743.
from springtails—another way of getting this essential part of the . .
fungal diet. It is, however, not known how the Laccaria are able Thorn, R-G- & G-L- Barron, 1984- Carnivorous mushrooms. SC""
to kill the springtails. ence 2243 76—78-
page 4

"
"5","Thorn, R.G. & G.L. Barron, 1986. Nematoctonus and the tribe Fort Bragg is in Mendocino County, a stretch of coast known for
Resupinatae in Ontario, Canada. Mycotaxon 25: 321—453. its grand seascapes, organic wineries and trailblazing politics: the
Thorn R G J -M Moncalvo C A Reddy & R Vilgalys 2000 county was the ﬁrst in the nation to legalize medical marijuana
Phylogenetic analyses and the distribution of neInatophagy support and to ban genetically modiﬁed crops and animals.
a Inonopyletic Pleurotaceae within the polyphyletic pleurotoid- Fort Bragg, population 7,000, never ﬁt in here. Home to the
lentinoid fungi. Mycologia 92: 241—252. country’s second-largest redwood mill for over a century, it was
Yang Y E Yang Z An & Z Liu 2007 Evolution of nemato- a working man’s town where the only wine tasting was at a row
detrapping cells of predatory fungi of the Orbilz'aceae based on 3351211012] tavernslButichtange 1F“? 019m: SlIle: the mlll closeddin
evidence from rRNA-encoding DNA and multiprotein sequences. ' e owe a rea y as a “i“r ra e (.30. ee company an a
Proceedings 0 f the National Academy 0 f Sciences US A 104: raw food cooking school. The C1ty Coun01l 1s cons1der1ng a ban
8379—8384 ’ on plastic grocery bags. And with the push for mushrooms, the
' town seems to have ofﬁcially exchanged its grit for green.
The mill, owned by Georgia-Paciﬁc, took up 420 acres, a space
TRUFFLE KERFUFFLE GRIPS ITALY roughly half the size Of Central Park, thWCCIl downtown FOI‘t
Guardian Un Zimi te d May 16 2008 Bragg and the Paciﬁc Ocean. Among several toxic hot spots
’ ’ discovered here were ﬁve plots of soil with high levels of dioxin
Forever on the warpath against Chinese imitations of its designer that Georgia-Pamﬁc says were ash piles from 2001—2002? when
clothes and sunglasses, Italy faces an oriental threat to one of the 91111 burned wood from Bay Area landﬁlls to create power and
its priciest culinary exports, Tuber melanospomm, the black sell It to Paelﬁc Gas & Electric.
trufﬂe.
Researchers in Turin were startled to ﬁnd DNA traces of T uber _ ’ - - ... g ‘7 i E
indicum, a Chinese trufﬂe, on tree roots in Italy—the ﬁrst such ’7“ . - E
discovery in Europe—and fear the Asian invader could muscle E
out its more delicate homegrown cousin. ML} 4‘ . ; a ‘_ , f , i
“[The Chinese trufﬂe] looks the same as the black Italian trufﬂe, §
but has no taste or smell and grows faster and more aggressively ‘ ” ‘ , , .. e
than either the black or white Italian versions,” said Paola Bon- """" """" 3‘ a ' '7 ,- ’39,
fante, a plant biologist at Turin University. “If the spores have ' ' “ L7“ "" "" ‘ “3:: J_ _ A
spread it could usurp them.” That could spell disaster not only for 2 ~ 7 7 i,” ‘ _ be
astronomes but also for trufﬂe traders. “Thanks to our studies of . . . . .
‘ighe enome se uencin of black trufﬂes we are also checkin to For y ears’ thls Georgm-Paaﬁ-c lumber ml” domleated. the was? of
g . q 3 . 9 . g F ort Bragg, Calzf. Wzth the mzll closed, the beautzful vzew remams,
see 1fhybr1ds of the Ch1nese vers1on and the Italian black trufﬂe but so does toxic waste.
could one day be found in Italian woods,” added Bonfante.
Researchers stumbled on the new arrival when atrufﬂe cultivator Debate remains about how toxic dioxin is to humans, but the
near Turin asked for an analys1s 0f some plants he had purchased Department of Toxic Substances Control says there is no safe
with roots impregnated with Italian black trufﬂe spores.” He was level Of exposure.
having no luck producing trufﬂes, and our tests found the DNA of , , , , , , ,
the Chin es e V ersi on 99 said B onfant e. “‘We have no i d e a who s 01 d Kimi Klein, a human health tox1colog1st With the department, said
him the fungi but hé was 0 onn e d ,, Prolong e d drought in many of that although the dioxin on the mill site was not the most toxic
the black trufﬂe’s prime growing regions in Europe and predictions dioX1n out there,. there was “very goo‘cl. eYldence” that chronic
about global warming have heightened fears about its future. exposure to dioX1n caused cancer and It is our policy to say If
any chemical causes cancer there is no safe level.”
Fort Bragg must clean the dioxin-contaminated coastline this year
SADDLED WITH DIOXIN, TOWN CONSIDERS AN or risk losing a $4.2 million grant from the California Coastal Con-
ODD ALLY; TH E MUSH ROOM Annie Correal servancy for a coastal trail. Its options: haul the soil in a thousand
The New York Times, April 27, 2008 truckloads to a landﬁll about 200 miles away, or bury it on site in
a plastic-lined, 1.3-acre landﬁll.
FORT BRAGG’ Calif. T On a warm April evening, 90 people Alarmed by the ultimatum, residents called in Paul E. Stamets,
crowded into the cafeteria of Redwood Elementary School here author of Mycelz’um Running How Mushrooms Can Help Save
to meet with representatives of the State Department of Toxic the War] d '
Substances Control. The substance at issue was dioxin, a pollut- . ' . . . .
ant that infests the site of a former lumber mill in this town 130 Typically, contaminated 5011 15 hauled eff» huheda 01"" burned.
miles north of San Francisco. And the method of cleanup being Us1ng the IhUShTOOIh method, Ml? Stamets said, It 15 Pm 1h plots,
proposed was a novel one: mushrooms. strewn with straw, and left alone with mushroom spawn. The
M h h b d , th 1 , f ,1 .11 spawn release a ﬁne, threadlike web called mycelium that secretes
us rooms .ave een use in e C eaning up 0 01 sp1 S’ a pro- enzymes “like little Pac-Mans that break down molecular bonds,”
cess .called bioreinediation, but they. have not been usecl to treat Mr. Stamets said. And presto: toxins fall apart.
dioX1n. “I am gomg to make a heretical suggestion,” said Debra . . .
Scott, who works at a health food collective and has lived in the 1h January, Mr- Stamets came down from FUhgl Perfecti, h1s mush-
area for more than two decades, to whoops and cheers. “We could room farm 1h Olympia, Washington. He walked the three-nnle
be the pilot study.” com‘. on page 6
page 5

"
"6","Dioxin remediation, cont. from page 5 drying sheds for mushroom testing. And the City Council said it
would approve the landﬁll but only if it came with bioremedia-
coastline at the site, winding around rocky coves on wind-swept tion experiments.
bluffs where rass has rown over an airstri but barel conceals . . . .
- g cc g - p - y So, sometime later this year, Mr. Stamets is scheduled to begln
the ash p11es. It was one of the most beautiful places 1n the world, . , . . . .
,9 - testing a dump truck s load of dioX1n-laced d1rt 1n Fort Bragg.
hands down, he said.
- - - - cc “One bin. Ten cubic yards. That’s a beginning,” said Dave Turner,
Quick to caution against easy remedies— I am not a panacea for . cc ,
- ,9 - - - - a Coun01l member. I have hope—I wouldn t bet my house on
all then problems —he said he had hope for cleanlng up dioX1n 't b tI h h b' d' t th' ,,
and other hazardous substances on the site. “The less recalcitrant 1 — u ave a ope we can loreme 1a e 1s.
toxins could be broken down within 10 years.”
At least two dioxin-degrading species of mushroom indigenous to
the Northern California coast could work, he said: the turkey tail TREKKIE “TRICORDER” TRAC KS B ACTERI A
and oyster mushroomS- Turkey tails (Tram- ~ 2 A '- -- _ AND FUNGI ON SPACE STATION RedOrbit, TX
etes versicolor) have rufﬂed edges and are ' 3.3,. 7 I” ’ May 11 2008
made into medicinal tea. Oyster mushrooms 3‘;- 9
.9 - b t- s n -
(PZQWOWS 05179611715). have domed tOPS and “1-) Wait“ a Any Trekkles out there? Remember the tricorder? Dr. McCoy and
are frequently found 111 A513“ fOOd- 2‘, T ' .: Mr. Spock both carried them, and they came in mighty handy eX-
_ , ‘ {g u. ploring “strange new worlds. . .where no one has gone before.”

1;“ K'ﬁ-i »#&z\§( h‘ mi ‘ On the International Space Station, astronauts are carrying an
~ ,i"" W} ’ ‘ ‘ &"" experimental device that looks strikingly similar: LOCAD-PTS,
Else , r Wi :3 ' ‘ ,; g .._ short for Lab-On-a-Chip Application Development Portable Test
i . j Vi “3:: “.zé, r, Ab P1 t System. This hand—held biological lab is the ﬁrst step along the path
7 {.5- v 7"" J 5 tzwl‘ W» i ‘"" OW: euro ”5 ' ' ' ’ ' '

a (t; E j. M? ostreatus (Oyster to developing something ak1n to Dr. McCoy s medical tricorder.
d “ Mn}. ff t, / ,5» mushVOOmS) “LOCAD is like that tricorder in that it is ortable, ra id, and
, ‘ KEQ . v ‘1- ‘wé gfgzv' ‘J p p
§(\ .3; _ ‘ ”Eﬁx ’ VWJ-h L ft° Trametes detects a biochemical molecule,” says Heather Morris, LOCAD
T“ ' ?t—‘RQWW. e '. scientist from NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, and an admit-
, \i M w W vers1color (Turkey , , ,
‘ tail) ted Star Trek fan. But while tricorders could do almost anything
. . . . from checking Vital signs to ﬁnding alien life, LOCAD is a little
Local mushroom enthus1asts.enV1s1on the Site as a global center more specialized: “LOCAD is speciﬁcally designed to detect and
for the study of bioremediation that could even export fungi to identify microbes on space station surfaces.”
other polluted communities. “Eventually, it could be covered in . . .
mushrooms,” said Antonio Wuttke, who lives in neighboring It.1s a .fact of llfe that wherever humans go, mlcrobes f0.119W-
Mendocino and describes his occupation as environmental land- 13.101085? estimate that everyhuman body has atoleast a “11110,“
scape designer, over a cup of organic Sumatra at the Headlands h1tchh1k1ng microheseaccounting for as thh as 2 A) ofa person 5
Coffeehouse. total mass. Most live in harmony w1th native human cells; others
, , , , can make you s1ck.
The proposal is not w1thout critics, however. .
“ . . . Here’s how it works: An ISS crew member uses a dry swab to take

Therea’still needs to be further testing Oh whether 1t w01jks on samples of surfaces where microbes might be lurking. Flushing
dloX1n, sa1d Edgardo R. Gillera, a hazardous substances sc1ent1st sterile water through the swab converts the sample to li qui d form,
for the State Department of Tox1c Substances Control. “There has and the astronaut puts a few drops into the LOCAD. What’s in the
only been a handful Of tests, 1h labs and ﬁeld stud1es Oh a much sample? The system gives its answer less than 15 minutes later.
sinaller scale. I need to see more stud1es on a larger scale to COh' The whole easy procedure is done on location. Nothing has to be
s1der It a V1able optlon. sent back to a lab on Earth, which would take time and introduce
On April 14, at a packed City Council meeting, an environmental the possibility 0f contamination 611 route.
eonsultant hired by the city voiced skepticism, citing a study hhd' “It’s important to monitor bacteria on the space station so we can
1ng that mushrooms reduced dioX1ns by only 50 percent. Jonathan ﬁnd the best way to keep them under control,” says Morris, who
Shepard, a soccer coach, stood up and asked:- Why only ? I thlhk adds this curiosity: “LOCAD can’t yet distinguish between live
we should rephrase that. I think we should give thanks and praise and dead bacteria.” So no one can cry out it’s dead Jim! “We’re
to a iner01ful God that prov1ded a mushroom that eats the worst working to add this capability in the future.”
poss1ble tox1n that man can create.” . . . . . .

, , , , In addition to detecting Gram-negative bacteria like E. coli and
J 1m Tarbell, an author and something of a s001olog1st of the Men- Salmonella, the latest LOCAD cartridges just sent up to station
docino Coast, said the enthusiasm for bioremediation showed a aboard shuttle mission STS-123 can alert the crew to fungi.
change. 1h the culture at large. “We are trying to move from the Since fungi actually decomposed some electronics on the Rus-
extraction economy to the restoration economy,” Mr. Tarbell sa1d. sian Space Station MIR they have become unwelcome “house
“I think that’s a choice that a broad cross-section of the country is guests.” LOCAD can detect low 0 on c entrati ons of a c omm on
gomg to have to 100k at.” fungal compound; this allows LOCAD to ﬁnd fungi on surfaces
At the April 14 meeting, Georgia-Paciﬁc promised to ﬁnance before the fungi have a chance to multiply.

a pllot pI‘OJCCt. Roger J. H.1lar1des, who manages. cleanups for By the end of the year, yet another cartridge will be available for
the company, offered the City at least one lO-cublc-yard hlh Of the space station. This one will detect the presence of Gram-posi-
dioX1n-laced s01l and a 5-year lease on the s1te’s greenhouse and tive bacteria such as Staphylococcus and Streptococcus.

page 6

"
"7","“Ultimately we want to provide cartridges for all kinds of micro- with roots, fungal-based approaches should not be neglected in
organisms and chemical compounds,” says Morris. “We’d even rernediation attempts for rnetal-polluted soils.”
hke t0 beable to use our ”Stem t3 ﬁgure out what ‘bug an astro- In the new study, the researchers found that free-living and plant
naut has 1f he or she becomes 111. - - - - - -
syrnblotlc (rnycorrhlzal) fungl can colonlze depleted-uranlurn
Lisa Monaco, LOCAD project scientist, adds her Vision of the surfaces and transform the metal into uranyl phosphate rninerals.
future: “What we are developing at MSFC has use not only on “The fungal-produced minerals are capable of long-term uraniurn
the 188, but also on lunar rnissions, long-duration stays on other retention, so this may help prevent uptake of uranium by plants,
planets, and most certainly here on Earth.” animals, and microbes. It might also prevent the spent uraniurn
In the years ahead, as space voyages becorne longer and longer, it from leachlng out from the 8011’” explalned Gadd.
will be even more imperative to have ways of checking astronauts’ The process involves a combination of environmental and biologi-
health and monitoring electronics. For the record, no astronaut cal factors. First, the unstable uraniurn rnetal gets coated with a
has ever become seriously ill on any space mission. However, the layer of oxides. Moisture in the environment also “corrodes” the
scientists point out that if an astronaut did ever get sick, it would depleted uranium, encouraging fungal colonization and growth.
take too much time to send a sample back to Earth, have it tested, While the fungi grow, they produce acidic substances, which cor-
and receive a long-distance ‘ .3 ‘\ rode the depleted uranium even further. Some of the substances
answer. With next-generation 3,5 g produced include organic acids that convert the uranium into a
LOCAD technologies, detec- ‘ V 2 form that the fungi can take up or that can interact with other com-
tion and diagnosis would be ""gig” 543% 1: ] pounds. Ultimately, the interaction of soluble forms of uranium
quick, easy, and on the spot. 3m: ‘1‘ \’ r f 1 with phosphate leads to the formation of the new uraniurn minerals
D 1,. M CC 0y, h e 1, e we come. - 7' I"" “2’¢¢’\ ﬂ , that get deposited around the fungal biornass.
'W' i "" ‘/‘ \ i . 4 1 “We have shown for the ﬁrst time that fungi can transform metallic
‘ - 2- uran1urn 1nto rn1nerals, Wl’llCh are capable of long-term uran1urn
retention,” the researchers concluded. “This phenomenon could
be relevant to the future development of various remediation and
FUNGI ENLISTED TO CLEAN UP DEPLETED revegetation techniques for uraniurn-polluted soils.”
URANIUM Kate Melville
ScienceA G0 G0, May 6, 2008
PRESIDENT’S MESSAGE Patrice Benson
In a discovery that could have important implications for the
cleanup of war ravaged countries, researchers have found evidence I am typing this on a Blackberry from the belfry of the Chateau
that fungi can “lock” depleted uranium into a mineral form that de St. Julien l’Ars in France near Poitier. Joanne Young is here
would be less likely to ﬁnd its way into plants, animals, or the too, as we needed a vacation after that wonderful ﬁrst Mushroom
water supply. Maynia! at the Burke Museum on May 4th.
Depleted uraniurn is aby—product of the enrichment process used to Sixty PSMS members participated along with rnycologists Drs.
create uraniurn 235, the isotope which is used in nuclear weapons Joseph Arnrnirati, Steve Trudell, Michele Seidl, Katherine Glew,
and reactors. It is almost twice as dense as lead, giving it enough and Dean Glawe. Attendance included 300 who paid adrnission
kinetic energy to blast through the tough armor of a tank. The to see the eXhibit as well as 70 Burke Museurn members, and we
Department of Energy considers depleted uranium to be a “waste signed up about eight new members to PSMS. It was a delightful
material” and it is freely available to rnunitions manufacturers. experience for everybody. Thanks to all who made this possible,
In rnunitions, depleted uranium pulverizes into a ﬁne dust upon especially Dr. Julie Stein and Carl Sander of the Burke for their
impact, where it can be inhaled or seep into the soil. support in development and planning. By all accounts it was a
A Estimates of deple te d uranium in Iraq success and should become a yearly tradition!
i :55 . ~ .. alone total more than 2,000 tons, with We will be losing three dedicated and hard-wroking board mem-
""f"" f?"" other regions around the world such as bers this summer. Molly and Kevin Bernstein and Cynthia Nuzzi
4 .g f“ i the Balkan states 3150 affected. Depleted will be moving from Seattle. They will be missed.
I w 1, 1 1'1 uran1urn 1,5 llnked t0 b1rth defects and The mushrooms are ﬁnally coming up in the Paciﬁc Northwest
4743/0. "" / . has an estlrnated half—llfe Of 4'5 b11110n after a long cool spring. Two friends and I found 21 rnorels on
' i i n , «3‘ years. May 8th sornewhere east of Easton. Reports from the local Knife
t There has been little investigation into and Gun shop here in St. Julien l’Ars are that the cepes are up
7 how an affected environment could be about 7 km from here. Stay tuned! Au revoir.
cleaned up after a conﬂict, but recent
_ work, published in Current Biology, by
researchers at the University of Dundee YAHOO DISCUSSION GROUP
in Scotland indicates that nature may be able to lend a hand. “This
work provides yet another example of the incredible properties of Want to stay in touch over the summer? The PSMS e-rnail discus-
microorganisms in effecting transformations of metals and miner— sion group maintained by Yahoo Groups is an easy way to keep in
als in the natural environment,” said Dundee’s Geoffrey Gadd. contact with other members, circulate information about PSMS
“Because fungi are perfectly suited as biogeochernical agents, events, and post general mushroom information. To join, follow
often dominate the biota in polluted soils, and play a rnaj or role in the directions on the PSMS Website (http://www.psms.org) or on
the establishment and survival of plants through their association page 40 of the club roster.
page 7

"
"8","NEW MUSHROOM MAGAZINE Carol Deptolla ROAST VEAL WITH MORELS
Milwaukee Jaumal Sentinel, May 15, 2008 Schuyler Ingle and Sharon Kramis
Northwest Bounty, 1988
Mushrooms are popping up, and s0 is a
new magazine all about them. A good choice for a spring dinner, When the morels are showing
Fungi, based in Richfield, celebrated up in the wootls ahd the markets. They are heavenly prepared this
its launch in conjunction With two ﬁve- » way. Serve th1s W1th fresh asparagus and oven-roasted potatoes.
course mushroom dinners: at Heaven City 1 3-p0und veal shoulder roast, well-trimmed and tied
in Mukwonago on Sunday, and at Sanford . '1 "" . r 2 TBs butter
in Milwaukee on Tuesday. -' j 11/2 cups chicken stock
Britt Bunyard 0f Richﬁeld—Who h 01 ds H I ‘ 1/2 pound fresh morels, brushed clean With a mushroom brush
a doctorate in mycology, the study of IIIIIIIIIII' 11/2 CUPS heavy cream
mushrooms—is the publisher and editor— Salt and pepper to taste
in-chief 0f the new, full-color magazine, called F ungi. Dash Of nutmeg
Fungi made its debut this month, and Will publish ﬁve ti m e s a Preheat the oven to 3500.13. Brown the roast slowly in a Dutch oven
year: four seasonal issues and one special themed issue. This 11? the butter. Add the chlcken StOCk' Remove from the heat. Lay a
year’s special issue, due in early fall, Will be dedicated to trufﬂes, p1ece ofwaxed paper dlrectlly on top 0fthe Iheat and then cover the
including those found in such unexpected places as the desert and pot. Bake 1n the oven for 2 /2 hours, or unt11 the meat 1s tender.
Oregon, Bunyard said. Slice the morels and place in a sauté pan. Pour in the cream and
The magazine is aimed at amateur and professional mycologists summer for 20 mlnutes, 0r.unt11 the cream has been absorbed by
alike, and its offerings Will include hOW-to articles on topics such the mushrooms. Season W1th salt, pepper, and nutmeg.
as cultivating mushrooms, as well as peer—reviewed technical Remove roast from pan. Place on serving dish. Add 1/2 t0 1 cup
papers. of the pan juices to the mushrooms and heat and serve With the
Articles in the inaugural issue include “Mushroom Love, Morels: roast. Serves 6'
Seasonality, Meditation, Celebration,” complete With recipes, and @ ‘é’ﬁ ”£5 /
a mouthful of a different sort, the scientiﬁcally oriented “MyXO- . . . “a a“ E /
mycete Plasmodia and Fruiting Bodies: Unusual Occurrences Th” W1” be the 1a“ newsletter untzl September. W£I_~
and User—friendly Study Techniques.” For more information, see H ave a good summer! m
www.fungimag.com. ,7 ’5
page 8
gugtethoLljjrgd hf—Iyeteloltgical Society N0n_Pr-Ofit Org.
@ W
Seattle, Washington 98195 PAID
SEATTLE, WA
PERMIT NO. 6545
RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED

"
