"","x"
"1","Space 2003 AIAA 2003-6243
23 - 25 September 2003, Long Beach, California
MIDDECK ACTIVE CONTROL EXPERIMENT REFLIGHT (MACE II) PROGRAM:
ADVENTURES IN SPACE
R. Rory Ninneman, Air Force Research Laboratory, Kirtland AFB, NM
David B. Founds, Air Force Research Laboratory, Kirtland AFB, NM
Lawrence DaVis, Planning Systems, Inc., Melbourne, FL
Scott Greeley, Planning Systems, Inc., Melbourne, FL
J ames King, Planning Systems, Inc., Melbourne, FL
ABSTRACT AFRL successfully presented our experiment plan to the
Department of Defense (DOD) Space Experiments Review
The Middeck Active Control Experiment Reﬂight Board (SERB) and were ranked the #1 DOD Space Shuttle
(MACE II) Program was the ﬁrst on-orbit payload. Our program was subsequently assigned to the
demonstration of adaptive structural control DOD Space Test Program detachment in Houston to
technology and the ﬁrst active science experiment coordinate with NASA to get us manifested 0n the shuttle.
ﬂown aboard the International Space Station. Our However, due to space availability problems, it appeared
program objectives were to (1) greatly decease the we had no hope of getting manifested in a realistic amount
need for modeling and ground testing to develop of time. This was mainly due to the majority of shuttle
controllers and (2) allow for autonomous missions supporting the assembly and supply of the
reconﬁguration of the control system to changing International Space Station. With hopes of a shuttle ﬂight
dynamic characteristics and sensor/actuator failures. slipping away, the DOD STP took a different course. We
This paper discusses the development of the MACE requested that MACE 11 be manifested on 188 during
11 program, an overview of the technical success of Increment 1. Initially, this idea was rejected because the
the MACE II mission, and lessons learned from both ﬂight experiments had already been assigned. However,
a technical and programmatic standpoint dealing with several experiments did not meet their ship dates and
the Space Test Program and NASA. NASA agreed to ﬂy MACE II. MACE II was then
manifested 0n STSlO6 (188 Flight 2A.2B) for delivery to
INTRODUCTION ISS, Captain William Shepherd (USN) was selected to be
our on-orbit investigator, and MACE II launch on 8 Sep
The Middeck Active Control Experiment Reﬂight 2000 aboard the SPACEHAB module. MACE II was
(MACE II) Program was an outgrowth of adaptive extended through Increment 2 and C01 Susan Helms took
controls research sponsored by the Air Force over as our experimenter. MACE II was 0n-0rbit 347
Research Laboratory (AFRL). Through a series of days and returned to KSC on 20 Aug 2001 aboard STS-
small business innovative research efforts, 105.
educational partnership agreements, cooperative
research and development agreements, and This paper will provide a brief overview of the original
reutilization 0f the original MACE hardware MACE mission, the motivation for MACE II, a
developed by the Massachusetts Institute of description of the ﬂight hardware, the technical success of
Technology (MIT) for NASA Langley Research the program, and lessons learned from the experience.
Center (NASA LaRC); AFRL was able to craft a
program resulting in the ﬁrst on-orbit demonstration MIDDECK ACTIVE CONTROL EXPERIMENT
of adaptive structural control. MACE II consisted of gMACE)
two science teams. The ﬁrst led by AFRL and their
prime contractor, Planning Systems Inc. of NASA Langley through the NASA In—Step Program and
Melbourne, FL. In addition, the AFRL team included the NASA CSI ofﬁce funded the original MACE program.
Payload Systems, Inc., the University of Michigan, The MACE ﬂight experiment was designed through a
Virginia Tech and Sheet Dynamics Ltd. MIT SSL cooperative effort between the MIT Space Engineering
led the second team that included Lockheed Martin Research Center, Payload Systems, Inc. (Cambridge,
and Mide Technologies. MA), Lockheed Martin, and NASA Langley. The original
MACE ﬂight experiment was designed to investigate
modeling and control issues for achieving high precision
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

"
"2","pointing and Vibration control of future spacecraft.
The primary objective of the original MACE The Middeck Active Control Experiment — Flight 11
experiment was to demonstrate the effectiveness of (MACE II) was a follow-on ﬂight experiment to the
structural control in improving spacecraft stability original MACE ﬂight experiment. The Air Force
and to assess the predictability of controller Research Laboratory (AFRL) initiated a program to re-ﬂy
performance based on analysis and l-g testing. To the MACE hardware in 1998 to investigate the use of
accomplish these objectives, a variety of techniques adaptive control algorithms for precision structural
were developed to obtain accurate O-g models, along control. The ﬂight hardware was transferred from NASA
with associated parameter uncertainty models, using Langley to AFRL. In addition, AFRL established a
ﬁnite element modeling and l-g ground testing. second science team, led by MIT, to perform experiments
These models were then used to design a variety of demonstrating Controls/Structures Interaction (CSI)
ﬁxed gain control laws that were demonstrated on control approaches for Time Varying (TV) systems.
orbit and later modiﬁed during ﬂight to improve Space based systems offer particularly challenging
performance and robustness using on-orbit data. The examples of CSI, as in situ (O-g) test data is not available
original MACE ﬂight experiment ﬂew on STS67 in for controller design or veriﬁcation prior to ﬂight, and
March 1995. The experiment was highly successful generally l-g test data is not representative of O-g
and demonstrated structural control could be dynamics.
effectively accomplished using the developed
techniques. [1] The remainder of this paper will focus on the activities of
Despite these signiﬁcant achievements, the MACE the two primary Air Force science team members,
program also revealed limitations of the model-based Planning Systems, Inc. and the University of Michigan.
ﬁxed gain linear control approach. These limitations MACE II was the ﬁrst experiment to investigate and
include: demonstrate adaptive structural control in a micro-graVity
space environment. MACE 11 answered key questions
- Signiﬁcant expense and time associated with about the ability of adaptive control algorithms to
developing high ﬁdelity ﬁnite element models maintain performance of a complex space system as its
needed for control design dynamics change from l-g qualiﬁcation testing to O-g.
We have demonstrated the ability to autonomously
- Loss of robustness due to unknown or .
an dele d 0_ d namics recover from subsystem failures such as the loss of an
11 g y actuator or sensor and the ability of adaptive algorithms to
- Difﬁculties in handling nonlinear behaVior perform with respect to the constraints and uncertainties
. . . . associated with space ﬂight. MACE II also provided a
- Potential loss of performance or instability due . . . . .
. . . . bas1s for comparing these adaptive techniques With the
to t1me-vary1ng dynamics or sudden failures of . .
d t t ﬁxed-gain linear control approach employed by the
sensors an ac ua ors. original M ACE ﬂight.
Despit e extenswe research, .MACE. and other The primary objective of MACE II is to validate the
experiments have shown that it remains extremely . . .
. . . . . . ability of adaptive neural network—based and other
difﬁcult to predict on-orbit O-g behaV1or. In addition, . . . . .
. . . . adaptive algorithms to control, With little or no prior
system dynamics often tend to be time varying. This . .
system knowledge, a representative small satellite system
can be due to thermal effects, slow changes due to . . . .
. . . that alters its dynamics between l-g qualiﬁcation and O-g
degradation of materials and the aging of the . . . . . . .
. operations. [2] Spe01ﬁc experiment ObJCCtIVCS include.
spacecraft, or sudden failures such as the loss of a
sensor or actuator. These events become1ncreas1ngly 1. Demonstrate that performance achievable on the
likely as spacecraft become more complex and are . . .
. . . . ground can be achieved on-orbit Without the need
expected to be in serV1ce for longer periods of time. .
. . . . for control redes1gn.
By decreas1ng modeling and testing requirements,
lowering operations and maintenance activities, and 2. Demonstrate autonomous failure recovery to events
increasing reliability and survivability, adaptive such as sensor/actuator failure.
methods .have the potential to Signiﬁcantly reduce 3. Demonstrate the saVings that can be achieved by
cost and increase performance of these systems. . . . .
reduCIng modeling and testing currently required to
Middeck Active Control Experiment Reﬂight a:ﬂfﬂ:gfgvlgegnjfogggorme W a ﬁxed-
{MACE 11) g p '
2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","4. Demonstrate that adaptive algorithms can be EX erinient Su ort Module
implemented successfully using limited
com utational ower consistent With space The EX eriment Su ort Module (ESM) is a complete
P P P PP
applications. controlled-systems laboratory in a single low power
. . . . ' + ' l '
5. Collect data for further evaluation of the ability EECk?ge Volt}: eESaMndreiulgizteszégaYDﬁl nﬂﬁﬂ (HES:
of nonlinear modeling and identiﬁcation tools 00:? :rtnient gressures anfcl tem eratures
to accurately predict 0-g on-orbit behavior. p p p '
The ESM uses a 486-based processor host for a 40 MHz
—FLIGHT HARDWARE DESCRIPTION TI C30 processor With 1 MB of system RAM. PCMCIA
. . disk drives, compatible With the STS communication
The MACE ﬂlght hardware COHSIStS Of .three system, are used for protocol (algorithm) and data storage.
components; the Multi-body Platform; Experiment
Tippsrltl Module; and tthe Hafn $161? aerial Terntnﬁa: Custom software development tools are used to create
f e OWE): ingMelsdcrii 10:8 ti) 2 a: Vila: a em: em new protocols. Protocols contain system initialization
($11: CE)‘ Se 1 e; r:,,1V[e1] on ro Xpe e commands, disturbance generation parameters, real-tinie
' ummary epo ' and background control operations, and last known state
Multi-bod Platform and data archival commands.
. . H h l ' lT ' l
The Multi-body Platform (MBP) cons1sts of a and e d Seria ernnna
segmented ﬂexible structural buswith integral power The Handheld Serial Terminal (HST) is the astronaut
andtdata connections. A: two-ax1s gimbaied p.13]??? interface to the ESM. Essential a ruggedized keypad, the
con (:1ng lwzatXlS .rate gyroscopesd (1r 1he nad HST controls all operational functions. The protocol
p01n1ng ang e e ernnna ion is moun e a .eac e naming convention uses a ﬁle name consisting of up to
of the bus. In the center, a three-aX1s reaction Wheel ﬁve numeric characters This greatly simpli ﬁes
assembly .(RWA)’ used to provid e attitude control operations and HST design. In addition to the ten
torques, tls. ngougted. t 1:1 .adlditiotn,d a tltNOt 3:? numeric keys, there are special character keys to allow for
E13526 ectﬁc e n 1ng sdruf tﬁs tocater neX 0 e entry of date and time, to answer questions (Yes and No),
on e primary en 0 e S rue u e. Enter, Exit and Stop (software kill switch). The unit also
E h t t . . t t d 'th tr in contains a hardware kill switch (Halt button) to disable the
ac .8 rub 1;. ins funqen e t W S aAn gfigesl output of the actuator ampliﬁers to disable the multibody
nieascliiring en lilgd S rain 1:11 W01) alxes: t op ca platform (MBP) in case the software kill switch is unable
E100 er 118 mm? e 21m déacl gim at aiistho mealsur: to abort the controller. An experiment is aborted if the
16 :mgltl atrh r: e an 1sp acemen 0 e pay oa MBP is about to or does make contact With a crewmember
re a we 0 e us. of the vehicle or When the MBP exhibits “Limit Cycle”
. , behavior.
Bus Reaction Wheel (3) © 85%
Prima-End - ‘ A 4/ I /Straages (6)\ Secdary End
EIEIHIEII'AV'H'EEI— El'n'ﬂll MACE II FLIGHT OPPORTUNITY
Ilka £333 Sﬁfa‘iis(§xa§§dzi) 323$ Sﬂiﬁ‘fﬁgwc The 1998 DoD Space Experiments Review Board (SERB)
D P_ P 1 d y SecondaryPayload All ranked MACE II as the fourth overall highest priority
11:12:? (:1: X Sm-OsdaryGyr(Xm) DoD ﬂight experiment and ﬁrst among DoD shuttle
. . Z middeck experiments. The 1999 DoD SERB ranked
Figure 1: MUItl'BOdy Platform (MBP) MACE II sixth out of 40 experiments and continued its
. . number one ranking among STS payloads.
A PD servo controller is closed between each gimbal
and encoder pair. Attached to the RWA are three rate M ACE II was manifested on STS-106 Which is also
gyroscopes to measure inertial attitude Of the bus and designated as International Space Station (188) Flight
three. tachometers to measure the speed Of the 2A.2B. STS-106 launched on 8 Sep 2000 from Kennedy
reaction Wheels. Analog speed control servos are Space Center. M ACE II ﬂew solely as cargo on STS-106
closed between each tachometer and reaction Wheel and was transported to the 188 Where it awaited the
pair. Increment 1 crew for operations.
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","University of Michigan and members of PSI’s Melbourne
Captain William Sheppard (USN) operated MACE II. Controls Group. Its development was motivated by the
need for an algorithm for feedback which requires only a
MACE II is a labor-intensive ﬂight experiment local measurement, has predictable convergence
requiring mission specialist participation in minimum properties, and yields performance in terms easily
four hours blocks to unstow the experiment, understood by control system engineers. The Frequency
assemble, perform checkout, execute protocols, Domain Expert algorithm can be thought of as a nonlinear
disassemble, and stow the hardware. AFRL has adapter that measures and inspects the frequency response
requested a total of eighty hours of experiment time characteristics of the system in order to arrive at a control
on orbit. This time will be shared equally between design that meets frequency domain performance
the AFRL and MIT Science Teams. speciﬁcations. N0 adaptation of an internal system model
is needed. Instead, the algorithm takes frequency
AFRL AND MACE II PARTNERS response measurements of the system, applies a nonlinear
mapping to arrive at a stabilizing control law, closes the
AFRL is the program manager for the MACE II ﬂight loop, and if needed takes a new measurement to begin the
experiment. There were four AFRL science team process again. Once it has converged on a controller
partners developing adaptive control algorithms for which meets the performance speciﬁcations, it no longer
implementation on the MACE II ﬂight hardware. performs frequency response measurements but switches
Our partners include: Planning Systems, Inc., the to a passive monitoring of the measurement, waiting for a
University of Michigan, Virginia Tech, and Sheet change in the signature of the signal which indicates that
Dynamics, Ltd. Due length restrictions, only the system dynamics have changed. If a change occurs,
overviews of Planning Systems and the University of the algorithm begins adapting again.
Michigan will be presented later in this paper.
PSI Ground Test Results:
In addition, AFRL is sharing time with a second team
of experimenters led by the Massachusetts Institute of The results of the Frequency Domain Expert algorithm
Technology. The MIT team includes the Lockheed applied to the MACE test article, as suspended at the
Martin Corporation, Mide Technology and NASA AFRL test facility, are shown Figure 4. In each case, the
Langley Research Center. [3] results were obtained with a low-authority gimbal
stabilization loop closed. The results were obtained by
Air Force Research Laboratog gAFRL) carrying out automatic loop designs in the following
order, where each design entails an automated collocated
AFRL has primary programmatic responsibilities loop FRF measurement and loop design with all
coordinating this effort. Through a series of previously designed loops closed:
contracts, Educational Partnership Agreements
(EPAs) and a Cooperative Research and ' A local control loop was closed around the X-aXis
Development Agreement (CRDA); AFRL has momentum wheel and collocated rate gyro.
established a science team to meet our mission .
objectives. AFRL is also coordinating with the Space . A.local control 190p was closed around the Z-ax1s
and Missile System C enter (SMC) D epartment of primary payload gimbal and collocated rate gyro.
Defense (DOD) Space Test Program (STP) DOD ' A local control loop was closed around the X-aXis
STP has primary responsibility for ﬁnding launch primary payload gimbal and collocated rate gyro. At
opportunities for Air Force research payloads and this point, the performance of the combined X and Z
acts as the Air Force liaison with NASA. DOD STP axes (RSS) was measured (the bottom line Of the
is currently working With the International Space ﬁgure). An overall attenuation 0f 18 dB rms was
Station (188) Payload Ofﬁce to complete the manifest obtained over the 0. 5-50 Hz performance, with
process requirements for MACE H to ﬂy on STS'106 approximately 30 dB attenuation achieved in the
(188 Flight 2A-2B)- proximity of 1-2 Hz.
Planning Systems Inc. ' A failure was introduced into the X momentum wheel
loop by zeroing the command to the actuator. The
The Frequency Domain Expert (FDE) algorithm is a controller automatically. detected the failure. .The X-
recent invention by Dr. David Hyland at the aX1s primary payload gimbal loop was redes1gned1n
4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","real-time without the momentum wheel loop. 0 and 1 g environments being readily accommodated. In
The combined X and Z-aXis results were again fact, the O-g results were better than those achieved on the
measured (the next-to—bottom line in the ﬁgure). ground. Flight testing produced FDE controllers that
An overall attenuation of 17 dB rms was reduced line of sight (LOS) error by almost 20 dB (only a
obtained over the 05-50 Hz performance band. few dB less than the best performance attained Via ofﬂine-
designed, optimal controllers during the original MACE
10-5 ﬂight). In addition, ﬂight tests showed FDE’s ability to
redesign controllers autonomously after a simulated
i23:23223é;:é;3%;;23223i2322;z:5;;;3223;:é;;23;ié;;i;223223;:é:;7fffffff'fifff’fiffi‘ii‘i???_ actuator failure, achieving 16 dB ofLos attenuation.
E104 11f:1:1:iiififi1:1:1:1:1:11:15:1:1:111151111115:1:1:1:1:11.51.15:'11:1'1:11:11:::1::::::::::f:::::f:::: Now the vastly different low frequency dynamics below 5
2310—8 iffffffff?ffffffffffffffiffffffff?ffffffifffffffffffimff7337fffffffffifffffffffiff: Hz from Figures 3 and 4. The ground result (Figure 3)
ff fffff ffffffffff'f'f.VHf]. ”ff: fffffff shOWS a graVity ofﬂoad SUSpensiOH mode around 2 HZ as
35:1“ well as much lower non-ﬂeXible Vibration levels. In both
cases, however, FDE designed controllers from scratch
iii;iiiii355:5i;iiii1:iiiiiii5:55iiiiiij:i:ii5:5iiiiiiiiii5:5i5:5iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiijéi that reduce the LOS error by nearly a factor of 10 rms
0V6r5-50HZ-
4217::i::ififiifiii:i:ii:i:i:7::i:i::ifiii:ii?i:i:ii:i::Tiifii:ii:i:i:ii:i::iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiifiiii pGXposmonPSD,mpezpempemmw17513520atten
100 Frequency(Hz) 101
Figure 2: RSS X and Z Axis Ground Test Results for 10-8 / \_
MACE using FDE 1/ M/ L“
3 win “rim
Note the presence of a strong line of closed-loop gm Mk
ampliﬁcation (de-stabilization) at approximately 24 E MU
Hz. This ampliﬁcation line reduced overall 10“ W
performance by about 1 dB. The ampliﬁcation I
occurred in spite of single-iteration gain margin 10-12
constraints on the measured loop-transfer function of 12021GroundTestData m
6 dB. Two effects gave rise to this defect. First, the “I
gain margin of the overall control law is not 10 1o” F H 10‘
constrained. Only the gain margin of a single FDE requenm Z)
iterate is constrained at a time. The FDE algorithm Figure 33 Ground Test RCSUItS using FDE
slowly reduces the overall predicted gain margin by
successive design iterations while meeting the 6 dB PGXvositionPSDyBX/PGZ/PGXopen/closed19-880532atten
restriction on each iteration.
Second, the combination of residual FRF 10b b\l/gﬁ/
measurement inaccuracy and ﬁnite resolution can Wt
give rise to small errors in the FRF. These became (”10.5 i
greatly ampliﬁed when the loop transfer function i “M
closely approaches the -1 point. The proximity of the E 10.10 W
overall control loop to the -1 point has been
constrained in later versions of the FDE algorithm, ‘
and has helped resolve both of these issues. 10 ‘1'»
”""th
PSI Flight Test Results: 10'” 100 101 10
Figures 3 and 4 show the X-aXis primary payload Freqmy‘Hz’
gimbal position PSD performance plots obtained on Figure 4: Flight Test Results using FDE
the ground and during ﬂight for the same protocol.
Flight test results show that the FDE algorithm
worked in ﬂight much as it did on the ground, with
changes in the structural dynamics associated with the
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","University ofMichigan level regulation and tracking tasks. They are generally
based on the backpropagation learning mechanism and
The impetus for the University of Michigan work was address supervised learning tasks (e.g. Vibration control)
the realization that contemplated future space wherein at every time, the desired response of the system
missions will require a higher degree of autonomy in is known and is provided to the learning algorithm for
their control operations. This is because these appropriate adaptation of the on-line control. A second
systems will entail complex, high performance and quite distinct type of algorithm may be termed
controls that will necessarily be sensitive to estimated ""Hebbian"" learning algorithms because they do not
system parameters and will be comprised of many employ backpropagation but instead are based on the
components with a high probability of some earlier and considerably simpler learning paradigm of
component failures during the mission. Secondly, Hebb. Hebbian algorithms are applicable to more general
future concepts involve remote and long duration situations than the N—Step ahead controls, including
operations, during which the use of conventional inﬁnite horizon optimization and unsupervised learning, in
controls approaches would necessitate cumbersome which the ""right answer"" or desired behavior are not
and costly ground station operations. known or provided to the system at every time but,
instead, learning is guided by a regime of rewards and
In response to these factors, Dr. David Hyland penalties imposed by the environment. In this work, both
believes it necessary to develop self—reliant control of the broad types of control are applied to active
systems. In the context of this paper, self—reliance is suppression of Vibration-induced line-of—sight (LOS)
taken to comprise four basic features: pointing error within the context of the MACE II
hardware and within the limitations of the ﬂight processor.
(1) Autonomous multi-level mission planning and
control. Michigan Ground Test Results:
(2) Comprehenswe adaptive control capabilities. The University of Michigan Team initially considered the
(3) Capability for identifying faults and working control loop from the Primary Gimbal Z Torque (PGZt) to
around problems to recover control effectiveness. the Primary Gimbal Rate Gyro Z (PGRGZ). Though
. . . . colocated, the loop is non-minimum phase due to anti-
(4) Effectively communicate critical events to human 1. . f1 ters Two 0 en 100 modes near 40 and 50 Hz
agents and to respond to human direction when a 1as1ng 1 ' p p ’
. . respectively, have phase near -180 degrees and thus
SUCh direction becomes necessary. provide a signiﬁcant design challenge. The disturbance to
By addressing adaptive control capabilities, MACE II reject is a bandlimited, uniform white noise fed into PGZt.
will take a modest step toward self—reliant systems. The open loop power spectral density (PSD) ofPGRGZ is
The speciﬁc goals of the study are to: shown as the dash-dot line in Figure 5. The power in the
1-60 Hz control bandwidth is 10.11. A 13th order
(1) Demonstrate in a space ﬂight environment the classical, ﬁxed-gain controller was designed and the
capabilities of adaptive neural control (ANC). resulting closed-loop PSD is shown as the dashed line in
(2) Explore and resolve practical implementation Figure 5. The power in the control bandwidth has been
. reduced by 47%. This controller is used to initialize the
issues for ANC on space systems. adaptive algorithm. For this ground test the algorithm
(3) Experimentally test, Via Vibration control, a proceeded for 10 design cycles (~3 minutes). The design
selection of ANC algorithms drawn for a variety was done online and did not destabilize the system. The
of layers of the necessarily multi-layer hierarchy ﬁnal controller’s PSD is shown as the solid line in Figure
of intelligent control needed for self—reliant 5. Although the initializing controller’s PSD is lower for a
systems and large part of the frequency range, the ﬁnal controller has
(4) Correlate experimental data and pre-ﬁight Zeundb a better. trad: hotflfﬁ between low-ﬁequency
predictions to increase the conﬁdence with which 1stur ance rejection an 1g. _ equency n01se attenuation
. . . (the ﬁnal controller s PSD is lower above 45 Hz). In 3
ANC can be used in future nnss10ns. minutes, the closed loop power has been reduced by 10%.
The overall technical approach for MACE II
emphasizes two distinct types of controls. The ﬁrst
category may be termed ""N—Step ahead controls"".
These are applicable to fast control loops for lower-
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","a great deal of consternation for our program. MACE II
J had previously ﬂown on STS-67, however, this was not
‘0"" £th geed enough for 155 and we had to deal With a Whele new
h‘ﬂhm certiﬁcation process. Several requirements (anUStiC, emi,
IIiiti:Q‘TE::ﬁ'it'ttt’gifg'ﬂ:LIEIHTTi:t'itﬁEEETI: power) had to be retested and eventually waivered to
E102attilltftahtti‘tt:I==it53333333;.tt allow us to ﬂy. My favorite was trying to meet an
i :Lhrtttthteth acoustic speciﬁcation that to my knowledge no system
05: ::':_: {9:11.:.:::::5:::::?::::::2::::‘i‘a?:::::9::::::?:_*tf'?‘%efth5 was able to meet The MACE H electronic support
mg .1 module (ESM) had a single 3”, 100 cfm mufﬁn fan. It
failed the speciﬁcation. The “quiet” chamber we tested in
.Iigiiii .Igii3333;33333E333331;33333;"";‘5regains}IteéLJeT—Lidh'im"" could barely pass the requirement when we performed the
5 10 15 2D 25 3D 35 40 45 5D 55 EU
Frequem (HZ) The “Power System” Nightmare
Figure 3. PSD of PGZt to PGRGZ Ground Test
The decision was made (for many reasons) to specify the
Michigan Flight Test Results were unavailable at the 188 power system to be 120V DC. However, no
time or publication. provision was made in the initial designs to accommodate
traditional 28 VDC systems. MACE II (and other safety
W critical systems to be ﬂown on 188) required 28V DC. At
the time MACE II was considered for manifest on 188, no
The MACE 11 program was in many ways a guinea ISS certiﬁed 120 VDC to 28V DC power
pig. We were one Of the ﬁrst experiments through the eonverter/supplies existed at time of ﬂight. Fortunately
ISS “pipeline”, 50 we were trailblazers in the maze or for us, the DoD STP found an existing waivered design
155 bureaucracy, requirements, procedures and used by a safety critical piece of ISS hardware. Even with
operations. AS many or these procedures were being this precedent, we had to ﬁght to build/test/use this
developed in parallel with our PUSh through the system. Finally, we were only waivered because other
system, it led to many interesting situations. The systems need to “borrow” the three converters we were
following is brief overview of some of the lessons going to develop.
learned from our experience.
Lack of Astronaut training opportunities
How do we get to orbit?
Since we were a science experiment and not a critical ISS
MACE H received the #1 STS payload ranking by the system, we were not allowed to schedule “Hands-On”
DOD Space Experiments Review Board (SERB)- Astronaut Training for mission science or experiment
However, that rating had little or he meaning to operations. We were only allowed a single 30 minute
NASA: due to ﬂight commitments to assemble and Safety Training Session with Astronaut William
supply the 155- At the time Of our request, there were Sheppard. Science/operations training were handled
hO STS science ﬂight opportunities scheduled With a strictly through computer-based training (CBT). This
reasonable timeframe. We thought all was 105t- turned out to be detrimental to science ops as it was
Fortunately, the dedicated and creative members to difﬁcult to relate anomalous behavior due to lack of a
the DOD Space Test Program (STP) tried another common vocabulary. Due to software restrictions, success
approach. Monitoring the payloads manifested Ch of certain experiments was dependent on astronaut
155: they fOUhd an opportunity to ﬂy 0h 155 when interaction. The majority of the experiments that failed
several experiments failed to meet their delivery failed due to lack of proper astronaut training. As part of
deadlines. They then negotiated our manifest on STS developing and validating the experiment mission
106 and 155- It’s the 01d adage, “If you can’t procedures, Astronaut Candidates, not the actual astronaut
beat’em, join’em”. executing the experiments, performed procedural
checkout of the step—by-step experiment procedures. In
W addition, the initial set of procedures was written in the
standard “STS” format. Unfortunately, there was a new
STS and 155 requirements levied 0h external “188” format and all of the procedures had to be modiﬁed
experimenters are signiﬁcantly different. This caused at the last minute to ﬁt the new 188 format. Due to the
7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","last minute rush, we were unsure if procedural Due to political reasons, the ﬂow of data went from J SC
changes (in 188 format, NOT STS format) made it to MSFC and back to J SC. The result was that all data
into CBT. The Astronaut Candidates conducted no downlinked and processed through 188 ground system
similar scrub of the CBT. was corrupted due to software and operating system
incompatibilities between the two sites. DoD STP came
The “Communications” Nightmare to the rescue by making arrangements to grab the raw data
“at the source” to get clean data sets.
When Astronaut Sheppard began the MACE 11
experiments, we suffered an initial hardware failure. Downlink availability
The description of the problem relayed to the PI (at
0400 local) was “... it’s broke...”. No other details We found it very difﬁcult to schedule access to the OCA
were available and he was told to wait for the daily to downlink data. Last data we received was in June and
logs to be downlinked. Unfortunately, the daily log it was a small subset of what was taken on orbit. MACE
did not have sufﬁcient information to diagnose II was on the ground before we could access all our
problem. Working completely in the dark, we science data. Delays in experiment operations and data
developed and submitted trouble-shooting downlink cost the program signiﬁcant science. The MIT
procedures. We have no idea where they ended up Science team was dependent on data downlink of System
and there was no response sent back to the PI. The Identiﬁcation experiments to develop their Control
convoluted communications path is still bewildering. System algorithms. They were unable to get their data in
The PI submitted information to the DoD STP. DoD time. As a result, they were not able to develop or test
STP talked to their interface at NASA J SC. From any of their control algorithms and were unable to meet
there, we think the information was forwarded to their stated program objectives.
NASA MFSC (they were in charge of science -
maybe), then back to some organization at NASA CONCLUSION
J SC, who then relayed it to CapCOM who talked to
the astronauts on 188. Nothing appeared to ﬂow in Successful completion of experiments such as MACE II is
reverse. Viewed as critical as the ﬁrst step in allowing adaptive
control technology to go from state-of—the-art to state-of—
The problem was eventually ﬁxed when Astronaut the-practice. The beneﬁts of this transition will be the
Sheppard tried the backup boot disk. The problem availability of algorithms that have the ability to quickly
was due to failure of the primary PCMCIA boot disk and autonomously recover from subsystem failures, to be
during launch. developed and maintained at greatly reduced cost, and to
control systems that may be nonlinear in nature. It is
Data downlink woes expected that this research will allow complex future
systems to have much greater robustness and reliability
MACE II was the ﬁrst active science experiment than possible with techniques currently used in spacecraft
operated on 188. This occurred during Increment 1. operations.
Unfortunately, this was no high—speed downlink
available when we got up to 188 because there was no The MACEII AFRL Science Team successfully met
OCA during Increment 1. The Russians had a high- several of its objectives. Being the ﬁrst through any
speed link, but we were not allowed to use it. Data process can be a difﬁcult and frustrating experience.
could only be transferred physically, I.e. data disks
returned during resupply missions. Unfortunately, We would like to express our thanks to all of the
this decreased available storage on-orbit. During individuals of the DoD Space Test Program for their
Increment 2, the OCA was delivered to ISS and efforts. Special thanks go to Captain Tom Hoge, Johnnie
installed. Installation checkout discovered a TDRSS Englehardt, and Todd Hellner for all of their hard work
tracking problem and this further delayed availability and support. Special thanks to John Uri, NASA J SC
of the system. When it was ﬁnally ﬁxed, we were the Increment 1 Chief Scientist, for championing our cause on
guinea pigs to test the OCA. the NASA side. Finally, thanks to Bill Shepherd for his
efforts trouble-shooting our initial hardware failure and
Data retrieval/transfer/storage/release p_rocess ﬂawed Susan Helms for her extraordinary efforts to maximize the
number of on-orbit experiments run during Increment 2.
8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","REFERENCES
1. Miller, D., etal., The Middeck Active Control
Experiment (MACE): Summary Report, SERC#7-96,
June 1996.
2. Denoyer, K.D., Hyland, D.C., Davis, L.D., and
Miller, D.W., “MACE II: A Space Shuttle
Experiment for Investigating Adaptive Control of
Flexible Spacecraft”, AIAA-98-4319.
3. Blaurock, C., Yung, J . Kenny, S. and Miller, D.,
“Nonlinear Modeling and Control for the Middeck
Active Control Experiment Reﬂight”, AIAA Space
Technology and Exposition, Albuquerque, NM,
September 1999.
9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
